You will rejoice to hear that no disaster has accompanied the commencement of an enterprise which you have regarded with such evil forebodings. I arrived here yesterday, and my first task is to assure my dear sister of my welfare and increasing confidence in the success of my undertaking. I am already far north of London, and as I walk in the streets of Petersburgh, I feel a cold northern breeze play upon my cheeks, which braces my nerves and fills me with delight. Do you understand this feeling? This breeze, which has travelled from the regions towards which I am advancing, gives me a foretaste of those icy climes. Inspirited by this wind of promise, my daydreams become more fervent and vivid. I try in vain to be persuaded that the pole is the seat of frost and desolation; it ever presents itself to my imagination as the region of beauty and delight. There, Margaret, the sun is for ever visible, its broad disk just skirting the horizon and diffusing a perpetual splendour. There—for with your leave, my sister, I will put some trust in preceding navigators—there snow and frost are banished; and, sailing over a calm sea, we may be wafted to a land surpassing in wonders and in beauty every region hitherto discovered on the habitable globe. Its productions and features may be without example, as the phenomena of the heavenly bodies undoubtedly are in those undiscovered solitudes. What may not be expected in a country of eternal light? I may there discover the wondrous power which attracts the needle and may regulate a thousand celestial observations that require only this voyage to render their seeming eccentricities consistent for ever. I shall satiate my ardent curiosity with the sight of a part of the world never before visited, and may tread a land never before imprinted by the foot of man. These are my enticements, and they are sufficient to conquer all fear of danger or death and to induce me to commence this laborious voyage with the joy a child feels when he embarks in a little boat, with his holiday mates, on an expedition of discovery up his native river. But supposing all these conjectures to be false, you cannot contest the inestimable benefit which I shall confer on all mankind, to the last generation, by discovering a passage near the pole to those countries, to reach which at present so many months are requisite; or by ascertaining the secret of the magnet, which, if at all possible, can only be effected by an undertaking such as mine.

These reflections have dispelled the agitation with which I began my letter, and I feel my heart glow with an enthusiasm which elevates me to heaven, for nothing contributes so much to tranquillise the mind as a steady purpose—a point on which the soul may fix its intellectual eye. This expedition has been the favourite dream of my early years. I have read with ardour the accounts of the various voyages which have been made in the prospect of arriving at the North Pacific Ocean through the seas which surround the pole. You may remember that a history of all the voyages made for purposes of discovery composed the whole of our good Uncle Thomas’ library. My education was neglected, yet I was passionately fond of reading. These volumes were my study day and night, and my familiarity with them increased that regret which I had felt, as a child, on learning that my father’s dying injunction had forbidden my uncle to allow me to embark in a seafaring life. These visions faded when I perused, for the first time, those poets whose effusions entranced my soul and lifted it to heaven. I also became a poet and for one year lived in a paradise of my own creation; I imagined that I also might obtain a niche in the temple where the names of Homer and Shakespeare are consecrated. You are well acquainted with my failure and how heavily I bore the disappointment. But just at that time I inherited the fortune of my cousin, and my thoughts were turned into the channel of their earlier bent.

Six years have passed since I resolved on my present undertaking. I can, even now, remember the hour from which I dedicated myself to this great enterprise. I commenced by inuring my body to hardship. I accompanied the whale-fishers on several expeditions to the North Sea; I voluntarily endured cold, famine, thirst, and want of sleep; I often worked harder than the common sailors during the day and devoted my nights to the study of mathematics, the theory of medicine, and those branches of physical science from which a naval adventurer might derive the greatest practical advantage. Twice I actually hired myself as an under-mate in a Greenland whaler, and acquitted myself to admiration. I must own I felt a little proud when my captain offered me the second dignity in the vessel and entreated me to remain with the greatest earnestness, so valuable did he consider my services. And now, dear Margaret, do I not deserve to accomplish some great purpose? My life might have been passed in ease and luxury, but I preferred glory to every enticement that wealth placed in my path. Oh, that some encouraging voice would answer in the affirmative! My courage and my resolution is firm; but my hopes fluctuate, and my spirits are often depressed. I am about to proceed on a long and difficult voyage, the emergencies of which will demand all my fortitude: I am required not only to raise the spirits of others, but sometimes to sustain my own, when theirs are failing.

This is the most favourable period for travelling in Russia. They fly quickly over the snow in their sledges; the motion is pleasant, and, in my opinion, far more agreeable than that of an English stagecoach. The cold is not excessive, if you are wrapped in furs—a dress which I have already adopted, for there is a great difference between walking the deck and remaining seated motionless for hours, when no exercise prevents the blood from actually freezing in your veins. I have no ambition to lose my life on the post-road between St. Petersburgh and Archangel. I shall depart for the latter town in a fortnight or three weeks; and my intention is to hire a ship there, which can easily be done by paying the insurance for the owner, and to engage as many sailors as I think necessary among those who are accustomed to the whale-fishing. I do not intend to sail until the month of June; and when shall I return? Ah, dear sister, how can I answer this question? If I succeed, many, many months, perhaps years, will pass before you and I may meet. If I fail, you will see me again soon, or never.

Farewell, my dear, excellent Margaret. Heaven shower down blessings on you, and save me, that I may again and again testify my gratitude for all your love and kindness. How slowly the time passes here, encompassed as I am by frost and snow! Yet a second step is taken towards my enterprise. I have hired a vessel and am occupied in collecting my sailors; those whom I have already engaged appear to be men on whom I can depend and are certainly possessed of dauntless courage. But I have one want which I have never yet been able to satisfy, and the absence of the object of which I now feel as a most severe evil, I have no friend, Margaret: when I am glowing with the enthusiasm of success, there will be none to participate my joy; if I am assailed by disappointment, no one will endeavour to sustain me in dejection. I shall commit my thoughts to paper, it is true; but that is a poor medium for the communication of feeling. I desire the company of a man who could sympathise with me, whose eyes would reply to mine. You may deem me romantic, my dear sister, but I bitterly feel the want of a friend. I have no one near me, gentle yet courageous, possessed of a cultivated as well as of a capacious mind, whose tastes are like my own, to approve or amend my plans. How would such a friend repair the faults of your poor brother! I am too ardent in execution and too impatient of difficulties. But it is a still greater evil to me that I am self-educated: for the first fourteen years of my life I ran wild on a common and read nothing but our Uncle Thomas’ books of voyages. At that age I became acquainted with the celebrated poets of our own country; but it was only when it had ceased to be in my power to derive its most important benefits from such a conviction that I perceived the necessity of becoming acquainted with more languages than that of my native country. Now I am twenty-eight and am in reality more illiterate than many schoolboys of fifteen. It is true that I have thought more and that my daydreams are more extended and magnificent, but they want (as the painters call it) _keeping;_ and I greatly need a friend who would have sense enough not to despise me as romantic, and affection enough for me to endeavour to regulate my mind.

Well, these are useless complaints; I shall certainly find no friend on the wide ocean, nor even here in Archangel, among merchants and seamen. Yet some feelings, unallied to the dross of human nature, beat even in these rugged bosoms. My lieutenant, for instance, is a man of wonderful courage and enterprise; he is madly desirous of glory, or rather, to word my phrase more characteristically, of advancement in his profession. He is an Englishman, and in the midst of national and professional prejudices, unsoftened by cultivation, retains some of the noblest endowments of humanity. I first became acquainted with him on board a whale vessel; finding that he was unemployed in this city, I easily engaged him to assist in my enterprise. The master is a person of an excellent disposition and is remarkable in the ship for his gentleness and the mildness of his discipline. This circumstance, added to his well-known integrity and dauntless courage, made me very desirous to engage him. A youth passed in solitude, my best years spent under your gentle and feminine fosterage, has so refined the groundwork of my character that I cannot overcome an intense distaste to the usual brutality exercised on board ship: I have never believed it to be necessary, and when I heard of a mariner equally noted for his kindliness of heart and the respect and obedience paid to him by his crew, I felt myself peculiarly fortunate in being able to secure his services. I heard of him first in rather a romantic manner, from a lady who owes to him the happiness of her life. This, briefly, is his story. Some years ago he loved a young Russian lady of moderate fortune, and having amassed a considerable sum in prize-money, the father of the girl consented to the match. He saw his mistress once before the destined ceremony; but she was bathed in tears, and throwing herself at his feet, entreated him to spare her, confessing at the same time that she loved another, but that he was poor, and that her father would never consent to the union. My generous friend reassured the suppliant, and on being informed of the name of her lover, instantly abandoned his pursuit. He had already bought a farm with his money, on which he had designed to pass the remainder of his life; but he bestowed the whole on his rival, together with the remains of his prize-money to purchase stock, and then himself solicited the young woman’s father to consent to her marriage with her lover. But the old man decidedly refused, thinking himself bound in honour to my friend, who, when he found the father inexorable, quitted his country, nor returned until he heard that his former mistress was married according to her inclinations. “What a noble fellow!” you will exclaim. He is so; but then he is wholly uneducated: he is as silent as a Turk, and a kind of ignorant carelessness attends him, which, while it renders his conduct the more astonishing, detracts from the interest and sympathy which otherwise he would command.

Yet do not suppose, because I complain a little or because I can conceive a consolation for my toils which I may never know, that I am wavering in my resolutions. Those are as fixed as fate, and my voyage is only now delayed until the weather shall permit my embarkation. The winter has been dreadfully severe, but the spring promises well, and it is considered as a remarkably early season, so that perhaps I may sail sooner than I expected. I shall do nothing rashly: you know me sufficiently to confide in my prudence and considerateness whenever the safety of others is committed to my care. I cannot describe to you my sensations on the near prospect of my undertaking. It is impossible to communicate to you a conception of the trembling sensation, half pleasurable and half fearful, with which I am preparing to depart. I am going to unexplored regions, to “the land of mist and snow,” but I shall kill no albatross; therefore do not be alarmed for my safety or if I should come back to you as worn and woeful as the “Ancient Mariner.” You will smile at my allusion, but I will disclose a secret. I have often attributed my attachment to, my passionate enthusiasm for, the dangerous mysteries of ocean to that production of the most imaginative of modern poets. There is something at work in my soul which I do not understand. I am practically industrious—painstaking, a workman to execute with perseverance and labour—but besides this there is a love for the marvellous, a belief in the marvellous, intertwined in all my projects, which hurries me out of the common pathways of men, even to the wild sea and unvisited regions I am about to explore.

But to return to dearer considerations. Shall I meet you again, after having traversed immense seas, and returned by the most southern cape of Africa or America? I dare not expect such success, yet I cannot bear to look on the reverse of the picture. Continue for the present to write to me by every opportunity: I may receive your letters on some occasions when I need them most to support my spirits. I love you very tenderly. Remember me with affection, should you never hear from me again. I write a few lines in haste to say that I am safe—and well advanced on my voyage. This letter will reach England by a merchantman now on its homeward voyage from Archangel; more fortunate than I, who may not see my native land, perhaps, for many years. I am, however, in good spirits: my men are bold and apparently firm of purpose, nor do the floating sheets of ice that continually pass us, indicating the dangers of the region towards which we are advancing, appear to dismay them. We have already reached a very high latitude; but it is the height of summer, and although not so warm as in England, the southern gales, which blow us speedily towards those shores which I so ardently desire to attain, breathe a degree of renovating warmth which I had not expected.

No incidents have hitherto befallen us that would make a figure in a letter. One or two stiff gales and the springing of a leak are accidents which experienced navigators scarcely remember to record, and I shall be well content if nothing worse happen to us during our voyage. Adieu, my dear Margaret. Be assured that for my own sake, as well as yours, I will not rashly encounter danger. I will be cool, persevering, and prudent. But success _shall_ crown my endeavours. Wherefore not? Thus far I have gone, tracing a secure way over the pathless seas, the very stars themselves being witnesses and testimonies of my triumph. Why not still proceed over the untamed yet obedient element? What can stop the determined heart and resolved will of man? So strange an accident has happened to us that I cannot forbear recording it, although it is very probable that you will see me before these papers can come into your possession. Last Monday (July 31st) we were nearly surrounded by ice, which closed in the ship on all sides, scarcely leaving her the sea-room in which she floated. Our situation was somewhat dangerous, especially as we were compassed round by a very thick fog. We accordingly lay to, hoping that some change would take place in the atmosphere and weather.

About two o’clock the mist cleared away, and we beheld, stretched out in every direction, vast and irregular plains of ice, which seemed to have no end. Some of my comrades groaned, and my own mind began to grow watchful with anxious thoughts, when a strange sight suddenly attracted our attention and diverted our solicitude from our own situation. We perceived a low carriage, fixed on a sledge and drawn by dogs, pass on towards the north, at the distance of half a mile; a being which had the shape of a man, but apparently of gigantic stature, sat in the sledge and guided the dogs. We watched the rapid progress of the traveller with our telescopes until he was lost among the distant inequalities of the ice. This appearance excited our unqualified wonder. We were, as we believed, many hundred miles from any land; but this apparition seemed to denote that it was not, in reality, so distant as we had supposed. Shut in, however, by ice, it was impossible to follow his track, which we had observed with the greatest attention.

About two hours after this occurrence we heard the ground sea, and before night the ice broke and freed our ship. We, however, lay to until the morning, fearing to encounter in the dark those large loose masses which float about after the breaking up of the ice. I profited of this time to rest for a few hours. In the morning, however, as soon as it was light, I went upon deck and found all the sailors busy on one side of the vessel, apparently talking to someone in the sea. It was, in fact, a sledge, like that we had seen before, which had drifted towards us in the night on a large fragment of ice. Only one dog remained alive; but there was a human being within it whom the sailors were persuading to enter the vessel. He was not, as the other traveller seemed to be, a savage inhabitant of some undiscovered island, but a European. When I appeared on deck the master said, “Here is our captain, and he will not allow you to perish on the open sea.”

On perceiving me, the stranger addressed me in English, although with a foreign accent. “Before I come on board your vessel,” said he, “will you have the kindness to inform me whither you are bound?” You may conceive my astonishment on hearing such a question addressed to me from a man on the brink of destruction and to whom I should have supposed that my vessel would have been a resource which he would not have exchanged for the most precious wealth the earth can afford. I replied, however, that we were on a voyage of discovery towards the northern pole. Upon hearing this he appeared satisfied and consented to come on board. Good God! Margaret, if you had seen the man who thus capitulated for his safety, your surprise would have been boundless. His limbs were nearly frozen, and his body dreadfully emaciated by fatigue and suffering. I never saw a man in so wretched a condition. We attempted to carry him into the cabin, but as soon as he had quitted the fresh air he fainted. We accordingly brought him back to the deck and restored him to animation by rubbing him with brandy and forcing him to swallow a small quantity. As soon as he showed signs of life we wrapped him up in blankets and placed him near the chimney of the kitchen stove. By slow degrees he recovered and ate a little soup, which restored him wonderfully.

Two days passed in this manner before he was able to speak, and I often feared that his sufferings had deprived him of understanding. When he had in some measure recovered, I removed him to my own cabin and attended on him as much as my duty would permit. I never saw a more interesting creature: his eyes have generally an expression of wildness, and even madness, but there are moments when, if anyone performs an act of kindness towards him or does him any the most trifling service, his whole countenance is lighted up, as it were, with a beam of benevolence and sweetness that I never saw equalled. But he is generally melancholy and despairing, and sometimes he gnashes his teeth, as if impatient of the weight of woes that oppresses him. When my guest was a little recovered I had great trouble to keep off the men, who wished to ask him a thousand questions; but I would not allow him to be tormented by their idle curiosity, in a state of body and mind whose restoration evidently depended upon entire repose. Once, however, the lieutenant asked why he had come so far upon the ice in so strange a vehicle.

This aroused the stranger’s attention, and he asked a multitude of questions concerning the route which the dæmon, as he called him, had pursued. Soon after, when he was alone with me, he said, “I have, doubtless, excited your curiosity, as well as that of these good people; but you are too considerate to make inquiries.” Soon after this he inquired if I thought that the breaking up of the ice had destroyed the other sledge. I replied that I could not answer with any degree of certainty, for the ice had not broken until near midnight, and the traveller might have arrived at a place of safety before that time; but of this I could not judge. From this time a new spirit of life animated the decaying frame of the stranger. He manifested the greatest eagerness to be upon deck to watch for the sledge which had before appeared; but I have persuaded him to remain in the cabin, for he is far too weak to sustain the rawness of the atmosphere. I have promised that someone should watch for him and give him instant notice if any new object should appear in sight.

Such is my journal of what relates to this strange occurrence up to the present day. The stranger has gradually improved in health but is very silent and appears uneasy when anyone except myself enters his cabin. Yet his manners are so conciliating and gentle that the sailors are all interested in him, although they have had very little communication with him. For my own part, I begin to love him as a brother, and his constant and deep grief fills me with sympathy and compassion. He must have been a noble creature in his better days, being even now in wreck so attractive and amiable. I said in one of my letters, my dear Margaret, that I should find no friend on the wide ocean; yet I have found a man who, before his spirit had been broken by misery, I should have been happy to have possessed as the brother of my heart. My affection for my guest increases every day. He excites at once my admiration and my pity to an astonishing degree. How can I see so noble a creature destroyed by misery without feeling the most poignant grief? He is so gentle, yet so wise; his mind is so cultivated, and when he speaks, although his words are culled with the choicest art, yet they flow with rapidity and unparalleled eloquence.

He is now much recovered from his illness and is continually on the deck, apparently watching for the sledge that preceded his own. Yet, although unhappy, he is not so utterly occupied by his own misery but that he interests himself deeply in the projects of others. He has frequently conversed with me on mine, which I have communicated to him without disguise. He entered attentively into all my arguments in favour of my eventual success and into every minute detail of the measures I had taken to secure it. I was easily led by the sympathy which he evinced to use the language of my heart, to give utterance to the burning ardour of my soul and to say, with all the fervour that warmed me, how gladly I would sacrifice my fortune, my existence, my every hope, to the furtherance of my enterprise. One man’s life or death were but a small price to pay for the acquirement of the knowledge which I sought, for the dominion I should acquire and transmit over the elemental foes of our race. As I spoke, a dark gloom spread over my listener’s countenance. At first I perceived that he tried to suppress his emotion; he placed his hands before his eyes, and my voice quivered and failed me as I beheld tears trickle fast from between his fingers; a groan burst from his heaving breast. I paused; at length he spoke, in broken accents: “Unhappy man! Do you share my madness? Have you drunk also of the intoxicating draught? Hear me; let me reveal my tale, and you will dash the cup from your lips!”

Such words, you may imagine, strongly excited my curiosity; but the paroxysm of grief that had seized the stranger overcame his weakened powers, and many hours of repose and tranquil conversation were necessary to restore his composure. Having conquered the violence of his feelings, he appeared to despise himself for being the slave of passion; and quelling the dark tyranny of despair, he led me again to converse concerning myself personally. He asked me the history of my earlier years. The tale was quickly told, but it awakened various trains of reflection. I spoke of my desire of finding a friend, of my thirst for a more intimate sympathy with a fellow mind than had ever fallen to my lot, and expressed my conviction that a man could boast of little happiness who did not enjoy this blessing. “I agree with you,” replied the stranger; “we are unfashioned creatures, but half made up, if one wiser, better, dearer than ourselves—such a friend ought to be—do not lend his aid to perfectionate our weak and faulty natures. I once had a friend, the most noble of human creatures, and am entitled, therefore, to judge respecting friendship. You have hope, and the world before you, and have no cause for despair. But I—I have lost everything and cannot begin life anew.”

As he said this his countenance became expressive of a calm, settled grief that touched me to the heart. But he was silent and presently retired to his cabin. Even broken in spirit as he is, no one can feel more deeply than he does the beauties of nature. The starry sky, the sea, and every sight afforded by these wonderful regions seem still to have the power of elevating his soul from earth. Such a man has a double existence: he may suffer misery and be overwhelmed by disappointments, yet when he has retired into himself, he will be like a celestial spirit that has a halo around him, within whose circle no grief or folly ventures. Will you smile at the enthusiasm I express concerning this divine wanderer? You would not if you saw him. You have been tutored and refined by books and retirement from the world, and you are therefore somewhat fastidious; but this only renders you the more fit to appreciate the extraordinary merits of this wonderful man. Sometimes I have endeavoured to discover what quality it is which he possesses that elevates him so immeasurably above any other person I ever knew. I believe it to be an intuitive discernment, a quick but never-failing power of judgment, a penetration into the causes of things, unequalled for clearness and precision; add to this a facility of expression and a voice whose varied intonations are soul-subduing music.

Yesterday the stranger said to me, “You may easily perceive, Captain Walton, that I have suffered great and unparalleled misfortunes. I had determined at one time that the memory of these evils should die with me, but you have won me to alter my determination. You seek for knowledge and wisdom, as I once did; and I ardently hope that the gratification of your wishes may not be a serpent to sting you, as mine has been. I do not know that the relation of my disasters will be useful to you; yet, when I reflect that you are pursuing the same course, exposing yourself to the same dangers which have rendered me what I am, I imagine that you may deduce an apt moral from my tale, one that may direct you if you succeed in your undertaking and console you in case of failure. Prepare to hear of occurrences which are usually deemed marvellous. Were we among the tamer scenes of nature I might fear to encounter your unbelief, perhaps your ridicule; but many things will appear possible in these wild and mysterious regions which would provoke the laughter of those unacquainted with the ever-varied powers of nature; nor can I doubt but that my tale conveys in its series internal evidence of the truth of the events of which it is composed.”

You may easily imagine that I was much gratified by the offered communication, yet I could not endure that he should renew his grief by a recital of his misfortunes. I felt the greatest eagerness to hear the promised narrative, partly from curiosity and partly from a strong desire to ameliorate his fate if it were in my power. I expressed these feelings in my answer. “I thank you,” he replied, “for your sympathy, but it is useless; my fate is nearly fulfilled. I wait but for one event, and then I shall repose in peace. I understand your feeling,” continued he, perceiving that I wished to interrupt him; “but you are mistaken, my friend, if thus you will allow me to name you; nothing can alter my destiny; listen to my history, and you will perceive how irrevocably it is determined.” He then told me that he would commence his narrative the next day when I should be at leisure. This promise drew from me the warmest thanks. I have resolved every night, when I am not imperatively occupied by my duties, to record, as nearly as possible in his own words, what he has related during the day. If I should be engaged, I will at least make notes. This manuscript will doubtless afford you the greatest pleasure; but to me, who know him, and who hear it from his own lips—with what interest and sympathy shall I read it in some future day! Even now, as I commence my task, his full-toned voice swells in my ears; his lustrous eyes dwell on me with all their melancholy sweetness; I see his thin hand raised in animation, while the lineaments of his face are irradiated by the soul within. Strange and harrowing must be his story, frightful the storm which embraced the gallant vessel on its course and wrecked it—thus!

I am by birth a Genevese, and my family is one of the most distinguished of that republic. My ancestors had been for many years counsellors and syndics, and my father had filled several public situations with honour and reputation. He was respected by all who knew him for his integrity and indefatigable attention to public business. He passed his younger days perpetually occupied by the affairs of his country; a variety of circumstances had prevented his marrying early, nor was it until the decline of life that he became a husband and the father of a family. As the circumstances of his marriage illustrate his character, I cannot refrain from relating them. One of his most intimate friends was a merchant who, from a flourishing state, fell, through numerous mischances, into poverty. This man, whose name was Beaufort, was of a proud and unbending disposition and could not bear to live in poverty and oblivion in the same country where he had formerly been distinguished for his rank and magnificence. Having paid his debts, therefore, in the most honourable manner, he retreated with his daughter to the town of Lucerne, where he lived unknown and in wretchedness. My father loved Beaufort with the truest friendship and was deeply grieved by his retreat in these unfortunate circumstances. He bitterly deplored the false pride which led his friend to a conduct so little worthy of the affection that united them. He lost no time in endeavouring to seek him out, with the hope of persuading him to begin the world again through his credit and assistance.

Beaufort had taken effectual measures to conceal himself, and it was ten months before my father discovered his abode. Overjoyed at this discovery, he hastened to the house, which was situated in a mean street near the Reuss. But when he entered, misery and despair alone welcomed him. Beaufort had saved but a very small sum of money from the wreck of his fortunes, but it was sufficient to provide him with sustenance for some months, and in the meantime he hoped to procure some respectable employment in a merchant’s house. The interval was, consequently, spent in inaction; his grief only became more deep and rankling when he had leisure for reflection, and at length it took so fast hold of his mind that at the end of three months he lay on a bed of sickness, incapable of any exertion. His daughter attended him with the greatest tenderness, but she saw with despair that their little fund was rapidly decreasing and that there was no other prospect of support. But Caroline Beaufort possessed a mind of an uncommon mould, and her courage rose to support her in her adversity. She procured plain work; she plaited straw and by various means contrived to earn a pittance scarcely sufficient to support life.

Several months passed in this manner. Her father grew worse; her time was more entirely occupied in attending him; her means of subsistence decreased; and in the tenth month her father died in her arms, leaving her an orphan and a beggar. This last blow overcame her, and she knelt by Beaufort’s coffin weeping bitterly, when my father entered the chamber. He came like a protecting spirit to the poor girl, who committed herself to his care; and after the interment of his friend he conducted her to Geneva and placed her under the protection of a relation. Two years after this event Caroline became his wife. There was a considerable difference between the ages of my parents, but this circumstance seemed to unite them only closer in bonds of devoted affection. There was a sense of justice in my father’s upright mind which rendered it necessary that he should approve highly to love strongly. Perhaps during former years he had suffered from the late-discovered unworthiness of one beloved and so was disposed to set a greater value on tried worth. There was a show of gratitude and worship in his attachment to my mother, differing wholly from the doting fondness of age, for it was inspired by reverence for her virtues and a desire to be the means of, in some degree, recompensing her for the sorrows she had endured, but which gave inexpressible grace to his behaviour to her. Everything was made to yield to her wishes and her convenience. He strove to shelter her, as a fair exotic is sheltered by the gardener, from every rougher wind and to surround her with all that could tend to excite pleasurable emotion in her soft and benevolent mind. Her health, and even the tranquillity of her hitherto constant spirit, had been shaken by what she had gone through. During the two years that had elapsed previous to their marriage my father had gradually relinquished all his public functions; and immediately after their union they sought the pleasant climate of Italy, and the change of scene and interest attendant on a tour through that land of wonders, as a restorative for her weakened frame.

From Italy they visited Germany and France. I, their eldest child, was born at Naples, and as an infant accompanied them in their rambles. I remained for several years their only child. Much as they were attached to each other, they seemed to draw inexhaustible stores of affection from a very mine of love to bestow them upon me. My mother’s tender caresses and my father’s smile of benevolent pleasure while regarding me are my first recollections. I was their plaything and their idol, and something better—their child, the innocent and helpless creature bestowed on them by Heaven, whom to bring up to good, and whose future lot it was in their hands to direct to happiness or misery, according as they fulfilled their duties towards me. With this deep consciousness of what they owed towards the being to which they had given life, added to the active spirit of tenderness that animated both, it may be imagined that while during every hour of my infant life I received a lesson of patience, of charity, and of self-control, I was so guided by a silken cord that all seemed but one train of enjoyment to me.

For a long time I was their only care. My mother had much desired to have a daughter, but I continued their single offspring. When I was about five years old, while making an excursion beyond the frontiers of Italy, they passed a week on the shores of the Lake of Como. Their benevolent disposition often made them enter the cottages of the poor. This, to my mother, was more than a duty; it was a necessity, a passion—remembering what she had suffered, and how she had been relieved—for her to act in her turn the guardian angel to the afflicted. During one of their walks a poor cot in the foldings of a vale attracted their notice as being singularly disconsolate, while the number of half-clothed children gathered about it spoke of penury in its worst shape. One day, when my father had gone by himself to Milan, my mother, accompanied by me, visited this abode. She found a peasant and his wife, hard working, bent down by care and labour, distributing a scanty meal to five hungry babes. Among these there was one which attracted my mother far above all the rest. She appeared of a different stock. The four others were dark-eyed, hardy little vagrants; this child was thin and very fair. Her hair was the brightest living gold, and despite the poverty of her clothing, seemed to set a crown of distinction on her head. Her brow was clear and ample, her blue eyes cloudless, and her lips and the moulding of her face so expressive of sensibility and sweetness that none could behold her without looking on her as of a distinct species, a being heaven-sent, and bearing a celestial stamp in all her features.

The peasant woman, perceiving that my mother fixed eyes of wonder and admiration on this lovely girl, eagerly communicated her history. She was not her child, but the daughter of a Milanese nobleman. Her mother was a German and had died on giving her birth. The infant had been placed with these good people to nurse: they were better off then. They had not been long married, and their eldest child was but just born. The father of their charge was one of those Italians nursed in the memory of the antique glory of Italy—one among the _schiavi ognor frementi,_ who exerted himself to obtain the liberty of his country. He became the victim of its weakness. Whether he had died or still lingered in the dungeons of Austria was not known. His property was confiscated; his child became an orphan and a beggar. She continued with her foster parents and bloomed in their rude abode, fairer than a garden rose among dark-leaved brambles. When my father returned from Milan, he found playing with me in the hall of our villa a child fairer than pictured cherub—a creature who seemed to shed radiance from her looks and whose form and motions were lighter than the chamois of the hills. The apparition was soon explained. With his permission my mother prevailed on her rustic guardians to yield their charge to her. They were fond of the sweet orphan. Her presence had seemed a blessing to them, but it would be unfair to her to keep her in poverty and want when Providence afforded her such powerful protection. They consulted their village priest, and the result was that Elizabeth Lavenza became the inmate of my parents’ house—my more than sister—the beautiful and adored companion of all my occupations and my pleasures.

Everyone loved Elizabeth. The passionate and almost reverential attachment with which all regarded her became, while I shared it, my pride and my delight. On the evening previous to her being brought to my home, my mother had said playfully, “I have a pretty present for my Victor—tomorrow he shall have it.” And when, on the morrow, she presented Elizabeth to me as her promised gift, I, with childish seriousness, interpreted her words literally and looked upon Elizabeth as mine—mine to protect, love, and cherish. All praises bestowed on her I received as made to a possession of my own. We called each other familiarly by the name of cousin. No word, no expression could body forth the kind of relation in which she stood to me—my more than sister, since till death she was to be mine only. We were brought up together; there was not quite a year difference in our ages. I need not say that we were strangers to any species of disunion or dispute. Harmony was the soul of our companionship, and the diversity and contrast that subsisted in our characters drew us nearer together. Elizabeth was of a calmer and more concentrated disposition; but, with all my ardour, I was capable of a more intense application and was more deeply smitten with the thirst for knowledge. She busied herself with following the aerial creations of the poets; and in the majestic and wondrous scenes which surrounded our Swiss home —the sublime shapes of the mountains, the changes of the seasons, tempest and calm, the silence of winter, and the life and turbulence of our Alpine summers—she found ample scope for admiration and delight. While my companion contemplated with a serious and satisfied spirit the magnificent appearances of things, I delighted in investigating their causes. The world was to me a secret which I desired to divine. Curiosity, earnest research to learn the hidden laws of nature, gladness akin to rapture, as they were unfolded to me, are among the earliest sensations I can remember.

On the birth of a second son, my junior by seven years, my parents gave up entirely their wandering life and fixed themselves in their native country. We possessed a house in Geneva, and a _campagne_ on Belrive, the eastern shore of the lake, at the distance of rather more than a league from the city. We resided principally in the latter, and the lives of my parents were passed in considerable seclusion. It was my temper to avoid a crowd and to attach myself fervently to a few. I was indifferent, therefore, to my school-fellows in general; but I united myself in the bonds of the closest friendship to one among them. Henry Clerval was the son of a merchant of Geneva. He was a boy of singular talent and fancy. He loved enterprise, hardship, and even danger for its own sake. He was deeply read in books of chivalry and romance. He composed heroic songs and began to write many a tale of enchantment and knightly adventure. He tried to make us act plays and to enter into masquerades, in which the characters were drawn from the heroes of Roncesvalles, of the Round Table of King Arthur, and the chivalrous train who shed their blood to redeem the holy sepulchre from the hands of the infidels.

No human being could have passed a happier childhood than myself. My parents were possessed by the very spirit of kindness and indulgence. We felt that they were not the tyrants to rule our lot according to their caprice, but the agents and creators of all the many delights which we enjoyed. When I mingled with other families I distinctly discerned how peculiarly fortunate my lot was, and gratitude assisted the development of filial love. My temper was sometimes violent, and my passions vehement; but by some law in my temperature they were turned not towards childish pursuits but to an eager desire to learn, and not to learn all things indiscriminately. I confess that neither the structure of languages, nor the code of governments, nor the politics of various states possessed attractions for me. It was the secrets of heaven and earth that I desired to learn; and whether it was the outward substance of things or the inner spirit of nature and the mysterious soul of man that occupied me, still my inquiries were directed to the metaphysical, or in its highest sense, the physical secrets of the world.

Meanwhile Clerval occupied himself, so to speak, with the moral relations of things. The busy stage of life, the virtues of heroes, and the actions of men were his theme; and his hope and his dream was to become one among those whose names are recorded in story as the gallant and adventurous benefactors of our species. The saintly soul of Elizabeth shone like a shrine-dedicated lamp in our peaceful home. Her sympathy was ours; her smile, her soft voice, the sweet glance of her celestial eyes, were ever there to bless and animate us. She was the living spirit of love to soften and attract; I might have become sullen in my study, rough through the ardour of my nature, but that she was there to subdue me to a semblance of her own gentleness. And Clerval—could aught ill entrench on the noble spirit of Clerval? Yet he might not have been so perfectly humane, so thoughtful in his generosity, so full of kindness and tenderness amidst his passion for adventurous exploit, had she not unfolded to him the real loveliness of beneficence and made the doing good the end and aim of his soaring ambition.

I feel exquisite pleasure in dwelling on the recollections of childhood, before misfortune had tainted my mind and changed its bright visions of extensive usefulness into gloomy and narrow reflections upon self. Besides, in drawing the picture of my early days, I also record those events which led, by insensible steps, to my after tale of misery, for when I would account to myself for the birth of that passion which afterwards ruled my destiny I find it arise, like a mountain river, from ignoble and almost forgotten sources; but, swelling as it proceeded, it became the torrent which, in its course, has swept away all my hopes and joys. Natural philosophy is the genius that has regulated my fate; I desire, therefore, in this narration, to state those facts which led to my predilection for that science. When I was thirteen years of age we all went on a party of pleasure to the baths near Thonon; the inclemency of the weather obliged us to remain a day confined to the inn. In this house I chanced to find a volume of the works of Cornelius Agrippa. I opened it with apathy; the theory which he attempts to demonstrate and the wonderful facts which he relates soon changed this feeling into enthusiasm. A new light seemed to dawn upon my mind, and bounding with joy, I communicated my discovery to my father. My father looked carelessly at the title page of my book and said, “Ah! Cornelius Agrippa! My dear Victor, do not waste your time upon this; it is sad trash.”

If, instead of this remark, my father had taken the pains to explain to me that the principles of Agrippa had been entirely exploded and that a modern system of science had been introduced which possessed much greater powers than the ancient, because the powers of the latter were chimerical, while those of the former were real and practical, under such circumstances I should certainly have thrown Agrippa aside and have contented my imagination, warmed as it was, by returning with greater ardour to my former studies. It is even possible that the train of my ideas would never have received the fatal impulse that led to my ruin. But the cursory glance my father had taken of my volume by no means assured me that he was acquainted with its contents, and I continued to read with the greatest avidity. When I returned home my first care was to procure the whole works of this author, and afterwards of Paracelsus and Albertus Magnus. I read and studied the wild fancies of these writers with delight; they appeared to me treasures known to few besides myself. I have described myself as always having been imbued with a fervent longing to penetrate the secrets of nature. In spite of the intense labour and wonderful discoveries of modern philosophers, I always came from my studies discontented and unsatisfied. Sir Isaac Newton is said to have avowed that he felt like a child picking up shells beside the great and unexplored ocean of truth. Those of his successors in each branch of natural philosophy with whom I was acquainted appeared even to my boy’s apprehensions as tyros engaged in the same pursuit.

The untaught peasant beheld the elements around him and was acquainted with their practical uses. The most learned philosopher knew little more. He had partially unveiled the face of Nature, but her immortal lineaments were still a wonder and a mystery. He might dissect, anatomise, and give names; but, not to speak of a final cause, causes in their secondary and tertiary grades were utterly unknown to him. I had gazed upon the fortifications and impediments that seemed to keep human beings from entering the citadel of nature, and rashly and ignorantly I had repined. But here were books, and here were men who had penetrated deeper and knew more. I took their word for all that they averred, and I became their disciple. It may appear strange that such should arise in the eighteenth century; but while I followed the routine of education in the schools of Geneva, I was, to a great degree, self-taught with regard to my favourite studies. My father was not scientific, and I was left to struggle with a child’s blindness, added to a student’s thirst for knowledge. Under the guidance of my new preceptors I entered with the greatest diligence into the search of the philosopher’s stone and the elixir of life; but the latter soon obtained my undivided attention. Wealth was an inferior object, but what glory would attend the discovery if I could banish disease from the human frame and render man invulnerable to any but a violent death!

Nor were these my only visions. The raising of ghosts or devils was a promise liberally accorded by my favourite authors, the fulfilment of which I most eagerly sought; and if my incantations were always unsuccessful, I attributed the failure rather to my own inexperience and mistake than to a want of skill or fidelity in my instructors. And thus for a time I was occupied by exploded systems, mingling, like an unadept, a thousand contradictory theories and floundering desperately in a very slough of multifarious knowledge, guided by an ardent imagination and childish reasoning, till an accident again changed the current of my ideas. When I was about fifteen years old we had retired to our house near Belrive, when we witnessed a most violent and terrible thunderstorm. It advanced from behind the mountains of Jura, and the thunder burst at once with frightful loudness from various quarters of the heavens. I remained, while the storm lasted, watching its progress with curiosity and delight. As I stood at the door, on a sudden I beheld a stream of fire issue from an old and beautiful oak which stood about twenty yards from our house; and so soon as the dazzling light vanished, the oak had disappeared, and nothing remained but a blasted stump. When we visited it the next morning, we found the tree shattered in a singular manner. It was not splintered by the shock, but entirely reduced to thin ribbons of wood. I never beheld anything so utterly destroyed.

Before this I was not unacquainted with the more obvious laws of electricity. On this occasion a man of great research in natural philosophy was with us, and excited by this catastrophe, he entered on the explanation of a theory which he had formed on the subject of electricity and galvanism, which was at once new and astonishing to me. All that he said threw greatly into the shade Cornelius Agrippa, Albertus Magnus, and Paracelsus, the lords of my imagination; but by some fatality the overthrow of these men disinclined me to pursue my accustomed studies. It seemed to me as if nothing would or could ever be known. All that had so long engaged my attention suddenly grew despicable. By one of those caprices of the mind which we are perhaps most subject to in early youth, I at once gave up my former occupations, set down natural history and all its progeny as a deformed and abortive creation, and entertained the greatest disdain for a would-be science which could never even step within the threshold of real knowledge. In this mood of mind I betook myself to the mathematics and the branches of study appertaining to that science as being built upon secure foundations, and so worthy of my consideration.

Thus strangely are our souls constructed, and by such slight ligaments are we bound to prosperity or ruin. When I look back, it seems to me as if this almost miraculous change of inclination and will was the immediate suggestion of the guardian angel of my life—the last effort made by the spirit of preservation to avert the storm that was even then hanging in the stars and ready to envelop me. Her victory was announced by an unusual tranquillity and gladness of soul which followed the relinquishing of my ancient and latterly tormenting studies. It was thus that I was to be taught to associate evil with their prosecution, happiness with their disregard. It was a strong effort of the spirit of good, but it was ineffectual. Destiny was too potent, and her immutable laws had decreed my utter and terrible destruction. When I had attained the age of seventeen my parents resolved that I should become a student at the university of Ingolstadt. I had hitherto attended the schools of Geneva, but my father thought it necessary for the completion of my education that I should be made acquainted with other customs than those of my native country. My departure was therefore fixed at an early date, but before the day resolved upon could arrive, the first misfortune of my life occurred—an omen, as it were, of my future misery.

Elizabeth had caught the scarlet fever; her illness was severe, and she was in the greatest danger. During her illness many arguments had been urged to persuade my mother to refrain from attending upon her. She had at first yielded to our entreaties, but when she heard that the life of her favourite was menaced, she could no longer control her anxiety. She attended her sickbed; her watchful attentions triumphed over the malignity of the distemper—Elizabeth was saved, but the consequences of this imprudence were fatal to her preserver. On the third day my mother sickened; her fever was accompanied by the most alarming symptoms, and the looks of her medical attendants prognosticated the worst event. On her deathbed the fortitude and benignity of this best of women did not desert her. She joined the hands of Elizabeth and myself. “My children,” she said, “my firmest hopes of future happiness were placed on the prospect of your union. This expectation will now be the consolation of your father. Elizabeth, my love, you must supply my place to my younger children. Alas! I regret that I am taken from you; and, happy and beloved as I have been, is it not hard to quit you all? But these are not thoughts befitting me; I will endeavour to resign myself cheerfully to death and will indulge a hope of meeting you in another world.”

She died calmly, and her countenance expressed affection even in death. I need not describe the feelings of those whose dearest ties are rent by that most irreparable evil, the void that presents itself to the soul, and the despair that is exhibited on the countenance. It is so long before the mind can persuade itself that she whom we saw every day and whose very existence appeared a part of our own can have departed for ever—that the brightness of a beloved eye can have been extinguished and the sound of a voice so familiar and dear to the ear can be hushed, never more to be heard. These are the reflections of the first days; but when the lapse of time proves the reality of the evil, then the actual bitterness of grief commences. Yet from whom has not that rude hand rent away some dear connection? And why should I describe a sorrow which all have felt, and must feel? The time at length arrives when grief is rather an indulgence than a necessity; and the smile that plays upon the lips, although it may be deemed a sacrilege, is not banished. My mother was dead, but we had still duties which we ought to perform; we must continue our course with the rest and learn to think ourselves fortunate whilst one remains whom the spoiler has not seized.

My departure for Ingolstadt, which had been deferred by these events, was now again determined upon. I obtained from my father a respite of some weeks. It appeared to me sacrilege so soon to leave the repose, akin to death, of the house of mourning and to rush into the thick of life. I was new to sorrow, but it did not the less alarm me. I was unwilling to quit the sight of those that remained to me, and above all, I desired to see my sweet Elizabeth in some degree consoled. She indeed veiled her grief and strove to act the comforter to us all. She looked steadily on life and assumed its duties with courage and zeal. She devoted herself to those whom she had been taught to call her uncle and cousins. Never was she so enchanting as at this time, when she recalled the sunshine of her smiles and spent them upon us. She forgot even her own regret in her endeavours to make us forget. The day of my departure at length arrived. Clerval spent the last evening with us. He had endeavoured to persuade his father to permit him to accompany me and to become my fellow student, but in vain. His father was a narrow-minded trader and saw idleness and ruin in the aspirations and ambition of his son. Henry deeply felt the misfortune of being debarred from a liberal education. He said little, but when he spoke I read in his kindling eye and in his animated glance a restrained but firm resolve not to be chained to the miserable details of commerce.

We sat late. We could not tear ourselves away from each other nor persuade ourselves to say the word “Farewell!” It was said, and we retired under the pretence of seeking repose, each fancying that the other was deceived; but when at morning’s dawn I descended to the carriage which was to convey me away, they were all there—my father again to bless me, Clerval to press my hand once more, my Elizabeth to renew her entreaties that I would write often and to bestow the last feminine attentions on her playmate and friend. I threw myself into the chaise that was to convey me away and indulged in the most melancholy reflections. I, who had ever been surrounded by amiable companions, continually engaged in endeavouring to bestow mutual pleasure—I was now alone. In the university whither I was going I must form my own friends and be my own protector. My life had hitherto been remarkably secluded and domestic, and this had given me invincible repugnance to new countenances. I loved my brothers, Elizabeth, and Clerval; these were “old familiar faces,” but I believed myself totally unfitted for the company of strangers. Such were my reflections as I commenced my journey; but as I proceeded, my spirits and hopes rose. I ardently desired the acquisition of knowledge. I had often, when at home, thought it hard to remain during my youth cooped up in one place and had longed to enter the world and take my station among other human beings. Now my desires were complied with, and it would, indeed, have been folly to repent.

I had sufficient leisure for these and many other reflections during my journey to Ingolstadt, which was long and fatiguing. At length the high white steeple of the town met my eyes. I alighted and was conducted to my solitary apartment to spend the evening as I pleased. The next morning I delivered my letters of introduction and paid a visit to some of the principal professors. Chance—or rather the evil influence, the Angel of Destruction, which asserted omnipotent sway over me from the moment I turned my reluctant steps from my father’s door—led me first to M. Krempe, professor of natural philosophy. He was an uncouth man, but deeply imbued in the secrets of his science. He asked me several questions concerning my progress in the different branches of science appertaining to natural philosophy. I replied carelessly, and partly in contempt, mentioned the names of my alchemists as the principal authors I had studied. The professor stared. “Have you,” he said, “really spent your time in studying such nonsense?” I replied in the affirmative. “Every minute,” continued M. Krempe with warmth, “every instant that you have wasted on those books is utterly and entirely lost. You have burdened your memory with exploded systems and useless names. Good God! In what desert land have you lived, where no one was kind enough to inform you that these fancies which you have so greedily imbibed are a thousand years old and as musty as they are ancient? I little expected, in this enlightened and scientific age, to find a disciple of Albertus Magnus and Paracelsus. My dear sir, you must begin your studies entirely anew.”

So saying, he stepped aside and wrote down a list of several books treating of natural philosophy which he desired me to procure, and dismissed me after mentioning that in the beginning of the following week he intended to commence a course of lectures upon natural philosophy in its general relations, and that M. Waldman, a fellow professor, would lecture upon chemistry the alternate days that he omitted. I returned home not disappointed, for I have said that I had long considered those authors useless whom the professor reprobated; but I returned not at all the more inclined to recur to these studies in any shape. M. Krempe was a little squat man with a gruff voice and a repulsive countenance; the teacher, therefore, did not prepossess me in favour of his pursuits. In rather a too philosophical and connected a strain, perhaps, I have given an account of the conclusions I had come to concerning them in my early years. As a child I had not been content with the results promised by the modern professors of natural science. With a confusion of ideas only to be accounted for by my extreme youth and my want of a guide on such matters, I had retrod the steps of knowledge along the paths of time and exchanged the discoveries of recent inquirers for the dreams of forgotten alchemists. Besides, I had a contempt for the uses of modern natural philosophy. It was very different when the masters of the science sought immortality and power; such views, although futile, were grand; but now the scene was changed. The ambition of the inquirer seemed to limit itself to the annihilation of those visions on which my interest in science was chiefly founded. I was required to exchange chimeras of boundless grandeur for realities of little worth.

Such were my reflections during the first two or three days of my residence at Ingolstadt, which were chiefly spent in becoming acquainted with the localities and the principal residents in my new abode. But as the ensuing week commenced, I thought of the information which M. Krempe had given me concerning the lectures. And although I could not consent to go and hear that little conceited fellow deliver sentences out of a pulpit, I recollected what he had said of M. Waldman, whom I had never seen, as he had hitherto been out of town. Partly from curiosity and partly from idleness, I went into the lecturing room, which M. Waldman entered shortly after. This professor was very unlike his colleague. He appeared about fifty years of age, but with an aspect expressive of the greatest benevolence; a few grey hairs covered his temples, but those at the back of his head were nearly black. His person was short but remarkably erect and his voice the sweetest I had ever heard. He began his lecture by a recapitulation of the history of chemistry and the various improvements made by different men of learning, pronouncing with fervour the names of the most distinguished discoverers. He then took a cursory view of the present state of the science and explained many of its elementary terms. After having made a few preparatory experiments, he concluded with a panegyric upon modern chemistry, the terms of which I shall never forget:

“The ancient teachers of this science,” said he, “promised impossibilities and performed nothing. The modern masters promise very little; they know that metals cannot be transmuted and that the elixir of life is a chimera but these philosophers, whose hands seem only made to dabble in dirt, and their eyes to pore over the microscope or crucible, have indeed performed miracles. They penetrate into the recesses of nature and show how she works in her hiding-places. They ascend into the heavens; they have discovered how the blood circulates, and the nature of the air we breathe. They have acquired new and almost unlimited powers; they can command the thunders of heaven, mimic the earthquake, and even mock the invisible world with its own shadows.” Such were the professor’s words—rather let me say such the words of the fate—enounced to destroy me. As he went on I felt as if my soul were grappling with a palpable enemy; one by one the various keys were touched which formed the mechanism of my being; chord after chord was sounded, and soon my mind was filled with one thought, one conception, one purpose. So much has been done, exclaimed the soul of Frankenstein—more, far more, will I achieve; treading in the steps already marked, I will pioneer a new way, explore unknown powers, and unfold to the world the deepest mysteries of creation.

I closed not my eyes that night. My internal being was in a state of insurrection and turmoil; I felt that order would thence arise, but I had no power to produce it. By degrees, after the morning’s dawn, sleep came. I awoke, and my yesternight’s thoughts were as a dream. There only remained a resolution to return to my ancient studies and to devote myself to a science for which I believed myself to possess a natural talent. On the same day I paid M. Waldman a visit. His manners in private were even more mild and attractive than in public, for there was a certain dignity in his mien during his lecture which in his own house was replaced by the greatest affability and kindness. I gave him pretty nearly the same account of my former pursuits as I had given to his fellow professor. He heard with attention the little narration concerning my studies and smiled at the names of Cornelius Agrippa and Paracelsus, but without the contempt that M. Krempe had exhibited. He said that “These were men to whose indefatigable zeal modern philosophers were indebted for most of the foundations of their knowledge. They had left to us, as an easier task, to give new names and arrange in connected classifications the facts which they in a great degree had been the instruments of bringing to light. The labours of men of genius, however erroneously directed, scarcely ever fail in ultimately turning to the solid advantage of mankind.” I listened to his statement, which was delivered without any presumption or affectation, and then added that his lecture had removed my prejudices against modern chemists; I expressed myself in measured terms, with the modesty and deference due from a youth to his instructor, without letting escape (inexperience in life would have made me ashamed) any of the enthusiasm which stimulated my intended labours. I requested his advice concerning the books I ought to procure.

“I am happy,” said M. Waldman, “to have gained a disciple; and if your application equals your ability, I have no doubt of your success. Chemistry is that branch of natural philosophy in which the greatest improvements have been and may be made; it is on that account that I have made it my peculiar study; but at the same time, I have not neglected the other branches of science. A man would make but a very sorry chemist if he attended to that department of human knowledge alone. If your wish is to become really a man of science and not merely a petty experimentalist, I should advise you to apply to every branch of natural philosophy, including mathematics.” He then took me into his laboratory and explained to me the uses of his various machines, instructing me as to what I ought to procure and promising me the use of his own when I should have advanced far enough in the science not to derange their mechanism. He also gave me the list of books which I had requested, and I took my leave.

From this day natural philosophy, and particularly chemistry, in the most comprehensive sense of the term, became nearly my sole occupation. I read with ardour those works, so full of genius and discrimination, which modern inquirers have written on these subjects. I attended the lectures and cultivated the acquaintance of the men of science of the university, and I found even in M. Krempe a great deal of sound sense and real information, combined, it is true, with a repulsive physiognomy and manners, but not on that account the less valuable. In M. Waldman I found a true friend. His gentleness was never tinged by dogmatism, and his instructions were given with an air of frankness and good nature that banished every idea of pedantry. In a thousand ways he smoothed for me the path of knowledge and made the most abstruse inquiries clear and facile to my apprehension. My application was at first fluctuating and uncertain; it gained strength as I proceeded and soon became so ardent and eager that the stars often disappeared in the light of morning whilst I was yet engaged in my laboratory.

As I applied so closely, it may be easily conceived that my progress was rapid. My ardour was indeed the astonishment of the students, and my proficiency that of the masters. Professor Krempe often asked me, with a sly smile, how Cornelius Agrippa went on, whilst M. Waldman expressed the most heartfelt exultation in my progress. Two years passed in this manner, during which I paid no visit to Geneva, but was engaged, heart and soul, in the pursuit of some discoveries which I hoped to make. None but those who have experienced them can conceive of the enticements of science. In other studies you go as far as others have gone before you, and there is nothing more to know; but in a scientific pursuit there is continual food for discovery and wonder. A mind of moderate capacity which closely pursues one study must infallibly arrive at great proficiency in that study; and I, who continually sought the attainment of one object of pursuit and was solely wrapped up in this, improved so rapidly that at the end of two years I made some discoveries in the improvement of some chemical instruments, which procured me great esteem and admiration at the university. When I had arrived at this point and had become as well acquainted with the theory and practice of natural philosophy as depended on the lessons of any of the professors at Ingolstadt, my residence there being no longer conducive to my improvements, I thought of returning to my friends and my native town, when an incident happened that protracted my stay.

One of the phenomena which had peculiarly attracted my attention was the structure of the human frame, and, indeed, any animal endued with life. Whence, I often asked myself, did the principle of life proceed? It was a bold question, and one which has ever been considered as a mystery; yet with how many things are we upon the brink of becoming acquainted, if cowardice or carelessness did not restrain our inquiries. I revolved these circumstances in my mind and determined thenceforth to apply myself more particularly to those branches of natural philosophy which relate to physiology. Unless I had been animated by an almost supernatural enthusiasm, my application to this study would have been irksome and almost intolerable. To examine the causes of life, we must first have recourse to death. I became acquainted with the science of anatomy, but this was not sufficient; I must also observe the natural decay and corruption of the human body. In my education my father had taken the greatest precautions that my mind should be impressed with no supernatural horrors. I do not ever remember to have trembled at a tale of superstition or to have feared the apparition of a spirit. Darkness had no effect upon my fancy, and a churchyard was to me merely the receptacle of bodies deprived of life, which, from being the seat of beauty and strength, had become food for the worm. Now I was led to examine the cause and progress of this decay and forced to spend days and nights in vaults and charnel-houses. My attention was fixed upon every object the most insupportable to the delicacy of the human feelings. I saw how the fine form of man was degraded and wasted; I beheld the corruption of death succeed to the blooming cheek of life; I saw how the worm inherited the wonders of the eye and brain. I paused, examining and analysing all the minutiae of causation, as exemplified in the change from life to death, and death to life, until from the midst of this darkness a sudden light broke in upon me—a light so brilliant and wondrous, yet so simple, that while I became dizzy with the immensity of the prospect which it illustrated, I was surprised that among so many men of genius who had directed their inquiries towards the same science, that I alone should be reserved to discover so astonishing a secret.

Remember, I am not recording the vision of a madman. The sun does not more certainly shine in the heavens than that which I now affirm is true. Some miracle might have produced it, yet the stages of the discovery were distinct and probable. After days and nights of incredible labour and fatigue, I succeeded in discovering the cause of generation and life; nay, more, I became myself capable of bestowing animation upon lifeless matter. The astonishment which I had at first experienced on this discovery soon gave place to delight and rapture. After so much time spent in painful labour, to arrive at once at the summit of my desires was the most gratifying consummation of my toils. But this discovery was so great and overwhelming that all the steps by which I had been progressively led to it were obliterated, and I beheld only the result. What had been the study and desire of the wisest men since the creation of the world was now within my grasp. Not that, like a magic scene, it all opened upon me at once: the information I had obtained was of a nature rather to direct my endeavours so soon as I should point them towards the object of my search than to exhibit that object already accomplished. I was like the Arabian who had been buried with the dead and found a passage to life, aided only by one glimmering and seemingly ineffectual light.

I see by your eagerness and the wonder and hope which your eyes express, my friend, that you expect to be informed of the secret with which I am acquainted; that cannot be; listen patiently until the end of my story, and you will easily perceive why I am reserved upon that subject. I will not lead you on, unguarded and ardent as I then was, to your destruction and infallible misery. Learn from me, if not by my precepts, at least by my example, how dangerous is the acquirement of knowledge and how much happier that man is who believes his native town to be the world, than he who aspires to become greater than his nature will allow. When I found so astonishing a power placed within my hands, I hesitated a long time concerning the manner in which I should employ it. Although I possessed the capacity of bestowing animation, yet to prepare a frame for the reception of it, with all its intricacies of fibres, muscles, and veins, still remained a work of inconceivable difficulty and labour. I doubted at first whether I should attempt the creation of a being like myself, or one of simpler organization; but my imagination was too much exalted by my first success to permit me to doubt of my ability to give life to an animal as complex and wonderful as man. The materials at present within my command hardly appeared adequate to so arduous an undertaking, but I doubted not that I should ultimately succeed. I prepared myself for a multitude of reverses; my operations might be incessantly baffled, and at last my work be imperfect, yet when I considered the improvement which every day takes place in science and mechanics, I was encouraged to hope my present attempts would at least lay the foundations of future success. Nor could I consider the magnitude and complexity of my plan as any argument of its impracticability. It was with these feelings that I began the creation of a human being. As the minuteness of the parts formed a great hindrance to my speed, I resolved, contrary to my first intention, to make the being of a gigantic stature, that is to say, about eight feet in height, and proportionably large. After having formed this determination and having spent some months in successfully collecting and arranging my materials, I began.

No one can conceive the variety of feelings which bore me onwards, like a hurricane, in the first enthusiasm of success. Life and death appeared to me ideal bounds, which I should first break through, and pour a torrent of light into our dark world. A new species would bless me as its creator and source; many happy and excellent natures would owe their being to me. No father could claim the gratitude of his child so completely as I should deserve theirs. Pursuing these reflections, I thought that if I could bestow animation upon lifeless matter, I might in process of time (although I now found it impossible) renew life where death had apparently devoted the body to corruption. These thoughts supported my spirits, while I pursued my undertaking with unremitting ardour. My cheek had grown pale with study, and my person had become emaciated with confinement. Sometimes, on the very brink of certainty, I failed; yet still I clung to the hope which the next day or the next hour might realise. One secret which I alone possessed was the hope to which I had dedicated myself; and the moon gazed on my midnight labours, while, with unrelaxed and breathless eagerness, I pursued nature to her hiding-places. Who shall conceive the horrors of my secret toil as I dabbled among the unhallowed damps of the grave or tortured the living animal to animate the lifeless clay? My limbs now tremble, and my eyes swim with the remembrance; but then a resistless and almost frantic impulse urged me forward; I seemed to have lost all soul or sensation but for this one pursuit. It was indeed but a passing trance, that only made me feel with renewed acuteness so soon as, the unnatural stimulus ceasing to operate, I had returned to my old habits. I collected bones from charnel-houses and disturbed, with profane fingers, the tremendous secrets of the human frame. In a solitary chamber, or rather cell, at the top of the house, and separated from all the other apartments by a gallery and staircase, I kept my workshop of filthy creation; my eyeballs were starting from their sockets in attending to the details of my employment. The dissecting room and the slaughter-house furnished many of my materials; and often did my human nature turn with loathing from my occupation, whilst, still urged on by an eagerness which perpetually increased, I brought my work near to a conclusion.

The summer months passed while I was thus engaged, heart and soul, in one pursuit. It was a most beautiful season; never did the fields bestow a more plentiful harvest or the vines yield a more luxuriant vintage, but my eyes were insensible to the charms of nature. And the same feelings which made me neglect the scenes around me caused me also to forget those friends who were so many miles absent, and whom I had not seen for so long a time. I knew my silence disquieted them, and I well remembered the words of my father: “I know that while you are pleased with yourself you will think of us with affection, and we shall hear regularly from you. You must pardon me if I regard any interruption in your correspondence as a proof that your other duties are equally neglected.” I knew well therefore what would be my father’s feelings, but I could not tear my thoughts from my employment, loathsome in itself, but which had taken an irresistible hold of my imagination. I wished, as it were, to procrastinate all that related to my feelings of affection until the great object, which swallowed up every habit of my nature, should be completed.

I then thought that my father would be unjust if he ascribed my neglect to vice or faultiness on my part, but I am now convinced that he was justified in conceiving that I should not be altogether free from blame. A human being in perfection ought always to preserve a calm and peaceful mind and never to allow passion or a transitory desire to disturb his tranquillity. I do not think that the pursuit of knowledge is an exception to this rule. If the study to which you apply yourself has a tendency to weaken your affections and to destroy your taste for those simple pleasures in which no alloy can possibly mix, then that study is certainly unlawful, that is to say, not befitting the human mind. If this rule were always observed; if no man allowed any pursuit whatsoever to interfere with the tranquillity of his domestic affections, Greece had not been enslaved, Cæsar would have spared his country, America would have been discovered more gradually, and the empires of Mexico and Peru had not been destroyed.

My father made no reproach in his letters and only took notice of my silence by inquiring into my occupations more particularly than before. Winter, spring, and summer passed away during my labours; but I did not watch the blossom or the expanding leaves—sights which before always yielded me supreme delight—so deeply was I engrossed in my occupation. The leaves of that year had withered before my work drew near to a close, and now every day showed me more plainly how well I had succeeded. But my enthusiasm was checked by my anxiety, and I appeared rather like one doomed by slavery to toil in the mines, or any other unwholesome trade than an artist occupied by his favourite employment. Every night I was oppressed by a slow fever, and I became nervous to a most painful degree; the fall of a leaf startled me, and I shunned my fellow creatures as if I had been guilty of a crime. Sometimes I grew alarmed at the wreck I perceived that I had become; the energy of my purpose alone sustained me: my labours would soon end, and I believed that exercise and amusement would then drive away incipient disease; and I promised myself both of these when my creation should be complete.

It was on a dreary night of November that I beheld the accomplishment of my toils. With an anxiety that almost amounted to agony, I collected the instruments of life around me, that I might infuse a spark of being into the lifeless thing that lay at my feet. It was already one in the morning; the rain pattered dismally against the panes, and my candle was nearly burnt out, when, by the glimmer of the half-extinguished light, I saw the dull yellow eye of the creature open; it breathed hard, and a convulsive motion agitated its limbs. How can I describe my emotions at this catastrophe, or how delineate the wretch whom with such infinite pains and care I had endeavoured to form? His limbs were in proportion, and I had selected his features as beautiful. Beautiful! Great God! His yellow skin scarcely covered the work of muscles and arteries beneath; his hair was of a lustrous black, and flowing; his teeth of a pearly whiteness; but these luxuriances only formed a more horrid contrast with his watery eyes, that seemed almost of the same colour as the dun-white sockets in which they were set, his shrivelled complexion and straight black lips.

The different accidents of life are not so changeable as the feelings of human nature. I had worked hard for nearly two years, for the sole purpose of infusing life into an inanimate body. For this I had deprived myself of rest and health. I had desired it with an ardour that far exceeded moderation; but now that I had finished, the beauty of the dream vanished, and breathless horror and disgust filled my heart. Unable to endure the aspect of the being I had created, I rushed out of the room and continued a long time traversing my bed-chamber, unable to compose my mind to sleep. At length lassitude succeeded to the tumult I had before endured, and I threw myself on the bed in my clothes, endeavouring to seek a few moments of forgetfulness. But it was in vain; I slept, indeed, but I was disturbed by the wildest dreams. I thought I saw Elizabeth, in the bloom of health, walking in the streets of Ingolstadt. Delighted and surprised, I embraced her, but as I imprinted the first kiss on her lips, they became livid with the hue of death; her features appeared to change, and I thought that I held the corpse of my dead mother in my arms; a shroud enveloped her form, and I saw the grave-worms crawling in the folds of the flannel. I started from my sleep with horror; a cold dew covered my forehead, my teeth chattered, and every limb became convulsed; when, by the dim and yellow light of the moon, as it forced its way through the window shutters, I beheld the wretch—the miserable monster whom I had created. He held up the curtain of the bed; and his eyes, if eyes they may be called, were fixed on me. His jaws opened, and he muttered some inarticulate sounds, while a grin wrinkled his cheeks. He might have spoken, but I did not hear; one hand was stretched out, seemingly to detain me, but I escaped and rushed downstairs. I took refuge in the courtyard belonging to the house which I inhabited, where I remained during the rest of the night, walking up and down in the greatest agitation, listening attentively, catching and fearing each sound as if it were to announce the approach of the demoniacal corpse to which I had so miserably given life.

Oh! No mortal could support the horror of that countenance. A mummy again endued with animation could not be so hideous as that wretch. I had gazed on him while unfinished; he was ugly then, but when those muscles and joints were rendered capable of motion, it became a thing such as even Dante could not have conceived. I passed the night wretchedly. Sometimes my pulse beat so quickly and hardly that I felt the palpitation of every artery; at others, I nearly sank to the ground through languor and extreme weakness. Mingled with this horror, I felt the bitterness of disappointment; dreams that had been my food and pleasant rest for so long a space were now become a hell to me; and the change was so rapid, the overthrow so complete! Morning, dismal and wet, at length dawned and discovered to my sleepless and aching eyes the church of Ingolstadt, its white steeple and clock, which indicated the sixth hour. The porter opened the gates of the court, which had that night been my asylum, and I issued into the streets, pacing them with quick steps, as if I sought to avoid the wretch whom I feared every turning of the street would present to my view. I did not dare return to the apartment which I inhabited, but felt impelled to hurry on, although drenched by the rain which poured from a black and comfortless sky.

I continued walking in this manner for some time, endeavouring by bodily exercise to ease the load that weighed upon my mind. I traversed the streets without any clear conception of where I was or what I was doing. My heart palpitated in the sickness of fear, and I hurried on with irregular steps, not daring to look about me: Like one who, on a lonely road, Doth walk in fear and dread, And, having once turned round, walks on, And turns no more his head; Because he knows a frightful fiend Doth close behind him tread. [Coleridge’s “Ancient Mariner.”] Continuing thus, I came at length opposite to the inn at which the various diligences and carriages usually stopped. Here I paused, I knew not why; but I remained some minutes with my eyes fixed on a coach that was coming towards me from the other end of the street. As it drew nearer I observed that it was the Swiss diligence; it stopped just where I was standing, and on the door being opened, I perceived Henry Clerval, who, on seeing me, instantly sprung out. “My dear Frankenstein,” exclaimed he, “how glad I am to see you! How fortunate that you should be here at the very moment of my alighting!”

Nothing could equal my delight on seeing Clerval; his presence brought back to my thoughts my father, Elizabeth, and all those scenes of home so dear to my recollection. I grasped his hand, and in a moment forgot my horror and misfortune; I felt suddenly, and for the first time during many months, calm and serene joy. I welcomed my friend, therefore, in the most cordial manner, and we walked towards my college. Clerval continued talking for some time about our mutual friends and his own good fortune in being permitted to come to Ingolstadt. “You may easily believe,” said he, “how great was the difficulty to persuade my father that all necessary knowledge was not comprised in the noble art of book-keeping; and, indeed, I believe I left him incredulous to the last, for his constant answer to my unwearied entreaties was the same as that of the Dutch schoolmaster in The Vicar of Wakefield: ‘I have ten thousand florins a year without Greek, I eat heartily without Greek.’ But his affection for me at length overcame his dislike of learning, and he has permitted me to undertake a voyage of discovery to the land of knowledge.”

“Very well, and very happy, only a little uneasy that they hear from you so seldom. By the by, I mean to lecture you a little upon their account myself. But, my dear Frankenstein,” continued he, stopping short and gazing full in my face, “I did not before remark how very ill you appear; so thin and pale; you look as if you had been watching for several nights.” “You have guessed right; I have lately been so deeply engaged in one occupation that I have not allowed myself sufficient rest, as you see; but I hope, I sincerely hope, that all these employments are now at an end and that I am at length free.” I trembled excessively; I could not endure to think of, and far less to allude to, the occurrences of the preceding night. I walked with a quick pace, and we soon arrived at my college. I then reflected, and the thought made me shiver, that the creature whom I had left in my apartment might still be there, alive and walking about. I dreaded to behold this monster, but I feared still more that Henry should see him. Entreating him, therefore, to remain a few minutes at the bottom of the stairs, I darted up towards my own room. My hand was already on the lock of the door before I recollected myself. I then paused, and a cold shivering came over me. I threw the door forcibly open, as children are accustomed to do when they expect a spectre to stand in waiting for them on the other side; but nothing appeared. I stepped fearfully in: the apartment was empty, and my bedroom was also freed from its hideous guest. I could hardly believe that so great a good fortune could have befallen me, but when I became assured that my enemy had indeed fled, I clapped my hands for joy and ran down to Clerval.

We ascended into my room, and the servant presently brought breakfast; but I was unable to contain myself. It was not joy only that possessed me; I felt my flesh tingle with excess of sensitiveness, and my pulse beat rapidly. I was unable to remain for a single instant in the same place; I jumped over the chairs, clapped my hands, and laughed aloud. Clerval at first attributed my unusual spirits to joy on his arrival, but when he observed me more attentively, he saw a wildness in my eyes for which he could not account, and my loud, unrestrained, heartless laughter frightened and astonished him. “Do not ask me,” cried I, putting my hands before my eyes, for I thought I saw the dreaded spectre glide into the room; “_he_ can tell. Oh, save me! Save me!” I imagined that the monster seized me; I struggled furiously and fell down in a fit. Poor Clerval! What must have been his feelings? A meeting, which he anticipated with such joy, so strangely turned to bitterness. But I was not the witness of his grief, for I was lifeless and did not recover my senses for a long, long time.

This was the commencement of a nervous fever which confined me for several months. During all that time Henry was my only nurse. I afterwards learned that, knowing my father’s advanced age and unfitness for so long a journey, and how wretched my sickness would make Elizabeth, he spared them this grief by concealing the extent of my disorder. He knew that I could not have a more kind and attentive nurse than himself; and, firm in the hope he felt of my recovery, he did not doubt that, instead of doing harm, he performed the kindest action that he could towards them. But I was in reality very ill, and surely nothing but the unbounded and unremitting attentions of my friend could have restored me to life. The form of the monster on whom I had bestowed existence was for ever before my eyes, and I raved incessantly concerning him. Doubtless my words surprised Henry; he at first believed them to be the wanderings of my disturbed imagination, but the pertinacity with which I continually recurred to the same subject persuaded him that my disorder indeed owed its origin to some uncommon and terrible event.

By very slow degrees, and with frequent relapses that alarmed and grieved my friend, I recovered. I remember the first time I became capable of observing outward objects with any kind of pleasure, I perceived that the fallen leaves had disappeared and that the young buds were shooting forth from the trees that shaded my window. It was a divine spring, and the season contributed greatly to my convalescence. I felt also sentiments of joy and affection revive in my bosom; my gloom disappeared, and in a short time I became as cheerful as before I was attacked by the fatal passion. “Dearest Clerval,” exclaimed I, “how kind, how very good you are to me. This whole winter, instead of being spent in study, as you promised yourself, has been consumed in my sick room. How shall I ever repay you? I feel the greatest remorse for the disappointment of which I have been the occasion, but you will forgive me.” “You will repay me entirely if you do not discompose yourself, but get well as fast as you can; and since you appear in such good spirits, I may speak to you on one subject, may I not?”

“Compose yourself,” said Clerval, who observed my change of colour, “I will not mention it if it agitates you; but your father and cousin would be very happy if they received a letter from you in your own handwriting. They hardly know how ill you have been and are uneasy at your long silence.” “Is that all, my dear Henry? How could you suppose that my first thought would not fly towards those dear, dear friends whom I love and who are so deserving of my love?” “If this is your present temper, my friend, you will perhaps be glad to see a letter that has been lying here some days for you; it is from your cousin, I believe.” “You have been ill, very ill, and even the constant letters of dear kind Henry are not sufficient to reassure me on your account. You are forbidden to write—to hold a pen; yet one word from you, dear Victor, is necessary to calm our apprehensions. For a long time I have thought that each post would bring this line, and my persuasions have restrained my uncle from undertaking a journey to Ingolstadt. I have prevented his encountering the inconveniences and perhaps dangers of so long a journey, yet how often have I regretted not being able to perform it myself! I figure to myself that the task of attending on your sickbed has devolved on some mercenary old nurse, who could never guess your wishes nor minister to them with the care and affection of your poor cousin. Yet that is over now: Clerval writes that indeed you are getting better. I eagerly hope that you will confirm this intelligence soon in your own handwriting.

“Get well—and return to us. You will find a happy, cheerful home and friends who love you dearly. Your father’s health is vigorous, and he asks but to see you, but to be assured that you are well; and not a care will ever cloud his benevolent countenance. How pleased you would be to remark the improvement of our Ernest! He is now sixteen and full of activity and spirit. He is desirous to be a true Swiss and to enter into foreign service, but we cannot part with him, at least until his elder brother returns to us. My uncle is not pleased with the idea of a military career in a distant country, but Ernest never had your powers of application. He looks upon study as an odious fetter; his time is spent in the open air, climbing the hills or rowing on the lake. I fear that he will become an idler unless we yield the point and permit him to enter on the profession which he has selected. “Little alteration, except the growth of our dear children, has taken place since you left us. The blue lake and snow-clad mountains—they never change; and I think our placid home and our contented hearts are regulated by the same immutable laws. My trifling occupations take up my time and amuse me, and I am rewarded for any exertions by seeing none but happy, kind faces around me. Since you left us, but one change has taken place in our little household. Do you remember on what occasion Justine Moritz entered our family? Probably you do not; I will relate her history, therefore in a few words. Madame Moritz, her mother, was a widow with four children, of whom Justine was the third. This girl had always been the favourite of her father, but through a strange perversity, her mother could not endure her, and after the death of M. Moritz, treated her very ill. My aunt observed this, and when Justine was twelve years of age, prevailed on her mother to allow her to live at our house. The republican institutions of our country have produced simpler and happier manners than those which prevail in the great monarchies that surround it. Hence there is less distinction between the several classes of its inhabitants; and the lower orders, being neither so poor nor so despised, their manners are more refined and moral. A servant in Geneva does not mean the same thing as a servant in France and England. Justine, thus received in our family, learned the duties of a servant, a condition which, in our fortunate country, does not include the idea of ignorance and a sacrifice of the dignity of a human being.

“Justine, you may remember, was a great favourite of yours; and I recollect you once remarked that if you were in an ill humour, one glance from Justine could dissipate it, for the same reason that Ariosto gives concerning the beauty of Angelica—she looked so frank-hearted and happy. My aunt conceived a great attachment for her, by which she was induced to give her an education superior to that which she had at first intended. This benefit was fully repaid; Justine was the most grateful little creature in the world: I do not mean that she made any professions I never heard one pass her lips, but you could see by her eyes that she almost adored her protectress. Although her disposition was gay and in many respects inconsiderate, yet she paid the greatest attention to every gesture of my aunt. She thought her the model of all excellence and endeavoured to imitate her phraseology and manners, so that even now she often reminds me of her. “When my dearest aunt died every one was too much occupied in their own grief to notice poor Justine, who had attended her during her illness with the most anxious affection. Poor Justine was very ill; but other trials were reserved for her.

“One by one, her brothers and sister died; and her mother, with the exception of her neglected daughter, was left childless. The conscience of the woman was troubled; she began to think that the deaths of her favourites was a judgement from heaven to chastise her partiality. She was a Roman Catholic; and I believe her confessor confirmed the idea which she had conceived. Accordingly, a few months after your departure for Ingolstadt, Justine was called home by her repentant mother. Poor girl! She wept when she quitted our house; she was much altered since the death of my aunt; grief had given softness and a winning mildness to her manners, which had before been remarkable for vivacity. Nor was her residence at her mother’s house of a nature to restore her gaiety. The poor woman was very vacillating in her repentance. She sometimes begged Justine to forgive her unkindness, but much oftener accused her of having caused the deaths of her brothers and sister. Perpetual fretting at length threw Madame Moritz into a decline, which at first increased her irritability, but she is now at peace for ever. She died on the first approach of cold weather, at the beginning of this last winter. Justine has just returned to us; and I assure you I love her tenderly. She is very clever and gentle, and extremely pretty; as I mentioned before, her mien and her expression continually remind me of my dear aunt.

“I must say also a few words to you, my dear cousin, of little darling William. I wish you could see him; he is very tall of his age, with sweet laughing blue eyes, dark eyelashes, and curling hair. When he smiles, two little dimples appear on each cheek, which are rosy with health. He has already had one or two little _wives,_ but Louisa Biron is his favourite, a pretty little girl of five years of age. “Now, dear Victor, I dare say you wish to be indulged in a little gossip concerning the good people of Geneva. The pretty Miss Mansfield has already received the congratulatory visits on her approaching marriage with a young Englishman, John Melbourne, Esq. Her ugly sister, Manon, married M. Duvillard, the rich banker, last autumn. Your favourite schoolfellow, Louis Manoir, has suffered several misfortunes since the departure of Clerval from Geneva. But he has already recovered his spirits, and is reported to be on the point of marrying a lively pretty Frenchwoman, Madame Tavernier. She is a widow, and much older than Manoir; but she is very much admired, and a favourite with everybody.

“I have written myself into better spirits, dear cousin; but my anxiety returns upon me as I conclude. Write, dearest Victor,—one line—one word will be a blessing to us. Ten thousand thanks to Henry for his kindness, his affection, and his many letters; we are sincerely grateful. Adieu! my cousin; take care of yourself; and, I entreat you, write! “Dear, dear Elizabeth!” I exclaimed, when I had read her letter: “I will write instantly and relieve them from the anxiety they must feel.” I wrote, and this exertion greatly fatigued me; but my convalescence had commenced, and proceeded regularly. In another fortnight I was able to leave my chamber. One of my first duties on my recovery was to introduce Clerval to the several professors of the university. In doing this, I underwent a kind of rough usage, ill befitting the wounds that my mind had sustained. Ever since the fatal night, the end of my labours, and the beginning of my misfortunes, I had conceived a violent antipathy even to the name of natural philosophy. When I was otherwise quite restored to health, the sight of a chemical instrument would renew all the agony of my nervous symptoms. Henry saw this, and had removed all my apparatus from my view. He had also changed my apartment; for he perceived that I had acquired a dislike for the room which had previously been my laboratory. But these cares of Clerval were made of no avail when I visited the professors. M. Waldman inflicted torture when he praised, with kindness and warmth, the astonishing progress I had made in the sciences. He soon perceived that I disliked the subject; but not guessing the real cause, he attributed my feelings to modesty, and changed the subject from my improvement, to the science itself, with a desire, as I evidently saw, of drawing me out. What could I do? He meant to please, and he tormented me. I felt as if he had placed carefully, one by one, in my view those instruments which were to be afterwards used in putting me to a slow and cruel death. I writhed under his words, yet dared not exhibit the pain I felt. Clerval, whose eyes and feelings were always quick in discerning the sensations of others, declined the subject, alleging, in excuse, his total ignorance; and the conversation took a more general turn. I thanked my friend from my heart, but I did not speak. I saw plainly that he was surprised, but he never attempted to draw my secret from me; and although I loved him with a mixture of affection and reverence that knew no bounds, yet I could never persuade myself to confide in him that event which was so often present to my recollection, but which I feared the detail to another would only impress more deeply.

M. Krempe was not equally docile; and in my condition at that time, of almost insupportable sensitiveness, his harsh blunt encomiums gave me even more pain than the benevolent approbation of M. Waldman. “D—n the fellow!” cried he; “why, M. Clerval, I assure you he has outstript us all. Ay, stare if you please; but it is nevertheless true. A youngster who, but a few years ago, believed in Cornelius Agrippa as firmly as in the gospel, has now set himself at the head of the university; and if he is not soon pulled down, we shall all be out of countenance.—Ay, ay,” continued he, observing my face expressive of suffering, “M. Frankenstein is modest; an excellent quality in a young man. Young men should be diffident of themselves, you know, M. Clerval: I was myself when young; but that wears out in a very short time.” Clerval had never sympathised in my tastes for natural science; and his literary pursuits differed wholly from those which had occupied me. He came to the university with the design of making himself complete master of the oriental languages, and thus he should open a field for the plan of life he had marked out for himself. Resolved to pursue no inglorious career, he turned his eyes toward the East, as affording scope for his spirit of enterprise. The Persian, Arabic, and Sanskrit languages engaged his attention, and I was easily induced to enter on the same studies. Idleness had ever been irksome to me, and now that I wished to fly from reflection, and hated my former studies, I felt great relief in being the fellow-pupil with my friend, and found not only instruction but consolation in the works of the orientalists. I did not, like him, attempt a critical knowledge of their dialects, for I did not contemplate making any other use of them than temporary amusement. I read merely to understand their meaning, and they well repaid my labours. Their melancholy is soothing, and their joy elevating, to a degree I never experienced in studying the authors of any other country. When you read their writings, life appears to consist in a warm sun and a garden of roses,—in the smiles and frowns of a fair enemy, and the fire that consumes your own heart. How different from the manly and heroical poetry of Greece and Rome!

Summer passed away in these occupations, and my return to Geneva was fixed for the latter end of autumn; but being delayed by several accidents, winter and snow arrived, the roads were deemed impassable, and my journey was retarded until the ensuing spring. I felt this delay very bitterly; for I longed to see my native town and my beloved friends. My return had only been delayed so long, from an unwillingness to leave Clerval in a strange place, before he had become acquainted with any of its inhabitants. The winter, however, was spent cheerfully; and although the spring was uncommonly late, when it came its beauty compensated for its dilatoriness. The month of May had already commenced, and I expected the letter daily which was to fix the date of my departure, when Henry proposed a pedestrian tour in the environs of Ingolstadt, that I might bid a personal farewell to the country I had so long inhabited. I acceded with pleasure to this proposition: I was fond of exercise, and Clerval had always been my favourite companion in the ramble of this nature that I had taken among the scenes of my native country.

We passed a fortnight in these perambulations: my health and spirits had long been restored, and they gained additional strength from the salubrious air I breathed, the natural incidents of our progress, and the conversation of my friend. Study had before secluded me from the intercourse of my fellow-creatures, and rendered me unsocial; but Clerval called forth the better feelings of my heart; he again taught me to love the aspect of nature, and the cheerful faces of children. Excellent friend! how sincerely you did love me, and endeavour to elevate my mind until it was on a level with your own. A selfish pursuit had cramped and narrowed me, until your gentleness and affection warmed and opened my senses; I became the same happy creature who, a few years ago, loved and beloved by all, had no sorrow or care. When happy, inanimate nature had the power of bestowing on me the most delightful sensations. A serene sky and verdant fields filled me with ecstasy. The present season was indeed divine; the flowers of spring bloomed in the hedges, while those of summer were already in bud. I was undisturbed by thoughts which during the preceding year had pressed upon me, notwithstanding my endeavours to throw them off, with an invincible burden.

Henry rejoiced in my gaiety, and sincerely sympathised in my feelings: he exerted himself to amuse me, while he expressed the sensations that filled his soul. The resources of his mind on this occasion were truly astonishing: his conversation was full of imagination; and very often, in imitation of the Persian and Arabic writers, he invented tales of wonderful fancy and passion. At other times he repeated my favourite poems, or drew me out into arguments, which he supported with great ingenuity. We returned to our college on a Sunday afternoon: the peasants were dancing, and every one we met appeared gay and happy. My own spirits were high, and I bounded along with feelings of unbridled joy and hilarity. “You have probably waited impatiently for a letter to fix the date of your return to us; and I was at first tempted to write only a few lines, merely mentioning the day on which I should expect you. But that would be a cruel kindness, and I dare not do it. What would be your surprise, my son, when you expected a happy and glad welcome, to behold, on the contrary, tears and wretchedness? And how, Victor, can I relate our misfortune? Absence cannot have rendered you callous to our joys and griefs; and how shall I inflict pain on my long absent son? I wish to prepare you for the woeful news, but I know it is impossible; even now your eye skims over the page to seek the words which are to convey to you the horrible tidings.

“Last Thursday (May 7th), I, my niece, and your two brothers, went to walk in Plainpalais. The evening was warm and serene, and we prolonged our walk farther than usual. It was already dusk before we thought of returning; and then we discovered that William and Ernest, who had gone on before, were not to be found. We accordingly rested on a seat until they should return. Presently Ernest came, and enquired if we had seen his brother; he said, that he had been playing with him, that William had run away to hide himself, and that he vainly sought for him, and afterwards waited for a long time, but that he did not return. “This account rather alarmed us, and we continued to search for him until night fell, when Elizabeth conjectured that he might have returned to the house. He was not there. We returned again, with torches; for I could not rest, when I thought that my sweet boy had lost himself, and was exposed to all the damps and dews of night; Elizabeth also suffered extreme anguish. About five in the morning I discovered my lovely boy, whom the night before I had seen blooming and active in health, stretched on the grass livid and motionless; the print of the murder’s finger was on his neck.

“He was conveyed home, and the anguish that was visible in my countenance betrayed the secret to Elizabeth. She was very earnest to see the corpse. At first I attempted to prevent her but she persisted, and entering the room where it lay, hastily examined the neck of the victim, and clasping her hands exclaimed, ‘O God! I have murdered my darling child!’ “She fainted, and was restored with extreme difficulty. When she again lived, it was only to weep and sigh. She told me, that that same evening William had teased her to let him wear a very valuable miniature that she possessed of your mother. This picture is gone, and was doubtless the temptation which urged the murderer to the deed. We have no trace of him at present, although our exertions to discover him are unremitted; but they will not restore my beloved William! “Come, dearest Victor; you alone can console Elizabeth. She weeps continually, and accuses herself unjustly as the cause of his death; her words pierce my heart. We are all unhappy; but will not that be an additional motive for you, my son, to return and be our comforter? Your dear mother! Alas, Victor! I now say, Thank God she did not live to witness the cruel, miserable death of her youngest darling!

“Come, Victor; not brooding thoughts of vengeance against the assassin, but with feelings of peace and gentleness, that will heal, instead of festering, the wounds of our minds. Enter the house of mourning, my friend, but with kindness and affection for those who love you, and not with hatred for your enemies. Clerval, who had watched my countenance as I read this letter, was surprised to observe the despair that succeeded the joy I at first expressed on receiving news from my friends. I threw the letter on the table, and covered my face with my hands. “My dear Frankenstein,” exclaimed Henry, when he perceived me weep with bitterness, “are you always to be unhappy? My dear friend, what has happened?” I motioned him to take up the letter, while I walked up and down the room in the extremest agitation. Tears also gushed from the eyes of Clerval, as he read the account of my misfortune. During our walk, Clerval endeavoured to say a few words of consolation; he could only express his heartfelt sympathy. “Poor William!” said he, “dear lovely child, he now sleeps with his angel mother! Who that had seen him bright and joyous in his young beauty, but must weep over his untimely loss! To die so miserably; to feel the murderer’s grasp! How much more a murdered that could destroy radiant innocence! Poor little fellow! one only consolation have we; his friends mourn and weep, but he is at rest. The pang is over, his sufferings are at an end for ever. A sod covers his gentle form, and he knows no pain. He can no longer be a subject for pity; we must reserve that for his miserable survivors.”

Clerval spoke thus as we hurried through the streets; the words impressed themselves on my mind and I remembered them afterwards in solitude. But now, as soon as the horses arrived, I hurried into a cabriolet, and bade farewell to my friend. My journey was very melancholy. At first I wished to hurry on, for I longed to console and sympathise with my loved and sorrowing friends; but when I drew near my native town, I slackened my progress. I could hardly sustain the multitude of feelings that crowded into my mind. I passed through scenes familiar to my youth, but which I had not seen for nearly six years. How altered every thing might be during that time! One sudden and desolating change had taken place; but a thousand little circumstances might have by degrees worked other alterations, which, although they were done more tranquilly, might not be the less decisive. Fear overcame me; I dared no advance, dreading a thousand nameless evils that made me tremble, although I was unable to define them. I remained two days at Lausanne, in this painful state of mind. I contemplated the lake: the waters were placid; all around was calm; and the snowy mountains, “the palaces of nature,” were not changed. By degrees the calm and heavenly scene restored me, and I continued my journey towards Geneva.

The road ran by the side of the lake, which became narrower as I approached my native town. I discovered more distinctly the black sides of Jura, and the bright summit of Mont Blanc. I wept like a child. “Dear mountains! my own beautiful lake! how do you welcome your wanderer? Your summits are clear; the sky and lake are blue and placid. Is this to prognosticate peace, or to mock at my unhappiness?” I fear, my friend, that I shall render myself tedious by dwelling on these preliminary circumstances; but they were days of comparative happiness, and I think of them with pleasure. My country, my beloved country! who but a native can tell the delight I took in again beholding thy streams, thy mountains, and, more than all, thy lovely lake! Yet, as I drew nearer home, grief and fear again overcame me. Night also closed around; and when I could hardly see the dark mountains, I felt still more gloomily. The picture appeared a vast and dim scene of evil, and I foresaw obscurely that I was destined to become the most wretched of human beings. Alas! I prophesied truly, and failed only in one single circumstance, that in all the misery I imagined and dreaded, I did not conceive the hundredth part of the anguish I was destined to endure.

It was completely dark when I arrived in the environs of Geneva; the gates of the town were already shut; and I was obliged to pass the night at Secheron, a village at the distance of half a league from the city. The sky was serene; and, as I was unable to rest, I resolved to visit the spot where my poor William had been murdered. As I could not pass through the town, I was obliged to cross the lake in a boat to arrive at Plainpalais. During this short voyage I saw the lightning playing on the summit of Mont Blanc in the most beautiful figures. The storm appeared to approach rapidly, and, on landing, I ascended a low hill, that I might observe its progress. It advanced; the heavens were clouded, and I soon felt the rain coming slowly in large drops, but its violence quickly increased. I quitted my seat, and walked on, although the darkness and storm increased every minute, and the thunder burst with a terrific crash over my head. It was echoed from Salêve, the Juras, and the Alps of Savoy; vivid flashes of lightning dazzled my eyes, illuminating the lake, making it appear like a vast sheet of fire; then for an instant every thing seemed of a pitchy darkness, until the eye recovered itself from the preceding flash. The storm, as is often the case in Switzerland, appeared at once in various parts of the heavens. The most violent storm hung exactly north of the town, over the part of the lake which lies between the promontory of Belrive and the village of Copêt. Another storm enlightened Jura with faint flashes; and another darkened and sometimes disclosed the Môle, a peaked mountain to the east of the lake.

While I watched the tempest, so beautiful yet terrific, I wandered on with a hasty step. This noble war in the sky elevated my spirits; I clasped my hands, and exclaimed aloud, “William, dear angel! this is thy funeral, this thy dirge!” As I said these words, I perceived in the gloom a figure which stole from behind a clump of trees near me; I stood fixed, gazing intently: I could not be mistaken. A flash of lightning illuminated the object, and discovered its shape plainly to me; its gigantic stature, and the deformity of its aspect more hideous than belongs to humanity, instantly informed me that it was the wretch, the filthy dæmon, to whom I had given life. What did he there? Could he be (I shuddered at the conception) the murderer of my brother? No sooner did that idea cross my imagination, than I became convinced of its truth; my teeth chattered, and I was forced to lean against a tree for support. The figure passed me quickly, and I lost it in the gloom. Nothing in human shape could have destroyed the fair child. _He_ was the murderer! I could not doubt it. The mere presence of the idea was an irresistible proof of the fact. I thought of pursuing the devil; but it would have been in vain, for another flash discovered him to me hanging among the rocks of the nearly perpendicular ascent of Mont Salêve, a hill that bounds Plainpalais on the south. He soon reached the summit, and disappeared.

I remained motionless. The thunder ceased; but the rain still continued, and the scene was enveloped in an impenetrable darkness. I revolved in my mind the events which I had until now sought to forget: the whole train of my progress toward the creation; the appearance of the works of my own hands at my bedside; its departure. Two years had now nearly elapsed since the night on which he first received life; and was this his first crime? Alas! I had turned loose into the world a depraved wretch, whose delight was in carnage and misery; had he not murdered my brother? No one can conceive the anguish I suffered during the remainder of the night, which I spent, cold and wet, in the open air. But I did not feel the inconvenience of the weather; my imagination was busy in scenes of evil and despair. I considered the being whom I had cast among mankind, and endowed with the will and power to effect purposes of horror, such as the deed which he had now done, nearly in the light of my own vampire, my own spirit let loose from the grave, and forced to destroy all that was dear to me.

Day dawned; and I directed my steps towards the town. The gates were open, and I hastened to my father’s house. My first thought was to discover what I knew of the murderer, and cause instant pursuit to be made. But I paused when I reflected on the story that I had to tell. A being whom I myself had formed, and endued with life, had met me at midnight among the precipices of an inaccessible mountain. I remembered also the nervous fever with which I had been seized just at the time that I dated my creation, and which would give an air of delirium to a tale otherwise so utterly improbable. I well knew that if any other had communicated such a relation to me, I should have looked upon it as the ravings of insanity. Besides, the strange nature of the animal would elude all pursuit, even if I were so far credited as to persuade my relatives to commence it. And then of what use would be pursuit? Who could arrest a creature capable of scaling the overhanging sides of Mont Salêve? These reflections determined me, and I resolved to remain silent.

It was about five in the morning when I entered my father’s house. I told the servants not to disturb the family, and went into the library to attend their usual hour of rising. Six years had elapsed, passed in a dream but for one indelible trace, and I stood in the same place where I had last embraced my father before my departure for Ingolstadt. Beloved and venerable parent! He still remained to me. I gazed on the picture of my mother, which stood over the mantel-piece. It was an historical subject, painted at my father’s desire, and represented Caroline Beaufort in an agony of despair, kneeling by the coffin of her dead father. Her garb was rustic, and her cheek pale; but there was an air of dignity and beauty, that hardly permitted the sentiment of pity. Below this picture was a miniature of William; and my tears flowed when I looked upon it. While I was thus engaged, Ernest entered: he had heard me arrive, and hastened to welcome me: “Welcome, my dearest Victor,” said he. “Ah! I wish you had come three months ago, and then you would have found us all joyous and delighted. You come to us now to share a misery which nothing can alleviate; yet your presence will, I hope, revive our father, who seems sinking under his misfortune; and your persuasions will induce poor Elizabeth to cease her vain and tormenting self-accusations.—Poor William! he was our darling and our pride!”

Tears, unrestrained, fell from my brother’s eyes; a sense of mortal agony crept over my frame. Before, I had only imagined the wretchedness of my desolated home; the reality came on me as a new, and a not less terrible, disaster. I tried to calm Ernest; I enquired more minutely concerning my father, and here I named my cousin. “She most of all,” said Ernest, “requires consolation; she accused herself of having caused the death of my brother, and that made her very wretched. But since the murderer has been discovered—” “The murderer discovered! Good God! how can that be? who could attempt to pursue him? It is impossible; one might as well try to overtake the winds, or confine a mountain-stream with a straw. I saw him too; he was free last night!” “I do not know what you mean,” replied my brother, in accents of wonder, “but to us the discovery we have made completes our misery. No one would believe it at first; and even now Elizabeth will not be convinced, notwithstanding all the evidence. Indeed, who would credit that Justine Moritz, who was so amiable, and fond of all the family, could suddenly become so capable of so frightful, so appalling a crime?”

“No one did at first; but several circumstances came out, that have almost forced conviction upon us; and her own behaviour has been so confused, as to add to the evidence of facts a weight that, I fear, leaves no hope for doubt. But she will be tried today, and you will then hear all.” He then related that, the morning on which the murder of poor William had been discovered, Justine had been taken ill, and confined to her bed for several days. During this interval, one of the servants, happening to examine the apparel she had worn on the night of the murder, had discovered in her pocket the picture of my mother, which had been judged to be the temptation of the murderer. The servant instantly showed it to one of the others, who, without saying a word to any of the family, went to a magistrate; and, upon their deposition, Justine was apprehended. On being charged with the fact, the poor girl confirmed the suspicion in a great measure by her extreme confusion of manner. This was a strange tale, but it did not shake my faith; and I replied earnestly, “You are all mistaken; I know the murderer. Justine, poor, good Justine, is innocent.”

At that instant my father entered. I saw unhappiness deeply impressed on his countenance, but he endeavoured to welcome me cheerfully; and, after we had exchanged our mournful greeting, would have introduced some other topic than that of our disaster, had not Ernest exclaimed, “Good God, papa! Victor says that he knows who was the murderer of poor William.” “We do also, unfortunately,” replied my father, “for indeed I had rather have been for ever ignorant than have discovered so much depravity and ungratitude in one I valued so highly.” This speech calmed me. I was firmly convinced in my own mind that Justine, and indeed every human being, was guiltless of this murder. I had no fear, therefore, that any circumstantial evidence could be brought forward strong enough to convict her. My tale was not one to announce publicly; its astounding horror would be looked upon as madness by the vulgar. Did any one indeed exist, except I, the creator, who would believe, unless his senses convinced him, in the existence of the living monument of presumption and rash ignorance which I had let loose upon the world?

We were soon joined by Elizabeth. Time had altered her since I last beheld her; it had endowed her with loveliness surpassing the beauty of her childish years. There was the same candour, the same vivacity, but it was allied to an expression more full of sensibility and intellect. She welcomed me with the greatest affection. “Your arrival, my dear cousin,” said she, “fills me with hope. You perhaps will find some means to justify my poor guiltless Justine. Alas! who is safe, if she be convicted of crime? I rely on her innocence as certainly as I do upon my own. Our misfortune is doubly hard to us; we have not only lost that lovely darling boy, but this poor girl, whom I sincerely love, is to be torn away by even a worse fate. If she is condemned, I never shall know joy more. But she will not, I am sure she will not; and then I shall be happy again, even after the sad death of my little William.” “How kind and generous you are! every one else believes in her guilt, and that made me wretched, for I knew that it was impossible: and to see every one else prejudiced in so deadly a manner rendered me hopeless and despairing.” She wept.

“Dearest niece,” said my father, “dry your tears. If she is, as you believe, innocent, rely on the justice of our laws, and the activity with which I shall prevent the slightest shadow of partiality.” We passed a few sad hours until eleven o’clock, when the trial was to commence. My father and the rest of the family being obliged to attend as witnesses, I accompanied them to the court. During the whole of this wretched mockery of justice I suffered living torture. It was to be decided whether the result of my curiosity and lawless devices would cause the death of two of my fellow beings: one a smiling babe full of innocence and joy, the other far more dreadfully murdered, with every aggravation of infamy that could make the murder memorable in horror. Justine also was a girl of merit and possessed qualities which promised to render her life happy; now all was to be obliterated in an ignominious grave, and I the cause! A thousand times rather would I have confessed myself guilty of the crime ascribed to Justine, but I was absent when it was committed, and such a declaration would have been considered as the ravings of a madman and would not have exculpated her who suffered through me.

The appearance of Justine was calm. She was dressed in mourning, and her countenance, always engaging, was rendered, by the solemnity of her feelings, exquisitely beautiful. Yet she appeared confident in innocence and did not tremble, although gazed on and execrated by thousands, for all the kindness which her beauty might otherwise have excited was obliterated in the minds of the spectators by the imagination of the enormity she was supposed to have committed. She was tranquil, yet her tranquillity was evidently constrained; and as her confusion had before been adduced as a proof of her guilt, she worked up her mind to an appearance of courage. When she entered the court she threw her eyes round it and quickly discovered where we were seated. A tear seemed to dim her eye when she saw us, but she quickly recovered herself, and a look of sorrowful affection seemed to attest her utter guiltlessness. The trial began, and after the advocate against her had stated the charge, several witnesses were called. Several strange facts combined against her, which might have staggered anyone who had not such proof of her innocence as I had. She had been out the whole of the night on which the murder had been committed and towards morning had been perceived by a market-woman not far from the spot where the body of the murdered child had been afterwards found. The woman asked her what she did there, but she looked very strangely and only returned a confused and unintelligible answer. She returned to the house about eight o’clock, and when one inquired where she had passed the night, she replied that she had been looking for the child and demanded earnestly if anything had been heard concerning him. When shown the body, she fell into violent hysterics and kept her bed for several days. The picture was then produced which the servant had found in her pocket; and when Elizabeth, in a faltering voice, proved that it was the same which, an hour before the child had been missed, she had placed round his neck, a murmur of horror and indignation filled the court.

Justine was called on for her defence. As the trial had proceeded, her countenance had altered. Surprise, horror, and misery were strongly expressed. Sometimes she struggled with her tears, but when she was desired to plead, she collected her powers and spoke in an audible although variable voice. “God knows,” she said, “how entirely I am innocent. But I do not pretend that my protestations should acquit me; I rest my innocence on a plain and simple explanation of the facts which have been adduced against me, and I hope the character I have always borne will incline my judges to a favourable interpretation where any circumstance appears doubtful or suspicious.” She then related that, by the permission of Elizabeth, she had passed the evening of the night on which the murder had been committed at the house of an aunt at Chêne, a village situated at about a league from Geneva. On her return, at about nine o’clock, she met a man who asked her if she had seen anything of the child who was lost. She was alarmed by this account and passed several hours in looking for him, when the gates of Geneva were shut, and she was forced to remain several hours of the night in a barn belonging to a cottage, being unwilling to call up the inhabitants, to whom she was well known. Most of the night she spent here watching; towards morning she believed that she slept for a few minutes; some steps disturbed her, and she awoke. It was dawn, and she quitted her asylum, that she might again endeavour to find my brother. If she had gone near the spot where his body lay, it was without her knowledge. That she had been bewildered when questioned by the market-woman was not surprising, since she had passed a sleepless night and the fate of poor William was yet uncertain. Concerning the picture she could give no account.

“I know,” continued the unhappy victim, “how heavily and fatally this one circumstance weighs against me, but I have no power of explaining it; and when I have expressed my utter ignorance, I am only left to conjecture concerning the probabilities by which it might have been placed in my pocket. But here also I am checked. I believe that I have no enemy on earth, and none surely would have been so wicked as to destroy me wantonly. Did the murderer place it there? I know of no opportunity afforded him for so doing; or, if I had, why should he have stolen the jewel, to part with it again so soon? “I commit my cause to the justice of my judges, yet I see no room for hope. I beg permission to have a few witnesses examined concerning my character, and if their testimony shall not overweigh my supposed guilt, I must be condemned, although I would pledge my salvation on my innocence.” Several witnesses were called who had known her for many years, and they spoke well of her; but fear and hatred of the crime of which they supposed her guilty rendered them timorous and unwilling to come forward. Elizabeth saw even this last resource, her excellent dispositions and irreproachable conduct, about to fail the accused, when, although violently agitated, she desired permission to address the court.

“I am,” said she, “the cousin of the unhappy child who was murdered, or rather his sister, for I was educated by and have lived with his parents ever since and even long before his birth. It may therefore be judged indecent in me to come forward on this occasion, but when I see a fellow creature about to perish through the cowardice of her pretended friends, I wish to be allowed to speak, that I may say what I know of her character. I am well acquainted with the accused. I have lived in the same house with her, at one time for five and at another for nearly two years. During all that period she appeared to me the most amiable and benevolent of human creatures. She nursed Madame Frankenstein, my aunt, in her last illness, with the greatest affection and care and afterwards attended her own mother during a tedious illness, in a manner that excited the admiration of all who knew her, after which she again lived in my uncle’s house, where she was beloved by all the family. She was warmly attached to the child who is now dead and acted towards him like a most affectionate mother. For my own part, I do not hesitate to say that, notwithstanding all the evidence produced against her, I believe and rely on her perfect innocence. She had no temptation for such an action; as to the bauble on which the chief proof rests, if she had earnestly desired it, I should have willingly given it to her, so much do I esteem and value her.”

A murmur of approbation followed Elizabeth’s simple and powerful appeal, but it was excited by her generous interference, and not in favour of poor Justine, on whom the public indignation was turned with renewed violence, charging her with the blackest ingratitude. She herself wept as Elizabeth spoke, but she did not answer. My own agitation and anguish was extreme during the whole trial. I believed in her innocence; I knew it. Could the dæmon who had (I did not for a minute doubt) murdered my brother also in his hellish sport have betrayed the innocent to death and ignominy? I could not sustain the horror of my situation, and when I perceived that the popular voice and the countenances of the judges had already condemned my unhappy victim, I rushed out of the court in agony. The tortures of the accused did not equal mine; she was sustained by innocence, but the fangs of remorse tore my bosom and would not forgo their hold. I passed a night of unmingled wretchedness. In the morning I went to the court; my lips and throat were parched. I dared not ask the fatal question, but I was known, and the officer guessed the cause of my visit. The ballots had been thrown; they were all black, and Justine was condemned.

I cannot pretend to describe what I then felt. I had before experienced sensations of horror, and I have endeavoured to bestow upon them adequate expressions, but words cannot convey an idea of the heart-sickening despair that I then endured. The person to whom I addressed myself added that Justine had already confessed her guilt. “That evidence,” he observed, “was hardly required in so glaring a case, but I am glad of it, and, indeed, none of our judges like to condemn a criminal upon circumstantial evidence, be it ever so decisive.” This was strange and unexpected intelligence; what could it mean? Had my eyes deceived me? And was I really as mad as the whole world would believe me to be if I disclosed the object of my suspicions? I hastened to return home, and Elizabeth eagerly demanded the result. “My cousin,” replied I, “it is decided as you may have expected; all judges had rather that ten innocent should suffer than that one guilty should escape. But she has confessed.” This was a dire blow to poor Elizabeth, who had relied with firmness upon Justine’s innocence. “Alas!” said she. “How shall I ever again believe in human goodness? Justine, whom I loved and esteemed as my sister, how could she put on those smiles of innocence only to betray? Her mild eyes seemed incapable of any severity or guile, and yet she has committed a murder.”

Soon after we heard that the poor victim had expressed a desire to see my cousin. My father wished her not to go but said that he left it to her own judgment and feelings to decide. “Yes,” said Elizabeth, “I will go, although she is guilty; and you, Victor, shall accompany me; I cannot go alone.” The idea of this visit was torture to me, yet I could not refuse. We entered the gloomy prison chamber and beheld Justine sitting on some straw at the farther end; her hands were manacled, and her head rested on her knees. She rose on seeing us enter, and when we were left alone with her, she threw herself at the feet of Elizabeth, weeping bitterly. My cousin wept also. “Oh, Justine!” said she. “Why did you rob me of my last consolation? I relied on your innocence, and although I was then very wretched, I was not so miserable as I am now.” “And do you also believe that I am so very, very wicked? Do you also join with my enemies to crush me, to condemn me as a murderer?” Her voice was suffocated with sobs.

“Rise, my poor girl,” said Elizabeth; “why do you kneel, if you are innocent? I am not one of your enemies, I believed you guiltless, notwithstanding every evidence, until I heard that you had yourself declared your guilt. That report, you say, is false; and be assured, dear Justine, that nothing can shake my confidence in you for a moment, but your own confession.” “I did confess, but I confessed a lie. I confessed, that I might obtain absolution; but now that falsehood lies heavier at my heart than all my other sins. The God of heaven forgive me! Ever since I was condemned, my confessor has besieged me; he threatened and menaced, until I almost began to think that I was the monster that he said I was. He threatened excommunication and hell fire in my last moments if I continued obdurate. Dear lady, I had none to support me; all looked on me as a wretch doomed to ignominy and perdition. What could I do? In an evil hour I subscribed to a lie; and now only am I truly miserable.”

She paused, weeping, and then continued, “I thought with horror, my sweet lady, that you should believe your Justine, whom your blessed aunt had so highly honoured, and whom you loved, was a creature capable of a crime which none but the devil himself could have perpetrated. Dear William! dearest blessed child! I soon shall see you again in heaven, where we shall all be happy; and that consoles me, going as I am to suffer ignominy and death.” “Oh, Justine! Forgive me for having for one moment distrusted you. Why did you confess? But do not mourn, dear girl. Do not fear. I will proclaim, I will prove your innocence. I will melt the stony hearts of your enemies by my tears and prayers. You shall not die! You, my playfellow, my companion, my sister, perish on the scaffold! No! No! I never could survive so horrible a misfortune.” Justine shook her head mournfully. “I do not fear to die,” she said; “that pang is past. God raises my weakness and gives me courage to endure the worst. I leave a sad and bitter world; and if you remember me and think of me as of one unjustly condemned, I am resigned to the fate awaiting me. Learn from me, dear lady, to submit in patience to the will of heaven!”

During this conversation I had retired to a corner of the prison room, where I could conceal the horrid anguish that possessed me. Despair! Who dared talk of that? The poor victim, who on the morrow was to pass the awful boundary between life and death, felt not, as I did, such deep and bitter agony. I gnashed my teeth and ground them together, uttering a groan that came from my inmost soul. Justine started. When she saw who it was, she approached me and said, “Dear sir, you are very kind to visit me; you, I hope, do not believe that I am guilty?” I could not answer. “No, Justine,” said Elizabeth; “he is more convinced of your innocence than I was, for even when he heard that you had confessed, he did not credit it.” “I truly thank him. In these last moments I feel the sincerest gratitude towards those who think of me with kindness. How sweet is the affection of others to such a wretch as I am! It removes more than half my misfortune, and I feel as if I could die in peace now that my innocence is acknowledged by you, dear lady, and your cousin.”

Thus the poor sufferer tried to comfort others and herself. She indeed gained the resignation she desired. But I, the true murderer, felt the never-dying worm alive in my bosom, which allowed of no hope or consolation. Elizabeth also wept and was unhappy, but hers also was the misery of innocence, which, like a cloud that passes over the fair moon, for a while hides but cannot tarnish its brightness. Anguish and despair had penetrated into the core of my heart; I bore a hell within me which nothing could extinguish. We stayed several hours with Justine, and it was with great difficulty that Elizabeth could tear herself away. “I wish,” cried she, “that I were to die with you; I cannot live in this world of misery.” Justine assumed an air of cheerfulness, while she with difficulty repressed her bitter tears. She embraced Elizabeth and said in a voice of half-suppressed emotion, “Farewell, sweet lady, dearest Elizabeth, my beloved and only friend; may heaven, in its bounty, bless and preserve you; may this be the last misfortune that you will ever suffer! Live, and be happy, and make others so.”

And on the morrow Justine died. Elizabeth’s heart-rending eloquence failed to move the judges from their settled conviction in the criminality of the saintly sufferer. My passionate and indignant appeals were lost upon them. And when I received their cold answers and heard the harsh, unfeeling reasoning of these men, my purposed avowal died away on my lips. Thus I might proclaim myself a madman, but not revoke the sentence passed upon my wretched victim. She perished on the scaffold as a murderess! From the tortures of my own heart, I turned to contemplate the deep and voiceless grief of my Elizabeth. This also was my doing! And my father’s woe, and the desolation of that late so smiling home all was the work of my thrice-accursed hands! Ye weep, unhappy ones, but these are not your last tears! Again shall you raise the funeral wail, and the sound of your lamentations shall again and again be heard! Frankenstein, your son, your kinsman, your early, much-loved friend; he who would spend each vital drop of blood for your sakes, who has no thought nor sense of joy except as it is mirrored also in your dear countenances, who would fill the air with blessings and spend his life in serving you—he bids you weep, to shed countless tears; happy beyond his hopes, if thus inexorable fate be satisfied, and if the destruction pause before the peace of the grave have succeeded to your sad torments!

Thus spoke my prophetic soul, as, torn by remorse, horror, and despair, I beheld those I loved spend vain sorrow upon the graves of William and Justine, the first hapless victims to my unhallowed arts. Nothing is more painful to the human mind than, after the feelings have been worked up by a quick succession of events, the dead calmness of inaction and certainty which follows and deprives the soul both of hope and fear. Justine died, she rested, and I was alive. The blood flowed freely in my veins, but a weight of despair and remorse pressed on my heart which nothing could remove. Sleep fled from my eyes; I wandered like an evil spirit, for I had committed deeds of mischief beyond description horrible, and more, much more (I persuaded myself) was yet behind. Yet my heart overflowed with kindness and the love of virtue. I had begun life with benevolent intentions and thirsted for the moment when I should put them in practice and make myself useful to my fellow beings. Now all was blasted; instead of that serenity of conscience which allowed me to look back upon the past with self-satisfaction, and from thence to gather promise of new hopes, I was seized by remorse and the sense of guilt, which hurried me away to a hell of intense tortures such as no language can describe.

This state of mind preyed upon my health, which had perhaps never entirely recovered from the first shock it had sustained. I shunned the face of man; all sound of joy or complacency was torture to me; solitude was my only consolation—deep, dark, deathlike solitude. My father observed with pain the alteration perceptible in my disposition and habits and endeavoured by arguments deduced from the feelings of his serene conscience and guiltless life to inspire me with fortitude and awaken in me the courage to dispel the dark cloud which brooded over me. “Do you think, Victor,” said he, “that I do not suffer also? No one could love a child more than I loved your brother”—tears came into his eyes as he spoke—“but is it not a duty to the survivors that we should refrain from augmenting their unhappiness by an appearance of immoderate grief? It is also a duty owed to yourself, for excessive sorrow prevents improvement or enjoyment, or even the discharge of daily usefulness, without which no man is fit for society.” This advice, although good, was totally inapplicable to my case; I should have been the first to hide my grief and console my friends if remorse had not mingled its bitterness, and terror its alarm, with my other sensations. Now I could only answer my father with a look of despair and endeavour to hide myself from his view.

About this time we retired to our house at Belrive. This change was particularly agreeable to me. The shutting of the gates regularly at ten o’clock and the impossibility of remaining on the lake after that hour had rendered our residence within the walls of Geneva very irksome to me. I was now free. Often, after the rest of the family had retired for the night, I took the boat and passed many hours upon the water. Sometimes, with my sails set, I was carried by the wind; and sometimes, after rowing into the middle of the lake, I left the boat to pursue its own course and gave way to my own miserable reflections. I was often tempted, when all was at peace around me, and I the only unquiet thing that wandered restless in a scene so beautiful and heavenly—if I except some bat, or the frogs, whose harsh and interrupted croaking was heard only when I approached the shore—often, I say, I was tempted to plunge into the silent lake, that the waters might close over me and my calamities for ever. But I was restrained, when I thought of the heroic and suffering Elizabeth, whom I tenderly loved, and whose existence was bound up in mine. I thought also of my father and surviving brother; should I by my base desertion leave them exposed and unprotected to the malice of the fiend whom I had let loose among them?

At these moments I wept bitterly and wished that peace would revisit my mind only that I might afford them consolation and happiness. But that could not be. Remorse extinguished every hope. I had been the author of unalterable evils, and I lived in daily fear lest the monster whom I had created should perpetrate some new wickedness. I had an obscure feeling that all was not over and that he would still commit some signal crime, which by its enormity should almost efface the recollection of the past. There was always scope for fear so long as anything I loved remained behind. My abhorrence of this fiend cannot be conceived. When I thought of him I gnashed my teeth, my eyes became inflamed, and I ardently wished to extinguish that life which I had so thoughtlessly bestowed. When I reflected on his crimes and malice, my hatred and revenge burst all bounds of moderation. I would have made a pilgrimage to the highest peak of the Andes, could I, when there, have precipitated him to their base. I wished to see him again, that I might wreak the utmost extent of abhorrence on his head and avenge the deaths of William and Justine.

Our house was the house of mourning. My father’s health was deeply shaken by the horror of the recent events. Elizabeth was sad and desponding; she no longer took delight in her ordinary occupations; all pleasure seemed to her sacrilege toward the dead; eternal woe and tears she then thought was the just tribute she should pay to innocence so blasted and destroyed. She was no longer that happy creature who in earlier youth wandered with me on the banks of the lake and talked with ecstasy of our future prospects. The first of those sorrows which are sent to wean us from the earth had visited her, and its dimming influence quenched her dearest smiles. “When I reflect, my dear cousin,” said she, “on the miserable death of Justine Moritz, I no longer see the world and its works as they before appeared to me. Before, I looked upon the accounts of vice and injustice that I read in books or heard from others as tales of ancient days or imaginary evils; at least they were remote and more familiar to reason than to the imagination; but now misery has come home, and men appear to me as monsters thirsting for each other’s blood. Yet I am certainly unjust. Everybody believed that poor girl to be guilty; and if she could have committed the crime for which she suffered, assuredly she would have been the most depraved of human creatures. For the sake of a few jewels, to have murdered the son of her benefactor and friend, a child whom she had nursed from its birth, and appeared to love as if it had been her own! I could not consent to the death of any human being, but certainly I should have thought such a creature unfit to remain in the society of men. But she was innocent. I know, I feel she was innocent; you are of the same opinion, and that confirms me. Alas! Victor, when falsehood can look so like the truth, who can assure themselves of certain happiness? I feel as if I were walking on the edge of a precipice, towards which thousands are crowding and endeavouring to plunge me into the abyss. William and Justine were assassinated, and the murderer escapes; he walks about the world free, and perhaps respected. But even if I were condemned to suffer on the scaffold for the same crimes, I would not change places with such a wretch.”

I listened to this discourse with the extremest agony. I, not in deed, but in effect, was the true murderer. Elizabeth read my anguish in my countenance, and kindly taking my hand, said, “My dearest friend, you must calm yourself. These events have affected me, God knows how deeply; but I am not so wretched as you are. There is an expression of despair, and sometimes of revenge, in your countenance that makes me tremble. Dear Victor, banish these dark passions. Remember the friends around you, who centre all their hopes in you. Have we lost the power of rendering you happy? Ah! While we love, while we are true to each other, here in this land of peace and beauty, your native country, we may reap every tranquil blessing—what can disturb our peace?” And could not such words from her whom I fondly prized before every other gift of fortune suffice to chase away the fiend that lurked in my heart? Even as she spoke I drew near to her, as if in terror, lest at that very moment the destroyer had been near to rob me of her.

Thus not the tenderness of friendship, nor the beauty of earth, nor of heaven, could redeem my soul from woe; the very accents of love were ineffectual. I was encompassed by a cloud which no beneficial influence could penetrate. The wounded deer dragging its fainting limbs to some untrodden brake, there to gaze upon the arrow which had pierced it, and to die, was but a type of me. Sometimes I could cope with the sullen despair that overwhelmed me, but sometimes the whirlwind passions of my soul drove me to seek, by bodily exercise and by change of place, some relief from my intolerable sensations. It was during an access of this kind that I suddenly left my home, and bending my steps towards the near Alpine valleys, sought in the magnificence, the eternity of such scenes, to forget myself and my ephemeral, because human, sorrows. My wanderings were directed towards the valley of Chamounix. I had visited it frequently during my boyhood. Six years had passed since then: _I_ was a wreck, but nought had changed in those savage and enduring scenes.

I performed the first part of my journey on horseback. I afterwards hired a mule, as the more sure-footed and least liable to receive injury on these rugged roads. The weather was fine; it was about the middle of the month of August, nearly two months after the death of Justine, that miserable epoch from which I dated all my woe. The weight upon my spirit was sensibly lightened as I plunged yet deeper in the ravine of Arve. The immense mountains and precipices that overhung me on every side, the sound of the river raging among the rocks, and the dashing of the waterfalls around spoke of a power mighty as Omnipotence—and I ceased to fear or to bend before any being less almighty than that which had created and ruled the elements, here displayed in their most terrific guise. Still, as I ascended higher, the valley assumed a more magnificent and astonishing character. Ruined castles hanging on the precipices of piny mountains, the impetuous Arve, and cottages every here and there peeping forth from among the trees formed a scene of singular beauty. But it was augmented and rendered sublime by the mighty Alps, whose white and shining pyramids and domes towered above all, as belonging to another earth, the habitations of another race of beings.

I passed the bridge of Pélissier, where the ravine, which the river forms, opened before me, and I began to ascend the mountain that overhangs it. Soon after, I entered the valley of Chamounix. This valley is more wonderful and sublime, but not so beautiful and picturesque as that of Servox, through which I had just passed. The high and snowy mountains were its immediate boundaries, but I saw no more ruined castles and fertile fields. Immense glaciers approached the road; I heard the rumbling thunder of the falling avalanche and marked the smoke of its passage. Mont Blanc, the supreme and magnificent Mont Blanc, raised itself from the surrounding _aiguilles_, and its tremendous _dôme_ overlooked the valley. A tingling long-lost sense of pleasure often came across me during this journey. Some turn in the road, some new object suddenly perceived and recognised, reminded me of days gone by, and were associated with the lighthearted gaiety of boyhood. The very winds whispered in soothing accents, and maternal Nature bade me weep no more. Then again the kindly influence ceased to act—I found myself fettered again to grief and indulging in all the misery of reflection. Then I spurred on my animal, striving so to forget the world, my fears, and more than all, myself—or, in a more desperate fashion, I alighted and threw myself on the grass, weighed down by horror and despair.

At length I arrived at the village of Chamounix. Exhaustion succeeded to the extreme fatigue both of body and of mind which I had endured. For a short space of time I remained at the window watching the pallid lightnings that played above Mont Blanc and listening to the rushing of the Arve, which pursued its noisy way beneath. The same lulling sounds acted as a lullaby to my too keen sensations; when I placed my head upon my pillow, sleep crept over me; I felt it as it came and blessed the giver of oblivion. I spent the following day roaming through the valley. I stood beside the sources of the Arveiron, which take their rise in a glacier, that with slow pace is advancing down from the summit of the hills to barricade the valley. The abrupt sides of vast mountains were before me; the icy wall of the glacier overhung me; a few shattered pines were scattered around; and the solemn silence of this glorious presence-chamber of imperial Nature was broken only by the brawling waves or the fall of some vast fragment, the thunder sound of the avalanche or the cracking, reverberated along the mountains, of the accumulated ice, which, through the silent working of immutable laws, was ever and anon rent and torn, as if it had been but a plaything in their hands. These sublime and magnificent scenes afforded me the greatest consolation that I was capable of receiving. They elevated me from all littleness of feeling, and although they did not remove my grief, they subdued and tranquillised it. In some degree, also, they diverted my mind from the thoughts over which it had brooded for the last month. I retired to rest at night; my slumbers, as it were, waited on and ministered to by the assemblance of grand shapes which I had contemplated during the day. They congregated round me; the unstained snowy mountain-top, the glittering pinnacle, the pine woods, and ragged bare ravine, the eagle, soaring amidst the clouds—they all gathered round me and bade me be at peace.

Where had they fled when the next morning I awoke? All of soul-inspiriting fled with sleep, and dark melancholy clouded every thought. The rain was pouring in torrents, and thick mists hid the summits of the mountains, so that I even saw not the faces of those mighty friends. Still I would penetrate their misty veil and seek them in their cloudy retreats. What were rain and storm to me? My mule was brought to the door, and I resolved to ascend to the summit of Montanvert. I remembered the effect that the view of the tremendous and ever-moving glacier had produced upon my mind when I first saw it. It had then filled me with a sublime ecstasy that gave wings to the soul and allowed it to soar from the obscure world to light and joy. The sight of the awful and majestic in nature had indeed always the effect of solemnising my mind and causing me to forget the passing cares of life. I determined to go without a guide, for I was well acquainted with the path, and the presence of another would destroy the solitary grandeur of the scene.

The ascent is precipitous, but the path is cut into continual and short windings, which enable you to surmount the perpendicularity of the mountain. It is a scene terrifically desolate. In a thousand spots the traces of the winter avalanche may be perceived, where trees lie broken and strewed on the ground, some entirely destroyed, others bent, leaning upon the jutting rocks of the mountain or transversely upon other trees. The path, as you ascend higher, is intersected by ravines of snow, down which stones continually roll from above; one of them is particularly dangerous, as the slightest sound, such as even speaking in a loud voice, produces a concussion of air sufficient to draw destruction upon the head of the speaker. The pines are not tall or luxuriant, but they are sombre and add an air of severity to the scene. I looked on the valley beneath; vast mists were rising from the rivers which ran through it and curling in thick wreaths around the opposite mountains, whose summits were hid in the uniform clouds, while rain poured from the dark sky and added to the melancholy impression I received from the objects around me. Alas! Why does man boast of sensibilities superior to those apparent in the brute; it only renders them more necessary beings. If our impulses were confined to hunger, thirst, and desire, we might be nearly free; but now we are moved by every wind that blows and a chance word or scene that that word may convey to us.

We rest; a dream has power to poison sleep. We rise; one wand’ring thought pollutes the day. We feel, conceive, or reason; laugh or weep, Embrace fond woe, or cast our cares away; It is the same: for, be it joy or sorrow, The path of its departure still is free. Man’s yesterday may ne’er be like his morrow; Nought may endure but mutability! It was nearly noon when I arrived at the top of the ascent. For some time I sat upon the rock that overlooks the sea of ice. A mist covered both that and the surrounding mountains. Presently a breeze dissipated the cloud, and I descended upon the glacier. The surface is very uneven, rising like the waves of a troubled sea, descending low, and interspersed by rifts that sink deep. The field of ice is almost a league in width, but I spent nearly two hours in crossing it. The opposite mountain is a bare perpendicular rock. From the side where I now stood Montanvert was exactly opposite, at the distance of a league; and above it rose Mont Blanc, in awful majesty. I remained in a recess of the rock, gazing on this wonderful and stupendous scene. The sea, or rather the vast river of ice, wound among its dependent mountains, whose aerial summits hung over its recesses. Their icy and glittering peaks shone in the sunlight over the clouds. My heart, which was before sorrowful, now swelled with something like joy; I exclaimed, “Wandering spirits, if indeed ye wander, and do not rest in your narrow beds, allow me this faint happiness, or take me, as your companion, away from the joys of life.”

As I said this I suddenly beheld the figure of a man, at some distance, advancing towards me with superhuman speed. He bounded over the crevices in the ice, among which I had walked with caution; his stature, also, as he approached, seemed to exceed that of man. I was troubled; a mist came over my eyes, and I felt a faintness seize me, but I was quickly restored by the cold gale of the mountains. I perceived, as the shape came nearer (sight tremendous and abhorred!) that it was the wretch whom I had created. I trembled with rage and horror, resolving to wait his approach and then close with him in mortal combat. He approached; his countenance bespoke bitter anguish, combined with disdain and malignity, while its unearthly ugliness rendered it almost too horrible for human eyes. But I scarcely observed this; rage and hatred had at first deprived me of utterance, and I recovered only to overwhelm him with words expressive of furious detestation and contempt. “Devil,” I exclaimed, “do you dare approach me? And do not you fear the fierce vengeance of my arm wreaked on your miserable head? Begone, vile insect! Or rather, stay, that I may trample you to dust! And, oh! That I could, with the extinction of your miserable existence, restore those victims whom you have so diabolically murdered!”

“I expected this reception,” said the dæmon. “All men hate the wretched; how, then, must I be hated, who am miserable beyond all living things! Yet you, my creator, detest and spurn me, thy creature, to whom thou art bound by ties only dissoluble by the annihilation of one of us. You purpose to kill me. How dare you sport thus with life? Do your duty towards me, and I will do mine towards you and the rest of mankind. If you will comply with my conditions, I will leave them and you at peace; but if you refuse, I will glut the maw of death, until it be satiated with the blood of your remaining friends.” “Abhorred monster! Fiend that thou art! The tortures of hell are too mild a vengeance for thy crimes. Wretched devil! You reproach me with your creation, come on, then, that I may extinguish the spark which I so negligently bestowed.” “Be calm! I entreat you to hear me before you give vent to your hatred on my devoted head. Have I not suffered enough, that you seek to increase my misery? Life, although it may only be an accumulation of anguish, is dear to me, and I will defend it. Remember, thou hast made me more powerful than thyself; my height is superior to thine, my joints more supple. But I will not be tempted to set myself in opposition to thee. I am thy creature, and I will be even mild and docile to my natural lord and king if thou wilt also perform thy part, the which thou owest me. Oh, Frankenstein, be not equitable to every other and trample upon me alone, to whom thy justice, and even thy clemency and affection, is most due. Remember that I am thy creature; I ought to be thy Adam, but I am rather the fallen angel, whom thou drivest from joy for no misdeed. Everywhere I see bliss, from which I alone am irrevocably excluded. I was benevolent and good; misery made me a fiend. Make me happy, and I shall again be virtuous.”

“Begone! I will not hear you. There can be no community between you and me; we are enemies. Begone, or let us try our strength in a fight, in which one must fall.” “How can I move thee? Will no entreaties cause thee to turn a favourable eye upon thy creature, who implores thy goodness and compassion? Believe me, Frankenstein, I was benevolent; my soul glowed with love and humanity; but am I not alone, miserably alone? You, my creator, abhor me; what hope can I gather from your fellow creatures, who owe me nothing? They spurn and hate me. The desert mountains and dreary glaciers are my refuge. I have wandered here many days; the caves of ice, which I only do not fear, are a dwelling to me, and the only one which man does not grudge. These bleak skies I hail, for they are kinder to me than your fellow beings. If the multitude of mankind knew of my existence, they would do as you do, and arm themselves for my destruction. Shall I not then hate them who abhor me? I will keep no terms with my enemies. I am miserable, and they shall share my wretchedness. Yet it is in your power to recompense me, and deliver them from an evil which it only remains for you to make so great, that not only you and your family, but thousands of others, shall be swallowed up in the whirlwinds of its rage. Let your compassion be moved, and do not disdain me. Listen to my tale; when you have heard that, abandon or commiserate me, as you shall judge that I deserve. But hear me. The guilty are allowed, by human laws, bloody as they are, to speak in their own defence before they are condemned. Listen to me, Frankenstein. You accuse me of murder, and yet you would, with a satisfied conscience, destroy your own creature. Oh, praise the eternal justice of man! Yet I ask you not to spare me; listen to me, and then, if you can, and if you will, destroy the work of your hands.”

“Why do you call to my remembrance,” I rejoined, “circumstances of which I shudder to reflect, that I have been the miserable origin and author? Cursed be the day, abhorred devil, in which you first saw light! Cursed (although I curse myself) be the hands that formed you! You have made me wretched beyond expression. You have left me no power to consider whether I am just to you or not. Begone! Relieve me from the sight of your detested form.” “Thus I relieve thee, my creator,” he said, and placed his hated hands before my eyes, which I flung from me with violence; “thus I take from thee a sight which you abhor. Still thou canst listen to me and grant me thy compassion. By the virtues that I once possessed, I demand this from you. Hear my tale; it is long and strange, and the temperature of this place is not fitting to your fine sensations; come to the hut upon the mountain. The sun is yet high in the heavens; before it descends to hide itself behind your snowy precipices and illuminate another world, you will have heard my story and can decide. On you it rests, whether I quit for ever the neighbourhood of man and lead a harmless life, or become the scourge of your fellow creatures and the author of your own speedy ruin.”

As he said this he led the way across the ice; I followed. My heart was full, and I did not answer him, but as I proceeded, I weighed the various arguments that he had used and determined at least to listen to his tale. I was partly urged by curiosity, and compassion confirmed my resolution. I had hitherto supposed him to be the murderer of my brother, and I eagerly sought a confirmation or denial of this opinion. For the first time, also, I felt what the duties of a creator towards his creature were, and that I ought to render him happy before I complained of his wickedness. These motives urged me to comply with his demand. We crossed the ice, therefore, and ascended the opposite rock. The air was cold, and the rain again began to descend; we entered the hut, the fiend with an air of exultation, I with a heavy heart and depressed spirits. But I consented to listen, and seating myself by the fire which my odious companion had lighted, he thus began his tale.

“It is with considerable difficulty that I remember the original era of my being; all the events of that period appear confused and indistinct. A strange multiplicity of sensations seized me, and I saw, felt, heard, and smelt at the same time; and it was, indeed, a long time before I learned to distinguish between the operations of my various senses. By degrees, I remember, a stronger light pressed upon my nerves, so that I was obliged to shut my eyes. Darkness then came over me and troubled me, but hardly had I felt this when, by opening my eyes, as I now suppose, the light poured in upon me again. I walked and, I believe, descended, but I presently found a great alteration in my sensations. Before, dark and opaque bodies had surrounded me, impervious to my touch or sight; but I now found that I could wander on at liberty, with no obstacles which I could not either surmount or avoid. The light became more and more oppressive to me, and the heat wearying me as I walked, I sought a place where I could receive shade. This was the forest near Ingolstadt; and here I lay by the side of a brook resting from my fatigue, until I felt tormented by hunger and thirst. This roused me from my nearly dormant state, and I ate some berries which I found hanging on the trees or lying on the ground. I slaked my thirst at the brook, and then lying down, was overcome by sleep.

“It was dark when I awoke; I felt cold also, and half frightened, as it were, instinctively, finding myself so desolate. Before I had quitted your apartment, on a sensation of cold, I had covered myself with some clothes, but these were insufficient to secure me from the dews of night. I was a poor, helpless, miserable wretch; I knew, and could distinguish, nothing; but feeling pain invade me on all sides, I sat down and wept. “Soon a gentle light stole over the heavens and gave me a sensation of pleasure. I started up and beheld a radiant form rise from among the trees. [The moon] I gazed with a kind of wonder. It moved slowly, but it enlightened my path, and I again went out in search of berries. I was still cold when under one of the trees I found a huge cloak, with which I covered myself, and sat down upon the ground. No distinct ideas occupied my mind; all was confused. I felt light, and hunger, and thirst, and darkness; innumerable sounds rang in my ears, and on all sides various scents saluted me; the only object that I could distinguish was the bright moon, and I fixed my eyes on that with pleasure.

“Several changes of day and night passed, and the orb of night had greatly lessened, when I began to distinguish my sensations from each other. I gradually saw plainly the clear stream that supplied me with drink and the trees that shaded me with their foliage. I was delighted when I first discovered that a pleasant sound, which often saluted my ears, proceeded from the throats of the little winged animals who had often intercepted the light from my eyes. I began also to observe, with greater accuracy, the forms that surrounded me and to perceive the boundaries of the radiant roof of light which canopied me. Sometimes I tried to imitate the pleasant songs of the birds but was unable. Sometimes I wished to express my sensations in my own mode, but the uncouth and inarticulate sounds which broke from me frightened me into silence again. “The moon had disappeared from the night, and again, with a lessened form, showed itself, while I still remained in the forest. My sensations had by this time become distinct, and my mind received every day additional ideas. My eyes became accustomed to the light and to perceive objects in their right forms; I distinguished the insect from the herb, and by degrees, one herb from another. I found that the sparrow uttered none but harsh notes, whilst those of the blackbird and thrush were sweet and enticing.

“One day, when I was oppressed by cold, I found a fire which had been left by some wandering beggars, and was overcome with delight at the warmth I experienced from it. In my joy I thrust my hand into the live embers, but quickly drew it out again with a cry of pain. How strange, I thought, that the same cause should produce such opposite effects! I examined the materials of the fire, and to my joy found it to be composed of wood. I quickly collected some branches, but they were wet and would not burn. I was pained at this and sat still watching the operation of the fire. The wet wood which I had placed near the heat dried and itself became inflamed. I reflected on this, and by touching the various branches, I discovered the cause and busied myself in collecting a great quantity of wood, that I might dry it and have a plentiful supply of fire. When night came on and brought sleep with it, I was in the greatest fear lest my fire should be extinguished. I covered it carefully with dry wood and leaves and placed wet branches upon it; and then, spreading my cloak, I lay on the ground and sank into sleep.

“It was morning when I awoke, and my first care was to visit the fire. I uncovered it, and a gentle breeze quickly fanned it into a flame. I observed this also and contrived a fan of branches, which roused the embers when they were nearly extinguished. When night came again I found, with pleasure, that the fire gave light as well as heat and that the discovery of this element was useful to me in my food, for I found some of the offals that the travellers had left had been roasted, and tasted much more savoury than the berries I gathered from the trees. I tried, therefore, to dress my food in the same manner, placing it on the live embers. I found that the berries were spoiled by this operation, and the nuts and roots much improved. “Food, however, became scarce, and I often spent the whole day searching in vain for a few acorns to assuage the pangs of hunger. When I found this, I resolved to quit the place that I had hitherto inhabited, to seek for one where the few wants I experienced would be more easily satisfied. In this emigration I exceedingly lamented the loss of the fire which I had obtained through accident and knew not how to reproduce it. I gave several hours to the serious consideration of this difficulty, but I was obliged to relinquish all attempt to supply it, and wrapping myself up in my cloak, I struck across the wood towards the setting sun. I passed three days in these rambles and at length discovered the open country. A great fall of snow had taken place the night before, and the fields were of one uniform white; the appearance was disconsolate, and I found my feet chilled by the cold damp substance that covered the ground.

“It was about seven in the morning, and I longed to obtain food and shelter; at length I perceived a small hut, on a rising ground, which had doubtless been built for the convenience of some shepherd. This was a new sight to me, and I examined the structure with great curiosity. Finding the door open, I entered. An old man sat in it, near a fire, over which he was preparing his breakfast. He turned on hearing a noise, and perceiving me, shrieked loudly, and quitting the hut, ran across the fields with a speed of which his debilitated form hardly appeared capable. His appearance, different from any I had ever before seen, and his flight somewhat surprised me. But I was enchanted by the appearance of the hut; here the snow and rain could not penetrate; the ground was dry; and it presented to me then as exquisite and divine a retreat as Pandæmonium appeared to the dæmons of hell after their sufferings in the lake of fire. I greedily devoured the remnants of the shepherd’s breakfast, which consisted of bread, cheese, milk, and wine; the latter, however, I did not like. Then, overcome by fatigue, I lay down among some straw and fell asleep.

“It was noon when I awoke, and allured by the warmth of the sun, which shone brightly on the white ground, I determined to recommence my travels; and, depositing the remains of the peasant’s breakfast in a wallet I found, I proceeded across the fields for several hours, until at sunset I arrived at a village. How miraculous did this appear! The huts, the neater cottages, and stately houses engaged my admiration by turns. The vegetables in the gardens, the milk and cheese that I saw placed at the windows of some of the cottages, allured my appetite. One of the best of these I entered, but I had hardly placed my foot within the door before the children shrieked, and one of the women fainted. The whole village was roused; some fled, some attacked me, until, grievously bruised by stones and many other kinds of missile weapons, I escaped to the open country and fearfully took refuge in a low hovel, quite bare, and making a wretched appearance after the palaces I had beheld in the village. This hovel however, joined a cottage of a neat and pleasant appearance, but after my late dearly bought experience, I dared not enter it. My place of refuge was constructed of wood, but so low that I could with difficulty sit upright in it. No wood, however, was placed on the earth, which formed the floor, but it was dry; and although the wind entered it by innumerable chinks, I found it an agreeable asylum from the snow and rain.

“Here, then, I retreated and lay down happy to have found a shelter, however miserable, from the inclemency of the season, and still more from the barbarity of man. As soon as morning dawned I crept from my kennel, that I might view the adjacent cottage and discover if I could remain in the habitation I had found. It was situated against the back of the cottage and surrounded on the sides which were exposed by a pig sty and a clear pool of water. One part was open, and by that I had crept in; but now I covered every crevice by which I might be perceived with stones and wood, yet in such a manner that I might move them on occasion to pass out; all the light I enjoyed came through the sty, and that was sufficient for me. “Having thus arranged my dwelling and carpeted it with clean straw, I retired, for I saw the figure of a man at a distance, and I remembered too well my treatment the night before to trust myself in his power. I had first, however, provided for my sustenance for that day by a loaf of coarse bread, which I purloined, and a cup with which I could drink more conveniently than from my hand of the pure water which flowed by my retreat. The floor was a little raised, so that it was kept perfectly dry, and by its vicinity to the chimney of the cottage it was tolerably warm.

“Being thus provided, I resolved to reside in this hovel until something should occur which might alter my determination. It was indeed a paradise compared to the bleak forest, my former residence, the rain-dropping branches, and dank earth. I ate my breakfast with pleasure and was about to remove a plank to procure myself a little water when I heard a step, and looking through a small chink, I beheld a young creature, with a pail on her head, passing before my hovel. The girl was young and of gentle demeanour, unlike what I have since found cottagers and farmhouse servants to be. Yet she was meanly dressed, a coarse blue petticoat and a linen jacket being her only garb; her fair hair was plaited but not adorned: she looked patient yet sad. I lost sight of her, and in about a quarter of an hour she returned bearing the pail, which was now partly filled with milk. As she walked along, seemingly incommoded by the burden, a young man met her, whose countenance expressed a deeper despondence. Uttering a few sounds with an air of melancholy, he took the pail from her head and bore it to the cottage himself. She followed, and they disappeared. Presently I saw the young man again, with some tools in his hand, cross the field behind the cottage; and the girl was also busied, sometimes in the house and sometimes in the yard.

“On examining my dwelling, I found that one of the windows of the cottage had formerly occupied a part of it, but the panes had been filled up with wood. In one of these was a small and almost imperceptible chink through which the eye could just penetrate. Through this crevice a small room was visible, whitewashed and clean but very bare of furniture. In one corner, near a small fire, sat an old man, leaning his head on his hands in a disconsolate attitude. The young girl was occupied in arranging the cottage; but presently she took something out of a drawer, which employed her hands, and she sat down beside the old man, who, taking up an instrument, began to play and to produce sounds sweeter than the voice of the thrush or the nightingale. It was a lovely sight, even to me, poor wretch who had never beheld aught beautiful before. The silver hair and benevolent countenance of the aged cottager won my reverence, while the gentle manners of the girl enticed my love. He played a sweet mournful air which I perceived drew tears from the eyes of his amiable companion, of which the old man took no notice, until she sobbed audibly; he then pronounced a few sounds, and the fair creature, leaving her work, knelt at his feet. He raised her and smiled with such kindness and affection that I felt sensations of a peculiar and overpowering nature; they were a mixture of pain and pleasure, such as I had never before experienced, either from hunger or cold, warmth or food; and I withdrew from the window, unable to bear these emotions.

“Soon after this the young man returned, bearing on his shoulders a load of wood. The girl met him at the door, helped to relieve him of his burden, and taking some of the fuel into the cottage, placed it on the fire; then she and the youth went apart into a nook of the cottage, and he showed her a large loaf and a piece of cheese. She seemed pleased and went into the garden for some roots and plants, which she placed in water, and then upon the fire. She afterwards continued her work, whilst the young man went into the garden and appeared busily employed in digging and pulling up roots. After he had been employed thus about an hour, the young woman joined him and they entered the cottage together. “The old man had, in the meantime, been pensive, but on the appearance of his companions he assumed a more cheerful air, and they sat down to eat. The meal was quickly dispatched. The young woman was again occupied in arranging the cottage, the old man walked before the cottage in the sun for a few minutes, leaning on the arm of the youth. Nothing could exceed in beauty the contrast between these two excellent creatures. One was old, with silver hairs and a countenance beaming with benevolence and love; the younger was slight and graceful in his figure, and his features were moulded with the finest symmetry, yet his eyes and attitude expressed the utmost sadness and despondency. The old man returned to the cottage, and the youth, with tools different from those he had used in the morning, directed his steps across the fields.

“Night quickly shut in, but to my extreme wonder, I found that the cottagers had a means of prolonging light by the use of tapers, and was delighted to find that the setting of the sun did not put an end to the pleasure I experienced in watching my human neighbours. In the evening the young girl and her companion were employed in various occupations which I did not understand; and the old man again took up the instrument which produced the divine sounds that had enchanted me in the morning. So soon as he had finished, the youth began, not to play, but to utter sounds that were monotonous, and neither resembling the harmony of the old man’s instrument nor the songs of the birds; I since found that he read aloud, but at that time I knew nothing of the science of words or letters. “I lay on my straw, but I could not sleep. I thought of the occurrences of the day. What chiefly struck me was the gentle manners of these people, and I longed to join them, but dared not. I remembered too well the treatment I had suffered the night before from the barbarous villagers, and resolved, whatever course of conduct I might hereafter think it right to pursue, that for the present I would remain quietly in my hovel, watching and endeavouring to discover the motives which influenced their actions.

“The cottagers arose the next morning before the sun. The young woman arranged the cottage and prepared the food, and the youth departed after the first meal. “This day was passed in the same routine as that which preceded it. The young man was constantly employed out of doors, and the girl in various laborious occupations within. The old man, whom I soon perceived to be blind, employed his leisure hours on his instrument or in contemplation. Nothing could exceed the love and respect which the younger cottagers exhibited towards their venerable companion. They performed towards him every little office of affection and duty with gentleness, and he rewarded them by his benevolent smiles. “They were not entirely happy. The young man and his companion often went apart and appeared to weep. I saw no cause for their unhappiness, but I was deeply affected by it. If such lovely creatures were miserable, it was less strange that I, an imperfect and solitary being, should be wretched. Yet why were these gentle beings unhappy? They possessed a delightful house (for such it was in my eyes) and every luxury; they had a fire to warm them when chill and delicious viands when hungry; they were dressed in excellent clothes; and, still more, they enjoyed one another’s company and speech, interchanging each day looks of affection and kindness. What did their tears imply? Did they really express pain? I was at first unable to solve these questions, but perpetual attention and time explained to me many appearances which were at first enigmatic.

“A considerable period elapsed before I discovered one of the causes of the uneasiness of this amiable family: it was poverty, and they suffered that evil in a very distressing degree. Their nourishment consisted entirely of the vegetables of their garden and the milk of one cow, which gave very little during the winter, when its masters could scarcely procure food to support it. They often, I believe, suffered the pangs of hunger very poignantly, especially the two younger cottagers, for several times they placed food before the old man when they reserved none for themselves. “This trait of kindness moved me sensibly. I had been accustomed, during the night, to steal a part of their store for my own consumption, but when I found that in doing this I inflicted pain on the cottagers, I abstained and satisfied myself with berries, nuts, and roots which I gathered from a neighbouring wood. “I discovered also another means through which I was enabled to assist their labours. I found that the youth spent a great part of each day in collecting wood for the family fire, and during the night I often took his tools, the use of which I quickly discovered, and brought home firing sufficient for the consumption of several days.

“I remember, the first time that I did this, the young woman, when she opened the door in the morning, appeared greatly astonished on seeing a great pile of wood on the outside. She uttered some words in a loud voice, and the youth joined her, who also expressed surprise. I observed, with pleasure, that he did not go to the forest that day, but spent it in repairing the cottage and cultivating the garden. “By degrees I made a discovery of still greater moment. I found that these people possessed a method of communicating their experience and feelings to one another by articulate sounds. I perceived that the words they spoke sometimes produced pleasure or pain, smiles or sadness, in the minds and countenances of the hearers. This was indeed a godlike science, and I ardently desired to become acquainted with it. But I was baffled in every attempt I made for this purpose. Their pronunciation was quick, and the words they uttered, not having any apparent connection with visible objects, I was unable to discover any clue by which I could unravel the mystery of their reference. By great application, however, and after having remained during the space of several revolutions of the moon in my hovel, I discovered the names that were given to some of the most familiar objects of discourse; I learned and applied the words, _fire, milk, bread,_ and _wood._ I learned also the names of the cottagers themselves. The youth and his companion had each of them several names, but the old man had only one, which was _father._ The girl was called _sister_ or _Agatha,_ and the youth _Felix, brother,_ or _son_. I cannot describe the delight I felt when I learned the ideas appropriated to each of these sounds and was able to pronounce them. I distinguished several other words without being able as yet to understand or apply them, such as _good, dearest, unhappy._

“I spent the winter in this manner. The gentle manners and beauty of the cottagers greatly endeared them to me; when they were unhappy, I felt depressed; when they rejoiced, I sympathised in their joys. I saw few human beings besides them, and if any other happened to enter the cottage, their harsh manners and rude gait only enhanced to me the superior accomplishments of my friends. The old man, I could perceive, often endeavoured to encourage his children, as sometimes I found that he called them, to cast off their melancholy. He would talk in a cheerful accent, with an expression of goodness that bestowed pleasure even upon me. Agatha listened with respect, her eyes sometimes filled with tears, which she endeavoured to wipe away unperceived; but I generally found that her countenance and tone were more cheerful after having listened to the exhortations of her father. It was not thus with Felix. He was always the saddest of the group, and even to my unpractised senses, he appeared to have suffered more deeply than his friends. But if his countenance was more sorrowful, his voice was more cheerful than that of his sister, especially when he addressed the old man.

“I could mention innumerable instances which, although slight, marked the dispositions of these amiable cottagers. In the midst of poverty and want, Felix carried with pleasure to his sister the first little white flower that peeped out from beneath the snowy ground. Early in the morning, before she had risen, he cleared away the snow that obstructed her path to the milk-house, drew water from the well, and brought the wood from the outhouse, where, to his perpetual astonishment, he found his store always replenished by an invisible hand. In the day, I believe, he worked sometimes for a neighbouring farmer, because he often went forth and did not return until dinner, yet brought no wood with him. At other times he worked in the garden, but as there was little to do in the frosty season, he read to the old man and Agatha. “This reading had puzzled me extremely at first, but by degrees I discovered that he uttered many of the same sounds when he read as when he talked. I conjectured, therefore, that he found on the paper signs for speech which he understood, and I ardently longed to comprehend these also; but how was that possible when I did not even understand the sounds for which they stood as signs? I improved, however, sensibly in this science, but not sufficiently to follow up any kind of conversation, although I applied my whole mind to the endeavour, for I easily perceived that, although I eagerly longed to discover myself to the cottagers, I ought not to make the attempt until I had first become master of their language, which knowledge might enable me to make them overlook the deformity of my figure, for with this also the contrast perpetually presented to my eyes had made me acquainted.

“I had admired the perfect forms of my cottagers—their grace, beauty, and delicate complexions; but how was I terrified when I viewed myself in a transparent pool! At first I started back, unable to believe that it was indeed I who was reflected in the mirror; and when I became fully convinced that I was in reality the monster that I am, I was filled with the bitterest sensations of despondence and mortification. Alas! I did not yet entirely know the fatal effects of this miserable deformity. “As the sun became warmer and the light of day longer, the snow vanished, and I beheld the bare trees and the black earth. From this time Felix was more employed, and the heart-moving indications of impending famine disappeared. Their food, as I afterwards found, was coarse, but it was wholesome; and they procured a sufficiency of it. Several new kinds of plants sprang up in the garden, which they dressed; and these signs of comfort increased daily as the season advanced. “The old man, leaning on his son, walked each day at noon, when it did not rain, as I found it was called when the heavens poured forth its waters. This frequently took place, but a high wind quickly dried the earth, and the season became far more pleasant than it had been.

“My mode of life in my hovel was uniform. During the morning I attended the motions of the cottagers, and when they were dispersed in various occupations, I slept; the remainder of the day was spent in observing my friends. When they had retired to rest, if there was any moon or the night was star-light, I went into the woods and collected my own food and fuel for the cottage. When I returned, as often as it was necessary, I cleared their path from the snow and performed those offices that I had seen done by Felix. I afterwards found that these labours, performed by an invisible hand, greatly astonished them; and once or twice I heard them, on these occasions, utter the words _good spirit, wonderful_; but I did not then understand the signification of these terms. “My thoughts now became more active, and I longed to discover the motives and feelings of these lovely creatures; I was inquisitive to know why Felix appeared so miserable and Agatha so sad. I thought (foolish wretch!) that it might be in my power to restore happiness to these deserving people. When I slept or was absent, the forms of the venerable blind father, the gentle Agatha, and the excellent Felix flitted before me. I looked upon them as superior beings who would be the arbiters of my future destiny. I formed in my imagination a thousand pictures of presenting myself to them, and their reception of me. I imagined that they would be disgusted, until, by my gentle demeanour and conciliating words, I should first win their favour and afterwards their love.

“These thoughts exhilarated me and led me to apply with fresh ardour to the acquiring the art of language. My organs were indeed harsh, but supple; and although my voice was very unlike the soft music of their tones, yet I pronounced such words as I understood with tolerable ease. It was as the ass and the lap-dog; yet surely the gentle ass whose intentions were affectionate, although his manners were rude, deserved better treatment than blows and execration. “The pleasant showers and genial warmth of spring greatly altered the aspect of the earth. Men who before this change seemed to have been hid in caves dispersed themselves and were employed in various arts of cultivation. The birds sang in more cheerful notes, and the leaves began to bud forth on the trees. Happy, happy earth! Fit habitation for gods, which, so short a time before, was bleak, damp, and unwholesome. My spirits were elevated by the enchanting appearance of nature; the past was blotted from my memory, the present was tranquil, and the future gilded by bright rays of hope and anticipations of joy.”

“I now hasten to the more moving part of my story. I shall relate events that impressed me with feelings which, from what I had been, have made me what I am. “Spring advanced rapidly; the weather became fine and the skies cloudless. It surprised me that what before was desert and gloomy should now bloom with the most beautiful flowers and verdure. My senses were gratified and refreshed by a thousand scents of delight and a thousand sights of beauty. “It was on one of these days, when my cottagers periodically rested from labour—the old man played on his guitar, and the children listened to him—that I observed the countenance of Felix was melancholy beyond expression; he sighed frequently, and once his father paused in his music, and I conjectured by his manner that he inquired the cause of his son’s sorrow. Felix replied in a cheerful accent, and the old man was recommencing his music when someone tapped at the door. “It was a lady on horseback, accompanied by a country-man as a guide. The lady was dressed in a dark suit and covered with a thick black veil. Agatha asked a question, to which the stranger only replied by pronouncing, in a sweet accent, the name of Felix. Her voice was musical but unlike that of either of my friends. On hearing this word, Felix came up hastily to the lady, who, when she saw him, threw up her veil, and I beheld a countenance of angelic beauty and expression. Her hair of a shining raven black, and curiously braided; her eyes were dark, but gentle, although animated; her features of a regular proportion, and her complexion wondrously fair, each cheek tinged with a lovely pink.

“Felix seemed ravished with delight when he saw her, every trait of sorrow vanished from his face, and it instantly expressed a degree of ecstatic joy, of which I could hardly have believed it capable; his eyes sparkled, as his cheek flushed with pleasure; and at that moment I thought him as beautiful as the stranger. She appeared affected by different feelings; wiping a few tears from her lovely eyes, she held out her hand to Felix, who kissed it rapturously and called her, as well as I could distinguish, his sweet Arabian. She did not appear to understand him, but smiled. He assisted her to dismount, and dismissing her guide, conducted her into the cottage. Some conversation took place between him and his father, and the young stranger knelt at the old man’s feet and would have kissed his hand, but he raised her and embraced her affectionately. “I soon perceived that although the stranger uttered articulate sounds and appeared to have a language of her own, she was neither understood by nor herself understood the cottagers. They made many signs which I did not comprehend, but I saw that her presence diffused gladness through the cottage, dispelling their sorrow as the sun dissipates the morning mists. Felix seemed peculiarly happy and with smiles of delight welcomed his Arabian. Agatha, the ever-gentle Agatha, kissed the hands of the lovely stranger, and pointing to her brother, made signs which appeared to me to mean that he had been sorrowful until she came. Some hours passed thus, while they, by their countenances, expressed joy, the cause of which I did not comprehend. Presently I found, by the frequent recurrence of some sound which the stranger repeated after them, that she was endeavouring to learn their language; and the idea instantly occurred to me that I should make use of the same instructions to the same end. The stranger learned about twenty words at the first lesson; most of them, indeed, were those which I had before understood, but I profited by the others.

“As night came on, Agatha and the Arabian retired early. When they separated Felix kissed the hand of the stranger and said, ‘Good night sweet Safie.’ He sat up much longer, conversing with his father, and by the frequent repetition of her name I conjectured that their lovely guest was the subject of their conversation. I ardently desired to understand them, and bent every faculty towards that purpose, but found it utterly impossible. “The next morning Felix went out to his work, and after the usual occupations of Agatha were finished, the Arabian sat at the feet of the old man, and taking his guitar, played some airs so entrancingly beautiful that they at once drew tears of sorrow and delight from my eyes. She sang, and her voice flowed in a rich cadence, swelling or dying away like a nightingale of the woods. “When she had finished, she gave the guitar to Agatha, who at first declined it. She played a simple air, and her voice accompanied it in sweet accents, but unlike the wondrous strain of the stranger. The old man appeared enraptured and said some words which Agatha endeavoured to explain to Safie, and by which he appeared to wish to express that she bestowed on him the greatest delight by her music.

“The days now passed as peaceably as before, with the sole alteration that joy had taken place of sadness in the countenances of my friends. Safie was always gay and happy; she and I improved rapidly in the knowledge of language, so that in two months I began to comprehend most of the words uttered by my protectors. “In the meanwhile also the black ground was covered with herbage, and the green banks interspersed with innumerable flowers, sweet to the scent and the eyes, stars of pale radiance among the moonlight woods; the sun became warmer, the nights clear and balmy; and my nocturnal rambles were an extreme pleasure to me, although they were considerably shortened by the late setting and early rising of the sun, for I never ventured abroad during daylight, fearful of meeting with the same treatment I had formerly endured in the first village which I entered. “My days were spent in close attention, that I might more speedily master the language; and I may boast that I improved more rapidly than the Arabian, who understood very little and conversed in broken accents, whilst I comprehended and could imitate almost every word that was spoken.

“While I improved in speech, I also learned the science of letters as it was taught to the stranger, and this opened before me a wide field for wonder and delight. “The book from which Felix instructed Safie was Volney’s _Ruins of Empires_. I should not have understood the purport of this book had not Felix, in reading it, given very minute explanations. He had chosen this work, he said, because the declamatory style was framed in imitation of the Eastern authors. Through this work I obtained a cursory knowledge of history and a view of the several empires at present existing in the world; it gave me an insight into the manners, governments, and religions of the different nations of the earth. I heard of the slothful Asiatics, of the stupendous genius and mental activity of the Grecians, of the wars and wonderful virtue of the early Romans—of their subsequent degenerating—of the decline of that mighty empire, of chivalry, Christianity, and kings. I heard of the discovery of the American hemisphere and wept with Safie over the hapless fate of its original inhabitants.

“These wonderful narrations inspired me with strange feelings. Was man, indeed, at once so powerful, so virtuous and magnificent, yet so vicious and base? He appeared at one time a mere scion of the evil principle and at another as all that can be conceived of noble and godlike. To be a great and virtuous man appeared the highest honour that can befall a sensitive being; to be base and vicious, as many on record have been, appeared the lowest degradation, a condition more abject than that of the blind mole or harmless worm. For a long time I could not conceive how one man could go forth to murder his fellow, or even why there were laws and governments; but when I heard details of vice and bloodshed, my wonder ceased and I turned away with disgust and loathing. “Every conversation of the cottagers now opened new wonders to me. While I listened to the instructions which Felix bestowed upon the Arabian, the strange system of human society was explained to me. I heard of the division of property, of immense wealth and squalid poverty, of rank, descent, and noble blood.

“The words induced me to turn towards myself. I learned that the possessions most esteemed by your fellow creatures were high and unsullied descent united with riches. A man might be respected with only one of these advantages, but without either he was considered, except in very rare instances, as a vagabond and a slave, doomed to waste his powers for the profits of the chosen few! And what was I? Of my creation and creator I was absolutely ignorant, but I knew that I possessed no money, no friends, no kind of property. I was, besides, endued with a figure hideously deformed and loathsome; I was not even of the same nature as man. I was more agile than they and could subsist upon coarser diet; I bore the extremes of heat and cold with less injury to my frame; my stature far exceeded theirs. When I looked around I saw and heard of none like me. Was I, then, a monster, a blot upon the earth, from which all men fled and whom all men disowned? “I cannot describe to you the agony that these reflections inflicted upon me; I tried to dispel them, but sorrow only increased with knowledge. Oh, that I had for ever remained in my native wood, nor known nor felt beyond the sensations of hunger, thirst, and heat!

“Of what a strange nature is knowledge! It clings to the mind when it has once seized on it like a lichen on the rock. I wished sometimes to shake off all thought and feeling, but I learned that there was but one means to overcome the sensation of pain, and that was death—a state which I feared yet did not understand. I admired virtue and good feelings and loved the gentle manners and amiable qualities of my cottagers, but I was shut out from intercourse with them, except through means which I obtained by stealth, when I was unseen and unknown, and which rather increased than satisfied the desire I had of becoming one among my fellows. The gentle words of Agatha and the animated smiles of the charming Arabian were not for me. The mild exhortations of the old man and the lively conversation of the loved Felix were not for me. Miserable, unhappy wretch! “Other lessons were impressed upon me even more deeply. I heard of the difference of sexes, and the birth and growth of children, how the father doted on the smiles of the infant, and the lively sallies of the older child, how all the life and cares of the mother were wrapped up in the precious charge, how the mind of youth expanded and gained knowledge, of brother, sister, and all the various relationships which bind one human being to another in mutual bonds.

“But where were my friends and relations? No father had watched my infant days, no mother had blessed me with smiles and caresses; or if they had, all my past life was now a blot, a blind vacancy in which I distinguished nothing. From my earliest remembrance I had been as I then was in height and proportion. I had never yet seen a being resembling me or who claimed any intercourse with me. What was I? The question again recurred, to be answered only with groans. “I will soon explain to what these feelings tended, but allow me now to return to the cottagers, whose story excited in me such various feelings of indignation, delight, and wonder, but which all terminated in additional love and reverence for my protectors (for so I loved, in an innocent, half-painful self-deceit, to call them).” “Some time elapsed before I learned the history of my friends. It was one which could not fail to impress itself deeply on my mind, unfolding as it did a number of circumstances, each interesting and wonderful to one so utterly inexperienced as I was.

“The name of the old man was De Lacey. He was descended from a good family in France, where he had lived for many years in affluence, respected by his superiors and beloved by his equals. His son was bred in the service of his country, and Agatha had ranked with ladies of the highest distinction. A few months before my arrival they had lived in a large and luxurious city called Paris, surrounded by friends and possessed of every enjoyment which virtue, refinement of intellect, or taste, accompanied by a moderate fortune, could afford. “The father of Safie had been the cause of their ruin. He was a Turkish merchant and had inhabited Paris for many years, when, for some reason which I could not learn, he became obnoxious to the government. He was seized and cast into prison the very day that Safie arrived from Constantinople to join him. He was tried and condemned to death. The injustice of his sentence was very flagrant; all Paris was indignant; and it was judged that his religion and wealth rather than the crime alleged against him had been the cause of his condemnation.

“Felix had accidentally been present at the trial; his horror and indignation were uncontrollable when he heard the decision of the court. He made, at that moment, a solemn vow to deliver him and then looked around for the means. After many fruitless attempts to gain admittance to the prison, he found a strongly grated window in an unguarded part of the building, which lighted the dungeon of the unfortunate Muhammadan, who, loaded with chains, waited in despair the execution of the barbarous sentence. Felix visited the grate at night and made known to the prisoner his intentions in his favour. The Turk, amazed and delighted, endeavoured to kindle the zeal of his deliverer by promises of reward and wealth. Felix rejected his offers with contempt, yet when he saw the lovely Safie, who was allowed to visit her father and who by her gestures expressed her lively gratitude, the youth could not help owning to his own mind that the captive possessed a treasure which would fully reward his toil and hazard. “The Turk quickly perceived the impression that his daughter had made on the heart of Felix and endeavoured to secure him more entirely in his interests by the promise of her hand in marriage so soon as he should be conveyed to a place of safety. Felix was too delicate to accept this offer, yet he looked forward to the probability of the event as to the consummation of his happiness.

“During the ensuing days, while the preparations were going forward for the escape of the merchant, the zeal of Felix was warmed by several letters that he received from this lovely girl, who found means to express her thoughts in the language of her lover by the aid of an old man, a servant of her father who understood French. She thanked him in the most ardent terms for his intended services towards her parent, and at the same time she gently deplored her own fate. “I have copies of these letters, for I found means, during my residence in the hovel, to procure the implements of writing; and the letters were often in the hands of Felix or Agatha. Before I depart I will give them to you; they will prove the truth of my tale; but at present, as the sun is already far declined, I shall only have time to repeat the substance of them to you. “Safie related that her mother was a Christian Arab, seized and made a slave by the Turks; recommended by her beauty, she had won the heart of the father of Safie, who married her. The young girl spoke in high and enthusiastic terms of her mother, who, born in freedom, spurned the bondage to which she was now reduced. She instructed her daughter in the tenets of her religion and taught her to aspire to higher powers of intellect and an independence of spirit forbidden to the female followers of Muhammad. This lady died, but her lessons were indelibly impressed on the mind of Safie, who sickened at the prospect of again returning to Asia and being immured within the walls of a harem, allowed only to occupy herself with infantile amusements, ill-suited to the temper of her soul, now accustomed to grand ideas and a noble emulation for virtue. The prospect of marrying a Christian and remaining in a country where women were allowed to take a rank in society was enchanting to her.

“The day for the execution of the Turk was fixed, but on the night previous to it he quitted his prison and before morning was distant many leagues from Paris. Felix had procured passports in the name of his father, sister, and himself. He had previously communicated his plan to the former, who aided the deceit by quitting his house, under the pretence of a journey and concealed himself, with his daughter, in an obscure part of Paris. “Felix conducted the fugitives through France to Lyons and across Mont Cenis to Leghorn, where the merchant had decided to wait a favourable opportunity of passing into some part of the Turkish dominions. “Safie resolved to remain with her father until the moment of his departure, before which time the Turk renewed his promise that she should be united to his deliverer; and Felix remained with them in expectation of that event; and in the meantime he enjoyed the society of the Arabian, who exhibited towards him the simplest and tenderest affection. They conversed with one another through the means of an interpreter, and sometimes with the interpretation of looks; and Safie sang to him the divine airs of her native country.

“The Turk allowed this intimacy to take place and encouraged the hopes of the youthful lovers, while in his heart he had formed far other plans. He loathed the idea that his daughter should be united to a Christian, but he feared the resentment of Felix if he should appear lukewarm, for he knew that he was still in the power of his deliverer if he should choose to betray him to the Italian state which they inhabited. He revolved a thousand plans by which he should be enabled to prolong the deceit until it might be no longer necessary, and secretly to take his daughter with him when he departed. His plans were facilitated by the news which arrived from Paris. “The government of France were greatly enraged at the escape of their victim and spared no pains to detect and punish his deliverer. The plot of Felix was quickly discovered, and De Lacey and Agatha were thrown into prison. The news reached Felix and roused him from his dream of pleasure. His blind and aged father and his gentle sister lay in a noisome dungeon while he enjoyed the free air and the society of her whom he loved. This idea was torture to him. He quickly arranged with the Turk that if the latter should find a favourable opportunity for escape before Felix could return to Italy, Safie should remain as a boarder at a convent at Leghorn; and then, quitting the lovely Arabian, he hastened to Paris and delivered himself up to the vengeance of the law, hoping to free De Lacey and Agatha by this proceeding.

“He did not succeed. They remained confined for five months before the trial took place, the result of which deprived them of their fortune and condemned them to a perpetual exile from their native country. “They found a miserable asylum in the cottage in Germany, where I discovered them. Felix soon learned that the treacherous Turk, for whom he and his family endured such unheard-of oppression, on discovering that his deliverer was thus reduced to poverty and ruin, became a traitor to good feeling and honour and had quitted Italy with his daughter, insultingly sending Felix a pittance of money to aid him, as he said, in some plan of future maintenance. “Such were the events that preyed on the heart of Felix and rendered him, when I first saw him, the most miserable of his family. He could have endured poverty, and while this distress had been the meed of his virtue, he gloried in it; but the ingratitude of the Turk and the loss of his beloved Safie were misfortunes more bitter and irreparable. The arrival of the Arabian now infused new life into his soul.

“When the news reached Leghorn that Felix was deprived of his wealth and rank, the merchant commanded his daughter to think no more of her lover, but to prepare to return to her native country. The generous nature of Safie was outraged by this command; she attempted to expostulate with her father, but he left her angrily, reiterating his tyrannical mandate. “A few days after, the Turk entered his daughter’s apartment and told her hastily that he had reason to believe that his residence at Leghorn had been divulged and that he should speedily be delivered up to the French government; he had consequently hired a vessel to convey him to Constantinople, for which city he should sail in a few hours. He intended to leave his daughter under the care of a confidential servant, to follow at her leisure with the greater part of his property, which had not yet arrived at Leghorn. “When alone, Safie resolved in her own mind the plan of conduct that it would become her to pursue in this emergency. A residence in Turkey was abhorrent to her; her religion and her feelings were alike averse to it. By some papers of her father which fell into her hands she heard of the exile of her lover and learnt the name of the spot where he then resided. She hesitated some time, but at length she formed her determination. Taking with her some jewels that belonged to her and a sum of money, she quitted Italy with an attendant, a native of Leghorn, but who understood the common language of Turkey, and departed for Germany.

“She arrived in safety at a town about twenty leagues from the cottage of De Lacey, when her attendant fell dangerously ill. Safie nursed her with the most devoted affection, but the poor girl died, and the Arabian was left alone, unacquainted with the language of the country and utterly ignorant of the customs of the world. She fell, however, into good hands. The Italian had mentioned the name of the spot for which they were bound, and after her death the woman of the house in which they had lived took care that Safie should arrive in safety at the cottage of her lover.” “Such was the history of my beloved cottagers. It impressed me deeply. I learned, from the views of social life which it developed, to admire their virtues and to deprecate the vices of mankind. “As yet I looked upon crime as a distant evil, benevolence and generosity were ever present before me, inciting within me a desire to become an actor in the busy scene where so many admirable qualities were called forth and displayed. But in giving an account of the progress of my intellect, I must not omit a circumstance which occurred in the beginning of the month of August of the same year.

“One night during my accustomed visit to the neighbouring wood where I collected my own food and brought home firing for my protectors, I found on the ground a leathern portmanteau containing several articles of dress and some books. I eagerly seized the prize and returned with it to my hovel. Fortunately the books were written in the language, the elements of which I had acquired at the cottage; they consisted of _Paradise Lost_, a volume of _Plutarch’s Lives_, and the _Sorrows of Werter_. The possession of these treasures gave me extreme delight; I now continually studied and exercised my mind upon these histories, whilst my friends were employed in their ordinary occupations. “I can hardly describe to you the effect of these books. They produced in me an infinity of new images and feelings, that sometimes raised me to ecstasy, but more frequently sunk me into the lowest dejection. In the _Sorrows of Werter_, besides the interest of its simple and affecting story, so many opinions are canvassed and so many lights thrown upon what had hitherto been to me obscure subjects that I found in it a never-ending source of speculation and astonishment. The gentle and domestic manners it described, combined with lofty sentiments and feelings, which had for their object something out of self, accorded well with my experience among my protectors and with the wants which were for ever alive in my own bosom. But I thought Werter himself a more divine being than I had ever beheld or imagined; his character contained no pretension, but it sank deep. The disquisitions upon death and suicide were calculated to fill me with wonder. I did not pretend to enter into the merits of the case, yet I inclined towards the opinions of the hero, whose extinction I wept, without precisely understanding it.

“As I read, however, I applied much personally to my own feelings and condition. I found myself similar yet at the same time strangely unlike to the beings concerning whom I read and to whose conversation I was a listener. I sympathised with and partly understood them, but I was unformed in mind; I was dependent on none and related to none. ‘The path of my departure was free,’ and there was none to lament my annihilation. My person was hideous and my stature gigantic. What did this mean? Who was I? What was I? Whence did I come? What was my destination? These questions continually recurred, but I was unable to solve them. “The volume of _Plutarch’s Lives_ which I possessed contained the histories of the first founders of the ancient republics. This book had a far different effect upon me from the _Sorrows of Werter_. I learned from Werter’s imaginations despondency and gloom, but Plutarch taught me high thoughts; he elevated me above the wretched sphere of my own reflections, to admire and love the heroes of past ages. Many things I read surpassed my understanding and experience. I had a very confused knowledge of kingdoms, wide extents of country, mighty rivers, and boundless seas. But I was perfectly unacquainted with towns and large assemblages of men. The cottage of my protectors had been the only school in which I had studied human nature, but this book developed new and mightier scenes of action. I read of men concerned in public affairs, governing or massacring their species. I felt the greatest ardour for virtue rise within me, and abhorrence for vice, as far as I understood the signification of those terms, relative as they were, as I applied them, to pleasure and pain alone. Induced by these feelings, I was of course led to admire peaceable lawgivers, Numa, Solon, and Lycurgus, in preference to Romulus and Theseus. The patriarchal lives of my protectors caused these impressions to take a firm hold on my mind; perhaps, if my first introduction to humanity had been made by a young soldier, burning for glory and slaughter, I should have been imbued with different sensations.

“But _Paradise Lost_ excited different and far deeper emotions. I read it, as I had read the other volumes which had fallen into my hands, as a true history. It moved every feeling of wonder and awe that the picture of an omnipotent God warring with his creatures was capable of exciting. I often referred the several situations, as their similarity struck me, to my own. Like Adam, I was apparently united by no link to any other being in existence; but his state was far different from mine in every other respect. He had come forth from the hands of God a perfect creature, happy and prosperous, guarded by the especial care of his Creator; he was allowed to converse with and acquire knowledge from beings of a superior nature, but I was wretched, helpless, and alone. Many times I considered Satan as the fitter emblem of my condition, for often, like him, when I viewed the bliss of my protectors, the bitter gall of envy rose within me. “Another circumstance strengthened and confirmed these feelings. Soon after my arrival in the hovel I discovered some papers in the pocket of the dress which I had taken from your laboratory. At first I had neglected them, but now that I was able to decipher the characters in which they were written, I began to study them with diligence. It was your journal of the four months that preceded my creation. You minutely described in these papers every step you took in the progress of your work; this history was mingled with accounts of domestic occurrences. You doubtless recollect these papers. Here they are. Everything is related in them which bears reference to my accursed origin; the whole detail of that series of disgusting circumstances which produced it is set in view; the minutest description of my odious and loathsome person is given, in language which painted your own horrors and rendered mine indelible. I sickened as I read. ‘Hateful day when I received life!’ I exclaimed in agony. ‘Accursed creator! Why did you form a monster so hideous that even _you_ turned from me in disgust? God, in pity, made man beautiful and alluring, after his own image; but my form is a filthy type of yours, more horrid even from the very resemblance. Satan had his companions, fellow devils, to admire and encourage him, but I am solitary and abhorred.’

“These were the reflections of my hours of despondency and solitude; but when I contemplated the virtues of the cottagers, their amiable and benevolent dispositions, I persuaded myself that when they should become acquainted with my admiration of their virtues they would compassionate me and overlook my personal deformity. Could they turn from their door one, however monstrous, who solicited their compassion and friendship? I resolved, at least, not to despair, but in every way to fit myself for an interview with them which would decide my fate. I postponed this attempt for some months longer, for the importance attached to its success inspired me with a dread lest I should fail. Besides, I found that my understanding improved so much with every day’s experience that I was unwilling to commence this undertaking until a few more months should have added to my sagacity. “Several changes, in the meantime, took place in the cottage. The presence of Safie diffused happiness among its inhabitants, and I also found that a greater degree of plenty reigned there. Felix and Agatha spent more time in amusement and conversation, and were assisted in their labours by servants. They did not appear rich, but they were contented and happy; their feelings were serene and peaceful, while mine became every day more tumultuous. Increase of knowledge only discovered to me more clearly what a wretched outcast I was. I cherished hope, it is true, but it vanished when I beheld my person reflected in water or my shadow in the moonshine, even as that frail image and that inconstant shade.

“I endeavoured to crush these fears and to fortify myself for the trial which in a few months I resolved to undergo; and sometimes I allowed my thoughts, unchecked by reason, to ramble in the fields of Paradise, and dared to fancy amiable and lovely creatures sympathising with my feelings and cheering my gloom; their angelic countenances breathed smiles of consolation. But it was all a dream; no Eve soothed my sorrows nor shared my thoughts; I was alone. I remembered Adam’s supplication to his Creator. But where was mine? He had abandoned me, and in the bitterness of my heart I cursed him. “Autumn passed thus. I saw, with surprise and grief, the leaves decay and fall, and nature again assume the barren and bleak appearance it had worn when I first beheld the woods and the lovely moon. Yet I did not heed the bleakness of the weather; I was better fitted by my conformation for the endurance of cold than heat. But my chief delights were the sight of the flowers, the birds, and all the gay apparel of summer; when those deserted me, I turned with more attention towards the cottagers. Their happiness was not decreased by the absence of summer. They loved and sympathised with one another; and their joys, depending on each other, were not interrupted by the casualties that took place around them. The more I saw of them, the greater became my desire to claim their protection and kindness; my heart yearned to be known and loved by these amiable creatures; to see their sweet looks directed towards me with affection was the utmost limit of my ambition. I dared not think that they would turn them from me with disdain and horror. The poor that stopped at their door were never driven away. I asked, it is true, for greater treasures than a little food or rest: I required kindness and sympathy; but I did not believe myself utterly unworthy of it.

“The winter advanced, and an entire revolution of the seasons had taken place since I awoke into life. My attention at this time was solely directed towards my plan of introducing myself into the cottage of my protectors. I revolved many projects, but that on which I finally fixed was to enter the dwelling when the blind old man should be alone. I had sagacity enough to discover that the unnatural hideousness of my person was the chief object of horror with those who had formerly beheld me. My voice, although harsh, had nothing terrible in it; I thought, therefore, that if in the absence of his children I could gain the good will and mediation of the old De Lacey, I might by his means be tolerated by my younger protectors. “One day, when the sun shone on the red leaves that strewed the ground and diffused cheerfulness, although it denied warmth, Safie, Agatha, and Felix departed on a long country walk, and the old man, at his own desire, was left alone in the cottage. When his children had departed, he took up his guitar and played several mournful but sweet airs, more sweet and mournful than I had ever heard him play before. At first his countenance was illuminated with pleasure, but as he continued, thoughtfulness and sadness succeeded; at length, laying aside the instrument, he sat absorbed in reflection.

“My heart beat quick; this was the hour and moment of trial, which would decide my hopes or realise my fears. The servants were gone to a neighbouring fair. All was silent in and around the cottage; it was an excellent opportunity; yet, when I proceeded to execute my plan, my limbs failed me and I sank to the ground. Again I rose, and exerting all the firmness of which I was master, removed the planks which I had placed before my hovel to conceal my retreat. The fresh air revived me, and with renewed determination I approached the door of their cottage. “I entered. ‘Pardon this intrusion,’ said I; ‘I am a traveller in want of a little rest; you would greatly oblige me if you would allow me to remain a few minutes before the fire.’ “‘Enter,’ said De Lacey, ‘and I will try in what manner I can to relieve your wants; but, unfortunately, my children are from home, and as I am blind, I am afraid I shall find it difficult to procure food for you.’

“I sat down, and a silence ensued. I knew that every minute was precious to me, yet I remained irresolute in what manner to commence the interview, when the old man addressed me. “‘No; but I was educated by a French family and understand that language only. I am now going to claim the protection of some friends, whom I sincerely love, and of whose favour I have some hopes.’ “‘No, they are French. But let us change the subject. I am an unfortunate and deserted creature, I look around and I have no relation or friend upon earth. These amiable people to whom I go have never seen me and know little of me. I am full of fears, for if I fail there, I am an outcast in the world for ever.’ “‘Do not despair. To be friendless is indeed to be unfortunate, but the hearts of men, when unprejudiced by any obvious self-interest, are full of brotherly love and charity. Rely, therefore, on your hopes; and if these friends are good and amiable, do not despair.’ “‘They are kind—they are the most excellent creatures in the world; but, unfortunately, they are prejudiced against me. I have good dispositions; my life has been hitherto harmless and in some degree beneficial; but a fatal prejudice clouds their eyes, and where they ought to see a feeling and kind friend, they behold only a detestable monster.’

“‘I am about to undertake that task; and it is on that account that I feel so many overwhelming terrors. I tenderly love these friends; I have, unknown to them, been for many months in the habits of daily kindness towards them; but they believe that I wish to injure them, and it is that prejudice which I wish to overcome.’ “The old man paused and then continued, ‘If you will unreservedly confide to me the particulars of your tale, I perhaps may be of use in undeceiving them. I am blind and cannot judge of your countenance, but there is something in your words which persuades me that you are sincere. I am poor and an exile, but it will afford me true pleasure to be in any way serviceable to a human creature.’ “‘Excellent man! I thank you and accept your generous offer. You raise me from the dust by this kindness; and I trust that, by your aid, I shall not be driven from the society and sympathy of your fellow creatures.’ “‘Heaven forbid! Even if you were really criminal, for that can only drive you to desperation, and not instigate you to virtue. I also am unfortunate; I and my family have been condemned, although innocent; judge, therefore, if I do not feel for your misfortunes.’

“‘How can I thank you, my best and only benefactor? From your lips first have I heard the voice of kindness directed towards me; I shall be for ever grateful; and your present humanity assures me of success with those friends whom I am on the point of meeting.’ “I paused. This, I thought, was the moment of decision, which was to rob me of or bestow happiness on me for ever. I struggled vainly for firmness sufficient to answer him, but the effort destroyed all my remaining strength; I sank on the chair and sobbed aloud. At that moment I heard the steps of my younger protectors. I had not a moment to lose, but seizing the hand of the old man, I cried, ‘Now is the time! Save and protect me! You and your family are the friends whom I seek. Do not you desert me in the hour of trial!’ “At that instant the cottage door was opened, and Felix, Safie, and Agatha entered. Who can describe their horror and consternation on beholding me? Agatha fainted, and Safie, unable to attend to her friend, rushed out of the cottage. Felix darted forward, and with supernatural force tore me from his father, to whose knees I clung, in a transport of fury, he dashed me to the ground and struck me violently with a stick. I could have torn him limb from limb, as the lion rends the antelope. But my heart sank within me as with bitter sickness, and I refrained. I saw him on the point of repeating his blow, when, overcome by pain and anguish, I quitted the cottage, and in the general tumult escaped unperceived to my hovel.”

“Cursed, cursed creator! Why did I live? Why, in that instant, did I not extinguish the spark of existence which you had so wantonly bestowed? I know not; despair had not yet taken possession of me; my feelings were those of rage and revenge. I could with pleasure have destroyed the cottage and its inhabitants and have glutted myself with their shrieks and misery. “When night came I quitted my retreat and wandered in the wood; and now, no longer restrained by the fear of discovery, I gave vent to my anguish in fearful howlings. I was like a wild beast that had broken the toils, destroying the objects that obstructed me and ranging through the wood with a stag-like swiftness. Oh! What a miserable night I passed! The cold stars shone in mockery, and the bare trees waved their branches above me; now and then the sweet voice of a bird burst forth amidst the universal stillness. All, save I, were at rest or in enjoyment; I, like the arch-fiend, bore a hell within me, and finding myself unsympathised with, wished to tear up the trees, spread havoc and destruction around me, and then to have sat down and enjoyed the ruin.

“But this was a luxury of sensation that could not endure; I became fatigued with excess of bodily exertion and sank on the damp grass in the sick impotence of despair. There was none among the myriads of men that existed who would pity or assist me; and should I feel kindness towards my enemies? No; from that moment I declared everlasting war against the species, and more than all, against him who had formed me and sent me forth to this insupportable misery. “The sun rose; I heard the voices of men and knew that it was impossible to return to my retreat during that day. Accordingly I hid myself in some thick underwood, determining to devote the ensuing hours to reflection on my situation. “The pleasant sunshine and the pure air of day restored me to some degree of tranquillity; and when I considered what had passed at the cottage, I could not help believing that I had been too hasty in my conclusions. I had certainly acted imprudently. It was apparent that my conversation had interested the father in my behalf, and I was a fool in having exposed my person to the horror of his children. I ought to have familiarised the old De Lacey to me, and by degrees to have discovered myself to the rest of his family, when they should have been prepared for my approach. But I did not believe my errors to be irretrievable, and after much consideration I resolved to return to the cottage, seek the old man, and by my representations win him to my party.

“These thoughts calmed me, and in the afternoon I sank into a profound sleep; but the fever of my blood did not allow me to be visited by peaceful dreams. The horrible scene of the preceding day was for ever acting before my eyes; the females were flying and the enraged Felix tearing me from his father’s feet. I awoke exhausted, and finding that it was already night, I crept forth from my hiding-place, and went in search of food. “When my hunger was appeased, I directed my steps towards the well-known path that conducted to the cottage. All there was at peace. I crept into my hovel and remained in silent expectation of the accustomed hour when the family arose. That hour passed, the sun mounted high in the heavens, but the cottagers did not appear. I trembled violently, apprehending some dreadful misfortune. The inside of the cottage was dark, and I heard no motion; I cannot describe the agony of this suspense. “Presently two countrymen passed by, but pausing near the cottage, they entered into conversation, using violent gesticulations; but I did not understand what they said, as they spoke the language of the country, which differed from that of my protectors. Soon after, however, Felix approached with another man; I was surprised, as I knew that he had not quitted the cottage that morning, and waited anxiously to discover from his discourse the meaning of these unusual appearances.

“‘Do you consider,’ said his companion to him, ‘that you will be obliged to pay three months’ rent and to lose the produce of your garden? I do not wish to take any unfair advantage, and I beg therefore that you will take some days to consider of your determination.’ “‘It is utterly useless,’ replied Felix; ‘we can never again inhabit your cottage. The life of my father is in the greatest danger, owing to the dreadful circumstance that I have related. My wife and my sister will never recover from their horror. I entreat you not to reason with me any more. Take possession of your tenement and let me fly from this place.’ “Felix trembled violently as he said this. He and his companion entered the cottage, in which they remained for a few minutes, and then departed. I never saw any of the family of De Lacey more. “I continued for the remainder of the day in my hovel in a state of utter and stupid despair. My protectors had departed and had broken the only link that held me to the world. For the first time the feelings of revenge and hatred filled my bosom, and I did not strive to control them, but allowing myself to be borne away by the stream, I bent my mind towards injury and death. When I thought of my friends, of the mild voice of De Lacey, the gentle eyes of Agatha, and the exquisite beauty of the Arabian, these thoughts vanished and a gush of tears somewhat soothed me. But again when I reflected that they had spurned and deserted me, anger returned, a rage of anger, and unable to injure anything human, I turned my fury towards inanimate objects. As night advanced, I placed a variety of combustibles around the cottage, and after having destroyed every vestige of cultivation in the garden, I waited with forced impatience until the moon had sunk to commence my operations.

“As the night advanced, a fierce wind arose from the woods and quickly dispersed the clouds that had loitered in the heavens; the blast tore along like a mighty avalanche and produced a kind of insanity in my spirits that burst all bounds of reason and reflection. I lighted the dry branch of a tree and danced with fury around the devoted cottage, my eyes still fixed on the western horizon, the edge of which the moon nearly touched. A part of its orb was at length hid, and I waved my brand; it sank, and with a loud scream I fired the straw, and heath, and bushes, which I had collected. The wind fanned the fire, and the cottage was quickly enveloped by the flames, which clung to it and licked it with their forked and destroying tongues. “And now, with the world before me, whither should I bend my steps? I resolved to fly far from the scene of my misfortunes; but to me, hated and despised, every country must be equally horrible. At length the thought of you crossed my mind. I learned from your papers that you were my father, my creator; and to whom could I apply with more fitness than to him who had given me life? Among the lessons that Felix had bestowed upon Safie, geography had not been omitted; I had learned from these the relative situations of the different countries of the earth. You had mentioned Geneva as the name of your native town, and towards this place I resolved to proceed.

“But how was I to direct myself? I knew that I must travel in a southwesterly direction to reach my destination, but the sun was my only guide. I did not know the names of the towns that I was to pass through, nor could I ask information from a single human being; but I did not despair. From you only could I hope for succour, although towards you I felt no sentiment but that of hatred. Unfeeling, heartless creator! You had endowed me with perceptions and passions and then cast me abroad an object for the scorn and horror of mankind. But on you only had I any claim for pity and redress, and from you I determined to seek that justice which I vainly attempted to gain from any other being that wore the human form. “My travels were long and the sufferings I endured intense. It was late in autumn when I quitted the district where I had so long resided. I travelled only at night, fearful of encountering the visage of a human being. Nature decayed around me, and the sun became heatless; rain and snow poured around me; mighty rivers were frozen; the surface of the earth was hard and chill, and bare, and I found no shelter. Oh, earth! How often did I imprecate curses on the cause of my being! The mildness of my nature had fled, and all within me was turned to gall and bitterness. The nearer I approached to your habitation, the more deeply did I feel the spirit of revenge enkindled in my heart. Snow fell, and the waters were hardened, but I rested not. A few incidents now and then directed me, and I possessed a map of the country; but I often wandered wide from my path. The agony of my feelings allowed me no respite; no incident occurred from which my rage and misery could not extract its food; but a circumstance that happened when I arrived on the confines of Switzerland, when the sun had recovered its warmth and the earth again began to look green, confirmed in an especial manner the bitterness and horror of my feelings.

“I generally rested during the day and travelled only when I was secured by night from the view of man. One morning, however, finding that my path lay through a deep wood, I ventured to continue my journey after the sun had risen; the day, which was one of the first of spring, cheered even me by the loveliness of its sunshine and the balminess of the air. I felt emotions of gentleness and pleasure, that had long appeared dead, revive within me. Half surprised by the novelty of these sensations, I allowed myself to be borne away by them, and forgetting my solitude and deformity, dared to be happy. Soft tears again bedewed my cheeks, and I even raised my humid eyes with thankfulness towards the blessed sun, which bestowed such joy upon me. “I continued to wind among the paths of the wood, until I came to its boundary, which was skirted by a deep and rapid river, into which many of the trees bent their branches, now budding with the fresh spring. Here I paused, not exactly knowing what path to pursue, when I heard the sound of voices, that induced me to conceal myself under the shade of a cypress. I was scarcely hid when a young girl came running towards the spot where I was concealed, laughing, as if she ran from someone in sport. She continued her course along the precipitous sides of the river, when suddenly her foot slipped, and she fell into the rapid stream. I rushed from my hiding-place and with extreme labour, from the force of the current, saved her and dragged her to shore. She was senseless, and I endeavoured by every means in my power to restore animation, when I was suddenly interrupted by the approach of a rustic, who was probably the person from whom she had playfully fled. On seeing me, he darted towards me, and tearing the girl from my arms, hastened towards the deeper parts of the wood. I followed speedily, I hardly knew why; but when the man saw me draw near, he aimed a gun, which he carried, at my body and fired. I sank to the ground, and my injurer, with increased swiftness, escaped into the wood.

“This was then the reward of my benevolence! I had saved a human being from destruction, and as a recompense I now writhed under the miserable pain of a wound which shattered the flesh and bone. The feelings of kindness and gentleness which I had entertained but a few moments before gave place to hellish rage and gnashing of teeth. Inflamed by pain, I vowed eternal hatred and vengeance to all mankind. But the agony of my wound overcame me; my pulses paused, and I fainted. “For some weeks I led a miserable life in the woods, endeavouring to cure the wound which I had received. The ball had entered my shoulder, and I knew not whether it had remained there or passed through; at any rate I had no means of extracting it. My sufferings were augmented also by the oppressive sense of the injustice and ingratitude of their infliction. My daily vows rose for revenge—a deep and deadly revenge, such as would alone compensate for the outrages and anguish I had endured. “After some weeks my wound healed, and I continued my journey. The labours I endured were no longer to be alleviated by the bright sun or gentle breezes of spring; all joy was but a mockery which insulted my desolate state and made me feel more painfully that I was not made for the enjoyment of pleasure.

“It was evening when I arrived, and I retired to a hiding-place among the fields that surround it to meditate in what manner I should apply to you. I was oppressed by fatigue and hunger and far too unhappy to enjoy the gentle breezes of evening or the prospect of the sun setting behind the stupendous mountains of Jura. “At this time a slight sleep relieved me from the pain of reflection, which was disturbed by the approach of a beautiful child, who came running into the recess I had chosen, with all the sportiveness of infancy. Suddenly, as I gazed on him, an idea seized me that this little creature was unprejudiced and had lived too short a time to have imbibed a horror of deformity. If, therefore, I could seize him and educate him as my companion and friend, I should not be so desolate in this peopled earth. “Urged by this impulse, I seized on the boy as he passed and drew him towards me. As soon as he beheld my form, he placed his hands before his eyes and uttered a shrill scream; I drew his hand forcibly from his face and said, ‘Child, what is the meaning of this? I do not intend to hurt you; listen to me.’

“He struggled violently. ‘Let me go,’ he cried; ‘monster! Ugly wretch! You wish to eat me and tear me to pieces. You are an ogre. Let me go, or I will tell my papa.’ “The child still struggled and loaded me with epithets which carried despair to my heart; I grasped his throat to silence him, and in a moment he lay dead at my feet. “I gazed on my victim, and my heart swelled with exultation and hellish triumph; clapping my hands, I exclaimed, ‘I too can create desolation; my enemy is not invulnerable; this death will carry despair to him, and a thousand other miseries shall torment and destroy him.’ “As I fixed my eyes on the child, I saw something glittering on his breast. I took it; it was a portrait of a most lovely woman. In spite of my malignity, it softened and attracted me. For a few moments I gazed with delight on her dark eyes, fringed by deep lashes, and her lovely lips; but presently my rage returned; I remembered that I was for ever deprived of the delights that such beautiful creatures could bestow and that she whose resemblance I contemplated would, in regarding me, have changed that air of divine benignity to one expressive of disgust and affright.

“Can you wonder that such thoughts transported me with rage? I only wonder that at that moment, instead of venting my sensations in exclamations and agony, I did not rush among mankind and perish in the attempt to destroy them. “While I was overcome by these feelings, I left the spot where I had committed the murder, and seeking a more secluded hiding-place, I entered a barn which had appeared to me to be empty. A woman was sleeping on some straw; she was young, not indeed so beautiful as her whose portrait I held, but of an agreeable aspect and blooming in the loveliness of youth and health. Here, I thought, is one of those whose joy-imparting smiles are bestowed on all but me. And then I bent over her and whispered, ‘Awake, fairest, thy lover is near—he who would give his life but to obtain one look of affection from thine eyes; my beloved, awake!’ “The sleeper stirred; a thrill of terror ran through me. Should she indeed awake, and see me, and curse me, and denounce the murderer? Thus would she assuredly act if her darkened eyes opened and she beheld me. The thought was madness; it stirred the fiend within me—not I, but she, shall suffer; the murder I have committed because I am for ever robbed of all that she could give me, she shall atone. The crime had its source in her; be hers the punishment! Thanks to the lessons of Felix and the sanguinary laws of man, I had learned now to work mischief. I bent over her and placed the portrait securely in one of the folds of her dress. She moved again, and I fled.

“For some days I haunted the spot where these scenes had taken place, sometimes wishing to see you, sometimes resolved to quit the world and its miseries for ever. At length I wandered towards these mountains, and have ranged through their immense recesses, consumed by a burning passion which you alone can gratify. We may not part until you have promised to comply with my requisition. I am alone and miserable; man will not associate with me; but one as deformed and horrible as myself would not deny herself to me. My companion must be of the same species and have the same defects. This being you must create.” The being finished speaking and fixed his looks upon me in the expectation of a reply. But I was bewildered, perplexed, and unable to arrange my ideas sufficiently to understand the full extent of his proposition. He continued, “You must create a female for me with whom I can live in the interchange of those sympathies necessary for my being. This you alone can do, and I demand it of you as a right which you must not refuse to concede.”

The latter part of his tale had kindled anew in me the anger that had died away while he narrated his peaceful life among the cottagers, and as he said this I could no longer suppress the rage that burned within me. “I do refuse it,” I replied; “and no torture shall ever extort a consent from me. You may render me the most miserable of men, but you shall never make me base in my own eyes. Shall I create another like yourself, whose joint wickedness might desolate the world. Begone! I have answered you; you may torture me, but I will never consent.” “You are in the wrong,” replied the fiend; “and instead of threatening, I am content to reason with you. I am malicious because I am miserable. Am I not shunned and hated by all mankind? You, my creator, would tear me to pieces and triumph; remember that, and tell me why I should pity man more than he pities me? You would not call it murder if you could precipitate me into one of those ice-rifts and destroy my frame, the work of your own hands. Shall I respect man when he condemns me? Let him live with me in the interchange of kindness, and instead of injury I would bestow every benefit upon him with tears of gratitude at his acceptance. But that cannot be; the human senses are insurmountable barriers to our union. Yet mine shall not be the submission of abject slavery. I will revenge my injuries; if I cannot inspire love, I will cause fear, and chiefly towards you my arch-enemy, because my creator, do I swear inextinguishable hatred. Have a care; I will work at your destruction, nor finish until I desolate your heart, so that you shall curse the hour of your birth.”

A fiendish rage animated him as he said this; his face was wrinkled into contortions too horrible for human eyes to behold; but presently he calmed himself and proceeded— “I intended to reason. This passion is detrimental to me, for you do not reflect that _you_ are the cause of its excess. If any being felt emotions of benevolence towards me, I should return them a hundred and a hundredfold; for that one creature’s sake I would make peace with the whole kind! But I now indulge in dreams of bliss that cannot be realised. What I ask of you is reasonable and moderate; I demand a creature of another sex, but as hideous as myself; the gratification is small, but it is all that I can receive, and it shall content me. It is true, we shall be monsters, cut off from all the world; but on that account we shall be more attached to one another. Our lives will not be happy, but they will be harmless and free from the misery I now feel. Oh! My creator, make me happy; let me feel gratitude towards you for one benefit! Let me see that I excite the sympathy of some existing thing; do not deny me my request!”

I was moved. I shuddered when I thought of the possible consequences of my consent, but I felt that there was some justice in his argument. His tale and the feelings he now expressed proved him to be a creature of fine sensations, and did I not as his maker owe him all the portion of happiness that it was in my power to bestow? He saw my change of feeling and continued, “If you consent, neither you nor any other human being shall ever see us again; I will go to the vast wilds of South America. My food is not that of man; I do not destroy the lamb and the kid to glut my appetite; acorns and berries afford me sufficient nourishment. My companion will be of the same nature as myself and will be content with the same fare. We shall make our bed of dried leaves; the sun will shine on us as on man and will ripen our food. The picture I present to you is peaceful and human, and you must feel that you could deny it only in the wantonness of power and cruelty. Pitiless as you have been towards me, I now see compassion in your eyes; let me seize the favourable moment and persuade you to promise what I so ardently desire.”

“You propose,” replied I, “to fly from the habitations of man, to dwell in those wilds where the beasts of the field will be your only companions. How can you, who long for the love and sympathy of man, persevere in this exile? You will return and again seek their kindness, and you will meet with their detestation; your evil passions will be renewed, and you will then have a companion to aid you in the task of destruction. This may not be; cease to argue the point, for I cannot consent.” “How inconstant are your feelings! But a moment ago you were moved by my representations, and why do you again harden yourself to my complaints? I swear to you, by the earth which I inhabit, and by you that made me, that with the companion you bestow, I will quit the neighbourhood of man and dwell, as it may chance, in the most savage of places. My evil passions will have fled, for I shall meet with sympathy! My life will flow quietly away, and in my dying moments I shall not curse my maker.”

His words had a strange effect upon me. I compassionated him and sometimes felt a wish to console him, but when I looked upon him, when I saw the filthy mass that moved and talked, my heart sickened and my feelings were altered to those of horror and hatred. I tried to stifle these sensations; I thought that as I could not sympathise with him, I had no right to withhold from him the small portion of happiness which was yet in my power to bestow. “You swear,” I said, “to be harmless; but have you not already shown a degree of malice that should reasonably make me distrust you? May not even this be a feint that will increase your triumph by affording a wider scope for your revenge?” “How is this? I must not be trifled with, and I demand an answer. If I have no ties and no affections, hatred and vice must be my portion; the love of another will destroy the cause of my crimes, and I shall become a thing of whose existence everyone will be ignorant. My vices are the children of a forced solitude that I abhor, and my virtues will necessarily arise when I live in communion with an equal. I shall feel the affections of a sensitive being and become linked to the chain of existence and events from which I am now excluded.”

I paused some time to reflect on all he had related and the various arguments which he had employed. I thought of the promise of virtues which he had displayed on the opening of his existence and the subsequent blight of all kindly feeling by the loathing and scorn which his protectors had manifested towards him. His power and threats were not omitted in my calculations; a creature who could exist in the ice-caves of the glaciers and hide himself from pursuit among the ridges of inaccessible precipices was a being possessing faculties it would be vain to cope with. After a long pause of reflection I concluded that the justice due both to him and my fellow creatures demanded of me that I should comply with his request. Turning to him, therefore, I said, “I consent to your demand, on your solemn oath to quit Europe for ever, and every other place in the neighbourhood of man, as soon as I shall deliver into your hands a female who will accompany you in your exile.” “I swear,” he cried, “by the sun, and by the blue sky of heaven, and by the fire of love that burns my heart, that if you grant my prayer, while they exist you shall never behold me again. Depart to your home and commence your labours; I shall watch their progress with unutterable anxiety; and fear not but that when you are ready I shall appear.”

Saying this, he suddenly quitted me, fearful, perhaps, of any change in my sentiments. I saw him descend the mountain with greater speed than the flight of an eagle, and quickly lost among the undulations of the sea of ice. His tale had occupied the whole day, and the sun was upon the verge of the horizon when he departed. I knew that I ought to hasten my descent towards the valley, as I should soon be encompassed in darkness; but my heart was heavy, and my steps slow. The labour of winding among the little paths of the mountain and fixing my feet firmly as I advanced perplexed me, occupied as I was by the emotions which the occurrences of the day had produced. Night was far advanced when I came to the halfway resting-place and seated myself beside the fountain. The stars shone at intervals as the clouds passed from over them; the dark pines rose before me, and every here and there a broken tree lay on the ground; it was a scene of wonderful solemnity and stirred strange thoughts within me. I wept bitterly, and clasping my hands in agony, I exclaimed, “Oh! stars and clouds and winds, ye are all about to mock me; if ye really pity me, crush sensation and memory; let me become as nought; but if not, depart, depart, and leave me in darkness.”

These were wild and miserable thoughts, but I cannot describe to you how the eternal twinkling of the stars weighed upon me and how I listened to every blast of wind as if it were a dull ugly siroc on its way to consume me. Morning dawned before I arrived at the village of Chamounix; I took no rest, but returned immediately to Geneva. Even in my own heart I could give no expression to my sensations—they weighed on me with a mountain’s weight and their excess destroyed my agony beneath them. Thus I returned home, and entering the house, presented myself to the family. My haggard and wild appearance awoke intense alarm, but I answered no question, scarcely did I speak. I felt as if I were placed under a ban—as if I had no right to claim their sympathies—as if never more might I enjoy companionship with them. Yet even thus I loved them to adoration; and to save them, I resolved to dedicate myself to my most abhorred task. The prospect of such an occupation made every other circumstance of existence pass before me like a dream, and that thought only had to me the reality of life.

Day after day, week after week, passed away on my return to Geneva; and I could not collect the courage to recommence my work. I feared the vengeance of the disappointed fiend, yet I was unable to overcome my repugnance to the task which was enjoined me. I found that I could not compose a female without again devoting several months to profound study and laborious disquisition. I had heard of some discoveries having been made by an English philosopher, the knowledge of which was material to my success, and I sometimes thought of obtaining my father’s consent to visit England for this purpose; but I clung to every pretence of delay and shrank from taking the first step in an undertaking whose immediate necessity began to appear less absolute to me. A change indeed had taken place in me; my health, which had hitherto declined, was now much restored; and my spirits, when unchecked by the memory of my unhappy promise, rose proportionably. My father saw this change with pleasure, and he turned his thoughts towards the best method of eradicating the remains of my melancholy, which every now and then would return by fits, and with a devouring blackness overcast the approaching sunshine. At these moments I took refuge in the most perfect solitude. I passed whole days on the lake alone in a little boat, watching the clouds and listening to the rippling of the waves, silent and listless. But the fresh air and bright sun seldom failed to restore me to some degree of composure, and on my return I met the salutations of my friends with a readier smile and a more cheerful heart.

“I am happy to remark, my dear son, that you have resumed your former pleasures and seem to be returning to yourself. And yet you are still unhappy and still avoid our society. For some time I was lost in conjecture as to the cause of this, but yesterday an idea struck me, and if it is well founded, I conjure you to avow it. Reserve on such a point would be not only useless, but draw down treble misery on us all.” “I confess, my son, that I have always looked forward to your marriage with our dear Elizabeth as the tie of our domestic comfort and the stay of my declining years. You were attached to each other from your earliest infancy; you studied together, and appeared, in dispositions and tastes, entirely suited to one another. But so blind is the experience of man that what I conceived to be the best assistants to my plan may have entirely destroyed it. You, perhaps, regard her as your sister, without any wish that she might become your wife. Nay, you may have met with another whom you may love; and considering yourself as bound in honour to Elizabeth, this struggle may occasion the poignant misery which you appear to feel.”

“My dear father, reassure yourself. I love my cousin tenderly and sincerely. I never saw any woman who excited, as Elizabeth does, my warmest admiration and affection. My future hopes and prospects are entirely bound up in the expectation of our union.” “The expression of your sentiments of this subject, my dear Victor, gives me more pleasure than I have for some time experienced. If you feel thus, we shall assuredly be happy, however present events may cast a gloom over us. But it is this gloom which appears to have taken so strong a hold of your mind that I wish to dissipate. Tell me, therefore, whether you object to an immediate solemnisation of the marriage. We have been unfortunate, and recent events have drawn us from that everyday tranquillity befitting my years and infirmities. You are younger; yet I do not suppose, possessed as you are of a competent fortune, that an early marriage would at all interfere with any future plans of honour and utility that you may have formed. Do not suppose, however, that I wish to dictate happiness to you or that a delay on your part would cause me any serious uneasiness. Interpret my words with candour and answer me, I conjure you, with confidence and sincerity.”

I listened to my father in silence and remained for some time incapable of offering any reply. I revolved rapidly in my mind a multitude of thoughts and endeavoured to arrive at some conclusion. Alas! To me the idea of an immediate union with my Elizabeth was one of horror and dismay. I was bound by a solemn promise which I had not yet fulfilled and dared not break, or if I did, what manifold miseries might not impend over me and my devoted family! Could I enter into a festival with this deadly weight yet hanging round my neck and bowing me to the ground? I must perform my engagement and let the monster depart with his mate before I allowed myself to enjoy the delight of a union from which I expected peace. I remembered also the necessity imposed upon me of either journeying to England or entering into a long correspondence with those philosophers of that country whose knowledge and discoveries were of indispensable use to me in my present undertaking. The latter method of obtaining the desired intelligence was dilatory and unsatisfactory; besides, I had an insurmountable aversion to the idea of engaging myself in my loathsome task in my father’s house while in habits of familiar intercourse with those I loved. I knew that a thousand fearful accidents might occur, the slightest of which would disclose a tale to thrill all connected with me with horror. I was aware also that I should often lose all self-command, all capacity of hiding the harrowing sensations that would possess me during the progress of my unearthly occupation. I must absent myself from all I loved while thus employed. Once commenced, it would quickly be achieved, and I might be restored to my family in peace and happiness. My promise fulfilled, the monster would depart for ever. Or (so my fond fancy imaged) some accident might meanwhile occur to destroy him and put an end to my slavery for ever.

These feelings dictated my answer to my father. I expressed a wish to visit England, but concealing the true reasons of this request, I clothed my desires under a guise which excited no suspicion, while I urged my desire with an earnestness that easily induced my father to comply. After so long a period of an absorbing melancholy that resembled madness in its intensity and effects, he was glad to find that I was capable of taking pleasure in the idea of such a journey, and he hoped that change of scene and varied amusement would, before my return, have restored me entirely to myself. The duration of my absence was left to my own choice; a few months, or at most a year, was the period contemplated. One paternal kind precaution he had taken to ensure my having a companion. Without previously communicating with me, he had, in concert with Elizabeth, arranged that Clerval should join me at Strasburgh. This interfered with the solitude I coveted for the prosecution of my task; yet at the commencement of my journey the presence of my friend could in no way be an impediment, and truly I rejoiced that thus I should be saved many hours of lonely, maddening reflection. Nay, Henry might stand between me and the intrusion of my foe. If I were alone, would he not at times force his abhorred presence on me to remind me of my task or to contemplate its progress?

To England, therefore, I was bound, and it was understood that my union with Elizabeth should take place immediately on my return. My father’s age rendered him extremely averse to delay. For myself, there was one reward I promised myself from my detested toils—one consolation for my unparalleled sufferings; it was the prospect of that day when, enfranchised from my miserable slavery, I might claim Elizabeth and forget the past in my union with her. I now made arrangements for my journey, but one feeling haunted me which filled me with fear and agitation. During my absence I should leave my friends unconscious of the existence of their enemy and unprotected from his attacks, exasperated as he might be by my departure. But he had promised to follow me wherever I might go, and would he not accompany me to England? This imagination was dreadful in itself, but soothing inasmuch as it supposed the safety of my friends. I was agonised with the idea of the possibility that the reverse of this might happen. But through the whole period during which I was the slave of my creature I allowed myself to be governed by the impulses of the moment; and my present sensations strongly intimated that the fiend would follow me and exempt my family from the danger of his machinations.

It was in the latter end of September that I again quitted my native country. My journey had been my own suggestion, and Elizabeth therefore acquiesced, but she was filled with disquiet at the idea of my suffering, away from her, the inroads of misery and grief. It had been her care which provided me a companion in Clerval—and yet a man is blind to a thousand minute circumstances which call forth a woman’s sedulous attention. She longed to bid me hasten my return; a thousand conflicting emotions rendered her mute as she bade me a tearful, silent farewell. I threw myself into the carriage that was to convey me away, hardly knowing whither I was going, and careless of what was passing around. I remembered only, and it was with a bitter anguish that I reflected on it, to order that my chemical instruments should be packed to go with me. Filled with dreary imaginations, I passed through many beautiful and majestic scenes, but my eyes were fixed and unobserving. I could only think of the bourne of my travels and the work which was to occupy me whilst they endured.

After some days spent in listless indolence, during which I traversed many leagues, I arrived at Strasburgh, where I waited two days for Clerval. He came. Alas, how great was the contrast between us! He was alive to every new scene, joyful when he saw the beauties of the setting sun, and more happy when he beheld it rise and recommence a new day. He pointed out to me the shifting colours of the landscape and the appearances of the sky. “This is what it is to live,” he cried; “now I enjoy existence! But you, my dear Frankenstein, wherefore are you desponding and sorrowful!” In truth, I was occupied by gloomy thoughts and neither saw the descent of the evening star nor the golden sunrise reflected in the Rhine. And you, my friend, would be far more amused with the journal of Clerval, who observed the scenery with an eye of feeling and delight, than in listening to my reflections. I, a miserable wretch, haunted by a curse that shut up every avenue to enjoyment. We had agreed to descend the Rhine in a boat from Strasburgh to Rotterdam, whence we might take shipping for London. During this voyage we passed many willowy islands and saw several beautiful towns. We stayed a day at Mannheim, and on the fifth from our departure from Strasburgh, arrived at Mainz. The course of the Rhine below Mainz becomes much more picturesque. The river descends rapidly and winds between hills, not high, but steep, and of beautiful forms. We saw many ruined castles standing on the edges of precipices, surrounded by black woods, high and inaccessible. This part of the Rhine, indeed, presents a singularly variegated landscape. In one spot you view rugged hills, ruined castles overlooking tremendous precipices, with the dark Rhine rushing beneath; and on the sudden turn of a promontory, flourishing vineyards with green sloping banks and a meandering river and populous towns occupy the scene.

We travelled at the time of the vintage and heard the song of the labourers as we glided down the stream. Even I, depressed in mind, and my spirits continually agitated by gloomy feelings, even I was pleased. I lay at the bottom of the boat, and as I gazed on the cloudless blue sky, I seemed to drink in a tranquillity to which I had long been a stranger. And if these were my sensations, who can describe those of Henry? He felt as if he had been transported to Fairy-land and enjoyed a happiness seldom tasted by man. “I have seen,” he said, “the most beautiful scenes of my own country; I have visited the lakes of Lucerne and Uri, where the snowy mountains descend almost perpendicularly to the water, casting black and impenetrable shades, which would cause a gloomy and mournful appearance were it not for the most verdant islands that relieve the eye by their gay appearance; I have seen this lake agitated by a tempest, when the wind tore up whirlwinds of water and gave you an idea of what the water-spout must be on the great ocean; and the waves dash with fury the base of the mountain, where the priest and his mistress were overwhelmed by an avalanche and where their dying voices are still said to be heard amid the pauses of the nightly wind; I have seen the mountains of La Valais, and the Pays de Vaud; but this country, Victor, pleases me more than all those wonders. The mountains of Switzerland are more majestic and strange, but there is a charm in the banks of this divine river that I never before saw equalled. Look at that castle which overhangs yon precipice; and that also on the island, almost concealed amongst the foliage of those lovely trees; and now that group of labourers coming from among their vines; and that village half hid in the recess of the mountain. Oh, surely the spirit that inhabits and guards this place has a soul more in harmony with man than those who pile the glacier or retire to the inaccessible peaks of the mountains of our own country.”

Clerval! Beloved friend! Even now it delights me to record your words and to dwell on the praise of which you are so eminently deserving. He was a being formed in the “very poetry of nature.” His wild and enthusiastic imagination was chastened by the sensibility of his heart. His soul overflowed with ardent affections, and his friendship was of that devoted and wondrous nature that the worldly-minded teach us to look for only in the imagination. But even human sympathies were not sufficient to satisfy his eager mind. The scenery of external nature, which others regard only with admiration, he loved with ardour:— ——The sounding cataract Haunted him like a passion: the tall rock, The mountain, and the deep and gloomy wood, Their colours and their forms, were then to him An appetite; a feeling, and a love, That had no need of a remoter charm, By thought supplied, or any interest Unborrow’d from the eye. And where does he now exist? Is this gentle and lovely being lost for ever? Has this mind, so replete with ideas, imaginations fanciful and magnificent, which formed a world, whose existence depended on the life of its creator;—has this mind perished? Does it now only exist in my memory? No, it is not thus; your form so divinely wrought, and beaming with beauty, has decayed, but your spirit still visits and consoles your unhappy friend.

Pardon this gush of sorrow; these ineffectual words are but a slight tribute to the unexampled worth of Henry, but they soothe my heart, overflowing with the anguish which his remembrance creates. I will proceed with my tale. Beyond Cologne we descended to the plains of Holland; and we resolved to post the remainder of our way, for the wind was contrary and the stream of the river was too gentle to aid us. Our journey here lost the interest arising from beautiful scenery, but we arrived in a few days at Rotterdam, whence we proceeded by sea to England. It was on a clear morning, in the latter days of December, that I first saw the white cliffs of Britain. The banks of the Thames presented a new scene; they were flat but fertile, and almost every town was marked by the remembrance of some story. We saw Tilbury Fort and remembered the Spanish Armada, Gravesend, Woolwich, and Greenwich—places which I had heard of even in my country. London was our present point of rest; we determined to remain several months in this wonderful and celebrated city. Clerval desired the intercourse of the men of genius and talent who flourished at this time, but this was with me a secondary object; I was principally occupied with the means of obtaining the information necessary for the completion of my promise and quickly availed myself of the letters of introduction that I had brought with me, addressed to the most distinguished natural philosophers.

If this journey had taken place during my days of study and happiness, it would have afforded me inexpressible pleasure. But a blight had come over my existence, and I only visited these people for the sake of the information they might give me on the subject in which my interest was so terribly profound. Company was irksome to me; when alone, I could fill my mind with the sights of heaven and earth; the voice of Henry soothed me, and I could thus cheat myself into a transitory peace. But busy, uninteresting, joyous faces brought back despair to my heart. I saw an insurmountable barrier placed between me and my fellow men; this barrier was sealed with the blood of William and Justine, and to reflect on the events connected with those names filled my soul with anguish. But in Clerval I saw the image of my former self; he was inquisitive and anxious to gain experience and instruction. The difference of manners which he observed was to him an inexhaustible source of instruction and amusement. He was also pursuing an object he had long had in view. His design was to visit India, in the belief that he had in his knowledge of its various languages, and in the views he had taken of its society, the means of materially assisting the progress of European colonization and trade. In Britain only could he further the execution of his plan. He was for ever busy, and the only check to his enjoyments was my sorrowful and dejected mind. I tried to conceal this as much as possible, that I might not debar him from the pleasures natural to one who was entering on a new scene of life, undisturbed by any care or bitter recollection. I often refused to accompany him, alleging another engagement, that I might remain alone. I now also began to collect the materials necessary for my new creation, and this was to me like the torture of single drops of water continually falling on the head. Every thought that was devoted to it was an extreme anguish, and every word that I spoke in allusion to it caused my lips to quiver, and my heart to palpitate.

After passing some months in London, we received a letter from a person in Scotland who had formerly been our visitor at Geneva. He mentioned the beauties of his native country and asked us if those were not sufficient allurements to induce us to prolong our journey as far north as Perth, where he resided. Clerval eagerly desired to accept this invitation, and I, although I abhorred society, wished to view again mountains and streams and all the wondrous works with which Nature adorns her chosen dwelling-places. We had arrived in England at the beginning of October, and it was now February. We accordingly determined to commence our journey towards the north at the expiration of another month. In this expedition we did not intend to follow the great road to Edinburgh, but to visit Windsor, Oxford, Matlock, and the Cumberland lakes, resolving to arrive at the completion of this tour about the end of July. I packed up my chemical instruments and the materials I had collected, resolving to finish my labours in some obscure nook in the northern highlands of Scotland.

We quitted London on the 27th of March and remained a few days at Windsor, rambling in its beautiful forest. This was a new scene to us mountaineers; the majestic oaks, the quantity of game, and the herds of stately deer were all novelties to us. From thence we proceeded to Oxford. As we entered this city, our minds were filled with the remembrance of the events that had been transacted there more than a century and a half before. It was here that Charles I. had collected his forces. This city had remained faithful to him, after the whole nation had forsaken his cause to join the standard of Parliament and liberty. The memory of that unfortunate king and his companions, the amiable Falkland, the insolent Goring, his queen, and son, gave a peculiar interest to every part of the city which they might be supposed to have inhabited. The spirit of elder days found a dwelling here, and we delighted to trace its footsteps. If these feelings had not found an imaginary gratification, the appearance of the city had yet in itself sufficient beauty to obtain our admiration. The colleges are ancient and picturesque; the streets are almost magnificent; and the lovely Isis, which flows beside it through meadows of exquisite verdure, is spread forth into a placid expanse of waters, which reflects its majestic assemblage of towers, and spires, and domes, embosomed among aged trees.

I enjoyed this scene, and yet my enjoyment was embittered both by the memory of the past and the anticipation of the future. I was formed for peaceful happiness. During my youthful days discontent never visited my mind, and if I was ever overcome by _ennui_, the sight of what is beautiful in nature or the study of what is excellent and sublime in the productions of man could always interest my heart and communicate elasticity to my spirits. But I am a blasted tree; the bolt has entered my soul; and I felt then that I should survive to exhibit what I shall soon cease to be—a miserable spectacle of wrecked humanity, pitiable to others and intolerable to myself. We passed a considerable period at Oxford, rambling among its environs and endeavouring to identify every spot which might relate to the most animating epoch of English history. Our little voyages of discovery were often prolonged by the successive objects that presented themselves. We visited the tomb of the illustrious Hampden and the field on which that patriot fell. For a moment my soul was elevated from its debasing and miserable fears to contemplate the divine ideas of liberty and self-sacrifice of which these sights were the monuments and the remembrancers. For an instant I dared to shake off my chains and look around me with a free and lofty spirit, but the iron had eaten into my flesh, and I sank again, trembling and hopeless, into my miserable self.

We left Oxford with regret and proceeded to Matlock, which was our next place of rest. The country in the neighbourhood of this village resembled, to a greater degree, the scenery of Switzerland; but everything is on a lower scale, and the green hills want the crown of distant white Alps which always attend on the piny mountains of my native country. We visited the wondrous cave and the little cabinets of natural history, where the curiosities are disposed in the same manner as in the collections at Servox and Chamounix. The latter name made me tremble when pronounced by Henry, and I hastened to quit Matlock, with which that terrible scene was thus associated. From Derby, still journeying northwards, we passed two months in Cumberland and Westmorland. I could now almost fancy myself among the Swiss mountains. The little patches of snow which yet lingered on the northern sides of the mountains, the lakes, and the dashing of the rocky streams were all familiar and dear sights to me. Here also we made some acquaintances, who almost contrived to cheat me into happiness. The delight of Clerval was proportionably greater than mine; his mind expanded in the company of men of talent, and he found in his own nature greater capacities and resources than he could have imagined himself to have possessed while he associated with his inferiors. “I could pass my life here,” said he to me; “and among these mountains I should scarcely regret Switzerland and the Rhine.”

But he found that a traveller’s life is one that includes much pain amidst its enjoyments. His feelings are for ever on the stretch; and when he begins to sink into repose, he finds himself obliged to quit that on which he rests in pleasure for something new, which again engages his attention, and which also he forsakes for other novelties. We had scarcely visited the various lakes of Cumberland and Westmorland and conceived an affection for some of the inhabitants when the period of our appointment with our Scotch friend approached, and we left them to travel on. For my own part I was not sorry. I had now neglected my promise for some time, and I feared the effects of the dæmon’s disappointment. He might remain in Switzerland and wreak his vengeance on my relatives. This idea pursued me and tormented me at every moment from which I might otherwise have snatched repose and peace. I waited for my letters with feverish impatience; if they were delayed I was miserable and overcome by a thousand fears; and when they arrived and I saw the superscription of Elizabeth or my father, I hardly dared to read and ascertain my fate. Sometimes I thought that the fiend followed me and might expedite my remissness by murdering my companion. When these thoughts possessed me, I would not quit Henry for a moment, but followed him as his shadow, to protect him from the fancied rage of his destroyer. I felt as if I had committed some great crime, the consciousness of which haunted me. I was guiltless, but I had indeed drawn down a horrible curse upon my head, as mortal as that of crime.

I visited Edinburgh with languid eyes and mind; and yet that city might have interested the most unfortunate being. Clerval did not like it so well as Oxford, for the antiquity of the latter city was more pleasing to him. But the beauty and regularity of the new town of Edinburgh, its romantic castle and its environs, the most delightful in the world, Arthur’s Seat, St. Bernard’s Well, and the Pentland Hills, compensated him for the change and filled him with cheerfulness and admiration. But I was impatient to arrive at the termination of my journey. We left Edinburgh in a week, passing through Coupar, St. Andrew’s, and along the banks of the Tay, to Perth, where our friend expected us. But I was in no mood to laugh and talk with strangers or enter into their feelings or plans with the good humour expected from a guest; and accordingly I told Clerval that I wished to make the tour of Scotland alone. “Do you,” said I, “enjoy yourself, and let this be our rendezvous. I may be absent a month or two; but do not interfere with my motions, I entreat you; leave me to peace and solitude for a short time; and when I return, I hope it will be with a lighter heart, more congenial to your own temper.”

Henry wished to dissuade me, but seeing me bent on this plan, ceased to remonstrate. He entreated me to write often. “I had rather be with you,” he said, “in your solitary rambles, than with these Scotch people, whom I do not know; hasten, then, my dear friend, to return, that I may again feel myself somewhat at home, which I cannot do in your absence.” Having parted from my friend, I determined to visit some remote spot of Scotland and finish my work in solitude. I did not doubt but that the monster followed me and would discover himself to me when I should have finished, that he might receive his companion. With this resolution I traversed the northern highlands and fixed on one of the remotest of the Orkneys as the scene of my labours. It was a place fitted for such a work, being hardly more than a rock whose high sides were continually beaten upon by the waves. The soil was barren, scarcely affording pasture for a few miserable cows, and oatmeal for its inhabitants, which consisted of five persons, whose gaunt and scraggy limbs gave tokens of their miserable fare. Vegetables and bread, when they indulged in such luxuries, and even fresh water, was to be procured from the mainland, which was about five miles distant.

On the whole island there were but three miserable huts, and one of these was vacant when I arrived. This I hired. It contained but two rooms, and these exhibited all the squalidness of the most miserable penury. The thatch had fallen in, the walls were unplastered, and the door was off its hinges. I ordered it to be repaired, bought some furniture, and took possession, an incident which would doubtless have occasioned some surprise had not all the senses of the cottagers been benumbed by want and squalid poverty. As it was, I lived ungazed at and unmolested, hardly thanked for the pittance of food and clothes which I gave, so much does suffering blunt even the coarsest sensations of men. In this retreat I devoted the morning to labour; but in the evening, when the weather permitted, I walked on the stony beach of the sea to listen to the waves as they roared and dashed at my feet. It was a monotonous yet ever-changing scene. I thought of Switzerland; it was far different from this desolate and appalling landscape. Its hills are covered with vines, and its cottages are scattered thickly in the plains. Its fair lakes reflect a blue and gentle sky, and when troubled by the winds, their tumult is but as the play of a lively infant when compared to the roarings of the giant ocean.

In this manner I distributed my occupations when I first arrived, but as I proceeded in my labour, it became every day more horrible and irksome to me. Sometimes I could not prevail on myself to enter my laboratory for several days, and at other times I toiled day and night in order to complete my work. It was, indeed, a filthy process in which I was engaged. During my first experiment, a kind of enthusiastic frenzy had blinded me to the horror of my employment; my mind was intently fixed on the consummation of my labour, and my eyes were shut to the horror of my proceedings. But now I went to it in cold blood, and my heart often sickened at the work of my hands. Thus situated, employed in the most detestable occupation, immersed in a solitude where nothing could for an instant call my attention from the actual scene in which I was engaged, my spirits became unequal; I grew restless and nervous. Every moment I feared to meet my persecutor. Sometimes I sat with my eyes fixed on the ground, fearing to raise them lest they should encounter the object which I so much dreaded to behold. I feared to wander from the sight of my fellow creatures lest when alone he should come to claim his companion.

In the mean time I worked on, and my labour was already considerably advanced. I looked towards its completion with a tremulous and eager hope, which I dared not trust myself to question but which was intermixed with obscure forebodings of evil that made my heart sicken in my bosom. I sat one evening in my laboratory; the sun had set, and the moon was just rising from the sea; I had not sufficient light for my employment, and I remained idle, in a pause of consideration of whether I should leave my labour for the night or hasten its conclusion by an unremitting attention to it. As I sat, a train of reflection occurred to me which led me to consider the effects of what I was now doing. Three years before, I was engaged in the same manner and had created a fiend whose unparalleled barbarity had desolated my heart and filled it for ever with the bitterest remorse. I was now about to form another being of whose dispositions I was alike ignorant; she might become ten thousand times more malignant than her mate and delight, for its own sake, in murder and wretchedness. He had sworn to quit the neighbourhood of man and hide himself in deserts, but she had not; and she, who in all probability was to become a thinking and reasoning animal, might refuse to comply with a compact made before her creation. They might even hate each other; the creature who already lived loathed his own deformity, and might he not conceive a greater abhorrence for it when it came before his eyes in the female form? She also might turn with disgust from him to the superior beauty of man; she might quit him, and he be again alone, exasperated by the fresh provocation of being deserted by one of his own species.

Even if they were to leave Europe and inhabit the deserts of the new world, yet one of the first results of those sympathies for which the dæmon thirsted would be children, and a race of devils would be propagated upon the earth who might make the very existence of the species of man a condition precarious and full of terror. Had I right, for my own benefit, to inflict this curse upon everlasting generations? I had before been moved by the sophisms of the being I had created; I had been struck senseless by his fiendish threats; but now, for the first time, the wickedness of my promise burst upon me; I shuddered to think that future ages might curse me as their pest, whose selfishness had not hesitated to buy its own peace at the price, perhaps, of the existence of the whole human race. I trembled and my heart failed within me, when, on looking up, I saw by the light of the moon the dæmon at the casement. A ghastly grin wrinkled his lips as he gazed on me, where I sat fulfilling the task which he had allotted to me. Yes, he had followed me in my travels; he had loitered in forests, hid himself in caves, or taken refuge in wide and desert heaths; and he now came to mark my progress and claim the fulfilment of my promise.

As I looked on him, his countenance expressed the utmost extent of malice and treachery. I thought with a sensation of madness on my promise of creating another like to him, and trembling with passion, tore to pieces the thing on which I was engaged. The wretch saw me destroy the creature on whose future existence he depended for happiness, and with a howl of devilish despair and revenge, withdrew. I left the room, and locking the door, made a solemn vow in my own heart never to resume my labours; and then, with trembling steps, I sought my own apartment. I was alone; none were near me to dissipate the gloom and relieve me from the sickening oppression of the most terrible reveries. Several hours passed, and I remained near my window gazing on the sea; it was almost motionless, for the winds were hushed, and all nature reposed under the eye of the quiet moon. A few fishing vessels alone specked the water, and now and then the gentle breeze wafted the sound of voices as the fishermen called to one another. I felt the silence, although I was hardly conscious of its extreme profundity, until my ear was suddenly arrested by the paddling of oars near the shore, and a person landed close to my house.

In a few minutes after, I heard the creaking of my door, as if some one endeavoured to open it softly. I trembled from head to foot; I felt a presentiment of who it was and wished to rouse one of the peasants who dwelt in a cottage not far from mine; but I was overcome by the sensation of helplessness, so often felt in frightful dreams, when you in vain endeavour to fly from an impending danger, and was rooted to the spot. Presently I heard the sound of footsteps along the passage; the door opened, and the wretch whom I dreaded appeared. Shutting the door, he approached me and said in a smothered voice, “You have destroyed the work which you began; what is it that you intend? Do you dare to break your promise? I have endured toil and misery; I left Switzerland with you; I crept along the shores of the Rhine, among its willow islands and over the summits of its hills. I have dwelt many months in the heaths of England and among the deserts of Scotland. I have endured incalculable fatigue, and cold, and hunger; do you dare destroy my hopes?”

“Slave, I before reasoned with you, but you have proved yourself unworthy of my condescension. Remember that I have power; you believe yourself miserable, but I can make you so wretched that the light of day will be hateful to you. You are my creator, but I am your master; obey!” “The hour of my irresolution is past, and the period of your power is arrived. Your threats cannot move me to do an act of wickedness; but they confirm me in a determination of not creating you a companion in vice. Shall I, in cool blood, set loose upon the earth a dæmon whose delight is in death and wretchedness? Begone! I am firm, and your words will only exasperate my rage.” The monster saw my determination in my face and gnashed his teeth in the impotence of anger. “Shall each man,” cried he, “find a wife for his bosom, and each beast have his mate, and I be alone? I had feelings of affection, and they were requited by detestation and scorn. Man! You may hate, but beware! Your hours will pass in dread and misery, and soon the bolt will fall which must ravish from you your happiness for ever. Are you to be happy while I grovel in the intensity of my wretchedness? You can blast my other passions, but revenge remains—revenge, henceforth dearer than light or food! I may die, but first you, my tyrant and tormentor, shall curse the sun that gazes on your misery. Beware, for I am fearless and therefore powerful. I will watch with the wiliness of a snake, that I may sting with its venom. Man, you shall repent of the injuries you inflict.”

“Devil, cease; and do not poison the air with these sounds of malice. I have declared my resolution to you, and I am no coward to bend beneath words. Leave me; I am inexorable.” I would have seized him, but he eluded me and quitted the house with precipitation. In a few moments I saw him in his boat, which shot across the waters with an arrowy swiftness and was soon lost amidst the waves. All was again silent, but his words rang in my ears. I burned with rage to pursue the murderer of my peace and precipitate him into the ocean. I walked up and down my room hastily and perturbed, while my imagination conjured up a thousand images to torment and sting me. Why had I not followed him and closed with him in mortal strife? But I had suffered him to depart, and he had directed his course towards the mainland. I shuddered to think who might be the next victim sacrificed to his insatiate revenge. And then I thought again of his words—“_I will be with you on your wedding-night._” That, then, was the period fixed for the fulfilment of my destiny. In that hour I should die and at once satisfy and extinguish his malice. The prospect did not move me to fear; yet when I thought of my beloved Elizabeth, of her tears and endless sorrow, when she should find her lover so barbarously snatched from her, tears, the first I had shed for many months, streamed from my eyes, and I resolved not to fall before my enemy without a bitter struggle.

The night passed away, and the sun rose from the ocean; my feelings became calmer, if it may be called calmness when the violence of rage sinks into the depths of despair. I left the house, the horrid scene of the last night’s contention, and walked on the beach of the sea, which I almost regarded as an insuperable barrier between me and my fellow creatures; nay, a wish that such should prove the fact stole across me. I desired that I might pass my life on that barren rock, wearily, it is true, but uninterrupted by any sudden shock of misery. If I returned, it was to be sacrificed or to see those whom I most loved die under the grasp of a dæmon whom I had myself created. I walked about the isle like a restless spectre, separated from all it loved and miserable in the separation. When it became noon, and the sun rose higher, I lay down on the grass and was overpowered by a deep sleep. I had been awake the whole of the preceding night, my nerves were agitated, and my eyes inflamed by watching and misery. The sleep into which I now sank refreshed me; and when I awoke, I again felt as if I belonged to a race of human beings like myself, and I began to reflect upon what had passed with greater composure; yet still the words of the fiend rang in my ears like a death-knell; they appeared like a dream, yet distinct and oppressive as a reality.

The sun had far descended, and I still sat on the shore, satisfying my appetite, which had become ravenous, with an oaten cake, when I saw a fishing-boat land close to me, and one of the men brought me a packet; it contained letters from Geneva, and one from Clerval entreating me to join him. He said that he was wearing away his time fruitlessly where he was, that letters from the friends he had formed in London desired his return to complete the negotiation they had entered into for his Indian enterprise. He could not any longer delay his departure; but as his journey to London might be followed, even sooner than he now conjectured, by his longer voyage, he entreated me to bestow as much of my society on him as I could spare. He besought me, therefore, to leave my solitary isle and to meet him at Perth, that we might proceed southwards together. This letter in a degree recalled me to life, and I determined to quit my island at the expiration of two days. Yet, before I departed, there was a task to perform, on which I shuddered to reflect; I must pack up my chemical instruments, and for that purpose I must enter the room which had been the scene of my odious work, and I must handle those utensils the sight of which was sickening to me. The next morning, at daybreak, I summoned sufficient courage and unlocked the door of my laboratory. The remains of the half-finished creature, whom I had destroyed, lay scattered on the floor, and I almost felt as if I had mangled the living flesh of a human being. I paused to collect myself and then entered the chamber. With trembling hand I conveyed the instruments out of the room, but I reflected that I ought not to leave the relics of my work to excite the horror and suspicion of the peasants; and I accordingly put them into a basket, with a great quantity of stones, and laying them up, determined to throw them into the sea that very night; and in the meantime I sat upon the beach, employed in cleaning and arranging my chemical apparatus.

Nothing could be more complete than the alteration that had taken place in my feelings since the night of the appearance of the dæmon. I had before regarded my promise with a gloomy despair as a thing that, with whatever consequences, must be fulfilled; but I now felt as if a film had been taken from before my eyes and that I for the first time saw clearly. The idea of renewing my labours did not for one instant occur to me; the threat I had heard weighed on my thoughts, but I did not reflect that a voluntary act of mine could avert it. I had resolved in my own mind that to create another like the fiend I had first made would be an act of the basest and most atrocious selfishness, and I banished from my mind every thought that could lead to a different conclusion. Between two and three in the morning the moon rose; and I then, putting my basket aboard a little skiff, sailed out about four miles from the shore. The scene was perfectly solitary; a few boats were returning towards land, but I sailed away from them. I felt as if I was about the commission of a dreadful crime and avoided with shuddering anxiety any encounter with my fellow creatures. At one time the moon, which had before been clear, was suddenly overspread by a thick cloud, and I took advantage of the moment of darkness and cast my basket into the sea; I listened to the gurgling sound as it sank and then sailed away from the spot. The sky became clouded, but the air was pure, although chilled by the northeast breeze that was then rising. But it refreshed me and filled me with such agreeable sensations that I resolved to prolong my stay on the water, and fixing the rudder in a direct position, stretched myself at the bottom of the boat. Clouds hid the moon, everything was obscure, and I heard only the sound of the boat as its keel cut through the waves; the murmur lulled me, and in a short time I slept soundly.

I do not know how long I remained in this situation, but when I awoke I found that the sun had already mounted considerably. The wind was high, and the waves continually threatened the safety of my little skiff. I found that the wind was northeast and must have driven me far from the coast from which I had embarked. I endeavoured to change my course but quickly found that if I again made the attempt the boat would be instantly filled with water. Thus situated, my only resource was to drive before the wind. I confess that I felt a few sensations of terror. I had no compass with me and was so slenderly acquainted with the geography of this part of the world that the sun was of little benefit to me. I might be driven into the wide Atlantic and feel all the tortures of starvation or be swallowed up in the immeasurable waters that roared and buffeted around me. I had already been out many hours and felt the torment of a burning thirst, a prelude to my other sufferings. I looked on the heavens, which were covered by clouds that flew before the wind, only to be replaced by others; I looked upon the sea; it was to be my grave. “Fiend,” I exclaimed, “your task is already fulfilled!” I thought of Elizabeth, of my father, and of Clerval—all left behind, on whom the monster might satisfy his sanguinary and merciless passions. This idea plunged me into a reverie so despairing and frightful that even now, when the scene is on the point of closing before me for ever, I shudder to reflect on it.

Some hours passed thus; but by degrees, as the sun declined towards the horizon, the wind died away into a gentle breeze and the sea became free from breakers. But these gave place to a heavy swell; I felt sick and hardly able to hold the rudder, when suddenly I saw a line of high land towards the south. Almost spent, as I was, by fatigue and the dreadful suspense I endured for several hours, this sudden certainty of life rushed like a flood of warm joy to my heart, and tears gushed from my eyes. How mutable are our feelings, and how strange is that clinging love we have of life even in the excess of misery! I constructed another sail with a part of my dress and eagerly steered my course towards the land. It had a wild and rocky appearance, but as I approached nearer I easily perceived the traces of cultivation. I saw vessels near the shore and found myself suddenly transported back to the neighbourhood of civilised man. I carefully traced the windings of the land and hailed a steeple which I at length saw issuing from behind a small promontory. As I was in a state of extreme debility, I resolved to sail directly towards the town, as a place where I could most easily procure nourishment. Fortunately I had money with me. As I turned the promontory I perceived a small neat town and a good harbour, which I entered, my heart bounding with joy at my unexpected escape.

As I was occupied in fixing the boat and arranging the sails, several people crowded towards the spot. They seemed much surprised at my appearance, but instead of offering me any assistance, whispered together with gestures that at any other time might have produced in me a slight sensation of alarm. As it was, I merely remarked that they spoke English, and I therefore addressed them in that language. “My good friends,” said I, “will you be so kind as to tell me the name of this town and inform me where I am?” “You will know that soon enough,” replied a man with a hoarse voice. “Maybe you are come to a place that will not prove much to your taste, but you will not be consulted as to your quarters, I promise you.” I was exceedingly surprised on receiving so rude an answer from a stranger, and I was also disconcerted on perceiving the frowning and angry countenances of his companions. “Why do you answer me so roughly?” I replied. “Surely it is not the custom of Englishmen to receive strangers so inhospitably.”

While this strange dialogue continued, I perceived the crowd rapidly increase. Their faces expressed a mixture of curiosity and anger, which annoyed and in some degree alarmed me. I inquired the way to the inn, but no one replied. I then moved forward, and a murmuring sound arose from the crowd as they followed and surrounded me, when an ill-looking man approaching tapped me on the shoulder and said, “Come, sir, you must follow me to Mr. Kirwin’s to give an account of yourself.” “Ay, sir, free enough for honest folks. Mr. Kirwin is a magistrate, and you are to give an account of the death of a gentleman who was found murdered here last night.” This answer startled me, but I presently recovered myself. I was innocent; that could easily be proved; accordingly I followed my conductor in silence and was led to one of the best houses in the town. I was ready to sink from fatigue and hunger, but being surrounded by a crowd, I thought it politic to rouse all my strength, that no physical debility might be construed into apprehension or conscious guilt. Little did I then expect the calamity that was in a few moments to overwhelm me and extinguish in horror and despair all fear of ignominy or death.

I must pause here, for it requires all my fortitude to recall the memory of the frightful events which I am about to relate, in proper detail, to my recollection. I was soon introduced into the presence of the magistrate, an old benevolent man with calm and mild manners. He looked upon me, however, with some degree of severity, and then, turning towards my conductors, he asked who appeared as witnesses on this occasion. About half a dozen men came forward; and, one being selected by the magistrate, he deposed that he had been out fishing the night before with his son and brother-in-law, Daniel Nugent, when, about ten o’clock, they observed a strong northerly blast rising, and they accordingly put in for port. It was a very dark night, as the moon had not yet risen; they did not land at the harbour, but, as they had been accustomed, at a creek about two miles below. He walked on first, carrying a part of the fishing tackle, and his companions followed him at some distance. As he was proceeding along the sands, he struck his foot against something and fell at his length on the ground. His companions came up to assist him, and by the light of their lantern they found that he had fallen on the body of a man, who was to all appearance dead. Their first supposition was that it was the corpse of some person who had been drowned and was thrown on shore by the waves, but on examination they found that the clothes were not wet and even that the body was not then cold. They instantly carried it to the cottage of an old woman near the spot and endeavoured, but in vain, to restore it to life. It appeared to be a handsome young man, about five and twenty years of age. He had apparently been strangled, for there was no sign of any violence except the black mark of fingers on his neck.

The first part of this deposition did not in the least interest me, but when the mark of the fingers was mentioned I remembered the murder of my brother and felt myself extremely agitated; my limbs trembled, and a mist came over my eyes, which obliged me to lean on a chair for support. The magistrate observed me with a keen eye and of course drew an unfavourable augury from my manner. The son confirmed his father’s account, but when Daniel Nugent was called he swore positively that just before the fall of his companion, he saw a boat, with a single man in it, at a short distance from the shore; and as far as he could judge by the light of a few stars, it was the same boat in which I had just landed. A woman deposed that she lived near the beach and was standing at the door of her cottage, waiting for the return of the fishermen, about an hour before she heard of the discovery of the body, when she saw a boat with only one man in it push off from that part of the shore where the corpse was afterwards found.

Another woman confirmed the account of the fishermen having brought the body into her house; it was not cold. They put it into a bed and rubbed it, and Daniel went to the town for an apothecary, but life was quite gone. Several other men were examined concerning my landing, and they agreed that, with the strong north wind that had arisen during the night, it was very probable that I had beaten about for many hours and had been obliged to return nearly to the same spot from which I had departed. Besides, they observed that it appeared that I had brought the body from another place, and it was likely that as I did not appear to know the shore, I might have put into the harbour ignorant of the distance of the town of —— from the place where I had deposited the corpse. Mr. Kirwin, on hearing this evidence, desired that I should be taken into the room where the body lay for interment, that it might be observed what effect the sight of it would produce upon me. This idea was probably suggested by the extreme agitation I had exhibited when the mode of the murder had been described. I was accordingly conducted, by the magistrate and several other persons, to the inn. I could not help being struck by the strange coincidences that had taken place during this eventful night; but, knowing that I had been conversing with several persons in the island I had inhabited about the time that the body had been found, I was perfectly tranquil as to the consequences of the affair.

I entered the room where the corpse lay and was led up to the coffin. How can I describe my sensations on beholding it? I feel yet parched with horror, nor can I reflect on that terrible moment without shuddering and agony. The examination, the presence of the magistrate and witnesses, passed like a dream from my memory when I saw the lifeless form of Henry Clerval stretched before me. I gasped for breath, and throwing myself on the body, I exclaimed, “Have my murderous machinations deprived you also, my dearest Henry, of life? Two I have already destroyed; other victims await their destiny; but you, Clerval, my friend, my benefactor—” A fever succeeded to this. I lay for two months on the point of death; my ravings, as I afterwards heard, were frightful; I called myself the murderer of William, of Justine, and of Clerval. Sometimes I entreated my attendants to assist me in the destruction of the fiend by whom I was tormented; and at others I felt the fingers of the monster already grasping my neck, and screamed aloud with agony and terror. Fortunately, as I spoke my native language, Mr. Kirwin alone understood me; but my gestures and bitter cries were sufficient to affright the other witnesses.

Why did I not die? More miserable than man ever was before, why did I not sink into forgetfulness and rest? Death snatches away many blooming children, the only hopes of their doting parents; how many brides and youthful lovers have been one day in the bloom of health and hope, and the next a prey for worms and the decay of the tomb! Of what materials was I made that I could thus resist so many shocks, which, like the turning of the wheel, continually renewed the torture? But I was doomed to live and in two months found myself as awaking from a dream, in a prison, stretched on a wretched bed, surrounded by gaolers, turnkeys, bolts, and all the miserable apparatus of a dungeon. It was morning, I remember, when I thus awoke to understanding; I had forgotten the particulars of what had happened and only felt as if some great misfortune had suddenly overwhelmed me; but when I looked around and saw the barred windows and the squalidness of the room in which I was, all flashed across my memory and I groaned bitterly.

This sound disturbed an old woman who was sleeping in a chair beside me. She was a hired nurse, the wife of one of the turnkeys, and her countenance expressed all those bad qualities which often characterise that class. The lines of her face were hard and rude, like that of persons accustomed to see without sympathising in sights of misery. Her tone expressed her entire indifference; she addressed me in English, and the voice struck me as one that I had heard during my sufferings. I replied in the same language, with a feeble voice, “I believe I am; but if it be all true, if indeed I did not dream, I am sorry that I am still alive to feel this misery and horror.” “For that matter,” replied the old woman, “if you mean about the gentleman you murdered, I believe that it were better for you if you were dead, for I fancy it will go hard with you! However, that’s none of my business; I am sent to nurse you and get you well; I do my duty with a safe conscience; it were well if everybody did the same.”

I turned with loathing from the woman who could utter so unfeeling a speech to a person just saved, on the very edge of death; but I felt languid and unable to reflect on all that had passed. The whole series of my life appeared to me as a dream; I sometimes doubted if indeed it were all true, for it never presented itself to my mind with the force of reality. As the images that floated before me became more distinct, I grew feverish; a darkness pressed around me; no one was near me who soothed me with the gentle voice of love; no dear hand supported me. The physician came and prescribed medicines, and the old woman prepared them for me; but utter carelessness was visible in the first, and the expression of brutality was strongly marked in the visage of the second. Who could be interested in the fate of a murderer but the hangman who would gain his fee? These were my first reflections, but I soon learned that Mr. Kirwin had shown me extreme kindness. He had caused the best room in the prison to be prepared for me (wretched indeed was the best); and it was he who had provided a physician and a nurse. It is true, he seldom came to see me, for although he ardently desired to relieve the sufferings of every human creature, he did not wish to be present at the agonies and miserable ravings of a murderer. He came, therefore, sometimes to see that I was not neglected, but his visits were short and with long intervals.

One day, while I was gradually recovering, I was seated in a chair, my eyes half open and my cheeks livid like those in death. I was overcome by gloom and misery and often reflected I had better seek death than desire to remain in a world which to me was replete with wretchedness. At one time I considered whether I should not declare myself guilty and suffer the penalty of the law, less innocent than poor Justine had been. Such were my thoughts when the door of my apartment was opened and Mr. Kirwin entered. His countenance expressed sympathy and compassion; he drew a chair close to mine and addressed me in French, “I know that the sympathy of a stranger can be but of little relief to one borne down as you are by so strange a misfortune. But you will, I hope, soon quit this melancholy abode, for doubtless evidence can easily be brought to free you from the criminal charge.” “That is my least concern; I am, by a course of strange events, become the most miserable of mortals. Persecuted and tortured as I am and have been, can death be any evil to me?”

“Nothing indeed could be more unfortunate and agonising than the strange chances that have lately occurred. You were thrown, by some surprising accident, on this shore, renowned for its hospitality, seized immediately, and charged with murder. The first sight that was presented to your eyes was the body of your friend, murdered in so unaccountable a manner and placed, as it were, by some fiend across your path.” As Mr. Kirwin said this, notwithstanding the agitation I endured on this retrospect of my sufferings, I also felt considerable surprise at the knowledge he seemed to possess concerning me. I suppose some astonishment was exhibited in my countenance, for Mr. Kirwin hastened to say, “Immediately upon your being taken ill, all the papers that were on your person were brought me, and I examined them that I might discover some trace by which I could send to your relations an account of your misfortune and illness. I found several letters, and, among others, one which I discovered from its commencement to be from your father. I instantly wrote to Geneva; nearly two months have elapsed since the departure of my letter. But you are ill; even now you tremble; you are unfit for agitation of any kind.”

“This suspense is a thousand times worse than the most horrible event; tell me what new scene of death has been acted, and whose murder I am now to lament?” I know not by what chain of thought the idea presented itself, but it instantly darted into my mind that the murderer had come to mock at my misery and taunt me with the death of Clerval, as a new incitement for me to comply with his hellish desires. I put my hand before my eyes, and cried out in agony, Mr. Kirwin regarded me with a troubled countenance. He could not help regarding my exclamation as a presumption of my guilt and said in rather a severe tone, “My father!” cried I, while every feature and every muscle was relaxed from anguish to pleasure. “Is my father indeed come? How kind, how very kind! But where is he, why does he not hasten to me?” My change of manner surprised and pleased the magistrate; perhaps he thought that my former exclamation was a momentary return of delirium, and now he instantly resumed his former benevolence. He rose and quitted the room with my nurse, and in a moment my father entered it.

My father calmed me with assurances of their welfare and endeavoured, by dwelling on these subjects so interesting to my heart, to raise my desponding spirits; but he soon felt that a prison cannot be the abode of cheerfulness. “What a place is this that you inhabit, my son!” said he, looking mournfully at the barred windows and wretched appearance of the room. “You travelled to seek happiness, but a fatality seems to pursue you. And poor Clerval—” “Alas! Yes, my father,” replied I; “some destiny of the most horrible kind hangs over me, and I must live to fulfil it, or surely I should have died on the coffin of Henry.” We were not allowed to converse for any length of time, for the precarious state of my health rendered every precaution necessary that could ensure tranquillity. Mr. Kirwin came in and insisted that my strength should not be exhausted by too much exertion. But the appearance of my father was to me like that of my good angel, and I gradually recovered my health. As my sickness quitted me, I was absorbed by a gloomy and black melancholy that nothing could dissipate. The image of Clerval was for ever before me, ghastly and murdered. More than once the agitation into which these reflections threw me made my friends dread a dangerous relapse. Alas! Why did they preserve so miserable and detested a life? It was surely that I might fulfil my destiny, which is now drawing to a close. Soon, oh, very soon, will death extinguish these throbbings and relieve me from the mighty weight of anguish that bears me to the dust; and, in executing the award of justice, I shall also sink to rest. Then the appearance of death was distant, although the wish was ever present to my thoughts; and I often sat for hours motionless and speechless, wishing for some mighty revolution that might bury me and my destroyer in its ruins.

The season of the assizes approached. I had already been three months in prison, and although I was still weak and in continual danger of a relapse, I was obliged to travel nearly a hundred miles to the country town where the court was held. Mr. Kirwin charged himself with every care of collecting witnesses and arranging my defence. I was spared the disgrace of appearing publicly as a criminal, as the case was not brought before the court that decides on life and death. The grand jury rejected the bill, on its being proved that I was on the Orkney Islands at the hour the body of my friend was found; and a fortnight after my removal I was liberated from prison. My father was enraptured on finding me freed from the vexations of a criminal charge, that I was again allowed to breathe the fresh atmosphere and permitted to return to my native country. I did not participate in these feelings, for to me the walls of a dungeon or a palace were alike hateful. The cup of life was poisoned for ever, and although the sun shone upon me, as upon the happy and gay of heart, I saw around me nothing but a dense and frightful darkness, penetrated by no light but the glimmer of two eyes that glared upon me. Sometimes they were the expressive eyes of Henry, languishing in death, the dark orbs nearly covered by the lids and the long black lashes that fringed them; sometimes it was the watery, clouded eyes of the monster, as I first saw them in my chamber at Ingolstadt.

My father tried to awaken in me the feelings of affection. He talked of Geneva, which I should soon visit, of Elizabeth and Ernest; but these words only drew deep groans from me. Sometimes, indeed, I felt a wish for happiness and thought with melancholy delight of my beloved cousin or longed, with a devouring _maladie du pays_, to see once more the blue lake and rapid Rhone, that had been so dear to me in early childhood; but my general state of feeling was a torpor in which a prison was as welcome a residence as the divinest scene in nature; and these fits were seldom interrupted but by paroxysms of anguish and despair. At these moments I often endeavoured to put an end to the existence I loathed, and it required unceasing attendance and vigilance to restrain me from committing some dreadful act of violence. Yet one duty remained to me, the recollection of which finally triumphed over my selfish despair. It was necessary that I should return without delay to Geneva, there to watch over the lives of those I so fondly loved and to lie in wait for the murderer, that if any chance led me to the place of his concealment, or if he dared again to blast me by his presence, I might, with unfailing aim, put an end to the existence of the monstrous image which I had endued with the mockery of a soul still more monstrous. My father still desired to delay our departure, fearful that I could not sustain the fatigues of a journey, for I was a shattered wreck—the shadow of a human being. My strength was gone. I was a mere skeleton, and fever night and day preyed upon my wasted frame.

Still, as I urged our leaving Ireland with such inquietude and impatience, my father thought it best to yield. We took our passage on board a vessel bound for Havre-de-Grace and sailed with a fair wind from the Irish shores. It was midnight. I lay on the deck looking at the stars and listening to the dashing of the waves. I hailed the darkness that shut Ireland from my sight, and my pulse beat with a feverish joy when I reflected that I should soon see Geneva. The past appeared to me in the light of a frightful dream; yet the vessel in which I was, the wind that blew me from the detested shore of Ireland, and the sea which surrounded me, told me too forcibly that I was deceived by no vision and that Clerval, my friend and dearest companion, had fallen a victim to me and the monster of my creation. I repassed, in my memory, my whole life; my quiet happiness while residing with my family in Geneva, the death of my mother, and my departure for Ingolstadt. I remembered, shuddering, the mad enthusiasm that hurried me on to the creation of my hideous enemy, and I called to mind the night in which he first lived. I was unable to pursue the train of thought; a thousand feelings pressed upon me, and I wept bitterly.

Ever since my recovery from the fever, I had been in the custom of taking every night a small quantity of laudanum, for it was by means of this drug only that I was enabled to gain the rest necessary for the preservation of life. Oppressed by the recollection of my various misfortunes, I now swallowed double my usual quantity and soon slept profoundly. But sleep did not afford me respite from thought and misery; my dreams presented a thousand objects that scared me. Towards morning I was possessed by a kind of nightmare; I felt the fiend’s grasp in my neck and could not free myself from it; groans and cries rang in my ears. My father, who was watching over me, perceiving my restlessness, awoke me; the dashing waves were around, the cloudy sky above, the fiend was not here: a sense of security, a feeling that a truce was established between the present hour and the irresistible, disastrous future imparted to me a kind of calm forgetfulness, of which the human mind is by its structure peculiarly susceptible.

The voyage came to an end. We landed, and proceeded to Paris. I soon found that I had overtaxed my strength and that I must repose before I could continue my journey. My father’s care and attentions were indefatigable, but he did not know the origin of my sufferings and sought erroneous methods to remedy the incurable ill. He wished me to seek amusement in society. I abhorred the face of man. Oh, not abhorred! They were my brethren, my fellow beings, and I felt attracted even to the most repulsive among them, as to creatures of an angelic nature and celestial mechanism. But I felt that I had no right to share their intercourse. I had unchained an enemy among them whose joy it was to shed their blood and to revel in their groans. How they would, each and all, abhor me and hunt me from the world, did they know my unhallowed acts and the crimes which had their source in me! My father yielded at length to my desire to avoid society and strove by various arguments to banish my despair. Sometimes he thought that I felt deeply the degradation of being obliged to answer a charge of murder, and he endeavoured to prove to me the futility of pride.

“Alas! My father,” said I, “how little do you know me. Human beings, their feelings and passions, would indeed be degraded if such a wretch as I felt pride. Justine, poor unhappy Justine, was as innocent as I, and she suffered the same charge; she died for it; and I am the cause of this—I murdered her. William, Justine, and Henry—they all died by my hands.” My father had often, during my imprisonment, heard me make the same assertion; when I thus accused myself, he sometimes seemed to desire an explanation, and at others he appeared to consider it as the offspring of delirium, and that, during my illness, some idea of this kind had presented itself to my imagination, the remembrance of which I preserved in my convalescence. I avoided explanation and maintained a continual silence concerning the wretch I had created. I had a persuasion that I should be supposed mad, and this in itself would for ever have chained my tongue. But, besides, I could not bring myself to disclose a secret which would fill my hearer with consternation and make fear and unnatural horror the inmates of his breast. I checked, therefore, my impatient thirst for sympathy and was silent when I would have given the world to have confided the fatal secret. Yet, still, words like those I have recorded would burst uncontrollably from me. I could offer no explanation of them, but their truth in part relieved the burden of my mysterious woe.

Upon this occasion my father said, with an expression of unbounded wonder, “My dearest Victor, what infatuation is this? My dear son, I entreat you never to make such an assertion again.” “I am not mad,” I cried energetically; “the sun and the heavens, who have viewed my operations, can bear witness of my truth. I am the assassin of those most innocent victims; they died by my machinations. A thousand times would I have shed my own blood, drop by drop, to have saved their lives; but I could not, my father, indeed I could not sacrifice the whole human race.” The conclusion of this speech convinced my father that my ideas were deranged, and he instantly changed the subject of our conversation and endeavoured to alter the course of my thoughts. He wished as much as possible to obliterate the memory of the scenes that had taken place in Ireland and never alluded to them or suffered me to speak of my misfortunes. As time passed away I became more calm; misery had her dwelling in my heart, but I no longer talked in the same incoherent manner of my own crimes; sufficient for me was the consciousness of them. By the utmost self-violence I curbed the imperious voice of wretchedness, which sometimes desired to declare itself to the whole world, and my manners were calmer and more composed than they had ever been since my journey to the sea of ice.

“It gave me the greatest pleasure to receive a letter from my uncle dated at Paris; you are no longer at a formidable distance, and I may hope to see you in less than a fortnight. My poor cousin, how much you must have suffered! I expect to see you looking even more ill than when you quitted Geneva. This winter has been passed most miserably, tortured as I have been by anxious suspense; yet I hope to see peace in your countenance and to find that your heart is not totally void of comfort and tranquillity. “Yet I fear that the same feelings now exist that made you so miserable a year ago, even perhaps augmented by time. I would not disturb you at this period, when so many misfortunes weigh upon you, but a conversation that I had with my uncle previous to his departure renders some explanation necessary before we meet. Explanation! You may possibly say, What can Elizabeth have to explain? If you really say this, my questions are answered and all my doubts satisfied. But you are distant from me, and it is possible that you may dread and yet be pleased with this explanation; and in a probability of this being the case, I dare not any longer postpone writing what, during your absence, I have often wished to express to you but have never had the courage to begin.

“You well know, Victor, that our union had been the favourite plan of your parents ever since our infancy. We were told this when young, and taught to look forward to it as an event that would certainly take place. We were affectionate playfellows during childhood, and, I believe, dear and valued friends to one another as we grew older. But as brother and sister often entertain a lively affection towards each other without desiring a more intimate union, may not such also be our case? Tell me, dearest Victor. Answer me, I conjure you by our mutual happiness, with simple truth—Do you not love another? “You have travelled; you have spent several years of your life at Ingolstadt; and I confess to you, my friend, that when I saw you last autumn so unhappy, flying to solitude from the society of every creature, I could not help supposing that you might regret our connection and believe yourself bound in honour to fulfil the wishes of your parents, although they opposed themselves to your inclinations. But this is false reasoning. I confess to you, my friend, that I love you and that in my airy dreams of futurity you have been my constant friend and companion. But it is your happiness I desire as well as my own when I declare to you that our marriage would render me eternally miserable unless it were the dictate of your own free choice. Even now I weep to think that, borne down as you are by the cruellest misfortunes, you may stifle, by the word _honour_, all hope of that love and happiness which would alone restore you to yourself. I, who have so disinterested an affection for you, may increase your miseries tenfold by being an obstacle to your wishes. Ah! Victor, be assured that your cousin and playmate has too sincere a love for you not to be made miserable by this supposition. Be happy, my friend; and if you obey me in this one request, remain satisfied that nothing on earth will have the power to interrupt my tranquillity.

“Do not let this letter disturb you; do not answer tomorrow, or the next day, or even until you come, if it will give you pain. My uncle will send me news of your health, and if I see but one smile on your lips when we meet, occasioned by this or any other exertion of mine, I shall need no other happiness. This letter revived in my memory what I had before forgotten, the threat of the fiend—“_I will be with you on your wedding-night!_” Such was my sentence, and on that night would the dæmon employ every art to destroy me and tear me from the glimpse of happiness which promised partly to console my sufferings. On that night he had determined to consummate his crimes by my death. Well, be it so; a deadly struggle would then assuredly take place, in which if he were victorious I should be at peace and his power over me be at an end. If he were vanquished, I should be a free man. Alas! What freedom? Such as the peasant enjoys when his family have been massacred before his eyes, his cottage burnt, his lands laid waste, and he is turned adrift, homeless, penniless, and alone, but free. Such would be my liberty except that in my Elizabeth I possessed a treasure, alas, balanced by those horrors of remorse and guilt which would pursue me until death.

Sweet and beloved Elizabeth! I read and reread her letter, and some softened feelings stole into my heart and dared to whisper paradisiacal dreams of love and joy; but the apple was already eaten, and the angel’s arm bared to drive me from all hope. Yet I would die to make her happy. If the monster executed his threat, death was inevitable; yet, again, I considered whether my marriage would hasten my fate. My destruction might indeed arrive a few months sooner, but if my torturer should suspect that I postponed it, influenced by his menaces, he would surely find other and perhaps more dreadful means of revenge. He had vowed _to be with me on my wedding-night_, yet he did not consider that threat as binding him to peace in the meantime, for as if to show me that he was not yet satiated with blood, he had murdered Clerval immediately after the enunciation of his threats. I resolved, therefore, that if my immediate union with my cousin would conduce either to hers or my father’s happiness, my adversary’s designs against my life should not retard it a single hour.

In this state of mind I wrote to Elizabeth. My letter was calm and affectionate. “I fear, my beloved girl,” I said, “little happiness remains for us on earth; yet all that I may one day enjoy is centred in you. Chase away your idle fears; to you alone do I consecrate my life and my endeavours for contentment. I have one secret, Elizabeth, a dreadful one; when revealed to you, it will chill your frame with horror, and then, far from being surprised at my misery, you will only wonder that I survive what I have endured. I will confide this tale of misery and terror to you the day after our marriage shall take place, for, my sweet cousin, there must be perfect confidence between us. But until then, I conjure you, do not mention or allude to it. This I most earnestly entreat, and I know you will comply.” In about a week after the arrival of Elizabeth’s letter we returned to Geneva. The sweet girl welcomed me with warm affection, yet tears were in her eyes as she beheld my emaciated frame and feverish cheeks. I saw a change in her also. She was thinner and had lost much of that heavenly vivacity that had before charmed me; but her gentleness and soft looks of compassion made her a more fit companion for one blasted and miserable as I was.

The tranquillity which I now enjoyed did not endure. Memory brought madness with it, and when I thought of what had passed, a real insanity possessed me; sometimes I was furious and burnt with rage, sometimes low and despondent. I neither spoke nor looked at anyone, but sat motionless, bewildered by the multitude of miseries that overcame me. Elizabeth alone had the power to draw me from these fits; her gentle voice would soothe me when transported by passion and inspire me with human feelings when sunk in torpor. She wept with me and for me. When reason returned, she would remonstrate and endeavour to inspire me with resignation. Ah! It is well for the unfortunate to be resigned, but for the guilty there is no peace. The agonies of remorse poison the luxury there is otherwise sometimes found in indulging the excess of grief. “None on earth. I love Elizabeth and look forward to our union with delight. Let the day therefore be fixed; and on it I will consecrate myself, in life or death, to the happiness of my cousin.”

“My dear Victor, do not speak thus. Heavy misfortunes have befallen us, but let us only cling closer to what remains and transfer our love for those whom we have lost to those who yet live. Our circle will be small but bound close by the ties of affection and mutual misfortune. And when time shall have softened your despair, new and dear objects of care will be born to replace those of whom we have been so cruelly deprived.” Such were the lessons of my father. But to me the remembrance of the threat returned; nor can you wonder that, omnipotent as the fiend had yet been in his deeds of blood, I should almost regard him as invincible, and that when he had pronounced the words “_I shall be with you on your wedding-night_,” I should regard the threatened fate as unavoidable. But death was no evil to me if the loss of Elizabeth were balanced with it, and I therefore, with a contented and even cheerful countenance, agreed with my father that if my cousin would consent, the ceremony should take place in ten days, and thus put, as I imagined, the seal to my fate.

Great God! If for one instant I had thought what might be the hellish intention of my fiendish adversary, I would rather have banished myself for ever from my native country and wandered a friendless outcast over the earth than have consented to this miserable marriage. But, as if possessed of magic powers, the monster had blinded me to his real intentions; and when I thought that I had prepared only my own death, I hastened that of a far dearer victim. As the period fixed for our marriage drew nearer, whether from cowardice or a prophetic feeling, I felt my heart sink within me. But I concealed my feelings by an appearance of hilarity that brought smiles and joy to the countenance of my father, but hardly deceived the ever-watchful and nicer eye of Elizabeth. She looked forward to our union with placid contentment, not unmingled with a little fear, which past misfortunes had impressed, that what now appeared certain and tangible happiness might soon dissipate into an airy dream and leave no trace but deep and everlasting regret.

Preparations were made for the event, congratulatory visits were received, and all wore a smiling appearance. I shut up, as well as I could, in my own heart the anxiety that preyed there and entered with seeming earnestness into the plans of my father, although they might only serve as the decorations of my tragedy. Through my father’s exertions a part of the inheritance of Elizabeth had been restored to her by the Austrian government. A small possession on the shores of Como belonged to her. It was agreed that, immediately after our union, we should proceed to Villa Lavenza and spend our first days of happiness beside the beautiful lake near which it stood. In the meantime I took every precaution to defend my person in case the fiend should openly attack me. I carried pistols and a dagger constantly about me and was ever on the watch to prevent artifice, and by these means gained a greater degree of tranquillity. Indeed, as the period approached, the threat appeared more as a delusion, not to be regarded as worthy to disturb my peace, while the happiness I hoped for in my marriage wore a greater appearance of certainty as the day fixed for its solemnisation drew nearer and I heard it continually spoken of as an occurrence which no accident could possibly prevent.

Elizabeth seemed happy; my tranquil demeanour contributed greatly to calm her mind. But on the day that was to fulfil my wishes and my destiny, she was melancholy, and a presentiment of evil pervaded her; and perhaps also she thought of the dreadful secret which I had promised to reveal to her on the following day. My father was in the meantime overjoyed, and, in the bustle of preparation, only recognised in the melancholy of his niece the diffidence of a bride. After the ceremony was performed a large party assembled at my father’s, but it was agreed that Elizabeth and I should commence our journey by water, sleeping that night at Evian and continuing our voyage on the following day. The day was fair, the wind favourable; all smiled on our nuptial embarkation. Those were the last moments of my life during which I enjoyed the feeling of happiness. We passed rapidly along; the sun was hot, but we were sheltered from its rays by a kind of canopy while we enjoyed the beauty of the scene, sometimes on one side of the lake, where we saw Mont Salêve, the pleasant banks of Montalègre, and at a distance, surmounting all, the beautiful Mont Blanc, and the assemblage of snowy mountains that in vain endeavour to emulate her; sometimes coasting the opposite banks, we saw the mighty Jura opposing its dark side to the ambition that would quit its native country, and an almost insurmountable barrier to the invader who should wish to enslave it.

I took the hand of Elizabeth. “You are sorrowful, my love. Ah! If you knew what I have suffered and what I may yet endure, you would endeavour to let me taste the quiet and freedom from despair that this one day at least permits me to enjoy.” “Be happy, my dear Victor,” replied Elizabeth; “there is, I hope, nothing to distress you; and be assured that if a lively joy is not painted in my face, my heart is contented. Something whispers to me not to depend too much on the prospect that is opened before us, but I will not listen to such a sinister voice. Observe how fast we move along and how the clouds, which sometimes obscure and sometimes rise above the dome of Mont Blanc, render this scene of beauty still more interesting. Look also at the innumerable fish that are swimming in the clear waters, where we can distinguish every pebble that lies at the bottom. What a divine day! How happy and serene all nature appears!” Thus Elizabeth endeavoured to divert her thoughts and mine from all reflection upon melancholy subjects. But her temper was fluctuating; joy for a few instants shone in her eyes, but it continually gave place to distraction and reverie.

The sun sank lower in the heavens; we passed the river Drance and observed its path through the chasms of the higher and the glens of the lower hills. The Alps here come closer to the lake, and we approached the amphitheatre of mountains which forms its eastern boundary. The spire of Evian shone under the woods that surrounded it and the range of mountain above mountain by which it was overhung. The wind, which had hitherto carried us along with amazing rapidity, sank at sunset to a light breeze; the soft air just ruffled the water and caused a pleasant motion among the trees as we approached the shore, from which it wafted the most delightful scent of flowers and hay. The sun sank beneath the horizon as we landed, and as I touched the shore I felt those cares and fears revive which soon were to clasp me and cling to me for ever. It was eight o’clock when we landed; we walked for a short time on the shore, enjoying the transitory light, and then retired to the inn and contemplated the lovely scene of waters, woods, and mountains, obscured in darkness, yet still displaying their black outlines.

The wind, which had fallen in the south, now rose with great violence in the west. The moon had reached her summit in the heavens and was beginning to descend; the clouds swept across it swifter than the flight of the vulture and dimmed her rays, while the lake reflected the scene of the busy heavens, rendered still busier by the restless waves that were beginning to rise. Suddenly a heavy storm of rain descended. I had been calm during the day, but so soon as night obscured the shapes of objects, a thousand fears arose in my mind. I was anxious and watchful, while my right hand grasped a pistol which was hidden in my bosom; every sound terrified me, but I resolved that I would sell my life dearly and not shrink from the conflict until my own life or that of my adversary was extinguished. Elizabeth observed my agitation for some time in timid and fearful silence, but there was something in my glance which communicated terror to her, and trembling, she asked, “What is it that agitates you, my dear Victor? What is it you fear?”

I passed an hour in this state of mind, when suddenly I reflected how fearful the combat which I momentarily expected would be to my wife, and I earnestly entreated her to retire, resolving not to join her until I had obtained some knowledge as to the situation of my enemy. She left me, and I continued some time walking up and down the passages of the house and inspecting every corner that might afford a retreat to my adversary. But I discovered no trace of him and was beginning to conjecture that some fortunate chance had intervened to prevent the execution of his menaces when suddenly I heard a shrill and dreadful scream. It came from the room into which Elizabeth had retired. As I heard it, the whole truth rushed into my mind, my arms dropped, the motion of every muscle and fibre was suspended; I could feel the blood trickling in my veins and tingling in the extremities of my limbs. This state lasted but for an instant; the scream was repeated, and I rushed into the room.

Great God! Why did I not then expire! Why am I here to relate the destruction of the best hope and the purest creature on earth? She was there, lifeless and inanimate, thrown across the bed, her head hanging down and her pale and distorted features half covered by her hair. Everywhere I turn I see the same figure—her bloodless arms and relaxed form flung by the murderer on its bridal bier. Could I behold this and live? Alas! Life is obstinate and clings closest where it is most hated. For a moment only did I lose recollection; I fell senseless on the ground. When I recovered I found myself surrounded by the people of the inn; their countenances expressed a breathless terror, but the horror of others appeared only as a mockery, a shadow of the feelings that oppressed me. I escaped from them to the room where lay the body of Elizabeth, my love, my wife, so lately living, so dear, so worthy. She had been moved from the posture in which I had first beheld her, and now, as she lay, her head upon her arm and a handkerchief thrown across her face and neck, I might have supposed her asleep. I rushed towards her and embraced her with ardour, but the deadly languor and coldness of the limbs told me that what I now held in my arms had ceased to be the Elizabeth whom I had loved and cherished. The murderous mark of the fiend’s grasp was on her neck, and the breath had ceased to issue from her lips.

While I still hung over her in the agony of despair, I happened to look up. The windows of the room had before been darkened, and I felt a kind of panic on seeing the pale yellow light of the moon illuminate the chamber. The shutters had been thrown back, and with a sensation of horror not to be described, I saw at the open window a figure the most hideous and abhorred. A grin was on the face of the monster; he seemed to jeer, as with his fiendish finger he pointed towards the corpse of my wife. I rushed towards the window, and drawing a pistol from my bosom, fired; but he eluded me, leaped from his station, and running with the swiftness of lightning, plunged into the lake. The report of the pistol brought a crowd into the room. I pointed to the spot where he had disappeared, and we followed the track with boats; nets were cast, but in vain. After passing several hours, we returned hopeless, most of my companions believing it to have been a form conjured up by my fancy. After having landed, they proceeded to search the country, parties going in different directions among the woods and vines.

I attempted to accompany them and proceeded a short distance from the house, but my head whirled round, my steps were like those of a drunken man, I fell at last in a state of utter exhaustion; a film covered my eyes, and my skin was parched with the heat of fever. In this state I was carried back and placed on a bed, hardly conscious of what had happened; my eyes wandered round the room as if to seek something that I had lost. After an interval I arose, and as if by instinct, crawled into the room where the corpse of my beloved lay. There were women weeping around; I hung over it and joined my sad tears to theirs; all this time no distinct idea presented itself to my mind, but my thoughts rambled to various subjects, reflecting confusedly on my misfortunes and their cause. I was bewildered, in a cloud of wonder and horror. The death of William, the execution of Justine, the murder of Clerval, and lastly of my wife; even at that moment I knew not that my only remaining friends were safe from the malignity of the fiend; my father even now might be writhing under his grasp, and Ernest might be dead at his feet. This idea made me shudder and recalled me to action. I started up and resolved to return to Geneva with all possible speed.

There were no horses to be procured, and I must return by the lake; but the wind was unfavourable, and the rain fell in torrents. However, it was hardly morning, and I might reasonably hope to arrive by night. I hired men to row and took an oar myself, for I had always experienced relief from mental torment in bodily exercise. But the overflowing misery I now felt, and the excess of agitation that I endured rendered me incapable of any exertion. I threw down the oar, and leaning my head upon my hands, gave way to every gloomy idea that arose. If I looked up, I saw scenes which were familiar to me in my happier time and which I had contemplated but the day before in the company of her who was now but a shadow and a recollection. Tears streamed from my eyes. The rain had ceased for a moment, and I saw the fish play in the waters as they had done a few hours before; they had then been observed by Elizabeth. Nothing is so painful to the human mind as a great and sudden change. The sun might shine or the clouds might lower, but nothing could appear to me as it had done the day before. A fiend had snatched from me every hope of future happiness; no creature had ever been so miserable as I was; so frightful an event is single in the history of man.

But why should I dwell upon the incidents that followed this last overwhelming event? Mine has been a tale of horrors; I have reached their _acme_, and what I must now relate can but be tedious to you. Know that, one by one, my friends were snatched away; I was left desolate. My own strength is exhausted, and I must tell, in a few words, what remains of my hideous narration. I arrived at Geneva. My father and Ernest yet lived, but the former sunk under the tidings that I bore. I see him now, excellent and venerable old man! His eyes wandered in vacancy, for they had lost their charm and their delight—his Elizabeth, his more than daughter, whom he doted on with all that affection which a man feels, who in the decline of life, having few affections, clings more earnestly to those that remain. Cursed, cursed be the fiend that brought misery on his grey hairs and doomed him to waste in wretchedness! He could not live under the horrors that were accumulated around him; the springs of existence suddenly gave way; he was unable to rise from his bed, and in a few days he died in my arms.

What then became of me? I know not; I lost sensation, and chains and darkness were the only objects that pressed upon me. Sometimes, indeed, I dreamt that I wandered in flowery meadows and pleasant vales with the friends of my youth, but I awoke and found myself in a dungeon. Melancholy followed, but by degrees I gained a clear conception of my miseries and situation and was then released from my prison. For they had called me mad, and during many months, as I understood, a solitary cell had been my habitation. Liberty, however, had been a useless gift to me, had I not, as I awakened to reason, at the same time awakened to revenge. As the memory of past misfortunes pressed upon me, I began to reflect on their cause—the monster whom I had created, the miserable dæmon whom I had sent abroad into the world for my destruction. I was possessed by a maddening rage when I thought of him, and desired and ardently prayed that I might have him within my grasp to wreak a great and signal revenge on his cursed head.

Nor did my hate long confine itself to useless wishes; I began to reflect on the best means of securing him; and for this purpose, about a month after my release, I repaired to a criminal judge in the town and told him that I had an accusation to make, that I knew the destroyer of my family, and that I required him to exert his whole authority for the apprehension of the murderer. The magistrate listened to me with attention and kindness. “Be assured, sir,” said he, “no pains or exertions on my part shall be spared to discover the villain.” “I thank you,” replied I; “listen, therefore, to the deposition that I have to make. It is indeed a tale so strange that I should fear you would not credit it were there not something in truth which, however wonderful, forces conviction. The story is too connected to be mistaken for a dream, and I have no motive for falsehood.” My manner as I thus addressed him was impressive but calm; I had formed in my own heart a resolution to pursue my destroyer to death, and this purpose quieted my agony and for an interval reconciled me to life. I now related my history briefly but with firmness and precision, marking the dates with accuracy and never deviating into invective or exclamation.

The magistrate appeared at first perfectly incredulous, but as I continued he became more attentive and interested; I saw him sometimes shudder with horror; at others a lively surprise, unmingled with disbelief, was painted on his countenance. When I had concluded my narration, I said, “This is the being whom I accuse and for whose seizure and punishment I call upon you to exert your whole power. It is your duty as a magistrate, and I believe and hope that your feelings as a man will not revolt from the execution of those functions on this occasion.” This address caused a considerable change in the physiognomy of my own auditor. He had heard my story with that half kind of belief that is given to a tale of spirits and supernatural events; but when he was called upon to act officially in consequence, the whole tide of his incredulity returned. He, however, answered mildly, “I would willingly afford you every aid in your pursuit, but the creature of whom you speak appears to have powers which would put all my exertions to defiance. Who can follow an animal which can traverse the sea of ice and inhabit caves and dens where no man would venture to intrude? Besides, some months have elapsed since the commission of his crimes, and no one can conjecture to what place he has wandered or what region he may now inhabit.”

“I do not doubt that he hovers near the spot which I inhabit, and if he has indeed taken refuge in the Alps, he may be hunted like the chamois and destroyed as a beast of prey. But I perceive your thoughts; you do not credit my narrative and do not intend to pursue my enemy with the punishment which is his desert.” As I spoke, rage sparkled in my eyes; the magistrate was intimidated. “You are mistaken,” said he. “I will exert myself, and if it is in my power to seize the monster, be assured that he shall suffer punishment proportionate to his crimes. But I fear, from what you have yourself described to be his properties, that this will prove impracticable; and thus, while every proper measure is pursued, you should make up your mind to disappointment.” “That cannot be; but all that I can say will be of little avail. My revenge is of no moment to you; yet, while I allow it to be a vice, I confess that it is the devouring and only passion of my soul. My rage is unspeakable when I reflect that the murderer, whom I have turned loose upon society, still exists. You refuse my just demand; I have but one resource, and I devote myself, either in my life or death, to his destruction.”

I trembled with excess of agitation as I said this; there was a frenzy in my manner, and something, I doubt not, of that haughty fierceness which the martyrs of old are said to have possessed. But to a Genevan magistrate, whose mind was occupied by far other ideas than those of devotion and heroism, this elevation of mind had much the appearance of madness. He endeavoured to soothe me as a nurse does a child and reverted to my tale as the effects of delirium. My present situation was one in which all voluntary thought was swallowed up and lost. I was hurried away by fury; revenge alone endowed me with strength and composure; it moulded my feelings and allowed me to be calculating and calm at periods when otherwise delirium or death would have been my portion. My first resolution was to quit Geneva for ever; my country, which, when I was happy and beloved, was dear to me, now, in my adversity, became hateful. I provided myself with a sum of money, together with a few jewels which had belonged to my mother, and departed.

And now my wanderings began which are to cease but with life. I have traversed a vast portion of the earth and have endured all the hardships which travellers in deserts and barbarous countries are wont to meet. How I have lived I hardly know; many times have I stretched my failing limbs upon the sandy plain and prayed for death. But revenge kept me alive; I dared not die and leave my adversary in being. When I quitted Geneva my first labour was to gain some clue by which I might trace the steps of my fiendish enemy. But my plan was unsettled, and I wandered many hours round the confines of the town, uncertain what path I should pursue. As night approached I found myself at the entrance of the cemetery where William, Elizabeth, and my father reposed. I entered it and approached the tomb which marked their graves. Everything was silent except the leaves of the trees, which were gently agitated by the wind; the night was nearly dark, and the scene would have been solemn and affecting even to an uninterested observer. The spirits of the departed seemed to flit around and to cast a shadow, which was felt but not seen, around the head of the mourner.

The deep grief which this scene had at first excited quickly gave way to rage and despair. They were dead, and I lived; their murderer also lived, and to destroy him I must drag out my weary existence. I knelt on the grass and kissed the earth and with quivering lips exclaimed, “By the sacred earth on which I kneel, by the shades that wander near me, by the deep and eternal grief that I feel, I swear; and by thee, O Night, and the spirits that preside over thee, to pursue the dæmon who caused this misery, until he or I shall perish in mortal conflict. For this purpose I will preserve my life; to execute this dear revenge will I again behold the sun and tread the green herbage of earth, which otherwise should vanish from my eyes for ever. And I call on you, spirits of the dead, and on you, wandering ministers of vengeance, to aid and conduct me in my work. Let the cursed and hellish monster drink deep of agony; let him feel the despair that now torments me.”

I had begun my adjuration with solemnity and an awe which almost assured me that the shades of my murdered friends heard and approved my devotion, but the furies possessed me as I concluded, and rage choked my utterance. I was answered through the stillness of night by a loud and fiendish laugh. It rang on my ears long and heavily; the mountains re-echoed it, and I felt as if all hell surrounded me with mockery and laughter. Surely in that moment I should have been possessed by frenzy and have destroyed my miserable existence but that my vow was heard and that I was reserved for vengeance. The laughter died away, when a well-known and abhorred voice, apparently close to my ear, addressed me in an audible whisper, “I am satisfied, miserable wretch! You have determined to live, and I am satisfied.” I darted towards the spot from which the sound proceeded, but the devil eluded my grasp. Suddenly the broad disk of the moon arose and shone full upon his ghastly and distorted shape as he fled with more than mortal speed.

I pursued him, and for many months this has been my task. Guided by a slight clue, I followed the windings of the Rhone, but vainly. The blue Mediterranean appeared, and by a strange chance, I saw the fiend enter by night and hide himself in a vessel bound for the Black Sea. I took my passage in the same ship, but he escaped, I know not how. Amidst the wilds of Tartary and Russia, although he still evaded me, I have ever followed in his track. Sometimes the peasants, scared by this horrid apparition, informed me of his path; sometimes he himself, who feared that if I lost all trace of him I should despair and die, left some mark to guide me. The snows descended on my head, and I saw the print of his huge step on the white plain. To you first entering on life, to whom care is new and agony unknown, how can you understand what I have felt and still feel? Cold, want, and fatigue were the least pains which I was destined to endure; I was cursed by some devil and carried about with me my eternal hell; yet still a spirit of good followed and directed my steps and when I most murmured would suddenly extricate me from seemingly insurmountable difficulties. Sometimes, when nature, overcome by hunger, sank under the exhaustion, a repast was prepared for me in the desert that restored and inspirited me. The fare was, indeed, coarse, such as the peasants of the country ate, but I will not doubt that it was set there by the spirits that I had invoked to aid me. Often, when all was dry, the heavens cloudless, and I was parched by thirst, a slight cloud would bedim the sky, shed the few drops that revived me, and vanish.

I followed, when I could, the courses of the rivers; but the dæmon generally avoided these, as it was here that the population of the country chiefly collected. In other places human beings were seldom seen, and I generally subsisted on the wild animals that crossed my path. I had money with me and gained the friendship of the villagers by distributing it; or I brought with me some food that I had killed, which, after taking a small part, I always presented to those who had provided me with fire and utensils for cooking. My life, as it passed thus, was indeed hateful to me, and it was during sleep alone that I could taste joy. O blessed sleep! Often, when most miserable, I sank to repose, and my dreams lulled me even to rapture. The spirits that guarded me had provided these moments, or rather hours, of happiness that I might retain strength to fulfil my pilgrimage. Deprived of this respite, I should have sunk under my hardships. During the day I was sustained and inspirited by the hope of night, for in sleep I saw my friends, my wife, and my beloved country; again I saw the benevolent countenance of my father, heard the silver tones of my Elizabeth’s voice, and beheld Clerval enjoying health and youth. Often, when wearied by a toilsome march, I persuaded myself that I was dreaming until night should come and that I should then enjoy reality in the arms of my dearest friends. What agonising fondness did I feel for them! How did I cling to their dear forms, as sometimes they haunted even my waking hours, and persuade myself that they still lived! At such moments vengeance, that burned within me, died in my heart, and I pursued my path towards the destruction of the dæmon more as a task enjoined by heaven, as the mechanical impulse of some power of which I was unconscious, than as the ardent desire of my soul.

What his feelings were whom I pursued I cannot know. Sometimes, indeed, he left marks in writing on the barks of the trees or cut in stone that guided me and instigated my fury. “My reign is not yet over”—these words were legible in one of these inscriptions—“you live, and my power is complete. Follow me; I seek the everlasting ices of the north, where you will feel the misery of cold and frost, to which I am impassive. You will find near this place, if you follow not too tardily, a dead hare; eat and be refreshed. Come on, my enemy; we have yet to wrestle for our lives, but many hard and miserable hours must you endure until that period shall arrive.” Scoffing devil! Again do I vow vengeance; again do I devote thee, miserable fiend, to torture and death. Never will I give up my search until he or I perish; and then with what ecstasy shall I join my Elizabeth and my departed friends, who even now prepare for me the reward of my tedious toil and horrible pilgrimage!

As I still pursued my journey to the northward, the snows thickened and the cold increased in a degree almost too severe to support. The peasants were shut up in their hovels, and only a few of the most hardy ventured forth to seize the animals whom starvation had forced from their hiding-places to seek for prey. The rivers were covered with ice, and no fish could be procured; and thus I was cut off from my chief article of maintenance. The triumph of my enemy increased with the difficulty of my labours. One inscription that he left was in these words: “Prepare! Your toils only begin; wrap yourself in furs and provide food, for we shall soon enter upon a journey where your sufferings will satisfy my everlasting hatred.” My courage and perseverance were invigorated by these scoffing words; I resolved not to fail in my purpose, and calling on Heaven to support me, I continued with unabated fervour to traverse immense deserts, until the ocean appeared at a distance and formed the utmost boundary of the horizon. Oh! How unlike it was to the blue seasons of the south! Covered with ice, it was only to be distinguished from land by its superior wildness and ruggedness. The Greeks wept for joy when they beheld the Mediterranean from the hills of Asia, and hailed with rapture the boundary of their toils. I did not weep, but I knelt down and with a full heart thanked my guiding spirit for conducting me in safety to the place where I hoped, notwithstanding my adversary’s gibe, to meet and grapple with him.

Some weeks before this period I had procured a sledge and dogs and thus traversed the snows with inconceivable speed. I know not whether the fiend possessed the same advantages, but I found that, as before I had daily lost ground in the pursuit, I now gained on him, so much so that when I first saw the ocean he was but one day’s journey in advance, and I hoped to intercept him before he should reach the beach. With new courage, therefore, I pressed on, and in two days arrived at a wretched hamlet on the seashore. I inquired of the inhabitants concerning the fiend and gained accurate information. A gigantic monster, they said, had arrived the night before, armed with a gun and many pistols, putting to flight the inhabitants of a solitary cottage through fear of his terrific appearance. He had carried off their store of winter food, and placing it in a sledge, to draw which he had seized on a numerous drove of trained dogs, he had harnessed them, and the same night, to the joy of the horror-struck villagers, had pursued his journey across the sea in a direction that led to no land; and they conjectured that he must speedily be destroyed by the breaking of the ice or frozen by the eternal frosts.

On hearing this information I suffered a temporary access of despair. He had escaped me, and I must commence a destructive and almost endless journey across the mountainous ices of the ocean, amidst cold that few of the inhabitants could long endure and which I, the native of a genial and sunny climate, could not hope to survive. Yet at the idea that the fiend should live and be triumphant, my rage and vengeance returned, and like a mighty tide, overwhelmed every other feeling. After a slight repose, during which the spirits of the dead hovered round and instigated me to toil and revenge, I prepared for my journey. I exchanged my land-sledge for one fashioned for the inequalities of the Frozen Ocean, and purchasing a plentiful stock of provisions, I departed from land. I cannot guess how many days have passed since then, but I have endured misery which nothing but the eternal sentiment of a just retribution burning within my heart could have enabled me to support. Immense and rugged mountains of ice often barred up my passage, and I often heard the thunder of the ground sea, which threatened my destruction. But again the frost came and made the paths of the sea secure.

By the quantity of provision which I had consumed, I should guess that I had passed three weeks in this journey; and the continual protraction of hope, returning back upon the heart, often wrung bitter drops of despondency and grief from my eyes. Despair had indeed almost secured her prey, and I should soon have sunk beneath this misery. Once, after the poor animals that conveyed me had with incredible toil gained the summit of a sloping ice mountain, and one, sinking under his fatigue, died, I viewed the expanse before me with anguish, when suddenly my eye caught a dark speck upon the dusky plain. I strained my sight to discover what it could be and uttered a wild cry of ecstasy when I distinguished a sledge and the distorted proportions of a well-known form within. Oh! With what a burning gush did hope revisit my heart! Warm tears filled my eyes, which I hastily wiped away, that they might not intercept the view I had of the dæmon; but still my sight was dimmed by the burning drops, until, giving way to the emotions that oppressed me, I wept aloud.

But this was not the time for delay; I disencumbered the dogs of their dead companion, gave them a plentiful portion of food, and after an hour’s rest, which was absolutely necessary, and yet which was bitterly irksome to me, I continued my route. The sledge was still visible, nor did I again lose sight of it except at the moments when for a short time some ice-rock concealed it with its intervening crags. I indeed perceptibly gained on it, and when, after nearly two days’ journey, I beheld my enemy at no more than a mile distant, my heart bounded within me. But now, when I appeared almost within grasp of my foe, my hopes were suddenly extinguished, and I lost all trace of him more utterly than I had ever done before. A ground sea was heard; the thunder of its progress, as the waters rolled and swelled beneath me, became every moment more ominous and terrific. I pressed on, but in vain. The wind arose; the sea roared; and, as with the mighty shock of an earthquake, it split and cracked with a tremendous and overwhelming sound. The work was soon finished; in a few minutes a tumultuous sea rolled between me and my enemy, and I was left drifting on a scattered piece of ice that was continually lessening and thus preparing for me a hideous death.

In this manner many appalling hours passed; several of my dogs died, and I myself was about to sink under the accumulation of distress when I saw your vessel riding at anchor and holding forth to me hopes of succour and life. I had no conception that vessels ever came so far north and was astounded at the sight. I quickly destroyed part of my sledge to construct oars, and by these means was enabled, with infinite fatigue, to move my ice raft in the direction of your ship. I had determined, if you were going southwards, still to trust myself to the mercy of the seas rather than abandon my purpose. I hoped to induce you to grant me a boat with which I could pursue my enemy. But your direction was northwards. You took me on board when my vigour was exhausted, and I should soon have sunk under my multiplied hardships into a death which I still dread, for my task is unfulfilled. Oh! When will my guiding spirit, in conducting me to the dæmon, allow me the rest I so much desire; or must I die, and he yet live? If I do, swear to me, Walton, that he shall not escape, that you will seek him and satisfy my vengeance in his death. And do I dare to ask of you to undertake my pilgrimage, to endure the hardships that I have undergone? No; I am not so selfish. Yet, when I am dead, if he should appear, if the ministers of vengeance should conduct him to you, swear that he shall not live—swear that he shall not triumph over my accumulated woes and survive to add to the list of his dark crimes. He is eloquent and persuasive, and once his words had even power over my heart; but trust him not. His soul is as hellish as his form, full of treachery and fiend-like malice. Hear him not; call on the names of William, Justine, Clerval, Elizabeth, my father, and of the wretched Victor, and thrust your sword into his heart. I will hover near and direct the steel aright.

You have read this strange and terrific story, Margaret; and do you not feel your blood congeal with horror, like that which even now curdles mine? Sometimes, seized with sudden agony, he could not continue his tale; at others, his voice broken, yet piercing, uttered with difficulty the words so replete with anguish. His fine and lovely eyes were now lighted up with indignation, now subdued to downcast sorrow and quenched in infinite wretchedness. Sometimes he commanded his countenance and tones and related the most horrible incidents with a tranquil voice, suppressing every mark of agitation; then, like a volcano bursting forth, his face would suddenly change to an expression of the wildest rage as he shrieked out imprecations on his persecutor. His tale is connected and told with an appearance of the simplest truth, yet I own to you that the letters of Felix and Safie, which he showed me, and the apparition of the monster seen from our ship, brought to me a greater conviction of the truth of his narrative than his asseverations, however earnest and connected. Such a monster has, then, really existence! I cannot doubt it, yet I am lost in surprise and admiration. Sometimes I endeavoured to gain from Frankenstein the particulars of his creature’s formation, but on this point he was impenetrable.

“Are you mad, my friend?” said he. “Or whither does your senseless curiosity lead you? Would you also create for yourself and the world a demoniacal enemy? Peace, peace! Learn my miseries and do not seek to increase your own.” Frankenstein discovered that I made notes concerning his history; he asked to see them and then himself corrected and augmented them in many places, but principally in giving the life and spirit to the conversations he held with his enemy. “Since you have preserved my narration,” said he, “I would not that a mutilated one should go down to posterity.” Thus has a week passed away, while I have listened to the strangest tale that ever imagination formed. My thoughts and every feeling of my soul have been drunk up by the interest for my guest which this tale and his own elevated and gentle manners have created. I wish to soothe him, yet can I counsel one so infinitely miserable, so destitute of every hope of consolation, to live? Oh, no! The only joy that he can now know will be when he composes his shattered spirit to peace and death. Yet he enjoys one comfort, the offspring of solitude and delirium; he believes that when in dreams he holds converse with his friends and derives from that communion consolation for his miseries or excitements to his vengeance, that they are not the creations of his fancy, but the beings themselves who visit him from the regions of a remote world. This faith gives a solemnity to his reveries that render them to me almost as imposing and interesting as truth.

Our conversations are not always confined to his own history and misfortunes. On every point of general literature he displays unbounded knowledge and a quick and piercing apprehension. His eloquence is forcible and touching; nor can I hear him, when he relates a pathetic incident or endeavours to move the passions of pity or love, without tears. What a glorious creature must he have been in the days of his prosperity, when he is thus noble and godlike in ruin! He seems to feel his own worth and the greatness of his fall. “When younger,” said he, “I believed myself destined for some great enterprise. My feelings are profound, but I possessed a coolness of judgment that fitted me for illustrious achievements. This sentiment of the worth of my nature supported me when others would have been oppressed, for I deemed it criminal to throw away in useless grief those talents that might be useful to my fellow creatures. When I reflected on the work I had completed, no less a one than the creation of a sensitive and rational animal, I could not rank myself with the herd of common projectors. But this thought, which supported me in the commencement of my career, now serves only to plunge me lower in the dust. All my speculations and hopes are as nothing, and like the archangel who aspired to omnipotence, I am chained in an eternal hell. My imagination was vivid, yet my powers of analysis and application were intense; by the union of these qualities I conceived the idea and executed the creation of a man. Even now I cannot recollect without passion my reveries while the work was incomplete. I trod heaven in my thoughts, now exulting in my powers, now burning with the idea of their effects. From my infancy I was imbued with high hopes and a lofty ambition; but how am I sunk! Oh! My friend, if you had known me as I once was, you would not recognise me in this state of degradation. Despondency rarely visited my heart; a high destiny seemed to bear me on, until I fell, never, never again to rise.”

Must I then lose this admirable being? I have longed for a friend; I have sought one who would sympathise with and love me. Behold, on these desert seas I have found such a one, but I fear I have gained him only to know his value and lose him. I would reconcile him to life, but he repulses the idea. “I thank you, Walton,” he said, “for your kind intentions towards so miserable a wretch; but when you speak of new ties and fresh affections, think you that any can replace those who are gone? Can any man be to me as Clerval was, or any woman another Elizabeth? Even where the affections are not strongly moved by any superior excellence, the companions of our childhood always possess a certain power over our minds which hardly any later friend can obtain. They know our infantine dispositions, which, however they may be afterwards modified, are never eradicated; and they can judge of our actions with more certain conclusions as to the integrity of our motives. A sister or a brother can never, unless indeed such symptoms have been shown early, suspect the other of fraud or false dealing, when another friend, however strongly he may be attached, may, in spite of himself, be contemplated with suspicion. But I enjoyed friends, dear not only through habit and association, but from their own merits; and wherever I am, the soothing voice of my Elizabeth and the conversation of Clerval will be ever whispered in my ear. They are dead, and but one feeling in such a solitude can persuade me to preserve my life. If I were engaged in any high undertaking or design, fraught with extensive utility to my fellow creatures, then could I live to fulfil it. But such is not my destiny; I must pursue and destroy the being to whom I gave existence; then my lot on earth will be fulfilled and I may die.”

I write to you, encompassed by peril and ignorant whether I am ever doomed to see again dear England and the dearer friends that inhabit it. I am surrounded by mountains of ice which admit of no escape and threaten every moment to crush my vessel. The brave fellows whom I have persuaded to be my companions look towards me for aid, but I have none to bestow. There is something terribly appalling in our situation, yet my courage and hopes do not desert me. Yet it is terrible to reflect that the lives of all these men are endangered through me. If we are lost, my mad schemes are the cause. And what, Margaret, will be the state of your mind? You will not hear of my destruction, and you will anxiously await my return. Years will pass, and you will have visitings of despair and yet be tortured by hope. Oh! My beloved sister, the sickening failing of your heart-felt expectations is, in prospect, more terrible to me than my own death. But you have a husband and lovely children; you may be happy. Heaven bless you and make you so!

My unfortunate guest regards me with the tenderest compassion. He endeavours to fill me with hope and talks as if life were a possession which he valued. He reminds me how often the same accidents have happened to other navigators who have attempted this sea, and in spite of myself, he fills me with cheerful auguries. Even the sailors feel the power of his eloquence; when he speaks, they no longer despair; he rouses their energies, and while they hear his voice they believe these vast mountains of ice are mole-hills which will vanish before the resolutions of man. These feelings are transitory; each day of expectation delayed fills them with fear, and I almost dread a mutiny caused by this despair. A scene has just passed of such uncommon interest that, although it is highly probable that these papers may never reach you, yet I cannot forbear recording it. We are still surrounded by mountains of ice, still in imminent danger of being crushed in their conflict. The cold is excessive, and many of my unfortunate comrades have already found a grave amidst this scene of desolation. Frankenstein has daily declined in health; a feverish fire still glimmers in his eyes, but he is exhausted, and when suddenly roused to any exertion, he speedily sinks again into apparent lifelessness.

I mentioned in my last letter the fears I entertained of a mutiny. This morning, as I sat watching the wan countenance of my friend—his eyes half closed and his limbs hanging listlessly—I was roused by half a dozen of the sailors, who demanded admission into the cabin. They entered, and their leader addressed me. He told me that he and his companions had been chosen by the other sailors to come in deputation to me to make me a requisition which, in justice, I could not refuse. We were immured in ice and should probably never escape, but they feared that if, as was possible, the ice should dissipate and a free passage be opened, I should be rash enough to continue my voyage and lead them into fresh dangers, after they might happily have surmounted this. They insisted, therefore, that I should engage with a solemn promise that if the vessel should be freed I would instantly direct my course southwards. This speech troubled me. I had not despaired, nor had I yet conceived the idea of returning if set free. Yet could I, in justice, or even in possibility, refuse this demand? I hesitated before I answered, when Frankenstein, who had at first been silent, and indeed appeared hardly to have force enough to attend, now roused himself; his eyes sparkled, and his cheeks flushed with momentary vigour. Turning towards the men, he said,

“What do you mean? What do you demand of your captain? Are you, then, so easily turned from your design? Did you not call this a glorious expedition? “And wherefore was it glorious? Not because the way was smooth and placid as a southern sea, but because it was full of dangers and terror, because at every new incident your fortitude was to be called forth and your courage exhibited, because danger and death surrounded it, and these you were to brave and overcome. For this was it a glorious, for this was it an honourable undertaking. You were hereafter to be hailed as the benefactors of your species, your names adored as belonging to brave men who encountered death for honour and the benefit of mankind. And now, behold, with the first imagination of danger, or, if you will, the first mighty and terrific trial of your courage, you shrink away and are content to be handed down as men who had not strength enough to endure cold and peril; and so, poor souls, they were chilly and returned to their warm firesides. Why, that requires not this preparation; ye need not have come thus far and dragged your captain to the shame of a defeat merely to prove yourselves cowards. Oh! Be men, or be more than men. Be steady to your purposes and firm as a rock. This ice is not made of such stuff as your hearts may be; it is mutable and cannot withstand you if you say that it shall not. Do not return to your families with the stigma of disgrace marked on your brows. Return as heroes who have fought and conquered and who know not what it is to turn their backs on the foe.”

He spoke this with a voice so modulated to the different feelings expressed in his speech, with an eye so full of lofty design and heroism, that can you wonder that these men were moved? They looked at one another and were unable to reply. I spoke; I told them to retire and consider of what had been said, that I would not lead them farther north if they strenuously desired the contrary, but that I hoped that, with reflection, their courage would return. How all this will terminate, I know not, but I had rather die than return shamefully, my purpose unfulfilled. Yet I fear such will be my fate; the men, unsupported by ideas of glory and honour, can never willingly continue to endure their present hardships. The die is cast; I have consented to return if we are not destroyed. Thus are my hopes blasted by cowardice and indecision; I come back ignorant and disappointed. It requires more philosophy than I possess to bear this injustice with patience. It is past; I am returning to England. I have lost my hopes of utility and glory; I have lost my friend. But I will endeavour to detail these bitter circumstances to you, my dear sister; and while I am wafted towards England and towards you, I will not despond.

September 9th, the ice began to move, and roarings like thunder were heard at a distance as the islands split and cracked in every direction. We were in the most imminent peril, but as we could only remain passive, my chief attention was occupied by my unfortunate guest whose illness increased in such a degree that he was entirely confined to his bed. The ice cracked behind us and was driven with force towards the north; a breeze sprang from the west, and on the 11th the passage towards the south became perfectly free. When the sailors saw this and that their return to their native country was apparently assured, a shout of tumultuous joy broke from them, loud and long-continued. Frankenstein, who was dozing, awoke and asked the cause of the tumult. “They shout,” I said, “because they will soon return to England.” “Do so, if you will; but I will not. You may give up your purpose, but mine is assigned to me by Heaven, and I dare not. I am weak, but surely the spirits who assist my vengeance will endow me with sufficient strength.” Saying this, he endeavoured to spring from the bed, but the exertion was too great for him; he fell back and fainted.

It was long before he was restored, and I often thought that life was entirely extinct. At length he opened his eyes; he breathed with difficulty and was unable to speak. The surgeon gave him a composing draught and ordered us to leave him undisturbed. In the meantime he told me that my friend had certainly not many hours to live. His sentence was pronounced, and I could only grieve and be patient. I sat by his bed, watching him; his eyes were closed, and I thought he slept; but presently he called to me in a feeble voice, and bidding me come near, said, “Alas! The strength I relied on is gone; I feel that I shall soon die, and he, my enemy and persecutor, may still be in being. Think not, Walton, that in the last moments of my existence I feel that burning hatred and ardent desire of revenge I once expressed; but I feel myself justified in desiring the death of my adversary. During these last days I have been occupied in examining my past conduct; nor do I find it blamable. In a fit of enthusiastic madness I created a rational creature and was bound towards him to assure, as far as was in my power, his happiness and well-being. This was my duty, but there was another still paramount to that. My duties towards the beings of my own species had greater claims to my attention because they included a greater proportion of happiness or misery. Urged by this view, I refused, and I did right in refusing, to create a companion for the first creature. He showed unparalleled malignity and selfishness in evil; he destroyed my friends; he devoted to destruction beings who possessed exquisite sensations, happiness, and wisdom; nor do I know where this thirst for vengeance may end. Miserable himself that he may render no other wretched, he ought to die. The task of his destruction was mine, but I have failed. When actuated by selfish and vicious motives, I asked you to undertake my unfinished work, and I renew this request now, when I am only induced by reason and virtue.

“Yet I cannot ask you to renounce your country and friends to fulfil this task; and now that you are returning to England, you will have little chance of meeting with him. But the consideration of these points, and the well balancing of what you may esteem your duties, I leave to you; my judgment and ideas are already disturbed by the near approach of death. I dare not ask you to do what I think right, for I may still be misled by passion. “That he should live to be an instrument of mischief disturbs me; in other respects, this hour, when I momentarily expect my release, is the only happy one which I have enjoyed for several years. The forms of the beloved dead flit before me, and I hasten to their arms. Farewell, Walton! Seek happiness in tranquillity and avoid ambition, even if it be only the apparently innocent one of distinguishing yourself in science and discoveries. Yet why do I say this? I have myself been blasted in these hopes, yet another may succeed.” His voice became fainter as he spoke, and at length, exhausted by his effort, he sank into silence. About half an hour afterwards he attempted again to speak but was unable; he pressed my hand feebly, and his eyes closed for ever, while the irradiation of a gentle smile passed away from his lips.

Margaret, what comment can I make on the untimely extinction of this glorious spirit? What can I say that will enable you to understand the depth of my sorrow? All that I should express would be inadequate and feeble. My tears flow; my mind is overshadowed by a cloud of disappointment. But I journey towards England, and I may there find consolation. I am interrupted. What do these sounds portend? It is midnight; the breeze blows fairly, and the watch on deck scarcely stir. Again there is a sound as of a human voice, but hoarser; it comes from the cabin where the remains of Frankenstein still lie. I must arise and examine. Good night, my sister. Great God! what a scene has just taken place! I am yet dizzy with the remembrance of it. I hardly know whether I shall have the power to detail it; yet the tale which I have recorded would be incomplete without this final and wonderful catastrophe. I entered the cabin where lay the remains of my ill-fated and admirable friend. Over him hung a form which I cannot find words to describe—gigantic in stature, yet uncouth and distorted in its proportions. As he hung over the coffin, his face was concealed by long locks of ragged hair; but one vast hand was extended, in colour and apparent texture like that of a mummy. When he heard the sound of my approach, he ceased to utter exclamations of grief and horror and sprung towards the window. Never did I behold a vision so horrible as his face, of such loathsome yet appalling hideousness. I shut my eyes involuntarily and endeavoured to recollect what were my duties with regard to this destroyer. I called on him to stay.

He paused, looking on me with wonder, and again turning towards the lifeless form of his creator, he seemed to forget my presence, and every feature and gesture seemed instigated by the wildest rage of some uncontrollable passion. “That is also my victim!” he exclaimed. “In his murder my crimes are consummated; the miserable series of my being is wound to its close! Oh, Frankenstein! Generous and self-devoted being! What does it avail that I now ask thee to pardon me? I, who irretrievably destroyed thee by destroying all thou lovedst. Alas! He is cold, he cannot answer me.” His voice seemed suffocated, and my first impulses, which had suggested to me the duty of obeying the dying request of my friend in destroying his enemy, were now suspended by a mixture of curiosity and compassion. I approached this tremendous being; I dared not again raise my eyes to his face, there was something so scaring and unearthly in his ugliness. I attempted to speak, but the words died away on my lips. The monster continued to utter wild and incoherent self-reproaches. At length I gathered resolution to address him in a pause of the tempest of his passion.

“Your repentance,” I said, “is now superfluous. If you had listened to the voice of conscience and heeded the stings of remorse before you had urged your diabolical vengeance to this extremity, Frankenstein would yet have lived.” “And do you dream?” said the dæmon. “Do you think that I was then dead to agony and remorse? He,” he continued, pointing to the corpse, “he suffered not in the consummation of the deed. Oh! Not the ten-thousandth portion of the anguish that was mine during the lingering detail of its execution. A frightful selfishness hurried me on, while my heart was poisoned with remorse. Think you that the groans of Clerval were music to my ears? My heart was fashioned to be susceptible of love and sympathy, and when wrenched by misery to vice and hatred, it did not endure the violence of the change without torture such as you cannot even imagine. “After the murder of Clerval I returned to Switzerland, heart-broken and overcome. I pitied Frankenstein; my pity amounted to horror; I abhorred myself. But when I discovered that he, the author at once of my existence and of its unspeakable torments, dared to hope for happiness, that while he accumulated wretchedness and despair upon me he sought his own enjoyment in feelings and passions from the indulgence of which I was for ever barred, then impotent envy and bitter indignation filled me with an insatiable thirst for vengeance. I recollected my threat and resolved that it should be accomplished. I knew that I was preparing for myself a deadly torture, but I was the slave, not the master, of an impulse which I detested yet could not disobey. Yet when she died! Nay, then I was not miserable. I had cast off all feeling, subdued all anguish, to riot in the excess of my despair. Evil thenceforth became my good. Urged thus far, I had no choice but to adapt my nature to an element which I had willingly chosen. The completion of my demoniacal design became an insatiable passion. And now it is ended; there is my last victim!”

I was at first touched by the expressions of his misery; yet, when I called to mind what Frankenstein had said of his powers of eloquence and persuasion, and when I again cast my eyes on the lifeless form of my friend, indignation was rekindled within me. “Wretch!” I said. “It is well that you come here to whine over the desolation that you have made. You throw a torch into a pile of buildings, and when they are consumed, you sit among the ruins and lament the fall. Hypocritical fiend! If he whom you mourn still lived, still would he be the object, again would he become the prey, of your accursed vengeance. It is not pity that you feel; you lament only because the victim of your malignity is withdrawn from your power.” “Oh, it is not thus—not thus,” interrupted the being. “Yet such must be the impression conveyed to you by what appears to be the purport of my actions. Yet I seek not a fellow feeling in my misery. No sympathy may I ever find. When I first sought it, it was the love of virtue, the feelings of happiness and affection with which my whole being overflowed, that I wished to be participated. But now that virtue has become to me a shadow, and that happiness and affection are turned into bitter and loathing despair, in what should I seek for sympathy? I am content to suffer alone while my sufferings shall endure; when I die, I am well satisfied that abhorrence and opprobrium should load my memory. Once my fancy was soothed with dreams of virtue, of fame, and of enjoyment. Once I falsely hoped to meet with beings who, pardoning my outward form, would love me for the excellent qualities which I was capable of unfolding. I was nourished with high thoughts of honour and devotion. But now crime has degraded me beneath the meanest animal. No guilt, no mischief, no malignity, no misery, can be found comparable to mine. When I run over the frightful catalogue of my sins, I cannot believe that I am the same creature whose thoughts were once filled with sublime and transcendent visions of the beauty and the majesty of goodness. But it is even so; the fallen angel becomes a malignant devil. Yet even that enemy of God and man had friends and associates in his desolation; I am alone.

“You, who call Frankenstein your friend, seem to have a knowledge of my crimes and his misfortunes. But in the detail which he gave you of them he could not sum up the hours and months of misery which I endured wasting in impotent passions. For while I destroyed his hopes, I did not satisfy my own desires. They were for ever ardent and craving; still I desired love and fellowship, and I was still spurned. Was there no injustice in this? Am I to be thought the only criminal, when all humankind sinned against me? Why do you not hate Felix, who drove his friend from his door with contumely? Why do you not execrate the rustic who sought to destroy the saviour of his child? Nay, these are virtuous and immaculate beings! I, the miserable and the abandoned, am an abortion, to be spurned at, and kicked, and trampled on. Even now my blood boils at the recollection of this injustice. “But it is true that I am a wretch. I have murdered the lovely and the helpless; I have strangled the innocent as they slept and grasped to death his throat who never injured me or any other living thing. I have devoted my creator, the select specimen of all that is worthy of love and admiration among men, to misery; I have pursued him even to that irremediable ruin. There he lies, white and cold in death. You hate me, but your abhorrence cannot equal that with which I regard myself. I look on the hands which executed the deed; I think on the heart in which the imagination of it was conceived and long for the moment when these hands will meet my eyes, when that imagination will haunt my thoughts no more.

“Fear not that I shall be the instrument of future mischief. My work is nearly complete. Neither yours nor any man’s death is needed to consummate the series of my being and accomplish that which must be done, but it requires my own. Do not think that I shall be slow to perform this sacrifice. I shall quit your vessel on the ice raft which brought me thither and shall seek the most northern extremity of the globe; I shall collect my funeral pile and consume to ashes this miserable frame, that its remains may afford no light to any curious and unhallowed wretch who would create such another as I have been. I shall die. I shall no longer feel the agonies which now consume me or be the prey of feelings unsatisfied, yet unquenched. He is dead who called me into being; and when I shall be no more, the very remembrance of us both will speedily vanish. I shall no longer see the sun or stars or feel the winds play on my cheeks. Light, feeling, and sense will pass away; and in this condition must I find my happiness. Some years ago, when the images which this world affords first opened upon me, when I felt the cheering warmth of summer and heard the rustling of the leaves and the warbling of the birds, and these were all to me, I should have wept to die; now it is my only consolation. Polluted by crimes and torn by the bitterest remorse, where can I find rest but in death?

“Farewell! I leave you, and in you the last of humankind whom these eyes will ever behold. Farewell, Frankenstein! If thou wert yet alive and yet cherished a desire of revenge against me, it would be better satiated in my life than in my destruction. But it was not so; thou didst seek my extinction, that I might not cause greater wretchedness; and if yet, in some mode unknown to me, thou hadst not ceased to think and feel, thou wouldst not desire against me a vengeance greater than that which I feel. Blasted as thou wert, my agony was still superior to thine, for the bitter sting of remorse will not cease to rankle in my wounds until death shall close them for ever. “But soon,” he cried with sad and solemn enthusiasm, “I shall die, and what I now feel be no longer felt. Soon these burning miseries will be extinct. I shall ascend my funeral pile triumphantly and exult in the agony of the torturing flames. The light of that conflagration will fade away; my ashes will be swept into the sea by the winds. My spirit will sleep in peace, or if it thinks, it will not surely think thus. Farewell.”

He sprang from the cabin-window as he said this, upon the ice raft which lay close to the vessel. He was soon borne away by the waves and lost in darkness and distance. Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as cr _Walt Whitman has somewhere a fine and just distinction between “loving by allowance” and “loving with personal love.” This distinction applies to books as well as to men and women; and in the case of the not very numerous authors who are the objects of the personal affection, it brings a curious consequence with it. There is much more difference as to their best work than in the case of those others who are loved “by allowance” by convention, and because it is felt to be the right and proper thing to love them. And in the sect--fairly large and yet unusually choice--of Austenians or Janites, there would probably be found partisans of the claim to primacy of almost every one of the novels. To some the delightful freshness and humour of_ Northanger Abbey, _its completeness, finish, and_ entrain, _obscure the undoubted critical facts that its scale is small, and its scheme, after all, that of burlesque or parody, a kind in which the first rank is reached with difficulty._ Persuasion, _relatively faint in tone, and not enthralling in interest, has devotees who exalt above all the others its exquisite delicacy and keeping. The catastrophe of_ Mansfield Park _is admittedly theatrical, the hero and heroine are insipid, and the author has almost wickedly destroyed all romantic interest by expressly admitting that Edmund only took Fanny because Mary shocked him, and that Fanny might very likely have taken Crawford if he had been a little more assiduous; yet the matchless rehearsal-scenes and the characters of Mrs. Norris and others have secured, I believe, a considerable party for it._ Sense and Sensibility _has perhaps the fewest out-and-out admirers; but it does not want them._

_I suppose, however, that the majority of at least competent votes would, all things considered, be divided between_ Emma _and the present book; and perhaps the vulgar verdict (if indeed a fondness for Miss Austen be not of itself a patent of exemption from any possible charge of vulgarity) would go for_ Emma. _It is the larger, the more varied, the more popular; the author had by the time of its composition seen rather more of the world, and had improved her general, though not her most peculiar and characteristic dialogue; such figures as Miss Bates, as the Eltons, cannot but unite the suffrages of everybody. On the other hand, I, for my part, declare for_ Pride and Prejudice _unhesitatingly. It seems to me the most perfect, the most characteristic, the most eminently quintessential of its author’s works; and for this contention in such narrow space as is permitted to me, I propose here to show cause._ _In the first place, the book (it may be barely necessary to remind the reader) was in its first shape written very early, somewhere about 1796, when Miss Austen was barely twenty-one; though it was revised and finished at Chawton some fifteen years later, and was not published till 1813, only four years before her death. I do not know whether, in this combination of the fresh and vigorous projection of youth, and the critical revision of middle life, there may be traced the distinct superiority in point of construction, which, as it seems to me, it possesses over all the others. The plot, though not elaborate, is almost regular enough for Fielding; hardly a character, hardly an incident could be retrenched without loss to the story. The elopement of Lydia and Wickham is not, like that of Crawford and Mrs. Rushworth, a_ coup de théâtre; _it connects itself in the strictest way with the course of the story earlier, and brings about the denouement with complete propriety. All the minor passages--the loves of Jane and Bingley, the advent of Mr. Collins, the visit to Hunsford, the Derbyshire tour--fit in after the same unostentatious, but masterly fashion. There is no attempt at the hide-and-seek, in-and-out business, which in the transactions between Frank Churchill and Jane Fairfax contributes no doubt a good deal to the intrigue of_ Emma, _but contributes it in a fashion which I do not think the best feature of that otherwise admirable book. Although Miss Austen always liked something of the misunderstanding kind, which afforded her opportunities for the display of the peculiar and incomparable talent to be noticed presently, she has been satisfied here with the perfectly natural occasions provided by the false account of Darcy’s conduct given by Wickham, and by the awkwardness (arising with equal naturalness) from the gradual transformation of Elizabeth’s own feelings from positive aversion to actual love. I do not know whether the all-grasping hand of the playwright has ever been laid upon_ Pride and Prejudice; _and I dare say that, if it were, the situations would prove not startling or garish enough for the footlights, the character-scheme too subtle and delicate for pit and gallery. But if the attempt were made, it would certainly not be hampered by any of those loosenesses of construction, which, sometimes disguised by the conveniences of which the novelist can avail himself, appear at once on the stage._

_I think, however, though the thought will doubtless seem heretical to more than one school of critics, that construction is not the highest merit, the choicest gift, of the novelist. It sets off his other gifts and graces most advantageously to the critical eye; and the want of it will sometimes mar those graces--appreciably, though not quite consciously--to eyes by no means ultra-critical. But a very badly-built novel which excelled in pathetic or humorous character, or which displayed consummate command of dialogue--perhaps the rarest of all faculties--would be an infinitely better thing than a faultless plot acted and told by puppets with pebbles in their mouths. And despite the ability which Miss Austen has shown in working out the story, I for one should put_ Pride and Prejudice _far lower if it did not contain what seem to me the very masterpieces of Miss Austen’s humour and of her faculty of character-creation--masterpieces who may indeed admit John Thorpe, the Eltons, Mrs. Norris, and one or two others to their company, but who, in one instance certainly, and perhaps in others, are still superior to them._

_In respect of her art generally, Mr. Goldwin Smith has truly observed that “metaphor has been exhausted in depicting the perfection of it, combined with the narrowness of her field;” and he has justly added that we need not go beyond her own comparison to the art of a miniature painter. To make this latter observation quite exact we must not use the term miniature in its restricted sense, and must think rather of Memling at one end of the history of painting and Meissonier at the other, than of Cosway or any of his kind. And I am not so certain that I should myself use the word “narrow” in connection with her. If her world is a microcosm, the cosmic quality of it is at least as eminent as the littleness. She does not touch what she did not feel herself called to paint; I am not so sure that she could not have painted what she did not feel herself called to touch. It is at least remarkable that in two very short periods of writing--one of about three years, and another of not much more than five--she executed six capital works, and has not left a single failure. It is possible that the romantic paste in her composition was defective: we must always remember that hardly anybody born in her decade--that of the eighteenth-century seventies--independently exhibited the full romantic quality. Even Scott required hill and mountain and ballad, even Coleridge metaphysics and German to enable them to chip the classical shell. Miss Austen was an English girl, brought up in a country retirement, at the time when ladies went back into the house if there was a white frost which might pierce their kid shoes, when a sudden cold was the subject of the gravest fears, when their studies, their ways, their conduct were subject to all those fantastic limits and restrictions against which Mary Wollstonecraft protested with better general sense than particular taste or judgment. Miss Austen, too, drew back when the white frost touched her shoes; but I think she would have made a pretty good journey even in a black one._

_For if her knowledge was not very extended, she knew two things which only genius knows. The one was humanity, and the other was art. On the first head she could not make a mistake; her men, though limited, are true, and her women are, in the old sense, “absolute.” As to art, if she has never tried idealism, her realism is real to a degree which makes the false realism of our own day look merely dead-alive. Take almost any Frenchman, except the late M. de Maupassant, and watch him laboriously piling up strokes in the hope of giving a complete impression. You get none; you are lucky if, discarding two-thirds of what he gives, you can shape a real impression out of the rest. But with Miss Austen the myriad, trivial, unforced strokes build up the picture like magic. Nothing is false; nothing is superfluous. When (to take the present book only) Mr. Collins changed his mind from Jane to Elizabeth “while Mrs. Bennet was stirring the fire” (and we know_ how _Mrs. Bennet would have stirred the fire), when Mr. Darcy “brought his coffee-cup back_ himself,” _the touch in each case is like that of Swift--“taller by the breadth of my nail”--which impressed the half-reluctant Thackeray with just and outspoken admiration. Indeed, fantastic as it may seem, I should put Miss Austen as near to Swift in some ways, as I have put her to Addison in others._

_This Swiftian quality appears in the present novel as it appears nowhere else in the character of the immortal, the ineffable Mr. Collins. Mr. Collins is really_ great; _far greater than anything Addison ever did, almost great enough for Fielding or for Swift himself. It has been said that no one ever was like him. But in the first place,_ he _was like him; he is there--alive, imperishable, more real than hundreds of prime ministers and archbishops, of “metals, semi-metals, and distinguished philosophers.” In the second place, it is rash, I think, to conclude that an actual Mr. Collins was impossible or non-existent at the end of the eighteenth century. It is very interesting that we possess, in this same gallery, what may be called a spoiled first draught, or an unsuccessful study of him, in John Dashwood. The formality, the under-breeding, the meanness, are there; but the portrait is only half alive, and is felt to be even a little unnatural. Mr. Collins is perfectly natural, and perfectly alive. In fact, for all the “miniature,” there is something gigantic in the way in which a certain side, and more than one, of humanity, and especially eighteenth-century humanity, its Philistinism, its well-meaning but hide-bound morality, its formal pettiness, its grovelling respect for rank, its materialism, its selfishness, receives exhibition. I will not admit that one speech or one action of this inestimable man is incapable of being reconciled with reality, and I should not wonder if many of these words and actions are historically true._

_The goodness of the minor characters in_ Pride and Prejudice _has been already alluded to, and it makes a detailed dwelling on their beauties difficult in any space, and impossible in this. Mrs. Bennet we have glanced at, and it is not easy to say whether she is more exquisitely amusing or more horribly true. Much the same may be said of Kitty and Lydia; but it is not every author, even of genius, who would have differentiated with such unerring skill the effects of folly and vulgarity of intellect and disposition working upon the common weaknesses of woman at such different ages. With Mary, Miss Austen has taken rather less pains, though she has been even more unkind to her; not merely in the text, but, as we learn from those interesting traditional appendices which Mr. Austen Leigh has given us, in dooming her privately to marry “one of Mr. Philips’s clerks.” The habits of first copying and then retailing moral sentiments, of playing and singing too long in public, are, no doubt, grievous and criminal; but perhaps poor Mary was rather the scapegoat of the sins of blue stockings in that Fordyce-belectured generation. It is at any rate difficult not to extend to her a share of the respect and affection (affection and respect of a peculiar kind; doubtless), with which one regards Mr. Collins, when she draws the moral of Lydia’s fall. I sometimes wish that the exigencies of the story had permitted Miss Austen to unite these personages, and thus at once achieve a notable mating and soothe poor Mrs. Bennet’s anguish over the entail._

_The Bingleys and the Gardiners and the Lucases, Miss Darcy and Miss de Bourgh, Jane, Wickham, and the rest, must pass without special comment, further than the remark that Charlotte Lucas (her egregious papa, though delightful, is just a little on the thither side of the line between comedy and farce) is a wonderfully clever study in drab of one kind, and that Wickham (though something of Miss Austen’s hesitation of touch in dealing with young men appears) is a not much less notable sketch in drab of another. Only genius could have made Charlotte what she is, yet not disagreeable; Wickham what he is, without investing him either with a cheap Don Juanish attractiveness or a disgusting rascality. But the hero and the heroine are not tints to be dismissed._ _Darcy has always seemed to me by far the best and most interesting of Miss Austen’s heroes; the only possible competitor being Henry Tilney, whose part is so slight and simple that it hardly enters into comparison. It has sometimes, I believe, been urged that his pride is unnatural at first in its expression and later in its yielding, while his falling in love at all is not extremely probable. Here again I cannot go with the objectors. Darcy’s own account of the way in which his pride had been pampered, is perfectly rational and sufficient; and nothing could be, psychologically speaking, a_ causa verior _for its sudden restoration to healthy conditions than the shock of Elizabeth’s scornful refusal acting on a nature_ ex hypothesi _generous. Nothing in even our author is finer and more delicately touched than the change of his demeanour at the sudden meeting in the grounds of Pemberley. Had he been a bad prig or a bad coxcomb, he might have been still smarting under his rejection, or suspicious that the girl had come husband-hunting. His being neither is exactly consistent with the probable feelings of a man spoilt in the common sense, but not really injured in disposition, and thoroughly in love. As for his being in love, Elizabeth has given as just an exposition of the causes of that phenomenon as Darcy has of the conditions of his unregenerate state, only she has of course not counted in what was due to her own personal charm._

_The secret of that charm many men and not a few women, from Miss Austen herself downwards, have felt, and like most charms it is a thing rather to be felt than to be explained. Elizabeth of course belongs to the_ allegro _or_ allegra _division of the army of Venus. Miss Austen was always provokingly chary of description in regard to her beauties; and except the fine eyes, and a hint or two that she had at any rate sometimes a bright complexion, and was not very tall, we hear nothing about her looks. But her chief difference from other heroines of the lively type seems to lie first in her being distinctly clever--almost strong-minded, in the better sense of that objectionable word--and secondly in her being entirely destitute of ill-nature for all her propensity to tease and the sharpness of her tongue. Elizabeth can give at least as good as she gets when she is attacked; but she never “scratches,” and she never attacks first. Some of the merest obsoletenesses of phrase and manner give one or two of her early speeches a slight pertness, but that is nothing, and when she comes to serious business, as in the great proposal scene with Darcy (which is, as it should be, the climax of the interest of the book), and in the final ladies’ battle with Lady Catherine, she is unexceptionable. Then too she is a perfectly natural girl. She does not disguise from herself or anybody that she resents Darcy’s first ill-mannered personality with as personal a feeling. (By the way, the reproach that the ill-manners of this speech are overdone is certainly unjust; for things of the same kind, expressed no doubt less stiltedly but more coarsely, might have been heard in more than one ball-room during this very year from persons who ought to have been no worse bred than Darcy.) And she lets the injury done to Jane and the contempt shown to the rest of her family aggravate this resentment in the healthiest way in the world._

_Still, all this does not explain her charm, which, taking beauty as a common form of all heroines, may perhaps consist in the addition to her playfulness, her wit, her affectionate and natural disposition, of a certain fearlessness very uncommon in heroines of her type and age. Nearly all of them would have been in speechless awe of the magnificent Darcy; nearly all of them would have palpitated and fluttered at the idea of proposals, even naughty ones, from the fascinating Wickham. Elizabeth, with nothing offensive, nothing_ viraginous, _nothing of the “New Woman” about her, has by nature what the best modern (not “new”) women have by education and experience, a perfect freedom from the idea that all men may bully her if they choose, and that most will away with her if they can. Though not in the least “impudent and mannish grown,” she has no mere sensibility, no nasty niceness about her. The form of passion common and likely to seem natural in Miss Austen’s day was so invariably connected with the display of one or the other, or both of these qualities, that she has not made Elizabeth outwardly passionate. But I, at least, have not the slightest doubt that she would have married Darcy just as willingly without Pemberley as with it, and anybody who can read between lines will not find the lovers’ conversations in the final chapters so frigid as they might have looked to the Della Cruscans of their own day, and perhaps do look to the Della Cruscans of this._

_And, after all, what is the good of seeking for the reason of charm?--it is there. There were better sense in the sad mechanic exercise of determining the reason of its absence where it is not. In the novels of the last hundred years there are vast numbers of young ladies with whom it might be a pleasure to fall in love; there are at least five with whom, as it seems to me, no man of taste and spirit can help doing so. Their names are, in chronological order, Elizabeth Bennet, Diana Vernon, Argemone Lavington, Beatrix Esmond, and Barbara Grant. I should have been most in love with Beatrix and Argemone; I should, I think, for mere occasional companionship, have preferred Diana and Barbara. But to live with and to marry, I do not know that any one of the four can come into competition with Elizabeth._ However little known the feelings or views of such a man may be on his first entering a neighbourhood, this truth is so well fixed in the minds of the surrounding families, that he is considered as the rightful property of some one or other of their daughters.

“Why, my dear, you must know, Mrs. Long says that Netherfield is taken by a young man of large fortune from the north of England; that he came down on Monday in a chaise and four to see the place, and was so much delighted with it that he agreed with Mr. Morris immediately; that he is to take possession before Michaelmas, and some of his servants are to be in the house by the end of next week.” “Design? Nonsense, how can you talk so! But it is very likely that he _may_ fall in love with one of them, and therefore you must visit him as soon as he comes.” “I see no occasion for that. You and the girls may go--or you may send them by themselves, which perhaps will be still better; for as you are as handsome as any of them, Mr. Bingley might like you the best of the party.” “My dear, you flatter me. I certainly _have_ had my share of beauty, but I do not pretend to be anything extraordinary now. When a woman has five grown-up daughters, she ought to give over thinking of her own beauty.”

“But consider your daughters. Only think what an establishment it would be for one of them. Sir William and Lady Lucas are determined to go, merely on that account; for in general, you know, they visit no new comers. Indeed you must go, for it will be impossible for _us_ to visit him, if you do not.” “You are over scrupulous, surely. I dare say Mr. Bingley will be very glad to see you; and I will send a few lines by you to assure him of my hearty consent to his marrying whichever he chooses of the girls--though I must throw in a good word for my little Lizzy.” “I desire you will do no such thing. Lizzy is not a bit better than the others: and I am sure she is not half so handsome as Jane, nor half so good-humoured as Lydia. But you are always giving _her_ the preference.” “They have none of them much to recommend them,” replied he: “they are all silly and ignorant like other girls; but Lizzy has something more of quickness than her sisters.”

“You mistake me, my dear. I have a high respect for your nerves. They are my old friends. I have heard you mention them with consideration these twenty years at least.” Mr. Bennet was so odd a mixture of quick parts, sarcastic humour, reserve, and caprice, that the experience of three-and-twenty years had been insufficient to make his wife understand his character. _Her_ mind was less difficult to develope. She was a woman of mean understanding, little information, and uncertain temper. When she was discontented, she fancied herself nervous. The business of her life was to get her daughters married: its solace was visiting and news. Mr. Bennet was among the earliest of those who waited on Mr. Bingley. He had always intended to visit him, though to the last always assuring his wife that he should not go; and till the evening after the visit was paid she had no knowledge of it. It was then disclosed in the following manner. Observing his second daughter employed in trimming a hat, he suddenly addressed her with,-- “I do not believe Mrs. Long will do any such thing. She has two nieces of her own. She is a selfish, hypocritical woman, and I have no opinion of her.”

“Ay, so it is,” cried her mother, “and Mrs. Long does not come back till the day before; so, it will be impossible for her to introduce him, for she will not know him herself.” “I honour your circumspection. A fortnight’s acquaintance is certainly very little. One cannot know what a man really is by the end of a fortnight. But if _we_ do not venture, somebody else will; and after all, Mrs. Long and her nieces must stand their chance; and, therefore, as she will think it an act of kindness, if you decline the office, I will take it on myself.” “What can be the meaning of that emphatic exclamation?” cried he. “Do you consider the forms of introduction, and the stress that is laid on them, as nonsense? I cannot quite agree with you _there_. What say you, Mary? For you are a young lady of deep reflection, I know, and read great books, and make extracts.” “I am sorry to hear _that_; but why did you not tell me so before? If I had known as much this morning, I certainly would not have called on him. It is very unlucky; but as I have actually paid the visit, we cannot escape the acquaintance now.”

The astonishment of the ladies was just what he wished--that of Mrs. Bennet perhaps surpassing the rest; though when the first tumult of joy was over, she began to declare that it was what she had expected all the while. “How good it was in you, my dear Mr. Bennet! But I knew I should persuade you at last. I was sure you loved your girls too well to neglect such an acquaintance. Well, how pleased I am! And it is such a good joke, too, that you should have gone this morning, and never said a word about it till now.” “What an excellent father you have, girls,” said she, when the door was shut. “I do not know how you will ever make him amends for his kindness; or me either, for that matter. At our time of life, it is not so pleasant, I can tell you, to be making new acquaintances every day; but for your sakes we would do anything. Lydia, my love, though you _are_ the youngest, I dare say Mr. Bingley will dance with you at the next ball.”

Not all that Mrs. Bennet, however, with the assistance of her five daughters, could ask on the subject, was sufficient to draw from her husband any satisfactory description of Mr. Bingley. They attacked him in various ways, with barefaced questions, ingenious suppositions, and distant surmises; but he eluded the skill of them all; and they were at last obliged to accept the second-hand intelligence of their neighbour, Lady Lucas. Her report was highly favourable. Sir William had been delighted with him. He was quite young, wonderfully handsome, extremely agreeable, and, to crown the whole, he meant to be at the next assembly with a large party. Nothing could be more delightful! To be fond of dancing was a certain step towards falling in love; and very lively hopes of Mr. Bingley’s heart were entertained. “If I can but see one of my daughters happily settled at Netherfield,” said Mrs. Bennet to her husband, “and all the others equally well married, I shall have nothing to wish for.” In a few days Mr. Bingley returned Mr. Bennet’s visit, and sat about ten minutes with him in his library. He had entertained hopes of being admitted to a sight of the young ladies, of whose beauty he had heard much; but he saw only the father. The ladies were somewhat more fortunate, for they had the advantage of ascertaining, from an upper window, that he wore a blue coat and rode a black horse.

An invitation to dinner was soon afterwards despatched; and already had Mrs. Bennet planned the courses that were to do credit to her housekeeping, when an answer arrived which deferred it all. Mr. Bingley was obliged to be in town the following day, and consequently unable to accept the honour of their invitation, etc. Mrs. Bennet was quite disconcerted. She could not imagine what business he could have in town so soon after his arrival in Hertfordshire; and she began to fear that he might always be flying about from one place to another, and never settled at Netherfield as he ought to be. Lady Lucas quieted her fears a little by starting the idea of his being gone to London only to get a large party for the ball; and a report soon followed that Mr. Bingley was to bring twelve ladies and seven gentlemen with him to the assembly. The girls grieved over such a number of ladies; but were comforted the day before the ball by hearing that, instead of twelve, he had brought only six with him from London, his five sisters and a cousin. And when the party entered the assembly-room, it consisted of only five altogether: Mr. Bingley, his two sisters, the husband of the eldest, and another young man.

Mr. Bingley was good-looking and gentlemanlike: he had a pleasant countenance, and easy, unaffected manners. His sisters were fine women, with an air of decided fashion. His brother-in-law, Mr. Hurst, merely looked the gentleman; but his friend Mr. Darcy soon drew the attention of the room by his fine, tall person, handsome features, noble mien, and the report, which was in general circulation within five minutes after his entrance, of his having ten thousand a year. The gentlemen pronounced him to be a fine figure of a man, the ladies declared he was much handsomer than Mr. Bingley, and he was looked at with great admiration for about half the evening, till his manners gave a disgust which turned the tide of his popularity; for he was discovered to be proud, to be above his company, and above being pleased; and not all his large estate in Derbyshire could save him from having a most forbidding, disagreeable countenance, and being unworthy to be compared with his friend. Mr. Bingley had soon made himself acquainted with all the principal people in the room: he was lively and unreserved, danced every dance, was angry that the ball closed so early, and talked of giving one himself at Netherfield. Such amiable qualities must speak for themselves. What a contrast between him and his friend! Mr. Darcy danced only once with Mrs. Hurst and once with Miss Bingley, declined being introduced to any other lady, and spent the rest of the evening in walking about the room, speaking occasionally to one of his own party. His character was decided. He was the proudest, most disagreeable man in the world, and everybody hoped that he would never come there again. Amongst the most violent against him was Mrs. Bennet, whose dislike of his general behaviour was sharpened into particular resentment by his having slighted one of her daughters.

Elizabeth Bennet had been obliged, by the scarcity of gentlemen, to sit down for two dances; and during part of that time, Mr. Darcy had been standing near enough for her to overhear a conversation between him and Mr. Bingley, who came from the dance for a few minutes to press his friend to join it. “I certainly shall not. You know how I detest it, unless I am particularly acquainted with my partner. At such an assembly as this, it would be insupportable. Your sisters are engaged, and there is not another woman in the room whom it would not be a punishment to me to stand up with.” “I would not be so fastidious as you are,” cried Bingley, “for a kingdom! Upon my honour, I never met with so many pleasant girls in my life as I have this evening; and there are several of them, you see, uncommonly pretty.” “Oh, she is the most beautiful creature I ever beheld! But there is one of her sisters sitting down just behind you, who is very pretty, and I dare say very agreeable. Do let me ask my partner to introduce you.”

“Which do you mean?” and turning round, he looked for a moment at Elizabeth, till, catching her eye, he withdrew his own, and coldly said, “She is tolerable: but not handsome enough to tempt _me_; and I am in no humour at present to give consequence to young ladies who are slighted by other men. You had better return to your partner and enjoy her smiles, for you are wasting your time with me.” Mr. Bingley followed his advice. Mr. Darcy walked off; and Elizabeth remained with no very cordial feelings towards him. She told the story, however, with great spirit among her friends; for she had a lively, playful disposition, which delighted in anything ridiculous. The evening altogether passed off pleasantly to the whole family. Mrs. Bennet had seen her eldest daughter much admired by the Netherfield party. Mr. Bingley had danced with her twice, and she had been distinguished by his sisters. Jane was as much gratified by this as her mother could be, though in a quieter way. Elizabeth felt Jane’s pleasure. Mary had heard herself mentioned to Miss Bingley as the most accomplished girl in the neighbourhood; and Catherine and Lydia had been fortunate enough to be never without partners, which was all that they had yet learnt to care for at a ball. They returned, therefore, in good spirits to Longbourn, the village where they lived, and of which they were the principal inhabitants. They found Mr. Bennet still up. With a book, he was regardless of time; and on the present occasion he had a good deal of curiosity as to the event of an evening which had raised such splendid expectations. He had rather hoped that all his wife’s views on the stranger would be disappointed; but he soon found that he had a very different story to hear.

“Oh, my dear Mr. Bennet,” as she entered the room, “we have had a most delightful evening, a most excellent ball. I wish you had been there. Jane was so admired, nothing could be like it. Everybody said how well she looked; and Mr. Bingley thought her quite beautiful, and danced with her twice. Only think of _that_, my dear: he actually danced with her twice; and she was the only creature in the room that he asked a second time. First of all, he asked Miss Lucas. I was so vexed to see him stand up with her; but, however, he did not admire her at all; indeed, nobody can, you know; and he seemed quite struck with Jane as she was going down the dance. So he inquired who she was, and got introduced, and asked her for the two next. Then, the two third he danced with Miss King, and the two fourth with Maria Lucas, and the two fifth with Jane again, and the two sixth with Lizzy, and the _Boulanger_----” “If he had had any compassion for _me_,” cried her husband impatiently, “he would not have danced half so much! For God’s sake, say no more of his partners. O that he had sprained his ancle in the first dance!”

“Oh, my dear,” continued Mrs. Bennet, “I am quite delighted with him. He is so excessively handsome! and his sisters are charming women. I never in my life saw anything more elegant than their dresses. I dare say the lace upon Mrs. Hurst’s gown----” Here she was interrupted again. Mr. Bennet protested against any description of finery. She was therefore obliged to seek another branch of the subject, and related, with much bitterness of spirit, and some exaggeration, the shocking rudeness of Mr. Darcy. “But I can assure you,” she added, “that Lizzy does not lose much by not suiting _his_ fancy; for he is a most disagreeable, horrid man, not at all worth pleasing. So high and so conceited, that there was no enduring him! He walked here, and he walked there, fancying himself so very great! Not handsome enough to dance with! I wish you had been there, my dear, to have given him one of your set-downs. I quite detest the man.” When Jane and Elizabeth were alone, the former, who had been cautious in her praise of Mr. Bingley before, expressed to her sister how very much she admired him.

“He is just what a young man ought to be,” said she, “sensible, good-humoured, lively; and I never saw such happy manners! so much ease, with such perfect good breeding!” “Did not you? _I_ did for you. But that is one great difference between us. Compliments always take _you_ by surprise, and _me_ never. What could be more natural than his asking you again? He could not help seeing that you were about five times as pretty as every other woman in the room. No thanks to his gallantry for that. Well, he certainly is very agreeable, and I give you leave to like him. You have liked many a stupider person.” “Oh, you are a great deal too apt, you know, to like people in general. You never see a fault in anybody. All the world are good and agreeable in your eyes. I never heard you speak ill of a human being in my life.” “I know you do: and it is _that_ which makes the wonder. With _your_ good sense, to be so honestly blind to the follies and nonsense of others! Affectation of candour is common enough; one meets with it everywhere. But to be candid without ostentation or design,--to take the good of everybody’s character and make it still better, and say nothing of the bad,--belongs to you alone. And so, you like this man’s sisters, too, do you? Their manners are not equal to his.”

“Certainly not, at first; but they are very pleasing women when you converse with them. Miss Bingley is to live with her brother, and keep his house; and I am much mistaken if we shall not find a very charming neighbour in her.” Elizabeth listened in silence, but was not convinced: their behaviour at the assembly had not been calculated to please in general; and with more quickness of observation and less pliancy of temper than her sister, and with a judgment, too, unassailed by any attention to herself, she was very little disposed to approve them. They were, in fact, very fine ladies; not deficient in good-humour when they were pleased, nor in the power of being agreeable where they chose it; but proud and conceited. They were rather handsome; had been educated in one of the first private seminaries in town; had a fortune of twenty thousand pounds; were in the habit of spending more than they ought, and of associating with people of rank; and were, therefore, in every respect entitled to think well of themselves and meanly of others. They were of a respectable family in the north of England; a circumstance more deeply impressed on their memories than that their brother’s fortune and their own had been acquired by trade.

Mr. Bingley inherited property to the amount of nearly a hundred thousand pounds from his father, who had intended to purchase an estate, but did not live to do it. Mr. Bingley intended it likewise, and sometimes made choice of his county; but, as he was now provided with a good house and the liberty of a manor, it was doubtful to many of those who best knew the easiness of his temper, whether he might not spend the remainder of his days at Netherfield, and leave the next generation to purchase. His sisters were very anxious for his having an estate of his own; but though he was now established only as a tenant, Miss Bingley was by no means unwilling to preside at his table; nor was Mrs. Hurst, who had married a man of more fashion than fortune, less disposed to consider his house as her home when it suited her. Mr. Bingley had not been of age two years when he was tempted, by an accidental recommendation, to look at Netherfield House. He did look at it, and into it, for half an hour; was pleased with the situation and the principal rooms, satisfied with what the owner said in its praise, and took it immediately.

Between him and Darcy there was a very steady friendship, in spite of a great opposition of character. Bingley was endeared to Darcy by the easiness, openness, and ductility of his temper, though no disposition could offer a greater contrast to his own, and though with his own he never appeared dissatisfied. On the strength of Darcy’s regard, Bingley had the firmest reliance, and of his judgment the highest opinion. In understanding, Darcy was the superior. Bingley was by no means deficient; but Darcy was clever. He was at the same time haughty, reserved, and fastidious; and his manners, though well bred, were not inviting. In that respect his friend had greatly the advantage. Bingley was sure of being liked wherever he appeared; Darcy was continually giving offence. The manner in which they spoke of the Meryton assembly was sufficiently characteristic. Bingley had never met with pleasanter people or prettier girls in his life; everybody had been most kind and attentive to him; there had been no formality, no stiffness; he had soon felt acquainted with all the room; and as to Miss Bennet, he could not conceive an angel more beautiful. Darcy, on the contrary, had seen a collection of people in whom there was little beauty and no fashion, for none of whom he had felt the smallest interest, and from none received either attention or pleasure. Miss Bennet he acknowledged to be pretty; but she smiled too much.

Mrs. Hurst and her sister allowed it to be so; but still they admired her and liked her, and pronounced her to be a sweet girl, and one whom they should not object to know more of. Miss Bennet was therefore established as a sweet girl; and their brother felt authorized by such commendation to think of her as he chose. Within a short walk of Longbourn lived a family with whom the Bennets were particularly intimate. Sir William Lucas had been formerly in trade in Meryton, where he had made a tolerable fortune, and risen to the honour of knighthood by an address to the king during his mayoralty. The distinction had, perhaps, been felt too strongly. It had given him a disgust to his business and to his residence in a small market town; and, quitting them both, he had removed with his family to a house about a mile from Meryton, denominated from that period Lucas Lodge; where he could think with pleasure of his own importance, and, unshackled by business, occupy himself solely in being civil to all the world. For, though elated by his rank, it did not render him supercilious; on the contrary, he was all attention to everybody. By nature inoffensive, friendly, and obliging, his presentation at St. James’s had made him courteous.

Lady Lucas was a very good kind of woman, not too clever to be a valuable neighbour to Mrs. Bennet. They had several children. The eldest of them, a sensible, intelligent young woman, about twenty-seven, was Elizabeth’s intimate friend. That the Miss Lucases and the Miss Bennets should meet to talk over a ball was absolutely necessary; and the morning after the assembly brought the former to Longbourn to hear and to communicate. “Oh, you mean Jane, I suppose, because he danced with her twice. To be sure that _did_ seem as if he admired her--indeed, I rather believe he _did_--I heard something about it--but I hardly know what--something about Mr. Robinson.” “Perhaps you mean what I overheard between him and Mr. Robinson: did not I mention it to you? Mr. Robinson’s asking him how he liked our Meryton assemblies, and whether he did not think there were a great many pretty women in the room, and _which_ he thought the prettiest? and his answering immediately to the last question, ‘Oh, the eldest Miss Bennet, beyond a doubt: there cannot be two opinions on that point.’”

“_My_ overhearings were more to the purpose than _yours_, Eliza,” said Charlotte. “Mr. Darcy is not so well worth listening to as his friend, is he? Poor Eliza! to be only just _tolerable_.” “I beg you will not put it into Lizzy’s head to be vexed by his ill-treatment, for he is such a disagreeable man that it would be quite a misfortune to be liked by him. Mrs. Long told me last night that he sat close to her for half an hour without once opening his lips.” “Ay, because she asked him at last how he liked Netherfield, and he could not help answering her; but she said he seemed very angry at being spoke to.” “I do not believe a word of it, my dear. If he had been so very agreeable, he would have talked to Mrs. Long. But I can guess how it was; everybody says that he is eat up with pride, and I dare say he had heard somehow that Mrs. Long does not keep a carriage, and had to come to the ball in a hack chaise.”

“His pride,” said Miss Lucas, “does not offend _me_ so much as pride often does, because there is an excuse for it. One cannot wonder that so very fine a young man, with family, fortune, everything in his favour, should think highly of himself. If I may so express it, he has a _right_ to be proud.” “Pride,” observed Mary, who piqued herself upon the solidity of her reflections, “is a very common failing, I believe. By all that I have ever read, I am convinced that it is very common indeed; that human nature is particularly prone to it, and that there are very few of us who do not cherish a feeling of self-complacency on the score of some quality or other, real or imaginary. Vanity and pride are different things, though the words are often used synonymously. A person may be proud without being vain. Pride relates more to our opinion of ourselves; vanity to what we would have others think of us.” “If I were as rich as Mr. Darcy,” cried a young Lucas, who came with his sisters, “I should not care how proud I was. I would keep a pack of foxhounds, and drink a bottle of wine every day.”

The ladies of Longbourn soon waited on those of Netherfield. The visit was returned in due form. Miss Bennet’s pleasing manners grew on the good-will of Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley; and though the mother was found to be intolerable, and the younger sisters not worth speaking to, a wish of being better acquainted with _them_ was expressed towards the two eldest. By Jane this attention was received with the greatest pleasure; but Elizabeth still saw superciliousness in their treatment of everybody, hardly excepting even her sister, and could not like them; though their kindness to Jane, such as it was, had a value, as arising, in all probability, from the influence of their brother’s admiration. It was generally evident, whenever they met, that he _did_ admire her; and to _her_ it was equally evident that Jane was yielding to the preference which she had begun to entertain for him from the first, and was in a way to be very much in love; but she considered with pleasure that it was not likely to be discovered by the world in general, since Jane united with great strength of feeling, a composure of temper and an uniform cheerfulness of manner, which would guard her from the suspicions of the impertinent. She mentioned this to her friend, Miss Lucas.

“It may, perhaps, be pleasant,” replied Charlotte, “to be able to impose on the public in such a case; but it is sometimes a disadvantage to be so very guarded. If a woman conceals her affection with the same skill from the object of it, she may lose the opportunity of fixing him; and it will then be but poor consolation to believe the world equally in the dark. There is so much of gratitude or vanity in almost every attachment, that it is not safe to leave any to itself. We can all _begin_ freely--a slight preference is natural enough; but there are very few of us who have heart enough to be really in love without encouragement. In nine cases out of ten, a woman had better show _more_ affection than she feels. Bingley likes your sister undoubtedly; but he may never do more than like her, if she does not help him on.” “But she does help him on, as much as her nature will allow. If _I_ can perceive her regard for him, he must be a simpleton indeed not to discover it too.”

“Perhaps he must, if he sees enough of her. But though Bingley and Jane meet tolerably often, it is never for many hours together; and as they always see each other in large mixed parties, it is impossible that every moment should be employed in conversing together. Jane should therefore make the most of every half hour in which she can command his attention. When she is secure of him, there will be leisure for falling in love as much as she chooses.” “Your plan is a good one,” replied Elizabeth, “where nothing is in question but the desire of being well married; and if I were determined to get a rich husband, or any husband, I dare say I should adopt it. But these are not Jane’s feelings; she is not acting by design. As yet she cannot even be certain of the degree of her own regard, nor of its reasonableness. She has known him only a fortnight. She danced four dances with him at Meryton; she saw him one morning at his own house, and has since dined in company with him four times. This is not quite enough to make her understand his character.”

“Not as you represent it. Had she merely _dined_ with him, she might only have discovered whether he had a good appetite; but you must remember that four evenings have been also spent together--and four evenings may do a great deal.” “Yes: these four evenings have enabled them to ascertain that they both like Vingt-un better than Commerce, but with respect to any other leading characteristic, I do not imagine that much has been unfolded.” “Well,” said Charlotte, “I wish Jane success with all my heart; and if she were married to him to-morrow, I should think she had as good a chance of happiness as if she were to be studying his character for a twelvemonth. Happiness in marriage is entirely a matter of chance. If the dispositions of the parties are ever so well known to each other, or ever so similar beforehand, it does not advance their felicity in the least. They always continue to grow sufficiently unlike afterwards to have their share of vexation; and it is better to know as little as possible of the defects of the person with whom you are to pass your life.”

Occupied in observing Mr. Bingley’s attention to her sister, Elizabeth was far from suspecting that she was herself becoming an object of some interest in the eyes of his friend. Mr. Darcy had at first scarcely allowed her to be pretty: he had looked at her without admiration at the ball; and when they next met, he looked at her only to criticise. But no sooner had he made it clear to himself and his friends that she had hardly a good feature in her face, than he began to find it was rendered uncommonly intelligent by the beautiful expression of her dark eyes. To this discovery succeeded some others equally mortifying. Though he had detected with a critical eye more than one failure of perfect symmetry in her form, he was forced to acknowledge her figure to be light and pleasing; and in spite of his asserting that her manners were not those of the fashionable world, he was caught by their easy playfulness. Of this she was perfectly unaware: to her he was only the man who made himself agreeable nowhere, and who had not thought her handsome enough to dance with.

He began to wish to know more of her; and, as a step towards conversing with her himself, attended to her conversation with others. His doing so drew her notice. It was at Sir William Lucas’s, where a large party were assembled. “But if he does it any more, I shall certainly let him know that I see what he is about. He has a very satirical eye, and if I do not begin by being impertinent myself, I shall soon grow afraid of him.” On his approaching them soon afterwards, though without seeming to have any intention of speaking, Miss Lucas defied her friend to mention such a subject to him, which immediately provoking Elizabeth to do it, she turned to him and said,-- “You are a very strange creature by way of a friend!--always wanting me to play and sing before anybody and everybody! If my vanity had taken a musical turn, you would have been invaluable; but as it is, I would really rather not sit down before those who must be in the habit of hearing the very best performers.” On Miss Lucas’s persevering, however, she added, “Very well; if it must be so, it must.” And gravely glancing at Mr. Darcy, “There is a very fine old saying, which everybody here is of course familiar with--‘Keep your breath to cool your porridge,’--and I shall keep mine to swell my song.”

Her performance was pleasing, though by no means capital. After a song or two, and before she could reply to the entreaties of several that she would sing again, she was eagerly succeeded at the instrument by her sister Mary, who having, in consequence of being the only plain one in the family, worked hard for knowledge and accomplishments, was always impatient for display. Mary had neither genius nor taste; and though vanity had given her application, it had given her likewise a pedantic air and conceited manner, which would have injured a higher degree of excellence than she had reached. Elizabeth, easy and unaffected, had been listened to with much more pleasure, though not playing half so well; and Mary, at the end of a long concerto, was glad to purchase praise and gratitude by Scotch and Irish airs, at the request of her younger sisters, who with some of the Lucases, and two or three officers, joined eagerly in dancing at one end of the room. Mr. Darcy stood near them in silent indignation at such a mode of passing the evening, to the exclusion of all conversation, and was too much engrossed by his own thoughts to perceive that Sir William Lucas was his neighbour, till Sir William thus began:--

“What a charming amusement for young people this is, Mr. Darcy! There is nothing like dancing, after all. I consider it as one of the first refinements of polished societies.” Sir William only smiled. “Your friend performs delightfully,” he continued, after a pause, on seeing Bingley join the group; “and I doubt not that you are an adept in the science yourself, Mr. Darcy.” “I had once some thoughts of fixing in town myself, for I am fond of superior society; but I did not feel quite certain that the air of London would agree with Lady Lucas.” He paused in hopes of an answer: but his companion was not disposed to make any; and Elizabeth at that instant moving towards them, he was struck with the notion of doing a very gallant thing, and called out to her,-- “My dear Miss Eliza, why are not you dancing? Mr. Darcy, you must allow me to present this young lady to you as a very desirable partner. You cannot refuse to dance, I am sure, when so much beauty is before you.” And, taking her hand, he would have given it to Mr. Darcy, who, though extremely surprised, was not unwilling to receive it, when she instantly drew back, and said with some discomposure to Sir William,--

Mr. Darcy, with grave propriety, requested to be allowed the honour of her hand, but in vain. Elizabeth was determined; nor did Sir William at all shake her purpose by his attempt at persuasion. “You excel so much in the dance, Miss Eliza, that it is cruel to deny me the happiness of seeing you; and though this gentleman dislikes the amusement in general, he can have no objection, I am sure, to oblige us for one half hour.” Elizabeth looked archly, and turned away. Her resistance had not injured her with the gentleman, and he was thinking of her with some complacency, when thus accosted by Miss Bingley,-- “You are considering how insupportable it would be to pass many evenings in this manner,--in such society; and, indeed, I am quite of your opinion. I was never more annoyed! The insipidity, and yet the noise--the nothingness, and yet the self-importance, of all these people! What would I give to hear your strictures on them!” “Your conjecture is totally wrong, I assure you. My mind was more agreeably engaged. I have been meditating on the very great pleasure which a pair of fine eyes in the face of a pretty woman can bestow.”

Miss Bingley immediately fixed her eyes on his face, and desired he would tell her what lady had the credit of inspiring such reflections. Mr. Darcy replied, with great intrepidity,-- “That is exactly the question which I expected you to ask. A lady’s imagination is very rapid; it jumps from admiration to love, from love to matrimony, in a moment. I knew you would be wishing me joy.” “Nay, if you are so serious about it, I shall consider the matter as absolutely settled. You will have a charming mother-in-law, indeed, and of course she will be always at Pemberley with you.” He listened to her with perfect indifference, while she chose to entertain herself in this manner; and as his composure convinced her that all was safe, her wit flowed along. Mr. Bennet’s property consisted almost entirely in an estate of two thousand a year, which, unfortunately for his daughters, was entailed, in default of heirs male, on a distant relation; and their mother’s fortune, though ample for her situation in life, could but ill supply the deficiency of his. Her father had been an attorney in Meryton, and had left her four thousand pounds.

She had a sister married to a Mr. Philips, who had been a clerk to their father and succeeded him in the business, and a brother settled in London in a respectable line of trade. The village of Longbourn was only one mile from Meryton; a most convenient distance for the young ladies, who were usually tempted thither three or four times a week, to pay their duty to their aunt, and to a milliner’s shop just over the way. The two youngest of the family, Catherine and Lydia, were particularly frequent in these attentions: their minds were more vacant than their sisters’, and when nothing better offered, a walk to Meryton was necessary to amuse their morning hours and furnish conversation for the evening; and, however bare of news the country in general might be, they always contrived to learn some from their aunt. At present, indeed, they were well supplied both with news and happiness by the recent arrival of a militia regiment in the neighbourhood; it was to remain the whole winter, and Meryton was the head-quarters.

Their visits to Mrs. Philips were now productive of the most interesting intelligence. Every day added something to their knowledge of the officers’ names and connections. Their lodgings were not long a secret, and at length they began to know the officers themselves. Mr. Philips visited them all, and this opened to his nieces a source of felicity unknown before. They could talk of nothing but officers; and Mr. Bingley’s large fortune, the mention of which gave animation to their mother, was worthless in their eyes when opposed to the regimentals of an ensign. “From all that I can collect by your manner of talking, you must be two of the silliest girls in the country. I have suspected it some time, but I am now convinced.” Catherine was disconcerted, and made no answer; but Lydia, with perfect indifference, continued to express her admiration of Captain Carter, and her hope of seeing him in the course of the day, as he was going the next morning to London. “I am astonished, my dear,” said Mrs. Bennet, “that you should be so ready to think your own children silly. If I wished to think slightingly of anybody’s children, it should not be of my own, however.”

“This is the only point, I flatter myself, on which we do not agree. I had hoped that our sentiments coincided in every particular, but I must so far differ from you as to think our two youngest daughters uncommonly foolish.” “My dear Mr. Bennet, you must not expect such girls to have the sense of their father and mother. When they get to our age, I dare say they will not think about officers any more than we do. I remember the time when I liked a red coat myself very well--and, indeed, so I do still at my heart; and if a smart young colonel, with five or six thousand a year, should want one of my girls, I shall not say nay to him; and I thought Colonel Forster looked very becoming the other night at Sir William’s in his regimentals.” “Mamma,” cried Lydia, “my aunt says that Colonel Forster and Captain Carter do not go so often to Miss Watson’s as they did when they first came; she sees them now very often standing in Clarke’s library.”

Mrs. Bennet was prevented replying by the entrance of the footman with a note for Miss Bennet; it came from Netherfield, and the servant waited for an answer. Mrs. Bennet’s eyes sparkled with pleasure, and she was eagerly calling out, while her daughter read,-- “If you are not so compassionate as to dine to-day with Louisa and me, we shall be in danger of hating each other for the rest of our lives; for a whole day’s _tête-à-tête_ between two women can never end without a quarrel. Come as soon as you can on the receipt of this. My brother and the gentlemen are to dine with the officers. Yours ever, She did at last extort from her father an acknowledgment that the horses were engaged; Jane was therefore obliged to go on horseback, and her mother attended her to the door with many cheerful prognostics of a bad day. Her hopes were answered; Jane had not been gone long before it rained hard. Her sisters were uneasy for her, but her mother was delighted. The rain continued the whole evening without intermission; Jane certainly could not come back.

“This was a lucky idea of mine, indeed!” said Mrs. Bennet, more than once, as if the credit of making it rain were all her own. Till the next morning, however, she was not aware of all the felicity of her contrivance. Breakfast was scarcely over when a servant from Netherfield brought the following note for Elizabeth:-- “I find myself very unwell this morning, which, I suppose, is to be imputed to my getting wet through yesterday. My kind friends will not hear of my returning home till I am better. They insist also on my seeing Mr. Jones--therefore do not be alarmed if you should hear of his having been to me--and, excepting a sore throat and a headache, there is not much the matter with me. “Well, my dear,” said Mr. Bennet, when Elizabeth had read the note aloud, “if your daughter should have a dangerous fit of illness--if she should die--it would be a comfort to know that it was all in pursuit of Mr. Bingley, and under your orders.” “Oh, I am not at all afraid of her dying. People do not die of little trifling colds. She will be taken good care of. As long as she stays there, it is all very well. I would go and see her if I could have the carriage.”

Elizabeth, feeling really anxious, determined to go to her, though the carriage was not to be had: and as she was no horsewoman, walking was her only alternative. She declared her resolution. “I admire the activity of your benevolence,” observed Mary, “but every impulse of feeling should be guided by reason; and, in my opinion, exertion should always be in proportion to what is required.” In Meryton they parted: the two youngest repaired to the lodgings of one of the officers’ wives, and Elizabeth continued her walk alone, crossing field after field at a quick pace, jumping over stiles and springing over puddles, with impatient activity, and finding herself at last within view of the house, with weary ancles, dirty stockings, and a face glowing with the warmth of exercise. She was shown into the breakfast parlour, where all but Jane were assembled, and where her appearance created a great deal of surprise. That she should have walked three miles so early in the day in such dirty weather, and by herself, was almost incredible to Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley; and Elizabeth was convinced that they held her in contempt for it. She was received, however, very politely by them; and in their brother’s manners there was something better than politeness--there was good-humour and kindness. Mr. Darcy said very little, and Mr. Hurst nothing at all. The former was divided between admiration of the brilliancy which exercise had given to her complexion and doubt as to the occasion’s justifying her coming so far alone. The latter was thinking only of his breakfast.

Her inquiries after her sister were not very favourably answered. Miss Bennet had slept ill, and though up, was very feverish, and not well enough to leave her room. Elizabeth was glad to be taken to her immediately; and Jane, who had only been withheld by the fear of giving alarm or inconvenience, from expressing in her note how much she longed for such a visit, was delighted at her entrance. She was not equal, however, to much conversation; and when Miss Bingley left them together, could attempt little beside expressions of gratitude for the extraordinary kindness she was treated with. Elizabeth silently attended her. When breakfast was over, they were joined by the sisters; and Elizabeth began to like them herself, when she saw how much affection and solicitude they showed for Jane. The apothecary came; and having examined his patient, said, as might be supposed, that she had caught a violent cold, and that they must endeavour to get the better of it; advised her to return to bed, and promised her some draughts. The advice was followed readily, for the feverish symptoms increased, and her head ached acutely. Elizabeth did not quit her room for a moment, nor were the other ladies often absent; the gentlemen being out, they had in fact nothing to do elsewhere.

When the clock struck three, Elizabeth felt that she must go, and very unwillingly said so. Miss Bingley offered her the carriage, and she only wanted a little pressing to accept it, when Jane testified such concern at parting with her that Miss Bingley was obliged to convert the offer of the chaise into an invitation to remain at Netherfield for the present. Elizabeth most thankfully consented, and a servant was despatched to Longbourn, to acquaint the family with her stay, and bring back a supply of clothes. At five o’clock the two ladies retired to dress, and at half-past six Elizabeth was summoned to dinner. To the civil inquiries which then poured in, and amongst which she had the pleasure of distinguishing the much superior solicitude of Mr. Bingley, she could not make a very favourable answer. Jane was by no means better. The sisters, on hearing this, repeated three or four times how much they were grieved, how shocking it was to have a bad cold, and how excessively they disliked being ill themselves; and then thought no more of the matter: and their indifference towards Jane, when not immediately before them, restored Elizabeth to the enjoyment of all her original dislike.

Their brother, indeed, was the only one of the party whom she could regard with any complacency. His anxiety for Jane was evident, and his attentions to herself most pleasing; and they prevented her feeling herself so much an intruder as she believed she was considered by the others. She had very little notice from any but him. Miss Bingley was engrossed by Mr. Darcy, her sister scarcely less so; and as for Mr. Hurst, by whom Elizabeth sat, he was an indolent man, who lived only to eat, drink, and play at cards, who, when he found her prefer a plain dish to a ragout, had nothing to say to her. When dinner was over, she returned directly to Jane, and Miss Bingley began abusing her as soon as she was out of the room. Her manners were pronounced to be very bad indeed,--a mixture of pride and impertinence: she had no conversation, no style, no taste, no beauty. Mrs. Hurst thought the same, and added,-- “She has nothing, in short, to recommend her, but being an excellent walker. I shall never forget her appearance this morning. She really looked almost wild.”

“She did indeed, Louisa. I could hardly keep my countenance. Very nonsensical to come at all! Why must _she_ be scampering about the country, because her sister had a cold? Her hair so untidy, so blowzy!” “Yes, and her petticoat; I hope you saw her petticoat, six inches deep in mud, I am absolutely certain, and the gown which had been let down to hide it not doing its office.” “Your picture may be very exact, Louisa,” said Bingley; “but this was all lost upon me. I thought Miss Elizabeth Bennet looked remarkably well when she came into the room this morning. Her dirty petticoat quite escaped my notice.” “_You_ observed it, Mr. Darcy, I am sure,” said Miss Bingley; “and I am inclined to think that you would not wish to see _your sister_ make such an exhibition.” “To walk three miles, or four miles, or five miles, or whatever it is, above her ancles in dirt, and alone, quite alone! what could she mean by it? It seems to me to show an abominable sort of conceited independence, a most country-town indifference to decorum.”

“I have an excessive regard for Jane Bennet,--she is really a very sweet girl,--and I wish with all my heart she were well settled. But with such a father and mother, and such low connections, I am afraid there is no chance of it.” To this speech Bingley made no answer; but his sisters gave it their hearty assent, and indulged their mirth for some time at the expense of their dear friend’s vulgar relations. With a renewal of tenderness, however, they repaired to her room on leaving the dining-parlour, and sat with her till summoned to coffee. She was still very poorly, and Elizabeth would not quit her at all, till late in the evening, when she had the comfort of seeing her asleep, and when it appeared to her rather right than pleasant that she should go down stairs herself. On entering the drawing-room, she found the whole party at loo, and was immediately invited to join them; but suspecting them to be playing high, she declined it, and making her sister the excuse, said she would amuse herself, for the short time she could stay below, with a book. Mr. Hurst looked at her with astonishment.

Elizabeth thanked him from her heart, and then walked towards a table where a few books were lying. He immediately offered to fetch her others; all that his library afforded. “And I wish my collection were larger for your benefit and my own credit; but I am an idle fellow; and though I have not many, I have more than I ever looked into.” “I am astonished,” said Miss Bingley, “that my father should have left so small a collection of books. What a delightful library you have at Pemberley, Mr. Darcy!” “Neglect! I am sure you neglect nothing that can add to the beauties of that noble place. Charles, when you build _your_ house, I wish it may be half as delightful as Pemberley.” “But I would really advise you to make your purchase in that neighbourhood, and take Pemberley for a kind of model. There is not a finer county in England than Derbyshire.” Elizabeth was so much caught by what passed, as to leave her very little attention for her book; and, soon laying it wholly aside, she drew near the card-table, and stationed herself between Mr. Bingley and his eldest sister, to observe the game.

“How I long to see her again! I never met with anybody who delighted me so much. Such a countenance, such manners, and so extremely accomplished for her age! Her performance on the pianoforte is exquisite.” “Yes, all of them, I think. They all paint tables, cover screens, and net purses. I scarcely know any one who cannot do all this; and I am sure I never heard a young lady spoken of for the first time, without being informed that she was very accomplished.” “Your list of the common extent of accomplishments,” said Darcy, “has too much truth. The word is applied to many a woman who deserves it no otherwise than by netting a purse or covering a screen; but I am very far from agreeing with you in your estimation of ladies in general. I cannot boast of knowing more than half-a-dozen in the whole range of my acquaintance that are really accomplished.” “Oh, certainly,” cried his faithful assistant, “no one can be really esteemed accomplished who does not greatly surpass what is usually met with. A woman must have a thorough knowledge of music, singing, drawing, dancing, and the modern languages, to deserve the word; and, besides all this, she must possess a certain something in her air and manner of walking, the tone of her voice, her address and expressions, or the word will be but half deserved.”

“All this she must possess,” added Darcy; “and to all she must yet add something more substantial in the improvement of her mind by extensive reading.” Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley both cried out against the injustice of her implied doubt, and were both protesting that they knew many women who answered this description, when Mr. Hurst called them to order, with bitter complaints of their inattention to what was going forward. As all conversation was thereby at an end, Elizabeth soon afterwards left the room. “Eliza Bennet,” said Miss Bingley, when the door was closed on her, “is one of those young ladies who seek to recommend themselves to the other sex by undervaluing their own; and with many men, I daresay, it succeeds; but, in my opinion, it is a paltry device, a very mean art.” “Undoubtedly,” replied Darcy, to whom this remark was chiefly addressed, “there is meanness in _all_ the arts which ladies sometimes condescend to employ for captivation. Whatever bears affinity to cunning is despicable.” Elizabeth joined them again only to say that her sister was worse, and that she could not leave her. Bingley urged Mr. Jones’s being sent for immediately; while his sisters, convinced that no country advice could be of any service, recommended an express to town for one of the most eminent physicians. This she would not hear of; but she was not so unwilling to comply with their brother’s proposal; and it was settled that Mr. Jones should be sent for early in the morning, if Miss Bennet were not decidedly better. Bingley was quite uncomfortable; his sisters declared that they were miserable. They solaced their wretchedness, however, by duets after supper; while he could find no better relief to his feelings than by giving his housekeeper directions that every possible attention might be paid to the sick lady and her sister.

Elizabeth passed the chief of the night in her sister’s room, and in the morning had the pleasure of being able to send a tolerable answer to the inquiries which she very early received from Mr. Bingley by a housemaid, and some time afterwards from the two elegant ladies who waited on his sisters. In spite of this amendment, however, she requested to have a note sent to Longbourn, desiring her mother to visit Jane, and form her own judgment of her situation. The note was immediately despatched, and its contents as quickly complied with. Mrs. Bennet, accompanied by her two youngest girls, reached Netherfield soon after the family breakfast. Had she found Jane in any apparent danger, Mrs. Bennet would have been very miserable; but being satisfied on seeing her that her illness was not alarming, she had no wish of her recovering immediately, as her restoration to health would probably remove her from Netherfield. She would not listen, therefore, to her daughter’s proposal of being carried home; neither did the apothecary, who arrived about the same time, think it at all advisable. After sitting a little while with Jane, on Miss Bingley’s appearance and invitation, the mother and three daughters all attended her into the breakfast parlour. Bingley met them with hopes that Mrs. Bennet had not found Miss Bennet worse than she expected.

“Indeed I have, sir,” was her answer. “She is a great deal too ill to be moved. Mr. Jones says we must not think of moving her. We must trespass a little longer on your kindness.” “You may depend upon it, madam,” said Miss Bingley, with cold civility, “that Miss Bennet shall receive every possible attention while she remains with us.” “I am sure,” she added, “if it was not for such good friends, I do not know what would become of her, for she is very ill indeed, and suffers a vast deal, though with the greatest patience in the world, which is always the way with her, for she has, without exception, the sweetest temper I ever met with. I often tell my other girls they are nothing to _her_. You have a sweet room here, Mr. Bingley, and a charming prospect over that gravel walk. I do not know a place in the country that is equal to Netherfield. You will not think of quitting it in a hurry, I hope, though you have but a short lease.”

“Whatever I do is done in a hurry,” replied he; “and therefore if I should resolve to quit Netherfield, I should probably be off in five minutes. At present, however, I consider myself as quite fixed here.” “The country,” said Darcy, “can in general supply but few subjects for such a study. In a country neighbourhood you move in a very confined and unvarying society.” “Yes, indeed,” cried Mrs. Bennet, offended by his manner of mentioning a country neighbourhood. “I assure you there is quite as much of _that_ going on in the country as in town.” Everybody was surprised; and Darcy, after looking at her for a moment, turned silently away. Mrs. Bennet, who fancied she had gained a complete victory over him, continued her triumph,-- “I cannot see that London has any great advantage over the country, for my part, except the shops and public places. The country is a vast deal pleasanter, is not it, Mr. Bingley?” “When I am in the country,” he replied, “I never wish to leave it; and when I am in town, it is pretty much the same. They have each their advantages, and I can be equally happy in either.”

“Indeed, mamma, you are mistaken,” said Elizabeth, blushing for her mother. “You quite mistook Mr. Darcy. He only meant that there was not such a variety of people to be met with in the country as in town, which you must acknowledge to be true.” “Certainly, my dear, nobody said there were; but as to not meeting with many people in this neighbourhood, I believe there are few neighbourhoods larger. I know we dine with four-and-twenty families.” Nothing but concern for Elizabeth could enable Bingley to keep his countenance. His sister was less delicate, and directed her eye towards Mr. Darcy with a very expressive smile. Elizabeth, for the sake of saying something that might turn her mother’s thoughts, now asked her if Charlotte Lucas had been at Longbourn since _her_ coming away. “Yes, she called yesterday with her father. What an agreeable man Sir William is, Mr. Bingley--is not he? so much the man of fashion! so genteel and so easy! He has always something to say to everybody. _That_ is my idea of good breeding; and those persons who fancy themselves very important and never open their mouths quite mistake the matter.”

“No, she would go home. I fancy she was wanted about the mince-pies. For my part, Mr. Bingley, _I_ always keep servants that can do their own work; _my_ daughters are brought up differently. But everybody is to judge for themselves, and the Lucases are a very good sort of girls, I assure you. It is a pity they are not handsome! Not that _I_ think Charlotte so _very_ plain; but then she is our particular friend.” “Oh dear, yes; but you must own she is very plain. Lady Lucas herself has often said so, and envied me Jane’s beauty. I do not like to boast of my own child; but to be sure, Jane--one does not often see anybody better looking. It is what everybody says. I do not trust my own partiality. When she was only fifteen there was a gentleman at my brother Gardiner’s in town so much in love with her, that my sister-in-law was sure he would make her an offer before we came away. But, however, he did not. Perhaps he thought her too young. However, he wrote some verses on her, and very pretty they were.”

“And so ended his affection,” said Elizabeth, impatiently. “There has been many a one, I fancy, overcome in the same way. I wonder who first discovered the efficacy of poetry in driving away love!” “Of a fine, stout, healthy love it may. Everything nourishes what is strong already. But if it be only a slight, thin sort of inclination, I am convinced that one good sonnet will starve it entirely away.” Darcy only smiled; and the general pause which ensued made Elizabeth tremble lest her mother should be exposing herself again. She longed to speak, but could think of nothing to say; and after a short silence Mrs. Bennet began repeating her thanks to Mr. Bingley for his kindness to Jane, with an apology for troubling him also with Lizzy. Mr. Bingley was unaffectedly civil in his answer, and forced his younger sister to be civil also, and say what the occasion required. She performed her part, indeed, without much graciousness, but Mrs. Bennet was satisfied, and soon afterwards ordered her carriage. Upon this signal, the youngest of her daughters put herself forward. The two girls had been whispering to each other during the whole visit; and the result of it was, that the youngest should tax Mr. Bingley with having promised on his first coming into the country to give a ball at Netherfield.

Lydia was a stout, well-grown girl of fifteen, with a fine complexion and good-humoured countenance; a favourite with her mother, whose affection had brought her into public at an early age. She had high animal spirits, and a sort of natural self-consequence, which the attentions of the officers, to whom her uncle’s good dinners and her own easy manners recommended her, had increased into assurance. She was very equal, therefore, to address Mr. Bingley on the subject of the ball, and abruptly reminded him of his promise; adding, that it would be the most shameful thing in the world if he did not keep it. His answer to this sudden attack was delightful to her mother’s ear. “I am perfectly ready, I assure you, to keep my engagement; and, when your sister is recovered, you shall, if you please, name the very day of the ball. But you would not wish to be dancing while she is ill?” Lydia declared herself satisfied. “Oh yes--it would be much better to wait till Jane was well; and by that time, most likely, Captain Carter would be at Meryton again. And when you have given _your_ ball,” she added, “I shall insist on their giving one also. I shall tell Colonel Forster it will be quite a shame if he does not.”

Mrs. Bennet and her daughters then departed, and Elizabeth returned instantly to Jane, leaving her own and her relations’ behaviour to the remarks of the two ladies and Mr. Darcy; the latter of whom, however, could not be prevailed on to join in their censure of _her_, in spite of all Miss Bingley’s witticisms on _fine eyes_. The day passed much as the day before had done. Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley had spent some hours of the morning with the invalid, who continued, though slowly, to mend; and, in the evening, Elizabeth joined their party in the drawing-room. The loo table, however, did not appear. Mr. Darcy was writing, and Miss Bingley, seated near him, was watching the progress of his letter, and repeatedly calling off his attention by messages to his sister. Mr. Hurst and Mr. Bingley were at piquet, and Mrs. Hurst was observing their game. Elizabeth took up some needlework, and was sufficiently amused in attending to what passed between Darcy and his companion. The perpetual commendations of the lady either on his hand-writing, or on the evenness of his lines, or on the length of his letter, with the perfect unconcern with which her praises were received, formed a curious dialogue, and was exactly in unison with her opinion of each.

“Tell your sister I am delighted to hear of her improvement on the harp, and pray let her know that I am quite in raptures with her beautiful little design for a table, and I think it infinitely superior to Miss Grantley’s.” “That will not do for a compliment to Darcy, Caroline,” cried her brother, “because he does _not_ write with ease. He studies too much for words of four syllables. Do not you, Darcy?” “Nothing is more deceitful,” said Darcy, “than the appearance of humility. It is often only carelessness of opinion, and sometimes an indirect boast.” “The indirect boast; for you are really proud of your defects in writing, because you consider them as proceeding from a rapidity of thought and carelessness of execution, which, if not estimable, you think at least highly interesting. The power of doing anything with quickness is always much prized by the possessor, and often without any attention to the imperfection of the performance. When you told Mrs. Bennet this morning, that if you ever resolved on quitting Netherfield you should be gone in five minutes, you meant it to be a sort of panegyric, of compliment to yourself; and yet what is there so very laudable in a precipitance which must leave very necessary business undone, and can be of no real advantage to yourself or anyone else?”

“Nay,” cried Bingley, “this is too much, to remember at night all the foolish things that were said in the morning. And yet, upon my honour, I believed what I said of myself to be true, and I believe it at this moment. At least, therefore, I did not assume the character of needless precipitance merely to show off before the ladies.” “I daresay you believed it; but I am by no means convinced that you would be gone with such celerity. Your conduct would be quite as dependent on chance as that of any man I know; and if, as you were mounting your horse, a friend were to say, ‘Bingley, you had better stay till next week,’ you would probably do it--you would probably not go--and, at another word, might stay a month.” “You have only proved by this,” cried Elizabeth, “that Mr. Bingley did not do justice to his own disposition. You have shown him off now much more than he did himself.” “I am exceedingly gratified,” said Bingley, “by your converting what my friend says into a compliment on the sweetness of my temper. But I am afraid you are giving it a turn which that gentleman did by no means intend; for he would certainly think the better of me if, under such a circumstance, I were to give a flat denial, and ride off as fast as I could.”

“You expect me to account for opinions which you choose to call mine, but which I have never acknowledged. Allowing the case, however, to stand according to your representation, you must remember, Miss Bennet, that the friend who is supposed to desire his return to the house, and the delay of his plan, has merely desired it, asked it without offering one argument in favour of its propriety.” “You appear to me, Mr. Darcy, to allow nothing for the influence of friendship and affection. A regard for the requester would often make one readily yield to a request, without waiting for arguments to reason one into it. I am not particularly speaking of such a case as you have supposed about Mr. Bingley. We may as well wait, perhaps, till the circumstance occurs, before we discuss the discretion of his behaviour thereupon. But in general and ordinary cases, between friend and friend, where one of them is desired by the other to change a resolution of no very great moment, should you think ill of that person for complying with the desire, without waiting to be argued into it?”

“Will it not be advisable, before we proceed on this subject, to arrange with rather more precision the degree of importance which is to appertain to this request, as well as the degree of intimacy subsisting between the parties?” “By all means,” cried Bingley; “let us hear all the particulars, not forgetting their comparative height and size, for that will have more weight in the argument, Miss Bennet, than you may be aware of. I assure you that if Darcy were not such a great tall fellow, in comparison with myself, I should not pay him half so much deference. I declare I do not know a more awful object than Darcy on particular occasions, and in particular places; at his own house especially, and of a Sunday evening, when he has nothing to do.” Mr. Darcy smiled; but Elizabeth thought she could perceive that he was rather offended, and therefore checked her laugh. Miss Bingley warmly resented the indignity he had received, in an expostulation with her brother for talking such nonsense. “Perhaps I do. Arguments are too much like disputes. If you and Miss Bennet will defer yours till I am out of the room, I shall be very thankful; and then you may say whatever you like of me.”

When that business was over, he applied to Miss Bingley and Elizabeth for the indulgence of some music. Miss Bingley moved with alacrity to the pianoforte, and after a polite request that Elizabeth would lead the way, which the other as politely and more earnestly negatived, she seated herself. Mrs. Hurst sang with her sister; and while they were thus employed, Elizabeth could not help observing, as she turned over some music-books that lay on the instrument, how frequently Mr. Darcy’s eyes were fixed on her. She hardly knew how to suppose that she could be an object of admiration to so great a man, and yet that he should look at her because he disliked her was still more strange. She could only imagine, however, at last, that she drew his notice because there was something about her more wrong and reprehensible, according to his ideas of right, than in any other person present. The supposition did not pain her. She liked him too little to care for his approbation. After playing some Italian songs, Miss Bingley varied the charm by a lively Scotch air; and soon afterwards Mr. Darcy, drawing near Elizabeth, said to her,--

“Oh,” said she, “I heard you before; but I could not immediately determine what to say in reply. You wanted me, I know, to say ‘Yes,’ that you might have the pleasure of despising my taste; but I always delight in overthrowing those kind of schemes, and cheating a person of their premeditated contempt. I have, therefore, made up my mind to tell you that I do not want to dance a reel at all; and now despise me if you dare.” Elizabeth, having rather expected to affront him, was amazed at his gallantry; but there was a mixture of sweetness and archness in her manner which made it difficult for her to affront anybody, and Darcy had never been so bewitched by any woman as he was by her. He really believed that, were it not for the inferiority of her connections, he should be in some danger. Miss Bingley saw, or suspected, enough to be jealous; and her great anxiety for the recovery of her dear friend Jane received some assistance from her desire of getting rid of Elizabeth.

“I hope,” said she, as they were walking together in the shrubbery the next day, “you will give your mother-in-law a few hints, when this desirable event takes place, as to the advantage of holding her tongue; and if you can compass it, to cure the younger girls of running after the officers. And, if I may mention so delicate a subject, endeavour to check that little something, bordering on conceit and impertinence, which your lady possesses.” “Oh yes. Do let the portraits of your uncle and aunt Philips be placed in the gallery at Pemberley. Put them next to your great-uncle the judge. They are in the same profession, you know, only in different lines. As for your Elizabeth’s picture, you must not attempt to have it taken, for what painter could do justice to those beautiful eyes?” Then taking the disengaged arm of Mr. Darcy, she left Elizabeth to walk by herself. The path just admitted three. Mr. Darcy felt their rudeness, and immediately said,-- “No, no; stay where you are. You are charmingly grouped, and appear to uncommon advantage. The picturesque would be spoilt by admitting a fourth. Good-bye.”

She then ran gaily off, rejoicing, as she rambled about, in the hope of being at home again in a day or two. Jane was already so much recovered as to intend leaving her room for a couple of hours that evening. When the ladies removed after dinner Elizabeth ran up to her sister, and seeing her well guarded from cold, attended her into the drawing-room, where she was welcomed by her two friends with many professions of pleasure; and Elizabeth had never seen them so agreeable as they were during the hour which passed before the gentlemen appeared. Their powers of conversation were considerable. They could describe an entertainment with accuracy, relate an anecdote with humour, and laugh at their acquaintance with spirit. But when the gentlemen entered, Jane was no longer the first object; Miss Bingley’s eyes were instantly turned towards Darcy, and she had something to say to him before he had advanced many steps. He addressed himself directly to Miss Bennet with a polite congratulation; Mr. Hurst also made her a slight bow, and said he was “very glad;” but diffuseness and warmth remained for Bingley’s salutation. He was full of joy and attention. The first half hour was spent in piling up the fire, lest she should suffer from the change of room; and she removed, at his desire, to the other side of the fireplace, that she might be farther from the door. He then sat down by her, and talked scarcely to anyone else. Elizabeth, at work in the opposite corner, saw it all with great delight.

When tea was over Mr. Hurst reminded his sister-in-law of the card-table--but in vain. She had obtained private intelligence that Mr. Darcy did not wish for cards, and Mr. Hurst soon found even his open petition rejected. She assured him that no one intended to play, and the silence of the whole party on the subject seemed to justify her. Mr. Hurst had, therefore, nothing to do but to stretch himself on one of the sofas and go to sleep. Darcy took up a book. Miss Bingley did the same; and Mrs. Hurst, principally occupied in playing with her bracelets and rings, joined now and then in her brother’s conversation with Miss Bennet. Miss Bingley’s attention was quite as much engaged in watching Mr. Darcy’s progress through _his_ book, as in reading her own; and she was perpetually either making some inquiry, or looking at his page. She could not win him, however, to any conversation; he merely answered her question and read on. At length, quite exhausted by the attempt to be amused with her own book, which she had only chosen because it was the second volume of his, she gave a great yawn and said, “How pleasant it is to spend an evening in this way! I declare, after all, there is no enjoyment like reading! How much sooner one tires of anything than of a book! When I have a house of my own, I shall be miserable if I have not an excellent library.”

No one made any reply. She then yawned again, threw aside her book, and cast her eyes round the room in quest of some amusement; when, hearing her brother mentioning a ball to Miss Bennet, she turned suddenly towards him and said,-- “By the bye Charles, are you really serious in meditating a dance at Netherfield? I would advise you, before you determine on it, to consult the wishes of the present party; I am much mistaken if there are not some among us to whom a ball would be rather a punishment than a pleasure.” “If you mean Darcy,” cried her brother, “he may go to bed, if he chooses, before it begins; but as for the ball, it is quite a settled thing, and as soon as Nicholls has made white soup enough I shall send round my cards.” “I should like balls infinitely better,” she replied, “if they were carried on in a different manner; but there is something insufferably tedious in the usual process of such a meeting. It would surely be much more rational if conversation instead of dancing made the order of the day.”

Miss Bingley made no answer, and soon afterwards got up and walked about the room. Her figure was elegant, and she walked well; but Darcy, at whom it was all aimed, was still inflexibly studious. In the desperation of her feelings, she resolved on one effort more; and, turning to Elizabeth, said,-- “Miss Eliza Bennet, let me persuade you to follow my example, and take a turn about the room. I assure you it is very refreshing after sitting so long in one attitude.” Elizabeth was surprised, but agreed to it immediately. Miss Bingley succeeded no less in the real object of her civility: Mr. Darcy looked up. He was as much awake to the novelty of attention in that quarter as Elizabeth herself could be, and unconsciously closed his book. He was directly invited to join their party, but he declined it, observing that he could imagine but two motives for their choosing to walk up and down the room together, with either of which motives his joining them would interfere. What could he mean? She was dying to know what could be his meaning--and asked Elizabeth whether she could at all understand him.

“Not at all,” was her answer; “but, depend upon it, he means to be severe on us, and our surest way of disappointing him will be to ask nothing about it.” Miss Bingley, however, was incapable of disappointing Mr. Darcy in anything, and persevered, therefore, in requiring an explanation of his two motives. “I have not the smallest objection to explaining them,” said he, as soon as she allowed him to speak. “You either choose this method of passing the evening because you are in each other’s confidence, and have secret affairs to discuss, or because you are conscious that your figures appear to the greatest advantage in walking: if the first, I should be completely in your way; and if the second, I can admire you much better as I sit by the fire.” “Nothing so easy, if you have but the inclination,” said Elizabeth. “We can all plague and punish one another. Tease him--laugh at him. Intimate as you are, you must know how it is to be done.” “But upon my honour I do _not_. I do assure you that my intimacy has not yet taught me _that_. Tease calmness of temper and presence of mind! No, no; I feel he may defy us there. And as to laughter, we will not expose ourselves, if you please, by attempting to laugh without a subject. Mr. Darcy may hug himself.”

“Mr. Darcy is not to be laughed at!” cried Elizabeth. “That is an uncommon advantage, and uncommon I hope it will continue, for it would be a great loss to _me_ to have many such acquaintance. I dearly love a laugh.” “Miss Bingley,” said he, “has given me credit for more than can be. The wisest and best of men,--nay, the wisest and best of their actions,--may be rendered ridiculous by a person whose first object in life is a joke.” “Certainly,” replied Elizabeth, “there are such people, but I hope I am not one of _them_. I hope I never ridicule what is wise or good. Follies and nonsense, whims and inconsistencies, _do_ divert me, I own, and I laugh at them whenever I can. But these, I suppose, are precisely what you are without.” “Perhaps that is not possible for anyone. But it has been the study of my life to avoid those weaknesses which often expose a strong understanding to ridicule.” “No,” said Darcy, “I have made no such pretension. I have faults enough, but they are not, I hope, of understanding. My temper I dare not vouch for. It is, I believe, too little yielding; certainly too little for the convenience of the world. I cannot forget the follies and vices of others so soon as I ought, nor their offences against myself. My feelings are not puffed about with every attempt to move them. My temper would perhaps be called resentful. My good opinion once lost is lost for ever.”

“_That_ is a failing, indeed!” cried Elizabeth. “Implacable resentment _is_ a shade in a character. But you have chosen your fault well. I really cannot _laugh_ at it. You are safe from me.” “Do let us have a little music,” cried Miss Bingley, tired of a conversation in which she had no share. “Louisa, you will not mind my waking Mr. Hurst.” Her sister made not the smallest objection, and the pianoforte was opened; and Darcy, after a few moments’ recollection, was not sorry for it. He began to feel the danger of paying Elizabeth too much attention. In consequence of an agreement between the sisters, Elizabeth wrote the next morning to her mother, to beg that the carriage might be sent for them in the course of the day. But Mrs. Bennet, who had calculated on her daughters remaining at Netherfield till the following Tuesday, which would exactly finish Jane’s week, could not bring herself to receive them with pleasure before. Her answer, therefore, was not propitious, at least not to Elizabeth’s wishes, for she was impatient to get home. Mrs. Bennet sent them word that they could not possibly have the carriage before Tuesday; and in her postscript it was added, that if Mr. Bingley and his sister pressed them to stay longer, she could spare them very well. Against staying longer, however, Elizabeth was positively resolved--nor did she much expect it would be asked; and fearful, on the contrary, of being considered as intruding themselves needlessly long, she urged Jane to borrow Mr. Bingley’s carriage immediately, and at length it was settled that their original design of leaving Netherfield that morning should be mentioned, and the request made.

The communication excited many professions of concern; and enough was said of wishing them to stay at least till the following day to work on Jane; and till the morrow their going was deferred. Miss Bingley was then sorry that she had proposed the delay; for her jealousy and dislike of one sister much exceeded her affection for the other. The master of the house heard with real sorrow that they were to go so soon, and repeatedly tried to persuade Miss Bennet that it would not be safe for her--that she was not enough recovered; but Jane was firm where she felt herself to be right. To Mr. Darcy it was welcome intelligence: Elizabeth had been at Netherfield long enough. She attracted him more than he liked; and Miss Bingley was uncivil to _her_ and more teasing than usual to himself. He wisely resolved to be particularly careful that no sign of admiration should _now_ escape him--nothing that could elevate her with the hope of influencing his felicity; sensible that, if such an idea had been suggested, his behaviour during the last day must have material weight in confirming or crushing it. Steady to his purpose, he scarcely spoke ten words to her through the whole of Saturday: and though they were at one time left by themselves for half an hour, he adhered most conscientiously to his book, and would not even look at her.

On Sunday, after morning service, the separation, so agreeable to almost all, took place. Miss Bingley’s civility to Elizabeth increased at last very rapidly, as well as her affection for Jane; and when they parted, after assuring the latter of the pleasure it would always give her to see her either at Longbourn or Netherfield, and embracing her most tenderly, she even shook hands with the former. Elizabeth took leave of the whole party in the liveliest spirits. They were not welcomed home very cordially by their mother. Mrs. Bennet wondered at their coming, and thought them very wrong to give so much trouble, and was sure Jane would have caught cold again. But their father, though very laconic in his expressions of pleasure, was really glad to see them; he had felt their importance in the family circle. The evening conversation, when they were all assembled, had lost much of its animation, and almost all its sense, by the absence of Jane and Elizabeth. They found Mary, as usual, deep in the study of thorough bass and human nature; and had some new extracts to admire and some new observations of threadbare morality to listen to. Catherine and Lydia had information for them of a different sort. Much had been done, and much had been said in the regiment since the preceding Wednesday; several of the officers had dined lately with their uncle; a private had been flogged; and it had actually been hinted that Colonel Forster was going to be married.

“I hope, my dear,” said Mr. Bennet to his wife, as they were at breakfast the next morning, “that you have ordered a good dinner to-day, because I have reason to expect an addition to our family party.” “Who do you mean, my dear? I know of nobody that is coming, I am sure, unless Charlotte Lucas should happen to call in; and I hope _my_ dinners are good enough for her. I do not believe she often sees such at home.” Mrs. Bennet’s eyes sparkled. “A gentleman and a stranger! It is Mr. Bingley, I am sure. Why, Jane--you never dropped a word of this--you sly thing! Well, I am sure I shall be extremely glad to see Mr. Bingley. But--good Lord! how unlucky! there is not a bit of fish to be got to-day. Lydia, my love, ring the bell. I must speak to Hill this moment.” After amusing himself some time with their curiosity, he thus explained:--“About a month ago I received this letter, and about a fortnight ago I answered it; for I thought it a case of some delicacy, and requiring early attention. It is from my cousin, Mr. Collins, who, when I am dead, may turn you all out of this house as soon as he pleases.”

“Oh, my dear,” cried his wife, “I cannot bear to hear that mentioned. Pray do not talk of that odious man. I do think it is the hardest thing in the world, that your estate should be entailed away from your own children; and I am sure, if I had been you, I should have tried long ago to do something or other about it.” Jane and Elizabeth attempted to explain to her the nature of an entail. They had often attempted it before: but it was a subject on which Mrs. Bennet was beyond the reach of reason; and she continued to rail bitterly against the cruelty of settling an estate away from a family of five daughters, in favour of a man whom nobody cared anything about. “It certainly is a most iniquitous affair,” said Mr. Bennet; “and nothing can clear Mr. Collins from the guilt of inheriting Longbourn. But if you will listen to his letter, you may, perhaps, be a little softened by his manner of expressing himself.” “No, that I am sure I shall not: and I think it was very impertinent of him to write to you at all, and very hypocritical. I hate such false friends. Why could not he keep on quarrelling with you, as his father did before him?”

“The disagreement subsisting between yourself and my late honoured father always gave me much uneasiness; and, since I have had the misfortune to lose him, I have frequently wished to heal the breach: but, for some time, I was kept back by my own doubts, fearing lest it might seem disrespectful to his memory for me to be on good terms with anyone with whom it had always pleased him to be at variance.”--‘There, Mrs. Bennet.’--“My mind, however, is now made up on the subject; for, having received ordination at Easter, I have been so fortunate as to be distinguished by the patronage of the Right Honourable Lady Catherine de Bourgh, widow of Sir Lewis de Bourgh, whose bounty and beneficence has preferred me to the valuable rectory of this parish, where it shall be my earnest endeavour to demean myself with grateful respect towards her Ladyship, and be ever ready to perform those rites and ceremonies which are instituted by the Church of England. As a clergyman, moreover, I feel it my duty to promote and establish the blessing of peace in all families within the reach of my influence; and on these grounds I flatter myself that my present overtures of good-will are highly commendable, and that the circumstance of my being next in the entail of Longbourn estate will be kindly overlooked on your side, and not lead you to reject the offered olive branch. I cannot be otherwise than concerned at being the means of injuring your amiable daughters, and beg leave to apologize for it, as well as to assure you of my readiness to make them every possible amends; but of this hereafter. If you should have no objection to receive me into your house, I propose myself the satisfaction of waiting on you and your family, Monday, November 18th, by four o’clock, and shall probably trespass on your hospitality till the Saturday se’nnight following, which I can do without any inconvenience, as Lady Catherine is far from objecting to my occasional absence on a Sunday, provided that some other clergyman is engaged to do the duty of the day. I remain, dear sir, with respectful compliments to your lady and daughters, your well-wisher and friend,

“At four o’clock, therefore, we may expect this peace-making gentleman,” said Mr. Bennet, as he folded up the letter. “He seems to be a most conscientious and polite young man, upon my word; and, I doubt not, will prove a valuable acquaintance, especially if Lady Catherine should be so indulgent as to let him come to us again.” “There is some sense in what he says about the girls, however; and, if he is disposed to make them any amends, I shall not be the person to discourage him.” “Though it is difficult,” said Jane, “to guess in what way he can mean to make us the atonement he thinks our due, the wish is certainly to his credit.” Elizabeth was chiefly struck with his extraordinary deference for Lady Catherine, and his kind intention of christening, marrying, and burying his parishioners whenever it were required. “He must be an oddity, I think,” said she. “I cannot make him out. There is something very pompous in his style. And what can he mean by apologizing for being next in the entail? We cannot suppose he would help it, if he could. Can he be a sensible man, sir?”

“No, my dear; I think not. I have great hopes of finding him quite the reverse. There is a mixture of servility and self-importance in his letter which promises well. I am impatient to see him.” “In point of composition,” said Mary, “his letter does not seem defective. The idea of the olive branch perhaps is not wholly new, yet I think it is well expressed.” To Catherine and Lydia neither the letter nor its writer were in any degree interesting. It was next to impossible that their cousin should come in a scarlet coat, and it was now some weeks since they had received pleasure from the society of a man in any other colour. As for their mother, Mr. Collins’s letter had done away much of her ill-will, and she was preparing to see him with a degree of composure which astonished her husband and daughters. Mr. Collins was punctual to his time, and was received with great politeness by the whole family. Mr. Bennet indeed said little; but the ladies were ready enough to talk, and Mr. Collins seemed neither in need of encouragement, nor inclined to be silent himself. He was a tall, heavy-looking young man of five-and-twenty. His air was grave and stately, and his manners were very formal. He had not been long seated before he complimented Mrs. Bennet on having so fine a family of daughters, said he had heard much of their beauty, but that, in this instance, fame had fallen short of the truth; and added, that he did not doubt her seeing them all in due time well disposed of in marriage. This gallantry was not much to the taste of some of his hearers; but Mrs. Bennet, who quarrelled with no compliments, answered most readily,--

“You are very kind, sir, I am sure; and I wish with all my heart it may prove so; for else they will be destitute enough. Things are settled so oddly.” “Ah, sir, I do indeed. It is a grievous affair to my poor girls, you must confess. Not that I mean to find fault with _you_, for such things, I know, are all chance in this world. There is no knowing how estates will go when once they come to be entailed.” “I am very sensible, madam, of the hardship to my fair cousins, and could say much on the subject, but that I am cautious of appearing forward and precipitate. But I can assure the young ladies that I come prepared to admire them. At present I will not say more, but, perhaps, when we are better acquainted----” He was interrupted by a summons to dinner; and the girls smiled on each other. They were not the only objects of Mr. Collins’s admiration. The hall, the dining-room, and all its furniture, were examined and praised; and his commendation of everything would have touched Mrs. Bennet’s heart, but for the mortifying supposition of his viewing it all as his own future property. The dinner, too, in its turn, was highly admired; and he begged to know to which of his fair cousins the excellence of its cookery was owing. But here he was set right by Mrs. Bennet, who assured him, with some asperity, that they were very well able to keep a good cook, and that her daughters had nothing to do in the kitchen. He begged pardon for having displeased her. In a softened tone she declared herself not at all offended; but he continued to apologize for about a quarter of an hour.

During dinner, Mr. Bennet scarcely spoke at all; but when the servants were withdrawn, he thought it time to have some conversation with his guest, and therefore started a subject in which he expected him to shine, by observing that he seemed very fortunate in his patroness. Lady Catherine de Bourgh’s attention to his wishes, and consideration for his comfort, appeared very remarkable. Mr. Bennet could not have chosen better. Mr. Collins was eloquent in her praise. The subject elevated him to more than usual solemnity of manner; and with a most important aspect he protested that he had never in his life witnessed such behaviour in a person of rank--such affability and condescension, as he had himself experienced from Lady Catherine. She had been graciously pleased to approve of both the discourses which he had already had the honour of preaching before her. She had also asked him twice to dine at Rosings, and had sent for him only the Saturday before, to make up her pool of quadrille in the evening. Lady Catherine was reckoned proud by many people, he knew, but _he_ had never seen anything but affability in her. She had always spoken to him as she would to any other gentleman; she made not the smallest objection to his joining in the society of the neighbourhood, nor to his leaving his parish occasionally for a week or two to visit his relations. She had even condescended to advise him to marry as soon as he could, provided he chose with discretion; and had once paid him a visit in his humble parsonage, where she had perfectly approved all the alterations he had been making, and had even vouchsafed to suggest some herself,--some shelves in the closets upstairs.

“That is all very proper and civil, I am sure,” said Mrs. Bennet, “and I dare say she is a very agreeable woman. It is a pity that great ladies in general are not more like her. Does she live near you, sir?” “She is a most charming young lady, indeed. Lady Catherine herself says that, in point of true beauty, Miss de Bourgh is far superior to the handsomest of her sex; because there is that in her features which marks the young woman of distinguished birth. She is unfortunately of a sickly constitution, which has prevented her making that progress in many accomplishments which she could not otherwise have failed of, as I am informed by the lady who superintended her education, and who still resides with them. But she is perfectly amiable, and often condescends to drive by my humble abode in her little phaeton and ponies.” “Her indifferent state of health unhappily prevents her being in town; and by that means, as I told Lady Catherine myself one day, has deprived the British Court of its brightest ornament. Her Ladyship seemed pleased with the idea; and you may imagine that I am happy on every occasion to offer those little delicate compliments which are always acceptable to ladies. I have more than once observed to Lady Catherine, that her charming daughter seemed born to be a duchess; and that the most elevated rank, instead of giving her consequence, would be adorned by her. These are the kind of little things which please her Ladyship, and it is a sort of attention which I conceive myself peculiarly bound to pay.”

“You judge very properly,” said Mr. Bennet; “and it is happy for you that you possess the talent of flattering with delicacy. May I ask whether these pleasing attentions proceed from the impulse of the moment, or are the result of previous study?” “They arise chiefly from what is passing at the time; and though I sometimes amuse myself with suggesting and arranging such little elegant compliments as may be adapted to ordinary occasions, I always wish to give them as unstudied an air as possible.” Mr. Bennet’s expectations were fully answered. His cousin was as absurd as he had hoped; and he listened to him with the keenest enjoyment, maintaining at the same time the most resolute composure of countenance, and, except in an occasional glance at Elizabeth, requiring no partner in his pleasure. By tea-time, however, the dose had been enough, and Mr. Bennet was glad to take his guest into the drawing-room again, and when tea was over, glad to invite him to read aloud to the ladies. Mr. Collins readily assented, and a book was produced; but on beholding it (for everything announced it to be from a circulating library) he started back, and, begging pardon, protested that he never read novels. Kitty stared at him, and Lydia exclaimed. Other books were produced, and after some deliberation he chose “Fordyce’s Sermons.” Lydia gaped as he opened the volume; and before he had, with very monotonous solemnity, read three pages, she interrupted him with,--

“Do you know, mamma, that my uncle Philips talks of turning away Richard? and if he does, Colonel Forster will hire him. My aunt told me so herself on Saturday. I shall walk to Meryton to-morrow to hear more about it, and to ask when Mr. Denny comes back from town.” “I have often observed how little young ladies are interested by books of a serious stamp, though written solely for their benefit. It amazes me, I confess; for certainly there can be nothing so advantageous to them as instruction. But I will no longer importune my young cousin.” Then, turning to Mr. Bennet, he offered himself as his antagonist at backgammon. Mr. Bennet accepted the challenge, observing that he acted very wisely in leaving the girls to their own trifling amusements. Mrs. Bennet and her daughters apologized most civilly for Lydia’s interruption, and promised that it should not occur again, if he would resume his book; but Mr. Collins, after assuring them that he bore his young cousin no ill-will, and should never resent her behaviour as any affront, seated himself at another table with Mr. Bennet, and prepared for backgammon.

Mr. Collins was not a sensible man, and the deficiency of nature had been but little assisted by education or society; the greatest part of his life having been spent under the guidance of an illiterate and miserly father; and though he belonged to one of the universities, he had merely kept the necessary terms without forming at it any useful acquaintance. The subjection in which his father had brought him up had given him originally great humility of manner; but it was now a good deal counteracted by the self-conceit of a weak head, living in retirement, and the consequential feelings of early and unexpected prosperity. A fortunate chance had recommended him to Lady Catherine de Bourgh when the living of Hunsford was vacant; and the respect which he felt for her high rank, and his veneration for her as his patroness, mingling with a very good opinion of himself, of his authority as a clergyman, and his right as a rector, made him altogether a mixture of pride and obsequiousness, self-importance and humility. Having now a good house and a very sufficient income, he intended to marry; and in seeking a reconciliation with the Longbourn family he had a wife in view, as he meant to choose one of the daughters, if he found them as handsome and amiable as they were represented by common report. This was his plan of amends--of atonement--for inheriting their father’s estate; and he thought it an excellent one, full of eligibility and suitableness, and excessively generous and disinterested on his own part.

His plan did not vary on seeing them. Miss Bennet’s lovely face confirmed his views, and established all his strictest notions of what was due to seniority; and for the first evening _she_ was his settled choice. The next morning, however, made an alteration; for in a quarter of an hour’s _tête-à-tête_ with Mrs. Bennet before breakfast, a conversation beginning with his parsonage-house, and leading naturally to the avowal of his hopes, that a mistress for it might be found at Longbourn, produced from her, amid very complaisant smiles and general encouragement, a caution against the very Jane he had fixed on. “As to her _younger_ daughters, she could not take upon her to say--she could not positively answer--but she did not _know_ of any prepossession;--her _eldest_ daughter she must just mention--she felt it incumbent on her to hint, was likely to be very soon engaged.” Mr. Collins had only to change from Jane to Elizabeth--and it was soon done--done while Mrs. Bennet was stirring the fire. Elizabeth, equally next to Jane in birth and beauty, succeeded her of course.

Mrs. Bennet treasured up the hint, and trusted that she might soon have two daughters married; and the man whom she could not bear to speak of the day before, was now high in her good graces. Lydia’s intention of walking to Meryton was not forgotten: every sister except Mary agreed to go with her; and Mr. Collins was to attend them, at the request of Mr. Bennet, who was most anxious to get rid of him, and have his library to himself; for thither Mr. Collins had followed him after breakfast, and there he would continue, nominally engaged with one of the largest folios in the collection, but really talking to Mr. Bennet, with little cessation, of his house and garden at Hunsford. Such doings discomposed Mr. Bennet exceedingly. In his library he had been always sure of leisure and tranquillity; and though prepared, as he told Elizabeth, to meet with folly and conceit in every other room in the house, he was used to be free from them there: his civility, therefore, was most prompt in inviting Mr. Collins to join his daughters in their walk; and Mr. Collins, being in fact much better fitted for a walker than a reader, was extremely well pleased to close his large book, and go.

In pompous nothings on his side, and civil assents on that of his cousins, their time passed till they entered Meryton. The attention of the younger ones was then no longer to be gained by _him_. Their eyes were immediately wandering up the street in quest of the officers, and nothing less than a very smart bonnet, indeed, or a really new muslin in a shop window, could recall them. But the attention of every lady was soon caught by a young man, whom they had never seen before, of most gentlemanlike appearance, walking with an officer on the other side of the way. The officer was the very Mr. Denny concerning whose return from London Lydia came to inquire, and he bowed as they passed. All were struck with the stranger’s air, all wondered who he could be; and Kitty and Lydia, determined if possible to find out, led the way across the street, under pretence of wanting something in an opposite shop, and fortunately had just gained the pavement, when the two gentlemen, turning back, had reached the same spot. Mr. Denny addressed them directly, and entreated permission to introduce his friend, Mr. Wickham, who had returned with him the day before from town, and, he was happy to say, had accepted a commission in their corps. This was exactly as it should be; for the young man wanted only regimentals to make him completely charming. His appearance was greatly in his favour: he had all the best parts of beauty, a fine countenance, a good figure, and very pleasing address. The introduction was followed up on his side by a happy readiness of conversation--a readiness at the same time perfectly correct and unassuming; and the whole party were still standing and talking together very agreeably, when the sound of horses drew their notice, and Darcy and Bingley were seen riding down the street. On distinguishing the ladies of the group the two gentlemen came directly towards them, and began the usual civilities. Bingley was the principal spokesman, and Miss Bennet the principal object. He was then, he said, on his way to Longbourn on purpose to inquire after her. Mr. Darcy corroborated it with a bow, and was beginning to determine not to fix his eyes on Elizabeth, when they were suddenly arrested by the sight of the stranger; and Elizabeth happening to see the countenance of both as they looked at each other, was all astonishment at the effect of the meeting. Both changed colour, one looked white, the other red. Mr. Wickham, after a few moments, touched his hat--a salutation which Mr. Darcy just deigned to return. What could be the meaning of it? It was impossible to imagine; it was impossible not to long to know.

Mr. Denny and Mr. Wickham walked with the young ladies to the door of Mr. Philips’s house, and then made their bows, in spite of Miss Lydia’s pressing entreaties that they would come in, and even in spite of Mrs. Philips’s throwing up the parlour window, and loudly seconding the invitation. Mrs. Philips was always glad to see her nieces; and the two eldest, from their recent absence, were particularly welcome; and she was eagerly expressing her surprise at their sudden return home, which, as their own carriage had not fetched them, she should have known nothing about, if she had not happened to see Mr. Jones’s shopboy in the street, who had told her that they were not to send any more draughts to Netherfield, because the Miss Bennets were come away, when her civility was claimed towards Mr. Collins by Jane’s introduction of him. She received him with her very best politeness, which he returned with as much more, apologizing for his intrusion, without any previous acquaintance with her, which he could not help flattering himself, however, might be justified by his relationship to the young ladies who introduced him to her notice. Mrs. Philips was quite awed by such an excess of good breeding; but her contemplation of one stranger was soon put an end to by exclamations and inquiries about the other, of whom, however, she could only tell her nieces what they already knew, that Mr. Denny had brought him from London, and that he was to have a lieutenant’s commission in the ----shire. She had been watching him the last hour, she said, as he walked up and down the street,--and had Mr. Wickham appeared, Kitty and Lydia would certainly have continued the occupation; but unluckily no one passed the windows now except a few of the officers, who, in comparison with the stranger, were become “stupid, disagreeable fellows.” Some of them were to dine with the Philipses the next day, and their aunt promised to make her husband call on Mr. Wickham, and give him an invitation also, if the family from Longbourn would come in the evening. This was agreed to; and Mrs. Philips protested that they would have a nice comfortable noisy game of lottery tickets, and a little bit of hot supper afterwards. The prospect of such delights was very cheering, and they parted in mutual good spirits. Mr. Collins repeated his apologies in quitting the room, and was assured, with unwearying civility, that they were perfectly needless.

As they walked home, Elizabeth related to Jane what she had seen pass between the two gentlemen; but though Jane would have defended either or both, had they appeared to be wrong, she could no more explain such behaviour than her sister. Mr. Collins on his return highly gratified Mrs. Bennet by admiring Mrs. Philips’s manners and politeness. He protested that, except Lady Catherine and her daughter, he had never seen a more elegant woman; for she had not only received him with the utmost civility, but had even pointedly included him in her invitation for the next evening, although utterly unknown to her before. Something, he supposed, might be attributed to his connection with them, but yet he had never met with so much attention in the whole course of his life. As no objection was made to the young people’s engagement with their aunt, and all Mr. Collins’s scruples of leaving Mr. and Mrs. Bennet for a single evening during his visit were most steadily resisted, the coach conveyed him and his five cousins at a suitable hour to Meryton; and the girls had the pleasure of hearing, as they entered the drawing-room, that Mr. Wickham had accepted their uncle’s invitation, and was then in the house.

When this information was given, and they had all taken their seats, Mr. Collins was at leisure to look around him and admire, and he was so much struck with the size and furniture of the apartment, that he declared he might almost have supposed himself in the small summer breakfast parlour at Rosings; a comparison that did not at first convey much gratification; but when Mrs. Philips understood from him what Rosings was, and who was its proprietor, when she had listened to the description of only one of Lady Catherine’s drawing-rooms, and found that the chimney-piece alone had cost eight hundred pounds, she felt all the force of the compliment, and would hardly have resented a comparison with the housekeeper’s room. In describing to her all the grandeur of Lady Catherine and her mansion, with occasional digressions in praise of his own humble abode, and the improvements it was receiving, he was happily employed until the gentlemen joined them; and he found in Mrs. Philips a very attentive listener, whose opinion of his consequence increased with what she heard, and who was resolving to retail it all among her neighbours as soon as she could. To the girls, who could not listen to their cousin, and who had nothing to do but to wish for an instrument, and examine their own indifferent imitations of china on the mantel-piece, the interval of waiting appeared very long. It was over at last, however. The gentlemen did approach: and when Mr. Wickham walked into the room, Elizabeth felt that she had neither been seeing him before, nor thinking of him since, with the smallest degree of unreasonable admiration. The officers of the ----shire were in general a very creditable, gentlemanlike set and the best of them were of the present party; but Mr. Wickham was as far beyond them all in person, countenance, air, and walk, as _they_ were superior to the broad-faced stuffy uncle Philips, breathing port wine, who followed them into the room.

Mr. Wickham was the happy man towards whom almost every female eye was turned, and Elizabeth was the happy woman by whom he finally seated himself; and the agreeable manner in which he immediately fell into conversation, though it was only on its being a wet night, and on the probability of a rainy season, made her feel that the commonest, dullest, most threadbare topic might be rendered interesting by the skill of the speaker. With such rivals for the notice of the fair as Mr. Wickham and the officers, Mr. Collins seemed to sink into insignificance; to the young ladies he certainly was nothing; but he had still at intervals a kind listener in Mrs. Philips, and was, by her watchfulness, most abundantly supplied with coffee and muffin. “I know little of the game at present,” said he, “but I shall be glad to improve myself; for in my situation of life----” Mrs. Philips was very thankful for his compliance, but could not wait for his reason. Mr. Wickham did not play at whist, and with ready delight was he received at the other table between Elizabeth and Lydia. At first there seemed danger of Lydia’s engrossing him entirely, for she was a most determined talker; but being likewise extremely fond of lottery tickets, she soon grew too much interested in the game, too eager in making bets and exclaiming after prizes, to have attention for anyone in particular. Allowing for the common demands of the game, Mr. Wickham was therefore at leisure to talk to Elizabeth, and she was very willing to hear him, though what she chiefly wished to hear she could not hope to be told, the history of his acquaintance with Mr. Darcy. She dared not even mention that gentleman. Her curiosity, however, was unexpectedly relieved. Mr. Wickham began the subject himself. He inquired how far Netherfield was from Meryton; and, after receiving her answer, asked in a hesitating manner how long Mr. Darcy had been staying there.

“About a month,” said Elizabeth; and then, unwilling to let the subject drop, added, “he is a man of very large property in Derbyshire, I understand.” “Yes,” replied Wickham; “his estate there is a noble one. A clear ten thousand per annum. You could not have met with a person more capable of giving you certain information on that head than myself--for I have been connected with his family, in a particular manner, from my infancy.” “You may well be surprised, Miss Bennet, at such an assertion, after seeing, as you probably might, the very cold manner of our meeting yesterday. Are you much acquainted with Mr. Darcy?” “I have no right to give _my_ opinion,” said Wickham, “as to his being agreeable or otherwise. I am not qualified to form one. I have known him too long and too well to be a fair judge. It is impossible for _me_ to be impartial. But I believe your opinion of him would in general astonish--and, perhaps, you would not express it quite so strongly anywhere else. Here you are in your own family.”

“Upon my word I say no more _here_ than I might say in any house in the neighbourhood, except Netherfield. He is not at all liked in Hertfordshire. Everybody is disgusted with his pride. You will not find him more favourably spoken of by anyone.” “I cannot pretend to be sorry,” said Wickham, after a short interruption, “that he or that any man should not be estimated beyond their deserts; but with _him_ I believe it does not often happen. The world is blinded by his fortune and consequence, or frightened by his high and imposing manners, and sees him only as he chooses to be seen.” “I do not at all know; but I _heard_ nothing of his going away when I was at Netherfield. I hope your plans in favour of the ----shire will not be affected by his being in the neighbourhood.” “Oh no--it is not for _me_ to be driven away by Mr. Darcy. If _he_ wishes to avoid seeing _me_ he must go. We are not on friendly terms, and it always gives me pain to meet him, but I have no reason for avoiding _him_ but what I might proclaim to all the world--a sense of very great ill-usage, and most painful regrets at his being what he is. His father, Miss Bennet, the late Mr. Darcy, was one of the best men that ever breathed, and the truest friend I ever had; and I can never be in company with this Mr. Darcy without being grieved to the soul by a thousand tender recollections. His behaviour to myself has been scandalous; but I verily believe I could forgive him anything and everything, rather than his disappointing the hopes and disgracing the memory of his father.”

Mr. Wickham began to speak on more general topics, Meryton, the neighbourhood, the society, appearing highly pleased with all that he had yet seen, and speaking of the latter, especially, with gentle but very intelligible gallantry. “It was the prospect of constant society, and good society,” he added, “which was my chief inducement to enter the ----shire. I know it to be a most respectable, agreeable corps; and my friend Denny tempted me further by his account of their present quarters, and the very great attentions and excellent acquaintance Meryton had procured them. Society, I own, is necessary to me. I have been a disappointed man, and my spirits will not bear solitude. I _must_ have employment and society. A military life is not what I was intended for, but circumstances have now made it eligible. The church _ought_ to have been my profession--I was brought up for the church; and I should at this time have been in possession of a most valuable living, had it pleased the gentleman we were speaking of just now.” “Yes--the late Mr. Darcy bequeathed me the next presentation of the best living in his gift. He was my godfather, and excessively attached to me. I cannot do justice to his kindness. He meant to provide for me amply, and thought he had done it; but when the living fell, it was given elsewhere.”

“There was just such an informality in the terms of the bequest as to give me no hope from law. A man of honour could not have doubted the intention, but Mr. Darcy chose to doubt it--or to treat it as a merely conditional recommendation, and to assert that I had forfeited all claim to it by extravagance, imprudence, in short, anything or nothing. Certain it is that the living became vacant two years ago, exactly as I was of an age to hold it, and that it was given to another man; and no less certain is it, that I cannot accuse myself of having really done anything to deserve to lose it. I have a warm unguarded temper, and I may perhaps have sometimes spoken my opinion _of_ him, and _to_ him, too freely. I can recall nothing worse. But the fact is, that we are very different sort of men, and that he hates me.” “A thorough, determined dislike of me--a dislike which I cannot but attribute in some measure to jealousy. Had the late Mr. Darcy liked me less, his son might have borne with me better; but his father’s uncommon attachment to me irritated him, I believe, very early in life. He had not a temper to bear the sort of competition in which we stood--the sort of preference which was often given me.”

“I had not thought Mr. Darcy so bad as this--though I have never liked him, I had not thought so very ill of him--I had supposed him to be despising his fellow-creatures in general, but did not suspect him of descending to such malicious revenge, such injustice, such inhumanity as this!” After a few minutes’ reflection, however, she continued, “I _do_ remember his boasting one day, at Netherfield, of the implacability of his resentments, of his having an unforgiving temper. His disposition must be dreadful.” Elizabeth was again deep in thought, and after a time exclaimed, “To treat in such a manner the godson, the friend, the favourite of his father!” She could have added, “A young man, too, like _you_, whose very countenance may vouch for your being amiable.” But she contented herself with--“And one, too, who had probably been his own companion from childhood, connected together, as I think you said, in the closest manner.” “We were born in the same parish, within the same park; the greatest part of our youth was passed together: inmates of the same house, sharing the same amusements, objects of the same parental care. _My_ father began life in the profession which your uncle, Mr. Philips, appears to do so much credit to; but he gave up everything to be of use to the late Mr. Darcy, and devoted all his time to the care of the Pemberley property. He was most highly esteemed by Mr. Darcy, a most intimate, confidential friend. Mr. Darcy often acknowledged himself to be under the greatest obligations to my father’s active superintendence; and when, immediately before my father’s death, Mr. Darcy gave him a voluntary promise of providing for me, I am convinced that he felt it to be as much a debt of gratitude to _him_ as of affection to myself.”

“How strange!” cried Elizabeth. “How abominable! I wonder that the very pride of this Mr. Darcy has not made him just to you. If from no better motive, that he should not have been too proud to be dishonest,--for dishonesty I must call it.” “It _is_ wonderful,” replied Wickham; “for almost all his actions may be traced to pride; and pride has often been his best friend. It has connected him nearer with virtue than any other feeling. But we are none of us consistent; and in his behaviour to me there were stronger impulses even than pride.” “Yes; it has often led him to be liberal and generous; to give his money freely, to display hospitality, to assist his tenants, and relieve the poor. Family pride, and _filial_ pride, for he is very proud of what his father was, have done this. Not to appear to disgrace his family, to degenerate from the popular qualities, or lose the influence of the Pemberley House, is a powerful motive. He has also _brotherly_ pride, which, with _some_ brotherly affection, makes him a very kind and careful guardian of his sister; and you will hear him generally cried up as the most attentive and best of brothers.”

He shook his head. “I wish I could call her amiable. It gives me pain to speak ill of a Darcy; but she is too much like her brother,--very, very proud. As a child, she was affectionate and pleasing, and extremely fond of me; and I have devoted hours and hours to her amusement. But she is nothing to me now. She is a handsome girl, about fifteen or sixteen, and, I understand, highly accomplished. Since her father’s death her home has been London, where a lady lives with her, and superintends her education.” “I am astonished at his intimacy with Mr. Bingley. How can Mr. Bingley, who seems good-humour itself, and is, I really believe, truly amiable, be in friendship with such a man? How can they suit each other? Do you know Mr. Bingley?” “Probably not; but Mr. Darcy can please where he chooses. He does not want abilities. He can be a conversible companion if he thinks it worth his while. Among those who are at all his equals in consequence, he is a very different man from what he is to the less prosperous. His pride never deserts him; but with the rich he is liberal-minded, just, sincere, rational, honourable, and, perhaps, agreeable,--allowing something for fortune and figure.”

The whist party soon afterwards breaking up, the players gathered round the other table, and Mr. Collins took his station between his cousin Elizabeth and Mrs. Philips. The usual inquiries as to his success were made by the latter. It had not been very great; he had lost every point; but when Mrs. Philips began to express her concern thereupon, he assured her, with much earnest gravity, that it was not of the least importance; that he considered the money as a mere trifle, and begged she would not make herself uneasy. “I know very well, madam,” said he, “that when persons sit down to a card table they must take their chance of these things,--and happily I am not in such circumstances as to make five shillings any object. There are, undoubtedly, many who could not say the same; but, thanks to Lady Catherine de Bourgh, I am removed far beyond the necessity of regarding little matters.” Mr. Wickham’s attention was caught; and after observing Mr. Collins for a few moments, he asked Elizabeth in a low voice whether her relations were very intimately acquainted with the family of De Bourgh.

“Lady Catherine de Bourgh,” she replied, “has very lately given him a living. I hardly know how Mr. Collins was first introduced to her notice, but he certainly has not known her long.” This information made Elizabeth smile, as she thought of poor Miss Bingley. Vain indeed must be all her attentions, vain and useless her affection for his sister and her praise of himself, if he were already self-destined to another. “Mr. Collins,” said she, “speaks highly both of Lady Catherine and her daughter; but, from some particulars that he has related of her Ladyship, I suspect his gratitude misleads him; and that, in spite of her being his patroness, she is an arrogant, conceited woman.” “I believe her to be both in a great degree,” replied Wickham; “I have not seen her for many years; but I very well remember that I never liked her, and that her manners were dictatorial and insolent. She has the reputation of being remarkably sensible and clever; but I rather believe she derives part of her abilities from her rank and fortune, part from her authoritative manner, and the rest from the pride of her nephew, who chooses that everyone connected with him should have an understanding of the first class.”

Elizabeth allowed that he had given a very rational account of it, and they continued talking together with mutual satisfaction till supper put an end to cards, and gave the rest of the ladies their share of Mr. Wickham’s attentions. There could be no conversation in the noise of Mrs. Philips’s supper party, but his manners recommended him to everybody. Whatever he said, was said well; and whatever he did, done gracefully. Elizabeth went away with her head full of him. She could think of nothing but of Mr. Wickham, and of what he had told her, all the way home; but there was not time for her even to mention his name as they went, for neither Lydia nor Mr. Collins were once silent. Lydia talked incessantly of lottery tickets, of the fish she had lost and the fish she had won; and Mr. Collins, in describing the civility of Mr. and Mrs. Philips, protesting that he did not in the least regard his losses at whist, enumerating all the dishes at supper, and repeatedly fearing that he crowded his cousins, had more to say than he could well manage before the carriage stopped at Longbourn House.

Elizabeth related to Jane, the next day, what had passed between Mr. Wickham and herself. Jane listened with astonishment and concern: she knew not how to believe that Mr. Darcy could be so unworthy of Mr. Bingley’s regard; and yet it was not in her nature to question the veracity of a young man of such amiable appearance as Wickham. The possibility of his having really endured such unkindness was enough to interest all her tender feelings; and nothing therefore remained to be done but to think well of them both, to defend the conduct of each, and throw into the account of accident or mistake whatever could not be otherwise explained. “They have both,” said she, “been deceived, I dare say, in some way or other, of which we can form no idea. Interested people have perhaps misrepresented each to the other. It is, in short, impossible for us to conjecture the causes or circumstances which may have alienated them, without actual blame on either side.” “Very true, indeed; and now, my dear Jane, what have you got to say in behalf of the interested people who have probably been concerned in the business? Do clear _them_, too, or we shall be obliged to think ill of somebody.”

“Laugh as much as you choose, but you will not laugh me out of my opinion. My dearest Lizzy, do but consider in what a disgraceful light it places Mr. Darcy, to be treating his father’s favourite in such a manner,--one whom his father had promised to provide for. It is impossible. No man of common humanity, no man who had any value for his character, could be capable of it. Can his most intimate friends be so excessively deceived in him? Oh no.” “I can much more easily believe Mr. Bingley’s being imposed on than that Mr. Wickham should invent such a history of himself as he gave me last night; names, facts, everything mentioned without ceremony. If it be not so, let Mr. Darcy contradict it. Besides, there was truth in his looks.” But Jane could think with certainty on only one point,--that Mr. Bingley, if he _had been_ imposed on, would have much to suffer when the affair became public. The two young ladies were summoned from the shrubbery, where this conversation passed, by the arrival of some of the very persons of whom they had been speaking; Mr. Bingley and his sisters came to give their personal invitation for the long expected ball at Netherfield, which was fixed for the following Tuesday. The two ladies were delighted to see their dear friend again, called it an age since they had met, and repeatedly asked what she had been doing with herself since their separation. To the rest of the family they paid little attention; avoiding Mrs. Bennet as much as possible, saying not much to Elizabeth, and nothing at all to the others. They were soon gone again, rising from their seats with an activity which took their brother by surprise, and hurrying off as if eager to escape from Mrs. Bennet’s civilities.

The prospect of the Netherfield ball was extremely agreeable to every female of the family. Mrs. Bennet chose to consider it as given in compliment to her eldest daughter, and was particularly flattered by receiving the invitation from Mr. Bingley himself, instead of a ceremonious card. Jane pictured to herself a happy evening in the society of her two friends, and the attentions of their brother; and Elizabeth thought with pleasure of dancing a great deal with Mr. Wickham, and of seeing a confirmation of everything in Mr. Darcy’s look and behaviour. The happiness anticipated by Catherine and Lydia depended less on any single event, or any particular person; for though they each, like Elizabeth, meant to dance half the evening with Mr. Wickham, he was by no means the only partner who could satisfy them, and a ball was, at any rate, a ball. And even Mary could assure her family that she had no disinclination for it. “While I can have my mornings to myself,” said she, “it is enough. I think it is no sacrifice to join occasionally in evening engagements. Society has claims on us all; and I profess myself one of those who consider intervals of recreation and amusement as desirable for everybody.”

Elizabeth’s spirits were so high on the occasion, that though she did not often speak unnecessarily to Mr. Collins, she could not help asking him whether he intended to accept Mr. Bingley’s invitation, and if he did, whether he would think it proper to join in the evening’s amusement; and she was rather surprised to find that he entertained no scruple whatever on that head, and was very far from dreading a rebuke, either from the Archbishop or Lady Catherine de Bourgh, by venturing to dance. “I am by no means of opinion, I assure you,” said he, “that a ball of this kind, given by a young man of character, to respectable people, can have any evil tendency; and I am so far from objecting to dancing myself, that I shall hope to be honoured with the hands of all my fair cousins in the course of the evening; and I take this opportunity of soliciting yours, Miss Elizabeth, for the two first dances especially; a preference which I trust my cousin Jane will attribute to the right cause, and not to any disrespect for her.”

Elizabeth felt herself completely taken in. She had fully proposed being engaged by Wickham for those very dances; and to have Mr. Collins instead!--her liveliness had been never worse timed. There was no help for it, however. Mr. Wickham’s happiness and her own was perforce delayed a little longer, and Mr. Collins’s proposal accepted with as good a grace as she could. She was not the better pleased with his gallantry, from the idea it suggested of something more. It now first struck her, that _she_ was selected from among her sisters as worthy of being the mistress of Hunsford Parsonage, and of assisting to form a quadrille table at Rosings, in the absence of more eligible visitors. The idea soon reached to conviction, as she observed his increasing civilities towards herself, and heard his frequent attempt at a compliment on her wit and vivacity; and though more astonished than gratified herself by this effect of her charms, it was not long before her mother gave her to understand that the probability of their marriage was exceedingly agreeable to _her_. Elizabeth, however, did not choose to take the hint, being well aware that a serious dispute must be the consequence of any reply. Mr. Collins might never make the offer, and, till he did, it was useless to quarrel about him.

If there had not been a Netherfield ball to prepare for and talk of, the younger Miss Bennets would have been in a pitiable state at this time; for, from the day of the invitation to the day of the ball, there was such a succession of rain as prevented their walking to Meryton once. No aunt, no officers, no news could be sought after; the very shoe-roses for Netherfield were got by proxy. Even Elizabeth might have found some trial of her patience in weather which totally suspended the improvement of her acquaintance with Mr. Wickham; and nothing less than a dance on Tuesday could have made such a Friday, Saturday, Sunday, and Monday endurable to Kitty and Lydia. Till Elizabeth entered the drawing-room at Netherfield, and looked in vain for Mr. Wickham among the cluster of red coats there assembled, a doubt of his being present had never occurred to her. The certainty of meeting him had not been checked by any of those recollections that might not unreasonably have alarmed her. She had dressed with more than usual care, and prepared in the highest spirits for the conquest of all that remained unsubdued of his heart, trusting that it was not more than might be won in the course of the evening. But in an instant arose the dreadful suspicion of his being purposely omitted, for Mr. Darcy’s pleasure, in the Bingleys’ invitation to the officers; and though this was not exactly the case, the absolute fact of his absence was pronounced by his friend Mr. Denny, to whom Lydia eagerly applied, and who told them that Wickham had been obliged to go to town on business the day before, and was not yet returned; adding, with a significant smile,--

This part of his intelligence, though unheard by Lydia, was caught by Elizabeth; and, as it assured her that Darcy was not less answerable for Wickham’s absence than if her first surmise had been just, every feeling of displeasure against the former was so sharpened by immediate disappointment, that she could hardly reply with tolerable civility to the polite inquiries which he directly afterwards approached to make. Attention, forbearance, patience with Darcy, was injury to Wickham. She was resolved against any sort of conversation with him, and turned away with a degree of ill-humour which she could not wholly surmount even in speaking to Mr. Bingley, whose blind partiality provoked her. But Elizabeth was not formed for ill-humour; and though every prospect of her own was destroyed for the evening, it could not dwell long on her spirits; and, having told all her griefs to Charlotte Lucas, whom she had not seen for a week, she was soon able to make a voluntary transition to the oddities of her cousin, and to point him out to her particular notice. The two first dances, however, brought a return of distress: they were dances of mortification. Mr. Collins, awkward and solemn, apologizing instead of attending, and often moving wrong without being aware of it, gave her all the shame and misery which a disagreeable partner for a couple of dances can give. The moment of her release from him was ecstasy.

She danced next with an officer, and had the refreshment of talking of Wickham, and of hearing that he was universally liked. When those dances were over, she returned to Charlotte Lucas, and was in conversation with her, when she found herself suddenly addressed by Mr. Darcy, who took her so much by surprise in his application for her hand, that, without knowing what she did, she accepted him. He walked away again immediately, and she was left to fret over her own want of presence of mind: Charlotte tried to console her. When the dancing recommenced, however, and Darcy approached to claim her hand, Charlotte could not help cautioning her, in a whisper, not to be a simpleton, and allow her fancy for Wickham to make her appear unpleasant in the eyes of a man often times his consequence. Elizabeth made no answer, and took her place in the set, amazed at the dignity to which she was arrived in being allowed to stand opposite to Mr. Darcy, and reading in her neighbours’ looks their equal amazement in beholding it. They stood for some time without speaking a word; and she began to imagine that their silence was to last through the two dances, and, at first, was resolved not to break it; till suddenly fancying that it would be the greater punishment to her partner to oblige him to talk, she made some slight observation on the dance. He replied, and was again silent. After a pause of some minutes, she addressed him a second time, with--

“It is _your_ turn to say something now, Mr. Darcy. _I_ talked about the dance, and _you_ ought to make some kind of remark on the size of the room, or the number of couples.” “Very well; that reply will do for the present. Perhaps, by-and-by, I may observe that private balls are much pleasanter than public ones; but _now_ we may be silent.” “Sometimes. One must speak a little, you know. It would look odd to be entirely silent for half an hour together; and yet, for the advantage of _some_, conversation ought to be so arranged as that they may have the trouble of saying as little as possible.” “Both,” replied Elizabeth archly; “for I have always seen a great similarity in the turn of our minds. We are each of an unsocial, taciturn disposition, unwilling to speak, unless we expect to say something that will amaze the whole room, and be handed down to posterity with all the _éclat_ of a proverb.” “This is no very striking resemblance of your own character, I am sure,” said he. “How near it may be to _mine_, I cannot pretend to say. _You_ think it a faithful portrait, undoubtedly.”

He made no answer; and they were again silent till they had gone down the dance, when he asked her if she and her sisters did not very often walk to Meryton. She answered in the affirmative; and, unable to resist the temptation, added, “When you met us there the other day, we had just been forming a new acquaintance.” The effect was immediate. A deeper shade of _hauteur_ overspread his features, but he said not a word; and Elizabeth, though blaming herself for her own weakness, could not go on. At length Darcy spoke, and in a constrained manner said,-- “Mr. Wickham is blessed with such happy manners as may insure his _making_ friends; whether he may be equally capable of _retaining_ them, is less certain.” “He has been so unlucky as to lose your friendship,” replied Elizabeth, with emphasis, “and in a manner which he is likely to suffer from all his life.” Darcy made no answer, and seemed desirous of changing the subject. At that moment Sir William Lucas appeared close to them, meaning to pass through the set to the other side of the room; but, on perceiving Mr. Darcy, he stopped, with a bow of superior courtesy, to compliment him on his dancing and his partner.

“I have been most highly gratified, indeed, my dear sir; such very superior dancing is not often seen. It is evident that you belong to the first circles. Allow me to say, however, that your fair partner does not disgrace you: and that I must hope to have this pleasure often repeated, especially when a certain desirable event, my dear Miss Eliza (glancing at her sister and Bingley), shall take place. What congratulations will then flow in! I appeal to Mr. Darcy;--but let me not interrupt you, sir. You will not thank me for detaining you from the bewitching converse of that young lady, whose bright eyes are also upbraiding me.” The latter part of this address was scarcely heard by Darcy; but Sir William’s allusion to his friend seemed to strike him forcibly, and his eyes were directed, with a very serious expression, towards Bingley and Jane, who were dancing together. Recovering himself, however, shortly, he turned to his partner, and said,-- “I do not think we were speaking at all. Sir William could not have interrupted any two people in the room who had less to say for themselves. We have tried two or three subjects already without success, and what we are to talk of next I cannot imagine.”

“Yes, always,” she replied, without knowing what she said; for her thoughts had wandered far from the subject, as soon afterwards appeared by her suddenly exclaiming, “I remember hearing you once say, Mr. Darcy, that you hardly ever forgave;--that your resentment, once created, was unappeasable. You are very cautious, I suppose, as to its _being created_?” “I can readily believe,” answered he, gravely, “that reports may vary greatly with respect to me; and I could wish, Miss Bennet, that you were not to sketch my character at the present moment, as there is reason to fear that the performance would reflect no credit on either.” “I would by no means suspend any pleasure of yours,” he coldly replied. She said no more, and they went down the other dance and parted in silence; on each side dissatisfied, though not to an equal degree; for in Darcy’s breast there was a tolerably powerful feeling towards her, which soon procured her pardon, and directed all his anger against another. “So, Miss Eliza, I hear you are quite delighted with George Wickham? Your sister has been talking to me about him, and asking me a thousand questions; and I find that the young man forgot to tell you, among his other communications, that he was the son of old Wickham, the late Mr. Darcy’s steward. Let me recommend you, however, as a friend, not to give implicit confidence to all his assertions; for, as to Mr. Darcy’s using him ill, it is perfectly false: for, on the contrary, he has been always remarkably kind to him, though George Wickham has treated Mr. Darcy in a most infamous manner. I do not know the particulars, but I know very well that Mr. Darcy is not in the least to blame; that he cannot bear to hear George Wickham mentioned; and that though my brother thought he could not well avoid including him in his invitation to the officers, he was excessively glad to find that he had taken himself out of the way. His coming into the country at all is a most insolent thing, indeed, and I wonder how he could presume to do it. I pity you, Miss Eliza, for this discovery of your favourite’s guilt; but really, considering his descent, one could not expect much better.”

“His guilt and his descent appear, by your account, to be the same,” said Elizabeth, angrily; “for I have heard you accuse him of nothing worse than of being the son of Mr. Darcy’s steward, and of _that_, I can assure you, he informed me himself.” “Insolent girl!” said Elizabeth to herself. “You are much mistaken if you expect to influence me by such a paltry attack as this. I see nothing in it but your own wilful ignorance and the malice of Mr. Darcy.” She then sought her eldest sister, who had undertaken to make inquiries on the same subject of Bingley. Jane met her with a smile of such sweet complacency, a glow of such happy expression, as sufficiently marked how well she was satisfied with the occurrences of the evening. Elizabeth instantly read her feelings; and, at that moment, solicitude for Wickham, resentment against his enemies, and everything else, gave way before the hope of Jane’s being in the fairest way for happiness. “I want to know,” said she, with a countenance no less smiling than her sister’s, “what you have learnt about Mr. Wickham. But perhaps you have been too pleasantly engaged to think of any third person, in which case you may be sure of my pardon.”

“No,” replied Jane, “I have not forgotten him; but I have nothing satisfactory to tell you. Mr. Bingley does not know the whole of his history, and is quite ignorant of the circumstances which have principally offended Mr. Darcy; but he will vouch for the good conduct, the probity and honour, of his friend, and is perfectly convinced that Mr. Wickham has deserved much less attention from Mr. Darcy than he has received; and I am sorry to say that by his account, as well as his sister’s, Mr. Wickham is by no means a respectable young man. I am afraid he has been very imprudent, and has deserved to lose Mr. Darcy’s regard.” “He does not exactly recollect the circumstances, though he has heard them from Mr. Darcy more than once, but he believes that it was left to him _conditionally_ only.” “I have not a doubt of Mr. Bingley’s sincerity,” said Elizabeth warmly, “but you must excuse my not being convinced by assurances only. Mr. Bingley’s defence of his friend was a very able one, I dare say; but since he is unacquainted with several parts of the story, and has learnt the rest from that friend himself, I shall venture still to think of both gentlemen as I did before.”

She then changed the discourse to one more gratifying to each, and on which there could be no difference of sentiment. Elizabeth listened with delight to the happy though modest hopes which Jane entertained of Bingley’s regard, and said all in her power to heighten her confidence in it. On their being joined by Mr. Bingley himself, Elizabeth withdrew to Miss Lucas; to whose inquiry after the pleasantness of her last partner she had scarcely replied, before Mr. Collins came up to them, and told her with great exultation, that he had just been so fortunate as to make a most important discovery. “I have found out,” said he, “by a singular accident, that there is now in the room a near relation to my patroness. I happened to overhear the gentleman himself mentioning to the young lady who does the honours of this house the names of his cousin Miss De Bourgh, and of her mother, Lady Catherine. How wonderfully these sort of things occur! Who would have thought of my meeting with--perhaps--a nephew of Lady Catherine de Bourgh in this assembly! I am most thankful that the discovery is made in time for me to pay my respects to him, which I am now going to do, and trust he will excuse my not having done it before. My total ignorance of the connection must plead my apology.”

“Indeed I am. I shall entreat his pardon for not having done it earlier. I believe him to be Lady Catherine’s _nephew_. It will be in my power to assure him that her Ladyship was quite well yesterday se’nnight.” Elizabeth tried hard to dissuade him from such a scheme; assuring him that Mr. Darcy would consider his addressing him without introduction as an impertinent freedom, rather than a compliment to his aunt; that it was not in the least necessary there should be any notice on either side, and that if it were, it must belong to Mr. Darcy, the superior in consequence, to begin the acquaintance. Mr. Collins listened to her with the determined air of following his own inclination, and when she ceased speaking, replied thus,-- “My dear Miss Elizabeth, I have the highest opinion in the world of your excellent judgment in all matters within the scope of your understanding, but permit me to say that there must be a wide difference between the established forms of ceremony amongst the laity and those which regulate the clergy; for, give me leave to observe that I consider the clerical office as equal in point of dignity with the highest rank in the kingdom--provided that a proper humility of behaviour is at the same time maintained. You must, therefore, allow me to follow the dictates of my conscience on this occasion, which lead me to perform what I look on as a point of duty. Pardon me for neglecting to profit by your advice, which on every other subject shall be my constant guide, though in the case before us I consider myself more fitted by education and habitual study to decide on what is right than a young lady like yourself;” and with a low bow he left her to attack Mr. Darcy, whose reception of his advances she eagerly watched, and whose astonishment at being so addressed was very evident. Her cousin prefaced his speech with a solemn bow, and though she could not hear a word of it, she felt as if hearing it all, and saw in the motion of his lips the words “apology,” “Hunsford,” and “Lady Catherine de Bourgh.” It vexed her to see him expose himself to such a man. Mr. Darcy was eyeing him with unrestrained wonder; and when at last Mr. Collins allowed him to speak, replied with an air of distant civility. Mr. Collins, however, was not discouraged from speaking again, and Mr. Darcy’s contempt seemed abundantly increasing with the length of his second speech; and at the end of it he only made him a slight bow, and moved another way: Mr. Collins then returned to Elizabeth.

“I have no reason, I assure you,” said he, “to be dissatisfied with my reception. Mr. Darcy seemed much pleased with the attention. He answered me with the utmost civility, and even paid me the compliment of saying, that he was so well convinced of Lady Catherine’s discernment as to be certain she could never bestow a favour unworthily. It was really a very handsome thought. Upon the whole, I am much pleased with him.” As Elizabeth had no longer any interest of her own to pursue, she turned her attention almost entirely on her sister and Mr. Bingley; and the train of agreeable reflections which her observations gave birth to made her perhaps almost as happy as Jane. She saw her in idea settled in that very house, in all the felicity which a marriage of true affection could bestow; and she felt capable, under such circumstances, of endeavouring even to like Bingley’s two sisters. Her mother’s thoughts she plainly saw were bent the same way, and she determined not to venture near her, lest she might hear too much. When they sat down to supper, therefore, she considered it a most unlucky perverseness which placed them within one of each other; and deeply was she vexed to find that her mother was talking to that one person (Lady Lucas) freely, openly, and of nothing else but of her expectation that Jane would be soon married to Mr. Bingley. It was an animating subject, and Mrs. Bennet seemed incapable of fatigue while enumerating the advantages of the match. His being such a charming young man, and so rich, and living but three miles from them, were the first points of self-gratulation; and then it was such a comfort to think how fond the two sisters were of Jane, and to be certain that they must desire the connection as much as she could do. It was, moreover, such a promising thing for her younger daughters, as Jane’s marrying so greatly must throw them in the way of other rich men; and, lastly, it was so pleasant at her time of life to be able to consign her single daughters to the care of their sister, that she might not be obliged to go into company more than she liked. It was necessary to make this circumstance a matter of pleasure, because on such occasions it is the etiquette; but no one was less likely than Mrs. Bennet to find comfort in staying at home at any period of her life. She concluded with many good wishes that Lady Lucas might soon be equally fortunate, though evidently and triumphantly believing there was no chance of it.

In vain did Elizabeth endeavour to check the rapidity of her mother’s words, or persuade her to describe her felicity in a less audible whisper; for to her inexpressible vexation she could perceive that the chief of it was overheard by Mr. Darcy, who sat opposite to them. Her mother only scolded her for being nonsensical. “What is Mr. Darcy to me, pray, that I should be afraid of him? I am sure we owe him no such particular civility as to be obliged to say nothing _he_ may not like to hear.” “For heaven’s sake, madam, speak lower. What advantage can it be to you to offend Mr. Darcy? You will never recommend yourself to his friend by so doing.” Nothing that she could say, however, had any influence. Her mother would talk of her views in the same intelligible tone. Elizabeth blushed and blushed again with shame and vexation. She could not help frequently glancing her eye at Mr. Darcy, though every glance convinced her of what she dreaded; for though he was not always looking at her mother, she was convinced that his attention was invariably fixed by her. The expression of his face changed gradually from indignant contempt to a composed and steady gravity.

At length, however, Mrs. Bennet had no more to say; and Lady Lucas, who had been long yawning at the repetition of delights which she saw no likelihood of sharing, was left to the comforts of cold ham and chicken. Elizabeth now began to revive. But not long was the interval of tranquillity; for when supper was over, singing was talked of, and she had the mortification of seeing Mary, after very little entreaty, preparing to oblige the company. By many significant looks and silent entreaties did she endeavour to prevent such a proof of complaisance,--but in vain; Mary would not understand them; such an opportunity of exhibiting was delightful to her, and she began her song. Elizabeth’s eyes were fixed on her, with most painful sensations; and she watched her progress through the several stanzas with an impatience which was very ill rewarded at their close; for Mary, on receiving amongst the thanks of the table the hint of a hope that she might be prevailed on to favour them again, after the pause of half a minute began another. Mary’s powers were by no means fitted for such a display; her voice was weak, and her manner affected. Elizabeth was in agonies. She looked at Jane to see how she bore it; but Jane was very composedly talking to Bingley. She looked at his two sisters, and saw them making signs of derision at each other, and at Darcy, who continued, however, impenetrably grave. She looked at her father to entreat his interference, lest Mary should be singing all night. He took the hint, and, when Mary had finished her second song, said aloud,--

Mary, though pretending not to hear, was somewhat disconcerted; and Elizabeth, sorry for her, and sorry for her father’s speech, was afraid her anxiety had done no good. Others of the party were now applied to. “If I,” said Mr. Collins, “were so fortunate as to be able to sing, I should have great pleasure, I am sure, in obliging the company with an air; for I consider music as a very innocent diversion, and perfectly compatible with the profession of a clergyman. I do not mean, however, to assert that we can be justified in devoting too much of our time to music, for there are certainly other things to be attended to. The rector of a parish has much to do. In the first place, he must make such an agreement for tithes as may be beneficial to himself and not offensive to his patron. He must write his own sermons; and the time that remains will not be too much for his parish duties, and the care and improvement of his dwelling, which he cannot be excused from making as comfortable as possible. And I do not think it of light importance that he should have attentive and conciliatory manners towards everybody, especially towards those to whom he owes his preferment. I cannot acquit him of that duty; nor could I think well of the man who should omit an occasion of testifying his respect towards anybody connected with the family.” And with a bow to Mr. Darcy, he concluded his speech, which had been spoken so loud as to be heard by half the room. Many stared--many smiled; but no one looked more amused than Mr. Bennet himself, while his wife seriously commended Mr. Collins for having spoken so sensibly, and observed, in a half-whisper to Lady Lucas, that he was a remarkably clever, good kind of young man.

To Elizabeth it appeared, that had her family made an agreement to expose themselves as much as they could during the evening, it would have been impossible for them to play their parts with more spirit, or finer success; and happy did she think it for Bingley and her sister that some of the exhibition had escaped his notice, and that his feelings were not of a sort to be much distressed by the folly which he must have witnessed. That his two sisters and Mr. Darcy, however, should have such an opportunity of ridiculing her relations was bad enough; and she could not determine whether the silent contempt of the gentleman, or the insolent smiles of the ladies, were more intolerable. The rest of the evening brought her little amusement. She was teased by Mr. Collins, who continued most perseveringly by her side; and though he could not prevail with her to dance with him again, put it out of her power to dance with others. In vain did she entreat him to stand up with somebody else, and offered to introduce him to any young lady in the room. He assured her that, as to dancing, he was perfectly indifferent to it; that his chief object was, by delicate attentions, to recommend himself to her; and that he should therefore make a point of remaining close to her the whole evening. There was no arguing upon such a project. She owed her greatest relief to her friend Miss Lucas, who often joined them, and good-naturedly engaged Mr. Collins’s conversation to herself.

She was at least free from the offence of Mr. Darcy’s further notice: though often standing within a very short distance of her, quite disengaged, he never came near enough to speak. She felt it to be the probable consequence of her allusions to Mr. Wickham, and rejoiced in it. The Longbourn party were the last of all the company to depart; and by a manœuvre of Mrs. Bennet had to wait for their carriage a quarter of an hour after everybody else was gone, which gave them time to see how heartily they were wished away by some of the family. Mrs. Hurst and her sister scarcely opened their mouths except to complain of fatigue, and were evidently impatient to have the house to themselves. They repulsed every attempt of Mrs. Bennet at conversation, and, by so doing, threw a languor over the whole party, which was very little relieved by the long speeches of Mr. Collins, who was complimenting Mr. Bingley and his sisters on the elegance of their entertainment, and the hospitality and politeness which had marked their behaviour to their guests. Darcy said nothing at all. Mr. Bennet, in equal silence, was enjoying the scene. Mr. Bingley and Jane were standing together a little detached from the rest, and talked only to each other. Elizabeth preserved as steady a silence as either Mrs. Hurst or Miss Bingley; and even Lydia was too much fatigued to utter more than the occasional exclamation of “Lord, how tired I am!” accompanied by a violent yawn.

When at length they arose to take leave, Mrs. Bennet was most pressingly civil in her hope of seeing the whole family soon at Longbourn; and addressed herself particularly to Mr. Bingley, to assure him how happy he would make them, by eating a family dinner with them at any time, without the ceremony of a formal invitation. Bingley was all grateful pleasure; and he readily engaged for taking the earliest opportunity of waiting on her after his return from London, whither he was obliged to go the next day for a short time. Mrs. Bennet was perfectly satisfied; and quitted the house under the delightful persuasion that, allowing for the necessary preparations of settlements, new carriages, and wedding clothes, she should undoubtedly see her daughter settled at Netherfield in the course of three or four months. Of having another daughter married to Mr. Collins she thought with equal certainty, and with considerable, though not equal, pleasure. Elizabeth was the least dear to her of all her children; and though the man and the match were quite good enough for _her_, the worth of each was eclipsed by Mr. Bingley and Netherfield.

The next day opened a new scene at Longbourn. Mr. Collins made his declaration in form. Having resolved to do it without loss of time, as his leave of absence extended only to the following Saturday, and having no feelings of diffidence to make it distressing to himself even at the moment, he set about it in a very orderly manner, with all the observances which he supposed a regular part of the business. On finding Mrs. Bennet, Elizabeth, and one of the younger girls together, soon after breakfast, he addressed the mother in these words,-- “May I hope, madam, for your interest with your fair daughter Elizabeth, when I solicit for the honour of a private audience with her in the course of this morning?” “Oh dear! Yes, certainly. I am sure Lizzy will be very happy--I am sure she can have no objection. Come, Kitty, I want you upstairs.” And gathering her work together, she was hastening away, when Elizabeth called out,-- “Dear ma’am, do not go. I beg you will not go. Mr. Collins must excuse me. He can have nothing to say to me that anybody need not hear. I am going away myself.”

“No, no, nonsense, Lizzy. I desire you will stay where you are.” And upon Elizabeth’s seeming really, with vexed and embarrassed looks, about to escape, she added, “Lizzy, I _insist_ upon your staying and hearing Mr. Collins.” Elizabeth would not oppose such an injunction; and a moment’s consideration making her also sensible that it would be wisest to get it over as soon and as quietly as possible, she sat down again, and tried to conceal, by incessant employment, the feelings which were divided between distress and diversion. Mrs. Bennet and Kitty walked off, and as soon as they were gone, Mr. Collins began,-- “Believe me, my dear Miss Elizabeth, that your modesty, so far from doing you any disservice, rather adds to your other perfections. You would have been less amiable in my eyes had there _not_ been this little unwillingness; but allow me to assure you that I have your respected mother’s permission for this address. You can hardly doubt the purport of my discourse, however your natural delicacy may lead you to dissemble; my attentions have been too marked to be mistaken. Almost as soon as I entered the house I singled you out as the companion of my future life. But before I am run away with by my feelings on this subject, perhaps it will be advisable for me to state my reasons for marrying--and, moreover, for coming into Hertfordshire with the design of selecting a wife, as I certainly did.”

The idea of Mr. Collins, with all his solemn composure, being run away with by his feelings, made Elizabeth so near laughing that she could not use the short pause he allowed in any attempt to stop him farther, and he continued,-- “You are too hasty, sir,” she cried. “You forget that I have made no answer. Let me do it without further loss of time. Accept my thanks for the compliment you are paying me. I am very sensible of the honour of your proposals, but it is impossible for me to do otherwise than decline them.” “I am not now to learn,” replied Mr. Collins, with a formal wave of the hand, “that it is usual with young ladies to reject the addresses of the man whom they secretly mean to accept, when he first applies for their favour; and that sometimes the refusal is repeated a second or even a third time. I am, therefore, by no means discouraged by what you have just said, and shall hope to lead you to the altar ere long.” “Upon my word, sir,” cried Elizabeth, “your hope is rather an extraordinary one after my declaration. I do assure you that I am not one of those young ladies (if such young ladies there are) who are so daring as to risk their happiness on the chance of being asked a second time. I am perfectly serious in my refusal. You could not make _me_ happy, and I am convinced that I am the last woman in the world who would make _you_ so. Nay, were your friend Lady Catherine to know me, I am persuaded she would find me in every respect ill qualified for the situation.”

“Were it certain that Lady Catherine would think so,” said Mr. Collins, very gravely--“but I cannot imagine that her Ladyship would at all disapprove of you. And you may be certain that when I have the honour of seeing her again I shall speak in the highest terms of your modesty, economy, and other amiable qualifications.” “Indeed, Mr. Collins, all praise of me will be unnecessary. You must give me leave to judge for myself, and pay me the compliment of believing what I say. I wish you very happy and very rich, and by refusing your hand, do all in my power to prevent your being otherwise. In making me the offer, you must have satisfied the delicacy of your feelings with regard to my family, and may take possession of Longbourn estate whenever it falls, without any self-reproach. This matter may be considered, therefore, as finally settled.” And rising as she thus spoke, she would have quitted the room, had not Mr. Collins thus addressed her,-- “When I do myself the honour of speaking to you next on the subject, I shall hope to receive a more favourable answer than you have now given me; though I am far from accusing you of cruelty at present, because I know it to be the established custom of your sex to reject a man on the first application, and, perhaps, you have even now said as much to encourage my suit as would be consistent with the true delicacy of the female character.”

“Really, Mr. Collins,” cried Elizabeth, with some warmth, “you puzzle me exceedingly. If what I have hitherto said can appear to you in the form of encouragement, I know not how to express my refusal in such a way as may convince you of its being one.” “You must give me leave to flatter myself, my dear cousin, that your refusal of my addresses are merely words of course. My reasons for believing it are briefly these:--It does not appear to me that my hand is unworthy of your acceptance, or that the establishment I can offer would be any other than highly desirable. My situation in life, my connections with the family of De Bourgh, and my relationship to your own, are circumstances highly in my favour; and you should take it into further consideration that, in spite of your manifold attractions, it is by no means certain that another offer of marriage may ever be made you. Your portion is unhappily so small, that it will in all likelihood undo the effects of your loveliness and amiable qualifications. As I must, therefore, conclude that you are not serious in your rejection of me, I shall choose to attribute it to your wish of increasing my love by suspense, according to the usual practice of elegant females.”

“I do assure you, sir, that I have no pretensions whatever to that kind of elegance which consists in tormenting a respectable man. I would rather be paid the compliment of being believed sincere. I thank you again and again for the honour you have done me in your proposals, but to accept them is absolutely impossible. My feelings in every respect forbid it. Can I speak plainer? Do not consider me now as an elegant female intending to plague you, but as a rational creature speaking the truth from her heart.” “You are uniformly charming!” cried he, with an air of awkward gallantry; “and I am persuaded that, when sanctioned by the express authority of both your excellent parents, my proposals will not fail of being acceptable.” To such perseverance in wilful self-deception Elizabeth would make no reply, and immediately and in silence withdrew; determined, that if he persisted in considering her repeated refusals as flattering encouragement, to apply to her father, whose negative might be uttered in such a manner as must be decisive, and whose behaviour at least could not be mistaken for the affectation and coquetry of an elegant female.

Mr. Collins was not left long to the silent contemplation of his successful love; for Mrs. Bennet, having dawdled about in the vestibule to watch for the end of the conference, no sooner saw Elizabeth open the door and with quick step pass her towards the staircase, than she entered the breakfast-room, and congratulated both him and herself in warm terms on the happy prospect of their nearer connection. Mr. Collins received and returned these felicitations with equal pleasure, and then proceeded to relate the particulars of their interview, with the result of which he trusted he had every reason to be satisfied, since the refusal which his cousin had steadfastly given him would naturally flow from her bashful modesty and the genuine delicacy of her character. This information, however, startled Mrs. Bennet: she would have been glad to be equally satisfied that her daughter had meant to encourage him by protesting against his proposals, but she dared not believe it, and could not help saying so. “But depend upon it, Mr. Collins,” she added, “that Lizzy shall be brought to reason. I will speak to her about it myself directly. She is a very headstrong, foolish girl, and does not know her own interest; but I will _make_ her know it.”

“Pardon me for interrupting you, madam,” cried Mr. Collins; “but if she is really headstrong and foolish, I know not whether she would altogether be a very desirable wife to a man in my situation, who naturally looks for happiness in the marriage state. If, therefore, she actually persists in rejecting my suit, perhaps it were better not to force her into accepting me, because, if liable to such defects of temper, she could not contribute much to my felicity.” “Sir, you quite misunderstand me,” said Mrs. Bennet, alarmed. “Lizzy is only headstrong in such matters as these. In everything else she is as good-natured a girl as ever lived. I will go directly to Mr. Bennet, and we shall very soon settle it with her, I am sure.” “Oh, Mr. Bennet, you are wanted immediately; we are all in an uproar. You must come and make Lizzy marry Mr. Collins, for she vows she will not have him; and if you do not make haste he will change his mind and not have _her_.” Mr. Bennet raised his eyes from his book as she entered, and fixed them on her face with a calm unconcern, which was not in the least altered by her communication.

“Come here, child,” cried her father as she appeared. “I have sent for you on an affair of importance. I understand that Mr. Collins has made you an offer of marriage. Is it true?” “An unhappy alternative is before you, Elizabeth. From this day you must be a stranger to one of your parents. Your mother will never see you again if you do _not_ marry Mr. Collins, and I will never see you again if you _do_.” Elizabeth could not but smile at such a conclusion of such a beginning; but Mrs. Bennet, who had persuaded herself that her husband regarded the affair as she wished, was excessively disappointed. “My dear,” replied her husband, “I have two small favours to request. First, that you will allow me the free use of my understanding on the present occasion; and, secondly, of my room. I shall be glad to have the library to myself as soon as may be.” Not yet, however, in spite of her disappointment in her husband, did Mrs. Bennet give up the point. She talked to Elizabeth again and again; coaxed and threatened her by turns. She endeavoured to secure Jane in her interest, but Jane, with all possible mildness, declined interfering; and Elizabeth, sometimes with real earnestness, and sometimes with playful gaiety, replied to her attacks. Though her manner varied, however, her determination never did.

Mr. Collins, meanwhile, was meditating in solitude on what had passed. He thought too well of himself to comprehend on what motive his cousin could refuse him; and though his pride was hurt, he suffered in no other way. His regard for her was quite imaginary; and the possibility of her deserving her mother’s reproach prevented his feeling any regret. While the family were in this confusion, Charlotte Lucas came to spend the day with them. She was met in the vestibule by Lydia, who, flying to her, cried in a half whisper, “I am glad you are come, for there is such fun here! What do you think has happened this morning? Mr. Collins has made an offer to Lizzy, and she will not have him.” Charlotte had hardly time to answer before they were joined by Kitty, who came to tell the same news; and no sooner had they entered the breakfast-room, where Mrs. Bennet was alone, than she likewise began on the subject, calling on Miss Lucas for her compassion, and entreating her to persuade her friend Lizzy to comply with the wishes of her family. “Pray do, my dear Miss Lucas,” she added, in a melancholy tone; “for nobody is on my side, nobody takes part with me; I am cruelly used, nobody feels for my poor nerves.”

“Ay, there she comes,” continued Mrs. Bennet, “looking as unconcerned as may be, and caring no more for us than if we were at York, provided she can have her own way. But I tell you what, Miss Lizzy, if you take it into your head to go on refusing every offer of marriage in this way, you will never get a husband at all--and I am sure I do not know who is to maintain you when your father is dead. _I_ shall not be able to keep you--and so I warn you. I have done with you from this very day. I told you in the library, you know, that I should never speak to you again, and you will find me as good as my word. I have no pleasure in talking to undutiful children. Not that I have much pleasure, indeed, in talking to anybody. People who suffer as I do from nervous complaints can have no great inclination for talking. Nobody can tell what I suffer! But it is always so. Those who do not complain are never pitied.”

Her daughters listened in silence to this effusion, sensible that any attempt to reason with or soothe her would only increase the irritation. She talked on, therefore, without interruption from any of them till they were joined by Mr. Collins, who entered with an air more stately than usual, and on perceiving whom, she said to the girls,-- Elizabeth passed quietly out of the room, Jane and Kitty followed, but Lydia stood her ground, determined to hear all she could; and Charlotte, detained first by the civility of Mr. Collins, whose inquiries after herself and all her family were very minute, and then by a little curiosity, satisfied herself with walking to the window and pretending not to hear. In a doleful voice Mrs. Bennet thus began the projected conversation:-- “My dear madam,” replied he, “let us be for ever silent on this point. Far be it from me,” he presently continued, in a voice that marked his displeasure, “to resent the behaviour of your daughter. Resignation to inevitable evils is the duty of us all: the peculiar duty of a young man who has been so fortunate as I have been, in early preferment; and, I trust, I am resigned. Perhaps not the less so from feeling a doubt of my positive happiness had my fair cousin honoured me with her hand; for I have often observed, that resignation is never so perfect as when the blessing denied begins to lose somewhat of its value in our estimation. You will not, I hope, consider me as showing any disrespect to your family, my dear madam, by thus withdrawing my pretensions to your daughter’s favour, without having paid yourself and Mr. Bennet the compliment of requesting you to interpose your authority in my behalf. My conduct may, I fear, be objectionable in having accepted my dismission from your daughter’s lips instead of your own; but we are all liable to error. I have certainly meant well through the whole affair. My object has been to secure an amiable companion for myself, with due consideration for the advantage of all your family; and if my _manner_ has been at all reprehensible, I here beg leave to apologize.”

The discussion of Mr. Collins’s offer was now nearly at an end, and Elizabeth had only to suffer from the uncomfortable feelings necessarily attending it, and occasionally from some peevish allusion of her mother. As for the gentleman himself, _his_ feelings were chiefly expressed, not by embarrassment or dejection, or by trying to avoid her, but by stiffness of manner and resentful silence. He scarcely ever spoke to her; and the assiduous attentions which he had been so sensible of himself were transferred for the rest of the day to Miss Lucas, whose civility in listening to him was a seasonable relief to them all, and especially to her friend. The morrow produced no abatement of Mrs. Bennet’s ill humour or ill health. Mr. Collins was also in the same state of angry pride. Elizabeth had hoped that his resentment might shorten his visit, but his plan did not appear in the least affected by it. He was always to have gone on Saturday, and to Saturday he still meant to stay. After breakfast, the girls walked to Meryton, to inquire if Mr. Wickham were returned, and to lament over his absence from the Netherfield ball. He joined them on their entering the town, and attended them to their aunt’s, where his regret and vexation and the concern of everybody were well talked over. To Elizabeth, however, he voluntarily acknowledged that the necessity of his absence _had_ been self-imposed.

“I found,” said he, “as the time drew near, that I had better not meet Mr. Darcy;--that to be in the same room, the same party with him for so many hours together, might be more than I could bear, and that scenes might arise unpleasant to more than myself.” She highly approved his forbearance; and they had leisure for a full discussion of it, and for all the commendations which they civilly bestowed on each other, as Wickham and another officer walked back with them to Longbourn, and during the walk he particularly attended to her. His accompanying them was a double advantage: she felt all the compliment it offered to herself; and it was most acceptable as an occasion of introducing him to her father and mother. Soon after their return, a letter was delivered to Miss Bennet; it came from Netherfield, and was opened immediately. The envelope contained a sheet of elegant, little, hot-pressed paper, well covered with a lady’s fair, flowing hand; and Elizabeth saw her sister’s countenance change as she read it, and saw her dwelling intently on some particular passages. Jane recollected herself soon; and putting the letter away, tried to join, with her usual cheerfulness, in the general conversation: but Elizabeth felt an anxiety on the subject which drew off her attention even from Wickham; and no sooner had he and his companion taken leave, than a glance from Jane invited her to follow her upstairs. When they had gained their own room, Jane, taking out her letter, said, “This is from Caroline Bingley: what it contains has surprised me a good deal. The whole party have left Netherfield by this time, and are on their way to town; and without any intention of coming back again. You shall hear what she says.”

She then read the first sentence aloud, which comprised the information of their having just resolved to follow their brother to town directly, and of their meaning to dine that day in Grosvenor Street, where Mr. Hurst had a house. The next was in these words:--“‘I do not pretend to regret anything I shall leave in Hertfordshire except your society, my dearest friend; but we will hope, at some future period, to enjoy many returns of that delightful intercourse we have known, and in the meanwhile may lessen the pain of separation by a very frequent and most unreserved correspondence. I depend on you for that.’” To these high-flown expressions Elizabeth listened with all the insensibility of distrust; and though the suddenness of their removal surprised her, she saw nothing in it really to lament: it was not to be supposed that their absence from Netherfield would prevent Mr. Bingley’s being there; and as to the loss of their society, she was persuaded that Jane must soon cease to regard it in the enjoyment of his. “It is unlucky,” said she, after a short pause, “that you should not be able to see your friends before they leave the country. But may we not hope that the period of future happiness, to which Miss Bingley looks forward, may arrive earlier than she is aware, and that the delightful intercourse you have known as friends will be renewed with yet greater satisfaction as sisters? Mr. Bingley will not be detained in London by them.”

“‘When my brother left us yesterday, he imagined that the business which took him to London might be concluded in three or four days; but as we are certain it cannot be so, and at the same time convinced that when Charles gets to town he will be in no hurry to leave it again, we have determined on following him thither, that he may not be obliged to spend his vacant hours in a comfortless hotel. Many of my acquaintance are already there for the winter: I wish I could hear that you, my dearest friend, had any intention of making one in the crowd, but of that I despair. I sincerely hope your Christmas in Hertfordshire may abound in the gaieties which that season generally brings, and that your beaux will be so numerous as to prevent your feeling the loss of the three of whom we shall deprive you.’ “Why will you think so? It must be his own doing; he is his own master. But you do not know _all_. I _will_ read you the passage which particularly hurts me. I will have no reserves from _you_. ‘Mr. Darcy is impatient to see his sister; and to confess the truth, _we_ are scarcely less eager to meet her again. I really do not think Georgiana Darcy has her equal for beauty, elegance, and accomplishments; and the affection she inspires in Louisa and myself is heightened into something still more interesting from the hope we dare to entertain of her being hereafter our sister. I do not know whether I ever before mentioned to you my feelings on this subject, but I will not leave the country without confiding them, and I trust you will not esteem them unreasonable. My brother admires her greatly already; he will have frequent opportunity now of seeing her on the most intimate footing; her relations all wish the connection as much as his own; and a sister’s partiality is not misleading me, I think, when I call Charles most capable of engaging any woman’s heart. With all these circumstances to favour an attachment, and nothing to prevent it, am I wrong, my dearest Jane, in indulging the hope of an event which will secure the happiness of so many?’ What think you of _this_ sentence, my dear Lizzy?” said Jane, as she finished it. “Is it not clear enough? Does it not expressly declare that Caroline neither expects nor wishes me to be her sister; that she is perfectly convinced of her brother’s indifference; and that if she suspects the nature of my feelings for him she means (most kindly!) to put me on my guard. Can there be any other opinion on the subject?”

“You shall have it in a few words. Miss Bingley sees that her brother is in love with you and wants him to marry Miss Darcy. She follows him to town in the hope of keeping him there, and tries to persuade you that he does not care about you.” “Indeed, Jane, you ought to believe me. No one who has ever seen you together can doubt his affection; Miss Bingley, I am sure, cannot: she is not such a simpleton. Could she have seen half as much love in Mr. Darcy for herself, she would have ordered her wedding clothes. But the case is this:--we are not rich enough or grand enough for them; and she is the more anxious to get Miss Darcy for her brother, from the notion that when there has been _one_ inter-marriage, she may have less trouble in achieving a second; in which there is certainly some ingenuity, and I dare say it would succeed if Miss de Bourgh were out of the way. But, my dearest Jane, you cannot seriously imagine that, because Miss Bingley tells you her brother greatly admires Miss Darcy, he is in the smallest degree less sensible of _your_ merit than when he took leave of you on Tuesday; or that it will be in her power to persuade him that, instead of being in love with you, he is very much in love with her friend.”

“If we thought alike of Miss Bingley,” replied Jane, “your representation of all this might make me quite easy. But I know the foundation is unjust. Caroline is incapable of wilfully deceiving anyone; and all that I can hope in this case is, that she is deceived herself.” “That is right. You could not have started a more happy idea, since you will not take comfort in mine: believe her to be deceived, by all means. You have now done your duty by her, and must fret no longer.” “You must decide for yourself,” said Elizabeth; “and if, upon mature deliberation, you find that the misery of disobliging his two sisters is more than equivalent to the happiness of being his wife, I advise you, by all means, to refuse him.” “How can you talk so?” said Jane, faintly smiling; “you must know, that, though I should be exceedingly grieved at their disapprobation, I could not hesitate.” The idea of his returning no more Elizabeth treated with the utmost contempt. It appeared to her merely the suggestion of Caroline’s interested wishes; and she could not for a moment suppose that those wishes, however openly or artfully spoken, could influence a young man so totally independent of everyone.

She represented to her sister, as forcibly as possible, what she felt on the subject, and had soon the pleasure of seeing its happy effect. Jane’s temper was not desponding; and she was gradually led to hope, though the diffidence of affection sometimes overcame the hope, that Bingley would return to Netherfield, and answer every wish of her heart. They agreed that Mrs. Bennet should only hear of the departure of the family, without being alarmed on the score of the gentleman’s conduct; but even this partial communication gave her a great deal of concern, and she bewailed it as exceedingly unlucky that the ladies should happen to go away just as they were all getting so intimate together. After lamenting it, however, at some length, she had the consolation of thinking that Mr. Bingley would be soon down again, and soon dining at Longbourn; and the conclusion of all was the comfortable declaration, that, though he had been invited only to a family dinner, she would take care to have two full courses. The Bennets were engaged to dine with the Lucases; and again, during the chief of the day, was Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to Mr. Collins. Elizabeth took an opportunity of thanking her. “It keeps him in good humour,” said she, “and I am more obliged to you than I can express.”

Charlotte assured her friend of her satisfaction in being useful, and that it amply repaid her for the little sacrifice of her time. This was very amiable; but Charlotte’s kindness extended farther than Elizabeth had any conception of:--its object was nothing less than to secure her from any return of Mr. Collins’s addresses, by engaging them towards herself. Such was Miss Lucas’s scheme; and appearances were so favourable, that when they parted at night, she would have felt almost sure of success if he had not been to leave Hertfordshire so very soon. But here she did injustice to the fire and independence of his character; for it led him to escape out of Longbourn House the next morning with admirable slyness, and hasten to Lucas Lodge to throw himself at her feet. He was anxious to avoid the notice of his cousins, from a conviction that, if they saw him depart, they could not fail to conjecture his design, and he was not willing to have the attempt known till its success could be known likewise; for, though feeling almost secure, and with reason, for Charlotte had been tolerably encouraging, he was comparatively diffident since the adventure of Wednesday. His reception, however, was of the most flattering kind. Miss Lucas perceived him from an upper window as he walked towards the house, and instantly set out to meet him accidentally in the lane. But little had she dared to hope that so much love and eloquence awaited her there.

In as short a time as Mr. Collins’s long speeches would allow, everything was settled between them to the satisfaction of both; and as they entered the house, he earnestly entreated her to name the day that was to make him the happiest of men; and though such a solicitation must be waived for the present, the lady felt no inclination to trifle with his happiness. The stupidity with which he was favoured by nature must guard his courtship from any charm that could make a woman wish for its continuance; and Miss Lucas, who accepted him solely from the pure and disinterested desire of an establishment, cared not how soon that establishment were gained. Sir William and Lady Lucas were speedily applied to for their consent; and it was bestowed with a most joyful alacrity. Mr. Collins’s present circumstances made it a most eligible match for their daughter, to whom they could give little fortune; and his prospects of future wealth were exceedingly fair. Lady Lucas began directly to calculate, with more interest than the matter had ever excited before, how many years longer Mr. Bennet was likely to live; and Sir William gave it as his decided opinion, that whenever Mr. Collins should be in possession of the Longbourn estate, it would be highly expedient that both he and his wife should make their appearance at St. James’s. The whole family in short were properly overjoyed on the occasion. The younger girls formed hopes of _coming out_ a year or two sooner than they might otherwise have done; and the boys were relieved from their apprehension of Charlotte’s dying an old maid. Charlotte herself was tolerably composed. She had gained her point, and had time to consider of it. Her reflections were in general satisfactory. Mr. Collins, to be sure, was neither sensible nor agreeable: his society was irksome, and his attachment to her must be imaginary. But still he would be her husband. Without thinking highly either of men or of matrimony, marriage had always been her object: it was the only honourable provision for well-educated young women of small fortune, and, however uncertain of giving happiness, must be their pleasantest preservative from want. This preservative she had now obtained; and at the age of twenty-seven, without having ever been handsome, she felt all the good luck of it. The least agreeable circumstance in the business was the surprise it must occasion to Elizabeth Bennet, whose friendship she valued beyond that of any other person. Elizabeth would wonder, and probably would blame her; and though her resolution was not to be shaken, her feelings must be hurt by such a disapprobation. She resolved to give her the information herself; and therefore charged Mr. Collins, when he returned to Longbourn to dinner, to drop no hint of what had passed before any of the family. A promise of secrecy was of course very dutifully given, but it could not be kept without difficulty; for the curiosity excited by his long absence burst forth in such very direct questions on his return, as required some ingenuity to evade, and he was at the same time exercising great self-denial, for he was longing to publish his prosperous love.

As he was to begin his journey too early on the morrow to see any of the family, the ceremony of leave-taking was performed when the ladies moved for the night; and Mrs. Bennet, with great politeness and cordiality, said how happy they should be to see him at Longbourn again, whenever his other engagements might allow him to visit them. “My dear madam,” he replied, “this invitation is particularly gratifying, because it is what I have been hoping to receive; and you may be very certain that I shall avail myself of it as soon as possible.” “But is there not danger of Lady Catherine’s disapprobation here, my good sir? You had better neglect your relations than run the risk of offending your patroness.” “My dear sir,” replied Mr. Collins, “I am particularly obliged to you for this friendly caution, and you may depend upon my not taking so material a step without her Ladyship’s concurrence.” “You cannot be too much on your guard. Risk anything rather than her displeasure; and if you find it likely to be raised by your coming to us again, which I should think exceedingly probable, stay quietly at home, and be satisfied that _we_ shall take no offence.”

“Believe me, my dear sir, my gratitude is warmly excited by such affectionate attention; and, depend upon it, you will speedily receive from me a letter of thanks for this as well as for every other mark of your regard during my stay in Hertfordshire. As for my fair cousins, though my absence may not be long enough to render it necessary, I shall now take the liberty of wishing them health and happiness, not excepting my cousin Elizabeth.” With proper civilities, the ladies then withdrew; all of them equally surprised to find that he meditated a quick return. Mrs. Bennet wished to understand by it that he thought of paying his addresses to one of her younger girls, and Mary might have been prevailed on to accept him. She rated his abilities much higher than any of the others: there was a solidity in his reflections which often struck her; and though by no means so clever as herself, she thought that, if encouraged to read and improve himself by such an example as hers, he might become a very agreeable companion. But on the following morning every hope of this kind was done away. Miss Lucas called soon after breakfast, and in a private conference with Elizabeth related the event of the day before.

The possibility of Mr. Collins’s fancying himself in love with her friend had once occurred to Elizabeth within the last day or two: but that Charlotte could encourage him seemed almost as far from possibility as that she could encourage him herself; and her astonishment was consequently so great as to overcome at first the bounds of decorum, and she could not help crying out,-- The steady countenance which Miss Lucas had commanded in telling her story gave way to a momentary confusion here on receiving so direct a reproach; though, as it was no more than she expected, she soon regained her composure, and calmly replied,-- “Why should you be surprised, my dear Eliza? Do you think it incredible that Mr. Collins should be able to procure any woman’s good opinion, because he was not so happy as to succeed with you?” But Elizabeth had now recollected herself; and, making a strong effort for it, was able to assure her, with tolerable firmness, that the prospect of their relationship was highly grateful to her, and that she wished her all imaginable happiness.

“I see what you are feeling,” replied Charlotte; “you must be surprised, very much surprised, so lately as Mr. Collins was wishing to marry you. But when you have had time to think it all over, I hope you will be satisfied with what I have done. I am not romantic, you know. I never was. I ask only a comfortable home; and, considering Mr. Collins’s character, connections, and situation in life, I am convinced that my chance of happiness with him is as fair as most people can boast on entering the marriage state.” Elizabeth quietly answered “undoubtedly;” and, after an awkward pause, they returned to the rest of the family. Charlotte did not stay much longer; and Elizabeth was then left to reflect on what she had heard. It was a long time before she became at all reconciled to the idea of so unsuitable a match. The strangeness of Mr. Collins’s making two offers of marriage within three days was nothing in comparison of his being now accepted. She had always felt that Charlotte’s opinion of matrimony was not exactly like her own; but she could not have supposed it possible that, when called into action, she would have sacrificed every better feeling to worldly advantage. Charlotte, the wife of Mr. Collins, was a most humiliating picture! And to the pang of a friend disgracing herself, and sunk in her esteem, was added the distressing conviction that it was impossible for that friend to be tolerably happy in the lot she had chosen.

Elizabeth was sitting with her mother and sisters, reflecting on what she had heard, and doubting whether she was authorized to mention it, when Sir William Lucas himself appeared, sent by his daughter to announce her engagement to the family. With many compliments to them, and much self-gratulation on the prospect of a connection between the houses, he unfolded the matter,--to an audience not merely wondering, but incredulous; for Mrs. Bennet, with more perseverance than politeness, protested he must be entirely mistaken; and Lydia, always unguarded and often uncivil, boisterously exclaimed,-- Nothing less than the complaisance of a courtier could have borne without anger such treatment: but Sir William’s good-breeding carried him through it all; and though he begged leave to be positive as to the truth of his information, he listened to all their impertinence with the most forbearing courtesy. Elizabeth, feeling it incumbent on her to relieve him from so unpleasant a situation, now put herself forward to confirm his account, by mentioning her prior knowledge of it from Charlotte herself; and endeavoured to put a stop to the exclamations of her mother and sisters, by the earnestness of her congratulations to Sir William, in which she was readily joined by Jane, and by making a variety of remarks on the happiness that might be expected from the match, the excellent character of Mr. Collins, and the convenient distance of Hunsford from London.

Mrs. Bennet was, in fact, too much overpowered to say a great deal while Sir William remained; but no sooner had he left them than her feelings found a rapid vent. In the first place, she persisted in disbelieving the whole of the matter; secondly, she was very sure that Mr. Collins had been taken in; thirdly, she trusted that they would never be happy together; and, fourthly, that the match might be broken off. Two inferences, however, were plainly deduced from the whole: one, that Elizabeth was the real cause of all the mischief; and the other, that she herself had been barbarously used by them all; and on these two points she principally dwelt during the rest of the day. Nothing could console and nothing appease her. Nor did that day wear out her resentment. A week elapsed before she could see Elizabeth without scolding her: a month passed away before she could speak to Sir William or Lady Lucas without being rude; and many months were gone before she could at all forgive their daughter. Mr. Bennet’s emotions were much more tranquil on the occasion, and such as he did experience he pronounced to be of a most agreeable sort; for it gratified him, he said, to discover that Charlotte Lucas, whom he had been used to think tolerably sensible, was as foolish as his wife, and more foolish than his daughter!

Jane confessed herself a little surprised at the match: but she said less of her astonishment than of her earnest desire for their happiness; nor could Elizabeth persuade her to consider it as improbable. Kitty and Lydia were far from envying Miss Lucas, for Mr. Collins was only a clergyman; and it affected them in no other way than as a piece of news to spread at Meryton. Lady Lucas could not be insensible of triumph on being able to retort on Mrs. Bennet the comfort of having a daughter well married; and she called at Longbourn rather oftener than usual to say how happy she was, though Mrs. Bennet’s sour looks and ill-natured remarks might have been enough to drive happiness away. Between Elizabeth and Charlotte there was a restraint which kept them mutually silent on the subject; and Elizabeth felt persuaded that no real confidence could ever subsist between them again. Her disappointment in Charlotte made her turn with fonder regard to her sister, of whose rectitude and delicacy she was sure her opinion could never be shaken, and for whose happiness she grew daily more anxious, as Bingley had now been gone a week, and nothing was heard of his return.

Jane had sent Caroline an early answer to her letter, and was counting the days till she might reasonably hope to hear again. The promised letter of thanks from Mr. Collins arrived on Tuesday, addressed to their father, and written with all the solemnity of gratitude which a twelve-month’s abode in the family might have prompted. After discharging his conscience on that head, he proceeded to inform them, with many rapturous expressions, of his happiness in having obtained the affection of their amiable neighbour, Miss Lucas, and then explained that it was merely with the view of enjoying her society that he had been so ready to close with their kind wish of seeing him again at Longbourn, whither he hoped to be able to return on Monday fortnight; for Lady Catherine, he added, so heartily approved his marriage, that she wished it to take place as soon as possible, which he trusted would be an unanswerable argument with his amiable Charlotte to name an early day for making him the happiest of men. Mr. Collins’s return into Hertfordshire was no longer a matter of pleasure to Mrs. Bennet. On the contrary, she was as much disposed to complain of it as her husband. It was very strange that he should come to Longbourn instead of to Lucas Lodge; it was also very inconvenient and exceedingly troublesome. She hated having visitors in the house while her health was so indifferent, and lovers were of all people the most disagreeable. Such were the gentle murmurs of Mrs. Bennet, and they gave way only to the greater distress of Mr. Bingley’s continued absence.

Neither Jane nor Elizabeth were comfortable on this subject. Day after day passed away without bringing any other tidings of him than the report which shortly prevailed in Meryton of his coming no more to Netherfield the whole winter; a report which highly incensed Mrs. Bennet, and which she never failed to contradict as a most scandalous falsehood. Even Elizabeth began to fear--not that Bingley was indifferent--but that his sisters would be successful in keeping him away. Unwilling as she was to admit an idea so destructive to Jane’s happiness, and so dishonourable to the stability of her lover, she could not prevent its frequently recurring. The united efforts of his two unfeeling sisters, and of his overpowering friend, assisted by the attractions of Miss Darcy and the amusements of London, might be too much, she feared, for the strength of his attachment. As for Jane, _her_ anxiety under this suspense was, of course, more painful than Elizabeth’s: but whatever she felt she was desirous of concealing; and between herself and Elizabeth, therefore, the subject was never alluded to. But as no such delicacy restrained her mother, an hour seldom passed in which she did not talk of Bingley, express her impatience for his arrival, or even require Jane to confess that if he did not come back she should think herself very ill-used. It needed all Jane’s steady mildness to bear these attacks with tolerable tranquillity.

Mr. Collins returned most punctually on the Monday fortnight, but his reception at Longbourn was not quite so gracious as it had been on his first introduction. He was too happy, however, to need much attention; and, luckily for the others, the business of love-making relieved them from a great deal of his company. The chief of every day was spent by him at Lucas Lodge, and he sometimes returned to Longbourn only in time to make an apology for his absence before the family went to bed. Mrs. Bennet was really in a most pitiable state. The very mention of anything concerning the match threw her into an agony of ill-humour, and wherever she went she was sure of hearing it talked of. The sight of Miss Lucas was odious to her. As her successor in that house, she regarded her with jealous abhorrence. Whenever Charlotte came to see them, she concluded her to be anticipating the hour of possession; and whenever she spoke in a low voice to Mr. Collins, was convinced that they were talking of the Longbourn estate, and resolving to turn herself and her daughters out of the house as soon as Mr. Bennet was dead. She complained bitterly of all this to her husband.

“Indeed, Mr. Bennet,” said she, “it is very hard to think that Charlotte Lucas should ever be mistress of this house, that _I_ should be forced to make way for _her_, and live to see her take my place in it!” “I never can be thankful, Mr. Bennet, for anything about the entail. How anyone could have the conscience to entail away an estate from one’s own daughters I cannot understand; and all for the sake of Mr. Collins, too! Why should _he_ have it more than anybody else?” Miss Bingley’s letter arrived, and put an end to doubt. The very first sentence conveyed the assurance of their being all settled in London for the winter, and concluded with her brother’s regret at not having had time to pay his respects to his friends in Hertfordshire before he left the country. Hope was over, entirely over; and when Jane could attend to the rest of the letter, she found little, except the professed affection of the writer, that could give her any comfort. Miss Darcy’s praise occupied the chief of it. Her many attractions were again dwelt on; and Caroline boasted joyfully of their increasing intimacy, and ventured to predict the accomplishment of the wishes which had been unfolded in her former letter. She wrote also with great pleasure of her brother’s being an inmate of Mr. Darcy’s house, and mentioned with raptures some plans of the latter with regard to new furniture.

Elizabeth, to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this, heard it in silent indignation. Her heart was divided between concern for her sister and resentment against all others. To Caroline’s assertion of her brother’s being partial to Miss Darcy, she paid no credit. That he was really fond of Jane, she doubted no more than she had ever done; and much as she had always been disposed to like him, she could not think without anger, hardly without contempt, on that easiness of temper, that want of proper resolution, which now made him the slave of his designing friends, and led him to sacrifice his own happiness to the caprice of their inclinations. Had his own happiness, however, been the only sacrifice, he might have been allowed to sport with it in whatever manner he thought best; but her sister’s was involved in it, as she thought he must be sensible himself. It was a subject, in short, on which reflection would be long indulged, and must be unavailing. She could think of nothing else; and yet, whether Bingley’s regard had really died away, or were suppressed by his friends’ interference; whether he had been aware of Jane’s attachment, or whether it had escaped his observation; whichever were the case, though her opinion of him must be materially affected by the difference, her sister’s situation remained the same, her peace equally wounded.

A day or two passed before Jane had courage to speak of her feelings to Elizabeth; but at last, on Mrs. Bennet’s leaving them together, after a longer irritation than usual about Netherfield and its master, she could not help saying,-- “O that my dear mother had more command over herself! she can have no idea of the pain she gives me by her continual reflections on him. But I will not repine. It cannot last long. He will be forgot, and we shall all be as we were before.” “You doubt me,” cried Jane, slightly colouring; “indeed, you have no reason. He may live in my memory as the most amiable man of my acquaintance but that is all. I have nothing either to hope or fear, and nothing to reproach him with. Thank God I have not _that_ pain. A little time, therefore--I shall certainly try to get the better----” With a stronger voice she soon added, “I have this comfort immediately, that it has not been more than an error of fancy on my side, and that it has done no harm to anyone but myself.”

“My dear Jane,” exclaimed Elizabeth, “you are too good. Your sweetness and disinterestedness are really angelic; I do not know what to say to you. I feel as if I had never done you justice, or loved you as you deserve.” “Nay,” said Elizabeth, “this is not fair. _You_ wish to think all the world respectable, and are hurt if I speak ill of anybody. _I_ only want to think _you_ perfect, and you set yourself against it. Do not be afraid of my running into any excess, of my encroaching on your privilege of universal good-will. You need not. There are few people whom I really love, and still fewer of whom I think well. The more I see of the world the more am I dissatisfied with it; and every day confirms my belief of the inconsistency of all human characters, and of the little dependence that can be placed on the appearance of either merit or sense. I have met with two instances lately: one I will not mention, the other is Charlotte’s marriage. It is unaccountable! in every view it is unaccountable!”

“My dear Lizzy, do not give way to such feelings as these. They will ruin your happiness. You do not make allowance enough for difference of situation and temper. Consider Mr. Collins’s respectability, and Charlotte’s prudent, steady character. Remember that she is one of a large family; that as to fortune it is a most eligible match; and be ready to believe, for everybody’s sake, that she may feel something like regard and esteem for our cousin.” “To oblige you, I would try to believe almost anything, but no one else could be benefited by such a belief as this; for were I persuaded that Charlotte had any regard for him, I should only think worse of her understanding than I now do of her heart. My dear Jane, Mr. Collins is a conceited, pompous, narrow-minded, silly man: you know he is, as well as I do; and you must feel, as well as I do, that the woman who marries him cannot have a proper way of thinking. You shall not defend her, though it is Charlotte Lucas. You shall not, for the sake of one individual, change the meaning of principle and integrity, nor endeavour to persuade yourself or me, that selfishness is prudence, and insensibility of danger security for happiness.”

“I must think your language too strong in speaking of both,” replied Jane; “and I hope you will be convinced of it, by seeing them happy together. But enough of this. You alluded to something else. You mentioned _two_ instances. I cannot misunderstand you, but I entreat you, dear Lizzy, not to pain me by thinking _that person_ to blame, and saying your opinion of him is sunk. We must not be so ready to fancy ourselves intentionally injured. We must not expect a lively young man to be always so guarded and circumspect. It is very often nothing but our own vanity that deceives us. Women fancy admiration means more than it does.” “I am far from attributing any part of Mr. Bingley’s conduct to design,” said Elizabeth; “but, without scheming to do wrong, or to make others unhappy, there may be error and there may be misery. Thoughtlessness, want of attention to other people’s feelings, and want of resolution, will do the business.” “I cannot believe it. Why should they try to influence him? They can only wish his happiness; and if he is attached to me no other woman can secure it.”

“Your first position is false. They may wish many things besides his happiness: they may wish his increase of wealth and consequence; they may wish him to marry a girl who has all the importance of money, great connections, and pride.” “Beyond a doubt they do wish him to choose Miss Darcy,” replied Jane; “but this may be from better feelings than you are supposing. They have known her much longer than they have known me; no wonder if they love her better. But, whatever may be their own wishes, it is very unlikely they should have opposed their brother’s. What sister would think herself at liberty to do it, unless there were something very objectionable? If they believed him attached to me they would not try to part us; if he were so, they could not succeed. By supposing such an affection, you make everybody acting unnaturally and wrong, and me most unhappy. Do not distress me by the idea. I am not ashamed of having been mistaken--or, at least, it is slight, it is nothing in comparison of what I should feel in thinking ill of him or his sisters. Let me take it in the best light, in the light in which it may be understood.”

Mrs. Bennet still continued to wonder and repine at his returning no more; and though a day seldom passed in which Elizabeth did not account for it clearly, there seemed little chance of her ever considering it with less perplexity. Her daughter endeavoured to convince her of what she did not believe herself, that his attentions to Jane had been merely the effect of a common and transient liking, which ceased when he saw her no more; but though the probability of the statement was admitted at the time, she had the same story to repeat every day. Mrs. Bennet’s best comfort was, that Mr. Bingley must be down again in the summer. Mr. Bennet treated the matter differently. “So, Lizzy,” said he, one day, “your sister is crossed in love, I find. I congratulate her. Next to being married, a girl likes to be crossed in love a little now and then. It is something to think of, and gives her a sort of distinction among her companions. When is your turn to come? You will hardly bear to be long outdone by Jane. Now is your time. Here are officers enough at Meryton to disappoint all the young ladies in the country. Let Wickham be your man. He is a pleasant fellow, and would jilt you creditably.”

“True,” said Mr. Bennet; “but it is a comfort to think that, whatever of that kind may befall you, you have an affectionate mother who will always make the most of it.” Mr. Wickham’s society was of material service in dispelling the gloom which the late perverse occurrences had thrown on many of the Longbourn family. They saw him often, and to his other recommendations was now added that of general unreserve. The whole of what Elizabeth had already heard, his claims on Mr. Darcy, and all that he had suffered from him, was now openly acknowledged and publicly canvassed; and everybody was pleased to think how much they had always disliked Mr. Darcy before they had known anything of the matter. Miss Bennet was the only creature who could suppose there might be any extenuating circumstances in the case unknown to the society of Hertfordshire: her mild and steady candour always pleaded for allowances, and urged the possibility of mistakes; but by everybody else Mr. Darcy was condemned as the worst of men. After a week spent in professions of love and schemes of felicity, Mr. Collins was called from his amiable Charlotte by the arrival of Saturday. The pain of separation, however, might be alleviated on his side by preparations for the reception of his bride, as he had reason to hope, that shortly after his next return into Hertfordshire, the day would be fixed that was to make him the happiest of men. He took leave of his relations at Longbourn with as much solemnity as before; wished his fair cousins health and happiness again, and promised their father another letter of thanks.

On the following Monday, Mrs. Bennet had the pleasure of receiving her brother and his wife, who came, as usual, to spend the Christmas at Longbourn. Mr. Gardiner was a sensible, gentlemanlike man, greatly superior to his sister, as well by nature as education. The Netherfield ladies would have had difficulty in believing that a man who lived by trade, and within view of his own warehouses, could have been so well-bred and agreeable. Mrs. Gardiner, who was several years younger than Mrs. Bennet and Mrs. Philips, was an amiable, intelligent, elegant woman, and a great favourite with her Longbourn nieces. Between the two eldest and herself especially, there subsisted a very particular regard. They had frequently been staying with her in town. The first part of Mrs. Gardiner’s business, on her arrival, was to distribute her presents and describe the newest fashions. When this was done, she had a less active part to play. It became her turn to listen. Mrs. Bennet had many grievances to relate, and much to complain of. They had all been very ill-used since she last saw her sister. Two of her girls had been on the point of marriage, and after all there was nothing in it.

“I do not blame Jane,” she continued, “for Jane would have got Mr. Bingley if she could. But, Lizzy! Oh, sister! it is very hard to think that she might have been Mr. Collins’s wife by this time, had not it been for her own perverseness. He made her an offer in this very room, and she refused him. The consequence of it is, that Lady Lucas will have a daughter married before I have, and that Longbourn estate is just as much entailed as ever. The Lucases are very artful people, indeed, sister. They are all for what they can get. I am sorry to say it of them, but so it is. It makes me very nervous and poorly, to be thwarted so in my own family, and to have neighbours who think of themselves before anybody else. However, your coming just at this time is the greatest of comforts, and I am very glad to hear what you tell us of long sleeves.” Mrs. Gardiner, to whom the chief of this news had been given before, in the course of Jane and Elizabeth’s correspondence with her, made her sister a slight answer, and, in compassion to her nieces, turned the conversation.

When alone with Elizabeth afterwards, she spoke more on the subject. “It seems likely to have been a desirable match for Jane,” said she. “I am sorry it went off. But these things happen so often! A young man, such as you describe Mr. Bingley, so easily falls in love with a pretty girl for a few weeks, and, when accident separates them, so easily forgets her, that these sort of inconstancies are very frequent.” “An excellent consolation in its way,” said Elizabeth; “but it will not do for _us_. We do not suffer by accident. It does not often happen that the interference of friends will persuade a young man of independent fortune to think no more of a girl whom he was violently in love with only a few days before.” “But that expression of ‘violently in love’ is so hackneyed, so doubtful, so indefinite, that it gives me very little idea. It is as often applied to feelings which arise only from a half hour’s acquaintance, as to a real, strong attachment. Pray, how _violent was_ Mr. Bingley’s love?”

“I never saw a more promising inclination; he was growing quite inattentive to other people, and wholly engrossed by her. Every time they met, it was more decided and remarkable. At his own ball he offended two or three young ladies by not asking them to dance; and I spoke to him twice myself without receiving an answer. Could there be finer symptoms? Is not general incivility the very essence of love?” “Oh, yes! of that kind of love which I suppose him to have felt. Poor Jane! I am sorry for her, because, with her disposition, she may not get over it immediately. It had better have happened to _you_, Lizzy; you would have laughed yourself out of it sooner. But do you think she would be prevailed on to go back with us? Change of scene might be of service--and perhaps a little relief from home may be as useful as anything.” “I hope,” added Mrs. Gardiner, “that no consideration with regard to this young man will influence her. We live in so different a part of town, all our connections are so different, and, as you well know, we go out so little, that it is very improbable they should meet at all, unless he really comes to see her.”

“And _that_ is quite impossible; for he is now in the custody of his friend, and Mr. Darcy would no more suffer him to call on Jane in such a part of London! My dear aunt, how could you think of it? Mr. Darcy may, perhaps, have _heard_ of such a place as Gracechurch Street, but he would hardly think a month’s ablution enough to cleanse him from its impurities, were he once to enter it; and, depend upon it, Mr. Bingley never stirs without him.” But, in spite of the certainty in which Elizabeth affected to place this point, as well as the still more interesting one of Bingley’s being withheld from seeing Jane, she felt a solicitude on the subject which convinced her, on examination, that she did not consider it entirely hopeless. It was possible, and sometimes she thought it probable, that his affection might be re-animated, and the influence of his friends successfully combated by the more natural influence of Jane’s attractions. Miss Bennet accepted her aunt’s invitation with pleasure; and the Bingleys were no otherwise in her thoughts at the same time than as she hoped, by Caroline’s not living in the same house with her brother, she might occasionally spend a morning with her, without any danger of seeing him.

The Gardiners stayed a week at Longbourn; and what with the Philipses, the Lucases, and the officers, there was not a day without its engagement. Mrs. Bennet had so carefully provided for the entertainment of her brother and sister, that they did not once sit down to a family dinner. When the engagement was for home, some of the officers always made part of it, of which officers Mr. Wickham was sure to be one; and on these occasions Mrs. Gardiner, rendered suspicious by Elizabeth’s warm commendation of him, narrowly observed them both. Without supposing them, from what she saw, to be very seriously in love, their preference of each other was plain enough to make her a little uneasy; and she resolved to speak to Elizabeth on the subject before she left Hertfordshire, and represent to her the imprudence of encouraging such an attachment. To Mrs. Gardiner, Wickham had one means of affording pleasure, unconnected with his general powers. About ten or a dozen years ago, before her marriage, she had spent a considerable time in that very part of Derbyshire to which he belonged. They had, therefore, many acquaintance in common; and, though Wickham had been little there since the death of Darcy’s father, five years before, it was yet in his power to give her fresher intelligence of her former friends than she had been in the way of procuring.

Mrs. Gardiner had seen Pemberley, and known the late Mr. Darcy by character perfectly well. Here, consequently, was an inexhaustible subject of discourse. In comparing her recollection of Pemberley with the minute description which Wickham could give, and in bestowing her tribute of praise on the character of its late possessor, she was delighting both him and herself. On being made acquainted with the present Mr. Darcy’s treatment of him, she tried to remember something of that gentleman’s reputed disposition, when quite a lad, which might agree with it; and was confident, at last, that she recollected having heard Mr. Fitzwilliam Darcy formerly spoken of as a very proud, ill-natured boy. Mrs. Gardiner’s caution to Elizabeth was punctually and kindly given on the first favourable opportunity of speaking to her alone: after honestly telling her what she thought, she thus went on:-- “You are too sensible a girl, Lizzy, to fall in love merely because you are warned against it; and, therefore, I am not afraid of speaking openly. Seriously, I would have you be on your guard. Do not involve yourself, or endeavour to involve him, in an affection which the want of fortune would make so very imprudent. I have nothing to say against _him_: he is a most interesting young man; and if he had the fortune he ought to have, I should think you could not do better. But as it is--you must not let your fancy run away with you. You have sense, and we all expect you to use it. Your father would depend on _your_ resolution and good conduct, I am sure. You must not disappoint your father.”

“Well, then, you need not be under any alarm. I will take care of myself, and of Mr. Wickham too. He shall not be in love with me, if I can prevent it.” “I beg your pardon. I will try again. At present I am not in love with Mr. Wickham; no, I certainly am not. But he is, beyond all comparison, the most agreeable man I ever saw--and if he becomes really attached to me--I believe it will be better that he should not. I see the imprudence of it. Oh, _that_ abominable Mr. Darcy! My father’s opinion of me does me the greatest honour; and I should be miserable to forfeit it. My father, however, is partial to Mr. Wickham. In short, my dear aunt, I should be very sorry to be the means of making any of you unhappy; but since we see, every day, that where there is affection young people are seldom withheld, by immediate want of fortune, from entering into engagements with each other, how can I promise to be wiser than so many of my fellow-creatures, if I am tempted, or how am I even to know that it would be wiser to resist? All that I can promise you, therefore, is not to be in a hurry. I will not be in a hurry to believe myself his first object. When I am in company with him, I will not be wishing. In short, I will do my best.”

“As I did the other day,” said Elizabeth, with a conscious smile; “very true, it will be wise in me to refrain from _that_. But do not imagine that he is always here so often. It is on your account that he has been so frequently invited this week. You know my mother’s ideas as to the necessity of constant company for her friends. But really, and upon my honour, I will try to do what I think to be wisest; and now I hope you are satisfied.” Her aunt assured her that she was; and Elizabeth, having thanked her for the kindness of her hints, they parted,--a wonderful instance of advice being given on such a point without being resented. Mr. Collins returned into Hertfordshire soon after it had been quitted by the Gardiners and Jane; but, as he took up his abode with the Lucases, his arrival was no great inconvenience to Mrs. Bennet. His marriage was now fast approaching; and she was at length so far resigned as to think it inevitable, and even repeatedly to say, in an ill-natured tone, that she “_wished_ they might be happy.” Thursday was to be the wedding-day, and on Wednesday Miss Lucas paid her farewell visit; and when she rose to take leave, Elizabeth, ashamed of her mother’s ungracious and reluctant good wishes, and sincerely affected herself, accompanied her out of the room. As they went down stairs together, Charlotte said,--

“My father and Maria are to come to me in March,” added Charlotte, “and I hope you will consent to be of the party. Indeed, Eliza, you will be as welcome to me as either of them.” The wedding took place: the bride and bridegroom set off for Kent from the church door, and everybody had as much to say or to hear on the subject as usual. Elizabeth soon heard from her friend, and their correspondence was as regular and frequent as it ever had been: that it should be equally unreserved was impossible. Elizabeth could never address her without feeling that all the comfort of intimacy was over; and, though determined not to slacken as a correspondent, it was for the sake of what had been rather than what was. Charlotte’s first letters were received with a good deal of eagerness: there could not but be curiosity to know how she would speak of her new home, how she would like Lady Catherine, and how happy she would dare pronounce herself to be; though, when the letters were read, Elizabeth felt that Charlotte expressed herself on every point exactly as she might have foreseen. She wrote cheerfully, seemed surrounded with comforts, and mentioned nothing which she could not praise. The house, furniture, neighbourhood, and roads, were all to her taste, and Lady Catherine’s behaviour was most friendly and obliging. It was Mr. Collins’s picture of Hunsford and Rosings rationally softened; and Elizabeth perceived that she must wait for her own visit there, to know the rest.

Jane had already written a few lines to her sister, to announce their safe arrival in London; and when she wrote again, Elizabeth hoped it would be in her power to say something of the Bingleys. Her impatience for this second letter was as well rewarded as impatience generally is. Jane had been a week in town, without either seeing or hearing from Caroline. She accounted for it, however, by supposing that her last letter to her friend from Longbourn had by some accident been lost. She wrote again when the visit was paid, and she had seen Miss Bingley. “I did not think Caroline in spirits,” were her words, “but she was very glad to see me, and reproached me for giving her no notice of my coming to London. I was right, therefore; my last letter had never reached her. I inquired after their brother, of course. He was well, but so much engaged with Mr. Darcy that they scarcely ever saw him. I found that Miss Darcy was expected to dinner: I wish I could see her. My visit was not long, as Caroline and Mrs. Hurst were going out. I dare say I shall soon see them here.”

Four weeks passed away, and Jane saw nothing of him. She endeavoured to persuade herself that she did not regret it; but she could no longer be blind to Miss Bingley’s inattention. After waiting at home every morning for a fortnight, and inventing every evening a fresh excuse for her, the visitor did at last appear; but the shortness of her stay, and, yet more, the alteration of her manner, would allow Jane to deceive herself no longer. The letter which she wrote on this occasion to her sister will prove what she felt:-- This letter gave Elizabeth some pain; but her spirits returned, as she considered that Jane would no longer be duped, by the sister at least. All expectation from the brother was now absolutely over. She would not even wish for any renewal of his attentions. His character sunk on every review of it; and, as a punishment for him, as well as a possible advantage to Jane, she seriously hoped he might really soon marry Mr. Darcy’s sister, as, by Wickham’s account, she would make him abundantly regret what he had thrown away.

Mrs. Gardiner about this time reminded Elizabeth of her promise concerning that gentleman, and required information; and Elizabeth had such to send as might rather give contentment to her aunt than to herself. His apparent partiality had subsided, his attentions were over, he was the admirer of some one else. Elizabeth was watchful enough to see it all, but she could see it and write of it without material pain. Her heart had been but slightly touched, and her vanity was satisfied with believing that _she_ would have been his only choice, had fortune permitted it. The sudden acquisition of ten thousand pounds was the most remarkable charm of the young lady to whom he was now rendering himself agreeable; but Elizabeth, less clear-sighted perhaps in this case than in Charlotte’s, did not quarrel with him for his wish of independence. Nothing, on the contrary, could be more natural; and, while able to suppose that it cost him a few struggles to relinquish her, she was ready to allow it a wise and desirable measure for both, and could very sincerely wish him happy.

All this was acknowledged to Mrs. Gardiner; and, after relating the circumstances, she thus went on:--“I am now convinced, my dear aunt, that I have never been much in love; for had I really experienced that pure and elevating passion, I should at present detest his very name, and wish him all manner of evil. But my feelings are not only cordial towards _him_, they are even impartial towards Miss King. I cannot find out that I hate her at all, or that I am in the least unwilling to think her a very good sort of girl. There can be no love in all this. My watchfulness has been effectual; and though I should certainly be a more interesting object to all my acquaintance, were I distractedly in love with him, I cannot say that I regret my comparative insignificance. Importance may sometimes be purchased too dearly. Kitty and Lydia take his defection much more to heart than I do. They are young in the ways of the world, and not yet open to the mortifying conviction that handsome young men must have something to live on as well as the plain.”

With no greater events than these in the Longbourn family, and otherwise diversified by little beyond the walks to Meryton, sometimes dirty and sometimes cold, did January and February pass away. March was to take Elizabeth to Hunsford. She had not at first thought very seriously of going thither; but Charlotte, she soon found, was depending on the plan, and she gradually learned to consider it herself with greater pleasure as well as greater certainty. Absence had increased her desire of seeing Charlotte again, and weakened her disgust of Mr. Collins. There was novelty in the scheme; and as, with such a mother and such uncompanionable sisters, home could not be faultless, a little change was not unwelcome for its own sake. The journey would, moreover, give her a peep at Jane; and, in short, as the time drew near, she would have been very sorry for any delay. Everything, however, went on smoothly, and was finally settled according to Charlotte’s first sketch. She was to accompany Sir William and his second daughter. The improvement of spending a night in London was added in time, and the plan became as perfect as plan could be.

The only pain was in leaving her father, who would certainly miss her, and who, when it came to the point, so little liked her going, that he told her to write to him, and almost promised to answer her letter. The farewell between herself and Mr. Wickham was perfectly friendly; on his side even more. His present pursuit could not make him forget that Elizabeth had been the first to excite and to deserve his attention, the first to listen and to pity, the first to be admired; and in his manner of bidding her adieu, wishing her every enjoyment, reminding her of what she was to expect in Lady Catherine de Bourgh, and trusting their opinion of her--their opinion of everybody--would always coincide, there was a solicitude, an interest, which she felt must ever attach her to him with a most sincere regard; and she parted from him convinced, that, whether married or single, he must always be her model of the amiable and pleasing. Her fellow-travellers the next day were not of a kind to make her think him less agreeable. Sir William Lucas, and his daughter Maria, a good-humoured girl, but as empty-headed as himself, had nothing to say that could be worth hearing, and were listened to with about as much delight as the rattle of the chaise. Elizabeth loved absurdities, but she had known Sir William’s too long. He could tell her nothing new of the wonders of his presentation and knighthood; and his civilities were worn out, like his information.

It was a journey of only twenty-four miles, and they began it so early as to be in Gracechurch Street by noon. As they drove to Mr. Gardiner’s door, Jane was at a drawing-room window watching their arrival: when they entered the passage, she was there to welcome them, and Elizabeth, looking earnestly in her face, was pleased to see it healthful and lovely as ever. On the stairs were a troop of little boys and girls, whose eagerness for their cousin’s appearance would not allow them to wait in the drawing-room, and whose shyness, as they had not seen her for a twelvemonth, prevented their coming lower. All was joy and kindness. The day passed most pleasantly away; the morning in bustle and shopping, and the evening at one of the theatres. Elizabeth then contrived to sit by her aunt. Their first subject was her sister; and she was more grieved than astonished to hear, in reply to her minute inquiries, that though Jane always struggled to support her spirits, there were periods of dejection. It was reasonable, however, to hope that they would not continue long. Mrs. Gardiner gave her the particulars also of Miss Bingley’s visit in Gracechurch Street, and repeated conversations occurring at different times between Jane and herself, which proved that the former had, from her heart, given up the acquaintance.

“Pray, my dear aunt, what is the difference in matrimonial affairs, between the mercenary and the prudent motive? Where does discretion end, and avarice begin? Last Christmas you were afraid of his marrying me, because it would be imprudent; and now, because he is trying to get a girl with only ten thousand pounds, you want to find out that he is mercenary.” “No--why should he? If it were not allowable for him to gain _my_ affections, because I had no money, what occasion could there be for making love to a girl whom he did not care about, and who was equally poor?” “A man in distressed circumstances has not time for all those elegant decorums which other people may observe. If _she_ does not object to it, why should _we_?” “Oh, if that is all, I have a very poor opinion of young men who live in Derbyshire; and their intimate friends who live in Hertfordshire are not much better. I am sick of them all. Thank heaven! I am going to-morrow where I shall find a man who has not one agreeable quality, who has neither manners nor sense to recommend him. Stupid men are the only ones worth knowing, after all.”

Before they were separated by the conclusion of the play, she had the unexpected happiness of an invitation to accompany her uncle and aunt in a tour of pleasure which they proposed taking in the summer. No scheme could have been more agreeable to Elizabeth, and her acceptance of the invitation was most ready and grateful. “My dear, dear aunt,” she rapturously cried, “what delight! what felicity! You give me fresh life and vigour. Adieu to disappointment and spleen. What are men to rocks and mountains? Oh, what hours of transport we shall spend! And when we _do_ return, it shall not be like other travellers, without being able to give one accurate idea of anything. We _will_ know where we have gone--we _will_ recollect what we have seen. Lakes, mountains, and rivers, shall not be jumbled together in our imaginations; nor, when we attempt to describe any particular scene, will we begin quarrelling about its relative situation. Let _our_ first effusions be less insupportable than those of the generality of travellers.” Every object in the next day’s journey was new and interesting to Elizabeth; and her spirits were in a state of enjoyment; for she had seen her sister looking so well as to banish all fear for her health, and the prospect of her northern tour was a constant source of delight.

When they left the high road for the lane to Hunsford, every eye was in search of the Parsonage, and every turning expected to bring it in view. The paling of Rosings park was their boundary on one side. Elizabeth smiled at the recollection of all that she had heard of its inhabitants. At length the Parsonage was discernible. The garden sloping to the road, the house standing in it, the green pales and the laurel hedge, everything declared they were arriving. Mr. Collins and Charlotte appeared at the door, and the carriage stopped at the small gate, which led by a short gravel walk to the house, amidst the nods and smiles of the whole party. In a moment they were all out of the chaise, rejoicing at the sight of each other. Mrs. Collins welcomed her friend with the liveliest pleasure, and Elizabeth was more and more satisfied with coming, when she found herself so affectionately received. She saw instantly that her cousin’s manners were not altered by his marriage: his formal civility was just what it had been; and he detained her some minutes at the gate to hear and satisfy his inquiries after all her family. They were then, with no other delay than his pointing out the neatness of the entrance, taken into the house; and as soon as they were in the parlour, he welcomed them a second time, with ostentatious formality, to his humble abode, and punctually repeated all his wife’s offers of refreshment.

Elizabeth was prepared to see him in his glory; and she could not help fancying that in displaying the good proportion of the room, its aspect, and its furniture, he addressed himself particularly to her, as if wishing to make her feel what she had lost in refusing him. But though everything seemed neat and comfortable, she was not able to gratify him by any sigh of repentance; and rather looked with wonder at her friend, that she could have so cheerful an air with such a companion. When Mr. Collins said anything of which his wife might reasonably be ashamed, which certainly was not seldom, she involuntarily turned her eye on Charlotte. Once or twice she could discern a faint blush; but in general Charlotte wisely did not hear. After sitting long enough to admire every article of furniture in the room, from the sideboard to the fender, to give an account of their journey, and of all that had happened in London, Mr. Collins invited them to take a stroll in the garden, which was large and well laid out, and to the cultivation of which he attended himself. To work in his garden was one of his most respectable pleasures; and Elizabeth admired the command of countenance with which Charlotte talked of the healthfulness of the exercise, and owned she encouraged it as much as possible. Here, leading the way through every walk and cross walk, and scarcely allowing them an interval to utter the praises he asked for, every view was pointed out with a minuteness which left beauty entirely behind. He could number the fields in every direction, and could tell how many trees there were in the most distant clump. But of all the views which his garden, or which the country or the kingdom could boast, none were to be compared with the prospect of Rosings, afforded by an opening in the trees that bordered the park nearly opposite the front of his house. It was a handsome modern building, well situated on rising ground.

From his garden, Mr. Collins would have led them round his two meadows; but the ladies, not having shoes to encounter the remains of a white frost, turned back; and while Sir William accompanied him, Charlotte took her sister and friend over the house, extremely well pleased, probably, to have the opportunity of showing it without her husband’s help. It was rather small, but well built and convenient; and everything was fitted up and arranged with a neatness and consistency, of which Elizabeth gave Charlotte all the credit. When Mr. Collins could be forgotten, there was really a great air of comfort throughout, and by Charlotte’s evident enjoyment of it, Elizabeth supposed he must be often forgotten. She had already learnt that Lady Catherine was still in the country. It was spoken of again while they were at dinner, when Mr. Collins joining in, observed,-- “Yes, Miss Elizabeth, you will have the honour of seeing Lady Catherine de Bourgh on the ensuing Sunday at church, and I need not say you will be delighted with her. She is all affability and condescension, and I doubt not but you will be honoured with some portion of her notice when service is over. I have scarcely any hesitation in saying that she will include you and my sister Maria in every invitation with which she honours us during your stay here. Her behaviour to my dear Charlotte is charming. We dine at Rosings twice every week, and are never allowed to walk home. Her Ladyship’s carriage is regularly ordered for us. I _should_ say, one of her Ladyship’s carriages, for she has several.”

The evening was spent chiefly in talking over Hertfordshire news, and telling again what had been already written; and when it closed, Elizabeth, in the solitude of her chamber, had to meditate upon Charlotte’s degree of contentment, to understand her address in guiding, and composure in bearing with, her husband, and to acknowledge that it was all done very well. She had also to anticipate how her visit would pass, the quiet tenour of their usual employments, the vexatious interruptions of Mr. Collins, and the gaieties of their intercourse with Rosings. A lively imagination soon settled it all. About the middle of the next day, as she was in her room getting ready for a walk, a sudden noise below seemed to speak the whole house in confusion; and, after listening a moment, she heard somebody running upstairs in a violent hurry, and calling loudly after her. She opened the door, and met Maria in the landing-place, who, breathless with agitation, cried out,-- “Oh, my dear Eliza! pray make haste and come into the dining-room, for there is such a sight to be seen! I will not tell you what it is. Make haste, and come down this moment.”

Elizabeth asked questions in vain; Maria would tell her nothing more; and down they ran into the dining-room which fronted the lane, in quest of this wonder; it was two ladies, stopping in a low phaeton at the garden gate. “And is this all?” cried Elizabeth. “I expected at least that the pigs were got into the garden, and here is nothing but Lady Catherine and her daughter!” “La! my dear,” said Maria, quite shocked at the mistake, “it is not Lady Catherine. The old lady is Mrs. Jenkinson, who lives with them. The other is Miss De Bourgh. Only look at her. She is quite a little creature. Who would have thought she could be so thin and small!” “I like her appearance,” said Elizabeth, struck with other ideas. “She looks sickly and cross. Yes, she will do for him very well. She will make him a very proper wife.” Mr. Collins and Charlotte were both standing at the gate in conversation with the ladies; and Sir William, to Elizabeth’s high diversion, was stationed in the doorway, in earnest contemplation of the greatness before him, and constantly bowing whenever Miss De Bourgh looked that way.

At length there was nothing more to be said; the ladies drove on, and the others returned into the house. Mr. Collins no sooner saw the two girls than he began to congratulate them on their good fortune, which Charlotte explained by letting them know that the whole party was asked to dine at Rosings the next day. Mr. Collins’s triumph, in consequence of this invitation, was complete. The power of displaying the grandeur of his patroness to his wondering visitors, and of letting them see her civility towards himself and his wife, was exactly what he had wished for; and that an opportunity of doing it should be given so soon was such an instance of Lady Catherine’s condescension as he knew not how to admire enough. “I confess,” said he, “that I should not have been at all surprised by her Ladyship’s asking us on Sunday to drink tea and spend the evening at Rosings. I rather expected, from my knowledge of her affability, that it would happen. But who could have foreseen such an attention as this? Who could have imagined that we should receive an invitation to dine there (an invitation, moreover, including the whole party) so immediately after your arrival?”

“I am the less surprised at what has happened,” replied Sir William, “from that knowledge of what the manners of the great really are, which my situation in life has allowed me to acquire. About the court, such instances of elegant breeding are not uncommon.” Scarcely anything was talked of the whole day or next morning but their visit to Rosings. Mr. Collins was carefully instructing them in what they were to expect, that the sight of such rooms, so many servants, and so splendid a dinner, might not wholly overpower them. “Do not make yourself uneasy, my dear cousin, about your apparel. Lady Catherine is far from requiring that elegance of dress in us which becomes herself and daughter. I would advise you merely to put on whatever of your clothes is superior to the rest--there is no occasion for anything more. Lady Catherine will not think the worse of you for being simply dressed. She likes to have the distinction of rank preserved.” While they were dressing, he came two or three times to their different doors, to recommend their being quick, as Lady Catherine very much objected to be kept waiting for her dinner. Such formidable accounts of her Ladyship, and her manner of living, quite frightened Maria Lucas, who had been little used to company; and she looked forward to her introduction at Rosings with as much apprehension as her father had done to his presentation at St. James’s.

As the weather was fine, they had a pleasant walk of about half a mile across the park. Every park has its beauty and its prospects; and Elizabeth saw much to be pleased with, though she could not be in such raptures as Mr. Collins expected the scene to inspire, and was but slightly affected by his enumeration of the windows in front of the house, and his relation of what the glazing altogether had originally cost Sir Lewis de Bourgh. When they ascended the steps to the hall, Maria’s alarm was every moment increasing, and even Sir William did not look perfectly calm. Elizabeth’s courage did not fail her. She had heard nothing of Lady Catherine that spoke her awful from any extraordinary talents or miraculous virtue, and the mere stateliness of money and rank she thought she could witness without trepidation. From the entrance hall, of which Mr. Collins pointed out, with a rapturous air, the fine proportion and finished ornaments, they followed the servants through an antechamber to the room where Lady Catherine, her daughter, and Mrs. Jenkinson were sitting. Her Ladyship, with great condescension, arose to receive them; and as Mrs. Collins had settled it with her husband that the office of introduction should be hers, it was performed in a proper manner, without any of those apologies and thanks which he would have thought necessary.

In spite of having been at St. James’s, Sir William was so completely awed by the grandeur surrounding him, that he had but just courage enough to make a very low bow, and take his seat without saying a word; and his daughter, frightened almost out of her senses, sat on the edge of her chair, not knowing which way to look. Elizabeth found herself quite equal to the scene, and could observe the three ladies before her composedly. Lady Catherine was a tall, large woman, with strongly-marked features, which might once have been handsome. Her air was not conciliating, nor was her manner of receiving them such as to make her visitors forget their inferior rank. She was not rendered formidable by silence: but whatever she said was spoken in so authoritative a tone as marked her self-importance, and brought Mr. Wickham immediately to Elizabeth’s mind; and, from the observation of the day altogether, she believed Lady Catherine to be exactly what he had represented. When, after examining the mother, in whose countenance and deportment she soon found some resemblance of Mr. Darcy, she turned her eyes on the daughter, she could almost have joined in Maria’s astonishment at her being so thin and so small. There was neither in figure nor face any likeness between the ladies. Miss de Bourgh was pale and sickly: her features, though not plain, were insignificant; and she spoke very little, except in a low voice, to Mrs. Jenkinson, in whose appearance there was nothing remarkable, and who was entirely engaged in listening to what she said, and placing a screen in the proper direction before her eyes.

After sitting a few minutes, they were all sent to one of the windows to admire the view, Mr. Collins attending them to point out its beauties, and Lady Catherine kindly informing them that it was much better worth looking at in the summer. The dinner was exceedingly handsome, and there were all the servants, and all the articles of plate which Mr. Collins had promised; and, as he had likewise foretold, he took his seat at the bottom of the table, by her Ladyship’s desire, and looked as if he felt that life could furnish nothing greater. He carved and ate and praised with delighted alacrity; and every dish was commended first by him, and then by Sir William, who was now enough recovered to echo whatever his son-in-law said, in a manner which Elizabeth wondered Lady Catherine could bear. But Lady Catherine seemed gratified by their excessive admiration, and gave most gracious smiles, especially when any dish on the table proved a novelty to them. The party did not supply much conversation. Elizabeth was ready to speak whenever there was an opening, but she was seated between Charlotte and Miss de Bourgh--the former of whom was engaged in listening to Lady Catherine, and the latter said not a word to her all the dinnertime. Mrs. Jenkinson was chiefly employed in watching how little Miss de Bourgh ate, pressing her to try some other dish and fearing she was indisposed. Maria thought speaking out of the question, and the gentlemen did nothing but eat and admire.

When the ladies returned to the drawing-room, there was little to be done but to hear Lady Catherine talk, which she did without any intermission till coffee came in, delivering her opinion on every subject in so decisive a manner as proved that she was not used to have her judgment controverted. She inquired into Charlotte’s domestic concerns familiarly and minutely, and gave her a great deal of advice as to the management of them all; told her how everything ought to be regulated in so small a family as hers, and instructed her as to the care of her cows and her poultry. Elizabeth found that nothing was beneath this great lady’s attention which could furnish her with an occasion for dictating to others. In the intervals of her discourse with Mrs. Collins, she addressed a variety of questions to Maria and Elizabeth, but especially to the latter, of whose connections she knew the least, and who, she observed to Mrs. Collins, was a very genteel, pretty kind of girl. She asked her at different times how many sisters she had, whether they were older or younger than herself, whether any of them were likely to be married, whether they were handsome, where they had been educated, what carriage her father kept, and what had been her mother’s maiden name? Elizabeth felt all the impertinence of her questions, but answered them very composedly. Lady Catherine then observed,--

“Your father’s estate is entailed on Mr. Collins, I think? For your sake,” turning to Charlotte, “I am glad of it; but otherwise I see no occasion for entailing estates from the female line. It was not thought necessary in Sir Lewis de Bourgh’s family. Do you play and sing, Miss Bennet?” “Oh then--some time or other we shall be happy to hear you. Our instrument is a capital one, probably superior to ---- you shall try it some day. Do your sisters play and sing?” “Why did not you all learn? You ought all to have learned. The Miss Webbs all play, and their father has not so good an income as yours. Do you draw?” “No governess! How was that possible? Five daughters brought up at home without a governess! I never heard of such a thing. Your mother must have been quite a slave to your education.” “Compared with some families, I believe we were; but such of us as wished to learn never wanted the means. We were always encouraged to read, and had all the masters that were necessary. Those who chose to be idle certainly might.”

“Ay, no doubt: but that is what a governess will prevent; and if I had known your mother, I should have advised her most strenuously to engage one. I always say that nothing is to be done in education without steady and regular instruction, and nobody but a governess can give it. It is wonderful how many families I have been the means of supplying in that way. I am always glad to get a young person well placed out. Four nieces of Mrs. Jenkinson are most delightfully situated through my means; and it was but the other day that I recommended another young person, who was merely accidentally mentioned to me, and the family are quite delighted with her. Mrs. Collins, did I tell you of Lady Metcalfe’s calling yesterday to thank me? She finds Miss Pope a treasure. ‘Lady Catherine,’ said she, ‘you have given me a treasure.’ Are any of your younger sisters out, Miss Bennet?” “All! What, all five out at once? Very odd! And you only the second. The younger ones out before the elder are married! Your younger sisters must be very young?”

“Yes, my youngest is not sixteen. Perhaps _she_ is full young to be much in company. But really, ma’am, I think it would be very hard upon younger sisters that they should not have their share of society and amusement, because the elder may not have the means or inclination to marry early. The last born has as good a right to the pleasures of youth as the first. And to be kept back on _such_ a motive! I think it would not be very likely to promote sisterly affection or delicacy of mind.” Lady Catherine seemed quite astonished at not receiving a direct answer; and Elizabeth suspected herself to be the first creature who had ever dared to trifle with so much dignified impertinence. When the gentlemen had joined them, and tea was over, the card tables were placed. Lady Catherine, Sir William, and Mr. and Mrs. Collins sat down to quadrille; and as Miss De Bourgh chose to play at cassino, the two girls had the honour of assisting Mrs. Jenkinson to make up her party. Their table was superlatively stupid. Scarcely a syllable was uttered that did not relate to the game, except when Mrs. Jenkinson expressed her fears of Miss De Bourgh’s being too hot or too cold, or having too much or too little light. A great deal more passed at the other table. Lady Catherine was generally speaking--stating the mistakes of the three others, or relating some anecdote of herself. Mr. Collins was employed in agreeing to everything her Ladyship said, thanking her for every fish he won, and apologizing if he thought he won too many. Sir William did not say much. He was storing his memory with anecdotes and noble names.

When Lady Catherine and her daughter had played as long as they chose, the tables were broken up, the carriage was offered to Mrs. Collins, gratefully accepted, and immediately ordered. The party then gathered round the fire to hear Lady Catherine determine what weather they were to have on the morrow. From these instructions they were summoned by the arrival of the coach; and with many speeches of thankfulness on Mr. Collins’s side, and as many bows on Sir William’s, they departed. As soon as they had driven from the door, Elizabeth was called on by her cousin to give her opinion of all that she had seen at Rosings, which, for Charlotte’s sake, she made more favourable than it really was. But her commendation, though costing her some trouble, could by no means satisfy Mr. Collins, and he was very soon obliged to take her Ladyship’s praise into his own hands. Sir William stayed only a week at Hunsford; but his visit was long enough to convince him of his daughter’s being most comfortably settled, and of her possessing such a husband and such a neighbour as were not often met with. While Sir William was with them, Mr. Collins devoted his mornings to driving him out in his gig, and showing him the country: but when he went away, the whole family returned to their usual employments, and Elizabeth was thankful to find that they did not see more of her cousin by the alteration; for the chief of the time between breakfast and dinner was now passed by him either at work in the garden, or in reading and writing, and looking out of window in his own book room, which fronted the road. The room in which the ladies sat was backwards. Elizabeth at first had rather wondered that Charlotte should not prefer the dining parlour for common use; it was a better sized room, and had a pleasanter aspect: but she soon saw that her friend had an excellent reason for what she did, for Mr. Collins would undoubtedly have been much less in his own apartment had they sat in one equally lively; and she gave Charlotte credit for the arrangement.

From the drawing-room they could distinguish nothing in the lane, and were indebted to Mr. Collins for the knowledge of what carriages went along, and how often especially Miss De Bourgh drove by in her phaeton, which he never failed coming to inform them of, though it happened almost every day. She not unfrequently stopped at the Parsonage, and had a few minutes’ conversation with Charlotte, but was scarcely ever prevailed on to get out. Very few days passed in which Mr. Collins did not walk to Rosings, and not many in which his wife did not think it necessary to go likewise; and till Elizabeth recollected that there might be other family livings to be disposed of, she could not understand the sacrifice of so many hours. Now and then they were honoured with a call from her Ladyship, and nothing escaped her observation that was passing in the room during these visits. She examined into their employments, looked at their work, and advised them to do it differently; found fault with the arrangement of the furniture, or detected the housemaid in negligence; and if she accepted any refreshment, seemed to do it only for the sake of finding out that Mrs. Collins’s joints of meat were too large for her family.

Elizabeth soon perceived, that though this great lady was not in the commission of the peace for the county, she was a most active magistrate in her own parish, the minutest concerns of which were carried to her by Mr. Collins; and whenever any of the cottagers were disposed to be quarrelsome, discontented, or too poor, she sallied forth into the village to settle their differences, silence their complaints, and scold them into harmony and plenty. The entertainment of dining at Rosings was repeated about twice a week; and, allowing for the loss of Sir William, and there being only one card-table in the evening, every such entertainment was the counterpart of the first. Their other engagements were few, as the style of living of the neighbourhood in general was beyond the Collinses’ reach. This, however, was no evil to Elizabeth, and upon the whole she spent her time comfortably enough: there were half hours of pleasant conversation with Charlotte, and the weather was so fine for the time of year, that she had often great enjoyment out of doors. Her favourite walk, and where she frequently went while the others were calling on Lady Catherine, was along the open grove which edged that side of the park, where there was a nice sheltered path, which no one seemed to value but herself, and where she felt beyond the reach of Lady Catherine’s curiosity.

In this quiet way the first fortnight of her visit soon passed away. Easter was approaching, and the week preceding it was to bring an addition to the family at Rosings, which in so small a circle must be important. Elizabeth had heard, soon after her arrival, that Mr. Darcy was expected there in the course of a few weeks; and though there were not many of her acquaintance whom she did not prefer, his coming would furnish one comparatively new to look at in their Rosings parties, and she might be amused in seeing how hopeless Miss Bingley’s designs on him were, by his behaviour to his cousin, for whom he was evidently destined by Lady Catherine, who talked of his coming with the greatest satisfaction, spoke of him in terms of the highest admiration, and seemed almost angry to find that he had already been frequently seen by Miss Lucas and herself. His arrival was soon known at the Parsonage; for Mr. Collins was walking the whole morning within view of the lodges opening into Hunsford Lane, in order to have

the earliest assurance of it; and, after making his bow as the carriage turned into the park, hurried home with the great intelligence. On the following morning he hastened to Rosings to pay his respects. There were two nephews of Lady Catherine to require them, for Mr. Darcy had brought with him a Colonel Fitzwilliam, the younger son of his uncle, Lord ----; and, to the great surprise of all the party, when Mr. Collins returned, the gentlemen accompanied him. Charlotte had seen them from her husband’s room, crossing the road, and immediately running into the other, told the girls what an honour they might expect, adding,-- Elizabeth had scarcely time to disclaim all right to the compliment before their approach was announced by the door-bell, and shortly afterwards the three gentlemen entered the room. Colonel Fitzwilliam, who led the way, was about thirty, not handsome, but in person and address most truly the gentleman. Mr. Darcy looked just as he had been used to look in Hertfordshire, paid his compliments, with his usual reserve, to Mrs. Collins; and whatever might be his feelings towards her friend, met her with every appearance of composure. Elizabeth merely courtesied to him, without saying a word.

Colonel Fitzwilliam entered into conversation directly, with the readiness and ease of a well-bred man, and talked very pleasantly; but his cousin, after having addressed a slight observation on the house and garden to Mrs. Collins, sat for some time without speaking to anybody. At length, however, his civility was so far awakened as to inquire of Elizabeth after the health of her family. She answered him in the usual way; and, after a moment’s pause, added,-- She was perfectly sensible that he never had: but she wished to see whether he would betray any consciousness of what had passed between the Bingleys and Jane; and she thought he looked a little confused as he answered that he had never been so fortunate as to meet Miss Bennet. The subject was pursued no further, and the gentlemen soon afterwards went away. Colonel Fitzwilliam’s manners were very much admired at the Parsonage, and the ladies all felt that he must add considerably to the pleasure of their engagements at Rosings. It was some days, however, before they received any invitation thither, for while there were visitors in the house they could not be necessary; and it was not till Easter-day, almost a week after the gentlemen’s arrival, that they were honoured by such an attention, and then they were merely asked on leaving church to come there in the evening. For the last week they had seen very little of either Lady Catherine or her daughter. Colonel Fitzwilliam had called at the Parsonage more than once during the time, but Mr. Darcy they had only seen at church.

The invitation was accepted, of course, and at a proper hour they joined the party in Lady Catherine’s drawing-room. Her Ladyship received them civilly, but it was plain that their company was by no means so acceptable as when she could get nobody else; and she was, in fact, almost engrossed by her nephews, speaking to them, especially to Darcy, much more than to any other person in the room. Colonel Fitzwilliam seemed really glad to see them: anything was a welcome relief to him at Rosings; and Mrs. Collins’s pretty friend had, moreover, caught his fancy very much. He now seated himself by her, and talked so agreeably of Kent and Hertfordshire, of travelling and staying at home, of new books and music, that Elizabeth had never been half so well entertained in that room before; and they conversed with so much spirit and flow as to draw the attention of Lady Catherine herself, as well as of Mr. Darcy. _His_ eyes had been soon and repeatedly turned towards them with a look of curiosity; and that her Ladyship, after a while, shared the feeling, was more openly acknowledged, for she did not scruple to call out,--

“Of music! Then pray speak aloud. It is of all subjects my delight. I must have my share in the conversation, if you are speaking of music. There are few people in England, I suppose, who have more true enjoyment of music than myself, or a better natural taste. If I had ever learnt, I should have been a great proficient. And so would Anne, if her health had allowed her to apply. I am confident that she would have performed delightfully. How does Georgiana get on, Darcy?” “I am very glad to hear such a good account of her,” said Lady Catherine; “and pray tell her from me, that she cannot expect to excel, if she does not practise a great deal.” “So much the better. It cannot be done too much; and when I next write to her, I shall charge her not to neglect it on any account. I often tell young ladies, that no excellence in music is to be acquired without constant practice. I have told Miss Bennet several times, that she will never play really well, unless she practises more; and though Mrs. Collins has no instrument, she is very welcome, as I have often told her, to come to Rosings every day, and play on the pianoforte in Mrs. Jenkinson’s room. She would be in nobody’s way, you know, in that part of the house.”

When coffee was over, Colonel Fitzwilliam reminded Elizabeth of having promised to play to him; and she sat down directly to the instrument. He drew a chair near her. Lady Catherine listened to half a song, and then talked, as before, to her other nephew; till the latter walked away from her, and moving with his usual deliberation towards the pianoforte, stationed himself so as to command a full view of the fair performer’s countenance. Elizabeth saw what he was doing, and at the first convenient pause turned to him with an arch smile, and said,-- “You mean to frighten me, Mr. Darcy, by coming in all this state to hear me. But I will not be alarmed, though your sister _does_ play so well. There is a stubbornness about me that never can bear to be frightened at the will of others. My courage always rises with every attempt to intimidate me.” “I shall not say that you are mistaken,” he replied, “because you could not really believe me to entertain any design of alarming you; and I have had the pleasure of your acquaintance long enough to know, that you find great enjoyment in occasionally professing opinions which, in fact, are not your own.”

Elizabeth laughed heartily at this picture of herself, and said to Colonel Fitzwilliam, “Your cousin will give you a very pretty notion of me, and teach you not to believe a word I say. I am particularly unlucky in meeting with a person so well able to expose my real character, in a part of the world where I had hoped to pass myself off with some degree of credit. Indeed, Mr. Darcy, it is very ungenerous in you to mention all that you knew to my disadvantage in Hertfordshire--and, give me leave to say, very impolitic too--for it is provoking me to retaliate, and such things may come out as will shock your relations to hear.” “You shall hear, then--but prepare for something very dreadful. The first time of my ever seeing him in Hertfordshire, you must know, was at a ball--and at this ball, what do you think he did? He danced only four dances! I am sorry to pain you, but so it was. He danced only four dances, though gentlemen were scarce; and, to my certain knowledge, more than one young lady was sitting down in want of a partner. Mr. Darcy, you cannot deny the fact.”

“Shall we ask your cousin the reason of this?” said Elizabeth, still addressing Colonel Fitzwilliam. “Shall we ask him why a man of sense and education, and who has lived in the world, is ill-qualified to recommend himself to strangers?” “I certainly have not the talent which some people possess,” said Darcy, “of conversing easily with those I have never seen before. I cannot catch their tone of conversation, or appear interested in their concerns, as I often see done.” “My fingers,” said Elizabeth, “do not move over this instrument in the masterly manner which I see so many women’s do. They have not the same force or rapidity, and do not produce the same expression. But then I have always supposed it to be my own fault--because I would not take the trouble of practising. It is not that I do not believe _my_ fingers as capable as any other woman’s of superior execution.” Darcy smiled and said, “You are perfectly right. You have employed your time much better. No one admitted to the privilege of hearing you can think anything wanting. We neither of us perform to strangers.”

Here they were interrupted by Lady Catherine, who called out to know what they were talking of. Elizabeth immediately began playing again. Lady Catherine approached, and, after listening for a few minutes, said to Darcy,-- “Miss Bennet would not play at all amiss if she practised more, and could have the advantage of a London master. She has a very good notion of fingering, though her taste is not equal to Anne’s. Anne would have been a delightful performer, had her health allowed her to learn.” Elizabeth looked at Darcy, to see how cordially he assented to his cousin’s praise: but neither at that moment nor at any other could she discern any symptom of love; and from the whole of his behaviour to Miss De Bourgh she derived this comfort for Miss Bingley, that he might have been just as likely to marry _her_, had she been his relation. Lady Catherine continued her remarks on Elizabeth’s performance, mixing with them many instructions on execution and taste. Elizabeth received them with all the forbearance of civility; and at the request of the gentlemen remained at the instrument till her Ladyship’s carriage was ready to take them all home.

Elizabeth was sitting by herself the next morning, and writing to Jane, while Mrs. Collins and Maria were gone on business into the village, when she was startled by a ring at the door, the certain signal of a visitor. As she had heard no carriage, she thought it not unlikely to be Lady Catherine; and under that apprehension was putting away her half-finished letter, that she might escape all impertinent questions, when the door opened, and to her very great surprise Mr. Darcy, and Mr. Darcy only, entered the room. He seemed astonished too on finding her alone, and apologized for his intrusion, by letting her know that he had understood all the ladies to be within. They then sat down, and when her inquiries after Rosings were made, seemed in danger of sinking into total silence. It was absolutely necessary, therefore, to think of something; and in this emergency recollecting _when_ she had seen him last in Hertfordshire, and feeling curious to know what he would say on the subject of their hasty departure, she observed,-- “How very suddenly you all quitted Netherfield last November, Mr. Darcy! It must have been a most agreeable surprise to Mr. Bingley to see you all after him so soon; for, if I recollect right, he went but the day before. He and his sisters were well, I hope, when you left London?”

“I have never heard him say so; but it is probable that he may spend very little of his time there in future. He has many friends, and he is at a time of life when friends and engagements are continually increasing.” “If he means to be but little at Netherfield, it would be better for the neighbourhood that he should give up the place entirely, for then we might possibly get a settled family there. But, perhaps, Mr. Bingley did not take the house so much for the convenience of the neighbourhood as for his own, and we must expect him to keep or quit it on the same principle.” Elizabeth made no answer. She was afraid of talking longer of his friend; and, having nothing else to say, was now determined to leave the trouble of finding a subject to him. He took the hint and soon began with, “This seems a very comfortable house. Lady Catherine, I believe, did a great deal to it when Mr. Collins first came to Hunsford.” “Yes, indeed; his friends may well rejoice in his having met with one of the very few sensible women who would have accepted him, or have made him happy if they had. My friend has an excellent understanding--though I am not certain that I consider her marrying Mr. Collins as the wisest thing she ever did. She seems perfectly happy, however; and, in a prudential light, it is certainly a very good match for her.”

“I should never have considered the distance as one of the _advantages_ of the match,” cried Elizabeth. “I should never have said Mrs. Collins was settled _near_ her family.” As he spoke there was a sort of smile, which Elizabeth fancied she understood; he must be supposing her to be thinking of Jane and Netherfield, and she blushed as she answered,-- “I do not mean to say that a woman may not be settled too near her family. The far and the near must be relative, and depend on many varying circumstances. Where there is fortune to make the expense of travelling unimportant, distance becomes no evil. But that is not the case _here_. Mr. and Mrs. Collins have a comfortable income, but not such a one as will allow of frequent journeys--and I am persuaded my friend would not call herself _near_ her family under less than _half_ the present distance.” Mr. Darcy drew his chair a little towards her, and said, “_You_ cannot have a right to such very strong local attachment. _You_ cannot have been always at Longbourn.”

Elizabeth looked surprised. The gentleman experienced some change of feeling; he drew back his chair, took a newspaper from the table, and, glancing over it, said, in a colder voice,-- A short dialogue on the subject of the country ensued, on either side calm and concise--and soon put an end to by the entrance of Charlotte and her sister, just returned from their walk. The _tête-à-tête_ surprised them. Mr. Darcy related the mistake which had occasioned his intruding on Miss Bennet, and, after sitting a few minutes longer, without saying much to anybody, went away. “What can be the meaning of this?” said Charlotte, as soon as he was gone. “My dear Eliza, he must be in love with you, or he would never have called on us in this familiar way.” But when Elizabeth told of his silence, it did not seem very likely, even to Charlotte’s wishes, to be the case; and, after various conjectures, they could at last only suppose his visit to proceed from the difficulty of finding anything to do, which was the more probable from the time of year. All field sports were over. Within doors there was Lady Catherine, books, and a billiard table, but gentlemen cannot be always within doors; and in the nearness of the Parsonage, or the pleasantness of the walk to it, or of the people who lived in it, the two cousins found a temptation from this period of walking thither almost every day. They called at various times of the morning, sometimes separately, sometimes together, and now and then accompanied by their aunt. It was plain to them all that Colonel Fitzwilliam came because he had pleasure in their society, a persuasion which of course recommended him still more; and Elizabeth was reminded by her own satisfaction in being with him, as well as by his evident admiration, of her former favourite, George Wickham; and though, in comparing them, she saw there was less captivating softness in Colonel Fitzwilliam’s manners, she believed he might have the best informed mind.

But why Mr. Darcy came so often to the Parsonage it was more difficult to understand. It could not be for society, as he frequently sat there ten minutes together without opening his lips; and when he did speak, it seemed the effect of necessity rather than of choice--a sacrifice to propriety, not a pleasure to himself. He seldom appeared really animated. Mrs. Collins knew not what to make of him. Colonel Fitzwilliam’s occasionally laughing at his stupidity proved that he was generally different, which her own knowledge of him could not have told her; and as she would have liked to believe this change the effect of love, and the object of that love her friend Eliza, she set herself seriously to work to find it out: she watched him whenever they were at Rosings, and whenever he came to Hunsford; but without much success. He certainly looked at her friend a great deal, but the expression of that look was disputable. It was an earnest, steadfast gaze, but she often doubted whether there were much admiration in it, and sometimes it seemed nothing but absence of mind.

She had once or twice suggested to Elizabeth the possibility of his being partial to her, but Elizabeth always laughed at the idea; and Mrs. Collins did not think it right to press the subject, from the danger of raising expectations which might only end in disappointment; for in her opinion it admitted not of a doubt, that all her friend’s dislike would vanish, if she could suppose him to be in her power. In her kind schemes for Elizabeth, she sometimes planned her marrying Colonel Fitzwilliam. He was, beyond comparison, the pleasantest man: he certainly admired her, and his situation in life was most eligible; but, to counterbalance these advantages, Mr. Darcy had considerable patronage in the church, and his cousin could have none at all. More than once did Elizabeth, in her ramble within the park, unexpectedly meet Mr. Darcy. She felt all the perverseness of the mischance that should bring him where no one else was brought; and, to prevent its ever happening again, took care to inform him, at first, that it was a favourite haunt of hers. How it could occur a second time, therefore, was very odd! Yet it did, and even the third. It seemed like wilful ill-nature, or a voluntary penance; for on these occasions it was not merely a few formal inquiries and an awkward pause and then away, but he actually thought it necessary to turn back and walk with her. He never said a great deal, nor did she give herself the trouble of talking or of listening much; but it struck her in the course of their third encounter that he was asking some odd unconnected questions--about her pleasure in being at Hunsford, her love of solitary walks, and her opinion of Mr. and Mrs. Collins’s happiness; and that in speaking of Rosings, and her not perfectly understanding the house, he seemed to expect that whenever she came into Kent again she would be staying _there_ too. His words seemed to imply it. Could he have Colonel Fitzwilliam in his thoughts? She supposed, if he meant anything, he must mean an allusion to what might arise in that quarter. It distressed her a little, and she was quite glad to find herself at the gate in the pales opposite the Parsonage.

She was engaged one day, as she walked, in re-perusing Jane’s last letter, and dwelling on some passages which proved that Jane had not written in spirits, when, instead of being again surprised by Mr. Darcy, she saw, on looking up, that Colonel Fitzwilliam was meeting her. Putting away the letter immediately, and forcing a smile, she said,-- “I have been making the tour of the park,” he replied, “as I generally do every year, and intended to close it with a call at the Parsonage. Are you going much farther?” “And if not able to please himself in the arrangement, he has at least great pleasure in the power of choice. I do not know anybody who seems more to enjoy the power of doing what he likes than Mr. Darcy.” “He likes to have his own way very well,” replied Colonel Fitzwilliam. “But so we all do. It is only that he has better means of having it than many others, because he is rich, and many others are poor. I speak feelingly. A younger son, you know, must be inured to self-denial and dependence.”

“In my opinion, the younger son of an earl can know very little of either. Now, seriously, what have you ever known of self-denial and dependence? When have you been prevented by want of money from going wherever you chose or procuring anything you had a fancy for?” “These are home questions--and perhaps I cannot say that I have experienced many hardships of that nature. But in matters of greater weight, I may suffer from the want of money. Younger sons cannot marry where they like.” “Is this,” thought Elizabeth, “meant for me?” and she coloured at the idea; but, recovering herself, said in a lively tone, “And pray, what is the usual price of an earl’s younger son? Unless the elder brother is very sickly, I suppose you would not ask above fifty thousand pounds.” He answered her in the same style, and the subject dropped. To interrupt a silence which might make him fancy her affected with what had passed, she soon afterwards said,-- “I imagine your cousin brought you down with him chiefly for the sake of having somebody at his disposal. I wonder he does not marry, to secure a lasting convenience of that kind. But, perhaps, his sister does as well for the present; and, as she is under his sole care, he may do what he likes with her.”

“Are you, indeed? And pray what sort of a guardian do you make? Does your charge give you much trouble? Young ladies of her age are sometimes a little difficult to manage; and if she has the true Darcy spirit, she may like to have her own way.” As she spoke, she observed him looking at her earnestly; and the manner in which he immediately asked her why she supposed Miss Darcy likely to give them any uneasiness, convinced her that she had somehow or other got pretty near the truth. She directly replied,-- “You need not be frightened. I never heard any harm of her; and I dare say she is one of the most tractable creatures in the world. She is a very great favourite with some ladies of my acquaintance, Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley. I think I have heard you say that you know them.” “Care of him! Yes, I really believe Darcy _does_ take care of him in those points where he most wants care. From something that he told me in our journey hither, I have reason to think Bingley very much indebted to him. But I ought to beg his pardon, for I have no right to suppose that Bingley was the person meant. It was all conjecture.”

“It is a circumstance which Darcy of course could not wish to be generally known, because if it were to get round to the lady’s family it would be an unpleasant thing.” “And remember that I have not much reason for supposing it to be Bingley. What he told me was merely this: that he congratulated himself on having lately saved a friend from the inconveniences of a most imprudent marriage, but without mentioning names or any other particulars; and I only suspected it to be Bingley from believing him the kind of young man to get into a scrape of that sort, and from knowing them to have been together the whole of last summer.” Elizabeth made no answer, and walked on, her heart swelling with indignation. After watching her a little, Fitzwilliam asked her why she was so thoughtful. “I do not see what right Mr. Darcy had to decide on the propriety of his friend’s inclination; or why, upon his own judgment alone, he was to determine and direct in what manner that friend was to be happy. But,” she continued, recollecting herself, “as we know none of the particulars, it is not fair to condemn him. It is not to be supposed that there was much affection in the case.”

This was spoken jestingly, but it appeared to her so just a picture of Mr. Darcy, that she would not trust herself with an answer; and, therefore, abruptly changing the conversation, talked on indifferent matters till they reached the Parsonage. There, shut into her own room, as soon as their visitor left them, she could think without interruption of all that she had heard. It was not to be supposed that any other people could be meant than those with whom she was connected. There could not exist in the world _two_ men over whom Mr. Darcy could have such boundless influence. That he had been concerned in the measures taken to separate Mr. Bingley and Jane, she had never doubted; but she had always attributed to Miss Bingley the principal design and arrangement of them. If his own vanity, however, did not mislead him, _he_ was the cause--his pride and caprice were the cause--of all that Jane had suffered, and still continued to suffer. He had ruined for a while every hope of happiness for the most affectionate, generous heart in the world; and no one could say how lasting an evil he might have inflicted.

“There were some very strong objections against the lady,” were Colonel Fitzwilliam’s words; and these strong objections probably were, her having one uncle who was a country attorney, and another who was in business in London. “To Jane herself,” she exclaimed, “there could be no possibility of objection,--all loveliness and goodness as she is! Her understanding excellent, her mind improved, and her manners captivating. Neither could anything be urged against my father, who, though with some peculiarities, has abilities which Mr. Darcy himself need not disdain, and respectability which he will probably never reach.” When she thought of her mother, indeed, her confidence gave way a little; but she would not allow that any objections _there_ had material weight with Mr. Darcy, whose pride, she was convinced, would receive a deeper wound from the want of importance in his friend’s connections than from their want of sense; and she was quite decided, at last, that he had been partly governed by this worst kind of pride, and partly by the wish of retaining Mr. Bingley for his sister. The agitation and tears which the subject occasioned brought on a headache; and it grew so much worse towards the evening that, added to her unwillingness to see Mr. Darcy, it determined her not to attend her cousins to Rosings, where they were engaged to drink tea. Mrs. Collins, seeing that she was really unwell, did not press her to go, and as much as possible prevented her husband from pressing her; but Mr. Collins could not conceal his apprehension of Lady Catherine’s being rather displeased by her staying at home.

When they were gone, Elizabeth, as if intending to exasperate herself as much as possible against Mr. Darcy, chose for her employment the examination of all the letters which Jane had written to her since her being in Kent. They contained no actual complaint, nor was there any revival of past occurrences, or any communication of present suffering. But in all, and in almost every line of each, there was a want of that cheerfulness which had been used to characterize her style, and which, proceeding from the serenity of a mind at ease with itself, and kindly disposed towards everyone, had been scarcely ever clouded. Elizabeth noticed every sentence conveying the idea of uneasiness, with an attention which it had hardly received on the first perusal. Mr. Darcy’s shameful boast of what misery he had been able to inflict gave her a keener sense of her sister’s sufferings. It was some consolation to think that his visit to Rosings was to end on the day after the next, and a still greater that in less than a fortnight she should herself be with Jane again, and enabled to contribute to the recovery of her spirits, by all that affection could do.

She could not think of Darcy’s leaving Kent without remembering that his cousin was to go with him; but Colonel Fitzwilliam had made it clear that he had no intentions at all, and, agreeable as he was, she did not mean to be unhappy about him. While settling this point, she was suddenly roused by the sound of the door-bell; and her spirits were a little fluttered by the idea of its being Colonel Fitzwilliam himself, who had once before called late in the evening, and might now come to inquire particularly after her. But this idea was soon banished, and her spirits were very differently affected, when, to her utter amazement, she saw Mr. Darcy walk into the room. In a hurried manner he immediately began an inquiry after her health, imputing his visit to a wish of hearing that she were better. She answered him with cold civility. He sat down for a few moments, and then getting up walked about the room. Elizabeth was surprised, but said not a word. After a silence of several minutes, he came towards her in an agitated manner, and thus began:--

Elizabeth’s astonishment was beyond expression. She stared, coloured, doubted, and was silent. This he considered sufficient encouragement, and the avowal of all that he felt and had long felt for her immediately followed. He spoke well; but there were feelings besides those of the heart to be detailed, and he was not more eloquent on the subject of tenderness than of pride. His sense of her inferiority, of its being a degradation, of the family obstacles which judgment had always opposed to inclination, were dwelt on with a warmth which seemed due to the consequence he was wounding, but was very unlikely to recommend his suit. In spite of her deeply-rooted dislike, she could not be insensible to the compliment of such a man’s affection, and though her intentions did not vary for an instant, she was at first sorry for the pain he was to receive; till roused to resentment by his subsequent language, she lost all compassion in anger. She tried, however, to compose herself to answer him with patience, when he should have done. He concluded with representing to her the strength of that attachment which in spite of all his endeavours he had found impossible to conquer; and with expressing his hope that it would now be rewarded by her acceptance of his hand. As he said this she could easily see that he had no doubt of a favourable answer. He _spoke_ of apprehension and anxiety, but his countenance expressed real security. Such a circumstance could only exasperate farther; and when he ceased the colour rose into her cheeks and she said,--

“In such cases as this, it is, I believe, the established mode to express a sense of obligation for the sentiments avowed, however unequally they may be returned. It is natural that obligation should be felt, and if I could _feel_ gratitude, I would now thank you. But I cannot--I have never desired your good opinion, and you have certainly bestowed it most unwillingly. I am sorry to have occasioned pain to anyone. It has been most unconsciously done, however, and I hope will be of short duration. The feelings which you tell me have long prevented the acknowledgment of your regard can have little difficulty in overcoming it after this explanation.” Mr. Darcy, who was leaning against the mantel-piece with his eyes fixed on her face, seemed to catch her words with no less resentment than surprise. His complexion became pale with anger, and the disturbance of his mind was visible in every feature. He was struggling for the appearance of composure, and would not open his lips till he believed himself to have attained it. The pause was to Elizabeth’s feelings dreadful. At length, in a voice of forced calmness, he said,--

“And this is all the reply which I am to have the honour of expecting! I might, perhaps, wish to be informed why, with so little _endeavour_ at civility, I am thus rejected. But it is of small importance.” “I might as well inquire,” replied she, “why, with so evident a design of offending and insulting me, you chose to tell me that you liked me against your will, against your reason, and even against your character? Was not this some excuse for incivility, if I _was_ uncivil? But I have other provocations. You know I have. Had not my own feelings decided against you, had they been indifferent, or had they even been favourable, do you think that any consideration would tempt me to accept the man who has been the means of ruining, perhaps for ever, the happiness of a most beloved sister?” As she pronounced these words, Mr. Darcy changed colour; but the emotion was short, and he listened without attempting to interrupt her while she continued,-- “I have every reason in the world to think ill of you. No motive can excuse the unjust and ungenerous part you acted _there_. You dare not, you cannot deny that you have been the principal, if not the only means of dividing them from each other, of exposing one to the censure of the world for caprice and instability, the other to its derision for disappointed hopes, and involving them both in misery of the acutest kind.”

She paused, and saw with no slight indignation that he was listening with an air which proved him wholly unmoved by any feeling of remorse. He even looked at her with a smile of affected incredulity. With assumed tranquillity he then replied, “I have no wish of denying that I did everything in my power to separate my friend from your sister, or that I rejoice in my success. Towards _him_ I have been kinder than towards myself.” “But it is not merely this affair,” she continued, “on which my dislike is founded. Long before it had taken place, my opinion of you was decided. Your character was unfolded in the recital which I received many months ago from Mr. Wickham. On this subject, what can you have to say? In what imaginary act of friendship can you here defend yourself? or under what misrepresentation can you here impose upon others?” “And of your infliction,” cried Elizabeth, with energy; “You have reduced him to his present state of poverty--comparative poverty. You have withheld the advantages which you must know to have been designed for him. You have deprived the best years of his life of that independence which was no less his due than his desert. You have done all this! and yet you can treat the mention of his misfortunes with contempt and ridicule.”

“And this,” cried Darcy, as he walked with quick steps across the room, “is your opinion of me! This is the estimation in which you hold me! I thank you for explaining it so fully. My faults, according to this calculation, are heavy indeed! But, perhaps,” added he, stopping in his walk, and turning towards her, “these offences might have been overlooked, had not your pride been hurt by my honest confession of the scruples that had long prevented my forming any serious design. These bitter accusations might have been suppressed, had I, with greater policy, concealed my struggles, and flattered you into the belief of my being impelled by unqualified, unalloyed inclination; by reason, by reflection, by everything. But disguise of every sort is my abhorrence. Nor am I ashamed of the feelings I related. They were natural and just. Could you expect me to rejoice in the inferiority of your connections?--to congratulate myself on the hope of relations whose condition in life is so decidedly beneath my own?” “You are mistaken, Mr. Darcy, if you suppose that the mode of your declaration affected me in any other way than as it spared me the concern which I might have felt in refusing you, had you behaved in a more gentlemanlike manner.”

“From the very beginning, from the first moment, I may almost say, of my acquaintance with you, your manners impressing me with the fullest belief of your arrogance, your conceit, and your selfish disdain of the feelings of others, were such as to form that groundwork of disapprobation, on which succeeding events have built so immovable a dislike; and I had not known you a month before I felt that you were the last man in the world whom I could ever be prevailed on to marry.” “You have said quite enough, madam. I perfectly comprehend your feelings, and have now only to be ashamed of what my own have been. Forgive me for having taken up so much of your time, and accept my best wishes for your health and happiness.” And with these words he hastily left the room, and Elizabeth heard him the next moment open the front door and quit the house. The tumult of her mind was now painfully great. She knew not how to support herself, and, from actual weakness, sat down and cried for half an hour. Her astonishment, as she reflected on what had passed, was increased by every review of it. That she should receive an offer of marriage from Mr. Darcy! that he should have been in love with her for so many months! so much in love as to wish to marry her in spite of all the objections which had made him prevent his friend’s marrying her sister, and which must appear at least with equal force in his own case, was almost incredible! it was gratifying to have inspired unconsciously so strong an affection. But his pride, his abominable pride, his shameless avowal of what he had done with respect to Jane, his unpardonable assurance in acknowledging, though he could not justify it, and the unfeeling manner which he had mentioned Mr. Wickham, his cruelty towards whom he had not attempted to deny, soon overcame the pity which the consideration of his attachment had for a moment excited.

She continued in very agitating reflections till the sound of Lady Catherine’s carriage made her feel how unequal she was to encounter Charlotte’s observation, and hurried her away to her room. Elizabeth awoke the next morning to the same thoughts and meditations which had at length closed her eyes. She could not yet recover from the surprise of what had happened: it was impossible to think of anything else; and, totally indisposed for employment, she resolved soon after breakfast to indulge herself in air and exercise. She was proceeding directly to her favourite walk, when the recollection of Mr. Darcy’s sometimes coming there stopped her, and instead of entering the park, she turned up the lane which led her farther from the turnpike road. The park paling was still the boundary on one side, and she soon passed one of the gates into the ground. After walking two or three times along that part of the lane, she was tempted, by the pleasantness of the morning, to stop at the gates and look into the park. The five weeks which she had now passed in Kent had made a great difference in the country, and every day was adding to the verdure of the early trees. She was on the point of continuing her walk, when she caught a glimpse of a gentleman within the sort of grove which edged the park: he was moving that way; and fearful of its being Mr. Darcy, she was directly retreating. But the person who advanced was now near enough to see her, and stepping forward with eagerness, pronounced her name. She had turned away; but on hearing herself called, though in a voice which proved it to be Mr. Darcy, she moved again towards the gate. He had by that time reached it also; and, holding out a letter, which she instinctively took, said, with a look of haughty composure, “I have been walking in the grove some time, in the hope of meeting you. Will you do me the honour of reading that letter?” and then, with a slight bow, turned again into the plantation, and was soon out of sight.

With no expectation of pleasure, but with the strongest curiosity, Elizabeth opened the letter, and to her still increasing wonder, perceived an envelope containing two sheets of letter paper, written quite through, in a very close hand. The envelope itself was likewise full. Pursuing her way along the lane, she then began it. It was dated from Rosings, at eight o’clock in the morning, and was as follows:-- “Be not alarmed, madam, on receiving this letter, by the apprehension of its containing any repetition of those sentiments, or renewal of those offers, which were last night so disgusting to you. I write without any intention of paining you, or humbling myself, by dwelling on wishes, which, for the happiness of both, cannot be too soon forgotten; and the effort which the formation and the perusal of this letter must occasion, should have been spared, had not my character required it to be written and read. You must, therefore, pardon the freedom with which I demand your attention; your feelings, I know, will bestow it unwillingly, but I demand it of your justice.

Elizabeth, when Mr. Darcy gave her the letter, did not expect it to contain a renewal of his offers, she had formed no expectation at all of its contents. But such as they were, it may be well supposed how eagerly she went through them, and what a contrariety of emotion they excited. Her feelings as she read were scarcely to be defined. With amazement did she first understand that he believed any apology to be in his power; and steadfastly was she persuaded, that he could have no explanation to give, which a just sense of shame would not conceal. With a strong prejudice against everything he might say, she began his account of what had happened at Netherfield. She read with an eagerness which hardly left her power of comprehension; and from impatience of knowing what the next sentence might bring, was incapable of attending to the sense of the one before her eyes. His belief of her sister’s insensibility she instantly resolved to be false; and his account of the real, the worst objections to the match, made her too angry to have any wish of doing him justice. He expressed no regret for what he had done which satisfied her; his style was not penitent, but haughty. It was all pride and insolence.

But when this subject was succeeded by his account of Mr. Wickham--when she read, with somewhat clearer attention, a relation of events which, if true, must overthrow every cherished opinion of his worth, and which bore so alarming an affinity to his own history of himself--her feelings were yet more acutely painful and more difficult of definition. Astonishment, apprehension, and even horror, oppressed her. She wished to discredit it entirely, repeatedly exclaiming, “This must be false! This cannot be! This must be the grossest falsehood!”--and when she had gone through the whole letter, though scarcely knowing anything of the last page or two, put it hastily away, protesting that she would not regard it, that she would never look in it again. In this perturbed state of mind, with thoughts that could rest on nothing, she walked on; but it would not do: in half a minute the letter was unfolded again; and collecting herself as well as she could, she again began the mortifying perusal of all that related to Wickham, and commanded herself so far as to examine the meaning of every sentence. The account of his connection with the Pemberley family was exactly what he had related himself; and the kindness of the late Mr. Darcy, though she had not before known its extent, agreed equally well with his own words. So far each recital confirmed the other; but when she came to the will, the difference was great. What Wickham had said of the living was fresh in her memory; and as she recalled his very words, it was impossible not to feel that there was gross duplicity on one side or the other, and, for a few moments, she flattered herself that her wishes did not err. But when she read and re-read, with the closest attention, the particulars immediately following of Wickham’s resigning all pretensions to the living, of his receiving in lieu so considerable a sum as three thousand pounds, again was she forced to hesitate. She put down the letter, weighed every circumstance with what she meant to be impartiality--deliberated on the probability of each statement--but with little success. On both sides it was only assertion. Again she read on. But every line proved more clearly that the affair, which she had believed it impossible that any contrivance could so represent as to render Mr. Darcy’s conduct in it less than infamous, was capable of a turn which must make him entirely blameless throughout the whole.

The extravagance and general profligacy which he scrupled not to lay to Mr. Wickham’s charge exceedingly shocked her; the more so, as she could bring no proof of its injustice. She had never heard of him before his entrance into the ----shire militia, in which he had engaged at the persuasion of the young man, who, on meeting him accidentally in town, had there renewed a slight acquaintance. Of his former way of life, nothing had been known in Hertfordshire but what he told himself. As to his real character, had information been in her power, she had never felt a wish of inquiring. His countenance, voice, and manner, had established him at once in the possession of every virtue. She tried to recollect some instance of goodness, some distinguished trait of integrity or benevolence, that might rescue him from the attacks of Mr. Darcy; or at least, by the predominance of virtue, atone for those casual errors, under which she would endeavour to class what Mr. Darcy had described as the idleness and vice of many years’ continuance. But no such recollection befriended her. She could see him instantly before her, in every charm of air and address, but she could remember no more substantial good than the general approbation of the neighbourhood, and the regard which his social powers had gained him in the mess. After pausing on this point a considerable while, she once more continued to read. But, alas! the story which followed, of his designs on Miss Darcy, received some confirmation from what had passed between Colonel Fitzwilliam and herself only the morning before; and at last she was referred for the truth of every particular to Colonel Fitzwilliam himself--from whom she had previously received the information of his near concern in all his cousin’s affairs and whose character she had no reason to question. At one time she had almost resolved on applying to him, but the idea was checked by the awkwardness of the application, and at length wholly banished by the conviction that Mr. Darcy would never have hazarded such a proposal, if he had not been well assured of his cousin’s corroboration.

She perfectly remembered everything that had passed in conversation between Wickham and herself in their first evening at Mr. Philips’s. Many of his expressions were still fresh in her memory. She was _now_ struck with the impropriety of such communications to a stranger, and wondered it had escaped her before. She saw the indelicacy of putting himself forward as he had done, and the inconsistency of his professions with his conduct. She remembered that he had boasted of having no fear of seeing Mr. Darcy--that Mr. Darcy might leave the country, but that _he_ should stand his ground; yet he had avoided the Netherfield ball the very next week. She remembered, also, that till the Netherfield family had quitted the country, he had told his story to no one but herself; but that after their removal, it had been everywhere discussed; that he had then no reserves, no scruples in sinking Mr. Darcy’s character, though he had assured her that respect for the father would always prevent his exposing the son. How differently did everything now appear in which he was concerned! His attentions to Miss King were now the consequence of views solely and hatefully mercenary; and the mediocrity of her fortune proved no longer the moderation of his wishes, but his eagerness to grasp at anything. His behaviour to herself could now have had no tolerable motive: he had either been deceived with regard to her fortune, or had been gratifying his vanity by encouraging the preference which she believed she had most incautiously shown. Every lingering struggle in his favour grew fainter and fainter; and in further justification of Mr. Darcy, she could not but allow that Mr. Bingley, when questioned by Jane, had long ago asserted his blamelessness in the affair;--that, proud and repulsive as were his manners, she had never, in the whole course of their acquaintance--an acquaintance which had latterly brought them much together, and given her a sort of intimacy with his ways--seen anything that betrayed him to be unprincipled or unjust--anything that spoke him of irreligious or immoral habits;--that among his own connections he was esteemed and valued;--that even Wickham had allowed him merit as a brother, and that she had often heard him speak so affectionately of his sister as to prove him capable of some amiable feeling;--that had his actions been what Wickham represented them, so gross a violation of everything right could hardly have been concealed from the world; and that friendship between a person capable of it and such an amiable man as Mr. Bingley was incomprehensible.

She grew absolutely ashamed of herself. Of neither Darcy nor Wickham could she think, without feeling that she had been blind, partial, prejudiced, absurd. “How despicably have I acted!” she cried. “I, who have prided myself on my discernment! I, who have valued myself on my abilities! who have often disdained the generous candour of my sister, and gratified my vanity in useless or blameless distrust. How humiliating is this discovery! Yet, how just a humiliation! Had I been in love, I could not have been more wretchedly blind. But vanity, not love, has been my folly. Pleased with the preference of one, and offended by the neglect of the other, on the very beginning of our acquaintance, I have courted prepossession and ignorance, and driven reason away where either were concerned. Till this moment, I never knew myself.” From herself to Jane, from Jane to Bingley, her thoughts were in a line which soon brought to her recollection that Mr. Darcy’s explanation _there_ had appeared very insufficient; and she read it again. Widely different was the effect of a second perusal. How could she deny that credit to his assertions, in one instance, which she had been obliged to give in the other? He declared himself to have been totally unsuspicious of her sister’s attachment; and she could not help remembering what Charlotte’s opinion had always been. Neither could she deny the justice of his description of Jane. She felt that Jane’s feelings, though fervent, were little displayed, and that there was a constant complacency in her air and manner, not often united with great sensibility.

When she came to that part of the letter in which her family were mentioned, in tones of such mortifying, yet merited, reproach, her sense of shame was severe. The justice of the charge struck her too forcibly for denial; and the circumstances to which he particularly alluded, as having passed at the Netherfield ball, and as confirming all his first disapprobation, could not have made a stronger impression on his mind than on hers. The compliment to herself and her sister was not unfelt. It soothed, but it could not console her for the contempt which had been thus self-attracted by the rest of her family; and as she considered that Jane’s disappointment had, in fact, been the work of her nearest relations, and reflected how materially the credit of both must be hurt by such impropriety of conduct, she felt depressed beyond anything she had ever known before. After wandering along the lane for two hours, giving way to every variety of thought, reconsidering events, determining probabilities, and reconciling herself, as well as she could, to a change so sudden and so important, fatigue, and a recollection of her long absence, made her at length return home; and she entered the house with the wish of appearing cheerful as usual, and the resolution of repressing such reflections as must make her unfit for conversation.

She was immediately told, that the two gentlemen from Rosings had each called during her absence; Mr. Darcy, only for a few minutes, to take leave, but that Colonel Fitzwilliam had been sitting with them at least an hour, hoping for her return, and almost resolving to walk after her till she could be found. Elizabeth could but just _affect_ concern in missing him; she really rejoiced at it. Colonel Fitzwilliam was no longer an object. She could think only of her letter. The two gentlemen left Rosings the next morning; and Mr. Collins having been in waiting near the lodges, to make them his parting obeisance, was able to bring home the pleasing intelligence of their appearing in very good health, and in as tolerable spirits as could be expected, after the melancholy scene so lately gone through at Rosings. To Rosings he then hastened to console Lady Catherine and her daughter; and on his return brought back, with great satisfaction, a message from her Ladyship, importing that she felt herself so dull as to make her very desirous of having them all to dine with her.

Elizabeth could not see Lady Catherine without recollecting that, had she chosen it, she might by this time have been presented to her as her future niece; nor could she think, without a smile, of what her Ladyship’s indignation would have been. “What would she have said? how would she have behaved?” were the questions with which she amused herself. Their first subject was the diminution of the Rosings’ party. “I assure you, I feel it exceedingly,” said Lady Catherine; “I believe nobody feels the loss of friends so much as I do. But I am particularly attached to these young men; and know them to be so much attached to me! They were excessively sorry to go! But so they always are. The dear Colonel rallied his spirits tolerably till just at last; but Darcy seemed to feel it most acutely--more, I think, than last year. His attachment to Rosings certainly increases.” Lady Catherine observed, after dinner, that Miss Bennet seemed out of spirits; and immediately accounting for it herself, by supposing that she did not like to go home again so soon, she added,--

“But if that is the case, you must write to your mother to beg that you may stay a little longer. Mrs. Collins will be very glad of your company, I am sure.” “I am much obliged to your Ladyship for your kind invitation,” replied Elizabeth; “but it is not in my power to accept it. I must be in town next Saturday.” “Why, at that rate, you will have been here only six weeks. I expected you to stay two months. I told Mrs. Collins so before you came. There can be no occasion for your going so soon. Mrs. Bennet could certainly spare you for another fortnight.” “Oh, your father, of course, may spare you, if your mother can. Daughters are never of so much consequence to a father. And if you will stay another _month_ complete, it will be in my power to take one of you as far as London, for I am going there early in June, for a week; and as Dawson does not object to the barouche-box, there will be very good room for one of you--and, indeed, if the weather should happen to be cool, I should not object to taking you both, as you are neither of you large.”

Lady Catherine seemed resigned. “Mrs. Collins, you must send a servant with them. You know I always speak my mind, and I cannot bear the idea of two young women travelling post by themselves. It is highly improper. You must contrive to send somebody. I have the greatest dislike in the world to that sort of thing. Young women should always be properly guarded and attended, according to their situation in life. When my niece Georgiana went to Ramsgate last summer, I made a point of her having two men-servants go with her. Miss Darcy, the daughter of Mr. Darcy of Pemberley, and Lady Anne, could not have appeared with propriety in a different manner. I am excessively attentive to all those things. You must send John with the young ladies, Mrs. Collins. I am glad it occurred to me to mention it; for it would really be discreditable to _you_ to let them go alone.” “Oh! Your uncle! He keeps a man-servant, does he? I am very glad you have somebody who thinks of those things. Where shall you change horses? Oh, Bromley, of course. If you mention my name at the Bell, you will be attended to.”

Lady Catherine had many other questions to ask respecting their journey; and as she did not answer them all herself attention was necessary--which Elizabeth believed to be lucky for her; or, with a mind so occupied, she might have forgotten where she was. Reflection must be reserved for solitary hours: whenever she was alone, she gave way to it as the greatest relief; and not a day went by without a solitary walk, in which she might indulge in all the delight of unpleasant recollections. Mr. Darcy’s letter she was in a fair way of soon knowing by heart. She studied every sentence; and her feelings towards its writer were at times widely different. When she remembered the style of his address, she was still full of indignation: but when she considered how unjustly she had condemned and upbraided him, her anger was turned against herself; and his disappointed feelings became the object of compassion. His attachment excited gratitude, his general character respect: but she could not approve him; nor could she for a moment repent her refusal, or feel the slightest inclination ever to see him again. In her own past behaviour, there was a constant source of vexation and regret: and in the unhappy defects of her family, a subject of yet heavier chagrin. They were hopeless of remedy. Her father, contented with laughing at them, would never exert himself to restrain the wild giddiness of his youngest daughters; and her mother, with manners so far from right herself, was entirely insensible of the evil. Elizabeth had frequently united with Jane in an endeavour to check the imprudence of Catherine and Lydia; but while they were supported by their mother’s indulgence, what chance could there be of improvement? Catherine, weak-spirited, irritable, and completely under Lydia’s guidance, had been always affronted by their advice; and Lydia, self-willed and careless, would scarcely give them a hearing. They were ignorant, idle, and vain. While there was an officer in Meryton, they would flirt with him; and while Meryton was within a walk of Longbourn, they would be going there for ever.

Anxiety on Jane’s behalf was another prevailing concern; and Mr. Darcy’s explanation, by restoring Bingley to all her former good opinion, heightened the sense of what Jane had lost. His affection was proved to have been sincere, and his conduct cleared of all blame, unless any could attach to the implicitness of his confidence in his friend. How grievous then was the thought that, of a situation so desirable in every respect, so replete with advantage, so promising for happiness, Jane had been deprived, by the folly and indecorum of her own family! When to these recollections was added the development of Wickham’s character, it may be easily believed that the happy spirits which had seldom been depressed before were now so much affected as to make it almost impossible for her to appear tolerably cheerful. Their engagements at Rosings were as frequent during the last week of her stay as they had been at first. The very last evening was spent there; and her Ladyship again inquired minutely into the particulars of their journey, gave them directions as to the best method of packing, and was so urgent on the necessity of placing gowns in the only right way, that Maria thought herself obliged, on her return, to undo all the work of the morning, and pack her trunk afresh.

When they parted, Lady Catherine, with great condescension, wished them a good journey, and invited them to come to Hunsford again next year; and Miss de Bourgh exerted herself so far as to courtesy and hold out her hand to both. On Saturday morning Elizabeth and Mr. Collins met for breakfast a few minutes before the others appeared; and he took the opportunity of paying the parting civilities which he deemed indispensably necessary. “I know not, Miss Elizabeth,” said he, “whether Mrs. Collins has yet expressed her sense of your kindness in coming to us; but I am very certain you will not leave the house without receiving her thanks for it. The favour of your company has been much felt, I assure you. We know how little there is to tempt anyone to our humble abode. Our plain manner of living, our small rooms, and few domestics, and the little we see of the world, must make Hunsford extremely dull to a young lady like yourself; but I hope you will believe us grateful for the condescension, and that we have done everything in our power to prevent you spending your time unpleasantly.”

Elizabeth was eager with her thanks and assurances of happiness. She had spent six weeks with great enjoyment; and the pleasure of being with Charlotte, and the kind attention she had received, must make _her_ feel the obliged. Mr. Collins was gratified; and with a more smiling solemnity replied,-- “It gives me the greatest pleasure to hear that you have passed your time not disagreeably. We have certainly done our best; and most fortunately having it in our power to introduce you to very superior society, and from our connection with Rosings, the frequent means of varying the humble home scene, I think we may flatter ourselves that your Hunsford visit cannot have been entirely irksome. Our situation with regard to Lady Catherine’s family is, indeed, the sort of extraordinary advantage and blessing which few can boast. You see on what a footing we are. You see how continually we are engaged there. In truth, I must acknowledge, that, with all the disadvantages of this humble parsonage, I should not think anyone abiding in it an object of compassion, while they are sharers of our intimacy at Rosings.”

Words were insufficient for the elevation of his feelings; and he was obliged to walk about the room, while Elizabeth tried to unite civility and truth in a few short sentences. “You may, in fact, carry a very favourable report of us into Hertfordshire, my dear cousin. I flatter myself, at least, that you will be able to do so. Lady Catherine’s great attentions to Mrs. Collins you have been a daily witness of; and altogether I trust it does not appear that your friend has drawn an unfortunate--but on this point it will be as well to be silent. Only let me assure you, my dear Miss Elizabeth, that I can from my heart most cordially wish you equal felicity in marriage. My dear Charlotte and I have but one mind and one way of thinking. There is in everything a most remarkable resemblance of character and ideas between us. We seem to have been designed for each other.” Elizabeth could safely say that it was a great happiness where that was the case, and with equal sincerity could add, that she firmly believed and rejoiced in his domestic comforts. She was not sorry, however, to have the recital of them interrupted by the entrance of the lady from whom they sprang. Poor Charlotte! it was melancholy to leave her to such society! But she had chosen it with her eyes open; and though evidently regretting that her visitors were to go, she did not seem to ask for compassion. Her home and her housekeeping, her parish and her poultry, and all their dependent concerns, had not yet lost their charms.

At length the chaise arrived, the trunks were fastened on, the parcels placed within, and it was pronounced to be ready. After an affectionate parting between the friends, Elizabeth was attended to the carriage by Mr. Collins; and as they walked down the garden, he was commissioning her with his best respects to all her family, not forgetting his thanks for the kindness he had received at Longbourn in the winter, and his compliments to Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner, though unknown. He then handed her in, Maria followed, and the door was on the point of being closed, when he suddenly reminded them, with some consternation, that they had hitherto forgotten to leave any message for the ladies of Rosings. “But,” he added, “you will of course wish to have your humble respects delivered to them, with your grateful thanks for their kindness to you while you have been here.” Their journey was performed without much conversation, or any alarm; and within four hours of their leaving Hunsford they reached Mr. Gardiner’s house, where they were to remain a few days.

Jane looked well, and Elizabeth had little opportunity of studying her spirits, amidst the various engagements which the kindness of her aunt had reserved for them. But Jane was to go home with her, and at Longbourn there would be leisure enough for observation. It was not without an effort, meanwhile, that she could wait even for Longbourn, before she told her sister of Mr. Darcy’s proposals. To know that she had the power of revealing what would so exceedingly astonish Jane, and must, at the same time, so highly gratify whatever of her own vanity she had not yet been able to reason away, was such a temptation to openness as nothing could have conquered, but the state of indecision in which she remained as to the extent of what she should communicate, and her fear, if she once entered on the subject, of being hurried into repeating something of Bingley, which might only grieve her sister further. It was the second week in May, in which the three young ladies set out together from Gracechurch Street for the town of ----, in Hertfordshire; and, as they drew near the appointed inn where Mr. Bennet’s carriage was to meet them, they quickly perceived, in token of the coachman’s punctuality, both Kitty and Lydia looking out of a dining-room upstairs. These two girls had been above an hour in the place, happily employed in visiting an opposite milliner, watching the sentinel on guard, and dressing a salad and cucumber.

After welcoming their sisters, they triumphantly displayed a table set out with such cold meat as an inn larder usually affords, exclaiming, “Is not this nice? is not this an agreeable surprise?” “And we mean to treat you all,” added Lydia; “but you must lend us the money, for we have just spent ours at the shop out there.” Then showing her purchases,--“Look here, I have bought this bonnet. I do not think it is very pretty; but I thought I might as well buy it as not. I shall pull it to pieces as soon as I get home, and see if I can make it up any better.” And when her sisters abused it as ugly, she added, with perfect unconcern, “Oh, but there were two or three much uglier in the shop; and when I have bought some prettier-coloured satin to trim it with fresh, I think it will be very tolerable. Besides, it will not much signify what one wears this summer, after the ----shire have left Meryton, and they are going in a fortnight.” “They are going to be encamped near Brighton; and I do so want papa to take us all there for the summer! It would be such a delicious scheme, and I dare say would hardly cost anything at all. Mamma would like to go, too, of all things! Only think what a miserable summer else we shall have!”

“Yes,” thought Elizabeth; “_that_ would be a delightful scheme, indeed, and completely do for us at once. Good Heaven! Brighton and a whole campful of soldiers, to us, who have been overset already by one poor regiment of militia, and the monthly balls of Meryton!” “Now I have got some news for you,” said Lydia, as they sat down to table. “What do you think? It is excellent news, capital news, and about a certain person that we all like.” “Ay, that is just like your formality and discretion. You thought the waiter must not hear, as if he cared! I dare say he often hears worse things said than I am going to say. But he is an ugly fellow! I am glad he is gone. I never saw such a long chin in my life. Well, but now for my news: it is about dear Wickham; too good for the waiter, is not it? There is no danger of Wickham’s marrying Mary King--there’s for you! She is gone down to her uncle at Liverpool; gone to stay. Wickham is safe.”

Elizabeth was shocked to think that, however incapable of such coarseness of _expression_ herself, the coarseness of the _sentiment_ was little other than her own breast had formerly harboured and fancied liberal! As soon as all had ate, and the elder ones paid, the carriage was ordered; and, after some contrivance, the whole party, with all their boxes, workbags, and parcels, and the unwelcome addition of Kitty’s and Lydia’s purchases, were seated in it. “How nicely we are crammed in!” cried Lydia. “I am glad I brought my bonnet, if it is only for the fun of having another band-box! Well, now let us be quite comfortable and snug, and talk and laugh all the way home. And in the first place, let us hear what has happened to you all since you went away. Have you seen any pleasant men? Have you had any flirting? I was in great hopes that one of you would have got a husband before you came back. Jane will be quite an old maid soon, I declare. She is almost three-and-twenty! Lord! how ashamed I should be of not being married before three-and-twenty! My aunt Philips wants you so to get husbands you can’t think. She says Lizzy had better have taken Mr. Collins; but _I_ do not think there would have been any fun in it. Lord! how I should like to be married before any of you! and then I would _chaperon_ you about to all the balls. Dear me! we had such a good piece of fun the other day at Colonel Forster’s! Kitty and me were to spend the day there, and Mrs. Forster promised to have a little dance in the evening; (by-the-bye, Mrs. Forster and me are _such_ friends!) and so she asked the two Harringtons to come: but Harriet was ill, and so Pen was forced to come by herself; and then, what do you think we did? We dressed up Chamberlayne in woman’s clothes, on purpose to pass for a lady,--only think what fun! Not a soul knew of it, but Colonel and Mrs. Forster, and Kitty and me, except my aunt, for we were forced to borrow one of her gowns; and you cannot imagine how well he looked! When Denny, and Wickham, and Pratt, and two or three more of the men came in, they did not know him in the least. Lord! how I laughed! and so did Mrs. Forster. I thought I should have died. And _that_ made the men suspect something, and then they soon found out what was the matter.”

With such kind of histories of their parties and good jokes did Lydia, assisted by Kitty’s hints and additions, endeavour to amuse her companions all the way to Longbourn. Elizabeth listened as little as she could, but there was no escaping the frequent mention of Wickham’s name. Their reception at home was most kind. Mrs. Bennet rejoiced to see Jane in undiminished beauty; and more than once during dinner did Mr. Bennet say voluntarily to Elizabeth,---- Their party in the dining-room was large, for almost all the Lucases came to meet Maria and hear the news; and various were the subjects which occupied them: Lady Lucas was inquiring of Maria, across the table, after the welfare and poultry of her eldest daughter; Mrs. Bennet was doubly engaged, on one hand collecting an account of the present fashions from Jane, who sat some way below her, and on the other, retailing them all to the younger Miss Lucases; and Lydia, in a voice rather louder than any other person’s, was enumerating the various pleasures of the morning to anybody who would hear her.

“Oh, Mary,” said she, “I wish you had gone with us, for we had such fun! as we went along Kitty and me drew up all the blinds, and pretended there was nobody in the coach; and I should have gone so all the way, if Kitty had not been sick; and when we got to the George, I do think we behaved very handsomely, for we treated the other three with the nicest cold luncheon in the world, and if you would have gone, we would have treated you too. And then when we came away it was such fun! I thought we never should have got into the coach. I was ready to die of laughter. And then we were so merry all the way home! we talked and laughed so loud, that anybody might have heard us ten miles off!” To this, Mary very gravely replied, “Far be it from me, my dear sister, to depreciate such pleasures. They would doubtless be congenial with the generality of female minds. But I confess they would have no charms for _me_. I should infinitely prefer a book.”

In the afternoon Lydia was urgent with the rest of the girls to walk to Meryton, and see how everybody went on; but Elizabeth steadily opposed the scheme. It should not be said, that the Miss Bennets could not be at home half a day before they were in pursuit of the officers. There was another reason, too, for her opposition. She dreaded seeing Wickham again, and was resolved to avoid it as long as possible. The comfort to _her_, of the regiment’s approaching removal, was indeed beyond expression. In a fortnight they were to go, and once gone, she hoped there could be nothing more to plague her on his account. She had not been many hours at home, before she found that the Brighton scheme, of which Lydia had given them a hint at the inn, was under frequent discussion between her parents. Elizabeth saw directly that her father had not the smallest intention of yielding; but his answers were at the same time so vague and equivocal, that her mother, though often disheartened, had never yet despaired of succeeding at last.

Elizabeth’s impatience to acquaint Jane with what had happened could no longer be overcome; and at length resolving to suppress every particular in which her sister was concerned, and preparing her to be surprised, she related to her the next morning the chief of the scene between Mr. Darcy and herself. Miss Bennet’s astonishment was soon lessened by the strong sisterly partiality which made any admiration of Elizabeth appear perfectly natural; and all surprise was shortly lost in other feelings. She was sorry that Mr. Darcy should have delivered his sentiments in a manner so little suited to recommend them; but still more was she grieved for the unhappiness which her sister’s refusal must have given him. “His being so sure of succeeding was wrong,” said she, “and certainly ought not to have appeared; but consider how much it must increase his disappointment.” “Indeed,” replied Elizabeth, “I am heartily sorry for him; but he has other feelings which will probably soon drive away his regard for me. You do not blame me, however, for refusing him?” She then spoke of the letter, repeating the whole of its contents as far as they concerned George Wickham. What a stroke was this for poor Jane, who would willingly have gone through the world without believing that so much wickedness existed in the whole race of mankind as was here collected in one individual! Nor was Darcy’s vindication, though grateful to her feelings, capable of consoling her for such discovery. Most earnestly did she labour to prove the probability of error, and seek to clear one, without involving the other.

“This will not do,” said Elizabeth; “you never will be able to make both of them good for anything. Take your choice, but you must be satisfied with only one. There is but such a quantity of merit between them; just enough to make one good sort of man; and of late it has been shifting about pretty much. For my part, I am inclined to believe it all Mr. Darcy’s, but you shall do as you choose.” “I do not know when I have been more shocked,” said she. “Wickham so very bad! It is almost past belief. And poor Mr. Darcy! dear Lizzy, only consider what he must have suffered. Such a disappointment! and with the knowledge of your ill opinion too! and having to relate such a thing of his sister! It is really too distressing, I am sure you must feel it so.” “Oh no, my regret and compassion are all done away by seeing you so full of both. I know you will do him such ample justice, that I am growing every moment more unconcerned and indifferent. Your profusion makes me saving; and if you lament over him much longer, my heart will be as light as a feather.”

“There certainly was some great mismanagement in the education of those two young men. One has got all the goodness, and the other all the appearance of it.” “And yet I meant to be uncommonly clever in taking so decided a dislike to him, without any reason. It is such a spur to one’s genius, such an opening for wit, to have a dislike of that kind. One may be continually abusive without saying anything just; but one cannot be always laughing at a man without now and then stumbling on something witty.” “Indeed, I could not. I was uncomfortable enough, I was very uncomfortable--I may say unhappy. And with no one to speak to of what I felt, no Jane to comfort me, and say that I had not been so very weak, and vain, and nonsensical, as I knew I had! Oh, how I wanted you!” “How unfortunate that you should have used such very strong expressions in speaking of Wickham to Mr. Darcy, for now they _do_ appear wholly undeserved.” “Certainly. But the misfortune of speaking with bitterness is a most natural consequence of the prejudices I had been encouraging. There is one point on which I want your advice. I want to be told whether I ought, or ought not, to make our acquaintance in general understand Wickham’s character.”

“That it ought not to be attempted. Mr. Darcy has not authorized me to make his communication public. On the contrary, every particular relative to his sister was meant to be kept as much as possible to myself; and if I endeavour to undeceive people as to the rest of his conduct, who will believe me? The general prejudice against Mr. Darcy is so violent, that it would be the death of half the good people in Meryton, to attempt to place him in an amiable light. I am not equal to it. Wickham will soon be gone; and, therefore, it will not signify to anybody here what he really is. Some time hence it will be all found out, and then we may laugh at their stupidity in not knowing it before. At present I will say nothing about it.” “You are quite right. To have his errors made public might ruin him for ever. He is now, perhaps, sorry for what he has done, and anxious to re-establish a character. We must not make him desperate.” The tumult of Elizabeth’s mind was allayed by this conversation. She had got rid of two of the secrets which had weighed on her for a fortnight, and was certain of a willing listener in Jane, whenever she might wish to talk again of either. But there was still something lurking behind, of which prudence forbade the disclosure. She dared not relate the other half of Mr. Darcy’s letter, nor explain to her sister how sincerely she had been valued by his friend. Here was knowledge in which no one could partake; and she was sensible that nothing less than a perfect understanding between the parties could justify her in throwing off this last encumbrance of mystery. “And then,” said she, “if that very improbable event should ever take place, I shall merely be able to tell what Bingley may tell in a much more agreeable manner himself. The liberty of communication cannot be mine till it has lost all its value!”

She was now, on being settled at home, at leisure to observe the real state of her sister’s spirits. Jane was not happy. She still cherished a very tender affection for Bingley. Having never even fancied herself in love before, her regard had all the warmth of first attachment, and from her age and disposition, greater steadiness than first attachments often boast; and so fervently did she value his remembrance, and prefer him to every other man, that all her good sense, and all her attention to the feelings of her friends, were requisite to check the indulgence of those regrets which must have been injurious to her own health and their tranquillity. “Well, Lizzy,” said Mrs. Bennet, one day, “what is your opinion _now_ of this sad business of Jane’s? For my part, I am determined never to speak of it again to anybody. I told my sister Philips so the other day. But I cannot find out that Jane saw anything of him in London. Well, he is a very undeserving young man--and I do not suppose there is the least chance in the world of her ever getting him now. There is no talk of his coming to Netherfield again in the summer; and I have inquired of everybody, too, who is likely to know.”

“Oh, well! it is just as he chooses. Nobody wants him to come; though I shall always say that he used my daughter extremely ill; and, if I was her, I would not have put up with it. Well, my comfort is, I am sure Jane will die of a broken heart, and then he will be sorry for what he has done.” “Well, Lizzy,” continued her mother, soon afterwards, “and so the Collinses live very comfortable, do they? Well, well, I only hope it will last. And what sort of table do they keep? Charlotte is an excellent manager, I dare say. If she is half as sharp as her mother, she is saving enough. There is nothing extravagant in _their_ housekeeping, I dare say.” “A great deal of good management, depend upon it. Yes, yes. _They_ will take care not to outrun their income. _They_ will never be distressed for money. Well, much good may it do them! And so, I suppose, they often talk of having Longbourn when your father is dead. They look upon it quite as their own, I dare say, whenever that happens.”

“No; it would have been strange if they had. But I make no doubt they often talk of it between themselves. Well, if they can be easy with an estate that is not lawfully their own, so much the better. _I_ should be ashamed of having one that was only entailed on me.” The first week of their return was soon gone. The second began. It was the last of the regiment’s stay in Meryton, and all the young ladies in the neighbourhood were drooping apace. The dejection was almost universal. The elder Miss Bennets alone were still able to eat, drink, and sleep, and pursue the usual course of their employments. Very frequently were they reproached for this insensibility by Kitty and Lydia, whose own misery was extreme, and who could not comprehend such hard-heartedness in any of the family. Such were the kind of lamentations resounding perpetually through Longbourn House. Elizabeth tried to be diverted by them; but all sense of pleasure was lost in shame. She felt anew the justice of Mr. Darcy’s objections; and never had she before been so much disposed to pardon his interference in the views of his friend.

But the gloom of Lydia’s prospect was shortly cleared away; for she received an invitation from Mrs. Forster, the wife of the colonel of the regiment, to accompany her to Brighton. This invaluable friend was a very young woman, and very lately married. A resemblance in good-humour and good spirits had recommended her and Lydia to each other, and out of their _three_ months’ acquaintance they had been intimate _two_. The rapture of Lydia on this occasion, her adoration of Mrs. Forster, the delight of Mrs. Bennet, and the mortification of Kitty, are scarcely to be described. Wholly inattentive to her sister’s feelings, Lydia flew about the house in restless ecstasy, calling for everyone’s congratulations, and laughing and talking with more violence than ever; whilst the luckless Kitty continued in the parlour repining at her fate in terms as unreasonable as her accent was peevish. “I cannot see why Mrs. Forster should not ask _me_ as well as Lydia,” said she, “though I am _not_ her particular friend. I have just as much right to be asked as she has, and more too, for I am two years older.”

In vain did Elizabeth attempt to make her reasonable, and Jane to make her resigned. As for Elizabeth herself, this invitation was so far from exciting in her the same feelings as in her mother and Lydia, that she considered it as the death-warrant of all possibility of common sense for the latter; and detestable as such a step must make her, were it known, she could not help secretly advising her father not to let her go. She represented to him all the improprieties of Lydia’s general behaviour, the little advantage she could derive from the friendship of such a woman as Mrs. Forster, and the probability of her being yet more imprudent with such a companion at Brighton, where the temptations must be greater than at home. He heard her attentively, and then said,-- “Lydia will never be easy till she has exposed herself in some public place or other, and we can never expect her to do it with so little expense or inconvenience to her family as under the present circumstances.” “If you were aware,” said Elizabeth, “of the very great disadvantage to us all, which must arise from the public notice of Lydia’s unguarded and imprudent manner, nay, which has already arisen from it, I am sure you would judge differently in the affair.”

“Already arisen!” repeated Mr. Bennet. “What! has she frightened away some of your lovers? Poor little Lizzy! But do not be cast down. Such squeamish youths as cannot bear to be connected with a little absurdity are not worth a regret. Come, let me see the list of the pitiful fellows who have been kept aloof by Lydia’s folly.” “Indeed, you are mistaken. I have no such injuries to resent. It is not of peculiar, but of general evils, which I am now complaining. Our importance, our respectability in the world, must be affected by the wild volatility, the assurance and disdain of all restraint which mark Lydia’s character. Excuse me,--for I must speak plainly. If you, my dear father, will not take the trouble of checking her exuberant spirits, and of teaching her that her present pursuits are not to be the business of her life, she will soon be beyond the reach of amendment. Her character will be fixed; and she will, at sixteen, be the most determined flirt that ever made herself and her family ridiculous;--a flirt, too, in the worst and meanest degree of flirtation; without any attraction beyond youth and a tolerable person; and, from the ignorance and emptiness of her mind, wholly unable to ward off any portion of that universal contempt which her rage for admiration will excite. In this danger Kitty is also comprehended. She will follow wherever Lydia leads. Vain, ignorant, idle, and absolutely uncontrolled! Oh, my dear father, can you suppose it possible that they will not be censured and despised wherever they are known, and that their sisters will not be often involved in the disgrace?”

“Do not make yourself uneasy, my love. Wherever you and Jane are known, you must be respected and valued; and you will not appear to less advantage for having a couple of--or I may say, three--very silly sisters. We shall have no peace at Longbourn if Lydia does not go to Brighton. Let her go, then. Colonel Forster is a sensible man, and will keep her out of any real mischief; and she is luckily too poor to be an object of prey to anybody. At Brighton she will be of less importance even as a common flirt than she has been here. The officers will find women better worth their notice. Let us hope, therefore, that her being there may teach her her own insignificance. At any rate, she cannot grow many degrees worse, without authorizing us to lock her up for the rest of her life.” With this answer Elizabeth was forced to be content; but her own opinion continued the same, and she left him disappointed and sorry. It was not in her nature, however, to increase her vexations by dwelling on them. She was confident of having performed her duty; and to fret over unavoidable evils, or augment them by anxiety, was no part of her disposition.

Had Lydia and her mother known the substance of her conference with her father, their indignation would hardly have found expression in their united volubility. In Lydia’s imagination, a visit to Brighton comprised every possibility of earthly happiness. She saw, with the creative eye of fancy, the streets of that gay bathing-place covered with officers. She saw herself the object of attention to tens and to scores of them at present unknown. She saw all the glories of the camp: its tents stretched forth in beauteous uniformity of lines, crowded with the young and the gay, and dazzling with scarlet; and, to complete the view, she saw herself seated beneath a tent, tenderly flirting with at least six officers at once. Had she known that her sister sought to tear her from such prospects and such realities as these, what would have been her sensations? They could have been understood only by her mother, who might have felt nearly the same. Lydia’s going to Brighton was all that consoled her for the melancholy conviction of her husband’s never intending to go there himself.

Elizabeth was now to see Mr. Wickham for the last time. Having been frequently in company with him since her return, agitation was pretty well over; the agitations of former partiality entirely so. She had even learnt to detect, in the very gentleness which had first delighted her, an affectation and a sameness to disgust and weary. In his present behaviour to herself, moreover, she had a fresh source of displeasure; for the inclination he soon testified of renewing those attentions which had marked the early part of their acquaintance could only serve, after what had since passed, to provoke her. She lost all concern for him in finding herself thus selected as the object of such idle and frivolous gallantry; and while she steadily repressed it, could not but feel the reproof contained in his believing, that however long, and for whatever cause, his attentions had been withdrawn, her vanity would be gratified, and her preference secured, at any time, by their renewal. On the very last day of the regiment’s remaining in Meryton, he dined, with others of the officers, at Longbourn; and so little was Elizabeth disposed to part from him in good-humour, that, on his making some inquiry as to the manner in which her time had passed at Hunsford, she mentioned Colonel Fitzwilliam’s and Mr. Darcy’s having both spent three weeks at Rosings, and asked him if he were acquainted with the former.

He looked surprised, displeased, alarmed; but, with a moment’s recollection, and a returning smile, replied, that he had formerly seen him often; and, after observing that he was a very gentlemanlike man, asked her how she had liked him. Her answer was warmly in his favour. With an air of indifference, he soon afterwards added, “How long did you say that he was at Rosings?” “Indeed!” cried Wickham, with a look which did not escape her. “And pray may I ask--” but checking himself, he added, in a gayer tone, “Is it in address that he improves? Has he deigned to add aught of civility to his ordinary style? for I dare not hope,” he continued, in a lower and more serious tone, “that he is improved in essentials.” While she spoke, Wickham looked as if scarcely knowing whether to rejoice over her words or to distrust their meaning. There was a something in her countenance which made him listen with an apprehensive and anxious attention, while she added,-- “When I said that he improved on acquaintance, I did not mean that either his mind or manners were in a state of improvement; but that, from knowing him better, his disposition was better understood.”

Wickham’s alarm now appeared in a heightened complexion and agitated look; for a few minutes he was silent; till, shaking off his embarrassment, he turned to her again, and said in the gentlest of accents,-- “You, who so well know my feelings towards Mr. Darcy, will readily comprehend how sincerely I must rejoice that he is wise enough to assume even the _appearance_ of what is right. His pride, in that direction, may be of service, if not to himself, to many others, for it must deter him from such foul misconduct as I have suffered by. I only fear that the sort of cautiousness to which you, I imagine, have been alluding, is merely adopted on his visits to his aunt, of whose good opinion and judgment he stands much in awe. His fear of her has always operated, I know, when they were together; and a good deal is to be imputed to his wish of forwarding the match with Miss de Bourgh, which I am certain he has very much at heart.” Elizabeth could not repress a smile at this, but she answered only by a slight inclination of the head. She saw that he wanted to engage her on the old subject of his grievances, and she was in no humour to indulge him. The rest of the evening passed with the _appearance_, on his side, of usual cheerfulness, but with no further attempt to distinguish Elizabeth; and they parted at last with mutual civility, and possibly a mutual desire of never meeting again.

When the party broke up, Lydia returned with Mrs. Forster to Meryton, from whence they were to set out early the next morning. The separation between her and her family was rather noisy than pathetic. Kitty was the only one who shed tears; but she did weep from vexation and envy. Mrs. Bennet was diffuse in her good wishes for the felicity of her daughter, and impressive in her injunctions that she would not miss the opportunity of enjoying herself as much as possible,--advice which there was every reason to believe would be attended to; and, in the clamorous happiness of Lydia herself in bidding farewell, the more gentle adieus of her sisters were uttered without being heard. Had Elizabeth’s opinion been all drawn from her own family, she could not have formed a very pleasing picture of conjugal felicity or domestic comfort. Her father, captivated by youth and beauty, and that appearance of good-humour which youth and beauty generally give, had married a woman whose weak understanding and illiberal mind had very early in their marriage put an end to all real affection for her. Respect, esteem, and confidence had vanished for ever; and all his views of domestic happiness were overthrown. But Mr. Bennet was not of a disposition to seek comfort for the disappointment which his own imprudence had brought on in any of those pleasures which too often console the unfortunate for their folly or their vice. He was fond of the country and of books; and from these tastes had arisen his principal enjoyments. To his wife he was very little otherwise indebted than as her ignorance and folly had contributed to his amusement. This is not the sort of happiness which a man would in general wish to owe to his wife; but where other powers of entertainment are wanting, the true philosopher will derive benefit from such as are given.

Elizabeth, however, had never been blind to the impropriety of her father’s behaviour as a husband. She had always seen it with pain; but respecting his abilities, and grateful for his affectionate treatment of herself, she endeavoured to forget what she could not overlook, and to banish from her thoughts that continual breach of conjugal obligation and decorum which, in exposing his wife to the contempt of her own children, was so highly reprehensible. But she had never felt so strongly as now the disadvantages which must attend the children of so unsuitable a marriage, nor ever been so fully aware of the evils arising from so ill-judged a direction of talents--talents which, rightly used, might at least have preserved the respectability of his daughters, even if incapable of enlarging the mind of his wife. When Elizabeth had rejoiced over Wickham’s departure, she found little other cause for satisfaction in the loss of the regiment. Their parties abroad were less varied than before; and at home she had a mother and sister, whose constant repinings at the dulness of everything around them threw a real gloom over their domestic circle; and, though Kitty might in time regain her natural degree of sense, since the disturbers of her brain were removed, her other sister, from whose disposition greater evil might be apprehended, was likely to be hardened in all her folly and assurance, by a situation of such double danger as a watering-place and a camp. Upon the whole, therefore, she found, what has been sometimes found before, that an event to which she had looked forward with impatient desire, did not, in taking place, bring all the satisfaction she had promised herself. It was consequently necessary to name some other period for the commencement of actual felicity; to have some other point on which her wishes and hopes might be fixed, and by again enjoying the pleasure of anticipation, console herself for the present, and prepare for another disappointment. Her tour to the Lakes was now the object of her happiest thoughts: it was her best consolation for all the uncomfortable hours which the discontentedness of her mother and Kitty made inevitable; and could she have included Jane in the scheme, every part of it would have been perfect.

“But it is fortunate,” thought she, “that I have something to wish for. Were the whole arrangement complete, my disappointment would be certain. But here, by carrying with me one ceaseless source of regret in my sister’s absence, I may reasonably hope to have all my expectations of pleasure realized. A scheme of which every part promises delight can never be successful; and general disappointment is only warded off by the defence of some little peculiar vexation.” When Lydia went away she promised to write very often and very minutely to her mother and Kitty; but her letters were always long expected, and always very short. Those to her mother contained little else than that they were just returned from the library, where such and such officers had attended them, and where she had seen such beautiful ornaments as made her quite wild; that she had a new gown, or a new parasol, which she would have described more fully, but was obliged to leave off in a violent hurry, as Mrs. Forster called her, and they were going to the camp; and from her correspondence with her sister there was still less to be learnt, for her letters to Kitty, though rather longer, were much too full of lines under the words to be made public.

After the first fortnight or three weeks of her absence, health, good-humour, and cheerfulness began to reappear at Longbourn. Everything wore a happier aspect. The families who had been in town for the winter came back again, and summer finery and summer engagements arose. Mrs. Bennet was restored to her usual querulous serenity; and by the middle of June Kitty was so much recovered as to be able to enter Meryton without tears,--an event of such happy promise as to make Elizabeth hope, that by the following Christmas she might be so tolerably reasonable as not to mention an officer above once a day, unless, by some cruel and malicious arrangement at the War Office, another regiment should be quartered in Meryton. The time fixed for the beginning of their northern tour was now fast approaching; and a fortnight only was wanting of it, when a letter arrived from Mrs. Gardiner, which at once delayed its commencement and curtailed its extent. Mr. Gardiner would be prevented by business from setting out till a fortnight later in July, and must be in London again within a month; and as that left too short a period for them to go so far, and see so much as they had proposed, or at least to see it with the leisure and comfort they had built on, they were obliged to give up the Lakes, and substitute a more contracted tour; and, according to the present plan, were to go no farther northward than Derbyshire. In that county there was enough to be seen to occupy the chief of their three weeks; and to Mrs. Gardiner it had a peculiarly strong attraction. The town where she had formerly passed some years of her life, and where they were now to spend a few days, was probably as great an object of her curiosity as all the celebrated beauties of Matlock, Chatsworth, Dovedale, or the Peak.

Elizabeth was excessively disappointed: she had set her heart on seeing the Lakes; and still thought there might have been time enough. But it was her business to be satisfied--and certainly her temper to be happy; and all was soon right again. With the mention of Derbyshire, there were many ideas connected. It was impossible for her to see the word without thinking of Pemberley and its owner. “But surely,” said she, “I may enter his county with impunity, and rob it of a few petrified spars, without his perceiving me.” The period of expectation was now doubled. Four weeks were to pass away before her uncle and aunt’s arrival. But they did pass away, and Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner, with their four children, did at length appear at Longbourn. The children, two girls of six and eight years old, and two younger boys, were to be left under the particular care of their cousin Jane, who was the general favourite, and whose steady sense and sweetness of temper exactly adapted her for attending to them in every way--teaching them, playing with them, and loving them.

The Gardiners stayed only one night at Longbourn, and set off the next morning with Elizabeth in pursuit of novelty and amusement. One enjoyment was certain--that of suitableness as companions; a suitableness which comprehended health and temper to bear inconveniences--cheerfulness to enhance every pleasure--and affection and intelligence, which might supply it among themselves if there were disappointments abroad. It is not the object of this work to give a description of Derbyshire, nor of any of the remarkable places through which their route thither lay--Oxford, Blenheim, Warwick, Kenilworth, Birmingham, etc., are sufficiently known. A small part of Derbyshire is all the present concern. To the little town of Lambton, the scene of Mrs. Gardiner’s former residence, and where she had lately learned that some acquaintance still remained, they bent their steps, after having seen all the principal wonders of the country; and within five miles of Lambton, Elizabeth found, from her aunt, that Pemberley was situated. It was not in their direct road; nor more than a mile or two out of it. In talking over their route the evening before, Mrs. Gardiner expressed an inclination to see the place again. Mr. Gardiner declared his willingness, and Elizabeth was applied to for her approbation.

“My love, should not you like to see a place of which you have heard so much?” said her aunt. “A place, too, with which so many of your acquaintance are connected. Wickham passed all his youth there, you know.” Elizabeth was distressed. She felt that she had no business at Pemberley, and was obliged to assume a disinclination for seeing it. She must own that she was tired of great houses: after going over so many, she really had no pleasure in fine carpets or satin curtains. Mrs. Gardiner abused her stupidity. “If it were merely a fine house richly furnished,” said she, “I should not care about it myself; but the grounds are delightful. They have some of the finest woods in the country.” Elizabeth said no more; but her mind could not acquiesce. The possibility of meeting Mr. Darcy, while viewing the place, instantly occurred. It would be dreadful! She blushed at the very idea; and thought it would be better to speak openly to her aunt, than to run such a risk. But against this there were objections; and she finally resolved that it could be the last resource, if her private inquiries as to the absence of the family were unfavourably answered.

Accordingly, when she retired at night, she asked the chambermaid whether Pemberley were not a very fine place, what was the name of its proprietor, and, with no little alarm, whether the family were down for the summer? A most welcome negative followed the last question; and her alarms being now removed, she was at leisure to feel a great deal of curiosity to see the house herself; and when the subject was revived the next morning, and she was again applied to, could readily answer, and with a proper air of indifference, that she had not really any dislike to the scheme. Elizabeth, as they drove along, watched for the first appearance of Pemberley Woods with some perturbation; and when at length they turned in at the lodge, her spirits were in a high flutter. The park was very large, and contained great variety of ground. They entered it in one of its lowest points, and drove for some time through a beautiful wood stretching over a wide extent. Elizabeth’s mind was too full for conversation, but she saw and admired every remarkable spot and point of view. They gradually ascended for half a mile, and then found themselves at the top of a considerable eminence, where the wood ceased, and the eye was instantly caught by Pemberley House, situated on the opposite side of the valley, into which the road with some abruptness wound. It was a large, handsome stone building, standing well on rising ground, and backed by a ridge of high woody hills; and in front a stream of some natural importance was swelled into greater, but without any artificial appearance. Its banks were neither formal nor falsely adorned. Elizabeth was delighted. She had never seen a place for which nature had done more, or where natural beauty had been so little counteracted by an awkward taste. They were all of them warm in their admiration; and at that moment she felt that to be mistress of Pemberley might be something!

They descended the hill, crossed the bridge, and drove to the door; and, while examining the nearer aspect of the house, all her apprehension of meeting its owner returned. She dreaded lest the chambermaid had been mistaken. On applying to see the place, they were admitted into the hall; and Elizabeth, as they waited for the housekeeper, had leisure to wonder at her being where she was. The housekeeper came; a respectable looking elderly woman, much less fine, and more civil, than she had any notion of finding her. They followed her into the dining-parlour. It was a large, well-proportioned room, handsomely fitted up. Elizabeth, after slightly surveying it, went to a window to enjoy its prospect. The hill, crowned with wood, from which they had descended, receiving increased abruptness from the distance, was a beautiful object. Every disposition of the ground was good; and she looked on the whole scene, the river, the trees scattered on its banks, and the winding of the valley, as far as she could trace it, with delight. As they passed into other rooms, these objects were taking different positions; but from every window there were beauties to be seen. The rooms were lofty and handsome, and their furniture suitable to the fortune of their proprietor; but Elizabeth saw, with admiration of his taste, that it was neither gaudy nor uselessly fine,--with less of splendour, and more real elegance, than the furniture of Rosings.

“And of this place,” thought she, “I might have been mistress! With these rooms I might have now been familiarly acquainted! Instead of viewing them as a stranger, I might have rejoiced in them as my own, and welcomed to them as visitors my uncle and aunt. But, no,” recollecting herself, “that could never be; my uncle and aunt would have been lost to me; I should not have been allowed to invite them.” She longed to inquire of the housekeeper whether her master were really absent, but had not courage for it. At length, however, the question was asked by her uncle; and she turned away with alarm, while Mrs. Reynolds replied, that he was; adding, “But we expect him to-morrow, with a large party of friends.” How rejoiced was Elizabeth that their own journey had not by any circumstance been delayed a day! Her aunt now called her to look at a picture. She approached, and saw the likeness of Mr. Wickham, suspended, amongst several other miniatures, over the mantel-piece. Her aunt asked her, smilingly, how she liked it. The housekeeper came forward, and told them it was the picture of a young gentleman, the son of her late master’s steward, who had been brought up by him at his own expense. “He is now gone into the army,” she added; “but I am afraid he has turned out very wild.”

“And that,” said Mrs. Reynolds, pointing to another of the miniatures, “is my master--and very like him. It was drawn at the same time as the other--about eight years ago.” “I have heard much of your master’s fine person,” said Mrs. Gardiner, looking at the picture; “it is a handsome face. But, Lizzy, you can tell us whether it is like or not.” “I am sure _I_ know none so handsome; but in the gallery upstairs you will see a finer, larger picture of him than this. This room was my late master’s favourite room, and these miniatures are just as they used to be then. He was very fond of them.” “Oh, yes--the handsomest young lady that ever was seen; and so accomplished! She plays and sings all day long. In the next room is a new instrument just come down for her--a present from my master: she comes here to-morrow with him.” Mr. Gardiner, whose manners were easy and pleasant, encouraged her communicativeness by his questions and remarks: Mrs. Reynolds, either from pride or attachment, had evidently great pleasure in talking of her master and his sister.

“I say no more than the truth, and what everybody will say that knows him,” replied the other. Elizabeth thought this was going pretty far; and she listened with increasing astonishment as the housekeeper added, “I have never had a cross word from him in my life, and I have known him ever since he was four years old.” This was praise of all others most extraordinary, most opposite to her ideas. That he was not a good-tempered man had been her firmest opinion. Her keenest attention was awakened: she longed to hear more; and was grateful to her uncle for saying,-- “Yes, sir, I know I am. If I were to go through the world, I could not meet with a better. But I have always observed, that they who are good-natured when children, are good-natured when they grow up; and he was always the sweetest tempered, most generous-hearted boy in the world.” Elizabeth listened, wondered, doubted, and was impatient for more. Mrs. Reynolds could interest her on no other point. She related the subjects of the pictures, the dimensions of the rooms, and the price of the furniture in vain. Mr. Gardiner, highly amused by the kind of family prejudice, to which he attributed her excessive commendation of her master, soon led again to the subject; and she dwelt with energy on his many merits, as they proceeded together up the great staircase.

“He is the best landlord, and the best master,” said she, “that ever lived. Not like the wild young men now-a-days, who think of nothing but themselves. There is not one of his tenants or servants but what will give him a good name. Some people call him proud; but I am sure I never saw anything of it. To my fancy, it is only because he does not rattle away like other young men.” On reaching the spacious lobby above, they were shown into a very pretty sitting-room, lately fitted up with greater elegance and lightness than the apartments below; and were informed that it was but just done to give pleasure to Miss Darcy, who had taken a liking to the room, when last at Pemberley. Mrs. Reynolds anticipated Miss Darcy’s delight, when she should enter the room. “And this is always the way with him,” she added. “Whatever can give his sister any pleasure, is sure to be done in a moment. There is nothing he would not do for her.” The picture gallery, and two or three of the principal bed-rooms, were all that remained to be shown. In the former were many good paintings: but Elizabeth knew nothing of the art; and from such as had been already visible below, she had willingly turned to look at some drawings of Miss Darcy’s, in crayons, whose subjects were usually more interesting, and also more intelligible.

In the gallery there were many family portraits, but they could have little to fix the attention of a stranger. Elizabeth walked on in quest of the only face whose features would be known to her. At last it arrested her--and she beheld a striking resemblance of Mr. Darcy, with such a smile over the face, as she remembered to have sometimes seen, when he looked at her. She stood several minutes before the picture, in earnest contemplation, and returned to it again before they quitted the gallery. Mrs. Reynolds informed them, that it had been taken in his father’s lifetime. There was certainly at this moment, in Elizabeth’s mind, a more gentle sensation towards the original than she had ever felt in the height of their acquaintance. The commendation bestowed on him by Mrs. Reynolds was of no trifling nature. What praise is more valuable than the praise of an intelligent servant? As a brother, a landlord, a master, she considered how many people’s happiness were in his guardianship! How much of pleasure or pain it was in his power to bestow! How much of good or evil must be done by him! Every idea that had been brought forward by the housekeeper was favourable to his character; and as she stood before the canvas, on which he was represented, and fixed his eyes upon herself, she thought of his regard with a deeper sentiment of gratitude than it had ever raised before: she remembered its warmth, and softened its impropriety of expression.

When all of the house that was open to general inspection had been seen, they returned down stairs; and, taking leave of the housekeeper, were consigned over to the gardener, who met them at the hall door. As they walked across the lawn towards the river, Elizabeth turned back to look again; her uncle and aunt stopped also; and while the former was conjecturing as to the date of the building, the owner of it himself suddenly came forward from the road which led behind it to the stables. They were within twenty yards of each other; and so abrupt was his appearance, that it was impossible to avoid his sight. Their eyes instantly met, and the cheeks of each were overspread with the deepest blush. He absolutely started, and for a moment seemed immovable from surprise; but shortly recovering himself, advanced towards the party, and spoke to Elizabeth, if not in terms of perfect composure, at least of perfect civility. She had instinctively turned away; but stopping on his approach, received his compliments with an embarrassment impossible to be overcome. Had his first appearance, or his resemblance to the picture they had just been examining, been insufficient to assure the other two that they now saw Mr. Darcy, the gardener’s expression of surprise, on beholding his master, must immediately have told it. They stood a little aloof while he was talking to their niece, who, astonished and confused, scarcely dared lift her eyes to his face, and knew not what answer she returned to his civil inquiries after her family. Amazed at the alteration of his manner since they last parted, every sentence that he uttered was increasing her embarrassment; and every idea of the impropriety of her being found there recurring to her mind, the few minutes in which they continued together were some of the most uncomfortable of her life. Nor did he seem much more at ease; when he spoke, his accent had none of its usual sedateness; and he repeated his inquiries as to the time of her having left Longbourn, and of her stay in Derbyshire, so often, and in so hurried a way, as plainly spoke the distraction of his thoughts.

The others then joined her, and expressed their admiration of his figure; but Elizabeth heard not a word, and, wholly engrossed by her own feelings, followed them in silence. She was overpowered by shame and vexation. Her coming there was the most unfortunate, the most ill-judged thing in the world! How strange must it appear to him! In what a disgraceful light might it not strike so vain a man! It might seem as if she had purposely thrown herself in his way again! Oh! why did she come? or, why did he thus come a day before he was expected? Had they been only ten minutes sooner, they should have been beyond the reach of his discrimination; for it was plain that he was that moment arrived, that moment alighted from his horse or his carriage. She blushed again and again over the perverseness of the meeting. And his behaviour, so strikingly altered,--what could it mean? That he should even speak to her was amazing!--but to speak with such civility, to inquire after her family! Never in her life had she seen his manners so little dignified, never had he spoken with such gentleness as on this unexpected meeting. What a contrast did it offer to his last address in Rosings Park, when he put his letter into her hand! She knew not what to think, or how to account for it.

They had now entered a beautiful walk by the side of the water, and every step was bringing forward a nobler fall of ground, or a finer reach of the woods to which they were approaching: but it was some time before Elizabeth was sensible of any of it; and, though she answered mechanically to the repeated appeals of her uncle and aunt, and seemed to direct her eyes to such objects as they pointed out, she distinguished no part of the scene. Her thoughts were all fixed on that one spot of Pemberley House, whichever it might be, where Mr. Darcy then was. She longed to know what at that moment was passing in his mind; in what manner he thought of her, and whether, in defiance of everything, she was still dear to him. Perhaps he had been civil only because he felt himself at ease; yet there had been _that_ in his voice, which was not like ease. Whether he had felt more of pain or of pleasure in seeing her, she could not tell, but he certainly had not seen her with composure.

Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind; and on her pausing, he asked her if she would do him the honour of introducing him to her friends. This was a stroke of civility for which she was quite unprepared; and she could hardly suppress a smile at his being now seeking the acquaintance of some of those very people, against whom his pride had revolted, in his offer to herself. “What will be his surprise,” thought she, “when he knows who they are! He takes them now for people of fashion.” The introduction, however, was immediately made; and as she named their relationship to herself, she stole a sly look at him, to see how he bore it; and was not without the expectation of his decamping as fast as he could from such disgraceful companions. That he was _surprised_ by the connection was evident: he sustained it, however, with fortitude: and, so far from going away, turned back with them, and entered into conversation with Mr. Gardiner. Elizabeth could not but be pleased, could not but triumph. It was consoling that he should know she had some relations for whom there was no need to blush. She listened most attentively to all that passed between them, and gloried in every expression, every sentence of her uncle, which marked his intelligence, his taste, or his good manners.

The conversation soon turned upon fishing; and she heard Mr. Darcy invite him, with the greatest civility, to fish there as often as he chose, while he continued in the neighbourhood, offering at the same time to supply him with fishing tackle, and pointing out those parts of the stream where there was usually most sport. Mrs. Gardiner, who was walking arm in arm with Elizabeth, gave her a look expressive of her wonder. Elizabeth said nothing, but it gratified her exceedingly; the compliment must be all for herself. Her astonishment, however, was extreme; and continually was she repeating, “Why is he so altered? From what can it proceed? It cannot be for _me_, it cannot be for _my_ sake that his manners are thus softened. My reproofs at Hunsford could not work such a change as this. It is impossible that he should still love me.” After walking some time in this way, the two ladies in front, the two gentlemen behind, on resuming their places, after descending to the brink of the river for the better inspection of some curious water-plant, there chanced to be a little alteration. It originated in Mrs. Gardiner, who, fatigued by the exercise of the morning, found Elizabeth’s arm inadequate to her support, and consequently preferred her husband’s. Mr. Darcy took her place by her niece, and they walked on together. After a short silence the lady first spoke. She wished him to know that she had been assured of his absence before she came to the place, and accordingly began by observing, that his arrival had been very unexpected--“for your housekeeper,” she added, “informed us that you would certainly not be here till to-morrow; and, indeed, before we left Bakewell, we understood that you were not immediately expected in the country.” He acknowledged the truth of it all; and said that business with his steward had occasioned his coming forward a few hours before the rest of the party with whom he had been travelling. “They will join me early to-morrow,” he continued, “and among them are some who will claim an acquaintance with you,--Mr. Bingley and his sisters.”

Elizabeth answered only by a slight bow. Her thoughts were instantly driven back to the time when Mr. Bingley’s name had been last mentioned between them; and if she might judge from his complexion, _his_ mind was not very differently engaged. “There is also one other person in the party,” he continued after a pause, “who more particularly wishes to be known to you. Will you allow me, or do I ask too much, to introduce my sister to your acquaintance during your stay at Lambton?” The surprise of such an application was great indeed; it was too great for her to know in what manner she acceded to it. She immediately felt that whatever desire Miss Darcy might have of being acquainted with her, must be the work of her brother, and without looking farther, it was satisfactory; it was gratifying to know that his resentment had not made him think really ill of her. They now walked on in silence; each of them deep in thought. Elizabeth was not comfortable; that was impossible; but she was flattered and pleased. His wish of introducing his sister to her was a compliment of the highest kind. They soon outstripped the others; and when they had reached the carriage, Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner were half a quarter of a mile behind.

He then asked her to walk into the house--but she declared herself not tired, and they stood together on the lawn. At such a time much might have been said, and silence was very awkward. She wanted to talk, but there seemed an embargo on every subject. At last she recollected that she had been travelling, and they talked of Matlock and Dovedale with great perseverance. Yet time and her aunt moved slowly--and her patience and her ideas were nearly worn out before the _tête-à-tête_ was over. On Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner’s coming up they were all pressed to go into the house and take some refreshment; but this was declined, and they parted on each side with the utmost politeness. Mr. Darcy handed the ladies into the carriage; and when it drove off, Elizabeth saw him walking slowly towards the house. “There _is_ something a little stately in him, to be sure,” replied her aunt; “but it is confined to his air, and is not unbecoming. I can now say with the housekeeper, that though some people may call him proud, _I_ have seen nothing of it.”

“I was never more surprised than by his behaviour to us. It was more than civil; it was really attentive; and there was no necessity for such attention. His acquaintance with Elizabeth was very trifling.” “To be sure, Lizzy,” said her aunt, “he is not so handsome as Wickham; or rather he has not Wickham’s countenance, for his features are perfectly good. But how came you to tell us that he was so disagreeable?” Elizabeth excused herself as well as she could: said that she had liked him better when they met in Kent than before, and that she had never seen him so pleasant as this morning. “But perhaps he may be a little whimsical in his civilities,” replied her uncle. “Your great men often are; and therefore I shall not take him at his word about fishing, as he might change his mind another day, and warn me off his grounds.” “From what we have seen of him,” continued Mrs. Gardiner, “I really should not have thought that he could have behaved in so cruel a way by anybody as he has done by poor Wickham. He has not an ill-natured look. On the contrary, there is something pleasing about his mouth when he speaks. And there is something of dignity in his countenance, that would not give one an unfavourable idea of his heart. But, to be sure, the good lady who showed us the house did give him a most flaming character! I could hardly help laughing aloud sometimes. But he is a liberal master, I suppose, and _that_, in the eye of a servant, comprehends every virtue.”

Elizabeth here felt herself called on to say something in vindication of his behaviour to Wickham; and, therefore, gave them to understand, in as guarded a manner as she could, that by what she had heard from his relations in Kent, his actions were capable of a very different construction; and that his character was by no means so faulty, nor Wickham’s so amiable, as they had been considered in Hertfordshire. In confirmation of this, she related the particulars of all the pecuniary transactions in which they had been connected, without actually naming her authority, but stating it to be such as might be relied on. Mrs. Gardiner was surprised and concerned: but as they were now approaching the scene of her former pleasures, every idea gave way to the charm of recollection; and she was too much engaged in pointing out to her husband all the interesting spots in its environs, to think of anything else. Fatigued as she had been by the morning’s walk, they had no sooner dined than she set off again in quest of her former acquaintance, and the evening was spent in the satisfactions of an intercourse renewed after many years’ discontinuance.

The occurrences of the day were too full of interest to leave Elizabeth much attention for any of these new friends; and she could do nothing but think, and think with wonder, of Mr. Darcy’s civility, and, above all, of his wishing her to be acquainted with his sister. Elizabeth had settled it that Mr. Darcy would bring his sister to visit her the very day after her reaching Pemberley; and was, consequently, resolved not to be out of sight of the inn the whole of that morning. But her conclusion was false; for on the very morning after their own arrival at Lambton these visitors came. They had been walking about the place with some of their new friends, and were just returned to the inn to dress themselves for dining with the same family, when the sound of a carriage drew them to a window, and they saw a gentleman and lady in a curricle driving up the street. Elizabeth, immediately recognizing the livery, guessed what it meant, and imparted no small degree of surprise to her relations, by acquainting them with the honour which she expected. Her uncle and aunt were all amazement; and the embarrassment of her manner as she spoke, joined to the circumstance itself, and many of the circumstances of the preceding day, opened to them a new idea on the business. Nothing had ever suggested it before, but they now felt that there was no other way of accounting for such attentions from such a quarter than by supposing a partiality for their niece. While these newly-born notions were passing in their heads, the perturbation of Elizabeth’s feelings was every moment increasing. She was quite amazed at her own discomposure; but, amongst other causes of disquiet, she dreaded lest the partiality of the brother should have said too much in her favour; and, more than commonly anxious to please, she naturally suspected that every power of pleasing would fail her.

She retreated from the window, fearful of being seen; and as she walked up and down the room, endeavouring to compose herself, saw such looks of inquiring surprise in her uncle and aunt as made everything worse. Miss Darcy and her brother appeared, and this formidable introduction took place. With astonishment did Elizabeth see that her new acquaintance was at least as much embarrassed as herself. Since her being at Lambton, she had heard that Miss Darcy was exceedingly proud; but the observation of a very few minutes convinced her that she was only exceedingly shy. She found it difficult to obtain even a word from her beyond a monosyllable. Miss Darcy was tall, and on a larger scale than Elizabeth; and, though little more than sixteen, her figure was formed, and her appearance womanly and graceful. She was less handsome than her brother, but there was sense and good-humour in her face, and her manners were perfectly unassuming and gentle. Elizabeth, who had expected to find in her as acute and unembarrassed an observer as ever Mr. Darcy had been, was much relieved by discerning such different feelings.

They had not been long together before Darcy told her that Bingley was also coming to wait on her; and she had barely time to express her satisfaction, and prepare for such a visitor, when Bingley’s quick step was heard on the stairs, and in a moment he entered the room. All Elizabeth’s anger against him had been long done away; but had she still felt any, it could hardly have stood its ground against the unaffected cordiality with which he expressed himself on seeing her again. He inquired in a friendly, though general, way, after her family, and looked and spoke with the same good-humoured ease that he had ever done. To Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner he was scarcely a less interesting personage than to herself. They had long wished to see him. The whole party before them, indeed, excited a lively attention. The suspicions which had just arisen of Mr. Darcy and their niece, directed their observation towards each with an earnest, though guarded, inquiry; and they soon drew from those inquiries the full conviction that one of them at least knew what it was to love. Of the lady’s sensations they remained a little in doubt; but that the gentleman was overflowing with admiration was evident enough.

Elizabeth, on her side, had much to do. She wanted to ascertain the feelings of each of her visitors, she wanted to compose her own, and to make herself agreeable to all; and in the latter object, where she feared most to fail, she was most sure of success, for those to whom she endeavoured to give pleasure were pre-possessed in her favour. Bingley was ready, Georgiana was eager, and Darcy determined, to be pleased. In seeing Bingley, her thoughts naturally flew to her sister; and oh! how ardently did she long to know whether any of his were directed in a like manner. Sometimes she could fancy that he talked less than on former occasions, and once or twice pleased herself with the notion that, as he looked at her, he was trying to trace a resemblance. But, though this might be imaginary, she could not be deceived as to his behaviour to Miss Darcy, who had been set up as a rival to Jane. No look appeared on either side that spoke particular regard. Nothing occurred between them that could justify the hopes of his sister. On this point she was soon satisfied; and two or three little circumstances occurred ere they parted, which, in her anxious interpretation, denoted a recollection of Jane, not untinctured by tenderness, and a wish of saying more that might lead to the mention of her, had he dared. He observed to her, at a moment when the others were talking together, and in a tone which had something of real regret, that it “was a very long time since he had had the pleasure of seeing her;” and, before she could reply, he added, “It is above eight months. We have not met since the 26th of November, when we were all dancing together at Netherfield.”

Elizabeth was pleased to find his memory so exact; and he afterwards took occasion to ask her, when unattended to by any of the rest, whether _all_ her sisters were at Longbourn. There was not much in the question, nor in the preceding remark; but there was a look and a manner which gave them meaning. It was not often that she could turn her eyes on Mr. Darcy himself; but whenever she did catch a glimpse she saw an expression of general complaisance, and in all that he said, she heard an accent so far removed from _hauteur_ or disdain of his companions, as convinced her that the improvement of manners which she had yesterday witnessed, however temporary its existence might prove, had at least outlived one day. When she saw him thus seeking the acquaintance, and courting the good opinion of people with whom any intercourse a few months ago would have been a disgrace; when she saw him thus civil, not only to herself, but to the very relations whom he had openly disdained, and recollected their last lively scene in Hunsford Parsonage, the difference, the change was so great, and struck so forcibly on her mind, that she could hardly restrain her astonishment from being visible. Never, even in the company of his dear friends at Netherfield, or his dignified relations at Rosings, had she seen him so desirous to please, so free from self-consequence or unbending reserve, as now, when no importance could result from the success of his endeavours, and when even the acquaintance of those to whom his attentions were addressed, would draw down the ridicule and censure of the ladies both of Netherfield and Rosings.

Their visitors stayed with them above half an hour; and when they arose to depart, Mr. Darcy called on his sister to join him in expressing their wish of seeing Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner, and Miss Bennet, to dinner at Pemberley, before they left the country. Miss Darcy, though with a diffidence which marked her little in the habit of giving invitations, readily obeyed. Mrs. Gardiner looked at her niece, desirous of knowing how _she_, whom the invitation most concerned, felt disposed as to its acceptance, but Elizabeth had turned away her head. Presuming, however, that this studied avoidance spoke rather a momentary embarrassment than any dislike of the proposal, and seeing in her husband, who was fond of society, a perfect willingness to accept it, she ventured to engage for her attendance, and the day after the next was fixed on. Bingley expressed great pleasure in the certainty of seeing Elizabeth again, having still a great deal to say to her, and many inquiries to make after all their Hertfordshire friends. Elizabeth, construing all this into a wish of hearing her speak of her sister, was pleased; and on this account, as well as some others, found herself, when their visitors left them, capable of considering the last half hour with some satisfaction, though while it was passing the enjoyment of it had been little. Eager to be alone, and fearful of inquiries or hints from her uncle and aunt, she stayed with them only long enough to hear their favourable opinion of Bingley, and then hurried away to dress.

But she had no reason to fear Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner’s curiosity; it was not their wish to force her communication. It was evident that she was much better acquainted with Mr. Darcy than they had before any idea of; it was evident that he was very much in love with her. They saw much to interest, but nothing to justify inquiry. Of Mr. Darcy it was now a matter of anxiety to think well; and, as far as their acquaintance reached, there was no fault to find. They could not be untouched by his politeness; and had they drawn his character from their own feelings and his servant’s report, without any reference to any other account, the circle in Hertfordshire to which he was known would not have recognized it for Mr. Darcy. There was now an interest, however, in believing the housekeeper; and they soon became sensible that the authority of a servant, who had known him since he was four years old, and whose own manners indicated respectability, was not to be hastily rejected. Neither had anything occurred in the intelligence of their Lambton friends that could materially lessen its weight. They had nothing to accuse him of but pride; pride he probably had, and if not, it would certainly be imputed by the inhabitants of a small market town where the family did not visit. It was acknowledged, however, that he was a liberal man, and did much good among the poor.

With respect to Wickham, the travellers soon found that he was not held there in much estimation; for though the chief of his concerns with the son of his patron were imperfectly understood, it was yet a well-known fact that, on his quitting Derbyshire, he had left many debts behind him, which Mr. Darcy afterwards discharged. As for Elizabeth, her thoughts were at Pemberley this evening more than the last; and the evening, though as it passed it seemed long, was not long enough to determine her feelings towards _one_ in that mansion; and she lay awake two whole hours, endeavouring to make them out. She certainly did not hate him. No; hatred had vanished long ago, and she had almost as long been ashamed of ever feeling a dislike against him, that could be so called. The respect created by the conviction of his valuable qualities, though at first unwillingly admitted, had for some time ceased to be repugnant to her feelings; and it was now heightened into somewhat of a friendlier nature by the testimony so highly in his favour, and bringing forward his disposition in so amiable a light, which yesterday had produced. But above all, above respect and esteem, there was a motive within her of good-will which could not be overlooked. It was gratitude;--gratitude, not merely for having once loved her, but for loving her still well enough to forgive all the petulance and acrimony of her manner in rejecting him, and all the unjust accusations accompanying her rejection. He who, she had been persuaded, would avoid her as his greatest enemy, seemed, on this accidental meeting, most eager to preserve the acquaintance; and without any indelicate display of regard, or any peculiarity of manner, where their two selves only were concerned, was soliciting the good opinion of her friends, and bent on making her known to his sister. Such a change in a man of so much pride excited not only astonishment but gratitude--for to love, ardent love, it must be attributed; and, as such, its impression on her was of a sort to be encouraged, as by no means unpleasing, though it could not be exactly defined. She respected, she esteemed, she was grateful to him, she felt a real interest in his welfare; and she only wanted to know how far she wished that welfare to depend upon herself, and how far it would be for the happiness of both that she should employ the power, which her fancy told her she still possessed, of bringing on the renewal of his addresses.

It had been settled in the evening, between the aunt and niece, that such a striking civility as Miss Darcy’s, in coming to them on the very day of her arrival at Pemberley--for she had reached it only to a late breakfast--ought to be imitated, though it could not be equalled, by some exertion of politeness on their side; and, consequently, that it would be highly expedient to wait on her at Pemberley the following morning. They were, therefore, to go. Elizabeth was pleased; though when she asked herself the reason, she had very little to say in reply. Mr. Gardiner left them soon after breakfast. The fishing scheme had been renewed the day before, and a positive engagement made of his meeting some of the gentlemen at Pemberley by noon. Convinced as Elizabeth now was that Miss Bingley’s dislike of her had originated in jealousy, she could not help feeling how very unwelcome her appearance at Pemberley must be to her, and was curious to know with how much civility on that lady’s side the acquaintance would now be renewed.

On reaching the house, they were shown through the hall into the saloon, whose northern aspect rendered it delightful for summer. Its windows, opening to the ground, admitted a most refreshing view of the high woody hills behind the house, and of the beautiful oaks and Spanish chestnuts which were scattered over the intermediate lawn. In this room they were received by Miss Darcy, who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley, and the lady with whom she lived in London. Georgiana’s reception of them was very civil, but attended with all that embarrassment which, though proceeding from shyness and the fear of doing wrong, would easily give to those who felt themselves inferior the belief of her being proud and reserved. Mrs. Gardiner and her niece, however, did her justice, and pitied her. By Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley they were noticed only by a courtesy; and on their being seated, a pause, awkward as such pauses must always be, succeeded for a few moments. It was first broken by Mrs. Annesley, a genteel, agreeable-looking woman, whose endeavour to introduce some kind of discourse proved her to be more truly well-bred than either of the others; and between her and Mrs. Gardiner, with occasional help from Elizabeth, the conversation was carried on. Miss Darcy looked as if she wished for courage enough to join in it; and sometimes did venture a short sentence, when there was least danger of its being heard.

Elizabeth soon saw that she was herself closely watched by Miss Bingley, and that she could not speak a word, especially to Miss Darcy, without calling her attention. This observation would not have prevented her from trying to talk to the latter, had they not been seated at an inconvenient distance; but she was not sorry to be spared the necessity of saying much: her own thoughts were employing her. She expected every moment that some of the gentlemen would enter the room: she wished, she feared, that the master of the house might be amongst them; and whether she wished or feared it most, she could scarcely determine. After sitting in this manner a quarter of an hour, without hearing Miss Bingley’s voice, Elizabeth was roused by receiving from her a cold inquiry after the health of her family. She answered with equal indifference and brevity, and the other said no more. The next variation which their visit afforded was produced by the entrance of servants with cold meat, cake, and a variety of all the finest fruits in season; but this did not take place till after many a significant look and smile from Mrs. Annesley to Miss Darcy had been given, to remind her of her post. There was now employment for the whole party; for though they could not all talk, they could all eat; and the beautiful pyramids of grapes, nectarines, and peaches, soon collected them round the table.

While thus engaged, Elizabeth had a fair opportunity of deciding whether she most feared or wished for the appearance of Mr. Darcy, by the feelings which prevailed on his entering the room; and then, though but a moment before she had believed her wishes to predominate, she began to regret that he came. He had been some time with Mr. Gardiner, who, with two or three other gentlemen from the house, was engaged by the river; and had left him only on learning that the ladies of the family intended a visit to Georgiana that morning. No sooner did he appear, than Elizabeth wisely resolved to be perfectly easy and unembarrassed;--a resolution the more necessary to be made, but perhaps not the more easily kept, because she saw that the suspicions of the whole party were awakened against them, and that there was scarcely an eye which did not watch his behaviour when he first came into the room. In no countenance was attentive curiosity so strongly marked as in Miss Bingley’s, in spite of the smiles which overspread her face whenever she spoke to one of its objects; for jealousy had not yet made her desperate, and her attentions to Mr. Darcy were by no means over. Miss Darcy, on her brother’s entrance, exerted herself much more to talk; and Elizabeth saw that he was anxious for his sister and herself to get acquainted, and forwarded, as much as possible, every attempt at conversation on either side. Miss Bingley saw all this likewise; and, in the imprudence of anger, took the first opportunity of saying, with sneering civility,--

In Darcy’s presence she dared not mention Wickham’s name: but Elizabeth instantly comprehended that he was uppermost in her thoughts; and the various recollections connected with him gave her a moment’s distress; but, exerting herself vigorously to repel the ill-natured attack, she presently answered the question in a tolerably disengaged tone. While she spoke, an involuntary glance showed her Darcy with a heightened complexion, earnestly looking at her, and his sister overcome with confusion, and unable to lift up her eyes. Had Miss Bingley known what pain she was then giving her beloved friend, she undoubtedly would have refrained from the hint; but she had merely intended to discompose Elizabeth, by bringing forward the idea of a man to whom she believed her partial, to make her betray a sensibility which might injure her in Darcy’s opinion, and, perhaps, to remind the latter of all the follies and absurdities by which some part of her family were connected with that corps. Not a syllable had ever reached her of Miss Darcy’s meditated elopement. To no creature had it been revealed, where secrecy was possible, except to Elizabeth; and from all Bingley’s connections her brother was particularly anxious to conceal it, from that very wish which Elizabeth had long ago attributed to him, of their becoming hereafter her own. He had certainly formed such a plan; and without meaning that it should affect his endeavour to separate him from Miss Bennet, it is probable that it might add something to his lively concern for the welfare of his friend.

Elizabeth’s collected behaviour, however, soon quieted his emotion; and as Miss Bingley, vexed and disappointed, dared not approach nearer to Wickham, Georgiana also recovered in time, though not enough to be able to speak any more. Her brother, whose eye she feared to meet, scarcely recollected her interest in the affair; and the very circumstance which had been designed to turn his thoughts from Elizabeth, seemed to have fixed them on her more and more cheerfully. Their visit did not continue long after the question and answer above mentioned; and while Mr. Darcy was attending them to their carriage, Miss Bingley was venting her feelings in criticisms on Elizabeth’s person, behaviour, and dress. But Georgiana would not join her. Her brother’s recommendation was enough to insure her favour: his judgment could not err; and he had spoken in such terms of Elizabeth, as to leave Georgiana without the power of finding her otherwise than lovely and amiable. When Darcy returned to the saloon, Miss Bingley could not help repeating to him some part of what she had been saying to his sister.

“How very ill Eliza Bennet looks this morning, Mr. Darcy,” she cried: “I never in my life saw anyone so much altered as she is since the winter. She is grown so brown and coarse! Louisa and I were agreeing that we should not have known her again.” However little Mr. Darcy might have liked such an address, he contented himself with coolly replying, that he perceived no other alteration than her being rather tanned,--no miraculous consequence of travelling in the summer. “For my own part,” she rejoined, “I must confess that I never could see any beauty in her. Her face is too thin; her complexion has no brilliancy; and her features are not at all handsome. Her nose wants character; there is nothing marked in its lines. Her teeth are tolerable, but not out of the common way; and as for her eyes, which have sometimes been called so fine, I never could perceive anything extraordinary in them. They have a sharp, shrewish look, which I do not like at all; and in her air altogether, there is a self-sufficiency without fashion, which is intolerable.”

Persuaded as Miss Bingley was that Darcy admired Elizabeth, this was not the best method of recommending herself; but angry people are not always wise; and in seeing him at last look somewhat nettled, she had all the success she expected. He was resolutely silent, however; and, from a determination of making him speak, she continued,-- “I remember, when we first knew her in Hertfordshire, how amazed we all were to find that she was a reputed beauty; and I particularly recollect your saying one night, after they had been dining at Netherfield, ‘_She_ a beauty! I should as soon call her mother a wit.’ But afterwards she seemed to improve on you, and I believe you thought her rather pretty at one time.” “Yes,” replied Darcy, who could contain himself no longer, “but _that_ was only when I first knew her; for it is many months since I have considered her as one of the handsomest women of my acquaintance.” Mrs. Gardiner and Elizabeth talked of all that had occurred during their visit, as they returned, except what had particularly interested them both. The looks and behaviour of everybody they had seen were discussed, except of the person who had mostly engaged their attention. They talked of his sister, his friends, his house, his fruit, of everything but himself; yet Elizabeth was longing to know what Mrs. Gardiner thought of him, and Mrs. Gardiner would have been highly gratified by her niece’s beginning the subject.

Elizabeth had been a good deal disappointed in not finding a letter from Jane on their first arrival at Lambton; and this disappointment had been renewed on each of the mornings that had now been spent there; but on the third her repining was over, and her sister justified, by the receipt of two letters from her at once, on one of which was marked that it had been mis-sent elsewhere. Elizabeth was not surprised at it, as Jane had written the direction remarkably ill. They had just been preparing to walk as the letters came in; and her uncle and aunt, leaving her to enjoy them in quiet, set off by themselves. The one mis-sent must be first attended to; it had been written five days ago. The beginning contained an account of all their little parties and engagements, with such news as the country afforded; but the latter half, which was dated a day later, and written in evident agitation, gave more important intelligence. It was to this effect:-- “Since writing the above, dearest Lizzy, something has occurred of a most unexpected and serious nature; but I am afraid of alarming you--be assured that we are all well. What I have to say relates to poor Lydia. An express came at twelve last night, just as we were all gone to bed, from Colonel Forster, to inform us that she was gone off to Scotland with one of his officers; to own the truth, with Wickham! Imagine our surprise. To Kitty, however, it does not seem so wholly unexpected. I am very, very sorry. So imprudent a match on both sides! But I am willing to hope the best, and that his character has been misunderstood. Thoughtless and indiscreet I can easily believe him, but this step (and let us rejoice over it) marks nothing bad at heart. His choice is disinterested at least, for he must know my father can give her nothing. Our poor mother is sadly grieved. My father bears it better. How thankful am I, that we never let them know what has been said against him; we must forget it ourselves. They were off Saturday night about twelve, as is conjectured, but were not missed till yesterday morning at eight. The express was sent off directly. My dear Lizzy, they must have passed within ten miles of us. Colonel Forster gives us reason to expect him here soon. Lydia left a few lines for his wife, informing her of their intention. I must conclude, for I cannot be long from my poor mother. I am afraid you will not be able to make it out, but I hardly know what I have written.”

Without allowing herself time for consideration, and scarcely knowing what she felt, Elizabeth, on finishing this letter, instantly seized the other, and opening it with the utmost impatience, read as follows: it had been written a day later than the conclusion of the first. “Oh! where, where is my uncle?” cried Elizabeth, darting from her seat as she finished the letter, in eagerness to follow him, without losing a moment of the time so precious; but as she reached the door, it was opened by a servant, and Mr. Darcy appeared. Her pale face and impetuous manner made him start, and before he could recover himself enough to speak, she, in whose mind every idea was superseded by Lydia’s situation, hastily exclaimed, “I beg your pardon, but I must leave you. I must find Mr. Gardiner this moment on business that cannot be delayed; I have not an instant to lose.” “Good God! what is the matter?” cried he, with more feeling than politeness; then recollecting himself, “I will not detain you a minute; but let me, or let the servant, go after Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner. You are not well enough; you cannot go yourself.”

Elizabeth hesitated; but her knees trembled under her, and she felt how little would be gained by her attempting to pursue them. Calling back the servant, therefore, she commissioned him, though in so breathless an accent as made her almost unintelligible, to fetch his master and mistress home instantly. On his quitting the room, she sat down, unable to support herself, and looking so miserably ill, that it was impossible for Darcy to leave her, or to refrain from saying, in a tone of gentleness and commiseration, “Let me call your maid. Is there nothing you could take to give you present relief? A glass of wine; shall I get you one? You are very ill.” “No, I thank you,” she replied, endeavouring to recover herself. “There is nothing the matter with me. I am quite well, I am only distressed by some dreadful news which I have just received from Longbourn.” She burst into tears as she alluded to it, and for a few minutes could not speak another word. Darcy, in wretched suspense, could only say something indistinctly of his

concern, and observe her in compassionate silence. At length she spoke again. “I have just had a letter from Jane, with such dreadful news. It cannot be concealed from anyone. My youngest sister has left all her friends--has eloped; has thrown herself into the power of--of Mr. Wickham. They are gone off together from Brighton. _You_ know him too well to doubt the rest. She has no money, no connections, nothing that can tempt him to--she is lost for ever.” “When I consider,” she added, in a yet more agitated voice, “that _I_ might have prevented it! _I_ who knew what he was. Had I but explained some part of it only--some part of what I learnt, to my own family! Had his character been known, this could not have happened. But it is all, all too late now.” “My father has gone to London, and Jane has written to beg my uncle’s immediate assistance, and we shall be off, I hope, in half an hour. But nothing can be done; I know very well that nothing can be done. How is such a man to be worked on? How are they even to be discovered? I have not the smallest hope. It is every way horrible!”

“When _my_ eyes were opened to his real character, oh! had I known what I ought, what I dared to do! But I knew not--I was afraid of doing too much. Wretched, wretched mistake!” Darcy made no answer. He seemed scarcely to hear her, and was walking up and down the room in earnest meditation; his brow contracted, his air gloomy. Elizabeth soon observed, and instantly understood it. Her power was sinking; everything _must_ sink under such a proof of family weakness, such an assurance of the deepest disgrace. She could neither wonder nor condemn; but the belief of his self-conquest brought nothing consolatory to her bosom, afforded no palliation of her distress. It was, on the contrary, exactly calculated to make her understand her own wishes; and never had she so honestly felt that she could have loved him, as now, when all love must be vain. But self, though it would intrude, could not engross her. Lydia--the humiliation, the misery she was bringing on them all--soon swallowed up every private care; and covering her face with her handkerchief, Elizabeth was soon lost to everything else; and, after a pause of several minutes, was only recalled to a sense of her situation by the voice of her companion, who, in a manner which, though it spoke compassion, spoke likewise restraint, said,--

“I am afraid you have been long desiring my absence, nor have I anything to plead in excuse of my stay, but real, though unavailing concern. Would to Heaven that anything could be either said or done on my part, that might offer consolation to such distress! But I will not torment you with vain wishes, which may seem purposely to ask for your thanks. This unfortunate affair will, I fear, prevent my sister’s having the pleasure of seeing you at Pemberley to-day.” “Oh, yes! Be so kind as to apologize for us to Miss Darcy. Say that urgent business calls us home immediately. Conceal the unhappy truth as long as it is possible. I know it cannot be long.” He readily assured her of his secrecy, again expressed his sorrow for her distress, wished it a happier conclusion than there was at present reason to hope, and, leaving his compliments for her relations, with only one serious parting look, went away. As he quitted the room, Elizabeth felt how improbable it was that they should ever see each other again on such terms of cordiality as had marked their several meetings in Derbyshire; and as she threw a retrospective glance over the whole of their acquaintance, so full of contradictions and varieties, sighed at the perverseness of those feelings which would now have promoted its continuance, and would formerly have rejoiced in its termination.

If gratitude and esteem are good foundations of affection, Elizabeth’s change of sentiment will be neither improbable nor faulty. But if otherwise, if the regard springing from such sources is unreasonable or unnatural, in comparison of what is so often described as arising on a first interview with its object, and even before two words have been exchanged, nothing can be said in her defence, except that she had given somewhat of a trial to the latter method, in her partiality for Wickham, and that its ill success might, perhaps, authorize her to seek the other less interesting mode of attachment. Be that as it may, she saw him go with regret; and in this early example of what Lydia’s infamy must produce, found additional anguish as she reflected on that wretched business. Never since reading Jane’s second letter had she entertained a hope of Wickham’s meaning to marry her. No one but Jane, she thought, could flatter herself with such an expectation. Surprise was the least of all her feelings on this development. While the contents of the first letter remained on her mind, she was all surprise, all astonishment, that Wickham should marry a girl whom it was impossible he could marry for money; and how Lydia could ever have attached him had appeared incomprehensible. But now it was all too natural. For such an attachment as this, she might have sufficient charms; and though she did not suppose Lydia to be deliberately engaging in an elopement, without the intention of marriage, she had no difficulty in believing that neither her virtue nor her understanding would preserve her from falling an easy prey.

She had never perceived, while the regiment was in Hertfordshire, that Lydia had any partiality for him; but she was convinced that Lydia had wanted only encouragement to attach herself to anybody. Sometimes one officer, sometimes another, had been her favourite, as their attentions raised them in her opinion. Her affections had been continually fluctuating, but never without an object. The mischief of neglect and mistaken indulgence towards such a girl--oh! how acutely did she now feel it! She was wild to be at home--to hear, to see, to be upon the spot to share with Jane in the cares that must now fall wholly upon her, in a family so deranged; a father absent, a mother incapable of exertion, and requiring constant attendance; and though almost persuaded that nothing could be done for Lydia, her uncle’s interference seemed of the utmost importance, and till he entered the room the misery of her impatience was severe. Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner had hurried back in alarm, supposing, by the servant’s account, that their niece was taken suddenly ill; but satisfying them instantly on that head, she eagerly communicated the cause of their summons, reading the two letters aloud, and dwelling on the postscript of the last with trembling energy. Though Lydia had never been a favourite with them, Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner could not but be deeply affected. Not Lydia only, but all were concerned in it; and after the first exclamations of surprise and horror, Mr. Gardiner readily promised every assistance in his power. Elizabeth, though expecting no less, thanked him with tears of gratitude; and all three being actuated by one spirit, everything relating to their journey was speedily settled. They were to be off as soon as possible. “But what is to be done about Pemberley?” cried Mrs. Gardiner. “John told us Mr. Darcy was here when you sent for us;--was it so?”

“What is all settled?” repeated the other, as she ran into her room to prepare. “And are they upon such terms as for her to disclose the real truth? Oh, that I knew how it was!” But wishes were vain; or, at best, could serve only to amuse her in the hurry and confusion of the following hour. Had Elizabeth been at leisure to be idle, she would have remained certain that all employment was impossible to one so wretched as herself; but she had her share of business as well as her aunt, and amongst the rest there were notes to be written to all their friends at Lambton, with false excuses for their sudden departure. An hour, however, saw the whole completed; and Mr. Gardiner, meanwhile, having settled his account at the inn, nothing remained to be done but to go; and Elizabeth, after all the misery of the morning, found herself, in a shorter space of time than she could have supposed, seated in the carriage, and on the road to Longbourn. “I have been thinking it over again, Elizabeth,” said her uncle, as they drove from the town; “and really, upon serious consideration, I am much more inclined than I was to judge as your eldest sister does of the matter. It appears to me so very unlikely that any young man should form such a design against a girl who is by no means unprotected or friendless, and who was actually staying in his Colonel’s family, that I am strongly inclined to hope the best. Could he expect that her friends would not step forward? Could he expect to be noticed again by the regiment, after such an affront to Colonel Forster? His temptation is not adequate to the risk.”

“Upon my word,” said Mrs. Gardiner, “I begin to be of your uncle’s opinion. It is really too great a violation of decency, honour, and interest, for him to be guilty of it. I cannot think so very ill of Wickham. Can you, yourself, Lizzie, so wholly give him up, as to believe him capable of it?” “Not perhaps of neglecting his own interest. But of every other neglect I can believe him capable. If, indeed, it should be so! But I dare not hope it. Why should they not go on to Scotland, if that had been the case?” “Oh, but their removing from the chaise into a hackney coach is such a presumption! And, besides, no traces of them were to be found on the Barnet road.” “Well, then,--supposing them to be in London--they may be there, though for the purpose of concealment, for no more exceptionable purpose. It is not likely that money should be very abundant on either side; and it might strike them that they could be more economically, though less expeditiously, married in London, than in Scotland.”

“But why all this secrecy? Why any fear of detection? Why must their marriage be private? Oh, no, no--this is not likely. His most particular friend, you see by Jane’s account, was persuaded of his never intending to marry her. Wickham will never marry a woman without some money. He cannot afford it. And what claims has Lydia, what attractions has she beyond youth, health, and good humour, that could make him for her sake forego every chance of benefiting himself by marrying well? As to what restraint the apprehensions of disgrace in the corps might throw on a dishonourable elopement with her, I am not able to judge; for I know nothing of the effects that such a step might produce. But as to your other objection, I am afraid it will hardly hold good. Lydia has no brothers to step forward; and he might imagine, from my father’s behaviour, from his indolence and the little attention he has ever seemed to give to what was going forward in his family, that _he_ would do as little and think as little about it, as any father could do, in such a matter.”

“It does seem, and it is most shocking, indeed,” replied Elizabeth, with tears in her eyes, “that a sister’s sense of decency and virtue in such a point should admit of doubt. But, really, I know not what to say. Perhaps I am not doing her justice. But she is very young: she has never been taught to think on serious subjects; and for the last half year, nay, for a twelvemonth, she has been given up to nothing but amusement and vanity. She has been allowed to dispose of her time in the most idle and frivolous manner, and to adopt any opinions that came in her way. Since the ----shire were first quartered in Meryton, nothing but love, flirtation, and officers, have been in her head. She has been doing everything in her power, by thinking and talking on the subject, to give greater--what shall I call it?--susceptibility to her feelings; which are naturally lively enough. And we all know that Wickham has every charm of person and address that can captivate a woman.” “Of whom does Jane ever think ill? And who is there, whatever might be their former conduct, that she would believe capable of such an attempt, till it were proved against them? But Jane knows, as well as I do, what Wickham really is. We both know that he has been profligate in every sense of the word; that he has neither integrity nor honour; that he is as false and deceitful as he is insinuating.”

“I do, indeed,” replied Elizabeth, colouring. “I told you the other day of his infamous behaviour to Mr. Darcy; and you, yourself, when last at Longbourn, heard in what manner he spoke of the man who had behaved with such forbearance and liberality towards him. And there are other circumstances which I am not at liberty--which it is not worth while to relate; but his lies about the whole Pemberley family are endless. From what he said of Miss Darcy, I was thoroughly prepared to see a proud, reserved, disagreeable girl. Yet he knew to the contrary himself. He must know that she was as amiable and unpretending as we have found her.” “Oh, yes!--that, that is the worst of all. Till I was in Kent, and saw so much both of Mr. Darcy and his relation Colonel Fitzwilliam, I was ignorant of the truth myself. And when I returned home the ----shire was to leave Meryton in a week or fortnight’s time. As that was the case, neither Jane, to whom I related the whole, nor I, thought it necessary to make our knowledge public; for of what use could it apparently be to anyone, that the good opinion, which all the neighbourhood had of him, should then be overthrown? And even when it was settled that Lydia should go with Mrs. Forster, the necessity of opening her eyes to his character never occurred to me. That _she_ could be in any danger from the deception never entered my head. That such a consequence as _this_ should ensue, you may easily believe was far enough from my thoughts.”

“Not the slightest. I can remember no symptom of affection on either side; and had anything of the kind been perceptible, you must be aware that ours is not a family on which it could be thrown away. When first he entered the corps, she was ready enough to admire him; but so we all were. Every girl in or near Meryton was out of her senses about him for the first two months: but he never distinguished _her_ by any particular attention; and, consequently, after a moderate period of extravagant and wild admiration, her fancy for him gave way, and others of the regiment, who treated her with more distinction, again became her favourites.” It may be easily believed, that however little of novelty could be added to their fears, hopes, and conjectures, on this interesting subject by its repeated discussion, no other could detain them from it long, during the whole of the journey. From Elizabeth’s thoughts it was never absent. Fixed there by the keenest of all anguish, self-reproach, she could find no interval of ease or forgetfulness.

They travelled as expeditiously as possible; and sleeping one night on the road, reached Longbourn by dinnertime the next day. It was a comfort to Elizabeth to consider that Jane could not have been wearied by long expectations. The little Gardiners, attracted by the sight of a chaise, were standing on the steps of the house, as they entered the paddock; and when the carriage drove up to the door, the joyful surprise that lighted up their faces and displayed itself over their whole bodies, in a variety of capers and frisks, was the first pleasing earnest of their welcome. Elizabeth jumped out; and after giving each of them a hasty kiss, hurried into the vestibule, where Jane, who came running downstairs from her mother’s apartment, immediately met her. Elizabeth, as she affectionately embraced her, whilst tears filled the eyes of both, lost not a moment in asking whether anything had been heard of the fugitives. “We have heard only once. He wrote me a few lines on Wednesday, to say that he had arrived in safety, and to give me his directions, which I particularly begged him to do. He merely added, that he should not write again, till he had something of importance to mention.”

“My mother is tolerably well, I trust; though her spirits are greatly shaken. She is upstairs, and will have great satisfaction in seeing you all. She does not yet leave her dressing-room. Mary and Kitty, thank Heaven! are quite well.” Her sister, however, assured her of her being perfectly well; and their conversation, which had been passing while Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner were engaged with their children, was now put an end to by the approach of the whole party. Jane ran to her uncle and aunt, and welcomed and thanked them both, with alternate smiles and tears. When they were all in the drawing-room, the questions which Elizabeth had already asked were of course repeated by the others, and they soon found that Jane had no intelligence to give. The sanguine hope of good, however, which the benevolence of her heart suggested, had not yet deserted her; she still expected that it would all end well, and that every morning would bring some letter, either from Lydia or her father, to explain their proceedings, and, perhaps, announce the marriage.

Mrs. Bennet, to whose apartment they all repaired, after a few minutes’ conversation together, received them exactly as might be expected; with tears and lamentations of regret, invectives against the villainous conduct of Wickham, and complaints of her own sufferings and ill-usage; blaming everybody but the person to whose ill-judging indulgence the errors of her daughter must be principally owing. “If I had been able,” said she, “to carry my point in going to Brighton with all my family, _this_ would not have happened: but poor dear Lydia had nobody to take care of her. Why did the Forsters ever let her go out of their sight? I am sure there was some great neglect or other on their side, for she is not the kind of girl to do such a thing, if she had been well looked after. I always thought they were very unfit to have the charge of her; but I was over-ruled, as I always am. Poor, dear child! And now here’s Mr. Bennet gone away, and I know he will fight Wickham, wherever he meets him, and then he will be killed, and what is to become of us all? The Collinses will turn us out, before he is cold in his grave; and if you are not kind to us, brother, I do not know what we shall do.”

They all exclaimed against such terrific ideas; and Mr. Gardiner, after general assurances of his affection for her and all her family, told her that he meant to be in London the very next day, and would assist Mr. Bennet in every endeavour for recovering Lydia. “Do not give way to useless alarm,” added he: “though it is right to be prepared for the worst, there is no occasion to look on it as certain. It is not quite a week since they left Brighton. In a few days more, we may gain some news of them; and till we know that they are not married, and have no design of marrying, do not let us give the matter over as lost. As soon as I get to town, I shall go to my brother, and make him come home with me to Gracechurch Street, and then we may consult together as to what is to be done.” “Oh, my dear brother,” replied Mrs. Bennet, “that is exactly what I could most wish for. And now do, when you get to town, find them out, wherever they may be; and if they are not married already, _make_ them marry. And as for wedding clothes, do not let them wait for that, but tell Lydia she shall have as much money as she chooses to buy them, after they are married. And, above all things, keep Mr. Bennet from fighting. Tell him what a dreadful state I am in--that I am frightened out of my wits; and have such tremblings, such flutterings all over me, such spasms in my side, and pains in my head, and such beatings at my heart, that I can get no rest by night nor by day. And tell my dear Lydia not to give any directions about her clothes till she has seen me, for she does not know which are the best warehouses. Oh, brother, how kind you are! I know you will contrive it all.”

But Mr. Gardiner, though he assured her again of his earnest endeavours in the cause, could not avoid recommending moderation to her, as well in her hopes as her fears; and after talking with her in this manner till dinner was on table, they left her to vent all her feelings on the housekeeper, who attended in the absence of her daughters. Though her brother and sister were persuaded that there was no real occasion for such a seclusion from the family, they did not attempt to oppose it; for they knew that she had not prudence enough to hold her tongue before the servants, while they waited at table, and judged it better that _one_ only of the household, and the one whom they could most trust, should comprehend all her fears and solicitude on the subject. In the dining-room they were soon joined by Mary and Kitty, who had been too busily engaged in their separate apartments to make their appearance before. One came from her books, and the other from her toilette. The faces of both, however, were tolerably calm; and no change was visible in either, except that the loss of her favourite sister, or the anger which she had herself incurred in the business, had given something more of fretfulness than usual to the accents of Kitty. As for Mary, she was mistress enough of herself to whisper to Elizabeth, with a countenance of grave reflection, soon after they were seated at table,--

“This is a most unfortunate affair, and will probably be much talked of. But we must stem the tide of malice, and pour into the wounded bosoms of each other the balm of sisterly consolation.” Then perceiving in Elizabeth no inclination of replying, she added, “Unhappy as the event must be for Lydia, we may draw from it this useful lesson:--that loss of virtue in a female is irretrievable, that one false step involves her in endless ruin, that her reputation is no less brittle than it is beautiful, and that she cannot be too much guarded in her behaviour towards the undeserving of the other sex.” Elizabeth lifted up her eyes in amazement, but was too much oppressed to make any reply. Mary, however, continued to console herself with such kind of moral extractions from the evil before them. In the afternoon, the two elder Miss Bennets were able to be for half an hour by themselves; and Elizabeth instantly availed herself of the opportunity of making any inquiries which Jane was equally eager to satisfy. After joining in general lamentations over the dreadful sequel of this event, which Elizabeth considered as all but certain, and Miss Bennet could not assert to be wholly impossible, the former continued the subject by saying, “But tell me all and everything about it which I have not already heard. Give me further particulars. What did Colonel Forster say? Had they no apprehension of anything before the elopement took place? They must have seen them together for ever.”

“Colonel Forster did own that he had often suspected some partiality, especially on Lydia’s side, but nothing to give him any alarm. I am so grieved for him. His behaviour was attentive and kind to the utmost. He _was_ coming to us, in order to assure us of his concern, before he had any idea of their not being gone to Scotland: when that apprehension first got abroad, it hastened his journey.” “Yes; but when questioned by _him_, Denny denied knowing anything of their plan, and would not give his real opinion about it. He did not repeat his persuasion of their not marrying, and from _that_ I am inclined to hope he might have been misunderstood before.” “How was it possible that such an idea should enter our brains? I felt a little uneasy--a little fearful of my sister’s happiness with him in marriage, because I knew that his conduct had not been always quite right. My father and mother knew nothing of that; they only felt how imprudent a match it must be. Kitty then owned, with a very natural triumph on knowing more than the rest of us, that in Lydia’s last letter she had prepared her for such a step. She had known, it seems, of their being in love with each other many weeks.”

“I must confess that he did not speak so well of Wickham as he formerly did. He believed him to be imprudent and extravagant; and since this sad affair has taken place, it is said that he left Meryton greatly in debt: but I hope this may be false.” “You will laugh when you know where I am gone, and I cannot help laughing myself at your surprise to-morrow morning, as soon as I am missed. I am going to Gretna Green, and if you cannot guess with who, I shall think you a simpleton, for there is but one man in the world I love, and he is an angel. I should never be happy without him, so think it no harm to be off. You need not send them word at Longbourn of my going, if you do not like it, for it will make the surprise the greater when I write to them, and sign my name Lydia Wickham. What a good joke it will be! I can hardly write for laughing. Pray make my excuses to Pratt for not keeping my engagement, and dancing with him to-night. Tell him I hope he will excuse me when he knows all, and tell him I will dance with him at the next ball we meet with great pleasure. I shall send for my clothes when I get to Longbourn; but I wish you would tell Sally to mend a great slit in my worked muslin gown before they are packed up. Good-bye. Give my love to Colonel Forster. I hope you will drink to our good journey.

“Oh, thoughtless, thoughtless Lydia!” cried Elizabeth when she had finished it. “What a letter is this, to be written at such a moment! But at least it shows that _she_ was serious in the object of her journey. Whatever he might afterwards persuade her to, it was not on her side a _scheme_ of infamy. My poor father! how he must have felt it!” “I never saw anyone so shocked. He could not speak a word for full ten minutes. My mother was taken ill immediately, and the whole house in such confusion!” “I do not know: I hope there was. But to be guarded at such a time is very difficult. My mother was in hysterics; and though I endeavoured to give her every assistance in my power, I am afraid I did not do so much as I might have done. But the horror of what might possibly happen almost took from me my faculties.” “Your attendance upon her has been too much for you. You do not look well. Oh that I had been with you! you have had every care and anxiety upon yourself alone.”

“Mary and Kitty have been very kind, and would have shared in every fatigue, I am sure, but I did not think it right for either of them. Kitty is slight and delicate, and Mary studies so much that her hours of repose should not be broken in on. My aunt Philips came to Longbourn on Tuesday, after my father went away; and was so good as to stay till Thursday with me. She was of great use and comfort to us all, and Lady Lucas has been very kind: she walked here on Wednesday morning to condole with us, and offered her services, or any of her daughters, if they could be of use to us.” “She had better have stayed at home,” cried Elizabeth: “perhaps she _meant_ well, but, under such a misfortune as this, one cannot see too little of one’s neighbours. Assistance is impossible; condolence, insufferable. Let them triumph over us at a distance, and be satisfied.” “He meant, I believe,” replied Jane, “to go to Epsom, the place where they last changed horses, see the postilions, and try if anything could be made out from them. His principal object must be to discover the number of the hackney coach which took them from Clapham. It had come with a fare from London; and as he thought the circumstance of a gentleman and lady’s removing from one carriage into another might be remarked, he meant to make inquiries at Clapham. If he could anyhow discover at what house the coachman had before set down his fare, he determined to make inquiries there, and hoped it might not be impossible to find out the stand and number of the coach. I do not know of any other designs that he had formed; but he was in such a hurry to be gone, and his spirits so greatly discomposed, that I had difficulty in finding out even so much as this.”

The whole party were in hopes of a letter from Mr. Bennet the next morning, but the post came in without bringing a single line from him. His family knew him to be, on all common occasions, a most negligent and dilatory correspondent; but at such a time they had hoped for exertion. They were forced to conclude, that he had no pleasing intelligence to send; but even of _that_ they would have been glad to be certain. Mr. Gardiner had waited only for the letters before he set off. When he was gone, they were certain at least of receiving constant information of what was going on; and their uncle promised, at parting, to prevail on Mr. Bennet to return to Longbourn as soon as he could, to the great consolation of his sister, who considered it as the only security for her husband’s not being killed in a duel. Mrs. Gardiner and the children were to remain in Hertfordshire a few days longer, as the former thought her presence might be serviceable to her nieces. She shared in their attendance on Mrs. Bennet, and was a great comfort to them in their hours of freedom. Their other aunt also visited them frequently, and always, as she said, with the design of cheering and heartening them up--though, as she never came without reporting some fresh instance of Wickham’s extravagance or irregularity, she seldom went away without leaving them more dispirited than she found them.

All Meryton seemed striving to blacken the man who, but three months before, had been almost an angel of light. He was declared to be in debt to every tradesman in the place, and his intrigues, all honoured with the title of seduction, had been extended into every tradesman’s family. Everybody declared that he was the wickedest young man in the world; and everybody began to find out that they had always distrusted the appearance of his goodness. Elizabeth, though she did not credit above half of what was said, believed enough to make her former assurance of her sister’s ruin still more certain; and even Jane, who believed still less of it, became almost hopeless, more especially as the time was now come, when, if they had gone to Scotland, which she had never before entirely despaired of, they must in all probability have gained some news of them. Mr. Gardiner left Longbourn on Sunday; on Tuesday, his wife received a letter from him: it told them, that on his arrival he had immediately found out his brother, and persuaded him to come to Gracechurch Street. That Mr. Bennet had been to Epsom and Clapham, before his arrival, but without gaining any satisfactory information; and that he was now determined to inquire at all the principal hotels in town, as Mr. Bennet thought it possible they might have gone to one of them, on their first coming to London, before they procured lodgings. Mr. Gardiner himself did not expect any success from this measure; but as his brother was eager in it, he meant to assist him in pursuing it. He added, that Mr. Bennet seemed wholly disinclined at present to leave London, and promised to write again very soon. There was also a postscript to this effect:--

“I have written to Colonel Forster to desire him to find out, if possible, from some of the young man’s intimates in the regiment, whether Wickham has any relations or connections who would be likely to know in what part of the town he has now concealed himself. If there were anyone that one could apply to, with a probability of gaining such a clue as that, it might be of essential consequence. At present we have nothing to guide us. Colonel Forster will, I dare say, do everything in his power to satisfy us on this head. But, on second thoughts, perhaps Lizzy could tell us what relations he has now living better than any other person.” Elizabeth was at no loss to understand from whence this deference for her authority proceeded; but it was not in her power to give any information of so satisfactory a nature as the compliment deserved. She had never heard of his having had any relations, except a father and mother, both of whom had been dead many years. It was possible, however, that some of his companions in the ----shire might be able to give more information; and though she was not very sanguine in expecting it, the application was a something to look forward to.

Every day at Longbourn was now a day of anxiety; but the most anxious part of each was when the post was expected. The arrival of letters was the first grand object of every morning’s impatience. Through letters, whatever of good or bad was to be told would be communicated; and every succeeding day was expected to bring some news of importance. But before they heard again from Mr. Gardiner, a letter arrived for their father, from a different quarter, from Mr. Collins; which, as Jane had received directions to open all that came for him in his absence, she accordingly read; and Elizabeth, who knew what curiosities his letters always were, looked over her, and read it likewise. It was as follows:-- “I feel myself called upon, by our relationship, and my situation in life, to condole with you on the grievous affliction you are now suffering under, of which we were yesterday informed by a letter from Hertfordshire. Be assured, my dear sir, that Mrs. Collins and myself sincerely sympathize with you, and all your respectable family, in your present distress, which must be of the bitterest kind, because proceeding from a cause which no time can remove. No arguments shall be wanting on my part, that can alleviate so severe a misfortune; or that may comfort you, under a circumstance that must be, of all others, most afflicting to a parent’s mind. The death of your daughter would have been a blessing in comparison of this. And it is the more to be lamented, because there is reason to suppose, as my dear Charlotte informs me, that this licentiousness of behaviour in your

daughter has proceeded from a faulty degree of indulgence; though, at the same time, for the consolation of yourself and Mrs. Bennet, I am inclined to think that her own disposition must be naturally bad, or she could not be guilty of such an enormity, at so early an age. Howsoever that may be, you are grievously to be pitied; in which opinion I am not only joined by Mrs. Collins, but likewise by Lady Catherine and her daughter, to whom I have related the affair. They agree with me in apprehending that this false step in one daughter will be injurious to the fortunes of all the others: for who, as Lady Catherine herself condescendingly says, will connect themselves with such a family? And this consideration leads me, moreover, to reflect, with augmented satisfaction, on a certain event of last November; for had it been otherwise, I must have been involved in all your sorrow and disgrace. Let me advise you, then, my dear sir, to console yourself as much as possible, to throw off your unworthy child from your affection for ever, and leave her to reap the fruits of her own heinous offence.

Mr. Gardiner did not write again, till he had received an answer from Colonel Forster; and then he had nothing of a pleasant nature to send. It was not known that Wickham had a single relation with whom he kept up any connection, and it was certain that he had no near one living. His former acquaintance had been numerous; but since he had been in the militia, it did not appear that he was on terms of particular friendship with any of them. There was no one, therefore, who could be pointed out as likely to give any news of him. And in the wretched state of his own finances, there was a very powerful motive for secrecy, in addition to his fear of discovery by Lydia’s relations; for it had just transpired that he had left gaming debts behind him to a very considerable amount. Colonel Forster believed that more than a thousand pounds would be necessary to clear his expenses at Brighton. He owed a good deal in the town, but his debts of honour were still more formidable. Mr. Gardiner did not attempt to conceal these particulars from the Longbourn family; Jane heard them with horror. “A gamester!” she cried. “This is wholly unexpected; I had not an idea of it.”

Mr. Gardiner added, in his letter, that they might expect to see their father at home on the following day, which was Saturday. Rendered spiritless by the ill success of all their endeavours, he had yielded to his brother-in-law’s entreaty that he would return to his family and leave it to him to do whatever occasion might suggest to be advisable for continuing their pursuit. When Mrs. Bennet was told of this, she did not express so much satisfaction as her children expected, considering what her anxiety for his life had been before. “What! is he coming home, and without poor Lydia?” she cried. “Sure he will not leave London before he has found them. Who is to fight Wickham, and make him marry her, if he comes away?” As Mrs. Gardiner began to wish to be at home, it was settled that she and her children should go to London at the same time that Mr. Bennet came from it. The coach, therefore, took them the first stage of their journey, and brought its master back to Longbourn. Mrs. Gardiner went away in all the perplexity about Elizabeth and her Derbyshire friend, that had attended her from that part of the world. His name had never been voluntarily mentioned before them by her niece; and the kind of half-expectation which Mrs. Gardiner had formed, of their being followed by a letter from him, had ended in nothing. Elizabeth had received none since her return, that could come from Pemberley.

The present unhappy state of the family rendered any other excuse for the lowness of her spirits unnecessary; nothing, therefore, could be fairly conjectured from _that_,--though Elizabeth, who was by this time tolerably well acquainted with her own feelings, was perfectly aware that, had she known nothing of Darcy, she could have borne the dread of Lydia’s infamy somewhat better. It would have spared her, she thought, one sleepless night out of two. When Mr. Bennet arrived, he had all the appearance of his usual philosophic composure. He said as little as he had ever been in the habit of saying; made no mention of the business that had taken him away; and it was some time before his daughters had courage to speak of it. It was not till the afternoon, when he joined them at tea, that Elizabeth ventured to introduce the subject; and then, on her briefly expressing her sorrow for what he must have endured, he replied, “Say nothing of that. Who should suffer but myself? It has been my own doing, and I ought to feel it.”

“You may well warn me against such an evil. Human nature is so prone to fall into it! No, Lizzy, let me once in my life feel how much I have been to blame. I am not afraid of being overpowered by the impression. It will pass away soon enough.” Then, after a short silence, he continued, “Lizzy, I bear you no ill-will for being justified in your advice to me last May, which, considering the event, shows some greatness of mind.” “This is a parade,” cried he, “which does one good; it gives such an elegance to misfortune! Another day I will do the same; I will sit in my library, in my nightcap and powdering gown, and give as much trouble as I can,--or perhaps I may defer it till Kitty runs away.” “_You_ go to Brighton! I would not trust you so near it as Eastbourne, for fifty pounds! No, Kitty, I have at least learnt to be cautious, and you will feel the effects of it. No officer is ever to enter my house again, nor even to pass through the village. Balls will be absolutely prohibited, unless you stand up with one of your sisters. And you are never to stir out of doors, till you can prove that you have spent ten minutes of every day in a rational manner.”

Two days after Mr. Bennet’s return, as Jane and Elizabeth were walking together in the shrubbery behind the house, they saw the housekeeper coming towards them, and concluding that she came to call them to their mother, went forward to meet her; but instead of the expected summons, when they approached her, she said to Miss Bennet, “I beg your pardon, madam, for interrupting you, but I was in hopes you might have got some good news from town, so I took the liberty of coming to ask.” “Dear madam,” cried Mrs. Hill, in great astonishment, “don’t you know there is an express come for master from Mr. Gardiner? He has been here this half hour, and master has had a letter.” Away ran the girls, too eager to get in to have time for speech. They ran through the vestibule into the breakfast-room; from thence to the library;--their father was in neither; and they were on the point of seeking him upstairs with their mother, when they were met by the butler, who said,-- Upon this information, they instantly passed through the hall once more, and ran across the lawn after their father, who was deliberately pursuing his way towards a small wood on one side of the paddock.

Jane, who was not so light, nor so much in the habit of running as Elizabeth, soon lagged behind, while her sister, panting for breath, came up with him, and eagerly cried out,-- “At last I am able to send you some tidings of my niece, and such as, upon the whole, I hope will give you satisfaction. Soon after you left me on Saturday, I was fortunate enough to find out in what part of London they were. The particulars I reserve till we meet. It is enough to know they are discovered: I have seen them both----” Elizabeth read on: “I have seen them both. They are not married, nor can I find there was any intention of being so; but if you are willing to perform the engagements which I have ventured to make on your side, I hope it will not be long before they are. All that is required of you is, to assure to your daughter, by settlement, her equal share of the five thousand pounds, secured among your children after the decease of yourself and my sister; and, moreover, to enter into an engagement of allowing her, during your life, one hundred pounds per annum. These are conditions which, considering everything, I had no hesitation in complying with, as far as I thought myself privileged, for you. I shall send this by express, that no time may be lost in bringing me your answer. You will easily comprehend, from these particulars, that Mr. Wickham’s circumstances are not so hopeless as they are generally believed to be. The world has been deceived in that respect; and I am happy to say, there will be some little money, even when all his debts are discharged, to settle on my niece, in addition to her own fortune. If, as I conclude will be the case, you send me full powers to act in your name throughout the whole of this business, I will immediately give directions to Haggerston for preparing a proper settlement. There will not be the smallest occasion for your coming to town again; therefore stay quietly at Longbourn, and depend on my diligence and care. Send back your answer as soon as you can, and be careful to write explicitly. We have judged it best that my niece should be married from this house, of which I hope you will approve. She comes to us to-day. I shall write again as soon as anything more is determined on. Yours, etc.

“Yes, yes, they must marry. There is nothing else to be done. But there are two things that I want very much to know:--one is, how much money your uncle has laid down to bring it about; and the other, how I am ever to pay him.” “I mean that no man in his proper senses would marry Lydia on so slight a temptation as one hundred a year during my life, and fifty after I am gone.” “That is very true,” said Elizabeth; “though it had not occurred to me before. His debts to be discharged, and something still to remain! Oh, it must be my uncle’s doings! Generous, good man, I am afraid he has distressed himself. A small sum could not do all this.” “No,” said her father. “Wickham’s a fool if he takes her with a farthing less than ten thousand pounds: I should be sorry to think so ill of him, in the very beginning of our relationship.” Mr. Bennet made no answer; and each of them, deep in thought, continued silent till they reached the house. Their father then went to the library to write, and the girls walked into the breakfast-room.

“And they are really to be married!” cried Elizabeth, as soon as they were by themselves. “How strange this is! and for _this_ we are to be thankful. That they should marry, small as is their chance of happiness, and wretched as is his character, we are forced to rejoice! Oh, Lydia!” “I comfort myself with thinking,” replied Jane, “that he certainly would not marry Lydia, if he had not a real regard for her. Though our kind uncle has done something towards clearing him, I cannot believe that ten thousand pounds, or anything like it, has been advanced. He has children of his own, and may have more. How could he spare half ten thousand pounds?” “If we are ever able to learn what Wickham’s debts have been,” said Elizabeth, “and how much is settled on his side on our sister, we shall exactly know what Mr. Gardiner has done for them, because Wickham has not sixpence of his own. The kindness of my uncle and aunt can never be requited. Their taking her home, and affording her their personal protection and countenance, is such a sacrifice to her advantage as years of gratitude cannot enough acknowledge. By this time she is actually with them! If such goodness does not make her miserable now, she will never deserve to be happy! What a meeting for her, when she first sees my aunt!”

“We must endeavour to forget all that has passed on either side,” said Jane: “I hope and trust they will yet be happy. His consenting to marry her is a proof, I will believe, that he is come to a right way of thinking. Their mutual affection will steady them; and I flatter myself they will settle so quietly, and live in so rational a manner, as may in time make their past imprudence forgotten.” It now occurred to the girls that their mother was in all likelihood perfectly ignorant of what had happened. They went to the library, therefore, and asked their father whether he would not wish them to make it known to her. He was writing, and, without raising his head, coolly replied,-- Elizabeth took the letter from his writing-table, and they went upstairs together. Mary and Kitty were both with Mrs. Bennet: one communication would, therefore, do for all. After a slight preparation for good news, the letter was read aloud. Mrs. Bennet could hardly contain herself. As soon as Jane had read Mr. Gardiner’s hope of Lydia’s being soon married, her joy burst forth, and every following sentence added to its exuberance. She was now in an irritation as violent from delight as she had ever been fidgety from alarm and vexation. To know that her daughter would be married was enough. She was disturbed by no fear for her felicity, nor humbled by any remembrance of her misconduct.

“My dear, dear Lydia!” she cried: “this is delightful indeed! She will be married! I shall see her again! She will be married at sixteen! My good, kind brother! I knew how it would be--I knew he would manage everything. How I long to see her! and to see dear Wickham too! But the clothes, the wedding clothes! I will write to my sister Gardiner about them directly. Lizzy, my dear, run down to your father, and ask him how much he will give her. Stay, stay, I will go myself. Ring the bell, Kitty, for Hill. I will put on my things in a moment. My dear, dear Lydia! How merry we shall be together when we meet!” Her eldest daughter endeavoured to give some relief to the violence of these transports, by leading her thoughts to the obligations which Mr. Gardiner’s behaviour laid them all under. “For we must attribute this happy conclusion,” she added, “in a great measure to his kindness. We are persuaded that he has pledged himself to assist Mr. Wickham with money.” “Well,” cried her mother, “it is all very right; who should do it but her own uncle? If he had not had a family of his own, I and my children must have had all his money, you know; and it is the first time we have ever had anything from him except a few presents. Well! I am so happy. In a short time, I shall have a daughter married. Mrs. Wickham! How well it sounds! And she was only sixteen last June. My dear Jane, I am in such a flutter, that I am sure I can’t write; so I will dictate, and you write for me. We will settle with your father about the money afterwards; but the things should be ordered immediately.”

She was then proceeding to all the particulars of calico, muslin, and cambric, and would shortly have dictated some very plentiful orders, had not Jane, though with some difficulty, persuaded her to wait till her father was at leisure to be consulted. One day’s delay, she observed, would be of small importance; and her mother was too happy to be quite so obstinate as usual. Other schemes, too, came into her head. “I will go to Meryton,” said she, “as soon as I am dressed, and tell the good, good news to my sister Philips. And as I come back, I can call on Lady Lucas and Mrs. Long. Kitty, run down and order the carriage. An airing would do me a great deal of good, I am sure. Girls, can I do anything for you in Meryton? Oh! here comes Hill. My dear Hill, have you heard the good news? Miss Lydia is going to be married; and you shall all have a bowl of punch to make merry at her wedding.” Mrs. Hill began instantly to express her joy. Elizabeth received her congratulations amongst the rest, and then, sick of this folly, took refuge in her own room, that she might think with freedom. Poor Lydia’s situation must, at best, be bad enough; but that it was no worse, she had need to be thankful. She felt it so; and though, in looking forward, neither rational happiness, nor worldly prosperity could be justly expected for her sister, in looking back to what they had feared, only two hours ago, she felt all the advantages of what they had gained.

Mr. Bennet had very often wished, before this period of his life, that, instead of spending his whole income, he had laid by an annual sum, for the better provision of his children, and of his wife, if she survived him. He now wished it more than ever. Had he done his duty in that respect, Lydia need not have been indebted to her uncle for whatever of honour or credit could now be purchased for her. The satisfaction of prevailing on one of the most worthless young men in Great Britain to be her husband might then have rested in its proper place. He was seriously concerned that a cause of so little advantage to anyone should be forwarded at the sole expense of his brother-in-law; and he was determined, if possible, to find out the extent of his assistance, and to discharge the obligation as soon as he could. When first Mr. Bennet had married, economy was held to be perfectly useless; for, of course, they were to have a son. This son was to join in cutting off the entail, as soon as he should be of age, and the widow and younger children would by that means be provided for. Five daughters successively entered the world, but yet the son was to come; and Mrs. Bennet, for many years after Lydia’s birth, had been certain that he would. This event had at last been despaired of, but it was then too late to be saving. Mrs. Bennet had no turn for economy; and her husband’s love of independence had alone prevented their exceeding their income.

Five thousand pounds was settled by marriage articles on Mrs. Bennet and the children. But in what proportions it should be divided amongst the latter depended on the will of the parents. This was one point, with regard to Lydia at least, which was now to be settled, and Mr. Bennet could have no hesitation in acceding to the proposal before him. In terms of grateful acknowledgment for the kindness of his brother, though expressed most concisely, he then delivered on paper his perfect approbation of all that was done, and his willingness to fulfil the engagements that had been made for him. He had never before supposed that, could Wickham be prevailed on to marry his daughter, it would be done with so little inconvenience to himself as by the present arrangement. He would scarcely be ten pounds a year the loser, by the hundred that was to be paid them; for, what with her board and pocket allowance, and the continual presents in money which passed to her through her mother’s hands, Lydia’s expenses had been very little within that sum.

That it would be done with such trifling exertion on his side, too, was another very welcome surprise; for his chief wish at present was to have as little trouble in the business as possible. When the first transports of rage which had produced his activity in seeking her were over, he naturally returned to all his former indolence. His letter was soon despatched; for though dilatory in undertaking business, he was quick in its execution. He begged to know further particulars of what he was indebted to his brother; but was too angry with Lydia to send any message to her. The good news quickly spread through the house; and with proportionate speed through the neighbourhood. It was borne in the latter with decent philosophy. To be sure, it would have been more for the advantage of conversation, had Miss Lydia Bennet come upon the town; or, as the happiest alternative, been secluded from the world in some distant farm-house. But there was much to be talked of, in marrying her; and the good-natured wishes for her well-doing, which had proceeded before from all the spiteful old ladies in Meryton, lost but little of their spirit in this change of circumstances, because with such a husband her misery was considered certain.

It was a fortnight since Mrs. Bennet had been down stairs, but on this happy day she again took her seat at the head of her table, and in spirits oppressively high. No sentiment of shame gave a damp to her triumph. The marriage of a daughter, which had been the first object of her wishes since Jane was sixteen, was now on the point of accomplishment, and her thoughts and her words ran wholly on those attendants of elegant nuptials, fine muslins, new carriages, and servants. She was busily searching through the neighbourhood for a proper situation for her daughter; and, without knowing or considering what their income might be, rejected many as deficient in size and importance. “Haye Park might do,” said she, “if the Gouldings would quit it, or the great house at Stoke, if the drawing-room were larger; but Ashworth is too far off. I could not bear to have her ten miles from me; and as for Purvis Lodge, the attics are dreadful.” Her husband allowed her to talk on without interruption while the servants remained. But when they had withdrawn, he said to her, “Mrs. Bennet, before you take any, or all of these houses, for your son and daughter, let us come to a right understanding. Into _one_ house in this neighbourhood they shall never have admittance. I will not encourage the imprudence of either, by receiving them at Longbourn.”

A long dispute followed this declaration; but Mr. Bennet was firm: it soon led to another; and Mrs. Bennet found, with amazement and horror, that her husband would not advance a guinea to buy clothes for his daughter. He protested that she should receive from him no mark of affection whatever on the occasion. Mrs. Bennet could hardly comprehend it. That his anger could be carried to such a point of inconceivable resentment as to refuse his daughter a privilege, without which her marriage would scarcely seem valid, exceeded all that she could believe possible. She was more alive to the disgrace, which her want of new clothes must reflect on her daughter’s nuptials, than to any sense of shame at her eloping and living with Wickham a fortnight before they took place. Elizabeth was now most heartily sorry that she had, from the distress of the moment, been led to make Mr. Darcy acquainted with their fears for her sister; for since her marriage would so shortly give the proper termination to the elopement, they might hope to conceal its unfavourable beginning from all those who were not immediately on the spot.

She had no fear of its spreading farther, through his means. There were few people on whose secrecy she would have more confidently depended; but at the same time there was no one whose knowledge of a sister’s frailty would have mortified her so much. Not, however, from any fear of disadvantage from it individually to herself; for at any rate there seemed a gulf impassable between them. Had Lydia’s marriage been concluded on the most honourable terms, it was not to be supposed that Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family, where to every other objection would now be added an alliance and relationship of the nearest kind with the man whom he so justly scorned. From such a connection she could not wonder that he should shrink. The wish of procuring her regard, which she had assured herself of his feeling in Derbyshire, could not in rational expectation survive such a blow as this. She was humbled, she was grieved; she repented, though she hardly knew of what. She became jealous of his esteem, when she could no longer hope to be benefited by it. She wanted to hear of him, when there seemed the least chance of gaining intelligence. She was convinced that she could have been happy with him, when it was no longer likely they should meet.

What a triumph for him, as she often thought, could he know that the proposals which she had proudly spurned only four months ago would now have been gladly and gratefully received! He was as generous, she doubted not, as the most generous of his sex. But while he was mortal, there must be a triumph. She began now to comprehend that he was exactly the man who, in disposition and talents, would most suit her. His understanding and temper, though unlike her own, would have answered all her wishes. It was an union that must have been to the advantage of both: by her ease and liveliness, his mind might have been softened, his manners improved; and from his judgment, information, and knowledge of the world, she must have received benefit of greater importance. But no such happy marriage could now teach the admiring multitude what connubial felicity really was. An union of a different tendency, and precluding the possibility of the other, was soon to be formed in their family. How Wickham and Lydia were to be supported in tolerable independence she could not imagine. But how little of permanent happiness could belong to a couple who were only brought together because their passions were stronger than their virtue, she could easily conjecture.

Mr. Gardiner soon wrote again to his brother. To Mr. Bennet’s acknowledgments he briefly replied, with assurances of his eagerness to promote the welfare of any of his family; and concluded with entreaties that the subject might never be mentioned to him again. The principal purport of his letter was to inform them, that Mr. Wickham had resolved on quitting the militia. “It was greatly my wish that he should do so,” he added, “as soon as his marriage was fixed on. And I think you will agree with me, in considering a removal from that corps as highly advisable, both on his account and my niece’s. It is Mr. Wickham’s intention to go into the Regulars; and, among his former friends, there are still some who are able and willing to assist him in the army. He has the promise of an ensigncy in General----’s regiment, now quartered in the north. It is an advantage to have it so far from this part of the kingdom. He promises fairly; and I hope among different people, where they may each have a character to preserve, they will both be more prudent. I have written to Colonel Forster, to inform him of our present arrangements, and to request that he will satisfy the various creditors of Mr. Wickham in and near Brighton with assurances of speedy payment, for which I have pledged myself. And will you give yourself the trouble of carrying similar assurances to his creditors in Meryton, of whom I shall subjoin a list, according to his information? He has given in all his debts; I hope at least he has not deceived us. Haggerston has our directions, and all will be completed in a week. They will then join his regiment, unless they are first invited to Longbourn; and I understand from Mrs. Gardiner that my niece is very desirous of seeing you all before she leaves the south. She is well, and begs to be dutifully remembered to you and her mother.--Yours, etc.

Mr. Bennet and his daughters saw all the advantages of Wickham’s removal from the ----shire, as clearly as Mr. Gardiner could do. But Mrs. Bennet was not so well pleased with it. Lydia’s being settled in the north, just when she had expected most pleasure and pride in her company, for she had by no means given up her plan of their residing in Hertfordshire, was a severe disappointment; and, besides, it was such a pity that Lydia should be taken from a regiment where she was acquainted with everybody, and had so many favourites. “She is so fond of Mrs. Forster,” said she, “it will be quite shocking to send her away! And there are several of the young men, too, that she likes very much. The officers may not be so pleasant in General----’s regiment.” His daughter’s request, for such it might be considered, of being admitted into her family again, before she set off for the north, received at first an absolute negative. But Jane and Elizabeth, who agreed in wishing, for the sake of their sister’s feelings and consequence, that she should be noticed on her marriage by her parents, urged him so earnestly, yet so rationally and so mildly, to receive her and her husband at Longbourn, as soon as they were married, that he was prevailed on to think as they thought, and act as they wished. And their mother had the satisfaction of knowing, that she should be able to show her married daughter in the neighbourhood, before she was banished to the north. When Mr. Bennet wrote again to his brother, therefore, he sent his permission for them to come; and it was settled, that, as soon as the ceremony was over, they should proceed to Longbourn. Elizabeth was surprised, however, that Wickham should consent to such a scheme; and, had she consulted only her own inclination, any meeting with him would have been the last object of her wishes.

Their sister’s wedding-day arrived; and Jane and Elizabeth felt for her probably more than she felt for herself. The carriage was sent to meet them at----, and they were to return in it by dinnertime. Their arrival was dreaded by the elder Miss Bennets--and Jane more especially, who gave Lydia the feelings which would have attended herself, had _she_ been the culprit, and was wretched in the thought of what her sister must endure. They came. The family were assembled in the breakfast-room to receive them. Smiles decked the face of Mrs. Bennet, as the carriage drove up to the door; her husband looked impenetrably grave; her daughters, alarmed, anxious, uneasy. Lydia’s voice was heard in the vestibule; the door was thrown open, and she ran into the room. Her mother stepped forwards, embraced her, and welcomed her with rapture; gave her hand with an affectionate smile to Wickham, who followed his lady; and wished them both joy, with an alacrity which showed no doubt of their happiness. Their reception from Mr. Bennet, to whom they then turned, was not quite so cordial. His countenance rather gained in austerity; and he scarcely opened his lips. The easy assurance of the young couple, indeed, was enough to provoke him.

Elizabeth was disgusted, and even Miss Bennet was shocked. Lydia was Lydia still; untamed, unabashed, wild, noisy, and fearless. She turned from sister to sister, demanding their congratulations; and when at length they all sat down, looked eagerly round the room, took notice of some little alteration in it, and observed, with a laugh, that it was a great while since she had been there. Wickham was not at all more distressed than herself; but his manners were always so pleasing, that, had his character and his marriage been exactly what they ought, his smiles and his easy address, while he claimed their relationship, would have delighted them all. Elizabeth had not before believed him quite equal to such assurance; but she sat down, resolving within herself to draw no limits in future to the impudence of an impudent man. _She_ blushed, and Jane blushed; but the cheeks of the two who caused their confusion suffered no variation of colour. There was no want of discourse. The bride and her mother could neither of them talk fast enough; and Wickham, who happened to sit near Elizabeth, began inquiring after his acquaintance in that neighbourhood, with a good-humoured ease, which she felt very unable to equal in her replies. They seemed each of them to have the happiest memories in the world. Nothing of the past was recollected with pain; and Lydia led voluntarily to subjects which her sisters would not have alluded to for the world.

“Only think of its being three months,” she cried, “since I went away: it seems but a fortnight, I declare; and yet there have been things enough happened in the time. Good gracious! when I went away, I am sure I had no more idea of being married till I came back again! though I thought it would be very good fun if I was.” Her father lifted up his eyes, Jane was distressed, Elizabeth looked expressively at Lydia; but she, who never heard nor saw anything of which she chose to be insensible, gaily continued,-- “Oh, mamma, do the people hereabouts know I am married to-day? I was afraid they might not; and we overtook William Goulding in his curricle, so I was determined he should know it, and so I let down the side glass next to him, and took off my glove and let my hand just rest upon the window frame, so that he might see the ring, and then I bowed and smiled like anything.” Elizabeth could bear it no longer. She got up and ran out of the room; and returned no more, till she heard them passing through the hall to the dining-parlour. She then joined them soon enough to see Lydia, with anxious parade, walk up to her mother’s right hand, and hear her say to her eldest sister,--

It was not to be supposed that time would give Lydia that embarrassment from which she had been so wholly free at first. Her ease and good spirits increased. She longed to see Mrs. Philips, the Lucases, and all their other neighbours, and to hear herself called “Mrs. Wickham” by each of them; and in the meantime she went after dinner to show her ring and boast of being married to Mrs. Hill and the two housemaids. “Well, mamma,” said she, when they were all returned to the breakfast-room, “and what do you think of my husband? Is not he a charming man? I am sure my sisters must all envy me. I only hope they may have half my good luck. They must all go to Brighton. That is the place to get husbands. What a pity it is, mamma, we did not all go!” “Oh, Lord! yes; there is nothing in that. I shall like it of all things. You and papa, and my sisters, must come down and see us. We shall be at Newcastle all the winter, and I dare say there will be some balls, and I will take care to get good partners for them all.”

“And then when you go away, you may leave one or two of my sisters behind you; and I dare say I shall get husbands for them before the winter is over.” Their visitors were not to remain above ten days with them. Mr. Wickham had received his commission before he left London, and he was to join his regiment at the end of a fortnight. No one but Mrs. Bennet regretted that their stay would be so short; and she made the most of the time by visiting about with her daughter, and having very frequent parties at home. These parties were acceptable to all; to avoid a family circle was even more desirable to such as did think than such as did not. Wickham’s affection for Lydia was just what Elizabeth had expected to find it; not equal to Lydia’s for him. She had scarcely needed her present observation to be satisfied, from the reason of things, that their elopement had been brought on by the strength of her love rather than by his; and she would have wondered why, without violently caring for her, he chose to elope with her at all, had she not felt certain that his flight was rendered necessary by distress of circumstances; and if that were the case, he was not the young man to resist an opportunity of having a companion.

Lydia was exceedingly fond of him. He was her dear Wickham on every occasion; no one was to be put in competition with him. He did everything best in the world; and she was sure he would kill more birds on the first of September than anybody else in the country. “Lizzy, I never gave _you_ an account of my wedding, I believe. You were not by, when I told mamma, and the others, all about it. Are not you curious to hear how it was managed?” “La! You are so strange! But I must tell you how it went off. We were married, you know, at St. Clement’s, because Wickham’s lodgings were in that parish. And it was settled that we should all be there by eleven o’clock. My uncle and aunt and I were to go together; and the others were to meet us at the church. “Well, Monday morning came, and I was in such a fuss! I was so afraid, you know, that something would happen to put it off, and then I should have gone quite distracted. And there was my aunt, all the time I was dressing, preaching and talking away just as if she was reading a sermon. However, I did not hear above one word in ten, for I was thinking, you may suppose, of my dear Wickham. I longed to know whether he would be married in his blue coat.

“Well, and so we breakfasted at ten as usual: I thought it would never be over; for, by the bye, you are to understand that my uncle and aunt were horrid unpleasant all the time I was with them. If you’ll believe me, I did not once put my foot out of doors, though I was there a fortnight. Not one party, or scheme, or anything! To be sure, London was rather thin, but, however, the Little Theatre was open. “Well, and so, just as the carriage came to the door, my uncle was called away upon business to that horrid man Mr. Stone. And then, you know, when once they get together, there is no end of it. Well, I was so frightened I did not know what to do, for my uncle was to give me away; and if we were beyond the hour we could not be married all day. But, luckily, he came back again in ten minutes’ time, and then we all set out. However, I recollected afterwards, that if he _had_ been prevented going, the wedding need not be put off, for Mr. Darcy might have done as well.”

“Oh, yes! he was to come there with Wickham, you know. But, gracious me! I quite forgot! I ought not to have said a word about it. I promised them so faithfully! What will Wickham say? It was to be such a secret!” But to live in ignorance on such a point was impossible; or at least it was impossible not to try for information. Mr. Darcy had been at her sister’s wedding. It was exactly a scene, and exactly among people, where he had apparently least to do, and least temptation to go. Conjectures as to the meaning of it, rapid and wild, hurried into her brain; but she was satisfied with none. Those that best pleased her, as placing his conduct in the noblest light, seemed most improbable. She could not bear such suspense; and hastily seizing a sheet of paper, wrote a short letter to her aunt, to request an explanation of what Lydia had dropped, if it were compatible with the secrecy which had been intended. “You may readily comprehend,” she added, “what my curiosity must be to know how a person unconnected with any of us, and, comparatively speaking, a stranger to our family, should have been amongst you at such a time. Pray write instantly, and let me understand it--unless it is, for very cogent reasons, to remain in the secrecy which Lydia seems to think necessary; and then I must endeavour to be satisfied with ignorance.”

“Not that I _shall_, though,” she added to herself, and she finished the letter; “and, my dear aunt, if you do not tell me in an honourable manner, I shall certainly be reduced to tricks and stratagems to find it out.” Jane’s delicate sense of honour would not allow her to speak to Elizabeth privately of what Lydia had let fall; Elizabeth was glad of it:--till it appeared whether her inquiries would receive any satisfaction, she had rather be without a confidante. Elizabeth had the satisfaction of receiving an answer to her letter as soon as she possibly could. She was no sooner in possession of it, than hurrying into the little copse, where she was least likely to be interrupted, she sat down on one of the benches, and prepared to be happy; for the length of the letter convinced her that it did not contain a denial. She was roused from her seat and her reflections, by someone’s approach; and, before she could strike into another path, she was overtaken by Wickham. “I do not know. Mrs. Bennet and Lydia are going in the carriage to Meryton. And so, my dear sister, I find, from our uncle and aunt, that you have actually seen Pemberley.”

“I almost envy you the pleasure, and yet I believe it would be too much for me, or else I could take it in my way to Newcastle. And you saw the old housekeeper, I suppose? Poor Reynolds, she was always very fond of me. But of course she did not mention my name to you.” “That you were gone into the army, and she was afraid had--not turned out well. At such a distance as _that_, you know, things are strangely misrepresented.” “I have heard, indeed, that she is uncommonly improved within this year or two. When I last saw her, she was not very promising. I am very glad you liked her. I hope she will turn out well.” “I mention it because it is the living which I ought to have had. A most delightful place! Excellent parsonage-house! It would have suited me in every respect.” “Exceedingly well. I should have considered it as part of my duty, and the exertion would soon have been nothing. One ought not to repine; but, to be sure, it would have been such a thing for me! The quiet, the retirement of such a life, would have answered all my ideas of happiness! But it was not to be. Did you ever hear Darcy mention the circumstance when you were in Kent?”

“I _did_ hear, too, that there was a time when sermon-making was not so palatable to you as it seems to be at present; that you actually declared your resolution of never taking orders, and that the business had been compromised accordingly.” They were now almost at the door of the house, for she had walked fast to get rid of him; and unwilling, for her sister’s sake, to provoke him, she only said in reply, with a good-humoured smile,-- Mr. Wickham was so perfectly satisfied with this conversation, that he never again distressed himself, or provoked his dear sister Elizabeth, by introducing the subject of it; and she was pleased to find that she had said enough to keep him quiet. The day of his and Lydia’s departure soon came; and Mrs. Bennet was forced to submit to a separation, which, as her husband by no means entered into her scheme of their all going to Newcastle, was likely to continue at least a twelvemonth. “He is as fine a fellow,” said Mr. Bennet, as soon as they were out of the house, “as ever I saw. He simpers, and smirks, and makes love to us all. I am prodigiously proud of him. I defy even Sir William Lucas himself to produce a more valuable son-in-law.”

“This is the consequence, you see, madam, of marrying a daughter,” said Elizabeth. “It must make you better satisfied that your other four are single.” “It is no such thing. Lydia does not leave me because she is married; but only because her husband’s regiment happens to be so far off. If that had been nearer, she would not have gone so soon.” But the spiritless condition which this event threw her into was shortly relieved, and her mind opened again to the agitation of hope, by an article of news which then began to be in circulation. The housekeeper at Netherfield had received orders to prepare for the arrival of her master, who was coming down in a day or two, to shoot there for several weeks. Mrs. Bennet was quite in the fidgets. She looked at Jane, and smiled, and shook her head, by turns. “Well, well, and so Mr. Bingley is coming down, sister,” (for Mrs. Philips first brought her the news). “Well, so much the better. Not that I care about it, though. He is nothing to us, you know, and I am sure I never want to see him again. But, however, he is very welcome to come to Netherfield, if he likes it. And who knows what _may_ happen? But that is nothing to us. You know, sister, we agreed long ago never to mention a word about it. And so, it is quite certain he is coming?”

“You may depend on it,” replied the other, “for Mrs. Nichols was in Meryton last night: I saw her passing by, and went out myself on purpose to know the truth of it; and she told me that it was certainly true. He comes down on Thursday, at the latest, very likely on Wednesday. She was going to the butcher’s, she told me, on purpose to order in some meat on Wednesday, and she has got three couple of ducks just fit to be killed.” Miss Bennet had not been able to hear of his coming without changing colour. It was many months since she had mentioned his name to Elizabeth; but now, as soon as they were alone together, she said,-- “I saw you look at me to-day, Lizzy, when my aunt told us of the present report; and I know I appeared distressed; but don’t imagine it was from any silly cause. I was only confused for the moment, because I felt that I _should_ be looked at. I do assure you that the news does not affect me either with pleasure or pain. I am glad of one thing, that he comes alone; because we shall see the less of him. Not that I am afraid of _myself_, but I dread other people’s remarks.”

Elizabeth did not know what to make of it. Had she not seen him in Derbyshire, she might have supposed him capable of coming there with no other view than what was acknowledged; but she still thought him partial to Jane, and she wavered as to the greater probability of his coming there _with_ his friend’s permission, or being bold enough to come without it. “Yet it is hard,” she sometimes thought, “that this poor man cannot come to a house, which he has legally hired, without raising all this speculation! I _will_ leave him to himself.” In spite of what her sister declared, and really believed to be her feelings, in the expectation of his arrival, Elizabeth could easily perceive that her spirits were affected by it. They were more disturbed, more unequal, than she had often seen them. “No, no. You forced me into visiting him last year, and promised, if I went to see him, he should marry one of my daughters. But it ended in nothing, and I will not be sent on a fool’s errand again.”

“’Tis an _etiquette_ I despise,” said he. “If he wants our society, let him seek it. He knows where we live. I will not spend _my_ hours in running after my neighbours every time they go away and come back again.” “Well, all I know is, that it will be abominably rude if you do not wait on him. But, however, that shan’t prevent my asking him to dine here, I am determined. We must have Mrs. Long and the Gouldings soon. That will make thirteen with ourselves, so there will be just room at table for him.” Consoled by this resolution, she was the better able to bear her husband’s incivility; though it was very mortifying to know that her neighbours might all see Mr. Bingley, in consequence of it, before _they_ did. As the day of his arrival drew near,-- “I begin to be sorry that he comes at all,” said Jane to her sister. “It would be nothing; I could see him with perfect indifference; but I can hardly bear to hear it thus perpetually talked of. My mother means well; but she does not know, no one can know, how much I suffer from what she says. Happy shall I be when his stay at Netherfield is over!”

“I wish I could say anything to comfort you,” replied Elizabeth; “but it is wholly out of my power. You must feel it; and the usual satisfaction of preaching patience to a sufferer is denied me, because you have always so much.” Mr. Bingley arrived. Mrs. Bennet, through the assistance of servants, contrived to have the earliest tidings of it, that the period of anxiety and fretfulness on her side be as long as it could. She counted the days that must intervene before their invitation could be sent--hopeless of seeing him before. But on the third morning after his arrival in Hertfordshire, she saw him from her dressing-room window enter the paddock, and ride towards the house. Her daughters were eagerly called to partake of her joy. Jane resolutely kept her place at the table; but Elizabeth, to satisfy her mother, went to the window--she looked--she saw Mr. Darcy with him, and sat down again by her sister. “Good gracious! Mr. Darcy!--and so it does, I vow. Well, any friend of Mr. Bingley’s will always be welcome here, to be sure; but else I must say that I hate the very sight of him.”

Jane looked at Elizabeth with surprise and concern. She knew but little of their meeting in Derbyshire, and therefore felt for the awkwardness which must attend her sister, in seeing him almost for the first time after receiving his explanatory letter. Both sisters were uncomfortable enough. Each felt for the other, and of course for themselves; and their mother talked on of her dislike of Mr. Darcy, and her resolution to be civil to him only as Mr. Bingley’s friend, without being heard by either of them. But Elizabeth had sources of uneasiness which could not yet be suspected by Jane, to whom she had never yet had courage to show Mrs. Gardiner’s letter, or to relate her own change of sentiment towards him. To Jane, he could be only a man whose proposals she had refused, and whose merits she had undervalued; but to her own more extensive information, he was the person to whom the whole family were indebted for the first of benefits, and whom she regarded herself with an interest, if not quite so tender, at least as reasonable and just, as what Jane felt for Bingley. Her astonishment at his coming--at his coming to Netherfield, to Longbourn, and voluntarily seeking her again, was almost equal to what she had known on first witnessing his altered behaviour in Derbyshire.

The colour which had been driven from her face returned for half a minute with an additional glow, and a smile of delight added lustre to her eyes, as she thought for that space of time that his affection and wishes must still be unshaken; but she would not be secure. She sat intently at work, striving to be composed, and without daring to lift up her eyes, till anxious curiosity carried them to the face of her sister as the servant was approaching the door. Jane looked a little paler than usual, but more sedate than Elizabeth had expected. On the gentlemen’s appearing, her colour increased; yet she received them with tolerable ease, and with a propriety of behaviour equally free from any symptom of resentment, or any unnecessary complaisance. Elizabeth said as little to either as civility would allow, and sat down again to her work, with an eagerness which it did not often command. She had ventured only one glance at Darcy. He looked serious as usual; and, she thought, more as he had been used to look in Hertfordshire, than as she had seen him at Pemberley. But, perhaps, he could not in her mother’s presence be what he was before her uncle and aunt. It was a painful, but not an improbable, conjecture.

Bingley she had likewise seen for an instant, and in that short period saw him looking both pleased and embarrassed. He was received by Mrs. Bennet with a degree of civility which made her two daughters ashamed, especially when contrasted with the cold and ceremonious politeness of her courtesy and address of his friend. Elizabeth particularly, who knew that her mother owed to the latter the preservation of her favourite daughter from irremediable infamy, was hurt and distressed to a most painful degree by a distinction so ill applied. Darcy, after inquiring of her how Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner did--a question which she could not answer without confusion--said scarcely anything. He was not seated by her: perhaps that was the reason of his silence; but it had not been so in Derbyshire. There he had talked to her friends when he could not to herself. But now several minutes elapsed, without bringing the sound of his voice; and when occasionally, unable to resist the impulse of curiosity, she raised her eyes to his face, she as often found him looking at Jane as at herself, and frequently on no object but the ground. More thoughtfulness and less anxiety to please, than when they last met, were plainly expressed. She was disappointed, and angry with herself for being so.

“I began to be afraid you would never come back again. People _did_ say, you meant to quit the place entirely at Michaelmas; but, however, I hope it is not true. A great many changes have happened in the neighbourhood since you went away. Miss Lucas is married and settled: and one of my own daughters. I suppose you have heard of it; indeed, you must have seen it in the papers. It was in the ‘Times’ and the ‘Courier,’ I know; though it was not put in as it ought to be. It was only said, ‘Lately, George Wickham, Esq., to Miss Lydia Bennet,’ without there being a syllable said of her father, or the place where she lived, or anything. It was my brother Gardiner’s drawing up, too, and I wonder how he came to make such an awkward business of it. Did you see it?” “It is a delightful thing, to be sure, to have a daughter well married,” continued her mother; “but at the same time, Mr. Bingley, it is very hard to have her taken away from me. They are gone down to Newcastle, a place quite northward it seems, and there they are to stay, I do not know how long. His regiment is there; for I suppose you have heard of his leaving the ----shire, and of his being gone into the Regulars. Thank heaven! he has _some_ friends, though, perhaps, not so many as he deserves.”

Elizabeth, who knew this to be levelled at Mr. Darcy, was in such misery of shame that she could hardly keep her seat. It drew from her, however, the exertion of speaking, which nothing else had so effectually done before; and she asked Bingley whether he meant to make any stay in the country at present. A few weeks, he believed. “When you have killed all your own birds, Mr. Bingley,” said her mother, “I beg you will come here and shoot as many as you please on Mr. Bennet’s manor. I am sure he will be vastly happy to oblige you, and will save all the best of the coveys for you.” Elizabeth’s misery increased at such unnecessary, such officious attention! Were the same fair prospect to arise at present, as had flattered them a year ago, everything, she was persuaded, would be hastening to the same vexatious conclusion. At that instant she felt, that years of happiness could not make Jane or herself amends for moments of such painful confusion. “The first wish of my heart,” said she to herself, “is never more to be in company with either of them. Their society can afford no pleasure that will atone for such wretchedness as this! Let me never see either one or the other again!”

Yet the misery, for which years of happiness were to offer no compensation, received soon afterwards material relief, from observing how much the beauty of her sister rekindled the admiration of her former lover. When first he came in, he had spoken to her but little, but every five minutes seemed to be giving her more of his attention. He found her as handsome as she had been last year; as good-natured, and as unaffected, though not quite so chatty. Jane was anxious that no difference should be perceived in her at all, and was really persuaded that she talked as much as ever; but her mind was so busily engaged, that she did not always know when she was silent. When the gentlemen rose to go away, Mrs. Bennet was mindful of her intended civility, and they were invited and engaged to dine at Longbourn in a few days’ time. “You are quite a visit in my debt, Mr. Bingley,” she added; “for when you went to town last winter, you promised to take a family dinner with us as soon as you returned. I have not forgot, you see; and I assure you I was very much disappointed that you did not come back and keep your engagement.”

Mrs. Bennet had been strongly inclined to ask them to stay and dine there that day; but, though she always kept a very good table, she did not think anything less than two courses could be good enough for a man on whom she had such anxious designs, or satisfy the appetite and pride of one who had ten thousand a year. As soon as they were gone, Elizabeth walked out to recover her spirits; or, in other words, to dwell without interruption on those subjects which must deaden them more. Mr. Darcy’s behaviour astonished and vexed her. “He could be still amiable, still pleasing to my uncle and aunt, when he was in town; and why not to me? If he fears me, why come hither? If he no longer cares for me, why silent? Teasing, teasing man! I will think no more about him.” Her resolution was for a short time involuntarily kept by the approach of her sister, who joined her with a cheerful look which showed her better satisfied with their visitors than Elizabeth. “Now,” said she, “that this first meeting is over, I feel perfectly easy. I know my own strength, and I shall never be embarrassed again by his coming. I am glad he dines here on Tuesday. It will then be publicly seen, that on both sides we meet only as common and indifferent acquaintance.”

They did not see the gentlemen again till Tuesday; and Mrs. Bennet, in the meanwhile, was giving way to all the happy schemes which the good-humour and common politeness of Bingley, in half an hour’s visit, had revived. On Tuesday there was a large party assembled at Longbourn; and the two who were most anxiously expected, to the credit of their punctuality as sportsmen, were in very good time. When they repaired to the dining-room, Elizabeth eagerly watched to see whether Bingley would take the place which, in all their former parties, had belonged to him, by her sister. Her prudent mother, occupied by the same ideas, forbore to invite him to sit by herself. On entering the room, he seemed to hesitate; but Jane happened to look round, and happened to smile: it was decided. He placed himself by her. Elizabeth, with a triumphant sensation, looked towards his friend. He bore it with noble indifference; and she would have imagined that Bingley had received his sanction to be happy, had she not seen his eyes likewise turned towards Mr. Darcy, with an expression of half-laughing alarm.

His behaviour to her sister was such during dinnertime as showed an admiration of her, which, though more guarded than formerly, persuaded Elizabeth, that, if left wholly to himself, Jane’s happiness, and his own, would be speedily secured. Though she dared not depend upon the consequence, she yet received pleasure from observing his behaviour. It gave her all the animation that her spirits could boast; for she was in no cheerful humour. Mr. Darcy was almost as far from her as the table could divide them. He was on one side of her mother. She knew how little such a situation would give pleasure to either, or make either appear to advantage. She was not near enough to hear any of their discourse; but she could see how seldom they spoke to each other, and how formal and cold was their manner whenever they did. Her mother’s ungraciousness made the sense of what they owed him more painful to Elizabeth’s mind; and she would, at times, have given anything to be privileged to tell him, that his kindness was neither unknown nor unfelt by the whole of the family.

She was in hopes that the evening would afford some opportunity of bringing them together; that the whole of the visit would not pass away without enabling them to enter into something more of conversation, than the mere ceremonious salutation attending his entrance. Anxious and uneasy, the period which passed in the drawing-room before the gentlemen came, was wearisome and dull to a degree that almost made her uncivil. She looked forward to their entrance as the point on which all her chance of pleasure for the evening must depend. The gentlemen came; and she thought he looked as if he would have answered her hopes; but, alas! the ladies had crowded round the table, where Miss Bennet was making tea, and Elizabeth pouring out the coffee, in so close a confederacy, that there was not a single vacancy near her which would admit of a chair. And on the gentlemen’s approaching, one of the girls moved closer to her than ever, and said, in a whisper,-- Darcy had walked away to another part of the room. She followed him with her eyes, envied everyone to whom he spoke, had scarcely patience enough to help anybody to coffee, and then was enraged against herself for being so silly!

“A man who has once been refused! How could I ever be foolish enough to expect a renewal of his love? Is there one among the sex who would not protest against such a weakness as a second proposal to the same woman? There is no indignity so abhorrent to their feelings.” She could think of nothing more to say; but if he wished to converse with her, he might have better success. He stood by her, however, for some minutes, in silence; and, at last, on the young lady’s whispering to Elizabeth again, he walked away. When the tea things were removed, and the card tables placed, the ladies all rose; and Elizabeth was then hoping to be soon joined by him, when all her views were overthrown, by seeing him fall a victim to her mother’s rapacity for whist players, and in a few moments after seated with the rest of the party. She now lost every expectation of pleasure. They were confined for the evening at different tables; and she had nothing to hope, but that his eyes were so often turned towards her side of the room, as to make him play as unsuccessfully as herself.

Mrs. Bennet had designed to keep the two Netherfield gentlemen to supper; but their carriage was, unluckily, ordered before any of the others, and she had no opportunity of detaining them. “Well, girls,” said she, as soon as they were left to themselves, “what say you to the day? I think everything has passed off uncommonly well, I assure you. The dinner was as well dressed as any I ever saw. The venison was roasted to a turn--and everybody said, they never saw so fat a haunch. The soup was fifty times better than what we had at the Lucases’ last week; and even Mr. Darcy acknowledged that the partridges were remarkably well done; and I suppose he has two or three French cooks at least. And, my dear Jane, I never saw you look in greater beauty. Mrs. Long said so too, for I asked her whether you did not. And what do you think she said besides? ‘Ah! Mrs. Bennet, we shall have her at Netherfield at last!’ She did, indeed. I do think Mrs. Long is as good a creature as ever lived--and her nieces are very pretty behaved girls, and not at all handsome: I like them prodigiously.”

Mrs. Bennet, in short, was in very great spirits: she had seen enough of Bingley’s behaviour to Jane to be convinced that she would get him at last; and her expectations of advantage to her family, when in a happy humour, were so far beyond reason, that she was quite disappointed at not seeing him there again the next day, to make his proposals. “It has been a very agreeable day,” said Miss Bennet to Elizabeth. “The party seemed so well selected, so suitable one with the other. I hope we may often meet again.” “Lizzy, you must not do so. You must not suspect me. It mortifies me. I assure you that I have now learnt to enjoy his conversation as an agreeable and sensible young man without having a wish beyond it. I am perfectly satisfied, from what his manners now are, that he never had any design of engaging my affection. It is only that he is blessed with greater sweetness of address, and a stronger desire of generally pleasing, than any other man.” “How hard it is in some cases to be believed! And how impossible in others! But why should you wish to persuade me that I feel more than I acknowledge?”

“That is a question which I hardly know how to answer. We all love to instruct, though we can teach only what is not worth knowing. Forgive me; and if you persist in indifference, do not make _me_ your confidante.” A few days after this visit, Mr. Bingley called again, and alone. His friend had left him that morning for London, but was to return home in ten days’ time. He sat with them above an hour, and was in remarkably good spirits. Mrs. Bennet invited him to dine with them; but, with many expressions of concern, he confessed himself engaged elsewhere. He came, and in such very good time, that the ladies were none of them dressed. In ran Mrs. Bennet to her daughters’ room, in her dressing-gown, and with her hair half finished, crying out,-- “My dear Jane, make haste and hurry down. He is come--Mr. Bingley is come. He is, indeed. Make haste, make haste. Here, Sarah, come to Miss Bennet this moment, and help her on with her gown. Never mind Miss Lizzy’s hair.” The same anxiety to get them by themselves was visible again in the evening. After tea, Mr. Bennet retired to the library, as was his custom, and Mary went upstairs to her instrument. Two obstacles of the five being thus removed, Mrs. Bennet sat looking and winking at Elizabeth and Catherine for a considerable time, without making any impression on them. Elizabeth would not observe her; and when at last Kitty did, she very innocently said, “What is the matter, mamma? What do you keep winking at me for? What am I to do?”

“Nothing, child, nothing. I did not wink at you.” She then sat still five minutes longer; but unable to waste such a precious occasion, she suddenly got up, and saying to Kitty,-- “Come here, my love, I want to speak to you,” took her out of the room. Jane instantly gave a look at Elizabeth which spoke her distress at such premeditation, and her entreaty that _she_ would not give in to it. In a few minutes, Mrs. Bennet half opened the door and called out,-- “We may as well leave them by themselves, you know,” said her mother as soon as she was in the hall. “Kitty and I are going upstairs to sit in my dressing-room.” Elizabeth made no attempt to reason with her mother, but remained quietly in the hall till she and Kitty were out of sight, then returned into the drawing-room. Mrs. Bennet’s schemes for this day were ineffectual. Bingley was everything that was charming, except the professed lover of her daughter. His ease and cheerfulness rendered him a most agreeable addition to their evening party; and he bore with the ill-judged officiousness of the mother, and heard all her silly remarks with a forbearance and command of countenance particularly grateful to the daughter.

He scarcely needed an invitation to stay supper; and before he went away an engagement was formed, chiefly through his own and Mrs. Bennet’s means, for his coming next morning to shoot with her husband. After this day, Jane said no more of her indifference. Not a word passed between the sisters concerning Bingley; but Elizabeth went to bed in the happy belief that all must speedily be concluded, unless Mr. Darcy returned within the stated time. Seriously, however, she felt tolerably persuaded that all this must have taken place with that gentleman’s concurrence. Bingley was punctual to his appointment; and he and Mr. Bennet spent the morning together, as had been agreed on. The latter was much more agreeable than his companion expected. There was nothing of presumption or folly in Bingley that could provoke his ridicule, or disgust him into silence; and he was more communicative, and less eccentric, than the other had ever seen him. Bingley of course returned with him to dinner; and in the evening Mrs. Bennet’s invention was again at work to get everybody away from him and her daughter. Elizabeth, who had a letter to write, went into the breakfast-room for that purpose soon after tea; for as the others were all going to sit down to cards, she could not be wanted to counteract her mother’s schemes.

But on her returning to the drawing-room, when her letter was finished, she saw, to her infinite surprise, there was reason to fear that her mother had been too ingenious for her. On opening the door, she perceived her sister and Bingley standing together over the hearth, as if engaged in earnest conversation; and had this led to no suspicion, the faces of both, as they hastily turned round and moved away from each other, would have told it all. _Their_ situation was awkward enough; but _hers_ she thought was still worse. Not a syllable was uttered by either; and Elizabeth was on the point of going away again, when Bingley, who as well as the other had sat down, suddenly rose, and, whispering a few words to her sister, ran out of the room. Jane could have no reserves from Elizabeth, where confidence would give pleasure; and, instantly embracing her, acknowledged, with the liveliest emotion, that she was the happiest creature in the world. Elizabeth’s congratulations were given with a sincerity, a warmth, a delight, which words could but poorly express. Every sentence of kindness was a fresh source of happiness to Jane. But she would not allow herself to stay with her sister, or say half that remained to be said, for the present.

“I must go instantly to my mother,” she cried. “I would not on any account trifle with her affectionate solicitude, or allow her to hear it from anyone but myself. He is gone to my father already. Oh, Lizzy, to know that what I have to relate will give such pleasure to all my dear family! how shall I bear so much happiness?” Elizabeth, who was left by herself, now smiled at the rapidity and ease with which an affair was finally settled, that had given them so many previous months of suspense and vexation. “And this,” said she, “is the end of all his friend’s anxious circumspection! of all his sister’s falsehood and contrivance! the happiest, wisest, and most reasonable end!” He then shut the door, and, coming up to her, claimed the good wishes and affection of a sister. Elizabeth honestly and heartily expressed her delight in the prospect of their relationship. They shook hands with great cordiality; and then, till her sister came down, she had to listen to all he had to say of his own happiness, and of Jane’s perfections; and in spite of his being a lover, Elizabeth really believed all his expectations of felicity to be rationally founded, because they had for basis the excellent understanding and super-excellent disposition of Jane, and a general similarity of feeling and taste between her and himself.

It was an evening of no common delight to them all; the satisfaction of Miss Bennet’s mind gave such a glow of sweet animation to her face, as made her look handsomer than ever. Kitty simpered and smiled, and hoped her turn was coming soon. Mrs. Bennet could not give her consent, or speak her approbation in terms warm enough to satisfy her feelings, though she talked to Bingley of nothing else, for half an hour; and when Mr. Bennet joined them at supper, his voice and manner plainly showed how really happy he was. Not a word, however, passed his lips in allusion to it, till their visitor took his leave for the night; but as soon as he was gone, he turned to his daughter and said,-- “You are a good girl,” he replied, “and I have great pleasure in thinking you will be so happily settled. I have not a doubt of your doing very well together. Your tempers are by no means unlike. You are each of you so complying, that nothing will ever be resolved on; so easy, that every servant will cheat you; and so generous, that you will always exceed your income.”

“Exceed their income! My dear Mr. Bennet,” cried his wife, “what are you talking of? Why, he has four or five thousand a year, and very likely more.” Then addressing her daughter, “Oh, my dear, dear Jane, I am so happy! I am sure I shan’t get a wink of sleep all night. I knew how it would be. I always said it must be so, at last. I was sure you could not be so beautiful for nothing! I remember, as soon as ever I saw him, when he first came into Hertfordshire last year, I thought how likely it was that you should come together. Oh, he is the handsomest young man that ever was seen!” Wickham, Lydia, were all forgotten. Jane was beyond competition her favourite child. At that moment she cared for no other. Her younger sisters soon began to make interest with her for objects of happiness which she might in future be able to dispense. Bingley, from this time, was of course a daily visitor at Longbourn; coming frequently before breakfast, and always remaining till after supper; unless when some barbarous neighbour, who could not be enough detested, had given him an invitation to dinner, which he thought himself obliged to accept.

Elizabeth had now but little time for conversation with her sister; for while he was present Jane had no attention to bestow on anyone else: but she found herself considerably useful to both of them, in those hours of separation that must sometimes occur. In the absence of Jane, he always attached himself to Elizabeth for the pleasure of talking of her; and when Bingley was gone, Jane constantly sought the same means of relief. “He has made me so happy,” said she, one evening, “by telling me that he was totally ignorant of my being in town last spring! I had not believed it possible.” “It must have been his sisters’ doing. They were certainly no friends to his acquaintance with me, which I cannot wonder at, since he might have chosen so much more advantageously in many respects. But when they see, as I trust they will, that their brother is happy with me, they will learn to be contented, and we shall be on good terms again: though we can never be what we once were to each other.”

“That is the most unforgiving speech,” said Elizabeth, “that I ever heard you utter. Good girl! It would vex me, indeed, to see you again the dupe of Miss Bingley’s pretended regard.” “Would you believe it, Lizzy, that when he went to town last November he really loved me, and nothing but a persuasion of _my_ being indifferent would have prevented his coming down again?” Elizabeth was pleased to find that he had not betrayed the interference of his friend; for, though Jane had the most generous and forgiving heart in the world, she knew it was a circumstance which must prejudice her against him. “I am certainly the most fortunate creature that ever existed!” cried Jane. “Oh, Lizzy, why am I thus singled from my family, and blessed above them all? If I could but see you as happy! If there were but such another man for you!” “If you were to give me forty such men I never could be so happy as you. Till I have your disposition, your goodness, I never can have your happiness. No, no, let me shift for myself; and, perhaps, if I have very good luck, I may meet with another Mr. Collins in time.”

The situation of affairs in the Longbourn family could not be long a secret. Mrs. Bennet was privileged to whisper it to Mrs. Philips, and she ventured, without any permission, to do the same by all her neighbours in Meryton. The Bennets were speedily pronounced to be the luckiest family in the world; though only a few weeks before, when Lydia had first run away, they had been generally proved to be marked out for misfortune. One morning, about a week after Bingley’s engagement with Jane had been formed, as he and the females of the family were sitting together in the dining-room, their attention was suddenly drawn to the window by the sound of a carriage; and they perceived a chaise and four driving up the lawn. It was too early in the morning for visitors; and besides, the equipage did not answer to that of any of their neighbours. The horses were post; and neither the carriage, nor the livery of the servant who preceded it, were familiar to them. As it was certain, however, that somebody was coming, Bingley instantly prevailed on Miss Bennet to avoid the confinement of such an intrusion, and walk away with him into the shrubbery. They both set off; and the conjectures of the remaining three continued, though with little satisfaction, till the door was thrown open, and their visitor entered. It was Lady Catherine de Bourgh.

They were of course all intending to be surprised: but their astonishment was beyond their expectation; and on the part of Mrs. Bennet and Kitty, though she was perfectly unknown to them, even inferior to what Elizabeth felt. She entered the room with an air more than usually ungracious, made no other reply to Elizabeth’s salutation than a slight inclination of the head, and sat down without saying a word. Elizabeth had mentioned her name to her mother on her Ladyship’s entrance, though no request of introduction had been made. Mrs. Bennet, all amazement, though flattered by having a guest of such high importance, received her with the utmost politeness. After sitting for a moment in silence, she said, very stiffly, to Elizabeth,-- “Yes, madam,” said Mrs. Bennet, delighted to speak to a Lady Catherine. “She is my youngest girl but one. My youngest of all is lately married, and my eldest is somewhere about the ground, walking with a young man, who, I believe, will soon become a part of the family.” Elizabeth now expected that she would produce a letter for her from Charlotte, as it seemed the only probable motive for her calling. But no letter appeared, and she was completely puzzled.

Mrs. Bennet, with great civility, begged her Ladyship to take some refreshment: but Lady Catherine very resolutely, and not very politely, declined eating anything; and then, rising up, said to Elizabeth,-- “Miss Bennet, there seemed to be a prettyish kind of a little wilderness on one side of your lawn. I should be glad to take a turn in it, if you will favour me with your company.” Elizabeth obeyed; and, running into her own room for her parasol, attended her noble guest downstairs. As they passed through the hall, Lady Catherine opened the doors into the dining-parlour and drawing-room, and pronouncing them, after a short survey, to be decent-looking rooms, walked on. Her carriage remained at the door, and Elizabeth saw that her waiting-woman was in it. They proceeded in silence along the gravel walk that led to the copse; Elizabeth was determined to make no effort for conversation with a woman who was now more than usually insolent and disagreeable. “Miss Bennet,” replied her Ladyship, in an angry tone, “you ought to know that I am not to be trifled with. But however insincere _you_ may choose to be, you shall not find _me_ so. My character has ever been celebrated for its sincerity and frankness; and in a cause of such moment as this, I shall certainly not depart from it. A report of a most alarming nature reached me two days ago. I was told, that not only your sister was on the point of being most advantageously married, but that _you_--that Miss Elizabeth Bennet would, in all likelihood, be soon afterwards united to my nephew--my own nephew, Mr. Darcy. Though I _know_ it must be a scandalous falsehood, though I would not injure him so much as to suppose the truth of it possible, I instantly resolved on setting off for this place, that I might make my sentiments known to you.”

“If you believed it impossible to be true,” said Elizabeth, colouring with astonishment and disdain, “I wonder you took the trouble of coming so far. What could your Ladyship propose by it?” “Your coming to Longbourn, to see me and my family,” said Elizabeth coolly, “will be rather a confirmation of it--if, indeed, such a report is in existence.” “If! do you then pretend to be ignorant of it? Has it not been industriously circulated by yourselves? Do you not know that such a report is spread abroad?” “It ought to be so; it must be so, while he retains the use of his reason. But _your_ arts and allurements may, in a moment of infatuation, have made him forget what he owes to himself and to all his family. You may have drawn him in.” “Miss Bennet, do you know who I am? I have not been accustomed to such language as this. I am almost the nearest relation he has in the world, and am entitled to know all his dearest concerns.” “Let me be rightly understood. This match, to which you have the presumption to aspire, can never take place. No, never. Mr. Darcy is engaged to _my daughter_. Now, what have you to say?”

“The engagement between them is of a peculiar kind. From their infancy, they have been intended for each other. It was the favourite wish of _his_ mother, as well as of hers. While in their cradles we planned the union; and now, at the moment when the wishes of both sisters would be accomplished, is their marriage to be prevented by a young woman of inferior birth, of no importance in the world, and wholly unallied to the family? Do you pay no regard to the wishes of his friends--to his tacit engagement with Miss de Bourgh? Are you lost to every feeling of propriety and delicacy? Have you not heard me say, that from his earliest hours he was destined for his cousin?” “Yes; and I had heard it before. But what is that to me? If there is no other objection to my marrying your nephew, I shall certainly not be kept from it by knowing that his mother and aunt wished him to marry Miss de Bourgh. You both did as much as you could in planning the marriage. Its completion depended on others. If Mr. Darcy is neither by honour nor inclination confined to his cousin, why is not he to make another choice? And if I am that choice, why may not I accept him?”

“Because honour, decorum, prudence--nay, interest--forbid it. Yes, Miss Bennet, interest; for do not expect to be noticed by his family or friends, if you wilfully act against the inclinations of all. You will be censured, slighted, and despised, by everyone connected with him. Your alliance will be a disgrace; your name will never even be mentioned by any of us.” “These are heavy misfortunes,” replied Elizabeth. “But the wife of Mr. Darcy must have such extraordinary sources of happiness necessarily attached to her situation, that she could, upon the whole, have no cause to repine.” “Obstinate, headstrong girl! I am ashamed of you! Is this your gratitude for my attentions to you last spring? Is nothing due to me on that score? Let us sit down. You are to understand, Miss Bennet, that I came here with the determined resolution of carrying my purpose; nor will I be dissuaded from it. I have not been used to submit to any person’s whims. I have not been in the habit of brooking disappointment.” “I will not be interrupted! Hear me in silence. My daughter and my nephew are formed for each other. They are descended, on the maternal side, from the same noble line; and, on the father’s, from respectable, honourable, and ancient, though untitled, families. Their fortune on both sides is splendid. They are destined for each other by the voice of every member of their respective houses; and what is to divide them?--the upstart pretensions of a young woman without family, connections, or fortune! Is this to be endured? But it must not, shall not be! If you were sensible of your own good, you would not wish to quit the sphere in which you have been brought up.”

Though Elizabeth would not, for the mere purpose of obliging Lady Catherine, have answered this question, she could not but say, after a moment’s deliberation,-- “Miss Bennet, I am shocked and astonished. I expected to find a more reasonable young woman. But do not deceive yourself into a belief that I will ever recede. I shall not go away till you have given me the assurance I require.” “And I certainly _never_ shall give it. I am not to be intimidated into anything so wholly unreasonable. Your Ladyship wants Mr. Darcy to marry your daughter; but would my giving you the wished-for promise make _their_ marriage at all more probable? Supposing him to be attached to me, would _my_ refusing to accept his hand make him wish to bestow it on his cousin? Allow me to say, Lady Catherine, that the arguments with which you have supported this extraordinary application have been as frivolous as the application was ill-judged. You have widely mistaken my character, if you think I can be worked on by such persuasions as these. How far your nephew might approve of your interference in _his_ affairs, I cannot tell; but you have certainly no right to concern yourself in mine. I must beg, therefore, to be importuned no further on the subject.”

“Not so hasty, if you please. I have by no means done. To all the objections I have already urged I have still another to add. I am no stranger to the particulars of your youngest sister’s infamous elopement. I know it all; that the young man’s marrying her was a patched-up business, at the expense of your father and uncle. And is _such_ a girl to be my nephew’s sister? Is _her_ husband, who is the son of his late father’s steward, to be his brother? Heaven and earth!--of what are you thinking? Are the shades of Pemberley to be thus polluted?” “You can _now_ have nothing further to say,” she resentfully answered. “You have insulted me, in every possible method. I must beg to return to the house.” “You have no regard, then, for the honour and credit of my nephew! Unfeeling, selfish girl! Do you not consider that a connection with you must disgrace him in the eyes of everybody?” “I have said no such thing. I am only resolved to act in that manner, which will, in my own opinion, constitute my happiness, without reference to _you_, or to any person so wholly unconnected with me.”

“It is well. You refuse, then, to oblige me. You refuse to obey the claims of duty, honour, and gratitude. You are determined to ruin him in the opinion of all his friends, and make him the contempt of the world.” “Neither duty, nor honour, nor gratitude,” replied Elizabeth, “has any possible claim on me, in the present instance. No principle of either would be violated by my marriage with Mr. Darcy. And with regard to the resentment of his family, or the indignation of the world, if the former _were_ excited by his marrying me, it would not give me one moment’s concern--and the world in general would have too much sense to join in the scorn.” “And this is your real opinion! This is your final resolve! Very well. I shall now know how to act. Do not imagine, Miss Bennet, that your ambition will ever be gratified. I came to try you. I hoped to find you reasonable; but depend upon it I will carry my point.” Elizabeth made no answer; and without attempting to persuade her Ladyship to return into the house, walked quietly into it herself. She heard the carriage drive away as she proceeded upstairs. Her mother impatiently met her at the door of her dressing-room, to ask why Lady Catherine would not come in again and rest herself.

“She is a very fine-looking woman! and her calling here was prodigiously civil! for she only came, I suppose, to tell us the Collinses were well. She is on her road somewhere, I dare say; and so, passing through Meryton, thought she might as well call on you. I suppose she had nothing particular to say to you, Lizzy?” The discomposure of spirits which this extraordinary visit threw Elizabeth into could not be easily overcome; nor could she for many hours learn to think of it less than incessantly. Lady Catherine, it appeared, had actually taken the trouble of this journey from Rosings for the sole purpose of breaking off her supposed engagement with Mr. Darcy. It was a rational scheme, to be sure! but from what the report of their engagement could originate, Elizabeth was at a loss to imagine; till she recollected that _his_ being the intimate friend of Bingley, and _her_ being the sister of Jane, was enough, at a time when the expectation of one wedding made everybody eager for another, to supply the idea. She had not herself forgotten to feel that the marriage of her sister must bring them more frequently together. And her neighbours at Lucas Lodge, therefore, (for through their communication with the Collinses, the report, she concluded, had reached Lady Catherine,) had only set _that_ down as almost certain and immediate which _she_ had looked forward to as possible at some future time.

In revolving Lady Catherine’s expressions, however, she could not help feeling some uneasiness as to the possible consequence of her persisting in this interference. From what she had said of her resolution to prevent the marriage, it occurred to Elizabeth that she must meditate an application to her nephew; and how he might take a similar representation of the evils attached to a connection with her she dared not pronounce. She knew not the exact degree of his affection for his aunt, or his dependence on her judgment, but it was natural to suppose that he thought much higher of her Ladyship than _she_ could do; and it was certain, that in enumerating the miseries of a marriage with _one_ whose immediate connections were so unequal to his own, his aunt would address him on his weakest side. With his notions of dignity, he would probably feel that the arguments, which to Elizabeth had appeared weak and ridiculous, contained much good sense and solid reasoning. If he had been wavering before, as to what he should do, which had often seemed likely, the advice and entreaty of so near a relation might settle every doubt, and determine him at once to be as happy as dignity unblemished could make him. In that case he would return no more. Lady Catherine might see him in her way through town; and his engagement to Bingley of coming again to Netherfield must give way.

“If, therefore, an excuse for not keeping his promise should come to his friend within a few days,” she added, “I shall know how to understand it. I shall then give over every expectation, every wish of his constancy. If he is satisfied with only regretting me, when he might have obtained my affections and hand, I shall soon cease to regret him at all.” The surprise of the rest of the family, on hearing who their visitor had been, was very great: but they obligingly satisfied it with the same kind of supposition which had appeased Mrs. Bennet’s curiosity; and Elizabeth was spared from much teasing on the subject. She followed him thither; and her curiosity to know what he had to tell her was heightened by the supposition of its being in some manner connected with the letter he held. It suddenly struck her that it might be from Lady Catherine, and she anticipated with dismay all the consequent explanations. “I have received a letter this morning that has astonished me exceedingly. As it principally concerns yourself, you ought to know its contents. I did not know before that I had _two_ daughters on the brink of matrimony. Let me congratulate you on a very important conquest.”

The colour now rushed into Elizabeth’s cheeks in the instantaneous conviction of its being a letter from the nephew, instead of the aunt; and she was undetermined whether most to be pleased that he explained himself at all, or offended that his letter was not rather addressed to herself, when her father continued,-- “You look conscious. Young ladies have great penetration in such matters as these; but I think I may defy even _your_ sagacity to discover the name of your admirer. This letter is from Mr. Collins.” “Something very much to the purpose, of course. He begins with congratulations on the approaching nuptials of my eldest daughter, of which, it seems, he has been told by some of the good-natured, gossiping Lucases. I shall not sport with your impatience by reading what he says on that point. What relates to yourself is as follows:--‘Having thus offered you the sincere congratulations of Mrs. Collins and myself on this happy event, let me now add a short hint on the subject of another, of which we have been advertised by the same authority. Your daughter Elizabeth, it is presumed, will not long bear the name of Bennet, after her eldest sister has resigned it; and the chosen partner of her fate may be reasonably looked up to as one of the most illustrious personages in this land.’ Can you possibly guess, Lizzy, who is meant by this? ‘This young gentleman is blessed, in a peculiar way, with everything the heart of mortal can most desire,--splendid property, noble kindred, and extensive patronage. Yet, in spite of all these temptations, let me warn my cousin Elizabeth, and yourself, of what evils you may incur by a precipitate closure with this gentleman’s proposals, which, of course, you will be inclined to take immediate advantage of.’ Have you any idea, Lizzy, who this gentleman is? But now it comes out. ‘My motive for cautioning you is as follows:--We have reason to imagine that his aunt, Lady Catherine de Bourgh, does not look on the match with a friendly eye.’ _Mr. Darcy_, you see, is the man! Now, Lizzy, I think I _have_ surprised you. Could he, or the Lucases, have pitched on any man, within the circle of our acquaintance, whose name would have given the lie more effectually to what they related? Mr. Darcy, who never looks at any woman but to see a blemish, and who probably never looked at _you_ in his life! It is admirable!”

Elizabeth tried to join in her father’s pleasantry, but could only force one most reluctant smile. Never had his wit been directed in a manner so little agreeable to her. “‘After mentioning the likelihood of this marriage to her Ladyship last night, she immediately, with her usual condescension, expressed what she felt on the occasion; when it became apparent, that, on the score of some family objections on the part of my cousin, she would never give her consent to what she termed so disgraceful a match. I thought it my duty to give the speediest intelligence of this to my cousin, that she and her noble admirer may be aware of what they are about, and not run hastily into a marriage which has not been properly sanctioned.’ Mr. Collins, moreover, adds, ‘I am truly rejoiced that my cousin Lydia’s sad business has been so well hushed up, and am only concerned that their living together before the marriage took place should be so generally known. I must not, however, neglect the duties of my station, or refrain from declaring my amazement, at hearing that you received the young couple into your house as soon as they were married. It was an encouragement of vice; and had I been the rector of Longbourn, I should very strenuously have opposed it. You ought certainly to forgive them as a Christian, but never to admit them in your sight, or allow their names to be mentioned in your hearing.’ _That_ is his notion of Christian forgiveness! The rest of his letter is only about his dear Charlotte’s situation, and his expectation of a young olive-branch. But, Lizzy, you look as if you did not enjoy it. You are not going to be _missish_, I hope, and pretend to be affronted at an idle report. For what do we live, but to make sport for our neighbours, and laugh at them in our turn?”

“Yes, _that_ is what makes it amusing. Had they fixed on any other man it would have been nothing; but _his_ perfect indifference and _your_ pointed dislike make it so delightfully absurd! Much as I abominate writing, I would not give up Mr. Collins’s correspondence for any consideration. Nay, when I read a letter of his, I cannot help giving him the preference even over Wickham, much as I value the impudence and hypocrisy of my son-in-law. And pray, Lizzy, what said Lady Catherine about this report? Did she call to refuse her consent?” To this question his daughter replied only with a laugh; and as it had been asked without the least suspicion, she was not distressed by his repeating it. Elizabeth had never been more at a loss to make her feelings appear what they were not. It was necessary to laugh when she would rather have cried. Her father had most cruelly mortified her by what he said of Mr. Darcy’s indifference; and she could do nothing but wonder at such a want of penetration, or fear that, perhaps, instead of his seeing too _little_, she might have fancied too _much_.

Instead of receiving any such letter of excuse from his friend, as Elizabeth half expected Mr. Bingley to do, he was able to bring Darcy with him to Longbourn before many days had passed after Lady Catherine’s visit. The gentlemen arrived early; and, before Mrs. Bennet had time to tell him of their having seen his aunt, of which her daughter sat in momentary dread, Bingley, who wanted to be alone with Jane, proposed their all walking out. It was agreed to. Mrs. Bennet was not in the habit of walking, Mary could never spare time, but the remaining five set off together. Bingley and Jane, however, soon allowed the others to outstrip them. They lagged behind, while Elizabeth, Kitty, and Darcy were to entertain each other. Very little was said by either; Kitty was too much afraid of him to talk; Elizabeth was secretly forming a desperate resolution; and, perhaps, he might be doing the same. They walked towards the Lucases’, because Kitty wished to call upon Maria; and as Elizabeth saw no occasion for making it a general concern, when Kitty left them she went boldly on with him alone. Now was the moment for her resolution to be executed; and while her courage was high, she immediately said,--

“Mr. Darcy, I am a very selfish creature, and for the sake of giving relief to my own feelings care not how much I may be wounding yours. I can no longer help thanking you for your unexampled kindness to my poor sister. Ever since I have known it I have been most anxious to acknowledge to you how gratefully I feel it. Were it known to the rest of my family I should not have merely my own gratitude to express.” “I am sorry, exceedingly sorry,” replied Darcy, in a tone of surprise and emotion, “that you have ever been informed of what may, in a mistaken light, have given you uneasiness. I did not think Mrs. Gardiner was so little to be trusted.” “You must not blame my aunt. Lydia’s thoughtlessness first betrayed to me that you had been concerned in the matter; and, of course, I could not rest till I knew the particulars. Let me thank you again and again, in the name of all my family, for that generous compassion which induced you to take so much trouble, and bear so many mortifications, for the sake of discovering them.”

“If you _will_ thank me,” he replied, “let it be for yourself alone. That the wish of giving happiness to you might add force to the other inducements which led me on, I shall not attempt to deny. But your _family_ owe me nothing. Much as I respect them, I believe I thought only of _you_.” Elizabeth was too much embarrassed to say a word. After a short pause, her companion added, “You are too generous to trifle with me. If your feelings are still what they were last April, tell me so at once. _My_ affections and wishes are unchanged; but one word from you will silence me on this subject for ever.” Elizabeth, feeling all the more than common awkwardness and anxiety of his situation, now forced herself to speak; and immediately, though not very fluently, gave him to understand that her sentiments had undergone so material a change since the period to which he alluded, as to make her receive with gratitude and pleasure his present assurances. The happiness which this reply produced was such as he had probably never felt before; and he expressed himself on the occasion as sensibly and as warmly as a man violently in love can be supposed to do. Had Elizabeth been able to encounter his eyes, she might have seen how well the expression of heartfelt delight diffused over his face became him: but though she could not look she could listen; and he told her of feelings which, in proving of what importance she was to him, made his affection every moment more valuable.

They walked on without knowing in what direction. There was too much to be thought, and felt, and said, for attention to any other objects. She soon learnt that they were indebted for their present good understanding to the efforts of his aunt, who _did_ call on him in her return through London, and there relate her journey to Longbourn, its motive, and the substance of her conversation with Elizabeth; dwelling emphatically on every expression of the latter, which, in her Ladyship’s apprehension, peculiarly denoted her perverseness and assurance, in the belief that such a relation must assist her endeavours to obtain that promise from her nephew which _she_ had refused to give. But, unluckily for her Ladyship, its effect had been exactly contrariwise. “It taught me to hope,” said he, “as I had scarcely ever allowed myself to hope before. I knew enough of your disposition to be certain, that had you been absolutely, irrevocably decided against me, you would have acknowledged it to Lady Catherine frankly and openly.” Elizabeth coloured and laughed as she replied, “Yes, you know enough of my _frankness_ to believe me capable of _that_. After abusing you so abominably to your face, I could have no scruple in abusing you to all your relations.”

“What did you say of me that I did not deserve? For though your accusations were ill-founded, formed on mistaken premises, my behaviour to you at the time had merited the severest reproof. It was unpardonable. I cannot think of it without abhorrence.” “We will not quarrel for the greater share of blame annexed to that evening,” said Elizabeth. “The conduct of neither, if strictly examined, will be irreproachable; but since then we have both, I hope, improved in civility.” “I cannot be so easily reconciled to myself. The recollection of what I then said, of my conduct, my manners, my expressions during the whole of it, is now, and has been many months, inexpressibly painful to me. Your reproof, so well applied, I shall never forget: ‘Had you behaved in a more gentlemanlike manner.’ Those were your words. You know not, you can scarcely conceive, how they have tortured me; though it was some time, I confess, before I was reasonable enough to allow their justice.” “I can easily believe it. You thought me then devoid of every proper feeling, I am sure you did. The turn of your countenance I shall never forget, as you said that I could not have addressed you in any possible way that would induce you to accept me.”

“I knew,” said he, “that what I wrote must give you pain, but it was necessary. I hope you have destroyed the letter. There was one part, especially the opening of it, which I should dread your having the power of reading again. I can remember some expressions which might justly make you hate me.” “The letter shall certainly be burnt, if you believe it essential to the preservation of my regard; but, though we have both reason to think my opinions not entirely unalterable, they are not, I hope, quite so easily changed as that implies.” “When I wrote that letter,” replied Darcy, “I believed myself perfectly calm and cool; but I am since convinced that it was written in a dreadful bitterness of spirit.” “The letter, perhaps, began in bitterness, but it did not end so. The adieu is charity itself. But think no more of the letter. The feelings of the person who wrote and the person who received it are now so widely different from what they were then, that every unpleasant circumstance attending it ought to be forgotten. You must learn some of my philosophy. Think only of the past as its remembrance gives you pleasure.”

“I cannot give you credit for any philosophy of the kind. _Your_ retrospections must be so totally void of reproach, that the contentment arising from them is not of philosophy, but, what is much better, of ignorance. But with _me_, it is not so. Painful recollections will intrude, which cannot, which ought not to be repelled. I have been a selfish being all my life, in practice, though not in principle. As a child I was taught what was _right_, but I was not taught to correct my temper. I was given good principles, but left to follow them in pride and conceit. Unfortunately an only son (for many years an only _child_), I was spoiled by my parents, who, though good themselves, (my father particularly, all that was benevolent and amiable,) allowed, encouraged, almost taught me to be selfish and overbearing, to care for none beyond my own family circle, to think meanly of all the rest of the world, to _wish_ at least to think meanly of their sense and worth compared with my own. Such I was, from eight to eight-and-twenty; and such I might still have been but for you, dearest, loveliest Elizabeth! What do I not owe you! You taught me a lesson, hard indeed at first, but most advantageous. By you, I was properly humbled. I came to you without a doubt of my reception. You showed me how insufficient were all my pretensions to please a woman worthy of being pleased.”

“My manners must have been in fault, but not intentionally, I assure you. I never meant to deceive you, but my spirits might often lead me wrong. How you must have hated me after _that_ evening!” “Your surprise could not be greater than _mine_ in being noticed by you. My conscience told me that I deserved no extraordinary politeness, and I confess that I did not expect to receive _more_ than my due.” “My object _then_,” replied Darcy, “was to show you, by every civility in my power, that I was not so mean as to resent the past; and I hoped to obtain your forgiveness, to lessen your ill opinion, by letting you see that your reproofs had been attended to. How soon any other wishes introduced themselves, I can hardly tell, but I believe in about half an hour after I had seen you.” He then told her of Georgiana’s delight in her acquaintance, and of her disappointment at its sudden interruption; which naturally leading to the cause of that interruption, she soon learnt that his resolution of following her from Derbyshire in quest of her sister had been formed before he quitted the inn, and that his gravity and thoughtfulness there had arisen from no other struggles than what such a purpose must comprehend.

After walking several miles in a leisurely manner, and too busy to know anything about it, they found at last, on examining their watches, that it was time to be at home. “What could have become of Mr. Bingley and Jane?” was a wonder which introduced the discussion of _their_ affairs. Darcy was delighted with their engagement; his friend had given him the earliest information of it. “That is to say, you had given your permission. I guessed as much.” And though he exclaimed at the term, she found that it had been pretty much the case. “On the evening before my going to London,” said he, “I made a confession to him, which I believe I ought to have made long ago. I told him of all that had occurred to make my former interference in his affairs absurd and impertinent. His surprise was great. He had never had the slightest suspicion. I told him, moreover, that I believed myself mistaken in supposing, as I had done, that your sister was indifferent to him; and as I could easily perceive that his attachment to her was unabated, I felt no doubt of their happiness together.”

“It did. Bingley is most unaffectedly modest. His diffidence had prevented his depending on his own judgment in so anxious a case, but his reliance on mine made everything easy. I was obliged to confess one thing, which for a time, and not unjustly, offended him. I could not allow myself to conceal that your sister had been in town three months last winter, that I had known it, and purposely kept it from him. He was angry. But his anger, I am persuaded, lasted no longer than he remained in any doubt of your sister’s sentiments. He has heartily forgiven me now.” Elizabeth longed to observe that Mr. Bingley had been a most delightful friend; so easily guided that his worth was invaluable; but she checked herself. She remembered that he had yet to learn to be laughed at, and it was rather too early to begin. In anticipating the happiness of Bingley, which of course was to be inferior only to his own, he continued the conversation till they reached the house. In the hall they parted. “My dear Lizzy, where can you have been walking to?” was a question which Elizabeth received from Jane as soon as she entered the room, and from all the others when they sat down to table. She had only to say in reply, that they had wandered about till she was beyond her own knowledge. She coloured as she spoke; but neither that, nor anything else, awakened a suspicion of the truth.

The evening passed quietly, unmarked by anything extraordinary. The acknowledged lovers talked and laughed; the unacknowledged were silent. Darcy was not of a disposition in which happiness overflows in mirth; and Elizabeth, agitated and confused, rather _knew_ that she was happy than _felt_ herself to be so; for, besides the immediate embarrassment, there were other evils before her. She anticipated what would be felt in the family when her situation became known: she was aware that no one liked him but Jane; and even feared that with the others it was a _dislike_ which not all his fortune and consequence might do away. “This is a wretched beginning, indeed! My sole dependence was on you; and I am sure nobody else will believe me, if you do not. Yet, indeed, I am in earnest. I speak nothing but the truth. He still loves me, and we are engaged.” “You know nothing of the matter. _That_ is all to be forgot. Perhaps I did not always love him so well as I do now; but in such cases as these a good memory is unpardonable. This is the last time I shall ever remember it myself.”

“Good heaven! can it be really so? Yet now I must believe you,” cried Jane. “My dear, dear Lizzy, I would, I do congratulate you; but are you certain--forgive the question--are you quite certain that you can be happy with him?” “There can be no doubt of that. It is settled between us already that we are to be the happiest couple in the world. But are you pleased, Jane? Shall you like to have such a brother?” “Very, very much. Nothing could give either Bingley or myself more delight. But we considered it, we talked of it as impossible. And do you really love him quite well enough? Oh, Lizzy! do anything rather than marry without affection. Are you quite sure that you feel what you ought to do?” “My dearest sister, now be, _be_ serious. I want to talk very seriously. Let me know everything that I am to know without delay. Will you tell me how long you have loved him?” “It has been coming on so gradually, that I hardly know when it began; but I believe I must date it from my first seeing his beautiful grounds at Pemberley.”

Another entreaty that she would be serious, however, produced the desired effect; and she soon satisfied Jane by her solemn assurances of attachment. When convinced on that article, Miss Bennet had nothing further to wish. “Now I am quite happy,” said she, “for you will be as happy as myself. I always had a value for him. Were it for nothing but his love of you, I must always have esteemed him; but now, as Bingley’s friend and your husband, there can be only Bingley and yourself more dear to me. But, Lizzy, you have been very sly, very reserved with me. How little did you tell me of what passed at Pemberley and Lambton! I owe all that I know of it to another, not to you.” Elizabeth told her the motives of her secrecy. She had been unwilling to mention Bingley; and the unsettled state of her own feelings had made her equally avoid the name of his friend: but now she would no longer conceal from her his share in Lydia’s marriage. All was acknowledged, and half the night spent in conversation.

“Good gracious!” cried Mrs. Bennet, as she stood at a window the next morning, “if that disagreeable Mr. Darcy is not coming here again with our dear Bingley! What can he mean by being so tiresome as to be always coming here? I had no notion but he would go a-shooting, or something or other, and not disturb us with his company. What shall we do with him? Lizzy, you must walk out with him again, that he may not be in Bingley’s way.” As soon as they entered, Bingley looked at her so expressively, and shook hands with such warmth, as left no doubt of his good information; and he soon afterwards said aloud, “Mrs. Bennet, have you no more lanes hereabouts in which Lizzy may lose her way again to-day?” “I advise Mr. Darcy, and Lizzy, and Kitty,” said Mrs. Bennet, “to walk to Oakham Mount this morning. It is a nice long walk, and Mr. Darcy has never seen the view.” Kitty owned that she had rather stay at home. Darcy professed a great curiosity to see the view from the Mount, and Elizabeth silently consented. As she went upstairs to get ready, Mrs. Bennet followed her, saying,--

“I am quite sorry, Lizzy, that you should be forced to have that disagreeable man all to yourself; but I hope you will not mind it. It is all for Jane’s sake, you know; and there is no occasion for talking to him except just now and then; so do not put yourself to inconvenience.” During their walk, it was resolved that Mr. Bennet’s consent should be asked in the course of the evening: Elizabeth reserved to herself the application for her mother’s. She could not determine how her mother would take it; sometimes doubting whether all his wealth and grandeur would be enough to overcome her abhorrence of the man; but whether she were violently set against the match, or violently delighted with it, it was certain that her manner would be equally ill adapted to do credit to her sense; and she could no more bear that Mr. Darcy should hear the first raptures of her joy, than the first vehemence of her disapprobation. In the evening, soon after Mr. Bennet withdrew to the library, she saw Mr. Darcy rise also and follow him, and her agitation on seeing it was extreme. She did not fear her father’s opposition, but he was going to be made unhappy, and that it should be through her means; that _she_, his favourite child, should be distressing him by her choice, should be filling him with fears and regrets in disposing of her, was a wretched reflection, and she sat in misery till Mr. Darcy appeared again, when, looking at him, she was a little relieved by his smile. In a few minutes he approached the table where she was sitting with Kitty; and, while pretending to admire her work, said in a whisper, “Go to your father; he wants you in the library.” She was gone directly.

Her father was walking about the room, looking grave and anxious. “Lizzy,” said he, “what are you doing? Are you out of your senses to be accepting this man? Have not you always hated him?” How earnestly did she then wish that her former opinions had been more reasonable, her expressions more moderate! It would have spared her from explanations and professions which it was exceedingly awkward to give; but they were now necessary, and she assured him, with some confusion, of her attachment to Mr. Darcy. “Or, in other words, you are determined to have him. He is rich, to be sure, and you may have more fine clothes and fine carriages than Jane. But will they make you happy?” “I do, I do like him,” she replied, with tears in her eyes; “I love him. Indeed he has no improper pride. He is perfectly amiable. You do not know what he really is; then pray do not pain me by speaking of him in such terms.” “Lizzy,” said her father, “I have given him my consent. He is the kind of man, indeed, to whom I should never dare refuse anything, which he condescended to ask. I now give it to _you_, if you are resolved on having him. But let me advise you to think better of it. I know your disposition, Lizzy. I know that you could be neither happy nor respectable, unless you truly esteemed your husband, unless you looked up to him as a superior. Your lively talents would place you in the greatest danger in an unequal marriage. You could scarcely escape discredit and misery. My child, let me not have the grief of seeing _you_ unable to respect your partner in life. You know not what you are about.”

Elizabeth, still more affected, was earnest and solemn in her reply; and, at length, by repeated assurances that Mr. Darcy was really the object of her choice, by explaining the gradual change which her estimation of him had undergone, relating her absolute certainty that his affection was not the work of a day, but had stood the test of many months’ suspense, and enumerating with energy all his good qualities, she did conquer her father’s incredulity, and reconcile him to the match. “Well, my dear,” said he, when she ceased speaking, “I have no more to say. If this be the case, he deserves you. I could not have parted with you, my Lizzy, to anyone less worthy.” “This is an evening of wonders, indeed! And so, Darcy did everything; made up the match, gave the money, paid the fellow’s debts, and got him his commission! So much the better. It will save me a world of trouble and economy. Had it been your uncle’s doing, I must and _would_ have paid him; but these violent young lovers carry everything their own way. I shall offer to pay him to-morrow, he will rant and storm about his love for you, and there will be an end of the matter.”

He then recollected her embarrassment a few days before on his reading Mr. Collins’s letter; and after laughing at her some time, allowed her at last to go, saying, as she quitted the room, “If any young men come for Mary or Kitty, send them in, for I am quite at leisure.” Elizabeth’s mind was now relieved from a very heavy weight; and, after half an hour’s quiet reflection in her own room, she was able to join the others with tolerable composure. Everything was too recent for gaiety, but the evening passed tranquilly away; there was no longer anything material to be dreaded, and the comfort of ease and familiarity would come in time. When her mother went up to her dressing-room at night, she followed her, and made the important communication. Its effect was most extraordinary; for, on first hearing it, Mrs. Bennet sat quite still, and unable to utter a syllable. Nor was it under many, many minutes, that she could comprehend what she heard, though not in general backward to credit what was for the advantage of her family, or that came in the shape of a lover to any of them. She began at length to recover, to fidget about in her chair, get up, sit down again, wonder, and bless herself.

“Good gracious! Lord bless me! only think! dear me! Mr. Darcy! Who would have thought it? And is it really true? Oh, my sweetest Lizzy! how rich and how great you will be! What pin-money, what jewels, what carriages you will have! Jane’s is nothing to it--nothing at all. I am so pleased--so happy. Such a charming man! so handsome! so tall! Oh, my dear Lizzy! pray apologize for my having disliked him so much before. I hope he will overlook it. Dear, dear Lizzy. A house in town! Everything that is charming! Three daughters married! Ten thousand a year! Oh, Lord! what will become of me? I shall go distracted.” This was enough to prove that her approbation need not be doubted; and Elizabeth, rejoicing that such an effusion was heard only by herself, soon went away. But before she had been three minutes in her own room, her mother followed her. “My dearest child,” she cried, “I can think of nothing else. Ten thousand a year, and very likely more! ’Tis as good as a lord! And a special licence--you must and shall be married by a special licence. But, my dearest love, tell me what dish Mr. Darcy is particularly fond of, that I may have it to-morrow.”

This was a sad omen of what her mother’s behaviour to the gentleman himself might be; and Elizabeth found that, though in the certain possession of his warmest affection, and secure of her relations’ consent, there was still something to be wished for. But the morrow passed off much better than she expected; for Mrs. Bennet luckily stood in such awe of her intended son-in-law, that she ventured not to speak to him, unless it was in her power to offer him any attention, or mark her deference for his opinion. Elizabeth had the satisfaction of seeing her father taking pains to get acquainted with him; and Mr. Bennet soon assured her that he was rising every hour in his esteem. “I admire all my three sons-in-law highly,” said he. “Wickham, perhaps, is my favourite; but I think I shall like _your_ husband quite as well as Jane’s.” Elizabeth’s spirits soon rising to playfulness again, she wanted Mr. Darcy to account for his having ever fallen in love with her. “How could you begin?” said she. “I can comprehend your going on charmingly, when you had once made a beginning; but what could set you off in the first place?”

“I cannot fix on the hour, or the spot, or the look, or the words, which laid the foundation. It is too long ago. I was in the middle before I knew that I _had_ begun.” “My beauty you had early withstood, and as for my manners--my behaviour to _you_ was at least always bordering on the uncivil, and I never spoke to you without rather wishing to give you pain than not. Now, be sincere; did you admire me for my impertinence?” “You may as well call it impertinence at once. It was very little less. The fact is, that you were sick of civility, of deference, of officious attention. You were disgusted with the women who were always speaking, and looking, and thinking for _your_ approbation alone. I roused and interested you, because I was so unlike _them_. Had you not been really amiable you would have hated me for it: but in spite of the pains you took to disguise yourself, your feelings were always noble and just; and in your heart you thoroughly despised the persons who so assiduously courted you. There--I have saved you the trouble of accounting for it; and really, all things considered, I begin to think it perfectly reasonable. To be sure you know no actual good of me--but nobody thinks of _that_ when they fall in love.”

“Dearest Jane! who could have done less for her? But make a virtue of it by all means. My good qualities are under your protection, and you are to exaggerate them as much as possible; and, in return, it belongs to me to find occasions for teasing and quarrelling with you as often as may be; and I shall begin directly, by asking you what made you so unwilling to come to the point at last? What made you so shy of me, when you first called, and afterwards dined here? Why, especially, when you called, did you look as if you did not care about me?” “How unlucky that you should have a reasonable answer to give, and that I should be so reasonable as to admit it! But I wonder how long you _would_ have gone on, if you had been left to yourself. I wonder when you _would_ have spoken if I had not asked you! My resolution of thanking you for your kindness to Lydia had certainly great effect. _Too much_, I am afraid; for what becomes of the moral, if our comfort springs from a breach of promise, for I ought not to have mentioned the subject? This will never do.”

“You need not distress yourself. The moral will be perfectly fair. Lady Catherine’s unjustifiable endeavours to separate us were the means of removing all my doubts. I am not indebted for my present happiness to your eager desire of expressing your gratitude. I was not in a humour to wait for an opening of yours. My aunt’s intelligence had given me hope, and I was determined at once to know everything.” “Lady Catherine has been of infinite use, which ought to make her happy, for she loves to be of use. But tell me, what did you come down to Netherfield for? Was it merely to ride to Longbourn and be embarrassed? or had you intended any more serious consequences?” “My real purpose was to see _you_, and to judge, if I could, whether I might ever hope to make you love me. My avowed one, or what I avowed to myself, was to see whether your sister was still partial to Bingley, and if she were, to make the confession to him which I have since made.” “And if I had not a letter to write myself, I might sit by you, and admire the evenness of your writing, as another young lady once did. But I have an aunt, too, who must not be longer neglected.”

From an unwillingness to confess how much her intimacy with Mr. Darcy had been overrated, Elizabeth had never yet answered Mrs. Gardiner’s long letter; but now, having _that_ to communicate which she knew would be most welcome, she was almost ashamed to find that her uncle and aunt had already lost three days of happiness, and immediately wrote as follows:-- “I would have thanked you before, my dear aunt, as I ought to have done, for your long, kind, satisfactory detail of particulars; but, to say the truth, I was too cross to write. You supposed more than really existed. But _now_ suppose as much as you choose; give a loose to your fancy, indulge your imagination in every possible flight which the subject will afford, and unless you believe me actually married, you cannot greatly err. You must write again very soon, and praise him a great deal more than you did in your last. I thank you again and again, for not going to the Lakes. How could I be so silly as to wish it! Your idea of the ponies is delightful. We will go round the park every day. I am the happiest creature in the world. Perhaps other people have said so before, but no one with such justice. I am happier even than Jane; she only smiles, I laugh. Mr. Darcy sends you all the love in the world that can be spared from me. You are all to come to Pemberley at Christmas. Yours,” etc.

Mr. Darcy’s letter to Lady Catherine was in a different style, and still different from either was what Mr. Bennet sent to Mr. Collins, in return for his last. “I must trouble you once more for congratulations. Elizabeth will soon be the wife of Mr. Darcy. Console Lady Catherine as well as you can. But, if I were you, I would stand by the nephew. He has more to give. Miss Bingley’s congratulations to her brother on his approaching marriage were all that was affectionate and insincere. She wrote even to Jane on the occasion, to express her delight, and repeat all her former professions of regard. Jane was not deceived, but she was affected; and though feeling no reliance on her, could not help writing her a much kinder answer than she knew was deserved. The joy which Miss Darcy expressed on receiving similar information was as sincere as her brother’s in sending it. Four sides of paper were insufficient to contain all her delight, and all her earnest desire of being loved by her sister. Before any answer could arrive from Mr. Collins, or any congratulations to Elizabeth from his wife, the Longbourn family heard that the Collinses were come themselves to Lucas Lodge. The reason of this sudden removal was soon evident. Lady Catherine had been rendered so exceedingly angry by the contents of her nephew’s letter, that Charlotte, really rejoicing in the match, was anxious to get away till the storm was blown over. At such a moment, the arrival of her friend was a sincere pleasure to Elizabeth, though in the course of their meetings she must sometimes think the pleasure dearly bought, when she saw Mr. Darcy exposed to all the parading and obsequious civility of her husband. He bore it, however, with admirable calmness. He could even listen to Sir William Lucas, when he complimented him on carrying away the brightest jewel of the country, and expressed his hopes of their all meeting frequently at St. James’s, with very decent composure. If he did shrug his shoulders, it was not till Sir William was out of sight.

Mrs. Philips’s vulgarity was another, and, perhaps, a greater tax on his forbearance; and though Mrs. Philips, as well as her sister, stood in too much awe of him to speak with the familiarity which Bingley’s good-humour encouraged; yet, whenever she _did_ speak, she must be vulgar. Nor was her respect for him, though it made her more quiet, at all likely to make her more elegant. Elizabeth did all she could to shield him from the frequent notice of either, and was ever anxious to keep him to herself, and to those of her family with whom he might converse without mortification; and though the uncomfortable feelings arising from all this took from the season of courtship much of its pleasure, it added to the hope of the future; and she looked forward with delight to the time when they should be removed from society so little pleasing to either, to all the comfort and elegance of their family party at Pemberley. Happy for all her maternal feelings was the day on which Mrs. Bennet got rid of her two most deserving daughters. With what delighted pride she afterwards visited Mrs. Bingley, and talked of Mrs. Darcy, may be guessed. I wish I could say, for the sake of her family, that the accomplishment of her earnest desire in the establishment of so many of her children produced so happy an effect as to make her a sensible, amiable, well-informed woman for the rest of her life; though, perhaps, it was lucky for her husband, who might not have relished domestic felicity in so unusual a form, that she still was occasionally nervous and invariably silly.

Mr. Bennet missed his second daughter exceedingly; his affection for her drew him oftener from home than anything else could do. He delighted in going to Pemberley, especially when he was least expected. Mr. Bingley and Jane remained at Netherfield only a twelvemonth. So near a vicinity to her mother and Meryton relations was not desirable even to _his_ easy temper, or _her_ affectionate heart. The darling wish of his sisters was then gratified: he bought an estate in a neighbouring county to Derbyshire; and Jane and Elizabeth, in addition to every other source of happiness, were within thirty miles of each other. Kitty, to her very material advantage, spent the chief of her time with her two elder sisters. In society so superior to what she had generally known, her improvement was great. She was not of so ungovernable a temper as Lydia; and, removed from the influence of Lydia’s example, she became, by proper attention and management, less irritable, less ignorant, and less insipid. From the further disadvantage of Lydia’s society she was of course carefully kept; and though Mrs. Wickham frequently invited her to come and stay with her, with the promise of balls and young men, her father would never consent to her going.

Mary was the only daughter who remained at home; and she was necessarily drawn from the pursuit of accomplishments by Mrs. Bennet’s being quite unable to sit alone. Mary was obliged to mix more with the world, but she could still moralize over every morning visit; and as she was no longer mortified by comparisons between her sisters’ beauty and her own, it was suspected by her father that she submitted to the change without much reluctance. As for Wickham and Lydia, their characters suffered no revolution from the marriage of her sisters. He bore with philosophy the conviction that Elizabeth must now become acquainted with whatever of his ingratitude and falsehood had before been unknown to her; and, in spite of everything, was not wholly without hope that Darcy might yet be prevailed on to make his fortune. The congratulatory letter which Elizabeth received from Lydia on her marriage explained to her that, by his wife at least, if not by himself, such a hope was cherished. The letter was to this effect:-- “I wish you joy. If you love Mr. Darcy half so well as I do my dear Wickham, you must be very happy. It is a great comfort to have you so rich; and when you have nothing else to do, I hope you will think of us. I am sure Wickham would like a place at court very much; and I do not think we shall have quite money enough to live upon without some help. Any place would do of about three or four hundred a year; but, however, do not speak to Mr. Darcy about it, if you had rather not.

As it happened that Elizabeth had much rather not, she endeavoured in her answer to put an end to every entreaty and expectation of the kind. Such relief, however, as it was in her power to afford, by the practice of what might be called economy in her own private expenses, she frequently sent them. It had always been evident to her that such an income as theirs, under the direction of two persons so extravagant in their wants, and heedless of the future, must be very insufficient to their support; and whenever they changed their quarters, either Jane or herself were sure of being applied to for some little assistance towards discharging their bills. Their manner of living, even when the restoration of peace dismissed them to a home, was unsettled in the extreme. They were always moving from place to place in quest of a cheap situation, and always spending more than they ought. His affection for her soon sunk into indifference: hers lasted a little longer; and, in spite of her youth and her manners, she retained all the claims to reputation which her marriage had given her. Though Darcy could never receive _him_ at Pemberley, yet, for Elizabeth’s sake, he assisted him further in his profession. Lydia was occasionally a visitor there, when her husband was gone to enjoy himself in London or Bath; and with the Bingleys they both of them frequently stayed so long, that even Bingley’s good-humour was overcome, and he proceeded so far as to _talk_ of giving them a hint to be gone.

Miss Bingley was very deeply mortified by Darcy’s marriage; but as she thought it advisable to retain the right of visiting at Pemberley, she dropped all her resentment; was fonder than ever of Georgiana, almost as attentive to Darcy as heretofore, and paid off every arrear of civility to Elizabeth. Pemberley was now Georgiana’s home; and the attachment of the sisters was exactly what Darcy had hoped to see. They were able to love each other, even as well as they intended. Georgiana had the highest opinion in the world of Elizabeth; though at first she often listened with an astonishment bordering on alarm at her lively, sportive manner of talking to her brother. He, who had always inspired in herself a respect which almost overcame her affection, she now saw the object of open pleasantry. Her mind received knowledge which had never before fallen in her way. By Elizabeth’s instructions she began to comprehend that a woman may take liberties with her husband, which a brother will not always allow in a sister more than ten years younger than himself.

Lady Catherine was extremely indignant on the marriage of her nephew; and as she gave way to all the genuine frankness of her character, in her reply to the letter which announced its arrangement, she sent him language so very abusive, especially of Elizabeth, that for some time all intercourse was at an end. But at length, by Elizabeth’s persuasion, he was prevailed on to overlook the offence, and seek a reconciliation; and, after a little further resistance on the part of his aunt, her resentment gave way, either to her affection for him, or her curiosity to see how his wife conducted herself; and she condescended to wait on them at Pemberley, in spite of that pollution which its woods had received, not merely from the presence of such a mistress, but the visits of her uncle and aunt from the city. With the Gardiners they were always on the most intimate terms. Darcy, as well as Elizabeth, really loved them; and they were both ever sensible of the warmest gratitude towards the persons who, by bringing her into Derbyshire, had been the means of uniting them.

Alice was beginning to get very tired of sitting by her sister on the bank, and of having nothing to do: once or twice she had peeped into the book her sister was reading, but it had no pictures or conversations in it, “and what is the use of a book,” thought Alice “without pictures or conversations?” So she was considering in her own mind (as well as she could, for the hot day made her feel very sleepy and stupid), whether the pleasure of making a daisy-chain would be worth the trouble of getting up and picking the daisies, when suddenly a White Rabbit with pink eyes ran close by her. There was nothing so _very_ remarkable in that; nor did Alice think it so _very_ much out of the way to hear the Rabbit say to itself, “Oh dear! Oh dear! I shall be late!” (when she thought it over afterwards, it occurred to her that she ought to have wondered at this, but at the time it all seemed quite natural); but when the Rabbit actually _took a watch out of its waistcoat-pocket_, and looked at it, and then hurried on, Alice started to her feet, for it flashed across her mind that she had never before seen a rabbit with either a waistcoat-pocket, or a watch to take out of it, and burning with curiosity, she ran across the field after it, and fortunately was just in time to see it pop down a large rabbit-hole under the hedge.

The rabbit-hole went straight on like a tunnel for some way, and then dipped suddenly down, so suddenly that Alice had not a moment to think about stopping herself before she found herself falling down a very deep well. Either the well was very deep, or she fell very slowly, for she had plenty of time as she went down to look about her and to wonder what was going to happen next. First, she tried to look down and make out what she was coming to, but it was too dark to see anything; then she looked at the sides of the well, and noticed that they were filled with cupboards and book-shelves; here and there she saw maps and pictures hung upon pegs. She took down a jar from one of the shelves as she passed; it was labelled “ORANGE MARMALADE”, but to her great disappointment it was empty: she did not like to drop the jar for fear of killing somebody underneath, so managed to put it into one of the cupboards as she fell past it.

“Well!” thought Alice to herself, “after such a fall as this, I shall think nothing of tumbling down stairs! How brave they’ll all think me at home! Why, I wouldn’t say anything about it, even if I fell off the top of the house!” (Which was very likely true.) Down, down, down. Would the fall _never_ come to an end? “I wonder how many miles I’ve fallen by this time?” she said aloud. “I must be getting somewhere near the centre of the earth. Let me see: that would be four thousand miles down, I think—” (for, you see, Alice had learnt several things of this sort in her lessons in the schoolroom, and though this was not a _very_ good opportunity for showing off her knowledge, as there was no one to listen to her, still it was good practice to say it over) “—yes, that’s about the right distance—but then I wonder what Latitude or Longitude I’ve got to?” (Alice had no idea what Latitude was, or Longitude either, but thought they were nice grand words to say.)

Presently she began again. “I wonder if I shall fall right _through_ the earth! How funny it’ll seem to come out among the people that walk with their heads downward! The Antipathies, I think—” (she was rather glad there _was_ no one listening, this time, as it didn’t sound at all the right word) “—but I shall have to ask them what the name of the country is, you know. Please, Ma’am, is this New Zealand or Australia?” (and she tried to curtsey as she spoke—fancy _curtseying_ as you’re falling through the air! Do you think you could manage it?) “And what an ignorant little girl she’ll think me for asking! No, it’ll never do to ask: perhaps I shall see it written up somewhere.” Down, down, down. There was nothing else to do, so Alice soon began talking again. “Dinah’ll miss me very much to-night, I should think!” (Dinah was the cat.) “I hope they’ll remember her saucer of milk at tea-time. Dinah my dear! I wish you were down here with me! There are no mice in the air, I’m afraid, but you might catch a bat, and that’s very like a mouse, you know. But do cats eat bats, I wonder?” And here Alice began to get rather sleepy, and went on saying to herself, in a dreamy sort of way, “Do cats eat bats? Do cats eat bats?” and sometimes, “Do bats eat cats?” for, you see, as she couldn’t answer either question, it didn’t much matter which way she put it. She felt that she was dozing off, and had just begun to dream that she was walking hand in hand with Dinah, and saying to her very earnestly, “Now, Dinah, tell me the truth: did you ever eat a bat?” when suddenly, thump! thump! down she came upon a heap of sticks and dry leaves, and the fall was over.

Alice was not a bit hurt, and she jumped up on to her feet in a moment: she looked up, but it was all dark overhead; before her was another long passage, and the White Rabbit was still in sight, hurrying down it. There was not a moment to be lost: away went Alice like the wind, and was just in time to hear it say, as it turned a corner, “Oh my ears and whiskers, how late it’s getting!” She was close behind it when she turned the corner, but the Rabbit was no longer to be seen: she found herself in a long, low hall, which was lit up by a row of lamps hanging from the roof. There were doors all round the hall, but they were all locked; and when Alice had been all the way down one side and up the other, trying every door, she walked sadly down the middle, wondering how she was ever to get out again. Suddenly she came upon a little three-legged table, all made of solid glass; there was nothing on it except a tiny golden key, and Alice’s first thought was that it might belong to one of the doors of the hall; but, alas! either the locks were too large, or the key was too small, but at any rate it would not open any of them. However, on the second time round, she came upon a low curtain she had not noticed before, and behind it was a little door about fifteen inches high: she tried the little golden key in the lock, and to her great delight it fitted!

Alice opened the door and found that it led into a small passage, not much larger than a rat-hole: she knelt down and looked along the passage into the loveliest garden you ever saw. How she longed to get out of that dark hall, and wander about among those beds of bright flowers and those cool fountains, but she could not even get her head through the doorway; “and even if my head would go through,” thought poor Alice, “it would be of very little use without my shoulders. Oh, how I wish I could shut up like a telescope! I think I could, if I only knew how to begin.” For, you see, so many out-of-the-way things had happened lately, that Alice had begun to think that very few things indeed were really impossible. There seemed to be no use in waiting by the little door, so she went back to the table, half hoping she might find another key on it, or at any rate a book of rules for shutting people up like telescopes: this time she found a little bottle on it, (“which certainly was not here before,” said Alice,) and round the neck of the bottle was a paper label, with the words “DRINK ME,” beautifully printed on it in large letters.

It was all very well to say “Drink me,” but the wise little Alice was not going to do _that_ in a hurry. “No, I’ll look first,” she said, “and see whether it’s marked ‘_poison_’ or not”; for she had read several nice little histories about children who had got burnt, and eaten up by wild beasts and other unpleasant things, all because they _would_ not remember the simple rules their friends had taught them: such as, that a red-hot poker will burn you if you hold it too long; and that if you cut your finger _very_ deeply with a knife, it usually bleeds; and she had never forgotten that, if you drink much from a bottle marked “poison,” it is almost certain to disagree with you, sooner or later. However, this bottle was _not_ marked “poison,” so Alice ventured to taste it, and finding it very nice, (it had, in fact, a sort of mixed flavour of cherry-tart, custard, pine-apple, roast turkey, toffee, and hot buttered toast,) she very soon finished it off. And so it was indeed: she was now only ten inches high, and her face brightened up at the thought that she was now the right size for going through the little door into that lovely garden. First, however, she waited for a few minutes to see if she was going to shrink any further: she felt a little nervous about this; “for it might end, you know,” said Alice to herself, “in my going out altogether, like a candle. I wonder what I should be like then?” And she tried to fancy what the flame of a candle is like after the candle is blown out, for she could not remember ever having seen such a thing.

After a while, finding that nothing more happened, she decided on going into the garden at once; but, alas for poor Alice! when she got to the door, she found she had forgotten the little golden key, and when she went back to the table for it, she found she could not possibly reach it: she could see it quite plainly through the glass, and she tried her best to climb up one of the legs of the table, but it was too slippery; and when she had tired herself out with trying, the poor little thing sat down and cried. “Come, there’s no use in crying like that!” said Alice to herself, rather sharply; “I advise you to leave off this minute!” She generally gave herself very good advice, (though she very seldom followed it), and sometimes she scolded herself so severely as to bring tears into her eyes; and once she remembered trying to box her own ears for having cheated herself in a game of croquet she was playing against herself, for this curious child was very fond of pretending to be two people. “But it’s no use now,” thought poor Alice, “to pretend to be two people! Why, there’s hardly enough of me left to make _one_ respectable person!”

Soon her eye fell on a little glass box that was lying under the table: she opened it, and found in it a very small cake, on which the words “EAT ME” were beautifully marked in currants. “Well, I’ll eat it,” said Alice, “and if it makes me grow larger, I can reach the key; and if it makes me grow smaller, I can creep under the door; so either way I’ll get into the garden, and I don’t care which happens!” She ate a little bit, and said anxiously to herself, “Which way? Which way?”, holding her hand on the top of her head to feel which way it was growing, and she was quite surprised to find that she remained the same size: to be sure, this generally happens when one eats cake, but Alice had got so much into the way of expecting nothing but out-of-the-way things to happen, that it seemed quite dull and stupid for life to go on in the common way. “Curiouser and curiouser!” cried Alice (she was so much surprised, that for the moment she quite forgot how to speak good English); “now I’m opening out like the largest telescope that ever was! Good-bye, feet!” (for when she looked down at her feet, they seemed to be almost out of sight, they were getting so far off). “Oh, my poor little feet, I wonder who will put on your shoes and stockings for you now, dears? I’m sure _I_ shan’t be able! I shall be a great deal too far off to trouble myself about you: you must manage the best way you can;—but I must be kind to them,” thought Alice, “or perhaps they won’t walk the way I want to go! Let me see: I’ll give them a new pair of boots every Christmas.”

And she went on planning to herself how she would manage it. “They must go by the carrier,” she thought; “and how funny it’ll seem, sending presents to one’s own feet! And how odd the directions will look! Just then her head struck against the roof of the hall: in fact she was now more than nine feet high, and she at once took up the little golden key and hurried off to the garden door. Poor Alice! It was as much as she could do, lying down on one side, to look through into the garden with one eye; but to get through was more hopeless than ever: she sat down and began to cry again. “You ought to be ashamed of yourself,” said Alice, “a great girl like you,” (she might well say this), “to go on crying in this way! Stop this moment, I tell you!” But she went on all the same, shedding gallons of tears, until there was a large pool all round her, about four inches deep and reaching half down the hall. After a time she heard a little pattering of feet in the distance, and she hastily dried her eyes to see what was coming. It was the White Rabbit returning, splendidly dressed, with a pair of white kid gloves in one hand and a large fan in the other: he came trotting along in a great hurry, muttering to himself as he came, “Oh! the Duchess, the Duchess! Oh! won’t she be savage if I’ve kept her waiting!” Alice felt so desperate that she was ready to ask help of any one; so, when the Rabbit came near her, she began, in a low, timid voice, “If you please, sir—” The Rabbit started violently, dropped the white kid gloves and the fan, and skurried away into the darkness as hard as he could go.

Alice took up the fan and gloves, and, as the hall was very hot, she kept fanning herself all the time she went on talking: “Dear, dear! How queer everything is to-day! And yesterday things went on just as usual. I wonder if I’ve been changed in the night? Let me think: was I the same when I got up this morning? I almost think I can remember feeling a little different. But if I’m not the same, the next question is, Who in the world am I? Ah, _that’s_ the great puzzle!” And she began thinking over all the children she knew that were of the same age as herself, to see if she could have been changed for any of them. “I’m sure I’m not Ada,” she said, “for her hair goes in such long ringlets, and mine doesn’t go in ringlets at all; and I’m sure I can’t be Mabel, for I know all sorts of things, and she, oh! she knows such a very little! Besides, _she’s_ she, and _I’m_ I, and—oh dear, how puzzling it all is! I’ll try if I know all the things I used to know. Let me see: four times five is twelve, and four times six is thirteen, and four times seven is—oh dear! I shall never get to twenty at that rate! However, the Multiplication Table doesn’t signify: let’s try Geography. London is the capital of Paris, and Paris is the capital of Rome, and Rome—no, _that’s_ all wrong, I’m certain! I must have been changed for Mabel! I’ll try and say ‘_How doth the little_—’” and she crossed her hands on her lap as if she were saying lessons, and began to repeat it, but her voice sounded hoarse and strange, and the words did not come the same as they used to do:—

“I’m sure those are not the right words,” said poor Alice, and her eyes filled with tears again as she went on, “I must be Mabel after all, and I shall have to go and live in that poky little house, and have next to no toys to play with, and oh! ever so many lessons to learn! No, I’ve made up my mind about it; if I’m Mabel, I’ll stay down here! It’ll be no use their putting their heads down and saying ‘Come up again, dear!’ I shall only look up and say ‘Who am I then? Tell me that first, and then, if I like being that person, I’ll come up: if not, I’ll stay down here till I’m somebody else’—but, oh dear!” cried Alice, with a sudden burst of tears, “I do wish they _would_ put their heads down! I am so _very_ tired of being all alone here!” As she said this she looked down at her hands, and was surprised to see that she had put on one of the Rabbit’s little white kid gloves while she was talking. “How _can_ I have done that?” she thought. “I must be growing small again.” She got up and went to the table to measure herself by it, and found that, as nearly as she could guess, she was now about two feet high, and was going on shrinking rapidly: she soon found out that the cause of this was the fan she was holding, and she dropped it hastily, just in time to avoid shrinking away altogether.

“That _was_ a narrow escape!” said Alice, a good deal frightened at the sudden change, but very glad to find herself still in existence; “and now for the garden!” and she ran with all speed back to the little door: but, alas! the little door was shut again, and the little golden key was lying on the glass table as before, “and things are worse than ever,” thought the poor child, “for I never was so small as this before, never! And I declare it’s too bad, that it is!” As she said these words her foot slipped, and in another moment, splash! she was up to her chin in salt water. Her first idea was that she had somehow fallen into the sea, “and in that case I can go back by railway,” she said to herself. (Alice had been to the seaside once in her life, and had come to the general conclusion, that wherever you go to on the English coast you find a number of bathing machines in the sea, some children digging in the sand with wooden spades, then a row of lodging houses, and behind them a railway station.) However, she soon made out that she was in the pool of tears which she had wept when she was nine feet high.

“I wish I hadn’t cried so much!” said Alice, as she swam about, trying to find her way out. “I shall be punished for it now, I suppose, by being drowned in my own tears! That _will_ be a queer thing, to be sure! However, everything is queer to-day.” Just then she heard something splashing about in the pool a little way off, and she swam nearer to make out what it was: at first she thought it must be a walrus or hippopotamus, but then she remembered how small she was now, and she soon made out that it was only a mouse that had slipped in like herself. “Would it be of any use, now,” thought Alice, “to speak to this mouse? Everything is so out-of-the-way down here, that I should think very likely it can talk: at any rate, there’s no harm in trying.” So she began: “O Mouse, do you know the way out of this pool? I am very tired of swimming about here, O Mouse!” (Alice thought this must be the right way of speaking to a mouse: she had never done such a thing before, but she remembered having seen in her brother’s Latin Grammar, “A mouse—of a mouse—to a mouse—a mouse—O mouse!”) The Mouse looked at her rather inquisitively, and seemed to her to wink with one of its little eyes, but it said nothing.

“Perhaps it doesn’t understand English,” thought Alice; “I daresay it’s a French mouse, come over with William the Conqueror.” (For, with all her knowledge of history, Alice had no very clear notion how long ago anything had happened.) So she began again: “Où est ma chatte?” which was the first sentence in her French lesson-book. The Mouse gave a sudden leap out of the water, and seemed to quiver all over with fright. “Oh, I beg your pardon!” cried Alice hastily, afraid that she had hurt the poor animal’s feelings. “I quite forgot you didn’t like cats.” “Well, perhaps not,” said Alice in a soothing tone: “don’t be angry about it. And yet I wish I could show you our cat Dinah: I think you’d take a fancy to cats if you could only see her. She is such a dear quiet thing,” Alice went on, half to herself, as she swam lazily about in the pool, “and she sits purring so nicely by the fire, licking her paws and washing her face—and she is such a nice soft thing to nurse—and she’s such a capital one for catching mice—oh, I beg your pardon!” cried Alice again, for this time the Mouse was bristling all over, and she felt certain it must be really offended. “We won’t talk about her any more if you’d rather not.”

“We indeed!” cried the Mouse, who was trembling down to the end of his tail. “As if _I_ would talk on such a subject! Our family always _hated_ cats: nasty, low, vulgar things! Don’t let me hear the name again!” “I won’t indeed!” said Alice, in a great hurry to change the subject of conversation. “Are you—are you fond—of—of dogs?” The Mouse did not answer, so Alice went on eagerly: “There is such a nice little dog near our house I should like to show you! A little bright-eyed terrier, you know, with oh, such long curly brown hair! And it’ll fetch things when you throw them, and it’ll sit up and beg for its dinner, and all sorts of things—I can’t remember half of them—and it belongs to a farmer, you know, and he says it’s so useful, it’s worth a hundred pounds! He says it kills all the rats and—oh dear!” cried Alice in a sorrowful tone, “I’m afraid I’ve offended it again!” For the Mouse was swimming away from her as hard as it could go, and making quite a commotion in the pool as it went.

So she called softly after it, “Mouse dear! Do come back again, and we won’t talk about cats or dogs either, if you don’t like them!” When the Mouse heard this, it turned round and swam slowly back to her: its face was quite pale (with passion, Alice thought), and it said in a low trembling voice, “Let us get to the shore, and then I’ll tell you my history, and you’ll understand why it is I hate cats and dogs.” It was high time to go, for the pool was getting quite crowded with the birds and animals that had fallen into it: there were a Duck and a Dodo, a Lory and an Eaglet, and several other curious creatures. Alice led the way, and the whole party swam to the shore. They were indeed a queer-looking party that assembled on the bank—the birds with draggled feathers, the animals with their fur clinging close to them, and all dripping wet, cross, and uncomfortable. The first question of course was, how to get dry again: they had a consultation about this, and after a few minutes it seemed quite natural to Alice to find herself talking familiarly with them, as if she had known them all her life. Indeed, she had quite a long argument with the Lory, who at last turned sulky, and would only say, “I am older than you, and must know better;” and this Alice would not allow without knowing how old it was, and, as the Lory positively refused to tell its age, there was no more to be said.

At last the Mouse, who seemed to be a person of authority among them, called out, “Sit down, all of you, and listen to me! _I’ll_ soon make you dry enough!” They all sat down at once, in a large ring, with the Mouse in the middle. Alice kept her eyes anxiously fixed on it, for she felt sure she would catch a bad cold if she did not get dry very soon. “Ahem!” said the Mouse with an important air, “are you all ready? This is the driest thing I know. Silence all round, if you please! ‘William the Conqueror, whose cause was favoured by the pope, was soon submitted to by the English, who wanted leaders, and had been of late much accustomed to usurpation and conquest. Edwin and Morcar, the earls of Mercia and Northumbria—’” “I thought you did,” said the Mouse. “—I proceed. ‘Edwin and Morcar, the earls of Mercia and Northumbria, declared for him: and even Stigand, the patriotic archbishop of Canterbury, found it advisable—’” “I know what ‘it’ means well enough, when _I_ find a thing,” said the Duck: “it’s generally a frog or a worm. The question is, what did the archbishop find?”

The Mouse did not notice this question, but hurriedly went on, “‘—found it advisable to go with Edgar Atheling to meet William and offer him the crown. William’s conduct at first was moderate. But the insolence of his Normans—’ How are you getting on now, my dear?” it continued, turning to Alice as it spoke. “Speak English!” said the Eaglet. “I don’t know the meaning of half those long words, and, what’s more, I don’t believe you do either!” And the Eaglet bent down its head to hide a smile: some of the other birds tittered audibly. “What _is_ a Caucus-race?” said Alice; not that she wanted much to know, but the Dodo had paused as if it thought that _somebody_ ought to speak, and no one else seemed inclined to say anything. “Why,” said the Dodo, “the best way to explain it is to do it.” (And, as you might like to try the thing yourself, some winter day, I will tell you how the Dodo managed it.) First it marked out a race-course, in a sort of circle, (“the exact shape doesn’t matter,” it said,) and then all the party were placed along the course, here and there. There was no “One, two, three, and away,” but they began running when they liked, and left off when they liked, so that it was not easy to know when the race was over. However, when they had been running half an hour or so, and were quite dry again, the Dodo suddenly called out “The race is over!” and they all crowded round it, panting, and asking, “But who has won?”

This question the Dodo could not answer without a great deal of thought, and it sat for a long time with one finger pressed upon its forehead (the position in which you usually see Shakespeare, in the pictures of him), while the rest waited in silence. At last the Dodo said, “_Everybody_ has won, and all must have prizes.” “Why, _she_, of course,” said the Dodo, pointing to Alice with one finger; and the whole party at once crowded round her, calling out in a confused way, “Prizes! Prizes!” Alice had no idea what to do, and in despair she put her hand in her pocket, and pulled out a box of comfits, (luckily the salt water had not got into it), and handed them round as prizes. There was exactly one a-piece, all round. Then they all crowded round her once more, while the Dodo solemnly presented the thimble, saying “We beg your acceptance of this elegant thimble;” and, when it had finished this short speech, they all cheered. Alice thought the whole thing very absurd, but they all looked so grave that she did not dare to laugh; and, as she could not think of anything to say, she simply bowed, and took the thimble, looking as solemn as she could.

The next thing was to eat the comfits: this caused some noise and confusion, as the large birds complained that they could not taste theirs, and the small ones choked and had to be patted on the back. However, it was over at last, and they sat down again in a ring, and begged the Mouse to tell them something more. “You promised to tell me your history, you know,” said Alice, “and why it is you hate—C and D,” she added in a whisper, half afraid that it would be offended again. “It _is_ a long tail, certainly,” said Alice, looking down with wonder at the Mouse’s tail; “but why do you call it sad?” And she kept on puzzling about it while the Mouse was speaking, so that her idea of the tale was something like this:— “Fury said to a mouse, That he met in the house, ‘Let us both go to law: _I_ will prosecute _you_.—Come, I’ll take no denial; We must have a trial: For really this morning I’ve nothing to do.’ Said the mouse to the cur, ‘Such a trial, dear sir, With no jury or judge, would be wasting our breath.’ ‘I’ll be judge, I’ll be jury,’ Said cunning old Fury: ‘I’ll try the whole cause, and condemn you to death.’”

“Please come back and finish your story!” Alice called after it; and the others all joined in chorus, “Yes, please do!” but the Mouse only shook its head impatiently, and walked a little quicker. “What a pity it wouldn’t stay!” sighed the Lory, as soon as it was quite out of sight; and an old Crab took the opportunity of saying to her daughter “Ah, my dear! Let this be a lesson to you never to lose _your_ temper!” “Hold your tongue, Ma!” said the young Crab, a little snappishly. “You’re enough to try the patience of an oyster!” Alice replied eagerly, for she was always ready to talk about her pet: “Dinah’s our cat. And she’s such a capital one for catching mice you can’t think! And oh, I wish you could see her after the birds! Why, she’ll eat a little bird as soon as look at it!” This speech caused a remarkable sensation among the party. Some of the birds hurried off at once: one old Magpie began wrapping itself up very carefully, remarking, “I really must be getting home; the night-air doesn’t suit my throat!” and a Canary called out in a trembling voice to its children, “Come away, my dears! It’s high time you were all in bed!” On various pretexts they all moved off, and Alice was soon left alone.

“I wish I hadn’t mentioned Dinah!” she said to herself in a melancholy tone. “Nobody seems to like her, down here, and I’m sure she’s the best cat in the world! Oh, my dear Dinah! I wonder if I shall ever see you any more!” And here poor Alice began to cry again, for she felt very lonely and low-spirited. In a little while, however, she again heard a little pattering of footsteps in the distance, and she looked up eagerly, half hoping that the Mouse had changed his mind, and was coming back to finish his story. It was the White Rabbit, trotting slowly back again, and looking anxiously about as it went, as if it had lost something; and she heard it muttering to itself “The Duchess! The Duchess! Oh my dear paws! Oh my fur and whiskers! She’ll get me executed, as sure as ferrets are ferrets! Where _can_ I have dropped them, I wonder?” Alice guessed in a moment that it was looking for the fan and the pair of white kid gloves, and she very good-naturedly began hunting about for them, but they were nowhere to be seen—everything seemed to have changed since her swim in the pool, and the great hall, with the glass table and the little door, had vanished completely.

Very soon the Rabbit noticed Alice, as she went hunting about, and called out to her in an angry tone, “Why, Mary Ann, what _are_ you doing out here? Run home this moment, and fetch me a pair of gloves and a fan! Quick, now!” And Alice was so much frightened that she ran off at once in the direction it pointed to, without trying to explain the mistake it had made. “He took me for his housemaid,” she said to herself as she ran. “How surprised he’ll be when he finds out who I am! But I’d better take him his fan and gloves—that is, if I can find them.” As she said this, she came upon a neat little house, on the door of which was a bright brass plate with the name “W. RABBIT,” engraved upon it. She went in without knocking, and hurried upstairs, in great fear lest she should meet the real Mary Ann, and be turned out of the house before she had found the fan and gloves. “How queer it seems,” Alice said to herself, “to be going messages for a rabbit! I suppose Dinah’ll be sending me on messages next!” And she began fancying the sort of thing that would happen: “‘Miss Alice! Come here directly, and get ready for your walk!’ ‘Coming in a minute, nurse! But I’ve got to see that the mouse doesn’t get out.’ Only I don’t think,” Alice went on, “that they’d let Dinah stop in the house if it began ordering people about like that!”

By this time she had found her way into a tidy little room with a table in the window, and on it (as she had hoped) a fan and two or three pairs of tiny white kid gloves: she took up the fan and a pair of the gloves, and was just going to leave the room, when her eye fell upon a little bottle that stood near the looking-glass. There was no label this time with the words “DRINK ME,” but nevertheless she uncorked it and put it to her lips. “I know _something_ interesting is sure to happen,” she said to herself, “whenever I eat or drink anything; so I’ll just see what this bottle does. I do hope it’ll make me grow large again, for really I’m quite tired of being such a tiny little thing!” It did so indeed, and much sooner than she had expected: before she had drunk half the bottle, she found her head pressing against the ceiling, and had to stoop to save her neck from being broken. She hastily put down the bottle, saying to herself “That’s quite enough—I hope I shan’t grow any more—As it is, I can’t get out at the door—I do wish I hadn’t drunk quite so much!”

Alas! it was too late to wish that! She went on growing, and growing, and very soon had to kneel down on the floor: in another minute there was not even room for this, and she tried the effect of lying down with one elbow against the door, and the other arm curled round her head. Still she went on growing, and, as a last resource, she put one arm out of the window, and one foot up the chimney, and said to herself “Now I can do no more, whatever happens. What _will_ become of me?” Luckily for Alice, the little magic bottle had now had its full effect, and she grew no larger: still it was very uncomfortable, and, as there seemed to be no sort of chance of her ever getting out of the room again, no wonder she felt unhappy. “It was much pleasanter at home,” thought poor Alice, “when one wasn’t always growing larger and smaller, and being ordered about by mice and rabbits. I almost wish I hadn’t gone down that rabbit-hole—and yet—and yet—it’s rather curious, you know, this sort of life! I do wonder what _can_ have happened to me! When I used to read fairy-tales, I fancied that kind of thing never happened, and now here I am in the middle of one! There ought to be a book written about me, that there ought! And when I grow up, I’ll write one—but I’m grown up now,” she added in a sorrowful tone; “at least there’s no room to grow up any more _here_.”

“But then,” thought Alice, “shall I _never_ get any older than I am now? That’ll be a comfort, one way—never to be an old woman—but then—always to have lessons to learn! Oh, I shouldn’t like _that!_” “Oh, you foolish Alice!” she answered herself. “How can you learn lessons in here? Why, there’s hardly room for _you_, and no room at all for any lesson-books!” And so she went on, taking first one side and then the other, and making quite a conversation of it altogether; but after a few minutes she heard a voice outside, and stopped to listen. “Mary Ann! Mary Ann!” said the voice. “Fetch me my gloves this moment!” Then came a little pattering of feet on the stairs. Alice knew it was the Rabbit coming to look for her, and she trembled till she shook the house, quite forgetting that she was now about a thousand times as large as the Rabbit, and had no reason to be afraid of it. Presently the Rabbit came up to the door, and tried to open it; but, as the door opened inwards, and Alice’s elbow was pressed hard against it, that attempt proved a failure. Alice heard it say to itself “Then I’ll go round and get in at the window.”

“_That_ you won’t!” thought Alice, and, after waiting till she fancied she heard the Rabbit just under the window, she suddenly spread out her hand, and made a snatch in the air. She did not get hold of anything, but she heard a little shriek and a fall, and a crash of broken glass, from which she concluded that it was just possible it had fallen into a cucumber-frame, or something of the sort. Next came an angry voice—the Rabbit’s—“Pat! Pat! Where are you?” And then a voice she had never heard before, “Sure then I’m here! Digging for apples, yer honour!” There was a long silence after this, and Alice could only hear whispers now and then; such as, “Sure, I don’t like it, yer honour, at all, at all!” “Do as I tell you, you coward!” and at last she spread out her hand again, and made another snatch in the air. This time there were _two_ little shrieks, and more sounds of broken glass. “What a number of cucumber-frames there must be!” thought Alice. “I wonder what they’ll do next! As for pulling me out of the window, I only wish they _could!_ I’m sure _I_ don’t want to stay in here any longer!”

She waited for some time without hearing anything more: at last came a rumbling of little cartwheels, and the sound of a good many voices all talking together: she made out the words: “Where’s the other ladder?—Why, I hadn’t to bring but one; Bill’s got the other—Bill! fetch it here, lad!—Here, put ’em up at this corner—No, tie ’em together first—they don’t reach half high enough yet—Oh! they’ll do well enough; don’t be particular—Here, Bill! catch hold of this rope—Will the roof bear?—Mind that loose slate—Oh, it’s coming down! Heads below!” (a loud crash)—“Now, who did that?—It was Bill, I fancy—Who’s to go down the chimney?—Nay, _I_ shan’t! _You_ do it!—_That_ I won’t, then!—Bill’s to go down—Here, Bill! the master says you’re to go down the chimney!” “Oh! So Bill’s got to come down the chimney, has he?” said Alice to herself. “Shy, they seem to put everything upon Bill! I wouldn’t be in Bill’s place for a good deal: this fireplace is narrow, to be sure; but I _think_ I can kick a little!” She drew her foot as far down the chimney as she could, and waited till she heard a little animal (she couldn’t guess of what sort it was) scratching and scrambling about in the chimney close above her: then, saying to herself “This is Bill,” she gave one sharp kick, and waited to see what would happen next.

The first thing she heard was a general chorus of “There goes Bill!” then the Rabbit’s voice along—“Catch him, you by the hedge!” then silence, and then another confusion of voices—“Hold up his head—Brandy now—Don’t choke him—How was it, old fellow? What happened to you? Tell us all about it!” Last came a little feeble, squeaking voice, (“That’s Bill,” thought Alice,) “Well, I hardly know—No more, thank ye; I’m better now—but I’m a deal too flustered to tell you—all I know is, something comes at me like a Jack-in-the-box, and up I goes like a sky-rocket!” There was a dead silence instantly, and Alice thought to herself, “I wonder what they _will_ do next! If they had any sense, they’d take the roof off.” After a minute or two, they began moving about again, and Alice heard the Rabbit say, “A barrowful will do, to begin with.” “A barrowful of _what?_” thought Alice; but she had not long to doubt, for the next moment a shower of little pebbles came rattling in at the window, and some of them hit her in the face. “I’ll put a stop to this,” she said to herself, and shouted out, “You’d better not do that again!” which produced another dead silence.

Alice noticed with some surprise that the pebbles were all turning into little cakes as they lay on the floor, and a bright idea came into her head. “If I eat one of these cakes,” she thought, “it’s sure to make _some_ change in my size; and as it can’t possibly make me larger, it must make me smaller, I suppose.” So she swallowed one of the cakes, and was delighted to find that she began shrinking directly. As soon as she was small enough to get through the door, she ran out of the house, and found quite a crowd of little animals and birds waiting outside. The poor little Lizard, Bill, was in the middle, being held up by two guinea-pigs, who were giving it something out of a bottle. They all made a rush at Alice the moment she appeared; but she ran off as hard as she could, and soon found herself safe in a thick wood. “The first thing I’ve got to do,” said Alice to herself, as she wandered about in the wood, “is to grow to my right size again; and the second thing is to find my way into that lovely garden. I think that will be the best plan.”

It sounded an excellent plan, no doubt, and very neatly and simply arranged; the only difficulty was, that she had not the smallest idea how to set about it; and while she was peering about anxiously among the trees, a little sharp bark just over her head made her look up in a great hurry. An enormous puppy was looking down at her with large round eyes, and feebly stretching out one paw, trying to touch her. “Poor little thing!” said Alice, in a coaxing tone, and she tried hard to whistle to it; but she was terribly frightened all the time at the thought that it might be hungry, in which case it would be very likely to eat her up in spite of all her coaxing. Hardly knowing what she did, she picked up a little bit of stick, and held it out to the puppy; whereupon the puppy jumped into the air off all its feet at once, with a yelp of delight, and rushed at the stick, and made believe to worry it; then Alice dodged behind a great thistle, to keep herself from being run over; and the moment she appeared on the other side, the puppy made another rush at the stick, and tumbled head over heels in its hurry to get hold of it; then Alice, thinking it was very like having a game of play with a cart-horse, and expecting every moment to be trampled under its feet, ran round the thistle again; then the puppy began a series of short charges at the stick, running a very little way forwards each time and a long way back, and barking hoarsely all the while, till at last it sat down a good way off, panting, with its tongue hanging out of its mouth, and its great eyes half shut.

This seemed to Alice a good opportunity for making her escape; so she set off at once, and ran till she was quite tired and out of breath, and till the puppy’s bark sounded quite faint in the distance. “And yet what a dear little puppy it was!” said Alice, as she leant against a buttercup to rest herself, and fanned herself with one of the leaves: “I should have liked teaching it tricks very much, if—if I’d only been the right size to do it! Oh dear! I’d nearly forgotten that I’ve got to grow up again! Let me see—how _is_ it to be managed? I suppose I ought to eat or drink something or other; but the great question is, what?” The great question certainly was, what? Alice looked all round her at the flowers and the blades of grass, but she did not see anything that looked like the right thing to eat or drink under the circumstances. There was a large mushroom growing near her, about the same height as herself; and when she had looked under it, and on both sides of it, and behind it, it occurred to her that she might as well look and see what was on the top of it.

She stretched herself up on tiptoe, and peeped over the edge of the mushroom, and her eyes immediately met those of a large blue caterpillar, that was sitting on the top with its arms folded, quietly smoking a long hookah, and taking not the smallest notice of her or of anything else. The Caterpillar and Alice looked at each other for some time in silence: at last the Caterpillar took the hookah out of its mouth, and addressed her in a languid, sleepy voice. This was not an encouraging opening for a conversation. Alice replied, rather shyly, “I—I hardly know, sir, just at present—at least I know who I _was_ when I got up this morning, but I think I must have been changed several times since then.” “I’m afraid I can’t put it more clearly,” Alice replied very politely, “for I can’t understand it myself to begin with; and being so many different sizes in a day is very confusing.” “Well, perhaps you haven’t found it so yet,” said Alice; “but when you have to turn into a chrysalis—you will some day, you know—and then after that into a butterfly, I should think you’ll feel it a little queer, won’t you?”

Which brought them back again to the beginning of the conversation. Alice felt a little irritated at the Caterpillar’s making such _very_ short remarks, and she drew herself up and said, very gravely, “I think, you ought to tell me who _you_ are, first.” Here was another puzzling question; and as Alice could not think of any good reason, and as the Caterpillar seemed to be in a _very_ unpleasant state of mind, she turned away. Alice thought she might as well wait, as she had nothing else to do, and perhaps after all it might tell her something worth hearing. For some minutes it puffed away without speaking, but at last it unfolded its arms, took the hookah out of its mouth again, and said, “So you think you’re changed, do you?” “You are old, Father William,” the young man said, “And your hair has become very white; And yet you incessantly stand on your head— Do you think, at your age, it is right?” “In my youth,” Father William replied to his son, “I feared it might injure the brain; But, now that I’m perfectly sure I have none, Why, I do it again and again.”

“You are old,” said the youth, “as I mentioned before, And have grown most uncommonly fat; Yet you turned a back-somersault in at the door— Pray, what is the reason of that?” “In my youth,” said the sage, as he shook his grey locks, “I kept all my limbs very supple By the use of this ointment—one shilling the box— Allow me to sell you a couple?” “You are old,” said the youth, “and your jaws are too weak For anything tougher than suet; Yet you finished the goose, with the bones and the beak— Pray, how did you manage to do it?” “In my youth,” said his father, “I took to the law, And argued each case with my wife; And the muscular strength, which it gave to my jaw, Has lasted the rest of my life.” “You are old,” said the youth, “one would hardly suppose That your eye was as steady as ever; Yet you balanced an eel on the end of your nose— What made you so awfully clever?” “I have answered three questions, and that is enough,” Said his father; “don’t give yourself airs! Do you think I can listen all day to such stuff? Be off, or I’ll kick you down stairs!”

This time Alice waited patiently until it chose to speak again. In a minute or two the Caterpillar took the hookah out of its mouth and yawned once or twice, and shook itself. Then it got down off the mushroom, and crawled away in the grass, merely remarking as it went, “One side will make you grow taller, and the other side will make you grow shorter.” Alice remained looking thoughtfully at the mushroom for a minute, trying to make out which were the two sides of it; and as it was perfectly round, she found this a very difficult question. However, at last she stretched her arms round it as far as they would go, and broke off a bit of the edge with each hand. “And now which is which?” she said to herself, and nibbled a little of the right-hand bit to try the effect: the next moment she felt a violent blow underneath her chin: it had struck her foot! She was a good deal frightened by this very sudden change, but she felt that there was no time to be lost, as she was shrinking rapidly; so she set to work at once to eat some of the other bit. Her chin was pressed so closely against her foot, that there was hardly room to open her mouth; but she did it at last, and managed to swallow a morsel of the lefthand bit.

“Come, my head’s free at last!” said Alice in a tone of delight, which changed into alarm in another moment, when she found that her shoulders were nowhere to be found: all she could see, when she looked down, was an immense length of neck, which seemed to rise like a stalk out of a sea of green leaves that lay far below her. “What _can_ all that green stuff be?” said Alice. “And where _have_ my shoulders got to? And oh, my poor hands, how is it I can’t see you?” She was moving them about as she spoke, but no result seemed to follow, except a little shaking among the distant green leaves. As there seemed to be no chance of getting her hands up to her head, she tried to get her head down to them, and was delighted to find that her neck would bend about easily in any direction, like a serpent. She had just succeeded in curving it down into a graceful zigzag, and was going to dive in among the leaves, which she found to be nothing but the tops of the trees under which she had been wandering, when a sharp hiss made her draw back in a hurry: a large pigeon had flown into her face, and was beating her violently with its wings.

“Serpent, I say again!” repeated the Pigeon, but in a more subdued tone, and added with a kind of sob, “I’ve tried every way, and nothing seems to suit them!” “I’ve tried the roots of trees, and I’ve tried banks, and I’ve tried hedges,” the Pigeon went on, without attending to her; “but those serpents! There’s no pleasing them!” “As if it wasn’t trouble enough hatching the eggs,” said the Pigeon; “but I must be on the look-out for serpents night and day! Why, I haven’t had a wink of sleep these three weeks!” “And just as I’d taken the highest tree in the wood,” continued the Pigeon, raising its voice to a shriek, “and just as I was thinking I should be free of them at last, they must needs come wriggling down from the sky! Ugh, Serpent!” “A likely story indeed!” said the Pigeon in a tone of the deepest contempt. “I’ve seen a good many little girls in my time, but never _one_ with such a neck as that! No, no! You’re a serpent; and there’s no use denying it. I suppose you’ll be telling me next that you never tasted an egg!”

This was such a new idea to Alice, that she was quite silent for a minute or two, which gave the Pigeon the opportunity of adding, “You’re looking for eggs, I know _that_ well enough; and what does it matter to me whether you’re a little girl or a serpent?” “It matters a good deal to _me_,” said Alice hastily; “but I’m not looking for eggs, as it happens; and if I was, I shouldn’t want _yours_: I don’t like them raw.” “Well, be off, then!” said the Pigeon in a sulky tone, as it settled down again into its nest. Alice crouched down among the trees as well as she could, for her neck kept getting entangled among the branches, and every now and then she had to stop and untwist it. After a while she remembered that she still held the pieces of mushroom in her hands, and she set to work very carefully, nibbling first at one and then at the other, and growing sometimes taller and sometimes shorter, until she had succeeded in bringing herself down to her usual height.

It was so long since she had been anything near the right size, that it felt quite strange at first; but she got used to it in a few minutes, and began talking to herself, as usual. “Come, there’s half my plan done now! How puzzling all these changes are! I’m never sure what I’m going to be, from one minute to another! However, I’ve got back to my right size: the next thing is, to get into that beautiful garden—how _is_ that to be done, I wonder?” As she said this, she came suddenly upon an open place, with a little house in it about four feet high. “Whoever lives there,” thought Alice, “it’ll never do to come upon them _this_ size: why, I should frighten them out of their wits!” So she began nibbling at the righthand bit again, and did not venture to go near the house till she had brought herself down to nine inches high. For a minute or two she stood looking at the house, and wondering what to do next, when suddenly a footman in livery came running out of the wood—(she considered him to be a footman because he was in livery: otherwise, judging by his face only, she would have called him a fish)—and rapped loudly at the door with his knuckles. It was opened by another footman in livery, with a round face, and large eyes like a frog; and both footmen, Alice noticed, had powdered hair that curled all over their heads. She felt very curious to know what it was all about, and crept a little way out of the wood to listen.

The Fish-Footman began by producing from under his arm a great letter, nearly as large as himself, and this he handed over to the other, saying, in a solemn tone, “For the Duchess. An invitation from the Queen to play croquet.” The Frog-Footman repeated, in the same solemn tone, only changing the order of the words a little, “From the Queen. An invitation for the Duchess to play croquet.” Alice laughed so much at this, that she had to run back into the wood for fear of their hearing her; and when she next peeped out the Fish-Footman was gone, and the other was sitting on the ground near the door, staring stupidly up into the sky. “There’s no sort of use in knocking,” said the Footman, “and that for two reasons. First, because I’m on the same side of the door as you are; secondly, because they’re making such a noise inside, no one could possibly hear you.” And certainly there _was_ a most extraordinary noise going on within—a constant howling and sneezing, and every now and then a great crash, as if a dish or kettle had been broken to pieces.

“There might be some sense in your knocking,” the Footman went on without attending to her, “if we had the door between us. For instance, if you were _inside_, you might knock, and I could let you out, you know.” He was looking up into the sky all the time he was speaking, and this Alice thought decidedly uncivil. “But perhaps he can’t help it,” she said to herself; “his eyes are so _very_ nearly at the top of his head. But at any rate he might answer questions.—How am I to get in?” she repeated, aloud. At this moment the door of the house opened, and a large plate came skimming out, straight at the Footman’s head: it just grazed his nose, and broke to pieces against one of the trees behind him. It was, no doubt: only Alice did not like to be told so. “It’s really dreadful,” she muttered to herself, “the way all the creatures argue. It’s enough to drive one crazy!” The Footman seemed to think this a good opportunity for repeating his remark, with variations. “I shall sit here,” he said, “on and off, for days and days.”

The door led right into a large kitchen, which was full of smoke from one end to the other: the Duchess was sitting on a three-legged stool in the middle, nursing a baby; the cook was leaning over the fire, stirring a large cauldron which seemed to be full of soup. There was certainly too much of it in the air. Even the Duchess sneezed occasionally; and as for the baby, it was sneezing and howling alternately without a moment’s pause. The only things in the kitchen that did not sneeze, were the cook, and a large cat which was sitting on the hearth and grinning from ear to ear. “Please would you tell me,” said Alice, a little timidly, for she was not quite sure whether it was good manners for her to speak first, “why your cat grins like that?” She said the last word with such sudden violence that Alice quite jumped; but she saw in another moment that it was addressed to the baby, and not to her, so she took courage, and went on again:—

Alice did not at all like the tone of this remark, and thought it would be as well to introduce some other subject of conversation. While she was trying to fix on one, the cook took the cauldron of soup off the fire, and at once set to work throwing everything within her reach at the Duchess and the baby—the fire-irons came first; then followed a shower of saucepans, plates, and dishes. The Duchess took no notice of them even when they hit her; and the baby was howling so much already, that it was quite impossible to say whether the blows hurt it or not. “Oh, _please_ mind what you’re doing!” cried Alice, jumping up and down in an agony of terror. “Oh, there goes his _precious_ nose!” as an unusually large saucepan flew close by it, and very nearly carried it off. “Which would _not_ be an advantage,” said Alice, who felt very glad to get an opportunity of showing off a little of her knowledge. “Just think of what work it would make with the day and night! You see the earth takes twenty-four hours to turn round on its axis—”

Alice glanced rather anxiously at the cook, to see if she meant to take the hint; but the cook was busily stirring the soup, and seemed not to be listening, so she went on again: “Twenty-four hours, I _think_; or is it twelve? I—” “Oh, don’t bother _me_,” said the Duchess; “I never could abide figures!” And with that she began nursing her child again, singing a sort of lullaby to it as she did so, and giving it a violent shake at the end of every line: While the Duchess sang the second verse of the song, she kept tossing the baby violently up and down, and the poor little thing howled so, that Alice could hardly hear the words:— “Here! you may nurse it a bit, if you like!” the Duchess said to Alice, flinging the baby at her as she spoke. “I must go and get ready to play croquet with the Queen,” and she hurried out of the room. The cook threw a frying-pan after her as she went out, but it just missed her. Alice caught the baby with some difficulty, as it was a queer-shaped little creature, and held out its arms and legs in all directions, “just like a star-fish,” thought Alice. The poor little thing was snorting like a steam-engine when she caught it, and kept doubling itself up and straightening itself out again, so that altogether, for the first minute or two, it was as much as she could do to hold it.

As soon as she had made out the proper way of nursing it, (which was to twist it up into a sort of knot, and then keep tight hold of its right ear and left foot, so as to prevent its undoing itself,) she carried it out into the open air. “If I don’t take this child away with me,” thought Alice, “they’re sure to kill it in a day or two: wouldn’t it be murder to leave it behind?” She said the last words out loud, and the little thing grunted in reply (it had left off sneezing by this time). “Don’t grunt,” said Alice; “that’s not at all a proper way of expressing yourself.” The baby grunted again, and Alice looked very anxiously into its face to see what was the matter with it. There could be no doubt that it had a _very_ turn-up nose, much more like a snout than a real nose; also its eyes were getting extremely small for a baby: altogether Alice did not like the look of the thing at all. “But perhaps it was only sobbing,” she thought, and looked into its eyes again, to see if there were any tears.

No, there were no tears. “If you’re going to turn into a pig, my dear,” said Alice, seriously, “I’ll have nothing more to do with you. Mind now!” The poor little thing sobbed again (or grunted, it was impossible to say which), and they went on for some while in silence. Alice was just beginning to think to herself, “Now, what am I to do with this creature when I get it home?” when it grunted again, so violently, that she looked down into its face in some alarm. This time there could be _no_ mistake about it: it was neither more nor less than a pig, and she felt that it would be quite absurd for her to carry it further. So she set the little creature down, and felt quite relieved to see it trot away quietly into the wood. “If it had grown up,” she said to herself, “it would have made a dreadfully ugly child: but it makes rather a handsome pig, I think.” And she began thinking over other children she knew, who might do very well as pigs, and was just saying to herself, “if one only knew the right way to change them—” when she was a little startled by seeing the Cheshire Cat sitting on a bough of a tree a few yards off.

The Cat only grinned when it saw Alice. It looked good-natured, she thought: still it had _very_ long claws and a great many teeth, so she felt that it ought to be treated with respect. “Cheshire Puss,” she began, rather timidly, as she did not at all know whether it would like the name: however, it only grinned a little wider. “Come, it’s pleased so far,” thought Alice, and she went on. “Would you tell me, please, which way I ought to go from here?” “In _that_ direction,” the Cat said, waving its right paw round, “lives a Hatter: and in _that_ direction,” waving the other paw, “lives a March Hare. Visit either you like: they’re both mad.” “Well, then,” the Cat went on, “you see, a dog growls when it’s angry, and wags its tail when it’s pleased. Now _I_ growl when I’m pleased, and wag my tail when I’m angry. Therefore I’m mad.” Alice was not much surprised at this, she was getting so used to queer things happening. While she was looking at the place where it had been, it suddenly appeared again.

Alice waited a little, half expecting to see it again, but it did not appear, and after a minute or two she walked on in the direction in which the March Hare was said to live. “I’ve seen hatters before,” she said to herself; “the March Hare will be much the most interesting, and perhaps as this is May it won’t be raving mad—at least not so mad as it was in March.” As she said this, she looked up, and there was the Cat again, sitting on a branch of a tree. “All right,” said the Cat; and this time it vanished quite slowly, beginning with the end of the tail, and ending with the grin, which remained some time after the rest of it had gone. She had not gone much farther before she came in sight of the house of the March Hare: she thought it must be the right house, because the chimneys were shaped like ears and the roof was thatched with fur. It was so large a house, that she did not like to go nearer till she had nibbled some more of the lefthand bit of mushroom, and raised herself to about two feet high: even then she walked up towards it rather timidly, saying to herself “Suppose it should be raving mad after all! I almost wish I’d gone to see the Hatter instead!”

There was a table set out under a tree in front of the house, and the March Hare and the Hatter were having tea at it: a Dormouse was sitting between them, fast asleep, and the other two were using it as a cushion, resting their elbows on it, and talking over its head. “Very uncomfortable for the Dormouse,” thought Alice; “only, as it’s asleep, I suppose it doesn’t mind.” The table was a large one, but the three were all crowded together at one corner of it: “No room! No room!” they cried out when they saw Alice coming. “There’s _plenty_ of room!” said Alice indignantly, and she sat down in a large arm-chair at one end of the table. “You might just as well say,” added the Dormouse, who seemed to be talking in his sleep, “that ‘I breathe when I sleep’ is the same thing as ‘I sleep when I breathe’!” “It _is_ the same thing with you,” said the Hatter, and here the conversation dropped, and the party sat silent for a minute, while Alice thought over all she could remember about ravens and writing-desks, which wasn’t much.

The Hatter was the first to break the silence. “What day of the month is it?” he said, turning to Alice: he had taken his watch out of his pocket, and was looking at it uneasily, shaking it every now and then, and holding it to his ear. The March Hare took the watch and looked at it gloomily: then he dipped it into his cup of tea, and looked at it again: but he could think of nothing better to say than his first remark, “It was the _best_ butter, you know.” Alice had been looking over his shoulder with some curiosity. “What a funny watch!” she remarked. “It tells the day of the month, and doesn’t tell what o’clock it is!” Alice felt dreadfully puzzled, The Hatter’s remark seemed to have no sort of meaning in it, and yet it was certainly English. “I don’t quite understand you,” she said, as politely as she could. “Ah! that accounts for it,” said the Hatter. “He won’t stand beating. Now, if you only kept on good terms with him, he’d do almost anything you liked with the clock. For instance, suppose it were nine o’clock in the morning, just time to begin lessons: you’d only have to whisper a hint to Time, and round goes the clock in a twinkling! Half-past one, time for dinner!”

The Hatter shook his head mournfully. “Not I!” he replied. “We quarrelled last March—just before _he_ went mad, you know—” (pointing with his tea spoon at the March Hare,) “—it was at the great concert given by the Queen of Hearts, and I had to sing Here the Dormouse shook itself, and began singing in its sleep “_Twinkle, twinkle, twinkle, twinkle_—” and went on so long that they had to pinch it to make it stop. “Well, I’d hardly finished the first verse,” said the Hatter, “when the Queen jumped up and bawled out, ‘He’s murdering the time! Off with his head!’” “Once upon a time there were three little sisters,” the Dormouse began in a great hurry; “and their names were Elsie, Lacie, and Tillie; and they lived at the bottom of a well—” Alice tried to fancy to herself what such an extraordinary way of living would be like, but it puzzled her too much, so she went on: “But why did they live at the bottom of a well?” Alice did not quite know what to say to this: so she helped herself to some tea and bread-and-butter, and then turned to the Dormouse, and repeated her question. “Why did they live at the bottom of a well?”

“There’s no such thing!” Alice was beginning very angrily, but the Hatter and the March Hare went “Sh! sh!” and the Dormouse sulkily remarked, “If you can’t be civil, you’d better finish the story for yourself.” “One, indeed!” said the Dormouse indignantly. However, he consented to go on. “And so these three little sisters—they were learning to draw, you know—” He moved on as he spoke, and the Dormouse followed him: the March Hare moved into the Dormouse’s place, and Alice rather unwillingly took the place of the March Hare. The Hatter was the only one who got any advantage from the change: and Alice was a good deal worse off than before, as the March Hare had just upset the milk-jug into his plate. “They were learning to draw,” the Dormouse went on, yawning and rubbing its eyes, for it was getting very sleepy; “and they drew all manner of things—everything that begins with an M—” The Dormouse had closed its eyes by this time, and was going off into a doze; but, on being pinched by the Hatter, it woke up again with a little shriek, and went on: “—that begins with an M, such as mouse-traps, and the moon, and memory, and muchness—you know you say things are “much of a muchness”—did you ever see such a thing as a drawing of a muchness?”

This piece of rudeness was more than Alice could bear: she got up in great disgust, and walked off; the Dormouse fell asleep instantly, and neither of the others took the least notice of her going, though she looked back once or twice, half hoping that they would call after her: the last time she saw them, they were trying to put the Dormouse into the teapot. “At any rate I’ll never go _there_ again!” said Alice as she picked her way through the wood. “It’s the stupidest tea-party I ever was at in all my life!” Just as she said this, she noticed that one of the trees had a door leading right into it. “That’s very curious!” she thought. “But everything’s curious today. I think I may as well go in at once.” And in she went. Once more she found herself in the long hall, and close to the little glass table. “Now, I’ll manage better this time,” she said to herself, and began by taking the little golden key, and unlocking the door that led into the garden. Then she went to work nibbling at the mushroom (she had kept a piece of it in her pocket) till she was about a foot high: then she walked down the little passage: and _then_—she found herself at last in the beautiful garden, among the bright flower-beds and the cool fountains.

A large rose-tree stood near the entrance of the garden: the roses growing on it were white, but there were three gardeners at it, busily painting them red. Alice thought this a very curious thing, and she went nearer to watch them, and just as she came up to them she heard one of them say, “Look out now, Five! Don’t go splashing paint over me like that!” Seven flung down his brush, and had just begun “Well, of all the unjust things—” when his eye chanced to fall upon Alice, as she stood watching them, and he checked himself suddenly: the others looked round also, and all of them bowed low. Five and Seven said nothing, but looked at Two. Two began in a low voice, “Why the fact is, you see, Miss, this here ought to have been a _red_ rose-tree, and we put a white one in by mistake; and if the Queen was to find it out, we should all have our heads cut off, you know. So you see, Miss, we’re doing our best, afore she comes, to—” At this moment Five, who had been anxiously looking across the garden, called out “The Queen! The Queen!” and the three gardeners instantly threw themselves flat upon their faces. There was a sound of many footsteps, and Alice looked round, eager to see the Queen.

First came ten soldiers carrying clubs; these were all shaped like the three gardeners, oblong and flat, with their hands and feet at the corners: next the ten courtiers; these were ornamented all over with diamonds, and walked two and two, as the soldiers did. After these came the royal children; there were ten of them, and the little dears came jumping merrily along hand in hand, in couples: they were all ornamented with hearts. Next came the guests, mostly Kings and Queens, and among them Alice recognised the White Rabbit: it was talking in a hurried nervous manner, smiling at everything that was said, and went by without noticing her. Then followed the Knave of Hearts, carrying the King’s crown on a crimson velvet cushion; and, last of all this grand procession, came THE KING AND QUEEN OF HEARTS. Alice was rather doubtful whether she ought not to lie down on her face like the three gardeners, but she could not remember ever having heard of such a rule at processions; “and besides, what would be the use of a procession,” thought she, “if people had all to lie down upon their faces, so that they couldn’t see it?” So she stood still where she was, and waited.

When the procession came opposite to Alice, they all stopped and looked at her, and the Queen said severely “Who is this?” She said it to the Knave of Hearts, who only bowed and smiled in reply. “My name is Alice, so please your Majesty,” said Alice very politely; but she added, to herself, “Why, they’re only a pack of cards, after all. I needn’t be afraid of them!” “And who are _these?_” said the Queen, pointing to the three gardeners who were lying round the rose-tree; for, you see, as they were lying on their faces, and the pattern on their backs was the same as the rest of the pack, she could not tell whether they were gardeners, or soldiers, or courtiers, or three of her own children. “Get up!” said the Queen, in a shrill, loud voice, and the three gardeners instantly jumped up, and began bowing to the King, the Queen, the royal children, and everybody else. “_I_ see!” said the Queen, who had meanwhile been examining the roses. “Off with their heads!” and the procession moved on, three of the soldiers remaining behind to execute the unfortunate gardeners, who ran to Alice for protection.

“You shan’t be beheaded!” said Alice, and she put them into a large flower-pot that stood near. The three soldiers wandered about for a minute or two, looking for them, and then quietly marched off after the others. “Hush! Hush!” said the Rabbit in a low, hurried tone. He looked anxiously over his shoulder as he spoke, and then raised himself upon tiptoe, put his mouth close to her ear, and whispered “She’s under sentence of execution.” “She boxed the Queen’s ears—” the Rabbit began. Alice gave a little scream of laughter. “Oh, hush!” the Rabbit whispered in a frightened tone. “The Queen will hear you! You see, she came rather late, and the Queen said—” “Get to your places!” shouted the Queen in a voice of thunder, and people began running about in all directions, tumbling up against each other; however, they got settled down in a minute or two, and the game began. Alice thought she had never seen such a curious croquet-ground in her life; it was all ridges and furrows; the balls were live hedgehogs, the mallets live flamingoes, and the soldiers had to double themselves up and to stand on their hands and feet, to make the arches.

The chief difficulty Alice found at first was in managing her flamingo: she succeeded in getting its body tucked away, comfortably enough, under her arm, with its legs hanging down, but generally, just as she had got its neck nicely straightened out, and was going to give the hedgehog a blow with its head, it _would_ twist itself round and look up in her face, with such a puzzled expression that she could not help bursting out laughing: and when she had got its head down, and was going to begin again, it was very provoking to find that the hedgehog had unrolled itself, and was in the act of crawling away: besides all this, there was generally a ridge or furrow in the way wherever she wanted to send the hedgehog to, and, as the doubled-up soldiers were always getting up and walking off to other parts of the ground, Alice soon came to the conclusion that it was a very difficult game indeed. The players all played at once without waiting for turns, quarrelling all the while, and fighting for the hedgehogs; and in a very short time the Queen was in a furious passion, and went stamping about, and shouting “Off with his head!” or “Off with her head!” about once in a minute.

Alice began to feel very uneasy: to be sure, she had not as yet had any dispute with the Queen, but she knew that it might happen any minute, “and then,” thought she, “what would become of me? They’re dreadfully fond of beheading people here; the great wonder is, that there’s any one left alive!” She was looking about for some way of escape, and wondering whether she could get away without being seen, when she noticed a curious appearance in the air: it puzzled her very much at first, but, after watching it a minute or two, she made it out to be a grin, and she said to herself “It’s the Cheshire Cat: now I shall have somebody to talk to.” Alice waited till the eyes appeared, and then nodded. “It’s no use speaking to it,” she thought, “till its ears have come, or at least one of them.” In another minute the whole head appeared, and then Alice put down her flamingo, and began an account of the game, feeling very glad she had someone to listen to her. The Cat seemed to think that there was enough of it now in sight, and no more of it appeared.

“I don’t think they play at all fairly,” Alice began, in rather a complaining tone, “and they all quarrel so dreadfully one can’t hear oneself speak—and they don’t seem to have any rules in particular; at least, if there are, nobody attends to them—and you’ve no idea how confusing it is all the things being alive; for instance, there’s the arch I’ve got to go through next walking about at the other end of the ground—and I should have croqueted the Queen’s hedgehog just now, only it ran away when it saw mine coming!” “Not at all,” said Alice: “she’s so extremely—” Just then she noticed that the Queen was close behind her, listening: so she went on, “—likely to win, that it’s hardly worth while finishing the game.” “Well, it must be removed,” said the King very decidedly, and he called the Queen, who was passing at the moment, “My dear! I wish you would have this cat removed!” Alice thought she might as well go back, and see how the game was going on, as she heard the Queen’s voice in the distance, screaming with passion. She had already heard her sentence three of the players to be executed for having missed their turns, and she did not like the look of things at all, as the game was in such confusion that she never knew whether it was her turn or not. So she went in search of her hedgehog.

The hedgehog was engaged in a fight with another hedgehog, which seemed to Alice an excellent opportunity for croqueting one of them with the other: the only difficulty was, that her flamingo was gone across to the other side of the garden, where Alice could see it trying in a helpless sort of way to fly up into a tree. By the time she had caught the flamingo and brought it back, the fight was over, and both the hedgehogs were out of sight: “but it doesn’t matter much,” thought Alice, “as all the arches are gone from this side of the ground.” So she tucked it away under her arm, that it might not escape again, and went back for a little more conversation with her friend. When she got back to the Cheshire Cat, she was surprised to find quite a large crowd collected round it: there was a dispute going on between the executioner, the King, and the Queen, who were all talking at once, while all the rest were quite silent, and looked very uncomfortable. The moment Alice appeared, she was appealed to by all three to settle the question, and they repeated their arguments to her, though, as they all spoke at once, she found it very hard indeed to make out exactly what they said.

The executioner’s argument was, that you couldn’t cut off a head unless there was a body to cut it off from: that he had never had to do such a thing before, and he wasn’t going to begin at _his_ time of life. The Queen’s argument was, that if something wasn’t done about it in less than no time she’d have everybody executed, all round. (It was this last remark that had made the whole party look so grave and anxious.) The Cat’s head began fading away the moment he was gone, and, by the time he had come back with the Duchess, it had entirely disappeared; so the King and the executioner ran wildly up and down looking for it, while the rest of the party went back to the game. “You can’t think how glad I am to see you again, you dear old thing!” said the Duchess, as she tucked her arm affectionately into Alice’s, and they walked off together. Alice was very glad to find her in such a pleasant temper, and thought to herself that perhaps it was only the pepper that had made her so savage when they met in the kitchen.

“When _I’m_ a Duchess,” she said to herself, (not in a very hopeful tone though), “I won’t have any pepper in my kitchen _at all_. Soup does very well without—Maybe it’s always pepper that makes people hot-tempered,” she went on, very much pleased at having found out a new kind of rule, “and vinegar that makes them sour—and camomile that makes them bitter—and—and barley-sugar and such things that make children sweet-tempered. I only wish people knew _that_: then they wouldn’t be so stingy about it, you know—” She had quite forgotten the Duchess by this time, and was a little startled when she heard her voice close to her ear. “You’re thinking about something, my dear, and that makes you forget to talk. I can’t tell you just now what the moral of that is, but I shall remember it in a bit.” “Tut, tut, child!” said the Duchess. “Everything’s got a moral, if only you can find it.” And she squeezed herself up closer to Alice’s side as she spoke. Alice did not much like keeping so close to her: first, because the Duchess was _very_ ugly; and secondly, because she was exactly the right height to rest her chin upon Alice’s shoulder, and it was an uncomfortably sharp chin. However, she did not like to be rude, so she bore it as well as she could.

“Ah, well! It means much the same thing,” said the Duchess, digging her sharp little chin into Alice’s shoulder as she added, “and the moral of _that_ is—‘Take care of the sense, and the sounds will take care of themselves.’” “I dare say you’re wondering why I don’t put my arm round your waist,” the Duchess said after a pause: “the reason is, that I’m doubtful about the temper of your flamingo. Shall I try the experiment?” “Of course it is,” said the Duchess, who seemed ready to agree to everything that Alice said; “there’s a large mustard-mine near here. And the moral of that is—‘The more there is of mine, the less there is of yours.’” “I quite agree with you,” said the Duchess; “and the moral of that is—‘Be what you would seem to be’—or if you’d like it put more simply—‘Never imagine yourself not to be otherwise than what it might appear to others that what you were or might have been was not otherwise than what you had been would have appeared to them to be otherwise.’”

But here, to Alice’s great surprise, the Duchess’s voice died away, even in the middle of her favourite word ‘moral,’ and the arm that was linked into hers began to tremble. Alice looked up, and there stood the Queen in front of them, with her arms folded, frowning like a thunderstorm. “Now, I give you fair warning,” shouted the Queen, stamping on the ground as she spoke; “either you or your head must be off, and that in about half no time! Take your choice!” “Let’s go on with the game,” the Queen said to Alice; and Alice was too much frightened to say a word, but slowly followed her back to the croquet-ground. The other guests had taken advantage of the Queen’s absence, and were resting in the shade: however, the moment they saw her, they hurried back to the game, the Queen merely remarking that a moment’s delay would cost them their lives. All the time they were playing the Queen never left off quarrelling with the other players, and shouting “Off with his head!” or “Off with her head!” Those whom she sentenced were taken into custody by the soldiers, who of course had to leave off being arches to do this, so that by the end of half an hour or so there were no arches left, and all the players, except the King, the Queen, and Alice, were in custody and under sentence of execution.

As they walked off together, Alice heard the King say in a low voice, to the company generally, “You are all pardoned.” “Come, _that’s_ a good thing!” she said to herself, for she had felt quite unhappy at the number of executions the Queen had ordered. They very soon came upon a Gryphon, lying fast asleep in the sun. (If you don’t know what a Gryphon is, look at the picture.) “Up, lazy thing!” said the Queen, “and take this young lady to see the Mock Turtle, and to hear his history. I must go back and see after some executions I have ordered;” and she walked off, leaving Alice alone with the Gryphon. Alice did not quite like the look of the creature, but on the whole she thought it would be quite as safe to stay with it as to go after that savage Queen: so she waited. The Gryphon sat up and rubbed its eyes: then it watched the Queen till she was out of sight: then it chuckled. “What fun!” said the Gryphon, half to itself, half to Alice.

They had not gone far before they saw the Mock Turtle in the distance, sitting sad and lonely on a little ledge of rock, and, as they came nearer, Alice could hear him sighing as if his heart would break. She pitied him deeply. “What is his sorrow?” she asked the Gryphon, and the Gryphon answered, very nearly in the same words as before, “It’s all his fancy, that: he hasn’t got no sorrow, you know. Come on!” So they sat down, and nobody spoke for some minutes. Alice thought to herself, “I don’t see how he can _ever_ finish, if he doesn’t begin.” But she waited patiently. These words were followed by a very long silence, broken only by an occasional exclamation of “Hjckrrh!” from the Gryphon, and the constant heavy sobbing of the Mock Turtle. Alice was very nearly getting up and saying, “Thank you, sir, for your interesting story,” but she could not help thinking there _must_ be more to come, so she sat still and said nothing. “When we were little,” the Mock Turtle went on at last, more calmly, though still sobbing a little now and then, “we went to school in the sea. The master was an old Turtle—we used to call him Tortoise—”

“You ought to be ashamed of yourself for asking such a simple question,” added the Gryphon; and then they both sat silent and looked at poor Alice, who felt ready to sink into the earth. At last the Gryphon said to the Mock Turtle, “Drive on, old fellow! Don’t be all day about it!” and he went on in these words: “Ah! then yours wasn’t a really good school,” said the Mock Turtle in a tone of great relief. “Now at _ours_ they had at the end of the bill, ‘French, music, _and washing_—extra.’” “Reeling and Writhing, of course, to begin with,” the Mock Turtle replied; “and then the different branches of Arithmetic—Ambition, Distraction, Uglification, and Derision.” “Well, there was Mystery,” the Mock Turtle replied, counting off the subjects on his flappers, “—Mystery, ancient and modern, with Seaography: then Drawling—the Drawling-master was an old conger-eel, that used to come once a week: _he_ taught us Drawling, Stretching, and Fainting in Coils.” This was quite a new idea to Alice, and she thought it over a little before she made her next remark. “Then the eleventh day must have been a holiday?”

The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and drew the back of one flapper across his eyes. He looked at Alice, and tried to speak, but for a minute or two sobs choked his voice. “Same as if he had a bone in his throat,” said the Gryphon: and it set to work shaking him and punching him in the back. At last the Mock Turtle recovered his voice, and, with tears running down his cheeks, he went on again:— “You may not have lived much under the sea—” (“I haven’t,” said Alice)—“and perhaps you were never even introduced to a lobster—” (Alice began to say “I once tasted—” but checked herself hastily, and said “No, never”) “—so you can have no idea what a delightful thing a Lobster Quadrille is!” “Back to land again, and that’s all the first figure,” said the Mock Turtle, suddenly dropping his voice; and the two creatures, who had been jumping about like mad things all this time, sat down again very sadly and quietly, and looked at Alice. So they began solemnly dancing round and round Alice, every now and then treading on her toes when they passed too close, and waving their forepaws to mark the time, while the Mock Turtle sang this, very slowly and sadly:—

“Will you walk a little faster?” said a whiting to a snail. “There’s a porpoise close behind us, and he’s treading on my tail. See how eagerly the lobsters and the turtles all advance! They are waiting on the shingle—will you come and join the dance? Will you, won’t you, will you, won’t you, will you join the dance? Will you, won’t you, will you, won’t you, won’t you join the dance? “You can really have no notion how delightful it will be When they take us up and throw us, with the lobsters, out to sea!” But the snail replied “Too far, too far!” and gave a look askance— Said he thanked the whiting kindly, but he would not join the dance. Would not, could not, would not, could not, would not join the dance. Would not, could not, would not, could not, could not join the dance. “Thank you, it’s a very interesting dance to watch,” said Alice, feeling very glad that it was over at last: “and I do so like that curious song about the whiting!”

“You’re wrong about the crumbs,” said the Mock Turtle: “crumbs would all wash off in the sea. But they _have_ their tails in their mouths; and the reason is—” here the Mock Turtle yawned and shut his eyes.—“Tell her about the reason and all that,” he said to the Gryphon. “The reason is,” said the Gryphon, “that they _would_ go with the lobsters to the dance. So they got thrown out to sea. So they had to fall a long way. So they got their tails fast in their mouths. So they couldn’t get them out again. That’s all.” “If I’d been the whiting,” said Alice, whose thoughts were still running on the song, “I’d have said to the porpoise, ‘Keep back, please: we don’t want _you_ with us!’” “I could tell you my adventures—beginning from this morning,” said Alice a little timidly: “but it’s no use going back to yesterday, because I was a different person then.” So Alice began telling them her adventures from the time when she first saw the White Rabbit. She was a little nervous about it just at first, the two creatures got so close to her, one on each side, and opened their eyes and mouths so _very_ wide, but she gained courage as she went on. Her listeners were perfectly quiet till she got to the part about her repeating “_You are old, Father William_,” to the Caterpillar, and the words all coming different, and then the Mock Turtle drew a long breath, and said “That’s very curious.”

“It all came different!” the Mock Turtle repeated thoughtfully. “I should like to hear her try and repeat something now. Tell her to begin.” He looked at the Gryphon as if he thought it had some kind of authority over Alice. “How the creatures order one about, and make one repeat lessons!” thought Alice; “I might as well be at school at once.” However, she got up, and began to repeat it, but her head was so full of the Lobster Quadrille, that she hardly knew what she was saying, and the words came very queer indeed:— “’Tis the voice of the Lobster; I heard him declare, “You have baked me too brown, I must sugar my hair.” As a duck with its eyelids, so he with his nose Trims his belt and his buttons, and turns out his toes.” [later editions continued as follows When the sands are all dry, he is gay as a lark, And will talk in contemptuous tones of the Shark, But, when the tide rises and sharks are around, His voice has a timid and tremulous sound.]

[later editions continued as follows The Panther took pie-crust, and gravy, and meat, While the Owl had the dish as its share of the treat. When the pie was all finished, the Owl, as a boon, Was kindly permitted to pocket the spoon: While the Panther received knife and fork with a growl, And concluded the banquet—] “What _is_ the use of repeating all that stuff,” the Mock Turtle interrupted, “if you don’t explain it as you go on? It’s by far the most confusing thing _I_ ever heard!” “Oh, a song, please, if the Mock Turtle would be so kind,” Alice replied, so eagerly that the Gryphon said, in a rather offended tone, “Hm! No accounting for tastes! Sing her ‘_Turtle Soup_,’ will you, old fellow?” “Beautiful Soup, so rich and green, Waiting in a hot tureen! Who for such dainties would not stoop? Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup! Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup! Beau—ootiful Soo—oop! Beau—ootiful Soo—oop! Soo—oop of the e—e—evening, Beautiful, beautiful Soup! “What trial is it?” Alice panted as she ran; but the Gryphon only answered “Come on!” and ran the faster, while more and more faintly came, carried on the breeze that followed them, the melancholy words:—

The King and Queen of Hearts were seated on their throne when they arrived, with a great crowd assembled about them—all sorts of little birds and beasts, as well as the whole pack of cards: the Knave was standing before them, in chains, with a soldier on each side to guard him; and near the King was the White Rabbit, with a trumpet in one hand, and a scroll of parchment in the other. In the very middle of the court was a table, with a large dish of tarts upon it: they looked so good, that it made Alice quite hungry to look at them—“I wish they’d get the trial done,” she thought, “and hand round the refreshments!” But there seemed to be no chance of this, so she began looking at everything about her, to pass away the time. Alice had never been in a court of justice before, but she had read about them in books, and she was quite pleased to find that she knew the name of nearly everything there. “That’s the judge,” she said to herself, “because of his great wig.”

The judge, by the way, was the King; and as he wore his crown over the wig, (look at the frontispiece if you want to see how he did it,) he did not look at all comfortable, and it was certainly not becoming. “And that’s the jury-box,” thought Alice, “and those twelve creatures,” (she was obliged to say “creatures,” you see, because some of them were animals, and some were birds,) “I suppose they are the jurors.” She said this last word two or three times over to herself, being rather proud of it: for she thought, and rightly too, that very few little girls of her age knew the meaning of it at all. However, “jury-men” would have done just as well. The twelve jurors were all writing very busily on slates. “What are they doing?” Alice whispered to the Gryphon. “They can’t have anything to put down yet, before the trial’s begun.” “Stupid things!” Alice began in a loud, indignant voice, but she stopped hastily, for the White Rabbit cried out, “Silence in the court!” and the King put on his spectacles and looked anxiously round, to make out who was talking.

Alice could see, as well as if she were looking over their shoulders, that all the jurors were writing down “stupid things!” on their slates, and she could even make out that one of them didn’t know how to spell “stupid,” and that he had to ask his neighbour to tell him. “A nice muddle their slates’ll be in before the trial’s over!” thought Alice. One of the jurors had a pencil that squeaked. This of course, Alice could _not_ stand, and she went round the court and got behind him, and very soon found an opportunity of taking it away. She did it so quickly that the poor little juror (it was Bill, the Lizard) could not make out at all what had become of it; so, after hunting all about for it, he was obliged to write with one finger for the rest of the day; and this was of very little use, as it left no mark on the slate. The first witness was the Hatter. He came in with a teacup in one hand and a piece of bread-and-butter in the other. “I beg pardon, your Majesty,” he began, “for bringing these in: but I hadn’t quite finished my tea when I was sent for.”

The Hatter looked at the March Hare, who had followed him into the court, arm-in-arm with the Dormouse. “Fourteenth of March, I _think_ it was,” he said. “Write that down,” the King said to the jury, and the jury eagerly wrote down all three dates on their slates, and then added them up, and reduced the answer to shillings and pence. This did not seem to encourage the witness at all: he kept shifting from one foot to the other, looking uneasily at the Queen, and in his confusion he bit a large piece out of his teacup instead of the bread-and-butter. Just at this moment Alice felt a very curious sensation, which puzzled her a good deal until she made out what it was: she was beginning to grow larger again, and she thought at first she would get up and leave the court; but on second thoughts she decided to remain where she was as long as there was room for her. “Yes, but _I_ grow at a reasonable pace,” said the Dormouse: “not in that ridiculous fashion.” And he got up very sulkily and crossed over to the other side of the court.

All this time the Queen had never left off staring at the Hatter, and, just as the Dormouse crossed the court, she said to one of the officers of the court, “Bring me the list of the singers in the last concert!” on which the wretched Hatter trembled so, that he shook both his shoes off. “I’m a poor man, your Majesty,” the Hatter began, in a trembling voice, “—and I hadn’t begun my tea—not above a week or so—and what with the bread-and-butter getting so thin—and the twinkling of the tea—” “Well, at any rate, the Dormouse said—” the Hatter went on, looking anxiously round to see if he would deny it too: but the Dormouse denied nothing, being fast asleep. Here one of the guinea-pigs cheered, and was immediately suppressed by the officers of the court. (As that is rather a hard word, I will just explain to you how it was done. They had a large canvas bag, which tied up at the mouth with strings: into this they slipped the guinea-pig, head first, and then sat upon it.)

“I’m glad I’ve seen that done,” thought Alice. “I’ve so often read in the newspapers, at the end of trials, “There was some attempts at applause, which was immediately suppressed by the officers of the court,” and I never understood what it meant till now.” “—and just take his head off outside,” the Queen added to one of the officers: but the Hatter was out of sight before the officer could get to the door. The next witness was the Duchess’s cook. She carried the pepper-box in her hand, and Alice guessed who it was, even before she got into the court, by the way the people near the door began sneezing all at once. “Well, if I must, I must,” the King said, with a melancholy air, and, after folding his arms and frowning at the cook till his eyes were nearly out of sight, he said in a deep voice, “What are tarts made of?” “Collar that Dormouse,” the Queen shrieked out. “Behead that Dormouse! Turn that Dormouse out of court! Suppress him! Pinch him! Off with his whiskers!”

For some minutes the whole court was in confusion, getting the Dormouse turned out, and, by the time they had settled down again, the cook had disappeared. “Never mind!” said the King, with an air of great relief. “Call the next witness.” And he added in an undertone to the Queen, “Really, my dear, _you_ must cross-examine the next witness. It quite makes my forehead ache!” Alice watched the White Rabbit as he fumbled over the list, feeling very curious to see what the next witness would be like, “—for they haven’t got much evidence _yet_,” she said to herself. Imagine her surprise, when the White Rabbit read out, at the top of his shrill little voice, the name “Alice!” “Here!” cried Alice, quite forgetting in the flurry of the moment how large she had grown in the last few minutes, and she jumped up in such a hurry that she tipped over the jury-box with the edge of her skirt, upsetting all the jurymen on to the heads of the crowd below, and there they lay sprawling about, reminding her very much of a globe of goldfish she had accidentally upset the week before.

“Oh, I _beg_ your pardon!” she exclaimed in a tone of great dismay, and began picking them up again as quickly as she could, for the accident of the goldfish kept running in her head, and she had a vague sort of idea that they must be collected at once and put back into the jury-box, or they would die. “The trial cannot proceed,” said the King in a very grave voice, “until all the jurymen are back in their proper places—_all_,” he repeated with great emphasis, looking hard at Alice as he said so. Alice looked at the jury-box, and saw that, in her haste, she had put the Lizard in head downwards, and the poor little thing was waving its tail about in a melancholy way, being quite unable to move. She soon got it out again, and put it right; “not that it signifies much,” she said to herself; “I should think it would be _quite_ as much use in the trial one way up as the other.” As soon as the jury had a little recovered from the shock of being upset, and their slates and pencils had been found and handed back to them, they set to work very diligently to write out a history of the accident, all except the Lizard, who seemed too much overcome to do anything but sit with its mouth open, gazing up into the roof of the court.

“That’s very important,” the King said, turning to the jury. They were just beginning to write this down on their slates, when the White Rabbit interrupted: “_Un_important, your Majesty means, of course,” he said in a very respectful tone, but frowning and making faces at him as he spoke. Some of the jury wrote it down “important,” and some “unimportant.” Alice could see this, as she was near enough to look over their slates; “but it doesn’t matter a bit,” she thought to herself. At this moment the King, who had been for some time busily writing in his note-book, cackled out “Silence!” and read out from his book, “Rule Forty-two. _All persons more than a mile high to leave the court_.” “It isn’t directed at all,” said the White Rabbit; “in fact, there’s nothing written on the _outside_.” He unfolded the paper as he spoke, and added “It isn’t a letter, after all: it’s a set of verses.” “If you didn’t sign it,” said the King, “that only makes the matter worse. You _must_ have meant some mischief, or else you’d have signed your name like an honest man.”

“If any one of them can explain it,” said Alice, (she had grown so large in the last few minutes that she wasn’t a bit afraid of interrupting him,) “I’ll give him sixpence. _I_ don’t believe there’s an atom of meaning in it.” “If there’s no meaning in it,” said the King, “that saves a world of trouble, you know, as we needn’t try to find any. And yet I don’t know,” he went on, spreading out the verses on his knee, and looking at them with one eye; “I seem to see some meaning in them, after all. “—_said I could not swim_—” you can’t swim, can you?” he added, turning to the Knave. “All right, so far,” said the King, and he went on muttering over the verses to himself: “‘_We know it to be true_—’ that’s the jury, of course—‘_I gave her one, they gave him two_—’ why, that must be what he did with the tarts, you know—” “Why, there they are!” said the King triumphantly, pointing to the tarts on the table. “Nothing can be clearer than _that_. Then again—‘_before she had this fit_—’ you never had fits, my dear, I think?” he said to the Queen.

“Never!” said the Queen furiously, throwing an inkstand at the Lizard as she spoke. (The unfortunate little Bill had left off writing on his slate with one finger, as he found it made no mark; but he now hastily began again, using the ink, that was trickling down his face, as long as it lasted.) “It’s a pun!” the King added in an offended tone, and everybody laughed, “Let the jury consider their verdict,” the King said, for about the twentieth time that day. At this the whole pack rose up into the air, and came flying down upon her: she gave a little scream, half of fright and half of anger, and tried to beat them off, and found herself lying on the bank, with her head in the lap of her sister, who was gently brushing away some dead leaves that had fluttered down from the trees upon her face. “Oh, I’ve had such a curious dream!” said Alice, and she told her sister, as well as she could remember them, all these strange Adventures of hers that you have just been reading about; and when she had finished, her sister kissed her, and said, “It _was_ a curious dream, dear, certainly: but now run in to your tea; it’s getting late.” So Alice got up and ran off, thinking while she ran, as well she might, what a wonderful dream it had been.

But her sister sat still just as she left her, leaning her head on her hand, watching the setting sun, and thinking of little Alice and all her wonderful Adventures, till she too began dreaming after a fashion, and this was her dream:— First, she dreamed of little Alice herself, and once again the tiny hands were clasped upon her knee, and the bright eager eyes were looking up into hers—she could hear the very tones of her voice, and see that queer little toss of her head to keep back the wandering hair that _would_ always get into her eyes—and still as she listened, or seemed to listen, the whole place around her became alive with the strange creatures of her little sister’s dream. The long grass rustled at her feet as the White Rabbit hurried by—the frightened Mouse splashed his way through the neighbouring pool—she could hear the rattle of the teacups as the March Hare and his friends shared their never-ending meal, and the shrill voice of the Queen ordering off her unfortunate guests to execution—once more the pig-baby was sneezing on the Duchess’s knee, while plates and dishes crashed around it—once more the shriek of the Gryphon, the squeaking of the Lizard’s slate-pencil, and the choking of the suppressed guinea-pigs, filled the air, mixed up with the distant sobs of the miserable Mock Turtle.

So she sat on, with closed eyes, and half believed herself in Wonderland, though she knew she had but to open them again, and all would change to dull reality—the grass would be only rustling in the wind, and the pool rippling to the waving of the reeds—the rattling teacups would change to tinkling sheep-bells, and the Queen’s shrill cries to the voice of the shepherd boy—and the sneeze of the baby, the shriek of the Gryphon, and all the other queer noises, would change (she knew) to the confused clamour of the busy farm-yard—while the lowing of the cattle in the distance would take the place of the Mock Turtle’s heavy sobs. Lastly, she pictured to herself how this same little sister of hers would, in the after-time, be herself a grown woman; and how she would keep, through all her riper years, the simple and loving heart of her childhood: and how she would gather about her other little children, and make _their_ eyes bright and eager with many a strange tale, perhaps even with the dream of Wonderland of long ago: and how she would feel with all their simple sorrows, and find a pleasure in all their simple joys, remembering her own child-life, and the happy summer days.

I HAVE endeavoured in this Ghostly little book, to raise the Ghost of an Idea, which shall not put my readers out of humour with themselves, with each other, with the season, or with me. May it haunt their houses pleasantly, and no one wish to lay it. Stave I: Marley's Ghost Stave II: The First of the Three Spirits Stave III: The Second of the Three Spirits Stave IV: The Last of the Spirits Stave V: The End of It MARLEY was dead: to begin with. There is no doubt whatever about that. The register of his burial was signed by the clergyman, the clerk, the undertaker, and the chief mourner. Scrooge signed it: and Scrooge's name was good upon 'Change, for anything he chose to put his hand to. Old Marley was as dead as a door-nail. Mind! I don't mean to say that I know, of my own knowledge, what there is particularly dead about a door-nail. I might have been inclined, myself, to regard a coffin-nail as the deadest piece of ironmongery in the trade. But the wisdom of our ancestors is in the simile; and my unhallowed hands shall not disturb it, or the Country's done for. You will therefore permit me to repeat, emphatically, that Marley was as dead as a door-nail.

Scrooge knew he was dead? Of course he did. How could it be otherwise? Scrooge and he were partners for I don't know how many years. Scrooge was his sole executor, his sole administrator, his sole assign, his sole residuary legatee, his sole friend, and sole mourner. And even Scrooge was not so dreadfully cut up by the sad event, but that he was an excellent man of business on the very day of the funeral, and solemnised it with an undoubted bargain. The mention of Marley's funeral brings me back to the point I started from. There is no doubt that Marley was dead. This must be distinctly understood, or nothing wonderful can come of the story I am going to relate. If we were not perfectly convinced that Hamlet's Father died before the play began, there would be nothing more remarkable in his taking a stroll at night, in an easterly wind, upon his own ramparts, than there would be in any other middle-aged gentleman rashly turning out after dark in a breezy spot--say Saint Paul's Churchyard for instance-- literally to astonish his son's weak mind.

Scrooge never painted out Old Marley's name. There it stood, years afterwards, above the warehouse door: Scrooge and Marley. The firm was known as Scrooge and Marley. Sometimes people new to the business called Scrooge Scrooge, and sometimes Marley, but he answered to both names. It was all the same to him. Oh! But he was a tight-fisted hand at the grind-stone, Scrooge! a squeezing, wrenching, grasping, scraping, clutching, covetous, old sinner! Hard and sharp as flint, from which no steel had ever struck out generous fire; secret, and self-contained, and solitary as an oyster. The cold within him froze his old features, nipped his pointed nose, shrivelled his cheek, stiffened his gait; made his eyes red, his thin lips blue; and spoke out shrewdly in his grating voice. A frosty rime was on his head, and on his eyebrows, and his wiry chin. He carried his own low temperature always about with him; he iced his office in the dog-days; and didn't thaw it one degree at Christmas. External heat and cold had little influence on Scrooge. No warmth could warm, no wintry weather chill him. No wind that blew was bitterer than he, no falling snow was more intent upon its purpose, no pelting rain less open to entreaty. Foul weather didn't know where to have him. The heaviest rain, and snow, and hail, and sleet, could boast of the advantage over him in only one respect. They often "came down" handsomely, and Scrooge never did.

Nobody ever stopped him in the street to say, with gladsome looks, "My dear Scrooge, how are you? When will you come to see me?" No beggars implored him to bestow a trifle, no children asked him what it was o'clock, no man or woman ever once in all his life inquired the way to such and such a place, of Scrooge. Even the blind men's dogs appeared to know him; and when they saw him coming on, would tug their owners into doorways and up courts; and then would wag their tails as though they said, "No eye at all is better than an evil eye, dark master!" But what did Scrooge care! It was the very thing he liked. To edge his way along the crowded paths of life, warning all human sympathy to keep its distance, was what the knowing ones call "nuts" to Scrooge. Once upon a time--of all the good days in the year, on Christmas Eve--old Scrooge sat busy in his counting-house. It was cold, bleak, biting weather: foggy withal: and he could hear the people in the court outside, go wheezing up and down, beating their hands upon their breasts, and stamping their feet upon the pavement stones to warm them. The city clocks had only just gone three, but it was quite dark already-- it had not been light all day--and candles were flaring in the windows of the neighbouring offices, like ruddy smears upon the palpable brown air. The fog came pouring in at every chink and keyhole, and was so dense without, that although the court was of the narrowest, the houses opposite were mere phantoms. To see the dingy cloud come drooping down, obscuring everything, one might have thought that Nature lived hard by, and was brewing on a large scale.

The door of Scrooge's counting-house was open that he might keep his eye upon his clerk, who in a dismal little cell beyond, a sort of tank, was copying letters. Scrooge had a very small fire, but the clerk's fire was so very much smaller that it looked like one coal. But he couldn't replenish it, for Scrooge kept the coal-box in his own room; and so surely as the clerk came in with the shovel, the master predicted that it would be necessary for them to part. Wherefore the clerk put on his white comforter, and tried to warm himself at the candle; in which effort, not being a man of a strong imagination, he failed. "A merry Christmas, uncle! God save you!" cried a cheerful voice. It was the voice of Scrooge's nephew, who came upon him so quickly that this was the first intimation he had of his approach. He had so heated himself with rapid walking in the fog and frost, this nephew of Scrooge's, that he was all in a glow; his face was ruddy and handsome; his eyes sparkled, and his breath smoked again.

"What else can I be," returned the uncle, "when I live in such a world of fools as this? Merry Christmas! Out upon merry Christmas! What's Christmas time to you but a time for paying bills without money; a time for finding yourself a year older, but not an hour richer; a time for balancing your books and having every item in 'em through a round dozen of months presented dead against you? If I could work my will," said Scrooge indignantly, "every idiot who goes about with 'Merry Christmas' on his lips, should be boiled with his own pudding, and buried with a stake of holly through his heart. He should!" "There are many things from which I might have derived good, by which I have not profited, I dare say," returned the nephew. "Christmas among the rest. But I am sure I have always thought of Christmas time, when it has come round--apart from the veneration due to its sacred name and origin, if anything belonging to it can be apart from that--as a good time; a kind, forgiving, charitable, pleasant time; the only time I know of, in the long calendar of the year, when men and women seem by one consent to open their shut-up hearts freely, and to think of people below them as if they really were fellow-passengers to the grave, and not another race of creatures bound on other journeys. And therefore, uncle, though it has never put a scrap of gold or silver in my pocket, I believe that it has done me good, and will do me good; and I say, God bless it!"

The clerk in the Tank involuntarily applauded. Becoming immediately sensible of the impropriety, he poked the fire, and extinguished the last frail spark for ever. "Let me hear another sound from you," said Scrooge, "and you'll keep your Christmas by losing your situation! You're quite a powerful speaker, sir," he added, turning to his nephew. "I wonder you don't go into Parliament." Scrooge said that he would see him--yes, indeed he did. He went the whole length of the expression, and said that he would see him in that extremity first. "Because you fell in love!" growled Scrooge, as if that were the only one thing in the world more ridiculous than a merry Christmas. "Good afternoon!" "I am sorry, with all my heart, to find you so resolute. We have never had any quarrel, to which I have been a party. But I have made the trial in homage to Christmas, and I'll keep my Christmas humour to the last. So A Merry Christmas, uncle!" His nephew left the room without an angry word, notwithstanding. He stopped at the outer door to bestow the greetings of the season on the clerk, who, cold as he was, was warmer than Scrooge; for he returned them cordially.

"There's another fellow," muttered Scrooge; who overheard him: "my clerk, with fifteen shillings a week, and a wife and family, talking about a merry Christmas. I'll retire to Bedlam." This lunatic, in letting Scrooge's nephew out, had let two other people in. They were portly gentlemen, pleasant to behold, and now stood, with their hats off, in Scrooge's office. They had books and papers in their hands, and bowed to him. It certainly was; for they had been two kindred spirits. At the ominous word "liberality," Scrooge frowned, and shook his head, and handed the credentials back. "At this festive season of the year, Mr. Scrooge," said the gentleman, taking up a pen, "it is more than usually desirable that we should make some slight provision for the Poor and destitute, who suffer greatly at the present time. Many thousands are in want of common necessaries; hundreds of thousands are in want of common comforts, sir." "Oh! I was afraid, from what you said at first, that something had occurred to stop them in their useful course," said Scrooge. "I'm very glad to hear it."

"Under the impression that they scarcely furnish Christian cheer of mind or body to the multitude," returned the gentleman, "a few of us are endeavouring to raise a fund to buy the Poor some meat and drink, and means of warmth. We choose this time, because it is a time, of all others, when Want is keenly felt, and Abundance rejoices. What shall I put you down for?" "I wish to be left alone," said Scrooge. "Since you ask me what I wish, gentlemen, that is my answer. I don't make merry myself at Christmas and I can't afford to make idle people merry. I help to support the establishments I have mentioned--they cost enough; and those who are badly off must go there." "It's not my business," Scrooge returned. "It's enough for a man to understand his own business, and not to interfere with other people's. Mine occupies me constantly. Good afternoon, gentlemen!" Seeing clearly that it would be useless to pursue their point, the gentlemen withdrew. Scrooge resumed his labours with an improved opinion of himself, and in a more facetious temper than was usual with him.

Meanwhile the fog and darkness thickened so, that people ran about with flaring links, proffering their services to go before horses in carriages, and conduct them on their way. The ancient tower of a church, whose gruff old bell was always peeping slily down at Scrooge out of a Gothic window in the wall, became invisible, and struck the hours and quarters in the clouds, with tremulous vibrations afterwards as if its teeth were chattering in its frozen head up there. The cold became intense. In the main street, at the corner of the court, some labourers were repairing the gas-pipes, and had lighted a great fire in a brazier, round which a party of ragged men and boys were gathered: warming their hands and winking their eyes before the blaze in rapture. The water-plug being left in solitude, its overflowings sullenly congealed, and turned to misanthropic ice. The brightness of the shops where holly sprigs and berries crackled in the lamp heat of the windows, made pale faces ruddy as they passed. Poulterers' and grocers' trades became a splendid joke: a glorious pageant, with which it was next to impossible to believe that such dull principles as bargain and sale had anything to do. The Lord Mayor, in the stronghold of the mighty Mansion House, gave orders to his fifty cooks and butlers to keep Christmas as a Lord Mayor's household should; and even the little tailor, whom he had fined five shillings on the previous Monday for being drunk and bloodthirsty in the streets, stirred up to-morrow's pudding in his garret, while his lean wife and the baby sallied out to buy the beef.

Foggier yet, and colder. Piercing, searching, biting cold. If the good Saint Dunstan had but nipped the Evil Spirit's nose with a touch of such weather as that, instead of using his familiar weapons, then indeed he would have roared to lusty purpose. The owner of one scant young nose, gnawed and mumbled by the hungry cold as bones are gnawed by dogs, stooped down at Scrooge's keyhole to regale him with a Christmas carol: but at the first sound of At length the hour of shutting up the counting-house arrived. With an ill-will Scrooge dismounted from his stool, and tacitly admitted the fact to the expectant clerk in the Tank, who instantly snuffed his candle out, and put on his hat. "A poor excuse for picking a man's pocket every twenty-fifth of December!" said Scrooge, buttoning his great-coat to the chin. "But I suppose you must have the whole day. Be here all the earlier next morning." The clerk promised that he would; and Scrooge walked out with a growl. The office was closed in a twinkling, and the clerk, with the long ends of his white comforter dangling below his waist (for he boasted no great-coat), went down a slide on Cornhill, at the end of a lane of boys, twenty times, in honour of its being Christmas Eve, and then ran home to Camden Town as hard as he could pelt, to play at blindman's-buff.

Scrooge took his melancholy dinner in his usual melancholy tavern; and having read all the newspapers, and beguiled the rest of the evening with his banker's-book, went home to bed. He lived in chambers which had once belonged to his deceased partner. They were a gloomy suite of rooms, in a lowering pile of building up a yard, where it had so little business to be, that one could scarcely help fancying it must have run there when it was a young house, playing at hide-and-seek with other houses, and forgotten the way out again. It was old enough now, and dreary enough, for nobody lived in it but Scrooge, the other rooms being all let out as offices. The yard was so dark that even Scrooge, who knew its every stone, was fain to grope with his hands. The fog and frost so hung about the black old gateway of the house, that it seemed as if the Genius of the Weather sat in mournful meditation on the threshold. Now, it is a fact, that there was nothing at all particular about the knocker on the door, except that it was very large. It is also a fact, that Scrooge had seen it, night and morning, during his whole residence in that place; also that Scrooge had as little of what is called fancy about him as any man in the city of London, even including--which is a bold word--the corporation, aldermen, and livery. Let it also be borne in mind that Scrooge had not bestowed one thought on Marley, since his last mention of his seven years' dead partner that afternoon. And then let any man explain to me, if he can, how it happened that Scrooge, having his key in the lock of the door, saw in the knocker, without its undergoing any intermediate process of change--not a knocker, but Marley's face.

Marley's face. It was not in impenetrable shadow as the other objects in the yard were, but had a dismal light about it, like a bad lobster in a dark cellar. It was not angry or ferocious, but looked at Scrooge as Marley used to look: with ghostly spectacles turned up on its ghostly forehead. The hair was curiously stirred, as if by breath or hot air; and, though the eyes were wide open, they were perfectly motionless. That, and its livid colour, made it horrible; but its horror seemed to be in spite of the face and beyond its control, rather than a part of its own expression. To say that he was not startled, or that his blood was not conscious of a terrible sensation to which it had been a stranger from infancy, would be untrue. But he put his hand upon the key he had relinquished, turned it sturdily, walked in, and lighted his candle. He did pause, with a moment's irresolution, before he shut the door; and he did look cautiously behind it first, as if he half expected to be terrified with the sight of Marley's pigtail sticking out into the hall. But there was nothing on the back of the door, except the screws and nuts that held the knocker on, so he said "Pooh, pooh!" and closed it with a bang.

The sound resounded through the house like thunder. Every room above, and every cask in the wine-merchant's cellars below, appeared to have a separate peal of echoes of its own. Scrooge was not a man to be frightened by echoes. He fastened the door, and walked across the hall, and up the stairs; slowly too: trimming his candle as he went. You may talk vaguely about driving a coach-and-six up a good old flight of stairs, or through a bad young Act of Parliament; but I mean to say you might have got a hearse up that staircase, and taken it broadwise, with the splinter-bar towards the wall and the door towards the balustrades: and done it easy. There was plenty of width for that, and room to spare; which is perhaps the reason why Scrooge thought he saw a locomotive hearse going on before him in the gloom. Half-a-dozen gas-lamps out of the street wouldn't have lighted the entry too well, so you may suppose that it was pretty dark with Scrooge's dip. Up Scrooge went, not caring a button for that. Darkness is cheap, and Scrooge liked it. But before he shut his heavy door, he walked through his rooms to see that all was right. He had just enough recollection of the face to desire to do that.

Sitting-room, bedroom, lumber-room. All as they should be. Nobody under the table, nobody under the sofa; a small fire in the grate; spoon and basin ready; and the little saucepan of gruel (Scrooge had a cold in his head) upon the hob. Nobody under the bed; nobody in the closet; nobody in his dressing-gown, which was hanging up in a suspicious attitude against the wall. Lumber-room as usual. Old fire-guard, old shoes, two fish-baskets, washing-stand on three legs, and a poker. Quite satisfied, he closed his door, and locked himself in; double-locked himself in, which was not his custom. Thus secured against surprise, he took off his cravat; put on his dressing-gown and slippers, and his nightcap; and sat down before the fire to take his gruel. It was a very low fire indeed; nothing on such a bitter night. He was obliged to sit close to it, and brood over it, before he could extract the least sensation of warmth from such a handful of fuel. The fireplace was an old one, built by some Dutch merchant long ago, and paved all round with quaint Dutch tiles, designed to illustrate the Scriptures. There were Cains and Abels, Pharaoh's daughters; Queens of Sheba, Angelic messengers descending through the air on clouds like feather-beds, Abrahams, Belshazzars, Apostles putting off to sea in butter-boats, hundreds of figures to attract his thoughts; and yet that face of Marley, seven years dead, came like the ancient Prophet's rod, and swallowed up the whole. If each smooth tile had been a blank at first, with power to shape some picture on its surface from the disjointed fragments of his thoughts, there would have been a copy of old Marley's head on every one.

After several turns, he sat down again. As he threw his head back in the chair, his glance happened to rest upon a bell, a disused bell, that hung in the room, and communicated for some purpose now forgotten with a chamber in the highest story of the building. It was with great astonishment, and with a strange, inexplicable dread, that as he looked, he saw this bell begin to swing. It swung so softly in the outset that it scarcely made a sound; but soon it rang out loudly, and so did every bell in the house. This might have lasted half a minute, or a minute, but it seemed an hour. The bells ceased as they had begun, together. They were succeeded by a clanking noise, deep down below; as if some person were dragging a heavy chain over the casks in the wine-merchant's cellar. Scrooge then remembered to have heard that ghosts in haunted houses were described as dragging chains. The cellar-door flew open with a booming sound, and then he heard the noise much louder, on the floors below; then coming up the stairs; then coming straight towards his door.

His colour changed though, when, without a pause, it came on through the heavy door, and passed into the room before his eyes. Upon its coming in, the dying flame leaped up, as though it cried, "I know him; Marley's Ghost!" and fell again. The same face: the very same. Marley in his pigtail, usual waistcoat, tights and boots; the tassels on the latter bristling, like his pigtail, and his coat-skirts, and the hair upon his head. The chain he drew was clasped about his middle. It was long, and wound about him like a tail; and it was made (for Scrooge observed it closely) of cash-boxes, keys, padlocks, ledgers, deeds, and heavy purses wrought in steel. His body was transparent; so that Scrooge, observing him, and looking through his waistcoat, could see the two buttons on his coat behind. No, nor did he believe it even now. Though he looked the phantom through and through, and saw it standing before him; though he felt the chilling influence of its death-cold eyes; and marked the very texture of the folded kerchief bound about its head and chin, which wrapper he had not observed before; he was still incredulous, and fought against his senses.

"Who were you then?" said Scrooge, raising his voice. "You're particular, for a shade." He was going to say "to a shade," but substituted this, as more appropriate. Scrooge asked the question, because he didn't know whether a ghost so transparent might find himself in a condition to take a chair; and felt that in the event of its being impossible, it might involve the necessity of an embarrassing explanation. But the ghost sat down on the opposite side of the fireplace, as if he were quite used to it. "Because," said Scrooge, "a little thing affects them. A slight disorder of the stomach makes them cheats. You may be an undigested bit of beef, a blot of mustard, a crumb of cheese, a fragment of an underdone potato. There's more of gravy than of grave about you, whatever you are!" Scrooge was not much in the habit of cracking jokes, nor did he feel, in his heart, by any means waggish then. The truth is, that he tried to be smart, as a means of distracting his own attention, and keeping down his terror; for the spectre's voice disturbed the very marrow in his bones.

To sit, staring at those fixed glazed eyes, in silence for a moment, would play, Scrooge felt, the very deuce with him. There was something very awful, too, in the spectre's being provided with an infernal atmosphere of its own. Scrooge could not feel it himself, but this was clearly the case; for though the Ghost sat perfectly motionless, its hair, and skirts, and tassels, were still agitated as by the hot vapour from an oven. "You see this toothpick?" said Scrooge, returning quickly to the charge, for the reason just assigned; and wishing, though it were only for a second, to divert the vision's stony gaze from himself. "Well!" returned Scrooge, "I have but to swallow this, and be for the rest of my days persecuted by a legion of goblins, all of my own creation. Humbug, I tell you! humbug!" At this the spirit raised a frightful cry, and shook its chain with such a dismal and appalling noise, that Scrooge held on tight to his chair, to save himself from falling in a swoon. But how much greater was his horror, when the phantom taking off the bandage round its head, as if it were too warm to wear indoors, its lower jaw dropped down upon its breast!

"It is required of every man," the Ghost returned, "that the spirit within him should walk abroad among his fellowmen, and travel far and wide; and if that spirit goes not forth in life, it is condemned to do so after death. It is doomed to wander through the world--oh, woe is me!--and witness what it cannot share, but might have shared on earth, and turned to happiness!" "I wear the chain I forged in life," replied the Ghost. "I made it link by link, and yard by yard; I girded it on of my own free will, and of my own free will I wore it. Is its pattern strange to you?" "Or would you know," pursued the Ghost, "the weight and length of the strong coil you bear yourself? It was full as heavy and as long as this, seven Christmas Eves ago. You have laboured on it, since. It is a ponderous chain!" Scrooge glanced about him on the floor, in the expectation of finding himself surrounded by some fifty or sixty fathoms of iron cable: but he could see nothing.

"I have none to give," the Ghost replied. "It comes from other regions, Ebenezer Scrooge, and is conveyed by other ministers, to other kinds of men. Nor can I tell you what I would. A very little more is all permitted to me. I cannot rest, I cannot stay, I cannot linger anywhere. My spirit never walked beyond our counting-house--mark me!--in life my spirit never roved beyond the narrow limits of our money-changing hole; and weary journeys lie before me!" It was a habit with Scrooge, whenever he became thoughtful, to put his hands in his breeches pockets. Pondering on what the Ghost had said, he did so now, but without lifting up his eyes, or getting off his knees. The Ghost, on hearing this, set up another cry, and clanked its chain so hideously in the dead silence of the night, that the Ward would have been justified in indicting it for a nuisance. "Oh! captive, bound, and double-ironed," cried the phantom, "not to know, that ages of incessant labour by immortal creatures, for this earth must pass into eternity before the good of which it is susceptible is all developed. Not to know that any Christian spirit working kindly in its little sphere, whatever it may be, will find its mortal life too short for its vast means of usefulness. Not to know that no space of regret can make amends for one life's opportunity misused! Yet such was I! Oh! such was I!"

"Business!" cried the Ghost, wringing its hands again. "Mankind was my business. The common welfare was my business; charity, mercy, forbearance, and benevolence, were, all, my business. The dealings of my trade were but a drop of water in the comprehensive ocean of my business!" "At this time of the rolling year," the spectre said, "I suffer most. Why did I walk through crowds of fellow-beings with my eyes turned down, and never raise them to that blessed Star which led the Wise Men to a poor abode! Were there no poor homes to which its light would have conducted me!" "That is no light part of my penance," pursued the Ghost. "I am here to-night to warn you, that you have yet a chance and hope of escaping my fate. A chance and hope of my procuring, Ebenezer." "Expect the second on the next night at the same hour. The third upon the next night when the last stroke of Twelve has ceased to vibrate. Look to see me no more; and look that, for your own sake, you remember what has passed between us!"

When it had said these words, the spectre took its wrapper from the table, and bound it round its head, as before. Scrooge knew this, by the smart sound its teeth made, when the jaws were brought together by the bandage. He ventured to raise his eyes again, and found his supernatural visitor confronting him in an erect attitude, with its chain wound over and about its arm. The apparition walked backward from him; and at every step it took, the window raised itself a little, so that when the spectre reached it, it was wide open. It beckoned Scrooge to approach, which he did. When they were within two paces of each other, Marley's Ghost held up its hand, warning him to come no nearer. Scrooge stopped. Not so much in obedience, as in surprise and fear: for on the raising of the hand, he became sensible of confused noises in the air; incoherent sounds of lamentation and regret; wailings inexpressibly sorrowful and self-accusatory. The spectre, after listening for a moment, joined in the mournful dirge; and floated out upon the bleak, dark night.

The air was filled with phantoms, wandering hither and thither in restless haste, and moaning as they went. Every one of them wore chains like Marley's Ghost; some few (they might be guilty governments) were linked together; none were free. Many had been personally known to Scrooge in their lives. He had been quite familiar with one old ghost, in a white waistcoat, with a monstrous iron safe attached to its ankle, who cried piteously at being unable to assist a wretched woman with an infant, whom it saw below, upon a door-step. The misery with them all was, clearly, that they sought to interfere, for good, in human matters, and had lost the power for ever. Whether these creatures faded into mist, or mist enshrouded them, he could not tell. But they and their spirit voices faded together; and the night became as it had been when he walked home. Scrooge closed the window, and examined the door by which the Ghost had entered. It was double-locked, as he had locked it with his own hands, and the bolts were undisturbed. He tried to say "Humbug!" but stopped at the first syllable. And being, from the emotion he had undergone, or the fatigues of the day, or his glimpse of the Invisible World, or the dull conversation of the Ghost, or the lateness of the hour, much in need of repose; went straight to bed, without undressing, and fell asleep upon the instant.

WHEN Scrooge awoke, it was so dark, that looking out of bed, he could scarcely distinguish the transparent window from the opaque walls of his chamber. He was endeavouring to pierce the darkness with his ferret eyes, when the chimes of a neighbouring church struck the four quarters. So he listened for the hour. To his great astonishment the heavy bell went on from six to seven, and from seven to eight, and regularly up to twelve; then stopped. Twelve! It was past two when he went to bed. The clock was wrong. An icicle must have got into the works. Twelve! "Why, it isn't possible," said Scrooge, "that I can have slept through a whole day and far into another night. It isn't possible that anything has happened to the sun, and this is twelve at noon!" The idea being an alarming one, he scrambled out of bed, and groped his way to the window. He was obliged to rub the frost off with the sleeve of his dressing-gown before he could see anything; and could see very little then. All he could make out was, that it was still very foggy and extremely cold, and that there was no noise of people running to and fro, and making a great stir, as there unquestionably would have been if night had beaten off bright day, and taken possession of the world. This was a great relief, because "three days after sight of this First of Exchange pay to Mr. Ebenezer Scrooge or his order," and so forth, would have become a mere United States' security if there were no days to count by.

Scrooge went to bed again, and thought, and thought, and thought it over and over and over, and could make nothing of it. The more he thought, the more perplexed he was; and the more he endeavoured not to think, the more he thought. Marley's Ghost bothered him exceedingly. Every time he resolved within himself, after mature inquiry, that it was all a dream, his mind flew back again, like a strong spring released, to its first position, and presented the same problem to be worked all through, "Was it a dream or not?" Scrooge lay in this state until the chime had gone three quarters more, when he remembered, on a sudden, that the Ghost had warned him of a visitation when the bell tolled one. He resolved to lie awake until the hour was passed; and, considering that he could no more go to sleep than go to Heaven, this was perhaps the wisest resolution in his power. The quarter was so long, that he was more than once convinced he must have sunk into a doze unconsciously, and missed the clock. At length it broke upon his listening ear.

He spoke before the hour bell sounded, which it now did with a deep, dull, hollow, melancholy ONE. Light flashed up in the room upon the instant, and the curtains of his bed were drawn. The curtains of his bed were drawn aside, I tell you, by a hand. Not the curtains at his feet, nor the curtains at his back, but those to which his face was addressed. The curtains of his bed were drawn aside; and Scrooge, starting up into a half-recumbent attitude, found himself face to face with the unearthly visitor who drew them: as close to it as I am now to you, and I am standing in the spirit at your elbow. It was a strange figure--like a child: yet not so like a child as like an old man, viewed through some supernatural medium, which gave him the appearance of having receded from the view, and being diminished to a child's proportions. Its hair, which hung about its neck and down its back, was white as if with age; and yet the face had not a wrinkle in it, and the tenderest bloom was on the skin. The arms were very long and muscular; the hands the same, as if its hold were of uncommon strength. Its legs and feet, most delicately formed, were, like those upper members, bare. It wore a tunic of the purest white; and round its waist was bound a lustrous belt, the sheen of which was beautiful. It held a branch of fresh green holly in its hand; and, in singular contradiction of that wintry emblem, had its dress trimmed with summer flowers. But the strangest thing about it was, that from the crown of its head there sprung a bright clear jet of light, by which all this was visible; and which was doubtless the occasion of its using, in its duller moments, a great extinguisher for a cap, which it now held under its arm.

Even this, though, when Scrooge looked at it with increasing steadiness, was not its strangest quality. For as its belt sparkled and glittered now in one part and now in another, and what was light one instant, at another time was dark, so the figure itself fluctuated in its distinctness: being now a thing with one arm, now with one leg, now with twenty legs, now a pair of legs without a head, now a head without a body: of which dissolving parts, no outline would be visible in the dense gloom wherein they melted away. And in the very wonder of this, it would be itself again; distinct and clear as ever. Perhaps, Scrooge could not have told anybody why, if anybody could have asked him; but he had a special desire to see the Spirit in his cap; and begged him to be covered. "What!" exclaimed the Ghost, "would you so soon put out, with worldly hands, the light I give? Is it not enough that you are one of those whose passions made this cap, and force me through whole trains of years to wear it low upon my brow!"

Scrooge reverently disclaimed all intention to offend or any knowledge of having wilfully "bonneted" the Spirit at any period of his life. He then made bold to inquire what business brought him there. Scrooge expressed himself much obliged, but could not help thinking that a night of unbroken rest would have been more conducive to that end. The Spirit must have heard him thinking, for it said immediately: It would have been in vain for Scrooge to plead that the weather and the hour were not adapted to pedestrian purposes; that bed was warm, and the thermometer a long way below freezing; that he was clad but lightly in his slippers, dressing-gown, and nightcap; and that he had a cold upon him at that time. The grasp, though gentle as a woman's hand, was not to be resisted. He rose: but finding that the Spirit made towards the window, clasped his robe in supplication. As the words were spoken, they passed through the wall, and stood upon an open country road, with fields on either hand. The city had entirely vanished. Not a vestige of it was to be seen. The darkness and the mist had vanished with it, for it was a clear, cold, winter day, with snow upon the ground.

The Spirit gazed upon him mildly. Its gentle touch, though it had been light and instantaneous, appeared still present to the old man's sense of feeling. He was conscious of a thousand odours floating in the air, each one connected with a thousand thoughts, and hopes, and joys, and cares long, long, forgotten! They walked along the road, Scrooge recognising every gate, and post, and tree; until a little market-town appeared in the distance, with its bridge, its church, and winding river. Some shaggy ponies now were seen trotting towards them with boys upon their backs, who called to other boys in country gigs and carts, driven by farmers. All these boys were in great spirits, and shouted to each other, until the broad fields were so full of merry music, that the crisp air laughed to hear it! The jocund travellers came on; and as they came, Scrooge knew and named them every one. Why was he rejoiced beyond all bounds to see them! Why did his cold eye glisten, and his heart leap up as they went past! Why was he filled with gladness when he heard them give each other Merry Christmas, as they parted at cross-roads and bye-ways, for their several homes! What was merry Christmas to Scrooge? Out upon merry Christmas! What good had it ever done to him?

They left the high-road, by a well-remembered lane, and soon approached a mansion of dull red brick, with a little weathercock-surmounted cupola, on the roof, and a bell hanging in it. It was a large house, but one of broken fortunes; for the spacious offices were little used, their walls were damp and mossy, their windows broken, and their gates decayed. Fowls clucked and strutted in the stables; and the coach-houses and sheds were over-run with grass. Nor was it more retentive of its ancient state, within; for entering the dreary hall, and glancing through the open doors of many rooms, they found them poorly furnished, cold, and vast. There was an earthy savour in the air, a chilly bareness in the place, which associated itself somehow with too much getting up by candle-light, and not too much to eat. They went, the Ghost and Scrooge, across the hall, to a door at the back of the house. It opened before them, and disclosed a long, bare, melancholy room, made barer still by lines of plain deal forms and desks. At one of these a lonely boy was reading near a feeble fire; and Scrooge sat down upon a form, and wept to see his poor forgotten self as he used to be.

Not a latent echo in the house, not a squeak and scuffle from the mice behind the panelling, not a drip from the half-thawed water-spout in the dull yard behind, not a sigh among the leafless boughs of one despondent poplar, not the idle swinging of an empty store-house door, no, not a clicking in the fire, but fell upon the heart of Scrooge with a softening influence, and gave a freer passage to his tears. The Spirit touched him on the arm, and pointed to his younger self, intent upon his reading. Suddenly a man, in foreign garments: wonderfully real and distinct to look at: stood outside the window, with an axe stuck in his belt, and leading by the bridle an ass laden with wood. "Why, it's Ali Baba!" Scrooge exclaimed in ecstasy. "It's dear old honest Ali Baba! Yes, yes, I know! One Christmas time, when yonder solitary child was left here all alone, he did come, for the first time, just like that. Poor boy! And Valentine," said Scrooge, "and his wild brother, Orson; there they go! And what's his name, who was put down in his drawers, asleep, at the Gate of Damascus; don't you see him! And the Sultan's Groom turned upside down by the Genii; there he is upon his head! Serve him right. I'm glad of it. What business had he to be married to the Princess!"

To hear Scrooge expending all the earnestness of his nature on such subjects, in a most extraordinary voice between laughing and crying; and to see his heightened and excited face; would have been a surprise to his business friends in the city, indeed. "There's the Parrot!" cried Scrooge. "Green body and yellow tail, with a thing like a lettuce growing out of the top of his head; there he is! Poor Robin Crusoe, he called him, when he came home again after sailing round the island. 'Poor Robin Crusoe, where have you been, Robin Crusoe?' The man thought he was dreaming, but he wasn't. It was the Parrot, you know. There goes Friday, running for his life to the little creek! Halloa! Hoop! Halloo!" "Nothing," said Scrooge. "Nothing. There was a boy singing a Christmas Carol at my door last night. I should like to have given him something: that's all." Scrooge's former self grew larger at the words, and the room became a little darker and more dirty. The panels shrunk, the windows cracked; fragments of plaster fell out of the ceiling, and the naked laths were shown instead; but how all this was brought about, Scrooge knew no more than you do. He only knew that it was quite correct; that everything had happened so; that there he was, alone again, when all the other boys had gone home for the jolly holidays.

He was not reading now, but walking up and down despairingly. Scrooge looked at the Ghost, and with a mournful shaking of his head, glanced anxiously towards the door. It opened; and a little girl, much younger than the boy, came darting in, and putting her arms about his neck, and often kissing him, addressed him as her "Dear, dear brother." "Yes!" said the child, brimful of glee. "Home, for good and all. Home, for ever and ever. Father is so much kinder than he used to be, that home's like Heaven! He spoke so gently to me one dear night when I was going to bed, that I was not afraid to ask him once more if you might come home; and he said Yes, you should; and sent me in a coach to bring you. And you're to be a man!" said the child, opening her eyes, "and are never to come back here; but first, we're to be together all the Christmas long, and have the merriest time in all the world." She clapped her hands and laughed, and tried to touch his head; but being too little, laughed again, and stood on tiptoe to embrace him. Then she began to drag him, in her childish eagerness, towards the door; and he, nothing loth to go, accompanied her.

A terrible voice in the hall cried, "Bring down Master Scrooge's box, there!" and in the hall appeared the schoolmaster himself, who glared on Master Scrooge with a ferocious condescension, and threw him into a dreadful state of mind by shaking hands with him. He then conveyed him and his sister into the veriest old well of a shivering best-parlour that ever was seen, where the maps upon the wall, and the celestial and terrestrial globes in the windows, were waxy with cold. Here he produced a decanter of curiously light wine, and a block of curiously heavy cake, and administered instalments of those dainties to the young people: at the same time, sending out a meagre servant to offer a glass of "something" to the postboy, who answered that he thanked the gentleman, but if it was the same tap as he had tasted before, he had rather not. Master Scrooge's trunk being by this time tied on to the top of the chaise, the children bade the schoolmaster good-bye right willingly; and getting into it, drove gaily down the garden-sweep: the quick wheels dashing the hoar-frost and snow from off the dark leaves of the evergreens like spray.

Although they had but that moment left the school behind them, they were now in the busy thoroughfares of a city, where shadowy passengers passed and repassed; where shadowy carts and coaches battled for the way, and all the strife and tumult of a real city were. It was made plain enough, by the dressing of the shops, that here too it was Christmas time again; but it was evening, and the streets were lighted up. They went in. At sight of an old gentleman in a Welsh wig, sitting behind such a high desk, that if he had been two inches taller he must have knocked his head against the ceiling, Scrooge cried in great excitement: Old Fezziwig laid down his pen, and looked up at the clock, which pointed to the hour of seven. He rubbed his hands; adjusted his capacious waistcoat; laughed all over himself, from his shoes to his organ of benevolence; and called out in a comfortable, oily, rich, fat, jovial voice: "Dick Wilkins, to be sure!" said Scrooge to the Ghost. "Bless me, yes. There he is. He was very much attached to me, was Dick. Poor Dick! Dear, dear!"

"Yo ho, my boys!" said Fezziwig. "No more work to-night. Christmas Eve, Dick. Christmas, Ebenezer! Let's have the shutters up," cried old Fezziwig, with a sharp clap of his hands, "before a man can say Jack Robinson!" You wouldn't believe how those two fellows went at it! They charged into the street with the shutters--one, two, three--had 'em up in their places--four, five, six--barred 'em and pinned 'em--seven, eight, nine--and came back before you could have got to twelve, panting like race-horses. "Hilli-ho!" cried old Fezziwig, skipping down from the high desk, with wonderful agility. "Clear away, my lads, and let's have lots of room here! Hilli-ho, Dick! Chirrup, Ebenezer!" Clear away! There was nothing they wouldn't have cleared away, or couldn't have cleared away, with old Fezziwig looking on. It was done in a minute. Every movable was packed off, as if it were dismissed from public life for evermore; the floor was swept and watered, the lamps were trimmed, fuel was heaped upon the fire; and the warehouse was as snug, and warm, and dry, and bright a ball-room, as you would desire to see upon a winter's night.

In came a fiddler with a music-book, and went up to the lofty desk, and made an orchestra of it, and tuned like fifty stomach-aches. In came Mrs. Fezziwig, one vast substantial smile. In came the three Miss Fezziwigs, beaming and lovable. In came the six young followers whose hearts they broke. In came all the young men and women employed in the business. In came the housemaid, with her cousin, the baker. In came the cook, with her brother's particular friend, the milkman. In came the boy from over the way, who was suspected of not having board enough from his master; trying to hide himself behind the girl from next door but one, who was proved to have had her ears pulled by her mistress. In they all came, one after another; some shyly, some boldly, some gracefully, some awkwardly, some pushing, some pulling; in they all came, anyhow and everyhow. Away they all went, twenty couple at once; hands half round and back again the other way; down the middle and up again; round and round in various stages of affectionate grouping; old top couple always turning up in the wrong place; new top couple starting off again, as soon as they got there; all top couples at last, and not a bottom one to help them! When this result was brought about, old Fezziwig, clapping his hands to stop the dance, cried out, "Well done!" and the fiddler plunged his hot face into a pot of porter, especially provided for that purpose. But scorning rest, upon his reappearance, he instantly began again, though there were no dancers yet, as if the other fiddler had been carried home, exhausted, on a shutter, and he were a bran-new man resolved to beat him out of sight, or perish.

There were more dances, and there were forfeits, and more dances, and there was cake, and there was negus, and there was a great piece of Cold Roast, and there was a great piece of Cold Boiled, and there were mince-pies, and plenty of beer. But the great effect of the evening came after the Roast and Boiled, when the fiddler (an artful dog, mind! The sort of man who knew his business better than you or I could have told it him!) struck up "Sir Roger de Coverley." Then old Fezziwig stood out to dance with Mrs. Fezziwig. Top couple, too; with a good stiff piece of work cut out for them; three or four and twenty pair of partners; people who were not to be trifled with; people who would dance, and had no notion of walking. But if they had been twice as many--ah, four times--old Fezziwig would have been a match for them, and so would Mrs. Fezziwig. As to her, she was worthy to be his partner in every sense of the term. If that's not high praise, tell me higher, and I'll use it. A positive light appeared to issue from Fezziwig's calves. They shone in every part of the dance like moons. You couldn't have predicted, at any given time, what would have become of them next. And when old Fezziwig and Mrs. Fezziwig had gone all through the dance; advance and retire, both hands to your partner, bow and curtsey, corkscrew, thread-the-needle, and back again to your place; Fezziwig "cut"--cut so deftly, that he appeared to wink with his legs, and came upon his feet again without a stagger.

When the clock struck eleven, this domestic ball broke up. Mr. and Mrs. Fezziwig took their stations, one on either side of the door, and shaking hands with every person individually as he or she went out, wished him or her a Merry Christmas. When everybody had retired but the two 'prentices, they did the same to them; and thus the cheerful voices died away, and the lads were left to their beds; which were under a counter in the back-shop. During the whole of this time, Scrooge had acted like a man out of his wits. His heart and soul were in the scene, and with his former self. He corroborated everything, remembered everything, enjoyed everything, and underwent the strangest agitation. It was not until now, when the bright faces of his former self and Dick were turned from them, that he remembered the Ghost, and became conscious that it was looking full upon him, while the light upon its head burnt very clear. "It isn't that," said Scrooge, heated by the remark, and speaking unconsciously like his former, not his latter, self. "It isn't that, Spirit. He has the power to render us happy or unhappy; to make our service light or burdensome; a pleasure or a toil. Say that his power lies in words and looks; in things so slight and insignificant that it is impossible to add and count 'em up: what then? The happiness he gives, is quite as great as if it cost a fortune."

This was not addressed to Scrooge, or to any one whom he could see, but it produced an immediate effect. For again Scrooge saw himself. He was older now; a man in the prime of life. His face had not the harsh and rigid lines of later years; but it had begun to wear the signs of care and avarice. There was an eager, greedy, restless motion in the eye, which showed the passion that had taken root, and where the shadow of the growing tree would fall. He was not alone, but sat by the side of a fair young girl in a mourning-dress: in whose eyes there were tears, which sparkled in the light that shone out of the Ghost of Christmas Past. "It matters little," she said, softly. "To you, very little. Another idol has displaced me; and if it can cheer and comfort you in time to come, as I would have tried to do, I have no just cause to grieve." "This is the even-handed dealing of the world!" he said. "There is nothing on which it is so hard as poverty; and there is nothing it professes to condemn with such severity as the pursuit of wealth!"

"You fear the world too much," she answered, gently. "All your other hopes have merged into the hope of being beyond the chance of its sordid reproach. I have seen your nobler aspirations fall off one by one, until the master-passion, Gain, engrosses you. Have I not?" "Our contract is an old one. It was made when we were both poor and content to be so, until, in good season, we could improve our worldly fortune by our patient industry. You are changed. When it was made, you were another man." "Your own feeling tells you that you were not what you are," she returned. "I am. That which promised happiness when we were one in heart, is fraught with misery now that we are two. How often and how keenly I have thought of this, I will not say. It is enough that I have thought of it, and can release you." "In a changed nature; in an altered spirit; in another atmosphere of life; another Hope as its great end. In everything that made my love of any worth or value in your sight. If this had never been between us," said the girl, looking mildly, but with steadiness, upon him; "tell me, would you seek me out and try to win me now? Ah, no!"

"I would gladly think otherwise if I could," she answered, "Heaven knows! When I have learned a Truth like this, I know how strong and irresistible it must be. But if you were free to-day, to-morrow, yesterday, can even I believe that you would choose a dowerless girl--you who, in your very confidence with her, weigh everything by Gain: or, choosing her, if for a moment you were false enough to your one guiding principle to do so, do I not know that your repentance and regret would surely follow? I do; and I release you. With a full heart, for the love of him you once were." "You may--the memory of what is past half makes me hope you will--have pain in this. A very, very brief time, and you will dismiss the recollection of it, gladly, as an unprofitable dream, from which it happened well that you awoke. May you be happy in the life you have chosen!" They were in another scene and place; a room, not very large or handsome, but full of comfort. Near to the winter fire sat a beautiful young girl, so like that last that Scrooge believed it was the same, until he saw her, now a comely matron, sitting opposite her daughter. The noise in this room was perfectly tumultuous, for there were more children there, than Scrooge in his agitated state of mind could count; and, unlike the celebrated herd in the poem, they were not forty children conducting themselves like one, but every child was conducting itself like forty. The consequences were uproarious beyond belief; but no one seemed to care; on the contrary, the mother and daughter laughed heartily, and enjoyed it very much; and the latter, soon beginning to mingle in the sports, got pillaged by the young brigands most ruthlessly. What would I not have given to be one of them! Though I never could have been so rude, no, no! I wouldn't for the wealth of all the world have crushed that braided hair, and torn it down; and for the precious little shoe, I wouldn't have plucked it off, God bless my soul! to save my life. As to measuring her waist in sport, as they did, bold young brood, I couldn't have done it; I should have expected my arm to have grown round it for a punishment, and never come straight again. And yet I should have dearly liked, I own, to have touched her lips; to have questioned her, that she might have opened them; to have looked upon the lashes of her downcast eyes, and never raised a blush; to have let loose waves of hair, an inch of which would be a keepsake beyond price: in short, I should have liked, I do confess, to have had the lightest licence of a child, and yet to have been man enough to know its value.

But now a knocking at the door was heard, and such a rush immediately ensued that she with laughing face and plundered dress was borne towards it the centre of a flushed and boisterous group, just in time to greet the father, who came home attended by a man laden with Christmas toys and presents. Then the shouting and the struggling, and the onslaught that was made on the defenceless porter! The scaling him with chairs for ladders to dive into his pockets, despoil him of brown-paper parcels, hold on tight by his cravat, hug him round his neck, pommel his back, and kick his legs in irrepressible affection! The shouts of wonder and delight with which the development of every package was received! The terrible announcement that the baby had been taken in the act of putting a doll's frying-pan into his mouth, and was more than suspected of having swallowed a fictitious turkey, glued on a wooden platter! The immense relief of finding this a false alarm! The joy, and gratitude, and ecstasy! They are all indescribable alike. It is enough that by degrees the children and their emotions got out of the parlour, and by one stair at a time, up to the top of the house; where they went to bed, and so subsided.

And now Scrooge looked on more attentively than ever, when the master of the house, having his daughter leaning fondly on him, sat down with her and her mother at his own fireside; and when he thought that such another creature, quite as graceful and as full of promise, might have called him father, and been a spring-time in the haggard winter of his life, his sight grew very dim indeed. "Mr. Scrooge it was. I passed his office window; and as it was not shut up, and he had a candle inside, I could scarcely help seeing him. His partner lies upon the point of death, I hear; and there he sat alone. Quite alone in the world, I do believe." He turned upon the Ghost, and seeing that it looked upon him with a face, in which in some strange way there were fragments of all the faces it had shown him, wrestled with it. In the struggle, if that can be called a struggle in which the Ghost with no visible resistance on its own part was undisturbed by any effort of its adversary, Scrooge observed that its light was burning high and bright; and dimly connecting that with its influence over him, he seized the extinguisher-cap, and by a sudden action pressed it down upon its head.

The Spirit dropped beneath it, so that the extinguisher covered its whole form; but though Scrooge pressed it down with all his force, he could not hide the light: which streamed from under it, in an unbroken flood upon the ground. He was conscious of being exhausted, and overcome by an irresistible drowsiness; and, further, of being in his own bedroom. He gave the cap a parting squeeze, in which his hand relaxed; and had barely time to reel to bed, before he sank into a heavy sleep. AWAKING in the middle of a prodigiously tough snore, and sitting up in bed to get his thoughts together, Scrooge had no occasion to be told that the bell was again upon the stroke of One. He felt that he was restored to consciousness in the right nick of time, for the especial purpose of holding a conference with the second messenger despatched to him through Jacob Marley's intervention. But finding that he turned uncomfortably cold when he began to wonder which of his curtains this new spectre would draw back, he put them every one aside with his own hands; and lying down again, established a sharp look-out all round the bed. For he wished to challenge the Spirit on the moment of its appearance, and did not wish to be taken by surprise, and made nervous.

Gentlemen of the free-and-easy sort, who plume themselves on being acquainted with a move or two, and being usually equal to the time-of-day, express the wide range of their capacity for adventure by observing that they are good for anything from pitch-and-toss to manslaughter; between which opposite extremes, no doubt, there lies a tolerably wide and comprehensive range of subjects. Without venturing for Scrooge quite as hardily as this, I don't mind calling on you to believe that he was ready for a good broad field of strange appearances, and that nothing between a baby and rhinoceros would have astonished him very much. Now, being prepared for almost anything, he was not by any means prepared for nothing; and, consequently, when the Bell struck One, and no shape appeared, he was taken with a violent fit of trembling. Five minutes, ten minutes, a quarter of an hour went by, yet nothing came. All this time, he lay upon his bed, the very core and centre of a blaze of ruddy light, which streamed upon it when the clock proclaimed the hour; and which, being only light, was more alarming than a dozen ghosts, as he was powerless to make out what it meant, or would be at; and was sometimes apprehensive that he might be at that very moment an interesting case of spontaneous combustion, without having the consolation of knowing it. At last, however, he began to think--as you or I would have thought at first; for it is always the person not in the predicament who knows what ought to have been done in it, and would unquestionably have done it too--at last, I say, he began to think that the source and secret of this ghostly light might be in the adjoining room, from whence, on further tracing it, it seemed to shine. This idea taking full possession of his mind, he got up softly and shuffled in his slippers to the door.

It was his own room. There was no doubt about that. But it had undergone a surprising transformation. The walls and ceiling were so hung with living green, that it looked a perfect grove; from every part of which, bright gleaming berries glistened. The crisp leaves of holly, mistletoe, and ivy reflected back the light, as if so many little mirrors had been scattered there; and such a mighty blaze went roaring up the chimney, as that dull petrification of a hearth had never known in Scrooge's time, or Marley's, or for many and many a winter season gone. Heaped up on the floor, to form a kind of throne, were turkeys, geese, game, poultry, brawn, great joints of meat, sucking-pigs, long wreaths of sausages, mince-pies, plum-puddings, barrels of oysters, red-hot chestnuts, cherry-cheeked apples, juicy oranges, luscious pears, immense twelfth-cakes, and seething bowls of punch, that made the chamber dim with their delicious steam. In easy state upon this couch, there sat a jolly Giant, glorious to see; who bore a glowing torch, in shape not unlike Plenty's horn, and held it up, high up, to shed its light on Scrooge, as he came peeping round the door.

Scrooge entered timidly, and hung his head before this Spirit. He was not the dogged Scrooge he had been; and though the Spirit's eyes were clear and kind, he did not like to meet them. Scrooge reverently did so. It was clothed in one simple green robe, or mantle, bordered with white fur. This garment hung so loosely on the figure, that its capacious breast was bare, as if disdaining to be warded or concealed by any artifice. Its feet, observable beneath the ample folds of the garment, were also bare; and on its head it wore no other covering than a holly wreath, set here and there with shining icicles. Its dark brown curls were long and free; free as its genial face, its sparkling eye, its open hand, its cheery voice, its unconstrained demeanour, and its joyful air. Girded round its middle was an antique scabbard; but no sword was in it, and the ancient sheath was eaten up with rust. "Have never walked forth with the younger members of my family; meaning (for I am very young) my elder brothers born in these later years?" pursued the Phantom.

"Spirit," said Scrooge submissively, "conduct me where you will. I went forth last night on compulsion, and I learnt a lesson which is working now. To-night, if you have aught to teach me, let me profit by it." Holly, mistletoe, red berries, ivy, turkeys, geese, game, poultry, brawn, meat, pigs, sausages, oysters, pies, puddings, fruit, and punch, all vanished instantly. So did the room, the fire, the ruddy glow, the hour of night, and they stood in the city streets on Christmas morning, where (for the weather was severe) the people made a rough, but brisk and not unpleasant kind of music, in scraping the snow from the pavement in front of their dwellings, and from the tops of their houses, whence it was mad delight to the boys to see it come plumping down into the road below, and splitting into artificial little snow-storms. The house fronts looked black enough, and the windows blacker, contrasting with the smooth white sheet of snow upon the roofs, and with the dirtier snow upon the ground; which last deposit had been ploughed up in deep furrows by the heavy wheels of carts and waggons; furrows that crossed and re-crossed each other hundreds of times where the great streets branched off; and made intricate channels, hard to trace in the thick yellow mud and icy water. The sky was gloomy, and the shortest streets were choked up with a dingy mist, half thawed, half frozen, whose heavier particles descended in a shower of sooty atoms, as if all the chimneys in Great Britain had, by one consent, caught fire, and were blazing away to their dear hearts' content. There was nothing very cheerful in the climate or the town, and yet was there an air of cheerfulness abroad that the clearest summer air and brightest summer sun might have endeavoured to diffuse in vain.

For, the people who were shovelling away on the housetops were jovial and full of glee; calling out to one another from the parapets, and now and then exchanging a facetious snowball--better-natured missile far than many a wordy jest-- laughing heartily if it went right and not less heartily if it went wrong. The poulterers' shops were still half open, and the fruiterers' were radiant in their glory. There were great, round, pot-bellied baskets of chestnuts, shaped like the waistcoats of jolly old gentlemen, lolling at the doors, and tumbling out into the street in their apoplectic opulence. There were ruddy, brown-faced, broad-girthed Spanish Onions, shining in the fatness of their growth like Spanish Friars, and winking from their shelves in wanton slyness at the girls as they went by, and glanced demurely at the hung-up mistletoe. There were pears and apples, clustered high in blooming pyramids; there were bunches of grapes, made, in the shopkeepers' benevolence to dangle from conspicuous hooks, that people's mouths might water gratis as they passed; there were piles of filberts, mossy and brown, recalling, in their fragrance, ancient walks among the woods, and pleasant shufflings ankle deep through withered leaves; there were Norfolk Biffins, squat and swarthy, setting off the yellow of the oranges and lemons, and, in the great compactness of their juicy persons, urgently entreating and beseeching to be carried home in paper bags and eaten after dinner. The very gold and silver fish, set forth among these choice fruits in a bowl, though members of a dull and stagnant-blooded race, appeared to know that there was something going on; and, to a fish, went gasping round and round their little world in slow and passionless excitement.

The Grocers'! oh, the Grocers'! nearly closed, with perhaps two shutters down, or one; but through those gaps such glimpses! It was not alone that the scales descending on the counter made a merry sound, or that the twine and roller parted company so briskly, or that the canisters were rattled up and down like juggling tricks, or even that the blended scents of tea and coffee were so grateful to the nose, or even that the raisins were so plentiful and rare, the almonds so extremely white, the sticks of cinnamon so long and straight, the other spices so delicious, the candied fruits so caked and spotted with molten sugar as to make the coldest lookers-on feel faint and subsequently bilious. Nor was it that the figs were moist and pulpy, or that the French plums blushed in modest tartness from their highly-decorated boxes, or that everything was good to eat and in its Christmas dress; but the customers were all so hurried and so eager in the hopeful promise of the day, that they tumbled up against each other at the door, crashing their wicker baskets wildly, and left their purchases upon the counter, and came running back to fetch them, and committed hundreds of the like mistakes, in the best humour possible; while the Grocer and his people were so frank and fresh that the polished hearts with which they fastened their aprons behind might have been their own, worn outside for general inspection, and for Christmas daws to peck at if they chose.

But soon the steeples called good people all, to church and chapel, and away they came, flocking through the streets in their best clothes, and with their gayest faces. And at the same time there emerged from scores of bye-streets, lanes, and nameless turnings, innumerable people, carrying their dinners to the bakers' shops. The sight of these poor revellers appeared to interest the Spirit very much, for he stood with Scrooge beside him in a baker's doorway, and taking off the covers as their bearers passed, sprinkled incense on their dinners from his torch. And it was a very uncommon kind of torch, for once or twice when there were angry words between some dinner-carriers who had jostled each other, he shed a few drops of water on them from it, and their good humour was restored directly. For they said, it was a shame to quarrel upon Christmas Day. And so it was! God love it, so it was! In time the bells ceased, and the bakers were shut up; and yet there was a genial shadowing forth of all these dinners and the progress of their cooking, in the thawed blotch of wet above each baker's oven; where the pavement smoked as if its stones were cooking too.

"Spirit," said Scrooge, after a moment's thought, "I wonder you, of all the beings in the many worlds about us, should desire to cramp these people's opportunities of innocent enjoyment." "You would deprive them of their means of dining every seventh day, often the only day on which they can be said to dine at all," said Scrooge. "Wouldn't you?" "There are some upon this earth of yours," returned the Spirit, "who lay claim to know us, and who do their deeds of passion, pride, ill-will, hatred, envy, bigotry, and selfishness in our name, who are as strange to us and all our kith and kin, as if they had never lived. Remember that, and charge their doings on themselves, not us." Scrooge promised that he would; and they went on, invisible, as they had been before, into the suburbs of the town. It was a remarkable quality of the Ghost (which Scrooge had observed at the baker's), that notwithstanding his gigantic size, he could accommodate himself to any place with ease; and that he stood beneath a low roof quite as gracefully and like a supernatural creature, as it was possible he could have done in any lofty hall.

And perhaps it was the pleasure the good Spirit had in showing off this power of his, or else it was his own kind, generous, hearty nature, and his sympathy with all poor men, that led him straight to Scrooge's clerk's; for there he went, and took Scrooge with him, holding to his robe; and on the threshold of the door the Spirit smiled, and stopped to bless Bob Cratchit's dwelling with the sprinkling of his torch. Think of that! Bob had but fifteen "Bob" a-week himself; he pocketed on Saturdays but fifteen copies of his Christian name; and yet the Ghost of Christmas Present blessed his four-roomed house! Then up rose Mrs. Cratchit, Cratchit's wife, dressed out but poorly in a twice-turned gown, but brave in ribbons, which are cheap and make a goodly show for sixpence; and she laid the cloth, assisted by Belinda Cratchit, second of her daughters, also brave in ribbons; while Master Peter Cratchit plunged a fork into the saucepan of potatoes, and getting the corners of his monstrous shirt collar (Bob's private property, conferred upon his son and heir in honour of the day) into his mouth, rejoiced to find himself so gallantly attired, and yearned to show his linen in the fashionable Parks. And now two smaller Cratchits, boy and girl, came tearing in, screaming that outside the baker's they had smelt the goose, and known it for their own; and basking in luxurious thoughts of sage and onion, these young Cratchits danced about the table, and exalted Master Peter Cratchit to the skies, while he (not proud, although his collars nearly choked him) blew the fire, until the slow potatoes bubbling up, knocked loudly at the saucepan-lid to be let out and peeled.

"What has ever got your precious father then?" said Mrs. Cratchit. "And your brother, Tiny Tim! And Martha warn't as late last Christmas Day by half-an-hour?" "Why, bless your heart alive, my dear, how late you are!" said Mrs. Cratchit, kissing her a dozen times, and taking off her shawl and bonnet for her with officious zeal. So Martha hid herself, and in came little Bob, the father, with at least three feet of comforter exclusive of the fringe, hanging down before him; and his threadbare clothes darned up and brushed, to look seasonable; and Tiny Tim upon his shoulder. Alas for Tiny Tim, he bore a little crutch, and had his limbs supported by an iron frame! "Not coming!" said Bob, with a sudden declension in his high spirits; for he had been Tim's blood horse all the way from church, and had come home rampant. "Not coming upon Christmas Day!" Martha didn't like to see him disappointed, if it were only in joke; so she came out prematurely from behind the closet door, and ran into his arms, while the two young Cratchits hustled Tiny Tim, and bore him off into the wash-house, that he might hear the pudding singing in the copper.

"And how did little Tim behave?" asked Mrs. Cratchit, when she had rallied Bob on his credulity, and Bob had hugged his daughter to his heart's content. "As good as gold," said Bob, "and better. Somehow he gets thoughtful, sitting by himself so much, and thinks the strangest things you ever heard. He told me, coming home, that he hoped the people saw him in the church, because he was a cripple, and it might be pleasant to them to remember upon Christmas Day, who made lame beggars walk, and blind men see." His active little crutch was heard upon the floor, and back came Tiny Tim before another word was spoken, escorted by his brother and sister to his stool before the fire; and while Bob, turning up his cuffs--as if, poor fellow, they were capable of being made more shabby--compounded some hot mixture in a jug with gin and lemons, and stirred it round and round and put it on the hob to simmer; Master Peter, and the two ubiquitous young Cratchits went to fetch the goose, with which they soon returned in high procession.

Such a bustle ensued that you might have thought a goose the rarest of all birds; a feathered phenomenon, to which a black swan was a matter of course--and in truth it was something very like it in that house. Mrs. Cratchit made the gravy (ready beforehand in a little saucepan) hissing hot; Master Peter mashed the potatoes with incredible vigour; Miss Belinda sweetened up the apple-sauce; Martha dusted the hot plates; Bob took Tiny Tim beside him in a tiny corner at the table; the two young Cratchits set chairs for everybody, not forgetting themselves, and mounting guard upon their posts, crammed spoons into their mouths, lest they should shriek for goose before their turn came to be helped. At last the dishes were set on, and grace was said. It was succeeded by a breathless pause, as Mrs. Cratchit, looking slowly all along the carving-knife, prepared to plunge it in the breast; but when she did, and when the long expected gush of stuffing issued forth, one murmur of delight arose all round the board, and even Tiny Tim, excited by the two young Cratchits, beat on the table with the handle of his knife, and feebly cried Hurrah!

There never was such a goose. Bob said he didn't believe there ever was such a goose cooked. Its tenderness and flavour, size and cheapness, were the themes of universal admiration. Eked out by apple-sauce and mashed potatoes, it was a sufficient dinner for the whole family; indeed, as Mrs. Cratchit said with great delight (surveying one small atom of a bone upon the dish), they hadn't ate it all at last! Yet every one had had enough, and the youngest Cratchits in particular, were steeped in sage and onion to the eyebrows! But now, the plates being changed by Miss Belinda, Mrs. Cratchit left the room alone--too nervous to bear witnesses--to take the pudding up and bring it in. Suppose it should not be done enough! Suppose it should break in turning out! Suppose somebody should have got over the wall of the back-yard, and stolen it, while they were merry with the goose--a supposition at which the two young Cratchits became livid! All sorts of horrors were supposed. Hallo! A great deal of steam! The pudding was out of the copper. A smell like a washing-day! That was the cloth. A smell like an eating-house and a pastrycook's next door to each other, with a laundress's next door to that! That was the pudding! In half a minute Mrs. Cratchit entered--flushed, but smiling proudly--with the pudding, like a speckled cannon-ball, so hard and firm, blazing in half of half-a-quartern of ignited brandy, and bedight with Christmas holly stuck into the top.

Oh, a wonderful pudding! Bob Cratchit said, and calmly too, that he regarded it as the greatest success achieved by Mrs. Cratchit since their marriage. Mrs. Cratchit said that now the weight was off her mind, she would confess she had had her doubts about the quantity of flour. Everybody had something to say about it, but nobody said or thought it was at all a small pudding for a large family. It would have been flat heresy to do so. Any Cratchit would have blushed to hint at such a thing. At last the dinner was all done, the cloth was cleared, the hearth swept, and the fire made up. The compound in the jug being tasted, and considered perfect, apples and oranges were put upon the table, and a shovel-full of chestnuts on the fire. Then all the Cratchit family drew round the hearth, in what Bob Cratchit called a circle, meaning half a one; and at Bob Cratchit's elbow stood the family display of glass. Two tumblers, and a custard-cup without a handle. These held the hot stuff from the jug, however, as well as golden goblets would have done; and Bob served it out with beaming looks, while the chestnuts on the fire sputtered and cracked noisily. Then Bob proposed:

He sat very close to his father's side upon his little stool. Bob held his withered little hand in his, as if he loved the child, and wished to keep him by his side, and dreaded that he might be taken from him. "I see a vacant seat," replied the Ghost, "in the poor chimney-corner, and a crutch without an owner, carefully preserved. If these shadows remain unaltered by the Future, the child will die." "If these shadows remain unaltered by the Future, none other of my race," returned the Ghost, "will find him here. What then? If he be like to die, he had better do it, and decrease the surplus population." "Man," said the Ghost, "if man you be in heart, not adamant, forbear that wicked cant until you have discovered What the surplus is, and Where it is. Will you decide what men shall live, what men shall die? It may be, that in the sight of Heaven, you are more worthless and less fit to live than millions like this poor man's child. Oh God! to hear the Insect on the leaf pronouncing on the too much life among his hungry brothers in the dust!"

"The Founder of the Feast indeed!" cried Mrs. Cratchit, reddening. "I wish I had him here. I'd give him a piece of my mind to feast upon, and I hope he'd have a good appetite for it." "It should be Christmas Day, I am sure," said she, "on which one drinks the health of such an odious, stingy, hard, unfeeling man as Mr. Scrooge. You know he is, Robert! Nobody knows it better than you do, poor fellow!" "I'll drink his health for your sake and the Day's," said Mrs. Cratchit, "not for his. Long life to him! A merry Christmas and a happy new year! He'll be very merry and very happy, I have no doubt!" The children drank the toast after her. It was the first of their proceedings which had no heartiness. Tiny Tim drank it last of all, but he didn't care twopence for it. Scrooge was the Ogre of the family. The mention of his name cast a dark shadow on the party, which was not dispelled for full five minutes. After it had passed away, they were ten times merrier than before, from the mere relief of Scrooge the Baleful being done with. Bob Cratchit told them how he had a situation in his eye for Master Peter, which would bring in, if obtained, full five-and-sixpence weekly. The two young Cratchits laughed tremendously at the idea of Peter's being a man of business; and Peter himself looked thoughtfully at the fire from between his collars, as if he were deliberating what particular investments he should favour when he came into the receipt of that bewildering income. Martha, who was a poor apprentice at a milliner's, then told them what kind of work she had to do, and how many hours she worked at a stretch, and how she meant to lie abed to-morrow morning for a good long rest; to-morrow being a holiday she passed at home. Also how she had seen a countess and a lord some days before, and how the lord "was much about as tall as Peter;" at which Peter pulled up his collars so high that you couldn't have seen his head if you had been there. All this time the chestnuts and the jug went round and round; and by-and-bye they had a song, about a lost child travelling in the snow, from Tiny Tim, who had a plaintive little voice, and sang it very well indeed.

There was nothing of high mark in this. They were not a handsome family; they were not well dressed; their shoes were far from being water-proof; their clothes were scanty; and Peter might have known, and very likely did, the inside of a pawnbroker's. But, they were happy, grateful, pleased with one another, and contented with the time; and when they faded, and looked happier yet in the bright sprinklings of the Spirit's torch at parting, Scrooge had his eye upon them, and especially on Tiny Tim, until the last. By this time it was getting dark, and snowing pretty heavily; and as Scrooge and the Spirit went along the streets, the brightness of the roaring fires in kitchens, parlours, and all sorts of rooms, was wonderful. Here, the flickering of the blaze showed preparations for a cosy dinner, with hot plates baking through and through before the fire, and deep red curtains, ready to be drawn to shut out cold and darkness. There all the children of the house were running out into the snow to meet their married sisters, brothers, cousins, uncles, aunts, and be the first to greet them. Here, again, were shadows on the window-blind of guests assembling; and there a group of handsome girls, all hooded and fur-booted, and all chattering at once, tripped lightly off to some near neighbour's house; where, woe upon the single man who saw them enter--artful witches, well they knew it--in a glow!

But, if you had judged from the numbers of people on their way to friendly gatherings, you might have thought that no one was at home to give them welcome when they got there, instead of every house expecting company, and piling up its fires half-chimney high. Blessings on it, how the Ghost exulted! How it bared its breadth of breast, and opened its capacious palm, and floated on, outpouring, with a generous hand, its bright and harmless mirth on everything within its reach! The very lamplighter, who ran on before, dotting the dusky street with specks of light, and who was dressed to spend the evening somewhere, laughed out loudly as the Spirit passed, though little kenned the lamplighter that he had any company but Christmas! And now, without a word of warning from the Ghost, they stood upon a bleak and desert moor, where monstrous masses of rude stone were cast about, as though it were the burial-place of giants; and water spread itself wheresoever it listed, or would have done so, but for the frost that held it prisoner; and nothing grew but moss and furze, and coarse rank grass. Down in the west the setting sun had left a streak of fiery red, which glared upon the desolation for an instant, like a sullen eye, and frowning lower, lower, lower yet, was lost in the thick gloom of darkest night.

A light shone from the window of a hut, and swiftly they advanced towards it. Passing through the wall of mud and stone, they found a cheerful company assembled round a glowing fire. An old, old man and woman, with their children and their children's children, and another generation beyond that, all decked out gaily in their holiday attire. The old man, in a voice that seldom rose above the howling of the wind upon the barren waste, was singing them a Christmas song--it had been a very old song when he was a boy--and from time to time they all joined in the chorus. So surely as they raised their voices, the old man got quite blithe and loud; and so surely as they stopped, his vigour sank again. The Spirit did not tarry here, but bade Scrooge hold his robe, and passing on above the moor, sped--whither? Not to sea? To sea. To Scrooge's horror, looking back, he saw the last of the land, a frightful range of rocks, behind them; and his ears were deafened by the thundering of water, as it rolled and roared, and raged among the dreadful caverns it had worn, and fiercely tried to undermine the earth.

Built upon a dismal reef of sunken rocks, some league or so from shore, on which the waters chafed and dashed, the wild year through, there stood a solitary lighthouse. Great heaps of sea-weed clung to its base, and storm-birds --born of the wind one might suppose, as sea-weed of the water--rose and fell about it, like the waves they skimmed. But even here, two men who watched the light had made a fire, that through the loophole in the thick stone wall shed out a ray of brightness on the awful sea. Joining their horny hands over the rough table at which they sat, they wished each other Merry Christmas in their can of grog; and one of them: the elder, too, with his face all damaged and scarred with hard weather, as the figure-head of an old ship might be: struck up a sturdy song that was like a Gale in itself. Again the Ghost sped on, above the black and heaving sea --on, on--until, being far away, as he told Scrooge, from any shore, they lighted on a ship. They stood beside the helmsman at the wheel, the look-out in the bow, the officers who had the watch; dark, ghostly figures in their several stations; but every man among them hummed a Christmas tune, or had a Christmas thought, or spoke below his breath to his companion of some bygone Christmas Day, with homeward hopes belonging to it. And every man on board, waking or sleeping, good or bad, had had a kinder word for another on that day than on any day in the year; and had shared to some extent in its festivities; and had remembered those he cared for at a distance, and had known that they delighted to remember him.

It was a great surprise to Scrooge, while listening to the moaning of the wind, and thinking what a solemn thing it was to move on through the lonely darkness over an unknown abyss, whose depths were secrets as profound as Death: it was a great surprise to Scrooge, while thus engaged, to hear a hearty laugh. It was a much greater surprise to Scrooge to recognise it as his own nephew's and to find himself in a bright, dry, gleaming room, with the Spirit standing smiling by his side, and looking at that same nephew with approving affability! If you should happen, by any unlikely chance, to know a man more blest in a laugh than Scrooge's nephew, all I can say is, I should like to know him too. Introduce him to me, and I'll cultivate his acquaintance. It is a fair, even-handed, noble adjustment of things, that while there is infection in disease and sorrow, there is nothing in the world so irresistibly contagious as laughter and good-humour. When Scrooge's nephew laughed in this way: holding his sides, rolling his head, and twisting his face into the most extravagant contortions: Scrooge's niece, by marriage, laughed as heartily as he. And their assembled friends being not a bit behindhand, roared out lustily.

She was very pretty: exceedingly pretty. With a dimpled, surprised-looking, capital face; a ripe little mouth, that seemed made to be kissed--as no doubt it was; all kinds of good little dots about her chin, that melted into one another when she laughed; and the sunniest pair of eyes you ever saw in any little creature's head. Altogether she was what you would have called provoking, you know; but satisfactory, too. Oh, perfectly satisfactory. "He's a comical old fellow," said Scrooge's nephew, "that's the truth: and not so pleasant as he might be. However, his offences carry their own punishment, and I have nothing to say against him." "What of that, my dear!" said Scrooge's nephew. "His wealth is of no use to him. He don't do any good with it. He don't make himself comfortable with it. He hasn't the satisfaction of thinking--ha, ha, ha!--that he is ever going to benefit US with it." "Oh, I have!" said Scrooge's nephew. "I am sorry for him; I couldn't be angry with him if I tried. Who suffers by his ill whims! Himself, always. Here, he takes it into his head to dislike us, and he won't come and dine with us. What's the consequence? He don't lose much of a dinner."

"Indeed, I think he loses a very good dinner," interrupted Scrooge's niece. Everybody else said the same, and they must be allowed to have been competent judges, because they had just had dinner; and, with the dessert upon the table, were clustered round the fire, by lamplight. Topper had clearly got his eye upon one of Scrooge's niece's sisters, for he answered that a bachelor was a wretched outcast, who had no right to express an opinion on the subject. Whereat Scrooge's niece's sister--the plump one with the lace tucker: not the one with the roses--blushed. Scrooge's nephew revelled in another laugh, and as it was impossible to keep the infection off; though the plump sister tried hard to do it with aromatic vinegar; his example was unanimously followed. "I was only going to say," said Scrooge's nephew, "that the consequence of his taking a dislike to us, and not making merry with us, is, as I think, that he loses some pleasant moments, which could do him no harm. I am sure he loses pleasanter companions than he can find in his own thoughts, either in his mouldy old office, or his dusty chambers. I mean to give him the same chance every year, whether he likes it or not, for I pity him. He may rail at Christmas till he dies, but he can't help thinking better of it--I defy him--if he finds me going there, in good temper, year after year, and saying Uncle Scrooge, how are you? If it only puts him in the vein to leave his poor clerk fifty pounds, that's something; and I think I shook him yesterday."

It was their turn to laugh now at the notion of his shaking Scrooge. But being thoroughly good-natured, and not much caring what they laughed at, so that they laughed at any rate, he encouraged them in their merriment, and passed the bottle joyously. After tea, they had some music. For they were a musical family, and knew what they were about, when they sung a Glee or Catch, I can assure you: especially Topper, who could growl away in the bass like a good one, and never swell the large veins in his forehead, or get red in the face over it. Scrooge's niece played well upon the harp; and played among other tunes a simple little air (a mere nothing: you might learn to whistle it in two minutes), which had been familiar to the child who fetched Scrooge from the boarding-school, as he had been reminded by the Ghost of Christmas Past. When this strain of music sounded, all the things that Ghost had shown him, came upon his mind; he softened more and more; and thought that if he could have listened to it often, years ago, he might have cultivated the kindnesses of life for his own happiness with his own hands, without resorting to the sexton's spade that buried Jacob Marley.

But they didn't devote the whole evening to music. After a while they played at forfeits; for it is good to be children sometimes, and never better than at Christmas, when its mighty Founder was a child himself. Stop! There was first a game at blind-man's buff. Of course there was. And I no more believe Topper was really blind than I believe he had eyes in his boots. My opinion is, that it was a done thing between him and Scrooge's nephew; and that the Ghost of Christmas Present knew it. The way he went after that plump sister in the lace tucker, was an outrage on the credulity of human nature. Knocking down the fire-irons, tumbling over the chairs, bumping against the piano, smothering himself among the curtains, wherever she went, there went he! He always knew where the plump sister was. He wouldn't catch anybody else. If you had fallen up against him (as some of them did), on purpose, he would have made a feint of endeavouring to seize you, which would have been an affront to your understanding, and would instantly have sidled off in the direction of the plump sister. She often cried out that it wasn't fair; and it really was not. But when at last, he caught her; when, in spite of all her silken rustlings, and her rapid flutterings past him, he got her into a corner whence there was no escape; then his conduct was the most execrable. For his pretending not to know her; his pretending that it was necessary to touch her head-dress, and further to assure himself of her identity by pressing a certain ring upon her finger, and a certain chain about her neck; was vile, monstrous! No doubt she told him her opinion of it, when, another blind-man being in office, they were so very confidential together, behind the curtains.

Scrooge's niece was not one of the blind-man's buff party, but was made comfortable with a large chair and a footstool, in a snug corner, where the Ghost and Scrooge were close behind her. But she joined in the forfeits, and loved her love to admiration with all the letters of the alphabet. Likewise at the game of How, When, and Where, she was very great, and to the secret joy of Scrooge's nephew, beat her sisters hollow: though they were sharp girls too, as Topper could have told you. There might have been twenty people there, young and old, but they all played, and so did Scrooge; for wholly forgetting in the interest he had in what was going on, that his voice made no sound in their ears, he sometimes came out with his guess quite loud, and very often guessed quite right, too; for the sharpest needle, best Whitechapel, warranted not to cut in the eye, was not sharper than Scrooge; blunt as he took it in his head to be. The Ghost was greatly pleased to find him in this mood, and looked upon him with such favour, that he begged like a boy to be allowed to stay until the guests departed. But this the Spirit said could not be done.

It was a Game called Yes and No, where Scrooge's nephew had to think of something, and the rest must find out what; he only answering to their questions yes or no, as the case was. The brisk fire of questioning to which he was exposed, elicited from him that he was thinking of an animal, a live animal, rather a disagreeable animal, a savage animal, an animal that growled and grunted sometimes, and talked sometimes, and lived in London, and walked about the streets, and wasn't made a show of, and wasn't led by anybody, and didn't live in a menagerie, and was never killed in a market, and was not a horse, or an ass, or a cow, or a bull, or a tiger, or a dog, or a pig, or a cat, or a bear. At every fresh question that was put to him, this nephew burst into a fresh roar of laughter; and was so inexpressibly tickled, that he was obliged to get up off the sofa and stamp. At last the plump sister, falling into a similar state, cried out:

Which it certainly was. Admiration was the universal sentiment, though some objected that the reply to "Is it a bear?" ought to have been "Yes;" inasmuch as an answer in the negative was sufficient to have diverted their thoughts from Mr. Scrooge, supposing they had ever had any tendency that way. "He has given us plenty of merriment, I am sure," said Fred, "and it would be ungrateful not to drink his health. Here is a glass of mulled wine ready to our hand at the moment; and I say, 'Uncle Scrooge!'" "A Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year to the old man, whatever he is!" said Scrooge's nephew. "He wouldn't take it from me, but may he have it, nevertheless. Uncle Scrooge!" Uncle Scrooge had imperceptibly become so gay and light of heart, that he would have pledged the unconscious company in return, and thanked them in an inaudible speech, if the Ghost had given him time. But the whole scene passed off in the breath of the last word spoken by his nephew; and he and the Spirit were again upon their travels.

Much they saw, and far they went, and many homes they visited, but always with a happy end. The Spirit stood beside sick beds, and they were cheerful; on foreign lands, and they were close at home; by struggling men, and they were patient in their greater hope; by poverty, and it was rich. In almshouse, hospital, and jail, in misery's every refuge, where vain man in his little brief authority had not made fast the door, and barred the Spirit out, he left his blessing, and taught Scrooge his precepts. It was a long night, if it were only a night; but Scrooge had his doubts of this, because the Christmas Holidays appeared to be condensed into the space of time they passed together. It was strange, too, that while Scrooge remained unaltered in his outward form, the Ghost grew older, clearly older. Scrooge had observed this change, but never spoke of it, until they left a children's Twelfth Night party, when, looking at the Spirit as they stood together in an open place, he noticed that its hair was grey.

"Forgive me if I am not justified in what I ask," said Scrooge, looking intently at the Spirit's robe, "but I see something strange, and not belonging to yourself, protruding from your skirts. Is it a foot or a claw?" From the foldings of its robe, it brought two children; wretched, abject, frightful, hideous, miserable. They knelt down at its feet, and clung upon the outside of its garment. They were a boy and girl. Yellow, meagre, ragged, scowling, wolfish; but prostrate, too, in their humility. Where graceful youth should have filled their features out, and touched them with its freshest tints, a stale and shrivelled hand, like that of age, had pinched, and twisted them, and pulled them into shreds. Where angels might have sat enthroned, devils lurked, and glared out menacing. No change, no degradation, no perversion of humanity, in any grade, through all the mysteries of wonderful creation, has monsters half so horrible and dread. Scrooge started back, appalled. Having them shown to him in this way, he tried to say they were fine children, but the words choked themselves, rather than be parties to a lie of such enormous magnitude.

"They are Man's," said the Spirit, looking down upon them. "And they cling to me, appealing from their fathers. This boy is Ignorance. This girl is Want. Beware them both, and all of their degree, but most of all beware this boy, for on his brow I see that written which is Doom, unless the writing be erased. Deny it!" cried the Spirit, stretching out its hand towards the city. "Slander those who tell it ye! Admit it for your factious purposes, and make it worse. And bide the end!" Scrooge looked about him for the Ghost, and saw it not. As the last stroke ceased to vibrate, he remembered the prediction of old Jacob Marley, and lifting up his eyes, beheld a solemn Phantom, draped and hooded, coming, like a mist along the ground, towards him. THE Phantom slowly, gravely, silently, approached. When it came near him, Scrooge bent down upon his knee; for in the very air through which this Spirit moved it seemed to scatter gloom and mystery. It was shrouded in a deep black garment, which concealed its head, its face, its form, and left nothing of it visible save one outstretched hand. But for this it would have been difficult to detach its figure from the night, and separate it from the darkness by which it was surrounded.

He felt that it was tall and stately when it came beside him, and that its mysterious presence filled him with a solemn dread. He knew no more, for the Spirit neither spoke nor moved. "You are about to show me shadows of the things that have not happened, but will happen in the time before us," Scrooge pursued. "Is that so, Spirit?" The upper portion of the garment was contracted for an instant in its folds, as if the Spirit had inclined its head. That was the only answer he received. Although well used to ghostly company by this time, Scrooge feared the silent shape so much that his legs trembled beneath him, and he found that he could hardly stand when he prepared to follow it. The Spirit paused a moment, as observing his condition, and giving him time to recover. But Scrooge was all the worse for this. It thrilled him with a vague uncertain horror, to know that behind the dusky shroud, there were ghostly eyes intently fixed upon him, while he, though he stretched his own to the utmost, could see nothing but a spectral hand and one great heap of black.

"Ghost of the Future!" he exclaimed, "I fear you more than any spectre I have seen. But as I know your purpose is to do me good, and as I hope to live to be another man from what I was, I am prepared to bear you company, and do it with a thankful heart. Will you not speak to me?" They scarcely seemed to enter the city; for the city rather seemed to spring up about them, and encompass them of its own act. But there they were, in the heart of it; on 'Change, amongst the merchants; who hurried up and down, and chinked the money in their pockets, and conversed in groups, and looked at their watches, and trifled thoughtfully with their great gold seals; and so forth, as Scrooge had seen them often. "What has he done with his money?" asked a red-faced gentleman with a pendulous excrescence on the end of his nose, that shook like the gills of a turkey-cock. "It's likely to be a very cheap funeral," said the same speaker; "for upon my life I don't know of anybody to go to it. Suppose we make up a party and volunteer?"

"Well, I am the most disinterested among you, after all," said the first speaker, "for I never wear black gloves, and I never eat lunch. But I'll offer to go, if anybody else will. When I come to think of it, I'm not at all sure that I wasn't his most particular friend; for we used to stop and speak whenever we met. Bye, bye!" He knew these men, also, perfectly. They were men of business: very wealthy, and of great importance. He had made a point always of standing well in their esteem: in a business point of view, that is; strictly in a business point of view. Scrooge was at first inclined to be surprised that the Spirit should attach importance to conversations apparently so trivial; but feeling assured that they must have some hidden purpose, he set himself to consider what it was likely to be. They could scarcely be supposed to have any bearing on the death of Jacob, his old partner, for that was Past, and this Ghost's province was the Future. Nor could he think of any one immediately connected with himself, to whom he could apply them. But nothing doubting that to whomsoever they applied they had some latent moral for his own improvement, he resolved to treasure up every word he heard, and everything he saw; and especially to observe the shadow of himself when it appeared. For he had an expectation that the conduct of his future self would give him the clue he missed, and would render the solution of these riddles easy.

He looked about in that very place for his own image; but another man stood in his accustomed corner, and though the clock pointed to his usual time of day for being there, he saw no likeness of himself among the multitudes that poured in through the Porch. It gave him little surprise, however; for he had been revolving in his mind a change of life, and thought and hoped he saw his new-born resolutions carried out in this. Quiet and dark, beside him stood the Phantom, with its outstretched hand. When he roused himself from his thoughtful quest, he fancied from the turn of the hand, and its situation in reference to himself, that the Unseen Eyes were looking at him keenly. It made him shudder, and feel very cold. They left the busy scene, and went into an obscure part of the town, where Scrooge had never penetrated before, although he recognised its situation, and its bad repute. The ways were foul and narrow; the shops and houses wretched; the people half-naked, drunken, slipshod, ugly. Alleys and archways, like so many cesspools, disgorged their offences of smell, and dirt, and life, upon the straggling streets; and the whole quarter reeked with crime, with filth, and misery.

Far in this den of infamous resort, there was a low-browed, beetling shop, below a pent-house roof, where iron, old rags, bottles, bones, and greasy offal, were bought. Upon the floor within, were piled up heaps of rusty keys, nails, chains, hinges, files, scales, weights, and refuse iron of all kinds. Secrets that few would like to scrutinise were bred and hidden in mountains of unseemly rags, masses of corrupted fat, and sepulchres of bones. Sitting in among the wares he dealt in, by a charcoal stove, made of old bricks, was a grey-haired rascal, nearly seventy years of age; who had screened himself from the cold air without, by a frousy curtaining of miscellaneous tatters, hung upon a line; and smoked his pipe in all the luxury of calm retirement. Scrooge and the Phantom came into the presence of this man, just as a woman with a heavy bundle slunk into the shop. But she had scarcely entered, when another woman, similarly laden, came in too; and she was closely followed by a man in faded black, who was no less startled by the sight of them, than they had been upon the recognition of each other. After a short period of blank astonishment, in which the old man with the pipe had joined them, they all three burst into a laugh.

"Let the charwoman alone to be the first!" cried she who had entered first. "Let the laundress alone to be the second; and let the undertaker's man alone to be the third. Look here, old Joe, here's a chance! If we haven't all three met here without meaning it!" "You couldn't have met in a better place," said old Joe, removing his pipe from his mouth. "Come into the parlour. You were made free of it long ago, you know; and the other two an't strangers. Stop till I shut the door of the shop. Ah! How it skreeks! There an't such a rusty bit of metal in the place as its own hinges, I believe; and I'm sure there's no such old bones here, as mine. Ha, ha! We're all suitable to our calling, we're well matched. Come into the parlour. Come into the parlour." The parlour was the space behind the screen of rags. The old man raked the fire together with an old stair-rod, and having trimmed his smoky lamp (for it was night), with the stem of his pipe, put it in his mouth again.

While he did this, the woman who had already spoken threw her bundle on the floor, and sat down in a flaunting manner on a stool; crossing her elbows on her knees, and looking with a bold defiance at the other two. "If he wanted to keep 'em after he was dead, a wicked old screw," pursued the woman, "why wasn't he natural in his lifetime? If he had been, he'd have had somebody to look after him when he was struck with Death, instead of lying gasping out his last there, alone by himself." "I wish it was a little heavier judgment," replied the woman; "and it should have been, you may depend upon it, if I could have laid my hands on anything else. Open that bundle, old Joe, and let me know the value of it. Speak out plain. I'm not afraid to be the first, nor afraid for them to see it. We know pretty well that we were helping ourselves, before we met here, I believe. It's no sin. Open the bundle, Joe." But the gallantry of her friends would not allow of this; and the man in faded black, mounting the breach first, produced his plunder. It was not extensive. A seal or two, a pencil-case, a pair of sleeve-buttons, and a brooch of no great value, were all. They were severally examined and appraised by old Joe, who chalked the sums he was disposed to give for each, upon the wall, and added them up into a total when he found there was nothing more to come.

Mrs. Dilber was next. Sheets and towels, a little wearing apparel, two old-fashioned silver teaspoons, a pair of sugar-tongs, and a few boots. Her account was stated on the wall in the same manner. "I always give too much to ladies. It's a weakness of mine, and that's the way I ruin myself," said old Joe. "That's your account. If you asked me for another penny, and made it an open question, I'd repent of being so liberal and knock off half-a-crown." Joe went down on his knees for the greater convenience of opening it, and having unfastened a great many knots, dragged out a large and heavy roll of some dark stuff. "I certainly shan't hold my hand, when I can get anything in it by reaching it out, for the sake of such a man as He was, I promise you, Joe," returned the woman coolly. "Don't drop that oil upon the blankets, now." "Don't you be afraid of that," returned the woman. "I an't so fond of his company that I'd loiter about him for such things, if he did. Ah! you may look through that shirt till your eyes ache; but you won't find a hole in it, nor a threadbare place. It's the best he had, and a fine one too. They'd have wasted it, if it hadn't been for me."

"Putting it on him to be buried in, to be sure," replied the woman with a laugh. "Somebody was fool enough to do it, but I took it off again. If calico an't good enough for such a purpose, it isn't good enough for anything. It's quite as becoming to the body. He can't look uglier than he did in that one." Scrooge listened to this dialogue in horror. As they sat grouped about their spoil, in the scanty light afforded by the old man's lamp, he viewed them with a detestation and disgust, which could hardly have been greater, though they had been obscene demons, marketing the corpse itself. "Ha, ha!" laughed the same woman, when old Joe, producing a flannel bag with money in it, told out their several gains upon the ground. "This is the end of it, you see! He frightened every one away from him when he was alive, to profit us when he was dead! Ha, ha, ha!" "Spirit!" said Scrooge, shuddering from head to foot. "I see, I see. The case of this unhappy man might be my own. My life tends that way, now. Merciful Heaven, what is this!"

He recoiled in terror, for the scene had changed, and now he almost touched a bed: a bare, uncurtained bed: on which, beneath a ragged sheet, there lay a something covered up, which, though it was dumb, announced itself in awful language. The room was very dark, too dark to be observed with any accuracy, though Scrooge glanced round it in obedience to a secret impulse, anxious to know what kind of room it was. A pale light, rising in the outer air, fell straight upon the bed; and on it, plundered and bereft, unwatched, unwept, uncared for, was the body of this man. Scrooge glanced towards the Phantom. Its steady hand was pointed to the head. The cover was so carelessly adjusted that the slightest raising of it, the motion of a finger upon Scrooge's part, would have disclosed the face. He thought of it, felt how easy it would be to do, and longed to do it; but had no more power to withdraw the veil than to dismiss the spectre at his side. Oh cold, cold, rigid, dreadful Death, set up thine altar here, and dress it with such terrors as thou hast at thy command: for this is thy dominion! But of the loved, revered, and honoured head, thou canst not turn one hair to thy dread purposes, or make one feature odious. It is not that the hand is heavy and will fall down when released; it is not that the heart and pulse are still; but that the hand WAS open, generous, and true; the heart brave, warm, and tender; and the pulse a man's. Strike, Shadow, strike! And see his good deeds springing from the wound, to sow the world with life immortal!

No voice pronounced these words in Scrooge's ears, and yet he heard them when he looked upon the bed. He thought, if this man could be raised up now, what would be his foremost thoughts? Avarice, hard-dealing, griping cares? They have brought him to a rich end, truly! He lay, in the dark empty house, with not a man, a woman, or a child, to say that he was kind to me in this or that, and for the memory of one kind word I will be kind to him. A cat was tearing at the door, and there was a sound of gnawing rats beneath the hearth-stone. What they wanted in the room of death, and why they were so restless and disturbed, Scrooge did not dare to think. "If there is any person in the town, who feels emotion caused by this man's death," said Scrooge quite agonised, "show that person to me, Spirit, I beseech you!" The Phantom spread its dark robe before him for a moment, like a wing; and withdrawing it, revealed a room by daylight, where a mother and her children were.

She was expecting some one, and with anxious eagerness; for she walked up and down the room; started at every sound; looked out from the window; glanced at the clock; tried, but in vain, to work with her needle; and could hardly bear the voices of the children in their play. At length the long-expected knock was heard. She hurried to the door, and met her husband; a man whose face was careworn and depressed, though he was young. There was a remarkable expression in it now; a kind of serious delight of which he felt ashamed, and which he struggled to repress. He sat down to the dinner that had been hoarding for him by the fire; and when she asked him faintly what news (which was not until after a long silence), he appeared embarrassed how to answer. She was a mild and patient creature if her face spoke truth; but she was thankful in her soul to hear it, and she said so, with clasped hands. She prayed forgiveness the next moment, and was sorry; but the first was the emotion of her heart.

"What the half-drunken woman whom I told you of last night, said to me, when I tried to see him and obtain a week's delay; and what I thought was a mere excuse to avoid me; turns out to have been quite true. He was not only very ill, but dying, then." "I don't know. But before that time we shall be ready with the money; and even though we were not, it would be a bad fortune indeed to find so merciless a creditor in his successor. We may sleep to-night with light hearts, Caroline!" Yes. Soften it as they would, their hearts were lighter. The children's faces, hushed and clustered round to hear what they so little understood, were brighter; and it was a happier house for this man's death! The only emotion that the Ghost could show him, caused by the event, was one of pleasure. "Let me see some tenderness connected with a death," said Scrooge; "or that dark chamber, Spirit, which we left just now, will be for ever present to me." The Ghost conducted him through several streets familiar to his feet; and as they went along, Scrooge looked here and there to find himself, but nowhere was he to be seen. They entered poor Bob Cratchit's house; the dwelling he had visited before; and found the mother and the children seated round the fire.

Quiet. Very quiet. The noisy little Cratchits were as still as statues in one corner, and sat looking up at Peter, who had a book before him. The mother and her daughters were engaged in sewing. But surely they were very quiet! Where had Scrooge heard those words? He had not dreamed them. The boy must have read them out, as he and the Spirit crossed the threshold. Why did he not go on? "They're better now again," said Cratchit's wife. "It makes them weak by candle-light; and I wouldn't show weak eyes to your father when he comes home, for the world. It must be near his time." "But he was very light to carry," she resumed, intent upon her work, "and his father loved him so, that it was no trouble: no trouble. And there is your father at the door!" She hurried out to meet him; and little Bob in his comforter --he had need of it, poor fellow--came in. His tea was ready for him on the hob, and they all tried who should help him to it most. Then the two young Cratchits got upon his knees and laid, each child a little cheek, against his face, as if they said, "Don't mind it, father. Don't be grieved!"

Bob was very cheerful with them, and spoke pleasantly to all the family. He looked at the work upon the table, and praised the industry and speed of Mrs. Cratchit and the girls. They would be done long before Sunday, he said. "Yes, my dear," returned Bob. "I wish you could have gone. It would have done you good to see how green a place it is. But you'll see it often. I promised him that I would walk there on a Sunday. My little, little child!" cried Bob. "My little child!" He left the room, and went up-stairs into the room above, which was lighted cheerfully, and hung with Christmas. There was a chair set close beside the child, and there were signs of some one having been there, lately. Poor Bob sat down in it, and when he had thought a little and composed himself, he kissed the little face. He was reconciled to what had happened, and went down again quite happy. They drew about the fire, and talked; the girls and mother working still. Bob told them of the extraordinary kindness of Mr. Scrooge's nephew, whom he had scarcely seen but once, and who, meeting him in the street that day, and seeing that he looked a little--"just a little down you know," said Bob, inquired what had happened to distress him. "On which," said Bob, "for he is the pleasantest-spoken gentleman you ever heard, I told him. 'I am heartily sorry for it, Mr. Cratchit,' he said, 'and heartily sorry for your good wife.' By the bye, how he ever knew that, I don't know."

"Very well observed, my boy!" cried Bob. "I hope they do. 'Heartily sorry,' he said, 'for your good wife. If I can be of service to you in any way,' he said, giving me his card, 'that's where I live. Pray come to me.' Now, it wasn't," cried Bob, "for the sake of anything he might be able to do for us, so much as for his kind way, that this was quite delightful. It really seemed as if he had known our Tiny Tim, and felt with us." "You would be surer of it, my dear," returned Bob, "if you saw and spoke to him. I shouldn't be at all surprised-- mark what I say!--if he got Peter a better situation." "It's just as likely as not," said Bob, "one of these days; though there's plenty of time for that, my dear. But however and whenever we part from one another, I am sure we shall none of us forget poor Tiny Tim--shall we--or this first parting that there was among us?" "And I know," said Bob, "I know, my dears, that when we recollect how patient and how mild he was; although he was a little, little child; we shall not quarrel easily among ourselves, and forget poor Tiny Tim in doing it."

Mrs. Cratchit kissed him, his daughters kissed him, the two young Cratchits kissed him, and Peter and himself shook hands. Spirit of Tiny Tim, thy childish essence was from God! "Spectre," said Scrooge, "something informs me that our parting moment is at hand. I know it, but I know not how. Tell me what man that was whom we saw lying dead?" The Ghost of Christmas Yet To Come conveyed him, as before--though at a different time, he thought: indeed, there seemed no order in these latter visions, save that they were in the Future--into the resorts of business men, but showed him not himself. Indeed, the Spirit did not stay for anything, but went straight on, as to the end just now desired, until besought by Scrooge to tarry for a moment. "This court," said Scrooge, "through which we hurry now, is where my place of occupation is, and has been for a length of time. I see the house. Let me behold what I shall be, in days to come!" Scrooge hastened to the window of his office, and looked in. It was an office still, but not his. The furniture was not the same, and the figure in the chair was not himself. The Phantom pointed as before.

He joined it once again, and wondering why and whither he had gone, accompanied it until they reached an iron gate. He paused to look round before entering. A churchyard. Here, then; the wretched man whose name he had now to learn, lay underneath the ground. It was a worthy place. Walled in by houses; overrun by grass and weeds, the growth of vegetation's death, not life; choked up with too much burying; fat with repleted appetite. A worthy place! The Spirit stood among the graves, and pointed down to One. He advanced towards it trembling. The Phantom was exactly as it had been, but he dreaded that he saw new meaning in its solemn shape. "Before I draw nearer to that stone to which you point," said Scrooge, "answer me one question. Are these the shadows of the things that Will be, or are they shadows of things that May be, only?" "Men's courses will foreshadow certain ends, to which, if persevered in, they must lead," said Scrooge. "But if the courses be departed from, the ends will change. Say it is thus with what you show me!"

"Spirit!" he cried, tight clutching at its robe, "hear me! I am not the man I was. I will not be the man I must have been but for this intercourse. Why show me this, if I am past all hope!" "Good Spirit," he pursued, as down upon the ground he fell before it: "Your nature intercedes for me, and pities me. Assure me that I yet may change these shadows you have shown me, by an altered life!" "I will honour Christmas in my heart, and try to keep it all the year. I will live in the Past, the Present, and the Future. The Spirits of all Three shall strive within me. I will not shut out the lessons that they teach. Oh, tell me I may sponge away the writing on this stone!" In his agony, he caught the spectral hand. It sought to free itself, but he was strong in his entreaty, and detained it. The Spirit, stronger yet, repulsed him. Holding up his hands in a last prayer to have his fate reversed, he saw an alteration in the Phantom's hood and dress. It shrunk, collapsed, and dwindled down into a bedpost.

YES! and the bedpost was his own. The bed was his own, the room was his own. Best and happiest of all, the Time before him was his own, to make amends in! "I will live in the Past, the Present, and the Future!" Scrooge repeated, as he scrambled out of bed. "The Spirits of all Three shall strive within me. Oh Jacob Marley! Heaven, and the Christmas Time be praised for this! I say it on my knees, old Jacob; on my knees!" He was so fluttered and so glowing with his good intentions, that his broken voice would scarcely answer to his call. He had been sobbing violently in his conflict with the Spirit, and his face was wet with tears. "They are not torn down," cried Scrooge, folding one of his bed-curtains in his arms, "they are not torn down, rings and all. They are here--I am here--the shadows of the things that would have been, may be dispelled. They will be. I know they will!" His hands were busy with his garments all this time; turning them inside out, putting them on upside down, tearing them, mislaying them, making them parties to every kind of extravagance.

"I don't know what to do!" cried Scrooge, laughing and crying in the same breath; and making a perfect Laocoön of himself with his stockings. "I am as light as a feather, I am as happy as an angel, I am as merry as a schoolboy. I am as giddy as a drunken man. A merry Christmas to everybody! A happy New Year to all the world. Hallo here! Whoop! Hallo!" "There's the saucepan that the gruel was in!" cried Scrooge, starting off again, and going round the fireplace. "There's the door, by which the Ghost of Jacob Marley entered! There's the corner where the Ghost of Christmas Present, sat! There's the window where I saw the wandering Spirits! It's all right, it's all true, it all happened. Ha ha ha!" Really, for a man who had been out of practice for so many years, it was a splendid laugh, a most illustrious laugh. The father of a long, long line of brilliant laughs! "I don't know what day of the month it is!" said Scrooge. "I don't know how long I've been among the Spirits. I don't know anything. I'm quite a baby. Never mind. I don't care. I'd rather be a baby. Hallo! Whoop! Hallo here!"

He was checked in his transports by the churches ringing out the lustiest peals he had ever heard. Clash, clang, hammer; ding, dong, bell. Bell, dong, ding; hammer, clang, clash! Oh, glorious, glorious! Running to the window, he opened it, and put out his head. No fog, no mist; clear, bright, jovial, stirring, cold; cold, piping for the blood to dance to; Golden sunlight; Heavenly sky; sweet fresh air; merry bells. Oh, glorious! Glorious! "It's Christmas Day!" said Scrooge to himself. "I haven't missed it. The Spirits have done it all in one night. They can do anything they like. Of course they can. Of course they can. Hallo, my fine fellow!" "An intelligent boy!" said Scrooge. "A remarkable boy! Do you know whether they've sold the prize Turkey that was hanging up there?--Not the little prize Turkey: the big one?" "No, no," said Scrooge, "I am in earnest. Go and buy it, and tell 'em to bring it here, that I may give them the direction where to take it. Come back with the man, and I'll give you a shilling. Come back with him in less than five minutes and I'll give you half-a-crown!"

"I'll send it to Bob Cratchit's!" whispered Scrooge, rubbing his hands, and splitting with a laugh. "He sha'n't know who sends it. It's twice the size of Tiny Tim. Joe Miller never made such a joke as sending it to Bob's will be!" The hand in which he wrote the address was not a steady one, but write it he did, somehow, and went down-stairs to open the street door, ready for the coming of the poulterer's man. As he stood there, waiting his arrival, the knocker caught his eye. "I shall love it, as long as I live!" cried Scrooge, patting it with his hand. "I scarcely ever looked at it before. What an honest expression it has in its face! It's a wonderful knocker!--Here's the Turkey! Hallo! Whoop! How are you! Merry Christmas!" The chuckle with which he said this, and the chuckle with which he paid for the Turkey, and the chuckle with which he paid for the cab, and the chuckle with which he recompensed the boy, were only to be exceeded by the chuckle with which he sat down breathless in his chair again, and chuckled till he cried.

Shaving was not an easy task, for his hand continued to shake very much; and shaving requires attention, even when you don't dance while you are at it. But if he had cut the end of his nose off, he would have put a piece of sticking-plaister over it, and been quite satisfied. He dressed himself "all in his best," and at last got out into the streets. The people were by this time pouring forth, as he had seen them with the Ghost of Christmas Present; and walking with his hands behind him, Scrooge regarded every one with a delighted smile. He looked so irresistibly pleasant, in a word, that three or four good-humoured fellows said, "Good morning, sir! A merry Christmas to you!" And Scrooge said often afterwards, that of all the blithe sounds he had ever heard, those were the blithest in his ears. He had not gone far, when coming on towards him he beheld the portly gentleman, who had walked into his counting-house the day before, and said, "Scrooge and Marley's, I believe?" It sent a pang across his heart to think how this old gentleman would look upon him when they met; but he knew what path lay straight before him, and he took it.

"My dear sir," said Scrooge, quickening his pace, and taking the old gentleman by both his hands. "How do you do? I hope you succeeded yesterday. It was very kind of you. A merry Christmas to you, sir!" "Yes," said Scrooge. "That is my name, and I fear it may not be pleasant to you. Allow me to ask your pardon. And will you have the goodness"--here Scrooge whispered in his ear. He went to church, and walked about the streets, and watched the people hurrying to and fro, and patted children on the head, and questioned beggars, and looked down into the kitchens of houses, and up to the windows, and found that everything could yield him pleasure. He had never dreamed that any walk--that anything--could give him so much happiness. In the afternoon he turned his steps towards his nephew's house. He turned it gently, and sidled his face in, round the door. They were looking at the table (which was spread out in great array); for these young housekeepers are always nervous on such points, and like to see that everything is right.

Dear heart alive, how his niece by marriage started! Scrooge had forgotten, for the moment, about her sitting in the corner with the footstool, or he wouldn't have done it, on any account. Let him in! It is a mercy he didn't shake his arm off. He was at home in five minutes. Nothing could be heartier. His niece looked just the same. So did Topper when he came. So did the plump sister when she came. So did every one when they came. Wonderful party, wonderful games, wonderful unanimity, won-der-ful happiness! But he was early at the office next morning. Oh, he was early there. If he could only be there first, and catch Bob Cratchit coming late! That was the thing he had set his heart upon. And he did it; yes, he did! The clock struck nine. No Bob. A quarter past. No Bob. He was full eighteen minutes and a half behind his time. Scrooge sat with his door wide open, that he might see him come into the Tank. His hat was off, before he opened the door; his comforter too. He was on his stool in a jiffy; driving away with his pen, as if he were trying to overtake nine o'clock.

"Now, I'll tell you what, my friend," said Scrooge, "I am not going to stand this sort of thing any longer. And therefore," he continued, leaping from his stool, and giving Bob such a dig in the waistcoat that he staggered back into the Tank again; "and therefore I am about to raise your salary!" Bob trembled, and got a little nearer to the ruler. He had a momentary idea of knocking Scrooge down with it, holding him, and calling to the people in the court for help and a strait-waistcoat. "A merry Christmas, Bob!" said Scrooge, with an earnestness that could not be mistaken, as he clapped him on the back. "A merrier Christmas, Bob, my good fellow, than I have given you, for many a year! I'll raise your salary, and endeavour to assist your struggling family, and we will discuss your affairs this very afternoon, over a Christmas bowl of smoking bishop, Bob! Make up the fires, and buy another coal-scuttle before you dot another i, Bob Cratchit!" Scrooge was better than his word. He did it all, and infinitely more; and to Tiny Tim, who did NOT die, he was a second father. He became as good a friend, as good a master, and as good a man, as the good old city knew, or any other good old city, town, or borough, in the good old world. Some people laughed to see the alteration in him, but he let them laugh, and little heeded them; for he was wise enough to know that nothing ever happened on this globe, for good, at which some people did not have their fill of laughter in the outset; and knowing that such as these would be blind anyway, he thought it quite as well that they should wrinkle up their eyes in grins, as have the malady in less attractive forms. His own heart laughed: and that was quite enough for him.

He had no further intercourse with Spirits, but lived upon the Total Abstinence Principle, ever afterwards; and it was always said of him, that he knew how to keep Christmas well, if any man alive possessed the knowledge. May that be truly said of us, and all of us! And so, as Tiny Tim observed, God bless Us, Every One! It was the best of times, it was the worst of times, it was the age of wisdom, it was the age of foolishness, it was the epoch of belief, it was the epoch of incredulity, it was the season of Light, it was the season of Darkness, it was the spring of hope, it was the winter of despair, we had everything before us, we had nothing before us, we were all going direct to Heaven, we were all going direct the other way--in short, the period was so far like the present period, that some of its noisiest authorities insisted on its being received, for good or for evil, in the superlative degree of comparison only. There were a king with a large jaw and a queen with a plain face, on the throne of England; there were a king with a large jaw and a queen with a fair face, on the throne of France. In both countries it was clearer than crystal to the lords of the State preserves of loaves and fishes, that things in general were settled for ever.

It was the year of Our Lord one thousand seven hundred and seventy-five. Spiritual revelations were conceded to England at that favoured period, as at this. Mrs. Southcott had recently attained her five-and-twentieth blessed birthday, of whom a prophetic private in the Life Guards had heralded the sublime appearance by announcing that arrangements were made for the swallowing up of London and Westminster. Even the Cock-lane ghost had been laid only a round dozen of years, after rapping out its messages, as the spirits of this very year last past (supernaturally deficient in originality) rapped out theirs. Mere messages in the earthly order of events had lately come to the English Crown and People, from a congress of British subjects in America: which, strange to relate, have proved more important to the human race than any communications yet received through any of the chickens of the Cock-lane brood. France, less favoured on the whole as to matters spiritual than her sister of the shield and trident, rolled with exceeding smoothness down hill, making paper money and spending it. Under the guidance of her Christian pastors, she entertained herself, besides, with such humane achievements as sentencing a youth to have his hands cut off, his tongue torn out with pincers, and his body burned alive, because he had not kneeled down in the rain to do honour to a dirty procession of monks which passed within his view, at a distance of some fifty or sixty yards. It is likely enough that, rooted in the woods of France and Norway, there were growing trees, when that sufferer was put to death, already marked by the Woodman, Fate, to come down and be sawn into boards, to make a certain movable framework with a sack and a knife in it, terrible in history. It is likely enough that in the rough outhouses of some tillers of the heavy lands adjacent to Paris, there were sheltered from the weather that very day, rude carts, bespattered with rustic mire, snuffed about by pigs, and roosted in by poultry, which the Farmer, Death, had already set apart to be his tumbrils of the Revolution. But that Woodman and that Farmer, though they work unceasingly, work silently, and no one heard them as they went about with muffled tread: the rather, forasmuch as to entertain any suspicion that they were awake, was to be atheistical and traitorous.

In England, there was scarcely an amount of order and protection to justify much national boasting. Daring burglaries by armed men, and highway robberies, took place in the capital itself every night; families were publicly cautioned not to go out of town without removing their furniture to upholsterers’ warehouses for security; the highwayman in the dark was a City tradesman in the light, and, being recognised and challenged by his fellow-tradesman whom he stopped in his character of “the Captain,” gallantly shot him through the head and rode away; the mail was waylaid by seven robbers, and the guard shot three dead, and then got shot dead himself by the other four, “in consequence of the failure of his ammunition:” after which the mail was robbed in peace; that magnificent potentate, the Lord Mayor of London, was made to stand and deliver on Turnham Green, by one highwayman, who despoiled the illustrious creature in sight of all his retinue; prisoners in London gaols fought battles with their turnkeys, and the majesty of the law fired blunderbusses in among them, loaded with rounds of shot and ball; thieves snipped off diamond crosses from the necks of noble lords at Court drawing-rooms; musketeers went into St. Giles’s, to search for contraband goods, and the mob fired on the musketeers, and the musketeers fired on the mob, and nobody thought any of these occurrences much out of the common way. In the midst of them, the hangman, ever busy and ever worse than useless, was in constant requisition; now, stringing up long rows of miscellaneous criminals; now, hanging a housebreaker on Saturday who had been taken on Tuesday; now, burning people in the hand at Newgate by the dozen, and now burning pamphlets at the door of Westminster Hall; to-day, taking the life of an atrocious murderer, and to-morrow of a wretched pilferer who had robbed a farmer’s boy of sixpence.

All these things, and a thousand like them, came to pass in and close upon the dear old year one thousand seven hundred and seventy-five. Environed by them, while the Woodman and the Farmer worked unheeded, those two of the large jaws, and those other two of the plain and the fair faces, trod with stir enough, and carried their divine rights with a high hand. Thus did the year one thousand seven hundred and seventy-five conduct their Greatnesses, and myriads of small creatures--the creatures of this chronicle among the rest--along the roads that lay before them. It was the Dover road that lay, on a Friday night late in November, before the first of the persons with whom this history has business. The Dover road lay, as to him, beyond the Dover mail, as it lumbered up Shooter’s Hill. He walked up hill in the mire by the side of the mail, as the rest of the passengers did; not because they had the least relish for walking exercise, under the circumstances, but because the hill, and the harness, and the mud, and the mail, were all so heavy, that the horses had three times already come to a stop, besides once drawing the coach across the road, with the mutinous intent of taking it back to Blackheath. Reins and whip and coachman and guard, however, in combination, had read that article of war which forbade a purpose otherwise strongly in favour of the argument, that some brute animals are endued with Reason; and the team had capitulated and returned to their duty.

With drooping heads and tremulous tails, they mashed their way through the thick mud, floundering and stumbling between whiles, as if they were falling to pieces at the larger joints. As often as the driver rested them and brought them to a stand, with a wary “Wo-ho! so-ho-then!” the near leader violently shook his head and everything upon it--like an unusually emphatic horse, denying that the coach could be got up the hill. Whenever the leader made this rattle, the passenger started, as a nervous passenger might, and was disturbed in mind. There was a steaming mist in all the hollows, and it had roamed in its forlornness up the hill, like an evil spirit, seeking rest and finding none. A clammy and intensely cold mist, it made its slow way through the air in ripples that visibly followed and overspread one another, as the waves of an unwholesome sea might do. It was dense enough to shut out everything from the light of the coach-lamps but these its own workings, and a few yards of road; and the reek of the labouring horses steamed into it, as if they had made it all.

Two other passengers, besides the one, were plodding up the hill by the side of the mail. All three were wrapped to the cheekbones and over the ears, and wore jack-boots. Not one of the three could have said, from anything he saw, what either of the other two was like; and each was hidden under almost as many wrappers from the eyes of the mind, as from the eyes of the body, of his two companions. In those days, travellers were very shy of being confidential on a short notice, for anybody on the road might be a robber or in league with robbers. As to the latter, when every posting-house and ale-house could produce somebody in “the Captain’s” pay, ranging from the landlord to the lowest stable non-descript, it was the likeliest thing upon the cards. So the guard of the Dover mail thought to himself, that Friday night in November, one thousand seven hundred and seventy-five, lumbering up Shooter’s Hill, as he stood on his own particular perch behind the mail, beating his feet, and keeping an eye and a hand on the arm-chest before him, where a loaded blunderbuss lay at the top of six or eight loaded horse-pistols, deposited on a substratum of cutlass.

The Dover mail was in its usual genial position that the guard suspected the passengers, the passengers suspected one another and the guard, they all suspected everybody else, and the coachman was sure of nothing but the horses; as to which cattle he could with a clear conscience have taken his oath on the two Testaments that they were not fit for the journey. “Wo-ho!” said the coachman. “So, then! One more pull and you’re at the top and be damned to you, for I have had trouble enough to get you to it!--Joe!” The emphatic horse, cut short by the whip in a most decided negative, made a decided scramble for it, and the three other horses followed suit. Once more, the Dover mail struggled on, with the jack-boots of its passengers squashing along by its side. They had stopped when the coach stopped, and they kept close company with it. If any one of the three had had the hardihood to propose to another to walk on a little ahead into the mist and darkness, he would have put himself in a fair way of getting shot instantly as a highwayman.

The last burst carried the mail to the summit of the hill. The horses stopped to breathe again, and the guard got down to skid the wheel for the descent, and open the coach-door to let the passengers in. “_I_ say a horse at a gallop, Tom,” returned the guard, leaving his hold of the door, and mounting nimbly to his place. “Gentlemen! In the king’s name, all of you!” The passenger booked by this history, was on the coach-step, getting in; the two other passengers were close behind him, and about to follow. He remained on the step, half in the coach and half out of; they remained in the road below him. They all looked from the coachman to the guard, and from the guard to the coachman, and listened. The coachman looked back and the guard looked back, and even the emphatic leader pricked up his ears and looked back, without contradicting. The stillness consequent on the cessation of the rumbling and labouring of the coach, added to the stillness of the night, made it very quiet indeed. The panting of the horses communicated a tremulous motion to the coach, as if it were in a state of agitation. The hearts of the passengers beat loud enough perhaps to be heard; but at any rate, the quiet pause was audibly expressive of people out of breath, and holding the breath, and having the pulses quickened by expectation.

“Keep where you are,” the guard called to the voice in the mist, “because, if I should make a mistake, it could never be set right in your lifetime. Gentleman of the name of Lorry answer straight.” “I know this messenger, guard,” said Mr. Lorry, getting down into the road--assisted from behind more swiftly than politely by the other two passengers, who immediately scrambled into the coach, shut the door, and pulled up the window. “He may come close; there’s nothing wrong.” “Come on at a footpace! d’ye mind me? And if you’ve got holsters to that saddle o’ yourn, don’t let me see your hand go nigh ’em. For I’m a devil at a quick mistake, and when I make one it takes the form of Lead. So now let’s look at you.” The figures of a horse and rider came slowly through the eddying mist, and came to the side of the mail, where the passenger stood. The rider stooped, and, casting up his eyes at the guard, handed the passenger a small folded paper. The rider’s horse was blown, and both horse and rider were covered with mud, from the hoofs of the horse to the hat of the man.

The watchful guard, with his right hand at the stock of his raised blunderbuss, his left at the barrel, and his eye on the horseman, answered curtly, “Sir.” “There is nothing to apprehend. I belong to Tellson’s Bank. You must know Tellson’s Bank in London. I am going to Paris on business. A crown to drink. I may read this?” He opened it in the light of the coach-lamp on that side, and read--first to himself and then aloud: “‘Wait at Dover for Mam’selle.’ It’s not long, you see, guard. Jerry, say that my answer was, RECALLED TO LIFE.” With those words the passenger opened the coach-door and got in; not at all assisted by his fellow-passengers, who had expeditiously secreted their watches and purses in their boots, and were now making a general pretence of being asleep. With no more definite purpose than to escape the hazard of originating any other kind of action. The coach lumbered on again, with heavier wreaths of mist closing round it as it began the descent. The guard soon replaced his blunderbuss in his arm-chest, and, having looked to the rest of its contents, and having looked to the supplementary pistols that he wore in his belt, looked to a smaller chest beneath his seat, in which there were a few smith’s tools, a couple of torches, and a tinder-box. For he was furnished with that completeness that if the coach-lamps had been blown and stormed out, which did occasionally happen, he had only to shut himself up inside, keep the flint and steel sparks well off the straw, and get a light with tolerable safety and ease (if he were lucky) in five minutes.

Jerry, left alone in the mist and darkness, dismounted meanwhile, not only to ease his spent horse, but to wipe the mud from his face, and shake the wet out of his hat-brim, which might be capable of holding about half a gallon. After standing with the bridle over his heavily-splashed arm, until the wheels of the mail were no longer within hearing and the night was quite still again, he turned to walk down the hill. “After that there gallop from Temple Bar, old lady, I won’t trust your fore-legs till I get you on the level,” said this hoarse messenger, glancing at his mare. “‘Recalled to life.’ That’s a Blazing strange message. Much of that wouldn’t do for you, Jerry! I say, Jerry! You’d be in a Blazing bad way, if recalling to life was to come into fashion, Jerry!” A wonderful fact to reflect upon, that every human creature is constituted to be that profound secret and mystery to every other. A solemn consideration, when I enter a great city by night, that every one of those darkly clustered houses encloses its own secret; that every room in every one of them encloses its own secret; that every beating heart in the hundreds of thousands of breasts there, is, in some of its imaginings, a secret to the heart nearest it! Something of the awfulness, even of Death itself, is referable to this. No more can I turn the leaves of this dear book that I loved, and vainly hope in time to read it all. No more can I look into the depths of this unfathomable water, wherein, as momentary lights glanced into it, I have had glimpses of buried treasure and other things submerged. It was appointed that the book should shut with a spring, for ever and for ever, when I had read but a page. It was appointed that the water should be locked in an eternal frost, when the light was playing on its surface, and I stood in ignorance on the shore. My friend is dead, my neighbour is dead, my love, the darling of my soul, is dead; it is the inexorable consolidation and perpetuation of the secret that was always in that individuality, and which I shall carry in mine to my life’s end. In any of the burial-places of this city through which I pass, is there a sleeper more inscrutable than its busy inhabitants are, in their innermost personality, to me, or than I am to them?

As to this, his natural and not to be alienated inheritance, the messenger on horseback had exactly the same possessions as the King, the first Minister of State, or the richest merchant in London. So with the three passengers shut up in the narrow compass of one lumbering old mail coach; they were mysteries to one another, as complete as if each had been in his own coach and six, or his own coach and sixty, with the breadth of a county between him and the next. The messenger rode back at an easy trot, stopping pretty often at ale-houses by the way to drink, but evincing a tendency to keep his own counsel, and to keep his hat cocked over his eyes. He had eyes that assorted very well with that decoration, being of a surface black, with no depth in the colour or form, and much too near together--as if they were afraid of being found out in something, singly, if they kept too far apart. They had a sinister expression, under an old cocked-hat like a three-cornered spittoon, and over a great muffler for the chin and throat, which descended nearly to the wearer’s knees. When he stopped for drink, he moved this muffler with his left hand, only while he poured his liquor in with his right; as soon as that was done, he muffled again.

“No, Jerry, no!” said the messenger, harping on one theme as he rode. “It wouldn’t do for you, Jerry. Jerry, you honest tradesman, it wouldn’t suit _your_ line of business! Recalled--! Bust me if I don’t think he’d been a drinking!” His message perplexed his mind to that degree that he was fain, several times, to take off his hat to scratch his head. Except on the crown, which was raggedly bald, he had stiff, black hair, standing jaggedly all over it, and growing down hill almost to his broad, blunt nose. It was so like Smith’s work, so much more like the top of a strongly spiked wall than a head of hair, that the best of players at leap-frog might have declined him, as the most dangerous man in the world to go over. While he trotted back with the message he was to deliver to the night watchman in his box at the door of Tellson’s Bank, by Temple Bar, who was to deliver it to greater authorities within, the shadows of the night took such shapes to him as arose out of the message, and took such shapes to the mare as arose out of _her_ private topics of uneasiness. They seemed to be numerous, for she shied at every shadow on the road.

What time, the mail-coach lumbered, jolted, rattled, and bumped upon its tedious way, with its three fellow-inscrutables inside. To whom, likewise, the shadows of the night revealed themselves, in the forms their dozing eyes and wandering thoughts suggested. Tellson’s Bank had a run upon it in the mail. As the bank passenger--with an arm drawn through the leathern strap, which did what lay in it to keep him from pounding against the next passenger, and driving him into his corner, whenever the coach got a special jolt--nodded in his place, with half-shut eyes, the little coach-windows, and the coach-lamp dimly gleaming through them, and the bulky bundle of opposite passenger, became the bank, and did a great stroke of business. The rattle of the harness was the chink of money, and more drafts were honoured in five minutes than even Tellson’s, with all its foreign and home connection, ever paid in thrice the time. Then the strong-rooms underground, at Tellson’s, with such of their valuable stores and secrets as were known to the passenger (and it was not a little that he knew about them), opened before him, and he went in among them with the great keys and the feebly-burning candle, and found them safe, and strong, and sound, and still, just as he had last seen them.

But, though the bank was almost always with him, and though the coach (in a confused way, like the presence of pain under an opiate) was always with him, there was another current of impression that never ceased to run, all through the night. He was on his way to dig some one out of a grave. Now, which of the multitude of faces that showed themselves before him was the true face of the buried person, the shadows of the night did not indicate; but they were all the faces of a man of five-and-forty by years, and they differed principally in the passions they expressed, and in the ghastliness of their worn and wasted state. Pride, contempt, defiance, stubbornness, submission, lamentation, succeeded one another; so did varieties of sunken cheek, cadaverous colour, emaciated hands and figures. But the face was in the main one face, and every head was prematurely white. A hundred times the dozing passenger inquired of this spectre: The answers to this question were various and contradictory. Sometimes the broken reply was, “Wait! It would kill me if I saw her too soon.” Sometimes, it was given in a tender rain of tears, and then it was, “Take me to her.” Sometimes it was staring and bewildered, and then it was, “I don’t know her. I don’t understand.”

After such imaginary discourse, the passenger in his fancy would dig, and dig, dig--now with a spade, now with a great key, now with his hands--to dig this wretched creature out. Got out at last, with earth hanging about his face and hair, he would suddenly fan away to dust. The passenger would then start to himself, and lower the window, to get the reality of mist and rain on his cheek. Yet even when his eyes were opened on the mist and rain, on the moving patch of light from the lamps, and the hedge at the roadside retreating by jerks, the night shadows outside the coach would fall into the train of the night shadows within. The real Banking-house by Temple Bar, the real business of the past day, the real strong rooms, the real express sent after him, and the real message returned, would all be there. Out of the midst of them, the ghostly face would rise, and he would accost it again. Dig--dig--dig--until an impatient movement from one of the two passengers would admonish him to pull up the window, draw his arm securely through the leathern strap, and speculate upon the two slumbering forms, until his mind lost its hold of them, and they again slid away into the bank and the grave.

The words were still in his hearing as just spoken--distinctly in his hearing as ever spoken words had been in his life--when the weary passenger started to the consciousness of daylight, and found that the shadows of the night were gone. He lowered the window, and looked out at the rising sun. There was a ridge of ploughed land, with a plough upon it where it had been left last night when the horses were unyoked; beyond, a quiet coppice-wood, in which many leaves of burning red and golden yellow still remained upon the trees. Though the earth was cold and wet, the sky was clear, and the sun rose bright, placid, and beautiful. When the mail got successfully to Dover, in the course of the forenoon, the head drawer at the Royal George Hotel opened the coach-door as his custom was. He did it with some flourish of ceremony, for a mail journey from London in winter was an achievement to congratulate an adventurous traveller upon. By that time, there was only one adventurous traveller left be congratulated: for the two others had been set down at their respective roadside destinations. The mildewy inside of the coach, with its damp and dirty straw, its disagreeable smell, and its obscurity, was rather like a larger dog-kennel. Mr. Lorry, the passenger, shaking himself out of it in chains of straw, a tangle of shaggy wrapper, flapping hat, and muddy legs, was rather like a larger sort of dog.

“And then breakfast, sir? Yes, sir. That way, sir, if you please. Show Concord! Gentleman’s valise and hot water to Concord. Pull off gentleman’s boots in Concord. (You will find a fine sea-coal fire, sir.) Fetch barber to Concord. Stir about there, now, for Concord!” The Concord bed-chamber being always assigned to a passenger by the mail, and passengers by the mail being always heavily wrapped up from head to foot, the room had the odd interest for the establishment of the Royal George, that although but one kind of man was seen to go into it, all kinds and varieties of men came out of it. Consequently, another drawer, and two porters, and several maids and the landlady, were all loitering by accident at various points of the road between the Concord and the coffee-room, when a gentleman of sixty, formally dressed in a brown suit of clothes, pretty well worn, but very well kept, with large square cuffs and large flaps to the pockets, passed along on his way to his breakfast. The coffee-room had no other occupant, that forenoon, than the gentleman in brown. His breakfast-table was drawn before the fire, and as he sat, with its light shining on him, waiting for the meal, he sat so still, that he might have been sitting for his portrait.

Very orderly and methodical he looked, with a hand on each knee, and a loud watch ticking a sonorous sermon under his flapped waist-coat, as though it pitted its gravity and longevity against the levity and evanescence of the brisk fire. He had a good leg, and was a little vain of it, for his brown stockings fitted sleek and close, and were of a fine texture; his shoes and buckles, too, though plain, were trim. He wore an odd little sleek crisp flaxen wig, setting very close to his head: which wig, it is to be presumed, was made of hair, but which looked far more as though it were spun from filaments of silk or glass. His linen, though not of a fineness in accordance with his stockings, was as white as the tops of the waves that broke upon the neighbouring beach, or the specks of sail that glinted in the sunlight far at sea. A face habitually suppressed and quieted, was still lighted up under the quaint wig by a pair of moist bright eyes that it must have cost their owner, in years gone by, some pains to drill to the composed and reserved expression of Tellson’s Bank. He had a healthy colour in his cheeks, and his face, though lined, bore few traces of anxiety. But, perhaps the confidential bachelor clerks in Tellson’s Bank were principally occupied with the cares of other people; and perhaps second-hand cares, like second-hand clothes, come easily off and on.

Completing his resemblance to a man who was sitting for his portrait, Mr. Lorry dropped off to sleep. The arrival of his breakfast roused him, and he said to the drawer, as he moved his chair to it: “I wish accommodation prepared for a young lady who may come here at any time to-day. She may ask for Mr. Jarvis Lorry, or she may only ask for a gentleman from Tellson’s Bank. Please to let me know.” “Yes, sir. We have oftentimes the honour to entertain your gentlemen in their travelling backwards and forwards betwixt London and Paris, sir. A vast deal of travelling, sir, in Tellson and Company’s House.” Rounding his mouth and both his eyes, as he stepped backward from the table, the waiter shifted his napkin from his right arm to his left, dropped into a comfortable attitude, and stood surveying the guest while he ate and drank, as from an observatory or watchtower. According to the immemorial usage of waiters in all ages. When Mr. Lorry had finished his breakfast, he went out for a stroll on the beach. The little narrow, crooked town of Dover hid itself away from the beach, and ran its head into the chalk cliffs, like a marine ostrich. The beach was a desert of heaps of sea and stones tumbling wildly about, and the sea did what it liked, and what it liked was destruction. It thundered at the town, and thundered at the cliffs, and brought the coast down, madly. The air among the houses was of so strong a piscatory flavour that one might have supposed sick fish went up to be dipped in it, as sick people went down to be dipped in the sea. A little fishing was done in the port, and a quantity of strolling about by night, and looking seaward: particularly at those times when the tide made, and was near flood. Small tradesmen, who did no business whatever, sometimes unaccountably realised large fortunes, and it was remarkable that nobody in the neighbourhood could endure a lamplighter.

As the day declined into the afternoon, and the air, which had been at intervals clear enough to allow the French coast to be seen, became again charged with mist and vapour, Mr. Lorry’s thoughts seemed to cloud too. When it was dark, and he sat before the coffee-room fire, awaiting his dinner as he had awaited his breakfast, his mind was busily digging, digging, digging, in the live red coals. A bottle of good claret after dinner does a digger in the red coals no harm, otherwise than as it has a tendency to throw him out of work. Mr. Lorry had been idle a long time, and had just poured out his last glassful of wine with as complete an appearance of satisfaction as is ever to be found in an elderly gentleman of a fresh complexion who has got to the end of a bottle, when a rattling of wheels came up the narrow street, and rumbled into the inn-yard. In a very few minutes the waiter came in to announce that Miss Manette had arrived from London, and would be happy to see the gentleman from Tellson’s.

Miss Manette had taken some refreshment on the road, and required none then, and was extremely anxious to see the gentleman from Tellson’s immediately, if it suited his pleasure and convenience. The gentleman from Tellson’s had nothing left for it but to empty his glass with an air of stolid desperation, settle his odd little flaxen wig at the ears, and follow the waiter to Miss Manette’s apartment. It was a large, dark room, furnished in a funereal manner with black horsehair, and loaded with heavy dark tables. These had been oiled and oiled, until the two tall candles on the table in the middle of the room were gloomily reflected on every leaf; as if _they_ were buried, in deep graves of black mahogany, and no light to speak of could be expected from them until they were dug out. The obscurity was so difficult to penetrate that Mr. Lorry, picking his way over the well-worn Turkey carpet, supposed Miss Manette to be, for the moment, in some adjacent room, until, having got past the two tall candles, he saw standing to receive him by the table between them and the fire, a young lady of not more than seventeen, in a riding-cloak, and still holding her straw travelling-hat by its ribbon in her hand. As his eyes rested on a short, slight, pretty figure, a quantity of golden hair, a pair of blue eyes that met his own with an inquiring look, and a forehead with a singular capacity (remembering how young and smooth it was), of rifting and knitting itself into an expression that was not quite one of perplexity, or wonder, or alarm, or merely of a bright fixed attention, though it included all the four expressions--as his eyes rested on these things, a sudden vivid likeness passed before him, of a child whom he had held in his arms on the passage across that very Channel, one cold time, when the hail drifted heavily and the sea ran high. The likeness passed away, like a breath along the surface of the gaunt pier-glass behind her, on the frame of which, a hospital procession of negro cupids, several headless and all cripples, were offering black baskets of Dead Sea fruit to black divinities of the feminine gender--and he made his formal bow to Miss Manette.

Mr. Lorry moved in his chair, and cast a troubled look towards the hospital procession of negro cupids. As if _they_ had any help for anybody in their absurd baskets! “--rendered it necessary that I should go to Paris, there to communicate with a gentleman of the Bank, so good as to be despatched to Paris for the purpose.” She curtseyed to him (young ladies made curtseys in those days), with a pretty desire to convey to him that she felt how much older and wiser he was than she. He made her another bow. “I replied to the Bank, sir, that as it was considered necessary, by those who know, and who are so kind as to advise me, that I should go to France, and that as I am an orphan and have no friend who could go with me, I should esteem it highly if I might be permitted to place myself, during the journey, under that worthy gentleman’s protection. The gentleman had left London, but I think a messenger was sent after him to beg the favour of his waiting for me here.”

“Sir, I thank you indeed. I thank you very gratefully. It was told me by the Bank that the gentleman would explain to me the details of the business, and that I must prepare myself to find them of a surprising nature. I have done my best to prepare myself, and I naturally have a strong and eager interest to know what they are.” He did not begin, but, in his indecision, met her glance. The young forehead lifted itself into that singular expression--but it was pretty and characteristic, besides being singular--and she raised her hand, as if with an involuntary action she caught at, or stayed some passing shadow. Between the eyebrows and just over the little feminine nose, the line of which was as delicate and fine as it was possible to be, the expression deepened itself as she took her seat thoughtfully in the chair by which she had hitherto remained standing. He watched her as she mused, and the moment she raised her eyes again, went on: “Miss Manette, I am a man of business. I have a business charge to acquit myself of. In your reception of it, don’t heed me any more than if I was a speaking machine--truly, I am not much else. I will, with your leave, relate to you, miss, the story of one of our customers.”

He seemed wilfully to mistake the word she had repeated, when he added, in a hurry, “Yes, customers; in the banking business we usually call our connection our customers. He was a French gentleman; a scientific gentleman; a man of great acquirements--a Doctor.” “Why, yes, of Beauvais. Like Monsieur Manette, your father, the gentleman was of Beauvais. Like Monsieur Manette, your father, the gentleman was of repute in Paris. I had the honour of knowing him there. Our relations were business relations, but confidential. I was at that time in our French House, and had been--oh! twenty years.” “I speak, miss, of twenty years ago. He married--an English lady--and I was one of the trustees. His affairs, like the affairs of many other French gentlemen and French families, were entirely in Tellson’s hands. In a similar way I am, or I have been, trustee of one kind or other for scores of our customers. These are mere business relations, miss; there is no friendship in them, no particular interest, nothing like sentiment. I have passed from one to another, in the course of my business life, just as I pass from one of our customers to another in the course of my business day; in short, I have no feelings; I am a mere machine. To go on--”

“But this is my father’s story, sir; and I begin to think”--the curiously roughened forehead was very intent upon him--“that when I was left an orphan through my mother’s surviving my father only two years, it was you who brought me to England. I am almost sure it was you.” Mr. Lorry took the hesitating little hand that confidingly advanced to take his, and he put it with some ceremony to his lips. He then conducted the young lady straightway to her chair again, and, holding the chair-back with his left hand, and using his right by turns to rub his chin, pull his wig at the ears, or point what he said, stood looking down into her face while she sat looking up into his. “Miss Manette, it _was_ I. And you will see how truly I spoke of myself just now, in saying I had no feelings, and that all the relations I hold with my fellow-creatures are mere business relations, when you reflect that I have never seen you since. No; you have been the ward of Tellson’s House since, and I have been busy with the other business of Tellson’s House since. Feelings! I have no time for them, no chance of them. I pass my whole life, miss, in turning an immense pecuniary Mangle.”

After this odd description of his daily routine of employment, Mr. Lorry flattened his flaxen wig upon his head with both hands (which was most unnecessary, for nothing could be flatter than its shining surface was before), and resumed his former attitude. “So far, miss (as you have remarked), this is the story of your regretted father. Now comes the difference. If your father had not died when he did--Don’t be frightened! How you start!” “Pray,” said Mr. Lorry, in a soothing tone, bringing his left hand from the back of the chair to lay it on the supplicatory fingers that clasped him in so violent a tremble: “pray control your agitation--a matter of business. As I was saying--” “As I was saying; if Monsieur Manette had not died; if he had suddenly and silently disappeared; if he had been spirited away; if it had not been difficult to guess to what dreadful place, though no art could trace him; if he had an enemy in some compatriot who could exercise a privilege that I in my own time have known the boldest people afraid to speak of in a whisper, across the water there; for instance, the privilege of filling up blank forms for the consignment of any one to the oblivion of a prison for any length of time; if his wife had implored the king, the queen, the court, the clergy, for any tidings of him, and all quite in vain;--then the history of your father would have been the history of this unfortunate gentleman, the Doctor of Beauvais.”

“You speak collectedly, and you--_are_ collected. That’s good!” (Though his manner was less satisfied than his words.) “A matter of business. Regard it as a matter of business--business that must be done. Now if this doctor’s wife, though a lady of great courage and spirit, had suffered so intensely from this cause before her little child was born--” “A daughter. A-a-matter of business--don’t be distressed. Miss, if the poor lady had suffered so intensely before her little child was born, that she came to the determination of sparing the poor child the inheritance of any part of the agony she had known the pains of, by rearing her in the belief that her father was dead--No, don’t kneel! In Heaven’s name why should you kneel to me!” “A--a matter of business. You confuse me, and how can I transact business if I am confused? Let us be clear-headed. If you could kindly mention now, for instance, what nine times ninepence are, or how many shillings in twenty guineas, it would be so encouraging. I should be so much more at my ease about your state of mind.”

Without directly answering to this appeal, she sat so still when he had very gently raised her, and the hands that had not ceased to clasp his wrists were so much more steady than they had been, that she communicated some reassurance to Mr. Jarvis Lorry. “That’s right, that’s right. Courage! Business! You have business before you; useful business. Miss Manette, your mother took this course with you. And when she died--I believe broken-hearted--having never slackened her unavailing search for your father, she left you, at two years old, to grow to be blooming, beautiful, and happy, without the dark cloud upon you of living in uncertainty whether your father soon wore his heart out in prison, or wasted there through many lingering years.” As he said the words he looked down, with an admiring pity, on the flowing golden hair; as if he pictured to himself that it might have been already tinged with grey. “You know that your parents had no great possession, and that what they had was secured to your mother and to you. There has been no new discovery, of money, or of any other property; but--”

He felt his wrist held closer, and he stopped. The expression in the forehead, which had so particularly attracted his notice, and which was now immovable, had deepened into one of pain and horror. “But he has been--been found. He is alive. Greatly changed, it is too probable; almost a wreck, it is possible; though we will hope the best. Still, alive. Your father has been taken to the house of an old servant in Paris, and we are going there: I, to identify him if I can: you, to restore him to life, love, duty, rest, comfort.” Mr. Lorry quietly chafed the hands that held his arm. “There, there, there! See now, see now! The best and the worst are known to you, now. You are well on your way to the poor wronged gentleman, and, with a fair sea voyage, and a fair land journey, you will be soon at his dear side.” “Only one thing more,” said Mr. Lorry, laying stress upon it as a wholesome means of enforcing her attention: “he has been found under another name; his own, long forgotten or long concealed. It would be worse than useless now to inquire which; worse than useless to seek to know whether he has been for years overlooked, or always designedly held prisoner. It would be worse than useless now to make any inquiries, because it would be dangerous. Better not to mention the subject, anywhere or in any way, and to remove him--for a while at all events--out of France. Even I, safe as an Englishman, and even Tellson’s, important as they are to French credit, avoid all naming of the matter. I carry about me, not a scrap of writing openly referring to it. This is a secret service altogether. My credentials, entries, and memoranda, are all comprehended in the one line, ‘Recalled to Life;’ which may mean anything. But what is the matter! She doesn’t notice a word! Miss Manette!”

Perfectly still and silent, and not even fallen back in her chair, she sat under his hand, utterly insensible; with her eyes open and fixed upon him, and with that last expression looking as if it were carved or branded into her forehead. So close was her hold upon his arm, that he feared to detach himself lest he should hurt her; therefore he called out loudly for assistance without moving. A wild-looking woman, whom even in his agitation, Mr. Lorry observed to be all of a red colour, and to have red hair, and to be dressed in some extraordinary tight-fitting fashion, and to have on her head a most wonderful bonnet like a Grenadier wooden measure, and good measure too, or a great Stilton cheese, came running into the room in advance of the inn servants, and soon settled the question of his detachment from the poor young lady, by laying a brawny hand upon his chest, and sending him flying back against the nearest wall. “Why, look at you all!” bawled this figure, addressing the inn servants. “Why don’t you go and fetch things, instead of standing there staring at me? I am not so much to look at, am I? Why don’t you go and fetch things? I’ll let you know, if you don’t bring smelling-salts, cold water, and vinegar, quick, I will.”

There was an immediate dispersal for these restoratives, and she softly laid the patient on a sofa, and tended her with great skill and gentleness: calling her “my precious!” and “my bird!” and spreading her golden hair aside over her shoulders with great pride and care. “And you in brown!” she said, indignantly turning to Mr. Lorry; “couldn’t you tell her what you had to tell her, without frightening her to death? Look at her, with her pretty pale face and her cold hands. Do you call _that_ being a Banker?” Mr. Lorry was so exceedingly disconcerted by a question so hard to answer, that he could only look on, at a distance, with much feebler sympathy and humility, while the strong woman, having banished the inn servants under the mysterious penalty of “letting them know” something not mentioned if they stayed there, staring, recovered her charge by a regular series of gradations, and coaxed her to lay her drooping head upon her shoulder. “A likely thing, too!” replied the strong woman. “If it was ever intended that I should go across salt water, do you suppose Providence would have cast my lot in an island?”

A large cask of wine had been dropped and broken, in the street. The accident had happened in getting it out of a cart; the cask had tumbled out with a run, the hoops had burst, and it lay on the stones just outside the door of the wine-shop, shattered like a walnut-shell. All the people within reach had suspended their business, or their idleness, to run to the spot and drink the wine. The rough, irregular stones of the street, pointing every way, and designed, one might have thought, expressly to lame all living creatures that approached them, had dammed it into little pools; these were surrounded, each by its own jostling group or crowd, according to its size. Some men kneeled down, made scoops of their two hands joined, and sipped, or tried to help women, who bent over their shoulders, to sip, before the wine had all run out between their fingers. Others, men and women, dipped in the puddles with little mugs of mutilated earthenware, or even with handkerchiefs from women’s heads, which were squeezed dry into infants’ mouths; others made small mud-embankments, to stem the wine as it ran; others, directed by lookers-on up at high windows, darted here and there, to cut off little streams of wine that started away in new directions; others devoted themselves to the sodden and lee-dyed pieces of the cask, licking, and even champing the moister wine-rotted fragments with eager relish. There was no drainage to carry off the wine, and not only did it all get taken up, but so much mud got taken up along with it, that there might have been a scavenger in the street, if anybody acquainted with it could have believed in such a miraculous presence.

A shrill sound of laughter and of amused voices--voices of men, women, and children--resounded in the street while this wine game lasted. There was little roughness in the sport, and much playfulness. There was a special companionship in it, an observable inclination on the part of every one to join some other one, which led, especially among the luckier or lighter-hearted, to frolicsome embraces, drinking of healths, shaking of hands, and even joining of hands and dancing, a dozen together. When the wine was gone, and the places where it had been most abundant were raked into a gridiron-pattern by fingers, these demonstrations ceased, as suddenly as they had broken out. The man who had left his saw sticking in the firewood he was cutting, set it in motion again; the women who had left on a door-step the little pot of hot ashes, at which she had been trying to soften the pain in her own starved fingers and toes, or in those of her child, returned to it; men with bare arms, matted locks, and cadaverous faces, who had emerged into the winter light from cellars, moved away, to descend again; and a gloom gathered on the scene that appeared more natural to it than sunshine.

The wine was red wine, and had stained the ground of the narrow street in the suburb of Saint Antoine, in Paris, where it was spilled. It had stained many hands, too, and many faces, and many naked feet, and many wooden shoes. The hands of the man who sawed the wood, left red marks on the billets; and the forehead of the woman who nursed her baby, was stained with the stain of the old rag she wound about her head again. Those who had been greedy with the staves of the cask, had acquired a tigerish smear about the mouth; and one tall joker so besmirched, his head more out of a long squalid bag of a nightcap than in it, scrawled upon a wall with his finger dipped in muddy wine-lees--BLOOD. And now that the cloud settled on Saint Antoine, which a momentary gleam had driven from his sacred countenance, the darkness of it was heavy--cold, dirt, sickness, ignorance, and want, were the lords in waiting on the saintly presence--nobles of great power all of them; but, most especially the last. Samples of a people that had undergone a terrible grinding and regrinding in the mill, and certainly not in the fabulous mill which ground old people young, shivered at every corner, passed in and out at every doorway, looked from every window, fluttered in every vestige of a garment that the wind shook. The mill which had worked them down, was the mill that grinds young people old; the children had ancient faces and grave voices; and upon them, and upon the grown faces, and ploughed into every furrow of age and coming up afresh, was the sigh, Hunger. It was prevalent everywhere. Hunger was pushed out of the tall houses, in the wretched clothing that hung upon poles and lines; Hunger was patched into them with straw and rag and wood and paper; Hunger was repeated in every fragment of the small modicum of firewood that the man sawed off; Hunger stared down from the smokeless chimneys, and started up from the filthy street that had no offal, among its refuse, of anything to eat. Hunger was the inscription on the baker’s shelves, written in every small loaf of his scanty stock of bad bread; at the sausage-shop, in every dead-dog preparation that was offered for sale. Hunger rattled its dry bones among the roasting chestnuts in the turned cylinder; Hunger was shred into atomics in every farthing porringer of husky chips of potato, fried with some reluctant drops of oil.

Its abiding place was in all things fitted to it. A narrow winding street, full of offence and stench, with other narrow winding streets diverging, all peopled by rags and nightcaps, and all smelling of rags and nightcaps, and all visible things with a brooding look upon them that looked ill. In the hunted air of the people there was yet some wild-beast thought of the possibility of turning at bay. Depressed and slinking though they were, eyes of fire were not wanting among them; nor compressed lips, white with what they suppressed; nor foreheads knitted into the likeness of the gallows-rope they mused about enduring, or inflicting. The trade signs (and they were almost as many as the shops) were, all, grim illustrations of Want. The butcher and the porkman painted up, only the leanest scrags of meat; the baker, the coarsest of meagre loaves. The people rudely pictured as drinking in the wine-shops, croaked over their scanty measures of thin wine and beer, and were gloweringly confidential together. Nothing was represented in a flourishing condition, save tools and weapons; but, the cutler’s knives and axes were sharp and bright, the smith’s hammers were heavy, and the gunmaker’s stock was murderous. The crippling stones of the pavement, with their many little reservoirs of mud and water, had no footways, but broke off abruptly at the doors. The kennel, to make amends, ran down the middle of the street--when it ran at all: which was only after heavy rains, and then it ran, by many eccentric fits, into the houses. Across the streets, at wide intervals, one clumsy lamp was slung by a rope and pulley; at night, when the lamplighter had let these down, and lighted, and hoisted them again, a feeble grove of dim wicks swung in a sickly manner overhead, as if they were at sea. Indeed they were at sea, and the ship and crew were in peril of tempest.

For, the time was to come, when the gaunt scarecrows of that region should have watched the lamplighter, in their idleness and hunger, so long, as to conceive the idea of improving on his method, and hauling up men by those ropes and pulleys, to flare upon the darkness of their condition. But, the time was not come yet; and every wind that blew over France shook the rags of the scarecrows in vain, for the birds, fine of song and feather, took no warning. The wine-shop was a corner shop, better than most others in its appearance and degree, and the master of the wine-shop had stood outside it, in a yellow waistcoat and green breeches, looking on at the struggle for the lost wine. “It’s not my affair,” said he, with a final shrug of the shoulders. “The people from the market did it. Let them bring another.” The fellow pointed to his joke with immense significance, as is often the way with his tribe. It missed its mark, and completely failed, as is often the way with his tribe too.

“What now? Are you a subject for the mad hospital?” said the wine-shop keeper, crossing the road, and obliterating the jest with a handful of mud, picked up for the purpose, and smeared over it. “Why do you write in the public streets? Is there--tell me thou--is there no other place to write such words in?” In his expostulation he dropped his cleaner hand (perhaps accidentally, perhaps not) upon the joker’s heart. The joker rapped it with his own, took a nimble spring upward, and came down in a fantastic dancing attitude, with one of his stained shoes jerked off his foot into his hand, and held out. A joker of an extremely, not to say wolfishly practical character, he looked, under those circumstances. “Put it on, put it on,” said the other. “Call wine, wine; and finish there.” With that advice, he wiped his soiled hand upon the joker’s dress, such as it was--quite deliberately, as having dirtied the hand on his account; and then recrossed the road and entered the wine-shop. This wine-shop keeper was a bull-necked, martial-looking man of thirty, and he should have been of a hot temperament, for, although it was a bitter day, he wore no coat, but carried one slung over his shoulder. His shirt-sleeves were rolled up, too, and his brown arms were bare to the elbows. Neither did he wear anything more on his head than his own crisply-curling short dark hair. He was a dark man altogether, with good eyes and a good bold breadth between them. Good-humoured looking on the whole, but implacable-looking, too; evidently a man of a strong resolution and a set purpose; a man not desirable to be met, rushing down a narrow pass with a gulf on either side, for nothing would turn the man.

Madame Defarge, his wife, sat in the shop behind the counter as he came in. Madame Defarge was a stout woman of about his own age, with a watchful eye that seldom seemed to look at anything, a large hand heavily ringed, a steady face, strong features, and great composure of manner. There was a character about Madame Defarge, from which one might have predicated that she did not often make mistakes against herself in any of the reckonings over which she presided. Madame Defarge being sensitive to cold, was wrapped in fur, and had a quantity of bright shawl twined about her head, though not to the concealment of her large earrings. Her knitting was before her, but she had laid it down to pick her teeth with a toothpick. Thus engaged, with her right elbow supported by her left hand, Madame Defarge said nothing when her lord came in, but coughed just one grain of cough. This, in combination with the lifting of her darkly defined eyebrows over her toothpick by the breadth of a line, suggested to her husband that he would do well to look round the shop among the customers, for any new customer who had dropped in while he stepped over the way.

The wine-shop keeper accordingly rolled his eyes about, until they rested upon an elderly gentleman and a young lady, who were seated in a corner. Other company were there: two playing cards, two playing dominoes, three standing by the counter lengthening out a short supply of wine. As he passed behind the counter, he took notice that the elderly gentleman said in a look to the young lady, “This is our man.” When this interchange of Christian name was effected, Madame Defarge, picking her teeth with her toothpick, coughed another grain of cough, and raised her eyebrows by the breadth of another line. “It is not often,” said the second of the three, addressing Monsieur Defarge, “that many of these miserable beasts know the taste of wine, or of anything but black bread and death. Is it not so, Jacques?” “Ah! So much the worse! A bitter taste it is that such poor cattle always have in their mouths, and hard lives they live, Jacques. Am I right, Jacques?” This third interchange of the Christian name was completed at the moment when Madame Defarge put her toothpick by, kept her eyebrows up, and slightly rustled in her seat.

The three customers pulled off their hats to Madame Defarge, with three flourishes. She acknowledged their homage by bending her head, and giving them a quick look. Then she glanced in a casual manner round the wine-shop, took up her knitting with great apparent calmness and repose of spirit, and became absorbed in it. “Gentlemen,” said her husband, who had kept his bright eye observantly upon her, “good day. The chamber, furnished bachelor-fashion, that you wished to see, and were inquiring for when I stepped out, is on the fifth floor. The doorway of the staircase gives on the little courtyard close to the left here,” pointing with his hand, “near to the window of my establishment. But, now that I remember, one of you has already been there, and can show the way. Gentlemen, adieu!” They paid for their wine, and left the place. The eyes of Monsieur Defarge were studying his wife at her knitting when the elderly gentleman advanced from his corner, and begged the favour of a word. Their conference was very short, but very decided. Almost at the first word, Monsieur Defarge started and became deeply attentive. It had not lasted a minute, when he nodded and went out. The gentleman then beckoned to the young lady, and they, too, went out. Madame Defarge knitted with nimble fingers and steady eyebrows, and saw nothing.

Mr. Jarvis Lorry and Miss Manette, emerging from the wine-shop thus, joined Monsieur Defarge in the doorway to which he had directed his own company just before. It opened from a stinking little black courtyard, and was the general public entrance to a great pile of houses, inhabited by a great number of people. In the gloomy tile-paved entry to the gloomy tile-paved staircase, Monsieur Defarge bent down on one knee to the child of his old master, and put her hand to his lips. It was a gentle action, but not at all gently done; a very remarkable transformation had come over him in a few seconds. He had no good-humour in his face, nor any openness of aspect left, but had become a secret, angry, dangerous man. “It is very high; it is a little difficult. Better to begin slowly.” Thus, Monsieur Defarge, in a stern voice, to Mr. Lorry, as they began ascending the stairs. “Of his own necessity. As he was, when I first saw him after they found me and demanded to know if I would take him, and, at my peril be discreet--as he was then, so he is now.”

The keeper of the wine-shop stopped to strike the wall with his hand, and mutter a tremendous curse. No direct answer could have been half so forcible. Mr. Lorry’s spirits grew heavier and heavier, as he and his two companions ascended higher and higher. Such a staircase, with its accessories, in the older and more crowded parts of Paris, would be bad enough now; but, at that time, it was vile indeed to unaccustomed and unhardened senses. Every little habitation within the great foul nest of one high building--that is to say, the room or rooms within every door that opened on the general staircase--left its own heap of refuse on its own landing, besides flinging other refuse from its own windows. The uncontrollable and hopeless mass of decomposition so engendered, would have polluted the air, even if poverty and deprivation had not loaded it with their intangible impurities; the two bad sources combined made it almost insupportable. Through such an atmosphere, by a steep dark shaft of dirt and poison, the way lay. Yielding to his own disturbance of mind, and to his young companion’s agitation, which became greater every instant, Mr. Jarvis Lorry twice stopped to rest. Each of these stoppages was made at a doleful grating, by which any languishing good airs that were left uncorrupted, seemed to escape, and all spoilt and sickly vapours seemed to crawl in. Through the rusted bars, tastes, rather than glimpses, were caught of the jumbled neighbourhood; and nothing within range, nearer or lower than the summits of the two great towers of Notre-Dame, had any promise on it of healthy life or wholesome aspirations.

At last, the top of the staircase was gained, and they stopped for the third time. There was yet an upper staircase, of a steeper inclination and of contracted dimensions, to be ascended, before the garret story was reached. The keeper of the wine-shop, always going a little in advance, and always going on the side which Mr. Lorry took, as though he dreaded to be asked any question by the young lady, turned himself about here, and, carefully feeling in the pockets of the coat he carried over his shoulder, took out a key. “Why! Because he has lived so long, locked up, that he would be frightened--rave--tear himself to pieces--die--come to I know not what harm--if his door was left open.” “Is it possible!” repeated Defarge, bitterly. “Yes. And a beautiful world we live in, when it _is_ possible, and when many other such things are possible, and not only possible, but done--done, see you!--under that sky there, every day. Long live the Devil. Let us go on.” This dialogue had been held in so very low a whisper, that not a word of it had reached the young lady’s ears. But, by this time she trembled under such strong emotion, and her face expressed such deep anxiety, and, above all, such dread and terror, that Mr. Lorry felt it incumbent on him to speak a word or two of reassurance.

“Courage, dear miss! Courage! Business! The worst will be over in a moment; it is but passing the room-door, and the worst is over. Then, all the good you bring to him, all the relief, all the happiness you bring to him, begin. Let our good friend here, assist you on that side. That’s well, friend Defarge. Come, now. Business, business!” They went up slowly and softly. The staircase was short, and they were soon at the top. There, as it had an abrupt turn in it, they came all at once in sight of three men, whose heads were bent down close together at the side of a door, and who were intently looking into the room to which the door belonged, through some chinks or holes in the wall. On hearing footsteps close at hand, these three turned, and rose, and showed themselves to be the three of one name who had been drinking in the wine-shop. There appearing to be no other door on that floor, and the keeper of the wine-shop going straight to this one when they were left alone, Mr. Lorry asked him in a whisper, with a little anger:

“I choose them as real men, of my name--Jacques is my name--to whom the sight is likely to do good. Enough; you are English; that is another thing. Stay there, if you please, a little moment.” With an admonitory gesture to keep them back, he stooped, and looked in through the crevice in the wall. Soon raising his head again, he struck twice or thrice upon the door--evidently with no other object than to make a noise there. With the same intention, he drew the key across it, three or four times, before he put it clumsily into the lock, and turned it as heavily as he could. The door slowly opened inward under his hand, and he looked into the room and said something. A faint voice answered something. Little more than a single syllable could have been spoken on either side. He looked back over his shoulder, and beckoned them to enter. Mr. Lorry got his arm securely round the daughter’s waist, and held her; for he felt that she was sinking. Rendered in a manner desperate, by her state and by the beckoning of their conductor, he drew over his neck the arm that shook upon his shoulder, lifted her a little, and hurried her into the room. He sat her down just within the door, and held her, clinging to him.

Defarge drew out the key, closed the door, locked it on the inside, took out the key again, and held it in his hand. All this he did, methodically, and with as loud and harsh an accompaniment of noise as he could make. Finally, he walked across the room with a measured tread to where the window was. He stopped there, and faced round. The garret, built to be a depository for firewood and the like, was dim and dark: for, the window of dormer shape, was in truth a door in the roof, with a little crane over it for the hoisting up of stores from the street: unglazed, and closing up the middle in two pieces, like any other door of French construction. To exclude the cold, one half of this door was fast closed, and the other was opened but a very little way. Such a scanty portion of light was admitted through these means, that it was difficult, on first coming in, to see anything; and long habit alone could have slowly formed in any one, the ability to do any work requiring nicety in such obscurity. Yet, work of that kind was being done in the garret; for, with his back towards the door, and his face towards the window where the keeper of the wine-shop stood looking at him, a white-haired man sat on a low bench, stooping forward and very busy, making shoes.

After a long silence, the head was lifted for another moment, and the voice replied, “Yes--I am working.” This time, a pair of haggard eyes had looked at the questioner, before the face had dropped again. The faintness of the voice was pitiable and dreadful. It was not the faintness of physical weakness, though confinement and hard fare no doubt had their part in it. Its deplorable peculiarity was, that it was the faintness of solitude and disuse. It was like the last feeble echo of a sound made long and long ago. So entirely had it lost the life and resonance of the human voice, that it affected the senses like a once beautiful colour faded away into a poor weak stain. So sunken and suppressed it was, that it was like a voice underground. So expressive it was, of a hopeless and lost creature, that a famished traveller, wearied out by lonely wandering in a wilderness, would have remembered home and friends in such a tone before lying down to die. Some minutes of silent work had passed: and the haggard eyes had looked up again: not with any interest or curiosity, but with a dull mechanical perception, beforehand, that the spot where the only visitor they were aware of had stood, was not yet empty.

The shoemaker stopped his work; looked with a vacant air of listening, at the floor on one side of him; then similarly, at the floor on the other side of him; then, upward at the speaker. The opened half-door was opened a little further, and secured at that angle for the time. A broad ray of light fell into the garret, and showed the workman with an unfinished shoe upon his lap, pausing in his labour. His few common tools and various scraps of leather were at his feet and on his bench. He had a white beard, raggedly cut, but not very long, a hollow face, and exceedingly bright eyes. The hollowness and thinness of his face would have caused them to look large, under his yet dark eyebrows and his confused white hair, though they had been really otherwise; but, they were naturally large, and looked unnaturally so. His yellow rags of shirt lay open at the throat, and showed his body to be withered and worn. He, and his old canvas frock, and his loose stockings, and all his poor tatters of clothes, had, in a long seclusion from direct light and air, faded down to such a dull uniformity of parchment-yellow, that it would have been hard to say which was which.

He had put up a hand between his eyes and the light, and the very bones of it seemed transparent. So he sat, with a steadfastly vacant gaze, pausing in his work. He never looked at the figure before him, without first looking down on this side of himself, then on that, as if he had lost the habit of associating place with sound; he never spoke, without first wandering in this manner, and forgetting to speak. Mr. Lorry came silently forward, leaving the daughter by the door. When he had stood, for a minute or two, by the side of Defarge, the shoemaker looked up. He showed no surprise at seeing another figure, but the unsteady fingers of one of his hands strayed to his lips as he looked at it (his lips and his nails were of the same pale lead-colour), and then the hand dropped to his work, and he once more bent over the shoe. The look and the action had occupied but an instant. “It is a lady’s shoe. It is a young lady’s walking-shoe. It is in the present mode. I never saw the mode. I have had a pattern in my hand.” He glanced at the shoe with some little passing touch of pride.

Now that he had no work to hold, he laid the knuckles of the right hand in the hollow of the left, and then the knuckles of the left hand in the hollow of the right, and then passed a hand across his bearded chin, and so on in regular changes, without a moment’s intermission. The task of recalling him from the vagrancy into which he always sank when he had spoken, was like recalling some very weak person from a swoon, or endeavouring, in the hope of some disclosure, to stay the spirit of a fast-dying man. His haggard eyes turned to Defarge as if he would have transferred the question to him: but as no help came from that quarter, they turned back on the questioner when they had sought the ground. He lapsed away, even for minutes, ringing those measured changes on his hands the whole time. His eyes came slowly back, at last, to the face from which they had wandered; when they rested on it, he started, and resumed, in the manner of a sleeper that moment awake, reverting to a subject of last night.

“Monsieur Manette”; Mr. Lorry laid his hand upon Defarge’s arm; “do you remember nothing of this man? Look at him. Look at me. Is there no old banker, no old business, no old servant, no old time, rising in your mind, Monsieur Manette?” As the captive of many years sat looking fixedly, by turns, at Mr. Lorry and at Defarge, some long obliterated marks of an actively intent intelligence in the middle of the forehead, gradually forced themselves through the black mist that had fallen on him. They were overclouded again, they were fainter, they were gone; but they had been there. And so exactly was the expression repeated on the fair young face of her who had crept along the wall to a point where she could see him, and where she now stood looking at him, with hands which at first had been only raised in frightened compassion, if not even to keep him off and shut out the sight of him, but which were now extending towards him, trembling with eagerness to lay the spectral face upon her warm young breast, and love it back to life and hope--so exactly was the expression repeated (though in stronger characters) on her fair young face, that it looked as though it had passed like a moving light, from him to her.

Darkness had fallen on him in its place. He looked at the two, less and less attentively, and his eyes in gloomy abstraction sought the ground and looked about him in the old way. Finally, with a deep long sigh, he took the shoe up, and resumed his work. “Yes; for a moment. At first I thought it quite hopeless, but I have unquestionably seen, for a single moment, the face that I once knew so well. Hush! Let us draw further back. Hush!” She had moved from the wall of the garret, very near to the bench on which he sat. There was something awful in his unconsciousness of the figure that could have put out its hand and touched him as he stooped over his labour. It happened, at length, that he had occasion to change the instrument in his hand, for his shoemaker’s knife. It lay on that side of him which was not the side on which she stood. He had taken it up, and was stooping to work again, when his eyes caught the skirt of her dress. He raised them, and saw her face. The two spectators started forward, but she stayed them with a motion of her hand. She had no fear of his striking at her with the knife, though they had.

He stared at her with a fearful look, and after a while his lips began to form some words, though no sound proceeded from them. By degrees, in the pauses of his quick and laboured breathing, he was heard to say: With the tears streaming down her face, she put her two hands to her lips, and kissed them to him; then clasped them on her breast, as if she laid his ruined head there. Not yet trusting the tones of her voice, she sat down on the bench beside him. He recoiled, but she laid her hand upon his arm. A strange thrill struck him when she did so, and visibly passed over his frame; he laid the knife down softly, as he sat staring at her. Her golden hair, which she wore in long curls, had been hurriedly pushed aside, and fell down over her neck. Advancing his hand by little and little, he took it up and looked at it. In the midst of the action he went astray, and, with another deep sigh, fell to work at his shoemaking.

But not for long. Releasing his arm, she laid her hand upon his shoulder. After looking doubtfully at it, two or three times, as if to be sure that it was really there, he laid down his work, put his hand to his neck, and took off a blackened string with a scrap of folded rag attached to it. He opened this, carefully, on his knee, and it contained a very little quantity of hair: not more than one or two long golden hairs, which he had, in some old day, wound off upon his finger. As the concentrated expression returned to his forehead, he seemed to become conscious that it was in hers too. He turned her full to the light, and looked at her. “She had laid her head upon my shoulder, that night when I was summoned out--she had a fear of my going, though I had none--and when I was brought to the North Tower they found these upon my sleeve. ‘You will leave me them? They can never help me to escape in the body, though they may in the spirit.’ Those were the words I said. I remember them very well.”

He formed this speech with his lips many times before he could utter it. But when he did find spoken words for it, they came to him coherently, though slowly. Once more, the two spectators started, as he turned upon her with a frightful suddenness. But she sat perfectly still in his grasp, and only said, in a low voice, “I entreat you, good gentlemen, do not come near us, do not speak, do not move!” His hands released her as he uttered this cry, and went up to his white hair, which they tore in a frenzy. It died out, as everything but his shoemaking did die out of him, and he refolded his little packet and tried to secure it in his breast; but he still looked at her, and gloomily shook his head. “No, no, no; you are too young, too blooming. It can’t be. See what the prisoner is. These are not the hands she knew, this is not the face she knew, this is not a voice she ever heard. No, no. She was--and He was--before the slow years of the North Tower--ages ago. What is your name, my gentle angel?”

“O, sir, at another time you shall know my name, and who my mother was, and who my father, and how I never knew their hard, hard history. But I cannot tell you at this time, and I cannot tell you here. All that I may tell you, here and now, is, that I pray to you to touch me and to bless me. Kiss me, kiss me! O my dear, my dear!” “If you hear in my voice--I don’t know that it is so, but I hope it is--if you hear in my voice any resemblance to a voice that once was sweet music in your ears, weep for it, weep for it! If you touch, in touching my hair, anything that recalls a beloved head that lay on your breast when you were young and free, weep for it, weep for it! If, when I hint to you of a Home that is before us, where I will be true to you with all my duty and with all my faithful service, I bring back the remembrance of a Home long desolate, while your poor heart pined away, weep for it, weep for it!”

“If, when I tell you, dearest dear, that your agony is over, and that I have come here to take you from it, and that we go to England to be at peace and at rest, I cause you to think of your useful life laid waste, and of our native France so wicked to you, weep for it, weep for it! And if, when I shall tell you of my name, and of my father who is living, and of my mother who is dead, you learn that I have to kneel to my honoured father, and implore his pardon for having never for his sake striven all day and lain awake and wept all night, because the love of my poor mother hid his torture from me, weep for it, weep for it! Weep for her, then, and for me! Good gentlemen, thank God! I feel his sacred tears upon my face, and his sobs strike against my heart. O, see! Thank God for us, thank God!” He had sunk in her arms, and his face dropped on her breast: a sight so touching, yet so terrible in the tremendous wrong and suffering which had gone before it, that the two beholders covered their faces.

When the quiet of the garret had been long undisturbed, and his heaving breast and shaken form had long yielded to the calm that must follow all storms--emblem to humanity, of the rest and silence into which the storm called Life must hush at last--they came forward to raise the father and daughter from the ground. He had gradually dropped to the floor, and lay there in a lethargy, worn out. She had nestled down with him, that his head might lie upon her arm; and her hair drooping over him curtained him from the light. “If, without disturbing him,” she said, raising her hand to Mr. Lorry as he stooped over them, after repeated blowings of his nose, “all could be arranged for our leaving Paris at once, so that, from the very door, he could be taken away--” “It is true,” said Defarge, who was kneeling to look on and hear. “More than that; Monsieur Manette is, for all reasons, best out of France. Say, shall I hire a carriage and post-horses?” “Then be so kind,” urged Miss Manette, “as to leave us here. You see how composed he has become, and you cannot be afraid to leave him with me now. Why should you be? If you will lock the door to secure us from interruption, I do not doubt that you will find him, when you come back, as quiet as you leave him. In any case, I will take care of him until you return, and then we will remove him straight.”

Both Mr. Lorry and Defarge were rather disinclined to this course, and in favour of one of them remaining. But, as there were not only carriage and horses to be seen to, but travelling papers; and as time pressed, for the day was drawing to an end, it came at last to their hastily dividing the business that was necessary to be done, and hurrying away to do it. Then, as the darkness closed in, the daughter laid her head down on the hard ground close at the father’s side, and watched him. The darkness deepened and deepened, and they both lay quiet, until a light gleamed through the chinks in the wall. Mr. Lorry and Monsieur Defarge had made all ready for the journey, and had brought with them, besides travelling cloaks and wrappers, bread and meat, wine, and hot coffee. Monsieur Defarge put this provender, and the lamp he carried, on the shoemaker’s bench (there was nothing else in the garret but a pallet bed), and he and Mr. Lorry roused the captive, and assisted him to his feet.

No human intelligence could have read the mysteries of his mind, in the scared blank wonder of his face. Whether he knew what had happened, whether he recollected what they had said to him, whether he knew that he was free, were questions which no sagacity could have solved. They tried speaking to him; but, he was so confused, and so very slow to answer, that they took fright at his bewilderment, and agreed for the time to tamper with him no more. He had a wild, lost manner of occasionally clasping his head in his hands, that had not been seen in him before; yet, he had some pleasure in the mere sound of his daughter’s voice, and invariably turned to it when she spoke. In the submissive way of one long accustomed to obey under coercion, he ate and drank what they gave him to eat and drink, and put on the cloak and other wrappings, that they gave him to wear. He readily responded to his daughter’s drawing her arm through his, and took--and kept--her hand in both his own.

They began to descend; Monsieur Defarge going first with the lamp, Mr. Lorry closing the little procession. They had not traversed many steps of the long main staircase when he stopped, and stared at the roof and round at the walls. That he had no recollection whatever of his having been brought from his prison to that house, was apparent to them. They heard him mutter, “One Hundred and Five, North Tower;” and when he looked about him, it evidently was for the strong fortress-walls which had long encompassed him. On their reaching the courtyard he instinctively altered his tread, as being in expectation of a drawbridge; and when there was no drawbridge, and he saw the carriage waiting in the open street, he dropped his daughter’s hand and clasped his head again. No crowd was about the door; no people were discernible at any of the many windows; not even a chance passerby was in the street. An unnatural silence and desertion reigned there. Only one soul was to be seen, and that was Madame Defarge--who leaned against the door-post, knitting, and saw nothing.

The prisoner had got into a coach, and his daughter had followed him, when Mr. Lorry’s feet were arrested on the step by his asking, miserably, for his shoemaking tools and the unfinished shoes. Madame Defarge immediately called to her husband that she would get them, and went, knitting, out of the lamplight, through the courtyard. She quickly brought them down and handed them in;--and immediately afterwards leaned against the door-post, knitting, and saw nothing. Defarge got upon the box, and gave the word “To the Barrier!” The postilion cracked his whip, and they clattered away under the feeble over-swinging lamps. Under the over-swinging lamps--swinging ever brighter in the better streets, and ever dimmer in the worse--and by lighted shops, gay crowds, illuminated coffee-houses, and theatre-doors, to one of the city gates. Soldiers with lanterns, at the guard-house there. “Your papers, travellers!” “See here then, Monsieur the Officer,” said Defarge, getting down, and taking him gravely apart, “these are the papers of monsieur inside, with the white head. They were consigned to me, with him, at the--” He dropped his voice, there was a flutter among the military lanterns, and one of them being handed into the coach by an arm in uniform, the eyes connected with the arm looked, not an every day or an every night look, at monsieur with the white head. “It is well. Forward!” from the uniform. “Adieu!” from Defarge. And so, under a short grove of feebler and feebler over-swinging lamps, out under the great grove of stars.

Beneath that arch of unmoved and eternal lights; some, so remote from this little earth that the learned tell us it is doubtful whether their rays have even yet discovered it, as a point in space where anything is suffered or done: the shadows of the night were broad and black. All through the cold and restless interval, until dawn, they once more whispered in the ears of Mr. Jarvis Lorry--sitting opposite the buried man who had been dug out, and wondering what subtle powers were for ever lost to him, and what were capable of restoration--the old inquiry: Tellson’s Bank by Temple Bar was an old-fashioned place, even in the year one thousand seven hundred and eighty. It was very small, very dark, very ugly, very incommodious. It was an old-fashioned place, moreover, in the moral attribute that the partners in the House were proud of its smallness, proud of its darkness, proud of its ugliness, proud of its incommodiousness. They were even boastful of its eminence in those particulars, and were fired by an express conviction that, if it were less objectionable, it would be less respectable. This was no passive belief, but an active weapon which they flashed at more convenient places of business. Tellson’s (they said) wanted no elbow-room, Tellson’s wanted no light, Tellson’s wanted no embellishment. Noakes and Co.’s might, or Snooks Brothers’ might; but Tellson’s, thank Heaven--!

Any one of these partners would have disinherited his son on the question of rebuilding Tellson’s. In this respect the House was much on a par with the Country; which did very often disinherit its sons for suggesting improvements in laws and customs that had long been highly objectionable, but were only the more respectable. Thus it had come to pass, that Tellson’s was the triumphant perfection of inconvenience. After bursting open a door of idiotic obstinacy with a weak rattle in its throat, you fell into Tellson’s down two steps, and came to your senses in a miserable little shop, with two little counters, where the oldest of men made your cheque shake as if the wind rustled it, while they examined the signature by the dingiest of windows, which were always under a shower-bath of mud from Fleet-street, and which were made the dingier by their own iron bars proper, and the heavy shadow of Temple Bar. If your business necessitated your seeing “the House,” you were put into a species of Condemned Hold at the back, where you meditated on a misspent life, until the House came with its hands in its pockets, and you could hardly blink at it in the dismal twilight. Your money came out of, or went into, wormy old wooden drawers, particles of which flew up your nose and down your throat when they were opened and shut. Your bank-notes had a musty odour, as if they were fast decomposing into rags again. Your plate was stowed away among the neighbouring cesspools, and evil communications corrupted its good polish in a day or two. Your deeds got into extemporised strong-rooms made of kitchens and sculleries, and fretted all the fat out of their parchments into the banking-house air. Your lighter boxes of family papers went up-stairs into a Barmecide room, that always had a great dining-table in it and never had a dinner, and where, even in the year one thousand seven hundred and eighty, the first letters written to you by your old love, or by your little children, were but newly released from the horror of being ogled through the windows, by the heads exposed on Temple Bar with an insensate brutality and ferocity worthy of Abyssinia or Ashantee.

But indeed, at that time, putting to death was a recipe much in vogue with all trades and professions, and not least of all with Tellson’s. Death is Nature’s remedy for all things, and why not Legislation’s? Accordingly, the forger was put to Death; the utterer of a bad note was put to Death; the unlawful opener of a letter was put to Death; the purloiner of forty shillings and sixpence was put to Death; the holder of a horse at Tellson’s door, who made off with it, was put to Death; the coiner of a bad shilling was put to Death; the sounders of three-fourths of the notes in the whole gamut of Crime, were put to Death. Not that it did the least good in the way of prevention--it might almost have been worth remarking that the fact was exactly the reverse--but, it cleared off (as to this world) the trouble of each particular case, and left nothing else connected with it to be looked after. Thus, Tellson’s, in its day, like greater places of business, its contemporaries, had taken so many lives, that, if the heads laid low before it had been ranged on Temple Bar instead of being privately disposed of, they would probably have excluded what little light the ground floor had, in a rather significant manner.

Cramped in all kinds of dim cupboards and hutches at Tellson’s, the oldest of men carried on the business gravely. When they took a young man into Tellson’s London house, they hid him somewhere till he was old. They kept him in a dark place, like a cheese, until he had the full Tellson flavour and blue-mould upon him. Then only was he permitted to be seen, spectacularly poring over large books, and casting his breeches and gaiters into the general weight of the establishment. Outside Tellson’s--never by any means in it, unless called in--was an odd-job-man, an occasional porter and messenger, who served as the live sign of the house. He was never absent during business hours, unless upon an errand, and then he was represented by his son: a grisly urchin of twelve, who was his express image. People understood that Tellson’s, in a stately way, tolerated the odd-job-man. The house had always tolerated some person in that capacity, and time and tide had drifted this person to the post. His surname was Cruncher, and on the youthful occasion of his renouncing by proxy the works of darkness, in the easterly parish church of Hounsditch, he had received the added appellation of Jerry.

The scene was Mr. Cruncher’s private lodging in Hanging-sword-alley, Whitefriars: the time, half-past seven of the clock on a windy March morning, Anno Domini seventeen hundred and eighty. (Mr. Cruncher himself always spoke of the year of our Lord as Anna Dominoes: apparently under the impression that the Christian era dated from the invention of a popular game, by a lady who had bestowed her name upon it.) Mr. Cruncher’s apartments were not in a savoury neighbourhood, and were but two in number, even if a closet with a single pane of glass in it might be counted as one. But they were very decently kept. Early as it was, on the windy March morning, the room in which he lay abed was already scrubbed throughout; and between the cups and saucers arranged for breakfast, and the lumbering deal table, a very clean white cloth was spread. Mr. Cruncher reposed under a patchwork counterpane, like a Harlequin at home. At first, he slept heavily, but, by degrees, began to roll and surge in bed, until he rose above the surface, with his spiky hair looking as if it must tear the sheets to ribbons. At which juncture, he exclaimed, in a voice of dire exasperation:

A woman of orderly and industrious appearance rose from her knees in a corner, with sufficient haste and trepidation to show that she was the person referred to. After hailing the morn with this second salutation, he threw a boot at the woman as a third. It was a very muddy boot, and may introduce the odd circumstance connected with Mr. Cruncher’s domestic economy, that, whereas he often came home after banking hours with clean boots, he often got up next morning to find the same boots covered with clay. “You weren’t. And if you were, I won’t be took the liberty with. Here! your mother’s a nice woman, young Jerry, going a praying agin your father’s prosperity. You’ve got a dutiful mother, you have, my son. You’ve got a religious mother, you have, my boy: going and flopping herself down, and praying that the bread-and-butter may be snatched out of the mouth of her only child.” “And what do you suppose, you conceited female,” said Mr. Cruncher, with unconscious inconsistency, “that the worth of _your_ prayers may be? Name the price that you put _your_ prayers at!”

“Worth no more than that,” repeated Mr. Cruncher. “They ain’t worth much, then. Whether or no, I won’t be prayed agin, I tell you. I can’t afford it. I’m not a going to be made unlucky by _your_ sneaking. If you must go flopping yourself down, flop in favour of your husband and child, and not in opposition to ’em. If I had had any but a unnat’ral wife, and this poor boy had had any but a unnat’ral mother, I might have made some money last week instead of being counter-prayed and countermined and religiously circumwented into the worst of luck. B-u-u-ust me!” said Mr. Cruncher, who all this time had been putting on his clothes, “if I ain’t, what with piety and one blowed thing and another, been choused this last week into as bad luck as ever a poor devil of a honest tradesman met with! Young Jerry, dress yourself, my boy, and while I clean my boots keep a eye upon your mother now and then, and if you see any signs of more flopping, give me a call. For, I tell you,” here he addressed his wife once more, “I won’t be gone agin, in this manner. I am as rickety as a hackney-coach, I’m as sleepy as laudanum, my lines is strained to that degree that I shouldn’t know, if it wasn’t for the pain in ’em, which was me and which somebody else, yet I’m none the better for it in pocket; and it’s my suspicion that you’ve been at it from morning to night to prevent me from being the better for it in pocket, and I won’t put up with it, Aggerawayter, and what do you say now!”

Growling, in addition, such phrases as “Ah! yes! You’re religious, too. You wouldn’t put yourself in opposition to the interests of your husband and child, would you? Not you!” and throwing off other sarcastic sparks from the whirling grindstone of his indignation, Mr. Cruncher betook himself to his boot-cleaning and his general preparation for business. In the meantime, his son, whose head was garnished with tenderer spikes, and whose young eyes stood close by one another, as his father’s did, kept the required watch upon his mother. He greatly disturbed that poor woman at intervals, by darting out of his sleeping closet, where he made his toilet, with a suppressed cry of “You are going to flop, mother. --Halloa, father!” and, after raising this fictitious alarm, darting in again with an undutiful grin. “Don’t do it!” said Mr. Crunches looking about, as if he rather expected to see the loaf disappear under the efficacy of his wife’s petitions. “I ain’t a going to be blest out of house and home. I won’t have my wittles blest off my table. Keep still!”

Exceedingly red-eyed and grim, as if he had been up all night at a party which had taken anything but a convivial turn, Jerry Cruncher worried his breakfast rather than ate it, growling over it like any four-footed inmate of a menagerie. Towards nine o’clock he smoothed his ruffled aspect, and, presenting as respectable and business-like an exterior as he could overlay his natural self with, issued forth to the occupation of the day. It could scarcely be called a trade, in spite of his favourite description of himself as “a honest tradesman.” His stock consisted of a wooden stool, made out of a broken-backed chair cut down, which stool, young Jerry, walking at his father’s side, carried every morning to beneath the banking-house window that was nearest Temple Bar: where, with the addition of the first handful of straw that could be gleaned from any passing vehicle to keep the cold and wet from the odd-job-man’s feet, it formed the encampment for the day. On this post of his, Mr. Cruncher was as well known to Fleet-street and the Temple, as the Bar itself,--and was almost as in-looking.

Encamped at a quarter before nine, in good time to touch his three-cornered hat to the oldest of men as they passed in to Tellson’s, Jerry took up his station on this windy March morning, with young Jerry standing by him, when not engaged in making forays through the Bar, to inflict bodily and mental injuries of an acute description on passing boys who were small enough for his amiable purpose. Father and son, extremely like each other, looking silently on at the morning traffic in Fleet-street, with their two heads as near to one another as the two eyes of each were, bore a considerable resemblance to a pair of monkeys. The resemblance was not lessened by the accidental circumstance, that the mature Jerry bit and spat out straw, while the twinkling eyes of the youthful Jerry were as restlessly watchful of him as of everything else in Fleet-street. Having thus given his parent God speed, young Jerry seated himself on the stool, entered on his reversionary interest in the straw his father had been chewing, and cogitated. “Al-ways rusty! His fingers is al-ways rusty!” muttered young Jerry. “Where does my father get all that iron rust from? He don’t get no iron rust here!”

“I know Mr. Lorry, sir, much better than I know the Bailey. Much better,” said Jerry, not unlike a reluctant witness at the establishment in question, “than I, as a honest tradesman, wish to know the Bailey.” “I am going to tell you. The door-keeper will pass the note to Mr. Lorry, and do you make any gesture that will attract Mr. Lorry’s attention, and show him where you stand. Then what you have to do, is, to remain there until he wants you.” As the ancient clerk deliberately folded and superscribed the note, Mr. Cruncher, after surveying him in silence until he came to the blotting-paper stage, remarked: “Not at all,” retained the ancient clerk. “Speak well of the law. Take care of your chest and voice, my good friend, and leave the law to take care of itself. I give you that advice.” “Well, well,” said the old clerk; “we all have our various ways of gaining a livelihood. Some of us have damp ways, and some of us have dry ways. Here is the letter. Go along.”

Jerry took the letter, and, remarking to himself with less internal deference than he made an outward show of, “You are a lean old one, too,” made his bow, informed his son, in passing, of his destination, and went his way. They hanged at Tyburn, in those days, so the street outside Newgate had not obtained one infamous notoriety that has since attached to it. But, the gaol was a vile place, in which most kinds of debauchery and villainy were practised, and where dire diseases were bred, that came into court with the prisoners, and sometimes rushed straight from the dock at my Lord Chief Justice himself, and pulled him off the bench. It had more than once happened, that the Judge in the black cap pronounced his own doom as certainly as the prisoner’s, and even died before him. For the rest, the Old Bailey was famous as a kind of deadly inn-yard, from which pale travellers set out continually, in carts and coaches, on a violent passage into the other world: traversing some two miles and a half of public street and road, and shaming few good citizens, if any. So powerful is use, and so desirable to be good use in the beginning. It was famous, too, for the pillory, a wise old institution, that inflicted a punishment of which no one could foresee the extent; also, for the whipping-post, another dear old institution, very humanising and softening to behold in action; also, for extensive transactions in blood-money, another fragment of ancestral wisdom, systematically leading to the most frightful mercenary crimes that could be committed under Heaven. Altogether, the Old Bailey, at that date, was a choice illustration of the precept, that “Whatever is is right;” an aphorism that would be as final as it is lazy, did it not include the troublesome consequence, that nothing that ever was, was wrong.

Making his way through the tainted crowd, dispersed up and down this hideous scene of action, with the skill of a man accustomed to make his way quietly, the messenger found out the door he sought, and handed in his letter through a trap in it. For, people then paid to see the play at the Old Bailey, just as they paid to see the play in Bedlam--only the former entertainment was much the dearer. Therefore, all the Old Bailey doors were well guarded--except, indeed, the social doors by which the criminals got there, and those were always left wide open. “Ah!” returned the man, with a relish; “he’ll be drawn on a hurdle to be half hanged, and then he’ll be taken down and sliced before his own face, and then his inside will be taken out and burnt while he looks on, and then his head will be chopped off, and he’ll be cut into quarters. That’s the sentence.” Mr. Cruncher’s attention was here diverted to the door-keeper, whom he saw making his way to Mr. Lorry, with the note in his hand. Mr. Lorry sat at a table, among the gentlemen in wigs: not far from a wigged gentleman, the prisoner’s counsel, who had a great bundle of papers before him: and nearly opposite another wigged gentleman with his hands in his pockets, whose whole attention, when Mr. Cruncher looked at him then or afterwards, seemed to be concentrated on the ceiling of the court. After some gruff coughing and rubbing of his chin and signing with his hand, Jerry attracted the notice of Mr. Lorry, who had stood up to look for him, and who quietly nodded and sat down again.

The entrance of the Judge, and a consequent great stir and settling down in the court, stopped the dialogue. Presently, the dock became the central point of interest. Two gaolers, who had been standing there, went out, and the prisoner was brought in, and put to the bar. Everybody present, except the one wigged gentleman who looked at the ceiling, stared at him. All the human breath in the place, rolled at him, like a sea, or a wind, or a fire. Eager faces strained round pillars and corners, to get a sight of him; spectators in back rows stood up, not to miss a hair of him; people on the floor of the court, laid their hands on the shoulders of the people before them, to help themselves, at anybody’s cost, to a view of him--stood a-tiptoe, got upon ledges, stood upon next to nothing, to see every inch of him. Conspicuous among these latter, like an animated bit of the spiked wall of Newgate, Jerry stood: aiming at the prisoner the beery breath of a whet he had taken as he came along, and discharging it to mingle with the waves of other beer, and gin, and tea, and coffee, and what not, that flowed at him, and already broke upon the great windows behind him in an impure mist and rain.

The object of all this staring and blaring, was a young man of about five-and-twenty, well-grown and well-looking, with a sunburnt cheek and a dark eye. His condition was that of a young gentleman. He was plainly dressed in black, or very dark grey, and his hair, which was long and dark, was gathered in a ribbon at the back of his neck; more to be out of his way than for ornament. As an emotion of the mind will express itself through any covering of the body, so the paleness which his situation engendered came through the brown upon his cheek, showing the soul to be stronger than the sun. He was otherwise quite self-possessed, bowed to the Judge, and stood quiet. The sort of interest with which this man was stared and breathed at, was not a sort that elevated humanity. Had he stood in peril of a less horrible sentence--had there been a chance of any one of its savage details being spared--by just so much would he have lost in his fascination. The form that was to be doomed to be so shamefully mangled, was the sight; the immortal creature that was to be so butchered and torn asunder, yielded the sensation. Whatever gloss the various spectators put upon the interest, according to their several arts and powers of self-deceit, the interest was, at the root of it, Ogreish.

Silence in the court! Charles Darnay had yesterday pleaded Not Guilty to an indictment denouncing him (with infinite jingle and jangle) for that he was a false traitor to our serene, illustrious, excellent, and so forth, prince, our Lord the King, by reason of his having, on divers occasions, and by divers means and ways, assisted Lewis, the French King, in his wars against our said serene, illustrious, excellent, and so forth; that was to say, by coming and going, between the dominions of our said serene, illustrious, excellent, and so forth, and those of the said French Lewis, and wickedly, falsely, traitorously, and otherwise evil-adverbiously, revealing to the said French Lewis what forces our said serene, illustrious, excellent, and so forth, had in preparation to send to Canada and North America. This much, Jerry, with his head becoming more and more spiky as the law terms bristled it, made out with huge satisfaction, and so arrived circuitously at the understanding that the aforesaid, and over and over again aforesaid, Charles Darnay, stood there before him upon his trial; that the jury were swearing in; and that Mr. Attorney-General was making ready to speak.

The accused, who was (and who knew he was) being mentally hanged, beheaded, and quartered, by everybody there, neither flinched from the situation, nor assumed any theatrical air in it. He was quiet and attentive; watched the opening proceedings with a grave interest; and stood with his hands resting on the slab of wood before him, so composedly, that they had not displaced a leaf of the herbs with which it was strewn. The court was all bestrewn with herbs and sprinkled with vinegar, as a precaution against gaol air and gaol fever. Over the prisoner’s head there was a mirror, to throw the light down upon him. Crowds of the wicked and the wretched had been reflected in it, and had passed from its surface and this earth’s together. Haunted in a most ghastly manner that abominable place would have been, if the glass could ever have rendered back its reflections, as the ocean is one day to give up its dead. Some passing thought of the infamy and disgrace for which it had been reserved, may have struck the prisoner’s mind. Be that as it may, a change in his position making him conscious of a bar of light across his face, he looked up; and when he saw the glass his face flushed, and his right hand pushed the herbs away.

It happened, that the action turned his face to that side of the court which was on his left. About on a level with his eyes, there sat, in that corner of the Judge’s bench, two persons upon whom his look immediately rested; so immediately, and so much to the changing of his aspect, that all the eyes that were turned upon him, turned to them. The spectators saw in the two figures, a young lady of little more than twenty, and a gentleman who was evidently her father; a man of a very remarkable appearance in respect of the absolute whiteness of his hair, and a certain indescribable intensity of face: not of an active kind, but pondering and self-communing. When this expression was upon him, he looked as if he were old; but when it was stirred and broken up--as it was now, in a moment, on his speaking to his daughter--he became a handsome man, not past the prime of life. His daughter had one of her hands drawn through his arm, as she sat by him, and the other pressed upon it. She had drawn close to him, in her dread of the scene, and in her pity for the prisoner. Her forehead had been strikingly expressive of an engrossing terror and compassion that saw nothing but the peril of the accused. This had been so very noticeable, so very powerfully and naturally shown, that starers who had had no pity for him were touched by her; and the whisper went about, “Who are they?”

Jerry, the messenger, who had made his own observations, in his own manner, and who had been sucking the rust off his fingers in his absorption, stretched his neck to hear who they were. The crowd about him had pressed and passed the inquiry on to the nearest attendant, and from him it had been more slowly pressed and passed back; at last it got to Jerry: The Judge, whose eyes had gone in the general direction, recalled them, leaned back in his seat, and looked steadily at the man whose life was in his hand, as Mr. Attorney-General rose to spin the rope, grind the axe, and hammer the nails into the scaffold. When the Attorney-General ceased, a buzz arose in the court as if a cloud of great blue-flies were swarming about the prisoner, in anticipation of what he was soon to become. When toned down again, the unimpeachable patriot appeared in the witness-box. Mr. Solicitor-General then, following his leader’s lead, examined the patriot: John Barsad, gentleman, by name. The story of his pure soul was exactly what Mr. Attorney-General had described it to be--perhaps, if it had a fault, a little too exactly. Having released his noble bosom of its burden, he would have modestly withdrawn himself, but that the wigged gentleman with the papers before him, sitting not far from Mr. Lorry, begged to ask him a few questions. The wigged gentleman sitting opposite, still looking at the ceiling of the court.

Had he ever been a spy himself? No, he scorned the base insinuation. What did he live upon? His property. Where was his property? He didn’t precisely remember where it was. What was it? No business of anybody’s. Had he inherited it? Yes, he had. From whom? Distant relation. Very distant? Rather. Ever been in prison? Certainly not. Never in a debtors’ prison? Didn’t see what that had to do with it. Never in a debtors’ prison?--Come, once again. Never? Yes. How many times? Two or three times. Not five or six? Perhaps. Of what profession? Gentleman. Ever been kicked? Might have been. Frequently? No. Ever kicked downstairs? Decidedly not; once received a kick on the top of a staircase, and fell downstairs of his own accord. Kicked on that occasion for cheating at dice? Something to that effect was said by the intoxicated liar who committed the assault, but it was not true. Swear it was not true? Positively. Ever live by cheating at play? Never. Ever live by play? Not more than other gentlemen do. Ever borrow money of the prisoner? Yes. Ever pay him? No. Was not this intimacy with the prisoner, in reality a very slight one, forced upon the prisoner in coaches, inns, and packets? No. Sure he saw the prisoner with these lists? Certain. Knew no more about the lists? No. Had not procured them himself, for instance? No. Expect to get anything by this evidence? No. Not in regular government pay and employment, to lay traps? Oh dear no. Or to do anything? Oh dear no. Swear that? Over and over again. No motives but motives of sheer patriotism? None whatever.

The virtuous servant, Roger Cly, swore his way through the case at a great rate. He had taken service with the prisoner, in good faith and simplicity, four years ago. He had asked the prisoner, aboard the Calais packet, if he wanted a handy fellow, and the prisoner had engaged him. He had not asked the prisoner to take the handy fellow as an act of charity--never thought of such a thing. He began to have suspicions of the prisoner, and to keep an eye upon him, soon afterwards. In arranging his clothes, while travelling, he had seen similar lists to these in the prisoner’s pockets, over and over again. He had taken these lists from the drawer of the prisoner’s desk. He had not put them there first. He had seen the prisoner show these identical lists to French gentlemen at Calais, and similar lists to French gentlemen, both at Calais and Boulogne. He loved his country, and couldn’t bear it, and had given information. He had never been suspected of stealing a silver tea-pot; he had been maligned respecting a mustard-pot, but it turned out to be only a plated one. He had known the last witness seven or eight years; that was merely a coincidence. He didn’t call it a particularly curious coincidence; most coincidences were curious. Neither did he call it a curious coincidence that true patriotism was _his_ only motive too. He was a true Briton, and hoped there were many like him.

“Mr. Lorry, look again upon the prisoner. Supposing him wrapped up as those two passengers were, is there anything in his bulk and stature to render it unlikely that he was one of them?” “I was returning from France a few days afterwards, and, at Calais, the prisoner came on board the packet-ship in which I returned, and made the voyage with me.” The young lady, to whom all eyes had been turned before, and were now turned again, stood up where she had sat. Her father rose with her, and kept her hand drawn through his arm. To be confronted with such pity, and such earnest youth and beauty, was far more trying to the accused than to be confronted with all the crowd. Standing, as it were, apart with her on the edge of his grave, not all the staring curiosity that looked on, could, for the moment, nerve him to remain quite still. His hurried right hand parcelled out the herbs before him into imaginary beds of flowers in a garden; and his efforts to control and steady his breathing shook the lips from which the colour rushed to his heart. The buzz of the great flies was loud again.

The plaintive tone of her compassion merged into the less musical voice of the Judge, as he said something fiercely: “Answer the questions put to you, and make no remark upon them.” “When the prisoner came on board, he noticed that my father,” turning her eyes lovingly to him as he stood beside her, “was much fatigued and in a very weak state of health. My father was so reduced that I was afraid to take him out of the air, and I had made a bed for him on the deck near the cabin steps, and I sat on the deck at his side to take care of him. There were no other passengers that night, but we four. The prisoner was so good as to beg permission to advise me how I could shelter my father from the wind and weather, better than I had done. I had not known how to do it well, not understanding how the wind would set when we were out of the harbour. He did it for me. He expressed great gentleness and kindness for my father’s state, and I am sure he felt it. That was the manner of our beginning to speak together.”

“Possibly, but indeed I don’t know, although they stood whispering very near to me: because they stood at the top of the cabin steps to have the light of the lamp that was hanging there; it was a dull lamp, and they spoke very low, and I did not hear what they said, and saw only that they looked at papers.” “The prisoner was as open in his confidence with me--which arose out of my helpless situation--as he was kind, and good, and useful to my father. I hope,” bursting into tears, “I may not repay him by doing him harm to-day.” “Miss Manette, if the prisoner does not perfectly understand that you give the evidence which it is your duty to give--which you must give--and which you cannot escape from giving--with great unwillingness, he is the only person present in that condition. Please to go on.” “He told me that he was travelling on business of a delicate and difficult nature, which might get people into trouble, and that he was therefore travelling under an assumed name. He said that this business had, within a few days, taken him to France, and might, at intervals, take him backwards and forwards between France and England for a long time to come.”

“He tried to explain to me how that quarrel had arisen, and he said that, so far as he could judge, it was a wrong and foolish one on England’s part. He added, in a jesting way, that perhaps George Washington might gain almost as great a name in history as George the Third. But there was no harm in his way of saying this: it was said laughingly, and to beguile the time.” Any strongly marked expression of face on the part of a chief actor in a scene of great interest to whom many eyes are directed, will be unconsciously imitated by the spectators. Her forehead was painfully anxious and intent as she gave this evidence, and, in the pauses when she stopped for the Judge to write it down, watched its effect upon the counsel for and against. Among the lookers-on there was the same expression in all quarters of the court; insomuch, that a great majority of the foreheads there, might have been mirrors reflecting the witness, when the Judge looked up from his notes to glare at that tremendous heresy about George Washington.

Mr. Attorney-General now signified to my Lord, that he deemed it necessary, as a matter of precaution and form, to call the young lady’s father, Doctor Manette. Who was called accordingly. “None. My mind is a blank, from some time--I cannot even say what time--when I employed myself, in my captivity, in making shoes, to the time when I found myself living in London with my dear daughter here. She had become familiar to me, when a gracious God restored my faculties; but, I am quite unable even to say how she had become familiar. I have no remembrance of the process.” A singular circumstance then arose in the case. The object in hand being to show that the prisoner went down, with some fellow-plotter untracked, in the Dover mail on that Friday night in November five years ago, and got out of the mail in the night, as a blind, at a place where he did not remain, but from which he travelled back some dozen miles or more, to a garrison and dockyard, and there collected information; a witness was called to identify him as having been at the precise time required, in the coffee-room of an hotel in that garrison-and-dockyard town, waiting for another person. The prisoner’s counsel was cross-examining this witness with no result, except that he had never seen the prisoner on any other occasion, when the wigged gentleman who had all this time been looking at the ceiling of the court, wrote a word or two on a little piece of paper, screwed it up, and tossed it to him. Opening this piece of paper in the next pause, the counsel looked with great attention and curiosity at the prisoner.

“Look well upon that gentleman, my learned friend there,” pointing to him who had tossed the paper over, “and then look well upon the prisoner. How say you? Are they very like each other?” Allowing for my learned friend’s appearance being careless and slovenly if not debauched, they were sufficiently like each other to surprise, not only the witness, but everybody present, when they were thus brought into comparison. My Lord being prayed to bid my learned friend lay aside his wig, and giving no very gracious consent, the likeness became much more remarkable. My Lord inquired of Mr. Stryver (the prisoner’s counsel), whether they were next to try Mr. Carton (name of my learned friend) for treason? But, Mr. Stryver replied to my Lord, no; but he would ask the witness to tell him whether what happened once, might happen twice; whether he would have been so confident if he had seen this illustration of his rashness sooner, whether he would be so confident, having seen it; and more. The upshot of which, was, to smash this witness like a crockery vessel, and shiver his part of the case to useless lumber.

Mr. Cruncher had by this time taken quite a lunch of rust off his fingers in his following of the evidence. He had now to attend while Mr. Stryver fitted the prisoner’s case on the jury, like a compact suit of clothes; showing them how the patriot, Barsad, was a hired spy and traitor, an unblushing trafficker in blood, and one of the greatest scoundrels upon earth since accursed Judas--which he certainly did look rather like. How the virtuous servant, Cly, was his friend and partner, and was worthy to be; how the watchful eyes of those forgers and false swearers had rested on the prisoner as a victim, because some family affairs in France, he being of French extraction, did require his making those passages across the Channel--though what those affairs were, a consideration for others who were near and dear to him, forbade him, even for his life, to disclose. How the evidence that had been warped and wrested from the young lady, whose anguish in giving it they had witnessed, came to nothing, involving the mere little innocent gallantries and politenesses likely to pass between any young gentleman and young lady so thrown together;--with the exception of that reference to George Washington, which was altogether too extravagant and impossible to be regarded in any other light than as a monstrous joke. How it would be a weakness in the government to break down in this attempt to practise for popularity on the lowest national antipathies and fears, and therefore Mr. Attorney-General had made the most of it; how, nevertheless, it rested upon nothing, save that vile and infamous character of evidence too often disfiguring such cases, and of which the State Trials of this country were full. But, there my Lord interposed (with as grave a face as if it had not been true), saying that he could not sit upon that Bench and suffer those allusions.

Mr. Stryver then called his few witnesses, and Mr. Cruncher had next to attend while Mr. Attorney-General turned the whole suit of clothes Mr. Stryver had fitted on the jury, inside out; showing how Barsad and Cly were even a hundred times better than he had thought them, and the prisoner a hundred times worse. Lastly, came my Lord himself, turning the suit of clothes, now inside out, now outside in, but on the whole decidedly trimming and shaping them into grave-clothes for the prisoner. Mr. Carton, who had so long sat looking at the ceiling of the court, changed neither his place nor his attitude, even in this excitement. While his learned friend, Mr. Stryver, massing his papers before him, whispered with those who sat near, and from time to time glanced anxiously at the jury; while all the spectators moved more or less, and grouped themselves anew; while even my Lord himself arose from his seat, and slowly paced up and down his platform, not unattended by a suspicion in the minds of the audience that his state was feverish; this one man sat leaning back, with his torn gown half off him, his untidy wig put on just as it had happened to light on his head after its removal, his hands in his pockets, and his eyes on the ceiling as they had been all day. Something especially reckless in his demeanour, not only gave him a disreputable look, but so diminished the strong resemblance he undoubtedly bore to the prisoner (which his momentary earnestness, when they were compared together, had strengthened), that many of the lookers-on, taking note of him now, said to one another they would hardly have thought the two were so alike. Mr. Cruncher made the observation to his next neighbour, and added, “I’d hold half a guinea that _he_ don’t get no law-work to do. Don’t look like the sort of one to get any, do he?”

Yet, this Mr. Carton took in more of the details of the scene than he appeared to take in; for now, when Miss Manette’s head dropped upon her father’s breast, he was the first to see it, and to say audibly: “Officer! look to that young lady. Help the gentleman to take her out. Don’t you see she will fall!” There was much commiseration for her as she was removed, and much sympathy with her father. It had evidently been a great distress to him, to have the days of his imprisonment recalled. He had shown strong internal agitation when he was questioned, and that pondering or brooding look which made him old, had been upon him, like a heavy cloud, ever since. As he passed out, the jury, who had turned back and paused a moment, spoke, through their foreman. They were not agreed, and wished to retire. My Lord (perhaps with George Washington on his mind) showed some surprise that they were not agreed, but signified his pleasure that they should retire under watch and ward, and retired himself. The trial had lasted all day, and the lamps in the court were now being lighted. It began to be rumoured that the jury would be out a long while. The spectators dropped off to get refreshment, and the prisoner withdrew to the back of the dock, and sat down.

Mr. Lorry, who had gone out when the young lady and her father went out, now reappeared, and beckoned to Jerry: who, in the slackened interest, could easily get near him. “Jerry, if you wish to take something to eat, you can. But, keep in the way. You will be sure to hear when the jury come in. Don’t be a moment behind them, for I want you to take the verdict back to the bank. You are the quickest messenger I know, and will get to Temple Bar long before I can.” Jerry had just enough forehead to knuckle, and he knuckled it in acknowledgment of this communication and a shilling. Mr. Carton came up at the moment, and touched Mr. Lorry on the arm. Mr. Lorry reddened as if he were conscious of having debated the point in his mind, and Mr. Carton made his way to the outside of the bar. The way out of court lay in that direction, and Jerry followed him, all eyes, ears, and spikes. Loitering on the way out of court not being allowed, Jerry heard no more: but left them--so like each other in feature, so unlike each other in manner--standing side by side, both reflected in the glass above them.

An hour and a half limped heavily away in the thief-and-rascal crowded passages below, even though assisted off with mutton pies and ale. The hoarse messenger, uncomfortably seated on a form after taking that refection, had dropped into a doze, when a loud murmur and a rapid tide of people setting up the stairs that led to the court, carried him along with them. He had no opportunity of saying, or so much as thinking, anything else, until he was clear of the Old Bailey; for, the crowd came pouring out with a vehemence that nearly took him off his legs, and a loud buzz swept into the street as if the baffled blue-flies were dispersing in search of other carrion. From the dimly-lighted passages of the court, the last sediment of the human stew that had been boiling there all day, was straining off, when Doctor Manette, Lucie Manette, his daughter, Mr. Lorry, the solicitor for the defence, and its counsel, Mr. Stryver, stood gathered round Mr. Charles Darnay--just released--congratulating him on his escape from death. It would have been difficult by a far brighter light, to recognise in Doctor Manette, intellectual of face and upright of bearing, the shoemaker of the garret in Paris. Yet, no one could have looked at him twice, without looking again: even though the opportunity of observation had not extended to the mournful cadence of his low grave voice, and to the abstraction that overclouded him fitfully, without any apparent reason. While one external cause, and that a reference to his long lingering agony, would always--as on the trial--evoke this condition from the depths of his soul, it was also in its nature to arise of itself, and to draw a gloom over him, as incomprehensible to those unacquainted with his story as if they had seen the shadow of the actual Bastille thrown upon him by a summer sun, when the substance was three hundred miles away.

Only his daughter had the power of charming this black brooding from his mind. She was the golden thread that united him to a Past beyond his misery, and to a Present beyond his misery: and the sound of her voice, the light of her face, the touch of her hand, had a strong beneficial influence with him almost always. Not absolutely always, for she could recall some occasions on which her power had failed; but they were few and slight, and she believed them over. Mr. Darnay had kissed her hand fervently and gratefully, and had turned to Mr. Stryver, whom he warmly thanked. Mr. Stryver, a man of little more than thirty, but looking twenty years older than he was, stout, loud, red, bluff, and free from any drawback of delicacy, had a pushing way of shouldering himself (morally and physically) into companies and conversations, that argued well for his shouldering his way up in life. He still had his wig and gown on, and he said, squaring himself at his late client to that degree that he squeezed the innocent Mr. Lorry clean out of the group: “I am glad to have brought you off with honour, Mr. Darnay. It was an infamous prosecution, grossly infamous; but not the less likely to succeed on that account.”

It clearly being incumbent on some one to say, “Much better,” Mr. Lorry said it; perhaps not quite disinterestedly, but with the interested object of squeezing himself back again. “And as such,” quoth Mr. Lorry, whom the counsel learned in the law had now shouldered back into the group, just as he had previously shouldered him out of it--“as such I will appeal to Doctor Manette, to break up this conference and order us all to our homes. Miss Lucie looks ill, Mr. Darnay has had a terrible day, we are worn out.” “I speak for myself,” answered Mr. Lorry, “and for Mr. Darnay, and for Miss Lucie, and--Miss Lucie, do you not think I may speak for us all?” He asked her the question pointedly, and with a glance at her father. His face had become frozen, as it were, in a very curious look at Darnay: an intent look, deepening into a frown of dislike and distrust, not even unmixed with fear. With this strange expression on him his thoughts had wandered away. The friends of the acquitted prisoner had dispersed, under the impression--which he himself had originated--that he would not be released that night. The lights were nearly all extinguished in the passages, the iron gates were being closed with a jar and a rattle, and the dismal place was deserted until to-morrow morning’s interest of gallows, pillory, whipping-post, and branding-iron, should repeople it. Walking between her father and Mr. Darnay, Lucie Manette passed into the open air. A hackney-coach was called, and the father and daughter departed in it.

Mr. Stryver had left them in the passages, to shoulder his way back to the robing-room. Another person, who had not joined the group, or interchanged a word with any one of them, but who had been leaning against the wall where its shadow was darkest, had silently strolled out after the rest, and had looked on until the coach drove away. He now stepped up to where Mr. Lorry and Mr. Darnay stood upon the pavement. Nobody had made any acknowledgment of Mr. Carton’s part in the day’s proceedings; nobody had known of it. He was unrobed, and was none the better for it in appearance. “If you knew what a conflict goes on in the business mind, when the business mind is divided between good-natured impulse and business appearances, you would be amused, Mr. Darnay.” Mr. Lorry reddened, and said, warmly, “You have mentioned that before, sir. We men of business, who serve a House, are not our own masters. We have to think of the House more than ourselves.” “_I_ know, _I_ know,” rejoined Mr. Carton, carelessly. “Don’t be nettled, Mr. Lorry. You are as good as another, I have no doubt: better, I dare say.”

“And indeed, sir,” pursued Mr. Lorry, not minding him, “I really don’t know what you have to do with the matter. If you’ll excuse me, as very much your elder, for saying so, I really don’t know that it is your business.” “Well, sir!” cried Mr. Lorry, thoroughly heated by his indifference, “business is a very good thing, and a very respectable thing. And, sir, if business imposes its restraints and its silences and impediments, Mr. Darnay as a young gentleman of generosity knows how to make allowance for that circumstance. Mr. Darnay, good night, God bless you, sir! I hope you have been this day preserved for a prosperous and happy life.--Chair there!” Perhaps a little angry with himself, as well as with the barrister, Mr. Lorry bustled into the chair, and was carried off to Tellson’s. Carton, who smelt of port wine, and did not appear to be quite sober, laughed then, and turned to Darnay: “This is a strange chance that throws you and me together. This must be a strange night to you, standing alone here with your counterpart on these street stones?”

“Then why the devil don’t you dine? I dined, myself, while those numskulls were deliberating which world you should belong to--this, or some other. Let me show you the nearest tavern to dine well at.” Drawing his arm through his own, he took him down Ludgate-hill to Fleet-street, and so, up a covered way, into a tavern. Here, they were shown into a little room, where Charles Darnay was soon recruiting his strength with a good plain dinner and good wine: while Carton sat opposite to him at the same table, with his separate bottle of port before him, and his fully half-insolent manner upon him. “As to me, the greatest desire I have, is to forget that I belong to it. It has no good in it for me--except wine like this--nor I for it. So we are not much alike in that particular. Indeed, I begin to think we are not much alike in any particular, you and I.” Confused by the emotion of the day, and feeling his being there with this Double of coarse deportment, to be like a dream, Charles Darnay was at a loss how to answer; finally, answered not at all.

Looking his companion full in the face while he drank the toast, Carton flung his glass over his shoulder against the wall, where it shivered to pieces; then, rang the bell, and ordered in another. “That’s a fair young lady to be pitied by and wept for by! How does it feel? Is it worth being tried for one’s life, to be the object of such sympathy and compassion, Mr. Darnay?” The allusion served as a timely reminder to Darnay that this disagreeable companion had, of his own free will, assisted him in the strait of the day. He turned the dialogue to that point, and thanked him for it. “I neither want any thanks, nor merit any,” was the careless rejoinder. “It was nothing to do, in the first place; and I don’t know why I did it, in the second. Mr. Darnay, let me ask you a question.” “Nevertheless,” pursued Darnay, rising to ring the bell, “there is nothing in that, I hope, to prevent my calling the reckoning, and our parting without ill-blood on either side.” Carton rejoining, “Nothing in life!” Darnay rang. “Do you call the whole reckoning?” said Carton. On his answering in the affirmative, “Then bring me another pint of this same wine, drawer, and come and wake me at ten.”

The bill being paid, Charles Darnay rose and wished him good night. Without returning the wish, Carton rose too, with something of a threat of defiance in his manner, and said, “A last word, Mr. Darnay: you think I am drunk?” “Do you particularly like the man?” he muttered, at his own image; “why should you particularly like a man who resembles you? There is nothing in you to like; you know that. Ah, confound you! What a change you have made in yourself! A good reason for taking to a man, that he shows you what you have fallen away from, and what you might have been! Change places with him, and would you have been looked at by those blue eyes as he was, and commiserated by that agitated face as he was? Come on, and have it out in plain words! You hate the fellow.” He resorted to his pint of wine for consolation, drank it all in a few minutes, and fell asleep on his arms, with his hair straggling over the table, and a long winding-sheet in the candle dripping down upon him.

Those were drinking days, and most men drank hard. So very great is the improvement Time has brought about in such habits, that a moderate statement of the quantity of wine and punch which one man would swallow in the course of a night, without any detriment to his reputation as a perfect gentleman, would seem, in these days, a ridiculous exaggeration. The learned profession of the law was certainly not behind any other learned profession in its Bacchanalian propensities; neither was Mr. Stryver, already fast shouldering his way to a large and lucrative practice, behind his compeers in this particular, any more than in the drier parts of the legal race. A favourite at the Old Bailey, and eke at the Sessions, Mr. Stryver had begun cautiously to hew away the lower staves of the ladder on which he mounted. Sessions and Old Bailey had now to summon their favourite, specially, to their longing arms; and shouldering itself towards the visage of the Lord Chief Justice in the Court of King’s Bench, the florid countenance of Mr. Stryver might be daily seen, bursting out of the bed of wigs, like a great sunflower pushing its way at the sun from among a rank garden-full of flaring companions.

It had once been noted at the Bar, that while Mr. Stryver was a glib man, and an unscrupulous, and a ready, and a bold, he had not that faculty of extracting the essence from a heap of statements, which is among the most striking and necessary of the advocate’s accomplishments. But, a remarkable improvement came upon him as to this. The more business he got, the greater his power seemed to grow of getting at its pith and marrow; and however late at night he sat carousing with Sydney Carton, he always had his points at his fingers’ ends in the morning. Sydney Carton, idlest and most unpromising of men, was Stryver’s great ally. What the two drank together, between Hilary Term and Michaelmas, might have floated a king’s ship. Stryver never had a case in hand, anywhere, but Carton was there, with his hands in his pockets, staring at the ceiling of the court; they went the same Circuit, and even there they prolonged their usual orgies late into the night, and Carton was rumoured to be seen at broad day, going home stealthily and unsteadily to his lodgings, like a dissipated cat. At last, it began to get about, among such as were interested in the matter, that although Sydney Carton would never be a lion, he was an amazingly good jackal, and that he rendered suit and service to Stryver in that humble capacity.

After a few dull efforts to get to sleep again, which the man dexterously combated by stirring the fire continuously for five minutes, he got up, tossed his hat on, and walked out. He turned into the Temple, and, having revived himself by twice pacing the pavements of King’s Bench-walk and Paper-buildings, turned into the Stryver chambers. The Stryver clerk, who never assisted at these conferences, had gone home, and the Stryver principal opened the door. He had his slippers on, and a loose bed-gown, and his throat was bare for his greater ease. He had that rather wild, strained, seared marking about the eyes, which may be observed in all free livers of his class, from the portrait of Jeffries downward, and which can be traced, under various disguises of Art, through the portraits of every Drinking Age. They went into a dingy room lined with books and littered with papers, where there was a blazing fire. A kettle steamed upon the hob, and in the midst of the wreck of papers a table shone, with plenty of wine upon it, and brandy, and rum, and sugar, and lemons.

Sullenly enough, the jackal loosened his dress, went into an adjoining room, and came back with a large jug of cold water, a basin, and a towel or two. Steeping the towels in the water, and partially wringing them out, he folded them on his head in a manner hideous to behold, sat down at the table, and said, “Now I am ready!” The lion then composed himself on his back on a sofa on one side of the drinking-table, while the jackal sat at his own paper-bestrewn table proper, on the other side of it, with the bottles and glasses ready to his hand. Both resorted to the drinking-table without stint, but each in a different way; the lion for the most part reclining with his hands in his waistband, looking at the fire, or occasionally flirting with some lighter document; the jackal, with knitted brows and intent face, so deep in his task, that his eyes did not even follow the hand he stretched out for his glass--which often groped about, for a minute or more, before it found the glass for his lips. Two or three times, the matter in hand became so knotty, that the jackal found it imperative on him to get up, and steep his towels anew. From these pilgrimages to the jug and basin, he returned with such eccentricities of damp headgear as no words can describe; which were made the more ludicrous by his anxious gravity.

At length the jackal had got together a compact repast for the lion, and proceeded to offer it to him. The lion took it with care and caution, made his selections from it, and his remarks upon it, and the jackal assisted both. When the repast was fully discussed, the lion put his hands in his waistband again, and lay down to meditate. The jackal then invigorated himself with a bumper for his throttle, and a fresh application to his head, and applied himself to the collection of a second meal; this was administered to the lion in the same manner, and was not disposed of until the clocks struck three in the morning. “The old Sydney Carton of old Shrewsbury School,” said Stryver, nodding his head over him as he reviewed him in the present and the past, “the old seesaw Sydney. Up one minute and down the next; now in spirits and now in despondency!” “Carton,” said his friend, squaring himself at him with a bullying air, as if the fire-grate had been the furnace in which sustained endeavour was forged, and the one delicate thing to be done for the old Sydney Carton of old Shrewsbury School was to shoulder him into it, “your way is, and always was, a lame way. You summon no energy and purpose. Look at me.”

“Partly through paying me to help you, I suppose. But it’s not worth your while to apostrophise me, or the air, about it; what you want to do, you do. You were always in the front rank, and I was always behind.” “Before Shrewsbury, and at Shrewsbury, and ever since Shrewsbury,” pursued Carton, “you have fallen into your rank, and I have fallen into mine. Even when we were fellow-students in the Student-Quarter of Paris, picking up French, and French law, and other French crumbs that we didn’t get much good of, you were always somewhere, and I was always nowhere.” “Upon my soul, I am not sure that it was not yours. You were always driving and riving and shouldering and passing, to that restless degree that I had no chance for my life but in rust and repose. It’s a gloomy thing, however, to talk about one’s own past, with the day breaking. Turn me in some other direction before I go.” “Do you know, Sydney,” said Mr. Stryver, looking at him with sharp eyes, and slowly drawing a hand across his florid face: “do you know, I rather thought, at the time, that you sympathised with the golden-haired doll, and were quick to see what happened to the golden-haired doll?”

“Quick to see what happened! If a girl, doll or no doll, swoons within a yard or two of a man’s nose, he can see it without a perspective-glass. I pledge you, but I deny the beauty. And now I’ll have no more drink; I’ll get to bed.” When his host followed him out on the staircase with a candle, to light him down the stairs, the day was coldly looking in through its grimy windows. When he got out of the house, the air was cold and sad, the dull sky overcast, the river dark and dim, the whole scene like a lifeless desert. And wreaths of dust were spinning round and round before the morning blast, as if the desert-sand had risen far away, and the first spray of it in its advance had begun to overwhelm the city. Waste forces within him, and a desert all around, this man stood still on his way across a silent terrace, and saw for a moment, lying in the wilderness before him, a mirage of honourable ambition, self-denial, and perseverance. In the fair city of this vision, there were airy galleries from which the loves and graces looked upon him, gardens in which the fruits of life hung ripening, waters of Hope that sparkled in his sight. A moment, and it was gone. Climbing to a high chamber in a well of houses, he threw himself down in his clothes on a neglected bed, and its pillow was wet with wasted tears.

Sadly, sadly, the sun rose; it rose upon no sadder sight than the man of good abilities and good emotions, incapable of their directed exercise, incapable of his own help and his own happiness, sensible of the blight on him, and resigning himself to let it eat him away. The quiet lodgings of Doctor Manette were in a quiet street-corner not far from Soho-square. On the afternoon of a certain fine Sunday when the waves of four months had rolled over the trial for treason, and carried it, as to the public interest and memory, far out to sea, Mr. Jarvis Lorry walked along the sunny streets from Clerkenwell where he lived, on his way to dine with the Doctor. After several relapses into business-absorption, Mr. Lorry had become the Doctor’s friend, and the quiet street-corner was the sunny part of his life. On this certain fine Sunday, Mr. Lorry walked towards Soho, early in the afternoon, for three reasons of habit. Firstly, because, on fine Sundays, he often walked out, before dinner, with the Doctor and Lucie; secondly, because, on unfavourable Sundays, he was accustomed to be with them as the family friend, talking, reading, looking out of window, and generally getting through the day; thirdly, because he happened to have his own little shrewd doubts to solve, and knew how the ways of the Doctor’s household pointed to that time as a likely time for solving them.

A quainter corner than the corner where the Doctor lived, was not to be found in London. There was no way through it, and the front windows of the Doctor’s lodgings commanded a pleasant little vista of street that had a congenial air of retirement on it. There were few buildings then, north of the Oxford-road, and forest-trees flourished, and wild flowers grew, and the hawthorn blossomed, in the now vanished fields. As a consequence, country airs circulated in Soho with vigorous freedom, instead of languishing into the parish like stray paupers without a settlement; and there was many a good south wall, not far off, on which the peaches ripened in their season. The summer light struck into the corner brilliantly in the earlier part of the day; but, when the streets grew hot, the corner was in shadow, though not in shadow so remote but that you could see beyond it into a glare of brightness. It was a cool spot, staid but cheerful, a wonderful place for echoes, and a very harbour from the raging streets. There ought to have been a tranquil bark in such an anchorage, and there was. The Doctor occupied two floors of a large stiff house, where several callings purported to be pursued by day, but whereof little was audible any day, and which was shunned by all of them at night. In a building at the back, attainable by a courtyard where a plane-tree rustled its green leaves, church-organs claimed to be made, and silver to be chased, and likewise gold to be beaten by some mysterious giant who had a golden arm starting out of the wall of the front hall--as if he had beaten himself precious, and menaced a similar conversion of all visitors. Very little of these trades, or of a lonely lodger rumoured to live up-stairs, or of a dim coach-trimming maker asserted to have a counting-house below, was ever heard or seen. Occasionally, a stray workman putting his coat on, traversed the hall, or a stranger peered about there, or a distant clink was heard across the courtyard, or a thump from the golden giant. These, however, were only the exceptions required to prove the rule that the sparrows in the plane-tree behind the house, and the echoes in the corner before it, had their own way from Sunday morning unto Saturday night.

Doctor Manette received such patients here as his old reputation, and its revival in the floating whispers of his story, brought him. His scientific knowledge, and his vigilance and skill in conducting ingenious experiments, brought him otherwise into moderate request, and he earned as much as he wanted. These things were within Mr. Jarvis Lorry’s knowledge, thoughts, and notice, when he rang the door-bell of the tranquil house in the corner, on the fine Sunday afternoon. Although the Doctor’s daughter had known nothing of the country of her birth, she appeared to have innately derived from it that ability to make much of little means, which is one of its most useful and most agreeable characteristics. Simple as the furniture was, it was set off by so many little adornments, of no value but for their taste and fancy, that its effect was delightful. The disposition of everything in the rooms, from the largest object to the least; the arrangement of colours, the elegant variety and contrast obtained by thrift in trifles, by delicate hands, clear eyes, and good sense; were at once so pleasant in themselves, and so expressive of their originator, that, as Mr. Lorry stood looking about him, the very chairs and tables seemed to ask him, with something of that peculiar expression which he knew so well by this time, whether he approved?

There were three rooms on a floor, and, the doors by which they communicated being put open that the air might pass freely through them all, Mr. Lorry, smilingly observant of that fanciful resemblance which he detected all around him, walked from one to another. The first was the best room, and in it were Lucie’s birds, and flowers, and books, and desk, and work-table, and box of water-colours; the second was the Doctor’s consulting-room, used also as the dining-room; the third, changingly speckled by the rustle of the plane-tree in the yard, was the Doctor’s bedroom, and there, in a corner, stood the disused shoemaker’s bench and tray of tools, much as it had stood on the fifth floor of the dismal house by the wine-shop, in the suburb of Saint Antoine in Paris. It proceeded from Miss Pross, the wild red woman, strong of hand, whose acquaintance he had first made at the Royal George Hotel at Dover, and had since improved. “For gracious sake say something else besides ‘indeed,’ or you’ll fidget me to death,” said Miss Pross: whose character (dissociated from stature) was shortness.

It was characteristic of this lady (as of some other people before her time and since) that whenever her original proposition was questioned, she exaggerated it. “I have lived with the darling--or the darling has lived with me, and paid me for it; which she certainly should never have done, you may take your affidavit, if I could have afforded to keep either myself or her for nothing--since she was ten years old. And it’s really very hard,” said Miss Pross. Not seeing with precision what was very hard, Mr. Lorry shook his head; using that important part of himself as a sort of fairy cloak that would fit anything. “It wasn’t ending it, I suppose? I say, when you began it, it was hard enough; not that I have any fault to find with Doctor Manette, except that he is not worthy of such a daughter, which is no imputation on him, for it was not to be expected that anybody should be, under any circumstances. But it really is doubly and trebly hard to have crowds and multitudes of people turning up after him (I could have forgiven him), to take Ladybird’s affections away from me.”

Mr. Lorry knew Miss Pross to be very jealous, but he also knew her by this time to be, beneath the service of her eccentricity, one of those unselfish creatures--found only among women--who will, for pure love and admiration, bind themselves willing slaves, to youth when they have lost it, to beauty that they never had, to accomplishments that they were never fortunate enough to gain, to bright hopes that never shone upon their own sombre lives. He knew enough of the world to know that there is nothing in it better than the faithful service of the heart; so rendered and so free from any mercenary taint, he had such an exalted respect for it, that in the retributive arrangements made by his own mind--we all make such arrangements, more or less--he stationed Miss Pross much nearer to the lower Angels than many ladies immeasurably better got up both by Nature and Art, who had balances at Tellson’s. “There never was, nor will be, but one man worthy of Ladybird,” said Miss Pross; “and that was my brother Solomon, if he hadn’t made a mistake in life.”

Here again: Mr. Lorry’s inquiries into Miss Pross’s personal history had established the fact that her brother Solomon was a heartless scoundrel who had stripped her of everything she possessed, as a stake to speculate with, and had abandoned her in her poverty for evermore, with no touch of compunction. Miss Pross’s fidelity of belief in Solomon (deducting a mere trifle for this slight mistake) was quite a serious matter with Mr. Lorry, and had its weight in his good opinion of her. “As we happen to be alone for the moment, and are both people of business,” he said, when they had got back to the drawing-room and had sat down there in friendly relations, “let me ask you--does the Doctor, in talking with Lucie, never refer to the shoemaking time, yet?” “Do you suppose,” Mr. Lorry went on, with a laughing twinkle in his bright eye, as it looked kindly at her, “that Doctor Manette has any theory of his own, preserved through all those years, relative to the cause of his being so oppressed; perhaps, even to the name of his oppressor?”

Rather wishing his modest adjective away, Mr. Lorry replied, “No, no, no. Surely not. To return to business:--Is it not remarkable that Doctor Manette, unquestionably innocent of any crime as we are all well assured he is, should never touch upon that question? I will not say with me, though he had business relations with me many years ago, and we are now intimate; I will say with the fair daughter to whom he is so devotedly attached, and who is so devotedly attached to him? Believe me, Miss Pross, I don’t approach the topic with you, out of curiosity, but out of zealous interest.” “Well! To the best of my understanding, and bad’s the best, you’ll tell me,” said Miss Pross, softened by the tone of the apology, “he is afraid of the whole subject.” “It’s plain enough, I should think, why he may be. It’s a dreadful remembrance. Besides that, his loss of himself grew out of it. Not knowing how he lost himself, or how he recovered himself, he may never feel certain of not losing himself again. That alone wouldn’t make the subject pleasant, I should think.”

It was a profounder remark than Mr. Lorry had looked for. “True,” said he, “and fearful to reflect upon. Yet, a doubt lurks in my mind, Miss Pross, whether it is good for Doctor Manette to have that suppression always shut up within him. Indeed, it is this doubt and the uneasiness it sometimes causes me that has led me to our present confidence.” “Can’t be helped,” said Miss Pross, shaking her head. “Touch that string, and he instantly changes for the worse. Better leave it alone. In short, must leave it alone, like or no like. Sometimes, he gets up in the dead of the night, and will be heard, by us overhead there, walking up and down, walking up and down, in his room. Ladybird has learnt to know then that his mind is walking up and down, walking up and down, in his old prison. She hurries to him, and they go on together, walking up and down, walking up and down, until he is composed. But he never says a word of the true reason of his restlessness, to her, and she finds it best not to hint at it to him. In silence they go walking up and down together, walking up and down together, till her love and company have brought him to himself.”

Notwithstanding Miss Pross’s denial of her own imagination, there was a perception of the pain of being monotonously haunted by one sad idea, in her repetition of the phrase, walking up and down, which testified to her possessing such a thing. The corner has been mentioned as a wonderful corner for echoes; it had begun to echo so resoundingly to the tread of coming feet, that it seemed as though the very mention of that weary pacing to and fro had set it going. It was such a curious corner in its acoustical properties, such a peculiar Ear of a place, that as Mr. Lorry stood at the open window, looking for the father and daughter whose steps he heard, he fancied they would never approach. Not only would the echoes die away, as though the steps had gone; but, echoes of other steps that never came would be heard in their stead, and would die away for good when they seemed close at hand. However, father and daughter did at last appear, and Miss Pross was ready at the street door to receive them.

Miss Pross was a pleasant sight, albeit wild, and red, and grim, taking off her darling’s bonnet when she came up-stairs, and touching it up with the ends of her handkerchief, and blowing the dust off it, and folding her mantle ready for laying by, and smoothing her rich hair with as much pride as she could possibly have taken in her own hair if she had been the vainest and handsomest of women. Her darling was a pleasant sight too, embracing her and thanking her, and protesting against her taking so much trouble for her--which last she only dared to do playfully, or Miss Pross, sorely hurt, would have retired to her own chamber and cried. The Doctor was a pleasant sight too, looking on at them, and telling Miss Pross how she spoilt Lucie, in accents and with eyes that had as much spoiling in them as Miss Pross had, and would have had more if it were possible. Mr. Lorry was a pleasant sight too, beaming at all this in his little wig, and thanking his bachelor stars for having lighted him in his declining years to a Home. But, no Hundreds of people came to see the sights, and Mr. Lorry looked in vain for the fulfilment of Miss Pross’s prediction.

Dinner-time, and still no Hundreds of people. In the arrangements of the little household, Miss Pross took charge of the lower regions, and always acquitted herself marvellously. Her dinners, of a very modest quality, were so well cooked and so well served, and so neat in their contrivances, half English and half French, that nothing could be better. Miss Pross’s friendship being of the thoroughly practical kind, she had ravaged Soho and the adjacent provinces, in search of impoverished French, who, tempted by shillings and half-crowns, would impart culinary mysteries to her. From these decayed sons and daughters of Gaul, she had acquired such wonderful arts, that the woman and girl who formed the staff of domestics regarded her as quite a Sorceress, or Cinderella’s Godmother: who would send out for a fowl, a rabbit, a vegetable or two from the garden, and change them into anything she pleased. On Sundays, Miss Pross dined at the Doctor’s table, but on other days persisted in taking her meals at unknown periods, either in the lower regions, or in her own room on the second floor--a blue chamber, to which no one but her Ladybird ever gained admittance. On this occasion, Miss Pross, responding to Ladybird’s pleasant face and pleasant efforts to please her, unbent exceedingly; so the dinner was very pleasant, too.

It was an oppressive day, and, after dinner, Lucie proposed that the wine should be carried out under the plane-tree, and they should sit there in the air. As everything turned upon her, and revolved about her, they went out under the plane-tree, and she carried the wine down for the special benefit of Mr. Lorry. She had installed herself, some time before, as Mr. Lorry’s cup-bearer; and while they sat under the plane-tree, talking, she kept his glass replenished. Mysterious backs and ends of houses peeped at them as they talked, and the plane-tree whispered to them in its own way above their heads. Still, the Hundreds of people did not present themselves. Mr. Darnay presented himself while they were sitting under the plane-tree, but he was only One. Doctor Manette received him kindly, and so did Lucie. But, Miss Pross suddenly became afflicted with a twitching in the head and body, and retired into the house. She was not unfrequently the victim of this disorder, and she called it, in familiar conversation, “a fit of the jerks.” The Doctor was in his best condition, and looked specially young. The resemblance between him and Lucie was very strong at such times, and as they sat side by side, she leaning on his shoulder, and he resting his arm on the back of her chair, it was very agreeable to trace the likeness.

He had been talking all day, on many subjects, and with unusual vivacity. “Pray, Doctor Manette,” said Mr. Darnay, as they sat under the plane-tree--and he said it in the natural pursuit of the topic in hand, which happened to be the old buildings of London--“have you seen much of the Tower?” “_I_ have been there, as you remember,” said Darnay, with a smile, though reddening a little angrily, “in another character, and not in a character that gives facilities for seeing much of it. They told me a curious thing when I was there.” “In making some alterations, the workmen came upon an old dungeon, which had been, for many years, built up and forgotten. Every stone of its inner wall was covered by inscriptions which had been carved by prisoners--dates, names, complaints, and prayers. Upon a corner stone in an angle of the wall, one prisoner, who seemed to have gone to execution, had cut as his last work, three letters. They were done with some very poor instrument, and hurriedly, with an unsteady hand. At first, they were read as D. I. C.; but, on being more carefully examined, the last letter was found to be G. There was no record or legend of any prisoner with those initials, and many fruitless guesses were made what the name could have been. At length, it was suggested that the letters were not initials, but the complete word, DIG. The floor was examined very carefully under the inscription, and, in the earth beneath a stone, or tile, or some fragment of paving, were found the ashes of a paper, mingled with the ashes of a small leathern case or bag. What the unknown prisoner had written will never be read, but he had written something, and hidden it away to keep it from the gaoler.”

He recovered himself almost instantly. Rain was really falling in large drops, and he showed the back of his hand with rain-drops on it. But, he said not a single word in reference to the discovery that had been told of, and, as they went into the house, the business eye of Mr. Lorry either detected, or fancied it detected, on his face, as it turned towards Charles Darnay, the same singular look that had been upon it when it turned towards him in the passages of the Court House. He recovered himself so quickly, however, that Mr. Lorry had doubts of his business eye. The arm of the golden giant in the hall was not more steady than he was, when he stopped under it to remark to them that he was not yet proof against slight surprises (if he ever would be), and that the rain had startled him. Tea-time, and Miss Pross making tea, with another fit of the jerks upon her, and yet no Hundreds of people. Mr. Carton had lounged in, but he made only Two.

The night was so very sultry, that although they sat with doors and windows open, they were overpowered by heat. When the tea-table was done with, they all moved to one of the windows, and looked out into the heavy twilight. Lucie sat by her father; Darnay sat beside her; Carton leaned against a window. The curtains were long and white, and some of the thunder-gusts that whirled into the corner, caught them up to the ceiling, and waved them like spectral wings. There was a great hurry in the streets of people speeding away to get shelter before the storm broke; the wonderful corner for echoes resounded with the echoes of footsteps coming and going, yet not a footstep was there. “Is it not impressive, Mr. Darnay?” asked Lucie. “Sometimes, I have sat here of an evening, until I have fancied--but even the shade of a foolish fancy makes me shudder to-night, when all is so black and solemn--” “It will seem nothing to you. Such whims are only impressive as we originate them, I think; they are not to be communicated. I have sometimes sat alone here of an evening, listening, until I have made the echoes out to be the echoes of all the footsteps that are coming by-and-bye into our lives.”

The footsteps were incessant, and the hurry of them became more and more rapid. The corner echoed and re-echoed with the tread of feet; some, as it seemed, under the windows; some, as it seemed, in the room; some coming, some going, some breaking off, some stopping altogether; all in the distant streets, and not one within sight. “I don’t know, Mr. Darnay; I told you it was a foolish fancy, but you asked for it. When I have yielded myself to it, I have been alone, and then I have imagined them the footsteps of the people who are to come into my life, and my father’s.” “I take them into mine!” said Carton. “_I_ ask no questions and make no stipulations. There is a great crowd bearing down upon us, Miss Manette, and I see them--by the Lightning.” He added the last words, after there had been a vivid flash which had shown him lounging in the window. It was the rush and roar of rain that he typified, and it stopped him, for no voice could be heard in it. A memorable storm of thunder and lightning broke with that sweep of water, and there was not a moment’s interval in crash, and fire, and rain, until after the moon rose at midnight.

The great bell of Saint Paul’s was striking one in the cleared air, when Mr. Lorry, escorted by Jerry, high-booted and bearing a lantern, set forth on his return-passage to Clerkenwell. There were solitary patches of road on the way between Soho and Clerkenwell, and Mr. Lorry, mindful of foot-pads, always retained Jerry for this service: though it was usually performed a good two hours earlier. Monseigneur, one of the great lords in power at the Court, held his fortnightly reception in his grand hotel in Paris. Monseigneur was in his inner room, his sanctuary of sanctuaries, the Holiest of Holiests to the crowd of worshippers in the suite of rooms without. Monseigneur was about to take his chocolate. Monseigneur could swallow a great many things with ease, and was by some few sullen minds supposed to be rather rapidly swallowing France; but, his morning’s chocolate could not so much as get into the throat of Monseigneur, without the aid of four strong men besides the Cook. Yes. It took four men, all four ablaze with gorgeous decoration, and the Chief of them unable to exist with fewer than two gold watches in his pocket, emulative of the noble and chaste fashion set by Monseigneur, to conduct the happy chocolate to Monseigneur’s lips. One lacquey carried the chocolate-pot into the sacred presence; a second, milled and frothed the chocolate with the little instrument he bore for that function; a third, presented the favoured napkin; a fourth (he of the two gold watches), poured the chocolate out. It was impossible for Monseigneur to dispense with one of these attendants on the chocolate and hold his high place under the admiring Heavens. Deep would have been the blot upon his escutcheon if his chocolate had been ignobly waited on by only three men; he must have died of two.

Monseigneur had been out at a little supper last night, where the Comedy and the Grand Opera were charmingly represented. Monseigneur was out at a little supper most nights, with fascinating company. So polite and so impressible was Monseigneur, that the Comedy and the Grand Opera had far more influence with him in the tiresome articles of state affairs and state secrets, than the needs of all France. A happy circumstance for France, as the like always is for all countries similarly favoured!--always was for England (by way of example), in the regretted days of the merry Stuart who sold it. Monseigneur had one truly noble idea of general public business, which was, to let everything go on in its own way; of particular public business, Monseigneur had the other truly noble idea that it must all go his way--tend to his own power and pocket. Of his pleasures, general and particular, Monseigneur had the other truly noble idea, that the world was made for them. The text of his order (altered from the original by only a pronoun, which is not much) ran: “The earth and the fulness thereof are mine, saith Monseigneur.”

Yet, Monseigneur had slowly found that vulgar embarrassments crept into his affairs, both private and public; and he had, as to both classes of affairs, allied himself perforce with a Farmer-General. As to finances public, because Monseigneur could not make anything at all of them, and must consequently let them out to somebody who could; as to finances private, because Farmer-Generals were rich, and Monseigneur, after generations of great luxury and expense, was growing poor. Hence Monseigneur had taken his sister from a convent, while there was yet time to ward off the impending veil, the cheapest garment she could wear, and had bestowed her as a prize upon a very rich Farmer-General, poor in family. Which Farmer-General, carrying an appropriate cane with a golden apple on the top of it, was now among the company in the outer rooms, much prostrated before by mankind--always excepting superior mankind of the blood of Monseigneur, who, his own wife included, looked down upon him with the loftiest contempt. A sumptuous man was the Farmer-General. Thirty horses stood in his stables, twenty-four male domestics sat in his halls, six body-women waited on his wife. As one who pretended to do nothing but plunder and forage where he could, the Farmer-General--howsoever his matrimonial relations conduced to social morality--was at least the greatest reality among the personages who attended at the hotel of Monseigneur that day.

The leprosy of unreality disfigured every human creature in attendance upon Monseigneur. In the outermost room were half a dozen exceptional people who had had, for a few years, some vague misgiving in them that things in general were going rather wrong. As a promising way of setting them right, half of the half-dozen had become members of a fantastic sect of Convulsionists, and were even then considering within themselves whether they should foam, rage, roar, and turn cataleptic on the spot--thereby setting up a highly intelligible finger-post to the Future, for Monseigneur’s guidance. Besides these Dervishes, were other three who had rushed into another sect, which mended matters with a jargon about “the Centre of Truth:” holding that Man had got out of the Centre of Truth--which did not need much demonstration--but had not got out of the Circumference, and that he was to be kept from flying out of the Circumference, and was even to be shoved back into the Centre, by fasting and seeing of spirits. Among these, accordingly, much discoursing with spirits went on--and it did a world of good which never became manifest.

But, the comfort was, that all the company at the grand hotel of Monseigneur were perfectly dressed. If the Day of Judgment had only been ascertained to be a dress day, everybody there would have been eternally correct. Such frizzling and powdering and sticking up of hair, such delicate complexions artificially preserved and mended, such gallant swords to look at, and such delicate honour to the sense of smell, would surely keep anything going, for ever and ever. The exquisite gentlemen of the finest breeding wore little pendent trinkets that chinked as they languidly moved; these golden fetters rang like precious little bells; and what with that ringing, and with the rustle of silk and brocade and fine linen, there was a flutter in the air that fanned Saint Antoine and his devouring hunger far away. Dress was the one unfailing talisman and charm used for keeping all things in their places. Everybody was dressed for a Fancy Ball that was never to leave off. From the Palace of the Tuileries, through Monseigneur and the whole Court, through the Chambers, the Tribunals of Justice, and all society (except the scarecrows), the Fancy Ball descended to the Common Executioner: who, in pursuance of the charm, was required to officiate “frizzled, powdered, in a gold-laced coat, pumps, and white silk stockings.” At the gallows and the wheel--the axe was a rarity--Monsieur Paris, as it was the episcopal mode among his brother Professors of the provinces, Monsieur Orleans, and the rest, to call him, presided in this dainty dress. And who among the company at Monseigneur’s reception in that seventeen hundred and eightieth year of our Lord, could possibly doubt, that a system rooted in a frizzled hangman, powdered, gold-laced, pumped, and white-silk stockinged, would see the very stars out!

Monseigneur having eased his four men of their burdens and taken his chocolate, caused the doors of the Holiest of Holiests to be thrown open, and issued forth. Then, what submission, what cringing and fawning, what servility, what abject humiliation! As to bowing down in body and spirit, nothing in that way was left for Heaven--which may have been one among other reasons why the worshippers of Monseigneur never troubled it. Bestowing a word of promise here and a smile there, a whisper on one happy slave and a wave of the hand on another, Monseigneur affably passed through his rooms to the remote region of the Circumference of Truth. There, Monseigneur turned, and came back again, and so in due course of time got himself shut up in his sanctuary by the chocolate sprites, and was seen no more. The show being over, the flutter in the air became quite a little storm, and the precious little bells went ringing downstairs. There was soon but one person left of all the crowd, and he, with his hat under his arm and his snuff-box in his hand, slowly passed among the mirrors on his way out.

He was a man of about sixty, handsomely dressed, haughty in manner, and with a face like a fine mask. A face of a transparent paleness; every feature in it clearly defined; one set expression on it. The nose, beautifully formed otherwise, was very slightly pinched at the top of each nostril. In those two compressions, or dints, the only little change that the face ever showed, resided. They persisted in changing colour sometimes, and they would be occasionally dilated and contracted by something like a faint pulsation; then, they gave a look of treachery, and cruelty, to the whole countenance. Examined with attention, its capacity of helping such a look was to be found in the line of the mouth, and the lines of the orbits of the eyes, being much too horizontal and thin; still, in the effect of the face made, it was a handsome face, and a remarkable one. Its owner went downstairs into the courtyard, got into his carriage, and drove away. Not many people had talked with him at the reception; he had stood in a little space apart, and Monseigneur might have been warmer in his manner. It appeared, under the circumstances, rather agreeable to him to see the common people dispersed before his horses, and often barely escaping from being run down. His man drove as if he were charging an enemy, and the furious recklessness of the man brought no check into the face, or to the lips, of the master. The complaint had sometimes made itself audible, even in that deaf city and dumb age, that, in the narrow streets without footways, the fierce patrician custom of hard driving endangered and maimed the mere vulgar in a barbarous manner. But, few cared enough for that to think of it a second time, and, in this matter, as in all others, the common wretches were left to get out of their difficulties as they could.

With a wild rattle and clatter, and an inhuman abandonment of consideration not easy to be understood in these days, the carriage dashed through streets and swept round corners, with women screaming before it, and men clutching each other and clutching children out of its way. At last, swooping at a street corner by a fountain, one of its wheels came to a sickening little jolt, and there was a loud cry from a number of voices, and the horses reared and plunged. But for the latter inconvenience, the carriage probably would not have stopped; carriages were often known to drive on, and leave their wounded behind, and why not? But the frightened valet had got down in a hurry, and there were twenty hands at the horses’ bridles. A tall man in a nightcap had caught up a bundle from among the feet of the horses, and had laid it on the basement of the fountain, and was down in the mud and wet, howling over it like a wild animal. The fountain was a little removed; for the street opened, where it was, into a space some ten or twelve yards square. As the tall man suddenly got up from the ground, and came running at the carriage, Monsieur the Marquis clapped his hand for an instant on his sword-hilt.

The people closed round, and looked at Monsieur the Marquis. There was nothing revealed by the many eyes that looked at him but watchfulness and eagerness; there was no visible menacing or anger. Neither did the people say anything; after the first cry, they had been silent, and they remained so. The voice of the submissive man who had spoken, was flat and tame in its extreme submission. Monsieur the Marquis ran his eyes over them all, as if they had been mere rats come out of their holes. “It is extraordinary to me,” said he, “that you people cannot take care of yourselves and your children. One or the other of you is for ever in the way. How do I know what injury you have done my horses. See! Give him that.” He threw out a gold coin for the valet to pick up, and all the heads craned forward that all the eyes might look down at it as it fell. The tall man called out again with a most unearthly cry, “Dead!” He was arrested by the quick arrival of another man, for whom the rest made way. On seeing him, the miserable creature fell upon his shoulder, sobbing and crying, and pointing to the fountain, where some women were stooping over the motionless bundle, and moving gently about it. They were as silent, however, as the men.

“I know all, I know all,” said the last comer. “Be a brave man, my Gaspard! It is better for the poor little plaything to die so, than to live. It has died in a moment without pain. Could it have lived an hour as happily?” “Pick up that, philosopher and vendor of wine,” said the Marquis, throwing him another gold coin, “and spend it as you will. The horses there; are they right?” Without deigning to look at the assemblage a second time, Monsieur the Marquis leaned back in his seat, and was just being driven away with the air of a gentleman who had accidentally broke some common thing, and had paid for it, and could afford to pay for it; when his ease was suddenly disturbed by a coin flying into his carriage, and ringing on its floor. He looked to the spot where Defarge the vendor of wine had stood, a moment before; but the wretched father was grovelling on his face on the pavement in that spot, and the figure that stood beside him was the figure of a dark stout woman, knitting.

“You dogs!” said the Marquis, but smoothly, and with an unchanged front, except as to the spots on his nose: “I would ride over any of you very willingly, and exterminate you from the earth. If I knew which rascal threw at the carriage, and if that brigand were sufficiently near it, he should be crushed under the wheels.” So cowed was their condition, and so long and hard their experience of what such a man could do to them, within the law and beyond it, that not a voice, or a hand, or even an eye was raised. Among the men, not one. But the woman who stood knitting looked up steadily, and looked the Marquis in the face. It was not for his dignity to notice it; his contemptuous eyes passed over her, and over all the other rats; and he leaned back in his seat again, and gave the word “Go on!” He was driven on, and other carriages came whirling by in quick succession; the Minister, the State-Projector, the Farmer-General, the Doctor, the Lawyer, the Ecclesiastic, the Grand Opera, the Comedy, the whole Fancy Ball in a bright continuous flow, came whirling by. The rats had crept out of their holes to look on, and they remained looking on for hours; soldiers and police often passing between them and the spectacle, and making a barrier behind which they slunk, and through which they peeped. The father had long ago taken up his bundle and bidden himself away with it, when the women who had tended the bundle while it lay on the base of the fountain, sat there watching the running of the water and the rolling of the Fancy Ball--when the one woman who had stood conspicuous, knitting, still knitted on with the steadfastness of Fate. The water of the fountain ran, the swift river ran, the day ran into evening, so much life in the city ran into death according to rule, time and tide waited for no man, the rats were sleeping close together in their dark holes again, the Fancy Ball was lighted up at supper, all things ran their course.

A beautiful landscape, with the corn bright in it, but not abundant. Patches of poor rye where corn should have been, patches of poor peas and beans, patches of most coarse vegetable substitutes for wheat. On inanimate nature, as on the men and women who cultivated it, a prevalent tendency towards an appearance of vegetating unwillingly--a dejected disposition to give up, and wither away. Monsieur the Marquis in his travelling carriage (which might have been lighter), conducted by four post-horses and two postilions, fagged up a steep hill. A blush on the countenance of Monsieur the Marquis was no impeachment of his high breeding; it was not from within; it was occasioned by an external circumstance beyond his control--the setting sun. The sunset struck so brilliantly into the travelling carriage when it gained the hill-top, that its occupant was steeped in crimson. “It will die out,” said Monsieur the Marquis, glancing at his hands, “directly.” In effect, the sun was so low that it dipped at the moment. When the heavy drag had been adjusted to the wheel, and the carriage slid down hill, with a cinderous smell, in a cloud of dust, the red glow departed quickly; the sun and the Marquis going down together, there was no glow left when the drag was taken off.

But, there remained a broken country, bold and open, a little village at the bottom of the hill, a broad sweep and rise beyond it, a church-tower, a windmill, a forest for the chase, and a crag with a fortress on it used as a prison. Round upon all these darkening objects as the night drew on, the Marquis looked, with the air of one who was coming near home. The village had its one poor street, with its poor brewery, poor tannery, poor tavern, poor stable-yard for relays of post-horses, poor fountain, all usual poor appointments. It had its poor people too. All its people were poor, and many of them were sitting at their doors, shredding spare onions and the like for supper, while many were at the fountain, washing leaves, and grasses, and any such small yieldings of the earth that could be eaten. Expressive signs of what made them poor, were not wanting; the tax for the state, the tax for the church, the tax for the lord, tax local and tax general, were to be paid here and to be paid there, according to solemn inscription in the little village, until the wonder was, that there was any village left unswallowed.

Few children were to be seen, and no dogs. As to the men and women, their choice on earth was stated in the prospect--Life on the lowest terms that could sustain it, down in the little village under the mill; or captivity and Death in the dominant prison on the crag. Heralded by a courier in advance, and by the cracking of his postilions’ whips, which twined snake-like about their heads in the evening air, as if he came attended by the Furies, Monsieur the Marquis drew up in his travelling carriage at the posting-house gate. It was hard by the fountain, and the peasants suspended their operations to look at him. He looked at them, and saw in them, without knowing it, the slow sure filing down of misery-worn face and figure, that was to make the meagreness of Frenchmen an English superstition which should survive the truth through the best part of a hundred years. Monsieur the Marquis cast his eyes over the submissive faces that drooped before him, as the like of himself had drooped before Monseigneur of the Court--only the difference was, that these faces drooped merely to suffer and not to propitiate--when a grizzled mender of the roads joined the group.

He turned himself sideways to the carriage, and leaned back, with his face thrown up to the sky, and his head hanging down; then recovered himself, fumbled with his cap, and made a bow. The picture produced an immense sensation in the little crowd; but all eyes, without comparing notes with other eyes, looked at Monsieur the Marquis. Perhaps, to observe whether he had any spectre on his conscience. “Truly, you did well,” said the Marquis, felicitously sensible that such vermin were not to ruffle him, “to see a thief accompanying my carriage, and not open that great mouth of yours. Bah! Put him aside, Monsieur Gabelle!” Monsieur Gabelle was the Postmaster, and some other taxing functionary united; he had come out with great obsequiousness to assist at this examination, and had held the examined by the drapery of his arm in an official manner. The accursed was already under the carriage with some half-dozen particular friends, pointing out the chain with his blue cap. Some half-dozen other particular friends promptly hauled him out, and presented him breathless to Monsieur the Marquis.

The half-dozen who were peering at the chain were still among the wheels, like sheep; the wheels turned so suddenly that they were lucky to save their skins and bones; they had very little else to save, or they might not have been so fortunate. The burst with which the carriage started out of the village and up the rise beyond, was soon checked by the steepness of the hill. Gradually, it subsided to a foot pace, swinging and lumbering upward among the many sweet scents of a summer night. The postilions, with a thousand gossamer gnats circling about them in lieu of the Furies, quietly mended the points to the lashes of their whips; the valet walked by the horses; the courier was audible, trotting on ahead into the dull distance. At the steepest point of the hill there was a little burial-ground, with a Cross and a new large figure of Our Saviour on it; it was a poor figure in wood, done by some inexperienced rustic carver, but he had studied the figure from the life--his own life, maybe--for it was dreadfully spare and thin.

To this distressful emblem of a great distress that had long been growing worse, and was not at its worst, a woman was kneeling. She turned her head as the carriage came up to her, rose quickly, and presented herself at the carriage-door. She looked an old woman, but was young. Her manner was one of passionate grief; by turns she clasped her veinous and knotted hands together with wild energy, and laid one of them on the carriage-door--tenderly, caressingly, as if it had been a human breast, and could be expected to feel the appealing touch. “Monseigneur, the good God knows; but I don’t ask it. My petition is, that a morsel of stone or wood, with my husband’s name, may be placed over him to show where he lies. Otherwise, the place will be quickly forgotten, it will never be found when I am dead of the same malady, I shall be laid under some other heap of poor grass. Monseigneur, they are so many, they increase so fast, there is so much want. Monseigneur! Monseigneur!” The valet had put her away from the door, the carriage had broken into a brisk trot, the postilions had quickened the pace, she was left far behind, and Monseigneur, again escorted by the Furies, was rapidly diminishing the league or two of distance that remained between him and his chateau.

The sweet scents of the summer night rose all around him, and rose, as the rain falls, impartially, on the dusty, ragged, and toil-worn group at the fountain not far away; to whom the mender of roads, with the aid of the blue cap without which he was nothing, still enlarged upon his man like a spectre, as long as they could bear it. By degrees, as they could bear no more, they dropped off one by one, and lights twinkled in little casements; which lights, as the casements darkened, and more stars came out, seemed to have shot up into the sky instead of having been extinguished. The shadow of a large high-roofed house, and of many over-hanging trees, was upon Monsieur the Marquis by that time; and the shadow was exchanged for the light of a flambeau, as his carriage stopped, and the great door of his chateau was opened to him. It was a heavy mass of building, that chateau of Monsieur the Marquis, with a large stone courtyard before it, and two stone sweeps of staircase meeting in a stone terrace before the principal door. A stony business altogether, with heavy stone balustrades, and stone urns, and stone flowers, and stone faces of men, and stone heads of lions, in all directions. As if the Gorgon’s head had surveyed it, when it was finished, two centuries ago.

Up the broad flight of shallow steps, Monsieur the Marquis, flambeau preceded, went from his carriage, sufficiently disturbing the darkness to elicit loud remonstrance from an owl in the roof of the great pile of stable building away among the trees. All else was so quiet, that the flambeau carried up the steps, and the other flambeau held at the great door, burnt as if they were in a close room of state, instead of being in the open night-air. Other sound than the owl’s voice there was none, save the falling of a fountain into its stone basin; for, it was one of those dark nights that hold their breath by the hour together, and then heave a long low sigh, and hold their breath again. The great door clanged behind him, and Monsieur the Marquis crossed a hall grim with certain old boar-spears, swords, and knives of the chase; grimmer with certain heavy riding-rods and riding-whips, of which many a peasant, gone to his benefactor Death, had felt the weight when his lord was angry. Avoiding the larger rooms, which were dark and made fast for the night, Monsieur the Marquis, with his flambeau-bearer going on before, went up the staircase to a door in a corridor. This thrown open, admitted him to his own private apartment of three rooms: his bed-chamber and two others. High vaulted rooms with cool uncarpeted floors, great dogs upon the hearths for the burning of wood in winter time, and all luxuries befitting the state of a marquis in a luxurious age and country. The fashion of the last Louis but one, of the line that was never to break--the fourteenth Louis--was conspicuous in their rich furniture; but, it was diversified by many objects that were illustrations of old pages in the history of France.

A supper-table was laid for two, in the third of the rooms; a round room, in one of the chateau’s four extinguisher-topped towers. A small lofty room, with its window wide open, and the wooden jalousie-blinds closed, so that the dark night only showed in slight horizontal lines of black, alternating with their broad lines of stone colour. In a quarter of an hour Monseigneur was ready, and sat down alone to his sumptuous and choice supper. His chair was opposite to the window, and he had taken his soup, and was raising his glass of Bordeaux to his lips, when he put it down. The servant who spoke, had thrown the blinds wide, had looked out into the vacant darkness, and stood with that blank behind him, looking round for instructions. That was done too, and the Marquis went on with his supper. He was half way through it, when he again stopped with his glass in his hand, hearing the sound of wheels. It came on briskly, and came up to the front of the chateau. It was the nephew of Monseigneur. He had been some few leagues behind Monseigneur, early in the afternoon. He had diminished the distance rapidly, but not so rapidly as to come up with Monseigneur on the road. He had heard of Monseigneur, at the posting-houses, as being before him.

He was to be told (said Monseigneur) that supper awaited him then and there, and that he was prayed to come to it. In a little while he came. He had been known in England as Charles Darnay. So long as a servant was present, no other words passed between them. When coffee had been served and they were alone together, the nephew, looking at the uncle and meeting the eyes of the face that was like a fine mask, opened a conversation. “I have come back, sir, as you anticipate, pursuing the object that took me away. It carried me into great and unexpected peril; but it is a sacred object, and if it had carried me to death I hope it would have sustained me.” The deepened marks in the nose, and the lengthening of the fine straight lines in the cruel face, looked ominous as to that; the uncle made a graceful gesture of protest, which was so clearly a slight form of good breeding that it was not reassuring. “Indeed, sir,” pursued the nephew, “for anything I know, you may have expressly worked to give a more suspicious appearance to the suspicious circumstances that surrounded me.”

“But, however that may be,” resumed the nephew, glancing at him with deep distrust, “I know that your diplomacy would stop me by any means, and would know no scruple as to means.” “In effect, sir,” pursued the nephew, “I believe it to be at once your bad fortune, and my good fortune, that has kept me out of a prison in France here.” “I believe that if you were not in disgrace with the Court, and had not been overshadowed by that cloud for years past, a letter de cachet would have sent me to some fortress indefinitely.” “It is possible,” said the uncle, with great calmness. “For the honour of the family, I could even resolve to incommode you to that extent. Pray excuse me!” “I would not say happily, my friend,” returned the uncle, with refined politeness; “I would not be sure of that. A good opportunity for consideration, surrounded by the advantages of solitude, might influence your destiny to far greater advantage than you influence it for yourself. But it is useless to discuss the question. I am, as you say, at a disadvantage. These little instruments of correction, these gentle aids to the power and honour of families, these slight favours that might so incommode you, are only to be obtained now by interest and importunity. They are sought by so many, and they are granted (comparatively) to so few! It used not to be so, but France in all such things is changed for the worse. Our not remote ancestors held the right of life and death over the surrounding vulgar. From this room, many such dogs have been taken out to be hanged; in the next room (my bedroom), one fellow, to our knowledge, was poniarded on the spot for professing some insolent delicacy respecting his daughter--_his_ daughter? We have lost many privileges; a new philosophy has become the mode; and the assertion of our station, in these days, might (I do not go so far as to say would, but might) cause us real inconvenience. All very bad, very bad!”

The Marquis took a gentle little pinch of snuff, and shook his head; as elegantly despondent as he could becomingly be of a country still containing himself, that great means of regeneration. “We have so asserted our station, both in the old time and in the modern time also,” said the nephew, gloomily, “that I believe our name to be more detested than any name in France.” “There is not,” pursued the nephew, in his former tone, “a face I can look at, in all this country round about us, which looks at me with any deference on it but the dark deference of fear and slavery.” “A compliment,” said the Marquis, “to the grandeur of the family, merited by the manner in which the family has sustained its grandeur. Hah!” And he took another gentle little pinch of snuff, and lightly crossed his legs. But, when his nephew, leaning an elbow on the table, covered his eyes thoughtfully and dejectedly with his hand, the fine mask looked at him sideways with a stronger concentration of keenness, closeness, and dislike, than was comportable with its wearer’s assumption of indifference.

“Repression is the only lasting philosophy. The dark deference of fear and slavery, my friend,” observed the Marquis, “will keep the dogs obedient to the whip, as long as this roof,” looking up to it, “shuts out the sky.” That might not be so long as the Marquis supposed. If a picture of the chateau as it was to be a very few years hence, and of fifty like it as they too were to be a very few years hence, could have been shown to him that night, he might have been at a loss to claim his own from the ghastly, fire-charred, plunder-wrecked rains. As for the roof he vaunted, he might have found _that_ shutting out the sky in a new way--to wit, for ever, from the eyes of the bodies into which its lead was fired, out of the barrels of a hundred thousand muskets. “Meanwhile,” said the Marquis, “I will preserve the honour and repose of the family, if you will not. But you must be fatigued. Shall we terminate our conference for the night?”

“Our family; our honourable family, whose honour is of so much account to both of us, in such different ways. Even in my father’s time, we did a world of wrong, injuring every human creature who came between us and our pleasure, whatever it was. Why need I speak of my father’s time, when it is equally yours? Can I separate my father’s twin-brother, joint inheritor, and next successor, from himself?” “And has left me,” answered the nephew, “bound to a system that is frightful to me, responsible for it, but powerless in it; seeking to execute the last request of my dear mother’s lips, and obey the last look of my dear mother’s eyes, which implored me to have mercy and to redress; and tortured by seeking assistance and power in vain.” “Seeking them from me, my nephew,” said the Marquis, touching him on the breast with his forefinger--they were now standing by the hearth--“you will for ever seek them in vain, be assured.” Every fine straight line in the clear whiteness of his face, was cruelly, craftily, and closely compressed, while he stood looking quietly at his nephew, with his snuff-box in his hand. Once again he touched him on the breast, as though his finger were the fine point of a small sword, with which, in delicate finesse, he ran him through the body, and said,

“Better to be a rational creature,” he added then, after ringing a small bell on the table, “and accept your natural destiny. But you are lost, Monsieur Charles, I see.” “To the eye it is fair enough, here; but seen in its integrity, under the sky, and by the daylight, it is a crumbling tower of waste, mismanagement, extortion, debt, mortgage, oppression, hunger, nakedness, and suffering.” “If it ever becomes mine, it shall be put into some hands better qualified to free it slowly (if such a thing is possible) from the weight that drags it down, so that the miserable people who cannot leave it and who have been long wrung to the last point of endurance, may, in another generation, suffer less; but it is not for me. There is a curse on it, and on all this land.” The ringing of the bell had caused the adjoining bed-chamber to be lighted. It now shone brightly, through the door of communication. The Marquis looked that way, and listened for the retreating step of his valet. “England is very attractive to you, seeing how indifferently you have prospered there,” he observed then, turning his calm face to his nephew with a smile.

As he bent his head in his most courtly manner, there was a secrecy in his smiling face, and he conveyed an air of mystery to those words, which struck the eyes and ears of his nephew forcibly. At the same time, the thin straight lines of the setting of the eyes, and the thin straight lips, and the markings in the nose, curved with a sarcasm that looked handsomely diabolic. It would have been of as much avail to interrogate any stone face outside the chateau as to interrogate that face of his. The nephew looked at him, in vain, in passing on to the door. “Good night!” said the uncle. “I look to the pleasure of seeing you again in the morning. Good repose! Light Monsieur my nephew to his chamber there!--And burn Monsieur my nephew in his bed, if you will,” he added to himself, before he rang his little bell again, and summoned his valet to his own bedroom. The valet come and gone, Monsieur the Marquis walked to and fro in his loose chamber-robe, to prepare himself gently for sleep, that hot still night. Rustling about the room, his softly-slippered feet making no noise on the floor, he moved like a refined tiger:--looked like some enchanted marquis of the impenitently wicked sort, in story, whose periodical change into tiger form was either just going off, or just coming on.

He moved from end to end of his voluptuous bedroom, looking again at the scraps of the day’s journey that came unbidden into his mind; the slow toil up the hill at sunset, the setting sun, the descent, the mill, the prison on the crag, the little village in the hollow, the peasants at the fountain, and the mender of roads with his blue cap pointing out the chain under the carriage. That fountain suggested the Paris fountain, the little bundle lying on the step, the women bending over it, and the tall man with his arms up, crying, “Dead!” So, leaving only one light burning on the large hearth, he let his thin gauze curtains fall around him, and heard the night break its silence with a long sigh as he composed himself to sleep. The stone faces on the outer walls stared blindly at the black night for three heavy hours; for three heavy hours, the horses in the stables rattled at their racks, the dogs barked, and the owl made a noise with very little resemblance in it to the noise conventionally assigned to the owl by men-poets. But it is the obstinate custom of such creatures hardly ever to say what is set down for them.

For three heavy hours, the stone faces of the chateau, lion and human, stared blindly at the night. Dead darkness lay on all the landscape, dead darkness added its own hush to the hushing dust on all the roads. The burial-place had got to the pass that its little heaps of poor grass were undistinguishable from one another; the figure on the Cross might have come down, for anything that could be seen of it. In the village, taxers and taxed were fast asleep. Dreaming, perhaps, of banquets, as the starved usually do, and of ease and rest, as the driven slave and the yoked ox may, its lean inhabitants slept soundly, and were fed and freed. The fountain in the village flowed unseen and unheard, and the fountain at the chateau dropped unseen and unheard--both melting away, like the minutes that were falling from the spring of Time--through three dark hours. Then, the grey water of both began to be ghostly in the light, and the eyes of the stone faces of the chateau were opened. Lighter and lighter, until at last the sun touched the tops of the still trees, and poured its radiance over the hill. In the glow, the water of the chateau fountain seemed to turn to blood, and the stone faces crimsoned. The carol of the birds was loud and high, and, on the weather-beaten sill of the great window of the bed-chamber of Monsieur the Marquis, one little bird sang its sweetest song with all its might. At this, the nearest stone face seemed to stare amazed, and, with open mouth and dropped under-jaw, looked awe-stricken.

Now, the sun was full up, and movement began in the village. Casement windows opened, crazy doors were unbarred, and people came forth shivering--chilled, as yet, by the new sweet air. Then began the rarely lightened toil of the day among the village population. Some, to the fountain; some, to the fields; men and women here, to dig and delve; men and women there, to see to the poor live stock, and lead the bony cows out, to such pasture as could be found by the roadside. In the church and at the Cross, a kneeling figure or two; attendant on the latter prayers, the led cow, trying for a breakfast among the weeds at its foot. The chateau awoke later, as became its quality, but awoke gradually and surely. First, the lonely boar-spears and knives of the chase had been reddened as of old; then, had gleamed trenchant in the morning sunshine; now, doors and windows were thrown open, horses in their stables looked round over their shoulders at the light and freshness pouring in at doorways, leaves sparkled and rustled at iron-grated windows, dogs pulled hard at their chains, and reared impatient to be loosed.

All these trivial incidents belonged to the routine of life, and the return of morning. Surely, not so the ringing of the great bell of the chateau, nor the running up and down the stairs; nor the hurried figures on the terrace; nor the booting and tramping here and there and everywhere, nor the quick saddling of horses and riding away? What winds conveyed this hurry to the grizzled mender of roads, already at work on the hill-top beyond the village, with his day’s dinner (not much to carry) lying in a bundle that it was worth no crow’s while to peck at, on a heap of stones? Had the birds, carrying some grains of it to a distance, dropped one over him as they sow chance seeds? Whether or no, the mender of roads ran, on the sultry morning, as if for his life, down the hill, knee-high in dust, and never stopped till he got to the fountain. All the people of the village were at the fountain, standing about in their depressed manner, and whispering low, but showing no other emotions than grim curiosity and surprise. The led cows, hastily brought in and tethered to anything that would hold them, were looking stupidly on, or lying down chewing the cud of nothing particularly repaying their trouble, which they had picked up in their interrupted saunter. Some of the people of the chateau, and some of those of the posting-house, and all the taxing authorities, were armed more or less, and were crowded on the other side of the little street in a purposeless way, that was highly fraught with nothing. Already, the mender of roads had penetrated into the midst of a group of fifty particular friends, and was smiting himself in the breast with his blue cap. What did all this portend, and what portended the swift hoisting-up of Monsieur Gabelle behind a servant on horseback, and the conveying away of the said Gabelle (double-laden though the horse was), at a gallop, like a new version of the German ballad of Leonora?

The Gorgon had surveyed the building again in the night, and had added the one stone face wanting; the stone face for which it had waited through about two hundred years. It lay back on the pillow of Monsieur the Marquis. It was like a fine mask, suddenly startled, made angry, and petrified. Driven home into the heart of the stone figure attached to it, was a knife. Round its hilt was a frill of paper, on which was scrawled: More months, to the number of twelve, had come and gone, and Mr. Charles Darnay was established in England as a higher teacher of the French language who was conversant with French literature. In this age, he would have been a Professor; in that age, he was a Tutor. He read with young men who could find any leisure and interest for the study of a living tongue spoken all over the world, and he cultivated a taste for its stores of knowledge and fancy. He could write of them, besides, in sound English, and render them into sound English. Such masters were not at that time easily found; Princes that had been, and Kings that were to be, were not yet of the Teacher class, and no ruined nobility had dropped out of Tellson’s ledgers, to turn cooks and carpenters. As a tutor, whose attainments made the student’s way unusually pleasant and profitable, and as an elegant translator who brought something to his work besides mere dictionary knowledge, young Mr. Darnay soon became known and encouraged. He was well acquainted, more-over, with the circumstances of his country, and those were of ever-growing interest. So, with great perseverance and untiring industry, he prospered.

In London, he had expected neither to walk on pavements of gold, nor to lie on beds of roses; if he had had any such exalted expectation, he would not have prospered. He had expected labour, and he found it, and did it and made the best of it. In this, his prosperity consisted. A certain portion of his time was passed at Cambridge, where he read with undergraduates as a sort of tolerated smuggler who drove a contraband trade in European languages, instead of conveying Greek and Latin through the Custom-house. The rest of his time he passed in London. Now, from the days when it was always summer in Eden, to these days when it is mostly winter in fallen latitudes, the world of a man has invariably gone one way--Charles Darnay’s way--the way of the love of a woman. He had loved Lucie Manette from the hour of his danger. He had never heard a sound so sweet and dear as the sound of her compassionate voice; he had never seen a face so tenderly beautiful, as hers when it was confronted with his own on the edge of the grave that had been dug for him. But, he had not yet spoken to her on the subject; the assassination at the deserted chateau far away beyond the heaving water and the long, long, dusty roads--the solid stone chateau which had itself become the mere mist of a dream--had been done a year, and he had never yet, by so much as a single spoken word, disclosed to her the state of his heart.

That he had his reasons for this, he knew full well. It was again a summer day when, lately arrived in London from his college occupation, he turned into the quiet corner in Soho, bent on seeking an opportunity of opening his mind to Doctor Manette. It was the close of the summer day, and he knew Lucie to be out with Miss Pross. He found the Doctor reading in his arm-chair at a window. The energy which had at once supported him under his old sufferings and aggravated their sharpness, had been gradually restored to him. He was now a very energetic man indeed, with great firmness of purpose, strength of resolution, and vigour of action. In his recovered energy he was sometimes a little fitful and sudden, as he had at first been in the exercise of his other recovered faculties; but, this had never been frequently observable, and had grown more and more rare. He studied much, slept little, sustained a great deal of fatigue with ease, and was equably cheerful. To him, now entered Charles Darnay, at sight of whom he laid aside his book and held out his hand.

“Charles Darnay! I rejoice to see you. We have been counting on your return these three or four days past. Mr. Stryver and Sydney Carton were both here yesterday, and both made you out to be more than due.” “I am obliged to them for their interest in the matter,” he answered, a little coldly as to them, though very warmly as to the Doctor. “Miss Manette--” “Is well,” said the Doctor, as he stopped short, “and your return will delight us all. She has gone out on some household matters, but will soon be home.” “I have had the happiness, Doctor Manette, of being so intimate here,” so he at length began, “for some year and a half, that I hope the topic on which I am about to touch may not--” His constraint was so manifest, and it was so manifest, too, that it originated in an unwillingness to approach the subject, that Charles Darnay hesitated. “You anticipate what I would say, though you cannot know how earnestly I say it, how earnestly I feel it, without knowing my secret heart, and the hopes and fears and anxieties with which it has long been laden. Dear Doctor Manette, I love your daughter fondly, dearly, disinterestedly, devotedly. If ever there were love in the world, I love her. You have loved yourself; let your old love speak for me!”

His cry was so like a cry of actual pain, that it rang in Charles Darnay’s ears long after he had ceased. He motioned with the hand he had extended, and it seemed to be an appeal to Darnay to pause. The latter so received it, and remained silent. He turned towards him in his chair, but did not look at him, or raise his eyes. His chin dropped upon his hand, and his white hair overshadowed his face: “I know,” said Darnay, respectfully, “how can I fail to know, Doctor Manette, I who have seen you together from day to day, that between you and Miss Manette there is an affection so unusual, so touching, so belonging to the circumstances in which it has been nurtured, that it can have few parallels, even in the tenderness between a father and child. I know, Doctor Manette--how can I fail to know--that, mingled with the affection and duty of a daughter who has become a woman, there is, in her heart, towards you, all the love and reliance of infancy itself. I know that, as in her childhood she had no parent, so she is now devoted to you with all the constancy and fervour of her present years and character, united to the trustfulness and attachment of the early days in which you were lost to her. I know perfectly well that if you had been restored to her from the world beyond this life, you could hardly be invested, in her sight, with a more sacred character than that in which you are always with her. I know that when she is clinging to you, the hands of baby, girl, and woman, all in one, are round your neck. I know that in loving you she sees and loves her mother at her own age, sees and loves you at my age, loves her mother broken-hearted, loves you through your dreadful trial and in your blessed restoration. I have known this, night and day, since I have known you in your home.”

“Dear Doctor Manette, always knowing this, always seeing her and you with this hallowed light about you, I have forborne, and forborne, as long as it was in the nature of man to do it. I have felt, and do even now feel, that to bring my love--even mine--between you, is to touch your history with something not quite so good as itself. But I love her. Heaven is my witness that I love her!” “But, do not believe,” said Darnay, upon whose ear the mournful voice struck with a reproachful sound, “that if my fortune were so cast as that, being one day so happy as to make her my wife, I must at any time put any separation between her and you, I could or would breathe a word of what I now say. Besides that I should know it to be hopeless, I should know it to be a baseness. If I had any such possibility, even at a remote distance of years, harboured in my thoughts, and hidden in my heart--if it ever had been there--if it ever could be there--I could not now touch this honoured hand.”

“No, dear Doctor Manette. Like you, a voluntary exile from France; like you, driven from it by its distractions, oppressions, and miseries; like you, striving to live away from it by my own exertions, and trusting in a happier future; I look only to sharing your fortunes, sharing your life and home, and being faithful to you to the death. Not to divide with Lucie her privilege as your child, companion, and friend; but to come in aid of it, and bind her closer to you, if such a thing can be.” His touch still lingered on her father’s hand. Answering the touch for a moment, but not coldly, her father rested his hands upon the arms of his chair, and looked up for the first time since the beginning of the conference. A struggle was evidently in his face; a struggle with that occasional look which had a tendency in it to dark doubt and dread. “You speak so feelingly and so manfully, Charles Darnay, that I thank you with all my heart, and will open all my heart--or nearly so. Have you any reason to believe that Lucie loves you?”

“I well understand that, without you, I could have no hope. I well understand that, even if Miss Manette held me at this moment in her innocent heart--do not think I have the presumption to assume so much--I could retain no place in it against her love for her father.” “I understand equally well, that a word from her father in any suitor’s favour, would outweigh herself and all the world. For which reason, Doctor Manette,” said Darnay, modestly but firmly, “I would not ask that word, to save my life.” “I am sure of it. Charles Darnay, mysteries arise out of close love, as well as out of wide division; in the former case, they are subtle and delicate, and difficult to penetrate. My daughter Lucie is, in this one respect, such a mystery to me; I can make no guess at the state of her heart.” “It is, that if Miss Manette should bring to you at any time, on her own part, such a confidence as I have ventured to lay before you, you will bear testimony to what I have said, and to your belief in it. I hope you may be able to think so well of me, as to urge no influence against me. I say nothing more of my stake in this; this is what I ask. The condition on which I ask it, and which you have an undoubted right to require, I will observe immediately.”

“I give the promise,” said the Doctor, “without any condition. I believe your object to be, purely and truthfully, as you have stated it. I believe your intention is to perpetuate, and not to weaken, the ties between me and my other and far dearer self. If she should ever tell me that you are essential to her perfect happiness, I will give her to you. If there were--Charles Darnay, if there were--” “--any fancies, any reasons, any apprehensions, anything whatsoever, new or old, against the man she really loved--the direct responsibility thereof not lying on his head--they should all be obliterated for her sake. She is everything to me; more to me than suffering, more to me than wrong, more to me--Well! This is idle talk.” So strange was the way in which he faded into silence, and so strange his fixed look when he had ceased to speak, that Darnay felt his own hand turn cold in the hand that slowly released and dropped it. “Your confidence in me ought to be returned with full confidence on my part. My present name, though but slightly changed from my mother’s, is not, as you will remember, my own. I wish to tell you what that is, and why I am in England.”

It was dark when Charles Darnay left him, and it was an hour later and darker when Lucie came home; she hurried into the room alone--for Miss Pross had gone straight up-stairs--and was surprised to find his reading-chair empty. Nothing was said in answer, but she heard a low hammering sound in his bedroom. Passing lightly across the intermediate room, she looked in at his door and came running back frightened, crying to herself, with her blood all chilled, “What shall I do! What shall I do!” Her uncertainty lasted but a moment; she hurried back, and tapped at his door, and softly called to him. The noise ceased at the sound of her voice, and he presently came out to her, and they walked up and down together for a long time. She came down from her bed, to look at him in his sleep that night. He slept heavily, and his tray of shoemaking tools, and his old unfinished work, were all as usual. Sydney had been working double tides that night, and the night before, and the night before that, and a good many nights in succession, making a grand clearance among Mr. Stryver’s papers before the setting in of the long vacation. The clearance was effected at last; the Stryver arrears were handsomely fetched up; everything was got rid of until November should come with its fogs atmospheric, and fogs legal, and bring grist to the mill again.

Sydney was none the livelier and none the soberer for so much application. It had taken a deal of extra wet-towelling to pull him through the night; a correspondingly extra quantity of wine had preceded the towelling; and he was in a very damaged condition, as he now pulled his turban off and threw it into the basin in which he had steeped it at intervals for the last six hours. “Are you mixing that other bowl of punch?” said Stryver the portly, with his hands in his waistband, glancing round from the sofa where he lay on his back. “Now, look here! I am going to tell you something that will rather surprise you, and that perhaps will make you think me not quite as shrewd as you usually do think me. I intend to marry.” “I am not going to guess, at five o’clock in the morning, with my brains frying and sputtering in my head. If you want me to guess, you must ask me to dinner.” “Well then, I’ll tell you,” said Stryver, coming slowly into a sitting posture. “Sydney, I rather despair of making myself intelligible to you, because you are such an insensible dog.”

“Come!” rejoined Stryver, laughing boastfully, “though I don’t prefer any claim to being the soul of Romance (for I hope I know better), still I am a tenderer sort of fellow than _you_.” “Well! I’ll say gallantry. My meaning is that I am a man,” said Stryver, inflating himself at his friend as he made the punch, “who cares more to be agreeable, who takes more pains to be agreeable, who knows better how to be agreeable, in a woman’s society, than you do.” “No; but before I go on,” said Stryver, shaking his head in his bullying way, “I’ll have this out with you. You’ve been at Doctor Manette’s house as much as I have, or more than I have. Why, I have been ashamed of your moroseness there! Your manners have been of that silent and sullen and hangdog kind, that, upon my life and soul, I have been ashamed of you, Sydney!” “It should be very beneficial to a man in your practice at the bar, to be ashamed of anything,” returned Sydney; “you ought to be much obliged to me.”

“You shall not get off in that way,” rejoined Stryver, shouldering the rejoinder at him; “no, Sydney, it’s my duty to tell you--and I tell you to your face to do you good--that you are a devilish ill-conditioned fellow in that sort of society. You are a disagreeable fellow.” “Look at me!” said Stryver, squaring himself; “I have less need to make myself agreeable than you have, being more independent in circumstances. Why do I do it?” “You don’t get on with your account of your matrimonial intentions,” answered Carton, with a careless air; “I wish you would keep to that. As to me--will you never understand that I am incorrigible?” “Now, don’t let my announcement of the name make you uncomfortable, Sydney,” said Mr. Stryver, preparing him with ostentatious friendliness for the disclosure he was about to make, “because I know you don’t mean half you say; and if you meant it all, it would be of no importance. I make this little preface, because you once mentioned the young lady to me in slighting terms.” “You made mention of the young lady as a golden-haired doll. The young lady is Miss Manette. If you had been a fellow of any sensitiveness or delicacy of feeling in that kind of way, Sydney, I might have been a little resentful of your employing such a designation; but you are not. You want that sense altogether; therefore I am no more annoyed when I think of the expression, than I should be annoyed by a man’s opinion of a picture of mine, who had no eye for pictures: or of a piece of music of mine, who had no ear for music.”

“Now you know all about it, Syd,” said Mr. Stryver. “I don’t care about fortune: she is a charming creature, and I have made up my mind to please myself: on the whole, I think I can afford to please myself. She will have in me a man already pretty well off, and a rapidly rising man, and a man of some distinction: it is a piece of good fortune for her, but she is worthy of good fortune. Are you astonished?” “Well!” said his friend Stryver, “you take it more easily than I fancied you would, and are less mercenary on my behalf than I thought you would be; though, to be sure, you know well enough by this time that your ancient chum is a man of a pretty strong will. Yes, Sydney, I have had enough of this style of life, with no other as a change from it; I feel that it is a pleasant thing for a man to have a home when he feels inclined to go to it (when he doesn’t, he can stay away), and I feel that Miss Manette will tell well in any station, and will always do me credit. So I have made up my mind. And now, Sydney, old boy, I want to say a word to _you_ about _your_ prospects. You are in a bad way, you know; you really are in a bad way. You don’t know the value of money, you live hard, you’ll knock up one of these days, and be ill and poor; you really ought to think about a nurse.”

“Now, let me recommend you,” pursued Stryver, “to look it in the face. I have looked it in the face, in my different way; look it in the face, you, in your different way. Marry. Provide somebody to take care of you. Never mind your having no enjoyment of women’s society, nor understanding of it, nor tact for it. Find out somebody. Find out some respectable woman with a little property--somebody in the landlady way, or lodging-letting way--and marry her, against a rainy day. That’s the kind of thing for _you_. Now think of it, Sydney.” Mr. Stryver having made up his mind to that magnanimous bestowal of good fortune on the Doctor’s daughter, resolved to make her happiness known to her before he left town for the Long Vacation. After some mental debating of the point, he came to the conclusion that it would be as well to get all the preliminaries done with, and they could then arrange at their leisure whether he should give her his hand a week or two before Michaelmas Term, or in the little Christmas vacation between it and Hilary.

As to the strength of his case, he had not a doubt about it, but clearly saw his way to the verdict. Argued with the jury on substantial worldly grounds--the only grounds ever worth taking into account--it was a plain case, and had not a weak spot in it. He called himself for the plaintiff, there was no getting over his evidence, the counsel for the defendant threw up his brief, and the jury did not even turn to consider. After trying it, Stryver, C. J., was satisfied that no plainer case could be. Accordingly, Mr. Stryver inaugurated the Long Vacation with a formal proposal to take Miss Manette to Vauxhall Gardens; that failing, to Ranelagh; that unaccountably failing too, it behoved him to present himself in Soho, and there declare his noble mind. Towards Soho, therefore, Mr. Stryver shouldered his way from the Temple, while the bloom of the Long Vacation’s infancy was still upon it. Anybody who had seen him projecting himself into Soho while he was yet on Saint Dunstan’s side of Temple Bar, bursting in his full-blown way along the pavement, to the jostlement of all weaker people, might have seen how safe and strong he was.

His way taking him past Tellson’s, and he both banking at Tellson’s and knowing Mr. Lorry as the intimate friend of the Manettes, it entered Mr. Stryver’s mind to enter the bank, and reveal to Mr. Lorry the brightness of the Soho horizon. So, he pushed open the door with the weak rattle in its throat, stumbled down the two steps, got past the two ancient cashiers, and shouldered himself into the musty back closet where Mr. Lorry sat at great books ruled for figures, with perpendicular iron bars to his window as if that were ruled for figures too, and everything under the clouds were a sum. It was Stryver’s grand peculiarity that he always seemed too big for any place, or space. He was so much too big for Tellson’s, that old clerks in distant corners looked up with looks of remonstrance, as though he squeezed them against the wall. The House itself, magnificently reading the paper quite in the far-off perspective, lowered displeased, as if the Stryver head had been butted into its responsible waistcoat. The discreet Mr. Lorry said, in a sample tone of the voice he would recommend under the circumstances, “How do you do, Mr. Stryver? How do you do, sir?” and shook hands. There was a peculiarity in his manner of shaking hands, always to be seen in any clerk at Tellson’s who shook hands with a customer when the House pervaded the air. He shook in a self-abnegating way, as one who shook for Tellson and Co.

“I am going,” said Mr. Stryver, leaning his arms confidentially on the desk: whereupon, although it was a large double one, there appeared to be not half desk enough for him: “I am going to make an offer of myself in marriage to your agreeable little friend, Miss Manette, Mr. Lorry.” “My meaning,” answered the man of business, “is, of course, friendly and appreciative, and that it does you the greatest credit, and--in short, my meaning is everything you could desire. But--really, you know, Mr. Stryver--” Mr. Lorry paused, and shook his head at him in the oddest manner, as if he were compelled against his will to add, internally, “you know there really is so much too much of you!” “Well!” said Stryver, slapping the desk with his contentious hand, opening his eyes wider, and taking a long breath, “if I understand you, Mr. Lorry, I’ll be hanged!” “Why?” said Stryver. “Now, I’ll put you in a corner,” forensically shaking a forefinger at him. “You are a man of business and bound to have a reason. State your reason. Why wouldn’t you go?”

“Here’s a man of business--a man of years--a man of experience--_in_ a Bank,” said Stryver; “and having summed up three leading reasons for complete success, he says there’s no reason at all! Says it with his head on!” Mr. Stryver remarked upon the peculiarity as if it would have been infinitely less remarkable if he had said it with his head off. “When I speak of success, I speak of success with the young lady; and when I speak of causes and reasons to make success probable, I speak of causes and reasons that will tell as such with the young lady. The young lady, my good sir,” said Mr. Lorry, mildly tapping the Stryver arm, “the young lady. The young lady goes before all.” “Then you mean to tell me, Mr. Lorry,” said Stryver, squaring his elbows, “that it is your deliberate opinion that the young lady at present in question is a mincing Fool?” “Not exactly so. I mean to tell you, Mr. Stryver,” said Mr. Lorry, reddening, “that I will hear no disrespectful word of that young lady from any lips; and that if I knew any man--which I hope I do not--whose taste was so coarse, and whose temper was so overbearing, that he could not restrain himself from speaking disrespectfully of that young lady at this desk, not even Tellson’s should prevent my giving him a piece of my mind.”

The necessity of being angry in a suppressed tone had put Mr. Stryver’s blood-vessels into a dangerous state when it was his turn to be angry; Mr. Lorry’s veins, methodical as their courses could usually be, were in no better state now it was his turn. Mr. Stryver sucked the end of a ruler for a little while, and then stood hitting a tune out of his teeth with it, which probably gave him the toothache. He broke the awkward silence by saying: “This is something new to me, Mr. Lorry. You deliberately advise me not to go up to Soho and offer myself--_my_self, Stryver of the King’s Bench bar?” “Now understand me,” pursued Mr. Lorry. “As a man of business, I am not justified in saying anything about this matter, for, as a man of business, I know nothing of it. But, as an old fellow, who has carried Miss Manette in his arms, who is the trusted friend of Miss Manette and of her father too, and who has a great affection for them both, I have spoken. The confidence is not of my seeking, recollect. Now, you think I may not be right?”

“Not I!” said Stryver, whistling. “I can’t undertake to find third parties in common sense; I can only find it for myself. I suppose sense in certain quarters; you suppose mincing bread-and-butter nonsense. It’s new to me, but you are right, I dare say.” “What I suppose, Mr. Stryver, I claim to characterise for myself--And understand me, sir,” said Mr. Lorry, quickly flushing again, “I will not--not even at Tellson’s--have it characterised for me by any gentleman breathing.” “Granted. Thank you. Well, Mr. Stryver, I was about to say:--it might be painful to you to find yourself mistaken, it might be painful to Doctor Manette to have the task of being explicit with you, it might be very painful to Miss Manette to have the task of being explicit with you. You know the terms upon which I have the honour and happiness to stand with the family. If you please, committing you in no way, representing you in no way, I will undertake to correct my advice by the exercise of a little new observation and judgment expressly brought to bear upon it. If you should then be dissatisfied with it, you can but test its soundness for yourself; if, on the other hand, you should be satisfied with it, and it should be what it now is, it may spare all sides what is best spared. What do you say?”

“Then I say yes,” said Stryver: “I won’t go up there now, I am not so hot upon it as that comes to; I say yes, and I shall expect you to look in to-night. Good morning.” Then Mr. Stryver turned and burst out of the Bank, causing such a concussion of air on his passage through, that to stand up against it bowing behind the two counters, required the utmost remaining strength of the two ancient clerks. Those venerable and feeble persons were always seen by the public in the act of bowing, and were popularly believed, when they had bowed a customer out, still to keep on bowing in the empty office until they bowed another customer in. The barrister was keen enough to divine that the banker would not have gone so far in his expression of opinion on any less solid ground than moral certainty. Unprepared as he was for the large pill he had to swallow, he got it down. “And now,” said Mr. Stryver, shaking his forensic forefinger at the Temple in general, when it was down, “my way out of this, is, to put you all in the wrong.”

It was a bit of the art of an Old Bailey tactician, in which he found great relief. “You shall not put me in the wrong, young lady,” said Mr. Stryver; “I’ll do that for you.” Accordingly, when Mr. Lorry called that night as late as ten o’clock, Mr. Stryver, among a quantity of books and papers littered out for the purpose, seemed to have nothing less on his mind than the subject of the morning. He even showed surprise when he saw Mr. Lorry, and was altogether in an absent and preoccupied state. “I assure you,” returned Mr. Stryver, in the friendliest way, “that I am sorry for it on your account, and sorry for it on the poor father’s account. I know this must always be a sore subject with the family; let us say no more about it.” “No it doesn’t; I assure you it doesn’t. Having supposed that there was sense where there is no sense, and a laudable ambition where there is not a laudable ambition, I am well out of my mistake, and no harm is done. Young women have committed similar follies often before, and have repented them in poverty and obscurity often before. In an unselfish aspect, I am sorry that the thing is dropped, because it would have been a bad thing for me in a worldly point of view; in a selfish aspect, I am glad that the thing has dropped, because it would have been a bad thing for me in a worldly point of view--it is hardly necessary to say I could have gained nothing by it. There is no harm at all done. I have not proposed to the young lady, and, between ourselves, I am by no means certain, on reflection, that I ever should have committed myself to that extent. Mr. Lorry, you cannot control the mincing vanities and giddinesses of empty-headed girls; you must not expect to do it, or you will always be disappointed. Now, pray say no more about it. I tell you, I regret it on account of others, but I am satisfied on my own account. And I am really very much obliged to you for allowing me to sound you, and for giving me your advice; you know the young lady better than I do; you were right, it never would have done.”

Mr. Lorry was so taken aback, that he looked quite stupidly at Mr. Stryver shouldering him towards the door, with an appearance of showering generosity, forbearance, and goodwill, on his erring head. “Make the best of it, my dear sir,” said Stryver; “say no more about it; thank you again for allowing me to sound you; good night!” If Sydney Carton ever shone anywhere, he certainly never shone in the house of Doctor Manette. He had been there often, during a whole year, and had always been the same moody and morose lounger there. When he cared to talk, he talked well; but, the cloud of caring for nothing, which overshadowed him with such a fatal darkness, was very rarely pierced by the light within him. And yet he did care something for the streets that environed that house, and for the senseless stones that made their pavements. Many a night he vaguely and unhappily wandered there, when wine had brought no transitory gladness to him; many a dreary daybreak revealed his solitary figure lingering there, and still lingering there when the first beams of the sun brought into strong relief, removed beauties of architecture in spires of churches and lofty buildings, as perhaps the quiet time brought some sense of better things, else forgotten and unattainable, into his mind. Of late, the neglected bed in the Temple Court had known him more scantily than ever; and often when he had thrown himself upon it no longer than a few minutes, he had got up again, and haunted that neighbourhood.

On a day in August, when Mr. Stryver (after notifying to his jackal that “he had thought better of that marrying matter”) had carried his delicacy into Devonshire, and when the sight and scent of flowers in the City streets had some waifs of goodness in them for the worst, of health for the sickliest, and of youth for the oldest, Sydney’s feet still trod those stones. From being irresolute and purposeless, his feet became animated by an intention, and, in the working out of that intention, they took him to the Doctor’s door. He was shown up-stairs, and found Lucie at her work, alone. She had never been quite at her ease with him, and received him with some little embarrassment as he seated himself near her table. But, looking up at his face in the interchange of the first few common-places, she observed a change in it. Looking gently at him again, she was surprised and saddened to see that there were tears in his eyes. There were tears in his voice too, as he answered: She was pale and trembling. He came to her relief with a fixed despair of himself which made the interview unlike any other that could have been holden.

“If it had been possible, Miss Manette, that you could have returned the love of the man you see before yourself--flung away, wasted, drunken, poor creature of misuse as you know him to be--he would have been conscious this day and hour, in spite of his happiness, that he would bring you to misery, bring you to sorrow and repentance, blight you, disgrace you, pull you down with him. I know very well that you can have no tenderness for me; I ask for none; I am even thankful that it cannot be.” “Without it, can I not save you, Mr. Carton? Can I not recall you--forgive me again!--to a better course? Can I in no way repay your confidence? I know this is a confidence,” she modestly said, after a little hesitation, and in earnest tears, “I know you would say this to no one else. Can I turn it to no good account for yourself, Mr. Carton?” “To none. No, Miss Manette, to none. If you will hear me through a very little more, all you can ever do for me is done. I wish you to know that you have been the last dream of my soul. In my degradation I have not been so degraded but that the sight of you with your father, and of this home made such a home by you, has stirred old shadows that I thought had died out of me. Since I knew you, I have been troubled by a remorse that I thought would never reproach me again, and have heard whispers from old voices impelling me upward, that I thought were silent for ever. I have had unformed ideas of striving afresh, beginning anew, shaking off sloth and sensuality, and fighting out the abandoned fight. A dream, all a dream, that ends in nothing, and leaves the sleeper where he lay down, but I wish you to know that you inspired it.”

“No, Miss Manette; all through it, I have known myself to be quite undeserving. And yet I have had the weakness, and have still the weakness, to wish you to know with what a sudden mastery you kindled me, heap of ashes that I am, into fire--a fire, however, inseparable in its nature from myself, quickening nothing, lighting nothing, doing no service, idly burning away.” “Since the state of your mind that you describe, is, at all events, attributable to some influence of mine--this is what I mean, if I can make it plain--can I use no influence to serve you? Have I no power for good, with you, at all?” “The utmost good that I am capable of now, Miss Manette, I have come here to realise. Let me carry through the rest of my misdirected life, the remembrance that I opened my heart to you, last of all the world; and that there was something left in me at this time which you could deplore and pity.” “Entreat me to believe it no more, Miss Manette. I have proved myself, and I know better. I distress you; I draw fast to an end. Will you let me believe, when I recall this day, that the last confidence of my life was reposed in your pure and innocent breast, and that it lies there alone, and will be shared by no one?”

“Be under no apprehension, Miss Manette, of my ever resuming this conversation by so much as a passing word. I will never refer to it again. If I were dead, that could not be surer than it is henceforth. In the hour of my death, I shall hold sacred the one good remembrance--and shall thank and bless you for it--that my last avowal of myself was made to you, and that my name, and faults, and miseries were gently carried in your heart. May it otherwise be light and happy!” He was so unlike what he had ever shown himself to be, and it was so sad to think how much he had thrown away, and how much he every day kept down and perverted, that Lucie Manette wept mournfully for him as he stood looking back at her. “Be comforted!” he said, “I am not worth such feeling, Miss Manette. An hour or two hence, and the low companions and low habits that I scorn but yield to, will render me less worth such tears as those, than any wretch who creeps along the streets. Be comforted! But, within myself, I shall always be, towards you, what I am now, though outwardly I shall be what you have heretofore seen me. The last supplication but one I make to you, is, that you will believe this of me.”

“My last supplication of all, is this; and with it, I will relieve you of a visitor with whom I well know you have nothing in unison, and between whom and you there is an impassable space. It is useless to say it, I know, but it rises out of my soul. For you, and for any dear to you, I would do anything. If my career were of that better kind that there was any opportunity or capacity of sacrifice in it, I would embrace any sacrifice for you and for those dear to you. Try to hold me in your mind, at some quiet times, as ardent and sincere in this one thing. The time will come, the time will not be long in coming, when new ties will be formed about you--ties that will bind you yet more tenderly and strongly to the home you so adorn--the dearest ties that will ever grace and gladden you. O Miss Manette, when the little picture of a happy father’s face looks up in yours, when you see your own bright beauty springing up anew at your feet, think now and then that there is a man who would give his life, to keep a life you love beside you!”

To the eyes of Mr. Jeremiah Cruncher, sitting on his stool in Fleet-street with his grisly urchin beside him, a vast number and variety of objects in movement were every day presented. Who could sit upon anything in Fleet-street during the busy hours of the day, and not be dazed and deafened by two immense processions, one ever tending westward with the sun, the other ever tending eastward from the sun, both ever tending to the plains beyond the range of red and purple where the sun goes down! With his straw in his mouth, Mr. Cruncher sat watching the two streams, like the heathen rustic who has for several centuries been on duty watching one stream--saving that Jerry had no expectation of their ever running dry. Nor would it have been an expectation of a hopeful kind, since a small part of his income was derived from the pilotage of timid women (mostly of a full habit and past the middle term of life) from Tellson’s side of the tides to the opposite shore. Brief as such companionship was in every separate instance, Mr. Cruncher never failed to become so interested in the lady as to express a strong desire to have the honour of drinking her very good health. And it was from the gifts bestowed upon him towards the execution of this benevolent purpose, that he recruited his finances, as just now observed.

Time was, when a poet sat upon a stool in a public place, and mused in the sight of men. Mr. Cruncher, sitting on a stool in a public place, but not being a poet, mused as little as possible, and looked about him. It fell out that he was thus engaged in a season when crowds were few, and belated women few, and when his affairs in general were so unprosperous as to awaken a strong suspicion in his breast that Mrs. Cruncher must have been “flopping” in some pointed manner, when an unusual concourse pouring down Fleet-street westward, attracted his attention. Looking that way, Mr. Cruncher made out that some kind of funeral was coming along, and that there was popular objection to this funeral, which engendered uproar. The young gentleman uttered this exultant sound with mysterious significance. The elder gentleman took the cry so ill, that he watched his opportunity, and smote the young gentleman on the ear. “What d’ye mean? What are you hooroaring at? What do you want to conwey to your own father, you young Rip? This boy is a getting too many for _me_!” said Mr. Cruncher, surveying him. “Him and his hooroars! Don’t let me hear no more of you, or you shall feel some more of me. D’ye hear?”

His son obeyed, and the crowd approached; they were bawling and hissing round a dingy hearse and dingy mourning coach, in which mourning coach there was only one mourner, dressed in the dingy trappings that were considered essential to the dignity of the position. The position appeared by no means to please him, however, with an increasing rabble surrounding the coach, deriding him, making grimaces at him, and incessantly groaning and calling out: “Yah! Spies! Tst! Yaha! Spies!” with many compliments too numerous and forcible to repeat. Funerals had at all times a remarkable attraction for Mr. Cruncher; he always pricked up his senses, and became excited, when a funeral passed Tellson’s. Naturally, therefore, a funeral with this uncommon attendance excited him greatly, and he asked of the first man who ran against him: “_I_ don’t know,” returned the man, clapping his hands to his mouth nevertheless, and vociferating in a surprising heat and with the greatest ardour, “Spies! Yaha! Tst, tst! Spi--ies!” At length, a person better informed on the merits of the case, tumbled against him, and from this person he learned that the funeral was the funeral of one Roger Cly.

The idea was so acceptable in the prevalent absence of any idea, that the crowd caught it up with eagerness, and loudly repeating the suggestion to have ’em out, and to pull ’em out, mobbed the two vehicles so closely that they came to a stop. On the crowd’s opening the coach doors, the one mourner scuffled out by himself and was in their hands for a moment; but he was so alert, and made such good use of his time, that in another moment he was scouring away up a bye-street, after shedding his cloak, hat, long hatband, white pocket-handkerchief, and other symbolical tears. These, the people tore to pieces and scattered far and wide with great enjoyment, while the tradesmen hurriedly shut up their shops; for a crowd in those times stopped at nothing, and was a monster much dreaded. They had already got the length of opening the hearse to take the coffin out, when some brighter genius proposed instead, its being escorted to its destination amidst general rejoicing. Practical suggestions being much needed, this suggestion, too, was received with acclamation, and the coach was immediately filled with eight inside and a dozen out, while as many people got on the roof of the hearse as could by any exercise of ingenuity stick upon it. Among the first of these volunteers was Jerry Cruncher himself, who modestly concealed his spiky head from the observation of Tellson’s, in the further corner of the mourning coach.

The officiating undertakers made some protest against these changes in the ceremonies; but, the river being alarmingly near, and several voices remarking on the efficacy of cold immersion in bringing refractory members of the profession to reason, the protest was faint and brief. The remodelled procession started, with a chimney-sweep driving the hearse--advised by the regular driver, who was perched beside him, under close inspection, for the purpose--and with a pieman, also attended by his cabinet minister, driving the mourning coach. A bear-leader, a popular street character of the time, was impressed as an additional ornament, before the cavalcade had gone far down the Strand; and his bear, who was black and very mangy, gave quite an Undertaking air to that part of the procession in which he walked. Thus, with beer-drinking, pipe-smoking, song-roaring, and infinite caricaturing of woe, the disorderly procession went its way, recruiting at every step, and all the shops shutting up before it. Its destination was the old church of Saint Pancras, far off in the fields. It got there in course of time; insisted on pouring into the burial-ground; finally, accomplished the interment of the deceased Roger Cly in its own way, and highly to its own satisfaction.

The dead man disposed of, and the crowd being under the necessity of providing some other entertainment for itself, another brighter genius (or perhaps the same) conceived the humour of impeaching casual passers-by, as Old Bailey spies, and wreaking vengeance on them. Chase was given to some scores of inoffensive persons who had never been near the Old Bailey in their lives, in the realisation of this fancy, and they were roughly hustled and maltreated. The transition to the sport of window-breaking, and thence to the plundering of public-houses, was easy and natural. At last, after several hours, when sundry summer-houses had been pulled down, and some area-railings had been torn up, to arm the more belligerent spirits, a rumour got about that the Guards were coming. Before this rumour, the crowd gradually melted away, and perhaps the Guards came, and perhaps they never came, and this was the usual progress of a mob. Mr. Cruncher did not assist at the closing sports, but had remained behind in the churchyard, to confer and condole with the undertakers. The place had a soothing influence on him. He procured a pipe from a neighbouring public-house, and smoked it, looking in at the railings and maturely considering the spot.

“Jerry,” said Mr. Cruncher, apostrophising himself in his usual way, “you see that there Cly that day, and you see with your own eyes that he was a young ’un and a straight made ’un.” Having smoked his pipe out, and ruminated a little longer, he turned himself about, that he might appear, before the hour of closing, on his station at Tellson’s. Whether his meditations on mortality had touched his liver, or whether his general health had been previously at all amiss, or whether he desired to show a little attention to an eminent man, is not so much to the purpose, as that he made a short call upon his medical adviser--a distinguished surgeon--on his way back. Young Jerry relieved his father with dutiful interest, and reported No job in his absence. The bank closed, the ancient clerks came out, the usual watch was set, and Mr. Cruncher and his son went home to tea. “Now, I tell you where it is!” said Mr. Cruncher to his wife, on entering. “If, as a honest tradesman, my wenturs goes wrong to-night, I shall make sure that you’ve been praying again me, and I shall work you for it just the same as if I seen you do it.”

Mr. Cruncher had no particular meaning in these sulky corroborations, but made use of them, as people not unfrequently do, to express general ironical dissatisfaction. “You and your yes, Jerry,” said Mr. Cruncher, taking a bite out of his bread-and-butter, and seeming to help it down with a large invisible oyster out of his saucer. “Ah! I think so. I believe you.” “If I don’t, you’ll have short commons, to-morrow,” returned that gentleman, shaking his head; “that’s questions enough for you; I ain’t a going out, till you’ve been long abed.” He devoted himself during the remainder of the evening to keeping a most vigilant watch on Mrs. Cruncher, and sullenly holding her in conversation that she might be prevented from meditating any petitions to his disadvantage. With this view, he urged his son to hold her in conversation also, and led the unfortunate woman a hard life by dwelling on any causes of complaint he could bring against her, rather than he would leave her for a moment to her own reflections. The devoutest person could have rendered no greater homage to the efficacy of an honest prayer than he did in this distrust of his wife. It was as if a professed unbeliever in ghosts should be frightened by a ghost story.

“And mind you!” said Mr. Cruncher. “No games to-morrow! If I, as a honest tradesman, succeed in providing a jinte of meat or two, none of your not touching of it, and sticking to bread. If I, as a honest tradesman, am able to provide a little beer, none of your declaring on water. When you go to Rome, do as Rome does. Rome will be a ugly customer to you, if you don’t. _I_’m your Rome, you know.” “With your flying into the face of your own wittles and drink! I don’t know how scarce you mayn’t make the wittles and drink here, by your flopping tricks and your unfeeling conduct. Look at your boy: he _is_ your’n, ain’t he? He’s as thin as a lath. Do you call yourself a mother, and not know that a mother’s first duty is to blow her boy out?” This touched Young Jerry on a tender place; who adjured his mother to perform her first duty, and, whatever else she did or neglected, above all things to lay especial stress on the discharge of that maternal function so affectingly and delicately indicated by his other parent.

Thus the evening wore away with the Cruncher family, until Young Jerry was ordered to bed, and his mother, laid under similar injunctions, obeyed them. Mr. Cruncher beguiled the earlier watches of the night with solitary pipes, and did not start upon his excursion until nearly one o’clock. Towards that small and ghostly hour, he rose up from his chair, took a key out of his pocket, opened a locked cupboard, and brought forth a sack, a crowbar of convenient size, a rope and chain, and other fishing tackle of that nature. Disposing these articles about him in skilful manner, he bestowed a parting defiance on Mrs. Cruncher, extinguished the light, and went out. Young Jerry, who had only made a feint of undressing when he went to bed, was not long after his father. Under cover of the darkness he followed out of the room, followed down the stairs, followed down the court, followed out into the streets. He was in no uneasiness concerning his getting into the house again, for it was full of lodgers, and the door stood ajar all night.

Impelled by a laudable ambition to study the art and mystery of his father’s honest calling, Young Jerry, keeping as close to house fronts, walls, and doorways, as his eyes were close to one another, held his honoured parent in view. The honoured parent steering Northward, had not gone far, when he was joined by another disciple of Izaak Walton, and the two trudged on together. Within half an hour from the first starting, they were beyond the winking lamps, and the more than winking watchmen, and were out upon a lonely road. Another fisherman was picked up here--and that so silently, that if Young Jerry had been superstitious, he might have supposed the second follower of the gentle craft to have, all of a sudden, split himself into two. The three went on, and Young Jerry went on, until the three stopped under a bank overhanging the road. Upon the top of the bank was a low brick wall, surmounted by an iron railing. In the shadow of bank and wall the three turned out of the road, and up a blind lane, of which the wall--there, risen to some eight or ten feet high--formed one side. Crouching down in a corner, peeping up the lane, the next object that Young Jerry saw, was the form of his honoured parent, pretty well defined against a watery and clouded moon, nimbly scaling an iron gate. He was soon over, and then the second fisherman got over, and then the third. They all dropped softly on the ground within the gate, and lay there a little--listening perhaps. Then, they moved away on their hands and knees.

It was now Young Jerry’s turn to approach the gate: which he did, holding his breath. Crouching down again in a corner there, and looking in, he made out the three fishermen creeping through some rank grass! and all the gravestones in the churchyard--it was a large churchyard that they were in--looking on like ghosts in white, while the church tower itself looked on like the ghost of a monstrous giant. They did not creep far, before they stopped and stood upright. And then they began to fish. They fished with a spade, at first. Presently the honoured parent appeared to be adjusting some instrument like a great corkscrew. Whatever tools they worked with, they worked hard, until the awful striking of the church clock so terrified Young Jerry, that he made off, with his hair as stiff as his father’s. But, his long-cherished desire to know more about these matters, not only stopped him in his running away, but lured him back again. They were still fishing perseveringly, when he peeped in at the gate for the second time; but, now they seemed to have got a bite. There was a screwing and complaining sound down below, and their bent figures were strained, as if by a weight. By slow degrees the weight broke away the earth upon it, and came to the surface. Young Jerry very well knew what it would be; but, when he saw it, and saw his honoured parent about to wrench it open, he was so frightened, being new to the sight, that he made off again, and never stopped until he had run a mile or more.

He would not have stopped then, for anything less necessary than breath, it being a spectral sort of race that he ran, and one highly desirable to get to the end of. He had a strong idea that the coffin he had seen was running after him; and, pictured as hopping on behind him, bolt upright, upon its narrow end, always on the point of overtaking him and hopping on at his side--perhaps taking his arm--it was a pursuer to shun. It was an inconsistent and ubiquitous fiend too, for, while it was making the whole night behind him dreadful, he darted out into the roadway to avoid dark alleys, fearful of its coming hopping out of them like a dropsical boy’s kite without tail and wings. It hid in doorways too, rubbing its horrible shoulders against doors, and drawing them up to its ears, as if it were laughing. It got into shadows on the road, and lay cunningly on its back to trip him up. All this time it was incessantly hopping on behind and gaining on him, so that when the boy got to his own door he had reason for being half dead. And even then it would not leave him, but followed him upstairs with a bump on every stair, scrambled into bed with him, and bumped down, dead and heavy, on his breast when he fell asleep.

From his oppressed slumber, Young Jerry in his closet was awakened after daybreak and before sunrise, by the presence of his father in the family room. Something had gone wrong with him; at least, so Young Jerry inferred, from the circumstance of his holding Mrs. Cruncher by the ears, and knocking the back of her head against the head-board of the bed. “You oppose yourself to the profit of the business,” said Jerry, “and me and my partners suffer. You was to honour and obey; why the devil don’t you?” “Is it being a good wife to oppose your husband’s business? Is it honouring your husband to dishonour his business? Is it obeying your husband to disobey him on the wital subject of his business?” “It’s enough for you,” retorted Mr. Cruncher, “to be the wife of a honest tradesman, and not to occupy your female mind with calculations when he took to his trade or when he didn’t. A honouring and obeying wife would let his trade alone altogether. Call yourself a religious woman? If you’re a religious woman, give me a irreligious one! You have no more nat’ral sense of duty than the bed of this here Thames river has of a pile, and similarly it must be knocked into you.”

The altercation was conducted in a low tone of voice, and terminated in the honest tradesman’s kicking off his clay-soiled boots, and lying down at his length on the floor. After taking a timid peep at him lying on his back, with his rusty hands under his head for a pillow, his son lay down too, and fell asleep again. There was no fish for breakfast, and not much of anything else. Mr. Cruncher was out of spirits, and out of temper, and kept an iron pot-lid by him as a projectile for the correction of Mrs. Cruncher, in case he should observe any symptoms of her saying Grace. He was brushed and washed at the usual hour, and set off with his son to pursue his ostensible calling. Young Jerry, walking with the stool under his arm at his father’s side along sunny and crowded Fleet-street, was a very different Young Jerry from him of the previous night, running home through darkness and solitude from his grim pursuer. His cunning was fresh with the day, and his qualms were gone with the night--in which particulars it is not improbable that he had compeers in Fleet-street and the City of London, that fine morning.

“Father,” said Young Jerry, as they walked along: taking care to keep at arm’s length and to have the stool well between them: “what’s a Resurrection-Man?” Mr. Cruncher was soothed, but shook his head in a dubious and moral way. “It depends upon how you dewelop your talents. Be careful to dewelop your talents, and never to say no more than you can help to nobody, and there’s no telling at the present time what you may not come to be fit for.” As Young Jerry, thus encouraged, went on a few yards in advance, to plant the stool in the shadow of the Bar, Mr. Cruncher added to himself: “Jerry, you honest tradesman, there’s hopes wot that boy will yet be a blessing to you, and a recompense to you for his mother!” There had been earlier drinking than usual in the wine-shop of Monsieur Defarge. As early as six o’clock in the morning, sallow faces peeping through its barred windows had descried other faces within, bending over measures of wine. Monsieur Defarge sold a very thin wine at the best of times, but it would seem to have been an unusually thin wine that he sold at this time. A sour wine, moreover, or a souring, for its influence on the mood of those who drank it was to make them gloomy. No vivacious Bacchanalian flame leaped out of the pressed grape of Monsieur Defarge: but, a smouldering fire that burnt in the dark, lay hidden in the dregs of it.

This had been the third morning in succession, on which there had been early drinking at the wine-shop of Monsieur Defarge. It had begun on Monday, and here was Wednesday come. There had been more of early brooding than drinking; for, many men had listened and whispered and slunk about there from the time of the opening of the door, who could not have laid a piece of money on the counter to save their souls. These were to the full as interested in the place, however, as if they could have commanded whole barrels of wine; and they glided from seat to seat, and from corner to corner, swallowing talk in lieu of drink, with greedy looks. Notwithstanding an unusual flow of company, the master of the wine-shop was not visible. He was not missed; for, nobody who crossed the threshold looked for him, nobody asked for him, nobody wondered to see only Madame Defarge in her seat, presiding over the distribution of wine, with a bowl of battered small coins before her, as much defaced and beaten out of their original impress as the small coinage of humanity from whose ragged pockets they had come.

A suspended interest and a prevalent absence of mind, were perhaps observed by the spies who looked in at the wine-shop, as they looked in at every place, high and low, from the king’s palace to the criminal’s gaol. Games at cards languished, players at dominoes musingly built towers with them, drinkers drew figures on the tables with spilt drops of wine, Madame Defarge herself picked out the pattern on her sleeve with her toothpick, and saw and heard something inaudible and invisible a long way off. Thus, Saint Antoine in this vinous feature of his, until midday. It was high noontide, when two dusty men passed through his streets and under his swinging lamps: of whom, one was Monsieur Defarge: the other a mender of roads in a blue cap. All adust and athirst, the two entered the wine-shop. Their arrival had lighted a kind of fire in the breast of Saint Antoine, fast spreading as they came along, which stirred and flickered in flames of faces at most doors and windows. Yet, no one had followed them, and no man spoke when they entered the wine-shop, though the eyes of every man there were turned upon them.

“My wife,” said Defarge aloud, addressing Madame Defarge: “I have travelled certain leagues with this good mender of roads, called Jacques. I met him--by accident--a day and half’s journey out of Paris. He is a good child, this mender of roads, called Jacques. Give him to drink, my wife!” A second man got up and went out. Madame Defarge set wine before the mender of roads called Jacques, who doffed his blue cap to the company, and drank. In the breast of his blouse he carried some coarse dark bread; he ate of this between whiles, and sat munching and drinking near Madame Defarge’s counter. A third man got up and went out. Defarge refreshed himself with a draught of wine--but, he took less than was given to the stranger, as being himself a man to whom it was no rarity--and stood waiting until the countryman had made his breakfast. He looked at no one present, and no one now looked at him; not even Madame Defarge, who had taken up her knitting, and was at work. No white-haired man was there now; but, the three men were there who had gone out of the wine-shop singly. And between them and the white-haired man afar off, was the one small link, that they had once looked in at him through the chinks in the wall.

“Jacques One, Jacques Two, Jacques Three! This is the witness encountered by appointment, by me, Jacques Four. He will tell you all. Speak, Jacques Five!” “I saw him then, messieurs,” began the mender of roads, “a year ago this running summer, underneath the carriage of the Marquis, hanging by the chain. Behold the manner of it. I leaving my work on the road, the sun going to bed, the carriage of the Marquis slowly ascending the hill, he hanging by the chain--like this.” Again the mender of roads went through the whole performance; in which he ought to have been perfect by that time, seeing that it had been the infallible resource and indispensable entertainment of his village during a whole year. “By his tall figure,” said the mender of roads, softly, and with his finger at his nose. “When Monsieur the Marquis demands that evening, ‘Say, what is he like?’ I make response, ‘Tall as a spectre.’” “But what did I know? The deed was not then accomplished, neither did he confide in me. Observe! Under those circumstances even, I do not offer my testimony. Monsieur the Marquis indicates me with his finger, standing near our little fountain, and says, ‘To me! Bring that rascal!’ My faith, messieurs, I offer nothing.”

“I am again at work upon the hill-side, and the sun is again about to go to bed. I am collecting my tools to descend to my cottage down in the village below, where it is already dark, when I raise my eyes, and see coming over the hill six soldiers. In the midst of them is a tall man with his arms bound--tied to his sides--like this!” “I stand aside, messieurs, by my heap of stones, to see the soldiers and their prisoner pass (for it is a solitary road, that, where any spectacle is well worth looking at), and at first, as they approach, I see no more than that they are six soldiers with a tall man bound, and that they are almost black to my sight--except on the side of the sun going to bed, where they have a red edge, messieurs. Also, I see that their long shadows are on the hollow ridge on the opposite side of the road, and are on the hill above it, and are like the shadows of giants. Also, I see that they are covered with dust, and that the dust moves with them as they come, tramp, tramp! But when they advance quite near to me, I recognise the tall man, and he recognises me. Ah, but he would be well content to precipitate himself over the hill-side once again, as on the evening when he and I first encountered, close to the same spot!”

“I do not show the soldiers that I recognise the tall man; he does not show the soldiers that he recognises me; we do it, and we know it, with our eyes. ‘Come on!’ says the chief of that company, pointing to the village, ‘bring him fast to his tomb!’ and they bring him faster. I follow. His arms are swelled because of being bound so tight, his wooden shoes are large and clumsy, and he is lame. Because he is lame, and consequently slow, they drive him with their guns--like this!” “As they descend the hill like madmen running a race, he falls. They laugh and pick him up again. His face is bleeding and covered with dust, but he cannot touch it; thereupon they laugh again. They bring him into the village; all the village runs to look; they take him past the mill, and up to the prison; all the village sees the prison gate open in the darkness of the night, and swallow him--like this!” He opened his mouth as wide as he could, and shut it with a sounding snap of his teeth. Observant of his unwillingness to mar the effect by opening it again, Defarge said, “Go on, Jacques.”

“All the village,” pursued the mender of roads, on tiptoe and in a low voice, “withdraws; all the village whispers by the fountain; all the village sleeps; all the village dreams of that unhappy one, within the locks and bars of the prison on the crag, and never to come out of it, except to perish. In the morning, with my tools upon my shoulder, eating my morsel of black bread as I go, I make a circuit by the prison, on my way to my work. There I see him, high up, behind the bars of a lofty iron cage, bloody and dusty as last night, looking through. He has no hand free, to wave to me; I dare not call to him; he regards me like a dead man.” Defarge and the three glanced darkly at one another. The looks of all of them were dark, repressed, and revengeful, as they listened to the countryman’s story; the manner of all of them, while it was secret, was authoritative too. They had the air of a rough tribunal; Jacques One and Two sitting on the old pallet-bed, each with his chin resting on his hand, and his eyes intent on the road-mender; Jacques Three, equally intent, on one knee behind them, with his agitated hand always gliding over the network of fine nerves about his mouth and nose; Defarge standing between them and the narrator, whom he had stationed in the light of the window, by turns looking from him to them, and from them to him.

“He remains up there in his iron cage some days. The village looks at him by stealth, for it is afraid. But it always looks up, from a distance, at the prison on the crag; and in the evening, when the work of the day is achieved and it assembles to gossip at the fountain, all faces are turned towards the prison. Formerly, they were turned towards the posting-house; now, they are turned towards the prison. They whisper at the fountain, that although condemned to death he will not be executed; they say that petitions have been presented in Paris, showing that he was enraged and made mad by the death of his child; they say that a petition has been presented to the King himself. What do I know? It is possible. Perhaps yes, perhaps no.” “Listen then, Jacques,” Number One of that name sternly interposed. “Know that a petition was presented to the King and Queen. All here, yourself excepted, saw the King take it, in his carriage in the street, sitting beside the Queen. It is Defarge whom you see here, who, at the hazard of his life, darted out before the horses, with the petition in his hand.”

“And once again listen, Jacques!” said the kneeling Number Three: his fingers ever wandering over and over those fine nerves, with a strikingly greedy air, as if he hungered for something--that was neither food nor drink; “the guard, horse and foot, surrounded the petitioner, and struck him blows. You hear?” “Again; on the other hand, they whisper at the fountain,” resumed the countryman, “that he is brought down into our country to be executed on the spot, and that he will very certainly be executed. They even whisper that because he has slain Monseigneur, and because Monseigneur was the father of his tenants--serfs--what you will--he will be executed as a parricide. One old man says at the fountain, that his right hand, armed with the knife, will be burnt off before his face; that, into wounds which will be made in his arms, his breast, and his legs, there will be poured boiling oil, melted lead, hot resin, wax, and sulphur; finally, that he will be torn limb from limb by four strong horses. That old man says, all this was actually done to a prisoner who made an attempt on the life of the late King, Louis Fifteen. But how do I know if he lies? I am not a scholar.”

“Listen once again then, Jacques!” said the man with the restless hand and the craving air. “The name of that prisoner was Damiens, and it was all done in open day, in the open streets of this city of Paris; and nothing was more noticed in the vast concourse that saw it done, than the crowd of ladies of quality and fashion, who were full of eager attention to the last--to the last, Jacques, prolonged until nightfall, when he had lost two legs and an arm, and still breathed! And it was done--why, how old are you?” “Well! Some whisper this, some whisper that; they speak of nothing else; even the fountain appears to fall to that tune. At length, on Sunday night when all the village is asleep, come soldiers, winding down from the prison, and their guns ring on the stones of the little street. Workmen dig, workmen hammer, soldiers laugh and sing; in the morning, by the fountain, there is raised a gallows forty feet high, poisoning the water.” “All work is stopped, all assemble there, nobody leads the cows out, the cows are there with the rest. At midday, the roll of drums. Soldiers have marched into the prison in the night, and he is in the midst of many soldiers. He is bound as before, and in his mouth there is a gag--tied so, with a tight string, making him look almost as if he laughed.” He suggested it, by creasing his face with his two thumbs, from the corners of his mouth to his ears. “On the top of the gallows is fixed the knife, blade upwards, with its point in the air. He is hanged there forty feet high--and is left hanging, poisoning the water.”

“It is frightful, messieurs. How can the women and the children draw water! Who can gossip of an evening, under that shadow! Under it, have I said? When I left the village, Monday evening as the sun was going to bed, and looked back from the hill, the shadow struck across the church, across the mill, across the prison--seemed to strike across the earth, messieurs, to where the sky rests upon it!” “That’s all, messieurs. I left at sunset (as I had been warned to do), and I walked on, that night and half next day, until I met (as I was warned I should) this comrade. With him, I came on, now riding and now walking, through the rest of yesterday and through last night. And here you see me!” “Are you sure,” asked Jacques Two, of Defarge, “that no embarrassment can arise from our manner of keeping the register? Without doubt it is safe, for no one beyond ourselves can decipher it; but shall we always be able to decipher it--or, I ought to say, will she?” “Jacques,” returned Defarge, drawing himself up, “if madame my wife undertook to keep the register in her memory alone, she would not lose a word of it--not a syllable of it. Knitted, in her own stitches and her own symbols, it will always be as plain to her as the sun. Confide in Madame Defarge. It would be easier for the weakest poltroon that lives, to erase himself from existence, than to erase one letter of his name or crimes from the knitted register of Madame Defarge.”

There was a murmur of confidence and approval, and then the man who hungered, asked: “Is this rustic to be sent back soon? I hope so. He is very simple; is he not a little dangerous?” “He knows nothing,” said Defarge; “at least nothing more than would easily elevate himself to a gallows of the same height. I charge myself with him; let him remain with me; I will take care of him, and set him on his road. He wishes to see the fine world--the King, the Queen, and Court; let him see them on Sunday.” “Jacques,” said Defarge; “judiciously show a cat milk, if you wish her to thirst for it. Judiciously show a dog his natural prey, if you wish him to bring it down one day.” Nothing more was said, and the mender of roads, being found already dozing on the topmost stair, was advised to lay himself down on the pallet-bed and take some rest. He needed no persuasion, and was soon asleep. Worse quarters than Defarge’s wine-shop, could easily have been found in Paris for a provincial slave of that degree. Saving for a mysterious dread of madame by which he was constantly haunted, his life was very new and agreeable. But, madame sat all day at her counter, so expressly unconscious of him, and so particularly determined not to perceive that his being there had any connection with anything below the surface, that he shook in his wooden shoes whenever his eye lighted on her. For, he contended with himself that it was impossible to foresee what that lady might pretend next; and he felt assured that if she should take it into her brightly ornamented head to pretend that she had seen him do a murder and afterwards flay the victim, she would infallibly go through with it until the play was played out.

Therefore, when Sunday came, the mender of roads was not enchanted (though he said he was) to find that madame was to accompany monsieur and himself to Versailles. It was additionally disconcerting to have madame knitting all the way there, in a public conveyance; it was additionally disconcerting yet, to have madame in the crowd in the afternoon, still with her knitting in her hands as the crowd waited to see the carriage of the King and Queen. The man moved a little further away, as soon as he could, and the mender of roads fanned himself with his blue cap: feeling it mightily close and oppressive. If he needed a King and Queen to restore him, he was fortunate in having his remedy at hand; for, soon the large-faced King and the fair-faced Queen came in their golden coach, attended by the shining Bull’s Eye of their Court, a glittering multitude of laughing ladies and fine lords; and in jewels and silks and powder and splendour and elegantly spurning figures and handsomely disdainful faces of both sexes, the mender of roads bathed himself, so much to his temporary intoxication, that he cried Long live the King, Long live the Queen, Long live everybody and everything! as if he had never heard of ubiquitous Jacques in his time. Then, there were gardens, courtyards, terraces, fountains, green banks, more King and Queen, more Bull’s Eye, more lords and ladies, more Long live they all! until he absolutely wept with sentiment. During the whole of this scene, which lasted some three hours, he had plenty of shouting and weeping and sentimental company, and throughout Defarge held him by the collar, as if to restrain him from flying at the objects of his brief devotion and tearing them to pieces.

“You are the fellow we want,” said Defarge, in his ear; “you make these fools believe that it will last for ever. Then, they are the more insolent, and it is the nearer ended.” “These fools know nothing. While they despise your breath, and would stop it for ever and ever, in you or in a hundred like you rather than in one of their own horses or dogs, they only know what your breath tells them. Let it deceive them, then, a little longer; it cannot deceive them too much.” “If you were shown a great heap of dolls, and were set upon them to pluck them to pieces and despoil them for your own advantage, you would pick out the richest and gayest. Say! Would you not?” “Yes. And if you were shown a flock of birds, unable to fly, and were set upon them to strip them of their feathers for your own advantage, you would set upon the birds of the finest feathers; would you not?” “You have seen both dolls and birds to-day,” said Madame Defarge, with a wave of her hand towards the place where they had last been apparent; “now, go home!”

Madame Defarge and monsieur her husband returned amicably to the bosom of Saint Antoine, while a speck in a blue cap toiled through the darkness, and through the dust, and down the weary miles of avenue by the wayside, slowly tending towards that point of the compass where the chateau of Monsieur the Marquis, now in his grave, listened to the whispering trees. Such ample leisure had the stone faces, now, for listening to the trees and to the fountain, that the few village scarecrows who, in their quest for herbs to eat and fragments of dead stick to burn, strayed within sight of the great stone courtyard and terrace staircase, had it borne in upon their starved fancy that the expression of the faces was altered. A rumour just lived in the village--had a faint and bare existence there, as its people had--that when the knife struck home, the faces changed, from faces of pride to faces of anger and pain; also, that when that dangling figure was hauled up forty feet above the fountain, they changed again, and bore a cruel look of being avenged, which they would henceforth bear for ever. In the stone face over the great window of the bed-chamber where the murder was done, two fine dints were pointed out in the sculptured nose, which everybody recognised, and which nobody had seen of old; and on the scarce occasions when two or three ragged peasants emerged from the crowd to take a hurried peep at Monsieur the Marquis petrified, a skinny finger would not have pointed to it for a minute, before they all started away among the moss and leaves, like the more fortunate hares who could find a living there.

Chateau and hut, stone face and dangling figure, the red stain on the stone floor, and the pure water in the village well--thousands of acres of land--a whole province of France--all France itself--lay under the night sky, concentrated into a faint hair-breadth line. So does a whole world, with all its greatnesses and littlenesses, lie in a twinkling star. And as mere human knowledge can split a ray of light and analyse the manner of its composition, so, sublimer intelligences may read in the feeble shining of this earth of ours, every thought and act, every vice and virtue, of every responsible creature on it. The Defarges, husband and wife, came lumbering under the starlight, in their public vehicle, to that gate of Paris whereunto their journey naturally tended. There was the usual stoppage at the barrier guardhouse, and the usual lanterns came glancing forth for the usual examination and inquiry. Monsieur Defarge alighted; knowing one or two of the soldiery there, and one of the police. The latter he was intimate with, and affectionately embraced. When Saint Antoine had again enfolded the Defarges in his dusky wings, and they, having finally alighted near the Saint’s boundaries, were picking their way on foot through the black mud and offal of his streets, Madame Defarge spoke to her husband:

“Very little to-night, but all he knows. There is another spy commissioned for our quarter. There may be many more, for all that he can say, but he knows of one.” “Barsad,” said Defarge, making it French by pronunciation. But, he had been so careful to get it accurately, that he then spelt it with perfect correctness. “Age, about forty years; height, about five feet nine; black hair; complexion dark; generally, rather handsome visage; eyes dark, face thin, long, and sallow; nose aquiline, but not straight, having a peculiar inclination towards the left cheek; expression, therefore, sinister.” They turned into the wine-shop, which was closed (for it was midnight), and where Madame Defarge immediately took her post at her desk, counted the small moneys that had been taken during her absence, examined the stock, went through the entries in the book, made other entries of her own, checked the serving man in every possible way, and finally dismissed him to bed. Then she turned out the contents of the bowl of money for the second time, and began knotting them up in her handkerchief, in a chain of separate knots, for safe keeping through the night. All this while, Defarge, with his pipe in his mouth, walked up and down, complacently admiring, but never interfering; in which condition, indeed, as to the business and his domestic affairs, he walked up and down through life.

The night was hot, and the shop, close shut and surrounded by so foul a neighbourhood, was ill-smelling. Monsieur Defarge’s olfactory sense was by no means delicate, but the stock of wine smelt much stronger than it ever tasted, and so did the stock of rum and brandy and aniseed. He whiffed the compound of scents away, as he put down his smoked-out pipe. “You are a little depressed, too,” said madame, whose quick eyes had never been so intent on the accounts, but they had had a ray or two for him. “Oh, the men, the men!” “But when it is ready, it takes place, and grinds to pieces everything before it. In the meantime, it is always preparing, though it is not seen or heard. That is your consolation. Keep it.” “I tell thee,” said madame, extending her right hand, for emphasis, “that although it is a long time on the road, it is on the road and coming. I tell thee it never retreats, and never stops. I tell thee it is always advancing. Look around and consider the lives of all the world that we know, consider the faces of all the world that we know, consider the rage and discontent to which the Jacquerie addresses itself with more and more of certainty every hour. Can such things last? Bah! I mock you.”

“My brave wife,” returned Defarge, standing before her with his head a little bent, and his hands clasped at his back, like a docile and attentive pupil before his catechist, “I do not question all this. But it has lasted a long time, and it is possible--you know well, my wife, it is possible--that it may not come, during our lives.” “We shall have helped it,” returned madame, with her extended hand in strong action. “Nothing that we do, is done in vain. I believe, with all my soul, that we shall see the triumph. But even if not, even if I knew certainly not, show me the neck of an aristocrat and tyrant, and still I would--” “Yes! But it is your weakness that you sometimes need to see your victim and your opportunity, to sustain you. Sustain yourself without that. When the time comes, let loose a tiger and a devil; but wait for the time with the tiger and the devil chained--not shown--yet always ready.” Madame enforced the conclusion of this piece of advice by striking her little counter with her chain of money as if she knocked its brains out, and then gathering the heavy handkerchief under her arm in a serene manner, and observing that it was time to go to bed.

Next noontide saw the admirable woman in her usual place in the wine-shop, knitting away assiduously. A rose lay beside her, and if she now and then glanced at the flower, it was with no infraction of her usual preoccupied air. There were a few customers, drinking or not drinking, standing or seated, sprinkled about. The day was very hot, and heaps of flies, who were extending their inquisitive and adventurous perquisitions into all the glutinous little glasses near madame, fell dead at the bottom. Their decease made no impression on the other flies out promenading, who looked at them in the coolest manner (as if they themselves were elephants, or something as far removed), until they met the same fate. Curious to consider how heedless flies are!--perhaps they thought as much at Court that sunny summer day. A figure entering at the door threw a shadow on Madame Defarge which she felt to be a new one. She laid down her knitting, and began to pin her rose in her head-dress, before she looked at the figure. She said it aloud, but added to herself, as she resumed her knitting: “Hah! Good day, age about forty, height about five feet nine, black hair, generally rather handsome visage, complexion dark, eyes dark, thin, long and sallow face, aquiline nose but not straight, having a peculiar inclination towards the left cheek which imparts a sinister expression! Good day, one and all!”

It was the first time it had ever been so complimented, and Madame Defarge knew enough of its antecedents to know better. She said, however, that the cognac was flattered, and took up her knitting. The visitor watched her fingers for a few moments, and took the opportunity of observing the place in general. “That depends. I may find a use for it one day. If I do--Well,” said madame, drawing a breath and nodding her head with a stern kind of coquetry, “I’ll use it!” It was remarkable; but, the taste of Saint Antoine seemed to be decidedly opposed to a rose on the head-dress of Madame Defarge. Two men had entered separately, and had been about to order drink, when, catching sight of that novelty, they faltered, made a pretence of looking about as if for some friend who was not there, and went away. Nor, of those who had been there when this visitor entered, was there one left. They had all dropped off. The spy had kept his eyes open, but had been able to detect no sign. They had lounged away in a poverty-stricken, purposeless, accidental manner, quite natural and unimpeachable.

“_John_,” thought madame, checking off her work as her fingers knitted, and her eyes looked at the stranger. “Stay long enough, and I shall knit ‘BARSAD’ before you go.” “_I_ think?” returned madame, in a high voice. “I and my husband have enough to do to keep this wine-shop open, without thinking. All we think, here, is how to live. That is the subject _we_ think of, and it gives us, from morning to night, enough to think about, without embarrassing our heads concerning others. _I_ think for others? No, no.” The spy, who was there to pick up any crumbs he could find or make, did not allow his baffled state to express itself in his sinister face; but, stood with an air of gossiping gallantry, leaning his elbow on Madame Defarge’s little counter, and occasionally sipping his cognac. “My faith!” returned madame, coolly and lightly, “if people use knives for such purposes, they have to pay for it. He knew beforehand what the price of his luxury was; he has paid the price.” “I believe,” said the spy, dropping his soft voice to a tone that invited confidence, and expressing an injured revolutionary susceptibility in every muscle of his wicked face: “I believe there is much compassion and anger in this neighbourhood, touching the poor fellow? Between ourselves.”

As the keeper of the wine-shop entered at the door, the spy saluted him by touching his hat, and saying, with an engaging smile, “Good day, Jacques!” Defarge stopped short, and stared at him. “I was saying to madame, with whom I had the pleasure of chatting when you entered, that they tell me there is--and no wonder!--much sympathy and anger in Saint Antoine, touching the unhappy fate of poor Gaspard.” Having said it, he passed behind the little counter, and stood with his hand on the back of his wife’s chair, looking over that barrier at the person to whom they were both opposed, and whom either of them would have shot with the greatest satisfaction. The spy, well used to his business, did not change his unconscious attitude, but drained his little glass of cognac, took a sip of fresh water, and asked for another glass of cognac. Madame Defarge poured it out for him, took to her knitting again, and hummed a little song over it. “The pleasure of conversing with you, Monsieur Defarge, recalls to me,” pursued the spy, “that I have the honour of cherishing some interesting associations with your name.”

“Yes, indeed. When Doctor Manette was released, you, his old domestic, had the charge of him, I know. He was delivered to you. You see I am informed of the circumstances?” “Such is the fact, certainly,” said Defarge. He had had it conveyed to him, in an accidental touch of his wife’s elbow as she knitted and warbled, that he would do best to answer, but always with brevity. “It was to you,” said the spy, “that his daughter came; and it was from your care that his daughter took him, accompanied by a neat brown monsieur; how is he called?--in a little wig--Lorry--of the bank of Tellson and Company--over to England.” “In effect,” madame struck in, looking up from her work and her little song, “we never hear about them. We received the news of their safe arrival, and perhaps another letter, or perhaps two; but, since then, they have gradually taken their road in life--we, ours--and we have held no correspondence.” He did not take the identification as a compliment; but he made the best of it, and turned it off with a laugh. After sipping his cognac to the end, he added:

“Yes, Miss Manette is going to be married. But not to an Englishman; to one who, like herself, is French by birth. And speaking of Gaspard (ah, poor Gaspard! It was cruel, cruel!), it is a curious thing that she is going to marry the nephew of Monsieur the Marquis, for whom Gaspard was exalted to that height of so many feet; in other words, the present Marquis. But he lives unknown in England, he is no Marquis there; he is Mr. Charles Darnay. D’Aulnais is the name of his mother’s family.” Madame Defarge knitted steadily, but the intelligence had a palpable effect upon her husband. Do what he would, behind the little counter, as to the striking of a light and the lighting of his pipe, he was troubled, and his hand was not trustworthy. The spy would have been no spy if he had failed to see it, or to record it in his mind. Having made, at least, this one hit, whatever it might prove to be worth, and no customers coming in to help him to any other, Mr. Barsad paid for what he had drunk, and took his leave: taking occasion to say, in a genteel manner, before he departed, that he looked forward to the pleasure of seeing Monsieur and Madame Defarge again. For some minutes after he had emerged into the outer presence of Saint Antoine, the husband and wife remained exactly as he had left them, lest he should come back.

“Can it be true,” said Defarge, in a low voice, looking down at his wife as he stood smoking with his hand on the back of her chair: “what he has said of Ma’amselle Manette?” “Her husband’s destiny,” said Madame Defarge, with her usual composure, “will take him where he is to go, and will lead him to the end that is to end him. That is all I know.” “But it is very strange--now, at least, is it not very strange”--said Defarge, rather pleading with his wife to induce her to admit it, “that, after all our sympathy for Monsieur her father, and herself, her husband’s name should be proscribed under your hand at this moment, by the side of that infernal dog’s who has just left us?” “Stranger things than that will happen when it does come,” answered madame. “I have them both here, of a certainty; and they are both here for their merits; that is enough.” She rolled up her knitting when she had said those words, and presently took the rose out of the handkerchief that was wound about her head. Either Saint Antoine had an instinctive sense that the objectionable decoration was gone, or Saint Antoine was on the watch for its disappearance; howbeit, the Saint took courage to lounge in, very shortly afterwards, and the wine-shop recovered its habitual aspect.

In the evening, at which season of all others Saint Antoine turned himself inside out, and sat on door-steps and window-ledges, and came to the corners of vile streets and courts, for a breath of air, Madame Defarge with her work in her hand was accustomed to pass from place to place and from group to group: a Missionary--there were many like her--such as the world will do well never to breed again. All the women knitted. They knitted worthless things; but, the mechanical work was a mechanical substitute for eating and drinking; the hands moved for the jaws and the digestive apparatus: if the bony fingers had been still, the stomachs would have been more famine-pinched. But, as the fingers went, the eyes went, and the thoughts. And as Madame Defarge moved on from group to group, all three went quicker and fiercer among every little knot of women that she had spoken with, and left behind. Her husband smoked at his door, looking after her with admiration. “A great woman,” said he, “a strong woman, a grand woman, a frightfully grand woman!”

Darkness closed around, and then came the ringing of church bells and the distant beating of the military drums in the Palace Courtyard, as the women sat knitting, knitting. Darkness encompassed them. Another darkness was closing in as surely, when the church bells, then ringing pleasantly in many an airy steeple over France, should be melted into thundering cannon; when the military drums should be beating to drown a wretched voice, that night all potent as the voice of Power and Plenty, Freedom and Life. So much was closing in about the women who sat knitting, knitting, that they their very selves were closing in around a structure yet unbuilt, where they were to sit knitting, knitting, counting dropping heads. Never did the sun go down with a brighter glory on the quiet corner in Soho, than one memorable evening when the Doctor and his daughter sat under the plane-tree together. Never did the moon rise with a milder radiance over great London, than on that night when it found them still seated under the tree, and shone upon their faces through its leaves.

They had said little, though they had been there a long time. When it was yet light enough to work and read, she had neither engaged herself in her usual work, nor had she read to him. She had employed herself in both ways, at his side under the tree, many and many a time; but, this time was not quite like any other, and nothing could make it so. “And I am very happy to-night, dear father. I am deeply happy in the love that Heaven has so blessed--my love for Charles, and Charles’s love for me. But, if my life were not to be still consecrated to you, or if my marriage were so arranged as that it would part us, even by the length of a few of these streets, I should be more unhappy and self-reproachful now than I can tell you. Even as it is--” In the sad moonlight, she clasped him by the neck, and laid her face upon his breast. In the moonlight which is always sad, as the light of the sun itself is--as the light called human life is--at its coming and its going.

“Dearest dear! Can you tell me, this last time, that you feel quite, quite sure, no new affections of mine, and no new duties of mine, will ever interpose between us? _I_ know it well, but do you know it? In your own heart, do you feel quite certain?” Her father answered, with a cheerful firmness of conviction he could scarcely have assumed, “Quite sure, my darling! More than that,” he added, as he tenderly kissed her: “my future is far brighter, Lucie, seen through your marriage, than it could have been--nay, than it ever was--without it.” “Believe it, love! Indeed it is so. Consider how natural and how plain it is, my dear, that it should be so. You, devoted and young, cannot fully appreciate the anxiety I have felt that your life should not be wasted--” “--wasted, my child--should not be wasted, struck aside from the natural order of things--for my sake. Your unselfishness cannot entirely comprehend how much my mind has gone on this; but, only ask yourself, how could my happiness be perfect, while yours was incomplete?”

“My child, you did see him, and it is Charles. If it had not been Charles, it would have been another. Or, if it had been no other, I should have been the cause, and then the dark part of my life would have cast its shadow beyond myself, and would have fallen on you.” It was the first time, except at the trial, of her ever hearing him refer to the period of his suffering. It gave her a strange and new sensation while his words were in her ears; and she remembered it long afterwards. “See!” said the Doctor of Beauvais, raising his hand towards the moon. “I have looked at her from my prison-window, when I could not bear her light. I have looked at her when it has been such torture to me to think of her shining upon what I had lost, that I have beaten my head against my prison-walls. I have looked at her, in a state so dull and lethargic, that I have thought of nothing but the number of horizontal lines I could draw across her at the full, and the number of perpendicular lines with which I could intersect them.” He added in his inward and pondering manner, as he looked at the moon, “It was twenty either way, I remember, and the twentieth was difficult to squeeze in.”

The strange thrill with which she heard him go back to that time, deepened as he dwelt upon it; but, there was nothing to shock her in the manner of his reference. He only seemed to contrast his present cheerfulness and felicity with the dire endurance that was over. “I have looked at her, speculating thousands of times upon the unborn child from whom I had been rent. Whether it was alive. Whether it had been born alive, or the poor mother’s shock had killed it. Whether it was a son who would some day avenge his father. (There was a time in my imprisonment, when my desire for vengeance was unbearable.) Whether it was a son who would never know his father’s story; who might even live to weigh the possibility of his father’s having disappeared of his own will and act. Whether it was a daughter who would grow to be a woman.” “I have pictured my daughter, to myself, as perfectly forgetful of me--rather, altogether ignorant of me, and unconscious of me. I have cast up the years of her age, year after year. I have seen her married to a man who knew nothing of my fate. I have altogether perished from the remembrance of the living, and in the next generation my place was a blank.”

“You, Lucie? It is out of the Consolation and restoration you have brought to me, that these remembrances arise, and pass between us and the moon on this last night.--What did I say just now?” “So! But on other moonlight nights, when the sadness and the silence have touched me in a different way--have affected me with something as like a sorrowful sense of peace, as any emotion that had pain for its foundations could--I have imagined her as coming to me in my cell, and leading me out into the freedom beyond the fortress. I have seen her image in the moonlight often, as I now see you; except that I never held her in my arms; it stood between the little grated window and the door. But, you understand that that was not the child I am speaking of?” “No. That was another thing. It stood before my disturbed sense of sight, but it never moved. The phantom that my mind pursued, was another and more real child. Of her outward appearance I know no more than that she was like her mother. The other had that likeness too--as you have--but was not the same. Can you follow me, Lucie? Hardly, I think? I doubt you must have been a solitary prisoner to understand these perplexed distinctions.”

“In that more peaceful state, I have imagined her, in the moonlight, coming to me and taking me out to show me that the home of her married life was full of her loving remembrance of her lost father. My picture was in her room, and I was in her prayers. Her life was active, cheerful, useful; but my poor history pervaded it all.” “And she showed me her children,” said the Doctor of Beauvais, “and they had heard of me, and had been taught to pity me. When they passed a prison of the State, they kept far from its frowning walls, and looked up at its bars, and spoke in whispers. She could never deliver me; I imagined that she always brought me back after showing me such things. But then, blessed with the relief of tears, I fell upon my knees, and blessed her.” “Lucie, I recall these old troubles in the reason that I have to-night for loving you better than words can tell, and thanking God for my great happiness. My thoughts, when they were wildest, never rose near the happiness that I have known with you, and that we have before us.”

There was no one bidden to the marriage but Mr. Lorry; there was even to be no bridesmaid but the gaunt Miss Pross. The marriage was to make no change in their place of residence; they had been able to extend it, by taking to themselves the upper rooms formerly belonging to the apocryphal invisible lodger, and they desired nothing more. Doctor Manette was very cheerful at the little supper. They were only three at table, and Miss Pross made the third. He regretted that Charles was not there; was more than half disposed to object to the loving little plot that kept him away; and drank to him affectionately. So, the time came for him to bid Lucie good night, and they separated. But, in the stillness of the third hour of the morning, Lucie came downstairs again, and stole into his room; not free from unshaped fears, beforehand. All things, however, were in their places; all was quiet; and he lay asleep, his white hair picturesque on the untroubled pillow, and his hands lying quiet on the coverlet. She put her needless candle in the shadow at a distance, crept up to his bed, and put her lips to his; then, leaned over him, and looked at him.

Into his handsome face, the bitter waters of captivity had worn; but, he covered up their tracks with a determination so strong, that he held the mastery of them even in his sleep. A more remarkable face in its quiet, resolute, and guarded struggle with an unseen assailant, was not to be beheld in all the wide dominions of sleep, that night. She timidly laid her hand on his dear breast, and put up a prayer that she might ever be as true to him as her love aspired to be, and as his sorrows deserved. Then, she withdrew her hand, and kissed his lips once more, and went away. So, the sunrise came, and the shadows of the leaves of the plane-tree moved upon his face, as softly as her lips had moved in praying for him. The marriage-day was shining brightly, and they were ready outside the closed door of the Doctor’s room, where he was speaking with Charles Darnay. They were ready to go to church; the beautiful bride, Mr. Lorry, and Miss Pross--to whom the event, through a gradual process of reconcilement to the inevitable, would have been one of absolute bliss, but for the yet lingering consideration that her brother Solomon should have been the bridegroom.

“And so,” said Mr. Lorry, who could not sufficiently admire the bride, and who had been moving round her to take in every point of her quiet, pretty dress; “and so it was for this, my sweet Lucie, that I brought you across the Channel, such a baby! Lord bless me! How little I thought what I was doing! How lightly I valued the obligation I was conferring on my friend Mr. Charles!” “You were, just now; I saw you do it, and I don’t wonder at it. Such a present of plate as you have made ’em, is enough to bring tears into anybody’s eyes. There’s not a fork or a spoon in the collection,” said Miss Pross, “that I didn’t cry over, last night after the box came, till I couldn’t see it.” “I am highly gratified,” said Mr. Lorry, “though, upon my honour, I had no intention of rendering those trifling articles of remembrance invisible to any one. Dear me! This is an occasion that makes a man speculate on all he has lost. Dear, dear, dear! To think that there might have been a Mrs. Lorry, any time these fifty years almost!”

“Then, I think,” said Mr. Lorry, “that I was very unhandsomely dealt with, and that I ought to have had a voice in the selection of my pattern. Enough! Now, my dear Lucie,” drawing his arm soothingly round her waist, “I hear them moving in the next room, and Miss Pross and I, as two formal folks of business, are anxious not to lose the final opportunity of saying something to you that you wish to hear. You leave your good father, my dear, in hands as earnest and as loving as your own; he shall be taken every conceivable care of; during the next fortnight, while you are in Warwickshire and thereabouts, even Tellson’s shall go to the wall (comparatively speaking) before him. And when, at the fortnight’s end, he comes to join you and your beloved husband, on your other fortnight’s trip in Wales, you shall say that we have sent him to you in the best health and in the happiest frame. Now, I hear Somebody’s step coming to the door. Let me kiss my dear girl with an old-fashioned bachelor blessing, before Somebody comes to claim his own.”

For a moment, he held the fair face from him to look at the well-remembered expression on the forehead, and then laid the bright golden hair against his little brown wig, with a genuine tenderness and delicacy which, if such things be old-fashioned, were as old as Adam. The door of the Doctor’s room opened, and he came out with Charles Darnay. He was so deadly pale--which had not been the case when they went in together--that no vestige of colour was to be seen in his face. But, in the composure of his manner he was unaltered, except that to the shrewd glance of Mr. Lorry it disclosed some shadowy indication that the old air of avoidance and dread had lately passed over him, like a cold wind. He gave his arm to his daughter, and took her down-stairs to the chariot which Mr. Lorry had hired in honour of the day. The rest followed in another carriage, and soon, in a neighbouring church, where no strange eyes looked on, Charles Darnay and Lucie Manette were happily married. Besides the glancing tears that shone among the smiles of the little group when it was done, some diamonds, very bright and sparkling, glanced on the bride’s hand, which were newly released from the dark obscurity of one of Mr. Lorry’s pockets. They returned home to breakfast, and all went well, and in due course the golden hair that had mingled with the poor shoemaker’s white locks in the Paris garret, were mingled with them again in the morning sunlight, on the threshold of the door at parting.

It was a hard parting, though it was not for long. But her father cheered her, and said at last, gently disengaging himself from her enfolding arms, “Take her, Charles! She is yours!” The corner being out of the way of the idle and curious, and the preparations having been very simple and few, the Doctor, Mr. Lorry, and Miss Pross, were left quite alone. It was when they turned into the welcome shade of the cool old hall, that Mr. Lorry observed a great change to have come over the Doctor; as if the golden arm uplifted there, had struck him a poisoned blow. He had naturally repressed much, and some revulsion might have been expected in him when the occasion for repression was gone. But, it was the old scared lost look that troubled Mr. Lorry; and through his absent manner of clasping his head and drearily wandering away into his own room when they got up-stairs, Mr. Lorry was reminded of Defarge the wine-shop keeper, and the starlight ride. “I think,” he whispered to Miss Pross, after anxious consideration, “I think we had best not speak to him just now, or at all disturb him. I must look in at Tellson’s; so I will go there at once and come back presently. Then, we will take him a ride into the country, and dine there, and all will be well.”

It was easier for Mr. Lorry to look in at Tellson’s, than to look out of Tellson’s. He was detained two hours. When he came back, he ascended the old staircase alone, having asked no question of the servant; going thus into the Doctor’s rooms, he was stopped by a low sound of knocking. Miss Pross, with a terrified face, was at his ear. “O me, O me! All is lost!” cried she, wringing her hands. “What is to be told to Ladybird? He doesn’t know me, and is making shoes!” Mr. Lorry said what he could to calm her, and went himself into the Doctor’s room. The bench was turned towards the light, as it had been when he had seen the shoemaker at his work before, and his head was bent down, and he was very busy. He had laid aside his coat and waistcoat; his shirt was open at the throat, as it used to be when he did that work; and even the old haggard, faded surface of face had come back to him. He worked hard--impatiently--as if in some sense of having been interrupted.

Mr. Lorry glanced at the work in his hand, and observed that it was a shoe of the old size and shape. He took up another that was lying by him, and asked what it was. Nothing would induce him to speak more. He looked up, for an instant at a time, when he was requested to do so; but, no persuasion would extract a word from him. He worked, and worked, and worked, in silence, and words fell on him as they would have fallen on an echoless wall, or on the air. The only ray of hope that Mr. Lorry could discover, was, that he sometimes furtively looked up without being asked. In that, there seemed a faint expression of curiosity or perplexity--as though he were trying to reconcile some doubts in his mind. Two things at once impressed themselves on Mr. Lorry, as important above all others; the first, that this must be kept secret from Lucie; the second, that it must be kept secret from all who knew him. In conjunction with Miss Pross, he took immediate steps towards the latter precaution, by giving out that the Doctor was not well, and required a few days of complete rest. In aid of the kind deception to be practised on his daughter, Miss Pross was to write, describing his having been called away professionally, and referring to an imaginary letter of two or three hurried lines in his own hand, represented to have been addressed to her by the same post.

These measures, advisable to be taken in any case, Mr. Lorry took in the hope of his coming to himself. If that should happen soon, he kept another course in reserve; which was, to have a certain opinion that he thought the best, on the Doctor’s case. In the hope of his recovery, and of resort to this third course being thereby rendered practicable, Mr. Lorry resolved to watch him attentively, with as little appearance as possible of doing so. He therefore made arrangements to absent himself from Tellson’s for the first time in his life, and took his post by the window in the same room. He was not long in discovering that it was worse than useless to speak to him, since, on being pressed, he became worried. He abandoned that attempt on the first day, and resolved merely to keep himself always before him, as a silent protest against the delusion into which he had fallen, or was falling. He remained, therefore, in his seat near the window, reading and writing, and expressing in as many pleasant and natural ways as he could think of, that it was a free place.

Doctor Manette took what was given him to eat and drink, and worked on, that first day, until it was too dark to see--worked on, half an hour after Mr. Lorry could not have seen, for his life, to read or write. When he put his tools aside as useless, until morning, Mr. Lorry rose and said to him: He made no effort to say why not, and said not a word more. But, Mr. Lorry thought he saw, as he leaned forward on his bench in the dusk, with his elbows on his knees and his head in his hands, that he was in some misty way asking himself, “Why not?” The sagacity of the man of business perceived an advantage here, and determined to hold it. Miss Pross and he divided the night into two watches, and observed him at intervals from the adjoining room. He paced up and down for a long time before he lay down; but, when he did finally lay himself down, he fell asleep. In the morning, he was up betimes, and went straight to his bench and to work.

On this second day, Mr. Lorry saluted him cheerfully by his name, and spoke to him on topics that had been of late familiar to them. He returned no reply, but it was evident that he heard what was said, and that he thought about it, however confusedly. This encouraged Mr. Lorry to have Miss Pross in with her work, several times during the day; at those times, they quietly spoke of Lucie, and of her father then present, precisely in the usual manner, and as if there were nothing amiss. This was done without any demonstrative accompaniment, not long enough, or often enough to harass him; and it lightened Mr. Lorry’s friendly heart to believe that he looked up oftener, and that he appeared to be stirred by some perception of inconsistencies surrounding him. This time, Mr. Lorry feigned to go out when he could extract no answer from him, and, after remaining absent for an hour, returned. In the meanwhile, the Doctor had removed to the seat in the window, and had sat there looking down at the plane-tree; but, on Mr. Lorry’s return, he slipped away to his bench.

The time went very slowly on, and Mr. Lorry’s hope darkened, and his heart grew heavier again, and grew yet heavier and heavier every day. The third day came and went, the fourth, the fifth. Five days, six days, seven days, eight days, nine days. With a hope ever darkening, and with a heart always growing heavier and heavier, Mr. Lorry passed through this anxious time. The secret was well kept, and Lucie was unconscious and happy; but he could not fail to observe that the shoemaker, whose hand had been a little out at first, was growing dreadfully skilful, and that he had never been so intent on his work, and that his hands had never been so nimble and expert, as in the dusk of the ninth evening. Worn out by anxious watching, Mr. Lorry fell asleep at his post. On the tenth morning of his suspense, he was startled by the shining of the sun into the room where a heavy slumber had overtaken him when it was dark night. He rubbed his eyes and roused himself; but he doubted, when he had done so, whether he was not still asleep. For, going to the door of the Doctor’s room and looking in, he perceived that the shoemaker’s bench and tools were put aside again, and that the Doctor himself sat reading at the window. He was in his usual morning dress, and his face (which Mr. Lorry could distinctly see), though still very pale, was calmly studious and attentive.

Even when he had satisfied himself that he was awake, Mr. Lorry felt giddily uncertain for some few moments whether the late shoemaking might not be a disturbed dream of his own; for, did not his eyes show him his friend before him in his accustomed clothing and aspect, and employed as usual; and was there any sign within their range, that the change of which he had so strong an impression had actually happened? It was but the inquiry of his first confusion and astonishment, the answer being obvious. If the impression were not produced by a real corresponding and sufficient cause, how came he, Jarvis Lorry, there? How came he to have fallen asleep, in his clothes, on the sofa in Doctor Manette’s consulting-room, and to be debating these points outside the Doctor’s bedroom door in the early morning? Within a few minutes, Miss Pross stood whispering at his side. If he had had any particle of doubt left, her talk would of necessity have resolved it; but he was by that time clear-headed, and had none. He advised that they should let the time go by until the regular breakfast-hour, and should then meet the Doctor as if nothing unusual had occurred. If he appeared to be in his customary state of mind, Mr. Lorry would then cautiously proceed to seek direction and guidance from the opinion he had been, in his anxiety, so anxious to obtain.

Miss Pross, submitting herself to his judgment, the scheme was worked out with care. Having abundance of time for his usual methodical toilette, Mr. Lorry presented himself at the breakfast-hour in his usual white linen, and with his usual neat leg. The Doctor was summoned in the usual way, and came to breakfast. So far as it was possible to comprehend him without overstepping those delicate and gradual approaches which Mr. Lorry felt to be the only safe advance, he at first supposed that his daughter’s marriage had taken place yesterday. An incidental allusion, purposely thrown out, to the day of the week, and the day of the month, set him thinking and counting, and evidently made him uneasy. In all other respects, however, he was so composedly himself, that Mr. Lorry determined to have the aid he sought. And that aid was his own. “My dear Manette, I am anxious to have your opinion, in confidence, on a very curious case in which I am deeply interested; that is to say, it is very curious to me; perhaps, to your better information it may be less so.”

Glancing at his hands, which were discoloured by his late work, the Doctor looked troubled, and listened attentively. He had already glanced at his hands more than once. “Doctor Manette,” said Mr. Lorry, touching him affectionately on the arm, “the case is the case of a particularly dear friend of mine. Pray give your mind to it, and advise me well for his sake--and above all, for his daughter’s--his daughter’s, my dear Manette.” “My dear Manette, it is the case of an old and a prolonged shock, of great acuteness and severity to the affections, the feelings, the--the--as you express it--the mind. The mind. It is the case of a shock under which the sufferer was borne down, one cannot say for how long, because I believe he cannot calculate the time himself, and there are no other means of getting at it. It is the case of a shock from which the sufferer recovered, by a process that he cannot trace himself--as I once heard him publicly relate in a striking manner. It is the case of a shock from which he has recovered, so completely, as to be a highly intelligent man, capable of close application of mind, and great exertion of body, and of constantly making fresh additions to his stock of knowledge, which was already very large. But, unfortunately, there has been,” he paused and took a deep breath--“a slight relapse.”

The Doctor grasped his hand, and murmured, “That was very kind. That was very thoughtful!” Mr. Lorry grasped his hand in return, and neither of the two spoke for a little while. “Now, my dear Manette,” said Mr. Lorry, at length, in his most considerate and most affectionate way, “I am a mere man of business, and unfit to cope with such intricate and difficult matters. I do not possess the kind of information necessary; I do not possess the kind of intelligence; I want guiding. There is no man in this world on whom I could so rely for right guidance, as on you. Tell me, how does this relapse come about? Is there danger of another? Could a repetition of it be prevented? How should a repetition of it be treated? How does it come about at all? What can I do for my friend? No man ever can have been more desirous in his heart to serve a friend, than I am to serve mine, if I knew how. “But I don’t know how to originate, in such a case. If your sagacity, knowledge, and experience, could put me on the right track, I might be able to do so much; unenlightened and undirected, I can do so little. Pray discuss it with me; pray enable me to see it a little more clearly, and teach me how to be a little more useful.”

“I think it probable,” said the Doctor, breaking silence with an effort, “that the relapse you have described, my dear friend, was not quite unforeseen by its subject.” “You have no idea how such an apprehension weighs on the sufferer’s mind, and how difficult--how almost impossible--it is, for him to force himself to utter a word upon the topic that oppresses him.” “I believe,” returned Doctor Manette, “that there had been a strong and extraordinary revival of the train of thought and remembrance that was the first cause of the malady. Some intense associations of a most distressing nature were vividly recalled, I think. It is probable that there had long been a dread lurking in his mind, that those associations would be recalled--say, under certain circumstances--say, on a particular occasion. He tried to prepare himself in vain; perhaps the effort to prepare himself made him less able to bear it.” “As to the future,” said the Doctor, recovering firmness, “I should have great hope. As it pleased Heaven in its mercy to restore him so soon, I should have great hope. He, yielding under the pressure of a complicated something, long dreaded and long vaguely foreseen and contended against, and recovering after the cloud had burst and passed, I should hope that the worst was over.”

“To the first, then. He is of a studious habit, and unusually energetic; he applies himself with great ardour to the acquisition of professional knowledge, to the conducting of experiments, to many things. Now, does he do too much?” “I think not. It may be the character of his mind, to be always in singular need of occupation. That may be, in part, natural to it; in part, the result of affliction. The less it was occupied with healthy things, the more it would be in danger of turning in the unhealthy direction. He may have observed himself, and made the discovery.” “I do not think so. I do not think,” said Doctor Manette with the firmness of self-conviction, “that anything but the one train of association would renew it. I think that, henceforth, nothing but some extraordinary jarring of that chord could renew it. After what has happened, and after his recovery, I find it difficult to imagine any such violent sounding of that string again. I trust, and I almost believe, that the circumstances likely to renew it are exhausted.”

He spoke with the diffidence of a man who knew how slight a thing would overset the delicate organisation of the mind, and yet with the confidence of a man who had slowly won his assurance out of personal endurance and distress. It was not for his friend to abate that confidence. He professed himself more relieved and encouraged than he really was, and approached his second and last point. He felt it to be the most difficult of all; but, remembering his old Sunday morning conversation with Miss Pross, and remembering what he had seen in the last nine days, he knew that he must face it. “The occupation resumed under the influence of this passing affliction so happily recovered from,” said Mr. Lorry, clearing his throat, “we will call--Blacksmith’s work, Blacksmith’s work. We will say, to put a case and for the sake of illustration, that he had been used, in his bad time, to work at a little forge. We will say that he was unexpectedly found at his forge again. Is it not a pity that he should keep it by him?”

“You do not find it easy to advise me?” said Mr. Lorry. “I quite understand it to be a nice question. And yet I think--” And there he shook his head, and stopped. “You see,” said Doctor Manette, turning to him after an uneasy pause, “it is very hard to explain, consistently, the innermost workings of this poor man’s mind. He once yearned so frightfully for that occupation, and it was so welcome when it came; no doubt it relieved his pain so much, by substituting the perplexity of the fingers for the perplexity of the brain, and by substituting, as he became more practised, the ingenuity of the hands, for the ingenuity of the mental torture; that he has never been able to bear the thought of putting it quite out of his reach. Even now, when I believe he is more hopeful of himself than he has ever been, and even speaks of himself with a kind of confidence, the idea that he might need that old employment, and not find it, gives him a sudden sense of terror, like that which one may fancy strikes to the heart of a lost child.”

“But may not--mind! I ask for information, as a plodding man of business who only deals with such material objects as guineas, shillings, and bank-notes--may not the retention of the thing involve the retention of the idea? If the thing were gone, my dear Manette, might not the fear go with it? In short, is it not a concession to the misgiving, to keep the forge?” “I would not keep it,” said Mr. Lorry, shaking his head; for he gained in firmness as he saw the Doctor disquieted. “I would recommend him to sacrifice it. I only want your authority. I am sure it does no good. Come! Give me your authority, like a dear good man. For his daughter’s sake, my dear Manette!” “In her name, then, let it be done; I sanction it. But, I would not take it away while he was present. Let it be removed when he is not there; let him miss his old companion after an absence.” Mr. Lorry readily engaged for that, and the conference was ended. They passed the day in the country, and the Doctor was quite restored. On the three following days he remained perfectly well, and on the fourteenth day he went away to join Lucie and her husband. The precaution that had been taken to account for his silence, Mr. Lorry had previously explained to him, and he had written to Lucie in accordance with it, and she had no suspicions.

On the night of the day on which he left the house, Mr. Lorry went into his room with a chopper, saw, chisel, and hammer, attended by Miss Pross carrying a light. There, with closed doors, and in a mysterious and guilty manner, Mr. Lorry hacked the shoemaker’s bench to pieces, while Miss Pross held the candle as if she were assisting at a murder--for which, indeed, in her grimness, she was no unsuitable figure. The burning of the body (previously reduced to pieces convenient for the purpose) was commenced without delay in the kitchen fire; and the tools, shoes, and leather, were buried in the garden. So wicked do destruction and secrecy appear to honest minds, that Mr. Lorry and Miss Pross, while engaged in the commission of their deed and in the removal of its traces, almost felt, and almost looked, like accomplices in a horrible crime. When the newly-married pair came home, the first person who appeared, to offer his congratulations, was Sydney Carton. They had not been at home many hours, when he presented himself. He was not improved in habits, or in looks, or in manner; but there was a certain rugged air of fidelity about him, which was new to the observation of Charles Darnay.

“You are good enough to say so, as a fashion of speech; but, I don’t mean any fashion of speech. Indeed, when I say I wish we might be friends, I scarcely mean quite that, either.” “Upon my life,” said Carton, smiling, “I find that easier to comprehend in my own mind, than to convey to yours. However, let me try. You remember a certain famous occasion when I was more drunk than--than usual?” “I remember it too. The curse of those occasions is heavy upon me, for I always remember them. I hope it may be taken into account one day, when all days are at an end for me! Don’t be alarmed; I am not going to preach.” “Ah!” said Carton, with a careless wave of his hand, as if he waved that away. “On the drunken occasion in question (one of a large number, as you know), I was insufferable about liking you, and not liking you. I wish you would forget it.” “Fashion of speech again! But, Mr. Darnay, oblivion is not so easy to me, as you represent it to be to you. I have by no means forgotten it, and a light answer does not help me to forget it.”

“If it was a light answer,” returned Darnay, “I beg your forgiveness for it. I had no other object than to turn a slight thing, which, to my surprise, seems to trouble you too much, aside. I declare to you, on the faith of a gentleman, that I have long dismissed it from my mind. Good Heaven, what was there to dismiss! Have I had nothing more important to remember, in the great service you rendered me that day?” “As to the great service,” said Carton, “I am bound to avow to you, when you speak of it in that way, that it was mere professional claptrap, I don’t know that I cared what became of you, when I rendered it.--Mind! I say when I rendered it; I am speaking of the past.” “Genuine truth, Mr. Darnay, trust me! I have gone aside from my purpose; I was speaking about our being friends. Now, you know me; you know I am incapable of all the higher and better flights of men. If you doubt it, ask Stryver, and he’ll tell you so.”

“But I do, and you must take my word for it. Well! If you could endure to have such a worthless fellow, and a fellow of such indifferent reputation, coming and going at odd times, I should ask that I might be permitted to come and go as a privileged person here; that I might be regarded as an useless (and I would add, if it were not for the resemblance I detected between you and me, an unornamental) piece of furniture, tolerated for its old service, and taken no notice of. I doubt if I should abuse the permission. It is a hundred to one if I should avail myself of it four times in a year. It would satisfy me, I dare say, to know that I had it.” When he was gone, and in the course of an evening passed with Miss Pross, the Doctor, and Mr. Lorry, Charles Darnay made some mention of this conversation in general terms, and spoke of Sydney Carton as a problem of carelessness and recklessness. He spoke of him, in short, not bitterly or meaning to bear hard upon him, but as anybody might who saw him as he showed himself.

He had no idea that this could dwell in the thoughts of his fair young wife; but, when he afterwards joined her in their own rooms, he found her waiting for him with the old pretty lifting of the forehead strongly marked. “Yes, dearest Charles,” with her hands on his breast, and the inquiring and attentive expression fixed upon him; “we are rather thoughtful to-night, for we have something on our mind to-night.” “I would ask you, dearest, to be very generous with him always, and very lenient on his faults when he is not by. I would ask you to believe that he has a heart he very, very seldom reveals, and that there are deep wounds in it. My dear, I have seen it bleeding.” “My husband, it is so. I fear he is not to be reclaimed; there is scarcely a hope that anything in his character or fortunes is reparable now. But, I am sure that he is capable of good things, gentle things, even magnanimous things.” “And, O my dearest Love!” she urged, clinging nearer to him, laying her head upon his breast, and raising her eyes to his, “remember how strong we are in our happiness, and how weak he is in his misery!”

He bent over the golden head, and put the rosy lips to his, and folded her in his arms. If one forlorn wanderer then pacing the dark streets, could have heard her innocent disclosure, and could have seen the drops of pity kissed away by her husband from the soft blue eyes so loving of that husband, he might have cried to the night--and the words would not have parted from his lips for the first time-- A wonderful corner for echoes, it has been remarked, that corner where the Doctor lived. Ever busily winding the golden thread which bound her husband, and her father, and herself, and her old directress and companion, in a life of quiet bliss, Lucie sat in the still house in the tranquilly resounding corner, listening to the echoing footsteps of years. At first, there were times, though she was a perfectly happy young wife, when her work would slowly fall from her hands, and her eyes would be dimmed. For, there was something coming in the echoes, something light, afar off, and scarcely audible yet, that stirred her heart too much. Fluttering hopes and doubts--hopes, of a love as yet unknown to her: doubts, of her remaining upon earth, to enjoy that new delight--divided her breast. Among the echoes then, there would arise the sound of footsteps at her own early grave; and thoughts of the husband who would be left so desolate, and who would mourn for her so much, swelled to her eyes, and broke like waves.

That time passed, and her little Lucie lay on her bosom. Then, among the advancing echoes, there was the tread of her tiny feet and the sound of her prattling words. Let greater echoes resound as they would, the young mother at the cradle side could always hear those coming. They came, and the shady house was sunny with a child’s laugh, and the Divine friend of children, to whom in her trouble she had confided hers, seemed to take her child in his arms, as He took the child of old, and made it a sacred joy to her. Ever busily winding the golden thread that bound them all together, weaving the service of her happy influence through the tissue of all their lives, and making it predominate nowhere, Lucie heard in the echoes of years none but friendly and soothing sounds. Her husband’s step was strong and prosperous among them; her father’s firm and equal. Lo, Miss Pross, in harness of string, awakening the echoes, as an unruly charger, whip-corrected, snorting and pawing the earth under the plane-tree in the garden!

Even when there were sounds of sorrow among the rest, they were not harsh nor cruel. Even when golden hair, like her own, lay in a halo on a pillow round the worn face of a little boy, and he said, with a radiant smile, “Dear papa and mamma, I am very sorry to leave you both, and to leave my pretty sister; but I am called, and I must go!” those were not tears all of agony that wetted his young mother’s cheek, as the spirit departed from her embrace that had been entrusted to it. Suffer them and forbid them not. They see my Father’s face. O Father, blessed words! Thus, the rustling of an Angel’s wings got blended with the other echoes, and they were not wholly of earth, but had in them that breath of Heaven. Sighs of the winds that blew over a little garden-tomb were mingled with them also, and both were audible to Lucie, in a hushed murmur--like the breathing of a summer sea asleep upon a sandy shore--as the little Lucie, comically studious at the task of the morning, or dressing a doll at her mother’s footstool, chattered in the tongues of the Two Cities that were blended in her life.

The Echoes rarely answered to the actual tread of Sydney Carton. Some half-dozen times a year, at most, he claimed his privilege of coming in uninvited, and would sit among them through the evening, as he had once done often. He never came there heated with wine. And one other thing regarding him was whispered in the echoes, which has been whispered by all true echoes for ages and ages. No man ever really loved a woman, lost her, and knew her with a blameless though an unchanged mind, when she was a wife and a mother, but her children had a strange sympathy with him--an instinctive delicacy of pity for him. What fine hidden sensibilities are touched in such a case, no echoes tell; but it is so, and it was so here. Carton was the first stranger to whom little Lucie held out her chubby arms, and he kept his place with her as she grew. The little boy had spoken of him, almost at the last. “Poor Carton! Kiss him for me!” Mr. Stryver shouldered his way through the law, like some great engine forcing itself through turbid water, and dragged his useful friend in his wake, like a boat towed astern. As the boat so favoured is usually in a rough plight, and mostly under water, so, Sydney had a swamped life of it. But, easy and strong custom, unhappily so much easier and stronger in him than any stimulating sense of desert or disgrace, made it the life he was to lead; and he no more thought of emerging from his state of lion’s jackal, than any real jackal may be supposed to think of rising to be a lion. Stryver was rich; had married a florid widow with property and three boys, who had nothing particularly shining about them but the straight hair of their dumpling heads.

These three young gentlemen, Mr. Stryver, exuding patronage of the most offensive quality from every pore, had walked before him like three sheep to the quiet corner in Soho, and had offered as pupils to Lucie’s husband: delicately saying “Halloa! here are three lumps of bread-and-cheese towards your matrimonial picnic, Darnay!” The polite rejection of the three lumps of bread-and-cheese had quite bloated Mr. Stryver with indignation, which he afterwards turned to account in the training of the young gentlemen, by directing them to beware of the pride of Beggars, like that tutor-fellow. He was also in the habit of declaiming to Mrs. Stryver, over his full-bodied wine, on the arts Mrs. Darnay had once put in practice to “catch” him, and on the diamond-cut-diamond arts in himself, madam, which had rendered him “not to be caught.” Some of his King’s Bench familiars, who were occasionally parties to the full-bodied wine and the lie, excused him for the latter by saying that he had told it so often, that he believed it himself--which is surely such an incorrigible aggravation of an originally bad offence, as to justify any such offender’s being carried off to some suitably retired spot, and there hanged out of the way.

These were among the echoes to which Lucie, sometimes pensive, sometimes amused and laughing, listened in the echoing corner, until her little daughter was six years old. How near to her heart the echoes of her child’s tread came, and those of her own dear father’s, always active and self-possessed, and those of her dear husband’s, need not be told. Nor, how the lightest echo of their united home, directed by herself with such a wise and elegant thrift that it was more abundant than any waste, was music to her. Nor, how there were echoes all about her, sweet in her ears, of the many times her father had told her that he found her more devoted to him married (if that could be) than single, and of the many times her husband had said to her that no cares and duties seemed to divide her love for him or her help to him, and asked her “What is the magic secret, my darling, of your being everything to all of us, as if there were only one of us, yet never seeming to be hurried, or to have too much to do?”

But, there were other echoes, from a distance, that rumbled menacingly in the corner all through this space of time. And it was now, about little Lucie’s sixth birthday, that they began to have an awful sound, as of a great storm in France with a dreadful sea rising. On a night in mid-July, one thousand seven hundred and eighty-nine, Mr. Lorry came in late, from Tellson’s, and sat himself down by Lucie and her husband in the dark window. It was a hot, wild night, and they were all three reminded of the old Sunday night when they had looked at the lightning from the same place. “I began to think,” said Mr. Lorry, pushing his brown wig back, “that I should have to pass the night at Tellson’s. We have been so full of business all day, that we have not known what to do first, or which way to turn. There is such an uneasiness in Paris, that we have actually a run of confidence upon us! Our customers over there, seem not to be able to confide their property to us fast enough. There is positively a mania among some of them for sending it to England.”

“A bad look, you say, my dear Darnay? Yes, but we don’t know what reason there is in it. People are so unreasonable! Some of us at Tellson’s are getting old, and we really can’t be troubled out of the ordinary course without due occasion.” “I know that, to be sure,” assented Mr. Lorry, trying to persuade himself that his sweet temper was soured, and that he grumbled, “but I am determined to be peevish after my long day’s botheration. Where is Manette?” “I am quite glad you are at home; for these hurries and forebodings by which I have been surrounded all day long, have made me nervous without reason. You are not going out, I hope?” “That’s right; all safe and well! I don’t know why anything should be otherwise than safe and well here, thank God; but I have been so put out all day, and I am not as young as I was! My tea, my dear! Thank ye. Now, come and take your place in the circle, and let us sit quiet, and hear the echoes about which you have your theory.”

Headlong, mad, and dangerous footsteps to force their way into anybody’s life, footsteps not easily made clean again if once stained red, the footsteps raging in Saint Antoine afar off, as the little circle sat in the dark London window. Saint Antoine had been, that morning, a vast dusky mass of scarecrows heaving to and fro, with frequent gleams of light above the billowy heads, where steel blades and bayonets shone in the sun. A tremendous roar arose from the throat of Saint Antoine, and a forest of naked arms struggled in the air like shrivelled branches of trees in a winter wind: all the fingers convulsively clutching at every weapon or semblance of a weapon that was thrown up from the depths below, no matter how far off. Who gave them out, whence they last came, where they began, through what agency they crookedly quivered and jerked, scores at a time, over the heads of the crowd, like a kind of lightning, no eye in the throng could have told; but, muskets were being distributed--so were cartridges, powder, and ball, bars of iron and wood, knives, axes, pikes, every weapon that distracted ingenuity could discover or devise. People who could lay hold of nothing else, set themselves with bleeding hands to force stones and bricks out of their places in walls. Every pulse and heart in Saint Antoine was on high-fever strain and at high-fever heat. Every living creature there held life as of no account, and was demented with a passionate readiness to sacrifice it.

As a whirlpool of boiling waters has a centre point, so, all this raging circled round Defarge’s wine-shop, and every human drop in the caldron had a tendency to be sucked towards the vortex where Defarge himself, already begrimed with gunpowder and sweat, issued orders, issued arms, thrust this man back, dragged this man forward, disarmed one to arm another, laboured and strove in the thickest of the uproar. “Keep near to me, Jacques Three,” cried Defarge; “and do you, Jacques One and Two, separate and put yourselves at the head of as many of these patriots as you can. Where is my wife?” “Eh, well! Here you see me!” said madame, composed as ever, but not knitting to-day. Madame’s resolute right hand was occupied with an axe, in place of the usual softer implements, and in her girdle were a pistol and a cruel knife. With a roar that sounded as if all the breath in France had been shaped into the detested word, the living sea rose, wave on wave, depth on depth, and overflowed the city to that point. Alarm-bells ringing, drums beating, the sea raging and thundering on its new beach, the attack began.

Deep ditches, double drawbridge, massive stone walls, eight great towers, cannon, muskets, fire and smoke. Through the fire and through the smoke--in the fire and in the smoke, for the sea cast him up against a cannon, and on the instant he became a cannonier--Defarge of the wine-shop worked like a manful soldier, Two fierce hours. Deep ditch, single drawbridge, massive stone walls, eight great towers, cannon, muskets, fire and smoke. One drawbridge down! “Work, comrades all, work! Work, Jacques One, Jacques Two, Jacques One Thousand, Jacques Two Thousand, Jacques Five-and-Twenty Thousand; in the name of all the Angels or the Devils--which you prefer--work!” Thus Defarge of the wine-shop, still at his gun, which had long grown hot. “To me, women!” cried madame his wife. “What! We can kill as well as the men when the place is taken!” And to her, with a shrill thirsty cry, trooping women variously armed, but all armed alike in hunger and revenge. Cannon, muskets, fire and smoke; but, still the deep ditch, the single drawbridge, the massive stone walls, and the eight great towers. Slight displacements of the raging sea, made by the falling wounded. Flashing weapons, blazing torches, smoking waggonloads of wet straw, hard work at neighbouring barricades in all directions, shrieks, volleys, execrations, bravery without stint, boom smash and rattle, and the furious sounding of the living sea; but, still the deep ditch, and the single drawbridge, and the massive stone walls, and the eight great towers, and still Defarge of the wine-shop at his gun, grown doubly hot by the service of Four fierce hours.

A white flag from within the fortress, and a parley--this dimly perceptible through the raging storm, nothing audible in it--suddenly the sea rose immeasurably wider and higher, and swept Defarge of the wine-shop over the lowered drawbridge, past the massive stone outer walls, in among the eight great towers surrendered! So resistless was the force of the ocean bearing him on, that even to draw his breath or turn his head was as impracticable as if he had been struggling in the surf at the South Sea, until he was landed in the outer courtyard of the Bastille. There, against an angle of a wall, he made a struggle to look about him. Jacques Three was nearly at his side; Madame Defarge, still heading some of her women, was visible in the inner distance, and her knife was in her hand. Everywhere was tumult, exultation, deafening and maniacal bewilderment, astounding noise, yet furious dumb-show. Of all these cries, and ten thousand incoherences, “The Prisoners!” was the cry most taken up by the sea that rushed in, as if there were an eternity of people, as well as of time and space. When the foremost billows rolled past, bearing the prison officers with them, and threatening them all with instant death if any secret nook remained undisclosed, Defarge laid his strong hand on the breast of one of these men--a man with a grey head, who had a lighted torch in his hand--separated him from the rest, and got him between himself and the wall.

Jacques Three, with his usual craving on him, and evidently disappointed by the dialogue taking a turn that did not seem to promise bloodshed, held by Defarge’s arm as he held by the turnkey’s. Their three heads had been close together during this brief discourse, and it had been as much as they could do to hear one another, even then: so tremendous was the noise of the living ocean, in its irruption into the Fortress, and its inundation of the courts and passages and staircases. All around outside, too, it beat the walls with a deep, hoarse roar, from which, occasionally, some partial shouts of tumult broke and leaped into the air like spray. Through gloomy vaults where the light of day had never shone, past hideous doors of dark dens and cages, down cavernous flights of steps, and again up steep rugged ascents of stone and brick, more like dry waterfalls than staircases, Defarge, the turnkey, and Jacques Three, linked hand and arm, went with all the speed they could make. Here and there, especially at first, the inundation started on them and swept by; but when they had done descending, and were winding and climbing up a tower, they were alone. Hemmed in here by the massive thickness of walls and arches, the storm within the fortress and without was only audible to them in a dull, subdued way, as if the noise out of which they had come had almost destroyed their sense of hearing.

There was a small, heavily-grated, unglazed window high in the wall, with a stone screen before it, so that the sky could be only seen by stooping low and looking up. There was a small chimney, heavily barred across, a few feet within. There was a heap of old feathery wood-ashes on the hearth. There was a stool, and table, and a straw bed. There were the four blackened walls, and a rusted iron ring in one of them. “Alexandre Manette,” said Defarge in his ear, following the letters with his swart forefinger, deeply engrained with gunpowder. “And here he wrote ‘a poor physician.’ And it was he, without doubt, who scratched a calendar on this stone. What is that in your hand? A crowbar? Give it me!” He had still the linstock of his gun in his own hand. He made a sudden exchange of the two instruments, and turning on the worm-eaten stool and table, beat them to pieces in a few blows. “Hold the light higher!” he said, wrathfully, to the turnkey. “Look among those fragments with care, Jacques. And see! Here is my knife,” throwing it to him; “rip open that bed, and search the straw. Hold the light higher, you!”

With a menacing look at the turnkey he crawled upon the hearth, and, peering up the chimney, struck and prised at its sides with the crowbar, and worked at the iron grating across it. In a few minutes, some mortar and dust came dropping down, which he averted his face to avoid; and in it, and in the old wood-ashes, and in a crevice in the chimney into which his weapon had slipped or wrought itself, he groped with a cautious touch. The turnkey fired the little pile, which blazed high and hot. Stooping again to come out at the low-arched door, they left it burning, and retraced their way to the courtyard; seeming to recover their sense of hearing as they came down, until they were in the raging flood once more. They found it surging and tossing, in quest of Defarge himself. Saint Antoine was clamorous to have its wine-shop keeper foremost in the guard upon the governor who had defended the Bastille and shot the people. Otherwise, the governor would not be marched to the Hotel de Ville for judgment. Otherwise, the governor would escape, and the people’s blood (suddenly of some value, after many years of worthlessness) be unavenged.

In the howling universe of passion and contention that seemed to encompass this grim old officer conspicuous in his grey coat and red decoration, there was but one quite steady figure, and that was a woman’s. “See, there is my husband!” she cried, pointing him out. “See Defarge!” She stood immovable close to the grim old officer, and remained immovable close to him; remained immovable close to him through the streets, as Defarge and the rest bore him along; remained immovable close to him when he was got near his destination, and began to be struck at from behind; remained immovable close to him when the long-gathering rain of stabs and blows fell heavy; was so close to him when he dropped dead under it, that, suddenly animated, she put her foot upon his neck, and with her cruel knife--long ready--hewed off his head. The hour was come, when Saint Antoine was to execute his horrible idea of hoisting up men for lamps to show what he could be and do. Saint Antoine’s blood was up, and the blood of tyranny and domination by the iron hand was down--down on the steps of the Hotel de Ville where the governor’s body lay--down on the sole of the shoe of Madame Defarge where she had trodden on the body to steady it for mutilation. “Lower the lamp yonder!” cried Saint Antoine, after glaring round for a new means of death; “here is one of his soldiers to be left on guard!” The swinging sentinel was posted, and the sea rushed on.

The sea of black and threatening waters, and of destructive upheaving of wave against wave, whose depths were yet unfathomed and whose forces were yet unknown. The remorseless sea of turbulently swaying shapes, voices of vengeance, and faces hardened in the furnaces of suffering until the touch of pity could make no mark on them. But, in the ocean of faces where every fierce and furious expression was in vivid life, there were two groups of faces--each seven in number--so fixedly contrasting with the rest, that never did sea roll which bore more memorable wrecks with it. Seven faces of prisoners, suddenly released by the storm that had burst their tomb, were carried high overhead: all scared, all lost, all wondering and amazed, as if the Last Day were come, and those who rejoiced around them were lost spirits. Other seven faces there were, carried higher, seven dead faces, whose drooping eyelids and half-seen eyes awaited the Last Day. Impassive faces, yet with a suspended--not an abolished--expression on them; faces, rather, in a fearful pause, as having yet to raise the dropped lids of the eyes, and bear witness with the bloodless lips, “THOU DIDST IT!”

Seven prisoners released, seven gory heads on pikes, the keys of the accursed fortress of the eight strong towers, some discovered letters and other memorials of prisoners of old time, long dead of broken hearts,--such, and such--like, the loudly echoing footsteps of Saint Antoine escort through the Paris streets in mid-July, one thousand seven hundred and eighty-nine. Now, Heaven defeat the fancy of Lucie Darnay, and keep these feet far out of her life! For, they are headlong, mad, and dangerous; and in the years so long after the breaking of the cask at Defarge’s wine-shop door, they are not easily purified when once stained red. Haggard Saint Antoine had had only one exultant week, in which to soften his modicum of hard and bitter bread to such extent as he could, with the relish of fraternal embraces and congratulations, when Madame Defarge sat at her counter, as usual, presiding over the customers. Madame Defarge wore no rose in her head, for the great brotherhood of Spies had become, even in one short week, extremely chary of trusting themselves to the saint’s mercies. The lamps across his streets had a portentously elastic swing with them.

Madame Defarge, with her arms folded, sat in the morning light and heat, contemplating the wine-shop and the street. In both, there were several knots of loungers, squalid and miserable, but now with a manifest sense of power enthroned on their distress. The raggedest nightcap, awry on the wretchedest head, had this crooked significance in it: “I know how hard it has grown for me, the wearer of this, to support life in myself; but do you know how easy it has grown for me, the wearer of this, to destroy life in you?” Every lean bare arm, that had been without work before, had this work always ready for it now, that it could strike. The fingers of the knitting women were vicious, with the experience that they could tear. There was a change in the appearance of Saint Antoine; the image had been hammering into this for hundreds of years, and the last finishing blows had told mightily on the expression. Madame Defarge sat observing it, with such suppressed approval as was to be desired in the leader of the Saint Antoine women. One of her sisterhood knitted beside her. The short, rather plump wife of a starved grocer, and the mother of two children withal, this lieutenant had already earned the complimentary name of The Vengeance.

As if a train of powder laid from the outermost bound of Saint Antoine Quarter to the wine-shop door, had been suddenly fired, a fast-spreading murmur came rushing along. Defarge came in breathless, pulled off a red cap he wore, and looked around him! “Listen, everywhere!” said madame again. “Listen to him!” Defarge stood, panting, against a background of eager eyes and open mouths, formed outside the door; all those within the wine-shop had sprung to their feet. “Not dead! He feared us so much--and with reason--that he caused himself to be represented as dead, and had a grand mock-funeral. But they have found him alive, hiding in the country, and have brought him in. I have seen him but now, on his way to the Hotel de Ville, a prisoner. I have said that he had reason to fear us. Say all! _Had_ he reason?” Wretched old sinner of more than threescore years and ten, if he had never known it yet, he would have known it in his heart of hearts if he could have heard the answering cry.

A moment of profound silence followed. Defarge and his wife looked steadfastly at one another. The Vengeance stooped, and the jar of a drum was heard as she moved it at her feet behind the counter. Instantly Madame Defarge’s knife was in her girdle; the drum was beating in the streets, as if it and a drummer had flown together by magic; and The Vengeance, uttering terrific shrieks, and flinging her arms about her head like all the forty Furies at once, was tearing from house to house, rousing the women. The men were terrible, in the bloody-minded anger with which they looked from windows, caught up what arms they had, and came pouring down into the streets; but, the women were a sight to chill the boldest. From such household occupations as their bare poverty yielded, from their children, from their aged and their sick crouching on the bare ground famished and naked, they ran out with streaming hair, urging one another, and themselves, to madness with the wildest cries and actions. Villain Foulon taken, my sister! Old Foulon taken, my mother! Miscreant Foulon taken, my daughter! Then, a score of others ran into the midst of these, beating their breasts, tearing their hair, and screaming, Foulon alive! Foulon who told the starving people they might eat grass! Foulon who told my old father that he might eat grass, when I had no bread to give him! Foulon who told my baby it might suck grass, when these breasts were dry with want! O mother of God, this Foulon! O Heaven our suffering! Hear me, my dead baby and my withered father: I swear on my knees, on these stones, to avenge you on Foulon! Husbands, and brothers, and young men, Give us the blood of Foulon, Give us the head of Foulon, Give us the heart of Foulon, Give us the body and soul of Foulon, Rend Foulon to pieces, and dig him into the ground, that grass may grow from him! With these cries, numbers of the women, lashed into blind frenzy, whirled about, striking and tearing at their own friends until they dropped into a passionate swoon, and were only saved by the men belonging to them from being trampled under foot.

Nevertheless, not a moment was lost; not a moment! This Foulon was at the Hotel de Ville, and might be loosed. Never, if Saint Antoine knew his own sufferings, insults, and wrongs! Armed men and women flocked out of the Quarter so fast, and drew even these last dregs after them with such a force of suction, that within a quarter of an hour there was not a human creature in Saint Antoine’s bosom but a few old crones and the wailing children. No. They were all by that time choking the Hall of Examination where this old man, ugly and wicked, was, and overflowing into the adjacent open space and streets. The Defarges, husband and wife, The Vengeance, and Jacques Three, were in the first press, and at no great distance from him in the Hall. “See!” cried madame, pointing with her knife. “See the old villain bound with ropes. That was well done to tie a bunch of grass upon his back. Ha, ha! That was well done. Let him eat it now!” Madame put her knife under her arm, and clapped her hands as at a play.

The people immediately behind Madame Defarge, explaining the cause of her satisfaction to those behind them, and those again explaining to others, and those to others, the neighbouring streets resounded with the clapping of hands. Similarly, during two or three hours of drawl, and the winnowing of many bushels of words, Madame Defarge’s frequent expressions of impatience were taken up, with marvellous quickness, at a distance: the more readily, because certain men who had by some wonderful exercise of agility climbed up the external architecture to look in from the windows, knew Madame Defarge well, and acted as a telegraph between her and the crowd outside the building. At length the sun rose so high that it struck a kindly ray as of hope or protection, directly down upon the old prisoner’s head. The favour was too much to bear; in an instant the barrier of dust and chaff that had stood surprisingly long, went to the winds, and Saint Antoine had got him! It was known directly, to the furthest confines of the crowd. Defarge had but sprung over a railing and a table, and folded the miserable wretch in a deadly embrace--Madame Defarge had but followed and turned her hand in one of the ropes with which he was tied--The Vengeance and Jacques Three were not yet up with them, and the men at the windows had not yet swooped into the Hall, like birds of prey from their high perches--when the cry seemed to go up, all over the city, “Bring him out! Bring him to the lamp!”

Down, and up, and head foremost on the steps of the building; now, on his knees; now, on his feet; now, on his back; dragged, and struck at, and stifled by the bunches of grass and straw that were thrust into his face by hundreds of hands; torn, bruised, panting, bleeding, yet always entreating and beseeching for mercy; now full of vehement agony of action, with a small clear space about him as the people drew one another back that they might see; now, a log of dead wood drawn through a forest of legs; he was hauled to the nearest street corner where one of the fatal lamps swung, and there Madame Defarge let him go--as a cat might have done to a mouse--and silently and composedly looked at him while they made ready, and while he besought her: the women passionately screeching at him all the time, and the men sternly calling out to have him killed with grass in his mouth. Once, he went aloft, and the rope broke, and they caught him shrieking; twice, he went aloft, and the rope broke, and they caught him shrieking; then, the rope was merciful, and held him, and his head was soon upon a pike, with grass enough in the mouth for all Saint Antoine to dance at the sight of.

Nor was this the end of the day’s bad work, for Saint Antoine so shouted and danced his angry blood up, that it boiled again, on hearing when the day closed in that the son-in-law of the despatched, another of the people’s enemies and insulters, was coming into Paris under a guard five hundred strong, in cavalry alone. Saint Antoine wrote his crimes on flaring sheets of paper, seized him--would have torn him out of the breast of an army to bear Foulon company--set his head and heart on pikes, and carried the three spoils of the day, in Wolf-procession through the streets. Not before dark night did the men and women come back to the children, wailing and breadless. Then, the miserable bakers’ shops were beset by long files of them, patiently waiting to buy bad bread; and while they waited with stomachs faint and empty, they beguiled the time by embracing one another on the triumphs of the day, and achieving them again in gossip. Gradually, these strings of ragged people shortened and frayed away; and then poor lights began to shine in high windows, and slender fires were made in the streets, at which neighbours cooked in common, afterwards supping at their doors.

Scanty and insufficient suppers those, and innocent of meat, as of most other sauce to wretched bread. Yet, human fellowship infused some nourishment into the flinty viands, and struck some sparks of cheerfulness out of them. Fathers and mothers who had had their full share in the worst of the day, played gently with their meagre children; and lovers, with such a world around them and before them, loved and hoped. It was almost morning, when Defarge’s wine-shop parted with its last knot of customers, and Monsieur Defarge said to madame his wife, in husky tones, while fastening the door: Saint Antoine slept, the Defarges slept: even The Vengeance slept with her starved grocer, and the drum was at rest. The drum’s was the only voice in Saint Antoine that blood and hurry had not changed. The Vengeance, as custodian of the drum, could have wakened him up and had the same speech out of him as before the Bastille fell, or old Foulon was seized; not so with the hoarse tones of the men and women in Saint Antoine’s bosom.

There was a change on the village where the fountain fell, and where the mender of roads went forth daily to hammer out of the stones on the highway such morsels of bread as might serve for patches to hold his poor ignorant soul and his poor reduced body together. The prison on the crag was not so dominant as of yore; there were soldiers to guard it, but not many; there were officers to guard the soldiers, but not one of them knew what his men would do--beyond this: that it would probably not be what he was ordered. Far and wide lay a ruined country, yielding nothing but desolation. Every green leaf, every blade of grass and blade of grain, was as shrivelled and poor as the miserable people. Everything was bowed down, dejected, oppressed, and broken. Habitations, fences, domesticated animals, men, women, children, and the soil that bore them--all worn out. Monseigneur (often a most worthy individual gentleman) was a national blessing, gave a chivalrous tone to things, was a polite example of luxurious and shining life, and a great deal more to equal purpose; nevertheless, Monseigneur as a class had, somehow or other, brought things to this. Strange that Creation, designed expressly for Monseigneur, should be so soon wrung dry and squeezed out! There must be something short-sighted in the eternal arrangements, surely! Thus it was, however; and the last drop of blood having been extracted from the flints, and the last screw of the rack having been turned so often that its purchase crumbled, and it now turned and turned with nothing to bite, Monseigneur began to run away from a phenomenon so low and unaccountable.

But, this was not the change on the village, and on many a village like it. For scores of years gone by, Monseigneur had squeezed it and wrung it, and had seldom graced it with his presence except for the pleasures of the chase--now, found in hunting the people; now, found in hunting the beasts, for whose preservation Monseigneur made edifying spaces of barbarous and barren wilderness. No. The change consisted in the appearance of strange faces of low caste, rather than in the disappearance of the high caste, chiselled, and otherwise beautified and beautifying features of Monseigneur. For, in these times, as the mender of roads worked, solitary, in the dust, not often troubling himself to reflect that dust he was and to dust he must return, being for the most part too much occupied in thinking how little he had for supper and how much more he would eat if he had it--in these times, as he raised his eyes from his lonely labour, and viewed the prospect, he would see some rough figure approaching on foot, the like of which was once a rarity in those parts, but was now a frequent presence. As it advanced, the mender of roads would discern without surprise, that it was a shaggy-haired man, of almost barbarian aspect, tall, in wooden shoes that were clumsy even to the eyes of a mender of roads, grim, rough, swart, steeped in the mud and dust of many highways, dank with the marshy moisture of many low grounds, sprinkled with the thorns and leaves and moss of many byways through woods.

Such a man came upon him, like a ghost, at noon in the July weather, as he sat on his heap of stones under a bank, taking such shelter as he could get from a shower of hail. The man looked at him, looked at the village in the hollow, at the mill, and at the prison on the crag. When he had identified these objects in what benighted mind he had, he said, in a dialect that was just intelligible: He took out a blackened pipe, filled it, lighted it with flint and steel, pulled at it until it was in a bright glow: then, suddenly held it from him and dropped something into it from between his finger and thumb, that blazed and went out in a puff of smoke. He and the mender of roads sat on the heap of stones looking silently at one another, with the hail driving in between them like a pigmy charge of bayonets, until the sky began to clear over the village. “Will you wake me, before departing? I have walked two nights without resting. Let me finish my pipe, and I shall sleep like a child. Will you wake me?”

The wayfarer smoked his pipe out, put it in his breast, slipped off his great wooden shoes, and lay down on his back on the heap of stones. He was fast asleep directly. As the road-mender plied his dusty labour, and the hail-clouds, rolling away, revealed bright bars and streaks of sky which were responded to by silver gleams upon the landscape, the little man (who wore a red cap now, in place of his blue one) seemed fascinated by the figure on the heap of stones. His eyes were so often turned towards it, that he used his tools mechanically, and, one would have said, to very poor account. The bronze face, the shaggy black hair and beard, the coarse woollen red cap, the rough medley dress of home-spun stuff and hairy skins of beasts, the powerful frame attenuated by spare living, and the sullen and desperate compression of the lips in sleep, inspired the mender of roads with awe. The traveller had travelled far, and his feet were footsore, and his ankles chafed and bleeding; his great shoes, stuffed with leaves and grass, had been heavy to drag over the many long leagues, and his clothes were chafed into holes, as he himself was into sores. Stooping down beside him, the road-mender tried to get a peep at secret weapons in his breast or where not; but, in vain, for he slept with his arms crossed upon him, and set as resolutely as his lips. Fortified towns with their stockades, guard-houses, gates, trenches, and drawbridges, seemed to the mender of roads, to be so much air as against this figure. And when he lifted his eyes from it to the horizon and looked around, he saw in his small fancy similar figures, stopped by no obstacle, tending to centres all over France.

The man slept on, indifferent to showers of hail and intervals of brightness, to sunshine on his face and shadow, to the paltering lumps of dull ice on his body and the diamonds into which the sun changed them, until the sun was low in the west, and the sky was glowing. Then, the mender of roads having got his tools together and all things ready to go down into the village, roused him. The mender of roads went home, with the dust going on before him according to the set of the wind, and was soon at the fountain, squeezing himself in among the lean kine brought there to drink, and appearing even to whisper to them in his whispering to all the village. When the village had taken its poor supper, it did not creep to bed, as it usually did, but came out of doors again, and remained there. A curious contagion of whispering was upon it, and also, when it gathered together at the fountain in the dark, another curious contagion of looking expectantly at the sky in one direction only. Monsieur Gabelle, chief functionary of the place, became uneasy; went out on his house-top alone, and looked in that direction too; glanced down from behind his chimneys at the darkening faces by the fountain below, and sent word to the sacristan who kept the keys of the church, that there might be need to ring the tocsin by-and-bye.

The night deepened. The trees environing the old chateau, keeping its solitary state apart, moved in a rising wind, as though they threatened the pile of building massive and dark in the gloom. Up the two terrace flights of steps the rain ran wildly, and beat at the great door, like a swift messenger rousing those within; uneasy rushes of wind went through the hall, among the old spears and knives, and passed lamenting up the stairs, and shook the curtains of the bed where the last Marquis had slept. East, West, North, and South, through the woods, four heavy-treading, unkempt figures crushed the high grass and cracked the branches, striding on cautiously to come together in the courtyard. Four lights broke out there, and moved away in different directions, and all was black again. But, not for long. Presently, the chateau began to make itself strangely visible by some light of its own, as though it were growing luminous. Then, a flickering streak played behind the architecture of the front, picking out transparent places, and showing where balustrades, arches, and windows were. Then it soared higher, and grew broader and brighter. Soon, from a score of the great windows, flames burst forth, and the stone faces awakened, stared out of fire.

A faint murmur arose about the house from the few people who were left there, and there was a saddling of a horse and riding away. There was spurring and splashing through the darkness, and bridle was drawn in the space by the village fountain, and the horse in a foam stood at Monsieur Gabelle’s door. “Help, Gabelle! Help, every one!” The tocsin rang impatiently, but other help (if that were any) there was none. The mender of roads, and two hundred and fifty particular friends, stood with folded arms at the fountain, looking at the pillar of fire in the sky. “It must be forty feet high,” said they, grimly; and never moved. The rider from the chateau, and the horse in a foam, clattered away through the village, and galloped up the stony steep, to the prison on the crag. At the gate, a group of officers were looking at the fire; removed from them, a group of soldiers. “Help, gentlemen--officers! The chateau is on fire; valuable objects may be saved from the flames by timely aid! Help, help!” The officers looked towards the soldiers who looked at the fire; gave no orders; and answered, with shrugs and biting of lips, “It must burn.”

As the rider rattled down the hill again and through the street, the village was illuminating. The mender of roads, and the two hundred and fifty particular friends, inspired as one man and woman by the idea of lighting up, had darted into their houses, and were putting candles in every dull little pane of glass. The general scarcity of everything, occasioned candles to be borrowed in a rather peremptory manner of Monsieur Gabelle; and in a moment of reluctance and hesitation on that functionary’s part, the mender of roads, once so submissive to authority, had remarked that carriages were good to make bonfires with, and that post-horses would roast. The chateau was left to itself to flame and burn. In the roaring and raging of the conflagration, a red-hot wind, driving straight from the infernal regions, seemed to be blowing the edifice away. With the rising and falling of the blaze, the stone faces showed as if they were in torment. When great masses of stone and timber fell, the face with the two dints in the nose became obscured: anon struggled out of the smoke again, as if it were the face of the cruel Marquis, burning at the stake and contending with the fire.

The chateau burned; the nearest trees, laid hold of by the fire, scorched and shrivelled; trees at a distance, fired by the four fierce figures, begirt the blazing edifice with a new forest of smoke. Molten lead and iron boiled in the marble basin of the fountain; the water ran dry; the extinguisher tops of the towers vanished like ice before the heat, and trickled down into four rugged wells of flame. Great rents and splits branched out in the solid walls, like crystallisation; stupefied birds wheeled about and dropped into the furnace; four fierce figures trudged away, East, West, North, and South, along the night-enshrouded roads, guided by the beacon they had lighted, towards their next destination. The illuminated village had seized hold of the tocsin, and, abolishing the lawful ringer, rang for joy. Not only that; but the village, light-headed with famine, fire, and bell-ringing, and bethinking itself that Monsieur Gabelle had to do with the collection of rent and taxes--though it was but a small instalment of taxes, and no rent at all, that Gabelle had got in those latter days--became impatient for an interview with him, and, surrounding his house, summoned him to come forth for personal conference. Whereupon, Monsieur Gabelle did heavily bar his door, and retire to hold counsel with himself. The result of that conference was, that Gabelle again withdrew himself to his housetop behind his stack of chimneys; this time resolved, if his door were broken in (he was a small Southern man of retaliative temperament), to pitch himself head foremost over the parapet, and crush a man or two below.

Probably, Monsieur Gabelle passed a long night up there, with the distant chateau for fire and candle, and the beating at his door, combined with the joy-ringing, for music; not to mention his having an ill-omened lamp slung across the road before his posting-house gate, which the village showed a lively inclination to displace in his favour. A trying suspense, to be passing a whole summer night on the brink of the black ocean, ready to take that plunge into it upon which Monsieur Gabelle had resolved! But, the friendly dawn appearing at last, and the rush-candles of the village guttering out, the people happily dispersed, and Monsieur Gabelle came down bringing his life with him for that while. Within a hundred miles, and in the light of other fires, there were other functionaries less fortunate, that night and other nights, whom the rising sun found hanging across once-peaceful streets, where they had been born and bred; also, there were other villagers and townspeople less fortunate than the mender of roads and his fellows, upon whom the functionaries and soldiery turned with success, and whom they strung up in their turn. But, the fierce figures were steadily wending East, West, North, and South, be that as it would; and whosoever hung, fire burned. The altitude of the gallows that would turn to water and quench it, no functionary, by any stretch of mathematics, was able to calculate successfully.

In such risings of fire and risings of sea--the firm earth shaken by the rushes of an angry ocean which had now no ebb, but was always on the flow, higher and higher, to the terror and wonder of the beholders on the shore--three years of tempest were consumed. Three more birthdays of little Lucie had been woven by the golden thread into the peaceful tissue of the life of her home. Many a night and many a day had its inmates listened to the echoes in the corner, with hearts that failed them when they heard the thronging feet. For, the footsteps had become to their minds as the footsteps of a people, tumultuous under a red flag and with their country declared in danger, changed into wild beasts, by terrible enchantment long persisted in. Monseigneur, as a class, had dissociated himself from the phenomenon of his not being appreciated: of his being so little wanted in France, as to incur considerable danger of receiving his dismissal from it, and this life together. Like the fabled rustic who raised the Devil with infinite pains, and was so terrified at the sight of him that he could ask the Enemy no question, but immediately fled; so, Monseigneur, after boldly reading the Lord’s Prayer backwards for a great number of years, and performing many other potent spells for compelling the Evil One, no sooner beheld him in his terrors than he took to his noble heels.

The shining Bull’s Eye of the Court was gone, or it would have been the mark for a hurricane of national bullets. It had never been a good eye to see with--had long had the mote in it of Lucifer’s pride, Sardanapalus’s luxury, and a mole’s blindness--but it had dropped out and was gone. The Court, from that exclusive inner circle to its outermost rotten ring of intrigue, corruption, and dissimulation, was all gone together. Royalty was gone; had been besieged in its Palace and “suspended,” when the last tidings came over. As was natural, the head-quarters and great gathering-place of Monseigneur, in London, was Tellson’s Bank. Spirits are supposed to haunt the places where their bodies most resorted, and Monseigneur without a guinea haunted the spot where his guineas used to be. Moreover, it was the spot to which such French intelligence as was most to be relied upon, came quickest. Again: Tellson’s was a munificent house, and extended great liberality to old customers who had fallen from their high estate. Again: those nobles who had seen the coming storm in time, and anticipating plunder or confiscation, had made provident remittances to Tellson’s, were always to be heard of there by their needy brethren. To which it must be added that every new-comer from France reported himself and his tidings at Tellson’s, almost as a matter of course. For such variety of reasons, Tellson’s was at that time, as to French intelligence, a kind of High Exchange; and this was so well known to the public, and the inquiries made there were in consequence so numerous, that Tellson’s sometimes wrote the latest news out in a line or so and posted it in the Bank windows, for all who ran through Temple Bar to read.

On a steaming, misty afternoon, Mr. Lorry sat at his desk, and Charles Darnay stood leaning on it, talking with him in a low voice. The penitential den once set apart for interviews with the House, was now the news-Exchange, and was filled to overflowing. It was within half an hour or so of the time of closing. “My dear Charles,” said Mr. Lorry, with cheerful confidence, “you touch some of the reasons for my going: not for my staying away. It is safe enough for me; nobody will care to interfere with an old fellow of hard upon fourscore when there are so many people there much better worth interfering with. As to its being a disorganised city, if it were not a disorganised city there would be no occasion to send somebody from our House here to our House there, who knows the city and the business, of old, and is in Tellson’s confidence. As to the uncertain travelling, the long journey, and the winter weather, if I were not prepared to submit myself to a few inconveniences for the sake of Tellson’s, after all these years, who ought to be?”

“Indeed! You are a pretty fellow to object and advise!” exclaimed Mr. Lorry. “You wish you were going yourself? And you a Frenchman born? You are a wise counsellor.” “My dear Mr. Lorry, it is because I am a Frenchman born, that the thought (which I did not mean to utter here, however) has passed through my mind often. One cannot help thinking, having had some sympathy for the miserable people, and having abandoned something to them,” he spoke here in his former thoughtful manner, “that one might be listened to, and might have the power to persuade to some restraint. Only last night, after you had left us, when I was talking to Lucie--” “When you were talking to Lucie,” Mr. Lorry repeated. “Yes. I wonder you are not ashamed to mention the name of Lucie! Wishing you were going to France at this time of day!” “And I am, in plain reality. The truth is, my dear Charles,” Mr. Lorry glanced at the distant House, and lowered his voice, “you can have no conception of the difficulty with which our business is transacted, and of the peril in which our books and papers over yonder are involved. The Lord above knows what the compromising consequences would be to numbers of people, if some of our documents were seized or destroyed; and they might be, at any time, you know, for who can say that Paris is not set afire to-day, or sacked to-morrow! Now, a judicious selection from these with the least possible delay, and the burying of them, or otherwise getting of them out of harm’s way, is within the power (without loss of precious time) of scarcely any one but myself, if any one. And shall I hang back, when Tellson’s knows this and says this--Tellson’s, whose bread I have eaten these sixty years--because I am a little stiff about the joints? Why, I am a boy, sir, to half a dozen old codgers here!”

“Tut! Nonsense, sir!--And, my dear Charles,” said Mr. Lorry, glancing at the House again, “you are to remember, that getting things out of Paris at this present time, no matter what things, is next to an impossibility. Papers and precious matters were this very day brought to us here (I speak in strict confidence; it is not business-like to whisper it, even to you), by the strangest bearers you can imagine, every one of whom had his head hanging on by a single hair as he passed the Barriers. At another time, our parcels would come and go, as easily as in business-like Old England; but now, everything is stopped.” “All sorts of people have been proposed to me, but I will have nothing to say to any of them. I intend to take Jerry. Jerry has been my bodyguard on Sunday nights for a long time past and I am used to him. Nobody will suspect Jerry of being anything but an English bull-dog, or of having any design in his head but to fly at anybody who touches his master.”

“I must say again, nonsense, nonsense! When I have executed this little commission, I shall, perhaps, accept Tellson’s proposal to retire and live at my ease. Time enough, then, to think about growing old.” This dialogue had taken place at Mr. Lorry’s usual desk, with Monseigneur swarming within a yard or two of it, boastful of what he would do to avenge himself on the rascal-people before long. It was too much the way of Monseigneur under his reverses as a refugee, and it was much too much the way of native British orthodoxy, to talk of this terrible Revolution as if it were the only harvest ever known under the skies that had not been sown--as if nothing had ever been done, or omitted to be done, that had led to it--as if observers of the wretched millions in France, and of the misused and perverted resources that should have made them prosperous, had not seen it inevitably coming, years before, and had not in plain words recorded what they saw. Such vapouring, combined with the extravagant plots of Monseigneur for the restoration of a state of things that had utterly exhausted itself, and worn out Heaven and earth as well as itself, was hard to be endured without some remonstrance by any sane man who knew the truth. And it was such vapouring all about his ears, like a troublesome confusion of blood in his own head, added to a latent uneasiness in his mind, which had already made Charles Darnay restless, and which still kept him so.

Among the talkers, was Stryver, of the King’s Bench Bar, far on his way to state promotion, and, therefore, loud on the theme: broaching to Monseigneur, his devices for blowing the people up and exterminating them from the face of the earth, and doing without them: and for accomplishing many similar objects akin in their nature to the abolition of eagles by sprinkling salt on the tails of the race. Him, Darnay heard with a particular feeling of objection; and Darnay stood divided between going away that he might hear no more, and remaining to interpose his word, when the thing that was to be, went on to shape itself out. The House approached Mr. Lorry, and laying a soiled and unopened letter before him, asked if he had yet discovered any traces of the person to whom it was addressed? The House laid the letter down so close to Darnay that he saw the direction--the more quickly because it was his own right name. The address, turned into English, ran: “Very pressing. To Monsieur heretofore the Marquis St. Evrémonde, of France. Confided to the cares of Messrs. Tellson and Co., Bankers, London, England.”

On the marriage morning, Doctor Manette had made it his one urgent and express request to Charles Darnay, that the secret of this name should be--unless he, the Doctor, dissolved the obligation--kept inviolate between them. Nobody else knew it to be his name; his own wife had no suspicion of the fact; Mr. Lorry could have none. “No,” said Mr. Lorry, in reply to the House; “I have referred it, I think, to everybody now here, and no one can tell me where this gentleman is to be found.” The hands of the clock verging upon the hour of closing the Bank, there was a general set of the current of talkers past Mr. Lorry’s desk. He held the letter out inquiringly; and Monseigneur looked at it, in the person of this plotting and indignant refugee; and Monseigneur looked at it in the person of that plotting and indignant refugee; and This, That, and The Other, all had something disparaging to say, in French or in English, concerning the Marquis who was not to be found. “A craven who abandoned his post,” said another--this Monseigneur had been got out of Paris, legs uppermost and half suffocated, in a load of hay--“some years ago.”

“Infected with the new doctrines,” said a third, eyeing the direction through his glass in passing; “set himself in opposition to the last Marquis, abandoned the estates when he inherited them, and left them to the ruffian herd. They will recompense him now, I hope, as he deserves.” “Then I tell you again, Mr. Darnay, I am sorry for it. I am sorry to hear you putting any such extraordinary questions. Here is a fellow, who, infected by the most pestilent and blasphemous code of devilry that ever was known, abandoned his property to the vilest scum of the earth that ever did murder by wholesale, and you ask me why I am sorry that a man who instructs youth knows him? Well, but I’ll answer you. I am sorry because I believe there is contamination in such a scoundrel. That’s why.” “I understand how to put _you_ in a corner, Mr. Darnay,” said Bully Stryver, “and I’ll do it. If this fellow is a gentleman, I _don’t_ understand him. You may tell him so, with my compliments. You may also tell him, from me, that after abandoning his worldly goods and position to this butcherly mob, I wonder he is not at the head of them. But, no, gentlemen,” said Stryver, looking all round, and snapping his fingers, “I know something of human nature, and I tell you that you’ll never find a fellow like this fellow, trusting himself to the mercies of such precious _protégés_. No, gentlemen; he’ll always show ’em a clean pair of heels very early in the scuffle, and sneak away.”

With those words, and a final snap of his fingers, Mr. Stryver shouldered himself into Fleet-street, amidst the general approbation of his hearers. Mr. Lorry and Charles Darnay were left alone at the desk, in the general departure from the Bank. “Will you undertake to explain, that we suppose it to have been addressed here, on the chance of our knowing where to forward it, and that it has been here some time?” Very ill at ease with himself, and with Stryver and most other men, Darnay made the best of his way into the quiet of the Temple, opened the letter, and read it. These were its contents: “After having long been in danger of my life at the hands of the village, I have been seized, with great violence and indignity, and brought a long journey on foot to Paris. On the road I have suffered a great deal. Nor is that all; my house has been destroyed--razed to the ground. “The crime for which I am imprisoned, Monsieur heretofore the Marquis, and for which I shall be summoned before the tribunal, and shall lose my life (without your so generous help), is, they tell me, treason against the majesty of the people, in that I have acted against them for an emigrant. It is in vain I represent that I have acted for them, and not against, according to your commands. It is in vain I represent that, before the sequestration of emigrant property, I had remitted the imposts they had ceased to pay; that I had collected no rent; that I had had recourse to no process. The only response is, that I have acted for an emigrant, and where is that emigrant?

“Ah! most gracious Monsieur heretofore the Marquis, where is that emigrant? I cry in my sleep where is he? I demand of Heaven, will he not come to deliver me? No answer. Ah Monsieur heretofore the Marquis, I send my desolate cry across the sea, hoping it may perhaps reach your ears through the great bank of Tilson known at Paris! “For the love of Heaven, of justice, of generosity, of the honour of your noble name, I supplicate you, Monsieur heretofore the Marquis, to succour and release me. My fault is, that I have been true to you. Oh Monsieur heretofore the Marquis, I pray you be you true to me! “From this prison here of horror, whence I every hour tend nearer and nearer to destruction, I send you, Monsieur heretofore the Marquis, the assurance of my dolorous and unhappy service. The latent uneasiness in Darnay’s mind was roused to vigourous life by this letter. The peril of an old servant and a good one, whose only crime was fidelity to himself and his family, stared him so reproachfully in the face, that, as he walked to and fro in the Temple considering what to do, he almost hid his face from the passersby.

He knew very well, that in his horror of the deed which had culminated the bad deeds and bad reputation of the old family house, in his resentful suspicions of his uncle, and in the aversion with which his conscience regarded the crumbling fabric that he was supposed to uphold, he had acted imperfectly. He knew very well, that in his love for Lucie, his renunciation of his social place, though by no means new to his own mind, had been hurried and incomplete. He knew that he ought to have systematically worked it out and supervised it, and that he had meant to do it, and that it had never been done. The happiness of his own chosen English home, the necessity of being always actively employed, the swift changes and troubles of the time which had followed on one another so fast, that the events of this week annihilated the immature plans of last week, and the events of the week following made all new again; he knew very well, that to the force of these circumstances he had yielded:--not without disquiet, but still without continuous and accumulating resistance. That he had watched the times for a time of action, and that they had shifted and struggled until the time had gone by, and the nobility were trooping from France by every highway and byway, and their property was in course of confiscation and destruction, and their very names were blotting out, was as well known to himself as it could be to any new authority in France that might impeach him for it.

But, he had oppressed no man, he had imprisoned no man; he was so far from having harshly exacted payment of his dues, that he had relinquished them of his own will, thrown himself on a world with no favour in it, won his own private place there, and earned his own bread. Monsieur Gabelle had held the impoverished and involved estate on written instructions, to spare the people, to give them what little there was to give--such fuel as the heavy creditors would let them have in the winter, and such produce as could be saved from the same grip in the summer--and no doubt he had put the fact in plea and proof, for his own safety, so that it could not but appear now. Yes. Like the mariner in the old story, the winds and streams had driven him within the influence of the Loadstone Rock, and it was drawing him to itself, and he must go. Everything that arose before his mind drifted him on, faster and faster, more and more steadily, to the terrible attraction. His latent uneasiness had been, that bad aims were being worked out in his own unhappy land by bad instruments, and that he who could not fail to know that he was better than they, was not there, trying to do something to stay bloodshed, and assert the claims of mercy and humanity. With this uneasiness half stifled, and half reproaching him, he had been brought to the pointed comparison of himself with the brave old gentleman in whom duty was so strong; upon that comparison (injurious to himself) had instantly followed the sneers of Monseigneur, which had stung him bitterly, and those of Stryver, which above all were coarse and galling, for old reasons. Upon those, had followed Gabelle’s letter: the appeal of an innocent prisoner, in danger of death, to his justice, honour, and good name.

Yes. The Loadstone Rock was drawing him, and he must sail on, until he struck. He knew of no rock; he saw hardly any danger. The intention with which he had done what he had done, even although he had left it incomplete, presented it before him in an aspect that would be gratefully acknowledged in France on his presenting himself to assert it. Then, that glorious vision of doing good, which is so often the sanguine mirage of so many good minds, arose before him, and he even saw himself in the illusion with some influence to guide this raging Revolution that was running so fearfully wild. As he walked to and fro with his resolution made, he considered that neither Lucie nor her father must know of it until he was gone. Lucie should be spared the pain of separation; and her father, always reluctant to turn his thoughts towards the dangerous ground of old, should come to the knowledge of the step, as a step taken, and not in the balance of suspense and doubt. How much of the incompleteness of his situation was referable to her father, through the painful anxiety to avoid reviving old associations of France in his mind, he did not discuss with himself. But, that circumstance too, had had its influence in his course.

He walked to and fro, with thoughts very busy, until it was time to return to Tellson’s and take leave of Mr. Lorry. As soon as he arrived in Paris he would present himself to this old friend, but he must say nothing of his intention now. “I have delivered that letter,” said Charles Darnay to Mr. Lorry. “I would not consent to your being charged with any written answer, but perhaps you will take a verbal one?” He helped Mr. Lorry to wrap himself in a number of coats and cloaks, and went out with him from the warm atmosphere of the old Bank, into the misty air of Fleet-street. “My love to Lucie, and to little Lucie,” said Mr. Lorry at parting, “and take precious care of them till I come back.” Charles Darnay shook his head and doubtfully smiled, as the carriage rolled away. That night--it was the fourteenth of August--he sat up late, and wrote two fervent letters; one was to Lucie, explaining the strong obligation he was under to go to Paris, and showing her, at length, the reasons that he had, for feeling confident that he could become involved in no personal danger there; the other was to the Doctor, confiding Lucie and their dear child to his care, and dwelling on the same topics with the strongest assurances. To both, he wrote that he would despatch letters in proof of his safety, immediately after his arrival.

It was a hard day, that day of being among them, with the first reservation of their joint lives on his mind. It was a hard matter to preserve the innocent deceit of which they were profoundly unsuspicious. But, an affectionate glance at his wife, so happy and busy, made him resolute not to tell her what impended (he had been half moved to do it, so strange it was to him to act in anything without her quiet aid), and the day passed quickly. Early in the evening he embraced her, and her scarcely less dear namesake, pretending that he would return by-and-bye (an imaginary engagement took him out, and he had secreted a valise of clothes ready), and so he emerged into the heavy mist of the heavy streets, with a heavier heart. The unseen force was drawing him fast to itself, now, and all the tides and winds were setting straight and strong towards it. He left his two letters with a trusty porter, to be delivered half an hour before midnight, and no sooner; took horse for Dover; and began his journey. “For the love of Heaven, of justice, of generosity, of the honour of your noble name!” was the poor prisoner’s cry with which he strengthened his sinking heart, as he left all that was dear on earth behind him, and floated away for the Loadstone Rock.

The traveller fared slowly on his way, who fared towards Paris from England in the autumn of the year one thousand seven hundred and ninety-two. More than enough of bad roads, bad equipages, and bad horses, he would have encountered to delay him, though the fallen and unfortunate King of France had been upon his throne in all his glory; but, the changed times were fraught with other obstacles than these. Every town-gate and village taxing-house had its band of citizen-patriots, with their national muskets in a most explosive state of readiness, who stopped all comers and goers, cross-questioned them, inspected their papers, looked for their names in lists of their own, turned them back, or sent them on, or stopped them and laid them in hold, as their capricious judgment or fancy deemed best for the dawning Republic One and Indivisible, of Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, or Death. A very few French leagues of his journey were accomplished, when Charles Darnay began to perceive that for him along these country roads there was no hope of return until he should have been declared a good citizen at Paris. Whatever might befall now, he must on to his journey’s end. Not a mean village closed upon him, not a common barrier dropped across the road behind him, but he knew it to be another iron door in the series that was barred between him and England. The universal watchfulness so encompassed him, that if he had been taken in a net, or were being forwarded to his destination in a cage, he could not have felt his freedom more completely gone.

This universal watchfulness not only stopped him on the highway twenty times in a stage, but retarded his progress twenty times in a day, by riding after him and taking him back, riding before him and stopping him by anticipation, riding with him and keeping him in charge. He had been days upon his journey in France alone, when he went to bed tired out, in a little town on the high road, still a long way from Paris. Nothing but the production of the afflicted Gabelle’s letter from his prison of the Abbaye would have got him on so far. His difficulty at the guard-house in this small place had been such, that he felt his journey to have come to a crisis. And he was, therefore, as little surprised as a man could be, to find himself awakened at the small inn to which he had been remitted until morning, in the middle of the night. Darnay complied, and was taken back to the guard-house, where other patriots in rough red caps were smoking, drinking, and sleeping, by a watch-fire. Here he paid a heavy price for his escort, and hence he started with it on the wet, wet roads at three o’clock in the morning.

The escort were two mounted patriots in red caps and tri-coloured cockades, armed with national muskets and sabres, who rode one on either side of him. The escorted governed his own horse, but a loose line was attached to his bridle, the end of which one of the patriots kept girded round his wrist. In this state they set forth with the sharp rain driving in their faces: clattering at a heavy dragoon trot over the uneven town pavement, and out upon the mire-deep roads. In this state they traversed without change, except of horses and pace, all the mire-deep leagues that lay between them and the capital. They travelled in the night, halting an hour or two after daybreak, and lying by until the twilight fell. The escort were so wretchedly clothed, that they twisted straw round their bare legs, and thatched their ragged shoulders to keep the wet off. Apart from the personal discomfort of being so attended, and apart from such considerations of present danger as arose from one of the patriots being chronically drunk, and carrying his musket very recklessly, Charles Darnay did not allow the restraint that was laid upon him to awaken any serious fears in his breast; for, he reasoned with himself that it could have no reference to the merits of an individual case that was not yet stated, and of representations, confirmable by the prisoner in the Abbaye, that were not yet made.

But when they came to the town of Beauvais--which they did at eventide, when the streets were filled with people--he could not conceal from himself that the aspect of affairs was very alarming. An ominous crowd gathered to see him dismount of the posting-yard, and many voices called out loudly, “Down with the emigrant!” The postmaster interposed himself between this man and the rider’s bridle (at which he was evidently making), and soothingly said, “Let him be; let him be! He will be judged at Paris.” Checking the postmaster, who was for turning his horse’s head to the yard (the drunken patriot sat composedly in his saddle looking on, with the line round his wrist), Darnay said, as soon as he could make his voice heard: At the instant when Darnay saw a rush in the eyes of the crowd, which another instant would have brought upon him, the postmaster turned his horse into the yard, the escort rode in close upon his horse’s flanks, and the postmaster shut and barred the crazy double gates. The farrier struck a blow upon them with his hammer, and the crowd groaned; but, no more was done.

“Everybody says it is but one of several, and that there will be others--if there are not already--banishing all emigrants, and condemning all to death who return. That is what he meant when he said your life was not your own.” They rested on some straw in a loft until the middle of the night, and then rode forward again when all the town was asleep. Among the many wild changes observable on familiar things which made this wild ride unreal, not the least was the seeming rarity of sleep. After long and lonely spurring over dreary roads, they would come to a cluster of poor cottages, not steeped in darkness, but all glittering with lights, and would find the people, in a ghostly manner in the dead of the night, circling hand in hand round a shrivelled tree of Liberty, or all drawn up together singing a Liberty song. Happily, however, there was sleep in Beauvais that night to help them out of it and they passed on once more into solitude and loneliness: jingling through the untimely cold and wet, among impoverished fields that had yielded no fruits of the earth that year, diversified by the blackened remains of burnt houses, and by the sudden emergence from ambuscade, and sharp reining up across their way, of patriot patrols on the watch on all the roads.

Naturally struck by the disagreeable word, Charles Darnay requested the speaker to take notice that he was a free traveller and French citizen, in charge of an escort which the disturbed state of the country had imposed upon him, and which he had paid for. The drunken patriot had them in his cap, and produced them. Casting his eyes over Gabelle’s letter, the same personage in authority showed some disorder and surprise, and looked at Darnay with a close attention. He left escort and escorted without saying a word, however, and went into the guard-room; meanwhile, they sat upon their horses outside the gate. Looking about him while in this state of suspense, Charles Darnay observed that the gate was held by a mixed guard of soldiers and patriots, the latter far outnumbering the former; and that while ingress into the city for peasants’ carts bringing in supplies, and for similar traffic and traffickers, was easy enough, egress, even for the homeliest people, was very difficult. A numerous medley of men and women, not to mention beasts and vehicles of various sorts, was waiting to issue forth; but, the previous identification was so strict, that they filtered through the barrier very slowly. Some of these people knew their turn for examination to be so far off, that they lay down on the ground to sleep or smoke, while others talked together, or loitered about. The red cap and tri-colour cockade were universal, both among men and women.

When he had sat in his saddle some half-hour, taking note of these things, Darnay found himself confronted by the same man in authority, who directed the guard to open the barrier. Then he delivered to the escort, drunk and sober, a receipt for the escorted, and requested him to dismount. He did so, and the two patriots, leading his tired horse, turned and rode away without entering the city. He accompanied his conductor into a guard-room, smelling of common wine and tobacco, where certain soldiers and patriots, asleep and awake, drunk and sober, and in various neutral states between sleeping and waking, drunkenness and sobriety, were standing and lying about. The light in the guard-house, half derived from the waning oil-lamps of the night, and half from the overcast day, was in a correspondingly uncertain condition. Some registers were lying open on a desk, and an officer of a coarse, dark aspect, presided over these. “I entreat you to observe that I have come here voluntarily, in response to that written appeal of a fellow-countryman which lies before you. I demand no more than the opportunity to do so without delay. Is not that my right?”

“Emigrants have no rights, Evrémonde,” was the stolid reply. The officer wrote until he had finished, read over to himself what he had written, sanded it, and handed it to Defarge, with the words “In secret.” “Is it you,” said Defarge, in a low voice, as they went down the guardhouse steps and turned into Paris, “who married the daughter of Doctor Manette, once a prisoner in the Bastille that is no more?” The word “wife” seemed to serve as a gloomy reminder to Defarge, to say with sudden impatience, “In the name of that sharp female newly-born, and called La Guillotine, why did you come to France?” Defarge glanced darkly at him for answer, and walked on in a steady and set silence. The deeper he sank into this silence, the fainter hope there was--or so Darnay thought--of his softening in any slight degree. He, therefore, made haste to say: “It is of the utmost importance to me (you know, Citizen, even better than I, of how much importance), that I should be able to communicate to Mr. Lorry of Tellson’s Bank, an English gentleman who is now in Paris, the simple fact, without comment, that I have been thrown into the prison of La Force. Will you cause that to be done for me?”

“I will do,” Defarge doggedly rejoined, “nothing for you. My duty is to my country and the People. I am the sworn servant of both, against you. I will do nothing for you.” Charles Darnay felt it hopeless to entreat him further, and his pride was touched besides. As they walked on in silence, he could not but see how used the people were to the spectacle of prisoners passing along the streets. The very children scarcely noticed him. A few passers turned their heads, and a few shook their fingers at him as an aristocrat; otherwise, that a man in good clothes should be going to prison, was no more remarkable than that a labourer in working clothes should be going to work. In one narrow, dark, and dirty street through which they passed, an excited orator, mounted on a stool, was addressing an excited audience on the crimes against the people, of the king and the royal family. The few words that he caught from this man’s lips, first made it known to Charles Darnay that the king was in prison, and that the foreign ambassadors had one and all left Paris. On the road (except at Beauvais) he had heard absolutely nothing. The escort and the universal watchfulness had completely isolated him.

That he had fallen among far greater dangers than those which had developed themselves when he left England, he of course knew now. That perils had thickened about him fast, and might thicken faster and faster yet, he of course knew now. He could not but admit to himself that he might not have made this journey, if he could have foreseen the events of a few days. And yet his misgivings were not so dark as, imagined by the light of this later time, they would appear. Troubled as the future was, it was the unknown future, and in its obscurity there was ignorant hope. The horrible massacre, days and nights long, which, within a few rounds of the clock, was to set a great mark of blood upon the blessed garnering time of harvest, was as far out of his knowledge as if it had been a hundred thousand years away. The “sharp female newly-born, and called La Guillotine,” was hardly known to him, or to the generality of people, by name. The frightful deeds that were to be soon done, were probably unimagined at that time in the brains of the doers. How could they have a place in the shadowy conceptions of a gentle mind?

Of unjust treatment in detention and hardship, and in cruel separation from his wife and child, he foreshadowed the likelihood, or the certainty; but, beyond this, he dreaded nothing distinctly. With this on his mind, which was enough to carry into a dreary prison courtyard, he arrived at the prison of La Force. The gaoler’s wife, being provided with no answer to the question, merely replied, “One must have patience, my dear!” Three turnkeys who entered responsive to a bell she rang, echoed the sentiment, and one added, “For the love of Liberty;” which sounded in that place like an inappropriate conclusion. The prison of La Force was a gloomy prison, dark and filthy, and with a horrible smell of foul sleep in it. Extraordinary how soon the noisome flavour of imprisoned sleep, becomes manifest in all such places that are ill cared for! He stuck the paper on a file, in an ill-humour, and Charles Darnay awaited his further pleasure for half an hour: sometimes, pacing to and fro in the strong arched room: sometimes, resting on a stone seat: in either case detained to be imprinted on the memory of the chief and his subordinates.

Through the dismal prison twilight, his new charge accompanied him by corridor and staircase, many doors clanging and locking behind them, until they came into a large, low, vaulted chamber, crowded with prisoners of both sexes. The women were seated at a long table, reading and writing, knitting, sewing, and embroidering; the men were for the most part standing behind their chairs, or lingering up and down the room. In the instinctive association of prisoners with shameful crime and disgrace, the new-comer recoiled from this company. But the crowning unreality of his long unreal ride, was, their all at once rising to receive him, with every refinement of manner known to the time, and with all the engaging graces and courtesies of life. So strangely clouded were these refinements by the prison manners and gloom, so spectral did they become in the inappropriate squalor and misery through which they were seen, that Charles Darnay seemed to stand in a company of the dead. Ghosts all! The ghost of beauty, the ghost of stateliness, the ghost of elegance, the ghost of pride, the ghost of frivolity, the ghost of wit, the ghost of youth, the ghost of age, all waiting their dismissal from the desolate shore, all turning on him eyes that were changed by the death they had died in coming there.

It struck him motionless. The gaoler standing at his side, and the other gaolers moving about, who would have been well enough as to appearance in the ordinary exercise of their functions, looked so extravagantly coarse contrasted with sorrowing mothers and blooming daughters who were there--with the apparitions of the coquette, the young beauty, and the mature woman delicately bred--that the inversion of all experience and likelihood which the scene of shadows presented, was heightened to its utmost. Surely, ghosts all. Surely, the long unreal ride some progress of disease that had brought him to these gloomy shades! “In the name of the assembled companions in misfortune,” said a gentleman of courtly appearance and address, coming forward, “I have the honour of giving you welcome to La Force, and of condoling with you on the calamity that has brought you among us. May it soon terminate happily! It would be an impertinence elsewhere, but it is not so here, to ask your name and condition?” “Ah, what a pity! We so much regret it! But take courage; several members of our society have been in secret, at first, and it has lasted but a short time.” Then he added, raising his voice, “I grieve to inform the society--in secret.”

There was a murmur of commiseration as Charles Darnay crossed the room to a grated door where the gaoler awaited him, and many voices--among which, the soft and compassionate voices of women were conspicuous--gave him good wishes and encouragement. He turned at the grated door, to render the thanks of his heart; it closed under the gaoler’s hand; and the apparitions vanished from his sight forever. The wicket opened on a stone staircase, leading upward. When they had ascended forty steps (the prisoner of half an hour already counted them), the gaoler opened a low black door, and they passed into a solitary cell. It struck cold and damp, but was not dark. There were in the cell, a chair, a table, and a straw mattress. As the gaoler made a general inspection of these objects, and of the four walls, before going out, a wandering fancy wandered through the mind of the prisoner leaning against the wall opposite to him, that this gaoler was so unwholesomely bloated, both in face and person, as to look like a man who had been drowned and filled with water. When the gaoler was gone, he thought in the same wandering way, “Now am I left, as if I were dead.” Stopping then, to look down at the mattress, he turned from it with a sick feeling, and thought, “And here in these crawling creatures is the first condition of the body after death.”

“Five paces by four and a half, five paces by four and a half, five paces by four and a half.” The prisoner walked to and fro in his cell, counting its measurement, and the roar of the city arose like muffled drums with a wild swell of voices added to them. “He made shoes, he made shoes, he made shoes.” The prisoner counted the measurement again, and paced faster, to draw his mind with him from that latter repetition. “The ghosts that vanished when the wicket closed. There was one among them, the appearance of a lady dressed in black, who was leaning in the embrasure of a window, and she had a light shining upon her golden hair, and she looked like * * * * Let us ride on again, for God’s sake, through the illuminated villages with the people all awake! * * * * He made shoes, he made shoes, he made shoes. * * * * Five paces by four and a half.” With such scraps tossing and rolling upward from the depths of his mind, the prisoner walked faster and faster, obstinately counting and counting; and the roar of the city changed to this extent--that it still rolled in like muffled drums, but with the wail of voices that he knew, in the swell that rose above them.

Tellson’s Bank, established in the Saint Germain Quarter of Paris, was in a wing of a large house, approached by a courtyard and shut off from the street by a high wall and a strong gate. The house belonged to a great nobleman who had lived in it until he made a flight from the troubles, in his own cook’s dress, and got across the borders. A mere beast of the chase flying from hunters, he was still in his metempsychosis no other than the same Monseigneur, the preparation of whose chocolate for whose lips had once occupied three strong men besides the cook in question. Monseigneur gone, and the three strong men absolving themselves from the sin of having drawn his high wages, by being more than ready and willing to cut his throat on the altar of the dawning Republic one and indivisible of Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, or Death, Monseigneur’s house had been first sequestrated, and then confiscated. For, all things moved so fast, and decree followed decree with that fierce precipitation, that now upon the third night of the autumn month of September, patriot emissaries of the law were in possession of Monseigneur’s house, and had marked it with the tri-colour, and were drinking brandy in its state apartments.

A place of business in London like Tellson’s place of business in Paris, would soon have driven the House out of its mind and into the Gazette. For, what would staid British responsibility and respectability have said to orange-trees in boxes in a Bank courtyard, and even to a Cupid over the counter? Yet such things were. Tellson’s had whitewashed the Cupid, but he was still to be seen on the ceiling, in the coolest linen, aiming (as he very often does) at money from morning to night. Bankruptcy must inevitably have come of this young Pagan, in Lombard-street, London, and also of a curtained alcove in the rear of the immortal boy, and also of a looking-glass let into the wall, and also of clerks not at all old, who danced in public on the slightest provocation. Yet, a French Tellson’s could get on with these things exceedingly well, and, as long as the times held together, no man had taken fright at them, and drawn out his money. What money would be drawn out of Tellson’s henceforth, and what would lie there, lost and forgotten; what plate and jewels would tarnish in Tellson’s hiding-places, while the depositors rusted in prisons, and when they should have violently perished; how many accounts with Tellson’s never to be balanced in this world, must be carried over into the next; no man could have said, that night, any more than Mr. Jarvis Lorry could, though he thought heavily of these questions. He sat by a newly-lighted wood fire (the blighted and unfruitful year was prematurely cold), and on his honest and courageous face there was a deeper shade than the pendent lamp could throw, or any object in the room distortedly reflect--a shade of horror.

He occupied rooms in the Bank, in his fidelity to the House of which he had grown to be a part, like strong root-ivy. It chanced that they derived a kind of security from the patriotic occupation of the main building, but the true-hearted old gentleman never calculated about that. All such circumstances were indifferent to him, so that he did his duty. On the opposite side of the courtyard, under a colonnade, was extensive standing--for carriages--where, indeed, some carriages of Monseigneur yet stood. Against two of the pillars were fastened two great flaring flambeaux, and in the light of these, standing out in the open air, was a large grindstone: a roughly mounted thing which appeared to have hurriedly been brought there from some neighbouring smithy, or other workshop. Rising and looking out of window at these harmless objects, Mr. Lorry shivered, and retired to his seat by the fire. He had opened, not only the glass window, but the lattice blind outside it, and he had closed both again, and he shivered through his frame. From the streets beyond the high wall and the strong gate, there came the usual night hum of the city, with now and then an indescribable ring in it, weird and unearthly, as if some unwonted sounds of a terrible nature were going up to Heaven.

“Thank God,” said Mr. Lorry, clasping his hands, “that no one near and dear to me is in this dreadful town to-night. May He have mercy on all who are in danger!” Soon afterwards, the bell at the great gate sounded, and he thought, “They have come back!” and sat listening. But, there was no loud irruption into the courtyard, as he had expected, and he heard the gate clash again, and all was quiet. The nervousness and dread that were upon him inspired that vague uneasiness respecting the Bank, which a great change would naturally awaken, with such feelings roused. It was well guarded, and he got up to go among the trusty people who were watching it, when his door suddenly opened, and two figures rushed in, at sight of which he fell back in amazement. Lucie and her father! Lucie with her arms stretched out to him, and with that old look of earnestness so concentrated and intensified, that it seemed as though it had been stamped upon her face expressly to give force and power to it in this one passage of her life.

“What is this?” cried Mr. Lorry, breathless and confused. “What is the matter? Lucie! Manette! What has happened? What has brought you here? What is it?” “Has been here some days--three or four--I don’t know how many--I can’t collect my thoughts. An errand of generosity brought him here unknown to us; he was stopped at the barrier, and sent to prison.” The old man uttered an irrepressible cry. Almost at the same moment, the bell of the great gate rang again, and a loud noise of feet and voices came pouring into the courtyard. “My dear friend, I have a charmed life in this city. I have been a Bastille prisoner. There is no patriot in Paris--in Paris? In France--who, knowing me to have been a prisoner in the Bastille, would touch me, except to overwhelm me with embraces, or carry me in triumph. My old pain has given me a power that has brought us through the barrier, and gained us news of Charles there, and brought us here. I knew it would be so; I knew I could help Charles out of all danger; I told Lucie so.--What is that noise?” His hand was again upon the window.

“Don’t look!” cried Mr. Lorry, absolutely desperate. “No, Lucie, my dear, nor you!” He got his arm round her, and held her. “Don’t be so terrified, my love. I solemnly swear to you that I know of no harm having happened to Charles; that I had no suspicion even of his being in this fatal place. What prison is he in?” “La Force! Lucie, my child, if ever you were brave and serviceable in your life--and you were always both--you will compose yourself now, to do exactly as I bid you; for more depends upon it than you can think, or I can say. There is no help for you in any action on your part to-night; you cannot possibly stir out. I say this, because what I must bid you to do for Charles’s sake, is the hardest thing to do of all. You must instantly be obedient, still, and quiet. You must let me put you in a room at the back here. You must leave your father and me alone for two minutes, and as there are Life and Death in the world you must not delay.”

The old man kissed her, and hurried her into his room, and turned the key; then, came hurrying back to the Doctor, and opened the window and partly opened the blind, and put his hand upon the Doctor’s arm, and looked out with him into the courtyard. Looked out upon a throng of men and women: not enough in number, or near enough, to fill the courtyard: not more than forty or fifty in all. The people in possession of the house had let them in at the gate, and they had rushed in to work at the grindstone; it had evidently been set up there for their purpose, as in a convenient and retired spot. The grindstone had a double handle, and, turning at it madly were two men, whose faces, as their long hair flapped back when the whirlings of the grindstone brought their faces up, were more horrible and cruel than the visages of the wildest savages in their most barbarous disguise. False eyebrows and false moustaches were stuck upon them, and their hideous countenances were all bloody and sweaty, and all awry with howling, and all staring and glaring with beastly excitement and want of sleep. As these ruffians turned and turned, their matted locks now flung forward over their eyes, now flung backward over their necks, some women held wine to their mouths that they might drink; and what with dropping blood, and what with dropping wine, and what with the stream of sparks struck out of the stone, all their wicked atmosphere seemed gore and fire. The eye could not detect one creature in the group free from the smear of blood. Shouldering one another to get next at the sharpening-stone, were men stripped to the waist, with the stain all over their limbs and bodies; men in all sorts of rags, with the stain upon those rags; men devilishly set off with spoils of women’s lace and silk and ribbon, with the stain dyeing those trifles through and through. Hatchets, knives, bayonets, swords, all brought to be sharpened, were all red with it. Some of the hacked swords were tied to the wrists of those who carried them, with strips of linen and fragments of dress: ligatures various in kind, but all deep of the one colour. And as the frantic wielders of these weapons snatched them from the stream of sparks and tore away into the streets, the same red hue was red in their frenzied eyes;--eyes which any unbrutalised beholder would have given twenty years of life, to petrify with a well-directed gun.

All this was seen in a moment, as the vision of a drowning man, or of any human creature at any very great pass, could see a world if it were there. They drew back from the window, and the Doctor looked for explanation in his friend’s ashy face. “They are,” Mr. Lorry whispered the words, glancing fearfully round at the locked room, “murdering the prisoners. If you are sure of what you say; if you really have the power you think you have--as I believe you have--make yourself known to these devils, and get taken to La Force. It may be too late, I don’t know, but let it not be a minute later!” His streaming white hair, his remarkable face, and the impetuous confidence of his manner, as he put the weapons aside like water, carried him in an instant to the heart of the concourse at the stone. For a few moments there was a pause, and a hurry, and a murmur, and the unintelligible sound of his voice; and then Mr. Lorry saw him, surrounded by all, and in the midst of a line of twenty men long, all linked shoulder to shoulder, and hand to shoulder, hurried out with cries of--“Live the Bastille prisoner! Help for the Bastille prisoner’s kindred in La Force! Room for the Bastille prisoner in front there! Save the prisoner Evrémonde at La Force!” and a thousand answering shouts.

He closed the lattice again with a fluttering heart, closed the window and the curtain, hastened to Lucie, and told her that her father was assisted by the people, and gone in search of her husband. He found her child and Miss Pross with her; but, it never occurred to him to be surprised by their appearance until a long time afterwards, when he sat watching them in such quiet as the night knew. Lucie had, by that time, fallen into a stupor on the floor at his feet, clinging to his hand. Miss Pross had laid the child down on his own bed, and her head had gradually fallen on the pillow beside her pretty charge. O the long, long night, with the moans of the poor wife! And O the long, long night, with no return of her father and no tidings! Twice more in the darkness the bell at the great gate sounded, and the irruption was repeated, and the grindstone whirled and spluttered. “What is it?” cried Lucie, affrighted. “Hush! The soldiers’ swords are sharpened there,” said Mr. Lorry. “The place is national property now, and used as a kind of armoury, my love.”

Twice more in all; but, the last spell of work was feeble and fitful. Soon afterwards the day began to dawn, and he softly detached himself from the clasping hand, and cautiously looked out again. A man, so besmeared that he might have been a sorely wounded soldier creeping back to consciousness on a field of slain, was rising from the pavement by the side of the grindstone, and looking about him with a vacant air. Shortly, this worn-out murderer descried in the imperfect light one of the carriages of Monseigneur, and, staggering to that gorgeous vehicle, climbed in at the door, and shut himself up to take his rest on its dainty cushions. The great grindstone, Earth, had turned when Mr. Lorry looked out again, and the sun was red on the courtyard. But, the lesser grindstone stood alone there in the calm morning air, with a red upon it that the sun had never given, and would never take away. One of the first considerations which arose in the business mind of Mr. Lorry when business hours came round, was this:--that he had no right to imperil Tellson’s by sheltering the wife of an emigrant prisoner under the Bank roof. His own possessions, safety, life, he would have hazarded for Lucie and her child, without a moment’s demur; but the great trust he held was not his own, and as to that business charge he was a strict man of business.

At first, his mind reverted to Defarge, and he thought of finding out the wine-shop again and taking counsel with its master in reference to the safest dwelling-place in the distracted state of the city. But, the same consideration that suggested him, repudiated him; he lived in the most violent Quarter, and doubtless was influential there, and deep in its dangerous workings. Noon coming, and the Doctor not returning, and every minute’s delay tending to compromise Tellson’s, Mr. Lorry advised with Lucie. She said that her father had spoken of hiring a lodging for a short term, in that Quarter, near the Banking-house. As there was no business objection to this, and as he foresaw that even if it were all well with Charles, and he were to be released, he could not hope to leave the city, Mr. Lorry went out in quest of such a lodging, and found a suitable one, high up in a removed by-street where the closed blinds in all the other windows of a high melancholy square of buildings marked deserted homes. To this lodging he at once removed Lucie and her child, and Miss Pross: giving them what comfort he could, and much more than he had himself. He left Jerry with them, as a figure to fill a doorway that would bear considerable knocking on the head, and returned to his own occupations. A disturbed and doleful mind he brought to bear upon them, and slowly and heavily the day lagged on with him.

It wore itself out, and wore him out with it, until the Bank closed. He was again alone in his room of the previous night, considering what to do next, when he heard a foot upon the stair. In a few moments, a man stood in his presence, who, with a keenly observant look at him, addressed him by his name. He was a strongly made man with dark curling hair, from forty-five to fifty years of age. For answer he repeated, without any change of emphasis, the words: “Charles is safe, but I cannot safely leave this place yet. I have obtained the favour that the bearer has a short note from Charles to his wife. Let the bearer see his wife.” Scarcely noticing as yet, in what a curiously reserved and mechanical way Defarge spoke, Mr. Lorry put on his hat and they went down into the courtyard. There, they found two women; one, knitting. Beginning to be struck by Defarge’s manner, Mr. Lorry looked dubiously at him, and led the way. Both the women followed; the second woman being The Vengeance.

They passed through the intervening streets as quickly as they might, ascended the staircase of the new domicile, were admitted by Jerry, and found Lucie weeping, alone. She was thrown into a transport by the tidings Mr. Lorry gave her of her husband, and clasped the hand that delivered his note--little thinking what it had been doing near him in the night, and might, but for a chance, have done to him. That was all the writing. It was so much, however, to her who received it, that she turned from Defarge to his wife, and kissed one of the hands that knitted. It was a passionate, loving, thankful, womanly action, but the hand made no response--dropped cold and heavy, and took to its knitting again. There was something in its touch that gave Lucie a check. She stopped in the act of putting the note in her bosom, and, with her hands yet at her neck, looked terrified at Madame Defarge. Madame Defarge met the lifted eyebrows and forehead with a cold, impassive stare. “My dear,” said Mr. Lorry, striking in to explain; “there are frequent risings in the streets; and, although it is not likely they will ever trouble you, Madame Defarge wishes to see those whom she has the power to protect at such times, to the end that she may know them--that she may identify them. I believe,” said Mr. Lorry, rather halting in his reassuring words, as the stony manner of all the three impressed itself upon him more and more, “I state the case, Citizen Defarge?”

“You had better, Lucie,” said Mr. Lorry, doing all he could to propitiate, by tone and manner, “have the dear child here, and our good Pross. Our good Pross, Defarge, is an English lady, and knows no French.” The lady in question, whose rooted conviction that she was more than a match for any foreigner, was not to be shaken by distress and, danger, appeared with folded arms, and observed in English to The Vengeance, whom her eyes first encountered, “Well, I am sure, Boldface! I hope _you_ are pretty well!” She also bestowed a British cough on Madame Defarge; but, neither of the two took much heed of her. “Is that his child?” said Madame Defarge, stopping in her work for the first time, and pointing her knitting-needle at little Lucie as if it were the finger of Fate. The shadow attendant on Madame Defarge and her party seemed to fall so threatening and dark on the child, that her mother instinctively kneeled on the ground beside her, and held her to her breast. The shadow attendant on Madame Defarge and her party seemed then to fall, threatening and dark, on both the mother and the child.

But, the suppressed manner had enough of menace in it--not visible and presented, but indistinct and withheld--to alarm Lucie into saying, as she laid her appealing hand on Madame Defarge’s dress: “Your husband is not my business here,” returned Madame Defarge, looking down at her with perfect composure. “It is the daughter of your father who is my business here.” “For my sake, then, be merciful to my husband. For my child’s sake! She will put her hands together and pray you to be merciful. We are more afraid of you than of these others.” Madame Defarge received it as a compliment, and looked at her husband. Defarge, who had been uneasily biting his thumb-nail and looking at her, collected his face into a sterner expression. “What is it that your husband says in that little letter?” asked Madame Defarge, with a lowering smile. “Influence; he says something touching influence?” “That my father,” said Lucie, hurriedly taking the paper from her breast, but with her alarmed eyes on her questioner and not on it, “has much influence around him.” “As a wife and mother,” cried Lucie, most earnestly, “I implore you to have pity on me and not to exercise any power that you possess, against my innocent husband, but to use it in his behalf. O sister-woman, think of me. As a wife and mother!”

“The wives and mothers we have been used to see, since we were as little as this child, and much less, have not been greatly considered? We have known _their_ husbands and fathers laid in prison and kept from them, often enough? All our lives, we have seen our sister-women suffer, in themselves and in their children, poverty, nakedness, hunger, thirst, sickness, misery, oppression and neglect of all kinds?” “We have borne this a long time,” said Madame Defarge, turning her eyes again upon Lucie. “Judge you! Is it likely that the trouble of one wife and mother would be much to us now?” “Courage, my dear Lucie,” said Mr. Lorry, as he raised her. “Courage, courage! So far all goes well with us--much, much better than it has of late gone with many poor souls. Cheer up, and have a thankful heart.” Doctor Manette did not return until the morning of the fourth day of his absence. So much of what had happened in that dreadful time as could be kept from the knowledge of Lucie was so well concealed from her, that not until long afterwards, when France and she were far apart, did she know that eleven hundred defenceless prisoners of both sexes and all ages had been killed by the populace; that four days and nights had been darkened by this deed of horror; and that the air around her had been tainted by the slain. She only knew that there had been an attack upon the prisons, that all political prisoners had been in danger, and that some had been dragged out by the crowd and murdered.

To Mr. Lorry, the Doctor communicated under an injunction of secrecy on which he had no need to dwell, that the crowd had taken him through a scene of carnage to the prison of La Force. That, in the prison he had found a self-appointed Tribunal sitting, before which the prisoners were brought singly, and by which they were rapidly ordered to be put forth to be massacred, or to be released, or (in a few cases) to be sent back to their cells. That, presented by his conductors to this Tribunal, he had announced himself by name and profession as having been for eighteen years a secret and unaccused prisoner in the Bastille; that, one of the body so sitting in judgment had risen and identified him, and that this man was Defarge. That, hereupon he had ascertained, through the registers on the table, that his son-in-law was among the living prisoners, and had pleaded hard to the Tribunal--of whom some members were asleep and some awake, some dirty with murder and some clean, some sober and some not--for his life and liberty. That, in the first frantic greetings lavished on himself as a notable sufferer under the overthrown system, it had been accorded to him to have Charles Darnay brought before the lawless Court, and examined. That, he seemed on the point of being at once released, when the tide in his favour met with some unexplained check (not intelligible to the Doctor), which led to a few words of secret conference. That, the man sitting as President had then informed Doctor Manette that the prisoner must remain in custody, but should, for his sake, be held inviolate in safe custody. That, immediately, on a signal, the prisoner was removed to the interior of the prison again; but, that he, the Doctor, had then so strongly pleaded for permission to remain and assure himself that his son-in-law was, through no malice or mischance, delivered to the concourse whose murderous yells outside the gate had often drowned the proceedings, that he had obtained the permission, and had remained in that Hall of Blood until the danger was over.

The sights he had seen there, with brief snatches of food and sleep by intervals, shall remain untold. The mad joy over the prisoners who were saved, had astounded him scarcely less than the mad ferocity against those who were cut to pieces. One prisoner there was, he said, who had been discharged into the street free, but at whom a mistaken savage had thrust a pike as he passed out. Being besought to go to him and dress the wound, the Doctor had passed out at the same gate, and had found him in the arms of a company of Samaritans, who were seated on the bodies of their victims. With an inconsistency as monstrous as anything in this awful nightmare, they had helped the healer, and tended the wounded man with the gentlest solicitude--had made a litter for him and escorted him carefully from the spot--had then caught up their weapons and plunged anew into a butchery so dreadful, that the Doctor had covered his eyes with his hands, and swooned away in the midst of it. As Mr. Lorry received these confidences, and as he watched the face of his friend now sixty-two years of age, a misgiving arose within him that such dread experiences would revive the old danger.

But, he had never seen his friend in his present aspect: he had never at all known him in his present character. For the first time the Doctor felt, now, that his suffering was strength and power. For the first time he felt that in that sharp fire, he had slowly forged the iron which could break the prison door of his daughter’s husband, and deliver him. “It all tended to a good end, my friend; it was not mere waste and ruin. As my beloved child was helpful in restoring me to myself, I will be helpful now in restoring the dearest part of herself to her; by the aid of Heaven I will do it!” Thus, Doctor Manette. And when Jarvis Lorry saw the kindled eyes, the resolute face, the calm strong look and bearing of the man whose life always seemed to him to have been stopped, like a clock, for so many years, and then set going again with an energy which had lain dormant during the cessation of its usefulness, he believed. Greater things than the Doctor had at that time to contend with, would have yielded before his persevering purpose. While he kept himself in his place, as a physician, whose business was with all degrees of mankind, bond and free, rich and poor, bad and good, he used his personal influence so wisely, that he was soon the inspecting physician of three prisons, and among them of La Force. He could now assure Lucie that her husband was no longer confined alone, but was mixed with the general body of prisoners; he saw her husband weekly, and brought sweet messages to her, straight from his lips; sometimes her husband himself sent a letter to her (though never by the Doctor’s hand), but she was not permitted to write to him: for, among the many wild suspicions of plots in the prisons, the wildest of all pointed at emigrants who were known to have made friends or permanent connections abroad.

This new life of the Doctor’s was an anxious life, no doubt; still, the sagacious Mr. Lorry saw that there was a new sustaining pride in it. Nothing unbecoming tinged the pride; it was a natural and worthy one; but he observed it as a curiosity. The Doctor knew, that up to that time, his imprisonment had been associated in the minds of his daughter and his friend, with his personal affliction, deprivation, and weakness. Now that this was changed, and he knew himself to be invested through that old trial with forces to which they both looked for Charles’s ultimate safety and deliverance, he became so far exalted by the change, that he took the lead and direction, and required them as the weak, to trust to him as the strong. The preceding relative positions of himself and Lucie were reversed, yet only as the liveliest gratitude and affection could reverse them, for he could have had no pride but in rendering some service to her who had rendered so much to him. “All curious to see,” thought Mr. Lorry, in his amiably shrewd way, “but all natural and right; so, take the lead, my dear friend, and keep it; it couldn’t be in better hands.”

But, though the Doctor tried hard, and never ceased trying, to get Charles Darnay set at liberty, or at least to get him brought to trial, the public current of the time set too strong and fast for him. The new era began; the king was tried, doomed, and beheaded; the Republic of Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, or Death, declared for victory or death against the world in arms; the black flag waved night and day from the great towers of Notre Dame; three hundred thousand men, summoned to rise against the tyrants of the earth, rose from all the varying soils of France, as if the dragon’s teeth had been sown broadcast, and had yielded fruit equally on hill and plain, on rock, in gravel, and alluvial mud, under the bright sky of the South and under the clouds of the North, in fell and forest, in the vineyards and the olive-grounds and among the cropped grass and the stubble of the corn, along the fruitful banks of the broad rivers, and in the sand of the sea-shore. What private solicitude could rear itself against the deluge of the Year One of Liberty--the deluge rising from below, not falling from above, and with the windows of Heaven shut, not opened!

There was no pause, no pity, no peace, no interval of relenting rest, no measurement of time. Though days and nights circled as regularly as when time was young, and the evening and morning were the first day, other count of time there was none. Hold of it was lost in the raging fever of a nation, as it is in the fever of one patient. Now, breaking the unnatural silence of a whole city, the executioner showed the people the head of the king--and now, it seemed almost in the same breath, the head of his fair wife which had had eight weary months of imprisoned widowhood and misery, to turn it grey. And yet, observing the strange law of contradiction which obtains in all such cases, the time was long, while it flamed by so fast. A revolutionary tribunal in the capital, and forty or fifty thousand revolutionary committees all over the land; a law of the Suspected, which struck away all security for liberty or life, and delivered over any good and innocent person to any bad and guilty one; prisons gorged with people who had committed no offence, and could obtain no hearing; these things became the established order and nature of appointed things, and seemed to be ancient usage before they were many weeks old. Above all, one hideous figure grew as familiar as if it had been before the general gaze from the foundations of the world--the figure of the sharp female called La Guillotine.

It was the popular theme for jests; it was the best cure for headache, it infallibly prevented the hair from turning grey, it imparted a peculiar delicacy to the complexion, it was the National Razor which shaved close: who kissed La Guillotine, looked through the little window and sneezed into the sack. It was the sign of the regeneration of the human race. It superseded the Cross. Models of it were worn on breasts from which the Cross was discarded, and it was bowed down to and believed in where the Cross was denied. It sheared off heads so many, that it, and the ground it most polluted, were a rotten red. It was taken to pieces, like a toy-puzzle for a young Devil, and was put together again when the occasion wanted it. It hushed the eloquent, struck down the powerful, abolished the beautiful and good. Twenty-two friends of high public mark, twenty-one living and one dead, it had lopped the heads off, in one morning, in as many minutes. The name of the strong man of Old Scripture had descended to the chief functionary who worked it; but, so armed, he was stronger than his namesake, and blinder, and tore away the gates of God’s own Temple every day.

Among these terrors, and the brood belonging to them, the Doctor walked with a steady head: confident in his power, cautiously persistent in his end, never doubting that he would save Lucie’s husband at last. Yet the current of the time swept by, so strong and deep, and carried the time away so fiercely, that Charles had lain in prison one year and three months when the Doctor was thus steady and confident. So much more wicked and distracted had the Revolution grown in that December month, that the rivers of the South were encumbered with the bodies of the violently drowned by night, and prisoners were shot in lines and squares under the southern wintry sun. Still, the Doctor walked among the terrors with a steady head. No man better known than he, in Paris at that day; no man in a stranger situation. Silent, humane, indispensable in hospital and prison, using his art equally among assassins and victims, he was a man apart. In the exercise of his skill, the appearance and the story of the Bastille Captive removed him from all other men. He was not suspected or brought in question, any more than if he had indeed been recalled to life some eighteen years before, or were a Spirit moving among mortals.

One year and three months. During all that time Lucie was never sure, from hour to hour, but that the Guillotine would strike off her husband’s head next day. Every day, through the stony streets, the tumbrils now jolted heavily, filled with Condemned. Lovely girls; bright women, brown-haired, black-haired, and grey; youths; stalwart men and old; gentle born and peasant born; all red wine for La Guillotine, all daily brought into light from the dark cellars of the loathsome prisons, and carried to her through the streets to slake her devouring thirst. Liberty, equality, fraternity, or death;--the last, much the easiest to bestow, O Guillotine! If the suddenness of her calamity, and the whirling wheels of the time, had stunned the Doctor’s daughter into awaiting the result in idle despair, it would but have been with her as it was with many. But, from the hour when she had taken the white head to her fresh young bosom in the garret of Saint Antoine, she had been true to her duties. She was truest to them in the season of trial, as all the quietly loyal and good will always be.

As soon as they were established in their new residence, and her father had entered on the routine of his avocations, she arranged the little household as exactly as if her husband had been there. Everything had its appointed place and its appointed time. Little Lucie she taught, as regularly, as if they had all been united in their English home. The slight devices with which she cheated herself into the show of a belief that they would soon be reunited--the little preparations for his speedy return, the setting aside of his chair and his books--these, and the solemn prayer at night for one dear prisoner especially, among the many unhappy souls in prison and the shadow of death--were almost the only outspoken reliefs of her heavy mind. She did not greatly alter in appearance. The plain dark dresses, akin to mourning dresses, which she and her child wore, were as neat and as well attended to as the brighter clothes of happy days. She lost her colour, and the old and intent expression was a constant, not an occasional, thing; otherwise, she remained very pretty and comely. Sometimes, at night on kissing her father, she would burst into the grief she had repressed all day, and would say that her sole reliance, under Heaven, was on him. He always resolutely answered: “Nothing can happen to him without my knowledge, and I know that I can save him, Lucie.”

“My dear, there is an upper window in the prison, to which Charles can sometimes gain access at three in the afternoon. When he can get to it--which depends on many uncertainties and incidents--he might see you in the street, he thinks, if you stood in a certain place that I can show you. But you will not be able to see him, my poor child, and even if you could, it would be unsafe for you to make a sign of recognition.” From that time, in all weathers, she waited there two hours. As the clock struck two, she was there, and at four she turned resignedly away. When it was not too wet or inclement for her child to be with her, they went together; at other times she was alone; but, she never missed a single day. It was the dark and dirty corner of a small winding street. The hovel of a cutter of wood into lengths for burning, was the only house at that end; all else was wall. On the third day of her being there, he noticed her.

This mode of address was now prescribed by decree. It had been established voluntarily some time ago, among the more thorough patriots; but, was now law for everybody. The wood-sawyer, who was a little man with a redundancy of gesture (he had once been a mender of roads), cast a glance at the prison, pointed at the prison, and putting his ten fingers before his face to represent bars, peeped through them jocosely. “I call myself the Samson of the firewood guillotine. See here again! Loo, loo, loo; Loo, loo, loo! And off _her_ head comes! Now, a child. Tickle, tickle; Pickle, pickle! And off _its_ head comes. All the family!” Lucie shuddered as he threw two more billets into his basket, but it was impossible to be there while the wood-sawyer was at work, and not be in his sight. Thenceforth, to secure his good will, she always spoke to him first, and often gave him drink-money, which he readily received. He was an inquisitive fellow, and sometimes when she had quite forgotten him in gazing at the prison roof and grates, and in lifting her heart up to her husband, she would come to herself to find him looking at her, with his knee on his bench and his saw stopped in its work. “But it’s not my business!” he would generally say at those times, and would briskly fall to his sawing again.

In all weathers, in the snow and frost of winter, in the bitter winds of spring, in the hot sunshine of summer, in the rains of autumn, and again in the snow and frost of winter, Lucie passed two hours of every day at this place; and every day on leaving it, she kissed the prison wall. Her husband saw her (so she learned from her father) it might be once in five or six times: it might be twice or thrice running: it might be, not for a week or a fortnight together. It was enough that he could and did see her when the chances served, and on that possibility she would have waited out the day, seven days a week. These occupations brought her round to the December month, wherein her father walked among the terrors with a steady head. On a lightly-snowing afternoon she arrived at the usual corner. It was a day of some wild rejoicing, and a festival. She had seen the houses, as she came along, decorated with little pikes, and with little red caps stuck upon them; also, with tricoloured ribbons; also, with the standard inscription (tricoloured letters were the favourite), Republic One and Indivisible. Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, or Death!

The miserable shop of the wood-sawyer was so small, that its whole surface furnished very indifferent space for this legend. He had got somebody to scrawl it up for him, however, who had squeezed Death in with most inappropriate difficulty. On his house-top, he displayed pike and cap, as a good citizen must, and in a window he had stationed his saw inscribed as his “Little Sainte Guillotine”--for the great sharp female was by that time popularly canonised. His shop was shut and he was not there, which was a relief to Lucie, and left her quite alone. But, he was not far off, for presently she heard a troubled movement and a shouting coming along, which filled her with fear. A moment afterwards, and a throng of people came pouring round the corner by the prison wall, in the midst of whom was the wood-sawyer hand in hand with The Vengeance. There could not be fewer than five hundred people, and they were dancing like five thousand demons. There was no other music than their own singing. They danced to the popular Revolution song, keeping a ferocious time that was like a gnashing of teeth in unison. Men and women danced together, women danced together, men danced together, as hazard had brought them together. At first, they were a mere storm of coarse red caps and coarse woollen rags; but, as they filled the place, and stopped to dance about Lucie, some ghastly apparition of a dance-figure gone raving mad arose among them. They advanced, retreated, struck at one another’s hands, clutched at one another’s heads, spun round alone, caught one another and spun round in pairs, until many of them dropped. While those were down, the rest linked hand in hand, and all spun round together: then the ring broke, and in separate rings of two and four they turned and turned until they all stopped at once, began again, struck, clutched, and tore, and then reversed the spin, and all spun round another way. Suddenly they stopped again, paused, struck out the time afresh, formed into lines the width of the public way, and, with their heads low down and their hands high up, swooped screaming off. No fight could have been half so terrible as this dance. It was so emphatically a fallen sport--a something, once innocent, delivered over to all devilry--a healthy pastime changed into a means of angering the blood, bewildering the senses, and steeling the heart. Such grace as was visible in it, made it the uglier, showing how warped and perverted all things good by nature were become. The maidenly bosom bared to this, the pretty almost-child’s head thus distracted, the delicate foot mincing in this slough of blood and dirt, were types of the disjointed time.

This was the Carmagnole. As it passed, leaving Lucie frightened and bewildered in the doorway of the wood-sawyer’s house, the feathery snow fell as quietly and lay as white and soft, as if it had never been. “We will set him above their mercies very soon. I left him climbing to the window, and I came to tell you. There is no one here to see. You may kiss your hand towards that highest shelving roof.” A footstep in the snow. Madame Defarge. “I salute you, citizeness,” from the Doctor. “I salute you, citizen.” This in passing. Nothing more. Madame Defarge gone, like a shadow over the white road. “Give me your arm, my love. Pass from here with an air of cheerfulness and courage, for his sake. That was well done;” they had left the spot; “it shall not be in vain. Charles is summoned for to-morrow.” “There is no time to lose. I am well prepared, but there are precautions to be taken, that could not be taken until he was actually summoned before the Tribunal. He has not received the notice yet, but I know that he will presently be summoned for to-morrow, and removed to the Conciergerie; I have timely information. You are not afraid?”

“Do so, implicitly. Your suspense is nearly ended, my darling; he shall be restored to you within a few hours; I have encompassed him with every protection. I must see Lorry.” He stopped. There was a heavy lumbering of wheels within hearing. They both knew too well what it meant. One. Two. Three. Three tumbrils faring away with their dread loads over the hushing snow. The staunch old gentleman was still in his trust; had never left it. He and his books were in frequent requisition as to property confiscated and made national. What he could save for the owners, he saved. No better man living to hold fast by what Tellson’s had in keeping, and to hold his peace. A murky red and yellow sky, and a rising mist from the Seine, denoted the approach of darkness. It was almost dark when they arrived at the Bank. The stately residence of Monseigneur was altogether blighted and deserted. Above a heap of dust and ashes in the court, ran the letters: National Property. Republic One and Indivisible. Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, or Death!

Who could that be with Mr. Lorry--the owner of the riding-coat upon the chair--who must not be seen? From whom newly arrived, did he come out, agitated and surprised, to take his favourite in his arms? To whom did he appear to repeat her faltering words, when, raising his voice and turning his head towards the door of the room from which he had issued, he said: “Removed to the Conciergerie, and summoned for to-morrow?” The dread tribunal of five Judges, Public Prosecutor, and determined Jury, sat every day. Their lists went forth every evening, and were read out by the gaolers of the various prisons to their prisoners. The standard gaoler-joke was, “Come out and listen to the Evening Paper, you inside there!” When a name was called, its owner stepped apart into a spot reserved for those who were announced as being thus fatally recorded. Charles Evrémonde, called Darnay, had reason to know the usage; he had seen hundreds pass away so. His bloated gaoler, who wore spectacles to read with, glanced over them to assure himself that he had taken his place, and went through the list, making a similar short pause at each name. There were twenty-three names, but only twenty were responded to; for one of the prisoners so summoned had died in gaol and been forgotten, and two had already been guillotined and forgotten. The list was read, in the vaulted chamber where Darnay had seen the associated prisoners on the night of his arrival. Every one of those had perished in the massacre; every human creature he had since cared for and parted with, had died on the scaffold.

There were hurried words of farewell and kindness, but the parting was soon over. It was the incident of every day, and the society of La Force were engaged in the preparation of some games of forfeits and a little concert, for that evening. They crowded to the grates and shed tears there; but, twenty places in the projected entertainments had to be refilled, and the time was, at best, short to the lock-up hour, when the common rooms and corridors would be delivered over to the great dogs who kept watch there through the night. The prisoners were far from insensible or unfeeling; their ways arose out of the condition of the time. Similarly, though with a subtle difference, a species of fervour or intoxication, known, without doubt, to have led some persons to brave the guillotine unnecessarily, and to die by it, was not mere boastfulness, but a wild infection of the wildly shaken public mind. In seasons of pestilence, some of us will have a secret attraction to the disease--a terrible passing inclination to die of it. And all of us have like wonders hidden in our breasts, only needing circumstances to evoke them.

The passage to the Conciergerie was short and dark; the night in its vermin-haunted cells was long and cold. Next day, fifteen prisoners were put to the bar before Charles Darnay’s name was called. All the fifteen were condemned, and the trials of the whole occupied an hour and a half. His judges sat upon the Bench in feathered hats; but the rough red cap and tricoloured cockade was the head-dress otherwise prevailing. Looking at the Jury and the turbulent audience, he might have thought that the usual order of things was reversed, and that the felons were trying the honest men. The lowest, cruelest, and worst populace of a city, never without its quantity of low, cruel, and bad, were the directing spirits of the scene: noisily commenting, applauding, disapproving, anticipating, and precipitating the result, without a check. Of the men, the greater part were armed in various ways; of the women, some wore knives, some daggers, some ate and drank as they looked on, many knitted. Among these last, was one, with a spare piece of knitting under her arm as she worked. She was in a front row, by the side of a man whom he had never seen since his arrival at the Barrier, but whom he directly remembered as Defarge. He noticed that she once or twice whispered in his ear, and that she seemed to be his wife; but, what he most noticed in the two figures was, that although they were posted as close to himself as they could be, they never looked towards him. They seemed to be waiting for something with a dogged determination, and they looked at the Jury, but at nothing else. Under the President sat Doctor Manette, in his usual quiet dress. As well as the prisoner could see, he and Mr. Lorry were the only men there, unconnected with the Tribunal, who wore their usual clothes, and had not assumed the coarse garb of the Carmagnole.

Charles Evrémonde, called Darnay, was accused by the public prosecutor as an emigrant, whose life was forfeit to the Republic, under the decree which banished all emigrants on pain of Death. It was nothing that the decree bore date since his return to France. There he was, and there was the decree; he had been taken in France, and his head was demanded. Because he had voluntarily relinquished a title that was distasteful to him, and a station that was distasteful to him, and had left his country--he submitted before the word emigrant in the present acceptation by the Tribunal was in use--to live by his own industry in England, rather than on the industry of the overladen people of France. This answer had a happy effect upon the audience. Cries in exaltation of the well-known good physician rent the hall. So capriciously were the people moved, that tears immediately rolled down several ferocious countenances which had been glaring at the prisoner a moment before, as if with impatience to pluck him out into the streets and kill him. On these few steps of his dangerous way, Charles Darnay had set his foot according to Doctor Manette’s reiterated instructions. The same cautious counsel directed every step that lay before him, and had prepared every inch of his road.

He had not returned sooner, he replied, simply because he had no means of living in France, save those he had resigned; whereas, in England, he lived by giving instruction in the French language and literature. He had returned when he did, on the pressing and written entreaty of a French citizen, who represented that his life was endangered by his absence. He had come back, to save a citizen’s life, and to bear his testimony, at whatever personal hazard, to the truth. Was that criminal in the eyes of the Republic? The populace cried enthusiastically, “No!” and the President rang his bell to quiet them. Which it did not, for they continued to cry “No!” until they left off, of their own will. The President required the name of that citizen. The accused explained that the citizen was his first witness. He also referred with confidence to the citizen’s letter, which had been taken from him at the Barrier, but which he did not doubt would be found among the papers then before the President. The Doctor had taken care that it should be there--had assured him that it would be there--and at this stage of the proceedings it was produced and read. Citizen Gabelle was called to confirm it, and did so. Citizen Gabelle hinted, with infinite delicacy and politeness, that in the pressure of business imposed on the Tribunal by the multitude of enemies of the Republic with which it had to deal, he had been slightly overlooked in his prison of the Abbaye--in fact, had rather passed out of the Tribunal’s patriotic remembrance--until three days ago; when he had been summoned before it, and had been set at liberty on the Jury’s declaring themselves satisfied that the accusation against him was answered, as to himself, by the surrender of the citizen Evrémonde, called Darnay.

Doctor Manette was next questioned. His high personal popularity, and the clearness of his answers, made a great impression; but, as he proceeded, as he showed that the Accused was his first friend on his release from his long imprisonment; that, the accused had remained in England, always faithful and devoted to his daughter and himself in their exile; that, so far from being in favour with the Aristocrat government there, he had actually been tried for his life by it, as the foe of England and friend of the United States--as he brought these circumstances into view, with the greatest discretion and with the straightforward force of truth and earnestness, the Jury and the populace became one. At last, when he appealed by name to Monsieur Lorry, an English gentleman then and there present, who, like himself, had been a witness on that English trial and could corroborate his account of it, the Jury declared that they had heard enough, and that they were ready with their votes if the President were content to receive them. At every vote (the Jurymen voted aloud and individually), the populace set up a shout of applause. All the voices were in the prisoner’s favour, and the President declared him free.

Then, began one of those extraordinary scenes with which the populace sometimes gratified their fickleness, or their better impulses towards generosity and mercy, or which they regarded as some set-off against their swollen account of cruel rage. No man can decide now to which of these motives such extraordinary scenes were referable; it is probable, to a blending of all the three, with the second predominating. No sooner was the acquittal pronounced, than tears were shed as freely as blood at another time, and such fraternal embraces were bestowed upon the prisoner by as many of both sexes as could rush at him, that after his long and unwholesome confinement he was in danger of fainting from exhaustion; none the less because he knew very well, that the very same people, carried by another current, would have rushed at him with the very same intensity, to rend him to pieces and strew him over the streets. His removal, to make way for other accused persons who were to be tried, rescued him from these caresses for the moment. Five were to be tried together, next, as enemies of the Republic, forasmuch as they had not assisted it by word or deed. So quick was the Tribunal to compensate itself and the nation for a chance lost, that these five came down to him before he left the place, condemned to die within twenty-four hours. The first of them told him so, with the customary prison sign of Death--a raised finger--and they all added in words, “Long live the Republic!”

The five had had, it is true, no audience to lengthen their proceedings, for when he and Doctor Manette emerged from the gate, there was a great crowd about it, in which there seemed to be every face he had seen in Court--except two, for which he looked in vain. On his coming out, the concourse made at him anew, weeping, embracing, and shouting, all by turns and all together, until the very tide of the river on the bank of which the mad scene was acted, seemed to run mad, like the people on the shore. They put him into a great chair they had among them, and which they had taken either out of the Court itself, or one of its rooms or passages. Over the chair they had thrown a red flag, and to the back of it they had bound a pike with a red cap on its top. In this car of triumph, not even the Doctor’s entreaties could prevent his being carried to his home on men’s shoulders, with a confused sea of red caps heaving about him, and casting up to sight from the stormy deep such wrecks of faces, that he more than once misdoubted his mind being in confusion, and that he was in the tumbril on his way to the Guillotine.

In wild dreamlike procession, embracing whom they met and pointing him out, they carried him on. Reddening the snowy streets with the prevailing Republican colour, in winding and tramping through them, as they had reddened them below the snow with a deeper dye, they carried him thus into the courtyard of the building where he lived. Her father had gone on before, to prepare her, and when her husband stood upon his feet, she dropped insensible in his arms. As he held her to his heart and turned her beautiful head between his face and the brawling crowd, so that his tears and her lips might come together unseen, a few of the people fell to dancing. Instantly, all the rest fell to dancing, and the courtyard overflowed with the Carmagnole. Then, they elevated into the vacant chair a young woman from the crowd to be carried as the Goddess of Liberty, and then swelling and overflowing out into the adjacent streets, and along the river’s bank, and over the bridge, the Carmagnole absorbed them every one and whirled them away.

After grasping the Doctor’s hand, as he stood victorious and proud before him; after grasping the hand of Mr. Lorry, who came panting in breathless from his struggle against the waterspout of the Carmagnole; after kissing little Lucie, who was lifted up to clasp her arms round his neck; and after embracing the ever zealous and faithful Pross who lifted her; he took his wife in his arms, and carried her up to their rooms. She laid her head upon her father’s breast, as she had laid his poor head on her own breast, long, long ago. He was happy in the return he had made her, he was recompensed for his suffering, he was proud of his strength. “You must not be weak, my darling,” he remonstrated; “don’t tremble so. I have saved him.” “I have saved him.” It was not another of the dreams in which he had often come back; he was really here. And yet his wife trembled, and a vague but heavy fear was upon her. All the air round was so thick and dark, the people were so passionately revengeful and fitful, the innocent were so constantly put to death on vague suspicion and black malice, it was so impossible to forget that many as blameless as her husband and as dear to others as he was to her, every day shared the fate from which he had been clutched, that her heart could not be as lightened of its load as she felt it ought to be. The shadows of the wintry afternoon were beginning to fall, and even now the dreadful carts were rolling through the streets. Her mind pursued them, looking for him among the Condemned; and then she clung closer to his real presence and trembled more.

Her father, cheering her, showed a compassionate superiority to this woman’s weakness, which was wonderful to see. No garret, no shoemaking, no One Hundred and Five, North Tower, now! He had accomplished the task he had set himself, his promise was redeemed, he had saved Charles. Let them all lean upon him. Their housekeeping was of a very frugal kind: not only because that was the safest way of life, involving the least offence to the people, but because they were not rich, and Charles, throughout his imprisonment, had had to pay heavily for his bad food, and for his guard, and towards the living of the poorer prisoners. Partly on this account, and partly to avoid a domestic spy, they kept no servant; the citizen and citizeness who acted as porters at the courtyard gate, rendered them occasional service; and Jerry (almost wholly transferred to them by Mr. Lorry) had become their daily retainer, and had his bed there every night. It was an ordinance of the Republic One and Indivisible of Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, or Death, that on the door or doorpost of every house, the name of every inmate must be legibly inscribed in letters of a certain size, at a certain convenient height from the ground. Mr. Jerry Cruncher’s name, therefore, duly embellished the doorpost down below; and, as the afternoon shadows deepened, the owner of that name himself appeared, from overlooking a painter whom Doctor Manette had employed to add to the list the name of Charles Evrémonde, called Darnay.

In the universal fear and distrust that darkened the time, all the usual harmless ways of life were changed. In the Doctor’s little household, as in very many others, the articles of daily consumption that were wanted were purchased every evening, in small quantities and at various small shops. To avoid attracting notice, and to give as little occasion as possible for talk and envy, was the general desire. For some months past, Miss Pross and Mr. Cruncher had discharged the office of purveyors; the former carrying the money; the latter, the basket. Every afternoon at about the time when the public lamps were lighted, they fared forth on this duty, and made and brought home such purchases as were needful. Although Miss Pross, through her long association with a French family, might have known as much of their language as of her own, if she had had a mind, she had no mind in that direction; consequently she knew no more of that “nonsense” (as she was pleased to call it) than Mr. Cruncher did. So her manner of marketing was to plump a noun-substantive at the head of a shopkeeper without any introduction in the nature of an article, and, if it happened not to be the name of the thing she wanted, to look round for that thing, lay hold of it, and hold on by it until the bargain was concluded. She always made a bargain for it, by holding up, as a statement of its just price, one finger less than the merchant held up, whatever his number might be.

“There’s all manner of things wanted,” said Miss Pross, “and we shall have a precious time of it. We want wine, among the rest. Nice toasts these Redheads will be drinking, wherever we buy it.” “Ha!” said Miss Pross, “it doesn’t need an interpreter to explain the meaning of these creatures. They have but one, and it’s Midnight Murder, and Mischief.” “Yes, yes, yes, I’ll be cautious,” said Miss Pross; “but I may say among ourselves, that I do hope there will be no oniony and tobaccoey smotherings in the form of embracings all round, going on in the streets. Now, Ladybird, never you stir from that fire till I come back! Take care of the dear husband you have recovered, and don’t move your pretty head from his shoulder as you have it now, till you see me again! May I ask a question, Doctor Manette, before I go?” “Well, my sweet,” said Miss Pross, nodding her head emphatically, “the short and the long of it is, that I am a subject of His Most Gracious Majesty King George the Third;” Miss Pross curtseyed at the name; “and as such, my maxim is, Confound their politics, Frustrate their knavish tricks, On him our hopes we fix, God save the King!”

“I am glad you have so much of the Englishman in you, though I wish you had never taken that cold in your voice,” said Miss Pross, approvingly. “But the question, Doctor Manette. Is there”--it was the good creature’s way to affect to make light of anything that was a great anxiety with them all, and to come at it in this chance manner--“is there any prospect yet, of our getting out of this place?” “Heigh-ho-hum!” said Miss Pross, cheerfully repressing a sigh as she glanced at her darling’s golden hair in the light of the fire, “then we must have patience and wait: that’s all. We must hold up our heads and fight low, as my brother Solomon used to say. Now, Mr. Cruncher!--Don’t you move, Ladybird!” They went out, leaving Lucie, and her husband, her father, and the child, by a bright fire. Mr. Lorry was expected back presently from the Banking House. Miss Pross had lighted the lamp, but had put it aside in a corner, that they might enjoy the fire-light undisturbed. Little Lucie sat by her grandfather with her hands clasped through his arm: and he, in a tone not rising much above a whisper, began to tell her a story of a great and powerful Fairy who had opened a prison-wall and let out a captive who had once done the Fairy a service. All was subdued and quiet, and Lucie was more at ease than she had been.

“My dear!” said her father, stopping in his story, and laying his hand on hers, “command yourself. What a disordered state you are in! The least thing--nothing--startles you! _You_, your father’s daughter!” “My child,” said the Doctor, rising, and laying his hand upon her shoulder, “I _have_ saved him. What weakness is this, my dear! Let me go to the door.” He took the lamp in his hand, crossed the two intervening outer rooms, and opened it. A rude clattering of feet over the floor, and four rough men in red caps, armed with sabres and pistols, entered the room. Doctor Manette, whom this visitation had so turned into stone, that he stood with the lamp in his hand, as if he were a statue made to hold it, moved after these words were spoken, put the lamp down, and confronting the speaker, and taking him, not ungently, by the loose front of his red woollen shirt, said: “Citizen Doctor,” said the first, reluctantly, “he has been denounced to the Section of Saint Antoine. This citizen,” pointing out the second who had entered, “is from Saint Antoine.”

“Citizen Doctor,” said the first, with his former reluctance, “ask no more. If the Republic demands sacrifices from you, without doubt you as a good patriot will be happy to make them. The Republic goes before all. The People is supreme. Evrémonde, we are pressed.” Happily unconscious of the new calamity at home, Miss Pross threaded her way along the narrow streets and crossed the river by the bridge of the Pont-Neuf, reckoning in her mind the number of indispensable purchases she had to make. Mr. Cruncher, with the basket, walked at her side. They both looked to the right and to the left into most of the shops they passed, had a wary eye for all gregarious assemblages of people, and turned out of their road to avoid any very excited group of talkers. It was a raw evening, and the misty river, blurred to the eye with blazing lights and to the ear with harsh noises, showed where the barges were stationed in which the smiths worked, making guns for the Army of the Republic. Woe to the man who played tricks with _that_ Army, or got undeserved promotion in it! Better for him that his beard had never grown, for the National Razor shaved him close.

Having purchased a few small articles of grocery, and a measure of oil for the lamp, Miss Pross bethought herself of the wine they wanted. After peeping into several wine-shops, she stopped at the sign of the Good Republican Brutus of Antiquity, not far from the National Palace, once (and twice) the Tuileries, where the aspect of things rather took her fancy. It had a quieter look than any other place of the same description they had passed, and, though red with patriotic caps, was not so red as the rest. Sounding Mr. Cruncher, and finding him of her opinion, Miss Pross resorted to the Good Republican Brutus of Antiquity, attended by her cavalier. Slightly observant of the smoky lights; of the people, pipe in mouth, playing with limp cards and yellow dominoes; of the one bare-breasted, bare-armed, soot-begrimed workman reading a journal aloud, and of the others listening to him; of the weapons worn, or laid aside to be resumed; of the two or three customers fallen forward asleep, who in the popular high-shouldered shaggy black spencer looked, in that attitude, like slumbering bears or dogs; the two outlandish customers approached the counter, and showed what they wanted.

As their wine was measuring out, a man parted from another man in a corner, and rose to depart. In going, he had to face Miss Pross. No sooner did he face her, than Miss Pross uttered a scream, and clapped her hands. In a moment, the whole company were on their feet. That somebody was assassinated by somebody vindicating a difference of opinion was the likeliest occurrence. Everybody looked to see somebody fall, but only saw a man and a woman standing staring at each other; the man with all the outward aspect of a Frenchman and a thorough Republican; the woman, evidently English. What was said in this disappointing anti-climax, by the disciples of the Good Republican Brutus of Antiquity, except that it was something very voluble and loud, would have been as so much Hebrew or Chaldean to Miss Pross and her protector, though they had been all ears. But, they had no ears for anything in their surprise. For, it must be recorded, that not only was Miss Pross lost in amazement and agitation, but, Mr. Cruncher--though it seemed on his own separate and individual account--was in a state of the greatest wonder.

“Oh, Solomon, dear Solomon!” cried Miss Pross, clapping her hands again. “After not setting eyes upon you or hearing of you for so long a time, do I find you here!” Apparently, Mr. Cruncher did, to judge from his looks. He said not a word, however, and Miss Pross, exploring the depths of her reticule through her tears with great difficulty paid for her wine. As she did so, Solomon turned to the followers of the Good Republican Brutus of Antiquity, and offered a few words of explanation in the French language, which caused them all to relapse into their former places and pursuits. “How dreadfully unkind in a brother nothing has ever turned my love away from!” cried Miss Pross, “to give me such a greeting, and show me no affection.” “If you expect me to be surprised,” said her brother Solomon, “I am not surprised; I knew you were here; I know of most people who are here. If you really don’t want to endanger my existence--which I half believe you do--go your ways as soon as possible, and let me go mine. I am busy. I am an official.”

“My English brother Solomon,” mourned Miss Pross, casting up her tear-fraught eyes, “that had the makings in him of one of the best and greatest of men in his native country, an official among foreigners, and such foreigners! I would almost sooner have seen the dear boy lying in his--” “I said so!” cried her brother, interrupting. “I knew it. You want to be the death of me. I shall be rendered Suspected, by my own sister. Just as I am getting on!” “The gracious and merciful Heavens forbid!” cried Miss Pross. “Far rather would I never see you again, dear Solomon, though I have ever loved you truly, and ever shall. Say but one affectionate word to me, and tell me there is nothing angry or estranged between us, and I will detain you no longer.” Good Miss Pross! As if the estrangement between them had come of any culpability of hers. As if Mr. Lorry had not known it for a fact, years ago, in the quiet corner in Soho, that this precious brother had spent her money and left her!

He was saying the affectionate word, however, with a far more grudging condescension and patronage than he could have shown if their relative merits and positions had been reversed (which is invariably the case, all the world over), when Mr. Cruncher, touching him on the shoulder, hoarsely and unexpectedly interposed with the following singular question: “Come!” said Mr. Cruncher. “Speak out, you know.” (Which, by the way, was more than he could do himself.) “John Solomon, or Solomon John? She calls you Solomon, and she must know, being your sister. And _I_ know you’re John, you know. Which of the two goes first? And regarding that name of Pross, likewise. That warn’t your name over the water.” “Yes. T’other one’s was one syllable. I know you. You was a spy--witness at the Bailey. What, in the name of the Father of Lies, own father to yourself, was you called at that time?” The speaker who struck in, was Sydney Carton. He had his hands behind him under the skirts of his riding-coat, and he stood at Mr. Cruncher’s elbow as negligently as he might have stood at the Old Bailey itself.

“Don’t be alarmed, my dear Miss Pross. I arrived at Mr. Lorry’s, to his surprise, yesterday evening; we agreed that I would not present myself elsewhere until all was well, or unless I could be useful; I present myself here, to beg a little talk with your brother. I wish you had a better employed brother than Mr. Barsad. I wish for your sake Mr. Barsad was not a Sheep of the Prisons.” “I’ll tell you,” said Sydney. “I lighted on you, Mr. Barsad, coming out of the prison of the Conciergerie while I was contemplating the walls, an hour or more ago. You have a face to be remembered, and I remember faces well. Made curious by seeing you in that connection, and having a reason, to which you are no stranger, for associating you with the misfortunes of a friend now very unfortunate, I walked in your direction. I walked into the wine-shop here, close after you, and sat near you. I had no difficulty in deducing from your unreserved conversation, and the rumour openly going about among your admirers, the nature of your calling. And gradually, what I had done at random, seemed to shape itself into a purpose, Mr. Barsad.”

“It would be troublesome, and might be dangerous, to explain in the street. Could you favour me, in confidence, with some minutes of your company--at the office of Tellson’s Bank, for instance?” Carton’s negligent recklessness of manner came powerfully in aid of his quickness and skill, in such a business as he had in his secret mind, and with such a man as he had to do with. His practised eye saw it, and made the most of it. “Come, come, Mr. Barsad!” exclaimed Sydney. “Don’t be ungrateful. But for my great respect for your sister, I might not have led up so pleasantly to a little proposal that I wish to make for our mutual satisfaction. Do you go with me to the Bank?” “I propose that we first conduct your sister safely to the corner of her own street. Let me take your arm, Miss Pross. This is not a good city, at this time, for you to be out in, unprotected; and as your escort knows Mr. Barsad, I will invite him to Mr. Lorry’s with us. Are we ready? Come then!”

Miss Pross recalled soon afterwards, and to the end of her life remembered, that as she pressed her hands on Sydney’s arm and looked up in his face, imploring him to do no hurt to Solomon, there was a braced purpose in the arm and a kind of inspiration in the eyes, which not only contradicted his light manner, but changed and raised the man. She was too much occupied then with fears for the brother who so little deserved her affection, and with Sydney’s friendly reassurances, adequately to heed what she observed. They left her at the corner of the street, and Carton led the way to Mr. Lorry’s, which was within a few minutes’ walk. John Barsad, or Solomon Pross, walked at his side. Mr. Lorry had just finished his dinner, and was sitting before a cheery little log or two of fire--perhaps looking into their blaze for the picture of that younger elderly gentleman from Tellson’s, who had looked into the red coals at the Royal George at Dover, now a good many years ago. He turned his head as they entered, and showed the surprise with which he saw a stranger.

As he took a chair himself, he supplied the link that Mr. Lorry wanted, by saying to him with a frown, “Witness at that trial.” Mr. Lorry immediately remembered, and regarded his new visitor with an undisguised look of abhorrence. “Mr. Barsad has been recognised by Miss Pross as the affectionate brother you have heard of,” said Sydney, “and has acknowledged the relationship. I pass to worse news. Darnay has been arrested again.” Struck with consternation, the old gentleman exclaimed, “What do you tell me! I left him safe and free within these two hours, and am about to return to him!” “Mr. Barsad is the best authority possible, sir,” said Sydney, “and I have it from Mr. Barsad’s communication to a friend and brother Sheep over a bottle of wine, that the arrest has taken place. He left the messengers at the gate, and saw them admitted by the porter. There is no earthly doubt that he is retaken.” Mr. Lorry’s business eye read in the speaker’s face that it was loss of time to dwell upon the point. Confused, but sensible that something might depend on his presence of mind, he commanded himself, and was silently attentive.

“Now, I trust,” said Sydney to him, “that the name and influence of Doctor Manette may stand him in as good stead to-morrow--you said he would be before the Tribunal again to-morrow, Mr. Barsad?--” “--In as good stead to-morrow as to-day. But it may not be so. I own to you, I am shaken, Mr. Lorry, by Doctor Manette’s not having had the power to prevent this arrest.” “In short,” said Sydney, “this is a desperate time, when desperate games are played for desperate stakes. Let the Doctor play the winning game; I will play the losing one. No man’s life here is worth purchase. Any one carried home by the people to-day, may be condemned tomorrow. Now, the stake I have resolved to play for, in case of the worst, is a friend in the Conciergerie. And the friend I purpose to myself to win, is Mr. Barsad.” “Mr. Barsad,” he went on, in the tone of one who really was looking over a hand at cards: “Sheep of the prisons, emissary of Republican committees, now turnkey, now prisoner, always spy and secret informer, so much the more valuable here for being English that an Englishman is less open to suspicion of subornation in those characters than a Frenchman, represents himself to his employers under a false name. That’s a very good card. Mr. Barsad, now in the employ of the republican French government, was formerly in the employ of the aristocratic English government, the enemy of France and freedom. That’s an excellent card. Inference clear as day in this region of suspicion, that Mr. Barsad, still in the pay of the aristocratic English government, is the spy of Pitt, the treacherous foe of the Republic crouching in its bosom, the English traitor and agent of all mischief so much spoken of and so difficult to find. That’s a card not to be beaten. Have you followed my hand, Mr. Barsad?”

He drew the bottle near, poured out another glassful of brandy, and drank it off. He saw that the spy was fearful of his drinking himself into a fit state for the immediate denunciation of him. Seeing it, he poured out and drank another glassful. It was a poorer hand than he suspected. Mr. Barsad saw losing cards in it that Sydney Carton knew nothing of. Thrown out of his honourable employment in England, through too much unsuccessful hard swearing there--not because he was not wanted there; our English reasons for vaunting our superiority to secrecy and spies are of very modern date--he knew that he had crossed the Channel, and accepted service in France: first, as a tempter and an eavesdropper among his own countrymen there: gradually, as a tempter and an eavesdropper among the natives. He knew that under the overthrown government he had been a spy upon Saint Antoine and Defarge’s wine-shop; had received from the watchful police such heads of information concerning Doctor Manette’s imprisonment, release, and history, as should serve him for an introduction to familiar conversation with the Defarges; and tried them on Madame Defarge, and had broken down with them signally. He always remembered with fear and trembling, that that terrible woman had knitted when he talked with her, and had looked ominously at him as her fingers moved. He had since seen her, in the Section of Saint Antoine, over and over again produce her knitted registers, and denounce people whose lives the guillotine then surely swallowed up. He knew, as every one employed as he was did, that he was never safe; that flight was impossible; that he was tied fast under the shadow of the axe; and that in spite of his utmost tergiversation and treachery in furtherance of the reigning terror, a word might bring it down upon him. Once denounced, and on such grave grounds as had just now been suggested to his mind, he foresaw that the dreadful woman of whose unrelenting character he had seen many proofs, would produce against him that fatal register, and would quash his last chance of life. Besides that all secret men are men soon terrified, here were surely cards enough of one black suit, to justify the holder in growing rather livid as he turned them over.

“I think, sir,” said the spy, in the meanest manner, as he turned to Mr. Lorry, “I may appeal to a gentleman of your years and benevolence, to put it to this other gentleman, so much your junior, whether he can under any circumstances reconcile it to his station to play that Ace of which he has spoken. I admit that _I_ am a spy, and that it is considered a discreditable station--though it must be filled by somebody; but this gentleman is no spy, and why should he so demean himself as to make himself one?” The smooth manner of the spy, curiously in dissonance with his ostentatiously rough dress, and probably with his usual demeanour, received such a check from the inscrutability of Carton,--who was a mystery to wiser and honester men than he,--that it faltered here and failed him. While he was at a loss, Carton said, resuming his former air of contemplating cards: “And indeed, now I think again, I have a strong impression that I have another good card here, not yet enumerated. That friend and fellow-Sheep, who spoke of himself as pasturing in the country prisons; who was he?”

“Though it’s not important,” repeated Carton, in the same mechanical way--“though it’s not important--No, it’s not important. No. Yet I know the face.” “It-can’t-be,” muttered Sydney Carton, retrospectively, and idling his glass (which fortunately was a small one) again. “Can’t-be. Spoke good French. Yet like a foreigner, I thought?” “No. Foreign!” cried Carton, striking his open hand on the table, as a light broke clearly on his mind. “Cly! Disguised, but the same man. We had that man before us at the Old Bailey.” “Now, there you are hasty, sir,” said Barsad, with a smile that gave his aquiline nose an extra inclination to one side; “there you really give me an advantage over you. Cly (who I will unreservedly admit, at this distance of time, was a partner of mine) has been dead several years. I attended him in his last illness. He was buried in London, at the church of Saint Pancras-in-the-Fields. His unpopularity with the blackguard multitude at the moment prevented my following his remains, but I helped to lay him in his coffin.” Here, Mr. Lorry became aware, from where he sat, of a most remarkable goblin shadow on the wall. Tracing it to its source, he discovered it to be caused by a sudden extraordinary rising and stiffening of all the risen and stiff hair on Mr. Cruncher’s head.

“Let us be reasonable,” said the spy, “and let us be fair. To show you how mistaken you are, and what an unfounded assumption yours is, I will lay before you a certificate of Cly’s burial, which I happened to have carried in my pocket-book,” with a hurried hand he produced and opened it, “ever since. There it is. Oh, look at it, look at it! You may take it in your hand; it’s no forgery.” Here, Mr. Lorry perceived the reflection on the wall to elongate, and Mr. Cruncher rose and stepped forward. His hair could not have been more violently on end, if it had been that moment dressed by the Cow with the crumpled horn in the house that Jack built. “I tell you,” said Jerry, “that you buried paving-stones and earth in that there coffin. Don’t go and tell me that you buried Cly. It was a take in. Me and two more knows it.” “What’s that to you? Ecod!” growled Mr. Cruncher, “it’s you I have got a old grudge again, is it, with your shameful impositions upon tradesmen! I’d catch hold of your throat and choke you for half a guinea.”

Sydney Carton, who, with Mr. Lorry, had been lost in amazement at this turn of the business, here requested Mr. Cruncher to moderate and explain himself. “At another time, sir,” he returned, evasively, “the present time is ill-conwenient for explainin’. What I stand to, is, that he knows well wot that there Cly was never in that there coffin. Let him say he was, in so much as a word of one syllable, and I’ll either catch hold of his throat and choke him for half a guinea;” Mr. Cruncher dwelt upon this as quite a liberal offer; “or I’ll out and announce him.” “Humph! I see one thing,” said Carton. “I hold another card, Mr. Barsad. Impossible, here in raging Paris, with Suspicion filling the air, for you to outlive denunciation, when you are in communication with another aristocratic spy of the same antecedents as yourself, who, moreover, has the mystery about him of having feigned death and come to life again! A plot in the prisons, of the foreigner against the Republic. A strong card--a certain Guillotine card! Do you play?”

“No!” returned the spy. “I throw up. I confess that we were so unpopular with the outrageous mob, that I only got away from England at the risk of being ducked to death, and that Cly was so ferreted up and down, that he never would have got away at all but for that sham. Though how this man knows it was a sham, is a wonder of wonders to me.” “Never you trouble your head about this man,” retorted the contentious Mr. Cruncher; “you’ll have trouble enough with giving your attention to that gentleman. And look here! Once more!”--Mr. Cruncher could not be restrained from making rather an ostentatious parade of his liberality--“I’d catch hold of your throat and choke you for half a guinea.” The Sheep of the prisons turned from him to Sydney Carton, and said, with more decision, “It has come to a point. I go on duty soon, and can’t overstay my time. You told me you had a proposal; what is it? Now, it is of no use asking too much of me. Ask me to do anything in my office, putting my head in great extra danger, and I had better trust my life to the chances of a refusal than the chances of consent. In short, I should make that choice. You talk of desperation. We are all desperate here. Remember! I may denounce you if I think proper, and I can swear my way through stone walls, and so can others. Now, what do you want with me?”

Sydney Carton filled another glass with brandy, poured it slowly out upon the hearth, and watched it as it dropped. It being all spent, he said, rising: “So far, we have spoken before these two, because it was as well that the merits of the cards should not rest solely between you and me. Come into the dark room here, and let us have one final word alone.” While Sydney Carton and the Sheep of the prisons were in the adjoining dark room, speaking so low that not a sound was heard, Mr. Lorry looked at Jerry in considerable doubt and mistrust. That honest tradesman’s manner of receiving the look, did not inspire confidence; he changed the leg on which he rested, as often as if he had fifty of those limbs, and were trying them all; he examined his finger-nails with a very questionable closeness of attention; and whenever Mr. Lorry’s eye caught his, he was taken with that peculiar kind of short cough requiring the hollow of a hand before it, which is seldom, if ever, known to be an infirmity attendant on perfect openness of character.

“My mind misgives me much,” said Mr. Lorry, angrily shaking a forefinger at him, “that you have used the respectable and great house of Tellson’s as a blind, and that you have had an unlawful occupation of an infamous description. If you have, don’t expect me to befriend you when you get back to England. If you have, don’t expect me to keep your secret. Tellson’s shall not be imposed upon.” “I hope, sir,” pleaded the abashed Mr. Cruncher, “that a gentleman like yourself wot I’ve had the honour of odd jobbing till I’m grey at it, would think twice about harming of me, even if it wos so--I don’t say it is, but even if it wos. And which it is to be took into account that if it wos, it wouldn’t, even then, be all o’ one side. There’d be two sides to it. There might be medical doctors at the present hour, a picking up their guineas where a honest tradesman don’t pick up his fardens--fardens! no, nor yet his half fardens--half fardens! no, nor yet his quarter--a banking away like smoke at Tellson’s, and a cocking their medical eyes at that tradesman on the sly, a going in and going out to their own carriages--ah! equally like smoke, if not more so. Well, that ’ud be imposing, too, on Tellson’s. For you cannot sarse the goose and not the gander. And here’s Mrs. Cruncher, or leastways wos in the Old England times, and would be to-morrow, if cause given, a floppin’ again the business to that degree as is ruinating--stark ruinating! Whereas them medical doctors’ wives don’t flop--catch ’em at it! Or, if they flop, their floppings goes in favour of more patients, and how can you rightly have one without t’other? Then, wot with undertakers, and wot with parish clerks, and wot with sextons, and wot with private watchmen (all awaricious and all in it), a man wouldn’t get much by it, even if it wos so. And wot little a man did get, would never prosper with him, Mr. Lorry. He’d never have no good of it; he’d want all along to be out of the line, if he, could see his way out, being once in--even if it wos so.”

“No, I will _not_, sir,” returned Mr. Crunches as if nothing were further from his thoughts or practice--“which I don’t say it is--wot I would humbly offer to you, sir, would be this. Upon that there stool, at that there Bar, sets that there boy of mine, brought up and growed up to be a man, wot will errand you, message you, general-light-job you, till your heels is where your head is, if such should be your wishes. If it wos so, which I still don’t say it is (for I will not prewaricate to you, sir), let that there boy keep his father’s place, and take care of his mother; don’t blow upon that boy’s father--do not do it, sir--and let that father go into the line of the reg’lar diggin’, and make amends for what he would have undug--if it wos so--by diggin’ of ’em in with a will, and with conwictions respectin’ the futur’ keepin’ of ’em safe. That, Mr. Lorry,” said Mr. Cruncher, wiping his forehead with his arm, as an announcement that he had arrived at the peroration of his discourse, “is wot I would respectfully offer to you, sir. A man don’t see all this here a goin’ on dreadful round him, in the way of Subjects without heads, dear me, plentiful enough fur to bring the price down to porterage and hardly that, without havin’ his serious thoughts of things. And these here would be mine, if it wos so, entreatin’ of you fur to bear in mind that wot I said just now, I up and said in the good cause when I might have kep’ it back.”

“That at least is true,” said Mr. Lorry. “Say no more now. It may be that I shall yet stand your friend, if you deserve it, and repent in action--not in words. I want no more words.” Mr. Cruncher knuckled his forehead, as Sydney Carton and the spy returned from the dark room. “Adieu, Mr. Barsad,” said the former; “our arrangement thus made, you have nothing to fear from me.” “It is all I could do,” said Carton. “To propose too much, would be to put this man’s head under the axe, and, as he himself said, nothing worse could happen to him if he were denounced. It was obviously the weakness of the position. There is no help for it.” Mr. Lorry’s eyes gradually sought the fire; his sympathy with his darling, and the heavy disappointment of his second arrest, gradually weakened them; he was an old man now, overborne with anxiety of late, and his tears fell. “You are a good man and a true friend,” said Carton, in an altered voice. “Forgive me if I notice that you are affected. I could not see my father weep, and sit by, careless. And I could not respect your sorrow more, if you were my father. You are free from that misfortune, however.”

Though he said the last words, with a slip into his usual manner, there was a true feeling and respect both in his tone and in his touch, that Mr. Lorry, who had never seen the better side of him, was wholly unprepared for. He gave him his hand, and Carton gently pressed it. “To return to poor Darnay,” said Carton. “Don’t tell Her of this interview, or this arrangement. It would not enable Her to go to see him. She might think it was contrived, in case of the worse, to convey to him the means of anticipating the sentence.” Mr. Lorry had not thought of that, and he looked quickly at Carton to see if it were in his mind. It seemed to be; he returned the look, and evidently understood it. “She might think a thousand things,” Carton said, “and any of them would only add to her trouble. Don’t speak of me to her. As I said to you when I first came, I had better not see her. I can put my hand out, to do any little helpful work for her that my hand can find to do, without that. You are going to her, I hope? She must be very desolate to-night.”

It was a long, grieving sound, like a sigh--almost like a sob. It attracted Mr. Lorry’s eyes to Carton’s face, which was turned to the fire. A light, or a shade (the old gentleman could not have said which), passed from it as swiftly as a change will sweep over a hill-side on a wild bright day, and he lifted his foot to put back one of the little flaming logs, which was tumbling forward. He wore the white riding-coat and top-boots, then in vogue, and the light of the fire touching their light surfaces made him look very pale, with his long brown hair, all untrimmed, hanging loose about him. His indifference to fire was sufficiently remarkable to elicit a word of remonstrance from Mr. Lorry; his boot was still upon the hot embers of the flaming log, when it had broken under the weight of his foot. Mr. Lorry’s eyes were again attracted to his face. Taking note of the wasted air which clouded the naturally handsome features, and having the expression of prisoners’ faces fresh in his mind, he was strongly reminded of that expression.

“Yes. As I was telling you last night when Lucie came in so unexpectedly, I have at length done all that I can do here. I hoped to have left them in perfect safety, and then to have quitted Paris. I have my Leave to Pass. I was ready to go.” “If you could say, with truth, to your own solitary heart, to-night, ‘I have secured to myself the love and attachment, the gratitude or respect, of no human creature; I have won myself a tender place in no regard; I have done nothing good or serviceable to be remembered by!’ your seventy-eight years would be seventy-eight heavy curses; would they not?” “Twenty years back, yes; at this time of my life, no. For, as I draw closer and closer to the end, I travel in the circle, nearer and nearer to the beginning. It seems to be one of the kind smoothings and preparings of the way. My heart is touched now, by many remembrances that had long fallen asleep, of my pretty young mother (and I so old!), and by many associations of the days when what we call the World was not so real with me, and my faults were not confirmed in me.”

Carton terminated the conversation here, by rising to help him on with his outer coat; “But you,” said Mr. Lorry, reverting to the theme, “you are young.” “I’ll walk with you to her gate. You know my vagabond and restless habits. If I should prowl about the streets a long time, don’t be uneasy; I shall reappear in the morning. You go to the Court to-morrow?” Mr. Lorry did so, and they went down-stairs and out in the streets. A few minutes brought them to Mr. Lorry’s destination. Carton left him there; but lingered at a little distance, and turned back to the gate again when it was shut, and touched it. He had heard of her going to the prison every day. “She came out here,” he said, looking about him, “turned this way, must have trod on these stones often. Let me follow in her steps.” It was ten o’clock at night when he stood before the prison of La Force, where she had stood hundreds of times. A little wood-sawyer, having closed his shop, was smoking his pipe at his shop-door.

“You mean the Guillotine. Not ill. Sixty-three to-day. We shall mount to a hundred soon. Samson and his men complain sometimes, of being exhausted. Ha, ha, ha! He is so droll, that Samson. Such a Barber!” “Go and see him when he has a good batch. Figure this to yourself, citizen; he shaved the sixty-three to-day, in less than two pipes! Less than two pipes. Word of honour!” As the grinning little man held out the pipe he was smoking, to explain how he timed the executioner, Carton was so sensible of a rising desire to strike the life out of him, that he turned away. Sydney had not gone far out of sight, when he stopped in the middle of the street under a glimmering lamp, and wrote with his pencil on a scrap of paper. Then, traversing with the decided step of one who remembered the way well, several dark and dirty streets--much dirtier than usual, for the best public thoroughfares remained uncleansed in those times of terror--he stopped at a chemist’s shop, which the owner was closing with his own hands. A small, dim, crooked shop, kept in a tortuous, up-hill thoroughfare, by a small, dim, crooked man.

Giving this citizen, too, good night, as he confronted him at his counter, he laid the scrap of paper before him. “Whew!” the chemist whistled softly, as he read it. “Hi! hi! hi!” Certain small packets were made and given to him. He put them, one by one, in the breast of his inner coat, counted out the money for them, and deliberately left the shop. “There is nothing more to do,” said he, glancing upward at the moon, “until to-morrow. I can’t sleep.” It was not a reckless manner, the manner in which he said these words aloud under the fast-sailing clouds, nor was it more expressive of negligence than defiance. It was the settled manner of a tired man, who had wandered and struggled and got lost, but who at length struck into his road and saw its end. Long ago, when he had been famous among his earliest competitors as a youth of great promise, he had followed his father to the grave. His mother had died, years before. These solemn words, which had been read at his father’s grave, arose in his mind as he went down the dark streets, among the heavy shadows, with the moon and the clouds sailing on high above him. “I am the resurrection and the life, saith the Lord: he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: and whosoever liveth and believeth in me, shall never die.”

In a city dominated by the axe, alone at night, with natural sorrow rising in him for the sixty-three who had been that day put to death, and for to-morrow’s victims then awaiting their doom in the prisons, and still of to-morrow’s and to-morrow’s, the chain of association that brought the words home, like a rusty old ship’s anchor from the deep, might have been easily found. He did not seek it, but repeated them and went on. With a solemn interest in the lighted windows where the people were going to rest, forgetful through a few calm hours of the horrors surrounding them; in the towers of the churches, where no prayers were said, for the popular revulsion had even travelled that length of self-destruction from years of priestly impostors, plunderers, and profligates; in the distant burial-places, reserved, as they wrote upon the gates, for Eternal Sleep; in the abounding gaols; and in the streets along which the sixties rolled to a death which had become so common and material, that no sorrowful story of a haunting Spirit ever arose among the people out of all the working of the Guillotine; with a solemn interest in the whole life and death of the city settling down to its short nightly pause in fury; Sydney Carton crossed the Seine again for the lighter streets.

Few coaches were abroad, for riders in coaches were liable to be suspected, and gentility hid its head in red nightcaps, and put on heavy shoes, and trudged. But, the theatres were all well filled, and the people poured cheerfully out as he passed, and went chatting home. At one of the theatre doors, there was a little girl with a mother, looking for a way across the street through the mud. He carried the child over, and before the timid arm was loosed from his neck asked her for a kiss. Now, that the streets were quiet, and the night wore on, the words were in the echoes of his feet, and were in the air. Perfectly calm and steady, he sometimes repeated them to himself as he walked; but, he heard them always. The night wore out, and, as he stood upon the bridge listening to the water as it splashed the river-walls of the Island of Paris, where the picturesque confusion of houses and cathedral shone bright in the light of the moon, the day came coldly, looking like a dead face out of the sky. Then, the night, with the moon and the stars, turned pale and died, and for a little while it seemed as if Creation were delivered over to Death’s dominion.

But, the glorious sun, rising, seemed to strike those words, that burden of the night, straight and warm to his heart in its long bright rays. And looking along them, with reverently shaded eyes, a bridge of light appeared to span the air between him and the sun, while the river sparkled under it. The strong tide, so swift, so deep, and certain, was like a congenial friend, in the morning stillness. He walked by the stream, far from the houses, and in the light and warmth of the sun fell asleep on the bank. When he awoke and was afoot again, he lingered there yet a little longer, watching an eddy that turned and turned purposeless, until the stream absorbed it, and carried it on to the sea.--“Like me.” A trading-boat, with a sail of the softened colour of a dead leaf, then glided into his view, floated by him, and died away. As its silent track in the water disappeared, the prayer that had broken up out of his heart for a merciful consideration of all his poor blindnesses and errors, ended in the words, “I am the resurrection and the life.”

Mr. Lorry was already out when he got back, and it was easy to surmise where the good old man was gone. Sydney Carton drank nothing but a little coffee, ate some bread, and, having washed and changed to refresh himself, went out to the place of trial. The court was all astir and a-buzz, when the black sheep--whom many fell away from in dread--pressed him into an obscure corner among the crowd. Mr. Lorry was there, and Doctor Manette was there. She was there, sitting beside her father. When her husband was brought in, she turned a look upon him, so sustaining, so encouraging, so full of admiring love and pitying tenderness, yet so courageous for his sake, that it called the healthy blood into his face, brightened his glance, and animated his heart. If there had been any eyes to notice the influence of her look, on Sydney Carton, it would have been seen to be the same influence exactly. Before that unjust Tribunal, there was little or no order of procedure, ensuring to any accused person any reasonable hearing. There could have been no such Revolution, if all laws, forms, and ceremonies, had not first been so monstrously abused, that the suicidal vengeance of the Revolution was to scatter them all to the winds.

Every eye was turned to the jury. The same determined patriots and good republicans as yesterday and the day before, and to-morrow and the day after. Eager and prominent among them, one man with a craving face, and his fingers perpetually hovering about his lips, whose appearance gave great satisfaction to the spectators. A life-thirsting, cannibal-looking, bloody-minded juryman, the Jacques Three of St. Antoine. The whole jury, as a jury of dogs empannelled to try the deer. Every eye then turned to the five judges and the public prosecutor. No favourable leaning in that quarter to-day. A fell, uncompromising, murderous business-meaning there. Every eye then sought some other eye in the crowd, and gleamed at it approvingly; and heads nodded at one another, before bending forward with a strained attention. Charles Evrémonde, called Darnay. Released yesterday. Reaccused and retaken yesterday. Indictment delivered to him last night. Suspected and Denounced enemy of the Republic, Aristocrat, one of a family of tyrants, one of a race proscribed, for that they had used their abolished privileges to the infamous oppression of the people. Charles Evrémonde, called Darnay, in right of such proscription, absolutely Dead in Law.

“President, I indignantly protest to you that this is a forgery and a fraud. You know the accused to be the husband of my daughter. My daughter, and those dear to her, are far dearer to me than my life. Who and where is the false conspirator who says that I denounce the husband of my child!” “Citizen Manette, be tranquil. To fail in submission to the authority of the Tribunal would be to put yourself out of Law. As to what is dearer to you than life, nothing can be so dear to a good citizen as the Republic.” “If the Republic should demand of you the sacrifice of your child herself, you would have no duty but to sacrifice her. Listen to what is to follow. In the meanwhile, be silent!” Frantic acclamations were again raised. Doctor Manette sat down, with his eyes looking around, and his lips trembling; his daughter drew closer to him. The craving man on the jury rubbed his hands together, and restored the usual hand to his mouth. Defarge was produced, when the court was quiet enough to admit of his being heard, and rapidly expounded the story of the imprisonment, and of his having been a mere boy in the Doctor’s service, and of the release, and of the state of the prisoner when released and delivered to him. This short examination followed, for the court was quick with its work.

Here, an excited woman screeched from the crowd: “You were one of the best patriots there. Why not say so? You were a cannonier that day there, and you were among the first to enter the accursed fortress when it fell. Patriots, I speak the truth!” It was The Vengeance who, amidst the warm commendations of the audience, thus assisted the proceedings. The President rang his bell; but, The Vengeance, warming with encouragement, shrieked, “I defy that bell!” wherein she was likewise much commended. “I knew,” said Defarge, looking down at his wife, who stood at the bottom of the steps on which he was raised, looking steadily up at him; “I knew that this prisoner, of whom I speak, had been confined in a cell known as One Hundred and Five, North Tower. I knew it from himself. He knew himself by no other name than One Hundred and Five, North Tower, when he made shoes under my care. As I serve my gun that day, I resolve, when the place shall fall, to examine that cell. It falls. I mount to the cell, with a fellow-citizen who is one of the Jury, directed by a gaoler. I examine it, very closely. In a hole in the chimney, where a stone has been worked out and replaced, I find a written paper. This is that written paper. I have made it my business to examine some specimens of the writing of Doctor Manette. This is the writing of Doctor Manette. I confide this paper, in the writing of Doctor Manette, to the hands of the President.”

In a dead silence and stillness--the prisoner under trial looking lovingly at his wife, his wife only looking from him to look with solicitude at her father, Doctor Manette keeping his eyes fixed on the reader, Madame Defarge never taking hers from the prisoner, Defarge never taking his from his feasting wife, and all the other eyes there intent upon the Doctor, who saw none of them--the paper was read, as follows. “I, Alexandre Manette, unfortunate physician, native of Beauvais, and afterwards resident in Paris, write this melancholy paper in my doleful cell in the Bastille, during the last month of the year, 1767. I write it at stolen intervals, under every difficulty. I design to secrete it in the wall of the chimney, where I have slowly and laboriously made a place of concealment for it. Some pitying hand may find it there, when I and my sorrows are dust. “These words are formed by the rusty iron point with which I write with difficulty in scrapings of soot and charcoal from the chimney, mixed with blood, in the last month of the tenth year of my captivity. Hope has quite departed from my breast. I know from terrible warnings I have noted in myself that my reason will not long remain unimpaired, but I solemnly declare that I am at this time in the possession of my right mind--that my memory is exact and circumstantial--and that I write the truth as I shall answer for these my last recorded words, whether they be ever read by men or not, at the Eternal Judgment-seat.

“One cloudy moonlight night, in the third week of December (I think the twenty-second of the month) in the year 1757, I was walking on a retired part of the quay by the Seine for the refreshment of the frosty air, at an hour’s distance from my place of residence in the Street of the School of Medicine, when a carriage came along behind me, driven very fast. As I stood aside to let that carriage pass, apprehensive that it might otherwise run me down, a head was put out at the window, and a voice called to the driver to stop. “The carriage stopped as soon as the driver could rein in his horses, and the same voice called to me by my name. I answered. The carriage was then so far in advance of me that two gentlemen had time to open the door and alight before I came up with it. “I observed that they were both wrapped in cloaks, and appeared to conceal themselves. As they stood side by side near the carriage door, I also observed that they both looked of about my own age, or rather younger, and that they were greatly alike, in stature, manner, voice, and (as far as I could see) face too.

“‘Doctor Manette, formerly of Beauvais,’ said the other; ‘the young physician, originally an expert surgeon, who within the last year or two has made a rising reputation in Paris?’ “‘We have been to your residence,’ said the first, ‘and not being so fortunate as to find you there, and being informed that you were probably walking in this direction, we followed, in the hope of overtaking you. Will you please to enter the carriage?’ “The manner of both was imperious, and they both moved, as these words were spoken, so as to place me between themselves and the carriage door. They were armed. I was not. “‘Gentlemen,’ said I, ‘pardon me; but I usually inquire who does me the honour to seek my assistance, and what is the nature of the case to which I am summoned.’ “The reply to this was made by him who had spoken second. ‘Doctor, your clients are people of condition. As to the nature of the case, our confidence in your skill assures us that you will ascertain it for yourself better than we can describe it. Enough. Will you please to enter the carriage?’

“I could do nothing but comply, and I entered it in silence. They both entered after me--the last springing in, after putting up the steps. The carriage turned about, and drove on at its former speed. “I repeat this conversation exactly as it occurred. I have no doubt that it is, word for word, the same. I describe everything exactly as it took place, constraining my mind not to wander from the task. Where I make the broken marks that follow here, I leave off for the time, and put my paper in its hiding-place. “The carriage left the streets behind, passed the North Barrier, and emerged upon the country road. At two-thirds of a league from the Barrier--I did not estimate the distance at that time, but afterwards when I traversed it--it struck out of the main avenue, and presently stopped at a solitary house, We all three alighted, and walked, by a damp soft footpath in a garden where a neglected fountain had overflowed, to the door of the house. It was not opened immediately, in answer to the ringing of the bell, and one of my two conductors struck the man who opened it, with his heavy riding glove, across the face.

“There was nothing in this action to attract my particular attention, for I had seen common people struck more commonly than dogs. But, the other of the two, being angry likewise, struck the man in like manner with his arm; the look and bearing of the brothers were then so exactly alike, that I then first perceived them to be twin brothers. “From the time of our alighting at the outer gate (which we found locked, and which one of the brothers had opened to admit us, and had relocked), I had heard cries proceeding from an upper chamber. I was conducted to this chamber straight, the cries growing louder as we ascended the stairs, and I found a patient in a high fever of the brain, lying on a bed. “The patient was a woman of great beauty, and young; assuredly not much past twenty. Her hair was torn and ragged, and her arms were bound to her sides with sashes and handkerchiefs. I noticed that these bonds were all portions of a gentleman’s dress. On one of them, which was a fringed scarf for a dress of ceremony, I saw the armorial bearings of a Noble, and the letter E.

“I saw this, within the first minute of my contemplation of the patient; for, in her restless strivings she had turned over on her face on the edge of the bed, had drawn the end of the scarf into her mouth, and was in danger of suffocation. My first act was to put out my hand to relieve her breathing; and in moving the scarf aside, the embroidery in the corner caught my sight. “I turned her gently over, placed my hands upon her breast to calm her and keep her down, and looked into her face. Her eyes were dilated and wild, and she constantly uttered piercing shrieks, and repeated the words, ‘My husband, my father, and my brother!’ and then counted up to twelve, and said, ‘Hush!’ For an instant, and no more, she would pause to listen, and then the piercing shrieks would begin again, and she would repeat the cry, ‘My husband, my father, and my brother!’ and would count up to twelve, and say, ‘Hush!’ There was no variation in the order, or the manner. There was no cessation, but the regular moment’s pause, in the utterance of these sounds.

“To distinguish the brothers, I will call them the elder and the younger; by the elder, I mean him who exercised the most authority. It was the elder who replied, ‘Since about this hour last night.’ “‘See, gentlemen,’ said I, still keeping my hands upon her breast, ‘how useless I am, as you have brought me! If I had known what I was coming to see, I could have come provided. As it is, time must be lost. There are no medicines to be obtained in this lonely place.’ “The elder brother looked to the younger, who said haughtily, ‘There is a case of medicines here;’ and brought it from a closet, and put it on the table. “I opened some of the bottles, smelt them, and put the stoppers to my lips. If I had wanted to use anything save narcotic medicines that were poisons in themselves, I would not have administered any of those. “I made the patient swallow, with great difficulty, and after many efforts, the dose that I desired to give. As I intended to repeat it after a while, and as it was necessary to watch its influence, I then sat down by the side of the bed. There was a timid and suppressed woman in attendance (wife of the man down-stairs), who had retreated into a corner. The house was damp and decayed, indifferently furnished--evidently, recently occupied and temporarily used. Some thick old hangings had been nailed up before the windows, to deaden the sound of the shrieks. They continued to be uttered in their regular succession, with the cry, ‘My husband, my father, and my brother!’ the counting up to twelve, and ‘Hush!’ The frenzy was so violent, that I had not unfastened the bandages restraining the arms; but, I had looked to them, to see that they were not painful. The only spark of encouragement in the case, was, that my hand upon the sufferer’s breast had this much soothing influence, that for minutes at a time it tranquillised the figure. It had no effect upon the cries; no pendulum could be more regular.

“For the reason that my hand had this effect (I assume), I had sat by the side of the bed for half an hour, with the two brothers looking on, before the elder said: “The other patient lay in a back room across a second staircase, which was a species of loft over a stable. There was a low plastered ceiling to a part of it; the rest was open, to the ridge of the tiled roof, and there were beams across. Hay and straw were stored in that portion of the place, fagots for firing, and a heap of apples in sand. I had to pass through that part, to get at the other. My memory is circumstantial and unshaken. I try it with these details, and I see them all, in this my cell in the Bastille, near the close of the tenth year of my captivity, as I saw them all that night. “On some hay on the ground, with a cushion thrown under his head, lay a handsome peasant boy--a boy of not more than seventeen at the most. He lay on his back, with his teeth set, his right hand clenched on his breast, and his glaring eyes looking straight upward. I could not see where his wound was, as I kneeled on one knee over him; but, I could see that he was dying of a wound from a sharp point.

“It was under his hand, and I soothed him to let me move his hand away. The wound was a sword-thrust, received from twenty to twenty-four hours before, but no skill could have saved him if it had been looked to without delay. He was then dying fast. As I turned my eyes to the elder brother, I saw him looking down at this handsome boy whose life was ebbing out, as if he were a wounded bird, or hare, or rabbit; not at all as if he were a fellow-creature. “There was no touch of pity, sorrow, or kindred humanity, in this answer. The speaker seemed to acknowledge that it was inconvenient to have that different order of creature dying there, and that it would have been better if he had died in the usual obscure routine of his vermin kind. He was quite incapable of any compassionate feeling about the boy, or about his fate. “‘Doctor, they are very proud, these Nobles; but we common dogs are proud too, sometimes. They plunder us, outrage us, beat us, kill us; but we have a little pride left, sometimes. She--have you seen her, Doctor?’

“‘She is my sister, Doctor. They have had their shameful rights, these Nobles, in the modesty and virtue of our sisters, many years, but we have had good girls among us. I know it, and have heard my father say so. She was a good girl. She was betrothed to a good young man, too: a tenant of his. We were all tenants of his--that man’s who stands there. The other is his brother, the worst of a bad race.’ “‘We were so robbed by that man who stands there, as all we common dogs are by those superior Beings--taxed by him without mercy, obliged to work for him without pay, obliged to grind our corn at his mill, obliged to feed scores of his tame birds on our wretched crops, and forbidden for our lives to keep a single tame bird of our own, pillaged and plundered to that degree that when we chanced to have a bit of meat, we ate it in fear, with the door barred and the shutters closed, that his people should not see it and take it from us--I say, we were so robbed, and hunted, and were made so poor, that our father told us it was a dreadful thing to bring a child into the world, and that what we should most pray for, was, that our women might be barren and our miserable race die out!’

“I had never before seen the sense of being oppressed, bursting forth like a fire. I had supposed that it must be latent in the people somewhere; but, I had never seen it break out, until I saw it in the dying boy. “‘Nevertheless, Doctor, my sister married. He was ailing at that time, poor fellow, and she married her lover, that she might tend and comfort him in our cottage--our dog-hut, as that man would call it. She had not been married many weeks, when that man’s brother saw her and admired her, and asked that man to lend her to him--for what are husbands among us! He was willing enough, but my sister was good and virtuous, and hated his brother with a hatred as strong as mine. What did the two then, to persuade her husband to use his influence with her, to make her willing?’ “The boy’s eyes, which had been fixed on mine, slowly turned to the looker-on, and I saw in the two faces that all he said was true. The two opposing kinds of pride confronting one another, I can see, even in this Bastille; the gentleman’s, all negligent indifference; the peasant’s, all trodden-down sentiment, and passionate revenge.

“‘You know, Doctor, that it is among the Rights of these Nobles to harness us common dogs to carts, and drive us. They so harnessed him and drove him. You know that it is among their Rights to keep us in their grounds all night, quieting the frogs, in order that their noble sleep may not be disturbed. They kept him out in the unwholesome mists at night, and ordered him back into his harness in the day. But he was not persuaded. No! Taken out of harness one day at noon, to feed--if he could find food--he sobbed twelve times, once for every stroke of the bell, and died on her bosom.’ “Nothing human could have held life in the boy but his determination to tell all his wrong. He forced back the gathering shadows of death, as he forced his clenched right hand to remain clenched, and to cover his wound. “‘Then, with that man’s permission and even with his aid, his brother took her away; in spite of what I know she must have told his brother--and what that is, will not be long unknown to you, Doctor, if it is now--his brother took her away--for his pleasure and diversion, for a little while. I saw her pass me on the road. When I took the tidings home, our father’s heart burst; he never spoke one of the words that filled it. I took my young sister (for I have another) to a place beyond the reach of this man, and where, at least, she will never be _his_ vassal. Then, I tracked the brother here, and last night climbed in--a common dog, but sword in hand.--Where is the loft window? It was somewhere here?’

“The room was darkening to his sight; the world was narrowing around him. I glanced about me, and saw that the hay and straw were trampled over the floor, as if there had been a struggle. “‘She heard me, and ran in. I told her not to come near us till he was dead. He came in and first tossed me some pieces of money; then struck at me with a whip. But I, though a common dog, so struck at him as to make him draw. Let him break into as many pieces as he will, the sword that he stained with my common blood; he drew to defend himself--thrust at me with all his skill for his life.’ “My glance had fallen, but a few moments before, on the fragments of a broken sword, lying among the hay. That weapon was a gentleman’s. In another place, lay an old sword that seemed to have been a soldier’s. “I did so, raising the boy’s head against my knee. But, invested for the moment with extraordinary power, he raised himself completely: obliging me to rise too, or I could not have still supported him.

“‘Marquis,’ said the boy, turned to him with his eyes opened wide, and his right hand raised, ‘in the days when all these things are to be answered for, I summon you and yours, to the last of your bad race, to answer for them. I mark this cross of blood upon you, as a sign that I do it. In the days when all these things are to be answered for, I summon your brother, the worst of the bad race, to answer for them separately. I mark this cross of blood upon him, as a sign that I do it.’ “Twice, he put his hand to the wound in his breast, and with his forefinger drew a cross in the air. He stood for an instant with the finger yet raised, and as it dropped, he dropped with it, and I laid him down dead. “When I returned to the bedside of the young woman, I found her raving in precisely the same order of continuity. I knew that this might last for many hours, and that it would probably end in the silence of the grave.

“I repeated the medicines I had given her, and I sat at the side of the bed until the night was far advanced. She never abated the piercing quality of her shrieks, never stumbled in the distinctness or the order of her words. They were always ‘My husband, my father, and my brother! One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven, twelve. Hush!’ “This lasted twenty-six hours from the time when I first saw her. I had come and gone twice, and was again sitting by her, when she began to falter. I did what little could be done to assist that opportunity, and by-and-bye she sank into a lethargy, and lay like the dead. “It was as if the wind and rain had lulled at last, after a long and fearful storm. I released her arms, and called the woman to assist me to compose her figure and the dress she had torn. It was then that I knew her condition to be that of one in whom the first expectations of being a mother have arisen; and it was then that I lost the little hope I had had of her.

“He first laughed at my words, and then frowned at them. He moved a chair with his foot near to mine, ordered the woman away, and said in a subdued voice, “‘Doctor, finding my brother in this difficulty with these hinds, I recommended that your aid should be invited. Your reputation is high, and, as a young man with your fortune to make, you are probably mindful of your interest. The things that you see here, are things to be seen, and not spoken of.’ “‘Monsieur,’ said I, ‘in my profession, the communications of patients are always received in confidence.’ I was guarded in my answer, for I was troubled in my mind with what I had heard and seen. “Her breathing was so difficult to trace, that I carefully tried the pulse and the heart. There was life, and no more. Looking round as I resumed my seat, I found both the brothers intent upon me. “I write with so much difficulty, the cold is so severe, I am so fearful of being detected and consigned to an underground cell and total darkness, that I must abridge this narrative. There is no confusion or failure in my memory; it can recall, and could detail, every word that was ever spoken between me and those brothers.

“She lingered for a week. Towards the last, I could understand some few syllables that she said to me, by placing my ear close to her lips. She asked me where she was, and I told her; who I was, and I told her. It was in vain that I asked her for her family name. She faintly shook her head upon the pillow, and kept her secret, as the boy had done. “I had no opportunity of asking her any question, until I had told the brothers she was sinking fast, and could not live another day. Until then, though no one was ever presented to her consciousness save the woman and myself, one or other of them had always jealously sat behind the curtain at the head of the bed when I was there. But when it came to that, they seemed careless what communication I might hold with her; as if--the thought passed through my mind--I were dying too. “I always observed that their pride bitterly resented the younger brother’s (as I call him) having crossed swords with a peasant, and that peasant a boy. The only consideration that appeared to affect the mind of either of them was the consideration that this was highly degrading to the family, and was ridiculous. As often as I caught the younger brother’s eyes, their expression reminded me that he disliked me deeply, for knowing what I knew from the boy. He was smoother and more polite to me than the elder; but I saw this. I also saw that I was an incumbrance in the mind of the elder, too.

“My patient died, two hours before midnight--at a time, by my watch, answering almost to the minute when I had first seen her. I was alone with her, when her forlorn young head drooped gently on one side, and all her earthly wrongs and sorrows ended. “The brothers were waiting in a room down-stairs, impatient to ride away. I had heard them, alone at the bedside, striking their boots with their riding-whips, and loitering up and down. “He had before offered me money, which I had postponed taking. He now gave me a rouleau of gold. I took it from his hand, but laid it on the table. I had considered the question, and had resolved to accept nothing. “Early in the morning, the rouleau of gold was left at my door in a little box, with my name on the outside. From the first, I had anxiously considered what I ought to do. I decided, that day, to write privately to the Minister, stating the nature of the two cases to which I had been summoned, and the place to which I had gone: in effect, stating all the circumstances. I knew what Court influence was, and what the immunities of the Nobles were, and I expected that the matter would never be heard of; but, I wished to relieve my own mind. I had kept the matter a profound secret, even from my wife; and this, too, I resolved to state in my letter. I had no apprehension whatever of my real danger; but I was conscious that there might be danger for others, if others were compromised by possessing the knowledge that I possessed.

“I was much engaged that day, and could not complete my letter that night. I rose long before my usual time next morning to finish it. It was the last day of the year. The letter was lying before me just completed, when I was told that a lady waited, who wished to see me. “I am growing more and more unequal to the task I have set myself. It is so cold, so dark, my senses are so benumbed, and the gloom upon me is so dreadful. “The lady was young, engaging, and handsome, but not marked for long life. She was in great agitation. She presented herself to me as the wife of the Marquis St. Evrémonde. I connected the title by which the boy had addressed the elder brother, with the initial letter embroidered on the scarf, and had no difficulty in arriving at the conclusion that I had seen that nobleman very lately. “My memory is still accurate, but I cannot write the words of our conversation. I suspect that I am watched more closely than I was, and I know not at what times I may be watched. She had in part suspected, and in part discovered, the main facts of the cruel story, of her husband’s share in it, and my being resorted to. She did not know that the girl was dead. Her hope had been, she said in great distress, to show her, in secret, a woman’s sympathy. Her hope had been to avert the wrath of Heaven from a House that had long been hateful to the suffering many.

“She had reasons for believing that there was a young sister living, and her greatest desire was, to help that sister. I could tell her nothing but that there was such a sister; beyond that, I knew nothing. Her inducement to come to me, relying on my confidence, had been the hope that I could tell her the name and place of abode. Whereas, to this wretched hour I am ignorant of both. “She was a good, compassionate lady, and not happy in her marriage. How could she be! The brother distrusted and disliked her, and his influence was all opposed to her; she stood in dread of him, and in dread of her husband too. When I handed her down to the door, there was a child, a pretty boy from two to three years old, in her carriage. “‘For his sake, Doctor,’ she said, pointing to him in tears, ‘I would do all I can to make what poor amends I can. He will never prosper in his inheritance otherwise. I have a presentiment that if no other innocent atonement is made for this, it will one day be required of him. What I have left to call my own--it is little beyond the worth of a few jewels--I will make it the first charge of his life to bestow, with the compassion and lamenting of his dead mother, on this injured family, if the sister can be discovered.’

“She kissed the boy, and said, caressing him, ‘It is for thine own dear sake. Thou wilt be faithful, little Charles?’ The child answered her bravely, ‘Yes!’ I kissed her hand, and she took him in her arms, and went away caressing him. I never saw her more. “As she had mentioned her husband’s name in the faith that I knew it, I added no mention of it to my letter. I sealed my letter, and, not trusting it out of my own hands, delivered it myself that day. “That night, the last night of the year, towards nine o’clock, a man in a black dress rang at my gate, demanded to see me, and softly followed my servant, Ernest Defarge, a youth, up-stairs. When my servant came into the room where I sat with my wife--O my wife, beloved of my heart! My fair young English wife!--we saw the man, who was supposed to be at the gate, standing silent behind him. “It brought me here, it brought me to my grave. When I was clear of the house, a black muffler was drawn tightly over my mouth from behind, and my arms were pinioned. The two brothers crossed the road from a dark corner, and identified me with a single gesture. The Marquis took from his pocket the letter I had written, showed it me, burnt it in the light of a lantern that was held, and extinguished the ashes with his foot. Not a word was spoken. I was brought here, I was brought to my living grave.

“If it had pleased _God_ to put it in the hard heart of either of the brothers, in all these frightful years, to grant me any tidings of my dearest wife--so much as to let me know by a word whether alive or dead--I might have thought that He had not quite abandoned them. But, now I believe that the mark of the red cross is fatal to them, and that they have no part in His mercies. And them and their descendants, to the last of their race, I, Alexandre Manette, unhappy prisoner, do this last night of the year 1767, in my unbearable agony, denounce to the times when all these things shall be answered for. I denounce them to Heaven and to earth.” A terrible sound arose when the reading of this document was done. A sound of craving and eagerness that had nothing articulate in it but blood. The narrative called up the most revengeful passions of the time, and there was not a head in the nation but must have dropped before it. Little need, in presence of that tribunal and that auditory, to show how the Defarges had not made the paper public, with the other captured Bastille memorials borne in procession, and had kept it, biding their time. Little need to show that this detested family name had long been anathematised by Saint Antoine, and was wrought into the fatal register. The man never trod ground whose virtues and services would have sustained him in that place that day, against such denunciation.

And all the worse for the doomed man, that the denouncer was a well-known citizen, his own attached friend, the father of his wife. One of the frenzied aspirations of the populace was, for imitations of the questionable public virtues of antiquity, and for sacrifices and self-immolations on the people’s altar. Therefore when the President said (else had his own head quivered on his shoulders), that the good physician of the Republic would deserve better still of the Republic by rooting out an obnoxious family of Aristocrats, and would doubtless feel a sacred glow and joy in making his daughter a widow and her child an orphan, there was wild excitement, patriotic fervour, not a touch of human sympathy. Unanimously voted. At heart and by descent an Aristocrat, an enemy of the Republic, a notorious oppressor of the People. Back to the Conciergerie, and Death within four-and-twenty hours! The wretched wife of the innocent man thus doomed to die, fell under the sentence, as if she had been mortally stricken. But, she uttered no sound; and so strong was the voice within her, representing that it was she of all the world who must uphold him in his misery and not augment it, that it quickly raised her, even from that shock.

The Judges having to take part in a public demonstration out of doors, the Tribunal adjourned. The quick noise and movement of the court’s emptying itself by many passages had not ceased, when Lucie stood stretching out her arms towards her husband, with nothing in her face but love and consolation. There was but a gaoler left, along with two of the four men who had taken him last night, and Barsad. The people had all poured out to the show in the streets. Barsad proposed to the rest, “Let her embrace him then; it is but a moment.” It was silently acquiesced in, and they passed her over the seats in the hall to a raised place, where he, by leaning over the dock, could fold her in his arms. “My husband. No! A moment!” He was tearing himself apart from her. “We shall not be separated long. I feel that this will break my heart by-and-bye; but I will do my duty while I can, and when I leave her, God will raise up friends for her, as He did for me.”

“No, no! What have you done, what have you done, that you should kneel to us! We know now, what a struggle you made of old. We know, now what you underwent when you suspected my descent, and when you knew it. We know now, the natural antipathy you strove against, and conquered, for her dear sake. We thank you with all our hearts, and all our love and duty. Heaven be with you!” “It could not be otherwise,” said the prisoner. “All things have worked together as they have fallen out. It was the always-vain endeavour to discharge my poor mother’s trust that first brought my fatal presence near you. Good could never come of such evil, a happier end was not in nature to so unhappy a beginning. Be comforted, and forgive me. Heaven bless you!” As he was drawn away, his wife released him, and stood looking after him with her hands touching one another in the attitude of prayer, and with a radiant look upon her face, in which there was even a comforting smile. As he went out at the prisoners’ door, she turned, laid her head lovingly on her father’s breast, tried to speak to him, and fell at his feet.

Then, issuing from the obscure corner from which he had never moved, Sydney Carton came and took her up. Only her father and Mr. Lorry were with her. His arm trembled as it raised her, and supported her head. Yet, there was an air about him that was not all of pity--that had a flush of pride in it. He carried her lightly to the door, and laid her tenderly down in a coach. Her father and their old friend got into it, and he took his seat beside the driver. When they arrived at the gateway where he had paused in the dark not many hours before, to picture to himself on which of the rough stones of the street her feet had trodden, he lifted her again, and carried her up the staircase to their rooms. There, he laid her down on a couch, where her child and Miss Pross wept over her. “Oh, Carton, Carton, dear Carton!” cried little Lucie, springing up and throwing her arms passionately round him, in a burst of grief. “Now that you have come, I think you will do something to help mamma, something to save papa! O, look at her, dear Carton! Can you, of all the people who love her, bear to see her so?”

It was remembered afterwards that when he bent down and touched her face with his lips, he murmured some words. The child, who was nearest to him, told them afterwards, and told her grandchildren when she was a handsome old lady, that she heard him say, “A life you love.” “You had great influence but yesterday, Doctor Manette; let it at least be tried. These judges, and all the men in power, are very friendly to you, and very recognisant of your services; are they not?” “Nothing connected with Charles was concealed from me. I had the strongest assurances that I should save him; and I did.” He returned the answer in great trouble, and very slowly. “That’s well. I have known such energy as yours do great things before now--though never,” he added, with a smile and a sigh together, “such great things as this. But try! Of little worth as life is when we misuse it, it is worth that effort. It would cost nothing to lay down if it were not.” “I will go,” said Doctor Manette, “to the Prosecutor and the President straight, and I will go to others whom it is better not to name. I will write too, and--But stay! There is a Celebration in the streets, and no one will be accessible until dark.”

“That’s true. Well! It is a forlorn hope at the best, and not much the forlorner for being delayed till dark. I should like to know how you speed; though, mind! I expect nothing! When are you likely to have seen these dread powers, Doctor Manette?” “It will be dark soon after four. Let us stretch the hour or two. If I go to Mr. Lorry’s at nine, shall I hear what you have done, either from our friend or from yourself?” “If any one of these men, or all of these men, were disposed to spare him--which is a large supposition; for what is his life, or any man’s to them!--I doubt if they durst spare him after the demonstration in the court.” “Don’t despond,” said Carton, very gently; “don’t grieve. I encouraged Doctor Manette in this idea, because I felt that it might one day be consolatory to her. Otherwise, she might think ‘his life was wantonly thrown away or wasted,’ and that might trouble her.” Sydney Carton paused in the street, not quite decided where to go. “At Tellson’s banking-house at nine,” he said, with a musing face. “Shall I do well, in the mean time, to show myself? I think so. It is best that these people should know there is such a man as I here; it is a sound precaution, and may be a necessary preparation. But care, care, care! Let me think it out!”

Checking his steps which had begun to tend towards an object, he took a turn or two in the already darkening street, and traced the thought in his mind to its possible consequences. His first impression was confirmed. “It is best,” he said, finally resolved, “that these people should know there is such a man as I here.” And he turned his face towards Saint Antoine. Defarge had described himself, that day, as the keeper of a wine-shop in the Saint Antoine suburb. It was not difficult for one who knew the city well, to find his house without asking any question. Having ascertained its situation, Carton came out of those closer streets again, and dined at a place of refreshment and fell sound asleep after dinner. For the first time in many years, he had no strong drink. Since last night he had taken nothing but a little light thin wine, and last night he had dropped the brandy slowly down on Mr. Lorry’s hearth like a man who had done with it. It was as late as seven o’clock when he awoke refreshed, and went out into the streets again. As he passed along towards Saint Antoine, he stopped at a shop-window where there was a mirror, and slightly altered the disordered arrangement of his loose cravat, and his coat-collar, and his wild hair. This done, he went on direct to Defarge’s, and went in.

There happened to be no customer in the shop but Jacques Three, of the restless fingers and the croaking voice. This man, whom he had seen upon the Jury, stood drinking at the little counter, in conversation with the Defarges, man and wife. The Vengeance assisted in the conversation, like a regular member of the establishment. As Carton walked in, took his seat and asked (in very indifferent French) for a small measure of wine, Madame Defarge cast a careless glance at him, and then a keener, and then a keener, and then advanced to him herself, and asked him what it was he had ordered. After looking at her, as if the sound of even a single French word were slow to express itself to him, he answered, in his former strong foreign accent. “Yes, madame, yes. I am English!” Madame Defarge returned to her counter to get the wine, and, as he took up a Jacobin journal and feigned to pore over it puzzling out its meaning, he heard her say, “I swear to you, like Evrémonde!” Defarge went back to the counter, and said, “Certainly, a little like.” Madame sternly retorted, “I tell you a good deal like.” Jacques Three pacifically remarked, “He is so much in your mind, see you, madame.” The amiable Vengeance added, with a laugh, “Yes, my faith! And you are looking forward with so much pleasure to seeing him once more to-morrow!”

Carton followed the lines and words of his paper, with a slow forefinger, and with a studious and absorbed face. They were all leaning their arms on the counter close together, speaking low. After a silence of a few moments, during which they all looked towards him without disturbing his outward attention from the Jacobin editor, they resumed their conversation. “Extermination is good doctrine, my wife,” said Defarge, rather troubled; “in general, I say nothing against it. But this Doctor has suffered much; you have seen him to-day; you have observed his face when the paper was read.” “I have observed his face!” repeated madame, contemptuously and angrily. “Yes. I have observed his face. I have observed his face to be not the face of a true friend of the Republic. Let him take care of his face!” “I have observed his daughter,” repeated madame; “yes, I have observed his daughter, more times than one. I have observed her to-day, and I have observed her other days. I have observed her in the court, and I have observed her in the street by the prison. Let me but lift my finger--!” She seemed to raise it (the listener’s eyes were always on his paper), and to let it fall with a rattle on the ledge before her, as if the axe had dropped.

“As to thee,” pursued madame, implacably, addressing her husband, “if it depended on thee--which, happily, it does not--thou wouldst rescue this man even now.” “See you then, Jacques,” said Madame Defarge, wrathfully; “and see you, too, my little Vengeance; see you both! Listen! For other crimes as tyrants and oppressors, I have this race a long time on my register, doomed to destruction and extermination. Ask my husband, is that so.” “In the beginning of the great days, when the Bastille falls, he finds this paper of to-day, and he brings it home, and in the middle of the night when this place is clear and shut, we read it, here on this spot, by the light of this lamp. Ask him, is that so.” “That night, I tell him, when the paper is read through, and the lamp is burnt out, and the day is gleaming in above those shutters and between those iron bars, that I have now a secret to communicate. Ask him, is that so.” “I communicate to him that secret. I smite this bosom with these two hands as I smite it now, and I tell him, ‘Defarge, I was brought up among the fishermen of the sea-shore, and that peasant family so injured by the two Evrémonde brothers, as that Bastille paper describes, is my family. Defarge, that sister of the mortally wounded boy upon the ground was my sister, that husband was my sister’s husband, that unborn child was their child, that brother was my brother, that father was my father, those dead are my dead, and that summons to answer for those things descends to me!’ Ask him, is that so.”

Both her hearers derived a horrible enjoyment from the deadly nature of her wrath--the listener could feel how white she was, without seeing her--and both highly commended it. Defarge, a weak minority, interposed a few words for the memory of the compassionate wife of the Marquis; but only elicited from his own wife a repetition of her last reply. “Tell the Wind and the Fire where to stop; not me!” Customers entered, and the group was broken up. The English customer paid for what he had had, perplexedly counted his change, and asked, as a stranger, to be directed towards the National Palace. Madame Defarge took him to the door, and put her arm on his, in pointing out the road. The English customer was not without his reflections then, that it might be a good deed to seize that arm, lift it, and strike under it sharp and deep. But, he went his way, and was soon swallowed up in the shadow of the prison wall. At the appointed hour, he emerged from it to present himself in Mr. Lorry’s room again, where he found the old gentleman walking to and fro in restless anxiety. He said he had been with Lucie until just now, and had only left her for a few minutes, to come and keep his appointment. Her father had not been seen, since he quitted the banking-house towards four o’clock. She had some faint hopes that his mediation might save Charles, but they were very slight. He had been more than five hours gone: where could he be?

Mr. Lorry waited until ten; but, Doctor Manette not returning, and he being unwilling to leave Lucie any longer, it was arranged that he should go back to her, and come to the banking-house again at midnight. In the meanwhile, Carton would wait alone by the fire for the Doctor. He waited and waited, and the clock struck twelve; but Doctor Manette did not come back. Mr. Lorry returned, and found no tidings of him, and brought none. Where could he be? They were discussing this question, and were almost building up some weak structure of hope on his prolonged absence, when they heard him on the stairs. The instant he entered the room, it was plain that all was lost. Whether he had really been to any one, or whether he had been all that time traversing the streets, was never known. As he stood staring at them, they asked him no question, for his face told them everything. “Where is my bench? I have been looking everywhere for my bench, and I can’t find it. What have they done with my work? Time presses: I must finish those shoes.”

“Don’t torture a poor forlorn wretch,” he implored them, with a dreadful cry; “but give me my work! What is to become of us, if those shoes are not done to-night?” It was so clearly beyond hope to reason with him, or try to restore him, that--as if by agreement--they each put a hand upon his shoulder, and soothed him to sit down before the fire, with a promise that he should have his work presently. He sank into the chair, and brooded over the embers, and shed tears. As if all that had happened since the garret time were a momentary fancy, or a dream, Mr. Lorry saw him shrink into the exact figure that Defarge had had in keeping. Affected, and impressed with terror as they both were, by this spectacle of ruin, it was not a time to yield to such emotions. His lonely daughter, bereft of her final hope and reliance, appealed to them both too strongly. Again, as if by agreement, they looked at one another with one meaning in their faces. Carton was the first to speak:

“The last chance is gone: it was not much. Yes; he had better be taken to her. But, before you go, will you, for a moment, steadily attend to me? Don’t ask me why I make the stipulations I am going to make, and exact the promise I am going to exact; I have a reason--a good one.” The figure in the chair between them, was all the time monotonously rocking itself to and fro, and moaning. They spoke in such a tone as they would have used if they had been watching by a sick-bed in the night. Carton stooped to pick up the coat, which lay almost entangling his feet. As he did so, a small case in which the Doctor was accustomed to carry the lists of his day’s duties, fell lightly on the floor. Carton took it up, and there was a folded paper in it. “We should look at this!” he said. Mr. Lorry nodded his consent. He opened it, and exclaimed, “Thank _God!_” “A moment! Let me speak of it in its place. First,” he put his hand in his coat, and took another paper from it, “that is the certificate which enables me to pass out of this city. Look at it. You see--Sydney Carton, an Englishman?”

“I don’t know; I prefer not to do so. Now, take this paper that Doctor Manette has carried about him. It is a similar certificate, enabling him and his daughter and her child, at any time, to pass the barrier and the frontier! You see?” “Perhaps he obtained it as his last and utmost precaution against evil, yesterday. When is it dated? But no matter; don’t stay to look; put it up carefully with mine and your own. Now, observe! I never doubted until within this hour or two, that he had, or could have such a paper. It is good, until recalled. But it may be soon recalled, and, I have reason to think, will be.” “They are in great danger. They are in danger of denunciation by Madame Defarge. I know it from her own lips. I have overheard words of that woman’s, to-night, which have presented their danger to me in strong colours. I have lost no time, and since then, I have seen the spy. He confirms me. He knows that a wood-sawyer, living by the prison wall, is under the control of the Defarges, and has been rehearsed by Madame Defarge as to his having seen Her”--he never mentioned Lucie’s name--“making signs and signals to prisoners. It is easy to foresee that the pretence will be the common one, a prison plot, and that it will involve her life--and perhaps her child’s--and perhaps her father’s--for both have been seen with her at that place. Don’t look so horrified. You will save them all.”

“I am going to tell you how. It will depend on you, and it could depend on no better man. This new denunciation will certainly not take place until after to-morrow; probably not until two or three days afterwards; more probably a week afterwards. You know it is a capital crime, to mourn for, or sympathise with, a victim of the Guillotine. She and her father would unquestionably be guilty of this crime, and this woman (the inveteracy of whose pursuit cannot be described) would wait to add that strength to her case, and make herself doubly sure. You follow me?” “So attentively, and with so much confidence in what you say, that for the moment I lose sight,” touching the back of the Doctor’s chair, “even of this distress.” “You have money, and can buy the means of travelling to the seacoast as quickly as the journey can be made. Your preparations have been completed for some days, to return to England. Early to-morrow have your horses ready, so that they may be in starting trim at two o’clock in the afternoon.”

“You are a noble heart. Did I say we could depend upon no better man? Tell her, to-night, what you know of her danger as involving her child and her father. Dwell upon that, for she would lay her own fair head beside her husband’s cheerfully.” He faltered for an instant; then went on as before. “For the sake of her child and her father, press upon her the necessity of leaving Paris, with them and you, at that hour. Tell her that it was her husband’s last arrangement. Tell her that more depends upon it than she dare believe, or hope. You think that her father, even in this sad state, will submit himself to her; do you not?” “I thought so. Quietly and steadily have all these arrangements made in the courtyard here, even to the taking of your own seat in the carriage. The moment I come to you, take me in, and drive away.” “You have my certificate in your hand with the rest, you know, and will reserve my place. Wait for nothing but to have my place occupied, and then for England!”

“Why, then,” said Mr. Lorry, grasping his eager but so firm and steady hand, “it does not all depend on one old man, but I shall have a young and ardent man at my side.” “By the help of Heaven you shall! Promise me solemnly that nothing will influence you to alter the course on which we now stand pledged to one another.” “Remember these words to-morrow: change the course, or delay in it--for any reason--and no life can possibly be saved, and many lives must inevitably be sacrificed.” Though he said it with a grave smile of earnestness, and though he even put the old man’s hand to his lips, he did not part from him then. He helped him so far to arouse the rocking figure before the dying embers, as to get a cloak and hat put upon it, and to tempt it forth to find where the bench and work were hidden that it still moaningly besought to have. He walked on the other side of it and protected it to the courtyard of the house where the afflicted heart--so happy in the memorable time when he had revealed his own desolate heart to it--outwatched the awful night. He entered the courtyard and remained there for a few moments alone, looking up at the light in the window of her room. Before he went away, he breathed a blessing towards it, and a Farewell.

In the black prison of the Conciergerie, the doomed of the day awaited their fate. They were in number as the weeks of the year. Fifty-two were to roll that afternoon on the life-tide of the city to the boundless everlasting sea. Before their cells were quit of them, new occupants were appointed; before their blood ran into the blood spilled yesterday, the blood that was to mingle with theirs to-morrow was already set apart. Two score and twelve were told off. From the farmer-general of seventy, whose riches could not buy his life, to the seamstress of twenty, whose poverty and obscurity could not save her. Physical diseases, engendered in the vices and neglects of men, will seize on victims of all degrees; and the frightful moral disorder, born of unspeakable suffering, intolerable oppression, and heartless indifference, smote equally without distinction. Charles Darnay, alone in a cell, had sustained himself with no flattering delusion since he came to it from the Tribunal. In every line of the narrative he had heard, he had heard his condemnation. He had fully comprehended that no personal influence could possibly save him, that he was virtually sentenced by the millions, and that units could avail him nothing.

Nevertheless, it was not easy, with the face of his beloved wife fresh before him, to compose his mind to what it must bear. His hold on life was strong, and it was very, very hard, to loosen; by gradual efforts and degrees unclosed a little here, it clenched the tighter there; and when he brought his strength to bear on that hand and it yielded, this was closed again. There was a hurry, too, in all his thoughts, a turbulent and heated working of his heart, that contended against resignation. If, for a moment, he did feel resigned, then his wife and child who had to live after him, seemed to protest and to make it a selfish thing. But, all this was at first. Before long, the consideration that there was no disgrace in the fate he must meet, and that numbers went the same road wrongfully, and trod it firmly every day, sprang up to stimulate him. Next followed the thought that much of the future peace of mind enjoyable by the dear ones, depended on his quiet fortitude. So, by degrees he calmed into the better state, when he could raise his thoughts much higher, and draw comfort down.

Before it had set in dark on the night of his condemnation, he had travelled thus far on his last way. Being allowed to purchase the means of writing, and a light, he sat down to write until such time as the prison lamps should be extinguished. He wrote a long letter to Lucie, showing her that he had known nothing of her father’s imprisonment, until he had heard of it from herself, and that he had been as ignorant as she of his father’s and uncle’s responsibility for that misery, until the paper had been read. He had already explained to her that his concealment from herself of the name he had relinquished, was the one condition--fully intelligible now--that her father had attached to their betrothal, and was the one promise he had still exacted on the morning of their marriage. He entreated her, for her father’s sake, never to seek to know whether her father had become oblivious of the existence of the paper, or had had it recalled to him (for the moment, or for good), by the story of the Tower, on that old Sunday under the dear old plane-tree in the garden. If he had preserved any definite remembrance of it, there could be no doubt that he had supposed it destroyed with the Bastille, when he had found no mention of it among the relics of prisoners which the populace had discovered there, and which had been described to all the world. He besought her--though he added that he knew it was needless--to console her father, by impressing him through every tender means she could think of, with the truth that he had done nothing for which he could justly reproach himself, but had uniformly forgotten himself for their joint sakes. Next to her preservation of his own last grateful love and blessing, and her overcoming of her sorrow, to devote herself to their dear child, he adjured her, as they would meet in Heaven, to comfort her father.

To her father himself, he wrote in the same strain; but, he told her father that he expressly confided his wife and child to his care. And he told him this, very strongly, with the hope of rousing him from any despondency or dangerous retrospect towards which he foresaw he might be tending. To Mr. Lorry, he commended them all, and explained his worldly affairs. That done, with many added sentences of grateful friendship and warm attachment, all was done. He never thought of Carton. His mind was so full of the others, that he never once thought of him. But, it beckoned him back in his sleep, and showed itself in shining forms. Free and happy, back in the old house in Soho (though it had nothing in it like the real house), unaccountably released and light of heart, he was with Lucie again, and she told him it was all a dream, and he had never gone away. A pause of forgetfulness, and then he had even suffered, and had come back to her, dead and at peace, and yet there was no difference in him. Another pause of oblivion, and he awoke in the sombre morning, unconscious where he was or what had happened, until it flashed upon his mind, “this is the day of my death!”

Thus, had he come through the hours, to the day when the fifty-two heads were to fall. And now, while he was composed, and hoped that he could meet the end with quiet heroism, a new action began in his waking thoughts, which was very difficult to master. He had never seen the instrument that was to terminate his life. How high it was from the ground, how many steps it had, where he would be stood, how he would be touched, whether the touching hands would be dyed red, which way his face would be turned, whether he would be the first, or might be the last: these and many similar questions, in nowise directed by his will, obtruded themselves over and over again, countless times. Neither were they connected with fear: he was conscious of no fear. Rather, they originated in a strange besetting desire to know what to do when the time came; a desire gigantically disproportionate to the few swift moments to which it referred; a wondering that was more like the wondering of some other spirit within his, than his own.

The hours went on as he walked to and fro, and the clocks struck the numbers he would never hear again. Nine gone for ever, ten gone for ever, eleven gone for ever, twelve coming on to pass away. After a hard contest with that eccentric action of thought which had last perplexed him, he had got the better of it. He walked up and down, softly repeating their names to himself. The worst of the strife was over. He could walk up and down, free from distracting fancies, praying for himself and for them. He had been apprised that the final hour was Three, and he knew he would be summoned some time earlier, inasmuch as the tumbrils jolted heavily and slowly through the streets. Therefore, he resolved to keep Two before his mind, as the hour, and so to strengthen himself in the interval that he might be able, after that time, to strengthen others. Walking regularly to and fro with his arms folded on his breast, a very different man from the prisoner, who had walked to and fro at La Force, he heard One struck away from him, without surprise. The hour had measured like most other hours. Devoutly thankful to Heaven for his recovered self-possession, he thought, “There is but another now,” and turned to walk again.

The key was put in the lock, and turned. Before the door was opened, or as it opened, a man said in a low voice, in English: “He has never seen me here; I have kept out of his way. Go you in alone; I wait near. Lose no time!” The door was quickly opened and closed, and there stood before him face to face, quiet, intent upon him, with the light of a smile on his features, and a cautionary finger on his lip, Sydney Carton. There was something so bright and remarkable in his look, that, for the first moment, the prisoner misdoubted him to be an apparition of his own imagining. But, he spoke, and it was his voice; he took the prisoner’s hand, and it was his real grasp. “No. I am accidentally possessed of a power over one of the keepers here, and in virtue of it I stand before you. I come from her--your wife, dear Darnay.” “You have no time to ask me why I bring it, or what it means; I have no time to tell you. You must comply with it--take off those boots you wear, and draw on these of mine.”

There was a chair against the wall of the cell, behind the prisoner. Carton, pressing forward, had already, with the speed of lightning, got him down into it, and stood over him, barefoot. “It would be madness if I asked you to escape; but do I? When I ask you to pass out at that door, tell me it is madness and remain here. Change that cravat for this of mine, that coat for this of mine. While you do it, let me take this ribbon from your hair, and shake out your hair like this of mine!” With wonderful quickness, and with a strength both of will and action, that appeared quite supernatural, he forced all these changes upon him. The prisoner was like a young child in his hands. “Carton! Dear Carton! It is madness. It cannot be accomplished, it never can be done, it has been attempted, and has always failed. I implore you not to add your death to the bitterness of mine.” “Do I ask you, my dear Darnay, to pass the door? When I ask that, refuse. There are pen and ink and paper on this table. Is your hand steady enough to write?”

“‘If you remember,’” said Carton, dictating, “‘the words that passed between us, long ago, you will readily comprehend this when you see it. You do remember them, I know. It is not in your nature to forget them.’” He was drawing his hand from his breast; the prisoner chancing to look up in his hurried wonder as he wrote, the hand stopped, closing upon something. “You shall know directly. Write on; there are but a few words more.” He dictated again. “‘I am thankful that the time has come, when I can prove them. That I do so is no subject for regret or grief.’” As he said these words with his eyes fixed on the writer, his hand slowly and softly moved down close to the writer’s face. As if his memory were impaired, or his faculties disordered, the prisoner made an effort to rally his attention. As he looked at Carton with clouded eyes and with an altered manner of breathing, Carton--his hand again in his breast--looked steadily at him. “‘If it had been otherwise;’” Carton’s hand was again watchfully and softly stealing down; “‘I never should have used the longer opportunity. If it had been otherwise;’” the hand was at the prisoner’s face; “‘I should but have had so much the more to answer for. If it had been otherwise--’” Carton looked at the pen and saw it was trailing off into unintelligible signs.

Carton’s hand moved back to his breast no more. The prisoner sprang up with a reproachful look, but Carton’s hand was close and firm at his nostrils, and Carton’s left arm caught him round the waist. For a few seconds he faintly struggled with the man who had come to lay down his life for him; but, within a minute or so, he was stretched insensible on the ground. Quickly, but with hands as true to the purpose as his heart was, Carton dressed himself in the clothes the prisoner had laid aside, combed back his hair, and tied it with the ribbon the prisoner had worn. Then, he softly called, “Enter there! Come in!” and the Spy presented himself. “You see?” said Carton, looking up, as he kneeled on one knee beside the insensible figure, putting the paper in the breast: “is your hazard very great?” “Mr. Carton,” the Spy answered, with a timid snap of his fingers, “my hazard is not _that_, in the thick of business here, if you are true to the whole of your bargain.”

“Have no fear! I shall soon be out of the way of harming you, and the rest will soon be far from here, please God! Now, get assistance and take me to the coach.” “I was weak and faint when you brought me in, and I am fainter now you take me out. The parting interview has overpowered me. Such a thing has happened here, often, and too often. Your life is in your own hands. Quick! Call assistance!” “Man, man!” returned Carton, stamping his foot; “have I sworn by no solemn vow already, to go through with this, that you waste the precious moments now? Take him yourself to the courtyard you know of, place him yourself in the carriage, show him yourself to Mr. Lorry, tell him yourself to give him no restorative but air, and to remember my words of last night, and his promise of last night, and drive away!” “How, then?” said one of them, contemplating the fallen figure. “So afflicted to find that his friend has drawn a prize in the lottery of Sainte Guillotine?”

The door closed, and Carton was left alone. Straining his powers of listening to the utmost, he listened for any sound that might denote suspicion or alarm. There was none. Keys turned, doors clashed, footsteps passed along distant passages: no cry was raised, or hurry made, that seemed unusual. Breathing more freely in a little while, he sat down at the table, and listened again until the clock struck Two. Sounds that he was not afraid of, for he divined their meaning, then began to be audible. Several doors were opened in succession, and finally his own. A gaoler, with a list in his hand, looked in, merely saying, “Follow me, Evrémonde!” and he followed into a large dark room, at a distance. It was a dark winter day, and what with the shadows within, and what with the shadows without, he could but dimly discern the others who were brought there to have their arms bound. Some were standing; some seated. Some were lamenting, and in restless motion; but, these were few. The great majority were silent and still, looking fixedly at the ground.

As he stood by the wall in a dim corner, while some of the fifty-two were brought in after him, one man stopped in passing, to embrace him, as having a knowledge of him. It thrilled him with a great dread of discovery; but the man went on. A very few moments after that, a young woman, with a slight girlish form, a sweet spare face in which there was no vestige of colour, and large widely opened patient eyes, rose from the seat where he had observed her sitting, and came to speak to him. “I am not afraid to die, Citizen Evrémonde, but I have done nothing. I am not unwilling to die, if the Republic which is to do so much good to us poor, will profit by my death; but I do not know how that can be, Citizen Evrémonde. Such a poor weak little creature!” “If I may ride with you, Citizen Evrémonde, will you let me hold your hand? I am not afraid, but I am little and weak, and it will give me more courage.”

As the patient eyes were lifted to his face, he saw a sudden doubt in them, and then astonishment. He pressed the work-worn, hunger-worn young fingers, and touched his lips. The same shadows that are falling on the prison, are falling, in that same hour of the early afternoon, on the Barrier with the crowd about it, when a coach going out of Paris drives up to be examined. “Kiss me, child of Evrémonde. Now, thou hast kissed a good Republican; something new in thy family; remember it! Sydney Carton. Advocate. English. Which is he?” It is hoped he will recover in the fresher air. It is represented that he is not in strong health, and has separated sadly from a friend who is under the displeasure of the Republic. “Is that all? It is not a great deal, that! Many are under the displeasure of the Republic, and must look out at the little window. Jarvis Lorry. Banker. English. Which is he?” It is Jarvis Lorry who has replied to all the previous questions. It is Jarvis Lorry who has alighted and stands with his hand on the coach door, replying to a group of officials. They leisurely walk round the carriage and leisurely mount the box, to look at what little luggage it carries on the roof; the country-people hanging about, press nearer to the coach doors and greedily stare in; a little child, carried by its mother, has its short arm held out for it, that it may touch the wife of an aristocrat who has gone to the Guillotine.

These are again the words of Jarvis Lorry, as he clasps his hands, and looks upward. There is terror in the carriage, there is weeping, there is the heavy breathing of the insensible traveller. Houses in twos and threes pass by us, solitary farms, ruinous buildings, dye-works, tanneries, and the like, open country, avenues of leafless trees. The hard uneven pavement is under us, the soft deep mud is on either side. Sometimes, we strike into the skirting mud, to avoid the stones that clatter us and shake us; sometimes, we stick in ruts and sloughs there. The agony of our impatience is then so great, that in our wild alarm and hurry we are for getting out and running--hiding--doing anything but stopping. Out of the open country, in again among ruinous buildings, solitary farms, dye-works, tanneries, and the like, cottages in twos and threes, avenues of leafless trees. Have these men deceived us, and taken us back by another road? Is not this the same place twice over? Thank Heaven, no. A village. Look back, look back, and see if we are pursued! Hush! the posting-house.

Leisurely, our four horses are taken out; leisurely, the coach stands in the little street, bereft of horses, and with no likelihood upon it of ever moving again; leisurely, the new horses come into visible existence, one by one; leisurely, the new postilions follow, sucking and plaiting the lashes of their whips; leisurely, the old postilions count their money, make wrong additions, and arrive at dissatisfied results. All the time, our overfraught hearts are beating at a rate that would far outstrip the fastest gallop of the fastest horses ever foaled. At length the new postilions are in their saddles, and the old are left behind. We are through the village, up the hill, and down the hill, and on the low watery grounds. Suddenly, the postilions exchange speech with animated gesticulation, and the horses are pulled up, almost on their haunches. We are pursued? “I said so! A brave number! My fellow-citizen here would have it forty-two; ten more heads are worth having. The Guillotine goes handsomely. I love it. Hi forward. Whoop!” The night comes on dark. He moves more; he is beginning to revive, and to speak intelligibly; he thinks they are still together; he asks him, by his name, what he has in his hand. O pity us, kind Heaven, and help us! Look out, look out, and see if we are pursued.

The wind is rushing after us, and the clouds are flying after us, and the moon is plunging after us, and the whole wild night is in pursuit of us; but, so far, we are pursued by nothing else. In that same juncture of time when the Fifty-Two awaited their fate Madame Defarge held darkly ominous council with The Vengeance and Jacques Three of the Revolutionary Jury. Not in the wine-shop did Madame Defarge confer with these ministers, but in the shed of the wood-sawyer, erst a mender of roads. The sawyer himself did not participate in the conference, but abided at a little distance, like an outer satellite who was not to speak until required, or to offer an opinion until invited. “Peace, little Vengeance,” said Madame Defarge, laying her hand with a slight frown on her lieutenant’s lips, “hear me speak. My husband, fellow-citizen, is a good Republican and a bold man; he has deserved well of the Republic, and possesses its confidence. But my husband has his weaknesses, and he is so weak as to relent towards this Doctor.”

“It is a great pity,” croaked Jacques Three, dubiously shaking his head, with his cruel fingers at his hungry mouth; “it is not quite like a good citizen; it is a thing to regret.” “See you,” said madame, “I care nothing for this Doctor, I. He may wear his head or lose it, for any interest I have in him; it is all one to me. But, the Evrémonde people are to be exterminated, and the wife and child must follow the husband and father.” “She has a fine head for it,” croaked Jacques Three. “I have seen blue eyes and golden hair there, and they looked charming when Samson held them up.” Ogre that he was, he spoke like an epicure. “The child also,” observed Jacques Three, with a meditative enjoyment of his words, “has golden hair and blue eyes. And we seldom have a child there. It is a pretty sight!” “In a word,” said Madame Defarge, coming out of her short abstraction, “I cannot trust my husband in this matter. Not only do I feel, since last night, that I dare not confide to him the details of my projects; but also I feel that if I delay, there is danger of his giving warning, and then they might escape.”

“In a word,” Madame Defarge went on, “my husband has not my reason for pursuing this family to annihilation, and I have not his reason for regarding this Doctor with any sensibility. I must act for myself, therefore. Come hither, little citizen.” “Touching those signals, little citizen,” said Madame Defarge, sternly, “that she made to the prisoners; you are ready to bear witness to them this very day?” “Ay, ay, why not!” cried the sawyer. “Every day, in all weathers, from two to four, always signalling, sometimes with the little one, sometimes without. I know what I know. I have seen with my eyes.” “Now, let me see,” said Madame Defarge, pondering again. “Yet once more! Can I spare this Doctor to my husband? I have no feeling either way. Can I spare him?” “He was signalling with her when I saw her,” argued Madame Defarge; “I cannot speak of one without the other; and I must not be silent, and trust the case wholly to him, this little citizen here. For, I am not a bad witness.” The Vengeance and Jacques Three vied with each other in their fervent protestations that she was the most admirable and marvellous of witnesses. The little citizen, not to be outdone, declared her to be a celestial witness.

“He must take his chance,” said Madame Defarge. “No, I cannot spare him! You are engaged at three o’clock; you are going to see the batch of to-day executed.--You?” The question was addressed to the wood-sawyer, who hurriedly replied in the affirmative: seizing the occasion to add that he was the most ardent of Republicans, and that he would be in effect the most desolate of Republicans, if anything prevented him from enjoying the pleasure of smoking his afternoon pipe in the contemplation of the droll national barber. He was so very demonstrative herein, that he might have been suspected (perhaps was, by the dark eyes that looked contemptuously at him out of Madame Defarge’s head) of having his small individual fears for his own personal safety, every hour in the day. “I,” said madame, “am equally engaged at the same place. After it is over--say at eight to-night--come you to me, in Saint Antoine, and we will give information against these people at my Section.” The wood-sawyer said he would be proud and flattered to attend the citizeness. The citizeness looking at him, he became embarrassed, evaded her glance as a small dog would have done, retreated among his wood, and hid his confusion over the handle of his saw.

“She will now be at home, awaiting the moment of his death. She will be mourning and grieving. She will be in a state of mind to impeach the justice of the Republic. She will be full of sympathy with its enemies. I will go to her.” “Take you my knitting,” said Madame Defarge, placing it in her lieutenant’s hands, “and have it ready for me in my usual seat. Keep me my usual chair. Go you there, straight, for there will probably be a greater concourse than usual, to-day.” “And before the tumbrils arrive. Be sure you are there, my soul,” said The Vengeance, calling after her, for she had already turned into the street, “before the tumbrils arrive!” Madame Defarge slightly waved her hand, to imply that she heard, and might be relied upon to arrive in good time, and so went through the mud, and round the corner of the prison wall. The Vengeance and the Juryman, looking after her as she walked away, were highly appreciative of her fine figure, and her superb moral endowments. There were many women at that time, upon whom the time laid a dreadfully disfiguring hand; but, there was not one among them more to be dreaded than this ruthless woman, now taking her way along the streets. Of a strong and fearless character, of shrewd sense and readiness, of great determination, of that kind of beauty which not only seems to impart to its possessor firmness and animosity, but to strike into others an instinctive recognition of those qualities; the troubled time would have heaved her up, under any circumstances. But, imbued from her childhood with a brooding sense of wrong, and an inveterate hatred of a class, opportunity had developed her into a tigress. She was absolutely without pity. If she had ever had the virtue in her, it had quite gone out of her.

It was nothing to her, that an innocent man was to die for the sins of his forefathers; she saw, not him, but them. It was nothing to her, that his wife was to be made a widow and his daughter an orphan; that was insufficient punishment, because they were her natural enemies and her prey, and as such had no right to live. To appeal to her, was made hopeless by her having no sense of pity, even for herself. If she had been laid low in the streets, in any of the many encounters in which she had been engaged, she would not have pitied herself; nor, if she had been ordered to the axe to-morrow, would she have gone to it with any softer feeling than a fierce desire to change places with the man who sent her there. Such a heart Madame Defarge carried under her rough robe. Carelessly worn, it was a becoming robe enough, in a certain weird way, and her dark hair looked rich under her coarse red cap. Lying hidden in her bosom, was a loaded pistol. Lying hidden at her waist, was a sharpened dagger. Thus accoutred, and walking with the confident tread of such a character, and with the supple freedom of a woman who had habitually walked in her girlhood, bare-foot and bare-legged, on the brown sea-sand, Madame Defarge took her way along the streets.

Now, when the journey of the travelling coach, at that very moment waiting for the completion of its load, had been planned out last night, the difficulty of taking Miss Pross in it had much engaged Mr. Lorry’s attention. It was not merely desirable to avoid overloading the coach, but it was of the highest importance that the time occupied in examining it and its passengers, should be reduced to the utmost; since their escape might depend on the saving of only a few seconds here and there. Finally, he had proposed, after anxious consideration, that Miss Pross and Jerry, who were at liberty to leave the city, should leave it at three o’clock in the lightest-wheeled conveyance known to that period. Unencumbered with luggage, they would soon overtake the coach, and, passing it and preceding it on the road, would order its horses in advance, and greatly facilitate its progress during the precious hours of the night, when delay was the most to be dreaded. Seeing in this arrangement the hope of rendering real service in that pressing emergency, Miss Pross hailed it with joy. She and Jerry had beheld the coach start, had known who it was that Solomon brought, had passed some ten minutes in tortures of suspense, and were now concluding their arrangements to follow the coach, even as Madame Defarge, taking her way through the streets, now drew nearer and nearer to the else-deserted lodging in which they held their consultation.

“Now what do you think, Mr. Cruncher,” said Miss Pross, whose agitation was so great that she could hardly speak, or stand, or move, or live: “what do you think of our not starting from this courtyard? Another carriage having already gone from here to-day, it might awaken suspicion.” “I am so distracted with fear and hope for our precious creatures,” said Miss Pross, wildly crying, “that I am incapable of forming any plan. Are _you_ capable of forming any plan, my dear good Mr. Cruncher?” “Respectin’ a future spear o’ life, miss,” returned Mr. Cruncher, “I hope so. Respectin’ any present use o’ this here blessed old head o’ mine, I think not. Would you do me the favour, miss, to take notice o’ two promises and wows wot it is my wishes fur to record in this here crisis?” “First,” said Mr. Cruncher, who was all in a tremble, and who spoke with an ashy and solemn visage, “them poor things well out o’ this, never no more will I do it, never no more!” “I am quite sure, Mr. Cruncher,” returned Miss Pross, “that you never will do it again, whatever it is, and I beg you not to think it necessary to mention more particularly what it is.”

“No, miss,” returned Jerry, “it shall not be named to you. Second: them poor things well out o’ this, and never no more will I interfere with Mrs. Cruncher’s flopping, never no more!” “Whatever housekeeping arrangement that may be,” said Miss Pross, striving to dry her eyes and compose herself, “I have no doubt it is best that Mrs. Cruncher should have it entirely under her own superintendence.--O my poor darlings!” “I go so far as to say, miss, moreover,” proceeded Mr. Cruncher, with a most alarming tendency to hold forth as from a pulpit--“and let my words be took down and took to Mrs. Cruncher through yourself--that wot my opinions respectin’ flopping has undergone a change, and that wot I only hope with all my heart as Mrs. Cruncher may be a flopping at the present time.” “Forbid it,” proceeded Mr. Cruncher, with additional solemnity, additional slowness, and additional tendency to hold forth and hold out, “as anything wot I have ever said or done should be wisited on my earnest wishes for them poor creeturs now! Forbid it as we shouldn’t all flop (if it was anyways conwenient) to get ’em out o’ this here dismal risk! Forbid it, miss! Wot I say, for-_bid_ it!” This was Mr. Cruncher’s conclusion after a protracted but vain endeavour to find a better one.

“If we ever get back to our native land,” said Miss Pross, “you may rely upon my telling Mrs. Cruncher as much as I may be able to remember and understand of what you have so impressively said; and at all events you may be sure that I shall bear witness to your being thoroughly in earnest at this dreadful time. Now, pray let us think! My esteemed Mr. Cruncher, let us think!” “If you were to go before,” said Miss Pross, “and stop the vehicle and horses from coming here, and were to wait somewhere for me; wouldn’t that be best?” Mr. Cruncher was so bewildered that he could think of no locality but Temple Bar. Alas! Temple Bar was hundreds of miles away, and Madame Defarge was drawing very near indeed. “Heaven knows we don’t,” returned Miss Pross, “but have no fear for me. Take me in at the cathedral, at Three o’Clock, or as near it as you can, and I am sure it will be better than our going from here. I feel certain of it. There! Bless you, Mr. Cruncher! Think-not of me, but of the lives that may depend on both of us!”

This exordium, and Miss Pross’s two hands in quite agonised entreaty clasping his, decided Mr. Cruncher. With an encouraging nod or two, he immediately went out to alter the arrangements, and left her by herself to follow as she had proposed. The having originated a precaution which was already in course of execution, was a great relief to Miss Pross. The necessity of composing her appearance so that it should attract no special notice in the streets, was another relief. She looked at her watch, and it was twenty minutes past two. She had no time to lose, but must get ready at once. Afraid, in her extreme perturbation, of the loneliness of the deserted rooms, and of half-imagined faces peeping from behind every open door in them, Miss Pross got a basin of cold water and began laving her eyes, which were swollen and red. Haunted by her feverish apprehensions, she could not bear to have her sight obscured for a minute at a time by the dripping water, but constantly paused and looked round to see that there was no one watching her. In one of those pauses she recoiled and cried out, for she saw a figure standing in the room.

The basin fell to the ground broken, and the water flowed to the feet of Madame Defarge. By strange stern ways, and through much staining blood, those feet had come to meet that water. It flashed upon Miss Pross’s mind that the doors were all standing open, and would suggest the flight. Her first act was to shut them. There were four in the room, and she shut them all. She then placed herself before the door of the chamber which Lucie had occupied. Madame Defarge’s dark eyes followed her through this rapid movement, and rested on her when it was finished. Miss Pross had nothing beautiful about her; years had not tamed the wildness, or softened the grimness, of her appearance; but, she too was a determined woman in her different way, and she measured Madame Defarge with her eyes, every inch. “You might, from your appearance, be the wife of Lucifer,” said Miss Pross, in her breathing. “Nevertheless, you shall not get the better of me. I am an Englishwoman.” Madame Defarge looked at her scornfully, but still with something of Miss Pross’s own perception that they two were at bay. She saw a tight, hard, wiry woman before her, as Mr. Lorry had seen in the same figure a woman with a strong hand, in the years gone by. She knew full well that Miss Pross was the family’s devoted friend; Miss Pross knew full well that Madame Defarge was the family’s malevolent enemy.

“On my way yonder,” said Madame Defarge, with a slight movement of her hand towards the fatal spot, “where they reserve my chair and my knitting for me, I am come to make my compliments to her in passing. I wish to see her.” Each spoke in her own language; neither understood the other’s words; both were very watchful, and intent to deduce from look and manner, what the unintelligible words meant. “It will do her no good to keep herself concealed from me at this moment,” said Madame Defarge. “Good patriots will know what that means. Let me see her. Go tell her that I wish to see her. Do you hear?” “If those eyes of yours were bed-winches,” returned Miss Pross, “and I was an English four-poster, they shouldn’t loose a splinter of me. No, you wicked foreign woman; I am your match.” “Woman imbecile and pig-like!” said Madame Defarge, frowning. “I take no answer from you. I demand to see her. Either tell her that I demand to see her, or stand out of the way of the door and let me go to her!” This, with an angry explanatory wave of her right arm.

“I little thought,” said Miss Pross, “that I should ever want to understand your nonsensical language; but I would give all I have, except the clothes I wear, to know whether you suspect the truth, or any part of it.” Neither of them for a single moment released the other’s eyes. Madame Defarge had not moved from the spot where she stood when Miss Pross first became aware of her; but, she now advanced one step. “I am a Briton,” said Miss Pross, “I am desperate. I don’t care an English Twopence for myself. I know that the longer I keep you here, the greater hope there is for my Ladybird. I’ll not leave a handful of that dark hair upon your head, if you lay a finger on me!” Thus Miss Pross, with a shake of her head and a flash of her eyes between every rapid sentence, and every rapid sentence a whole breath. Thus Miss Pross, who had never struck a blow in her life. But, her courage was of that emotional nature that it brought the irrepressible tears into her eyes. This was a courage that Madame Defarge so little comprehended as to mistake for weakness. “Ha, ha!” she laughed, “you poor wretch! What are you worth! I address myself to that Doctor.” Then she raised her voice and called out, “Citizen Doctor! Wife of Evrémonde! Child of Evrémonde! Any person but this miserable fool, answer the Citizeness Defarge!”

Perhaps the following silence, perhaps some latent disclosure in the expression of Miss Pross’s face, perhaps a sudden misgiving apart from either suggestion, whispered to Madame Defarge that they were gone. Three of the doors she opened swiftly, and looked in. “Those rooms are all in disorder, there has been hurried packing, there are odds and ends upon the ground. There is no one in that room behind you! Let me look.” “As long as you don’t know whether they are in that room or not, you are uncertain what to do,” said Miss Pross to herself; “and you shall not know that, if I can prevent your knowing it; and know that, or not know that, you shall not leave here while I can hold you.” “I have been in the streets from the first, nothing has stopped me, I will tear you to pieces, but I will have you from that door,” said Madame Defarge. “We are alone at the top of a high house in a solitary courtyard, we are not likely to be heard, and I pray for bodily strength to keep you here, while every minute you are here is worth a hundred thousand guineas to my darling,” said Miss Pross.

Madame Defarge made at the door. Miss Pross, on the instinct of the moment, seized her round the waist in both her arms, and held her tight. It was in vain for Madame Defarge to struggle and to strike; Miss Pross, with the vigorous tenacity of love, always so much stronger than hate, clasped her tight, and even lifted her from the floor in the struggle that they had. The two hands of Madame Defarge buffeted and tore her face; but, Miss Pross, with her head down, held her round the waist, and clung to her with more than the hold of a drowning woman. Soon, Madame Defarge’s hands ceased to strike, and felt at her encircled waist. “It is under my arm,” said Miss Pross, in smothered tones, “you shall not draw it. I am stronger than you, I bless Heaven for it. I hold you till one or other of us faints or dies!” Madame Defarge’s hands were at her bosom. Miss Pross looked up, saw what it was, struck at it, struck out a flash and a crash, and stood alone--blinded with smoke.

All this was in a second. As the smoke cleared, leaving an awful stillness, it passed out on the air, like the soul of the furious woman whose body lay lifeless on the ground. In the first fright and horror of her situation, Miss Pross passed the body as far from it as she could, and ran down the stairs to call for fruitless help. Happily, she bethought herself of the consequences of what she did, in time to check herself and go back. It was dreadful to go in at the door again; but, she did go in, and even went near it, to get the bonnet and other things that she must wear. These she put on, out on the staircase, first shutting and locking the door and taking away the key. She then sat down on the stairs a few moments to breathe and to cry, and then got up and hurried away. By good fortune she had a veil on her bonnet, or she could hardly have gone along the streets without being stopped. By good fortune, too, she was naturally so peculiar in appearance as not to show disfigurement like any other woman. She needed both advantages, for the marks of gripping fingers were deep in her face, and her hair was torn, and her dress (hastily composed with unsteady hands) was clutched and dragged a hundred ways.

In crossing the bridge, she dropped the door key in the river. Arriving at the cathedral some few minutes before her escort, and waiting there, she thought, what if the key were already taken in a net, what if it were identified, what if the door were opened and the remains discovered, what if she were stopped at the gate, sent to prison, and charged with murder! In the midst of these fluttering thoughts, the escort appeared, took her in, and took her away. It was in vain for Mr. Cruncher to repeat what he said; Miss Pross could not hear him. “So I’ll nod my head,” thought Mr. Cruncher, amazed, “at all events she’ll see that.” And she did. “Blest if she ain’t in a queer condition!” said Mr. Cruncher, more and more disturbed. “Wot can she have been a takin’, to keep her courage up? Hark! There’s the roll of them dreadful carts! You can hear that, miss?” “I can hear,” said Miss Pross, seeing that he spoke to her, “nothing. O, my good man, there was first a great crash, and then a great stillness, and that stillness seems to be fixed and unchangeable, never to be broken any more as long as my life lasts.”

“If she don’t hear the roll of those dreadful carts, now very nigh their journey’s end,” said Mr. Cruncher, glancing over his shoulder, “it’s my opinion that indeed she never will hear anything else in this world.” Along the Paris streets, the death-carts rumble, hollow and harsh. Six tumbrils carry the day’s wine to La Guillotine. All the devouring and insatiate Monsters imagined since imagination could record itself, are fused in the one realisation, Guillotine. And yet there is not in France, with its rich variety of soil and climate, a blade, a leaf, a root, a sprig, a peppercorn, which will grow to maturity under conditions more certain than those that have produced this horror. Crush humanity out of shape once more, under similar hammers, and it will twist itself into the same tortured forms. Sow the same seed of rapacious license and oppression over again, and it will surely yield the same fruit according to its kind. Six tumbrils roll along the streets. Change these back again to what they were, thou powerful enchanter, Time, and they shall be seen to be the carriages of absolute monarchs, the equipages of feudal nobles, the toilettes of flaring Jezebels, the churches that are not my father’s house but dens of thieves, the huts of millions of starving peasants! No; the great magician who majestically works out the appointed order of the Creator, never reverses his transformations. “If thou be changed into this shape by the will of God,” say the seers to the enchanted, in the wise Arabian stories, “then remain so! But, if thou wear this form through mere passing conjuration, then resume thy former aspect!” Changeless and hopeless, the tumbrils roll along.

As the sombre wheels of the six carts go round, they seem to plough up a long crooked furrow among the populace in the streets. Ridges of faces are thrown to this side and to that, and the ploughs go steadily onward. So used are the regular inhabitants of the houses to the spectacle, that in many windows there are no people, and in some the occupation of the hands is not so much as suspended, while the eyes survey the faces in the tumbrils. Here and there, the inmate has visitors to see the sight; then he points his finger, with something of the complacency of a curator or authorised exponent, to this cart and to this, and seems to tell who sat here yesterday, and who there the day before. Of the riders in the tumbrils, some observe these things, and all things on their last roadside, with an impassive stare; others, with a lingering interest in the ways of life and men. Some, seated with drooping heads, are sunk in silent despair; again, there are some so heedful of their looks that they cast upon the multitude such glances as they have seen in theatres, and in pictures. Several close their eyes, and think, or try to get their straying thoughts together. Only one, and he a miserable creature, of a crazed aspect, is so shattered and made drunk by horror, that he sings, and tries to dance. Not one of the whole number appeals by look or gesture, to the pity of the people.

There is a guard of sundry horsemen riding abreast of the tumbrils, and faces are often turned up to some of them, and they are asked some question. It would seem to be always the same question, for, it is always followed by a press of people towards the third cart. The horsemen abreast of that cart, frequently point out one man in it with their swords. The leading curiosity is, to know which is he; he stands at the back of the tumbril with his head bent down, to converse with a mere girl who sits on the side of the cart, and holds his hand. He has no curiosity or care for the scene about him, and always speaks to the girl. Here and there in the long street of St. Honore, cries are raised against him. If they move him at all, it is only to a quiet smile, as he shakes his hair a little more loosely about his face. He cannot easily touch his face, his arms being bound. On the steps of a church, awaiting the coming-up of the tumbrils, stands the Spy and prison-sheep. He looks into the first of them: not there. He looks into the second: not there. He already asks himself, “Has he sacrificed me?” when his face clears, as he looks into the third.

But the man continuing to exclaim, “Down, Evrémonde!” the face of Evrémonde is for a moment turned towards him. Evrémonde then sees the Spy, and looks attentively at him, and goes his way. The clocks are on the stroke of three, and the furrow ploughed among the populace is turning round, to come on into the place of execution, and end. The ridges thrown to this side and to that, now crumble in and close behind the last plough as it passes on, for all are following to the Guillotine. In front of it, seated in chairs, as in a garden of public diversion, are a number of women, busily knitting. On one of the fore-most chairs, stands The Vengeance, looking about for her friend. Ay! Louder, Vengeance, much louder, and still she will scarcely hear thee. Louder yet, Vengeance, with a little oath or so added, and yet it will hardly bring her. Send other women up and down to seek her, lingering somewhere; and yet, although the messengers have done dread deeds, it is questionable whether of their own wills they will go far enough to find her!

“Bad Fortune!” cries The Vengeance, stamping her foot in the chair, “and here are the tumbrils! And Evrémonde will be despatched in a wink, and she not here! See her knitting in my hand, and her empty chair ready for her. I cry with vexation and disappointment!” As The Vengeance descends from her elevation to do it, the tumbrils begin to discharge their loads. The ministers of Sainte Guillotine are robed and ready. Crash!--A head is held up, and the knitting-women who scarcely lifted their eyes to look at it a moment ago when it could think and speak, count One. The supposed Evrémonde descends, and the seamstress is lifted out next after him. He has not relinquished her patient hand in getting out, but still holds it as he promised. He gently places her with her back to the crashing engine that constantly whirrs up and falls, and she looks into his face and thanks him. “But for you, dear stranger, I should not be so composed, for I am naturally a poor little thing, faint of heart; nor should I have been able to raise my thoughts to Him who was put to death, that we might have hope and comfort here to-day. I think you were sent to me by Heaven.”

The two stand in the fast-thinning throng of victims, but they speak as if they were alone. Eye to eye, voice to voice, hand to hand, heart to heart, these two children of the Universal Mother, else so wide apart and differing, have come together on the dark highway, to repair home together, and to rest in her bosom. “I have a cousin, an only relative and an orphan, like myself, whom I love very dearly. She is five years younger than I, and she lives in a farmer’s house in the south country. Poverty parted us, and she knows nothing of my fate--for I cannot write--and if I could, how should I tell her! It is better as it is.” “What I have been thinking as we came along, and what I am still thinking now, as I look into your kind strong face which gives me so much support, is this:--If the Republic really does good to the poor, and they come to be less hungry, and in all ways to suffer less, she may live a long time: she may even live to be old.”

“Do you think:” the uncomplaining eyes in which there is so much endurance, fill with tears, and the lips part a little more and tremble: “that it will seem long to me, while I wait for her in the better land where I trust both you and I will be mercifully sheltered?” She kisses his lips; he kisses hers; they solemnly bless each other. The spare hand does not tremble as he releases it; nothing worse than a sweet, bright constancy is in the patient face. She goes next before him--is gone; the knitting-women count Twenty-Two. The murmuring of many voices, the upturning of many faces, the pressing on of many footsteps in the outskirts of the crowd, so that it swells forward in a mass, like one great heave of water, all flashes away. Twenty-Three. They said of him, about the city that night, that it was the peacefullest man’s face ever beheld there. Many added that he looked sublime and prophetic. One of the most remarkable sufferers by the same axe--a woman--had asked at the foot of the same scaffold, not long before, to be allowed to write down the thoughts that were inspiring her. If he had given any utterance to his, and they were prophetic, they would have been these:

“I see Barsad, and Cly, Defarge, The Vengeance, the Juryman, the Judge, long ranks of the new oppressors who have risen on the destruction of the old, perishing by this retributive instrument, before it shall cease out of its present use. I see a beautiful city and a brilliant people rising from this abyss, and, in their struggles to be truly free, in their triumphs and defeats, through long years to come, I see the evil of this time and of the previous time of which this is the natural birth, gradually making expiation for itself and wearing out. “I see the lives for which I lay down my life, peaceful, useful, prosperous and happy, in that England which I shall see no more. I see Her with a child upon her bosom, who bears my name. I see her father, aged and bent, but otherwise restored, and faithful to all men in his healing office, and at peace. I see the good old man, so long their friend, in ten years’ time enriching them with all he has, and passing tranquilly to his reward.

“I see that I hold a sanctuary in their hearts, and in the hearts of their descendants, generations hence. I see her, an old woman, weeping for me on the anniversary of this day. I see her and her husband, their course done, lying side by side in their last earthly bed, and I know that each was not more honoured and held sacred in the other’s soul, than I was in the souls of both. “I see that child who lay upon her bosom and who bore my name, a man winning his way up in that path of life which once was mine. I see him winning it so well, that my name is made illustrious there by the light of his. I see the blots I threw upon it, faded away. I see him, fore-most of just judges and honoured men, bringing a boy of my name, with a forehead that I know and golden hair, to this place--then fair to look upon, with not a trace of this day’s disfigurement--and I hear him tell the child my story, with a tender and a faltering voice.

I. A Scandal in Bohemia II. The Red-Headed League III. A Case of Identity IV. The Boscombe Valley Mystery V. The Five Orange Pips VI. The Man with the Twisted Lip VII. The Adventure of the Blue Carbuncle VIII. The Adventure of the Speckled Band IX. The Adventure of the Engineer’s Thumb X. The Adventure of the Noble Bachelor XI. The Adventure of the Beryl Coronet XII. The Adventure of the Copper Beeches To Sherlock Holmes she is always _the_ woman. I have seldom heard him mention her under any other name. In his eyes she eclipses and predominates the whole of her sex. It was not that he felt any emotion akin to love for Irene Adler. All emotions, and that one particularly, were abhorrent to his cold, precise but admirably balanced mind. He was, I take it, the most perfect reasoning and observing machine that the world has seen, but as a lover he would have placed himself in a false position. He never spoke of the softer passions, save with a gibe and a sneer. They were admirable things for the observer—excellent for drawing the veil from men’s motives and actions. But for the trained reasoner to admit such intrusions into his own delicate and finely adjusted temperament was to introduce a distracting factor which might throw a doubt upon all his mental results. Grit in a sensitive instrument, or a crack in one of his own high-power lenses, would not be more disturbing than a strong emotion in a nature such as his. And yet there was but one woman to him, and that woman was the late Irene Adler, of dubious and questionable memory.

I had seen little of Holmes lately. My marriage had drifted us away from each other. My own complete happiness, and the home-centred interests which rise up around the man who first finds himself master of his own establishment, were sufficient to absorb all my attention, while Holmes, who loathed every form of society with his whole Bohemian soul, remained in our lodgings in Baker Street, buried among his old books, and alternating from week to week between cocaine and ambition, the drowsiness of the drug, and the fierce energy of his own keen nature. He was still, as ever, deeply attracted by the study of crime, and occupied his immense faculties and extraordinary powers of observation in following out those clues, and clearing up those mysteries which had been abandoned as hopeless by the official police. From time to time I heard some vague account of his doings: of his summons to Odessa in the case of the Trepoff murder, of his clearing up of the singular tragedy of the Atkinson brothers at Trincomalee, and finally of the mission which he had accomplished so delicately and successfully for the reigning family of Holland. Beyond these signs of his activity, however, which I merely shared with all the readers of the daily press, I knew little of my former friend and companion.

One night—it was on the twentieth of March, 1888—I was returning from a journey to a patient (for I had now returned to civil practice), when my way led me through Baker Street. As I passed the well-remembered door, which must always be associated in my mind with my wooing, and with the dark incidents of the Study in Scarlet, I was seized with a keen desire to see Holmes again, and to know how he was employing his extraordinary powers. His rooms were brilliantly lit, and, even as I looked up, I saw his tall, spare figure pass twice in a dark silhouette against the blind. He was pacing the room swiftly, eagerly, with his head sunk upon his chest and his hands clasped behind him. To me, who knew his every mood and habit, his attitude and manner told their own story. He was at work again. He had risen out of his drug-created dreams and was hot upon the scent of some new problem. I rang the bell and was shown up to the chamber which had formerly been in part my own.

His manner was not effusive. It seldom was; but he was glad, I think, to see me. With hardly a word spoken, but with a kindly eye, he waved me to an armchair, threw across his case of cigars, and indicated a spirit case and a gasogene in the corner. Then he stood before the fire and looked me over in his singular introspective fashion. “Indeed, I should have thought a little more. Just a trifle more, I fancy, Watson. And in practice again, I observe. You did not tell me that you intended to go into harness.” “I see it, I deduce it. How do I know that you have been getting yourself very wet lately, and that you have a most clumsy and careless servant girl?” “My dear Holmes,” said I, “this is too much. You would certainly have been burned, had you lived a few centuries ago. It is true that I had a country walk on Thursday and came home in a dreadful mess, but as I have changed my clothes I can’t imagine how you deduce it. As to Mary Jane, she is incorrigible, and my wife has given her notice, but there, again, I fail to see how you work it out.”

“It is simplicity itself,” said he; “my eyes tell me that on the inside of your left shoe, just where the firelight strikes it, the leather is scored by six almost parallel cuts. Obviously they have been caused by someone who has very carelessly scraped round the edges of the sole in order to remove crusted mud from it. Hence, you see, my double deduction that you had been out in vile weather, and that you had a particularly malignant boot-slitting specimen of the London slavey. As to your practice, if a gentleman walks into my rooms smelling of iodoform, with a black mark of nitrate of silver upon his right forefinger, and a bulge on the right side of his top-hat to show where he has secreted his stethoscope, I must be dull, indeed, if I do not pronounce him to be an active member of the medical profession.” I could not help laughing at the ease with which he explained his process of deduction. “When I hear you give your reasons,” I remarked, “the thing always appears to me to be so ridiculously simple that I could easily do it myself, though at each successive instance of your reasoning I am baffled until you explain your process. And yet I believe that my eyes are as good as yours.”

“Quite so,” he answered, lighting a cigarette, and throwing himself down into an armchair. “You see, but you do not observe. The distinction is clear. For example, you have frequently seen the steps which lead up from the hall to this room.” “Quite so! You have not observed. And yet you have seen. That is just my point. Now, I know that there are seventeen steps, because I have both seen and observed. By the way, since you are interested in these little problems, and since you are good enough to chronicle one or two of my trifling experiences, you may be interested in this.” He threw over a sheet of thick, pink-tinted notepaper which had been lying open upon the table. “It came by the last post,” said he. “Read it aloud.” “There will call upon you to-night, at a quarter to eight o’clock,” it said, “a gentleman who desires to consult you upon a matter of the very deepest moment. Your recent services to one of the royal houses of Europe have shown that you are one who may safely be trusted with matters which are of an importance which can hardly be exaggerated. This account of you we have from all quarters received. Be in your chamber then at that hour, and do not take it amiss if your visitor wear a mask.”

“I have no data yet. It is a capital mistake to theorise before one has data. Insensibly one begins to twist facts to suit theories, instead of theories to suit facts. But the note itself. What do you deduce from it?” “The man who wrote it was presumably well to do,” I remarked, endeavouring to imitate my companion’s processes. “Such paper could not be bought under half a crown a packet. It is peculiarly strong and stiff.” “Not at all. The ‘G’ with the small ‘t’ stands for ‘Gesellschaft,’ which is the German for ‘Company.’ It is a customary contraction like our ‘Co.’ ‘P,’ of course, stands for ‘Papier.’ Now for the ‘Eg.’ Let us glance at our Continental Gazetteer.” He took down a heavy brown volume from his shelves. “Eglow, Eglonitz—here we are, Egria. It is in a German-speaking country—in Bohemia, not far from Carlsbad. ‘Remarkable as being the scene of the death of Wallenstein, and for its numerous glass-factories and paper-mills.’ Ha, ha, my boy, what do you make of that?” His eyes sparkled, and he sent up a great blue triumphant cloud from his cigarette.

“Precisely. And the man who wrote the note is a German. Do you note the peculiar construction of the sentence—‘This account of you we have from all quarters received.’ A Frenchman or Russian could not have written that. It is the German who is so uncourteous to his verbs. It only remains, therefore, to discover what is wanted by this German who writes upon Bohemian paper and prefers wearing a mask to showing his face. And here he comes, if I am not mistaken, to resolve all our doubts.” “A pair, by the sound,” said he. “Yes,” he continued, glancing out of the window. “A nice little brougham and a pair of beauties. A hundred and fifty guineas apiece. There’s money in this case, Watson, if there is nothing else.” A slow and heavy step, which had been heard upon the stairs and in the passage, paused immediately outside the door. Then there was a loud and authoritative tap. A man entered who could hardly have been less than six feet six inches in height, with the chest and limbs of a Hercules. His dress was rich with a richness which would, in England, be looked upon as akin to bad taste. Heavy bands of astrakhan were slashed across the sleeves and fronts of his double-breasted coat, while the deep blue cloak which was thrown over his shoulders was lined with flame-coloured silk and secured at the neck with a brooch which consisted of a single flaming beryl. Boots which extended halfway up his calves, and which were trimmed at the tops with rich brown fur, completed the impression of barbaric opulence which was suggested by his whole appearance. He carried a broad-brimmed hat in his hand, while he wore across the upper part of his face, extending down past the cheekbones, a black vizard mask, which he had apparently adjusted that very moment, for his hand was still raised to it as he entered. From the lower part of the face he appeared to be a man of strong character, with a thick, hanging lip, and a long, straight chin suggestive of resolution pushed to the length of obstinacy.

“You had my note?” he asked with a deep harsh voice and a strongly marked German accent. “I told you that I would call.” He looked from one to the other of us, as if uncertain which to address. “Pray take a seat,” said Holmes. “This is my friend and colleague, Dr. Watson, who is occasionally good enough to help me in my cases. Whom have I the honour to address?” “You may address me as the Count Von Kramm, a Bohemian nobleman. I understand that this gentleman, your friend, is a man of honour and discretion, whom I may trust with a matter of the most extreme importance. If not, I should much prefer to communicate with you alone.” I rose to go, but Holmes caught me by the wrist and pushed me back into my chair. “It is both, or none,” said he. “You may say before this gentleman anything which you may say to me.” The Count shrugged his broad shoulders. “Then I must begin,” said he, “by binding you both to absolute secrecy for two years; at the end of that time the matter will be of no importance. At present it is not too much to say that it is of such weight it may have an influence upon European history.”

“You will excuse this mask,” continued our strange visitor. “The august person who employs me wishes his agent to be unknown to you, and I may confess at once that the title by which I have just called myself is not exactly my own.” “The circumstances are of great delicacy, and every precaution has to be taken to quench what might grow to be an immense scandal and seriously compromise one of the reigning families of Europe. To speak plainly, the matter implicates the great House of Ormstein, hereditary kings of Bohemia.” Our visitor glanced with some apparent surprise at the languid, lounging figure of the man who had been no doubt depicted to him as the most incisive reasoner and most energetic agent in Europe. Holmes slowly reopened his eyes and looked impatiently at his gigantic client. The man sprang from his chair and paced up and down the room in uncontrollable agitation. Then, with a gesture of desperation, he tore the mask from his face and hurled it upon the ground. “You are right,” he cried; “I am the King. Why should I attempt to conceal it?”

“Why, indeed?” murmured Holmes. “Your Majesty had not spoken before I was aware that I was addressing Wilhelm Gottsreich Sigismond von Ormstein, Grand Duke of Cassel-Felstein, and hereditary King of Bohemia.” “But you can understand,” said our strange visitor, sitting down once more and passing his hand over his high white forehead, “you can understand that I am not accustomed to doing such business in my own person. Yet the matter was so delicate that I could not confide it to an agent without putting myself in his power. I have come _incognito_ from Prague for the purpose of consulting you.” “The facts are briefly these: Some five years ago, during a lengthy visit to Warsaw, I made the acquaintance of the well-known adventuress, Irene Adler. The name is no doubt familiar to you.” “Kindly look her up in my index, Doctor,” murmured Holmes without opening his eyes. For many years he had adopted a system of docketing all paragraphs concerning men and things, so that it was difficult to name a subject or a person on which he could not at once furnish information. In this case I found her biography sandwiched in between that of a Hebrew rabbi and that of a staff-commander who had written a monograph upon the deep-sea fishes.

“Let me see!” said Holmes. “Hum! Born in New Jersey in the year 1858. Contralto—hum! La Scala, hum! Prima donna Imperial Opera of Warsaw—yes! Retired from operatic stage—ha! Living in London—quite so! Your Majesty, as I understand, became entangled with this young person, wrote her some compromising letters, and is now desirous of getting those letters back.” “Then I fail to follow your Majesty. If this young person should produce her letters for blackmailing or other purposes, how is she to prove their authenticity?” “Five attempts have been made. Twice burglars in my pay ransacked her house. Once we diverted her luggage when she travelled. Twice she has been waylaid. There has been no result.” “To Clotilde Lothman von Saxe-Meningen, second daughter of the King of Scandinavia. You may know the strict principles of her family. She is herself the very soul of delicacy. A shadow of a doubt as to my conduct would bring the matter to an end.” “Threatens to send them the photograph. And she will do it. I know that she will do it. You do not know her, but she has a soul of steel. She has the face of the most beautiful of women, and the mind of the most resolute of men. Rather than I should marry another woman, there are no lengths to which she would not go—none.”

“Oh, then we have three days yet,” said Holmes with a yawn. “That is very fortunate, as I have one or two matters of importance to look into just at present. Your Majesty will, of course, stay in London for the present?” “Then, good-night, your Majesty, and I trust that we shall soon have some good news for you. And good-night, Watson,” he added, as the wheels of the royal brougham rolled down the street. “If you will be good enough to call to-morrow afternoon at three o’clock I should like to chat this little matter over with you.” At three o’clock precisely I was at Baker Street, but Holmes had not yet returned. The landlady informed me that he had left the house shortly after eight o’clock in the morning. I sat down beside the fire, however, with the intention of awaiting him, however long he might be. I was already deeply interested in his inquiry, for, though it was surrounded by none of the grim and strange features which were associated with the two crimes which I have already recorded, still, the nature of the case and the exalted station of his client gave it a character of its own. Indeed, apart from the nature of the investigation which my friend had on hand, there was something in his masterly grasp of a situation, and his keen, incisive reasoning, which made it a pleasure to me to study his system of work, and to follow the quick, subtle methods by which he disentangled the most inextricable mysteries. So accustomed was I to his invariable success that the very possibility of his failing had ceased to enter into my head.

It was close upon four before the door opened, and a drunken-looking groom, ill-kempt and side-whiskered, with an inflamed face and disreputable clothes, walked into the room. Accustomed as I was to my friend’s amazing powers in the use of disguises, I had to look three times before I was certain that it was indeed he. With a nod he vanished into the bedroom, whence he emerged in five minutes tweed-suited and respectable, as of old. Putting his hands into his pockets, he stretched out his legs in front of the fire and laughed heartily for some minutes. “Quite so; but the sequel was rather unusual. I will tell you, however. I left the house a little after eight o’clock this morning in the character of a groom out of work. There is a wonderful sympathy and freemasonry among horsey men. Be one of them, and you will know all that there is to know. I soon found Briony Lodge. It is a _bijou_ villa, with a garden at the back, but built out in front right up to the road, two stories. Chubb lock to the door. Large sitting-room on the right side, well furnished, with long windows almost to the floor, and those preposterous English window fasteners which a child could open. Behind there was nothing remarkable, save that the passage window could be reached from the top of the coach-house. I walked round it and examined it closely from every point of view, but without noting anything else of interest.

“I then lounged down the street and found, as I expected, that there was a mews in a lane which runs down by one wall of the garden. I lent the ostlers a hand in rubbing down their horses, and received in exchange twopence, a glass of half-and-half, two fills of shag tobacco, and as much information as I could desire about Miss Adler, to say nothing of half a dozen other people in the neighbourhood in whom I was not in the least interested, but whose biographies I was compelled to listen to.” “Oh, she has turned all the men’s heads down in that part. She is the daintiest thing under a bonnet on this planet. So say the Serpentine-mews, to a man. She lives quietly, sings at concerts, drives out at five every day, and returns at seven sharp for dinner. Seldom goes out at other times, except when she sings. Has only one male visitor, but a good deal of him. He is dark, handsome, and dashing, never calls less than once a day, and often twice. He is a Mr. Godfrey Norton, of the Inner Temple. See the advantages of a cabman as a confidant. They had driven him home a dozen times from Serpentine-mews, and knew all about him. When I had listened to all they had to tell, I began to walk up and down near Briony Lodge once more, and to think over my plan of campaign.

“This Godfrey Norton was evidently an important factor in the matter. He was a lawyer. That sounded ominous. What was the relation between them, and what the object of his repeated visits? Was she his client, his friend, or his mistress? If the former, she had probably transferred the photograph to his keeping. If the latter, it was less likely. On the issue of this question depended whether I should continue my work at Briony Lodge, or turn my attention to the gentleman’s chambers in the Temple. It was a delicate point, and it widened the field of my inquiry. I fear that I bore you with these details, but I have to let you see my little difficulties, if you are to understand the situation.” “I was still balancing the matter in my mind when a hansom cab drove up to Briony Lodge, and a gentleman sprang out. He was a remarkably handsome man, dark, aquiline, and moustached—evidently the man of whom I had heard. He appeared to be in a great hurry, shouted to the cabman to wait, and brushed past the maid who opened the door with the air of a man who was thoroughly at home.

“He was in the house about half an hour, and I could catch glimpses of him in the windows of the sitting-room, pacing up and down, talking excitedly, and waving his arms. Of her I could see nothing. Presently he emerged, looking even more flurried than before. As he stepped up to the cab, he pulled a gold watch from his pocket and looked at it earnestly, ‘Drive like the devil,’ he shouted, ‘first to Gross & Hankey’s in Regent Street, and then to the Church of St. Monica in the Edgeware Road. Half a guinea if you do it in twenty minutes!’ “Away they went, and I was just wondering whether I should not do well to follow them when up the lane came a neat little landau, the coachman with his coat only half-buttoned, and his tie under his ear, while all the tags of his harness were sticking out of the buckles. It hadn’t pulled up before she shot out of the hall door and into it. I only caught a glimpse of her at the moment, but she was a lovely woman, with a face that a man might die for.

“This was quite too good to lose, Watson. I was just balancing whether I should run for it, or whether I should perch behind her landau when a cab came through the street. The driver looked twice at such a shabby fare, but I jumped in before he could object. ‘The Church of St. Monica,’ said I, ‘and half a sovereign if you reach it in twenty minutes.’ It was twenty-five minutes to twelve, and of course it was clear enough what was in the wind. “My cabby drove fast. I don’t think I ever drove faster, but the others were there before us. The cab and the landau with their steaming horses were in front of the door when I arrived. I paid the man and hurried into the church. There was not a soul there save the two whom I had followed and a surpliced clergyman, who seemed to be expostulating with them. They were all three standing in a knot in front of the altar. I lounged up the side aisle like any other idler who has dropped into a church. Suddenly, to my surprise, the three at the altar faced round to me, and Godfrey Norton came running as hard as he could towards me.

“I was half-dragged up to the altar, and before I knew where I was I found myself mumbling responses which were whispered in my ear, and vouching for things of which I knew nothing, and generally assisting in the secure tying up of Irene Adler, spinster, to Godfrey Norton, bachelor. It was all done in an instant, and there was the gentleman thanking me on the one side and the lady on the other, while the clergyman beamed on me in front. It was the most preposterous position in which I ever found myself in my life, and it was the thought of it that started me laughing just now. It seems that there had been some informality about their license, that the clergyman absolutely refused to marry them without a witness of some sort, and that my lucky appearance saved the bridegroom from having to sally out into the streets in search of a best man. The bride gave me a sovereign, and I mean to wear it on my watch chain in memory of the occasion.” “Well, I found my plans very seriously menaced. It looked as if the pair might take an immediate departure, and so necessitate very prompt and energetic measures on my part. At the church door, however, they separated, he driving back to the Temple, and she to her own house. ‘I shall drive out in the park at five as usual,’ she said as she left him. I heard no more. They drove away in different directions, and I went off to make my own arrangements.”

“Some cold beef and a glass of beer,” he answered, ringing the bell. “I have been too busy to think of food, and I am likely to be busier still this evening. By the way, Doctor, I shall want your co-operation.” “When Mrs. Turner has brought in the tray I will make it clear to you. Now,” he said as he turned hungrily on the simple fare that our landlady had provided, “I must discuss it while I eat, for I have not much time. It is nearly five now. In two hours we must be on the scene of action. Miss Irene, or Madame, rather, returns from her drive at seven. We must be at Briony Lodge to meet her.” “You must leave that to me. I have already arranged what is to occur. There is only one point on which I must insist. You must not interfere, come what may. You understand?” “To do nothing whatever. There will probably be some small unpleasantness. Do not join in it. It will end in my being conveyed into the house. Four or five minutes afterwards the sitting-room window will open. You are to station yourself close to that open window.”

“And when I raise my hand—so—you will throw into the room what I give you to throw, and will, at the same time, raise the cry of fire. You quite follow me?” “It is nothing very formidable,” he said, taking a long cigar-shaped roll from his pocket. “It is an ordinary plumber’s smoke-rocket, fitted with a cap at either end to make it self-lighting. Your task is confined to that. When you raise your cry of fire, it will be taken up by quite a number of people. You may then walk to the end of the street, and I will rejoin you in ten minutes. I hope that I have made myself clear?” “I am to remain neutral, to get near the window, to watch you, and at the signal to throw in this object, then to raise the cry of fire, and to wait you at the corner of the street.” He disappeared into his bedroom and returned in a few minutes in the character of an amiable and simple-minded Nonconformist clergyman. His broad black hat, his baggy trousers, his white tie, his sympathetic smile, and general look of peering and benevolent curiosity were such as Mr. John Hare alone could have equalled. It was not merely that Holmes changed his costume. His expression, his manner, his very soul seemed to vary with every fresh part that he assumed. The stage lost a fine actor, even as science lost an acute reasoner, when he became a specialist in crime.

It was a quarter past six when we left Baker Street, and it still wanted ten minutes to the hour when we found ourselves in Serpentine Avenue. It was already dusk, and the lamps were just being lighted as we paced up and down in front of Briony Lodge, waiting for the coming of its occupant. The house was just such as I had pictured it from Sherlock Holmes’ succinct description, but the locality appeared to be less private than I expected. On the contrary, for a small street in a quiet neighbourhood, it was remarkably animated. There was a group of shabbily dressed men smoking and laughing in a corner, a scissors-grinder with his wheel, two guardsmen who were flirting with a nurse-girl, and several well-dressed young men who were lounging up and down with cigars in their mouths. “You see,” remarked Holmes, as we paced to and fro in front of the house, “this marriage rather simplifies matters. The photograph becomes a double-edged weapon now. The chances are that she would be as averse to its being seen by Mr. Godfrey Norton, as our client is to its coming to the eyes of his princess. Now the question is, Where are we to find the photograph?”

“It is most unlikely that she carries it about with her. It is cabinet size. Too large for easy concealment about a woman’s dress. She knows that the King is capable of having her waylaid and searched. Two attempts of the sort have already been made. We may take it, then, that she does not carry it about with her.” “Her banker or her lawyer. There is that double possibility. But I am inclined to think neither. Women are naturally secretive, and they like to do their own secreting. Why should she hand it over to anyone else? She could trust her own guardianship, but she could not tell what indirect or political influence might be brought to bear upon a business man. Besides, remember that she had resolved to use it within a few days. It must be where she can lay her hands upon it. It must be in her own house.” As he spoke the gleam of the sidelights of a carriage came round the curve of the avenue. It was a smart little landau which rattled up to the door of Briony Lodge. As it pulled up, one of the loafing men at the corner dashed forward to open the door in the hope of earning a copper, but was elbowed away by another loafer, who had rushed up with the same intention. A fierce quarrel broke out, which was increased by the two guardsmen, who took sides with one of the loungers, and by the scissors-grinder, who was equally hot upon the other side. A blow was struck, and in an instant the lady, who had stepped from her carriage, was the centre of a little knot of flushed and struggling men, who struck savagely at each other with their fists and sticks. Holmes dashed into the crowd to protect the lady; but, just as he reached her, he gave a cry and dropped to the ground, with the blood running freely down his face. At his fall the guardsmen took to their heels in one direction and the loungers in the other, while a number of better dressed people, who had watched the scuffle without taking part in it, crowded in to help the lady and to attend to the injured man. Irene Adler, as I will still call her, had hurried up the steps; but she stood at the top with her superb figure outlined against the lights of the hall, looking back into the street.

“He’s a brave fellow,” said a woman. “They would have had the lady’s purse and watch if it hadn’t been for him. They were a gang, and a rough one, too. Ah, he’s breathing now.” Slowly and solemnly he was borne into Briony Lodge and laid out in the principal room, while I still observed the proceedings from my post by the window. The lamps had been lit, but the blinds had not been drawn, so that I could see Holmes as he lay upon the couch. I do not know whether he was seized with compunction at that moment for the part he was playing, but I know that I never felt more heartily ashamed of myself in my life than when I saw the beautiful creature against whom I was conspiring, or the grace and kindliness with which she waited upon the injured man. And yet it would be the blackest treachery to Holmes to draw back now from the part which he had intrusted to me. I hardened my heart, and took the smoke-rocket from under my ulster. After all, I thought, we are not injuring her. We are but preventing her from injuring another.

Holmes had sat up upon the couch, and I saw him motion like a man who is in need of air. A maid rushed across and threw open the window. At the same instant I saw him raise his hand and at the signal I tossed my rocket into the room with a cry of “Fire!” The word was no sooner out of my mouth than the whole crowd of spectators, well dressed and ill—gentlemen, ostlers, and servant maids—joined in a general shriek of “Fire!” Thick clouds of smoke curled through the room and out at the open window. I caught a glimpse of rushing figures, and a moment later the voice of Holmes from within assuring them that it was a false alarm. Slipping through the shouting crowd I made my way to the corner of the street, and in ten minutes was rejoiced to find my friend’s arm in mine, and to get away from the scene of uproar. He walked swiftly and in silence for some few minutes until we had turned down one of the quiet streets which lead towards the Edgeware Road.

“I do not wish to make a mystery,” said he, laughing. “The matter was perfectly simple. You, of course, saw that everyone in the street was an accomplice. They were all engaged for the evening.” “Then, when the row broke out, I had a little moist red paint in the palm of my hand. I rushed forward, fell down, clapped my hand to my face, and became a piteous spectacle. It is an old trick.” “Then they carried me in. She was bound to have me in. What else could she do? And into her sitting-room, which was the very room which I suspected. It lay between that and her bedroom, and I was determined to see which. They laid me on a couch, I motioned for air, they were compelled to open the window, and you had your chance.” “It was all-important. When a woman thinks that her house is on fire, her instinct is at once to rush to the thing which she values most. It is a perfectly overpowering impulse, and I have more than once taken advantage of it. In the case of the Darlington Substitution Scandal it was of use to me, and also in the Arnsworth Castle business. A married woman grabs at her baby; an unmarried one reaches for her jewel-box. Now it was clear to me that our lady of to-day had nothing in the house more precious to her than what we are in quest of. She would rush to secure it. The alarm of fire was admirably done. The smoke and shouting were enough to shake nerves of steel. She responded beautifully. The photograph is in a recess behind a sliding panel just above the right bell-pull. She was there in an instant, and I caught a glimpse of it as she half drew it out. When I cried out that it was a false alarm, she replaced it, glanced at the rocket, rushed from the room, and I have not seen her since. I rose, and, making my excuses, escaped from the house. I hesitated whether to attempt to secure the photograph at once; but the coachman had come in, and as he was watching me narrowly, it seemed safer to wait. A little over-precipitance may ruin all.”

“Our quest is practically finished. I shall call with the King to-morrow, and with you, if you care to come with us. We will be shown into the sitting-room to wait for the lady, but it is probable that when she comes she may find neither us nor the photograph. It might be a satisfaction to his Majesty to regain it with his own hands.” “At eight in the morning. She will not be up, so that we shall have a clear field. Besides, we must be prompt, for this marriage may mean a complete change in her life and habits. I must wire to the King without delay.” “Because it would spare your Majesty all fear of future annoyance. If the lady loves her husband, she does not love your Majesty. If she does not love your Majesty, there is no reason why she should interfere with your Majesty’s plan.” “It is true. And yet—! Well! I wish she had been of my own station! What a queen she would have made!” He relapsed into a moody silence, which was not broken until we drew up in Serpentine Avenue.

“Indeed! My mistress told me that you were likely to call. She left this morning with her husband by the 5:15 train from Charing Cross for the Continent.” “We shall see.” He pushed past the servant and rushed into the drawing-room, followed by the King and myself. The furniture was scattered about in every direction, with dismantled shelves and open drawers, as if the lady had hurriedly ransacked them before her flight. Holmes rushed at the bell-pull, tore back a small sliding shutter, and, plunging in his hand, pulled out a photograph and a letter. The photograph was of Irene Adler herself in evening dress, the letter was superscribed to “Sherlock Holmes, Esq. To be left till called for.” My friend tore it open, and we all three read it together. It was dated at midnight of the preceding night and ran in this way: “MY DEAR MR. SHERLOCK HOLMES,—You really did it very well. You took me in completely. Until after the alarm of fire, I had not a suspicion. But then, when I found how I had betrayed myself, I began to think. I had been warned against you months ago. I had been told that, if the King employed an agent, it would certainly be you. And your address had been given me. Yet, with all this, you made me reveal what you wanted to know. Even after I became suspicious, I found it hard to think evil of such a dear, kind old clergyman. But, you know, I have been trained as an actress myself. Male costume is nothing new to me. I often take advantage of the freedom which it gives. I sent John, the coachman, to watch you, ran upstairs, got into my walking clothes, as I call them, and came down just as you departed.

“Well, I followed you to your door, and so made sure that I was really an object of interest to the celebrated Mr. Sherlock Holmes. Then I, rather imprudently, wished you good-night, and started for the Temple to see my husband. “We both thought the best resource was flight, when pursued by so formidable an antagonist; so you will find the nest empty when you call to-morrow. As to the photograph, your client may rest in peace. I love and am loved by a better man than he. The King may do what he will without hindrance from one whom he has cruelly wronged. I keep it only to safeguard myself, and to preserve a weapon which will always secure me from any steps which he might take in the future. I leave a photograph which he might care to possess; and I remain, dear Mr. Sherlock Holmes, “What a woman—oh, what a woman!” cried the King of Bohemia, when we had all three read this epistle. “Did I not tell you how quick and resolute she was? Would she not have made an admirable queen? Is it not a pity that she was not on my level?”

“From what I have seen of the lady, she seems, indeed, to be on a very different level to your Majesty,” said Holmes coldly. “I am sorry that I have not been able to bring your Majesty’s business to a more successful conclusion.” “On the contrary, my dear sir,” cried the King; “nothing could be more successful. I know that her word is inviolate. The photograph is now as safe as if it were in the fire.” “I am immensely indebted to you. Pray tell me in what way I can reward you. This ring—” He slipped an emerald snake ring from his finger and held it out upon the palm of his hand. “I thank your Majesty. Then there is no more to be done in the matter. I have the honour to wish you a very good morning.” He bowed, and, turning away without observing the hand which the King had stretched out to him, he set off in my company for his chambers. And that was how a great scandal threatened to affect the kingdom of Bohemia, and how the best plans of Mr. Sherlock Holmes were beaten by a woman’s wit. He used to make merry over the cleverness of women, but I have not heard him do it of late. And when he speaks of Irene Adler, or when he refers to her photograph, it is always under the honourable title of _the_ woman.

I had called upon my friend, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, one day in the autumn of last year and found him in deep conversation with a very stout, florid-faced, elderly gentleman with fiery red hair. With an apology for my intrusion, I was about to withdraw when Holmes pulled me abruptly into the room and closed the door behind me. “Not at all. This gentleman, Mr. Wilson, has been my partner and helper in many of my most successful cases, and I have no doubt that he will be of the utmost use to me in yours also.” “Try the settee,” said Holmes, relapsing into his armchair and putting his fingertips together, as was his custom when in judicial moods. “I know, my dear Watson, that you share my love of all that is bizarre and outside the conventions and humdrum routine of everyday life. You have shown your relish for it by the enthusiasm which has prompted you to chronicle, and, if you will excuse my saying so, somewhat to embellish so many of my own little adventures.” “You will remember that I remarked the other day, just before we went into the very simple problem presented by Miss Mary Sutherland, that for strange effects and extraordinary combinations we must go to life itself, which is always far more daring than any effort of the imagination.”

“You did, Doctor, but none the less you must come round to my view, for otherwise I shall keep on piling fact upon fact on you until your reason breaks down under them and acknowledges me to be right. Now, Mr. Jabez Wilson here has been good enough to call upon me this morning, and to begin a narrative which promises to be one of the most singular which I have listened to for some time. You have heard me remark that the strangest and most unique things are very often connected not with the larger but with the smaller crimes, and occasionally, indeed, where there is room for doubt whether any positive crime has been committed. As far as I have heard, it is impossible for me to say whether the present case is an instance of crime or not, but the course of events is certainly among the most singular that I have ever listened to. Perhaps, Mr. Wilson, you would have the great kindness to recommence your narrative. I ask you not merely because my friend Dr. Watson has not heard the opening part but also because the peculiar nature of the story makes me anxious to have every possible detail from your lips. As a rule, when I have heard some slight indication of the course of events, I am able to guide myself by the thousands of other similar cases which occur to my memory. In the present instance I am forced to admit that the facts are, to the best of my belief, unique.”

The portly client puffed out his chest with an appearance of some little pride and pulled a dirty and wrinkled newspaper from the inside pocket of his greatcoat. As he glanced down the advertisement column, with his head thrust forward and the paper flattened out upon his knee, I took a good look at the man and endeavoured, after the fashion of my companion, to read the indications which might be presented by his dress or appearance. I did not gain very much, however, by my inspection. Our visitor bore every mark of being an average commonplace British tradesman, obese, pompous, and slow. He wore rather baggy grey shepherd’s check trousers, a not over-clean black frock-coat, unbuttoned in the front, and a drab waistcoat with a heavy brassy Albert chain, and a square pierced bit of metal dangling down as an ornament. A frayed top-hat and a faded brown overcoat with a wrinkled velvet collar lay upon a chair beside him. Altogether, look as I would, there was nothing remarkable about the man save his blazing red head, and the expression of extreme chagrin and discontent upon his features.

Sherlock Holmes’ quick eye took in my occupation, and he shook his head with a smile as he noticed my questioning glances. “Beyond the obvious facts that he has at some time done manual labour, that he takes snuff, that he is a Freemason, that he has been in China, and that he has done a considerable amount of writing lately, I can deduce nothing else.” “How, in the name of good-fortune, did you know all that, Mr. Holmes?” he asked. “How did you know, for example, that I did manual labour. It’s as true as gospel, for I began as a ship’s carpenter.” “I won’t insult your intelligence by telling you how I read that, especially as, rather against the strict rules of your order, you use an arc-and-compass breastpin.” “What else can be indicated by that right cuff so very shiny for five inches, and the left one with the smooth patch near the elbow where you rest it upon the desk?” “The fish that you have tattooed immediately above your right wrist could only have been done in China. I have made a small study of tattoo marks and have even contributed to the literature of the subject. That trick of staining the fishes’ scales of a delicate pink is quite peculiar to China. When, in addition, I see a Chinese coin hanging from your watch-chain, the matter becomes even more simple.”

Mr. Jabez Wilson laughed heavily. “Well, I never!” said he. “I thought at first that you had done something clever, but I see that there was nothing in it after all.” “I begin to think, Watson,” said Holmes, “that I make a mistake in explaining. ‘_Omne ignotum pro magnifico_,’ you know, and my poor little reputation, such as it is, will suffer shipwreck if I am so candid. Can you not find the advertisement, Mr. Wilson?” “Yes, I have got it now,” he answered with his thick red finger planted halfway down the column. “Here it is. This is what began it all. You just read it for yourself, sir.” “TO THE RED-HEADED LEAGUE: On account of the bequest of the late Ezekiah Hopkins, of Lebanon, Pennsylvania, U.S.A., there is now another vacancy open which entitles a member of the League to a salary of £ 4 a week for purely nominal services. All red-headed men who are sound in body and mind and above the age of twenty-one years, are eligible. Apply in person on Monday, at eleven o’clock, to Duncan Ross, at the offices of the League, 7 Pope’s Court, Fleet Street.”

Holmes chuckled and wriggled in his chair, as was his habit when in high spirits. “It is a little off the beaten track, isn’t it?” said he. “And now, Mr. Wilson, off you go at scratch and tell us all about yourself, your household, and the effect which this advertisement had upon your fortunes. You will first make a note, Doctor, of the paper and the date.” “Well, it is just as I have been telling you, Mr. Sherlock Holmes,” said Jabez Wilson, mopping his forehead; “I have a small pawnbroker’s business at Coburg Square, near the City. It’s not a very large affair, and of late years it has not done more than just give me a living. I used to be able to keep two assistants, but now I only keep one; and I would have a job to pay him but that he is willing to come for half wages so as to learn the business.” “His name is Vincent Spaulding, and he’s not such a youth, either. It’s hard to say his age. I should not wish a smarter assistant, Mr. Holmes; and I know very well that he could better himself and earn twice what I am able to give him. But, after all, if he is satisfied, why should I put ideas in his head?”

“Why, indeed? You seem most fortunate in having an _employé_ who comes under the full market price. It is not a common experience among employers in this age. I don’t know that your assistant is not as remarkable as your advertisement.” “Oh, he has his faults, too,” said Mr. Wilson. “Never was such a fellow for photography. Snapping away with a camera when he ought to be improving his mind, and then diving down into the cellar like a rabbit into its hole to develop his pictures. That is his main fault, but on the whole he’s a good worker. There’s no vice in him.” “Yes, sir. He and a girl of fourteen, who does a bit of simple cooking and keeps the place clean—that’s all I have in the house, for I am a widower and never had any family. We live very quietly, sir, the three of us; and we keep a roof over our heads and pay our debts, if we do nothing more. “The first thing that put us out was that advertisement. Spaulding, he came down into the office just this day eight weeks, with this very paper in his hand, and he says:

“‘Why,’ says he, ‘here’s another vacancy on the League of the Red-headed Men. It’s worth quite a little fortune to any man who gets it, and I understand that there are more vacancies than there are men, so that the trustees are at their wits’ end what to do with the money. If my hair would only change colour, here’s a nice little crib all ready for me to step into.’ “‘Why, what is it, then?’ I asked. You see, Mr. Holmes, I am a very stay-at-home man, and as my business came to me instead of my having to go to it, I was often weeks on end without putting my foot over the door-mat. In that way I didn’t know much of what was going on outside, and I was always glad of a bit of news. “Well, you can easily think that that made me prick up my ears, for the business has not been over good for some years, and an extra couple of hundred would have been very handy. “‘Well,’ said he, showing me the advertisement, ‘you can see for yourself that the League has a vacancy, and there is the address where you should apply for particulars. As far as I can make out, the League was founded by an American millionaire, Ezekiah Hopkins, who was very peculiar in his ways. He was himself red-headed, and he had a great sympathy for all red-headed men; so, when he died, it was found that he had left his enormous fortune in the hands of trustees, with instructions to apply the interest to the providing of easy berths to men whose hair is of that colour. From all I hear it is splendid pay and very little to do.’

“‘Not so many as you might think,’ he answered. ‘You see it is really confined to Londoners, and to grown men. This American had started from London when he was young, and he wanted to do the old town a good turn. Then, again, I have heard it is no use your applying if your hair is light red, or dark red, or anything but real bright, blazing, fiery red. Now, if you cared to apply, Mr. Wilson, you would just walk in; but perhaps it would hardly be worth your while to put yourself out of the way for the sake of a few hundred pounds.’ “Now, it is a fact, gentlemen, as you may see for yourselves, that my hair is of a very full and rich tint, so that it seemed to me that if there was to be any competition in the matter I stood as good a chance as any man that I had ever met. Vincent Spaulding seemed to know so much about it that I thought he might prove useful, so I just ordered him to put up the shutters for the day and to come right away with me. He was very willing to have a holiday, so we shut the business up and started off for the address that was given us in the advertisement.

“I never hope to see such a sight as that again, Mr. Holmes. From north, south, east, and west every man who had a shade of red in his hair had tramped into the city to answer the advertisement. Fleet Street was choked with red-headed folk, and Pope’s Court looked like a coster’s orange barrow. I should not have thought there were so many in the whole country as were brought together by that single advertisement. Every shade of colour they were—straw, lemon, orange, brick, Irish-setter, liver, clay; but, as Spaulding said, there were not many who had the real vivid flame-coloured tint. When I saw how many were waiting, I would have given it up in despair; but Spaulding would not hear of it. How he did it I could not imagine, but he pushed and pulled and butted until he got me through the crowd, and right up to the steps which led to the office. There was a double stream upon the stair, some going up in hope, and some coming back dejected; but we wedged in as well as we could and soon found ourselves in the office.”

“Your experience has been a most entertaining one,” remarked Holmes as his client paused and refreshed his memory with a huge pinch of snuff. “Pray continue your very interesting statement.” “There was nothing in the office but a couple of wooden chairs and a deal table, behind which sat a small man with a head that was even redder than mine. He said a few words to each candidate as he came up, and then he always managed to find some fault in them which would disqualify them. Getting a vacancy did not seem to be such a very easy matter, after all. However, when our turn came the little man was much more favourable to me than to any of the others, and he closed the door as we entered, so that he might have a private word with us. “‘And he is admirably suited for it,’ the other answered. ‘He has every requirement. I cannot recall when I have seen anything so fine.’ He took a step backward, cocked his head on one side, and gazed at my hair until I felt quite bashful. Then suddenly he plunged forward, wrung my hand, and congratulated me warmly on my success.

“‘It would be injustice to hesitate,’ said he. ‘You will, however, I am sure, excuse me for taking an obvious precaution.’ With that he seized my hair in both his hands, and tugged until I yelled with the pain. ‘There is water in your eyes,’ said he as he released me. ‘I perceive that all is as it should be. But we have to be careful, for we have twice been deceived by wigs and once by paint. I could tell you tales of cobbler’s wax which would disgust you with human nature.’ He stepped over to the window and shouted through it at the top of his voice that the vacancy was filled. A groan of disappointment came up from below, and the folk all trooped away in different directions until there was not a red-head to be seen except my own and that of the manager. “‘My name,’ said he, ‘is Mr. Duncan Ross, and I am myself one of the pensioners upon the fund left by our noble benefactor. Are you a married man, Mr. Wilson? Have you a family?’

“‘Dear me!’ he said gravely, ‘that is very serious indeed! I am sorry to hear you say that. The fund was, of course, for the propagation and spread of the red-heads as well as for their maintenance. It is exceedingly unfortunate that you should be a bachelor.’ “My face lengthened at this, Mr. Holmes, for I thought that I was not to have the vacancy after all; but after thinking it over for a few minutes he said that it would be all right. “‘In the case of another,’ said he, ‘the objection might be fatal, but we must stretch a point in favour of a man with such a head of hair as yours. When shall you be able to enter upon your new duties?’ “Now a pawnbroker’s business is mostly done of an evening, Mr. Holmes, especially Thursday and Friday evening, which is just before pay-day; so it would suit me very well to earn a little in the mornings. Besides, I knew that my assistant was a good man, and that he would see to anything that turned up.

“‘Well, you have to be in the office, or at least in the building, the whole time. If you leave, you forfeit your whole position forever. The will is very clear upon that point. You don’t comply with the conditions if you budge from the office during that time.’ “‘Is to copy out the _Encyclopædia Britannica_. There is the first volume of it in that press. You must find your own ink, pens, and blotting-paper, but we provide this table and chair. Will you be ready to-morrow?’ “‘Then, good-bye, Mr. Jabez Wilson, and let me congratulate you once more on the important position which you have been fortunate enough to gain.’ He bowed me out of the room and I went home with my assistant, hardly knowing what to say or do, I was so pleased at my own good fortune. “Well, I thought over the matter all day, and by evening I was in low spirits again; for I had quite persuaded myself that the whole affair must be some great hoax or fraud, though what its object might be I could not imagine. It seemed altogether past belief that anyone could make such a will, or that they would pay such a sum for doing anything so simple as copying out the _Encyclopædia Britannica_. Vincent Spaulding did what he could to cheer me up, but by bedtime I had reasoned myself out of the whole thing. However, in the morning I determined to have a look at it anyhow, so I bought a penny bottle of ink, and with a quill-pen, and seven sheets of foolscap paper, I started off for Pope’s Court.

“Well, to my surprise and delight, everything was as right as possible. The table was set out ready for me, and Mr. Duncan Ross was there to see that I got fairly to work. He started me off upon the letter A, and then he left me; but he would drop in from time to time to see that all was right with me. At two o’clock he bade me good-day, complimented me upon the amount that I had written, and locked the door of the office after me. “This went on day after day, Mr. Holmes, and on Saturday the manager came in and planked down four golden sovereigns for my week’s work. It was the same next week, and the same the week after. Every morning I was there at ten, and every afternoon I left at two. By degrees Mr. Duncan Ross took to coming in only once of a morning, and then, after a time, he did not come in at all. Still, of course, I never dared to leave the room for an instant, for I was not sure when he might come, and the billet was such a good one, and suited me so well, that I would not risk the loss of it.

“Eight weeks passed away like this, and I had written about Abbots and Archery and Armour and Architecture and Attica, and hoped with diligence that I might get on to the B’s before very long. It cost me something in foolscap, and I had pretty nearly filled a shelf with my writings. And then suddenly the whole business came to an end.” “Yes, sir. And no later than this morning. I went to my work as usual at ten o’clock, but the door was shut and locked, with a little square of cardboard hammered on to the middle of the panel with a tack. Here it is, and you can read for yourself.” Sherlock Holmes and I surveyed this curt announcement and the rueful face behind it, until the comical side of the affair so completely overtopped every other consideration that we both burst out into a roar of laughter. “I cannot see that there is anything very funny,” cried our client, flushing up to the roots of his flaming head. “If you can do nothing better than laugh at me, I can go elsewhere.”

“No, no,” cried Holmes, shoving him back into the chair from which he had half risen. “I really wouldn’t miss your case for the world. It is most refreshingly unusual. But there is, if you will excuse my saying so, something just a little funny about it. Pray what steps did you take when you found the card upon the door?” “I was staggered, sir. I did not know what to do. Then I called at the offices round, but none of them seemed to know anything about it. Finally, I went to the landlord, who is an accountant living on the ground floor, and I asked him if he could tell me what had become of the Red-headed League. He said that he had never heard of any such body. Then I asked him who Mr. Duncan Ross was. He answered that the name was new to him. “‘Oh,’ said he, ‘his name was William Morris. He was a solicitor and was using my room as a temporary convenience until his new premises were ready. He moved out yesterday.’

“I started off, Mr. Holmes, but when I got to that address it was a manufactory of artificial knee-caps, and no one in it had ever heard of either Mr. William Morris or Mr. Duncan Ross.” “I went home to Saxe-Coburg Square, and I took the advice of my assistant. But he could not help me in any way. He could only say that if I waited I should hear by post. But that was not quite good enough, Mr. Holmes. I did not wish to lose such a place without a struggle, so, as I had heard that you were good enough to give advice to poor folk who were in need of it, I came right away to you.” “And you did very wisely,” said Holmes. “Your case is an exceedingly remarkable one, and I shall be happy to look into it. From what you have told me I think that it is possible that graver issues hang from it than might at first sight appear.” “As far as you are personally concerned,” remarked Holmes, “I do not see that you have any grievance against this extraordinary league. On the contrary, you are, as I understand, richer by some £ 30, to say nothing of the minute knowledge which you have gained on every subject which comes under the letter A. You have lost nothing by them.”

“No, sir. But I want to find out about them, and who they are, and what their object was in playing this prank—if it was a prank—upon me. It was a pretty expensive joke for them, for it cost them two and thirty pounds.” “We shall endeavour to clear up these points for you. And, first, one or two questions, Mr. Wilson. This assistant of yours who first called your attention to the advertisement—how long had he been with you?” “That will do, Mr. Wilson. I shall be happy to give you an opinion upon the subject in the course of a day or two. To-day is Saturday, and I hope that by Monday we may come to a conclusion.” “As a rule,” said Holmes, “the more bizarre a thing is the less mysterious it proves to be. It is your commonplace, featureless crimes which are really puzzling, just as a commonplace face is the most difficult to identify. But I must be prompt over this matter.” “To smoke,” he answered. “It is quite a three pipe problem, and I beg that you won’t speak to me for fifty minutes.” He curled himself up in his chair, with his thin knees drawn up to his hawk-like nose, and there he sat with his eyes closed and his black clay pipe thrusting out like the bill of some strange bird. I had come to the conclusion that he had dropped asleep, and indeed was nodding myself, when he suddenly sprang out of his chair with the gesture of a man who has made up his mind and put his pipe down upon the mantelpiece.

“Then put on your hat and come. I am going through the City first, and we can have some lunch on the way. I observe that there is a good deal of German music on the programme, which is rather more to my taste than Italian or French. It is introspective, and I want to introspect. Come along!” We travelled by the Underground as far as Aldersgate; and a short walk took us to Saxe-Coburg Square, the scene of the singular story which we had listened to in the morning. It was a poky, little, shabby-genteel place, where four lines of dingy two-storied brick houses looked out into a small railed-in enclosure, where a lawn of weedy grass and a few clumps of faded laurel bushes made a hard fight against a smoke-laden and uncongenial atmosphere. Three gilt balls and a brown board with “JABEZ WILSON” in white letters, upon a corner house, announced the place where our red-headed client carried on his business. Sherlock Holmes stopped in front of it with his head on one side and looked it all over, with his eyes shining brightly between puckered lids. Then he walked slowly up the street, and then down again to the corner, still looking keenly at the houses. Finally he returned to the pawnbroker’s, and, having thumped vigorously upon the pavement with his stick two or three times, he went up to the door and knocked. It was instantly opened by a bright-looking, clean-shaven young fellow, who asked him to step in.

“Smart fellow, that,” observed Holmes as we walked away. “He is, in my judgment, the fourth smartest man in London, and for daring I am not sure that he has not a claim to be third. I have known something of him before.” “Evidently,” said I, “Mr. Wilson’s assistant counts for a good deal in this mystery of the Red-headed League. I am sure that you inquired your way merely in order that you might see him.” “My dear doctor, this is a time for observation, not for talk. We are spies in an enemy’s country. We know something of Saxe-Coburg Square. Let us now explore the parts which lie behind it.” The road in which we found ourselves as we turned round the corner from the retired Saxe-Coburg Square presented as great a contrast to it as the front of a picture does to the back. It was one of the main arteries which conveyed the traffic of the City to the north and west. The roadway was blocked with the immense stream of commerce flowing in a double tide inward and outward, while the footpaths were black with the hurrying swarm of pedestrians. It was difficult to realise as we looked at the line of fine shops and stately business premises that they really abutted on the other side upon the faded and stagnant square which we had just quitted.

“Let me see,” said Holmes, standing at the corner and glancing along the line, “I should like just to remember the order of the houses here. It is a hobby of mine to have an exact knowledge of London. There is Mortimer’s, the tobacconist, the little newspaper shop, the Coburg branch of the City and Suburban Bank, the Vegetarian Restaurant, and McFarlane’s carriage-building depot. That carries us right on to the other block. And now, Doctor, we’ve done our work, so it’s time we had some play. A sandwich and a cup of coffee, and then off to violin-land, where all is sweetness and delicacy and harmony, and there are no red-headed clients to vex us with their conundrums.” My friend was an enthusiastic musician, being himself not only a very capable performer but a composer of no ordinary merit. All the afternoon he sat in the stalls wrapped in the most perfect happiness, gently waving his long, thin fingers in time to the music, while his gently smiling face and his languid, dreamy eyes were as unlike those of Holmes the sleuth-hound, Holmes the relentless, keen-witted, ready-handed criminal agent, as it was possible to conceive. In his singular character the dual nature alternately asserted itself, and his extreme exactness and astuteness represented, as I have often thought, the reaction against the poetic and contemplative mood which occasionally predominated in him. The swing of his nature took him from extreme languor to devouring energy; and, as I knew well, he was never so truly formidable as when, for days on end, he had been lounging in his armchair amid his improvisations and his black-letter editions. Then it was that the lust of the chase would suddenly come upon him, and that his brilliant reasoning power would rise to the level of intuition, until those who were unacquainted with his methods would look askance at him as on a man whose knowledge was not that of other mortals. When I saw him that afternoon so enwrapped in the music at St. James’s Hall I felt that an evil time might be coming upon those whom he had set himself to hunt down.

“A considerable crime is in contemplation. I have every reason to believe that we shall be in time to stop it. But to-day being Saturday rather complicates matters. I shall want your help to-night.” “Very well. And, I say, Doctor, there may be some little danger, so kindly put your army revolver in your pocket.” He waved his hand, turned on his heel, and disappeared in an instant among the crowd. I trust that I am not more dense than my neighbours, but I was always oppressed with a sense of my own stupidity in my dealings with Sherlock Holmes. Here I had heard what he had heard, I had seen what he had seen, and yet from his words it was evident that he saw clearly not only what had happened but what was about to happen, while to me the whole business was still confused and grotesque. As I drove home to my house in Kensington I thought over it all, from the extraordinary story of the red-headed copier of the _Encyclopædia_ down to the visit to Saxe-Coburg Square, and the ominous words with which he had parted from me. What was this nocturnal expedition, and why should I go armed? Where were we going, and what were we to do? I had the hint from Holmes that this smooth-faced pawnbroker’s assistant was a formidable man—a man who might play a deep game. I tried to puzzle it out, but gave it up in despair and set the matter aside until night should bring an explanation.

It was a quarter-past nine when I started from home and made my way across the Park, and so through Oxford Street to Baker Street. Two hansoms were standing at the door, and as I entered the passage I heard the sound of voices from above. On entering his room, I found Holmes in animated conversation with two men, one of whom I recognised as Peter Jones, the official police agent, while the other was a long, thin, sad-faced man, with a very shiny hat and oppressively respectable frock-coat. “Ha! Our party is complete,” said Holmes, buttoning up his pea-jacket and taking his heavy hunting crop from the rack. “Watson, I think you know Mr. Jones, of Scotland Yard? Let me introduce you to Mr. Merryweather, who is to be our companion in to-night’s adventure.” “We’re hunting in couples again, Doctor, you see,” said Jones in his consequential way. “Our friend here is a wonderful man for starting a chase. All he wants is an old dog to help him to do the running down.” “You may place considerable confidence in Mr. Holmes, sir,” said the police agent loftily. “He has his own little methods, which are, if he won’t mind my saying so, just a little too theoretical and fantastic, but he has the makings of a detective in him. It is not too much to say that once or twice, as in that business of the Sholto murder and the Agra treasure, he has been more nearly correct than the official force.”

“Oh, if you say so, Mr. Jones, it is all right,” said the stranger with deference. “Still, I confess that I miss my rubber. It is the first Saturday night for seven-and-twenty years that I have not had my rubber.” “I think you will find,” said Sherlock Holmes, “that you will play for a higher stake to-night than you have ever done yet, and that the play will be more exciting. For you, Mr. Merryweather, the stake will be some £ 30,000; and for you, Jones, it will be the man upon whom you wish to lay your hands.” “John Clay, the murderer, thief, smasher, and forger. He’s a young man, Mr. Merryweather, but he is at the head of his profession, and I would rather have my bracelets on him than on any criminal in London. He’s a remarkable man, is young John Clay. His grandfather was a royal duke, and he himself has been to Eton and Oxford. His brain is as cunning as his fingers, and though we meet signs of him at every turn, we never know where to find the man himself. He’ll crack a crib in Scotland one week, and be raising money to build an orphanage in Cornwall the next. I’ve been on his track for years and have never set eyes on him yet.”

“I hope that I may have the pleasure of introducing you to-night. I’ve had one or two little turns also with Mr. John Clay, and I agree with you that he is at the head of his profession. It is past ten, however, and quite time that we started. If you two will take the first hansom, Watson and I will follow in the second.” Sherlock Holmes was not very communicative during the long drive and lay back in the cab humming the tunes which he had heard in the afternoon. We rattled through an endless labyrinth of gas-lit streets until we emerged into Farrington Street. “We are close there now,” my friend remarked. “This fellow Merryweather is a bank director, and personally interested in the matter. I thought it as well to have Jones with us also. He is not a bad fellow, though an absolute imbecile in his profession. He has one positive virtue. He is as brave as a bulldog and as tenacious as a lobster if he gets his claws upon anyone. Here we are, and they are waiting for us.”

We had reached the same crowded thoroughfare in which we had found ourselves in the morning. Our cabs were dismissed, and, following the guidance of Mr. Merryweather, we passed down a narrow passage and through a side door, which he opened for us. Within there was a small corridor, which ended in a very massive iron gate. This also was opened, and led down a flight of winding stone steps, which terminated at another formidable gate. Mr. Merryweather stopped to light a lantern, and then conducted us down a dark, earth-smelling passage, and so, after opening a third door, into a huge vault or cellar, which was piled all round with crates and massive boxes. “Nor from below,” said Mr. Merryweather, striking his stick upon the flags which lined the floor. “Why, dear me, it sounds quite hollow!” he remarked, looking up in surprise. “I must really ask you to be a little more quiet!” said Holmes severely. “You have already imperilled the whole success of our expedition. Might I beg that you would have the goodness to sit down upon one of those boxes, and not to interfere?”

The solemn Mr. Merryweather perched himself upon a crate, with a very injured expression upon his face, while Holmes fell upon his knees upon the floor and, with the lantern and a magnifying lens, began to examine minutely the cracks between the stones. A few seconds sufficed to satisfy him, for he sprang to his feet again and put his glass in his pocket. “We have at least an hour before us,” he remarked, “for they can hardly take any steps until the good pawnbroker is safely in bed. Then they will not lose a minute, for the sooner they do their work the longer time they will have for their escape. We are at present, Doctor—as no doubt you have divined—in the cellar of the City branch of one of the principal London banks. Mr. Merryweather is the chairman of directors, and he will explain to you that there are reasons why the more daring criminals of London should take a considerable interest in this cellar at present.” “Yes. We had occasion some months ago to strengthen our resources and borrowed for that purpose 30,000 napoleons from the Bank of France. It has become known that we have never had occasion to unpack the money, and that it is still lying in our cellar. The crate upon which I sit contains 2,000 napoleons packed between layers of lead foil. Our reserve of bullion is much larger at present than is usually kept in a single branch office, and the directors have had misgivings upon the subject.”

“Which were very well justified,” observed Holmes. “And now it is time that we arranged our little plans. I expect that within an hour matters will come to a head. In the meantime Mr. Merryweather, we must put the screen over that dark lantern.” “I am afraid so. I had brought a pack of cards in my pocket, and I thought that, as we were a _partie carrée_, you might have your rubber after all. But I see that the enemy’s preparations have gone so far that we cannot risk the presence of a light. And, first of all, we must choose our positions. These are daring men, and though we shall take them at a disadvantage, they may do us some harm unless we are careful. I shall stand behind this crate, and do you conceal yourselves behind those. Then, when I flash a light upon them, close in swiftly. If they fire, Watson, have no compunction about shooting them down.” I placed my revolver, cocked, upon the top of the wooden case behind which I crouched. Holmes shot the slide across the front of his lantern and left us in pitch darkness—such an absolute darkness as I have never before experienced. The smell of hot metal remained to assure us that the light was still there, ready to flash out at a moment’s notice. To me, with my nerves worked up to a pitch of expectancy, there was something depressing and subduing in the sudden gloom, and in the cold dank air of the vault.

“They have but one retreat,” whispered Holmes. “That is back through the house into Saxe-Coburg Square. I hope that you have done what I asked you, Jones?” What a time it seemed! From comparing notes afterwards it was but an hour and a quarter, yet it appeared to me that the night must have almost gone, and the dawn be breaking above us. My limbs were weary and stiff, for I feared to change my position; yet my nerves were worked up to the highest pitch of tension, and my hearing was so acute that I could not only hear the gentle breathing of my companions, but I could distinguish the deeper, heavier in-breath of the bulky Jones from the thin, sighing note of the bank director. From my position I could look over the case in the direction of the floor. Suddenly my eyes caught the glint of a light. At first it was but a lurid spark upon the stone pavement. Then it lengthened out until it became a yellow line, and then, without any warning or sound, a gash seemed to open and a hand appeared, a white, almost womanly hand, which felt about in the centre of the little area of light. For a minute or more the hand, with its writhing fingers, protruded out of the floor. Then it was withdrawn as suddenly as it appeared, and all was dark again save the single lurid spark which marked a chink between the stones.

Its disappearance, however, was but momentary. With a rending, tearing sound, one of the broad, white stones turned over upon its side and left a square, gaping hole, through which streamed the light of a lantern. Over the edge there peeped a clean-cut, boyish face, which looked keenly about it, and then, with a hand on either side of the aperture, drew itself shoulder-high and waist-high, until one knee rested upon the edge. In another instant he stood at the side of the hole and was hauling after him a companion, lithe and small like himself, with a pale face and a shock of very red hair. Sherlock Holmes had sprung out and seized the intruder by the collar. The other dived down the hole, and I heard the sound of rending cloth as Jones clutched at his skirts. The light flashed upon the barrel of a revolver, but Holmes’ hunting crop came down on the man’s wrist, and the pistol clinked upon the stone floor. “I beg that you will not touch me with your filthy hands,” remarked our prisoner as the handcuffs clattered upon his wrists. “You may not be aware that I have royal blood in my veins. Have the goodness, also, when you address me always to say ‘sir’ and ‘please.’”

“All right,” said Jones with a stare and a snigger. “Well, would you please, sir, march upstairs, where we can get a cab to carry your Highness to the police-station?” “Really, Mr. Holmes,” said Mr. Merryweather as we followed them from the cellar, “I do not know how the bank can thank you or repay you. There is no doubt that you have detected and defeated in the most complete manner one of the most determined attempts at bank robbery that have ever come within my experience.” “I have had one or two little scores of my own to settle with Mr. John Clay,” said Holmes. “I have been at some small expense over this matter, which I shall expect the bank to refund, but beyond that I am amply repaid by having had an experience which is in many ways unique, and by hearing the very remarkable narrative of the Red-headed League.” “You see, Watson,” he explained in the early hours of the morning as we sat over a glass of whisky and soda in Baker Street, “it was perfectly obvious from the first that the only possible object of this rather fantastic business of the advertisement of the League, and the copying of the _Encyclopædia_, must be to get this not over-bright pawnbroker out of the way for a number of hours every day. It was a curious way of managing it, but, really, it would be difficult to suggest a better. The method was no doubt suggested to Clay’s ingenious mind by the colour of his accomplice’s hair. The £ 4 a week was a lure which must draw him, and what was it to them, who were playing for thousands? They put in the advertisement, one rogue has the temporary office, the other rogue incites the man to apply for it, and together they manage to secure his absence every morning in the week. From the time that I heard of the assistant having come for half wages, it was obvious to me that he had some strong motive for securing the situation.”

“Had there been women in the house, I should have suspected a mere vulgar intrigue. That, however, was out of the question. The man’s business was a small one, and there was nothing in his house which could account for such elaborate preparations, and such an expenditure as they were at. It must, then, be something out of the house. What could it be? I thought of the assistant’s fondness for photography, and his trick of vanishing into the cellar. The cellar! There was the end of this tangled clue. Then I made inquiries as to this mysterious assistant and found that I had to deal with one of the coolest and most daring criminals in London. He was doing something in the cellar—something which took many hours a day for months on end. What could it be, once more? I could think of nothing save that he was running a tunnel to some other building. “So far I had got when we went to visit the scene of action. I surprised you by beating upon the pavement with my stick. I was ascertaining whether the cellar stretched out in front or behind. It was not in front. Then I rang the bell, and, as I hoped, the assistant answered it. We have had some skirmishes, but we had never set eyes upon each other before. I hardly looked at his face. His knees were what I wished to see. You must yourself have remarked how worn, wrinkled, and stained they were. They spoke of those hours of burrowing. The only remaining point was what they were burrowing for. I walked round the corner, saw the City and Suburban Bank abutted on our friend’s premises, and felt that I had solved my problem. When you drove home after the concert I called upon Scotland Yard and upon the chairman of the bank directors, with the result that you have seen.”

“Well, when they closed their League offices that was a sign that they cared no longer about Mr. Jabez Wilson’s presence—in other words, that they had completed their tunnel. But it was essential that they should use it soon, as it might be discovered, or the bullion might be removed. Saturday would suit them better than any other day, as it would give them two days for their escape. For all these reasons I expected them to come to-night.” “It saved me from ennui,” he answered, yawning. “Alas! I already feel it closing in upon me. My life is spent in one long effort to escape from the commonplaces of existence. These little problems help me to do so.” He shrugged his shoulders. “Well, perhaps, after all, it is of some little use,” he remarked. “‘_L’homme c’est rien—l’œuvre c’est tout_,’ as Gustave Flaubert wrote to George Sand.” “My dear fellow,” said Sherlock Holmes as we sat on either side of the fire in his lodgings at Baker Street, “life is infinitely stranger than anything which the mind of man could invent. We would not dare to conceive the things which are really mere commonplaces of existence. If we could fly out of that window hand in hand, hover over this great city, gently remove the roofs, and peep in at the queer things which are going on, the strange coincidences, the plannings, the cross-purposes, the wonderful chains of events, working through generations, and leading to the most _outré_ results, it would make all fiction with its conventionalities and foreseen conclusions most stale and unprofitable.”

“And yet I am not convinced of it,” I answered. “The cases which come to light in the papers are, as a rule, bald enough, and vulgar enough. We have in our police reports realism pushed to its extreme limits, and yet the result is, it must be confessed, neither fascinating nor artistic.” “A certain selection and discretion must be used in producing a realistic effect,” remarked Holmes. “This is wanting in the police report, where more stress is laid, perhaps, upon the platitudes of the magistrate than upon the details, which to an observer contain the vital essence of the whole matter. Depend upon it, there is nothing so unnatural as the commonplace.” I smiled and shook my head. “I can quite understand your thinking so,” I said. “Of course, in your position of unofficial adviser and helper to everybody who is absolutely puzzled, throughout three continents, you are brought in contact with all that is strange and bizarre. But here”—I picked up the morning paper from the ground—“let us put it to a practical test. Here is the first heading upon which I come. ‘A husband’s cruelty to his wife.’ There is half a column of print, but I know without reading it that it is all perfectly familiar to me. There is, of course, the other woman, the drink, the push, the blow, the bruise, the sympathetic sister or landlady. The crudest of writers could invent nothing more crude.”

“Indeed, your example is an unfortunate one for your argument,” said Holmes, taking the paper and glancing his eye down it. “This is the Dundas separation case, and, as it happens, I was engaged in clearing up some small points in connection with it. The husband was a teetotaler, there was no other woman, and the conduct complained of was that he had drifted into the habit of winding up every meal by taking out his false teeth and hurling them at his wife, which, you will allow, is not an action likely to occur to the imagination of the average story-teller. Take a pinch of snuff, Doctor, and acknowledge that I have scored over you in your example.” He held out his snuffbox of old gold, with a great amethyst in the centre of the lid. Its splendour was in such contrast to his homely ways and simple life that I could not help commenting upon it. “Ah,” said he, “I forgot that I had not seen you for some weeks. It is a little souvenir from the King of Bohemia in return for my assistance in the case of the Irene Adler papers.”

“It was from the reigning family of Holland, though the matter in which I served them was of such delicacy that I cannot confide it even to you, who have been good enough to chronicle one or two of my little problems.” “Some ten or twelve, but none which present any feature of interest. They are important, you understand, without being interesting. Indeed, I have found that it is usually in unimportant matters that there is a field for the observation, and for the quick analysis of cause and effect which gives the charm to an investigation. The larger crimes are apt to be the simpler, for the bigger the crime the more obvious, as a rule, is the motive. In these cases, save for one rather intricate matter which has been referred to me from Marseilles, there is nothing which presents any features of interest. It is possible, however, that I may have something better before very many minutes are over, for this is one of my clients, or I am much mistaken.” He had risen from his chair and was standing between the parted blinds gazing down into the dull neutral-tinted London street. Looking over his shoulder, I saw that on the pavement opposite there stood a large woman with a heavy fur boa round her neck, and a large curling red feather in a broad-brimmed hat which was tilted in a coquettish Duchess of Devonshire fashion over her ear. From under this great panoply she peeped up in a nervous, hesitating fashion at our windows, while her body oscillated backward and forward, and her fingers fidgeted with her glove buttons. Suddenly, with a plunge, as of the swimmer who leaves the bank, she hurried across the road, and we heard the sharp clang of the bell.

“I have seen those symptoms before,” said Holmes, throwing his cigarette into the fire. “Oscillation upon the pavement always means an _affaire de cœur_. She would like advice, but is not sure that the matter is not too delicate for communication. And yet even here we may discriminate. When a woman has been seriously wronged by a man she no longer oscillates, and the usual symptom is a broken bell wire. Here we may take it that there is a love matter, but that the maiden is not so much angry as perplexed, or grieved. But here she comes in person to resolve our doubts.” As he spoke there was a tap at the door, and the boy in buttons entered to announce Miss Mary Sutherland, while the lady herself loomed behind his small black figure like a full-sailed merchant-man behind a tiny pilot boat. Sherlock Holmes welcomed her with the easy courtesy for which he was remarkable, and, having closed the door and bowed her into an armchair, he looked her over in the minute and yet abstracted fashion which was peculiar to him.

“I did at first,” she answered, “but now I know where the letters are without looking.” Then, suddenly realising the full purport of his words, she gave a violent start and looked up, with fear and astonishment upon her broad, good-humoured face. “You’ve heard about me, Mr. Holmes,” she cried, “else how could you know all that?” “Never mind,” said Holmes, laughing; “it is my business to know things. Perhaps I have trained myself to see what others overlook. If not, why should you come to consult me?” “I came to you, sir, because I heard of you from Mrs. Etherege, whose husband you found so easy when the police and everyone had given him up for dead. Oh, Mr. Holmes, I wish you would do as much for me. I’m not rich, but still I have a hundred a year in my own right, besides the little that I make by the machine, and I would give it all to know what has become of Mr. Hosmer Angel.” Again a startled look came over the somewhat vacuous face of Miss Mary Sutherland. “Yes, I did bang out of the house,” she said, “for it made me angry to see the easy way in which Mr. Windibank—that is, my father—took it all. He would not go to the police, and he would not go to you, and so at last, as he would do nothing and kept on saying that there was no harm done, it made me mad, and I just on with my things and came right away to you.”

“Oh, yes, mother is alive and well. I wasn’t best pleased, Mr. Holmes, when she married again so soon after father’s death, and a man who was nearly fifteen years younger than herself. Father was a plumber in the Tottenham Court Road, and he left a tidy business behind him, which mother carried on with Mr. Hardy, the foreman; but when Mr. Windibank came he made her sell the business, for he was very superior, being a traveller in wines. They got £ 4700 for the goodwill and interest, which wasn’t near as much as father could have got if he had been alive.” I had expected to see Sherlock Holmes impatient under this rambling and inconsequential narrative, but, on the contrary, he had listened with the greatest concentration of attention. “Oh, no, sir. It is quite separate and was left me by my uncle Ned in Auckland. It is in New Zealand stock, paying 4½ per cent. Two thousand five hundred pounds was the amount, but I can only touch the interest.” “You interest me extremely,” said Holmes. “And since you draw so large a sum as a hundred a year, with what you earn into the bargain, you no doubt travel a little and indulge yourself in every way. I believe that a single lady can get on very nicely upon an income of about £ 60.”

“I could do with much less than that, Mr. Holmes, but you understand that as long as I live at home I don’t wish to be a burden to them, and so they have the use of the money just while I am staying with them. Of course, that is only just for the time. Mr. Windibank draws my interest every quarter and pays it over to mother, and I find that I can do pretty well with what I earn at typewriting. It brings me twopence a sheet, and I can often do from fifteen to twenty sheets in a day.” “You have made your position very clear to me,” said Holmes. “This is my friend, Dr. Watson, before whom you can speak as freely as before myself. Kindly tell us now all about your connection with Mr. Hosmer Angel.” A flush stole over Miss Sutherland’s face, and she picked nervously at the fringe of her jacket. “I met him first at the gasfitters’ ball,” she said. “They used to send father tickets when he was alive, and then afterwards they remembered us, and sent them to mother. Mr. Windibank did not wish us to go. He never did wish us to go anywhere. He would get quite mad if I wanted so much as to join a Sunday-school treat. But this time I was set on going, and I would go; for what right had he to prevent? He said the folk were not fit for us to know, when all father’s friends were to be there. And he said that I had nothing fit to wear, when I had my purple plush that I had never so much as taken out of the drawer. At last, when nothing else would do, he went off to France upon the business of the firm, but we went, mother and I, with Mr. Hardy, who used to be our foreman, and it was there I met Mr. Hosmer Angel.”

“Oh, well, he was very good about it. He laughed, I remember, and shrugged his shoulders, and said there was no use denying anything to a woman, for she would have her way.” “Yes, sir. I met him that night, and he called next day to ask if we had got home all safe, and after that we met him—that is to say, Mr. Holmes, I met him twice for walks, but after that father came back again, and Mr. Hosmer Angel could not come to the house any more.” “Well, you know father didn’t like anything of the sort. He wouldn’t have any visitors if he could help it, and he used to say that a woman should be happy in her own family circle. But then, as I used to say to mother, a woman wants her own circle to begin with, and I had not got mine yet.” “Well, father was going off to France again in a week, and Hosmer wrote and said that it would be safer and better not to see each other until he had gone. We could write in the meantime, and he used to write every day. I took the letters in in the morning, so there was no need for father to know.”

“To the Leadenhall Street Post Office, to be left till called for. He said that if they were sent to the office he would be chaffed by all the other clerks about having letters from a lady, so I offered to typewrite them, like he did his, but he wouldn’t have that, for he said that when I wrote them they seemed to come from me, but when they were typewritten he always felt that the machine had come between us. That will just show you how fond he was of me, Mr. Holmes, and the little things that he would think of.” “It was most suggestive,” said Holmes. “It has long been an axiom of mine that the little things are infinitely the most important. Can you remember any other little things about Mr. Hosmer Angel?” “He was a very shy man, Mr. Holmes. He would rather walk with me in the evening than in the daylight, for he said that he hated to be conspicuous. Very retiring and gentlemanly he was. Even his voice was gentle. He’d had the quinsy and swollen glands when he was young, he told me, and it had left him with a weak throat, and a hesitating, whispering fashion of speech. He was always well dressed, very neat and plain, but his eyes were weak, just as mine are, and he wore tinted glasses against the glare.”

“Mr. Hosmer Angel came to the house again and proposed that we should marry before father came back. He was in dreadful earnest and made me swear, with my hands on the Testament, that whatever happened I would always be true to him. Mother said he was quite right to make me swear, and that it was a sign of his passion. Mother was all in his favour from the first and was even fonder of him than I was. Then, when they talked of marrying within the week, I began to ask about father; but they both said never to mind about father, but just to tell him afterwards, and mother said she would make it all right with him. I didn’t quite like that, Mr. Holmes. It seemed funny that I should ask his leave, as he was only a few years older than me; but I didn’t want to do anything on the sly, so I wrote to father at Bordeaux, where the company has its French offices, but the letter came back to me on the very morning of the wedding.”

“Yes, sir, but very quietly. It was to be at St. Saviour’s, near King’s Cross, and we were to have breakfast afterwards at the St. Pancras Hotel. Hosmer came for us in a hansom, but as there were two of us he put us both into it and stepped himself into a four-wheeler, which happened to be the only other cab in the street. We got to the church first, and when the four-wheeler drove up we waited for him to step out, but he never did, and when the cabman got down from the box and looked there was no one there! The cabman said that he could not imagine what had become of him, for he had seen him get in with his own eyes. That was last Friday, Mr. Holmes, and I have never seen or heard anything since then to throw any light upon what became of him.” “Oh, no, sir! He was too good and kind to leave me so. Why, all the morning he was saying to me that, whatever happened, I was to be true; and that even if something quite unforeseen occurred to separate us, I was always to remember that I was pledged to him, and that he would claim his pledge sooner or later. It seemed strange talk for a wedding-morning, but what has happened since gives a meaning to it.”

“Yes; and he seemed to think, with me, that something had happened, and that I should hear of Hosmer again. As he said, what interest could anyone have in bringing me to the doors of the church, and then leaving me? Now, if he had borrowed my money, or if he had married me and got my money settled on him, there might be some reason, but Hosmer was very independent about money and never would look at a shilling of mine. And yet, what could have happened? And why could he not write? Oh, it drives me half-mad to think of it, and I can’t sleep a wink at night.” She pulled a little handkerchief out of her muff and began to sob heavily into it. “I shall glance into the case for you,” said Holmes, rising, “and I have no doubt that we shall reach some definite result. Let the weight of the matter rest upon me now, and do not let your mind dwell upon it further. Above all, try to let Mr. Hosmer Angel vanish from your memory, as he has done from your life.”

“Thank you. You have made your statement very clearly. You will leave the papers here, and remember the advice which I have given you. Let the whole incident be a sealed book, and do not allow it to affect your life.” For all the preposterous hat and the vacuous face, there was something noble in the simple faith of our visitor which compelled our respect. She laid her little bundle of papers upon the table and went her way, with a promise to come again whenever she might be summoned. Sherlock Holmes sat silent for a few minutes with his fingertips still pressed together, his legs stretched out in front of him, and his gaze directed upward to the ceiling. Then he took down from the rack the old and oily clay pipe, which was to him as a counsellor, and, having lit it, he leaned back in his chair, with the thick blue cloud-wreaths spinning up from him, and a look of infinite languor in his face. “Quite an interesting study, that maiden,” he observed. “I found her more interesting than her little problem, which, by the way, is rather a trite one. You will find parallel cases, if you consult my index, in Andover in ’77, and there was something of the sort at The Hague last year. Old as is the idea, however, there were one or two details which were new to me. But the maiden herself was most instructive.”

“Not invisible but unnoticed, Watson. You did not know where to look, and so you missed all that was important. I can never bring you to realise the importance of sleeves, the suggestiveness of thumb-nails, or the great issues that may hang from a boot-lace. Now, what did you gather from that woman’s appearance? Describe it.” “Well, she had a slate-coloured, broad-brimmed straw hat, with a feather of a brickish red. Her jacket was black, with black beads sewn upon it, and a fringe of little black jet ornaments. Her dress was brown, rather darker than coffee colour, with a little purple plush at the neck and sleeves. Her gloves were greyish and were worn through at the right forefinger. Her boots I didn’t observe. She had small round, hanging gold earrings, and a general air of being fairly well-to-do in a vulgar, comfortable, easy-going way.” “’Pon my word, Watson, you are coming along wonderfully. You have really done very well indeed. It is true that you have missed everything of importance, but you have hit upon the method, and you have a quick eye for colour. Never trust to general impressions, my boy, but concentrate yourself upon details. My first glance is always at a woman’s sleeve. In a man it is perhaps better first to take the knee of the trouser. As you observe, this woman had plush upon her sleeves, which is a most useful material for showing traces. The double line a little above the wrist, where the typewritist presses against the table, was beautifully defined. The sewing-machine, of the hand type, leaves a similar mark, but only on the left arm, and on the side of it farthest from the thumb, instead of being right across the broadest part, as this was. I then glanced at her face, and, observing the dint of a pince-nez at either side of her nose, I ventured a remark upon short sight and typewriting, which seemed to surprise her.”

“But, surely, it was obvious. I was then much surprised and interested on glancing down to observe that, though the boots which she was wearing were not unlike each other, they were really odd ones; the one having a slightly decorated toe-cap, and the other a plain one. One was buttoned only in the two lower buttons out of five, and the other at the first, third, and fifth. Now, when you see that a young lady, otherwise neatly dressed, has come away from home with odd boots, half-buttoned, it is no great deduction to say that she came away in a hurry.” “I noted, in passing, that she had written a note before leaving home but after being fully dressed. You observed that her right glove was torn at the forefinger, but you did not apparently see that both glove and finger were stained with violet ink. She had written in a hurry and dipped her pen too deep. It must have been this morning, or the mark would not remain clear upon the finger. All this is amusing, though rather elementary, but I must go back to business, Watson. Would you mind reading me the advertised description of Mr. Hosmer Angel?”

I held the little printed slip to the light. “Missing,” it said, “on the morning of the fourteenth, a gentleman named Hosmer Angel. About five ft. seven in. in height; strongly built, sallow complexion, black hair, a little bald in the centre, bushy, black side-whiskers and moustache; tinted glasses, slight infirmity of speech. Was dressed, when last seen, in black frock-coat faced with silk, black waistcoat, gold Albert chain, and grey Harris tweed trousers, with brown gaiters over elastic-sided boots. Known to have been employed in an office in Leadenhall Street. Anybody bringing,” &c, &c. “That will do,” said Holmes. “As to the letters,” he continued, glancing over them, “they are very commonplace. Absolutely no clue in them to Mr. Angel, save that he quotes Balzac once. There is one remarkable point, however, which will no doubt strike you.” “Not only that, but the signature is typewritten. Look at the neat little ‘Hosmer Angel’ at the bottom. There is a date, you see, but no superscription except Leadenhall Street, which is rather vague. The point about the signature is very suggestive—in fact, we may call it conclusive.”

“No, that was not the point. However, I shall write two letters, which should settle the matter. One is to a firm in the City, the other is to the young lady’s stepfather, Mr. Windibank, asking him whether he could meet us here at six o’clock to-morrow evening. It is just as well that we should do business with the male relatives. And now, Doctor, we can do nothing until the answers to those letters come, so we may put our little problem upon the shelf for the interim.” I had had so many reasons to believe in my friend’s subtle powers of reasoning and extraordinary energy in action that I felt that he must have some solid grounds for the assured and easy demeanour with which he treated the singular mystery which he had been called upon to fathom. Once only had I known him to fail, in the case of the King of Bohemia and of the Irene Adler photograph; but when I looked back to the weird business of the Sign of Four, and the extraordinary circumstances connected with the Study in Scarlet, I felt that it would be a strange tangle indeed which he could not unravel.

I left him then, still puffing at his black clay pipe, with the conviction that when I came again on the next evening I would find that he held in his hands all the clues which would lead up to the identity of the disappearing bridegroom of Miss Mary Sutherland. A professional case of great gravity was engaging my own attention at the time, and the whole of next day I was busy at the bedside of the sufferer. It was not until close upon six o’clock that I found myself free and was able to spring into a hansom and drive to Baker Street, half afraid that I might be too late to assist at the _dénouement_ of the little mystery. I found Sherlock Holmes alone, however, half asleep, with his long, thin form curled up in the recesses of his armchair. A formidable array of bottles and test-tubes, with the pungent cleanly smell of hydrochloric acid, told me that he had spent his day in the chemical work which was so dear to him. “Oh, that! I thought of the salt that I have been working upon. There was never any mystery in the matter, though, as I said yesterday, some of the details are of interest. The only drawback is that there is no law, I fear, that can touch the scoundrel.”

The question was hardly out of my mouth, and Holmes had not yet opened his lips to reply, when we heard a heavy footfall in the passage and a tap at the door. The man who entered was a sturdy, middle-sized fellow, some thirty years of age, clean-shaven, and sallow-skinned, with a bland, insinuating manner, and a pair of wonderfully sharp and penetrating grey eyes. He shot a questioning glance at each of us, placed his shiny top-hat upon the sideboard, and with a slight bow sidled down into the nearest chair. “Good-evening, Mr. James Windibank,” said Holmes. “I think that this typewritten letter is from you, in which you made an appointment with me for six o’clock?” “Yes, sir. I am afraid that I am a little late, but I am not quite my own master, you know. I am sorry that Miss Sutherland has troubled you about this little matter, for I think it is far better not to wash linen of the sort in public. It was quite against my wishes that she came, but she is a very excitable, impulsive girl, as you may have noticed, and she is not easily controlled when she has made up her mind on a point. Of course, I did not mind you so much, as you are not connected with the official police, but it is not pleasant to have a family misfortune like this noised abroad. Besides, it is a useless expense, for how could you possibly find this Hosmer Angel?”

“It is a curious thing,” remarked Holmes, “that a typewriter has really quite as much individuality as a man’s handwriting. Unless they are quite new, no two of them write exactly alike. Some letters get more worn than others, and some wear only on one side. Now, you remark in this note of yours, Mr. Windibank, that in every case there is some little slurring over of the ‘e,’ and a slight defect in the tail of the ‘r.’ There are fourteen other characteristics, but those are the more obvious.” “We do all our correspondence with this machine at the office, and no doubt it is a little worn,” our visitor answered, glancing keenly at Holmes with his bright little eyes. “And now I will show you what is really a very interesting study, Mr. Windibank,” Holmes continued. “I think of writing another little monograph some of these days on the typewriter and its relation to crime. It is a subject to which I have devoted some little attention. I have here four letters which purport to come from the missing man. They are all typewritten. In each case, not only are the ‘e’s’ slurred and the ‘r’s’ tailless, but you will observe, if you care to use my magnifying lens, that the fourteen other characteristics to which I have alluded are there as well.”

Mr. Windibank sprang out of his chair and picked up his hat. “I cannot waste time over this sort of fantastic talk, Mr. Holmes,” he said. “If you can catch the man, catch him, and let me know when you have done it.” “Oh, it won’t do—really it won’t,” said Holmes suavely. “There is no possible getting out of it, Mr. Windibank. It is quite too transparent, and it was a very bad compliment when you said that it was impossible for me to solve so simple a question. That’s right! Sit down and let us talk it over.” “I am very much afraid that it is not. But between ourselves, Windibank, it was as cruel and selfish and heartless a trick in a petty way as ever came before me. Now, let me just run over the course of events, and you will contradict me if I go wrong.” The man sat huddled up in his chair, with his head sunk upon his breast, like one who is utterly crushed. Holmes stuck his feet up on the corner of the mantelpiece and, leaning back with his hands in his pockets, began talking, rather to himself, as it seemed, than to us.

“The man married a woman very much older than himself for her money,” said he, “and he enjoyed the use of the money of the daughter as long as she lived with them. It was a considerable sum, for people in their position, and the loss of it would have made a serious difference. It was worth an effort to preserve it. The daughter was of a good, amiable disposition, but affectionate and warm-hearted in her ways, so that it was evident that with her fair personal advantages, and her little income, she would not be allowed to remain single long. Now her marriage would mean, of course, the loss of a hundred a year, so what does her stepfather do to prevent it? He takes the obvious course of keeping her at home and forbidding her to seek the company of people of her own age. But soon he found that that would not answer forever. She became restive, insisted upon her rights, and finally announced her positive intention of going to a certain ball. What does her clever stepfather do then? He conceives an idea more creditable to his head than to his heart. With the connivance and assistance of his wife he disguised himself, covered those keen eyes with tinted glasses, masked the face with a moustache and a pair of bushy whiskers, sunk that clear voice into an insinuating whisper, and doubly secure on account of the girl’s short sight, he appears as Mr. Hosmer Angel, and keeps off other lovers by making love himself.”

“Very likely not. However that may be, the young lady was very decidedly carried away, and, having quite made up her mind that her stepfather was in France, the suspicion of treachery never for an instant entered her mind. She was flattered by the gentleman’s attentions, and the effect was increased by the loudly expressed admiration of her mother. Then Mr. Angel began to call, for it was obvious that the matter should be pushed as far as it would go if a real effect were to be produced. There were meetings, and an engagement, which would finally secure the girl’s affections from turning towards anyone else. But the deception could not be kept up forever. These pretended journeys to France were rather cumbrous. The thing to do was clearly to bring the business to an end in such a dramatic manner that it would leave a permanent impression upon the young lady’s mind and prevent her from looking upon any other suitor for some time to come. Hence those vows of fidelity exacted upon a Testament, and hence also the allusions to a possibility of something happening on the very morning of the wedding. James Windibank wished Miss Sutherland to be so bound to Hosmer Angel, and so uncertain as to his fate, that for ten years to come, at any rate, she would not listen to another man. As far as the church door he brought her, and then, as he could go no farther, he conveniently vanished away by the old trick of stepping in at one door of a four-wheeler and out at the other. I think that was the chain of events, Mr. Windibank!”

Our visitor had recovered something of his assurance while Holmes had been talking, and he rose from his chair now with a cold sneer upon his pale face. “It may be so, or it may not, Mr. Holmes,” said he, “but if you are so very sharp you ought to be sharp enough to know that it is you who are breaking the law now, and not me. I have done nothing actionable from the first, but as long as you keep that door locked you lay yourself open to an action for assault and illegal constraint.” “The law cannot, as you say, touch you,” said Holmes, unlocking and throwing open the door, “yet there never was a man who deserved punishment more. If the young lady has a brother or a friend, he ought to lay a whip across your shoulders. By Jove!” he continued, flushing up at the sight of the bitter sneer upon the man’s face, “it is not part of my duties to my client, but here’s a hunting crop handy, and I think I shall just treat myself to—” He took two swift steps to the whip, but before he could grasp it there was a wild clatter of steps upon the stairs, the heavy hall door banged, and from the window we could see Mr. James Windibank running at the top of his speed down the road.

“There’s a cold-blooded scoundrel!” said Holmes, laughing, as he threw himself down into his chair once more. “That fellow will rise from crime to crime until he does something very bad, and ends on a gallows. The case has, in some respects, been not entirely devoid of interest.” “Well, of course it was obvious from the first that this Mr. Hosmer Angel must have some strong object for his curious conduct, and it was equally clear that the only man who really profited by the incident, as far as we could see, was the stepfather. Then the fact that the two men were never together, but that the one always appeared when the other was away, was suggestive. So were the tinted spectacles and the curious voice, which both hinted at a disguise, as did the bushy whiskers. My suspicions were all confirmed by his peculiar action in typewriting his signature, which, of course, inferred that his handwriting was so familiar to her that she would recognise even the smallest sample of it. You see all these isolated facts, together with many minor ones, all pointed in the same direction.”

“Having once spotted my man, it was easy to get corroboration. I knew the firm for which this man worked. Having taken the printed description. I eliminated everything from it which could be the result of a disguise—the whiskers, the glasses, the voice, and I sent it to the firm, with a request that they would inform me whether it answered to the description of any of their travellers. I had already noticed the peculiarities of the typewriter, and I wrote to the man himself at his business address asking him if he would come here. As I expected, his reply was typewritten and revealed the same trivial but characteristic defects. The same post brought me a letter from Westhouse & Marbank, of Fenchurch Street, to say that the description tallied in every respect with that of their employé, James Windibank. _Voilà tout_!” “If I tell her she will not believe me. You may remember the old Persian saying, ‘There is danger for him who taketh the tiger cub, and danger also for whoso snatches a delusion from a woman.’ There is as much sense in Hafiz as in Horace, and as much knowledge of the world.”

“Have you a couple of days to spare? Have just been wired for from the west of England in connection with Boscombe Valley tragedy. Shall be glad if you will come with me. Air and scenery perfect. Leave Paddington by the 11:15.” “Oh, Anstruther would do your work for you. You have been looking a little pale lately. I think that the change would do you good, and you are always so interested in Mr. Sherlock Holmes’ cases.” “I should be ungrateful if I were not, seeing what I gained through one of them,” I answered. “But if I am to go, I must pack at once, for I have only half an hour.” My experience of camp life in Afghanistan had at least had the effect of making me a prompt and ready traveller. My wants were few and simple, so that in less than the time stated I was in a cab with my valise, rattling away to Paddington Station. Sherlock Holmes was pacing up and down the platform, his tall, gaunt figure made even gaunter and taller by his long grey travelling-cloak and close-fitting cloth cap.

“It is really very good of you to come, Watson,” said he. “It makes a considerable difference to me, having someone with me on whom I can thoroughly rely. Local aid is always either worthless or else biassed. If you will keep the two corner seats I shall get the tickets.” We had the carriage to ourselves save for an immense litter of papers which Holmes had brought with him. Among these he rummaged and read, with intervals of note-taking and of meditation, until we were past Reading. Then he suddenly rolled them all into a gigantic ball and tossed them up onto the rack. “The London press has not had very full accounts. I have just been looking through all the recent papers in order to master the particulars. It seems, from what I gather, to be one of those simple cases which are so extremely difficult.” “But it is profoundly true. Singularity is almost invariably a clue. The more featureless and commonplace a crime is, the more difficult it is to bring it home. In this case, however, they have established a very serious case against the son of the murdered man.”

“Well, it is conjectured to be so. I shall take nothing for granted until I have the opportunity of looking personally into it. I will explain the state of things to you, as far as I have been able to understand it, in a very few words. “Boscombe Valley is a country district not very far from Ross, in Herefordshire. The largest landed proprietor in that part is a Mr. John Turner, who made his money in Australia and returned some years ago to the old country. One of the farms which he held, that of Hatherley, was let to Mr. Charles McCarthy, who was also an ex-Australian. The men had known each other in the colonies, so that it was not unnatural that when they came to settle down they should do so as near each other as possible. Turner was apparently the richer man, so McCarthy became his tenant but still remained, it seems, upon terms of perfect equality, as they were frequently together. McCarthy had one son, a lad of eighteen, and Turner had an only daughter of the same age, but neither of them had wives living. They appear to have avoided the society of the neighbouring English families and to have led retired lives, though both the McCarthys were fond of sport and were frequently seen at the race-meetings of the neighbourhood. McCarthy kept two servants—a man and a girl. Turner had a considerable household, some half-dozen at the least. That is as much as I have been able to gather about the families. Now for the facts.

“On June 3rd, that is, on Monday last, McCarthy left his house at Hatherley about three in the afternoon and walked down to the Boscombe Pool, which is a small lake formed by the spreading out of the stream which runs down the Boscombe Valley. He had been out with his serving-man in the morning at Ross, and he had told the man that he must hurry, as he had an appointment of importance to keep at three. From that appointment he never came back alive. “From Hatherley Farmhouse to the Boscombe Pool is a quarter of a mile, and two people saw him as he passed over this ground. One was an old woman, whose name is not mentioned, and the other was William Crowder, a game-keeper in the employ of Mr. Turner. Both these witnesses depose that Mr. McCarthy was walking alone. The game-keeper adds that within a few minutes of his seeing Mr. McCarthy pass he had seen his son, Mr. James McCarthy, going the same way with a gun under his arm. To the best of his belief, the father was actually in sight at the time, and the son was following him. He thought no more of the matter until he heard in the evening of the tragedy that had occurred.

“The two McCarthys were seen after the time when William Crowder, the game-keeper, lost sight of them. The Boscombe Pool is thickly wooded round, with just a fringe of grass and of reeds round the edge. A girl of fourteen, Patience Moran, who is the daughter of the lodge-keeper of the Boscombe Valley estate, was in one of the woods picking flowers. She states that while she was there she saw, at the border of the wood and close by the lake, Mr. McCarthy and his son, and that they appeared to be having a violent quarrel. She heard Mr. McCarthy the elder using very strong language to his son, and she saw the latter raise up his hand as if to strike his father. She was so frightened by their violence that she ran away and told her mother when she reached home that she had left the two McCarthys quarrelling near Boscombe Pool, and that she was afraid that they were going to fight. She had hardly said the words when young Mr. McCarthy came running up to the lodge to say that he had found his father dead in the wood, and to ask for the help of the lodge-keeper. He was much excited, without either his gun or his hat, and his right hand and sleeve were observed to be stained with fresh blood. On following him they found the dead body stretched out upon the grass beside the pool. The head had been beaten in by repeated blows of some heavy and blunt weapon. The injuries were such as might very well have been inflicted by the butt-end of his son’s gun, which was found lying on the grass within a few paces of the body. Under these circumstances the young man was instantly arrested, and a verdict of ‘wilful murder’ having been returned at the inquest on Tuesday, he was on Wednesday brought before the magistrates at Ross, who have referred the case to the next Assizes. Those are the main facts of the case as they came out before the coroner and the police-court.”

“Circumstantial evidence is a very tricky thing,” answered Holmes thoughtfully. “It may seem to point very straight to one thing, but if you shift your own point of view a little, you may find it pointing in an equally uncompromising manner to something entirely different. It must be confessed, however, that the case looks exceedingly grave against the young man, and it is very possible that he is indeed the culprit. There are several people in the neighbourhood, however, and among them Miss Turner, the daughter of the neighbouring landowner, who believe in his innocence, and who have retained Lestrade, whom you may recollect in connection with the Study in Scarlet, to work out the case in his interest. Lestrade, being rather puzzled, has referred the case to me, and hence it is that two middle-aged gentlemen are flying westward at fifty miles an hour instead of quietly digesting their breakfasts at home.” “There is nothing more deceptive than an obvious fact,” he answered, laughing. “Besides, we may chance to hit upon some other obvious facts which may have been by no means obvious to Mr. Lestrade. You know me too well to think that I am boasting when I say that I shall either confirm or destroy his theory by means which he is quite incapable of employing, or even of understanding. To take the first example to hand, I very clearly perceive that in your bedroom the window is upon the right-hand side, and yet I question whether Mr. Lestrade would have noted even so self-evident a thing as that.”

“My dear fellow, I know you well. I know the military neatness which characterises you. You shave every morning, and in this season you shave by the sunlight; but since your shaving is less and less complete as we get farther back on the left side, until it becomes positively slovenly as we get round the angle of the jaw, it is surely very clear that that side is less illuminated than the other. I could not imagine a man of your habits looking at himself in an equal light and being satisfied with such a result. I only quote this as a trivial example of observation and inference. Therein lies my _métier_, and it is just possible that it may be of some service in the investigation which lies before us. There are one or two minor points which were brought out in the inquest, and which are worth considering.” “It appears that his arrest did not take place at once, but after the return to Hatherley Farm. On the inspector of constabulary informing him that he was a prisoner, he remarked that he was not surprised to hear it, and that it was no more than his deserts. This observation of his had the natural effect of removing any traces of doubt which might have remained in the minds of the coroner’s jury.”

“On the contrary,” said Holmes, “it is the brightest rift which I can at present see in the clouds. However innocent he might be, he could not be such an absolute imbecile as not to see that the circumstances were very black against him. Had he appeared surprised at his own arrest, or feigned indignation at it, I should have looked upon it as highly suspicious, because such surprise or anger would not be natural under the circumstances, and yet might appear to be the best policy to a scheming man. His frank acceptance of the situation marks him as either an innocent man, or else as a man of considerable self-restraint and firmness. As to his remark about his deserts, it was also not unnatural if you consider that he stood beside the dead body of his father, and that there is no doubt that he had that very day so far forgotten his filial duty as to bandy words with him, and even, according to the little girl whose evidence is so important, to raise his hand as if to strike him. The self-reproach and contrition which are displayed in his remark appear to me to be the signs of a healthy mind rather than of a guilty one.”

“It is, I am afraid, not very encouraging to his supporters, though there are one or two points in it which are suggestive. You will find it here, and may read it for yourself.” He picked out from his bundle a copy of the local Herefordshire paper, and having turned down the sheet he pointed out the paragraph in which the unfortunate young man had given his own statement of what had occurred. I settled myself down in the corner of the carriage and read it very carefully. It ran in this way: “Mr. James McCarthy, the only son of the deceased, was then called and gave evidence as follows: ‘I had been away from home for three days at Bristol, and had only just returned upon the morning of last Monday, the 3rd. My father was absent from home at the time of my arrival, and I was informed by the maid that he had driven over to Ross with John Cobb, the groom. Shortly after my return I heard the wheels of his trap in the yard, and, looking out of my window, I saw him get out and walk rapidly out of the yard, though I was not aware in which direction he was going. I then took my gun and strolled out in the direction of the Boscombe Pool, with the intention of visiting the rabbit warren which is upon the other side. On my way I saw William Crowder, the game-keeper, as he had stated in his evidence; but he is mistaken in thinking that I was following my father. I had no idea that he was in front of me. When about a hundred yards from the pool I heard a cry of “Cooee!” which was a usual signal between my father and myself. I then hurried forward, and found him standing by the pool. He appeared to be much surprised at seeing me and asked me rather roughly what I was doing there. A conversation ensued which led to high words and almost to blows, for my father was a man of a very violent temper. Seeing that his passion was becoming ungovernable, I left him and returned towards Hatherley Farm. I had not gone more than 150 yards, however, when I heard a hideous outcry behind me, which caused me to run back again. I found my father expiring upon the ground, with his head terribly injured. I dropped my gun and held him in my arms, but he almost instantly expired. I knelt beside him for some minutes, and then made my way to Mr. Turner’s lodge-keeper, his house being the nearest, to ask for assistance. I saw no one near my father when I returned, and I have no idea how he came by his injuries. He was not a popular man, being somewhat cold and forbidding in his manners, but he had, as far as I know, no active enemies. I know nothing further of the matter.’

“The Coroner: That is for the court to decide. I need not point out to you that your refusal to answer will prejudice your case considerably in any future proceedings which may arise. “Witness: I was so disturbed and excited as I rushed out into the open, that I could think of nothing except of my father. Yet I have a vague impression that as I ran forward something lay upon the ground to the left of me. It seemed to me to be something grey in colour, a coat of some sort, or a plaid perhaps. When I rose from my father I looked round for it, but it was gone. “I see,” said I as I glanced down the column, “that the coroner in his concluding remarks was rather severe upon young McCarthy. He calls attention, and with reason, to the discrepancy about his father having signalled to him before seeing him, also to his refusal to give details of his conversation with his father, and his singular account of his father’s dying words. They are all, as he remarks, very much against the son.”

Holmes laughed softly to himself and stretched himself out upon the cushioned seat. “Both you and the coroner have been at some pains,” said he, “to single out the very strongest points in the young man’s favour. Don’t you see that you alternately give him credit for having too much imagination and too little? Too little, if he could not invent a cause of quarrel which would give him the sympathy of the jury; too much, if he evolved from his own inner consciousness anything so _outré_ as a dying reference to a rat, and the incident of the vanishing cloth. No, sir, I shall approach this case from the point of view that what this young man says is true, and we shall see whither that hypothesis will lead us. And now here is my pocket Petrarch, and not another word shall I say of this case until we are on the scene of action. We lunch at Swindon, and I see that we shall be there in twenty minutes.” It was nearly four o’clock when we at last, after passing through the beautiful Stroud Valley, and over the broad gleaming Severn, found ourselves at the pretty little country-town of Ross. A lean, ferret-like man, furtive and sly-looking, was waiting for us upon the platform. In spite of the light brown dustcoat and leather-leggings which he wore in deference to his rustic surroundings, I had no difficulty in recognising Lestrade, of Scotland Yard. With him we drove to the Hereford Arms where a room had already been engaged for us.

“I have ordered a carriage,” said Lestrade as we sat over a cup of tea. “I knew your energetic nature, and that you would not be happy until you had been on the scene of the crime.” “How is the glass? Twenty-nine, I see. No wind, and not a cloud in the sky. I have a caseful of cigarettes here which need smoking, and the sofa is very much superior to the usual country hotel abomination. I do not think that it is probable that I shall use the carriage to-night.” Lestrade laughed indulgently. “You have, no doubt, already formed your conclusions from the newspapers,” he said. “The case is as plain as a pikestaff, and the more one goes into it the plainer it becomes. Still, of course, one can’t refuse a lady, and such a very positive one, too. She has heard of you, and would have your opinion, though I repeatedly told her that there was nothing which you could do which I had not already done. Why, bless my soul! here is her carriage at the door.”

He had hardly spoken before there rushed into the room one of the most lovely young women that I have ever seen in my life. Her violet eyes shining, her lips parted, a pink flush upon her cheeks, all thought of her natural reserve lost in her overpowering excitement and concern. “Oh, Mr. Sherlock Holmes!” she cried, glancing from one to the other of us, and finally, with a woman’s quick intuition, fastening upon my companion, “I am so glad that you have come. I have driven down to tell you so. I know that James didn’t do it. I know it, and I want you to start upon your work knowing it, too. Never let yourself doubt upon that point. We have known each other since we were little children, and I know his faults as no one else does; but he is too tender-hearted to hurt a fly. Such a charge is absurd to anyone who really knows him.” “But you have read the evidence. You have formed some conclusion? Do you not see some loophole, some flaw? Do you not yourself think that he is innocent?”

“But he is right. Oh! I know that he is right. James never did it. And about his quarrel with his father, I am sure that the reason why he would not speak about it to the coroner was because I was concerned in it.” “It is no time for me to hide anything. James and his father had many disagreements about me. Mr. McCarthy was very anxious that there should be a marriage between us. James and I have always loved each other as brother and sister; but of course he is young and has seen very little of life yet, and—and—well, he naturally did not wish to do anything like that yet. So there were quarrels, and this, I am sure, was one of them.” “No, he was averse to it also. No one but Mr. McCarthy was in favour of it.” A quick blush passed over her fresh young face as Holmes shot one of his keen, questioning glances at her. “Yes, have you not heard? Poor father has never been strong for years back, but this has broken him down completely. He has taken to his bed, and Dr. Willows says that he is a wreck and that his nervous system is shattered. Mr. McCarthy was the only man alive who had known dad in the old days in Victoria.”

“You will tell me if you have any news to-morrow. No doubt you will go to the prison to see James. Oh, if you do, Mr. Holmes, do tell him that I know him to be innocent.” “I must go home now, for dad is very ill, and he misses me so if I leave him. Good-bye, and God help you in your undertaking.” She hurried from the room as impulsively as she had entered, and we heard the wheels of her carriage rattle off down the street. “I am ashamed of you, Holmes,” said Lestrade with dignity after a few minutes’ silence. “Why should you raise up hopes which you are bound to disappoint? I am not over-tender of heart, but I call it cruel.” “The glass still keeps very high,” he remarked as he sat down. “It is of importance that it should not rain before we are able to go over the ground. On the other hand, a man should be at his very best and keenest for such nice work as that, and I did not wish to do it when fagged by a long journey. I have seen young McCarthy.”

“None at all. I was inclined to think at one time that he knew who had done it and was screening him or her, but I am convinced now that he is as puzzled as everyone else. He is not a very quick-witted youth, though comely to look at and, I should think, sound at heart.” “Ah, thereby hangs a rather painful tale. This fellow is madly, insanely, in love with her, but some two years ago, when he was only a lad, and before he really knew her, for she had been away five years at a boarding-school, what does the idiot do but get into the clutches of a barmaid in Bristol and marry her at a registry office? No one knows a word of the matter, but you can imagine how maddening it must be to him to be upbraided for not doing what he would give his very eyes to do, but what he knows to be absolutely impossible. It was sheer frenzy of this sort which made him throw his hands up into the air when his father, at their last interview, was goading him on to propose to Miss Turner. On the other hand, he had no means of supporting himself, and his father, who was by all accounts a very hard man, would have thrown him over utterly had he known the truth. It was with his barmaid wife that he had spent the last three days in Bristol, and his father did not know where he was. Mark that point. It is of importance. Good has come out of evil, however, for the barmaid, finding from the papers that he is in serious trouble and likely to be hanged, has thrown him over utterly and has written to him to say that she has a husband already in the Bermuda Dockyard, so that there is really no tie between them. I think that that bit of news has consoled young McCarthy for all that he has suffered.”

“Ah! who? I would call your attention very particularly to two points. One is that the murdered man had an appointment with someone at the pool, and that the someone could not have been his son, for his son was away, and he did not know when he would return. The second is that the murdered man was heard to cry ‘Cooee!’ before he knew that his son had returned. Those are the crucial points upon which the case depends. And now let us talk about George Meredith, if you please, and we shall leave all minor matters until to-morrow.” There was no rain, as Holmes had foretold, and the morning broke bright and cloudless. At nine o’clock Lestrade called for us with the carriage, and we set off for Hatherley Farm and the Boscombe Pool. “About sixty; but his constitution has been shattered by his life abroad, and he has been in failing health for some time. This business has had a very bad effect upon him. He was an old friend of McCarthy’s, and, I may add, a great benefactor to him, for I have learned that he gave him Hatherley Farm rent free.”

“Really! Does it not strike you as a little singular that this McCarthy, who appears to have had little of his own, and to have been under such obligations to Turner, should still talk of marrying his son to Turner’s daughter, who is, presumably, heiress to the estate, and that in such a very cocksure manner, as if it were merely a case of a proposal and all else would follow? It is the more strange, since we know that Turner himself was averse to the idea. The daughter told us as much. Do you not deduce something from that?” “We have got to the deductions and the inferences,” said Lestrade, winking at me. “I find it hard enough to tackle facts, Holmes, without flying away after theories and fancies.” “Yes, that is it.” It was a widespread, comfortable-looking building, two-storied, slate-roofed, with great yellow blotches of lichen upon the grey walls. The drawn blinds and the smokeless chimneys, however, gave it a stricken look, as though the weight of this horror still lay heavy upon it. We called at the door, when the maid, at Holmes’ request, showed us the boots which her master wore at the time of his death, and also a pair of the son’s, though not the pair which he had then had. Having measured these very carefully from seven or eight different points, Holmes desired to be led to the court-yard, from which we all followed the winding track which led to Boscombe Pool.

Sherlock Holmes was transformed when he was hot upon such a scent as this. Men who had only known the quiet thinker and logician of Baker Street would have failed to recognise him. His face flushed and darkened. His brows were drawn into two hard black lines, while his eyes shone out from beneath them with a steely glitter. His face was bent downward, his shoulders bowed, his lips compressed, and the veins stood out like whipcord in his long, sinewy neck. His nostrils seemed to dilate with a purely animal lust for the chase, and his mind was so absolutely concentrated upon the matter before him that a question or remark fell unheeded upon his ears, or, at the most, only provoked a quick, impatient snarl in reply. Swiftly and silently he made his way along the track which ran through the meadows, and so by way of the woods to the Boscombe Pool. It was damp, marshy ground, as is all that district, and there were marks of many feet, both upon the path and amid the short grass which bounded it on either side. Sometimes Holmes would hurry on, sometimes stop dead, and once he made quite a little detour into the meadow. Lestrade and I walked behind him, the detective indifferent and contemptuous, while I watched my friend with the interest which sprang from the conviction that every one of his actions was directed towards a definite end.

The Boscombe Pool, which is a little reed-girt sheet of water some fifty yards across, is situated at the boundary between the Hatherley Farm and the private park of the wealthy Mr. Turner. Above the woods which lined it upon the farther side we could see the red, jutting pinnacles which marked the site of the rich landowner’s dwelling. On the Hatherley side of the pool the woods grew very thick, and there was a narrow belt of sodden grass twenty paces across between the edge of the trees and the reeds which lined the lake. Lestrade showed us the exact spot at which the body had been found, and, indeed, so moist was the ground, that I could plainly see the traces which had been left by the fall of the stricken man. To Holmes, as I could see by his eager face and peering eyes, very many other things were to be read upon the trampled grass. He ran round, like a dog who is picking up a scent, and then turned upon my companion. “Oh, tut, tut! I have no time! That left foot of yours with its inward twist is all over the place. A mole could trace it, and there it vanishes among the reeds. Oh, how simple it would all have been had I been here before they came like a herd of buffalo and wallowed all over it. Here is where the party with the lodge-keeper came, and they have covered all tracks for six or eight feet round the body. But here are three separate tracks of the same feet.” He drew out a lens and lay down upon his waterproof to have a better view, talking all the time rather to himself than to us. “These are young McCarthy’s feet. Twice he was walking, and once he ran swiftly, so that the soles are deeply marked and the heels hardly visible. That bears out his story. He ran when he saw his father on the ground. Then here are the father’s feet as he paced up and down. What is this, then? It is the butt-end of the gun as the son stood listening. And this? Ha, ha! What have we here? Tiptoes! tiptoes! Square, too, quite unusual boots! They come, they go, they come again—of course that was for the cloak. Now where did they come from?” He ran up and down, sometimes losing, sometimes finding the track until we were well within the edge of the wood and under the shadow of a great beech, the largest tree in the neighbourhood. Holmes traced his way to the farther side of this and lay down once more upon his face with a little cry of satisfaction. For a long time he remained there, turning over the leaves and dried sticks, gathering up what seemed to me to be dust into an envelope and examining with his lens not only the ground but even the bark of the tree as far as he could reach. A jagged stone was lying among the moss, and this also he carefully examined and retained. Then he followed a pathway through the wood until he came to the high road, where all traces were lost.

“It has been a case of considerable interest,” he remarked, returning to his natural manner. “I fancy that this grey house on the right must be the lodge. I think that I will go in and have a word with Moran, and perhaps write a little note. Having done that, we may drive back to our luncheon. You may walk to the cab, and I shall be with you presently.” It was about ten minutes before we regained our cab and drove back into Ross, Holmes still carrying with him the stone which he had picked up in the wood. “The grass was growing under it. It had only lain there a few days. There was no sign of a place whence it had been taken. It corresponds with the injuries. There is no sign of any other weapon.” “Is a tall man, left-handed, limps with the right leg, wears thick-soled shooting-boots and a grey cloak, smokes Indian cigars, uses a cigar-holder, and carries a blunt pen-knife in his pocket. There are several other indications, but these may be enough to aid us in our search.”

Lestrade laughed. “I am afraid that I am still a sceptic,” he said. “Theories are all very well, but we have to deal with a hard-headed British jury.” “_Nous verrons_,” answered Holmes calmly. “You work your own method, and I shall work mine. I shall be busy this afternoon, and shall probably return to London by the evening train.” Lestrade shrugged his shoulders. “I am a practical man,” he said, “and I really cannot undertake to go about the country looking for a left-handed gentleman with a game leg. I should become the laughing-stock of Scotland Yard.” Having left Lestrade at his rooms, we drove to our hotel, where we found lunch upon the table. Holmes was silent and buried in thought with a pained expression upon his face, as one who finds himself in a perplexing position. “Look here, Watson,” he said when the cloth was cleared “just sit down in this chair and let me preach to you for a little. I don’t know quite what to do, and I should value your advice. Light a cigar and let me expound.”

“Well, now, in considering this case there are two points about young McCarthy’s narrative which struck us both instantly, although they impressed me in his favour and you against him. One was the fact that his father should, according to his account, cry ‘Cooee!’ before seeing him. The other was his singular dying reference to a rat. He mumbled several words, you understand, but that was all that caught the son’s ear. Now from this double point our research must commence, and we will begin it by presuming that what the lad says is absolutely true.” “Well, obviously it could not have been meant for the son. The son, as far as he knew, was in Bristol. It was mere chance that he was within earshot. The ‘Cooee!’ was meant to attract the attention of whoever it was that he had the appointment with. But ‘Cooee’ is a distinctly Australian cry, and one which is used between Australians. There is a strong presumption that the person whom McCarthy expected to meet him at Boscombe Pool was someone who had been in Australia.”

Sherlock Holmes took a folded paper from his pocket and flattened it out on the table. “This is a map of the Colony of Victoria,” he said. “I wired to Bristol for it last night.” He put his hand over part of the map. “What do you read?” “Quite so. That was the word the man uttered, and of which his son only caught the last two syllables. He was trying to utter the name of his murderer. So and so, of Ballarat.” “It is obvious. And now, you see, I had narrowed the field down considerably. The possession of a grey garment was a third point which, granting the son’s statement to be correct, was a certainty. We have come now out of mere vagueness to the definite conception of an Australian from Ballarat with a grey cloak.” “Then comes our expedition of to-day. By an examination of the ground I gained the trifling details which I gave to that imbecile Lestrade, as to the personality of the criminal.” “You were yourself struck by the nature of the injury as recorded by the surgeon at the inquest. The blow was struck from immediately behind, and yet was upon the left side. Now, how can that be unless it were by a left-handed man? He had stood behind that tree during the interview between the father and son. He had even smoked there. I found the ash of a cigar, which my special knowledge of tobacco ashes enables me to pronounce as an Indian cigar. I have, as you know, devoted some attention to this, and written a little monograph on the ashes of 140 different varieties of pipe, cigar, and cigarette tobacco. Having found the ash, I then looked round and discovered the stump among the moss where he had tossed it. It was an Indian cigar, of the variety which are rolled in Rotterdam.”

“I could see that the end had not been in his mouth. Therefore he used a holder. The tip had been cut off, not bitten off, but the cut was not a clean one, so I deduced a blunt pen-knife.” “Holmes,” I said, “you have drawn a net round this man from which he cannot escape, and you have saved an innocent human life as truly as if you had cut the cord which was hanging him. I see the direction in which all this points. The culprit is—” The man who entered was a strange and impressive figure. His slow, limping step and bowed shoulders gave the appearance of decrepitude, and yet his hard, deep-lined, craggy features, and his enormous limbs showed that he was possessed of unusual strength of body and of character. His tangled beard, grizzled hair, and outstanding, drooping eyebrows combined to give an air of dignity and power to his appearance, but his face was of an ashen white, while his lips and the corners of his nostrils were tinged with a shade of blue. It was clear to me at a glance that he was in the grip of some deadly and chronic disease.

The old man sank his face in his hands. “God help me!” he cried. “But I would not have let the young man come to harm. I give you my word that I would have spoken out if it went against him at the Assizes.” “I am no official agent. I understand that it was your daughter who required my presence here, and I am acting in her interests. Young McCarthy must be got off, however.” “I am a dying man,” said old Turner. “I have had diabetes for years. My doctor says it is a question whether I shall live a month. Yet I would rather die under my own roof than in a gaol.” Holmes rose and sat down at the table with his pen in his hand and a bundle of paper before him. “Just tell us the truth,” he said. “I shall jot down the facts. You will sign it, and Watson here can witness it. Then I could produce your confession at the last extremity to save young McCarthy. I promise you that I shall not use it unless it is absolutely needed.”

“It’s as well,” said the old man; “it’s a question whether I shall live to the Assizes, so it matters little to me, but I should wish to spare Alice the shock. And now I will make the thing clear to you; it has been a long time in the acting, but will not take me long to tell. “You didn’t know this dead man, McCarthy. He was a devil incarnate. I tell you that. God keep you out of the clutches of such a man as he. His grip has been upon me these twenty years, and he has blasted my life. I’ll tell you first how I came to be in his power. “It was in the early ’60’s at the diggings. I was a young chap then, hot-blooded and reckless, ready to turn my hand at anything; I got among bad companions, took to drink, had no luck with my claim, took to the bush, and in a word became what you would call over here a highway robber. There were six of us, and we had a wild, free life of it, sticking up a station from time to time, or stopping the wagons on the road to the diggings. Black Jack of Ballarat was the name I went under, and our party is still remembered in the colony as the Ballarat Gang.

“One day a gold convoy came down from Ballarat to Melbourne, and we lay in wait for it and attacked it. There were six troopers and six of us, so it was a close thing, but we emptied four of their saddles at the first volley. Three of our boys were killed, however, before we got the swag. I put my pistol to the head of the wagon-driver, who was this very man McCarthy. I wish to the Lord that I had shot him then, but I spared him, though I saw his wicked little eyes fixed on my face, as though to remember every feature. We got away with the gold, became wealthy men, and made our way over to England without being suspected. There I parted from my old pals and determined to settle down to a quiet and respectable life. I bought this estate, which chanced to be in the market, and I set myself to do a little good with my money, to make up for the way in which I had earned it. I married, too, and though my wife died young she left me my dear little Alice. Even when she was just a baby her wee hand seemed to lead me down the right path as nothing else had ever done. In a word, I turned over a new leaf and did my best to make up for the past. All was going well when McCarthy laid his grip upon me.

“‘Here we are, Jack,’ says he, touching me on the arm; ‘we’ll be as good as a family to you. There’s two of us, me and my son, and you can have the keeping of us. If you don’t—it’s a fine, law-abiding country is England, and there’s always a policeman within hail.’ “Well, down they came to the west country, there was no shaking them off, and there they have lived rent free on my best land ever since. There was no rest for me, no peace, no forgetfulness; turn where I would, there was his cunning, grinning face at my elbow. It grew worse as Alice grew up, for he soon saw I was more afraid of her knowing my past than of the police. Whatever he wanted he must have, and whatever it was I gave him without question, land, money, houses, until at last he asked a thing which I could not give. He asked for Alice. “His son, you see, had grown up, and so had my girl, and as I was known to be in weak health, it seemed a fine stroke to him that his lad should step into the whole property. But there I was firm. I would not have his cursed stock mixed with mine; not that I had any dislike to the lad, but his blood was in him, and that was enough. I stood firm. McCarthy threatened. I braved him to do his worst. We were to meet at the pool midway between our houses to talk it over.

“When I went down there I found him talking with his son, so I smoked a cigar and waited behind a tree until he should be alone. But as I listened to his talk all that was black and bitter in me seemed to come uppermost. He was urging his son to marry my daughter with as little regard for what she might think as if she were a slut from off the streets. It drove me mad to think that I and all that I held most dear should be in the power of such a man as this. Could I not snap the bond? I was already a dying and a desperate man. Though clear of mind and fairly strong of limb, I knew that my own fate was sealed. But my memory and my girl! Both could be saved if I could but silence that foul tongue. I did it, Mr. Holmes. I would do it again. Deeply as I have sinned, I have led a life of martyrdom to atone for it. But that my girl should be entangled in the same meshes which held me was more than I could suffer. I struck him down with no more compunction than if he had been some foul and venomous beast. His cry brought back his son; but I had gained the cover of the wood, though I was forced to go back to fetch the cloak which I had dropped in my flight. That is the true story, gentlemen, of all that occurred.”

“Well, it is not for me to judge you,” said Holmes as the old man signed the statement which had been drawn out. “I pray that we may never be exposed to such a temptation.” “In view of your health, nothing. You are yourself aware that you will soon have to answer for your deed at a higher court than the Assizes. I will keep your confession, and if McCarthy is condemned I shall be forced to use it. If not, it shall never be seen by mortal eye; and your secret, whether you be alive or dead, shall be safe with us.” “Farewell, then,” said the old man solemnly. “Your own deathbeds, when they come, will be the easier for the thought of the peace which you have given to mine.” Tottering and shaking in all his giant frame, he stumbled slowly from the room. “God help us!” said Holmes after a long silence. “Why does fate play such tricks with poor, helpless worms? I never hear of such a case as this that I do not think of Baxter’s words, and say, ‘There, but for the grace of God, goes Sherlock Holmes.’”

James McCarthy was acquitted at the Assizes on the strength of a number of objections which had been drawn out by Holmes and submitted to the defending counsel. Old Turner lived for seven months after our interview, but he is now dead; and there is every prospect that the son and daughter may come to live happily together in ignorance of the black cloud which rests upon their past. When I glance over my notes and records of the Sherlock Holmes cases between the years ’82 and ’90, I am faced by so many which present strange and interesting features that it is no easy matter to know which to choose and which to leave. Some, however, have already gained publicity through the papers, and others have not offered a field for those peculiar qualities which my friend possessed in so high a degree, and which it is the object of these papers to illustrate. Some, too, have baffled his analytical skill, and would be, as narratives, beginnings without an ending, while others have been but partially cleared up, and have their explanations founded rather upon conjecture and surmise than on that absolute logical proof which was so dear to him. There is, however, one of these last which was so remarkable in its details and so startling in its results that I am tempted to give some account of it in spite of the fact that there are points in connection with it which never have been, and probably never will be, entirely cleared up.

The year ’87 furnished us with a long series of cases of greater or less interest, of which I retain the records. Among my headings under this one twelve months I find an account of the adventure of the Paradol Chamber, of the Amateur Mendicant Society, who held a luxurious club in the lower vault of a furniture warehouse, of the facts connected with the loss of the British barque _Sophy Anderson_, of the singular adventures of the Grice Patersons in the island of Uffa, and finally of the Camberwell poisoning case. In the latter, as may be remembered, Sherlock Holmes was able, by winding up the dead man’s watch, to prove that it had been wound up two hours before, and that therefore the deceased had gone to bed within that time—a deduction which was of the greatest importance in clearing up the case. All these I may sketch out at some future date, but none of them present such singular features as the strange train of circumstances which I have now taken up my pen to describe. It was in the latter days of September, and the equinoctial gales had set in with exceptional violence. All day the wind had screamed and the rain had beaten against the windows, so that even here in the heart of great, hand-made London we were forced to raise our minds for the instant from the routine of life and to recognise the presence of those great elemental forces which shriek at mankind through the bars of his civilisation, like untamed beasts in a cage. As evening drew in, the storm grew higher and louder, and the wind cried and sobbed like a child in the chimney. Sherlock Holmes sat moodily at one side of the fireplace cross-indexing his records of crime, while I at the other was deep in one of Clark Russell’s fine sea-stories until the howl of the gale from without seemed to blend with the text, and the splash of the rain to lengthen out into the long swash of the sea waves. My wife was on a visit to her mother’s, and for a few days I was a dweller once more in my old quarters at Baker Street.

“If so, it is a serious case. Nothing less would bring a man out on such a day and at such an hour. But I take it that it is more likely to be some crony of the landlady’s.” Sherlock Holmes was wrong in his conjecture, however, for there came a step in the passage and a tapping at the door. He stretched out his long arm to turn the lamp away from himself and towards the vacant chair upon which a newcomer must sit. The man who entered was young, some two-and-twenty at the outside, well-groomed and trimly clad, with something of refinement and delicacy in his bearing. The streaming umbrella which he held in his hand, and his long shining waterproof told of the fierce weather through which he had come. He looked about him anxiously in the glare of the lamp, and I could see that his face was pale and his eyes heavy, like those of a man who is weighed down with some great anxiety. “I owe you an apology,” he said, raising his golden pince-nez to his eyes. “I trust that I am not intruding. I fear that I have brought some traces of the storm and rain into your snug chamber.”

“Give me your coat and umbrella,” said Holmes. “They may rest here on the hook and will be dry presently. You have come up from the south-west, I see.” “And yet I question, sir, whether, in all your experience, you have ever listened to a more mysterious and inexplicable chain of events than those which have happened in my own family.” “You fill me with interest,” said Holmes. “Pray give us the essential facts from the commencement, and I can afterwards question you as to those details which seem to me to be most important.” “My name,” said he, “is John Openshaw, but my own affairs have, as far as I can understand, little to do with this awful business. It is a hereditary matter; so in order to give you an idea of the facts, I must go back to the commencement of the affair. “You must know that my grandfather had two sons—my uncle Elias and my father Joseph. My father had a small factory at Coventry, which he enlarged at the time of the invention of bicycling. He was a patentee of the Openshaw unbreakable tire, and his business met with such success that he was able to sell it and to retire upon a handsome competence.

“My uncle Elias emigrated to America when he was a young man and became a planter in Florida, where he was reported to have done very well. At the time of the war he fought in Jackson’s army, and afterwards under Hood, where he rose to be a colonel. When Lee laid down his arms my uncle returned to his plantation, where he remained for three or four years. About 1869 or 1870 he came back to Europe and took a small estate in Sussex, near Horsham. He had made a very considerable fortune in the States, and his reason for leaving them was his aversion to the negroes, and his dislike of the Republican policy in extending the franchise to them. He was a singular man, fierce and quick-tempered, very foul-mouthed when he was angry, and of a most retiring disposition. During all the years that he lived at Horsham, I doubt if ever he set foot in the town. He had a garden and two or three fields round his house, and there he would take his exercise, though very often for weeks on end he would never leave his room. He drank a great deal of brandy and smoked very heavily, but he would see no society and did not want any friends, not even his own brother.

“He didn’t mind me; in fact, he took a fancy to me, for at the time when he saw me first I was a youngster of twelve or so. This would be in the year 1878, after he had been eight or nine years in England. He begged my father to let me live with him and he was very kind to me in his way. When he was sober he used to be fond of playing backgammon and draughts with me, and he would make me his representative both with the servants and with the tradespeople, so that by the time that I was sixteen I was quite master of the house. I kept all the keys and could go where I liked and do what I liked, so long as I did not disturb him in his privacy. There was one singular exception, however, for he had a single room, a lumber-room up among the attics, which was invariably locked, and which he would never permit either me or anyone else to enter. With a boy’s curiosity I have peeped through the keyhole, but I was never able to see more than such a collection of old trunks and bundles as would be expected in such a room.

“One day—it was in March, 1883—a letter with a foreign stamp lay upon the table in front of the colonel’s plate. It was not a common thing for him to receive letters, for his bills were all paid in ready money, and he had no friends of any sort. ‘From India!’ said he as he took it up, ‘Pondicherry postmark! What can this be?’ Opening it hurriedly, out there jumped five little dried orange pips, which pattered down upon his plate. I began to laugh at this, but the laugh was struck from my lips at the sight of his face. His lip had fallen, his eyes were protruding, his skin the colour of putty, and he glared at the envelope which he still held in his trembling hand, ‘K. K. K.!’ he shrieked, and then, ‘My God, my God, my sins have overtaken me!’ “‘Death,’ said he, and rising from the table he retired to his room, leaving me palpitating with horror. I took up the envelope and saw scrawled in red ink upon the inner flap, just above the gum, the letter K three times repeated. There was nothing else save the five dried pips. What could be the reason of his overpowering terror? I left the breakfast-table, and as I ascended the stair I met him coming down with an old rusty key, which must have belonged to the attic, in one hand, and a small brass box, like a cashbox, in the other.

“‘They may do what they like, but I’ll checkmate them still,’ said he with an oath. ‘Tell Mary that I shall want a fire in my room to-day, and send down to Fordham, the Horsham lawyer.’ “I did as he ordered, and when the lawyer arrived I was asked to step up to the room. The fire was burning brightly, and in the grate there was a mass of black, fluffy ashes, as of burned paper, while the brass box stood open and empty beside it. As I glanced at the box I noticed, with a start, that upon the lid was printed the treble K which I had read in the morning upon the envelope. “‘I wish you, John,’ said my uncle, ‘to witness my will. I leave my estate, with all its advantages and all its disadvantages, to my brother, your father, whence it will, no doubt, descend to you. If you can enjoy it in peace, well and good! If you find you cannot, take my advice, my boy, and leave it to your deadliest enemy. I am sorry to give you such a two-edged thing, but I can’t say what turn things are going to take. Kindly sign the paper where Mr. Fordham shows you.’

“I signed the paper as directed, and the lawyer took it away with him. The singular incident made, as you may think, the deepest impression upon me, and I pondered over it and turned it every way in my mind without being able to make anything of it. Yet I could not shake off the vague feeling of dread which it left behind, though the sensation grew less keen as the weeks passed and nothing happened to disturb the usual routine of our lives. I could see a change in my uncle, however. He drank more than ever, and he was less inclined for any sort of society. Most of his time he would spend in his room, with the door locked upon the inside, but sometimes he would emerge in a sort of drunken frenzy and would burst out of the house and tear about the garden with a revolver in his hand, screaming out that he was afraid of no man, and that he was not to be cooped up, like a sheep in a pen, by man or devil. When these hot fits were over, however, he would rush tumultuously in at the door and lock and bar it behind him, like a man who can brazen it out no longer against the terror which lies at the roots of his soul. At such times I have seen his face, even on a cold day, glisten with moisture, as though it were new raised from a basin.

“Well, to come to an end of the matter, Mr. Holmes, and not to abuse your patience, there came a night when he made one of those drunken sallies from which he never came back. We found him, when we went to search for him, face downward in a little green-scummed pool, which lay at the foot of the garden. There was no sign of any violence, and the water was but two feet deep, so that the jury, having regard to his known eccentricity, brought in a verdict of ‘suicide.’ But I, who knew how he winced from the very thought of death, had much ado to persuade myself that he had gone out of his way to meet it. The matter passed, however, and my father entered into possession of the estate, and of some £ 14,000, which lay to his credit at the bank.” “One moment,” Holmes interposed, “your statement is, I foresee, one of the most remarkable to which I have ever listened. Let me have the date of the reception by your uncle of the letter, and the date of his supposed suicide.”

“When my father took over the Horsham property, he, at my request, made a careful examination of the attic, which had been always locked up. We found the brass box there, although its contents had been destroyed. On the inside of the cover was a paper label, with the initials of K. K. K. repeated upon it, and ‘Letters, memoranda, receipts, and a register’ written beneath. These, we presume, indicated the nature of the papers which had been destroyed by Colonel Openshaw. For the rest, there was nothing of much importance in the attic save a great many scattered papers and note-books bearing upon my uncle’s life in America. Some of them were of the war time and showed that he had done his duty well and had borne the repute of a brave soldier. Others were of a date during the reconstruction of the Southern states, and were mostly concerned with politics, for he had evidently taken a strong part in opposing the carpet-bag politicians who had been sent down from the North. “Well, it was the beginning of ’84 when my father came to live at Horsham, and all went as well as possible with us until the January of ’85. On the fourth day after the new year I heard my father give a sharp cry of surprise as we sat together at the breakfast-table. There he was, sitting with a newly opened envelope in one hand and five dried orange pips in the outstretched palm of the other one. He had always laughed at what he called my cock-and-bull story about the colonel, but he looked very scared and puzzled now that the same thing had come upon himself.

“‘Pooh!’ said he, gripping hard at his courage. ‘We are in a civilised land here, and we can’t have tomfoolery of this kind. Where does the thing come from?’ “On the third day after the coming of the letter my father went from home to visit an old friend of his, Major Freebody, who is in command of one of the forts upon Portsdown Hill. I was glad that he should go, for it seemed to me that he was farther from danger when he was away from home. In that, however, I was in error. Upon the second day of his absence I received a telegram from the major, imploring me to come at once. My father had fallen over one of the deep chalk-pits which abound in the neighbourhood, and was lying senseless, with a shattered skull. I hurried to him, but he passed away without having ever recovered his consciousness. He had, as it appears, been returning from Fareham in the twilight, and as the country was unknown to him, and the chalk-pit unfenced, the jury had no hesitation in bringing in a verdict of ‘death from accidental causes.’ Carefully as I examined every fact connected with his death, I was unable to find anything which could suggest the idea of murder. There were no signs of violence, no footmarks, no robbery, no record of strangers having been seen upon the roads. And yet I need not tell you that my mind was far from at ease, and that I was well-nigh certain that some foul plot had been woven round him.

“In this sinister way I came into my inheritance. You will ask me why I did not dispose of it? I answer, because I was well convinced that our troubles were in some way dependent upon an incident in my uncle’s life, and that the danger would be as pressing in one house as in another. “It was in January, ’85, that my poor father met his end, and two years and eight months have elapsed since then. During that time I have lived happily at Horsham, and I had begun to hope that this curse had passed away from the family, and that it had ended with the last generation. I had begun to take comfort too soon, however; yesterday morning the blow fell in the very shape in which it had come upon my father.” “This is the envelope,” he continued. “The postmark is London—eastern division. Within are the very words which were upon my father’s last message: ‘K. K. K.’; and then ‘Put the papers on the sundial.’” “To tell the truth”—he sank his face into his thin, white hands—“I have felt helpless. I have felt like one of those poor rabbits when the snake is writhing towards it. I seem to be in the grasp of some resistless, inexorable evil, which no foresight and no precautions can guard against.”

“But they listened to my story with a smile. I am convinced that the inspector has formed the opinion that the letters are all practical jokes, and that the deaths of my relations were really accidents, as the jury stated, and were not to be connected with the warnings.” “It is really two days since you had the letter. We should have acted before this. You have no further evidence, I suppose, than that which you have placed before us—no suggestive detail which might help us?” “There is one thing,” said John Openshaw. He rummaged in his coat pocket, and, drawing out a piece of discoloured, blue-tinted paper, he laid it out upon the table. “I have some remembrance,” said he, “that on the day when my uncle burned the papers I observed that the small, unburned margins which lay amid the ashes were of this particular colour. I found this single sheet upon the floor of his room, and I am inclined to think that it may be one of the papers which has, perhaps, fluttered out from among the others, and in that way has escaped destruction. Beyond the mention of pips, I do not see that it helps us much. I think myself that it is a page from some private diary. The writing is undoubtedly my uncle’s.”

Holmes moved the lamp, and we both bent over the sheet of paper, which showed by its ragged edge that it had indeed been torn from a book. It was headed, “March, 1869,” and beneath were the following enigmatical notices: “Thank you!” said Holmes, folding up the paper and returning it to our visitor. “And now you must on no account lose another instant. We cannot spare time even to discuss what you have told me. You must get home instantly and act.” “There is but one thing to do. It must be done at once. You must put this piece of paper which you have shown us into the brass box which you have described. You must also put in a note to say that all the other papers were burned by your uncle, and that this is the only one which remains. You must assert that in such words as will carry conviction with them. Having done this, you must at once put the box out upon the sundial, as directed. Do you understand?” “Do not think of revenge, or anything of the sort, at present. I think that we may gain that by means of the law; but we have our web to weave, while theirs is already woven. The first consideration is to remove the pressing danger which threatens you. The second is to clear up the mystery and to punish the guilty parties.”

“Do not lose an instant. And, above all, take care of yourself in the meanwhile, for I do not think that there can be a doubt that you are threatened by a very real and imminent danger. How do you go back?” “Then I shall call upon you in a day, or in two days, with news as to the box and the papers. I shall take your advice in every particular.” He shook hands with us and took his leave. Outside the wind still screamed and the rain splashed and pattered against the windows. This strange, wild story seemed to have come to us from amid the mad elements—blown in upon us like a sheet of sea-weed in a gale—and now to have been reabsorbed by them once more. Sherlock Holmes sat for some time in silence, with his head sunk forward and his eyes bent upon the red glow of the fire. Then he lit his pipe, and leaning back in his chair he watched the blue smoke-rings as they chased each other up to the ceiling. Sherlock Holmes closed his eyes and placed his elbows upon the arms of his chair, with his finger-tips together. “The ideal reasoner,” he remarked, “would, when he had once been shown a single fact in all its bearings, deduce from it not only all the chain of events which led up to it but also all the results which would follow from it. As Cuvier could correctly describe a whole animal by the contemplation of a single bone, so the observer who has thoroughly understood one link in a series of incidents should be able to accurately state all the other ones, both before and after. We have not yet grasped the results which the reason alone can attain to. Problems may be solved in the study which have baffled all those who have sought a solution by the aid of their senses. To carry the art, however, to its highest pitch, it is necessary that the reasoner should be able to utilise all the facts which have come to his knowledge; and this in itself implies, as you will readily see, a possession of all knowledge, which, even in these days of free education and encyclopædias, is a somewhat rare accomplishment. It is not so impossible, however, that a man should possess all knowledge which is likely to be useful to him in his work, and this I have endeavoured in my case to do. If I remember rightly, you on one occasion, in the early days of our friendship, defined my limits in a very precise fashion.”

“Yes,” I answered, laughing. “It was a singular document. Philosophy, astronomy, and politics were marked at zero, I remember. Botany variable, geology profound as regards the mud-stains from any region within fifty miles of town, chemistry eccentric, anatomy unsystematic, sensational literature and crime records unique, violin-player, boxer, swordsman, lawyer, and self-poisoner by cocaine and tobacco. Those, I think, were the main points of my analysis.” Holmes grinned at the last item. “Well,” he said, “I say now, as I said then, that a man should keep his little brain-attic stocked with all the furniture that he is likely to use, and the rest he can put away in the lumber-room of his library, where he can get it if he wants it. Now, for such a case as the one which has been submitted to us to-night, we need certainly to muster all our resources. Kindly hand me down the letter K of the _American Encyclopædia_ which stands upon the shelf beside you. Thank you. Now let us consider the situation and see what may be deduced from it. In the first place, we may start with a strong presumption that Colonel Openshaw had some very strong reason for leaving America. Men at his time of life do not change all their habits and exchange willingly the charming climate of Florida for the lonely life of an English provincial town. His extreme love of solitude in England suggests the idea that he was in fear of someone or something, so we may assume as a working hypothesis that it was fear of someone or something which drove him from America. As to what it was he feared, we can only deduce that by considering the formidable letters which were received by himself and his successors. Did you remark the postmarks of those letters?”

“Excellent. We have already a clue. There can be no doubt that the probability—the strong probability—is that the writer was on board of a ship. And now let us consider another point. In the case of Pondicherry, seven weeks elapsed between the threat and its fulfilment, in Dundee it was only some three or four days. Does that suggest anything?” “There is at least a presumption that the vessel in which the man or men are is a sailing-ship. It looks as if they always send their singular warning or token before them when starting upon their mission. You see how quickly the deed followed the sign when it came from Dundee. If they had come from Pondicherry in a steamer they would have arrived almost as soon as their letter. But, as a matter of fact, seven weeks elapsed. I think that those seven weeks represented the difference between the mail-boat which brought the letter and the sailing vessel which brought the writer.” “More than that. It is probable. And now you see the deadly urgency of this new case, and why I urged young Openshaw to caution. The blow has always fallen at the end of the time which it would take the senders to travel the distance. But this one comes from London, and therefore we cannot count upon delay.”

“The papers which Openshaw carried are obviously of vital importance to the person or persons in the sailing-ship. I think that it is quite clear that there must be more than one of them. A single man could not have carried out two deaths in such a way as to deceive a coroner’s jury. There must have been several in it, and they must have been men of resource and determination. Their papers they mean to have, be the holder of them who it may. In this way you see K. K. K. ceases to be the initials of an individual and becomes the badge of a society.” “‘Ku Klux Klan. A name derived from the fanciful resemblance to the sound produced by cocking a rifle. This terrible secret society was formed by some ex-Confederate soldiers in the Southern states after the Civil War, and it rapidly formed local branches in different parts of the country, notably in Tennessee, Louisiana, the Carolinas, Georgia, and Florida. Its power was used for political purposes, principally for the terrorising of the negro voters and the murdering and driving from the country of those who were opposed to its views. Its outrages were usually preceded by a warning sent to the marked man in some fantastic but generally recognised shape—a sprig of oak-leaves in some parts, melon seeds or orange pips in others. On receiving this the victim might either openly abjure his former ways, or might fly from the country. If he braved the matter out, death would unfailingly come upon him, and usually in some strange and unforeseen manner. So perfect was the organisation of the society, and so systematic its methods, that there is hardly a case upon record where any man succeeded in braving it with impunity, or in which any of its outrages were traced home to the perpetrators. For some years the organisation flourished in spite of the efforts of the United States government and of the better classes of the community in the South. Eventually, in the year 1869, the movement rather suddenly collapsed, although there have been sporadic outbreaks of the same sort since that date.’

“You will observe,” said Holmes, laying down the volume, “that the sudden breaking up of the society was coincident with the disappearance of Openshaw from America with their papers. It may well have been cause and effect. It is no wonder that he and his family have some of the more implacable spirits upon their track. You can understand that this register and diary may implicate some of the first men in the South, and that there may be many who will not sleep easy at night until it is recovered.” “Is such as we might expect. It ran, if I remember right, ‘sent the pips to A, B, and C’—that is, sent the society’s warning to them. Then there are successive entries that A and B cleared, or left the country, and finally that C was visited, with, I fear, a sinister result for C. Well, I think, Doctor, that we may let some light into this dark place, and I believe that the only chance young Openshaw has in the meantime is to do what I have told him. There is nothing more to be said or to be done to-night, so hand me over my violin and let us try to forget for half an hour the miserable weather and the still more miserable ways of our fellow men.”

It had cleared in the morning, and the sun was shining with a subdued brightness through the dim veil which hangs over the great city. Sherlock Holmes was already at breakfast when I came down. “‘Between nine and ten last night Police-Constable Cook, of the H Division, on duty near Waterloo Bridge, heard a cry for help and a splash in the water. The night, however, was extremely dark and stormy, so that, in spite of the help of several passers-by, it was quite impossible to effect a rescue. The alarm, however, was given, and, by the aid of the water-police, the body was eventually recovered. It proved to be that of a young gentleman whose name, as it appears from an envelope which was found in his pocket, was John Openshaw, and whose residence is near Horsham. It is conjectured that he may have been hurrying down to catch the last train from Waterloo Station, and that in his haste and the extreme darkness he missed his path and walked over the edge of one of the small landing-places for river steamboats. The body exhibited no traces of violence, and there can be no doubt that the deceased had been the victim of an unfortunate accident, which should have the effect of calling the attention of the authorities to the condition of the riverside landing-stages.’”

“That hurts my pride, Watson,” he said at last. “It is a petty feeling, no doubt, but it hurts my pride. It becomes a personal matter with me now, and, if God sends me health, I shall set my hand upon this gang. That he should come to me for help, and that I should send him away to his death—!” He sprang from his chair and paced about the room in uncontrollable agitation, with a flush upon his sallow cheeks and a nervous clasping and unclasping of his long thin hands. “They must be cunning devils,” he exclaimed at last. “How could they have decoyed him down there? The Embankment is not on the direct line to the station. The bridge, no doubt, was too crowded, even on such a night, for their purpose. Well, Watson, we shall see who will win in the long run. I am going out now!” All day I was engaged in my professional work, and it was late in the evening before I returned to Baker Street. Sherlock Holmes had not come back yet. It was nearly ten o’clock before he entered, looking pale and worn. He walked up to the sideboard, and tearing a piece from the loaf he devoured it voraciously, washing it down with a long draught of water.

“I have them in the hollow of my hand. Young Openshaw shall not long remain unavenged. Why, Watson, let us put their own devilish trade-mark upon them. It is well thought of!” He took an orange from the cupboard, and tearing it to pieces he squeezed out the pips upon the table. Of these he took five and thrust them into an envelope. On the inside of the flap he wrote “S. H. for J. O.” Then he sealed it and addressed it to “Captain James Calhoun, Barque _Lone Star_, Savannah, Georgia.” “That will await him when he enters port,” said he, chuckling. “It may give him a sleepless night. He will find it as sure a precursor of his fate as Openshaw did before him.” “I have spent the whole day,” said he, “over Lloyd’s registers and files of the old papers, following the future career of every vessel which touched at Pondicherry in January and February in ’83. There were thirty-six ships of fair tonnage which were reported there during those months. Of these, one, the _Lone Star_, instantly attracted my attention, since, although it was reported as having cleared from London, the name is that which is given to one of the states of the Union.”

“I searched the Dundee records, and when I found that the barque _Lone Star_ was there in January, ’85, my suspicion became a certainty. I then inquired as to the vessels which lay at present in the port of London.” “The _Lone Star_ had arrived here last week. I went down to the Albert Dock and found that she had been taken down the river by the early tide this morning, homeward bound to Savannah. I wired to Gravesend and learned that she had passed some time ago, and as the wind is easterly I have no doubt that she is now past the Goodwins and not very far from the Isle of Wight.” “Oh, I have my hand upon him. He and the two mates, are as I learn, the only native-born Americans in the ship. The others are Finns and Germans. I know, also, that they were all three away from the ship last night. I had it from the stevedore who has been loading their cargo. By the time that their sailing-ship reaches Savannah the mail-boat will have carried this letter, and the cable will have informed the police of Savannah that these three gentlemen are badly wanted here upon a charge of murder.”

There is ever a flaw, however, in the best laid of human plans, and the murderers of John Openshaw were never to receive the orange pips which would show them that another, as cunning and as resolute as themselves, was upon their track. Very long and very severe were the equinoctial gales that year. We waited long for news of the _Lone Star_ of Savannah, but none ever reached us. We did at last hear that somewhere far out in the Atlantic a shattered stern-post of a boat was seen swinging in the trough of a wave, with the letters “L. S.” carved upon it, and that is all which we shall ever know of the fate of the _Lone Star_. Isa Whitney, brother of the late Elias Whitney, D.D., Principal of the Theological College of St. George’s, was much addicted to opium. The habit grew upon him, as I understand, from some foolish freak when he was at college; for having read De Quincey’s description of his dreams and sensations, he had drenched his tobacco with laudanum in an attempt to produce the same effects. He found, as so many more have done, that the practice is easier to attain than to get rid of, and for many years he continued to be a slave to the drug, an object of mingled horror and pity to his friends and relatives. I can see him now, with yellow, pasty face, drooping lids, and pin-point pupils, all huddled in a chair, the wreck and ruin of a noble man.

One night—it was in June, ’89—there came a ring to my bell, about the hour when a man gives his first yawn and glances at the clock. I sat up in my chair, and my wife laid her needle-work down in her lap and made a little face of disappointment. We heard the door open, a few hurried words, and then quick steps upon the linoleum. Our own door flew open, and a lady, clad in some dark-coloured stuff, with a black veil, entered the room. “You will excuse my calling so late,” she began, and then, suddenly losing her self-control, she ran forward, threw her arms about my wife’s neck, and sobbed upon her shoulder. “Oh, I’m in such trouble!” she cried; “I do so want a little help.” “It was very sweet of you to come. Now, you must have some wine and water, and sit here comfortably and tell us all about it. Or should you rather that I sent James off to bed?” It was not the first time that she had spoken to us of her husband’s trouble, to me as a doctor, to my wife as an old friend and school companion. We soothed and comforted her by such words as we could find. Did she know where her husband was? Was it possible that we could bring him back to her?

It seems that it was. She had the surest information that of late he had, when the fit was on him, made use of an opium den in the farthest east of the City. Hitherto his orgies had always been confined to one day, and he had come back, twitching and shattered, in the evening. But now the spell had been upon him eight-and-forty hours, and he lay there, doubtless among the dregs of the docks, breathing in the poison or sleeping off the effects. There he was to be found, she was sure of it, at the Bar of Gold, in Upper Swandam Lane. But what was she to do? How could she, a young and timid woman, make her way into such a place and pluck her husband out from among the ruffians who surrounded him? There was the case, and of course there was but one way out of it. Might I not escort her to this place? And then, as a second thought, why should she come at all? I was Isa Whitney’s medical adviser, and as such I had influence over him. I could manage it better if I were alone. I promised her on my word that I would send him home in a cab within two hours if he were indeed at the address which she had given me. And so in ten minutes I had left my armchair and cheery sitting-room behind me, and was speeding eastward in a hansom on a strange errand, as it seemed to me at the time, though the future only could show how strange it was to be.

But there was no great difficulty in the first stage of my adventure. Upper Swandam Lane is a vile alley lurking behind the high wharves which line the north side of the river to the east of London Bridge. Between a slop-shop and a gin-shop, approached by a steep flight of steps leading down to a black gap like the mouth of a cave, I found the den of which I was in search. Ordering my cab to wait, I passed down the steps, worn hollow in the centre by the ceaseless tread of drunken feet; and by the light of a flickering oil-lamp above the door I found the latch and made my way into a long, low room, thick and heavy with the brown opium smoke, and terraced with wooden berths, like the forecastle of an emigrant ship. Through the gloom one could dimly catch a glimpse of bodies lying in strange fantastic poses, bowed shoulders, bent knees, heads thrown back, and chins pointing upward, with here and there a dark, lack-lustre eye turned upon the newcomer. Out of the black shadows there glimmered little red circles of light, now bright, now faint, as the burning poison waxed or waned in the bowls of the metal pipes. The most lay silent, but some muttered to themselves, and others talked together in a strange, low, monotonous voice, their conversation coming in gushes, and then suddenly tailing off into silence, each mumbling out his own thoughts and paying little heed to the words of his neighbour. At the farther end was a small brazier of burning charcoal, beside which on a three-legged wooden stool there sat a tall, thin old man, with his jaw resting upon his two fists, and his elbows upon his knees, staring into the fire.

“Good heavens! I thought it was Wednesday. It is Wednesday. What d’you want to frighten a chap for?” He sank his face onto his arms and began to sob in a high treble key. “So I am. But you’ve got mixed, Watson, for I have only been here a few hours, three pipes, four pipes—I forget how many. But I’ll go home with you. I wouldn’t frighten Kate—poor little Kate. Give me your hand! Have you a cab?” I walked down the narrow passage between the double row of sleepers, holding my breath to keep out the vile, stupefying fumes of the drug, and looking about for the manager. As I passed the tall man who sat by the brazier I felt a sudden pluck at my skirt, and a low voice whispered, “Walk past me, and then look back at me.” The words fell quite distinctly upon my ear. I glanced down. They could only have come from the old man at my side, and yet he sat now as absorbed as ever, very thin, very wrinkled, bent with age, an opium pipe dangling down from between his knees, as though it had dropped in sheer lassitude from his fingers. I took two steps forward and looked back. It took all my self-control to prevent me from breaking out into a cry of astonishment. He had turned his back so that none could see him but I. His form had filled out, his wrinkles were gone, the dull eyes had regained their fire, and there, sitting by the fire and grinning at my surprise, was none other than Sherlock Holmes. He made a slight motion to me to approach him, and instantly, as he turned his face half round to the company once more, subsided into a doddering, loose-lipped senility.

“As low as you can,” he answered; “I have excellent ears. If you would have the great kindness to get rid of that sottish friend of yours I should be exceedingly glad to have a little talk with you.” “Then pray send him home in it. You may safely trust him, for he appears to be too limp to get into any mischief. I should recommend you also to send a note by the cabman to your wife to say that you have thrown in your lot with me. If you will wait outside, I shall be with you in five minutes.” It was difficult to refuse any of Sherlock Holmes’ requests, for they were always so exceedingly definite, and put forward with such a quiet air of mastery. I felt, however, that when Whitney was once confined in the cab my mission was practically accomplished; and for the rest, I could not wish anything better than to be associated with my friend in one of those singular adventures which were the normal condition of his existence. In a few minutes I had written my note, paid Whitney’s bill, led him out to the cab, and seen him driven through the darkness. In a very short time a decrepit figure had emerged from the opium den, and I was walking down the street with Sherlock Holmes. For two streets he shuffled along with a bent back and an uncertain foot. Then, glancing quickly round, he straightened himself out and burst into a hearty fit of laughter.

“I suppose, Watson,” said he, “that you imagine that I have added opium-smoking to cocaine injections, and all the other little weaknesses on which you have favoured me with your medical views.” “Yes; one of my natural enemies, or, shall I say, my natural prey. Briefly, Watson, I am in the midst of a very remarkable inquiry, and I have hoped to find a clue in the incoherent ramblings of these sots, as I have done before now. Had I been recognised in that den my life would not have been worth an hour’s purchase; for I have used it before now for my own purposes, and the rascally Lascar who runs it has sworn to have vengeance upon me. There is a trap-door at the back of that building, near the corner of Paul’s Wharf, which could tell some strange tales of what has passed through it upon the moonless nights.” “Ay, bodies, Watson. We should be rich men if we had £ 1000 for every poor devil who has been done to death in that den. It is the vilest murder-trap on the whole riverside, and I fear that Neville St. Clair has entered it never to leave it more. But our trap should be here.” He put his two forefingers between his teeth and whistled shrilly—a signal which was answered by a similar whistle from the distance, followed shortly by the rattle of wheels and the clink of horses’ hoofs.

“Now, Watson,” said Holmes, as a tall dog-cart dashed up through the gloom, throwing out two golden tunnels of yellow light from its side lanterns. “You’ll come with me, won’t you?” “Of course you are. You’ll know all about it presently. Jump up here. All right, John; we shall not need you. Here’s half a crown. Look out for me to-morrow, about eleven. Give her her head. So long, then!” He flicked the horse with his whip, and we dashed away through the endless succession of sombre and deserted streets, which widened gradually, until we were flying across a broad balustraded bridge, with the murky river flowing sluggishly beneath us. Beyond lay another dull wilderness of bricks and mortar, its silence broken only by the heavy, regular footfall of the policeman, or the songs and shouts of some belated party of revellers. A dull wrack was drifting slowly across the sky, and a star or two twinkled dimly here and there through the rifts of the clouds. Holmes drove in silence, with his head sunk upon his breast, and the air of a man who is lost in thought, while I sat beside him, curious to learn what this new quest might be which seemed to tax his powers so sorely, and yet afraid to break in upon the current of his thoughts. We had driven several miles, and were beginning to get to the fringe of the belt of suburban villas, when he shook himself, shrugged his shoulders, and lit up his pipe with the air of a man who has satisfied himself that he is acting for the best.

“You have a grand gift of silence, Watson,” said he. “It makes you quite invaluable as a companion. ’Pon my word, it is a great thing for me to have someone to talk to, for my own thoughts are not over-pleasant. I was wondering what I should say to this dear little woman to-night when she meets me at the door.” “I shall just have time to tell you the facts of the case before we get to Lee. It seems absurdly simple, and yet, somehow I can get nothing to go upon. There’s plenty of thread, no doubt, but I can’t get the end of it into my hand. Now, I’ll state the case clearly and concisely to you, Watson, and maybe you can see a spark where all is dark to me.” “Some years ago—to be definite, in May, 1884—there came to Lee a gentleman, Neville St. Clair by name, who appeared to have plenty of money. He took a large villa, laid out the grounds very nicely, and lived generally in good style. By degrees he made friends in the neighbourhood, and in 1887 he married the daughter of a local brewer, by whom he now has two children. He had no occupation, but was interested in several companies and went into town as a rule in the morning, returning by the 5:14 from Cannon Street every night. Mr. St. Clair is now thirty-seven years of age, is a man of temperate habits, a good husband, a very affectionate father, and a man who is popular with all who know him. I may add that his whole debts at the present moment, as far as we have been able to ascertain, amount to £ 88 10_s_., while he has £ 220 standing to his credit in the Capital and Counties Bank. There is no reason, therefore, to think that money troubles have been weighing upon his mind.

“Last Monday Mr. Neville St. Clair went into town rather earlier than usual, remarking before he started that he had two important commissions to perform, and that he would bring his little boy home a box of bricks. Now, by the merest chance, his wife received a telegram upon this same Monday, very shortly after his departure, to the effect that a small parcel of considerable value which she had been expecting was waiting for her at the offices of the Aberdeen Shipping Company. Now, if you are well up in your London, you will know that the office of the company is in Fresno Street, which branches out of Upper Swandam Lane, where you found me to-night. Mrs. St. Clair had her lunch, started for the City, did some shopping, proceeded to the company’s office, got her packet, and found herself at exactly 4:35 walking through Swandam Lane on her way back to the station. Have you followed me so far?” “If you remember, Monday was an exceedingly hot day, and Mrs. St. Clair walked slowly, glancing about in the hope of seeing a cab, as she did not like the neighbourhood in which she found herself. While she was walking in this way down Swandam Lane, she suddenly heard an ejaculation or cry, and was struck cold to see her husband looking down at her and, as it seemed to her, beckoning to her from a second-floor window. The window was open, and she distinctly saw his face, which she describes as being terribly agitated. He waved his hands frantically to her, and then vanished from the window so suddenly that it seemed to her that he had been plucked back by some irresistible force from behind. One singular point which struck her quick feminine eye was that although he wore some dark coat, such as he had started to town in, he had on neither collar nor necktie.

“Convinced that something was amiss with him, she rushed down the steps—for the house was none other than the opium den in which you found me to-night—and running through the front room she attempted to ascend the stairs which led to the first floor. At the foot of the stairs, however, she met this Lascar scoundrel of whom I have spoken, who thrust her back and, aided by a Dane, who acts as assistant there, pushed her out into the street. Filled with the most maddening doubts and fears, she rushed down the lane and, by rare good-fortune, met in Fresno Street a number of constables with an inspector, all on their way to their beat. The inspector and two men accompanied her back, and in spite of the continued resistance of the proprietor, they made their way to the room in which Mr. St. Clair had last been seen. There was no sign of him there. In fact, in the whole of that floor there was no one to be found save a crippled wretch of hideous aspect, who, it seems, made his home there. Both he and the Lascar stoutly swore that no one else had been in the front room during the afternoon. So determined was their denial that the inspector was staggered, and had almost come to believe that Mrs. St. Clair had been deluded when, with a cry, she sprang at a small deal box which lay upon the table and tore the lid from it. Out there fell a cascade of children’s bricks. It was the toy which he had promised to bring home.

“This discovery, and the evident confusion which the cripple showed, made the inspector realise that the matter was serious. The rooms were carefully examined, and results all pointed to an abominable crime. The front room was plainly furnished as a sitting-room and led into a small bedroom, which looked out upon the back of one of the wharves. Between the wharf and the bedroom window is a narrow strip, which is dry at low tide but is covered at high tide with at least four and a half feet of water. The bedroom window was a broad one and opened from below. On examination traces of blood were to be seen upon the windowsill, and several scattered drops were visible upon the wooden floor of the bedroom. Thrust away behind a curtain in the front room were all the clothes of Mr. Neville St. Clair, with the exception of his coat. His boots, his socks, his hat, and his watch—all were there. There were no signs of violence upon any of these garments, and there were no other traces of Mr. Neville St. Clair. Out of the window he must apparently have gone for no other exit could be discovered, and the ominous bloodstains upon the sill gave little promise that he could save himself by swimming, for the tide was at its very highest at the moment of the tragedy.

“And now as to the villains who seemed to be immediately implicated in the matter. The Lascar was known to be a man of the vilest antecedents, but as, by Mrs. St. Clair’s story, he was known to have been at the foot of the stair within a very few seconds of her husband’s appearance at the window, he could hardly have been more than an accessory to the crime. His defence was one of absolute ignorance, and he protested that he had no knowledge as to the doings of Hugh Boone, his lodger, and that he could not account in any way for the presence of the missing gentleman’s clothes. “So much for the Lascar manager. Now for the sinister cripple who lives upon the second floor of the opium den, and who was certainly the last human being whose eyes rested upon Neville St. Clair. His name is Hugh Boone, and his hideous face is one which is familiar to every man who goes much to the City. He is a professional beggar, though in order to avoid the police regulations he pretends to a small trade in wax vestas. Some little distance down Threadneedle Street, upon the left-hand side, there is, as you may have remarked, a small angle in the wall. Here it is that this creature takes his daily seat, cross-legged with his tiny stock of matches on his lap, and as he is a piteous spectacle a small rain of charity descends into the greasy leather cap which lies upon the pavement beside him. I have watched the fellow more than once before ever I thought of making his professional acquaintance, and I have been surprised at the harvest which he has reaped in a short time. His appearance, you see, is so remarkable that no one can pass him without observing him. A shock of orange hair, a pale face disfigured by a horrible scar, which, by its contraction, has turned up the outer edge of his upper lip, a bulldog chin, and a pair of very penetrating dark eyes, which present a singular contrast to the colour of his hair, all mark him out from amid the common crowd of mendicants and so, too, does his wit, for he is ever ready with a reply to any piece of chaff which may be thrown at him by the passers-by. This is the man whom we now learn to have been the lodger at the opium den, and to have been the last man to see the gentleman of whom we are in quest.”

“He is a cripple in the sense that he walks with a limp; but in other respects he appears to be a powerful and well-nurtured man. Surely your medical experience would tell you, Watson, that weakness in one limb is often compensated for by exceptional strength in the others.” “Mrs. St. Clair had fainted at the sight of the blood upon the window, and she was escorted home in a cab by the police, as her presence could be of no help to them in their investigations. Inspector Barton, who had charge of the case, made a very careful examination of the premises, but without finding anything which threw any light upon the matter. One mistake had been made in not arresting Boone instantly, as he was allowed some few minutes during which he might have communicated with his friend the Lascar, but this fault was soon remedied, and he was seized and searched, without anything being found which could incriminate him. There were, it is true, some blood-stains upon his right shirt-sleeve, but he pointed to his ring-finger, which had been cut near the nail, and explained that the bleeding came from there, adding that he had been to the window not long before, and that the stains which had been observed there came doubtless from the same source. He denied strenuously having ever seen Mr. Neville St. Clair and swore that the presence of the clothes in his room was as much a mystery to him as to the police. As to Mrs. St. Clair’s assertion that she had actually seen her husband at the window, he declared that she must have been either mad or dreaming. He was removed, loudly protesting, to the police-station, while the inspector remained upon the premises in the hope that the ebbing tide might afford some fresh clue.

“And it did, though they hardly found upon the mud-bank what they had feared to find. It was Neville St. Clair’s coat, and not Neville St. Clair, which lay uncovered as the tide receded. And what do you think they found in the pockets?” “No, I don’t think you would guess. Every pocket stuffed with pennies and half-pennies—421 pennies and 270 half-pennies. It was no wonder that it had not been swept away by the tide. But a human body is a different matter. There is a fierce eddy between the wharf and the house. It seemed likely enough that the weighted coat had remained when the stripped body had been sucked away into the river.” “No, sir, but the facts might be met speciously enough. Suppose that this man Boone had thrust Neville St. Clair through the window, there is no human eye which could have seen the deed. What would he do then? It would of course instantly strike him that he must get rid of the tell-tale garments. He would seize the coat, then, and be in the act of throwing it out, when it would occur to him that it would swim and not sink. He has little time, for he has heard the scuffle downstairs when the wife tried to force her way up, and perhaps he has already heard from his Lascar confederate that the police are hurrying up the street. There is not an instant to be lost. He rushes to some secret hoard, where he has accumulated the fruits of his beggary, and he stuffs all the coins upon which he can lay his hands into the pockets to make sure of the coat’s sinking. He throws it out, and would have done the same with the other garments had not he heard the rush of steps below, and only just had time to close the window when the police appeared.”

“Well, we will take it as a working hypothesis for want of a better. Boone, as I have told you, was arrested and taken to the station, but it could not be shown that there had ever before been anything against him. He had for years been known as a professional beggar, but his life appeared to have been a very quiet and innocent one. There the matter stands at present, and the questions which have to be solved—what Neville St. Clair was doing in the opium den, what happened to him when there, where is he now, and what Hugh Boone had to do with his disappearance—are all as far from a solution as ever. I confess that I cannot recall any case within my experience which looked at the first glance so simple and yet which presented such difficulties.” While Sherlock Holmes had been detailing this singular series of events, we had been whirling through the outskirts of the great town until the last straggling houses had been left behind, and we rattled along with a country hedge upon either side of us. Just as he finished, however, we drove through two scattered villages, where a few lights still glimmered in the windows.

“We are on the outskirts of Lee,” said my companion. “We have touched on three English counties in our short drive, starting in Middlesex, passing over an angle of Surrey, and ending in Kent. See that light among the trees? That is The Cedars, and beside that lamp sits a woman whose anxious ears have already, I have little doubt, caught the clink of our horse’s feet.” “Because there are many inquiries which must be made out here. Mrs. St. Clair has most kindly put two rooms at my disposal, and you may rest assured that she will have nothing but a welcome for my friend and colleague. I hate to meet her, Watson, when I have no news of her husband. Here we are. Whoa, there, whoa!” We had pulled up in front of a large villa which stood within its own grounds. A stable-boy had run out to the horse’s head, and springing down, I followed Holmes up the small, winding gravel-drive which led to the house. As we approached, the door flew open, and a little blonde woman stood in the opening, clad in some sort of light mousseline de soie, with a touch of fluffy pink chiffon at her neck and wrists. She stood with her figure outlined against the flood of light, one hand upon the door, one half-raised in her eagerness, her body slightly bent, her head and face protruded, with eager eyes and parted lips, a standing question.

“Well?” she cried, “well?” And then, seeing that there were two of us, she gave a cry of hope which sank into a groan as she saw that my companion shook his head and shrugged his shoulders. “This is my friend, Dr. Watson. He has been of most vital use to me in several of my cases, and a lucky chance has made it possible for me to bring him out and associate him with this investigation.” “I am delighted to see you,” said she, pressing my hand warmly. “You will, I am sure, forgive anything that may be wanting in our arrangements, when you consider the blow which has come so suddenly upon us.” “My dear madam,” said I, “I am an old campaigner, and if I were not I can very well see that no apology is needed. If I can be of any assistance, either to you or to my friend here, I shall be indeed happy.” “Now, Mr. Sherlock Holmes,” said the lady as we entered a well-lit dining-room, upon the table of which a cold supper had been laid out, “I should very much like to ask you one or two plain questions, to which I beg that you will give a plain answer.”

Sherlock Holmes seemed to be embarrassed by the question. “Frankly, now!” she repeated, standing upon the rug and looking keenly down at him as he leaned back in a basket-chair. He snatched it from her in his eagerness, and smoothing it out upon the table he drew over the lamp and examined it intently. I had left my chair and was gazing at it over his shoulder. The envelope was a very coarse one and was stamped with the Gravesend postmark and with the date of that very day, or rather of the day before, for it was considerably after midnight. “The name, you see, is in perfectly black ink, which has dried itself. The rest is of the greyish colour, which shows that blotting-paper has been used. If it had been written straight off, and then blotted, none would be of a deep black shade. This man has written the name, and there has then been a pause before he wrote the address, which can only mean that he was not familiar with it. It is, of course, a trifle, but there is nothing so important as trifles. Let us now see the letter. Ha! there has been an enclosure here!”

“‘Dearest do not be frightened. All will come well. There is a huge error which it may take some little time to rectify. Wait in patience.—NEVILLE.’ Written in pencil upon the fly-leaf of a book, octavo size, no water-mark. Hum! Posted to-day in Gravesend by a man with a dirty thumb. Ha! And the flap has been gummed, if I am not very much in error, by a person who had been chewing tobacco. And you have no doubt that it is your husband’s hand, madam?” “Oh, you must not discourage me, Mr. Holmes. I know that all is well with him. There is so keen a sympathy between us that I should know if evil came upon him. On the very day that I saw him last he cut himself in the bedroom, and yet I in the dining-room rushed upstairs instantly with the utmost certainty that something had happened. Do you think that I would respond to such a trifle and yet be ignorant of his death?” “I have seen too much not to know that the impression of a woman may be more valuable than the conclusion of an analytical reasoner. And in this letter you certainly have a very strong piece of evidence to corroborate your view. But if your husband is alive and able to write letters, why should he remain away from you?”

“Thank you, Mrs. St. Clair. Those are the principal points about which I wished to be absolutely clear. We shall now have a little supper and then retire, for we may have a very busy day to-morrow.” A large and comfortable double-bedded room had been placed at our disposal, and I was quickly between the sheets, for I was weary after my night of adventure. Sherlock Holmes was a man, however, who, when he had an unsolved problem upon his mind, would go for days, and even for a week, without rest, turning it over, rearranging his facts, looking at it from every point of view until he had either fathomed it or convinced himself that his data were insufficient. It was soon evident to me that he was now preparing for an all-night sitting. He took off his coat and waistcoat, put on a large blue dressing-gown, and then wandered about the room collecting pillows from his bed and cushions from the sofa and armchairs. With these he constructed a sort of Eastern divan, upon which he perched himself cross-legged, with an ounce of shag tobacco and a box of matches laid out in front of him. In the dim light of the lamp I saw him sitting there, an old briar pipe between his lips, his eyes fixed vacantly upon the corner of the ceiling, the blue smoke curling up from him, silent, motionless, with the light shining upon his strong-set aquiline features. So he sat as I dropped off to sleep, and so he sat when a sudden ejaculation caused me to wake up, and I found the summer sun shining into the apartment. The pipe was still between his lips, the smoke still curled upward, and the room was full of a dense tobacco haze, but nothing remained of the heap of shag which I had seen upon the previous night.

“Then dress. No one is stirring yet, but I know where the stable-boy sleeps, and we shall soon have the trap out.” He chuckled to himself as he spoke, his eyes twinkled, and he seemed a different man to the sombre thinker of the previous night. As I dressed I glanced at my watch. It was no wonder that no one was stirring. It was twenty-five minutes past four. I had hardly finished when Holmes returned with the news that the boy was putting in the horse. “I want to test a little theory of mine,” said he, pulling on his boots. “I think, Watson, that you are now standing in the presence of one of the most absolute fools in Europe. I deserve to be kicked from here to Charing Cross. But I think I have the key of the affair now.” “In the bathroom,” he answered. “Oh, yes, I am not joking,” he continued, seeing my look of incredulity. “I have just been there, and I have taken it out, and I have got it in this Gladstone bag. Come on, my boy, and we shall see whether it will not fit the lock.”

We made our way downstairs as quietly as possible, and out into the bright morning sunshine. In the road stood our horse and trap, with the half-clad stable-boy waiting at the head. We both sprang in, and away we dashed down the London Road. A few country carts were stirring, bearing in vegetables to the metropolis, but the lines of villas on either side were as silent and lifeless as some city in a dream. “It has been in some points a singular case,” said Holmes, flicking the horse on into a gallop. “I confess that I have been as blind as a mole, but it is better to learn wisdom late than never to learn it at all.” In town the earliest risers were just beginning to look sleepily from their windows as we drove through the streets of the Surrey side. Passing down the Waterloo Bridge Road we crossed over the river, and dashing up Wellington Street wheeled sharply to the right and found ourselves in Bow Street. Sherlock Holmes was well known to the force, and the two constables at the door saluted him. One of them held the horse’s head while the other led us in.

“Ah, Bradstreet, how are you?” A tall, stout official had come down the stone-flagged passage, in a peaked cap and frogged jacket. “I wish to have a quiet word with you, Bradstreet.” “Yes, it is all we can do to make him wash his hands, and his face is as black as a tinker’s. Well, when once his case has been settled, he will have a regular prison bath; and I think, if you saw him, you would agree with me that he needed it.” “Very good. Come this way, if you please.” He led us down a passage, opened a barred door, passed down a winding stair, and brought us to a whitewashed corridor with a line of doors on each side. We both put our eyes to the grating. The prisoner lay with his face towards us, in a very deep sleep, breathing slowly and heavily. He was a middle-sized man, coarsely clad as became his calling, with a coloured shirt protruding through the rent in his tattered coat. He was, as the inspector had said, extremely dirty, but the grime which covered his face could not conceal its repulsive ugliness. A broad wheal from an old scar ran right across it from eye to chin, and by its contraction had turned up one side of the upper lip, so that three teeth were exposed in a perpetual snarl. A shock of very bright red hair grew low over his eyes and forehead.

“He certainly needs a wash,” remarked Holmes. “I had an idea that he might, and I took the liberty of bringing the tools with me.” He opened the Gladstone bag as he spoke, and took out, to my astonishment, a very large bath-sponge. “Well, I don’t know why not,” said the inspector. “He doesn’t look a credit to the Bow Street cells, does he?” He slipped his key into the lock, and we all very quietly entered the cell. The sleeper half turned, and then settled down once more into a deep slumber. Holmes stooped to the water-jug, moistened his sponge, and then rubbed it twice vigorously across and down the prisoner’s face. Never in my life have I seen such a sight. The man’s face peeled off under the sponge like the bark from a tree. Gone was the coarse brown tint! Gone, too, was the horrid scar which had seamed it across, and the twisted lip which had given the repulsive sneer to the face! A twitch brought away the tangled red hair, and there, sitting up in his bed, was a pale, sad-faced, refined-looking man, black-haired and smooth-skinned, rubbing his eyes and staring about him with sleepy bewilderment. Then suddenly realising the exposure, he broke into a scream and threw himself down with his face to the pillow.

“With making away with Mr. Neville St.— Oh, come, you can’t be charged with that unless they make a case of attempted suicide of it,” said the inspector with a grin. “Well, I have been twenty-seven years in the force, but this really takes the cake.” “It was not the wife; it was the children,” groaned the prisoner. “God help me, I would not have them ashamed of their father. My God! What an exposure! What can I do?” “If you leave it to a court of law to clear the matter up,” said he, “of course you can hardly avoid publicity. On the other hand, if you convince the police authorities that there is no possible case against you, I do not know that there is any reason that the details should find their way into the papers. Inspector Bradstreet would, I am sure, make notes upon anything which you might tell us and submit it to the proper authorities. The case would then never go into court at all.” “God bless you!” cried the prisoner passionately. “I would have endured imprisonment, ay, even execution, rather than have left my miserable secret as a family blot to my children.

“You are the first who have ever heard my story. My father was a schoolmaster in Chesterfield, where I received an excellent education. I travelled in my youth, took to the stage, and finally became a reporter on an evening paper in London. One day my editor wished to have a series of articles upon begging in the metropolis, and I volunteered to supply them. There was the point from which all my adventures started. It was only by trying begging as an amateur that I could get the facts upon which to base my articles. When an actor I had, of course, learned all the secrets of making up, and had been famous in the green-room for my skill. I took advantage now of my attainments. I painted my face, and to make myself as pitiable as possible I made a good scar and fixed one side of my lip in a twist by the aid of a small slip of flesh-coloured plaster. Then with a red head of hair, and an appropriate dress, I took my station in the business part of the city, ostensibly as a match-seller but really as a beggar. For seven hours I plied my trade, and when I returned home in the evening I found to my surprise that I had received no less than 26_s_. 4_d_.

“I wrote my articles and thought little more of the matter until, some time later, I backed a bill for a friend and had a writ served upon me for £ 25. I was at my wit’s end where to get the money, but a sudden idea came to me. I begged a fortnight’s grace from the creditor, asked for a holiday from my employers, and spent the time in begging in the City under my disguise. In ten days I had the money and had paid the debt. “Well, you can imagine how hard it was to settle down to arduous work at £ 2 a week when I knew that I could earn as much in a day by smearing my face with a little paint, laying my cap on the ground, and sitting still. It was a long fight between my pride and the money, but the dollars won at last, and I threw up reporting and sat day after day in the corner which I had first chosen, inspiring pity by my ghastly face and filling my pockets with coppers. Only one man knew my secret. He was the keeper of a low den in which I used to lodge in Swandam Lane, where I could every morning emerge as a squalid beggar and in the evenings transform myself into a well-dressed man about town. This fellow, a Lascar, was well paid by me for his rooms, so that I knew that my secret was safe in his possession.

“Well, very soon I found that I was saving considerable sums of money. I do not mean that any beggar in the streets of London could earn £ 700 a year—which is less than my average takings—but I had exceptional advantages in my power of making up, and also in a facility of repartee, which improved by practice and made me quite a recognised character in the City. All day a stream of pennies, varied by silver, poured in upon me, and it was a very bad day in which I failed to take £ 2. “As I grew richer I grew more ambitious, took a house in the country, and eventually married, without anyone having a suspicion as to my real occupation. My dear wife knew that I had business in the City. She little knew what. “Last Monday I had finished for the day and was dressing in my room above the opium den when I looked out of my window and saw, to my horror and astonishment, that my wife was standing in the street, with her eyes fixed full upon me. I gave a cry of surprise, threw up my arms to cover my face, and, rushing to my confidant, the Lascar, entreated him to prevent anyone from coming up to me. I heard her voice downstairs, but I knew that she could not ascend. Swiftly I threw off my clothes, pulled on those of a beggar, and put on my pigments and wig. Even a wife’s eyes could not pierce so complete a disguise. But then it occurred to me that there might be a search in the room, and that the clothes might betray me. I threw open the window, reopening by my violence a small cut which I had inflicted upon myself in the bedroom that morning. Then I seized my coat, which was weighted by the coppers which I had just transferred to it from the leather bag in which I carried my takings. I hurled it out of the window, and it disappeared into the Thames. The other clothes would have followed, but at that moment there was a rush of constables up the stair, and a few minutes after I found, rather, I confess, to my relief, that instead of being identified as Mr. Neville St. Clair, I was arrested as his murderer.

“I do not know that there is anything else for me to explain. I was determined to preserve my disguise as long as possible, and hence my preference for a dirty face. Knowing that my wife would be terribly anxious, I slipped off my ring and confided it to the Lascar at a moment when no constable was watching me, together with a hurried scrawl, telling her that she had no cause to fear.” “The police have watched this Lascar,” said Inspector Bradstreet, “and I can quite understand that he might find it difficult to post a letter unobserved. Probably he handed it to some sailor customer of his, who forgot all about it for some days.” “In that case I think that it is probable that no further steps may be taken. But if you are found again, then all must come out. I am sure, Mr. Holmes, that we are very much indebted to you for having cleared the matter up. I wish I knew how you reach your results.” “I reached this one,” said my friend, “by sitting upon five pillows and consuming an ounce of shag. I think, Watson, that if we drive to Baker Street we shall just be in time for breakfast.”

I had called upon my friend Sherlock Holmes upon the second morning after Christmas, with the intention of wishing him the compliments of the season. He was lounging upon the sofa in a purple dressing-gown, a pipe-rack within his reach upon the right, and a pile of crumpled morning papers, evidently newly studied, near at hand. Beside the couch was a wooden chair, and on the angle of the back hung a very seedy and disreputable hard-felt hat, much the worse for wear, and cracked in several places. A lens and a forceps lying upon the seat of the chair suggested that the hat had been suspended in this manner for the purpose of examination. “Not at all. I am glad to have a friend with whom I can discuss my results. The matter is a perfectly trivial one”—he jerked his thumb in the direction of the old hat—“but there are points in connection with it which are not entirely devoid of interest and even of instruction.” I seated myself in his armchair and warmed my hands before his crackling fire, for a sharp frost had set in, and the windows were thick with the ice crystals. “I suppose,” I remarked, “that, homely as it looks, this thing has some deadly story linked on to it—that it is the clue which will guide you in the solution of some mystery and the punishment of some crime.”

“No, no. No crime,” said Sherlock Holmes, laughing. “Only one of those whimsical little incidents which will happen when you have four million human beings all jostling each other within the space of a few square miles. Amid the action and reaction of so dense a swarm of humanity, every possible combination of events may be expected to take place, and many a little problem will be presented which may be striking and bizarre without being criminal. We have already had experience of such.” “Precisely. You allude to my attempt to recover the Irene Adler papers, to the singular case of Miss Mary Sutherland, and to the adventure of the man with the twisted lip. Well, I have no doubt that this small matter will fall into the same innocent category. You know Peterson, the commissionaire?” “No, no, he found it. Its owner is unknown. I beg that you will look upon it not as a battered billycock but as an intellectual problem. And, first, as to how it came here. It arrived upon Christmas morning, in company with a good fat goose, which is, I have no doubt, roasting at this moment in front of Peterson’s fire. The facts are these: about four o’clock on Christmas morning, Peterson, who, as you know, is a very honest fellow, was returning from some small jollification and was making his way homeward down Tottenham Court Road. In front of him he saw, in the gaslight, a tallish man, walking with a slight stagger, and carrying a white goose slung over his shoulder. As he reached the corner of Goodge Street, a row broke out between this stranger and a little knot of roughs. One of the latter knocked off the man’s hat, on which he raised his stick to defend himself and, swinging it over his head, smashed the shop window behind him. Peterson had rushed forward to protect the stranger from his assailants; but the man, shocked at having broken the window, and seeing an official-looking person in uniform rushing towards him, dropped his goose, took to his heels, and vanished amid the labyrinth of small streets which lie at the back of Tottenham Court Road. The roughs had also fled at the appearance of Peterson, so that he was left in possession of the field of battle, and also of the spoils of victory in the shape of this battered hat and a most unimpeachable Christmas goose.”

“My dear fellow, there lies the problem. It is true that ‘For Mrs. Henry Baker’ was printed upon a small card which was tied to the bird’s left leg, and it is also true that the initials ‘H. B.’ are legible upon the lining of this hat, but as there are some thousands of Bakers, and some hundreds of Henry Bakers in this city of ours, it is not easy to restore lost property to any one of them.” “He brought round both hat and goose to me on Christmas morning, knowing that even the smallest problems are of interest to me. The goose we retained until this morning, when there were signs that, in spite of the slight frost, it would be well that it should be eaten without unnecessary delay. Its finder has carried it off, therefore, to fulfil the ultimate destiny of a goose, while I continue to retain the hat of the unknown gentleman who lost his Christmas dinner.” I took the tattered object in my hands and turned it over rather ruefully. It was a very ordinary black hat of the usual round shape, hard and much the worse for wear. The lining had been of red silk, but was a good deal discoloured. There was no maker’s name; but, as Holmes had remarked, the initials “H. B.” were scrawled upon one side. It was pierced in the brim for a hat-securer, but the elastic was missing. For the rest, it was cracked, exceedingly dusty, and spotted in several places, although there seemed to have been some attempt to hide the discoloured patches by smearing them with ink.

He picked it up and gazed at it in the peculiar introspective fashion which was characteristic of him. “It is perhaps less suggestive than it might have been,” he remarked, “and yet there are a few inferences which are very distinct, and a few others which represent at least a strong balance of probability. That the man was highly intellectual is of course obvious upon the face of it, and also that he was fairly well-to-do within the last three years, although he has now fallen upon evil days. He had foresight, but has less now than formerly, pointing to a moral retrogression, which, when taken with the decline of his fortunes, seems to indicate some evil influence, probably drink, at work upon him. This may account also for the obvious fact that his wife has ceased to love him.” “He has, however, retained some degree of self-respect,” he continued, disregarding my remonstrance. “He is a man who leads a sedentary life, goes out little, is out of training entirely, is middle-aged, has grizzled hair which he has had cut within the last few days, and which he anoints with lime-cream. These are the more patent facts which are to be deduced from his hat. Also, by the way, that it is extremely improbable that he has gas laid on in his house.”

“I have no doubt that I am very stupid, but I must confess that I am unable to follow you. For example, how did you deduce that this man was intellectual?” For answer Holmes clapped the hat upon his head. It came right over the forehead and settled upon the bridge of his nose. “It is a question of cubic capacity,” said he; “a man with so large a brain must have something in it.” “This hat is three years old. These flat brims curled at the edge came in then. It is a hat of the very best quality. Look at the band of ribbed silk and the excellent lining. If this man could afford to buy so expensive a hat three years ago, and has had no hat since, then he has assuredly gone down in the world.” Sherlock Holmes laughed. “Here is the foresight,” said he putting his finger upon the little disc and loop of the hat-securer. “They are never sold upon hats. If this man ordered one, it is a sign of a certain amount of foresight, since he went out of his way to take this precaution against the wind. But since we see that he has broken the elastic and has not troubled to replace it, it is obvious that he has less foresight now than formerly, which is a distinct proof of a weakening nature. On the other hand, he has endeavoured to conceal some of these stains upon the felt by daubing them with ink, which is a sign that he has not entirely lost his self-respect.”

“The further points, that he is middle-aged, that his hair is grizzled, that it has been recently cut, and that he uses lime-cream, are all to be gathered from a close examination of the lower part of the lining. The lens discloses a large number of hair-ends, clean cut by the scissors of the barber. They all appear to be adhesive, and there is a distinct odour of lime-cream. This dust, you will observe, is not the gritty, grey dust of the street but the fluffy brown dust of the house, showing that it has been hung up indoors most of the time, while the marks of moisture upon the inside are proof positive that the wearer perspired very freely, and could therefore, hardly be in the best of training.” “This hat has not been brushed for weeks. When I see you, my dear Watson, with a week’s accumulation of dust upon your hat, and when your wife allows you to go out in such a state, I shall fear that you also have been unfortunate enough to lose your wife’s affection.”

“One tallow stain, or even two, might come by chance; but when I see no less than five, I think that there can be little doubt that the individual must be brought into frequent contact with burning tallow—walks upstairs at night probably with his hat in one hand and a guttering candle in the other. Anyhow, he never got tallow-stains from a gas-jet. Are you satisfied?” “Well, it is very ingenious,” said I, laughing; “but since, as you said just now, there has been no crime committed, and no harm done save the loss of a goose, all this seems to be rather a waste of energy.” Sherlock Holmes had opened his mouth to reply, when the door flew open, and Peterson, the commissionaire, rushed into the apartment with flushed cheeks and the face of a man who is dazed with astonishment. “Eh? What of it, then? Has it returned to life and flapped off through the kitchen window?” Holmes twisted himself round upon the sofa to get a fairer view of the man’s excited face. “See here, sir! See what my wife found in its crop!” He held out his hand and displayed upon the centre of the palm a brilliantly scintillating blue stone, rather smaller than a bean in size, but of such purity and radiance that it twinkled like an electric point in the dark hollow of his hand.

“Precisely so. I ought to know its size and shape, seeing that I have read the advertisement about it in _The Times_ every day lately. It is absolutely unique, and its value can only be conjectured, but the reward offered of £ 1000 is certainly not within a twentieth part of the market price.” “That is the reward, and I have reason to know that there are sentimental considerations in the background which would induce the Countess to part with half her fortune if she could but recover the gem.” “Precisely so, on December 22nd, just five days ago. John Horner, a plumber, was accused of having abstracted it from the lady’s jewel-case. The evidence against him was so strong that the case has been referred to the Assizes. I have some account of the matter here, I believe.” He rummaged amid his newspapers, glancing over the dates, until at last he smoothed one out, doubled it over, and read the following paragraph: “Hotel Cosmopolitan Jewel Robbery. John Horner, 26, plumber, was brought up upon the charge of having upon the 22nd inst., abstracted from the jewel-case of the Countess of Morcar the valuable gem known as the blue carbuncle. James Ryder, upper-attendant at the hotel, gave his evidence to the effect that he had shown Horner up to the dressing-room of the Countess of Morcar upon the day of the robbery in order that he might solder the second bar of the grate, which was loose. He had remained with Horner some little time, but had finally been called away. On returning, he found that Horner had disappeared, that the bureau had been forced open, and that the small morocco casket in which, as it afterwards transpired, the Countess was accustomed to keep her jewel, was lying empty upon the dressing-table. Ryder instantly gave the alarm, and Horner was arrested the same evening; but the stone could not be found either upon his person or in his rooms. Catherine Cusack, maid to the Countess, deposed to having heard Ryder’s cry of dismay on discovering the robbery, and to having rushed into the room, where she found matters as described by the last witness. Inspector Bradstreet, B division, gave evidence as to the arrest of Horner, who struggled frantically, and protested his innocence in the strongest terms. Evidence of a previous conviction for robbery having been given against the prisoner, the magistrate refused to deal summarily with the offence, but referred it to the Assizes. Horner, who had shown signs of intense emotion during the proceedings, fainted away at the conclusion and was carried out of court.”

“Hum! So much for the police-court,” said Holmes thoughtfully, tossing aside the paper. “The question for us now to solve is the sequence of events leading from a rifled jewel-case at one end to the crop of a goose in Tottenham Court Road at the other. You see, Watson, our little deductions have suddenly assumed a much more important and less innocent aspect. Here is the stone; the stone came from the goose, and the goose came from Mr. Henry Baker, the gentleman with the bad hat and all the other characteristics with which I have bored you. So now we must set ourselves very seriously to finding this gentleman and ascertaining what part he has played in this little mystery. To do this, we must try the simplest means first, and these lie undoubtedly in an advertisement in all the evening papers. If this fail, I shall have recourse to other methods.” “Give me a pencil and that slip of paper. Now, then: ‘Found at the corner of Goodge Street, a goose and a black felt hat. Mr. Henry Baker can have the same by applying at 6:30 this evening at 221B, Baker Street.’ That is clear and concise.”

“Well, he is sure to keep an eye on the papers, since, to a poor man, the loss was a heavy one. He was clearly so scared by his mischance in breaking the window and by the approach of Peterson that he thought of nothing but flight, but since then he must have bitterly regretted the impulse which caused him to drop his bird. Then, again, the introduction of his name will cause him to see it, for everyone who knows him will direct his attention to it. Here you are, Peterson, run down to the advertising agency and have this put in the evening papers.” “Ah, yes, I shall keep the stone. Thank you. And, I say, Peterson, just buy a goose on your way back and leave it here with me, for we must have one to give to this gentleman in place of the one which your family is now devouring.” When the commissionaire had gone, Holmes took up the stone and held it against the light. “It’s a bonny thing,” said he. “Just see how it glints and sparkles. Of course it is a nucleus and focus of crime. Every good stone is. They are the devil’s pet baits. In the larger and older jewels every facet may stand for a bloody deed. This stone is not yet twenty years old. It was found in the banks of the Amoy River in southern China and is remarkable in having every characteristic of the carbuncle, save that it is blue in shade instead of ruby red. In spite of its youth, it has already a sinister history. There have been two murders, a vitriol-throwing, a suicide, and several robberies brought about for the sake of this forty-grain weight of crystallised charcoal. Who would think that so pretty a toy would be a purveyor to the gallows and the prison? I’ll lock it up in my strong box now and drop a line to the Countess to say that we have it.”

“It is, I think, much more likely that Henry Baker is an absolutely innocent man, who had no idea that the bird which he was carrying was of considerably more value than if it were made of solid gold. That, however, I shall determine by a very simple test if we have an answer to our advertisement.” “In that case I shall continue my professional round. But I shall come back in the evening at the hour you have mentioned, for I should like to see the solution of so tangled a business.” “Very glad to see you. I dine at seven. There is a woodcock, I believe. By the way, in view of recent occurrences, perhaps I ought to ask Mrs. Hudson to examine its crop.” I had been delayed at a case, and it was a little after half-past six when I found myself in Baker Street once more. As I approached the house I saw a tall man in a Scotch bonnet with a coat which was buttoned up to his chin waiting outside in the bright semicircle which was thrown from the fanlight. Just as I arrived the door was opened, and we were shown up together to Holmes’ room.

“Mr. Henry Baker, I believe,” said he, rising from his armchair and greeting his visitor with the easy air of geniality which he could so readily assume. “Pray take this chair by the fire, Mr. Baker. It is a cold night, and I observe that your circulation is more adapted for summer than for winter. Ah, Watson, you have just come at the right time. Is that your hat, Mr. Baker?” He was a large man with rounded shoulders, a massive head, and a broad, intelligent face, sloping down to a pointed beard of grizzled brown. A touch of red in nose and cheeks, with a slight tremor of his extended hand, recalled Holmes’ surmise as to his habits. His rusty black frock-coat was buttoned right up in front, with the collar turned up, and his lank wrists protruded from his sleeves without a sign of cuff or shirt. He spoke in a slow staccato fashion, choosing his words with care, and gave the impression generally of a man of learning and letters who had had ill-usage at the hands of fortune.

“We have retained these things for some days,” said Holmes, “because we expected to see an advertisement from you giving your address. I am at a loss to know now why you did not advertise.” Our visitor gave a rather shamefaced laugh. “Shillings have not been so plentiful with me as they once were,” he remarked. “I had no doubt that the gang of roughs who assaulted me had carried off both my hat and the bird. I did not care to spend more money in a hopeless attempt at recovering them.” “Yes, it would have been of no use to anyone had we not done so. But I presume that this other goose upon the sideboard, which is about the same weight and perfectly fresh, will answer your purpose equally well?” The man burst into a hearty laugh. “They might be useful to me as relics of my adventure,” said he, “but beyond that I can hardly see what use the _disjecta membra_ of my late acquaintance are going to be to me. No, sir, I think that, with your permission, I will confine my attentions to the excellent bird which I perceive upon the sideboard.”

“There is your hat, then, and there your bird,” said he. “By the way, would it bore you to tell me where you got the other one from? I am somewhat of a fowl fancier, and I have seldom seen a better grown goose.” “Certainly, sir,” said Baker, who had risen and tucked his newly gained property under his arm. “There are a few of us who frequent the Alpha Inn, near the Museum—we are to be found in the Museum itself during the day, you understand. This year our good host, Windigate by name, instituted a goose club, by which, on consideration of some few pence every week, we were each to receive a bird at Christmas. My pence were duly paid, and the rest is familiar to you. I am much indebted to you, sir, for a Scotch bonnet is fitted neither to my years nor my gravity.” With a comical pomposity of manner he bowed solemnly to both of us and strode off upon his way. “So much for Mr. Henry Baker,” said Holmes when he had closed the door behind him. “It is quite certain that he knows nothing whatever about the matter. Are you hungry, Watson?”

It was a bitter night, so we drew on our ulsters and wrapped cravats about our throats. Outside, the stars were shining coldly in a cloudless sky, and the breath of the passers-by blew out into smoke like so many pistol shots. Our footfalls rang out crisply and loudly as we swung through the doctors’ quarter, Wimpole Street, Harley Street, and so through Wigmore Street into Oxford Street. In a quarter of an hour we were in Bloomsbury at the Alpha Inn, which is a small public-house at the corner of one of the streets which runs down into Holborn. Holmes pushed open the door of the private bar and ordered two glasses of beer from the ruddy-faced, white-aproned landlord. “Now for Mr. Breckinridge,” he continued, buttoning up his coat as we came out into the frosty air. “Remember, Watson that though we have so homely a thing as a goose at one end of this chain, we have at the other a man who will certainly get seven years’ penal servitude unless we can establish his innocence. It is possible that our inquiry may but confirm his guilt; but, in any case, we have a line of investigation which has been missed by the police, and which a singular chance has placed in our hands. Let us follow it out to the bitter end. Faces to the south, then, and quick march!”

We passed across Holborn, down Endell Street, and so through a zigzag of slums to Covent Garden Market. One of the largest stalls bore the name of Breckinridge upon it, and the proprietor a horsey-looking man, with a sharp face and trim side-whiskers was helping a boy to put up the shutters. “Warm! You’d be as warm, maybe, if you were as pestered as I am. When I pay good money for a good article there should be an end of the business; but it’s ‘Where are the geese?’ and ‘Who did you sell the geese to?’ and ‘What will you take for the geese?’ One would think they were the only geese in the world, to hear the fuss that is made over them.” “Well, I have no connection with any other people who have been making inquiries,” said Holmes carelessly. “If you won’t tell us the bet is off, that is all. But I’m always ready to back my opinion on a matter of fowls, and I have a fiver on it that the bird I ate is country bred.”

“D’you think you know more about fowls than I, who have handled them ever since I was a nipper? I tell you, all those birds that went to the Alpha were town bred.” “Now then, Mr. Cocksure,” said the salesman, “I thought that I was out of geese, but before I finish you’ll find that there is still one left in my shop. You see this little book?” “That’s the list of the folk from whom I buy. D’you see? Well, then, here on this page are the country folk, and the numbers after their names are where their accounts are in the big ledger. Now, then! You see this other page in red ink? Well, that is a list of my town suppliers. Now, look at that third name. Just read it out to me.” Sherlock Holmes looked deeply chagrined. He drew a sovereign from his pocket and threw it down upon the slab, turning away with the air of a man whose disgust is too deep for words. A few yards off he stopped under a lamp-post and laughed in the hearty, noiseless fashion which was peculiar to him.

“When you see a man with whiskers of that cut and the ‘Pink ’un’ protruding out of his pocket, you can always draw him by a bet,” said he. “I daresay that if I had put £ 100 down in front of him, that man would not have given me such complete information as was drawn from him by the idea that he was doing me on a wager. Well, Watson, we are, I fancy, nearing the end of our quest, and the only point which remains to be determined is whether we should go on to this Mrs. Oakshott to-night, or whether we should reserve it for to-morrow. It is clear from what that surly fellow said that there are others besides ourselves who are anxious about the matter, and I should—” His remarks were suddenly cut short by a loud hubbub which broke out from the stall which we had just left. Turning round we saw a little rat-faced fellow standing in the centre of the circle of yellow light which was thrown by the swinging lamp, while Breckinridge, the salesman, framed in the door of his stall, was shaking his fists fiercely at the cringing figure.

“I’ve had enough of you and your geese,” he shouted. “I wish you were all at the devil together. If you come pestering me any more with your silly talk I’ll set the dog at you. You bring Mrs. Oakshott here and I’ll answer her, but what have you to do with it? Did I buy the geese off you?” “Well, you can ask the King of Proosia, for all I care. I’ve had enough of it. Get out of this!” He rushed fiercely forward, and the inquirer flitted away into the darkness. “Ha! this may save us a visit to Brixton Road,” whispered Holmes. “Come with me, and we will see what is to be made of this fellow.” Striding through the scattered knots of people who lounged round the flaring stalls, my companion speedily overtook the little man and touched him upon the shoulder. He sprang round, and I could see in the gas-light that every vestige of colour had been driven from his face. “You will excuse me,” said Holmes blandly, “but I could not help overhearing the questions which you put to the salesman just now. I think that I could be of assistance to you.”

“Excuse me, I know everything of it. You are endeavouring to trace some geese which were sold by Mrs. Oakshott, of Brixton Road, to a salesman named Breckinridge, by him in turn to Mr. Windigate, of the Alpha, and by him to his club, of which Mr. Henry Baker is a member.” “Oh, sir, you are the very man whom I have longed to meet,” cried the little fellow with outstretched hands and quivering fingers. “I can hardly explain to you how interested I am in this matter.” Sherlock Holmes hailed a four-wheeler which was passing. “In that case we had better discuss it in a cosy room rather than in this wind-swept market-place,” said he. “But pray tell me, before we go farther, who it is that I have the pleasure of assisting.” “Precisely so. Head attendant at the Hotel Cosmopolitan. Pray step into the cab, and I shall soon be able to tell you everything which you would wish to know.” The little man stood glancing from one to the other of us with half-frightened, half-hopeful eyes, as one who is not sure whether he is on the verge of a windfall or of a catastrophe. Then he stepped into the cab, and in half an hour we were back in the sitting-room at Baker Street. Nothing had been said during our drive, but the high, thin breathing of our new companion, and the claspings and unclaspings of his hands, spoke of the nervous tension within him.

“Here we are!” said Holmes cheerily as we filed into the room. “The fire looks very seasonable in this weather. You look cold, Mr. Ryder. Pray take the basket-chair. I will just put on my slippers before we settle this little matter of yours. Now, then! You want to know what became of those geese?” “Yes, and a most remarkable bird it proved. I don’t wonder that you should take an interest in it. It laid an egg after it was dead—the bonniest, brightest little blue egg that ever was seen. I have it here in my museum.” Our visitor staggered to his feet and clutched the mantelpiece with his right hand. Holmes unlocked his strong-box and held up the blue carbuncle, which shone out like a star, with a cold, brilliant, many-pointed radiance. Ryder stood glaring with a drawn face, uncertain whether to claim or to disown it. “The game’s up, Ryder,” said Holmes quietly. “Hold up, man, or you’ll be into the fire! Give him an arm back into his chair, Watson. He’s not got blood enough to go in for felony with impunity. Give him a dash of brandy. So! Now he looks a little more human. What a shrimp it is, to be sure!”

For a moment he had staggered and nearly fallen, but the brandy brought a tinge of colour into his cheeks, and he sat staring with frightened eyes at his accuser. “I have almost every link in my hands, and all the proofs which I could possibly need, so there is little which you need tell me. Still, that little may as well be cleared up to make the case complete. You had heard, Ryder, of this blue stone of the Countess of Morcar’s?” “I see—her ladyship’s waiting-maid. Well, the temptation of sudden wealth so easily acquired was too much for you, as it has been for better men before you; but you were not very scrupulous in the means you used. It seems to me, Ryder, that there is the making of a very pretty villain in you. You knew that this man Horner, the plumber, had been concerned in some such matter before, and that suspicion would rest the more readily upon him. What did you do, then? You made some small job in my lady’s room—you and your confederate Cusack—and you managed that he should be the man sent for. Then, when he had left, you rifled the jewel-case, raised the alarm, and had this unfortunate man arrested. You then—”

Ryder threw himself down suddenly upon the rug and clutched at my companion’s knees. “For God’s sake, have mercy!” he shrieked. “Think of my father! Of my mother! It would break their hearts. I never went wrong before! I never will again. I swear it. I’ll swear it on a Bible. Oh, don’t bring it into court! For Christ’s sake, don’t!” “Get back into your chair!” said Holmes sternly. “It is very well to cringe and crawl now, but you thought little enough of this poor Horner in the dock for a crime of which he knew nothing.” “Hum! We will talk about that. And now let us hear a true account of the next act. How came the stone into the goose, and how came the goose into the open market? Tell us the truth, for there lies your only hope of safety.” Ryder passed his tongue over his parched lips. “I will tell you it just as it happened, sir,” said he. “When Horner had been arrested, it seemed to me that it would be best for me to get away with the stone at once, for I did not know at what moment the police might not take it into their heads to search me and my room. There was no place about the hotel where it would be safe. I went out, as if on some commission, and I made for my sister’s house. She had married a man named Oakshott, and lived in Brixton Road, where she fattened fowls for the market. All the way there every man I met seemed to me to be a policeman or a detective; and, for all that it was a cold night, the sweat was pouring down my face before I came to the Brixton Road. My sister asked me what was the matter, and why I was so pale; but I told her that I had been upset by the jewel robbery at the hotel. Then I went into the back yard and smoked a pipe and wondered what it would be best to do.

“I had a friend once called Maudsley, who went to the bad, and has just been serving his time in Pentonville. One day he had met me, and fell into talk about the ways of thieves, and how they could get rid of what they stole. I knew that he would be true to me, for I knew one or two things about him; so I made up my mind to go right on to Kilburn, where he lived, and take him into my confidence. He would show me how to turn the stone into money. But how to get to him in safety? I thought of the agonies I had gone through in coming from the hotel. I might at any moment be seized and searched, and there would be the stone in my waistcoat pocket. I was leaning against the wall at the time and looking at the geese which were waddling about round my feet, and suddenly an idea came into my head which showed me how I could beat the best detective that ever lived. “My sister had told me some weeks before that I might have the pick of her geese for a Christmas present, and I knew that she was always as good as her word. I would take my goose now, and in it I would carry my stone to Kilburn. There was a little shed in the yard, and behind this I drove one of the birds—a fine big one, white, with a barred tail. I caught it, and prying its bill open, I thrust the stone down its throat as far as my finger could reach. The bird gave a gulp, and I felt the stone pass along its gullet and down into its crop. But the creature flapped and struggled, and out came my sister to know what was the matter. As I turned to speak to her the brute broke loose and fluttered off among the others.

“‘Oh,’ says she, ‘we’ve set yours aside for you—Jem’s bird, we call it. It’s the big white one over yonder. There’s twenty-six of them, which makes one for you, and one for us, and two dozen for the market.’ “Well, I did what she said, Mr. Holmes, and I carried the bird all the way to Kilburn. I told my pal what I had done, for he was a man that it was easy to tell a thing like that to. He laughed until he choked, and we got a knife and opened the goose. My heart turned to water, for there was no sign of the stone, and I knew that some terrible mistake had occurred. I left the bird, rushed back to my sister’s, and hurried into the back yard. There was not a bird to be seen there. “Well, then, of course I saw it all, and I ran off as hard as my feet would carry me to this man Breckinridge; but he had sold the lot at once, and not one word would he tell me as to where they had gone. You heard him yourselves to-night. Well, he has always answered me like that. My sister thinks that I am going mad. Sometimes I think that I am myself. And now—and now I am myself a branded thief, without ever having touched the wealth for which I sold my character. God help me! God help me!” He burst into convulsive sobbing, with his face buried in his hands.

There was a long silence, broken only by his heavy breathing and by the measured tapping of Sherlock Holmes’ finger-tips upon the edge of the table. Then my friend rose and threw open the door. And no more words were needed. There was a rush, a clatter upon the stairs, the bang of a door, and the crisp rattle of running footfalls from the street. “After all, Watson,” said Holmes, reaching up his hand for his clay pipe, “I am not retained by the police to supply their deficiencies. If Horner were in danger it would be another thing; but this fellow will not appear against him, and the case must collapse. I suppose that I am commuting a felony, but it is just possible that I am saving a soul. This fellow will not go wrong again; he is too terribly frightened. Send him to gaol now, and you make him a gaol-bird for life. Besides, it is the season of forgiveness. Chance has put in our way a most singular and whimsical problem, and its solution is its own reward. If you will have the goodness to touch the bell, Doctor, we will begin another investigation, in which, also a bird will be the chief feature.”

On glancing over my notes of the seventy odd cases in which I have during the last eight years studied the methods of my friend Sherlock Holmes, I find many tragic, some comic, a large number merely strange, but none commonplace; for, working as he did rather for the love of his art than for the acquirement of wealth, he refused to associate himself with any investigation which did not tend towards the unusual, and even the fantastic. Of all these varied cases, however, I cannot recall any which presented more singular features than that which was associated with the well-known Surrey family of the Roylotts of Stoke Moran. The events in question occurred in the early days of my association with Holmes, when we were sharing rooms as bachelors in Baker Street. It is possible that I might have placed them upon record before, but a promise of secrecy was made at the time, from which I have only been freed during the last month by the untimely death of the lady to whom the pledge was given. It is perhaps as well that the facts should now come to light, for I have reasons to know that there are widespread rumours as to the death of Dr. Grimesby Roylott which tend to make the matter even more terrible than the truth.

It was early in April in the year ’83 that I woke one morning to find Sherlock Holmes standing, fully dressed, by the side of my bed. He was a late riser, as a rule, and as the clock on the mantelpiece showed me that it was only a quarter-past seven, I blinked up at him in some surprise, and perhaps just a little resentment, for I was myself regular in my habits. “Very sorry to knock you up, Watson,” said he, “but it’s the common lot this morning. Mrs. Hudson has been knocked up, she retorted upon me, and I on you.” “No; a client. It seems that a young lady has arrived in a considerable state of excitement, who insists upon seeing me. She is waiting now in the sitting-room. Now, when young ladies wander about the metropolis at this hour of the morning, and knock sleepy people up out of their beds, I presume that it is something very pressing which they have to communicate. Should it prove to be an interesting case, you would, I am sure, wish to follow it from the outset. I thought, at any rate, that I should call you and give you the chance.”

I had no keener pleasure than in following Holmes in his professional investigations, and in admiring the rapid deductions, as swift as intuitions, and yet always founded on a logical basis with which he unravelled the problems which were submitted to him. I rapidly threw on my clothes and was ready in a few minutes to accompany my friend down to the sitting-room. A lady dressed in black and heavily veiled, who had been sitting in the window, rose as we entered. “Good-morning, madam,” said Holmes cheerily. “My name is Sherlock Holmes. This is my intimate friend and associate, Dr. Watson, before whom you can speak as freely as before myself. Ha! I am glad to see that Mrs. Hudson has had the good sense to light the fire. Pray draw up to it, and I shall order you a cup of hot coffee, for I observe that you are shivering.” “It is fear, Mr. Holmes. It is terror.” She raised her veil as she spoke, and we could see that she was indeed in a pitiable state of agitation, her face all drawn and grey, with restless frightened eyes, like those of some hunted animal. Her features and figure were those of a woman of thirty, but her hair was shot with premature grey, and her expression was weary and haggard. Sherlock Holmes ran her over with one of his quick, all-comprehensive glances.

“You must not fear,” said he soothingly, bending forward and patting her forearm. “We shall soon set matters right, I have no doubt. You have come in by train this morning, I see.” “No, but I observe the second half of a return ticket in the palm of your left glove. You must have started early, and yet you had a good drive in a dog-cart, along heavy roads, before you reached the station.” “There is no mystery, my dear madam,” said he, smiling. “The left arm of your jacket is spattered with mud in no less than seven places. The marks are perfectly fresh. There is no vehicle save a dog-cart which throws up mud in that way, and then only when you sit on the left-hand side of the driver.” “Whatever your reasons may be, you are perfectly correct,” said she. “I started from home before six, reached Leatherhead at twenty past, and came in by the first train to Waterloo. Sir, I can stand this strain no longer; I shall go mad if it continues. I have no one to turn to—none, save only one, who cares for me, and he, poor fellow, can be of little aid. I have heard of you, Mr. Holmes; I have heard of you from Mrs. Farintosh, whom you helped in the hour of her sore need. It was from her that I had your address. Oh, sir, do you not think that you could help me, too, and at least throw a little light through the dense darkness which surrounds me? At present it is out of my power to reward you for your services, but in a month or six weeks I shall be married, with the control of my own income, and then at least you shall not find me ungrateful.”

“Farintosh,” said he. “Ah yes, I recall the case; it was concerned with an opal tiara. I think it was before your time, Watson. I can only say, madam, that I shall be happy to devote the same care to your case as I did to that of your friend. As to reward, my profession is its own reward; but you are at liberty to defray whatever expenses I may be put to, at the time which suits you best. And now I beg that you will lay before us everything that may help us in forming an opinion upon the matter.” “Alas!” replied our visitor, “the very horror of my situation lies in the fact that my fears are so vague, and my suspicions depend so entirely upon small points, which might seem trivial to another, that even he to whom of all others I have a right to look for help and advice looks upon all that I tell him about it as the fancies of a nervous woman. He does not say so, but I can read it from his soothing answers and averted eyes. But I have heard, Mr. Holmes, that you can see deeply into the manifold wickedness of the human heart. You may advise me how to walk amid the dangers which encompass me.”

“My name is Helen Stoner, and I am living with my stepfather, who is the last survivor of one of the oldest Saxon families in England, the Roylotts of Stoke Moran, on the western border of Surrey.” “The family was at one time among the richest in England, and the estates extended over the borders into Berkshire in the north, and Hampshire in the west. In the last century, however, four successive heirs were of a dissolute and wasteful disposition, and the family ruin was eventually completed by a gambler in the days of the Regency. Nothing was left save a few acres of ground, and the two-hundred-year-old house, which is itself crushed under a heavy mortgage. The last squire dragged out his existence there, living the horrible life of an aristocratic pauper; but his only son, my stepfather, seeing that he must adapt himself to the new conditions, obtained an advance from a relative, which enabled him to take a medical degree and went out to Calcutta, where, by his professional skill and his force of character, he established a large practice. In a fit of anger, however, caused by some robberies which had been perpetrated in the house, he beat his native butler to death and narrowly escaped a capital sentence. As it was, he suffered a long term of imprisonment and afterwards returned to England a morose and disappointed man.

“When Dr. Roylott was in India he married my mother, Mrs. Stoner, the young widow of Major-General Stoner, of the Bengal Artillery. My sister Julia and I were twins, and we were only two years old at the time of my mother’s re-marriage. She had a considerable sum of money—not less than £ 1000 a year—and this she bequeathed to Dr. Roylott entirely while we resided with him, with a provision that a certain annual sum should be allowed to each of us in the event of our marriage. Shortly after our return to England my mother died—she was killed eight years ago in a railway accident near Crewe. Dr. Roylott then abandoned his attempts to establish himself in practice in London and took us to live with him in the old ancestral house at Stoke Moran. The money which my mother had left was enough for all our wants, and there seemed to be no obstacle to our happiness. “But a terrible change came over our stepfather about this time. Instead of making friends and exchanging visits with our neighbours, who had at first been overjoyed to see a Roylott of Stoke Moran back in the old family seat, he shut himself up in his house and seldom came out save to indulge in ferocious quarrels with whoever might cross his path. Violence of temper approaching to mania has been hereditary in the men of the family, and in my stepfather’s case it had, I believe, been intensified by his long residence in the tropics. A series of disgraceful brawls took place, two of which ended in the police-court, until at last he became the terror of the village, and the folks would fly at his approach, for he is a man of immense strength, and absolutely uncontrollable in his anger.

“Last week he hurled the local blacksmith over a parapet into a stream, and it was only by paying over all the money which I could gather together that I was able to avert another public exposure. He had no friends at all save the wandering gipsies, and he would give these vagabonds leave to encamp upon the few acres of bramble-covered land which represent the family estate, and would accept in return the hospitality of their tents, wandering away with them sometimes for weeks on end. He has a passion also for Indian animals, which are sent over to him by a correspondent, and he has at this moment a cheetah and a baboon, which wander freely over his grounds and are feared by the villagers almost as much as their master. “You can imagine from what I say that my poor sister Julia and I had no great pleasure in our lives. No servant would stay with us, and for a long time we did all the work of the house. She was but thirty at the time of her death, and yet her hair had already begun to whiten, even as mine has.”

“She died just two years ago, and it is of her death that I wish to speak to you. You can understand that, living the life which I have described, we were little likely to see anyone of our own age and position. We had, however, an aunt, my mother’s maiden sister, Miss Honoria Westphail, who lives near Harrow, and we were occasionally allowed to pay short visits at this lady’s house. Julia went there at Christmas two years ago, and met there a half-pay major of marines, to whom she became engaged. My stepfather learned of the engagement when my sister returned and offered no objection to the marriage; but within a fortnight of the day which had been fixed for the wedding, the terrible event occurred which has deprived me of my only companion.” Sherlock Holmes had been leaning back in his chair with his eyes closed and his head sunk in a cushion, but he half opened his lids now and glanced across at his visitor. “It is easy for me to be so, for every event of that dreadful time is seared into my memory. The manor-house is, as I have already said, very old, and only one wing is now inhabited. The bedrooms in this wing are on the ground floor, the sitting-rooms being in the central block of the buildings. Of these bedrooms the first is Dr. Roylott’s, the second my sister’s, and the third my own. There is no communication between them, but they all open out into the same corridor. Do I make myself plain?”

“The windows of the three rooms open out upon the lawn. That fatal night Dr. Roylott had gone to his room early, though we knew that he had not retired to rest, for my sister was troubled by the smell of the strong Indian cigars which it was his custom to smoke. She left her room, therefore, and came into mine, where she sat for some time, chatting about her approaching wedding. At eleven o’clock she rose to leave me, but she paused at the door and looked back. “‘Because during the last few nights I have always, about three in the morning, heard a low, clear whistle. I am a light sleeper, and it has awakened me. I cannot tell where it came from—perhaps from the next room, perhaps from the lawn. I thought that I would just ask you whether you had heard it.’ “‘Well, it is of no great consequence, at any rate.’ She smiled back at me, closed my door, and a few moments later I heard her key turn in the lock.” “I could not sleep that night. A vague feeling of impending misfortune impressed me. My sister and I, you will recollect, were twins, and you know how subtle are the links which bind two souls which are so closely allied. It was a wild night. The wind was howling outside, and the rain was beating and splashing against the windows. Suddenly, amid all the hubbub of the gale, there burst forth the wild scream of a terrified woman. I knew that it was my sister’s voice. I sprang from my bed, wrapped a shawl round me, and rushed into the corridor. As I opened my door I seemed to hear a low whistle, such as my sister described, and a few moments later a clanging sound, as if a mass of metal had fallen. As I ran down the passage, my sister’s door was unlocked, and revolved slowly upon its hinges. I stared at it horror-stricken, not knowing what was about to issue from it. By the light of the corridor-lamp I saw my sister appear at the opening, her face blanched with terror, her hands groping for help, her whole figure swaying to and fro like that of a drunkard. I ran to her and threw my arms round her, but at that moment her knees seemed to give way and she fell to the ground. She writhed as one who is in terrible pain, and her limbs were dreadfully convulsed. At first I thought that she had not recognised me, but as I bent over her she suddenly shrieked out in a voice which I shall never forget, ‘Oh, my God! Helen! It was the band! The speckled band!’ There was something else which she would fain have said, and she stabbed with her finger into the air in the direction of the Doctor’s room, but a fresh convulsion seized her and choked her words. I rushed out, calling loudly for my stepfather, and I met him hastening from his room in his dressing-gown. When he reached my sister’s side she was unconscious, and though he poured brandy down her throat and sent for medical aid from the village, all efforts were in vain, for she slowly sank and died without having recovered her consciousness. Such was the dreadful end of my beloved sister.”

“That was what the county coroner asked me at the inquiry. It is my strong impression that I heard it, and yet, among the crash of the gale and the creaking of an old house, I may possibly have been deceived.” “Showing that she had struck a light and looked about her when the alarm took place. That is important. And what conclusions did the coroner come to?” “He investigated the case with great care, for Dr. Roylott’s conduct had long been notorious in the county, but he was unable to find any satisfactory cause of death. My evidence showed that the door had been fastened upon the inner side, and the windows were blocked by old-fashioned shutters with broad iron bars, which were secured every night. The walls were carefully sounded, and were shown to be quite solid all round, and the flooring was also thoroughly examined, with the same result. The chimney is wide, but is barred up by four large staples. It is certain, therefore, that my sister was quite alone when she met her end. Besides, there were no marks of any violence upon her.”

“Sometimes I have thought that it was merely the wild talk of delirium, sometimes that it may have referred to some band of people, perhaps to these very gipsies in the plantation. I do not know whether the spotted handkerchiefs which so many of them wear over their heads might have suggested the strange adjective which she used.” “Two years have passed since then, and my life has been until lately lonelier than ever. A month ago, however, a dear friend, whom I have known for many years, has done me the honour to ask my hand in marriage. His name is Armitage—Percy Armitage—the second son of Mr. Armitage, of Crane Water, near Reading. My stepfather has offered no opposition to the match, and we are to be married in the course of the spring. Two days ago some repairs were started in the west wing of the building, and my bedroom wall has been pierced, so that I have had to move into the chamber in which my sister died, and to sleep in the very bed in which she slept. Imagine, then, my thrill of terror when last night, as I lay awake, thinking over her terrible fate, I suddenly heard in the silence of the night the low whistle which had been the herald of her own death. I sprang up and lit the lamp, but nothing was to be seen in the room. I was too shaken to go to bed again, however, so I dressed, and as soon as it was daylight I slipped down, got a dog-cart at the Crown Inn, which is opposite, and drove to Leatherhead, from whence I have come on this morning with the one object of seeing you and asking your advice.”

For answer Holmes pushed back the frill of black lace which fringed the hand that lay upon our visitor’s knee. Five little livid spots, the marks of four fingers and a thumb, were printed upon the white wrist. “This is a very deep business,” he said at last. “There are a thousand details which I should desire to know before I decide upon our course of action. Yet we have not a moment to lose. If we were to come to Stoke Moran to-day, would it be possible for us to see over these rooms without the knowledge of your stepfather?” “As it happens, he spoke of coming into town to-day upon some most important business. It is probable that he will be away all day, and that there would be nothing to disturb you. We have a housekeeper now, but she is old and foolish, and I could easily get her out of the way.” “I have one or two things which I would wish to do now that I am in town. But I shall return by the twelve o’clock train, so as to be there in time for your coming.”

“No, I must go. My heart is lightened already since I have confided my trouble to you. I shall look forward to seeing you again this afternoon.” She dropped her thick black veil over her face and glided from the room. “Yet if the lady is correct in saying that the flooring and walls are sound, and that the door, window, and chimney are impassable, then her sister must have been undoubtedly alone when she met her mysterious end.” “When you combine the ideas of whistles at night, the presence of a band of gipsies who are on intimate terms with this old doctor, the fact that we have every reason to believe that the doctor has an interest in preventing his stepdaughter’s marriage, the dying allusion to a band, and, finally, the fact that Miss Helen Stoner heard a metallic clang, which might have been caused by one of those metal bars that secured the shutters falling back into its place, I think that there is good ground to think that the mystery may be cleared along those lines.”

“And so do I. It is precisely for that reason that we are going to Stoke Moran this day. I want to see whether the objections are fatal, or if they may be explained away. But what in the name of the devil!” The ejaculation had been drawn from my companion by the fact that our door had been suddenly dashed open, and that a huge man had framed himself in the aperture. His costume was a peculiar mixture of the professional and of the agricultural, having a black top-hat, a long frock-coat, and a pair of high gaiters, with a hunting-crop swinging in his hand. So tall was he that his hat actually brushed the cross bar of the doorway, and his breadth seemed to span it across from side to side. A large face, seared with a thousand wrinkles, burned yellow with the sun, and marked with every evil passion, was turned from one to the other of us, while his deep-set, bile-shot eyes, and his high, thin, fleshless nose, gave him somewhat the resemblance to a fierce old bird of prey.

“Ha! You put me off, do you?” said our new visitor, taking a step forward and shaking his hunting-crop. “I know you, you scoundrel! I have heard of you before. You are Holmes, the meddler.” “I will go when I have had my say. Don’t you dare to meddle with my affairs. I know that Miss Stoner has been here. I traced her! I am a dangerous man to fall foul of! See here.” He stepped swiftly forward, seized the poker, and bent it into a curve with his huge brown hands. “He seems a very amiable person,” said Holmes, laughing. “I am not quite so bulky, but if he had remained I might have shown him that my grip was not much more feeble than his own.” As he spoke he picked up the steel poker and, with a sudden effort, straightened it out again. “Fancy his having the insolence to confound me with the official detective force! This incident gives zest to our investigation, however, and I only trust that our little friend will not suffer from her imprudence in allowing this brute to trace her. And now, Watson, we shall order breakfast, and afterwards I shall walk down to Doctors’ Commons, where I hope to get some data which may help us in this matter.”

It was nearly one o’clock when Sherlock Holmes returned from his excursion. He held in his hand a sheet of blue paper, scrawled over with notes and figures. “I have seen the will of the deceased wife,” said he. “To determine its exact meaning I have been obliged to work out the present prices of the investments with which it is concerned. The total income, which at the time of the wife’s death was little short of £ 1,100, is now, through the fall in agricultural prices, not more than £ 750. Each daughter can claim an income of £ 250, in case of marriage. It is evident, therefore, that if both girls had married, this beauty would have had a mere pittance, while even one of them would cripple him to a very serious extent. My morning’s work has not been wasted, since it has proved that he has the very strongest motives for standing in the way of anything of the sort. And now, Watson, this is too serious for dawdling, especially as the old man is aware that we are interesting ourselves in his affairs; so if you are ready, we shall call a cab and drive to Waterloo. I should be very much obliged if you would slip your revolver into your pocket. An Eley’s No. 2 is an excellent argument with gentlemen who can twist steel pokers into knots. That and a tooth-brush are, I think, all that we need.”

At Waterloo we were fortunate in catching a train for Leatherhead, where we hired a trap at the station inn and drove for four or five miles through the lovely Surrey lanes. It was a perfect day, with a bright sun and a few fleecy clouds in the heavens. The trees and wayside hedges were just throwing out their first green shoots, and the air was full of the pleasant smell of the moist earth. To me at least there was a strange contrast between the sweet promise of the spring and this sinister quest upon which we were engaged. My companion sat in the front of the trap, his arms folded, his hat pulled down over his eyes, and his chin sunk upon his breast, buried in the deepest thought. Suddenly, however, he started, tapped me on the shoulder, and pointed over the meadows. A heavily timbered park stretched up in a gentle slope, thickening into a grove at the highest point. From amid the branches there jutted out the grey gables and high roof-tree of a very old mansion.

“There’s the village,” said the driver, pointing to a cluster of roofs some distance to the left; “but if you want to get to the house, you’ll find it shorter to get over this stile, and so by the footpath over the fields. There it is, where the lady is walking.” “I thought it as well,” said Holmes as we climbed the stile, “that this fellow should think we had come here as architects, or on some definite business. It may stop his gossip. Good-afternoon, Miss Stoner. You see that we have been as good as our word.” Our client of the morning had hurried forward to meet us with a face which spoke her joy. “I have been waiting so eagerly for you,” she cried, shaking hands with us warmly. “All has turned out splendidly. Dr. Roylott has gone to town, and it is unlikely that he will be back before evening.” “We have had the pleasure of making the Doctor’s acquaintance,” said Holmes, and in a few words he sketched out what had occurred. Miss Stoner turned white to the lips as she listened.

“He must guard himself, for he may find that there is someone more cunning than himself upon his track. You must lock yourself up from him to-night. If he is violent, we shall take you away to your aunt’s at Harrow. Now, we must make the best use of our time, so kindly take us at once to the rooms which we are to examine.” The building was of grey, lichen-blotched stone, with a high central portion and two curving wings, like the claws of a crab, thrown out on each side. In one of these wings the windows were broken and blocked with wooden boards, while the roof was partly caved in, a picture of ruin. The central portion was in little better repair, but the right-hand block was comparatively modern, and the blinds in the windows, with the blue smoke curling up from the chimneys, showed that this was where the family resided. Some scaffolding had been erected against the end wall, and the stone-work had been broken into, but there were no signs of any workmen at the moment of our visit. Holmes walked slowly up and down the ill-trimmed lawn and examined with deep attention the outsides of the windows.

“This, I take it, belongs to the room in which you used to sleep, the centre one to your sister’s, and the one next to the main building to Dr. Roylott’s chamber?” “Ah! that is suggestive. Now, on the other side of this narrow wing runs the corridor from which these three rooms open. There are windows in it, of course?” “As you both locked your doors at night, your rooms were unapproachable from that side. Now, would you have the kindness to go into your room and bar your shutters?” Miss Stoner did so, and Holmes, after a careful examination through the open window, endeavoured in every way to force the shutter open, but without success. There was no slit through which a knife could be passed to raise the bar. Then with his lens he tested the hinges, but they were of solid iron, built firmly into the massive masonry. “Hum!” said he, scratching his chin in some perplexity, “my theory certainly presents some difficulties. No one could pass these shutters if they were bolted. Well, we shall see if the inside throws any light upon the matter.”

A small side door led into the whitewashed corridor from which the three bedrooms opened. Holmes refused to examine the third chamber, so we passed at once to the second, that in which Miss Stoner was now sleeping, and in which her sister had met with her fate. It was a homely little room, with a low ceiling and a gaping fireplace, after the fashion of old country-houses. A brown chest of drawers stood in one corner, a narrow white-counterpaned bed in another, and a dressing-table on the left-hand side of the window. These articles, with two small wicker-work chairs, made up all the furniture in the room save for a square of Wilton carpet in the centre. The boards round and the panelling of the walls were of brown, worm-eaten oak, so old and discoloured that it may have dated from the original building of the house. Holmes drew one of the chairs into a corner and sat silent, while his eyes travelled round and round and up and down, taking in every detail of the apartment. “Where does that bell communicate with?” he asked at last pointing to a thick bell-rope which hung down beside the bed, the tassel actually lying upon the pillow.

“Indeed, it seemed unnecessary to put so nice a bell-pull there. You will excuse me for a few minutes while I satisfy myself as to this floor.” He threw himself down upon his face with his lens in his hand and crawled swiftly backward and forward, examining minutely the cracks between the boards. Then he did the same with the wood-work with which the chamber was panelled. Finally he walked over to the bed and spent some time in staring at it and in running his eye up and down the wall. Finally he took the bell-rope in his hand and gave it a brisk tug. “No, it is not even attached to a wire. This is very interesting. You can see now that it is fastened to a hook just above where the little opening for the ventilator is.” “Very strange!” muttered Holmes, pulling at the rope. “There are one or two very singular points about this room. For example, what a fool a builder must be to open a ventilator into another room, when, with the same trouble, he might have communicated with the outside air!”

“They seem to have been of a most interesting character—dummy bell-ropes, and ventilators which do not ventilate. With your permission, Miss Stoner, we shall now carry our researches into the inner apartment.” Dr. Grimesby Roylott’s chamber was larger than that of his step-daughter, but was as plainly furnished. A camp-bed, a small wooden shelf full of books, mostly of a technical character, an armchair beside the bed, a plain wooden chair against the wall, a round table, and a large iron safe were the principal things which met the eye. Holmes walked slowly round and examined each and all of them with the keenest interest. “Ah, yes, of course! Well, a cheetah is just a big cat, and yet a saucer of milk does not go very far in satisfying its wants, I daresay. There is one point which I should wish to determine.” He squatted down in front of the wooden chair and examined the seat of it with the greatest attention. The object which had caught his eye was a small dog lash hung on one corner of the bed. The lash, however, was curled upon itself and tied so as to make a loop of whipcord.

“That is not quite so common, is it? Ah, me! it’s a wicked world, and when a clever man turns his brains to crime it is the worst of all. I think that I have seen enough now, Miss Stoner, and with your permission we shall walk out upon the lawn.” I had never seen my friend’s face so grim or his brow so dark as it was when we turned from the scene of this investigation. We had walked several times up and down the lawn, neither Miss Stoner nor myself liking to break in upon his thoughts before he roused himself from his reverie. “You must confine yourself to your room, on pretence of a headache, when your stepfather comes back. Then when you hear him retire for the night, you must open the shutters of your window, undo the hasp, put your lamp there as a signal to us, and then withdraw quietly with everything which you are likely to want into the room which you used to occupy. I have no doubt that, in spite of the repairs, you could manage there for one night.”

“No, I do not think so. I think that there was probably some more tangible cause. And now, Miss Stoner, we must leave you for if Dr. Roylott returned and saw us our journey would be in vain. Good-bye, and be brave, for if you will do what I have told you, you may rest assured that we shall soon drive away the dangers that threaten you.” Sherlock Holmes and I had no difficulty in engaging a bedroom and sitting-room at the Crown Inn. They were on the upper floor, and from our window we could command a view of the avenue gate, and of the inhabited wing of Stoke Moran Manor House. At dusk we saw Dr. Grimesby Roylott drive past, his huge form looming up beside the little figure of the lad who drove him. The boy had some slight difficulty in undoing the heavy iron gates, and we heard the hoarse roar of the Doctor’s voice and saw the fury with which he shook his clinched fists at him. The trap drove on, and a few minutes later we saw a sudden light spring up among the trees as the lamp was lit in one of the sitting-rooms.

“Do you know, Watson,” said Holmes as we sat together in the gathering darkness, “I have really some scruples as to taking you to-night. There is a distinct element of danger.” “Yes, but I do not think that it is such a very unusual thing to have a small opening between two rooms. It was so small that a rat could hardly pass through.” “Oh, yes, I did. You remember in her statement she said that her sister could smell Dr. Roylott’s cigar. Now, of course that suggested at once that there must be a communication between the two rooms. It could only be a small one, or it would have been remarked upon at the coroner’s inquiry. I deduced a ventilator.” “Well, there is at least a curious coincidence of dates. A ventilator is made, a cord is hung, and a lady who sleeps in the bed dies. Does not that strike you?” “The lady could not move her bed. It must always be in the same relative position to the ventilator and to the rope—or so we may call it, since it was clearly never meant for a bell-pull.”

“Subtle enough and horrible enough. When a doctor does go wrong he is the first of criminals. He has nerve and he has knowledge. Palmer and Pritchard were among the heads of their profession. This man strikes even deeper, but I think, Watson, that we shall be able to strike deeper still. But we shall have horrors enough before the night is over; for goodness’ sake let us have a quiet pipe and turn our minds for a few hours to something more cheerful.” About nine o’clock the light among the trees was extinguished, and all was dark in the direction of the Manor House. Two hours passed slowly away, and then, suddenly, just at the stroke of eleven, a single bright light shone out right in front of us. As we passed out he exchanged a few words with the landlord, explaining that we were going on a late visit to an acquaintance, and that it was possible that we might spend the night there. A moment later we were out on the dark road, a chill wind blowing in our faces, and one yellow light twinkling in front of us through the gloom to guide us on our sombre errand.

There was little difficulty in entering the grounds, for unrepaired breaches gaped in the old park wall. Making our way among the trees, we reached the lawn, crossed it, and were about to enter through the window when out from a clump of laurel bushes there darted what seemed to be a hideous and distorted child, who threw itself upon the grass with writhing limbs and then ran swiftly across the lawn into the darkness. Holmes was for the moment as startled as I. His hand closed like a vice upon my wrist in his agitation. Then he broke into a low laugh and put his lips to my ear. I had forgotten the strange pets which the Doctor affected. There was a cheetah, too; perhaps we might find it upon our shoulders at any moment. I confess that I felt easier in my mind when, after following Holmes’ example and slipping off my shoes, I found myself inside the bedroom. My companion noiselessly closed the shutters, moved the lamp onto the table, and cast his eyes round the room. All was as we had seen it in the daytime. Then creeping up to me and making a trumpet of his hand, he whispered into my ear again so gently that it was all that I could do to distinguish the words:

“Do not go asleep; your very life may depend upon it. Have your pistol ready in case we should need it. I will sit on the side of the bed, and you in that chair.” Holmes had brought up a long thin cane, and this he placed upon the bed beside him. By it he laid the box of matches and the stump of a candle. Then he turned down the lamp, and we were left in darkness. How shall I ever forget that dreadful vigil? I could not hear a sound, not even the drawing of a breath, and yet I knew that my companion sat open-eyed, within a few feet of me, in the same state of nervous tension in which I was myself. The shutters cut off the least ray of light, and we waited in absolute darkness. From outside came the occasional cry of a night-bird, and once at our very window a long drawn catlike whine, which told us that the cheetah was indeed at liberty. Far away we could hear the deep tones of the parish clock, which boomed out every quarter of an hour. How long they seemed, those quarters! Twelve struck, and one and two and three, and still we sat waiting silently for whatever might befall.

Suddenly there was the momentary gleam of a light up in the direction of the ventilator, which vanished immediately, but was succeeded by a strong smell of burning oil and heated metal. Someone in the next room had lit a dark-lantern. I heard a gentle sound of movement, and then all was silent once more, though the smell grew stronger. For half an hour I sat with straining ears. Then suddenly another sound became audible—a very gentle, soothing sound, like that of a small jet of steam escaping continually from a kettle. The instant that we heard it, Holmes sprang from the bed, struck a match, and lashed furiously with his cane at the bell-pull. But I saw nothing. At the moment when Holmes struck the light I heard a low, clear whistle, but the sudden glare flashing into my weary eyes made it impossible for me to tell what it was at which my friend lashed so savagely. I could, however, see that his face was deadly pale and filled with horror and loathing. He had ceased to strike and was gazing up at the ventilator when suddenly there broke from the silence of the night the most horrible cry to which I have ever listened. It swelled up louder and louder, a hoarse yell of pain and fear and anger all mingled in the one dreadful shriek. They say that away down in the village, and even in the distant parsonage, that cry raised the sleepers from their beds. It struck cold to our hearts, and I stood gazing at Holmes, and he at me, until the last echoes of it had died away into the silence from which it rose.

“It means that it is all over,” Holmes answered. “And perhaps, after all, it is for the best. Take your pistol, and we will enter Dr. Roylott’s room.” With a grave face he lit the lamp and led the way down the corridor. Twice he struck at the chamber door without any reply from within. Then he turned the handle and entered, I at his heels, with the cocked pistol in my hand. It was a singular sight which met our eyes. On the table stood a dark-lantern with the shutter half open, throwing a brilliant beam of light upon the iron safe, the door of which was ajar. Beside this table, on the wooden chair, sat Dr. Grimesby Roylott clad in a long grey dressing-gown, his bare ankles protruding beneath, and his feet thrust into red heelless Turkish slippers. Across his lap lay the short stock with the long lash which we had noticed during the day. His chin was cocked upward and his eyes were fixed in a dreadful, rigid stare at the corner of the ceiling. Round his brow he had a peculiar yellow band, with brownish speckles, which seemed to be bound tightly round his head. As we entered he made neither sound nor motion.

I took a step forward. In an instant his strange headgear began to move, and there reared itself from among his hair the squat diamond-shaped head and puffed neck of a loathsome serpent. “It is a swamp adder!” cried Holmes; “the deadliest snake in India. He has died within ten seconds of being bitten. Violence does, in truth, recoil upon the violent, and the schemer falls into the pit which he digs for another. Let us thrust this creature back into its den, and we can then remove Miss Stoner to some place of shelter and let the county police know what has happened.” As he spoke he drew the dog-whip swiftly from the dead man’s lap, and throwing the noose round the reptile’s neck he drew it from its horrid perch and, carrying it at arm’s length, threw it into the iron safe, which he closed upon it. Such are the true facts of the death of Dr. Grimesby Roylott, of Stoke Moran. It is not necessary that I should prolong a narrative which has already run to too great a length by telling how we broke the sad news to the terrified girl, how we conveyed her by the morning train to the care of her good aunt at Harrow, of how the slow process of official inquiry came to the conclusion that the doctor met his fate while indiscreetly playing with a dangerous pet. The little which I had yet to learn of the case was told me by Sherlock Holmes as we travelled back next day.

“I had,” said he, “come to an entirely erroneous conclusion which shows, my dear Watson, how dangerous it always is to reason from insufficient data. The presence of the gipsies, and the use of the word ‘band,’ which was used by the poor girl, no doubt, to explain the appearance which she had caught a hurried glimpse of by the light of her match, were sufficient to put me upon an entirely wrong scent. I can only claim the merit that I instantly reconsidered my position when, however, it became clear to me that whatever danger threatened an occupant of the room could not come either from the window or the door. My attention was speedily drawn, as I have already remarked to you, to this ventilator, and to the bell-rope which hung down to the bed. The discovery that this was a dummy, and that the bed was clamped to the floor, instantly gave rise to the suspicion that the rope was there as a bridge for something passing through the hole and coming to the bed. The idea of a snake instantly occurred to me, and when I coupled it with my knowledge that the doctor was furnished with a supply of creatures from India, I felt that I was probably on the right track. The idea of using a form of poison which could not possibly be discovered by any chemical test was just such a one as would occur to a clever and ruthless man who had had an Eastern training. The rapidity with which such a poison would take effect would also, from his point of view, be an advantage. It would be a sharp-eyed coroner, indeed, who could distinguish the two little dark punctures which would show where the poison fangs had done their work. Then I thought of the whistle. Of course he must recall the snake before the morning light revealed it to the victim. He had trained it, probably by the use of the milk which we saw, to return to him when summoned. He would put it through this ventilator at the hour that he thought best, with the certainty that it would crawl down the rope and land on the bed. It might or might not bite the occupant, perhaps she might escape every night for a week, but sooner or later she must fall a victim.

“I had come to these conclusions before ever I had entered his room. An inspection of his chair showed me that he had been in the habit of standing on it, which of course would be necessary in order that he should reach the ventilator. The sight of the safe, the saucer of milk, and the loop of whipcord were enough to finally dispel any doubts which may have remained. The metallic clang heard by Miss Stoner was obviously caused by her stepfather hastily closing the door of his safe upon its terrible occupant. Having once made up my mind, you know the steps which I took in order to put the matter to the proof. I heard the creature hiss as I have no doubt that you did also, and I instantly lit the light and attacked it.” “And also with the result of causing it to turn upon its master at the other side. Some of the blows of my cane came home and roused its snakish temper, so that it flew upon the first person it saw. In this way I am no doubt indirectly responsible for Dr. Grimesby Roylott’s death, and I cannot say that it is likely to weigh very heavily upon my conscience.”

Of all the problems which have been submitted to my friend, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, for solution during the years of our intimacy, there were only two which I was the means of introducing to his notice—that of Mr. Hatherley’s thumb, and that of Colonel Warburton’s madness. Of these the latter may have afforded a finer field for an acute and original observer, but the other was so strange in its inception and so dramatic in its details that it may be the more worthy of being placed upon record, even if it gave my friend fewer openings for those deductive methods of reasoning by which he achieved such remarkable results. The story has, I believe, been told more than once in the newspapers, but, like all such narratives, its effect is much less striking when set forth _en bloc_ in a single half-column of print than when the facts slowly evolve before your own eyes, and the mystery clears gradually away as each new discovery furnishes a step which leads on to the complete truth. At the time the circumstances made a deep impression upon me, and the lapse of two years has hardly served to weaken the effect.

It was in the summer of ’89, not long after my marriage, that the events occurred which I am now about to summarise. I had returned to civil practice and had finally abandoned Holmes in his Baker Street rooms, although I continually visited him and occasionally even persuaded him to forgo his Bohemian habits so far as to come and visit us. My practice had steadily increased, and as I happened to live at no very great distance from Paddington Station, I got a few patients from among the officials. One of these, whom I had cured of a painful and lingering disease, was never weary of advertising my virtues and of endeavouring to send me on every sufferer over whom he might have any influence. One morning, at a little before seven o’clock, I was awakened by the maid tapping at the door to announce that two men had come from Paddington and were waiting in the consulting-room. I dressed hurriedly, for I knew by experience that railway cases were seldom trivial, and hastened downstairs. As I descended, my old ally, the guard, came out of the room and closed the door tightly behind him.

“It’s a new patient,” he whispered. “I thought I’d bring him round myself; then he couldn’t slip away. There he is, all safe and sound. I must go now, Doctor; I have my dooties, just the same as you.” And off he went, this trusty tout, without even giving me time to thank him. I entered my consulting-room and found a gentleman seated by the table. He was quietly dressed in a suit of heather tweed with a soft cloth cap which he had laid down upon my books. Round one of his hands he had a handkerchief wrapped, which was mottled all over with bloodstains. He was young, not more than five-and-twenty, I should say, with a strong, masculine face; but he was exceedingly pale and gave me the impression of a man who was suffering from some strong agitation, which it took all his strength of mind to control. “I am sorry to knock you up so early, Doctor,” said he, “but I have had a very serious accident during the night. I came in by train this morning, and on inquiring at Paddington as to where I might find a doctor, a worthy fellow very kindly escorted me here. I gave the maid a card, but I see that she has left it upon the side-table.”

I took it up and glanced at it. “Mr. Victor Hatherley, hydraulic engineer, 16A, Victoria Street (3rd floor).” That was the name, style, and abode of my morning visitor. “I regret that I have kept you waiting,” said I, sitting down in my library-chair. “You are fresh from a night journey, I understand, which is in itself a monotonous occupation.” “Oh, my night could not be called monotonous,” said he, and laughed. He laughed very heartily, with a high, ringing note, leaning back in his chair and shaking his sides. All my medical instincts rose up against that laugh. It was useless, however. He was off in one of those hysterical outbursts which come upon a strong nature when some great crisis is over and gone. Presently he came to himself once more, very weary and pale-looking. He unwound the handkerchief and held out his hand. It gave even my hardened nerves a shudder to look at it. There were four protruding fingers and a horrid red, spongy surface where the thumb should have been. It had been hacked or torn right out from the roots.

“Yes, it did. I fainted when it was done, and I think that I must have been senseless for a long time. When I came to I found that it was still bleeding, so I tied one end of my handkerchief very tightly round the wrist and braced it up with a twig.” I sponged the wound, cleaned it, dressed it, and finally covered it over with cotton wadding and carbolised bandages. He lay back without wincing, though he bit his lip from time to time. “Oh, no, not now. I shall have to tell my tale to the police; but, between ourselves, if it were not for the convincing evidence of this wound of mine, I should be surprised if they believed my statement, for it is a very extraordinary one, and I have not much in the way of proof with which to back it up; and, even if they believe me, the clues which I can give them are so vague that it is a question whether justice will be done.” “Ha!” cried I, “if it is anything in the nature of a problem which you desire to see solved, I should strongly recommend you to come to my friend, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, before you go to the official police.”

“Oh, I have heard of that fellow,” answered my visitor, “and I should be very glad if he would take the matter up, though of course I must use the official police as well. Would you give me an introduction to him?” “Then my servant will call a cab, and I shall be with you in an instant.” I rushed upstairs, explained the matter shortly to my wife, and in five minutes was inside a hansom, driving with my new acquaintance to Baker Street. Sherlock Holmes was, as I expected, lounging about his sitting-room in his dressing-gown, reading the agony column of _The Times_ and smoking his before-breakfast pipe, which was composed of all the plugs and dottles left from his smokes of the day before, all carefully dried and collected on the corner of the mantelpiece. He received us in his quietly genial fashion, ordered fresh rashers and eggs, and joined us in a hearty meal. When it was concluded he settled our new acquaintance upon the sofa, placed a pillow beneath his head, and laid a glass of brandy and water within his reach.

“It is easy to see that your experience has been no common one, Mr. Hatherley,” said he. “Pray, lie down there and make yourself absolutely at home. Tell us what you can, but stop when you are tired and keep up your strength with a little stimulant.” “Thank you,” said my patient, “but I have felt another man since the doctor bandaged me, and I think that your breakfast has completed the cure. I shall take up as little of your valuable time as possible, so I shall start at once upon my peculiar experiences.” Holmes sat in his big armchair with the weary, heavy-lidded expression which veiled his keen and eager nature, while I sat opposite to him, and we listened in silence to the strange story which our visitor detailed to us. “You must know,” said he, “that I am an orphan and a bachelor, residing alone in lodgings in London. By profession I am a hydraulic engineer, and I have had considerable experience of my work during the seven years that I was apprenticed to Venner & Matheson, the well-known firm, of Greenwich. Two years ago, having served my time, and having also come into a fair sum of money through my poor father’s death, I determined to start in business for myself and took professional chambers in Victoria Street.

“I suppose that everyone finds his first independent start in business a dreary experience. To me it has been exceptionally so. During two years I have had three consultations and one small job, and that is absolutely all that my profession has brought me. My gross takings amount to £ 27 10_s_. Every day, from nine in the morning until four in the afternoon, I waited in my little den, until at last my heart began to sink, and I came to believe that I should never have any practice at all. “Yesterday, however, just as I was thinking of leaving the office, my clerk entered to say there was a gentleman waiting who wished to see me upon business. He brought up a card, too, with the name of ‘Colonel Lysander Stark’ engraved upon it. Close at his heels came the colonel himself, a man rather over the middle size, but of an exceeding thinness. I do not think that I have ever seen so thin a man. His whole face sharpened away into nose and chin, and the skin of his cheeks was drawn quite tense over his outstanding bones. Yet this emaciation seemed to be his natural habit, and due to no disease, for his eye was bright, his step brisk, and his bearing assured. He was plainly but neatly dressed, and his age, I should judge, would be nearer forty than thirty.

“‘Mr. Hatherley?’ said he, with something of a German accent. ‘You have been recommended to me, Mr. Hatherley, as being a man who is not only proficient in his profession but is also discreet and capable of preserving a secret.’ “‘Well, perhaps it is better that I should not tell you that just at this moment. I have it from the same source that you are both an orphan and a bachelor and are residing alone in London.’ “‘That is quite correct,’ I answered; ‘but you will excuse me if I say that I cannot see how all this bears upon my professional qualifications. I understand that it was on a professional matter that you wished to speak to me?’ “‘Undoubtedly so. But you will find that all I say is really to the point. I have a professional commission for you, but absolute secrecy is quite essential—absolute secrecy, you understand, and of course we may expect that more from a man who is alone than from one who lives in the bosom of his family.’ “‘That’s all right,’ said he, coming back. ‘I know that clerks are sometimes curious as to their master’s affairs. Now we can talk in safety.’ He drew up his chair very close to mine and began to stare at me again with the same questioning and thoughtful look.

“A feeling of repulsion, and of something akin to fear had begun to rise within me at the strange antics of this fleshless man. Even my dread of losing a client could not restrain me from showing my impatience. “‘I beg that you will state your business, sir,’ said I; ‘my time is of value.’ Heaven forgive me for that last sentence, but the words came to my lips. “‘I say a night’s work, but an hour’s would be nearer the mark. I simply want your opinion about a hydraulic stamping machine which has got out of gear. If you show us what is wrong we shall soon set it right ourselves. What do you think of such a commission as that?’ “‘To Eyford, in Berkshire. It is a little place near the borders of Oxfordshire, and within seven miles of Reading. There is a train from Paddington which would bring you there at about 11:15.’ “‘We have judged it best that you should come late. It is to recompense you for any inconvenience that we are paying to you, a young and unknown man, a fee which would buy an opinion from the very heads of your profession. Still, of course, if you would like to draw out of the business, there is plenty of time to do so.’

“I thought of the fifty guineas, and of how very useful they would be to me. ‘Not at all,’ said I, ‘I shall be very happy to accommodate myself to your wishes. I should like, however, to understand a little more clearly what it is that you wish me to do.’ “‘Quite so. It is very natural that the pledge of secrecy which we have exacted from you should have aroused your curiosity. I have no wish to commit you to anything without your having it all laid before you. I suppose that we are absolutely safe from eavesdroppers?’ “‘Then the matter stands thus. You are probably aware that fuller’s-earth is a valuable product, and that it is only found in one or two places in England?’ “‘Some little time ago I bought a small place—a very small place—within ten miles of Reading. I was fortunate enough to discover that there was a deposit of fuller’s-earth in one of my fields. On examining it, however, I found that this deposit was a comparatively small one, and that it formed a link between two very much larger ones upon the right and left—both of them, however, in the grounds of my neighbours. These good people were absolutely ignorant that their land contained that which was quite as valuable as a gold-mine. Naturally, it was to my interest to buy their land before they discovered its true value, but unfortunately I had no capital by which I could do this. I took a few of my friends into the secret, however, and they suggested that we should quietly and secretly work our own little deposit and that in this way we should earn the money which would enable us to buy the neighbouring fields. This we have now been doing for some time, and in order to help us in our operations we erected a hydraulic press. This press, as I have already explained, has got out of order, and we wish your advice upon the subject. We guard our secret very jealously, however, and if it once became known that we had hydraulic engineers coming to our little house, it would soon rouse inquiry, and then, if the facts came out, it would be good-bye to any chance of getting these fields and carrying out our plans. That is why I have made you promise me that you will not tell a human being that you are going to Eyford to-night. I hope that I make it all plain?’

“‘I quite follow you,’ said I. ‘The only point which I could not quite understand was what use you could make of a hydraulic press in excavating fuller’s-earth, which, as I understand, is dug out like gravel from a pit.’ “‘Ah!’ said he carelessly, ‘we have our own process. We compress the earth into bricks, so as to remove them without revealing what they are. But that is a mere detail. I have taken you fully into my confidence now, Mr. Hatherley, and I have shown you how I trust you.’ He rose as he spoke. ‘I shall expect you, then, at Eyford at 11:15.’ “‘And not a word to a soul.’ He looked at me with a last long, questioning gaze, and then, pressing my hand in a cold, dank grasp, he hurried from the room. “Well, when I came to think it all over in cool blood I was very much astonished, as you may both think, at this sudden commission which had been intrusted to me. On the one hand, of course, I was glad, for the fee was at least tenfold what I should have asked had I set a price upon my own services, and it was possible that this order might lead to other ones. On the other hand, the face and manner of my patron had made an unpleasant impression upon me, and I could not think that his explanation of the fuller’s-earth was sufficient to explain the necessity for my coming at midnight, and his extreme anxiety lest I should tell anyone of my errand. However, I threw all fears to the winds, ate a hearty supper, drove to Paddington, and started off, having obeyed to the letter the injunction as to holding my tongue.

“At Reading I had to change not only my carriage but my station. However, I was in time for the last train to Eyford, and I reached the little dim-lit station after eleven o’clock. I was the only passenger who got out there, and there was no one upon the platform save a single sleepy porter with a lantern. As I passed out through the wicket gate, however, I found my acquaintance of the morning waiting in the shadow upon the other side. Without a word he grasped my arm and hurried me into a carriage, the door of which was standing open. He drew up the windows on either side, tapped on the wood-work, and away we went as fast as the horse could go.” “Away we went then, and we drove for at least an hour. Colonel Lysander Stark had said that it was only seven miles, but I should think, from the rate that we seemed to go, and from the time that we took, that it must have been nearer twelve. He sat at my side in silence all the time, and I was aware, more than once when I glanced in his direction, that he was looking at me with great intensity. The country roads seem to be not very good in that part of the world, for we lurched and jolted terribly. I tried to look out of the windows to see something of where we were, but they were made of frosted glass, and I could make out nothing save the occasional bright blur of a passing light. Now and then I hazarded some remark to break the monotony of the journey, but the colonel answered only in monosyllables, and the conversation soon flagged. At last, however, the bumping of the road was exchanged for the crisp smoothness of a gravel-drive, and the carriage came to a stand. Colonel Lysander Stark sprang out, and, as I followed after him, pulled me swiftly into a porch which gaped in front of us. We stepped, as it were, right out of the carriage and into the hall, so that I failed to catch the most fleeting glance of the front of the house. The instant that I had crossed the threshold the door slammed heavily behind us, and I heard faintly the rattle of the wheels as the carriage drove away.

“It was pitch dark inside the house, and the colonel fumbled about looking for matches and muttering under his breath. Suddenly a door opened at the other end of the passage, and a long, golden bar of light shot out in our direction. It grew broader, and a woman appeared with a lamp in her hand, which she held above her head, pushing her face forward and peering at us. I could see that she was pretty, and from the gloss with which the light shone upon her dark dress I knew that it was a rich material. She spoke a few words in a foreign tongue in a tone as though asking a question, and when my companion answered in a gruff monosyllable she gave such a start that the lamp nearly fell from her hand. Colonel Stark went up to her, whispered something in her ear, and then, pushing her back into the room from whence she had come, he walked towards me again with the lamp in his hand. “‘Perhaps you will have the kindness to wait in this room for a few minutes,’ said he, throwing open another door. It was a quiet, little, plainly furnished room, with a round table in the centre, on which several German books were scattered. Colonel Stark laid down the lamp on the top of a harmonium beside the door. ‘I shall not keep you waiting an instant,’ said he, and vanished into the darkness.

“I glanced at the books upon the table, and in spite of my ignorance of German I could see that two of them were treatises on science, the others being volumes of poetry. Then I walked across to the window, hoping that I might catch some glimpse of the country-side, but an oak shutter, heavily barred, was folded across it. It was a wonderfully silent house. There was an old clock ticking loudly somewhere in the passage, but otherwise everything was deadly still. A vague feeling of uneasiness began to steal over me. Who were these German people, and what were they doing living in this strange, out-of-the-way place? And where was the place? I was ten miles or so from Eyford, that was all I knew, but whether north, south, east, or west I had no idea. For that matter, Reading, and possibly other large towns, were within that radius, so the place might not be so secluded, after all. Yet it was quite certain, from the absolute stillness, that we were in the country. I paced up and down the room, humming a tune under my breath to keep up my spirits and feeling that I was thoroughly earning my fifty-guinea fee.

“Suddenly, without any preliminary sound in the midst of the utter stillness, the door of my room swung slowly open. The woman was standing in the aperture, the darkness of the hall behind her, the yellow light from my lamp beating upon her eager and beautiful face. I could see at a glance that she was sick with fear, and the sight sent a chill to my own heart. She held up one shaking finger to warn me to be silent, and she shot a few whispered words of broken English at me, her eyes glancing back, like those of a frightened horse, into the gloom behind her. “‘It is not worth your while to wait,’ she went on. ‘You can pass through the door; no one hinders.’ And then, seeing that I smiled and shook my head, she suddenly threw aside her constraint and made a step forward, with her hands wrung together. ‘For the love of Heaven!’ she whispered, ‘get away from here before it is too late!’ “But I am somewhat headstrong by nature, and the more ready to engage in an affair when there is some obstacle in the way. I thought of my fifty-guinea fee, of my wearisome journey, and of the unpleasant night which seemed to be before me. Was it all to go for nothing? Why should I slink away without having carried out my commission, and without the payment which was my due? This woman might, for all I knew, be a monomaniac. With a stout bearing, therefore, though her manner had shaken me more than I cared to confess, I still shook my head and declared my intention of remaining where I was. She was about to renew her entreaties when a door slammed overhead, and the sound of several footsteps was heard upon the stairs. She listened for an instant, threw up her hands with a despairing gesture, and vanished as suddenly and as noiselessly as she had come.

“The newcomers were Colonel Lysander Stark and a short thick man with a chinchilla beard growing out of the creases of his double chin, who was introduced to me as Mr. Ferguson. “‘This is my secretary and manager,’ said the colonel. ‘By the way, I was under the impression that I left this door shut just now. I fear that you have felt the draught.’ “He shot one of his suspicious looks at me. ‘Perhaps we had better proceed to business, then,’ said he. ‘Mr. Ferguson and I will take you up to see the machine.’ “‘No, no. This is only where we compress it. But never mind that. All we wish you to do is to examine the machine and to let us know what is wrong with it.’ “We went upstairs together, the colonel first with the lamp, the fat manager and I behind him. It was a labyrinth of an old house, with corridors, passages, narrow winding staircases, and little low doors, the thresholds of which were hollowed out by the generations who had crossed them. There were no carpets and no signs of any furniture above the ground floor, while the plaster was peeling off the walls, and the damp was breaking through in green, unhealthy blotches. I tried to put on as unconcerned an air as possible, but I had not forgotten the warnings of the lady, even though I disregarded them, and I kept a keen eye upon my two companions. Ferguson appeared to be a morose and silent man, but I could see from the little that he said that he was at least a fellow-countryman.

“Colonel Lysander Stark stopped at last before a low door, which he unlocked. Within was a small, square room, in which the three of us could hardly get at one time. Ferguson remained outside, and the colonel ushered me in. “‘We are now,’ said he, ‘actually within the hydraulic press, and it would be a particularly unpleasant thing for us if anyone were to turn it on. The ceiling of this small chamber is really the end of the descending piston, and it comes down with the force of many tons upon this metal floor. There are small lateral columns of water outside which receive the force, and which transmit and multiply it in the manner which is familiar to you. The machine goes readily enough, but there is some stiffness in the working of it, and it has lost a little of its force. Perhaps you will have the goodness to look it over and to show us how we can set it right.’ “I took the lamp from him, and I examined the machine very thoroughly. It was indeed a gigantic one, and capable of exercising enormous pressure. When I passed outside, however, and pressed down the levers which controlled it, I knew at once by the whishing sound that there was a slight leakage, which allowed a regurgitation of water through one of the side cylinders. An examination showed that one of the india-rubber bands which was round the head of a driving-rod had shrunk so as not quite to fill the socket along which it worked. This was clearly the cause of the loss of power, and I pointed it out to my companions, who followed my remarks very carefully and asked several practical questions as to how they should proceed to set it right. When I had made it clear to them, I returned to the main chamber of the machine and took a good look at it to satisfy my own curiosity. It was obvious at a glance that the story of the fuller’s-earth was the merest fabrication, for it would be absurd to suppose that so powerful an engine could be designed for so inadequate a purpose. The walls were of wood, but the floor consisted of a large iron trough, and when I came to examine it I could see a crust of metallic deposit all over it. I had stooped and was scraping at this to see exactly what it was when I heard a muttered exclamation in German and saw the cadaverous face of the colonel looking down at me.

“I felt angry at having been tricked by so elaborate a story as that which he had told me. ‘I was admiring your fuller’s-earth,’ said I; ‘I think that I should be better able to advise you as to your machine if I knew what the exact purpose was for which it was used.’ “‘Very well,’ said he, ‘you shall know all about the machine.’ He took a step backward, slammed the little door, and turned the key in the lock. I rushed towards it and pulled at the handle, but it was quite secure, and did not give in the least to my kicks and shoves. ‘Hullo!’ I yelled. ‘Hullo! Colonel! Let me out!’ “And then suddenly in the silence I heard a sound which sent my heart into my mouth. It was the clank of the levers and the swish of the leaking cylinder. He had set the engine at work. The lamp still stood upon the floor where I had placed it when examining the trough. By its light I saw that the black ceiling was coming down upon me, slowly, jerkily, but, as none knew better than myself, with a force which must within a minute grind me to a shapeless pulp. I threw myself, screaming, against the door, and dragged with my nails at the lock. I implored the colonel to let me out, but the remorseless clanking of the levers drowned my cries. The ceiling was only a foot or two above my head, and with my hand upraised I could feel its hard, rough surface. Then it flashed through my mind that the pain of my death would depend very much upon the position in which I met it. If I lay on my face the weight would come upon my spine, and I shuddered to think of that dreadful snap. Easier the other way, perhaps; and yet, had I the nerve to lie and look up at that deadly black shadow wavering down upon me? Already I was unable to stand erect, when my eye caught something which brought a gush of hope back to my heart.

“I have said that though the floor and ceiling were of iron, the walls were of wood. As I gave a last hurried glance around, I saw a thin line of yellow light between two of the boards, which broadened and broadened as a small panel was pushed backward. For an instant I could hardly believe that here was indeed a door which led away from death. The next instant I threw myself through, and lay half-fainting upon the other side. The panel had closed again behind me, but the crash of the lamp, and a few moments afterwards the clang of the two slabs of metal, told me how narrow had been my escape. “I was recalled to myself by a frantic plucking at my wrist, and I found myself lying upon the stone floor of a narrow corridor, while a woman bent over me and tugged at me with her left hand, while she held a candle in her right. It was the same good friend whose warning I had so foolishly rejected. “‘Come! come!’ she cried breathlessly. ‘They will be here in a moment. They will see that you are not there. Oh, do not waste the so-precious time, but come!’

“This time, at least, I did not scorn her advice. I staggered to my feet and ran with her along the corridor and down a winding stair. The latter led to another broad passage, and just as we reached it we heard the sound of running feet and the shouting of two voices, one answering the other from the floor on which we were and from the one beneath. My guide stopped and looked about her like one who is at her wit’s end. Then she threw open a door which led into a bedroom, through the window of which the moon was shining brightly. “As she spoke a light sprang into view at the further end of the passage, and I saw the lean figure of Colonel Lysander Stark rushing forward with a lantern in one hand and a weapon like a butcher’s cleaver in the other. I rushed across the bedroom, flung open the window, and looked out. How quiet and sweet and wholesome the garden looked in the moonlight, and it could not be more than thirty feet down. I clambered out upon the sill, but I hesitated to jump until I should have heard what passed between my saviour and the ruffian who pursued me. If she were ill-used, then at any risks I was determined to go back to her assistance. The thought had hardly flashed through my mind before he was at the door, pushing his way past her; but she threw her arms round him and tried to hold him back.

“‘Fritz! Fritz!’ she cried in English, ‘remember your promise after the last time. You said it should not be again. He will be silent! Oh, he will be silent!’ “‘You are mad, Elise!’ he shouted, struggling to break away from her. ‘You will be the ruin of us. He has seen too much. Let me pass, I say!’ He dashed her to one side, and, rushing to the window, cut at me with his heavy weapon. I had let myself go, and was hanging by the hands to the sill, when his blow fell. I was conscious of a dull pain, my grip loosened, and I fell into the garden below. “I was shaken but not hurt by the fall; so I picked myself up and rushed off among the bushes as hard as I could run, for I understood that I was far from being out of danger yet. Suddenly, however, as I ran, a deadly dizziness and sickness came over me. I glanced down at my hand, which was throbbing painfully, and then, for the first time, saw that my thumb had been cut off and that the blood was pouring from my wound. I endeavoured to tie my handkerchief round it, but there came a sudden buzzing in my ears, and next moment I fell in a dead faint among the rose-bushes.

“How long I remained unconscious I cannot tell. It must have been a very long time, for the moon had sunk, and a bright morning was breaking when I came to myself. My clothes were all sodden with dew, and my coat-sleeve was drenched with blood from my wounded thumb. The smarting of it recalled in an instant all the particulars of my night’s adventure, and I sprang to my feet with the feeling that I might hardly yet be safe from my pursuers. But to my astonishment, when I came to look round me, neither house nor garden were to be seen. I had been lying in an angle of the hedge close by the high road, and just a little lower down was a long building, which proved, upon my approaching it, to be the very station at which I had arrived upon the previous night. Were it not for the ugly wound upon my hand, all that had passed during those dreadful hours might have been an evil dream. “Half dazed, I went into the station and asked about the morning train. There would be one to Reading in less than an hour. The same porter was on duty, I found, as had been there when I arrived. I inquired of him whether he had ever heard of Colonel Lysander Stark. The name was strange to him. Had he observed a carriage the night before waiting for me? No, he had not. Was there a police-station anywhere near? There was one about three miles off.

“It was too far for me to go, weak and ill as I was. I determined to wait until I got back to town before telling my story to the police. It was a little past six when I arrived, so I went first to have my wound dressed, and then the doctor was kind enough to bring me along here. I put the case into your hands and shall do exactly what you advise.” We both sat in silence for some little time after listening to this extraordinary narrative. Then Sherlock Holmes pulled down from the shelf one of the ponderous commonplace books in which he placed his cuttings. “Here is an advertisement which will interest you,” said he. “It appeared in all the papers about a year ago. Listen to this: ‘Lost, on the 9th inst., Mr. Jeremiah Hayling, aged twenty-six, a hydraulic engineer. Left his lodgings at ten o’clock at night, and has not been heard of since. Was dressed in,’ etc., etc. Ha! That represents the last time that the colonel needed to have his machine overhauled, I fancy.”

“Undoubtedly. It is quite clear that the colonel was a cool and desperate man, who was absolutely determined that nothing should stand in the way of his little game, like those out-and-out pirates who will leave no survivor from a captured ship. Well, every moment now is precious, so if you feel equal to it we shall go down to Scotland Yard at once as a preliminary to starting for Eyford.” Some three hours or so afterwards we were all in the train together, bound from Reading to the little Berkshire village. There were Sherlock Holmes, the hydraulic engineer, Inspector Bradstreet, of Scotland Yard, a plain-clothes man, and myself. Bradstreet had spread an ordnance map of the county out upon the seat and was busy with his compasses drawing a circle with Eyford for its centre. “There you are,” said he. “That circle is drawn at a radius of ten miles from the village. The place we want must be somewhere near that line. You said ten miles, I think, sir.” “What I cannot understand,” said I, “is why they should have spared you when they found you lying fainting in the garden. Perhaps the villain was softened by the woman’s entreaties.”

“Oh, we shall soon clear up all that,” said Bradstreet. “Well, I have drawn my circle, and I only wish I knew at what point upon it the folk that we are in search of are to be found.” “Really, now!” cried the inspector, “you have formed your opinion! Come, now, we shall see who agrees with you. I say it is south, for the country is more deserted there.” “Come,” cried the inspector, laughing; “it’s a very pretty diversity of opinion. We have boxed the compass among us. Who do you give your casting vote to?” “Six out and six back. Nothing simpler. You say yourself that the horse was fresh and glossy when you got in. How could it be that if it had gone twelve miles over heavy roads?” “We have known for some time that a clever gang was at work,” said the inspector. “They have been turning out half-crowns by the thousand. We even traced them as far as Reading, but could get no farther, for they had covered their traces in a way that showed that they were very old hands. But now, thanks to this lucky chance, I think that we have got them right enough.”

But the inspector was mistaken, for those criminals were not destined to fall into the hands of justice. As we rolled into Eyford Station we saw a gigantic column of smoke which streamed up from behind a small clump of trees in the neighbourhood and hung like an immense ostrich feather over the landscape. The station-master laughed heartily. “No, sir, Dr. Becher is an Englishman, and there isn’t a man in the parish who has a better-lined waistcoat. But he has a gentleman staying with him, a patient, as I understand, who is a foreigner, and he looks as if a little good Berkshire beef would do him no harm.” The station-master had not finished his speech before we were all hastening in the direction of the fire. The road topped a low hill, and there was a great widespread whitewashed building in front of us, spouting fire at every chink and window, while in the garden in front three fire-engines were vainly striving to keep the flames under. “That’s it!” cried Hatherley, in intense excitement. “There is the gravel-drive, and there are the rose-bushes where I lay. That second window is the one that I jumped from.”

“Well, at least,” said Holmes, “you have had your revenge upon them. There can be no question that it was your oil-lamp which, when it was crushed in the press, set fire to the wooden walls, though no doubt they were too excited in the chase after you to observe it at the time. Now keep your eyes open in this crowd for your friends of last night, though I very much fear that they are a good hundred miles off by now.” And Holmes’ fears came to be realised, for from that day to this no word has ever been heard either of the beautiful woman, the sinister German, or the morose Englishman. Early that morning a peasant had met a cart containing several people and some very bulky boxes driving rapidly in the direction of Reading, but there all traces of the fugitives disappeared, and even Holmes’ ingenuity failed ever to discover the least clue as to their whereabouts. The firemen had been much perturbed at the strange arrangements which they had found within, and still more so by discovering a newly severed human thumb upon a window-sill of the second floor. About sunset, however, their efforts were at last successful, and they subdued the flames, but not before the roof had fallen in, and the whole place been reduced to such absolute ruin that, save some twisted cylinders and iron piping, not a trace remained of the machinery which had cost our unfortunate acquaintance so dearly. Large masses of nickel and of tin were discovered stored in an out-house, but no coins were to be found, which may have explained the presence of those bulky boxes which have been already referred to.

How our hydraulic engineer had been conveyed from the garden to the spot where he recovered his senses might have remained forever a mystery were it not for the soft mould, which told us a very plain tale. He had evidently been carried down by two persons, one of whom had remarkably small feet and the other unusually large ones. On the whole, it was most probable that the silent Englishman, being less bold or less murderous than his companion, had assisted the woman to bear the unconscious man out of the way of danger. “Well,” said our engineer ruefully as we took our seats to return once more to London, “it has been a pretty business for me! I have lost my thumb and I have lost a fifty-guinea fee, and what have I gained?” “Experience,” said Holmes, laughing. “Indirectly it may be of value, you know; you have only to put it into words to gain the reputation of being excellent company for the remainder of your existence.” The Lord St. Simon marriage, and its curious termination, have long ceased to be a subject of interest in those exalted circles in which the unfortunate bridegroom moves. Fresh scandals have eclipsed it, and their more piquant details have drawn the gossips away from this four-year-old drama. As I have reason to believe, however, that the full facts have never been revealed to the general public, and as my friend Sherlock Holmes had a considerable share in clearing the matter up, I feel that no memoir of him would be complete without some little sketch of this remarkable episode.

It was a few weeks before my own marriage, during the days when I was still sharing rooms with Holmes in Baker Street, that he came home from an afternoon stroll to find a letter on the table waiting for him. I had remained indoors all day, for the weather had taken a sudden turn to rain, with high autumnal winds, and the jezail bullet which I had brought back in one of my limbs as a relic of my Afghan campaign throbbed with dull persistence. With my body in one easy-chair and my legs upon another, I had surrounded myself with a cloud of newspapers until at last, saturated with the news of the day, I tossed them all aside and lay listless, watching the huge crest and monogram upon the envelope upon the table and wondering lazily who my friend’s noble correspondent could be. “Here is a very fashionable epistle,” I remarked as he entered. “Your morning letters, if I remember right, were from a fish-monger and a tide-waiter.” “Yes, my correspondence has certainly the charm of variety,” he answered, smiling, “and the humbler are usually the more interesting. This looks like one of those unwelcome social summonses which call upon a man either to be bored or to lie.”

“I assure you, Watson, without affectation, that the status of my client is a matter of less moment to me than the interest of his case. It is just possible, however, that that also may not be wanting in this new investigation. You have been reading the papers diligently of late, have you not?” “It is fortunate, for you will perhaps be able to post me up. I read nothing except the criminal news and the agony column. The latter is always instructive. But if you have followed recent events so closely you must have read about Lord St. Simon and his wedding?” “That is well. The letter which I hold in my hand is from Lord St. Simon. I will read it to you, and in return you must turn over these papers and let me have whatever bears upon the matter. This is what he says: “‘MY DEAR MR. SHERLOCK HOLMES,—Lord Backwater tells me that I may place implicit reliance upon your judgment and discretion. I have determined, therefore, to call upon you and to consult you in reference to the very painful event which has occurred in connection with my wedding. Mr. Lestrade, of Scotland Yard, is acting already in the matter, but he assures me that he sees no objection to your co-operation, and that he even thinks that it might be of some assistance. I will call at four o’clock in the afternoon, and, should you have any other engagement at that time, I hope that you will postpone it, as this matter is of paramount importance. Yours faithfully,

“It is dated from Grosvenor Mansions, written with a quill pen, and the noble lord has had the misfortune to get a smear of ink upon the outer side of his right little finger,” remarked Holmes as he folded up the epistle. “Then I have just time, with your assistance, to get clear upon the subject. Turn over those papers and arrange the extracts in their order of time, while I take a glance as to who our client is.” He picked a red-covered volume from a line of books of reference beside the mantelpiece. “Here he is,” said he, sitting down and flattening it out upon his knee. “‘Lord Robert Walsingham de Vere St. Simon, second son of the Duke of Balmoral.’ Hum! ‘Arms: Azure, three caltrops in chief over a fess sable. Born in 1846.’ He’s forty-one years of age, which is mature for marriage. Was Under-Secretary for the colonies in a late administration. The Duke, his father, was at one time Secretary for Foreign Affairs. They inherit Plantagenet blood by direct descent, and Tudor on the distaff side. Ha! Well, there is nothing very instructive in all this. I think that I must turn to you Watson, for something more solid.”

“I have very little difficulty in finding what I want,” said I, “for the facts are quite recent, and the matter struck me as remarkable. I feared to refer them to you, however, as I knew that you had an inquiry on hand and that you disliked the intrusion of other matters.” “Oh, you mean the little problem of the Grosvenor Square furniture van. That is quite cleared up now—though, indeed, it was obvious from the first. Pray give me the results of your newspaper selections.” “Here is the first notice which I can find. It is in the personal column of the _Morning Post_, and dates, as you see, some weeks back: ‘A marriage has been arranged,’ it says, ‘and will, if rumour is correct, very shortly take place, between Lord Robert St. Simon, second son of the Duke of Balmoral, and Miss Hatty Doran, the only daughter of Aloysius Doran. Esq., of San Francisco, Cal., U.S.A.’ That is all.” “There was a paragraph amplifying this in one of the society papers of the same week. Ah, here it is: ‘There will soon be a call for protection in the marriage market, for the present free-trade principle appears to tell heavily against our home product. One by one the management of the noble houses of Great Britain is passing into the hands of our fair cousins from across the Atlantic. An important addition has been made during the last week to the list of the prizes which have been borne away by these charming invaders. Lord St. Simon, who has shown himself for over twenty years proof against the little god’s arrows, has now definitely announced his approaching marriage with Miss Hatty Doran, the fascinating daughter of a California millionaire. Miss Doran, whose graceful figure and striking face attracted much attention at the Westbury House festivities, is an only child, and it is currently reported that her dowry will run to considerably over the six figures, with expectancies for the future. As it is an open secret that the Duke of Balmoral has been compelled to sell his pictures within the last few years, and as Lord St. Simon has no property of his own save the small estate of Birchmoor, it is obvious that the Californian heiress is not the only gainer by an alliance which will enable her to make the easy and common transition from a Republican lady to a British peeress.’”

“Oh, yes; plenty. Then there is another note in the _Morning Post_ to say that the marriage would be an absolutely quiet one, that it would be at St. George’s, Hanover Square, that only half a dozen intimate friends would be invited, and that the party would return to the furnished house at Lancaster Gate which has been taken by Mr. Aloysius Doran. Two days later—that is, on Wednesday last—there is a curt announcement that the wedding had taken place, and that the honeymoon would be passed at Lord Backwater’s place, near Petersfield. Those are all the notices which appeared before the disappearance of the bride.” “They often vanish before the ceremony, and occasionally during the honeymoon; but I cannot call to mind anything quite so prompt as this. Pray let me have the details.” “Such as they are, they are set forth in a single article of a morning paper of yesterday, which I will read to you. It is headed, ‘Singular Occurrence at a Fashionable Wedding’: “‘The family of Lord Robert St. Simon has been thrown into the greatest consternation by the strange and painful episodes which have taken place in connection with his wedding. The ceremony, as shortly announced in the papers of yesterday, occurred on the previous morning; but it is only now that it has been possible to confirm the strange rumours which have been so persistently floating about. In spite of the attempts of the friends to hush the matter up, so much public attention has now been drawn to it that no good purpose can be served by affecting to disregard what is a common subject for conversation.

“‘The ceremony, which was performed at St. George’s, Hanover Square, was a very quiet one, no one being present save the father of the bride, Mr. Aloysius Doran, the Duchess of Balmoral, Lord Backwater, Lord Eustace and Lady Clara St. Simon (the younger brother and sister of the bridegroom), and Lady Alicia Whittington. The whole party proceeded afterwards to the house of Mr. Aloysius Doran, at Lancaster Gate, where breakfast had been prepared. It appears that some little trouble was caused by a woman, whose name has not been ascertained, who endeavoured to force her way into the house after the bridal party, alleging that she had some claim upon Lord St. Simon. It was only after a painful and prolonged scene that she was ejected by the butler and the footman. The bride, who had fortunately entered the house before this unpleasant interruption, had sat down to breakfast with the rest, when she complained of a sudden indisposition and retired to her room. Her prolonged absence having caused some comment, her father followed her, but learned from her maid that she had only come up to her chamber for an instant, caught up an ulster and bonnet, and hurried down to the passage. One of the footmen declared that he had seen a lady leave the house thus apparelled, but had refused to credit that it was his mistress, believing her to be with the company. On ascertaining that his daughter had disappeared, Mr. Aloysius Doran, in conjunction with the bridegroom, instantly put themselves in communication with the police, and very energetic inquiries are being made, which will probably result in a speedy clearing up of this very singular business. Up to a late hour last night, however, nothing had transpired as to the whereabouts of the missing lady. There are rumours of foul play in the matter, and it is said that the police have caused the arrest of the woman who had caused the original disturbance, in the belief that, from jealousy or some other motive, she may have been concerned in the strange disappearance of the bride.’”

“That Miss Flora Millar, the lady who had caused the disturbance, has actually been arrested. It appears that she was formerly a _danseuse_ at the Allegro, and that she has known the bridegroom for some years. There are no further particulars, and the whole case is in your hands now—so far as it has been set forth in the public press.” “And an exceedingly interesting case it appears to be. I would not have missed it for worlds. But there is a ring at the bell, Watson, and as the clock makes it a few minutes after four, I have no doubt that this will prove to be our noble client. Do not dream of going, Watson, for I very much prefer having a witness, if only as a check to my own memory.” “Lord Robert St. Simon,” announced our page-boy, throwing open the door. A gentleman entered, with a pleasant, cultured face, high-nosed and pale, with something perhaps of petulance about the mouth, and with the steady, well-opened eye of a man whose pleasant lot it had ever been to command and to be obeyed. His manner was brisk, and yet his general appearance gave an undue impression of age, for he had a slight forward stoop and a little bend of the knees as he walked. His hair, too, as he swept off his very curly-brimmed hat, was grizzled round the edges and thin upon the top. As to his dress, it was careful to the verge of foppishness, with high collar, black frock-coat, white waistcoat, yellow gloves, patent-leather shoes, and light-coloured gaiters. He advanced slowly into the room, turning his head from left to right, and swinging in his right hand the cord which held his golden eyeglasses.

“Good-day, Lord St. Simon,” said Holmes, rising and bowing. “Pray take the basket-chair. This is my friend and colleague, Dr. Watson. Draw up a little to the fire, and we will talk this matter over.” “A most painful matter to me, as you can most readily imagine, Mr. Holmes. I have been cut to the quick. I understand that you have already managed several delicate cases of this sort, sir, though I presume that they were hardly from the same class of society.” “Of course! Very right! very right! I’m sure I beg pardon. As to my own case, I am ready to give you any information which may assist you in forming an opinion.” “Thank you. I have already learned all that is in the public prints, nothing more. I presume that I may take it as correct—this article, for example, as to the disappearance of the bride.” “But it needs a great deal of supplementing before anyone could offer an opinion. I think that I may arrive at my facts most directly by questioning you.” The nobleman swung his glasses a little faster and stared down into the fire. “You see, Mr. Holmes,” said he, “my wife was twenty before her father became a rich man. During that time she ran free in a mining camp and wandered through woods or mountains, so that her education has come from Nature rather than from the schoolmaster. She is what we call in England a tomboy, with a strong nature, wild and free, unfettered by any sort of traditions. She is impetuous—volcanic, I was about to say. She is swift in making up her mind and fearless in carrying out her resolutions. On the other hand, I would not have given her the name which I have the honour to bear”—he gave a little stately cough—“had I not thought her to be at bottom a noble woman. I believe that she is capable of heroic self-sacrifice and that anything dishonourable would be repugnant to her.”

“I brought this with me.” He opened a locket and showed us the full face of a very lovely woman. It was not a photograph but an ivory miniature, and the artist had brought out the full effect of the lustrous black hair, the large dark eyes, and the exquisite mouth. Holmes gazed long and earnestly at it. Then he closed the locket and handed it back to Lord St. Simon. “Well, to tell the truth, I saw then the first signs that I had ever seen that her temper was just a little sharp. The incident however, was too trivial to relate and can have no possible bearing upon the case.” “Oh, it is childish. She dropped her bouquet as we went towards the vestry. She was passing the front pew at the time, and it fell over into the pew. There was a moment’s delay, but the gentleman in the pew handed it up to her again, and it did not appear to be the worse for the fall. Yet when I spoke to her of the matter, she answered me abruptly; and in the carriage, on our way home, she seemed absurdly agitated over this trifling cause.”

“No, no; I call him a gentleman by courtesy, but he was quite a common-looking person. I hardly noticed his appearance. But really I think that we are wandering rather far from the point.” “Lady St. Simon, then, returned from the wedding in a less cheerful frame of mind than she had gone to it. What did she do on re-entering her father’s house?” “A little too much so. It seemed to me that her mistress allowed her to take great liberties. Still, of course, in America they look upon these things in a different way.” “No, alone. She was very independent in little matters like that. Then, after we had sat down for ten minutes or so, she rose hurriedly, muttered some words of apology, and left the room. She never came back.” “But this maid, Alice, as I understand, deposes that she went to her room, covered her bride’s dress with a long ulster, put on a bonnet, and went out.” “Quite so. And she was afterwards seen walking into Hyde Park in company with Flora Millar, a woman who is now in custody, and who had already made a disturbance at Mr. Doran’s house that morning.”

Lord St. Simon shrugged his shoulders and raised his eyebrows. “We have been on a friendly footing for some years—I may say on a _very_ friendly footing. She used to be at the Allegro. I have not treated her ungenerously, and she had no just cause of complaint against me, but you know what women are, Mr. Holmes. Flora was a dear little thing, but exceedingly hot-headed and devotedly attached to me. She wrote me dreadful letters when she heard that I was about to be married, and, to tell the truth, the reason why I had the marriage celebrated so quietly was that I feared lest there might be a scandal in the church. She came to Mr. Doran’s door just after we returned, and she endeavoured to push her way in, uttering very abusive expressions towards my wife, and even threatening her, but I had foreseen the possibility of something of the sort, and I had two police fellows there in private clothes, who soon pushed her out again. She was quiet when she saw that there was no good in making a row.”

“Yes. That is what Mr. Lestrade, of Scotland Yard, looks upon as so serious. It is thought that Flora decoyed my wife out and laid some terrible trap for her.” “Well, really, I came to seek a theory, not to propound one. I have given you all the facts. Since you ask me, however, I may say that it has occurred to me as possible that the excitement of this affair, the consciousness that she had made so immense a social stride, had the effect of causing some little nervous disturbance in my wife.” “Well, really, when I consider that she has turned her back—I will not say upon me, but upon so much that many have aspired to without success—I can hardly explain it in any other fashion.” “Well, certainly that is also a conceivable hypothesis,” said Holmes, smiling. “And now, Lord St. Simon, I think that I have nearly all my data. May I ask whether you were seated at the breakfast-table so that you could see out of the window?” Lord St. Simon shook his head. “I am afraid that it will take wiser heads than yours or mine,” he remarked, and bowing in a stately, old-fashioned manner he departed.

“It is very good of Lord St. Simon to honour my head by putting it on a level with his own,” said Sherlock Holmes, laughing. “I think that I shall have a whisky and soda and a cigar after all this cross-questioning. I had formed my conclusions as to the case before our client came into the room.” “I have notes of several similar cases, though none, as I remarked before, which were quite as prompt. My whole examination served to turn my conjecture into a certainty. Circumstantial evidence is occasionally very convincing, as when you find a trout in the milk, to quote Thoreau’s example.” “Without, however, the knowledge of pre-existing cases which serves me so well. There was a parallel instance in Aberdeen some years back, and something on very much the same lines at Munich the year after the Franco-Prussian War. It is one of these cases—but, hullo, here is Lestrade! Good-afternoon, Lestrade! You will find an extra tumbler upon the sideboard, and there are cigars in the box.” The official detective was attired in a pea-jacket and cravat, which gave him a decidedly nautical appearance, and he carried a black canvas bag in his hand. With a short greeting he seated himself and lit the cigar which had been offered to him.

“Then perhaps you will kindly explain how it is that we found this in it?” He opened his bag as he spoke, and tumbled onto the floor a wedding-dress of watered silk, a pair of white satin shoes and a bride’s wreath and veil, all discoloured and soaked in water. “There,” said he, putting a new wedding-ring upon the top of the pile. “There is a little nut for you to crack, Master Holmes.” “No. They were found floating near the margin by a park-keeper. They have been identified as her clothes, and it seemed to me that if the clothes were there the body would not be far off.” “By the same brilliant reasoning, every man’s body is to be found in the neighbourhood of his wardrobe. And pray what did you hope to arrive at through this?” “Are you, indeed, now?” cried Lestrade with some bitterness. “I am afraid, Holmes, that you are not very practical with your deductions and your inferences. You have made two blunders in as many minutes. This dress does implicate Miss Flora Millar.”

“In the dress is a pocket. In the pocket is a card-case. In the card-case is a note. And here is the very note.” He slapped it down upon the table in front of him. “Listen to this: ‘You will see me when all is ready. Come at once. F. H. M.’ Now my theory all along has been that Lady St. Simon was decoyed away by Flora Millar, and that she, with confederates, no doubt, was responsible for her disappearance. Here, signed with her initials, is the very note which was no doubt quietly slipped into her hand at the door and which lured her within their reach.” “Very good, Lestrade,” said Holmes, laughing. “You really are very fine indeed. Let me see it.” He took up the paper in a listless way, but his attention instantly became riveted, and he gave a little cry of satisfaction. “This is indeed important,” said he. “There’s nothing in it. I looked at it before,” said Lestrade. “‘Oct. 4th, rooms 8_s_., breakfast 2_s_. 6_d_., cocktail 1_s_., lunch 2_s_. 6_d_., glass sherry, 8_d_.’ I see nothing in that.”

“Very likely not. It is most important, all the same. As to the note, it is important also, or at least the initials are, so I congratulate you again.” “I’ve wasted time enough,” said Lestrade, rising. “I believe in hard work and not in sitting by the fire spinning fine theories. Good-day, Mr. Holmes, and we shall see which gets to the bottom of the matter first.” He gathered up the garments, thrust them into the bag, and made for the door. “Just one hint to you, Lestrade,” drawled Holmes before his rival vanished; “I will tell you the true solution of the matter. Lady St. Simon is a myth. There is not, and there never has been, any such person.” He had hardly shut the door behind him when Holmes rose to put on his overcoat. “There is something in what the fellow says about outdoor work,” he remarked, “so I think, Watson, that I must leave you to your papers for a little.” It was after five o’clock when Sherlock Holmes left me, but I had no time to be lonely, for within an hour there arrived a confectioner’s man with a very large flat box. This he unpacked with the help of a youth whom he had brought with him, and presently, to my very great astonishment, a quite epicurean little cold supper began to be laid out upon our humble lodging-house mahogany. There were a couple of brace of cold woodcock, a pheasant, a _pâté de foie gras_ pie with a group of ancient and cobwebby bottles. Having laid out all these luxuries, my two visitors vanished away, like the genii of the Arabian Nights, with no explanation save that the things had been paid for and were ordered to this address.

Just before nine o’clock Sherlock Holmes stepped briskly into the room. His features were gravely set, but there was a light in his eye which made me think that he had not been disappointed in his conclusions. “Yes, I fancy we may have some company dropping in,” said he. “I am surprised that Lord St. Simon has not already arrived. Ha! I fancy that I hear his step now upon the stairs.” It was indeed our visitor of the afternoon who came bustling in, dangling his glasses more vigorously than ever, and with a very perturbed expression upon his aristocratic features. “I fail to see that anyone is to blame. I can hardly see how the lady could have acted otherwise, though her abrupt method of doing it was undoubtedly to be regretted. Having no mother, she had no one to advise her at such a crisis.” “I think that I heard a ring,” said Holmes. “Yes, there are steps on the landing. If I cannot persuade you to take a lenient view of the matter, Lord St. Simon, I have brought an advocate here who may be more successful.” He opened the door and ushered in a lady and gentleman. “Lord St. Simon,” said he “allow me to introduce you to Mr. and Mrs. Francis Hay Moulton. The lady, I think, you have already met.”

At the sight of these newcomers our client had sprung from his seat and stood very erect, with his eyes cast down and his hand thrust into the breast of his frock-coat, a picture of offended dignity. The lady had taken a quick step forward and had held out her hand to him, but he still refused to raise his eyes. It was as well for his resolution, perhaps, for her pleading face was one which it was hard to resist. “Oh, yes, I know that I have treated you real bad and that I should have spoken to you before I went; but I was kind of rattled, and from the time when I saw Frank here again I just didn’t know what I was doing or saying. I only wonder I didn’t fall down and do a faint right there before the altar.” “If I may give an opinion,” remarked the strange gentleman, “we’ve had just a little too much secrecy over this business already. For my part, I should like all Europe and America to hear the rights of it.” He was a small, wiry, sunburnt man, clean-shaven, with a sharp face and alert manner.

“Then I’ll tell our story right away,” said the lady. “Frank here and I met in ’84, in McQuire’s camp, near the Rockies, where Pa was working a claim. We were engaged to each other, Frank and I; but then one day father struck a rich pocket and made a pile, while poor Frank here had a claim that petered out and came to nothing. The richer Pa grew the poorer was Frank; so at last Pa wouldn’t hear of our engagement lasting any longer, and he took me away to ’Frisco. Frank wouldn’t throw up his hand, though; so he followed me there, and he saw me without Pa knowing anything about it. It would only have made him mad to know, so we just fixed it all up for ourselves. Frank said that he would go and make his pile, too, and never come back to claim me until he had as much as Pa. So then I promised to wait for him to the end of time and pledged myself not to marry anyone else while he lived. ‘Why shouldn’t we be married right away, then,’ said he, ‘and then I will feel sure of you; and I won’t claim to be your husband until I come back?’ Well, we talked it over, and he had fixed it all up so nicely, with a clergyman all ready in waiting, that we just did it right there; and then Frank went off to seek his fortune, and I went back to Pa.

“The next I heard of Frank was that he was in Montana, and then he went prospecting in Arizona, and then I heard of him from New Mexico. After that came a long newspaper story about how a miners’ camp had been attacked by Apache Indians, and there was my Frank’s name among the killed. I fainted dead away, and I was very sick for months after. Pa thought I had a decline and took me to half the doctors in ’Frisco. Not a word of news came for a year and more, so that I never doubted that Frank was really dead. Then Lord St. Simon came to ’Frisco, and we came to London, and a marriage was arranged, and Pa was very pleased, but I felt all the time that no man on this earth would ever take the place in my heart that had been given to my poor Frank. “Still, if I had married Lord St. Simon, of course I’d have done my duty by him. We can’t command our love, but we can our actions. I went to the altar with him with the intention to make him just as good a wife as it was in me to be. But you may imagine what I felt when, just as I came to the altar rails, I glanced back and saw Frank standing and looking at me out of the first pew. I thought it was his ghost at first; but when I looked again there he was still, with a kind of question in his eyes, as if to ask me whether I were glad or sorry to see him. I wonder I didn’t drop. I know that everything was turning round, and the words of the clergyman were just like the buzz of a bee in my ear. I didn’t know what to do. Should I stop the service and make a scene in the church? I glanced at him again, and he seemed to know what I was thinking, for he raised his finger to his lips to tell me to be still. Then I saw him scribble on a piece of paper, and I knew that he was writing me a note. As I passed his pew on the way out I dropped my bouquet over to him, and he slipped the note into my hand when he returned me the flowers. It was only a line asking me to join him when he made the sign to me to do so. Of course I never doubted for a moment that my first duty was now to him, and I determined to do just whatever he might direct.

“When I got back I told my maid, who had known him in California, and had always been his friend. I ordered her to say nothing, but to get a few things packed and my ulster ready. I know I ought to have spoken to Lord St. Simon, but it was dreadful hard before his mother and all those great people. I just made up my mind to run away and explain afterwards. I hadn’t been at the table ten minutes before I saw Frank out of the window at the other side of the road. He beckoned to me and then began walking into the Park. I slipped out, put on my things, and followed him. Some woman came talking something or other about Lord St. Simon to me—seemed to me from the little I heard as if he had a little secret of his own before marriage also—but I managed to get away from her and soon overtook Frank. We got into a cab together, and away we drove to some lodgings he had taken in Gordon Square, and that was my true wedding after all those years of waiting. Frank had been a prisoner among the Apaches, had escaped, came on to ’Frisco, found that I had given him up for dead and had gone to England, followed me there, and had come upon me at last on the very morning of my second wedding.”

“Then we had a talk as to what we should do, and Frank was all for openness, but I was so ashamed of it all that I felt as if I should like to vanish away and never see any of them again—just sending a line to Pa, perhaps, to show him that I was alive. It was awful to me to think of all those lords and ladies sitting round that breakfast-table and waiting for me to come back. So Frank took my wedding-clothes and things and made a bundle of them, so that I should not be traced, and dropped them away somewhere where no one could find them. It is likely that we should have gone on to Paris to-morrow, only that this good gentleman, Mr. Holmes, came round to us this evening, though how he found us is more than I can think, and he showed us very clearly and kindly that I was wrong and that Frank was right, and that we should be putting ourselves in the wrong if we were so secret. Then he offered to give us a chance of talking to Lord St. Simon alone, and so we came right away round to his rooms at once. Now, Robert, you have heard it all, and I am very sorry if I have given you pain, and I hope that you do not think very meanly of me.”

“I think that there you ask a little too much,” responded his Lordship. “I may be forced to acquiesce in these recent developments, but I can hardly be expected to make merry over them. I think that with your permission I will now wish you all a very good-night.” He included us all in a sweeping bow and stalked out of the room. “Then I trust that you at least will honour me with your company,” said Sherlock Holmes. “It is always a joy to meet an American, Mr. Moulton, for I am one of those who believe that the folly of a monarch and the blundering of a minister in far-gone years will not prevent our children from being some day citizens of the same world-wide country under a flag which shall be a quartering of the Union Jack with the Stars and Stripes.” “The case has been an interesting one,” remarked Holmes when our visitors had left us, “because it serves to show very clearly how simple the explanation may be of an affair which at first sight seems to be almost inexplicable. Nothing could be more natural than the sequence of events as narrated by this lady, and nothing stranger than the result when viewed, for instance, by Mr. Lestrade of Scotland Yard.”

“From the first, two facts were very obvious to me, the one that the lady had been quite willing to undergo the wedding ceremony, the other that she had repented of it within a few minutes of returning home. Obviously something had occurred during the morning, then, to cause her to change her mind. What could that something be? She could not have spoken to anyone when she was out, for she had been in the company of the bridegroom. Had she seen someone, then? If she had, it must be someone from America because she had spent so short a time in this country that she could hardly have allowed anyone to acquire so deep an influence over her that the mere sight of him would induce her to change her plans so completely. You see we have already arrived, by a process of exclusion, at the idea that she might have seen an American. Then who could this American be, and why should he possess so much influence over her? It might be a lover; it might be a husband. Her young womanhood had, I knew, been spent in rough scenes and under strange conditions. So far I had got before I ever heard Lord St. Simon’s narrative. When he told us of a man in a pew, of the change in the bride’s manner, of so transparent a device for obtaining a note as the dropping of a bouquet, of her resort to her confidential maid, and of her very significant allusion to claim-jumping—which in miners’ parlance means taking possession of that which another person has a prior claim to—the whole situation became absolutely clear. She had gone off with a man, and the man was either a lover or was a previous husband—the chances being in favour of the latter.”

“It might have been difficult, but friend Lestrade held information in his hands the value of which he did not himself know. The initials were, of course, of the highest importance, but more valuable still was it to know that within a week he had settled his bill at one of the most select London hotels.” “By the select prices. Eight shillings for a bed and eightpence for a glass of sherry pointed to one of the most expensive hotels. There are not many in London which charge at that rate. In the second one which I visited in Northumberland Avenue, I learned by an inspection of the book that Francis H. Moulton, an American gentleman, had left only the day before, and on looking over the entries against him, I came upon the very items which I had seen in the duplicate bill. His letters were to be forwarded to 226 Gordon Square; so thither I travelled, and being fortunate enough to find the loving couple at home, I ventured to give them some paternal advice and to point out to them that it would be better in every way that they should make their position a little clearer both to the general public and to Lord St. Simon in particular. I invited them to meet him here, and, as you see, I made him keep the appointment.”

“Ah, Watson,” said Holmes, smiling, “perhaps you would not be very gracious either, if, after all the trouble of wooing and wedding, you found yourself deprived in an instant of wife and of fortune. I think that we may judge Lord St. Simon very mercifully and thank our stars that we are never likely to find ourselves in the same position. Draw your chair up and hand me my violin, for the only problem we have still to solve is how to while away these bleak autumnal evenings.” “Holmes,” said I as I stood one morning in our bow-window looking down the street, “here is a madman coming along. It seems rather sad that his relatives should allow him to come out alone.” My friend rose lazily from his armchair and stood with his hands in the pockets of his dressing-gown, looking over my shoulder. It was a bright, crisp February morning, and the snow of the day before still lay deep upon the ground, shimmering brightly in the wintry sun. Down the centre of Baker Street it had been ploughed into a brown crumbly band by the traffic, but at either side and on the heaped-up edges of the footpaths it still lay as white as when it fell. The grey pavement had been cleaned and scraped, but was still dangerously slippery, so that there were fewer passengers than usual. Indeed, from the direction of the Metropolitan Station no one was coming save the single gentleman whose eccentric conduct had drawn my attention.

He was a man of about fifty, tall, portly, and imposing, with a massive, strongly marked face and a commanding figure. He was dressed in a sombre yet rich style, in black frock-coat, shining hat, neat brown gaiters, and well-cut pearl-grey trousers. Yet his actions were in absurd contrast to the dignity of his dress and features, for he was running hard, with occasional little springs, such as a weary man gives who is little accustomed to set any tax upon his legs. As he ran he jerked his hands up and down, waggled his head, and writhed his face into the most extraordinary contortions. “Yes; I rather think he is coming to consult me professionally. I think that I recognise the symptoms. Ha! did I not tell you?” As he spoke, the man, puffing and blowing, rushed at our door and pulled at our bell until the whole house resounded with the clanging. A few moments later he was in our room, still puffing, still gesticulating, but with so fixed a look of grief and despair in his eyes that our smiles were turned in an instant to horror and pity. For a while he could not get his words out, but swayed his body and plucked at his hair like one who has been driven to the extreme limits of his reason. Then, suddenly springing to his feet, he beat his head against the wall with such force that we both rushed upon him and tore him away to the centre of the room. Sherlock Holmes pushed him down into the easy-chair and, sitting beside him, patted his hand and chatted with him in the easy, soothing tones which he knew so well how to employ.

“You have come to me to tell your story, have you not?” said he. “You are fatigued with your haste. Pray wait until you have recovered yourself, and then I shall be most happy to look into any little problem which you may submit to me.” The man sat for a minute or more with a heaving chest, fighting against his emotion. Then he passed his handkerchief over his brow, set his lips tight, and turned his face towards us. “God knows I have!—a trouble which is enough to unseat my reason, so sudden and so terrible is it. Public disgrace I might have faced, although I am a man whose character has never yet borne a stain. Private affliction also is the lot of every man; but the two coming together, and in so frightful a form, have been enough to shake my very soul. Besides, it is not I alone. The very noblest in the land may suffer unless some way be found out of this horrible affair.” “My name,” answered our visitor, “is probably familiar to your ears. I am Alexander Holder, of the banking firm of Holder & Stevenson, of Threadneedle Street.”

The name was indeed well known to us as belonging to the senior partner in the second largest private banking concern in the City of London. What could have happened, then, to bring one of the foremost citizens of London to this most pitiable pass? We waited, all curiosity, until with another effort he braced himself to tell his story. “I feel that time is of value,” said he; “that is why I hastened here when the police inspector suggested that I should secure your co-operation. I came to Baker Street by the Underground and hurried from there on foot, for the cabs go slowly through this snow. That is why I was so out of breath, for I am a man who takes very little exercise. I feel better now, and I will put the facts before you as shortly and yet as clearly as I can. “It is, of course, well known to you that in a successful banking business as much depends upon our being able to find remunerative investments for our funds as upon our increasing our connection and the number of our depositors. One of our most lucrative means of laying out money is in the shape of loans, where the security is unimpeachable. We have done a good deal in this direction during the last few years, and there are many noble families to whom we have advanced large sums upon the security of their pictures, libraries, or plate.

“Yesterday morning I was seated in my office at the bank when a card was brought in to me by one of the clerks. I started when I saw the name, for it was that of none other than—well, perhaps even to you I had better say no more than that it was a name which is a household word all over the earth—one of the highest, noblest, most exalted names in England. I was overwhelmed by the honour and attempted, when he entered, to say so, but he plunged at once into business with the air of a man who wishes to hurry quickly through a disagreeable task. “‘It is absolutely essential to me,’ said he, ‘that I should have £ 50,000 at once. I could, of course, borrow so trifling a sum ten times over from my friends, but I much prefer to make it a matter of business and to carry out that business myself. In my position you can readily understand that it is unwise to place one’s self under obligations.’ “‘Next Monday I have a large sum due to me, and I shall then most certainly repay what you advance, with whatever interest you think it right to charge. But it is very essential to me that the money should be paid at once.’

“‘I should be happy to advance it without further parley from my own private purse,’ said I, ‘were it not that the strain would be rather more than it could bear. If, on the other hand, I am to do it in the name of the firm, then in justice to my partner I must insist that, even in your case, every businesslike precaution should be taken.’ “‘I should much prefer to have it so,’ said he, raising up a square, black morocco case which he had laid beside his chair. ‘You have doubtless heard of the Beryl Coronet?’ “‘Precisely.’ He opened the case, and there, imbedded in soft, flesh-coloured velvet, lay the magnificent piece of jewellery which he had named. ‘There are thirty-nine enormous beryls,’ said he, ‘and the price of the gold chasing is incalculable. The lowest estimate would put the worth of the coronet at double the sum which I have asked. I am prepared to leave it with you as my security.’ “‘The propriety of my leaving it. You may set your mind at rest about that. I should not dream of doing so were it not absolutely certain that I should be able in four days to reclaim it. It is a pure matter of form. Is the security sufficient?’

“‘You understand, Mr. Holder, that I am giving you a strong proof of the confidence which I have in you, founded upon all that I have heard of you. I rely upon you not only to be discreet and to refrain from all gossip upon the matter but, above all, to preserve this coronet with every possible precaution because I need not say that a great public scandal would be caused if any harm were to befall it. Any injury to it would be almost as serious as its complete loss, for there are no beryls in the world to match these, and it would be impossible to replace them. I leave it with you, however, with every confidence, and I shall call for it in person on Monday morning.’ “Seeing that my client was anxious to leave, I said no more but, calling for my cashier, I ordered him to pay over fifty £ 1000 notes. When I was alone once more, however, with the precious case lying upon the table in front of me, I could not but think with some misgivings of the immense responsibility which it entailed upon me. There could be no doubt that, as it was a national possession, a horrible scandal would ensue if any misfortune should occur to it. I already regretted having ever consented to take charge of it. However, it was too late to alter the matter now, so I locked it up in my private safe and turned once more to my work.

“When evening came I felt that it would be an imprudence to leave so precious a thing in the office behind me. Bankers’ safes had been forced before now, and why should not mine be? If so, how terrible would be the position in which I should find myself! I determined, therefore, that for the next few days I would always carry the case backward and forward with me, so that it might never be really out of my reach. With this intention, I called a cab and drove out to my house at Streatham, carrying the jewel with me. I did not breathe freely until I had taken it upstairs and locked it in the bureau of my dressing-room. “And now a word as to my household, Mr. Holmes, for I wish you to thoroughly understand the situation. My groom and my page sleep out of the house, and may be set aside altogether. I have three maid-servants who have been with me a number of years and whose absolute reliability is quite above suspicion. Another, Lucy Parr, the second waiting-maid, has only been in my service a few months. She came with an excellent character, however, and has always given me satisfaction. She is a very pretty girl and has attracted admirers who have occasionally hung about the place. That is the only drawback which we have found to her, but we believe her to be a thoroughly good girl in every way.

“So much for the servants. My family itself is so small that it will not take me long to describe it. I am a widower and have an only son, Arthur. He has been a disappointment to me, Mr. Holmes—a grievous disappointment. I have no doubt that I am myself to blame. People tell me that I have spoiled him. Very likely I have. When my dear wife died I felt that he was all I had to love. I could not bear to see the smile fade even for a moment from his face. I have never denied him a wish. Perhaps it would have been better for both of us had I been sterner, but I meant it for the best. “It was naturally my intention that he should succeed me in my business, but he was not of a business turn. He was wild, wayward, and, to speak the truth, I could not trust him in the handling of large sums of money. When he was young he became a member of an aristocratic club, and there, having charming manners, he was soon the intimate of a number of men with long purses and expensive habits. He learned to play heavily at cards and to squander money on the turf, until he had again and again to come to me and implore me to give him an advance upon his allowance, that he might settle his debts of honour. He tried more than once to break away from the dangerous company which he was keeping, but each time the influence of his friend, Sir George Burnwell, was enough to draw him back again.

“And, indeed, I could not wonder that such a man as Sir George Burnwell should gain an influence over him, for he has frequently brought him to my house, and I have found myself that I could hardly resist the fascination of his manner. He is older than Arthur, a man of the world to his finger-tips, one who had been everywhere, seen everything, a brilliant talker, and a man of great personal beauty. Yet when I think of him in cold blood, far away from the glamour of his presence, I am convinced from his cynical speech and the look which I have caught in his eyes that he is one who should be deeply distrusted. So I think, and so, too, thinks my little Mary, who has a woman’s quick insight into character. “And now there is only she to be described. She is my niece; but when my brother died five years ago and left her alone in the world I adopted her, and have looked upon her ever since as my daughter. She is a sunbeam in my house—sweet, loving, beautiful, a wonderful manager and housekeeper, yet as tender and quiet and gentle as a woman could be. She is my right hand. I do not know what I could do without her. In only one matter has she ever gone against my wishes. Twice my boy has asked her to marry him, for he loves her devotedly, but each time she has refused him. I think that if anyone could have drawn him into the right path it would have been she, and that his marriage might have changed his whole life; but now, alas! it is too late—forever too late!

“When we were taking coffee in the drawing-room that night after dinner, I told Arthur and Mary my experience, and of the precious treasure which we had under our roof, suppressing only the name of my client. Lucy Parr, who had brought in the coffee, had, I am sure, left the room; but I cannot swear that the door was closed. Mary and Arthur were much interested and wished to see the famous coronet, but I thought it better not to disturb it. “‘Yes, but you would not have me leave it a dishonoured man,’ said he. ‘I could not bear the disgrace. I must raise the money in some way, and if you will not let me have it, then I must try other means.’ “I was very angry, for this was the third demand during the month. ‘You shall not have a farthing from me,’ I cried, on which he bowed and left the room without another word. “When he was gone I unlocked my bureau, made sure that my treasure was safe, and locked it again. Then I started to go round the house to see that all was secure—a duty which I usually leave to Mary but which I thought it well to perform myself that night. As I came down the stairs I saw Mary herself at the side window of the hall, which she closed and fastened as I approached.

“‘She came in just now by the back door. I have no doubt that she has only been to the side gate to see someone, but I think that it is hardly safe and should be stopped.’ “I am endeavouring to tell you everything, Mr. Holmes, which may have any bearing upon the case, but I beg that you will question me upon any point which I do not make clear.” “I come to a part of my story now in which I should wish to be particularly so. I am not a very heavy sleeper, and the anxiety in my mind tended, no doubt, to make me even less so than usual. About two in the morning, then, I was awakened by some sound in the house. It had ceased ere I was wide awake, but it had left an impression behind it as though a window had gently closed somewhere. I lay listening with all my ears. Suddenly, to my horror, there was a distinct sound of footsteps moving softly in the next room. I slipped out of bed, all palpitating with fear, and peeped round the corner of my dressing-room door.

“The gas was half up, as I had left it, and my unhappy boy, dressed only in his shirt and trousers, was standing beside the light, holding the coronet in his hands. He appeared to be wrenching at it, or bending it with all his strength. At my cry he dropped it from his grasp and turned as pale as death. I snatched it up and examined it. One of the gold corners, with three of the beryls in it, was missing. “‘You blackguard!’ I shouted, beside myself with rage. ‘You have destroyed it! You have dishonoured me forever! Where are the jewels which you have stolen?’ “‘There are three missing. And you know where they are. Must I call you a liar as well as a thief? Did I not see you trying to tear off another piece?’ “‘You have called me names enough,’ said he, ‘I will not stand it any longer. I shall not say another word about this business, since you have chosen to insult me. I will leave your house in the morning and make my own way in the world.’

“‘You shall learn nothing from me,’ said he with a passion such as I should not have thought was in his nature. ‘If you choose to call the police, let the police find what they can.’ “By this time the whole house was astir, for I had raised my voice in my anger. Mary was the first to rush into my room, and, at the sight of the coronet and of Arthur’s face, she read the whole story and, with a scream, fell down senseless on the ground. I sent the housemaid for the police and put the investigation into their hands at once. When the inspector and a constable entered the house, Arthur, who had stood sullenly with his arms folded, asked me whether it was my intention to charge him with theft. I answered that it had ceased to be a private matter, but had become a public one, since the ruined coronet was national property. I was determined that the law should have its way in everything. “‘At least,’ said he, ‘you will not have me arrested at once. It would be to your advantage as well as mine if I might leave the house for five minutes.’

“‘That you may get away, or perhaps that you may conceal what you have stolen,’ said I. And then, realising the dreadful position in which I was placed, I implored him to remember that not only my honour but that of one who was far greater than I was at stake; and that he threatened to raise a scandal which would convulse the nation. He might avert it all if he would but tell me what he had done with the three missing stones. “‘You may as well face the matter,’ said I; ‘you have been caught in the act, and no confession could make your guilt more heinous. If you but make such reparation as is in your power, by telling us where the beryls are, all shall be forgiven and forgotten.’ “‘Keep your forgiveness for those who ask for it,’ he answered, turning away from me with a sneer. I saw that he was too hardened for any words of mine to influence him. There was but one way for it. I called in the inspector and gave him into custody. A search was made at once not only of his person but of his room and of every portion of the house where he could possibly have concealed the gems; but no trace of them could be found, nor would the wretched boy open his mouth for all our persuasions and our threats. This morning he was removed to a cell, and I, after going through all the police formalities, have hurried round to you to implore you to use your skill in unravelling the matter. The police have openly confessed that they can at present make nothing of it. You may go to any expense which you think necessary. I have already offered a reward of £ 1000. My God, what shall I do! I have lost my honour, my gems, and my son in one night. Oh, what shall I do!”

“God bless you! You are doing what you can for him and for me. But it is too heavy a task. What was he doing there at all? If his purpose were innocent, why did he not say so?” “Precisely. And if it were guilty, why did he not invent a lie? His silence appears to me to cut both ways. There are several singular points about the case. What did the police think of the noise which awoke you from your sleep?” “A likely story! As if a man bent on felony would slam his door so as to wake a household. What did they say, then, of the disappearance of these gems?” “Now, my dear sir,” said Holmes, “is it not obvious to you now that this matter really strikes very much deeper than either you or the police were at first inclined to think? It appeared to you to be a simple case; to me it seems exceedingly complex. Consider what is involved by your theory. You suppose that your son came down from his bed, went, at great risk, to your dressing-room, opened your bureau, took out your coronet, broke off by main force a small portion of it, went off to some other place, concealed three gems out of the thirty-nine, with such skill that nobody can find them, and then returned with the other thirty-six into the room in which he exposed himself to the greatest danger of being discovered. I ask you now, is such a theory tenable?”

“It is our task to find that out,” replied Holmes; “so now, if you please, Mr. Holder, we will set off for Streatham together, and devote an hour to glancing a little more closely into details.” My friend insisted upon my accompanying them in their expedition, which I was eager enough to do, for my curiosity and sympathy were deeply stirred by the story to which we had listened. I confess that the guilt of the banker’s son appeared to me to be as obvious as it did to his unhappy father, but still I had such faith in Holmes’ judgment that I felt that there must be some grounds for hope as long as he was dissatisfied with the accepted explanation. He hardly spoke a word the whole way out to the southern suburb, but sat with his chin upon his breast and his hat drawn over his eyes, sunk in the deepest thought. Our client appeared to have taken fresh heart at the little glimpse of hope which had been presented to him, and he even broke into a desultory chat with me over his business affairs. A short railway journey and a shorter walk brought us to Fairbank, the modest residence of the great financier.

Fairbank was a good-sized square house of white stone, standing back a little from the road. A double carriage-sweep, with a snow-clad lawn, stretched down in front to two large iron gates which closed the entrance. On the right side was a small wooden thicket, which led into a narrow path between two neat hedges stretching from the road to the kitchen door, and forming the tradesmen’s entrance. On the left ran a lane which led to the stables, and was not itself within the grounds at all, being a public, though little used, thoroughfare. Holmes left us standing at the door and walked slowly all round the house, across the front, down the tradesmen’s path, and so round by the garden behind into the stable lane. So long was he that Mr. Holder and I went into the dining-room and waited by the fire until he should return. We were sitting there in silence when the door opened and a young lady came in. She was rather above the middle height, slim, with dark hair and eyes, which seemed the darker against the absolute pallor of her skin. I do not think that I have ever seen such deadly paleness in a woman’s face. Her lips, too, were bloodless, but her eyes were flushed with crying. As she swept silently into the room she impressed me with a greater sense of grief than the banker had done in the morning, and it was the more striking in her as she was evidently a woman of strong character, with immense capacity for self-restraint. Disregarding my presence, she went straight to her uncle and passed her hand over his head with a sweet womanly caress.

“But I am so sure that he is innocent. You know what woman’s instincts are. I know that he has done no harm and that you will be sorry for having acted so harshly.” “Oh, but he had only picked it up to look at it. Oh, do, do take my word for it that he is innocent. Let the matter drop and say no more. It is so dreadful to think of our dear Arthur in prison!” “I shall never let it drop until the gems are found—never, Mary! Your affection for Arthur blinds you as to the awful consequences to me. Far from hushing the thing up, I have brought a gentleman down from London to inquire more deeply into it.” “The stable lane?” She raised her dark eyebrows. “What can he hope to find there? Ah! this, I suppose, is he. I trust, sir, that you will succeed in proving, what I feel sure is the truth, that my cousin Arthur is innocent of this crime.” “I fully share your opinion, and I trust, with you, that we may prove it,” returned Holmes, going back to the mat to knock the snow from his shoes. “I believe I have the honour of addressing Miss Mary Holder. Might I ask you a question or two?”

“But what is the good of all these vague theories,” cried the banker impatiently, “when I have told you that I saw Arthur with the coronet in his hands?” Something like fear sprang up in the young lady’s expressive black eyes. “Why, you are like a magician,” said she. “How do you know that?” She smiled, but there was no answering smile in Holmes’ thin, eager face. “I should be very glad now to go upstairs,” said he. “I shall probably wish to go over the outside of the house again. Perhaps I had better take a look at the lower windows before I go up.” He walked swiftly round from one to the other, pausing only at the large one which looked from the hall onto the stable lane. This he opened and made a very careful examination of the sill with his powerful magnifying lens. “Now we shall go upstairs,” said he at last. The banker’s dressing-room was a plainly furnished little chamber, with a grey carpet, a large bureau, and a long mirror. Holmes went to the bureau first and looked hard at the lock.

“It is a noiseless lock,” said he. “It is no wonder that it did not wake you. This case, I presume, contains the coronet. We must have a look at it.” He opened the case, and taking out the diadem he laid it upon the table. It was a magnificent specimen of the jeweller’s art, and the thirty-six stones were the finest that I have ever seen. At one side of the coronet was a cracked edge, where a corner holding three gems had been torn away. “Now, Mr. Holder,” said Holmes, “here is the corner which corresponds to that which has been so unfortunately lost. Might I beg that you will break it off.” “Then I will.” Holmes suddenly bent his strength upon it, but without result. “I feel it give a little,” said he; “but, though I am exceptionally strong in the fingers, it would take me all my time to break it. An ordinary man could not do it. Now, what do you think would happen if I did break it, Mr. Holder? There would be a noise like a pistol shot. Do you tell me that all this happened within a few yards of your bed and that you heard nothing of it?”

“Thank you. We have certainly been favoured with extraordinary luck during this inquiry, and it will be entirely our own fault if we do not succeed in clearing the matter up. With your permission, Mr. Holder, I shall now continue my investigations outside.” He went alone, at his own request, for he explained that any unnecessary footmarks might make his task more difficult. For an hour or more he was at work, returning at last with his feet heavy with snow and his features as inscrutable as ever. “If you can call upon me at my Baker Street rooms to-morrow morning between nine and ten I shall be happy to do what I can to make it clearer. I understand that you give me _carte blanche_ to act for you, provided only that I get back the gems, and that you place no limit on the sum I may draw.” “Very good. I shall look into the matter between this and then. Good-bye; it is just possible that I may have to come over here again before evening.” It was obvious to me that my companion’s mind was now made up about the case, although what his conclusions were was more than I could even dimly imagine. Several times during our homeward journey I endeavoured to sound him upon the point, but he always glided away to some other topic, until at last I gave it over in despair. It was not yet three when we found ourselves in our rooms once more. He hurried to his chamber and was down again in a few minutes dressed as a common loafer. With his collar turned up, his shiny, seedy coat, his red cravat, and his worn boots, he was a perfect sample of the class.

“I think that this should do,” said he, glancing into the glass above the fireplace. “I only wish that you could come with me, Watson, but I fear that it won’t do. I may be on the trail in this matter, or I may be following a will-o’-the-wisp, but I shall soon know which it is. I hope that I may be back in a few hours.” He cut a slice of beef from the joint upon the sideboard, sandwiched it between two rounds of bread, and thrusting this rude meal into his pocket he started off upon his expedition. I had just finished my tea when he returned, evidently in excellent spirits, swinging an old elastic-sided boot in his hand. He chucked it down into a corner and helped himself to a cup of tea. “Oh, so so. Nothing to complain of. I have been out to Streatham since I saw you last, but I did not call at the house. It is a very sweet little problem, and I would not have missed it for a good deal. However, I must not sit gossiping here, but must get these disreputable clothes off and return to my highly respectable self.”

I could see by his manner that he had stronger reasons for satisfaction than his words alone would imply. His eyes twinkled, and there was even a touch of colour upon his sallow cheeks. He hastened upstairs, and a few minutes later I heard the slam of the hall door, which told me that he was off once more upon his congenial hunt. I waited until midnight, but there was no sign of his return, so I retired to my room. It was no uncommon thing for him to be away for days and nights on end when he was hot upon a scent, so that his lateness caused me no surprise. I do not know at what hour he came in, but when I came down to breakfast in the morning there he was with a cup of coffee in one hand and the paper in the other, as fresh and trim as possible. It was, indeed, our friend the financier. I was shocked by the change which had come over him, for his face which was naturally of a broad and massive mould, was now pinched and fallen in, while his hair seemed to me at least a shade whiter. He entered with a weariness and lethargy which was even more painful than his violence of the morning before, and he dropped heavily into the armchair which I pushed forward for him.

“I do not know what I have done to be so severely tried,” said he. “Only two days ago I was a happy and prosperous man, without a care in the world. Now I am left to a lonely and dishonoured age. One sorrow comes close upon the heels of another. My niece, Mary, has deserted me.” “Yes. Her bed this morning had not been slept in, her room was empty, and a note for me lay upon the hall table. I had said to her last night, in sorrow and not in anger, that if she had married my boy all might have been well with him. Perhaps it was thoughtless of me to say so. It is to that remark that she refers in this note: “‘MY DEAREST UNCLE,—I feel that I have brought trouble upon you, and that if I had acted differently this terrible misfortune might never have occurred. I cannot, with this thought in my mind, ever again be happy under your roof, and I feel that I must leave you forever. Do not worry about my future, for that is provided for; and, above all, do not search for me, for it will be fruitless labour and an ill-service to me. In life or in death, I am ever your loving,

“That would be unnecessary. Three thousand will cover the matter. And there is a little reward, I fancy. Have you your cheque-book? Here is a pen. Better make it out for £ 4000.” With a dazed face the banker made out the required check. Holmes walked over to his desk, took out a little triangular piece of gold with three gems in it, and threw it down upon the table. “No, the debt is not to me. You owe a very humble apology to that noble lad, your son, who has carried himself in this matter as I should be proud to see my own son do, should I ever chance to have one.” “He knows it already. When I had cleared it all up I had an interview with him, and finding that he would not tell me the story, I told it to him, on which he had to confess that I was right and to add the very few details which were not yet quite clear to me. Your news of this morning, however, may open his lips.”

“I will do so, and I will show you the steps by which I reached it. And let me say to you, first, that which it is hardest for me to say and for you to hear: there has been an understanding between Sir George Burnwell and your niece Mary. They have now fled together.” “It is unfortunately more than possible; it is certain. Neither you nor your son knew the true character of this man when you admitted him into your family circle. He is one of the most dangerous men in England—a ruined gambler, an absolutely desperate villain, a man without heart or conscience. Your niece knew nothing of such men. When he breathed his vows to her, as he had done to a hundred before her, she flattered herself that she alone had touched his heart. The devil knows best what he said, but at least she became his tool and was in the habit of seeing him nearly every evening.” “I will tell you, then, what occurred in your house last night. Your niece, when you had, as she thought, gone to your room, slipped down and talked to her lover through the window which leads into the stable lane. His footmarks had pressed right through the snow, so long had he stood there. She told him of the coronet. His wicked lust for gold kindled at the news, and he bent her to his will. I have no doubt that she loved you, but there are women in whom the love of a lover extinguishes all other loves, and I think that she must have been one. She had hardly listened to his instructions when she saw you coming downstairs, on which she closed the window rapidly and told you about one of the servants’ escapade with her wooden-legged lover, which was all perfectly true.

“Your boy, Arthur, went to bed after his interview with you but he slept badly on account of his uneasiness about his club debts. In the middle of the night he heard a soft tread pass his door, so he rose and, looking out, was surprised to see his cousin walking very stealthily along the passage until she disappeared into your dressing-room. Petrified with astonishment, the lad slipped on some clothes and waited there in the dark to see what would come of this strange affair. Presently she emerged from the room again, and in the light of the passage-lamp your son saw that she carried the precious coronet in her hands. She passed down the stairs, and he, thrilling with horror, ran along and slipped behind the curtain near your door, whence he could see what passed in the hall beneath. He saw her stealthily open the window, hand out the coronet to someone in the gloom, and then closing it once more hurry back to her room, passing quite close to where he stood hid behind the curtain.

“As long as she was on the scene he could not take any action without a horrible exposure of the woman whom he loved. But the instant that she was gone he realised how crushing a misfortune this would be for you, and how all-important it was to set it right. He rushed down, just as he was, in his bare feet, opened the window, sprang out into the snow, and ran down the lane, where he could see a dark figure in the moonlight. Sir George Burnwell tried to get away, but Arthur caught him, and there was a struggle between them, your lad tugging at one side of the coronet, and his opponent at the other. In the scuffle, your son struck Sir George and cut him over the eye. Then something suddenly snapped, and your son, finding that he had the coronet in his hands, rushed back, closed the window, ascended to your room, and had just observed that the coronet had been twisted in the struggle and was endeavouring to straighten it when you appeared upon the scene.”

“You then roused his anger by calling him names at a moment when he felt that he had deserved your warmest thanks. He could not explain the true state of affairs without betraying one who certainly deserved little enough consideration at his hands. He took the more chivalrous view, however, and preserved her secret.” “And that was why she shrieked and fainted when she saw the coronet,” cried Mr. Holder. “Oh, my God! what a blind fool I have been! And his asking to be allowed to go out for five minutes! The dear fellow wanted to see if the missing piece were at the scene of the struggle. How cruelly I have misjudged him!” “When I arrived at the house,” continued Holmes, “I at once went very carefully round it to observe if there were any traces in the snow which might help me. I knew that none had fallen since the evening before, and also that there had been a strong frost to preserve impressions. I passed along the tradesmen’s path, but found it all trampled down and indistinguishable. Just beyond it, however, at the far side of the kitchen door, a woman had stood and talked with a man, whose round impressions on one side showed that he had a wooden leg. I could even tell that they had been disturbed, for the woman had run back swiftly to the door, as was shown by the deep toe and light heel marks, while Wooden-leg had waited a little, and then had gone away. I thought at the time that this might be the maid and her sweetheart, of whom you had already spoken to me, and inquiry showed it was so. I passed round the garden without seeing anything more than random tracks, which I took to be the police; but when I got into the stable lane a very long and complex story was written in the snow in front of me.

“There was a double line of tracks of a booted man, and a second double line which I saw with delight belonged to a man with naked feet. I was at once convinced from what you had told me that the latter was your son. The first had walked both ways, but the other had run swiftly, and as his tread was marked in places over the depression of the boot, it was obvious that he had passed after the other. I followed them up and found they led to the hall window, where Boots had worn all the snow away while waiting. Then I walked to the other end, which was a hundred yards or more down the lane. I saw where Boots had faced round, where the snow was cut up as though there had been a struggle, and, finally, where a few drops of blood had fallen, to show me that I was not mistaken. Boots had then run down the lane, and another little smudge of blood showed that it was he who had been hurt. When he came to the high road at the other end, I found that the pavement had been cleared, so there was an end to that clue.

“On entering the house, however, I examined, as you remember, the sill and framework of the hall window with my lens, and I could at once see that someone had passed out. I could distinguish the outline of an instep where the wet foot had been placed in coming in. I was then beginning to be able to form an opinion as to what had occurred. A man had waited outside the window; someone had brought the gems; the deed had been overseen by your son; he had pursued the thief; had struggled with him; they had each tugged at the coronet, their united strength causing injuries which neither alone could have effected. He had returned with the prize, but had left a fragment in the grasp of his opponent. So far I was clear. The question now was, who was the man, and who was it brought him the coronet? “It is an old maxim of mine that when you have excluded the impossible, whatever remains, however improbable, must be the truth. Now, I knew that it was not you who had brought it down, so there only remained your niece and the maids. But if it were the maids, why should your son allow himself to be accused in their place? There could be no possible reason. As he loved his cousin, however, there was an excellent explanation why he should retain her secret—the more so as the secret was a disgraceful one. When I remembered that you had seen her at that window, and how she had fainted on seeing the coronet again, my conjecture became a certainty.

“And who could it be who was her confederate? A lover evidently, for who else could outweigh the love and gratitude which she must feel to you? I knew that you went out little, and that your circle of friends was a very limited one. But among them was Sir George Burnwell. I had heard of him before as being a man of evil reputation among women. It must have been he who wore those boots and retained the missing gems. Even though he knew that Arthur had discovered him, he might still flatter himself that he was safe, for the lad could not say a word without compromising his own family. “Well, your own good sense will suggest what measures I took next. I went in the shape of a loafer to Sir George’s house, managed to pick up an acquaintance with his valet, learned that his master had cut his head the night before, and, finally, at the expense of six shillings, made all sure by buying a pair of his cast-off shoes. With these I journeyed down to Streatham and saw that they exactly fitted the tracks.”

“Precisely. It was I. I found that I had my man, so I came home and changed my clothes. It was a delicate part which I had to play then, for I saw that a prosecution must be avoided to avert scandal, and I knew that so astute a villain would see that our hands were tied in the matter. I went and saw him. At first, of course, he denied everything. But when I gave him every particular that had occurred, he tried to bluster and took down a life-preserver from the wall. I knew my man, however, and I clapped a pistol to his head before he could strike. Then he became a little more reasonable. I told him that we would give him a price for the stones he held—£ 1000 apiece. That brought out the first signs of grief that he had shown. ‘Why, dash it all!’ said he, ‘I’ve let them go at six hundred for the three!’ I soon managed to get the address of the receiver who had them, on promising him that there would be no prosecution. Off I set to him, and after much chaffering I got our stones at £ 1000 apiece. Then I looked in upon your son, told him that all was right, and eventually got to my bed about two o’clock, after what I may call a really hard day’s work.”

“A day which has saved England from a great public scandal,” said the banker, rising. “Sir, I cannot find words to thank you, but you shall not find me ungrateful for what you have done. Your skill has indeed exceeded all that I have heard of it. And now I must fly to my dear boy to apologise to him for the wrong which I have done him. As to what you tell me of poor Mary, it goes to my very heart. Not even your skill can inform me where she is now.” “I think that we may safely say,” returned Holmes, “that she is wherever Sir George Burnwell is. It is equally certain, too, that whatever her sins are, they will soon receive a more than sufficient punishment.” “To the man who loves art for its own sake,” remarked Sherlock Holmes, tossing aside the advertisement sheet of _The Daily Telegraph_, “it is frequently in its least important and lowliest manifestations that the keenest pleasure is to be derived. It is pleasant to me to observe, Watson, that you have so far grasped this truth that in these little records of our cases which you have been good enough to draw up, and, I am bound to say, occasionally to embellish, you have given prominence not so much to the many _causes célèbres_ and sensational trials in which I have figured but rather to those incidents which may have been trivial in themselves, but which have given room for those faculties of deduction and of logical synthesis which I have made my special province.”

“You have erred, perhaps,” he observed, taking up a glowing cinder with the tongs and lighting with it the long cherry-wood pipe which was wont to replace his clay when he was in a disputatious rather than a meditative mood—“you have erred perhaps in attempting to put colour and life into each of your statements instead of confining yourself to the task of placing upon record that severe reasoning from cause to effect which is really the only notable feature about the thing.” “It seems to me that I have done you full justice in the matter,” I remarked with some coldness, for I was repelled by the egotism which I had more than once observed to be a strong factor in my friend’s singular character. “No, it is not selfishness or conceit,” said he, answering, as was his wont, my thoughts rather than my words. “If I claim full justice for my art, it is because it is an impersonal thing—a thing beyond myself. Crime is common. Logic is rare. Therefore it is upon the logic rather than upon the crime that you should dwell. You have degraded what should have been a course of lectures into a series of tales.”

It was a cold morning of the early spring, and we sat after breakfast on either side of a cheery fire in the old room at Baker Street. A thick fog rolled down between the lines of dun-coloured houses, and the opposing windows loomed like dark, shapeless blurs through the heavy yellow wreaths. Our gas was lit and shone on the white cloth and glimmer of china and metal, for the table had not been cleared yet. Sherlock Holmes had been silent all the morning, dipping continuously into the advertisement columns of a succession of papers until at last, having apparently given up his search, he had emerged in no very sweet temper to lecture me upon my literary shortcomings. “At the same time,” he remarked after a pause, during which he had sat puffing at his long pipe and gazing down into the fire, “you can hardly be open to a charge of sensationalism, for out of these cases which you have been so kind as to interest yourself in, a fair proportion do not treat of crime, in its legal sense, at all. The small matter in which I endeavoured to help the King of Bohemia, the singular experience of Miss Mary Sutherland, the problem connected with the man with the twisted lip, and the incident of the noble bachelor, were all matters which are outside the pale of the law. But in avoiding the sensational, I fear that you may have bordered on the trivial.”

“Pshaw, my dear fellow, what do the public, the great unobservant public, who could hardly tell a weaver by his tooth or a compositor by his left thumb, care about the finer shades of analysis and deduction! But, indeed, if you are trivial, I cannot blame you, for the days of the great cases are past. Man, or at least criminal man, has lost all enterprise and originality. As to my own little practice, it seems to be degenerating into an agency for recovering lost lead pencils and giving advice to young ladies from boarding-schools. I think that I have touched bottom at last, however. This note I had this morning marks my zero-point, I fancy. Read it!” He tossed a crumpled letter across to me. “DEAR MR. HOLMES,—I am very anxious to consult you as to whether I should or should not accept a situation which has been offered to me as governess. I shall call at half-past ten to-morrow if I do not inconvenience you. Yours faithfully, “It may turn out to be of more interest than you think. You remember that the affair of the blue carbuncle, which appeared to be a mere whim at first, developed into a serious investigation. It may be so in this case, also.”

As he spoke the door opened and a young lady entered the room. She was plainly but neatly dressed, with a bright, quick face, freckled like a plover’s egg, and with the brisk manner of a woman who has had her own way to make in the world. “You will excuse my troubling you, I am sure,” said she, as my companion rose to greet her, “but I have had a very strange experience, and as I have no parents or relations of any sort from whom I could ask advice, I thought that perhaps you would be kind enough to tell me what I should do.” I could see that Holmes was favourably impressed by the manner and speech of his new client. He looked her over in his searching fashion, and then composed himself, with his lids drooping and his finger-tips together, to listen to her story. “I have been a governess for five years,” said she, “in the family of Colonel Spence Munro, but two months ago the colonel received an appointment at Halifax, in Nova Scotia, and took his children over to America with him, so that I found myself without a situation. I advertised, and I answered advertisements, but without success. At last the little money which I had saved began to run short, and I was at my wit’s end as to what I should do.

“There is a well-known agency for governesses in the West End called Westaway’s, and there I used to call about once a week in order to see whether anything had turned up which might suit me. Westaway was the name of the founder of the business, but it is really managed by Miss Stoper. She sits in her own little office, and the ladies who are seeking employment wait in an anteroom, and are then shown in one by one, when she consults her ledgers and sees whether she has anything which would suit them. “Well, when I called last week I was shown into the little office as usual, but I found that Miss Stoper was not alone. A prodigiously stout man with a very smiling face and a great heavy chin which rolled down in fold upon fold over his throat sat at her elbow with a pair of glasses on his nose, looking very earnestly at the ladies who entered. As I came in he gave quite a jump in his chair and turned quickly to Miss Stoper.

“‘That will do,’ said he; ‘I could not ask for anything better. Capital! capital!’ He seemed quite enthusiastic and rubbed his hands together in the most genial fashion. He was such a comfortable-looking man that it was quite a pleasure to look at him. “‘Oh, tut, tut! sweating—rank sweating!’ he cried, throwing his fat hands out into the air like a man who is in a boiling passion. ‘How could anyone offer so pitiful a sum to a lady with such attractions and accomplishments?’ “‘Tut, tut!’ he cried. ‘This is all quite beside the question. The point is, have you or have you not the bearing and deportment of a lady? There it is in a nutshell. If you have not, you are not fitted for the rearing of a child who may some day play a considerable part in the history of the country. But if you have, why, then, how could any gentleman ask you to condescend to accept anything under the three figures? Your salary with me, madam, would commence at £ 100 a year.’ “You may imagine, Mr. Holmes, that to me, destitute as I was, such an offer seemed almost too good to be true. The gentleman, however, seeing perhaps the look of incredulity upon my face, opened a pocket-book and took out a note.

“‘It is also my custom,’ said he, smiling in the most pleasant fashion until his eyes were just two little shining slits amid the white creases of his face, ‘to advance to my young ladies half their salary beforehand, so that they may meet any little expenses of their journey and their wardrobe.’ “It seemed to me that I had never met so fascinating and so thoughtful a man. As I was already in debt to my tradesmen, the advance was a great convenience, and yet there was something unnatural about the whole transaction which made me wish to know a little more before I quite committed myself. “‘Hampshire. Charming rural place. The Copper Beeches, five miles on the far side of Winchester. It is the most lovely country, my dear young lady, and the dearest old country-house.’ “‘One child—one dear little romper just six years old. Oh, if you could see him killing cockroaches with a slipper! Smack! smack! smack! Three gone before you could wink!’ He leaned back in his chair and laughed his eyes into his head again.

“‘No, no, not the sole, not the sole, my dear young lady,’ he cried. ‘Your duty would be, as I am sure your good sense would suggest, to obey any little commands my wife might give, provided always that they were such commands as a lady might with propriety obey. You see no difficulty, heh?’ “‘Quite so. In dress now, for example. We are faddy people, you know—faddy but kind-hearted. If you were asked to wear any dress which we might give you, you would not object to our little whim. Heh?’ “I could hardly believe my ears. As you may observe, Mr. Holmes, my hair is somewhat luxuriant, and of a rather peculiar tint of chestnut. It has been considered artistic. I could not dream of sacrificing it in this offhand fashion. “‘I am afraid that that is quite impossible,’ said I. He had been watching me eagerly out of his small eyes, and I could see a shadow pass over his face as I spoke. “‘I am afraid that it is quite essential,’ said he. ‘It is a little fancy of my wife’s, and ladies’ fancies, you know, madam, ladies’ fancies must be consulted. And so you won’t cut your hair?’

“‘Ah, very well; then that quite settles the matter. It is a pity, because in other respects you would really have done very nicely. In that case, Miss Stoper, I had best inspect a few more of your young ladies.’ “The manageress had sat all this while busy with her papers without a word to either of us, but she glanced at me now with so much annoyance upon her face that I could not help suspecting that she had lost a handsome commission through my refusal. “‘Well, really, it seems rather useless, since you refuse the most excellent offers in this fashion,’ said she sharply. ‘You can hardly expect us to exert ourselves to find another such opening for you. Good-day to you, Miss Hunter.’ She struck a gong upon the table, and I was shown out by the page. “Well, Mr. Holmes, when I got back to my lodgings and found little enough in the cupboard, and two or three bills upon the table, I began to ask myself whether I had not done a very foolish thing. After all, if these people had strange fads and expected obedience on the most extraordinary matters, they were at least ready to pay for their eccentricity. Very few governesses in England are getting £ 100 a year. Besides, what use was my hair to me? Many people are improved by wearing it short and perhaps I should be among the number. Next day I was inclined to think that I had made a mistake, and by the day after I was sure of it. I had almost overcome my pride so far as to go back to the agency and inquire whether the place was still open when I received this letter from the gentleman himself. I have it here and I will read it to you:

“‘DEAR MISS HUNTER,—Miss Stoper has very kindly given me your address, and I write from here to ask you whether you have reconsidered your decision. My wife is very anxious that you should come, for she has been much attracted by my description of you. We are willing to give £ 30 a quarter, or £ 120 a year, so as to recompense you for any little inconvenience which our fads may cause you. They are not very exacting, after all. My wife is fond of a particular shade of electric blue and would like you to wear such a dress indoors in the morning. You need not, however, go to the expense of purchasing one, as we have one belonging to my dear daughter Alice (now in Philadelphia), which would, I should think, fit you very well. Then, as to sitting here or there, or amusing yourself in any manner indicated, that need cause you no inconvenience. As regards your hair, it is no doubt a pity, especially as I could not help remarking its beauty during our short interview, but I am afraid that I must remain firm upon this point, and I only hope that the increased salary may recompense you for the loss. Your duties, as far as the child is concerned, are very light. Now do try to come, and I shall meet you with the dog-cart at Winchester. Let me know your train. Yours faithfully,

“That is the letter which I have just received, Mr. Holmes, and my mind is made up that I will accept it. I thought, however, that before taking the final step I should like to submit the whole matter to your consideration.” “Well, there seems to me to be only one possible solution. Mr. Rucastle seemed to be a very kind, good-natured man. Is it not possible that his wife is a lunatic, that he desires to keep the matter quiet for fear she should be taken to an asylum, and that he humours her fancies in every way in order to prevent an outbreak?” “That is a possible solution—in fact, as matters stand, it is the most probable one. But in any case it does not seem to be a nice household for a young lady.” “Well, yes, of course the pay is good—too good. That is what makes me uneasy. Why should they give you £ 120 a year, when they could have their pick for £ 40? There must be some strong reason behind.” “I thought that if I told you the circumstances you would understand afterwards if I wanted your help. I should feel so much stronger if I felt that you were at the back of me.”

“Oh, you may carry that feeling away with you. I assure you that your little problem promises to be the most interesting which has come my way for some months. There is something distinctly novel about some of the features. If you should find yourself in doubt or in danger—” Holmes shook his head gravely. “It would cease to be a danger if we could define it,” said he. “But at any time, day or night, a telegram would bring me down to your help.” “That is enough.” She rose briskly from her chair with the anxiety all swept from her face. “I shall go down to Hampshire quite easy in my mind now. I shall write to Mr. Rucastle at once, sacrifice my poor hair to-night, and start for Winchester to-morrow.” With a few grateful words to Holmes she bade us both good-night and bustled off upon her way. “At least,” said I as we heard her quick, firm steps descending the stairs, “she seems to be a young lady who is very well able to take care of herself.”

It was not very long before my friend’s prediction was fulfilled. A fortnight went by, during which I frequently found my thoughts turning in her direction and wondering what strange side-alley of human experience this lonely woman had strayed into. The unusual salary, the curious conditions, the light duties, all pointed to something abnormal, though whether a fad or a plot, or whether the man were a philanthropist or a villain, it was quite beyond my powers to determine. As to Holmes, I observed that he sat frequently for half an hour on end, with knitted brows and an abstracted air, but he swept the matter away with a wave of his hand when I mentioned it. “Data! data! data!” he cried impatiently. “I can’t make bricks without clay.” And yet he would always wind up by muttering that no sister of his should ever have accepted such a situation. The telegram which we eventually received came late one night just as I was thinking of turning in and Holmes was settling down to one of those all-night chemical researches which he frequently indulged in, when I would leave him stooping over a retort and a test-tube at night and find him in the same position when I came down to breakfast in the morning. He opened the yellow envelope, and then, glancing at the message, threw it across to me.

By eleven o’clock the next day we were well upon our way to the old English capital. Holmes had been buried in the morning papers all the way down, but after we had passed the Hampshire border he threw them down and began to admire the scenery. It was an ideal spring day, a light blue sky, flecked with little fleecy white clouds drifting across from west to east. The sun was shining very brightly, and yet there was an exhilarating nip in the air, which set an edge to a man’s energy. All over the countryside, away to the rolling hills around Aldershot, the little red and grey roofs of the farm-steadings peeped out from amid the light green of the new foliage. “Do you know, Watson,” said he, “that it is one of the curses of a mind with a turn like mine that I must look at everything with reference to my own special subject. You look at these scattered houses, and you are impressed by their beauty. I look at them, and the only thought which comes to me is a feeling of their isolation and of the impunity with which crime may be committed there.”

“They always fill me with a certain horror. It is my belief, Watson, founded upon my experience, that the lowest and vilest alleys in London do not present a more dreadful record of sin than does the smiling and beautiful countryside.” “But the reason is very obvious. The pressure of public opinion can do in the town what the law cannot accomplish. There is no lane so vile that the scream of a tortured child, or the thud of a drunkard’s blow, does not beget sympathy and indignation among the neighbours, and then the whole machinery of justice is ever so close that a word of complaint can set it going, and there is but a step between the crime and the dock. But look at these lonely houses, each in its own fields, filled for the most part with poor ignorant folk who know little of the law. Think of the deeds of hellish cruelty, the hidden wickedness which may go on, year in, year out, in such places, and none the wiser. Had this lady who appeals to us for help gone to live in Winchester, I should never have had a fear for her. It is the five miles of country which makes the danger. Still, it is clear that she is not personally threatened.”

“I have devised seven separate explanations, each of which would cover the facts as far as we know them. But which of these is correct can only be determined by the fresh information which we shall no doubt find waiting for us. Well, there is the tower of the cathedral, and we shall soon learn all that Miss Hunter has to tell.” The Black Swan is an inn of repute in the High Street, at no distance from the station, and there we found the young lady waiting for us. She had engaged a sitting-room, and our lunch awaited us upon the table. “I am so delighted that you have come,” she said earnestly. “It is so very kind of you both; but indeed I do not know what I should do. Your advice will be altogether invaluable to me.” “I will do so, and I must be quick, for I have promised Mr. Rucastle to be back before three. I got his leave to come into town this morning, though he little knew for what purpose.” “In the first place, I may say that I have met, on the whole, with no actual ill-treatment from Mr. and Mrs. Rucastle. It is only fair to them to say that. But I cannot understand them, and I am not easy in my mind about them.”

“Their reasons for their conduct. But you shall have it all just as it occurred. When I came down, Mr. Rucastle met me here and drove me in his dog-cart to the Copper Beeches. It is, as he said, beautifully situated, but it is not beautiful in itself, for it is a large square block of a house, whitewashed, but all stained and streaked with damp and bad weather. There are grounds round it, woods on three sides, and on the fourth a field which slopes down to the Southampton high road, which curves past about a hundred yards from the front door. This ground in front belongs to the house, but the woods all round are part of Lord Southerton’s preserves. A clump of copper beeches immediately in front of the hall door has given its name to the place. “I was driven over by my employer, who was as amiable as ever, and was introduced by him that evening to his wife and the child. There was no truth, Mr. Holmes, in the conjecture which seemed to us to be probable in your rooms at Baker Street. Mrs. Rucastle is not mad. I found her to be a silent, pale-faced woman, much younger than her husband, not more than thirty, I should think, while he can hardly be less than forty-five. From their conversation I have gathered that they have been married about seven years, that he was a widower, and that his only child by the first wife was the daughter who has gone to Philadelphia. Mr. Rucastle told me in private that the reason why she had left them was that she had an unreasoning aversion to her stepmother. As the daughter could not have been less than twenty, I can quite imagine that her position must have been uncomfortable with her father’s young wife.

“Mrs. Rucastle seemed to me to be colourless in mind as well as in feature. She impressed me neither favourably nor the reverse. She was a nonentity. It was easy to see that she was passionately devoted both to her husband and to her little son. Her light grey eyes wandered continually from one to the other, noting every little want and forestalling it if possible. He was kind to her also in his bluff, boisterous fashion, and on the whole they seemed to be a happy couple. And yet she had some secret sorrow, this woman. She would often be lost in deep thought, with the saddest look upon her face. More than once I have surprised her in tears. I have thought sometimes that it was the disposition of her child which weighed upon her mind, for I have never met so utterly spoiled and so ill-natured a little creature. He is small for his age, with a head which is quite disproportionately large. His whole life appears to be spent in an alternation between savage fits of passion and gloomy intervals of sulking. Giving pain to any creature weaker than himself seems to be his one idea of amusement, and he shows quite remarkable talent in planning the capture of mice, little birds, and insects. But I would rather not talk about the creature, Mr. Holmes, and, indeed, he has little to do with my story.”

“I shall try not to miss anything of importance. The one unpleasant thing about the house, which struck me at once, was the appearance and conduct of the servants. There are only two, a man and his wife. Toller, for that is his name, is a rough, uncouth man, with grizzled hair and whiskers, and a perpetual smell of drink. Twice since I have been with them he has been quite drunk, and yet Mr. Rucastle seemed to take no notice of it. His wife is a very tall and strong woman with a sour face, as silent as Mrs. Rucastle and much less amiable. They are a most unpleasant couple, but fortunately I spend most of my time in the nursery and my own room, which are next to each other in one corner of the building. “For two days after my arrival at the Copper Beeches my life was very quiet; on the third, Mrs. Rucastle came down just after breakfast and whispered something to her husband. “‘Oh, yes,’ said he, turning to me, ‘we are very much obliged to you, Miss Hunter, for falling in with our whims so far as to cut your hair. I assure you that it has not detracted in the tiniest iota from your appearance. We shall now see how the electric-blue dress will become you. You will find it laid out upon the bed in your room, and if you would be so good as to put it on we should both be extremely obliged.’

“The dress which I found waiting for me was of a peculiar shade of blue. It was of excellent material, a sort of beige, but it bore unmistakable signs of having been worn before. It could not have been a better fit if I had been measured for it. Both Mr. and Mrs. Rucastle expressed a delight at the look of it, which seemed quite exaggerated in its vehemence. They were waiting for me in the drawing-room, which is a very large room, stretching along the entire front of the house, with three long windows reaching down to the floor. A chair had been placed close to the central window, with its back turned towards it. In this I was asked to sit, and then Mr. Rucastle, walking up and down on the other side of the room, began to tell me a series of the funniest stories that I have ever listened to. You cannot imagine how comical he was, and I laughed until I was quite weary. Mrs. Rucastle, however, who has evidently no sense of humour, never so much as smiled, but sat with her hands in her lap, and a sad, anxious look upon her face. After an hour or so, Mr. Rucastle suddenly remarked that it was time to commence the duties of the day, and that I might change my dress and go to little Edward in the nursery.

“Two days later this same performance was gone through under exactly similar circumstances. Again I changed my dress, again I sat in the window, and again I laughed very heartily at the funny stories of which my employer had an immense _répertoire_, and which he told inimitably. Then he handed me a yellow-backed novel, and moving my chair a little sideways, that my own shadow might not fall upon the page, he begged me to read aloud to him. I read for about ten minutes, beginning in the heart of a chapter, and then suddenly, in the middle of a sentence, he ordered me to cease and to change my dress. “You can easily imagine, Mr. Holmes, how curious I became as to what the meaning of this extraordinary performance could possibly be. They were always very careful, I observed, to turn my face away from the window, so that I became consumed with the desire to see what was going on behind my back. At first it seemed to be impossible, but I soon devised a means. My hand-mirror had been broken, so a happy thought seized me, and I concealed a piece of the glass in my handkerchief. On the next occasion, in the midst of my laughter, I put my handkerchief up to my eyes, and was able with a little management to see all that there was behind me. I confess that I was disappointed. There was nothing. At least that was my first impression. At the second glance, however, I perceived that there was a man standing in the Southampton Road, a small bearded man in a grey suit, who seemed to be looking in my direction. The road is an important highway, and there are usually people there. This man, however, was leaning against the railings which bordered our field and was looking earnestly up. I lowered my handkerchief and glanced at Mrs. Rucastle to find her eyes fixed upon me with a most searching gaze. She said nothing, but I am convinced that she had divined that I had a mirror in my hand and had seen what was behind me. She rose at once.

“I did as I was told, and at the same instant Mrs. Rucastle drew down the blind. That was a week ago, and from that time I have not sat again in the window, nor have I worn the blue dress, nor seen the man in the road.” “You will find it rather disconnected, I fear, and there may prove to be little relation between the different incidents of which I speak. On the very first day that I was at the Copper Beeches, Mr. Rucastle took me to a small outhouse which stands near the kitchen door. As we approached it I heard the sharp rattling of a chain, and the sound as of a large animal moving about. “‘Don’t be frightened,’ said my employer, laughing at the start which I had given. ‘It’s only Carlo, my mastiff. I call him mine, but really old Toller, my groom, is the only man who can do anything with him. We feed him once a day, and not too much then, so that he is always as keen as mustard. Toller lets him loose every night, and God help the trespasser whom he lays his fangs upon. For goodness’ sake don’t you ever on any pretext set your foot over the threshold at night, for it’s as much as your life is worth.’

“The warning was no idle one, for two nights later I happened to look out of my bedroom window about two o’clock in the morning. It was a beautiful moonlight night, and the lawn in front of the house was silvered over and almost as bright as day. I was standing, rapt in the peaceful beauty of the scene, when I was aware that something was moving under the shadow of the copper beeches. As it emerged into the moonshine I saw what it was. It was a giant dog, as large as a calf, tawny tinted, with hanging jowl, black muzzle, and huge projecting bones. It walked slowly across the lawn and vanished into the shadow upon the other side. That dreadful sentinel sent a chill to my heart which I do not think that any burglar could have done. “And now I have a very strange experience to tell you. I had, as you know, cut off my hair in London, and I had placed it in a great coil at the bottom of my trunk. One evening, after the child was in bed, I began to amuse myself by examining the furniture of my room and by rearranging my own little things. There was an old chest of drawers in the room, the two upper ones empty and open, the lower one locked. I had filled the first two with my linen, and as I had still much to pack away I was naturally annoyed at not having the use of the third drawer. It struck me that it might have been fastened by a mere oversight, so I took out my bunch of keys and tried to open it. The very first key fitted to perfection, and I drew the drawer open. There was only one thing in it, but I am sure that you would never guess what it was. It was my coil of hair.

“I took it up and examined it. It was of the same peculiar tint, and the same thickness. But then the impossibility of the thing obtruded itself upon me. How could my hair have been locked in the drawer? With trembling hands I undid my trunk, turned out the contents, and drew from the bottom my own hair. I laid the two tresses together, and I assure you that they were identical. Was it not extraordinary? Puzzle as I would, I could make nothing at all of what it meant. I returned the strange hair to the drawer, and I said nothing of the matter to the Rucastles as I felt that I had put myself in the wrong by opening a drawer which they had locked. “I am naturally observant, as you may have remarked, Mr. Holmes, and I soon had a pretty good plan of the whole house in my head. There was one wing, however, which appeared not to be inhabited at all. A door which faced that which led into the quarters of the Tollers opened into this suite, but it was invariably locked. One day, however, as I ascended the stair, I met Mr. Rucastle coming out through this door, his keys in his hand, and a look on his face which made him a very different person to the round, jovial man to whom I was accustomed. His cheeks were red, his brow was all crinkled with anger, and the veins stood out at his temples with passion. He locked the door and hurried past me without a word or a look.

“This aroused my curiosity, so when I went out for a walk in the grounds with my charge, I strolled round to the side from which I could see the windows of this part of the house. There were four of them in a row, three of which were simply dirty, while the fourth was shuttered up. They were evidently all deserted. As I strolled up and down, glancing at them occasionally, Mr. Rucastle came out to me, looking as merry and jovial as ever. “I assured him that I was not offended. ‘By the way,’ said I, ‘you seem to have quite a suite of spare rooms up there, and one of them has the shutters up.’ “‘Photography is one of my hobbies,’ said he. ‘I have made my dark room up there. But, dear me! what an observant young lady we have come upon. Who would have believed it? Who would have ever believed it?’ He spoke in a jesting tone, but there was no jest in his eyes as he looked at me. I read suspicion there and annoyance, but no jest.

“Well, Mr. Holmes, from the moment that I understood that there was something about that suite of rooms which I was not to know, I was all on fire to go over them. It was not mere curiosity, though I have my share of that. It was more a feeling of duty—a feeling that some good might come from my penetrating to this place. They talk of woman’s instinct; perhaps it was woman’s instinct which gave me that feeling. At any rate, it was there, and I was keenly on the lookout for any chance to pass the forbidden door. “It was only yesterday that the chance came. I may tell you that, besides Mr. Rucastle, both Toller and his wife find something to do in these deserted rooms, and I once saw him carrying a large black linen bag with him through the door. Recently he has been drinking hard, and yesterday evening he was very drunk; and when I came upstairs there was the key in the door. I have no doubt at all that he had left it there. Mr. and Mrs. Rucastle were both downstairs, and the child was with them, so that I had an admirable opportunity. I turned the key gently in the lock, opened the door, and slipped through.

“There was a little passage in front of me, unpapered and uncarpeted, which turned at a right angle at the farther end. Round this corner were three doors in a line, the first and third of which were open. They each led into an empty room, dusty and cheerless, with two windows in the one and one in the other, so thick with dirt that the evening light glimmered dimly through them. The centre door was closed, and across the outside of it had been fastened one of the broad bars of an iron bed, padlocked at one end to a ring in the wall, and fastened at the other with stout cord. The door itself was locked as well, and the key was not there. This barricaded door corresponded clearly with the shuttered window outside, and yet I could see by the glimmer from beneath it that the room was not in darkness. Evidently there was a skylight which let in light from above. As I stood in the passage gazing at the sinister door and wondering what secret it might veil, I suddenly heard the sound of steps within the room and saw a shadow pass backward and forward against the little slit of dim light which shone out from under the door. A mad, unreasoning terror rose up in me at the sight, Mr. Holmes. My overstrung nerves failed me suddenly, and I turned and ran—ran as though some dreadful hand were behind me clutching at the skirt of my dress. I rushed down the passage, through the door, and straight into the arms of Mr. Rucastle, who was waiting outside.

“‘My dear young lady! my dear young lady!’—you cannot think how caressing and soothing his manner was—‘and what has frightened you, my dear young lady?’ “‘I was foolish enough to go into the empty wing,’ I answered. ‘But it is so lonely and eerie in this dim light that I was frightened and ran out again. Oh, it is so dreadfully still in there!’ “‘Well, then, you know now. And if you ever put your foot over that threshold again’—here in an instant the smile hardened into a grin of rage, and he glared down at me with the face of a demon—‘I’ll throw you to the mastiff.’ “I was so terrified that I do not know what I did. I suppose that I must have rushed past him into my room. I remember nothing until I found myself lying on my bed trembling all over. Then I thought of you, Mr. Holmes. I could not live there longer without some advice. I was frightened of the house, of the man, of the woman, of the servants, even of the child. They were all horrible to me. If I could only bring you down all would be well. Of course I might have fled from the house, but my curiosity was almost as strong as my fears. My mind was soon made up. I would send you a wire. I put on my hat and cloak, went down to the office, which is about half a mile from the house, and then returned, feeling very much easier. A horrible doubt came into my mind as I approached the door lest the dog might be loose, but I remembered that Toller had drunk himself into a state of insensibility that evening, and I knew that he was the only one in the household who had any influence with the savage creature, or who would venture to set him free. I slipped in in safety and lay awake half the night in my joy at the thought of seeing you. I had no difficulty in getting leave to come into Winchester this morning, but I must be back before three o’clock, for Mr. and Mrs. Rucastle are going on a visit, and will be away all the evening, so that I must look after the child. Now I have told you all my adventures, Mr. Holmes, and I should be very glad if you could tell me what it all means, and, above all, what I should do.”

Holmes and I had listened spellbound to this extraordinary story. My friend rose now and paced up and down the room, his hands in his pockets, and an expression of the most profound gravity upon his face. “You seem to me to have acted all through this matter like a very brave and sensible girl, Miss Hunter. Do you think that you could perform one more feat? I should not ask it of you if I did not think you a quite exceptional woman.” “We shall be at the Copper Beeches by seven o’clock, my friend and I. The Rucastles will be gone by that time, and Toller will, we hope, be incapable. There only remains Mrs. Toller, who might give the alarm. If you could send her into the cellar on some errand, and then turn the key upon her, you would facilitate matters immensely.” “Excellent! We shall then look thoroughly into the affair. Of course there is only one feasible explanation. You have been brought there to personate someone, and the real person is imprisoned in this chamber. That is obvious. As to who this prisoner is, I have no doubt that it is the daughter, Miss Alice Rucastle, if I remember right, who was said to have gone to America. You were chosen, doubtless, as resembling her in height, figure, and the colour of your hair. Hers had been cut off, very possibly in some illness through which she has passed, and so, of course, yours had to be sacrificed also. By a curious chance you came upon her tresses. The man in the road was undoubtedly some friend of hers—possibly her _fiancé_—and no doubt, as you wore the girl’s dress and were so like her, he was convinced from your laughter, whenever he saw you, and afterwards from your gesture, that Miss Rucastle was perfectly happy, and that she no longer desired his attentions. The dog is let loose at night to prevent him from endeavouring to communicate with her. So much is fairly clear. The most serious point in the case is the disposition of the child.”

“My dear Watson, you as a medical man are continually gaining light as to the tendencies of a child by the study of the parents. Don’t you see that the converse is equally valid. I have frequently gained my first real insight into the character of parents by studying their children. This child’s disposition is abnormally cruel, merely for cruelty’s sake, and whether he derives this from his smiling father, as I should suspect, or from his mother, it bodes evil for the poor girl who is in their power.” “I am sure that you are right, Mr. Holmes,” cried our client. “A thousand things come back to me which make me certain that you have hit it. Oh, let us lose not an instant in bringing help to this poor creature.” “We must be circumspect, for we are dealing with a very cunning man. We can do nothing until seven o’clock. At that hour we shall be with you, and it will not be long before we solve the mystery.” We were as good as our word, for it was just seven when we reached the Copper Beeches, having put up our trap at a wayside public-house. The group of trees, with their dark leaves shining like burnished metal in the light of the setting sun, were sufficient to mark the house even had Miss Hunter not been standing smiling on the door-step.

A loud thudding noise came from somewhere downstairs. “That is Mrs. Toller in the cellar,” said she. “Her husband lies snoring on the kitchen rug. Here are his keys, which are the duplicates of Mr. Rucastle’s.” We passed up the stair, unlocked the door, followed on down a passage, and found ourselves in front of the barricade which Miss Hunter had described. Holmes cut the cord and removed the transverse bar. Then he tried the various keys in the lock, but without success. No sound came from within, and at the silence Holmes’ face clouded over. “I trust that we are not too late,” said he. “I think, Miss Hunter, that we had better go in without you. Now, Watson, put your shoulder to it, and we shall see whether we cannot make our way in.” It was an old rickety door and gave at once before our united strength. Together we rushed into the room. It was empty. There was no furniture save a little pallet bed, a small table, and a basketful of linen. The skylight above was open, and the prisoner gone.

“Through the skylight. We shall soon see how he managed it.” He swung himself up onto the roof. “Ah, yes,” he cried, “here’s the end of a long light ladder against the eaves. That is how he did it.” “He has come back and done it. I tell you that he is a clever and dangerous man. I should not be very much surprised if this were he whose step I hear now upon the stair. I think, Watson, that it would be as well for you to have your pistol ready.” The words were hardly out of his mouth before a man appeared at the door of the room, a very fat and burly man, with a heavy stick in his hand. Miss Hunter screamed and shrunk against the wall at the sight of him, but Sherlock Holmes sprang forward and confronted him. “It is for me to ask you that,” he shrieked, “you thieves! Spies and thieves! I have caught you, have I? You are in my power. I’ll serve you!” He turned and clattered down the stairs as hard as he could go.

“Better close the front door,” cried Holmes, and we all rushed down the stairs together. We had hardly reached the hall when we heard the baying of a hound, and then a scream of agony, with a horrible worrying sound which it was dreadful to listen to. An elderly man with a red face and shaking limbs came staggering out at a side door. Holmes and I rushed out and round the angle of the house, with Toller hurrying behind us. There was the huge famished brute, its black muzzle buried in Rucastle’s throat, while he writhed and screamed upon the ground. Running up, I blew its brains out, and it fell over with its keen white teeth still meeting in the great creases of his neck. With much labour we separated them and carried him, living but horribly mangled, into the house. We laid him upon the drawing-room sofa, and having dispatched the sobered Toller to bear the news to his wife, I did what I could to relieve his pain. We were all assembled round him when the door opened, and a tall, gaunt woman entered the room.

“Yes, miss. Mr. Rucastle let me out when he came back before he went up to you. Ah, miss, it is a pity you didn’t let me know what you were planning, for I would have told you that your pains were wasted.” “I will soon make it clear to you,” said she; “and I’d have done so before now if I could ha’ got out from the cellar. If there’s police-court business over this, you’ll remember that I was the one that stood your friend, and that I was Miss Alice’s friend too. “She was never happy at home, Miss Alice wasn’t, from the time that her father married again. She was slighted like and had no say in anything, but it never really became bad for her until after she met Mr. Fowler at a friend’s house. As well as I could learn, Miss Alice had rights of her own by will, but she was so quiet and patient, she was, that she never said a word about them but just left everything in Mr. Rucastle’s hands. He knew he was safe with her; but when there was a chance of a husband coming forward, who would ask for all that the law would give him, then her father thought it time to put a stop on it. He wanted her to sign a paper, so that whether she married or not, he could use her money. When she wouldn’t do it, he kept on worrying her until she got brain-fever, and for six weeks was at death’s door. Then she got better at last, all worn to a shadow, and with her beautiful hair cut off; but that didn’t make no change in her young man, and he stuck to her as true as man could be.”

“Ah,” said Holmes, “I think that what you have been good enough to tell us makes the matter fairly clear, and that I can deduce all that remains. Mr. Rucastle then, I presume, took to this system of imprisonment?” “But Mr. Fowler being a persevering man, as a good seaman should be, blockaded the house, and having met you succeeded by certain arguments, metallic or otherwise, in convincing you that your interests were the same as his.” “And in this way he managed that your good man should have no want of drink, and that a ladder should be ready at the moment when your master had gone out.” “I am sure we owe you an apology, Mrs. Toller,” said Holmes, “for you have certainly cleared up everything which puzzled us. And here comes the country surgeon and Mrs. Rucastle, so I think, Watson, that we had best escort Miss Hunter back to Winchester, as it seems to me that our _locus standi_ now is rather a questionable one.” And thus was solved the mystery of the sinister house with the copper beeches in front of the door. Mr. Rucastle survived, but was always a broken man, kept alive solely through the care of his devoted wife. They still live with their old servants, who probably know so much of Rucastle’s past life that he finds it difficult to part from them. Mr. Fowler and Miss Rucastle were married, by special license, in Southampton the day after their flight, and he is now the holder of a government appointment in the island of Mauritius. As to Miss Violet Hunter, my friend Holmes, rather to my disappointment, manifested no further interest in her when once she had ceased to be the centre of one of his problems, and she is now the head of a private school at Walsall, where I believe that she has met with considerable success.

The artist is the creator of beautiful things. To reveal art and conceal the artist is art’s aim. The critic is he who can translate into another manner or a new material his impression of beautiful things. The highest as the lowest form of criticism is a mode of autobiography. Those who find ugly meanings in beautiful things are corrupt without being charming. This is a fault. Those who find beautiful meanings in beautiful things are the cultivated. For these there is hope. They are the elect to whom beautiful things mean only beauty. The nineteenth century dislike of romanticism is the rage of Caliban not seeing his own face in a glass. The moral life of man forms part of the subject-matter of the artist, but the morality of art consists in the perfect use of an imperfect medium. No artist desires to prove anything. Even things that are true can be proved. No artist has ethical sympathies. An ethical sympathy in an artist is an unpardonable mannerism of style. No artist is ever morbid. The artist can express everything. Thought and language are to the artist instruments of an art. Vice and virtue are to the artist materials for an art. From the point of view of form, the type of all the arts is the art of the musician. From the point of view of feeling, the actor’s craft is the type. All art is at once surface and symbol. Those who go beneath the surface do so at their peril. Those who read the symbol do so at their peril. It is the spectator, and not life, that art really mirrors. Diversity of opinion about a work of art shows that the work is new, complex, and vital. When critics disagree, the artist is in accord with himself. We can forgive a man for making a useful thing as long as he does not admire it. The only excuse for making a useless thing is that one admires it intensely.

The studio was filled with the rich odour of roses, and when the light summer wind stirred amidst the trees of the garden, there came through the open door the heavy scent of the lilac, or the more delicate perfume of the pink-flowering thorn. From the corner of the divan of Persian saddle-bags on which he was lying, smoking, as was his custom, innumerable cigarettes, Lord Henry Wotton could just catch the gleam of the honey-sweet and honey-coloured blossoms of a laburnum, whose tremulous branches seemed hardly able to bear the burden of a beauty so flamelike as theirs; and now and then the fantastic shadows of birds in flight flitted across the long tussore-silk curtains that were stretched in front of the huge window, producing a kind of momentary Japanese effect, and making him think of those pallid, jade-faced painters of Tokyo who, through the medium of an art that is necessarily immobile, seek to convey the sense of swiftness and motion. The sullen murmur of the bees shouldering their way through the long unmown grass, or circling with monotonous insistence round the dusty gilt horns of the straggling woodbine, seemed to make the stillness more oppressive. The dim roar of London was like the bourdon note of a distant organ.

In the centre of the room, clamped to an upright easel, stood the full-length portrait of a young man of extraordinary personal beauty, and in front of it, some little distance away, was sitting the artist himself, Basil Hallward, whose sudden disappearance some years ago caused, at the time, such public excitement and gave rise to so many strange conjectures. As the painter looked at the gracious and comely form he had so skilfully mirrored in his art, a smile of pleasure passed across his face, and seemed about to linger there. But he suddenly started up, and closing his eyes, placed his fingers upon the lids, as though he sought to imprison within his brain some curious dream from which he feared he might awake. “It is your best work, Basil, the best thing you have ever done,” said Lord Henry languidly. “You must certainly send it next year to the Grosvenor. The Academy is too large and too vulgar. Whenever I have gone there, there have been either so many people that I have not been able to see the pictures, which was dreadful, or so many pictures that I have not been able to see the people, which was worse. The Grosvenor is really the only place.”

“I don’t think I shall send it anywhere,” he answered, tossing his head back in that odd way that used to make his friends laugh at him at Oxford. “No, I won’t send it anywhere.” Lord Henry elevated his eyebrows and looked at him in amazement through the thin blue wreaths of smoke that curled up in such fanciful whorls from his heavy, opium-tainted cigarette. “Not send it anywhere? My dear fellow, why? Have you any reason? What odd chaps you painters are! You do anything in the world to gain a reputation. As soon as you have one, you seem to want to throw it away. It is silly of you, for there is only one thing in the world worse than being talked about, and that is not being talked about. A portrait like this would set you far above all the young men in England, and make the old men quite jealous, if old men are ever capable of any emotion.” “Too much of yourself in it! Upon my word, Basil, I didn’t know you were so vain; and I really can’t see any resemblance between you, with your rugged strong face and your coal-black hair, and this young Adonis, who looks as if he was made out of ivory and rose-leaves. Why, my dear Basil, he is a Narcissus, and you—well, of course you have an intellectual expression and all that. But beauty, real beauty, ends where an intellectual expression begins. Intellect is in itself a mode of exaggeration, and destroys the harmony of any face. The moment one sits down to think, one becomes all nose, or all forehead, or something horrid. Look at the successful men in any of the learned professions. How perfectly hideous they are! Except, of course, in the Church. But then in the Church they don’t think. A bishop keeps on saying at the age of eighty what he was told to say when he was a boy of eighteen, and as a natural consequence he always looks absolutely delightful. Your mysterious young friend, whose name you have never told me, but whose picture really fascinates me, never thinks. I feel quite sure of that. He is some brainless beautiful creature who should be always here in winter when we have no flowers to look at, and always here in summer when we want something to chill our intelligence. Don’t flatter yourself, Basil: you are not in the least like him.”

“You don’t understand me, Harry,” answered the artist. “Of course I am not like him. I know that perfectly well. Indeed, I should be sorry to look like him. You shrug your shoulders? I am telling you the truth. There is a fatality about all physical and intellectual distinction, the sort of fatality that seems to dog through history the faltering steps of kings. It is better not to be different from one’s fellows. The ugly and the stupid have the best of it in this world. They can sit at their ease and gape at the play. If they know nothing of victory, they are at least spared the knowledge of defeat. They live as we all should live—undisturbed, indifferent, and without disquiet. They neither bring ruin upon others, nor ever receive it from alien hands. Your rank and wealth, Harry; my brains, such as they are—my art, whatever it may be worth; Dorian Gray’s good looks—we shall all suffer for what the gods have given us, suffer terribly.” “Oh, I can’t explain. When I like people immensely, I never tell their names to any one. It is like surrendering a part of them. I have grown to love secrecy. It seems to be the one thing that can make modern life mysterious or marvellous to us. The commonest thing is delightful if one only hides it. When I leave town now I never tell my people where I am going. If I did, I would lose all my pleasure. It is a silly habit, I dare say, but somehow it seems to bring a great deal of romance into one’s life. I suppose you think me awfully foolish about it?”

“Not at all,” answered Lord Henry, “not at all, my dear Basil. You seem to forget that I am married, and the one charm of marriage is that it makes a life of deception absolutely necessary for both parties. I never know where my wife is, and my wife never knows what I am doing. When we meet—we do meet occasionally, when we dine out together, or go down to the Duke’s—we tell each other the most absurd stories with the most serious faces. My wife is very good at it—much better, in fact, than I am. She never gets confused over her dates, and I always do. But when she does find me out, she makes no row at all. I sometimes wish she would; but she merely laughs at me.” “I hate the way you talk about your married life, Harry,” said Basil Hallward, strolling towards the door that led into the garden. “I believe that you are really a very good husband, but that you are thoroughly ashamed of your own virtues. You are an extraordinary fellow. You never say a moral thing, and you never do a wrong thing. Your cynicism is simply a pose.”

“Being natural is simply a pose, and the most irritating pose I know,” cried Lord Henry, laughing; and the two young men went out into the garden together and ensconced themselves on a long bamboo seat that stood in the shade of a tall laurel bush. The sunlight slipped over the polished leaves. In the grass, white daisies were tremulous. After a pause, Lord Henry pulled out his watch. “I am afraid I must be going, Basil,” he murmured, “and before I go, I insist on your answering a question I put to you some time ago.” “Harry,” said Basil Hallward, looking him straight in the face, “every portrait that is painted with feeling is a portrait of the artist, not of the sitter. The sitter is merely the accident, the occasion. It is not he who is revealed by the painter; it is rather the painter who, on the coloured canvas, reveals himself. The reason I will not exhibit this picture is that I am afraid that I have shown in it the secret of my own soul.” “Oh, there is really very little to tell, Harry,” answered the painter; “and I am afraid you will hardly understand it. Perhaps you will hardly believe it.”

Lord Henry smiled, and leaning down, plucked a pink-petalled daisy from the grass and examined it. “I am quite sure I shall understand it,” he replied, gazing intently at the little golden, white-feathered disk, “and as for believing things, I can believe anything, provided that it is quite incredible.” The wind shook some blossoms from the trees, and the heavy lilac-blooms, with their clustering stars, moved to and fro in the languid air. A grasshopper began to chirrup by the wall, and like a blue thread a long thin dragon-fly floated past on its brown gauze wings. Lord Henry felt as if he could hear Basil Hallward’s heart beating, and wondered what was coming. “The story is simply this,” said the painter after some time. “Two months ago I went to a crush at Lady Brandon’s. You know we poor artists have to show ourselves in society from time to time, just to remind the public that we are not savages. With an evening coat and a white tie, as you told me once, anybody, even a stock-broker, can gain a reputation for being civilized. Well, after I had been in the room about ten minutes, talking to huge overdressed dowagers and tedious academicians, I suddenly became conscious that some one was looking at me. I turned half-way round and saw Dorian Gray for the first time. When our eyes met, I felt that I was growing pale. A curious sensation of terror came over me. I knew that I had come face to face with some one whose mere personality was so fascinating that, if I allowed it to do so, it would absorb my whole nature, my whole soul, my very art itself. I did not want any external influence in my life. You know yourself, Harry, how independent I am by nature. I have always been my own master; had at least always been so, till I met Dorian Gray. Then—but I don’t know how to explain it to you. Something seemed to tell me that I was on the verge of a terrible crisis in my life. I had a strange feeling that fate had in store for me exquisite joys and exquisite sorrows. I grew afraid and turned to quit the room. It was not conscience that made me do so: it was a sort of cowardice. I take no credit to myself for trying to escape.”

“I don’t believe that, Harry, and I don’t believe you do either. However, whatever was my motive—and it may have been pride, for I used to be very proud—I certainly struggled to the door. There, of course, I stumbled against Lady Brandon. ‘You are not going to run away so soon, Mr. Hallward?’ she screamed out. You know her curiously shrill voice?” “I could not get rid of her. She brought me up to royalties, and people with stars and garters, and elderly ladies with gigantic tiaras and parrot noses. She spoke of me as her dearest friend. I had only met her once before, but she took it into her head to lionize me. I believe some picture of mine had made a great success at the time, at least had been chattered about in the penny newspapers, which is the nineteenth-century standard of immortality. Suddenly I found myself face to face with the young man whose personality had so strangely stirred me. We were quite close, almost touching. Our eyes met again. It was reckless of me, but I asked Lady Brandon to introduce me to him. Perhaps it was not so reckless, after all. It was simply inevitable. We would have spoken to each other without any introduction. I am sure of that. Dorian told me so afterwards. He, too, felt that we were destined to know each other.”

“And how did Lady Brandon describe this wonderful young man?” asked his companion. “I know she goes in for giving a rapid _précis_ of all her guests. I remember her bringing me up to a truculent and red-faced old gentleman covered all over with orders and ribbons, and hissing into my ear, in a tragic whisper which must have been perfectly audible to everybody in the room, the most astounding details. I simply fled. I like to find out people for myself. But Lady Brandon treats her guests exactly as an auctioneer treats his goods. She either explains them entirely away, or tells one everything about them except what one wants to know.” “My dear fellow, she tried to found a _salon_, and only succeeded in opening a restaurant. How could I admire her? But tell me, what did she say about Mr. Dorian Gray?” “Oh, something like, ‘Charming boy—poor dear mother and I absolutely inseparable. Quite forget what he does—afraid he—doesn’t do anything—oh, yes, plays the piano—or is it the violin, dear Mr. Gray?’ Neither of us could help laughing, and we became friends at once.”

Hallward shook his head. “You don’t understand what friendship is, Harry,” he murmured—“or what enmity is, for that matter. You like every one; that is to say, you are indifferent to every one.” “How horribly unjust of you!” cried Lord Henry, tilting his hat back and looking up at the little clouds that, like ravelled skeins of glossy white silk, were drifting across the hollowed turquoise of the summer sky. “Yes; horribly unjust of you. I make a great difference between people. I choose my friends for their good looks, my acquaintances for their good characters, and my enemies for their good intellects. A man cannot be too careful in the choice of his enemies. I have not got one who is a fool. They are all men of some intellectual power, and consequently they all appreciate me. Is that very vain of me? I think it is rather vain.” “My dear fellow, I am not quite serious. But I can’t help detesting my relations. I suppose it comes from the fact that none of us can stand other people having the same faults as ourselves. I quite sympathize with the rage of the English democracy against what they call the vices of the upper orders. The masses feel that drunkenness, stupidity, and immorality should be their own special property, and that if any one of us makes an ass of himself, he is poaching on their preserves. When poor Southwark got into the divorce court, their indignation was quite magnificent. And yet I don’t suppose that ten per cent of the proletariat live correctly.”

Lord Henry stroked his pointed brown beard and tapped the toe of his patent-leather boot with a tasselled ebony cane. “How English you are Basil! That is the second time you have made that observation. If one puts forward an idea to a true Englishman—always a rash thing to do—he never dreams of considering whether the idea is right or wrong. The only thing he considers of any importance is whether one believes it oneself. Now, the value of an idea has nothing whatsoever to do with the sincerity of the man who expresses it. Indeed, the probabilities are that the more insincere the man is, the more purely intellectual will the idea be, as in that case it will not be coloured by either his wants, his desires, or his prejudices. However, I don’t propose to discuss politics, sociology, or metaphysics with you. I like persons better than principles, and I like persons with no principles better than anything else in the world. Tell me more about Mr. Dorian Gray. How often do you see him?” “He is all my art to me now,” said the painter gravely. “I sometimes think, Harry, that there are only two eras of any importance in the world’s history. The first is the appearance of a new medium for art, and the second is the appearance of a new personality for art also. What the invention of oil-painting was to the Venetians, the face of Antinous was to late Greek sculpture, and the face of Dorian Gray will some day be to me. It is not merely that I paint from him, draw from him, sketch from him. Of course, I have done all that. But he is much more to me than a model or a sitter. I won’t tell you that I am dissatisfied with what I have done of him, or that his beauty is such that art cannot express it. There is nothing that art cannot express, and I know that the work I have done, since I met Dorian Gray, is good work, is the best work of my life. But in some curious way—I wonder will you understand me?—his personality has suggested to me an entirely new manner in art, an entirely new mode of style. I see things differently, I think of them differently. I can now recreate life in a way that was hidden from me before. ‘A dream of form in days of thought’—who is it who says that? I forget; but it is what Dorian Gray has been to me. The merely visible presence of this lad—for he seems to me little more than a lad, though he is really over twenty—his merely visible presence—ah! I wonder can you realize all that that means? Unconsciously he defines for me the lines of a fresh school, a school that is to have in it all the passion of the romantic spirit, all the perfection of the spirit that is Greek. The harmony of soul and body—how much that is! We in our madness have separated the two, and have invented a realism that is vulgar, an ideality that is void. Harry! if you only knew what Dorian Gray is to me! You remember that landscape of mine, for which Agnew offered me such a huge price but which I would not part with? It is one of the best things I have ever done. And why is it so? Because, while I was painting it, Dorian Gray sat beside me. Some subtle influence passed from him to me, and for the first time in my life I saw in the plain woodland the wonder I had always looked for and always missed.”

Hallward got up from the seat and walked up and down the garden. After some time he came back. “Harry,” he said, “Dorian Gray is to me simply a motive in art. You might see nothing in him. I see everything in him. He is never more present in my work than when no image of him is there. He is a suggestion, as I have said, of a new manner. I find him in the curves of certain lines, in the loveliness and subtleties of certain colours. That is all.” “Because, without intending it, I have put into it some expression of all this curious artistic idolatry, of which, of course, I have never cared to speak to him. He knows nothing about it. He shall never know anything about it. But the world might guess it, and I will not bare my soul to their shallow prying eyes. My heart shall never be put under their microscope. There is too much of myself in the thing, Harry—too much of myself!” “I hate them for it,” cried Hallward. “An artist should create beautiful things, but should put nothing of his own life into them. We live in an age when men treat art as if it were meant to be a form of autobiography. We have lost the abstract sense of beauty. Some day I will show the world what it is; and for that reason the world shall never see my portrait of Dorian Gray.”

“I think you are wrong, Basil, but I won’t argue with you. It is only the intellectually lost who ever argue. Tell me, is Dorian Gray very fond of you?” The painter considered for a few moments. “He likes me,” he answered after a pause; “I know he likes me. Of course I flatter him dreadfully. I find a strange pleasure in saying things to him that I know I shall be sorry for having said. As a rule, he is charming to me, and we sit in the studio and talk of a thousand things. Now and then, however, he is horribly thoughtless, and seems to take a real delight in giving me pain. Then I feel, Harry, that I have given away my whole soul to some one who treats it as if it were a flower to put in his coat, a bit of decoration to charm his vanity, an ornament for a summer’s day.” “Days in summer, Basil, are apt to linger,” murmured Lord Henry. “Perhaps you will tire sooner than he will. It is a sad thing to think of, but there is no doubt that genius lasts longer than beauty. That accounts for the fact that we all take such pains to over-educate ourselves. In the wild struggle for existence, we want to have something that endures, and so we fill our minds with rubbish and facts, in the silly hope of keeping our place. The thoroughly well-informed man—that is the modern ideal. And the mind of the thoroughly well-informed man is a dreadful thing. It is like a _bric-à-brac_ shop, all monsters and dust, with everything priced above its proper value. I think you will tire first, all the same. Some day you will look at your friend, and he will seem to you to be a little out of drawing, or you won’t like his tone of colour, or something. You will bitterly reproach him in your own heart, and seriously think that he has behaved very badly to you. The next time he calls, you will be perfectly cold and indifferent. It will be a great pity, for it will alter you. What you have told me is quite a romance, a romance of art one might call it, and the worst of having a romance of any kind is that it leaves one so unromantic.”

“Ah, my dear Basil, that is exactly why I can feel it. Those who are faithful know only the trivial side of love: it is the faithless who know love’s tragedies.” And Lord Henry struck a light on a dainty silver case and began to smoke a cigarette with a self-conscious and satisfied air, as if he had summed up the world in a phrase. There was a rustle of chirruping sparrows in the green lacquer leaves of the ivy, and the blue cloud-shadows chased themselves across the grass like swallows. How pleasant it was in the garden! And how delightful other people’s emotions were!—much more delightful than their ideas, it seemed to him. One’s own soul, and the passions of one’s friends—those were the fascinating things in life. He pictured to himself with silent amusement the tedious luncheon that he had missed by staying so long with Basil Hallward. Had he gone to his aunt’s, he would have been sure to have met Lord Goodbody there, and the whole conversation would have been about the feeding of the poor and the necessity for model lodging-houses. Each class would have preached the importance of those virtues, for whose exercise there was no necessity in their own lives. The rich would have spoken on the value of thrift, and the idle grown eloquent over the dignity of labour. It was charming to have escaped all that! As he thought of his aunt, an idea seemed to strike him. He turned to Hallward and said, “My dear fellow, I have just remembered.”

“Don’t look so angry, Basil. It was at my aunt, Lady Agatha’s. She told me she had discovered a wonderful young man who was going to help her in the East End, and that his name was Dorian Gray. I am bound to state that she never told me he was good-looking. Women have no appreciation of good looks; at least, good women have not. She said that he was very earnest and had a beautiful nature. I at once pictured to myself a creature with spectacles and lank hair, horribly freckled, and tramping about on huge feet. I wish I had known it was your friend.” The painter turned to his servant, who stood blinking in the sunlight. “Ask Mr. Gray to wait, Parker: I shall be in in a few moments.” The man bowed and went up the walk. Then he looked at Lord Henry. “Dorian Gray is my dearest friend,” he said. “He has a simple and a beautiful nature. Your aunt was quite right in what she said of him. Don’t spoil him. Don’t try to influence him. Your influence would be bad. The world is wide, and has many marvellous people in it. Don’t take away from me the one person who gives to my art whatever charm it possesses: my life as an artist depends on him. Mind, Harry, I trust you.” He spoke very slowly, and the words seemed wrung out of him almost against his will.

As they entered they saw Dorian Gray. He was seated at the piano, with his back to them, turning over the pages of a volume of Schumann’s “Forest Scenes.” “You must lend me these, Basil,” he cried. “I want to learn them. They are perfectly charming.” “Oh, I am tired of sitting, and I don’t want a life-sized portrait of myself,” answered the lad, swinging round on the music-stool in a wilful, petulant manner. When he caught sight of Lord Henry, a faint blush coloured his cheeks for a moment, and he started up. “I beg your pardon, Basil, but I didn’t know you had any one with you.” “This is Lord Henry Wotton, Dorian, an old Oxford friend of mine. I have just been telling him what a capital sitter you were, and now you have spoiled everything.” “You have not spoiled my pleasure in meeting you, Mr. Gray,” said Lord Henry, stepping forward and extending his hand. “My aunt has often spoken to me about you. You are one of her favourites, and, I am afraid, one of her victims also.”

“I am in Lady Agatha’s black books at present,” answered Dorian with a funny look of penitence. “I promised to go to a club in Whitechapel with her last Tuesday, and I really forgot all about it. We were to have played a duet together—three duets, I believe. I don’t know what she will say to me. I am far too frightened to call.” “Oh, I will make your peace with my aunt. She is quite devoted to you. And I don’t think it really matters about your not being there. The audience probably thought it was a duet. When Aunt Agatha sits down to the piano, she makes quite enough noise for two people.” Lord Henry looked at him. Yes, he was certainly wonderfully handsome, with his finely curved scarlet lips, his frank blue eyes, his crisp gold hair. There was something in his face that made one trust him at once. All the candour of youth was there, as well as all youth’s passionate purity. One felt that he had kept himself unspotted from the world. No wonder Basil Hallward worshipped him.

“You are too charming to go in for philanthropy, Mr. Gray—far too charming.” And Lord Henry flung himself down on the divan and opened his cigarette-case. The painter had been busy mixing his colours and getting his brushes ready. He was looking worried, and when he heard Lord Henry’s last remark, he glanced at him, hesitated for a moment, and then said, “Harry, I want to finish this picture to-day. Would you think it awfully rude of me if I asked you to go away?” “Oh, please don’t, Lord Henry. I see that Basil is in one of his sulky moods, and I can’t bear him when he sulks. Besides, I want you to tell me why I should not go in for philanthropy.” “I don’t know that I shall tell you that, Mr. Gray. It is so tedious a subject that one would have to talk seriously about it. But I certainly shall not run away, now that you have asked me to stop. You don’t really mind, Basil, do you? You have often told me that you liked your sitters to have some one to chat to.”

Lord Henry took up his hat and gloves. “You are very pressing, Basil, but I am afraid I must go. I have promised to meet a man at the Orleans. Good-bye, Mr. Gray. Come and see me some afternoon in Curzon Street. I am nearly always at home at five o’clock. Write to me when you are coming. I should be sorry to miss you.” “Basil,” cried Dorian Gray, “if Lord Henry Wotton goes, I shall go, too. You never open your lips while you are painting, and it is horribly dull standing on a platform and trying to look pleasant. Ask him to stay. I insist upon it.” “Stay, Harry, to oblige Dorian, and to oblige me,” said Hallward, gazing intently at his picture. “It is quite true, I never talk when I am working, and never listen either, and it must be dreadfully tedious for my unfortunate sitters. I beg you to stay.” The painter laughed. “I don’t think there will be any difficulty about that. Sit down again, Harry. And now, Dorian, get up on the platform, and don’t move about too much, or pay any attention to what Lord Henry says. He has a very bad influence over all his friends, with the single exception of myself.”

Dorian Gray stepped up on the dais with the air of a young Greek martyr, and made a little _moue_ of discontent to Lord Henry, to whom he had rather taken a fancy. He was so unlike Basil. They made a delightful contrast. And he had such a beautiful voice. After a few moments he said to him, “Have you really a very bad influence, Lord Henry? As bad as Basil says?” “Because to influence a person is to give him one’s own soul. He does not think his natural thoughts, or burn with his natural passions. His virtues are not real to him. His sins, if there are such things as sins, are borrowed. He becomes an echo of some one else’s music, an actor of a part that has not been written for him. The aim of life is self-development. To realize one’s nature perfectly—that is what each of us is here for. People are afraid of themselves, nowadays. They have forgotten the highest of all duties, the duty that one owes to one’s self. Of course, they are charitable. They feed the hungry and clothe the beggar. But their own souls starve, and are naked. Courage has gone out of our race. Perhaps we never really had it. The terror of society, which is the basis of morals, the terror of God, which is the secret of religion—these are the two things that govern us. And yet—”

“Just turn your head a little more to the right, Dorian, like a good boy,” said the painter, deep in his work and conscious only that a look had come into the lad’s face that he had never seen there before. “And yet,” continued Lord Henry, in his low, musical voice, and with that graceful wave of the hand that was always so characteristic of him, and that he had even in his Eton days, “I believe that if one man were to live out his life fully and completely, were to give form to every feeling, expression to every thought, reality to every dream—I believe that the world would gain such a fresh impulse of joy that we would forget all the maladies of mediævalism, and return to the Hellenic ideal—to something finer, richer than the Hellenic ideal, it may be. But the bravest man amongst us is afraid of himself. The mutilation of the savage has its tragic survival in the self-denial that mars our lives. We are punished for our refusals. Every impulse that we strive to strangle broods in the mind and poisons us. The body sins once, and has done with its sin, for action is a mode of purification. Nothing remains then but the recollection of a pleasure, or the luxury of a regret. The only way to get rid of a temptation is to yield to it. Resist it, and your soul grows sick with longing for the things it has forbidden to itself, with desire for what its monstrous laws have made monstrous and unlawful. It has been said that the great events of the world take place in the brain. It is in the brain, and the brain only, that the great sins of the world take place also. You, Mr. Gray, you yourself, with your rose-red youth and your rose-white boyhood, you have had passions that have made you afraid, thoughts that have filled you with terror, day-dreams and sleeping dreams whose mere memory might stain your cheek with shame—”

“Stop!” faltered Dorian Gray, “stop! you bewilder me. I don’t know what to say. There is some answer to you, but I cannot find it. Don’t speak. Let me think. Or, rather, let me try not to think.” For nearly ten minutes he stood there, motionless, with parted lips and eyes strangely bright. He was dimly conscious that entirely fresh influences were at work within him. Yet they seemed to him to have come really from himself. The few words that Basil’s friend had said to him—words spoken by chance, no doubt, and with wilful paradox in them—had touched some secret chord that had never been touched before, but that he felt was now vibrating and throbbing to curious pulses. Music had stirred him like that. Music had troubled him many times. But music was not articulate. It was not a new world, but rather another chaos, that it created in us. Words! Mere words! How terrible they were! How clear, and vivid, and cruel! One could not escape from them. And yet what a subtle magic there was in them! They seemed to be able to give a plastic form to formless things, and to have a music of their own as sweet as that of viol or of lute. Mere words! Was there anything so real as words?

Yes; there had been things in his boyhood that he had not understood. He understood them now. Life suddenly became fiery-coloured to him. It seemed to him that he had been walking in fire. Why had he not known it? With his subtle smile, Lord Henry watched him. He knew the precise psychological moment when to say nothing. He felt intensely interested. He was amazed at the sudden impression that his words had produced, and, remembering a book that he had read when he was sixteen, a book which had revealed to him much that he had not known before, he wondered whether Dorian Gray was passing through a similar experience. He had merely shot an arrow into the air. Had it hit the mark? How fascinating the lad was! Hallward painted away with that marvellous bold touch of his, that had the true refinement and perfect delicacy that in art, at any rate comes only from strength. He was unconscious of the silence. “My dear fellow, I am so sorry. When I am painting, I can’t think of anything else. But you never sat better. You were perfectly still. And I have caught the effect I wanted—the half-parted lips and the bright look in the eyes. I don’t know what Harry has been saying to you, but he has certainly made you have the most wonderful expression. I suppose he has been paying you compliments. You mustn’t believe a word that he says.”

“You know you believe it all,” said Lord Henry, looking at him with his dreamy languorous eyes. “I will go out to the garden with you. It is horribly hot in the studio. Basil, let us have something iced to drink, something with strawberries in it.” “Certainly, Harry. Just touch the bell, and when Parker comes I will tell him what you want. I have got to work up this background, so I will join you later on. Don’t keep Dorian too long. I have never been in better form for painting than I am to-day. This is going to be my masterpiece. It is my masterpiece as it stands.” Lord Henry went out to the garden and found Dorian Gray burying his face in the great cool lilac-blossoms, feverishly drinking in their perfume as if it had been wine. He came close to him and put his hand upon his shoulder. “You are quite right to do that,” he murmured. “Nothing can cure the soul but the senses, just as nothing can cure the senses but the soul.” The lad started and drew back. He was bareheaded, and the leaves had tossed his rebellious curls and tangled all their gilded threads. There was a look of fear in his eyes, such as people have when they are suddenly awakened. His finely chiselled nostrils quivered, and some hidden nerve shook the scarlet of his lips and left them trembling.

“Yes,” continued Lord Henry, “that is one of the great secrets of life—to cure the soul by means of the senses, and the senses by means of the soul. You are a wonderful creation. You know more than you think you know, just as you know less than you want to know.” Dorian Gray frowned and turned his head away. He could not help liking the tall, graceful young man who was standing by him. His romantic, olive-coloured face and worn expression interested him. There was something in his low languid voice that was absolutely fascinating. His cool, white, flowerlike hands, even, had a curious charm. They moved, as he spoke, like music, and seemed to have a language of their own. But he felt afraid of him, and ashamed of being afraid. Why had it been left for a stranger to reveal him to himself? He had known Basil Hallward for months, but the friendship between them had never altered him. Suddenly there had come some one across his life who seemed to have disclosed to him life’s mystery. And, yet, what was there to be afraid of? He was not a schoolboy or a girl. It was absurd to be frightened.

“Let us go and sit in the shade,” said Lord Henry. “Parker has brought out the drinks, and if you stay any longer in this glare, you will be quite spoiled, and Basil will never paint you again. You really must not allow yourself to become sunburnt. It would be unbecoming.” Dorian Gray listened, open-eyed and wondering. The spray of lilac fell from his hand upon the gravel. A furry bee came and buzzed round it for a moment. Then it began to scramble all over the oval stellated globe of the tiny blossoms. He watched it with that strange interest in trivial things that we try to develop when things of high import make us afraid, or when we are stirred by some new emotion for which we cannot find expression, or when some thought that terrifies us lays sudden siege to the brain and calls on us to yield. After a time the bee flew away. He saw it creeping into the stained trumpet of a Tyrian convolvulus. The flower seemed to quiver, and then swayed gently to and fro.

They rose up and sauntered down the walk together. Two green-and-white butterflies fluttered past them, and in the pear-tree at the corner of the garden a thrush began to sing. “Always! That is a dreadful word. It makes me shudder when I hear it. Women are so fond of using it. They spoil every romance by trying to make it last for ever. It is a meaningless word, too. The only difference between a caprice and a lifelong passion is that the caprice lasts a little longer.” As they entered the studio, Dorian Gray put his hand upon Lord Henry’s arm. “In that case, let our friendship be a caprice,” he murmured, flushing at his own boldness, then stepped up on the platform and resumed his pose. Lord Henry flung himself into a large wicker arm-chair and watched him. The sweep and dash of the brush on the canvas made the only sound that broke the stillness, except when, now and then, Hallward stepped back to look at his work from a distance. In the slanting beams that streamed through the open doorway the dust danced and was golden. The heavy scent of the roses seemed to brood over everything.

After about a quarter of an hour Hallward stopped painting, looked for a long time at Dorian Gray, and then for a long time at the picture, biting the end of one of his huge brushes and frowning. “It is quite finished,” he cried at last, and stooping down he wrote his name in long vermilion letters on the left-hand corner of the canvas. Dorian made no answer, but passed listlessly in front of his picture and turned towards it. When he saw it he drew back, and his cheeks flushed for a moment with pleasure. A look of joy came into his eyes, as if he had recognized himself for the first time. He stood there motionless and in wonder, dimly conscious that Hallward was speaking to him, but not catching the meaning of his words. The sense of his own beauty came on him like a revelation. He had never felt it before. Basil Hallward’s compliments had seemed to him to be merely the charming exaggeration of friendship. He had listened to them, laughed at them, forgotten them. They had not influenced his nature. Then had come Lord Henry Wotton with his strange panegyric on youth, his terrible warning of its brevity. That had stirred him at the time, and now, as he stood gazing at the shadow of his own loveliness, the full reality of the description flashed across him. Yes, there would be a day when his face would be wrinkled and wizen, his eyes dim and colourless, the grace of his figure broken and deformed. The scarlet would pass away from his lips and the gold steal from his hair. The life that was to make his soul would mar his body. He would become dreadful, hideous, and uncouth.

As he thought of it, a sharp pang of pain struck through him like a knife and made each delicate fibre of his nature quiver. His eyes deepened into amethyst, and across them came a mist of tears. He felt as if a hand of ice had been laid upon his heart. “Of course he likes it,” said Lord Henry. “Who wouldn’t like it? It is one of the greatest things in modern art. I will give you anything you like to ask for it. I must have it.” “How sad it is!” murmured Dorian Gray with his eyes still fixed upon his own portrait. “How sad it is! I shall grow old, and horrible, and dreadful. But this picture will remain always young. It will never be older than this particular day of June.... If it were only the other way! If it were I who was to be always young, and the picture that was to grow old! For that—for that—I would give everything! Yes, there is nothing in the whole world I would not give! I would give my soul for that!”

Dorian Gray turned and looked at him. “I believe you would, Basil. You like your art better than your friends. I am no more to you than a green bronze figure. Hardly as much, I dare say.” The painter stared in amazement. It was so unlike Dorian to speak like that. What had happened? He seemed quite angry. His face was flushed and his cheeks burning. “Yes,” he continued, “I am less to you than your ivory Hermes or your silver Faun. You will like them always. How long will you like me? Till I have my first wrinkle, I suppose. I know, now, that when one loses one’s good looks, whatever they may be, one loses everything. Your picture has taught me that. Lord Henry Wotton is perfectly right. Youth is the only thing worth having. When I find that I am growing old, I shall kill myself.” Hallward turned pale and caught his hand. “Dorian! Dorian!” he cried, “don’t talk like that. I have never had such a friend as you, and I shall never have such another. You are not jealous of material things, are you?—you who are finer than any of them!”

“I am jealous of everything whose beauty does not die. I am jealous of the portrait you have painted of me. Why should it keep what I must lose? Every moment that passes takes something from me and gives something to it. Oh, if it were only the other way! If the picture could change, and I could be always what I am now! Why did you paint it? It will mock me some day—mock me horribly!” The hot tears welled into his eyes; he tore his hand away and, flinging himself on the divan, he buried his face in the cushions, as though he was praying. “Harry, I can’t quarrel with my two best friends at once, but between you both you have made me hate the finest piece of work I have ever done, and I will destroy it. What is it but canvas and colour? I will not let it come across our three lives and mar them.” Dorian Gray lifted his golden head from the pillow, and with pallid face and tear-stained eyes, looked at him as he walked over to the deal painting-table that was set beneath the high curtained window. What was he doing there? His fingers were straying about among the litter of tin tubes and dry brushes, seeking for something. Yes, it was for the long palette-knife, with its thin blade of lithe steel. He had found it at last. He was going to rip up the canvas.

With a stifled sob the lad leaped from the couch, and, rushing over to Hallward, tore the knife out of his hand, and flung it to the end of the studio. “Don’t, Basil, don’t!” he cried. “It would be murder!” “Well, as soon as you are dry, you shall be varnished, and framed, and sent home. Then you can do what you like with yourself.” And he walked across the room and rang the bell for tea. “You will have tea, of course, Dorian? And so will you, Harry? Or do you object to such simple pleasures?” “I adore simple pleasures,” said Lord Henry. “They are the last refuge of the complex. But I don’t like scenes, except on the stage. What absurd fellows you are, both of you! I wonder who it was defined man as a rational animal. It was the most premature definition ever given. Man is many things, but he is not rational. I am glad he is not, after all—though I wish you chaps would not squabble over the picture. You had much better let me have it, Basil. This silly boy doesn’t really want it, and I really do.”

There came a knock at the door, and the butler entered with a laden tea-tray and set it down upon a small Japanese table. There was a rattle of cups and saucers and the hissing of a fluted Georgian urn. Two globe-shaped china dishes were brought in by a page. Dorian Gray went over and poured out the tea. The two men sauntered languidly to the table and examined what was under the covers. “Let us go to the theatre to-night,” said Lord Henry. “There is sure to be something on, somewhere. I have promised to dine at White’s, but it is only with an old friend, so I can send him a wire to say that I am ill, or that I am prevented from coming in consequence of a subsequent engagement. I think that would be a rather nice excuse: it would have all the surprise of candour.” “Yes,” answered Lord Henry dreamily, “the costume of the nineteenth century is detestable. It is so sombre, so depressing. Sin is the only real colour-element left in modern life.” “What a fuss people make about fidelity!” exclaimed Lord Henry. “Why, even in love it is purely a question for physiology. It has nothing to do with our own will. Young men want to be faithful, and are not; old men want to be faithless, and cannot: that is all one can say.”

“Very well,” said Hallward, and he went over and laid down his cup on the tray. “It is rather late, and, as you have to dress, you had better lose no time. Good-bye, Harry. Good-bye, Dorian. Come and see me soon. Come to-morrow.” “I wish I could trust myself,” said Lord Henry, laughing. “Come, Mr. Gray, my hansom is outside, and I can drop you at your own place. Good-bye, Basil. It has been a most interesting afternoon.” At half-past twelve next day Lord Henry Wotton strolled from Curzon Street over to the Albany to call on his uncle, Lord Fermor, a genial if somewhat rough-mannered old bachelor, whom the outside world called selfish because it derived no particular benefit from him, but who was considered generous by Society as he fed the people who amused him. His father had been our ambassador at Madrid when Isabella was young and Prim unthought of, but had retired from the diplomatic service in a capricious moment of annoyance on not being offered the Embassy at Paris, a post to which he considered that he was fully entitled by reason of his birth, his indolence, the good English of his dispatches, and his inordinate passion for pleasure. The son, who had been his father’s secretary, had resigned along with his chief, somewhat foolishly as was thought at the time, and on succeeding some months later to the title, had set himself to the serious study of the great aristocratic art of doing absolutely nothing. He had two large town houses, but preferred to live in chambers as it was less trouble, and took most of his meals at his club. He paid some attention to the management of his collieries in the Midland counties, excusing himself for this taint of industry on the ground that the one advantage of having coal was that it enabled a gentleman to afford the decency of burning wood on his own hearth. In politics he was a Tory, except when the Tories were in office, during which period he roundly abused them for being a pack of Radicals. He was a hero to his valet, who bullied him, and a terror to most of his relations, whom he bullied in turn. Only England could have produced him, and he always said that the country was going to the dogs. His principles were out of date, but there was a good deal to be said for his prejudices.

When Lord Henry entered the room, he found his uncle sitting in a rough shooting-coat, smoking a cheroot and grumbling over _The Times_. “Well, Harry,” said the old gentleman, “what brings you out so early? I thought you dandies never got up till two, and were not visible till five.” “Money, I suppose,” said Lord Fermor, making a wry face. “Well, sit down and tell me all about it. Young people, nowadays, imagine that money is everything.” “Yes,” murmured Lord Henry, settling his button-hole in his coat; “and when they grow older they know it. But I don’t want money. It is only people who pay their bills who want that, Uncle George, and I never pay mine. Credit is the capital of a younger son, and one lives charmingly upon it. Besides, I always deal with Dartmoor’s tradesmen, and consequently they never bother me. What I want is information: not useful information, of course; useless information.” “Well, I can tell you anything that is in an English Blue Book, Harry, although those fellows nowadays write a lot of nonsense. When I was in the Diplomatic, things were much better. But I hear they let them in now by examination. What can you expect? Examinations, sir, are pure humbug from beginning to end. If a man is a gentleman, he knows quite enough, and if he is not a gentleman, whatever he knows is bad for him.”

“That is what I have come to learn, Uncle George. Or rather, I know who he is. He is the last Lord Kelso’s grandson. His mother was a Devereux, Lady Margaret Devereux. I want you to tell me about his mother. What was she like? Whom did she marry? You have known nearly everybody in your time, so you might have known her. I am very much interested in Mr. Gray at present. I have only just met him.” “Kelso’s grandson!” echoed the old gentleman. “Kelso’s grandson! ... Of course.... I knew his mother intimately. I believe I was at her christening. She was an extraordinarily beautiful girl, Margaret Devereux, and made all the men frantic by running away with a penniless young fellow—a mere nobody, sir, a subaltern in a foot regiment, or something of that kind. Certainly. I remember the whole thing as if it happened yesterday. The poor chap was killed in a duel at Spa a few months after the marriage. There was an ugly story about it. They said Kelso got some rascally adventurer, some Belgian brute, to insult his son-in-law in public—paid him, sir, to do it, paid him—and that the fellow spitted his man as if he had been a pigeon. The thing was hushed up, but, egad, Kelso ate his chop alone at the club for some time afterwards. He brought his daughter back with him, I was told, and she never spoke to him again. Oh, yes; it was a bad business. The girl died, too, died within a year. So she left a son, did she? I had forgotten that. What sort of boy is he? If he is like his mother, he must be a good-looking chap.”

“I hope he will fall into proper hands,” continued the old man. “He should have a pot of money waiting for him if Kelso did the right thing by him. His mother had money, too. All the Selby property came to her, through her grandfather. Her grandfather hated Kelso, thought him a mean dog. He was, too. Came to Madrid once when I was there. Egad, I was ashamed of him. The Queen used to ask me about the English noble who was always quarrelling with the cabmen about their fares. They made quite a story of it. I didn’t dare show my face at Court for a month. I hope he treated his grandson better than he did the jarvies.” “I don’t know,” answered Lord Henry. “I fancy that the boy will be well off. He is not of age yet. He has Selby, I know. He told me so. And ... his mother was very beautiful?” “Margaret Devereux was one of the loveliest creatures I ever saw, Harry. What on earth induced her to behave as she did, I never could understand. She could have married anybody she chose. Carlington was mad after her. She was romantic, though. All the women of that family were. The men were a poor lot, but, egad! the women were wonderful. Carlington went on his knees to her. Told me so himself. She laughed at him, and there wasn’t a girl in London at the time who wasn’t after him. And by the way, Harry, talking about silly marriages, what is this humbug your father tells me about Dartmoor wanting to marry an American? Ain’t English girls good enough for him?”

Lord Henry shook his head. “American girls are as clever at concealing their parents, as English women are at concealing their past,” he said, rising to go. “It is. That is the reason why, like Eve, they are so excessively anxious to get out of it,” said Lord Henry. “Good-bye, Uncle George. I shall be late for lunch, if I stop any longer. Thanks for giving me the information I wanted. I always like to know everything about my new friends, and nothing about my old ones.” “Humph! tell your Aunt Agatha, Harry, not to bother me any more with her charity appeals. I am sick of them. Why, the good woman thinks that I have nothing to do but to write cheques for her silly fads.” “All right, Uncle George, I’ll tell her, but it won’t have any effect. Philanthropic people lose all sense of humanity. It is their distinguishing characteristic.” The old gentleman growled approvingly and rang the bell for his servant. Lord Henry passed up the low arcade into Burlington Street and turned his steps in the direction of Berkeley Square.

Suddenly he stopped and glanced up at the houses. He found that he had passed his aunt’s some distance, and, smiling to himself, turned back. When he entered the somewhat sombre hall, the butler told him that they had gone in to lunch. He gave one of the footmen his hat and stick and passed into the dining-room. He invented a facile excuse, and having taken the vacant seat next to her, looked round to see who was there. Dorian bowed to him shyly from the end of the table, a flush of pleasure stealing into his cheek. Opposite was the Duchess of Harley, a lady of admirable good-nature and good temper, much liked by every one who knew her, and of those ample architectural proportions that in women who are not duchesses are described by contemporary historians as stoutness. Next to her sat, on her right, Sir Thomas Burdon, a Radical member of Parliament, who followed his leader in public life and in private life followed the best cooks, dining with the Tories and thinking with the Liberals, in accordance with a wise and well-known rule. The post on her left was occupied by Mr. Erskine of Treadley, an old gentleman of considerable charm and culture, who had fallen, however, into bad habits of silence, having, as he explained once to Lady Agatha, said everything that he had to say before he was thirty. His own neighbour was Mrs. Vandeleur, one of his aunt’s oldest friends, a perfect saint amongst women, but so dreadfully dowdy that she reminded one of a badly bound hymn-book. Fortunately for him she had on the other side Lord Faudel, a most intelligent middle-aged mediocrity, as bald as a ministerial statement in the House of Commons, with whom she was conversing in that intensely earnest manner which is the one unpardonable error, as he remarked once himself, that all really good people fall into, and from which none of them ever quite escape.

“We are talking about poor Dartmoor, Lord Henry,” cried the duchess, nodding pleasantly to him across the table. “Do you think he will really marry this fascinating young person?” “When America was discovered,” said the Radical member—and he began to give some wearisome facts. Like all people who try to exhaust a subject, he exhausted his listeners. The duchess sighed and exercised her privilege of interruption. “I wish to goodness it never had been discovered at all!” she exclaimed. “Really, our girls have no chance nowadays. It is most unfair.” “Oh! but I have seen specimens of the inhabitants,” answered the duchess vaguely. “I must confess that most of them are extremely pretty. And they dress well, too. They get all their dresses in Paris. I wish I could afford to do the same.” Sir Thomas frowned. “I am afraid that your nephew is prejudiced against that great country,” he said to Lady Agatha. “I have travelled all over it in cars provided by the directors, who, in such matters, are extremely civil. I assure you that it is an education to visit it.”

Sir Thomas waved his hand. “Mr. Erskine of Treadley has the world on his shelves. We practical men like to see things, not to read about them. The Americans are an extremely interesting people. They are absolutely reasonable. I think that is their distinguishing characteristic. Yes, Mr. Erskine, an absolutely reasonable people. I assure you there is no nonsense about the Americans.” “How dreadful!” cried Lord Henry. “I can stand brute force, but brute reason is quite unbearable. There is something unfair about its use. It is hitting below the intellect.” “Was that a paradox?” asked Mr. Erskine. “I did not think so. Perhaps it was. Well, the way of paradoxes is the way of truth. To test reality we must see it on the tight rope. When the verities become acrobats, we can judge them.” “Dear me!” said Lady Agatha, “how you men argue! I am sure I never can make out what you are talking about. Oh! Harry, I am quite vexed with you. Why do you try to persuade our nice Mr. Dorian Gray to give up the East End? I assure you he would be quite invaluable. They would love his playing.”

“I can sympathize with everything except suffering,” said Lord Henry, shrugging his shoulders. “I cannot sympathize with that. It is too ugly, too horrible, too distressing. There is something terribly morbid in the modern sympathy with pain. One should sympathize with the colour, the beauty, the joy of life. The less said about life’s sores, the better.” Lord Henry laughed. “I don’t desire to change anything in England except the weather,” he answered. “I am quite content with philosophic contemplation. But, as the nineteenth century has gone bankrupt through an over-expenditure of sympathy, I would suggest that we should appeal to science to put us straight. The advantage of the emotions is that they lead us astray, and the advantage of science is that it is not emotional.” Lord Henry looked over at Mr. Erskine. “Humanity takes itself too seriously. It is the world’s original sin. If the caveman had known how to laugh, history would have been different.” “You are really very comforting,” warbled the duchess. “I have always felt rather guilty when I came to see your dear aunt, for I take no interest at all in the East End. For the future I shall be able to look her in the face without a blush.”

“Only when one is young,” she answered. “When an old woman like myself blushes, it is a very bad sign. Ah! Lord Henry, I wish you would tell me how to become young again.” He thought for a moment. “Can you remember any great error that you committed in your early days, Duchess?” he asked, looking at her across the table. “Yes,” he continued, “that is one of the great secrets of life. Nowadays most people die of a sort of creeping common sense, and discover when it is too late that the only things one never regrets are one’s mistakes.” He played with the idea and grew wilful; tossed it into the air and transformed it; let it escape and recaptured it; made it iridescent with fancy and winged it with paradox. The praise of folly, as he went on, soared into a philosophy, and philosophy herself became young, and catching the mad music of pleasure, wearing, one might fancy, her wine-stained robe and wreath of ivy, danced like a Bacchante over the hills of life, and mocked the slow Silenus for being sober. Facts fled before her like frightened forest things. Her white feet trod the huge press at which wise Omar sits, till the seething grape-juice rose round her bare limbs in waves of purple bubbles, or crawled in red foam over the vat’s black, dripping, sloping sides. It was an extraordinary improvisation. He felt that the eyes of Dorian Gray were fixed on him, and the consciousness that amongst his audience there was one whose temperament he wished to fascinate seemed to give his wit keenness and to lend colour to his imagination. He was brilliant, fantastic, irresponsible. He charmed his listeners out of themselves, and they followed his pipe, laughing. Dorian Gray never took his gaze off him, but sat like one under a spell, smiles chasing each other over his lips and wonder growing grave in his darkening eyes.

At last, liveried in the costume of the age, reality entered the room in the shape of a servant to tell the duchess that her carriage was waiting. She wrung her hands in mock despair. “How annoying!” she cried. “I must go. I have to call for my husband at the club, to take him to some absurd meeting at Willis’s Rooms, where he is going to be in the chair. If I am late he is sure to be furious, and I couldn’t have a scene in this bonnet. It is far too fragile. A harsh word would ruin it. No, I must go, dear Agatha. Good-bye, Lord Henry, you are quite delightful and dreadfully demoralizing. I am sure I don’t know what to say about your views. You must come and dine with us some night. Tuesday? Are you disengaged Tuesday?” “Ah! that is very nice, and very wrong of you,” she cried; “so mind you come”; and she swept out of the room, followed by Lady Agatha and the other ladies. “I am too fond of reading books to care to write them, Mr. Erskine. I should like to write a novel certainly, a novel that would be as lovely as a Persian carpet and as unreal. But there is no literary public in England for anything except newspapers, primers, and encyclopaedias. Of all people in the world the English have the least sense of the beauty of literature.”

“I fear you are right,” answered Mr. Erskine. “I myself used to have literary ambitions, but I gave them up long ago. And now, my dear young friend, if you will allow me to call you so, may I ask if you really meant all that you said to us at lunch?” “Very bad indeed. In fact I consider you extremely dangerous, and if anything happens to our good duchess, we shall all look on you as being primarily responsible. But I should like to talk to you about life. The generation into which I was born was tedious. Some day, when you are tired of London, come down to Treadley and expound to me your philosophy of pleasure over some admirable Burgundy I am fortunate enough to possess.” “You will complete it,” answered the old gentleman with a courteous bow. “And now I must bid good-bye to your excellent aunt. I am due at the Athenaeum. It is the hour when we sleep there.” “I would sooner come with you; yes, I feel I must come with you. Do let me. And you will promise to talk to me all the time? No one talks so wonderfully as you do.”

“Ah! I have talked quite enough for to-day,” said Lord Henry, smiling. “All I want now is to look at life. You may come and look at it with me, if you care to.” One afternoon, a month later, Dorian Gray was reclining in a luxurious arm-chair, in the little library of Lord Henry’s house in Mayfair. It was, in its way, a very charming room, with its high panelled wainscoting of olive-stained oak, its cream-coloured frieze and ceiling of raised plasterwork, and its brickdust felt carpet strewn with silk, long-fringed Persian rugs. On a tiny satinwood table stood a statuette by Clodion, and beside it lay a copy of Les Cent Nouvelles, bound for Margaret of Valois by Clovis Eve and powdered with the gilt daisies that Queen had selected for her device. Some large blue china jars and parrot-tulips were ranged on the mantelshelf, and through the small leaded panes of the window streamed the apricot-coloured light of a summer day in London. Lord Henry had not yet come in. He was always late on principle, his principle being that punctuality is the thief of time. So the lad was looking rather sulky, as with listless fingers he turned over the pages of an elaborately illustrated edition of Manon Lescaut that he had found in one of the book-cases. The formal monotonous ticking of the Louis Quatorze clock annoyed him. Once or twice he thought of going away.

“You thought it was my husband. It is only his wife. You must let me introduce myself. I know you quite well by your photographs. I think my husband has got seventeen of them.” “Well, eighteen, then. And I saw you with him the other night at the opera.” She laughed nervously as she spoke, and watched him with her vague forget-me-not eyes. She was a curious woman, whose dresses always looked as if they had been designed in a rage and put on in a tempest. She was usually in love with somebody, and, as her passion was never returned, she had kept all her illusions. She tried to look picturesque, but only succeeded in being untidy. Her name was Victoria, and she had a perfect mania for going to church. “Yes; it was at dear Lohengrin. I like Wagner’s music better than anybody’s. It is so loud that one can talk the whole time without other people hearing what one says. That is a great advantage, don’t you think so, Mr. Gray?” Dorian smiled and shook his head: “I am afraid I don’t think so, Lady Henry. I never talk during music—at least, during good music. If one hears bad music, it is one’s duty to drown it in conversation.”

“Ah! that is one of Harry’s views, isn’t it, Mr. Gray? I always hear Harry’s views from his friends. It is the only way I get to know of them. But you must not think I don’t like good music. I adore it, but I am afraid of it. It makes me too romantic. I have simply worshipped pianists—two at a time, sometimes, Harry tells me. I don’t know what it is about them. Perhaps it is that they are foreigners. They all are, ain’t they? Even those that are born in England become foreigners after a time, don’t they? It is so clever of them, and such a compliment to art. Makes it quite cosmopolitan, doesn’t it? You have never been to any of my parties, have you, Mr. Gray? You must come. I can’t afford orchids, but I spare no expense in foreigners. They make one’s rooms look so picturesque. But here is Harry! Harry, I came in to look for you, to ask you something—I forget what it was—and I found Mr. Gray here. We have had such a pleasant chat about music. We have quite the same ideas. No; I think our ideas are quite different. But he has been most pleasant. I am so glad I’ve seen him.”

“I am charmed, my love, quite charmed,” said Lord Henry, elevating his dark, crescent-shaped eyebrows and looking at them both with an amused smile. “So sorry I am late, Dorian. I went to look after a piece of old brocade in Wardour Street and had to bargain for hours for it. Nowadays people know the price of everything and the value of nothing.” “I am afraid I must be going,” exclaimed Lady Henry, breaking an awkward silence with her silly sudden laugh. “I have promised to drive with the duchess. Good-bye, Mr. Gray. Good-bye, Harry. You are dining out, I suppose? So am I. Perhaps I shall see you at Lady Thornbury’s.” “I dare say, my dear,” said Lord Henry, shutting the door behind her as, looking like a bird of paradise that had been out all night in the rain, she flitted out of the room, leaving a faint odour of frangipanni. Then he lit a cigarette and flung himself down on the sofa. “I don’t think I am likely to marry, Harry. I am too much in love. That is one of your aphorisms. I am putting it into practice, as I do everything that you say.”

“My dear boy, no woman is a genius. Women are a decorative sex. They never have anything to say, but they say it charmingly. Women represent the triumph of matter over mind, just as men represent the triumph of mind over morals.” “My dear Dorian, it is quite true. I am analysing women at present, so I ought to know. The subject is not so abstruse as I thought it was. I find that, ultimately, there are only two kinds of women, the plain and the coloured. The plain women are very useful. If you want to gain a reputation for respectability, you have merely to take them down to supper. The other women are very charming. They commit one mistake, however. They paint in order to try and look young. Our grandmothers painted in order to try and talk brilliantly. _Rouge_ and _esprit_ used to go together. That is all over now. As long as a woman can look ten years younger than her own daughter, she is perfectly satisfied. As for conversation, there are only five women in London worth talking to, and two of these can’t be admitted into decent society. However, tell me about your genius. How long have you known her?”

“I will tell you, Harry, but you mustn’t be unsympathetic about it. After all, it never would have happened if I had not met you. You filled me with a wild desire to know everything about life. For days after I met you, something seemed to throb in my veins. As I lounged in the park, or strolled down Piccadilly, I used to look at every one who passed me and wonder, with a mad curiosity, what sort of lives they led. Some of them fascinated me. Others filled me with terror. There was an exquisite poison in the air. I had a passion for sensations.... Well, one evening about seven o’clock, I determined to go out in search of some adventure. I felt that this grey monstrous London of ours, with its myriads of people, its sordid sinners, and its splendid sins, as you once phrased it, must have something in store for me. I fancied a thousand things. The mere danger gave me a sense of delight. I remembered what you had said to me on that wonderful evening when we first dined together, about the search for beauty being the real secret of life. I don’t know what I expected, but I went out and wandered eastward, soon losing my way in a labyrinth of grimy streets and black grassless squares. About half-past eight I passed by an absurd little theatre, with great flaring gas-jets and gaudy play-bills. A hideous Jew, in the most amazing waistcoat I ever beheld in my life, was standing at the entrance, smoking a vile cigar. He had greasy ringlets, and an enormous diamond blazed in the centre of a soiled shirt. ‘Have a box, my Lord?’ he said, when he saw me, and he took off his hat with an air of gorgeous servility. There was something about him, Harry, that amused me. He was such a monster. You will laugh at me, I know, but I really went in and paid a whole guinea for the stage-box. To the present day I can’t make out why I did so; and yet if I hadn’t—my dear Harry, if I hadn’t—I should have missed the greatest romance of my life. I see you are laughing. It is horrid of you!”

“I am not laughing, Dorian; at least I am not laughing at you. But you should not say the greatest romance of your life. You should say the first romance of your life. You will always be loved, and you will always be in love with love. A _grande passion_ is the privilege of people who have nothing to do. That is the one use of the idle classes of a country. Don’t be afraid. There are exquisite things in store for you. This is merely the beginning.” “My dear boy, the people who love only once in their lives are really the shallow people. What they call their loyalty, and their fidelity, I call either the lethargy of custom or their lack of imagination. Faithfulness is to the emotional life what consistency is to the life of the intellect—simply a confession of failure. Faithfulness! I must analyse it some day. The passion for property is in it. There are many things that we would throw away if we were not afraid that others might pick them up. But I don’t want to interrupt you. Go on with your story.”

“Well, I found myself seated in a horrid little private box, with a vulgar drop-scene staring me in the face. I looked out from behind the curtain and surveyed the house. It was a tawdry affair, all Cupids and cornucopias, like a third-rate wedding-cake. The gallery and pit were fairly full, but the two rows of dingy stalls were quite empty, and there was hardly a person in what I suppose they called the dress-circle. Women went about with oranges and ginger-beer, and there was a terrible consumption of nuts going on.” “Just like, I should fancy, and very depressing. I began to wonder what on earth I should do when I caught sight of the play-bill. What do you think the play was, Harry?” “I should think ‘The Idiot Boy’, or ‘Dumb but Innocent’. Our fathers used to like that sort of piece, I believe. The longer I live, Dorian, the more keenly I feel that whatever was good enough for our fathers is not good enough for us. In art, as in politics, _les grandpères ont toujours tort_.”

“Yes, Harry, I believe that is true. I cannot help telling you things. You have a curious influence over me. If I ever did a crime, I would come and confess it to you. You would understand me.” “People like you—the wilful sunbeams of life—don’t commit crimes, Dorian. But I am much obliged for the compliment, all the same. And now tell me—reach me the matches, like a good boy—thanks—what are your actual relations with Sibyl Vane?” “It is only the sacred things that are worth touching, Dorian,” said Lord Henry, with a strange touch of pathos in his voice. “But why should you be annoyed? I suppose she will belong to you some day. When one is in love, one always begins by deceiving one’s self, and one always ends by deceiving others. That is what the world calls a romance. You know her, at any rate, I suppose?” “Of course I know her. On the first night I was at the theatre, the horrid old Jew came round to the box after the performance was over and offered to take me behind the scenes and introduce me to her. I was furious with him, and told him that Juliet had been dead for hundreds of years and that her body was lying in a marble tomb in Verona. I think, from his blank look of amazement, that he was under the impression that I had taken too much champagne, or something.”

“Then he asked me if I wrote for any of the newspapers. I told him I never even read them. He seemed terribly disappointed at that, and confided to me that all the dramatic critics were in a conspiracy against him, and that they were every one of them to be bought.” “Well, he seemed to think they were beyond his means,” laughed Dorian. “By this time, however, the lights were being put out in the theatre, and I had to go. He wanted me to try some cigars that he strongly recommended. I declined. The next night, of course, I arrived at the place again. When he saw me, he made me a low bow and assured me that I was a munificent patron of art. He was a most offensive brute, though he had an extraordinary passion for Shakespeare. He told me once, with an air of pride, that his five bankruptcies were entirely due to ‘The Bard,’ as he insisted on calling him. He seemed to think it a distinction.” “It was a distinction, my dear Dorian—a great distinction. Most people become bankrupt through having invested too heavily in the prose of life. To have ruined one’s self over poetry is an honour. But when did you first speak to Miss Sibyl Vane?”

“The third night. She had been playing Rosalind. I could not help going round. I had thrown her some flowers, and she had looked at me—at least I fancied that she had. The old Jew was persistent. He seemed determined to take me behind, so I consented. It was curious my not wanting to know her, wasn’t it?” “Sibyl? Oh, she was so shy and so gentle. There is something of a child about her. Her eyes opened wide in exquisite wonder when I told her what I thought of her performance, and she seemed quite unconscious of her power. I think we were both rather nervous. The old Jew stood grinning at the doorway of the dusty greenroom, making elaborate speeches about us both, while we stood looking at each other like children. He would insist on calling me ‘My Lord,’ so I had to assure Sibyl that I was not anything of the kind. She said quite simply to me, ‘You look more like a prince. I must call you Prince Charming.’” “You don’t understand her, Harry. She regarded me merely as a person in a play. She knows nothing of life. She lives with her mother, a faded tired woman who played Lady Capulet in a sort of magenta dressing-wrapper on the first night, and looks as if she had seen better days.”

“Sibyl is the only thing I care about. What is it to me where she came from? From her little head to her little feet, she is absolutely and entirely divine. Every night of my life I go to see her act, and every night she is more marvellous.” “That is the reason, I suppose, that you never dine with me now. I thought you must have some curious romance on hand. You have; but it is not quite what I expected.” “My dear Harry, we either lunch or sup together every day, and I have been to the opera with you several times,” said Dorian, opening his blue eyes in wonder. “Well, I can’t help going to see Sibyl play,” he cried, “even if it is only for a single act. I get hungry for her presence; and when I think of the wonderful soul that is hidden away in that little ivory body, I am filled with awe.” “How horrid you are! She is all the great heroines of the world in one. She is more than an individual. You laugh, but I tell you she has genius. I love her, and I must make her love me. You, who know all the secrets of life, tell me how to charm Sibyl Vane to love me! I want to make Romeo jealous. I want the dead lovers of the world to hear our laughter and grow sad. I want a breath of our passion to stir their dust into consciousness, to wake their ashes into pain. My God, Harry, how I worship her!” He was walking up and down the room as he spoke. Hectic spots of red burned on his cheeks. He was terribly excited.

Lord Henry watched him with a subtle sense of pleasure. How different he was now from the shy frightened boy he had met in Basil Hallward’s studio! His nature had developed like a flower, had borne blossoms of scarlet flame. Out of its secret hiding-place had crept his soul, and desire had come to meet it on the way. “I want you and Basil to come with me some night and see her act. I have not the slightest fear of the result. You are certain to acknowledge her genius. Then we must get her out of the Jew’s hands. She is bound to him for three years—at least for two years and eight months—from the present time. I shall have to pay him something, of course. When all that is settled, I shall take a West End theatre and bring her out properly. She will make the world as mad as she has made me.” “Yes, she will. She has not merely art, consummate art-instinct, in her, but she has personality also; and you have often told me that it is personalities, not principles, that move the age.”

“Half-past six! What an hour! It will be like having a meat-tea, or reading an English novel. It must be seven. No gentleman dines before seven. Shall you see Basil between this and then? Or shall I write to him?” “Dear Basil! I have not laid eyes on him for a week. It is rather horrid of me, as he has sent me my portrait in the most wonderful frame, specially designed by himself, and, though I am a little jealous of the picture for being a whole month younger than I am, I must admit that I delight in it. Perhaps you had better write to him. I don’t want to see him alone. He says things that annoy me. He gives me good advice.” “Basil, my dear boy, puts everything that is charming in him into his work. The consequence is that he has nothing left for life but his prejudices, his principles, and his common sense. The only artists I have ever known who are personally delightful are bad artists. Good artists exist simply in what they make, and consequently are perfectly uninteresting in what they are. A great poet, a really great poet, is the most unpoetical of all creatures. But inferior poets are absolutely fascinating. The worse their rhymes are, the more picturesque they look. The mere fact of having published a book of second-rate sonnets makes a man quite irresistible. He lives the poetry that he cannot write. The others write the poetry that they dare not realize.”

“I wonder is that really so, Harry?” said Dorian Gray, putting some perfume on his handkerchief out of a large, gold-topped bottle that stood on the table. “It must be, if you say it. And now I am off. Imogen is waiting for me. Don’t forget about to-morrow. Good-bye.” As he left the room, Lord Henry’s heavy eyelids drooped, and he began to think. Certainly few people had ever interested him so much as Dorian Gray, and yet the lad’s mad adoration of some one else caused him not the slightest pang of annoyance or jealousy. He was pleased by it. It made him a more interesting study. He had been always enthralled by the methods of natural science, but the ordinary subject-matter of that science had seemed to him trivial and of no import. And so he had begun by vivisecting himself, as he had ended by vivisecting others. Human life—that appeared to him the one thing worth investigating. Compared to it there was nothing else of any value. It was true that as one watched life in its curious crucible of pain and pleasure, one could not wear over one’s face a mask of glass, nor keep the sulphurous fumes from troubling the brain and making the imagination turbid with monstrous fancies and misshapen dreams. There were poisons so subtle that to know their properties one had to sicken of them. There were maladies so strange that one had to pass through them if one sought to understand their nature. And, yet, what a great reward one received! How wonderful the whole world became to one! To note the curious hard logic of passion, and the emotional coloured life of the intellect—to observe where they met, and where they separated, at what point they were in unison, and at what point they were at discord—there was a delight in that! What matter what the cost was? One could never pay too high a price for any sensation.

He was conscious—and the thought brought a gleam of pleasure into his brown agate eyes—that it was through certain words of his, musical words said with musical utterance, that Dorian Gray’s soul had turned to this white girl and bowed in worship before her. To a large extent the lad was his own creation. He had made him premature. That was something. Ordinary people waited till life disclosed to them its secrets, but to the few, to the elect, the mysteries of life were revealed before the veil was drawn away. Sometimes this was the effect of art, and chiefly of the art of literature, which dealt immediately with the passions and the intellect. But now and then a complex personality took the place and assumed the office of art, was indeed, in its way, a real work of art, life having its elaborate masterpieces, just as poetry has, or sculpture, or painting. Yes, the lad was premature. He was gathering his harvest while it was yet spring. The pulse and passion of youth were in him, but he was becoming self-conscious. It was delightful to watch him. With his beautiful face, and his beautiful soul, he was a thing to wonder at. It was no matter how it all ended, or was destined to end. He was like one of those gracious figures in a pageant or a play, whose joys seem to be remote from one, but whose sorrows stir one’s sense of beauty, and whose wounds are like red roses.

Soul and body, body and soul—how mysterious they were! There was animalism in the soul, and the body had its moments of spirituality. The senses could refine, and the intellect could degrade. Who could say where the fleshly impulse ceased, or the psychical impulse began? How shallow were the arbitrary definitions of ordinary psychologists! And yet how difficult to decide between the claims of the various schools! Was the soul a shadow seated in the house of sin? Or was the body really in the soul, as Giordano Bruno thought? The separation of spirit from matter was a mystery, and the union of spirit with matter was a mystery also. He began to wonder whether we could ever make psychology so absolute a science that each little spring of life would be revealed to us. As it was, we always misunderstood ourselves and rarely understood others. Experience was of no ethical value. It was merely the name men gave to their mistakes. Moralists had, as a rule, regarded it as a mode of warning, had claimed for it a certain ethical efficacy in the formation of character, had praised it as something that taught us what to follow and showed us what to avoid. But there was no motive power in experience. It was as little of an active cause as conscience itself. All that it really demonstrated was that our future would be the same as our past, and that the sin we had done once, and with loathing, we would do many times, and with joy.

It was clear to him that the experimental method was the only method by which one could arrive at any scientific analysis of the passions; and certainly Dorian Gray was a subject made to his hand, and seemed to promise rich and fruitful results. His sudden mad love for Sibyl Vane was a psychological phenomenon of no small interest. There was no doubt that curiosity had much to do with it, curiosity and the desire for new experiences, yet it was not a simple, but rather a very complex passion. What there was in it of the purely sensuous instinct of boyhood had been transformed by the workings of the imagination, changed into something that seemed to the lad himself to be remote from sense, and was for that very reason all the more dangerous. It was the passions about whose origin we deceived ourselves that tyrannized most strongly over us. Our weakest motives were those of whose nature we were conscious. It often happened that when we thought we were experimenting on others we were really experimenting on ourselves.

While Lord Henry sat dreaming on these things, a knock came to the door, and his valet entered and reminded him it was time to dress for dinner. He got up and looked out into the street. The sunset had smitten into scarlet gold the upper windows of the houses opposite. The panes glowed like plates of heated metal. The sky above was like a faded rose. He thought of his friend’s young fiery-coloured life and wondered how it was all going to end. When he arrived home, about half-past twelve o’clock, he saw a telegram lying on the hall table. He opened it and found it was from Dorian Gray. It was to tell him that he was engaged to be married to Sibyl Vane. “Mother, Mother, I am so happy!” whispered the girl, burying her face in the lap of the faded, tired-looking woman who, with back turned to the shrill intrusive light, was sitting in the one arm-chair that their dingy sitting-room contained. “I am so happy!” she repeated, “and you must be happy, too!” Mrs. Vane winced and put her thin, bismuth-whitened hands on her daughter’s head. “Happy!” she echoed, “I am only happy, Sibyl, when I see you act. You must not think of anything but your acting. Mr. Isaacs has been very good to us, and we owe him money.”

“Mr. Isaacs has advanced us fifty pounds to pay off our debts and to get a proper outfit for James. You must not forget that, Sibyl. Fifty pounds is a very large sum. Mr. Isaacs has been most considerate.” Sibyl Vane tossed her head and laughed. “We don’t want him any more, Mother. Prince Charming rules life for us now.” Then she paused. A rose shook in her blood and shadowed her cheeks. Quick breath parted the petals of her lips. They trembled. Some southern wind of passion swept over her and stirred the dainty folds of her dress. “I love him,” she said simply. The girl laughed again. The joy of a caged bird was in her voice. Her eyes caught the melody and echoed it in radiance, then closed for a moment, as though to hide their secret. When they opened, the mist of a dream had passed across them. Thin-lipped wisdom spoke at her from the worn chair, hinted at prudence, quoted from that book of cowardice whose author apes the name of common sense. She did not listen. She was free in her prison of passion. Her prince, Prince Charming, was with her. She had called on memory to remake him. She had sent her soul to search for him, and it had brought him back. His kiss burned again upon her mouth. Her eyelids were warm with his breath.

Then wisdom altered its method and spoke of espial and discovery. This young man might be rich. If so, marriage should be thought of. Against the shell of her ear broke the waves of worldly cunning. The arrows of craft shot by her. She saw the thin lips moving, and smiled. Suddenly she felt the need to speak. The wordy silence troubled her. “Mother, Mother,” she cried, “why does he love me so much? I know why I love him. I love him because he is like what love himself should be. But what does he see in me? I am not worthy of him. And yet—why, I cannot tell—though I feel so much beneath him, I don’t feel humble. I feel proud, terribly proud. Mother, did you love my father as I love Prince Charming?” The elder woman grew pale beneath the coarse powder that daubed her cheeks, and her dry lips twitched with a spasm of pain. Sybil rushed to her, flung her arms round her neck, and kissed her. “Forgive me, Mother. I know it pains you to talk about our father. But it only pains you because you loved him so much. Don’t look so sad. I am as happy to-day as you were twenty years ago. Ah! let me be happy for ever!”

“My child, you are far too young to think of falling in love. Besides, what do you know of this young man? You don’t even know his name. The whole thing is most inconvenient, and really, when James is going away to Australia, and I have so much to think of, I must say that you should have shown more consideration. However, as I said before, if he is rich ...” Mrs. Vane glanced at her, and with one of those false theatrical gestures that so often become a mode of second nature to a stage-player, clasped her in her arms. At this moment, the door opened and a young lad with rough brown hair came into the room. He was thick-set of figure, and his hands and feet were large and somewhat clumsy in movement. He was not so finely bred as his sister. One would hardly have guessed the close relationship that existed between them. Mrs. Vane fixed her eyes on him and intensified her smile. She mentally elevated her son to the dignity of an audience. She felt sure that the _tableau_ was interesting.

James Vane looked into his sister’s face with tenderness. “I want you to come out with me for a walk, Sibyl. I don’t suppose I shall ever see this horrid London again. I am sure I don’t want to.” “My son, don’t say such dreadful things,” murmured Mrs. Vane, taking up a tawdry theatrical dress, with a sigh, and beginning to patch it. She felt a little disappointed that he had not joined the group. It would have increased the theatrical picturesqueness of the situation. “You pain me, my son. I trust you will return from Australia in a position of affluence. I believe there is no society of any kind in the Colonies—nothing that I would call society—so when you have made your fortune, you must come back and assert yourself in London.” “Society!” muttered the lad. “I don’t want to know anything about that. I should like to make some money to take you and Sibyl off the stage. I hate it.” “Oh, Jim!” said Sibyl, laughing, “how unkind of you! But are you really going for a walk with me? That will be nice! I was afraid you were going to say good-bye to some of your friends—to Tom Hardy, who gave you that hideous pipe, or Ned Langton, who makes fun of you for smoking it. It is very sweet of you to let me have your last afternoon. Where shall we go? Let us go to the park.”

He hesitated for a moment. “Very well,” he said at last, “but don’t be too long dressing.” She danced out of the door. One could hear her singing as she ran upstairs. Her little feet pattered overhead. “Quite ready, James,” she answered, keeping her eyes on her work. For some months past she had felt ill at ease when she was alone with this rough stern son of hers. Her shallow secret nature was troubled when their eyes met. She used to wonder if he suspected anything. The silence, for he made no other observation, became intolerable to her. She began to complain. Women defend themselves by attacking, just as they attack by sudden and strange surrenders. “I hope you will be contented, James, with your sea-faring life,” she said. “You must remember that it is your own choice. You might have entered a solicitor’s office. Solicitors are a very respectable class, and in the country often dine with the best families.” “I hate offices, and I hate clerks,” he replied. “But you are quite right. I have chosen my own life. All I say is, watch over Sibyl. Don’t let her come to any harm. Mother, you must watch over her.”

“You are speaking about things you don’t understand, James. In the profession we are accustomed to receive a great deal of most gratifying attention. I myself used to receive many bouquets at one time. That was when acting was really understood. As for Sibyl, I do not know at present whether her attachment is serious or not. But there is no doubt that the young man in question is a perfect gentleman. He is always most polite to me. Besides, he has the appearance of being rich, and the flowers he sends are lovely.” “No,” answered his mother with a placid expression in her face. “He has not yet revealed his real name. I think it is quite romantic of him. He is probably a member of the aristocracy.” “My son, you distress me very much. Sibyl is always under my special care. Of course, if this gentleman is wealthy, there is no reason why she should not contract an alliance with him. I trust he is one of the aristocracy. He has all the appearance of it, I must say. It might be a most brilliant marriage for Sibyl. They would make a charming couple. His good looks are really quite remarkable; everybody notices them.”

The lad muttered something to himself and drummed on the window-pane with his coarse fingers. He had just turned round to say something when the door opened and Sibyl ran in. “Nothing,” he answered. “I suppose one must be serious sometimes. Good-bye, Mother; I will have my dinner at five o’clock. Everything is packed, except my shirts, so you need not trouble.” They went out into the flickering, wind-blown sunlight and strolled down the dreary Euston Road. The passersby glanced in wonder at the sullen heavy youth who, in coarse, ill-fitting clothes, was in the company of such a graceful, refined-looking girl. He was like a common gardener walking with a rose. Jim frowned from time to time when he caught the inquisitive glance of some stranger. He had that dislike of being stared at, which comes on geniuses late in life and never leaves the commonplace. Sibyl, however, was quite unconscious of the effect she was producing. Her love was trembling in laughter on her lips. She was thinking of Prince Charming, and, that she might think of him all the more, she did not talk of him, but prattled on about the ship in which Jim was going to sail, about the gold he was certain to find, about the wonderful heiress whose life he was to save from the wicked, red-shirted bushrangers. For he was not to remain a sailor, or a supercargo, or whatever he was going to be. Oh, no! A sailor’s existence was dreadful. Fancy being cooped up in a horrid ship, with the hoarse, hump-backed waves trying to get in, and a black wind blowing the masts down and tearing the sails into long screaming ribands! He was to leave the vessel at Melbourne, bid a polite good-bye to the captain, and go off at once to the gold-fields. Before a week was over he was to come across a large nugget of pure gold, the largest nugget that had ever been discovered, and bring it down to the coast in a waggon guarded by six mounted policemen. The bushrangers were to attack them three times, and be defeated with immense slaughter. Or, no. He was not to go to the gold-fields at all. They were horrid places, where men got intoxicated, and shot each other in bar-rooms, and used bad language. He was to be a nice sheep-farmer, and one evening, as he was riding home, he was to see the beautiful heiress being carried off by a robber on a black horse, and give chase, and rescue her. Of course, she would fall in love with him, and he with her, and they would get married, and come home, and live in an immense house in London. Yes, there were delightful things in store for him. But he must be very good, and not lose his temper, or spend his money foolishly. She was only a year older than he was, but she knew so much more of life. He must be sure, also, to write to her by every mail, and to say his prayers each night before he went to sleep. God was very good, and would watch over him. She would pray for him, too, and in a few years he would come back quite rich and happy.

Yet it was not this alone that made him gloomy and morose. Inexperienced though he was, he had still a strong sense of the danger of Sibyl’s position. This young dandy who was making love to her could mean her no good. He was a gentleman, and he hated him for that, hated him through some curious race-instinct for which he could not account, and which for that reason was all the more dominant within him. He was conscious also of the shallowness and vanity of his mother’s nature, and in that saw infinite peril for Sibyl and Sibyl’s happiness. Children begin by loving their parents; as they grow older they judge them; sometimes they forgive them. His mother! He had something on his mind to ask of her, something that he had brooded on for many months of silence. A chance phrase that he had heard at the theatre, a whispered sneer that had reached his ears one night as he waited at the stage-door, had set loose a train of horrible thoughts. He remembered it as if it had been the lash of a hunting-crop across his face. His brows knit together into a wedge-like furrow, and with a twitch of pain he bit his underlip.

“He is called Prince Charming. Don’t you like the name? Oh! you silly boy! you should never forget it. If you only saw him, you would think him the most wonderful person in the world. Some day you will meet him—when you come back from Australia. You will like him so much. Everybody likes him, and I ... love him. I wish you could come to the theatre to-night. He is going to be there, and I am to play Juliet. Oh! how I shall play it! Fancy, Jim, to be in love and play Juliet! To have him sitting there! To play for his delight! I am afraid I may frighten the company, frighten or enthrall them. To be in love is to surpass one’s self. Poor dreadful Mr. Isaacs will be shouting ‘genius’ to his loafers at the bar. He has preached me as a dogma; to-night he will announce me as a revelation. I feel it. And it is all his, his only, Prince Charming, my wonderful lover, my god of graces. But I am poor beside him. Poor? What does that matter? When poverty creeps in at the door, love flies in through the window. Our proverbs want rewriting. They were made in winter, and it is summer now; spring-time for me, I think, a very dance of blossoms in blue skies.”

She laughed and took his arm. “You dear old Jim, you talk as if you were a hundred. Some day you will be in love yourself. Then you will know what it is. Don’t look so sulky. Surely you should be glad to think that, though you are going away, you leave me happier than I have ever been before. Life has been hard for us both, terribly hard and difficult. But it will be different now. You are going to a new world, and I have found one. Here are two chairs; let us sit down and see the smart people go by.” They took their seats amidst a crowd of watchers. The tulip-beds across the road flamed like throbbing rings of fire. A white dust—tremulous cloud of orris-root it seemed—hung in the panting air. The brightly coloured parasols danced and dipped like monstrous butterflies. She made her brother talk of himself, his hopes, his prospects. He spoke slowly and with effort. They passed words to each other as players at a game pass counters. Sibyl felt oppressed. She could not communicate her joy. A faint smile curving that sullen mouth was all the echo she could win. After some time she became silent. Suddenly she caught a glimpse of golden hair and laughing lips, and in an open carriage with two ladies Dorian Gray drove past.

He jumped up and seized her roughly by the arm. “Show him to me. Which is he? Point him out. I must see him!” he exclaimed; but at that moment the Duke of Berwick’s four-in-hand came between, and when it had left the space clear, the carriage had swept out of the park. She looked at him in horror. He repeated his words. They cut the air like a dagger. The people round began to gape. A lady standing close to her tittered. When they reached the Achilles Statue, she turned round. There was pity in her eyes that became laughter on her lips. She shook her head at him. “You are foolish, Jim, utterly foolish; a bad-tempered boy, that is all. How can you say such horrible things? You don’t know what you are talking about. You are simply jealous and unkind. Ah! I wish you would fall in love. Love makes people good, and what you said was wicked.” “I am sixteen,” he answered, “and I know what I am about. Mother is no help to you. She doesn’t understand how to look after you. I wish now that I was not going to Australia at all. I have a great mind to chuck the whole thing up. I would, if my articles hadn’t been signed.”

“Oh, don’t be so serious, Jim. You are like one of the heroes of those silly melodramas Mother used to be so fond of acting in. I am not going to quarrel with you. I have seen him, and oh! to see him is perfect happiness. We won’t quarrel. I know you would never harm any one I love, would you?” At the Marble Arch they hailed an omnibus, which left them close to their shabby home in the Euston Road. It was after five o’clock, and Sibyl had to lie down for a couple of hours before acting. Jim insisted that she should do so. He said that he would sooner part with her when their mother was not present. She would be sure to make a scene, and he detested scenes of every kind. In Sybil’s own room they parted. There was jealousy in the lad’s heart, and a fierce murderous hatred of the stranger who, as it seemed to him, had come between them. Yet, when her arms were flung round his neck, and her fingers strayed through his hair, he softened and kissed her with real affection. There were tears in his eyes as he went downstairs.

His mother was waiting for him below. She grumbled at his unpunctuality, as he entered. He made no answer, but sat down to his meagre meal. The flies buzzed round the table and crawled over the stained cloth. Through the rumble of omnibuses, and the clatter of street-cabs, he could hear the droning voice devouring each minute that was left to him. After some time, he thrust away his plate and put his head in his hands. He felt that he had a right to know. It should have been told to him before, if it was as he suspected. Leaden with fear, his mother watched him. Words dropped mechanically from her lips. A tattered lace handkerchief twitched in her fingers. When the clock struck six, he got up and went to the door. Then he turned back and looked at her. Their eyes met. In hers he saw a wild appeal for mercy. It enraged him. “Mother, I have something to ask you,” he said. Her eyes wandered vaguely about the room. She made no answer. “Tell me the truth. I have a right to know. Were you married to my father?”

She heaved a deep sigh. It was a sigh of relief. The terrible moment, the moment that night and day, for weeks and months, she had dreaded, had come at last, and yet she felt no terror. Indeed, in some measure it was a disappointment to her. The vulgar directness of the question called for a direct answer. The situation had not been gradually led up to. It was crude. It reminded her of a bad rehearsal. She shook her head. “I knew he was not free. We loved each other very much. If he had lived, he would have made provision for us. Don’t speak against him, my son. He was your father, and a gentleman. Indeed, he was highly connected.” An oath broke from his lips. “I don’t care for myself,” he exclaimed, “but don’t let Sibyl.... It is a gentleman, isn’t it, who is in love with her, or says he is? Highly connected, too, I suppose.” For a moment a hideous sense of humiliation came over the woman. Her head drooped. She wiped her eyes with shaking hands. “Sibyl has a mother,” she murmured; “I had none.”

The lad was touched. He went towards her, and stooping down, he kissed her. “I am sorry if I have pained you by asking about my father,” he said, “but I could not help it. I must go now. Good-bye. Don’t forget that you will have only one child now to look after, and believe me that if this man wrongs my sister, I will find out who he is, track him down, and kill him like a dog. I swear it.” The exaggerated folly of the threat, the passionate gesture that accompanied it, the mad melodramatic words, made life seem more vivid to her. She was familiar with the atmosphere. She breathed more freely, and for the first time for many months she really admired her son. She would have liked to have continued the scene on the same emotional scale, but he cut her short. Trunks had to be carried down and mufflers looked for. The lodging-house drudge bustled in and out. There was the bargaining with the cabman. The moment was lost in vulgar details. It was with a renewed feeling of disappointment that she waved the tattered lace handkerchief from the window, as her son drove away. She was conscious that a great opportunity had been wasted. She consoled herself by telling Sibyl how desolate she felt her life would be, now that she had only one child to look after. She remembered the phrase. It had pleased her. Of the threat she said nothing. It was vividly and dramatically expressed. She felt that they would all laugh at it some day.

“I suppose you have heard the news, Basil?” said Lord Henry that evening as Hallward was shown into a little private room at the Bristol where dinner had been laid for three. “No, Harry,” answered the artist, giving his hat and coat to the bowing waiter. “What is it? Nothing about politics, I hope! They don’t interest me. There is hardly a single person in the House of Commons worth painting, though many of them would be the better for a little whitewashing.” “Except in America,” rejoined Lord Henry languidly. “But I didn’t say he was married. I said he was engaged to be married. There is a great difference. I have a distinct remembrance of being married, but I have no recollection at all of being engaged. I am inclined to think that I never was engaged.” “If you want to make him marry this girl, tell him that, Basil. He is sure to do it, then. Whenever a man does a thoroughly stupid thing, it is always from the noblest motives.” “Oh, she is better than good—she is beautiful,” murmured Lord Henry, sipping a glass of vermouth and orange-bitters. “Dorian says she is beautiful, and he is not often wrong about things of that kind. Your portrait of him has quickened his appreciation of the personal appearance of other people. It has had that excellent effect, amongst others. We are to see her to-night, if that boy doesn’t forget his appointment.”

“But do you approve of it, Harry?” asked the painter, walking up and down the room and biting his lip. “You can’t approve of it, possibly. It is some silly infatuation.” “I never approve, or disapprove, of anything now. It is an absurd attitude to take towards life. We are not sent into the world to air our moral prejudices. I never take any notice of what common people say, and I never interfere with what charming people do. If a personality fascinates me, whatever mode of expression that personality selects is absolutely delightful to me. Dorian Gray falls in love with a beautiful girl who acts Juliet, and proposes to marry her. Why not? If he wedded Messalina, he would be none the less interesting. You know I am not a champion of marriage. The real drawback to marriage is that it makes one unselfish. And unselfish people are colourless. They lack individuality. Still, there are certain temperaments that marriage makes more complex. They retain their egotism, and add to it many other egos. They are forced to have more than one life. They become more highly organized, and to be highly organized is, I should fancy, the object of man’s existence. Besides, every experience is of value, and whatever one may say against marriage, it is certainly an experience. I hope that Dorian Gray will make this girl his wife, passionately adore her for six months, and then suddenly become fascinated by some one else. He would be a wonderful study.”

“You don’t mean a single word of all that, Harry; you know you don’t. If Dorian Gray’s life were spoiled, no one would be sorrier than yourself. You are much better than you pretend to be.” Lord Henry laughed. “The reason we all like to think so well of others is that we are all afraid for ourselves. The basis of optimism is sheer terror. We think that we are generous because we credit our neighbour with the possession of those virtues that are likely to be a benefit to us. We praise the banker that we may overdraw our account, and find good qualities in the highwayman in the hope that he may spare our pockets. I mean everything that I have said. I have the greatest contempt for optimism. As for a spoiled life, no life is spoiled but one whose growth is arrested. If you want to mar a nature, you have merely to reform it. As for marriage, of course that would be silly, but there are other and more interesting bonds between men and women. I will certainly encourage them. They have the charm of being fashionable. But here is Dorian himself. He will tell you more than I can.”

“My dear Harry, my dear Basil, you must both congratulate me!” said the lad, throwing off his evening cape with its satin-lined wings and shaking each of his friends by the hand in turn. “I have never been so happy. Of course, it is sudden—all really delightful things are. And yet it seems to me to be the one thing I have been looking for all my life.” He was flushed with excitement and pleasure, and looked extraordinarily handsome. “I hope you will always be very happy, Dorian,” said Hallward, “but I don’t quite forgive you for not having let me know of your engagement. You let Harry know.” “And I don’t forgive you for being late for dinner,” broke in Lord Henry, putting his hand on the lad’s shoulder and smiling as he spoke. “Come, let us sit down and try what the new _chef_ here is like, and then you will tell us how it all came about.” “There is really not much to tell,” cried Dorian as they took their seats at the small round table. “What happened was simply this. After I left you yesterday evening, Harry, I dressed, had some dinner at that little Italian restaurant in Rupert Street you introduced me to, and went down at eight o’clock to the theatre. Sibyl was playing Rosalind. Of course, the scenery was dreadful and the Orlando absurd. But Sibyl! You should have seen her! When she came on in her boy’s clothes, she was perfectly wonderful. She wore a moss-coloured velvet jerkin with cinnamon sleeves, slim, brown, cross-gartered hose, a dainty little green cap with a hawk’s feather caught in a jewel, and a hooded cloak lined with dull red. She had never seemed to me more exquisite. She had all the delicate grace of that Tanagra figurine that you have in your studio, Basil. Her hair clustered round her face like dark leaves round a pale rose. As for her acting—well, you shall see her to-night. She is simply a born artist. I sat in the dingy box absolutely enthralled. I forgot that I was in London and in the nineteenth century. I was away with my love in a forest that no man had ever seen. After the performance was over, I went behind and spoke to her. As we were sitting together, suddenly there came into her eyes a look that I had never seen there before. My lips moved towards hers. We kissed each other. I can’t describe to you what I felt at that moment. It seemed to me that all my life had been narrowed to one perfect point of rose-coloured joy. She trembled all over and shook like a white narcissus. Then she flung herself on her knees and kissed my hands. I feel that I should not tell you all this, but I can’t help it. Of course, our engagement is a dead secret. She has not even told her own mother. I don’t know what my guardians will say. Lord Radley is sure to be furious. I don’t care. I shall be of age in less than a year, and then I can do what I like. I have been right, Basil, haven’t I, to take my love out of poetry and to find my wife in Shakespeare’s plays? Lips that Shakespeare taught to speak have whispered their secret in my ear. I have had the arms of Rosalind around me, and kissed Juliet on the mouth.”

Lord Henry sipped his champagne in a meditative manner. “At what particular point did you mention the word marriage, Dorian? And what did she say in answer? Perhaps you forgot all about it.” “My dear Harry, I did not treat it as a business transaction, and I did not make any formal proposal. I told her that I loved her, and she said she was not worthy to be my wife. Not worthy! Why, the whole world is nothing to me compared with her.” “Women are wonderfully practical,” murmured Lord Henry, “much more practical than we are. In situations of that kind we often forget to say anything about marriage, and they always remind us.” Hallward laid his hand upon his arm. “Don’t, Harry. You have annoyed Dorian. He is not like other men. He would never bring misery upon any one. His nature is too fine for that.” Lord Henry looked across the table. “Dorian is never annoyed with me,” he answered. “I asked the question for the best reason possible, for the only reason, indeed, that excuses one for asking any question—simple curiosity. I have a theory that it is always the women who propose to us, and not we who propose to the women. Except, of course, in middle-class life. But then the middle classes are not modern.”

Dorian Gray laughed, and tossed his head. “You are quite incorrigible, Harry; but I don’t mind. It is impossible to be angry with you. When you see Sibyl Vane, you will feel that the man who could wrong her would be a beast, a beast without a heart. I cannot understand how any one can wish to shame the thing he loves. I love Sibyl Vane. I want to place her on a pedestal of gold and to see the world worship the woman who is mine. What is marriage? An irrevocable vow. You mock at it for that. Ah! don’t mock. It is an irrevocable vow that I want to take. Her trust makes me faithful, her belief makes me good. When I am with her, I regret all that you have taught me. I become different from what you have known me to be. I am changed, and the mere touch of Sibyl Vane’s hand makes me forget you and all your wrong, fascinating, poisonous, delightful theories.” “Pleasure is the only thing worth having a theory about,” he answered in his slow melodious voice. “But I am afraid I cannot claim my theory as my own. It belongs to Nature, not to me. Pleasure is Nature’s test, her sign of approval. When we are happy, we are always good, but when we are good, we are not always happy.”

“Yes,” echoed Dorian, leaning back in his chair and looking at Lord Henry over the heavy clusters of purple-lipped irises that stood in the centre of the table, “what do you mean by good, Harry?” “To be good is to be in harmony with one’s self,” he replied, touching the thin stem of his glass with his pale, fine-pointed fingers. “Discord is to be forced to be in harmony with others. One’s own life—that is the important thing. As for the lives of one’s neighbours, if one wishes to be a prig or a Puritan, one can flaunt one’s moral views about them, but they are not one’s concern. Besides, individualism has really the higher aim. Modern morality consists in accepting the standard of one’s age. I consider that for any man of culture to accept the standard of his age is a form of the grossest immorality.” “Yes, we are overcharged for everything nowadays. I should fancy that the real tragedy of the poor is that they can afford nothing but self-denial. Beautiful sins, like beautiful things, are the privilege of the rich.”

Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders. “My dear fellow, mediæval art is charming, but mediæval emotions are out of date. One can use them in fiction, of course. But then the only things that one can use in fiction are the things that one has ceased to use in fact. Believe me, no civilized man ever regrets a pleasure, and no uncivilized man ever knows what a pleasure is.” “That is certainly better than being adored,” he answered, toying with some fruits. “Being adored is a nuisance. Women treat us just as humanity treats its gods. They worship us, and are always bothering us to do something for them.” “I should have said that whatever they ask for they had first given to us,” murmured the lad gravely. “They create love in our natures. They have a right to demand it back.” “Possibly,” he sighed, “but they invariably want it back in such very small change. That is the worry. Women, as some witty Frenchman once put it, inspire us with the desire to do masterpieces and always prevent us from carrying them out.”

“You will always like me, Dorian,” he replied. “Will you have some coffee, you fellows? Waiter, bring coffee, and _fine-champagne_, and some cigarettes. No, don’t mind the cigarettes—I have some. Basil, I can’t allow you to smoke cigars. You must have a cigarette. A cigarette is the perfect type of a perfect pleasure. It is exquisite, and it leaves one unsatisfied. What more can one want? Yes, Dorian, you will always be fond of me. I represent to you all the sins you have never had the courage to commit.” “What nonsense you talk, Harry!” cried the lad, taking a light from a fire-breathing silver dragon that the waiter had placed on the table. “Let us go down to the theatre. When Sibyl comes on the stage you will have a new ideal of life. She will represent something to you that you have never known.” “I have known everything,” said Lord Henry, with a tired look in his eyes, “but I am always ready for a new emotion. I am afraid, however, that, for me at any rate, there is no such thing. Still, your wonderful girl may thrill me. I love acting. It is so much more real than life. Let us go. Dorian, you will come with me. I am so sorry, Basil, but there is only room for two in the brougham. You must follow us in a hansom.”

They got up and put on their coats, sipping their coffee standing. The painter was silent and preoccupied. There was a gloom over him. He could not bear this marriage, and yet it seemed to him to be better than many other things that might have happened. After a few minutes, they all passed downstairs. He drove off by himself, as had been arranged, and watched the flashing lights of the little brougham in front of him. A strange sense of loss came over him. He felt that Dorian Gray would never again be to him all that he had been in the past. Life had come between them.... His eyes darkened, and the crowded flaring streets became blurred to his eyes. When the cab drew up at the theatre, it seemed to him that he had grown years older. For some reason or other, the house was crowded that night, and the fat Jew manager who met them at the door was beaming from ear to ear with an oily tremulous smile. He escorted them to their box with a sort of pompous humility, waving his fat jewelled hands and talking at the top of his voice. Dorian Gray loathed him more than ever. He felt as if he had come to look for Miranda and had been met by Caliban. Lord Henry, upon the other hand, rather liked him. At least he declared he did, and insisted on shaking him by the hand and assuring him that he was proud to meet a man who had discovered a real genius and gone bankrupt over a poet. Hallward amused himself with watching the faces in the pit. The heat was terribly oppressive, and the huge sunlight flamed like a monstrous dahlia with petals of yellow fire. The youths in the gallery had taken off their coats and waistcoats and hung them over the side. They talked to each other across the theatre and shared their oranges with the tawdry girls who sat beside them. Some women were laughing in the pit. Their voices were horribly shrill and discordant. The sound of the popping of corks came from the bar.

“Yes!” answered Dorian Gray. “It was here I found her, and she is divine beyond all living things. When she acts, you will forget everything. These common rough people, with their coarse faces and brutal gestures, become quite different when she is on the stage. They sit silently and watch her. They weep and laugh as she wills them to do. She makes them as responsive as a violin. She spiritualizes them, and one feels that they are of the same flesh and blood as one’s self.” “The same flesh and blood as one’s self! Oh, I hope not!” exclaimed Lord Henry, who was scanning the occupants of the gallery through his opera-glass. “Don’t pay any attention to him, Dorian,” said the painter. “I understand what you mean, and I believe in this girl. Any one you love must be marvellous, and any girl who has the effect you describe must be fine and noble. To spiritualize one’s age—that is something worth doing. If this girl can give a soul to those who have lived without one, if she can create the sense of beauty in people whose lives have been sordid and ugly, if she can strip them of their selfishness and lend them tears for sorrows that are not their own, she is worthy of all your adoration, worthy of the adoration of the world. This marriage is quite right. I did not think so at first, but I admit it now. The gods made Sibyl Vane for you. Without her you would have been incomplete.”

“Thanks, Basil,” answered Dorian Gray, pressing his hand. “I knew that you would understand me. Harry is so cynical, he terrifies me. But here is the orchestra. It is quite dreadful, but it only lasts for about five minutes. Then the curtain rises, and you will see the girl to whom I am going to give all my life, to whom I have given everything that is good in me.” A quarter of an hour afterwards, amidst an extraordinary turmoil of applause, Sibyl Vane stepped on to the stage. Yes, she was certainly lovely to look at—one of the loveliest creatures, Lord Henry thought, that he had ever seen. There was something of the fawn in her shy grace and startled eyes. A faint blush, like the shadow of a rose in a mirror of silver, came to her cheeks as she glanced at the crowded enthusiastic house. She stepped back a few paces and her lips seemed to tremble. Basil Hallward leaped to his feet and began to applaud. Motionless, and as one in a dream, sat Dorian Gray, gazing at her. Lord Henry peered through his glasses, murmuring, “Charming! charming!”

The scene was the hall of Capulet’s house, and Romeo in his pilgrim’s dress had entered with Mercutio and his other friends. The band, such as it was, struck up a few bars of music, and the dance began. Through the crowd of ungainly, shabbily dressed actors, Sibyl Vane moved like a creature from a finer world. Her body swayed, while she danced, as a plant sways in the water. The curves of her throat were the curves of a white lily. Her hands seemed to be made of cool ivory. Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much, Which mannerly devotion shows in this; For saints have hands that pilgrims’ hands do touch, And palm to palm is holy palmers’ kiss— with the brief dialogue that follows, were spoken in a thoroughly artificial manner. The voice was exquisite, but from the point of view of tone it was absolutely false. It was wrong in colour. It took away all the life from the verse. It made the passion unreal. Dorian Gray grew pale as he watched her. He was puzzled and anxious. Neither of his friends dared to say anything to him. She seemed to them to be absolutely incompetent. They were horribly disappointed.

Yet they felt that the true test of any Juliet is the balcony scene of the second act. They waited for that. If she failed there, there was nothing in her. She looked charming as she came out in the moonlight. That could not be denied. But the staginess of her acting was unbearable, and grew worse as she went on. Her gestures became absurdly artificial. She overemphasized everything that she had to say. The beautiful passage— was declaimed with the painful precision of a schoolgirl who has been taught to recite by some second-rate professor of elocution. When she leaned over the balcony and came to those wonderful lines— Although I joy in thee, I have no joy of this contract to-night: It is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden; Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be Ere one can say, “It lightens.” Sweet, good-night! This bud of love by summer’s ripening breath May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet— she spoke the words as though they conveyed no meaning to her. It was not nervousness. Indeed, so far from being nervous, she was absolutely self-contained. It was simply bad art. She was a complete failure.

Even the common uneducated audience of the pit and gallery lost their interest in the play. They got restless, and began to talk loudly and to whistle. The Jew manager, who was standing at the back of the dress-circle, stamped and swore with rage. The only person unmoved was the girl herself. When the second act was over, there came a storm of hisses, and Lord Henry got up from his chair and put on his coat. “She is quite beautiful, Dorian,” he said, “but she can’t act. Let us go.” “I am going to see the play through,” answered the lad, in a hard bitter voice. “I am awfully sorry that I have made you waste an evening, Harry. I apologize to you both.” “I wish she were ill,” he rejoined. “But she seems to me to be simply callous and cold. She has entirely altered. Last night she was a great artist. This evening she is merely a commonplace mediocre actress.” “They are both simply forms of imitation,” remarked Lord Henry. “But do let us go. Dorian, you must not stay here any longer. It is not good for one’s morals to see bad acting. Besides, I don’t suppose you will want your wife to act, so what does it matter if she plays Juliet like a wooden doll? She is very lovely, and if she knows as little about life as she does about acting, she will be a delightful experience. There are only two kinds of people who are really fascinating—people who know absolutely everything, and people who know absolutely nothing. Good heavens, my dear boy, don’t look so tragic! The secret of remaining young is never to have an emotion that is unbecoming. Come to the club with Basil and myself. We will smoke cigarettes and drink to the beauty of Sibyl Vane. She is beautiful. What more can you want?”

“Go away, Harry,” cried the lad. “I want to be alone. Basil, you must go. Ah! can’t you see that my heart is breaking?” The hot tears came to his eyes. His lips trembled, and rushing to the back of the box, he leaned up against the wall, hiding his face in his hands. A few moments afterwards the footlights flared up and the curtain rose on the third act. Dorian Gray went back to his seat. He looked pale, and proud, and indifferent. The play dragged on, and seemed interminable. Half of the audience went out, tramping in heavy boots and laughing. The whole thing was a _fiasco_. The last act was played to almost empty benches. The curtain went down on a titter and some groans. As soon as it was over, Dorian Gray rushed behind the scenes into the greenroom. The girl was standing there alone, with a look of triumph on her face. Her eyes were lit with an exquisite fire. There was a radiance about her. Her parted lips were smiling over some secret of their own.

“Horribly!” he answered, gazing at her in amazement. “Horribly! It was dreadful. Are you ill? You have no idea what it was. You have no idea what I suffered.” The girl smiled. “Dorian,” she answered, lingering over his name with long-drawn music in her voice, as though it were sweeter than honey to the red petals of her mouth. “Dorian, you should have understood. But you understand now, don’t you?” He shrugged his shoulders. “You are ill, I suppose. When you are ill you shouldn’t act. You make yourself ridiculous. My friends were bored. I was bored.” “Dorian, Dorian,” she cried, “before I knew you, acting was the one reality of my life. It was only in the theatre that I lived. I thought that it was all true. I was Rosalind one night and Portia the other. The joy of Beatrice was my joy, and the sorrows of Cordelia were mine also. I believed in everything. The common people who acted with me seemed to me to be godlike. The painted scenes were my world. I knew nothing but shadows, and I thought them real. You came—oh, my beautiful love!—and you freed my soul from prison. You taught me what reality really is. To-night, for the first time in my life, I saw through the hollowness, the sham, the silliness of the empty pageant in which I had always played. To-night, for the first time, I became conscious that the Romeo was hideous, and old, and painted, that the moonlight in the orchard was false, that the scenery was vulgar, and that the words I had to speak were unreal, were not my words, were not what I wanted to say. You had brought me something higher, something of which all art is but a reflection. You had made me understand what love really is. My love! My love! Prince Charming! Prince of life! I have grown sick of shadows. You are more to me than all art can ever be. What have I to do with the puppets of a play? When I came on to-night, I could not understand how it was that everything had gone from me. I thought that I was going to be wonderful. I found that I could do nothing. Suddenly it dawned on my soul what it all meant. The knowledge was exquisite to me. I heard them hissing, and I smiled. What could they know of love such as ours? Take me away, Dorian—take me away with you, where we can be quite alone. I hate the stage. I might mimic a passion that I do not feel, but I cannot mimic one that burns me like fire. Oh, Dorian, Dorian, you understand now what it signifies? Even if I could do it, it would be profanation for me to play at being in love. You have made me see that.”

She looked at him in wonder and laughed. He made no answer. She came across to him, and with her little fingers stroked his hair. She knelt down and pressed his hands to her lips. He drew them away, and a shudder ran through him. Then he leaped up and went to the door. “Yes,” he cried, “you have killed my love. You used to stir my imagination. Now you don’t even stir my curiosity. You simply produce no effect. I loved you because you were marvellous, because you had genius and intellect, because you realized the dreams of great poets and gave shape and substance to the shadows of art. You have thrown it all away. You are shallow and stupid. My God! how mad I was to love you! What a fool I have been! You are nothing to me now. I will never see you again. I will never think of you. I will never mention your name. You don’t know what you were to me, once. Why, once ... Oh, I can’t bear to think of it! I wish I had never laid eyes upon you! You have spoiled the romance of my life. How little you can know of love, if you say it mars your art! Without your art, you are nothing. I would have made you famous, splendid, magnificent. The world would have worshipped you, and you would have borne my name. What are you now? A third-rate actress with a pretty face.”

The girl grew white, and trembled. She clenched her hands together, and her voice seemed to catch in her throat. “You are not serious, Dorian?” she murmured. “You are acting.” She rose from her knees and, with a piteous expression of pain in her face, came across the room to him. She put her hand upon his arm and looked into his eyes. He thrust her back. “Don’t touch me!” he cried. A low moan broke from her, and she flung herself at his feet and lay there like a trampled flower. “Dorian, Dorian, don’t leave me!” she whispered. “I am so sorry I didn’t act well. I was thinking of you all the time. But I will try—indeed, I will try. It came so suddenly across me, my love for you. I think I should never have known it if you had not kissed me—if we had not kissed each other. Kiss me again, my love. Don’t go away from me. I couldn’t bear it. Oh! don’t go away from me. My brother ... No; never mind. He didn’t mean it. He was in jest.... But you, oh! can’t you forgive me for to-night? I will work so hard and try to improve. Don’t be cruel to me, because I love you better than anything in the world. After all, it is only once that I have not pleased you. But you are quite right, Dorian. I should have shown myself more of an artist. It was foolish of me, and yet I couldn’t help it. Oh, don’t leave me, don’t leave me.” A fit of passionate sobbing choked her. She crouched on the floor like a wounded thing, and Dorian Gray, with his beautiful eyes, looked down at her, and his chiselled lips curled in exquisite disdain. There is always something ridiculous about the emotions of people whom one has ceased to love. Sibyl Vane seemed to him to be absurdly melodramatic. Her tears and sobs annoyed him.

She wept silently, and made no answer, but crept nearer. Her little hands stretched blindly out, and appeared to be seeking for him. He turned on his heel and left the room. In a few moments he was out of the theatre. Where he went to he hardly knew. He remembered wandering through dimly lit streets, past gaunt, black-shadowed archways and evil-looking houses. Women with hoarse voices and harsh laughter had called after him. Drunkards had reeled by, cursing and chattering to themselves like monstrous apes. He had seen grotesque children huddled upon door-steps, and heard shrieks and oaths from gloomy courts. As the dawn was just breaking, he found himself close to Covent Garden. The darkness lifted, and, flushed with faint fires, the sky hollowed itself into a perfect pearl. Huge carts filled with nodding lilies rumbled slowly down the polished empty street. The air was heavy with the perfume of the flowers, and their beauty seemed to bring him an anodyne for his pain. He followed into the market and watched the men unloading their waggons. A white-smocked carter offered him some cherries. He thanked him, wondered why he refused to accept any money for them, and began to eat them listlessly. They had been plucked at midnight, and the coldness of the moon had entered into them. A long line of boys carrying crates of striped tulips, and of yellow and red roses, defiled in front of him, threading their way through the huge, jade-green piles of vegetables. Under the portico, with its grey, sun-bleached pillars, loitered a troop of draggled bareheaded girls, waiting for the auction to be over. Others crowded round the swinging doors of the coffee-house in the piazza. The heavy cart-horses slipped and stamped upon the rough stones, shaking their bells and trappings. Some of the drivers were lying asleep on a pile of sacks. Iris-necked and pink-footed, the pigeons ran about picking up seeds.

After a little while, he hailed a hansom and drove home. For a few moments he loitered upon the doorstep, looking round at the silent square, with its blank, close-shuttered windows and its staring blinds. The sky was pure opal now, and the roofs of the houses glistened like silver against it. From some chimney opposite a thin wreath of smoke was rising. It curled, a violet riband, through the nacre-coloured air. In the huge gilt Venetian lantern, spoil of some Doge’s barge, that hung from the ceiling of the great, oak-panelled hall of entrance, lights were still burning from three flickering jets: thin blue petals of flame they seemed, rimmed with white fire. He turned them out and, having thrown his hat and cape on the table, passed through the library towards the door of his bedroom, a large octagonal chamber on the ground floor that, in his new-born feeling for luxury, he had just had decorated for himself and hung with some curious Renaissance tapestries that had been discovered stored in a disused attic at Selby Royal. As he was turning the handle of the door, his eye fell upon the portrait Basil Hallward had painted of him. He started back as if in surprise. Then he went on into his own room, looking somewhat puzzled. After he had taken the button-hole out of his coat, he seemed to hesitate. Finally, he came back, went over to the picture, and examined it. In the dim arrested light that struggled through the cream-coloured silk blinds, the face appeared to him to be a little changed. The expression looked different. One would have said that there was a touch of cruelty in the mouth. It was certainly strange.

He turned round and, walking to the window, drew up the blind. The bright dawn flooded the room and swept the fantastic shadows into dusky corners, where they lay shuddering. But the strange expression that he had noticed in the face of the portrait seemed to linger there, to be more intensified even. The quivering ardent sunlight showed him the lines of cruelty round the mouth as clearly as if he had been looking into a mirror after he had done some dreadful thing. He winced and, taking up from the table an oval glass framed in ivory Cupids, one of Lord Henry’s many presents to him, glanced hurriedly into its polished depths. No line like that warped his red lips. What did it mean? He rubbed his eyes, and came close to the picture, and examined it again. There were no signs of any change when he looked into the actual painting, and yet there was no doubt that the whole expression had altered. It was not a mere fancy of his own. The thing was horribly apparent. He threw himself into a chair and began to think. Suddenly there flashed across his mind what he had said in Basil Hallward’s studio the day the picture had been finished. Yes, he remembered it perfectly. He had uttered a mad wish that he himself might remain young, and the portrait grow old; that his own beauty might be untarnished, and the face on the canvas bear the burden of his passions and his sins; that the painted image might be seared with the lines of suffering and thought, and that he might keep all the delicate bloom and loveliness of his then just conscious boyhood. Surely his wish had not been fulfilled? Such things were impossible. It seemed monstrous even to think of them. And, yet, there was the picture before him, with the touch of cruelty in the mouth.

Cruelty! Had he been cruel? It was the girl’s fault, not his. He had dreamed of her as a great artist, had given his love to her because he had thought her great. Then she had disappointed him. She had been shallow and unworthy. And, yet, a feeling of infinite regret came over him, as he thought of her lying at his feet sobbing like a little child. He remembered with what callousness he had watched her. Why had he been made like that? Why had such a soul been given to him? But he had suffered also. During the three terrible hours that the play had lasted, he had lived centuries of pain, aeon upon aeon of torture. His life was well worth hers. She had marred him for a moment, if he had wounded her for an age. Besides, women were better suited to bear sorrow than men. They lived on their emotions. They only thought of their emotions. When they took lovers, it was merely to have some one with whom they could have scenes. Lord Henry had told him that, and Lord Henry knew what women were. Why should he trouble about Sibyl Vane? She was nothing to him now.

But the picture? What was he to say of that? It held the secret of his life, and told his story. It had taught him to love his own beauty. Would it teach him to loathe his own soul? Would he ever look at it again? No; it was merely an illusion wrought on the troubled senses. The horrible night that he had passed had left phantoms behind it. Suddenly there had fallen upon his brain that tiny scarlet speck that makes men mad. The picture had not changed. It was folly to think so. Yet it was watching him, with its beautiful marred face and its cruel smile. Its bright hair gleamed in the early sunlight. Its blue eyes met his own. A sense of infinite pity, not for himself, but for the painted image of himself, came over him. It had altered already, and would alter more. Its gold would wither into grey. Its red and white roses would die. For every sin that he committed, a stain would fleck and wreck its fairness. But he would not sin. The picture, changed or unchanged, would be to him the visible emblem of conscience. He would resist temptation. He would not see Lord Henry any more—would not, at any rate, listen to those subtle poisonous theories that in Basil Hallward’s garden had first stirred within him the passion for impossible things. He would go back to Sibyl Vane, make her amends, marry her, try to love her again. Yes, it was his duty to do so. She must have suffered more than he had. Poor child! He had been selfish and cruel to her. The fascination that she had exercised over him would return. They would be happy together. His life with her would be beautiful and pure.

He got up from his chair and drew a large screen right in front of the portrait, shuddering as he glanced at it. “How horrible!” he murmured to himself, and he walked across to the window and opened it. When he stepped out on to the grass, he drew a deep breath. The fresh morning air seemed to drive away all his sombre passions. He thought only of Sibyl. A faint echo of his love came back to him. He repeated her name over and over again. The birds that were singing in the dew-drenched garden seemed to be telling the flowers about her. It was long past noon when he awoke. His valet had crept several times on tiptoe into the room to see if he was stirring, and had wondered what made his young master sleep so late. Finally his bell sounded, and Victor came in softly with a cup of tea, and a pile of letters, on a small tray of old Sevres china, and drew back the olive-satin curtains, with their shimmering blue lining, that hung in front of the three tall windows.

How late it was! He sat up, and having sipped some tea, turned over his letters. One of them was from Lord Henry, and had been brought by hand that morning. He hesitated for a moment, and then put it aside. The others he opened listlessly. They contained the usual collection of cards, invitations to dinner, tickets for private views, programmes of charity concerts, and the like that are showered on fashionable young men every morning during the season. There was a rather heavy bill for a chased silver Louis-Quinze toilet-set that he had not yet had the courage to send on to his guardians, who were extremely old-fashioned people and did not realize that we live in an age when unnecessary things are our only necessities; and there were several very courteously worded communications from Jermyn Street money-lenders offering to advance any sum of money at a moment’s notice and at the most reasonable rates of interest. After about ten minutes he got up, and throwing on an elaborate dressing-gown of silk-embroidered cashmere wool, passed into the onyx-paved bathroom. The cool water refreshed him after his long sleep. He seemed to have forgotten all that he had gone through. A dim sense of having taken part in some strange tragedy came to him once or twice, but there was the unreality of a dream about it.

As soon as he was dressed, he went into the library and sat down to a light French breakfast that had been laid out for him on a small round table close to the open window. It was an exquisite day. The warm air seemed laden with spices. A bee flew in and buzzed round the blue-dragon bowl that, filled with sulphur-yellow roses, stood before him. He felt perfectly happy. Was it all true? Had the portrait really changed? Or had it been simply his own imagination that had made him see a look of evil where there had been a look of joy? Surely a painted canvas could not alter? The thing was absurd. It would serve as a tale to tell Basil some day. It would make him smile. And, yet, how vivid was his recollection of the whole thing! First in the dim twilight, and then in the bright dawn, he had seen the touch of cruelty round the warped lips. He almost dreaded his valet leaving the room. He knew that when he was alone he would have to examine the portrait. He was afraid of certainty. When the coffee and cigarettes had been brought and the man turned to go, he felt a wild desire to tell him to remain. As the door was closing behind him, he called him back. The man stood waiting for his orders. Dorian looked at him for a moment. “I am not at home to any one, Victor,” he said with a sigh. The man bowed and retired.

Then he rose from the table, lit a cigarette, and flung himself down on a luxuriously cushioned couch that stood facing the screen. The screen was an old one, of gilt Spanish leather, stamped and wrought with a rather florid Louis-Quatorze pattern. He scanned it curiously, wondering if ever before it had concealed the secret of a man’s life. Should he move it aside, after all? Why not let it stay there? What was the use of knowing? If the thing was true, it was terrible. If it was not true, why trouble about it? But what if, by some fate or deadlier chance, eyes other than his spied behind and saw the horrible change? What should he do if Basil Hallward came and asked to look at his own picture? Basil would be sure to do that. No; the thing had to be examined, and at once. Anything would be better than this dreadful state of doubt. He got up and locked both doors. At least he would be alone when he looked upon the mask of his shame. Then he drew the screen aside and saw himself face to face. It was perfectly true. The portrait had altered.

As he often remembered afterwards, and always with no small wonder, he found himself at first gazing at the portrait with a feeling of almost scientific interest. That such a change should have taken place was incredible to him. And yet it was a fact. Was there some subtle affinity between the chemical atoms that shaped themselves into form and colour on the canvas and the soul that was within him? Could it be that what that soul thought, they realized?—that what it dreamed, they made true? Or was there some other, more terrible reason? He shuddered, and felt afraid, and, going back to the couch, lay there, gazing at the picture in sickened horror. One thing, however, he felt that it had done for him. It had made him conscious how unjust, how cruel, he had been to Sibyl Vane. It was not too late to make reparation for that. She could still be his wife. His unreal and selfish love would yield to some higher influence, would be transformed into some nobler passion, and the portrait that Basil Hallward had painted of him would be a guide to him through life, would be to him what holiness is to some, and conscience to others, and the fear of God to us all. There were opiates for remorse, drugs that could lull the moral sense to sleep. But here was a visible symbol of the degradation of sin. Here was an ever-present sign of the ruin men brought upon their souls.

Three o’clock struck, and four, and the half-hour rang its double chime, but Dorian Gray did not stir. He was trying to gather up the scarlet threads of life and to weave them into a pattern; to find his way through the sanguine labyrinth of passion through which he was wandering. He did not know what to do, or what to think. Finally, he went over to the table and wrote a passionate letter to the girl he had loved, imploring her forgiveness and accusing himself of madness. He covered page after page with wild words of sorrow and wilder words of pain. There is a luxury in self-reproach. When we blame ourselves, we feel that no one else has a right to blame us. It is the confession, not the priest, that gives us absolution. When Dorian had finished the letter, he felt that he had been forgiven. Suddenly there came a knock to the door, and he heard Lord Henry’s voice outside. “My dear boy, I must see you. Let me in at once. I can’t bear your shutting yourself up like this.”

He made no answer at first, but remained quite still. The knocking still continued and grew louder. Yes, it was better to let Lord Henry in, and to explain to him the new life he was going to lead, to quarrel with him if it became necessary to quarrel, to part if parting was inevitable. He jumped up, drew the screen hastily across the picture, and unlocked the door. “Yes, of course,” answered Lord Henry, sinking into a chair and slowly pulling off his yellow gloves. “It is dreadful, from one point of view, but it was not your fault. Tell me, did you go behind and see her, after the play was over?” “I was brutal, Harry—perfectly brutal. But it is all right now. I am not sorry for anything that has happened. It has taught me to know myself better.” “I have got through all that,” said Dorian, shaking his head and smiling. “I am perfectly happy now. I know what conscience is, to begin with. It is not what you told me it was. It is the divinest thing in us. Don’t sneer at it, Harry, any more—at least not before me. I want to be good. I can’t bear the idea of my soul being hideous.”

“Yes, Harry, I know what you are going to say. Something dreadful about marriage. Don’t say it. Don’t ever say things of that kind to me again. Two days ago I asked Sibyl to marry me. I am not going to break my word to her. She is to be my wife.” “Your letter? Oh, yes, I remember. I have not read it yet, Harry. I was afraid there might be something in it that I wouldn’t like. You cut life to pieces with your epigrams.” Lord Henry walked across the room, and sitting down by Dorian Gray, took both his hands in his own and held them tightly. “Dorian,” he said, “my letter—don’t be frightened—was to tell you that Sibyl Vane is dead.” A cry of pain broke from the lad’s lips, and he leaped to his feet, tearing his hands away from Lord Henry’s grasp. “Dead! Sibyl dead! It is not true! It is a horrible lie! How dare you say it?” “It is quite true, Dorian,” said Lord Henry, gravely. “It is in all the morning papers. I wrote down to you to ask you not to see any one till I came. There will have to be an inquest, of course, and you must not be mixed up in it. Things like that make a man fashionable in Paris. But in London people are so prejudiced. Here, one should never make one’s _début_ with a scandal. One should reserve that to give an interest to one’s old age. I suppose they don’t know your name at the theatre? If they don’t, it is all right. Did any one see you going round to her room? That is an important point.”

Dorian did not answer for a few moments. He was dazed with horror. Finally he stammered, in a stifled voice, “Harry, did you say an inquest? What did you mean by that? Did Sibyl—? Oh, Harry, I can’t bear it! But be quick. Tell me everything at once.” “I have no doubt it was not an accident, Dorian, though it must be put in that way to the public. It seems that as she was leaving the theatre with her mother, about half-past twelve or so, she said she had forgotten something upstairs. They waited some time for her, but she did not come down again. They ultimately found her lying dead on the floor of her dressing-room. She had swallowed something by mistake, some dreadful thing they use at theatres. I don’t know what it was, but it had either prussic acid or white lead in it. I should fancy it was prussic acid, as she seems to have died instantaneously.” “Yes; it is very tragic, of course, but you must not get yourself mixed up in it. I see by _The Standard_ that she was seventeen. I should have thought she was almost younger than that. She looked such a child, and seemed to know so little about acting. Dorian, you mustn’t let this thing get on your nerves. You must come and dine with me, and afterwards we will look in at the opera. It is a Patti night, and everybody will be there. You can come to my sister’s box. She has got some smart women with her.”

“So I have murdered Sibyl Vane,” said Dorian Gray, half to himself, “murdered her as surely as if I had cut her little throat with a knife. Yet the roses are not less lovely for all that. The birds sing just as happily in my garden. And to-night I am to dine with you, and then go on to the opera, and sup somewhere, I suppose, afterwards. How extraordinarily dramatic life is! If I had read all this in a book, Harry, I think I would have wept over it. Somehow, now that it has happened actually, and to me, it seems far too wonderful for tears. Here is the first passionate love-letter I have ever written in my life. Strange, that my first passionate love-letter should have been addressed to a dead girl. Can they feel, I wonder, those white silent people we call the dead? Sibyl! Can she feel, or know, or listen? Oh, Harry, how I loved her once! It seems years ago to me now. She was everything to me. Then came that dreadful night—was it really only last night?—when she played so badly, and my heart almost broke. She explained it all to me. It was terribly pathetic. But I was not moved a bit. I thought her shallow. Suddenly something happened that made me afraid. I can’t tell you what it was, but it was terrible. I said I would go back to her. I felt I had done wrong. And now she is dead. My God! My God! Harry, what shall I do? You don’t know the danger I am in, and there is nothing to keep me straight. She would have done that for me. She had no right to kill herself. It was selfish of her.”

“My dear Dorian,” answered Lord Henry, taking a cigarette from his case and producing a gold-latten matchbox, “the only way a woman can ever reform a man is by boring him so completely that he loses all possible interest in life. If you had married this girl, you would have been wretched. Of course, you would have treated her kindly. One can always be kind to people about whom one cares nothing. But she would have soon found out that you were absolutely indifferent to her. And when a woman finds that out about her husband, she either becomes dreadfully dowdy, or wears very smart bonnets that some other woman’s husband has to pay for. I say nothing about the social mistake, which would have been abject—which, of course, I would not have allowed—but I assure you that in any case the whole thing would have been an absolute failure.” “I suppose it would,” muttered the lad, walking up and down the room and looking horribly pale. “But I thought it was my duty. It is not my fault that this terrible tragedy has prevented my doing what was right. I remember your saying once that there is a fatality about good resolutions—that they are always made too late. Mine certainly were.”

“Good resolutions are useless attempts to interfere with scientific laws. Their origin is pure vanity. Their result is absolutely _nil_. They give us, now and then, some of those luxurious sterile emotions that have a certain charm for the weak. That is all that can be said for them. They are simply cheques that men draw on a bank where they have no account.” “Harry,” cried Dorian Gray, coming over and sitting down beside him, “why is it that I cannot feel this tragedy as much as I want to? I don’t think I am heartless. Do you?” “You have done too many foolish things during the last fortnight to be entitled to give yourself that name, Dorian,” answered Lord Henry with his sweet melancholy smile. The lad frowned. “I don’t like that explanation, Harry,” he rejoined, “but I am glad you don’t think I am heartless. I am nothing of the kind. I know I am not. And yet I must admit that this thing that has happened does not affect me as it should. It seems to me to be simply like a wonderful ending to a wonderful play. It has all the terrible beauty of a Greek tragedy, a tragedy in which I took a great part, but by which I have not been wounded.”

“It is an interesting question,” said Lord Henry, who found an exquisite pleasure in playing on the lad’s unconscious egotism, “an extremely interesting question. I fancy that the true explanation is this: It often happens that the real tragedies of life occur in such an inartistic manner that they hurt us by their crude violence, their absolute incoherence, their absurd want of meaning, their entire lack of style. They affect us just as vulgarity affects us. They give us an impression of sheer brute force, and we revolt against that. Sometimes, however, a tragedy that possesses artistic elements of beauty crosses our lives. If these elements of beauty are real, the whole thing simply appeals to our sense of dramatic effect. Suddenly we find that we are no longer the actors, but the spectators of the play. Or rather we are both. We watch ourselves, and the mere wonder of the spectacle enthralls us. In the present case, what is it that has really happened? Some one has killed herself for love of you. I wish that I had ever had such an experience. It would have made me in love with love for the rest of my life. The people who have adored me—there have not been very many, but there have been some—have always insisted on living on, long after I had ceased to care for them, or they to care for me. They have become stout and tedious, and when I meet them, they go in at once for reminiscences. That awful memory of woman! What a fearful thing it is! And what an utter intellectual stagnation it reveals! One should absorb the colour of life, but one should never remember its details. Details are always vulgar.”

“There is no necessity,” rejoined his companion. “Life has always poppies in her hands. Of course, now and then things linger. I once wore nothing but violets all through one season, as a form of artistic mourning for a romance that would not die. Ultimately, however, it did die. I forget what killed it. I think it was her proposing to sacrifice the whole world for me. That is always a dreadful moment. It fills one with the terror of eternity. Well—would you believe it?—a week ago, at Lady Hampshire’s, I found myself seated at dinner next the lady in question, and she insisted on going over the whole thing again, and digging up the past, and raking up the future. I had buried my romance in a bed of asphodel. She dragged it out again and assured me that I had spoiled her life. I am bound to state that she ate an enormous dinner, so I did not feel any anxiety. But what a lack of taste she showed! The one charm of the past is that it is the past. But women never know when the curtain has fallen. They always want a sixth act, and as soon as the interest of the play is entirely over, they propose to continue it. If they were allowed their own way, every comedy would have a tragic ending, and every tragedy would culminate in a farce. They are charmingly artificial, but they have no sense of art. You are more fortunate than I am. I assure you, Dorian, that not one of the women I have known would have done for me what Sibyl Vane did for you. Ordinary women always console themselves. Some of them do it by going in for sentimental colours. Never trust a woman who wears mauve, whatever her age may be, or a woman over thirty-five who is fond of pink ribbons. It always means that they have a history. Others find a great consolation in suddenly discovering the good qualities of their husbands. They flaunt their conjugal felicity in one’s face, as if it were the most fascinating of sins. Religion consoles some. Its mysteries have all the charm of a flirtation, a woman once told me, and I can quite understand it. Besides, nothing makes one so vain as being told that one is a sinner. Conscience makes egotists of us all. Yes; there is really no end to the consolations that women find in modern life. Indeed, I have not mentioned the most important one.”

“Oh, the obvious consolation. Taking some one else’s admirer when one loses one’s own. In good society that always whitewashes a woman. But really, Dorian, how different Sibyl Vane must have been from all the women one meets! There is something to me quite beautiful about her death. I am glad I am living in a century when such wonders happen. They make one believe in the reality of the things we all play with, such as romance, passion, and love.” “I am afraid that women appreciate cruelty, downright cruelty, more than anything else. They have wonderfully primitive instincts. We have emancipated them, but they remain slaves looking for their masters, all the same. They love being dominated. I am sure you were splendid. I have never seen you really and absolutely angry, but I can fancy how delightful you looked. And, after all, you said something to me the day before yesterday that seemed to me at the time to be merely fanciful, but that I see now was absolutely true, and it holds the key to everything.” “You said to me that Sibyl Vane represented to you all the heroines of romance—that she was Desdemona one night, and Ophelia the other; that if she died as Juliet, she came to life as Imogen.”

“No, she will never come to life. She has played her last part. But you must think of that lonely death in the tawdry dressing-room simply as a strange lurid fragment from some Jacobean tragedy, as a wonderful scene from Webster, or Ford, or Cyril Tourneur. The girl never really lived, and so she has never really died. To you at least she was always a dream, a phantom that flitted through Shakespeare’s plays and left them lovelier for its presence, a reed through which Shakespeare’s music sounded richer and more full of joy. The moment she touched actual life, she marred it, and it marred her, and so she passed away. Mourn for Ophelia, if you like. Put ashes on your head because Cordelia was strangled. Cry out against Heaven because the daughter of Brabantio died. But don’t waste your tears over Sibyl Vane. She was less real than they are.” There was a silence. The evening darkened in the room. Noiselessly, and with silver feet, the shadows crept in from the garden. The colours faded wearily out of things.

After some time Dorian Gray looked up. “You have explained me to myself, Harry,” he murmured with something of a sigh of relief. “I felt all that you have said, but somehow I was afraid of it, and I could not express it to myself. How well you know me! But we will not talk again of what has happened. It has been a marvellous experience. That is all. I wonder if life has still in store for me anything as marvellous.” “Ah, then,” said Lord Henry, rising to go, “then, my dear Dorian, you would have to fight for your victories. As it is, they are brought to you. No, you must keep your good looks. We live in an age that reads too much to be wise, and that thinks too much to be beautiful. We cannot spare you. And now you had better dress and drive down to the club. We are rather late, as it is.” “I don’t feel up to it,” said Dorian listlessly. “But I am awfully obliged to you for all that you have said to me. You are certainly my best friend. No one has ever understood me as you have.”

“We are only at the beginning of our friendship, Dorian,” answered Lord Henry, shaking him by the hand. “Good-bye. I shall see you before nine-thirty, I hope. Remember, Patti is singing.” As he closed the door behind him, Dorian Gray touched the bell, and in a few minutes Victor appeared with the lamps and drew the blinds down. He waited impatiently for him to go. The man seemed to take an interminable time over everything. As soon as he had left, he rushed to the screen and drew it back. No; there was no further change in the picture. It had received the news of Sibyl Vane’s death before he had known of it himself. It was conscious of the events of life as they occurred. The vicious cruelty that marred the fine lines of the mouth had, no doubt, appeared at the very moment that the girl had drunk the poison, whatever it was. Or was it indifferent to results? Did it merely take cognizance of what passed within the soul? He wondered, and hoped that some day he would see the change taking place before his very eyes, shuddering as he hoped it.

Poor Sibyl! What a romance it had all been! She had often mimicked death on the stage. Then Death himself had touched her and taken her with him. How had she played that dreadful last scene? Had she cursed him, as she died? No; she had died for love of him, and love would always be a sacrament to him now. She had atoned for everything by the sacrifice she had made of her life. He would not think any more of what she had made him go through, on that horrible night at the theatre. When he thought of her, it would be as a wonderful tragic figure sent on to the world’s stage to show the supreme reality of love. A wonderful tragic figure? Tears came to his eyes as he remembered her childlike look, and winsome fanciful ways, and shy tremulous grace. He brushed them away hastily and looked again at the picture. He felt that the time had really come for making his choice. Or had his choice already been made? Yes, life had decided that for him—life, and his own infinite curiosity about life. Eternal youth, infinite passion, pleasures subtle and secret, wild joys and wilder sins—he was to have all these things. The portrait was to bear the burden of his shame: that was all.

A feeling of pain crept over him as he thought of the desecration that was in store for the fair face on the canvas. Once, in boyish mockery of Narcissus, he had kissed, or feigned to kiss, those painted lips that now smiled so cruelly at him. Morning after morning he had sat before the portrait wondering at its beauty, almost enamoured of it, as it seemed to him at times. Was it to alter now with every mood to which he yielded? Was it to become a monstrous and loathsome thing, to be hidden away in a locked room, to be shut out from the sunlight that had so often touched to brighter gold the waving wonder of its hair? The pity of it! the pity of it! For a moment, he thought of praying that the horrible sympathy that existed between him and the picture might cease. It had changed in answer to a prayer; perhaps in answer to a prayer it might remain unchanged. And yet, who, that knew anything about life, would surrender the chance of remaining always young, however fantastic that chance might be, or with what fateful consequences it might be fraught? Besides, was it really under his control? Had it indeed been prayer that had produced the substitution? Might there not be some curious scientific reason for it all? If thought could exercise its influence upon a living organism, might not thought exercise an influence upon dead and inorganic things? Nay, without thought or conscious desire, might not things external to ourselves vibrate in unison with our moods and passions, atom calling to atom in secret love or strange affinity? But the reason was of no importance. He would never again tempt by a prayer any terrible power. If the picture was to alter, it was to alter. That was all. Why inquire too closely into it?

For there would be a real pleasure in watching it. He would be able to follow his mind into its secret places. This portrait would be to him the most magical of mirrors. As it had revealed to him his own body, so it would reveal to him his own soul. And when winter came upon it, he would still be standing where spring trembles on the verge of summer. When the blood crept from its face, and left behind a pallid mask of chalk with leaden eyes, he would keep the glamour of boyhood. Not one blossom of his loveliness would ever fade. Not one pulse of his life would ever weaken. Like the gods of the Greeks, he would be strong, and fleet, and joyous. What did it matter what happened to the coloured image on the canvas? He would be safe. That was everything. He drew the screen back into its former place in front of the picture, smiling as he did so, and passed into his bedroom, where his valet was already waiting for him. An hour later he was at the opera, and Lord Henry was leaning over his chair.

“I am so glad I have found you, Dorian,” he said gravely. “I called last night, and they told me you were at the opera. Of course, I knew that was impossible. But I wish you had left word where you had really gone to. I passed a dreadful evening, half afraid that one tragedy might be followed by another. I think you might have telegraphed for me when you heard of it first. I read of it quite by chance in a late edition of _The Globe_ that I picked up at the club. I came here at once and was miserable at not finding you. I can’t tell you how heart-broken I am about the whole thing. I know what you must suffer. But where were you? Did you go down and see the girl’s mother? For a moment I thought of following you there. They gave the address in the paper. Somewhere in the Euston Road, isn’t it? But I was afraid of intruding upon a sorrow that I could not lighten. Poor woman! What a state she must be in! And her only child, too! What did she say about it all?”

“My dear Basil, how do I know?” murmured Dorian Gray, sipping some pale-yellow wine from a delicate, gold-beaded bubble of Venetian glass and looking dreadfully bored. “I was at the opera. You should have come on there. I met Lady Gwendolen, Harry’s sister, for the first time. We were in her box. She is perfectly charming; and Patti sang divinely. Don’t talk about horrid subjects. If one doesn’t talk about a thing, it has never happened. It is simply expression, as Harry says, that gives reality to things. I may mention that she was not the woman’s only child. There is a son, a charming fellow, I believe. But he is not on the stage. He is a sailor, or something. And now, tell me about yourself and what you are painting.” “You went to the opera?” said Hallward, speaking very slowly and with a strained touch of pain in his voice. “You went to the opera while Sibyl Vane was lying dead in some sordid lodging? You can talk to me of other women being charming, and of Patti singing divinely, before the girl you loved has even the quiet of a grave to sleep in? Why, man, there are horrors in store for that little white body of hers!”

“What has the actual lapse of time got to do with it? It is only shallow people who require years to get rid of an emotion. A man who is master of himself can end a sorrow as easily as he can invent a pleasure. I don’t want to be at the mercy of my emotions. I want to use them, to enjoy them, and to dominate them.” “Dorian, this is horrible! Something has changed you completely. You look exactly the same wonderful boy who, day after day, used to come down to my studio to sit for his picture. But you were simple, natural, and affectionate then. You were the most unspoiled creature in the whole world. Now, I don’t know what has come over you. You talk as if you had no heart, no pity in you. It is all Harry’s influence. I see that.” The lad flushed up and, going to the window, looked out for a few moments on the green, flickering, sun-lashed garden. “I owe a great deal to Harry, Basil,” he said at last, “more than I owe to you. You only taught me to be vain.”

“Basil,” said the lad, going over to him and putting his hand on his shoulder, “you have come too late. Yesterday, when I heard that Sibyl Vane had killed herself—” The painter felt strangely moved. The lad was infinitely dear to him, and his personality had been the great turning point in his art. He could not bear the idea of reproaching him any more. After all, his indifference was probably merely a mood that would pass away. There was so much in him that was good, so much in him that was noble. “Well, Dorian,” he said at length, with a sad smile, “I won’t speak to you again about this horrible thing, after to-day. I only trust your name won’t be mentioned in connection with it. The inquest is to take place this afternoon. Have they summoned you?” Dorian shook his head, and a look of annoyance passed over his face at the mention of the word “inquest.” There was something so crude and vulgar about everything of the kind. “They don’t know my name,” he answered. “Only my Christian name, and that I am quite sure she never mentioned to any one. She told me once that they were all rather curious to learn who I was, and that she invariably told them my name was Prince Charming. It was pretty of her. You must do me a drawing of Sibyl, Basil. I should like to have something more of her than the memory of a few kisses and some broken pathetic words.”

The painter stared at him. “My dear boy, what nonsense!” he cried. “Do you mean to say you don’t like what I did of you? Where is it? Why have you pulled the screen in front of it? Let me look at it. It is the best thing I have ever done. Do take the screen away, Dorian. It is simply disgraceful of your servant hiding my work like that. I felt the room looked different as I came in.” “My servant has nothing to do with it, Basil. You don’t imagine I let him arrange my room for me? He settles my flowers for me sometimes—that is all. No; I did it myself. The light was too strong on the portrait.” A cry of terror broke from Dorian Gray’s lips, and he rushed between the painter and the screen. “Basil,” he said, looking very pale, “you must not look at it. I don’t wish you to.” “If you try to look at it, Basil, on my word of honour I will never speak to you again as long as I live. I am quite serious. I don’t offer any explanation, and you are not to ask for any. But, remember, if you touch this screen, everything is over between us.”

Hallward was thunderstruck. He looked at Dorian Gray in absolute amazement. He had never seen him like this before. The lad was actually pallid with rage. His hands were clenched, and the pupils of his eyes were like disks of blue fire. He was trembling all over. “But what is the matter? Of course I won’t look at it if you don’t want me to,” he said, rather coldly, turning on his heel and going over towards the window. “But, really, it seems rather absurd that I shouldn’t see my own work, especially as I am going to exhibit it in Paris in the autumn. I shall probably have to give it another coat of varnish before that, so I must see it some day, and why not to-day?” “To exhibit it! You want to exhibit it?” exclaimed Dorian Gray, a strange sense of terror creeping over him. Was the world going to be shown his secret? Were people to gape at the mystery of his life? That was impossible. Something—he did not know what—had to be done at once.

“Yes; I don’t suppose you will object to that. Georges Petit is going to collect all my best pictures for a special exhibition in the Rue de Sèze, which will open the first week in October. The portrait will only be away a month. I should think you could easily spare it for that time. In fact, you are sure to be out of town. And if you keep it always behind a screen, you can’t care much about it.” Dorian Gray passed his hand over his forehead. There were beads of perspiration there. He felt that he was on the brink of a horrible danger. “You told me a month ago that you would never exhibit it,” he cried. “Why have you changed your mind? You people who go in for being consistent have just as many moods as others have. The only difference is that your moods are rather meaningless. You can’t have forgotten that you assured me most solemnly that nothing in the world would induce you to send it to any exhibition. You told Harry exactly the same thing.” He stopped suddenly, and a gleam of light came into his eyes. He remembered that Lord Henry had said to him once, half seriously and half in jest, “If you want to have a strange quarter of an hour, get Basil to tell you why he won’t exhibit your picture. He told me why he wouldn’t, and it was a revelation to me.” Yes, perhaps Basil, too, had his secret. He would ask him and try.

“Basil,” he said, coming over quite close and looking him straight in the face, “we have each of us a secret. Let me know yours, and I shall tell you mine. What was your reason for refusing to exhibit my picture?” The painter shuddered in spite of himself. “Dorian, if I told you, you might like me less than you do, and you would certainly laugh at me. I could not bear your doing either of those two things. If you wish me never to look at your picture again, I am content. I have always you to look at. If you wish the best work I have ever done to be hidden from the world, I am satisfied. Your friendship is dearer to me than any fame or reputation.” “No, Basil, you must tell me,” insisted Dorian Gray. “I think I have a right to know.” His feeling of terror had passed away, and curiosity had taken its place. He was determined to find out Basil Hallward’s mystery. “Let us sit down, Dorian,” said the painter, looking troubled. “Let us sit down. And just answer me one question. Have you noticed in the picture something curious?—something that probably at first did not strike you, but that revealed itself to you suddenly?”

Dorian Gray drew a long breath. The colour came back to his cheeks, and a smile played about his lips. The peril was over. He was safe for the time. Yet he could not help feeling infinite pity for the painter who had just made this strange confession to him, and wondered if he himself would ever be so dominated by the personality of a friend. Lord Henry had the charm of being very dangerous. But that was all. He was too clever and too cynical to be really fond of. Would there ever be some one who would fill him with a strange idolatry? Was that one of the things that life had in store? “Well, perhaps you are right. And now good-bye, Dorian. You have been the one person in my life who has really influenced my art. Whatever I have done that is good, I owe to you. Ah! you don’t know what it cost me to tell you all that I have told you.” “It was not intended as a compliment. It was a confession. Now that I have made it, something seems to have gone out of me. Perhaps one should never put one’s worship into words.”

“No; there was nothing else to see. Why do you ask? But you mustn’t talk about worship. It is foolish. You and I are friends, Basil, and we must always remain so.” “Oh, Harry!” cried the lad, with a ripple of laughter. “Harry spends his days in saying what is incredible and his evenings in doing what is improbable. Just the sort of life I would like to lead. But still I don’t think I would go to Harry if I were in trouble. I would sooner go to you, Basil.” “I can’t explain it to you, Basil, but I must never sit to you again. There is something fatal about a portrait. It has a life of its own. I will come and have tea with you. That will be just as pleasant.” “Pleasanter for you, I am afraid,” murmured Hallward regretfully. “And now good-bye. I am sorry you won’t let me look at the picture once again. But that can’t be helped. I quite understand what you feel about it.” As he left the room, Dorian Gray smiled to himself. Poor Basil! How little he knew of the true reason! And how strange it was that, instead of having been forced to reveal his own secret, he had succeeded, almost by chance, in wresting a secret from his friend! How much that strange confession explained to him! The painter’s absurd fits of jealousy, his wild devotion, his extravagant panegyrics, his curious reticences—he understood them all now, and he felt sorry. There seemed to him to be something tragic in a friendship so coloured by romance.

He sighed and touched the bell. The portrait must be hidden away at all costs. He could not run such a risk of discovery again. It had been mad of him to have allowed the thing to remain, even for an hour, in a room to which any of his friends had access. When his servant entered, he looked at him steadfastly and wondered if he had thought of peering behind the screen. The man was quite impassive and waited for his orders. Dorian lit a cigarette and walked over to the glass and glanced into it. He could see the reflection of Victor’s face perfectly. It was like a placid mask of servility. There was nothing to be afraid of, there. Yet he thought it best to be on his guard. Speaking very slowly, he told him to tell the house-keeper that he wanted to see her, and then to go to the frame-maker and ask him to send two of his men round at once. It seemed to him that as the man left the room his eyes wandered in the direction of the screen. Or was that merely his own fancy?

After a few moments, in her black silk dress, with old-fashioned thread mittens on her wrinkled hands, Mrs. Leaf bustled into the library. He asked her for the key of the schoolroom. “The old schoolroom, Mr. Dorian?” she exclaimed. “Why, it is full of dust. I must get it arranged and put straight before you go into it. It is not fit for you to see, sir. It is not, indeed.” He winced at the mention of his grandfather. He had hateful memories of him. “That does not matter,” he answered. “I simply want to see the place—that is all. Give me the key.” “And here is the key, sir,” said the old lady, going over the contents of her bunch with tremulously uncertain hands. “Here is the key. I’ll have it off the bunch in a moment. But you don’t think of living up there, sir, and you so comfortable here?” She lingered for a few moments, and was garrulous over some detail of the household. He sighed and told her to manage things as she thought best. She left the room, wreathed in smiles.

As the door closed, Dorian put the key in his pocket and looked round the room. His eye fell on a large, purple satin coverlet heavily embroidered with gold, a splendid piece of late seventeenth-century Venetian work that his grandfather had found in a convent near Bologna. Yes, that would serve to wrap the dreadful thing in. It had perhaps served often as a pall for the dead. Now it was to hide something that had a corruption of its own, worse than the corruption of death itself—something that would breed horrors and yet would never die. What the worm was to the corpse, his sins would be to the painted image on the canvas. They would mar its beauty and eat away its grace. They would defile it and make it shameful. And yet the thing would still live on. It would be always alive. He shuddered, and for a moment he regretted that he had not told Basil the true reason why he had wished to hide the picture away. Basil would have helped him to resist Lord Henry’s influence, and the still more poisonous influences that came from his own temperament. The love that he bore him—for it was really love—had nothing in it that was not noble and intellectual. It was not that mere physical admiration of beauty that is born of the senses and that dies when the senses tire. It was such love as Michelangelo had known, and Montaigne, and Winckelmann, and Shakespeare himself. Yes, Basil could have saved him. But it was too late now. The past could always be annihilated. Regret, denial, or forgetfulness could do that. But the future was inevitable. There were passions in him that would find their terrible outlet, dreams that would make the shadow of their evil real.

He took up from the couch the great purple-and-gold texture that covered it, and, holding it in his hands, passed behind the screen. Was the face on the canvas viler than before? It seemed to him that it was unchanged, and yet his loathing of it was intensified. Gold hair, blue eyes, and rose-red lips—they all were there. It was simply the expression that had altered. That was horrible in its cruelty. Compared to what he saw in it of censure or rebuke, how shallow Basil’s reproaches about Sibyl Vane had been!—how shallow, and of what little account! His own soul was looking out at him from the canvas and calling him to judgement. A look of pain came across him, and he flung the rich pall over the picture. As he did so, a knock came to the door. He passed out as his servant entered. He felt that the man must be got rid of at once. He must not be allowed to know where the picture was being taken to. There was something sly about him, and he had thoughtful, treacherous eyes. Sitting down at the writing-table he scribbled a note to Lord Henry, asking him to send him round something to read and reminding him that they were to meet at eight-fifteen that evening.

In two or three minutes there was another knock, and Mr. Hubbard himself, the celebrated frame-maker of South Audley Street, came in with a somewhat rough-looking young assistant. Mr. Hubbard was a florid, red-whiskered little man, whose admiration for art was considerably tempered by the inveterate impecuniosity of most of the artists who dealt with him. As a rule, he never left his shop. He waited for people to come to him. But he always made an exception in favour of Dorian Gray. There was something about Dorian that charmed everybody. It was a pleasure even to see him. “What can I do for you, Mr. Gray?” he said, rubbing his fat freckled hands. “I thought I would do myself the honour of coming round in person. I have just got a beauty of a frame, sir. Picked it up at a sale. Old Florentine. Came from Fonthill, I believe. Admirably suited for a religious subject, Mr. Gray.” “I am so sorry you have given yourself the trouble of coming round, Mr. Hubbard. I shall certainly drop in and look at the frame—though I don’t go in much at present for religious art—but to-day I only want a picture carried to the top of the house for me. It is rather heavy, so I thought I would ask you to lend me a couple of your men.”

“There will be no difficulty, sir,” said the genial frame-maker, beginning, with the aid of his assistant, to unhook the picture from the long brass chains by which it was suspended. “And, now, where shall we carry it to, Mr. Gray?” “I will show you the way, Mr. Hubbard, if you will kindly follow me. Or perhaps you had better go in front. I am afraid it is right at the top of the house. We will go up by the front staircase, as it is wider.” He held the door open for them, and they passed out into the hall and began the ascent. The elaborate character of the frame had made the picture extremely bulky, and now and then, in spite of the obsequious protests of Mr. Hubbard, who had the true tradesman’s spirited dislike of seeing a gentleman doing anything useful, Dorian put his hand to it so as to help them. “I am afraid it is rather heavy,” murmured Dorian as he unlocked the door that opened into the room that was to keep for him the curious secret of his life and hide his soul from the eyes of men.

He had not entered the place for more than four years—not, indeed, since he had used it first as a play-room when he was a child, and then as a study when he grew somewhat older. It was a large, well-proportioned room, which had been specially built by the last Lord Kelso for the use of the little grandson whom, for his strange likeness to his mother, and also for other reasons, he had always hated and desired to keep at a distance. It appeared to Dorian to have but little changed. There was the huge Italian _cassone_, with its fantastically painted panels and its tarnished gilt mouldings, in which he had so often hidden himself as a boy. There the satinwood book-case filled with his dog-eared schoolbooks. On the wall behind it was hanging the same ragged Flemish tapestry where a faded king and queen were playing chess in a garden, while a company of hawkers rode by, carrying hooded birds on their gauntleted wrists. How well he remembered it all! Every moment of his lonely childhood came back to him as he looked round. He recalled the stainless purity of his boyish life, and it seemed horrible to him that it was here the fatal portrait was to be hidden away. How little he had thought, in those dead days, of all that was in store for him!

But there was no other place in the house so secure from prying eyes as this. He had the key, and no one else could enter it. Beneath its purple pall, the face painted on the canvas could grow bestial, sodden, and unclean. What did it matter? No one could see it. He himself would not see it. Why should he watch the hideous corruption of his soul? He kept his youth—that was enough. And, besides, might not his nature grow finer, after all? There was no reason that the future should be so full of shame. Some love might come across his life, and purify him, and shield him from those sins that seemed to be already stirring in spirit and in flesh—those curious unpictured sins whose very mystery lent them their subtlety and their charm. Perhaps, some day, the cruel look would have passed away from the scarlet sensitive mouth, and he might show to the world Basil Hallward’s masterpiece. No; that was impossible. Hour by hour, and week by week, the thing upon the canvas was growing old. It might escape the hideousness of sin, but the hideousness of age was in store for it. The cheeks would become hollow or flaccid. Yellow crow’s feet would creep round the fading eyes and make them horrible. The hair would lose its brightness, the mouth would gape or droop, would be foolish or gross, as the mouths of old men are. There would be the wrinkled throat, the cold, blue-veined hands, the twisted body, that he remembered in the grandfather who had been so stern to him in his boyhood. The picture had to be concealed. There was no help for it.

Dorian started. “It would not interest you, Mr. Hubbard,” he said, keeping his eye on the man. He felt ready to leap upon him and fling him to the ground if he dared to lift the gorgeous hanging that concealed the secret of his life. “I shan’t trouble you any more now. I am much obliged for your kindness in coming round.” “Not at all, not at all, Mr. Gray. Ever ready to do anything for you, sir.” And Mr. Hubbard tramped downstairs, followed by the assistant, who glanced back at Dorian with a look of shy wonder in his rough uncomely face. He had never seen any one so marvellous. When the sound of their footsteps had died away, Dorian locked the door and put the key in his pocket. He felt safe now. No one would ever look upon the horrible thing. No eye but his would ever see his shame. On reaching the library, he found that it was just after five o’clock and that the tea had been already brought up. On a little table of dark perfumed wood thickly incrusted with nacre, a present from Lady Radley, his guardian’s wife, a pretty professional invalid, who had spent the preceding winter in Cairo, was lying a note from Lord Henry, and beside it was a book bound in yellow paper, the cover slightly torn and the edges soiled. A copy of the third edition of _The St. James’s Gazette_ had been placed on the tea-tray. It was evident that Victor had returned. He wondered if he had met the men in the hall as they were leaving the house and had wormed out of them what they had been doing. He would be sure to miss the picture—had no doubt missed it already, while he had been laying the tea-things. The screen had not been set back, and a blank space was visible on the wall. Perhaps some night he might find him creeping upstairs and trying to force the door of the room. It was a horrible thing to have a spy in one’s house. He had heard of rich men who had been blackmailed all their lives by some servant who had read a letter, or overheard a conversation, or picked up a card with an address, or found beneath a pillow a withered flower or a shred of crumpled lace.

He sighed, and having poured himself out some tea, opened Lord Henry’s note. It was simply to say that he sent him round the evening paper, and a book that might interest him, and that he would be at the club at eight-fifteen. He opened _The St. James’s_ languidly, and looked through it. A red pencil-mark on the fifth page caught his eye. It drew attention to the following paragraph: INQUEST ON AN ACTRESS.—An inquest was held this morning at the Bell Tavern, Hoxton Road, by Mr. Danby, the District Coroner, on the body of Sibyl Vane, a young actress recently engaged at the Royal Theatre, Holborn. A verdict of death by misadventure was returned. Considerable sympathy was expressed for the mother of the deceased, who was greatly affected during the giving of her own evidence, and that of Dr. Birrell, who had made the post-mortem examination of the deceased. He frowned, and tearing the paper in two, went across the room and flung the pieces away. How ugly it all was! And how horribly real ugliness made things! He felt a little annoyed with Lord Henry for having sent him the report. And it was certainly stupid of him to have marked it with red pencil. Victor might have read it. The man knew more than enough English for that.

Perhaps he had read it and had begun to suspect something. And, yet, what did it matter? What had Dorian Gray to do with Sibyl Vane’s death? There was nothing to fear. Dorian Gray had not killed her. His eye fell on the yellow book that Lord Henry had sent him. What was it, he wondered. He went towards the little, pearl-coloured octagonal stand that had always looked to him like the work of some strange Egyptian bees that wrought in silver, and taking up the volume, flung himself into an arm-chair and began to turn over the leaves. After a few minutes he became absorbed. It was the strangest book that he had ever read. It seemed to him that in exquisite raiment, and to the delicate sound of flutes, the sins of the world were passing in dumb show before him. Things that he had dimly dreamed of were suddenly made real to him. Things of which he had never dreamed were gradually revealed. It was a novel without a plot and with only one character, being, indeed, simply a psychological study of a certain young Parisian who spent his life trying to realize in the nineteenth century all the passions and modes of thought that belonged to every century except his own, and to sum up, as it were, in himself the various moods through which the world-spirit had ever passed, loving for their mere artificiality those renunciations that men have unwisely called virtue, as much as those natural rebellions that wise men still call sin. The style in which it was written was that curious jewelled style, vivid and obscure at once, full of _argot_ and of archaisms, of technical expressions and of elaborate paraphrases, that characterizes the work of some of the finest artists of the French school of _Symbolistes_. There were in it metaphors as monstrous as orchids and as subtle in colour. The life of the senses was described in the terms of mystical philosophy. One hardly knew at times whether one was reading the spiritual ecstasies of some mediæval saint or the morbid confessions of a modern sinner. It was a poisonous book. The heavy odour of incense seemed to cling about its pages and to trouble the brain. The mere cadence of the sentences, the subtle monotony of their music, so full as it was of complex refrains and movements elaborately repeated, produced in the mind of the lad, as he passed from chapter to chapter, a form of reverie, a malady of dreaming, that made him unconscious of the falling day and creeping shadows.

Cloudless, and pierced by one solitary star, a copper-green sky gleamed through the windows. He read on by its wan light till he could read no more. Then, after his valet had reminded him several times of the lateness of the hour, he got up, and going into the next room, placed the book on the little Florentine table that always stood at his bedside and began to dress for dinner. “I am so sorry, Harry,” he cried, “but really it is entirely your fault. That book you sent me so fascinated me that I forgot how the time was going.” For years, Dorian Gray could not free himself from the influence of this book. Or perhaps it would be more accurate to say that he never sought to free himself from it. He procured from Paris no less than nine large-paper copies of the first edition, and had them bound in different colours, so that they might suit his various moods and the changing fancies of a nature over which he seemed, at times, to have almost entirely lost control. The hero, the wonderful young Parisian in whom the romantic and the scientific temperaments were so strangely blended, became to him a kind of prefiguring type of himself. And, indeed, the whole book seemed to him to contain the story of his own life, written before he had lived it.

In one point he was more fortunate than the novel’s fantastic hero. He never knew—never, indeed, had any cause to know—that somewhat grotesque dread of mirrors, and polished metal surfaces, and still water which came upon the young Parisian so early in his life, and was occasioned by the sudden decay of a beau that had once, apparently, been so remarkable. It was with an almost cruel joy—and perhaps in nearly every joy, as certainly in every pleasure, cruelty has its place—that he used to read the latter part of the book, with its really tragic, if somewhat overemphasized, account of the sorrow and despair of one who had himself lost what in others, and the world, he had most dearly valued. For the wonderful beauty that had so fascinated Basil Hallward, and many others besides him, seemed never to leave him. Even those who had heard the most evil things against him—and from time to time strange rumours about his mode of life crept through London and became the chatter of the clubs—could not believe anything to his dishonour when they saw him. He had always the look of one who had kept himself unspotted from the world. Men who talked grossly became silent when Dorian Gray entered the room. There was something in the purity of his face that rebuked them. His mere presence seemed to recall to them the memory of the innocence that they had tarnished. They wondered how one so charming and graceful as he was could have escaped the stain of an age that was at once sordid and sensual.

Often, on returning home from one of those mysterious and prolonged absences that gave rise to such strange conjecture among those who were his friends, or thought that they were so, he himself would creep upstairs to the locked room, open the door with the key that never left him now, and stand, with a mirror, in front of the portrait that Basil Hallward had painted of him, looking now at the evil and aging face on the canvas, and now at the fair young face that laughed back at him from the polished glass. The very sharpness of the contrast used to quicken his sense of pleasure. He grew more and more enamoured of his own beauty, more and more interested in the corruption of his own soul. He would examine with minute care, and sometimes with a monstrous and terrible delight, the hideous lines that seared the wrinkling forehead or crawled around the heavy sensual mouth, wondering sometimes which were the more horrible, the signs of sin or the signs of age. He would place his white hands beside the coarse bloated hands of the picture, and smile. He mocked the misshapen body and the failing limbs.

There were moments, indeed, at night, when, lying sleepless in his own delicately scented chamber, or in the sordid room of the little ill-famed tavern near the docks which, under an assumed name and in disguise, it was his habit to frequent, he would think of the ruin he had brought upon his soul with a pity that was all the more poignant because it was purely selfish. But moments such as these were rare. That curiosity about life which Lord Henry had first stirred in him, as they sat together in the garden of their friend, seemed to increase with gratification. The more he knew, the more he desired to know. He had mad hungers that grew more ravenous as he fed them. Yet he was not really reckless, at any rate in his relations to society. Once or twice every month during the winter, and on each Wednesday evening while the season lasted, he would throw open to the world his beautiful house and have the most celebrated musicians of the day to charm his guests with the wonders of their art. His little dinners, in the settling of which Lord Henry always assisted him, were noted as much for the careful selection and placing of those invited, as for the exquisite taste shown in the decoration of the table, with its subtle symphonic arrangements of exotic flowers, and embroidered cloths, and antique plate of gold and silver. Indeed, there were many, especially among the very young men, who saw, or fancied that they saw, in Dorian Gray the true realization of a type of which they had often dreamed in Eton or Oxford days, a type that was to combine something of the real culture of the scholar with all the grace and distinction and perfect manner of a citizen of the world. To them he seemed to be of the company of those whom Dante describes as having sought to “make themselves perfect by the worship of beauty.” Like Gautier, he was one for whom “the visible world existed.”

And, certainly, to him life itself was the first, the greatest, of the arts, and for it all the other arts seemed to be but a preparation. Fashion, by which what is really fantastic becomes for a moment universal, and dandyism, which, in its own way, is an attempt to assert the absolute modernity of beauty, had, of course, their fascination for him. His mode of dressing, and the particular styles that from time to time he affected, had their marked influence on the young exquisites of the Mayfair balls and Pall Mall club windows, who copied him in everything that he did, and tried to reproduce the accidental charm of his graceful, though to him only half-serious, fopperies. For, while he was but too ready to accept the position that was almost immediately offered to him on his coming of age, and found, indeed, a subtle pleasure in the thought that he might really become to the London of his own day what to imperial Neronian Rome the author of the Satyricon once had been, yet in his inmost heart he desired to be something more than a mere _arbiter elegantiarum_, to be consulted on the wearing of a jewel, or the knotting of a necktie, or the conduct of a cane. He sought to elaborate some new scheme of life that would have its reasoned philosophy and its ordered principles, and find in the spiritualizing of the senses its highest realization.

The worship of the senses has often, and with much justice, been decried, men feeling a natural instinct of terror about passions and sensations that seem stronger than themselves, and that they are conscious of sharing with the less highly organized forms of existence. But it appeared to Dorian Gray that the true nature of the senses had never been understood, and that they had remained savage and animal merely because the world had sought to starve them into submission or to kill them by pain, instead of aiming at making them elements of a new spirituality, of which a fine instinct for beauty was to be the dominant characteristic. As he looked back upon man moving through history, he was haunted by a feeling of loss. So much had been surrendered! and to such little purpose! There had been mad wilful rejections, monstrous forms of self-torture and self-denial, whose origin was fear and whose result was a degradation infinitely more terrible than that fancied degradation from which, in their ignorance, they had sought to escape; Nature, in her wonderful irony, driving out the anchorite to feed with the wild animals of the desert and giving to the hermit the beasts of the field as his companions.

Yes: there was to be, as Lord Henry had prophesied, a new Hedonism that was to recreate life and to save it from that harsh uncomely puritanism that is having, in our own day, its curious revival. It was to have its service of the intellect, certainly, yet it was never to accept any theory or system that would involve the sacrifice of any mode of passionate experience. Its aim, indeed, was to be experience itself, and not the fruits of experience, sweet or bitter as they might be. Of the asceticism that deadens the senses, as of the vulgar profligacy that dulls them, it was to know nothing. But it was to teach man to concentrate himself upon the moments of a life that is itself but a moment. There are few of us who have not sometimes wakened before dawn, either after one of those dreamless nights that make us almost enamoured of death, or one of those nights of horror and misshapen joy, when through the chambers of the brain sweep phantoms more terrible than reality itself, and instinct with that vivid life that lurks in all grotesques, and that lends to Gothic art its enduring vitality, this art being, one might fancy, especially the art of those whose minds have been troubled with the malady of reverie. Gradually white fingers creep through the curtains, and they appear to tremble. In black fantastic shapes, dumb shadows crawl into the corners of the room and crouch there. Outside, there is the stirring of birds among the leaves, or the sound of men going forth to their work, or the sigh and sob of the wind coming down from the hills and wandering round the silent house, as though it feared to wake the sleepers and yet must needs call forth sleep from her purple cave. Veil after veil of thin dusky gauze is lifted, and by degrees the forms and colours of things are restored to them, and we watch the dawn remaking the world in its antique pattern. The wan mirrors get back their mimic life. The flameless tapers stand where we had left them, and beside them lies the half-cut book that we had been studying, or the wired flower that we had worn at the ball, or the letter that we had been afraid to read, or that we had read too often. Nothing seems to us changed. Out of the unreal shadows of the night comes back the real life that we had known. We have to resume it where we had left off, and there steals over us a terrible sense of the necessity for the continuance of energy in the same wearisome round of stereotyped habits, or a wild longing, it may be, that our eyelids might open some morning upon a world that had been refashioned anew in the darkness for our pleasure, a world in which things would have fresh shapes and colours, and be changed, or have other secrets, a world in which the past would have little or no place, or survive, at any rate, in no conscious form of obligation or regret, the remembrance even of joy having its bitterness and the memories of pleasure their pain.

It was the creation of such worlds as these that seemed to Dorian Gray to be the true object, or amongst the true objects, of life; and in his search for sensations that would be at once new and delightful, and possess that element of strangeness that is so essential to romance, he would often adopt certain modes of thought that he knew to be really alien to his nature, abandon himself to their subtle influences, and then, having, as it were, caught their colour and satisfied his intellectual curiosity, leave them with that curious indifference that is not incompatible with a real ardour of temperament, and that, indeed, according to certain modern psychologists, is often a condition of it. It was rumoured of him once that he was about to join the Roman Catholic communion, and certainly the Roman ritual had always a great attraction for him. The daily sacrifice, more awful really than all the sacrifices of the antique world, stirred him as much by its superb rejection of the evidence of the senses as by the primitive simplicity of its elements and the eternal pathos of the human tragedy that it sought to symbolize. He loved to kneel down on the cold marble pavement and watch the priest, in his stiff flowered dalmatic, slowly and with white hands moving aside the veil of the tabernacle, or raising aloft the jewelled, lantern-shaped monstrance with that pallid wafer that at times, one would fain think, is indeed the “_panis cælestis_,” the bread of angels, or, robed in the garments of the Passion of Christ, breaking the Host into the chalice and smiting his breast for his sins. The fuming censers that the grave boys, in their lace and scarlet, tossed into the air like great gilt flowers had their subtle fascination for him. As he passed out, he used to look with wonder at the black confessionals and long to sit in the dim shadow of one of them and listen to men and women whispering through the worn grating the true story of their lives.

But he never fell into the error of arresting his intellectual development by any formal acceptance of creed or system, or of mistaking, for a house in which to live, an inn that is but suitable for the sojourn of a night, or for a few hours of a night in which there are no stars and the moon is in travail. Mysticism, with its marvellous power of making common things strange to us, and the subtle antinomianism that always seems to accompany it, moved him for a season; and for a season he inclined to the materialistic doctrines of the _Darwinismus_ movement in Germany, and found a curious pleasure in tracing the thoughts and passions of men to some pearly cell in the brain, or some white nerve in the body, delighting in the conception of the absolute dependence of the spirit on certain physical conditions, morbid or healthy, normal or diseased. Yet, as has been said of him before, no theory of life seemed to him to be of any importance compared with life itself. He felt keenly conscious of how barren all intellectual speculation is when separated from action and experiment. He knew that the senses, no less than the soul, have their spiritual mysteries to reveal.

And so he would now study perfumes and the secrets of their manufacture, distilling heavily scented oils and burning odorous gums from the East. He saw that there was no mood of the mind that had not its counterpart in the sensuous life, and set himself to discover their true relations, wondering what there was in frankincense that made one mystical, and in ambergris that stirred one’s passions, and in violets that woke the memory of dead romances, and in musk that troubled the brain, and in champak that stained the imagination; and seeking often to elaborate a real psychology of perfumes, and to estimate the several influences of sweet-smelling roots and scented, pollen-laden flowers; of aromatic balms and of dark and fragrant woods; of spikenard, that sickens; of hovenia, that makes men mad; and of aloes, that are said to be able to expel melancholy from the soul. On one occasion he took up the study of jewels, and appeared at a costume ball as Anne de Joyeuse, Admiral of France, in a dress covered with five hundred and sixty pearls. This taste enthralled him for years, and, indeed, may be said never to have left him. He would often spend a whole day settling and resettling in their cases the various stones that he had collected, such as the olive-green chrysoberyl that turns red by lamplight, the cymophane with its wirelike line of silver, the pistachio-coloured peridot, rose-pink and wine-yellow topazes, carbuncles of fiery scarlet with tremulous, four-rayed stars, flame-red cinnamon-stones, orange and violet spinels, and amethysts with their alternate layers of ruby and sapphire. He loved the red gold of the sunstone, and the moonstone’s pearly whiteness, and the broken rainbow of the milky opal. He procured from Amsterdam three emeralds of extraordinary size and richness of colour, and had a turquoise _de la vieille roche_ that was the envy of all the connoisseurs.

He discovered wonderful stories, also, about jewels. In Alphonso’s Clericalis Disciplina a serpent was mentioned with eyes of real jacinth, and in the romantic history of Alexander, the Conqueror of Emathia was said to have found in the vale of Jordan snakes “with collars of real emeralds growing on their backs.” There was a gem in the brain of the dragon, Philostratus told us, and “by the exhibition of golden letters and a scarlet robe” the monster could be thrown into a magical sleep and slain. According to the great alchemist, Pierre de Boniface, the diamond rendered a man invisible, and the agate of India made him eloquent. The cornelian appeased anger, and the hyacinth provoked sleep, and the amethyst drove away the fumes of wine. The garnet cast out demons, and the hydropicus deprived the moon of her colour. The selenite waxed and waned with the moon, and the meloceus, that discovers thieves, could be affected only by the blood of kids. Leonardus Camillus had seen a white stone taken from the brain of a newly killed toad, that was a certain antidote against poison. The bezoar, that was found in the heart of the Arabian deer, was a charm that could cure the plague. In the nests of Arabian birds was the aspilates, that, according to Democritus, kept the wearer from any danger by fire.

The King of Ceilan rode through his city with a large ruby in his hand, as the ceremony of his coronation. The gates of the palace of John the Priest were “made of sardius, with the horn of the horned snake inwrought, so that no man might bring poison within.” Over the gable were “two golden apples, in which were two carbuncles,” so that the gold might shine by day and the carbuncles by night. In Lodge’s strange romance ‘A Margarite of America’, it was stated that in the chamber of the queen one could behold “all the chaste ladies of the world, inchased out of silver, looking through fair mirrours of chrysolites, carbuncles, sapphires, and greene emeraults.” Marco Polo had seen the inhabitants of Zipangu place rose-coloured pearls in the mouths of the dead. A sea-monster had been enamoured of the pearl that the diver brought to King Perozes, and had slain the thief, and mourned for seven moons over its loss. When the Huns lured the king into the great pit, he flung it away—Procopius tells the story—nor was it ever found again, though the Emperor Anastasius offered five hundred-weight of gold pieces for it. The King of Malabar had shown to a certain Venetian a rosary of three hundred and four pearls, one for every god that he worshipped.

When the Duke de Valentinois, son of Alexander VI., visited Louis XII. of France, his horse was loaded with gold leaves, according to Brantome, and his cap had double rows of rubies that threw out a great light. Charles of England had ridden in stirrups hung with four hundred and twenty-one diamonds. Richard II had a coat, valued at thirty thousand marks, which was covered with balas rubies. Hall described Henry VIII., on his way to the Tower previous to his coronation, as wearing “a jacket of raised gold, the placard embroidered with diamonds and other rich stones, and a great bauderike about his neck of large balasses.” The favourites of James I wore ear-rings of emeralds set in gold filigrane. Edward II gave to Piers Gaveston a suit of red-gold armour studded with jacinths, a collar of gold roses set with turquoise-stones, and a skull-cap _parsemé_ with pearls. Henry II. wore jewelled gloves reaching to the elbow, and had a hawk-glove sewn with twelve rubies and fifty-two great orients. The ducal hat of Charles the Rash, the last Duke of Burgundy of his race, was hung with pear-shaped pearls and studded with sapphires.

And so, for a whole year, he sought to accumulate the most exquisite specimens that he could find of textile and embroidered work, getting the dainty Delhi muslins, finely wrought with gold-thread palmates and stitched over with iridescent beetles’ wings; the Dacca gauzes, that from their transparency are known in the East as “woven air,” and “running water,” and “evening dew”; strange figured cloths from Java; elaborate yellow Chinese hangings; books bound in tawny satins or fair blue silks and wrought with _fleurs-de-lis_, birds and images; veils of _lacis_ worked in Hungary point; Sicilian brocades and stiff Spanish velvets; Georgian work, with its gilt coins, and Japanese _Foukousas_, with their green-toned golds and their marvellously plumaged birds. He had a special passion, also, for ecclesiastical vestments, as indeed he had for everything connected with the service of the Church. In the long cedar chests that lined the west gallery of his house, he had stored away many rare and beautiful specimens of what is really the raiment of the Bride of Christ, who must wear purple and jewels and fine linen that she may hide the pallid macerated body that is worn by the suffering that she seeks for and wounded by self-inflicted pain. He possessed a gorgeous cope of crimson silk and gold-thread damask, figured with a repeating pattern of golden pomegranates set in six-petalled formal blossoms, beyond which on either side was the pine-apple device wrought in seed-pearls. The orphreys were divided into panels representing scenes from the life of the Virgin, and the coronation of the Virgin was figured in coloured silks upon the hood. This was Italian work of the fifteenth century. Another cope was of green velvet, embroidered with heart-shaped groups of acanthus-leaves, from which spread long-stemmed white blossoms, the details of which were picked out with silver thread and coloured crystals. The morse bore a seraph’s head in gold-thread raised work. The orphreys were woven in a diaper of red and gold silk, and were starred with medallions of many saints and martyrs, among whom was St. Sebastian. He had chasubles, also, of amber-coloured silk, and blue silk and gold brocade, and yellow silk damask and cloth of gold, figured with representations of the Passion and Crucifixion of Christ, and embroidered with lions and peacocks and other emblems; dalmatics of white satin and pink silk damask, decorated with tulips and dolphins and _fleurs-de-lis_; altar frontals of crimson velvet and blue linen; and many corporals, chalice-veils, and sudaria. In the mystic offices to which such things were put, there was something that quickened his imagination.

For these treasures, and everything that he collected in his lovely house, were to be to him means of forgetfulness, modes by which he could escape, for a season, from the fear that seemed to him at times to be almost too great to be borne. Upon the walls of the lonely locked room where he had spent so much of his boyhood, he had hung with his own hands the terrible portrait whose changing features showed him the real degradation of his life, and in front of it had draped the purple-and-gold pall as a curtain. For weeks he would not go there, would forget the hideous painted thing, and get back his light heart, his wonderful joyousness, his passionate absorption in mere existence. Then, suddenly, some night he would creep out of the house, go down to dreadful places near Blue Gate Fields, and stay there, day after day, until he was driven away. On his return he would sit in front of the picture, sometimes loathing it and himself, but filled, at other times, with that pride of individualism that is half the fascination of sin, and smiling with secret pleasure at the misshapen shadow that had to bear the burden that should have been his own.

After a few years he could not endure to be long out of England, and gave up the villa that he had shared at Trouville with Lord Henry, as well as the little white walled-in house at Algiers where they had more than once spent the winter. He hated to be separated from the picture that was such a part of his life, and was also afraid that during his absence some one might gain access to the room, in spite of the elaborate bars that he had caused to be placed upon the door. He was quite conscious that this would tell them nothing. It was true that the portrait still preserved, under all the foulness and ugliness of the face, its marked likeness to himself; but what could they learn from that? He would laugh at any one who tried to taunt him. He had not painted it. What was it to him how vile and full of shame it looked? Even if he told them, would they believe it? Yet he was afraid. Sometimes when he was down at his great house in Nottinghamshire, entertaining the fashionable young men of his own rank who were his chief companions, and astounding the county by the wanton luxury and gorgeous splendour of his mode of life, he would suddenly leave his guests and rush back to town to see that the door had not been tampered with and that the picture was still there. What if it should be stolen? The mere thought made him cold with horror. Surely the world would know his secret then. Perhaps the world already suspected it.

For, while he fascinated many, there were not a few who distrusted him. He was very nearly blackballed at a West End club of which his birth and social position fully entitled him to become a member, and it was said that on one occasion, when he was brought by a friend into the smoking-room of the Churchill, the Duke of Berwick and another gentleman got up in a marked manner and went out. Curious stories became current about him after he had passed his twenty-fifth year. It was rumoured that he had been seen brawling with foreign sailors in a low den in the distant parts of Whitechapel, and that he consorted with thieves and coiners and knew the mysteries of their trade. His extraordinary absences became notorious, and, when he used to reappear again in society, men would whisper to each other in corners, or pass him with a sneer, or look at him with cold searching eyes, as though they were determined to discover his secret. Of such insolences and attempted slights he, of course, took no notice, and in the opinion of most people his frank debonair manner, his charming boyish smile, and the infinite grace of that wonderful youth that seemed never to leave him, were in themselves a sufficient answer to the calumnies, for so they termed them, that were circulated about him. It was remarked, however, that some of those who had been most intimate with him appeared, after a time, to shun him. Women who had wildly adored him, and for his sake had braved all social censure and set convention at defiance, were seen to grow pallid with shame or horror if Dorian Gray entered the room.

Yet these whispered scandals only increased in the eyes of many his strange and dangerous charm. His great wealth was a certain element of security. Society—civilized society, at least—is never very ready to believe anything to the detriment of those who are both rich and fascinating. It feels instinctively that manners are of more importance than morals, and, in its opinion, the highest respectability is of much less value than the possession of a good _chef_. And, after all, it is a very poor consolation to be told that the man who has given one a bad dinner, or poor wine, is irreproachable in his private life. Even the cardinal virtues cannot atone for half-cold _entrées_, as Lord Henry remarked once, in a discussion on the subject, and there is possibly a good deal to be said for his view. For the canons of good society are, or should be, the same as the canons of art. Form is absolutely essential to it. It should have the dignity of a ceremony, as well as its unreality, and should combine the insincere character of a romantic play with the wit and beauty that make such plays delightful to us. Is insincerity such a terrible thing? I think not. It is merely a method by which we can multiply our personalities.

Yet one had ancestors in literature as well as in one’s own race, nearer perhaps in type and temperament, many of them, and certainly with an influence of which one was more absolutely conscious. There were times when it appeared to Dorian Gray that the whole of history was merely the record of his own life, not as he had lived it in act and circumstance, but as his imagination had created it for him, as it had been in his brain and in his passions. He felt that he had known them all, those strange terrible figures that had passed across the stage of the world and made sin so marvellous and evil so full of subtlety. It seemed to him that in some mysterious way their lives had been his own. The hero of the wonderful novel that had so influenced his life had himself known this curious fancy. In the seventh chapter he tells how, crowned with laurel, lest lightning might strike him, he had sat, as Tiberius, in a garden at Capri, reading the shameful books of Elephantis, while dwarfs and peacocks strutted round him and the flute-player mocked the swinger of the censer; and, as Caligula, had caroused with the green-shirted jockeys in their stables and supped in an ivory manger with a jewel-frontleted horse; and, as Domitian, had wandered through a corridor lined with marble mirrors, looking round with haggard eyes for the reflection of the dagger that was to end his days, and sick with that ennui, that terrible _tædium vitæ_, that comes on those to whom life denies nothing; and had peered through a clear emerald at the red shambles of the circus and then, in a litter of pearl and purple drawn by silver-shod mules, been carried through the Street of Pomegranates to a House of Gold and heard men cry on Nero Caesar as he passed by; and, as Elagabalus, had painted his face with colours, and plied the distaff among the women, and brought the Moon from Carthage and given her in mystic marriage to the Sun.

There was a horrible fascination in them all. He saw them at night, and they troubled his imagination in the day. The Renaissance knew of strange manners of poisoning—poisoning by a helmet and a lighted torch, by an embroidered glove and a jewelled fan, by a gilded pomander and by an amber chain. Dorian Gray had been poisoned by a book. There were moments when he looked on evil simply as a mode through which he could realize his conception of the beautiful. He was walking home about eleven o’clock from Lord Henry’s, where he had been dining, and was wrapped in heavy furs, as the night was cold and foggy. At the corner of Grosvenor Square and South Audley Street, a man passed him in the mist, walking very fast and with the collar of his grey ulster turned up. He had a bag in his hand. Dorian recognized him. It was Basil Hallward. A strange sense of fear, for which he could not account, came over him. He made no sign of recognition and went on quickly in the direction of his own house.

“Dorian! What an extraordinary piece of luck! I have been waiting for you in your library ever since nine o’clock. Finally I took pity on your tired servant and told him to go to bed, as he let me out. I am off to Paris by the midnight train, and I particularly wanted to see you before I left. I thought it was you, or rather your fur coat, as you passed me. But I wasn’t quite sure. Didn’t you recognize me?” “In this fog, my dear Basil? Why, I can’t even recognize Grosvenor Square. I believe my house is somewhere about here, but I don’t feel at all certain about it. I am sorry you are going away, as I have not seen you for ages. But I suppose you will be back soon?” “No: I am going to be out of England for six months. I intend to take a studio in Paris and shut myself up till I have finished a great picture I have in my head. However, it wasn’t about myself I wanted to talk. Here we are at your door. Let me come in for a moment. I have something to say to you.”

The lamplight struggled out through the fog, and Hallward looked at his watch. “I have heaps of time,” he answered. “The train doesn’t go till twelve-fifteen, and it is only just eleven. In fact, I was on my way to the club to look for you, when I met you. You see, I shan’t have any delay about luggage, as I have sent on my heavy things. All I have with me is in this bag, and I can easily get to Victoria in twenty minutes.” Dorian looked at him and smiled. “What a way for a fashionable painter to travel! A Gladstone bag and an ulster! Come in, or the fog will get into the house. And mind you don’t talk about anything serious. Nothing is serious nowadays. At least nothing should be.” Hallward shook his head, as he entered, and followed Dorian into the library. There was a bright wood fire blazing in the large open hearth. The lamps were lit, and an open Dutch silver spirit-case stood, with some siphons of soda-water and large cut-glass tumblers, on a little marqueterie table.

“You see your servant made me quite at home, Dorian. He gave me everything I wanted, including your best gold-tipped cigarettes. He is a most hospitable creature. I like him much better than the Frenchman you used to have. What has become of the Frenchman, by the bye?” Dorian shrugged his shoulders. “I believe he married Lady Radley’s maid, and has established her in Paris as an English dressmaker. _Anglomanie_ is very fashionable over there now, I hear. It seems silly of the French, doesn’t it? But—do you know?—he was not at all a bad servant. I never liked him, but I had nothing to complain about. One often imagines things that are quite absurd. He was really very devoted to me and seemed quite sorry when he went away. Have another brandy-and-soda? Or would you like hock-and-seltzer? I always take hock-and-seltzer myself. There is sure to be some in the next room.” “Thanks, I won’t have anything more,” said the painter, taking his cap and coat off and throwing them on the bag that he had placed in the corner. “And now, my dear fellow, I want to speak to you seriously. Don’t frown like that. You make it so much more difficult for me.”

“What is it all about?” cried Dorian in his petulant way, flinging himself down on the sofa. “I hope it is not about myself. I am tired of myself to-night. I should like to be somebody else.” “It is not much to ask of you, Dorian, and it is entirely for your own sake that I am speaking. I think it right that you should know that the most dreadful things are being said against you in London.” “I don’t wish to know anything about them. I love scandals about other people, but scandals about myself don’t interest me. They have not got the charm of novelty.” “Stop, Basil. You are talking about things of which you know nothing,” said Dorian Gray, biting his lip, and with a note of infinite contempt in his voice. “You ask me why Berwick leaves a room when I enter it. It is because I know everything about his life, not because he knows anything about mine. With such blood as he has in his veins, how could his record be clean? You ask me about Henry Ashton and young Perth. Did I teach the one his vices, and the other his debauchery? If Kent’s silly son takes his wife from the streets, what is that to me? If Adrian Singleton writes his friend’s name across a bill, am I his keeper? I know how people chatter in England. The middle classes air their moral prejudices over their gross dinner-tables, and whisper about what they call the profligacies of their betters in order to try and pretend that they are in smart society and on intimate terms with the people they slander. In this country, it is enough for a man to have distinction and brains for every common tongue to wag against him. And what sort of lives do these people, who pose as being moral, lead themselves? My dear fellow, you forget that we are in the native land of the hypocrite.”

“Dorian,” cried Hallward, “that is not the question. England is bad enough I know, and English society is all wrong. That is the reason why I want you to be fine. You have not been fine. One has a right to judge of a man by the effect he has over his friends. Yours seem to lose all sense of honour, of goodness, of purity. You have filled them with a madness for pleasure. They have gone down into the depths. You led them there. Yes: you led them there, and yet you can smile, as you are smiling now. And there is worse behind. I know you and Harry are inseparable. Surely for that reason, if for none other, you should not have made his sister’s name a by-word.” “I must speak, and you must listen. You shall listen. When you met Lady Gwendolen, not a breath of scandal had ever touched her. Is there a single decent woman in London now who would drive with her in the park? Why, even her children are not allowed to live with her. Then there are other stories—stories that you have been seen creeping at dawn out of dreadful houses and slinking in disguise into the foulest dens in London. Are they true? Can they be true? When I first heard them, I laughed. I hear them now, and they make me shudder. What about your country-house and the life that is led there? Dorian, you don’t know what is said about you. I won’t tell you that I don’t want to preach to you. I remember Harry saying once that every man who turned himself into an amateur curate for the moment always began by saying that, and then proceeded to break his word. I do want to preach to you. I want you to lead such a life as will make the world respect you. I want you to have a clean name and a fair record. I want you to get rid of the dreadful people you associate with. Don’t shrug your shoulders like that. Don’t be so indifferent. You have a wonderful influence. Let it be for good, not for evil. They say that you corrupt every one with whom you become intimate, and that it is quite sufficient for you to enter a house for shame of some kind to follow after. I don’t know whether it is so or not. How should I know? But it is said of you. I am told things that it seems impossible to doubt. Lord Gloucester was one of my greatest friends at Oxford. He showed me a letter that his wife had written to him when she was dying alone in her villa at Mentone. Your name was implicated in the most terrible confession I ever read. I told him that it was absurd—that I knew you thoroughly, and that you were incapable of anything of the kind. Know you? I wonder do I know you? Before I could answer that, I should have to see your soul.”

A bitter laugh of mockery broke from the lips of the younger man. “You shall see it yourself, to-night!” he cried, seizing a lamp from the table. “Come: it is your own handiwork. Why shouldn’t you look at it? You can tell the world all about it afterwards, if you choose. Nobody would believe you. If they did believe you, they would like me all the better for it. I know the age better than you do, though you will prate about it so tediously. Come, I tell you. You have chattered enough about corruption. Now you shall look on it face to face.” There was the madness of pride in every word he uttered. He stamped his foot upon the ground in his boyish insolent manner. He felt a terrible joy at the thought that some one else was to share his secret, and that the man who had painted the portrait that was the origin of all his shame was to be burdened for the rest of his life with the hideous memory of what he had done.

“Yes,” he continued, coming closer to him and looking steadfastly into his stern eyes, “I shall show you my soul. You shall see the thing that you fancy only God can see.” A twisted flash of pain shot across the painter’s face. He paused for a moment, and a wild feeling of pity came over him. After all, what right had he to pry into the life of Dorian Gray? If he had done a tithe of what was rumoured about him, how much he must have suffered! Then he straightened himself up, and walked over to the fire-place, and stood there, looking at the burning logs with their frostlike ashes and their throbbing cores of flame. He turned round. “What I have to say is this,” he cried. “You must give me some answer to these horrible charges that are made against you. If you tell me that they are absolutely untrue from beginning to end, I shall believe you. Deny them, Dorian, deny them! Can’t you see what I am going through? My God! don’t tell me that you are bad, and corrupt, and shameful.”

Dorian Gray smiled. There was a curl of contempt in his lips. “Come upstairs, Basil,” he said quietly. “I keep a diary of my life from day to day, and it never leaves the room in which it is written. I shall show it to you if you come with me.” “I shall come with you, Dorian, if you wish it. I see I have missed my train. That makes no matter. I can go to-morrow. But don’t ask me to read anything to-night. All I want is a plain answer to my question.” He passed out of the room and began the ascent, Basil Hallward following close behind. They walked softly, as men do instinctively at night. The lamp cast fantastic shadows on the wall and staircase. A rising wind made some of the windows rattle. When they reached the top landing, Dorian set the lamp down on the floor, and taking out the key, turned it in the lock. “You insist on knowing, Basil?” he asked in a low voice. “I am delighted,” he answered, smiling. Then he added, somewhat harshly, “You are the one man in the world who is entitled to know everything about me. You have had more to do with my life than you think”; and, taking up the lamp, he opened the door and went in. A cold current of air passed them, and the light shot up for a moment in a flame of murky orange. He shuddered. “Shut the door behind you,” he whispered, as he placed the lamp on the table.

Hallward glanced round him with a puzzled expression. The room looked as if it had not been lived in for years. A faded Flemish tapestry, a curtained picture, an old Italian _cassone_, and an almost empty book-case—that was all that it seemed to contain, besides a chair and a table. As Dorian Gray was lighting a half-burned candle that was standing on the mantelshelf, he saw that the whole place was covered with dust and that the carpet was in holes. A mouse ran scuffling behind the wainscoting. There was a damp odour of mildew. An exclamation of horror broke from the painter’s lips as he saw in the dim light the hideous face on the canvas grinning at him. There was something in its expression that filled him with disgust and loathing. Good heavens! it was Dorian Gray’s own face that he was looking at! The horror, whatever it was, had not yet entirely spoiled that marvellous beauty. There was still some gold in the thinning hair and some scarlet on the sensual mouth. The sodden eyes had kept something of the loveliness of their blue, the noble curves had not yet completely passed away from chiselled nostrils and from plastic throat. Yes, it was Dorian himself. But who had done it? He seemed to recognize his own brushwork, and the frame was his own design. The idea was monstrous, yet he felt afraid. He seized the lighted candle, and held it to the picture. In the left-hand corner was his own name, traced in long letters of bright vermilion.

It was some foul parody, some infamous ignoble satire. He had never done that. Still, it was his own picture. He knew it, and he felt as if his blood had changed in a moment from fire to sluggish ice. His own picture! What did it mean? Why had it altered? He turned and looked at Dorian Gray with the eyes of a sick man. His mouth twitched, and his parched tongue seemed unable to articulate. He passed his hand across his forehead. It was dank with clammy sweat. The young man was leaning against the mantelshelf, watching him with that strange expression that one sees on the faces of those who are absorbed in a play when some great artist is acting. There was neither real sorrow in it nor real joy. There was simply the passion of the spectator, with perhaps a flicker of triumph in his eyes. He had taken the flower out of his coat, and was smelling it, or pretending to do so. “Years ago, when I was a boy,” said Dorian Gray, crushing the flower in his hand, “you met me, flattered me, and taught me to be vain of my good looks. One day you introduced me to a friend of yours, who explained to me the wonder of youth, and you finished a portrait of me that revealed to me the wonder of beauty. In a mad moment that, even now, I don’t know whether I regret or not, I made a wish, perhaps you would call it a prayer....”

“I remember it! Oh, how well I remember it! No! the thing is impossible. The room is damp. Mildew has got into the canvas. The paints I used had some wretched mineral poison in them. I tell you the thing is impossible.” Hallward turned again to the portrait and gazed at it. “My God! If it is true,” he exclaimed, “and this is what you have done with your life, why, you must be worse even than those who talk against you fancy you to be!” He held the light up again to the canvas and examined it. The surface seemed to be quite undisturbed and as he had left it. It was from within, apparently, that the foulness and horror had come. Through some strange quickening of inner life the leprosies of sin were slowly eating the thing away. The rotting of a corpse in a watery grave was not so fearful. His hand shook, and the candle fell from its socket on the floor and lay there sputtering. He placed his foot on it and put it out. Then he flung himself into the rickety chair that was standing by the table and buried his face in his hands.

“Good God, Dorian, what a lesson! What an awful lesson!” There was no answer, but he could hear the young man sobbing at the window. “Pray, Dorian, pray,” he murmured. “What is it that one was taught to say in one’s boyhood? ‘Lead us not into temptation. Forgive us our sins. Wash away our iniquities.’ Let us say that together. The prayer of your pride has been answered. The prayer of your repentance will be answered also. I worshipped you too much. I am punished for it. You worshipped yourself too much. We are both punished.” “It is never too late, Dorian. Let us kneel down and try if we cannot remember a prayer. Isn’t there a verse somewhere, ‘Though your sins be as scarlet, yet I will make them as white as snow’?” Dorian Gray glanced at the picture, and suddenly an uncontrollable feeling of hatred for Basil Hallward came over him, as though it had been suggested to him by the image on the canvas, whispered into his ear by those grinning lips. The mad passions of a hunted animal stirred within him, and he loathed the man who was seated at the table, more than in his whole life he had ever loathed anything. He glanced wildly around. Something glimmered on the top of the painted chest that faced him. His eye fell on it. He knew what it was. It was a knife that he had brought up, some days before, to cut a piece of cord, and had forgotten to take away with him. He moved slowly towards it, passing Hallward as he did so. As soon as he got behind him, he seized it and turned round. Hallward stirred in his chair as if he was going to rise. He rushed at him and dug the knife into the great vein that is behind the ear, crushing the man’s head down on the table and stabbing again and again.

There was a stifled groan and the horrible sound of some one choking with blood. Three times the outstretched arms shot up convulsively, waving grotesque, stiff-fingered hands in the air. He stabbed him twice more, but the man did not move. Something began to trickle on the floor. He waited for a moment, still pressing the head down. Then he threw the knife on the table, and listened. He could hear nothing, but the drip, drip on the threadbare carpet. He opened the door and went out on the landing. The house was absolutely quiet. No one was about. For a few seconds he stood bending over the balustrade and peering down into the black seething well of darkness. Then he took out the key and returned to the room, locking himself in as he did so. The thing was still seated in the chair, straining over the table with bowed head, and humped back, and long fantastic arms. Had it not been for the red jagged tear in the neck and the clotted black pool that was slowly widening on the table, one would have said that the man was simply asleep.

How quickly it had all been done! He felt strangely calm, and walking over to the window, opened it and stepped out on the balcony. The wind had blown the fog away, and the sky was like a monstrous peacock’s tail, starred with myriads of golden eyes. He looked down and saw the policeman going his rounds and flashing the long beam of his lantern on the doors of the silent houses. The crimson spot of a prowling hansom gleamed at the corner and then vanished. A woman in a fluttering shawl was creeping slowly by the railings, staggering as she went. Now and then she stopped and peered back. Once, she began to sing in a hoarse voice. The policeman strolled over and said something to her. She stumbled away, laughing. A bitter blast swept across the square. The gas-lamps flickered and became blue, and the leafless trees shook their black iron branches to and fro. He shivered and went back, closing the window behind him. Having reached the door, he turned the key and opened it. He did not even glance at the murdered man. He felt that the secret of the whole thing was not to realize the situation. The friend who had painted the fatal portrait to which all his misery had been due had gone out of his life. That was enough.

Then he remembered the lamp. It was a rather curious one of Moorish workmanship, made of dull silver inlaid with arabesques of burnished steel, and studded with coarse turquoises. Perhaps it might be missed by his servant, and questions would be asked. He hesitated for a moment, then he turned back and took it from the table. He could not help seeing the dead thing. How still it was! How horribly white the long hands looked! It was like a dreadful wax image. Having locked the door behind him, he crept quietly downstairs. The woodwork creaked and seemed to cry out as if in pain. He stopped several times and waited. No: everything was still. It was merely the sound of his own footsteps. When he reached the library, he saw the bag and coat in the corner. They must be hidden away somewhere. He unlocked a secret press that was in the wainscoting, a press in which he kept his own curious disguises, and put them into it. He could easily burn them afterwards. Then he pulled out his watch. It was twenty minutes to two.

He sat down and began to think. Every year—every month, almost—men were strangled in England for what he had done. There had been a madness of murder in the air. Some red star had come too close to the earth.... And yet, what evidence was there against him? Basil Hallward had left the house at eleven. No one had seen him come in again. Most of the servants were at Selby Royal. His valet had gone to bed.... Paris! Yes. It was to Paris that Basil had gone, and by the midnight train, as he had intended. With his curious reserved habits, it would be months before any suspicions would be roused. Months! Everything could be destroyed long before then. A sudden thought struck him. He put on his fur coat and hat and went out into the hall. There he paused, hearing the slow heavy tread of the policeman on the pavement outside and seeing the flash of the bull’s-eye reflected in the window. He waited and held his breath. After a few moments he drew back the latch and slipped out, shutting the door very gently behind him. Then he began ringing the bell. In about five minutes his valet appeared, half-dressed and looking very drowsy.

Dorian Gray threw his hat and coat upon the table and passed into the library. For a quarter of an hour he walked up and down the room, biting his lip and thinking. Then he took down the Blue Book from one of the shelves and began to turn over the leaves. “Alan Campbell, 152, Hertford Street, Mayfair.” Yes; that was the man he wanted. At nine o’clock the next morning his servant came in with a cup of chocolate on a tray and opened the shutters. Dorian was sleeping quite peacefully, lying on his right side, with one hand underneath his cheek. He looked like a boy who had been tired out with play, or study. The man had to touch him twice on the shoulder before he woke, and as he opened his eyes a faint smile passed across his lips, as though he had been lost in some delightful dream. Yet he had not dreamed at all. His night had been untroubled by any images of pleasure or of pain. But youth smiles without any reason. It is one of its chiefest charms.

He turned round, and leaning upon his elbow, began to sip his chocolate. The mellow November sun came streaming into the room. The sky was bright, and there was a genial warmth in the air. It was almost like a morning in May. Gradually the events of the preceding night crept with silent, blood-stained feet into his brain and reconstructed themselves there with terrible distinctness. He winced at the memory of all that he had suffered, and for a moment the same curious feeling of loathing for Basil Hallward that had made him kill him as he sat in the chair came back to him, and he grew cold with passion. The dead man was still sitting there, too, and in the sunlight now. How horrible that was! Such hideous things were for the darkness, not for the day. He felt that if he brooded on what he had gone through he would sicken or grow mad. There were sins whose fascination was more in the memory than in the doing of them, strange triumphs that gratified the pride more than the passions, and gave to the intellect a quickened sense of joy, greater than any joy they brought, or could ever bring, to the senses. But this was not one of them. It was a thing to be driven out of the mind, to be drugged with poppies, to be strangled lest it might strangle one itself.

When the half-hour struck, he passed his hand across his forehead, and then got up hastily and dressed himself with even more than his usual care, giving a good deal of attention to the choice of his necktie and scarf-pin and changing his rings more than once. He spent a long time also over breakfast, tasting the various dishes, talking to his valet about some new liveries that he was thinking of getting made for the servants at Selby, and going through his correspondence. At some of the letters, he smiled. Three of them bored him. One he read several times over and then tore up with a slight look of annoyance in his face. “That awful thing, a woman’s memory!” as Lord Henry had once said. After he had drunk his cup of black coffee, he wiped his lips slowly with a napkin, motioned to his servant to wait, and going over to the table, sat down and wrote two letters. One he put in his pocket, the other he handed to the valet. As soon as he was alone, he lit a cigarette and began sketching upon a piece of paper, drawing first flowers and bits of architecture, and then human faces. Suddenly he remarked that every face that he drew seemed to have a fantastic likeness to Basil Hallward. He frowned, and getting up, went over to the book-case and took out a volume at hazard. He was determined that he would not think about what had happened until it became absolutely necessary that he should do so.

When he had stretched himself on the sofa, he looked at the title-page of the book. It was Gautier’s “Émaux et Camées”, Charpentier’s Japanese-paper edition, with the Jacquemart etching. The binding was of citron-green leather, with a design of gilt trellis-work and dotted pomegranates. It had been given to him by Adrian Singleton. As he turned over the pages, his eye fell on the poem about the hand of Lacenaire, the cold yellow hand “_du supplice encore mal lavée_,” with its downy red hairs and its “_doigts de faune_.” He glanced at his own white taper fingers, shuddering slightly in spite of himself, and passed on, till he came to those lovely stanzas upon Venice: How exquisite they were! As one read them, one seemed to be floating down the green water-ways of the pink and pearl city, seated in a black gondola with silver prow and trailing curtains. The mere lines looked to him like those straight lines of turquoise-blue that follow one as one pushes out to the Lido. The sudden flashes of colour reminded him of the gleam of the opal-and-iris-throated birds that flutter round the tall honeycombed Campanile, or stalk, with such stately grace, through the dim, dust-stained arcades. Leaning back with half-closed eyes, he kept saying over and over to himself:

The whole of Venice was in those two lines. He remembered the autumn that he had passed there, and a wonderful love that had stirred him to mad delightful follies. There was romance in every place. But Venice, like Oxford, had kept the background for romance, and, to the true romantic, background was everything, or almost everything. Basil had been with him part of the time, and had gone wild over Tintoret. Poor Basil! What a horrible way for a man to die! He sighed, and took up the volume again, and tried to forget. He read of the swallows that fly in and out of the little _café_ at Smyrna where the Hadjis sit counting their amber beads and the turbaned merchants smoke their long tasselled pipes and talk gravely to each other; he read of the Obelisk in the Place de la Concorde that weeps tears of granite in its lonely sunless exile and longs to be back by the hot, lotus-covered Nile, where there are Sphinxes, and rose-red ibises, and white vultures with gilded claws, and crocodiles with small beryl eyes that crawl over the green steaming mud; he began to brood over those verses which, drawing music from kiss-stained marble, tell of that curious statue that Gautier compares to a contralto voice, the “_monstre charmant_” that couches in the porphyry-room of the Louvre. But after a time the book fell from his hand. He grew nervous, and a horrible fit of terror came over him. What if Alan Campbell should be out of England? Days would elapse before he could come back. Perhaps he might refuse to come. What could he do then? Every moment was of vital importance.

They had been great friends once, five years before—almost inseparable, indeed. Then the intimacy had come suddenly to an end. When they met in society now, it was only Dorian Gray who smiled: Alan Campbell never did. He was an extremely clever young man, though he had no real appreciation of the visible arts, and whatever little sense of the beauty of poetry he possessed he had gained entirely from Dorian. His dominant intellectual passion was for science. At Cambridge he had spent a great deal of his time working in the laboratory, and had taken a good class in the Natural Science Tripos of his year. Indeed, he was still devoted to the study of chemistry, and had a laboratory of his own in which he used to shut himself up all day long, greatly to the annoyance of his mother, who had set her heart on his standing for Parliament and had a vague idea that a chemist was a person who made up prescriptions. He was an excellent musician, however, as well, and played both the violin and the piano better than most amateurs. In fact, it was music that had first brought him and Dorian Gray together—music and that indefinable attraction that Dorian seemed to be able to exercise whenever he wished—and, indeed, exercised often without being conscious of it. They had met at Lady Berkshire’s the night that Rubinstein played there, and after that used to be always seen together at the opera and wherever good music was going on. For eighteen months their intimacy lasted. Campbell was always either at Selby Royal or in Grosvenor Square. To him, as to many others, Dorian Gray was the type of everything that is wonderful and fascinating in life. Whether or not a quarrel had taken place between them no one ever knew. But suddenly people remarked that they scarcely spoke when they met and that Campbell seemed always to go away early from any party at which Dorian Gray was present. He had changed, too—was strangely melancholy at times, appeared almost to dislike hearing music, and would never himself play, giving as his excuse, when he was called upon, that he was so absorbed in science that he had no time left in which to practise. And this was certainly true. Every day he seemed to become more interested in biology, and his name appeared once or twice in some of the scientific reviews in connection with certain curious experiments.

This was the man Dorian Gray was waiting for. Every second he kept glancing at the clock. As the minutes went by he became horribly agitated. At last he got up and began to pace up and down the room, looking like a beautiful caged thing. He took long stealthy strides. His hands were curiously cold. The suspense became unbearable. Time seemed to him to be crawling with feet of lead, while he by monstrous winds was being swept towards the jagged edge of some black cleft of precipice. He knew what was waiting for him there; saw it, indeed, and, shuddering, crushed with dank hands his burning lids as though he would have robbed the very brain of sight and driven the eyeballs back into their cave. It was useless. The brain had its own food on which it battened, and the imagination, made grotesque by terror, twisted and distorted as a living thing by pain, danced like some foul puppet on a stand and grinned through moving masks. Then, suddenly, time stopped for him. Yes: that blind, slow-breathing thing crawled no more, and horrible thoughts, time being dead, raced nimbly on in front, and dragged a hideous future from its grave, and showed it to him. He stared at it. Its very horror made him stone.

The man bowed and retired. In a few moments, Alan Campbell walked in, looking very stern and rather pale, his pallor being intensified by his coal-black hair and dark eyebrows. “I had intended never to enter your house again, Gray. But you said it was a matter of life and death.” His voice was hard and cold. He spoke with slow deliberation. There was a look of contempt in the steady searching gaze that he turned on Dorian. He kept his hands in the pockets of his Astrakhan coat, and seemed not to have noticed the gesture with which he had been greeted. Campbell took a chair by the table, and Dorian sat opposite to him. The two men’s eyes met. In Dorian’s there was infinite pity. He knew that what he was going to do was dreadful. After a strained moment of silence, he leaned across and said, very quietly, but watching the effect of each word upon the face of him he had sent for, “Alan, in a locked room at the top of this house, a room to which nobody but myself has access, a dead man is seated at a table. He has been dead ten hours now. Don’t stir, and don’t look at me like that. Who the man is, why he died, how he died, are matters that do not concern you. What you have to do is this—”

“Stop, Gray. I don’t want to know anything further. Whether what you have told me is true or not true doesn’t concern me. I entirely decline to be mixed up in your life. Keep your horrible secrets to yourself. They don’t interest me any more.” “Alan, they will have to interest you. This one will have to interest you. I am awfully sorry for you, Alan. But I can’t help myself. You are the one man who is able to save me. I am forced to bring you into the matter. I have no option. Alan, you are scientific. You know about chemistry and things of that kind. You have made experiments. What you have got to do is to destroy the thing that is upstairs—to destroy it so that not a vestige of it will be left. Nobody saw this person come into the house. Indeed, at the present moment he is supposed to be in Paris. He will not be missed for months. When he is missed, there must be no trace of him found here. You, Alan, you must change him, and everything that belongs to him, into a handful of ashes that I may scatter in the air.”

“You are mad, I tell you—mad to imagine that I would raise a finger to help you, mad to make this monstrous confession. I will have nothing to do with this matter, whatever it is. Do you think I am going to peril my reputation for you? What is it to me what devil’s work you are up to?” “Of course I refuse. I will have absolutely nothing to do with it. I don’t care what shame comes on you. You deserve it all. I should not be sorry to see you disgraced, publicly disgraced. How dare you ask me, of all men in the world, to mix myself up in this horror? I should have thought you knew more about people’s characters. Your friend Lord Henry Wotton can’t have taught you much about psychology, whatever else he has taught you. Nothing will induce me to stir a step to help you. You have come to the wrong man. Go to some of your friends. Don’t come to me.” “Alan, it was murder. I killed him. You don’t know what he had made me suffer. Whatever my life is, he had more to do with the making or the marring of it than poor Harry has had. He may not have intended it, the result was the same.”

“Murder! Good God, Dorian, is that what you have come to? I shall not inform upon you. It is not my business. Besides, without my stirring in the matter, you are certain to be arrested. Nobody ever commits a crime without doing something stupid. But I will have nothing to do with it.” “You must have something to do with it. Wait, wait a moment; listen to me. Only listen, Alan. All I ask of you is to perform a certain scientific experiment. You go to hospitals and dead-houses, and the horrors that you do there don’t affect you. If in some hideous dissecting-room or fetid laboratory you found this man lying on a leaden table with red gutters scooped out in it for the blood to flow through, you would simply look upon him as an admirable subject. You would not turn a hair. You would not believe that you were doing anything wrong. On the contrary, you would probably feel that you were benefiting the human race, or increasing the sum of knowledge in the world, or gratifying intellectual curiosity, or something of that kind. What I want you to do is merely what you have often done before. Indeed, to destroy a body must be far less horrible than what you are accustomed to work at. And, remember, it is the only piece of evidence against me. If it is discovered, I am lost; and it is sure to be discovered unless you help me.”

“Alan, I entreat you. Think of the position I am in. Just before you came I almost fainted with terror. You may know terror yourself some day. No! don’t think of that. Look at the matter purely from the scientific point of view. You don’t inquire where the dead things on which you experiment come from. Don’t inquire now. I have told you too much as it is. But I beg of you to do this. We were friends once, Alan.” “The dead linger sometimes. The man upstairs will not go away. He is sitting at the table with bowed head and outstretched arms. Alan! Alan! If you don’t come to my assistance, I am ruined. Why, they will hang me, Alan! Don’t you understand? They will hang me for what I have done.” The same look of pity came into Dorian Gray’s eyes. Then he stretched out his hand, took a piece of paper, and wrote something on it. He read it over twice, folded it carefully, and pushed it across the table. Having done this, he got up and went over to the window.

Campbell looked at him in surprise, and then took up the paper, and opened it. As he read it, his face became ghastly pale and he fell back in his chair. A horrible sense of sickness came over him. He felt as if his heart was beating itself to death in some empty hollow. “I am so sorry for you, Alan,” he murmured, “but you leave me no alternative. I have a letter written already. Here it is. You see the address. If you don’t help me, I must send it. If you don’t help me, I will send it. You know what the result will be. But you are going to help me. It is impossible for you to refuse now. I tried to spare you. You will do me the justice to admit that. You were stern, harsh, offensive. You treated me as no man has ever dared to treat me—no living man, at any rate. I bore it all. Now it is for me to dictate terms.” “Yes, it is my turn to dictate terms, Alan. You know what they are. The thing is quite simple. Come, don’t work yourself into this fever. The thing has to be done. Face it, and do it.”

A groan broke from Campbell’s lips and he shivered all over. The ticking of the clock on the mantelpiece seemed to him to be dividing time into separate atoms of agony, each of which was too terrible to be borne. He felt as if an iron ring was being slowly tightened round his forehead, as if the disgrace with which he was threatened had already come upon him. The hand upon his shoulder weighed like a hand of lead. It was intolerable. It seemed to crush him. “No, Alan, you must not leave the house. Write out on a sheet of notepaper what you want and my servant will take a cab and bring the things back to you.” Campbell scrawled a few lines, blotted them, and addressed an envelope to his assistant. Dorian took the note up and read it carefully. Then he rang the bell and gave it to his valet, with orders to return as soon as possible and to bring the things with him. As the hall door shut, Campbell started nervously, and having got up from the chair, went over to the chimney-piece. He was shivering with a kind of ague. For nearly twenty minutes, neither of the men spoke. A fly buzzed noisily about the room, and the ticking of the clock was like the beat of a hammer.

As the chime struck one, Campbell turned round, and looking at Dorian Gray, saw that his eyes were filled with tears. There was something in the purity and refinement of that sad face that seemed to enrage him. “You are infamous, absolutely infamous!” he muttered. “Your life? Good heavens! what a life that is! You have gone from corruption to corruption, and now you have culminated in crime. In doing what I am going to do—what you force me to do—it is not of your life that I am thinking.” “Ah, Alan,” murmured Dorian with a sigh, “I wish you had a thousandth part of the pity for me that I have for you.” He turned away as he spoke and stood looking out at the garden. Campbell made no answer. After about ten minutes a knock came to the door, and the servant entered, carrying a large mahogany chest of chemicals, with a long coil of steel and platinum wire and two rather curiously shaped iron clamps. “Yes,” said Dorian. “And I am afraid, Francis, that I have another errand for you. What is the name of the man at Richmond who supplies Selby with orchids?”

“Yes—Harden. You must go down to Richmond at once, see Harden personally, and tell him to send twice as many orchids as I ordered, and to have as few white ones as possible. In fact, I don’t want any white ones. It is a lovely day, Francis, and Richmond is a very pretty place—otherwise I wouldn’t bother you about it.” Dorian looked at Campbell. “How long will your experiment take, Alan?” he said in a calm indifferent voice. The presence of a third person in the room seemed to give him extraordinary courage. “It will be time enough, then, if you are back at half-past seven, Francis. Or stay: just leave my things out for dressing. You can have the evening to yourself. I am not dining at home, so I shall not want you.” “Now, Alan, there is not a moment to be lost. How heavy this chest is! I’ll take it for you. You bring the other things.” He spoke rapidly and in an authoritative manner. Campbell felt dominated by him. They left the room together. When they reached the top landing, Dorian took out the key and turned it in the lock. Then he stopped, and a troubled look came into his eyes. He shuddered. “I don’t think I can go in, Alan,” he murmured.

Dorian half opened the door. As he did so, he saw the face of his portrait leering in the sunlight. On the floor in front of it the torn curtain was lying. He remembered that the night before he had forgotten, for the first time in his life, to hide the fatal canvas, and was about to rush forward, when he drew back with a shudder. What was that loathsome red dew that gleamed, wet and glistening, on one of the hands, as though the canvas had sweated blood? How horrible it was!—more horrible, it seemed to him for the moment, than the silent thing that he knew was stretched across the table, the thing whose grotesque misshapen shadow on the spotted carpet showed him that it had not stirred, but was still there, as he had left it. He heaved a deep breath, opened the door a little wider, and with half-closed eyes and averted head, walked quickly in, determined that he would not look even once upon the dead man. Then, stooping down and taking up the gold-and-purple hanging, he flung it right over the picture.

There he stopped, feeling afraid to turn round, and his eyes fixed themselves on the intricacies of the pattern before him. He heard Campbell bringing in the heavy chest, and the irons, and the other things that he had required for his dreadful work. He began to wonder if he and Basil Hallward had ever met, and, if so, what they had thought of each other. He turned and hurried out, just conscious that the dead man had been thrust back into the chair and that Campbell was gazing into a glistening yellow face. As he was going downstairs, he heard the key being turned in the lock. It was long after seven when Campbell came back into the library. He was pale, but absolutely calm. “I have done what you asked me to do,” he muttered. “And now, good-bye. Let us never see each other again.” As soon as Campbell had left, he went upstairs. There was a horrible smell of nitric acid in the room. But the thing that had been sitting at the table was gone. That evening, at eight-thirty, exquisitely dressed and wearing a large button-hole of Parma violets, Dorian Gray was ushered into Lady Narborough’s drawing-room by bowing servants. His forehead was throbbing with maddened nerves, and he felt wildly excited, but his manner as he bent over his hostess’s hand was as easy and graceful as ever. Perhaps one never seems so much at one’s ease as when one has to play a part. Certainly no one looking at Dorian Gray that night could have believed that he had passed through a tragedy as horrible as any tragedy of our age. Those finely shaped fingers could never have clutched a knife for sin, nor those smiling lips have cried out on God and goodness. He himself could not help wondering at the calm of his demeanour, and for a moment felt keenly the terrible pleasure of a double life.

It was a small party, got up rather in a hurry by Lady Narborough, who was a very clever woman with what Lord Henry used to describe as the remains of really remarkable ugliness. She had proved an excellent wife to one of our most tedious ambassadors, and having buried her husband properly in a marble mausoleum, which she had herself designed, and married off her daughters to some rich, rather elderly men, she devoted herself now to the pleasures of French fiction, French cookery, and French _esprit_ when she could get it. Dorian was one of her especial favourites, and she always told him that she was extremely glad she had not met him in early life. “I know, my dear, I should have fallen madly in love with you,” she used to say, “and thrown my bonnet right over the mills for your sake. It is most fortunate that you were not thought of at the time. As it was, our bonnets were so unbecoming, and the mills were so occupied in trying to raise the wind, that I never had even a flirtation with anybody. However, that was all Narborough’s fault. He was dreadfully short-sighted, and there is no pleasure in taking in a husband who never sees anything.”

Her guests this evening were rather tedious. The fact was, as she explained to Dorian, behind a very shabby fan, one of her married daughters had come up quite suddenly to stay with her, and, to make matters worse, had actually brought her husband with her. “I think it is most unkind of her, my dear,” she whispered. “Of course I go and stay with them every summer after I come from Homburg, but then an old woman like me must have fresh air sometimes, and besides, I really wake them up. You don’t know what an existence they lead down there. It is pure unadulterated country life. They get up early, because they have so much to do, and go to bed early, because they have so little to think about. There has not been a scandal in the neighbourhood since the time of Queen Elizabeth, and consequently they all fall asleep after dinner. You shan’t sit next either of them. You shall sit by me and amuse me.” Dorian murmured a graceful compliment and looked round the room. Yes: it was certainly a tedious party. Two of the people he had never seen before, and the others consisted of Ernest Harrowden, one of those middle-aged mediocrities so common in London clubs who have no enemies, but are thoroughly disliked by their friends; Lady Ruxton, an overdressed woman of forty-seven, with a hooked nose, who was always trying to get herself compromised, but was so peculiarly plain that to her great disappointment no one would ever believe anything against her; Mrs. Erlynne, a pushing nobody, with a delightful lisp and Venetian-red hair; Lady Alice Chapman, his hostess’s daughter, a dowdy dull girl, with one of those characteristic British faces that, once seen, are never remembered; and her husband, a red-cheeked, white-whiskered creature who, like so many of his class, was under the impression that inordinate joviality can atone for an entire lack of ideas.

He was rather sorry he had come, till Lady Narborough, looking at the great ormolu gilt clock that sprawled in gaudy curves on the mauve-draped mantelshelf, exclaimed: “How horrid of Henry Wotton to be so late! I sent round to him this morning on chance and he promised faithfully not to disappoint me.” It was some consolation that Harry was to be there, and when the door opened and he heard his slow musical voice lending charm to some insincere apology, he ceased to feel bored. But at dinner he could not eat anything. Plate after plate went away untasted. Lady Narborough kept scolding him for what she called “an insult to poor Adolphe, who invented the _menu_ specially for you,” and now and then Lord Henry looked across at him, wondering at his silence and abstracted manner. From time to time the butler filled his glass with champagne. He drank eagerly, and his thirst seemed to increase. “I believe he is in love,” cried Lady Narborough, “and that he is afraid to tell me for fear I should be jealous. He is quite right. I certainly should.”

“It is simply because she remembers you when you were a little girl, Lady Narborough,” said Lord Henry. “She is the one link between us and your short frocks.” “She does not remember my short frocks at all, Lord Henry. But I remember her very well at Vienna thirty years ago, and how _décolletée_ she was then.” “She is still _décolletée_,” he answered, taking an olive in his long fingers; “and when she is in a very smart gown she looks like an _édition de luxe_ of a bad French novel. She is really wonderful, and full of surprises. Her capacity for family affection is extraordinary. When her third husband died, her hair turned quite gold from grief.” “She assures me so, Lady Narborough,” said Dorian. “I asked her whether, like Marguerite de Navarre, she had their hearts embalmed and hung at her girdle. She told me she didn’t, because none of them had had any hearts at all.” Lord Henry looked serious for some moments. “It is perfectly monstrous,” he said, at last, “the way people go about nowadays saying things against one behind one’s back that are absolutely and entirely true.”

“I hope so,” said his hostess, laughing. “But really, if you all worship Madame de Ferrol in this ridiculous way, I shall have to marry again so as to be in the fashion.” “You will never marry again, Lady Narborough,” broke in Lord Henry. “You were far too happy. When a woman marries again, it is because she detested her first husband. When a man marries again, it is because he adored his first wife. Women try their luck; men risk theirs.” “If he had been, you would not have loved him, my dear lady,” was the rejoinder. “Women love us for our defects. If we have enough of them, they will forgive us everything, even our intellects. You will never ask me to dinner again after saying this, I am afraid, Lady Narborough, but it is quite true.” “Of course it is true, Lord Henry. If we women did not love you for your defects, where would you all be? Not one of you would ever be married. You would be a set of unfortunate bachelors. Not, however, that that would alter you much. Nowadays all the married men live like bachelors, and all the bachelors like married men.”

“Ah, my dear,” cried Lady Narborough, putting on her gloves, “don’t tell me that you have exhausted life. When a man says that one knows that life has exhausted him. Lord Henry is very wicked, and I sometimes wish that I had been; but you are made to be good—you look so good. I must find you a nice wife. Lord Henry, don’t you think that Mr. Gray should get married?” “Well, we must look out for a suitable match for him. I shall go through Debrett carefully to-night and draw out a list of all the eligible young ladies.” “Of course, with their ages, slightly edited. But nothing must be done in a hurry. I want it to be what _The Morning Post_ calls a suitable alliance, and I want you both to be happy.” “Ah! what a cynic you are!” cried the old lady, pushing back her chair and nodding to Lady Ruxton. “You must come and dine with me soon again. You are really an admirable tonic, much better than what Sir Andrew prescribes for me. You must tell me what people you would like to meet, though. I want it to be a delightful gathering.”

“I fear so,” she said, laughing, as she stood up. “A thousand pardons, my dear Lady Ruxton,” she added, “I didn’t see you hadn’t finished your cigarette.” Lady Ruxton glanced at him curiously. “You must come and explain that to me some afternoon, Lord Henry. It sounds a fascinating theory,” she murmured, as she swept out of the room. “Now, mind you don’t stay too long over your politics and scandal,” cried Lady Narborough from the door. “If you do, we are sure to squabble upstairs.” The men laughed, and Mr. Chapman got up solemnly from the foot of the table and came up to the top. Dorian Gray changed his seat and went and sat by Lord Henry. Mr. Chapman began to talk in a loud voice about the situation in the House of Commons. He guffawed at his adversaries. The word _doctrinaire_—word full of terror to the British mind—reappeared from time to time between his explosions. An alliterative prefix served as an ornament of oratory. He hoisted the Union Jack on the pinnacles of thought. The inherited stupidity of the race—sound English common sense he jovially termed it—was shown to be the proper bulwark for society.

“He bores me dreadfully, almost as much as he bores her. She is very clever, too clever for a woman. She lacks the indefinable charm of weakness. It is the feet of clay that make the gold of the image precious. Her feet are very pretty, but they are not feet of clay. White porcelain feet, if you like. They have been through the fire, and what fire does not destroy, it hardens. She has had experiences.” “An eternity, she tells me. I believe, according to the peerage, it is ten years, but ten years with Monmouth must have been like eternity, with time thrown in. Who else is coming?” “I like him,” said Lord Henry. “A great many people don’t, but I find him charming. He atones for being occasionally somewhat overdressed by being always absolutely over-educated. He is a very modern type.” “Ah! what a nuisance people’s people are! Try and make him come. By the way, Dorian, you ran off very early last night. You left before eleven. What did you do afterwards? Did you go straight home?”

“Yes,” he answered. Then he bit his lip. “No, I don’t mean that. I didn’t go to the club. I walked about. I forget what I did.... How inquisitive you are, Harry! You always want to know what one has been doing. I always want to forget what I have been doing. I came in at half-past two, if you wish to know the exact time. I had left my latch-key at home, and my servant had to let me in. If you want any corroborative evidence on the subject, you can ask him.” Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders. “My dear fellow, as if I cared! Let us go up to the drawing-room. No sherry, thank you, Mr. Chapman. Something has happened to you, Dorian. Tell me what it is. You are not yourself to-night.” “Don’t mind me, Harry. I am irritable, and out of temper. I shall come round and see you to-morrow, or next day. Make my excuses to Lady Narborough. I shan’t go upstairs. I shall go home. I must go home.” “I will try to be there, Harry,” he said, leaving the room. As he drove back to his own house, he was conscious that the sense of terror he thought he had strangled had come back to him. Lord Henry’s casual questioning had made him lose his nerve for the moment, and he wanted his nerve still. Things that were dangerous had to be destroyed. He winced. He hated the idea of even touching them.

Yet it had to be done. He realized that, and when he had locked the door of his library, he opened the secret press into which he had thrust Basil Hallward’s coat and bag. A huge fire was blazing. He piled another log on it. The smell of the singeing clothes and burning leather was horrible. It took him three-quarters of an hour to consume everything. At the end he felt faint and sick, and having lit some Algerian pastilles in a pierced copper brazier, he bathed his hands and forehead with a cool musk-scented vinegar. Suddenly he started. His eyes grew strangely bright, and he gnawed nervously at his underlip. Between two of the windows stood a large Florentine cabinet, made out of ebony and inlaid with ivory and blue lapis. He watched it as though it were a thing that could fascinate and make afraid, as though it held something that he longed for and yet almost loathed. His breath quickened. A mad craving came over him. He lit a cigarette and then threw it away. His eyelids drooped till the long fringed lashes almost touched his cheek. But he still watched the cabinet. At last he got up from the sofa on which he had been lying, went over to it, and having unlocked it, touched some hidden spring. A triangular drawer passed slowly out. His fingers moved instinctively towards it, dipped in, and closed on something. It was a small Chinese box of black and gold-dust lacquer, elaborately wrought, the sides patterned with curved waves, and the silken cords hung with round crystals and tasselled in plaited metal threads. He opened it. Inside was a green paste, waxy in lustre, the odour curiously heavy and persistent.

He hesitated for some moments, with a strangely immobile smile upon his face. Then shivering, though the atmosphere of the room was terribly hot, he drew himself up and glanced at the clock. It was twenty minutes to twelve. He put the box back, shutting the cabinet doors as he did so, and went into his bedroom. As midnight was striking bronze blows upon the dusky air, Dorian Gray, dressed commonly, and with a muffler wrapped round his throat, crept quietly out of his house. In Bond Street he found a hansom with a good horse. He hailed it and in a low voice gave the driver an address. “All right, sir,” answered the man, “you will be there in an hour,” and after his fare had got in he turned his horse round and drove rapidly towards the river. A cold rain began to fall, and the blurred street-lamps looked ghastly in the dripping mist. The public-houses were just closing, and dim men and women were clustering in broken groups round their doors. From some of the bars came the sound of horrible laughter. In others, drunkards brawled and screamed.

Lying back in the hansom, with his hat pulled over his forehead, Dorian Gray watched with listless eyes the sordid shame of the great city, and now and then he repeated to himself the words that Lord Henry had said to him on the first day they had met, “To cure the soul by means of the senses, and the senses by means of the soul.” Yes, that was the secret. He had often tried it, and would try it again now. There were opium dens where one could buy oblivion, dens of horror where the memory of old sins could be destroyed by the madness of sins that were new. The moon hung low in the sky like a yellow skull. From time to time a huge misshapen cloud stretched a long arm across and hid it. The gas-lamps grew fewer, and the streets more narrow and gloomy. Once the man lost his way and had to drive back half a mile. A steam rose from the horse as it splashed up the puddles. The sidewindows of the hansom were clogged with a grey-flannel mist.

“To cure the soul by means of the senses, and the senses by means of the soul!” How the words rang in his ears! His soul, certainly, was sick to death. Was it true that the senses could cure it? Innocent blood had been spilled. What could atone for that? Ah! for that there was no atonement; but though forgiveness was impossible, forgetfulness was possible still, and he was determined to forget, to stamp the thing out, to crush it as one would crush the adder that had stung one. Indeed, what right had Basil to have spoken to him as he had done? Who had made him a judge over others? He had said things that were dreadful, horrible, not to be endured. On and on plodded the hansom, going slower, it seemed to him, at each step. He thrust up the trap and called to the man to drive faster. The hideous hunger for opium began to gnaw at him. His throat burned and his delicate hands twitched nervously together. He struck at the horse madly with his stick. The driver laughed and whipped up. He laughed in answer, and the man was silent.

The way seemed interminable, and the streets like the black web of some sprawling spider. The monotony became unbearable, and as the mist thickened, he felt afraid. Then they passed by lonely brickfields. The fog was lighter here, and he could see the strange, bottle-shaped kilns with their orange, fanlike tongues of fire. A dog barked as they went by, and far away in the darkness some wandering sea-gull screamed. The horse stumbled in a rut, then swerved aside and broke into a gallop. After some time they left the clay road and rattled again over rough-paven streets. Most of the windows were dark, but now and then fantastic shadows were silhouetted against some lamplit blind. He watched them curiously. They moved like monstrous marionettes and made gestures like live things. He hated them. A dull rage was in his heart. As they turned a corner, a woman yelled something at them from an open door, and two men ran after the hansom for about a hundred yards. The driver beat at them with his whip. It is said that passion makes one think in a circle. Certainly with hideous iteration the bitten lips of Dorian Gray shaped and reshaped those subtle words that dealt with soul and sense, till he had found in them the full expression, as it were, of his mood, and justified, by intellectual approval, passions that without such justification would still have dominated his temper. From cell to cell of his brain crept the one thought; and the wild desire to live, most terrible of all man’s appetites, quickened into force each trembling nerve and fibre. Ugliness that had once been hateful to him because it made things real, became dear to him now for that very reason. Ugliness was the one reality. The coarse brawl, the loathsome den, the crude violence of disordered life, the very vileness of thief and outcast, were more vivid, in their intense actuality of impression, than all the gracious shapes of art, the dreamy shadows of song. They were what he needed for forgetfulness. In three days he would be free.

Suddenly the man drew up with a jerk at the top of a dark lane. Over the low roofs and jagged chimney-stacks of the houses rose the black masts of ships. Wreaths of white mist clung like ghostly sails to the yards. Dorian started and peered round. “This will do,” he answered, and having got out hastily and given the driver the extra fare he had promised him, he walked quickly in the direction of the quay. Here and there a lantern gleamed at the stern of some huge merchantman. The light shook and splintered in the puddles. A red glare came from an outward-bound steamer that was coaling. The slimy pavement looked like a wet mackintosh. He hurried on towards the left, glancing back now and then to see if he was being followed. In about seven or eight minutes he reached a small shabby house that was wedged in between two gaunt factories. In one of the top-windows stood a lamp. He stopped and gave a peculiar knock. After a little time he heard steps in the passage and the chain being unhooked. The door opened quietly, and he went in without saying a word to the squat misshapen figure that flattened itself into the shadow as he passed. At the end of the hall hung a tattered green curtain that swayed and shook in the gusty wind which had followed him in from the street. He dragged it aside and entered a long low room which looked as if it had once been a third-rate dancing-saloon. Shrill flaring gas-jets, dulled and distorted in the fly-blown mirrors that faced them, were ranged round the walls. Greasy reflectors of ribbed tin backed them, making quivering disks of light. The floor was covered with ochre-coloured sawdust, trampled here and there into mud, and stained with dark rings of spilled liquor. Some Malays were crouching by a little charcoal stove, playing with bone counters and showing their white teeth as they chattered. In one corner, with his head buried in his arms, a sailor sprawled over a table, and by the tawdrily painted bar that ran across one complete side stood two haggard women, mocking an old man who was brushing the sleeves of his coat with an expression of disgust. “He thinks he’s got red ants on him,” laughed one of them, as Dorian passed by. The man looked at her in terror and began to whimper.

At the end of the room there was a little staircase, leading to a darkened chamber. As Dorian hurried up its three rickety steps, the heavy odour of opium met him. He heaved a deep breath, and his nostrils quivered with pleasure. When he entered, a young man with smooth yellow hair, who was bending over a lamp lighting a long thin pipe, looked up at him and nodded in a hesitating manner. “Darlington is not going to do anything. My brother paid the bill at last. George doesn’t speak to me either.... I don’t care,” he added with a sigh. “As long as one has this stuff, one doesn’t want friends. I think I have had too many friends.” Dorian winced and looked round at the grotesque things that lay in such fantastic postures on the ragged mattresses. The twisted limbs, the gaping mouths, the staring lustreless eyes, fascinated him. He knew in what strange heavens they were suffering, and what dull hells were teaching them the secret of some new joy. They were better off than he was. He was prisoned in thought. Memory, like a horrible malady, was eating his soul away. From time to time he seemed to see the eyes of Basil Hallward looking at him. Yet he felt he could not stay. The presence of Adrian Singleton troubled him. He wanted to be where no one would know who he was. He wanted to escape from himself.

Adrian Singleton rose up wearily and followed Dorian to the bar. A half-caste, in a ragged turban and a shabby ulster, grinned a hideous greeting as he thrust a bottle of brandy and two tumblers in front of them. The women sidled up and began to chatter. Dorian turned his back on them and said something in a low voice to Adrian Singleton. Two red sparks flashed for a moment in the woman’s sodden eyes, then flickered out and left them dull and glazed. She tossed her head and raked the coins off the counter with greedy fingers. Her companion watched her enviously. Dorian walked to the door with a look of pain in his face. As he drew the curtain aside, a hideous laugh broke from the painted lips of the woman who had taken his money. “There goes the devil’s bargain!” she hiccoughed, in a hoarse voice. The drowsy sailor leaped to his feet as she spoke, and looked wildly round. The sound of the shutting of the hall door fell on his ear. He rushed out as if in pursuit.

Dorian Gray hurried along the quay through the drizzling rain. His meeting with Adrian Singleton had strangely moved him, and he wondered if the ruin of that young life was really to be laid at his door, as Basil Hallward had said to him with such infamy of insult. He bit his lip, and for a few seconds his eyes grew sad. Yet, after all, what did it matter to him? One’s days were too brief to take the burden of another’s errors on one’s shoulders. Each man lived his own life and paid his own price for living it. The only pity was one had to pay so often for a single fault. One had to pay over and over again, indeed. In her dealings with man, destiny never closed her accounts. There are moments, psychologists tell us, when the passion for sin, or for what the world calls sin, so dominates a nature that every fibre of the body, as every cell of the brain, seems to be instinct with fearful impulses. Men and women at such moments lose the freedom of their will. They move to their terrible end as automatons move. Choice is taken from them, and conscience is either killed, or, if it lives at all, lives but to give rebellion its fascination and disobedience its charm. For all sins, as theologians weary not of reminding us, are sins of disobedience. When that high spirit, that morning star of evil, fell from heaven, it was as a rebel that he fell.

Callous, concentrated on evil, with stained mind, and soul hungry for rebellion, Dorian Gray hastened on, quickening his step as he went, but as he darted aside into a dim archway, that had served him often as a short cut to the ill-famed place where he was going, he felt himself suddenly seized from behind, and before he had time to defend himself, he was thrust back against the wall, with a brutal hand round his throat. He struggled madly for life, and by a terrible effort wrenched the tightening fingers away. In a second he heard the click of a revolver, and saw the gleam of a polished barrel, pointing straight at his head, and the dusky form of a short, thick-set man facing him. “You wrecked the life of Sibyl Vane,” was the answer, “and Sibyl Vane was my sister. She killed herself. I know it. Her death is at your door. I swore I would kill you in return. For years I have sought you. I had no clue, no trace. The two people who could have described you were dead. I knew nothing of you but the pet name she used to call you. I heard it to-night by chance. Make your peace with God, for to-night you are going to die.”

“You had better confess your sin, for as sure as I am James Vane, you are going to die.” There was a horrible moment. Dorian did not know what to say or do. “Down on your knees!” growled the man. “I give you one minute to make your peace—no more. I go on board to-night for India, and I must do my job first. One minute. That’s all.” Dorian’s arms fell to his side. Paralysed with terror, he did not know what to do. Suddenly a wild hope flashed across his brain. “Stop,” he cried. “How long ago is it since your sister died? Quick, tell me!” Dim and wavering as was the wind-blown light, yet it served to show him the hideous error, as it seemed, into which he had fallen, for the face of the man he had sought to kill had all the bloom of boyhood, all the unstained purity of youth. He seemed little more than a lad of twenty summers, hardly older, if older indeed at all, than his sister had been when they had parted so many years ago. It was obvious that this was not the man who had destroyed her life.

Dorian Gray drew a long breath. “You have been on the brink of committing a terrible crime, my man,” he said, looking at him sternly. “Let this be a warning to you not to take vengeance into your own hands.” James Vane stood on the pavement in horror. He was trembling from head to foot. After a little while, a black shadow that had been creeping along the dripping wall moved out into the light and came close to him with stealthy footsteps. He felt a hand laid on his arm and looked round with a start. It was one of the women who had been drinking at the bar. “Why didn’t you kill him?” she hissed out, putting haggard face quite close to his. “I knew you were following him when you rushed out from Daly’s. You fool! You should have killed him. He has lots of money, and he’s as bad as bad.” “He is not the man I am looking for,” he answered, “and I want no man’s money. I want a man’s life. The man whose life I want must be nearly forty now. This one is little more than a boy. Thank God, I have not got his blood upon my hands.”

The woman gave a bitter laugh. “Little more than a boy!” she sneered. “Why, man, it’s nigh on eighteen years since Prince Charming made me what I am.” “Strike me dumb if it ain’t so. He is the worst one that comes here. They say he has sold himself to the devil for a pretty face. It’s nigh on eighteen years since I met him. He hasn’t changed much since then. I have, though,” she added, with a sickly leer. “I swear it,” came in hoarse echo from her flat mouth. “But don’t give me away to him,” she whined; “I am afraid of him. Let me have some money for my night’s lodging.” He broke from her with an oath and rushed to the corner of the street, but Dorian Gray had disappeared. When he looked back, the woman had vanished also. A week later Dorian Gray was sitting in the conservatory at Selby Royal, talking to the pretty Duchess of Monmouth, who with her husband, a jaded-looking man of sixty, was amongst his guests. It was tea-time, and the mellow light of the huge, lace-covered lamp that stood on the table lit up the delicate china and hammered silver of the service at which the duchess was presiding. Her white hands were moving daintily among the cups, and her full red lips were smiling at something that Dorian had whispered to her. Lord Henry was lying back in a silk-draped wicker chair, looking at them. On a peach-coloured divan sat Lady Narborough, pretending to listen to the duke’s description of the last Brazilian beetle that he had added to his collection. Three young men in elaborate smoking-suits were handing tea-cakes to some of the women. The house-party consisted of twelve people, and there were more expected to arrive on the next day.

“What are you two talking about?” said Lord Henry, strolling over to the table and putting his cup down. “I hope Dorian has told you about my plan for rechristening everything, Gladys. It is a delightful idea.” “But I don’t want to be rechristened, Harry,” rejoined the duchess, looking up at him with her wonderful eyes. “I am quite satisfied with my own name, and I am sure Mr. Gray should be satisfied with his.” “My dear Gladys, I would not alter either name for the world. They are both perfect. I was thinking chiefly of flowers. Yesterday I cut an orchid, for my button-hole. It was a marvellous spotted thing, as effective as the seven deadly sins. In a thoughtless moment I asked one of the gardeners what it was called. He told me it was a fine specimen of _Robinsoniana_, or something dreadful of that kind. It is a sad truth, but we have lost the faculty of giving lovely names to things. Names are everything. I never quarrel with actions. My one quarrel is with words. That is the reason I hate vulgar realism in literature. The man who could call a spade a spade should be compelled to use one. It is the only thing he is fit for.”

“How can you say that? I admit that I think that it is better to be beautiful than to be good. But on the other hand, no one is more ready than I am to acknowledge that it is better to be good than to be ugly.” “Ugliness is one of the seven deadly virtues, Gladys. You, as a good Tory, must not underrate them. Beer, the Bible, and the seven deadly virtues have made our England what she is.” “Our host is rather horrid this evening,” answered the duchess, colouring. “I believe he thinks that Monmouth married me on purely scientific principles as the best specimen he could find of a modern butterfly.” “For the most trivial things, Mr. Gray, I assure you. Usually because I come in at ten minutes to nine and tell her that I must be dressed by half-past eight.” “I daren’t, Mr. Gray. Why, she invents hats for me. You remember the one I wore at Lady Hilstone’s garden-party? You don’t, but it is nice of you to pretend that you do. Well, she made it out of nothing. All good hats are made out of nothing.”

“Like all good reputations, Gladys,” interrupted Lord Henry. “Every effect that one produces gives one an enemy. To be popular one must be a mediocrity.” “Not with women,” said the duchess, shaking her head; “and women rule the world. I assure you we can’t bear mediocrities. We women, as some one says, love with our ears, just as you men love with your eyes, if you ever love at all.” “My dear Gladys!” cried Lord Henry. “How can you say that? Romance lives by repetition, and repetition converts an appetite into an art. Besides, each time that one loves is the only time one has ever loved. Difference of object does not alter singleness of passion. It merely intensifies it. We can have in life but one great experience at best, and the secret of life is to reproduce that experience as often as possible.” “Women are not always allowed a choice,” he answered, but hardly had he finished the sentence before from the far end of the conservatory came a stifled groan, followed by the dull sound of a heavy fall. Everybody started up. The duchess stood motionless in horror. And with fear in his eyes, Lord Henry rushed through the flapping palms to find Dorian Gray lying face downwards on the tiled floor in a deathlike swoon.

He was carried at once into the blue drawing-room and laid upon one of the sofas. After a short time, he came to himself and looked round with a dazed expression. “My dear Dorian,” answered Lord Henry, “you merely fainted. That was all. You must have overtired yourself. You had better not come down to dinner. I will take your place.” He went to his room and dressed. There was a wild recklessness of gaiety in his manner as he sat at table, but now and then a thrill of terror ran through him when he remembered that, pressed against the window of the conservatory, like a white handkerchief, he had seen the face of James Vane watching him. The next day he did not leave the house, and, indeed, spent most of the time in his own room, sick with a wild terror of dying, and yet indifferent to life itself. The consciousness of being hunted, snared, tracked down, had begun to dominate him. If the tapestry did but tremble in the wind, he shook. The dead leaves that were blown against the leaded panes seemed to him like his own wasted resolutions and wild regrets. When he closed his eyes, he saw again the sailor’s face peering through the mist-stained glass, and horror seemed once more to lay its hand upon his heart.

But perhaps it had been only his fancy that had called vengeance out of the night and set the hideous shapes of punishment before him. Actual life was chaos, but there was something terribly logical in the imagination. It was the imagination that set remorse to dog the feet of sin. It was the imagination that made each crime bear its misshapen brood. In the common world of fact the wicked were not punished, nor the good rewarded. Success was given to the strong, failure thrust upon the weak. That was all. Besides, had any stranger been prowling round the house, he would have been seen by the servants or the keepers. Had any foot-marks been found on the flower-beds, the gardeners would have reported it. Yes, it had been merely fancy. Sibyl Vane’s brother had not come back to kill him. He had sailed away in his ship to founder in some winter sea. From him, at any rate, he was safe. Why, the man did not know who he was, could not know who he was. The mask of youth had saved him.

And yet if it had been merely an illusion, how terrible it was to think that conscience could raise such fearful phantoms, and give them visible form, and make them move before one! What sort of life would his be if, day and night, shadows of his crime were to peer at him from silent corners, to mock him from secret places, to whisper in his ear as he sat at the feast, to wake him with icy fingers as he lay asleep! As the thought crept through his brain, he grew pale with terror, and the air seemed to him to have become suddenly colder. Oh! in what a wild hour of madness he had killed his friend! How ghastly the mere memory of the scene! He saw it all again. Each hideous detail came back to him with added horror. Out of the black cave of time, terrible and swathed in scarlet, rose the image of his sin. When Lord Henry came in at six o’clock, he found him crying as one whose heart will break. It was not till the third day that he ventured to go out. There was something in the clear, pine-scented air of that winter morning that seemed to bring him back his joyousness and his ardour for life. But it was not merely the physical conditions of environment that had caused the change. His own nature had revolted against the excess of anguish that had sought to maim and mar the perfection of its calm. With subtle and finely wrought temperaments it is always so. Their strong passions must either bruise or bend. They either slay the man, or themselves die. Shallow sorrows and shallow loves live on. The loves and sorrows that are great are destroyed by their own plenitude. Besides, he had convinced himself that he had been the victim of a terror-stricken imagination, and looked back now on his fears with something of pity and not a little of contempt.

After breakfast, he walked with the duchess for an hour in the garden and then drove across the park to join the shooting-party. The crisp frost lay like salt upon the grass. The sky was an inverted cup of blue metal. A thin film of ice bordered the flat, reed-grown lake. At the corner of the pine-wood he caught sight of Sir Geoffrey Clouston, the duchess’s brother, jerking two spent cartridges out of his gun. He jumped from the cart, and having told the groom to take the mare home, made his way towards his guest through the withered bracken and rough undergrowth. Dorian strolled along by his side. The keen aromatic air, the brown and red lights that glimmered in the wood, the hoarse cries of the beaters ringing out from time to time, and the sharp snaps of the guns that followed, fascinated him and filled him with a sense of delightful freedom. He was dominated by the carelessness of happiness, by the high indifference of joy. Suddenly from a lumpy tussock of old grass some twenty yards in front of them, with black-tipped ears erect and long hinder limbs throwing it forward, started a hare. It bolted for a thicket of alders. Sir Geoffrey put his gun to his shoulder, but there was something in the animal’s grace of movement that strangely charmed Dorian Gray, and he cried out at once, “Don’t shoot it, Geoffrey. Let it live.”

“What nonsense, Dorian!” laughed his companion, and as the hare bounded into the thicket, he fired. There were two cries heard, the cry of a hare in pain, which is dreadful, the cry of a man in agony, which is worse. “Good heavens! I have hit a beater!” exclaimed Sir Geoffrey. “What an ass the man was to get in front of the guns! Stop shooting there!” he called out at the top of his voice. “A man is hurt.” Dorian watched them as they plunged into the alder-clump, brushing the lithe swinging branches aside. In a few moments they emerged, dragging a body after them into the sunlight. He turned away in horror. It seemed to him that misfortune followed wherever he went. He heard Sir Geoffrey ask if the man was really dead, and the affirmative answer of the keeper. The wood seemed to him to have become suddenly alive with faces. There was the trampling of myriad feet and the low buzz of voices. A great copper-breasted pheasant came beating through the boughs overhead. After a few moments—that were to him, in his perturbed state, like endless hours of pain—he felt a hand laid on his shoulder. He started and looked round.

“I am afraid so,” rejoined Lord Henry. “He got the whole charge of shot in his chest. He must have died almost instantaneously. Come; let us go home.” They walked side by side in the direction of the avenue for nearly fifty yards without speaking. Then Dorian looked at Lord Henry and said, with a heavy sigh, “It is a bad omen, Harry, a very bad omen.” “What is?” asked Lord Henry. “Oh! this accident, I suppose. My dear fellow, it can’t be helped. It was the man’s own fault. Why did he get in front of the guns? Besides, it is nothing to us. It is rather awkward for Geoffrey, of course. It does not do to pepper beaters. It makes people think that one is a wild shot. And Geoffrey is not; he shoots very straight. But there is no use talking about the matter.” Dorian shook his head. “It is a bad omen, Harry. I feel as if something horrible were going to happen to some of us. To myself, perhaps,” he added, passing his hand over his eyes, with a gesture of pain.

The elder man laughed. “The only horrible thing in the world is _ennui_, Dorian. That is the one sin for which there is no forgiveness. But we are not likely to suffer from it unless these fellows keep chattering about this thing at dinner. I must tell them that the subject is to be tabooed. As for omens, there is no such thing as an omen. Destiny does not send us heralds. She is too wise or too cruel for that. Besides, what on earth could happen to you, Dorian? You have everything in the world that a man can want. There is no one who would not be delighted to change places with you.” “There is no one with whom I would not change places, Harry. Don’t laugh like that. I am telling you the truth. The wretched peasant who has just died is better off than I am. I have no terror of death. It is the coming of death that terrifies me. Its monstrous wings seem to wheel in the leaden air around me. Good heavens! don’t you see a man moving behind the trees there, watching me, waiting for me?”

Lord Henry looked in the direction in which the trembling gloved hand was pointing. “Yes,” he said, smiling, “I see the gardener waiting for you. I suppose he wants to ask you what flowers you wish to have on the table to-night. How absurdly nervous you are, my dear fellow! You must come and see my doctor, when we get back to town.” Dorian heaved a sigh of relief as he saw the gardener approaching. The man touched his hat, glanced for a moment at Lord Henry in a hesitating manner, and then produced a letter, which he handed to his master. “Her Grace told me to wait for an answer,” he murmured. Dorian put the letter into his pocket. “Tell her Grace that I am coming in,” he said, coldly. The man turned round and went rapidly in the direction of the house. “How fond women are of doing dangerous things!” laughed Lord Henry. “It is one of the qualities in them that I admire most. A woman will flirt with anybody in the world as long as other people are looking on.”

“How fond you are of saying dangerous things, Harry! In the present instance, you are quite astray. I like the duchess very much, but I don’t love her.” “I wish I could love,” cried Dorian Gray with a deep note of pathos in his voice. “But I seem to have lost the passion and forgotten the desire. I am too much concentrated on myself. My own personality has become a burden to me. I want to escape, to go away, to forget. It was silly of me to come down here at all. I think I shall send a wire to Harvey to have the yacht got ready. On a yacht one is safe.” “I can’t tell you, Harry,” he answered sadly. “And I dare say it is only a fancy of mine. This unfortunate accident has upset me. I have a horrible presentiment that something of the kind may happen to me.” “I have heard all about it, Mr. Gray,” she answered. “Poor Geoffrey is terribly upset. And it seems that you asked him not to shoot the hare. How curious!”

“Yes, it was very curious. I don’t know what made me say it. Some whim, I suppose. It looked the loveliest of little live things. But I am sorry they told you about the man. It is a hideous subject.” “It is an annoying subject,” broke in Lord Henry. “It has no psychological value at all. Now if Geoffrey had done the thing on purpose, how interesting he would be! I should like to know some one who had committed a real murder.” Dorian drew himself up with an effort and smiled. “It is nothing, Duchess,” he murmured; “my nerves are dreadfully out of order. That is all. I am afraid I walked too far this morning. I didn’t hear what Harry said. Was it very bad? You must tell me some other time. I think I must go and lie down. You will excuse me, won’t you?” They had reached the great flight of steps that led from the conservatory on to the terrace. As the glass door closed behind Dorian, Lord Henry turned and looked at the duchess with his slumberous eyes. “Are you very much in love with him?” he asked.

Upstairs, in his own room, Dorian Gray was lying on a sofa, with terror in every tingling fibre of his body. Life had suddenly become too hideous a burden for him to bear. The dreadful death of the unlucky beater, shot in the thicket like a wild animal, had seemed to him to pre-figure death for himself also. He had nearly swooned at what Lord Henry had said in a chance mood of cynical jesting. At five o’clock he rang his bell for his servant and gave him orders to pack his things for the night-express to town, and to have the brougham at the door by eight-thirty. He was determined not to sleep another night at Selby Royal. It was an ill-omened place. Death walked there in the sunlight. The grass of the forest had been spotted with blood. Then he wrote a note to Lord Henry, telling him that he was going up to town to consult his doctor and asking him to entertain his guests in his absence. As he was putting it into the envelope, a knock came to the door, and his valet informed him that the head-keeper wished to see him. He frowned and bit his lip. “Send him in,” he muttered, after some moments’ hesitation.

“Was the poor fellow married? Had he any people dependent on him?” asked Dorian, looking bored. “If so, I should not like them to be left in want, and will send them any sum of money you may think necessary.” Dorian started to his feet. A terrible hope fluttered past him. He clutched at it madly. “Where is the body?” he exclaimed. “Quick! I must see it at once.” “The Home Farm! Go there at once and meet me. Tell one of the grooms to bring my horse round. No. Never mind. I’ll go to the stables myself. It will save time.” In less than a quarter of an hour, Dorian Gray was galloping down the long avenue as hard as he could go. The trees seemed to sweep past him in spectral procession, and wild shadows to fling themselves across his path. Once the mare swerved at a white gate-post and nearly threw him. He lashed her across the neck with his crop. She cleft the dusky air like an arrow. The stones flew from her hoofs. At last he reached the Home Farm. Two men were loitering in the yard. He leaped from the saddle and threw the reins to one of them. In the farthest stable a light was glimmering. Something seemed to tell him that the body was there, and he hurried to the door and put his hand upon the latch.

There he paused for a moment, feeling that he was on the brink of a discovery that would either make or mar his life. Then he thrust the door open and entered. On a heap of sacking in the far corner was lying the dead body of a man dressed in a coarse shirt and a pair of blue trousers. A spotted handkerchief had been placed over the face. A coarse candle, stuck in a bottle, sputtered beside it. Dorian Gray shuddered. He felt that his could not be the hand to take the handkerchief away, and called out to one of the farm-servants to come to him. “There is no use your telling me that you are going to be good,” cried Lord Henry, dipping his white fingers into a red copper bowl filled with rose-water. “You are quite perfect. Pray, don’t change.” Dorian Gray shook his head. “No, Harry, I have done too many dreadful things in my life. I am not going to do any more. I began my good actions yesterday.” “My dear boy,” said Lord Henry, smiling, “anybody can be good in the country. There are no temptations there. That is the reason why people who live out of town are so absolutely uncivilized. Civilization is not by any means an easy thing to attain to. There are only two ways by which man can reach it. One is by being cultured, the other by being corrupt. Country people have no opportunity of being either, so they stagnate.”

“Culture and corruption,” echoed Dorian. “I have known something of both. It seems terrible to me now that they should ever be found together. For I have a new ideal, Harry. I am going to alter. I think I have altered.” “You have not yet told me what your good action was. Or did you say you had done more than one?” asked his companion as he spilled into his plate a little crimson pyramid of seeded strawberries and, through a perforated, shell-shaped spoon, snowed white sugar upon them. “I can tell you, Harry. It is not a story I could tell to any one else. I spared somebody. It sounds vain, but you understand what I mean. She was quite beautiful and wonderfully like Sibyl Vane. I think it was that which first attracted me to her. You remember Sibyl, don’t you? How long ago that seems! Well, Hetty was not one of our own class, of course. She was simply a girl in a village. But I really loved her. I am quite sure that I loved her. All during this wonderful May that we have been having, I used to run down and see her two or three times a week. Yesterday she met me in a little orchard. The apple-blossoms kept tumbling down on her hair, and she was laughing. We were to have gone away together this morning at dawn. Suddenly I determined to leave her as flowerlike as I had found her.”

“I should think the novelty of the emotion must have given you a thrill of real pleasure, Dorian,” interrupted Lord Henry. “But I can finish your idyll for you. You gave her good advice and broke her heart. That was the beginning of your reformation.” “Harry, you are horrible! You mustn’t say these dreadful things. Hetty’s heart is not broken. Of course, she cried and all that. But there is no disgrace upon her. She can live, like Perdita, in her garden of mint and marigold.” “And weep over a faithless Florizel,” said Lord Henry, laughing, as he leaned back in his chair. “My dear Dorian, you have the most curiously boyish moods. Do you think this girl will ever be really content now with any one of her own rank? I suppose she will be married some day to a rough carter or a grinning ploughman. Well, the fact of having met you, and loved you, will teach her to despise her husband, and she will be wretched. From a moral point of view, I cannot say that I think much of your great renunciation. Even as a beginning, it is poor. Besides, how do you know that Hetty isn’t floating at the present moment in some starlit mill-pond, with lovely water-lilies round her, like Ophelia?”

“I can’t bear this, Harry! You mock at everything, and then suggest the most serious tragedies. I am sorry I told you now. I don’t care what you say to me. I know I was right in acting as I did. Poor Hetty! As I rode past the farm this morning, I saw her white face at the window, like a spray of jasmine. Don’t let us talk about it any more, and don’t try to persuade me that the first good action I have done for years, the first little bit of self-sacrifice I have ever known, is really a sort of sin. I want to be better. I am going to be better. Tell me something about yourself. What is going on in town? I have not been to the club for days.” “My dear boy, they have only been talking about it for six weeks, and the British public are really not equal to the mental strain of having more than one topic every three months. They have been very fortunate lately, however. They have had my own divorce-case and Alan Campbell’s suicide. Now they have got the mysterious disappearance of an artist. Scotland Yard still insists that the man in the grey ulster who left for Paris by the midnight train on the ninth of November was poor Basil, and the French police declare that Basil never arrived in Paris at all. I suppose in about a fortnight we shall be told that he has been seen in San Francisco. It is an odd thing, but every one who disappears is said to be seen at San Francisco. It must be a delightful city, and possess all the attractions of the next world.”

“What do you think has happened to Basil?” asked Dorian, holding up his Burgundy against the light and wondering how it was that he could discuss the matter so calmly. “I have not the slightest idea. If Basil chooses to hide himself, it is no business of mine. If he is dead, I don’t want to think about him. Death is the only thing that ever terrifies me. I hate it.” “Because,” said Lord Henry, passing beneath his nostrils the gilt trellis of an open vinaigrette box, “one can survive everything nowadays except that. Death and vulgarity are the only two facts in the nineteenth century that one cannot explain away. Let us have our coffee in the music-room, Dorian. You must play Chopin to me. The man with whom my wife ran away played Chopin exquisitely. Poor Victoria! I was very fond of her. The house is rather lonely without her. Of course, married life is merely a habit, a bad habit. But then one regrets the loss even of one’s worst habits. Perhaps one regrets them the most. They are such an essential part of one’s personality.”

Dorian said nothing, but rose from the table, and passing into the next room, sat down to the piano and let his fingers stray across the white and black ivory of the keys. After the coffee had been brought in, he stopped, and looking over at Lord Henry, said, “Harry, did it ever occur to you that Basil was murdered?” Lord Henry yawned. “Basil was very popular, and always wore a Waterbury watch. Why should he have been murdered? He was not clever enough to have enemies. Of course, he had a wonderful genius for painting. But a man can paint like Velasquez and yet be as dull as possible. Basil was really rather dull. He only interested me once, and that was when he told me, years ago, that he had a wild adoration for you and that you were the dominant motive of his art.” “Oh, some of the papers do. It does not seem to me to be at all probable. I know there are dreadful places in Paris, but Basil was not the sort of man to have gone to them. He had no curiosity. It was his chief defect.”

“I would say, my dear fellow, that you were posing for a character that doesn’t suit you. All crime is vulgar, just as all vulgarity is crime. It is not in you, Dorian, to commit a murder. I am sorry if I hurt your vanity by saying so, but I assure you it is true. Crime belongs exclusively to the lower orders. I don’t blame them in the smallest degree. I should fancy that crime was to them what art is to us, simply a method of procuring extraordinary sensations.” “A method of procuring sensations? Do you think, then, that a man who has once committed a murder could possibly do the same crime again? Don’t tell me that.” “Oh! anything becomes a pleasure if one does it too often,” cried Lord Henry, laughing. “That is one of the most important secrets of life. I should fancy, however, that murder is always a mistake. One should never do anything that one cannot talk about after dinner. But let us pass from poor Basil. I wish I could believe that he had come to such a really romantic end as you suggest, but I can’t. I dare say he fell into the Seine off an omnibus and that the conductor hushed up the scandal. Yes: I should fancy that was his end. I see him lying now on his back under those dull-green waters, with the heavy barges floating over him and long weeds catching in his hair. Do you know, I don’t think he would have done much more good work. During the last ten years his painting had gone off very much.”

Dorian heaved a sigh, and Lord Henry strolled across the room and began to stroke the head of a curious Java parrot, a large, grey-plumaged bird with pink crest and tail, that was balancing itself upon a bamboo perch. As his pointed fingers touched it, it dropped the white scurf of crinkled lids over black, glasslike eyes and began to sway backwards and forwards. “Yes,” he continued, turning round and taking his handkerchief out of his pocket; “his painting had quite gone off. It seemed to me to have lost something. It had lost an ideal. When you and he ceased to be great friends, he ceased to be a great artist. What was it separated you? I suppose he bored you. If so, he never forgave you. It’s a habit bores have. By the way, what has become of that wonderful portrait he did of you? I don’t think I have ever seen it since he finished it. Oh! I remember your telling me years ago that you had sent it down to Selby, and that it had got mislaid or stolen on the way. You never got it back? What a pity! it was really a masterpiece. I remember I wanted to buy it. I wish I had now. It belonged to Basil’s best period. Since then, his work was that curious mixture of bad painting and good intentions that always entitles a man to be called a representative British artist. Did you advertise for it? You should.”

“I forget,” said Dorian. “I suppose I did. But I never really liked it. I am sorry I sat for it. The memory of the thing is hateful to me. Why do you talk of it? It used to remind me of those curious lines in some play—Hamlet, I think—how do they run?— The elder man lay back and looked at him with half-closed eyes. “By the way, Dorian,” he said after a pause, “‘what does it profit a man if he gain the whole world and lose—how does the quotation run?—his own soul’?” “My dear fellow,” said Lord Henry, elevating his eyebrows in surprise, “I asked you because I thought you might be able to give me an answer. That is all. I was going through the park last Sunday, and close by the Marble Arch there stood a little crowd of shabby-looking people listening to some vulgar street-preacher. As I passed by, I heard the man yelling out that question to his audience. It struck me as being rather dramatic. London is very rich in curious effects of that kind. A wet Sunday, an uncouth Christian in a mackintosh, a ring of sickly white faces under a broken roof of dripping umbrellas, and a wonderful phrase flung into the air by shrill hysterical lips—it was really very good in its way, quite a suggestion. I thought of telling the prophet that art had a soul, but that man had not. I am afraid, however, he would not have understood me.”

“Don’t, Harry. The soul is a terrible reality. It can be bought, and sold, and bartered away. It can be poisoned, or made perfect. There is a soul in each one of us. I know it.” “Ah! then it must be an illusion. The things one feels absolutely certain about are never true. That is the fatality of faith, and the lesson of romance. How grave you are! Don’t be so serious. What have you or I to do with the superstitions of our age? No: we have given up our belief in the soul. Play me something. Play me a nocturne, Dorian, and, as you play, tell me, in a low voice, how you have kept your youth. You must have some secret. I am only ten years older than you are, and I am wrinkled, and worn, and yellow. You are really wonderful, Dorian. You have never looked more charming than you do to-night. You remind me of the day I saw you first. You were rather cheeky, very shy, and absolutely extraordinary. You have changed, of course, but not in appearance. I wish you would tell me your secret. To get back my youth I would do anything in the world, except take exercise, get up early, or be respectable. Youth! There is nothing like it. It’s absurd to talk of the ignorance of youth. The only people to whose opinions I listen now with any respect are people much younger than myself. They seem in front of me. Life has revealed to them her latest wonder. As for the aged, I always contradict the aged. I do it on principle. If you ask them their opinion on something that happened yesterday, they solemnly give you the opinions current in 1820, when people wore high stocks, believed in everything, and knew absolutely nothing. How lovely that thing you are playing is! I wonder, did Chopin write it at Majorca, with the sea weeping round the villa and the salt spray dashing against the panes? It is marvellously romantic. What a blessing it is that there is one art left to us that is not imitative! Don’t stop. I want music to-night. It seems to me that you are the young Apollo and that I am Marsyas listening to you. I have sorrows, Dorian, of my own, that even you know nothing of. The tragedy of old age is not that one is old, but that one is young. I am amazed sometimes at my own sincerity. Ah, Dorian, how happy you are! What an exquisite life you have had! You have drunk deeply of everything. You have crushed the grapes against your palate. Nothing has been hidden from you. And it has all been to you no more than the sound of music. It has not marred you. You are still the same.”

“Yes, you are the same. I wonder what the rest of your life will be. Don’t spoil it by renunciations. At present you are a perfect type. Don’t make yourself incomplete. You are quite flawless now. You need not shake your head: you know you are. Besides, Dorian, don’t deceive yourself. Life is not governed by will or intention. Life is a question of nerves, and fibres, and slowly built-up cells in which thought hides itself and passion has its dreams. You may fancy yourself safe and think yourself strong. But a chance tone of colour in a room or a morning sky, a particular perfume that you had once loved and that brings subtle memories with it, a line from a forgotten poem that you had come across again, a cadence from a piece of music that you had ceased to play—I tell you, Dorian, that it is on things like these that our lives depend. Browning writes about that somewhere; but our own senses will imagine them for us. There are moments when the odour of _lilas blanc_ passes suddenly across me, and I have to live the strangest month of my life over again. I wish I could change places with you, Dorian. The world has cried out against us both, but it has always worshipped you. It always will worship you. You are the type of what the age is searching for, and what it is afraid it has found. I am so glad that you have never done anything, never carved a statue, or painted a picture, or produced anything outside of yourself! Life has been your art. You have set yourself to music. Your days are your sonnets.”

Dorian rose up from the piano and passed his hand through his hair. “Yes, life has been exquisite,” he murmured, “but I am not going to have the same life, Harry. And you must not say these extravagant things to me. You don’t know everything about me. I think that if you did, even you would turn from me. You laugh. Don’t laugh.” “Why have you stopped playing, Dorian? Go back and give me the nocturne over again. Look at that great, honey-coloured moon that hangs in the dusky air. She is waiting for you to charm her, and if you play she will come closer to the earth. You won’t? Let us go to the club, then. It has been a charming evening, and we must end it charmingly. There is some one at White’s who wants immensely to know you—young Lord Poole, Bournemouth’s eldest son. He has already copied your neckties, and has begged me to introduce him to you. He is quite delightful and rather reminds me of you.” “I hope not,” said Dorian with a sad look in his eyes. “But I am tired to-night, Harry. I shan’t go to the club. It is nearly eleven, and I want to go to bed early.”

“Do stay. You have never played so well as to-night. There was something in your touch that was wonderful. It had more expression than I had ever heard from it before.” “My dear boy, you are really beginning to moralize. You will soon be going about like the converted, and the revivalist, warning people against all the sins of which you have grown tired. You are much too delightful to do that. Besides, it is no use. You and I are what we are, and will be what we will be. As for being poisoned by a book, there is no such thing as that. Art has no influence upon action. It annihilates the desire to act. It is superbly sterile. The books that the world calls immoral are books that show the world its own shame. That is all. But we won’t discuss literature. Come round to-morrow. I am going to ride at eleven. We might go together, and I will take you to lunch afterwards with Lady Branksome. She is a charming woman, and wants to consult you about some tapestries she is thinking of buying. Mind you come. Or shall we lunch with our little duchess? She says she never sees you now. Perhaps you are tired of Gladys? I thought you would be. Her clever tongue gets on one’s nerves. Well, in any case, be here at eleven.”

“Very well. I shall be here at eleven,” said Dorian. “Good night, Harry.” As he reached the door, he hesitated for a moment, as if he had something more to say. Then he sighed and went out. It was a lovely night, so warm that he threw his coat over his arm and did not even put his silk scarf round his throat. As he strolled home, smoking his cigarette, two young men in evening dress passed him. He heard one of them whisper to the other, “That is Dorian Gray.” He remembered how pleased he used to be when he was pointed out, or stared at, or talked about. He was tired of hearing his own name now. Half the charm of the little village where he had been so often lately was that no one knew who he was. He had often told the girl whom he had lured to love him that he was poor, and she had believed him. He had told her once that he was wicked, and she had laughed at him and answered that wicked people were always very old and very ugly. What a laugh she had!—just like a thrush singing. And how pretty she had been in her cotton dresses and her large hats! She knew nothing, but she had everything that he had lost.

When he reached home, he found his servant waiting up for him. He sent him to bed, and threw himself down on the sofa in the library, and began to think over some of the things that Lord Henry had said to him. Was it really true that one could never change? He felt a wild longing for the unstained purity of his boyhood—his rose-white boyhood, as Lord Henry had once called it. He knew that he had tarnished himself, filled his mind with corruption and given horror to his fancy; that he had been an evil influence to others, and had experienced a terrible joy in being so; and that of the lives that had crossed his own, it had been the fairest and the most full of promise that he had brought to shame. But was it all irretrievable? Was there no hope for him? Ah! in what a monstrous moment of pride and passion he had prayed that the portrait should bear the burden of his days, and he keep the unsullied splendour of eternal youth! All his failure had been due to that. Better for him that each sin of his life had brought its sure swift penalty along with it. There was purification in punishment. Not “Forgive us our sins” but “Smite us for our iniquities” should be the prayer of man to a most just God.

The curiously carved mirror that Lord Henry had given to him, so many years ago now, was standing on the table, and the white-limbed Cupids laughed round it as of old. He took it up, as he had done on that night of horror when he had first noted the change in the fatal picture, and with wild, tear-dimmed eyes looked into its polished shield. Once, some one who had terribly loved him had written to him a mad letter, ending with these idolatrous words: “The world is changed because you are made of ivory and gold. The curves of your lips rewrite history.” The phrases came back to his memory, and he repeated them over and over to himself. Then he loathed his own beauty, and flinging the mirror on the floor, crushed it into silver splinters beneath his heel. It was his beauty that had ruined him, his beauty and the youth that he had prayed for. But for those two things, his life might have been free from stain. His beauty had been to him but a mask, his youth but a mockery. What was youth at best? A green, an unripe time, a time of shallow moods, and sickly thoughts. Why had he worn its livery? Youth had spoiled him.

It was better not to think of the past. Nothing could alter that. It was of himself, and of his own future, that he had to think. James Vane was hidden in a nameless grave in Selby churchyard. Alan Campbell had shot himself one night in his laboratory, but had not revealed the secret that he had been forced to know. The excitement, such as it was, over Basil Hallward’s disappearance would soon pass away. It was already waning. He was perfectly safe there. Nor, indeed, was it the death of Basil Hallward that weighed most upon his mind. It was the living death of his own soul that troubled him. Basil had painted the portrait that had marred his life. He could not forgive him that. It was the portrait that had done everything. Basil had said things to him that were unbearable, and that he had yet borne with patience. The murder had been simply the madness of a moment. As for Alan Campbell, his suicide had been his own act. He had chosen to do it. It was nothing to him.

A new life! That was what he wanted. That was what he was waiting for. Surely he had begun it already. He had spared one innocent thing, at any rate. He would never again tempt innocence. He would be good. As he thought of Hetty Merton, he began to wonder if the portrait in the locked room had changed. Surely it was not still so horrible as it had been? Perhaps if his life became pure, he would be able to expel every sign of evil passion from the face. Perhaps the signs of evil had already gone away. He would go and look. He took the lamp from the table and crept upstairs. As he unbarred the door, a smile of joy flitted across his strangely young-looking face and lingered for a moment about his lips. Yes, he would be good, and the hideous thing that he had hidden away would no longer be a terror to him. He felt as if the load had been lifted from him already. He went in quietly, locking the door behind him, as was his custom, and dragged the purple hanging from the portrait. A cry of pain and indignation broke from him. He could see no change, save that in the eyes there was a look of cunning and in the mouth the curved wrinkle of the hypocrite. The thing was still loathsome—more loathsome, if possible, than before—and the scarlet dew that spotted the hand seemed brighter, and more like blood newly spilled. Then he trembled. Had it been merely vanity that had made him do his one good deed? Or the desire for a new sensation, as Lord Henry had hinted, with his mocking laugh? Or that passion to act a part that sometimes makes us do things finer than we are ourselves? Or, perhaps, all these? And why was the red stain larger than it had been? It seemed to have crept like a horrible disease over the wrinkled fingers. There was blood on the painted feet, as though the thing had dripped—blood even on the hand that had not held the knife. Confess? Did it mean that he was to confess? To give himself up and be put to death? He laughed. He felt that the idea was monstrous. Besides, even if he did confess, who would believe him? There was no trace of the murdered man anywhere. Everything belonging to him had been destroyed. He himself had burned what had been below-stairs. The world would simply say that he was mad. They would shut him up if he persisted in his story.... Yet it was his duty to confess, to suffer public shame, and to make public atonement. There was a God who called upon men to tell their sins to earth as well as to heaven. Nothing that he could do would cleanse him till he had told his own sin. His sin? He shrugged his shoulders. The death of Basil Hallward seemed very little to him. He was thinking of Hetty Merton. For it was an unjust mirror, this mirror of his soul that he was looking at. Vanity? Curiosity? Hypocrisy? Had there been nothing more in his renunciation than that? There had been something more. At least he thought so. But who could tell? ... No. There had been nothing more. Through vanity he had spared her. In hypocrisy he had worn the mask of goodness. For curiosity’s sake he had tried the denial of self. He recognized that now.

But this murder—was it to dog him all his life? Was he always to be burdened by his past? Was he really to confess? Never. There was only one bit of evidence left against him. The picture itself—that was evidence. He would destroy it. Why had he kept it so long? Once it had given him pleasure to watch it changing and growing old. Of late he had felt no such pleasure. It had kept him awake at night. When he had been away, he had been filled with terror lest other eyes should look upon it. It had brought melancholy across his passions. Its mere memory had marred many moments of joy. It had been like conscience to him. Yes, it had been conscience. He would destroy it. He looked round and saw the knife that had stabbed Basil Hallward. He had cleaned it many times, till there was no stain left upon it. It was bright, and glistened. As it had killed the painter, so it would kill the painter’s work, and all that that meant. It would kill the past, and when that was dead, he would be free. It would kill this monstrous soul-life, and without its hideous warnings, he would be at peace. He seized the thing, and stabbed the picture with it.

There was a cry heard, and a crash. The cry was so horrible in its agony that the frightened servants woke and crept out of their rooms. Two gentlemen, who were passing in the square below, stopped and looked up at the great house. They walked on till they met a policeman and brought him back. The man rang the bell several times, but there was no answer. Except for a light in one of the top windows, the house was all dark. After a time, he went away and stood in an adjoining portico and watched. Inside, in the servants’ part of the house, the half-clad domestics were talking in low whispers to each other. Old Mrs. Leaf was crying and wringing her hands. Francis was as pale as death. After about a quarter of an hour, he got the coachman and one of the footmen and crept upstairs. They knocked, but there was no reply. They called out. Everything was still. Finally, after vainly trying to force the door, they got on the roof and dropped down on to the balcony. The windows yielded easily—their bolts were old.

When they entered, they found hanging upon the wall a splendid portrait of their master as they had last seen him, in all the wonder of his exquisite youth and beauty. Lying on the floor was a dead man, in evening dress, with a knife in his heart. He was withered, wrinkled, and loathsome of visage. It was not till they had examined the rings that they recognized who it was. This text is a combination of etexts, one from the now-defunct ERIS project at Virginia Tech and one from Project Gutenberg’s archives. The proofreaders of this version are indebted to The University of Adelaide Library for preserving the Virginia Tech version. The resulting etext was compared with a public domain hard copy version of the text. The pale Usher—threadbare in coat, heart, body, and brain; I see him now. He was ever dusting his old lexicons and grammars, with a queer handkerchief, mockingly embellished with all the gay flags of all the known nations of the world. He loved to dust his old grammars; it somehow mildly reminded him of his mortality.

“While you take in hand to school others, and to teach them by what name a whale-fish is to be called in our tongue, leaving out, through ignorance, the letter H, which almost alone maketh up the signification of the word, you deliver that which is not true.” —_Hackluyt._ “WHALE. * * * Sw. and Dan. _hval_. This animal is named from roundness or rolling; for in Dan. _hvalt_ is arched or vaulted.” —_Webster’s Dictionary._ It will be seen that this mere painstaking burrower and grub-worm of a poor devil of a Sub-Sub appears to have gone through the long Vaticans and street-stalls of the earth, picking up whatever random allusions to whales he could anyways find in any book whatsoever, sacred or profane. Therefore you must not, in every case at least, take the higgledy-piggledy whale statements, however authentic, in these extracts, for veritable gospel cetology. Far from it. As touching the ancient authors generally, as well as the poets here appearing, these extracts are solely valuable or entertaining, as affording a glancing bird’s eye view of what has been promiscuously said, thought, fancied, and sung of Leviathan, by many nations and generations, including our own.

So fare thee well, poor devil of a Sub-Sub, whose commentator I am. Thou belongest to that hopeless, sallow tribe which no wine of this world will ever warm; and for whom even Pale Sherry would be too rosy-strong; but with whom one sometimes loves to sit, and feel poor-devilish, too; and grow convivial upon tears; and say to them bluntly, with full eyes and empty glasses, and in not altogether unpleasant sadness—Give it up, Sub-Subs! For by how much the more pains ye take to please the world, by so much the more shall ye for ever go thankless! Would that I could clear out Hampton Court and the Tuileries for ye! But gulp down your tears and hie aloft to the royal-mast with your hearts; for your friends who have gone before are clearing out the seven-storied heavens, and making refugees of long-pampered Gabriel, Michael, and Raphael, against your coming. Here ye strike but splintered hearts together—there, ye shall strike unsplinterable glasses! “In that day, the Lord with his sore, and great, and strong sword, shall punish Leviathan the piercing serpent, even Leviathan that crooked serpent; and he shall slay the dragon that is in the sea.” —_Isaiah_.

In 1939 , Spain 's General Francisco Franco briefly considered a naval building program after seizing power in the Spanish Civil War . Franco concluded several agreements with the Italian government that would have seen the building of four Littorio-class battleships in Spain . The Italians promised to provide all necessary technical and material support for the construction of the ships . The Italian Navy pushed to modernize and enlarge the existing shipyards in Spain , so that they could handle a vessel as large as the Littorio class . The project was abandoned after Italy became involved in World War II , and as a result of limited Spanish industrial capacity . In the early 1930s , the Soviet Navy began a naval construction program , and sought advice from foreign shipbuilders for a new class of battleships . On 14 July 1939 , Ansaldo completed a design proposal for the Soviet Navy , for a ship largely based on the Littorio class , designated U.P. 41 . The design was for a 42,000 t ( 41,000 long tons ; 46,000 short tons ) ship armed with nine 406 mm guns in triple turrets . The Italians did not disclose the specifications of the Pugliese system and instead used a multiple-torpedo bulkhead system . Regardless , the Soviet Navy did not use the U.P. 41 design as the basis for the Sovetsky Soyuz-class battleships they laid down in the late 1930s . They were , however , equipped with the Pugliese system , the details of which were revealed through Soviet espionage .

A typhoon is a mature tropical cyclone that develops in the western part of the North Pacific Ocean between 180 ° and 100 ° E. This region is referred to as the Northwestern Pacific Basin , and is the most active tropical cyclone basin on Earth , accounting for almost one-third of the world 's annual tropical cyclones . For organisational purposes , the northern Pacific Ocean is divided into three regions : the eastern ( North America to 140 ° W ) , central ( 140 ° to 180 ° W ) , and western ( 180 ° to 100 ° E ) . The Regional Specialized Meteorological Center ( RSMC ) for tropical cyclone forecasts is in Japan , with other tropical cyclone warning centers for the northwest Pacific in Hawaii ( the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ) , the Philippines and Hong Kong . While the RSMC names each system , the main name list itself is coordinated among 18 countries that have territories threatened by typhoons each year . The Philippines use their own naming list for systems approaching the country . Within the northwestern Pacific there are no official typhoon seasons as tropical cyclones form throughout the year . Like any tropical cyclone , there are six main requirements for typhoon formation and development : sufficiently warm sea surface temperatures , atmospheric instability , high humidity in the lower to middle levels of the troposphere , enough Coriolis force to develop a low pressure center , a pre-existing low level focus or disturbance , and low vertical wind shear . The majority of storms form between June and November while tropical cyclone formation is at a minimum between December and May . On average , the northwestern Pacific features the most numerous and intense tropical cyclones globally . Like other basins , they are steered by the subtropical ridge towards the west or northwest , with some systems recurving near and east of Japan . The Philippines receive the brunt of the landfalls , with China and Japan being impacted slightly less . Some of the deadliest typhoons in history have struck China . Southern China has the longest record of typhoon impacts for the region , with a thousand-year sample via documents within their archives . Taiwan has received the wettest known typhoon on record for the northwest Pacific tropical cyclone basins .

The term Typhoon is the regional name in the northwest Pacific for a severe ( or mature ) tropical cyclone , whereas hurricane is the regional term in the northeast Pacific and northern Atlantic . Elsewhere this is called a tropical cyclone , severe tropical cyclone , or severe cyclonic storm . The Oxford English Dictionary cites several Oriental words from Persian and Chinese giving rise to two early forms in English : touffon ( from Persian ) and tuffoon / tay-fun ( from Chinese ) . The Persian source is the word توفان tūfān ( " storm " ; also Arabic طوفان ( ṭūfān , " to turn round " ) , Hindi तूफ ़ ान ( tūfān ) ) from the verb tūfīdan ( Persian : توفیدن / طوفیدن , " to roar , to blow furiously " ) . The Chinese source is the word tai fung ( simplified Chinese : 台风 ; traditional Chinese : 颱風 ; pinyin : táifēng ) , cited as a common dialect form of Mandarin dà " big " and fēng " wind " . In Mandarin the word for the windstorm is 大风 ( dàfēng , " big wind " ) and in Cantonese 大風 ( daai6 fung1 , " big wind " ) .

A tropical depression is the lowest category that the Japan Meteorological Agency uses and is the term used for a tropical system that has wind speeds not exceeding 33 knots ( 38 mph ; 61 km / h ) . A tropical depression is upgraded to a tropical storm should its sustained wind speeds exceed 34 knots ( 39 mph ; 63 km / h ) . Tropical storms also receive official names from RSMC Tokyo . Should the storm intensify further and reach sustained wind speeds of 48 knots ( 55 mph ; 89 km / h ) then it will be classified as a severe tropical storm . Once the system 's maximum sustained winds reach wind speeds of 64 knots ( 74 mph ; 119 km / h ) , the JMA will designate the tropical cyclone as a typhoon — the highest category on its scale . From 2009 the Hong Kong Observatory started to further divide typhoons into three different classifications : typhoon , severe typhoon and super typhoon . A typhoon has wind speed of 64-79 knots ( 73-91 mph ; 118 – 149 km / h ) , a severe typhoon has winds of at least 80 knots ( 92 mph ; 150 km / h ) , and a super typhoon has winds of at least 100 knots ( 120 mph ; 190 km / h ) . The United States ' Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) unofficially classifies typhoons with wind speeds of at least 130 knots ( 67 m / s ; 150 mph ; 241 km / h ) — the equivalent of a strong Category 4 storm in the Saffir-Simpson scale — as super typhoons . However , the maximum sustained wind speed measurements that the JTWC uses are based on a 1-minute averaging period , akin to the U.S. ' National Hurricane Center and Central Pacific Hurricane Center . As a result , the JTWC 's wind reports are higher than JMA 's measurements , as the latter are based on a 10-minute averaging interval .

There are six main requirements for tropical cyclogenesis : sufficiently warm sea surface temperatures , atmospheric instability , high humidity in the lower to middle levels of the troposphere , enough Coriolis force to develop a low pressure center , a pre-existing low level focus or disturbance , and low vertical wind shear . While these conditions are necessary for tropical cyclone formation , they do not guarantee that a tropical cyclone will form . Normally , an ocean temperature of 26.5 ° C ( 79.7 ° F ) spanning through a depth of at least 50 metres ( 160 ft ) is considered the minimum to maintain the special mesocyclone that is the tropical cyclone . These warm waters are needed to maintain the warm core that fuels tropical systems . A minimum distance of 500 km ( 300 mi ) from the equator is normally needed for tropical cyclogenesis . Whether it be a depression in the Intertropical Convergence Zone ( ITCZ ) or monsoon trough , a broad surface front , or an outflow boundary , a low level feature with sufficient vorticity and convergence is required to begin tropical cyclogenesis . About 85 to 90 percent of Pacific typhoons form within the monsoon trough . Even with perfect upper level conditions and the required atmospheric instability , the lack of a surface focus will prevent the development of organized convection and a surface low . Vertical wind shear of less than 10 m / s ( 20 kn , 33 ft / s ) between the ocean surface and the tropopause is required for tropical cyclone development . Typically with Pacific typhoons , there are two outflow jets : one to the north ahead of an upper trough in the Westerlies , and a second towards the equator .

In general , westerly wind increases associated with the Madden – Julian oscillation lead to increased tropical cyclogenesis in all tropical cyclone basins . As the oscillation propagates from west to east , it leads to an eastward march in tropical cyclogenesis with time during that hemisphere 's summer season . On average , twice per year twin tropical cyclones will form in the western Pacific ocean , near the 5th parallel north and the 5th parallel south , along the same meridian , or line of longitude . There is an inverse relationship between tropical cyclone activity in the western Pacific basin and the north Atlantic basin , however . When one basin is active , the other is normally quiet , and vice versa . The main reason for this appears to be the phase of the Madden – Julian oscillation , or MJO , which is normally in opposite modes between the two basins at any given time .

Nearly one-third of the world 's tropical cyclones form within the western Pacific . This makes this basin the most active on Earth . Pacific typhoons have formed year round , with peak months from August to October . The peak months correspond to that of the Atlantic hurricane seasons . Along with a high storm frequency , this basin also features the most globally intense storms on record . One of the most recent busy seasons was 2013 . Tropical cyclones form in any month of the year across the northwest Pacific ocean , and concentrate around June and November in the northern Indian ocean . The area just northeast of the Philippines is the most active place on Earth for tropical cyclones to exist . Across the Philippines themselves , activity reaches a minimum in February , before increasing steadily through June , and spiking from July through October , with September being the most active month for tropical cyclones across the archipelago . Activity falls off significantly in November , although Typhoon Haiyan , the strongest Philippine typhoon on record , was a November typhoon . The most frequently impacted areas of the Philippines by tropical cyclones are northern and central Luzon and eastern Visayas . A ten-year average of satellite determined precipitation showed that at least 30 percent of the annual rainfall in the northern Philippines could be traced to tropical cyclones , while the southern islands receive less than 10 percent of their annual rainfall from tropical cyclones . The genesis and intensity of typhoons are also modulated by slow variation of the sea surface temperature and circulation features following a near-10-year frequency .

Most tropical cyclones form on the side of the subtropical ridge closer to the equator , then move poleward past the ridge axis before recurving north and northeast into the main belt of the Westerlies . When the subtropical ridge position shifts due to El Niño , so will the preferred tropical cyclone tracks . Areas west of Japan and Korea tend to experience many fewer September – November tropical cyclone impacts during El Niño and neutral years . During El Niño years , the break in the subtropical ridge tends to lie near 130 ° E , which would favor the Japanese archipelago . During La Niña years , the formation of tropical cyclones , along with the subtropical ridge position , shifts westward across the western Pacific ocean , which increases the landfall threat to China and greater intensity to Philippines . Those that form near the Marshall Islands find their way to Jeju Island , Korea . Straight track ( or straight runner ) . A general westward path affects the Philippines , southern China , Taiwan , and Vietnam . A parabolic , recurving track . Storms recurving affect eastern Philippines , eastern China , Taiwan , Korea , Japan , and the Russian Far East .

Within the Western Pacific , RSMC Tokyo-Typhoon Center , part of the Japan Meteorological Agency has had the official warning responsibility for the whole of the Western Pacific since 1989 , and the naming responsibility for systems of tropical storm strength or greater since 2000 . However each National Meteorological and Hydrological Service within the western Pacific has the responsibility for issuing warnings for land areas about tropical cyclones affecting their country , such as the Joint Typhoon Warning Center for United States agencies , the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration ( PAGASA ) for interests in the island archipelago nation , and the Hong Kong Observatory for storms that come close enough to cause the issuance of warning signals .

The list of names consists of entries from 14 Southeast and East Asian nations and the United States who have territories directly affected by typhoons . The submitted names are arranged into five lists , and each list is cycled with each year . Unlike tropical cyclones in other parts of the world , typhoons are not named after people . Instead , they generally refer to animals , flowers , astrological signs , and a few personal names . However , PAGASA retains its own naming list , which does consist of human names . Therefore , a typhoon can possibly have two names . Storms that cross the date line from the central Pacific retain their original name , but the designation of hurricane becomes typhoon . In Japan , people use the numerical designation of typhoons according to the sequence of their occurrence in the calendar year .

The most active Western Pacific typhoon season was in 1964 , when 39 storms of tropical storm strength formed . The least activity seen in the northwest Pacific ocean was during the 2010 Pacific typhoon season , when only 14 tropical storms and seven typhoons formed . In the Philippines , the most active season , since 1945 , for tropical cyclone strikes was 1993 when nineteen tropical cyclones moved through the country . There was only one tropical cyclone that moved through the Philippines in 1958 . The 2004 Pacific typhoon season was the busiest for Okinawa since 1957 . Within Guangdong in southern China , during the past thousand years , the most active decades for typhoon strikes were the 1660s and 1670s . The highest reliably-estimated maximum sustained winds on record for a typhoon were those of Typhoon Haiyan at 195 miles per hour ( 314 km / h ) shortly before its landfall in the central Philippines on Nov. 8 , 2013 . The most intense storm based on minimum pressure was Typhoon Tip in the northwestern Pacific Ocean in 1979 , which reached a minimum pressure of 870 hectopascals ( 26 inHg ) and maximum sustained wind speeds of 165 knots ( 85 m / s , 190 mph , 310 km / h ) . The deadliest typhoon of the 20th century was Typhoon Nina , which killed nearly 100,000 in China in 1975 due to a flood that caused 12 reservoirs to fail . After Typhoon Morakot landed in Taiwan at midnight on August 8 , 2009 , almost the entire southern region of Taiwan ( Chiayi County / Chiayi City , Tainan County / Tainan City ( now merged as Tainan ) , Kaohsiung County / Kaohsiung City ( now merged as Kaohsiung ) , and Pingtung County ) and parts of Taitung County and Nantou County were flooded by record-breaking heavy rain . The rainfall in Pingtung County reached 2,327 millimeters ( 91.6 in ) , breaking all rainfall records of any single place in Taiwan induced by a single typhoon , and making the cyclone the wettest known typhoon .

The Halo Original Soundtrack is a soundtrack for the video game Halo : Combat Evolved . Composed and produced by Martin O 'Donnell and Michael Salvatori for Bungie , the soundtrack was released on June 11 , 2002 . Most of the music from Halo : Combat Evolved is present on the CD , although some songs have been remixed by O 'Donnell in medley form for " more enjoyable " listening . The first piece O 'Donnell wrote , known as " Halo " , became the basis for Halo 's " signature sound " which has been heard in the other games of the main trilogy . The soundtrack features a wide range of musical styles , including chanting , string orchestra , and percussion . Upon release , the soundtrack was well received by critics . Some complimented the wide range of musical styles , and most agreed that playing the game is not required to enjoy the soundtrack . A special edition of the soundtrack was released on October 28 , 2003 , featuring a DVD with a trailer , demo movie , and high quality music for Halo 2 .

As the audio director for Bungie , Martin O 'Donnell was tasked with writing the music for Halo : Combat Evolved . He had scored previous Bungie projects , including Myth : The Fallen Lords , while working for his audio company , TotalAudio , along with Michael Salvatori . O 'Donnell was nervous about the project , saying he approached it , " with fear and trepidation " . O 'Donnell stated his main influences were music he liked — " a little Samuel Barber meets Giorgio Moroder " . Bungie 's Director of cinematics , Joseph Staten told O 'Donnell , " the music should give a feeling of importance , weight , and sense of the ' ancient ' to the visuals of Halo " . O 'Donnell 's first piece of music , " Halo " , which would become " the signature theme for Halo " , was written and recorded in three days . O 'Donnell convinced Alex Seropian to allow him to produce an original piece of music for the game 's 1999 Macworld Conference & Expo demonstration . He drew inspiration for the theme from The Beatles ' " Yesterday " . O 'Donnell recruited Salvatori and three other colleagues he had recorded jingles with — Robert Bowker , Jeffrey Morrow , and Rob Trow — to produce the " chanting monks " that open the piece . Originally , he had intended the Qawwali accents to be sung by one of the professionals , but after singing an example of what he wanted , the others suggested using O 'Donnell 's own rendition instead . The theme premiered at the 1999 Macworld Conference & Expo .

The remaining themes were written , recorded , and produced throughout 2001 . The music was written with a variety of equipment including , " keyboards , synths , and samplers as well as digital recording equipment controlled by computers " . Live instrumentations , from members of the Chicago Symphony and Chicago Lyric Opera Orchestra , were added where needed . The soundtrack features a wide range of sounds , O 'Donnell described it as , " Gregorian chant , string orchestra , percussion and just a bit of a ' Qawwali voice ' " . Working closely with level designers , O 'Donnell divided the music " into chunks " . Based on these " chunks " , " [ Halo 's ] audio engine could play [ the music ] back dynamically based on the player 's actions " . For the soundtrack release , O 'Donnell rearranged the music featured in the game in order to make listening to the soundtrack " more enjoyable " . Bungie had previously released soundtracks for their games due to fan request , but Microsoft was hesitant to commit to producing a soundtrack for Halo ; at the time most video games did not get a commercial soundtrack release . The publisher finally relented after pressure from O 'Donnell and the outside solicitation of musician Nile Rodgers .

Reception of the soundtrack was generally positive from critics . IGN praised the soundtrack for its wide use of instruments stating , " Where other videogame scores tend to miss their mark when combining electronic and organic elements , O 'Donnell and Salvatori seem to have found a rather stable balance between the two divergent sounds . " Adding , overall , the soundtrack is " one of the better videogame oriented musical experiences out there " and playing the game is not required to find enjoyment within the score . Reviewing for Monsters At Play , Michael Johnson called the soundtrack " 66 minutes of orchestral goodness " citing the wide range of music covered as a strong point . Nuketown gave the soundtrack 9 out of 10 , stating , " the soundtrack is a welcome and invigorating reminder of good times had blasting unstoppable alien hordes " . The release went on to sell over 40,000 copies .

Icewind Dale II is a role-playing video game developed by Black Isle Studios and published by Interplay Entertainment , released on August 27 , 2002 . Like its 2000 predecessor Icewind Dale , the game is set in the Forgotten Realms fantasy setting in the Icewind Dale region . The player assumes control of a group of mercenaries in a war between the Ten Towns of Icewind Dale and a coalition of persecuted races and religions . The game is designed as an action-oriented alternative to other Infinity Engine games , with less emphasis on exploration and story . It uses a real-time adaptation of the Dungeons & Dragons ( D & D ) Third Edition ruleset . The Infinity Engine was extensively modified to comply with the Third Edition , but the team was forced to remove certain rules because of the engine 's outdated nature . It was the final game to be developed using the Infinity Engine . The game was well received by critics , who praised its combat , pacing , and use of the Third Edition rules . However , some reviewers felt that the graphics and engine had become outdated , and could not compete with its contemporaries .

Icewind Dale II is a real-time adaptation of the D & D Third Edition ruleset . The game is viewed from an isometric perspective , and a head-up display ( HUD ) occupies the bottom of the screen . Accessible from the HUD are an automap and a journal that records quests and important events . The player uses a point-and-click interface to interact with the game ; for example , clicking on the ground moves the selected player character , and clicking on a passive non-player character ( NPC ) will initiate dialogue . When conversations occur , the game presents multiple dialogue options . The game world is separated into area maps — obscured by fog of war — that are revealed as the area is explored . A multiplayer mode is available for up to six players over a local area network or the Internet . The " Heart of Fury " mode is also available , which increases the game 's difficulty and contains more powerful items . The game features over seven hundred items ; the designers included a system that randomizes the items the player obtains from enemies . When beginning the game , the player may choose to play a pre-selected party , or to create a party of up to six characters ; unlike the Baldur 's Gate series , Icewind Dale II does not permit the player to import characters from previous Icewind Dale games . While creating characters , the player chooses their gender , race , class , alignment , and attributes , among other things . The player can sometimes choose a subvariety of a race or class , such as Deep Gnome or Cleric of Ilmater . Race , alignment , and attributes affect the player character 's available dialogue options , as well as NPC responses . For example , some NPCs will be prejudiced against certain races , or a character of low intelligence will have limited dialogue options . Some sub-races in the game are significantly more powerful than the core races present in AD & D Third Edition ; these sub-races must earn more experience points than others before leveling up . Characters can reach a maximum level of thirty . It is possible to add additional characters to the party at any time , including during combat .

Icewind Dale II 's gameplay is focused on combat . The combat system is a real-time adaptation of the turn-based system used in D & D Third Edition , which caused the developers to remove certain aspects , such as " attacks of opportunity " . Dice rolls are simulated by the game . In place of the turn-based rounds used in D & D , characters have independent rounds , during which they may execute one or more actions , depending on such factors as the duration of the action . The player can pause the game and issue orders to characters at any time . Each character can carry a limited amount of items .

Icewind Dale II takes place in the Forgotten Realms D & D campaign setting , on the continent of Faerûn . It centers on the northern Icewind Dale region , and is set thirty years after the original game . The game begins in the harbor town of Targos , one of the Ten Towns of Icewind Dale , which is under siege by a goblin army . The goblins are directed by the Legion of the Chimera , an army composed of outcast races and religious factions , such as goblinoids , half-breeds , and followers of winter goddess Auril . Targos hires mercenaries to defend against the attack . Areas encountered in the game include : the Black Raven Monastery , built over an entrance to the Underdark ; the town of Kuldahar , constructed around a magical tree that emits heat ; the Severed Hand , an ancient elven fortress that was lost during a war with goblinoids ; and the Dragon 's Eye , a network of volcanic caverns inhabited by yuan-ti . Other areas include the Underdark and the Jungles of Chult .

The game begins as the player 's group of mercenaries arrives by ship to defend Targos . They report to the town palisade and fend off an assault by the goblin army . Afterwards , the mayor of Targos orders them to start an offensive on the goblin army . The group kills the chieftain of the army , and discovers that he was under the command of a woman named Sherincal . When they return to Targos , the mayor asks them to rendezvous with reinforcements from Neverwinter . The group travels to meet them in an airship piloted by Oswald Fiddlebender . A storm causes the ship to crash , and the group awakens to discover that a glacier blocks the reinforcements ' path . While investigating the glacier , the group finds Sherincal , a half-dragon , guarding the entrance to an Aurilite temple . They learn that Sherincal leads the Legion of the Chimera 's western forces , and that the leaders of the Legion of the Chimera , cambion twins named Isair and Madae , reside in the Severed Hand . Inside the Aurilite temple , the group finds a prisoner from Kuldahar , who asks them to warn Kuldahar of the threat posed by the Legion of the Chimera . After this , the group creates a passage through the glacier , and meets with the reinforcements .

As the group travels to Kuldahar , they meet a drow ( dark elf ) named Nym , who tells them that the pass to Kuldahar is guarded by the Legion of the Chimera , and that an alternate path through the Underdark exists . Later , Isair and Madae locate the group with information from Nym . They state their intention to attack Kuldahar , and warn the group to not interfere . The group then passes through the Black Raven Monastery to enter the Underdark . After exiting the Underdark , they are flown to Kuldahar by Oswald Fiddlebender . When the group lands in Kuldahar , they discover it has been invaded by the Legion of the Chimera . They meet the Archdruid of Kuldahar , who tells them that a portal has been opened to allow yuan-ti from the Jungles of Chult to assault Kuldahar . After the group prevents the attack , the Archdruid tells them that they may reach the Severed Hand through an exit at the bottom floor of the Dragon 's Eye . The group travels through Dragon 's Eye , and proceeds to the Severed Hand . Once inside , they learn that the war between the Ten Towns and the Legion of the Chimera was caused by the mayor of Bryn Shander , who had sent Isair and Madae poisoned food . They also discover that a mythal that was cast on the Severed Hand has been corrupted , and the structure will be transported to the plane of limbo . Eventually , the group finds Isair and Madae , and kills them .

During summer 2001 , Black Isle Studios employed three development teams . These included the Icewind Dale team , the team developing Torn , and a team working on an unannounced project . Before and during Torn 's development , several members of its team expressed interest in developing another game using the Infinity Engine . The development team was not made aware of Black Isle Studios ' decision to develop Icewind Dale II until Torn 's cancellation . Lead designer J. E. Sawyer described , " I don 't know when the producers decided to make the game , but I was told that we were making the game when I learned that TORN was being cancelled ... on a Wednesday afternoon " , and that Feargus Urquhart " asked me to work with Steve Bokkes to create a story and area overview by Thursday afternoon . Steve and I talked about it for the rest of the day . I went home that night and worked on the overviews until the next day . I came in and turned the docs in , and after the Friday division meeting , the project was in development . " During this period , Interplay Entertainment relied on Black Isle Studios ' games to alleviate financial trouble , which put pressure to release games quickly . The decision to develop Icewind Dale II was based partly on the original Icewind Dale 's reception , and the development teams ' ability to create a game with the Infinity Engine relatively quickly . Sawyer said of the decision , " In all honesty , the reasons for making Icewind Dale II have to do with limiting risks and maximizing our chances for a popular title . " Conceptualization of Icewind Dale II progressed during the development of the Icewind Dale expansions , and production began late July 2001 , shortly after the completion of Icewind Dale : Trials of the Luremaster . After six months of development , Icewind Dale II was officially announced on February 4 , 2002 .

Icewind Dale II was originally planned to be an incomplete conversion to the D & D Third Edition ruleset , with many rules omitted . The kit system ( class specialization ) introduced in Baldur 's Gate 2 was to be used , but this idea was later abandoned . Sawyer and several other members of the team pushed for the game 's conversion to Third Edition . The development team was eventually granted an extension , which allowed them to complete the change to Third Edition rules . The Infinity Engine required extensive modification to comply with Third Edition rules , as it had originally been designed for Second Edition rules ; certain elements of the rules were removed due to interface and engine issues . The game 's interface was redesigned , and all-new art was created . It features new item icons , with new spell icons by Brian Menze ; Menze had previously created Planescape : Torment 's spell icons . Jason Manley , the portrait artist for the previous Icewind Dale games , left Black Isle Studios in late 2001 ; several new works he painted before his departure were later used in Icewind Dale II . Black Isle Studios artist Justin Sweet was asked to substitute . The game 's resolution was increased to a minimum resolution of 800x600 , with an unofficially supported maximum resolution of 2048x1536 .

J. E. Sawyer managed rule implementation , but the areas of the game were divided between designers . For example , designer Chris Avellone created the opening sequence , designer Dave Maldonado developed the Black Raven Monastery and a large area of wilderness , and designers John Deiley and Damien Foletto created the ending areas . Partway through development , Sawyer left the team to work as the lead designer on another internal project ; Dave Maldonado and Chris Avellone were given his areas to finish . The developers wanted the game to contain more breaks from combat , with character interaction and puzzle solving , than the previous Icewind Dale . The decision to include more puzzles was influenced by the positive reception to the puzzles in Icewind Dale : Trials of the Luremaster . The game went gold on August 5 , 2002 , and was released on August 27 . After the release of Icewind Dale II , Sawyer expressed dissatisfaction over the Icewind Dale series , saying that , " I wasn 't particularly thrilled with how my work on [ Icewind Dale ] came out ... " and , " ... [ Heart of Winter ] managed to actually be worse than my Icewind Dale stuff . " In regards to Icewind Dale II he said , " [ It ] came out better than I expected , but still , not exactly awe-inspiring . " Chris Avellone later said , " Icewind Dale was a fun series , but it didn 't try to set the bar for anything other than a fun romp . People may remember enjoying it , but it wasn ’ t trying to break any new ground or do anything revolutionary . In some respects , it was almost a step back from other games we 'd done and focused more on exploration and dungeon crawls . " A Collector 's Edition containing bonus material , such as a full-color cloth map and soundtrack CD , was also released . Icewind Dale II was the final game developed using the Infinity Engine .

The music of the game was composed by Inon Zur , whose previous works included Baldur 's Gate 2 : Throne of Bhaal and Fallout Tactics . Inon Zur worked with Jeremy Soule , the composer for Icewind Dale , to maintain the tone of the music . Inon Zur also worked closely with Interplay audio director Adam Levenson while composing the music ; Zur and Levenson had worked together on several previous titles . Inon Zur said that while composing the theme for the game , " I wrote and rewrote the main theme several times " , and " we tried to create a piece that would preserve the sound of the first Icewind Dale [ ... ] we made great efforts to convey the new elements also . Capturing all of this in 30-45 seconds was not easy however I believe that we eventually found the right path for this game 's soundtrack . " Zur described the composing process , " After learning the storyboard and getting additional insight from the producers / music supervisor I 'll start to compose . The thematic idea ( main melody or rhythmical groove ) comes first . Then comes the accompaniment followed by the orchestration , " and that , " each piece should have its own unique flavour so every step is carefully examined . I have to make sure that the main idea of the piece is reflected in all these steps . " He called the composing experience " very pleasant and rewarding . "

The music was composed in five weeks , and the recording and mixing lasted three weeks . As the game 's music budget was low , a small Los Angeles orchestra was used to record the music ; the sound of the each instrument was doubled during production . Inon Zur described the music as having " some uniqueness to it , that basically it developed throughout the game [ with ] the [ inclusion ] of more instruments , taking flutes and percussion and combining them with the standard orchestra . " Zur later said , " I thought that we definitely met some high standards ; we compared our products to big budget films scores , " and , " in the end we were quite happy . " The game features voice work from Gabrielle Carteris , Peter Stormare , and Grey DeLisle , among others .

Icewind Dale II reached sixth on the NPD PC games sales chart in the last week of August 2002 , and climbed to fourth during the first week of September . Icewind Dale II 's reception was generally positive . Game Informer hailed it as , " one of the best RPGs ever released for the PC , " and GameSpot called it , " simply a great role-playing game . " However , PC Format said , " it 's uninspired and uninspiring , giving itself a narrow remit and fulfilling that unspectacularly . " Certain reviewers compared Icewind Dale II to Neverwinter Nights . IGN said , " [ Compared to Neverwinter Nights ] the pace of IWD2 is more varied , its balance better , the gameplay more interesting , " and Game Informer considered the interface superior to that of Neverwinter Nights . PC Format said , " in the light of Neverwinter Nights in particular , there ’ s little that stands out in Icewind Dale II to recommend it , " and PC Zone said , " it 's not the BG2 killer we had all hoped for and neither does it stack up to Neverwinter Nights . "

Many reviewers praised the game 's combat and pacing . G4 called the game 's combat " sublime , " and said that " no Infinity Engine game thus far has had such interesting and intricate tactical combat . " GameSpot called it " expertly paced . " PC Zone complained that certain gameplay mechanics had become outdated , but that " the only real downer is the antiquated spell system and the inexplicable necessity to rest after every fight . " The game was also praised for its implementation of the Third Edition rules and interface . Computer Gaming World said that " IWD II has the Third Edition rules down , and in no other place in the game is it more apparent than with character development , " and PC Gamer said it had " a dazzling implementation of the D & D 3rd Edition rules . " GameSpot called the interface " a big improvement on the spread-out interface of all previous Infinity Engine games , " and IGN said that " the customization improvements to the interface that seem so natural , they make you wonder why they weren 't thought of before . " Game Informer called the interface " absolutely inspired " and its inventory system " second to none . "

The game was criticized for its graphics and engine , which reviewers considered to be outdated . G4 called the engine " old " and " clunky " , and PC Format said that " the whole thing is limited by the creaking engine . " However , certain sources praised the engine . Game Informer called it " the best role-playing engine that has ever been invented , " and GameSpot said that " ' immortal ' may be a better word to describe the engine , because the fact is , Icewind Dale II plays great . " In regards to the graphics , GameSpot said that " in many ways Icewind Dale II represents the best use of the Infinity Engine 's prerendered , isometric settings to date , [ but ] that doesn 't change the fact that Icewind Dale II generally looks dated . " IGN thought the sprites had become out-dated , and that " the animations are crude by today 's standards . " New Straits Times agreed , saying that although some of the effects were attractive , the " dated Infinity engine " could not compare to contemporaries Dungeon Siege and Neverwinter Nights . However , Computer Gaming World believed that " it consistently offers the same striking and imaginative environments that establish the tone and immersive charm of the game , " and Computer Games Magazine said , " it may not look like much , but it 's got it where it counts . " The game 's pre-rendered backgrounds received praise . IGN said that " the artwork is attractive , both conceptually and in its final form , " and Game Informer called them " beautiful " . Many reviewers complained about the game 's pathfinding AI , which PC Zone called " outrageously bad . "

Game Informer called the writing and story " on par with any fantasy novel . " PC Gamer said it had " some of the richest and most enjoyable dialogue since Planescape Torment , " and an " impressive storyline . " GameSpot called the story " engrossing , " and said that " the game is very well written , offering up a number of strong characters and serious themes . " PC Zone noted that , " thanks to the excellent NPCs , the battles have a lot more meaning , as there is a strong storyline behind the endless hacking and slashing . " PC Format thought that " IDII also suffers , like its predecessor , from a story irrevocably weakened by anonymous central characters – the six you create . " In regards to the audio , GameSpot said that " Inon Zur does a truly fantastic job that 's perhaps even better than Soule 's effort in the original Icewind Dale , " and that " the voice acting in Icewind Dale II is as great as you 've perhaps come to expect from a Black Isle Studios role-playing game . " Computer Gaming World said that " [ the ] sound effects , music , and voiceovers are all excellent . "

Wu Zuguang ( Chinese : 吴祖光 ; Wade – Giles : Wu Tsu-kuang ; 21 April 1917 – 9 April 2003 ) was a Chinese playwright , film director and social critic who has been called a " legendary figure in Chinese art and literary circles " . He authored more than 40 plays and film scripts , including the patriotic drama City of Phoenix , one of the most influential plays during the Second Sino-Japanese War , and Return on a Snowy Night , which is generally considered his masterpiece . He directed The Soul of the Nation , Hong Kong 's first colour film , based on his own historical drama Song of Righteousness . He was also well known as an outspoken critic of China 's cultural policies , both of the Kuomintang ( KMT ) and the Communist governments , and was repeatedly persecuted as a result . He fled to Hong Kong in 1945 to avoid being captured by KMT agents , and returned to Beijing after the foundation of the People 's Republic China in 1949 . He was denounced as a " rightist " during the Anti-Rightist Movement and performed hard labour in the " Great Northern Wilderness " for three years , and was again persecuted during the Cultural Revolution . His wife , the celebrated pingju actress Xin Fengxia , refused to divorce him and became disabled after undergoing beatings and penal labour . Despite these ordeals , Wu continued to criticize government censorship and to call for political freedom , and was widely admired for his moral conviction .

Wu was born on 21 April 1917 to a prominent scholar-official family in Beijing , with ancestral roots in Changzhou , Jiangsu Province . His grandfather Wu Zhiying ( 吴稚英 ) was a muliao of the Qing dynasty reformer Zhang Zhidong and participated in the Xinhai Revolution . His father Wu Ying ( 吴瀛 ) was a founder and curator of the Beijing Palace Museum . His mother Zhou Qinqi ( 周琴绮 ) gave birth to 15 children , 11 of whom ( four sons and seven daughters ) survived to adulthood . She gave birth to Wu Zuguang , her first child , in the mansion of Wu Ying 's uncle Zhuang Yunkuan , a minister of the Republic of China government . In 1935 , Wu entered Sino-French University in Beijing . The next year , a relative who was running a drama school in Nanjing persuaded him to move there and teach at his school . There he met several people who would become prominent dramatists , including Cao Yu and Chen Zhice .

At the outset of the Second Sino-Japanese War in 1937 , Wu wrote the patriotic war play City of Phoenix ( 凤凰城 ) , which made him well-known in China at age 20 . It was one of the most performed dramas during the eight-year war . He later wrote several critically acclaimed plays , including Return on a Snowy Night , which is generally considered his masterpiece . His works are strongly influenced by the May Fourth New Culture Movement . As eastern China fell to the Japanese , he moved to the wartime capital Chongqing , where he worked as an editor for the Xinmin Wanbao newspaper . In 1945 , he published Mao Zedong 's now famous poem " Snow : to the Tune of Garden in Full Spring " , which infuriated the Kuomintang government . He escaped to British Hong Kong to avoid being captured by KMT agents , and made a living writing screenplays and making films . He directed The Soul of the Nation ( 国魂 ) , Hong Kong 's first colour film , based on his historical drama , Song of Righteousness , about the Song dynasty patriot Wen Tianxiang . He also made Return on a Snowy Night into a film , as well as two others . In 1946 , Wu married the actress Lü En ( 吕恩 ) in Shanghai .

After the Communist Party of China won the Civil War and established the People 's Republic of China in 1949 , Wu returned to Beijing . Like many intellectuals at the time , he held high hopes for the new People 's Republic which finally restored peace in a united China after decades of war and division . He wanted to return to writing plays , but was assigned by the government to direct Song of the Red Flag , a film about women textile workers . As he had no experience with factory life , it took him a year to finish the film , which he considered a " worthless failure . " He and Lü En divorced amicably in 1950 , due to differences in personality and interests . In 1951 , his friend Lao She introduced him to the famous pingju opera performer Xin Fengxia , who had acted in one of Wu 's plays and admired his talent . They married that year , despite the fact that they were from differing socioeconomic backgrounds ; she had no formal education and was nearly illiterate , while he was from a prominent family of scholars . Wu helped her to study reading , writing , and calligraphy .

During Mao Zedong 's Anti-Rightist Movement , Wu was denounced as a " rightist " in 1957 and sent to the Great Northern Wilderness in Heilongjiang to be " reformed through labour . " His crime was to criticize the Communist Party 's control of the theatre and to argue that the neihang ( experts ) should have a greater role in such matters . He was called an enemy of the Party , even by his renowned colleague Tian Han . Tian later referenced Wu 's work approvingly , which is seen by some as an implicit apology , and was himself persecuted to death . Xin Fengxia was pressured to divorce him , but refused . Citing a legendary love story from one of her operas , she said " Wang Baochuan waited 18 years for Xue Pinggui , and I will wait 28 years for Wu Zuguang . " As a result , she was herself labeled a rightist and went through struggle sessions . Wu returned to Beijing after three years of hard labour , but six years later , China fell into the even greater turmoil of the Cultural Revolution , which began in 1966 . Xin Fengxia and Wu Zuguang were both denounced at the beginning of the period . She became disabled below her left knee after a severe beating . Their friend Lao She drowned himself after being similarly tortured . During the tumultuous decade Wu and Xin both served years of forced labour . In December 1975 , she became paralyzed after suffering a stroke , and Wu took care of her for the rest of her life .

After the end of the Cultural Revolution , Wu was politically rehabilitated in 1980 and inducted into the Communist Party , an event he described as " neither an occasion for laughter or tears " , and his publication ban was lifted after two decades . His play Itinerant Players ( 闯江湖 ) , based on Xin Fengxia 's experiences , was performed that year . In 1983 , Wu traveled to the University of Iowa in the U.S. to attend the International Writing Program . Wu was in general loyal to Deng Xiaoping 's government , but continued to be an outspoken critic . In 1983 , he dismissed Deng 's Anti-Spiritual Pollution Campaign as futile . In September 1986 , he read an essay at a meeting of the China Writers Association entitled " Against Those Who Wield the Scissors — a Plea for an End to Censorship " . It was enthusiastically received by the audience , but only a censored version was published , minus 1,000 characters deemed " acrimonious " . After the December 1986 student demonstrations , he was pressured to leave the Communist Party in 1987 . Retired Politburo member Hu Qiaomu came to his home in person to demand his resignation from the Party . He obliged , as he did not think he was " the sort of person who should be in the Party . " In spring 1989 , Wu signed a petition calling for greater political freedom . Following the army crackdown of the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 , Wu called for a reassessment of the incident , but was forbidden to speak at a CPPCC meeting .

Zar 'a Ya`qob or Zera Yacob ( Ge 'ez ዘርአ : ያዕቆብ zar 'ā yāʿiqōb " Seed of Jacob , " modern zer 'a yā 'iqōb ) ( 1399 – 26 August 1468 ) was nəgusä nägäst ( 19 or 20 June 1434 – 1468 ) of Ethiopia ( throne name Kwestantinos I Ge 'ez ቈስታንቲኖስ qʷastāntīnōs or Constantine I ) , and a member of the Solomonic dynasty . Born at Tilq in the province of Fatagar ( now part of the Oromia Region , near the Awash River ) , Zara Yaqob was the youngest son of Dawit I and his youngest queen , Igzi Kebra . The British expert on Ethiopia , Edward Ullendorff , stated that Zara Yaqob " was unquestionably the greatest ruler Ethiopia had seen since Ezana , during the heyday of Aksumite power , and none of his successors on the throne – excepted only the emperors Menelik II and Haile Selassie – can be compared to him . " Paul B. Henze repeats the tradition that the jealousy of his older brother Tewodros I forced the courtiers to take Zara Yaqob to Tigray where he was brought up in secret , and educated in Axum and at the monastery of Debre Abbay . While admitting that this tradition " is invaluable as providing a religious background for Zar 'a-Ya 'iqob 's career " , Taddesse Tamrat dismisses this story as " very improbable in its details . " The professor notes that Zara Yaqob wrote in his Mashafa Berhan that " he was brought down from the royal prison of Mount Gishan only on the eve of his accession to the throne . "

Upon the death of Emperor Dawit , his older brother Tewodros ordered Zara Yaqob confined on Amba Geshen ( around 1414 ) . Despite this , Zara Yaqob 's supporters kept him a perennial candidate for Emperor , helped by the rapid succession of his older brothers to the throne over the next 20 years , and left him as the oldest qualified candidate . David Buxton points out the effect that his forced seclusion had on his personality , " deprived of all contact with ordinary people or ordinary life . " Thrust into a position of leadership " with no experience of the affairs of state , he [ Zara Yaqob ] was faced by a kingdom seething with plots and rebellions , a Church riven with heresies , and outside enemies constantly threatening invasion . " Buxton continues , In the circumstances it was hardly possible for the new king to show adaptability or tolerance or diplomatic skill , which are the fruit of long experience in human relationships . Confronted with a desperate and chaotic situation he met it instead with grim determination and implacable ferocity . Towards the end of his life , forfeiting the affection and loyalty even of his courtiers and family he became a lonely figure , isolated by suspicion and mistrust . But , in spite of all , the name of this great defender of the faith is one of the most memorable in Ethiopian history .

Although he became Emperor in 1434 , Zara Yaqob was not crowned until 1436 at Axum , where he resided for three years . It was not unusual for Ethiopian rulers to postpone their coronation until later in their reigns . After he became Emperor , Zara Yaqob married princess Eleni , who had converted from Islam before their marriage . Eleni was the daughter of the king of Hadiya , one of the Sidamo kingdoms south of the Abay River . Although she failed to bear him any children , Eleni grew into a powerful political person . When a conspiracy involving one of his Bitwodeds came to light , Zara Yaqob reacted by appointing his two daughters , Medhan Zamada and Berhan Zamada , to these two offices . According to the Chronicle of his reign , the Emperor also appointed his daughters and nieces as governors over eight of his provinces . These appointments were not successful . He defeated Badlay ad-Din , the Sultan of Adal at the Battle of Gomit in 1445 , which consolidated his hold over the Sidamo kingdoms in the south , as well as the weak Muslim kingdoms beyond the Awash River . Similar campaigns in the north against the Agaw and the Falasha were not as successful .

After witnessing a bright light in the sky ( which most historians have identified as Halley 's Comet , visible in Ethiopia in 1456 ) , Zara Yaqob founded Debre Berhan and made it his capital for the remainder of his reign . In his later years , Zara Yaqob became more despotic . When Takla Hawariat , abbot of Dabra Libanos , criticized Yaqob 's beatings and murder of men , the emperor had the abbot himself beaten and imprisoned , where he died after few months . Zara Yaqob was convinced of a plot against him in 1453 , which led to more brutal actions . He increasingly became convinced that his wife and children were plotting against him , and had several of them beaten . Seyon Morgasa , the mother of the future emperor Baeda Maryam I , died from this mistreatment in 1462 , which led to a complete break between son and father . Eventually relations between the two were repaired , and Zara Yaqob publicly designated Baeda Maryam as his successor .

At the time Zara Yaqob assumed the throne , the Ethiopian church had been divided over the issue of Biblical Sabbath observance for roughly a century . One group , loyal to the Coptic bishops , believed that the day of rest should be observed only on Sunday , or Great Sabbath ; another group , the followers of Ewostatewos , believed with their founder that both the original seventh-day Sabbath ( i.e. , Saturday , or Lesser Sabbath ) and Sunday should be observed . He was successful in persuading two recently arrived Egyptian bishops , Mikael and Gabriel , into accepting a compromise aimed at restoring harmony with the House of Ewostatewos , as the followers of Ewostatewos were known . At the same time , he made efforts to pacify the House of Ewostatewos . While the Ewostathians were won over to the compromise by 1442 , the two Egyptian bishops only agreed to the compromise at the Council of Debre Mitmaq in Tegulet ( 1450 ) . Emperor Zara Yaqob also continued as the defender of the Patriarch of Alexandria . When he heard in 1441 of the destruction of the Egyptian monastery of Dabra Mitmaq by Sultan Jaqmaq , he called for a period of mourning , then sent a letter of strong protest to the Sultan . He reminded Jaqmaq that he had Muslim subjects whom he treated fairly , and warned that he had the power to divert the Nile , but refrained from doing so for the human suffering it would cause . Jaqmaq responded with gifts to appease Zara Yaqob 's anger , but refused to rebuild the Coptic Churches he had destroyed .

Fujiwara Sadaie ( 藤原定家 ) , better-known as Fujiwara no Teika , ( 1162 – September 26 , 1241 ) was a Japanese poet , critic , calligrapher , novelist , anthologist , scribe , and scholar of the late Heian and early Kamakura periods . His influence was enormous , and he is counted as among the greatest of Japanese poets , and perhaps the greatest master of the waka form – an ancient poetic form consisting of five lines with a total of 31 syllables . Teika 's critical ideas on composing poetry were extremely influential and studied until as late as the Meiji era . A member of a poetic clan , Teika was born to the noted poet Fujiwara no Shunzei . After coming to the attention of the Retired Emperor Go-Toba ( 1180 – 1239 ; r . 1183 – 1198 ) , Teika began his long and distinguished career , spanning multiple areas of aesthetic endeavor . His relationship with Go-Toba was at first cordial and led to commissions to compile anthologies , but later resulted in his banishment from the retired emperor 's court . His descendants and ideas would dominate classical Japanese poetry for centuries afterwards .

Teika was born to a minor and distant branch of the aristocratic and courtly clan , the Fujiwara , in 1162 , sometime after the Fujiwara regents had lost their political pre-eminence in the Imperial court during the Hōgen Rebellion . His branch of the clan sought prestige and power in the court by aligning itself with the Mikohidari family , and by specializing in artistic endeavors , principally poetry . Such specialization was not unusual ; branches of extended clans were not in a position to compete directly in politics with the head branch of the clan ( or indeed other clans because of their junior status ) , but could compete in more restricted aesthetic pursuits . ( The Mikohidari , also known as the Miko , were a cadet branch of the Fujiwaras , through Fujiwara no Michinaga 's sixth son , Fujiwara no Nagaie ( 1005 – 1064 ) ; the Mikohidari were themselves aligned with the more senior Kujō branch of the original Fujiwara , who opposed the Rokujō family ) Teika 's grandfather was the venerable poet Fujiwara no Toshitada . His father was Fujiwara no Shunzei ( 1114 – 1204 ) , a well known and greatly respected poet ( and judge of poetry competitions ) , who had compiled the seventh Imperial anthology of waka ( the Senzai Wakashū ) . His sister would also become a well-respected poet of waka and renga , known as Kengozen or Shunzei 's Daughter , whom he would occasionally seek out for poetic advice . His elder brother , Fujiwara no Nariee ( sometimes romanized as " Nariie " ; 藤原成家 ) , would be somewhat successful in court , but not nearly as much as his sister . Teika 's foster-brother , the priest Jakuren or " Sadanaga " c . 1139 – 1202 would be successful as a poet although his career was cut tragically short ; he had been adopted by Shunzei when Shunzei 's younger brother " retired from the world " .

Teika 's goals as the senior male of his branch were to inherit and cement his father 's position in poetry , and to advance his own reputation ( thereby also improving the political fortunes of his own clan in the court ) . While his life would be marked by repeated illness and wildly shifting fortunes – only partially moderated by his father 's long-lasting influence in court ( Shunzei would live to the advanced age of 90 ) , the young and poetically inclined Retired Emperor Go-Toba 's patronage would prove to lead to some of Teika 's greatest successes .

The Retired Emperor Go-Toba announced , in the second year of his abdication ( 1200 , the second year of the Shōji era ) that he would be conducting a poetry contest . Retired Emperors frequently became more influential after their retirement from the office of Emperor rather than as the actual Emperor , since they were free from the highly restricting ceremonial requirements and politics of the court . Go-Toba was 20 when he abdicated ; he was the consummate amateur , skilled at playing the lute , considered an authority on traditional learning and courtly precedent , excellent at playing Go , and fond of equestrian pursuits such as horseback archery , shooting at running dogs , and swordsmanship . Go-Toba regarded all these pursuits as hobbies , taking one up and dropping another . One of these was his support of poetry , especially the waka . Immediately after his abdication , he had announced that he would hold two poetry contests , each requiring a number of preeminent poets to compose some 100 waka in a particular thematic progression , known as the hyakushu genre of poem sequences . The first contest ( Go-Toba In shodo hyakushu後鳥羽院初度百首 - " Ex-Emperor Go-Toba 's First Hundred-Poem Sequences " ) was considered a crucial political nexus ; if a clan 's poet did well and impressed the powerful ( and youthful ) Go-Toba , the clan would benefit considerably .

Teika 's diary records that he looked forward to this chance to improve himself . He was 38 , and had reached middle age . While he was recognized as a talented poet , his career was stagnant ; he had been in the Palace Guards of the Left for twenty years , and had not been promoted for nearly 10 . He was " Lesser Commander of the Palace Guards of the Left " with little prospect of further advancement . He had wider political problems : The influence of his patrons , the Kujōs , over the Emperors had declined drastically . Minamoto no Michichika ( d . 1202 ) had insinuated himself into Imperial circles through Go-Toba 's former nursemaid ; with this leverage , Michichika 's adopted daughter ( the then Shogun 's daughter , who had decided to marry his daughter off to the Emperor , using Michichika as a go-between – contrary to the Shogun 's usual policy if favoring Kujo Kanezane . The Shogun 's lack of confidence allowed Michichika to push Go-Toba into firing Kanezane as kampaku in 1196 ) became Go-Toba 's concubine ( making Michichika the Retired Emperor Go-Toba 's father in law ) , and she bore him his first heir in 1195 ; the shame of this usurpation led Go-Toba 's first wife , Ninshi , to retire from the court . As Ninshi was the daughter of the Kujō 's leader Kujo no Kanezane , the Kujō 's influence in court diminished considerably , even to the extent of Kanezane and Yoshitsune ( d . 1206 ; once the regent and prime minister ) being driven from the court in 1196 ; with the diminution of their influence , so dimmed Teika 's prospects . Teika expressed his disappointment through poetry , such as this example , written when he was " passed over for promotion in the spring list " in 1187 ( he would eventually be promoted in 1190 , but as his good and encouraging friend Saigyo died that year , it was cold comfort ) :

In fact , Teika was initially not invited , the instigation of the rival Rokujō clan 's leader , Suetsune and the connivance of Michichika . Suetsune and Teika were bitter enemies ; just a few months before , Teika had humiliated Suetsune by calling him " that fake poet " and publicly refusing to participate in a poetry competition with Suetsune . His revenge was well-done ; Teika was furious , writing in his Meigetsuki : : " I never heard of such a thing as choosing only senior poets [ writes Teika about the pretext used to exclude him ] . I can just see Suetsune at the bottom of this , contriving by some bribe that I be left out . It has to be Suetsune , Tsuneie , that whole family . Well , I have no regrets , for there is no possible hope for me now . But I did write in confidence to Kintsune so this may all come out eventually . He has replied that there is still room for hope . " " I gather that it was probably not the Emperor who decided on the rules for the hundred-poem competition . It was due entirely to the machinations of Michichika . One feels like flicking him away in disgust . "

Teika 's appeals to the unrelenting Michichika failed , and so Shunzei stepped in with an eloquent letter ( the well-known Waji sojo ; " Appeal in Japanese " – writing in Japanese as opposed to the official Chinese was considered a mark of sincerity ) addressed to Go-Toba , arguing that such an exclusion was without precedent , and motivated by base jealousy on their opponent 's part : " Of late the people who call themselves poets have all been mediocrities . The poems they compose are unpleasant to hear , wordy and lacking in finesse . " As Keene writes , " He denounced by name Teika 's enemy Suetsune , calling him an ignoramus , and urged Gotoba not to be misled by his machinations . " Gotoba relented at this appeal from a man he greatly respected ( the second time Shunzei had so interceded on Teika 's behalf ; the first time was in 1185 when Teika had lost his temper and struck a superior – the lesser general Masayuki – with a lamp ) . He allowed Teika , along with two other " young " poets , Fujiwara no Ietaka ( 1159 – 1237 ; 1158 – 1237 , according to Brower ) , adopted son of Jakuren and pupil to Shunzei , and Takafusa ( 1148 – 1209 ) to enter the contest . Teika was overjoyed at this turn of events :

" Early this morning came a message from Lord Kintsune that last evening the Ex-Emperor ordered my inclusion among the participants for the hundred-poem sequences ..... To have been added to the list for this occasion fills me with inexpressible joy . Though they can hinder me no more , I am still convinced that the trouble was all due to the machinations of those evil men . And that it has turned out this way is a fulfillment of all my hopes and prayers for this life and the next . " Teika furiously worked for more than two weeks to complete the full sequence , and when he finally turned his Shoji hyakushu in a day late , Go-Toba was so eager he read the poems immediately . Go-Toba 's personal secretary , Minamoto Ienaga , kept a diary ( the Minamoto Ienaga nikki ) which eulogistically concerned itself with Go-Toba 's poetic activities , and he records that it was Teika 's hundred-poem sequence , and more specifically , poem number 93 which was directly responsible for Teika 's being granted the special permission necessary to be admitted to the Retired Emperor 's court ( distinct from the reigning emperor 's court ; this special admittance was crucial to any future patronage ) ; this is scarcely surprising as the 100-poem sequences submitted were of uniformly high quality ( more poems originating in the sequences Go-Toba commissioned were included in the Shin Kokinshū than from any other source except the enormous " Poetry Contest in 1,500 Rounds " ) .

Interestingly , this poem is both a fine example of the jukkai ( " personal grievances " ) genre and as Minamoto no Ienaga first pointed out , also an allusion to the poem ( preserved , along with Go-Shirakawa 's reply , in the Imperial anthology Senzai Wakashū ) Shunzei had sent Retired Emperor Go-Shirakawa 14 years previously , imploring him to forgive Teika for striking a superior with a candlestick ; " the allusion conveys the hope that just as Shunzei 's poem obtained his erring son 's restoration to rank and office under Go-Shirakawa , now Teika 's own poem will win him admission to Go-Toba 's Court despite his connection with the " disgraced " Kujō faction . " Teika and Go-Toba would have a close and productive relationship ; Teika would be favored in such ways as being appointed by Go-Toba as one of the six compilers ( and de facto head compiler by virtue of his dedication and force of personality in addition to his already established reputation as a poet ) of the eighth Imperial Anthology of waka poetry , the esteemed Shin Kokinshū ( c . 1205 , " New Collection of Japanese Poetry , Ancient and Modern " ) which Go-Toba ordered to be written after the success of the hundred-poem sequences ( which furnished a base for the collection ) . In order to compile it , Go-Toba had resurrected the defunct institution , the Poetry Bureau in the seventh month of 1201 , with fifteen yoryudo , or " contributing members " , and three added later ) , who participated in the many poetry contests and similar activities that soon began taking place in the Bureau ; of the Fellows , six ( Minamoto Michitomo , Fujiwara Ariie , Teika , Fujiwara Ietaka , Fujiwara Masatsune and Jakuren , who would not live to finish the task , and was not replaced . Minamoto Ienaga was apparently detached from being Go-Toba 's personal secretary to instead serve as the secretary for the compilation committee ; his and Teika 's diaries have survived , affording an unprecedentedly good view of the inner workings of how an imperial anthology was created ) were chosen to compile the Shin Kokinshū in the eleventh month of 1201 .

This favorable patronage and collaboration eventually soured even as Teika 's relation with Emperor Juntoku and Minamoto no Sanetomo deepened , over many things such as differences in how one should use " association and progression " ( as Brower terms it ) in poetic sequences . In 100-poem sequences and the like , the poems were usually in one of several groups ( the four seasons were common ones , as was love ) ; the poems generally formed an integrated sequence in which they dealt with the same subject matter , proceeding from stage to stage ( for instance , a sequence on Love might proceed from loneliness , to falling in love , to a mature relationship , and then the sorrow when it ends ) or which refer to elements of previous poems ( a technique later central to renga sequences ) . Go-Toba used such techniques consistently and often , whereas Teika 's use was more erratic . During the compilation of the Shin Kokinshū , there were other differences , apparently over how wide-ranging a net to throw for poems : " In a situation like the present , where he [ Go-Toba ] has included poems by a great many people one has never heard of , whose names have remained in almost total obscurity for generations , and persons who have only recently begun to attract attention had as many as ten poems apiece included – in such a situation it is no particular distinction for me to have forty-odd [ 46 ] poems chosen , or for Ietaka to have a score or more . The Ex-Sovereign 's recent decisions make it appear he is choosing men rather than poems – a questionable procedure . "

Teika 's displeasure manifested itself in more petty ways , such as refusing to attend a banquet in 1205 ( 300 years after the Kokinshū was completed ) celebrating the official completion of the Shin Kokinshū because there was no precedent for such a banquet ( apparently he was not convinced by the precedent of the banquet celebrating the completion of the Nihon Shoki ) ; Go-Toba reciprocated by cutting Teika out of the process of continually revising the Shin Kokinshū ( while it was officially complete by the date of the banquet , it was de facto incomplete as the Japanese Preface only existed in rough drafts and because Go-Toba would continue revising the selection of poems for some time thereafter , only releasing the final edition approximately 6 years later , sometime after the ninth month of 1210 ; indeed , Go-Toba would continue revising it until his death , although the later revisions are not extant ) . In addition , there apparently were serious personality conflicts , which lead Go-Toba to write once , after praising Teika 's poetry , that : " The way Teika behaved , as if he knew all about poetry , was really quite extraordinary . Especially when he was defending his own opinion , he would act like the man who insisted a stag was a horse . He was utterly oblivious of others , and would exceed all reason , refusing to listen to anything other people had to say . "

( The stag and horse anecdote refers to the ancient Chinese Chao Kao ( d . 207 BCE ) , who revolted after an incident in which he brought a stag to the Imperial court , claimed it was actually a horse , and saw that more of the officials sycophantically agreed with him , rather than the emperor who pointed out that the horse was actually a stag . ) Donald Keene believes that as Teika grew more important , he resented Go-Toba 's peremptory use of him . In his later years , Go-Toba took issue not merely with Teika 's personality , but also with his poetry , complaining of Teika 's more liberal style that Teika ( among other things ) " by contrast , paid no attention whatsoever to the topic . For this reason in recent times even beginners have all come to be like this . It is outrageous . Only when one concentrates very hard upon a compound topic and composes a poem which centers upon the topic is the result of any interest . This modern style is sheer carelessness . It is absolutely essential to practice composing poems on compound topics in the correct way . "

In any event , the precipitating events were two incidents , one in 1207 and the next in 1220 . In 1207 , Go-Toba decided to organize the creation of 46 landscape screens for the Saishō Shitennō Temple which he had built in 1205 ( interestingly , apparently " in order to enlist divine aid in the overthrow the feudal government " ) ; each of these screens would also have a waka on the famous landscape depicted , composed by a leading poet , who would compose the requisite 46 , with the best poems for each landscape selected . Of course , Teika was asked to contribute , but one ( on the " Wood of Ikuta " , a famous and picturesque woodland attached to the Ikuta Shrine of Settsu Province , modern-day Kobe ; it was famous for being a battlefield between the Minamoto and Taira clans , as well as for its scenic beauty ) was rejected by Go-Toba ; not because it was a bad poem , but because it was a " poor model " , as Keene puts it . Teika , already annoyed by the minimal notice for the contest and the lack of time for composing the poems ( he had to turn them in two days after he was first informed of the contest ) , began complaining about Go-Toba and attacking his poetic judgement , both with regard to the Shin Kokinshū and the poems selected from the screens . Nothing came of this incident , but nevertheless , the damage had been done .

The second incident took place in the second month of 1220 and is described in a preface to the two poems concerned as recorded in Teika 's personal anthology , the Shū gusō ; during the six-year period covering such events as Teika 's banishment from Go-Toba 's court and Go-Toba 's participation in the Jōkyū War of 1221 , Teika 's diary is silent . Teika was asked to participate in a poem competition on the 13th of the second month ; Teika declined , citing as a reason the anniversary of his mother 's death 26 years previous , in 1194 . Go-Toba and his officials sent several letters to him , strongly urging him to come , and Teika eventually gave in , arriving with only two waka . The headnote to the two poems reads : " Having been summoned to the palace for a poetry gathering on the thirteenth day of the second month in the second year of Shokyu [ 1220 ] , I had begged to be excused because of a ritual defilement , it being the anniversary of my mother 's death . I thought no more about it , but quite unexpectedly in the evening of the appointed day , the Archivist Iemitsu come with a letter from the ex-emperor , saying that I was not the hold back on account of the defilement , but was to come in any case . I continued to refuse , but after the ex-emperor had sent two more letters insisting on my presence , I hastily wrote down the following two poems and took them with me . "

The first waka was critical of Go-Toba but otherwise fairly innocuous , but the second was quite pointed , obliquely attacking Go-Toba both for forcing Teika to attend Go-Toba 's contest when Teika was memorializing his mother and also for insufficiently promoting Teika ( the final line is a variation on a phrase dealing with " double griefs " ) : Go-Toba saw this attack as both ingratitude of the rankest sort and the culmination of a series of affronts , this latest being petty resentment at what Go-Toba would have seen as a flimsy pretext for attempting to get out of the poetry competition . Accordingly , he banished Teika from his court , a banishment that would last for more than a year ; this feud distressed devotees of poetry .

Possibly another a factor in this estrangement was politics – Teika had had the good fortune of being selected in 1209 as a poetry teacher to the new and young shogun , Minamoto no Sanetomo ; the Shogunate was a rival and superior authority to that of the Emperors and the Imperial court . It was probably to the unhappy Sanetomo that Teika addressed the prefatory essay to his didactic collection , Kindai shūka ( " Superior Poems of Our Time " ) , and his treatise on poetry Maigetsusho ( " Monthly Notes " ) . Go-Toba would become an enemy of the then-bedridden Teika . Fortunately for Teika , Go-Toba would be exiled by the Kamakura shogunate in 1221 for the rest of life to the Oki Islands after Go-Toba led a failed rebellion against the Shogunate ( the Jōkyū War ) which Go-Toba had long hated ; Teika 's political fortunes improved in this period , as it was after Go-Toba 's exile that Teika was appointed compiler of the ninth imperial anthology , the Shinchokusen Wakashū ( " New Imperial Collection " ; completed c . 1234 ) . While it was a great honor , it was poorly received except by conservatives . According to Donald Keene , Shunzei 's Daughter " declared that if it had not been compiled by Teika she would have refused even to take it into her hands . " ( From a letter sent to Fujiwara no Tameie , Teika 's son ) . She and others also criticized it for apparently deliberately excluding any of the objectively excellent poems produced by the three Retired Emperors exiled in the aftermath of the Jōkyū War This absence has been variously attributed to vengefulness on the part of Teika , or simply a desire to not potentially offend the Kamakura shogunate .

In 1232 , Teika was advanced at the age of 70 to the court rank of " Gon Chūnagon " ( Acting Middle Counselor . But even Teika 's improved fortunes could not insulate him entirely from the various famines and disasters that wracked the country in this period , and which greatly exacberated his illnesses : " Today I had my servants dig up the garden ( the north one ) , and plant wheat there . Even if we only grow a little , it will sustain our hunger in a bad year . Don 't make fun of me ! What other stratagem does a poor old man have ? " ( Meigetsuki , 13th day of the 10th month , 1230 ) " Starving people collapse , and their dead bodies fill the streets . Every day the numbers increase .... The stench has gradually reached my house . Day and night alike , people go by carrying the dead in their arms , too numerous to count . " ( Meigetsuki , 2nd day of the 7th month , 1231 ) During the later portions of his life , Teika experimented with refining his style of ushin , teaching and writing it ; in addition to his critical works and the manuscripts he studied and copied out , he experimented with the then-very young and immature form of renga – " They are an amusement to me in my dotage . " He died in 1241 , in Kyoto , and was buried at a Buddhist temple named " Shokokuji " .

One of his 27 children by various women ( and one of two legitimate sons ) , Fujiwara no Tameie ( 1198 – 1275 ; he is remembered as a reluctant heir , in youth inclining rather to court football at the encouragement of Go-Toba than to poetry ) , would carry on Teika 's poetic legacy . Tameie 's descendants would split into three branches : the conservative elder Nijō branch ( founded by Tameie 's elder son , Nijō Tameuji ( 1222 – 1286 ) ; the middle branch of the Kyōgoku founded by Fujiwara no Tamenori ( 1226 – 1279 ) , which , before it became extinct in 1332 with the death of Fujiwara no Tamekane , merged with the Reizei at the prompting of Nun Abutsu ; and the younger , more liberal Reizei branch , founded by Tameie ' younger son Fujiwara no Tamesuke ( b . 1263 ) by Abutsu ( d. circa 1283 ; a poet and a great diarist , especially remembered for her diary Isayoi Nikki ( " Diary of the Waning Moon " ) chronicling her legal battles to get the Kamakura shogunate to stop Tameuji from disinheriting Tamesuke of the Hosokawa estate near the capital that Tameie had left Tamesuke ) .

It is a testament to Teika 's importance that the poetic history of the next centuries is in large part a story of the battles between the rival branches ; indeed , it is this rivalry that is chiefly responsible for the great number of forgeries attributed to Teika . When the Reizei lost a court case concerning possession of the Hosokawa estate Tameie had willed to Tamesuke , they were ordered to hand over the valuable manuscripts and documents inherited from Teika and Tameie over to the Nijō ; they outwardly complied , but along with the few genuine documents whose existence the Nijō had already learned of , they mostly included forgeries which the Nijō had little choice but to accept . In retaliation , the Nijō manufactured a number of forgeries of their own , the better to buttress their claims . After a period of Reizei ascendancy under Reizei Tamehide ( 冷泉為秀 , great-grandson of Teika ) ( b . 1302 ? , d . 1372 ) , they suffered a decline and a consequent rise in the fortunes of the Nijō , as Tamehide 's son , Iametuni , became a Buddhist monk . However , the Nijō soon suffered setbacks of their own under the wastrel Nijō no Tameshige ( b . 1325 , d . 1385 ) , whose promising son , Nijō no Tametō ( b . 1341 , d . 1381 ) , died comparatively young , killed by a brigand .

" In this art of poetry , those who speak ill of Teika should be denied the protection of the gods and Buddhas and condemned to the punishments of hell . " -Shōtetsu Teika selected the works for the Ogura Hyakunin Isshu , an anthology of a hundred poems by a hundred poets . His Ogura Hyakunin Isshu was later thought to be a book of waka theory in which all types of ideal waka and all techniques were laid out ; disputes over specific style and whether to be conservative or liberal that divided his descendants into a number of feuding schools / clans like the Reizei , Kyōgoku , and Nijō . Teika made many manuscript copies of Japanese classics , including such landmarks of Japanese literature as The Tale of Genji , The Tales of Ise and the Kokinshū anthology . In his days , the ancient Japanese pronunciations were lost or difficult to understand , rendering the orthography of kana confused and uncertain . Teika researched old documents and recovered the earlier system of deciding between interpretations of kana , and developed a systematic orthography which was used until the modern Meiji period . He applied his kana system to his manuscripts , which were known for their accuracy and general high quality and called Teika bon ( " Teika text " ) . Using his method he was able to document the accurate pronunciation of earlier waka like the ones in the Kokin Wakashū . His manuscripts were also appreciated for his eponymous distinct and bold style of calligraphy . The Adobe font " Kazuraki SPN " , released in 2009 , is based upon the calligraphic style of Fujiwara Teika .

Teika is also remembered , like his father , as being something of an innovator – the Encyclopædia Britannica says : " Teika employed traditional language in startling new ways , showing that the prescriptive ideal of " old diction , new treatment " [ kotoba furuku , kokoro atarashi ] inherited from Shunzei might accommodate innovation and experimentation as well as ensure the preservation of the language and styles of the classical past . " The " old diction " here are phrases and words from the " Three Collections " : the Kokinshū , the Gosen Wakashū , and the Shūi Wakashū , but not much older than that ( for instance , the diction of the Man 'yōshū was considered too old ) . Teika wrote in his Maigetsusho that the best poems were spontaneous and original , but nevertheless traditional : " But such a notion is quite erroneous . For if we were to call such verses as that superior , then any poem at all we might write could be a fine one . No , first the powers of invention must be freed by reciting endless possibilities over and over to oneself . Then , suddenly and spontaneously , from among all the lines one is composing , may emerge a poem whose treatment of the topic is different from the common run , a verse that is somehow superior to the rest . It is full of poetic feeling , lofty in cadence , skillful , with resonances above and beyond the words themselves . It is dignified in effect , its phrasing original , yet smooth and gentle . It is interesting , suffused with an atmosphere subtle yet clear . It is richly evocative , its emotion not tense and nervous but sensible from the appropriateness of the imagery . Such a poem is not to be composed by conscious effort , but if a man will only persist in unremitting practice , he may produce one spontaneously . "

The following is an example of how Teika used old and classic imagery such as Takasago and Onoe , as well as pine and cherry trees , in fresh ways : His poems were described as remarkable for their elegance and exemplars of Teika 's ideals , in his early and later years ( respectively ; Teika considerably modified his personal beliefs during his 40s , after the death of Shunzei , and simplified his style of composition ) , of the styles of yoen – one of the ten orthodox styles Teika defined and defended in his poetic criticism , with some of the others being the onihishigitei ( " demon-quelling force " ) style , the style of sabi or " loneliness " ( closely related to mono no aware ) , the style of yugen , or " mystery and depth " ; the yoen style was concerned with " ethereal beauty " , and ushin ( " deep feeling " or " conviction of feeling " . This shift in style from yoen to ushin was intended to achieve a certain sort of makoto , or integrity ; Teika sometimes referred to his aim as ushin ( " deep feeling " ) , which confusingly was also the name of one of the ten styles . The yoen style was one of the most popular in his time due in no small part to Teika 's of it ( yoen had first been described by Fujiwara no Mototoshi in the 1150s , but had been only marginally successful ) ; years later , the Symbolists would admire and emulate ( to a degree ) his use of language to evoke atmosphere in his brief poems in the yoen style . An excellent example ( and one later chosen for an Imperial anthology ) is the first poem below :

Shūi gusō ( 拾遺愚草 ) ; Teika 's personal anthology which includes over 3500 poems selected by himself . The two poems which offended Retired Emperor Go-Toba so much and caused the rift between Teika and him are preserved here only . Meigetsuki ( 明月記 ) ( " The Record of the Clear Moon " ; sometimes called " Diary of the Clear Moon " or possibly " Chronicle of the Bright Moon " ; as the second translation suggests , this was a diary Teika kept in classical Chinese between the ages of approximately 18 ( in 1180 ) to just before his death , around 1241 ; the entries for 1180 and 1181 may have been written when Teika was an old man , but the bulk of the diary covers the 47 years between 1188 and 1235 . As its comprehensiveness might suggest , it is an extremely valuable resource for understanding the court and Teika 's place in the Imperial court , even despite its incompleteness — available extant versions consist of 56 scrolls ( the Reizei family possesses in its family library holographs of 56 and copies of two more ) , while scholars estimate that the original consisted of over 180 scrolls . ) Among its many interesting passages ( some quoted previously ) about Teika 's career and life is a famous passage from the ninth month of 1180 about Teika 's indifference to political or military advancement , in which he aristocratically remarked that " Reports of disturbances and punitive expeditions fill one 's ears , but I pay them no attention . The red banners and the expeditions against the traitors are no concern of mine . " ( Here , " red banners " probably refers to the Imperial standard ; the last line is possibly a reference to a poem by Po Chu-i in which he tells of how he has been effectively exiled and passes his time playing Go ) .

Hyakunin isshu ( 百人一首 ) ( c . 1235 " Single Poems by One Hundred Poets " ; this collection became the foundation of the modern Japanese New Year game karuta . ) Hyakunin Shūka ( 百人秀歌 ) ( 1229 – 1236 ? ; a 101-poem anthology arranged at the request of Utsunomiya Yoritsuna to be copied onto 101 strips of paper and pasted onto the walls of his villa ; it has 97 poems in common with Hyakunin isshu , suggesting that perhaps it is a misidentified and variant version of the Isshu . ) Gotoba-in Kumano Gokō Ki ( 熊野御幸記 ) ( 1201 ; " The Visit of the Cloistered Emperor to Kumano " ) . Portion of Meigetsuki which Teika wrote about a trip to Kumano he took with Go-Toba and Michichika ; like his other diary , it is written in classical Chinese , except for the wakas along the way to the shrines there that Go-Toba was so devoted to that this trip was but one of more than thirty . Teika seems not to have enjoyed the trip ; his diary often records concern over his health and matters of decorum such as the proper clothes to wear .

Eiga taigai or Eika no Taigai ( 詠歌大概 ) ( c . 1216 , 1222 ? ; " Essentials of Poetic Composition " ) . Besides normal advice and criticism of poetry such as pedantic rules on honkadori – poems used as a base in honkadori should always be old poems and from either the Kokinshū , Shūi Wakashū , or the Gosen Wakashū with no more than two and a half lines borrowed from the originals ; similarly , borrowed elements were to be moved within the new poem and the new poem should have a different theme ) , Teika also tellingly recommends certain classic works for aspiring poets to study : the Tales of Ise , Sanjurokkasen ( or " Poems of the Thirty-Six Immortals " ) and the first two portions of The Collected Works of Po Chü-i . Portions of the Eiga taigai have been translated into English Kindai shūka ( 近代秀歌 ) ( c . 1209 ; " Superior Poems of Our Time " ; a collection of poems Teika felt to be excellent models , with a preface dealing with his critical philosophy , sent to Sanetomo to instruct him in how his poems should emulate the great ancient Japanese poets – teaching by example . This sequence was constructed when he was 47 , after the death of Shunzei , which depressed Teika , as evidenced by his writing in the Kindai shūka that he had " forgotten the color of the followers of words ; the well-springs of inspiration have run dry . " )

Maigetsusho ( 毎月抄 ) ( c . 1219 ; " Monthly Notes " ; an epistle of corrections of one hundred poems , sent to a student of Teika 's . Besides the corrections , it bore a preface which is a major source of information regarding Teika 's view on the aesthetics of poetry ; Shōtetsu states that it was sent to Minamoto no Sanetomo ; Ton 'a holds rather that it had been sent to the " Kinugasa Great Inner Minister " , or Fujiwara no Ieyoshi . ) Besides Brower 's English translation , the Maigetsusho was also translated to French , Italian and Hungarian . Matsuranomiya Monogatari ( 松浦宮物語 ) ( " The Tale of the Matsura Palace " ; an experimental novel believed to be written by Teika , though Teika 's manuscript claims that he was merely copying it . ) Teika Jittai ( 定家十体 ) ( 1207 – 1213 ; an anthology of 286 poems , chiefly derived from the Shin Kokinshū ; long believed a forgery , but some modern scholars contend that it is a genuine work . )

Evan Rachel Wood ( born September 7 , 1987 ) is an American actress . She began acting in the 1990s , appearing in several television series , including American Gothic ( 1995 – 1996 ) and Once and Again ( 1999 – 2002 ) . Wood made her début as a leading film actress at the age of nine in Digging to China ( 1998 ) and became well known after her transition to a more adult-oriented Golden Globe-nominated role in the teen drama film Thirteen ( 2003 ) . Wood continued acting mostly in independent films , including Pretty Persuasion ( 2005 ) , Down in the Valley ( 2006 ) , Running with Scissors ( 2006 ) , and in the big studio production Across the Universe ( 2007 ) . Since 2008 , Wood has appeared in more mainstream films , including The Wrestler ( 2008 ) , Whatever Works ( 2009 ) and The Ides of March ( 2011 ) . She has also returned to television , playing the supporting role of Queen Sophie-Anne on True Blood from 2009 to 2011 and playing Kate Winslet 's character 's daughter in the HBO miniseries Mildred Pierce ( 2011 ) , a role for which she was nominated for the Golden Globe and Emmy Award for Best Supporting Actress .

Wood was born in Raleigh , North Carolina . Her father , Ira David Wood III , is a locally prominent actor , singer , theater director , and playwright ; he is the Executive Director of a local regional theatre company called Theatre in the Park . Her mother , Sara Lynn Moore ( b . March 6 , 1958 ) , is an actress , director , and acting coach . Wood 's brother , Ira David Wood IV , is also an actor ; she has two other brothers , Dana and Thomas , and a sister named Aden . Her paternal aunt , Carol Winstead Wood , was a Hollywood production designer . Wood and her brothers were actively involved in Theatre in the Park while growing up , including an appearance by her in the 1987 production of her father 's musical comedy adaptation of A Christmas Carol when she was just a few months old . Subsequently , she played the Ghost of Christmas Past in several productions at the theater , and she later starred as Helen Keller alongside her mother ( who played Anne Sullivan ) in a production of The Miracle Worker , under her father 's direction . Wood briefly attended Cary Elementary , a public school in Cary , North Carolina . She was subsequently home-schooled and received her high school diploma at age 15 .

Wood began her career appearing in several made-for-television films from 1994 onward , also playing an occasional role in the television series American Gothic . In 1996 , Wood 's parents separated and later divorced , and Wood moved with her mother to her mother 's native Los Angeles County , California . After a one-season role on the television drama Profiler , Wood was cast in the supporting role of Jessie Sammler on the television show Once and Again . Wood 's first major screen role was in the low-budget 1998 film Digging to China , which also starred Kevin Bacon and Mary Stuart Masterson . The film won the Children 's Jury Award at the Chicago International Children 's Film Festival . Wood remembers the role as initially being hard , but notes that it " eventually led to her decision that acting is something she might never want to stop doing . " She also had a role in Practical Magic , a fantasy film directed by Griffin Dunne , starring Sandra Bullock and Nicole Kidman , that same year .

Wood made her teenage debut as a leading film actress in 2002 's Little Secrets , directed by Blair Treu , where she played aspiring 14-year-old concert violinist Emily Lindstrom . For that role , she was nominated for Best Leading Young Actress at the Young Artist Awards . That same year , Wood played a supporting role in the Andrew Niccol-directed science fiction satirical drama film , S1m0ne , which starred Al Pacino . Wood 's breakthrough movie role followed with the 2003 film Thirteen . She played the role of Tracy Louise Freeland , one of two young teens who sink into a downward spiral of hard drugs , sex , and petty crime . Her performance was nominated for a Golden Globe Award as Best Actress - Drama and for a Screen Actors Guild ( SAG ) Award for Best Actress . During the time of Thirteen 's release , Vanity Fair named Wood as one of the It Girls of Hollywood , and she appeared , along with the other actresses , on the magazine 's July 2003 cover . A supporting role opposite Cate Blanchett and Tommy Lee Jones in Ron Howard 's The Missing , in which she played the kidnapped daughter , Lilly Gilkeson , followed the same year , as well as a role in the CSI : Crime Scene Investigation episode " Got Murder ? " .

In 2005 , Wood appeared in the Mike Binder-directed The Upside of Anger , opposite Kevin Costner and Joan Allen , a well-reviewed film in which Wood played Lavender " Popeye " Wolfmeyer , one of four sisters dealing with their father 's absence . Her character also narrated the film . Wood 's next two starring roles were in dark independent films . In the 2005 Grand Jury Prize Sundance Film Festival nominee Pretty Persuasion , a black comedy / satirical focusing on themes of sexual harassment and discrimination in schools and attitudes about females in media and society , Wood played Kimberly Joyce , a manipulative , sexually active high-schooler . One critic commented , " Wood does flip cynicism with such precise , easy rhythms and with such obvious pleasure in naughtiness that she 's impossible to hate . " In Down in the Valley , which was directed by David Jacobson , Wood 's character , Tobe , falls in love with an older man , a cowboy who is at odds with modern society ( Edward Norton ) . Of her performance , it was written that " Wood conveys every bit of the adamant certainty and aching vulnerability inherent in late adolescence . " Wood has commented on her choice of sexually themed roles , saying that she is not aiming for the " shock factor " in her film choices .

In September 2006 , Wood received Premiere magazine 's " Spotlight Award for Emerging Talent . " Also in 2006 , she was described by The Guardian as being " wise beyond her years " and as " one of the best actresses of her generation . " Later in 2006 , Wood appeared with an all-star ensemble cast as Natalie Finch in the Golden Globe-nominated 2006 comedy-drama film Running with Scissors . Directed by Ryan Murphy and starring Annette Bening , the film was based on the memoir by Augusten Burroughs , which is a semi-autobiographical account of Burroughs ' childhood in a dysfunctional family . Wood was awarded the 2007 Cannes Film Festival Chopard Trophy for Female Revelation for her performance . Wood had roles in two films released in September 2007 . King of California , which premiered at the Sundance Film Festival , a story of a bipolar jazz musician ( Michael Douglas ) and his long-suffering teenage daughter , Miranda ( Wood ) , who are reunited after his two-year stay in a mental institution and who embark on a quixotic search for Spanish treasure . One review praised Wood 's performance as " excellent " .

Across the Universe , a Julie Taymor-directed musical that was nominated for a Golden Globe and an Academy Award and was set in Liverpool , New York City , and Vietnam , focused on the tribulations of several characters during the counter-cultural revolution of the 1960s . It was set to the songs of The Beatles . Wood , who has described the music of The Beatles as a major part of her life , played Lucy , who develops a relationship with Jude ( Jim Sturgess ) . The film featured her singing musical numbers and she describes the role as her favorite , calling director Julie Taymor " one of the most amazing directors out there . " One critic wrote that " Wood brings much-needed emotional depth . " Wood provided the voice of an alien named Mala , a mechanically inclined free-thinker , in Battle for Terra , a 2008 computer-animated science fiction film about a peaceful alien planet that faces destruction from colonization by the displaced remainder of the human race . The film won the 2008 Grand Prize at the Ottawa International Animation Festival . The film showed at the San Francisco International Film Festival , where she received an award at the Midnight Awards along with Elijah Wood .

Wood starred in 2008 's Vadim Perelman-directed The Life Before Her Eyes , based on the Laura Kasischke novel of the same name , about the friendship of two teens of opposite character who are involved in a Columbine-like shooting incident at their school and are forced to make an impossible choice . Wood played the younger version of Uma Thurman 's character , Diana . One critic cited her performance as " hands-down extraordinary " . Wood stated that she intended the film to be the last one in which she played a teenager . In the same year , she also co-starred in director Darren Aronofsky 's The Wrestler , winner of the Golden Lion Award for Best Film at the Venice Film Festival , about Randy " Ram " Robinson ( Mickey Rourke ) , a professional wrestler from the 1980s who is forced to retire after a heart attack threatens to kill him the next time he wrestles . Wood played Stephanie , Randy " Ram " Robinson 's estranged daughter . Of her performance , one critic wrote , " Once her character stops stonewalling her father and hears him out , Wood provides a fine foil for Rourke in their turbulent scenes together . "

Wood co-starred in Woody Allen 's Whatever Works , which premiered at the 2009 Tribeca Film Festival , playing the young wife of Larry David 's character . In May 2009 , she played Juliet in six fundraising performances of William Shakespeare 's Romeo and Juliet at the Theater In The Park . The production was directed by her brother , who also starred . Wood had a recurring role in the second and third seasons of the HBO supernatural drama series , True Blood , from 2009 to 2011 as Sophie-Anne Leclerq . She appeared at the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards on September 12 , 2010 . Wood had a role in the film The Conspirator , which premiered at Ford 's Theatre in Washington D. C. in April , 2011 , directed by Robert Redford ( about the conspiracy surrounding the assassination of Abraham Lincoln ) . She also had a role in The Ides of March . She portrayed the title character 's daughter in the 2011 HBO miniseries Mildred Pierce , for which she was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Miniseries or a Movie . Wood played Gabi in the 2013 psychological romantic thriller film Charlie Countryman with Shia LaBeouf and Rupert Grint .

Wood began dating British actor Jamie Bell in 2005 after they co-starred in the music video for Green Day 's song " Wake Me Up When September Ends . " They got matching tattoos of each other 's initials ; in Wood 's case , a " J " on her left ankle . After a year together , the relationship ended in 2006 . Wood later commented that , " We had matching tattoos because we knew our love would last forever . Trouble is , it didn 't , things happened , we split . But I don 't regret the tattoo . It reminds me of a great , great period in my life . " In January 2007 , Wood 's relationship with Marilyn Manson became public . The two met at a party at the Chateau Marmont Hotel ; Wood has stated that she was attracted to Manson 's frequent use of black eye liner and once described their relationship as " healthy and loving " . Two portraits of Wood , painted by Manson , have been exhibited at the Celebritarian Corporation Gallery of Fine Art . Wood is also the inspiration behind Manson 's song " Heart-Shaped Glasses " , and she appeared with Manson in the song 's music video . Manson has said that Wood 's appearance was the highest-paid music video role ever . The couple split in November 2008 ; according to Wood , they " both decided to take some time apart so [ they ] could concentrate on work . " They later re-united and it was reported in early January 2010 that the couple was engaged to be married . Wood and Manson ended their engagement in August 2010 .

In the summer of 2011 , Wood was reported to have rekindled her relationship with Jamie Bell , five years after they first broke up . The couple married in a small ceremony on October 30 , 2012 . They have one son , born in July 2013 . Wood had a natural home birth with her son , and publicly thanked Ricki Lake , creator of the documentary The Business of Being Born , for inspiring her decision . In May 2014 , Wood and Bell announced that they had separated after 19 months of marriage . Wood 's mother is a convert to Judaism and Wood 's father is Christian . In 2003 , Wood described herself as Jewish . In 2012 , she stated , " I believe in God but I am not religious . I am spiritual . My definition of God isn 't in any religion . It 's very personal " .

M-30 is a state trunkline highway in the U.S. state of Michigan that runs in a north – south direction from the Midland area to West Branch . The highway runs through rural parts of three counties in the Lower Peninsula . The southern end runs along the Michigan Meridian and parallel to the Tittabawassee River . Prior to 1962 , M-30 's southern terminus ended at a junction with M-46 in Merrill . Since then , the segment south of US Highway 10 ( US 10 ) was returned to local control and decommissioned . In May 2009 , M-30 was extended southerly from US 10 to M-20 , restoring some of the highway decommissioned in the 1960s to M-30 .

M-30 is a rural , two-lane highway . M-30 follows Meridian Road starting at an intersection with M-20 ( Isabella Road ) outside of Midland . From this intersection , the highway runs north along the Michigan Meridian through forest lands to a crossing of the Tittabawassee River near Sanford . M-30 passes through the community and crosses the US 10 freeway near the location where the latter crosses a narrow section of Sanford Lake . The road continues north running parallel to the lake along the meridian to a point near Edenville . There , the highway turns westerly along Curtis Road and then back northerly on Midland Road to a crossing of the Tittabawassee and Wixom Lake . Past the river and lake crossings , M-30 angles to the northeast to return to the Michigan Meridian . The area adjacent to the lake is farm land , but continuing north , the highway returns to the woodlands of the Au Sable State Forest . M-30 intersects M-61 at Wooden Shoe Village near Smallwood Lake . The highway continues to parallel the Tittabawassee River , crossing several of its smaller tributaries , until a point south of the Gladwin – Ogemaw County county line . The trunkline passes through a small unnamed , unincorporated community northwest of Hockaday near Indian and Elk lakes as the road turns to the northeast between the lakes in the area . M-30 crosses the county line near Edwards and continues northward . The highway turns to the northeast as it approaches West Branch , crossing under I-75 without an interchange . M-30 ends at Business Loop I-75 / M-55 on the west side of West Branch .

The Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) maintains M-30 like all other parts of the state trunkline highway system . As a part of these responsibilities , the department tracks the volume of traffic using its roads in surveys using a metric called average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) . MDOT calculates the traffic level for a segment of roadway for any average day of the year in these surveys . For 2009 , the highest traffic levels were observed on the section north of US 10 at 7,579 vehicles per day . The lowest AADT levels were the 2,952 vehicles between the M-61 junction and the Gladwin – Ogemaw county line . The survey did not include the section south of US 10 . No segment has been listed as part of the National Highway System , a network of roads important to the nation 's economy , defense , and mobility .

M-30 was first designated by July 1 , 1919 . The original routing only ran from Winegars to West Branch . South of Winegars , the roadway is a portion of M-18 . An extension of M-18 in 1928 or 1929 south of Beaverton led to the redesignation and extension of M-30 south through Edenville and Sanford to end at M-46 . M-30 was completely paved as the last 15 miles ( 24 km ) of gravel roadway were completed between Sanford and the Midland – Saginaw county line in 1961 . The next year , when M-30 was truncated to end at the US 10 freeway in Sanford , the remaining portion south of US 10 was turned over to county control . On May 13 , 2009 , the Midland County Road Commission ( MCRC ) and the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) signed a Memorandum of Understanding that transferred control of Meridian Road south of US 10 to M-20 . The roadway transferred included a newly constructed bridge over the Tittabawassee River and other segments of roadway rebuilt by the MCRC .

" Father 's Day " is the eighth episode of the first series of the British science fiction television programme Doctor Who , first broadcast on 14 May 2005 on BBC One . It was written by Paul Cornell and directed by Joe Ahearne . In the episode , alien time traveller the Doctor ( Christopher Eccleston ) agrees to take his companion Rose Tyler ( Billie Piper ) back to the day her father Pete ( Shaun Dingwall ) died in 1987 . When Rose intervenes and pulls her father out of the path of a car , time is wounded and dangerous Reapers attack , threatening to erase history . Pete eventually learns that to get rid of the Reapers , he must throw himself under the car that was originally meant to kill him . Lead writer and executive producer Russell T Davies conceived " Father 's Day " as an emotionally driven time travel story to explore Rose 's character . He chose Cornell to write the episode ; Cornell had been a successful writer of spin-off material during the years the programme was on hiatus . The monster element of the story was expanded based on suggestions from Cornell and BBC Head of Drama Jane Tranter , and the Reapers went through many designs . The episode was filmed in November 2004 at St Paul 's Church and streets in Cardiff . " Father 's Day " was watched by 8.06 million viewers in the United Kingdom and received generally positive reviews . Critics praised the focus on character and emotion .

The episode opens with a flashback of Jackie Tyler telling a younger Rose about her father Pete , who died in a hit-and-run accident on the way to a friend 's wedding . In the TARDIS , the Doctor agrees to take Rose to the day her father died so that she can be there when it happens . Upon their arrival in London on Saturday 7 November 1987 , they witness the accident , but Rose is unable to move when The Doctor tells her to go comfort her dying father . Rose asks the Doctor if she can try again , and the Doctor allows it but warns Rose to not run until their former selves have left to prevent a paradox . As the accident is about to happen , Rose suddenly runs out and pushes Pete aside , saving his life . The younger versions of the Doctor and Rose vanish . Rose and the Doctor fight about her actions , with the Doctor rebuking her for potentially damaging the timeline . The Doctor takes Rose 's TARDIS key back and storms off without her . Rose decides to go with Pete to the wedding , while the Doctor walks back to the TARDIS only to find that it is now an empty shell . Strange flying beasts called Reapers appear and begin consuming people .

Rose and Pete drive to the wedding together , and the car that had been meant to kill Pete nearly collides with their car . They join the other guests , including Jackie who has brought the infant Rose with her . Rose is surprised to find that Jackie and Pete argue frequently . A young Mickey runs in to warn the guests about the Reapers , who think it is a joke until a Reaper appears above and attacks them . The Doctor runs to the church and directs everyone inside , noting that the age of the church will protect them against the Reapers . The Doctor explains to Rose that her actions have caused a paradox that normally the Time Lords would have prevented . Without them , the Reapers are sterilising the wound in time by consuming everyone within it . The Doctor further warns Rose not to touch her infant self , as it could cause further damage to time and allow the Reapers into the church . Feeling that his TARDIS key is still warm , the Doctor sets it up in the middle of the church and the TARDIS slowly begins materialising around it .

While waiting in the church , Jackie sees Pete talking to Rose and thinks he is having an affair . Pete and Rose talk alone , and he comes to realise that she is his daughter . When Rose is unable to answer questions about how good of a father he was , Pete realises he was meant to die in the accident . Jackie thinks Rose is Pete 's daughter with another woman , and in a fit of frustration Pete hands the baby Rose to adult Rose . The paradox worsens , and a Reaper is able to enter the church . The Doctor declares himself the oldest thing in the church and offers himself to the Reaper , who consumes him and disappears . The TARDIS key goes cold and drops to the ground . Pete realises that they now have no other choice and that he must die in order to restore the timeline . He bids Rose and Jackie an emotional farewell , races out of the church and throws himself under the car that was originally meant to kill him . The timeline is repaired , and those previously consumed by the beasts reappear . The Doctor sends Rose off to be with her dad as he dies , and she holds his hand until he is gone . Rose and the Doctor walk hand-in-hand back to the restored TARDIS .

Continuing the " Bad Wolf " arc of the series , a poster advertising a rave on a wall near where Pete was supposed to die in the beginning has the words " BAD WOLF " defacing it . Rose refers to the ending of this episode in " The Parting of the Ways " , telling Jackie that she met her father and was the girl who held Pete 's hand as he died . Although Pete Tyler dies in this episode , an alternative universe version of him appears in the second series episodes " Rise of the Cybermen " / " Age of Steel " and " Army of Ghosts " / " Doomsday " .

According to producer Phil Collinson , showrunner Russell T Davies came up with the concept for " Father 's Day " at an early stage in the planning of the series , as it was a " perfect time travel story " . Davies wanted the storyline to be easy-to-follow and drawn from human emotions . Additionally , the previous seven episodes had established why Rose was a good companion , and so " Father 's Day " shows that she does make mistakes , but in a relatable way . Davies chose Paul Cornell to write the episode ; Cornell was a successful writer of Doctor Who spin-off material , especially in novels for the Virgin New Adventures , which bridged the gap between the classic series and the new . Davies originally intended that the episode be a small budget-saver character piece investigating the death of Rose 's father , but Cornell suggested the addition of the Reapers and BBC Head of Drama Jane Tranter encouraged the additions of monsters to the new series . Working titles for the episode included " Wounded Time " and " Wound in Time " . Davies came up with the final title of " Father 's Day " in February 2005 , shortly before the series began airing .

Davies and Cornell debated whether it should have been Rose 's plan all along to save her father ; this is left ambiguous in the episode . Billie Piper felt that it did not occur to Rose until after she began travelling . In the original script , in the scene where the Doctor opens the TARDIS doors and discovers only a police box interior , the police box fell apart . This was changed for reasons of cost , and Cornell has stated that he thinks the change is an improvement . Cornell also states that the character of Pete Tyler is based on his own father , who attempted many different jobs and schemes ( including , like Pete , selling health drinks ) before eventually finding success running a betting shop . Pete 's line " I 'm your dad , it 's my job for it to be my fault " is taken from something Cornell 's father once said to him . Originally Pete was to take a swig of wine before sacrificing himself , but this was removed because a correlation between alcohol and bravery was not thought to be a positive message .

The entire episode was shot in Cardiff , in November 2004 . The weather changed frequently during filming , and the cast began to fall ill ; Eccleston had a cold . The production team selected several streets that looked similar . Most of the streets were in the community of Grangetown . The streets did not require much work for them to resemble 1980s streets ; only a few satellite dishes were taken down . The church is St Paul 's Church , also in Grangetown . The set of the Tyler 's flat was redressed for the time period . For the 1980s style , members of the cast and crew brought in photographs of themselves from the ' 80s ; for example , peach dresses and " big hair " were incorporated , but these elements were not meant to be distracting . Camille Coduri , who played Jackie , wore a wig for this episode . Some of the conversation between Rose and her father in the car was cut because the car had made the dialogue delivery too " bouncy " . Piper was scared of holding the baby . Because the baby is present throughout the majority of the episode , but they were limited to how many hours they could work with the infant , an " artificial baby " was used as a placeholder in some scenes .

The Reapers went through many designs . Originally , they were supposed to be " men in cowls " based on the Grim Reaper ; the final design retains some of this image with its " scythe-like tail " . The original design was deemed too similar to creatures seen in " The End of the World " , and so were reworked into something more " otherworldly " . They were not originally intended to fly . There was also discussion of how much they should resemble animals as opposed to the Grim Reaper ; the end result is a mixture of the two approaches . The final design had a " shark quality " , bat wings , and a mouth influenced by the praying mantis . Vulture sound effects were used for its screech . The model was made over two months , being finished at the end of February 2005 rather than at the beginning of January as scheduled . The special effects team then had two or three weeks to complete the " 40-odd shots " of the completely CGI Reapers in the episode . The episode ended up more expensive than intended because of the CGI .

" The Lamb and Flag " , a pub from the sitcom Bottom , is referenced in the episode . When time is damaged , one of the effects is that mobile telephones all begin to repeat the message , " Watson , come here , I need you , " purportedly Alexander Graham Bell 's first words ever spoken over a telephone . However historical records believe the words to be " Watson , come here , I want you . " The error was not present in Paul Cornell 's original script , but crept in at some point during production . Producer Phil Collinson speculated that it was because the line was rerecorded ; it was originally recorded by someone who the production team felt put on too false of a Scottish accent , and so it was rerecorded with a real Scot . The episode features two hits from 1987 , " Never Gonna Give You Up " performed by Rick Astley and " Never Can Say Goodbye " performed by The Communards , both of which have some relevance to the basic themes of the story . It also features the 2002 song " Don 't Mug Yourself " by The Streets , indicating the damage to the timeline . Rose believes Pete to be " a bit of a Del Boy " , referring to the character from 1980s comedy Only Fools and Horses .

" Father 's Day " was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on 14 May 2005 on BBC One . The episode received UK overnight ratings of 7.47 million viewers , an audience share of 42.74 % . When time-shifted viewers were taken into account , the number rose to 8.06 million . It received an Appreciation Index of 83 . " Father 's Day " was met with a generally positive reception . Piper stated that this was her favourite episode of the first series , and the most emotionally taxing for her to perform . SFX praised the way the concept of time was explored as well as the accurate representation of the ' 80s , and stated that Dingwall gave " one of the series ' best performances " as Pete Tyler . However , the reviewer thought that the Reapers were the let-down of the episode , finding that " the episode doesn 't feel as much like horror as it should " . Arnold T Blumburg of Now Playing gave the episode an A for the emotional impact and the acting . Blumburg did note , however , that there were " enormous logical gaps " involving " glowing TARDIS keys and under-explained paradoxes " . In 2013 , Radio Times reviewer Mark Braxton described it as " a time-travel tale with immense heart " and highlighted the shift of identification from the Doctor to Rose and the acting of Piper and Dingwall . Braxton , on the other hand , felt that the Reapers were redundant and the episode would have done " equally well if you scythed the Reapers from the script " . Reviewing " Father 's Day " for The A.V. Club in 2013 , Alasdair Wilkins gave it a grade of " A " , finding the story powerful . In Who Is the Doctor , a guide to the revived series , Robert Smith praised the emotion and the dilemma , which he felt was not heavy-handed . He was also positive about the direction and Dingwall 's performance , though he felt that removing the Doctor from the plot suggested that he would have done something else to resolve it , and he was not a fan of the scene where the Doctor tells two ordinary people how important their lives are , because it was " cheesy " and " disconnected " from the rest of the story . Coauthor Graeme Burk was also positive , writing that it may be " the best story this season " . He called the direction " wonderful " and the script " sublime " , and noted how the story was more about family than time travel .

Marshal of the Royal Air Force Cyril Louis Norton Newall , 1st Baron Newall GCB , OM , GCMG , CBE , AM ( 15 February 1886 – 30 November 1963 ) was a senior officer of the British Army and Royal Air Force . He commanded units of the Royal Flying Corps and Royal Air Force in the First World War , and served as Chief of the Air Staff during the first years of the Second World War . From 1941 to 1946 he was the Governor-General of New Zealand . Born to a military family , Newall studied at the Royal Military College , Sandhurst , before taking a commission as a junior officer in the Royal Warwickshire Regiment in 1905 . After transferring to the 2nd Gurkha Rifles in the Indian Army , he saw active service on the North West Frontier , but after learning to fly in 1911 turned towards a career in military aviation . During the First World War he rose from flying instructor to command of 41st Wing RFC , the main strategic bombing force , and was awarded the Albert Medal for putting out a fire in an explosives store .

He served in staff positions through the 1920s and was Air Officer Commanding the Middle East Command in the early 1930s before becoming Air Member for Supply and Organisation in 1935 . Newall was appointed Chief of the Air Staff in 1937 and , in that role , supported sharp increases in aircraft production , increasing expenditure on the new , heavily armed , Hurricane and Spitfire fighters , essential to re-equip Fighter Command . However , he was sacked after the Battle of Britain after political intrigue caused him to lose Churchill 's confidence . In 1941 he was appointed Governor-General of New Zealand , holding office until 1946 .

Newall was born to Lieutenant Colonel William Potter Newall and Edith Gwendoline Caroline Newall ( née Norton ) . After education at Bedford School , he attended the Royal Military College , Sandhurst . After leaving Sandhurst , he was commissioned into the Royal Warwickshire Regiment on 16 August 1905 . He was promoted to lieutenant on 18 November 1908 , and transferred to the 2nd King Edward VII 's Own Gurkha Rifles on 16 September 1909 . He served on the North-West Frontier , where he first encountered his future colleague Hugh Dowding ; at an exercise in 1909 , Dowding 's artillery section ambushed Newall 's Gurkhas whilst they were still breakfasting . Newall began to turn towards a career in aviation in 1911 , when he learned to fly in a Bristol Biplane at Larkhill whilst on leave in England . He held certificate No. 144 issued by the Royal Aero Club . He later passed a formal course at the Central Flying School , Upavon in 1913 , and began working as a pilot trainer there from 17 November 1913 ; it was intended that he would form part of a flight training school to be established in India , but he had not yet left England when the First World War broke out .

On the outbreak of war , Newall was in England . On 12 September 1914 , he was given the temporary rank of captain , and attached to the Royal Flying Corps as a flight commander , to serve with No. 1 Squadron on the Western Front . He was promoted to the permanent rank of captain on 22 September , effective from 16 August . On 24 March 1915 he was promoted to major and appointed to command No. 12 Squadron , flying BE2c aircraft in France from September onwards . The squadron took part in the Battle of Loos , bombing railways and carrying out reconnaissance missions in October 1915 . On taking command of the squadron , he chose to stop flying personally in order to concentrate on administration , a decision which was regarded dismissively by his men ; relations were strained until January 1916 , when he demonstrated his courage by walking into a burning bomb store to try to control the fire . He was awarded the Albert Medal for this act on the personal recommendation of General Hugh Trenchard , and in February 1916 was promoted to lieutenant colonel and given command of Training No. 6 Wing in England . In December 1916 he took command of No. 9 Wing in France , a long-range bomber and reconnaissance formation , and in October 1917 took command of the newly formed No. 41 Wing . This was upgraded as the 8th Brigade in December , with Newall promoted accordingly to the temporary rank of brigadier-general on 28 December 1917 . During 1918 , it joined the Independent Bombing Force , which was the main strategic bombing arm of the newly formed Royal Air Force . In June 1918 Newall was appointed the Deputy Commander of the Independent Bombing Force , serving under Trenchard .

Newall was granted a permanent commission in the Royal Air Force as a lieutenant colonel on 1 August 1919 and promoted to group captain on 8 August 1919 . He became Deputy Director of Personnel at the Air Ministry in August 1919 and then Deputy Commandant of the apprentices ' technical training school in August 1922 . He married May Weddell in 1922 ; she died in September 1924 , and he remarried the following year to Olive Foster , an American woman . He had three children with Foster , a son and two daughters . Newall was promoted to air commodore on 1 January 1925 , and took command of the newly formed Auxiliary Air Force in May 1925 . He was appointed to a League of Nations disarmament committee in December 1925 and then became Deputy Chief of the Air Staff and Director of Operations and Intelligence on 12 April 1926 . He was appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath in the 1929 Birthday Honours and , having been promoted to air vice marshal on 1 January 1930 , he stood down as Deputy Chief on 6 February 1931 . He became Air Officer Commanding Wessex Bombing Area in February 1931 and then Air Officer Commanding Middle East Command in September 1931 . He then returned to the Air Ministry , where he became Air Member for Supply and Organisation on 14 January 1935 , during the beginnings of the pre-war expansion and rearmament . He was advanced to Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath in the 1935 Birthday Honours and promoted to air marshal on 1 July 1935 . He attended the funeral of King George V in January 1936 .

Philosophically , Newall remained a close follower of Trenchard during the interwar period ; his time in the Independent Bombing Force had left him convinced that strategic bombing was an exceptionally powerful weapon , and one that could not effectively be defended against . In this , he was a supporter of the standard doctrine of the day , which suggested that the destructive power of a bomber force was sufficiently great that it could cripple an industrial economy in short order , and that so merely its presence could potentially serve as an effective deterrent . He was promoted to air chief marshal on 1 April 1937 .

On 1 September 1937 , Newall was appointed as Chief of the Air Staff , the military head of the RAF , in succession to Sir Edward Ellington . The promotion was unexpected ; of the prospective candidates mooted for the job , Newall has been widely seen by historians as the least gifted . The most prominent candidate was Hugh Dowding , the head of RAF Fighter Command and senior in rank to Newall by three months , who had been informally told by Ellington in 1936 that he was expected to be appointed as the new Chief of the Air Staff . The decision was taken by the Air Minister , Viscount Swinton , without consulting Ellington for advice . During 1936 and 1937 , the Air Staff had been fighting with the Cabinet over the rearmament plans ; the Air Staff wanted a substantial bomber force and only minor increases in fighters , whilst the Minister for Defence Co-ordination , Sir Thomas Inskip , successfully pushed for a greater role for the fighter force . Newall was promoted during the middle of this debate , and proved perhaps more flexible than might have been expected . In 1938 he supported sharp increases in aircraft production , including double-shift working and duplication of factories , and pushed for the creation of a dedicated organisation to repair and refit damaged aircraft . He supported expenditure on the new , heavily armed , Hurricane and Spitfire fighters , essential to re-equip Fighter Command . He even began to distance himself , albeit slightly , from orthodox bomber philosophy , noting to the Minister for Air that " no one can say with absolute certainty that a nation can be knocked out from the air , because no-one has yet attempted it " . Discussing plans for reacting to a war with Italy , in early 1939 , he opposed a French proposal to force Italy 's surrender by the use of heavy bombing raids against the north , arguing that it would be unlikely to force the country out of the war without the need for ground combat .

Newall was advanced to Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath in the 1938 Birthday Honours . He was still Chief of the Air Staff at the outbreak of the Second World War on 1 September 1939 ; his main contribution to the war effort was his successful resistance to the transfer of fighter squadrons to aid the collapsing French thus preserving a large portion of Fighter Command which would become crucial during the Battle of Britain . While he remained committed to the idea of a " knock-out blow " offensive by Bomber Command , he also recognised that it was too weak to do so successfully , but still strongly opposed the use of the RAF for close air support . Following the end of the Battle of Britain , Newall was quickly forced into retirement and replaced as Chief of the Air Staff by Sir Charles Portal . Contemporaries attributed this to the effects of overwork , which had certainly taken its toll , but there were also other aspects ; Newall had lost political support , particularly following a dispute with Lord Beaverbrook over the control of aircraft production and repair . Matters came to a head with the circulation of an anonymous memo attacking Newall , among other senior officers , as " a real weakness to the RAF and to the nation 's defences " . The author was Edgar McCloughry , a disaffected staff officer who saw himself as passed over for promotion and who had been brought into Beaverbrook 's inner circle . Beaverbrook pressed Churchill to dismiss Newall , gaining the support of influential ex-RAF figures such as Trenchard and Salmond . Trenchard had come out against Newall for his failure to launch a decisive strategic bombing offensive , while Salmond saw Newall 's removal as the simplest way to replace Dowding as head of Fighter Command – despite Newall having also sought to sack Dowding .

In February 1941 Newall was appointed Governor-General of New Zealand , a post he would hold for the remainder of the war . His time there was mostly quiet – described by one biographer as " a nice long rest " – and he toured the country extensively , referring to the war " in every public address " . Newall and his wife , who also carried out an extensive program of engagements , were broadly popular , but there were occasional tensions ; shortly after his arrival , it was widely ( but mistakenly ) rumoured that he had slighted the " men " of the Army in favour of the " gentlemen " of the RNZAF in a speech . A Freemason , Newall became Grand Master of New Zealand 's Grand Lodge while Governor-General . Politically , he had a lukewarm relationship with the Prime Minister , Peter Fraser – " I can 't persuade myself that he is all he quite appears to be " , Newall noted in a private report – but the two worked together effectively . Small problems occasionally flared up , such as that in October 1942 , when Fraser was reprimanded for not personally informing Newall of the resignation of four ministers . However , only one developed into a direct confrontation , when Newall became the last Governor-General to refuse to follow the advice of his cabinet . Newall was presented with a government recommendation to remit four prisoners sentenced to be flogged , but refused to do so . He argued that if the government was opposed to flogging , it should repeal the legislation rather than simply remitting the sentences , and that it was constitutionally improper for the government to retain the law while ignoring it . Fraser , and his deputy Walter Nash , refused to accept this response , and the impasse stretched out for several days ; in the end , a compromise was reached where Newall remitted the sentences but the government undertook to repeal the legislation .

A second conflict emerged just before the end of his term , when in 1945 , the Labour government sought to abolish the country quota , a system that gave additional electoral seats in rural areas . Farming groups – predominantly National-supporting – strongly opposed the move , and argued that such a major change could only be made after gaining approval in a general election . Newall sympathised , and advised Fraser to wait until after the election , but did not feel it was appropriate to intervene ; he assented to the bill . Following his return from New Zealand in 1946 , Newall was raised to the peerage as Baron Newall , of Clifton upon Dunsmoor , in the county of Warwick . He spoke in the House of Lords rarely , making five speeches between 1946 and 1948 and one in 1959 , mostly addressing defence issues . Newall died at his home at Welbeck Street in London on 30 November 1963 , at which time his son Francis inherited his title .

Salyut 6 ( Russian : Салют-6 ; lit . Salute 6 ) , DOS-5 , was a Soviet orbital space station , the eighth flown as part of the Salyut programme . Launched on 29 September 1977 by a Proton rocket , the station was the first of the ' second-generation ' type of space station . Salyut 6 possessed several revolutionary advances over the earlier Soviet space stations , which it nevertheless resembled in overall design . These included the addition of a second docking port , a new main propulsion system and the station 's primary scientific instrument , the BST-1M multispectral telescope . The addition of the second docking port made crew handovers and station resupply by unmanned Progress freighters possible for the first time . The early Salyut stations had no means of resupply or removing accumulated garbage ( aside from the limited amount that cosmonauts could carry in their Soyuz spacecraft ) , nor could the propulsion system be refueled once it exhausted its propellant supply . Consequently , once the consumables launched with the station were used up , its mission had to be concluded and as a result , manned missions had a maximum duration of three months . Progress spacecraft could now bring fresh supplies and propellant and also be used to dispose of waste , which was then destroyed once the spacecraft was deorbited .

Five crew residencies took place over the station 's lifespan , in late 1977-early 1978 , late 1978 , mid-1979 , mid-1980 , and early 1981 , including cosmonauts from Warsaw Pact countries as part of the Intercosmos programme . These crews were responsible for carrying out the primary missions of Salyut 6 , including astronomy , Earth-resources observations and the study of the effect of spaceflight on the human body . Following the completion of these missions and the launch of its successor , Salyut 7 , Salyut 6 was deorbited on 29 July 1982 , almost five years after its launch .

Salyut 6 , launched on a Proton 8K82K rocket on 29 September 1977 , marked the switch from engineering development stations to routine operations , and united the most effective elements from each of the previous stations . Its navigation system , made up of the Delta semi-automatic computer to depict the station 's orbit and the Kaskad system to control its orientation , was based on that used on Salyut 4 , as was its power system , which consisted of a trio of steerable solar panels together producing a peak of 4 kilowatts of power over 51 m ² . The station 's thermal regulation systems , which made use of a sophisticated arrangement of insulation and radiators , was also derived from that used on Salyut 4 . In addition , Salyut 6 made use of environmental systems first used on Salyut 3 , and controlled its orientation using gyrodynes first tested on that station . The most important feature on Salyut 6 , however , was the addition of a second docking port on the aft end of the station , which allowed two spacecraft to be docked at once . This , in turn , allowed resident crews to receive shorter , ' visiting ' expeditions whilst they remained on board , and for crew handovers to take place . In addition , it allowed Soyuz spacecraft that had exceeded their operating lifespan to be returned to Earth and replaced by fresh ones ( the Soyuz 7K used from 1972-81 had a maximum operating lifespan of three months ) . Such handovers , with one expedition vacating the station only after the next had arrived , permitted the long sought-after aim of continuous occupation to move a step closer . The very first long-duration crew to visit the station broke a long-standing endurance record set on board the American Skylab station , staying 96 days in orbit , whilst the longest expedition lasted 185 days . Some of the visiting expeditions were flown as part of the Intercosmos programme , with non-Soviet cosmonauts visiting the station . Vladimír Remek of Czechoslovakia , the first space traveller not from the US or USSR , visited Salyut 6 in 1978 , and the station hosted cosmonauts from Hungary , Poland , Romania , Cuba , Mongolia , Vietnam , and East Germany .

The rearward of the two ports was fitted with plumbing to allow the station to be refueled by unmanned Progress spacecraft . These freighters , which brought supplies and extra equipment to keep the station replenished , helped ensure that the crew were always able to carry out useful scientific work aboard the station . In all , twelve Progress flights delivered over 20 tonnes of equipment , supplies and fuel . The addition of the extra docking port caused the adoption of the Almaz-derived twin-chamber propulsion system first used on Salyut 3 and 5 , with the two engine nozzles — each producing 2.9 kilonewtons of thrust — mounted peripherally on either side of the aft port . Salyut 6 introduced a Unified Propulsion System , with both the engines and the station 's control thrusters running on unsymmetrical dimethylhydrazine and nitrogen tetroxide , drawn from a common set of pressurized tanks , allowing the refueling capabilities of the visiting Progress tankers to be exploited to the maximum effect . The entire engine and fuel storage assembly was contained within an unpressurized bay at the rear of the station , which was the same diameter as the main pressurized compartment . However , the replacement of the Soyuz engine used on previous stations with the bay meant that the station kept a similar overall length to its predecessors . The main engines could not be fired if the rear docking port was in use , hence any orbital maneuvers during this time had to be performed by the visiting spacecraft .

Salyut 6 's propulsion system experienced a serious malfunction during the second crew residency in 1978 and was not usable again for the remainder of the station 's lifespan . As a consequence , it was limited to firing its attitude control thrusters and visiting spacecraft had to perform orbital adjustments . After each crew residency ended , it was necessary for Progress and TKS spacecraft to boost the station into a high orbit so it wouldn 't decay until the next residency began . To enable spacewalks , Salyut 6 was equipped with an inward-opening EVA hatch on the side of the forward transfer compartment , which could be used as an airlock in a similar way to the system used on Salyut 4 . This compartment contained two new semi-rigid spacesuits which allowed much greater flexibility than earlier suits , and could be donned within five minutes in case of an emergency . Finally , the station offered considerable improvements in living conditions over previous outposts , with machinery being soundproofed , the crews being provided with designated ' cots ' for sleeping and the equipping of the station with a shower and extensive gymnasium .

The primary instrument carried aboard the station was the BST-1M multispectral telescope , which could carry out astronomical observations in the infrared , ultraviolet and submillimetre spectra using a 1.5 metre-diameter mirror which was operated in cryogenic conditions at around − 269 ° C. The telescope could be operated only when Salyut 6 was on the night side of the Earth , and had its cover closed for the rest of the time . The second major instrument was the MKF-6M multispectral camera , which carried out Earth-resources observations . An improved form of a camera first tested on Soyuz 22 , the camera captured an area of 165 × 220 kilometres with each image , down to a resolution of 20 metres . Each image was captured simultaneously in six bands in 1200-frame cassettes , which required regular replacement due to the fogging effects of radiation . Salyut 6 also featured a KATE-140 stereoscopic topographic mapping camera with a focal length of 140 milimetres , which captured images of 450 × 450 kilometres with a resolution of 50 metres in the visible and infrared spectra , which could be operated either remotely or by the resident crews . The photographic capabilities of the station were , therefore , extensive , and the Soviet Ministry of Agriculture had planted a number of specifically selected crops at test sites to examine the capabilities of the cameras .

Salyut 6 was primarily supported by the manned Soyuz spacecraft , which carried out crew rotations and would also have been used in the event of an emergency evacuation . The ferries docked automatically to the station , making use of the new Igla automatic docking system , and were used by departing crews to return to Earth at the end of their flight . The station was the first to be able to be resupplied by the newly developed unmanned Progress freighters , although they could only dock at the rear port , as the front port lacked the plumbing used to refuel the propulsion system . The freighters docked automatically to the station via the Igla , and were then opened and emptied by the cosmonauts on board , whilst transfer of fuel to the station took place automatically under supervision from the ground . In addition to the Soyuz and Progress spacecraft , after the final crew had left , Salyut 6 was visited by an experimental transport logistics spacecraft called Kosmos 1267 in 1982 . The transport logistics spacecraft , known as the TKS , was originally designed for the Almaz programme , and proved that large modules could dock automatically with space stations , a major step toward the construction of multimodular stations such as Mir and the International Space Station .

The station received 16 cosmonaut crews , including six long-duration crews , with the longest expedition lasting 185 days . Resident crew missions were identified with an EO prefix , whilst short-duration missions were identified with EP . On 10 December 1977 the first resident crew , Yuri Romanenko and Georgi Grechko , arrived on Soyuz 26 and remained aboard Salyut 6 for 96 days . On 15 June 1978 , Vladimir Kovalyonok and Aleksandr Ivanchenkov ( Soyuz 29 ) arrived and remained on board for 140 days . On 9 April 1980 Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin ( Soyuz 35 ) arrived for the longest stay on Salyut 6 , 185 days . While aboard , on 19 July , they sent their greetings to the Olympians and wished them happy starts in the live communication between the station and the Central Lenin Stadium , where the opening ceremony of the 1980 Summer Olympics was held . They appeared on the stadium 's scoreboard and their voices were translated via loud speakers . A repair mission , consisting of Leonid Kizim , Oleg Makarov , and Gennady Strekalov ( Soyuz T-3 ) worked on the space station for 12 days starting on 27 November 1980 .

HMS Achilles was an armoured frigate built for the Royal Navy in the 1860s . Upon completion in 1864 she was assigned to the Channel Fleet . The ship was paid off in 1868 to refit and be re-armed . When she recommissioned in 1869 , she was assigned as the guard ship of the Fleet Reserve in the Portland District until 1874 . Achilles was refitted and re-armed again in 1874 and became the guard ship of the Liverpool District in 1875 . Two years later , she was rejoined the Channel Fleet before going to the Mediterranean in 1878 . The ship returned to the Channel Fleet in 1880 and served until she was paid off in 1885 . Achilles was recommissioned in 1901 as a depot ship at Malta under a succession of different names . She was transferred to Chatham in 1914 and was again renamed multiple times before she was sold for scrap in 1923 . Achilles had more changes of her rigging and armament than any other British warship , before or since .

Achilles was the third member of the 1861 Naval Programme and was designed as an improved version of the earlier Warrior-class armoured frigates with a complete waterline armour belt . The ship was 380 feet 2 inches ( 115.9 m ) long between perpendiculars , had a beam of 58 feet 3 inches ( 17.8 m ) and a draft of 27 feet 2 inches ( 8.3 m ) . She displaced 9,820 long tons ( 9,980 t ) and had a tonnage of 6,121 bm . The hull was subdivided by watertight transverse bulkheads into 106 compartments and had a double bottom . Achilles was designed with a high centre of gravity and was very stiff . So much so that the ship only rolled 10 degrees during one storm that ripped the main and mizen topgallant masts off and split her topsails . Because of her great length she was not very manoeuvrable . Achilles had a crew of 709 officers and enlisted men .

The ship had a single two-cylinder trunk steam engine made by John Penn and Sons driving a single 24-foot ( 7.3 m ) propeller . Ten rectangular boilers provided steam to the engine at a working pressure of 25 psi ( 172 kPa ; 2 kgf / cm2 ) . During her sea trials on 15 March 1865 , Achilles had a maximum speed of 14.32 knots ( 26.52 km / h ; 16.48 mph ) from 5,722 indicated horsepower ( 4,267 kW ) . The ship carried 750 long tons ( 760 t ) of coal , enough to steam 1,800 nautical miles ( 3,300 km ; 2,100 mi ) at 6.5 knots ( 12.0 km / h ; 7.5 mph ) . As built , Achilles was ship-rigged with four masts , called bow , fore , main and mizen from fore to aft , and she was the only British warship ever to have four masts . They carried a total of 44,000 square feet ( 4,088 m2 ) of sail area , excluding the stunsails , the greatest area ever spread in a British warship . Her performance was unsatisfactory when the wind was before the beam and her bowsprit and bowmast were removed in June 1865 in an attempt to correct this problem . However , now she had too much weather helm so the bowsprit was replaced and the foremast was moved forward 25 feet ( 7.6 m ) in July 1866 . This reduced her sail area to 30,133 square feet ( 2,799 m2 ) . In 1877 Achilles was rerigged as a barque . Both of her funnels were retractable to reduce wind resistance while under sail alone .

The intended armament of Achilles changed no less than five times before it was finally mounted . She received four rifled 110-pounder breech-loading guns mounted on the upper deck , two of which served as chase guns at the bow and stern , and 16 smoothbore , muzzle-loading 100-pounder Somerset cannon , eight on each side on the main deck . The breech-loading guns were a new design from Armstrong and much was hoped for them . Firing tests carried out in September 1861 against an armoured target , however , proved that the 110-pounder was inferior to the 68-pounder smoothbore gun in armour penetration and repeated incidents of breech explosions during the Battles for Shimonoseki and the Bombardment of Kagoshima in 1863 – 64 caused the navy to withdraw the gun from service shortly afterwards . In 1865 , six 68-pounder smoothbores were added , three on each side of the main deck , although she was not comprehensively rearmed until her 1868 refit . Detailed data for the Somerset cannon is not available , but the 7.9-inch ( 201 mm ) solid shot of the 68-pounder gun weighed approximately 68 pounds ( 30.8 kg ) while the gun itself weighed 10,640 pounds ( 4,826.2 kg ) . The gun had a muzzle velocity of 1,579 ft / s ( 481 m / s ) and had a range of 3,200 yards ( 2,900 m ) at an elevation of 12 ° . The seven-inch ( 178 mm ) shell of the 110-pounder Armstrong breech-loader weighed 107 – 110 pounds ( 48.5 – 49.9 kg ) . It had a muzzle velocity of 1,150 ft / s ( 350 m / s ) and , at an elevation of 11.25 ° , a maximum range of 4,000 yards ( 3,700 m ) . The 110-pounder gun weighed 9,520 pounds ( 4,318.2 kg ) . All of the guns could fire both solid shot and explosive shells .

Achilles was rearmed during her 1867 – 68 refit with 22 seven-inch and eight 8-inch ( 203 mm ) rifled muzzle-loading guns . The eight-inch guns and 18 seven-inch guns were mounted on the main deck and the remaining seven-inch guns replaced the 110-pounders on the upper deck . The shell of the 15-calibre eight-inch gun weighed 175 pounds ( 79.4 kg ) while the gun itself weighed nine long tons ( 9.1 t ) . It had a muzzle velocity of 1,410 ft / s ( 430 m / s ) and was credited with the ability to penetrate 9.6 inches ( 244 mm ) of wrought iron armour at the muzzle . The 16-calibre seven-inch gun weighed 6.5 long tons ( 6.6 t ) and fired a 112 pounds ( 50.8 kg ) shell . It was credited with the ability to penetrate 7.7-inch ( 196 mm ) armour . In 1874 the ship was rearmed with 16 nine-inch rifled muzzle-loaders replacing the 4 eight-inch and 20 of the 22 seven-inch guns . Fourteen of the nine-inch ( 229 mm ) guns were mounted on the main deck and the other two replaced the seven-inch chase guns . The two remaining seven-inch guns stayed in their position on the quarterdeck . As the nine-inch guns were considerably bigger than their predecessors , the gun ports had to be widened to accommodate them . The shell of the 14-calibre nine-inch gun weighed 254 pounds ( 115.2 kg ) while the gun itself weighed 12 long tons ( 12 t ) . It had a muzzle velocity of 1,420 ft / s ( 430 m / s ) and was rated with the ability to penetrate a 11.3 inches ( 287 mm ) of wrought iron armour at the muzzle .

The ship had a wrought iron waterline armour belt that ran the full length of the ship . Amidships , it was 4.5 inches ( 114 mm ) thick for a length of 212 feet ( 64.6 m ) and tapered to a thickness of 2.5 inches ( 64 mm ) to the ends of the ship . The armour extended 5 feet 6 inches ( 1.7 m ) below the waterline . The main deck was protected by a strake of armour , also 4.5-inch thick and 212 feet long . To protect against raking fire the upper strake was closed off by 4.5-inch transverse bulkheads at each end .

Achilles , named after the Greek mythological hero , was ordered on 10 April 1861 from the Chatham Dockyard . She was the first iron-hulled warship to be built at a royal dockyard and her construction was delayed by the need to acquire the necessary machinery to handle iron and to train the workers to use it . The ship was laid down on 1 August 1861 in a drydock and was floated out rather than being launched on 23 December 1863 . Achilles was completed on 26 November 1864 at the cost of £ 469,572 . She served in the Channel Fleet until 1868 . After a refit and her first major re-armament , Achilles became the guardship at Portland until 1874 when she was again re-armed . Upon its completion in 1875 , the ship became guardship at Liverpool until 1877 when Captain William Hewett , VC , assumed command . In 1878 she was one of the ships in the Particular Service Squadron which Admiral Geoffrey Hornby took through the Dardanelles at the time of the Russian war scare in June – August 1878 during the Russo-Turkish War . Achilles accidentally collided with the flagship of the Mediterranean Fleet , Alexandra , in October 1879 , but was only lightly damaged by Alexandra 's propeller . The ship rejoined the Channel Fleet in 1880 and was paid off in 1885 .

She lay derelict in the Hamoaze until April 1901 , when she was sent to Malta as a depot ship . To release her name for the new armoured cruiser , Achilles was renamed Hibernia in 1902 . She was renamed Egmont in March 1904 , and remained in Malta until 1914 . Her role in Malta was assumed by the stone frigate Fort St Angelo . She was brought home to Chatham that year , and served there as a depot ship under the successive names of Egremont ( 19 June 1916 ) and Pembroke ( 6 June 1919 ) . The ship was sold for scrap on 26 January 1923 to the Granton Shipbreaking Co .

The M3 Gun Motor Carriage ( GMC ) was a United States Army tank destroyer equipped with one 75 mm gun and was produced by Autocar . After the fall of France , the U.S. Army decided to make a self-propelled artillery piece from the M1897A4 gun on the M3 chassis , which was designated the T12 . After some improvement , it came into production as the M3 Gun Motor Carriage . However , the supply of M2A3 gun shields was insufficient for production needs , so a new gun shield was used . This was designated the M3A1 GMC . The T12 / M3 first served in the Philippines Campaign in 1942 with the Provisional Field Artillery Brigade in the anti-tank and the fire-support role . It then served in North Africa in tank destroyer battalions . It was used ineffectively in the Battle of Kasserine Pass and several other engagements , but was used with success in the Battle of El Guettar . It also served in the Allied invasion of Sicily , but was eventually superseded by the M10 tank destroyer . A total of 2,203 were produced , of which 1,361 were converted back into M3A1 half-tracks .

The M3 GMC was 20.46 feet ( 6.24 m ) long , 6.45 feet ( 1.97 m ) wide , 8.17 feet ( 2.49 m ) high ( including the gun shield ) , and weighed 20,000 pounds ( 9.1 t ) . Its suspension consisted of semi-elliptical longitudal leaf springs for the wheels and vertical volute springs for the tracks , while its transmission consisted of constant mesh . Its ground clearance was 11.2 inches ( 280 mm ) . It had a White 160AX 147 horsepower ( 110 kW ) , 386 cubic inch ( 6,330 cc ) , 6-cylinder engine with a compression ratio of 6.44 : 1 . It had a 150 mile ( 240 km ) range , 60 US gal ( 230 l ) fuel tank , a speed of 47 mph ( 75 km / h ) , and a power to weight ratio of 14.7 hp per ton . It was armed with one 75 mm M1897A5 with 59 rounds , had 0.25 – 0.625 in ( 6.4 – 15.9 mm ) of armor , and a crew of five consisting of a commander , gunner , two loaders , and a driver . The M3 ( with the M2A3 mount ) could traverse 19 ° left and 21 ° right , elevate 29 ° and depress − 10 ° . The M3A1 ( using the M5 mount ) could traverse 21 ° in both directions , but could only depress − 6.5 ° .

After the fall of France , the U.S. Army studied the reasons behind the effectiveness of the German campaign against the French and British forces . One aspect that was highlighted by this study was the use of self propelled artillery ; however , by 1941 , there was little available in the U.S. Army 's arsenal that could be used in such a role . The Army had a number of M1897A5 guns , sufficient enough for the mass-production for such a weapon , and the M3 half-track was coming into production . After some debate , the Army decided to place M1897A5 guns on the M3 half-track chassis , which was designated the T12 GMC . The M1897A5 gun was originally adapted for the M3 chassis by placing it in a welded box riveted to the chassis behind the driver 's compartment . It was accepted by the Army on 31 October 1941 . A batch of 36 T12s were used for testing , while another 50 were built and transported to the Philippines . The 36 T12s were improved in multiple ways . The improvements included the inclusion of a mount that raised the gun shield , the replacement of the original gun shield with the M2A3 gun shield , and the addition of a 0.5 in ( 12.7 mm ) M2 Browning machine gun , which was later removed . After the final improvements were finished , the prototype vehicles were sent to the Autocar Company for production .

The T12 / M3 GMC first saw action with the U.S. Army in the Philippines in 1941 – 42 , six months after it was designed . Three battalions of the Provisional Field Artillery Brigade operated T12s against the Japanese when they invaded the Philippines . During the early part of the campaign , the vehicle was used to provide direct covering fire and anti-tank support . The Japanese captured a few vehicles in 1942 and used them in the defense of the Philippines . By 1942 , M3 GMCs were being used by tank destroyer battalions in the North African Campaign , each of which consisted of 36 M3s and four 37 mm M6 GMCs . The M3 GMCs , which were designed for ambushing tanks , proved to be inadequate for this task in the battles of Sidi Bou Zid and Kasserine Pass , mainly due to poor tactics . Nevertheless , the M3 was later used in the Battle of El Guettar with success , claiming 30 German tanks , including possibly two Tiger tanks , at the cost of 21 M3s . Some M3s also saw service in Allied invasion of Sicily ( Operation Husky ) , but by that time , the M10 tank destroyer had replaced it in the U.S. Army . A total of 1,360 M3 GMCs were also converted back into M3A1 half-tracks .

Óengus son of Fergus ( Pictish : * Onuist map Urguist ; Old Irish : Óengus mac Fergusso , " Angus mac Fergus " ) , was king of the Picts from 732 until his death in 761 . His reign can be reconstructed in some detail from a variety of sources . Óengus became the chief king in Pictland following a period of civil war in the late 720s . During his reign , the neighbouring kingdom of Dál Riata was subjugated and the kingdom of Strathclyde was attacked with less success . The most powerful ruler in Scotland for over two decades , he was involved in wars in Ireland and England . Kings from Óengus 's family dominated Pictland until 839 when a disastrous defeat at the hands of Vikings began a new period of instability , which ended with the coming to power of Cináed mac Ailpín .

Irish genealogies make Óengus a member of the Eóganachta of Munster , as a descendant of Coirpre Cruthnechán or " Cairbre the little Pict " , a mythological emanation or double of Coirpre Luachra mac Cuirc , legendary son of Conall Corc , and ancestor of the Eóganacht Locha Léin , rulers of the kingdom of Iarmuman . The branch of the kindred from which he came , known in the annals as the Eoghanachta Magh Geirginn , were said to be located in an area known as Circinn , usually associated with modern Angus and the Mearns . His early life is unknown ; Óengus was middle-aged by the time he entered into history . His close kin included at least two sons , Bridei ( died 736 ) and Talorgan ( died 782 ) , and two brothers , Talorgan ( died 750 ) and Bridei ( died 763 ) . King Nechtan son of Der-Ile abdicated to enter a monastery in 724 and was imprisoned by his successor Drest in 726 . In 728 and 729 , four kings competed for power in Pictland : Drest ; Nechtan ; Alpín , of whom little is known ; and lastly Óengus , who was a partisan of Nechtan , and perhaps his acknowledged heir .

Four battles large enough to be recorded in Ireland were fought in 728 and 729 . Alpín was defeated twice by Óengus , after which Nechtan was restored to power . In 729 a battle between supporters of Óengus and Nechtan 's enemies was fought at Monith Carno ( traditionally Cairn o ' Mount , near Fettercairn ) where the supporters of Óengus were victorious . Nechtan was restored to the kingship , probably until his death in 732 . On 12 August 729 Óengus defeated and killed Drest in battle at Druimm Derg Blathuug , a place which has not been identified .

In the 730s , Óengus fought against Dál Riata whose traditional overlords and protectors in Ireland , the Cenél Conaill , were much weakened at this time . A fleet from Dál Riata fought for Flaithbertach mac Loingsig , chief of the Cenél Conaill , in his war with Áed Allán of the Cenél nEógan , and suffered heavy losses in 733 . Dál Riata was ruled by Eochaid mac Echdach of the Cenél nGabráin who died in 733 , and the king lists are unclear as to who , if anyone , succeeded him as overking . The Cenél Loairn of north Argyll were ruled by Dúngal mac Selbaig whom Eochaid had deposed as overking of Dál Riata in the 720s . Fighting between the Picts , led by Óengus 's son Bridei , and the Dál Riata , led by Talorgan mac Congussa , is recorded in 731 . In 733 , Dúngal mac Selbaig " profaned [ the sanctuary ] of Tory Island when he dragged Bridei out of it . " Dúngal , previously deposed as overking of Dál Riata , was overthrown as king of the Cenél Loairn and replaced by his first cousin Muiredach mac Ainbcellaig .

In 734 Talorgan mac Congussa was handed over to the Picts by his brother and drowned by them . Talorgan son of Drostan was captured near Dún Ollaigh . He appears to have been the King of Atholl , and was drowned on Óengus 's order in 739 . Dúngal too was a target in this year . He was wounded , the unidentified fortress of Dún Leithfinn was destroyed , and he " fled into Ireland , to be out of the power of Óengus . " The annals report a second campaign by Óengus against the Dál Riata in 736 . Dúngal , who had returned from Ireland , and his brother Feradach , were captured and bound in chains . The fortresses of Creic and Dunadd were taken . Muiredach of the Cenél Loairn was no more successful , defeated with heavy loss by Óengus 's brother Talorgan mac Fergusa , perhaps by Loch Awe . A final campaign in 741 saw the Dál Riata again defeated . This was recorded in the Annals of Ulster as Percutio Dál Riatai la h-Óengus m . Forggusso , the " smiting of Dál Riata by Óengus son of Fergus " . With this Dál Riata disappears from the record for a generation .

In 740 , a war between the Picts and the Northumbrians is reported , during which Æthelbald , King of Mercia , took advantage of the absence of Eadberht of Northumbria to ravage his lands , and perhaps burn York . The reason for the war is unclear , but it has been suggested that it was related to the killing of Earnwine son of Eadwulf on Eadberht 's orders . Earnwine 's father had been an exile in the north after his defeat in the civil war of 705 – 706 , and it may be that Óengus , or Æthelbald , or both , had tried to place him on the Northumbrian throne . Battles between the Picts and the Britons of Alt Clut , or Strathclyde , are recorded in 744 and again in 750 , when Kyle was taken from Alt Clut by Eadberht of Northumbria . The 750 battle between the Britons and the Picts is reported at a place named Mocetauc ( perhaps Mugdock near Milngavie ) in which Talorgan mac Fergusa , Óengus 's brother , was killed . Following the defeat in 750 , the Annals of Ulster record " the ebbing of the sovereignty of Óengus " . This is thought to refer to the coming to power of Áed Find , son of Eochaid mac Echdach , in all or part of Dál Riata , and his rejection of Óengus 's overlordship .

Unlike the straightforward narrative of the attacks on Dál Riata , a number of interpretations have been offered of the relations between Óengus , Eadberht and Æthelbald in the period from 740 to 750 . One suggestion is that Óengus and Æthelbald were allied against Eadberht , or even that they exercised a joint rulership of Britain , or bretwaldaship , Óengus collecting tribute north of the River Humber and Æthelbald south of the Humber . This rests largely on a confused passage in Symeon of Durham 's Historia Regum Anglorum , and it has more recently been suggested that the interpretation offered by Frank Stenton — that it is based on a textual error and that Óengus and Æthelbald were not associated in any sort of joint overlordship — is the correct one . In 756 , Óengus is found campaigning alongside Eadberht of Northumbria . The campaign is reported as follows : In the year of the Lord 's incarnation 756 , king Eadberht in the eighteenth year of his reign , and Unust , king of Picts led armies to the town of Dumbarton . And hence the Britons accepted terms there , on the first day of the month of August . But on the tenth day of the same month perished almost the whole army which he led from Ouania to Niwanbirig .

That Ouania is Govan is now reasonably certain , but the location of Newanbirig is less so . Although there are very many Newburghs , it is Newburgh-on-Tyne near Hexham that has been the preferred location . An alternative interpretation of the events of 756 has been advanced : it identifies Newanbirig with Newborough by Lichfield in the kingdom of Mercia . A defeat here for Eadberht and Óengus by Æthelbald 's Mercians would correspond with the claim in the Saint Andrews foundation legends that a king named Óengus son of Fergus founded the church there as a thanksgiving to Saint Andrew for saving him after a defeat in Mercia .

The story of the foundation of St Andrews , originally Cennrígmonaid , is not contemporary and may contain many inventions . The Irish annals report the death of " Tuathalán , abbot of Cinrigh Móna " , in 747 , making it certain that St Andrews had been founded before that date , probably by Óengus or by Nechtan son of Der-Ilei . It is generally presumed that the St Andrews Sarcophagus was executed at the command of Óengus . Later generations may have conflated this king Óengus with the 9th century king of the same name . The choice of David as a model is , as Alex Woolf notes , an appropriate one : David too was an usurper . The cult of Saint Andrew may have come to Pictland from Northumbria , as had the cult of Saint Peter which had been favoured by Nechtan , and in particular from the monastery at Hexham which was dedicated to Saint Andrew . This apparent connection with the Northumbrian church may have left a written record . Óengus , like his successors and possible kinsmen Caustantín and Eógan , is recorded prominently in the Liber Vitae Ecclesiae Dunelmensis , a list of some 3000 benefactors for whom prayers were said in religious institutions connected with Durham .

Óengus died in 761 , " aged probably more than seventy , ... the dominating figure in the politics of Northern Britain " . His death is reported in the usual brief style by the annalists , except for the continuator of Bede in Northumbria , possibly relying upon a Dál Riata source , who wrote : Óengus , king of the Picts , died . From the beginning of his reign right to the end he perpetrated bloody crimes , like a tyrannical slaughterer . The Pictish Chronicle king lists have it that he was succeeded by his brother Bridei . His son Talorgan was later king , and is the first son of a Pictish king known to have become king . The following 9th-century Irish praise poem from the Book of Leinster is associated with Óengus : An assessment of Óengus is problematic , not least because annalistic sources provide very little information on Scotland in the succeeding generations . His apparent Irish links add to the long list of arguments which challenge the idea that the " Gaelicisation " of eastern Scotland began in the time of Cináed mac Ailpín ; indeed there are good reasons for believing that process began before Óengus 's reign . Many of the Pictish kings until the death of Eógan mac Óengusa in 839 belong to the family of Óengus , in particular the 9th century sons of Fergus , Caustantín and Óengus .

1 : Nenokkadine ( English : 1 : Lonely One ) is a 2014 Indian Telugu-language psychological thriller film written and directed by Sukumar . Produced by Ram Achanta , Gopichand Achanta , and Anil Sunkara as 14 Reels Entertainment and distributed by Eros International , the film features Mahesh Babu and Kriti Sanon in the lead roles ( Sanon 's Telugu cinema debut ) . Nassar , Pradeep Rawat , Kelly Dorji , and Anu Hasan appear in supporting roles . Mahesh 's son , Gautham Krishna , made his debut in the film as a younger version of the protagonist . 1 : Nenokkadine revolves around the search by Gautham ( a schizophrenic Indian rock musician missing 25 percent of his brain 's grey matter ) for his parents , whom he believes were murdered by three men . Sameera , a journalist , convinces him that he is an orphan and is hallucinating . When Gautham kills one of the " imaginary " men for his psychological satisfaction , he realises that the dead man is real and leaves for London to find his roots and the other two men behind his parents ' death . Sukumar began working on 1 : Nenokkadine 's script after completing 100 % Love ( 2011 ) , making a bus driver 's tale about a boy who claimed that his parents were murdered on his bus the film 's base . R. Rathnavelu was the film 's director of photography , and Karthika Srinivas its editor . Devi Sri Prasad composed the soundtrack and background score . 1 : Nenokkadine was introduced on 12 February 2012 and principal photography , which began on 23 April 2012 , was completed in late December 2013 . It was filmed in London , Belfast , Bangkok and Indian cities including Hyderabad , Mumbai , Goa , Chennai and Bangalore .

Produced on a budget of ₹ 700 million , 1 : Nenokkadine was released on 10 January 2014 on about 1,500 screens during the Makar Sankranti festival season . Grossing over $ 1.27 million , 1 : Nenokkadine became the fourth-highest-grossing Telugu film in history at the United States box office . The film won three awards from eight nominations at the 4th South Indian International Movie Awards , and two awards at the 11th CineMAA Awards . It was dubbed into Tamil and Malayalam as Number 1 and into Hindi as 1 : Ek Ka Dum ( English : One Man 's Courage ) .

Gautham is a schizophrenic Indian rock musician who is missing 25 percent of his grey matter . He hallucinates a mysterious person he believes is one of the three murderers of his parents . As a child , Gautham was convinced that he was an orphan and assumes that his parents are dead ; he does not remember their names or what they looked like . At one of his concerts , Gautham sees one of the three men and chases him . Sameera , a journalist at the concert , films Gautham fighting his imaginary opponent . Gautham surrenders to the police after " killing " the man , confessing that he killed three men : one in Belfast , one in Pune and one just now in Hyderabad . He is released from custody after Sameera broadcasts the video on television . According to his doctor , if Gautham can hallucinate a person other than the three men , he can be treated . Gautham goes to Goa on vacation . Sameera stalks him , convincing him that two people are stalking him : a journalist who wants to interview him ( imaginary ) , and a person claiming to be his fan ( real ) . Gautham begins to fall in love with Sameera . He saves her from a group of people trying to murder her ; on an isolated island together Gautham learns the truth behind the fourth imaginary person and writes Sameera off as a disturbed journalist . By the time he learns about Sameera 's intentions , she has left for Hyderabad ; Gautham pursues her .

In Hyderabad , Gautham accidentally spoils Sameera 's birthday plans , infuriating her . Although he is convinced that he has made up an enemy to cope with being an orphan , a mysterious person tries to kill Sameera . Gautham saves her and proposes marriage , which she accepts . Sameera learns that the mysterious person is Antonio Rosarios , a Goa-based crime boss who wants to kill her because she tried to expose the presence of hydrogen cyanide in seeds sold by Rosarios ' company , AG1 . Gautham meets Rosarios in the lobby of Sameera 's office building . Assuming that he is an illusion , he shoots Rosarios in his head . By the time Gautham realises Rosarios is real he is dead , and Gautham learns that his parents were murdered . He catches an aged taxi driver who was stalking him ( one of the three men he imagined ) , and learns that two London-based Indians ( one of whom was Rosarios ) killed his parents ; his father gave the taxi driver a bag to give to Gautham . In the bag is an old Rubik 's Cube , a key and a British coin .

Gautham and Sameera go to London , where they and their driver Gulaab Singh escape from a murder attempt ; Gautham 's manager , Michael , is killed . The Rubik 's Cube , when solved a certain way , reveals a safe-deposit-box number in which Gautham finds a preserved rice sample . After escaping another murder attempt in a parking lot , he eludes the police and the two men with Sameera and Singh 's help . One of the men — a fan — seeks revenge for his father ( one of the other murderers , according to the aged taxi driver ) , who was killed by Gautham in Belfast when he performed there . Gautham learns that the aged taxi driver he met previously is a businessman and the murderer ; the person hit by the businessman 's car in Gautham 's presence was the actual , innocent taxi driver . Gautham and the businessman confront each other , and the businessman says that he and Gautham 's father were good friends and fellow scientists . They worked on cultivating Golden rice , a variety which could grow in any weather . When Gautham 's father refused to sell it in favour of distributing it globally for free , the businessman and Rosarios killed his parents . When he refuses to tell Gautham about his parents , Gautham kills him . On his way to the airport , Gautham passes the school he had attended and hears children singing a rhyme . It reminds him of a similar rhyme he learned from his mother , and he remembers his way back to his house . At his house ( a dilapidated villa ) Gautham finds a photo of his parents , Chandrasekhar and Kalyani . He later introduces the rice variety at a global convention as " the second green revolution " , and the film ends with Gautham standing in his field of Golden rice .

After completing 100 % Love ( 2011 ) , Sukumar began working on a psychological thriller with Mahesh Babu in mind as the protagonist because he felt that Mahesh had universal appeal . An incident in which a bus driver talked about a young boy who said that his parents were murdered on his bus became the story 's base . Mahesh met Sukumar on the set of Businessman ( 2012 ) in Goa , and listened to the script for 25 minutes . Although Sukumar could not describe the story well in the noisy restaurant , Mahesh agreed to appear in the film within half an hour . Sukumar worked on 1 : Nenokkadine 's script for two months , and considered it his dream project . Ram Achanta , Gopichand Achanta and Anil Sunkara of 14 Reels Entertainment , who produced Mahesh 's Dookudu ( 2011 ) and Aagadu ( 2014 ) , agreed to produce 1 : Nenokkadine after hearing the script . Asked about his frequent collaboration with them , Mahesh said that Sukumar clearly indicated the risk of budget escalation and longer production and said that he and Sukumar could be viewed as criminals if it was produced by someone else . Sunil Lulla and Andrew Hefferman were credited as co-producers , and Koti Paruchuri was its executive producer . The film , introduced on 12 February 2012 in Hyderabad , received its title in May 2013 .

Mahesh agreed to be fit and healthy , since the film emphasised action scenes . He followed a 12-week Dynamic Transformation Plan ( DTP ) supervised by Kris Gethin , developing his abdominal muscles and losing weight . Mahesh then followed a Yoda Three Training regime ( Y3T ) , supervised by Neil Hill , further developing his muscles . His stylist , Ashwin Malwe , said that his appearance and style would be " sophisticated and classy " in the film . Sukumar had Mahesh wear eyeglasses , since the director felt that audiences tended to consider a bespectacled character to be perfectionistic and positive , and the actor 's hairstyle was changed . Tamannaah was considered for the female lead , since the producers were impressed with her performance in 100 % Love . She declined the offer , citing scheduling conflicts , and the Producer 's Council told her not to sign for any new films until she completed her current assignments . After auditioning two actresses , Sukumar chose Kajal Aggarwal in March 2012 as the female lead . She was replaced by Kriti Sanon in October 2012 , due to scheduling conflicts . Sanon was signed for Heropanti ( 2014 ) after completing one shooting schedule for 1 : Nenokkadine , and divided her time between the films . Sanon , who was involved in several action scenes filmed on the sea , was apprehensive about a scene in which Mahesh took her from a yacht since she did not knew how to swim .

Mahesh 's seven-year-old son , Gautham Krishna , was chosen to play the younger version of the protagonist in his Telugu cinema debut . According to Sukumar , Gautham looked like the actor did as a child . When the director approached Mahesh and his wife , Namrata Shirodkar , Gautham Krishna was only six and they were apprehensive . His introduction scene was filmed silently by Peter Hein , since the boy was afraid of gunfire . Naveen Polisetty played a supporting role as Mahesh 's friend in the film , and Vikram Singh was signed as an antagonist . Nassar , Pradeep Rawat , Kelly Dorji , Sayaji Shinde and Anu Hasan were cast in other supporting roles . Jacqueline Fernandez was approached to perform an item number in the film , but the producers failed to make a deal and instead signed Sophie Choudry after seeing her performance in " Aala Re Aala " from Shootout at Wadala ( 2013 ) . For her first Telugu song , Choudry joined the film 's set in September 2013 . Sukumar said about the item number , " It 's a superstar ’ s film and it should reach all . Item numbers are common these days and people expect to see them . The situation was that Mahesh had to go to a pub to get information about the person he was looking for . So there was occasion to put in an item number " .

R. Rathnavelu , who collaborated with Sukumar on Arya ( 2004 ) and Jagadam ( 2007 ) , was the film 's director of photography in his return to Telugu cinema after seven years . Rathnavelu called the film " more challenging aesthetically " and compared it to Enthiran ( 2010 ) , which he considered his technically-toughest film . He created the film 's visual style in a week with a variety of cameras , such as Red Epic , Body Rigs , Doggies and an underwater scuba camera . For the climaxes , Rathnavelu shifted from chrome to black-and-white to full colour in synchronisation with the story 's mood . Rathnavelu had to address the protagonist 's mood swings and hallucinations , replicating scenes with minor differences . The film was shot in locations with a variety of climates , and new technical crews were hired in those places . Sukumar said , " We looked at world technicians and saw them work and can use whatever we learnt " and called it a " new yet learning experience " [ sic ] . Sukumar 's usual composer , Devi Sri Prasad , was chosen for the film 's soundtrack and score in Prasad 's first Mahesh film . He went through the script and discussed it with Sukumar , who felt that Prasad translated his vision in the background score . Prasad finished re-recording the film 's second half in four days . Eleven-year-old journalist Smrithika Thuhina 's father was an associate director of the film , and Prasad emailed him the rhyme 's tune with several stills from the scene ; his daughter wrote the lyrics for the rhyme . P. Madhusudhan Reddy was the film 's audiographer .

Principal photography began on 23 April 2012 , with the filming of " Who R U ? " featuring Mahesh and Aggarwal supervised by Prem Rakshith on a set at Annapurna Studios in Hyderabad . Six hundred models performed in the song , and about 2,000 people participated in the shoot . After its completion , an action sequence was filmed . The first shooting schedule wrapped up , and Mahesh returned to the set of Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu ( 2013 ) . The second schedule began on 31 May 2012 on house and colony sets at Saradhi Studios in Hyderabad , including scenes with Mahesh and others . Scenes of Mahesh at the police station were also part of the schedule . Since the actor had allotted a block of time to Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu , 1 : Nenokkadine 's filming was delayed . When the former neared completion , he resumed work on 1 : Nenokkadine in late September 2012 in Hyderabad . Filming continued in Goa in mid-October , after a four-month hiatus , and a song with Mahesh and others was filmed in late October . The Goa schedule wrapped up on 1 November , with half the filming completed . Mahesh took a break to promote Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu , returning to the set on 23 January 2013 . The next shooting schedule , which began on 18 March , lasted for three weeks . Night scenes focusing on Mahesh and others were filmed in Kukatpally in mid-April .

The next schedule , which began on 18 June , filmed in London and Belfast for 60 days . At the Causeway Pictures studio in Northern Ireland , 1 : Nenokkadine was the first Telugu film shot in Belfast . Hollywood stunt co-ordinator Conrad Palmisano supervised stunts by Mahesh and others . Rathnavelu called the action scene in a London car park " one of the most satisfying " things he had ever done . The scene takes place during a power failure , with the headlights of motorcycles chasing the protagonist the only sources of light . To film the scene , Rathnavelu used LED lamps and three torchlights ; smoke was pumped into the air to create a backdrop . When scenes were filmed on one of London 's three main bridges , traffic was stopped on both sides of the bridge for more than eight hours . After London , filming continued in Bangkok in August 2013 and in Hyderabad in September ; some scenes were filmed in and near Banjara Hills . The last shooting schedule began in Bangkok in early October 2013 , with action scenes supervised by Peter Hein . The remaining dialogue scenes were filmed in Bangalore in mid-October 2013 . They were finished by late November , and the last song was filmed in Mumbai . Principal photography wrapped in late December 2013 .

The film 's five-song soundtrack was composed by Devi Sri Prasad , with lyrics by Chandrabose . Lahari Music acquired its marketing rights for ₹ 10 million , a record for a Telugu film . The soundtrack was released on 19 December 2013 with a promotional event at Shilpakala Vedika in Hyderabad . The event , watched by 14,500 people , was shown live in 24 theatres across Andhra Pradesh and Telangana and was the first Indian soundtrack release event shown live in theatres . The rhyme from the film 's climax was released separately on 25 January 2014 .

1 : Nenokkadine was released globally on 10 January 2014 on about 1,500 screens , around the same time as Yevadu ( which was released two days later ) . The film was Mahesh 's third consecutive release during the Makar Sankranti festival season , following Businessman in 2012 and Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu in 2013 . Eros International acquired its global distribution rights for ₹ 720 million , and it was released and distributed by 14 Reels Entertainment . 1 : Nenokkadine was released on 900 screens across Andhra Pradesh and Telangana . Including multiplexes , 108 screens were booked in Hyderabad and there were 600 screenings on the film 's release day . It broke the record held by Attarintiki Daredi ( 2013 ) , which had been released on 100 screens in Hyderabad . 14 Reels Entertainment released the film in Auro 11.1 cinema audio format , supported by Barco . Karnataka distribution rights were sold to RNR Films , who had distributed Dookudu in the state , for ₹ 450 million . 1 : Nenokkadine was released on about 200 screens overseas , a record for a Telugu film . In addition to the United States and the United Kingdom , the film was released in Australia , the Netherlands , Switzerland , Malaysia and Germany ; it was the first Telugu film released in Ukraine . When reaction to the film 's length was mixed , the producers reduced its running time from 169 to 149 minutes . 1 : Nenokkadine had its global television premiere on 8 June 2014 on Gemini TV , with a TRP rating of 7.32 . The film was dubbed into Hindi as 1 : Ek Ka Dum that year , and into Malayalam and Tamil as Number 1 in 2015 .

A mobile app was released on 10 December 2013 on Google Play , and later on iOS ; 1 : Nenokkadine 's first look , posters , video promos and other promotional material were released through the app . On 19 December 2013 , users could download the film 's soundtrack and purchase bulk pre-release tickets . Its digital-media marketing was handled by Sharath Chandra , Anurag and Rohita of First Show Digital . The digital campaign placed third at the 2014 Indian Digital Media Awards in Mumbai , surpassing that for Krrish 3 . It accounted for 15 percent of total promotional activity , influencing the sale of 7,500 tickets on the film 's release day . 1 : Nenokkadine 's YouTube channel had 12 million views ; on Facebook its page received 130 million views , reaching 40 million users and engaging 3.9 million people . South Indian actress Samantha Ruth Prabhu found a poster of Sanon crawling behind Mahesh " regressive " , triggering a backlash on Facebook and Twitter from Mahesh 's fans . Actor Siddharth and filmmaker Sekhar Kammula shared her view , receiving a similar response , and filmmaker Pritish Nandy said that the poster was " gross " and " regressive " . Sukumar later removed that sequence from the film to avoid further issues , although the Central Board of Film Certification did not object to its inclusion .

1 : Nenokkadine received generally negative reviews from critics . According to The New Indian Express , its audience was " gripped through the whole film , but not for the right reasons " : " Ending with a heralding of a second ' Green Revolution ' and carrying on a legacy that aims at a food Utopia , you wish the movie continued with the schizophrenia and ended in an asylum " . Karthik Pasupulate of The Times of India gave the film three out of five stars : " The [ Telugu cinema ] format of six songs , five fights and loads of entertainment and melodrama makes it impossible to respectably adapt racy Hollywood styled suspense thrillers " . Radhika Rajamani of Rediff called the film " inordinately long , with repetitive scenes and slow and sluggish narration " , and a " sense of ennui set in after a point " ; however , Rajamani praised the lead actors ' performances . Sify gave the film 2.75 out of five stars : " In 1 Nenokkadine , individual sequences are cool but the same cannot be said if we see it in totality . Apart from Mahesh Babu`s stunning performance , the drive of the film is completely off the track . It disappoints . " Suresh Kavirayani of Deccan Chronicle gave the film 2.5 out of five stars : " To say it in a line , the film falls short of expectations and disappoints film goers , especially the fans of Mahesh Babu " . Kavirayani called Rathnavelu 's cinematography its " saving grace " , praising the lead pair 's performances . IndiaGlitz also gave 1 Nenokkadine 2.5 out of five stars , saying that the film had the capacity to " tank without a trace if Mahesh Babu 's character did not come with a difference " ; the actor " looks that pained man every bit " , expressing " intense emotions without much effort " .

Sangeetha Devi Dundoo of The Hindu wrote , " How often do we get to watch a Telugu film where the audience , along with the protagonist and supporting characters , is also required to think and distinguish between events unfolding in real and imaginary spaces ? " and called 1 Nenokkadine a " visually stunning " film . Sridhar Vivan of Bangalore Mirror gave the film 3.5 out of five stars : " As the film tries out a refined or reformed revenge saga , it needs to be seen whether 1 Nenokkadine works at the box office . If it does , it is a good sign for Telugu cinema " . A. S. Sashidhar of The Times of India wrote , " The first half of 1 : Nenokkadine is good and will keep you wanting for more . The story has a few interesting twists and turns , in the second half too to keep the audience glued to the screen " , and Sukumar " should be commended for superb attempt in choosing to make a film that has not been explored in Telugu movies " . Shekhar of Oneindia called the film a " brilliant psychological thriller " : " The first half of 1 : Nenokkadine is excellent and will impress all classes of audience . A few sentimental scenes slow down the pace of narration in the second half . But the superb climax that lasts for 15 minutes will compensate it . The viewers will surely walk out of theatre with contented hearts " .

1 : Nenokkadine earned a distributor share of ₹ 84 million at the AP-Nizam box office on its first day , and ₹ 124 million over its opening weekend . Its United States opening box-office total was $ 946,552 ( ₹ 58.2 million ) , which trade analyst Taran Adarsh called a " glorious start " and " one of the best openings ever by an Indian film " . 1 : Nenokkadine passed the $ 1 million mark in three days , the seventh Telugu film ( and Mahesh 's third , after Dookudu and Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu ) to earn a million dollars . On its fourth and fifth days the film earned ₹ 32.5 million at the AP-Nizam box office , for a five-day total of about ₹ 150 million . By the end of 1 : Nenokkadine 's first week it had earned a distributor share of ₹ 181 million at the AP-Nizam box office , ₹ 21 million in Karnataka and ₹ 9 million in the rest of India . The film 's first-week global box-office total was ₹ 25.2 million . In ten days 1 : Nenokkadine grossed over $ 1.27 million in the United States , the fourth-highest-grossing Telugu film in that country . The film earned about ₹ 289 million worldwide , on a budget of ₹ 700 million .

The Kongō-class ironclads ( 金剛型 ) were a pair of armored corvettes built for the Imperial Japanese Navy ( IJN ) by British shipyards in the 1870s . A British offer to purchase the two ships during the Russo-Turkish War in 1878 was refused . They became training ships in 1887 and made training cruises to the Mediterranean and to countries on the edge of the Pacific Ocean . The ships returned to active duty during the First Sino-Japanese War of 1894 – 95 where one participated in the Battle of the Yalu River and both in the Battle of Weihaiwei . The Kongō-class ships resumed their training duties after the war , although they played a minor role in the Russo-Japanese War of 1904 – 05 . They were reclassified as survey ships in 1906 and were sold for scrap in 1910 and 1912 .

Tensions between Japan and China heightened after the former launched its punitive expedition against Taiwan in May 1874 in retaliation of the murder of a number of shipwrecked sailors by the Paiwan aborigines . China inquired into the possibility of buying ironclad warships from Great Britain and Japan was already negotiating with the Brazilian government about the purchase of the ironclad Independencia then under construction in Britain . The Japanese terminated the negotiations with the Brazilians in October after the ship was badly damaged upon launching and the expeditionary force was about to withdraw from Taiwan . The crisis illustrated the need to reinforce the IJN and a budget request was submitted that same month by Acting Navy Minister Kawamura Sumiyoshi for ¥ 3.9 – 4.2 million to purchase three warships from abroad . No Japanese shipyard was able to build ships of this size so they were ordered from Great Britain . This was rejected as too expensive and a revised request of ¥ 2.3 million was approved later that month . Nothing was done until March 1875 when Kawamura proposed to buy one ironclad for half of the money authorized and use the rest for shipbuilding and gun production at the Yokosuka Shipyard . No response was made by the Prime Minister 's office before the proposal was revised to use all of the allocated money to buy three ships , one armored frigate and two armored corvettes of composite construction to be designed by the prominent British naval architect Sir Edward Reed , formerly the Chief Constructor of the Royal Navy . Reed would also supervise the construction of the ships for an honorarium of five percent of the construction cost . The Prime Minister 's office approved the revised proposal on 2 May and notified the Japanese consul , Ueno Kagenori , that navy officers would be visiting to negotiate the contract with Reed .

Commander Matsumura Junzō arrived in London on 21 July and gave Reed the specifications for the ships . Reed responded on 3 September with an offer , excluding armament , that exceeded the amount allocated in the budget . Ueno signed the contracts for all three ships on 24 September despite this problem because Reed was scheduled to depart for a trip to Russia and the matter had to be concluded before his departure . Ueno had informed the Navy Ministry about the costs before signing , but Kawamura 's response to postpone the order for the armored frigate did not arrive until 8 October . The totals for all three contracts came to £ 433,850 or ¥ 2,231,563 and did not include the armament . These were ordered from Krupp with a 50 percent down payment of £ 24,978 . The government struggled to provide the necessary money even though the additional expenses had been approved by the Prime Minister 's office on 5 June 1876 , especially as more money was necessary to fully equip the ships for sea and to provision them for the delivery voyage to Japan .

The Kongō-class ships had a single two-cylinder double-expansion horizontal return connecting rod-steam engine made by Earle 's Shipbuilding and Engineering , driving a single two-bladed 16-foot ( 4.9 m ) propeller . Six cylindrical boilers provided steam to the engine at a working pressure of 4.22 bar ( 422 kPa ; 61 psi ) . The engine was designed to produce 2,500 indicated horsepower ( 1,900 kW ) to give the ships a speed of 13.5 knots ( 25.0 km / h ; 15.5 mph ) . During sea trials , the ships reached maximum speeds of 13.75 – 13.92 knots ( 25.47 – 25.78 km / h ; 15.82 – 16.02 mph ) . They carried a maximum of 345 – 390 long tons ( 351 – 396 t ) of coal , enough to steam 3,100 nautical miles ( 5,700 km ; 3,600 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . The ironclads were barque-rigged and had a sail area of 14,036 square feet ( 1,304 m2 ) . To reduce wind resistance while under sail alone , the funnel was semi-retractable . Their topmasts were removed in 1895 . Both ships were reboilered at Yokosuka Naval Arsenal in 1889 : Hiei received two steel double-ended cylindrical boilers while Kongō 's new boilers were of the same type as her original ones . The new boilers proved to be less powerful for both ships during sea trials , Kongō reached a maximum speed of 12.46 knots ( 23.08 km / h ; 14.34 mph ) from 2,028 ihp ( 1,512 kW ) while Hiei was significantly slower at 10.34 knots ( 19.15 km / h ; 11.90 mph ) from 1,279 ihp ( 954 kW ) .

The ships were fitted with three 172-millimeter ( 6.8 in ) Krupp rifled breech-loading ( RBL ) guns and six RBL 152-millimeter ( 6.0 in ) Krupp guns . All of the 172-millimeter guns were positioned as chase guns , two forward and one aft . The forward chase guns were pivot-mounted and could traverse 122 degrees from straight ahead on their side of the ship . The aft gun could traverse a total of 125 degrees to each side . The 152-millimeter guns were mounted on the broadside . Each ship also carried two short 75-millimeter ( 3.0 in ) guns for use ashore or mounted on the ships ' boats . The armor-piercing shell of the 172-millmeter gun weighed 132 pounds ( 59.9 kg ) . It had a muzzle velocity of about 1,500 ft / s ( 460 m / s ) and was credited with the ability to penetrate 10.3 inches ( 262 mm ) of wrought iron armor at the muzzle . Data for the 152-millimeter gun is not available . During the 1880s , the armament of the Kongō-class ships was reinforced with the addition of four quadruple-barreled 25-millimeter ( 1.0 in ) Nordenfelt and two quintuple-barreled 11-millimeter ( 0.4 in ) Nordenfeldt machine guns for defense against torpedo boats . Around the same time the ships each also received two 356-millimeter ( 14.0 in ) torpedo tubes for Schwartzkopff torpedoes . The tubes were mounted above the waterline and one torpedo was provided for each tube . Their anti-torpedo boat armament was again reinforced in 1897 by the addition of a pair of 2.5-pounder Hotchkiss guns . After the end of the Russo-Japanese War , their armament was reduced to six ex-Russian 12-pounder guns and six 2.5-pounders .

In February 1878 , during the Russo-Turkish War , the British were not willing to accept the occupation of the Ottoman Turkish capital of Constantinople by Russian forces and began to prepare for war . The British government made informal inquiries about purchasing the two corvettes , but this was firmly rejected by the Japanese government . The ships sailed from Britain in February – March and arrived in Yokohama two months later . They were sailed to Japan by hired British crews as the IJN lacked the necessary experience . The ships were not formally turned over to the navy until 10 July when a formal ceremony was held in Yokohama attended by the Meiji Emperor and many senior government officials . The ships were opened for public tours after the ceremony . Kongō hosted the Duke of Genoa when he visited Japan in late 1879 . Hiei made port visits in China and in the Persian Gulf the following year . In 1885 – 86 both ships were assigned to the Small Standing Fleet . They became training ships in 1887 and they both made a training cruise to the Mediterranean in 1889 – 90 with cadets from the Imperial Japanese Naval Academy . Hiei and Kongō ferried the 69 survivors of the wrecked Ertuğrul back to Turkey where the ships ' officers were received by Sultan Abdul Hamid II . The ships also carried a class of naval cadets . Until the end of the century , one or the other of the Kongō-class ships made the annual cadet cruise , usually to countries bordering the Pacific Ocean . Kongō was in Honolulu on one of these cruises during the Hawaiian Revolution of 1893 , although the ship played no part in the affair . She returned to Hawaii the next year and briefly became the patrol ship there until the start of the First Sino-Japanese War later in 1894 . Kongō did not participate in the Battle of the Yalu River , but Hiei was there . She was heavily engaged by Chinese ships and was damaged enough that she was forced to break off the action . Hiei was repaired after the battle and both ships were present during the Battle of Weihaiwei in early 1895 , although neither saw any significant combat .

The first season of the American web television series Jessica Jones , which is based on the Marvel Comics character of the same name , follows a former superhero who opens her own detective agency after an end to her superhero career at the hands of Kilgrave . It is set in the Marvel Cinematic Universe ( MCU ) , sharing continuity with the films and other television series of the franchise . The season was produced by Marvel Television in association with ABC Studios and Tall Girls Productions , with Melissa Rosenberg serving as showrunner . Krysten Ritter stars as Jones , while David Tennant plays Kilgrave . The two are joined by principal cast members Mike Colter , Rachael Taylor , Wil Traval , Erin Moriarty , Eka Darville , and Carrie-Anne Moss . Jessica Jones entered development in late 2013 , with Rosenberg reworking a series she had previously developed for ABC . Ritter was cast as Jones in December 2014 , with production on Jessica Jones taking place in New York City from February to August 2015 . The season addresses issues of rape and assault with realism and a grounded tone , and was always intended to be far more " adult " than other Marvel projects , particularly in terms of sex . The show 's cinematography took inspiration from noir , while visual effects house Shade VFX focused on creating " invisible " effects that would support its realistic approach .

The first two episodes of the season premiered in New York City on November 17 , 2015 , with the full season of 13 episodes released on Netflix on November 20 to an estimated high viewership and critical acclaim . Critics praised the performances of Ritter and Tennant , as well as the series ' noir tone , approach to sexuality , and coverage of darker topics such as rape , assault and posttraumatic stress disorder . The season was awarded a Peabody Award in the category of " Entertainment and Children 's programs " . A second season of Jessica Jones was ordered on January 17 , 2016 .

In October 2013 , Marvel and Disney announced that they would provide Netflix with live action series centered around Daredevil , Jessica Jones , Iron Fist , and Luke Cage , leading up to a miniseries based on the Defenders . Melissa Rosenberg was brought on to showrun the Jessica Jones series , to be reconfigured as a " page one do-over " from an original project she had developed in December 2010 for ABC . In December 2014 , the official title was revealed to be Marvel 's A.K.A. Jessica Jones , but that was shortened to Marvel 's Jessica Jones in June 2015 . The season consists of 13 hour-long episodes .

The writers for the series worked in Los Angeles , with one member of the writing team on set in New York for filming . Actress Carrie-Anne Moss talked about how the scripts developed through the production of the series , explaining that the dialogue usually did not change much while filming , but scenes were altered to accommodate the filming locations when necessary . Rosenberg stated that , since Jones is a private investigator , there would be some procedural elements to the show , " but that ’ s not our focus . There are cases . In particular , there is a large case that carries over the season . " Elaborating on this , Marvel Television head Jeph Loeb said that the " fun about being a private detective is that the line between what ’ s legal and what ’ s not legal gets very blurred .... her drive is not always necessarily to solve the case , as much as it is to go , ' Okay , can I pay the rent ? How am I going to get through this day ? ' " He also added that inspiration for the series came from " the noir films from the ‘ 40s " and " film [ s ] like Chinatown . "

Describing the tone of the series , Loeb said , " When we first started talking about Daredevil , we promised that we were telling a story that was first a crime drama and then a superhero show . This is more of a psychological thriller . This speaks to when you think about what happened to Jessica and what sort of destroyed her life and how she tried to put it together , and then to have to confront the person who deconstructed her world , that ’ s a very powerful , emotional place to start from . " On approaching rape and trauma in the series , Rosenberg wanted to avoid actually showing rape , which she called " lazy storytelling " and often a way to " spice up " male characters , and preferred to just make the trauma a part of the characters ' everyday lives rather than an " issue " for the series to tackle . When asked about the adult nature of the series , including the use of sex , Rosenberg explained that Marvel would only not allow showing nudity and the use of the word ' fuck ' in the series .

The main cast for the season includes Krysten Ritter as Jessica Jones , Mike Colter as Luke Cage , Rachael Taylor as Patricia " Trish " Walker , Wil Traval as Will Simpson , Erin Moriarty as Hope Shlottman , Eka Darville as Malcolm Ducasse , Carrie-Anne Moss as Jeri Hogarth , and David Tennant as Kilgrave . Appearing in recurring roles for the season are Susie Abromeit as Pam , Colby Minifie and Kieran Mulcare as Robyn and Ruben , Clarke Peters as Oscar Clemons , Michael Siberry and Lisa Emery as Albert and Louise Thompson , and Robin Weigert as Wendy Ross-Hogarth . Danielle Ferland , Gillian Glasco , Ryan Farrell , and Paul Pryce also recur as victims of Kilgrave who join a support group established by Jones , while Rosario Dawson and Royce Johnson reprise their roles of Claire Temple and Brett Mahoney , respectively , from Daredevil .

Stephanie Maslansky returned as the costume designer for Jessica Jones from Daredevil , and was assisted on the first episode by Jenn Rogien , who crafted Jessica Jones ' leather jacket , faded jeans , and boots costume . On Jones 's costume , Maslansky said she " considers her clothing to be an armor and a shield and something that helps her maintain a distance from other people and privacy . It keeps her from having to deal with the rest of humanity in a certain sort of way . " At least 10 versions of Jones 's jacket were made , which started as an Acne Studios leather motorcycle jacket that had any " bells and whistles and any additional superfluous design details " removed . 20 pairs of jeans were used , with both sets of clothing being aged and distressed . Because Jones 's costume does not evolve much throughout the series , Maslansky used flashbacks to show how her costume had evolved to the present day : for ' pre-Kilgrave ' Jessica Jones , Maslansky gave the character " more pulled together " clothes , albeit " still kind of edgy " clothes that did not change who she was as a character , but were just " different " . For instance , in a flashback to Jones working in a corporate environment , she does not wear a suit , instead " wear [ s ] her jeans and find [ s ] a really cool jacket , maybe a vintage thing , maybe something that she borrowed from Trish " . For a flashback where Jones wears a large sandwich costume , a " variety " of costumes were ordered online , with the chosen suit then distressed to " look dirty and old " ; " a mere shadow of its former sandwich self , " becoming " more of a hoagie than a sandwich . " In another flashback , Jones imagines escaping Kilgrave 's control . The bright yellow dress the character wears in the dream sequence was chosen for its juxtaposition to the character 's real situation , with Maslansky calling it " so beautiful and so free and so light " .

For Kilgrave , Maslansky used many suits created by designer Paul Smith , rather than custom-making them as she originally planned , as Smith " was all about purple " in the previous fashion season . On the suits , Maslansky added that the designers " wanted to find a place where we could utilize clothing in shades of purple , but not go so over the top that it would look silly and that he would stop feeling ominous or menacing . " Expanding on this , Maslansky called purple a traditionally " fairly friendly color , and he ’ s anything but friendly . So I had to find ways to make him be ominous and frightening and terrifying . I found that I needed the right proportion of shades of purple to other shades that were similar : navy , black , maroon . " Maslansky felt Luke Cage was also someone " who wears his clothing like an armor , " with his wardrobe consisting of T-shirts , jeans , leather jackets or an army jacket . For a character like Trish Walker , who does not have the same kind of " statement costume " as Jones , Maslansky tried to create a certain character style . Maslansky said that Walker 's uniform is fashion , so " even when she was hanging around the house , she was wearing a pair of Rag and Bone jeans with a Chloé top , and this was her version of a T-shirt and jeans . " Maslansky added that Robin was " a blast to dress " because of her " quirky " personality , yet she was still able to " put herself together aesthetically . " For Malcolm , as his story progressively became brighter throughout the season , so did his wardrobe , becoming " a little brighter and a little more hopeful . "

In February 2014 , Marvel announced that Jessica Jones would be filmed in New York City . In April , Marvel Comics ' editor-in-chief Joe Quesada stated that the show would be filming in areas of Brooklyn and Long Island City that still look like the old Hell ’ s Kitchen , in addition to sound stage work . The series went into production in February 2015 in The Bronx at Lehman College with the working title Violet , and aimed to film each episode over nine days , on average . Filming concluded in mid-late August , with other locations in New York City used including : the East Village 's Horseshoe Bar for Luke 's Bar ; the 33rd Street PATH station and a PATH train ; the 101st Street area for the exterior of Jessica 's apartment ( with the interior apartment settings created on a sound stage ) ; Douglaston , Queens for Jessica 's childhood home ; the Angel Orensanz Center for Jessica and Luke 's fight in " AKA Take a Bloody Number " ; and Williamsburgh Savings Bank Tower and Pier 88 for locations in " AKA Smile " . Concerning inspirations on the series , Loeb revealed that " Chinatown ... is one of the things that influenced Brian Michael Bendis and Michael Gaydos when they created the character . So those kind of beautiful , long , wide expansive shots , where people sort of come into frame and go back out of frame and someone ’ s in the foreground and then someone is way in the background and they ’ re having a conversation , that ’ s the stuff that makes it interesting . " Director of Photography Manuel Billeter and episodic director S. J. Clarkson took inspiration from the comics in terms of their color palette , while looking to the works of Wong Kar-wai as reference to create " unconventional " compositions , with Billeter explaining , " There were a lot of foreground elements [ and ] headroom as well , and we never wanted to show an open frame . We wanted to create a sense of claustrophobia . " Billeter shot the season with a Red Epic Dragon camera in 4K resolution , with 5K used for some visual effects shots , and with Panavision PVintage lenses ; he focused mostly on static frames and " good composition " , but did occasionally employ a camera dolly or steadicam . For lighting , Billeter noted that many New York street lamps had been changed from sodium-vapor lamps to LEDs , so he tried to recreate the " warm , dirty color of sodium vapor " for night exterior scenes .

Production designer Loren Weeks described Marvel 's Hell 's Kitchen as having " a little more [ East ] Village quality . " To achieve the explosion at Luke 's Bar , Weeks said , " We could not take out the windows [ at Horseshoe Bar ] , which are [ made up of ] multiple small colored glass and metal frames . We didn ’ t know frankly when we picked that location that we would have that explosion ... What we did was build a fireproof box in the entrance and we had a cannon in there which blew out debris and smoke and some fire . And then we did a lighting effect on the inside and then the rest of the explosion was handled by visual effects . " For the scenes on the PATH train and station , location manager Jason Farrar noted that production had exclusive use of the tracks and platform during the day when ridership was low to get their shots .

Shade VFX created over 600 effects shots for the season , with " invisible " effects " the showpiece , helping to push forward the darker elements the series . " Therefore , effects supervisor Karl Coyner and producer Julie Long worked closely with the crew on set to " execute stunts , set extensions , explosions , wetwork and fire sequences " while filming , rather than have Shade create those effects digitally . An effect that Shade was required to create was tinting Kilgrave 's skin purple " in a few key scenes " where he is using his powers , a nod to the comic iteration 's purple-skinned appearance .

On existing in the MCU , specifically in the same world as the other Netflix series , Rosenberg said , " Jessica Jones is a very , very different show than Daredevil . We exist in a cinematic universe , [ and ] the mythology of the universe is connected , but they look very different , tonally they ’ re very different … That was my one concern coming in : Am I going to have to fit into Daredevil or what ’ s come before ? And the answer is no . " On references or " easter eggs " in the series , Rosenberg explained that " A little is always there and in the writer ’ s room we have some fanboys that know all this stuff and they ’ re all geeking out with different stuff .... a lot of references are to the [ Alias comic ] . " She also said that nods to the larger MCU are in the series , with each episode having a " little something in it . " Jeryn Hogarth is closely associated with Iron Fist in the comics , and also worked with Luke Cage as part of those characters ' Heroes for Hire team . Like Daredevil , the series makes references to the events of The Avengers and the Avengers ( specifically Hulk and Captain America , though not by name ) . Jessica also mentions Angela del Toro as another private investigator , who in the comics is the hero White Tiger and has connections with K 'un-Lun and Iron Fist . Paul Tassi , writing for Forbes , was disappointed with how the series fit into the larger MCU , feeling the series seemed " removed from the world of The Avengers " and did not acknowledge Daredevil enough given that " it ’ s supposed to be sharing at least this little corner of the Marvel Cinematic Universe with it . " Eric Francisco of Inverse countered that Jessica Jones 's lack of overt connections to the MCU was " the show 's chief advantage . Besides demonstrating how physically wide open the MCU 's scope really is , Jessica Jones also proves the MCU 's thematic durability . "

Jessica Jones was released on November 20 , 2015 on the streaming service Netflix , in all territories where it is available , in Ultra HD 4K . In January 2015 , a month after Marvel announced a 2015 release for the series , Sarandos had said that it was " too hard to say now " if the series would actually release in 2015 , with Netflix 's plan to release a Marvel series approximately a year apart from each other after Daredevil 's April 2015 release . However , Netflix soon confirmed that the series would indeed release in 2015 , announcing the November 20 release date in September .

Disney Consumer Products created a small line of products to cater to a more adult audience , given the show ’ s edgier tone . Paul Gitter , senior VP of Marvel Licensing for Disney Consumer Products explained that the focus would be more on teens and adults than very young people , with products at outlets like Hot Topic . Additionally , a Marvel Knights merchandise program was created to support the series , which creates new opportunities for individual product lines and collector focused products . Licensing partners wanted to pair up with Marvel , despite this not being a film project , given its previous successes . In May 2015 , Marvel announced plans to reprint Alias , the comic that the series is based on , with new covers from David Mack , the original cover artist on the comic who is also providing artwork for the series ' opening credits . The reprints , which were all released digitally in June 2015 , and up to issue 15 in two trade paperbacks in September , were intended to both celebrate the history of Jessica Jones , and introduce new audiences to the character ahead of the release of the series . In late September through early October , Marvel and Netflix released short teasers for the series , which chronicled a day of Jones ' life . Also in early October , Marvel digitally released a 12-page one-shot comic by the original Alias creative team — Bendis , Gaydos , and Mack — set in the universe of the television series . The one-shot was created as an exclusive for New York Comic Con , where a print version was distributed . The comic sees Jessica Jones coming into contact with Daredevil character Turk Barrett , and includes a short sequence featuring Daredevil , to celebrate " the connective tissue that will build between the series . " Also during New York Comic Con , Marvel set up a street marketing campaign , and screened " AKA Ladies Night " on October 10 , while at the Marvel Booth fans could take their picture with the Alias Investigations desk , with Kilgrave 's eyes appearing in the background of the final animation . Marvel additionally partnered with Uber during the event to provide select riders with complimentary trips to or from the convention in custom designed SUVs .

A full trailer was released at the end of October , with Meagan Damore of Comic Book Resources feeling that it helped establish the same tone as Daredevil and introduced " Marvel 's creepiest villain yet " with Kilgrave . She also compared Jessica to some of the other female characters of the MCU — Black Widow , Melinda May , and Peggy Carter — feeling that Jessica stood out from the others because she does not have " a sense of togetherness " and was the most relatable because of her struggle with trauma , and that the series would have the amount of creative space required to explore the character that the other female characters were lacking . A second trailer was released on November 10 , 2015 . Sarene Leeds of The Wall Street Journal felt that this trailer highlighted empowerment , compared to the first that " was about illustrating the fear behind Jones ’ s past " . The season held its premiere in New York City on November 17 .

As Netflix does not reveal subscriber viewership numbers for any of their original series , Symphony Technology Group compiled data for the series based on a sample size of 15,000 people using software on their phones that measures television viewing by detecting a program 's sound . According to Symphony , from September to December 2015 , episodes of Jessica Jones averaged 4.8 million viewers during a 35-day viewing cycle . The data was presented by Alan Wurtzel , NBCUniversal president of research and media development , in a presentation aimed to provide " perspective " when stating " digital platforms are hurting the traditional TV business " . Netflix CCO Ted Sarandos responded to the data by saying that " the whole methodology and the measurement and the data itself doesn ’ t reflect any sense of reality of anything that we keep track of . " A further study from Symphony , for the same time period , found Jessica Jones to be one of the four most watched series in the 18 to 24 demographic , ahead of any broadcast network series .

The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 93 % approval rating with an average rating of 8.1 / 10 based on 54 reviews . The website 's critical consensus reads , " Jessica Jones builds a multifaceted drama around its engaging antihero , delivering what might be Marvel 's strongest TV franchise to date . " Metacritic , which uses a weighted average , assigned a score of 81 out of 100 based on 31 critics , indicating what the website considers to be " universal acclaim " . The early screening of the first episode at New York Comic Con was met by a very positive reaction from the crowd . George Marston of Newsarama gave the first episode a 10 out of 10 , saying the series " strikes a balance between self-aware noir and Marvel ’ s first flirtations with psychological horror .... not just another hit for Marvel and Netflix , but a landmark moment for female superheroes on TV . " Eric Goldman of IGN felt that " Jessica Jones starts out with a strong premiere episode that ... easily goes further than anything in the MCU in terms of sexuality . " He called Ritter " a commendably tough , sardonic " Jessica Jones and praised the supporting cast for the strong impressions they made , later scoring the episode an 8.5 out of 10 . Evan Valentine of Collider.com gave the episode 5 stars out of 5 , feeling that Tennant would " ascend to the same level as Tom Hiddleston ’ s Loki and Vincent D 'Onofrio ’ s Wilson Fisk as one of the cornerstones of villainy in the MCU " . Katharine Trendacosta of io9 also had positive thoughts on " AKA Ladies Night " , highlighting the episode 's use of light and color , especially with purple , and the way it portrays New York as how it " actually looks — not overly bright and shiny and clean , but not suffering a never-ending power-outage either " . Abraham Riesman noted the episode 's presentation of sexuality , which " was shockingly and refreshingly honest " , compared to Marvel 's other films and television series . He concluded by applauding the series ' bringing up of the topics of rape and PTSD .

Reviewing the first seven episodes of the series , Maureen Ryan of Variety gave positive thoughts on Jessica Jones , stating , " The show , which features an exceptional performance from Krysten Ritter and sure-handed guidance from executive producer Melissa Rosenberg , is not just a contender for the title Best Marvel-related TV property ; in a supremely crowded TV scene , it is one of the year ’ s most distinctive new dramas . " Jack Shepard of The Independent , also on the first seven episodes , felt the series " not only matches [ Daredevil ] but exceeds expectations . " Shepard gave exceptional praise to Tennant 's Kilgrave , feeling he was one of the best villains produced by Marvel , and possibly " the best on-screen comic book villain since Heath Ledger ’ s Joker . " Forbes ' Merrill Barr stated that after seeing the first seven episodes , " the answer is a resounding yes " if lightning could strike twice for Marvel Television , claiming , " In no uncertain terms , Jessica Jones is the best thing Marvel Television has ever produced . It contains all the hopeful anticipation of [ Agents of ] S.H.I.E.L.D. , all the feminist-overtones of Agent Carter and all the grittiness of Daredevil . "

Deadline.com 's Dominic Patten also had praise for the series , particularly Rosenberg 's influence on it , the coverage of topics such as " PTSD , abuse , assault , shame , and death " and the cast , highlighting Tennant 's Kilgrave as the actor 's best role as well as the MCU 's best villain . Mary McNamara from the Los Angeles Times felt Jessica Jones " rewrote the definition of superhuman " and was " a marvel " , lauding the series ' " breathtaking " examination of recovery from a sexually , emotionally and physically abusive relationship . Daniel Fienberg for The Hollywood Reporter was also positive , saying the series " looks and feels a bit like a cable anti-hero series — but it 's really more of a post-hero story , making it fascinating and unique in a marketplace that doesn 't lack for costumed do-gooders of all types . " His one criticism was that " the show shares Jessica 's monomaniacal fixation on [ Kilgrave ] and the result is a sort of narrative claustrophobia ... Everything in these opening episodes ties back to Kilgrave and Kilgrave is such a twisted figure that it 's hard for any light to get in . " Melissa Maerz of Entertainment Weekly was slightly more critical of the series , awarding it a " B " . Though Maerz felt Ritter was a good choice for Jessica and enjoyed the cinematography , she felt the series " could 've made for a gritty character drama if it weren 't for the noir clichés ( saxophone music , shadows through glass ) and a procedural structure that 's very CSI : Marvel . The show 's biggest weakness is the same as Jessica 's : It starts out with extraordinary potential , but somewhere along the way , it loses what make it special . "

Libby Hill of the Los Angeles Times commented on how Jessica Jones exposed modern day sexism and misogyny through Kilgrave 's use of the phrase " Smile " , calling the series " the most innocuous and incisive cultural critique " from Marvel to date . Hill likened an early scene that shows Kilgrave asking Jones to smile , and her obliging , to " similar well-meaning scenarios [ that ] play out in the real world time and again each day " many in the form of gendered street harassment , that resonates with many women . Hill also added that " Kilgrave serves as an exaggerated representation of perceived consent , " due to the response he gives later in the series to Jessica about never knowing if someone is doing what they want or what he tells them to do . She concludes that " Jessica Jones is revolutionary because in acknowledging casual misogyny and exaggerating its most destructive tendencies , it exposes the pervasive toxicity therein . It does all of this without making a show of its politics , instead resting easy on the knowledge that all too many women will relate to the subtleties of its premise . " Amy C. Chambers , writing for The Science and Entertainment Laboratory , noted how the season moved away from sexism even more so than the comics , by changing Kilgrave 's abilities from phermone based , with a particular effect on women , to viral , with equal effect no matter gender , indicating that " powerlessness is not gendered . "

Kwame Opam at The Verge chose to examine rape and the nature of consent in the series . Comparing Jessica Jones to other television series that have depicted rape ( Game of Thrones , Orange Is the New Black , and Outlander ) , Opam felt that " since rape is one of the show ’ s core themes , we never need to see it ... rape is a foundational part of the text , and its presence is constant . Even if it ’ s invisible , it ’ s always there . " He also felt the series took the time to examine how rape happens and what it means , especially in terms of power and consent , concluding , " Jessica Jones moves the conversation about rape forward by treating it as a complex subject worth investigating , rather than as spice for a story ... Maybe we don ’ t need to see it anymore to grasp how violent it is . Maybe our energies are better spent thinking deeply about why it happens at all . " The Guardian 's Lili Loofbourow also discussed the series depiction of rape and consent , noting the complications that come with Kilgrave telling his victims how to feel rather than just how to act , and saying , " however exceptional Kilgrave ’ s power seems , the moral quagmire it produces is all too common . It ’ s the condition of the rape victim who had an orgasm during her assault . It ’ s the condition of the soldier trained to kill when he suspects his targets are innocent . It ’ s the condition of the battered woman who goes back to her abuser and stays “ of her own free will ” . It ’ s the condition of ... any person , really , who agrees , whatever the context , to consent to forgo consent in the future . " Loofbourow also discussed the character of Simpson , comparing his power-inducing red pill to the anti-feminist " red pillers " , and noting that his taking of the pills " renders him not just dangerously delusional , but so utterly at odds with nature and reality of any kind that he will forget to breathe unless he counteracts the pill ’ s effects . "

Jessica Jones was included on multiple Best / Top TV Shows of 2015 lists , ranking on People 's ( 1st , along with Daredevil ) , Indiewire and The Star-Ledger 's ( 2nd ) , NPR 's ( 3rd ) , ScreenCrush 's ( 4th ) , Digital Spy 's ( 5th ) , Complex 's ( 6th ) , Vulture 's ( 7th ) , Slate Magazine 's ( 9th ) , and TV Guide 's ( 11th ) . It was also included on un-ranked lists from Maureen Ryan of Variety , Mary McNamara of the Los Angeles Times , The Week , and Wired . In December 2015 , IGN named Jessica Jones the Netflix 's best original series released to date , and it was named one of the Best New Shows of 2015 by Ryan , as well as the tenth best new show of 2015 by Entertainment Weekly 's Jeff Jensen . The Atlantic named " AKA WWJD ? " one of the best television episodes of 2015 . Additionally , Jessica Jones was the second most trending television series search on Google for 2015 .

Deepak Tijori ( born 28 August 1961 ) is an Indian film director and actor who works in Bollywood films and is well known for his supporting roles in Aashiqui ( 1990 ) , Khiladi ( 1992 ) , Jo Jeeta Wohi Sikandar ( 1992 ) , Kabhi Haan Kabhi Naa ( 1993 ) , Anjaam ( 1994 ) , Ghulam ( 1998 ) and Baadshah ( 1999 ) . He also starred as a lead actor in Pehla Nasha ( 1993 ) . Tijori started his directing career with Oops ! ( 2003 ) , a film about male strippers . This was followed by Fareb ( 2005 ) , Khamoshh ... Khauff Ki Raat ( 2005 ) , Tom , Dick , and Harry ( 2006 ) and Fox ( 2009 ) . Thriller at 10 – Fareb , a TV mini-series produced by Tijori won the 2001 Indian Television Academy Awards in the category best mini-series . Tijori has also been the housemate on Bigg Boss 1 ( 2006 ) . His wife is a fashion designer and his brother-in-law Kabir Sadanand is a film director . In 2009 Tijori 's daughter was kidnapped for a few hours .

Tijori received his college education from Narsee Monjee College in his hometown Mumbai . While in college , Tijori joined an amateur theatre group . Aamir Khan , Ashutosh Gowariker , Paresh Rawal and Vipul Shah were also the members of the same group . His friends influenced him to pursue a career in film acting , in which during his early career he struggled . He said in an interview with Rediff.com " For three years , I sat outside offices trying to get a word with producers [ ... ] I managed to do some tiny roles , which were very pathetic . " He had worked for Cine Blitz magazine and also as a hotel manager .

Tijori portrayed minor characters in Tera Naam Mera Naam ( 1988 ) , Parbat Ke Us Paar ( 1988 ) and Main Tera Dushman ( 1989 ) before appearing as one of the antagonist 's hitman in Shashilal K. Nair 's Kroadh ( 1990 ) . Tijori 's first important role came when Mahesh Bhatt cast him to play the role of protagonist 's friend in his romantic drama Aashiqui ( 1990 ) . The film turned out to be a commercial success and his hand gestures in the film were widely copied by the youth of that time . He played minor roles in Afsana Pyar Ka ( 1991 ) and Kaun Kare Kurbanie ( 1991 ) . In the same year , he was cast again by Bhatt to play supporting roles in two of his films ; romantic drama Dil Hai Ke Manta Nahin and romantic thriller Sadak . The latter film was loosely based on Martin Scorsese 's Taxi Driver ( 1976 ) and Tijori played a man who is killed by a pimp after he runs away with one of the prostitutes . In 1992 , he featured in Abbas-Mustan 's suspense thriller Khiladi alongside Akshay Kumar , Ayesha Jhulka and Sabeeha . Tijori played Boney and was paired with Sabeeha . Khiladi was a commercial success . Tijori 's next important role came with the Mansoor Khan-directed coming-of-age sports drama Jo Jeeta Wohi Sikandar alongside Aamir Khan , in which Tijori played the role of Shekhar Malhotra , a successful and arrogant cyclist , who wins the Inter-School Championship every year . Akshay Kumar had auditioned and Milind Soman was signed for Malhotra 's role before Tijori played it . Rediff.com ranked Jo Jeeta Wohi Sikandar , ninth in its Bollywood 's top 10 college movies list .

Tijori produced and played his only lead role in Gowariker-directed murder mystery Pehla Nasha ( 1993 ) , alongside Pooja Bhatt and Raveena Tandon . Upon release , the film received poor reviews and failed at the box office . In the same year , he appeared as the antagonist in D Rama Naidu-directed Santaan . Tijori starred alongside Shah Rukh Khan in Kabhi Haan Kabhi Naa and Anjaam ( both 1994 ) . The latter one is considered one of the most violent films in Bollywood . In 1995 , he starred in another Mahesh Bhatt-directed film Naajayaz . Tijori played a supporting role in action drama Mrityudata ( 1997 ) which did not receive favourable reviews from critics . He portrayed supporting characters in Aamir Khan-starrer Ghulam ( 1998 ) and the Abbas-Mustan-directed comedy thriller Baadshah . In the latter , he featured as the titular undercover CBI agent . In the same year , Tijori acted in Mahesh Manjrekar-directed crime drama Vaastav : The Reality ( 1999 ) and the Gujarati language film Hu Tu Ne Ramtudi . He played supporting roles in the romantic comedy Dulhan Hum Le Jayenge ( 2000 ) , Vaastav : The Reality 's sequel Hathyar ( 2002 ) and Kabir Sadanand-directed comedy Popcorn Khao ! Mast Ho Jao ( 2004 ) . In 2012 , he played a police officer in Ram Gopal Varma 's action film Department . Tijori had approached Varma for the villain 's role but he felt that Tijori 's image did not match the character 's and refused to give him the role . Tijori changed his look in one month 's time and was eventually cast by Varma . The following year , he was cast to play the antagonist in Devang Dholakia-directed Tina and Lolo . He had to lose weight for his role . Tijori stated that he himself " was looking for a change " while referring to his salt-and-pepper look in the film . Dholakia said that he was " looking for a new suave villain " and Tijori suited the role . He featured in the crime thriller Raja Natwarlal ( 2014 ) and played the role of a terrorist in the Sadanand-directed comedy Gollu Aur Pappu ( 2014 ) .

Tijori made his directorial debut in 2003 , with an adult film about male strippers Oops ! He was also credited as the producer and the writer . The film was produced on a budget of ₹ 2.5 crore ( US $ 370,000 ) and considered controversial because of the subject matter and initially it faced troubles with the Central Board of Film Certification . The film was released in two versions – Hindi and English . India Today called Tijori 's direction amateurish and termed the film " an example of brave new breed " . Oops ! did not receive favourable reviews but proved to be a turning point in actress Mink Brar 's career . His next directorial venture was Fareb ( 2005 ) , starring sisters Shilpa Shetty and Shamita Shetty . Like his previous film , Fareb too had troubles with the censor board and was given A certificate implying that it was to be viewed only by adult audience . It received negative reviews . In the same year , he directed the thriller Khamoshh ... Khauff Ki Raat featuring Shilpa Shetty , Juhi Chawla , Rakhi Sawant and debutante Kainaaz Perveez . The film received mixed response . The following year Tijori directed the comedy Tom , Dick , and Harry ( 2006 ) . In a review for India Today , Anupama Chopra called it the year 's worst film .

Tijori 's thriller Fox starring Arjun Rampal and Sunny Deol was delayed due to production issues . Upon release in September 2009 , the film received poor reviews . In the same year it was announced that Tijori would direct a Vikram Bhatt-produced film titled Bhaag Johny . The cast included Muzzamil Ibrahim and 2 new actresses . During the film 's shooting , Ibrahim had to leave the film due to his differences with Tijori and subsequently the film was shelved for a brief period . The following year , Bhatt announced that he himself will direct the film , there would be a different lead actor and Tijori would play the role of a Pakistani policeman . Two years later it was reported that Tijori would direct Vikram Bhatt-produced film Love Games . His next directorial was an adult suspense thriller titled Dare You , starring debutante Alisha Khan who was selected after an audition of more than 800 girls . The film 's poster was the first of its kind and featured the lead actress showing her middle finger . However , Tijori left the project due to creative differences with the film 's producers . In 2013 , he directed the film Rock 'In Love which featured Hanif Hilal and Sandeepa Dhar in lead role . Do Lafzon Ki Kahani starring Randeep Hooda is Tijori 's next directorial project .

He played the role of a housemate in the first season of Bigg Boss , as a replacement for Salil Ankola . Ankola had signed an agreement with Balaji Telefilms , which refrained him from participating or acting in television shows made by other production houses that " directly or indirectly compete with Balaji Telefilms . " On the seventh day , the Bombay High Court ordered Ankola to leave the house or face criminal charges . He was replaced by Tijori . During Tijori 's stay at the Bigg Boss house , his wife Shivani Tijori sent text messages to her friends , family members and media-persons to help Tijori in getting out of the house . After he was evicted from the show , Tijori said that he would make a film based on the show . Tijori called the show " a laundered reality " but denied that it was scripted .

Tijori 's wife Shivani is a fashion designer . Film director Kabir Sadanand and singer Kunika Lal are his brother-in-law and sister-in-law respectively . On 10 May 2009 , Tijori 's then 13-year-old daughter was kidnapped for a few hours . Based on her testimony , a suspect was arrested and charged for the crime . Goregaon ’ s Garden Estate Co-operative Housing Society asked Tijori and his family to vacate their house in November 2012 , following complaints from their neighbours . The Tijori family had been living there since 2009 . The residents of the building accused them of behaving rudely , not paying charges on time , insulting the society 's office bearers and bringing disrepute to them . After a general meeting of the members , the society passed a resolution and sent a notice to Tijori , asking him to vacate his flats within the next 30 days . The resolution was sent to the local registrar . He responded by filing a criminal case against nine members of the society and in October 2014 , the registrar gave the decision in his favour . Tijori called the legal proceedings a " long nightmarish battle " and accused the society for charging wrongful maintenance money .

Triptych , May – June 1973 is a triptych completed in 1973 by the Irish-born artist Francis Bacon ( 1909 – 1992 ) . The oil-on-canvas was painted in memory of Bacon 's lover George Dyer , who committed suicide on the eve of the artist 's retrospective at Paris 's Grand Palais on 24 October 1971 . The triptych is a portrait of the moments before Dyer 's death from an overdose of pills in their hotel room . Bacon was haunted and preoccupied by Dyer 's loss for the remaining years of his life and painted many works based on both the actual suicide and the events of its aftermath . He admitted to friends that he never fully recovered , describing the 1973 triptych as an exorcism of his feelings of loss and guilt . The work is stylistically more static and monumental than Bacon 's earlier triptychs of Greek figures and friends heads . It has been described as one of his " supreme achievements " and is generally viewed as his most intense and tragic canvas . Of the three Black Triptychs Bacon painted when confronting Dyer 's death , Triptych , May – June 1973 is generally regarded as the most accomplished . In 2006 , The Daily Telegraph 's art critic Sarah Crompton wrote that " emotion seeps into each panel of this giant canvas ... the sheer power and control of Bacon 's brushwork take the breath away " . Triptych , May – June 1973 was purchased at auction in 1989 by Esther Grether for $ 6.3 million , then a record for a Bacon painting .

Francis Bacon met George Dyer in a Soho pub . According to Bacon " George was down the far end of the bar and he came over and said ' You all seem to be having a good time , can I buy you a drink ? ' " ( Francis Bacon quoted in : Michael Peppiat , Francis Bacon : Anatomy of an Enigma , London 2008 , p . 259 ) . From that point on , Dyer became devoted to Bacon . He admired his intellect and power and was in awe of his self-confidence . He felt as if he had found a purpose , as the prominent artist 's companion . Dyer was then about thirty years old and had grown up in the East End of London in a family steeped in crime . He had spent his life drifting between theft , juvenile detention center and jail . Typical of Bacon 's taste in men , Dyer was fit , masculine , and not an intellectual . Bacon 's relationships prior to Dyer had all been with older men who were as tumultuous in temperament as the artist himself , but each had been the dominating presence . Peter Lacy , his first lover , would often tear up the young artist 's paintings , beat him up in drunken rages , and leave him on the street half-conscious . Bacon was attracted to Dyer 's vulnerability and trusting nature . Dyer was impressed by Bacon 's self-confidence and his artistic success , and Bacon acted as a protector and father figure to the insecure younger man . Dyer was , like Bacon , a borderline alcoholic and similarly took obsessive care with his appearance . Pale-faced and a chain-smoker , Dyer typically confronted his daily hangovers by drinking again . His compact and athletic build belied a docile and inwardly tortured personality ; the art critic Michael Peppiatt described him as having the air of a man who could " land a decisive punch " . Their behaviours eventually overwhelmed their affair , and by 1970 , Bacon was merely providing Dyer with enough money to stay more or less permanently drunk .

As Bacon 's work moved from the extreme subject matter of his early paintings to portraits of friends in the mid-1960s , Dyer became a dominating presence in the artist 's work . Bacon 's treatment of his lover in these canvasses emphasises his subject 's physicality while remaining uncharacteristically tender . More than any other of the artist 's close friends portrayed during this period , Dyer came to feel inseparable from his effigies . The paintings gave him stature , a raison d 'etre , and offered meaning to what Bacon described as Dyer 's " brief interlude between life and death " . Many critics have cited Dyer 's portraits as favourites , including Michel Leiris and Lawrence Gowling . Yet as Dyer 's novelty diminished within Bacon 's circle of sophisticated intellectuals , the younger man became increasingly bitter and ill at ease . Although Dyer welcomed the attention the paintings brought him , he did not pretend to understand or even like them . " All that money an ' I fink they 're reely ' orrible " , he observed with choked pride . He abandoned crime but soon descended into alcoholism . Bacon 's money allowed Dyer to attract hangers-on who would accompany him on massive benders around London 's Soho . Withdrawn and reserved when sober , Dyer was insuppressible when drunk , and would often attempt to " pull a Bacon " by buying large rounds and paying for expensive dinners for his wide circle . Dyer 's erratic behaviour inevitably wore thin — with his cronies , with Bacon , and with Bacon 's friends . Most of Bacon 's art world associates regarded Dyer as a nuisance — an intrusion into the world of high culture to which their Bacon belonged . Dyer reacted by becoming increasingly needy and dependent . By 1971 , he was drinking alone and was only in occasional contact with his former lover .

In October 1971 , Dyer accompanied Bacon to Paris for the opening of the artist 's retrospective at the Grand Palais . The show was the high point of Bacon 's career to date , and he was now being described as Britain 's " greatest living painter " . Dyer was now a desperate man , and although he was " allowed " to attend , he was well aware that he was " slipping " , in every sense , out of the picture . To draw Bacon 's attention he earlier planted cannabis in Bacon 's flat , then phoned the police , and he had attempted suicide on a number of occasions . On the eve of the Paris exhibition , Bacon and Dyer shared a hotel room , and Bacon spent the next day surrounded by people eager to meet him . In mid-evening he was informed that Dyer had taken an overdose of barbiturates and was dead . Though devastated , Bacon continued with the retrospective and displayed powers of self-control " to which few of us could aspire " , according to Russell . Bacon was deeply affected by the loss of Dyer , and he had recently lost four other friends and his nanny . From this point on , death haunted his life and work . Though he gave a stoic appearance at the time , he was inwardly broken . He did not express his feelings to critics , but later admitted to friends that " daemons , disaster and loss " now stalked him as if his own version of the Eumenides . Bacon spent the remainder of his stay in Paris attending to promotional activities and funeral arrangements . He returned to London later that week to comfort Dyer 's family . The funeral proved to be an emotional affair for all , and many of Dyer 's friends , including hardened East-End criminals , broke down in tears . As the coffin was lowered into the grave one attendant screamed " you bloody fool ! " . Although Bacon remained stoic throughout , in the following months Dyer preoccupied his imagination as never before . To confront his loss , he painted a number of tributes on small canvasses and his three " Black Triptych " masterpieces .

In each panel , Dyer is framed by a doorway , and set against a flat , anonymous foreground coloured with black and brown hues . In the left frame , he is seated on a toilet with his head crouched between his knees as if in pain . Although his arched back , thighs and legs are according to the Irish critic Colm Tóibín , " lovingly painted " , Dyer is by now clearly a broken man . This central panel shows Dyer sitting on the toilet bowl in a more contemplative pose , his head and upper body writhing beneath a hanging lightbulb which throws a large bat-like shadow formed in the shape of a demon or Eumenide . The art critic Sally Yard has noted that in the portrayal of Dyer 's flesh , " life seems to visibly drain ... into the substantial character of the shadow beneath him " . Dyer 's posture suggests he is seated on a lavatory bowl , though the object is not described . Schmied has proposed that in this frame the blackness of the background has enveloped the subject , and it " seems to be advancing forward over the threshold , threatening the viewer like a flood or a giant bat with flapping wings and extended claws . "

In the right panel , Dyer is shown with his eyes shut , vomiting into a hand basin . In the two outer frames his figure is shadowed by arrows , pictorial devices that Bacon often used to place a sense of energy into his paintings . In this work , the arrows point to a man about to die , and according to Tóibín they scream " Here ! " , " Him ! " . The arrow of the right panel , according to Tóibín , points to a " dead figure on the lavatory bowl , as though telling the Furies where to find him " . The triptych is centralised by the lightbulb , and by the fact that Dyer faces inwards in the two outer canvasses . The triptych 's composition and setting are poised to suggest instability , and the doors in each side panel are splayed outwards as if to look into the darkness of the foreground . Triptych , May – June 1973 has been said to achieve its tension by locating voluptuously described figures in an austere , cage-like space . The foreground of each panel is bounded by a wall , which runs parallel to a framing door . Each door admits a stark black into its frame , while the walls establish a link between each of the three Black Triptychs . In 1975 , the curator Hugh M. Davis noted that while Bacon 's earlier triptychs had been set in public spaces " open to all kinds of visitor " , the Black Triptychs are set in a " deeply private realm , to which only the individual — accompanied , perhaps , by one or two of his closest friends — has access " . In 1999 , Yard wrote that the sense of foreboding and ill-omen conjured by the Eumenides of Bacon 's Three Studies for Figures at the Base of a Crucifixion ( 1944 ) reappears in the triptych as a " batlike void that snared the figure of George Dyer as he subsides into the supple curves of death " . John Russell observed that the painting 's background describes an area which is half studio , half condemned cell . A reviewer of the 1975 Metropolitan Museum of Art exhibition found a resemblance between the concept of the central panel and Albrecht Dürer 's engraving Melencolia I ( 1514 ) — in the figure 's pose , the bat form , and the panel 's radiance — suggesting that Bacon 's late triptychs evoke " memorable figural formulations " of classic Western culture .

Bacon later stated that " painting has nothing to do with colouring surfaces " , and in general he was not preoccupied with detailing his backgrounds : " When I feel that I have to some extent formed the image , I put the background in to see how it 's going to work and then I go with the image itself . " He told David Sylvester that he intended his " hard , flat , bright ground " to juxtapose with the complexity of the central images , and noted that " for this work , it can work more starkly if the background is very united and clear . I think that probably is why I have used a very clear background against which the image can articulate itself " . Bacon usually applied paint to the background quickly , and with " great energy " ; however , he thought of it as a secondary element . He used its colour to establish tone , but in his mind the real work began when he came to paint the figures . Critics have argued whether the triptych should be read sequentially from left to right . Davies believes the work is a narrative , panoramic view of Dyer 's suicide , and that the triptych 's format implies a temporal continuity between each frame . Ernst van Alphen has argued that , notwithstanding spatial inconsistencies — the light bulb featured in the central panel is missing from the two outer canvasses , while the doorway view is reversed in the center panel — the triptych is a " plain representation of a story " .

Bacon 's work from the 1970s has been described by the art critic Hugh Davies as the " frenzied momentum of a struggle against death " . Bacon admitted during a 1974 interview that he thought the most difficult aspect of aging was " losing your friends " . This was a bleak period in his life , and though he was to live for another seventeen years , he felt that his life was almost over , " and all the people I 've loved are dead " . His concern is reflected in the darkened flesh and background tones of his paintings from this period . His acute sense of mortality and awareness of the fragility of life were heightened by Dyer 's death in Paris . In the next three years he painted many images of his former lover , including the series of three " Black Triptychs " which have come to be seen as among his best work . A number of characteristics bind the triptychs together : the form of a monochromatically rendered doorway features centrally in all , and each is framed by flat and shallow walls . In each three Dyer is stalked by a broad shadow ; which takes the form of pools of blood or flesh in the outer panels and the wings of the angel of death in the left hand and central images . In its display caption for Triptych – August 1972 the Tate gallery wrote , " What death has not already consumed seeps incontinently out of the figures as their shadows . "

Each of the three Black Triptychs displays sequential views of a single figure , and each seems to be intended to be viewed as if stills from a film . The figures rendered are not drawn from any of Bacon 's usual intellectual sources ; they do not depict Golgotha , Handes , or Leopold Bloom . In these pictures Bacon strips Dyer from the context of both Dyer 's own life and the artist 's life , and presents him as a nameless , slumped , gathering of flesh , awaiting the onset of death . Describing the Black Triptychs in 1993 , the art critic Juan Vicente Aliaga wrote that " the horror , the abjection that oozed from the crucifixes has been transformed in his last paintings into quiet solitude . The masculine bodies entwined in a carnal embrace have given way to the solitary figure leaning over the washbasin , standing firm on the smooth ground , neutral , bald-headed , his convex back deformed , his testicles contracted in a fold . " When asked by the broadcaster Melvyn Bragg in 1984 if the portraits painted in the wake of Dyer 's death were depictions of his emotional reaction to the event , Bacon replied that he did not consider himself to be an " expressionist painter " . He explained that he was " not trying to express anything , I wasn 't trying to express the sorrow about somebody committing suicide ... but perhaps it comes through without knowing it " . When Bragg inquired if he often thought about death , the artist replied that he was always aware of it , and that although " it 's just around the corner for [ me ] , I don 't think about it , because there 's nothing to think about . When it comes , it 's there . You 've had it . " Reflecting on the loss of Dyer , Bacon observed that as part of aging , " life becomes more of a desert around you " . He told Bragg that he believed in " nothing . We are born and we die and that 's it . There is nothing else . " Bragg asked Bacon what he did about that reality , and after the artist told him he did nothing about it , Bragg pleaded , " No Francis , you try and paint it . "

Throughout his career , Bacon consciously and carefully avoided explaining the meaning behind his paintings , and pointedly observed that they were not intended as narratives , nor open to interpretation . When Bragg challenged him with the observation that Triptych , May – June 1973 was the nearest the artist had come to telling a story , Bacon admitted that " it is in fact the nearest I 've ever done to a story , because you know that is the triptych of how [ Dyer ] was found " . He went on to say that the work reflected not just his reaction to Dyer 's death , but his general feelings about the fact that his friends were then dying around him " like flies " . A borderline alcoholic himself , Bacon continued to explain that his dead friends were " generally heavy drinkers " , and that their deaths led directly to his composition of a series of meditative self-portraits which emphasised his own aging and awareness of the passage of time .

Julius Franks , Jr . ( September 5 , 1922 – November 26 , 2008 ) was a civil rights leader and an All-American guard who played football at the University of Michigan from 1941 to 1942 . Franks wore # 62 as a varsity letterman in 1941 and # 63 in 1942 . Franks was the first ( or second depending on the source ) African-American University of Michigan player to become an All-American in football . Illness cut short his collegiate athletic career . After Michigan , Franks pursued a career in dentistry . He also became an active community leader who contributed his time to public service and who helped to integrate Grand Rapids , Michigan by financing home construction in a majority Caucasian neighborhood .

Franks , who was born in Macon , Georgia and raised in Hamtramck , Michigan , was named to the Detroit , Michigan , all-city team after the 1939 high school football season . He is the son of Julius Franks , Sr. and Nellie Mae Solomon and father of Daryl , Cheryl , Bobby , Beverly A Grant , Fredrick . After graduating from high school , he attended the University of Michigan , where he became the third African-American to play for the Michigan Wolverines football team . In 1942 , he became the first African-American at Michigan to earn All-American honors . He is described as the second to be All-American by some accounts . Head coach Fritz Crisler said Franks was one of the hardest-working players he ever coached . The 1942 Wolverines ' offensive line , which included Franks , Al Wistert , Robert Kolesar , Merv Pregulman , and Elmer Madar , was known as the " Seven Oak Posts " . Franks credited the group 's success to scrimmaging as rookies against the 1940 offense that included Tom Harmon , Forest Evashevski , and Bob Westfall . Franks was played all 60 minute in his games as a junior in 1942 and was named a first-team All American by the International News Service ( Hearst newspapers ) , Central Press , and Collier 's Weekly , and a second-team All-American by the Associated Press and New York Sun .

In 1943 , Franks and teammate Tom Kuzma came down with tuberculosis and were hospitalized at University Hospital for 25 months as they recuperated . Franks recalled that head coach Fritz Crisler was a regular visitor to his hospital room , and team star Tom Harmon also stopped to visit while on leave from military service . As a result of the hospitalization , Franks missed his senior year as a football player . He obtained his bachelor of science degree in 1947 . In 1982 , Franks was named to the University of Michigan Hall of Honor in the fifth class of inductees that was inducted in 1983 . He was the twelfth Michigan football player to earn this honor .

In 1951 , Franks earned his D.D.S. from the University of Michigan Dental School , and practiced dentistry in Grand Rapids , Michigan for more than 40 years . Franks was a leader in the Urban League , United Way , American Red Cross , Boy Scouts of America , and Rotary Club . In 1964 , Michigan Governor George Romney appointed Franks to Western Michigan University 's first Board of Trustees , where he served as a trustee until 1983 . Franks served on several boards : Executive Communication , Vice President , President , 1951 – 87 ; Kent County Dental Society , 1951 – 92 ; Michigan & American Dental Association , 1951 – 96 ; trustee , Western Michigan University , 1964 – 82 ( trustee emeritus , 1983 ) ; Director , Boulevard Memorial Medical Center , 1974 – 84 ; Director , United Way Kent County , 1987 – 92 . In 1992 , Franks contracted Guillain-Barré syndrome , which forced him into retirement . In the 1960s , Franks helped to integrate Grand Rapids . In the early 1960s , African Americans were not welcome in Grand Rapids ' " white " middle-class neighborhoods , and real estate agents would not show them houses . In 1962 , Franks ' friend , J.E. Adams , found vacant land designated as a potential park site . Adams , Franks , and friends Joseph Lee and Samuel Triplett created a plan to purchase the 20 acres ( 80,937 m2 ) site and build a middle-class neighborhood for African-Americans . The announcement " caused an uproar that resulted in protests , lawsuits and threats . " When banks refused to finance the project , the four men purchased the land on their own for $ 60,000 and started building . The first of 51 houses was completed in 1965 . Today , the neighborhood , known as Auburn Hills ( not to be confused with Auburn Hills , Michigan ) , has a population of 542 and the lowest crime rate in Grand Rapids . In 2006 , the Michigan Alumni Club gave Franks the " Paul G. Goebel , Sr. Distinguished Alumni in Athletics Award " . In later years , Franks was also a leader with the Urban League , United Way and other groups .

The first round of the tournament was played on May 9 and 10 at the home fields of the seeded teams . The quarterfinals were held on May 16 and 17th on neutral site fields at Hofstra University ( James M. Shuart Stadium ) and the United States Naval Academy ( Navy-Marine Corps Memorial Stadium ) . The tournament culminated with the semifinals and final held on Memorial Day weekend at Gillette Stadium in Foxborough , Massachusetts . The tournament was won by Syracuse University who defeated Cornell University , 10 – 9 , in overtime in front of 41,935 fans .

The NCAA Division I Men ’ s Lacrosse Committee selected the participating teams for the championship tournament . The committee announced the qualifying teams and the seeding order on Sunday , May 3 , 2009 . Seven conferences received automatic bids for their top team . The remaining nine teams were selected by the committee as " at-large " bids . Five conferences held tournament championships , which also determined their NCAA bids . Siena earned an automatic bid by winning the Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference ( MAAC ) championship for both their first conference title and first NCAA tournament appearance . Villanova earned an automatic bid by winning Colonial Athletic Association ( CAA ) championship and also made its NCAA tournament debut . Navy earned an automatic bid by winning its fifth Patriot League championship in six years . Both Notre Dame and UMBC repeated as conference champions by winning the Great Western Lacrosse League ( GWLL ) and America East Conference , respectively . Two conferences awarded their bids based on regular season performance . UMass earned the Eastern College Athletic Conference ( ECAC ) championship and its automatic with a 6 – 1 conference record . The Ivy League awarded its automatic bid to Cornell . Princeton and Cornell possessed identical conference records and were named co-champions . The head-to-head regular season game , which Cornell had won , acted as the tie-breaking criterion .

The 1st round of the tournament , seven of the eight seeded teams advanced . Every past NCAA tournament had been won by seven of the eight teams that advanced to the quarterfinals , with Duke being the only one to have never won a national title , up to this tournament . For the first time , all four Atlantic Coast Conference ( ACC ) teams advanced to the second round . It was just the second time in tournament history that four teams from the same conference advanced . The first instance occurred in 1990 with Brown , Harvard , Princeton , and Yale of the Ivy League . The tournament began on Saturday , May 9 , when the Brown Bears traveled to face the eighth-seeded Johns Hopkins Blue Jays at Homewood Field in Baltimore . The Blue Jays pulled away to three-goal leads in the first and final quarters , but the Bears equalized both times . In the final ten seconds of regulation , Brown attackman Kyle Hollingsworth batted in a loose ball to even the score , 11 – 11 . In overtime , Hopkins won the faceoff and called a timeout , before Brian Christopher drove up the right side of the field and made a game-winning top-corner shot on the run . It was the third overtime goal by Christopher in Hopkins ' past four games .

UMBC then played at number-six seed North Carolina . The UMBC Retrievers possessed the most efficient extra-man offense ( EMO ) and the best-rated midfield in the nation . Their roster , however , lacked depth , and the first-string midfielders were forced to play in the 90 ° F ( 32 ° C ) heat for almost the entire game . At halftime , the Retrievers led the Tar Heels , 8 – 6 . The lead changed hands several times in the third period , before North Carolina took control for the remainder of the game to win , 15 – 13 . Tar Heels attackman Billy Bitter , who attempted only nine shots , matched the school single-game record with eight goals . Hofstra played at fifth-seeded Cornell , where the teams were even at halftime , 5 – 5 . The third period was the decisive quarter , and Cornell won three face-offs and outscored Hofstra five-to-one . In Durham , third-seeded Duke hosted Navy . At halftime , the Blue Devils led 10 – 0 and expanded the rout to 13 – 1 at the start of the final period . Duke advanced with a final score of 14 – 5 .

The second day of the tournament began with the Maryland Terrapins facing the seventh-seeded Notre Dame Fighting Irish at home in South Bend , Indiana . The Fighting Irish entered the game in possession of a perfect 15 – 0 record , but still considered an unknown variable due to their schedule . The magazine Inside Lacrosse called the Terrapins a talented team that had underachieved during the regular season . The first-ranked Notre Dame defense frustrated Maryland , but the Terps still managed to gain a 6 – 1 lead in the third quarter . Maryland 's defense effectively shut-down Notre Dame and the leading Irish scorer Ryan Hoff was unable to make a single shot on goal . Maryland was the only unseeded team to advance to the quarterfinals . Both schools making their inaugural NCAA tournament appearance suffered quick elimination . The Villanova Wildcats were trounced by the Virginia Cavaliers , 18 – 6 . The Cavaliers were led by Brian Carroll 's career-high five goal performance . The Siena Saints were held scoreless for nearly 42 minutes in their loss to the Syracuse Orange , 11 – 4 . Onondaga Community College transfer Cody Jamieson , who had just been cleared academically , scored three goals in his first start for the Orange .

The quarterfinals took place over the weekend of May 16 to 17 at two neutral sites . The first doubleheader was sponsored on Saturday by Hofstra University , followed by games held at the United States Naval Academy on Sunday . Despite overcast weather at both locations , it was the first time that each NCAA quarterfinals venue attracted in excess of 11,000 spectators . The second round opened at Hofstra 's James M. Shuart Stadium with the Maryland – Syracuse match-up . Al Cavalieri filled in as the Orange goalkeeper for long-time starter John Galloway who was sick with the flu . Syracuse scored three unanswered goals in the first quarter before Maryland goalie Brian Phipps suffered an ACL tear . Terrapins midfielder Grant Catalino narrowed the deficit to 5 – 3 before halftime on an extra-man score . In the second half , Syracuse made defensive adjustments to shut down Maryland 's behind-the-goal attack , and the Orange tallied three times in the span of 2 : 10 to pull away in the third quarter . Syracuse won , 11 – 6 , and extended its postseason streak against Maryland to five . Ivy League rivals Cornell and Princeton then had their 70th meeting , but first in the NCAA tournament . Earlier in the postseason , the Big Red defeated the Tigers to split the Ivy League championship . Three Princeton shots hit the post in the first half of the second quarter , and Cornell entered halftime with a 5 – 1 advantage . In the third quarter , Tigers attackman Tommy Davis ended their 27 : 58 scoring drought with a 15-yard shot . Princeton quickly tallied again with 28 seconds in the period . In the final quarter , the Big Red withstood two penalties to win , 6 – 4 .

The second day of the quarterfinals took place at Navy-Marine Corps Memorial Stadium in Annapolis , Maryland . The first game featured top-ranked Virginia and Johns Hopkins . The Cavaliers dominated the Blue Jays , 19 – 8 , in their worst postseason defeat in school history . Shamel Bratton of Virginia scored a career-high five goals . The victory marked the 300th of head coach Dom Starsia 's career , and he became the third coach in Division I lacrosse history to win as many games . Virginia advanced to their fourth Final Four appearance in five seasons . With the quarterfinals elimination of both Maryland and Johns Hopkins , 2009 became only the third time since the NCAA tournament began that no team from the state participated in the Final Four . The final game of the round featured intrastate rivals Duke and North Carolina in their third meeting of the season . In the first quarter , the Blue Devils jumped out to an early lead and survived a two-man-down penalty , but the Tar Heels scored four unanswered goals to briefly take the lead in the second quarter . Late in the final period , North Carolina rallied from a four-point deficit to trail by one goal , 12 – 11 . As time expired , a shot by Sean Delaney missed high over the goal , and Duke defeated North Carolina for the third time of the year . The Blue Devils ' Zach Howell scored a career-high three goals and Tewaaraton Trophy finalist Ned Crotty tallied twice and had six assists . The Duke defense held Carolina 's leading scorer , Billy Bitter , to just two assists .

Syracuse met Duke for the first game at Gillette Stadium in Foxborough , Massachusetts , which was attended by 36,594 fans , a decrease from the previous year 's 48,224 . Nine Orange players scored in a rout of the Blue Devils , 17 – 7 , which demonstrated the depth of the Syracuse offense . It was the most goals allowed by Duke all season . Seniors Kenny Nims and Patrick Perritt led the Orange with four goals each . Freshman Tim Desko , son of head coach John Desko , and heralded transfer Cody Jamieson each tallied twice . The Orange dominated the faceoff circle and won 18 of 28 draws . To open the third quarter , senior Jake Moulton won the opening faceoff and scored nine seconds into the half . With the victory , the Orange advanced to the championship game for the seventh time since 1999 .

In the second game of the day , fifth-seeded Cornell upset first-ranked Virginia . The Big Red upset the Cavaliers decisively , 15 – 6 , and advanced to the championship game for the first time in over two decades . Cornell controlled the game from the start , and accounted for the game 's first three tallies and entered halftime with an 8 – 2 advantage . Big Red freshman Rob Pannell , junior Ryan Hurley , and senior Chris Finn each scored three times . The Cornell defense created 18 turnovers and stymied Virginia 's high-powered attack . Commenting on the upset , Cornell head coach Jeff Tambroni said , " We knew we weren 't going to have a whole lot of believers out there . We needed to play hard first and believe second . "

The final game was also held at Gillette Stadium and took place on Memorial Day , May 25 . Cornell controlled the tempo of the game for the first 56 minutes and frustrated Syracuse with a tough defense . Late in the fourth quarter , the Big Red led , 9 – 6 , before Syracuse 's Stephen Keogh and Cody Jamieson narrowed the deficit to one goal with 2 : 46 remaining . Keogh attempted another shot but missed , and Cornell took possession with 27.6 seconds left to play . The Orange 's Kenny Nims then dislodged the ball from Matt Moyer , and Keogh recovered possession . He took a wild shot , which was caught by Syracuse 's Matt Abbott . As he was flattened by Cornell defenders , Abbott got off a pass to Nims , who had run from midfield to the very edge of the crease . Nims connected with his shot on goal to send the game into overtime . Cornell won the overtime faceoff , but Syracuse defenseman Sid Smith stripped Ryan Hurley to create a turnover . Dan Hardy feigned a shot before passing to Jamieson , positioned just beyond the crease , who scored the game-winner .

The Latchkey is a 1910 American silent short comedy produced by the Thanhouser Company . The premise of the plot focuses on two businessmen who are friends Will ( or Bill in some publications ) and John . Will gives John the key to his apartment so he had stay there while Will goes on vacation . The landlady of the house leases the apartment to two ladies . John decides to go to Will 's apartment and lets himself in with the key and finds the two girls asleep . They awake and take him for a burglar and threaten to kill him and John pleads for mercy instead of addressing the misunderstanding . John is later revealed to be her employer after he is caught opening a safe in the office the next morning . The film was released on August 26 , 1910 and was met with positive reviews by the trade publications . The film is presumed lost .

Though the film is presumed lost , a synopsis survives in The Bioscope from November 10 , 1910 . It states : " Will and John are prosperous young businessmen and close friends . Will has an apartment in the city , while John lives in the suburbs . When Will goes to the country on his vacation he leaves the latchkey of his apartment with his chum , telling him to make himself at home . The landlady in the house in which Will lives is seized with a bright idea that she can sublet his apartment during his absence . May and Belle , two pretty girls who are in business , decide to try their hand at housekeeping . They rent Will 's apartment and settle down in their new quarters . John decides to take advantage of his friend 's invitation and make use of his rooms . He lets himself in with the latchkey , and is amazed to find the two girls sound asleep . Believing him to be a burglar the girls threaten him with annihilation . John thinks the joke too good to spoil , so does not try to square himself , but pleads for mercy . May secures his promise that he will never ' burgle ' again , and allows him to escape . Unknown to John , May has been engaged by his partner as a typist , and when she enters the office the following morning and finds John opening the safe , she decides that once again her burglar has been caught red-handed . She calls for help , and is greatly chagrined when her supposed burglar is introduced as her employer . Amid explanations , the ' burglar ' and the lady shake hands and become good friends . "

The one reel comedy , approximately 1,000 feet long , was released on August 26 , 1910 . The film likely saw a wide national release , advertisements in theaters are known in Indiana , North Carolina , and Pennsylvania . The New York Dramatic Mirror gave the most detailed review of the trade publications by summing up the scenario and approving of the plot and the good acting in the production . The reviewer concluded , " Not only are the leading roles well portrayed , but the minor parts are quite well done in the picture - the dismissed stenographer and the old landlady actually look and act their parts . There is a pleasing , symmetrical competence in the whole cast . " The production was reviewed positively by The Moving Picture World and concludes with the statement , " The story ends there without a suspicion of anybody falling in love with anybody else , a restraint which will be duly appreciated . " Bower 's notes that many Thanhouser plots conclude with the romance and the reviewer noted this change was a welcome one for this production . The previous film A Dainty Politician concluded with romance and the next release An Assisted Elopement took the romance element further with two sets of parents trying to get their children to marry each other .

Moto Racer Advance is a motocross racing game developed by Adeline Software International , produced by Delphine Software International and published by Ubisoft for the Game Boy Advance . It was released in PAL regions on October 4 , 2002 and in North America on December 4 , 2002 . It is part of the Moto Racer series and was the last game to be developed by Adeline Software and also the last with any involvement from Delphine Software . Moto Racer Advance features several different modes , but much of it centers on a " Progression " mode , which requires the player to compete in races in a variety of environments . Multiplayer is supported through the link cable . Moto Racer Advance garnered positive reception from critics , noting its graphical quality and overall presentation as two of the main reasons for its success . IGN 's Craig Harris called it one of the top racing games from 2002 . As of 2009 , Moto Racer Advance has received compilation scores of 86 / 100 and 83 % on Metacritic and GameRankings respectively .

The player controls a motorcyclist and must try to win races on various terrain and settings . Each motorcycle in the game handles differently with some performing better on paved roads and others working better on rougher terrain . There are a number of different modes : Grand Prix ( GP ) , Motocross , and Traffic . GP takes place at a number of different locations across the world on paved tracks in places such as San Francisco and Russia . The paved tracks require the player to learn how to effectively use their brakes around corners . The GP courses contain small differences between them , giving more variety to the courses in the game . Motocross requires the player to drive on off-road terrain and to master the act of " powersliding " on corners . The courses found in Motocross races are less hospitable and often take place in arid and unkept locales and with obstacles . Traffic mixes both GP and Motocross , having mixed pavement courses and traffic on roads that serve as obstacles . There are three different methods of gameplay : Championship , Progression , and Single Race . The single race mode must be earned through playing the progression mode . Progression is the game 's " main mode " and places the player in a number of different tournaments and races in all three racing styles . It allows the player to earn hidden content , including new bikes which handle differently . The game contains link cable support for up to four players , provided that all four people own a copy of the game .

Moto Racer Advance was first displayed at the 2002 Electronic Entertainment Expo ( E3 ) . IGN gave the game two awards for portable games after its E3 2002 coverage : " Best Graphics " and " Best Racing Game " . IGN praised the early version of the game for its high draw distance and smooth frame rate . The game was built from the ground up to be a racing game for the Game Boy Advance and to take advantage of the hardware offered by the system . IGN previewed the game six months before it was made available for retail and called the graphics the game 's highlight , while noting that tune-ups in the physics engine were needed before release . The game manipulated 2D sprites and backgrounds to give the impression of 3D to the player . By keeping the core graphics engine simple , the game was able to contain elongated draw distances and a smooth frame rate . It was released on October 4 , 2002 in PAL regions , and on December 4 , 2002 in North America . Moto Racer Advance was the last game to be developed by Adeline Software .

Moto Racer Advance garnered positive reaction from critics for its graphics and gameplay ; it received 86 / 100 and 83 % ratings on review aggregate websites Metacritic and GameRankings , respectively . IGN 's Craig Harris praised the smooth graphics engine of the game , noting that the designers had succeeded in creating a satisfying racing game for the Game Boy Advance . He called it one of the top racing games from 2002 . The Sydney Morning Herald 's Dan Toose praised the game 's " smooth , minimalist graphics " , while GameSpy 's Steve Steinberg noted that the physics of the game felt " dead-on " and enjoyed the overall presentation of the game . GamePro 's Vicious Sid was surprised by the game 's long draw distance , calling it a technical feat on the Game Boy Advance . The sound design from the game received a mixed response from critics . GameZone 's Code Cowboy stated that the Motocross bikes sounded " like gravel in a blender-- being chopped up " . IGN noted otherwise , saying that the sound stayed to the background and was mostly pleasant , while The Sydney Morning Herald praised the realistic sound the bikes created . The game received Editors ' Choice Awards from GameSpy , GamePro , and IGN .

Tina Turner ( born November 26 , 1939 ) , née Anna Mae Bullock , is a singer , dancer , actress and author , whose career has spanned more than half a century , earning her widespread recognition and numerous awards . Born and raised in the Southeastern United States , she is now a Swiss citizen . She began her musical career in the mid-1950s as a featured singer with Ike Turner 's Kings of Rhythm , first recording in 1958 under the name " Little Ann . " Her introduction to the public as Tina Turner began in 1960 as a member of the Ike & Tina Turner Revue . Success followed with a string of notable hits credited to the duo , including " A Fool in Love " , " River Deep – Mountain High " ( 1966 ) , " Proud Mary " ( 1971 ) and " Nutbush City Limits " ( 1973 ) , a song which she herself wrote . In her autobiography , I , Tina , she revealed several instances of severe domestic abuse against her by Ike Trevor Turner prior to their 1976 split and subsequent 1978 divorce . Raised as a Baptist , she encountered faith with Nichiren Shoshu Buddhism in 1971 , crediting the spiritual chant of Nam Myoho Renge Kyo , which Turner claims helped her to endure during difficult times .

After her divorce from Ike Turner , she rebuilt her career through live performances . In the early 1980s , she launched a major comeback with another string of hits , starting in 1983 with the single " Let 's Stay Together " followed by the 1984 release of her fifth solo album Private Dancer which became a worldwide success . " What 's Love Got to Do with It " , the lead single won three Grammy Awards including Record of the Year . Her solo success continued with the multi platinum albums Break Every Rule and Foreign Affair and with singles such as " We Don 't Need Another Hero ( Thunderdome ) " , " The Best " and " GoldenEye " for the James Bond film of the same name . " What 's Love Got to Do with It " was later used as the title of a loosely based biographical film adapted from her autobiography . In addition to her musical career , Turner has also experienced success in films , including the role of Acid Queen in the 1975 rock musical Tommy , a starring role alongside Mel Gibson in the 1985 action film Mad Max Beyond Thunderdome , and a cameo role in the 1993 film Last Action Hero .

One of the world 's best-selling music artists of all time , she has also been referred to as The Queen of Rock ' n ' Roll . Turner has been termed the most successful female Rock ' n ' Roll artist , receiving eleven Grammy Awards , including eight competitive awards and three Grammy Hall of Fame awards . Turner has also sold more concert tickets than any other solo performer in history . Her combined album and single sales total approximately 100 million copies worldwide , making her one of the biggest selling females in music history . She is noted for her energetic stage presence , powerful vocals , and career longevity . In 2008 , Turner returned from semi-retirement to embark on her Tina ! : 50th Anniversary Tour . Turner 's tour became one of the highest selling ticketed shows of 2008 – 09 . Rolling Stone ranked her no . 63 on their 100 greatest artists of all time . In 1991 , she was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame .

Turner was born Anna Mae Bullock on November 26 , 1939 , in Nutbush , an unincorporated area in Haywood County , Tennessee . Her parents were Zelma Priscilla ( née Currie ) and Floyd Richard Bullock . Anna Mae was born at Poindexter Farm on Highway 180 , where her father worked as an overseer of the sharecroppers . She is of African-American descent , with approximately 33 % European and 1 % Native American ancestry . ( The latter was revealed when she appeared on the PBS documentary African American Lives 2 , and the host Henry Louis Gates shared the results of Turner 's ancestral tests . ) Anna Mae had an older sister , Ruby Aillene . As young children , Anna Mae and Aillene were separated when their parents relocated to Knoxville , Tennessee , to work at a defense facility during World War II . Anna went to stay with her strict , religious paternal grandparents , Alex and Roxanna Bullock , who were deacon and deaconess at the Woodlawn Missionary Baptist Church , which was located on Woodlawn Road off Highway 19 . After the war , the sisters reunited with their parents and moved with them to Knoxville . Two years later , the family returned to Nutbush to live in the Flagg Grove community , where Anna attended Flagg Grove Elementary School from first through eighth grade . In 1889 , her great-great uncle had sold the land on which the school was built to the school trustees .

As a youngster , Anna Mae sang in the church choir at Nutbush 's Spring Hill Baptist Church . When she was 11 , her mother ran off without warning , seeking freedom from her abusive relationship with Floyd Bullock . Zelma relocated to St. Louis to live with Anna Mae 's great-aunt . As a preteen , Anna Mae worked as a domestic worker for the Henderson family . When Anna Mae was 13 , her father married another woman and moved to Detroit . Anna Mae and her sister were sent to live with their grandmother Georgeanna in Brownsville , Tennessee . Anna Mae later stated in her memoir I , Tina that she felt her mother had not loved her , and that she " wasn 't wanted " , stating further that her mother had planned to leave her father when pregnant with Anna Mae . " She was a very young woman who didn 't want another kid " , Anna Mae wrote . Her relationship with her mother remained estranged until Bullock 's death in 1999 . A self-professed tomboy , Anna Mae joined both the cheerleading squad and the female basketball team at Carver High School in Brownsville , and " socialized every chance she got . " Her first boyfriend , while she was living in Brownsville , was Harry Taylor , who originally attended a rival school to hers . Taylor relocated to Anna 's school to be near her . The relationship ended after Anna Mae learned Harry had married another woman .

Anna and her sister began to frequent nightclubs in the St. Louis and East St. Louis areas around this time . At Club Manhattan , a nightclub in the East St. Louis area , she first saw Ike Turner and his band , the Kings of Rhythm , perform . Anna was impressed by the band 's music and of Ike 's talent , claiming the bandleader 's music put her " into a trance . " Anna felt the urge to sing on stage with Ike 's band despite the fact that few women had ever sung with him . One night , 18-year-old Anna was given a microphone by Kings of Rhythm drummer Gene Washington during an intermission . Upon hearing her sing , Ike asked her if she knew more songs , she was allowed to sing that night , becoming a guest vocalist from then on . Through this period , Ike taught her the points of voice control and performance . Her first studio recording was in 1958 , singing background , under the name " Little Ann " , on the Ike Turner song , " Box Top " , alongside singer Carlson Oliver .

In 1960 , Ike wrote an R & B song , " A Fool in Love " , originally for Kings of Rhythm vocalist Art Lassiter . Lassiter failed to show up to the recording studio and Anna eventually was allowed to sing the song after much pleading to Ike . Ike agreed to use her voice as a " dummy vocal " , with the intention of erasing her vocals and adding Lassiter 's at a later date . Although some felt that the demo with Anna 's voice was " high pitched " and " screechy " , the song received decent airtime in St. Louis . Local St. Louis deejay Dave Dixon convinced Ike to send the tape to Juggy Murray , president of R & B label , Sue Records . Upon hearing the song , Murray was impressed with Anna 's vocals , later stating that her vocals " sounded like screaming dirt ... it was a funky sound . " Murray bought the track and paid Ike a $ 25,000 advance for recording and publishing rights . Murray also convinced Turner to make Anna " the star of the show . " It was at this point that Ike Turner renamed Anna Mae Bullock " Tina " , because the name rhymed with the television character Sheena . It has also been said that the renaming of Anna Mae Bullock was intended to keep her from running off and making a name for herself . Ike Turner felt that , if Anna Mae Bullock left him , he could replace her with another singer and have her perform as Tina .

" A Fool in Love " was released in July 1960 and became an immediate hit , peaking at number 2 on the Hot R & B Sides chart and number 27 on the Billboard Hot 100 that October . Kurt Loder described the track as " the blackest record to ever creep into the white pop charts since Ray Charles ' gospel-styled ' What 'd I Say ' that previous summer . " A second pop hit , " It 's Gonna Work Out Fine " ( 1961 ) , reached the top 20 and earned the duo a Grammy Award nomination for Best Rock and Roll Performance . Notable singles released during the duo 's Sue Records period included the R & B hits , " I Idolize You " , " Poor Fool " and " Tra-La-La-La . " In 1964 , Ike & Tina left Sue and signed with Kent Records , releasing the modest single , " I Can 't Believe What You Say . " The following year , they signed with Loma Records , a subsidiary of Warner Bros. Records and run by Bob Krasnow , who had become their manager shortly after they left Sue Records . Between 1964 and 1969 , Ike & Tina signed with more than ten labels .

The duo maintained a popularity through a rigorous touring schedule across the United States , gigging 90 days straight in dates around the country . During the days of the chitlin ' circuit , the Ike and Tina Turner Revue built a reputation that a writer for the History of Rock site cited as " one of the most hottest , most durable and potentially most explosive of all R & B ensembles " with its show rivaling that of the James Brown Show in terms of musical spectacle . The shows , organized by Ike Turner , provided them financial success . Due to their successful performances , the couple were able to perform in front of diverse crowds in the American South due to the money they made from performing in Southern clubs . Between 1963 and 1966 , the band toured constantly without the presence of a hit single . Tina 's own profile was raised after several solo appearances on shows such as American Bandstand and Shindig ! , while the entire Revue appeared on shows such as Hollywood A Go-Go , The Andy Williams Show and , in late 1965 , in the concert film The Big T.N.T. Show .

In 1965 , Phil Spector caught an Ike & Tina performance in Los Angeles and sought to work with Tina . Working out a deal , Spector gave Ike a $ 20,000 advance to keep out of the studio to which Ike agreed . With Spector , Tina produced the song " River Deep - Mountain High " , which was released in 1966 on Spector 's Philles label . Spector considered that record , with Tina 's maximum energy over a symphonic sound , to be his best work . It was successful overseas , particularly in the United Kingdom , where it eventually reached number 3 on the singles chart , but it failed to go any higher than # 88 in the United States . Crushed , Spector never signed another act to Philles and seldom produced again . But the impact of the record gave Ike and Tina an opening spot for The Rolling Stones ' UK tour later that fall , which the Revue later extended by performing all over Europe and Australia . Signing with Blue Thumb Records in 1968 , the Revue issued the blues-heavy albums , Outta Season and The Hunter . Outta Season produced the Revue 's charted cover of Otis Redding 's " I 've Been Loving You Too Long " , while the latter earned Tina a Grammy nomination for Best Female R & B Vocal Performance for her rendition of the title track , originally recorded by Albert King . The success of the albums led to the Revue headlining at Las Vegas where their shows were attended by a variety of celebrities including David Bowie , Sly Stone , Janis Joplin , Cher , James Brown , Ray Charles , Elton John and Elvis Presley .

In 1969 , the Revue 's profile in their home country was raised after opening for the Rolling Stones on their US tour . In 1970 , they performed on The Ed Sullivan Show . The tour 's success resulted in the Revue signing with Liberty Records , where they released two albums , Come Together and Workin ' Together , released in 1970 and 1971 respectively . Come Together produced the duo 's first top 40 single with their cover of Sly and the Family Stone 's " I Want to Take You Higher . " Come Together marked a turning point in their careers in which they switched from their usual R & B repertoire to incorporate more rock tunes . In early 1971 , their cover of Creedence Clearwater Revival 's " Proud Mary " became their biggest hit , reaching number 4 on the Hot 100 and selling over a million copies , winning them a Grammy for Best R & B Performance by a Duo or Group . Later in 1971 , their live album , What You Hear Is What You Get , taken from a performance at Carnegie Hall , was their first to be certified gold . In 1972 , Ike Turner created the studio , Bolic Sounds , near their home in Inglewood . After Liberty was bought by United Artists Records , the duo was assigned to that label , releasing ten albums in a three-year period . The duo 's final major hit single , " Nutbush City Limits " , was released in 1973 , reaching number 22 on the Hot 100 , and peaking at number 4 in the UK . In 1974 , Tina released her first solo album , Tina Turns the Country On ! , winning a Grammy nomination .

That year , Tina traveled to London to participate in the filming of the rock musical , Tommy , in which she played The Acid Queen , A drug addicted prostitute who tries to heal Tommy with illegal drugs and sang the song of the same name . Turner 's performance was critically acclaimed . Shortly after filming wrapped , Turner appeared with Ann-Margret on her TV special in London . Returning to the United States , Turner continued her career with the Revue . Following the release of Tommy , another Turner solo album , Acid Queen , was released in 1975 .

By the mid-1970s , Ike Turner 's excessive cocaine habit had gotten out of hand . During this period , Tina adopted the Nichiren Buddhism faith and chanting Nam Myoho Renge Kyo to help her deal through a stressful marriage and career . Due to Ike Turner 's drug abuse , some shows were either canceled or postponed . In July 1976 , Ike Turner had plans to leave United Artists Records for a five-year , $ 150,000 deal with Cream Records . The deal was to be signed on July 6 . On July 2 , 1976 , Ike and Tina were en route from Los Angeles to Dallas where the Revue had a gig at the Dallas Statler Hilton . The couple engaged in a bloody fight during their ride to the hotel . Shortly after arriving to the hotel , Tina fled from the hotel and later hid at a friend 's house . On July 27 , Tina sued for divorce in the grounds of irreconcilable differences . Tina later credited the Nichiren Buddhist faith and chanting Nam Myoho Renge Kyo with giving her the courage to strike out on her own . However , by walking out on Ike in the middle of a tour , she learned she was legally responsible to tour promoters for the canceled shows . After a year in court , their divorce was made final on March 29 , 1978 . In the divorce , she completely parted ways with him , retaining only her stage name and assuming responsibility for the debts incurred by the canceled tour as well as a significant Internal Revenue Service lien .

In 1977 , with finances given to her by United Artists executive Richard Stewart , Tina returned onstage , giving a round of shows in Las Vegas in a cabaret setting , influenced by the cabaret shows she witnessed while a member of the Ike & Tina Turner Revue . She took her cabaret act to smaller venues in the United States . Turner earned further income by appearing on shows such as The Hollywood Squares , Donny and Marie , The Sonny & Cher Show and The Brady Bunch Hour . Later in 1977 , Turner headlined her first solo concert tour , throughout Australia . In 1978 , United Artists released Turner 's third solo album , Rough , with distribution both in North America and Europe with EMI . That album , along with its followup , Love Explosion , which included a brief diversion to disco rhythms , failed to chart . The albums completed her United Artists / EMI contracts and Turner left the labels . Continuing her performing career with her second headlining tour , Wild Lady of Rock ' n ' Roll , she continued to be a successful live act even without the premise of a hit record . Following an appearance on Olivia Newton-John 's US TV special , Hollywood Nights , in 1979 , Turner sought contract with Newton-John 's manager Roger Davies . Davies agreed to work with Turner as her manager after seeing her perform at the Venetian Ballroom in the Fairmont San Francisco hotel in February 1980 .

Davies advised Turner to drop her band and remodel her show into a grittier rock 'n'roll showcase . In 1981 , Davies booked Tina at The Ritz in New York City . Following the performance , Rod Stewart hired Turner to perform a duet version of his hit , " Hot Legs " , on Saturday Night Live , and later hired Turner to open for him on his U.S. tour . One show with Rod Stewart and Kim Carnes , on 19 December 1981 , at the L. A. Forum , Inglewood , was filmed . Afterwards , Turner opened three shows for The Rolling Stones . A recorded cover of The Temptations ' " Ball of Confusion " for the UK production team B.E.F. featuring Robert Cray , became a hit in European dance clubs in 1982 . Following performances with Chuck Berry and several short tours in the U.S. and Europe , Turner again performed at the Ritz in December of the year , which resulted in a singles deal with Capitol Records under the insistence of David Bowie .

In November 1983 , Tina released her cover of Al Green 's " Let 's Stay Together " , with Capitol . The record became a hit , reaching several European charts , including a top 10 placement in the United Kingdom . The song peaked at number 26 on the Billboard Hot 100 , becoming Turner 's first solo entry into the U.S. charts . It also peaked at the top 10 of the Hot Dance Club Songs and Hot Black Singles charts . The success of the song forced Capitol to rethink its contract with Turner , offering the singer a three album deal , demanding an album on short notice , which had Turner staging what Ebony magazine later called an " amazing comeback . " Recorded in two months in London , the album , Private Dancer , was released in June 1984 . That same month , Capitol issued the album 's second single , " What 's Love Got to Do with It . " It reached the top 10 within a month and in September had reached number 1 on the Hot 100 in the U.S. Featuring hit singles such as " Better Be Good to Me " and " Private Dancer " , the album peaked at number 3 on the Billboard 200 , selling five million copies alone in the states and selling over twenty million copies worldwide , making it her most successful album . Turner 's comeback culminated in early 1985 when she won four Grammy Awards , including Record of the Year for " What 's Love Got to Do with It . " In February of that year , she embarked on her second world tour supporting the Private Dancer album , where she toured to huge crowds . One show , filmed at Birmingham , England 's NEC Arena , was later released on home video . During this time , she also contributed on vocals to the USA for Africa benefit song " We Are the World . "

Turner 's success continued when she travelled to Australia to star opposite Mel Gibson in the 1985 post-apocalyptic film Mad Max Beyond Thunderdome . The movie provided her with her first acting role in ten years — she portrayed the glamorous Aunty Entity , the ruler of Bartertown . Upon release , critical response to her performance was generally positive , and the film became a global success , making more than $ 36 million in the United States alone . Turner later received the NAACP Image Award for Outstanding Actress for her role in the film . She also recorded two songs for the film , " We Don 't Need Another Hero ( Thunderdome ) " and " One of the Living " ; both became hits , with the latter winning Turner a Grammy Award for Best Female Rock Vocal Performance . In July , Turner performed at Live Aid alongside Mick Jagger . Encouraged by a performance together during Tina 's filmed solo concert in England , singer Bryan Adams released their duet single together , " It 's Only Love " , later resulting in a Grammy nomination for Best Rock Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocal .

Turner followed up Private Dancer with Break Every Rule in 1986 . Featuring " Typical Male " , " Two People " and " What You Get Is What You See " , the album sold over four million copies worldwide . Prior to the album 's release , Turner published her memoirs , I , Tina , which later became a bestseller , and received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame . Turner 's European Break Every Rule Tour , which culminated in March 1988 in Munich , Germany , contributed to record breaking sales and concert attendances . In January 1988 , Turner made history alongside Paul McCartney when she performed in front of the largest paying audience ( approximately 184,000 ) to see a solo performer in Maracanã Stadium in Rio de Janeiro , Brazil , earning her a Guinness World Record . The success of Turner 's two live tours led to the recording of Tina Live in Europe which was released that April . Turner lay low following the end of her Break Every Rule Tour , emerging once again with Foreign Affair which included one of Turner 's signature songs , " The Best . " She later embarked on a European tour to promote the album . While Foreign Affair went gold in the United States , with its singles " The Best " and " Steamy Windows " becoming Top 40 hits there . It was hugely successful in Europe , where Turner had personally relocated .

In 1991 , Ike & Tina Turner were inducted to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame . Phil Spector later accepted on their behalf . That same year , the ex-couple signed away their rights to have their lives dramatized in the semi-autobiographical film What 's Love Got to Do with It , later released in 1993 and starring Angela Bassett as Tina and Laurence Fishburne as Ike , with the actors receiving Best Actress and Best Actor Academy Award nominations for their portrayals of the former husband-and-wife team . Turner contributed to the soundtrack for What 's Love Got to Do with It , re-recording songs from her Revue days and recording several newer songs , including what turned out to be her last Top 10 U.S. hit , " I Don 't Wanna Fight . " Other than helping Bassett with her wardrobe and teaching her dance steps as well as providing songs for the soundtrack , and appearing as herself at the end of the film , she refused to be involved fully in the film , telling an interviewer , " Why would I want to see Ike Turner beat me up again ? I haven 't dwelled on it ; it 's all in the past where it belongs . " Following the film 's and soundtrack 's release , Turner embarked on her first US tour in seven years . Following the tour 's end , Turner moved to Switzerland and took a year off from the road at the end of the tour .

Turner returned in 1995 with the U2 composition , " GoldenEye " for the James Bond film of the same name . Its huge success in Europe and modest success in her native United States led Turner to record a new album , releasing the Wildest Dreams album in 1996 . Though the album itself was not as hugely successful in the United States , thanks to a world tour and a much played Hanes hosiery commercial , the album went gold in the United States . The album reached platinum success in Europe where Turner had hits with " Whatever You Want " , " Missing You " , which briefly charted in the U.S. , " Something Beautiful Remains " , and the sensual Barry White duet " In Your Wildest Dreams . " Following the tour 's end in 1997 , Turner took another break before re-emerging again in 1999 appearing on the VH-1 special Divas Live ' 99 . In 1998 the duet with Italian musician Eros Ramazzotti in " Cose della vita " became a European hit . Before celebrating her 60th birthday , Turner released the dance-infused song , " When the Heartache Is Over " and its parent album , Twenty Four Seven the following month in Europe , releasing both the song and the album in North America in early 2000 . The success of " When the Heartache Is Over " and Turner 's tour supporting the album once again helped in the album going gold in the U.S. The Twenty Four Seven Tour became her most successful concert tour to date and became the highest-grossing tour of 2000 according to Pollstar grossing over $ 100 million . Later , Guinness World Records announced that Turner had sold more concert tickets than any other solo concert performer in music history . Afterwards Turner announced a semi-retirement .

In 2002 , Tennessee State Route 19 between Brownsville and Nutbush was named " Tina Turner Highway . " The following year , she recorded the duet " Great Spirits " with Phil Collins for the Disney film , Brother Bear . In 2004 , Tina made her first professional appearances following her semi-retirement , releasing the compilation album , All the Best , which produced the single " Open Arms " , and sold more than a million copies in the US . In December of the following year , Turner was recognized by the Kennedy Center Honors at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington , D.C. and was elected to join an elite group of entertainers . President George W. Bush commented on Turner 's " natural skill , the energy and sensuality " , and referred to her legs as " the most famous in show business . " Several artists paid tribute to her that night including Oprah Winfrey , Melissa Etheridge ( performing " River Deep - Mountain High " ) , Queen Latifah ( performing " What 's Love Got to Do with It " ) , Beyoncé ( performing " Proud Mary " ) , and Al Green ( performing " Let 's Stay Together " ) . Winfrey stated , " We don 't need another hero . We need more heroines like you , Tina . You make me proud to spell my name w-o-m-a-n , " In November , Turner released All the Best – Live Collection and it was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America . Turner participated in the soundtrack to All the Invisible Children , providing duet vocals to the song " Teach Me Again " , with singer Elisa , finding success in Italy where it peaked at the top spot .

In 2007 , Turner gave her first live performance in seven years , headlining a benefit concert for the Cauldwell 's Children Charity at London 's Natural History Museum . That year , Turner performed a rendition of Joni Mitchell 's " Edith and The Kingpin " on Herbie Hancock 's Mitchell tribute album , River : The Joni Letters . Turner 's original vocals for Carlos Santana 's " The Game of Love " were included in a Santana greatest hits compilation . Label demands led to Turner 's vocals being replaced at the last minute by Michelle Branch . On December 12 , 2007 , Turner 's former husband Ike Turner died from a cocaine overdose . He had also been suffering from emphysema and cardiovascular disease . Reached for comment , Turner issued a brief statement through her spokesperson stating : " Tina hasn 't had any contact with Ike in more than 30 years . No further comment will be made . " Turner made her public comeback in February 2008 at the Grammy Awards where she performed alongside Beyoncé . In addition , she picked up a Grammy as a featured artist on River : The Joni Letters . In October 2008 , Turner embarked on her first tour in nearly ten years with the Tina ! : 50th Anniversary Tour . In support of the tour , Turner released another hits compilation . The tour became a huge success and culminated in the release of the live album / DVD , Tina Live . In 2009 , Turner participated in the singing project Beyond with fellow musicians Regula Curti , Selda Bagcan , and Dechen Shak Dagsay . Their first album Buddhist And Christian Prayers combined Buddhist chants and Christian choral music along with a spiritual message read by Turner . The album was released only in Germany and a handful of other countries . It peaked at number 7 in Switzerland .

In April 2010 , mainly due to an online campaign by fans of the Rangers Football Club , Turner 's 1989 hit , " The Best " , returned to the UK singles chart , peaking at number 9 on the chart . In 2011 , Beyond 's second album Children - With Children United In Prayer followed and charted again in Switzerland . Turner promoted the album by performing on TV shows in Germany and Switzerland in December that year . In May 2012 , Turner was spotted attending a fashion show in Beijing to support Giorgio Armani . Turner appeared on the cover of the German issue of Vogue magazine in April 2013 , becoming at the age of 73 the oldest person worldwide to feature on the cover of Vogue . On February 3 , 2014 , Parlophone Records released a new compilation titled Love Songs . Later in the year , Beyond 's third album Love Within ' was released with Turner contributing some gospel tracks .

After moving to St. Louis , Tina ( then called Anna Mae Bullock ) and her sister became acquainted with members of the Kings of Rhythm , and Anna Mae dated the band 's saxophonist Raymond Hill . After Anna Mae gave birth to their son Craig , the couple 's relationship became strained . Allegedly , after a fight between the two broke out , Ike and other Kings of Rhythm members confronted Hill and beat him up , with one member tackling him to the ground , instantly breaking his leg . The injury was so severe that Hill had to return to his hometown of Clarksdale , Mississippi . Ike later adopted Anna Mae and Hill 's son , adding his own last name legally .

Tina and Ike 's early relationship was friendly and " like siblings . " In late 1958 , Tina moved into Ike 's home in East St. Louis . During that period , Ike began musically training Tina . At the beginning , the two had no mutual attraction ; Tina felt Ike was not the " ideal-looking man " , while Ike viewed her as a sister and favored " curvaceous women . " Ike was still married to his common-law wife , Lorraine Taylor , during this period . Ike and Tina began a sexual relationship in 1959 , much to Tina 's chagrin . Ike also felt guilt over the relationship , stating later that having sex with Tina felt as if he were having sex with a sibling . In her book , Tina stated the couple married in Tijuana , in 1962 . She recalled the first time Ike physically abused her began after she told him she was considering leaving Ike 's group due to financial disputes and their own confusing relationship . Tina said Ike grabbed a shoe stretcher and hit her in the head with it . Afterwards , Tina said , Ike asked her to have sex with him . Tina wrote in her memoirs , I , Tina , that the incident was the first time Ike had " instilled fear " in her .

Ike 's accounts of his relationship with Tina , including the incidents of abuse , differed . In a 1985 interview with Spin magazine , Ike admitted , " Yeah I hit her , but I didn 't hit her more than the average guy beats his wife .... If she says I abused her , maybe I did . " He worded this slightly differently in his memoirs , Taking Back My Name ( 1999 ) , writing : " Sure , I 've slapped Tina .... There have been times when I punched her to the ground without thinking . But I have never beat her . " Ike also claimed on more than one occasion that he and Tina weren 't even legally married . In the 1985 Spin article , Ike said , " As God is my judge , of all my wives , Tina is the only one I was never legally married to . " He explained in later years that Tina took his name in order to discourage a former lover from returning to her . Ike said he had married at least 14 times , and five times before he allegedly married Tina . Tina admits she " never felt like [ she ] was married " to Ike . A musician associate of Ike 's later recounted that , except for a few arguments , he never witnessed Ike being abusive to Tina or anyone else in his close circle .

Before a show in Los Angeles , in 1968 , Tina tried to commit suicide by swallowing 50 Valiums , after a fight with Ike . After their July 1976 fight in Dallas , Tina filed for divorce . In the final divorce decree , Tina took responsibility for missed concert dates as well as an IRS lien , and requested to be allowed to retain use of her stage name as a means to find work as a performer . Following the divorce , Turner claimed she had corrective surgery on her nasal septum , which she says was injured by Ike 's frequent hitting . Turner dismissed popular notions that she was a " victim " of Ike Turner 's abuse , stating she " was in control every minute there " during the abusive marriage . Friends and relatives of Ike 's said he never fully got over their divorce . Their son Ronald once alleged that Ike used to come to his house occasionally and snoop through his address book to locate Tina . After divorcing Ike in 1978 , Tina abstained from relationships for a long time , as she set on bringing her career back on track .

Turner has two sons . Her first , Raymond Craig , born in 1958 when Turner was 18 , is the child of Kings of Rhythm saxophonist Raymond Hill . Her second , Ronald Turner , born in October 1960 , is Turner 's only child with Ike Turner . After moving to Los Angeles in 1960 , Ike Turner 's estranged wife , Lorraine Turner , left her and Ike 's sons , Ike Jr . ( born 1958 ) and Michael ( born 1959 ) , to be raised by Ike and Tina . During Ike and Lorraine 's divorce trial , Ike sent the four boys to live with Tina at her home . In 1985 , Ike accused Tina of bad parenting , even alleging she had sent Michael to a mental hospital . Tina denied his claims , telling Australian magazine TV Week , " he gave me those children and not a penny to look after them with . "

Turner has sometimes referred to herself a Buddhist-Baptist , alluding to her upbringing in the Baptist church and her later conversion to Buddhism . Throughout her childhood and early adulthood , Turner was Baptist . In a 2016 interview , Turner stated that " I consider myself a Buddhist . " Turner was introduced to Nichiren Shoshu Buddhism in 1973 by a friend of Ike 's named Valerie Bishop . Turner wrote in her autobiography I , Tina that after Valerie taught her to recite the Buddhist chant Nam Myoho Renge Kyo , Tina observed that Ike , instead of hitting her for singing supposed wrong notes during recording sessions , would give her money to go shopping , something she regarded as a benefit of her newfound spiritual practice . In an August 2011 interview with Shambhala Sun Buddhist magazine , Turner stated she adheres to the teachings and values of the Buddhist association Soka Gakkai International . Turner has collaborated with Tibetan Buddhists and met with the 14th Dalai Lama , Tenzin Gyatso in Einsiedeln , Switzerland in 2005 , citing this as an inspiration for a spiritual music project she later co-founded called Beyond . In a 2011 public interview with Shambala Sun , Turner indicated that she no longer follows the morning and evening Gongyo practice in a regimented schedule and hosts various types of Buddhist statues in her home altar located in the upper attic of one of her guesthouses in Switzerland .

Turner has been living in a lake house , Château Algonquin in Küsnacht , next to Zurich , since moving there in 1994 . She owned property in Cologne , London , and Los Angeles , and a villa on the French Riviera named Anna Fleur . On January 25 , 2013 , it was announced that Turner had applied for Swiss citizenship , and that she would relinquish her U.S. citizenship . In April , she undertook a mandatory citizenship test which included advanced knowledge of the German language and of Swiss history . On April 22 , 2013 , she became a citizen of Switzerland and was issued a Swiss passport . Turner signed the paperwork to give up her American citizenship at the U.S. embassy in Bern on October 24 , 2013 .

In 2008 , Turner was listed at the 17th place on Rolling Stone 's list " The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time . " Three of her recordings , " River Deep – Mountain High " ( 1999 ) , " Proud Mary " ( 2003 ) , and " What 's Love Got to Do with It " ( 2012 ) , are in the Grammy Hall of Fame . Bryan Adams , who performed with her on the Private Dancer Tour , praised Turner 's live performances , saying : " I never saw Tina walk through a performance , she always put on a great show , and was gracious and grateful to her audience . " When Turner became a recipient of the 2005 Kennedy Center Honors , her legs were noted specifically by President George W. Bush . At age 73 , Turner became the oldest person to be featured on the front cover of Vogue , surpassing Meryl Streep , who covered American Vogue in 2012 , aged 62 .

Most fursuits are created by specialized online businesses if they are not self-made . Workmanship quality varies widely depending on the cost of the suit and skill of the maker . A fursuit may cost more than a thousand dollars . Many suits include special padding or undersuits to give the character its desired shape ( this is especially present in larger characters or those of a particular gender ) . Other suit variations include the partial suit , which only has a mask , gloves , a tail , and possibly feet , with regular clothing covering the rest of the body . Three-quarter suits also include part of the body , like the torso or legs . This type of fursuit works well for characters who only wear a shirt without pants or just a pair of pants without a shirt . Quadsuits are designed with arm-extending stilts so that the wearer can walk on all fours , for a more realistic appearance .

Animal costumes have been part of human culture since prehistorical times . Some of the customs have continued such as the Kurentovanje festival in Ptuj Slovenia , where participants dress in costumes of sheep or rabbit fur with feathers and animal horns and part of a fertility rite . Fursuits are worn to furry conventions and other events such as anime or gaming conventions . Fursuits may also be worn in public . Some fursuit owners use their suits as temporary costumed characters to bring attention to an event or charity . A subset of fursuits more resemble creature suits and may be used in live action role-playing games ( LARP ) or films .

Matt Striebel ( born January 12 , 1979 ) is a high school lacrosse coach at Northampton High School and a professional lacrosse midfielder who plays professional field lacrosse in the Major League Lacrosse ( MLL ) for the New York Lizards and formerly played professional box lacrosse in the National Lacrosse League ( NLL ) . He starred as a member of the Princeton Tigers men 's lacrosse team from 1998 through 2001 and the Princeton Tigers men 's soccer team from 1997 through 2000 . During his time at Princeton , the team qualified for the NCAA Men 's Lacrosse Championship all four years , reached the championship game three times , won the championship game twice and won four Ivy League championships . He was a two-time honorable mention United States Intercollegiate Lacrosse Association ( USILA ) All-American and three-time All-Ivy League selection ( once first team , twice second team ) . He was also an All-Ivy league performer in soccer and earned Princeton co-athlete of the year ( all-sport ) honors as a senior . As a professional , he has earned three MLL championships , a league record eight MLL All-Star recognitions and an MLL championship game MVP award . He is also a three-time Team USA representative and two-time World Lacrosse Championship gold medalist .

Striebel is a native of Gill , Massachusetts . He first got involved in lacrosse at about the age of 12 or 13 when his sister brought home the Brine Lightning stick that he began to play with . Striebel attended The Hotchkiss School in Lakeville , Connecticut . Striebel first started playing lacrosse when he was a youth for Jeff Coulson , owner of Indoor Action Sports , in Greenfield , Massachusetts . He also attended the Writers Workshop at The University of Iowa in Iowa City , Iowa , earning a Master of Fine Arts degree in 2007 . He had earned a Bachelor of Arts degree in English at Princeton .

At Princeton he was a two-time honorable mention USILA All-American Team selection in 2000 and 2001 . He was a second team All-Ivy League selection in 1999 and 2000 and a first team selection in 2001 . He was a 2001 USILA Scholar All-American . During his four-year career , Princeton went undefeated in Ivy League Conference play with consecutive 6 – 0 records . Princeton was invited to the 1999 tournament , was a finalist in the 2000 tournament and earned championships in both the 1998 and 2001 tournaments , bringing the schools consecutive tournament invitations streak to twelve . In Striebel 's 2001 senior season , the arrival of freshman Ryan Boyle necessitated that he move from attack to midfield . The move came the first practice after Princeton 's 14 – 8 loss to Syracuse . Striebel had previously been orchestrating the Princeton offense from behind the goal , but on March 25 , 2001 , head coach Bill Tierney made the switch . During the 1998 season when Princeton won the NCAA title , Striebel had been playing midfield . Princeton went undefeated for the rest of the 2001 season after the switch . During the 2000 NCAA tournament , Striebel scored two goals in the quarterfinals 10 – 7 victory against Maryland , and he added another in the 13 – 7 championship game loss to Syracuse . Striebel was one of the leading scorers on the team that season , and he was the team leader in assists entering the final four weekend . In the quarterfinals of the 2001 NCAA championship tournament , Striebel had an assist in the 8 – 7 victory over Loyola . In the 12 – 11 semifinal victory over Towson State , Striebel had a goal and an assist . Striebel scored twice in the 2001 championship game and also added two assists . He was selected to the All-tournament team .

Striebel was also an honorable mention All-Ivy League soccer player in 2000 as well as a 2000 Academic All-Ivy selection in soccer . As a junior , Striebel was a member of the 1999 Ivy League Champion Princeton Soccer team that earned an invitation to the 1999 NCAA Men 's Division I Soccer Championship . The team posted a 10 – 5 – 2 ( 5 – 1 – 1 Ivy League ) record . As of 2010 , Striebel ranks eighth on the Princeton Lacrosse career assists list and eleventh on the Princeton soccer career assists list . As a senior , he was honored as one of the three athletes of the year on campus ( along with Dennis Norman and Scott Denbo )

Striebel began his career in the league 's inaugural 2001 MLL season with the Bridgeport Barrage and stayed with the team as it remained in Bridgeport , Connecticut until the 2003 season . Then he moved with the franchise and played with the Philadelphia Barrage from 2004 through 2008 . In 2009 MLL season , he joined the Chicago Machine and then became a member of the Rochester Rattlers for the 2011 MLL season . Striebel and Boyle were reunited for five seasons in Philadelphia . Striebel has helped the Barrage to win three Steinfeld Cup championships in 2004 , 2006 , and 2007 . In the 2004 championship game , he scored what the Baltimore Sun described as the clinching goal in the 13 – 11 victory over the Boston Cannons . In the 2006 game , he had nine points ( four goals , including one two-pointer and four assists ) . He was presented with the 2007 Steinfeld Cup Game Most Valuable Player Award . Striebel appeared in the 2005 & 2007 Major League Lacrosse All-Star Games . In the 2006 All-Star game he represented Team USA by scoring a goal and two assists . Striebel was an MLL All-Pro selection in 2007 and 2008 . Striebel was an MLL All-Star in 2011 . In 2012 , Striebel set the MLL record for most All-Star games with eight ( consecutive ) .

Striebel served as an assistant coach for Princeton Men 's Lacrosse in 2005 . Striebel also spent time assisting the men 's lacrosse team at Iowa during his time there . As of 12 April 2012 , Striebel currently coaches the Varsity Boys Lacrosse team at Northampton High School in Northampton , MA which is just south of his hometown . He also played professionally in 2012 and 2013 . In addition to his field lacrosse career , Striebel played one season in 2003 of box lacrosse with the Philadelphia Wings in the National Lacrosse League . Streibel was traded by the Wings to the New York Saints in February 2003 . He never appeared in a game for the Saints . Striebel has also played professional soccer for the Western Massachusetts Pioneers . Striebel has represented Team USA in the World Lacrosse Championship in 2002 , 2006 , and 2010 . In the 2002 World Lacrosse Championship semifinal match against the Iroquois Nation , Striebel scored a goal in the 18 – 8 victory . Striebel also serves as a representative of Trilogy Lacrosse .

The Sembawang Hot Spring ( Chinese : 三巴旺溫泉 ; pinyin : sanbawang wenquan ) , located at Gambas Avenue between Woodlands Avenue 12 and Sembawang Road , is the only natural hot spring on the main island of Singapore . It lies in a wooded area about 100 metres ( 330 ft ) off the main road . The spring is believed by locals to have healing properties , and its water has been bottled commercially by Fraser and Neave , under the brand name of Seletaris . Since its discovery in 1909 , the spring , now on land belonging to a military air base , has gone through several changes of ownership and abortive redevelopment plans . The hot spring retains a rural rustic feel for nature visitors to unwind .

In 1909 , a Chinese merchant named Seah Eng Keong , the son of Chinese pioneer Seah Liang Seah , discovered hot springs in his pineapple estate in Sembawang . The three springs were channelled into one , so that the water would be conveniently concentrated in one area . A well was built along the spring , which became popular with the villagers , who frequently sought the waters for their supposed healing powers . The spring 's fame spread , resulting in the village becoming known as Kampong Ayer Panas , which means " Village of Hot Water " in Malay . Soft drinks firm Fraser & Neave ( F & N ) acquired the site in 1922 , and set up a bottling plant at nearby Semangat Ayer to tap the mineral water , which they labelled Seletaris . During the Second World War , the spring 's flow was temporarily interrupted when a bomb fell near the well during a Japanese air raid over Singapore in 1942 . After the fall of Singapore , the Japanese military seized the place and converted it into recreational thermal baths ( onsen ) . The hot spring was frequented by gamblers in 1960 , who took " good luck " baths before the start of horse races . That same year , the villagers urged the authorities to develop the area into a spa-like onsen tourist resort . However , F & N shelved the suggestion after geologists could not to trace the source of the spring water . In 1967 , the proposal of the spa surfaced again , when F & N proposed plans for the development of a bathhouse , restaurants , a miniature golf course and even a nature reserve . However , the plans did not materialize , so the hot spring remained untouched and forgotten .

In 1998 , the Ministry of Defence ( Mindef ) acquired the land containing the spring for the expansion of the nearby Sembawang Air Base , leaving F & N with less than 4 hectares ( 10 acres ) of land . Its water-bottling plant survived until the early 1990s however . In January 2002 , locals ' interest to the hot spring , which had caught the attention of Singaporeans after the surrounding land had been cleared to begin the RSAF air base extension . Sembawang community leaders gathered signatures to petition Mindef , which was going to fence off the area , to preserve and develop the hot spring for the general public . Mindef gave the green light to the appeals and opened a small side gate pavement for the public to access the spring . During that same year , a series of scalding cases , including an incident in which a senior citizen diabetic lost six toes to gangrene after soaking in the hot spring , prompted the Singapore General Hospital to warn that people with nerve disorders or diseases affecting blood circulation should be cautious to hot mineral springs . As a result of some negative rumors and hearsay , and the RSAF redevelopment , public interest began to wane and the number of visitors dwindled .

During its peak , up to 300 people visited the hot spring daily . On 1 March 2002 , it was closed for two months while upgrading and improvement works were carried out to the area around the spring , which had become sodden and muddy . Litter had also become a problem because of the increased numbers of visitors . The former dirt track leading to the spring was paved with cement , and lined with bougainvillea bushes and high fences to ensure the security of the air base . Drainage pipes were also installed . Mindef , which owns the land , allows public access between 7 am and 7 pm daily , free-of-charge . When the spring reopened on 1 May 2002 , more than 100 people visited the site despite the afternoon drizzle . At the same time , some new free-hold condominiums were built in the surrounding area ; one of the developments , built by the property arm of F & N in 2001 , is called Seletaris after the company 's former mineral water . In July 2005 , a Business Times reader proposed that the authorities should explore the possibility of tapping the geothermal heat that lies many miles under Sembawang — similar to the project in South Australia 's Cooper Basin — in order to aid Singapore 's reliance on oil and gas . The proposal was not acted upon .

As of 2014 , the well can still be seen locked inside a red-brick enclosure with a steel gate , and its geothermal heat can be felt outside the building . Some plastic chairs , pails and mini-tubs kindly donated by visitors are stored at the perimeter of the compound , which has a makeshift shed in one corner . A caretaker , paid by Mindef , takes care of the place to ensure its overall cleanliness , but there is no toilet on location . The hot spring is less frequented nowadays but remains rustic for rural and suburban families to discover and explore . The potential redevelopment of Sembawang Hot Spring into a national park is currently being explored . The Ministry of Defence ( MINDEF ) said on 23 April 2016 that it is prepared to return the land occupied by the hot spring to the Singapore Land Authority . MINDEF hopes a public agency such as the National Parks Board ( NParks ) can take over to improve and maintain the place , while constructing amenities such as toilets and adding more greenery . The ministry added that putting the place under a public agency means the land need not be tendered out to the highest bidder and become commercialised .

According to local geologists , the exact source of the spring remains unknown , but it is believed that its origin may be southwest of its actual location , possibly at Bukit Timah . Hot springs are formed when underground water comes into contact with hot rock masses . The resulting high pressure causes the water to seep upwards through cracks , forcing itself out of the ground as a spring . A series of tests conducted by the PSB Corporation and SGS Testing & Control Services found the spring water contains 420 mg of chloride per litre , an amount which is substantially higher than the 35 to 100 mg in the water from Choa Chu Kang and Bedok waterworks . It was also found that the sulphide content is three times more than tap water and the spring water is also slightly alkaline due to the presence of minerals . Natural spring waters may have health benefits , similar to the hot springs of other countries near tectonic plates with volcanoes , in a search for cures for some skin conditions , as well as debilitating ailments like rheumatism and arthritis . Although local rheumatologists conceded that hydrotherapy is an accepted treatment that can be helpful for mild forms of rheumatism or muscle strain , they , along with dermatologists , remain skeptical of claims about the alternative healing of the natural spring water .

Two men are surveying an area of the Apalachicola National Forest in Leon County , Florida when they are attacked and killed by unseen assailants with glowing red eyes . Later that day , Michael Asekoff and his son , Louis , are hunting for possums with their dog , Bo , in the same stretch of woods . Upon discovering a surveyor 's bloody jacket , the father orders his son to take the dog and run home . As the son and dog take off , two shots are heard . Meanwhile , Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) are carpooling with FBI agents Michael Kinsley and Carla Stonecypher en route to a " team building " seminar . When they are stopped at a roadblock by local police , Mulder decides to investigate . As Mulder and Scully venture into the woods , they are informed by Officer Michele Fazekas that no conclusive evidence has been found to support Louis ' report of a shooting . Mulder sees this as a perfect opportunity to ditch the seminar . Later , Mulder explains to Scully that no species native to North America will attack a stronger member of its prey when there is a weaker target available .

At the Asekoff residence , Bo becomes upset and begins barking . Mrs. Asekoff lets him outside but when she attempts to retrieve him , the dog refuses to budge . She turns to go back inside but discovers that it has been bolted from the inside . Louis hears his mother 's screams and climbs out of bed , but a dark , shadowy figure with red eyes corners him . Louis barely escapes through the dog door where he runs into Mulder , informing him of the creature 's whereabouts in the house . The next morning , Mulder shows Scully some tracks by the front door of the house that appear to be human . Based on the weight distribution , however , the assailant evidently travels on the balls of its feet rather than from heel to toe . Additionally , that the creature lured the mother out of the house in order to get to Louis suggests to Mulder that the creatures are paranormal in nature . Jeff Glaser , a local technician armed with a FLIR device , joins Fazekas , Mulder , and Scully on a search for the creature . They soon spot two creatures on the FLIR which travel in separate directions , causing the four to split up . Fazekas is attacked and disappears . Mulder deduces from this that the creatures may be related to the Mothman of Point Pleasant , West Virginia . After a brief encounter with the creatures , Glaser takes off running and is swiftly killed by a creature . Mulder is grabbed by the other creature , though it releases him after Scully manages to wound it with her firearm .

The next morning , Scully falls through a hole into an underground chamber where the bodies of their missing companions are stored . Spotting a pair of red eyes , Scully realizes she does not have her firearm on her . Mulder drops his down to her as the bushes behind him begin to rustle . He jumps in the hole as Scully shoots the creature and kills it . As they examine the dead creature , they notice its almost human-like features and wood-like skin . Nearby , the words " Ad Noctum " , Latin for " into darkness " , are found carved into a tree trunk . Mulder , Scully , Asekoff , and Fazekas are rescued , but there is no sign of Glaser or the other creature . Upon leaving the forest , Mulder states that the creature may , in fact , be an evolved version of the first Spanish conquistadors who had first settled in the forest 450 years before . Although Kinsley finds it ridiculous , Mulder believes that centuries of seclusion could be adequate for such drastic adaptations to happen . Afterwards , Mulder realizes that the creatures presume others ' presence in their territory as threatening and rushes to the hotel room where Scully is packing her things . After ascertaining that she is finished packing , he firmly urges her to vacate the room , which she does . The camera then pans under the bed where a pair of red eyes open .

Executive producer Frank Spotnitz was inspired to write the episode after watching the 1972 American thriller film Deliverance . Spotnitz recounted , " the idea of being stranded in a hostile environment is very interesting to me and so is the idea of something moving the brush that you can 't see . " Series writer Vince Gilligan contributed to the " team builder " exercise bit . The ending was left intentionally ambiguous . Spotnitz explained , " it 's scarier if you think [ the monster ] could still be out there . " Initially , scenes were filmed at the Seymour Demonstration Forest in North Vancouver . Although the typical shooting time for an episode of The X-Files is eight days , " Detour " took nineteen days to film . Second unit director Brett Dowler later recounted that it " rained every day " . This put a strain on the cast and crew because almost every main shot needed was intended to be outdoors in the daylight . Because of the massive delays , changes were made : the actors ' schedules were rearranged and Kim Manners was brought in to assist Dowler in finishing the second unit of the episode . Filming later moved to a soundstage to avoid the incessant rain . Spotnitz later noted that " I thought I 'd come up with a very simple concept . Literally , one that was easy for the props people and all the other departments . "

The plot and nature of the episode bears a striking resemblance to the film Predator ( 1987 ) , in which a creature that is able to perfectly camouflage itself , almost to the point of complete invisibility , stalks several humans in a dense jungle . While camping in the woods overnight , Scully sings " Joy to the World " by Three Dog Night while Mulder rests so that he can know she is awake and on guard . Originally , Scully was supposed to sing " I 'm So Lonesome I Could Cry " , a 1949 country song by Hank Williams . However , series creator Chris Carter requested something more " off the wall " . Spotnitz , instead , chose " Joy to the World " and later said , " in retrospect , the song was perfect " . When talking , Mulder admits that the only time he has ever thought about " seriously dying " was at the Ice Capades .

" Detour " received mixed to positive reviews from critics . Francis Dass of New Straits Times was positive toward the episode , calling it " imaginative " . IGN named it the seventh best standalone X-Files episode of the entire series . The site called the sequence wherein " Scully holds a wounded Mulder and sings ' Jeremiah was a Bullfrog ' [ sic ] " the " best scene " of the episode and praised the depth of the characters ' relationship . Zack Handlen from The A.V. Club gave the episode an A and called it a " solid " entry in the series . Handlen complimented the episode 's cold opening , structure , monster , and the relationship between Mulder and Scully ; writing that the " core relationship " between Mulder and Scully " was remarkably strong " . He also noted that their conversation in the woods was reminiscent of the third season episode " Quagmire " and was " sweet " . Jonathan Dunn , writing for What Culture , highlighted " Detour " for its cinematic appeal and included it in the " 5 Episodes [ of The X-Files ] That Could Be Made Into Movies " list .

The flora of Scotland is an assemblage of native plant species including over 1,600 vascular plants , more than 1,500 lichens and nearly 1,000 bryophytes . The total number of vascular species is low by world standard but lichens and bryophytes are abundant and the latter form a population of global importance . Various populations of rare fern exist , although the impact of 19th century collectors threatened the existence of several species . The flora is generally typical of the north west European part of the Palearctic ecozone and prominent features of the Scottish flora include boreal Caledonian forest ( much reduced from its natural extent ) , heather moorland and coastal machair . In addition to the native varieties of vascular plants there are numerous non-native introductions , now believed to make up some 43 % of the species in the country . There are a variety of important trees species and specimens ; a Grand Fir in Argyll is the tallest tree in the United Kingdom and the Fortingall Yew may be the oldest tree in Europe . The Arran Whitebeams , Shetland Mouse-ear and Scottish Primrose are endemic flowering plants and there are a variety of endemic mosses and lichens . Conservation of the natural environment is well developed and various organisations play an important role in the stewardship of the country 's flora . Numerous references to the country 's flora appear in folklore , song and poetry .

Scotland enjoys a diversity of temperate ecologies , incorporating both deciduous and coniferous woodlands , and moorland , montane , estuarine , freshwater , oceanic , and tundra landscapes . Approximately 14 % of Scotland is wooded , much of it forestry plantations , but prior to human clearing there would have been much larger areas of boreal Caledonian and broad-leaved forest . Although much reduced , significant remnants of the native Scots Pine woodlands can be found in places . 17 % of Scotland is covered by heather moorland and peatland . Caithness and Sutherland have some of the largest and most intact areas of blanket bog in the world , supporting a distinctive wildlife community . 75 % of Scotland 's land is classed as agricultural ( including some moorland ) with urban areas accounting for around 3 % of the total . The number of islands with terrestrial vegetation is nearly 800 , about 600 of them lying off the west coast . Scotland has more than 90 % of the volume and 70 % of the total surface area of fresh water in the United Kingdom . There are more than 30,000 freshwater lochs and 6,600 river systems .

The total number of vascular species is low by world standards , partly due to the effects of Pleistocene glaciations ( which eliminated all or nearly all species ) and the subsequent creation of the North Sea ( which created a barrier to re-colonisation ) . Nonetheless , there are a variety of important species and assemblages . Heather moor containing Ling , Bell Heather , Cross-leaved Heath , Bog Myrtle and fescues is generally abundant and contains various smaller flowering species such as Cloudberry and Alpine Ladies-mantle . Cliffs and mountains host a diversity of arctic and alpine plants including Alpine Pearlwort , Mossy Cyphal , Mountain Avens and Fir Clubmoss . On the Hebridean islands of the west coast , there are plantago pastures , which grow well in locations exposed to sea spray and include Red Fescue , Sea Plantain and Sea Pink . The machair landscapes include rare species such as Irish Lady 's Tresses , Yellow Rattle and numerous orchids along with more common species such as Marram and Buttercup , Ragwort , Bird 's-foot Trefoil and Ribwort Plantain . Scots Lovage , ( Ligusticum scoticum ) first recorded in 1684 by Robert Sibbald , and the Oyster Plant are common plants of the coasts .

Bogbean and Water Lobelia are common plants of moorland pools and lochans . The Least ( Nuphar pumila ) , Yellow and White Water-lilies are also widespread . Pipewort has generated some botanical controversy regarding its discovery , classification and distribution . It was found growing on Skye in the 18th century , although there was subsequent confusion as to both the discoverer and the correct scientific name – now agreed to be Eriocaulon aquaticum . The European range of this plant is confined to Scotland and western Ireland and it is one of only a small number of species which is common in North America , but very restricted in Europe . There are a few localised examples of the Rigid Hornwort ( Ceratophyllum demersum ) .

Grasses and sedges are common everywhere except dune systems ( where marram grass may be locally abundant ) and stony mountain tops and plateaux . The total number of species is large , 84 have been recorded on the verges of a single road in West Lothian . Smooth Meadow-grass and Broad-leaved Meadow-grass are widespread in damp lowland conditions , Wood Sedge ( Carex sylvatica ) in woodlands , and Oval Sedge and Early Hair-grass on upland moors . In damp conditions Phragmites reeds and several species of Juncus are found abundantly including Jointed Rush , Soft Rush and Toad Rush , and less commonly the introduced species Slender Rush . Common Cottongrass is a familiar site on marshy land , but Saltmarsh Sedge ( Carex salina ) was only discovered for the first time in 2004 at the head of Loch Duich .

Shetland Mouse-ear ( Cerastium nigrescens ) is an endemic plant found in Shetland . It was first recorded in 1837 by Shetland botanist Thomas Edmondston . Although reported from two other sites in the 19th century , it currently grows only on two serpentine hills on the island of Unst . The Scottish Primrose ( Primula scotica ) , is endemic to the north coast including Caithness and Orkney . It is closely related to the Arctic species Primula stricta and Primula scandinavica . Young 's Helleborine ( Epipactis youngiana ) is a rare endemic orchid principally found on bings created by the coal-mining industry in the Central Lowlands and classified as endangered . The St Kilda Dandelion ( Taraxacum pankhurstianum ) is a species of dandelion endemic to the island of Hirta , identified in 2012 .

Some of Scotland 's flowering plant species have extremely restricted ranges in the country . These include Diapensia lapponica , found only on the slopes of Sgurr an Utha , Argyll and Mountain Bearberry , recorded at only a few mainland locations , and on Skye and Orkney . The pinewoods of Strathspey contain rare species such as Creeping Lady 's Tresses , Twinflower and the One-flowered Wintergreen . Plans to protect the Intermediate Wintergreen , also found here , were introduced in 2008 . Other nationally rare species include Tufted Saxifrage , Alpine Catchfly , Sword-leaved Helleborine , Norwegian Sandwort , Dark-red Helleborine , Iceland Purslane , Small Cow-wheat and Yellow Oxytropis .

A number of non-native , invasive species have been identified as a threat to native biodiversity , including Giant Hogweed , Japanese Knotweed and Rhododendron . In May 2008 it was announced that psyllid lice from Japan , which feed on the Knotweed , may be introduced to the UK to bring the plant under control . This would be the first time that an alien species has been used in Britain in this way . Scientists at the Commonwealth Agricultural Bureaux International do not believe the lice will cause any environmental damage . Over-grazing caused by the large numbers of Red Deer and sheep has also resulted in the impoverishment of moorland and upland habitats and a loss of native woodland .

Only thirty-one species of deciduous tree and shrub are native to Scotland , including 10 willows , four whitebeams and three birch and cherry species . The Meikleour Beech hedges located in Perth and Kinross were planted in the autumn of 1745 by Jean Mercer and her husband , Robert Murray Nairne . This European Beech hedge , which is 530 metres ( 0.3 miles ) in length , reaches 30 metres ( 100 ft ) in height and is noted in the Guinness World Records as the tallest and longest hedge on Earth . The Arran Whitebeams are species unique to the Isle of Arran . The Arran Whitebeam ( Sorbus arranensis ) and the Cut-leaved Whitebeam ( S. pseudofennica ) are amongst the most endangered tree species in the world if rarity is measured by numbers alone . Only 236 S. pseudofennica and 283 S. arranensis were recorded as mature trees in 1980 . The trees developed in a highly complex fashion involving the Rock Whitebeam ( S. rupicola ) , which is found on nearby Holy Isle but not Arran , interbreeding with the Rowan ( S. aucuparia ) to produce the new species . In 2007 it was announced that two specimens of a third new hybrid , the Catacol Whitebeam ( S. pseudomeinichii ) had been discovered by researchers on Arran . This tree is a cross between the native Rowan and S. pseudofennica .

Shakespeare makes reference to Birnam Wood being used as camouflage for Malcolm Canmore ’ s army before the battle at Dunsinane with MacBeth . There is an ancient tree , the Birnam Oak , standing a few hundred metres from the centre of Birnam . It may well have been part of Birnam Wood at the time of the battle 900 years ago , and remains part of the legend . Research into the possible commercial use of Sea Buckthorn was undertaken by Moray College commencing in 2006 . The orange berries can be processed into jams , liquors and ointments and the hardy species grows well even on exposed west coasts .

The Scots Pine and Common Juniper are the only coniferous trees definitely native to Scotland with Yew a possible contender . The Fortingall Yew is an ancient tree in the churchyard of the village of Fortingall in Perthshire . Various estimates have put its age at between 2,000 and 5,000 years ; recent research into yew tree ages suggests that it is likely to be nearer the lower limit of 2,000 years . This still makes it the oldest tree in Europe , although there is an older Norway Spruce root system in Sweden . At 64.3 metres ( 211 ft ) , a Grand Fir planted beside Loch Fyne , Argyll in the 1870s was named as the UK ’ s tallest tree in 2011 . The next four tallest trees in the UK are all found in Scotland . The Stronardron Douglas Fir which grows near Dunans Castle in Argyll is recorded as 63.79 metres ( 209.3 ft ) . Diana ’ s Grove Grand Fir at Blair Castle , which was measured at 62.7 metres ( 206 ft ) is the next highest . Dùghall Mòr ( Scottish Gaelic : " big dark stranger " ) , another Douglas Fir located in Reelig Glen near Inverness , reaches just over 62 metres ( 203 ft ) in height and was considered to be the tallest tree in Britain until a survey undertaken by Sparsholt College in 2009 ( which named the Stronardron fir as the highest ) . This survey concluded that the Hermitage Douglas Fir near Dunkeld came next in height , standing at 61.31 metres ( 201 ft ) .

Bracken is very common in upland areas , Beech Fern in woods and other shaded locations and Scaly Male Fern in wooded or open areas . Wilsons Filmy-fern is a common upland variety in the Highlands , along with the Tunbridge Filmy-fern , Alpine Lady-fern and the rarer stunted form Newman ’ s Lady-fern ( A. distentifolium var. flexile ) which is endemic to Scotland . The Killarney Fern , once found on Arran was thought to be extinct in Scotland , but has been discovered on Skye in its gametophyte form . Scotland 's populations of Alpine Woodsia and Oblong Woodsia are on the edge of their natural ranges . The UK distribution of the former is confined to Angus , Perthshire , Argyll and north Wales , and of the latter to Angus , the Moffat Hills , north Wales and two locations in England . The plants were first identified as separate species by John Bolton in 1785 and came under severe threat from Victorian fern collectors in the mid 19th century . Cystopteris dickieana , first discovered in a sea cave in Kincardineshire , is a rare fern in a UK context whose distribution is confined to Scotland , although recent research suggests that it may be a variant of C. fragilis rather than a species in its own right .

Scotland provides ideal growing conditions for many bryophyte species , due to the damp climate , absence of lengthy droughts and winters without protracted hard frosts . In addition , the country 's diverse geology , numerous exposed rocky crags and screes and deep , damp ravines coupled with a relatively pollution-free atmosphere enables a diversity of species to exist . This unique assemblage is in marked contrast to the relative impoverishment of the native vascular plants . There are about 920 species of moss and liverwort in Scotland , with 87 % of UK and 60 % of European bryophytes represented . Scotland 's bryophyte flora is globally important and this small country may host as many as 5 % of the world ’ s species ( in 0.05 % of the Earth 's land area , similar in size to South Carolina or Assam ) . The mountains of the North-west Highlands host a unique bryophyte community called the " Northern Hepatic Mat " , which is dominated by a variety of rare liverworts , such as Pleurozia purpurea and Anastrophyllum alpinum . Scotland has played an important part in the development of the understanding of bryology , with pioneers such as Archibald Menzies and Sir William Hooker commencing explorations at the end of the eighteenth century . Tetrodontium brownianum is named after Robert Brown who first discovered the plant growing at Roslin near Edinburgh and several other species such as Plagiochila atlantica and Anastrepta orcadensis were also first discovered in the country .

Sphagnum , is common and harvested commercially for use in hanging baskets and wreaths , and for medical purposes . Glittering Wood-moss , Woolly Hair-moss ( Racomitrium lanuginosum ) and Bristly Haircap ( Polytrichum piliferum ) are amongst many other abundant natives . Endemic species include the Scottish Thread-moss , Dixon ’ s Thread Moss and Scottish Beard-moss . In the Cairngorms there are small stands of Snow Brook-moss and Alpine Thyme-moss , and an abundance of Icy Rock-moss , the latter 's UK population being found only here and at one site in England . The west coast is rich in oceanic mosses such as Cyclodictyon laetevirens and the Ben Lawers range also provides habitats for various rare species such as Tongue-leaved Gland Moss . Perthshire Beard-moss is a European endemic , occurring at only four European sites outside Scotland and it is classified as " Critically Endangered " .

There are numerous common liverworts such as Conocephalum conicum and Marchantia polymorpha . Autumn Flapwort ( Jamesoniella autumnali ) , a nationally scarce species most commonly found in the sessile oak woods of western Scotland , was discovered at a site on Ben Lomond in 2008 . The species is named after the Scottish botanist , William Jameson . Northern prongwort is an endemic liverwort found only in the Beinn Eighe nature reserve . The high Cairngorms provide sites for a variety of other unusual liverworts including Marsupella arctica , the European distribution of which is confined to two sites here and Svalbard . Hornworts are scarce in Scotland , Carolina Hornwort ( Phaeoceros carolinianus ) for example , having been found only in Lauderdale .

Lichens are abundant , with 37 % of European species represented in just 0.75 % of the European land area . Most rock surfaces , except those in very exposed places , or that are kept constantly wet by sea or fresh water , become grown with lichens . Reindeer Moss ( Cladonia rangiferina ) is a common species . The trunks and branches of large trees are an important lichen habitat , Tree Lungwort being particularly conspicuous . In the past lichens were widely used for dyeing clothing . Graphis alboscripta and Halecania rhypodiza are endemic species . The former is found in the hazel woodlands of the west coast and the latter at only two sites in the Highlands . The British ranges of 35 species are confined to the Cairngorm Mountains . These include Alectoria ochroleuca , Rinodian parasitica and Cladonia trassii . Other nationally rare species found here are Jamesiella scotica , Cladonia botrytes and Ramalina polymorpha .

Conservation of the natural environment is well developed in the United Kingdom . There are various public sector organisations with an important role in the stewardship of the country 's flora . Scottish Natural Heritage is the statutory body responsible for natural heritage management in Scotland . One of their duties is to establish National Nature Reserves . Until 2004 there were 73 , but a review carried out in that year resulted in a significant number of sites losing their NNR status , and as of 2006 there are 55 . The Forestry Commission in Scotland serves as the forestry department of the Scottish Government and is one of the country 's largest landowners . The Joint Nature Conservation Committee is the statutory adviser to Government on UK and international nature conservation . The country has two national parks . Cairngorms National Park includes the largest area of arctic mountain landscape in the UK . Sites designated as of importance to natural heritage take up 39 % of the land area , two thirds of which are of Europe-wide importance . Loch Lomond and the Trossachs National Park includes Britain 's largest body of freshwater , the mountains of Breadalbane and the sea lochs of Argyll .

There are also numerous charitable and voluntary organisations with an important role to play , of which the more prominent include the following . The National Trust for Scotland is the conservation charity that protects and promotes Scotland 's natural and cultural heritage . With over 270,000 members it is the largest conservation charity in Scotland . The Royal Society for the Protection of Birds promotes conservation of birds and other wildlife through the protection and re-creation of habitats . The John Muir Trust is a charity whose main role is as a guardian of wild land and wildlife , through the ownership of land and the promotion of education and conservation . The trust owns and manages estates in various locations , including Knoydart , Assynt , and on the isle of Skye . Trees for Life is a charity that aims to restore a " wild forest " in the Northwest Highlands and Grampian Mountains . Under the auspices of the European Unions Habitats Directive , as at 31 March 2003 a total of 230 sites in Scotland covering an area of 8,748.08 km2 ( 3,377.65 sq mi ) had been submitted by the UK government to the European Commission as candidate Special Areas of Conservation ( cSAC ) .

The thistle has been one of the national emblem of the Scots nation since the reign of Alexander III ( 1249 – 1286 ) and was used on silver coins issued by James III in 1470 . Today , it forms part of the emblem of the Scottish Rugby Union . As legend has it , an invading army had attempted to sneak up at night on the Scots . One , perhaps barefooted , unwelcome foreign soldier stumbled upon a Scots Thistle , and cried out in pain , thus alerting Scots to their presence . Some sources suggest the specific occasion was the Battle of Largs , which marked the beginning of the departure of the Viking monarch Haakon IV of Norway , who had harried the coast for some years . Spiky plants such as brambles appear to have been used around forts since time immemorial , so the story , whether it factually relates to the Haakon episode or not , likely is the culmination of more than one such event over time . In some variants , it is invading English which stumble on a thistle , but the story predates this time . Numerous plants are referred to in Scottish song and verse . These include Robert Burns A Red , Red Rose , Hugh MacDiarmid 's A Drunk Man Looks at the Thistle , Sorley MacLean 's Hallaig , Harry Lauder 's I Love A Lassie and in the 21st century , Runrig 's And The Accordions Played . The last two lyrics include a reference to the bluebell . The " Scottish Bluebell " is Campanula rotundifolia , ( known elsewhere as the " Harebell " ) rather than Hyacinthoides non-scripta , the " Common Bluebell " .

Trees held an important place in Gaelic culture from the earliest times . Particularly large trees were venerated , and the most valuable such as oak , Common Hazel and Apple were classed as " nobles " . The less important Common Alder , Common Hawthorn and Gean were classed as " commoners " , and there were " lower orders " and " slaves " such as Eurasian Aspen and Juniper . The alphabet was learned as a mnemonic using tree names . Rowan was regularly planted close to Highland houses as a protection from witchcraft . Various plants are said to have apotropaic qualities , notably Mountain Ash . Henbane ( Hyoscyamus niger ) may have been used as a hallucinogen as long ago as the Neolithic period . This tradition has recently been taken up once again by New Agers .

Grasshoppers are insects of the order Orthoptera , suborder Caelifera . They are sometimes referred to as short-horned grasshoppers to distinguish them from the katydids ( bush crickets ) which have much longer antennae . They are typically ground-dwelling insects with powerful hind legs which enable them to escape from threats by leaping vigorously . They are hemimetabolous insects ( do not undergo complete metamorphosis ) which hatch from an egg into a nymph or " hopper " which undergoes five moults , becoming more similar to the adult insect at each developmental stage . At high population densities and under certain environmental conditions , some grasshopper species can change colour and behaviour and form swarms . Under these circumstances they are known as locusts . Grasshoppers are plant-eaters , sometimes becoming serious pests of cereals , vegetables and pasture , especially when they swarm in their millions as locusts and destroy crops over wide areas . They protect themselves from predators by camouflage ; when detected , many species attempt to startle the predator with a brilliantly-coloured wing-flash while jumping and ( if adult ) launching themselves into the air , usually flying for only a short distance . Other species such as the rainbow grasshopper have warning coloration which deters predators . Grasshoppers are affected by parasites and various diseases , and many predatory creatures feed on both nymphs and adults . The eggs are the subject of attack by parasitoids and predators .

Grasshoppers have the typical insect body plan of head , thorax and abdomen . The head is held vertically , at an angle to the body with the mouth at the bottom . It bears a large pair of compound eyes which give all-round vision , three simple eyes which can detect light and dark and a pair of thread-like antennae which are sensitive to touch and smell . The downward-directed mouthparts are modified for chewing and there are two sensory palps in front of the jaws . The thorax and abdomen are segmented and have a rigid cuticle made up of overlapping plates composed of chitin . The three fused thoracic segments bear three pairs of legs and two pairs of wings . The forewings , known as tegmina , are narrow and leathery while the hind wings are large and membranous , the veins providing strength . The legs are terminated by claws for gripping . The hind leg is particularly powerful ; the femur is robust and has several ridges where different surfaces join and the inner ridges bear stridulatory pegs in some species . The posterior edge of the tibia bears a double row of spines and there are a pair of articulated spurs near its lower end . The interior of the thorax houses the muscles that control the limbs .

The abdomen has eleven segments , the first of which is fused to the thorax and contains the auditory organ and tympanum . Segments two to eight are ring-shaped and joined by flexible membranes . Segments nine to eleven are reduced ; segment nine bears a pair of cerci and segments ten and eleven house the reproductive organs . Female grasshoppers are normally larger than males , with short ovipositors . The name " Caelifera " comes from the Latin and means chisel-bearing , referring to the sharp ovipositor . Those species that make easily heard noises usually do so by rubbing a row of pegs on the hind femurs against the edges of the forewings ( stridulation ) . These sounds are produced mainly by males to attract females , though in some species the females also stridulate . Grasshoppers are easily confused with the other sub-order of Orthoptera , Ensifera ( crickets ) , but differ in many aspects , such as the number of segments in their antennae and structure of the ovipositor , as well as the location of the tympana and modes of sound production . Ensiferans have antennae that can be much longer than the body and have at least 20 – 24 segments , while caeliferans have fewer segments in their shorter , stouter antennae .

The phylogeny of the Caelifera based on mitochondrial RNA of 32 taxa in six out of seven superfamilies is shown as a cladogram . The Ensifera , Caelifera and all the superfamilies of grasshoppers except Pamphagoidea appear to be monophyletic . In evolutionary terms , the split between the Caelifera and the Ensifera is no more recent than the Permo-Triassic boundary ; the earliest insects that are certainly Caeliferans are in the extinct families Locustopseidae and Locustavidae from the early Triassic . The group diversified during the Triassic and have remained important plant-eaters from that time to now . The first modern families such as the Eumastacidae , Tetrigidae and Tridactylidae appeared in the Cretaceous , though some insects that might belong to the last two of these groups are found in the early Jurassic . Morphological classification is difficult because many taxa have converged towards a common habitat type ; recent taxonomists have concentrated on the internal genitalia , especially those of the male . This information is not available from fossil specimens , and the palaentological taxonomy is founded principally on the venation of the hindwings .

Most grasshoppers are polyphagous , eating vegetation from multiple plant sources , but some are omnivorous and also eat animal tissue and animal faeces . In general their preference is for grasses , including many cereals grown as crops . The mandibles chew the food slightly and salivary glands in the buccal cavity chemically begin to digest the carbohydrates present in it . The food is then passed via the oesophagus to the crop where it is stored temporarily and chemical digestion continues . Next it moves to the gizzard which has muscular walls and tooth-like plates which grind the food . From here , food enters the stomach , where six hepatic caeca add further enzymes and digestion is completed . At the junction between mid and hind-gut , several fine tubes known as malpighian tubules add the excretory products ( uric acid , urea and amino acids ) to the contents of the gut . Absorption of nutrients takes place in the ileum and any undigested residue is passed on to the colon . Here water is absorbed and the residue becomes solid . After storage in the rectum , the faeces are expelled as small dry pellets .

Grasshoppers have a typical insect nervous system , and have an extensive set of external sense organs . On the side of the head are a pair of large compound eyes which give a broad field of vision and can detect movement , shape , colour and distance . There are also three simple eyes ( ocelli ) on the forehead which can detect light intensity , a pair of antennae containing olfactory ( smell ) and touch receptors , and mouthparts containing gustatory ( taste ) receptors . At the front end of the abdomen there is a pair of tympanal organs for sound reception . There are numerous fine hairs covering the whole body that act as mechanoreceptors ( touch and wind sensors ) , and these are most dense on the antennae , the palps ( part of the mouth ) , and on the cerci at the tip of the abdomen . There are special receptors ( campaniform sensillae ) embedded in the cuticle of the legs that sense pressure and cuticle distortion . There are internal " chordotonal " sense organs specialized to detect position and movement about the joints of the exoskeleton . The receptors convey information to the central nervous system through sensory neurons , and most of these have their cell bodies located in the periphery near the receptor site itself .

Like other insects , grasshoppers have an open circulatory system and their body cavities are filled with haemolymph . A heart-like structure pumps the fluid to the head from where it percolates past the tissues and organs on its way back to the abdomen . It circulates nutrients throughout the body and carries metabolic wastes to be excreted into the gut . The haemolymph and the circulatory system are not involved in gaseous exchange . Respiration is performed using tracheae , air-filled tubes , which open at the surfaces of the thorax and abdomen through pairs of valved spiracles . Larger insects may need to actively ventilate their bodies by opening some spiracles while others remain closed , using abdominal muscles to expand and contract the body and pump air through the system .

A large grasshopper such as a locust can jump about a metre ( twenty body lengths ) without using its wings ; the acceleration peaks at about 20 g . Grasshoppers jump by extending their large back legs and pushing against the substrate ( the ground , a twig , a blade of grass or whatever else they are standing on ) ; the reaction force propels them into the air . They jump for several reasons ; to escape from a predator , to launch themselves for flight , or simply to move from place to place . For the escape jump in particular there is strong selective pressure to maximize take-off velocity , since this determines the range . This means that the legs must thrust against the ground with both high force and a high velocity of movement . However , a fundamental property of muscle is that it cannot contract with both high force and high velocity , which seems like a problem . Grasshoppers overcome this apparent contradiction by using a catapult mechanism to amplify the mechanical power produced by their muscles . The jump is a three-stage process . First , the grasshopper fully flexes the lower part of the leg ( tibia ) against the upper part ( femur ) by activating the flexor tibiae muscle ( the back legs of the immature grasshopper in the top photograph are in this preparatory position ) . Second , there is a period of co-contraction in which force builds up in the large , pennate extensor tibiae muscle , but the tibia is kept flexed by the simultaneous contraction of the flexor tibiae muscle . The extensor muscle is much stronger than the flexor muscle , but the latter is aided by specializations in the joint that give it a large effective mechanical advantage over the former when the tibia is fully flexed . Co-contraction can last for up to half a second , and during this period the extensor muscle shortens and stores elastic strain energy by distorting stiff cuticular structures in the leg . The extensor muscle contraction is quite slow ( almost isometric ) , which allows it to develop high force ( up to 14 N in the desert locust ) , but because it is slow only low power is needed . The third stage of the jump is the trigger relaxation of the flexor muscle , which releases the tibia from the flexed position . The subsequent rapid tibial extension is driven mainly by the relaxation of the elastic structures , rather than by further shortening of the extensor muscle . In this way the stiff cuticle acts like the elastic of a catapult , or the bow of a bow-and-arrow . Energy is put into the store at low power by slow but strong muscle contraction , and retrieved from the store at high power by rapid relaxation of the mechanical elastic structures .

Grasshoppers lay their eggs in pods in the ground near food plants , generally in the summer . The eggs in the pod are glued together with a froth in some species . After a few weeks of development , the eggs of most species go into diapause , and pass the winter in this state ; in a few species the eggs hatch in the same summer they were laid . Diapause is broken by a sufficiently low ground temperature ; development resumes as soon as the ground warms above a threshold temperature . The embryos in a pod generally all hatch out within a few minutes of each other . They soon shed their membranes and their exoskeletons harden . These first instar nymphs can then jump away from predators . Grasshoppers have incomplete metamorphosis : they repeatedly moult ( undergo ecdysis ) , becoming larger and more like an adult , with for instance larger wing-buds , in each instar . The number of instars varies between species . At the final moult , the wings are inflated and become fully functional . The migratory grasshopper , Melanoplus sanguinipes , spends about 25 – 30 days as a nymph depending on sex and temperature , and about 51 days as an adult .

Grasshoppers have a wide range of predators at different stages of their life-cycle . Eggs are eaten by bee-flies , ground beetles and blister beetles . Hoppers and adults are taken by predators including other insects such as ants , robber flies and sphecid wasps ; spiders ; many birds ; and small mammals . Parasitoids include blowflies , fleshflies , and tachinid flies . External parasites include mites . It has been found that female grasshoppers parasitised by mites produce fewer eggs and thus have fewer offspring . This is probably because the individuals concerned allocate resources in response to the parasitism which are then not available for reproduction . Spinochordodes tellinii and Paragordius tricuspidatus are parasitic worms that infect grasshoppers and alter the behaviour of their hosts . The grasshopper is persuaded to leap into a nearby body of water where it drowns , thus enabling the parasite to continue with the next stage of its life cycle which takes place in water . The grasshopper nematode ( Mermis nigrescens ) is a long slender worm that infests grasshoppers , living in the insect 's hemocoel . Adult worms lay eggs on plants and the host gets infected when it eats the foliage .

Grasshoppers are affected by diseases caused by bacteria , viruses , fungi and protozoa . The bacteria Serratia marcescens and Pseudomonas aeruginosa have both been implicated in causing disease in grasshoppers , as has the entomopathogenic fungus Beauveria bassiana . This widespread fungus has been used to control various pest insects around the world , but although it infects grasshoppers , basking in the sun has the result of raising the insect 's temperature above a threshold tolerated by the fungus , and the infection is not lethal . The fungal pathogen Entomophaga grylli is able to influence the behaviour of its grasshopper host , causing it to climb to the top of a plant and cling to the stem as it dies . This ensures wide dispersal of the fungal spores liberated from the corpse . The fungal pathogen Metarhizium acridum is found in Africa , Australia and Brazil where it has caused epizootics in grasshoppers . It is being investigated for possible use as a microbial insecticide for locust control . The microsporidian fungus Nosema locustae , once considered to be a protozoan , can be lethal to grasshoppers . It has to be consumed by mouth and is the basis for a bait-based commercial microbial pesticide . Various other microsporidians and protozoans are found in the gut .

Grasshoppers exemplify a range of anti-predator adaptations , enabling them to avoid detection , to escape if detected , and in some cases to avoid being eaten if captured . Grasshoppers are often camouflaged to avoid detection by predators that hunt by sight . Their colouration usually resembles the background , whether green for leafy vegetation , sandy for open areas or grey for rocks . Some species can change their colouration to suit their surroundings . Several species such as the hooded leaf grasshopper Phyllochoreia ramakrishnai ( Eumastacoidea ) are detailed mimics of leaves . Grasshoppers often have deimatic patterns on their wings , giving a sudden flash of bright colours that may startle predators long enough to give time to escape in a combination of jump and flight . Some species are genuinely aposematic , having both bright warning coloration and sufficient toxicity to dissuade predators . Dictyophorus productus ( Pyrgomorphidae ) is a " heavy , bloated , sluggish insect " that makes no attempt to hide ; it has a bright red abdomen . A Cercopithecus monkey that ate other grasshoppers refused to eat the species . Another species , the rainbow or painted grasshopper of Arizona , Dactylotum bicolor ( Acridoidea ) , has been shown by experiment with a natural predator , the little striped whiptail lizard , to be aposematic .

Grasshoppers are occasionally depicted in artworks , such as the Dutch Golden Age painter Balthasar van der Ast 's still life oil painting , Flowers in a Vase with Shells and Insects , c . 1630 , now in the National Gallery , London , though the insect may be a bush-cricket . Another orthopteran is found in Rachel Ruysch 's still life Flowers in a Vase , c . 1685 . The seemingly static scene is animated by a " grasshopper on the table that looks about ready to spring " , according to the gallery curator Betsy Wieseman , with other invertebrates including a spider , an ant , and two caterpillars .

Grasshoppers are sometimes used as symbols , as in Sir Thomas Gresham 's gilded grasshopper in Lombard Street , London , dating from 1563 ; the building was for a while the headquarters of the Guardian Royal Exchange , but the company declined to use the symbol for fear of confusion with the locust . When grasshoppers appear in dreams , these have been interpreted as symbols of " Freedom , independence , spiritual enlightenment , inability to settle down or commit to decision " . Locusts are taken literally to mean devastation of crops in the case of farmers ; figuratively as " wicked men and women " for non-farmers ; and " Extravagance , misfortune , & ephemeral happiness " by " gypsies " .

In some countries , grasshoppers are used as food . In southern Mexico , grasshoppers , known as chapulines , are eaten in a variety of dishes , such as in tortillas with chilli sauce . Grasshoppers are served on skewers in some Chinese food markets , like the Donghuamen Night Market . Fried grasshoppers ( walang goreng ) are eaten in the Gunung Kidul area of Yogjakarta , Java in Indonesia . In the Arab world , grasshoppers are boiled , salted , and sun-dried , and eaten as snacks . In Native America , the Ohlone people burned grassland to herd grasshoppers into pits where they could be collected as food . It is recorded in the Bible that John the Baptist ate locusts and wild honey ( Greek : ἀκρίδες καὶ μέλι ἄγριον , akrides kai meli agrion ) while living in the wilderness ; attempts have been made to explain the locusts as suitably ascetic vegetarian food such as carob beans , but the plain meaning of ἀκρίδες is the insects .

Grasshoppers eat large quantities of foliage both as adults and during their development , and can be serious pests of arid land and prairies . Pasture , grain , forage , vegetable and other crops can be affected . Grasshoppers often bask in the sun , and thrive in warm sunny conditions , so drought stimulates an increase in grasshopper populations . A single season of drought is not normally sufficient to stimulate a massive population increase , but several successive dry seasons can do so , especially if the intervening winters are mild so that large numbers of nymphs survive . Although sunny weather stimulates growth , there needs to be an adequate food supply for the increasing grasshopper population . This means that although precipitation is needed to stimulate plant growth , prolonged periods of cloudy weather will slow nymphal development . Grasshoppers can best be prevented from becoming pests by manipulating their environment . Shade provided by trees will discourage them and they may be prevented from moving onto developing crops by removing coarse vegetation from fallow land and field margins and discouraging luxurious growth beside ditches and on roadside verges . With increasing numbers of grasshoppers , predator numbers may increase , but this seldom happens sufficiently rapidly to have much effect on populations . Biological control is being investigated but with little success . On a small scale , neem products can be effective as a feeding deterrent and as a disruptor of nymphal development . Insecticides can be used , but adult grasshoppers are difficult to kill , and as they move into fields from surrounding rank growth , crops may soon become reinfested .

Locusts are the swarming phase of certain species of short-horned grasshoppers in the family Acrididae . It has been shown that swarming behaviour is a response to overcrowding . Increased tactile stimulation of the hind legs causes an increase in levels of serotonin . This causes the grasshopper to change colour , feed more and breed faster . The transformation of a solitary individual into a swarming one is induced by several contacts per minute over a short period . Following this transformation , under suitable conditions dense nomadic bands of flightless nymphs can occur , producing pheromones which attract them to each other . With several generations in a year , the locust population can build up from localised groups into vast accumulations of flying insects known as plagues , devouring all the vegetation they encounter . The largest recorded locust swarm was one of the now-extinct Rocky Mountain locust in 1875 , which was 1,800 miles ( 2,900 km ) long and 110 miles ( 180 km ) wide . An adult desert locust can eat about 2 g ( 0.1 oz ) each day so the billions of insects in a large swarm can be very destructive , stripping all the foliage from plants in an affected area and also consuming stems , flowers , fruits , seeds and bark . Locust plagues can have devastating effects on human populations , causing famines and population upheavals . They are mentioned in both the Koran and the Bible and have been held responsible for cholera epidemics , resulting from the corpses of locusts drowned in the Mediterranean Sea and decomposing on beaches .

The Egyptian word for locust or grasshopper was written snḥm in the consonantal hieroglyphic writing system . The pharaoh Ramesses II compared the armies of the Hittites to locusts : " They covered the mountains and valleys and were like locusts in their multitude . " One of Aesop 's Fables , later retold by La Fontaine , is the tale of The Ant and the Grasshopper . The ant works hard all summer , while the grasshopper plays . In winter , the ant is ready but the grasshopper starves . Somerset Maugham 's short story " The Ant and the Grasshopper " explores the fable 's symbolism via complex framing . The Canadian philosopher Bernard Suits retells the story with the grasshopper as " the exemplification of the life most worth living . " Other human weaknesses besides improvidence have become identified with the grasshopper 's behaviour . So an unfaithful woman ( hopping from man to man ) is " a grasshopper " in " Poprygunya " , an 1892 short story by Anton Chekhov , and in Jerry Paris 's 1969 film The Grasshopper . The 1957 film Beginning of the End portrayed giant grasshoppers attacking Chicago . In the 1998 film A Bug 's Life , the heroes are the members of an ant colony , and the lead villain and his henchmen are grasshoppers .

Ikuhiko Hata ( 秦 郁彦 , Hata Ikuhiko , born 12 December 1932 ) is a Japanese historian . He acquired his PhD at the University of Tokyo and has taught history at several universities . He is the author of a number of influential and well-received scholarly works , particularly on topics related to Japan 's role in the Second Sino-Japanese War and World War II . Hata is variously regarded as being a " conservative " historian or a " centrist " . He has written extensively on such controversial subjects as the Nanking Massacre and the comfort women . Fellow historian Edward Drea has called him " the doyen of Japanese military historians " .

Ikuhiko Hata was born on 12 December 1932 in the city of Hōfu in Yamaguchi Prefecture . He graduated from the University of Tokyo in 1956 and received his PhD there in 1974 . He worked as chief historian of the Japanese Ministry of Finance between 1956 and 1976 and during this period from 1963 to 1965 he was also a research assistant at Harvard University . After resigning his post at the Finance Ministry Hata served as a visiting professor at Princeton University from 1977 to 1978 and then was a history professor at Takushoku University from 1980 to 1993 , at Chiba University from 1994 to 1997 , and at Nihon University from 1997 to 2002 .

Hata has been described by numerous historians as an important scholar on the history of modern Japan . Historian Edward Drea has called him " the doyen of Japanese military historians " , and has written that Hata 's " published works are models of scholarship , research , accuracy , and judicious interpretation " , and Joshua A. Fogel , a historian of China at York University , concurs that Hata " is an eminent scholar who has for over forty years been writing numerous excellent studies of Japan at war . " Masahiro Yamamoto called him " a leading Japanese scholar in the field of Japan 's modern history " . Hata 's first published history book was Nicchū Sensōshi ( " A History of the Second Sino-Japanese War " ) , released in 1961 , which he began researching while completing his bachelor 's degree at the University of Tokyo . The work was well-received , described by Chalmers Johnson as " the most thorough study of Japanese policies in China during the 1930s " and by James T.C. Liu as " a welcome and pioneering contribution " . Fifty years after its publication Edward Drea and Tobe Ryoichi called it " a classic account " of the war . Hata 's second book , the 1962 work Gun fashizumu undō shi ( " A History of the Military Fascist Movement " ) , was promoted by the historian Shuhei Domon as " a first-rate narrative interpretation based on extensive use of documentary evidence . "

The Japan Association of International Relations selected Hata for a part of what historian James William Morley described as a team of " young , objective diplomatic and military historians " to be given unprecedented access to primary source records to write the history of the origins of World War II in Asia . The result was Taiheiyō sensō e no michi ( " The Road to the Pacific War " ) , published between 1962 and 1963 and then translated into English in the 1970s and 1980s . Hata contributed three essays to the series . Roger Dingman described the first , " The Japanese-Soviet Confrontation , 1935 – 1939 " , as " a wealth of new data " , and praised the second , " The Army 's Move into Northern Indochina " , for demonstrating " brilliantly how peaceful passage through northern Indochina became forceful occupation " . Mark Peattie wrote that Hata 's third essay , " The Marco Polo Bridge Incident 1937 " , was " the best overview we now have in English " of the event , and Hata would later expand it into a full-length book which Edward Drea and Tobe Ryoichi called " the single best source on the incident " .

Starting in 1968 Hata headed a team of scholars with a task from the Ministry of Education to analyze all available sources and documents on the workings of the wartime and prewar armed forces of Japan . The fruit of their research was Nihon Rikukaigun no Seido , Soshiki , Jinji ( " Institutions , Organization , and Personnel of the Japanese Army and Navy " ) , released in 1971 , which Mark Peattie called " the authoritative reference work in the field " . Soon after Hata was tasked with coordinating another collaborative research project , this one for the Finance Ministry , on the subject of the occupation of Japan by the United States after World War II . John W. Dower , Sadao Asada , and Roger Dingman credited Hata for the key role he played in producing the multivolume project , which began to be published in 1975 , and deemed it the best work of scholarship on the occupation produced until that point . In 1993 Hata wrote a two-volume work on controversial incidents in modern Japanese history , entitled Shōwashi no nazo wo ou ( " Chasing the Riddles of Showa History " ) , which was awarded the Kikuchi Kan Prize .

Hata co-wrote two books with Yasuho Izawa on Japanese fighter aces of World War II , both of which were described by historians as the definitive treatments of the subject . A work Hata had written in 1984 , Hirohito Tennō Itsutsu no Ketsudan ( " Emperor Hirohito 's Five Decisions " ) , attracted the attention of Marius Jansen , who arranged to have it translated into English as Hirohito : The Showa Emperor in War and Peace . According to Edward Drea , on the question of " whether the emperor was really Japan 's ruler and power-holder or merely a puppet and robot ... [ Hata ] concludes that the answer to this complex question lies somewhere in between , although Hata credits Hirohito with considerable political savvy . " Apart from Drea the book also garnered highly positive reviews from Stephen S. Large and Hugh Cortazzi .

Hata 's major contribution to Nanking Massacre studies is his book Nankin jiken ( " The Nanking Incident " ) , published in 1986 , which is a detailed study of the event based on Japanese , Chinese , and English sources that was later noted by historians such as Daqing Yang to be one of the few impartial works of scholarship written on the massacre during the period . The book is known for its relatively low estimate of the death toll , which Hata put at about 40,000 partly because , unlike most historians of the time , he excluded Chinese soldiers killed in action from his definition of the massacre . Hata 's book is acknowledged as the first to discuss what might have caused the massacre , whereas previous books had focused only on the event itself . Hata argued that the Japanese Army 's lack of military police and facilities to detain POWs , its ignorance of international laws , its excessive mopping-up operations , and the Chinese General Tang Shengzhi 's decision to flee the city without formally surrendering were among the factors which led to the slaughter . Some contemporary researchers including the historian Tomio Hora and the journalist Katsuichi Honda expressed strong disagreement with Hata 's death toll estimate , though both expressed admiration for Hata 's scholarship and sincerity . Hata is today recognized as the major scholar of the so-called " centrist " school of thought on the Nanking Massacre , which in terms of the death toll believes that tens of thousands were killed and thus stands between the " great massacre " school which believes that hundreds of thousands were killed , and the " illusion " school of Nanking Massacre deniers . By contrast , Takuji Kimura has criticized Hata as a " minimizer " of the atrocity , while still acknowledging that his book on the massacre was " an excellent study " and Herbert Bix has described him as " the most notorious " of the " partial deniers " of the Nanking Massacre . However , historians Haruo Tohmatsu and HP Willmott have stated that Hata 's estimate for the death toll is regarded in Japan as being " the most academically reliable estimate " .

Hata 's Nankin jiken has continued to receive plaudits from some scholars . In 2000 Marius Jansen endorsed it as " the most reasonable of many Japanese studies " on the massacre and in 2001 prominent Nanking Massacre scholar Yutaka Yoshida deemed it one of the top five books he recommends that people read on the Nanking Massacre , despite disagreeing with its death toll estimate . In 2003 Joshua Fogel called the book " still an authority in the field " , and Ritsumeikan University professor David Askew designated it " the best introductory work on the Nanjing Incident in any language " . By 1999 the book was in its nineteenth printing . In November 1997 at a conference in Princeton University Hata was confronted by Iris Chang , author of the book The Rape of Nanking , who asked him why he doubted the testimony of Japanese POWs who had stated that hundreds of thousands of Chinese were killed in the atrocity . When Hata replied that torture and coercion of Japanese POWs made their testimony unreliable Chang walked out and the audience became unruly , shouting Hata down and yelling insults at him . The moderator Perry Link barely kept the situation under control . In the wake of this incident , similar disruptions by Chinese students who disagreed with his death toll estimate prevented Hata from speaking at a number of universities that he visited . Bob Wakabayashi of York University argues that Hata became more strident in his tone following these attacks , once calling it the " Nanking industry " in comparison with Norman Finkelstein 's " Holocaust industry " . In the 1980s Hata had stated that the death toll was 38,000 to 42,000 while holding out the possibility that it might have been as high as 60,000 , but when he wrote the second edition of Nankin Jiken in 2007 he indicated that 42,000 massacred was the maximum possible and that the true number might have been lower .

Ikuhiko Hata is a leading historian on the subject of the comfort women who served alongside the Japanese Army in the 1930s and 1940s and is credited with being the first individual to expose as fraudulent the testimony of Seiji Yoshida , who claimed to have kidnapped Korean women for the Japanese military . Hata , who argues that the comfort women were not sex slaves but largely willing prostitutes with minority of them being sold by their parents and more crucially , no direct involvement by Japanese military except few incidents in South East Asia , summed up his views on the issue with , " There were at most 20,000 comfort women . None of them were forcibly recruited . Forty percent of them were from Japan , the most heavily represented nation . Many were sold to brokers by their parents . Some responded willingly to brokers ' offers ; others were deceived . I would add that , on the average , living conditions in the comfort stations were practically identical to those in brothels set up for American troops during the Vietnam War . " Historian Chunghee Sarah Soh notes that Hata had put the total number of comfort women at 90,000 in 1993 but he later revised the number downward because of " his political alignment with the conservative anti-redress camp in Japan that emerged in the latter half of the 1990s " .

Hata would expand his research into the 1999 book Ianfu to senjō no sei ( " Comfort women and sex on the battlefield " ) , described by Sarah Soh as " a 444-page treatise on the comfort women issue " . Ianfu to senjō no sei was noted for its extensive compilation of information , being praised by historian Haruo Tohmatsu as " probably the most well documented study on the question " and by Mainichi Shimbun reporter Takao Yamada as " an encyclopedia-like collection of facts on comfort women " . In The International History Review , A. Hamish Ion stated that with this work Hata has succeeded in creating " a measured evaluation in the face of sensational and supposedly ill-researched studies by George Hicks and others . " The book was also favorably reviewed by political scientist Itaru Shimazu and the journalist Takaaki Ishii . By contrast , historian Hirofumi Hayashi criticized the work for faulty use of documents , such as where Hata cites a document listing 650 comfort women allocated in five prefectures , when in fact the document said 400 comfort women . Hata , who supports the retraction of the Kono Statement on comfort women , was the only historian appointed to the committee established by the government of Shinzo Abe to re-examine the statement . In 2015 Hata led of group of Japanese historians in requesting that the publisher McGraw-Hill make corrections to what they believed were erroneous descriptions of the comfort women in a world history textbook published in the United States .

Hata 's general ideological leanings have been described in a variety of manners . Some sources have referred to him as being a right-leaning scholar , such as Thomas U. Berger who has called him , " a highly respected conservative Japanese historian " . Others , however , find characterizing Hata in these terms to be inaccurate , such as military historian Masahiro Yamamoto who notes that in the historical debate on the Nanking Massacre Hata was a centrist who actually leaned closer to the " traditionalist " scholars than the conservative " revisionists " . Takao Yamada likewise points out that Hata has criticized all sides in historical controversies and he argues that Hata can be better described as a " positivist " . Hata is known as a strong opponent of the attempts by some Japanese nationalists to revise Japan 's wartime history in a way that he deems ideologically biased . Hata , whom the Wall Street Journal described as an advocate of the " we-did-wrong view " of Japanese history , has expressed grave concern about the advent of new historical revisionists seeking to apologize for Japan 's wartime aggressions and absolve former Prime Minister Hideki Tojo . In 1995 Hata stepped down from a government commission on the construction of a new war museum near Yasukuni Shrine in fear that the project would be used to glorify Japan 's wartime actions . He favors the de-enshrinement of war criminals from Yasukuni Shrine and is also a critic of Yūshūkan , a museum near the shrine , for its nationalist-inspired portrayal of Japanese history . While he has been strongly critical of efforts by Japanese nationalist groups to alter history textbooks , Hata also agreed to testify for the Ministry of Education against left-wing historian Saburo Ienaga who believed that his textbook was being censored by the Japanese government . Hata has supported the work of the Japanese Society for History Textbook Reform , despite noting that the textbook which the Society had authored " was colored more strongly by nationalism than others " .

In 2007 Hata was vocal in his denunciation of an essay written by Toshio Tamogami , a former general in the Japanese Air Self-Defense Force , which sought to justify Japanese imperialism . Hata found Tamogami 's essay to be " of extremely low quality " and full of " old conspiracy theories " . Because of his scholarship on the Nanking Massacre Hata has been attacked by Nanking Massacre deniers such as Masaaki Tanaka , who said that Hata was infected with " IMTFE syndrome " , and Shōichi Watanabe . In 1990 Hata argued that the recently released monologue of Emperor Hirohito , the former Emperor 's recollection of wartime Japan which he recorded shortly after World War II , had likely been created to prove to the United States that he was not involved in war crimes and consequently Hata theorized that an English language translation must have also been drawn up at the same time , a theory which was mocked by right-wing scholars who felt the monologue was created as a simple historical record without ulterior motives . In 1997 the English language draft was discovered .

" Japanese Historical Writing on the Origins of the Pacific War " ( in Papers on Modern Japan . Canberra : Australian National University Press , 1968 . ) " The Battle of Midway " ( in Purnell 's History of the 20th Century Volume Seven . New York : Purnell , 1971 . ) " The Japanese-Soviet Confrontation , 1935-1939 " ( in Deterrent Diplomacy : Japan , Germany , and the USSR 1935-1940 . New York : Columbia University Press , 1976 . ) " The Army 's Move into Northern Indochina " ( in The Fateful Choice : Japan 's Advance into Southeast Asia , 1939 – 1941 . New York : Columbia University Press , 1980 . ) " The Occupation of Japan , 1945 – 1952 " ( in The American Military and the Far East : Proceedings of the Ninth Military History Symposium . Washington DC : Government Printing Office , 1980 . ) " From Mukden to Pearl Harbor " ( in Japan Examined : Perspectives on Modern Japanese History . Honolulu : University of Hawaii Press , 1983 . ) " The Marco Polo Bridge Incident 1937 " ( in The China Quagmire . New York : Columbia University Press , 1983 . )

" Continental Expansion 1905 – 1941 " ( in The Cambridge History of Japan Volume Six . London : Cambridge University Press , 1988 . ) " The Road to the Pacific War " ( in Pearl Harbor Reexamined . Honolulu : University of Hawaii Press , 1990 . ) " Admiral Yamamoto 's Surprise Attack and the Japanese Navy 's War Strategy " ( in From Pearl Harbor to Hiroshima . London : Macmillan , 1994 . ) " From Consideration to Contempt : The Changing Nature of Japanese Military and Popular Perceptions of Prisoners of War Through the Ages " ( in Prisoners of War and Their Captors in World War II . Oxford : Berg , 1996 . ) " The Flawed UN Report on Comfort Women " ( in Women and Women 's Issues in Post World War II Japan . New York : Garland , 1998 . ) " Nanjing , construction of a ' great massacre ' " ( in An Overview of the Nanjing Debate . Tokyo : Japan Echo , 2008 . ) " Nanking atrocities , fact and fable " ( in An Overview of the Nanjing Debate . Tokyo : Japan Echo , 2008 . )

Wonderland is the second studio album by teenage mezzo-soprano Faryl Smith , released by Decca Records on 30 November 2009 . Smith became famous after her participation in Britain 's Got Talent in 2008 , and subsequently , aged 13 , signed with Universal Classics and Jazz , releasing her debut album , Faryl . Released only a few months afterwards , Wonderland contains a mix of classical and non-classical songs , which were chosen by both Smith and her record label . A concept album , it is based on Alice in Wonderland , and features a digitally produced " duet " with Luciano Pavarotti , who died in 2007 , as well as a song set to " Winter " , from Vivaldi 's Four Seasons . As with Faryl , Wonderland was produced by Jon Cohen . Smith promoted the album with appearances on television and radio . For the most part , critics responded positively to the album , with praise for Smith 's vocals , the song choice and the musical arrangement , but criticism for " the lack of emotional weight " . Further , critics observed that Smith 's voice had improved since her appearance on Britain 's Got Talent . Despite this , Wonderland appeared in the UK Albums Chart for only one week , peaking at 54 , proving less successful than Faryl . Smith later rerecorded " The Prayer " , her cover of which was originally released on Wonderland , with 22 other classical artists , with proceeds going to charity .

Smith , aged 13 at the time , signed a record-breaking multi-album deal with Universal Classics and Jazz in December 2008 , six months after finishing outside the top three in the Britain 's Got Talent series two final . Her debut album , Faryl , was released in March 2009 . Smith later described the album as " an introduction to me and an introduction for me to recording " , and said that she " wanted to follow up [ Faryl ] as quickly as possible with another record , something richer and varied " . In July , it was announced that work had begun on her second album , with hopes to release it later in the year . Smith said in an interview that " We 're starting to look at what songs will be on the second album ... I 'm not really choosing the songs myself , I 'm leaving that up to the people at the record label . I 'm really happy that they want me to do another album so soon – I didn 't think I would be working on one so quickly after the first one was released ... I 'm just excited to get under way with it . "

Wonderland was revealed as the album 's name in September , and a preliminary release date of 30 November was forwarded . Recording took place at Sarm Studios in Notting Hill , London , and completed in early October . Smith recorded her vocals during her school holidays . Initially , Smith was asked by her label for a track listing , but said that she " didn 't know what songs would be wrong or right for an album " . Instead , she and Decca both created their own lists , and the final track list was compiled from the two . The result included a variety of songs ; Smith said she was pleased with the mix , citing " classical numbers " like " The Prayer " , in contrast to " a more unexpected song " , " Close to You " . The track " O Holy Night " features a " duet " with Luciano Pavarotti , who died in 2007 ; Pavarotti 's vocals were digitally added to Smith 's recording to produce the song , resulting in the pair sounding " as if they 're really there together " . The title track , " Wonderland " , is set to " Winter " , from Vivaldi 's Four Seasons , and the lead track , " Merry Christmas Mr Lawrence ( Somewhere Far Away ) " is an adaptation of a piece by Ryuichi Sakamoto , originally from Merry Christmas , Mr. Lawrence . Smith 's favourite tracks on the album are " O Holy Night " and " The Prayer " .

The album was produced by Jon Cohen , who also produced Faryl and has previously worked with artists including the Opera Babes and Vanessa-Mae . Cohen said that Smith has " matured as an artist since the first album " and that he had " no doubt that once again , people will be astonished and moved by her performances " . Smith 's father , Tony , said that the bosses at universal were hoping for the album to be more commercially successful than Faryl , but noted that the market around Christmas time is tough , due to the high volume of releases . Brian Roberts , writing for the Daily Mirror , claimed that Wonderland was " tipped to go head to head " for the number one classical album position with releases from Il Divo and Rhydian Roberts . Wonderland is a concept album loosely based on Lewis Carroll 's Alice in Wonderland . The album took the title from the book , and was created with the intention of taking listeners on a journey , as well as showcasing Smith 's voice . She said that " that 's something I like to hear in music . Whether I listen to Beyonce [ sic ] or Vivaldi , music is supposed to transport you away , escape from the everyday . " Smith said that she sometimes felt like Alice chasing White Rabbit , and , for this reason , " Wonderland " was a suitable title track for the album .

Wonderland was released for the Christmas market , and was labelled as a potential Christmas number one . Smith embarked on a promotional tour , beginning at the end of October , with magazine , television and radio appearances . Appearances included Ready Steady Cook , Blue Peter , the BBC News Channel , Sky News Sunrise , The Alan Titchmarsh Show and The Paul O 'Grady Show . Speaking about the album 's promotion , Smith said " [ i ] t is always a struggle when a second album comes out because you never know how it is going to do but fingers crossed people will enjoy it . I am very proud of it . ... I am excited about going on all the shows too – especially Ready Steady Cook because I can 't cook and I think it will be fun . "

Critics responded positively to the album . Paul Callan , reviewing the album for the Daily Express , described Wonderland as " a joy " ; he compared it to other Christmas albums , saying that " [ t ] oo many are tired , much-repeated carol selections . " He described Smith 's " control , tone and warmth " as " very moving " . Overall , he gave the album 4 out of 5 . A reviewer writing for The Sun described the album as a " lush collection " of songs , and said that Smith 's " voice is now stronger , richer and even more musical " . Andy Gill , reviewing Wonderland for The Independent , gave a more mixed review . He said that the influence of Alice in Wonderland was often hard to perceive , and said that Cohen and Smith had " sweetened the classical elements " . He praised the arrangements of " Adiemus " , " Barcarolle " , " Merry Christmas , Mr Lawrence " and " Blow the Wind Southerly " , but noted that " on " Close to You " and other tracks , " the lack of emotional weight is telling . " Overall , Gill gave Wonderland 3 out of 5 .

Local paper the Northamptonshire Evening Telegraph reported that Wonderland was selling well ; on Amazon.co.uk 's charts , it appeared at number one on the symphonies chart , 13 on easy listening and 95 overall . A spokesman for the local HMV store was quoted as saying " Sales of the new Faryl album have got off to a storming start – she is proving hugely popular at HMV . ... We 're actually selling as many copies of Faryl 's new album as we are Susan Boyle right now . " However , the album entered the top 75 of the UK Albums Chart for only one week , peaking at 54 . It appeared on the Arts & Book Review ( Independent Print ) classical albums chart for two weeks , peaking at number 6 . The album proved less successful than Smith 's debut , and , subsequent to its release , Smith 's contract with Universal ended . Having originally released her version of " The Prayer " on Wonderland , Smith and 22 other classical musicians from the UK recorded a version of the song for charity in the aftermath of the 2010 Haiti earthquake . The proceeds of the single , which was released on 14 March 2010 , went to the Disasters Emergency Committee . Smith said " It 's a real honour to be a part of something that is being done for the first time , and I hope that all music lovers get involved and help raise money for the campaign . I really hope that we can make a difference together to help the horrible situation that Haiti is in at the moment . " The group , dubbed " Classical Band Aid " , recorded the track at Metropolis Studios and were backed by the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra . Each vocalist in the group performed their own solo lines , and the entire group came together for the finale . " The Prayer " was the first ever classical charity single ; Smith noted that " Pop singers do things like this a lot but it 's unusual for classical singers to get involved so I 've been really excited . "

Orval Leroy Grove ( August 29 , 1919 – April 20 , 1992 ) was an American pitcher in Major League Baseball who played for ten seasons in the American League with the Chicago White Sox . In 207 career games , Grove pitched 1,176 innings and posted a win – loss record of 63 – 73 , with 66 complete games , 11 shutouts , and a 3.78 earned run average ( ERA ) . The only freshman on the Proviso High School varsity baseball team , Grove 's pitching ability attracted the attention of the White Sox . After signing with the team in 1937 , Grove moved between the major leagues and minor leagues for a few seasons until 1943 , when he found a solid place in the White Sox 's pitching rotation . Grove had a career-year in 1943 , finishing the season with career-bests in ERA , wins , and complete games ; in 1944 , he made his only All-Star appearance . Grove spent four more full seasons with the White Sox , and after pitching one game in 1949 , was sent to the Sacramento Solons of the Pacific Coast League . After playing four seasons with them , he formally retired from professional baseball . After retirement , he worked with his uncle in a trucking business in Chicago while continuing to pitch at the semi-pro level . In 1992 , Grove died at the age of 72 .

Grove was born in West Mineral , Kansas , on August 29 , 1919 , and was raised in Maywood , Illinois . By eighth grade , Grove developed a fondness for baseball and began pitching for the Proviso East High School baseball team . He became the first freshman member of the varsity team in school history . During a high school pitching career of three years , Grove lost only two games and pitched a no-hitter and two one-hitters . Over the summer of 1937 , Grove attracted the attention of Chicago White Sox talent scout Doug Minor , who requested that he " come and workout with the Sox . " Later that year , Grove was signed by the White Sox for $ 2,500 and began his minor league career , foregoing his senior season of high school .

Grove began his career with the Dallas Steers of the Texas League at the start of the 1938 season . He played with the Steers until management began to replace young players with veterans due to the team 's struggling form and moved Grove to the Longview Cannibals . As his first minor league season drew to a close , Grove planned on returning to Proviso High School to complete his education . At the end of the season , the St. Paul Saints purchased Grove 's contract to replenish their pitching staff . After the 1939 season had begun , Grove became part of the Oklahoma City Indians of the Texas League ; St. Paul did not see much potential in him . Grove played well enough over the course of the season to receive votes for Most Valuable Player , which ultimately went to Nick Cullop . In 1939 , Grove had a peculiar game while pitching against the Tulsa Oilers . Playing in a night game with virtually no light due to storms , Grove did not allow a hit during his time on the mound , but earned the loss because he walked three men in a row , which allowed a run to score . As the 1940 season began , Grove became a part of the White Sox roster and began his Major League career .

During spring training in 1940 , Hall of Fame pitcher Ted Lyons said that Grove would have a great career , stating , " They 'll never drive that sinker very far . " Grove was an official part of the 40-man roster as the 1940 season began ( teams started rather than ended the season with 40 men at this time ) , but had not made an appearance after a month on the roster . The White Sox planned to use three rookie pitchers , including Grove , during the final week of May , as they had three doubleheaders that week . Grove made his Major League debut on May 28 , 1940 . He pitched in two more games for the White Sox that season before being sent back to Oklahoma City . Grove finished 1940 with six innings of major league work over three games , allowing two earned runs . The highlight of Grove 's 1940 season came on August 11 against the Oilers ; he pitched a complete game that lasted 12 innings , winning 1 – 0 against Hall of Famer Dizzy Dean . Grove finished the minor league season with nine wins and eight losses , but the team saw issues with his control , and as a result he spent most of the next season in the minor leagues .

In 1941 , Grove played two games for the White Sox , pitching seven innings and allowing eight runs during the two outings . He spent the start of the 1941 season at Oklahoma City , though on May 19 he was sent to the Shreveport Sports of the Texas League , where he spent the rest of the season . Grove concluded the year at Oklahoma City with a 17 – 7 record , an improvement over the previous season . However , Grove received a knee injury late in the season , which he did not think much of at the time . In October , Grove injured his other knee when he was involved in an automobile accident in Missouri . The following season , Grove was provided an opportunity to be a starting pitcher for the White Sox . Over the course of the season , he started eight games and played in four more en route to a 4 – 6 record and a 5.16 ERA . In the middle of July , Dr. Philip Kruescher discovered that Grove had torn cartilage in his left knee , a result of the same injury which caused him problems for most of the season and the previous off-season . Grove was scheduled for knee surgery , which necessitated two months of recovery , effectively ending his season . Issues with his knee drew concern both during and after the season . Dr. Kruescher stated that Grove had a " 1 in 100 " chance of playing again , but the surgery was a success , and by season 's end Grove was able to test the knee and do light workouts . Complications arose shortly thereafter as an abscess developed on the back of his knee , prompting another operation in December to correct the problem .

As the 1943 season began , the White Sox held strong doubts about Grove 's status as a pitcher . They were so doubtful of his recovery from knee surgery that Grove was signed to a $ 1 contract until he could prove that his playing ability was back on par with the abilities of the other White Sox pitchers . After Grove proved himself in spring training , manager Jimmy Dykes gave him his first major test of the season against the New York Yankees in relief of Eddie Smith . He won the game in extra innings , and was placed in the starting rotation . In 1943 , Grove had to deal with issues related to World War II and the selective service . He was originally classified as 3-A , meaning that registration was deferred due to hardship to dependents , but was ordered to take the selective service screening examination in Cleveland in mid-May . After the examination , Grove was classified as 4-F , making him ineligible for military service , which meant that he could continue his baseball career . Grove took advantage of his place in Chicago 's starting rotation by winning nine consecutive decisions to start his season and by not losing a game until a contest against the Yankees , which he lost as the result of a balk . At the time , Grove became the second member of the White Sox to win nine consecutive decisions to start a season . The first pitcher to win nine straight games for the team was Lefty Williams in 1917 , and the only one to do it since Grove was LaMarr Hoyt in 1982 . On July 8 , 1943 , Grove nearly became one of the few pitchers in baseball history to pitch a no-hitter . In a game against the Yankees , he was one out away from pitching a no-hitter when Joe Gordon came up to bat . Gordon hit a double to left field that was fair by inches , ending Grove 's closest bid for a Major League no-hitter . Grove finished the season with career bests in ERA ( 2.75 ) , wins ( 15 ) , and complete games ( 18 ) . He led the White Sox that season in ERA , wins , innings pitched , complete games , and strikeouts ; at the time , Grove was the youngest pitcher on the team 's staff . Grove 's personal life improved along with his career . On January 8 , 1944 , he married Catherine Sloan , having met her at a party thrown for the White Sox by her father , Francis Sloan , a year and a half earlier .

Grove started the 1944 season with an interesting honor : he was assigned to the 4-F All-Star team , a group of 25 major league players who were the best of those exempt from military service . Grove was given the job of being the Opening Day starting pitcher for the White Sox . He pitched the first game of the season against the Cleveland Indians and their starting pitcher , Al Smith , on April 19 , 1944 , and won 3 – 1 . Grove also managed to shut out the Yankees on May 18 ; it was the first time the Yankees had not scored a run in 1944 . By mid-season , Grove had seven wins , six losses , five complete games , and a 3.40 ERA . Because of these statistics , he was selected to the American League All-Star team , his first and only career appearance . Five American League pitchers pitched in the All-Star Game on July 11 , although Grove was one of the four on the roster who did not ; therefore , his lone All-Star appearance was indeed only an appearance . During the second half of the season , Grove performed well at Comiskey Park , but struggled on the road , at one point losing five straight games despite good run support from the White Sox . Grove finished the season with 14 wins , 15 losses , an ERA of 3.72 , two shutouts , and a career best of nearly 235 innings pitched .

There was a sense of closure for Grove before the beginning of the 1945 season , as he was awarded $ 310 ( $ 4,075 today ) in damages for the auto accident in 1941 . He held out for a new contract in the off-season , and finally signed with the White Sox a couple weeks before the beginning of the season after becoming the last remaining holdout . Grove was the workhorse of the White Sox , leading the team in games pitched ( 33 ) and started ( 30 ) , while remaining the youngest pitcher on the roster . He finished the season with 217 pitched innings , a career best four shutouts , a 14 – 12 record , and a 3.44 ERA . The 1946 season saw Grove persist as a stable part of the White Sox pitching rotation . He pitched in 33 games during the season , second to closer Earl Caldwell , and started in 26 , second to Ed Lopat 's 29 . His best outing of the season occurred on August 3 against the Washington Senators . Grove pitched a complete game and threw to the minimum 27 batters , allowing three hits and a walk , all of which were negated by double plays . He finished the season with more losses than wins because he was eager to succeed and was trying too hard , and because of this the coaching staff planned to make Grove into " as good a pitcher most of the time as he is some of the time " . At the end of the 1946 season , Grove had eight wins and 13 losses , a 3.02 ERA , 10 complete games , and a league-leading 10 wild pitches .

During the off-season , while preparations were underway for the 1947 season , Grove was the subject of trade discussions . Most notably , White Sox manager Ted Lyons and Cleveland Indians president Bill Veeck discussed trading him for Indians pitcher Steve Gromek , but the deal was nixed when they could not come to an agreement . As the season began , Grove remained part of the rotation , which was led by Lopat and included Joe Haynes and Frank Papish . While Grove started off the season well , he struggled through the middle of the year , going from May 18 to August 2 without winning a game . As a result , he was benched , and finished the season with 19 starts in 25 pitching appearances . For the first time , Grove finished a full season with an ERA above 4.00 . He ended the season with six wins , eight losses , a 4.44 ERA , and six complete games . Grove spent the off-season working in the men 's furnishings department of Henry C. Lytton 's department store in Chicago . In the 1948 season , the White Sox faced difficult decisions regarding their pitching staff and starting rotation . In the midst of Caldwell 's departure and Papish 's absence for most of the preseason , Grove remained a starter heading into the season , having pitched decently during spring training . In his final exhibition matchup of the season against Johnny Schmitz , Grove pitched the full nine innings and the White Sox defeated the Chicago Cubs 1 – 0 , making Grove the only White Sox pitcher to throw a complete game during the preseason . By the end of May , Grove was the lone White Sox pitcher with a complete game through the first several weeks of the season . However , Grove eventually lost his starting job , and by the end of the season , he had two wins , 10 losses , a 6.16 ERA , and had started 11 games out of 32 total pitching appearances .

As the 1949 season began , Grove was again the subject of trade rumors . The Detroit Tigers agreed to trade an outfielder , presumably Don Lund or Jimmy Outlaw , in exchange for Grove , although the Tigers denied the existence of such a deal , stating " We need pitching , but I don 't think Grove would help us . " Grove pitched one game during the season on April 27 , 1949 , allowing four runs in two-thirds of an inning . In his one appearance against the Indians , he hit Lou Boudreau with a pitch , which prompted concern until X-rays revealed Boudreau 's left elbow was only bruised . Shortly afterward , Grove was demoted to the Sacramento Solons of the Pacific Coast League , having pitched his final major league game . During his inaugural season at Sacramento , he was part of a pitching quartet that included Ken Holcombe , Bob Gillespie , and Frank Dasso , and was declared by Sporting News sportswriter John B. Old as " the best any Coast League club ever had . " Over the course of the next three seasons , Grove continued to pitch for the Solons . He was one of the workhorses of the 1950 squad , finishing the season with 17 victories .

His contract with the Solons promised him part of the purchase price if he was sold to the majors . When this did not occur , he considered quitting baseball and devoting himself full-time to his uncle 's trucking business . However , Grove continued to play , and pitched 159 innings in 1951 , compiling an 8 – 9 record . There was talk of his retiring in the off-season ; however , Grove ended up playing part of the 1952 season , making his season debut on June 10 and playing for the rest of the season . After the season ended , Grove was traded to the Portland Beavers , and refused to report , choosing instead to pitch at the semi-pro level . Grove stated , " I 'm now pitching for Earl Smith Motors Pontiac sales service " , signaling the end of his professional baseball career .

After his retirement from baseball , Grove continued to work with his uncle . His legacy lived on in his nephew , Wayne Grove . While playing for the Bellwood Lions of the Chicago Little League , Wayne pitched a no-hitter and struck out 15 , and narrowly missed a perfect game when a runner got on base with two outs in the bottom of the ninth inning . Despite an unimpressive Major League career , Grove earned a few votes for induction into the Hall of Fame , receiving five votes in the 1958 balloting ( 1.9 % of the required votes needed ) and seven in the 1960 balloting ( 2.6 % of the required votes needed ) . Grove had four children and four grandchildren , and later was the co-owner of a car wash in Sacramento , California for 20 years . He became close friends with Joe Gordon , the player who broke up Grove 's no-hitter , after moving to Sacramento . Grove died in Carmichael , California on April 20 , 1992 , and is buried alongside his wife , Catherine .

The 1994 – 95 South Pacific cyclone season was one of the least active South Pacific tropical cyclone season 's on record , with only three tropical cyclones officially occurring within the South Pacific Ocean basin between 160 ° E and 120 ° W. The season ran from November 1 , 1994 until April 30 , 1995 with the first disturbance of the season developing on November 12 and the last disturbance dissipating on March 17 . The most intense tropical cyclone during the season was Tropical Cyclone William , which affected the Cook Islands . After the season the name William was retired , from the tropical cyclone naming lists . During the season , tropical cyclones were officially monitored by the Tropical Cyclone Warning Centers ( TCWC ) in Nadi , Fiji , Wellington , New Zealand and Brisbane , Australia . Throughout the season the United States Navy also monitored the basin and issued unofficial warnings , through its Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) and Naval Pacific Meteorology and Oceanography Center ( NPMOC ) . Tropical cyclones that were located between the Equator and 25S were monitored by TCWC Nadi while any that were located to the south of 25S were monitored by TCWC Wellington . During the season the JTWC issued warnings on any tropical cyclone that was located between 160 ° E and 180 ° while the NPMOC issued warnings for tropical cyclones forming between 180 ° and the American coast . TCWC Nadi , Wellington and Brisbane all used the Australian Tropical Cyclone Intensity Scale , and measured windspeeds over a 10-minute period , while the JTWC and the NPMOC measured sustained windspeeds over a 1-minute period .

The season was one of the most inactive tropical cyclone seasons on record , with only two tropical cyclones officially occurring within the South Pacific Ocean basin between 160 ° E and 120 ° W. The first tropical depression of the season developed out of an area of convection on November 12 to the northeast of Vanuatu , before it was named Vania on November 14 after it had become a category one tropical cyclone . The cyclone went on to end a long dry spell in Vanuatu , before it last noted on November 19 to the west of Port Vila , Vanuatu . The basin remained quiet until December 13 , when Tropical Depression 04P developed to the east of the Solomon Islands , before going on to affect Fiji and Tonga . During the final days of 1994 , Tropical Cyclone William developed to the northeast of American Samoa . Throughout its lifetime , William moved southeast and affected parts of French Polynesia and the Cook Islands before becoming extratropical on January 3 . After William left the basin on January 5 , the basin remained quiet until March 16 , when Tropical Depression 18P developed near Fiji , before dissipating during the next day . After the season had ended the name William was retired from the tropical cyclone naming lists , while in June 1995 , the World Meteorological Organization made TCWC Nadi a Regional Specialized Meteorological Center .

On November 12 , TCWC Nadi reported that a tropical depression had developed within a persistent area of convection , that was located about 795 kilometres ( 495 mi ) to the northeast of Port Vila , Vanuatu . Over the next couple of days the depression gradually developed further as it started to move towards the southwest , before the JTWC started to issue warnings on it during November 13 and designated it as Tropical Cyclone 01P after it had become equivalent to a tropical storm . Early on November 14 , as the system passed near the Solomon Island of Tikopia , TCWC Nadi reported that the system had become a category one tropical cyclone on the Australian scale , and named it as Vania . During that day as it continued to move towards the south — southwest and intensify , it started to affect Vanautu with storm force windspeeds and heavy rain which helped break a long dry spell in Vanuatu . Early on November 15 , TCWC Nadi reported that Vania had become a category two tropical cyclone with peak 10-minute sustained windspeeds of between 100 km / h ( 60 mph ) , while the JTWC reported peak 1-minute sustained windspeeds of 110 km / h ( 70 mph ) which made it equivalent to a tropical storm . Later that day Vania passed near or over several of the Vanuatuan islands as it continued to move towards the south — southwest , and started to weaken as it encountered a higher amount of vertical windshear . During the following day , TCWC Nadi reported that Vania had weakened into a category one tropical cyclone as the systems low level circulation stalled , before it turned and started to move westwards while located to the north of New Caledonia . During November 17 , as the system had become sheared the JTWC issued their final advisory on Vania , before the systems remnant low level circulation was last noted by TCWC Nadi and the JTWC during November 19 , while it was located about 100 km ( 60 mi ) to the west of Port Vila , Vanuatu . Only minor damage to crops and bush houses was reported to have occurred in the archipelago while no deaths were reported . As a result of Vania affecting parts of Vanuatu during November 15 , voting in provincial elections had to be extended by 24 hours .

On December 13 , the US Navy started to monitor an area of disturbed weather that was located about 720 km ( 480 mi ) , to the east of Honiara in the Solomon Islands . During that day , TCWC Nadi started to monitor the system as a tropical depression as the system moved southeast towards Fiji . Over the next couple of days , the depression continued to move southeast towards Fiji and gradually developed further . On December 15 , the NPMOC initiated advisories on the depression and designated it as Tropical Cyclone 04P , while it was located about 110 km ( 70 mi ) to the northeast of Labasa , Fiji . Later that day , the NPMOC reported that the system had become a tropical storm and reached its peak 1-minute sustained windspeeds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) , as it affected several Fijian islands including Vanua Levu and Thikombia . During December 16 , the cyclone continued to move towards the southeast and started to affect Tonga before the NPMOC issued their final warning on the system as it had weakened into a tropical depression . During the next day , the depression moved into TCWC Wellingtons area of responsibility and was subsequently declared extratropical .

On December 30 , TCWC Nadi reported that a tropical depression had developed about 860 km ( 535 mi ) , to the northeast of Pago Pago in American Samoa . Over the next couple of days the system moved towards the south-southeast and gradually developed further , before the NPMOC designated the depression as Tropical Cyclone 05P . During January 1 , TCWC Nadi reported that the depression had developed into a category 1 tropical cyclone and named it William as it passed near the Cook Island of Autitaki . During the next day William subsequently slowly accelerated as it passed near too or over several other Cook Islands and intensified into a category 2 tropical cyclone . Early on January 3 , TCWC Nadi reported that the system had reached its peak 10-minute wind speeds of 110 km / h ( 70 mph ) as it passed near or over the French Polynesian islands of Maria and Rimatara . At around the same time the NPMOC reported that William , had reached its peak 1-minute sustained windspeeds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . The system subsequently degenerated into an extratropical cyclone as it left the tropics later that day . The remnants of Tropical Cyclone William were tracked by TCWC Wellington until January 5 , as they moved south-eastwards and moved out of the South Pacific basin . Throughout the Southern Cook Islands caused around US $ 2.5 million worth of damage to crops , buildings and coconut trees and destroyed a causeway to a tourist resort on Aitutaki . William injured two people and destroyed over 150 houses in French Polynesia , where local leaders accused Météo-France off underestimating Williams intensity .

On March 15 , the US Navy started to monitor an area of disturbed weather , that had developed about 245 km ( 150 mi ) to the northeast of Nadi , Fiji . During that day the depression moved towards the southeast and gradually developed further while moving around the south coast of Viti Levu . During the next day , the NPMOC initiated advisories on the area of disturbed weather and designated it as Tropical Cyclone 18P , with 1-minute sustained windspeeds of 55 km / h ( 35 mph ) . During the following day as the depression did not intensify any further as it continued to move towards the southeast . The NPMOC then issued their final advisory on the system later that day , as the depression dissipated about 960 km ( 600 mi ) to the southeast of Nuku 'alofa , Tonga .

In mathematics , a Taylor series is a representation of a function as an infinite sum of terms that are calculated from the values of the function 's derivatives at a single point . The concept of a Taylor series was formulated by the Scottish mathematician James Gregory and formally introduced by the English mathematician Brook Taylor in 1715 . If the Taylor series is centered at zero , then that series is also called a Maclaurin series , named after the Scottish mathematician Colin Maclaurin , who made extensive use of this special case of Taylor series in the 18th century . A function can be approximated by using a finite number of terms of its Taylor series . Taylor 's theorem gives quantitative estimates on the error introduced by the use of such an approximation . The polynomial formed by taking some initial terms of the Taylor series is called a Taylor polynomial . The Taylor series of a function is the limit of that function 's Taylor polynomials as the degree increases , provided that the limit exists . A function may not be equal to its Taylor series , even if its Taylor series converges at every point . A function that is equal to its Taylor series in an open interval ( or a disc in the complex plane ) is known as an analytic function in that interval .

The Greek philosopher Zeno considered the problem of summing an infinite series to achieve a finite result , but rejected it as an impossibility : the result was Zeno 's paradox . Later , Aristotle proposed a philosophical resolution of the paradox , but the mathematical content was apparently unresolved until taken up by Archimedes , as it had been prior to Aristotle by the Presocratic Atomist Democritus . It was through Archimedes 's method of exhaustion that an infinite number of progressive subdivisions could be performed to achieve a finite result . Liu Hui independently employed a similar method a few centuries later . In the 14th century , the earliest examples of the use of Taylor series and closely related methods were given by Madhava of Sangamagrama . Though no record of his work survives , writings of later Indian mathematicians suggest that he found a number of special cases of the Taylor series , including those for the trigonometric functions of sine , cosine , tangent , and arctangent . The Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics further expanded his works with various series expansions and rational approximations until the 16th century . In the 17th century , James Gregory also worked in this area and published several Maclaurin series . It was not until 1715 however that a general method for constructing these series for all functions for which they exist was finally provided by Brook Taylor , after whom the series are now named .

If f ( x ) is given by a convergent power series in an open disc ( or interval in the real line ) centered at b in the complex plane , it is said to be analytic in this disc . Thus for x in this disc , f is given by a convergent power series and so the power series expansion agrees with the Taylor series . Thus a function is analytic in an open disc centered at b if and only if its Taylor series converges to the value of the function at each point of the disc . If f ( x ) is equal to its Taylor series for all x in the complex plane , it is called entire . The polynomials , exponential function ex , and the trigonometric functions sine and cosine , are examples of entire functions . Examples of functions that are not entire include the square root , the logarithm , the trigonometric function tangent , and its inverse , arctan . For these functions the Taylor series do not converge if x is far from b . That is , the Taylor series diverges at x if the distance between x and b is larger than the radius of convergence . The Taylor series can be used to calculate the value of an entire function at every point , if the value of the function , and of all of its derivatives , are known at a single point .

The partial sums ( the Taylor polynomials ) of the series can be used as approximations of the entire function . These approximations are good if sufficiently many terms are included . Differentiation and integration of power series can be performed term by term and is hence particularly easy . An analytic function is uniquely extended to a holomorphic function on an open disk in the complex plane . This makes the machinery of complex analysis available . The ( truncated ) series can be used to compute function values numerically , ( often by recasting the polynomial into the Chebyshev form and evaluating it with the Clenshaw algorithm ) . Algebraic operations can be done readily on the power series representation ; for instance , Euler 's formula follows from Taylor series expansions for trigonometric and exponential functions . This result is of fundamental importance in such fields as harmonic analysis . Approximations using the first few terms of a Taylor series can make otherwise unsolvable problems possible for a restricted domain ; this approach is often used in physics .

The error in this approximation is no more than | x | 9 / 9 ! . In particular , for − 1 < x < 1 , the error is less than 0.000003 . In contrast , also shown is a picture of the natural logarithm function log ( 1 + x ) and some of its Taylor polynomials around a = 0 . These approximations converge to the function only in the region − 1 < x ≤ 1 ; outside of this region the higher-degree Taylor polynomials are worse approximations for the function . This is similar to Runge 's phenomenon . The error incurred in approximating a function by its nth-degree Taylor polynomial is called the remainder or residual and is denoted by the function Rn ( x ) . Taylor 's theorem can be used to obtain a bound on the size of the remainder . In general , Taylor series need not be convergent at all . And in fact the set of functions with a convergent Taylor series is a meager set in the Fréchet space of smooth functions . And even if the Taylor series of a function f does converge , its limit need not in general be equal to the value of the function f ( x ) . For example , the function

0 is identically zero . However , f ( x ) is not the zero function , so does not equal its Taylor series around the origin . Thus , f ( x ) is an example of a non-analytic smooth function . In real analysis , this example shows that there are infinitely differentiable functions f ( x ) whose Taylor series are not equal to f ( x ) even if they converge . By contrast , the holomorphic functions studied in complex analysis always possess a convergent Taylor series , and even the Taylor series of meromorphic functions , which might have singularities , never converge to a value different from the function itself . The complex function e − z − 2 , however , does not approach 0 when z approaches 0 along the imaginary axis , so it is not continuous in the complex plane and its Taylor series is undefined at 0 . More generally , every sequence of real or complex numbers can appear as coefficients in the Taylor series of an infinitely differentiable function defined on the real line , a consequence of Borel 's lemma . As a result , the radius of convergence of a Taylor series can be zero . There are even infinitely differentiable functions defined on the real line whose Taylor series have a radius of convergence 0 everywhere .

There is , however , a generalization of the Taylor series that does converge to the value of the function itself for any bounded continuous function on ( 0 , ∞ ) , using the calculus of finite differences . Specifically , one has the following theorem , due to Einar Hille , that for any t > 0,Here Δnh is the n-th finite difference operator with step size h . The series is precisely the Taylor series , except that divided differences appear in place of differentiation : the series is formally similar to the Newton series . When the function f is analytic at a , the terms in the series converge to the terms of the Taylor series , and in this sense generalizes the usual Taylor series . The series on the right is the expectation value of f ( a + X ) , where X is a Poisson distributed random variable that takes the value jh with probability e − t / h ( t / h ) j / j ! . Hence ,

Several methods exist for the calculation of Taylor series of a large number of functions . One can attempt to use the definition of the Taylor series , though this often requires generalizing the form of the coefficients according to a readily apparent pattern . Alternatively , one can use manipulations such as substitution , multiplication or division , addition or subtraction of standard Taylor series to construct the Taylor series of a function , by virtue of Taylor series being power series . In some cases , one can also derive the Taylor series by repeatedly applying integration by parts . Particularly convenient is the use of computer algebra systems to calculate Taylor series .

Classically , algebraic functions are defined by an algebraic equation , and transcendental functions ( including those discussed above ) are defined by some property that holds for them , such as a differential equation . For example , the exponential function is the function which is equal to its own derivative everywhere , and assumes the value 1 at the origin . However , one may equally well define an analytic function by its Taylor series . Taylor series are used to define functions and " operators " in diverse areas of mathematics . In particular , this is true in areas where the classical definitions of functions break down . For example , using Taylor series , one may define analytical functions of matrices and operators , such as the matrix exponential or matrix logarithm . In other areas , such as formal analysis , it is more convenient to work directly with the power series themselves . Thus one may define a solution of a differential equation as a power series which , one hopes to prove , is the Taylor series of the desired solution .

For example , for a function that depends on two variables , x and y , the Taylor series to second order about the point ( a , b ) is A second-order Taylor series expansion of a scalar-valued function of more than one variable can be written compactly as where <formula> is the gradient of <formula> evaluated at <formula> and <formula> is the Hessian matrix . Applying the multi-index notation the Taylor series for several variables becomes which is to be understood as a still more abbreviated multi-index version of the first equation of this paragraph , again in full analogy to the single variable case .

The trigonometric Fourier series enables one to express a periodic function ( or a function defined on a closed interval [ a , b ] ) as an infinite sum of trigonometric functions ( sines and cosines ) . In this sense , the Fourier series is analogous to Taylor series , since the latter allows one to express a function as an infinite sum of powers . Nevertheless , the two series differ from each other in several relevant issues : Obviously the finite truncations of the Taylor series of f ( x ) about the point x = a are all exactly equal to f at a . In contrast , the Fourier series is computed by integrating over an entire interval , so there is generally no such point where all the finite truncations of the series are exact . Indeed , the computation of Taylor series requires the knowledge of the function on an arbitrary small neighbourhood of a point , whereas the computation of the Fourier series requires knowing the function on its whole domain interval . In a certain sense one could say that the Taylor series is " local " and the Fourier series is " global . "

The Taylor series is defined for a function which has infinitely many derivatives at a single point , whereas the Fourier series is defined for any integrable function . In particular , the function could be nowhere differentiable . ( For example , f ( x ) could be a Weierstrass function . ) The convergence of both series has very different properties . Even if the Taylor series has positive convergence radius , the resulting series may not coincide with the function ; but if the function is analytic then the series converges pointwise to the function , and uniformly on every compact subset of the convergence interval . Concerning the Fourier series , if the function is square-integrable then the series converges in quadratic mean , but additional requirements are needed to ensure the pointwise or uniform convergence ( for instance , if the function is periodic and of class C1 then the convergence is uniform ) . Finally , in practice one wants to approximate the function with a finite number of terms , let 's say with a Taylor polynomial or a partial sum of the trigonometric series , respectively . In the case of the Taylor series the error is very small in a neighbourhood of the point where it is computed , while it may be very large at a distant point . In the case of the Fourier series the error is distributed along the domain of the function .

The Chariot was an American metalcore band from Douglasville , Georgia , that existed from 2003 to 2013 . The last lineup consisted of drummer David Kennedy , vocalist and bandleader Josh Scogin , and guitarists Brandon Henderson and Stephen Harrison . The band experienced frequent lineup changes since its inception , with Scogin being the only original member . The band played an abrasive style of hardcore that does not adhere to typical stylings such as melodic / abrasive dynamics and harmonic vocals . They built a reputation around their powerful live performances , with Scogin 's lyrics covering topics like materialism , personal struggle , current events , politics , and Christian themes . Their music was critically acclaimed as something " that will melt your face and leave you wanting more . " The band was formed by Scogin shortly after he left his position of vocalist in Norma Jean . In 2004 , a record deal was signed with Solid State Records and a debut album was released , titled Everything Is Alive , Everything Is Breathing , Nothing Is Dead , and Nothing Is Bleeding . The band toured constantly after that . The Chariot released the Unsung EP in 2005 , which was then followed by three successful studio albums : The Fiancée in 2007 , Wars and Rumors of Wars in 2009 , and Long Live in 2010 . The band entered the studio in May 2012 to record their fifth full-length album titled One Wing which was released August 28 , 2012 . The Chariot disbanded following a farewell tour in late 2013 .

The Chariot was formed by Josh Scogin almost immediately after leaving his previous band Norma Jean , a metalcore group based in Douglasville , Georgia . He recorded one album with them titled Bless the Martyr and Kiss the Child in 2002 . Later that year , following Norma Jean 's set at Furnace Fest , Scogin shocked the audience and his unaware bandmates by announcing his departure . Scogin stated that his departure was not the result of internal conflict , but a personal choice . The event generated a public outcry from fans in hardcore circles . Scogin returned to Douglasville in 2003 and started the Chariot with other musicians in the area ; the first lineup included guitarists Keller Harbin and Tony " Taco " Medina , bassist Joshua Beiser , and drummer Jeff Carter . The band 's name was inspired by the Biblical story of Elijah and the chariot of fire . In 2004 , a record contract was signed with Solid State Records , a metal subdivision of Tooth & Nail Records and their first recorded song titled " It Is Usually the Boys Who Cry Wolf That Grow up to Be the Men Who Cry Sanctuary " was released on the compilation " This Is Solid State , Volume 5 " . This song was later re-recorded as " Yellow Dress , Locked Knees " on their debut . The band traveled to Atlanta , Georgia and worked on their debut album with Matt Goldman . The entire album was recorded live . The album was released in November and titled Everything Is Alive , Everything Is Breathing , Nothing Is Dead , and Nothing Is Bleeding , a parody of albums that featured morbid names . The album debuted at No. 23 on Top Heatseekers , and received favorable reviews from critics . Touring followed with As Cities Burn , He Is Legend , Far-less and Showbread on the Young Bloods Tour in Winter .

Medina and Carter left the band soon after ; they were replaced by Brian Khounvichit and Mark Nicks respectively . Carter went on to form the progressive death metal band , Deus Invictus . Nicks was later replaced by drummer Jake Ryan . In September 2005 , The Chariot began a 27-city tour at Poughkeepsie , New York with High on Fire , Every Time I Die , and The Red Chord . An EP , titled Unsung , was released at the beginning of December . It featured two new tracks and four re-recordings from their debut and was well received among critics . The band played shows with labelmates As Cities Burn , mewithoutYou , and Underoath later that month . Touring continued through 2006 as the band shared a national tour with P.O.D. in spring and garnered a spot in the Sounds of the Underground Tour with As I Lay Dying that summer . In June 2006 , Beiser and Harbin stepped down and were replaced by bassist Dan Eaton and guitarist Jon Terry respectively . The two men had been longtime friends of the band . The Chariot embarked on the Youngbloods II Tour in fall with Solid State labelmates August Burns Red , Destroy The Runner , and Inhale Exhale . In January 2007 , the band toured through Europe with Becoming the Archetype , and Shaped by Fate . By this time , yet another bass player had been recruited — Jon " KC Wolf " Kindler . In April of the same year , after delays relating to lineup changes , their second album , The Fiancée , was released . The record was produced by Matt Goldman . The writing and recording process had been driven by time constraints . " It was actually a very easy record to write , " said Scogin , " It came more naturally to us . " However , Scogin waited until the music was written before writing lyrics , an exercise he vowed never to attempt again . Hayley Williams of Paramore made a guest performance on the track " Then Came To Kill " as did Aaron Weiss of mewithoutYou when he played the harmonica on " Forgive Me Nashville " ; Scogin had been friends with both artists for many years . The Fiancée broke the Billboard 200 — it debuted at No. 169 , selling 6,800 copies — and was well received in the Christian and secular markets . The group played a release tour with Misery Signals , I Am Ghost , and I Hate Sally , and then made a short run on the Warped Tour in summer . Another leg of The Fiancée Tour extended into spring 2008 with LoveHateHero , Alesana , Our Last Night , and Sky Eats Airplane . The lineup underwent another drastic change in mid-2008 , as Jake Ryan , Dan Eaton and Jon Terry all decided to step down . Ryan and Eaton went on to form the indie pop band Queens Club and were signed to Tooth & Nail Records .

The group 's third album , titled Wars and Rumors of Wars , was released in May 2009 . The lineup changed once again , leaving Scogin as the only member to appear on their first two releases . The album title was inspired by Matthew 24 : 6 , which contains the passage " You will be hearing of wars and rumors of wars ... " Scogin explained that the album title referred to internal conflict that people experience , not literal war . The band hand-made the artwork and liner notes for the first 25,000 copies of the album . Wars and Rumors of War debuted at No. 112 on the Billboard 200 , their highest to date . Critical reception was very positive about the release . The Chariot performed on the Scream the Prayer Tour with Haste the Day , Sleeping Giant , Oh , Sleeper , and Project 86 that summer . Beginning late November , The Chariot and a group of hand picked artists , including Horse the Band supported Norma Jean who headlined the nationwide Explosions 2009 Tour .

The band announced via Twitter that they were entering the studio in May to record their next album . The album is called One Wing , and was released August 28 , 2012 . In June 2012 , longtime bassist Jon ( KC Wolf ) Kindler left the band to return to college . The band opted not to replace Kindler , continuing as a four-piece . The bass on One Wing has been recorded by both Henderson and Harrison . A track from the album , " In , " premiered on Alternative Press on August 16 . The Chariot had their final tour in October / November 2013 with Glass Cloud , Rebuker , Birds in Row and To the Wind .

The band 's music is characterized by a metal sound , and the screamed vocals of frontman Josh Scogin . Journalists have frequently referred to the music as " chaotic " ; Allmusic writer Alex Henderson described it as a " dense , clobbering sledgehammer " , while Brian Shultz of Alternative Press called it " manically pounding , distortion-soaked exercises of catharsis " . The Chariot has often been labeled a metalcore band . However , the music generally defies genre standards like melodic / abrasive dynamics and harmonizing vocals ; it wouldn 't leave room for the " nonstop firestorm of exploding drums , heaving guitars , and visceral shrieking , " as Allmusic writer Corey Apar put it . The band utilizes time changes and start-stop shifts , and typically write very short songs . Some journalists believe the music is challenging and an acquired taste . In interviews , Josh Scogin has described the band as “ heavy punk rock ” , doing away with genres and subgenres , and has also debunked many of these labels . “ Sometimes people refer to us as mathcore , which I think is a very incorrect statement , because I feel like that ’ s a very pre-calculated , ‘ this is weird because this time signature doesn ’ t go with this time … ’ . It ’ s very planned out . We ’ re not that smart . ”

Live performances are very important to the band . " We love playing live , " said Scogin , " That 's what this band are all about : playing live shows . " This mentality leaked into their recording process : the band 's first album was recorded entirely live in one take . Their next two efforts followed more traditional recording sensibilities : " We may go in and [ fix ] this one part , " explained Scogin , " but [ ... ] there 's lots of stuff we probably should have tightened up . [ Laughs . ] But that [ keeps ] it feeling like a real record . " Despite their attentiveness to the recording process , Scogin has maintained that their focal point is live performances , " ... recording records , that 's all circled around hopefully bringing more kids to the live show so we can perform for them . " The band 's shows have built up a reputation ; MTV called them " the thing of metalcore legend " . When tasked to describe their set on the Scream the Prayer Tour in HM Magazine , Corey Erb wrote :

Artists who possessed strong showmanship skills have largely influenced Scogin ; some of these artists include James Brown , Frank Sinatra , Jerry Lee Lewis , and Elvis Presley . He is also fond of Arcade Fire , The Beatles , Björk , Interpol , and The Killers . In an interview , Scogin expressed a desire to have seen At The Drive-In and Nirvana before they disbanded . Scogin 's introspective lyrics have covered topics like materialism , death , and the Nashville Christian music industry . The lyrics for Wars and Rumors of Wars were formed after a family loss : " ... only a year ago my father passed away . And I hate to say this , because it sounds like such a band-dude thing to say , but the lyrics are a lot darker than any other record just because of how personal they are for me . " Scogin usually refers to his lyrics as poems and has maintained that " a song is never finished but abandoned . " " ... as an artist you can forever be changing a song or making a song ' better ' or whatever but the moment that you stop recording and send it off to be mastered you have not ' finished ' the song … you have only abandoned the song and that is how it will stay forever . " His lyrics sometimes espouse Christian themes and beliefs , albeit subtly . For example , the track " Yellow Dress : Locked Knees " from Everything ... contains the Spanish lyrics " Jesus , yo quiero que este mundo te conozca . " ; when translated , it says " Jesus , I want this world to know You . " The song " And Shot Each Other " from The Fiancée fades out into a Sacred Harp choir singing the song ' Child of Grace ' , which features the lyrics " How happy is a child of grace , who feels his sins forgiven / This world , he cries , is not my place / I seek a place in Heaven . "

The Chariot is frequently called a Christian band , which Scogin agreed with in a 2005 interview : " We are Christians in a band therefore we are a Christian band . We are not ashamed of our beliefs but we don ’ t force feed people what we believe either . " In 2006 , he reaffirmed his previous statements and further opined , " When I was growing up , if I liked [ a band ] , I listened to it — and I went to the shows . If I didn 't , I didn 't . It wasn 't like , ' Oh , they don 't believe the same thing I do , ' [ ... ] People care too much about the fashion of it all . To me , a band 's either good or they ain 't , and that 's the only thing that should matter . "

Killer7 ( キラー7 , Kirā Sebun , stylized as killer7 ) is a 2005 action-adventure video game for the Nintendo GameCube and PlayStation 2 , developed by Grasshopper Manufacture and published by Capcom . The game was written and directed by Goichi Suda , also known by the nickname Suda51 , and produced by Hiroyuki Kobayashi . The game follows an elite group of assassins called the " killer7 " . The assassins , physical manifestations of a man named Harman Smith , perform hits on behalf of the United States government . Through these missions , the killer7 uncover a deeper conspiracy regarding the role of Japan in US politics and secrets about the nature of their organization . Killer7 features first-person shooter elements and a unique on rails control scheme , but the core adventure-style gameplay has been compared to Myst and Snatcher . Killer7 was Suda51 's first game released outside Japan . It received polarized reviews due to its unconventional control scheme and complex noir plot . The game 's score , visual style and thought-provoking story received wide praise from most critics that considered as the best aspects of the game and lead to several accolades and nominations . While some reviewers appreciated the stripped-down controls and stylized arthouse approach , others panned it as confusing and restricting . Despite these setbacks , Killer7 's cult appeal led to remakes of Suda51 's older works and the successful launch of No More Heroes .

The player controls the on-screen character , a member of the killer7 group , from a third-person view using the gamepad . The gameplay consists of elements of first-person shooter and action-adventure game with restricted movement ( i.e. " on rails " ) — rather than allow free motion , the game limits the on-screen character to predetermined paths through the environment . The on-screen character moves forward by holding a button and reverses direction with another button press . At intersections , the player may choose which path to take . Progress is made by navigating the environment and solving puzzles . Some puzzles require the talents of a specific killer7 member . The player may switch between available members via a menu in the pause screen at any time . Other puzzles require magical rings or other items collected throughout the game . Combat in Killer7 occurs when the player encounters enemies called " Heaven Smiles " . Smiles announce their presence with a laughing sound effect and are initially invisible . The player must switch to a first-person viewpoint and scan the surroundings to reveal Smiles . While in first-person view , movement is disabled and the analog stick aims the character 's gun . Targeting specific body parts will disable them ; for example , shooting off a leg will cause a Smile to fall to the ground and crawl toward the player . The player may aim for a " critical point " that instantly destroys the Smile . Smiles that get too close will explode and injure the character . If a character dies , players can use Garcian Smith to retrieve the fallen character 's head and bring them back to life ; if Garcian dies , then the game ends .

Defeated Smiles yield " thick blood " and " thin blood " . Thick blood functions similarly to experience points , and players gain more by shooting Smiles ' critical points . The player may redeem thick blood for " serum " while in " Harman 's Room " , checkpoints that appear throughout the game . Serum is used to improve the attributes of the characters such as " power " and " speed " . This also unlocks special abilities for the characters . Players may save their game to a memory card in designated Harman 's Rooms . Thin blood is used to recover the characters ' stamina and fuel special abilities .

Killer7 takes place in an alternate version of Earth in the early 21st century . After a treaty ends all international conflict , the world powers destroy all nuclear weapons by firing them into the upper atmosphere and intercepting them with other missiles . This event becomes known as " Fireworks " and symbolizes world peace to the general populace . In an effort to combat terrorism , pandemic disease , and cyberterrorism , the International Ethics Committee ( IEC ) shuts down all air travel and public use of the Internet . Air transportation is replaced by a system of intercontinental expressways . However , a new terrorist group called " Heaven Smile " appears , targeting the United Nations ( UN ) and IEC . The members of Heaven Smile are humans who have been infected with a virus that evokes a desire to kill . Factory-produced Smiles are given a " bomb-organ " that allows them to explode at will , their principal means of attack . In this Earth , Japanese politics are dominated by two parties : the UN Party and the Liberal Party . The UN Party is more powerful and moves to end the Asian Security Treaty and sever ties with the United States ( US ) . The UN Party seized control of the Japanese government through the wisdom of the " Yakumo Cabinet Policy " , a secret document which details how to run the " ideal nation " . It was written by the Union 7 , young members of the Liberal Party who went on to found the UN Party . The US government is also eager to sever relations with Japan , seeing the country as a hindrance and of little economic value . The interaction between Japan and the US is a central source of conflict in Killer7 .

The player controls the members of a group of assassins called the " killer7 " . The group is led by an elderly man in a wheelchair named Harman Smith , who exhibits " Multifoliate Personae Phenomenon " . This condition allows him to physically transform into one of his seven assassin personae : African American Garcian Smith , aggressive Irish American Dan Smith , barefoot Japanese American female KAEDE Smith , albino Briton Kevin Smith , Puerto Rican Coyote Smith , young Chinese American Con Smith , and Mexican American luchador MASK de Smith . These people were gifted killers in life and Harman absorbed their souls through his condition after their deaths . The killer7 were temporarily incapacitated in an incident 50 years ago , in which the members of the group were systematically tracked and killed while performing a job at the Union Hotel in Pennsylvania . Garcian , whose power is to revive fallen personae , became the dominant personality as a result . In this capacity , he receives orders from the frail Harman when his consciousness is " awake " and accepts jobs from Christopher Mills , who hires the killer7 on behalf of the US government . Multifoliate Personae Phenomenon also causes Harman and his personae to see " remnant psyches " — ghosts of their past victims . Iwazaru , a man in a bondage suit , and Travis Bell , the killer7 's first target , are the main remnant psyches who aid them throughout the game . The primary antagonist is an old friend of Harman 's named Kun Lan . He has the " Hand of God " , a supernatural power that produces the Heaven Smile virus .

The game opens with a conversation between Garcian Smith and Christopher Mills about a new job for the killer7 . The assassins battle their way to the top of a building which has become infested with Heaven Smiles . Harman confronts the source of the Smiles , an angel-like figure , but she is merely Kun Lan 's puppet . Harman and Kun Lan discuss the current state of the world before the mission ends . In the subsequent missions , the killer7 target a number of individuals on behalf of the US government or for personal reasons . They kill Andrei Ulmeyda , a Texan postal worker who established a successful company based on the Yakumo , when he becomes infected with the Heaven Smile virus . Dan Smith confronts Curtis Blackburn , his former mentor and murderer , when Mills informs the group that Blackburn is running an organ trafficking business that targets young girls . Their penultimate mission pits them against the " Handsome Men " , a group of sentai rangers who assassinate a US politician . The central plot arc concerns the true nature of US – Japan relations . To distance itself from Japan , the US fires a volley of two hundred intercontinental ballistic missiles at Japan and contracts the killer7 to eliminate Toru Fukushima , the head of the UN Party . However , an assassin posing as Fukushima 's secretary kills him first in an attempt to reclaim the Yakumo document for the Liberal Party , believing its wisdom would help the party to regain political power . Shortly thereafter , Kenjiro Matsuoka ( nicknamed " Matsuken " ) kills two senior members of the UN Party to become its new leader , under the influence of Kun Lan . In the end , the killer7 defeat the two UN Party members who had been reanimated by Kun Lan as Japan is destroyed by the missiles .

In their final mission , the killer7 seek Matsuken , who leads the 10 million UN Party members who live in the US . The government fears that if they converge on a single state , they could win a seat in the United States Senate . Garcian travels to Coburn Elementary School near Seattle , Washington and discovers tapes that reveal the school as a front for the UN Party to train children as assassins . The tapes focus on Emir Parkreiner , a gifted killer trained at the school . Garcian encounters Matsuken , who claims that Japan has used Coburn to control the course of US politics since its founding in 1780 . The assassins battle a group of invincible Smiles and all but Garcian are incapacitated . Garcian travels to the Union Hotel where he witnesses visions of the other members being killed in their rooms . At the top , he discovers that his true identity is Emir Parkreiner , the one who killed the killer7 at the Union Hotel over 50 years ago . Following that incident , Harman absorbed Emir as a persona and Emir 's memories were lost . Three years later , Garcian arrives at Battleship Island in Japan to destroy the last Heaven Smile . He meets with Matsuken , who presents Garcian with a choice : let him live , which allows Japan to mount an assault on the US ; or kill him , which lets the US discover Japan 's role in rigging American elections — US forces destroy Japan 's last stronghold , Battleship Island , in retaliation and wipe Japan off the map . Regardless of the player 's choice , Garcian finds that the last Heaven Smile is Iwazaru , whose real identity is Kun Lan , and kills him . However , Harman and Kun Lan are revealed to be immortal beings , representing a dialectic struggle between opposites , which persists a century in the future in Shanghai as they continue their eternal battle .

Development for Killer7 began in mid-2002 as part of the Capcom Five , a set of games overseen by Shinji Mikami and intended to be exclusive to the Nintendo GameCube . Capcom produced the games to bring new intellectual property to the video game industry , which the company viewed as stagnant . Killer7 's gameplay mechanics were finalized late in development because most resources went to story and visual work . Director Suda51 wrote the scenario based on a plot he conceived together with Mikami , and later decided on the unconventional control scheme as a deconstruction of how gamers play and to " create new expression " . Complex controls and combos were omitted to present a system that fosters easy progression for the player . Producer Hiroyuki Kobayashi described the controls as " intuitive " and stated that the team wanted players to " think when they are playing " so they can enjoy the mystery in the story . The long development process culminated in several delays , the last of which was due to an artistic desire to release the game on July 7 ( 7 / 7 ) . Suda51 drew influence from film noir , particularly the theme of multiple personality disorder , and called Killer7 a " hardboiled action-adventure " . Hiro Sugiyama , Peter Saville , and American comic book artists , such as Adrian Tomine , inspired the artistic design and aesthetic . Suda51 noted the inclusion of cel animation in Western and Japanese anime styles was meant to legitimize video games as an art form by competing with traditional art forms in their stage . Kobayashi commented that Killer7 is " styled more as an interactive story than a traditional game . " Suda also drew from yakuza film Battles Without Honor and Humanity : Hiroshima Deathmatch . His experience as an undertaker had a powerful effect on the portrayal of death in his games . The game reflects his interest in professional wrestling ; Suda51 included a luchador character , MASK de Smith , and conducted interviews and attended promotional events while wearing a lucha libre mask . Reflecting on his work , Suda51 considers Killer7 his proudest achievement .

Killer7 received divisive reviews and sparked debates about depictions of sex and violence in video games and the status of video games as art . James Mielke of 1UP.com likened the game 's high-contrast art style to noir and neo-noir film such as Se7en . He found that despite poor pacing and stilted gameplay , the " quirky scripting and edgy plot " were strong draws , and called Killer7 one of " most artfully designed footnotes in gaming history " . Edge magazine 's reviewers echoed this sentiment and predicted that the game would " [ pave the way ] for future creative leeway " , crediting the director with an unwavering artistic vision . Eurogamer 's Kristan Reed was keenly aware of the game 's limited appeal , calling it " a concept game , an arthouse game , a simple game , an often beautiful game , but most certainly never an everyman 's game " . Yahtzee Croshaw of The Escapist commends the game for " showing exactly what can be done when you flaunt all established convention and just start exploring what can really be done with gaming as an art form " . Virtually all aspects of the game had their proponents and detractors . Greg Kasavin of GameSpot praised the unity of " great-looking camera work with simple controls " and compared its " thought-provoking " storyline to Metal Gear Solid , while a GamePro reviewer criticized those features , calling the controls limited , the cel-shading dull , and the story incoherent . Kasavin complimented the game 's eclectic soundtrack , excellent voice acting , and distinctive sound effects , while the GamePro reviewer panned them as minimalist and irritating . IGN 's Matt Casamassina likened the control scheme to " old-school adventure games like Myst and Snatcher " and commended Suda51 for making a " cult hit " , " erupting with style , mood and undiluted craziness " . Casamassina was also impressed by the quality of the anime-style cutscenes featured in the latter half of the game .

The IGN , GameSpot , and GameSpy reviews noted the GameCube version features superior graphics , substantially faster loading times , and more responsive controls than the PlayStation 2 version , resulting in lower scores for the latter . Nevertheless , IGN called it the 94th best PlayStation 2 game . Nintendo Power claimed that Killer7 is a " highly rewarding " experience for dedicated gamers . Nintendo World Report writer Karl Castaneda also remarked that , despite repetitive gameplay , it was " still fun " . Charles Herold of The New York Times was less forgiving and commented that the lack of new features beyond the first hour made the remaining experience boring and annoying . Despite its mixed reception , a number of video game publications recognized Killer7 's unconventional gameplay and innovative style . At GameSpot 's " Best and Worst of 2005 " awards , the game was nominated for Best Story , Best GameCube Game , Most Outrageous Game , Most Gratuitous Use of F------ Swearing , and won Best New Character ( Harman Smith ) and Most Innovative Game . IGN GameCube similarly nominated it for Game of the Year , Most Innovative Design , and Best Artistic Design and awarded it Best Adventure Game , Best Story , and Best Game No One Played . IGN later named Killer7 the 20th best GameCube game of all time . The game had a large presence at the 2005 Nintendo Power Awards , winning Best New Character ( Harman Smith ) .

In August 2005 , Jack Thompson , an activist who campaigns against video games , demanded that the Entertainment Software Rating Board ( ESRB ) change its rating for Killer7 from " M " ( for Mature , ages 17 and up ) to " AO " ( for Adults Only , ages 18 and up ) . He cited Casamassina 's review of the game at IGN , claiming that " full-blown sex sequences " present in the game would be harmful to minors . Casamassina rebutted that the scene in question involved two fully clothed adults and that a similar scene in a film would garner " only a PG-13 or , worst , R-rating " .

Reviewers quickly identified Killer7 as a cult game with limited appeal . IGN lamented that its experimental style was not conducive to high sales , naming it GameCube 's Best Game No One Played in their 2005 awards . IGN 's Casamassina later placed it fourth in his Top 10 Tuesday : Underrated and Underappreciated Games feature . Despite modest sales , Killer7 's cult success prompted the development of remakes of Suda51 's older Japan-only games , The Silver Case and Flower , Sun , and Rain . In 2007 , Grasshopper Manufacture released Suda51 's No More Heroes to critical and commercial success . In addition to an original soundtrack and comic book adaptation , Capcom published Hand in killer7 , a companion book that explains the plot in more depth . Kinetic Underground , the company that handled the comic book , also released a number of figurines depicting characters from the game .

Killer7 Original Sound Track was released on June 20 , 2005 by Sony Music Entertainment . It features 55 compositions by Masafumi Takada and 6 by Jun Fukuda across two discs . Takada put a large emphasis on ambient music due to the genre 's ability to draw in the player . He called his soundtrack a " translation of the text " of the game and sought to retell the story through music . Carolyn Gudmundson of GamesRadar praised the soundtrack 's varied style , a " moody , atmosphereric base punctuated with spikes of manic energy " . She singled out " Rave On " , a track heard before mini-boss battles , as an excellent example of the latter . GameSpy 's Phil Theobald had similar compliments for " Rave On " and other more subdued pieces that slowly " work [ their ] way into your mind " .

In 2006 , Devil 's Due Publishing released a comic book adaptation of Killer7 , written and drawn by Kinetic Underground staff . The planned 12-issue limited series was cancelled after four issues . Players who preordered Killer7 through EB Games received a special " Issue # 0 " as a bonus , and " Issue # ½ " was available at the 2005 San Diego Comic-Con. Writer Arvid Nelson described the story as a " mutant cross-breeding of John Woo and Quentin Tarantino " , and Devil 's Due President Josh Blaylock commented that Killer7 's style was perfect for the comic book medium . In adapting the game , Nelson admitted that the plot was streamlined to maintain a comprehensible story , but noted that the " video game doesn 't spoon-feed you information ... That 's how the comic 's going to be , too " .

" Cold Comfort " is the fourth episode of the second series of the British dark comedy anthology television programme Inside No. 9 . The episode , which was written and directed by Steve Pemberton and Reece Shearsmith , was first broadcast on 16 April 2015 on BBC Two . Most of " Cold Comfort " is composed of a stream from a fixed camera on the desk of Andy , the protagonist , with smaller pictures on the side of the screen , in the style of a CCTV feed . " Cold Comfort " was filmed over two and a half days in Twickenham , and was , like " A Quiet Night In " from Inside No. 9 's first series , highly experimental . It was Pemberton and Shearsmith 's directorial debut . The episode starred Pemberton , Shearsmith , Jane Horrocks , Nikki Amuka-Bird and Tony Way as volunteers at Crisis Support Line , a crisis hotline . The story follows Andy ( Pemberton ) , who is starting at the call centre . After taking a particularly disturbing call from Chloe , a suicidal teenage girl , Andy begins to struggle , but he is offered support by his supervisor George ( Shearsmith ) , the gossipy Liz ( Horrocks ) and the officious Joanne ( Amuka-Bird ) . Andy is later joined by Michael ( Way ) . Vilma Hollingbery , Vicky Hall and members of the comedy group Gein 's Family Giftshop ( Edward Easton , Kath Hughes and James Meehan ) voiced various callers , with the Gein 's Family Giftshop comedians also appearing as on-screen extras , playing unnamed call centre volunteers .

The second series of Inside No. 9 written in 2014 , and then filmed from the end of 2014 into early 2015 . The idea for " Cold Comfort " began with the call centre , with Pemberton having kept a newspaper article on the subject from 2005 as a potential inspiration . Once the writers had the idea for the setting , they allowed the story to grow out of this . The pair visited a large number of locations — including a number of colleges — before settling on the one used , which was in Twickenham , rejecting many because they did not look enough like offices . They had three days at the location , but completed filming in two and a half .

" Cold Comfort " stars Pemberton as Andy , a new volunteer , and Shearsmith as George , Andy 's supervisor . According to Shearsmith , he and Pemberton do not typically write Inside No. 9 scripts with particular actors in mind for roles , and nor do they typically write roles specifically for themselves . They were unsure , for a long time , on which characters they should take , initially considering having Shearsmith play Andy and Pemberton play George . Shearsmith said that this felt like the more " obvious " option , but the characters were switched as they " thought it would be slightly more unusual " to have it that way around . As each episode of Inside No. 9 features new characters , the writers were able to attract actors who might have been unwilling to commit to an entire series . Jane Horrocks , Nikki Amuka-Bird and Tony Way star respectively as Liz , Joanne and Michael , other volunteers at the call centre . The characters of Liz and Joanne have strongly differing approaches to their roles as volunteers , with Joanne focussing on detachment and Liz on involvement . Both approaches , for Pemberton , have advantages and disadvantages . Jane 's desk is adorned with various trinkets , including ornaments and pictures . These were Horrocks 's idea , and , for Pemberton and Shearsmith , served to make viewers suspicious of her from the start . Horrocks was chosen because she would be able to add humour while still keeping to the tight timings necessary for the episode ; many of her lines were improvised . The character of Michael begins to work at the centre during the episode . Pemberton and Shearsmith considered having it mentioned that he had been sent by " Pauline from Wood Green " , a reference to the stage version of The League of Gentlemen 's Pauline , who had been based at Wood Green . However , this was not included in the final episode .

Edward Easton , Vilma Hollingbery , Kath Hughes , James Meehan and Vicky Hall provide the voices of various people who call in to the centre . Some of the voice actors were drawn from the comedy group Gein 's Family Giftshop , the performing members of which are Hughes , Easton and Meehan . After watching a Gein 's Family Giftshop performance , Pemberton and Shearsmith had invited the members to star in Inside No. 9 . The comedians then suggested that they also appear on-screen as extras , playing unnamed call centre volunteers . Hollingberry , who voiced " Ivy " , an old woman caller , had previously starred in Pemberton and Shearsmith 's Psychoville as Mrs Wren / Mrs Ladybirdface . She was one of the few actors whom Pemberton and Shearsmith used in both series .

Pemberton and Shearsmith , in addition to writing and starring in " Cold Comfort " , directed the episode . This episode — one of two in the second series that they jointly directed — was their directorial debut . The pair did not know , while writing for the series , which episodes they would be directing , meaning that their writing was unlikely to be influenced by the knowledge . Pemberton and Shearsmith had always intended to try directing , and the second series of Inside No. 9 offered them the opportunity . David Kerr , who had directed all of the episodes in the first series , was unable to return for the second . Guillem Morales and Dan Zeff each took on directorial duties for two episodes , while Pemberton and Shearsmith decided to direct the remaining two . Shearsmith said in an interview that the pair had considered directing episodes in which they did not appear much , but scheduling concerns left them with " Cold Comfort " and " Nana 's Party " ; episodes which feature the writers quite heavily . By contrast , Pemberton said that he and Shearsmith , knowing that they were going to be directing two episodes , deliberately chose " Cold Comfort " because the fixed cameras made filming a lot simpler , though Shearsmith said that the filming was more complex than they initially anticipated . For Horrocks , it was " lovely to be directed " by Pemberton and Shearsmith , as she " really [ liked ] their choices and ... [ loves ] their work " . Shearsmith said that he found directing the episode " exhausting " ; he found little time to rest during filming , as if he was not directly involved in filming , he was involved in making directorial decisions .

The episode progresses mostly through footage streamed from a fixed camera in booth nine of the call centre setting . Streams from other cameras are displayed on the side of the screen , in the style of a CCTV feed . The idea was inspired by a clip of a serial killer 's interview with the CIA which Shearsmith had seen online ; this , too , had a main feed with three smaller feeds giving different views of the scene . The writers felt that the multiple screens both served a narrative function and raised the tension . For much of the episode , viewers simply watch characters taking calls . Exras are seen moving back and forth in the smaller screens , with Pemberton having initially been keen for things to be happening away from the main feed . However , he was somewhat frustrated with the result , with the same extra moving on numerous occasions throughout the episode . Shearsmith felt that a whole series filmed in the same manner " would be a bit wearing on the eye " , but that the style could be used for a single episode . The format presented certain technical difficulties . The episode was filmed in very long takes — some as long as five or six minutes — without any cuts . This meant that the actors could not make any errors , but the result was " something you don 't normally see " . Pemberton said that the episode would " either be brilliantly tense or incredibly boring " . Timing during filming had to be precise , though scenes could be cut earlier or start later than was anticipated . For example , an earlier introduction of Joanne was cut in the final episode . Other unused versions of scenes included a more violent version of George 's attack on Liz and a version of the final scene with a gunshot . The gunshot was removed on the recommendation of Jon Plowman , Inside No. 9 's executive producer , which led to some debate ; Shearsmith , for example , preferred the original version .

Alex Thompson , the episode 's sound recordist , arranged the phones so that the actors could speak to each other in real-time . Pemberton and Shearsmith wanted this so that the voices would not have to be recorded in a studio later and added in ADR . The voice of " Chloe " — the identify of whom is key to the story — presented a particular technical challenge , as the writers wanted to ensure that her identity was not revealed the first time her voice is heard . First , the production team recorded Shearsmith playing George-as-Chloe , and then a number of actresses recorded their versions of Shearsmith playing George-as-Chloe . Of these , one — Hall — was chosen to lend her voice to Chloe . Shearsmith then re-recorded his voice , imitating Hall 's version of George-as-Chloe . Hall and Shearsmith 's respective performances of George-as-Chloe could then be merged together for the final episode . The first time viewers hear " Chloe " , her voice is mostly Hall 's ; as the episode progresses , more of Shearsmith 's voice is audible . For Shearsmith , this did not represent the production team cheating the viewers , as viewers ' experiences are filtered through Andy 's experiences . The first time viewers hear Chloe , they — like Andy — experience her as a teenage girl . As most of the episode was filmed in real-time , George is visible making calls as Chloe , meaning that he hides in plain sight . Footage of Shearsmith playing George-as-Chloe in George 's office — used in the final episode — was filmed separately to the rest of the episode , as a camera set-up in George 's office would have been visible on one of the main cameras .

Pemberton compared " Cold Comfort " to " A Quiet Night In " , the second episode of the first series of Inside No. 9 , a sentiment echoed by some critics . Both episodes were highly experimental — " A Quiet Night In " being mostly silent and " Cold Comfort " being filmed mostly from a fixed camera — something which the writers felt suits anthology format . On the other hand , according to Pemberton , as " Cold Comfort " is " static and all about listening " , it is , in a sense , the " polar opposite " of " A Quiet Night In " . Though all episodes in the series were very different in tone , Pemberton felt that " Cold Comfort " was " the most extreme experiment " .

Andy starts to volunteer at the Comfort Support Line ( CSL ) , a crisis hotline , after the death of his sister . His supervisor George takes him through the procedure for calls , and Andy chats to the more experienced Liz . He finds his first few calls difficult , and Joanne , a volunteer who shares a mutual distaste with Liz , advises him not to get emotionally invested in the callers . Andy takes a call from Chloe , a 16-year-old girl with problems at home . Chloe says that she has taken a drug overdose , and Andy sings " Shine " by Take That to her , but , when he finishes , Chloe is no longer on the line . He immediately takes a call from an elderly woman distraught that her cat has died , but responds insensitively , and hangs up . The following day , George thinks Liz is breaking the rules by taking a personal call ; he gets angry and wrestles the handset from her . Later , Andy is upset that he listened to Chloe in her final moments , and Liz , who has made a complaint about George 's conduct , tells him that she took a call from an ex-soldier , in tears because his mother committed suicide following the death of her cat . Andy realises that the man 's mother is the caller from the previous night . George advises that Andy will not face any repercussions , and asks Andy to help Michael , new to the centre , with his first call . Chloe calls in and speaks to Michael , again claiming that she has taken an overdose . Andy snatches the phone and shouts at Chloe , hanging up on her .

Following her argument with George , Liz is asked to leave CSL , and a small party is held in the workspace . During the party , Chloe calls the helpline again , asking to speak to Andy . Andy tells Chloe that her hoax call caused an old woman 's death , but Chloe says that this was Andy 's fault . She repeats what Andy had said to the old woman about her cat . Andy stays late in his cubicle and goes to George 's office , realising that " Chloe " must be someone who works at CSL . He accuses Joanne , who has just arrived , but she says she came back for her bag . He plans to get evidence from the CCTV footage and contact the police . Looking through CCTV footage , he and Joanne discover that it is George who made the calls . Unbeknownst to them , George is approaching the office ; he hastily leaves when he sees Andy and Joanne inside . George does not arrive for work the next day . Joanne shows in a new volunteer , Glen , who is replacing Liz . Having found out that George has made similar calls to CSL for years , Andy plans to go to the police . Andy answers the phone , and it is George . In Chloe 's voice , George says that he just wanted someone to listen to him , then warns that he has told the dead woman 's son where Andy works . In the background , Glen stands , and points a gun at Andy 's head .

Critics responded positively to " Cold Comfort " , though several characterised it as weaker than previous episodes in the series . David Chater , writing in The Times , described " Cold Comfort " as " a breather " after the " small masterpieces " of " The Trial of Elizabeth Gadge " and " The 12 Days of Christine " . He said that " Cold Comfort " offers " a promising set-up , but ... doesn 't unfold with the same simple , logical elegance as others in the series " . Andrew Billen , also writing for The Times , gave the episode three out of five stars , considering it weaker than is typical for Inside No. 9 . John Robinson , who reviewed the episode for The Guardian , felt that though " the episode has the tools to ratchet up the suspense " , it " lacks both the plausibility and element of surprise that characterise the best of this series " . Patrick Mulkern , on the other hand , who was writing for the Radio Times , described " Cold Comfort " as " warped brilliance " . He said that " any real helpline volunteers watching this episode may well wince , but it remains gripping throughout " . Reviewers in The Sunday Times called the episode " another corker " , and the freelance journalist Dan Owen called the episode " easily the funniest " since " La Couchette " , awarding it three out of four stars . He characterised it as mostly successful in its aims , and summarised it as a " memorable " and " well-executed " comedy-drama .

Robinson felt that the writers had " dial [ ed ] back the celebrity guests " for the episode , while Phoebe-Jane Boyd , writing for the entertainment website Den of Geek , said that the episode " had another set of fantastic guest stars " . The comedy critic Bruce Dessau praised the performances in the episode ; Billen said that Horrocks 's performance was " particularly good " , and critics in The Sunday Times said that Horrocks was " on fine form " . Commentators also commended the episode 's writing , though Owen felt that the plot took a while to " get going " . The television critic Julia Raeside discussed the unusual style of " Cold Comfort " , saying that " You could argue [ that the writers ] are at the stage in their careers where they don 't need to experiment . No one else makes television like them and yet still they push themselves . " For Clare Murphy , writing in the Daily Mirror , the episode " makes great use of CCTV split-screen footage " . Dessau said that the set-up gave the episode " its haunting flavour " . Viewers do not just see Andy , but also streams from other cameras , which , for Dessau , " makes the viewer both intrigued and anxious " . Boyd , too , claimed that the episode played on the " inherent creepiness " of CCTV footage . She said that the split-screen set-up increased the tension , and that the " gimmick is a good one " ; though it could " have worked well as a pleasing novelty on its own , [ it ] also makes this ' whodunit ' / ' who 's doing it ' a refreshingly inventive take on the genre " .

Critics writing for The Sunday Times said that set-up " proves very effective for the denouement " , which Mulkern described as " a creepy pay-off " . Chris Bennion of The Independent said that the ending was testament to the fact that the writers " know how to play their audience like a fiddle " . Billen was less impressed , saying that " the ultimate twist in the tale was crude , and the insight that those who offer help need it most just a little banal - by this series ' standards , at least " . Owen , similarly , found the motives of " Chloe " unconvincing , and considered " the surprisingly nihilistic final shot perhaps not fully earned or plausible " , but confessed that the episode was able to " outmanoeuvre [ sic ] " him , as he did not foresee the ending .

Barbeyella minutissima is a slime mould species of the order Echinosteliales , and the only species of the genus Barbeyella . First described in 1914 from the Jura mountains , its habitat is restricted to montane spruce and spruce-fir forests of the Northern Hemisphere , where it has been recorded from Asia , Europe , and North America . It typically colonises slimy , algae-covered logs that have lost their bark and have been partially to completely covered by liverworts . The sporangia are roughly spherical , up to 0.2 mm in diameter , and supported by a thin stalk up to 0.7 mm tall . After the spores have developed , the walls of the sporangia split open into lobes . The species is one of the smallest members of the Myxogastria and is considered rare .

The species was first described in 1914 by Charles Meylan on the basis of a collection made at an altitude of 1,400 metres ( 4,600 ft ) from the Swiss Jura in September the year before . Meylan thought the species warranted a new genus based on the unique mode of dehiscence and the makeup of the capillitium . The genus was named for the Swiss botanist William Barbey ( 1842 – 1914 ) . It and the genus Clastoderma together make up the family Clastodermataceae . Studies of the ultrastructure of the sporocarps suggests that Barbeyella occupies a systematic position intermediate between Echinosteliales and the Stemonitales .

The protoplasmodium , a microscopic , undifferentiated granular mass with a slime sheath , is transparent and colourless . A single sporangiophore ( the fruiting structure ) is produced from the semispherical protoplasmodium , which is approximately one and a half times the diameter of mature sporangia . It acquires dark spots as it matures and the centre of the protoplasm later becomes dark . Then , the transparent and milk-white protoplasmodium climbs along the stem to the top , where first the capillitium and peridium and finally the spores are produced . At room temperature , this process lasts roughly one day . The long-stemmed , blackish-brown or blackish-purple , barely translucent sporangia of Barbeyella are spherical , 0.15 to 0.2 mm in diameter and together with the stem measure 0.3 to 0.7 mm long . They are usually scattered on the substrate , but also often grouped in loose , large colonies . The hypothallus ( the tissue upon which the sporangiophore rests ) has a diameter of at least 0.7 mm . Although not visible on mosses , it has a reddish-brown color when growing on wood . The brownish-black stem is up to 0.1 mm thick , thinning to 5 µm towards the top and is filled with protoplasmatic scrap material . The columella – arising from the stem tip – matures at the upper end at roughly half the height of the sporangiophore into 7 to 13 simple or occasionally bifurcated , 1 to 4 µm large , dark-brown capillitium strands . Usually individual , occasionally in pairs , these are firmly fused with the lobed segments of the peridium , which are round in cross-section . When the spores mature , the sporangium splits and empties into the peridium towards the base . This prevents the lobes of the peridium from detaching and provides spore dispersal over a longer period , similar to a dehiscing capsule . The sporangia are filled towards the top with plasmatic granules , which diminish increasingly towards the base . Depending on the size of the plasmatic granules , the sporangia appear papillate or smooth .

Barbeyella minutissima is considered rare . Its habitat corresponds to the mountainous spruce-fir forests of the Northern Hemisphere . It is largely restricted to altitudes between 500 and 2,500 metres ( 1,600 and 8,200 ft ) , occasionally appearing as low as sea level and as high as 3,500 metres ( 11,500 ft ) . It has been found in Europe ( Finland , Germany , Switzerland , Poland , Romania , Latvia , and Russia ) , in west and east North America ( Washington , Oregon , California , and Mexico ; North and South Carolina and Virginia ) , in the Indian Himalayas as well as in Japan . It is relatively common in fir forests on high-altitude Mexican volcanoes , suggesting that air-borne spore dispersal is effective .

The species grows only on slightly to heavily rotten and barkless deadwood in coniferous forests in cool , moist areas . The wood is about 40 to 100 % overgrown with Marchantiophyta , especially of the genera Nowellia or Cephalozia . B. minutissima has been found growing on the liverwort Lepidozia reptans , although Nowellia curvifolia is the main indicator for the slime mould . In addition to liverworts , Barbeyella is found socialised with monocellular algae . It is assumed that the protoplasmodium phagocytises either the algae or the bacteria on their surface . Other Myxogastria species are often found together with Barbeyella , especially Lepidoderma tigrinum , Lamproderma columbinum and Colloderma oculatum . Aphanocladium album is a myxomyceticolous fungus ( i.e. , living on or within the fruit bodies of myxomycetes ) that has been reported growing on specimens of B. minutissima collected from North Carolina .

Walter Skinner 's old college friend , Hollywood producer Wayne Federman , is involved in a film project about the FBI . During Federman 's research phase , Skinner gives him access to Fox Mulder and Dana Scully , who are investigating the attempted murder of Cardinal O 'Fallon . Federman tags along and constantly interrupts the agents . While searching the catacombs of O 'Fallon 's church , Mulder finds the remains of Micah Hoffman , a missing 1960s counter-culturalist . Searching Hoffman 's apartment , they find bombs and counterfeiting tools , as well as forged gospel of Mary Magdalene . Mulder and Federman return to the church and search the catacombs , finding several skeletons and pieces of the forged gospel . Federman wanders off and stumbles upon animated bones , who attempt to assemble a shattered piece of pottery . He panics and leaves the scene . Mulder and Scully examine the pottery . Scully tells Mulder the story of " The Lazarus Bowl " , in which the aunt of Lazarus had been making a clay bowl when Jesus Christ resurrected him . The words of Christ were then recorded in the grooves of the bowl , much like a phonograph record . Mulder brings the relic to Chuck Burks , who , after performing a sonic analysis , discovers voices in Aramaic ; in one portion part of the audio , one man commands another to rise from the dead . The other contains lyrics from " I am the Walrus " by The Beatles .

Mulder visits O 'Fallon , who admits he bought the forged gospel from Hoffman , but believed it was real . Meanwhile , during Hoffman 's autopsy , Scully experiences a vision wherein he comes back to life on the operating table and begins talking . Later , at the church , Scully sees a vision of Hoffman in Jesus ' place on a large crucifix . Mulder arrests O 'Fallon for Hoffman 's murder , but Micah Hoffman walks in , unscathed . He tells the agent that while he initially created the forgeries to make money , he came to believe he was the reincarnation of Jesus Christ , and bombed the church to get rid of the " blasphemous " forgeries . Skinner suspends Scully and Mulder for four weeks because of the mix-up . Sixteen months later , O 'Fallon kills Micah Hoffman in a murder-suicide . As such , the X-File is never truly solved . During their suspension , Mulder and Scully venture to Hollywood to view the production of Federman 's film . It is revealed that Federman 's movie will be called The Lazarus Bowl , and Garry Shandling will play Mulder and Téa Leoni will play Scully . After filming is done , Mulder and Scully attend a screening of the film with Skinner , but are thoroughly disgusted at how their case , and they , are portrayed on the big screen . Mulder and Scully leave the set holding hands , presumably on their way to dinner with the FBI credit card Skinner gave them after watching the movie , hinting at the continued romantic relationship between Mulder and Scully that has been suggested in the last few episodes . As the agents leave , the dead who were resting underneath the film set are revived and begin to dance passionately , reinforcing a theory Mulder made earlier in the episode .

" Hollywood A.D. " was written and directed by series star David Duchovny . The episode was written after Duchovny received positive feedback on his last creation , season six 's " The Unnatural " . Duchovny originally approached executive producer Frank Spotnitz about the possibility of writing another episode . Spotnitz gave him the go-ahead and was soon given a rough copy of the script . Series creator Chris Carter was very happy with the story , calling it " a smart , [ ... ] , quirky , and intelligent idea " and he later described it as " outside the norm , even for The X-Files . " Once the script was approved , Duchovny took on an active role in preparing for the episode . There was a considerable amount of stunt work and choreographing done for " Hollywood A.D. " Two stunt doubles were hired for the scene where Shandling tackles Leoni and they tumble down a hill into an open casket . Some of the stunt men were even cast in non-stunt related jobs . Several were " transformed " into zombies , a process which took five hours . The zombie dance sequence at the end of the episode took two days to film . The first day was shot during active production and the second was scheduled for the blue screen work that was required .

Duchovny cast several of The X-Files ' technical crew members in the episode . Tina M. Amedrui , the show 's actual craft services woman , portrayed Tina , the craft service woman for Wayne Federman 's movie . Bill Roe , the show 's photography director , was cast as the vegetarian zombie . Assistant director Barry K. Thomas was cast as one of the men on the movie set , Paul Rabwin was cast as a producer , and special effects coordinator Bill Millar was cast as the movie 's director . Duchovny also cast his brother , Daniel , as the assistant director . Several of the family members and friends cast by Duchovny were able to apply for their Screen Actor 's Guild card and were able to apply for a health insurance plan . Téa Leoni , who portrayed a fictionalized version of herself portraying Scully in the production , was married to David Duchovny when this episode was filmed , a decision casting director Rick Millikan considered " clever . " Duchovny also cast his friend and fellow actor Garry Shandling as a fictionalized version of himself portraying Mulder . Shandling had originally been sought out to play the part of Morris Fletcher in the sixth season episode " Dreamland . " The joke about Garry Shandling having a crush on Mulder came from a recurring joke from the TV show The Larry Sanders Show , starring Shandling . In the recurring joke , David Duchovny has a homosexual interest in Shandling 's character .

The joke about Mulder wanting Richard Gere to appear in the movie stemmed from the fact that Duchovny 's acting was often compared to Gere 's . Duchovny decided to turn the idea into a joke , saying , " we used to always have the joke on set that when they do the movie it 's going to be Richard Gere and Jodie Foster [ playing Mulder and Scully ] . So I originally wrote the teaser for Richard Gere and Jodie Foster and I just started to think about it and you know , it 's so much funnier with Garry and Téa . " The episode featured several uncredited celebrity cameos . During the premiere of the movie , Duchovny 's Return to Me costars Minnie Driver and David Alan Grier appear as members of the audience . In addition , Chris Carter , the show 's creator , made a cameo during the theater scene . The appearance was his second in the series .

" Hollywood A.D. " first aired in the United States on April 30 , 2000 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 7.7 , with a 12 share , meaning that roughly 7.7 percent of all television-equipped households , and 12 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 12.88 million viewers . The episode aired in the United Kingdom and Ireland on Sky1 on May 7 , 2000 and received 0.80 million viewers , making it the second most watched episode that week . Fox promoted the episode with the tagline " Garry Shandling as Agent Mulder ? Téa Leoni as Agent Scully ? " Critical reception to " Hollywood A.D. " was mostly positive . The Montreal Gazette named the episode the sixth best stand-alone X-Files episode , writing that " Despite taxing our stomach for self-reflexive comedy , this David Duchovny scripted and directed episode manages to deliver some of the greatest laughs of the series . " Rob Bricken from Topless Robot named " Hollywood A.D. " the seventh funniest X-Files episode . Jessica Morgan from Television Without Pity gave the episode a B , slightly criticizing the dancing zombies at the end of the episode . Sarah Kendzior from 11th Hour Magazine wrote that , " My favorite [ episode ] this year may well be ' Hollywood A.D. ' , an ambitious , often ingenious and occasionally flawed sophomore effort concerning the entertainment industry , religion , and pretty much everything in between . " Rich Rosell from DigitallyObsessed.com awarded the episode 5 out of 5 stars and wrote that " [ the ] scene from the ' movie ' where Shandling / Mulder faces off against The Cigarette Smoking Pontiff , and his army of sniper zombies , is classic stuff , and earns ' Hollywood A.D. ' high marks . " Kenneth Silber from Space.com , while criticizing the episode for reveling in parody , noted that the episode was entertaining , writing , " ' Hollywood A.D. ' is a parody and , as such , will be unsatisfying to the many X-Files viewers , including this long-suffering reviewer , who 'd like to see the series culminate in a dramatic , multi-episode denouement of its ' mythology arc ' . Nonetheless , this episode has merit as a witty and imaginative parody . "

Tom Kessenich , in his book Examinations , gave the episode a relatively positive review . He wrote , " ' Hollywood A.D. ' was Duchovny 's nudge-nudge , wink-wink writing-directing effort for this season . [ ... ] Duchovny did not fail to deliver an episode that truly reflected his own wit and intelligence . All the while remaining true to the spirit of the show that made him famous . " Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club awarded the episode a " B + " , and wrote that it " is muddled and frequently so in love with just being weird for weird ’ s sake that everybody forgets we need at least a little justification to pull everything together in the end . " He also called it " a hard episode not to love , frankly . " Handlen felt that the humor and sweetness helped to make the episode a success . He also wrote that Mulder and Scully 's dynamic worked towards the episode 's favor .

Maryland Route 322 ( MD 322 ) is a state highway in the U.S. state of Maryland . Known as Easton Parkway , the highway runs 5.12 miles ( 8.24 km ) on the west side of Easton between two junctions with U.S. Route 50 ( US 50 ) . MD 322 serves as a bypass of downtown Easton for traffic between US 50 and highways to western Talbot County , including MD 33 toward Saint Michaels and MD 333 toward Oxford . Easton Parkway was constructed in the mid to late 1960s . The state highway was originally designated as part of MD 33 ; MD 322 became the sole designation on the bypass in 1978 .

MD 322 begins at a directional intersection with US 50 ( Ocean Gateway ) south of Easton ; there is no direct access from southbound MD 322 to westbound US 50 . MD 322 heads north as a four-lane divided highway to MD 565 ( Washington Street ) . Beyond this intersection , the state highway reduces to two lanes , curves to the northwest , and crosses Paper Mill Pond . MD 332 parallels the pond through the highway 's intersection with MD 333 , which heads southwest as Oxford Road and northeast as Peach Blossom Road . After the pond turns west , the state highway intersects Port Street , which heads east toward downtown Easton as MD 334 and west as a county highway into the Easton Point industrial area . MD 322 temporarily expands to a four-lane undivided highway at its intersection with MD 33 , which heads east as Bay Street toward downtown Easton and west as St. Michaels Road . The MD 322 – MD 33 intersection lies on a crossing of Tanyard Creek just east of its confluence with an unnamed creek to form the North Fork of the Tred Avon River . MD 322 continues northeast past several shopping centers and industrial parks between MD 33 and Glebe Road . Near its northern terminus , the state highway meets the northern end of Washington Street and Airpark Drive , which immediately has an intersection with MD 662 ( Centreville Road ) before entering an industrial park adjacent to Easton Airport . MD 322 reaches its northern terminus at a directional intersection with US 50 .

Easton Parkway was constructed as a way for traffic from Oxford and Saint Michaels to access points north and south via US 50 without having to travel through downtown Easton . The first section of the state highway was completed in 1965 from the present intersection with MD 33 north to US 50 . MD 33 was removed from Bay Street and Washington Street north of downtown Easton and placed on the first section of Easton Parkway . The highway was extended south to MD 333 in 1966 . The remainder of the highway south to US 50 was completed in 1970 . The MD 322 designation was originally applied to the southern part of the parkway as well as Bay Street . MD 33 and MD 322 were reassigned to their present lengths of highway in 1978 .

Asher Vollmer ( born September 14 , 1989 ) is an American indie video game developer and creator of Puzzlejuice and Threes . He created the 2012 iOS game Puzzlejuice while a student at USC Interactive Media & Games Division . The game began his collaboration with Greg Wohlwend . The pair 's next release , the 2014 iOS puzzle game Threes , received what review aggregator Metacritic described as " universal acclaim " , including perfect scores from Eurogamer and TouchArcade , and the title of Apple Inc . ' s iPhone game of the year . The game was later ported to multiple platforms . Polygon included Vollmer in their " 50 admirable gaming people " of the year for his work on Threes . Among other projects , Vollmer subsequently worked on Close Castles , a real-time strategy game later put on hiatus , and Royals , a simulation game for OS X and Windows .

Vollmer is a graduate of the USC Interactive Media & Games Division program . As a student , he began work on Puzzlejuice , a puzzle video game . He reached out to artist Greg Wohlwend for aesthetic advice , which led to a collaboration between the two . Puzzlejuice is a combination of Tetris , tile-matching , and Boggle : players rearrange falling tetromino blocks into rows of similar colors , which turn into letters that are cleared from the board by forming words . The iOS game was released on January 19 , 2012 , to what review aggregator Metacritic described as " generally favorable " reviews . Multiple reviewers mentioned the difficulty in mentally balancing the various components of the game . Vollmer started as thatgamecompany 's " feel engineer " in August 2012 , but left in April 2013 to " go indie " and work on his own projects . On his blog , he said he thought the studio 's current project would be groundbreaking , though he was unhappy working there . Vollmer tried to write a short story in an attempt to take a break from games . Before long , he began to play with his computer keyboard . Vollmer challenged himself to make a game that only used the arrow keys , and prototyped what would become Threes in ten hours overnight . He proceeded to iterate on the idea with Wohlwend over the game 's 14-month development . In Threes , the player slides numbered tiles on a four-by-four grid to combine addends and multiples of three . Vollmer cited Drop7 as an inspiration for the game , having played it for two years beforehand .

Threes had no original inclination towards minimalism . In fact , Vollmer and Wohlwend felt that the game needed to appear more complex so as to interest players . They returned to the original idea and added character personalities to the tiles . The iOS game was released on February 6 , 2014 , to what Metacritic characterized as " universal acclaim " . Reviewers found the game " charming " and " addictive " , and compared it to Drop7 ( 2009 ) , Triple Town ( 2010 ) , and Stickets ( 2013 ) . Eurogamer and TouchArcade awarded the game perfect scores , with the latter calling Threes " about as close as it gets to a perfect mobile game " . Other developers released similar games and clones within weeks of the game 's launch . Apple named Threes its best iPhone game of 2014 . The game was later ported to Android , Xbox One , and Windows Phone platforms . Polygon included Vollmer in their " 50 admirable gaming people of 2014 " for his work on Threes . Vollmer thought he would work on a new game a month after releasing Threes , but was kept busy by obligations to fix and update the game , to port it to other platforms , and to promote game through press and events . He was convinced that he would never make a game " as clean and tight as Threes ever again " . Vollmer 's next game was Close Castles , a real-time strategy game .

Vollmer unveiled Close Castles in June 2014 . Players start in corners of a " grid map " and are represented by castles . Vollmer explained that the game 's name is from castles built too close to one another , starting a mutually assured destruction scenario . Players can build three structure types out from their castle : towers that fire at incoming enemies ( defense ) , houses that make " loyal subjects " ( offense ) , and markets that make money ( economy ) . The " A " button with a direction constructs a path directing followers to the enemy . Followers capture enemy structures as denoted by a " defense bar " that fills as followers enter the structure and that destroys the structure when filled . Markets are the weakest structure , and two towers can defend against one house . Player turf grows as player structures approach the limits of their area . Players earn five units of money a second , which increases by five for every market . Polygon called the game 's simple visual design " horrifyingly deceptive " . Vollmer has said that games should last around three minutes apiece and that the local multiplayer 's lack of " hidden information " should make interactions with other players less of a " sadomasochistic " game of waiting for an opponent to concede . The game was demoed on an Xbox 360 but was planned for release on the PlayStation 4 . Vollmer put the project on hold while he worked out " fundamental flaws " in the gameplay .

While Vollmer traditionally worked on multiple games at once , Close Castles was his only project when it was in production . In March 2015 , he worked three days a week on a bigger project with a small team , and saved his other days for personal experimentation and Threes bugs . The next month , Vollmer released Royals , a pay what you want simulation game for OS X and Windows . The player controls a peasant who advances towards royal status by collecting resources and followers . Every player decision counts as a year of the peasant 's life . Polygon 's Megan Farokhmanesh described the game as difficult and charming , with a " quirky , subtle humor " . The game was designed to be " purposefully difficult and obtuse " and " nothing like Threes " . Eurogamer 's Jeffrey Matulef wrote that the gameplay was like a " comically minimalist roguelike " for its emphasis on resource management and short player lifespans .

The Battle of Unsan ( Hangul : 운산전투 ; hanja : 雲山戰鬪 ; RR : Unsan jeontu ; MR : Unsan chŏnt 'u ) , also known as the Battle of Yunshan ( Chinese : 云山战斗 ; pinyin : Yún Shān Zhàn Dòu ) , was a series of engagements of the Korean War that took place from 25 October to 4 November 1950 near Unsan , North Pyongan province in present-day North Korea . As part of the Chinese First Phase Campaign , the People 's Republic of China 's People 's Volunteer Army made repeated attacks against the Republic of Korea 1st Infantry Division near Unsan beginning on 25 October , in an attempt to take advancing United Nations forces by surprise . In an accidental first encounter with the United States military during the Korean War , the Chinese 39th Corps attacked the unprepared US 8th Cavalry Regiment in Unsan on 1 November , resulting in one of the most devastating US losses of the Korean War .

By October 1950 , the United Nations ( UN ) forces had successfully broken out of the Pusan Perimeter in the extreme south of Korea and begun an aggressive northward advance towards the Sino-Korean border , chasing the retreating Korean People 's Army ( KPA ) . The US 1st Cavalry Division entered Pyongyang on 19 October , while the Republic of Korea Army ( ROK ) were rushing towards the Yalu River in all directions . As part of the Thanksgiving Offensive to end the war , Major General Frank W. Milburn , commander of the US I Corps , ordered the ROK 1st Infantry Division to secure the Sup 'ung Dam on the Yalu River by advancing through Unsan . Alarmed by the rapid collapse of the KPA , China 's Chairman Mao Zedong ordered the People 's Liberation Army 's North East Frontier Force to be reorganized into the People 's Volunteer Army ( PVA ) for the upcoming intervention in Korea . Despite Mao 's determination to save North Korea from capitulation , the Chinese military leadership expressed doubts on the ability of the Chinese army to fight against the more modernized US forces . As a compromise , Mao authorized the First Phase Campaign , a bridgehead building operation with limited offensives against only the South Korean forces while avoiding contacts with the US forces . Under strict secrecy , the PVA entered Korea on 19 October .

Unsan is a town in northwest Korea , and it is located 50 mi ( 80 km ) from the Ch 'ongch 'on River mouth on the Korean west coast . Because of the hilly terrains at the Sino-Korean Border , Unsan is one of the few access points into the Yalu River area . The town is surrounded by hills to the north , the Nammyon River to the west and the Samtan River to the east . At the south of the town , a road junction controls the road from Unsan to Ipsok while a ridge dubbed " Bugle Hill " controls the road between Unsan and Yongsan-dong . Those two roads formed the only retreat routes for the UN forces at Unsan .

Acting on Milburn 's instruction , the ROK 1st Infantry Division advanced north on 24 October with the ROK 6th Infantry Division on its right and the US 24th Infantry Division on its left , and by the morning of 25 October , the ROK 1st Infantry Division had captured Unsan . But with the UN forces spread thinly across Korea , a 15 mi ( 24 km ) gap was left between the US 24th Division and ROK 1st Division , leaving the Korean left flank unprotected . Upon noticing the thinly held UN frontline , the Chinese decided to launch a pincer movement against the South Koreans at Unsan . As part of the First Phase Campaign , the PVA 120th Division of the 40th Corps was at first to block and hold the ROK 1st Infantry Division at Unsan . Simultaneously , the bulk of the 40th Corps , together with the PVA 38th Corps and one division from the 42nd Corps , would attack and destroy the ROK 6th and 8th Infantry Divisions at the east of Unsan . Finally , the PVA 39th Corps would destroy the ROK 1st Infantry Division by infiltrating the gap between US 24th Division and the ROK 1st Infantry Division west of Unsan . Undetected by UN intelligence , the 120th Division arrived at the blocking position on 24 October , with its 360th Regiment heavily fortified the hills north of Unsan . To obscure troop movements and to prevent UN air raids , the Chinese also started several forest fires around the end of October .

On 25 October at 10 : 30 , the ROK 1st Infantry Division attacked north with its 12th Regiment on the western bank of Samtan River while the 15th Regiment was trying to reach the eastern bank . But when the 15th Regiment was about to cross the river , the PVA 120th Division intercepted the South Koreans with heavy artillery fire . The South Koreans first believed the resistance to be the last remnants of the KPA , but the perception soon changed with the capture of the first Chinese prisoner in the Korean War . The prisoner revealed that there were 10,000 Chinese soldiers waiting to join the fight north of Unsan . Faced with the sudden appearance of the overwhelming Chinese forces , the ROK 1st Infantry Division tried to establish defensive positions by capturing the hills around Unsan . The South Koreans soon found themselves in a seesaw battle with the PVA 360th Regiment during the night of 25 October . The next day , the PVA 39th Corps arrived at the west of Unsan while cutting the road between Unsan and Yongsan-dong , completely surrounding the ROK 1st Infantry Division . Aided by airdrops , the US 6th Medium Tank Battalion and the US 10th Anti-Aircraft Artillery Group , the ROK 1st Infantry Division reopened the road on 27 October . Several more attempts to advance north by the Koreans made little progress , and the fighting stopped by 28 October .

Despite the warnings given by Brigadier General Paik Sun Yup , commander of the ROK 1st Infantry Division , a general feeling of optimism about the outcome of the war prevented the warnings from being taken seriously . With the fighting reached a stalemate at Unsan , General Walton Walker of the Eighth United States Army ordered the US 8th Cavalry Regiment of the US 1st Cavalry Division to resume offensives north by relieving the ROK 12th Regiment . By the time the US 8th Cavalry Regiment reached Unsan on 29 October , the ROK 11th Infantry Regiment of the ROK 1st Infantry Division was also pulling out of Unsan . At the same time , the Chinese had destroyed the ROK 6th Infantry Division on the east of Unsan . Unsan had now became a northern salient in the UN line containing only the US 8th Cavalry Regiment and the ROK 15th Infantry Regiment .

Still believing that the ROK 1st Infantry Division was tied up at Unsan , PVA Commander Peng Dehuai gave the go ahead for the 39th Corps to destroy the Unsan garrison on 1 November . The Chinese plan called for the PVA 117th Division to attack from the northeast , the 116th Division to attack from the northwest and the 115th Division to attack from the southwest . At the same time , the US 8th Cavalry Regiment had taken up positions around the town , with its 1st Battalion defending the north of Unsan by the Samtan River , while its 2nd and 3rd Battalions defending the areas west of the Unsan by the Nammyon River . The lack of UN manpower , however , created a 1 mi ( 1,600 m ) gap between the 1st and 2nd Battalions . The ROK 15th Infantry Regiment , on the other hand , had dug in northeast of the Unsan , across the river from the US 1st Battalion . In the early afternoon of 1 November , a combat patrol from the US 5th Cavalry Regiment , rear guard of the 8th Cavalry Regiment , was intercepted by PVA 343rd Regiment of the 115th Division at Bugle Hill . With the trap discovered , the Chinese immediately launched their attacks at 17 : 00 . Supported by rocket artillery , the 117th Division attacked the ROK 15th Infantry Regiment in full force while four Chinese battalions from the 116th Division struck the gap between the 1st and 2nd Battalions of the US 8th Cavalry Regiment . By 23 : 00 , the heavy fighting destroyed the ROK 15th Infantry Regiment while the US 1st and 2nd Battalions were running out of ammunition . As the UN forces began to buckle around Unsan , Milburn finally ordered the garrison to withdraw after learning the destruction of the ROK 6th Infantry Division on the right flank .

Before the withdrawal could be carried out , however , the PVA 347th Regiment of the 116th Division had already entered the town of Unsan through the gap between the American battalions . Soon afterward , several roadblocks appeared behind the US 1st and 2nd Battalions . With the attacks gaining momentum , the PVA 348th Regiment of the 116th Division advanced southward from Unsan , ambushing the UN forces at the road junction by 02 : 30 . With all the roads blocked , the US 8th Cavalry Regiment 's 1st and 2nd Battalions had to escape by infiltrating the Chinese lines in small groups , abandoning most of their vehicles and heavy weapons along the way . The surviving US and ROK soldiers reached UN lines by 2 November . While the US 8th Cavalry Regiment 's 1st and 2nd Battalions were under heavy attack , its 3rd Battalion was left alone for most of the night , but by 03 : 00 , a company of Chinese commandos from the 116th Division managed to infiltrate the battalion command post disguised as ROK soldiers . The following surprise attack set many vehicles on fire while causing numerous casualties among the Americans , most of whom were still sleeping . By the time the confusing fighting had ended , the 3rd Battalion was squeezed into a 200 yd ( 180 m ) wide perimeter by the PVA 345th Regiment of the 115th Division . The US 5th Cavalry Regiment made repeated attempts to rescue the 3rd Battalion by attacking the PVA 343rd Regiment at Bugle Hill , but after suffering 350 casualties , the 5th Cavalry was forced to withdraw under orders from Major General Hobart Gay , commander of the US 1st Cavalry Division . The trapped 3rd Battalion endured days of constant attacks , and the surviving soldiers managed to break out of the perimeter by 4 November . By the end of the battle , less than 200 survivors from the 3rd Battalion managed to return to the UN line .

Immediately after the success at Unsan , the rest of the Chinese forces advanced across the US lines , intending to push the US forces back across the Ch 'ongch 'on River and into Pyongyang . But food and ammunition shortages soon forced the Chinese to disengage on 5 November , thus ending the Chinese First Phase Campaign . Besides the victory at Unsan , the Chinese First Phase Campaign also destroyed the ROK 6th Infantry Division and one regiment from the ROK 8th Infantry Division at the Battle of Onjong . In return , the Chinese had suffered 10,700 casualties by the end of the Chinese First Phase Campaign . The Battle of Unsan has been considered to be one of the most devastating US losses of the Korean War . The Chinese victory at Unsan was as much of a surprise to the Chinese leadership as it was to the UN forces . The accidental encounter between the Chinese and US forces at Unsan eased the fear of the Chinese leadership about intervening in Korea , while the performance of the US 1st Cavalry Division was studied in great detail by Chinese commanders . For the UN forces , on the other hand , despite the heavy losses suffered by the US Eighth Army at Unsan , the unexpected Chinese withdrawal made the United Nations Command believe that China did not intervene in Korea on a large scale . PVA Commander Peng Dehuai incorporated the lessons from Unsan for the upcoming Second Phase Campaign , while General Douglas MacArthur launched the Home-by-Christmas Offensive under the assumption that only a weak Chinese force was present in Korea , resulting in the decisive battles at the Ch 'ongch 'on River and the Chosin Reservoir later that year .

" California King Bed " is a song by Barbadian singer Rihanna from her fifth studio album , Loud ( 2010 ) . The sixth single from the album , it was released on May 13 , 2011 , by Def Jam . Priscilla Renea and Alex Delicata wrote the song with its main producers , Jermaine Jackson and Andrew Harr of The Runners . Its recording took place in 2010 in the studios We The Best in Miami and Burst HQ in Wisconsin . Released digitally on iTunes Store May 13 , 2011 , it began to be played on April 4 in Australian radios and May 31 in the US . Later , after their impact on radio areas , the song was also issued on CD single format in Europe and also an extended play ( EP ) digital with nine remixes from the original track . The song had a moderate effect on music charts , leading the tables Slovakia , Poland and reaching the five best-selling bands in Germany , Australia , Austria , New Zealand and Portugal , while on the Billboard Hot 100 reached the 37th position .

Andy Gill of The Independent and Ryan Dombell from Pitchfork Media both noted that the song embodies all the elements of a big power ballad , with the former stating that it is " Rihanna 's best vocal performance " and the latter concurring , labeling the song as a " ' I Don 't Want to Miss a Thing ' type power ballad genetically engineered to soundtrack a bi-coastal Kate Hudson rom-com . " Daniel Brockman of Boston Phoenix writer perceived the song as an " innocuous soft jam . " Slant Magazine 's Sal Cinquemani called " California King Bed " a " slushy acoustic ballad whose clever metaphor is all but suffocated beneath the song 's cheesy production choices " Andy Gill of The Independent , gave a positive review for the song saying that it contained Rihanna 's best vocal performance to date . However , Robert Copsey of Digital Spy criticized her vocals , stating that " She [ Rihanna ] belts out in a range well beyond her natural vocal ability . " Scott Shetler of Popcrush commented that it was refreshing to see Rihanna release a down-tempo ballad , instead of a continuous flow of up-tempo dance songs , saying " Though ‘ California King Bed ’ follows a routine pop ballad arrangement , the song is a nice change of pace for the Barbadian hitmaker . As much as we love Rihanna ’ s dance club hits , it ’ s refreshing to hear a song built around her impressive voice . " Stacey Anderson of Spin magazine explained the lyrical meaning behind the song , saying , " ' California King Bed ' is a wrenching ballad about the waking death of a relationship , the stage of limbo before the final crash ; it 's so well-delivered , in fact , that it 's hard to hear . " Robert Copsey of Digital Spy gave the song four out of five stars , saying " The fourth single proper from Loud may pull in the reins as far as the hectic dance beats and sado-masochistic lyrics go , but it 's no less beefy and extravagant . Lilting acoustic guitars metamorphose into ' 80s rawk ones as she sings about the kind of separate-togetherness felt moments before a break-up . She belts out in a range well beyond her natural vocal ability . " Thomas Conner of Chicago Sun-Times concluded that " The acoustic strums of ' California King Bed ' build to a cinematic , Diane Warren-sized breakup chorus . "

Entertainment Weekly 's Kyle Anderson gave a mixed review of the song saying : " she [ Rihanna ] doesn 't have the chops to be a balladeer , which made the torch-song quality of ' California King Bed ' land with a thud . " Similarly , Henry Goldblatt of the same publication graded the song with a B + and gave a critical review of the title saying that it was borrowed from Pottery Barn . However , Goldblatt praised the irresistible heartbreak in the song and added that Rihanna 's voice demonstrates more range and power than her older material . Andy Kellman of Allmusic and Emily Mackay of NME were more critical of the song in their review , with the former calling the song an " overwrought rock weeper " and the latter saying it is a " howler of a ballad , with shlocky acoustic intro , trite piano and a faux-Slash solo . "

Before being officially released , " California King Bed " debuted on the Australian Singles Chart at number sixty-one on April 11 , 2011 and peaked at number four for two consecutive weeks . The song has since been certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , for shipments of 70,000 copies . The song also made an appearance on the New Zealand Singles Chart before its official release , debuting at number eighteen on April 18 , 2011 , before eventually peaking at number four for two consecutive weeks . The song has since been certified Gold for sales of over 7,500 copies . In the United Kingdom , the song reached a peaked of number eight on the UK Singles Chart on June 5 , 2011 as well as reaching a peak of number three on the UK R & B Chart on June 11 , 2011 . In the United States , the song made its debut on the week ending June 4 , 2011 at number eighty on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart and reached a peak of number thirty-seven , becoming Rihanna 's 25th top forty hit on the chart . " California King Bed " ranked at number 47 on Billboard magazine 's best-selling Dance / Clubs songs of 2011 .

The music video for " California King Bed " was shot on March 17 , 2011 and was shot by Anthony Mandler , who has frequently worked with Rihanna . Mandler directed the videos for other singles from Loud including " Only Girl ( In the World ) " and " Man Down " . The creative director , Ciarra Pardo , fabricated a custom made eighteen foot long bed , which was designed with a special feature to transport Rihanna the full distance from one side to the other . On May 4 , 2011 , Rihanna posted a picture of the video which showed her laying on a man while looking in the camera . She also tweeted " Bout to tweet u sumn I cud get in trouble for ! But I know ur anxious . " The full video premiered Monday , May 9 , 2011 on Rihanna 's official website and her VEVO account . In an interview with Jocelyn Vena of MTV News , Mandler spoke of his and Rihanna 's long collaborative history , saying : I think it 's something that is so unique about Rihanna whatever she 's doing , whatever character she 's playing , whatever side of herself she 's showing , she 's in it 1,000 percent ... And I think the song and the theme of this song , she wanted to obviously show a softer side , a lighter side , one that 's caught in maybe a tumultuous relationship ... There 's so much variety with her and it 's been such a journey with her .

As stated by Jason Lipshutz of Billboard , in this video , Rihanna returned to nature as in her video for her previous single , " Only Girl ( In the World ) " , which features nearly the same colors as the " California King Bed " video . Lipshutz also commented that Rihanna 's just rolled-out-bed appearance is completed by the modest , cream-colored attire in the airy , light-filled clip . Brad Wete of Entertainment Weekly gave a positive review of the video , writing : " Instead of being in complete control , here she is — vulnerable , open , and unsure . The video captures the feel of ' King Bed , ' not that it 's a difficult one to grasp . " Jessica Sinclair of Long Island Press was also positive about the video , praising the sensual side of Rihanna . A writer of The Huffington Post concluded : " In the video for her new video , ' California King Bed , ' the Barbadian pop star slows it down and shows her sensitive side , holding notes and bearing her soul over a troubled relationship . Set entirely in a gorgeously pink-palleted open air room overlooking the beach , the winds swirl and blow the curtains dramatically around the heart broken singer . " The writer finished the review saying that " Not much happens in the video – but then , that 's the point . " Amber Katz of MTV Buzzworthy compared the video with Fergie 's " Big Girls Don 't Cry " saying , that they " Both are midtempo , ballady and filmed in a soft-focus domestic setting . " Katz also complimented the bed in the video saying that it " evoke [ s ] a very Caribbean vibe , a shout-out to Rihanna 's native Barbados , no doubt . " A writer of Daily Mail complimented Rihanna 's looks in the video , saying that it showed her " most sultry " side . Both Nicole Eggenberger of OK ! and Eleanor Young of Marie Claire commented that the video uses a lot of sex appeal which was a departure from Rihanna 's older videos .

Rihanna performed the song for the first time alongside Sugarland front woman Jennifer Nettles , at the ACM Awards held by the Academy of Country Music on April 3 , 2011 . She was also a special guest star on the tenth season of American Idol on April 14 , 2011 . The performance featured Rihanna in a floor-length , heavily textured rose-colored gown , which she adorned as she appeared from behind flowing ceiling height curtains . Kara Warner of MTV News complimented the performance , saying " the 23-year-old rocked the house with an ethereal performance of her ballad ' California King Bed . ' " A writer of Rolling Stone wrote : " It 's a classy , laid-back performance with Rihanna in a lovely gown , backed up by interpretative dancers caressing large pieces of fabric that are probably meant to evoke bed sheets , but look a bit more like giant strips of toilet paper hanging from the ceiling . But either way , this is quite nice . " In March 2011 , Rihanna was appointed spokeswoman for the " 100 Years of Skin Care " Nivea Commercial campaign , which featured " California King Bed " as the song used in the commercials . As part of promotion for the campaign , Rihanna performed the song at private events in several European cities in May 2011 , including Hamburg , Milan and Paris . The song was also performed on NBC 's Today show on May 27 , 2011 , as part of their Summer Concert Series . The set also featured Rihanna performing her previous US Billboard Hot 100 number-one hits from Loud ; " Only Girl ( In the World ) " , " What 's My Name ? " and " S & M " . The song is included on the set-list of the Loud Tour ( 2011 ) .

Pia Toscano and Stefano Langone , contestants of the tenth season of American Idol , covered the song during one of the nights . American rapper Snoop Dogg , released an unofficial remix of the song along with a music video . In his version of the song he sings the lines " California dreamin ' , schemin ' , you got me gleamin ' / I need you on my team ' n you get my meanin ' / It sound crazy but it 's amazing / Lay down with me so we can make some babies . " The accompanying music video a girl which looks like Kim Kardashian waiting him at the hotel , while the official video of the song is played on TV screens .

Typhoon Nelson , known in the Philippines as Typhoon Bising , was the second tropical cyclone to strike the Philippines within a week in March 1982 . Nelson originated from a tropical disturbance southeast of Guam towards the middle of March . Although the system was initially poorly organized , it developed rather quickly , and was upgraded into Tropical Storm Nelson on March 19 . It tracked westward , and fluctuated in intensity for several days . On March 24 , Typhoon Nelson intensified into a typhoon , and entered an episode of rapid intensification . On March 25 , Nelson reached its peak intensity of 115 km / h ( 70 mph ) , but thereafter moved ashore on the Philippines , where the storm weakened significantly . On March 27 , the typhoon entered the South China Sea , and the next day , briefly re-intensified before resuming a weakening trend . Nelson dissipated on March 31 . Affecting the nation less than a week after Tropical Storm Mamie did , Nelson was responsible for additional flooding across much of the Philippines . Fifty-six people were killed due to the typhoon , eight of whom perished due to drownings . Over 1,200 homes were destroyed . More than 165,000 people fled to shelters , including 83,000 that were displaced from their home . Thirty fishing boats and 23 ferries were destroyed due to the system . Damage amounted to $ 17.2 million ( 1982 USD ) .

The second of three early season tropical cyclones to form in the West Pacific basin , Typhoon Nelson can be traced back to a low latitude area of disturbed in mid-March . The Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) started watching the system at 0000 UTC on March 18 while a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert ( TCFA ) was issued . Initially , the system was disorganized , but the disturbance was located in a favorable environment aloft and began to develop rapidly . Ten hours after the TCFA , the JTWC upgraded the system into a tropical depression . Early on March 19 , the JMA classified the system as a tropical storm . Later that morning , Hurricane Hunters reported winds of 95 km / h ( 60 mph ) and a barometric pressure of 993 mbar ( 29.3 inHg ) . Based on this , the JTWC designated the system as Tropical Storm Nelson . Nelson tracked westward , staying south of a large subtropical ridge . Despite the aforementioned favorable environment , Nelson briefly weakened late on March 19 , but re-intensified slightly the following morning . Shortly thereafter , the JTWC upgraded the system into a typhoon . Further intensification was halted due to increased easterly wind shear , and the storm began to level off in intensity as it accelerated on a westward course . On March 21 , the JMA declared Nelson a severe tropical storm . According to the JTWC , the storm fluctuated between tropical storm and typhoon status for about 60 hours , even though the JMA suggest that Nelson did not become a typhoon until March 24 . Around this time , the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration ( PAGASA ) also started monitoring the storm , assigning it with the local name Bising .

After becoming a typhoon , Nelson forward 's speed began to slow down as the storm began to move away from the ridge and encounter more conducive conditions . Consequently , Typhoon Nelson began to deepen more rapidly , and by the afternoon of March 25 , both the JTWC and JMA increased the intensity to 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) . Although the JMA suggests the system reached its peak intensity at that time , the JTWC indicated that Nelson strengthen slightly on March 25 , and attained winds of 195 km / h ( 120 mph ) , equivalent to a major hurricane or a Category 3 system on the United States-based Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale . Shortly thereafter , the storm moved ashore in the Philippine at peak intensity . After making landfall , Nelson weakened over the south-central portion of the nation . By March 26 , the JMA had lowered the winds to 160 km / h ( 100 mph ) . By March 27 , Nelson re-emerged into the South China Sea , having weakened considerably , and data from both the JMA and JTWC indicated that Nelson was no longer a typhoon . The next day , Nelson briefly re-intensified slightly , and at 1800 UTC on March 28 , the JMA estimated a secondary peak intensity of 105 km / h ( 65 mph ) . On the following day , Nelson resumed weakening due to increased wind shear . Despite the presence of a trough , Nelson did not recurve northeast , and instead meandered westward . On the afternoon of March 31 , the JMA ceased watching Nelson . On the next day , the JTWC followed suit while located about 450 km ( 280 mi ) east of Nha Trang , Vietnam .

Typhoon Nelson was the second storm to strike the Philippines within a week , following Tropical Storm Mamie , which claimed 54 lives . Considered a " pre-season " storm by newspapers , Nelson required storm warnings for parts of the nation , which were broadcast via radio . Much of the southern section of the Philippines were placed on typhoon alert . Due to the threat of storm surge , residents in coastal areas were advised to evacuate to higher ground . Typhoon Nelson was responsible for significant flooding across the Philippines . On the offshore Leyte Island , a radio transmitter and a school were destroyed . In Cebu City , schools , businesses , and government offices were closed for a day . Across the low-lying town of Abucay , flooding occurred . A total of 1,261 dwellings were leveled , including 703 houses destroyed in the provinces of Cebu , Bohol , and Surigao , leaving approximately 83,000 people homeless . In Loreto Town , part of the Suriago Province , 95 % of all coconut trees were toppled , and all but 45 of the town 's 600 houses were demolished . A total of 165,462 persons evacuated to shelters . Widespread power outages occurred while many bridges were washed away . Shipping and air services were halted ; 30 fishing boats and 23 ferries were destroyed . In all , 56 people perished due to Typhoon Nelson . Ten died in the hard-hit Leyte Province . At least eight of the casualties were due to drownings , which included two woman and an infant . Overall , damage from Nelson amounted to $ 17.2 million , crop and property damage alone totaled $ 7.4 million .

Hopeville Pond State Park is a Connecticut state park located in the town of Griswold . Before European colonization , the Mohegan people constructed weirs and fished from the Pachaug River . In 1711 , Stephen Gates was granted 14 acres of land that now resides within the park 's limits and constructed a gristmill and sawmill at the natural falls . In 1818 , Elizah Abel purchased the mill privilege and built a woolen mill at the site . The mills were later acquired by John Slater who constructed a satinet mill and named it " Hope Mill " . The village of Hopeville would derive its name from the mill , and it thrived until a series of fires destroyed the mills , the church and some houses . Sometime before 1917 , the Ashland Cotton Company erected a dam on the site and created a 145-acre reservoir . The United States Government purchased the land in the 1930s for recreational use and used the Civilian Conservation Corps to adapt the land to the purpose . In 1938 , the State of Connecticut designated Hopeville Pond as a state park . Hopeville Pond State Park 's recreational activities include biking , hiking , camping , fishing , boating and swimming . A variety of fish are found in the park , including northern pike , largemouth bass , and yellow perch . The park has a total of 80 camp sites with each site featuring a fire ring with grate and a picnic table . The park manager 's house is a National Register of Historic Places listed property .

The Avery House , also known as Hopeville Pond Park House , is a 20 feet ( 6.1 m ) by 40 feet ( 12 m ) , the two story central-chimney Colonial dating to circa 1770 . The central chimney is on a stone base and has a built-in root cellar . In 1935 , the Civilian Conservation Corps ( CCC ) rehabilitated the property for park use . The alterations in the house changed the traditional five-room first floor plan by eliminating the keeping rooms and the removal of the kitchen fireplace . It retains much of its original door frames and wrought-iron latch hardware . It was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1986 . After the rehabilitation of the property , the Avery House became the Hopeville Park manager 's residence .

Hopeville Pond State Park is listed for a multitude of recreational activities , including biking , hiking , camping , fishing , boating and swimming . Hopeville Pond was included in an 11-mile bike trail in Connecticut : Rides for the Casual Cyclist . The Lake Lubbers website states that Hopeville Pond is a popular location for fishing , including ice fishing . The reported fish include " northern pike , largemouth bass , smallmouth bass , catfish , chain pickerel , yellow perch , and bluegill " . According to the DEEP website , the camping season begins on the third week of April on Friday and ends on September 30 . The park has a total of 80 camp sites with each site featuring a fire ring with grate and a picnic table . The layout is in two loops designated with sites A-E and a second loop designated as F. Each loop has toilet and drinking water facilities . The camp site was rated highly for its beauty , spaciousness , cleanliness and security in 2013 by Best Tent Camping .

And Yet It Moves is a platform video game developed by independent developer Broken Rules . The game was released for Microsoft Windows , Mac OS X , and Linux on April 2 , 2009 , and a Wii port was released on the Wii Shop Channel in August 2010 . And Yet It Moves was originally designed as a computer science project at the Vienna University of Technology in 2007 . When the original prototype won or was nominated for awards at various independent game festivals , the team decided to create a full version of the game . And Yet It Moves focuses on moving the player character through a series of hazardous environments . The player possesses the ability to freely rotate the entire game world , transforming walls into floors and vice versa . The game 's levels and puzzles are designed around this concept . The game features paper collage styled visuals designed by Jan Hackl and a beatboxing soundtrack performed by Christoph Binder . Both the PC and WiiWare versions of the game received positive reviews , with many critics applauding the gameplay mechanics and the visuals . And Yet It Moves was also released as part of the third Humble Indie Bundle .

And Yet It Moves is a single-player puzzle platform game set in a world stylized to resemble a paper collage , where background elements and characters consist of ripped paper . The nameless player character , who appears as a cutout pencil line-drawing on white paper , is moved through a series of levels by running and jumping across the obstacles and avoiding hazards . The player possesses the ability to " spin " the entire game world in 90 or 180 degree increments at any time . Because the rotation is instantaneous and gravity will always point " downward " relative to the game screen , spinning the world has physical consequences on the player character and on the environment : walls that are too steep to climb become flat , walkable surfaces , and objects may move or react to the change in gravity . All objects retain their momentum relative to their frame of reference . The levels in And Yet It Moves are designed such that spinning the world at certain moments is required to progress . Because the character will tear into pieces if he falls from too high a distance , the player must often spin the world such that the character can safely surmount or descend from large obstacles . Other hazards such as wild beasts , fire and boulders , or falling into the black void that borders the playing field will tear the character . However , the player has unlimited lives and will reappear at the last checkpoint he passed prior to being torn .

The main campaign mode offers 17 levels that span three different environments . There are other gameplay features available , such as online leaderboards , various time attack modes , and optional achievements that are awarded for performing specific objectives . In the Wii version , players control the game using the Wii Remote held sideways , and the game world is rotated by twisting the controller in various directions . The Nunchuk and Classic Controller are also compatible for alternate control schemes . This version also removes the restriction to only rotate in 90 degree intervals and offers three additional levels compared to the PC versions .

And Yet It Moves is the first video game developed by Broken Rules , an independent game developer based in Vienna . The game began as a bachelor project held by the Department for Design and Assessment of Technology at the Vienna University of Technology . The four computer science students involved wanted to design a game that gave the player more freedom than possible in normal 2D games ; a side-scrolling platform game with the ability to rotate the entire game world was chosen . A prototype of the game took half a year to develop using the Torque game engine , and the name And Yet It Moves was chosen for its ambiguity and " it hints at world rotation , " an allusion to Galileo Galilei 's famous ( but apocryphal ) remark " Eppur si muove " . The prototype was showcased at various independent game development festivals and garnered positive feedback ; it was a winner in the Student Showcase category of the 2007 Independent Games Festival and a nominee for the 2007 Europrix Top Talent Award . The interest in the title inspired the students to develop a full game , which took approximately two years . Broken Rules was founded when it was realized that " it was a necessity [ in order ] to better deal with all the organizational , financial and juridical hassles that are involved when making business . "

Broken Rules did not have a dedicated artist , so the designers chose a graphical style they believed was both aesthetically pleasing and easy to create . A pencil-on-paper look was first attempted , but it appeared " empty and boring " until photographs , collected from public sources such as morgueFile , were added . The style evolved into the game 's final ripped paper collage look , intended to appear " rough and analog . " Designer Christoph Binder created the game 's background music and sound effects by beatboxing , echoing this motif . Felix Bohatsch , the project lead , stated in an interview that adding a narrative or backstory was avoided in favor of prioritizing the gameplay . He added however that the level design follows a leitmotif that conveys " a journey from being confined to becoming free " as the game progresses , first beginning in dark caves and ending in a wide blank space . In October 2008 , Nintendo contacted Broken Rules and asked if a downloadable WiiWare version of And Yet It Moves could be developed for its Wii console after seeing a demonstration of the game at the 2008 IndieCade Festival in Los Angeles . Bohatsch stated that " we didn 't think long about this decision because we always wanted to bring And Yet It Moves to a console and I have a sweet spot for the Wii . " However , the PC game 's projected release date was April 2 , 2009 ; it was too late in development to begin co-developing for Wii and launch simultaneously on both platforms . PC version development was completed first and then Wii development started in June .

Because And Yet It Moves was originally designed to be played with digital controls , the Wii Remote 's analog motion controls needed to be implemented such that they felt natural and not intrusive . Broken Rules determined , following a number of tests , that allowing the player to freely rotate to any degree best suited motion controls ; originally the player could only rotate in 90 degree intervals . Four different control schemes were implemented to satisfy a wide number of players , three of which either use motion control or the Wii Remote pointer . While the file size limit imposed on WiiWare games was not an issue , the visuals needed to be downsampled to cohere with the Wii hardware . A standard-definition television was used in development ; Bohatsch felt the visuals looked nicer on the SDTV than on a PC or Mac with higher display resolution , but warned that some HDTVs might not upsample the Wii resolution properly , recommending that a component cable be used while playing the game . The online leaderboards were omitted from the Wii version because the PC version 's leaderboards were not frequently used . Three new levels , unlocked when the player completes the main campaign mode , were added . The near final version of the game was submitted to Nintendo 's Quality Assurance team in May 2010 to inspect and find bugs . And Yet It Moves was released on the Wii Shop Channel in North America on August 23 , 2010 and then in Europe on August 27 .

And Yet It Moves received generally favorable reviews . The PC version gained aggregate scores of 71.50 % and 75 on GameRankings and Metacritic , respectively , while the WiiWare version gained aggregate scores of 85.30 % and 83 . Critics applauded the game 's unique take on the platforming genre and the game 's paper collage visual style , but felt the game was too short . Some critics noted the absence of any narrative or backstory , but felt that the game ultimately didn 't need one , though GameSpot noted it as one of the game 's weaknesses . In his review of the PC version , IGN 's Daemon Hatfield stated that And Yet It Moves " manages to make this quarter-century old genre [ 2D platformer ] feel new again . " Hatfield praised the gameplay , which was " challenging but avoids being frustrating " , but felt there wasn 't enough content to warrant the $ 15 price , despite the additional game modes available . Hatfield scored the game 8.4 out of 10 . GameFocus scored the PC version 8.0 out of 10 , praising the gameplay , sound , controls , and use of physics . The review also stated that players are unlikely to experience motion sickness despite the frequent rotating of the game screen . GameSpot scored the PC version 7.5 out of 10 , stating that while the rotation mechanic " wears thin toward the end of the game , " " the increasingly exotic level design manages to keep the good times rolling until the end . "

Justin Haywald of 1UP.com stated that " even when I felt I had to guess which direction I was supposed to go , the levels are set up well enough that the way forward is always easy to figure out " . Haywald praised the visuals as well , but stated that " as the scenery grows more cluttered , it also sometimes becomes difficult to find a safe place to land after sending the world spinning " . Haywald rated And Yet It Moves a B + . NintendoLife rated the WiiWare version 9 out of 10 , stating that the new additions and updated controls made it the " definitive version of the game " despite the omission of online features seen in the PC version .

Felix Bohatsch of Broken Rules reported in May 2009 that sales of the PC version were " not at a level we were expecting " . No digital rights management ( DRM ) protection was placed on the game because " we ... believe that any game will be cracked , no matter how we try to protect it , so our philosophy is that adding DRM or anything similar only annoys the people who actually pay for it . " The bootlegging rate was approximately 95.5 % , meaning " for every game [ sold ] there are 22 cracked version [ sic ] being played " . Bohatsch speculated that the poor sales were partly caused by the levels demonstrated in the free game demo , which did not focus enough on the game 's puzzles . More than 370,000 units of the game were sold as part of the third Humble Indie Bundle .

Sängerfest , also Sängerbund-Fest , Sängerfeste , or Saengerfest , meaning singer festival , is a competition of Sängerbunds , or singer groups , with prizes for the best group or groups . Such public events are also known as a Liederfest , or song festival . Participants number in the hundreds and thousands , and the fest is usually accompanied by a parade and other celebratory events . The sängerfest is most associated with the Germanic culture . Its origins can be traced back to 19th century Europe . Swiss composer Hans Georg Nägeli and educator Carl August Zeller , both protégés of Swiss educator Johann Heinrich Pestalozzi , established sängerbunds to help foster social change throughout Germany and Prussia . University students began to choose the art form as an avenue for political statements . As the sängerfest concept gained popularity and spread around the world , it was adapted by Christian churches for spiritual worship services . European immigrants brought the tradition in a non-political form to the North American continent . In the early part of the 20th century , sängerfest celebrations drew devotees in the tens of thousands , and included some United States presidents among their audiences . Sängerbunds are still active in Europe and in American communities with Germanic heritage .

Students of Swiss educator Johann Heinrich Pestalozzi , a proponent of social reform , applied his teachings when founding some singing groups as an instrument for cultural change . One of his students was Carl August Zeller , who helped establish the sängerbund movement throughout Prussia in 1809 . Pestalozzi 's protégé Hans Georg Nägeli was a composer , music teacher and songbook publisher who made numerous journeys across Germany from 1819 to encourage the formation of male singing groups for social reform . Nägeli established several sängerbunds in Switzerland , which became the inspiration for the 1824 establishment of the Stuttgarter Liederkranz . Following the 1819 Carlsbad Decrees in Germany , male-only choral celebrations with hundreds or thousands of vocalists were popular with the masses and often part of political events . Composer Friedrich Silcher was directly influenced by Pestalozzi and Nägeli . He began using large choirs to express political viewpoints at least as early as 1824 when he and a group of Tübingen University students performed La Marseillaise to commemorate the storming of the Bastille . In 1827 at Plochingen , Baden-Württemberg , several male-voiced choirs combined for a regional liederfest . Sängerfests were part of the Hambach Festival of 1832 .

Christian church organizations known as Christlicher sängerbunds adapted the sängerfest for religious gatherings and helped spread its popularity throughout Europe , North America and Australia . They became popular in late 19th century Russia among Mennonite congregations . On 30 May 1893 , a sängerfest of seven choirs was held in Rückenau in Molotschna , Ukraine . On Sunday , 29 May 1894 , the all-day Russische Saengervereinigung was held in Rückenau under the direction of Polish conductor Friedrich Schweige with assistance from Aron Gerhard Sawatsky , director of the Andreasfeld Mennonite Brethren Church . Beginning on 3 May , Schweiger traveled across Russia rehearsing choirs . On 29 May there were breakfasts for attendees , an estimated 50 vocal presentations by individual choirs , prayer services and sermons , lunch for 2,000 people and afternoon snacks .

Mennonites established the northwest Philadelphia section of Germantown in 1683 . The Philadelphia Männerchor founded by German immigrant Phillip Matthias Wohlseiffer in 1835 was the first German-American singing society organized in the United States where the sängerfest began to evolve as a form of civic entertainment . In 1836 , Wohlseiffer founded the Baltimore Liederkranz , which became the first to accept women members ( 1838 ) . In 1846 , the Philadelphia , Pennsylvania group and the Baltimore , Maryland group performed together at a public sängerfest . The " Brooklyn Daily Eagle Almanac " of 1891 listed numerous sängerbunds in the Brooklyn , New York area . On 21 June 1901 , the Nord-Amerikanischer Sängerbund presented a sängerfest in Buffalo , New York at the famous Pan-American Exposition ( where 25th President William McKinley was shot by Leon Czolgosz in a reception line in September 1901 ) . A group in Buffalo hoped to help pay the expenses of the fest by forming the Buffalo Sängerfest Company , selling 1,600 shares of stock at $ 25 each . In 1838 , the Cincinnati Deustcher Gesangverein was formed in Ohio , followed by the Cincinnati Deutsch Liedertafel in 1844 . The Gesang und Bildungsverein Deutscher Arbeiter formed in 1846 and was the first Cincinnati group that allowed women . Groups from Ohio , Kentucky , Maryland and Indiana created the Nord-Amerikanischer Sängerbund in 1849 for a sängerfest hosted by Cincinnati , featuring the music of German composers . By 1908 , it was estimated that 250,000 German Americans belonged to musical organizations , and 50,000 of those belonged to the Nord-Amerikanischer Sängerbund . The first post-Civil War sängerfest in Columbus , Ohio took place 29 August – 1 September 1865 at Schreiner 's Hall and the Opera House . Each arriving sängerbund was escorted to the hall by the Eighteenth regiment of the United States Infantry . There were an estimated 400 singers entertaining 12,000 to 15,000 attendees . The closing day was celebrated with pomp and circumstance .

The first sängerfest in Texas was held in 1853 in New Braunfels , and was held annually until 1860 when conflicting loyalties about , and participation in , the American Civil War caused a 10-year gap in the events . The San Antonio Männergesang-Verein was formed in 1847 , the New Braunfels Gesangverein Germania formed in 1850 , and the Austin Männerchor formed in 1852 . On 4 July 1853 in San Antonio , the San Antonio Männergesang-Verein sponsored an Independence Day celebration attended by the New Braunfels Gesangverein and the Austin Männerchor . The New Braunfels Gesangverein invited everyone to meet in New Braunfels on 16 – 17 October 1853 for its first Texas Sängerfest . In 1854 , the aggregate sängerbunds formed the Texas State Sängerbund . The San Antonio Beethoven Männerchor was organized in 1867 by Wilhelm Thielepape , assistant conductor of the San Antonio Männergesang-Verein . After the surrender of the Confederacy in 1865 , Thielepape raised the Union flag of the " Stars and Stripes " over the historic Texan battle site and former church mission , the Alamo in San Antonio and distributed wine and songbooks . The all-male Houston Sängerbund was founded on 6 October 1883 and chartered in 1890 . It affiliated itself with Der Deutsch-Texanische Sängerbund . In 1887 , founding member Carl C. Zeus served as principal of the organization 's German-English school .

22nd and 24th President Grover Cleveland , his wife , and guests took a special train from Washington , D.C. on " Independence Day " , 4 July 1888 , forty miles northeast to see a Baltimore event . Cleveland had friends who were members of the sängerbunds . 27th President William Howard Taft attended the 1 July 1912 event in Philadelphia . On 15 June 1903 , 26th President Theodore Roosevelt and Ambassador Herman Speck von Sternberg attended a sängerfest of 6,000 individual singers at Baltimore 's Armory Hall . All 9,000 seats were sold out . President Roosevelt delivered an address praising the German culture and the sängerfest tradition . The Northeastern Sängerbund presented selections by composers Herman Spielter , David Melamet , Carl Friedrich Zöllner , E.S. Engelsberg , Felix Mendelssohn and Richard Wagner . When Newark , New Jersey , hosted the 21st National Sängerfest , held on 1 – 4 July 1906 in Olympic Park , 25,000 people showed up to hear the music , many arriving on chartered trains . Only a few thousand were able to get into the hall , and 2,000 were standing . Five thousand singers from more than a hundred sängerbunds representing forty cities from New Jersey , New York , Maryland , Pennsylvania , and Delaware competed for a $ 20,000 prize offered by Kaiser Wilhelm II . Park vendors offered souvenirs , refreshments , games , and a carousel .

Germans began emigrating to Canada through Nova Scotia , where they helped found the town of Lunenburg in 1753 . The sängerfests were first performed in Kitchener , Ontario , in 1862 . The community events included the standard concerts and meals , with drama presentations and athletic entertainment sponsored by the local Turnvereine clubs . For the next 40 years , sängerbunds and sängerfests spread throughout Ontario . Pennsylvania Mennonites began settling in Ontario in the late 19th century . Alberta and Saskatchewan host annual Mennonite sängerfestes . In 1916 at his sentencing for bigamy , Count Max Lymer Louden related another misdeed from his past . Louden claimed he had been hired by a group of wealthy German Americans with a secret fund of $ 16,000,000 to take 150,000 German reservists , disguised as sängerbunds , across the Canada – United States border for a coup d 'état of Canada , on behalf of Kaiser Wilhelm II . If they drew suspicion , they were prepared to " sing at a moment 's notice . " It was his loyalty to America , he claimed , which caused him to desert the Kaiser 's singing invasion force .

Although some local festivals were canceled or suspended during the two world wars owing to rising anti-German sentiment , the triennial Sängerfest tradition has largely survived and many communities in areas with a significant German-American population have Sängerfests today . Two major German-American singing associations are the Nordöstlicher ( North Eastern ) Sängerbund and the much larger Nord-Amerikanischer ( North American ) Sängerbund ( which , contrary to the name , also includes a few choruses from southern states ) . Nordöstlicher Sängerbund : The 49th Sängerfest was in Lancaster , Pennsylvania in 2006 . The 50th Sängerfest , hosted by the Washington Sängerbund , took place on the 2009 Memorial Day Weekend in Washington , D.C. The 51st Sängerfest , hosted by the Lehigh Sängerbund , took place in June 2012 in Allentown , PA . The Bloomfield Liedertafel hosted the 52nd Sängerfest in 2015 in Pittsburgh , PA . Nord-Amerikanischer Sängerbund : The 61st Sängerfest of the Nord-Amerikanischer Sängerbund was June 2013 in Milwaukee , Wisconsin with over 1300 singers . The 62nd Sängerfest will take place May 27 – 29 , 2016 in Pittsburgh , PA .

Tom Norman , born Thomas Noakes , ( 7 May 1860 – 24 August 1930 ) , was an English businessman , showman and the last exhibitor of Joseph Merrick who was otherwise known as the " Elephant Man " . Among his later exhibits were a troupe of midgets , a " Man in a Trance " , " John Chambers the armless Carpenter " , and the " World 's Ugliest Woman " . Norman started his working life as a butcher in Sussex before moving to London at the age of 14 where he sought a career on the music hall stage . There , he became interested in freak shows which he attended in his spare time . After viewing an exhibition called " Electric Lady " next door to his place of work , he went into business with the exhibition 's manager and began his career as a showman of human oddities . He quickly became successful , for his patter as much as his exhibits , and was called the ' Silver King ' by the American showman P. T. Barnum . In 1884 , Norman took over the management of Joseph Merrick , otherwise known as the " Elephant Man " , and exhibited him for a few weeks until police closed down the show . Merrick later went to live at the London Hospital under the care of Sir Frederick Treves . In his 1923 memoirs , Treves portrayed Norman as a cruel drunk who ruthlessly exploited his acts . Norman refuted this characterisation and said that he provided Merrick ( and his other " freaks " ) with a means of making money independently . Norman continued a successful career as a showman and later became an auctioneer of novelty shows and circuses .

Norman was born Thomas Noakes on 7 May 1860 in Dallington , Sussex . He was the eldest of 17 children to Thomas Noakes , a butcher and a farmer , and his wife Eliza ( née Haiselden ) . Norman was introduced to his father 's trade at an early age and left school to work with him when he was 12 . He decided to go travelling two years later to seek a career as a performer . He was unsuccessful and after a short while , he moved to London where he worked as a butcher 's assistant . A kean gambler , Norman moved to Berkshire where he took up professional gambling at Ascot Racecourse . He wound up penniless and resumed his butchery trade in London where he gained a new interest in freak show entertainment .

After his unsuccessful venture in Berkshire , Norman returned to being a butcher , and , one day , viewed the " novelties " at a penny gaff next to his place of employment in Islington . There , Mlle Electra , " The Only Electric Lady — A Lady Born Full of Electricity " gave audience members an electrical shock via her handshake . Norman was impressed with the exhibition , realised its lucrative potential , and left his job to enter into business with Mlle Electra 's manager . He quickly discovered Electra was a fake connected to a supply of electricity . When Mlle Electra was exhibited at Kingston Fair , Norman realised he would be better off working alone , and successfully staged his own " Electric Lady " in Hammersmith . He learned that his skills as an entertainer were as important to his success as the novelties he exhibited . At some point , he changed his birth name to Tom Norman , and renounced his inheritance . According to Joseph Merrick 's biographers Michael Howell and Peter Ford , Norman may have changed his name to avoid shaming his family by his " distasteful " connections to circuses and fairgrounds .

Over the next few years , Norman 's travelling exhibitions featured Eliza Jenkins , the " Skeleton Woman " , a " Balloon Headed Baby " and a woman who bit off the heads of live rats — the " most gruesome " act Norman claimed to have seen . Other acts included fleas , fat ladies , giants , dwarves and retired white seamen , painted black and speaking in an invented language , billed " savage Zulus " . He displayed a " family of midgets " which in reality was composed of two men and a borrowed baby . He operated a number of shops in London and Nottingham , and exhibited travelling shows throughout the country . In 1882 , Norman gave a show at Islington 's Royal Agricultural Hall . Unknown to Norman , the show was attended by American showman P. T. Barnum . Norman falsely claimed to his audience , as he had often done in the past , that his show had been booked to appear at Barnum 's ' Greatest Show on Earth ' . Barnum was much amused and afterwards , seeing Norman 's silver necklace and noting his gift for oratory , dubbed him the ' Silver King ' . With 13 shops in London alone , Norman ran into a shortage of curiosities and travelled the country looking for new acts . He enticed human novelties into his employ with promises of generous salaries .

In 1884 , Norman came into contact with Joseph Merrick , a young man from Leicester who had extreme deformities . Unable to find work due to his physical appearance , Merrick ended up in the Leicester workhouse for four years . In 1884 he left the workhouse and put himself in the charge of the music hall proprietors Sam Torr and J. Ellis , and the travelling showman ' Little George ' Hitchcock . Collectively , they presented Merrick as " The Elephant Man , Half-a-Man and Half-an-Elephant " . They quickly realised that they would not be able to show Merrick for too long in one place , for fear of the novelty wearing off , and towards the end of 1884 , Hitchcock contacted Norman , an acquaintance of his , and transferred management of the Elephant Man to him . Merrick arrived in London and into Norman 's care . Norman , initially shocked by Merrick 's appearance and reluctant to display him , nonetheless exhibited him at his penny gaff shop at 123 Whitechapel Road , directly across the road from the London Hospital . Because of its proximity to the hospital , the shop received medical students and doctors as visitors . One of these was the surgeon Frederick Treves who arranged to have Merrick brought into the hospital to be examined . According to Norman 's autobiography , Merrick went to the hospital " two or three " times , but then refused to go any more , as the examinations made him feel " like an animal in a cattle market " .

The exhibition of the Elephant Man was reasonably successful , particularly with the added income from a printed pamphlet about Merrick 's life and condition . At this time , however , public opinion about freak shows was starting to change and the display of human novelties was beginning to be viewed as distasteful . After only a few weeks with Norman , the Elephant Man exhibition was shut down by the police , and Norman and Merrick parted ways . Treves later arranged for Merrick to live at the London Hospital until Merrick 's death in 1890 . In Treves 's 1923 memoir , The Elephant Man and Other Reminiscences Norman was portrayed as a drunk who cruelly exploited Merrick . Norman counteracted these claims in a letter in the World 's Fair newspaper that year , as well as his own autobiography . Norman 's opinion was that he provided Merrick ( and his other exhibits ) a way of making a living and remaining independent , but that on entering the London Hospital , Merrick remained a freak on display , only with no control over how or when he was viewed . The character Bytes , respectively portrayed by Freddie Jones in the 1980 film The Elephant Man , is based on Norman .

Norman remained a travelling showman for another 10 years following his encounter with Joseph Merrick , and exhibited , among others , a troupe of midgets , a ' Man in a Trance ' , John Chambers the armless Carpenter and the ' World 's Ugliest Woman ' . In 1893 , he announced that he was leaving for Chicago and advertised his goods for sale , but in the end , he never went . He became involved with the temperance movement and was the vice-president of the Van Dwellers Protection Association ( which later became the Showmen 's Guild of Great Britain ) . He became a showman 's auctioneer , auctioning novelty shows and circuses and according to the World 's Fair , presided over more such sales than any other auctioneer in the country at that time . Norman married the theatre performer Amy Rayner in 1896 , and they had six sons and four daughters . The family moved to Croydon , and Norman went into semi-retirement , selling off some of his shops . In 1905 he sold showman " Lord " George Sanger 's zoo , and then all of Sanger 's circus effects , an achievement Norman called " the crowning point in my life as regards the auctioneering business " . He made his comeback in 1919 with the exhibition of ' Phoebe the Strange Girl ' in Birmingham and Margate .

Banksia sphaerocarpa , commonly known as the Fox Banksia or Round-fruit Banksia , is a species of shrub or tree in the plant genus Banksia ( family Proteaceae ) . It is generally encountered as a 1 – 2 m ( 3.3 – 6.6 ft ) high shrub , and is usually smaller in the north of its range . This species has narrow green leaves , and brownish , orange or yellow round flower spikes which may be seen from January to July . It is widely distributed across the southwest of Western Australia , growing exclusively in sandy soils . It is usually the dominant plant in scrubland or low woodland . It is pollinated by , and is a food source for , birds , mammals , and insects . First described in 1810 by botanist Robert Brown , B. sphaerocarpa has a complicated taxonomic history , and several taxa once classified as part of a broadly defined B. sphaerocarpa have since been named as species in their own right . At present , most authorities recognise five varieties ; the largest variety , B. sphaerocarpa var. dolichostyla ( Ironcap Banksia ) , is sometimes given species rank as B. dolichostyla . B. sphaerocarpa is classified as Not Threatened under the Wildlife Conservation Act of Western Australia , although two varieties have been placed on the Declared Rare and Priority Flora List — var. latifolia has been declared a Priority Two – Poorly Known taxon , and var. dolichostyla has been Declared Rare Flora . None of the varieties are commonly seen in cultivation .

Banksia sphaerocarpa is a variable species that differs in plant size , flower size and leaf size across its range . The variability is marked enough that five varieties are recognised . This species is generally a shrub 0.4 – 2 m ( 1.3 – 6.6 ft ) tall . Plants are smaller in northern parts of the range , and grow larger in the southeast , with var. dolichostyla and rarely var. caesia reaching 4 m ( 13 ft ) in height . All varieties bear a lignotuber , a swollen starchy root crown from which the plant resprouts after bushfire . The new stems are finely hairy but become smooth with maturity . The leaves are stiff , narrow and linear , and measure 2.5 – 10 cm ( 0.98 – 3.94 in ) in length , on a petiole 2 – 3 mm ( 0.079 – 0.118 in ) long . Leaves of most varieties are 1 – 1.5 mm in width , and have a pointed tip , but var. latifolia has wider leaves , 2 – 2.5 cm ( 0.79 – 0.98 in ) , and a blunter tip . The foliage is green , or a more pale blue-grey in the case of caesia and dolichostyla .

The inflorescences are generally globular and measure 5 to 8 cm ( 2.0 to 3.1 in ) in diameter , although larger forms , such as var. dolichostyla , are more oval in shape . Flowering from January to July , the blooms are yellow , orange or brownish in colour . They take five to eight weeks to develop from bud to the finish of flowering . Anthesis takes place over two weeks , as the individual flowers open in a wave across the inflorescence . Three weeks before the flowers open , the spikes develop a strong musky smell . The flowers produce unusually large quantities of nectar ; indeed some flowers produce so much that it drips to the ground . The old flowers fade to brownish and grey hues and remain curled around the flower spike . Up to 60 follicles develop on the globular spikes . The follicles are finely furred at first before becoming smooth and golden brown in colour , measuring 1.5 – 3 cm ( 0.59 – 1.18 in ) long , 0.5 – 0.8 cm ( 0.20 – 0.31 in ) high , and 1 – 2.5 cm ( 0.39 – 0.98 in ) wide . The follicles are flat with pronounced ' shoulders ' , giving a rectangular appearance in cross section . Specimens of var. sphaerocarpa in the Whicher Range , Jarrah Forest and the vicinity of Nannup have larger follicles . The seeds are wedge-shaped ( cuneate ) , and measure 2.0 – 2.6 cm ( 0.79 – 1.02 in ) in length , containing a smaller cuneate seed body measuring 1 – 1.4 cm ( 0.39 – 0.55 in ) long by 0.5 – 1.3 cm ( 0.20 – 0.51 in ) wide .

The earliest known botanical collection of B. sphaerocarpa occurred in December 1801 , during the visit of HMS Investigator to King George Sound . The specimen was collected from " A single plant observed between Princess Royal Harbour & Oyster Harbour on a heath " , and is credited to English botanist Robert Brown , though it is not possible to be certain on this point , as Brown incorporated the collections of junior expedition members into his herbarium without attribution . Neither Brown nor expedition horticulturist Peter Good mentions the collection in his diary . Brown published a formal description and name for the species in his 1810 On the Proteaceae of Jussieu . He did not designate a type specimen ( a specimen to be representative of the species ) for the species , but the one specimen in his collection has since been formally declared the lectotype for the species . He also did not state the etymology of the specific epithet , but it is accepted that the name derives from the Ancient Greek sphaera- ( " round " ) , and carpos ( " fruit " ) , in reference to the shape of its infructescences .

In Brown 's arrangement of the genus , B. sphaerocarpa was placed between B. pulchella and B. nutans in taxonomic sequence ; that is , an order that places related taxa next to each other . No subdivision of the genus was given , other than to separate a single distinctive species into a subgenus of its own . Swiss botanist Carl Meissner published a more detailed arrangement in 1856 , placing B. sphaerocarpa in section Eubanksia because its inflorescence is a spike rather than a domed head , and in series Abietinae , whose members have inrolled leaf margins with no , or only very fine , serrations . Meissner also published a variety , B. sphaerocarpa var. glabrescens , based on specimens collected by James Drummond ; this is now considered a synonym of B. incana . George Bentham 's revision of Banksia for his 1870 Flora Australiensis overturned Meissner 's series ; instead , B. sphaerocarpa was placed in a new section , Oncostylis , because of its hooked styles . Two varieties were recognised : Meissner 's var. glabrescens was retained , and var. latifolia was newly described by Bentham . Bentham noted further variation amongst his specimens not accounted for by his varieties , stating " It is possible therefore that two species may be here confounded , but the specimens are insufficient for their distinction . "

For many years following Bentham 's arrangement , the circumscription of B. sphaerocarpa was widely recognised as unacceptably broad . William Blackall informally published two varieties , var. pinifolia and var. violacea ( properly Banksia violacea ) in his 1954 How to Know Western Australian Wildflowers ; and in 1966 the nurseryman Fred Lullfitz predicted that there were as many as eight taxa within the species . Several of these were recognised in George 's revision of the genus for 1981 " The genus Banksia L.f. ( Proteaceae ) " : B. micrantha , B. grossa , B. lanata , B. scabrella , B. telmatiaea , B. leptophylla and B. incana . George placed B. sphaerocarpa in subgenus Banksia because of its flower spike , section Oncostylis because its styles are hooked , and the resurrected series Abietinae , which he constrained to contain only round-fruited species . He reduced variety latifolia to synonymy with variety sphaerocarpa , but conceded the species needed further review . Alex George reported that he thought Banksia sphaerocarpa 's closest relatives to be Banksia micrantha and B. grossa . George 's arrangement remained current until 1996 , when Kevin Thiele and Pauline Ladiges published an arrangement informed by a cladistic analysis of morphological characteristics . They retained George 's subgenera and many of his series , but discarded his sections . Banksia ser . Abietinae was found to be very nearly monophyletic , and so retained . It further resolved into four subclades , so Thiele and Ladiges split it into four subseries . Banksia sphaerocarpa appeared in the second of these , initially called the ' grossa clade ' for its most basal member . As with George 's classification , B. grossa and B. micrantha emerged as close relatives of B. sphaerocarpa .

This clade became the basis for new subseries Sphaerocarpae , which Thiele defined as containing those species with lignotubers , styles loosely curling around the infructescence ( although this trait was reversed in micrantha ) , and " transversely aligned cells of the seed wing inner face " . Other than the most basal B. grossa , these species also have shouldered follicles . Having found B. micrantha to be more closely related than B. sphaerocarpa var. dolichostyla to the other varieties of B. sphaerocarpa , they promoted var. dolichostyla to species rank as Banksia dolichostyla . Morphological support for this was given by the fact that the old styles of var. dolichostyla are quite different from those of other varieties , being stouter , and tending not to curl around the infructescence as the others do . Questioning the emphasis on cladistics in Thiele and Ladiges ' arrangement , George published a slightly modified version of his 1981 arrangement in his 1999 treatment of Banksia for the Flora of Australia series of monographs . He added that he did not feel the characters of dolichostyla alone justified specific rank , beings essentially merely larger in all parts than , but otherwise essentially similar to , var. caesia . Therefore , he retained it as a variety of B. sphaerocarpa . To date , George 's 1999 arrangement remains the most recent comprehensive classification . The placement of B. sphaerocarpa in George 's 1999 arrangement may be summarised as follows :

Banksia sphaerocarpa is a widely distributed Western Australian species with four ( or five if one includes var. dolichostyla ) varieties : B. sphaerocarpa var. caesia , first described by Alex George in his 1981 revision of the genus , grows larger than most other varieties , reaching 2 m ( 6.6 ft ) , or occasionally 4 m ( 13 ft ) , in height . It has yellow blooms and bluish grey foliage and is found in the central and southern Wheatbelt between the towns of Piawaning , Kojonup , Newdegate and Corrigin . B. sphaerocarpa var. dolichostyla ( Ironcap Banksia ) was first described by Alex George in his 1981 revision of the genus . It is the largest of the varieties , encountered as a large shrub or small tree to 4 m ( 13 ft ) high . It is larger in all parts than the other varieties , and has been considered a separate species . It is restricted to a small area from South Ironcap , east of Hyden , south to Mt Holland in the eastern Wheatbelt . B. sphaerocarpa var. latifolia was originally described in a manuscript by Mueller and published by Bentham in 1870 . It grows as a small rounded shrub to 50 cm ( 1.6 ft ) in height , and is restricted to the vicinity of the south coast between Denmark and the Porongorup Range , where it is found in low , open forest of Eucalyptus marginata and E. calophylla .

B. sphaerocarpa var. sphaerocarpa is widely distributed from the Darling Plateau east of Perth to the Whicher Range in the southwest , and southeast to the Stirling Range . Populations north of Perth once referable to it are now classified as var. pumilio . B. sphaerocarpa var. pumilio , first described by Alex George in 2008 , is a small shrub less than a metre high . It is found from Tathra National Park east of Eneabba south to the Chittering valley . Its subspecific name is derived from the Latin pumilio " small " , relating to the flowers .

Various animals , including mammals , birds , and insects such as bees , wasps , ants and beetles , have been recorded visiting Banksia sphaerocarpa inflorescences , including the colletid bee species Hylaeus sanguinipictus . Botanist Stephen Hopper found pollen of B. sphaerocarpa on New Holland honeyeaters ( Phylidonyris novaehollandiae ) and honey possums ( Tarsipes rostratus ) at Cheyne Beach in a field study published in 1980 . Knowledge of the breeding system of B. sphaerocarpa comes from a 2009 study of genetic structure within and across fragmented plant populations , which made a case study of B. sphaerocarpa var. caesia populations in the vicinity of Dongolocking , where the landscape has been severely fragmented by land clearing . Very little self-pollination was observed . Most mating was between plants in the same population , but inter-population mating accounted for 15 – 33 % of seed , a " very significant contribution ... to overall reproductive dynamics " . This figure was lowest in the smallest populations , which also exhibited lower rates of germination , smaller plants , and less genetic diversity than larger populations . One possible interpretation of this is that interpopulation mating confers a fitness advantage . There was also evidence of fine-scale genetic structure , with plants tending to be more closely related to nearby plants than to more distant plants . The authors suggest that gene flow was probably always limited in these populations , even before they were fragmented .

Banksia sphaerocarpa is one of five closely related Banksia species that have highly unusual flower nectar . Whereas other Banksia species produce nectar that is clear and watery , the nectar of these species is pale yellow initially , but gradually becomes darker and thicker , changing to a thick , olive-green mucilage within one to two days of secretion , and eventually becoming " an almost black , gelatinous lump adhering to the base of the flowers " . It was first noted by Byron Lamont in 1980 ; he attributed it to cyanobacteria that feed off the nectar sugars . Noting that many of these cyanobacteria had heterocysts , he speculated that they aid the plant by fixing atmospheric nitrogen , which is then washed off the flower heads by rain , and absorbed by the proteoid root mat . This purported symbiosis was investigated by Barrett and Lamont in 1985 , but no evidence of nitrogen fixing was found . Further investigation by Markey and Lamont in 1996 suggested that the discolouration is not caused by cyanobacteria or other microorganisms in the nectar , but is rather " a chemical phenomenon of plant origin " . Their analyses indicated that the nectar had unusually high levels of sugar and free amino acids , but three of these species , including B. sphaerocarpa , have since been shown to have normal nectar sugar compositions .

Like most Western Australian Banksia species , B. sphaerocarpa is susceptible to dieback from the soil-borne water mould Phytophthora cinnamomi . In one experiment , 43 % of plants were dead within three months of inoculation , and the species was therefore rated as " moderately susceptible " . In another experiment , 37 % of plants were dead within three months , and 85 % within a year ; yet this study rated the species ' susceptibility as " high " . In the latter study , it took 35 to 40 days for the death rate to reach its maximum , and thereafter the death rate continued at that level throughout the year , only dipping slightly in the dry summer months .

None of the varieties of Banksia sphaerocarpa are commonly seen in cultivation . They are difficult to grow in the wetter conditions of Australia 's east coast . Trials with grafting have been very limited and results have been poor . Otherwise , they adapt well to gardens with good drainage , sandy soils and sunny aspects in drier and Mediterranean ( winter moisture ) climates , and are also frost tolerant . They are good bird-attracting plants , and flower when not much else is in flower . Seeds do not require any treatment prior to sowing , and take 20 to 48 days to germinate .

Hugh of Wells ( Hugh de Wells , or Hugh of Welles , sometimes Hugh Troteman ; died 7 February 1235 ) was a medieval Bishop of Lincoln . He began his career in the diocese of Bath , where he served two successive bishops , before joining royal service under King John of England . He served in the royal administration until 1209 , when he was elected to the see , or bishopric , of Lincoln . When John was excommunicated by Pope Innocent III in November 1209 , Hugh went into exile in France , where he remained until 1213 . When he returned to England , he continued to serve both John and John 's son King Henry III , but spent most of his time in his diocese . He introduced new administrative methods into the diocese , as well as working to improve the educational and financial well-being of his clergy and to secure the canonisation of his predecessor Hugh of Avalon as a saint in 1220 . Although the medieval writer Matthew Paris accused Hugh of being opposed to monastic houses and monks , there is little evidence of the bishop being biased , and after his death on 7 February 1235 parts of his estate were left to religious houses , including nunneries .

Hugh was the son of Edward of Wells and elder brother of Jocelin of Wells , Bishop of Bath . Hugh 's year of birth is unknown , but he was probably an old man at his death in 1235 . The fact that he never left his residence from March 1233 until his death implies that he was impaired from old age . He first appears as a witness on documents of Reginald fitzJocelin , the Bishop of Bath in the late 1180s . After fitzJocelin 's death in 1191 , Hugh continued in the service of the next bishop , Savaric FitzGeldewin . By the end of the 1190s , Hugh was a canon of Wells Cathedral . Although Hugh 's brother Jocelin was given the title of magister , implying that he attended a university , Hugh is never called magister , making it unlikely that he ever received much schooling . Hugh was a keeper of the king 's seal , serving as deputy to Simon of Wells , the Archdeacon of Wells who was Keeper of the Great Seal from around 1199 to 1204 . Simon was also a relative of Hugh 's , and seems to have helped secure positions for both Hugh and Jocelin in the royal administration . Hugh was a royal clerk in the chancery , the royal secretariat , and was named Archdeacon of Wells sometime before 25 April 1204 . He held prebends in the diocese of Lincoln and diocese of London as well . His service in the chancery would have involved him in Hubert Walter 's administrative innovations during his term as Chancellor .

Besides his episcopal appointments , Hugh was rewarded with two manors in Somerset , including the Treasurer 's House in Martock which he made his primary residence , and the right to collect taxes and fines in two hundreds in Somerset . He also served as the royal custodian of the diocese of Lincoln while the see was vacant between 1200 and 1203 , collecting the revenues of the see , most of which went to the king while a see was without a bishop . In 1205 and 1206 , Hugh was royal custodian for the diocese of Bath , which was similarly vacant .

Hugh was elected to the see of Lincoln about 14 April 1209 , after a papal command to the cathedral chapter to elect a new bishop , as Lincoln had again been without a bishop since 1206 . During the summer of 1209 , Hugh , along with his brother , was one of the councilors of King John urging the king to settle with Pope Innocent III before the pope excommunicated the king . However , negotiations with papal representatives got nowhere , and the king was excommunicated on 8 November 1209 . Hugh and his brother Jocelin had continued to support King John until this , two years after many of their fellow bishops had deserted the king , but by late in the year , Hugh left the king 's service and went into exile . The election , meanwhile , had aroused papal suspicions of undue royal influence , and Innocent sent Stephen Langton , the exiled Archbishop of Canterbury to investigate Hugh and the circumstances of his election . Langton was also to investigate rumours that Hugh was not celibate , and had two daughters . The results of the investigation must have been satisfactory , as Hugh was consecrated on 20 December 1209 at Melun . The consecration was performed by Langton . Hugh was in exile in France until he returned to England on 16 July 1213 . His only known activity while in exile was the writing of a will , which was dated November 1212 and was drawn up at St Martin de Garenne , near Paris .

Hugh attended the papal Fourth Lateran Council held in 1215 in Rome , along with a number of other English bishops , and both English archbishops . Soon after his return from the council , Hugh served as a royal judge , serving as one of the justices of the eyre for Lincolnshire , Nottinghamshire , and Derbyshire in 1218 and 1219 . In 1226 he was once more a royal justice . Later , he was employed by King Henry III as an ambassador , helping negotiate with King Louis VIII of France over the status of Normandy and Poitou . Hugh also worked to secure the canonisation of his predecessor Hugh of Avalon as a saint , which occurred in 1220 .

In 1222 , along with the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Bishop of Norwich , Hugh ordered that all those in their dioceses refrain from contact with Jews . This decree , however , was countermanded by a royal decree to the county sheriffs in the affected dioceses ordering them to imprison any residents who refused to interact with Jews . Besides these activities , Hugh was active in his diocese , including supervising the various monastic houses within it . In 1227 , a visitation to Eynsham Abbey resulted in Hugh deposing the abbot . Although the 12th chronicler Matthew Paris accused Hugh of being biased against monks and nuns , and even called him the " untiring persecutor of monks , the hammer of canons , nuns and all the religious " , there is little evidence that Hugh singled out monks for persecution . One reason for Paris ' dislike of the bishop may have been the fact that the chronicler 's own abbey of St Alban 's had to compromise with Hugh over two legal disputes , dealing with the right to appoint to various benefices . Hugh once was credited with creating 300 new vicarages within the diocese , largely on the basis of his surviving documents dealing with this , known as the Liber Antiquus . Further research has shown that a number of the vicarages he was once assumed to have founded were instead earlier foundations that Hugh either augmented or reassessed . Hugh also worked to improve the educational level of this clergy , even refusing to allow some candidates to benefices to be installed because of their lack of education . The bishop also worked to improve the conditions of the poorer clergy in his diocese , attempting to ensure that all the clergy in his diocese had enough to live on . Previously , it was thought that Hugh had sent out a set of articles of inquiry to his diocesan clergy , but these articles are now shown to have been produced by Hugh 's successor , Robert Grosseteste .

In the administration of his diocese , Hugh introduced new methods of recording documents . This system was modelled on that which Hubert Walter had introduced into the chancery , with separate registers for each archdeaconry , and registers , or rolls , for charters and memoranda , much like the Charter Roll or Memoranda Roll of the royal chancery . He also undertook a survey of the endowments of the vicarages within his diocese . Hugh supported the building campaign of Salisbury Cathedral , ordering that money be collected throughout his diocese . Likewise , he ordered similar collections for Daventry Priory , Sulby Abbey and parish churches in his diocese . Not only churches benefited from these sorts of collections , as the bishop offered indulgences to those who helped build bridges at Brampton , Rockingham , and Aynho .

Hugh died on 7 February 1235 , at his episcopal residence at Stow Park . He was buried on 10 February 1235 in Lincoln Cathedral , in the north aisle . In 1233 he had written a new will , which mentions his brother and a niece named Agatha . He left bequests to his family , his household , Lincoln Cathedral , and a number of monasteries in his diocese . What was left after the specific legacies was to be divided between poor religious houses , such as the Barrow Gurney Nunnery , students and teachers at Oxford University , Jewish converts and the poor on the episcopal manors . Hugh 's register of ordinations still survives , and is in the Lincoln cathedral archives . Parts of this were published by Alfred Gibbons in 1888 , and others in 1904 by the Canterbury and York Society . These records give not only the name of the person receiving a benefice , but what the clerical status of each new benefice holder was .

Panzer Dragoon ( パンツァードラグーン , Pantsā Doragūn ) is a rail shooter video game developed by Team Andromeda and released on the Sega Saturn console in 1995 ; and later released on R-Zone , PC , PlayStation 2 , and as a bonus in its sequel Panzer Dragoon Orta for Xbox . The game follows the journey of Keil Fluge ( unnamed in localized versions ) , a member of a hunting party who becomes the rider of a powerful blue dragon ( red dragon in the R-Zone version ) and joins it on its mission to stop a rival dragon from wreaking havoc on the world . The player moves an aiming reticle ( representing the dragon 's laser and the rider 's gun ) over the screen and shoots enemies while the dragon automatically flies through 3D environments on a predetermined track . As one of six games available at the Sega Saturn 's surprise North American launch , Panzer Dragoon was the first game created by Team Andromeda . The game also marked the directorial debut of game designer Yukio Futatsugi , who was 25 years old at the time of the game 's release . It is the first game in the Panzer Dragoon series , and introduced the series ' gameplay elements and art style .

Panzer Dragoon received positive reviews , both in 1995 and in recent retrospective coverage . It was Electronic Gaming Monthly 's " Game of the Month " in July 1995 , was named " Best Saturn Game of 1995 " in EGM 's 1996 Buyers ' Guide , and ranked 140th in EGM 's " The Greatest 200 Videogames of their time " in 2006 . In particular , its original art direction and post-apocalyptic science fantasy universe gained critical acclaim . It was followed by a prequel , Panzer Dragoon II Zwei , in 1996 , and two sequels : Panzer Dragoon Saga in 1998 , and Panzer Dragoon Orta in 2002 .

The game spans six levels , each lasting about five minutes , with a variety of boss battles . Over the course of the game , the plot is revealed through cutscenes using the game 's own graphic engine . Gameplay consists of a player controls a flying dragon and his rider through an aiming reticle that can be moved over the whole screen with the D-pad ; the player must shoot a variety of enemies ( ranging from machines to monsters ) in a 3D post-apocalyptic fantasy environment of barren landscapes and mysterious ruins of a fallen civilization . Progression through the levels is made at a predetermined pace , as the player is constantly set along a rail of gameplay . The only time the game pauses is during boss battles . The field of vision can be directed with the aiming reticle on the x and y-axis , but the overall direction of travel is predetermined . The dragon follows the reticle movements , allowing the player to avoid enemy projectiles and obstacles . The player has a full , 360-degree field of view , and can quickly look left , right , forward , and behind the dragon . Enemies come from all directions , varying in size and health , and also appear on an on-screen radar that monitors the dragon 's surroundings . Two weapons are available : the rider 's handgun , which can be fired with a single button press when an enemy enters the aiming reticle , and the homing laser fired by the dragon , which can lock on up to eight enemies by moving the reticle over them while holding down the fire button . Some situations with many enemies on screen require the use of the lock-on laser , while in others , quick gunshots to weak spots will prove more efficient .

In the distant future , thousands of years after a great war between humans and their biologically engineered weapons , humans live in everything from small tribes to large nations . One nation , the Empire , has discovered a black tower in the middle of a lake near their capital , which gave them access to large amounts of ancient weapons which they used to beat back and control the ever present monsters in the world . The Imperials were corrupted by this power and became conquerors of others as opposed to liberators from a violent world . The introduction movie opens with the protagonist , Keil Fluge ( unnamed in the North American version ) , hunting in a canyon . After seeing an Imperial flying battleship in the sky , he is attacked by two creatures and chases one of them to a large , ancient complex built directly into the rock . He explores the ruin , and sees relics of old technology still hanging from the ceilings . Another gigantic creature suddenly attacks him , and though his weapon is useless against the armored creature , a rumbling triggers a cave in , which crushes the monster and saves Keil . From the newly created hole , an armored , blue dragon flies down the cavern with a rider across its shoulders , being chased by an even bigger black dragon as the cavern is destroyed in an explosion . Regaining consciousness outside , Keil sees the two dragons locked in combat in the air before him . Dodging a blast from the black dragon , the blue dragon 's rider is then hit by single shot to the chest , and the black dragon flies away . The blue dragon flies towards Keil . A psychic connection is made between the rider and Keil , who is told not to let the black dragon reach the black tower . The rider then dies and Keil picks up his fallen gun , climbs atop the dragon and flies away , determined to finish the rider 's quest .

During the first level of the game , Keil and his dragon fly through a drowned city , where they encounter a small Imperial patrol ship . That ship sends a report to a large fleet of ships flying above the clouds . It is revealed that the Imperial forces are specifically searching for the blue dragon . The second level is a desert , where Keil and the dragon encounter gigantic worm-like creatures . At the stormy edge of the desert , they are confronted by the Black Dragon , which is defeated and speeds away . The third level is a mountainous landscape at night-time where Keil and the dragon get reacquainted with the Imperial forces , which were exploring ancient ruins . These encounters illustrate the ongoing conflict between the Imperial forces and the ancient machines and creatures . The fourth level is an ancient facility in which Keil and the dragon are pursued by both Imperial airships and cybernetic sentinels left behind by the ancient civilization . During the fifth level , they defeat a large armada of the most powerful Imperial ships over a forested area . A cutscene then shows a fleet of dragon-like creatures coming out of the tower to attack the Imperial forces . The sixth level features the black dragon and Keil racing through the battle-scarred Imperial capital . During this , they are both waylaid by the creatures and machines seen attacking the Imperial fleet around the tower while also being fired on by Imperial defenses . The black dragon then reaches the Tower and is mutated into a gigantic super-dragon and begins a climactic battle with Keil and the blue dragon , after which the black dragon is defeated and falls into the ocean .

In the ending cutscene , Keil and the dragon enter the tower . While traveling down a long corridor , the dragon surrounds Keil in a force field , lifting him from the saddle and suspending him in the hallway . Keil watches as the dragon continues on to the core of the tower , then a blinding light is seen and the tower explodes . Keil wakes up some time later in a desert area abutting the ocean . Looking down , he sees the foot prints of the blue dragon around him , indicating that after the explosion , the dragon carried him to safety and flew away .

Panzer Dragoon was created in the early 1990s as the Japanese video game company Sega was getting ready to release its Saturn console . At the time , the Saturn lacked third-party games ; because of this , Sega had to internally develop games in every genre , including shoot ' em up . In 1993 , Sega asked its developers for new game ideas , and it was then that Yukio Futatsugi , a young developer who had joined Sega only two years before , proposed several new concepts . One of these concepts was accepted and became Panzer Dragoon . Futatsugi , then 23 years old , was put in charge of the project and became the head of Team Andromeda , a development team that Sega assembled for the occasion in early 1994 and was built around the duo formed by Futatsugi and Manabu Kusunoki , art designer on the project . Overall , development lasted almost a year , and 15 people worked on the game . The project was designed as arcade-style from the start , as core members of the team like Kusunoki came from Sega 's arcade department . Team Andromeda wanted to create a fully 3D arcade game , having worked on similar games such as Out Run which were not truly 3D . With influences like Space Harrier , Starblade , Star Fox , and RayForce , the project became a 3D rail shooter . Usually , in 3D shooters , the player rides a 3D object like a jet fighter or a tank . Futatsugi and Kusunoki decided , however , that it would be more original for the player to ride an armored dragon , a living creature which would also allow for richer animations . The game 's name originates from its original concept , referred to as " armored dragon " ( kiko-ryu in Japanese ) , but Futatsugi , feeling that this was too bland , decided to translate it to German .

With this basic concept in mind , the creators had 3 months to define a visual identity and a setting for their game , prior to development . The game would be set in a post-apocalyptic science fantasy world , featuring ruins and relics of a fallen civilization and mankind struggling for survival , something typical in anime at that time . Futatsugi was particularly influenced by one of his childhood readings , The Long Afternoon of Earth , a science-fiction novel by Brian Aldiss , in which one side of the earth became perpetually hot , the other perpetually cold . The first presentation video featured a green dragon , in line with traditional European / medieval depictions , however the team quickly decided to change it and make it " more sci-fi " . In order for the dragon to be more original , it was made blue and covered in a white , bone-like armor . The dragon was supposed to come from the ancient times , so ruins and ancient flying technology also featured this white , shell-like material . The overall fantasy look of the game 's world , which mixed natural and technological elements , was also chosen in order to set it apart from classic science-fiction 3D games of the time . This world , as well as dragon and character designs , were mainly the work of Manabu Kusunoki , who took inspiration from various sources , including anime and manga , and who pushed the art direction toward a more Turkish / Ottoman style to avoid the European aesthetics of the early presentation video . Critics have noted similarities with the works of French artist Moebius ( notably his comic book Arzach , ) of whom Kusunoki was a fan , as well as with Hayao Miyazaki 's Nausicaa of the Valley of the Wind , and David Lynch 's Dune movie . However , Kusunoki was adamant not to include big robots from popular Gundam-like anime , and unrealistic designs like the spiky and colorful-haired characters wielding impossibly large swords from the Final Fantasy series . Kentaro Yoshida , texturing and modeling artist , described the creation process as similar in style to Star Wars , in that it " made an unearthly world appear so real " . Takashi Iwade , in charge of the opening cutscene and character models , designed the enemies using a lot of various influences : " I got inspiration from antique clocks and various industrial products from the era of the industrial revolution for mechanics , and myriapods , marine mollusks , ammonite , and a rusty fishing boat for creatures when I started thinking of the original battleship " . The team wanted a famous artist to make the game 's cover art . Manabu Kusunoki suggested Moebius , who accepted , and the team sent him designs that he was to interpret . The resulting illustration was used as the cover art for the Japanese release of the game .

The Saturn 's hardware was new to the team , and it was their first attempt at creating an original environment . It was also Futatsugi 's first year working as a full developer at Sega , so he was only able to do simple things while having a clear vision of what he wanted , which helped him to keep the overall style pure , with stark and minimalist cutscenes . Similarly , Iwade kept the enemies easy to understand visually , with simple shapes , and this overall simple style ended up fitting well with the Saturn 's hardware . Then , Team Andromeda set to work on elaborating an extensive back story , and Futatsugi , to be original and to avoid using Japanese or English , went so far as to create a new language for the game : a mix of Ancient Greek , Latin and Russian . This was apparently inspired by the anime The Wings of Honneamise , of which team members were fans and which also features an invented language . After the story and art were established , the team set to work on the graphics . Working on new hardware proved difficult for the young team , and the game ended up missing the initial deadline given by Sega , which was the Saturn Japanese launch on November 1994 . One of the problems was that the Saturn hardware was only finalized in mid-1994 , and without actual Saturn prototype to test their progress , the programmers initially had to work with hypothetical hardware performance . Team Andromeda created its own graphics library and mapping tools instead of using Sega 's , in order to make the most of their first game on the new system . The game 's graphics and cutscenes were done with Softimage , and the 3D elements were programmed on SGI workstations using OpenGL . The programmers were eventually able to transition to the debug Saturn they had received , but the process was difficult and the game had a very low frame rate at first , before it could be locked at 20 FPS . The six levels of Panzer Dragoon are barren landscapes with ancient ruins , which is consistent with the " simple " style appropriate for the Saturn . The first two levels that the team programmed , a desert ( level 2 ) and a forest ( level 5 ) , did not have any objects or anything besides sand and forest effects , again because the team was unsure how far the hardware could be pushed . Keeping CPU limitations in mind , simple tornado effects were added to level 2 , so that it did not look too bland .

Work on the soundtrack began after completion of the game , similar to the way movie soundtracks are made . The idea was to create musics that would specifically reflect each level art-style and events . As the game had an " on rail " progression system , the developers knew exactly where the player would be at any given time , so they showed videos to the composer and asked him to write specifically timed pieces that would match the player 's progression in each level . The soundtrack was outsourced to Yoshitaka Azuma , who was composing musics for NHK TV programs at that time . The music of Panzer Dragoon is a mix between orchestral and synthesizer tracks . Sega of America made several alterations to the game in order to make the North American release more challenging than the Japanese version . These alterations were retained in the PAL version .

The game was first released in Japan on March 10 , 1995 , then in North America on May 11 , 1995 and in Europe on August 30 , 1995 , on the Sega Saturn console . The next year , Panzer Dragoon was ported on PC . Identical to the Saturn version except with a higher resolution , this PC port was also included as an unlockable bonus in the Xbox game Panzer Dragoon Orta , released in 2002 . Aside from providing the source code , Team Andromeda had no involvement in the development of the PC version . The PlayStation 2 console saw the release of an updated version of the game in 2006 in Japan , as part of the Sega Ages 2500 collection . The port was handled by development studio Land Ho , and features both the original Saturn game and an " arrange " version with anti-aliasing filter , better texturing , and improved 3D models for the dragon and some enemies . The " arrange " version also includes new unlockable extras such as level selection and artworks , in the form of a " Pandora 's Box " option menu ( similar to Panzer Dragoon II Zwei ) .

Panzer Dragoon received positive reviews , both in 1995 and in retrospective coverage . Though sales were not as high as Sega expected , possibly due to the success of Sony 's PlayStation console over the Saturn , they were substantial enough for Sega to allow the series to continue with the 1996 prequel Panzer Dragoon II Zwei , also released on the Saturn . As one of the first Saturn titles , the game was highly anticipated by journalists after its appearance in promotional material . Ed Semrad and Danyon Carpenter from Electronic Gaming Monthly praised the game for its " innovative game play " and its " awe-inspiring visuals " from the opening cinematic to the backgrounds and the dragon 's animations . Al Manuel and Ken Williams criticized the game 's lack of diversity in weapons and its predetermined progression ; but the four EGM reviewers agreed that it was a must-have game for Saturn owners . Similarly , The Unknown Gamer from GamePro called the game a " masterpiece " , highlighted its high-quality graphics and musics , and described the story as " captivat [ ing ] " . However , the journalist noted the game 's overall difficulty " will single out all but advanced players " with its lack of power-ups or extra lives of any kind . Nevertheless , the game was seen as a good example of the Saturn 's capabilities . In contrast , a reviewer from Maximum said that the game was much too easy even on the highest difficulty setting , greatly reducing its already low longevity . He also said the gameplay would be too simplistic for many players , with its on-rails shooting and selection of only two weapons , but was overall very positive in his assessment of the game , highly praising the 360 degrees of rotation and most especially the textured 3D graphics of the enemies , settings , and bosses .

Patrick Gabbatta from Game Players stated that while the game may come off as " just a simple shooter " , it is at least a " very good one " that " puts a twist on the tired formula " , again praising the game play and the variety in camera angles . Chris Gore from VideoGames & Computer Entertainment named the game " the best shooter since Star Fox " , and a must-have for fantasy and sci-fi fans , with its " eerie " atmosphere noted by editor Betty Hallock . While the story itself was said to be " somewhat typical " and editor Chris Bieniek criticized the on-rail aspect , Gore noted the game 's " spectacular visuals " , and presented it as one of the Saturn 's system sellers . Famitsu magazine 's Reader Cross Review gave the game a 9 out of 10 in April 1995 , and it was named " Best Saturn Game of 1995 " by Electronic Gaming Monthly in their 1996 Buyers ' Guide . The game 's universe itself was deemed " coolly surreal " by Entertainment Weekly reviewer Albert Kim , who thought the game 's seven-minute " movie-quality " introduction was " gorgeous " and " nearly overshadowed the game itself " . Kim argued that Panzer Dragoon could be seen as a " lyrical and exhilarating epic " , a " story , not just a game " which could pave the way for a " transformation " of the videogame industry . Film director Steven Spielberg approached Team Andromeda to say he was impressed by the game 's presentation at the 1995 E3 show .

James Mielke from online game magazine 1UP.com gave Panzer Dragoon a retroactive review of 8 / 10 for what the game offered in 1995 , but gave it a modern score of 6 / 10 . Mielke highlighted the music as " one of the finest game soundtracks ever produced , " but said that the game itself " staggers a bit under the glaring light of a critical rereview [ sic ] " , arguing it is " little more than Space Harrier with a 3D camera and cut-scenes . " By contrast , Levi Buchanan from IGN gave the game a retrospective score of 9 / 10 , opining that " the fact that Panzer Dragoon holds up as well in 2008 as it did in 1995 is a just testament to the staying power of good art and tight gameplay . " Kurt Kalata , in a Gamasutra retrospective , also praised its art and universe , but said the actual game looked " a bit cut and dried " compared to its sequels . Panzer Dragoon ranked 140th in EGM ′ s " The Greatest 200 Videogames of their time " feature published in 2006 .

The Converted Deacon is a 1910 American silent short drama produced by the Thanhouser Company . The film follows the daughter who disobeys her father by associated with the theater and becomes a star on the stage . She keeps it a secret , but he father arrives in town and takes her home because her mother is ill . John DeLacy follows her home and disguises himself to secure a position on the farm . A newspaper reveals the daughter 's fame and only after a song and dance does the father 's anger abate and allows the two lovers to marry . Little is known about the production of the film , but the Thanhouser films were distinguished as being the best of the Independent companies in a The New York Dramatic Mirror editorial . The film was released on July 15 , 1910 , and met with mixed reception . The film is presumed lost

Though the film is presumed lost , a synopsis survives in The Moving Picture World from July 16 , 1910 . It states : " May Sanders is the daughter of a farmer , Deacon Sanders , who is nearly as poor as he is religious . May goes to the city to seek employment , and her father warns her to shun theatres and bad company . Her first job is a maid in the home of Mrs. Carr , wife of a theatrical manager . Mrs. Carr discovers that May can sing and dance exceptionally well , and her husband places May on the stage . She makes a hit right from the start . Also she annexes the affections of John DeLacy , a wealthy young man . But she does not dare tell her parents about her new vocation . Matters drag along until the Deacon unexpectedly arrives in town . May has still pretended to be the maid of Mrs. Carr , and the father finds her in the house when she calls . He tells her that her mother is ill , and she is needed at home . She goes and is promptly put to work on the farm . John follows his sweetheart to the country , and to be near her , pretends to be poor and secures a job on the farm . The newspaper gives the Deacon a clue to the mystery , and he prepares to disown his daughter . But when she sings and dances , his anger melts , he forgives May and John , who later marry with a paternal blessing . "

The writer of the scenario is unknown , but it was most likely Lloyd Lonergan . Lonergan was an experienced newspaperman employed by The New York Evening World while writing scripts for the Thanhouser productions . The film director and the cameraman are unknown and no known credits for the cast are cited by film historian , Q. David Bowers . Members cast may have included the leading players of the Thanhouser productions , Anna Rosemond , Frank H. Crane and Violet Heming . Despite the lack of production details , the quality of the Thanhouser films in general stood out amongst the Independent producers . An editorial by " The Spectator " in The New York Dramatic Mirror contained specific praise for Thanhouser productions by stating , " ... practically all other Independent American companies , excepting Thanhouser , show haste and lack of thought in their production . Crude stories are crudely handled , giving the impression that they are rushed through in a hurry - anything to get a thousand feet of negative ready for the market . Such pictures , of course , do not cost much to produce , but they are not of a class to make reputation . The Thanhouser company , alone of the Independents , shows a consistent effort to do things worthwhile ... " The editorial warned that American audiences were not subject to be entertained by the novelty of moving images and cautioned the Independents that there was distinct danger in quantity over quality . The editorial was written by Frank E. Woods of the American Biograph Company , a Licensed company , and like the publication itself had a considerable slant to the Licensed companies .

The single reel drama , approximately 1000 feet long , was released on July 15 , 1910 . The film had a wide national release in the United States , theaters showing advertisements include those in Kansas , North Carolina , Maryland , Indiana , Pennsylvania , Arizona , and Missouri . One of the last advertisements for the film was in Neosho , Missouri on May 14 , 1913 . The film received mixed reception in trade publications , but some advertisements would boast the power of the film or go so far as to call it a great American drama . The The Moving Picture News stated , " As a sketch of country folk , admirable because it is true . The situations are well worked out . The conversion ! Could it be ? A New England church meeting would be a good place to exhibit and - ask questions . " Though the reviewer in the The New York Dramatic Mirror however disagreed that the premise was plausible , " A [ straight-laced ] old deacon forms the complicating element in this rather conventional and rather improbable story . That a girl could become a comic opera star without the knowledge of her parents is a strain for the imagination . That a simple little dance like the one in the picture could effect such a conversion is another tax on belief . The acting is good , especially in the heroine 's role . The deacon displays an unnatural tendency in such a stern character when he rapturously kisses the photograph of his daughter . " It is unknown if the character of Deacon Sanders is really a church deacon because the synopsis states Deacon Sanders is a farmer who is " nearly as poor as he is religious " .

Christian metal , also known as white metal or heavenly metal , is a form of heavy metal music usually defined by its message using song lyrics as well as the dedication of the band members to Christianity . Christian metal is typically performed by professed Christians sometimes principally for Christians who listen to heavy metal music and often produced and distributed through various Christian networks . Christian metal bands exist in all the subgenres of heavy metal music , and the only common link among most Christian metal bands are the lyrics . The Christian themes are often melded with the subjects of the genre the band is rooted in , regularly providing a Christian take on the subject matter . It has been argued that the marginal yet transnational Christian metal subculture provides its core members an alternative religious expression and Christian identity , and that the music serves the purpose of offering a positive message through lyrical content . This may not necessarily show a direct connection or reference to the Christian faith but often it does . Christian metal emerged in the late 1970s as a means of evangelization to the wider heavy metal music scene and was pioneered by the American Resurrection Band and Barnabas , the Swedish Jerusalem , and Canadian Daniel Band . Los Angeles ' Stryper achieved wide success in the 1980s . In the mid to late 1980s , extreme metal genres were popularized by bands such as Vengeance Rising , Deliverance , Believer and Tourniquet . In the early 1990 , the Australian death metal band Mortification rose to prominence within its country 's underground metal scene . At the turn of the 21st century , the nu metal band P.O.D , with two platinum-selling albums , achieved a mainstream commercial success rivaling that of Stryper . The metalcore groups Underoath , Demon Hunter , As I Lay Dying and Norma Jean ( dubbed by Revolver Magazine as " The Holy Alliance " ) also brought some mainstream attention to the movement in the first decade of the 2000s , achieving ranks in the Billboard 200 .

Christian metal is not a solitary style of music , but rather an ideological umbrella term that comprises almost every subgenre of heavy metal music . The musicians within Christian metal bands typically base their lyrics on Judeo-Christian traditions . The lyrical approach of Christian metal bands is somewhat varied , as some emphasize the positive aspects of faith matters while others iterate the teachings of Christ . Some bands keep their message hidden in metaphors . Only a minority take an aggressive attitude towards those who speak against Christianity , " preaching full-on fire and brimstone and Old Testament style God 's wrath back at extreme Satanists " . References to eschatology and apocalyptic themes , particularly the ongoing spiritual warfare between good and evil as well as the Last Judgment and fall from grace are typical . The lyrical style varies depending on culture , denomination , and country . For example , in Northern Europe the bands with Lutheran members usually prefer a personal lyrical approach , which is seldom meant to " convert " in an aggressive manner , since evangelism has been more typical among American bands . Christian bands never deny their conviction but typically avoid preaching , and sometimes the matter is left unexpressed , leaving religion as a private issue of the listener . Certain bands choose to deal with every day life experiences from a Christian perspective in order to draw both Christian and non-Christian listeners . In such cases , identifying a " Christian band " can be difficult . Secular bands that occasionally deal with Christian topics are a different matter altogether . Defining a Christian band is a much debated issue on Christian metal forums . A Christian band is expected to have either professed Christian members or a Christian message , preferably both .

The term ' heavy metal ' , as it was used by Lester Bangs and Dave Marsh at Creem , referred to a sound best exemplified by albums such as Led Zeppelin 's Led Zeppelin II , Deep Purple 's Deep Purple in Rock , and Black Sabbath 's Paranoid . An examination of some of the lyrics from bands such as these show a lack of any explicitly negative themes . Led Zeppelin 's " Whole Lotta Love " could just as well be a conversation between husband and wife , as not . Black Sabbath 's " Electric Funeral " exactly parallels the blood red moon of St. John 's Revelation , while their " Hand of Doom " describes the ravages of drug abuse . Ozzy Osbourne could be heard preaching to his audience in the earlier song , " Children of the Grave " : " Tell the world that love is still alive you must be brave ; or the children of today are children of the grave . " Later , in the song " In My Time Of Dying " , Robert Plant even pleaded to Jesus : " Meet me Jesus , meet me ; Meet me in the middle of the air ; if my wings should fail me Lord , please meet me with another pair . " Perhaps not overtly Christian , but songs such as these exhibited similar themes .

Early heavy metal fans were viewed by the populace as a counter-culture , just as the fans of rock and roll , in general , were . Early heavy metal lyrics and themes were often accused of challenging Christian values , and as the genre grew , some bands actually did . Among the early bands who were accused of adding negative connotations to the term was Black Sabbath , combining heavy metal music with " occult symbols and odes to the Devil " . The early bands ' use of tritones , a " dissonant sound of the medieval ' Devil 's chord ' " , led to heavy metal being " cast as dumb , crass , and , on occasions , satanic ; music hardly fit for intelligent debate , let alone theological reflection . Despite such accusations , more serious examinations of Black Sabbath lyrics find several songs actually advocate Christianity and specifically warn audiences about the Devil . Bands such as Mötley Crüe , Ratt , and Twisted Sister took " themes of generalized rage , sexual abandon , drug abuse , violence , and despair into the homes of millions of young record buyers . " In the 1980s , with the growing appeal of metal , the National Coalition on Television Violence " called attention to the destructive potential of music videos , many of which graphically depict violence and rebellion . " A British cleric and metal fan analysed that because of distorted guitar sounds , " intense " beats and " muscular " vocals , heavy metal music songs are " unafraid to deal with death , violence and destruction " and that " much of metal 's fascination with Satan or evil is play-acting , driven by a desire to shock . " The Italian Capuchin friar and former metal vocalist Cesare Bonizzi ( " Fratello Metallo " ) stated that there are " maybe " some Satanic metal bands " but I think it 's an act so that they sell more , " and went to add that " metal is the most energetic , vital , deep and true musical language that I know . "

Christian metal has its origins in the late 1960s and early 1970s in the Jesus movement , a hippie movement with Christian ideology consisting of hippies that converted to Christianity . The Christian hippies within this movement , known as " Jesus People " , developed a musical movement called Jesus music , which primarily began in southern California , ex . Los Angeles when hippie street musicians converted to Christianity . These musicians continued playing the same styles of music they had played before converting , among them heavy metal music , though they infused their lyrics with a Christian message . Larry Norman was one of the earliest Christian rock musicians who released his first album titled Upon This Rock in 1969 which is arguably the first Christian rock album produced . Norman 's song " Why Should the Devil Have All the Good Music ? " summarised the ideas of these musicians . The first Christian hard rock group was possibly the California-based band Agape , formed in the late 1960s . Known for their psychedelic rock and blues influences , the band released an album titled Gospel Hard Rock in 1971 , followed by Victims of Tradition in 1972 . After Agape , the Resurrection Band was formed in 1972 in Milwaukee 's Jesus People community and released the hard rock album Music to Raise the Dead in 1974 . The Swedish group Jerusalem was formed in 1975 and is cited as another early Christian hard rock group . In 1978 , Resurrection Band released its album Awaiting Your Reply and Jerusalem released Jerusalem ( Volume 1 ) . Both albums had a notable impact on Christian music culture . During that time , heavy metal was a new style of music for the Christian music industry , and many Christian labels did not expect it to sell well . However , Awaiting Your Reply hit big in the Christian market , and reached No. 6 on the Gospel album sales charts . Jerusalem also became an instant hit among listeners , and within the first six months the record sold 20,000 copies , unheard of within the genre of Christian rock in Europe . The Canadian Daniel Band is cited among the first bands , as is Barnabas .

In the early 1980s , there were four notable Christian heavy metal groups : Messiah Prophet , Leviticus , Saint , and Stryper . Although it is debatable as to which band was formed first , the Orange County native glam metal group Stryper was the most popular one . Stryper was also the first band to identify as Christian metal . Stryper gained attention with their way of throwing Bibles to the audience at their concerts . In the beginning , mostly Christians went to Stryper 's concerts but soon they reached non-Christian audience . In the 1980s , Christian metal bands closely followed the trends of mainstream metal bands . During the mid-1980s , heavy metal music divided into autonomous subgenres . Weinstein ( 2000 ) described the thematic diversity that cross-cuts musical styles : " In the 1980s , white metal and black metal emerged . Their lyrical themes are at polar opposites to each other , one of them bringing the ' good news ' and the other the ' bad news . ' Both include bands whose sounds span the full spectrum of metal . White metal is commonly called Christian metal . In part a response to the popularity of the heavy metal genre , it transforms the code of heavy metal to serve purposes of Evangelical Christian sects and other denominations . In part , also , Christian metal is a well-crafted missionary effort to recruit members and save souls . [ ... ] Black metal stands in the thematic opposition to Christianity , not looking upward to heaven but setting its sights on the underworld . Satanic symbols and imagery have been a staple of heavy metal since its beginnings with Black Sabbath and Led Zeppelin . In the West , there is no better symbol for rebellion . But groups such as Mercyful Fate claimed that they were not playing . Their claims to be true believers , followers of the lord of the underworld , were seen by many to be a commercial ploy . " Chicago doom metal group Trouble was known to be the first band that was publicly marketed as " white metal " since their early albums Psalm 9 and The Skull feature Biblical references . The origin of the " white metal " term remains unclear ; it is merely known that the non-Christian label Metal Blade Records used " white metal " as a marketing term , in contrast to black metal .

Soon the Christian metal bands became controversial for their beliefs and often evangelistic goals in the metal music scene , which typically holds individualism in particularly high esteem . Stryper , for instance , although a commercial success at that time , received a hostile reception when they played at a Dutch metal festival in 1985 . Regardless of this , Stryper helped to popularize the genre . They were the first Christian band to reach platinum status on an album . The 1986 album To Hell with the Devil sold 2 million copies and achieved a Grammy nomination . The music videos for " Free " , " Calling on You " , and the power ballad " Honestly " all spent many weeks on Music Television 's Top 10 , and " Free " was in the No. 1 position for 12 weeks ( 60 days ) , May 4 – July 24 , 1987 . Not only was Christian metal criticized by non-Christian metal fans , but soon the movement was also criticized by fundamentalists ; Allmusic wrote that " when church leaders were accusing heavy metal of encouraging Satanism , Stryper set out to prove that metal and hard rock could be used to promote Christianity . The southern California band was viewed with suspicion by both ministers ( who refused to believe that Christianity and metal were compatible ) and fellow headbangers — and yet , Stryper managed to sell millions of albums to both Christian and secular audiences . " For example , the televangelist Jimmy Swaggart wrote a book titled Religious Rock n ' Roll – A Wolf in Sheep 's Clothing in 1987 and criticized the scene , particularly Stryper , for using heavy metal music to preach the gospel of Christianity . Many new bands began to arise , eventually drawing the attention of record labels that specialized in Christian music .

Christian metal soon developed into its own independent record labels and networks . The first Christian metal label was Pure Metal Records , a sublabel of Refuge Records . Soon there appeared other labels such as R.E.X. Records and Intense Records . Fanzines were published in several countries , with Heaven 's Metal as the first one in the US in 1985 . During that time almost every Christian record label became interested in Christian metal , and they advertised the newly signed metal bands on their roster on Heaven 's Metal since it was the only publication exclusively covering the movement . Soon Heaven 's Metal achieved more popularity and became an official , professional publication . Heaven 's Metal achieved a dedicated flock of 15,000 readers . Bands ' sales usually rose when the ensembles were covered on the magazine . During the 1980s and early 1990s , the more underground Christian metal releases were typically distributed in Christian bookstores , and those as well as the fanzines also traded Christian metal cassette copies with the music fans . Many rock and metal fans that became Christians through the ministry of Christian metal bands were rejected from churches in the 1980s . In 1984 , California pastor Bob Beeman saw this problem and soon started the ministry called Sanctuary - The Rock and Roll Refuge . This fellowship brought many musicians together and formed groups such as Tourniquet , Deliverance , Vengeance and Mortal that would soon become ground breaking acts in Christian music culture . Sanctuary 's first worship leader was Stryper 's vocalist Michael Sweet and later Barren Cross ' bass player Jim LaVerde . Sanctuary sponsored the first Christian metal festival , The Metal Mardi Gras , held in 1987 in Los Angeles . This proved influential and soon Christian metal festivals were organized elsewhere as well . Sanctuary 's activities began spreading , and it had 36 parishes all over the United States at its peak by the 1990s . The Sanctuary parishes had a significant impact on the Christian metal movement : groups that would later become notable such as P.O.D. performed their first concerts in Sanctuary .

Doug Van Pelt of HM Magazine stated that Christian metal had its " heyday " in the late 1980s and early 1990s . By 1987 , there were more than a hundred Christian metal bands , and their records were sold at both Christian bookstores and non-Christian retails . By 1988 , the four largest Christian metal bands ( excluding the mainstream success Stryper ) were Bloodgood , Barren Cross , Whitecross , and Leviticus . The Kentucky-based band Bride initially played speed metal , particularly on Live to Die , and reached a wider audience when they released Snakes in the Playground ( 1992 ) . Despite being criticized for their abrupt changes in style in favor of what 's " hot " , are still considered " a primeval force at the centre of Christian heavy metal . " In 1989 , the Orange County group X-Sinner released its debut album Get It , and was one of the most talked about bands within the white metal scene at the time . Noted for a classic metal sound similar to AC / DC , X-Sinner has managed to stay at the head of the Christian classic metal scene .

Glam metal band Holy Soldier , another group hailing from California , released its self-titled debut on Word and A & M Records ( Myrrh imprint ) in 1990 to critical and commercial acclaim . Two years later , the band followed up their debut with Last Train , another critical success , leading to 60 city world tour . The band Guardian achieved some mainstream attention for its album Fire and Love , and one of the videos was included in the MTV 's Headbangers Ball rotation . The heavy metal band Angelica introduced vocalist Rob Rock , who also achieved initial fame as the vocalist for guitar virtuoso Chris Impellitteri 's band Impellitteri during the 1980s and 1990s and then went solo with his Rage of Creation album . In the early 1990s , the rising musical styles , especially grunge , began to take their places as the dominant styles in the mainstream , which resulted in heavy metal music losing popularity and going underground for a decade . Many Christian metal musicians began to play extreme metal , and soon death metal replaced thrash metal in popularity . Audiences in many underground metal scenes began favoring more extreme sounds and disparaging the popular styles . As with other glam metal acts of the time , Stryper lost popularity and split up in 1993 .

Bruce Moore writes in the e-book Metal Missionaries that during mid-1990s Christian metal " ceased to play catch up ( replicating secular bands ) and began to assimilate into its rightful place in the Extreme music scene and the artists who played became influential in helping to define this relatively new , but growing genre . " With risen musical quality and more street-credibility , Christian metal and hardcore bands were signed to record labels such as Tooth and Nail , Solid State , Facedown Records as well as secular labels Metal Blade and Victory Records . Christian metal was available through non-Christian outlets ; " For the first time Extreme Christian music moved from the dusty back bin of the Christian book stores to the front racks at super retailers like Best Buy , Circuit City , FYE and even giant retailers like Wal-Mart , Target and Hot Topic . " The German secular metal label Nuclear Blast Records also released Christian metal . Torodd Fuglesteg of Norway 's Arctic Serenades Records has claimed : " The owner of Nuclear Blast was a committed Christian and he was pushing everything with that religious agenda through Nuclear Blast . Mortification and Horde were pushed like mad by Nuclear Blast when other labels were pushing pure satanic stuff . "

In the first decade of the 21st century some groups reached mainstream popularity . There are Christian metal bands that perform virtually every subgenre of metal . The Christian metal movement has spread worldwide since it emerged in the early 1980s , and there are now hundreds of active Christian metal bands . Inspired by the metal revival , many 1980s bands have made comebacks including Saint , Bloodgood and Stryper . In October 2004 , Doug Van Pelt brought Heaven 's Metal back as its own fanzine . The Internet has had a significant role on the revival of Christian metal as well . Many websites and online communities are dedicated to discussions about Christian metal 's music , events , and bands . For the first time since Stryper 's success in the 1980s , certain Christian metal artists found mainstream acceptance selling millions of albums to both Christian and non-Christian fans , including Underoath and P.O.D. The latter became the most successful Christian metal band when their 2001 album Satellite went multi-platinum , while the former 's 2006 album , Define the Great Line , ranked No. 2 on the Billboard 200 . Metalcore features many popular Christian bands , including such crossover bands such as Underoath , As I Lay Dying , August Burns Red , Blessthefall , Norma Jean , Haste the Day , The Devil Wears Prada , Disciple and Demon Hunter . As I Lay Dying have entered the Billboard 200 charts ( No. 8 ) for its record sales and were nominated for the " Best Metal Performance " Grammy for the single " Nothing Left " from the 2007 album An Ocean Between Us . The album made its debut on Metal Blade Records , charting at No. 19 in Canada . In the United States , nearly 40,000 units were sold in its first week . The second week after it was released , it charted at No. 39 in both the United States and Canada . Other Top 200 debuts around the world include a No. 117 in the United Kingdom and No. 154 in Japan . In 2015 , August Burns Red was given " Best Metal Performance " at the Grammys for their song " Identity " , off their Found in Far Away Places album .

Some notable American Christian thrash metal groups include Deliverance , Believer , Vengeance ( frontman , vocalist and last remaining member Roger Martinez currently against Christianity ) and Tourniquet . Allmusic states that Vengeance Rising 's first two albums " were huge successes in the world of Christian music , making them one of the few bands in the genre to cross over into the secular music scene . " Tourniquet was called " arguably the greatest Christian metal band in history " by Cross Rhythms in 1996 . Tourniquet 's Psycho Surgery was ranked as the second most influential Christian metal album of all time by HM Magazine . Deliverance 's 1990 music video for the title track of Weapons of Our Warfare album received some airplay on MTV . Allmusic wrote about Believer 's Sanity Obscure album : " Before 1990 , the Christian heavy metal genre rarely strayed from generic riffing and poor lyrics . Bands like Petra and Sacred Warrior never broke through to the mainstream for this very reason . With low expectations , Believer released this massive slab of molten metal . Although it never really became popular , several mainstream magazines praised the album . "

The British bands Seventh Angel and Detritus introduced Christian thrash metal to Europe . Seventh Angel were considered to be thrash metal pioneers , and their albums achieved mainstream distribution through the Music for Nations label . Cross Rhythms states that for a long time Seventh Angel were considered to be the best metal act in the UK . Seventh Angel also has included aspects of doom metal on some recordings . In the 1990s , New Mexico based Ultimatum and Oklahoman group called Eternal Decision gained some attention , the latter with its thrash and groove metal style . The 1997 album Eternal Decision hit the record stores in the U.S. and 16 other countries , achieving considerable acclaim and providing the band with even more notice .

In 1990 , the Australian group Mortification became the first widely recognized Christian death metal band . Their 1992 album Scrolls of the Megilloth garnered the band some attention from the heavy metal underground , according to Allmusic . At roughly the same time , the band Living Sacrifice was creating thrash and death metal , particularly on the albums Nonexistent ( 1992 ) and Inhabit ( 1994 ) , with Allmusic commenting that " the term Christian death metal seems like one of music 's most comical oxymorons . " Later they " evolved from their early death metal-inspired rumblings into a crushing , staccato-driven , heavily percussive metallic behemoth that pummels listeners with intense riffage and a decidedly personal , though nevertheless , often evangelical lyrical viewpoint . " The Minneapolis-based Crimson Thorn is described by Allmusic as " one of the world 's most extreme-sounding Christian metal bands . " Norwegian band Extol 's 1998 album Burial was called " Revolutionary . This release may have single-handedly been responsible for the revival of the Christ-centered extreme metal . " The band was popular among both Christian and general metal fans , mostly touring with well-known non-Christian bands .

Horde is widely considered to be the first unblack metal ( also called Christian black metal ) band . As a one-man band with only one release ( in 1994 ) , Horde initiated controversy within the extreme metal community , opposing the more common lyrical themes of Satanism and evil . The title of Horde 's only release – Hellig Usvart – means " Holy Unblack " , which is now often used by Christians to refer to Christian black metal , in order to avoid the negative connotations of the term " black metal " . Antestor ( then called Crush Evil ) existed prior to the release of Hellig Usvart but their music was a death / doom style , and was not yet musically considered black metal . During the early 1990s when the band was known as Crush Evil , Euronymous , guitarist for the seminal black metal band Mayhem , was planning to stop Crush Evil from continuing . However , this never took place . The release of Antestor 's The Return of the Black Death on the British black metal label Cacophonous Records in 1998 " set the standard for Christian black metal " . Swedish Crimson Moonlight 's The Covenant Progress , HM Magazine stated , " rivals the best any other band ( Christian or secular ) in this subgenre can offer . " While the unblack scene is not part of the traditional black metal scene , several musicians from both have co-operated : Stian Aarstad of Dimmu Borgir produced Vaakevandring 's eponymous EP , and Jan Axel Blomberg of Mayhem played drums for Antestor 's The Forsaken ( 2005 ) album .

Sacred Warrior preceded Christian power metal in the United States . The German group Seventh Avenue , formed in 1989 , was one of more notable Christian power metal bands in the 1990s . They released Rainbowland in 1995 , and after that the band was signed to Treasure Hunt Records . Their first release on this label , Tales of Tales , topped at 18 on the Japanese Heavy Metal Charts . Later in the 1990s , the Swedish group Narnia made contributions to Christian power metal history , having signed with Nuclear Blast Records , Germany , and Pony Canyon Records , Japan . Later there appeared more notable European groups such as the German bands Chrystyne and Lightmare , and the Swedish groups XT , Divinefire , Harmony , and Heartcry . Among the progressive metal representatives were Balance of Power , whose album When the World Falls Down was picked by Japanese label Pony Canyon . Jacobs Dream was signed to Metal Blade Records . HM wrote of the Athens , Georgia based Theocracy 's self-titled debut album that " Not only did this release gain [ the then-sole member ] Matt a lot of notoriety in the small Christian power / prog scene but the much larger secular power / prog secene embraced this as well . " Later turned to a full band , their sophomore 2008 album Mirror of Souls " defines excellence in current Christian metal . "

In 1987 , the Swedish group Veni Domine started playing progressive and symphonic doom metal and released its first album Fall Babylon Fall in 1992 , ranked as the 38th most influential Christian metal album of all time by HM . HM Magazine wrote that Paramaecium , with its 1993 album Exhumed of the Earth , " essentially delivered the most powerful and moving death / doom recording in the history of Christian metal . " Saviour Machine 's Saviour Machine I was called " amazing accomplishment " by HM and that " their gothic-tinged , progressive metal was quite unique to the scene when it was released in 1993 . " The alternative metal style 's leading groups included the nu metal bands P.O.D. , Thousand Foot Krutch , Disciple , and Pillar . Zao was a pioneer of metalcore , paving way for bands such as Underoath and Norma Jean . The California-based group Mortal is cited as one of the first Christian bands that represented the industrial metal style . Cross Rhythms wrote that when Mortal 's second album Fathom hit the scene in 1993 " there was nothing else quite like it " and that it is " truly a musical milestone . "

Another 1990s reputive Christian industrial metal band was Circle of Dust . The band received MTV exposure with a music video for " Telltale Crime " , and a part of the song " Deviate " was used as the intro-song for a long time in the now defunct MTV Sports show . Argyle Park , an underground supergroup of Christian industrial metal , received some success with the album Misguided ( 1995 ) as did , to some extent , LVL and Klank with Still Suffering in 1997 . Klank 's second album Numb was somewhat successful because the song " Blind " became a hit single . The Australian industrial metal band called Screams of Chaos was known for its bizarre style that combined several extreme metal influences with industrial . The late 1990s and early first decade of the 21st century popular American shock rock group Rackets & Drapes was known to have elements of industrial metal , and received a following .

While not uncommon in predominantly Catholic cultures , Christian metal is rooted in evangelical Protestantism , beginning as a means of evangelism among the non-Christian metal scene . Over the years the focus changed because of the increased secularization of Christianity in the West during the 1990s . Moberg ( 2008 ) notes that the current scene seems to have very little interest in evangelism , especially in Northern Europe . Instead , it is argued that the current Christian metal music scene ultimately provides its core members with important resources for the shaping of an alternative and complementary form of religious expression and practice and an alternative Christian identity . Thus , Moberg states that Christian metal serves four main purposes : an alternative form of religious expression and identity ; as a legitimate form of religious expression ; as an effective means of evangelism and fighting and standing up for the Christian faith ; as a positive alternative to non-Christian metal . In a 2006 interview with HM Magazine , Steve Rowe of Mortification , one of the best known figures in the scene , implies that evangelism is of secondary importance and that Christian metal should first and foremost bring " spiritual encouragement " for its Christian listeners . Moberg ( 2006 ) suspects that Christian metal music may suggest dissatisfaction with traditional forms of worship among today 's young Christians : " They may not feel comfortable with just going to church and singing hymns , they need an alternative means to express the same faith . " Apart from evangelism , Christian metal may also provide a means " to get away from the image of Christianity as something rigid and boring " .

Luhr ( 2009 ) states that Christian metal expresses feeling of isolation and rebellion just like non-Christian metal - but in a completely different way . Christian metal 's rebellion is about " Christian opposition to the perceived sinfulness and immorality of a late modern society and culture in which traditional family values have been eroded through such things as the legalization and increasing acceptability of abortion and pornography and the rise of gay rights and feminist movements . " Causes for the feeling of isolation can be explained with the fundamental Christian struggle of being in the world but not of it . Bloodgood and Barren Cross inverted the meaning of rebellion by declaring that in Western society and culture the Christian faith is true rebellion . As in non-Christian metal , fans are encouraged to stand up for their faith , think for themselves and not blindly follow authorities , including religious ones . According to Moberg ( 2008 ) , Christian metal has developed scenes in countries with long-standing metal subcultures : United States , Brazil , Mexico , Germany , Netherlands , Norway , Sweden and Finland . Despite its seemingly marginal niche audience , as Christian metal fans are counted in the thousands and the non-Christian metal fans in the millions , the Christian metal scene is one of the few transnational Christian communities that do not have any leaders or creed - only music connects its attendees . Just like non-Christian metal , the Christian metal scene has developed its own infrastructure of record labels , promotion and distribution channels , specialized media , discussion forums , attitude , rhetorics , slogans such as " Turn or Burn ! " , " Faster for the Master ! " and " Support the War against Satan ! " , webstores and festivals . Brazil and Mexico have tiny parishes of Christian metal fans . Finland in particular , with metal being more mainstream there than anywhere in the world , has held popular Metal Masses picked up by the Lutheran former state church since 2006 .

Certain Christian groups , most notably those in some King James Only denominations , consider all types of rock and metal music to be opposition to their faith , regardless of lyrical content or the lifestyles of the band members . However , fans and artists see metal as another genre of music , parallel to such genres as blues , classical , jazz , punk , and hip-hop . Bands such as Showbread and Antestor believe that the instrumentation of the music is simply a medium of art , while the person creating the music as well as the lyrics being presented provide the message . Therefore , Christian metal is created when Christians compose metal music in a way that reflects their faith in Christ . Keith Kahn-Harris states in the book Extreme Metal that sometimes fans of metal consider Christian faith and adherence in Church a membership of an established authority , and therefore Christian metal bands are seen as " posers " and the use of Christian lyrics to be opposed to the " true " purpose of metal , which values individualism and ignoring the opinions or rejection of religion . Christian metal groups such as Barnabas and Extol have criticized bands within the industry for a lack of innovation and for isolating bands within the industry . Pastor Bob Beeman of Sanctuary International stated that this is a compliment to secular music , as it lets people to listen to the music they enjoyed without feeling like they are giving up on the style they love and allows bands to crossover into mainstream success .

Some groups within the Christian metal movement have criticized bands within the industry for isolating the genre from general industry too avidly . For example , Christer Espevoll of Extol stated in 2003 : " I wish the scenes were more together . For a long time there has been a huge – and still growing – distance between Christian and secular music industries . This is the situation peculiarly in the US but also in Scandinavia . In my opinion this kind of polarization is not a good thing . Music is first and foremost about music so why should every band or artist that represents a religion or lack of it have its own industry ? Music has no religious borders . " However , most Christian bands today oppose to being isolated in the Christian music industry and have become mainstream successes , such as Virgin Black .

Since Christian metal is very much a counterculture of the Christian music scene , it has never had any major corporate radio outlets , as opposed to the more accepted CCM-associated Christian music formats . Nevertheless , it has remained culturally significant in the genre , primarily enduring the test of time through word of mouth and through the help of pioneering Christian rock and metal broadcasters . Despite the lack of commercial radio support , Christian metal broadcasters have managed to hit the airwaves on public radio , campus radio , Internet radio , and in recent years through podcasting via the Internet . As digital broadcasting technology becomes more accessible , the number of Christian metal broadcasters has steadily increased . Some of today 's largest non-commercial Christian alternative radio stations such as RadioU , Call FM , and Effect Radio have some Christian metal programing late nights and on weekends . However , as a whole these larger stations generally maintain a GMA-prescribed format . Other stations such as Almighty Metal Radio , Savage Rock Radio , Reign Radio , Metal Blessing Radio , The Cross Stream , The Refinery Rock Radio , www.theBlast.fm , and FuelRadio.FM have been able to maintain twenty-four-hour Christian metal formats through Internet radio . Some notable Christian metal radio DJs , shows and podcasts include : " Jesus Solid Rock " Show ( ' 74 - ' 80 ) hosted by Pastor Bob Beeman , " Intense Radio " ( ' 95 - present ) founded by Pastor Bob Beeman and Sanctuary International , " HM Podcast " with HM Magazine founder & publisher Doug Van Pelt , " The Full Armor of God Broadcast " ( ' 97 - present ) hosted by Bro Scotland Kubinski ( Kuba " The Demon Slayer " ) , " Radio U Hardcore " and ( ' 02 - present ) hosted by Jaddeus Dempsey ( A.K.A. " Jad " ) , and " The Nation of Rockwell " .

" Fifteen " is a country pop song performed by American singer-songwriter Taylor Swift . Swift self-penned the song and co-produced it along with Nathan Chapman . " Fifteen " was released on August 30 , 2009 by Big Machine Records , as the fourth single from Swift 's second studio album , Fearless ( 2008 ) . The song was inspired by Swift 's freshman year of high school at Hendersonville High School , where she first encountered heartbreak , along with her best friend Abigail Anderson . After writing it , Swift asked Anderson for authorization to record the song ( due to personal references in the song ) ; Anderson affirmed and it was ultimately included on Fearless . " Fifteen " is a ballad , which has Swift reminiscing on events that occurred to her and her best friend at the age of 15 and cautioning young girls to not fall in love easily . " Fifteen " peaked at number 23 on the Billboard Hot 100 and sold over a million digital downloads in the United States . The music video for " Fifteen " was directed by Roman White . It was filmed using a green screen and is heavily accentuated with special effects . The video features Swift walking through a garden , where she relives many memories with Anderson . It received a nomination for the Best Female Video category at the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards , but lost to Lady Gaga 's " Bad Romance " . " Fifteen " was promoted with live performances , including many that were part of Swift 's first and second headlining tours , the Fearless Tour ( 2009 — 10 ) and the Speak Now World Tour ( 2011 – 12 ) . Swift partnered with electronics retailer Best Buy for @ 15 , a program that allowed teens to help decide how funds would be distributed among various charities .

Swift began writing " Fifteen " with the lyric " And Abigail gave everything she had to a boy / Who changed his mind / We both cried " , which eventually became the song 's bridge , and continued writing everything else in a backwards manner . The song was written about Swift 's freshman year of high school at Hendersonville High School , where she met her best friend Abigail Anderson . " I just decided I really wanted to tell that story about our first year of high school because I felt in my freshman year , I grew up more than any year in my life so far " , Swift stated . The events it focused on were how both Swift and Anderson fell in love for the first time , but both suffered of heartbreaks . Aside from reminiscing on the events she and Anderson experienced , Swift wrote cautionary lyrics , intended to target teenage girls entering or already in their freshman year of high school . She described it as incorporating things she wished someone would have told her in a song when she was younger . " The thing about high school , you don 't know anything . You don 't know anything , but you think you know everything " , Swift said .

After the completion of composing " Fifteen " , Swift became very nervous to show Anderson the song , for she did not know how her friend would respond . " It was a really personal song , especially from her angle of it . " However , when Swift performed the song for Anderson and asked whether she was comfortable with the song , Anderson confirmed : " She said , ' Does it bother you that your name is in a song that 's so personal ? ' And it really doesn 't just because of the way Taylor and I feel about it . If one girl can kind of learn from it or connect to a song like that , it 's totally worth it . " With Anderson 's consent , Swift recorded " Fifteen " with producer Nathan Chapman , who produced all but one track on Swift 's 2006 eponymous debut album , Taylor Swift . Recording the highly personal track caused Swift to cry . Swift attributed the event to the fact that she is most likely to cry over when her loved ones undergo pain , as she witnesses it , rather than her own experiences . She went to say " Fifteen " usually gets her every time .

" Fifteen " is a country pop song with a length of four minutes and 55 seconds . It is set in common time and has a moderate tempo of 96 beats per minute . The track is categorized as a ballad . It is written in the key of G major and Swift 's vocals spans a little over two octaves , from G3 to C5 . It follows the chord progression Gsus2 – Csus2 – Em – Csus2 . It concludes with an outro that consists of Swift singing " la la la " and rephrasing the song 's opening lines . The lyrics of " Fifteen " have Swift narrating about multiple events . In the first verse , Swift details first entering high school with intentions of merely staying out of her peers ' way . The second verse bears Swift meeting Anderson and gossiping about the school 's queen bees with her . Successively , Swift describes first dates and falling in love for the first time . However , Swift and Anderson become heartbroken , revealing that Anderson " gave everything she had " to someone who later changed his mind . The song 's refrains have Swift cautioning young girls to not fall in love easily and acknowledging that she came to the realization of being able to accomplish more than dating a football team member .

Jody Rosen of Rolling Stone believed " Fifteen " was exemplary in that " Swift is a songwriting savant with an intuitive gift for verse-chorus-bridge architecture " . Rosen compared her songwriting in the track to that of producers Dr. Luke and Max Martin , who he referred to as " Swedish pop gods " . He continued , " Her music mixes an almost impersonal professionalism — it 's so rigorously crafted it sounds like it has been scientifically engineered in a hit factory — with confessions that are squirmingly intimate and true . " Jonathon Keefe of Slant Magazine considered the bridge one of the nicer moments of Fearless , but was unimpressed with Swift 's singing , particularly in the outro . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic found " Fifteen " , in which Swift portrayed the role of a big sister instead of a big star , to be one of the best and the most personal song on Fearless . Ken Tucker of Billboard magazine believed " Fifteen " could appeal with teenagers looking for hope and adult women reminiscing the past . Leah Greenbelt of Entertainment Weekly stated , " When she sings about sexuality , she sounds like a real teen , not some manufactured vixen-Lolita " .

Jon Caramanica of The New York Times said " Fifteen " was one of Swift 's best-written songs . James Reed of The Boston Globe believed " Fifteen " was one of Fearless 's most interesting songs and stated he could visualize the lyrics of the song scribbled in a diary that chronicled Swift 's freshman year in high school . Sean Dooley of About.com named it the best track on Fearless and said it showcased Swift 's growth as a songwriter . Josh Love of The Village Voice called the song a " standout " on the album and found it a refreshing contradiction to typical , idealistic country songs . Prior to its single release , Kate Kiefer of Paste magazine suggested for the song be released as a single from Fearless , adding that she loved it . Alexis Petridis of The Guardian called the track a fantastically good song that broadened " her potential market from teenage girls to anyone who used to be a teenage girl " . Petridis continued , " You applaud her skill , while feeling slightly unsettled by the thought of a teenager pontificating away like Yoda . " Aidan Vaziri of San Francisco Chronicle ranked it twelfth on his top 12 singles of 2009 list , commenting , " Damn it if this song isn 't too sweet , too vulnerable and just too real to ignore . "

Following the release of Fearless , on the week ending November 29 , 2008 , " Fifteen " debuted at number seventy-nine on the Billboard Hot 100 Its appearance , along with six other songs , on the chart tied Swift with Hannah Montana ( Miley Cyrus ) for the female act to have the most songs charting on the Billboard Hot 100 in the same week , a record later surpassed by Swift herself when she charted eleven songs at once in 2010 . It re-entered at number ninety-four on the week ending October 3 , 2009 , after its single release . On the week ending December 19 , 2009 , " Fifteen " reached its peak at number twenty-three on the Billboard Hot 100 , and , on the week ending February 6 , 2010 , spent its last week at number forty , after twenty-one weeks on the chart . The song is one of thirteen songs from Fearless charted within the top forty of the Billboard Hot 100 , breaking the record for the most top forty entries from a single album . The single was certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America . As of November 2014 , " Fifteen " has sold over 1,323,000 copies in the United States .

" Fifteen " debuted at number forty-one on Billboard Hot Country Songs . It jumped at number thirty-one on its second week and on the week-ending November 7 , 2009 , it entered the top ten at number ten . Six weeks later , it reached its peak at number seven on the week-ending December 12 , 2009 . The single became her second single that did not reach the top three of Billboard Hot Country Songs since her debut single " Tim McGraw " . " Fifteen " also peak at number ten on Billboard Pop Songs , number twelve on Billboard Adult Contemporary , and at number fourteen at Billboard Adult Pop Songs . On the week ending January 23 , 2010 , the song peaked at number nineteen in Canada . It was certified gold by Music Canada for sales of 40,000 digital downloads . " Fifteen " peaked at number forty-eight in Australia on the week ending December 13 , 2009 .

The music video for " Fifteen " was directed by Roman White , who previously directed Swift 's music video " You Belong with Me " . White began with the intention of creating a video different than others Swift did in the past . To do so , he believed he needed to set the video outside of high school . White explained , " Well , I think I really wanted this video to kind of be an evolution for Taylor [ ... ] I actually said to her , ' I don 't think we should shoot in a high school . ' And I don 't think she wanted to either . " White conceptualized the video 's setting by taking into account the literal meaning of the song and transforming into something new . He conceptualized the setting to be new world where Swift could revisit her memories , as they manifest around her . " Let 's take the literal meaning of this song and watch it evolve in front of us ... almost as a memory in your head . And create this world , somewhere you walk in on this desolate desert and you start to sing about all these great memories you have ... of everything you love blooming around you , and so we literally grew this garden around her " , White said . The world moved from one situation to the next . White decided to annex surreal elements to create a cross between a garden and the heart of the memories . He intertwined Swift 's emotions with the growth of the garden . The garden grew when Swift felt happy , but at the sight of pain and negative emotions , clouds appear and the garden dies , which also symbolized Anderson 's broken heart .

Swift 's friend , Anderson , portrayed herself in the video . The love interests of both Swift and Anderson were cast by Swift after she received images of them via e-mail . The video was filmed in two days . The first day consisted of actors , including Swift and Anderson , filming before a green screen . On the set , White presented Swift with caricature drawings depicting the music video , in order to guide herself . Swift was impressed by Anderson 's acting skills , considering her lack of experience , and called it " prolific " . On the second day , scenes at a high school were filmed ; artificial rain was made . Afterward , White and a team of visual effect artists created the setting . " If you watch just the offline edit of this video , it 's just green . It 's just Taylor walking around a giant green screen . And to think that every single thing in that video was created is amazing , ' cause a lot of people worked really hard on it " , White said . The visual effects team were at work for the video for some time , sometimes staying overnight in the office to produce the video . The direction was to make the video seem " magical " . Some of the props used when filming were recreated using digital animation , such as the door and the desks . Because extras were filmed separately , White was meticulous to find the right shots to make the scene more cohesive . White believed the finished product had a sense of innocence .

The video begins with Swift , barefoot and clad in a white sundress , approaching a tall , arched doorway which materializes in the middle of a barren landscape . Swift looks at a photograph of herself and her friend tucked into the arch and , then , passes through the doors . On the other side of the arch , animated flowers and vines grow across the scenes . People and objects from a high school fade in and out of view . Swift walks through the memories and begins to play an acoustic guitar beneath a tree . Afterward , Anderson appears , sitting at a desk before a chalkboard in the field of flowers . Swift sits down beside her and two begin to whisper and laugh to each other . In the next scene , Swift plays guitar while Anderson goes on her first date ; she kisses her date , but pushes him away when he tries to go further . Her love interest and all surroundings dissolve to show Anderson sitting alone on a stone bench . Swift approaches her and hugs her tightly as the field around them turns dark and stormy . The video then alternates between Swift singing in the rain and hugging her friend . After the landscape deteriorates , the video transitions to reality , where Swift , wearing a black trench coat , stands in the rain , across the street from a high school . Swift then sees a student at the entrance ; the two make eye contact and the video concludes . To date , the video has over 108 million views on YouTube .

The music video premiered on October 9 , 2009 on CMT . Peter Gicas of E ! thought the video was " sweet " and said , " And while the visuals here — Taylor walking in and out of various animated scenes — are certainly nice to look at , they nevertheless take a back seat to the country star 's cuteness . " Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly graded the video a B. Greenblatt believed the video was reverential and painterly , but criticized it by saying " Fifteen " ' s most powerful lyrics were outdone by the dreamy design . Jocelyn Vena of MTV wrote , " Taylor Swift is ' Fifteen ' all over again in the new music video for her song of the same name . " At the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards , the video was nominated for the MTV Video Music Award for Best Female Video , but lost to Lady Gaga 's video for " Bad Romance " ( 2009 ) .

Swift first performed " Fifteen " , as a duet with pop singer Miley Cyrus , at the 51st Grammy Awards . The duo sat on wooden stools for the acoustic performance , with Swift wearing a baggy beige dress layered over a tight black outfit and playing an acoustic guitar . Swift has also performed the song at We 're All for the Hall , a benefit concert organized by Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum , the 2009 CMA Music Festival , the 2009 V Festival , the Australian charity concert Sydney Sound Relief , and the Country Music Association Awards . In the United Kingdom , Swift performed " Fifteen " on Later ... with Jools Holland and The Paul O 'Grady Show . Swift performed the song on all venues in 2009 and 2010 of her first headlining concert tour , the Fearless Tour . The performances of " Fifteen " set on a small platform located at the opposite end , parallel to the stage in the arena . Swift , dressed in a pastel sundress , sat on a wooden stool while performing with wooden 12-string acoustic guitar strapped to her shoulder . Nicole Frehsee of Rolling Stone favored Swift 's performance of " Tim McGraw " at the August 27 , 2009 concert at Madison Square Garden in New York City . Frehsee described the entire concert as an " elaborate spectacle that doesn 't slow down , even when the singer hauls her acoustic guitar into the audience to play a sweet , stripped down set of tunes including ' Fifteen ' . " " Fifteen " served as a performance on the setlist of Swift 's second concert tour , the Speak Now World Tour ( 2011 ) ; the performances featured Swift sitting and playing an acoustic guitar , wearing a blue cocktail dress .

Swift partnered with electronics retailer Best Buy for @ 15 , a program that allowed teens to help decide how Best Buy 's " @ 15 Fund " would be distributed among various charities . Swift taped a Public Service Announcement ( PSA ) , called a " Teen Service Announcement " by Best Buy , for @ 15 . Within the PSA , which was released on February 9 , 2009 , scenes of Swift reminiscing on high school and encouraging originality and uniqueness were inter-cut with scenes of her singing " Fifteen " . In June 2009 , @ 15 became a partner for Swift 's Fearless Tour . The announcement was shown at each stop during the North American leg of the tour . In fifteen tour stops , @ 15 donated forty concert tickets and a guitar autographed by Swift to local teen-oriented charity groups , such as chapters of Boys & Girls Clubs of America and Big Brothers Big Sisters .

Wario World ( ワリオワールド , Wario Wārudo ) is a platform beat ' em up game developed by Treasure and published by Nintendo for the GameCube . It was released in Europe on June 20 , 2003 , in North America on June 23 , 2003 , in Australia on July 10 , 2003 , and in Japan on May 27 , 2004 . The game 's plot centers on Wario and his quest to regain his treasure and his castle from Black Jewel , an evil gem . The game was fairly well received by reviewers . They praised the gameplay but criticized the game for being too short . Wario World has sold over 142,000 copies in Japan and over 256,000 copies in the United States . In 2004 , the game was re-released as a Player 's Choice title .

Wario World 's gameplay centers mainly on combating enemies , although it requires some platform navigation similar to Super Mario 64 and Super Mario Sunshine . The controls are simple , and are only used to jump , run , dash , perform fighting moves , and use the " Hyper Suction " ability to collect nearby coins . The level designs are platform-based with combat elements , and have an overall linear design . The levels contain trapdoors , which lead to special platforming or puzzle-oriented challenges . Throughout the game , small forest sprites known as " Spiritelings " give Wario advice if they are rescued from imprisonment . During combat , Wario can grab enemies and either spin them around , throw them , or piledrive them into the ground . Enemies drop coins when defeated , and tend to regenerate if the area is left and returned to later . The coins are used to purchase items , such as life-restoring garlic , and to return to life . If Wario does not have enough money to return to life , the game is over . A new feature in Wario World are the spherical " glue globes " , in which Wario is stuck to if he touches it , allowing the player to reach otherwise inaccessible areas . Along the way , Wario can re-collect his lost treasures , which are hidden in treasure chests , and collect pieces of golden Wario statues , which increases Wario 's life meter by one half . In order to advance in the game , the player must collect a certain amount of red diamonds in each level . If the player collects all the treasure in the various levels , minigames from the Game Boy Advance title WarioWare , Inc . : Mega Microgames ! are unlocked , and they can be played by using the Nintendo GameCube – Game Boy Advance link cable .

The game begins with Wario enjoying his newly built castle , which is filled with treasures that he has collected from earlier adventures . An evil gem called Black Jewel , hidden amongst Wario 's treasure collection , suddenly awakens and takes over Wario 's castle . Black Jewel turns Wario 's treasure into monsters , and transforms the castle into four worlds called Excitement Central , Spooktastic World , Thrillsville and Sparkle Land , each consisting of two levels and a boss fight . A central area allows access to the different worlds , as well as to the Treasure Square , where the Huge Treasure Box inside of which Black Jewel is hiding can be found . Wario proceeds through the areas controlled by Black Jewel , recovering his treasure and rescuing Spritelings ( the creatures had sealed Black Jewel away in the past ) , then obtains the key to the Huge Treasure Box and engages Black Jewel in a battle . Wario 's subsequent victory allows him to regain control of his castle . During the game 's ending , Wario 's new castle quality depends on the number of Spiritelings rescued . The worst-case scenario sees Wario with nothing but a campsite with his throne in a dark jungle , but if all 40 Spritelings were rescued , Wario is given a palace even grander than his previous one .

Wario World was first shown at E3 2002 as a technical demo . At the next E3 in 2003 , it was shown with new levels of gameplay polish and tweaking , which the previous E3 demo was lacking . On August 22 , 2002 , at Nintendo 's Gamer 's Summit , Wario World 's North American release date was set to November 11 , 2002 . The game was later going to be released on May 26 , 2003 , but was further delayed by one month till June 23 . It was uncertain who was developing Wario World , until April 22 , 2003 , when Nintendo of America officially revealed that Treasure , the company behind the successful titles Gunstar Heroes and Ikaruga , was developing the game . After the successful development collaboration Treasure and Nintendo shared with the Nintendo 64 title , Sin and Punishment , the two companies wanted to work together again . The R & D1 team wanted to continue their co-development juncture with a 3D installment of the Wario franchise . Wario World 's music was composed by Norio Hanzawa and Minako Hamano . Wario was voiced by Charles Martinet , who also voices Mario and Luigi in the Mario series .

Wario World was a commercial success , selling over 142,000 copies in Japan . In 2004 , the game was re-released alongside Mario Golf : Toadstool Tour and F-Zero GX as part of the Player 's Choice line , a selection of games with high sales sold for a reduced price . Wario World received fairly positive reviews . The US version of Play magazine gave the game a perfect score , and the reviewer commented that Wario World " pays off every second [ he is ] holding the controller , and that , to [ him ] , is greatness " . Nintendo Power said that the game was " tons of fun " . GamePro stated that Wario World " stays addictive by weight of sheer design innovation " . The American-based publication Game Informer praised the game for including " droves of awesome boss battles " . Matt Casamassina of IGN declared that Wario World had " some great control mechanics and inventive level work " . Electronic Gaming Monthly 's Greg Ford said , " Wario [ World ] delivers a great time while it lasts and is well worth checking out . Just don 't expect a Mario-quality adventure " . Worthplaying gave the game 9 out 10 , stating that " Treasure has done itself proud with this title , and Wario himself can lift his head up high . At least in my book , he 's got at least one game that 's better than Mario 's . "

Wario World received criticism for its length , with some reviewers stating that the game was shorter than the average console title . Tom Bramwell of Eurogamer compared Wario World to Luigi 's Mansion , a game also criticized for its length , and said that the game was like Luigi 's Mansion " all over again " . GameSpy stated that Wario World " offers little above and beyond the standard 3D platform romp , and what is offered turns out to be very short and repetitive " . GameSpot commented that " the final product is too short and simplistic to hold your attention for more than a day " .

Middlesex is a Pulitzer Prize-winning novel by Jeffrey Eugenides published in 2002 . The book is a bestseller , with more than three million copies sold by May 2011 . Its characters and events are loosely based on aspects of Eugenides ' life and observations of his Greek heritage . It is not an autobiography ; unlike the protagonist , Eugenides is not intersex . The author decided to write Middlesex after he read the 1980 memoir Herculine Barbin and was dissatisfied with its discussion of intersex anatomy and emotions . Primarily a coming-of-age story ( Bildungsroman ) and family saga , the novel chronicles the effect of a mutated gene on three generations of a Greek family , causing momentous changes in the protagonist 's life . According to scholars , the novel 's main themes are nature versus nurture , rebirth , and the differing experiences of what society constructs as polar opposites — such as those found between men and women . It discusses the pursuit of the American Dream and explores gender identity . The novel contains many allusions to Greek mythology , including creatures such as the Minotaur , half-man and half-bull , and the Chimera , a monster composed of various animal parts .

Narrator and protagonist Cal Stephanides ( initially called " Callie " ) is an intersex man of Greek descent with a condition known as 5-alpha-reductase deficiency , which causes him to have certain feminine traits . The first half of the novel is about Cal 's family and depicts his grandparents ' migration from Bursa , a city in Asia Minor , to the United States in 1922 . It follows their assimilation into American society in Detroit , Michigan , then a booming industrial city . The latter half of the novel , set in the late 20th century , focuses on Cal 's experiences in his hometown of Detroit and his escape to San Francisco , where he comes to terms with his modified gender identity . Entertainment Weekly , the Los Angeles Times , and The New York Times Book Review considered Middlesex one of the best books of 2002 , and some scholars believed the novel should be considered for the title of Great American Novel . Generally , reviewers felt that the novel succeeded in portraying its Greek immigrant drama and were also impressed with Eugenides ' depiction of his hometown of Detroit — praising him for his social commentary . Reviewers from the medical , gay , and intersex communities mostly praised Middlesex , though some intersex commentators have been more critical . In 2007 , the book was featured in Oprah 's Book Club .

After publishing his first novel , The Virgin Suicides , in 1993 , Jeffrey Eugenides started on his next project Middlesex . He was inspired by having read Herculine Barbin , the diary of a 19th-century French convent schoolgirl who was intersex . Eugenides had first read the memoir a decade earlier and believed it evaded discussion about the anatomy and emotions of intersex people . He intended Middlesex to be " the story [ he ] wasn 't getting from the memoir " . Eugenides worked on Middlesex for nine years . He started writing during his short-term residence at MacDowell Colony in New Hampshire , United States , and finished the novel in Berlin , Germany ; he had accepted a grant from the German Academic Exchange Service in 1999 . Eugenides spent the first few years trying to establish the narrative voice for his novel . He wanted to " [ tell ] epic events in the third person and psychosexual events in the first person " . According to Eugenides , the voice " had to render the experience of a teenage girl and an adult man , or an adult male-identified hermaphrodite " . Although Eugenides sought expert advice about intersex , sexology , and the formation of gender identity , he refrained from meeting with intersex people , saying , " [ I ] decided not to work in that reportorial mode . Instead of trying to create a separate person , I tried to pretend that I had this [ physical feature ] and that I had lived through this as much as I could " . Eugenides read books , sifted through many sheets of microfiche , and combed through videotapes and newsletters that dealt with the subject . He visited the New York Public Library 's Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture to search for the sole copy of a book about an " elusive historical figure " . He discovered details of what he considered a vivid intersex condition while browsing Columbia University 's medical library .

After discovering in his library research 5-alpha-reductase deficiency , an autosomal recessive condition manifested primarily in inbred , isolated population groups , his perception of the novel significantly changed . Rather than a " slim fictional autobiography " of an intersex individual , the novel would be epic in scope , tracing the lives of three generations of Greek Americans . Eugenides lived in Brooklyn when he began his first draft of the novel . He went through a lengthy brainstorming process . He would write 50 pages in one voice , restart in a different voice with 75 pages , and then pursue a different narrative angle . He wanted the novel to be an " intimate " portrayal of protagonist Cal 's transformation , so he wrote a draft in the first-person narrative in Cal 's voice . He could not , however , portray Cal 's grandparents intimately , so he completely abandoned his preceding year 's draft in favor of writing the book in the third-person . He gradually violated his narrative convention by restoring the first-person voice amid the third-person narration to depict the mindsets of both Cal and Cal 's grandparents . During the writing process , Eugenides moved from Brooklyn to Manhattan and later returned to Brooklyn . Worried about the narrative 's sounding forced , he added instances of " self-reflexivity " to Cal 's voice . After several years of struggling with the narrative voice , Eugenides finally seated himself at his desk and wrote Middlesex 's initial page , " 500 words that contained the DNA for the protein synthesis of the entire book " .

The novel starts with a narration by its protagonist , Cal ( his masculine identity ) , also known as Calliope ( feminine ) : He recounts how 5-alpha-reductase deficiency , a recessive condition , caused him to be born with female characteristics . The book continues with accounts of his family 's history , starting with his paternal grandparents in their home village and ending with his father 's funeral . These accounts cover the conception of Cal , his teenage years , and the discovery of his intersex condition . Throughout the book , Cal weaves his opinion of the events in hindsight and of his life after his father 's funeral . Eugenides sets Middlesex in the 20th century and interjects historical elements , such as the Balkan Wars , the Nation of Islam , the 1967 Detroit riot , and the Watergate scandal in the story . The accounts of Cal 's family history start in 1922 . His grandfather , Eleutherios " Lefty " Stephanides , lives in Bithynios , a village in Asia Minor . Eugenides places the village high on the slope of Mount Olympos , above the city of Bursa , and describes incestuous marriages between cousins as a quietly accepted custom among the villagers . Lefty makes a living selling silkworm cocoons harvested by his sister , Desdemona . The siblings are orphans ; their parents are victims of the ongoing Greco-Turkish War . As the war progresses , Lefty and Desdemona develop a romantic relationship . Fleeing the chaos brought by the war , they board a ship amid the Great Fire of Smyrna and set sail for the United States . Their histories unknown to the other passengers , they marry each other on board the vessel .

After arriving in New York , they locate their cousin , Sourmelina " Lina " Zizmo , in Detroit , Michigan , and go to stay with her . Lina is a closeted lesbian and the only person there to know of the siblings ' incestuous relationship . Starting a new life , Lefty takes on a job at Ford Motor Company , but is later retrenched . He unknowingly joins Lina 's husband , Jimmy , in bootlegging . Desdemona gives birth to a son , Milton , and later a daughter , Zoe . Lina gives birth to a daughter , Theodora or " Tessie " . The relationship between Lefty and Desdemona declines after she learns that there is an increased chance of genetic disease for children born from incest . In 1924 , after Milton 's birth , Lefty opens a bar and gambling room , calling it the Zebra Room . Milton and Tessie marry in 1946 . They have two children , Chapter Eleven and Calliope ( " Callie " ) . Prior to Callie 's birth , Desdemona predicts the child to be a boy , although the parents prepare for a girl . Chapter Eleven is a biologically " normal " boy ; however , Callie is intersex . Her family members are unaware of her situation for many years , so they raise Callie as a girl . Elements of family life are portrayed against the rise and fall of industrial Detroit , where so many struggled . The family gets caught up in the 1967 Detroit riot resulting from racial tensions , after President Johnson authorizes the use of federal troops . The family home is raided during this period , to the shock of the parents . After this harrowing experience , the family moves to a house on Middlesex Boulevard , Grosse Pointe .

When she is 14 years old , Callie falls in love with her female best friend , whom Callie refers to as the " Obscure Object " . In separate encounters , Callie has her first sexual experiences with a woman , the Obscure Object , and with a man , the Obscure Object 's brother . After Callie is injured by a tractor , a doctor discovers that she is intersex . She is taken to a clinic in New York and undergoes a series of tests and examinations . After learning about the syndrome and facing the prospect of sex reassignment surgery , Callie runs away and assumes a male identity as Cal . He hitchhikes cross-country and reaches San Francisco , where he joins a burlesque show as Hermaphroditus . Cal is arrested by the police during a raid on his workplace . He is released into Chapter Eleven 's custody and learns of their father 's death . The siblings return to their family home on Middlesex . In a private moment , Desdemona recognizes Cal 's condition , associating it with stories from her old village about children born of incest . She confesses to Cal that her husband , Lefty , is also her brother . As Milton 's funeral takes place at the church , Cal stands in the doorway of his family home , assuming the male-only role in Greek traditions to keep his father 's spirit from re-entering the family home .

Reporters and critics noted that many characters and events in Middlesex parallel those in Eugenides ' life . The author denied writing the novel as an autobiography . In an interview by National Public Radio in 2002 , he commented on the similarities : Because the story is so far from my own experience , I had to use a lot of details from my own life to ground it in reality , to make it believable for me and then hopefully for the reader , as well . So I would use my own physical appearance . I would use details from my grandparents ' life , the streets they lived on , the kinds of places they lived . And all this made it real for me because it was a tall order to write such a story . Eugenides blended fact and fiction in his book . Like Cal , the author was born in 1960 ; unlike his creation , he is not intersex . His family moved to a house on Middlesex Road in Grosse Pointe after the Detroit riot in 1967 . Eugenides studied at University Liggett School , a private institution that served as a model for Callie 's Baker and Inglis School for Girls . He tapped into his own " locker room trauma " , an adolescent experience of being naked among many other nude bodies , and used it to develop Callie 's self-discovery of her body during puberty . He based the name of the character the " Obscure Object " on a Brown University classmate whom he found alluring and to whom he gave that nickname . Eugenides married a Japanese-American artist , Karen Yamauchi , and moved to Berlin .

Eugenides is of Greek heritage , albeit only through his father 's side . Although his paternal grandparents were not siblings like the Stephanides , they were silk farmers like their fictional counterparts . Cal 's learning of Greek customs to better understand his grandparents mirrored Eugenides ' own actions to do likewise . The Zebra Room and the bartender profession are other items shared by their grandfathers ; Eugenides said the inclusion of the bar was a deliberate " secret code of paying homage to my grandparents and my parents " . Several aspects of Chapter Eleven were based on Eugenides ' elder brother , who withdrew from society during a " hippie phase " in his life . While revising and editing the book , the author removed information that could be offensive to his relatives . Not all such material was excised , Eugenides said , " There may still be things in there that will sting . "

Several reviewers considered Middlesex to be overly verbose . The Economist described the novel as " ponderous " and said that the main story ( that of Cal ) does not " get off the ground until halfway through " the book . Time 's Richard Lacayo concurred ; he considered the hundreds of pages about Cal 's grandparents and several historical events to be trite , making Middlesex 's focus " footloose " in some spots . Several passages in the novel exhibit Eugenides ' obsession with " verbose voluptuousness " . An example noted by Thea Hillman in her review is an incident in which Cal says , " I sat in my seat , in a state of voluptuous agitation , of agitated voluptuousness , until my stop . Then I staggered out . " A contrary opinion is given by Daniel Soar in his article for London Review of Books . According to Soar , Eugenides did " both background and foreground in all the necessary detail " , seamlessly shifting from past to present . Despite the implausible tone of the novel 's events , the author successfully makes them " elaborately justified and motivated " . The quality of Middlesex 's writing was uneven in the opinions of Hillman and another reviewer , Sebastian Smee . The latter pointed out that Eugenides occasionally moves from the heartfelt ( " I remember the first time we took off our clothes in front of each other . It was like unwinding bandages " ) to the " trashily journalistic " ( " You 've heard of installation artists ? Well , the Object [ a heavy smoker ] was an exhalation artist " ) on several occasions .

Humor and irony are frequently used in the book . Mark Lawson of The Guardian considered the narrator 's tone to be " sardonic [ ally ] empath [ etic ] " , and other critics have characterized the beginning of the novel as comical . When Cal is baptized as an infant by Father Mike , a Greek Orthodox clergyman , the priest receives a surprise : " From between my cherubic legs a stream of crystalline liquid shot into the air ... Propelled by a full bladder , it cleared the lip of the font ... [ and ] struck Father Mike right in the middle of the face . " Derek Weiler of the Toronto Star noted that Eugenides has witty commentary about German compound words and the " horrific qualities of public men 's rooms " . The author employed another writing device — abrupt incongruity — in describing Desdemona 's physical appearances to suggest that her incestuous acts should be taken lightly when judging her . In describing her hair , he wrote that her " braids were not delicate like a little girl 's but heavy and womanly , possessing a natural power , like a beaver 's tail " . According to Penelope Music of Book Magazine , the mismatch in tone of the final two words compared with the rest of the sentence was such that the reading experience was changed from " run-of-the-mill magical realism to true , subversive comedy " . An instance of irony is illustrated by Cal 's grandparents and parents : His grandparents assimilate into American culture through hard work and struggles while retaining certain old customs . His parents , however , abandon their roots for a more comfortable lifestyle . In another incident , the diner owned by the Stephanides is engulfed in flames during the 1967 Detroit riot . Cal notes that " [ s ] hameful as it is to say , the riots were the best thing that ever happened to us . " The diner was insured and the Stephanides gain a windfall payout .

Middlesex is written in the form of a memoir , and switches between the first and the third person in several spots . Used as a comedic device , the third person narratives illustrate Cal 's estrangement from Calliope : When he refers to her in the third person , he is identifying her as someone other than him . Patricia Chu , a scholar of English literature , noted the effectiveness of this style in the chapter in which the adolescent Callie searches for information on hermaphroditism . As the teenager reads Webster 's Dictionary , following the trail of definitions related to her condition , she reaches the entry for hermaphrodite . The narration switches from personal to external , lending poignancy to the character 's final discovery as she confronts the word " monster " . Although the protagonist switches gender throughout the book , Cal 's manners of speech and thought are identical to Callie 's . Believing that males and females have no inherent disparities in their writing styles , Eugenides treated Cal and Callie as the same person , in terms of narrative voice . He also fixed the narrative voice in terms of age by setting up Cal to relate the entire story at one time . Eugenides gave his protagonist a mostly male outlook , justifying his treatment with the reasoning that Cal or Callie was a man in terms of appearance , sexual desires , and the brain . He asked his wife and other women to review his approaches on Cal 's feminine views . The " emotional stuff " was accurate but Eugenides had to refine certain details , such as those about toenail polish .

At the beginning of the book when Cal discusses his family 's history and actions prior to his birth , he speaks in an androgynous voice , with limited omniscience ; he acknowledges that he is fabricating some of the details . John Mullan , University College London 's professor of English and a contributor to The Guardian , wrote that by permitting Cal to be unrealistically aware of fellow characters ' thoughts , Eugenides intentionally contravenes an elementary standard in storytelling fiction . In the novel 's closing pages , Cal provides minute details about his father 's dying moments and thoughts in a nonsensical car accident even though he is several thousand miles from the scene and only learns of the tragedy from his brother . Cal has the ability to dwell in the minds of others because as a female who has become a male , his identity is not confined by his own body . According to Mullan , this " mobility of identification becomes a narrative principle " and is thoroughly exploited in Middlesex . The novel follows the principle that people are molded by events prior to their birth , and Eugenides explores a character 's prenatal life in terms of his or her genes ; the narrator is , however , subject to the principle that whatever he does not know is of his imagination . As such , contradictory statements highlight the unreliable nature of Cal 's narration . While narrating the story that pre-dates his birth , he remarks , " Of course , a narrator in my position ( prefetal at the time ) can 't be entirely sure about any of this . " However , he later says , " I alone , from the private box of my primordial egg , saw what was going on . " Cal 's dubious omniscience , doubtful narration , and parodies combine to show that his unreliability is an act of mischief .

Mullan remarked that Eugenides ' narrator has a proclivity to reveal events that will happen in the future . Cal is a narrator who is absorbed in how his fate has been shaped . Cal eschews a chronological telling of the story , where he shares the characters ' nescience . He chooses instead to relate the story beginning with his future knowledge . Cal 's genes reflect an anticipation of the future : the disclosure of his actual sex identity . Cal mimics this " genetic inevitability " by enjoining the readers to know the future prior to its occurring . Mullan observed that " [ f ] or the reader , apprehension predominates over surprise " as a result of this narrative style .

The Kirkus Reviews described Middlesex as a " virtuosic combination of elegy , sociohistorical study , and picaresque adventure " , and Adam Begley in The New York Observer called it " a hybrid form , epic crossed with history , romance , comedy , tragedy . " Other reviews also categorized the book under various genres . Covering the lives of three generations of the Stephanides family , Middlesex is considered a family saga by novelist Geraldine Bedell . The book is more than a mere family saga , according to Samuel Cohen in his paper for Twentieth Century Literature ; it depicts the Stephanides ' trials and tribulations through historical events . Cohen is not convinced by Eugenides ' declaration that Middlesex was not conceived as a historical novel ; he said the novel satisfied much of the criterion for the genre . Cal , narrating his story in 2002 , describes events from the early 1920s to the mid-1970s . According to Cohen , the difference in timeframes , at least 25 years apart , " establishes that the novel is set safely in the past " . According to Stewart O 'Nan of The Atlantic , Cal 's narration evokes the style of the picaresque novel , retelling events that have already occurred and foreshadowing the future through " portentous glimpses " . Francisco Collado-Rodríguez , a professor of American Literature , classified the beginning of Middlesex as a historiographical and metafictional chronicle for its discussion of events such as the Greco-Turkish war and the Great Fire of Smyrna . He also considered the first section of the novel as a tragicomedy about the Stephanides ' migration from Greece and assimilation into America . Soar posited Desdemona and Lefty 's passage as a romantic comedy : the lovers , brother and sister , pretend to be strangers who meet for the first time , attempting " to unknow themselves , to remythologise themselves by developing a past they could live with , unfamiliar and therefore permissible " . As the story progresses , Middlesex becomes a social novel about Detroit , discussing the seclusion of living in a 1970s suburb . At the end of the novel , the story adopts the tone of the detective genre .

The novel is characterized as a " dramatic " Bildungsroman with a " big twist " because the coming-of-age story is revealed to be the incorrect one : after being nurtured as a woman , Cal must instead learn to become a man . The book has " two distinct and occasionally warring halves " . Whereas the first part is about hermaphrodites , the second is about Greeks . The latter half , " full of incest , violence , and terrible family secrets " , was considered by Daniel Mendelsohn , an author and critic , to be more effective because Middlesex is largely about how Callie inherited the momentous gene that " ends up defining her indefinable life " . Writing for The New Republic , James Wood classified Middlesex as a story written in the vein of hysterical realism . He said the novel is influenced by its own recounting of " excitements , patternings , and implausibilities that lie on the soft side of magical realism " . Such moments in the book include how two cousins conceive " on the same night and at the same moment " and how years later , those children marry each other . Woods also pointed out the seeming coincidences that involved locales . Smyrna is the burning city from which she flees to start a new life ; New Smyrna Beach is where she spends her retirement . Effectively serving as a double entendre , the title of the book refers to the name of the street where Cal stays at and describes his situation : a hermaphrodite brought up as a girl but who decides to become a boy . Cal 's condition is also reflected in his choice of locale to narrate the novel : Berlin is a city formerly of " two halves or sexes " ( East and West ) .

Following the Great Fire of Smyrna , Lefty and Desdemona must start life anew . When she is 14 years old , Callie experiences a second birth to become Cal . To become a male , Callie peregrinates across the United States and becomes a midwife of her new life by teaching herself to forget what she has learned as a female . Likewise , Cal 's grandparents undergo a transformation , becoming husband and wife instead of brother and sister . Middlesex delves into the concept of identity , including how it is formed and how it is administered . The immigrant predicament is a metaphor and synecdoche for Calliope 's hermaphroditic condition ; Callie 's paternal grandparents become Americanized through the amalgamation of the elements of heredity , cultural metamorphoses , and probability . Callie 's maternal grandfather , Jimmy Zizmo , undergoes a rebirth when he transforms from a bootlegger into Farrad Mohammad , a Muslim minister .

Middlesex traces the trials and adversity faced by the Stephanides family as they pursue the American Dream . Beginning with Lefty and Desdemona , Cal 's grandparents , fleeing from their homeland to Ellis Island and the United States , the novel later depicts the family living in a suburban vista at Grosse Pointe , Michigan . After they immigrate to the United States , Lefty and Desdemona find themselves in a blissful America on the brink of economic collapse . They dream about a perfect America where effort and morals will lead to good fortune . However , they must seek to attain this perfection during a period characterized by Prohibition and xenophobic anti-immigration legislation . Middlesex depicts the tribulations of attaining an identity , especially while dealing with the revelation that the American Dream is a delusion that has already disappeared .

Middlesex portrays the race relations between people of different cultures ; Mendelsohn considered the handling of this theme " preachy and nervous " . In the United States , a strongly nativist country in the 1920s , Greek immigrants must suffer numerous humiliations at the hands of prejudiced whites . When Cal 's grandfather Lefty , a recent Greek immigrant , is working at one of Henry Ford 's automobile factories , Ford investigators attempt to Americanize him . They visit his house to ascertain that he has been living as a typical American . For example , during his first English-language lesson , Lefty is taught that " [ e ] mployees should use plenty of soap and water in the home " . The narrow-minded nativists believe that immigrants from Southern and Eastern Europe are unaware of the value of soap and water . According to scholar Robert Zecker , the novel depicts African-American poverty but does not illustrate its causes . None of the characters think about how 500,000 African-Americans were placed in cramped living areas of only 25 square blocks and the bitterness and rage that stems from such conditions . The African Americans do not forget the years of oppression they have endured . However , the Greek Americans , like other whites , fail to remember that the African Americans were assaulted by whites in 1943 and faced over two decades of oppression after that . Instead , Zecker noted that the characters in the novel believe that the 1967 Detroit riots are " inexplicable cataclysms that came out of nowhere " .

The novel skims over the brutal attacks , lasting a week , on blacks in Detroit during World War II . Years later , in 1967 , Lefty is incorrectly told that that year 's Detroit riots were started by a black man raping a white woman ; this falsehood is never rectified . However , despite this misinformation , Lefty denies service to a number of white customers who partook in the riots . One dismissed customer even yells at him , " [ w ] hy don 't you go back to your own country ? " , returning the spotlight of racial prejudice on him . The relationship between the Greek Americans and the African Americans is fraught with prejudice . For example , during the Depression , Desdemona is shocked and humiliated that she will have to work in the Black Bottom , a predominantly black neighborhood . When African Americans are beaten or taken advantage of by whites , the characters in Middlesex " suddenly are nearsighted " to the racial prejudice . Despite being in the United States for only 10 years and having experienced racism herself , she can , Zecker noted , " recite at heart the slights at blacks as lazy , dirty , sexually promiscuous , and incapable of self-help " . She and other whites , including immigrants whites , feel rage because they are " convinced they were somehow forced out of Detroit following 1967 " . While walking through the neighborhood , a group of African-American men loafing in front of a barbershop wolf-whistle to Desdemona and make lascivious comments , thus confirming the racial stereotype .

Zecker remarked that in an ironic twist , immediately after the riots , Desdemona 's family is shamed by a white realtor who " doubts their fitness ( whiteness ) " to live in the rich city Grosse Point . In the 1970s , African Americans , instead of Mediterraneans , were discriminated against through redlining . Zecker opined that by framing African Americans as the " eternal destroyers " and white ethnics as " yet again the oppressed innocents " , Eugenides " captures perfectly the dominant narrative of urban decline in the early twenty-first century American Zeitgeist " . Insurance settlement from the damage caused at the riots allows the Stephanides to purchase a home away from the African Americans . The family participates in the white flight from the city to avoid the racial desegregation in the public schools , sends Cal to a private school .

When Lefty and Desdemona are forced to immigrate to the United States , they have different mindsets . Whereas Lefty embraces his new country 's customs , Desdemona is adamant that she will follow her old country 's ways . For example , she is angered that her " immigrant hair " is chopped off because she does not want to " look like an Amerikanidha " and decides to regrow her hair immediately . Lefty attempts to assimilate into American culture by zealously learning English . Lina , the cousin of Lefty and Desdemona , is the paragon of immigrant integration . Cal noted : " In the five years since leaving Turkey , Sourmelina had managed to erase just about everything identifiably Greek about her . " Cal 's father , Milton , and his friends and family cherish their Sunday gatherings . They debate and tell stories to each other , attempting to regain their ethnic roots . A " contrarian " , Milton enjoys debating Richard Nixon and Henry Kissinger and lamenting the steep cost of church candles . Eugenides repeatedly returns the gathering prior to Cal 's conception to " manufacture a psychology that drives his narration " . As the immigrants attempt to maintain their identity , the stage is set for Cal 's writing even before he is conceived .

Middlesex delves into the schism and reconciling of two opposites by contrasting the experiences and opinions of males and females ; Greek Americans and White Anglo-Saxon Protestants ; Greeks and Turks ; and , African Americans and White Americans . Critic Raoul Eshelman noted that despite these conflicts , the narrator is able to achieve " ethnic reconciliation " when he moves to Berlin and lives with the Turks , people who had murdered his forebears in the early 20th century and who had indirectly allowed his grandparents to consummate their incestuous relationship . Alkarim Jivani opined on BBC Television 's current affairs broadcast Newsnight that " [ o ] nly a child of the Diaspora can do that , because we stand on the threshold of two rooms . " The novel also demonstrates that love and family are vital not only to people with unambiguous genders , but also hermaphrodites . The Greek immigrant family experiences a three-phase acculturation that occurs to immigrant families , according to scholar Merton Lee 's research about sociologist George A. Kourvetaris ' work . Each generation identifies with different nationalities and cultures . In the first generation , the family members classify themselves as having a Greek nationality . In the second generation , the children classify themselves with an American nationality and Greek Orthodox religion . In the third generation , the grandchildren , who comprise the most acculturated group , characterize themselves with " Greek-immigration status as a class " .

The Stephanides lineage is from Bithynios , a village in Asia Minor where the Greek middleman minority is inclined to be in uneasy relations with the Turkish majority . The people of the middleman minority do not assimilate because of their small mercantile businesses and because their host country is antagonistic towards them . Desdemona , a first-generation Greek immigrant , reflects a fixation with not assimilating . She tells her husband Lefty that she does not want to become an " Amerikanidha " and is frightened that her cousin Lina 's husband , Jimmy Zizmo , is a Pontian Greek . Desdemona considers Pontians to be adulterated Greeks because Pontians inhabited Turkey , where some became Muslims and did not follow the Greek Orthodox religion . Daniel Soar opined that Olympus , a parallel to Bithynios , served well as the starting point of a debacle ( the eventual birth of an intersex person ) that is the " story 's catalyst " . In Mount Olympus during Justinian 's days , silkworm eggs were contraband transported from China to Byzantium by missionaries . A parallel is drawn when Desdemona , a raiser of silk cocoons , attempts to bring them to Detroit . Because the silkworm eggs are considered parasites by the immigration officials , Desdemona must dispose of them . Soar noted that " for the three generations of Greek Americans who people Middlesex , the mulberry trees of Mount Olympus are an appropriately antique beginning : they are the egg inside which everything began " .

Middlesex has several allusions to Greek classical myths ; for example , the protagonist is named after Calliope , the muse of heroic poetry . Eugenides was partly inspired by the explorations of hermaphrodism in Greek myths to write the novel about an intersex man . In Middlesex , Cal acts out the story of Hermaphroditus , the Greek deity of bisexuality and effeminacy , while eking out a living in San Francisco . While narrating , Cal enters his ancestors ' thoughts and empathizes with them , an ability possessed by Hermaphroditus . The protagonist compared himself to another mythical figure — Tiresias , the blind prophet of Thebes ; the omniscient seer lived seven years as woman because of a curse . Eugenides and several critics compared Cal 's condition to mythical creatures described by the ancient Greeks . The author alluded his protagonist 's nature and heritage to the Minotaur , the half-man and half-bull creature . Cal 's father is conceived after his grandparents ' attendance of a theatric play entitled The Minotaur . The puzzle of Cal 's genetic identity is akin to the creature 's labyrinth and the thread that leads out of the maze is held here by his paternal grandmother , a former silk farmer . Frances Bartkowski , a scholar of English , named Callie in her puberty as a chimera . The mythical monster is an analogy for a complex personality , a mixture of body parts from various animals that each represents a human aspect or characteristic . Similarly , adolescent Callie is an amalgamation of her genes , neither male nor female , neither adult nor child , and yet all of them at the same time .

In her book column for Detroit Free Press , Marta Salij said that Cal 's identity crisis resembles Odysseus 's fate . Whereas the mythical hero is troubled by Poseidon and succored by Athena , the intersex protagonist is affected by his chromosomes in a similar manner . John Sykes , Professor of English and Religion Education , noted another Greek-hero reference . In a manner similar to Oedipus 's fulfillment of Pythia 's prophecy to slay his father and marry his mother , Callie validates the prediction her grandmother made before her birth by adopting a male identity . Eugenides also used the allusions to Greek mythology and modern pop music to show the passing of familial traits and idiosyncrasies from one generation to the next .

The novel examines the nature versus nurture debate in detail . At the beginning of the novel , Cal writes , " Sing now , O Muse , of the recessive mutation on my fifth chromosome . " He then apologizes , saying , " Sorry if I get a little Homeric at times . That 's genetic , too . " This is an allusion to the poet Homer , who was also captivated with the nature versus nurture debate . In fact , Cal himself confesses , " If you were going to devise an experiment to measure the relative influences of nature versus nurture , you couldn 't come up with anything better than my life . " Callie inherited the mutation for a gene that causes 5-alpha-reductase deficiency , which impedes the conversion of testosterone to dihydrotestosterone . While the former hormone causes the brain to become masculine , it is the latter that molds male genitals . When Callie reaches puberty , her testosterone levels increase significantly , resulting in the formation of a larger Adam 's apple , the broadening of her muscles , the deepening of her voice , and the augmentation of her clitoris to resemble a penis . Doctors determine that Callie has the XY chromosomes of a male after inspecting Callie 's genitalia . Callie 's parents bring her to New York City to see Dr. Peter Luce , a foremost expert on hermaphroditism , who believes she should retain her female identity . Luce plans a gender reassignment surgery to make her a female . However , Callie knows that she is sexually attracted to females , and decides to run away to pursue a male identity . When Cal has a sexual relationship with the Japanese-American photographer Julie at the end of the book , he is able to love " without the need to penetrate the object of his desire " .

Mark Lawson of The Guardian noted that the cause of Cal 's hermaphroditic condition is an inherited recessive gene . According to UC Riverside psychology professor Sonja Lyubomirsky , the novel examines how an individual 's traits are due neither solely to nature nor solely to nurture . Similarly , Cal 's gender cannot be defined solely as male or female . Rather , it is both male and female . Addressing how genetic determinism may have renewed the antediluvian beliefs about destiny , Eugenides refutes the post-Freudian beliefs that a person 's traits are mainly due to nurture . Thus , the novel pits evolutionary biology against free will . Eugenides sought to find a compromise between these two views . Explaining that gender is a " very American concept " , he believes that " humans are freer than we realize . Less genetically encumbered " .

Raised as a girl , Cal views himself as a girl who likes other girls . His ability to have a " feminine gender schema " despite his having male genes , substantiates the constructionist position that gender identity is fully dependent on outer influences . However , when Callie discovers that he could have been raised as a boy , he renounces his female gender , recognizing his chosen gender identity as a male . Disowning the female gender before he learned about masculine traits bolsters the argument for the " essentialist ideology of identity " . Cal 's embrace of his inherent male identity and renunciation of his childhood female gender identity is articulated when he reflects , " I never felt out of place being a girl , I still don 't feel entirely at home among men . " Cal exhibits many masculine characteristics when he is a child . He writes , " I began to exude some kind of masculinity , in the way I tossed up and caught my eraser , for instance . " In another incident , Cal discusses how his penchants were masculine . While his female classmates are turned off by the blood in The Iliad , Cal is " thrilled to [ read about ] the stabbings and beheadings , the gouging out of eyes , the juicy eviscerations " . Cal ponders his gender identity and how males and females associate with each other , reflecting , " Did I see through the male tricks because I was destined to scheme that way myself ? Or do girls see through the tricks , too , and just pretend not to notice ? "

Cal also exhibits feminine characteristics , which allows Dr. Luce to classify her as possessing a female gender identity . In a home video taken when Cal was a child , his mother gives him a doll and he nurses it with a milk bottle . Luce carefully observes Callie 's actions and diagnoses them as feminine , which causes him to determine that Callie has a feminine gender identity . Luce then concludes that gender identity is nurtured and etched into children at their young ages . Determining sex is paradoxical because the characters believe that the outward view of genitalia identifies one 's sex ; Cal 's transformation into a male shatters this belief and the methodology behind determining gender . Eugenides addresses how difficult it was for humans to devise a " universal classification for sex " . Through Cal , scholar Angela Pattatucci Aragon stated , Eugenides opines that the 1876 system devised by Edwin Klebs that used gonad tissue to determine sex provides the most accurate answer . According to intersex activist and academic Morgan Holmes , Eugenides posits that a person 's sexual attraction determines his or her gender . Cal 's wish to become male because he desires females demonstrates a link between gender identity and sexuality . While Callie is not permitted to love the Obscure Object openly , Cal can freely love Julie . Holmes believed that the depiction of Callie " denies the legitimate place of lesbian desire and rewrites it as male heterosexuality " . Book reviewer Georgia Warnke has a similar view . She wrote that by making these choices in the novel , Eugenides agrees with the belief that being attracted to females is " masculine " and thus it is " more natural " for a male to be attracted to a female than a female be attracted to a female . Daniel Mendelsohn of The New York Review of Books argued that Callie does not have to be a male in order to be drawn towards females ; she could be gay . As an adult , Cal brags , " Breasts have the same effect on me as on anyone with my testosterone level . " Mendelsohn noted that this assertion will astonish " Eugenides 's ( presumably testosterone-rich ) gay male readership " . Scholar Rachel Carroll agreed , writing that teenage Callie 's erotic interest in girls is " retroactively explained and legitimized , by the discovery of his ' true biological nature ' " . Cal 's gender identity postdates rather than predates his sexual interests . Carroll posited that Cal 's inability to form heterosexual relationships as an adult is founded not upon his being intersex , but on his rejection of the sexual ambiguities that form his sexual interests as a youth .

When Callie is in New York , she goes to the New York Public Library and searches for the meaning of the word " hermaphrodite " ; she is shocked when the dictionary entry concludes with " See synonyms at MONSTER " . Callie is not a Frankenstein ; she is more like Bigfoot or the Loch Ness Monster . Bartkowski stated that Eugenides ' message is " we must let our monsters out — they demand and deserve recognition — they are us : our same , self , others . " Morgan Holmes , formerly of ISNA , describes how the book constructs an intersex character whose life reproduces " social fascination with the monstrous and the deviant . " Sarah Graham wrote in Ariel , a journal published by University of Calgary , that Eugenides ' " persisen [ t ] " use of the word " hermaphrodite " , instead of " intersex " , alludes to Hermaphroditus . Hermaphroditus , a young man , is chased by the nymph Salmacis . She begs the Gods to bind her and Hermaphroditus together , and the Gods literally fulfill her wish . Hermaphroditus ' name is a compound of his parent 's names — Hermes and Aphrodite . He instantaneously turns into someone of both sexes . Devastated because he is no longer fully male , he " curses " the location where he first met Salmacis . Graham stated that the use of " hermaphrodite " carries negative connotations :

Based on this origin story , the hermaphrodite 's lot is miserable , associated with disempowerment , the theft of identity and an unhappy dual existence . In addition , the term " hermaphrodite " may be deemed problematic because it alludes to an impossible state of being : no-one can be equally male and female and the preferred term " intersex " indicates a blended rather than divided state . While the modern term might indicate the possibility of redefining sexual ambivalence , Cal is associated in the novel with the mythic term and all it connotes . His connection to this tragic figure is confirmed by his performance as " Hermaphroditus " in a sex show at the age of fourteen , just as he is beginning his female to male transition . Writing that he belongs to the Intersex Society of America , Cal notes that he has not participated in any of the group 's rallies because he is not a " political person " . While discussing political activism , Cal uses the word " intersex " , though in other parts of the novel , he uses the word " hermaphrodite " . In the 1920s , Bernice L. Hausman described " intersexuality " as a " continuum of physiological and anatomical sex differences " , contesting the notion of a " true sex " concealed in the tissues of the body . Though " hermaphrodite " is burdened by the implications of the anomaly , " intersexuality " is a neologism that tries to " naturalize various sexes , which themselves are naturally occurring " . Because Cal uses " hermaphrodite " , he indicates that the sole normal genders are the classifications of male and female . Eugenides was asked by an Oprah 's Book Club member why he used the term " hermaphrodite " despite its usage being " either terribly ignorant or unforgivably callous " . Eugenides replied that he reserved " hermaphrodite " for a literary character : Hermaphroditus . He further stated : " When speaking about real people , I should — and I do my best to — use the term ' intersex ' . " Noting that one of the initial sources he consulted was the journal Hermaphrodites with Attitude published by the Intersex Society of North America , he said that those writers have " co-opted " the term " hermaphrodite " . Their action is reminiscent , Eugenides wrote , of how some members of the gay community have " reclaimed " the term " queer " . Eugenides stated that it is no surprise that Cal uses " hermaphrodite " and further elaborated : " It 's paradoxical : Cal can say ' hermaphodite ' but I can 't . Or shouldn 't . "

Incest and intersex is another theme in Middlesex . Eugenides examines the passionate feelings that siblings living in seclusion experience for each other . Milton and Tessie , second cousins , are conceived during the same night , hinting to the incest of Desdemona and Lefty . Desdemona and Lefty 's incestuous relationship is a transgression of a powerful taboo , indicating that someone will suffer for their wrongs ; in a way , Cal 's intersex condition symbolizes this Greek hubris . In another incestuous relationship , Milton makes love to Tessie using a clarinet which he lovingly rubs against her ; their incestuous relationship enables them to contribute mutated genes to their child Cal . Cal 's mother interferes with fate by attempting to make her second child a daughter . Cal believes this interference was a factor in his being a hermaphrodite . Conversely , Cal 's relationship with his brother , Chapter Eleven , is indicative of the possible dissimilarities that are products of the biosocial . Thea Hillman , an intersex activist and board member for ( the now defunct ) Intersex Society of North America ( ISNA ) , wrote in the Lambda Book Report , 2002 , that the combination of incest and intersex is " inaccurate and misleading " . Noting that incest is a loathed social taboo that has " shameful , pathological and criminal repercussions " , she criticized Eugenides for underscoring that Cal 's intersex condition is due to incest . Hillman stated that this adds to the fallacious belief that intersex people are " shameful and sick " and a danger to society 's wellbeing .

Sarah Graham agrees with Hillman and Holmes , writing that Cal is paralleled with the tragic Greek mythological characters Hermaphroditus , Tiresias , and the Minotaur . She opined that other " deviant " characters in the novel such as Lefty and Desdemona are spared the " tragic or monstrous " allusions even though there are numerous examples of incest in Greek mythology . She listed the marriage of Oedipus and his mother Jocasta , as well as the son Adonis produced by the incest between Theias and his daughter Smyrna as examples . Therefore , Graham stated that comparing Cal , a hermaphrodite , to people who were " mythological monsters " is " complicit with [ the ] exploitation " of intersex people .

In 2003 , Middlesex was awarded the Pulitzer Prize for Fiction . The Pulitzer Board wrote in their report that Middlesex is a " vastly realized , multi-generational novel as highspirited as it is intelligent . . . Like the masks of Greek drama , Middlesex is equal parts comedy and tragedy , but its real triumph is its emotional abundance , delivered with consummate authority and grace . " Eugenides was attending the Prague Writers ' Festival when Middlesex won the Pulitzer Prize . When a young Associated Press photographer notified him about winning the award , Eugenides was dubious , noting that " [ i ] t seemed very unlikely that he would be the messenger of such news . " At the time , Eugenides was with the Canadian author Yann Martel who confirmed the photographer 's words after checking on the hotel 's computer . A waiter brought champagne to Eugenides , and Greek women started kissing him . When journalists called Eugenides , he declined to take their calls , saying in an interview later that he wanted to " celebrate the moment instead of leaping immediately into the media maelstrom " . The novel received the Ambassador Book Award , Spain 's Santiago de Compostela Literary Prize , and the Great Lakes Book Award . In 2003 , it was a finalist in the fictional category of the National Book Critics Circle Award . Middlesex was also a ﬁnalist for the Lambda Literary Award , which is given to LGBT literature . In 2003 , the novel was shortlisted for but did not win the International IMPAC Dublin Literary Award . Entertainment Weekly , the Los Angeles Times , and The New York Times Book Review considered Middlesex to be one of the best books in 2002 . In 2007 , Oprah Winfrey chose Middlesex to be discussed in her book club . Eugenides was a guest on Oprah 's show with several intersex individuals who told stories about their lives . In 2011 , Eugenides was interviewed by University College London English professor John Mullan in The Guardian Book Club .

Some critics were dissatisfied with the scope of the novel . Daniel Mendelsohn of The New York Times Book Review wrote that thematically , there was no reason that a Greek should be an intersex or vice versa and that Eugenides had two disconnected stories to tell . Caly Risen of Flak Magazine believed that the immigrant experience was the " heart of the novel " , lamenting that it minimized the story of Callie / Cal who is such a " fascinating character that the reader feels short-changed by his failure to take her / him further " . Risen wished to read more about the events between Cal 's adolescence and adulthood , such as Cal 's experience in college as an intersex person as well as the relationships he had . The Washington Post 's Lisa Zeidner opined that Eugenides purposefully devised this asymmetry . Stewart O 'Nan of The Atlantic also felt that the brief description of Callie 's childhood was lacking ; the book " gloss [ es ] over " how her mother did not recognize that Callie had male genitalia when she was washing or clothing Callie . Further , O 'Nan characterized Cal 's relationship with the Japanese-American photographer Julie as " underdeveloped " , causing the reader not to experience its entirety . Michelle Vellucci of People had the same view about the novel 's end , writing that the conclusion felt " rushed " .

Lisa Schwarzbaum of Entertainment Weekly called the novel a " big-hearted , restless story " and rated it an A minus . Lisa Zeidner of the Washington Post opined that Middlesex " provides not only incest à la Ada and a Lolita-style road trip , but enough dense detail to keep fans of close reading manically busy . " Tami Hoag of People concurred , writing that " this feast of a novel is thrilling in the scope of its imagination and surprising in its tenderness " . Andrew O 'Hehir of Salon agreed , praising Middlesex as an " epic and wondrous " novel filled with numerous characters and historical occurrences . Mendelsohn praised Middlesex for its " dense narrative , interwoven with sardonic , fashionably postmodern commentary " . However , he criticized the novel as a disjointed hybrid . He wrote Eugenides was successful with the story of the Greek immigrants , which he described as " authenti [ c ] " , but mishandled the hermaphrodite material , which Mendelsohn characterized as " unpersuasiv [ e ] " . The Economist review stated that a more concise , concentrated depiction of hermaphroditism would have made the book more " fun to read " . Jeff Zaleski of Publishers Weekly praised Eugenides ' portrayal of the girl , Callie , and the man Cal . Zaleski wrote that " [ i ] t 's difficult to imagine any serious male writer of earlier eras so effortlessly transcending the stereotypes of gender . " Paul Quinn of Contemporary Literary Criticism commended the novel , writing : " That Eugenides manages to move us without sinking into sentiment shows how successfully he has avoided the tentacles of irony which grip so many writers of his generation . " Christina McCarroll of The Christian Science Monitor wrote that " Eugenides wrangles with a destiny that mutates and recombines like restless chromosomes , in a novel of extraordinary flexibility , scope , and emotional depth . "

Marta Salij of the Detroit Free Press was impressed with the book 's depiction of Detroit , writing " [ a ] t last Detroit has its novel . What Dublin got from James Joyce — a sprawling , ambitious , loving , exasperated and playful chronicle of all its good and bad parts — Detroit has from native son Eugenides in these 500 pages . " David Kipen of the San Francisco Chronicle agreed , opining " [ a ] mong so many other things , this praiseworthy , prize-worthy yarn succeeds as a heartbroken mash note to the Detroit of Eugenides ' birth , a city whose neighborhoods he sometimes appears to love — as he loves his characters — less for their virtues than for their defects . Any book that can make a reader actively want to visit Detroit must have one honey of a tiger in its tank . " . Several critics have nominated the book for the title of " Great American Novel " . Tim Morris , a professor at the University of Texas at Arlington , wrote that the novel was " the latest in a long line of contenders for the status of Great American Novel " , and compared Cal to Huckleberry Finn , the narrator of Invisible Man , and J. Sutter in John Henry Days . Alexander Linklater of the Evening Standard commented that American publishers chose Middlesex as the next Great American Novel to generate progress for American fiction and that Eugenides is considered the " next stepping stone along from Jonathan Franzen " . Dan Cryer of Newsday wrote that with the publication of Middlesex , " [ f ] inally , Detroit has its very own great American novel " .

David Gates of Newsweek contrasted Eugenides ' debut novel The Virgin Suicides with Middlesex , writing that the first novel was " ingenious " , " entertaining " , and " oddly moving " , but that Middlesex is " ingenious " , " entertaining " , and " ultimately not-so-moving " . Despite this criticism , Gates considered Middlesex to be the novel where Eugenides " finally plays his metafictional ace " . Commenting that Middlesex is " more discursive and funnier " than The Virgin Suicides , Laura Miller of Salon wrote that the two novels deal with disunity . Max Watman of The New Criterion concurred , noting that Middlesex is " funny , big , embracing , and wonderful " , unlike Eugenides ' first novel . Mark Lawson of The Guardian praised Middlesex for having the same unique qualities as The Virgin Suicides , commenting that Middlesex had " an ability to describe the horrible in a comic voice , an unusual form of narration and an eye for bizarre detail " . Lawson noted that whereas Middlesex deals with the " links " among gender , life , and genes , The Virgin Suicides deals with the " connections " between gender and death .

According to Olivia Banner of Signs , medical journals generally had positive reviews of the novel for its depiction of the inner lives of intersex people . Writing in Archives of Disease in Childhood , Simon Fountain-Polley praised the novel , writing : " All clinicians , and families who have faced gender crises or difﬁcult life-changing decision [ s ] on identity should read this book ; delve into an emotional trip of discovery — where the slightest direction change could lead to myriad different lives " . Abraham Bergman wrote in the Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine : " Yes , it is fiction , but I cannot imagine a more authentic and sensitive voice . Because our interactions usually take place in limited and structured setting such as offices and hospitals , pediatricians have scant opportunity to learn how our young patients think . One way to sharpen our awareness is to listen to children 's voices as they are expressed in books . In Middlesex , the voice is loud and clear . " Banner noted that most of the reviews in intersex and queer publications praised Middlesex . She posited that the problematic issues of a " heteromasculine-identified narrator " and the " fact that it was authored by a heterosexual man " may have been outweighed by the necessity for an appropriate reading that " destigmatizes ambiguous sex " .

Eugenides ' third novel , The Marriage Plot , was published in 2011 . Reviewer William Deresiewicz contrasted The Marriage Plot and Middlesex , writing that the former was " far more intimate in tone and scale " . The Marriage Plot follows two years in the lives of three characters , fourth-year Brown University students in 1982 , whereas Middlesex follows the lives of three generations of characters . Deresiewicz preferred the 2011 novel , writing that " [ t ] he books are far apart in quality " . He criticized Middlesex for its " [ c ] lanking prose , clunky exposition , transparent devices , telegraphed moves " , " a hash of narrative contrivances with very little on its mind " . On a more positive note , Deresiewicz lauded Eugenides ' colorful depiction of " young love " across his three novels . In The Virgin Suicides , Eugenides resplendently portrayed the intense fear during virginal sex , as well as Gabriel García Márquez , the 1982 Nobel Prize in Literature laureate ; in Middlesex , the single event in which the novel " comes to life " is Eugenides ' depiction of Callie 's liaison with her adolescent lover ; and in The Marriage Plot , the novel was exceptional in its " sweet banter of courtship " and the " doormat nice-boy role " the character Mitchell assumes in his interplay with his darling , Madeleine .

From the book 's publication until the early months of 2003 , its sales were unsatisfactory , according to Bill Goldstein of The New York Times . In the week following April 7 , 2003 , the day Middlesex won the Pulitzer Prize , the book sold 2,700 copies . The book later made the best-selling fiction list and kept its position for five weeks . In June 2007 , the novel ranked seventh on USA Today 's Best-Selling Books list . In the same month , after Eugenides appeared on The Oprah Winfrey Show to discuss the novel , Middlesex placed second on The New York Times best-selling paperback fiction list . The Pulitzer award nearly propelled Middlesex to The New York Times Best Seller list , which in 2003 published only the top 15 bestsellers ; in the week after Middlesex was announced the winner of the Pulitzer Prize , the novel placed 17th on the " expanded list " . In 2007 , 1.3 million copies of the book had been sold . The same year , the book placed ninth on the Library Journal bestsellers list , which ranks " the books most borrowed in U.S. libraries " . By May 2011 , over three million copies of Middlesex had been sold .

Located entirely in Salt Lake County , Utah , SR-202 begins at an intersection with SR-201 and 11500 West northwest of Magna , Utah . The road travels northwesterly , bordered on the east by a large tailing pond owned by Kennecott Utah Copper and part of the former Denver and Rio Grande Western Railroad rail line , which is now owned by the Union Pacific Railroad ( UP ) . The parallel rail line intersects a pair of east – west rail lines , the southern line being UP main line , and the northern line being the Feather River Route of the former Western Pacific Railroad , which is now owned by UP . After crossing the rail lines , SR-202 intersects with I-80 near the Great Salt Lake State Park and comes to a terminus at the I-80 frontage road , which provides access to the Great Salt Lake State Park and to the Saltair resort . Kennecott Utah Copper owns all of the land surrounding SR-202 , except for the right-of-way for the railroad , and the highway itself . SR-202 serves as the eastbound ramp from SR-201 onto Interstate I-80 , because at its intersection with I-80 , the SR-201 ( which is the southern terminus of SR-202 ) traffic only has the option to continue on I-80 westbound , and does not have an offramp to eastbound I-80 . Traffic on SR-202 has increased 12 % between 2002 and 2007 , with a daily average of 735 cars per day using SR-202 in 2007 , compared to 475 cars per day in 2002 . Half of the traffic on SR-202 consists of buses and trucks .

Two other roads have been designated Utah State Route 202 in the past . From 1939 to 1953 , the name was used by the road that formed the eastern approach to Mercur , Utah and later became part of SR-73 . From 1961 to 1967 , the name was used by Main Street between SR-201 ( 2100 South ) and SR-171 in downtown Salt Lake City , which is now part of Utah State Route 186 . The road that currently carries the SR-202 designation has existed since 1937 , when it connected US-40 and US-50 along the Garfield Cut-Off Road . The Utah State Legislature designated the road SR-202 in 1969 , thus taking responsibility of maintaining the road from the county . No changes or alterations have been made to SR-202 , except for the legal definition of the road , which has changed twice since it was formed . On September 26 , 2008 , a sulfuric acid spill occurred , reported by people in vehicles traveling on Interstate 80 .

Lifesong is the second studio album by American Christian rock band Casting Crowns , released on August 30 , 2005 by Beach Street Records and Reunion Records . Produced by Mark A. Miller , Lifesong was the follow-up to the band 's self-titled debut album . Although the unexpected success of the first album led to tremendous demand for new music from Casting Crowns , lead vocalist Mark Hall was advised by Steven Curtis Chapman ( a co-producer of the debut album ) and Mac Powell not to worry about commercial expectations . Lifesong , which has a pop rock and adult contemporary sound , focuses on challenging believers and indicting piousness and hypocrisy in the Christian church . Worship themes are also prominent in the album . Lifesong was received positively by music critics . Many critics praised the album 's songwriting , although others felt the album 's sound was derivative . The album and its singles were nominated for many awards , with the album winning the Grammy Award for Best Pop / Contemporary Gospel Album at the 48th Grammy Awards and the Dove Award for Pop / Contemporary Album of the Year at the 37th GMA Dove Awards . It debuted and peaked at number nine on the Billboard 200 and number on the Billboard Christian Albums chart , selling 71,000 copies in its first week . The 15th best-selling Christian album of the 2000s in the United States , Lifesong has been certified Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) and has sold 1.4 million copies in the United States . All of the album 's singles topped the Billboard Christian Songs and Hot Christian AC charts .

Following the unexpected success of their first album , there was tremendous demand for new music from Casting Crowns . Although lead vocalist Mark Hall , who either wrote or co-wrote all the songs on the album , felt " a little worried " about the band 's follow-up album , fellow recording artists Steven Curtis Chapman ( who co-produced the band 's first album ) and Mac Powell of Christian rock band Third Day encouraged Hall to " say what God wants you to say " . They also advised him to not worry about commercial expectations or whether " people are going to like it " . Ultimately , Hall " absorbed " the feedback their first record had received , using it as inspiration . Lifesong focuses mainly on the " truth-can-be-a-tough-pill-to-swallow message " that " there are broken people within arm ’ s reach of the church , and if there is any hope of healing , it begins with people who will be the hands and feet of Jesus " . Hall responded to critics who felt the band 's material was " preaching to the choir " by saying " How can writing songs that challenge the church , songs that ask Christians to consider their actions , be a bad thing ? After all , it ’ s the message that matters ... Everybody is passionate about what they do , about what they feel called to , so for one to say the other ’ s ministry is more or less meaningful or spiritual or anything is ridiculous " . Hall also felt that there were " too many walls in Christian music " and said " I think people listen to you if you ’ re transparent ... People want to hear the truth . You just hang around church for a while , and you ’ ll see . People don ’ t want you to talk around it . They want you to tell it like it is , even if it hurts " . Hall ultimately wrote songs such as " Does Anybody Hear Her " and " Stained Glass Masquerade " , which " challenge believers " . According to Hall , he was trying to say that he didn 't think it bothers the world if people in the church sin . Rather , he felt that the world is bothered when Christians act like they don 't sin .

Musically , Lifesong is influenced by adult contemporary and pop rock music . The album also has influence from worship music in the vein of U2 , with songs building into " sweeping choruses and dramatic climaxes " . Much of the album 's lyrical content is devoted to challenging the Christian church and indicting hypocrisy and piousness within the church . Songs such as the title track and " Father , Spirit , Jesus " have worshipful lyrics while others such as " Stained Glass Masquerade " note the inability of church congregations to share their burdens openly . " Does Anybody Hear Her " condemns the church 's focus on judging rather than realizing pain and gives the message than condemning other people is wrong . " Set Me Free " is set from the perspective of " the demon-possessed man " , who is calling to Jesus for relief . It also incorporates more of a rock sound than Casting Crowns normally uses .

Lifesong received mostly positive reviews from music critics . Kim Jones of About.com gave it five out of five stars , saying " Bottom line - my hat goes off to Casting Crowns for a job well done , once again . This is one band that doesn 't soft-pedal their message , even if it is one that people enjoying a " comfort-zone " may not want to hear " . Jared Johnson of AllMusic gave the album four-and-a-half out of five stars , opining " One of the brightest spots on the CCM map in 2005 , Lifesong was powered by a second dose of Mark Hall 's earnestly challenging worship themes and a penchant for reflective pop ... From start to finish , the album showcases songwriting that is consistent , polished , and potent , furthering the septet 's reputation as one of Christian music 's most popular acts of the 21st century " . Deborah Evans Price of Billboard said that " there is no sophomore letdown here for Casting Crowns ... This is intelligent , soulful music that goes beyond mere entertainment to something deeper " . David McCreary of CCM Magazine gave Lifesong an A- , opining " staying true to their approach of assimilating crisp melodies , forthright lyrics and stout vocals , the Crowns effectively blend uptempo worship anthems and emotive ballads for another well-balanced set " . Russ Breimeier of Christianity Today gave the album three-and-a-half out of five stars , calling the music " derivative " , said that " [ Casting Crowns ] fans will find much to love , while others continue to ponder the secret of this band 's success . All can probably agree that Lifesong is a sequel in the truest sense , offering more of the same to the delight of those so touched and inspired by the music of Casting Crowns the first time " .

Simon Eden of Cross Rhythms gave the album ten out of ten squares , saying " With ' Lifesong ' being officially [ Casting Crowns ' ] second release , the pressure is on to see if they can deliver . The simple answer is quite probably yes as the band use a refreshing formula that challenges the Church instead of serving up milk and cookies " . John DiBiase of Jesus Freak Hideout gave it three out of five stars , opining " Overall , Lifesong is musically an assortment of experimentation and familiarity , as the band continues to offer songs with relatable messages to the church body . Frontman and chief songwriter Mark Hall 's strained , shouting-style vocals is [ sic ] still an acquired taste , along with his straightforward and often simplistic lyrics , but Lifesong is a noteworthy second chapter in an already impressive career for this young band " . Brian Mansfield of USA Today gave the album two-and-a-half out of four stars , commenting " [ Casting Crowns ] comes from the school of U2-influenced modern-worship music , so its songs predictably build to sweeping choruses and dramatic climaxes . The band 's message is more distinctive , calling out the " happy plastic people under shiny plastic steeples " to offer themselves to the lonely , the grieving , the desperate " .

Lifesong and its singles received various awards and nominations . At the 48th Grammy Awards , it received the Grammy Award for Best Pop / Contemporary Gospel Album . It received the Dove Award for Pop / Contemporary Album of the Year award at the 37th GMA Dove Awards . The album 's title track won the Dove Award for Pop / Contemporary Song of the Year and was nominated for the Dove Award for Song of the Year at the 37th GMA Dove Awards . " Praise You In This Storm " won the Dove Award for Pop / Contemporary Song of the Year at the 38th GMA Dove Awards and was nominated for the Dove Award for Worship Song of the Year at the 39th GMA Dove Awards .

Lifesong was released on August 30 , 2005 . It sold 71,000 copies in its first week , debuting at number nine on the Billboard 200 and Billboard Christian Albums chart . It spent a total of two weeks atop the Christian Albums chart and later appeared on the Billboard Catalog Albums chart in 2007 , peaking at number thirty-four . By April 1 , 2006 , Lifesong had sold 503,000 copies . It had sold 950,000 copies by August 25 , 2007 and , as of December 5 , 2009 , it has sold a total of 1.2 million copies . As of March 2014 , the album has sold 1.4 million copies . Three official singles ( " Lifesong " , " Praise You In This Storm " , " Does Anybody Hear Her " ) were released in promotion of Lifesong . All of the singles topped the Billboard Hot Christian Songs and Hot Christian AC charts . An additional song , " Set Me Free " , was released to Christian CHR radio , and peaked at number 23 .

Barry Lamar Bonds ( born July 24 , 1964 ) is an American former professional baseball left fielder who played 22 seasons in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) with the Pittsburgh Pirates and San Francisco Giants . Bonds received seven NL MVP awards and 14 All-Star selections , and is considered to be one of the greatest baseball players of all time . Bonds is currently the co-hitting coach for the Miami Marlins along with Frank Menechino . Bonds was regarded as an exceptional hitter , and finished his regular season career with a very high on-base percentage ( .444 ) and isolated power ( .309 ) . He holds many MLB hitting records , including most career home runs , most home runs in a single season ( 73 , set in 2001 ) and most career walks . He also received eight Gold Gloves for his defense in the outfield . He is ranked second in career Wins Above Replacement among all major league position players by both Fangraphs and Baseball-Reference.com , behind only Babe Ruth . Bonds led a controversial career , notably as a central figure in baseball 's steroids scandal . In 2007 , he was indicted on charges of perjury and obstruction of justice for allegedly lying to the grand jury during the federal government 's investigation of BALCO . The perjury charges against Bonds were dropped , and he was also initially convicted of obstruction of justice , but that was overturned in 2015 .

Born in Riverside , California to former major leaguer Bobby Bonds and the former Patricia Howard , Bonds grew up in San Carlos , California and attended Junípero Serra High School in San Mateo , California and excelled in baseball , basketball and football . He played on the junior varsity team during his freshman year and the remainder of his high school career on the varsity team . He batted for a .467 batting average his senior year , and was named prep All-American . The Giants drafted Bonds in the second round of the 1982 MLB draft as a high school senior , but the Giants and Bonds were unable to agree on contract terms when Tom Haller 's maximum offer was $ 70,000 ( $ 171,645 today ) and Bond 's minimum to go pro was $ 75,000 , so Bonds instead decided to attend college .

Bonds attended Arizona State University , hitting .347 with 45 home runs and 175 runs batted in ( RBI ) . In 1984 he batted .360 and had 30 stolen bases . In 1985 he hit 23 home runs with 66 RBIs and a .368 batting average . He was a Sporting News All-American selection that year . He tied the NCAA record with seven consecutive hits in the College World Series as sophomore and was named to All-Time College World Series Team in 1996 . He graduated from Arizona State in 1986 with a degree in criminology . He was named ASU On Deck Circle Most Valuable Player ; other winners include Dustin Pedroia , Willie Bloomquist , Paul Lo Duca , and Ike Davis . During college , he played part of one summer in the amateur Alaska Baseball League with the Alaska Goldpanners .

Before Bonds made it to the major leagues in Pittsburgh , Pirate fan attendance was low , with 1984 and 1985 attendance below 10,000 per game for the 81-game home schedule . Bonds made his major league debut on May 30 , 1986 . In 1986 , Bonds led National League ( NL ) rookies with 16 home runs , 48 RBI , 36 stolen bases and 65 walks , but he finished 6th in Rookie of the Year voting . He played center field in 1986 , but switched to left field with the arrival of centerfielder Andy Van Slyke in 1987 . In his early years , Bonds batted as the leadoff hitter . With Van Slyke also in the outfield , the Pirates had a venerable defensive tandem that worked together to cover a lot of ground on the field although they were not close off the field . The Pirates experienced a surge in fan enthusiasm with Bonds on the team and set the club attendance record of 52,119 in the 1987 home opener . That year , he hit 25 home runs in his second season , along with 32 stolen bases and 59 RBIs .

Bonds improved in 1988 , hitting .283 with 24 home runs . The Pirates broke the record set the previous year with 54,089 attending the home opener . Bonds now fit into a highly respected lineup featuring Bobby Bonilla , Van Slyke and Jay Bell . He finished with 19 homers , 58 RBIs , and 14 outfield assists in 1989 , which was second in the NL . Following the season , rumors that he would be traded to the Los Angeles Dodgers for Jeff Hamilton and John Wetteland , but the team denied the rumors and no such trade occurred . Bonds won his first MVP Award in 1990 , hitting .301 with 33 home runs and 114 RBIs . He also stole 52 bases , which were third in the league , to become a first-time member of the 30 – 30 club . He won his first Gold Glove Award and Silver Slugger Award . That year , the Pirates won the National League East title for their first postseason berth since winning the 1979 World Series . However , the Cincinnati Reds ( whose last post-season berth had also been in 1979 ; they lost to the Pirates in that year 's NLCS ) defeated the Pirates in the NLCS en route to winning the World Championship .

In 1991 , Bonds also put up great numbers , hitting 25 homers and driving in 116 runs , and obtained another Gold Glove and Silver Slugger . He finished second to the Atlanta Braves ' Terry Pendleton ( the NL batting champion ) in the MVP voting . The Pirates slugging outfield of Bonds , Bonilla and Van Slyke performed miserably in the 1990 and 1991 playoffs hitting .190 in 1990 ( 12 for 63 ) and .200 in 1991 ( 15 for 75 ) . In March 1992 , Pirates general manager Ted Simmons agreed to a deal with Atlanta Braves counterpart John Schuerholz to trade Bonds , in exchange for Alejandro Peña , Keith Mitchell , and a player to be named later . Pirates manager Jim Leyland opposed the trade vehemently , and the proposal was rescinded . Bonds stayed with Pittsburgh and won his second MVP award that season . While hitting .311 with 34 homers and 103 RBIs , he propelled the Pirates to their third straight National League East division title . However , Pittsburgh was defeated by the Braves in a seven-game National League Championship Series . Bonds participated in the final play of Game 7 of the NLCS , whereby he fielded a base hit by Francisco Cabrera and attempted to throw out Sid Bream at home plate . But the throw to Pirates catcher Mike LaValliere was late and Bream scored the winning run . For the third consecutive season , the NL East Champion Pirates were denied a trip to the World Series . Following the loss , Bonds and star teammate Doug Drabek were expected to command salaries too high for Pittsburgh to again sign them .

In 1993 , Bonds left the Pirates to sign a lucrative free agent contract worth a then-record $ 43.75 million ( $ 71.7 million today ) over six years with the Giants , with whom his father had spent the first seven years of his career , and with whom his godfather Willie Mays played 22 of his 24 Major League seasons . The deal was at that time the largest in baseball history , in terms of both total value and average annual salary . Once he signed with the Giants , Bonds had intended to wear 24 , his number during most of his stay with the Pirates , and after receiving Mays ' blessing the Giants were willing to unretire it until the public commotion from fans and media became too much . To honor his father , Bonds switched his jersey number to 25 , as it had been Bobby 's number in San Francisco . Bonds hit .336 in 1993 , leading the league with 46 home runs and 123 RBI en route to his second consecutive MVP award , and third overall . As good as the Giants were ( winning 103 games ) , the Atlanta Braves won 104 in what some call the last great pennant race ( due to the Wild Card being instituted shortly after ) .

In 1996 , Bonds became the first National League player and second ( of the current list of four ) major league player ( s ) to hit 40 home runs and steal 40 bases in the same season . The other members of the 40 – 40 club are José Canseco – 1988 , Alex Rodriguez – 1998 , and Alfonso Soriano – 2006 ; his father Bobby Bonds was one home run short in 1973 when he hit 39 home runs and stole 43 bases . Bonds hit his 300th and 301st home runs off the Florida Marlins ' John Burkett on April 27 . He became the fourth player in history to join the 300 – 300 club with 300 stolen bases and 300 home runs for a career , joining Willie Mays , Andre Dawson , and his father . Bonds ' totals for the season included 129 runs driven in , a .308 average and a then-National League record 151 walks . He finished fifth in the MVP balloting .

With two outs in the 9th inning of a game against the Arizona Diamondbacks on May 28 , 1998 , Bonds became only the fifth player in baseball history to be given an intentional walk with the bases loaded . Nap Lajoie ( 1901 ) , Del Bissonette ( 1928 ) and Bill Nicholson ( 1944 ) were three others in the 20th century who received that rare honor . The first to receive one was Abner Dalrymple in 1881 . During a game against the Philadelphia Phillies on August 2 , Bonds was hit by a pitch thrown by Ricky Bottalico , leading to Bonds charging the mound and triggering a bench-clearing brawl . On August 23 , Bonds hit his 400th career home run . By doing so , he became the first player ever to enter the 400 – 400 club by having career totals of 400 home runs and 400 stolen bases . The milestone home run came off Kirt Ojala , who , like Burkett , was pitching for the Marlins . For the season , he hit .303 with 37 home runs and drove in 122 runs , winning his eighth Gold Glove , He finished 8th in the MVP voting .

Bill James ranked Bonds as the best player of the 1990s . He added that the decade 's second-best player , Craig Biggio , had been closer in production to the decade 's 10th-best player than to Bonds . In 1999 , with statistics through 1997 being considered , Bonds ranked Number 34 on The Sporting News ' list of the 100 Greatest Baseball Players , making him the highest-ranking active player . When the Sporting News list was redone in 2005 , Bonds was ranked 6th behind Babe Ruth , Willie Mays , Ty Cobb , Walter Johnson , and Hank Aaron . Bonds was omitted from 1999 's Major League Baseball All-Century Team , to which Ken Griffey , Jr. was elected . James wrote of Bonds , " Certainly the most unappreciated superstar of my lifetime . ... Griffey has always been more popular , but Bonds has been a far , far greater player . " In 1999 , he rated Bonds as the 16th-best player of all time . " When people begin to take in all of his accomplishments " , he predicted , " Bonds may well be rated among the five greatest players in the history of the game . "

The next year , Bonds ' offensive production reached even higher levels , breaking not only his own personal records but several major league records . In the Giants ' first 50 games in 2001 , he hit 28 home runs , including 17 in May — a career high . This early stretch included his 500th home run hit on April 17 against Terry Adams of the Los Angeles Dodgers . He also hit 39 home runs by the All-star break ( a major league record ) , drew a major league record 177 walks , and had a .515 on-base average , a feat not seen since Mickey Mantle and Ted Williams over forty years earlier . Bonds ' slugging percentage was a major league record .863 ( 411 total bases in 476 at-bats ) , and , most impressively , he ended the season with a major league record 73 home runs . On October 4 , Bonds tied the previous record of 70 set by Mark McGwire – which McGwire set in the 162nd game in 1998 – by homering off Wilfredo Rodríguez in the 159th game of the season . He then hit numbers 71 and 72 the following night off Chan Ho Park . Bonds added his 73rd off Dennis Springer on October 7 . The ball was later sold to toy manufacturer Todd McFarlane for $ 450,000 . He previously bought Mark McGwire 's 70th home run ball from 1998 . Bonds received the Babe Ruth Home Run Award for leading MLB in homers that season .

Bonds re-signed with the Giants for a five-year , $ 90 million contract in January 2002 . He hit five home runs in the Giants ' first four games of the season , tying Lou Brock 's 35-year record for most home runs after four games . He won the NL batting title with a career-high .370 average and struck out only 47 times . He hit 46 home runs in 403 at-bats . Despite playing in nine fewer games than the previous season , he drew 198 walks , a major-league record ; 68 of them were intentional walks , surpassing Willie McCovey 's 45 in 1969 for another Major League record . He slugged .799 , then the fourth-highest total all time . Bonds broke Ted Williams ' major league record for on-base average with .582 . Bonds also hit his 600th home run , less than a year and a half after hitting his 500th . The home run came on August 9 at home against Kip Wells of the Pirates .

In 2003 , Bonds played in just 130 games . He hit 45 home runs in just 390 at-bats , along with a .341 batting average . He slugged .749 , walked 148 times , and had an on-base average well over .500 ( .529 ) for the third straight year . He also became the only member of the career 500 home run / 500 stolen base club by stealing second base on June 23 off of pitcher Éric Gagné in the 11th inning of a tied ball game against the Los Angeles Dodgers ( against whom Bonds had tallied his 500th home run ) . Bonds scored the game-winning run later that inning .

In 2004 , Bonds had perhaps his best season . He hit .362 en route to his second National League batting title , and broke his own record by walking 232 times . He slugged .812 , which was fourth-highest of all time , and broke his on-base percentage record with a .609 average . Bonds passed Mays on the career home run list by hitting his 661st off of Ben Ford on April 13 , He then hit his 700th off of Jake Peavy on September 17 . Bonds hit 45 home runs in 373 at-bats , and struck out just 41 times , putting himself in elite company , as few major leaguers have ever had more home runs than strikeouts in a season . Bonds would win his fourth consecutive MVP award and his seventh overall . His seven MVP awards are four more than any other player in history . In addition , no other player from either league has been awarded the MVP four times in a row . ( The MVP award was first given in 1931 ) . The 40-year-old Bonds also broke Willie Stargell 's 25-year record as the oldest player to win a Most Valuable Player Award ( Stargell , at 39 years , 8 months , was National League co-MVP with Keith Hernandez in 1979 ) . On July 4 , he tied and passed Rickey Henderson 's career bases on balls record with his 2190th and 2191st career walks .

As Bonds neared Aaron 's record , Aaron was called on for his opinion of Bonds . He clarified that he was a fan and admirer of Bonds and avoided the controversy regarding whether the record should be denoted with an asterisk due to Bonds ' alleged steroid usage . He felt recognition and respect for the award was something to be determined by the fans . As the steroid controversy received greater media attention during the offseason before the 2005 season , Aaron expressed some reservations about the statements Bonds made on the issue . Aaron expressed that he felt drug and steroid use to boost athletic performance was inappropriate . Aaron was frustrated that the media could not focus on events that occurred in the field of play and wished drugs or gambling allegations such as those associated with Pete Rose could be emphasized less . In 2007 , Aaron felt the whole steroid use issue was very controversial and decided that he would not attend any possible record-breaking games . Aaron congratulated Bonds through the media when Bonds broke Aaron 's record .

Bonds ' salary for the 2005 season was $ 22 million , the second-highest salary in Major League Baseball ( the Yankees ' Alex Rodriguez earned the highest , $ 25.2 million ) . Bonds endured a knee injury , multiple surgeries , and rehabilitation . He was activated on September 12 and started in left field . In his return against the San Diego Padres , he nearly hit a home run in his first at-bat . Bonds finished the night 1-for-4 . Upon his return , Bonds resumed his high-caliber performance at the plate , hitting home runs in four consecutive games from September 18 to September 21 and finishing with five homers in only 14 games .

In 2006 , Bonds earned $ 20 million ( not including bonuses ) , the fourth highest salary in baseball . Through the 2006 season he had earned approximately $ 172 million during his then 21-year career , making him baseball 's all-time highest paid player . Bonds hit under .200 for his first 10 games of the season and did not hit a home run until April 22 . This 10-game stretch was his longest home run slump since the 1998 season . On May 7 , Bonds drew within one home run of tying Babe Ruth for second place on the all-time list , hitting his 713th career home run into the second level of Citizens Bank Park in Philadelphia , off pitcher Jon Lieber in a game in which the Giants lost to the Philadelphia Phillies . The towering home run — one of the longest in Citizens Bank Park 's two-season history , traveling an estimated 450 feet ( 140 m ) — hit off the facade of the third deck in right field . On May 20 , Bonds tied Ruth , hitting his 714th career home run to deep right field to lead off the top of the 2nd inning . The home run came off left-handed pitcher Brad Halsey of the Oakland A 's , in an interleague game played in Oakland , California . Since this was an interleague game at an American League stadium , Bonds was batting as the designated hitter in the lineup for the Giants . Bonds was quoted after the game as being " glad it 's over with " and stated that more attention could be focused on Albert Pujols , who was on a very rapid home run pace in early 2006 .

On May 28 , Bonds passed Ruth , hitting his 715th career home run to center field off Colorado Rockies pitcher Byung-Hyun Kim . The ball was hit an estimated 445 feet ( 140 m ) into center field where it went through the hands of several fans but then fell onto an elevated platform in center field . Then it rolled off the platform where Andrew Morbitzer , a 38-year-old San Francisco resident , caught the ball while he was in line at a concession stand . Mysteriously , radio broadcaster Dave Flemming 's radio play-by-play of the home run went silent just as the ball was hit , apparently from a microphone failure . But the televised version , called by Giants broadcaster Duane Kuiper , was not affected . On September 22 , Bonds tied Henry Aaron 's National League career home run record of 733 . The home run came in the top of the 6th inning of a high-scoring game against the Milwaukee Brewers , at Miller Park in Milwaukee , Wisconsin . The achievement was notable for its occurrence in the very city where Aaron began ( with the Milwaukee Braves ) and concluded ( with the Brewers , then in the American League ) his career . With the Giants trailing 10 – 8 , Bonds hit a blast to deep center field on a 2 – 0 pitch off the Brewers ' Chris Spurling with runners on first and second and one out . Though the Giants were at the time clinging to only a slim chance of making the playoffs , Bonds ' home run provided the additional drama of giving the Giants an 11 – 10 lead late in a critical game in the final days of a pennant race . The Brewers eventually won the game , 13 – 12 , despite Bonds ' going 3 for 5 , with 2 doubles , the record-tying home run , and 6 runs batted in .

On September 23 , Bonds surpassed Aaron for the NL career home run record . Hit in Milwaukee like the previous one , this was a solo home run off Chris Capuano of the Brewers . This was the last home run Bonds hit in 2006 . In 2006 , Bonds recorded his lowest slugging percentage ( a statistic that he has historically ranked among league leaders season after season ) since 1991 with the Pittsburgh Pirates . In January 2007 , the New York Daily News reported that Bonds had tested positive for amphetamines . Under baseball 's amphetamine policy , which had been in effect for one season , players testing positive were to submit to six additional tests and undergo treatment and counseling . The policy also stated that players were not to be identified for a first positive test , but the New York Daily News leaked the test 's results . When the Players Association informed Bonds of the test results , he initially attributed it to a substance he had taken from the locker of Giants teammate Mark Sweeney , but would later retract this claim and publicly apologize to Sweeney .

On January 29 , 2007 , the Giants finalized a contract with Bonds for the 2007 season . After the commissioner 's office rejected Bonds ' one-year , $ 15.8 million deal because it contained a personal-appearance provision , the team sent revised documents to his agent , Jeff Borris , who stated that " At this time , Barry is not signing the new documents . " Bonds signed a revised one-year , $ 15.8 million contract on February 15 and reported to the Giants ' Spring training camp on time . Bonds resumed his march to the all-time record early in the 2007 season . After an opening game in which all he had was a first-inning single past third base against a right-shifted infield ( immediately followed by a stolen base and then a base-running misjudgment that got him thrown out at home ) and a deep out to left field late in the game , Bonds returned the next day , April 4 , with another mission . In his first at-bat of the season 's second game at the Giants ' AT & T Park , Bonds hit a Chris Young ( of the San Diego Padres ) pitch just over the wall to the left of straightaway center field for career home run 735 . This home run put Bonds past the midway point between Ruth and Aaron .

Bonds did not homer again until April 13 , when he hit two ( 736 and 737 ) in a 3 for 3 night that included 4 RBI against the Pittsburgh Pirates . Bonds splashed a pitch by St. Louis Cardinals pitcher Ryan Franklin into McCovey Cove on April 18 for home run 738 . Home runs number 739 and 740 came in back to back games on April 21 and April 22 against the Arizona Diamondbacks . The hype surrounding Bonds ' pursuit of the home run record escalated on May 14 . On this day , Sports Auction for Heritage ( a Dallas-based auction house ) offered US $ 1 million to the fan that caught Bonds ' record-breaking 756th-career home run . The million dollar offer was rescinded on June 11 out of concern of fan safety . Home run 748 came on Father 's Day , June 17 , in the final game of a 3-game road series against the Boston Red Sox at Fenway Park , where Bonds had never previously played . With this homer , Fenway Park became the 36th major league ballpark in which Bonds had hit a home run . He hit a Tim Wakefield knuckleball just over the low fence into the Giant 's bullpen in right field . It was his first home run off his former Pittsburgh Pirate teammate , who became the 441st different pitcher to surrender a four-bagger to Bonds . The 750th career home run , hit on June 29 , also came off a former teammate : Liván Hernández . The blast came in the 8th inning and at that point tied the game at 3 – 3 .

On July 19 , after a 21 at-bat hitless streak , Bonds hit 2 home runs , numbers 752 and 753 , against the Chicago Cubs . He went 3 – 3 with 2 home runs , 6 RBIs , and a walk on that day . The struggling last place Giants still lost the game , 9 – 8 . On July 27 , Bonds hit home run 754 against Florida Marlins pitcher Rick VandenHurk . Bonds was then walked his next 4 at-bats in the game , but a 2-run shot helped the Giants win the game 12 – 10 . It marked the first time since he had hit # 747 that Bonds had homered in a game the Giants won . On August 4 , Bonds hit a 382 foot ( 116 m ) home run against Clay Hensley of the San Diego Padres for home run number 755 , tying Hank Aaron 's all-time record . Bonds greeted his son , Nikolai , with an extended bear hug after crossing home plate . Bonds greeted his teammates and then his wife , Liz Watson , and daughter Aisha Lynn behind the backstop . Hensley was the 445th different pitcher to give up a home run to Bonds . Ironically , given the cloud of suspicion that surrounded Bonds , the tying home run was hit off a pitcher who 'd been suspended by baseball in 2005 for steroid use . He was walked in his next at bat and eventually scored on a fielder 's choice .

On August 7 at 8 : 51 PM PDT , Bonds hit a 435 foot ( 133 m ) home run , his 756th , off a pitch from Mike Bacsik of the Washington Nationals , breaking the all-time career home run record , formerly held by Hank Aaron . Coincidentally , Bacsik 's father had faced Aaron ( as a pitcher for the Texas Rangers ) after Aaron had hit his 755th home run . On August 23 , 1976 , Michael J. Bacsik held Aaron to a single and a fly out to right field . The younger Bacsik commented later , " If my dad had been gracious enough to let Hank Aaron hit a home run , we both would have given up 756 . " After hitting the home run , Bonds gave Bacsik an autographed bat . The pitch , the seventh of the at-bat , was a 3 – 2 pitch which Bonds hit into the right-center field bleachers . The fan who ended up with the ball , 22-year-old Matt Murphy from Queens , New York ( and a Mets fan ) , was promptly protected and escorted away from the mayhem by a group of San Francisco police officers . After Bonds finished his home run trot , a ten-minute delay followed , including a brief video by Aaron congratulating Bonds on breaking the record Aaron had held for 33 years , and expressing the hope that " the achievement of this record will inspire others to chase their own dreams . " Bonds made an impromptu emotional statement on the field , with Willie Mays , his godfather , at his side and thanked his teammates , family and his late father . Bonds sat out the rest of the game .

The commissioner , Bud Selig , was not in attendance in this game but was represented by the Executive Vice President of Baseball Operations , Jimmie Lee Solomon . Selig called Bonds later that night to congratulate him on breaking the record . President George W. Bush also called Bonds the next day to congratulate him . On August 24 , San Francisco honored and celebrated Bonds ' career accomplishments and breaking the home run record with a large rally in Justin Herman Plaza . The rally included video messages from Lou Brock , Ernie Banks , Ozzie Smith , Joe Montana , Wayne Gretzky and Michael Jordan . Speeches were made by Willie Mays , Giants teammates Omar Vizquel and Rich Aurilia , and Giants owner Peter Magowan . Mayor Gavin Newsom presented Bonds the key to the City and County of San Francisco and Giants vice president Larry Baer gave Bonds the home plate he touched after hitting his 756th career home run . The record-setting ball was consigned to an auction house on August 21 . Bidding began on August 28 and closed with a winning bid of US $ 752,467 on September 15 after a three phase online auction . The high bidder , fashion designer Marc Ecko , created a website to let fans decide its fate . Subsequently , Ben Padnos , who submitted the ( US ) $ 186,750 winning bid on Bonds ' record-tying 755th home run ball also set up a website to let fans decide its fate . Of Ecko 's plans , Bonds said " He spent $ 750,000 on the ball and that 's what he 's doing with it ? What he 's doing is stupid . " 10 million voters helped Ecko decide to brand the ball with an asterisk and send it to the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum . Padnos sold 5-year ads on a website , www.endthedebate.com , where people voted by a two to one margin to smash the ball .

On September 21 , 2007 , the San Francisco Giants confirmed that they would not re-sign Bonds for the 2008 season . The story was first announced on Bonds ' own web site earlier that day . Bonds officially filed for free agency on October 29 , 2007 . His agent Jeff Borris said : " I 'm anticipating widespread interest from every Major League team . " There was much speculation before the 2008 season about where Bonds might play . However , no one signed him during the 2008 or 2009 seasons . If he had returned to Major League Baseball , Bonds would have been within close range of several significant hitting milestones : needing just 65 hits to reach 3,000 , 4 runs batted in to reach 2,000 , and 38 home runs to reach 800 . He would have needed 69 more runs scored to move past Rickey Henderson as the all-time runs champion , and 37 extra base hits to move past Hank Aaron as the all-time extra base hits champion . As of November 13 , 2009 , Borris maintained that Bonds was still not retired . On December 9 , however , Borris told the San Francisco Chronicle that Bonds has played his last major league game . Bonds announced on April 11 , 2010 that he was proud of McGwire for admitting his use of steroids . Bonds said that it was not the time to retire , but he noted that he was not in shape to play immediately if an interested club called him .

Bonds has not had a jersey number retired by either the Pirates or Giants , although there have been calls by fans of both teams to retire their respective uniform numbers held by Bonds . However , his number 24 with the Pirates remains in circulation , most prominently worn by Brian Giles from 1999 to 2003 and by Pedro Alvarez from 2011 to 2015 . The Giants have not reissued Bonds ' number 25 . On December 15 , 2011 , Bonds was sentenced to 30 days of house arrest , two years of probation and 250 hours of community service , for an obstruction of justice conviction stemming from a grand jury appearance in 2003 . However , U.S. District Judge Susan Illston then delayed the sentence pending an appeal . In 2013 his conviction was upheld on appeal by a three judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit . However , the full court later granted Bonds an en banc rehearing , and on April 22 , 2015 , an 11-judge panel of the Ninth Circuit voted 10-1 to overturn his conviction . On March 10 , 2014 , Bonds began a seven-day stint as a roving Spring training instructor for the Giants .

Since 2003 , Bonds has been a key figure in the Bay Area Laboratory Co-operative ( BALCO ) scandal . He was under investigation by a federal grand jury regarding his testimony in the BALCO case , and was indicted on perjury and obstruction of justice charges on November 15 , 2007 . The indictment alleges that Bonds lied while under oath about his alleged use of steroids . In 2003 , Bonds first became embroiled in a scandal when Greg Anderson of the Bay Area Laboratory Co-operative ( BALCO ) , Bonds ' trainer since 2000 , was indicted by a federal grand jury in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California and charged with supplying anabolic steroids to athletes , including a number of baseball players . This led to speculation that Bonds had used performance-enhancing drugs during a time when there was no mandatory testing in Major League Baseball . Bonds declared his innocence , attributing his changed physique and increased power to a strict regimen of bodybuilding , diet and legitimate supplements . During grand jury testimony on December 4 , 2003 , Bonds said that he used a clear substance and a cream that he received from his personal strength trainer , Greg Anderson , who told him they were the nutritional supplement flaxseed oil and a rubbing balm for arthritis . This testimony , as reported by Lance Williams and Mark Fainaru-Wada , has frequently been misrepresented . Later reports on Bonds ' leaked grand-jury testimony contend that he admitted to unknowingly using " the cream " and " the clear " .

On November 15 , 2007 , Bonds was indicted on four counts of perjury and one count of obstruction of justice as it relates to the government investigation of BALCO . On February 14 , 2008 a typo in court papers filed by Federal prosecutors erroneously alleged that Bonds tested positive for steroids in November 2001 , a month after hitting his record 73rd home run . The reference was meant instead to refer to a November 2000 test that had already been disclosed and previously reported . The typo sparked a brief media frenzy . His trial for obstruction of justice was to have begun on March 2 , 2009 , but jury selection was postponed due to 11th-hour appeals by the prosecution . The trial commenced on March 21 , 2011 , in U. S. District Court , Northern District of California , with Judge Susan Illston presiding . He was convicted on April 13 , 2011 on the obstruction of justice charge , for giving an evasive answer to a question under oath . His sentence did not include prison . The conviction was initially upheld by a three judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit in 2013 , but a larger panel of the court voted 10-1 to overturn the conviction on April 22 , 2015 .

Bonds withdrew from the MLB Players Association 's ( MLBPA ) licensing agreement because he felt independent marketing deals would be more lucrative for him . Bonds is the first player in the thirty-year history of the licensing program not to sign . Because of this withdrawal , his name and likeness are not usable in any merchandise licensed by the MLBPA . In order to use his name or likeness , a company must deal directly with Bonds . For this reason he does not appear in some baseball video games , forcing game-makers to create generic athletes to replace him . For example , Bonds is replaced by " Jon Dowd " in MVP Baseball 2005 .

In March 2006 the book Game of Shadows , written by Lance Williams and Mark Fainaru-Wada , was released amid a storm of media publicity including the cover of Sports Illustrated . Initially small excerpts of the book were released by the authors in the issue of Sports Illustrated . The book alleges Bonds used stanozolol and a host of other steroids , and is perhaps most responsible for the change in public opinion regarding Bonds ' steroid use . The book contained excerpts of grand jury testimony that is supposed to be sealed and confidential by law . The authors have been steadfast in their refusal to divulge their sources and at one point faced jail time . On February 14 , 2007 , Troy Ellerman , one of Victor Conte 's lawyers , pleaded guilty to leaking grand jury testimony . Through the plea agreement , he will spend two and a half years in jail .

Bonds met Susann ( " Sun " ) Margreth Branco , the mother of his first two children ( Nikolai and Shikari ) , in Montreal , Quebec in August 1987 . They eloped to Las Vegas February 5 , 1988 . The couple separated in June 1994 , divorced in December 1994 , and had their marriage annulled in 1997 by the Catholic Church . The divorce was a media affair because Bonds had his Swedish spouse sign a prenuptial agreement in which she " waived her right to a share of his present and future earnings " and which was upheld . Bonds had been providing his wife $ 20,000 / month in child support and $ 10,000 in spousal support at the time of the ruling . During the hearings to set permanent support levels , allegations of abuse came from both parties . The trial dragged on for months , but Bonds was awarded both houses and reduced support . On August 21 , 2000 , the Supreme Court of California , in an opinion signed by Chief Justice Ronald M. George , unanimously held that " substantial evidence supports the determination of the trial court that the [ prenuptial ] agreement in the present case was entered into voluntarily . "

In 2010 , Bonds ' son Nikolai , who served as a Giants batboy during his father 's years playing in San Francisco and always sat next to his dad in the dugout during games , was charged with five misdemeanors resulting from a confrontation with his mother , Sun . Barry accompanied him to San Mateo County Superior Court . After the end of his first marriage , Bonds had an extensive intimate relationship with Kimberly Bell from 1994 through May 2003 . Bonds purchased a home in Scottsdale , Arizona for Kimberly . On January 10 , 1998 , Bonds married his second wife , Liz Watson , at the San Francisco Ritz-Carlton Hotel in front of 240 guests . The couple lived in Los Altos Hills , California , with their daughter Aisha during their ten and a half years of marriage before Watson filed for Legal Separation on June 9 , 2009 , citing irreconcilable differences . On July 21 , 2009 , just six weeks later , Watson announced that she was withdrawing her Legal Separation action . The couple were reconciled for seven months before Watson formally filed for divorce in Los Angeles on February 26 , 2010 . On June 6 , 2011 , Bonds and Watson filed a legal agreement not to take the divorce to trial and instead settle it in an " uncontested manner " , effectively agreeing to take the proceedings out of the public eye and end the marriage privately at an unspecified later date without further court involvement .

Several of Bonds ' family and extended family members have been involved in athletics as either a career or a notable pastime . Bonds has a younger brother , Bobby , Jr . , who was also a professional baseball player . His paternal aunt , Rosie Bonds , is a former American record holder in the 80 meter hurdles , and competed in the 1964 Olympics . In addition , he is a distant cousin of Hall of Famer Reggie Jackson . Among Bonds ' many real estate properties is a home he owns in the exclusive gated community of Beverly Park in Beverly Hills , California .

Besides holding Major League career records in home runs ( 762 ) , walks ( 2,558 ) , and intentional walks ( 688 ) , at the time of his retirement , Bonds also led all active players in RBI ( 1,996 ) , on-base percentage ( .444 ) , runs ( 2,227 ) , games ( 2,986 ) , extra-base hits ( 1,440 ) , at-bats per home run ( 12.92 ) , and total bases ( 5,976 ) . He is 2nd in doubles ( 601 ) , slugging percentage ( .607 ) , stolen bases ( 514 ) , at-bats ( 9,847 ) , and hits ( 2,935 ) , 6th in triples ( 77 ) , 8th in sacrifice flies ( 91 ) , and 9th in strikeouts ( 1,539 ) , through September 26 , 2007 . Bonds is the lone member of the 500 – 500 club , which means he has hit at least 500 home runs ( 762 ) and stolen 500 bases ( 514 ) . He is also one of only four baseball players all-time to be in the 40 – 40 club ( 1996 ) , which means he hit 40 home runs ( 42 ) and stole 40 bases ( 40 ) in the same season ; the other members are José Canseco , Alex Rodriguez and Alfonso Soriano .

Listed at # 6 on The Sporting News ' list of the 100 Greatest Baseball Players , the highest-ranked active player , i n 2005 . Named a finalist to the Major League Baseball All-Century Team in 1999 , but not elected to the team in the fan balloting . Rating of 352 on Baseball-Reference.com 's Hall of Fame monitor ( 100 is a good HOF candidate ) ; 9th among all hitters , highest among hitters not in HOF yet . Only the second player to twice have a single-season slugging percentage over .800 , with his record .863 in 2001 and .812 in 2004 . Babe Ruth was the other , with .847 in 1920 and .846 in 1921 . Became the first player in history with more times on base ( 376 ) than official times at bats ( 373 ) in 2004 . This was due to the record number of walks , which count as a time on base but not a time at-bat . He had 135 hits , 232 walks , and 9 hit-by-pitches for the 376 number . With his father Bobby ( 332 , 461 ) , leads all father-son combinations in combined home runs ( 1,094 ) and stolen bases ( 975 ) , respectively through September 26 , 2007 .

Played minor league baseball in both Alaska and Hawaii . In 1983 , he played for the Alaska Goldpanners of Fairbanks in the Alaska Baseball League , and in 1986 , he played for the Hawaii Islanders in the Pacific Coast League . Featured on the cover of Sports Illustrated . He has appeared as the main subject on the cover eight times in total ; seven with the Giants and once with the Pirates . He has also appeared in an inset on the cover twice . He was the most recent Pirate player to appear on the cover , until Jason Grilli was featured in SIs July 22 , 2013 edition .

" Interactions " is the second episode of the animated television series The Spectacular Spider-Man , based on the comic book character Spider-Man created by Stan Lee and Steve Ditko . The episode sees Spider-Man confronting the supervillain Electro , whose body was corrupted with electricity after a freak lab accident . Directed by Troy Adomitis , " Interactions " was written by Kevin Hopps , who researched all the available comic books he had that featured Electro . The character 's appearance in the episode draws on his traditional comic book style , though designer Victor Cook emphasized the color green and removed the character 's customary star-shaped mask . His voice actor , Crispin Freeman , sought to reflect the character 's declining sanity in his vocal style . " Interactions " first aired March 8 , 2008 , on the Kids ' WB block of The CW network , following the first episode . Its 1.4 / 4 Nielsen rating was higher than that of the pilot , " Survival of the Fittest " . The episode received mixed reviews ; IGN commented that " [ w ] hile not as strong as the pilot , the episode had some notable moments " .

The episode opens in Dr. Connors 's laboratory , where Connors demonstrates to his interns Peter , Gwen , and Eddie a new potential source of clean energy : genetically modified eels . After Gwen and Peter leave , an electrician , Max Dillon , attempts to upgrade the lab 's electrical filters , but gets electricuted and is sent to the hospital . There , he is found to be emitting strong electrical fields and is placed in quarantine . Max is further angered when a doctor explains that , although he is stable , he must wear a special suit to contain this emitted bioelectricity . Peter , meanwhile , is assigned to tutor a popular girl named Liz Allan . He is attempting to teach her science in a café when an angry Max enters and accidentally short circuits the power . Max leaves ; Peter , believing him to be dangerous , pursues him as Spider-Man . Peter manages to photograph Max and remove his mask ; Max , enraged , attacks , but flees while Peter is distracted by a phone call from Aunt May . The following day Peter discovers that his photographs have not developed properly , but is still able to identify the man he fought as Max . He meets with Dr. Connors , Eddie , and Gwen to seek a way to contain Max , who has meanwhile been attacked by the police and has decided to seek help from the lab . On arrival , though , Max becomes aggressive and threatens Connors 's wife , Martha . Eddie distracts him long enough for Peter to lead the girls to safety and return as Spider-Man : Max , declaring himself " Electro , " begins to fight with Spider-Man . The battle leads the pair out from the lab into the rain , where Spider-Man spots a radio tower beside a pool : he knocks Electro into the water , causing him to short circuit into unconsciousness .

" Interactions " was written by Kevin Hopps and directed by Troy Adomitis . Hopps , who had previously written for animated series such as Buzz Lightyear of Star Command , Justice League , and Darkwing Duck , researched for the episode by re-reading every available comic book that featured Electro . Hopps notes that he " like [ s ] the humanity " of Electro : " Here 's a person who didn 't ask to be a villain , but found himself thrust into that role . " The radio tower scene initially called for Electro to climb to the very top of the structure , a concept the crew found " clunky " throughout the storyboarding and directing process . Victor Cook , a producer and developer for The Spectacular Spider-Man , observed " He 's gonna climb the whole tower ? It just seems kind of weird . " Before release , the scene was altered to have Electro gradually propel himself up the tower with several electrical blasts . Cook retained the " classic silhouette " of Electro 's suit from the original comics , but removed his star-shaped mask . Cook made green the key color in the Electro design , noting that " In the 1960s it seems like the majority of Spider-man 's rogues gallery had green as part of their costumes . " In Cook 's broader color scheme for the cartoon green is used to symbolize negative situations in Peter 's life , while positive settings and occurrences , such as Peter 's biology class , feature other key colors like yellow .

Electro was voiced by Crispin Freeman , who sought to reflect in his vocal style the psychological decline brought on by the character 's new powers : " It never occurred to me before how that would have an effect on his character – to be dealing with that curse and blessing . And when you think about it , that 's also Peter Parker 's core issue . " The episode 's title , " Interactions , " expands the series theme " The Education of Peter Parker " chosen by developer Greg Weisman . Episodes in the early season one arc all shared a naming scheme based on the biological sciences .

" Interactions " originally aired on March 8 , 2008 , on the Kids ' WB block of The CW Network , following the show 's pilot , " Survival of the Fittest . " Disney XD aired the episode on March 23 , 2009 , between " Survival of the Fittest " and " Natural Selection " . The episode 's initial broadcast garnered a Nielsen rating of 1.4 / 4 , which is considered high for American television and was the network 's 2007 – 08 highest rating for the 10 : 30 a.m. timeslot . It beat the previous episode 's rating of 1.2 / 3 ( the highest for the 10 : 00 a.m. timeslot for the same season ) and represented a 75 % increase in the share of viewers aged 2 to 11 and a 200 % increase in viewers aged 2 to 5 . " Interactions " rated the highest of the season for kids and boys aged 9 to 14 . The episode received mixed reviews from television critics . Eric Goldman of IGN thought the episode " wasn 't as strong as the pilot " and rated it at 7.4 ( " Decent " ) . Goldman wrote that Electro 's redesigned costume retained " some nice visual nods to the Electro many of us grew up with . " Liz Allan 's characterization , though , he found confusing , with the character 's accent and background unclear , and the scene where Peter fought Electro while conducting a phonecall with Aunt May " just a bit too much " : " Come on , Aunt May isn 't freaking out hearing [ that ] ? " Nonetheless , Goldman praised the episode 's humorous scenes and the introduction of Dr. Conner 's limb regeneration experiments .

Rob M. Worley of the entertainment website Mania said that Freeman " charges up " the series with his role , writing that he " steps away from his luminary status in the world of anime and video game voiceovers . " Ultimate Disney reviewer Luke Bonanno did not include the episode among his top five episodes of The Spectacular Spider-Man 's first season , but " feel [ s ] obligated to point out that the uniform excellence of the lot [ makes ] this a challenging task . " DVD Talk reviewer Todd Douglass Jr. described Electro 's design as " [ incorporating ] some sharp edges and dynamic plays " to an " old " character .

Phillips ' Sound Recording Services was a studio in the house of Percy Francis Phillips ( 1896 – 1984 ) and his family at 38 Kensington , Kensington , Liverpool , England . Between the years of 1955 and 1969 , Phillips recorded numerous tapes and acetate discs for Liverpool acts , people and businesses in a small room behind the shop his family owned . Phillips first sold bicycles and motorbikes , but later started selling and recharging batteries in a shop in the front room of his house in 1925 . After a decline in demand for batteries in the early 1950s , he started selling electrical goods and popular records . In 1955 , Phillips set up a recording studio called Phillips ' Sound Recording Services . In 1958 , The Quarrymen ( John Lennon , Paul McCartney , George Harrison , John ' Duff ' Lowe and Colin Hanton ) recorded " That 'll Be The Day " , and " In Spite of All the Danger " in the studio . Other clients included Billy Fury , Ken Dodd , and Marty Wilde . Phillips died in 1984 . The Quarrymen recording and the site of the studio was commemorated in 2005 , when a Blue Plaque was unveiled by two of The Quarrymen ( Lowe and Hanton ) on the front of the house .

Percy Phillips was born in March 1896 , in Warrington , Lancashire . He was a veteran of the First World War , and left the British Army ( Loyal North Lancashire Regiment ) at the rank of Corporal in 1918 , since he was wounded before the war ended . After the war , he started selling bicycles and motorbikes in a small shop in Brunswick Street , in the Kensington Fields area of Liverpool . He began selling and recharging batteries in 1925 , opening a shop in the front room of his family 's three-storey Georgian terraced house , called Phillips ’ Battery Charging Depot , and had to install large accumulators in the cellar . Phillips ran the business for 30 years , even during WWII , but due to a decline in demand for batteries in the early 1950s ( most people having electricity by then ) he started selling household electrical goods . By late 1954 , the shop was only selling records and record players ; customers would buy recordings of American Country and Western , and Big Band music . As Phillips had supplied batteries to the Burtonwood air base during the war , he could buy and sell the latest records from America via his contacts there .

In 1955 , several customers asked if Phillips could make demo discs , so he bought a 1 / 4 inch tape recorder ( replaced in 1963 with a Vortexion portable ) , an MSS ( Marguerite Sound Studios - after the owner 's wife ) disc cutting machine , an amplifier , a 4-track mixer , three microphones ( a Reslo , an HMV ribbon microphone , and an AKG ) , and three pairs of headphones for £ 400 , while on a trip to London to visit his son Frank , who was there for a sound recording course at EMI Electronics . Phillips set up the equipment behind his shop in the ( 12 square feet ) middle living room , with a piano and an overturned tin bath in the cellar as a reverb chamber , with a speaker and microphone linked to the studio above . The recordings would normally be on tape , and then transferred to disc , although the tape was recorded over again during the next session . Because of trams , trucks , and horses going up and down Kensington , Phillips had to hang heavy blankets over the studio door and a rear window to minimise the noise . Phillips ' first recording was of himself singing " Bonnie Marie of Argyle " , ( unaccompanied ) and a few days later he recorded " Unchained Melody " , with local dance band singer Betty Roy . The first disc he cut in the studio was on 7 August 1955 , with his eight-year-old daughter , Carol , singing , " Mr Sandman " . All the discs had " Play with a light-weight pick-up " on the label , as this would increase the life of the disc , which would eventually wear out .

Phillips advertised the studio as Phillips ' Sound Recording Services ( also advertised as P. F. Phillips ' Professional Tape & Disc Recording Service ) , and his business cards read : " PF Phillips , 38 Kensington , Liverpool , 7 . Television and Battery Service . Gramophone Record Dealer . Professional Tape and Disc Recording Studio . " He started cutting discs for members of the public , as well as for actors from the Liverpool Playhouse , who often stayed in the first-floor boarding rooms above the studio , who were sometimes asked by Phillips to record monologues and poems . These included the actors John Thaw , Richard Briers , and the ventriloquist Ray Alan . For the first couple of years , Phillips made music compilation discs for local businesses such as the local ice rink or cinema , men singing songs for loved ones , children playing an instrument , or even a neighbour ’ s dog howling along to piano accompaniment . As the record shop and studio took over the business , he had a brass plate made which he put on the wall just outside the front door , and had labels made for the discs , but changed the design of the disc label every year . By 1957 , Phillips was recording more and more groups of young men with guitars , basses , washboards and drums , who played skiffle .

Ron Wycherly ( a.k.a. Billy Fury ) recorded several songs onto disc in the studio , including , " I 'm Left You 're Right She 's Gone " , " Playin ' For Keeps " , " Paralyzed " and " Come Go With Me " ( all previously released by Elvis Presley ) as well as , " Have I Told You Lately That I Love You " ( Lulu Belle and Scotty ) and his own composition , " Yodelling Song " . Fury 's mother sent the songs to impresario Larry Parnes , which started her son 's singing career . The songs were released on DVD / CD in 2008 .

Johnny ' Guitar ' Byrne ( from Rory Storm and The Hurricanes ) and singer Paul Murphy recorded a version of " Butterfly " and " She ’ s Got it " in the studio on 22 June 1957 , and Byrne later played the recording to Harrison . On 12 July 1958 , a local skiffle group , The Quarrymen ( Lennon , McCartney , Harrison , Lowe and Hanton ) visited Phillips ' studio to record two songs , although the date has been disputed , as Lowe remembered that the recording was during cold weather ( October or November , 1957 ) with the band wearing scarves . Hanton also mentioned the cold weather in interviews , and before recording , Lennon suggested that Hanton put his scarf over the snare drum to lower the volume , which supports the earlier date . The group were surprised to see how small and technically basic the studio was , with only one microphone in the centre of the room . Phillips demanded that they pay for the recording before they set up the equipment , so each member paid 3 shillings and 6 pence , but he then asked for an extra surcharge ( £ 1 ) to cover the cost of transferring the tape recording to acetate disc . As this was too expensive , Phillips said that for a cut-rate price they would not be taped first , but record directly to vinyl .

The first song they recorded was " That ‘ ll Be The Day " ( sung by Lennon with harmonies by McCartney ) . Phillips wanted them to immediately record the next song , but Lennon and McCartney could not decide on a song for the B-side of the disc . McCartney suggested the doo-wop ballad , " In Spite of All the Danger " ( by McCartney and Harrison , but sung by Lennon ) even though Lowe and Hanton had never heard it before . They asked for some time to rehearse , but Phillips refused , saying , " For seventeen and six 17 / 6d you 're not here all day " . Lowe and Hanton busked through the song , which was cut short by Phillips waving his hands to indicate that the cutting needle was getting close to the centre of the acetate . He then handed the band a fragile 78rpm 10-inch acetate record . It was later lost until Lowe rediscovered it in 1981 , and planned to put it up for auction at Sotheby 's , but sold it to McCartney for an undisclosed amount . McCartney later had the two songs digitally re-mastered and pressed 50 copies , giving them to friends as a Christmas present , although the two songs were released on 21 November 1995 , as part of The Beatles Anthology ( Anthology 1 ) . McCartney later said , " The strangest thing for me , listening to it , is that it 's like drowning , it 's like your life flashing by in front of you . From the earliest things by me and John when we used to sag off school and the earliest demo tape we ever made , to the first little record we made which was a version of John singing " That 'll Be The Day " , and a little song of mine [ and Harrison ] on the other side that 's never been released before . "

Other customers of Phillips ' studio included The Swinging Blue Jeans , Brian Epstein , Freddie Starr , Willy Russell , Liverpool F.C. supporters club , and players from Everton F.C .. Denny Seyton and The Sabres recorded " Little Latin Lupe Lu " ( Bill Medley ) in the studio in 1963 . Phillips closed the studio in 1969 , the record shop in 1974 , and died in 1984 , at the Royal Liverpool Hospital . The recording of The Quarrymen acetate and the site of Phillips ' Sound Recording Services was commemorated on 26 August 2005 , when a Blue Plaque was unveiled by two of The Quarrymen ( Lowe and Hanton ) on the front of the house .

The Guianan cock-of-the-rock ( Rupicola rupicola ) is a species of South American passerine . It is about 30 centimetres ( 12 in ) in length and weighs about 200 to 220 grams ( 7.1 to 7.8 oz ) . They are found in tropical rainforests , near its preferred habitat of rocky outcrops . The males plumage is bright orange and the males have a prominent half-moon crest . The females are brownish in colour , and are generally much duller coloured than the males . It is one of two species of the genus Rupicola , the other being the Andean cock-of-the-rock . The Guianan cock-of-the-rock lives across the forested region of northeastern South America . Its diet consists mostly of fruit , but sometimes includes small snakes and lizards . The Guianan cock-of-the-rock breeds in the early months of the year and , on average , lays its eggs around March . During the height of the mating season , males engage in competitive displays in lek , which is a complex courting behaviour that is done to attract females . Males and females live separately except when the females choose a mate . The mating success varies based on multiple factors , ranging from the plumage exhibited by a male to the composition of the lek itself . The females choose a male by flying down to the ground and pecking the male on his rump . The male then turns around and the mating takes place almost immediately . There is speculation that the male-to-male competition is an important factor in lek formation and breeding . The main predators of the Guianan cock-of-the-rock are harpy eagles and black-and-white hawk-eagles .

The Guianan cock-of-the-rock is a stout-bodied bird with a prominent half-moon crest . It is a sexually dimorphic bird . The male 's crest is more pronounced than the female 's and is bright orange . The males also have an orange-tipped black tail , black , orange and white wings , a bright orange bill , an orange iris yellowing as it nears its outer edge , and silky-orange filamentous feathers of the inner remiges . Both sexes also have orange legs and skin . The less conspicuous female is dark brownish-grey overall and has a yellow-tipped black bill , a duller orange iris , and a smaller crest . One-year-old juvenile males look similar to an adult female , but has orange speckles over their bodies . After two years , the juvenile males become mostly orange with brown and grey spots . Males attain their definitive plumage at around three years . Juvenile females look almost identical to their adult counterparts . Guianan cocks-of-the-rock have a total length of approximately 30 centimetres ( 12 in ) and a total weight of around 200 to 220 grams ( 7.1 to 7.8 oz ) . The two species of cock-of-the-rock are allopatric , and therefore do not meet with one another . The plumage of male Andean is redder and its wings are mostly black , lacking the orange colouration seen on the male Guianan . The female Andean is reddish brown rather than the brownish-gray of the Guianan .

As suggested by its name , the Guianan cock-of-the-rock is found in the Guianan Shield , occurring in French Guiana , Suriname , Guyana , southern Venezuela , eastern Colombia and northern Amazonian Brazil . Its preferred habitats are humid forests near rocky outcrops . They are normally found at an altitude of 300 to 2,000 metres ( 980 to 6,560 ft ) . The Guianan cock-of-the-rock has distinctive territorial markings . Males usually take dominance of an area on the ground , although they sometimes they occupy middle strata in forests . They make their characteristic marking by clearing out debris from the ground , including twigs , leaves , and pellets . This area is called a “ court ” . Quality of courts are known to have some influence on mate choice . The court quality is determined by the territory density and location to the center of activity in the lek . The reason for the focus on the center of activity in the lek is that successful males tended to own courts in the most densely clustered lek areas . Guianan courts are commonly found in the Guianan Shield , a forested region in northeastern South America .

The diet of the adult Guianan cock-of-the-rock consists mainly of fruits meaning they are frugivorous . Up to 65 species of fruit have been reported in their diet , primarily from canopy trees or lianas . Three quarters ( 75 % ) of the fruit eaten by the Guianan cock-of-the-rock at one study site were either black- or red-coloured fruit . In the British Guiana , Thomas E. Gilliard found papayas growing at the base of a huge rock . On top of the rock were perched females that were nesting . He found that no other papayas were growing in that part of the forest and speculated that the perched females ate papayas in the forest where they are native and dropped the seeds below where they were nesting . Small snakes , lizards , insects and frogs are occasionally found in its diet . By selectively feeding on nearby fruit trees and then defecating or regurgitating the seeds within the leks , these birds can actively influence the regeneration and succession of the forest habitat where they breed .

Guianan cocks-of-the-rock breed early in the year , and the females lay their eggs around March . During the height of mating season , males gather in leks with multiple males defending a social display arena of much greater area than that of a lone male . The males each have their own area on the forest floor where they make their courts . The size of each court is about 1 metre ( 3.3 ft ) in diameter , and the next bird is often about 3 metres ( 9.8 ft ) away . The females and males live separately ; only when it is time to mate do females fly over to observe and choose a male . When this occurs , the females tap the males from behind and insemination quickly follows . When females approach a lek , the males stand firmly and present themselves rigidly . Mating success is dependent on a variety of factors that range from the plumage exhibited by a male to the composition of the lek itself . In one study , the female Guianan cocks-of-the-rock displayed sexual selection based off sequential comparisons or threshold standards . The hens engaged in a “ pool – comparison ” tactic , meaning that females chose males of higher rank in courtship . Males of higher rank were those with more matings received from other females ; the lower-ranking single males were ignored . The rankings were determined by where the courts were positioned in the lek : courts that were more centrally placed indicated more successful and higher-ranking males . The females in the study were individually observed to aggregate towards larger , more centrally concentrated leks , demonstrating active female choice .

The smaller of the two cocks-of-the-rock , the male Guianan takes the lesser part in breeding . It is polygynous and has nothing to do with nesting once mating is done . The male 's energy instead is devoted to very elaborate display rituals that show off its magnificent plumage . These displays take place in communal leks , where 40 or more males may gather to challenge rivals and beckon to the females . The displaying male purposely contrasts itself from the forest , shows its crest and plumage so much that the bill and tail become obscured ; almost making it difficult to recognize as a bird , to attract females . Within the lek , each female has its own perch on a low branch , while the males own a " court " on the ground below that is cleared of dead leaves by the draughts of each male taking off and landing . The males have a variety of calls and movements , showing off the crest , elongated filaments on the rump , secondary feathers , and the snapping of their bills . Males display on branches about 2.5 metres ( 8.2 ft ) from the ground until a female approaches , when the males display and call from individual plots on the ground . Most males copulate with only a few females . However , some are very successful and may copulate with many . Unlike many other bird species , the male does not use resources nor parental care to entice females .

Males often engage in courtship disruption practices . In a study conducted by Pepper W. Trail , the interactions between adult males , females , and yearlings were observed and linked to mate choice and male dispersion patterns within leks . Adult males produced this disruptive behaviour with varying intensity , which depended on the situation . In lower-intensity disruptions , males usually directed their aggression or threats towards neighboring males , in attempts to improve or maintain breeding status and success . The males that were hassled tended to be more successful and often were disrupted with much greater frequency than males with lower mating success . Higher-intensity disruptions were used by less successful males and directed towards females that wandered by . This behaviour is suggested to have the effect of redirecting females towards the hassling male . Yearlings often disrupted courtships of the more mature adults on the basis of practice for future courtships , since the yearlings do not possess any territory within the lek . Female disruption was an uncommon event that had little , if any , effect on the accessibility of a male . Young males of highly promiscuous species such as the Cock-of-the rock often failed to mate in their first year , probably because older , more experienced males will enjoy the majority of matings . In this strong system of sexual selection , the successive breeding of dominant and aggressive males leads to high sex drives and the endurance of polygyny . A theory suggests that the selection of these aggressive males also puts a premium , or value , on female characteristics . Hence , there is a less likely occurrence of female – elicited aggression .

One possible advantage to lek formation in Guianan cock-of-the-rock is severe selection and consequent rapid evolutionary advancement , all of which is possible due to the high expendability of males . Only a few males are needed to fertilize the next generation . The courtship behaviour is similarly theorized to have arisen from differences in division of labour between the two sexes . Females expend their energy on building nests and rearing young , while males spend most of their time and energy of finding mates and caring for their plumage . Because Guianan cocks-of-the-rock form large leks , averaging 55 adult males , the males in these display leks were especially vulnerable to attacks and predation by large snakes and other natural predators . In manipulated groups of smaller size , around 6 , predation was less likely to occur , giving rise to an inverse relationship between the number and frequency of attacks and the size of leks . Thus , with a smaller frequency of attacks on the smaller group , the Guianan cock-of-the-rock males was less likely to spook or disperse completely as compared to a large group where a false alarm could trigger a complete flush out 90 % of the time . It was found that these birds have relatively ineffective methods of anti-predation and that only social anti-predation and the infrequency of encounters with predators were keeping these lekking males alive .

Unlike other species of the family Cotingidae , the Guianan cock-of-the-rock makes its nest on rocky cliff faces and caves rather than in the trees . The female lays one or two eggs in the nest of mud and plant material , which is attached by saliva to a vertical rock . The male does not participate in the building of the nest or the incubation of the eggs . Eggs typically incubate for 27 – 28 days . The ideal nesting sites for this species are usually located in a cave or vertical rock face with crevices that provide some shelter and protection from the elements . The nests themselves are solid moldings formed from mud and plant material deposited into the crevices . Due to the solid nature of these nests , they typically persist from one breeding season to the next . Females will make repairs to their nests as a breeding season begins .

The colouration of the males allows them to visibly stand out from the brown forest floor . This bright colouration provides a sexual advantage for the adult males , increasing their likelihood of successfully mating . The result is rapid evolutionary selection within the species for brighter plumage and more conspicuous behaviour patterns in the males . The bright colouration also makes the males more susceptible to predation . Males are more expendable for this reason ; only a small number of males are needed within any generation in order to perpetuate the species . While sexual selection leads to bright plumage , natural selection in turn favors defensive colouration in the birds . There is higher fitness in birds monitoring nests whose colouration acts as camouflage-protection from predation .

Fairly common in its large range , and with its population stable , the Guianan cock-of-the-rock is considered by the International Union for Conservation of Nature to be a Least Concern on its red list of threatened species . The main predators of the Guianan cock-of-the-rock are harpy eagles , black-and-white hawk-eagles , black hawk-eagles , and slaty-backed forest falcons . Although these are the main predators , two species of owls , crested owls and spectacled owls , are also predators . Felines such as the jaguar , puma , and ocelot can also be predators , along with snakes such as the bird snake , tree boas , boa constrictor , tiger rat snake , and fer-de-lance . The species is rare in captivity , but breeding has been achieved at a small number of facilities . The world 's first successful captive breeding was at Dallas World Aquarium ( USA ) in 2008 .

In larger lek groups there is less risk of predation . In a group there are more individuals to alert the group about an approaching predator . All the birds in the groups will be vigilant in looking for a predator because there is an advantage to seeing the predator first . There is also the risk that in a bigger group there will more false alarm signals . The common signal is vocalization , after which the birds will fly up into the trees . It was found the birds did not however give this signal when there was a snake .

The second season of the American animated television series SpongeBob SquarePants , created by Stephen Hillenburg , aired on Nickelodeon from October 26 , 2000 , to July 26 , 2003 , and consists of 20 episodes . The series chronicles the exploits and adventures of the title character and his various friends in the fictional underwater city of Bikini Bottom . The season was executive produced by series creator Hillenburg , who also acted as the showrunner . During the season 's run , SpongeBob SquarePants became Nickelodeon 's No. 2 children 's program , behind Rugrats . Nearly 40 percent of SpongeBob 's audience of 2.2 million were aged 18 to 34 . The show signed a marketing deal with Target Corporation and Burger King , expanding its merchandising , and SpongeBob 's popularity translated well into sales figures . In 2002 , the show itself was nominated at the Primetime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Children 's Program . At the 29th Annie Awards , the series was nominated three times . The episodes " The Secret Box " and " Band Geeks " won at the 2002 Golden Reel Awards for Best Sound Editing in Television — Animation , while the episodes " Jellyfish Hunter " and " The Fry Cook Games " received a nomination for Best Sound Editing in Television Animation — Music category .

The season aired on Nickelodeon , which is owned by Viacom , and was produced by United Plankton Pictures and Nickelodeon . The season 's executive producer was series creator Stephen Hillenburg , who also functioned as the series ' showrunner . During production of the previous season , Nickelodeon picked up a second season for SpongeBob SquarePants on August 31 , 1999 . The season premiered more than a year later , on October 26 , 2000 . Season production assistant and then-staff writer Derek Iversen commented , " We hoped it would go one season . We hoped it would go two seasons . I figured you do the best you can and you hope . " In this season , production switched from cel animation , used during the first season , to digital ink and paint . Executive producer Paul Tibbitt , in 2009 , said " The first season of SpongeBob was done the old-fashioned way on cells , and every cell had to be part-painted , left to dry , paint some other colours . It 's still a time-consuming aspect of the process now , but the digital way of doing things means it doesn 't take long to correct . " The animation was handled overseas in South Korea at Rough Draft Studios . Animation directors credited with episodes in the second season included Sean Dempsey , Edgar Larrazabal , Larry Leichliter , Andrew Overtoom , Leonard Robinson , Frank Weiss , and Tom Yasumi . The season was storyboarded by Walt Dohrn , C.H. Greenblatt , Chris Headrick , Chuck Klein , Carson Kugler , Jay Lender , Caleb Meurer , Dan Povenmire , William " Bill " Reiss , Octavio Rodriguez , Jim Schumann , Aaron Springer , Paul Tibbitt , and Erik Wiese .

Episodes were written by a team of writers , which consisted of Dohrn , David Fain , Greenblatt , Mr. Lawrence , Lender , Mark O 'Hare , Povenmire , William Reiss , Springer , Tibbitt , and Merriwether Williams . During the season , the writing staff used their individual childhood experiences as inspirations to come up with much of the story lines for individual episodes . For example , in the episode " Sailor Mouth " , SpongeBob learns profanity . The idea for the episode was inspired by creative director Derek Drymon 's experience " [ when ] I got in trouble for saying the f-word in front of my mother . " Drymon said , " The scene where Patrick is running to Mr. Krabs to tattle , with SpongeBob chasing him , is pretty much how it happened in real life . " The end of the episode , where Mr. Krabs uses more profanity than SpongeBob and Patrick , was also inspired " by the fact that my [ Drymon 's ] mother has a sailor mouth herself . " In " Secret Box " , SpongeBob wants to see what is inside Patrick 's secret box . The idea came to Drymon because he too had a secret box as a child . Creator Hillenburg said , " [ He ] started telling us about it . We wanted to make fun of him and use it . "

The second season had a cast of six main actors . Tom Kenny provided the voice of the title character SpongeBob SquarePants and his pet snail Gary . SpongeBob 's best friend , a starfish named Patrick Star , was voiced by Bill Fagerbakke , while Rodger Bumpass played the voice of Squidward Tentacles , an arrogant and ill-tempered octopus . Other members of the cast were Carolyn Lawrence as Sandy Cheeks , a squirrel from Texas ; Clancy Brown as Mr. Krabs , a miserly crab obsessed with money and SpongeBob 's boss at the Krusty Krab ; and Mr. Lawrence as Plankton , a small green copepod and Mr. Krabs ' business rival . The season had a number of secondary characters including Jill Talley as Plankton 's computer wife , Karen ; Mary Jo Catlett as Mrs. Puff , SpongeBob 's driving instructor ; Lori Alan as Pearl , Mr. Krabs ' daughter ; and Brian Doyle-Murray as the Flying Dutchman . Season two introduced various characters that would recur throughout the series . Mr. Krabs ' mother , Mama Krabs , debuted in the episode " Sailor Mouth " and was voiced by writer Paul Tibbitt . However , voice actress Sirena Irwin overtook Tibbitt 's role as the character reappeared in the fourth season episode " Enemy In-Law " in 2005 . In the Christmas special " Christmas Who ? " , SpongeBob 's voice actor , Tom Kenny , portrayed Patchy the Pirate , the president of the fictional SpongeBob SquarePants fan club , while series creator Hillenburg voiced the character of Potty the Parrot . After Hillenburg 's departure from the show as showrunner in 2004 , Tibbitt was given the role voicing Potty the Parrot .

In addition to the regular cast members , episodes feature guest voices from many ranges of professions , including actors , athletes , authors , musicians , and artists . American rock band Ween guest starred as themselves in " Your Shoe 's Untied " . The band performed " Loop de Loop " , a song they written for the episode . Before SpongeBob SquarePants aired on television in 1999 , Hillenburg had approached band guitarist Dean Ween to compose a song for the show . Dean Ween said " [ Hillenburg ] called me and told me [ he ] was a marine biologist who was starting a cartoon about underwater sea creatures and that The Mollusk was a big reference point for him creatively and would we like to do a song for the show . " The band conceived the song and wrote it in about three minutes . Ween 's 1997 song " Ocean Man " would also be used four years later during the end credits sequence in The SpongeBob SquarePants Movie , and as part of the film 's soundtrack . In the episode " Bossy Boots " , American band The Capsules performed the song " Bossy Boots " , which was later released on SpongeBob SquarePants : The Yellow Album in 2005 . In " Bubble Buddy " , professional American surfer Corky Carroll made a vocal cameo as Grubby Grouper , a famous surfer . It also stars Brad Abrell as titular character Bubble Buddy . " Grandma 's Kisses " features Marion Ross as SpongeBob 's grandmother . She would reprise her role throughout the series , including the fifth season episode " BlackJack " . In the entry " Pre-Hibernation Week " , where Sandy and SpongeBob play extreme sporting games , American heavy metal band Pantera appeared as themselves for a special musical performance . McHale 's Navy actors Ernest Borgnine and Tim Conway returned in the episode " Mermaid Man and Barnacle Boy III " , reprising their roles as Mermaid Man and Barnacle Boy , respectively . John Rhys-Davies also guest starred in the same episode as the heroes ' nemesis , Man Ray . Various other characters were voiced by voice acting veterans Dee Bradley Baker , Thomas F. Wilson and Clea Lewis .

Since SpongeBob SquarePants made its debut in 1999 , the show had flourished into Nickelodeon 's number 2 children 's program , after Rugrats . Nearly 40 percent of the show 's audience of 2.2 million were aged 18 to 34 . As a result , Nickelodeon moved the show from Saturday morning to a much more valuable timeslot : almost-prime time , appearing at 6 PM , from Monday through Thursday . In 2001 , Nickelodeon took the " Saturday-morning ratings crown " for the fourth straight season , grabbing a 4.8 rating / 21 share ( 1.9 million viewers ) in two- to eleven-year-olds , jumping 17 % from the previous year . SpongeBob SquarePants signed a marketing deal with Target Corporation and Burger King , expanding its merchandising . Furthermore , the popularity of SpongeBob translated well into sales figures . In 2002 , SpongeBob SquarePants dolls sold at a rate of 75,000 per week , which was faster than Tickle Me Elmo dolls were selling at the time . Nickelodeon 's parent company Viacom purposefully targeted women in Japan as a way of marketing the SpongeBob SquarePants brand . Skeptics initially doubted that SpongeBob could be popular in Japan , as the character 's design is very different from popular designs for Hello Kitty and Pikachu , but SpongeBob has gained popularity in Japan among women . Ratings and merchandise sales showed SpongeBob SquarePants had caught on with parents and with the college audience . In a recent promotion , college-oriented website Music.com gave away 80,000 SpongeBob T-shirts , four times more than during a similar promotion for Comedy Central 's South Park .

During the 2001 – 02 television season , the Parents Television Council ( PTC ) , a watchdog media group , named SpongeBob SquarePants among the best programs on cable television . However , according to a report titled Wolves in Sheep 's Clothing , which documents the increase in potentially violent , profane , and sexual content in children 's programming , the PTC and fans believed the episode " Sailor Mouth " , which originally aired during the 2001 – 02 season , was an implicit attempt to promote and satirize use of profanity among children . The report cited a repeat broadcast of the episode from 2005 to prove its point that it promoted use of profanity among children . In a later report , several members of the PTC listed " Sailor Mouth " as an example of how levels of profane , sexual , and violent activity has increased in children 's television programming . Nickelodeon , in response to the incident , said " It 's sad and a little desperate that they stooped to literally putting profane language in the mouths of our characters to make a point . Has the FCC looked at this ? " Richard Huff of the New York Daily News criticized the report for misinterpreting the episode over its intent to satirize profanity implicitly .

The 23rd Battalion was an infantry battalion of the Australian Army . It was raised in 1915 as part of the Australian Imperial Force for service during World War I and formed part of the 6th Brigade , attached to the 2nd Division . After being formed in Australia , the battalion was sent to Egypt to complete its training , before being committed to the Gallipoli Campaign as reinforcements in September 1915 . They remained on the peninsula until the evacuation of Allied troops in December , when they were withdrawn back to Egypt where they were reorganised before being transferred to the Western Front in March 1916 . Over the course of the next two-and-a-half years , the 23rd took part in a number of significant battles in France and Belgium , before being disbanded in mid-1919 following the conclusion of hostilities . In 1921 , the battalion was re-raised as a part-time unit within the Citizens Forces in the state of Victoria , but was amalgamated with the 21st Battalion in 1929 to form the 23rd / 21st Battalion .

The 23rd Battalion was raised in Victoria in March 1915 as part of the formation of the 2nd Division of the Australian Imperial Force ( AIF ) . Its first commanding officer was Lieutenant Colonel George Morton . Together with the 21st , 22nd and 24th Battalions , it formed the 6th Brigade under the command of Colonel Richard Linton . Organised into four rifle companies , designated ' A ' through to ' D ' , with a machine gun section in support , the Australian infantry battalion of the time had an authorised strength of 1,023 men of all ranks . After completing initial training at Broadmeadows , in May 1915 the 23rd embarked upon the troopship Euripides bound for Egypt . They arrived in Alexandria on 11 June and after being moved by train to Cairo they marched to a camp at Heliopolis where they undertook further training in preparation for deployment to Gallipoli , where the units of the 1st Division had landed on 25 April 1915 .

While they were training , the Allies launched the August Offensive in an attempt to break the deadlock that had developed on the Gallipoli Peninsula following the initial landing . The offensive largely failed and heavy casualties resulted . In order to replace the men that were lost and give the survivors a rest , the decision was made by Allied commanders to move the 2nd Division from Egypt . After being moved to Lemnos Island , the 23rd Battalion embarked for Gallipoli on 4 September , arriving there at 9 : 30 pm that evening . A day of familiarisation followed before the battalion took up defensive positions at Lone Pine . On 12 September , the 23rd , along with their sister battalion , the 24th , took over responsibility for the post from the 1st Division battalions that had held it previously . During the stalemate that followed , manning positions that , in some places , were only a few metres from the Ottoman lines , the 23rd Battalion began countermining operations after Turkish mining operations were discovered . For the next three months , due to the intensity of the fighting in the sector , the battalion alternated their position with the 24th Battalion almost every day until the evacuation of Allied troops from the peninsula occurred , embarking with the last troops to leave on the night of 19 / 20 December 1915 .

Following their withdrawal from Gallipoli , the 23rd Battalion was moved to Lemnos Island , where they remained until January 1916 when they were transferred back to Egypt . At this time , the AIF was reorganised and expanded in preparation for future operations . Two new infantry divisions were formed from the experienced troops of the 1st Division who had deployed to Gallipoli at the start of the campaign , while a third division was raised in Australia from scratch . The 2nd Division was largely left untouched , so that it could complete its formation which had been interrupted by its deployment to Gallipoli . The 23rd subsequently spent the early months of 1916 rebuilding its strength and conducting further training in preparation for its transfer to Europe .

After arriving in France in March , the battalion moved to the Western Front , occupying the forward positions around Armentières in northern France on 10 April 1916 . In mid-July , the battalion was transferred to the Somme , where they subsequently took part in the Battles of Pozières and Mouquet Farm , during which they suffered almost 90 per cent casualties . In early 1917 , the Germans shortened their lines and withdrew to the Hindenburg Line and the Australian divisions in the Somme were ordered to carry out an advance to follow them up . After being reinforced , the 23rd Battalion was committed to the fighting at the Second Battle of Bullecourt in early May 1917 after the first attempt to capture the town by the 4th Australian Division failed . Succeeding in capturing all its objectives , it was heavily counter-attacked by German forces , suffering a large number of casualties , including 100 men killed or died of wounds before being relieved by the Australian 3rd Battalion . After this the battalion was withdrawn from the line until early September 1917 when they moved into positions around Ypres , Belgium , and participated in the Battle of Broodseinde on 4 October . During this battle , the 6th Brigade was positioned to the south of Zonnebeke Lake , and the 23rd Battalion lost three officers and 101 other ranks killed or wounded , some of which were inflicted when an intense German mortar barrage fell upon their " waiting line " prior to the attack . Nevertheless , the attack which followed , after overcoming an encounter with a German regiment , the 212th , in no man 's land , resulted in success as the Australians captured the ridge .

In early 1918 , Russian resistance on the Eastern Front collapsed in the wake of the October Revolution and , as a result , the Germans were able to transfer a large number of troops to the Western Front . This greatly improved the German strength in the west and , as a result , in March , they launched their Spring Offensive . With the Germans making rapid gains , many Australian units , including the 23rd Battalion , were thrown into the line to blunt the attack in early April , as the 6th Brigade relieved the 12th around Dernancourt . After the German offensive was halted , a brief lull followed during which the Allies sought to regain the initiative , launching a series of " Peaceful Penetration " operations . Following this , the 23rd participated in the fighting at Hamel on 4 July , advancing as the right-hand battalion on the southern front behind a devastatingly accurate preparatory barrage . On 8 August 1918 , the 23rd joined the Allied Hundred Days Offensive , which was launched at Amiens , and was followed by a series of advances followed as the Allies began advancing through the Somme . For his actions during the fighting at Mont St. Quentin in early September , one of the battalion 's soldiers , Private Robert Mactier , was awarded the Victoria Cross posthumously . After participating in the Battle of Beaurevoir between 3 and 4 October , the battalion was sent to the rear for rest when the units of the Australian Corps , severely depleted , were withdrawn from the line upon the insistence of the Australian prime minister , Billy Hughes . As a result , it took no further part in the fighting before the armistice was declared on 11 November .

In 1921 , the decision was made to perpetuate the battle honours and traditions of the AIF by re-organising the units of the Citizens Forces to adopt the numerical designations of the AIF units with which they were affiliated . As a result of this decision , the 23rd Battalion was re-raised in Victoria , drawing personnel from the 2nd and 5th Battalions , 23rd Infantry Regiment , and part of the 29th Light Horse Regiment , and perpetuating the battle honours of its AIF predecessor . It later adopted the title of the " 23rd Battalion ( The City of Geelong Regiment ) " when territorial titles were introduced in 1927 . At the same time it was granted the motto Nulli Secundus . In 1928 , the battalion was part of the 2nd Brigade , within the 3rd Military District . Initially , the Citizen Forces units were maintained through a mixture of voluntary and compulsory service , but in late 1929 , following the election of the Scullin Labor government , the compulsory training scheme was abolished and this , coupled with the economic privations of the Great Depression drastically reduced the number of recruits available . As a result , the decision was made to amalgamate a number of units . The 23rd Battalion was one of those chosen and it was linked with the 21st Battalion to become the 23rd / 21st Battalion , adopting the territorial designation of " The City of Geelong Regiment / The Victoria Rangers " . This battalion undertook garrison duties in the Northern Territory during World War II , before being disbanded in August 1943 as being surplus to Army requirements without having served overseas . After the war , following the demobilisation of the wartime Army , Australia 's part-time military was re-formed in 1948 , but the 23rd Battalion was not re-raised at the time . In 1961 , although the battalion was in a state of suspended animation , it was entrusted with the 13 battle honours awarded to the 2 / 23rd Battalion for its service in North Africa and New Guinea during World War II .

World War I : Gallipoli 1915 , Egypt 1915 – 16 , Somme 1916 – 18 , Pozières , Bapaume 1917 , Bullecourt , Ypres 1917 , Menin Road , Polygon Wood , Broodseinde , Poelcappelle , Passchendaele , Hamel , Amiens , Albert 1918 , Mont St Quentin , Hindenburg Line , Beaurevoir , France and Flanders 1916 – 18 . World War II : North Africa 1941 – 42 , Defence of Tobruk , The Salient 1941 , Defence of Alamein Line , El Alamein , South-West Pacific 1943 – 45 , Lae – Nadzab , Finschhafen , Borneo , Busu River , Sattelberg , Wareo and Tarakan ( inherited ) .

Their Child is a 1910 American silent short drama produced by the Thanhouser Company . The film begins with Ellen Stokes whose extravagant lifestyle is outside the means of the family . While their only son is hosting a birthday party , the husband informs Ellen that they are financially ruined because of her . Ellen attempts to get money from her uncle , who refuses , and a friend of the family soon comes to her aid with a loan . Ellen is deceptive in telling who provided the money and her jealous husband soon learns the truth . In anger , he takes the child and leaves . The child soon returns to Ellen and she whisks him away to a new home where she fails to obtain gainful employment . The son decides to sell newspapers for some money and in this job is recognized by his father , soon the family is reunited . Marie Eline played the role of " their child " and was likely so well disguised that the reviewer for The Nickelodeon believed her to be a boy . The film was released on October 21 , 1910 , and was met with positive reviews . The film is presumed lost .

Though the film is presumed lost , a synopsis survives in The Moving Picture World from October 22 , 1910 . It states : " Ellen Stokes is a loving wife and mother , but she has one fault - extravagance . On the day that her only child is playing the host at a birthday party , Ellen 's husband informs her that he is practically ruined , and places the fault at her door . Ellen , conscience stricken , declares that she will aid her husband , and tells him that she will induce her rich uncle to aid them . When she talks to him on the subject , she finds that he is not disposed to aid her . Soon after his refusal , a friend of the family drops in , finds Ellen in tears , learns of her trouble , and offers a loan which she finally accepts . The woman 's husband is of a jealous nature and when Ellen gives him the money , he asks if it came from the other man . She hastily denies it , and says that her uncle was the one . The husband takes the money , and later finds that his wife has deceived him . In anger he leaves the house , taking their only child with him . "

" When Ellen finds that she has been deserted , she listens to the pleadings of the other man and is about to elope with him , when the baby , Tom , unexpectedly appears . He has run away from his father , and trudged through the streets , alone , to rejoin his mother . The woman clasped her child in her arms and decides to live for him in the future . The mother takes her child to humble lodgings , the whereabouts of which are unknown even to her husband . There she tries to make a living for herself and him by sewing , but is unable to do so . She has given the last crust of bread to the little one , and is herself in a starving condition , when the baby boy himself comes to the rescue by starting out on a business career , selling papers in the street . In this way the wolf is kept from the door for a little while longer , and the little fellow , while applying his trade on the street corner , is met and recognized by his father . With his son as his guide , the repentant husband , who now realizes his unjust action , goes to his wife , and with the baby as a mediator , the two become reconciled . "

It seems that Marie Eline was so well-disguised as a boy that the reviewer for The Nickelodeon was unable to recognize her true gender . The reviewer state " the meeting between the father and his newsboy child also has a touch of originality " and " [ t ] he child is a fine little actor , easily making himself the star of the piece . " Though this was not lost on the reviewer for The New York Dramatic Mirror which stated , " The work of the little girl who plays the leading role in this film is a constant wonder to spectators . " Eline had proven herself capable of handling male characters , with the first such credit as a young Italian boy in The Two Roses . Eline would also star as Hans in The Little Hero of Holland .

The single reel drama , approximately 1,000 feet long , was released on October 21 , 1910 . The film had a wide national release , with theaters showing the film in Maryland , Pennsylvania , South Dakota , Indiana , and Kansas . In 1917 , years after its release , it was later approved by the Pennsylvania State Board of Censors of Moving Pictures for viewing without modification . The film was reviewed positively by the trade publications . The Moving Picture World stated , " The dramatic qualities of this film are high , but the subject is somewhat depressing ... Maybe the picture will teach the lesson that it is better to listen to explanations at first and save all those intervening years of sorrow and suffering . It ought to , at any rate , because that story is plainly wrought out and is apparent as it is possible to make it . " A review in The Nickelodeon offered little more than a summary of the film , but the reviewer found the subject to be enhanced by the attention to detail in the production . The reviewer was also pleased that the child was not brought in to serve as in deus ex machina role . Though Lonergan was fond of using the technique . Even The New York Dramatic Mirror gave some praise to the production , but noted that the acting of the mother 's friend was the weakest because " [ a ] man of his [ caliber ] wouldn 't have backed off so quickly . " Overall , the reviewer found the acting to be better than the narrative itself and concluded that " [ s ] omething less laboredly sentimental would be much stronger . "

The Victoria Cross for New Zealand ( VC ) is a military decoration awarded for valour or gallantry in the presence of the enemy to members of the New Zealand Armed Forces . It may be awarded to a person of any rank in any service and civilians under military command , and is presented to the recipient by the Governor-General of New Zealand during an investiture held at Government House , Wellington . As the highest award for gallantry in New Zealand it takes precedence over all other postnominals and medals . The Victoria Cross for New Zealand was established in 1999 when New Zealand created a new award system that replaced several Commonwealth honours with New Zealand awards . It has been awarded once , on 2 July 2007 to Corporal Willie Apiata for actions in 2004 . The original Victoria Cross was introduced in 1856 by Queen Victoria to reward acts of valour during the Crimean War . That medal had been awarded 25 times to 24 individual military personnel from New Zealand ; Captain Charles Upham receiving a bar . Only 14 medals have been awarded since the end of the Second World War . The medal is made from the gunmetal of a weapon supposedly captured at the siege of Sevastopol , but several historians have since questioned the true origin of the gunmetal . Originally all Commonwealth recipients were issued with the same award , but over the last 50 years , Commonwealth countries have introduced separate award systems ; three of these retain " Victoria Cross " as part of the name of the highest award for gallantry .

The original Victoria Cross was created by Queen Victoria in 1856 to recognise incidents of gallantry that were unconnected with a man 's lengthy or meritorious service . She signed a Royal Warrant on 29 January 1856 that officially instituted the VC . The order was retroactive to 1854 to recognise acts of valour during the Crimean War . The Australian and New Zealand Victoria Crosses are made from the same gunmetal as the originals . It was originally intended that the VCs would be cast from the bronze cascabels of two cannon that were captured from the Russians at the siege of Sevastopol . The historian John Glanfield has since shown that the metal used for VCs is in fact from Chinese cannon not Russian , and their origin is a mystery . The barrels of the cannon in question are stationed outside the Officers ' Mess at the Royal Artillery Barracks at Woolwich . The remaining portion of the only remaining cascabel , weighing 10 kilograms ( 385 oz ) , is stored in a vault maintained by 15 Regiment Royal Logistic Corps at MoD Donnington . It can only be removed under armed guard . It is estimated that approximately 80 to 85 more VCs could be cast from this source . A single company of jewellers , Hancocks of London , has been responsible for the production of every VC .

In the last 60 years several Commonwealth countries have introduced their own honours systems , separate from the British Honours System . Australia , Canada and New Zealand have each introduced their own decorations for gallantry and bravery , replacing British decorations such as the Military Cross with their own awards . Most Commonwealth countries , however , still recognise some form of the VC as their highest decoration for valour . Australia was the first Commonwealth nation to create its own VC , on 15 January 1991 . Although it is a separate award , its appearance is identical to its British counterpart . Canada followed suit when in 1993 Queen Elizabeth signed Letters Patent creating the Canadian VC , which is also similar to the British version , except that the legend has been changed from FOR VALOUR to the Latin PRO VALORE . The New Zealand and Australian awards are still made by the jewellers Hancocks from the gunmetal used for the originals . The Canadian Victoria Cross also includes metal from the same cannon , along with copper and other metals from all regions of Canada . New Zealand was the third country to create the VC as part of its own honours system . On 21 September 1999 , Prime Minister Jenny Shipley announced that the Queen had approved the formal institution of a new range of Royal awards to recognise acts of gallantry and bravery performed by New Zealanders . The awards were designed to be the final major element in the development of a distinct New Zealand Royal honours system .

The Victoria Cross for New Zealand is identical to the original design . The decoration is a cross pattée , 41 millimetres ( 1.6 in ) high , 36 millimetres ( 1.4 in ) wide , bearing a crown surmounted by a lion , and the inscription FOR VALOUR . This was originally to have been FOR BRAVERY , until it was changed on the recommendation of Queen Victoria , who thought some might erroneously consider that only the recipients of the VC were brave in battle . The decoration , suspension bar and link weigh about 27 grams ( 0.87 troy ounces ) . The cross is suspended by a ring from a seriffed " V " to a bar ornamented with laurel leaves , through which the ribbon passes . The reverse of the suspension bar is engraved with the recipient 's name , rank , number and unit . On the reverse of the medal is a circular panel on which the date of the act for which it was awarded is engraved in the centre . The ribbon is crimson , 38 millimetres ( 1.5 inches ) wide . Although the warrants state the colour as being red it is described by most commentators as being crimson or " wine-red " .

The power of awarding the medal officially resides with the Queen of New Zealand . The Royal Warrant states that the " Awards of a New Zealand Gallantry Award and of a Bar to an Award shall be made by Us , Our Heirs and Successors , only on a recommendation by Our Prime Minister of New Zealand or a Minister of the Crown acting for Our Prime Minister . " As with the original Victoria Cross any recommendations pass through the New Zealand Defence Force chain of command to the Minister of Defence . The original Victoria Cross had been awarded to 24 New Zealanders . Thirteen of these awards were for action in the First World War . The Victoria Cross for New Zealand has been awarded once . It was officially announced on 2 July 2007 that Corporal Willie Apiata of the NZ SAS was awarded the Victoria Cross for New Zealand for his actions in saving the life of a " comrade under heavy fire from opposing forces " during the Afghanistan conflict in 2004 . Apiata received his medal from Governor-General Anand Satyanand at a ceremony held at Government House , Wellington on 26 July 2007 .

The 1999 Bridge Creek – Moore tornado ( locally referred to as the May 3rd tornado ) was an extremely powerful F5 tornado in which the highest wind speeds ever measured globally , 301 miles per hour ( 484 km / h ) , were recorded by a Doppler on Wheels ( DOW ) radar . The tornado devastated southern portions of Oklahoma City , Oklahoma , along with surrounding suburbs and towns during the early evening of May 3 , 1999 . Throughout its 85-minute existence , the tornado covered 38 miles ( 61 km ) , destroying thousands of homes , killing 36 people ( plus an additional five indirectly ) , and leaving US $ 1 billion in damage , ranking it as the fifth-costliest on record , not accounting for inflation . The tornado first touched down at 6 : 23 p.m. Central Daylight Time ( CDT ) in Grady County , roughly two miles ( 3.2 km ) south-southwest of Amber . It quickly intensified into a violent F4 , and gradually reached F5 status after traveling 6.5 miles ( 10.5 km ) , at which time it struck the community of Bridge Creek . Once it moved through the unincorporated community , it fluctuated in strength , ranging from F2 to F5 status before it crossed into Cleveland County . Not long after entering the county , it reached F5 intensity for a third time as it moved through the city of Moore . By 7 : 30 p.m. CDT , the tornado crossed into Oklahoma County and battered southeastern Oklahoma City , Del City and Midwest City , before dissipating around 7 : 48 p.m. CDT just outside Midwest City . In terms of structural losses , a total of 8,132 homes , 1,041 apartments , 260 businesses , 11 public buildings and seven churches were damaged or destroyed .

In the wake of the tornado , large-scale search and rescue operations took place in the affected areas . A major disaster declaration was signed by President Bill Clinton the following day ( May 4 ) , allowing for the state to receive federal aid . In the following months , disaster aid amounted to $ 67.8 million . In light of the fatalities that occurred under highway overpasses , the notion of them being safe areas to seek shelter was dismissed , and they were from then on considered to be one of the most dangerous places to be during a tornado . Reconstruction projects in subsequent years led to a safer , tornado-ready community . In May 2013 , similar areas adjacent to the 1999 storm 's track were again devastated by an EF5 tornado , resulting in 24 fatalities and extreme damage in Moore .

The Bridge Creek – Moore tornado was part of a much larger outbreak , which spawned 71 tornadoes across five states throughout the Central Plains on May 3 alone , along with an additional 25 that touched down on May 4 in some of the areas affected by the previous day 's activity ( some of which were spawned supercells that developed on the evening of May 3 ) , stretching eastward to the Mississippi River Valley . On the morning of May 3 , in its Day 1 Convective Outlook for the United States , the Storm Prediction Center ( SPC ) issued a slight risk for severe weather , as a dry line that stretched from western Kansas into western Texas approached a warm , humid air-mass over the Central Plains ; the conditions ahead of the dry line and a connecting trough positioned over northeastern Colorado appeared to favor the development of thunderstorms later that day that would contain large hail , damaging straight-line winds and isolated tornadoes . Forecasters at the SPC initially underestimated the atmospheric conditions that would support tornadic development that afternoon and evening ; around 4 : 00 a.m. CDT , Doppler radar and wind profile data indicated a 90-knot ( 100 mph ) jet streak along the border of California and Nevada , with weather balloon soundings sent up the previous evening by National Weather Service offices in the western United States and numerical computer model data failing to detect the fast-moving air current as it moved ashore from the Pacific Ocean . In addition , the dry line was diffused , with surface winds behind and ahead of the boundary moving into the region from a southerly direction . SPC meteorologists began to recalculate model data during the morning to account for the stronger wind profiles caused by the jet streak ; the data acknowledged that thunderstorms would occur within the Central Plains , but disagreed on the exact area of greatest severe weather risk .

By 7 : 00 a.m. Central Daylight Time , CAPE values began exceeding 4,000 j / kg , a level which climatologically favors the development of severe thunderstorms . Despite conflicting model data on the specified area where thunderstorms would develop , the newly available information that denoted a more favorable severe thunderstorm setup in that part of the state prompted the SPC to upgrade the forecasted threat of severe weather to a moderate risk for south-central Kansas , much of the western two-thirds of Oklahoma , and northwestern and north-central Texas at 11 : 15 a.m. CDT that morning , which now indicated an elevated threat of strong tornadoes . By the early afternoon hours , forecasters at both the SPC and the National Weather Service Weather Forecast Office in Norman , Oklahoma realized that a major event was likely to take place based solely on observational data from radar and weather satellite imagery and balloon soundings , as the computer models remained uncooperative in helping meteorologists determine where the greatest threat of severe storms would occur . Conditions became highly conducive for tornadic development by 1 : 00 p.m. CDT as wind shear intensified over the region ( as confirmed by an unscheduled balloon sounding flight conducted by the NWS Norman office ) , creating a highly unstable atmosphere . The sounding balloon recorded winds blowing southwesterly ( at 20 mph ( 17 kn ) and 50 mph ( 43 kn ) , respectively ) at the surface and at the 12,000-foot ( 3,700 m ) level , southerly winds of 40 mph ( 35 kn ) at 12,000 feet ( 3,700 m ) and westerly winds of 20 mph ( 17 kn ) at 20,000 feet ( 6,100 m ) ; it also indicated that a capping inversion over the region was weakening in southwestern Oklahoma and north Texas ; with the warm air above the surface cooling down , this allowed warm air at the surface the chance to rise and potentially create thunderstorms . Although cirrus clouds − a bank of which had developed in west Texas and overspread portions of Oklahoma later in the morning − were present through much of the day , an area of clearing skies over western north Texas and southwestern Oklahoma early that afternoon allowed for the sun to heat up the moisture-laden region , creating significant atmospheric instability .

At 3 : 49 p.m. CDT , a high risk of severe weather was issued by the Storm Prediction Center for much of central Oklahoma . Within 25 minutes of this , the National Weather Service office in Norman issued a severe thunderstorm warning for Comanche County by 4 : 15 p.m. CDT late that afternoon , as the first storm of the event rapidly intensified . A half-hour later at 4 : 45 p.m. CDT , the Storm Prediction Center issued a tornado watch for western and central Oklahoma , for the threat of tornadoes , hail up to 3 inches ( 7.6 cm ) in diameter and wind gusts to 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) .

The thunderstorm that eventually spawned the F5 Bridge Creek – Moore tornado formed around 3 : 30 p.m. CDT over Tillman County . Despite the lack of overall lift prevalent in the region , the storm formed out of a contrail-like horizontal area of convective clouds that developed during peak surface heating over southwestern Oklahoma , located well ahead of the dry line still positioned farther to the west , which provided enhanced lift and speed shear necessary to develop the supercell . Tracking northeast , the storm strengthened and entered Comanche County shortly after 4 : 00 p.m. CDT ; there , hail up to 1.75 inches ( 4.4 cm ) in diameter fell . As the rotation in the supercell began to rapidly increase at the cloud base , a tornado warning was issued for Comanche , Caddo and Grady Counties at 4 : 50 p.m. CDT ; at 4 : 51 p.m. , a small tornado roughly 25 yards ( 75 ft ) in diameter − the first of 14 associated with supercell " A " ( the National Weather Service Weather Forecast Office in Norman designated lettered names for the three tornado-producing supercells in the outbreak in storm surveys ) − touched down along U.S. Route 62 , seven miles ( 11 km ) east-northeast of Medicine Park . Five more tornadoes touched down as the storm continued northeast ; the sixth touchdown was an F3 , which caused substantial damage in central Grady County , including at Chickasha Municipal Airport , where the roofs were torn off of two hangars . At 6 : 23 p.m. CDT , the ninth tornado associated with supercell " A " touched down about 2 miles ( 3.2 km ) south-southwest of Amber .

That tornado quickly intensified as it crossed Oklahoma State Highway 92 , attaining F4 strength about 4 miles ( 6.4 km ) east-northeast of Amber . Damage consistent with this rating was sustained over the following 6.5 miles ( 10.5 km ) of the path before striking Bridge Creek . There , it attained the highest-possible rating on the Fujita Scale , F5 . Damage in this area was extreme , as many homes were completely swept away , leaving only concrete slabs where the structures once were . Damage surveyors noted that the remaining structural debris from some of the homes in this area was finely granulated into small fragments , and that trees and shrubs were completely debarked . A few of these homes were bolted to their foundations . Extensive ground scouring occurred , and vehicles were thrown hundreds of yards from where they originated , including a mangled pickup truck that was found wrapped around a telephone pole . It was in this area that a mobile Doppler weather radar recorded winds of 301 mph ( 484 km / h ) within the tornado , the highest wind speed ever recorded on Earth . However , since the record for maximum winds are reported from only non-tornadic events , the 253 mph ( 407 km / h ) wind gust from Cyclone Olivia in 1996 retained the title . About 1 inch ( 25 mm ) of asphalt was scoured off of a road in this area by the violent tornado . Approximately 200 mobile homes / houses were destroyed , and hundreds of other structures were damaged . The Ridgecrest Baptist Church in Bridge Creek was also destroyed . Twelve people died in Bridge Creek , nine of whom were in mobile homes ; all fatalities and the majority of injuries were concentrated in the Willow Lake Addition , Southern Hills Addition , and Bridge Creek Estates , consisting mostly of mobile homes . 39 people were injured in the area as well . Continuing northeastward , the tornado briefly weakened to F4 status before re-strengthening to F5 intensity as it neared the Grady-McClain County line , where a car was thrown roughly 0.25 mi ( 0.40 km ) , and a well-built home with anchor bolts was reduced to a bare slab . At this time , it had attained a width of one mile ( 1.6 km ) .

Around 6 : 57 p.m. CDT , the National Weather Service Weather Forecast Office in Norman issued the first-ever tornado emergency for southern portions of the Oklahoma City metropolitan area , which was released as a standalone weather statement ( instead of within a newly issued or a Special Weather Statement on an existing tornado warning , as became usual afterward ) . David Andra , a meteorologist at the NWS Norman office , said that he drafted the enhanced warning statement to " paint the picture that a rare and deadly tornado was imminent in the metro area . " Paralleling Interstate 44 , the tornado moved into McClain County , where it crossed the highway twice at F4 intensity , killing a woman as she was blown out from an underpass where she was attempting to seek shelter , after being dragged down the embankment by the intense channeling winds ; her 11-year-old son − with whom the woman vacated their stalled car nearby − survived , staying held tight onto the steel girders of the overpass . A man who helped the mother and son up the overpass suffered severe injuries to his leg , which was partially sliced by a highway sign thrown by the winds . At 7 : 10 p.m. CDT , a satellite tornado touched down over an open field north of Newcastle ; it was rated as an F0 due to lack of damage . 38 homes and two businesses were destroyed in McClain County , and 40 homes were damaged . Some of the homes were leveled at F4 intensity , and 17 people were injured .

After crossing the Canadian River , the tornado entered Cleveland County and weakened to F2 intensity . By this time , it had entered the southern reaches of the Oklahoma City limits . Several minutes after entering the county , it re-attained F4 status , and then moved directly into the city of Moore , where the tornado reached F5 intensity for a third time . Some of the most severe damage took place in Cleveland County , especially in the city of Moore , where 11 people were killed and 293 others were injured . The tornado caused an estimated $ 450 million in damage across the county . The first area impacted in Moore was the Country Place Estates subdivision , where 50 homes were damaged and one was completely swept away at F5 intensity , with only the foundation remaining . Several vehicles were picked up and tossed nearly 0.25 mi ( 0.40 km ) . According to local police , an airplane wing , believed to have been from an airport in Grady County , was found near Country Place Estates . Next , the powerful tornado struck the densely populated Eastlake Estates at F5 intensity , killing three people and reducing entire rows of homes to rubble . In one instance , four adjacent homes were completely destroyed , with only concrete slabs remaining , warranting an F5 rating at that location . Three other homes in this housing division also received F5 damage , with the remaining destruction rated high-end F4 . Severe debarking of trees was noted in this area . At the Emerald Springs Apartments , three more people were killed and a two-story apartment building was mostly flattened .

As it entered Cleveland County , the National Weather Service and Storm Prediction Center activated emergency procedures , preparing to evacuate staff and others present at the facility in the event that the supercell should turn right , placing areas surrounding the Norman campus in the tornado 's path ( under NOAA protocol in situations posing a danger to personnel at local Weather Forecast Offices and related guidance centers , responsibility over the issuance of warnings and statements on the unfolding outbreak would have been transferred to the nearest NWS Forecast Office , based in Tulsa , while the SPC 's forecasting responsibilities would be turned over to the 557th Weather Wing at Offutt Air Force Base ) . The supercell , however , continued on a northeastward track , sparing the Norman area . Safety precautions were also enacted elsewhere in and near the storm 's path ; council members and citizens at Moore City Hall − where a council meeting was scheduled to be held that evening − sheltered in place in the building 's first-floor restrooms , away from the multiple large-pane windows at its facade . In downtown Oklahoma City , spectators attending sporting events being held that evening involving two of the city 's minor league teams – a regular season baseball game between the Oklahoma RedHawks and Memphis Redbirds ( which was suspended during the second inning ) and Game 2 of the Ray Miron President 's Cup series between the Oklahoma City Blazers and the Huntsville Channel Cats – were also evacuated to shelter in an underground storage area connected to the Southwestern Bell Bricktown Ballpark and Myriad Convention Center amid concerns that the storm would jog northward and place Oklahoma City itself in the tornado 's path . Flights were grounded at Will Rogers World Airport as the northern edge of the supercell approached the area ; the tornado turned right , away from southwestern parts of the city proper , shortly before airport officials began evacuating employees and visitors at the terminals . Traffic on Interstate 35 in south Oklahoma City and north Moore became backed up for several miles , as drivers evacuated from their vehicles to seek shelter under an overpass overlooking South Shields Boulevard .

Just outside the Eastlake Estates , an honors ceremony was being held at Westmoore High School at the time of the tornado ; however , adequate warning time allowed those at the school to seek shelter ; more than 400 adults and children attending the awards ceremony at the school 's auditorium were moved to the main building , sheltering in reinforced hallways and bathrooms . Ultimately , Westmoore High sustained heavy damage and dozens of cars in the parking lot were tossed around , some of which were completely destroyed or thrown into nearby homes . No injures took place at the school , though a horse was found dead between a couple of destroyed cars in this area . The tornado proceeded through additional densely populated areas of Moore shortly thereafter , where several large groups of homes were flattened in residential areas , with a mixture of high-end F4 and low-end F5 damage noted . Near Janeway Avenue , four people were killed in an area where multiple homes were completely destroyed . A woman , who took shelter with her husband and two children , was also killed when she was blown out from under the Shields overpass on Interstate 35 . The tornado weakened somewhat as it moved through the Highland Park neighborhood of Moore , but still caused widespread F3 and F4 damage .

The tornado then entered Oklahoma County and struck the southeast fringes of Oklahoma City , where it re-intensified to high-end F4 strength and two people were killed as a trucking company was completely destroyed . Shortly before it tracked into the county , patrons and employees at Crossroads Mall were evacuated to storage areas in the basement of the building . Numerous industrial buildings were leveled in this area of the city . A freight car , weighing 36,000 lb ( 16,000 kg ) was thrown 0.75 mi ( 1.21 km ) . The car bounced as it traveled , remaining airborne for 50 to 100 yd ( 46 to 91 m ) at a time . Multiple homes were also completely destroyed in southeast Oklahoma City , and one woman was killed in that area . Crossing Southeast 44th Street into Del City , the tornado moved through the highly populated Del Aire housing addition , killing six people and damaging or destroying hundreds of homes , with many sustaining F3 to F4 damage . Seven people were killed as a direct result of the tornado in Del City , and hundreds of homes were damaged or destroyed .

The tornado then crossed Sooner Road , damaged an entry gate and several buildings at Tinker Air Force Base , then crossed 29th Street into Midwest City , destroying one building at the Boeing Complex and damaging two others . Widespread F3 / F4 damage continued as the tornado moved across Interstate 40 , affecting a large business district . Approximately 800 vehicles were damaged at Hudiburg Auto Group , located just south of Interstate 40 . Hundreds of vehicles at the dealership were moved from their original location on the lot , and dozens of vehicles ( including 30 awaiting tune-ups or repairs at Morris ' Auto Machine and Supply , and an unoccupied Mid-Del School District bus ) were picked up and tossed northward across the interstate into several motels , a distance of approximately two-tenths of a mile . Numerous motels and other businesses including Hampton Inn , Comfort Inn , Inn Suites , Clarion Inn , Cracker Barrel , and portions of Rose State College , were destroyed . Some of the damage through this area was rated high-end F4 , however low-end F5 was considered . The tornado then continued into another residential area located between Southeast 15th and Reno Avenue , where three fatalities occurred . Damage consistent with high-end F4 wind speeds was inflicted to four homes in this area . Two of these homes were located between Southeast 11th and 12th Streets , near Buena Vista , and the other two homes were located on Will Rogers Road , just south of Southeast 15th . Damage then diminished rapidly to F0 / F1 strength as the tornado crossed Reno Avenue , before dissipating three blocks north of Reno , between Sooner Road and Air Depot Boulevard . Throughout Oklahoma County , 12 people were killed and 234 others were injured while losses amounted to $ 450 million .

Throughout the tornado 's path , 36 people were killed as a direct result of the storm and five more died of indirect causes in the hours following it ( most of the indirect deaths were due to heart attacks or injuries suffered while trying to seek shelter ; however , one survivor , who was uninsured , died from a self-inflicted gunshot wound ) . According to the Oklahoma Department of Health , an estimated 583 people were injured by the tornado , accounting for those who likely did not go to the hospital or were unaccounted for . In terms of structural losses , a total of 8,132 homes , 1,041 apartments , 260 businesses , eleven public buildings and seven churches were damaged or destroyed . Total estimated damage costs in the areas affected by the storm totaled $ 1.2 billion , making it the first single tornado since records were first recorded to produce damage exceeding $ 1 billion . The Bridge Creek − Moore tornado produced an estimated 220 cubic yards ( 170 m3 ) of debris from the buildings that were destroyed in the storm . The 1999 Bridge Creek − Moore tornado was the deadliest tornado recorded in Oklahoma since an F5 tornado killed 107 people in Woodward on April 9 , 1947 . It is also the deadliest tornado ever recorded in the Oklahoma City metropolitan area ; the previous record was held by an F4 tornado that affected southwestern portions of the city on June 12 , 1942 , which killed 31 people and caused $ 500,000 in damage ( $ 10.6 million in ( 2016 USD ) when adjusted for inflation ) . The Bridge Creek − Moore tornado was the costliest single tornado in U.S. history until an EF4 tornado hit Tuscaloosa and northern portions of Birmingham in Alabama on April 27 , 2011 , causing an estimated $ 2.45 billion in damage ( as of 2015 the Bridge Creek – Moore tornado is the fourth-costliest single tornado , having also been surpassed by the EF5 tornadoes that hit Joplin on May 24 , 2011 and areas of Moore near the 1999 storm track on May 20 , 2013 ) . National Weather Service researchers estimated that the death toll from the storm would likely have exceeded 600 , had it not been for the advanced warning through local television and radio stations ( with coverage provided by three of the Oklahoma City market 's four television news outlets at the time − NBC affiliate KFOR-TV ( channel 4 ) , ABC affiliate KOCO-TV ( channel 5 ) and CBS affiliate KWTV ( channel 9 ) − being simulcast on some radio stations through central parts of Oklahoma as the storms became increasingly intense ) , and the extensive education among Oklahomans on tornadoes and the dangers they pose , as well as exercising proper safety precautions .

Preliminary damage surveys conducted by a group of structural engineers from Texas Tech University determined that many of the frame homes that were destroyed by the Bridge Creek − Moore tornado were constructed below minimal residential building code standards , discovering some structural deficiencies that violated codes , which were considered to be inadequate for regions prone to tornadic activity ( under federal building code standards , frame homes that were properly strapped and bolted would have withstood winds between 152 and 157 miles per hour ( 245 and 253 km / h ) , equivalent to an F2 tornado ) . The team , led by meteorological researcher Charles Doswell and storm damage engineer / meteorologist Tim Marshall , determined that nails attached to a plywood roof deck in one damaged home were not properly anchored to the rafters ; several homes in rural areas that were swept nearly 300 feet ( 91 m ) from their original location did not have anchor bolts that secured the frame to their foundations , as was the case at Country Place Estates , where the homes − which left a trail of debris strewn 3,000 feet ( 910 m ) away from their location − were attached to the concrete foundations by tapered cut nails that extended only a half-inch to the bases ; many homes that were left at least partially standing also had their garage doors ( mainly those made from aluminum material ) collapse inward , allowing the tornado 's destructive winds to enter the houses .

Marshall discovered other building and vehicle remains that became debris missiles , including a twisted 36-inch ( 0.91 m ) steel beam , a steel leg broken off of a lawn chair that was impaled into a 5-by-5-inch ( 13 cm × 13 cm ) post by the violent winds and a six-foot ( 180 cm ) section of a sewer pipe that was blown into the interior hallway of one house through the front door . The team 's findings also revealed that several homes were obliterated before they experienced the full impact of the vortex 's peak wind velocities , with some disintegrating as the external winds surrounding the parent tornado reached speeds of F2 intensity . Three months later , as homes were being built in the damage path , Marshall found their construction to be scarcely superior to that of the homes destroyed in the May 3 storm . The Federal Emergency Management Agency ( FEMA ) corroborated with Doswell and Marshall 's findings in its Building Performance Assessment Team Report on the May 3 outbreak , noting that much of the structural damage resulted from strong winds generated by the tornado and associated windborne debris that often " produced forces on buildings not designed to withstand such forces " and in some cases , were due to improper construction techniques and " poor selection " of materials used in their construction . The report acknowledged that federal construction code requirements needed to be revised above the then-current minimum standards to allow newer buildings to better withstand higher wind speeds consistent with tornadoes of lesser intensity than the one which devastated Bridge Creek and Moore , thereby lessening the degree of damage , fatalities and injuries that are probable in buildings of typically less reinforced construction .

Following the outbreak of deadly and destructive tornadoes , President Bill Clinton signed a major disaster declaration for eleven Oklahoma counties on May 4 . In a press statement by the Federal Emergency Management Agency ( FEMA ) , then-director James Lee Witt stated that " The President is deeply concerned about the tragic loss of life and destruction caused by these devastating storms . " The American Red Cross opened ten shelters overnight across central Oklahoma , housing 1,600 people immediately following the disaster . By May 5 , this number had lowered to 500 . Throughout May 5 , several post-disaster teams from FEMA were deployed to the region , including emergency response and preliminary damage assessment units . The United States Department of Defense deployed the 249th Engineering Battalion and placed the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers on standby for assistance . Medical and mortuary teams were also sent by the Department of Health and Human Services . By May 6 , donation centers and phone banks were being established to create funds for victims of the tornadoes . Continuing search and rescue efforts for thirteen people who were listed as missing through May 7 were assisted by urban search and rescue dogs from across the country . Nearly 1,000 members of the Oklahoma National Guard were deployed throughout the affected region . The American Red Cross had set up ten mobile feeding stations by this time and stated that 30 more were en route . On May 8 , a disaster recovery center was opened in Moore for individuals recovering from the tornadoes . According to the Army Corps of Engineers , roughly 500,000 cubic yards ( 382,277 cubic meters ) of debris was left behind and would likely take weeks to clear . Within the first few days of the disaster declaration , relief funds began being sent to families who requested aid . By May 9 , roughly $ 180,000 had been approved by FEMA for disaster housing assistance .

Debris removal finally began on May 12 as seven cleanup teams were sent to the region , more were expected to join over the following days . That day , FEMA also declared that seven counties − Canadian , Craig , Grady , Lincoln , Logan , Noble and Oklahoma − were eligible for federal financial assistance . By May 13 , roughly $ 1.6 million in disaster funds had been approved for housing and businesses loans . This quickly rose to more than $ 5.9 million over the following five days . By May 21 , more than 3,000 volunteers from across the country traveled to Oklahoma to help residents recover ; 1,000 of these volunteers were sent to Bridge Creek to clean up debris , cut trees , sort donations and cook meals . With a $ 452,199 grant from FEMA , a 60-day outreach program for victims suffering tornado-related stress was set up to help them cope with trauma . Applications for federal aid continued through June , with state approvals reaching $ 54 million on June 3 . By this date , the Army Corps of Engineers reported that 964,170 cubic yards ( 737,160 cubic meters ) , roughly 58 % , of the 1.65 million cubic yards ( 1.26 million cubic meters ) of debris had been removed . Assistance for farmers and ranchers who suffered severe losses from the tornadoes was also available by June 3 . After more than a month of being open , emergency shelters were set to be closed on June 18 . On June 21 , an educational road show made by FEMA visited the hardest hit areas in Oklahoma to urge residents to build storm cellars . According to FEMA , more than 9,500 residents applied for federal aid during the allocated period in the wake of the tornadoes . Most of the applicants lived in Oklahoma and Cleveland counties , 3,800 and 3,757 persons respectively . In all , disaster recovery aid for the tornadoes amounted to roughly $ 67.8 million by the end of July 2 .

From a meteorological and safety standpoint , the tornado also brought the use of highway overpasses as shelters into question . Prior to the events on May 3 , 1999 , videos of people taking shelter in overpasses during tornadoes in the past ( most notably one filmed near Wichita , Kansas during the April 26 , 1991 tornado outbreak involving a television news crew from Wichita NBC affiliate KSNW and other bystanders ) gave the public misunderstanding that overpasses provided shelter from tornadoes . For nearly 20 years , meteorologists had questioned the safety of these structures ; however , they lacked incidents involving loss of life . During the May 3 outbreak , three overpasses were directly struck by tornadoes , with a fatality taking place at each one . Two of these were from the F5 Bridge Creek – Moore tornado while the third was from a small F2 , which struck a rural area in Payne County , north-northeast of Oklahoma City . According to a study by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration , seeking shelter in an overpass " is to become a stationary target for flying debris . " Over the following four years , a $ 12 million project to construct storm shelters for residents across the Oklahoma City metropolitan area was enacted . The goal was to create a safer community in a tornado-prone region . By May 2003 , a total of 6,016 safe rooms were constructed . On May 9 , 2003 , the new initiative was put to the test as a tornado outbreak in the region spawned an F4 tornado , which took a path similar to that of the Bridge Creek – Moore tornado . Due to the higher standards for public safety , no one was killed by the 2003 tornado , a substantial improvement in just four years . On May 20 , 2013 , an EF5 tornado took a roughly similar path to the 1999 storm , tracking through the heart of Moore . Throughout the city , 24 people were killed ( along with one additional person who died as an indirect result of the tornado ) and more than 230 were injured .

" Dunder Mifflin Infinity " is the third and fourth episode of the fourth season of the American comedy television series The Office , and the show 's fifty-sixth and fifty-seventh episode overall . The episode was written by Michael Schur , who also acts in the show , and directed by Craig Zisk . It first aired in the United States on October 4 , 2007 on NBC . In this episode , Ryan returns to his old office and reveals his plan to bring technology to Dunder Mifflin . Michael and Dwight try to prove that the personal touch is better than technology . Meanwhile , Jim and Pam reveal their relationship to the rest of the office , Kelly attempts to reunite with Ryan , and Dwight and Angela 's relationship continues to plummet .

Ryan Howard ( B. J. Novak ) returns to the Scranton , Pennsylvania branch of Dunder Mifflin for the first time since his promotion to the corporate headquarters . Although he sports a much more urbane look and attitude , he garners little respect from his former peers . Ryan introduces " Dunder Mifflin Infinity , " his initiative to revitalize the company with new technology . Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) is initially excited about the prospect of getting a BlackBerry , but is warned by Creed Bratton ( Creed Bratton ) that the program is a ploy to get rid of older workers . Creed dyes his hair black with printer ink in an attempt to convince everyone that he is much younger . Michael holds a conference room meeting on the subject of ageism . To show that personal interaction is more effective than new technology , Michael and Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) decide to go out and win back the clients they lost in the past year with gift baskets . Each manager they encounter refuses to consider returning to Dunder Mifflin unless the company improves its technology , such as Dunder Mifflin 's website . While driving back to the office , Michael misinterprets his rental car 's GPS map system 's directions and drives into Lake Scranton . He takes this as further proof that new technology is useless because it tried to kill him . After the lake incident , he and Dwight walk back to one of the former clients to awkwardly get back their gift basket , causing a scene .

Meanwhile , Pam Beesly ( Jenna Fischer ) and Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) are exposed as a couple when Toby Flenderson ( Paul Lieberstein ) circulates a memo about public displays of affection . Jim secretly informs Pam that Dwight and Angela Martin ( Angela Kinsey ) are dating , only to discover that she already knew . Meanwhile , Dwight attempts to make amends for the death of Angela 's cat Sprinkles by giving her a stray cat he found in his barn , named Garbage . Angela rejects the gift . Kelly Kapoor ( Mindy Kaling ) tries to restart her relationship with Ryan , an effort he ignores until she tells him she is pregnant . After going out to dinner , Ryan learns that Kelly 's pregnancy claim was a lie that Kelly used in attempt to get them back together . Back at the office , Ryan asks Pam to create a logo for Dunder Mifflin Infinity . Pam is excited about the opportunity to use her art background , but Ryan uses the logo as an excuse to ask her out , which he does in front of Jim . Pam responds that she is dating Jim , which leaves the new boss thoroughly embarrassed .

The episode was the first episode of the series directed by Craig Zisk . Zisk had previously directed episodes of Nip / Tuck , Weeds , Scrubs , Smallville , and The Single Guy . " Dunder Mifflin Infinity " was written by Michael Schur , who plays Dwight 's Amish cousin Mose . For Ryan 's new appearance this season , the writers originally had B. J. Novak grow a goatee . Show runner and executive producer Greg Daniels decided to have Novak lose the goatee , because according to Novak " a goatee would make Ryan a flat-out chump . And we wanted it to be more subtle . " In addition to his five o 'clock shadow , Ryan was also seen wearing black clothes . Novak explained that " We wanted him to dress as obnoxious as possible . As much black as possible . " " Dunder Mifflin Infinity " went along with a website that had been created with the same name . The website was part of a game in which fans of The Office would sign up , and become " employees " of different " branches " . Members of the site would perform tasks such as design a logo for the company or make Creed look young again .

" Dunder Mifflin Infinity " received 4.5 / 11 in the ages 18 – 49 demographic in the Nielsen ratings . This means that 4.5 percent of all households with an 18- to 49-year-old living in it watched the episode , and eleven percent had their televisions tuned to the channel at any point . The episode was watched by 8.49 million viewers . " Dunder Mifflin Infinity " received mixed reviews from critics , with Michael driving his car into the lake being particularly panned by critics and viewers . Entertainment Weekly 's Christine Fenno commented that she thought " Michael seemed a bit more focused than usual , even competent at moments . And then he drove into a lake . " Jack Rodgers , from TV Guide said that his " favorite thing about this episode was the sly parallel that connects the three love stories " and " Michael ’ s obsession with sticking to his old methods rather than learning to change and embrace technology " . Will Leitch of New York Magazine criticized the episode , saying that Michael driving into the lake felt more like the actions of a " cartoon character " , than " based in reality " . Leitch did say that if " we can get Michael out of that lake and back in a conference room with Ryan , we 'll have something . "

Slay Tracks ( 1933 – 1969 ) ( also referred to as Slay Tracks ) is the debut extended play by the American indie rock band Pavement . Pavement , then consisting of founding members Stephen Malkmus ( guitar , vocals ) and Scott Kannberg ( guitar ) , recorded Slay Tracks with producer and future member Gary Young ( drums ) during a four-hour session . The EP was released as a 7 " vinyl record on the band 's own record label Treble Kicker in 1989 . The music in Slay Tracks is influenced by indie and punk rock bands , including Swell Maps and The Fall , and many of the lyrics are inspired by life in the band 's hometown of Stockton , California . Although only 1000 copies of Slay Tracks were pressed , the EP became an underground hit . It was met with generally positive reviews from critics , though most of its initial reviews were from independently produced zines . The songs on Slay Tracks would later appear on the 1993 compilation Westing ( By Musket and Sextant ) , reaching a wider audience than the EP 's limited initial release . The release of Slay Tracks was significant to Pavement 's signing to Drag City , and later to Matador Records .

Pavement was formed in 1989 in Stockton , California , by Stephen Malkmus and Scott Kannberg . Malkmus and Kannberg had previously performed together in the band Bag O ' Bones . Pavement had its start playing at open mike nights at clubs and bars . The songs the band played during this time were mostly covers , although they also performed many original songs that would later be released on Slay Tracks . Malkmus recalls , " It was pretty reasonable to be able to make a single for $ 1,000 , so we decided to go for it . We didn 't have any real plans because we weren 't a real band . " Two local studios existed in Stockton , the cheaper and less professionally minded of which was Gary Young 's Louder Than You Think Studio . The band decided to record at Young 's studio due to their admiration of other local punk bands who had recorded there , including The Young Pioneers and The Authorities . Kannberg reportedly borrowed $ 800 from his father to record Slay Tracks . Slay Tracks was recorded during a four-hour session on January 17 , 1989 , at Young 's studio . Kannberg , describing the studio and the recording process , said , " You go into his house and it 's stuff everywhere , old dogs lying around , big pot plants everywhere , and Gary tells us that he got all his equipment by selling pot ! It was us going in and pretty much just laying down the songs with a glide guitar and a detuned guitar through a bass amp and then we 'd play drums over the top . " Young , though bewildered by the band 's sound , contributed by playing drums . He recalled , " [ Malkmus and Kannberg ] come in and they play this weird guitar noise and it just sounds like noise , with no background . My drums were in there so I said , ' Should I drum ? ' and they said ' Okay . ' " Kannberg said , " We did it really fast . We probably spent one day tracking and one day mixing it . " The title of the EP had been decided prior to its recording , and the pseudonyms S.M. and Spiral Stairs were used to credit Malkmus and Kannberg respectively .

The music on Slay Tracks was written entirely by Malkmus , and he stated his influences on the record included Chrome , Swell Maps , and The Fall . The songs on the EP drew comparisons to the likes of R.E.M. , Pixies , and Sonic Youth by Stephen Thomas Erlewine and Heather Phares of AllMusic . Radio static and noise are prominently used on the EP , techniques which are characteristic of the lo-fi and noise pop genres that Pavement are frequently associated with . According to Malkmus , " We decided to use static as the third instrument . .... It was pretty exciting to be so experimental . " Young played drums on " Box Elder " and " Price Yeah ! " , and frequently improvised . Malkmus played drums on " Maybe Maybe " , while both Malkmus and Kannberg drummed on " She Believes " . " You 're Killing Me " , the longest song on the EP at three minutes and 20 seconds , is an example of the impact punk rock had on Pavement . The song features fuzz effects , repetitive lyrics , and no percussion or drums . " Box Elder " , an ironic song about someone wanting to move to Box Elder , Montana , was considered by Gerald Cosloy to be an example of Malkmus 's " honest , direct , and simplistic " lyrical style , and features greater influence from pop music than the rest of the EP . " Maybe Maybe " features distorted guitars and indiscernible vocals , and " Price Yeah ! " has a sound typical of hardcore punk . The band 's hometown of Stockton inspired the band 's lyrics and sound . Malkmus stated that " There 's something empty about Stockton . I wanted to convey that in our music . " Malkmus told Melody Maker in 1992 that " Pavement was originally a pathetic effort by us to do something to escape the terminal boredom we were experiencing in Stockton . "

After recording was completed Kannberg was tasked with releasing the music himself , as Malkmus had left on a trip to parts of Europe , North Africa , and the Middle East . Kannberg designed the cover of the EP and sent copies to various independent labels , distributors , and zines . He recalled " I had no idea how to do it . I 'd send off these little notes to my favorite labels like SST and Twin Tone and ask , ' How do I do this ? ' " A representative from SST recommended that Kannberg use Erica Records , a Los Angeles 7 " manufacturer . Erica Records became the manufacturer of Slay Tracks ; however , Kannberg was unhappy with the master recording produced by the company : " It sounds like it sounds now — it 's just a mess — but being poor and not really caring I said , ' Okay , that 's cool , if it sounds like that – whatever . ' " 1000 copies of Slay Tracks were pressed , and the first 50 included a green dinosaur stamp on the label . The EP was distributed on Kannberg 's own Treble Kicker Records in the United States and England , although Malkmus came across a copy in a record store while visiting Austria .

Slay Tracks found unexpected attention after the Leeds , England-based band The Wedding Present covered " Box Elder " on their own 1990 EP , Brassneck . The Wedding Present 's bassist , Keith Gregory , had been introduced to Slay Tracks by future Pavement bassist Mark Ibold while visiting New York City . The Wedding Present cover is different from the original in that the line " that I had to get the fuck out of this town " was changed to " that I had to get right out of this town " . The " Box Elder " cover received radio airplay from influential English disc jockey John Peel , which generated publicity for both The Wedding Present and Pavement . Neither member of Pavement was aware of the cover until Kannberg was informed of it . Kannberg remembered " I was kind of mad . I had no idea that people could do that , so I was all offended . " However , his opinion of the cover and its significance later changed : " It was so cool that some band from the UK wanted to cover this obscure , horribly recorded song . At the time I probably never appreciated the full extent of how them covering the song helped Pavement , especially in the UK , but it really did , and I 'll always be grateful to them for that . "

Shortly after its release , Slay Tracks became a collector 's item . According to an April 1990 Drag City press release , copies were typically sold for $ 500 – $ 600 . Malkmus and Kannberg each kept 100 copies of the EP , and Malkmus said " I used to sell them for fifty dollars . When I needed money I 'd go in and sell a couple to the store and they 'd sell for a hundred dollars each . I rarely meet anyone who bought it when it originally came out . " Malkmus also said that the pair " probably gave away about one-hundred to friends and bands we later toured with . " The songs on Slay Tracks found airplay on several college radio stations , including University of Virginia 's WTJU and University of California , Berkeley 's KALX . Kannberg commented on the EP 's unanticipated popularity , saying " It was very surprising to find that people were into [ Slay Tracks ] . "

Slay Tracks received generally positive reviews . Much of the initial critical reception to Slay Tracks was from zines to whom Kannberg had sent the EP . A review in the San Francisco-based zine Maximum RocknRoll said " Most of the tunes work by virtue of their eclecticism , freshness , and originality — this is a good one . " The zine Conflict called the EP " absolutely perfect . " Slay Tracks also received attention from mainstream publications . Robert Christgau of the Village Voice rated Slay Tracks an A- , and selected it as his fourth favorite EP of 1990 . Spin 's review said : " a long stream of noise water is omitted by Pavement . ... What a party ! " A reviewer for Option praised the band 's lo-fi characteristics and attitude , calling the EP " loose and intentionally lo-fi , " and saying " let 's hope this Pavement stays cracked . " College Music Journal 's review was also favorable , noting " You 're Killing Me " and " She Believes " as highlights , and calling the EP a " deep , intoxicating breath of homemade music from people with tongues in their cheeks and hearts on their sleeves ... the twin engine feedback and fuzz hits dead center with naive [ sic ] melodic balance , and whether that is in spite of or because of the sloppy , one-take feel is inconsequential . "

Young 's drum performance on Slay Tracks eventually led to him joining Pavement as a full-time member . Young produced the group 's 1990 EP Demolition Plot J-7 , but displayed hostility toward then-current drummer Jason Fawkes . Fawkes left Pavement in 1991 due to animosity with Malkmus , allowing Young to drum on their third EP , Perfect Sound Forever . Young drummed on all Pavement releases from then on until 1992 's Watery , Domestic , after which he was fired for his increasingly erratic behavior and was replaced with Steve West . Young 's drumming on Slay Tracks was later recognized as an important turning point in Pavement 's history , and was considered to be " the opportunity of a lifetime " by C. Harris-Nystrom of the News & Review . Dan Koretzky , founder of Drag City , ordered 200 copies of the EP for the Chicago Reckless Records store he worked for at the time . Koretzky asked Kannberg if he would sign to Drag City during the same phone call that he ordered the EP . Kannberg remembered expressing reluctance to sign to any label , but Drag City producer and session musician Rian Murphy recalled that " We asked , they said yes . Lives didn 't seem to be on the line . " Chris Lombardi and Gerald Cosloy of Matador Records also first heard of Pavement after Kannberg sent a copy of Slay Tracks to their zine , Conflict . Matador signed Pavement in 1992 for the release of their debut studio album , Slanted and Enchanted .

The songs on Slay Tracks are all included on the 1993 compilation Westing ( By Musket and Sextant ) , along with several of Pavement 's other early material . Westing has sold 63,000 copies , and was praised by Robert Christgau and Stephen Thomas Erlewine for making songs previously found exclusively on vinyl available on compact disc . All of the songs from Slay Tracks were played live throughout Pavement 's history , with " Box Elder " particularly cited as an " old favorite " for fans at concerts . Live performances of " Box Elder " has also been included on the compilation reissues Slanted and Enchanted : Luxe & Reduxe and Wowee Zowee : Sordid Sentinels Edition , with the version on the latter beginning with a short jam session . In a 1999 retrospective of the band 's career , Donna Freydkin of CNN.com called Slay Tracks " a quick underground favorite " , while John Hicks of the Planet Weekly wrote " Although Pavement was conceived as a studio-only project , the underground success of Slay Tracks ensured that it was only a matter of time before the group became a full-fledged performing entity . "

Cloudland Canyon State Park is a 3,485 acre ( 14.10 km ² ) Georgia state park located near Trenton and Cooper Heights on the western edge of Lookout Mountain . One of the largest and most scenic parks in Georgia , it contains rugged geology , and offers visitors a range of vistas across the deep gorge cut through the mountain by Sitton Gulch Creek , where the elevation varies from 800 to over 1,800 feet . Views of the canyon can be seen from the picnic area parking lot , in addition to additional views located along the rim trail . At the bottom of the gorge , two waterfalls cascade across layers of sandstone and shale , ending in small pools below . The park , previously known as Sitton Gulch ( or Gulf ) or Trenton Gulf , was purchased in stages by the state of Georgia beginning in 1938 . Under President Franklin D. Roosevelt , a project of Civilian Conservation Corps during the Great Depression built the first facilities and signs in the park , which opened the following year . Today the park features a variety of campsites , cabins , hiking and recreational activities .

Cloudland Canyon was designated a state park in 1939 when the state began acquiring land from private owners . Three of these owners , from the Mathews , McCauley and McKaig families , still reside in the area . Expansion of the park continues sporadically as new land is purchased for it . The park was originally 1,924 acres ( 7.8 km2 ) , and has been expanded to its present size of 3,485 acres ( 14.1 km2 ) . Until 1939 the only access to the area ( and much of Dade County , Georgia ) was through Tennessee or Alabama . That year Georgia began work on Highway 136 to connect U.S. 41 to the recently established park . The Civilian Conservation Corps did much of the early work to construct the state park and access roads .

The park is located on the Cumberland Plateau , atop Lookout Mountain . On the summit of Lookout Mountain , the waters of Daniel Creek and Bear Creek cut gorges through the rock , converging to form Sitton Gulch Creek . The flat-topped mountains of the Cumberland Plateau are significantly different from the narrow Armuchee ridges beyond nearby Chickamauga Valley to the east . From a geological standpoint , Lookout Mountain is transitional between the flat-lying sedimentary beds of central Tennessee , and the ridges and valley to the east , which display more intensive folding and faulting . Most of the canyon 's rock formations consist of sandstone ; shale layers below the sandstone are marked by pine trees . Lookout Mountain was created through a combination of seismic activity and erosion . It was uplifted during the period of mountain building that formed the Appalachians , known as the Appalachian orogeny . Over 200 million years ago , the modern-day parklands lay beneath an ocean . When first formed , the entire mountain was underwater , but the rim of the canyon eventually became a beach along the edge of the receding ocean . As the ocean dried up , Sitton Gulch Creek and its tributaries , particularly Daniel Creek , eroded the rock . The sandstone forming the bluffs has a tendency to fracture into blocks , creating unusual boulder formations . The concave shape of the top of Lookout Mountain also drains rainwater through fissures into the underlying limestone , forming miles of subterranean caves in the area .

The Park contains several well-marked trails which allow visitors to view the geology of the canyon and its surroundings , which spans millions of years . A paved , wheelchair-accessible trail about 0.25 miles ( 0.40 km ) long overlooks the rim of the canyon . The park also features four more extensive hiking trails , including one backpacking trail . These trails are generally considered moderate in difficulty . The Waterfalls Trail begins on a paved section , at the main overlook , and progresses into the canyon along a 40-degree slope . Most of the trail consists of gravel , and a 600-step staircase . Each waterfall emanates from Daniel Creek , and both cascade down sheer faces at 60 feet ( 18 m ) and 90 feet ( 27 m ) . The trail is generally considered to be a strenuous hike , which can take up to 90 minutes to complete . Cherokee Falls is 0.3 miles ( 0.48 km ) from the trailhead ; Hemlock Falls , at the bottom of the canyon , appears at 0.5 miles ( 0.80 km ) . Each cascades into small pools at the base of the canyon , and continue down through a boulder-strewn stream bed . The creek flow feeding the waterfalls varies considerably according to the season . The Sitton 's Gulch trail , commencing at the bottom of the Waterfalls Trail , runs parallel to the creek until it ends in a parking area in Trenton .

In contrast , the 4.8-mile ( 7.7 km ) long West Rim Loop Trail is rated as moderately difficult , although it contains a few short , steep rocky sections . A scenic hike beginning at the Daniels Creek Bridge , it offers panoramic views before climbing out of the canyon and onto the plateau . This trail also provides views of Trenton , Georgia , neighboring Sand Mountain , and of Cloudland Canyon . Rhododendron and mountain laurel thickets are interspersed with sourgum and dogwood ; large oaks , hickories , hemlocks and maples shade the trail . Cottages , West Rim , and Walk-In Camping areas are accessible via the West Rim Loop . Passing over varied terrain , most of the hike is moderately difficult , and is considered strenuous along several short sections . The 2.0-mile ( 3.2 km ) Backcountry Loop Trail provides access to the park 's eleven secluded primitive hike-in camping sites . Beginning at the parking area for group camping , the trail passes through hemlock groves , before descending on a moderate grade into a hollow filled with spring and summer flowers . At the far end of the loop , hikers emerge from the hemlock groves onto level trail , among oaks and hickories , before returning to the parking area .

In the fall of 2011 , the park reopened the Bear Creek Trail , which had been closed to hikers for nearly a decade . This approximately 9.0-mile ( 14.5 km ) trail is the longest trail in the park . This trail begins as a spur off of the Back Country Trail and drops down to Bear Creek . After crossing the creek , the trail continues up until it becomes a loop around the northeast portion of the park . Around the area of the creek , the trail crosses over private property for a brief distance . During wet seasons , the creek crossing can be difficult as there is no bridge or dry crossing available .

Cloudland Canyon State park features a variety of camping and lodging options . There are 16 rental cottages as well as a group lodge . The park also offers 73 tent , trailer and RV sites , 30 walk-in camp sites , and 11 back country camp sites for backpackers . Four pioneer sites provide facilities for groups of tent campers . The East Rim has 24 camp sites located along a loop road ; many of the sites can accommodate RVs , and all feature water and electric hookups . Bathing facilities are located nearby . The West Rim Camp ground , located across the gorge and away from the park 's busiest section , is located in thick forest , and hosts approximately 48 camp sites spread along two loops . It too offers bathing facilities . Picnic areas include a group pavilion , tennis courts , a children ’ s playground and a disc golf course . The park has an interpretive center near the main parking lot , adjacent to the canyon . Annual events hosted in the park include a Wildflower Program in April , Adventure Weekend ( also in April ) , and a Kids ' Catfish Rodeo in May .

Rapunzel is a fictional character who appears in Walt Disney Animation Studios ' 50th animated feature film Tangled ( 2010 ) , and its short film Tangled Ever After ( 2012 ) . Voiced by American actress and singer Mandy Moore , Rapunzel is a young princess kept unaware of her royal heritage by a vain old woman named Mother Gothel , who raises her in a secluded tower in order to exploit her hair 's healing abilities to remain young and beautiful forever . Created and animated by supervising animator Glen Keane , Rapunzel is loosely based on the title character who appears in the fairy tale of the same name by The Brothers Grimm . The character was adapted into a less passive heroine for the film . The writers incorporated the quirky personalities of actresses Reese Witherspoon , Natalie Portman and Amy Poehler into the character . Critical reception of Rapunzel has been generally positive , with critics complimenting her spirited , lively personality and independence . Chronologically the tenth Disney Princess , Rapunzel was officially inducted into the line-up on October 2 , 2011 , becoming the franchise 's first computer-animated member . Her physical appearance and personality have drawn much comparison between her and preceding Disney Princess Ariel from The Little Mermaid ( 1989 ) , by whom she was inspired .

Longtime Disney animator Glen Keane first decided to adapt the fairy tale " Rapunzel " by The Brothers Grimm into an animated feature film in 1996 . Keane became interested in the idea of directing an animated film based on " Rapunzel " because he was especially intrigued by the concept of a " person that was born with this gift inside of her and it had to come out " , which he felt was similar to his experience working as an animator at Walt Disney Animation Studios . Keane eventually resigned from his position as director after suffering a heart attack in 2008 , and Nathan Greno and Byron Howard were hired to replace him . However , Keane remained closely involved with the project nonetheless , serving as both the film 's executive producer and Rapunzel 's supervising animator . Walt Disney first attempted to adapt " Rapunzel " into an animated film soon after the studio released Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs in 1937 , but the project was ultimately abandoned when the story turned out to be " a really hard nut to crack " . According to Keane , this was mainly due to the fact that the majority of the fairy tale takes place within a tower . To overcome this , Tangled 's writers were forced to develop a way of " bringing Rapunzel out of the tower " . Originally , the film was conceived under the title Rapunzel Unbraided , which Keane described as " a Shrek-like version of the film " that revolved around an entirely different concept . Keane said of the original plot , " It was a fun , wonderful , witty version and we had a couple of great writers . But in my heart of hearts I believed there was something much more sincere and genuine to get out of the story , so we set it aside and went back to the roots of the original fairy tale . "

As directors , Greno and Howard felt it essential that Rapunzel resemble a less " passive " heroine than the way she is depicted in the original fairy tale . " We knew we were making this movie for a contemporary audience and we wanted Rapunzel to be a real role model in a way . We wanted all this girl power and to really drive this story , so she doesn 't wait around for anything ... she 's a smart girl , she has these hopes and dreams and she 's going to get what she wants out of life . "

Actress and singer Kristin Chenoweth was cast as the voice of Rapunzel . At one point , though briefly , the directors had cast actress Reese Witherspoon in the role , who was also to serve as the film 's executive producer . However , Witherspoon eventually departed from the project , citing creative differences with the filmmakers . Broadway performer Idina Menzel had also auditioned for the role , but didn 't get the part . After hundreds of auditions , the directors ultimately decided to cast recording artist and actress Mandy Moore in the role because , according to co-director Byron Howard , she " has this great soul to her voice " as well as " this down-to-earth , girl-next-door quality that makes her everything you could hope for in a Disney heroine . " Child actress Delaney Rose Stein was cast as a young version Rapunzel . Moore " grew up loving Disney films " , describing the opportunity to be featured in one as " the ultimate fantasy " . Initially , she had little intention of auditioning for Tangled because she was aware that there would be much competition , and feared that a failed audition would simply result in disappointment . Once she made up her mind to audition , Moore reportedly " chased after " the role of Rapunzel , auditioning for it twice . Because the film is a musical requiring its cast to provide both their characters ' speaking and singing voices , it was mandatory for all auditioning to perform one song of their choice . Following the given instructions to sing a song that was in the style of a singer-songwriter , Moore , a professional singer , performed singer-songwriter Joni Mitchell 's " Help Me " , a song that she herself had covered on her fourth studio album , Coverage ( 2003 ) .

The filmmakers fought against hiring top-billed celebrities to voice the film 's characters . When she joined the cast of Tangled , Moore was initially unaware that the film would become Walt Disney Animation Studios ' 50th animated feature film . Since that time , she has received her ignorance with gratitude , explaining , " I feel lucky because I would 've probably felt a bit more pressure had I known going into the recording process . " Moore was also surprised to learn that the majority of her dialogue would not be recorded in the presence of co-stars Zachary Levi and Donna Murphy , who provided the voices of Flynn Rider and Mother Gothel respectively . She claims to have only met with Levi once to record the song " I See the Light " , a duet between her character Rapunzel and Levi 's character , Flynn . Moore described the recording process as challenging because she was provided with little visual aid , explaining , " All I had to work off were a few sketches ... but it was also fun because it allows you to go into the depths of your imagination . " She also revealed that creating Rapunzel 's voice was simply a process of " let [ ting ] go " . Moore was often required to re-record a single line a total of four times before the directors finally heard a version with which they were satisfied . After watching the completed film for the first time , Moore was disappointed with her own performance because she felt that her voice sounded " shrill " .

Executive producer John Lasseter explained that " The challenge is that you want to make Rapunzel feel like a smart , clever , educated , healthy , fun human being " despite the fact that the character has not ventured outside of her tower in 18 years . To avoid creating a " princessy and aloof " heroine , the writers decided to base Rapunzel 's personality on those of real-life celebrities such as actresses Reese Witherspoon and Natalie Portman , as well as comedian Amy Poehler , which ultimately resulted in the character having a variety of " quirky qualities " that were used to " shake up expectations of what a princess should be . " According to The New York Times , Rapunzel 's personality made her a significant departure from traditional Disney heroines . Mandy Moore believes that Rapunzel is an atypical Disney princess because she is an independent character who " can take care of herself " , in addition to being largely oblivious to the fact that she is a princess . Supervising animator Glen Keane designed Rapunzel under the tutelage of veteran animator Ollie Johnston , one of Disney 's original Nine Old Men . Johnston advised Keane to attempt to capture what Rapunzel is thinking as opposed to simply animating what the character is doing after reviewing one of his early pencil tests . Keane compared receiving this advice to receiving a " slap that I never forgot , so when I was drawing over people 's work , I really tried to get into the head of the thinking of the character " . Co-director Byron Howard was inspired by the appearance of Ariel from Disney 's The Little Mermaid ( 1989 ) , a character who was also animated by Keane . Howard elaborated that " Ariel was the first character that I ever thought there was a soul behind her eyes ... We hoped to do that with Rapunzel to find some sort of soul and depth that people could relate to " . Meanwhile , Keane observed that Ariel and Rapunzel also share " irrepressible " spirits while encountering barriers that prevent them from pursuing their dreams . Keane was inspired by a book about the idea of feminine beauty ; the book cited " strangeness " as " the key to beauty ... in a woman 's face . " Taking this into consideration , Keane maintained a sense of asymmetry while drawing Rapunzel , incorporating into her face several subtle imperfections , specifically her bucked teeth that are bucked teeth . The character was also drawn with freckles , making her the first Disney princess to have this feature . Keane designed Rapunzel with large eyes in order to convey her " irrepressible quality " , a trait her also discovered in Mandy Moore 's voice . The animators created nine different versions of Rapunzel before finally settling on a design with which they were satisfied .

Rapunzel was the first blonde-haired Disney animated heroine since Aurora in Sleeping Beauty ( 1959 ) . Animating Rapunzel 's hair using computer-generated imagery has been regarded as the most challenging aspect in the development process of Tangled . According to the Los Angeles Times , supervising animator Glen Keane has become well known for animating some of Walt Disney Animation Studios ' " greatest hair hits " since 1989 , including Ariel from The Little Mermaid , the Beast from Beauty and the Beast ( 1991 ) and Pocahontas from Pocahontas ( 1995 ) . Both Keane and Howard have expressed similar opinions on Rapunzel 's hair , with Keane describing it as " this constant reminder that she has this gift " , and Howard describing it as its own character . As directors , Howard and Greno provided the animators with much live-action material and reference to use as inspiration for the appearance of Rapunzel 's hair , such as attaching long strands of string to a baseball cap that they would take turns wearing in the studio and moving around it . Additionally , they recruited women who had not cut their hair in several years to serve as live models .

Senior Software Engineer Dr. Kelly Ward , a hair simulation major and graduate from the University of North Carolina , was placed in charge of developing special software meant to assist the animators in animating 70 feet of hair . Ward revealed that , in real life , the character 's hair would weigh roughly 60 pounds , " more weight than a real person would be able to move around as effortlessly as we allow Rapunzel to do in the movie " . For simplicity sake , the animators reduced the realistic total of 100,000 individual strands of hair found on a typical human head to a more manageable 100 for Rapunzel . Acquiring the unique but realistic shade of golden blonde for Rapunzel 's hair also proved challenging animators .

In order to remain young and beautiful , a vain old woman named Mother Gothel hoards the healing properties of a magical golden flower . When the pregnant Queen falls ill , the flower is harvested and fed to her as medicine , thus preventing Gothel 's from using it . Once healthy , the Queen gives birth to Rapunzel , whose long golden hair has inherited the flower 's powerful healing magic . Hoping to regain full control over the flower , Gothel kidnaps the princess and incarcerates her in an isolated tower simply for the purpose of exploiting her magic hair in order to remain youthful . Every year on Rapunzel 's birthday , the kingdom of Corona releases thousands of floating lanterns into the sky in her memory . Eighteen years later , Rapunzel , ignorant to the fact that she is a princess , is growing eager to leave the tower and see the " floating lights , " which she believes bear some significance to her . However , she is forbidden by Gothel , by whom she has been led to believe is her mother . When a wanted thief named Flynn Rider , in search of a place to hide , stumbles upon Rapunzel 's tower , Rapunzel , who has tricked Gothel into leaving her unattended , blackmails Flynn into taking her to see the lanterns in return for the crown that he has stolen from the palace . Accompanied by Rapunzel 's chameleon friend Pascal , they embark , but Gothel is soon in close pursuit .

Rapunzel and Flynn eventually arrive at the kingdom in time for the lantern ceremony . Soon afterwards , Flynn is ambushed and vengefully turned into the police by his former partners-in-crime the Stabbington Brothers , who he abandoned in an attempt to outrun the King 's soldiers , and sentenced to death . However , before the Brothers can harm Rapunzel , Gothel knocks them unconscious and takes a heartbroken Rapunzel back to the tower . Back in her bedroom , Rapunzel is suddenly flooded by memories from her past . Realizing Gothel is a fraud , she finally finds the courage to rebel against her . However , Gothel , unwilling to lose Rapunzel , chains her up and gags her with a white handkerchief . When Flynn , having managed to escape from the castle , arrives at the tower , Gothel stabs him . Desperate to save him , Rapunzel promises to do whatever Gothel pleases in return . Gothel complies , but just as Rapunzel is about to heal him , Flynn cuts her hair short , causing it to turn brown and lose all of its magical powers and might never be long again , resulting in Gothel 's death . Flynn dies in Rapunzel 's arms and she cries bitterly . However , the flower 's magic manifests itself through Rapunzel 's tears and returns Flynn to life . Flynn returns Rapunzel to the palace , where she is finally reunited with her parents .

Rapunzel is the tenth member of the Disney Princess line-up , a marketing franchise aimed primarily at young girls that manufactures and releases products such as toys , video and audio recordings , clothing , and video games . The Walt Disney Company introduces characters into its Disney Princess line-up through coronation . Rapunzel 's was held on October 2 , 2011 , at the Kensington Palace in London , England ; the character became the franchise 's first princess to have been computer-animated . However , the franchise uses a traditionally animated rendering of Rapunzel in most of its merchandise . Following her coronation , Rapunzel was recognized with her own page on the official Disney Princess website . Disney Consumer Products has released several merchandise based on Tangled that features Rapunzel . Rapunzel appears as a playable character in an interactive adventure-themed video game based on the film , entitled Tangled : The Video Game . The game was released by Disney Interactive Studios on November 23 , 2010 , one day before the film 's November 24 theatrical release , specifically for the Nintendo video game platforms Wii and DS , and follows the plot of the original film . Voice actress Mandy Moore reprises her role as Rapunzel in the video game . The character 's likeness has also been adapted into a variety of doll products . Rapunzel was the first character created and released as part of the Disney Animator 's Collection , a series of dolls depicting each of the eleven Disney Princesses as toddler . She was designed Glen Keane , who served as her supervising animator on the original film .

Rapunzel currently makes regular appearances at various Walt Disney Parks and Resorts sites , locations and attractions . In anticipation of the film 's theatrical release , several Tangled-based attractions were constructed at various Disney Parks locations in both California and Florida , USA . These include a life-sized replica of Rapunzel 's tower , located in Fantasyland . As part of photographer Annie Leibovitz 's Disney Dream Portrait Series that she has been commissioning for Walt Disney Parks and Resorts since 2007 , The Walt Disney Company hired American country singer-songwriter Taylor Swift to be featured as the model for Rapunzel . In a detailed description of the piece , Us Weekly wrote , " The stunning image — captioned ' Where a world of adventure awaits ' — shows the 23-year-old Grammy winner perched on the window ledge of a moss-covered stone tower . A pink petticoat peeks out from under her purple gown as she stares wistfully into the distance , her long golden tresses flowing regally in the wind . " Swift told On The Red Carpet that she was honored to have been selected for the piece .

Critics were generally positive in their opinions of Rapunzel . The St. Paul Pioneer Press ' Chris Hewitt described the character as " no damsel in distress " , while Sara Vizcarrondo of Boxoffice described the character as " a spunky heroine who could infiltrate the heavily guarded princess canon . " Stephen Whitty of The Star-Ledger dubbed Rapunzel " a fairly capable young woman " . Bruce Diones of The New Yorker wrote that Rapunzel has " a sharp wit and intelligent concerns " , while Claudia Puig of USA Today opined , " Rapunzel is ... believable in her teenage histrionics " . Calling the character a " delight " , The Austin Chronicle 's Marjorie Baumgarten wrote , " Rapunzel is a spunky gal , capable of defending herself " . Sandie Angulo Chen of Common Sense Media wrote that Rapunzel is a " guileless , strong , and beautiful " character who is " so breathtakingly good that you can 't help but weep with her when she thinks all hope is lost . " The Milwaukee Journal Sentinel 's Cathy Jakicic described Rapunzel as a " scrappy , self-reliant " heroine who " can rescue herself " . The Scotsman commented , " the film doesn 't ... turn [ Rapunzel ] into a simpering damsel in distress . " Describing the character as " innocent but ( inevitably ) feisty " , Empire 's Helen O 'Hara enjoyed the fact that both Rapunzel and Flynn are given " decent character development " while " bas [ ing ] their growing love story on more than a single longing glance . " Similarly , the Mountain Xpress praised Rapunzel and Flynn 's relationship , writing , " what works best is the interplay between the two leads ... these animated characters are frankly more believable and charismatic than the human ones in ... Love and Other Drugs . " Todd Hertz of Christianity Today called Rapunzel " fun , dynamic , and wondrous " .

And , of course , the heart of the story is Rapunzel , a freshly minted heroine who morphs from prisoner to strong-willed seeker of her own destiny . Blondes have not had a good rap of late , thanks chiefly to the stream of formulaic rom-coms that have played them up as the ditzes and airheads of cliche . Rapunzel 's no-nonsense attitude and proactive air , however , reminds us that the blondes of yore were not to be trifled with . As reimagined in Tangled , Rapunzel defies authority , shuts down male ego and charts her own course . She 's not only a great role model for kids , she 's the type of gutsy , independently minded , value-added blonde Mae West would have been proud of . The character was not void of criticism . Although Richard Corliss of Time thoroughly enjoyed the film , he felt that too much emphasis was placed on Flynn Rider and not enough on Rapunzel . Corliss questioned the future of Disney 's animated heroines , writing , " For 60 years ... girls were the focal characters who could be expected to come of age , triumph over adversity and , in general , man up , " and accused various film studios of " abolish [ ing ] female-centered stories . " Variety 's Justin Chang described Rapunzel as a " bland , plastic " heroine , likening her to a Barbie doll . Similarly , Tom Huddleston of Time Out described Rapunzel as " bland " . James Berardinelli of ReelViews was fairly mixed in his review , writing , " although likeable and energetic , [ Rapunzel ] is not as memorable as Snow White , Ariel , or Belle . " Keith Uhlich of Time Out described the character as " synthetic " . He wrote , " you never feel like you 're watching a girl on the empowering cusp of adulthood so much as a selection of attitudes compiled through demographic study . " The Independent 's Anthony Quinn panned the character , describing her as " bland and Valley Girlish " . Joe Williams of the St. Louis Post-Dispatch opined , " when the big-eyed heroine tries to tug at our heartstrings and Flynn turns into Prince Charming , the too-familiar hero-and-damsel motif feels like a fashion faux-pas . " Similarly , the SouthtownStar 's Jake Coyle wrote , " Both Rapunzel and Flynn too much resemble Barbie and Ken , lacking both superficial and emotional individuality . " Jen Yamato of Movies.com criticized Disney for " failing to give Rapunzel a backbone and retreading ground so familiar you can fall asleep for ten minutes and still know exactly what happened " .

As the tenth Disney Princess , several critics have drawn comparisons between Rapunzel and preceding Disney Princesses and animated heroines , the most frequent and prominent of whom remains Ariel from The Little Mermaid ( 1989 ) . The Daily News ' Joe Neumaier likened Rapunzel 's independence to that of Belle from Beauty and the Beast ( 1991 ) , writing , " thoroughly modern Rapunzel does most of the saving " . Jonathan Crocker of Total Film noted similarities between Rapunzel and Ariel , describing Rapunzel as " A strong-willed heroine longing to see outside . " Mike Scott of The Times-Picayune commented on Rapunzel 's innocence , describing it as " reminiscent of Amy Adams ' flighty Giselle from ... Enchanted . " LoveFilm 's Tom Charity commented on the character 's independence , likening Rapunzel 's spirited personality to those of both Ariel from The Little Mermaid ( 1989 ) and Mulan from Mulan ( 1998 ) . Charity also labeled Rapunzel " another addition to the more recent Disney tradition of emancipated heroines " .

CNN 's Stephanie Goldberg included Rapunzel in her article " Brave 's Merida and other animated heroines " , a list that recognized some of Disney 's most heroic and independent heroines who have appeared in animated films . Goldberg jokingly wrote , " So what if ... Rapunzel defends herself with a frying pan and holds prisoners captive with her long , magical hair ? " Sonia Saraiya of Nerve ranked Rapunzel fourth in her article " Ranked : Disney Princesses From Least To Most Feminist " . Comparing the character 's spirited personality to that of preceding Disney Princesses Ariel and Jasmine from Aladdin ( 1992 ) , Saraiya described Rapunzel as " badass , " despite the fact that " her naivete sometimes gets in the way of her progressivism . " Saraiya continued , " [ Rapunzel ] also recognizes the unfairness of her plight and finds a way out of it , outwitting her ' mother , ' who is in fact her kidnapper , to venture to the outside world . " Tala Dayrit of Female Network included Rapunzel in her article " 30 Fierce and Fun Female Cartoon Characters " , writing that , unlike her original fairy tale counterpart , " She ’ s not the helpless damsel locked in a tower awaiting an unknown fate , but a strong woman capable of defending herself in a fight . "

Dragon Age : Origins is a role-playing video game developed by BioWare and published by Electronic Arts . It is the first game in the Dragon Age franchise , and was released for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 3 , and Xbox 360 in November 2009 , and for OS X in December 2009 . Edge of Reality developed the game 's console versions . Set in the fictional kingdom of Ferelden during a period of civil strife , the game puts the player in the role of a warrior , mage or rogue coming from an elven , human , or dwarven background who must unite the kingdom to fight an impending invasion by demonic forces known as the " Darkspawn " . The player character is recruited as a Grey Warden and is tasked to defeat the Archdemon ( a being with the soul of an old god in the body of a powerful Dragon ) that commands the Darkspawn , and end the catastrophe known as the Blight . The game is played from a third-person perspective that can be shifted to top-down perspective . Throughout the game , players encounter various companions , who play major roles in the game 's plot and gameplay and accompany the player throughout the game .

BioWare described Dragon Age : Origins as a " dark heroic fantasy " set in a unique world , and a spiritual successor to their previous Baldur 's Gate and Neverwinter Nights franchises . Its setting was inspired by The Lord of the Rings and A Song of Ice & Fire , and was described by BioWare as a mix between high fantasy and low fantasy . Development of the game began in 2002 , and lasted over six years . BioWare employed more than 144 voice-actors , and hired Inon Zur to compose the game 's music . Origins received critical acclaim upon release , with praise mostly directed at its story , setting , characters , music and combat system . It sold more than 3.2 million copies , and 1 million pieces of downloadable content . Its multiple year-end accolades included Game of the Year and Best Role-playing awards from several gaming publications . BioWare released several instances of downloadable content after the game 's initial launch , an expansion pack for the game titled Awakening in March 2010 , and two sequels , Dragon Age II and Dragon Age : Inquisition , were released in 2011 and 2014 respectively .

Dragon Age : Origins is an action role-playing game . The player is a Grey Warden , part of an order of elite fighters , whose task is to defeat the Archdemon and save the world from a disastrous event called the Blight . Players create their own Grey Warden character , customizing gender and appearance as well as choosing a race and class . The available classes are warriors , who perform strong physical attacks ; rogues , who carry out stealth attacks and steal items from other characters ; and mages , who cast spells on enemies , create combo spells , and support other party members . The three choices of race are human , elf , and dwarf . The combination of class and race determines which of six different origin stories the player experiences : Dalish Elf , City Elf , Dwarven Noble , Dwarven Commoner , Mage , or Human Noble . This affects the way other in-game characters perceive the player 's character ; for instance , a Dwarven Commoner would receive hatred and discrimination from other dwarves . However , all classes follow the same plot after the completion of the origin story .

During gameplay the player encounters a variety of enemies , including giant spiders , darkspawn , ghosts , walking trees , and dragons . They also recruit companions , who accompany them and provide assistance in battle . These companions are normally controlled by artificial intelligence , with behavior that the player can adjust through the " Tactic " menu , but the player also has the option to switch between characters , and is able to issue orders to them in real-time or pause the game to queue up actions . Utilizing a third-person perspective , the combat in Origins is largely similar to BioWare 's previous Star Wars : Knights of the Old Republic . The player and any companions engage in combat with the weapons they have equipped when the player targets or is noticed by a hostile enemy . Players can swap weapons and perform special attacks during combat , but most of these attacks have a recharge time . The point of view can be shifted from third person to a top-down view , where friendly and hostile units are labelled with different colors to distinguish them . At the end of a battle the characters ' health and stamina , which powers a character 's skills , are automatically refilled . When an enemy is defeated , the player collects any items or loot from its corpse .

The player can level up their Warden character by earning experience points through completing quests and defeating enemies . Each time player levels up , they receive three points to spend on the character 's six attributes . Strength inflicts more damage , dexterity helps evade attacks more often , willpower increases stamina , magic increases spell damage or magic defense , cunning improves combat tactics , and constitution helps withstand attacks . Special skills , which are divided into four different aspects for each class , and specialization options , which offer class-specific skills , can also be unlocked by levelling up . Players can be accompanied by a maximum of three companions . Companions who are not in the player 's active party stay in base camp , a hub where the player can talk to their party members as well as purchase new weapons , armor , and gear . In addition to the main story , the player can learn more about the world of Thedas by collecting the Indexes scattered throughout the game . The game 's dialogue engine is the same as that of Mass Effect . The player can talk and interact with both party members and other non-playable characters . A dialogue tree offers several dialogue options for the player to select . Through conversation , the player can unlock unique quests and dialogue revealing the lore of Dragon Age . It can also be used to persuade or intimidate other characters . The player often must choose between morally ambiguous options , which result in consequences that affect the game 's world and progression , and can even lead to the death of a potential companion . Companions react to the player 's choices through an " approval system " . When they dislike or object to the player 's decisions , their approval drops , which can result in a companion leaving the party or even attacking the Warden . Approval points can also be influenced by gifts , which will improve any companion 's approval but are each intended for a specific companion . Some gifts , if given to the right character , start a cutscene and can even unlock a quest . A high approval rating improves a companion 's morale and gives bonuses to their combat abilities . A significant approval rating also makes it possible for the Warden to pursue a romantic relationship with certain companions . The game 's " interaction reactivity " system means that the way a player treats one companion affects the approval rating of other companions as well .

The game is set in Ferelden , one of several countries in the mythical continent Thedas . Demonic creatures called the Darkspawn dwell within the Deep Roads , an underground highway system created by the dwarves long ago , deep beneath the surface of Thedas . Every few hundred years , the Darkspawn swarm the surface world in a movement known as a Blight . Ever since the first Blight , Thedas has relied on the legendary order of warriors known as the Grey Wardens to drive the Darkspawn back . Dragon Age : Origins begins on the eve of Thedas 's fifth Blight . Thedas is a world in which race and class combine to determine social class . Elves are often viewed as second-class citizens by humans , while human nobles are treated with respect . Mages , on the other hand , are cloistered by the Chantry : they have access to the Fade , the unconscious realm that is the home of spirits , and a single lapse in vigilance could cause them to be possessed by demons . Apostate mages , who live outside the Chantry 's control , are considered extremely dangerous , and the Chantry has a militant wing , the Templars , to seek them out and subdue them by any means necessary .

The chief protagonist of Dragon Age : Origins is the player-controlled character , whose biography and combat specialization are determined by the race and class chosen at the start of the game . While the player can choose his or her avatar 's first name , the character is usually referred to as " The Warden " by other characters and the game 's narration . Many of the game 's non-player characters ( NPCs ) are companion characters , who appear throughout the game and may volunteer their services . Companions include Alistair , a reluctantly heroic Grey Warden with a sarcastic wit ; Morrigan , the sultry but cynical dark mage who has little regard for authority or social mores ; Leliana , an ex-member of Ferelden 's Chantry whose optimistic and virtuous demeanor belies an aptitude for espionage and combat ; Sten , a proud but stoic warrior of the militaristic Qunari people who often questions human ways ; Oghren , a brutal dwarven warrior whose love of alcohol is only matched by his penchant for violence and loyalty to his friends ; Wynne , an Elder Mage of the Circle , a maternal figure to the party and a powerful healer ; Zevran , a rakish elven assassin who is fond of treasures , sex and innuendo ; and a loyal Mabari War Hound , which the player can name and use for scouting and combat . In the DLC , Shale , a sarcastic Golem with a mild ornithophobia who was a female dwarf in her prior life , is also available . There is also a so-called " secret companion " who can be recruited , but that will cause Alister to leave the Warden . The secret companion is Loghain .

Outside of companion characters , NPCs significant to the Origins plot include Duncan , the Grey Warden who recruits the player ; King Cailan , Ferelden 's naive but courageous leader and son of the legendary King Maric ; Queen Anora , Cailan 's politically-savvy wife , whose youth and beauty are matched by a commanding personality but somewhat offset by her ambition and ruthlessness ; and Flemeth , Morrigan 's mother , who appears to be a harmless old woman in public , but in truth is an infamous dark witch of Ferelden legend . The faceless Darkspawn horde is led by the archdemon Urthemiel , supposedly one of the Old Gods of the Tevinter Imperium , incarnated in the form of a powerful and corrupted dragon with total control over the darkspawn . The game 's other main antagonists are Teyrn Loghain Mac Tir , father of Queen Anora , a once-respected war hero gone mad with ambition and paranoia ; and Rendon Howe , the amoral and corrupt Arl of Amaranthine who allies with Loghain to further his own ambitions .

Depending on the player 's chosen race and class , they will begin the game with one of six predetermined origin stories . In each origin story , the player is introduced to Duncan , the commander of Ferelden 's Grey Wardens , who is trying to find recruits to join the order . At the end of the origin story , the player 's character is selected as a potential Grey Warden , and leaves with Duncan . The player and Duncan journey to a fortress in southern Ferelden called Ostagar . There , they join Cailan , the King of Ferelden , and his father-in-law Loghain , a legendary general . The three leaders plan to make a stand against the encroaching Darkspawn before a new Blight overwhelms Ferelden . Duncan senses the influence of an Archdemon , a god-like being hosted in the body of a powerful Dragon that commands the Darkspawn , which makes this the first true Blight in over 400 years . Duncan emphasizes the importance of defeating the Blight before it can gain enough momentum to threaten the rest of Thedas . Duncan initiates the player into the Grey Wardens through a dangerous ritual called the Joining . The Joining involves imbibing Darkspawn blood , which will either kill a person or imbue them with the powerful darkspawn essence known as the Taint , granting them the ability to sense Darkspawn and a rudimentary connection into their hive mind . After surviving the Joining , the player and another Grey Warden , Alistair , are given the task of lighting a beacon at the top of the fortress which will signal Loghain 's men to charge the horde 's flank . However , upon seeing the signal , Loghain abandons the battlefield with his army . Without Loghain 's reinforcements , King Cailan and Duncan are overwhelmed and slain by the Darkspawn , who massacre Cailan 's army , seize control of Ostagar and begin advancing into southern Ferelden .

The player 's Warden and Alistair are saved by Flemeth , a powerful witch who lives in a secluded hermitage with her daughter and apprentice , Morrigan . The player , Alistair , and Morrigan decide that in order to stop the Blight from destroying Ferelden , and possibly all of Thedas , they will need to gather a new army and slay the Archdemon . Using ancient Grey Warden treaties , the player 's Warden must travel across Ferelden to enlist the aid of the Dalish Elves , the Dwarves of Orzammar , the Circle of Magi , and the soldiers of Redcliffe , loyal to Arl Eamon . In addition , Alistair reveals that he is a bastard son of King Maric Theirin , Cailin 's father , putting him in contention for the recently vacated throne . Meanwhile , Loghain returns to Ferelden 's capital city , Denerim , to inform his daughter Queen Anora of King Cailan 's death . Loghain scapegoats the Grey Wardens for the defeat at Ostagar ; accusing them of betraying Ferelden , Loghain outlaws the order and demands the deaths of any surviving Wardens . While Anora inherits her husband 's authority , Loghain quickly declares himself her regent and effectively seizes control of the kingdom . Loghain swiftly becomes a brutal and tyrannical ruler willing to do anything to retain power , igniting a civil war between himself and Ferelden 's nobility , who refuse to acknowledge his authority . Both sides battle to an inconclusive stalemate , and the darkspawn take advantage of the chaos to advance further into Ferelden unopposed .

After the player successfully obtains the assistance of each of the primary factions , a Landsmeet is called among the nobles of Ferelden . There , the player confronts Loghain , ultimately either executing him or making him a Grey Warden ( in which case he joins the party , replacing Alistair ) . The player also settles who will lead Ferelden against the Blight ( Alistair , Anora , or both ) and rallies support from the rest of the kingdom to face the Darkspawn . At this point , the player learns that only a Grey Warden can slay the Archdemon because of the Taint present in a Grey Warden 's body . Killing the Archdemon releases the demonic essence within it , which is drawn to the Taint in the Grey Warden and effectively kills them as well ; if anyone other than a Warden slays it , the Archdemon 's essence survives and finds a new host in the nearest Darkspawn , making the monster effectively immortal . On the night before the final battle , Morrigan offers the player 's Warden a way to slay the Archdemon without sacrificing anyone : Morrigan believes that if the player succeeds in conceiving a child with her , the child would also carry the Taint . Once the Archdemon dies , its demonic essence would be drawn away from any Grey Warden to safely merge with the unborn child instead . The resulting child would be born a demigod , which she plans to raise on her own . The player can accept Morrigan 's offer , convince Alistair or Loghain to take part instead , or refuse the witch 's proposal , which will cause her to leave the party .

The next day , the player and the newly assembled army of Ferelden fight their way through the city of Denerim , which has been overrun by the Darkspawn . After fighting their way through the Darkspawn horde , and a final battle against the Archdemon atop Denerim 's highest tower , the player is given the chance to deliver the killing blow or to let Alistair or Loghain do it . With each choice , the Archdemon is killed and the leaderless Darkspawn army retreats from Denerim , marking the end of the Fifth Blight . Unless the ritual with Morrigan was performed , whoever slew the Archdemon also perishes . The story ends with a ceremony attended by the people of Ferelden during which the player and their companions are honored for saving the kingdom . The game then presents an epilogue in text and pictures which details the ramifications of the player 's in-game choices on the future of Ferelden and the lives of his or her companions .

Dragon Age : Origins was created by the Edmonton studio of BioWare , the developer of Neverwinter Nights and Jade Empire . Development of the game 's first demo began in November 2002 . It was officially revealed at E3 2004 as simply Dragon Age , and was re-revealed as Dragon Age : Origins in July 2008 , alongside a new trailer for the game . According to BioWare , they kept any information about the game hidden from the public , to further the game 's design and technology . More than 180 people worked on the game , and full-scale production began three years after the game 's initial development . The subtitle " Origins " was chosen to represent the six origins storyline , BioWare 's return to PC role-playing games , and the beginning of a new franchise . Origins is a spiritual successor to Baldur 's Gate and Neverwinter Nights , as an attempt to build a similar fantasy RPG without any licensing restrictions or issues . The similarities are mostly present in gameplay elements , such as real-time tactical combat ; the game does not share the Dungeons and Dragons setting of the Baldur 's Gate series , and is instead set in a period resembling the Stone Age or Iron Age , with dragons prevalent . The tactic menu was inspired by the gambit system from Final Fantasy XII .

David Gaider , the lead writer for Origins , built the game 's world first before writing the plot . The team chose a " fantasy " setting because Dan Tudge , the game 's director , thought that BioWare was at its best in the fantasy genre . In the first draft , there were no Darkspawn or Grey Wardens , and mages were not allowed to use magic in cities . There were twelve different origin stories , including Human Commoner and Avvar , a barbarian origin . However , most of them were scrapped for being " ridiculous " , leading to six stories being finalized . Loghain was the first character to be created , while an Ogre , nicknamed " Fluffy " , and a human with medium armor were the first enemies designed . The concepts of Alistair and Morrigan were the next to be created , as they play the largest role in the game 's plot . Their creation also took far longer than other characters . Morrigan was originally conceived to be similar to Flemeth , speaking whimsically . However , Gaider was not satisfied and decided to completely rewrite her personality . As a result , she was designed as a " blunt " person who always resists her mother . Finding a suitable voice actor for Morrigan took the most time of any character . The game 's final version features 68,260 lines of dialogue ; the quality assurance testers for the game enabled a cheat to automatically skip these cutscenes and dialogues during test runs .

Ray Muzyka , co-founder of BioWare , said that the team wanted to try something that would be new but familiar to most players . They hoped that Origins would redefine the genre to become The Lord of the Rings of video game franchises . Greg Zeschuk , another co-founder of BioWare , described the fantasy of Dragon Age as in between the high fantasy of J. R. R. Tolkien 's works and the low fantasy of works by George R.R. Martin . The goal was a " dark heroic fantasy " that would suit the taste of any fan of the genre . Thus , while the game has the typical races of human , elf , and dwarf , they are slightly altered from the usual nature of the three races , and a new lizard-like race called the Qunari was introduced . Some of the alterations they made included flipping how certain races , like elves , are treated in other fictional worlds . While elves are often described as a race of high prestige in fiction , Dragon Age : Origins presents them as slaves of humans , labelled as second class citizens who resent the human race . This extended to the gameplay , where the player can choose to discriminate against other races , and can experience discrimination from others based on their choices .

BioWare recognized that non-linear choices are an element unique to video games in the entertainment industry . Zeschuk called the sheer number of choices in the game " big " and " impactful " , and the team designed many of those to be emotional and create a more personal experience for the player . They intentionally avoided adding a karma system , as the choices are designed to be ambiguous , with only the player to judge whether they are good or bad . According to Muzyka , their goal was to make players sympathize with events and characters , connecting with them to feel true emotions . This vision challenged the team to balance many key aspects , such as the amount of dialogue and animation in each cutscene , to create a believable scenario for players . The team also hoped to handle romance in a more " mature " and " complicated " way , with a true reflection on human relationships and reactions rather than " adolescent titillation " . The game has sex scenes , but no nudity . Muzyka added that it was an artistic choice , and a decision made by the team , not the publisher Electronic Arts .

While Origins is a single-player-only game , Muzyka described it as a " social experience " , considering the narrative and its variety of paths as an integral part of the gameplay . The characters a player meets , items they collect , and quests they receive and complete may be different , leading to a completely different experience . He also considered the ways a player explores the world and discovers new areas as an exploration narrative . As each player had different experience , they hoped that those players would collaborate to expand upon their knowledge of the world . To that effect , the team built a community site as an online social environment for players to communicate . Players could share stats and automatically generated screenshots with the community .

The game features an orchestral soundtrack with choir , used both in-game and during cutscenes . The soundtrack was recorded by performance of a 44-piece orchestra , recorded twice and merged to sound like an 88-piece orchestra . It was composed by Inon Zur and performed by the Northwest Sinfonia . According to Zur , he intentionally made most of the soundtrack feel " dark " , combining low brass and bass string instruments with ancient drums to express a feeling that is both heroic and demonic . One of the tracks , " Leliana 's Song " , was composed in under 24 hours . The soundtrack was presented at a panel in the Hollywood Music in Media Interactive Conference in 2009 , and was performed as part of the September 26 " A Night in Fantasia 2009 " concert in Sydney , Australia , by the Eminence Symphony Orchestra . Origins contains a large amount of voice acting recorded in the US and the UK . Actors include Tim Russ , Steve Valentine , Kate Mulgrew , Simon Templeman , Mark Rolston , Tim Curry , Adam Howden , Nicola Bertram , and Claudia Black . In total , more than 140 voice actors worked on the game . A large part of these recordings became the ambient dialogue that takes place between non-player characters in the adventuring party , adding to their backstories and lending more credibility to the characters . Mark Darrah , executive producer of BioWare , described the cast of characters the largest of any of their games at that time , and hoped that using celebrities would add a layer of depth and complexity to the characters . The main protagonist is not voice-acted , as the team hoped that players would " reflect their own inner voice " when making decisions .

While the game was originally intended for PC , a console version was announced in 2008 by gaming magazine Game Informer . Prior to the announcement , Zeschuk suggested that the entire franchise has a " console future " . The decision was made to bring the game to consoles to introduce it to a wider audience . Mike Laidlaw , the game 's lead designer , considered creating the console versions ' interface a challenge , as they had to convert the long and complex quickbar from the PC version to a more streamlined interface that could use the same actions with only few button presses . To that end , the team decided to map six different actions together , and allow players to customize the arrangement . Also , the console version does not allow the top-down view possible in the PC version . The game was originally set to be released in early 2009 for Microsoft Windows , and later for PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 . The team partnered with Edge of Reality to develop the console versions of the game . However , its release date was pushed to the latter half of that year in order to have a simultaneous launch . BioWare announced that the game would be released on October 20 , 2009 , but pushed it back again to November 6 , 2009 , as the team wanted additional time to finalize some last-minute decisions . The PlayStation 3 version was at one point delayed to November 17 , but did end up launching alongside the other versions . A Mac version of the game , developed by TransGaming , was released on December 21 , 2009 .

In addition to the standard version , other editions of Origins were made available for purchase . The Collector 's Edition came in a SteelBook with different artwork . Like the standard edition , the Collector 's Edition included a redemption code to obtain the Stone Prisoner and Blood Dragon Armor DLC for free , but added three additional exclusive in-game items , a bonus disc containing a making-of documentary , concept art , trailers , the game 's original soundtrack , and a cloth map of Ferelden . The " Ultimate Edition " , released on October 26 , 2010 , includes the base game , the Awakening expansion pack , and all 9 DLC packs . The Dragon Age Character Creator was released on October 13 , 2009 , allowing players to create a character in advance and import it into the full game upon release . BioWare also released a " developer-grade " toolset to allow extensive modification and customization of the game 's PC version . Players can use these tools to craft new campaigns , quests , cinematics , and lip-syncing . On November 26 , 2009 , Electronic Arts announced a competition called Dragon Age : Warden ’ s Quest . Contestants formed groups of four people and competed to adventure through the game 's world , with the winning group receiving $ 12,500 . The representatives from Hungary won the contest , followed by a group called Bioware Community , Canada and a group from Poland . On March 9 , 2011 , Electronic Arts announced that players who pre-ordered Darkspore would receive a free copy of Origins . In 2012 , to celebrate the first-year anniversary of Electronic Arts ' own digital distribution software Origin , the game was made free to download alongside Battlefield : Bad Company 2 and Spore for a limited time . On October 8 , 2015 , it became free to download again for a limited time as part of Origin 's On the House program .

Dragon Age : Origins received critical acclaim from major video game critics upon its release . While the game is considered to be virtually identical across all platforms , differences in user interface , graphical performance , and online content delivery have led the PC version to be reviewed more favorably than the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 versions ; Metacritic ranks the PC , PlayStation 3 , and Xbox 360 versions of the game with scores of 91 , 87 , and 86 , respectively . The game 's setting was well received by critics . Dave Snider from Giant Bomb thought that the setting felt traditional due to the presence of dwarves and elves , but that the world was beautifully executed . He also appreciated the small touches BioWare added to the world , noting the " French-tinged accent " of the Orlesian Empire humans . He added that the six origin stories and their unique dialogue and referencing throughout the game make the world feel cohesive . Kevin VanOrd from GameSpot made similar comments , stating that the new ideas added to a familiar world make it feel original and new . However , Jeff Haynes from IGN said that the origin stories were inconsistent , with missteps that make the world , while " rich and vivid " , feel less believable . Joe Juba from Game Informer wrote that the world was well-realized with a deep history , which makes the game addicting , as players can sense their Warden 's importance in the world .

The game 's story and characters also received praise . Snider said that the story is driven by the characters , and that the choices presented in the game were difficult , making him regret some choices for weeks after completing the game . He added that the game 's main quest was well-written , and its quality boosted by excellent voice acting ; he called the performance of Claudia Black as Morrigan one of the best in the game . VanOrd commended the game 's story , saying that it was memorable and crafted with care , successfully making players care about the game 's world and characters . He added that the deep character development made every choice " momentous " . GamesRadar thought that the story and the Warden 's appearance felt generic , but that the story become more and more engrossing as it progressed . Nick Tan from Game Revolution liked the banter between companions as a humorous change of pace within the game . Gerald Villoria from GameSpy praised the exclusion of the moral system for making the characters feel more complex . Juba wrote that the story was good but predictable , not straying far from standard fantasy stories . Wesley Yin-Poole from VideoGamer.com called the story memorable , saying that it " leaves an itch in your mind " , and has attracted players to return to the game " like an addict seeking a hit of relief . "

As for the game 's combat , Snider called it streamlined , but said that players who do not want to use the pause mechanic would not be able to appreciate the game , as the combat requires both patience and strategy . He liked the game 's third-person view more than the top-down view , saying that being able to view the sky made environments feel more complicated , and praised the high difficulty of boss battles , which task players to manage their stamina carefully . His conclusion was that Origins " feels like a real throwback to the good old days of PC role-playing epics . " VanOrd said that the combat system was easily recognizable for players who have played other RPGs developed by BioWare . He added that players can have a lot of fun switching between characters , and agreed that the game had created thrilling boss battles . He praised the choice to have health and stamina replenish immediately after battles , as it sped up combat pace and flow . Tan also commended the combat , finding it a better system than other BioWare RPGs , but disliked the fact that characters can step into water . Juba praised the amount of space for players to experiment with new skills and abilities , adding that the required focus and attention make combat very satisfying .

The game 's graphics received mixed reviews . VanOrd was not impressed , stating that the environments do not look as good viewed from a top-down perspective , but he praised the art style and some of the game 's " eye-catching " landmarks . Tan liked that the environments were varied and unique , saying that each level felt " vast " and filled with details . Villoria found its visual quality lacking when compared with that of Mass Effect 2 , adding that the facial animation can feel wooden at times . However , he found the combat animation rewarding and satisfying . He further criticized the sex sequences as " off-putting " . Yin-Poole said that the game 's graphics were boring and generic , and called the sex scenes " anti-climatic " and poorly-executed . Both Villoria and Yin-Poole felt that the six-year development time was too long , considering the game 's mediocre graphics . GamesRadar estimated that there are more than 80 hours of content available in the game . Villoria called the world engaging , and its replay value very high , as players can play the story over and over again with a different origin . Juba agreed , as did Yin-Poole , who added that the way companions react to the player 's decisions , as well as the six origin stories , significantly expand the game 's longevity .

Dragon Age : Origins topped Steam 's sales chart on November 10 , 2009 . The Digital Deluxe version of the game was ranked first place , with the standard edition ranked second . The Xbox 360 version of the game was the ninth-best-selling game in the US according to the NPD Group , selling approximately 362,100 copies . According to John Riccitiello , CEO of Electronic Arts , the company is very satisfied with the sales of Origins ; more than 1 million DLC packs for the game were sold before the end of 2009 . In February 2010 , Electronic Arts announced that more than 3.2 million copies of the game had been sold .

Origins gained recognition from several gaming publications for its achievements . The Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences named it the " Role-Playing / Massively Multiplayer Game of the Year 2009 " . At the 2009 Spike Video Game Awards , Dragon Age : Origins received the Best PC Game and Best RPG awards . It was chosen as the PC Game of the Year , Best Xbox 360 RPG of the Year , Best Story of the Year , and Best PC Role-Playing Game of the Year by IGN . The game also received Giant Bomb 's Best PC Game of 2009 award , and Game of the Year 2009 and RPG of the Year awards from U.S. PC Gamer . In 2010 , the game was included as one of the titles in the book 1001 Video Games You Must Play Before You Die .

Although the name " Origins " hinted that the game would be a beginning of a new franchise , the team did not expect the game to become successful , and had never planned for sequels . Due to its success , the game spawned a Dragon Age franchise consisting of video games , comics , and novels . The game 's sequel , Dragon Age II , was announced on July 9 , 2010 , with the goal of bringing improved graphics and combat to the franchise . Dragon Age II is set within a ten-year period and features a new predefined protagonist , Hawke , and a new locale within the Dragon Age world , the city of Kirkwall . Players are able to transfer save data from Dragon Age : Origins into the sequel ; decisions that the player made during the course of Dragon Age : Origins are referenced while playing Dragon Age II . The third installment of the series , titled Dragon Age : Inquisition , was announced on September 17 , 2012 . In Inquisition , players take on the role of an Inquisitor , and must unite Ferelden and Orlais to defeat an ancient Darkspawn called Corypheus . The game was released on November 18 , 2014 , and in addition to the original three gaming platforms , it brought the Dragon Age franchise to the eighth generation of video game consoles : PlayStation 4 and Xbox One .

The two Shōkaku-class ( 翔鶴型 , Shōkaku-gata ) aircraft carriers were built for the Imperial Japanese Navy ( IJN ) in the late 1930s . Completed shortly before the start of the Pacific War in 1941 , they have been called " arguably the best aircraft carriers in the world " when built . With the exception of the Battle of Midway , they participated in every major naval action of the Pacific War , including the attack on Pearl Harbor , the Indian Ocean Raid , the Battle of the Coral Sea , and the Guadalcanal Campaign . Their inexperienced air groups were relegated to airfield attacks during the attack on Pearl Harbor , but they later sank two of the four fleet carriers lost by the United States Navy during the war in addition to one elderly British light carrier . The sister ships returned to Japan after the Battle of the Coral Sea , one to repair damage and the other to replace aircraft lost during the battle , so neither ship participated in the Battle of Midway in June 1942 . After the catastrophic losses of four carriers during that battle , they formed the bulk of the IJN 's carrier force for the rest of the war . As such they were the primary counterattack force deployed against the American invasion of Guadalcanal in the Battle of the Eastern Solomons in August . Two months later , they attempted to support a major offensive by the Imperial Japanese Army to push the United States Marines off Guadalcanal . This resulted in the Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands where they crippled one American carrier and damaged another in exchange for damage to Shōkaku and a light carrier . Neither attempt succeeded and the Japanese withdrew their remaining forces from Guadalcanal in early 1943 using the air group from Zuikaku to provide cover .

The two Shōkaku-class carriers were ordered in 1937 as part of the 3rd Naval Armaments Supplement Program . No longer restricted by the provisions of the Washington Naval Treaty , which had expired in December 1936 , and with relaxed budgetary limitations , the IJN sought qualitative superiority over their foreign counterparts . Drawing on experience with their existing carriers , the Navy General Staff laid out an ambitious requirement for a ship that equaled the 96-aircraft capacity of the Akagi and Kaga , the speed of Hiryū and the defensive armament of Kaga . The new ship was also to have superior protection and range over any of the existing carriers . The Basic Design Section of the Navy Technical Department decided upon an enlarged and improved Hiryū design with the island on the port side , amidships . After construction of the ships began , the Naval Air Technical Department ( NATD ) began having second thoughts about the location of the island because it thought that the portside location of the island on Hiryū and Akagi had an adverse impact on airflow over the flight deck . Another issue identified was that the amidships position shortened the available landing area , which had the potential to be problematic in the future as aircraft landing speeds increased with their growing weight . To verify these assumptions , the NATD filmed hundreds of takeoffs and landings aboard Akagi in October – November 1938 and decided to move the island over to the starboard side and further forward , about one-third of the length from the bow . Shōkaku was the furthest advanced by this point and the supporting structure for the bridge had already been built ; rebuilding it would have delayed construction so it was left in place . The changes that had to be made consisted of a 1-meter ( 3 ft 3 in ) widening of the flight deck opposite the island and a corresponding 50-centimeter ( 20 in ) narrowing on the starboard side and the addition of 100 metric tons ( 98 long tons ) of ballast on the port side to re-balance the ship .

The ships had a length of 257.5 meters ( 844 ft 10 in ) overall , a beam of 29 meters ( 95 ft 2 in ) , a draft of 9.32 meters ( 30 ft 7 in ) at deep load , and a moulded depth of 23 m ( 75 ft 6 in ) . They displaced 32,105 metric tons ( 31,598 long tons ) at deep load . Based on hydrodynamic research conducted for the Yamato-class battleships , the Shōkaku class received a bulbous bow and twin rudders , both of which were positioned on the centerline abaft the propellers . Their crew consisted of 1,660 men : 75 commissioned officers , 56 special duty officers , 71 warrant officers and 1,458 petty officers and crewmen , excluding the air group . The Shōkaku-class ships were fitted with four Kampon geared steam turbine sets , each driving one 4.2-meter ( 13 ft 9 in ) propeller , using steam provided by eight Kampon Type Model B water-tube boilers . With a working pressure of 30 kg / cm2 ( 2,942 kPa ; 427 psi ) , the boilers gave the turbines enough steam to generate a total of 160,000 shaft horsepower ( 120,000 kW ) and a designed speed of 34.5 knots ( 63.9 km / h ; 39.7 mph ) . This was the most powerful propulsion system in IJN service , 10,000 and 8,000 shaft horsepower ( 7,500 and 6,000 kW ) more than the Yamato class and the Mogami-class cruiser , respectively . During their sea trials , the sister ships achieved 34.37 – 34.58 knots ( 63.65 – 64.04 km / h ; 39.55 – 39.79 mph ) from 161,290 – 168,100 shaft horsepower ( 120,270 – 125,350 kW ) . They carried 5,000 metric tons ( 4,900 long tons ) of fuel oil which gave them a range of 9,700 nautical miles ( 18,000 km ; 11,200 mi ) at 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . The boiler uptakes were trunked to the ships ' starboard side amidships and exhausted just below flight deck level through two funnels that curved downward . The Shōkaku class was fitted with three 600-kilowatt ( 800 hp ) turbo generators and two 350-kilowatt ( 470 hp ) diesel generators , all operating at 225 volts .

The carriers ' 242.2-meter ( 794 ft 7 in ) flight deck had a maximum width of 29 meters and overhung the superstructure at both ends , supported by pillars . Ten transverse arrestor wires were installed on the flight deck that could stop a 4,000-kilogram ( 8,800 lb ) aircraft . If the aircraft missed those , it could be stopped by one of three crash barricades . Although space and weight were allocated for two aircraft catapults , their development was not completed before the Shōkaku-class ships were sunk . The ships were designed with two superimposed hangars ; the upper hangar was about 200 meters ( 656 ft 2 in ) long and had a width that varied between 18.5 and 24 meters ( 60 ft 8 in and 78 ft 9 in ) . It had a height of 4.85 meters ( 15 ft 11 in ) while the lower hangar was 4.7 meters ( 15 ft 5 in ) high and only usable by fighters . The lower hangar was about 20 meters ( 65 ft 7 in ) shorter than the upper one and its width ranged from 17.5 to 20 meters ( 57 ft 5 in to 65 ft 7 in ) . Together they had a total area of 5,545 square meters ( 59,690 sq ft ) . Each hangar could be subdivided by five or six fire curtains and they were fitted with fire fighting foam dispensers on each side . The lower hangar was also fitted with a carbon dioxide fire suppression system . Each subdivision was provided with a pair of enclosed and armored stations to control the fire curtains and fire fighting equipment .

Aircraft were transported between the hangars and the flight deck by three elevators that took 15 seconds to go from the lower hangar to the flight deck . The forward elevator was larger than the others to allow aircraft that had just landed to be moved below without folding their wings and measured 13 by 16 meters ( 42 ft 8 in × 52 ft 6 in ) . The other elevators were narrower , 13 by 12 meters ( 42 ft 8 in × 39 ft 4 in ) . The ships mounted a crane on the starboard side of the flight deck , abreast the rear elevator . When collapsed , it was flush with the flight deck . The Shōkaku-class carriers were initially intended to have an air group of 96 , including 24 aircraft in reserve . These were envisioned as 12 Mitsubishi A5M ( " Claude " ) monoplane fighters , 24 Aichi D1A2 ( " Susie " ) Type 96 dive bombers , 24 Mitsubishi B5M ( " Mabel " ) Type 97 No. 2 torpedo bombers , and 12 Nakajima C3N Type 97 reconnaissance aircraft . All of these aircraft were either superseded by larger , more modern aircraft or cancelled while the ships were being built , so the air group was revised to consist of 18 Mitsubishi A6M Zero fighters , 27 Aichi D3A ( " Val " ) dive bombers , and 27 Nakajima B5N ( " Kate " ) torpedo bombers . In addition , the ship carried 2 Zeros , 5 " Vals " , and 5 " Kates " as spares for a total of 84 aircraft .

The carriers ' primary anti-aircraft ( AA ) armament consisted of eight twin-gun mounts equipped with 40-caliber 12.7-centimeter ( 5 in ) Type 89 dual-purpose guns mounted on projecting sponsons , grouped into pairs fore and aft on each side of the hull . The guns had a range of 14,700 meters ( 16,100 yd ) , and a ceiling of 9,440 meters ( 30,970 ft ) at an elevation of + 90 degrees . Their maximum rate of fire was fourteen rounds a minute , but their sustained rate of fire was around eight rounds per minute . The ship was equipped with four Type 94 fire-control directors to control the 12.7 cm guns , one for each pair of guns , although the director on the island could control all of the Type 89 guns . Their light AA armament consisted of a dozen triple-gun mounts for license-built Hotchkiss 25 mm ( 1 in ) Type 96 AA guns , six mounts on each side of the flight deck . The gun was the standard Japanese light AA weapon during World War II , but it suffered from severe design shortcomings that rendered it largely ineffective . According to historian Mark Stille , the weapon had many faults including an inability to " handle high-speed targets because it could not be trained or elevated fast enough by either hand or power , its sights were inadequate for high-speed targets , it possessed excessive vibration and muzzle blast " . These guns had an effective range of 1,500 – 3,000 meters ( 1,600 – 3,300 yd ) , and a ceiling of 5,500 meters ( 18,000 ft ) at an elevation of + 85 degrees . The effective rate of fire was only between 110 and 120 rounds per minute because of the frequent need to change the 15-round magazines . The Type 96 guns were controlled by six Type 95 directors , one for every pair of mounts .

In June 1942 , Shōkaku and Zuikaku had their anti-aircraft armament augmented with six more triple 25 mm mounts , two each at the bow and stern , and one each fore and aft of the island . The bow and stern groups each received a Type 95 director . In October another triple 25 mm mount was added at the bow and stern and 10 single mounts were added before the Battle of the Philippine Sea in June 1944 . After the battle , Zuikaku 's anti-aircraft armament was reinforced with 26 single mounts for the 25 mm Type 96 gun , bringing the total of 25 mm barrels to 96 , 60 in 20 triple mounts and 36 single mounts . These guns were supplemented by eight 28-round AA rocket launchers . Each 12-centimeter ( 4.7 in ) rocket weighed 22.5 kilograms ( 50 lb ) and had a maximum velocity of 200 m / s ( 660 ft / s ) . Their maximum range was 4,800 meters ( 5,200 yd ) . Shōkaku was the first carrier in the IJN to be fitted with radar , a Type 21 early-warning radar , mounted on the top of the island around September 1942 . The date of Zuikaku 's installation is unknown , but both ships received a second Type 21 radar in a retractable installation adjacent to the flight deck after October . Before June 1944 , a Type 13 air-search radar was installed on the light tripod mast abaft the island . The Shōkaku-class carriers were also fitted with a Type 91 hydrophone in the bow that was only useful when anchored or moving very slowly .

The Shōkaku class had a waterline belt that consisted of 46 millimeters ( 1.8 in ) of Copper-alloy Non-Cemented armor ( CNC ) that covered most of the length of the ship . The belt was 4.1 meters ( 13 ft 5 in ) high , of which 2 meters ( 6 ft 7 in ) was below the waterline . The lower strake of the armor was backed by 50 millimeters ( 2.0 in ) of Ducol steel . The magazines were protected by 165 millimeters ( 6.5 in ) of New Vickers Non-Cemented ( NVNC ) armor , sloped at an inclination up to 25 ° and tapered to thicknesses of 55 – 75 millimeters ( 2.2 – 3.0 in ) . The flight and both hangar decks were unprotected and the ships ' propulsion machinery was protected by a 65-millimeter ( 2.6 in ) deck of CNC armor . The NVNC armor over the magazines was 132 millimeters ( 5.2 in ) thick and 105 millimeters ( 4.1 in ) thick over the aviation gasoline storage tanks . All of the deck armor was overlaid on a 25-millimeter deck of Ducol steel . The Shōkakus were the first Japanese carriers to incorporate a torpedo belt system . Based on model experiments that began in 1935 , it consisted of a liquid-loaded " sandwich " of compartments outboard of the torpedo bulkhead . The experiments showed that a narrow liquid-loaded compartment was necessary to distribute the force of a torpedo or mine 's detonation along the torpedo bulkhead by spreading it across the full width of the bulkhead and to stop the splinters created by the detonation . Outboard of this were two compartments intended to dissipate the force of the gases of the detonation , including the watertight compartment of the double bottom . The two innermost compartments were intended to be filled with fuel oil that would be replaced by water as it was consumed . The torpedo bulkhead itself consisted of an outer Ducol plate 18 – 30 millimeters ( 0.71 – 1.18 in ) thick that was riveted to a 12-millimeter ( 0.47 in ) plate . The IJN expected the torpedo bulkhead to be damaged in an attack and placed a thin holding bulkhead slightly inboard to prevent any leaks from reaching the ships ' vitals .

Shortly after completion in 1941 , Shōkaku and Zuikaku were assigned to the newly formed Fifth Carrier Division , which was itself assigned to the 1st Air Fleet ( Kidō Butai ) , and began working up to prepare for the Pearl Harbor attack . Due to their inexperience , their air groups were tasked with the less demanding airfield attack role rather than the anti-ship mission allocated to the veteran air groups of the older carriers . Each carrier 's aircraft complement consisted of 18 Zero fighters , 27 D3A dive bombers , and 27 B5N torpedo bombers . The two carriers contributed a total of 12 Zeros and 54 D3As to the first wave on the morning of 8 December 1941 ( Japan time ) ; these latter aircraft struck Wheeler Army Airfield , Hickam Field , and Naval Air Station Ford Island while the fighters strafed Marine Corps Air Station Kaneohe Bay . Only the 54 B5Ns participated in the second wave , striking Ford Island , Hickam Field and Kaneohe Bay again . The Fifth Carrier Division 's aircraft conducted the majority of the attack against the airfields , supplemented only by fighters from the other four carriers . Only one of Shōkaku 's dive bombers was lost during the attack ; in exchange 314 American aircraft were damaged or destroyed . Historian Alan Zimm said the young aviators delivered " a sterling performance , greatly exceeding expectations and outshining the dive bombers from the more experienced carriers . "

In January 1942 , together with Akagi and Kaga of the First Carrier Division , the sisters supported the invasion of Rabaul in the Bismarck Archipelago , as the Japanese moved to secure their southern defensive perimeter against attacks from Australia . Aircraft from all four carriers attacked the Australian base at Rabaul on 20 January ; the First Carrier Division continued to attack the town while the Fifth Carrier Division moved westwards and attacked Lae and Salamaua in New Guinea . They covered the landings at Rabaul and Kavieng on 23 January before returning to Truk before the end of the month . After the Marshalls – Gilberts raids on 1 February , the Fifth Carrier Division was retained in home waters until mid-March to defend against any American carrier raids on the Home Islands .

The sister ships then rejoined the Kido Butai at Staring Bay on Celebes Island in preparation for the Indian Ocean raid . By this time the air groups had been reorganized to consist of 21 each of the A6Ms , D3As and B5Ns . The Japanese intent was to defeat the British Eastern Fleet and destroy British airpower in the region in order to secure the flank of their operations in Burma . Shōkaku and Zuikaku contributed aircraft to the 5 April Easter Sunday Raid on Colombo , Ceylon . Although the civilian shipping had been evacuated from Colombo harbor , the Japanese sank an armed merchant cruiser and a destroyer and severely damaged some of the support facilities . The Kido Butai returned to Ceylon four days later and attacked Trincomalee ; the sisters ' aircraft sank a large cargo ship and damaged the monitor HMS Erebus . In the meantime , the Japanese spotted the light carrier HMS Hermes , escorted by the destroyer HMAS Vampire , and every available D3A was launched to attack the ships . Aircraft from Shōkaku and Zuikaku were the first to attack the Allied ships , both of which were sunk .

En route to Japan , the Fifth Carrier Division was diverted to Truk to support Operation Mo ( the planned capture of Port Moresby in New Guinea ) . While they were preparing for the mission , the Americans intercepted and decrypted Japanese naval messages discussing the operation and dispatched the carriers Yorktown and Lexington to stop the invasion . The Japanese opened Operation Mo by occupying Tulagi , in the Solomon Islands , on 3 May . American land-based aircraft had spotted the light carrier Shōhō escorting the transports of the main invasion force on 6 May , and the American carriers moved west to place themselves in a position to attack it the following morning . Shōhō was quickly located again that morning and sunk . In turn , the Japanese spotted the oiler , Neosho , and her escorting destroyer , which were misidentified as a carrier and a light cruiser . A single dive bomber was lost during the consequent airstrike that sank the destroyer and damaged Neosho badly enough that she had to be scuttled a few days later . Late in the afternoon , the Japanese launched a small airstrike , without any escorting fighters , based on an erroneous spot report . The American carriers were far closer to the Japanese than they realized and roughly in line with their intended target . Alerted by radar , some of the American Combat Air Patrol ( CAP ) was vectored to intercept the Japanese aircraft , the rest being retained near the carriers because of bad weather and fading daylight . The American fighters mauled the Japanese attackers who were forced to call off the attack , but some of the surviving Japanese pilots became confused in the darkness and attempted to verify if the American carriers were their own before being driven off .

On the morning of 8 May , both sides located each other at about the same time and began launching their aircraft about 09 : 00 . The American dive bombers disabled Shōkaku 's flight deck with three hits , but the carrier was able to evade all of the torpedoes . Hidden by a rain squall , Zuikaku escaped detection and was not attacked . In return , the Japanese aircraft badly damaged Lexington with two torpedo and two bomb hits and scored a single bomb hit on Yorktown . The torpedo hits on Lexington cracked one of her avgas tanks , and leaking vapor caused a series of large explosions that caused her to be scuttled . The air groups of the sisters were decimated in the battle , which forced Zuikaku to return to Japan with Shōkaku for resupply and aircrew training , and neither carrier was able to take part in the Battle of Midway in June . En route to Japan , Shōkaku was caught in a severe storm and nearly capsized as the weight of the water used to put out the fires had compromised her stability . Repairs took three months and she was not ready for action until late August .

The American landings on Guadalcanal and Tulagi on 7 August 1942 caught the Japanese by surprise . The next day , the light carrier Ryūjō joined the sister ships in the First Carrier Division , which departed for Truk on 16 August . Having learned the lesson taught at Midway , the IJN strengthened the fighter contingent at the expense of the torpedo bombers assigned to its carriers ; the Shōkaku-class carriers mustered 53 Zeros , 51 D3As , 36 B5Ns and 2 Yokosuka D4Y1-C " Judy " reconnaissance aircraft between them . After an American carrier was spotted near the Solomon Islands on 21 August , the division was ordered to bypass Truk and continue to the south . Ryūjō was detached early on 24 August to move in advance of the troop convoy bound for Guadalcanal and to attack the American air base at Henderson Field if no carriers were located . The two fleet carriers were to stand off , prepared to attack the Americans if found . Ryūjō and her escorts were the first Japanese ships spotted and sunk by the Americans later that morning , but Zuikaku and Shōkaku were not spotted until the afternoon . Shortly before an unsuccessful attack by the pair of Douglas SBD Dauntlesses conducting the search , the sisters launched half of their dive bombers to attack the American carriers Enterprise and Saratoga . Most of the American carrier aircraft were already airborne by this time , either on CAP , returning from search missions , or from sinking Ryūjō , so only a small airstrike was launched in response to the spot report . About an hour after the first Japanese airstrike took off , a second airstrike that included the rest of the dive bombers was launched , but their target location was mistaken and they failed to find the Americans . The first airstrike attacked the two American carriers , scoring one hit on the battleship USS North Carolina and three hits on Enterprise , but they were mauled by the large number of airborne American aircraft and heavy anti-aircraft fire . Uncertain of the damage inflicted on each other , both sides disengaged later that evening .

The First Carrier Division , now including the light carrier Zuihō , departed Truk on 11 October to support the Japanese Army operation to capture Henderson Field on Guadalcanal . At this time , the sisters mustered 54 A6Ms , 45 D3As , and 36 B5Ns between them . Four days later , the Japanese spotted a small American convoy that consisted of a fleet tug towing a gasoline barge and escorted by the destroyer Meredith . Aircraft from Shōkaku and Zuikaku sank the latter , but did not attack the tug . The Japanese and American carrier forces discovered each other in the early morning of 26 October and each side launched air strikes . Shōkaku was badly damaged by six hits from USS Hornet 's dive bombers ; Zuikaku was not spotted or attacked as she was hidden by the overcast conditions , just like at the Battle of the Coral Sea . In exchange , the Japanese crippled Hornet with two torpedoes and three bombs . In addition , two aircraft crashed into the American carrier and inflicted serious damage . Enterprise was also damaged by two bomb hits and a near miss and a destroyer was damaged when it was struck by a B5N . Attacks later in the day further damaged Hornet , which was abandoned and later sunk by Japanese destroyers Makigumo and Akigumo . The Japanese lost nearly half their aircraft that participated in the battle , together with their irreplaceable experienced aircrew . On 2 November , the First Carrier Division was ordered home for repairs and training .

Shōkaku 's repairs continued until March 1943 and Zuikaku , together with the recently repaired Zuihō , sailed for Truk on 17 January to support the impending evacuation of Japanese ground forces from Guadalcanal ( Operation Ke ) . On 29 January , the two carriers flew off 47 Zeros to Rabaul and Kahili Airfield , contributing some of their own aircraft and pilots . Zuihō was then used to cover the evacuation , while Zuikaku remained at Truk , together with the two Yamato-class battleships , acting as a fleet in being threatening to sortie at any time . In May , Shōkaku and Zuikaku were assigned to a mission to counterattack the American offensive in the Aleutian Islands , but this operation was cancelled after the Allied victory on Attu on 29 May 1943 . The sister ships were transferred to Truk in July . In response to the carrier raid on Tarawa on 18 September , the carriers and much of the fleet sortied for Eniwetok to search for the American forces before they returned to Truk on 23 September , having failed to locate them . The Japanese had intercepted some American radio traffic that suggested another attack on Wake Island , and on 17 October , Shōkaku and Zuikaku and the bulk of the 1st Fleet sailed for Eniwetok to be in a position to intercept any such attack , but no attack occurred and the fleet returned to Truk . At the beginning of November , the bulk of their air groups were transferred to Rabaul to bolster the defenses there , just in time to help defend the port against the Allied attack a few days later . They accomplished little there , for the loss of over half their number , before returning to Truk on the 13th . The sisters returned to Japan in December .

In February 1944 , Shōkaku and Zuikaku were transferred to Singapore . On 1 March the carrier divisions were reorganized with the new fleet carrier Taihō replacing Zuihō in the division . The First Carrier Division sailed in mid-May for Tawi-Tawi in the Philippines . The new base was closer to the oil wells in Borneo on which the IJN relied and also to the Palau and western Caroline Islands where the Japanese expected the next American attack ; the location lacked an airfield on which to train the inexperienced pilots and American submarine activity restricted the ships to the anchorage .

The 1st Mobile Fleet was en route to Guimares Island in the central Philippines on 13 June , where they intended to practice carrier operations in an area better protected from submarines , when Vice Admiral Jisaburō Ozawa learned of the American attack on the Mariana Islands the previous day . Upon reaching Guimares , the fleet refueled and sortied into the Philippine Sea where they spotted Task Force 58 on 18 June . At this time , the sister ships mustered 54 Zeros , 60 D4Ys and 36 Nakajima B6N " Jill " torpedo bombers . As the carriers were launching their first airstrike the following morning , Taihō was torpedoed by an American submarine and later sank . Later that morning , Shōkaku was torpedoed by a different submarine , USS Cavalla . The three or four torpedoes started multiple fires in the hangar , which ignited fueling aircraft , in addition to causing heavy flooding . As the bow continued to sink , aircraft and munitions began to slide forward and a bomb in the hangar detonated . This ignited gas and oil fumes which caused a series of four explosions that gutted the ship . Shōkaku sank several minutes later with the loss of 1,263 of her crew . 570 men were rescued by a light cruiser and a destroyer .

In October 1944 , Zuikaku was the flagship of Admiral Jisaburo Ozawa 's decoy Northern Force in Operation Shō-Gō 1 , the Japanese counterattack against the Allied landings on Leyte . At this time , the ship had 28 A6M5 Zero fighters , 16 A6M2 Zero fighter-bombers , 7 D4Y reconnaissance aircraft and 15 B6Ns . On the morning of 24 October , she launched 10 fighters , 11 fighter-bombers , 6 torpedo bombers , and 2 reconnaissance aircraft as her contribution to the airstrike intended to attract the attention of the American carriers away from the other task groups that were to destroy the landing forces . This accomplished little else as the Japanese aircraft failed to penetrate past the defending fighters ; the survivors landed at airfields on Luzon . The Americans were preoccupied dealing with the other Japanese naval forces and defending themselves from air attacks and finally found the Northern Force late that afternoon , but Admiral William Halsey , Jr . , commander of Task Force 38 , decided that it was too late in the day to mount an effective strike . He turned all of his ships north to position himself for an attack .

The American carriers launched an airstrike shortly after dawn ; Zuikaku was struck by three bombs and one torpedo that started fires in both hangars , damaged one propeller shaft , and gave her a 29.5 ° list to port . Fifteen minutes later , the fires were extinguished and the list was reduced to 6 ° by counterflooding . She was mostly ignored by the second wave of attacking aircraft , but was a focus of the third wave that hit her with six more torpedoes and four bombs . The bombs started fires in the hangars , the torpedoes caused major flooding that increased her list , and the order to abandon ship was issued before Zuikaku sank by the stern . Lost with the ship were 49 officers and 794 crewmen , but 47 officers and 815 crewmen were rescued by her escorting destroyers .

The President of Croatia ( Croatian : Predsjednik Hrvatske ) , officially styled the President of the Republic ( Croatian : Predsjednik Republike ) , is the head of state and chief representative of the Republic of Croatia in the country and abroad . The President is the holder of the highest office within the Republic of Croatia ; however , they are not the head of the executive branch . The President maintains regular and coordinated operation and stability of the national government system , and safeguards the independence and territorial integrity of the country . The President has the power to call elections for the Croatian Parliament as well as referendum ( with countersignature of the Prime Minister ) . The President appoints Prime Ministers on the basis of the balance of power in the Parliament , grants pardons and awards decorations and other state awards . The President and Government cooperate in the conducting the foreign policy . In addition , the President is the commander-in-chief of the Croatian Armed Forces . The President appoints the director of the Security and Intelligence Agency with the Prime Minister . The President may dissolve the Parliament as provided by the Constitution . Although enjoying immunity , the President is impeachable for violation of the Constitution . In case of incapability to discharge duties of office , the Speaker of the Parliament assumes the office of acting President until the President resumes duty , or until election of a new President .

The Office of the President of the Republic ( Ured Predsjednika Republike ) consists of the immediate staff of the president of Croatia , as well as support staff reporting to the president . The office is seated in the Presidential Palace in the Pantovčak area of Zagreb . The Constitution of Croatia defines the appearance and use of the presidential standard , flown on buildings of the Office of the President of Croatia , the residence of the president , the transportation vehicles when in use by the president , and in other ceremonial occasions . The President is elected on the basis of universal suffrage , through a secret ballot , for a five-year term . If no candidate in the elections secures more than 50 % of the votes , a runoff election is held . The Constitution of Croatia sets a limit to a maximum of two terms in office . The president-elect is required to take an oath of office before the judges of the Constitutional Court . Franjo Tuđman won the first Croatian presidential elections in 1992 and 1997 . During his time in office , the constitution of 1990 provided for a semi-presidential system . After his death in 1999 , the constitution was amended and much of the presidential powers were transferred to the parliament and the government . Stjepan Mesić won two consecutive terms , in 2000 and in 2005 . Ivo Josipović won the presidential elections held in 2009 – 2010 . Winner of the most recent presidential elections , held in 2014 – 15 , was Kolinda Grabar-Kitarović . She succeeded Josipović on 19 February 2015 .

The President of Croatia and the Government cooperate in the formulation and implementation of Croatia 's foreign policy . This provision of the constitution is an occasional source of conflict between the president and the government . The president decides on the establishment of diplomatic missions and consular offices of the Republic of Croatia abroad , at the Government 's proposal and with the countersignature of the prime minister . The president , following prior countersignature of the prime minister , appoints and recalls diplomatic representatives of the Republic of Croatia , at the proposal of the Government and upon receiving the opinion of an applicable committee of the parliament . The president receives letters of credence and letters of recall from foreign diplomatic representatives .

The President of Croatia is the commander-in-chief of the armed forces of the Republic of Croatia and appoints and relieves military commanders of duty , conforming to applicable legislation . Pursuant to decisions of the parliament , the president declares war and concludes peace . In cases of immediate threats to the independence , unity and existence of the state , the president may order the use of armed forces , even if no state of war is declared , provided that such an order is countersigned by the prime minister . During a state of war , the president may promulgate regulations with the force of law on the basis of , and within the scope of , authority obtained from the parliament . In such circumstances , the president may convene government cabinet meetings and preside over them . If the parliament is not in session , the president is authorized to regulate all matters required by the state of war through regulations carrying the force of law . In case of an immediate threat to the independence , unity and existence of the state , or if the governmental bodies are prevented from performing their constitutional duties regularly , the president may , at the proposal of the prime minister , issue regulations carrying the force of law . Such regulations must also be countersigned by the prime minister to become valid . The president is required to submit regulations that are promulgated thus to the parliament for approval as soon as the parliament may convene , otherwise the regulations become void . The president cooperates with the government directing operation of the Croatian security and intelligence system . The president and the prime minister jointly appoint heads of the security agencies , and the president may attend cabinet meetings , taking part in discussions held at such meetings .

The President of Croatia may dissolve Parliament upon the request of the government if the government proposes a confidence motion to Parliament and the majority of all deputies adopt a motion of no confidence or if Parliament fails to approve government budget 120 days after the budget is proposed in the parliament . That decision must be countersigned by the Prime Minister to become valid . The President may also dissolve Parliament after a motion of no confidence supported by a majority of all deputies has been adopted and a new government cannot be formed within 30 days or if a new government cannot be formed after general elections ( maximum period of 120 days ) . However , the President may not dissolve Parliament at the request of the government if a procedure to determine if the President has violated provisions of the constitution is in progress .

The Office of the President of the Republic ( Croatian : Ured Predsjednika Republike ) consists of the immediate staff of the President of Croatia , as well as support staff reporting to the president . As of May 2008 , the office employed 170 staff , with the maximum staffing level set at 191 by the Regulation on Internal Organisation of the Office of the President of Croatia . In 2009 government budget , the office was allocated 54 million kuna ( c . 7.3 million euro ) . The net monthly salary of the president is 23,500 kuna ( c . 3,170 euro ) . The Office of the President was created by a presidential decree by Franjo Tuđman on 19 January 1991 . The Office is headed by a Chief of Staff ( Croatian : Predstojnik ureda ) , who is appointed by the president . The presidents declare bylaws regulating composition of the office . The office employs advisors to the president and comprises eight departments , four councils , presidential pardon commission and two decorations and awards commissions .

The Presidential Palace ( Croatian : Predsjednički dvori , also referred to by the metonym Pantovčak ) in Zagreb is the official residence of the president . The president does not actually live in the building , as it is used as the Office of the President of Croatia rather than as a residence . The structure covers 3,700 square metres ( 40,000 square feet ) . It had been used as the official residence since then-president Franjo Tuđman moved there following the October 1991 bombing of Banski dvori . In addition to the original building , there is also an 3,500 square metres ( 38,000 square feet ) annex built in 1993 , an ancillary structure housing office security services and a bomb shelter predating the 1990s . The building , formerly known as Villa Zagorje or Tito 's Villa , was designed by architects Vjenceslav Richter and Kazimir Ostrogović and completed in 1964 for the former Yugoslav president Josip Broz Tito .

Presidential elections were held in Croatia for the first time on 2 August 1992 , simultaneously with the 1992 parliamentary elections . Voter turnout was 74.9 % . The result was a victory for Franjo Tuđman of the Croatian Democratic Union ( HDZ ) , who received 57.8 % of the vote in the first round of the elections , ahead of 7 other candidates . Dražen Budiša , the Croatian Social Liberal Party ( HSLS ) candidate and runner-up in the election , received 22.3 % of the vote . The second presidential elections in modern Croatia were held on 15 June 1997 . The incumbent , Franjo Tuđman ran opposed by Zdravko Tomac , the candidate of the Social Democratic Party of Croatia ( SDP ) , and Vlado Gotovac , nominated by the HSLS . Tomac and Gotovac received 21.0 % and 17.6 % of votes respectively in the first round of voting , and Tuđman secured another term . The third presidential elections were held on 24 January 2000 , to fill the office of the President of the Republic , after the incumbent Franjo Tuđman died on 10 December 1999 . The first round of voting saw Stjepan Mesić , candidate of the Croatian People 's Party ( HNS ) in the lead , receiving 41.3 % of votes , followed by Dražen Budiša of the HSLS with 27.8 % of votes and Mate Granić , nominated by the HDZ , receiving 22.6 % of votes . The runoff election , the first in the presidential elections of modern Croatia , was held on 7 February , when Mesić won , picking up 56.9 % of votes . Voter turnout in the first round was 63.0 % and 60.9 % in the runoff . The first round of the fourth presidential elections was held on 2 January 2005 . No candidate secured a first-round victory ; however , the incumbent Mesić enjoyed a substantial lead over other candidates , as he received 48.9 % of votes , and the second and third ranked candidates Jadranka Kosor ( HDZ ) and Boris Mikšić ( independent ) managed only 20.3 % and 17.8 % of voter support respectively . Ultimately , Mesić won reelection , receiving 65.9 % of votes in the runoff held on 16 January . The 2009 – 2010 presidential election was held on 27 December 2009 , with Ivo Josipović ( SDP ) picking up 32.4 % of votes , followed by Milan Bandić ( independent ) , Andrija Hebrang ( HDZ ) and Nadan Vidošević ( independent ) receiving 14.8 % , 12.0 % and 11.3 % of the votes respectively . The second round of voting was held on 10 January 2010 , when Josipović defeated Bandić , receiving 60.3 % of the vote . The first round of the most recent presidential election was held on 28 December 2014 , where Josipović won 38.46 % of the votes , followed by Kolinda Grabar-Kitarović ( HDZ ) who received 37.22 % of ballots . The third was an independent candidate , Ivan Vilibor Sinčić who received 16.42 % of votes , and Milan Kujundžić ( Croatian Dawn – Party of the People ) who was supported by 6.3 % of the votes . The runoff was held on 11 January 2015 , and Grabar-Kitarović won by a margin of approximately one percentage point .

The Socialist Republic of Croatia within SFR Yugoslavia was led by a group of communist party officials , who formed a collective Presidency with the president of the Presidency at its head . The first democratic elections of 1990 did not elect members of the Presidency directly . Rather , the parliament was tasked with filling these positions as it had done in the socialist period . The HDZ won the elections and its leader Tuđman assumed the presidency on 30 May 1990 . On 25 July of the same year , the parliament passed several constitutional amendments , including amendment LXXI , which created the position of President and Vice-Presidents . The Christmas Constitution , passed on 22 December 1990 , established the government as a semi-presidential system and called for presidential elections . Tuđman won the presidential elections in 1992 , and was inaugurated on 12 August 1992 . He was reelected in 1997 , and the Constitution of Croatia was amended the same year . After his death in 1999 , the constitution was amended and much of the presidential powers were transferred to the parliament and the government , creating a parliamentary system . Mesić won two consecutive terms in 2000 on the HNS ticket and in 2005 , the maximum term permitted by the constitution . Josipović , an SDP candidate , won the presidential elections held in 2009 – 2010 . Grabar-Kitarović won the elections of 2014 – 15 and she was voted to become the first woman president of Croatia .

The President of Croatia enjoys immunity — the president may not be arrested , nor can any criminal proceedings be instituted against the president without prior consent from the Constitutional Court . The only case in which immunity does not apply is if the president has been caught in the act of committing a criminal offense , which carries a penalty of imprisonment for more than five years . In such a case the state body that has detained the president must notify the President of the Constitutional Court immediately . The President of Croatia is impeachable for any violation of the Constitution committed in performance of duty . Impeachment proceedings may be initiated by the Parliament of Croatia by a two-thirds majority vote of all members of the parliament . The impeachment of the president is then decided by the Constitutional Court , by a two-thirds majority vote of all its judges . If the Constitutional Court impeaches the president , the president 's term is terminated .

In case of brief incapacitation to execute the office of the President of Croatia due to absence , illness or vacations , the president may transfer his powers to the Speaker of the Croatian Parliament to act as a deputy . The president decides on the revocation of this authority and his return to the office . If the president is prevented from performing his duties for a longer period of time due to illness or other form of incapacitation , and especially if the president is unable to decide on a transfer of powers to a deputy , the Speaker of the parliament becomes the acting president , assuming presidential duty pursuant to a decision of the Constitutional Court , made upon request of the Government . In case of death or resignation submitted to the President of the Constitutional Court and communicated to the Speaker of the parliament , or in cases when the Constitutional Court decides to terminate the presidential term through impeachment , the Speaker of the parliament becomes acting president . In those circumstances , new legislation is countersigned by the prime minister instead of the president and a new presidential election must be held within 60 days . This situation occurred after the death of Franjo Tuđman on 10 December 1999 , when Vlatko Pavletić became the acting president . After the parliamentary elections of 2000 , the role was transferred to Zlatko Tomčić , who filled the office until Stjepan Mesić was elected President of Croatia in 2000 .

Legislation defines the appearance and use of the Presidential Standard of Croatia as a symbol of the President of Croatia , and the appearance and use of the presidential sash as a symbol of honour of the office of the president . The presidential standard is a square , blue field with a thin border of alternating red and white squares on each side . In the centre of the blue field is the main shield of the coat of arms of Croatia with the historical arms of Croatia surrounding the main shield . From left to right , these are the oldest known coats of arms of Croatia , the Republic of Dubrovnik , Dalmatia , Istria and Slavonia , adorned with bands of gold , red and white stripes extending down vertically . Atop the shield there is a Croatian tricolour ribbon with golden letters RH that stand for the Republic of Croatia , executed in Roman square capitals . The presidential standard is flown on buildings of the Office of the President of Croatia , the residence of the president , transportation vehicles when in use by the president , and in other ceremonial occasions . The presidential standard was designed by Miroslav Šutej in 1990 .

The presidential sash is a Croatian tricolour band , trimmed with gold and adorned with the coat of arms of Croatia , which is placed in a white field , with the tricolour at the front . The arms are bordered by oak branches on the left and olive branches on the right . The sash is worn diagonally , over the right shoulder , and is fastened using a square clasp trimmed with golden Croatian interlace . The sash is adorned with the arms used on the presidential standard , although without the ribbon used in the arms . The constitution specifies that the sash is worn on Statehood Day , during awards ceremonies , during the acceptance of letters of credence and in other ceremonial occasions . The presidential sash was not in use since 2000 inauguration of Stjepan Mesić .

Former presidents of the Republic of Croatia are provided with an office and two staff members paid by the state once they leave the office . In addition , former presidents are assigned a driver , an official car and bodyguards . The government of Croatia is required to provide these benefits within 30 days following the end of the term of president , upon a president 's personal request . Stjepan Mesić 's office is located in Grškovićeva Street in Zagreb . The office employs a public-relations advisor and a foreign policy advisor . The office was established in 2010 and assigned an annual budget of 1.3 million kuna ( c . 175,000 euro ) . According to Mesić himself , his new office of the former president shall be at the disposal of Croatian companies to help them expand their market . Since the office has been established , former president Mesić also receives foreign diplomats and visits abroad where he meets officials and delivers lectures on occasion . The rights of the former presidents are defined by a parliamentary Act enacted in 2004 , during the first term of Stjepan Mesić . Before that act was enacted , the constitution provided that the former presidents shall become members of the Chambers of Counties of the Parliament of Croatia for life , unless otherwise requested by the president . This was never exercised in practice , since Franjo Tuđman died in office and the Chamber of Counties was abolished before the end of the first term of Stjepan Mesić .

William Alfred " Bill " Brown , OAM ( 31 July 1912 – 16 March 2008 ) was an Australian cricketer who played 22 Tests between 1934 and 1948 , captaining his country in one Test . A right-handed opening batsman , his partnership with Jack Fingleton in the 1930s is regarded as one of the finest in Australian Test history . After the interruption of World War II , Brown was a member of Don Bradman 's Invincibles , who toured England in 1948 without defeat . In a match in November 1947 , Brown was the unwitting victim of the first instance of " Mankading " . Raised in New South Wales , Brown initially struggled in both work and cricket , before gradually rising through the cricket ranks . He made his first-class debut for New South Wales in the 1932 – 33 season and forced his way into the national side during the 1934 tour of England . When long-term openers Bill Ponsford and Bill Woodfull retired at the end of the tour , Brown and his state opening partner Fingleton took over . After poor form made his selection for the 1938 tour of England controversial , Brown responded with a total of 1,854 runs , including an unbeaten 206 that saved Australia from defeat in the second Test , and was honoured as one of the five Wisden Cricketers of the Year .

The outbreak of the Second World War cost Brown his peak years , which he spent in the Royal Australian Air Force . Cricket resumed in 1945 – 46 and Brown , in Bradman 's absence , captained an Australian eleven in a match that was retrospectively awarded Test status . Brown missed the entirety of the following season because of injury . Upon his return , he was unable to repeat his previous success and was ousted from the opening positions by Arthur Morris and Sid Barnes . Selected for the Invincibles tour , he performed reasonably well in the tour matches but , with Morris and Barnes entrenched as openers , he batted out of position in the middle order during the first two Tests . He struggled and was dropped from the Test team , never to return . Upon returning to Australia , Brown continued playing for Queensland until the end of the 1949 – 50 season . In retirement , Brown briefly served as a Test selector and sold cars and , later , sports goods . In 2000 , he was awarded the Medal of the Order of Australia for his services to cricket . At the time of his death in 2008 , he was Australia 's oldest Test cricketer .

The son of a dairy farmer and hotel owner , Brown was born in Toowoomba , Queensland . Aged three , business failure hit the family , and they moved to Marrickville in inner Sydney . The family 's poor financial position meant that they lived in a one-bedroom home , with Brown and his brother sharing a bed . Educated at Dulwich Hill and Petersham High Schools in Sydney , Brown started playing cricket as a wicket-keeper , before changing his focus to opening the batting . He left high school after two years , but was unable to find regular full-time work amid the Great Depression . In 1929 – 30 , Brown played grade cricket for Marrickville Cricket Club , but was unable to hold down a regular place . He was on the verge of leaving Sydney when an innings of 172 for his Shire team reinvigorated his career . He progressed through the grades and reached the club 's First XI , where he performed steadily to earn selection for New South Wales in 1932 – 33 .

Making his first-class debut for New South Wales in a Sheffield Shield match against Queensland on 11 November 1932 , Brown was run out for a duck without facing a ball , while opening with Jack Fingleton. however , the match ended happily with Brown 's team winning decisively by an innings and 274 runs . The highlights of Brown 's first season were his 79 against South Australia , and 69 against Douglas Jardine 's England . However , neither Harold Larwood nor Bill Voce , the Bodyline spearheads , played in the match . During his first season , Brown earned the ire of Don Bradman , who was displeased with Brown 's poor communication with batting partners when running between the wickets , with the ensuing risk of falling foul of run outs . Brown ended his debut season with 269 runs at 29.88 . The following season , in the opening match of the season against Queensland at Brisbane in November 1933 , Brown made 154 , partnering Bradman in a stand of 294 in just three hours . This set up at total of 4 / 494 declared and an innings victory . He followed this with 205 in an opening stand of 340 against Victoria . Brown amassed two further half-centuries to end with 878 runs for the season at an average of 67.53 , which placed him second behind Bradman in the first-class run-scoring aggregates . When the selectors met to discuss the tour party for the 1934 tour of England , Brown and Fingleton had similar figures , but with the incumbent Victorian opening pair of Bill Ponsford and captain Bill Woodfull firmly in place , there was only one spot available for a reserve opener . The selectors asked Bradman — Australia 's leading batsman — for advice . Bradman nominated Brown , believing that his style was better suited to English pitches . A disappointed Fingleton disagreed and wrote to Woodfull , saying " You have chosen chaps who do not like fast bowling " . Brown justified his selection before departure with a pair of 90s in two matches for a combined Australian XI against Tasmania .

Brown missed selection for the tour opener against Worcestershire — in which Australia traditionally fielded its first-choice XI — before making his debut in the second match against Leicestershire . He made a century against Cambridge University in his second tour match , making 105 in the middle order . Batting at number 3 against Lancashire in the final tour match before the Tests , Brown scored 119 . After compiling 351 runs at 43.88 in the opening tour matches , Brown was selected for the Test side . Playing in all five Tests , Brown made his debut at Trent Bridge , Nottingham and scored 22 in his first innings . After Australia lost three early wickets in the second innings , Brown scored 73 to help secure a winning lead . Brown then made a century while opening the batting against Northamptonshire , and an unbeaten 62 in the second innings , guiding Australia to an eight-wicket victory over the Gentlemen of England . He was promoted to open in the Second Test at Lord 's with Woodfull , after Ponsford was unavailable due to illness . At the home of cricket , Brown made his maiden Test century , scoring 105 in the first innings . His innings was an unhurried one ; he tended to wait for the ball to come onto the bat rather than attacking the leather . However , he was unable to prevent Australia from being forced to follow-on and made two the match ended in an innings defeat . He was retained as opener upon Ponsford 's return for the Third Test , with Woodfull dropping down the order in a reshuffled batting line-up . Brown made 72 and a duck . The match ended in a draw after both teams passed 490 in the first innings .

It was the start of a barren month for Brown , who passed 30 only once in 11 first-class innings , totalling 171 runs at 15.55 . He ended the unproductive sequence with an unbeaten 100 against Nottinghamshire . This came after Bill Voce had bowled Bodyline at the start of the Australian innings , in contravention of a prior agreement . After an Australian protest , Voce missed the remainder of the match and Brown 's innings was punctuated by angry heckling by the local supporters . He was unable to pass 20 in the final two Tests and ended the series with 300 runs at 33.33 . Despite his inability to make a substantial contribution , Australia won the Fifth Test by 562 runs to reclaim the Ashes 2 – 1 . Brown scored three consecutive half-centuries after the Tests and ended with 1287 first-class runs at 36.77 . Brown 's strong form continued upon returning to Australia , compiling 683 runs at 45.53 , including three centuries , to be the second highest run-scorer for the 1934 – 35 domestic season . He started the season with the testimonial match for Woodfull , who retired upon returning to Australia . Brown scored 102 in the second innings to help Woodfull 's men defeat Victor Richardson 's XI by seven wickets . He started the Sheffield Shield season with 11 in an innings victory over South Australia , and scored fifties in three consecutive matches , before rounding off the season with 116 in the final match against Western Australia .

With the retirement of Woodfull and Ponsford after the tour of England , Brown and his state partner Fingleton became Australia 's opening pair for the 1935 – 36 tour of South Africa . It was one of the most productive phases of both men 's career . In Australia 's warm-up match against Western Australia before sailing across the Indian Ocean , Brown struck 55 in an innings win . Brown started the tour consistently , scoring 148 , 58 , 31 and 28 not on out in the three warm-up matches . In the first match of the tour against Natal , both Brown and Fingleton made centuries ; the first two matches were won by an innings and the third by ten wickets . Brown scored three consecutive half-centuries in the first two Tests in Durban and Johannesburg . Australia won the first by nine wickets and were 124 runs from victory with eight wickets in hand in the second when bad light stopped play . In the Third Test at Cape Town , the pair set a new Australian opening record of 233 , which laid the foundation for a large Australian total and an innings victory . It was Australia 's first double-century opening stand in Test cricket , and remains an Australian Test record for the first wicket against South Africa . Brown posted 121 , his highest Test score at the time . He scored 34 and 84 in Australia 's only innings of the Fourth and Fifth Tests in Johannesburg and Durban , making solid opening stands with Fingleton , who scored three consecutive centuries . The pair laid the platform for two further innings victories , as Australia took the five-Test series 4 – 0 . His compiled 417 runs at 59.57 for the series . Brown scored a further four fifties in the remaining tour matches to end with 1065 runs at 62.65 .

In 1936 , Brown accepted a coaching position and employment as a car salesman to move back to Queensland , representing his state of birth from 1936 – 37 onwards . He was appointed captain the following season . Brown started the new season strongly , scoring 111 for Victor Richardson 's XI in a testimonial match against Bradman 's XI , in the opening match of summer . In November , Brown played for an Australian XI and Queensland in two matches against the touring England team , scoring 71 and 74 the two drawn matches . His 1936 – 37 season was interrupted by injury and he appeared in only the Third and Fourth Tests against England . They were relatively unsuccessful , yielding only 95 runs at 23.75 in four innings without passing fifty . Nevertheless , Australia won the two matches . His debut season for Queensland was moderately successful , with 557 runs at an average of 37.13 , including one century and four fifties . Brown did not taste victory with his home state during the season ; the closest Queensland came was a one-wicket loss to New South Wales .

Brown 's form started to deteriorate in 1937 – 38 ; he scored only 400 runs at 36.36 for the season . Queensland played five matches under his watch , losing three , and went without victory . Of the two draws , one was washed out and in the other , Queensland hung on with two wickets in hand when time ran out . Although Brown compiled two centuries , he was only twelfth in the aggregates during an Australian season with no international tours . As a result , his selection for the 1938 tour to England was criticised in some quarters . Brown started the tour patchily , although Australia won their first four matches by an innings . In his first four innings , Brown passed five only once , scoring 72 against Oxford University . He returned to form with an unbeaten 194 against Northamptonshire , helping to set up an innings win , before adding another 96 in the next match against Surrey . Brown entered the Tests with 504 runs at 56.00 in the lead-in tour matches . After adding 48 in Australia 's first innings of 411 , Brown scored 133 in the second innings of the First Test at Nottingham after the tourists were forced to follow-on , helping Bradman ( 144 not out ) to save the Test . The Australians reached 6 / 427 in the second innings when the match ended in the draw .

Brown 's most celebrated innings came in the Second Test at Lord 's , carrying his bat to score 206 in the first televised Test match . England batted first and amassed 494 , largely on the back of Wally Hammond 's 240 . Brown featured in an opening stand of 69 before Fingleton was dismissed . Hedley Verity then bowled Bradman for 18 , leaving the score at 101 , before Stan McCabe fell after a quickfire 38 with the score at 3 / 152 . Brown registered his century in 193 minutes , during an innings highlighted by his driving on both sides of the wicket . After Lindsay Hassett was dismissed for 56 following a 134-run partnership , Australia reached stumps at 5 / 299 , with Brown on 140 . The following day , Brown set about ensuring that Australia would avoid the follow on , featuring in an aggressive eighth-wicket stand with tailender Bill O 'Reilly . The pair added 85 runs in just 46 minutes , with Brown recalling " It was a nice day , and a nice wicket . O 'Reilly came in , and I told him I 'd take the quicks — Wellard and Farnes — and Tiger [ O 'Reilly ] took Verity . " Brown continued past his double century and remained unbeaten on 206 from just 375 minutes when his last partner fell , leaving Australia all out for 422 . Brown 's innings was the 100th century by an Australian against England , and the highest Test score for batsman carrying his bat ; it stood until Glenn Turner made an unbeaten 223 in 1972 . Ray Robinson quipped that Brown 's performance " did not cause smoke to rise from the back of those [ television ] sets but the charm of his style gave viewers a favourable impression of Australian batsmanship " . They went on to draw the match , which was crucial in Australia 's eventual retention of the Ashes . Brown 's uninterrupted batting meant that he was on the field from the first morning until late on the fourth day .

Immediately after making his highest Test score at Lord 's , Brown recorded his highest first-class score of 265 not out against Derbyshire , in six hours of batting . Australia amassed 4 / 441 declared and won by an innings and 234 runs . He then made it three centuries in a row , scoring 101 against Warwickshire , setting up another innings win . The Third Test was washed out without a ball being bowled , and Australia won the Fourth Test by five wickets in a low-scoring match to retain The Ashes . Brown made 22 and nine as Australia scored 242 and 5 / 107 . It was the start of a quiet month for the opener , who scored only 194 runs in eight completed innings . He was the top Australian scorer in both innings of the Fifth Test at The Oval , scoring 69 and 15 . This was the match in which Len Hutton scored a world Test record 364 and England compiled 7 / 903 , before winning by an innings and 579 runs , which remains a world record winning margin in a Test match . Throughout the Tests , Brown aggregated 512 runs at 73.14 , totaling 1854 runs at 59.57 in all first-class matches for the tour . This placed Brown second to Bradman in both aggregates and average . He was named as one of the Wisden Cricketers of the Year for his performances in 1938 . Wisden described him as a " cricketer of remarkable powers " who batted with " a charming skill , coolness , thoughtfulness and certainty " .

Upon returning to Australia , Brown scored 1,057 runs at 105.70 in the 1938 – 39 Australian season , including 990 at 110.00 in six Sheffield Shield matches . Brown started the season well , scoring 84 as Queensland amassed 501 against New South Wales . His old state were still 27 runs from making Queensland bat again , but time ran out with one wicket intact , with Brown yet to taste victory with his new state . Nevertheless , he continued to perform strongly as passed 50 in each of his first four innings . In the fourth of these , he was out for 99 and then declared at 5 / 510 to leave Victoria a victory target of 319 . Brown then narrowly missed out on a milestone for the second time in the match when Victoria scraped home by three wickets to deny him a maiden victory with his home state . In the next match , he carried his bat to make an unbeaten 174 against South Australia at the Adelaide Oval , as his team fell to an innings defeat . After twelve matches for his state of origin , Brown was still to end up on the winning side . This changed in the next match against New South Wales . After their opponents had made 214 , Brown top-scored with 95 as Queensland replied with 200 . New South Wales made 264 to leave Brown 's men 279 for victory . The captain led the way , combining with Geoff Cook in Queensland 's then record first-wicket partnership of 265 . Brown was out for 168 , but his team held on to secure an eight-wicket victory over New South Wales . It was Brown 's first win in Queensland colours . He then scored 81 in a ten-wicket defeat to South Australia , before adding a second victory , this time over Victoria . Brown ended the season by amassing 215 as Queensland reached 7 / 575 declared before completing an innings win . Brown topped the aggregates with 1,057 runs and was the only player to pass 1,000 runs for the season .

Brown had another strong campaign in the following year , netting 857 runs at 61.21 , including three centuries . Despite this , Queensland had another poor season , losing five of their six matches . Brown started the season strongly , scoring 87 and 137 , but he was unable to stop New South Wales winning the opening match by three wickets . After a seven-wicket loss to Victoria , Brown made 156 , but was unable to prevent an innings defeat to South Australia . After an innings loss to New South Wales , he made 111 to steer Queensland to its only win of the season , a two-wicket victory over South Australia . He finished the season with 35 and 97 as The Rest of Australia lost to New South Wales by two wickets .

Due to World War II , cricket in Australia was scaled down and in a shortened season in 1940 – 41 , Brown made 307 runs at 30.70 in five matches , with two half-centuries . In 1941 – 42 , he played one match , his last first-class fixture during the war , scoring 56 and 69 in a narrow 19-run win over New South Wales . Brown was a flight lieutenant with the Royal Australian Air Force , serving in New Guinea and the Philippines during the Second World War , losing his prime years from the age of 27 to 33 . During the pre-war years , he had averaged 49.02 in Test cricket . First-class cricket resumed in 1945 – 46 after the Allied victory , and Brown began the post-war phase of his career with a steady season , scoring 604 runs at 46.46 with five half-centuries in seven matches . This placed him second to Sid Barnes in the run-scoring aggregates . His best effort was a 98 against South Australia , denied a century by a run out . Queensland lost more than they won , with two victories and three losses . At the end of the season , Brown captained an Australian side on a tour of New Zealand , and all five matches resulted in convincing victories .

Australia played its inaugural Test against New Zealand in Wellington , a match that was retrospectively given Test status . The uncertain status of the tour saw the players wearing blazers that were labelled ABC ( Australian Board of Control ) , rather than the Australian coat of arms . Brown led from the front , topping the tour aggregates and averages , with 443 runs at 73.83 in five matches . In the opening tour match against Auckland , Brown elected to bat and opened with 68 as Australia amassed 579 and took victory by an innings and 180 runs . This was followed by a match against Canterbury in Christchurch , in which Brown top-scored with 137 . This laid the foundation for a total of 8 / 415 and another innings victory . Brown made his second consecutive century in the third match against Otago at Carisbrook in Dunedin , again top-scoring with 106 in an eight-wicket victory . Brown made 34 in the final tour match as Australia defeated Wellington in another innings victory . The tour culminated in a match against New Zealand at the Basin Reserve in Wellington . With regular captain Don Bradman missing , Brown led a team that included seven Test debutants . The hosts won the toss and elected to bat first on a wet wicket , which came about after a week of rain before the match . New Zealand managed to reach 4 / 37 at lunch , before the sun emerged and caused the wicket to turn into a sticky with unpredictable bounce . Leg spinner Bill O 'Reilly — in his last Test — and debutant Ernie Toshack , took 5 / 14 and 4 / 12 respectively as New Zealand were bowled out for only 42 , losing their last six wickets for five runs . In reply , Australia were 1 / 9 when Ken Meuleman was dismissed . Having been dropped on 13 , Brown then combined in a 109-run first-wicket stand with Barnes , before falling for the innings top-score of 67 . It was the only partnership for the Test that went beyond 32 . Barnes ' dismissal triggered a collapse of 6 / 57 , prompting Brown to declare Australia 's innings closed at 8 / 199 . Australia then dismissed New Zealand for 54 in the second innings in just two hours , resulting in victory by an innings and 54 runs in just two days . As the hosts ' batsmen fell quickly , many of the Australian bowlers had limited opportunities . With one wicket left in the match , Brown used the toss of a coin to determine which of the debutants Colin McCool and Ian Johnson would bowl in Tests for the first time . McCool was given the ball and ended the match on his second delivery . Brown 's solitary Test as captain makes him the first and the only native Queenslander to have led Australia .

Brown returned to first-class cricket in 1947 – 48 , scoring 192 runs at 38.40 in the first three matches of the season . The season saw an Indian tour of Australia . The selectors initially dropped Barnes to pair Brown with Morris to open the batting . Apart from two Tests during the 1936 – 37 season against England , Brown had not played Test cricket on Australian soil . He had only one opportunity with the bat in the First Test in Brisbane , making 11 as India fell to an innings defeat . It was to be his only innings and Test match on his home ground . Brown 's participation in the series was overshadowed by his controversial run out by Indian left arm orthodox spinner Vinoo Mankad in the Second Test at the Sydney Cricket Ground in December 1947 . Brown was run out for 18 , when in the act of delivering the ball , Mankad held on to it and whipped the bails off at the non-striker 's end . Brown was well out of his crease while he was backing-up the striker , so that he could get a head start in case he attempted a run . This was the second time during the season that Mankad had dismissed Brown in this fashion — as he had previously done so a match against an Australian XI in November . On that occasion , Mankad had warned Brown before running him out . The local press strongly accused Mankad of being unsportsmanlike , although some Australians — including Bradman — defended Mankad 's actions . For his part , Brown took full blame and made light of the incident through humorous gestures in later matches , which referred to the event . After this incident , if a batsman is given out this way , he is said to have been " Mankaded " .

The dismissal ended another low-scoring innings , and Australia batted only once in a shortened match . Brown was omitted from the team in favour of Barnes for the next two Tests . Morris — who had established himself as one of Australia 's first-choice opening batsmen during Brown 's injury layoff during the previous season — was rested for the Fifth Test as the Australian Board trialled potential candidates for the 1948 tour of England . Morris was omitted after losing a coin toss to Barnes . Brown partnered Barnes , making 99 in the first innings before being run out . Brown had survived a confident appeal for caught behind before he had scored , and Barnes was convinced that his partner had edged the ball . Barnes claimed that had Brown failed to make an impact in the innings , he would have been overlooked for the 1948 tour . During the first innings , Brown captained Australia while Bradman was absent with fibrositis . The tourists fell for 331 , with debutants Sam Loxton and Doug Ring taking three wickets apiece . India eventually fell to another innings defeat , so Brown did not have another opportunity to score a Test century on home soil . His Test aggregate in Australia stood at 223 runs at only 33.86 , in contrast to his away average of 1,369 runs at 50.70 . His first-class batting average of 43.58 for the season was inferior to that of Barnes and Morris , both of whom averaged more than 50 .

In any case , Brown had done enough to be chosen to tour England with the Invincibles in 1948 , although Barnes and Morris were the first-choice opening combination . Brown made a strong start in the tour matches preceding the Tests . In the fifth fixture , which was against Cambridge University , Brown top-scored with 200 in an innings victory . In the following match against Essex , Brown combined with Bradman in a second-wicket partnership of 219 in 90 minutes , ending with 153 as Australia scored a world-record 721 runs in one day . Australia proceeded to another innings victory , and Brown completed his third century in as many innings with 108 against Oxford University . He preceded to add a fourth century in less than three weeks , with 122 against Nottinghamshire , and made an unbeaten 81 against Hampshire . In contrast , middle-order batsman Neil Harvey had struggled in the initial stages of his first tour of England , failing to pass 25 in his first six innings . Thus , Brown gained selection in the First Test at Trent Bridge , batting out of position in the middle order , whereas Harvey was dropped despite making a century in Australia 's most recent Test against India .

Brown made 17 in his only innings as Australia won by eight wickets . Between Tests , Brown scored 113 in a slow innings against Yorkshire to retain his middle-order position for the Second Test at Lord 's . He was unable to replicate the Test centuries he made in the preceding tours , scoring 24 and 32 . It was to be his last Test , as Sam Loxton top-scored with 159 not out against Gloucestershire in the match before the Third Test , ousting Brown from his middle-order position . Barnes was injured in the Third Test , but Brown was not recalled for the Fourth Test ; instead , Lindsay Hassett was promoted to open with Morris , while the teenaged Harvey came into the middle-order and struck 112 . Brown then scored 140 against Derbyshire immediately after the Fourth Test , in a dour display that displeased spectators , and then scored consecutive centuries against Kent and the Gentlemen of England after the Tests . He ended with eight centuries and a total of 1,448 runs on the tour at an average of 57.92 , behind only Bradman , Hassett and Morris , with the 200 against Cambridge University his highest score . Brown took 4 / 16 against the South of England in his only bowling assignment of the tour . It was his best career bowling figures , having amassed only six wickets in his first-class career . In three visits to England , Brown scored 18 centuries .

Upon returning to Australia , Bradman retired and Barnes took a break from cricket , thereby opening two vacancies in the Test team . Brown had a reasonable domestic season in 1948 – 1949 to press his claim for a Test recall . He scored 626 runs at 41.73 , the sixth highest aggregate of the season , with a century and three fifties . Queensland won two and lost three games . Despite this , the 37-year-old Brown was not named in the touring party for the Test tour of South Africa in 1949 – 50 . In the absence of the Test players , Brown scored 507 runs at 50.70 in the Sheffield Shield season , with a top score of 190 , making him the third highest run-getter . In their first five matches of the season , Queensland lost three times , before Brown 's 190 in the last match against South Australia set up a nine-wicket win . It was his only century of the season after previously falling for 94 twices . With his opportunities diminishing , he retired after captaining the Australian Second XI to New Zealand on an end-of-season tour , during which the team went undefeated . Most of the matches were not first-class but Brown scored his final first-class century against Otago , scoring 184 in an innings victory . He had been less effective in his later years , averaging 38.29 in Tests following World War II .

Brown was regarded as a cautious starter who was reluctant to use his full array of strokes . He had an upright stance and was known for his trademark leg glancing and placement of the ball . He hooked occasionally and scored the majority of his off-side runs with the cut shot . Johnnie Moyes said that " even when slow , he never wearied , as some do , because his style was cultured and free from jarring faults " . Moyes felt that Brown 's superior record on English soil was a result of the crowd attitude , which was more respectful . At Australian grounds , impatient spectators who disliked Brown 's cautious batting frequently heckled him , blaming Brown for delaying Bradman 's arrival to the crease . Moyes felt that the more serene English gallery allowed Brown to play to his game plan without hastening to placate impatient spectators . " A placid chap was Brown , and he liked to play in peaceful surroundings . When on the job he was as emotionless as a stoic . " Moyes said that Brown was " always cool and thoughtful , he preferred finesse to force " . The English journalist Neville Cardus commented " His cricket is perpetually keeping an appointment leisurely with moments to spare . Does the bat have an engagement this over with a half-volley ? Very well , then , put it down in the book . We 'll be there for it . Plenty of time . " Bradman also noted Brown 's ability to quickly get into position to play the ball , writing " One hallmark of good batting is that the player appears to have plenty of time in which to play his strokes . Bill Brown was an outstanding case of one who never seemed to be in a hurry for any stroke . " Ray Robinson said that Brown was " the most serene batsman I ever saw play for Australia " . Robinson said that " for artistry , Brown 's leg-glancing could be mentioned in the same breath as Archie Jackson 's " . Brown 's placid nature extended to his observations of modern cricket — he disliked the emotional displays made by contemporary players .

Brown 's partnership with Fingleton was regarded as one of the great opening pairings in Australian Test cricket history . In ten Tests as an opening combination , the pair averaged 63.75 for the first wicket , higher than any other Australian duo with more than 1000 runs . Brown was known for his self-effacing nature and was well liked among teammates and opponents alike . Of his batting , Brown joked that " My wife said you could always tell when I was batting by the number of people leaving the ground " . During a domestic match at the Adelaide Oval in December 1938 , he deflected a ball onto his stumps without dislodging a bail . He added a further 147 runs to end unbeaten on 174 , eternally apologising for his luck . In addition to his batting , Brown was a highly regarded fieldsman known for his fitness . He developed his skills through persistent training with professional sprinters in order to improve his anticipation and speed off the mark . Brown often fielded at slip or in the covers . With Australia boasting the leg spin pairing of O 'Reilly and Grimmett in the 1930s , close-catchers were frequently used . Along with Fingleton , Brown often fielded in the leg trap position .

In 1940 , Brown married Barbara Hart , a receptionist . The couple had three sons , whom Brown self-deprecatingly noted were " well spaced ... like my centuries " . Outside cricket , Brown worked in a variety of jobs . When Bradman relocated from New South Wales to South Australia in 1935 , Brown took his job at the men 's clothing store FJ Palmer . Following his relocation to Queensland , Brown was a Brisbane car salesman , selling Chevrolets for Egars , later running a sports store . Brown was a Queensland selector from 1950 – 51 to 1959 – 60 , and an Australian selector in 1952 – 53 after defeating New South Wales ' Chappie Dwyer in an election . He was the first Queenslander in 23 years to serve as a national selector . His brief tenure as a national selector was marked by abuse and harassment from parochial Queenslanders , upset that he did not include his fellow statesmen in the Test team . Brown 's sports store was vandalised and he resigned as a selector within a year . In 1992 , Brown was elected a life member of the Queensland Cricket Association , and in 2000 was awarded the Medal of the Order of Australia for his services to cricket .

Upon Bradman 's death in February 2001 , Brown became the oldest living Australian Test cricketer , greatly amused by the fame that came with the title . Highly regarded by Australian cricketers of the modern era , Steve Waugh invited Brown to present Test debutant Adam Gilchrist with his baggy green . The humble Brown was surprised , thinking himself an unworthy choice . Waugh disagreed , opining that " Bill is a baggy green icon who represents all that is good about playing for your country . He is humble , self-effacing and respectful , proud to have been afforded the honour of being an Australian Test cricketer , and a man who always looks for the positive in people . " In March 2008 , Brown died in Brisbane at the age of 95 . He was the last surviving Invincible to have played Test cricket before World War II and his death leaves only four living members of Bradman 's 1948 team .

Leonard Shaun Goater MBE ( born 25 February 1970 ) is a Bermudian footballer who is now retired . He played as a striker for a number of English clubs in the 1990s and 2000s . He is currently assistant manager at New Mills . Goater 's first professional club was Manchester United , but he did not reach the first team , making his League debut in 1989 after moving to Rotherham United . He played for Rotherham for seven years before moving to Bristol City in 1996 . Two years later he moved to Manchester City for a fee of £ 400,000 . He is most well known for his time at Manchester City , where he scored over 100 goals between 1998 and 2003 , finishing as the club 's top scorer for four consecutive seasons . After leaving City , Goater had spells with Reading , Coventry City and Southend United , before retiring in May 2006 . He represented Bermuda 36 times , scoring 32 goals .

Goater was born in the Bermudian capital Hamilton , living with his mother Lynette , his grandmother and two aunts . His introduction to English football came in April 1987 when he was invited to join the Saltus Grammar School football and basketball tour . He spent two weeks playing against various English high school teams , including the Leicester City youth team . At the age of 17 , he left home to further his education in the United States , where he had a soccer scholarship at Columbia High School , New Jersey . Whilst home in Bermuda during his Thanksgiving break , Goater was spotted by scouts from Manchester United , who invited him to England for a trial . With encouragement from his mother , who was a former football player herself , Goater accepted , forfeiting his scholarship by doing so . At this time , Goater did not play as a striker , but instead played as a creative midfielder .

Goater 's trial resulted in the offer of a professional contract , but he did not break into the first team . In 1989 , Goater signed for Rotherham United in order to play first team football . At this time , Goater suffered homesickness , finding it difficult to adapt to the English climate : " It took me a good two years to get used to life in England . At first I thought the sun never shone and it wasn 't for me . " However , he gradually got used to living in England , and over the course of seven seasons at Rotherham he gained a reputation as a reliable lower division striker , scoring 86 goals in 262 appearances , with a winner 's medal for the 1996 Auto Windscreens Shield the highlight . A 1992 League Cup tie against Everton gave Goater his first experience of playing against a Premier League team . In the first leg , Goater scored the only goal of the game as Rotherham won 1 – 0 . However , Everton won the return leg 3 – 0 and Rotherham were eliminated . In 1993 , Goater also had a brief loan spell at Notts County , though he made only one appearance for the Nottingham club due to a work permit problem . Towards the end of the 1995 – 96 season , Goater had a disagreement with Rotherham manager Archie Gemmill , and decided his future lay elsewhere .

In the 1995 – 96 close season , Goater received offers from Spanish club Osasuna and newly formed South Koreans Suwon Samsung Bluewings , but having recently married , he decided to stay in England . Shortly after , he moved to Bristol City for a fee of £ 175,000 . Goater 's Bristol City debut came against Gillingham . Goater scored , but Bristol City lost 3 – 2 . City finished the season in fifth , qualifying for the playoffs , but lost to Brentford . The following season Bristol City were pushing for promotion into the First Division , and Goater scored regularly , eventually being named in the PFA Team of the Year for the division . In a little under two years with the Bristol City , he scored 45 goals in 81 appearances . On 26 March 1998 , transfer deadline day , Goater signed for Manchester City , who paid Bristol City £ 400,000 for his services .

Goater joined Manchester City at a turbulent point in their history , with newly appointed manager Joe Royle battling to save the club from relegation to Second Division . Goater scored three goals in the seven remaining matches of the 1997 – 98 season , but this was not enough to prevent the club from being relegated to the third tier of English Football for the first time ever . Fans were initially sceptical as to Goater 's ability , but as goals were scored supporters were gradually won over , creating a song in his honour , " Feed The Goat And He Will Score " ( to the tune Cwm Rhondda ) . The 1998 – 99 season saw Goater score 21 goals , finishing the season as Manchester City 's top goalscorer . The last of these was the winning goal in a play-off semi-final against Wigan Athletic , sending Manchester City to Wembley Stadium for a playoff final which saw City promoted after a penalty shootout . The 1999 – 2000 season was even more successful for Goater . He was the club 's top goal score again , this time with 29 goals , and was named Manchester City 's Player of the Year by the supporters after Manchester City were promoted for the second successive year . In the summer , Goater was awarded the freedom of Bermuda , with 21 June declared as " Shaun Goater Day " on the island . The following season , Goater made his first appearance in top flight football at the age of 30 , though injury and the presence of new signings Paulo Wanchope and former World Player of the Year George Weah meant he had to wait three months to do so . Again established in the first team , Goater was Manchester City 's top goalscorer for the third consecutive season , but his 11 goals could not save the team from relegation .

During the 2000 – 01 close season , upheaval took place at Manchester City , with manager Royle departing to be replaced by Kevin Keegan . In the 2001 – 02 season , Goater became the first Manchester City player since Francis Lee in 1972 to score more than 30 goals in a season . City were promoted as champions , and he was the club 's top scorer for the fourth time in a row , as well as being the top scorer in the division . Over the summer of 2001 – 02 , there was speculation that Goater would be transferred , as Manchester City had twice broken their transfer record by buying strikers Jon Macken and Nicolas Anelka . Goater stayed , but opportunities were limited . He started just 14 games , but scored seven goals , including his 100th for the club , which came in a derby match against local rivals Manchester United . In February 2003 , Goater struck against the same opposition to score the fastest goal by a substitute in Premier League history , just 9 seconds after coming onto the pitch . He also scored a goal that would have won City the match , but it was disallowed .

Shortly before the end of the 2002 – 03 season , Goater announced his intention to leave Manchester City when the season finished in order to seek regular first team football . In his final match for Manchester City , he was asked to captain the side in Manchester City 's final game at Maine Road . In total , Goater scored 103 goals in 212 appearances for Manchester City . Since ending his footballing career , Goater has been critical of both Kevin Keegan , who he claims never praised him and Nicolas Anelka , who he feels wanted to be ' the daddy ' of Manchester City .

Goater moved to Reading on 1 August 2003 . Reading chairman John Madejski described the transfer as " the biggest in Reading Football Club 's history " , but Goater 's time there was not a happy one . Shortly after Goater 's arrival , Reading manager Alan Pardew left for West Ham United , and Pardew 's replacement , Steve Coppell , did not regard Goater as part of his plans . In his second and final season at Reading , Goater played just four times , and was loaned to Coventry City . Goater then considered retirement , but instead moved to League One club Southend United for a final season as a professional . The move , a free transfer , was completed on 3 August 2005 . At Southend , Goater acted as a mentor for young striker Freddy Eastwood , and contributed towards a second successive promotion for the Shrimpers , scoring 11 goals . His final appearance before retirement was on 6 May 2006 , when Southend played Bristol City , one of Goater 's former clubs . The crowd included an estimated 400 Manchester City fans who travelled to Southend to mark the occasion .

After retiring , Goater returned to Bermuda , receiving an official welcome from the Premier of Bermuda Alex Scott on his arrival . A week later , Southend played the Bermuda national team in an appreciation game for their former striker . Goater has expressed a wish to enter coaching following his retirement , and studied for the UEFA B coaching licence in 2005 . Since 2003 , Goater has organised the annual Shaun Goater Grass-roots Soccer Festival , a football coaching event for children in Bermuda . On 14 September 2006 , Goater and the United Soccer Leagues announced that Bermuda would receive a professional football team that would play in the third division of American football , the USL Second Division . Goater had roles as both a director and player of the team , the Bermuda Hogges . Goater left Bermuda Hogges in 2008 , to concentrate on youth coaching with North Village Rams in his home town . Goater and three other partners in the Bermuda-based East End Group Limited announced an amalgamation with Telecommunications Networks Limited ( now renamed East End Telecom ) on 9 November 2007 , which added to the group 's two other business subsidiaries , East End Asphalt and East End Aviation . Goater serves as the group 's Business Development Manager .

Goater has also played for the Bermudian national team 36 times , scoring 32 goals , though due to Bermuda 's lowly standing in world football he never played in a major international tournament . He made his first international appearance at the age of 17 against Canada . During the 1992 – 93 season , Goater missed eight weeks of the club season in order to represent his country in qualifying for the 1994 World Cup . However , Bermuda finished bottom of a group containing El Salvador , Canada and Jamaica . His final appearance was in June 2004 against El Salvador . When playing for Bermuda , Goater was often the only professional player in the team . Bermudian journalist Chris Gibbons described the difference between Goater and his team-mates : " He 's a class above every other player on the island . Before he went to England he was just quick , but now he 's a totally different player , a lot more aggressive and a much better header of the ball . The problem has been that he sets up chances for the others without them being on the same wavelength . " However , Goater noted that this had a detrimental aspect : " My fitness dropped off while I was with Bermuda . It was like being on holiday . The team just ate what they liked . I kept to my professional diet for about two or three weeks until peer pressure took over . "

Carlton Hill is an inner-city area of Brighton , part of the English city and seaside resort of Brighton and Hove . First developed in the early and mid-19th century on steeply sloping farmland east of central Brighton , it grew rapidly as the town became a fashionable , high-class destination . Carlton Hill 's population was always poor , though , and by the early 20th century the area was Brighton 's worst slum : overcrowding , crime and disease were rife . Extensive slum clearance in the mid-20th century introduced high-density tower blocks , but some old buildings remain : in 2008 , Brighton and Hove City Council designated part of Carlton Hill as the city 's 34th conservation area . The area now has housing of various styles and ages , large offices and small-scale industry ; there are also churches , a school and some open space . Carlton Hill 's pattern of development was defined by the long-established structure of land ownership around Brighton , whereby land was divided into long , narrow strips with many different owners . This encouraged the development of terraced housing — the predominant housing pattern until the council undertook large-scale demolition and high-density rebuilding in the mid-20th century . This work introduced more open space and varied land uses : Brighton Art College was able to expand into the area , and American Express opened a large , visually dominant headquarters .

Carlton Hill stands on high ground immediately east of the centre of Brighton . Its western boundary , Grand Parade , is part of the main road to London ; Edward Street , a major road leading towards Kemp Town and the eastbound coast road , forms the southern boundary ; the Queen 's Park residential area is to the east ; and the densely populated terraced housing of Hanover lies to the north . The main road through the area runs from west to east and is also called Carlton Hill . Albion Hill , another steeply sloping west – east road , forms the northern boundary between Hanover and Carlton Hill ; the area north of Sussex Street is sometimes referred to as Albion Hill . The high ground of the area reaches a summit of 230 feet ( 70 m ) at Windmill Terrace , between Albion Hill and Richmond Street . The latter was Brighton 's steepest road until redevelopment in the 1960s severed it : its 1 : 5 gradient necessitated a full-width wall halfway along , to intercept runaway handcarts and other vehicles . The area is not prominent on Brighton 's skyline , but good views are possible from its streets , especially westwards and southwestwards towards the sea and across the valley floor in which Old Steine and the old town are situated . Tarner Park , an open space in the centre of the conservation area , offers long views through nearly 180 ° .

Brighton 's origins lie in the Saxon fishing and agricultural village of Bristelmestune . The English Channel formed its southern limit , but on all other sides was farmland divided into open fields called laines . These were further subdivided into furlongs — wide parallel strips — and paul-pieces , which were much narrower strips . Despite their small size , neighbouring paul-pieces often had different owners . Wide paths ( leakways ) ran at right-angles to the furlongs , separating them . This ancient land-use pattern , which survived until the 18th century despite its unsuitability for contemporary farming methods , significantly influenced the pattern of urban development in 18th- and 19th-century Brighton . Hilly Laine was one of Brighton 's five laines . It was northeast of the Steine ( later called Old Steine ) , the centre of fashionable society in the 18th century , and rose steeply eastwards from an area of sheltered flatter land close to the Steine . Some fields were used for small-scale activities such as limeburning and market gardening , but most were farmed by individuals . The laine had several furlongs ; the second of these , which now forms the heart of the conservation area , was separated from its neighbours by leakways which became Carlton Hill ( the road ) and Sussex Street . Much of the land in this area was owned by Dr Benjamin Scutt , whose landholdings extended into the neighbouring village of Hove ( the Brunswick estate was built on land he sold in the 1820s ) . Starting around 1800 , the land was gradually sold to developers ; Edward Street was laid out in 1804 and quickly experienced a " mini building boom " with inns , stables and small workshops . John Street , on the first ( westernmost ) furlong of Hilly Laine , was built up by 1810 : its developer , John Hall , laid out plots for 11 by 15 feet ( 3.4 m × 4.6 m ) houses and started building and selling them in 1805 . Carlton Street , by another developer , followed by 1807 . Meanwhile , development continued slowly on the second furlong : four paul-pieces were occupied with buildings by 1819 .

Scutt 's land sales helped him fund the development of Carlton Place , an architectural set-piece consisting of a 20-house terrace surrounding a riding school , the Royal Circus ; the development took place between 1806 and 1808 . Named after Carlton House , the Prince Regent 's London home , the development was on a larger scale than the rest of Carlton Hill 's houses : each plot measured 17 by 60 feet ( 5.2 m × 18.3 m ) . Each cost about £ 410 ( £ 30,000 in 2016 ) to build , and proved to be profitable : one sold for £ 700 ( £ 51,000 in 2016 ) in 1806 to a local vicar , who later bought two more to rent out . A survey of the town 's housing by the Brighton Town Commissioners in 1814 valued Carlton Place within the top 25 % of all houses in Brighton . Scutt laid out three more streets nearby at the same time : Carlton Mews , Carlton Row and Woburn Place were narrow roads crowded with small houses , stables and workshops . Meanwhile , a farmhouse was built at an unknown time in the early 19th century on nearby Mighell Street ; it may have moved from agricultural to residential and commercial use later that century , and has an obscure early history .

Built as Patriot Place in the mid-1810s , Tilbury Place ( renamed in the 1860s ) and its five houses stood next to the farm and formed a pocket of high-class residential development in a mostly working-class area of small houses . Number 1 , also called St John 's Lodge , was the largest , and was built for Edward Tarner ( a merchant ) and his wife Laetitia , whose maiden name was Tilbury . It passed through the family until 1933 , when Laetitia Tilbury Tarner , a descendant , left it to Brighton Corporation for charitable purposes . It was converted into Tarner Home , a nursing and care institute for poor people , and later became a hostel . Apart from some land north of Sussex Street that remained agricultural until the 20th century , the whole hillside was covered with ( mostly terraced ) houses , small workshops and industrial structures , inns and other modest buildings by the mid-19th century . As early as 1840 , the area was considered to be affected by poverty and its high population density . Brighton Corporation undertook some slum clearance in the 1880s , when White and Blaker Streets were laid out between Carlton Hill and Edward Street . By this time , Carlton Hill was known as Brighton 's " foreign quarter " , where many Italian and French street vendors — who sold food of various types on Brighton beach , in the town centre and from door to door — settled . Brighton 's fishing industry still thrived into the early 20th century , and many fishermen lived in Carlton Hill and used its workshops and warehouses to cure and smoke their herring catches . A contemporary writer , quoted by Brighton historian Clifford Musgrave , observed that " an aromatic and appetising pall would envelop the entire neighbourhood , kippering both fish and residents alike " .

In the late 19th century and early 20th century , Carlton Hill 's notoriety as a slum increased . Poverty , drunkenness , disease and low living standards were rife . Brighton 's reputation was damaged by a disparaging article in The Lancet in 1882 : making reference to Carlton Hill , it criticised the town 's poor standards of health . Assisted by government funding , Brighton Corporation undertook extensive slum clearance from 1928 until the start of World War II , transforming the area 's appearance . Two large blocks of flats — Brighton Corporation 's first council flats — were built to rehouse many of the displaced residents . The Milner Flats , a long four-storey block , stand on the site of Woburn Place , and were completed in 1934 . Alderman Hugh Milner Black , a Corporation member who campaigned for housing improvements in Brighton , was commemorated in the naming . Kingswood Flats , on the site of Nelson Place and a Primitive Methodist chapel , were built in 1938 . The name refers to Minister for Health Kingsley Wood . Some displaced residents were moved out of the area : the new council estates of Whitehawk and Moulsecoomb , built in the 1920s and early 1930s on the fringe of Brighton , accommodated many former Carlton Hill residents . An earlier low-rise development took place in 1931 , when the small Tarnerland council estate was built on empty land near Tilbury Place .

The Corporation also provided non-residential buildings on the cleared land . The Circus Street Municipal Market , on a wide street built behind Scutt 's Royal Circus riding school , opened in January 1937 and became one of Brighton 's main markets . A former chapel and many terraced houses had stood on the site , whose redevelopment cost £ 75,000 ( £ 4,364,500 in 2016 ) . A fish market , moved from a site near the beach , was added in 1960 . The building closed in 2005 and has been empty since then , apart from its use as a temporary exhibition centre during the 2009 Brighton Festival — when sculptor Anish Kapoor showed a new work there . Two clinics , specialising in chest complaints and child welfare , opened on the north side of Sussex Street , opposite the market , in 1936 and 1938 respectively . The chest clinic closed in 1989 . The lower part of Sussex Street was renamed Morley Street at this time . Brighton Corporation compulsorily purchased Carlton Place in about 1955 and demolished the houses and former riding school in favour of new housing . John Street became the site of two important civic buildings in the mid-1960s : Brighton 's central police station was opened in 1965 , followed by the new county court building two years later .

Clearances around Albion Hill began in the 1950s . From 1959 , the narrow , densely populated terraces between Albion Hill and Morley Street were cleared and replaced with landscaped open space and seven tower blocks — Brighton 's first such buildings . The first , Highleigh , opened on 11 May 1961 . Like its later neighbours , it has 11 storeys . The steep Richmond Street was severed as part of this redevelopment ; its lower section was replaced by a zig-zag path down the hillside and a short road called Richmond Parade , and new roads ( Grove Hill and Ashton Rise ) were built between the tower blocks and across the slope of the hill . Similarly , the lowest section of Carlton Hill was renamed Kingswood Street when it was redeveloped in the 1960s : Brighton Art College ( now part of the University of Brighton ) was extended in 1967 by Brighton borough architect Percy Billington , taking up a large corner plot . In the mid-1970s , American Express sought land in Brighton to build a new European headquarters . The company had a long association with Sussex , and opened a mechanical accounting centre in a building on Edward Street in 1968 . Most of Mighell Street and all of its buildings — except the old farmhouse — and some neighbouring streets were demolished and replaced by the 300,000-square-foot ( 28,000 m2 ) Amex House , a nine-storey office building designed by American architecture firm Gollins , Melvin , Ward and Partners . A legislative order was raised by the Secretary of State for the Environment in mid-1973 to allow Mighell Street to be severed . In September 2008 , American Express announced plans to demolish and replace the building . The new office will be set slightly further back , closer to Carlton Hill ( the road ) , and better road access will be provided by means of a new entrance from John Street . The city council granted planning permission in November 2009 , and preliminary building work started in early 2010 .

Early in its development , Carlton Hill was provided with an Anglican church . St John the Evangelist 's Church , opposite the junction of Carlton Hill and White Street , was designed by George Cheesman junior in a " strangely bleak " Greek Revival / Neo-Georgian style in 1838 , with Doric columns and a stuccoed and pedimented façade . Never successful in attracting large congregations , it was declared redundant by the Diocese of Chichester in 1980 . Proposals for its conversion into a drug detoxification centre were opposed , and in March 1986 the Greek Orthodox community , which had been worshipping elsewhere in Brighton , bought the church and rededicated it as the Church of the Holy Trinity . The building was severely damaged by fire in July 2010 . The Ebenezer Reformed Baptist Church has occupied three buildings on two different sites in Carlton Hill . It was founded in 1825 , and the first service was held on 13 April of that year in a stuccoed Renaissance-style building on the north side of Richmond Street . The chapel , with ebenezer chapel erected a.d. 1825 prominently displayed on its entablature , was locally nicknamed " The Lemon Squeezer " . It was demolished in 1966 during the redevelopment of the Richmond Street area . Architect C.J. Wood built a new church in the Vernacular style on the opposite side of Richmond Parade , backing on to Ivory Place , in the same year . It was in turn demolished in 2007 , and a six-storey block of flats with a new church on the ground floor was built in its place . This opened in August 2010 .

Five other chapels were demolished during the area 's 20th-century redevelopment . The Sussex Street Strict Baptist Chapel stood on the section of that road which is now named Morley Street . It had lancet windows and a stuccoed exterior , and opened in 1867 . The congregation moved out in 1895 , and St Margaret 's Church in Cannon Place established a mission hall in the building . The Circus Street market was built on the site after its demolition in 1937 . Also on Sussex Street , a Primitive Methodist chapel was founded in 1836 . The Kingswood Flats now occupy the site of the building , which closed in about 1950 . Mighell Street Hall , demolished in 1965 , stood on land now covered by Amex House . It was used by Baptists from 1878 , then as the church hall of St John the Evangelist 's , and finally ( from January 1949 ) by Spiritualists . When the new Brighton National Spiritualist Church , a figure-of-eight concrete building , opened on Edward Street in 1965 , the hall closed for good . The Carlton Hill Apostolic Church stood for 99 years until 1964 , although its Catholic Apostolic congregation moved out in 1954 . Latterly it was used as student housing for the adjacent Brighton Art College , which extended its premises onto the site when the building was demolished . The Salvation Army had a citadel at the junction of Edward Street and the now vanished Riding School Lane ( near Mighell Street ) from 1884 until 1965 , when it was demolished for road widening . The denomination registered another building for worship and marriages in 1971 : it stood at the junction of Carlton Hill and Mighell Street , and was deregistered in 1985 .

Carlton Hill Primary School was built by the Local education authority in 1963 . It is on the boundary of the conservation area , between Sussex Street and Carlton Hill ( the road ) on the west side of Tilbury Place , and is well screened by trees . It has a tall wooden fence that , according to the council 's Conservation Area Character Statement , " visually intrudes on the approach to the conservation area and harms its setting " . It recommends replacing the fence with a flint wall . The school adjoins the site that is being redeveloped for the new American Express headquarters : the company paid the school £ 300,000 ( a condition of the council 's approval of the planning application ) to compensate for the effect on its playground , which will be overlooked by the building , and the building contractor Sir Robert McAlpine has paid for a school crossing patrol officer to help children cross Carlton Hill safely during the construction period . Several schools were founded in the mid-19th century . A Ragged Schools Union school stood on Carlton Street from the mid-1850s , and St John the Evangelist 's Church established its own school in 1870 on Carlton Hill . This was rebuilt in 1914 , and later housed the American Express social club until its demolition in early 2010 . Board schools were set up in 1873 on Richmond Street and 1883 on Circus Street . The Richmond Street school was the first in Brighton to offer school meals . The two Board schools merged in 1926 and took the name Sussex Street School , after which the Circus Street building closed . It was later sold to Brighton Polytechnic ( now the University of Brighton ) . The Richmond Street school ran along the west side of Claremont Row between Richmond and Sussex Streets ; playgrounds separated the boys ' and girls ' sections . In October 1930 , a nursery section was added . The school was compulsorily purchased in 1959 and demolished for redevelopment ; Carlton Hill Primary School was built to replace it .

Amex House " dominates the sweep of Carlton Hill " and is visible on the skyline from much of Brighton . Designed by British architecture firm Gollins Melvin and Ward , the building has prominent white horizontal bands of glass-reinforced plastic and blue-tinted glazing , and its corners are chamfered to give it a more rounded appearance . It is nicknamed " The Wedding Cake " , and its clean , futuristic design has been said to evoke Thunderbirds . The building is generally considered to be one of the better postwar additions to Brighton 's building stock , although it affects views into and out of the neighbouring conservation area . About 3,000 people work at the building , making American Express the largest private employer in Brighton and Hove . Prior House , at the north end of Tilbury Place , was built in 1936 for the Brighton Girl 's Club . This institution was founded in 1928 at Nelson Row , and was displaced from its original premises in 1934 when the Kingswood Flats were built on the site . In 1970 , Prior House became a centre for unemployed people , offering education and other social facilities ; it is now a base for voluntary and charitable groups under the aegis of the Resource Centre , a local organisation formed in 1975 . Architecturally , it is a plain red-brick building with a large stuccoed extension on the second floor , affecting the ambience of Tilbury Place and the neighbouring listed buildings .

The former vicarage of St John the Evangelist 's Church , opposite the church on the south side of Carlton Hill , has been converted into an office . It dates from 1899 and is domestic in character , with bay windows containing original sashes , red-brick walls and a steeply pitched roof . It is within the conservation area and is considered to make a " positive contribution " to its character . Another building formerly associated with the church is the Edward Riley Memorial Hall , now the Sussex Deaf Centre . It has a steep clay-tiled roof and brown brickwork . The high flint walls around it are described as a positive feature of the conservation area , although the building itself has a " neutral effect " according to the council 's character statement . The building was used as the church hall until the church closed in 1980 ; the Chichester Diocesan Centre for the Deaf was then established in it .

A building or structure is defined as " listed " when it is placed on a statutory register of buildings of " special architectural or historic interest " by the Secretary of State for Culture , Media and Sport , a Government department , in accordance with the Planning ( Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas ) Act 1990 . English Heritage , a non-departmental public body , acts as an agency of this department to administer the process and advise the department on relevant issues . In February 2001 , there were 24 listed buildings with Grade I status , 70 Grade II * -listed and 1,124 Grade II-listed buildings in Brighton and Hove . Grade I-listed buildings are defined as being of " exceptional interest " and greater than national importance ; Grade II * , the next highest status , is used for " particularly important buildings of more than special interest " ; and the lowest grade , Grade II , is used for " nationally important buildings of special interest " . Carlton Hill has nine listed buildings ( covered by five separate listings ) , all of which have Grade II status and lie within the conservation area . Number 1 Tilbury Place ( St John 's Lodge ) is listed together with its surrounding railings , garden wall and garden porch . The four neighbouring and contemporary houses at 2 – 5 Tilbury Place are also listed together under a single Grade II designation . Described by the council as an " impressive warm brick terrace " of " elegant townhouses " , they were much larger than the surrounding houses — especially number 1 , which also had extensive gardens . Number 5 is also slightly larger than the others , and originally had stables adjacent . They are in the Georgian style , built of pale yellow brick laid in the Flemish bond pattern . The roofs are slate-tiled , but some are hidden behind parapets . The entrance doors have decorated fanlights and original windows with ogee-shaped cast-iron miniature balconies . All five houses are now owned by a housing association and have been divided into flats .

The former St John the Evangelist 's Church was listed at Grade II on 20 August 1971 . It is a Greek Revival-style stucco-clad building of stone and brick with a partly hipped roof . The three-bay façade has four Tuscan pilasters beneath a substantial entablature and pediment . The frieze between them has metopes and triglyphs . Work by L.A. Mackintosh in 1957 altered the exterior ; the architect added his personal monogram and an eagle emblem ( representing John the Evangelist ) above the left and right entrances respectively . Numbers 34 and 35 Mighell Street ( the former Mighell Farmhouse ) were jointly listed on 13 October 1952 . Described as a " surprising survival " , the now semi-detached house is a two-storey cobble-fronted building with a prominent porch framed by Tuscan columns and topped by an entablature with a frieze and triglyph and a decorated pediment . An arched doorway with a keystone has a 19th-century panelled door set into it , and the sash windows are also original and have similar arched surrounds made of bricks . The roof is tiled and has chimneys at each end . The farmhouse 's origins are unknown , although a Philip Mighell was a major landowner on Hilly Laine in the late 18th century , when some of the paul-pieces bore his name . The building was apparently at least partly in commercial use by 1865 .

In Tarner Park , an area of open space formed from part of number 1 Tilbury Place 's grounds , there is a circular tower which is believed to have been built by Edward Tilbury Tarner ( son of the original occupants Edward and Laetitia Tarner ) as an observation tower so he could see ships in the English Channel . The mid-19th-century structure has two storeys and about 70 steps ; the upper level is recessed and has a walkway around it . The walls are of knapped flint with some brick and stonework . Part of an iron weather vane remains at the top . Both storeys have segmental-arched entrances , but these are now closed . The structure is in good condition but has some missing flints .

In the United Kingdom , a conservation area is a principally urban area " of special architectural or historic interest , the character or appearance of which it is desirable to preserve or enhance " . Such areas are identified by local authorities according to criteria defined by Sections 69 and 70 of the Planning ( Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas ) Act 1990 . On 4 July 2008 , 4.05 acres ( 1.64 ha ) at the heart of Carlton Hill was designated as the city of Brighton and Hove 's 34th conservation area . Its boundaries are ( clockwise from north ) Sussex Street , St John 's Place , Carlton Hill ( including the stub of Mighell Street ) and Tilbury Place , with the open space of Tarner Park at the centre . All of Carlton Hill 's listed buildings are within the designated area ; these , combined with the sheltered open space of Tarner Park , substantial tree cover , the survival of old street patterns and boundary walls , and the distinctive lie of the land , contribute to the area 's " special character " , as defined by Brighton and Hove City Council .

The area does not have a unified appearance or structure , owing to the large-scale redevelopment carried out in the 20th century . Instead , a " disparate group of individually interesting buildings " and small spaces define the area ; together , they form " a fragment of early 19th-century Brighton " . Flint and brown or yellow brick is used extensively , both for buildings within the conservation area and in associated structures such as boundary walls and pavements . Some kerbs are of granite , limestone and flint , while some high-quality Yorkstone paving slabs survive , along with some red-brick pavements .

The white-eyed river martin ( Pseudochelidon sirintarae ) is a passerine bird , one of only two members of the river martin subfamily of the swallows . Since it has significant differences from its closest relative , the African river martin , it is sometimes placed in its own genus , Eurochelidon . First found in 1968 , it is known only from a single wintering site in Thailand , and may be extinct , since it has not been seen since 1980 despite targeted surveys in Thailand and neighbouring Cambodia . It may possibly still breed in China or Southeast Asia , but a Chinese painting initially thought to depict this species was later reassessed as showing pratincoles . The adult white-eyed river martin is a medium-sized swallow , with mainly glossy greenish-black plumage , a white rump , and a tail which has two elongated slender central tail feathers , each widening to a racket-shape at the tip . It has a white eye ring and a broad , bright greenish-yellow bill . The sexes are similar in appearance , but the juvenile lacks the tail ornaments and is generally browner than the adult . Little is known of the behaviour or breeding habitat of this martin , although like other swallows it feeds on insects caught in flight , and its wide bill suggests that it may take relatively large species . It roosts in reed beds in winter , and may nest in river sandbanks , probably in April or May before the summer rains . It may have been overlooked prior to its discovery because it tended to feed at dawn or dusk rather than during the day .

Within the swallow family , the white-eyed river martin is one of only two members of the river martin subfamily Pseudochelidoninae , the other being the African river martin Pseudochelidon eurystomina of the Congo basin in Africa . These two species possess a number of distinctive features which mark them out from other swallows and martins , including their robust legs and feet , and stout bills . The extent of their differences from other swallows and the wide geographical separation of the two martins suggest that they are relict populations of a group of species that diverged from the main swallow lineage early in its evolution . The separation of this subfamily is supported by genetic evidence , and their habit of nesting in burrows is thought to be characteristic of the earliest members of the swallow family . The white-eyed river martin was discovered in 1968 by Thai ornithologist Kitti Thonglongya , who gave the bird its current binomial name . The genus name Pseudochelidon ( Hartlaub , 1861 ) comes from the Ancient Greek prefix ψευδο / pseudo " false " and χελιδον / chelidôn , " swallow " , and the species name sirintarae commemorates Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn of Thailand .

The African and Asian Pseudochelidon species differ markedly in the size of their bills and eyes , suggesting that they have different feeding ecologies , with the white-eyed river martin probably able to take much larger prey . The Thai species also has a swollen , hard gape ( fleshy interior of the bill ) unlike the softer , fleshier , and much less prominent gape of the African river martin . Thonglongya estimated the bill of the Thai species to be 17.6 % wider than that of the African bird , but a later estimate , using specimens preserved in alcohol instead of dried skins ( to avoid shrinkage ) , gave a difference of 22.5 % between the bills of the two swallows . Following a suggestion by Kitti in his original paper , Richard Brooke proposed in 1972 that the white-eyed river martin was sufficiently different from the African species to be placed in a separate monotypic genus Eurochelidon , but this was contested by other authorities . The new genus was not subsequently widely adopted by other authors , although BirdLife International uses Eurochelidon .

The adult white-eyed river martin is a medium-sized swallow , 18 cm ( 7 in ) long , with mainly silky black plumage and a white rump . The back is green-glossed black , and is separated from the similarly coloured upper tail by a narrow bright white rump band . The head is darker than the back , with a velvet-black chin leading to blue-green glossed black underparts . The wings are black , with brown inner edges to the flight feathers , and the tail is green-glossed black with two elongated , slender , central tail feathers , up to 9 cm ( 3.5 in ) long . These expand slightly at the tips to give narrow racquets 4.9 – 8.5 cm ( 1.9 – 3.3 in ) long . The wing length averages 11.5 cm ( 4.5 in ) , the tail is 10.7 cm ( 4.2 in ) long , and the tarsus averages 1.1 cm ( 0.43 in ) . The iris and eyelid are white , giving the appearance of a white eye ring , and the broad , bright greenish-yellow bill has a black hooked tip to the upper mandible . The large , strong feet and legs are flesh-coloured . This species is silent when wintering , and its breeding vocalisations are unknown . The sexes are similar , but the juvenile lacks the tail racquets , has a brown head and chin , and is generally browner than the adult . Juveniles taken in January and February were moulting their body feathers .

The white-eyed river martin was discovered in 1968 by Kitti Thonglongya , who obtained nine specimens netted by professional bird-hunters as part of a migratory bird survey at a night-time roost at Thailand 's largest freshwater lake , Bueng Boraphet in Nakhon Sawan Province . It was first seen in the wild by ornithologists at the same wintering site in 1977 . The species has only been seen at the lake , always between the months of November and February , and the wintering habitat is assumed to be in the vicinity of open fresh water for feeding , with reed beds for the night-time roost . The white-eyed river martin may be migratory , and if the breeding habitat resembles that of the African river martin , it is likely to be the forested valleys of large rivers ; these can provide sandbars and islands for nesting , and woodland over which the birds can catch insect prey . The breeding grounds and habitat are unknown , although river valleys in northern Thailand or southwestern China are possibilities . A claimed depiction of this species in a Chinese scroll painting initially appeared to support the possibility of the martin breeding in China . The bird in the painting had a similarly shaped head and bill , a white eye and a long tail , although it lacked the white rump , did not show the correct bill colour , and elongated the outer , rather than central , tail feathers . Painted before 1970 , it pre-dated the publication of pictures of the Thai bird , so it must have been painted from life . It is now thought more likely that the scroll shows Oriental pratincoles ( Glareola maldivarum ) . Cambodia and Burma have also been suggested as possible refuges for the martin , but there has also been speculation on whether it is migratory at all .

Since its breeding grounds are undiscovered , nothing is known about the white-eyed river martin 's breeding biology , although it is suggested that it may nest in burrows in river sandbars , probably in April or May before the monsoon rain raises water levels . However , distinct differences in foot and toe morphology from its African relative have led some authorities to speculate that even the assumption that it nests in burrows could be incorrect . In winter , it roosts with barn swallows in reed beds . Like other swallows , the white-eyed river martin feeds on insects , including beetles , which are caught on the wing . Given its size and unusual mouth structure , it may well take larger insects than other swallows . This species is described as graceful and buoyant in flight , and , like its African relative , appears reluctant to use perches , behaviour that , together with its unusual toe-shape and the fact that mud was found on the toes of one of the first specimens , suggest that this species may be relatively terrestrial . Pamela C. Rasmussen suggested that , given its unusually large eyes , the species might be nocturnal or at least crepuscular , a factor that could make it very inconspicuous , and thus partly explain how it remained undetected for so long . Although the fact that the first specimens were supposedly collected roosting at night in reedbeds might appear to contradict this theory , it is possible that the birds might not have been caught at the roost . Alternatively , they might be capable of both diurnal and nocturnal behaviour , or be crepuscular , depending on the season or circumstance .

The white-eyed river martin was seen in Thailand in 1972 , 1977 and 1980 , but not definitely since , although there is an unconfirmed sighting from Thailand from 1986 . It is classified as Critically Endangered , which is the highest risk category assigned by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources ( IUCN ) for wild species . The designation means that a species ' numbers have decreased , or will decrease , by 80 % within three generations . The IUCN does not consider a species extinct until extensive targeted surveys have been conducted , but the white-eyed river martin may well no longer exist in the wild , and was probably always rare . There has been a drastic decline in the Bueng Boraphet swallow population from the hundreds of thousands reported to roost around 1970 to maximum counts of 8,000 made in the winter of 1980 – 1981 , although it is not certain if this represents a real decline or a shift in site in response to hunting . Other potential causes for the martin 's decline include the disturbance of sand bars in the rivers , and the construction of dams ( which flood the area upstream and change the water flow downstream ) , deforestation , and increasing conversion of its habitat to agriculture . Other Southeast Asian species using riverine sand bars have also been adversely affected by disturbance and habitat degradation . Very few swallows of any kind now roost in the Bueng Boraphet reedbeds , preferring sugarcane plantations , and , despite searching , the white-eyed river martin has not been found in other nearby large swallow roosts .

The martin is legally protected under Appendix 1 ( the highest category ) of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) agreement , and is one of 15 " Reserved Species " in Thailand which , under the provisions of the Wild Animal Reservation and Protection Act , BE 2535 , cannot be legally hunted , collected , or kept in captivity under any circumstances . Despite official protection , the martin was captured by locals along with other swallows for sale as food or for release by devout Buddhists , and following its discovery by ornithologists , trappers were reported to have caught as many as 120 individuals and sold them to the director of the Nakhon Sawan Fisheries Station who was unable to keep them alive in captivity . Two birds sent to Bangkok Zoo in 1971 also soon died . The small population may therefore have become non-viable . Bueng Boraphet has been declared a Non-Hunting Area in an effort to protect the species , but surveys to find this martin have been unsuccessful . These include several searches at the main site , a 1969 survey of the Nan , Yom and Wang Rivers of northern Thailand , and a 1996 survey of rivers in northern Laos . A possible sighting was made in Cambodia in 2004 , but a 2008 investigation using speedboat surveys and interviews with villagers in Cambodia near the location of the claimed sighting failed to find any positive evidence , and noted that the habitat was in poor condition . Nevertheless , animals as a large as the saola have been rediscovered in Southeast Asia , so it is conceivable that a small population of the martin survives . Despite the lack of records from China , a 2000 field guide covering the region included this species , since it is the mostly likely breeding area outside Thailand , although it is omitted from the 2008 Birds of East Asia .

Vittorio Emanuele was an Italian pre-dreadnought battleship , laid down in 1901 , launched in 1904 and completed in 1908 . She was the second member of the Regina Elena class , which included three other vessels : Regina Elena , Napoli , and Roma . Vittorio Emmanuele was armed with a main battery of two 12 in ( 300 mm ) guns and twelve 8 in ( 200 mm ) guns . She was quite fast for the period , with a top speed of nearly 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) . Vittorio Emmaneule saw action in the Italo-Turkish War as the flagship of the 1st Division . During the war , she participated in operations in Cyrenaica and the eastern Mediterranean Sea , including the seizure of the islands of Rhodes and the Dodecanese . She served during the First World War , but saw no combat during the war due to the hesitance of both the Italian and Austro-Hungarian navies to risk their capital ships in pitched battle . She remained in service as a training ship until 1923 , when she was stricken from the naval register and broken up for scrap .

Vittorio Emanuele was 144.6 meters ( 474 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 22.4 m ( 73 ft ) and a maximum draft of 8.58 m ( 28.1 ft ) . She displaced 13,914 metric tons ( 13,694 long tons ; 15,338 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two vertical triple expansion engines rated at 19,424 indicated horsepower ( 14,484 kW ) . Steam for the engines was provided by twenty-eight coal-fired Belleville boilers . The ship 's propulsion system provided a top speed of 21.36 knots ( 39.56 km / h ; 24.58 mph ) and a range of approximately 10,000 nautical miles ( 18,520 km ; 11,508 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . Vittorio Emanuele had a crew of 742 – 764 officers and enlisted men . As built , the ship was armed with two 12 in ( 305 mm ) 40-caliber guns placed in two single gun turrets , one forward and one aft . The ship was also equipped with twelve 8 in ( 203 mm ) 40-cal. guns in six twin turrets amidships . Close-range defense against torpedo boats was provided by a battery of sixteen 3 in ( 76 mm ) 40-cal. guns . She was also equipped with two 17.7 in ( 450 mm ) torpedo tubes placed in the hull below the waterline . Vittorio Emanuele was protected with Krupp steel manufactured in Terni . The main belt was 9.8 in ( 249 mm ) thick , and the deck was 1.5 in ( 38 mm ) thick . The conning tower was protected by 10 in ( 254 mm ) of armor plating . The main battery guns had 8 in ( 203 mm ) thick plating , and the 8-inch gun turrets had 6 in ( 152 mm ) thick sides .

Vittorio Emanuele was built by the Castellammare di Stabia shipyard ; her keel was laid on 18 September 1901 . The ship was launched on 12 October 1904 , and construction was completed on 1 August 1908 . Vittorio Emanuele served in the active duty squadron through 1910 , by which time her three sisters had been completed , bringing the total number of front-line battleships to six , which also included the two Regina Margherita-class battleships . The active duty squadron was typically in service for seven months of the year for training ; the rest of the year they were placed in reserve .

On 29 September 1911 , Italy declared war on the Ottoman Empire in order to seize Libya . Vittorio Emanuele served as the flagship of Vice Admiral Augusto Aubry , the commander of the 1st Division throughout the conflict . On 30 September , Vittorio Emanuele , her sister Roma , and the armored cruiser Pisa cruised in the Aegean Sea , searching for the Ottoman training squadron that had departed Beirut for Constantinople two days before , and did not know that war had been declared . The Italian flotilla failed to locate its prey , which managed to safely reach Constantinople . On 18 October , Vittorio Emanuele and her three sisters , along with three cruisers and several destroyers and torpedo boats escorted a convoy that carried half of the 2nd Infantry Division to Benghazi . When the Ottomans refused to surrender the city before the amphibious assault , the Italian fleet opened fire on the Turkish defenders at 08 : 00 , while landing parties from the ships and the Army infantry went ashore . The Italians quickly forced the Ottomans to withdraw into the city by evening . After a short siege , the Ottoman forces withdrew on 29 October , leaving the city to the Italians .

By December , Vittorio Emanuele and the other ships of the 1st Squadron were dispersed in the ports of Cyrenaica . Vittorio Emanuele , Pisa , and the protected cruisers Etruria and Etna were stationed in Tobruk . While there , they supported the Italian Army as it occupied the city and surrounding area by contributing landing parties and providing fire support to the ground troops . In early 1912 , most of the fleet had withdrawn to Italy for repairs and refit , leaving only a small force of cruisers and light craft to patrol the North African coast . On 4 March , Aubry died while aboard his flagship ; Admiral Luigi Faravelli replaced him as the squadron commander . On 13 April , the 1st Division left Taranto , bound for the island of Rhodes . Meanwhile , the 3rd Division escorted a convoy of troopships from Tobruk to the island . The Italian heavy ships demonstrated off the city of Rhodes while the transports landed the expeditionary force 10 miles ( 16 km ) to the south on 4 May ; the soldiers quickly advanced on the city , supported by artillery fire from the Italian fleet . The Turks surrendered the city the following day . Between 8 and 20 May , Vittorio Emanuele was involved in the seizure of several islands in the Dodecanese between Crete , Rhodes , and Samos .

In June , Vittorio Emanuele and the rest of the 1st Division was stationed at Rhodes . Over the next two months , the ships cruised in the Aegean to prevent the Turks from attempting to launch their own amphibious operations to retake the islands Italy had seized in May . The 1st Division returned to Italy in late August for repairs and refitting , and were replaced by the battleships of the 2nd Squadron . The 1st Division left port on 14 October , but was recalled later that day , when the Ottomans had agreed to sign a peace treaty to end the war .

Italy declared neutrality after the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , but by July 1915 , the Triple Entente had convinced the Italians to enter the war against the Central Powers . The Austro-Hungarian Navy , Italy 's traditional naval rival , was the primary opponent in the conflict . The Italian Naval Chief of Staff , Admiral Paolo Thaon di Revel , believed that an active fleet policy was prohibited by the serious threat from submarines in the confined waters of the Adriatic Sea . Instead , Revel decided to implement blockade at the southern end of the Adriatic with the battle fleet , while smaller vessels , such as the MAS boats conducted raids on Austro-Hungarian ships and installations . Meanwhile , Revel 's capital ships would be preserved to confront the Austro-Hungarian battle fleet in the event that it sought a decisive engagement . As a result , the ship was not particularly active during the war . During the war , Vittorio Emanuele and her three sisters were assigned to the 2nd Division . They spent much of the war rotating between the bases at Taranto , Brindisi , and Valona , but did not see combat . On 14 – 15 May 1917 , three light cruisers of the Austro-Hungarian Navy raided the Otranto Barrage ; in the ensuring Battle of the Strait of Otranto , Vittorio Emanuele and her sisters raised steam to assist the Allied warships , but the Italian commander refused to permit them to join the battle for fear of risking their loss in the submarine-infested Adriatic .

After the end of the war , Vittorio Emanuele was used as a training ship for a short period . In the summer of 1922 , she was in Constantinople when the American destroyer USS Bulmer accidentally collided with a cutter from Vittorio Emanuele , causing minor damage to the boat . Then-Lieutenant Joseph J. Clark , Bulmer 's executive officer , came aboard Vittorio Emanuele to apologize for the incident . In early 1922 , the world 's major navies , including Italy , signed the Washington Naval Treaty . According to the terms of the treaty , Italy could keep Vittorio Emanuele and her three sisters , along with the newer dreadnought battleships . Due to the small size and age of the ships , particularly in comparison to the modern dreadnoughts , the Italians could have kept the ships in service indefinitely . They could not , however , be replaced by new battleships under the normal practice of the Treaty system , which provided for replacements after a ship was 20 years old . Vittorio Emanuele was stricken from the naval register on 1 April 1923 and subsequently broken up for scrap .

M-49 is a north – south state trunkline highway in the south-central portion of the US state of Michigan . It runs from the Ohio state line north to Litchfield through rural Hillsdale County . M-49 is the only Michigan highway in which the road crossing into another state has the same state highway number . M-49 continues as State Route 49 ( SR 49 ) , near the Indiana – Michigan – Ohio tripoint south of Camden . The highway dates back to 1930 and was only altered once in the 1940s . M-49 runs through Southern Michigan farmlands connecting several small towns along its path .

M-49 starts as the continuation of SR 49 into Michigan from Ohio . The highway crosses the state line south of Camden east of the tripoint with Indiana and Ohio . Running north through rural Hillsdale County , the roadway follows Edon Road through farm land . The highway follows two sweeping curves to cross Territorial Road and continue into the village of Camden . M-49 follows Main Street through town and turns northeasterly on the north side of the village on the way to Reading . Returning to a due-north course , the highway crosses a branch of the Indiana Northeastern Railroad on the south side of Reading . The Edon Road name gives way to Main Street through the city . M-49 runs north out of Reading , once again called Edon Road , through farm lands dotted with occasional trees . At Weston Road on the southeast side of Allen , the highway turns to the northeast to a junction with US 12 ( Chicago Road ) . M-49 turns west along US 12 , running concurrently into the village . M-49 resumes its northerly course at Railroad Street , separating from US 12 in the process . Outside of town , the roadway changes names to Allen Road , and through more Southern Michigan farmland , M-49 runs north to Genesee Road . The highway turns east on Genesee to Anderson Road , and then north to Litchfield . Crossing into that city , M-49 follows Chicago Street to the intersection with M-99 downtown . At that junction , M-49 terminates nearly 25.5 miles ( 41.0 km ) north of the state line . No part of the highway has been listed on the National Highway System , a system of highways important to the nation 's economy , defense , and mobility .

M-49 was added to the state highway system in 1930 , running along its current routing between M-9 ( now M-99 ) in Litchfield and the Ohio state line south of Camden . Near the state line , the highway jogged along Territorial Road for a short distance to make the connection with the continuation of SR 49 . The second version of M-120 ran concurrently with M-49 on this section of Territorial Road starting in 1939 . This concurrency was removed in late 1946 or early 1947 when M-49 was realigned to smooth out the corners in the roadway at M-120 . The routing of M-49 has remained the same since . It is currently the only state highway that connects with a like-numbered state highway from another state . The only other highways in Michigan to share a number with a cross-border connection are components of the Interstate Highway System or the United States Numbered Highways .

Huletts Landing is a hamlet in the town of Dresden in northern Washington County , New York , United States . A lakeside community on the eastern shore of Lake George in the Adirondack Mountains , Huletts Landing is located entirely within the Adirondack Park . There is only one roadway access to the hamlet , County Route 6 and its suffixed routes , which head north-south . Huletts Landing is geographically located at 43 ° 38 ′ 21 ″ N 73 ° 30 ′ 25 ″ W and has approximately two centuries of written history . The hamlet derives its name from the Hulett family , which resided in the area for several generations after Revolutionary War soldier David Hulett moved near the lakeside and began farming . In 1874 his descendant Philander Hulett built a boat landing , a general store , and a post office . This opened the scenic corner of the lake to steamship traffic and tourism . This suffered a major setback in 1915 when the hamlet 's largest hotel burned to its foundation , but tourism remained an important factor to the local economy . The town ( Dresden ) population , not Huletts Landing , is 695 , according to 2007 U.S. Census Bureau estimates .

The Hulett family appears to have been of French origin and came to North America to avoid religious persecution for their Huguenot beliefs . David Hulett , the founder of Huletts Landing , was born in Killingly , Connecticut c . 1758 – 1762 and served as a private under General James Wadsworth during the American Revolution . For three years the unit where Pvt. Hulett served fought mainly in upstate New York . Oral history asserts that David Hulett fought heroically at the Battle of Saratoga where he refused to leave the field despite an injury to his neck . The Hulett family settled near Lake George c . 1804 , possibly because of a land grant offered to veterans in lieu of wages for service . Along with Bolton , New York and Putnam , New York , Hulett 's Landing is one of three place names on Lake George relating with Wadsworth 's Connecticut brigade . Until 1874 the Huletts Landing area was known as Bosom Bay . Successive generations of the Hulett family lived by farming the area until Philander Hulett began to develop the area in the 1870s by building a steamship landing and submitting an application to build a post office . The post office application is the earliest document to use the Huletts Landing name . The existing Lake George Steamboat Company , which delivered mail as well as passengers , probably required either a post office or a tourism facility in order to justify adding a new stop to its schedule . An influential travelogue by Rev. William Henry Harrison Murray was published in 1868 and praised the Adirondacks for the relaxing effects of its picturesque wilderness . The first railroad service into the region was also built in the 1870s . The application received approval and Philander Hulett built the post office shortly afterward , housed in the same building as the community 's first store . He served as postmaster until his death in 1883 , but sold his property .

Part of Philander Hulett ’ s property would be sold to businessman John W. Hall , but the bulk of the real estate would pass first to C.W. Wentz , an executive with the Delaware and Hudson Railroad , next to entrepreneur Henry W. Buckell , and finally by the early part of the 20th century to William H. Wyatt , an owner of hotels . All of these successive owners saw their first and primary role as marketing the property as a tourist attraction . The first Lakeside Inn was constructed for John W. Hall in 1877 – 1878 on a 1 acre ( 0.0040 km2 ) lot . Although the only direct access to Huletts Landing was by ferry , a combination of train , coach , and ferry was normal for Adirondack vacationers of the period . Huletts Hotel grew from expansions on the original farmhouse until a fire destroyed it on 14 November 1915 . It was hastily rebuilt for the 1916 tourist season , but questions of arson arose , and led to trial . Tourism has continued to be a mainstay of the community 's economy . Adirondack Park was originally established in 1892 . In 1931 an eastward expansion brought Lake George and its communities within park boundaries .

Huletts Landing is located at coordinates 43.38 ° N 73.30 ° W ﻿ / 43.38 ; -73.30 . It is located on the northern shore of Lake George , which is a 32-mile ( 51 km ) lake in the Adirondacks . Huletts Landing is entirely situated within the Adirondack Park , which is the largest state park in the United States . Nearly two-thirds of the property within the park 's formal range is privately owned with various land use restrictions . The climate of Huletts Landing is diverse . On average , the coolest month is January , while the warmest is July . The highest monthly precipitation in the area , on average , occurs in August . The lowest recorded temperature was − 38 ° F ( − 39 ° C ) in 1979 , while the highest was 103 ° F ( 39 ° C ) in 1953 .

Huletts Landing is a remote hamlet , accessible by car only via Washington County Route 6 , which branches off of nearby New York State Route 22 . The main road is known as Huletts Landing Road , and spawns two suffixed routes which reach different parts of Huletts Landing . The first is County Route 6A , which is better known as Lands End Road , heads southward while the other , County Route 6B , which is better known as Bluff Head Road , brings the traveler northward , to locations such as Washington County Park and Huletts Landing Marina . Huletts Landing County Park is also on CR 6B . The airport at Burlington , Vermont is approximately one-hour drive from the eastern section of Adirondack Park , where Huletts Landing is located . A smaller airport within Adirondack Park is Adirondack Regional Airport in Saranac Lake .

" Hello Good Morning " is a song by American rapper and producer Diddy and his band Dirty Money , from their debut album , Last Train to Paris . It was released from March 30 , 2010 as the album 's third single . The electronic dance song incorporates an acid squelch section in the middle 8 , ad was written by Marcella Araica , Richard Butler , Clifford " T.I. " Harris and Nathaniel " Danja " Hills who also produced the song . T.I. has a featured rap on the song . The song 's musical composition was inspired by Diddy 's experiences in Ibiza night clubs ; its lyrics focus around sex and money . Three official remixes were released alongside the main single : the Official Remix with Rick Ross & Nicki Minaj , the " Grime Remix " with Skepta , and a " Team UK remix " with Tinchy Stryder and Tinie Tempah . Critics noted the track as one of the better songs from Last Train to Paris , particularly for Danja 's production , but criticized the lyrics for being superficial and for lacking substance . " Hello Good Morning " was promoted with several live television performances including on season nine of American Idol and Friday Night with Jonathan Ross , amongst others . An accompanying music video , filmed by Hype Williams , features Diddy – Dirty Money parting in Los Angeles , with T.I. enjoying the company of two ladies in an apartment and Diddy driving through the city at night . It was inspired by the 1995 film Heat . An edited version of the clip was made for the official remix , and a completely new street party-themed video was filmed for the grime remix . At the time of release , " Hello Good Morning " became the album and group 's first single to chart on the Billboard Hot 100 , reaching No. 27 . Commercially , the single was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for selling in excess of 500,000 copies . Internationally , the single peaked at No. 22 in UK , and was particularly successful on the German Black Chart and UK R & B Chart , reaching number one and number eight respectively .

" Hello Good Morning " was written by Marcella Araica , Richard Butler , T.I. , Nathaniel " Danja " Hills . The song which features T.I. , and was produced by Danja , is an electro-dance song influenced by Diddy 's experiences in Ibiza where he visited the DC10 nightclub . The music influences included " Felix da Housecat , Erick Morillo , Deep Dish and DJ Hell " . According to Rap-Up magazine , the lyrics refer to " keeping a party going till early hours of the morning " and see Diddy return to using his signature ad-libs . Nicki Escudero from The Phoenix New Times noted the song 's superficial themes which included lyrics about " sex , money and cheating " Brandon Soderberg from The Village Voice noted the song 's bridge where there was an " epic acid-squelch breakdown " .

Several official remixes were released alongside the video to promote the song . The first of these remixes added an introduction verse from rapper Rick Ross and then a new verse later in the song from female rapper , Nicki Minaj . Labelled the " Official Remix " , it was released in the United States on June 29 , 2010 for digital download . A music video for this version was created by adding additional footage to the original video . It premiered on June 21 , 2010 . A second remix featuring just Ross 's additional verse was used for the song 's main music video which premiered on May 11 , 2010 A third remix was made for the UK , titled the " Team UK Remix " . This version featured Tinie Tempah and Tinchy Stryder in place of Minaj and Ross . It premiered on June 11 , 2010 on Tim Westwood 's Radio 1Xtra daytime show Westwood . It was released as track two on the UK Digital EP single , released June 20 , 2010 . A final remix was created after Diddy highlighted his intent to find a UK emcee to record a new version of the song with him . Skepta was chosen for the remix , which was released as the " Official Grime Remix " . It is the only remix which alters the song 's production , and was released only in the UK , on August 12 , 2010 . A video for the grime remix was released on November 5 , 2010 . On January 5 , 2010 , MTV reported the emergence of a new remix of " Hello Good Morning " . The new remix replaces T.I. ' s vocals with a new verse from Eminem . D.L. Chandler from MTV said " Slim Shady ’ s humorous verses sound right at home over producer Danja ’ s club-ready banger . "

In a review by USA Today , " Hello Good Morning " was picked out as one of the best three songs on the Last Train to Paris . Nick Levine of Digital Spy gave the song three out of five stars in his review for the song , stating that although Dirty Money promised a new sound the song sounded like " Timba – pop , albeit one with a better-than-average hook . " He continued , " in Diddy 's final-minute rap , [ it 's ] a reminder of how he jump-started his journey towards a reported $ 300m fortune and a butler called Fonzworth Bentley . " Matt from Above & Beyond said it was the Danja-produced beat and the T.I. feature that make the song good . Fraser McAlpine of BBC Music said " Diddy seems to have abandoned conventional rapping in favour of some Kanye – style automooing . He 's quite good at it , too . Adds a certain nasal edge to proceedings . There 's a middle bit , and it 's like nothing else in the song ... It sounds more like someone doing the " I 've lost my keys " song , just before they leave the house in the morning . The odd thing is that it was left in there . I mean if minimal is your bag , surely that 'd be the first bit to cut ? " He awarded in four out of five stars . Becky Bain of Idolator was also positive about the song , saying , " Lyrically and stylistically , it ’ s a pretty standard club track — over various synth beats , the song covers the usual topics : hot girls dancing , crowds waiting to have fun , and spending time in a five star suite with some five star freaks getting high all week ... But honestly , we ’ re just overjoyed this song isn ’ t just a thinly-veiled four-minute commercial for any one of Diddy ’ s various products . "

However Nicki Escudero of the Phoenix New Times said that although the song was good for what it is , it lacked substance . " Now that Diddy-Dirty Money has had success with a superficial track about money , sex and cheating , here 's hoping the group will release a deeper song about something more meaningful . Unfortunately , hope can only go so far . " Meanwhile , Michael Cragg from The Guardian 's music blog commented that the UK remix featuring Skepta salvages what would otherwise be a boring Diddy track . " Thankfully , UK grime king , Skepta , has rescued the song by pushing Diddy to the periphery – his flow consists of going ' uh ' , ' Skepta ' and spelling out ' D.I.D.D.Y. # – setting off a smorgasbord of sonic explosions , tightening the whole thing up and making it sound a lot darker and more thrilling than a host of US producers could manage . Skepta also drops the following immortal line in the first verse : ' I like tea , but I don 't like crumpets . ' A man after my own heart . "

Two weeks after Diddy – Dirty Money 's appearance on American Idol , " Hello Good Morning " debuted on the U.S. Hot Digital Songs chart at No. 17 , and the single debuted on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 at No. 34 . Eventually the song peaked at No. 27 on the Hot 100 in the chart week dated July 24 , 2010 . At the time of its charting , it was the first single from Last Train to Paris to appear on the Billboard Hot 100 . Consequently , the song became Diddy 's best charting Hot 100 single since his 2007 hit single " Last Night " with Keyshia Cole , as well as his eleventh top-thirty Hot 100 single . In comparison , " Hello Good Morning " is Dawn Richard 's second lowest charting Hot 100 single , but first appearance on the chart since 2008 's " Damaged " as part of girlgroup , Danity Kane . For Kalenna Harper , it is her first Hot 100 chart appearance . T.I. , who is featured on the song , received his highest Hot 100 chart peak , since his 2009 single " Dead and Gone " with Justin Timberlake . On August 18 , 2010 , the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) certified the single gold for selling at least 500,000 copies . On the official end of year charts , compiled by Billboard , " Hello Good Morning " ranked at No. 29 on the U.S. Hot Rap Songs chart and No. 65 on the Hot R & B / Hip-Hop Songs chart .

Additionally the single proved successful on urban charts around the world . " Hello Good Morning " peaked at No. 8 on the U.S. Hot Rap Songs chart and No. 13 on the U.S. Hot R & B / Hip-Hop Songs chart . In Germany , it topped the Deutsche Black Charts ( German Black Charts ) while reaching top-ten on the United Kingdom 's R & B Singles Chart and No. 24 on Australia 's Urban Singles Chart . On the main singles charts , the song was most successful in the UK , where it charted at No. 22 on the UK Singles Chart . At the time of release , it became T.I. ' s best UK charting single since 2009 's " Dead and Gone " , and his overall joint sixth-best charting UK single along with 2006 's " Why You Wanna " . In the rest of Europe the single had mixed success , reaching the top-twenty in Belgium , on both the Ultratip Flemish and Wallonian single charts . In Canada the single managed to chart at No. 55 , and in Australia it peaked at No. 44 . According to a press release by Interscope Records , as of March 25 , 2011 , " Hello Good Morning " has sold 1 million digital downloads worldwide .

The music video for " Hello Good Morning " was directed by Hype Williams , and premiered on May 11 , 2010 , through the group 's official VEVO account . Later on May 23 , 2010 , a behind the scenes video was released , revealing that the video was filmed in Agua Dulce , California and Los Angeles . Swizz Beatz , Rico Love and Rick Ross all make cameos in the video . The video uses a remix of the song which is the same as the album version , but features an introduction rap from Ross . Dawn Richard said the concept of the video was based on the 1995 film Heat starring Robert De Niro and Al Pacino . T.I. ' s scenes were amongst the last to be filmed , and took place in an apartment in Bel Aire , CA .

The opening scene begins with panoramic camera shots of a helicopter flying over Los Angeles , at night . Then during Rick Ross 's verse the female members of the group appear posing in the background while Ross raps for the camera . Swizz Beatz and Rico Love make cameos alongside Ross . In a third scene , Diddy can be seen driving through the city at night in a black Bugatti Veyron . For the song 's chorus , Dawn Richard and Kalenna Harper take the lead , ordering drinks in a bar and enjoying the night club . A forth scene for T.I. ' s verse sees the camera focus on T.I. serenading two women in an apartment . Throughout the video the images flicker between the various scenes . In the final part of the video , and during the bridge , all three members of the group appear outside against a backdrop of thick smoke and bright red fireworks . There is a final flash of fireworks before the camera fades completely , to black .

The official remix video premiered on June 21 , 2010 , this version features Rick Ross and Nicki Minaj . The music video takes footage from the original version , but adds several new scenes . When Diddy drives through LA at night , the scene was refilmed with Minaj as his front seat passenger . Additionally there is another new scene where Minaj , in a blue curly wig , raps some of her verse against a dark backdrop . For the " Grime Remix " of the song , a completely new video was filmed Glasgow , Scotland on November 5 , 2010 and features cameos from Boy Better Know & Chipmunk . In this version , Diddy-Dirty Money and Skepta pose for the camera in an elevator before joining Chipmunk and Boy Better Know , backstage at a gig . The cameras follow the group and their guests as they move around backstage partying and walking the streets at night .

Diddy – Dirty Money performed " Hello Good Morning " live for the first time on March 31 , 2010 , on the ninth season of American Idol . The next performance did not come until June 4 , 2010 , this time on Good Morning America . They then reprised the performance five days later on French TV show , Le Grand Journal . On June 12 , 2010 , the group performed ( with guest drummer Matt Helders of Arctic Monkeys ) on Friday Night with Jonathan Ross . Dirty Money later performed " Hello Good Morning " at the 2010 Teen Choice Awards on August 9 , 2010 .

Living River Siam ( Thai : โครงการแม ่ น ้ ำเพื ่ อชีวิต ; formerly South East Asia Rivers Network , or SEARIN ) is a Thai non-governmental organization ( NGO ) which analyzes the impact of Thailand 's various dam projects and coordinates the research of indigenous peoples to give Thai villagers the power to document the influence of local rivers and dams . Founded in 1999 , it gained prominence during the Pak Mun Dam study period in 2001 , when it developed a method for instructing villagers on how to document the effects of the dammed river on their lives . When the Thai government proposed other dam sites , Living River Siam took its research methods to the villages surrounding those sites as well . Today , the organization works with other NGOs in Southeast Asia to counter government-sponsored research that encourages dam construction .

Living River Siam was launched on March 14 , 1999 , the International Rivers Day of Action , by a group of NGO workers and Thai academics . Its first action , on March 23 , was to support an occupation of the Pak Mun Dam site by 5,000 villagers . The Pak Mun Dam , funded partially by the World Bank , was built in 1994 and slowly became the focus of national controversy . It received widespread complaints from Thai villagers and was the focus of the Assembly of the Poor 's 99-day , 20,000-person protest in Bangkok in 1997 . The dam generates 0.5 percent of Thailand 's electric capacity ; 40 percent of Thailand 's total electric capacity goes unused on an everyday basis . On June 16 , 2001 , the Thai government under Thaksin Shinawatra agreed to open the sluice gates of the Pak Mun Dam for four months to allow studies to be conducted on its social impact ; this was later extended to 13 months . Coinciding with this agreement , the government announced that official studies would be conducted by Ubon Ratchathani University and a private team contracted by the National Economic and Social Development Board . The university received a budget of 10 million baht ( roughly US $ 280,000 ) , and the government contractors , alleged to be the same group that recommended damming another river , received 94 million baht ( roughly US $ 2,700,000 ) , raising suspicions . Villagers thought that outside academics would not be able to make an objective or accurate study of the river because they were unfamiliar with local fish migration and habitats .

In response , Living River Siam developed Ngan Wijai Thai Baan ( งานวิจัยไทบ ้ าน ) , or " research by Thai villagers " . This research is meant to circumvent the traditional approach to anthropological study by allowing villagers to investigate and document , in their own language and on their own terms , every aspect of their life on the river . The only function of the overseeing organization is to compile the villagers ' data and publish it for others to read . Living River Siam refers to this in English as " Thai Baan research " . The Mun River research documented the spawning grounds , migration patterns , habitats , and preferred baits of 137 species of fish . Originally , there were 265 species in the river ; 220 of these disappeared when the river was dammed , and only 92 reappeared when the sluice gates were opened , meaning that the diversity of the Mun ecosystem had already been severely reduced by the dam . There were 104 species that migrated between the Mekong and Mun rivers , meaning the dam endangered the Mekong 's ecosystem as well . Thai villagers took photos of all the fish and counted the number of fish caught before and after the opening of the gates . Over 200 villagers volunteered for the study , and divided themselves up into groups to survey the sub-ecosystems of rapids , channels , eddies , small waterfalls , drinking wells , don islands , bok hin pools , khum pools , wang pools , huu holes , lhum hin stone pockets , kon shallows , kan underwater rapids , and luang fishing grounds .

The use of small and large fish in the local economy was analyzed . Researchers found that while the less common large fish are sold for profit , the diet of Pak Mun villagers consisted mostly of small fish which can be caught in both the wet and dry seasons . Small fish are eaten , sold , and traded with the hill peoples for rice . The villages documented changes in their towns as a result of the opening of the sluice gates . Fishermen who had been forced to leave for the city returned to their homes , the increase in fish caused a boom in the rural economy , in fishing and tourism . Villagers were able to hold religious ceremonies in important riverside spaces .

The results of the Thai Baan research were supported by several academics , including Niti Pawakapan of Chulalongkorn University . The Ubon Ratchathani University study also recommended keeping the sluice gates open for at least five years . However , the Thai government rejected all of the studies for unclear reasons and instead conducted a three-day opinion poll of a random sample of Thais , after which it decided that the gates would stay closed for eight out of twelve months of the year . In 2007 , Prime Minister Surayud Chulanont decided to close the gates permanently , citing an alleged secret agreement between thousands of villagers and the Internal Security Operations Command . The response from non-governmental organizations has been more favorable . The Mekong Wetlands Biodiversity Programme ( MWBP ) , an international alliance managed by the United Nations Development Programme and World Conservation Union , has published a study on the methodology of Thai Baan research and coordinated their own study in Sri Songkham district in 2004 , concluding that it was more useful than top-down styles of village research . The study overseen by the MWBP was cited in an academic journal and submitted to an international conference . Living River Siam 's spokesperson Pianporn Deetes was invited to a United Nations Environment Programme conference on dams .

In 2002 the Thai government ’ s department of irrigation met the demands of Living River Siam and the Assembly of the Poor with a promise to halt all future dam projects , which was accepted with cautious optimism . To circumvent the issue of domestic damming , in 2007 the Electricity Generating Authority of Thailand ( EGAT ) announced plans to build a series of dams on Burma 's Salween River along its border with Thailand . Living River Siam opposed this plan , citing the threat of environmental destruction in Burma 's Shan , Karenni , and Karen states as well as Mae Hong Son Province .

The Mekong River remained free of dams until 1993 because of its complex system of rapids which wreck boats , and the unusual monsoon season which reverses the course of some of its branches . In 2004 , the Thai government made an agreement with China to open the river to commercial navigation by destroying rapids , which Thai Baan research had identified as important fish spawning grounds . On the Chinese side , dams were constructed . Living River Siam gathered additional Thai Baan surveys from 146 villagers in Amphoe Chiang Khong , which determined that the blasting of rapids had made the river water unsuitable for drinking and bathing , washed away many local riverside gardens , and decimated the populations of local plants and fish . In response to the 2004 studies , the Thai government suspended blasting on one of the rapids , the Khon Pi Luang .

In 2006 , in response to renewed plans for dam construction in Kaeng Sua Ten , Living River Siam released a report on the people of Sa-iap , Amphoe Song , Phrae Province ( part of Mae Yom National Park ) , based on their own experiences and history . It was called Chaobaan research , but the methodology was equivalent to the Thai Baan research . The report examined the ecosystem of the residents of Sa-iap , the vegetables and fungi they subsisted on , medicinal herbs they used , local fauna , wood resources , and their culture . The report divided Sa-iap history into four periods . Before 1937 , the village was self-sustaining and used both farming and gathering for the overwhelming majority of its needs . In 1937 , the Thai government allowed private companies to log the forest , destroying part of the villages ' infrastructure . In 1957 , the villagers entered the employ of the logging companies , causing internal and external conflict as well as increased reliance on unsustainable practices . Finally , in 1991 the villagers formed a conservation group , the Forest Lover Group , which the Chaobaan researchers agreed cut down on conflict . The mood of the villages has returned to one of mutual assistance and traditional customs .

The Rasi Salai Dam was completed in 1994 , around the same time as the Pak Mun Dam , and received similar local complaints . The dam 's central reservoir was occupied for two years by villagers , until a July 2000 decision opened the sluice gates . From 2003 to 2004 , Living River Siam coordinated Thai Baan research in three districts : Amphoe Rasi Salai , Amphoe Rattanaburi , and Amphoe Phon Sai . The report examined village culture , ecology , biodiversity , agriculture , and food and water management . The impact of the closing and opening of the sluice gates was also examined . It was concluded that the dam reduced fish populations , but more importantly , flooded natural salt pits and spread them into rice and vegetable fields , destroying trees and crops . The government has not made a commitment to keep the Rasi Salai Dam out of commission , but as of 2008 the gates have not yet been closed .

In 2005 , and again in 2008 , the Mekong River flooded its banks , damaging hundreds of rural villages . Living River Siam joined with other NGOs to form the Thai People 's Network for Mekong , which pointed to dams in China as the primary cause of the flooding . An intergovernmental working group called the Mekong River Commission opposed these claims , saying China 's dams had little to do with the flood , although they also pressed China for data on the floodwaters . The back-and-forth was covered heavily in Thai press , which gave ample space to the statements of the People 's Network .

Beginning in 2006 , Living River Siam began training other grassroots organizations in Thai Baan research , beginning with the Vietnam Rivers Network and expanding to a Chinese group in 2007 . In 2008 they worked with the Burma Rivers Network to conduct research on the Salween River . They also assisted a United Nations-funded NGO , the Mekong Wetlands Biodiversity Programme ( MWBP ) , with running Thai Baan research in 2004 . Living River Siam , along with the MWBP , organizes cross-basin coordination between Thai Baan research groups . Living River Siam has compiled the research and oral accounts of Thai villagers into many publications , which they make available on their website . Its published books document local knowledge about fish , the results of village research , a how-to manual for Thai Baan research , and citizens ' guides to defending Thai rivers and communities . They also have produced posters of fish species and dams , pamphlets on fishing gear , and short documentaries about the river .

The Battle of the Plains of Abraham , also known as the Battle of Quebec , ( Bataille des Plaines d 'Abraham or Première bataille de Québec in French ) was a pivotal battle in the Seven Years ' War ( referred to as the French and Indian War in the United States ) . The battle , which began on 13 September 1759 , was fought by the British Army and Navy against the French Army on a plateau just outside the walls of Quebec City , on land that was originally owned by a farmer named Abraham Martin , hence the name of the battle . The battle involved fewer than 10,000 troops between both sides , but proved to be a deciding moment in the conflict between France and Britain over the fate of New France , influencing the later creation of Canada . The culmination of a three-month siege by the British , the battle lasted about 15 minutes . British troops commanded by General James Wolfe successfully resisted the column advance of French troops and Canadien militia under General Louis-Joseph , Marquis de Montcalm , employing new tactics that proved extremely effective against standard military formations used in most large European conflicts . Both generals were mortally wounded during the battle ; Wolfe received three gunshot wounds that ended his life within minutes of the beginning of the engagement and Montcalm died the next morning after receiving a musket ball wound just below his ribs . In the wake of the battle , the French evacuated the city ; their remaining military force in Canada and the rest of North America came under increasing pressure from British forces .

As the Seven Years ' War entered its later stages through 1758 and 1759 , French forces and colonies in northeastern North America came under renewed attacks from British armies . In 1758 after defeat in July at the Battle of Carillon , the British took Louisbourg in August , causing Atlantic Canada to fall into British hands , and opening the sea route to attack Quebec . Fort Frontenac fell to the British in the same month , costing the French supplies for the Ohio Valley campaign . When some of the Indian supporters of the French made peace with the British , France was forced to draw its troops back . French leadership , specifically Governor de Vaudreuil and General Montcalm , were unsettled by the British successes . However , Quebec was still able to protect itself as the British prepared a three-pronged attack for 1759 . James Wolfe expected to lead 12,000 men , but was greeted by only approximately 400 officers , 7,000 regular troops , and 300 gunners . Wolfe 's troops were supported by a fleet of 49 ships and 140 smaller craft led by Admiral Charles Saunders . In preparation for the fleet 's approach to Quebec , James Cook surveyed a large portion of the river , including a dangerous channel known as The Traverse . Cook 's ship was one of the first ships up the river , sounding the channel and guiding the fleet as it moved up , eventually landing Wolfe and his men on the Île d 'Orléans on 28 June . The French attempted to attack the fleet by sending seven fire ships downriver to disrupt the landing , but the ships fired too early and British sailors in longboats were able to pull the flaming craft clear of the fleet . The following day , Wolfe 's troops landed on the south bank of the river at Point Levis , nearly directly across the river from Quebec ; an artillery battery was established there in early July that nearly levelled the lower town by bombardment .

Despite an air of defeatism among the leadership , the professional French troops and New French militia defenders focused preparations for the British attacks on the Beauport Shore . Montcalm and his staff , Major-General François de Gaston , Chevalier de Lévis , Colonel Louis Antoine de Bougainville , and Lieutenant-Colonel de Sennezergue , distributed some 12,000 troops in a nine-kilometre-long collection of fortified redoubts and batteries from the Saint-Charles River to the Montmorency Falls , along the shallows of the river in areas that had previously been targeted by British attempts to land . Prior to the arrival of the British , a small fleet of supply ships had arrived in Quebec with much needed supplies . Those supplies , along with 500 reinforcements , were likely behind the lengthened siege . Wolfe , on surveying the town of Beauport , found that the houses there had been barricaded and organized to allow for musket fire from within ; they were built in an unbroken line along the road , providing a formidable barrier . In addition , a screen of trees along the Montmorency River made an approach on that route dangerous . On 31 July , the first serious attempt by Wolfe 's troops to land on the northern shore led to the Battle of Beauport , also known as the Battle of Montmorency . Approximately 3,500 troops , supported by a heavy bombardment , attempted to land , but were caught under fire in the river shallows . Members of the Louisbourg Grenadiers , who reached the beach , attempted a generally undisciplined charge on the French positions , but came under heavy fire ; a thunderstorm ended the fight and allowed Wolfe to pull his troops back after taking some 450 casualties to Montcalm 's 60 .

Some French officers felt the Montmorency defeat would be the last British attack ; Vaudreuil wrote afterwards that " I have no more anxiety about Quebec . Wolfe , I assure you , will make no progress … He contented himself with losing about five hundred of his best soldiers . " He predicted another attack would come within days . Others in the French camp felt the campaign was over . For the remainder of the summer , Wolfe 's focus changed , possibly due to frustration with Montcalm 's tactics . His troops , along with American Rangers , attacked and destroyed small French settlements along the St. Lawrence . An estimated 1,400 stone houses and manors were destroyed , and many colonists killed . The effort was likely an attempt to force Montcalm 's army out of its fortifications , but was unsuccessful . However , the attacks did reduce the amount of supplies available to the French , especially as the British navy , unable to control the St. Lawrence entirely , was successfully blockading the ports in France .

Through the summer siege , illness spread through the British camps . In August , Wolfe himself was bedridden , causing already low morale to slump even further among the British troops . With many men in camp hospitals , British fighting numbers were thinned , and Wolfe personally felt that a new attack was needed by the end of September , or Britain 's opportunity would be lost . In addition , his frustration with Montcalm 's defensive stance continued to grow . In a letter to his mother , Wolfe wrote , " The Marquis of Montcalm is at the head of a great number of bad soldiers , and I am at the head of a small number of good ones that wish for nothing so much as to fight him ; but the wary old fellow avoids an action , doubtful of the behaviour of his army . " Montcalm also expressed frustration over the long siege , relating that he and his troops slept clothed and booted , and his horse was always saddled in preparation for an attack . After considering and rejecting a number of plans for landings on the north shore , a decision was made in late August by Wolfe and his brigadiers to land upriver of the city . If successful , such a landing would force Montcalm to fight , as a British force on the north shore of the St. Lawrence would cut his supply lines to Montreal . Initial suggestions for landing sites ranged as far as 32 kilometres ( 20 mi ) up the St. Lawrence , which would have given the French troops one or two days to prepare for the attack . Following the failed British assault on Montmorency , Montcalm altered his deployment , sending Bougainville and a column of approximately 1,500 regular troops , 200 cavalry , and a group of New French militia — some 3,000 men in all — upriver to Cap-Rouge to monitor the British ships upstream . He further strengthened his defences of the Beauport shore following the abandonment of the British camp at Montmorency , which he regarded as preparations for a descent ( amphibious attack ) on Beauport . In spite of warnings from local commanders , he did not view an upstream landing as a serious possibility .

The British , meanwhile , prepared for their risky deployment upstream . Troops had already been aboard landing ships and drifting up and down the river for several days when Wolfe on 12 September , made a final decision on the British landing site , selecting L 'Anse-au-Foulon . L 'Anse-au-Foulon is a cove situated southwest of the city , three kilometres upstream from Cap Diamant . It lies at the bottom of a 53-metre ( 174 ft ) high cliff leading to the plateau above , and was protected by a battery of guns . It is not known why Wolfe selected Foulon , as the original landing site was to be further up the river , in a position where the British would be able to develop a foothold and strike at Bougainville 's force to draw Montcalm out of Quebec and onto the plains . Brigadier-General George Townshend wrote that " by some intelligence the General had , he has changed his mind as to the place he intended to land . " In his final letter , dated HMS Sutherland , 8 : 30 p.m. 12 September , Wolfe wrote : Wolfe 's plan of attack depended on secrecy and surprise . His plan required that a small party of men should land by night on the north shore , climb the tall cliff , seize a small road , and overpower the garrison that protected it , allowing the bulk of his army ( 5,000 men ) to ascend the cliff by the small road and then deploy for battle on the plateau . Even if the first landing party succeeded in their mission and the army was able to follow , such a deployment would still leave his forces inside the French line of defense with no immediate retreat but the river . It is possible that Wolfe 's decision to change the landing site was owing less to a desire for secrecy and more to his general disdain for his brigadiers ( a feeling that was reciprocated ) ; it is also possible that he was still suffering the effects of his illness and the opiates he used as painkillers . Anderson believes Wolfe ordered the attack believing the advanced guard would be repulsed , and anticipated dying gallantly with his men rather than returning home in disgrace .

Bougainville , tasked with the defence of the large area between Cap Diamant and Cap Rouge , was upstream with his troops at Cap Rouge on the night of 12 September , and missed seeing numerous British ships moving downstream . A camp of approximately 100 militia led by Captain Louis Du Pont Duchambon de Vergor , who had unsuccessfully faced the British four years previously at Fort Beauséjour , had been assigned to watch the narrow road at L 'Anse-au-Foulon which followed a streambank , the Coulée Saint-Denis . On the night of 12 September and morning of 13 September , however , the camp may have contained as few as 40 men , as others were off harvesting . Vaudreuil and others had expressed their concern at the possibility of L 'Anse-au-Foulon being vulnerable , but Montcalm dismissed them , saying 100 men would hold off the army until daylight , remarking , " It is not to be supposed that the enemies have wings so that they can in the same night cross the river , disembark , climb the obstructed acclivity , and scale the walls , for which last operation they would have to carry ladders . "

Sentries did detect boats moving along the river that morning , but they were expecting a French supply convoy to pass that night — a plan that had been changed without Vergor being notified . When the boats , loaded with the first wave of British troops , were challenged , a French-speaking officer , either a Captain Fraser or Captain Donald McDonald of the 78th Fraser Highlanders , was able to answer the challenge in excellent French , allaying suspicion . The boats , however , had drifted slightly off course : instead of landing at the base of the road , many soldiers found themselves at the base of a slope . A group of 24 volunteers led by Colonel William Howe with fixed bayonets were sent to clear the picket along the road , and climbed the slope , a manoeuvre that allowed them to come up behind Vergor 's camp and capture it quickly . Wolfe followed an hour later when he could use an easy access road to climb to the plain . Thus , by the time the sun rose over the Plains of Abraham , Wolfe 's army had a solid foothold at the top of the cliffs .

The plateau was undefended save for Vergor 's camp , as Vaudreuil had ordered one of the French regiments to relocate to the east of the city not long before the landing . Had the immediate defenders been more numerous , the British might have been unable to deploy or even been pushed back . An officer who would normally have patrolled the cliffs regularly through the night was unable to on the night of the 12th because one of his horses had been stolen and his two others were lame . The first notice of the landing came from a runner who had fled from Vergor 's camp , but one of Montcalm 's aides felt the man was mad and sent him away , then went back to bed . Saunders had staged a diversionary action off Montmorency , firing on the shore emplacements through the night and loading boats with troops , many of them taken from field hospitals ; this preoccupied Montcalm . Montcalm was taken aback to learn of the British deployment , and his response has been regarded as precipitate . Though he might have awaited reinforcement by Bougainville 's column ( allowing simultaneous frontal and rear attacks on the British position ) or avoided battle while he concentrated his forces , or even yielded the city to Wolfe , he instead elected to confront Wolfe 's force directly . Had he waited , the British would have been entirely cut off — they had nowhere to go but back down the Foulon , and would have been under fire the entire way . To an artillery officer named Montbelliard , Montcalm explained his decision thus : " We cannot avoid action ; the enemy is entrenching , he already has two pieces of cannon . If we give him time to establish himself , we shall never be able to attack him with the troops we have . "

In total , Montcalm had 13,390 regular troops , Troupes de la Marine , and militia available in Quebec City and along the Beauport shore , as well as 200 cavalry , 200 artillery ( including the guns of Quebec ) , 300 native warriors ( including many Odawa under Charles de Langlade ) , and 140 Acadian volunteers , but most of these troops did not participate in the action . Many of the militia were inexperienced ; the Acadian , Canadian , and indigenous irregulars were more used to guerilla warfare . By contrast , the British troops were almost all regulars . On the morning of 13 September , Wolfe 's army formed a line first with their backs to the river , then spread out across the Plains with its right anchored by the bluff along the St. Lawrence and its left by a bluff and thick wood above the St. Charles River . While the regular French forces were approaching from Beauport and Quebec , the Canadian militia and native sharpshooters engaged the British left flank , sheltering in the trees and scrub ; the militia held these positions throughout the battle and fell back on this line during the general retreat , eventually holding the bridge over the St. Charles River .

The British troops , numbering approximately 3,300 , formed into a shallow horseshoe formation that stretched across the width of the Plains , the main firing line being roughly one kilometre long . In order to cover the entire plain , Wolfe was forced to array his soldiers two ranks deep , rather than the more conventional three ranks . On the left wing , regiments under Townshend exchanged fire with the militia in the scrub and captured a small collection of houses and gristmill to anchor the line . The defenders pushed the British from one house , but were repelled and , in retreat , lit several houses on fire to keep them out of enemy hands . Smoke from these fires wound up masking the British left , and may have confused Montcalm as to the width of the lines . As Wolfe 's men waited for the defenders , the steady fire became intense enough that Wolfe ordered his men to lie down amid the high grass and brush . As French troops arrived from Beauport , Montcalm , one of few mounted men on the field , decided that a swift assault was the only way to dislodge the British from their position . Accordingly , he deployed the forces immediately available in and near Quebec City and prepared an immediate attack , without waiting for further reinforcements from the Beauport shore . He arrayed his approximately 3,500 soldiers into place , his best regulars three deep , others six deep and his poorest regiment in column . At approximately 10 a.m. , Montcalm , riding his dark horse and waving his sword to encourage his men , ordered a general advance on the British line .

As a European-trained military leader , Montcalm 's instinct was for large , set-piece battles in which regiments and soldiers moved in precise order . Such actions required a disciplined soldiery , painstakingly drilled for as long as 18 months on the parade ground , trained to march in time , change formation at a word , and retain cohesion in the face of bayonet charges and musket volleys . Though his regular regiments ( the " troupes de terre " or " metropolitans " ) were adept at such formal warfare , in the course of the campaign their ranks had been replenished by less professional militiamen , whose talents at forest warfare emphasised the individual : they tended to fire early and then drop to the ground to reload , thus reducing the effect of concentrated fire at close range .

As the French approached , the British lines held their fire . Wolfe had devised a firing method for stopping French column advances in 1755 that called for the centre — in this case , the 43rd and 47th Foot regiments — to hold fire while waiting for the advancing force to approach within 30 yards ( 27 m ) , then open fire at close range . The French held their fire and both armies waited for two or three minutes . The French finally fired two disorganized volleys . Wolfe had ordered his soldiers to charge their muskets with two balls each in preparation for the engagement . Captain John Knox , serving with the 43rd Foot , wrote in his journal that as the French came within range , the regiments " gave them , with great calmness , as remarkable a close and heavy discharge as I ever saw . " After the first volley , the British lines marched forward a few paces towards the shocked French force and fired a second general volley that shattered the attackers and sent them into retreat . Wolfe , positioned with the 28th Foot and the Louisbourg Grenadiers , had moved to a rise to observe the battle ; he had been struck in the wrist early in the fight , but had wrapped the injury and continued on . Volunteer James Henderson , with the Louisbourg Grenadiers , had been tasked with holding the hill , and reported afterwards that within moments of the command to fire , Wolfe was struck with two shots , one low in the stomach and the second , a mortal wound in the chest . Knox wrote that one of the soldiers near Wolfe shouted " They run , see how they run . " Wolfe , on the ground , opened his eyes and asked who was running . Upon being told that the French had broken , he gave several orders , then turned on his side and said " Now , God be praised , I will die in peace " , and died .

With Wolfe dead and several other key officers injured , British troops fell into a disorganised pursuit of the retreating French troops . The 78th Fraser Highlanders were ordered by Brigadier-General James Murray to pursue the French with their swords , but were met near the city by a heavy fire from a floating battery covering the bridge over the St. Charles River as well as militia that remained in the trees . The 78th took the highest number of casualties of all British units in the battle . An eyewitness with the 78th Highlanders ( Dr. Robert Macpherson ) wrote three days after the battle : The Highlanders pursued them to the very Sally Port of the town . The Highlanders returned towards the main body . When the highlanders were gathered together , they lay 'd on a separate attack against a large body of Canadians on our flank that were posted in a small village and a Bush of woods . Here , after a wonderful escape all day , we suffered great loss both in Officers and men but at last drove them under the cover of their cannon which likeways did us considerable loss . "

Townshend took charge of the British forces and realised that Bougainville 's column was approaching from the British rear , having taken some time to arrive from Cap Rouge . He quickly formed up two battalions from the confused troops on the field and turned them to meet the oncoming French , a day-saving manoeuvre ; instead of attacking with a well rested and ready force , Bougainville retreated while the rest of Montcalm 's army slipped back across the St. Charles . During the retreat , Montcalm , still mounted , was struck by either canister shot from the British artillery or repeated musket fire , suffering injuries to the lower abdomen and thigh . He was able to make it back into the city , but his wounds were mortal and he died early the next morning . He was buried in a shell crater left in the floor of the Ursuline chapel by a British shell . The battle resulted in similar numbers of casualties on both sides of the field ; the French had 644 men killed or injured , while the British were left with 658 killed or wounded .

In the wake of the battle , a state of confusion spread through the French troops . Governor de Vaudreuil , who later wrote to his government and put the full blame for the French rout on the deceased Montcalm , decided to abandon Quebec and the Beauport shore , ordering all of his forces to march west and eventually join up with Bougainville , leaving the garrison in Quebec under the command of Jean-Baptiste Nicolas Roch de Ramezay . Meanwhile , the British , first under the command of Townshend and later with Murray in charge , settled in to besiege the city in conjunction with Saunders ' fleet . Within days , on 18 September , de Ramezay , Townshend and Saunders signed the Articles of Capitulation of Quebec and the city was turned over to British control . The remaining French forces positioned themselves on the Jacques-Cartier River west of the city . The British Navy was forced to leave the St. Lawrence shortly after the capture of Quebec due to pack ice closing the mouth of the river . Before the ice left the rivers in April , the Chevalier de Lévis , Montcalm 's successor as French commander , marched his 7,000 troops to Quebec . James Murray , the British commander , had experienced a terrible winter , in which scurvy had reduced his garrison to only 4,000 . On 28 April 1760 , Lévis ' forces met and defeated the British at the Battle of Sainte-Foy , immediately west of the city ( near the site of Université Laval today ) . This battle proved bloodier than that of the Plains of Abraham , with about 850 casualties on the French side and 1,100 on the British side . The British were defeated in the battle , but were able to withdraw within the walls of Quebec , which was now under siege . A lack of artillery and ammunition , combined with British improvements to the fortifications , meant that the French were unable to take the city before the arrival of the British fleet in mid-May which defeated Levis ' support ships . A naval battle fought at Quiberon Bay , just off the coast of France , proved the decisive battle for this part of New France . The Royal Navy destroyed the French fleet , meaning France could not send a reserve force to save New France . The success of the French army 's offensive against Quebec in the spring of 1760 had depended on the dispatch of a French armada , with fresh troops and supplies .

Today , while much of the foreshore along the base of the cliffs that were scaled by William Howe 's men the morning of the battle has been taken over by industry , the Plains of Abraham themselves are preserved within one of Canada 's National Urban Parks . There is a monument on the site of the Battle of Sainte-Foy . In 2009 , a number of activities were proposed to commemorate the 250th anniversary of the Battle of the Plains of Abraham . A plan to hold a reenactment of the battle itself ( as well as a reenactment of the subsequent French victory of 1760 at the Battle of Sainte-Foy ) was cancelled due to threats of public disorder . Leaders of separatist parties described the event as a slap in the face for Quebecers of French ancestry and as an insult for the francophone majority . Some sovereigntist groups threatened or made indirect threats by stating that if the event took place , there could be violence . The movement against re-enactment and these threats of violence led the National Battlefields Commission to cancel the event . Another commemorative event was proposed for the anniversary , the Moulin à paroles . Thousands gathered on the Plains of Abraham to listen to recitations of 140 significant texts from Quebec history , including the 1970 FLQ Manifesto . The inclusion of that document in the event led to condemnations and a boycott from federalist politicians and the withdrawal of some government funding for the event . The Moulin à paroles took place without incident .

In Two Grey Hills , New Mexico , Albert Hosteen ( Floyd Red Crow Westerman ) and his family are beaten by the Men in Black as they search for the whereabouts of Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) . Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) is pursued by a black helicopter before soldiers retrieve her printed copies of Albert 's translations of the digital tape . Scully denies having the original tape , saying it is in Mulder 's possession . Upon returning to Washington , the FBI puts Scully on mandatory leave and forces her to turn in her badge and gun . Upon entering Mulder 's office , she finds the tape missing . Meanwhile , in New York City , The Smoking Man ( William B. Davis ) appears before the Syndicate , who question him over the whereabouts of the tape . Mulder , alive but severely wounded , is found buried under some rocks near the buried boxcar . Hosteen has Mulder taken to a Navajo sweat lodge to be healed during a " Blessing Way " ritual . During the ritual , Mulder has ghostly visions of Deep Throat and his father , who urge him to recover and continue his search for the truth .

Melvin Frohike visits Scully 's apartment and shows her a newspaper article about Kenneth Soona 's murder . When she returns to FBI headquarters , the metal detector curiously goes off . Scully presents Skinner with the newspaper article , thinking that the data from Soona 's death can clear Mulder in his father 's murder . Skinner , however , refuses to do any follow-up on it . Leaving the building , Scully has a hunch upon seeing the metal detector again that leads to locating metal in the back of her neck . Scully sees a doctor , who removes a small metal implant . Scully 's sister Melissa urges her to see a hypnotherapist to recover lost memories of her abduction . Scully heads there , but becomes scared and stops the session . Returning home , Scully finds Skinner leaving her apartment and driving off ; he later denies being there . Mulder , recovered from the Blessing Way ritual , is told by Albert that he cannot bathe or change clothes for four days . Scully heads to Boston to attend Bill 's funeral , where she introduces herself to Mulder 's mother , Teena . At the cemetery , Scully is approached by a Syndicate member known as the Well-Manicured Man , who warns her that she is about to be killed , either by a pair of assassins or by someone she knows . Mulder goes to Connecticut and questions Teena about an old photo of his father standing with the other members of the Syndicate in front of a mysterious building .

Melissa calls Scully and tells her she is coming over . After receiving a call from someone who immediately hangs up , Scully leaves her apartment and tells Melissa that she 'll head to her home instead . As she leaves , Skinner pulls up in his car , telling her they need to speak in private . Melissa shows up soon afterwards and is mistakenly shot by Luis Cardinal , who is hiding there with Alex Krycek . Realizing they shot the wrong person , the two flee . Meanwhile , after taking Skinner to Mulder 's apartment , Scully holds him at gunpoint , believing he is the traitor the Well-Manicured Man spoke of . Skinner tells Scully that he is in possession of the digital tape . Just then , someone steps outside the door . This distracts Scully enough for Skinner to pull out his gun on her .

Series creator Chris Carter felt this was one of his favorite episodes to write , as he found it interesting to explore how the character of Fox Mulder would react to the death of his father . Carter had recently lost a parent himself when he began work on the episode . Frank Spotnitz said of the episode " The expectations were very high coming after a summer 's worth of anticipation to see how Mulder got out of the boxcar . We knew we had to answer that question and still leave an intriguing enough dilemma at the end of the show to bring viewers back for the third and final part . I also thought it was a big gamble to do all that Indian mysticism stuff . I thought a lot of people would not necessarily respond to that . So I was nervous about that , but very excited about the Scully storyline and the way all of that played out with Mulder and Skinner . " Carter attended Navajo chants and rituals to ensure the accuracy of the events in this episode , after being alerted to inaccuracies in the previous episode by Navajo scholars . A sand painter was brought in to create the two sand paintings for the Blessing Way sequence , which took an entire day to create . The scenes set in New Mexico were filmed in the same Vancouver quarry that had been used as a stand-in in the previous episode , " Anasazi " , the repainting of which required only minor touch-ups .

Visual effects producer Mat Beck considered the sequence where Fox Mulder has a vision of Deep Throat and his father the most difficult of the season . The end of the episode reads " In Memoriam , Larry Wells , 1946 - 1995 . " Wells was a costume designer on the show . Mark Snow slightly changed the piano melody from the opening theme music ( and the corresponding shortened theme in the credits ) from the first two seasons in this episode . The music would remain unchanged for several years . The title of the episode refers to the Navajo ceremony of the Blessing Way . This is the first episode where Mitch Pileggi is credited under Also Starring in the opening credits .

" The Blessing Way " received mixed reviews from critics . The episode , along with both other parts of the story arc , were listed concurrently as the second-best episode of the series by Den of Geek 's Nina Sordi . Sordi noted that the plotline " laid the groundwork for the mythology arc for the rest of the series " , adding that it " brought much more significance to what is to come " . John Keegan , writing for Critical Myth , gave the episode a largely positive review and rated it a 10 out of 10 . Keegan described it as the " perfect counterpoint to Anasazi " and a " strong beginning to the third season " . Other reviews were more mixed . In an overview of the third season in Entertainment Weekly , " The Blessing Way " was rated a B + . The episode was derided for its " corny dream sequence and high-flown cosmic hooey " , although the introduction of the Well-Manicured Man and Mitch Pileggi 's portrayal of Walter Skinner were seen as highlights . Writing for the A.V. Club , Todd VanDerWerff panned the episode 's " pseudo-mystical bullshit " , rating the episode a B- . He felt that the resolution of the cliffhanger from the previous episode " Anasazi " — that of Mulder 's apparent death — was poorly handled , and that the character of Albert Hosteen was perhaps the worst in the series . However , the introduction of plot threads such as Scully 's implant and the alien-human hybrids were deemed positive factors .

David Duchovny was somewhat disappointed with the episode , hoping he would have had a chance to do more in an episode that was primarily a symbolic journey for him rather than a real one . The actor said " I like the psychology , and I like the thinking that went into the episode as a viewer . As an actor , I felt like an opportunity passed me by . If I had to do any episode over again , it would be that one . " The actor called the episode in 1995 the greatest missed opportunity they had . Chris Carter disagreed , stating that Fox Mulder 's role in the episode was the right way to do it , and that the dramatic weight for the episode had to shift from Mulder to Dana Scully .

Ratu was an Indonesian music duo formed in 1999 with Maia Estianty , then the wife of musician Ahmad Dhani , on instruments and Pinkan Mambo on vocals . Ratu entered the Indonesian musical scene with their first album , Bersama ( Together ; 2003 ) . After a short break caused by Mambo 's departure in 2004 , the group formed anew with Mulan Kwok as vocalist . This new line-up proved more successful , with their most successful songs – " Teman Tapi Mesra " ( " Friends with Benefits " ) and " Lelaki Buaya Darat " ( " Womaniser " ) – released in this period ; both song titles later became common terms in the Indonesian vocabulary . The group 's second studio album , No . Satu ( Number One ; 2006 ) , sold 200,000 copies on the day of its release , a record for an album by an Indonesian female group . The group dissolved in 2007 . Ratu was the most successful female Indonesian music group of the 2000s . Aside from their music , they were known for their physical appearance and wide coverage in infotainment media . Through their choice in costumes , Ratu popularised Harajuku styles in Indonesia . Throughout their career , the band won numerous awards ; they were the first musical act to twice be declared " Artist of the Year " and " Group / Duo Artist of The Year " at the MTV Ampuh music awards . This success inspired numerous other groups to follow in their tracks .

Maia Ahmad , at the time wife of the musician Ahmad Dhani , had been a background singer for her husband 's band Dewa 19 since 1993 . She had been musically inclined since childhood and had formed a band while a teenager . She intended to be like her husband and enter the music industry as a headline performer . In a later interview , she explained her motivations : " I wasn 't following on the success of Krisdayanti dan Anang , a husband and wife who had made an album together . I just started when I did . Dhani only gave me the time then , as our children were getting older and I could focus on my music . " With Dhani 's guidance , in 1999 Maia decided to form a duo consisting of a singer and a musician , with the name Ratu . The concept was based on that of international bands like Roxette and Savage Garden . Maia set herself as a keyboardist , then began to look for a vocalist . Pinkan Mambo , who at the time sang at a café , was working towards a career as a professional musician . In mid-1999 , she met Dhani at a café in Pondok Indah Mall , South Jakarta . She introduced herself to him , saying that she had a good voice . When Dhani asked how good , she replied " Amazing . [ ... ] as good as Mariah Carey . " Mambo then received Dhani 's number , which she used to call him repeatedly and ask for an album . On the fifth day , Maia answered the phone and eventually offered Mambo the position of vocalist with Ratu . Although Mambo wanted to be a soloist , she accepted and had an audition at Maia 's home , where she was accepted before she could finish singing . Before she began work with Ratu , Pinkan was given training as a backing vocalist for Dewa 19 .

After three years of preparation , in January 2003 Ratu launched their debut album Bersama with Sony Music Indonesia . The album included ten songs , seven written by Maia and three by Dhani ; Maia also did the arrangement and served as backing vocalist . Other musicians involved on the album included Bintang ( bass ) , Denny Chasmala , Andra Ramadhan and Taras ( guitar ) , Agil Cinere ( drums ) , Donni ( flute ) , Sa 'unine ( strings ) and Henry Lamiri ( violin ) . The music was R & B-influenced , with added piano for a " feminine touch . " With the album several singles , " Aku Baik-Baik Saja " ( " I 'm Fine " ) , " Salahkah Aku Terlalu Mencintaimu " ( " Blame Me For Loving You Too Much " ) and " Jangan Bilang Siapa Siapa " ( " Don 't Tell Anyone " ) , were released . This first album was well-received and sold more than 250,000 copies . Ratu also provided a new sound , as the Indonesian music industry of the time was dominated by male groups . Ratu won Best Newcomer at the 2003 Clear Top Ten Awards . At the 2006 MTV Ampuh awards , Ratu was awarded Artist of the Year and Group / Duo Artist of The Year .

After the success of Bersama , Maia and Mambo began to work on a second album , scheduled for a 2004 release . However , on 14 October 2004 Mambo announced she was leaving the group amidst widespread media coverage of her being pregnant outside of wedlock . Reports indicated that she may have left the group because of Maia 's more dominant personality and conflicts between the two . Maia , left as the only member of the band , insisted that it was not dissolving , and would soon hold auditions for a new vocalist . As a temporary measure , several singers were contracted to perform with Maia , although not signed as members . Tia , a finalist in Akademi Fantasi Indosiar ( AFI ) , came under consideration for the position , but was unable to accept as she was still contracted to AFI .

While looking for a new vocalist , Maia met Mulan Kwok , a performer at Barbados Cafe in Bilangan Kemang , Jakarta , in December 2004 . Of this meeting , Maia later recalled " When I met Mulan it was like meeting a new lover . I saw her and I liked her . Just fell in love . " Mulan was a café singer from Bandung who sang with Dimensi Band . She was asked to audition for the role and ultimately selected ; her appointment was announced at a press conference on 7 April 2005 . With Mulan , the group 's concept , originally " elegant " , became " coquettish and sexy " . The group 's musical style also changed ; while originally R & B with light piano , it was changed to a rock sound with dominant guitars . On 30 August 2005 Ratu released a compilation album entitled Ratu & Friends which included two new songs from the group , " Teman Tapi Mesra " ( " Friends With Benefits " ) and a cover of Vina Panduwinata 's " Di Dadaku Ada Kamu " ( " In My Chest there is You " ) . " Teman Tapi Mesra " was an overnight hit in Indonesia , Malaysia , and Singapore and enjoyed by both adults and children alike . The term " Teman Tapi Mesra " , often abbreviated TTM , became widely used to describe those in a physical relationship without an emotional one . The ringback tone for " Teman Tapi Mesra " held the top position in Malaysia for several weeks . In Indonesia , the ringback tone saw more than a million downloads . The album sold more than 400,000 copies and was certified double platinum . Ratu then put on a forty-city concert tour throughout Indonesia with the band Radja ; the Rock in Love tour began with a concert at the Jakarta Convention Center on 20 February 2006 .

On 22 May 2006 Ratu released their second studio album , No . Satu ( Number One ) . Like on Bersama , most of the songs recorded were written by Maia . Dhani contributed three songs , while Mulan helped write the song " Seribu Cinta " ( " A Thousand Loves " ) . No . Satu also involved musicians such as Yoyo Padi , Denny Chasmala , Tepi Item , and Bintang . Two singles from the album , " Lelaki Buaya Darat " ( " Womanizer " ) and " Dear Diary " , were hits , as was the album ; it sold 200,000 copies on the day of its release , a record for a work by a female Indonesian group . " Lelaki Buaya Darat " was banned in Malaysia because of its perceived negative connotations . The band tried to change the song 's title , but this was unsuccessful . However , some radio stations in Malaysia still played the song . Throughout 2005 and 2006 Ratu was one of Indonesia 's dominant bands and often used in product advertisements . Both members explored different aspects of show business . Maia acted in Extravaganza , a comedy show on Trans TV , while Mulan starred in several television films . The band 's clothing , inspired by the Harajuku fashion district in Japan , made teenagers interested in street clothing . The band also received widespread coverage in infotainment media , with much gossip about Dhani 's relationship with Mulan . Noting the role that infotainment media had played in the band 's success , Maia said " Ratu should give thanks to all those reporters who gave us fame with their gossip . "

Ratu received numerous awards during this period . At the tenth Anugerah Musik Indonesia , the band received three nominations and won Best Produced Work for " Teman Tapi Mesra " . Maia and Mulan were also awarded Top Singer at the SCTV Awards , winning over established stars Agnes Monica , Ari Lasso , Iwan Fals , dan Krisdayanti . Ada the MTV Indonesia Awards , they were nominated in two categories . At the MTV Ampuh Awards , Ratu was declared Artist of the Year and " Group / Duo Artist of The Year " , making them the first group to win both awards twice .

At the end of 2006 , Ahmad Dhani threatened to disband the group if Maia did not cut back on her performance schedule ; he felt she was too busy , to the point of forgetting their children . Dhani later withdrew his threat , but – after becoming manager – limited the group to one performance a week . He then fired the group 's manager , Vita Ramona , who threatened to bring Dhani to court if he did not apologize for perceived defamation . This situation was exacerbated when Mulan publicly complained of not receiving her share of the band 's money and a lack of transparency in the management . She resigned on 30 January 2007 , after waiting ten days for her open letter to the management to receive a reply . Mulan then hired a lawyer and sued Dhani , resulting in her contract fee being returned . After Mulan left , Maia continued to perform as Ratu own her own . She participated in the concert tour A Mild Live Soundrenaline with Shanty , Bunga Citra Lestari , and Ghea — a winner of Indonesian Idol . Later domestic troubles between Dhani and Maia led to the group to dissolve . At the end of 2007 , the group 's name became an object of contention between the two . Dhani claimed the name " Ratu " as his intellectual right and said that he had registered it with the General Directorate of Intellectual Rights . He forbid Maia , who was then looking for a new partner , to use the name .

At the beginning of 2008 , Maia launched Duo Maia with her new partner Mey Chan . Unlike Ratu , Duo Maia was conceived as a vocal group and Maia was predominantly a vocalist . Meanwhile , Mulan signed with Republik Cinta Management under Ahmad Dhani . Mulan released a solo album entitled Makhluk Tuhan Paling Seksi ( God 's Sexiest Creature ) in 2008 and changed her stage name to Mulan Jameela . Mambo , the Ratu 's original vocalist , had already released a solo album , entitled Aku Tahu Rasanya ( I Know How It Feels ) in 2006 . In 2009 , " Teman Tapi Mesra " was bought by LadyLike , a Swedish girl band , and released in the European market as the English-language " Dreaming of the Time " . Ratu was followed by numerous Indonesian duos attempting to follow in its success . Towards the end of the 2000s , Ahmad Dhani did so as well , coaching the duos MahaDewi and The Virgin . None of these groups were as successful as Ratu , and , by 2011 , Korean-inspired boy and girl bands had become dominant . Maia later said that Ratu had been successful because it was the only one of its kind , that " there were benefits to being a pioneer "

Richard James " Rich " Appel ( born May 21 , 1963 ) is an American writer , producer and former attorney . Since 2012 , he has served as an Executive Producer and co-showrunner of Family Guy on Fox . Growing up in Wilmette , Illinois , Appel developed a love of comedy and dreamed of a career as a comedy writer ; he attended Harvard University and wrote for the Harvard Lampoon . Following in his mother 's footsteps , Appel instead became a lawyer . After attending law school he started out as a law clerk for Judge John M. Walker , Jr. before becoming a federal attorney , serving as assistant U.S. attorney for the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York for three years . In 1994 , he moved into comedy writing when he was hired for The Simpsons , writing seven episodes of the show including " Mother Simpson " . He moved on to become showrunner and executive producer of King of the Hill before creating the sitcom A.U.S.A .. He then worked on The Bernie Mac Show , Family Guy and American Dad ! before co-creating The Cleveland Show . He was married to the writer Mona Simpson .

Richard James Appel was born May 21 , 1963 in New York City , to Nina ( neé Schick ) and Alfred Appel . His mother was a lawyer , taught law and served as dean of Loyola University Chicago 's law school from 1983 – 2004 , and his father ( who died on May 2 , 2009 ) was professor of English at Northwestern University and an expert on Vladimir Nabokov . Appel has a sister , Karen Oshman . Appel lived in California while his parents taught at Stanford University before the family moved to Wilmette , Illinois , where Appel went to North Shore Country Day School . Appel became interested in comedy from a young age , noting : " I grew up watching The Dick Van Dyke Show and always thought that what Rob Petrie did for a living was what I wanted to do . " His father introduced him to the works of Buster Keaton and Laurel and Hardy and encouraged him to " read comic books and watch quality [ sic ] television " , and he and a friend produced parody adverts and news pieces with a Betamax and often engaged in prank phone calls . At high school , he wrote sketches and routines and dreamt of being a comedy writer but " didn 't know anyone who did it , and it didn 't seem like a career that was open to me . "

He attended Harvard University and wrote for the Harvard Lampoon , alongside Conan O 'Brien and Greg Daniels , both of whom he beat for the chance to give the comic graduation speech , the Ivy Oration . Tad Friend noted : " Everyone thought it would be Conan automatically , but Rich 's speech was funny and self-deprecating , in a way that was both silly and profound . " After graduation in 1985 with a degree in history and literature , Appel attended Harvard Law School rather than moving into comedy , because the idea of following his mother and grandfathers into the legal profession " appealed " to him . He then worked for two years as a law clerk for Judge John M. Walker , Jr . , of the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York , working on the trials of people such as Michael Milken and Leona Helmsley . Subsequently , for three years from 1990 , Appel served as an assistant U.S. attorney for the Southern District of New York . Fellow attorney Geoffrey Berman stated Appel " was an excellent lawyer . He was good on his feet , articulate , with a sense of the law that was common-sensical , more intuitive than based on books . " Appel still had dreams of becoming a comedy writer despite the security working as a lawyer offered him , but only in 1993 , after his wife became pregnant , was Appel " reminde [ d ] that this was [ his ] life and [ he ] could shape it . " Three months later he had retained an agent , had written and submitted two spec-scripts , and had moved to California .

When starting out as a comedy writer , Appel recalled : " One reason I caught up to my contemporaries is that when I started to send out my scripts , the idea that I 'd been on the Lampoon , even 8 or 10 years before , was a credential I could use . " Appel got his first television job when David Mirkin hired him for the writing staff of The Simpsons in 1994 , initially on a ten-week contract , and served as a writer and producer there for four years . There , he wrote seven episodes , often employing the use of " joke sequences , a narrative approach to humor that eschews the quick laugh in favor of something that develops over time . " Appel found work on The Simpsons to be a learning curve because it was a " very tough show to write for . " His first episode was season seven 's " Mother Simpson " . Appel was desperately trying to think of a story idea to show and decided that he had to really reach out and opted to do something about Homer 's mother , who previously had only been mentioned once . He named her Mona Simpson , after his wife . Many of the writers could not believe that an episode about Homer 's mother had not previously been produced . The writers used the episode to solve several little puzzles , such as where Lisa 's intelligence came from . Also for season seven he penned " Bart on the Road " , in which he utilized the plot devices of " go to work with your parents day " and Bart getting a driving license , and contributed to the episode " 22 Short Films About Springfield " ; the two segments he wrote for the episode ( one about Marge , the other about Lionel Hutz ) were both cut . Appel wrote two episodes from season eight , " Bart After Dark " and " The Secret War of Lisa Simpson " , as well as season nine 's " The Two Mrs Nahasapeemapetilons " and season 10 's " When You Dish Upon A Star " .

Daniels hired Appel as executive producer and showrunner on King of the Hill in 1997 , leading the show 's writing process and overseeing all aspects of the show . Daniels noted : " It was essential that Rich was a good writer who could deal with people , who could help manage the business in the room . But equally important was the fact that he was someone I could trust , who had a similar sense of taste and values . " He stayed until 2001 . For his work on The Simpsons and King of the Hill , Appel won three Primetime Emmy Awards . Appel created the short-lived series A.U.S.A. , which aired in 2003 , which he based on his own experiences as an assistant U.S. attorney . He conceived it in 2001 and NBC ordered 13 episodes the following year ; the show 's original pilot used a single-camera setup but NBC executives felt it would have more appeal as a multiple-camera setup , so it was re-shot . Appel noted of the show : " There 's a sense sometimes in Hollywood that writers and producers who come from animated shows maybe have something to prove to justify their credibility as live-action show-runners or writers . My own experience has been fortunate . I haven 't felt that . But I know it exists . " He was inspired by the comedic side of working as a lawyer when writing the show : " Whether you 're working on a case that you 're proud to tell you mother and grandmother about , you 're still going to encounter possibly really shifty dishonest lawyers , or a judge who is a little crazy , or witnesses who self-destruct on the stand . " The show was not acclaimed : Scott D. Pierce of The Deseret News praised the premise but felt the show was " sort of like watching a train wreck , " while Alan Sepinwall of The Star-Ledger said it was " too cartoonish to work . " Appel then wrote and worked as a co-executive producer on The Bernie Mac Show and Kitchen Confidential , and appeared as Josh in the 2004 film I ♥ Huckabees . In 2006 , Appel produced a pilot called My Ex Life about two divorcing couples for CBS , which was directed by Kelsey Grammer .

In 2008 , he served as a co-executive producer on Family Guy and executive producer on American Dad ! from 2008 until 2009 . Appel wrote the Family Guy seventh season episode " Family Gay " . Appel co-created , alongside Mike Henry and Seth MacFarlane , the Family Guy spin-off The Cleveland Show , which they began discussing in 2007 and which premiered September 27 , 2009 . He and Henry serve as the show 's executive producers and showrunners , handling the day-to-day operations , with limited involvement from MacFarlane . Henry and Appel conceived the show as " more of a family show , a sweeter show " than Family Guy . The show , which was picked up to air a first season consisting of 22 episodes , was picked up by Fox for a second season , consisting of 13 episodes , bringing the total number to 35 episodes . The announcement was made on May 3 , 2009 before the first season even premiered . It was extended to a full second season . Appel signed a new three-year , seven figure deal with Fox to continue serving as showrunner on The Cleveland Show in 2010 . Fox chairman Gary Newman commented : " What is special about him is his incredible leadership ability . He is a terrific showrunner , and he really sets the tone on a show that is exactly what you 're looking for . "

Jungle Strike is a video game developed and published by Electronic Arts in 1993 for the Sega Mega Drive . The game was later released on several other consoles such as the Super Nintendo Entertainment System ( SNES ) , and an upgraded version was made for the Amiga . The Amiga and other home computer conversions were the responsibility of Ocean Software while the SNES version was that of Gremlin Interactive . It is the direct sequel to Desert Strike : Return to the Gulf ( a best-seller released the previous year ) and is the second instalment in the Strike series . The game is a helicopter based shoot ' em up , mixing action and strategy . The plot concerns two villains intent on destroying Washington , D.C .. The player must use the helicopter and occasionally other vehicles to thwart their plans . Its game engine was carried over from a failed attempt at a flight simulator and was inspired by Matchbox toys and Choplifter . Jungle Strike retained its predecessor 's core mechanics and expanded on the model with additional vehicles and settings . The game was well received by most critics upon release , with the Mega Drive release receiving critical acclaim from their respective reviewers . Publications praised its gameplay , strategy , design , controls and graphics , although there were some complaints regarding the interface , difficulty and perceived jingoistic politics .

Jungle Strike features two antagonists : Ibn Kilbaba , the son of Desert Strike 's antagonist , and Carlos Ortega , a notorious South American drug lord . The opening sequence depicts the two men observing a nuclear explosion on a deserted island , while discussing the delivery of " nuclear resources " and an attack on Washington D.C. ; Kilbaba seeks revenge for his father 's death at the hands of the US , while Ortega wishes to " teach the Yankees to stay out of my drug trade " . The player takes control of a " lone special forces " pilot . The game 's first level depicts the protagonist repelling terrorist attacks on Washington , D.C. , including the President 's limousine . Subsequent levels depict counter-attacks on the drug lord 's forces , progressing towards his " jungle fortress " . In the game 's penultimate level , the player pursues Kilbaba and Ortega to their respective hideouts before capturing them . The final level takes place in Washington , D.C. again , where the two antagonists attempt to flee after escaping from prison . The player must destroy both Kilbaba and Ortega and stop four trucks carrying nuclear bombs from blowing up the White House . The PC version also extends the storyline with an extra level set in Alaska , in which the player must wipe out the remainder of Ortega 's forces under the command of a Russian defector named Ptofski , who has taken control of oil tankers and is threatening to destroy the ecosystem with crude oil if his demands are not met . Once all levels are complete , the ending sequence begins and depicts the protagonist and his co-pilot in an open-topped car in front of cheering crowds .

Jungle Strike is a helicopter-based shoot ' em up , mixing action and strategy . The player 's main weapon is a Comanche attack helicopter . Additional vehicles can be commandeered : a motorbike , hovercraft and F-117 . The latter in particular features variable height and unlimited ammunition , but is more vulnerable to crashes . The game features an " overhead " perspective " with a slight 3D twist " . The graphics uses a 2.5D perspective which simulates the appearance of being 3D . Levels consist of several missions , which are based around the destruction of enemy weapons and installations , as well as rescuing hostages or prisoners of war , or capturing enemy personnel . The helicopter is armed with machine guns , more powerful Hydra rockets and yet more deadly Hellfire missiles . The more powerful the weapon , the fewer can be carried : the player must choose an appropriate weapon for each situation . Enemy weapons range from armoured cars , to artillery and tanks . The player 's craft has a limited amount of armour , which is depleted as the helicopter is hit by enemy fire . Should the armour reach zero , the craft will be destroyed , losing the player a life . The player must outmanoeuvre enemies to avoid damage , but can replenish armour by means of power-ups or by airlifting rescued friendlies or captives to a landing zone . The helicopter has a finite amount of fuel which is steadily depleted as the level progresses . Should the fuel run out the Comanche will crash , again costing the player a life . The craft can refuel by collecting fuel barrels . The helicopter also carries limited ammunition , which must be replenished by means of ammo crates .

Jungle Strike is the sequel to Desert Strike : Return to the Gulf , a similar game which parodied the Gulf War and which was released in 1992 . Desert Strike arose from a failed attempt at a flight simulator and was inspired by Matchbox toys and Choplifter . Central to the game 's concept were nonlinear gameplay and the eschewing of power-ups and bosses . With the success of the original title , producer Scott Berfield , game director John Manley and associate producer Tony Barnes were tasked with creating the sequel . Jungle Strike retained the core mechanics of its predecessor , with the addition of various vehicles and settings . Desert Strike was at the time Electronic Arts ' highest selling video game and maintained a high sales chart position as Jungle Strike was released in 1993 . The Amiga conversion of Desert Strike featured upgraded graphics and sound over the Mega Drive original . With regards to the Jungle Strike Amiga conversion , senior programmer Stuart Johnson stated he " tried to keep this conversion a lot more faithful to the Mega Drive version than Desert Strike was " . He attempted to make the Amiga conversion run more smoothly than the Mega Drive original . Graphical improvements were attempted : these were less successful on the A500 than the A1200 because of technical restrictions . The developers also struggled with technical challenges because of differences in hardware between the Mega Drive and Amiga . Amendments were also made to the workings of in-mission plot screens . The Amiga conversion was released as sequel Urban Strike was published for the Mega Drive in 1994 .

Jungle Strike was followed by three further sequels : Urban Strike , Soviet Strike , and Nuclear Strike . As the series moved to more advanced consoles , series creator Mike Posehn became less involved in the programming side of development . Urban Strike , released for the Mega Drive , featured new vehicles and locations , as well as on-foot sections . Soviet Strike , released for Sony 's PlayStation and the Sega Saturn in 1996 , featured 3D graphics , as did Nuclear Strike , released on PC and PlayStation in 1997 and the Nintendo 64 in 1999 . Another sequel provisionally titled Future Strike was planned , but the game was eventually released as Future Cop : LAPD , a mech-based shooter game .

The game was well received by critics upon release , with some reviews regarding it with critical acclaim . Adrian Pitt and Mat Yeo of Sega Force both reviewed the game . Adrian Pitt called the title a " strategy game " and commented it as the " greatest game in the genre " . Pritt said the controls were " without fault " and the graphics " superb " . The second reviewer , Mat Yeo , praised the " amazing playability and ' lastability ' " and said the game was " twice as good " as Desert Strike . Yeo called the graphics " brilliant " and said the game was " the best shoot ' em up I 've seen in a long time " . The Mega Drive version was a best-seller for 3 months . MegaTech magazine said the game has " impressive graphics and tons of missions " . Mega placed the game at No. 13 in their Top Mega Drive Games of All Time . Lim Choon Klet of New Straits Times praised the " simply wonderful " graphics but questioned whether the sound effects were enough to " create the environment of a full-scale war " . Choon Klet pointed to a high initial difficulty but said : " Once the skills are acquired , be ready for many hours of enjoyment and sleepless nights . " Chip and Jonathan Carter of St. Petersburg Times deemed the game one of the best of the year and felt the SNES version " loses nothing in the translation " . The duo said the Game Boy and Game Gear versions were " less impressive " due to their technical restrictions but " about as good as you can get on the small screen " . " Sir Garnabus " of GamePro was impressed with the Game Boy version 's clear and detailed graphics , lack of slowdown , good controls , and faithfulness to the original version , but judged the Game Gear version to be " merely average " , saying issues such as poor collision detection hamper the game despite its outstanding graphics . Amiga CD32 Gamer called Jungle Strike " a 500lb gorilla among games " and praised its ease of control and " masses of gameplay and realistic detail " .

Amiga Computing said : " With its impressive graphics and superbly designed game system , it could well be the best chopper title yet " although the reviewer felt the difficulty curve was too steep . Amiga Format said of the game : " with a little more foresight and planning , it could have been a lot more fun " , as the reviewer was irritated by the fact that fuel , armour and ammunition levels were displayed on map screen . However the magazine also wrote : " The bottom line though , is that Jungle Strike is an incredibly good game " . Amiga Power called the game " an appreciable shoot ' em up " but said it was " clearly tailored for the shorter attention span " of a console gamer . CU Amiga Magazine wrote : " This blend of shooting and thinking action blends together seamlessly and in the process creates a classic blaster well worth a ride " . The One Amiga magazine wrote : " Jungle Strike 's a fine game , which will prove both a challenge for Desert Strike-ophiles , and a good solid blast for first bloods " . ACAR observed the game 's " Good graphics , okay sound , smooth animation and tough game play . " Amiga Power complained that " Throughout the game you 're battered with uneasily right-wing US politics " , while Amiga Format said " jingoism " was " rife " throughout the game . Amiga CD32 Gamer called the plot " typically ' ugly American ' idiocy " .

U.S. Route 50 ( US-50 ) in Utah crosses the center of the state . The highway serves no major population centers in Utah , with the largest city along its path being Delta . Most of the route passes through desolate , remote areas . Through the eastern half of the state the route is concurrent with Interstate 70 ( I-70 ) . US-50 both enters and exits Utah concurrent with US-6 , however the two routes are separate through the center of the state . Three completely different routings of US-50 have existed between Green River and Ely , Nevada . The route between these cities has become progressively shorter as new roads have been paved through this largely uninhabited region of both states . The earlier routings were a result of a dispute between Utah and Nevada over which auto trails would be paved and converted to U.S. Highways .

The highway enters Utah from Nevada in a desolate portion of the Great Basin desert . Similar to many portions of the route in Nevada , there are no services from this point to Delta , a span of roadway that is about 100 miles ( 160 km ) . While passing through the Great Basin the highway crosses two mountain ranges , the Confusion Range via kings canyon and House Range via Skull Rock Pass , before arriving at the shore of Sevier Lake . Sevier Lake is an intermittent lake which is fed by snow melt from many mountain ranges in the eastern half of the Great Basin . From US-50 , water is only usually visible in the spring months . The highway follows Sevier Lake to Delta . The scenery dramatically changes as US-50 approaches Delta , where U.S. Route 6 and 50 separate . As the road approaches Delta , a straight passage across desert changes to zigzags through farming areas . The highway continues to zigzag through farms until arriving at more mountainous terrain at Holden . At Holden , the highway merges with Interstate 15 to cross the Pavant Range at Scipio Summit . US-50 then separates from this freeway to meet Interstate 70 in Salina . The two highways run concurrent from this point east to Colorado . Yet again , there is a stretch of highway 110 miles ( 180 km ) long without services from Salina to Green River .

While co-routed with I-70 , US-50 crosses the Wasatch Plateau and passes through the San Rafael Swell . The construction of I-70 through the swell is noted as one of the engineering marvels of the Interstate Highway System . One specific feat , the excavation through a portion called Spotted Wolf Canyon , required excavating 3,500,000 cubic yards ( 2,700,000 m3 ) of rock to have a bed for just 8 miles ( 13 km ) of roadway . Construction workers noted that prior to the construction of the freeway a man could stand in this canyon and touch both sides of the canyon wall . US-6 rejoins US-50 near Green River . The three routes run concurrent and follow the southern edge of the Book Cliffs to Grand Junction , Colorado . Once again , services are not present from Thompson Springs to Fruita , Colorado , a span of about 60 miles ( 97 km ) . This portion of US-50 is part of the Dinosaur Diamond Prehistoric Highway , a National Scenic Byway . The name of the byway comes from the large number of areas along the route with visible dinosaur remains .

In 1926 , when the U.S. Highway system was first announced , there was a gap in US-50 between Ely and Thistle . At the time the states of Utah and Nevada were feuding about which of the old auto trails would be paved and used for the new U.S. Highway System . Nevada favored the Lincoln Highway , which the modern US-50 closely follows in that state . Utah refused to consider the Lincoln Highway west of Salt Lake City . Officials perceived that route would carry all California bound traffic directly to Nevada while passing through very few communities in Utah . Utah instead favored the Victory Highway ( modern Interstate 80 west of Salt Lake ) and the Arrowhead Trail ( modern Interstate 15 ) . By favoring these routes Utah could force travelers destined for southern California to use a different route than those destined for northern California , with both of these traversing through more cities in Utah than the Lincoln Highway . The Arrowhead trail was especially beneficial to Utah as it passed through many communities in the state , but only Las Vegas in Nevada . Utah prevailed and US-50 did not continue to follow the Lincoln Highway to Salt Lake City as Nevada had wanted . The first continuous route of US-50 across eastern Nevada and western Utah was an arch shaped route . US-50 proceeded north from Ely along what is now numbered U.S. Route 93 and Alternate US-93 where the highway would merge with the Victory Highway ( U.S. Route 40 along the Wendover Cut-off , since replaced by I-80 ) to Salt Lake . From there the highway returned to Green River via what is now numbered State Route 201 , U.S. Route 89 and U.S. Route 6 .

The second iteration has its origins with the formation of US-6 . In 1937 , US-6 was extended west from its former terminus at Greeley , Colorado to Long Beach , California . In eastern Utah the route used the existing alignment of US-50 . However , in western Utah the route used an unpaved road through Delta reconnecting with US-50 in Ely . By 1954 , this route was fully paved and US-50 was moved to this shorter alignment . With this change US-6 / 50 ran concurrent from Ely to Grand Junction , Colorado . The paved version did not exactly follow the unpaved roads . The dirt route passed through the numerous mountain ranges of the great basin with the most difficult being Marjum Canyon . The route was relocated to follow the north shore of Sevier Lake , which reduced the number of mountain ranges crossed . Although US-50 was moved to yet another alignment , this route remains US-6 today .

The modern route of US-50 was created in 1976 . This iteration of US-50 has its origins in a dispute over the route of Interstate 70 in Utah . While I-70 was in the planning stage Colorado lobbied for an extension of the original proposal to run across Colorado and into Utah . Utah supported an extension using then US-6 / 50 to connect Denver , Colorado with Salt Lake City . However , federal planners did not see value in this route and instead supported a route that could be used to connect Denver with Los Angeles , California . I-70 was built using the federally selected route . In 1976 , US-50 was changed again to a routing mostly concurrent with I-70 . The portion of modern US-50 between Delta and Scipio had been previously numbered State Route 26 , and the portion between Scipio and Salina had been numbered State Route 63 , with the SR-63 portion being transferred to SR-26 in 1971 . East of Green River I-70 closely follows the original route of US-50 , with some minor straightening by Crescent Junction , Cisco , and Westwater .

Susanna Cole ( née Hutchinson ; 1633 – c . 1713 ) was the lone survivor of an Indian attack in which many of her siblings and her famed mother , Anne Hutchinson , were killed . Following the attack , she was taken captive , and held for several years before her release . Born in Alford , Lincolnshire , England , Hutchinson was less than a year old when her family sailed from England to New England in 1634 . She was less than five when her family settled on Aquidneck Island ( later Rhode Island ) in the Narragansett Bay following her mother 's banishment from Massachusetts during the Antinomian Controversy . Shortly after her father 's death , when she was about eight years old , she , her mother and six of her siblings left Rhode Island to live in New Netherland . They settled in an area that became the far northeastern section of The Bronx in New York City , near the Westchester County line . Caught in the middle of severe tensions between the local natives and the Dutch , the family , except for Susanna , was massacred in August 1643 . She was taken captive , and raised by the Indians , later to be traded back to the English .

Hutchinson was taken to Boston where her oldest brother and an older sister lived , was re-introduced into English society , and at the age of 18 married John Cole , the son of Boston innkeeper Samuel Cole . They lived in Boston for a few years , but by 1663 had moved to the Narragansett country of Rhode Island ( later North Kingstown ) to look after the lands of her oldest brother , Edward Hutchinson . Here the couple remained and raised a large family . Susanna Cole was still alive in 1707 when given administration of her husband 's estate , but was deceased by December 1713 when her son William took receipts concerning his parents ' estate .

Baptized in Alford , Lincolnshire on 15 November 1633 , Susanna Hutchinson was the youngest child of William and Anne Hutchinson to accompany her parents on the voyage from England to New England in 1634 . She was the 14th child of her parents , of which 11 survived to make the trip to the New World ; a 15th child was born in New England . The family settled in Boston , and lived across the street from magistrate John Winthrop , who was a judge during the civil trial in 1637 that led to her mother 's banishment from the Massachusetts colony . While Hutchinson was still very young , her mother hosted popular religious discussions at their home . Her mother 's religious views , at odds with the rigid orthodoxy of the Puritan ministers , helped to create a major division in the Boston church and an untenable situation for the colony 's leaders . Forced to leave Massachusetts , the family settled with many of her mother 's supporters on Aquidneck Island in the Narragansett Bay , establishing the settlement of Portsmouth , which soon became a part of the Colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations . Hutchinson was less than five years old when the family left Boston , and was about eight when her father died in Portsmouth .

Frightened at the prospect of Massachusetts gaining influence or control over Rhode Island , Hutchinson 's widowed mother took her six youngest children , an older son , a son-in-law , and some servants and moved to the part of New Netherland that later became The Bronx in New York City . The Dutch and native Siwanoy were engaged in Kieft 's War during the family 's tenure there . In August 1643 Siwonoy attacked the emigrant household , and killed all members of the family , except for nine-year-old Hutchinson . According to one story , Susanna 's red hair spared her from the slaughter , while another account claimed that the girl was out picking blueberries some distance from the house and hid in the crevice of Split Rock . In any event , the attackers took Susanna Hutchinson captive , and held her for several years . In his journal , Massachusetts governor John Winthrop provided an account of Susanna under the date of July 1646 : A daughter of Mrs. Hutchinson was carried away by the Indians near the Dutch , when her mother and others were killed by them ; and upon the peace concluded between the Dutch and the same Indians , she was returned to the Dutch governor , who restored her to her friends here . She was about eight years old , when she was taken , and continued with them about four years , and she had forgot her own language , and all her friends , and was loath to have come from the Indians .

While Winthrop said that Hutchinson was captive about four years , his journal makes clear that her captivity lasted less than three years . When she returned to Boston , her known living siblings at the time were her oldest brother , Edward Hutchinson , another brother , Samuel , and her two oldest living sisters , Faith ( the wife of Thomas Savage ) , and Bridget ( the wife of John Sanford ) . Of these siblings , Faith lived in Mount Wollaston , about ten miles south of Boston ; Bridget lived in Portsmouth , Rhode Island ; and Samuel 's residence is unknown . Only her brother Edward is known to have lived in Boston proper , and it is likely that Hutchinson came to live with him and his family . On 30 December 1651 she married , in Boston , John Cole , the son of Boston innkeeper , Samuel Cole , who had established Boston 's first tavern in 1634 .

Susanna and John Cole began raising a family in Boston , but by 1663 they had gone to look after her brother 's land in the Narragansett country , which was then in disputed territory , but later became North Kingstown , Rhode Island . Here the Coles lived for the remainder of their lives , rearing many children . The will of John Cole 's father , Samuel Cole , dated 21 December 1666 , left a property at Bendall 's Dock in Boston to Susanna and her children to satisfy an agreement with Susanna 'a brother Edward Hutchinson and uncle Samuel Hutchinson . This property was leased out in 1676 , and sold in 1698 for £ 160 . In April 1667 , John Cole deeded their house in Boston to Susanna 's brother Edward and uncle Samuel , signifying that they intended to remain in Narragansett . They lived in the vicinity of Wickford , an area claimed by both Connecticut and Rhode Island . Many of the Wickford inhabitants preferred to be under the jurisdiction of Connecticut , and in the late 1660s John Cole became a magistrate and commissioner for the area under the auspices of the Connecticut government . Eventually , following many years of dispute and tension , Rhode Island was given control over the Narragansett lands , and in 1682 John Cole was made a conservator of the peace under the Rhode Island government . By 1707 John had died , and Susanna and her son William were given administration of his estate during that year . Susanna had died by 14 December 1713 when her son , William , " took receipts from heirs for their full proportion of estate of deceased father and mother ... "

Susanna and John Cole had 11 children : Susanna , Samuel , Mary , John , Ann , a second John , Hannah , William , Francis , Elizabeth , and Elisha ; at least 9 of them grew to maturity . Their oldest daughter , Susanna , married Thomas Eldred , but the fate of their oldest son , Samuel is not known . Mary lived into her 60s , never marrying , and John , Jr. died as a youngster . Ann married Henry Bull , the son of Jireh Bull , and grandson of Rhode Island colonial governor Henry Bull . A second John grew to maturity , Hannah married Thomas Place , and William married Ann Pinder . Francis grew to maturity , Elizabeth married Robert Potter , and Elisha married Elizabeth Dexter and was for many years a Deputy or Assistant in the Rhode Island colony . Among her well known descendants are two aspirants to the United States Presidency : Stephen Arnold Douglas , who lost to Abraham Lincoln in the 1860 election , and Willard Mitt Romney , who lost to incumbent Barack Obama in 2012 . Her grandson , John Cole , the son of Elisha Cole , was a chief justice of the Rhode Island Supreme Court .

There have been numerous books and articles written about Susanna Cole 's famous mother , Anne Hutchinson , most of which mention Susanna . One book has been written about Cole , Trouble 's Daughter by Katherine Kirkpatrick , which presents a fictionalized account about her life with the Native Americans who captured her , but also presents some of the limited historical information that is available about her . A bronze statue in front of the Massachusetts State House in Boston , dedicated in 1922 , displays an assumed likeness of Cole as a youngster , and her mother , Anne Hutchinson .

A battleship is a large armored warship with a main battery consisting of heavy caliber guns . During the late 19th and early 20th centuries the battleship was the most powerful type of warship , and a fleet of battleships was vital for any nation that desired to maintain command of the sea . The word battleship was coined around 1794 and is a contraction of the phrase line-of-battle ship , the dominant wooden warship during the Age of Sail . The term came into formal use in the late 1880s to describe a type of ironclad warship , now referred to by historians as pre-dreadnought battleships . In 1906 , the commissioning of HMS Dreadnought heralded a revolution in battleship design . Subsequent battleship designs , influenced by HMS Dreadnought , were referred to as " dreadnoughts " . Battleships were a symbol of naval dominance and national might , and for decades the battleship was a major factor in both diplomacy and military strategy . The global arms race in battleship construction began in Europe , following the 1890 publication of Alfred Thayer Mahan 's The Influence of Sea Power upon History , 1660 – 1783 . This arms race culminated at the decisive Battle of Tsushima in 1905 ; the outcome of which significantly influenced the design of HMS Dreadnought . The launch of Dreadnought in 1906 commenced a new naval arms race . Three major fleet action between steel battleships took place . The decisive battles of the Yellow Sea ( 1904 ) and Tsushima ( 1905 ) during the Russo-Japanese War , and the Battle of Jutland ( 1916 ) during the First World War . Jutland was the largest naval battle and the only full-scale clash of battleships in the war , and it was the last major battle fought primarily by battleships in world history .

The Naval Treaties of the 1920s and 1930s limited the number of battleships , though technical innovation in battleship design continued . Both the Allies and the Axis powers deployed battleships during World War II . However they were of lesser importance , especially after the Japanese aircraft carrier fleet sank the main American battleship fleet at Pearl Harbor in 1941 . The value of the battleship has been questioned , even during the period of their prominence . In spite of the immense resources spent on battleships , there were few pitched battleship clashes . Even with their enormous firepower and protection , battleships were increasingly vulnerable to much smaller , cheaper weapons : initially the torpedo and the naval mine , and later aircraft and the guided missile . The growing range of naval engagements led to the aircraft carrier replacing the battleship as the leading capital ship during World War II , with the last battleship to be launched being HMS Vanguard in 1944 . Battleships were retained by the United States Navy into the Cold War for fire support purposes before being stricken from the U.S. Naval Vessel Register in the 2000s .

A ship of the line was a large , unarmored wooden sailing ship which mounted a battery of up to 120 smoothbore guns and carronades . The ship of the line developed gradually over centuries and , apart from growing in size , it changed little between the adoption of line of battle tactics in the early 17th century and the end of the sailing battleship 's heyday in the 1830s . From 1794 , the alternative term ' line of battle ship ' was contracted ( informally at first ) to ' battle ship ' or ' battleship ' . The sheer number of guns fired broadside meant a sail battleship could wreck any wooden enemy , holing her hull , knocking down masts , wrecking her rigging , and killing her crew . However , the effective range of the guns was as little as a few hundred yards , so the battle tactics of sailing ships depended in part on the wind . The first major change to the ship of the line concept was the introduction of steam power as an auxiliary propulsion system . Steam power was gradually introduced to the navy in the first half of the 19th century , initially for small craft and later for frigates . The French Navy introduced steam to the line of battle with the 90-gun Napoléon in 1850 — the first true steam battleship . Napoléon was armed as a conventional ship-of-the-line , but her steam engines could give her a speed of 12 knots ( 22 km / h ) , regardless of the wind condition . This was a potentially decisive advantage in a naval engagement . The introduction of steam accelerated the growth in size of battleships . France and the United Kingdom were the only countries to develop fleets of wooden steam screw battleships , although several other navies operated small numbers of screw battleships , including Russia ( 9 ) , Turkey ( 3 ) , Sweden ( 2 ) , Naples ( 1 ) , Denmark ( 1 ) and Austria ( 1 ) .

Guns that fired explosive or incendiary shells were a major threat to wooden ships , and these weapons quickly became widespread after the introduction of 8 inch shell guns as part of the standard armament of French and American line-of-battle ships in 1841 . In the Crimean War , six line-of-battle ships and two frigates of the Russian Black Sea Fleet destroyed seven Turkish frigates and three corvettes with explosive shells at the Battle of Sinop in 1853 . Later in the war , French ironclad floating batteries used similar weapons against the defenses at the Battle of Kinburn . Nevertheless , wooden-hulled ships stood up comparatively well to shells , as shown in the 1866 Battle of Lissa , where the modern Austrian steam two-decker SMS Kaiser ranged across a confused battlefield , rammed an Italian ironclad and took 80 hits from Italian ironclads , many of which were shells , but including at least one 300 pound shot at point blank range . Despite losing her bowsprit and her foremast , and being set on fire , she was ready for action again the very next day .

The development of high-explosive shells made the use of iron armor plate on warships necessary . In 1859 France launched Gloire , the first ocean-going ironclad warship . She had the profile of a ship of the line , cut to one deck due to weight considerations . Although made of wood and reliant on sail for most journeys , Gloire was fitted with a propeller , and her wooden hull was protected by a layer of thick iron armor . Gloire prompted further innovation from the Royal Navy , anxious to prevent France from gaining a technological lead . The superior armored frigate Warrior followed Gloire by only 14 months , and both nations embarked on a program of building new ironclads and converting existing screw ships of the line to armored frigates . Within two years , Italy , Austria , Spain and Russia had all ordered ironclad warships , and by the time of the famous clash of the USS Monitor and the CSS Virginia at the Battle of Hampton Roads at least eight navies possessed ironclad ships . Navies experimented with the positioning of guns , in turrets ( like the USS Monitor ) , central-batteries or barbettes , or with the ram as the principal weapon . As steam technology developed , masts were gradually removed from battleship designs . By the mid-1870s steel was used as a construction material alongside iron and wood . The French Navy 's Redoutable , laid down in 1873 and launched in 1876 , was a central battery and barbette warship which became the first battleship in the world to use steel as the principal building material .

The term " battleship " was officially adopted by the Royal Navy in the re-classification of 1892 . By the 1890s , there was an increasing similarity between battleship designs , and the type that later became known as the ' pre-dreadnought battleship ' emerged . These were heavily armored ships , mounting a mixed battery of guns in turrets , and without sails . The typical first-class battleship of the pre-dreadnought era displaced 15,000 to 17,000 tons , had a speed of 16 knots ( 30 km / h ) , and an armament of four 12-inch ( 305 mm ) guns in two turrets fore and aft with a mixed-caliber secondary battery amidships around the superstructure . An early design with superficial similarity to the pre-dreadnought is the British Devastation class of 1871 . The slow-firing 12-inch ( 305 mm ) main guns were the principal weapons for battleship-to-battleship combat . The intermediate and secondary batteries had two roles . Against major ships , it was thought a ' hail of fire ' from quick-firing secondary weapons could distract enemy gun crews by inflicting damage to the superstructure , and they would be more effective against smaller ships such as cruisers . Smaller guns ( 12-pounders and smaller ) were reserved for protecting the battleship against the threat of torpedo attack from destroyers and torpedo boats .

The beginning of the pre-dreadnought era coincided with Britain reasserting her naval dominance . For many years previously , Britain had taken naval supremacy for granted . Expensive naval projects were criticised by political leaders of all inclinations . However , in 1888 a war scare with France and the build-up of the Russian navy gave added impetus to naval construction , and the British Naval Defence Act of 1889 laid down a new fleet including eight new battleships . The principle that Britain 's navy should be more powerful than the two next most powerful fleets combined was established . This policy was designed to deter France and Russia from building more battleships , but both nations nevertheless expanded their fleets with more and better pre-dreadnoughts in the 1890s . In the last years of the 19th century and the first years of the 20th , the escalation in the building of battleships became an arms race between Britain and Germany . The German naval laws of 1890 and 1898 authorised a fleet of 38 battleships , a vital threat to the balance of naval power . Britain answered with further shipbuilding , but by the end of the pre-dreadnought era , British supremacy at sea had markedly weakened . In 1883 , the United Kingdom had 38 battleships , twice as many as France and almost as many as the rest of the world put together . By 1897 , Britain 's lead was far smaller due to competition from France , Germany , and Russia , as well as the development of pre-dreadnought fleets in Italy , the United States and Japan . Turkey , Spain , Sweden , Denmark , Norway , the Netherlands , Chile and Brazil all had second-rate fleets led by armored cruisers , coastal defence ships or monitors .

Pre-dreadnoughts continued the technical innovations of the ironclad . Turrets , armor plate , and steam engines were all improved over the years , and torpedo tubes were introduced . A small number of designs , including the American Kearsarge and Virginia classes , experimented with all or part of the 8-inch intermediate battery superimposed over the 12-inch primary . Results were poor : recoil factors and blast effects resulted in the 8-inch battery being completely unusable , and the inability to train the primary and intermediate armaments on different targets led to significant tactical limitations . Even though such innovative designs saved weight ( a key reason for their inception ) , they proved too cumbersome in practice .

In 1906 , the British Royal Navy launched the revolutionary HMS Dreadnought . Created as a result of pressure from Admiral Sir John ( " Jackie " ) Fisher , HMS Dreadnought made existing battleships obsolete . Combining an " all-big-gun " armament of ten 12-inch ( 305 mm ) guns with unprecedented speed ( from steam turbine engines ) and protection , she prompted navies worldwide to re-evaluate their battleship building programs . While the Japanese had laid down an all-big-gun battleship , Satsuma , in 1904 and the concept of an all-big-gun ship had been in circulation for several years , it had yet to be validated in combat . Dreadnought sparked a new arms race , principally between Britain and Germany but reflected worldwide , as the new class of warships became a crucial element of national power . Technical development continued rapidly through the dreadnought era , with steep changes in armament , armor and propulsion . Ten years after Dreadnought 's commissioning , much more powerful ships , the super-dreadnoughts , were being built .

In the first years of the 20th century , several navies worldwide experimented with the idea of a new type of battleship with a uniform armament of very heavy guns . Admiral Vittorio Cuniberti , the Italian Navy 's chief naval architect , articulated the concept of an all-big-gun battleship in 1903 . When the Regia Marina did not pursue his ideas , Cuniberti wrote an article in Jane 's proposing an " ideal " future British battleship , a large armored warship of 17,000 tons , armed solely with a single calibre main battery ( twelve 12-inch { 305 mm } guns ) , carrying 300-millimetre ( 12 in ) belt armor , and capable of 24 knots ( 44 km / h ) . The Russo-Japanese War provided operational experience to validate the ' all-big-gun ' concept . At the Yellow Sea and Tsushima , pre-dreadnoughts exchanged volleys at ranges of 7,600 – 12,000 yd ( 7 to 11 km ) , beyond the range of the secondary batteries . It is often held that these engagements demonstrated the importance of the 12-inch ( 305 mm ) gun over its smaller counterparts , though some historians take the view that secondary batteries were just as important as the larger weapons .

In Japan , the two battleships of the 1903-4 Programme were the first to be laid down as all-big-gun designs , with eight 12-inch guns . However , the design had armor which was considered too thin , demanding a substantial redesign . The financial pressures of the Russo-Japanese War and the short supply of 12-inch guns which had to be imported from Britain meant these ships were completed with a mixed 10- and 12-inch armament . The 1903-4 design also retained traditional triple-expansion steam engines . As early as 1904 , Jackie Fisher had been convinced of the need for fast , powerful ships with an all-big-gun armament . If Tsushima influenced his thinking , it was to persuade him of the need to standardise on 12-inch ( 305 mm ) guns . Fisher 's concerns were submarines and destroyers equipped with torpedoes , then threatening to outrange battleship guns , making speed imperative for capital ships . Fisher 's preferred option was his brainchild , the battlecruiser : lightly armored but heavily armed with eight 12-inch guns and propelled to 25 knots ( 46 km / h ) by steam turbines . It was to prove this revolutionary technology that Dreadnought was designed in January 1905 , laid down in October 1905 and sped to completion by 1906 . She carried ten 12-inch guns , had an 11-inch armor belt , and was the first large ship powered by turbines . She mounted her guns in five turrets ; three on the centerline ( one forward , two aft ) and two on the wings , giving her at her launch twice the broadside of any other warship . She retained a number of 12-pound ( 3-inch , 76 mm ) quick-firing guns for use against destroyers and torpedo-boats . Her armor was heavy enough for her to go head-to-head with any other ship in a gun battle , and conceivably win .

Dreadnought was to have been followed by three Invincible-class battlecruisers , their construction delayed to allow lessons from Dreadnought to be used in their design . While Fisher may have intended Dreadnought to be the last Royal Navy battleship , the design was so successful he found little support for his plan to switch to a battlecruiser navy . Although there were some problems with the ship ( the wing turrets had limited arcs of fire and strained the hull when firing a full broadside , and the top of the thickest armor belt lay below the waterline at full load ) , the Royal Navy promptly commissioned another six ships to a similar design in the Bellerophon and St. Vincent classes . An American design , South Carolina , authorized in 1905 and laid down in December 1906 , was another of the first dreadnoughts , but she and her sister , Michigan , were not launched until 1908 . Both used triple-expansion engines and had a superior layout of the main battery , dispensing with Dreadnought 's wing turrets . They thus retained the same broadside , despite having two fewer guns .

In 1897 , before the revolution in design brought about by HMS Dreadnought , the Royal Navy had 62 battleships in commission or building , a lead of 26 over France and 50 over Germany . In 1906 , the Royal Navy owned the field with Dreadnought . The new class of ship prompted an arms race with major strategic consequences . Major naval powers raced to build their own dreadnoughts . Possession of modern battleships was not only vital to naval power , but also , as with nuclear weapons today , represented a nation 's standing in the world . Germany , France , Japan , Italy , Austria , and the United States all began dreadnought programmes ; while Ottoman Turkey , Argentina , Russia , Brazil , and Chile commissioned dreadnoughts to be built in British and American yards .

The battleship , particularly the dreadnought , was the dominant naval weapon of the World War I era . There were few serious challenges at that time . The most significant naval battles of World War I , such as Jutland ( May 31 , 1916 – June 1 , 1916 ) , were fought by battleships and their battlecruiser cousins . By virtue of geography , the Royal Navy was able to use her imposing battleship and battlecruiser fleet to impose a strict and successful naval blockade of Germany and kept Germany 's smaller battleship fleet bottled up in the North Sea : only narrow channels led to the Atlantic Ocean and these were guarded by British forces . Both sides were aware that , because of the greater number of British dreadnoughts , a full fleet engagement would be likely to result in a British victory . The German strategy was therefore to try to provoke an engagement on their terms : either to induce a part of the Grand Fleet to enter battle alone , or to fight a pitched battle near the German coastline , where friendly minefields , torpedo-boats and submarines could be used to even the odds . Germany 's submarines were able to break out and raid commerce , but even though they sank many merchant ships , they could not successfully blockade Great Britain – in contrast to Britain 's successful battleship blockade of Germany , which was a major cause of Germany 's economic collapse in 1918 . The Royal Navy on the other hand , successfully adopted convoy tactics to combat Germany 's submarine blockade and eventually defeated it .

The first two years of war saw the Royal Navy 's battleships and battlecruisers regularly " sweep " the North Sea making sure that no German ships could get in or out . Only a few German surface ships that were already at sea , such as the famous light cruiser SMS Emden , were able to raid commerce . Even some of those that did manage to get out were hunted down by battlecruisers , as in the Battle of the Falklands , December 7 , 1914 . The results of sweeping actions in the North Sea were battles such as the Heligoland Bight and Dogger Bank and German raids on the English coast , all of which were attempts by the Germans to lure out portions of the Grand Fleet in an attempt to defeat the Royal Navy in detail . On May 31 , 1916 , a further attempt to draw British ships into battle on German terms resulted in a clash of the battlefleets in the Battle of Jutland . The German fleet withdrew to port after two short encounters with the British fleet . Less than two months later , the Germans once again attempted to draw portions of the Grand Fleet into battle . The resulting Action of 19 August 1916 proved inconclusive . This reinforced German determination not to engage in a fleet to fleet battle .

In the other naval theatres there were no decisive pitched battles . In the Black Sea , engagement between Russian and Turkish battleships was restricted to skirmishes . In the Baltic Sea , action was largely limited to the raiding of convoys , and the laying of defensive minefields ; the only significant clash of battleship squadrons there was the Battle of Moon Sound at which one Russian pre-dreadnought was lost . The Adriatic was in a sense the mirror of the North Sea : the Austro-Hungarian dreadnought fleet remained bottled up by the British and French blockade . And in the Mediterranean , the most important use of battleships was in support of the amphibious assault on Gallipoli . In September 1914 , the threat posed to surface ships by German U-boats was confirmed by successful attacks on British cruisers , including the sinking of three British armored cruisers by the German submarine SM U-9 in less than an hour . The British Super-dreadnought HMS Audacious soon followed suit as she struck a mine laid by a German U-boat in October 1914 and sank . The threat that German U-boats posed to British dreadnoughts was enough to cause the Royal Navy to change their strategy and tactics in the North Sea to reduce the risk of U-boat attack . Further near-misses from submarine attacks on battleships and casualties amongst cruisers led to growing concern in the Royal Navy about the vulnerability of battleships .

As the war wore on however , it turned out that whilst submarines did prove to be an incredibly dangerous threat to older pre-dreadnought battleships , as shown by examples such as the sinking of the Mesûdiye , which was caught in the Dardanelles by a British submarine and the HMS Majestic and HMS Triumph were torpedoed by U-21 as well as HMS Formidable , HMS Cornwallis , HMS Britannia etc . , the threat posed to dreadnought battleships proved to have been largely a false alarm . HMS Audacious turned out to have been the only dreadnought sunk by a submarine in WWI . While battleships were never intended for anti-submarine warfare , there was one instance of a submarine being sunk by a dreadnought battleship . HMS Dreadnought rammed and sank the German U-29 on March 18 , 1915 off Moray Firth . Whilst the escape of the German fleet from the superior British firepower at Jutland was effected by the German cruisers and destroyers successfully turning away the British battleships , the German attempt to rely on U-boat attacks on the British fleet failed . Torpedo boats did have some successes against battleships in World War I , as demonstrated by the sinking of the British pre-dreadnought HMS Goliath by Muâvenet-i Millîye during the Dardanelles Campaign and the destruction of the Austro-Hungarian dreadnought SMS Szent István by Italian motor torpedo boats in June 1918 . In large fleet actions , however , destroyers and torpedo boats were usually unable to get close enough to the battleships to damage them . The only battleship sunk in a fleet action by either torpedo boats or destroyers was the obsolescent German pre-dreadnought SMS Pommern . She was sunk by destroyers during the night phase of the Battle of Jutland .

For many years , Germany simply had no battleships . The Armistice with Germany required that most of the High Seas Fleet be disarmed and interned in a neutral port ; largely because no neutral port could be found , the ships remained in British custody in Scapa Flow , Scotland . The Treaty of Versailles specified that the ships should be handed over to the British . Instead , most of them were scuttled by their German crews on June 21 , 1919 just before the signature of the peace treaty . The treaty also limited the German Navy , and prevented Germany from building or possessing any capital ships . The inter-war period saw the battleship subjected to strict international limitations to prevent a costly arms race breaking out . While the victors were not limited by the Treaty of Versailles , many of the major naval powers were crippled after the war . Faced with the prospect of a naval arms race against the United Kingdom and Japan , which would in turn have led to a possible Pacific war , the United States was keen to conclude the Washington Naval Treaty of 1922 . This treaty limited the number and size of battleships that each major nation could possess , and required Britain to accept parity with the U.S. and to abandon the British alliance with Japan . The Washington treaty was followed by a series of other naval treaties , including the First Geneva Naval Conference ( 1927 ) , the First London Naval Treaty ( 1930 ) , the Second Geneva Naval Conference ( 1932 ) , and finally the Second London Naval Treaty ( 1936 ) , which all set limits on major warships . These treaties became effectively obsolete on September 1 , 1939 at the beginning of World War II , but the ship classifications that had been agreed upon still apply . The treaty limitations meant that fewer new battleships were launched in 1919 – 39 than in 1905 – 14 . The treaties also inhibited development by putting maximum limits on the weights of ships . Designs like the projected British N3-class battleship , the first American South Dakota class , and the Japanese Kii class — all of which continued the trend to larger ships with bigger guns and thicker armor — never got off the drawing board . Those designs which were commissioned during this period were referred to as treaty battleships .

As early as 1914 , the British Admiral Percy Scott predicted that battleships would soon be made irrelevant by aircraft . By the end of World War I , aircraft had successfully adopted the torpedo as a weapon . In 1921 the Italian general and air theorist Giulio Douhet completed a hugely influential treatise on strategic bombing titled The Command of the Air , which foresaw the dominance of air power over naval units . In the 1920s , General Billy Mitchell of the United States Army Air Corps , believing that air forces had rendered navies around the world obsolete , testified in front of Congress that " 1,000 bombardment airplanes can be built and operated for about the price of one battleship " and that a squadron of these bombers could sink a battleship , making for more efficient use of government funds . This infuriated the U.S. Navy , but Mitchell was nevertheless allowed to conduct a careful series of bombing tests alongside Navy and Marine bombers . In 1921 , he bombed and sank numerous ships , including the " unsinkable " German World War I battleship SMS Ostfriesland and the American pre-dreadnought Alabama . Although Mitchell had required " war-time conditions " , the ships sunk were obsolete , stationary , defenseless and had no damage control . The sinking of Ostfriesland was accomplished by violating an agreement that would have allowed Navy engineers to examine the effects of various munitions : Mitchell 's airmen disregarded the rules , and sank the ship within minutes in a coordinated attack . The stunt made headlines , and Mitchell declared , " No surface vessels can exist wherever air forces acting from land bases are able to attack them . " While far from conclusive , Mitchell 's test was significant because it put proponents of the battleship against naval aviation on the back foot . Rear Admiral William A. Moffett used public relations against Mitchell to make headway toward expansion of the U.S. Navy 's nascent aircraft carrier program .

The Royal Navy , United States Navy , and Imperial Japanese Navy extensively upgraded and modernized their World War I – era battleships during the 1930s . Among the new features were an increased tower height and stability for the optical rangefinder equipment ( for gunnery control ) , more armor ( especially around turrets ) to protect against plunging fire and aerial bombing , and additional anti-aircraft weapons . Some British ships received a large block superstructure nicknamed the " Queen Anne 's castle " , such as in the Queen Elizabeth and Warspite , which would be used in the new conning towers of the King George V-class fast battleships . External bulges were added to improve both buoyancy to counteract weight increase and provide underwater protection against mines and torpedoes . The Japanese rebuilt all of their battleships , plus their battlecruisers , with distinctive " pagoda " structures , though the Hiei received a more modern bridge tower that would influence the new Yamato-class battleships . Bulges were fitted , including steel tube arrays to improve both underwater and vertical protection along the waterline . The U.S. experimented with cage masts and later tripod masts , though after Pearl Harbor some of the most severely damaged ships such as West Virginia and California were rebuilt to a similar appearance to their Iowa-class contemporaries ( called tower masts ) . Radar , which was effective beyond visual contact and was effective in complete darkness or adverse weather conditions , was introduced to supplement optical fire control .

Even when war threatened again in the late 1930s , battleship construction did not regain the level of importance which it had held in the years before World War I. The " building holiday " imposed by the naval treaties meant that the building capacity of dockyards worldwide was relatively reduced , and the strategic position had changed . In Germany , the ambitious Plan Z for naval rearmament was abandoned in favor of a strategy of submarine warfare supplemented by the use of battlecruisers and Bismarck-class battleships as commerce raiders . In Britain , the most pressing need was for air defenses and convoy escorts to safeguard the civilian population from bombing or starvation , and re-armament construction plans consisted of five ships of the King George V class . It was in the Mediterranean that navies remained most committed to battleship warfare . France intended to build six battleships of the Dunkerque and Richelieu classes , and the Italians four Littorio-class ships . Neither navy built significant aircraft carriers . The U.S. preferred to spend limited funds on aircraft carriers until the South Dakota class . Japan , also prioritising aircraft carriers , nevertheless began work on three mammoth Yamato-class ships ( although the third , Shinano , was later completed as a carrier ) and a planned fourth was cancelled .

At the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War , the Spanish navy consisted of only two small dreadnought battleships , España and Jaime I. España ( originally named Alfonso XIII ) , by then in reserve at the northwestern naval base of El Ferrol , fell into Nationalist hands in July 1936 . The crew aboard Jaime I remained loyal to the Republic , killed their officers , who apparently supported Franco 's attempted coup , and joined the Republican Navy . Thus each side had one battleship ; however , the Republican Navy generally lacked experienced officers . The Spanish battleships mainly restricted themselves to mutual blockades , convoy escort duties , and shore bombardment , rarely in direct fighting against other surface units . In April 1937 , España ran into a mine laid by friendly forces , and sank with little loss of life . In May 1937 , Jaime I was damaged by Nationalist air attacks and a grounding incident . The ship was forced to go back to port to be repaired . There she was again hit by several aerial bombs . It was then decided to tow the battleship to a more secure port , but during the transport she suffered an internal explosion that caused 300 deaths and her total loss . Several Italian and German capital ships participated in the non-intervention blockade . On May 29 , 1937 , two Republican aircraft managed to bomb the German pocket battleship Deutschland outside Ibiza , causing severe damage and loss of life . Admiral Scheer retaliated two days later by bombarding Almería , causing much destruction , and the resulting Deutschland incident meant the end of German and Italian support for non-intervention .

The German battleship Schleswig-Holstein — an obsolete pre-dreadnought — fired the first shots of World War II with the bombardment of the Polish garrison at Westerplatte ; and the final surrender of the Japanese Empire took place aboard a United States Navy battleship , USS Missouri . Between those two events , it had become clear that aircraft carriers were the new principal ships of the fleet and that battleships now performed a secondary role . Battleships played a part in major engagements in Atlantic , Pacific and Mediterranean theaters ; in the Atlantic , the Germans used their battleships as independent commerce raiders . However , clashes between battleships were of little strategic importance . The Battle of the Atlantic was fought between destroyers and submarines , and most of the decisive fleet clashes of the Pacific war were determined by aircraft carriers . In the first year of the war , armored warships defied predictions that aircraft would dominate naval warfare . Scharnhorst and Gneisenau surprised and sank the aircraft carrier Glorious off western Norway in June 1940 . This engagement marked the last time a fleet carrier was sunk by surface gunnery . In the attack on Mers-el-Kébir , British battleships opened fire on the French battleships in the harbor near Oran in Algeria with their heavy guns , and later pursued fleeing French ships with planes from aircraft carriers .

The subsequent years of the war saw many demonstrations of the maturity of the aircraft carrier as a strategic naval weapon and its potential against battleships . The British air attack on the Italian naval base at Taranto sank one Italian battleship and damaged two more . The same Swordfish torpedo bombers played a crucial role in sinking the German commerce-raider Bismarck . On December 7 , 1941 , the Japanese launched a surprise attack on Pearl Harbor . Within a short time five of eight U.S. battleships were sunk or sinking , with the rest damaged . The American aircraft carriers were out to sea , however , and evaded detection . They took up the fight , and eventually turned the tide of the war in the Pacific . The sinking of the British battleship Prince of Wales and her escort , the battlecruiser Repulse , demonstrated the vulnerability of a battleship to air attack while at sea without sufficient air cover , settling the argument begun by Mitchell in 1921 . Both warships were under way and en route to attack the Japanese amphibious force that had invaded Malaya when they were caught by Japanese land-based bombers and torpedo bombers on December 10 , 1941 .

At many of the early crucial battles of the Pacific , for instance Coral Sea and Midway , battleships were either absent or overshadowed as carriers launched wave after wave of planes into the attack at a range of hundreds of miles . In later battles in the Pacific , battleships primarily performed shore bombardment in support of amphibious landings and provided anti-aircraft defense as escort for the carriers . Even the largest battleships ever constructed , Japan 's Yamato class , which carried a main battery of nine 18-inch ( 46 cm ) guns and were designed as a principal strategic weapon , were never given a chance to show their potential in the decisive battleship action that figured in Japanese pre-war planning . The last battleship confrontation in history was the Battle of Surigao Strait , on October 25 , 1944 , in which a numerically and technically superior American battleship group destroyed a lesser Japanese battleship group by gunfire after it had already been devastated by destroyer torpedo attacks . All but one of the American battleships in this confrontation had previously been sunk by the attack on Pearl Harbor and subsequently raised and repaired . When Mississippi fired the last salvo of this battle , the last salvo fired by a battleship against another heavy ship , she was " firing a funeral salute to a finished era of naval warfare . " In April 1945 , during the battle for Okinawa , the world 's most powerful battleship , the Yamato , was sent out against a massive U.S. force on a suicide mission and sunk by overwhelming pressure from carrier aircraft with nearly all hands lost .

After World War II , several navies retained their existing battleships , but they were no longer strategically dominant military assets . Indeed , it soon became apparent that they were no longer worth the considerable cost of construction and maintenance and only one new battleship was commissioned after the war , HMS Vanguard . During the war it had been demonstrated that battleship-on-battleship engagements like Leyte Gulf or the sinking of HMS Hood were the exception and not the rule , and with the growing role of aircraft engagement ranges were becoming longer and longer , making heavy gun armament irrelevant . The armor of a battleship was equally irrelevant in the face of a nuclear attack as tactical missiles with a range of 100 kilometres ( 60 mi ) or more could be mounted on the Soviet Kildin-class destroyer and Whiskey-class submarines . By the end of the 1950s , smaller vessel classes such as destroyers , which formerly offered no noteworthy opposition to battleships , now were capable of eliminating battleships from outside the range of the ship 's heavy guns . The remaining battleships met a variety of ends . USS Arkansas and Nagato were sunk during the testing of nuclear weapons in Operation Crossroads in 1946 . Both battleships proved resistant to nuclear air burst but vulnerable to underwater nuclear explosions . The Italian battleship Giulio Cesare was taken by the Soviets as reparations and renamed Novorossiysk ; she was sunk by a leftover German mine in the Black Sea on October 29 , 1955 . The two Andrea Doria-class ships were scrapped in 1956 . The French Lorraine was scrapped in 1954 , Richelieu in 1968 , and Jean Bart in 1970 .

The United Kingdom 's four surviving King George V-class ships were scrapped in 1957 , and Vanguard followed in 1960 . All other surviving British battleships had been sold or broken up by 1949 . The Soviet Union 's Marat was scrapped in 1953 , Parizhskaya Kommuna in 1957 and Oktyabrskaya Revolutsiya ( back under her original name , Gangut , since 1942 ) in 1956-7 . Brazil 's Minas Geraes was scrapped in Genoa in 1953 , and her sister ship São Paulo sank during a storm in the Atlantic en route to the breakers in Italy in 1951 . Argentina kept its two Rivadavia-class ships until 1956 and Chile kept Almirante Latorre ( formerly HMS Canada ) until 1959 . The Turkish battlecruiser Yavûz ( formerly SMS Goeben , launched in 1911 ) was scrapped in 1976 after an offer to sell her back to Germany was refused . Sweden had several small coastal-defense battleships , one of which , HSwMS Gustav V , survived until 1970 . The Soviets scrapped four large incomplete cruisers in the late 1950s , whilst plans to build a number of new Stalingrad-class battlecruisers were abandoned following the death of Joseph Stalin in 1953 . The three old German battleships Schleswig-Holstein , Schlesien , and Hessen all met similar ends . Hessen was taken over by the Soviet Union and renamed Tsel . She was scrapped in 1960 . Schleswig-Holstein was renamed Borodino , and was used as a target ship until 1960 . Schlesien , too , was used as a target ship . She was broken up between 1952 and 1957 .

The Iowa-class battleships gained a new lease of life in the U.S. Navy as fire support ships . Radar and computer-controlled gunfire could be aimed with pinpoint accuracy to target . The U.S. recommissioned all four Iowa-class battleships for the Korean War and the New Jersey for the Vietnam War . These were primarily used for shore bombardment , New Jersey firing nearly 6,000 rounds of 16 inch shells and over 14,000 rounds of 5 inch projectiles during her tour on the gunline , seven times more rounds against shore targets in Vietnam than she had fired in the Second World War . As part of Navy Secretary John F. Lehman 's effort to build a 600-ship Navy in the 1980s , and in response to the commissioning of Kirov by the Soviet Union , the United States recommissioned all four Iowa-class battleships . On several occasions , battleships were support ships in carrier battle groups , or led their own battleship battle group . These were modernized to carry Tomahawk missiles , with New Jersey seeing action bombarding Lebanon in 1983 and 1984 , while Missouri and Wisconsin fired their 16 inch ( 406 mm ) guns at land targets and launched missiles during Operation Desert Storm in 1991 . Wisconsin served as the TLAM strike commander for the Persian Gulf , directing the sequence of launches that marked the opening of Desert Storm , firing a total of 24 TLAMs during the first two days of the campaign . The primary threat to the battleships were Iraqi shore based surface-to-surface missiles ; Missouri was targeted by two Iraqi Silkworm missiles , with one missing and another being intercepted by the British destroyer HMS Gloucester .

All four Iowa ships were decommissioned in the early 1990s , making them the last battleships to see active service . USS Iowa and USS Wisconsin were maintained to a standard where they could be rapidly returned to service as fire support vessels , pending the development of a superior fire support vessel . These last two battleships were finally stricken from the U.S. Naval Vessel Register in 2006 . The Military Balance and Russian Foreign Military Review states the U.S. Navy listed one battleship in the reserve ( Naval Inactive Fleet / Reserve 2nd Turn ) in 2010 . The Military Balance states the U.S. Navy listed no battleships in the reserve in 2014 . The U.S. Marine Corps believes that the current naval surface fire support gun and missile programs will not be able to provide adequate fire support for an amphibious assault or onshore operations . With the decommissioning of the last Iowa-class ships , no battleships remain in service or in reserve with any navy worldwide . A number are preserved as museum ships , either afloat or in drydock . The U.S. has eight battleships on display : Massachusetts , North Carolina , Alabama , Iowa , New Jersey , Missouri , Wisconsin and Texas . Missouri and New Jersey are museums at Pearl Harbor and Camden , New Jersey , respectively . Iowa is on display as an educational attraction at the Los Angeles Waterfront in San Pedro , California . Wisconsin now serves as a museum ship in Norfolk , Virginia . Massachusetts , which has the distinction of never having lost a man during service , is on display at the Battleship Cove naval museum in Fall River , Massachusetts . Texas , the first battleship turned into a museum , is on display at the San Jacinto Battleground State Historic Site , near Houston . North Carolina is on display in Wilmington , North Carolina . Alabama is on display in Mobile , Alabama . The wreck of the Arizona , sunk during the Pearl Harbor attack in 1941 , is designated a historical landmark and national gravesite .

Battleships were the embodiment of sea power . For Alfred Thayer Mahan and his followers , a strong navy was vital to the success of a nation , and control of the seas was vital for the projection of force on land and overseas . Mahan 's theory , proposed in The Influence of Sea Power Upon History , 1660 – 1783 of 1890 , dictated the role of the battleship was to sweep the enemy from the seas . While the work of escorting , blockading , and raiding might be done by cruisers or smaller vessels , the presence of the battleship was a potential threat to any convoy escorted by any vessels other than capital ships . This concept of " potential threat " can be further generalized to the mere existence ( as opposed to presence ) of a powerful fleet tying the opposing fleet down . This concept came to be known as a " fleet in being " – an idle yet mighty fleet forcing others to spend time , resource and effort to actively guard against it . Mahan went on to say victory could only be achieved by engagements between battleships , which came to be known as the decisive battle doctrine in some navies , while targeting merchant ships ( commerce raiding or guerre de course , as posited by the Jeune École ) could never succeed .

Mahan was highly influential in naval and political circles throughout the age of the battleship , calling for a large fleet of the most powerful battleships possible . Mahan 's work developed in the late 1880s , and by the end of the 1890s it had a massive international impact , in the end adopted by many major navies ( notably the British , American , German , and Japanese ) . The strength of Mahanian opinion was important in the development of the battleships arms races , and equally important in the agreement of the Powers to limit battleship numbers in the interwar era . The " fleet in being " suggested battleships could simply by their existence tie down superior enemy resources . This in turn was believed to be able to tip the balance of a conflict even without a battle . This suggested even for inferior naval powers a battleship fleet could have important strategic impact .

While the role of battleships in both World Wars reflected Mahanian doctrine , the details of battleship deployment were more complex . Unlike the ship of the line , the battleships of the late 19th and early 20th centuries had significant vulnerability to torpedoes and mines , which could be used by relatively small and inexpensive craft . The Jeune École doctrine of the 1870s and 1880s recommended placing torpedo boats alongside battleships ; these would hide behind the larger ships until gun-smoke obscured visibility enough for them to dart out and fire their torpedoes . While this tactic was vitiated by the development of smokeless propellant , the threat from more capable torpedo craft ( later including submarines ) remained . By the 1890s , the Royal Navy had developed the first destroyers , which were initially designed to intercept and drive off any attacking torpedo boats . During the First World War and subsequently , battleships were rarely deployed without a protective screen of destroyers . Battleship doctrine emphasised the concentration of the battlegroup . In order for this concentrated force to be able to bring its power to bear on a reluctant opponent ( or to avoid an encounter with a stronger enemy fleet ) , battlefleets needed some means of locating enemy ships beyond horizon range . This was provided by scouting forces ; at various stages battlecruisers , cruisers , destroyers , airships , submarines and aircraft were all used . ( With the development of radio , direction finding and traffic analysis would come into play , as well , so even shore stations , broadly speaking , joined the battlegroup . ) So for most of their history , battleships operated surrounded by squadrons of destroyers and cruisers . The North Sea campaign of the First World War illustrates how , despite this support , the threat of mine and torpedo attack , and the failure to integrate or appreciate the capabilities of new techniques , seriously inhibited the operations of the Royal Navy Grand Fleet , the greatest battleship fleet of its time .

The presence of battleships had a great psychological and diplomatic impact . Similar to possessing nuclear weapons today , the ownership of battleships served to enhance a nation 's force projection . Even during the Cold War , the psychological impact of a battleship was significant . In 1946 , USS Missouri was dispatched to deliver the remains of the ambassador from Turkey , and her presence in Turkish and Greek waters staved off a possible Soviet thrust into the Balkan region . In September 1983 , when Druze militia in Lebanon 's Shouf Mountains fired upon U.S. Marine peacekeepers , the arrival of USS New Jersey stopped the firing . Gunfire from New Jersey later killed militia leaders .

Battleships were the largest and most complex , and hence the most expensive warships of their time ; as a result , the value of investment in battleships has always been contested . As the French politician Etienne Lamy wrote in 1879 , " The construction of battleships is so costly , their effectiveness so uncertain and of such short duration , that the enterprise of creating an armored fleet seems to leave fruitless the perseverance of a people " . The Jeune École school of thought of the 1870s and 1880s sought alternatives to the crippling expense and debatable utility of a conventional battlefleet . It proposed what would nowadays be termed a sea denial strategy , based on fast , long-ranged cruisers for commerce raiding and torpedo boat flotillas to attack enemy ships attempting to blockade French ports . The ideas of the Jeune Ecole were ahead of their time ; it was not until the 20th century that efficient mines , torpedoes , submarines , and aircraft were available that allowed similar ideas to be effectively implemented . The determination of powers such as Germany to build battlefleets with which to confront much stronger rivals has been criticised by historians , who emphasise the futility of investment in a battlefleet that has no chance of matching its opponent in an actual battle .

Oryzomys is a genus of semiaquatic rodents in the tribe Oryzomyini living in southern North America and far northern South America . It includes eight species , two of which — the marsh rice rat ( O. palustris ) of the United States and O. couesi of Mexico and Central America — are widespread ; the six others have more restricted distributions . The species have had eventful taxonomic histories , and most species were at one time included in the marsh rice rat ; additional species may be recognized in the future . The name Oryzomys was established in 1857 by Spencer Fullerton Baird for the marsh rice rat and was soon applied to over a hundred species of American rodents . Subsequently , the genus gradually became more narrowly defined until its current contents were established in 2006 , when ten new genera were established for species previously placed in Oryzomys . Species of Oryzomys are medium-sized rats with long , coarse fur . The upperparts are gray to reddish and the underparts white to buff . The animals have broad feet with reduced or absent ungual tufts of hair around the claws and , in at least some species , with webbing between the toes . The rostrum ( front part of the skull ) is broad and the braincase is high . Both the marsh rice rat and O. couesi have 56 chromosomes , lack a gall bladder , and have a complex penis ( as is characteristic of the Sigmodontinae ) with some traits that are rare among oryzomyines ; these characteristics are unknown in the other species of this genus .

The habitat includes various kinds of wetlands , such as lakes , marshes , and rivers . Oryzomys species swim well , are active during the night , and eat both plant and animal food . They build woven nests of vegetation . After a gestation period of 21 to 28 days , about four young are born . Species of Oryzomys are infected by numerous parasites and carry at least three hantaviruses , one of which ( Bayou virus ) also infects humans . Two , maybe three , species have gone extinct over the last two centuries and at least one other is endangered , but the widespread marsh rice rat and O. couesi are not threatened .

Oryzomys is one of about thirty genera within the tribe Oryzomyini , a diverse group of well over a hundred species , many of which were formerly also included in Oryzomys . Oryzomyini is one of several tribes within the subfamily Sigmodontinae of the family Cricetidae , which includes hundreds of other species of mainly small rodents , distributed mainly in the Americas and Eurasia . Within Oryzomyini , a 2006 phylogenetic analysis by Marcelo Weksler which used both morphological and DNA sequence data found some evidence that Oryzomys is most closely related to a group including Holochilus , Lundomys , and Pseudoryzomys . Although analyses based on morphological and combined data supported this relationship , sequences of the Rbp3 gene alone instead placed Oryzomys among a group that included Nectomys , Sigmodontomys , and a few other genera . In all analyses , Oryzomys appeared within clade D of Oryzomyini . The relationship between Oryzomys and the Holochilus group was supported by five synapomorphies ( shared derived characters ) — absence or reduction of both the hypothenar and interdigital pads ; reduction of ungual tufts of hairs surrounding the claws ; having the back margin of the zygomatic plate of the skull at the same level as the front of the first upper molar ; and the anterocone ( front cusp ) of the first upper molar divided by an anteromedian fossette . The first three are adaptations to the semiaquatic lifestyle that Oryzomys and the members of the Holochilus group share , and may thus be examples of convergent evolution .

The name Oryzomys was introduced in 1857 by Spencer Fullerton Baird for the marsh rice rat ( now Oryzomys palustris ) of the eastern United States , which had been first described twenty years earlier by Richard Harlan . The name combines the Greek oryza " rice " and mys " mouse " and refers to the feeding habits of the marsh rice rat . Baird placed Oryzomys as a subgenus of the now-defunct genus Hesperomys and included only the marsh rice rat in it , a classification which was followed by Elliott Coues in 1874 and 1877 . In 1890 , Oryzomys was raised to generic rank , and in subsequent years numerous additional species were ascribed to it , many of which were soon moved to separate genera . In the 1898 Catalogus Mammalium , Édouard Louis Trouessart listed 67 species of Oryzomys , including some that are now placed in Calomys , Necromys , Thomasomys , and other genera unrelated to Oryzomys . Some of the new genera proposed were soon subsumed in Oryzomys again , and in The Families and Genera of Living Rodents ( 1941 ) , John Ellerman listed Microryzomys , Oligoryzomys , Melanomys , Nesoryzomys , and Oecomys as synonyms of Oryzomys and included about 127 species in it . In 1948 , Philip Hershkovitz suggested that other oryzomyines like Nectomys and Megalomys could as well be included in Oryzomys , and Clayton Ray followed this suggestion in 1962 .

Hershkovitz and Ray 's classification was never widely followed , and from 1976 on authors started to reinstate some of the other groups lumped in Oryzomys as separate genera . The genus was reduced to 43 species ( out of 110 in Oryzomyini ) in the third edition ( 2005 ) of Mammal Species of the World , but it was still not a natural , monophyletic group ; rather , it mostly united those oryzomyines that lacked the conspicuous specializations of other genera . In 2006 , Marcelo Weksler 's comprehensive phylogenetic analysis produced further evidence that the genus was polyphyletic , as species of Oryzomys were dispersed all over the oryzomyine tree . He proposed that eleven new genera should be created to accommodate those species that were not closely related to the type species of Oryzomys , the marsh rice rat ; he considered other options that would require fewer new genera , but argued that that would result in less meaningful genus-level groups in Oryzomyini . Later in the same year , Weksler , Percequillo , and Voss created ten new genera — Aegialomys , Cerradomys , Eremoryzomys , Euryoryzomys , Hylaeamys , Mindomys , Nephelomys , Oreoryzomys , Sooretamys , and Transandinomys — for species formerly placed in Oryzomys and placed six more species related to " Oryzomys " alfaroi in Handleyomys pending the description of more new genera for them . They left only five species in Oryzomys , which was now finally a natural , monophyletic group . Because of subsequent taxonomic work , the number of species has since increased to at least eight .

The current concept of Oryzomys derives from the palustris-mexicanus group recognized within a much larger genus Oryzomys by Merriam ( 1901 ) and the palustris group proposed by Goldman ( 1918 ) . Merriam recognized 21 species within his group , but Goldman consolidated them into eight — the marsh rice rat in the United States , O. couesi in far southern Texas , Mexico , and Central America , and six others with small distributions . In 1960 , Raymond Hall united O. couesi and the marsh rice rat into a single species , Oryzomys palustris , and thereafter , other localized forms were also included in O. palustris . Hershkovitz described another species in the group , O. gorgasi from Colombia , in 1970 and the next year he noted that O. dimidiatus , previously classified as a Nectomys , was similar to O. palustris . After 1979 , the marsh rice rat and O. couesi were again regarded as separate as a result of further work in Texas , where their ranges meet . While reviewing O. gorgasi in 2001 , J. Sánchez H. and colleagues redefined and characterized the O. palustris group and listed O. couesi , O. dimidiatus , O. gorgasi , and the marsh rice rat as its members ; Guy Musser and Michael Carleton in the 2005 third edition of Mammal Species of the World additionally listed O. nelsoni from María Madre Island in western Mexico .

In 2006 , Weksler and colleagues followed the 2001 definition by Sánchez and others for the restricted genus Oryzomys , but added O. antillarum from Jamaica as a species . Carleton and Joaquin Arroyo-Cabrales reviewed Oryzomys from western Mexico in 2009 and in this context provided an extended diagnosis of Oryzomys . They recognized eight species : the six previously mentioned plus O. albiventer and O. peninsulae . Also in 2009 , Robert Voss and Weksler identified the subfossil Oryzomys curasoae from Curaçao as an island population of O. gorgasi . The next year , Delton Hanson and colleagues published a study using DNA sequence data from the cytochrome b , interphotoreceptor retinoid-binding protein , and alcohol dehydrogenase 1 genes to assess relationships within Oryzomys . They recommended that the marsh rice rat be split into two species and that O. couesi be split into four species on the basis of the observed sequence divergence and other data . Merriam divided his palustris-mexicanus group in two " series " according to the color of the underparts ( white or fulvous ) . Goldman divided his palustris group in two " sections " — a couesi section with O. couesi and six related species , and a palustris section with O. palustris only . He noted that the latter differed from the former in the generally darker , more brownish , longer fur , and larger sphenopalatine vacuities ( openings in the mesopterygoid fossa , the gap behind the end of the palate ) . As Weksler 's 2006 analysis included only O. couesi and the marsh rice rat among species of Oryzomys in the strict sense , he could not test those groups . Carleton and Arroyo-Cabrales concurred with Goldman 's division , listing additional characters , and noted that the palustris group may be more semiaquatically adapted than the members of the couesi group are . In the latter , the fur is usually reddish-brown , as opposed to grayish-brown in the palustris group . Members of the couesi group have smaller sphenopalatine vacuities and a smaller sphenopalatine foramen , a foramen ( opening ) in the side of the skull above the molars , and a more highly developed anterolabial cingulum on the third lower molar ( a crest at the front of the tooth ) . The hypothenar pad of the hindfoot , located on the sole far from the fingers , is present in the couesi group , but absent in the palustris group . Interdigital webbing may be more highly developed in the palustris group . Using morphological data , Voss and Weksler found a closer relationship between O. couesi and O. gorgasi to the exclusion of O. palustris , but with low confidence . The DNA sequence data of Hanson and colleagues supported a deep separation between the palustris and couesi groups , but a Costa Rican sample ( assigned to O. couesi ) was about as distant from the two groups as they were from each other .

Oryzomys contains medium-sized , semiaquatically specialized oryzomyine rodents . They have long , coarse fur that is grayish to reddish on the upperparts and white to buff on the underparts . The marsh rice rat superficially resembles the introduced species black rat and brown rat , but has larger differences in color between the upper- and underparts . The vibrissae ( whiskers ) are short and the ears are small and well-haired . The tail is usually as long as or longer than the head and body and is sparsely haired , but the hairs on the lower side are longer than those above . Females have eight mammae , as in most oryzomyines . The hindfeet are broad and have the first and fifth digits notably shorter than the middle three . The upper surface is hairy , but the underside is naked and covered with small irregularities ( squamae ) . The pads are generally poorly developed , as are the ungual tufts . Interdigital webbing may be present , but its development is variable within the genus . The karyotype has been recorded in various populations of the marsh rice rat and O. couesi and is apparently stable within the genus at 56 chromosomes , with the fundamental number of chromosomal arms ranging from 56 to 60 ( 2n

56 – 60 ) . In both species , the stomach has the characteristic pattern of sigmodontines ( unilocular-hemiglandular ) : it is not split in two chambers by an incisura angularis and the front part ( antrum ) is covered by a glandular epithelium . Furthermore , the gall bladder is absent , a synapomorphy of Oryzomyini . Oryzomys species have a large skull with a short rostrum and high braincase . The interorbital region , located between the eyes , is narrowest to the front and is flanked by well-developed beads at its margins . The zygomatic plate is broad and has a well-developed zygomatic notch at its front . The zygomatic arch is robust and contains a small but distinct jugal bone . The interparietal bone , part of the roof of the braincase , is narrow and short ; its narrowness is a synapomorphy for O. couesi plus the marsh rice rat according to Weksler 's analysis . The incisive foramina are long , with their back margin at the front of the first molars or further back . The palate is also long , extending beyond the back margin of the maxillary bone , and is perforated near the third molars by well-developed posterolateral palatal pits . There is no alisphenoid strut , an extension of the alisphenoid bone that in some other oryzomyines separates two foramina in the skull . The auditory bullae are large . The condition of the arteries in the head is highly derived . In the mandible ( lower jaw ) , the coronoid process , a process at the back , is well developed and the capsular process , a raising of the mandibular bone housing the root of the lower incisor , is conspicuous .

As usual in oryzomyines , the molars are pentalophodont ( have the mesolophs and mesolophids , accessory crests , well developed ) and bunodont , with the cusps higher than the connecting crests . The cusps on the upper molars are arranged in two longitudinal series , not three as in the black and brown rats . The front cusps of the first upper and lower molar ( anterocone and anteroconid , respectively ) are broad and not divided completely by an anteromedian flexus or flexid . Behind the anterocone , the anteroloph ( a smaller crest ) is complete and separated from the anterocone . On both the second and third lower molars , the anterolophid ( a crest on the inner front corner ) is present , a putative synapomorphy of the genus . The first molars have additional small roots in addition to the main ones , so that the upper first molar has four and the lower has three or four roots . As is characteristic of Sigmodontinae , the marsh rice rat and O. couesi have a complex penis , with the baculum ( penis bone ) displaying large protuberances at the sides . The outer surface of the penis is mostly covered by small spines , but there is a broad band of nonspinous tissue . The papilla ( nipple-like projection ) on the dorsal ( upper ) side of the penis is covered with small spines , a character these two species share only with Oligoryzomys among oryzomyines examined . On the urethral process , located in the crater at the end of the penis , a fleshy process ( the subapical lobule ) is present ; it is absent in all other oryzomyines with studied penes except Holochilus brasiliensis . Both traits are recovered as synapomorphies of O. couesi plus the marsh rice rat in Weksler 's analysis .

The range of Oryzomys extends from New Jersey in the eastern United States through Mexico and Central America south to northwestern Colombia and east to northwestern Venezuela and Curaçao . Species of Oryzomys usually live in wet habitats such as marshes , streams , and mangroves , but both the marsh rice rat and O. couesi are also occasionally encountered in drier habitats . They occur or occurred on many continental-shelf islands and one oceanic island , Jamaica ; their adeptness at colonizing islands may be caused by their close association with water and frequent occurrence in coastal wetlands . The oldest fossils date to the Rancholabrean of the United States , about 300,000 years ago ; although there have been some earlier North American records , those are not in fact referable to Oryzomys or even Oryzomyini . Oryzomyines likely evolved in South America east of the Andes ; the presence of Oryzomys in Central America and other trans-Andean regions is thought to be the result of one of several independent invasions of this region by oryzomyines . Alternatively , Oryzomys may have evolved from the Pliocene North American Jacobsomys . O. antillarum may have reached Jamaica during the last glacial period while sea levels were low .

Behavior is known mainly from the marsh rice rat and O. couesi , with some scattered data from the other species . Oryzomys are semiaquatic , spending much time in the water , and otherwise mainly live on the ground ; both the marsh rice rat and O. couesi are known to be excellent swimmers and will flee into the water when disturbed . Both are also active during the night and build nests of interwoven vegetation , which may be suspended above the water . Breeding may occur throughout the year in both species , but is known to be seasonally variable in the marsh rice rat . In both , gestation takes about 21 to 28 days and litter size is usually one to seven , averaging three to five . Young marsh rice rats and O. couesi become reproductively active when about 50 days old . The marsh rice rat , O. couesi , and O. gorgasi are known to be omnivores , eating both plant and animal material . They eat both seeds and green plant parts and consume a variety of animals , including insects , crustaceans , and many others . The barn owl ( Tyto alba ) is a major predator on the marsh rice rat and remains of O. antillarum , O. couesi , and O. gorgasi have been found in owl pellet deposits . Several other animals are known to prey on Oryzomys . A variety of parasites are known from O. couesi and the marsh rice rat and two parasitic nematodes have been found in O. gorgasi .

Two species of Oryzomys , O. antillarum and O. nelsoni , have gone extinct since the 19th century , and a third , O. peninsulae , is unlikely to be still extant . Their extinction may have been caused by habitat destruction and by introduced species such as the small Asian mongoose and the brown and black rat . These same causes may threaten O. gorgasi , which the IUCN Red List assesses as " Endangered " . O. albiventer has been affected by human alteration of its habitat , but likely still survives . In contrast , the widespread species , the marsh rice rat and O. couesi , are common and of no conservation concern — indeed , both have been considered a pest — but some populations are threatened . Like these two species , O. dimidiatus is assessed as " Least Concern " by the Red List . The marsh rice rat is the natural reservoir of the Bayou virus , the second most common cause of hantavirus pulmonary syndrome in the United States . Two other hantaviruses , Catacamas virus and Playa de Oro virus , occur in O. couesi in Honduras and western Mexico , respectively , but are not known to infect humans .

Philosophie Zoologique ( " Zoological Philosophy : Exposition with Regard to the Natural History of Animals " ) is an 1809 book by the French naturalist Jean-Baptiste Lamarck , in which he outlines his pre-Darwinian theory of evolution now known as Lamarckism . In the book , Lamarck named two supposed laws that would enable animal species to acquire characteristics under the influence of their environment . The first law stated that use or disuse would cause body structures to grow or shrink over the generations . The second law asserted that such changes would be inherited . Those conditions together imply that species continuously change by adaptation to their environments , forming a branching series of evolutionary paths . Lamarck was largely ignored by the major French zoologists , Buffon and Cuvier , but he attracted much more interest abroad . The book was read carefully , but its thesis rejected , by nineteenth century scientists including the geologist Charles Lyell and the comparative anatomist Thomas Henry Huxley . Darwin acknowledged Lamarck as an important zoologist , and his theory a forerunner of Darwin 's evolution by natural selection .

Jean-Baptiste Lamarck ( 1744 – 1829 ) was a member of the French Academy of Sciences and a professor of botany at the Jardin des Plantes and then became the first professor of zoology at the new Muséum national d 'Histoire naturelle . He became known for his work on the taxonomy of the invertebrates , especially of molluscs . However , he is mainly remembered for the theory that now bears his name , Lamarckism , and in particular his view that the environment ( called by Lamarck the conditions of life ) gave rise to permanent , inherited , evolutionary changes in animals . He described his theory in his 1802 Recherches sur l 'organisation des corps vivants , and in his 1809 Philosophie Zoologique , and later in his Histoire naturelle des animaux sans vertèbres , ( 1815 – 1822 ) .

In the Philosophie Zoologique , Lamarck proposed that species could acquire new characteristics from influences in their environment , in two rules that he named as laws . His first law stated that use or disuse of a body 's structures would cause them to grow or shrink in the course of several generations . His second law held that any changes made in this way would be inherited . Together , Lamarck 's laws imply the steady adaptation of animals to their environments . He gave names to a number of vestigial structures in the book , among them " Olivier 's Spalax , which lives underground like the mole , and is apparently exposed to daylight even less than the mole , has altogether lost the use of sight : so that it shows nothing more than vestiges of this organ . " " as new modifications will necessarily continue to operate , however slowly , not only will there continually be found new species , new genera , and new orders , but each species will vary in some part of its structure and form ... individuals which from special causes are transported into very different situations from those where the others occur , and then constantly submitted to other influences - the former , I say , assume new forms , and then they constitute a new species . "

He argued that gaps between differing kinds of animals resulted from the extinction of intermediate forms : Species form " a branching series , irregularly graduated which has no discontinuity in its parts , or which , at least , if its true that there are some because of lost species , has not always had such . It follows that the species that terminate each branch of the general series are related , at least on one side , to the other neighboring species that shade into them " . Lamarck proposed the transmutation of species ( " transformisme " ) , but did not believe that all living things shared a common ancestor . Rather he believed that simple forms of life were created continuously by spontaneous generation . He also believed that an innate life force , which he sometimes described as a nervous fluid , drove species to become more complex over time , advancing up a linear ladder of complexity similar to the mediaeval great chain of being .

( Considérations sur l 'Histoire naturelle des Animaux , leurs caractères , leurs rapports , leur organisation , leur distribution , leur classification et leur espèces ) VI . Dégradation et simplification de l 'organisation d 'une extrémité a l 'autre de la Chaîne animale ( 130 ) VII . De l 'influence des Circonstances sur les actions et les habitudes des Animaux , et de celle des actions et des habitudes de ces Corps vivans , comme causes qui modifient leur organisation et leurs parties ( 218 ) VIII . De l 'Ordre naturel des Animaux et de la disposition qu 'il faut donner a leur distribution generale pour la rendre conforme a l 'ordre meme de la nature ( 269 ) ( Considerations sur les Causes physiques de la Vie , les conditions qu 'elle exige pour exister , la force excitatrice de ses mouvemens , les facultes qu 'elle donne aux corps qui la possedent , et les resultats de son existence dans les corps ) ( 359 ) I. Comparison des Corps inorganiques avec les Corps vivans , suivie d 'un Parallele entre les Animaux et les Vegetaux ( 377 ) II . De la Vie , de ce qui la constitue , et des Conditions essentielles a son existence dans un corps ( 400 )

Lamarck 's evolutionary theory made little immediate impact on his fellow zoologists , or on the public at the time . The historian of science Richard Burkhardt argues that this was because Lamarck was convinced his views would be poorly received , and made little effort to present his theory persuasively . In the French-speaking world in his lifetime , Lamarck and his theories were rejected by the major zoologists of the day , Buffon and Cuvier . However , he made more of an impact outside France and after his death , where leading scientists such as Ernst Haeckel , Charles Lyell and Darwin himself recognised him as a major zoologist , with theories that presaged Darwinian evolution . In 1830 – 1833 , Charles Lyell , in his Principles of Geology , carefully summarised Lamarck 's theory ( in about 6 pages , with cross-references to the Philosophie Zoologique ) and then roundly criticised it . Lyell begins by noting that Lamarck gives no examples at all of the development of any entirely new function ( " the substitution of some entirely new sense , faculty , or organ " ) but only proves that the " dimensions and strength " of some parts can be increased or decreased . Lyell says that with this " disregard to the strict rules of induction " Lamarck " resorts to fictions " . Lyell goes on , assuming for the sake of argument that Lamarck was right about the creation of new organs , that Lamarck 's theory would mean that instead of the nature and form of an animal giving rise to its behaviour , its behaviour would determine

the form of its body , the number and condition of its organs , in short , the faculties which it enjoys . Thus otters , beavers , waterfowl , turtles , and frogs , were not made web-footed in order that they might swim ; but their wants having attracted them to the water in search of prey , they stretched out the toes of their feet to strike the water and move rapidly along its surface . By the repeated stretching of their toes , the skin which united them at the base , acquired a habit of extension , until , in the course of time , the broad membranes which now connect their extremities were formed . Lyell similarly criticises the way Lamarck supposed the antelope and gazelle acquired " light agile forms " able to run swiftly ; or the " camelopard " ( giraffe ) became " gifted with a long flexible neck " . Lamarckism was popularised in the English-speaking world by the speculative Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation , published anonymously by Robert Chambers in 1844 . In 1887 Thomas Henry Huxley , the comparative anatomist known as " Darwin 's Bulldog " for his energetic advocacy of Darwinian evolution , wrote that

With respect to the Philosophie Zoologique , it is no reproach to Lamarck to say that the discussion of the Species question in that work , whatever might be said for it in 1809 , was miserably below the level of the knowledge of half a century later . In that interval of time the elucidation of the structure of the lower animals and plants had given rise to wholly new conceptions of their relations ; histology and embryology , in the modern sense , had been created ; physiology had been reconstituted ; the facts of distribution , geological and geographical , had been prodigiously multiplied and reduced to order . To any biologist whose studies had carried him beyond mere species-mongering in 1850 , one-half of Lamarck 's arguments were obsolete and the other half erroneous , or defective , in virtue of omitting to deal with the various classes of evidence which had been brought to light since his time . Moreover his one suggestion as to the cause of the gradual modification of species — effort excited by change of conditions — was , on the face of it , inapplicable to the whole vegetable world . I do not think that any impartial judge who reads the Philosophie Zoologique now , and who afterwards takes up Lyell 's trenchant and effectual criticism ( published as far back as 1830 ) , will be disposed to allot to Lamarck a much higher place in the establishment of biological evolution than that which Bacon assigns to himself in relation to physical science generally , — buccinator tantum .

Elections to Spain ’ s legislature , the Cortes Generales , were held on 19 November 1933 for all 473 seats in the unicameral Cortes of the Second Spanish Republic . Since the previous elections of 1931 , a new constitution had been ratified , and the franchise extended to more than six million women . The governing Republican-Socialist coalition had fallen apart , with the Radical Republican Party beginning to support a newly united political right . The right formed an electoral coalition , as was favoured by the new electoral system enacted earlier in the year . The Spanish Socialist Workers ' Party ( Partido Socialista Obrero Español , or PSOE ) won only 59 seats . The newly formed Catholic conservative Spanish Confederation of the Autonomous Right ( Confederación Española de Derechas Autónomas or CEDA ) gained 115 seats and the Radicals 102 . The right capitalised on disenchantment with the government among Catholics and other conservatives . CEDA campaigned on reversing the reforms that had been made under the Republic , and on freeing political prisoners . Anarchists favoured abstention from the vote . These factors helped the election to result in significant victory for the right over the left .

Elections in June 1931 had returned a large majority of Republicans and Socialists to the Cortes , with the PSOE gaining 116 seats and the Radical Republican Party 94 . The state 's financial position was poor . Wealth redistribution supported by the new government attracted criticism from the wealthy . The government also attempted to tackle poverty in rural areas by instituting an eight-hour day and giving security of tenure to farm workers , drawing criticism from landlords . An effective parliamentary opposition was led by three groups . The first included Catholic movements such as the Catholic Association of Propagandists ( Asociación Católica de Propagandistas ) . The second group consisted of organisations that had supported the monarchy , such as the Renovación Española and Carlists , who wanted to see the new republic overthrown in a violent uprising . The third group were fascist organisations . Members of the National Confederation of Labour ( Confederación Nacional del Trabajo , or CNT ) trade union movement willing to cooperate with the Republic were forced out of the CNT , which continued to oppose the government . Opposition parties had the support of the church . A new constitution was ratified on 9 December 1931 . It included many controversial articles , some of which were aimed at curbing the influence of the Catholic Church . The constitution was reformist , liberal , and democratic in nature , and was welcomed by the Republican-Socialist coalition , but opposed by landowners , industrialists , the organised church , and army officers . In opposing educational and religious reforms , Spanish Catholics were forced to oppose the government . The press criticised government actions as barbaric , unjust , and corrupt .

In October 1931 Prime Minister Niceto Alcalá Zamora resigned and was succeeded by Manuel Azaña . Radical Party leader Alejandro Lerroux had wanted that job himself and became alienated , switching his party 's support to the opposition . This left Azaña dependent on the Socialists , but both the Socialists , who favoured reform , and the conservative right , who were against reform , were critical of the government . Socialists continued to support Azaña , but the left became fractured , driving the Socialists to the left , while the right united into CEDA , which tacitly embraced fascism . On 1 October 1933 , Socialist left leader Largo Cabellero spoke out against Lerroux 's Republicans , suggesting the reform programme of the government , and thus the basis for the Republic itself , was under threat . He warned that if the government itself were the threat , the Socialists would have to withdraw support for it . The following day another Socialist leader , Indalecio Prieto , declared that the Socialists would no longer participate in government , which precipitated its collapse . Alcalá Zamora , who became President in 1931 , now requested that Republican Martínez Barrio form a new government . Socialist opposition on both constitutional and ideological grounds meant the PSOE withheld its support for the Barrio government , which was formed on 8 October , but called for fresh elections to be held on 19 November 1933 .

In common with the 1936 election , Spain was divided into multi-member constituencies ; for example , Madrid had 17 representatives . However , each member of the electorate could vote for somewhat less than that – in Madrid 's case , 13 . This favoured coalitions , as in Madrid when the Socialists won 13 members and the right , with only 5,000 votes less , secured only the remaining 4 . This system had been passed in 1933 . There would be two rounds of voting ; 40 % of the vote was necessary in the first round to win . In the event that no list of candidates reached 40 % , then a second round would be composed of those achieving at least 8 % in the first round . It was the first election in Spain where women had the vote , following the new constitution . This incorporated a new 6,800,000 electors . The governing leftist parties went to the polls divided . The political right , on the other hand , formed the Union of the Right ( Spanish : Unión de Derechas ) which incorporated CEDA , agrarian parties and traditionalists . It stood on a three-point programme : religious and social reforms would be examined and rolled back where needed ; agrarian reform would be reversed ; political prisoners would be released . These parties threw vast resources into their campaign , with ten million leaflets , 300,000 posters , radio and cinema addresses and aerial propaganda drops . They called upon Catholics to defend order and religion against the bourgeois Republic . The Radical Party campaigned primarily against the Socialists , since they would need the help of the political right if in government . They used mass-appeal slogans such as ' Republic , order , freedom , social justice , amnesty ' and were confident following successes at municipal level in 1933 . Anarchists such as the CNT-FAI called for absention : politicians were ' vultures ' , who must be overthrown by revolution . If the right were to win the election , there would be an uprising , they promised . Thus , anarchists should avoid voting for the left , since overthrowing the government would be preferable . Abstention was supported by Benito Pábon and Miguel Abós .

It resulted in an overwhelming victory for the right , with the CEDA and the Radicals together winning 219 seats . Although the political situation was complicated , parties of the right won around 3,365,700 votes , parties of the centre 2,051,500 votes , and parties of the left 3,118,000 according to one estimate . Turnout was around 8,535,200 votes , 67.5 % of the electorate . The right had spent far more on their election campaign than the Socialists , who campaigned alone . Women , in their first election , mainly voted for the centre-right . The Communist Party , with perhaps 3,000 members , were at this point not significant . Nationalist Basques won twelve of seventeen Basque seats , a considerable victory . Keeping their promise , the CNT proclaimed a revolution . There were many reasons the Socialists and Republicans lost out ; the female vote alone cannot explain the shift . Among them was the disunity of the political left compared to the right , in a system that favoured broad coalitions . The Radicals and their supporters had also shifted to the right . Abstentionalism hindered Socialist and Republican candidates . Overall , the political system in Spain had changed dramatically since the last election .

The Renovación Española and the Spanish Nationalist Party ( Spanish : Partido Nacionalista Español , PNE ) formed the National Block ( Spanish : Bloque Nacional ) , with a total of 14 deputies . Similarly , the Republican Left of Catalonia ( Catalan : Esquerra Republicana de Catalunya , ERC ) , the Socialist Union of Catalonia ( Unió Socialista de Catalunya , USC ) and the Union of Rabassaires ( Unió de Rabassaires , UdR ) formed the Catalan Left ( Esquerra Catalana ) with 18 deputies . Five independents joined the Agrarians and one joined CEDA . The other seven , along with one member of Conservative Republican Party ( Spanish : Partido Republicano Conservador , PRC ) , formed a group of independents called the Independent Right ( Independiente de Derechas ) . The Mallorcan Regionalist deputy joined the Catalan League ( Lliga Catalana ) , and the independent in favour of the Estella Statute joined the Basque Nationalist Party ( Partido Nacionalista Vasco ) . 5 members of the Agrarians and one of the PRC joined CEDA , although the Agrarians as a whole resisted pressure to join CEDA , and formed the Spanish Agrarian Party ( Partido Agrario Español ) .

New York State Route 812 ( NY 812 ) is a state highway in the North Country of New York in the United States . The southern terminus of the route is at an intersection with NY 12 and NY 26 in the Lewis County village of Lowville . Its northern terminus is at the Canada – United States border in Ogdensburg , where it crosses the Ogdensburg – Prescott International Bridge and connects to Highway 16 in Ontario . While most of NY 812 passes through rural areas of the North Country , the route also serves several villages and small communities . The origins of NY 812 date back to the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , when the portion of modern NY 812 from Lowville to Croghan became part of NY 26A and the segment of modern NY 812 between De Kalb and Ogdensburg was designated as the northernmost portion of New York State Route 87 . NY 87 originally extended as far south as Harrisville ; however , it was truncated north to Edwards in the 1940s and farther north to De Kalb in the 1970s . In June 1978 , all of NY 87 and the Lowville – Croghan leg of NY 26A were replaced with NY 812 , a new route that began in Lowville and passed through Croghan , Harrisville , Gouverneur , and De Kalb before ending near Ogdensburg . At the time , two sections of the route — from the Croghan village line to a point west of Harrisville and from Harrisville to Fowler — were maintained by the counties that they passed through , and a piece between NY 126 and the Croghan village line was maintained by the village itself . The state of New York assumed maintenance of the Croghan – Harrisville segment in 1980 and took over the Harrisville – Fowler section in 1982 .

NY 812 begins at an intersection with NY 12 and NY 26 in the center of village of Lowville , which is located in the town of the same name . NY 26 , concurrent with NY 12 south of this point , leaves NY 12 and follows NY 812 for several blocks along North State Street before NY 812 turns northeast onto Bostwick Street . Just before Bostwick ends at East State Street , NY 812 turns off and begins its progression northward through a largely rural area of the North Country . As it exits the village of Lowville ( but remains in the town of the same name ) , it begins to parallel the western bank of the Black River . The two entities remain close for roughly 1 mile ( 1.6 km ) before NY 812 crosses over the river and enters New Bremen . In the hamlet of New Bremen , NY 812 intersects County Route 33 ( CR 33 ) , a riverside roadway bypassing both Croghan and Beaver Falls along the east bank of the Black River , southwest of Duflo Airport . NY 812 continues onward , crossing the Black Creek as it enters Croghan , a village situated on the New Bremen – Croghan town line . At the center of the community , NY 812 meets the eastern terminus of NY 126 .

Outside of Croghan , NY 812 traverses the Beaver River just north of the village line . The route and the river continue northward along parallel routings for a brief distance before the two separate near the hamlet of High Falls . While the river curves east toward the hamlet , NY 812 presses northward through the rural hamlets of Indian River and Dutton Corners into the town of Diana , where NY 812 starts to parallel the west branch of the Oswegatchie River as both continue north through the town . At Tylers Corners , NY 812 intersects NY 3 and joins the route eastward into Harrisville , where the conjoined routes cross over the Oswegatchie . Northeast of Harrisville in extreme southwestern St. Lawrence County , NY 812 breaks from NY 3 and heads northwest through Pitcairn ( crossing over the Oswegatchie once more in the process ) .

From Harrisville , NY 812 travels north through an area of Pitcairn and Fowler . This area contains numerous small lakes and rivers and is predominantly rural in nature . Within Fowler , the route serves the hamlet of Balmat ( located on the eastern edge of Sylvia Lake ) before intersecting NY 58 in the hamlet of Fowler . Here , NY 812 joins NY 58 northeast along the southern bank of the now-unified Oswegatchie River to the village of Gouverneur , located in the town of the same name , where NY 812 leaves NY 58 but joins U.S. Route 11 ( US 11 ) at the heart of the community . Outside of the village , US 11 and NY 812 head northeast , roughly paralleling the Oswegatchie once more into the De Kalb village of Richville . The routes quickly exit the village and separate shortly thereafter south of the hamlet of De Kalb , with the Oswegatchie leaving the path of US 11 and following NY 812 . NY 812 heads north , serving De Kalb and crossing over the Oswegatchie south of an intersection with CR 14 , a connector leading to Rensselaer Falls that was once NY 186 . Here , NY 812 begins to the northwest as it approaches the village of Heuvelton .

Within the village , located in the town of Oswegatchie , NY 812 , here known as State Street , intersects NY 184 just before traversing the Oswegatchie one final time . The name remains for three blocks before NY 812 departs the village . Farther north , NY 812 passes by the Ogdensburg International Airport before meeting NY 37 at an interchange just south of the Ogdensburg city limits . NY 812 joins NY 37 here , following the route through the southern reaches of the city . The conjoined routes intersect NY 68 before separating near the northeastern city limits . Past NY 37 , NY 812 continues onto the Ogdensburg – Prescott International Bridge over the St. Lawrence River , where it becomes Highway 16 upon crossing the Canada – United States border into Ontario .

In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , what is now NY 812 between Lowville and Croghan became the southern leg of NY 26A , an alternate route of NY 26 between Lowville and Carthage . Farther north , the portion of modern NY 812 between De Kalb and Ogdensburg became part of NY 87 , a route extending from Harrisville to Ogdensburg via Edwards , Russell and De Kalb . From Harrisville to Fowler , NY 87 followed a parallel alignment to modern NY 812 along Hands Flats , Stone , and Pitcairn roads , and CR 24 . Between Fowler and De Kalb , NY 87 used what is now NY 58 , CR 24 , and CR 17 before following current NY 812 north to Ogdensburg . The portion of NY 87 between De Kalb Junction and De Kalb was concurrent with US 11 . Both US 11 and NY 87 were shifted south onto a new highway c . 1936 , at which time the former routing of US 11 between the new road and De Kalb became part of NY 87 . NY 87 was gradually truncated northward over time . The first change to the route 's southern end came in the early 1940s when it was moved northeastward to the eastern terminus of its former overlap with NY 58 in Edwards . It was moved once more , this time to what was the west end of its overlap with US 11 in De Kalb , in the early 1970s . In 1975 , officials from New York State Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) Region 7 proposed eliminating NY 87 in favor of NY 812 , a new route that would extend from Lowville to Ogdensburg via Croghan , Harrisville , Gouverneur , and De Kalb . The designation would also supplant NY 26A south of Croghan . The proposed route was part of a larger plan to connect the Delaware River at Deposit to the Ogdensburg – Prescott International Bridge over the Saint Lawrence River by way of as few numbered routes as possible . All of the suggested changes were implemented in June 1978 .

When NY 812 was first assigned , it was locally maintained from NY 126 in Croghan to NY 3 in Diana and from NY 3 in Pitcairn to NY 58 in Fowler . The section of the route between NY 126 and the Croghan village line was maintained by the village of Croghan ; however , the rest of the two locally maintained sections were maintained by Lewis and St. Lawrence counties . Most of the Lewis County-owned section was co-designated as CR 11 ; however , the short piece between the Croghan village line and Belfort Road was part of CR 10 . In St. Lawrence County , NY 812 was overlaid on the existing CR 73 from NY 3 to Stone Road , CR 99 between Stone Road and Balmat , and CR 56 from Balmat to Fowler . The state of New York assumed ownership and maintenance of NY 812 between Croghan and Diana on April 1 , 1980 , as part of a highway maintenance swap between the state and Lewis County that transferred NY 194 to the county . Ownership of NY 812 from Pitcairn to Fowler was transferred to the state on September 1 , 1982 , as part of a highway maintenance swap between the state and St. Lawrence County .

Runcorn is an industrial town and cargo port in Cheshire , England , located within the Borough of Halton . In 2010 , Runcorn 's population was recorded to be 61,000 . In May 2014 , it became a member of the Liverpool City Region Combined Authority . The town is on the southern bank of the River Mersey , where the estuary narrows to form the Runcorn Gap . Directly to the north across the River Mersey is the town of Widnes . Upstream and 8 miles ( 12.9 km ) to the northeast is the town of Warrington , and downstream 16 miles ( 26 km ) to the west is the city of Liverpool . Runcorn railway station is on a branch of the West Coast Main Line and provides frequent services to the Liverpool Lime Street , Birmingham New Street , and London Euston stations . The A533 road passes through the town from the south , crossing the Runcorn Gap over the Silver Jubilee Bridge , the lowest bridge crossing of the River Mersey . The Manchester Ship Canal runs alongside the Runcorn bank of the River Mersey ; the Bridgewater Canal terminates in the canal basin in the town centre , as the staircase of locks leading down to the ship canal was filled in many decades ago .

Runcorn was a small , isolated village until the Industrial Revolution . It was a health resort in the late 18th and early 19th centuries . Towards the end of the 18th century , a port began to develop on the south bank of the River Mersey . During the 19th century , industries developed the manufacture of soap and alkali , quarrying , shipbuilding , engineering , and tanning . In the early 20th century , the prime industries were chemicals and tanning . The original village has grown to include what were outlying villages . Except for chemicals , all of the old industries have disappeared and there has been diversification , in particular because of the close links to the motorway system and the development of warehousing and distribution centres . A new town was built to the east of the existing town in the 1960s and 1970s , and areas of private housing have been established farther to the east ; this has resulted in the population more than doubling from around 26,000 to its present level of 70,000 .

The earliest written reference to the town is in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle , where it is spelled " Rumcofan " , literally meaning " a wide cove or bay " . This word is derived from the Old English words " rúm " ( " wide " or " broad " ) and " cofa " ( " cave " or " cove " ) . Other historical spellings of Runcorn include " Rumcoven " , " Ronchestorn " , " Runckhorne " , and " Runcorne " . Little is known about the early history of the settlement but isolated findings of objects from the Stone , Bronze , and Iron Ages have been made and there is evidence of a Roman presence in the area . The earliest recorded event in its history is the building by Ethelfleda of a fortification at Runcorn to protect the northern frontier of her kingdom of Mercia against the Vikings in 915 . The fort was built on Castle Rock overlooking the River Mersey at Runcorn Gap . Following the Norman conquest , Runcorn was not mentioned in the 1086 Domesday survey , although surrounding settlements were . William the Conqueror granted the earldom of Chester to Hugh d 'Avranches who granted the barony of Halton to Nigel . It is likely that Nigel erected a motte and bailey castle on Halton Hill in the 1070s . In 1115 , Nigel 's son , William Fitznigel , founded an Augustinian Priory at Runcorn . In 1134 the priory was moved to Norton , about 3.5 miles ( 6 km ) away . In 1391 the priory was raised to the higher status of abbey . In 1536 the monastery was dissolved , and around nine years later the buildings and some of the monastic lands were sold to Sir Richard Brooke who converted the habitable part of the abbey into a house .

During the Civil War Halton Castle was held for the Royalists by John Savage , 2nd Earl Rivers , the Steward of Halton . It fell twice to Parliamentarian Roundheads . The first siege was led by Sir William Brereton in 1643 ; the second was during the following year . Following this , a " Council of War " was held in Warrington in 1646 at which it was decided that the castle should be slighted . In 1656 , Runcorn was described as being " nothing but a fair parish church , a parsonage and a few scattered tenements " . And so it remained for over a century , an isolated and poor hamlet . The only through traffic used the ferry which crossed from Runcorn to the north bank of the River Mersey . Towards the end of the 18th century and in the early years of the 19th century the town was a health resort . During the 18th century water transport had been improved in the area by the Mersey and Irwell Navigation , the Bridgewater Canal and the Trent and Mersey Canal . This gave Runcorn waterway connections with most of the interior of England through the canal system and with the sea along the River Mersey , thus forming the basis for the development of the Port of Runcorn . Later came the Runcorn to Latchford Canal linking with the Mersey and Irwell Navigation , and the Weston Canal which gave better access to the Weaver Navigation system . Industries began to develop within and around the town , in particular quarrying for Runcorn sandstone , shipbuilding , engineering , the manufacture of soap and chemicals and tanning . Runcorn was becoming an industrialised and highly polluted town . During the later 19th century the town became increasingly dominated by the chemical and tanning industries .

In 1868 the Runcorn Railway Bridge was opened across the Mersey , giving Runcorn direct rail links with Liverpool and the rest of the country . In the 1880s a pipeline was opened between Northwich and Weston Point , supplying brine to the salt and chemical works . In 1894 the Manchester Ship Canal was opened throughout its length . This allowed ocean-going ships to travel inland as far as Salford , some of them calling at the port of Runcorn . The rise in population between 1881 and 1891 and the drop by 1901 is explained by the number of people involved in constructing the ship canal . In 1905 the Widnes-Runcorn Transporter Bridge opened , giving a direct link for vehicular traffic for the first time between the two towns . During the first half of the 20th century the industry of the town continued to be dominated by chemicals and tanning . This growth was largely due to government fixed-priced cost contracts for tanned hides . In 1926 four chemical companies merged to form Imperial Chemical Industries ( ICI ) . As the century progressed there was diversification of industry . In 1961 the Transporter Bridge was replaced by Runcorn Road Bridge ( since named the Silver Jubilee Bridge ) which allowed a more efficient means of road traffic across Runcorn Gap . The designation of Runcorn as a new town in 1964 brought major changes and more than doubled the population . Much of the architecture of the new town was innovative , especially the Southgate development designed by Sir James Stirling and built between 1970 and 1977 . Stirling 's housing development was beset with problems and it was demolished in the early 1990s . During the second half of the 20th century the tanneries closed ( the last to close was the Highfield Tannery in the late 1960s ) and the chemical industry declined . At the same time , light industry developed together with warehouses and distribution centres .

At the time of the Domesday survey , Runcorn was in the hundred of Tunendune , but later , and until the early 19th century , Runcorn was part of the Bucklow hundred . Under the Runcorn Improvement Act 1852 , a board of Improvement Commissioners was established to administer the civil government of the town . By the Local Government Act 1894 , the administration of the town and the surrounding areas was divided into Runcorn Urban District and Runcorn Rural District . Initially the urban district consisted of only the built-up area of Runcorn itself . By 1937 , this area had been extended to include the communities of Weston and Weston Point to the south . By 1971 it had been further extended to the east to incorporate the village of Halton . In 1964 , Runcorn was designated as a new town . In 1974 , as part of the Local Government Act 1972 , Runcorn Urban District was abolished and its territory amalgamated with Widnes to form the borough of Halton . In 1998 , this borough became a unitary authority within the ceremonial county of Cheshire .

Before the Reform Act 1832 , Runcorn was in the parliamentary constituency of Cheshire which was represented by two Members of Parliament . Following the Reform Act , the town was placed in the North Cheshire constituency and from 1868 in the Mid Cheshire constituency . From 1885 to 1950 the town was in the constituency of Northwich . By an act of Parliament in 1948 , the constituency of Runcorn was created , and in 1950 Runcorn 's first Member of Parliament , Dennis Vosper , was elected . He continued to represent the constituency until 1964 , when he was succeeded by Mark Carlisle . Runcorn is part of two parliamentary constituencies . The western part of the town , which includes the old town area and part of the new town , is in the constituency of Halton and the eastern part , containing the rest of the new town and private housing to the east of this , is in the Weaver Vale constituency . Being a predominantly working class Labour area and shunted into a voting pool with affluent areas outside Runcorn , has caused much resentment in the town . As Runcorn and Halton as a whole hasn 't been a part of Cheshire since 1998 , locals oppose these changes . Since the 1997 general election the Member of Parliament for the Halton constituency has been Derek Twigg of the Labour party , and he continued to hold the seat in the 2010 general election . In the 2007 election the Weaver Vale constituency was won by Mike Hall , also the Labour candidate . Hall retired at the 2010 election when the seat was won by Graham Evans , the Conservative candidate . The local authority is the borough of Halton . The town is divided into ten electoral wards , with councillors serving for up to four years . Runcorn is in the European parliamentary constituency of North West England .

Runcorn is situated on a spur projecting into the River Mersey , which flows to the north and then to the west of the town . On the north bank of the river is another spur forming the West Bank area of Widnes ; together these form Runcorn Gap , a narrowing of the River Mersey . Runcorn Gap is crossed by the Runcorn Railway Bridge , which carries the Liverpool branch of the West Coast Main Line , and the Silver Jubilee Bridge , which carries the A533 . To the south of the town is the River Weaver and the Weston Canal . Both open into the ship canal . To the southeast of the town run the M56 motorway , the Chester – Manchester railway line , and the main branch of the West Coast Main Line . The town has a system of " expressways " , roads designed to divert traffic away from the residential areas . The Central Expressway runs through the centre of the town in a north-south direction . To the west of it lie most of the former settlements which formed the older part of the town , namely Runcorn , Higher Runcorn , Weston , Weston Point and Clifton ( formerly Rocksavage ) , and the new town areas of Halton Brook and Halton Lodge . To the east are the village of Halton , the old settlements of Norton and Stockham , and the new town areas of Castlefields , Palacefields , Windmill Hill , Murdishaw , Brookvale and Hallwood Park .

The Runcorn area drains into the River Mersey to the north and the River Weaver to the south . The bedrock of the western and northeastern parts of the town is made up of rock from the Sherwood sandstone group ; in the other areas the bedrock is from the Mercia mudstone group . In places there are prominent outcrops of sandstone , particularly at Runcorn Hill and Halton Hill . Elsewhere the bedrock is covered by drift . At the northwestern periphery of the town the drift consists of recently blown sand . Farther to the east and bordering the River Mersey is recent alluvium . Elsewhere the drift consists of till .

Being close to the west coast and the Irish Sea , the climate is generally temperate with few extremes of temperature or weather . The mean average temperature in the years 1971 to 2000 was 9.4 to 9.7 ° C , which was slightly above the average for the United Kingdom as was the average amount of annual sunshine at 1,391 to 1,470 hours . The average annual rainfall was 741 to 870 mm , which was slightly below the average for the UK . The average number of days in the year when snow is on the ground is 0 to 6 , which is low for the United Kingdom . The average number of days of air frost is 2 to 39 , which is also low .

Since the borough of Halton became a unitary authority in 1998 , demographic statistics have been collated for the authority as a whole , rather than separately for the towns of Runcorn and Widnes . While the two towns have different histories and come from different historic counties , their demographic features are similar . The population of Halton in 2011 was 125,700 . The change in population during the 20th and 21st centuries is shown in the following table . In 2003 Halton had the largest proportion of the population in Cheshire in the age groups under 5 , 5 to 15 and 16 to pension age and , at 16.1 % the lowest proportion of people at pension age or older . At 1.2 % the proportion of non-white ethnic groups in 2001 equalled the lowest in all local authorities in Cheshire . At 11.5 per 1,000 population , the live birth rate in Halton and Warrington is the highest in the county . At 121 the standardised mortality ratio is the highest in Cheshire , as is the percentage of persons with limiting long-term illness ( 21.5 % ) . There has been an increase in the number of households from 47,214 in 1991 to 52,501 in 2006 . The average household size has fallen from 2.70 in 1991 to 2.44 in 2001 . In 1991 , 75.8 % of houses were centrally heated , compared with 89.8 % in 2001 . The type of housing has also changed , with an increase from 15.5 % to 19.2 % in detached houses from 1991 to 2001 , an increase over the same years in semi-detached houses from 30.0 % to 33.0 % , and a corresponding decrease in terraced houses from 44.0 % to 37.5 % . The percentage of dwellings in council tax bands A – B is , at 69 % , the highest in any Cheshire local authority . The percentages in bands E – F ( 8 % ) and G – H ( 1 % ) are the lowest .

Of Runcorn 's former industries , all but the chemical industry have disappeared . The industry was dominated for many years by ICI 's Chlor Chemical division ; since divested and taken over by Ineos . In Runcorn , Ineos manufactures chemicals including chlorine , chlorine-containing compounds including vinyl chloride , heavy chemicals including alkalis , and fluorine-containing compounds . A separate business within the same company manufactures salt from brine transported by pipeline from the saltfields of central Cheshire . The former ICI offices and laboratories now comprise the Heath Business and Technical Park , which provides office , laboratory , conference , and leisure facilities . To the east of the town , diverse industries have been developed including , because of the proximity to the motorway system , warehouses and distribution centres . The town continues to act as a port on the Manchester Ship Canal . There are two adjacent ports . Runcorn Docks is owned by the Manchester Ship Canal Company , which is part of the Peel Ports Group . The Port of Weston is owned by the Stobart Group . In March 2014 the UK 's largest incinerator for burning refuse-derived fuel , managed by Viridor , commenced operation in Weston Point .

There has been a shift in employment from manufacturing to service industries . In 1991 , 34 % worked in the manufacturing sector and 61 % were in the service sector . By 2004 17 % were in manufacturing jobs and 78 % were in service jobs . This trend in the local region is demonstrated in this chart which shows the regional " gross value added " of Halton and Warrington at current basic prices , with figures in millions of pounds . Runcorn has two shopping centres . The original shopping area was in the older part of the town on High Street , Regent Street and Church Street . This centre continues to exist , but with the coming of the new town , has declined . There is a small supermarket and some specialist shops , but with a higher-than-average proportion of charity shops and take-away food outlets . A small market has been rebuilt adjacent to the old town bus station . In the centre of the new town area Runcorn Shopping Centre ( formerly Halton Lea ) is an enclosed shopping mall with an attached bus station . Adjacent to it is Trident Park containing shopping outlets and a cinema and further away is an Asda supermarket .

The major landmark in the town is Halton Castle on the top of Halton Hill near the geographical centre of the town . Only ruins of the castle exist , but there are widespread views from the top of the hill . The interior of the castle grounds is open at advertised times . Incorporated in the castle walls is the Castle Hotel , which used to include a courthouse on the first floor . Another landmark is Norton water tower , built of Runcorn sandstone , 112 feet ( 34 m ) high , which holds 672,000 imperial gallons ( 3 million litres ) of water and supplies water to Liverpool . An important historical site and the major visitor centre in the town is Norton Priory , now a museum . The site contains the remains of a priory with adjacent gardens , formerly of a country house . Nearby are a walled garden , including a national collection of tree quinces , and an ice house . Much of the architecture of the town is undistinguished , but there are listed buildings of some importance . The listed churches are All Saints Parish Church and Holy Trinity Church in the centre of the older part of the town , St Mary 's in Halton village , St John 's in Weston , and Christ Church in Weston Point . All Saints ' Church , a Grade II * listed building , dates from 1849 and was built by Anthony Salvin in red sandstone . The oldest existing houses are the Seneschal 's House in Halton village ( 1598 ) , Weston Old Hall ( 1607 ) , Brookfield Farmhouse ( 1691 ) and Halton Old Hall ( 1693 ) . Other outstanding houses include Runcorn Town Hall ( formerly Halton Grange ) , Camden House and Cottage in High Street and Bridgewater House near the ship canal .

The Brindley is a theatre and arts centre which opened in 2004 . It is situated in the old town centre and named after James Brindley , engineer of the adjacent Bridgewater Canal . It contains a proscenium theatre seating 420 and a multi-purpose theatre seating 108 , The Studio , which doubles as a cinema . There is an exhibition space for art installations , a small café and multi-purpose rooms . The centre is owned and administered by Halton Borough Council which runs community events in the building . In 2007 , it won the title of " Best Arts Project in the UK " at the National Lottery Awards . A multiplex cinema run by Cineworld is in Trident Park .

Runcorn has been used for the shooting of films and television programmes . Some of the sequences in the first two series of the BBC police drama Merseybeat were filmed in and around the town . The BBC situation comedy Two Pints of Lager and a Packet of Crisps was set in Runcorn . External shots of the Waterloo Hotel in the area of High Street known as Top Locks ( which is known in the show as The Archer ) appear as well . The opening credits show the Silver Jubilee Bridge and Halton Castle . Drop Dead Gorgeous , a drama on BBC Three , was set in Runcorn . Norton Priory has been used as a location in films and television programmes .

The main library is at Halton Lea with a branch library in the old town centre . Runcorn has two locations offering One-Stop-Shop facilities ; one is Halton Direct Link in Halton Lea , and the other is in the old town library . Runcorn Direct Link also includes a Tourist Information Centre . Runcorn Hill Local Nature Reserve has been developed on the site of a quarry and consists of heathland . Adjacent to it is a park which includes a bandstand , a model boating lake and sports facilities . Wigg Island is a nature reserve on a former industrial site . The reserve is on an island between the Manchester Ship Canal and the River Mersey and consists of open spaces and woodland with bird hides and pathways . Other nature reserves in the town are Murdishaw Valley , Oxmoor Woods and Ponds , and Dorchester Park . Further public open areas are Rock Park , Town Hall Park and Phoenix Park . Open areas in Runcorn form part of Mersey Forest , one of Britain 's community forests . Runcorn 's hospital is Halton General Hospital , which is administered by the Warrington and Halton Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust . Originally planned as a District General Hospital , it was never large enough to provide a full range of services . Acute medical services have been transferred to Warrington Hospital and Halton General has become a centre for non-emergency surgery and rehabilitation . Although it never had its own accident and emergency department the hospital has a minor injuries unit for basic emergency care . On the same site is the Cheshire and Merseyside NHS Treatment Centre , a purpose-built hospital for orthopaedic surgery . Halton Haven Hospice is in the Murdishaw area of the town . The body responsible for planning health services in Runcorn , including primary care , is the Halton Clinical Commissioning Group .

When plans for Runcorn New Town were drawn up , they included three distinct types of road : local roads , expressways and the Busway . The expressways are intended to keep all through traffic off the local roads . This system links to the north by the A533 over the Silver Jubilee Bridge to Widnes and Merseyside , to the northeast to Warrington by the A56 , to the east to Northwich and north Cheshire by the A533 , and to the southeast by the A557 to the M56 and to Frodsham . The M56 links to the M6 and , to the north of Widnes , the A557 links to the M62 . The Busway is a system of roads for use by buses only , and bears no resemblance to guided busways or bus lanes in use elsewhere , as it is a totally separate road system , not running alongside ( or down the middle of ) existing roads . In addition , there is a network of dedicated cycleways in the town . There are two railway stations . Runcorn Mainline Station , located in the old town , is on the Liverpool branch of the West Coast Main Line , and is managed by Virgin Trains , who provide services between Liverpool Lime Street and London Euston . London Midland run a service between Liverpool and Birmingham New Street that calls at the station . Runcorn East station , located in the Murdishaw district of the new town , is managed by Arriva Trains Wales , and provides services to Warrington , Manchester and Chester . Bus services are provided by Halton Transport and Arriva . National Express coaches call at Runcorn , and other coach services are provided by Selwyns Travel , and Anthony 's Travel , who are both based in the town .

The Silver Jubilee Bridge was widened in the mid-1970s by bolting a new pedestrian way to the side of the original structure and widening the roadways over the old footpaths . It is a bottleneck and becomes congested at peak travel times , and in the event of a breakdown or accident on the bridge , traffic in the area comes to a standstill . To resolve this problem , a second crossing of the Mersey is planned , to be known as the Mersey Gateway . Runcorn is 8 miles ( 13 km ) from Liverpool John Lennon Airport and 22 miles ( 35 km ) from Manchester Airport .

There are 29 primary schools in the town and one nursery school at the Grange . The five secondary schools are Ormiston Bolingbroke Academy ( formerly Halton High School ) , St Chad 's RC & CE High , the Grange , and the Heath and Sandymoor School . Two institutions , Halton College and Runcorn Sixth Form College , merged in 2006 to form Riverside College . There is one special school in the town , Cavendish School . There are opportunities for adult education in information technology at the Acorn Lifelong Learning Centre . Other courses for adults are held at different venues in the town .

The 2001 census showed , that of the people living in the borough of Halton , 83.8 % declared themselves to be Christian , 8.7 % stated that they had " no religion , " and 7.0 % made no religious claims at all . Those stating their religions as Buddhist , Hindu , Jewish , Islam or Sikh amounted to 0.5 % . The Anglican churches are part of the Diocese of Chester and the deanery of Frodsham . In Runcorn , the parish church is All Saints in the old town centre . Ten other Anglican churches are in the town . Five Roman Catholic churches can be found in Runcorn and are administered by the Diocese of Shrewsbury . There are three Methodist chapels and one Welsh Presbyterian chapel . Wicksten Drive Christian Centre is shared between the Church of England and the Methodists . Hallwood Ecumenical Parish in Beechwood and Palace Fields consists of 3 churches all recognised by the Church of England , the Methodists and the United Reformed Church . Norton Ecumenical Parish , covering Windmill Hill , Norton and Murdishaw , is served by an Ecumenical Partnership between St Berteline 's Church ( Anglican ) and Murdishaw Ecumenical Church ( Methodist run ) .

The main sport played in Runcorn is football , with the town having two senior football teams – Runcorn Linnets FC and Runcorn Town FC – both playing in the North West Counties League , with the town also having a thriving Sunday League and Junior League . There is also an open age women 's team Runcorn Ladies FC , who have recently formed . They are affiliated to Liverpool FA , and play in the Liverpool County Women 's Open Age Division . Runcorn Linnets were formed as a trust-based team in 2006 from the now defunct Runcorn F.C. Halton . It has existed in various guises since 1918 , and its performance peaked in 1982 when it won the Alliance Premier League , then the highest division below the Football League . The club initially did not have their own ground so , up until the 2009 – 10 season , they took part in a groundshare with Witton Albion to play their home matches at Wincham Park , Northwich . In their first season the club gained promotion to Division 1 of the North West Counties League . In October 2009 planning permission was granted for the club to build a new ground in the Murdishaw area of Runcorn .

Runcorn Town was formed in 1970 as Mond Rangers FC with the club changing their name in 2005 in order to " try and bring a more professional look to the club in general , and increase support from both businesses and individuals in the local community . " After finishing in third place in the West Cheshire League at the end of the 2009 / 10 season , the club were elected to join the North West Counties League at their AGM , the highest level that they have ever played at . Runcorn Cricket Club and Runcorn Hockey Club are based at the Runcorn Sports Club in Moughland Lane . Runcorn Rugby Union FC is based at Halton Sports Club in Murdishaw . There is an 18 hole golf course at Runcorn Golf Club in Clifton Road and a golf driving range at Sutton Fields . Runcorn Sports Club is a privately run sports club in Moughland Lane and provides facilities and coaching for cricket and hockey . Halton Sports Club is in Murdishaw Avenue . Privately run swimming pools are at Beechwood local centre and Stockham Lodge Raquet and Health Club . Adjacent to the latter are two artificial ski slopes administered by Runcorn Ski Centre . The Runcorn Rowing Club rows on the River Weaver Navigation near Clifton Village . The local authority runs several sports centres , including : Runcorn Swimming Pool ; Brookvale Recreation Centre , offering indoor sporting facilities ; and Phoenix Park , with outdoor sporting facilities . Other sports are also catered for . Runcorn also has its own professional wrestling training-school ( The Runcorn Wrestling Academy ) based in Grangeway , set up in 2005 by Andy Baker and Neil Davis .

In the late 19th century , and prior to the 1895 schism , rugby union footballers from the now defunct Runcorn , Harry Collinge Speakman played during the 1888 British Lions tour to New Zealand and Australia and Samuel Houghton played for England . When the rugby football schism occurred in 1895 , Runcorn became founder members of the Northern Rugby Football Union ( now Rugby Football League ) . Runcorn played from the 1895 – 96 season through to the end of 1914 – 15 season , they won the Lancashire League in both the 1895 – 96 and 1899 – 1900 seasons , and were losing semi-finalists in 1906 – 07 Rugby Football League Championship , and during the early part of the 20th century five rugby league players from the now defunct Runcorn played for both Great Britain , and England . Runcorn finish bottom of the league in the 1914 – 15 Northern Rugby Football Union season , and did not recommence playing following the aftermath of the First World War . Rugby league in the town is now represented by Runcorn RLC .

Mary Brewster Hazelton ( November 23 , 1868 – September 13 , 1953 ) was an American portrait painter . She attended the School of the Museum of Fine Arts , Boston , where she was later an instructor . Among her other achievements , Hazelton was the first woman to win an award open to both men and women in the United States when she won the Hallgarten Prize from the National Academy of Design in 1896 . Her portrait paintings are in the collections of the Massachusetts State House , Harvard University , Peabody Essex Museum , and Wellesley Historical Society . The professional organizations that Hazelton was affiliated with included the Wellesley Society of Artists , of which she was a founding member , and The Guild of Boston Artists , of which she was a charter member . She lived her adult life with her sisters in the Hazelton family home in Wellesley , Massachusetts .

Mary Brewster Hazelton was born on November 23 , 1868 in Milton , Massachusetts to Dr. Isaac Hills Hazelton ( 1838 – 1929 ) and Mary Allen Brewster Hazelton ( 1843 – 1923 ) . A Harvard College graduate , Dr. Hazelton served for the United States Navy during the Civil War as an assistant surgeon . He was an innovator in the treatment of the mentally ill . Mary had a brother , Isaac Brewster ( I. B. ) Hazelton ( 1873 – 1943 ) , and two sisters , Olivia Bowditch Hazelton ( 1873 – 1967 ) and Margaret Page Hazelton ( 1876 – 1965 ) . The family moved to Wellesley , Massachusetts , in 1873 . She began making artwork in the 1880s , which she often signed with her nickname , " Daisy " . In 1886 , Hazelton graduated from Wellesley High School . The three sisters lived together in the family home at 319 Washington Street over the course of their lives . The house has been called " Clapp House " and " Hazelton House " .

Hazelton attended the School of the Museum of Fine Arts , Boston ( MFAB ) under Edmund Tarbell . She was Philip Hale 's assistant and completed her education at MFAB in 1892 . She was a drawing class assistant for Frank Weston Benson after graduation and the following year became an assistant drawing instructor . Both Benson and Tarbell were noted Boston Impressionists . Rupert Hughes described Hazelton 's painting , Margaret , made by 1895 , as a " more than usually tender bit of Impressionism " . She studied with Impressionist painters in Paris and also studied in Spain , England , the Netherlands and Italy after winning the Paige Traveling Scholarship from the Museum of Fine Arts , Boston in 1899 . Hazelton was the organization 's first traveling scholar and received $ 800 each year of her two-year study program .

Hazelton was one of the women that collector Everette James identified as having " demonstrate [ d ] remarkable individual artistic skill " who attended the School of the Museum of Fine Arts , Boston in the late 19th-century . This was at a time , though , that women were not recognized for their individual style and abilities . " Tarbellites " was a phrase used at the time that reflected the belief that women 's skill was derived from their mentors , like Edmund C. Tarbell . Greater public exposure has helped to highlight the individual and unique qualities of some of the women portrait painters " that would rival a Tarbell , Benson or De Camp , " according to James in Antiques Journal . In his 2001 article Early Women Artists at the Guild of Boston Artists , Bob Jackman noted that Hazelton painted in a creative and assertive style that included " a loose Impressionist manner " that rivals the works of many other Boston painters . Her technical abilities in composition and use and capture of light are exemplified in the painting Two Sisters at the Piano that she made about 1894 .

Women did not win non-gender specific awards until 1896 when Hazelton won the National Academy of Design Hallgarten Prize for her oil painting In a Studio . It was determined to be the best oil painted made by a person under the age of 35 in the United States that year . The Museum of Fine Arts in Boston awarded her the first Paige Traveling Scholarship in 1899 . Hazelton won an Honorable Mention at the Pan-American Exposition in Buffalo , New York in 1901 . Hazelton had a studio at the old Harcourt Building in Boston in 1904 , when a severe fire burned the life 's work of several artists including Hazelton , Joseph DeCamp , and William M. Paxton . In the aftermath , a group of artists planned for a new building , which became Fenway Studios ( 30 Ipswich Street ) . Hazelton was among the initial group of artists that signed up , and arranged for studio 304 . From 1906 to 1940 , she had a studio at Fenway . In 1912 , the Wellesley Hills First Congregational Church commissioned Hazelton , who was a member , to paint wall murals for the church . One mural depicts the four virtues — truth , charity , justice , and faith — in eight-foot figures of three women and one man . For instance , the male figure carries a sword and scales to represent justice . She also created murals of the Four Evangelists and a representation of the Trinity .

During World War I , Hazelton designed a Liberty Loan campaign poster , using her painting Victory 's Record . She exhibited The Letter and Reverie at the Panama – Pacific International Exposition in San Francisco , California , in 1915 , where she won a bronze medal . She won the Popular Prize in Newport , Rhode Island in 1916 for The Lady in Black . She also won a prize for The Letter at Newport . John Singer Sargent considered her " one of the foremost portrait painters of her time " , according to Wellesley author Jennifer A. Jovin . Hazelton was a Wellesley Society of Artists founder and treasurer , charter member of The Guild of Boston Artists , and an early member of the Copley Society . She was a member of the Concord Art Association , American Federation of Arts , and Connecticut Academy of Fine Arts .

John Jordan Crittenden ( September 10 , 1787 – July 26 , 1863 ) was a politician from the U.S. state of Kentucky . He represented the state in both the U.S. House of Representatives and the U.S. Senate and twice served as United States Attorney General in the administrations of William Henry Harrison , John Tyler and Millard Fillmore . He was also the 17th governor of Kentucky and served in the state legislature . Although frequently mentioned as a potential candidate for the U.S. presidency , he never consented to run for the office . During his early political career , Crittenden served in the Kentucky House of Representatives and was chosen as speaker on several occasions . With the advent of the Second Party System , he allied with the National Republican ( later Whig ) Party and was a fervent supporter of Henry Clay and opponent of Democrats Andrew Jackson and Martin Van Buren . Jackson supporters in the Senate refused to confirm Crittenden 's nomination by John Quincy Adams to the U.S. Supreme Court in 1828 , but after his brief service as Kentucky Secretary of State , the state legislature elected him to the second of his four non-consecutive stints in the U.S. Senate . Upon his election as president , William Henry Harrison appointed Crittenden as Attorney General , but 5 months after Harrison 's death , political differences prompted him to resign rather than continue his service under Harrison 's successor , John Tyler .

He was returned to the Senate in 1842 , serving until 1848 , when he resigned to run for governor , hoping his election would help Zachary Taylor win Kentucky 's vote in the 1848 presidential election . Taylor was elected , but Crittenden refused a post in his cabinet , fearing he would be charged with making a " corrupt bargain " , as Clay had been in 1825 . Following Taylor 's death in 1850 , Crittenden resigned the governorship and accepted Millard Fillmore 's appointment as attorney general . As the Whig Party crumbled in the mid-1850s , Crittenden joined the Know Nothing ( or American ) Party . After the expiration of his term as attorney general , he was again elected to the U.S. Senate , where he urged compromise on the issue of slavery to prevent the breakup of the United States . As bitter partisanship increased the threat of secession , Crittenden sought out moderates from all parties and formed the Constitutional Union Party , though he refused the party 's nomination for president in the 1860 election . In December 1860 , he authored the Crittenden Compromise , a series of resolutions and constitutional amendments he hoped would avert the Civil War , but Congress would not approve them . Crittenden was elected to the House of Representatives in 1861 and continued to seek reconciliation between the states throughout his term . He declared his candidacy for re-election to the House in 1863 , but died before the election took place .

John Jordan Crittenden was born September 10 , 1787 , near Versailles , Woodford County , Kentucky . He was the second child and first son of Revolutionary War veteran John Crittenden and his wife Judith Harris . John and Judith Crittenden had four sons and five daughters , all but one of whom survived infancy . On his father 's side , he was of Welsh ancestry , while his mother 's family was French Huguenot . His father had surveyed land in Kentucky with George Rogers Clark , and settled there just after the end of the American Revolution . Two of Crittenden 's brothers , Thomas and Robert , became lawyers , while the third , Henry , was a farmer . Crittenden began a college preparatory curriculum at Pisgah Academy in Woodford County . He was then sent to a boarding school in Jessamine County . Among his classmates were Thomas Alexander Marshall and Francis P. Blair . Crittenden became especially close friends with Blair , and later political differences did little to diminish their friendship . After a year at boarding school , Crittenden moved to the Lexington , Kentucky , home of Judge George M. Bibb to study law . He began his tertiary studies at Washington College ( now Washington and Lee University ) in Lexington , Virginia . During his brief tenure there , he studied mathematics and belles-lettres and became friends with Hugh Lawson White . Crittenden was dissatisfied with the curriculum at Washington College and matriculated to the College of William and Mary . He studied under St. George Tucker and became acquainted with John Tyler . Crittenden completed his studies in 1806 , and was admitted to the bar the following year . He began his practice in Woodford County , but as central Kentucky was well already supplied with able lawyers , he moved to Logan County , Kentucky , on the then western frontier and opened his practice in Russellville . At age twenty-two , he was appointed by Governor Ninian Edwards of Illinois Territory as its attorney general . The following year , Edwards also made Crittenden his aide-de-camp . [ a ]

Crittenden 's career as an elected official began in the Kentucky House of Representatives , where he represented Logan County from 1811 to 1817 . After the 1811 legislative session , he volunteered as an aide to General Samuel Hopkins in an expedition against the Indians . On the outbreak of the War of 1812 , Kentucky governor Charles Scott appointed him as an aide-de-camp for the First Kentucky Militia . In 1813 , he became an aide-de-camp to Governor Isaac Shelby , serving at the Battle of the Thames in Canada . Following the war , the governor issued him a special commendation for faithfulness in carrying out his orders . He then resumed his law practice in Russellville . In 1814 , Governor Shelby appointed Crittenden to fill the U.S. Senate seat vacated by his former teacher , George M. Bibb ; later , however , Shelby learned that Crittenden was only twenty-seven years old , three years shy of the constitutional age requirement for senators . Hence he returned to his seat in the Kentucky House , where was elected speaker over John Rowan . He would retain the position from 1815 to 1817 . As speaker , Crittenden presided over a particularly tumultuous time in the legislature . In October 1816 , recently elected governor George Madison died . He was succeeded by Lieutenant Governor Gabriel Slaughter . Slaughter immediately made two extremely unpopular appointments , and quickly fell out of favor with many Kentuckians . A group of legislators , led by John C. Breckinridge , pointed out that the Kentucky Constitution provided only that the lieutenant governor would serve as governor until a new gubernatorial election was held and a qualified successor was chosen . Slaughter , they claimed , was only the " acting governor " . The group presented a bill to the House that called for new elections . The bill was defeated , but Crittenden supported it .

Crittenden 's support of a new election was both popular and politically expedient . When the U.S. Senate term of Martin D. Hardin , one of Slaughter 's unpopular nominees , expired in 1817 , the Kentucky General Assembly chose Crittenden to fill the vacancy . Though he was the youngest member of the body , he served as the second-ever chairman of the newly created Committee on the Judiciary . He was also a member of the Committee on Naval Affairs . During his term , he introduced legislation to reimburse and indemnify persons who were fined under the 1798 Sedition Act . He found state politics more interesting , however , and this fact , coupled with increased financial responsibilities incurred by the birth of his third and fourth children , prompted his decision to resign his seat on March 3 , 1819 .

After leaving Congress , Crittenden moved to Frankfort , the state capital , to attract more legal clients and be nearer the center of the state 's political activity . Among his clients after moving to Frankfort were former Presidents Madison and Monroe , future Vice-President Richard Mentor Johnson , and future governors James T. Morehead , John Breathitt , and Robert P. Letcher . During this period , he collaborated with Henry Clay in defending Charles Wickliffe , son of Robert C. Wickliffe . Wickliffe was charged with the murder of the editor of the Kentucky Gazette . Crittenden argued that the slaying was self-defense , and Clay delivered a passionate closing argument . The jury returned a verdict of " not guilty " only minutes after the case was submitted to them . In January 1820 , Crittenden and John Rowan were chosen to help resolve Kentucky 's boundary dispute with Tennessee . The boundary was supposed to run along the line at 36 degrees , 30 minutes north latitude , but when Dr. Thomas Walker surveyed it , he erroneously marked the line farther south . Crittenden and Rowan proposed either that the " Walker Line " remain the boundary from the Cumberland Mountains to the Tennessee River and Tennessee would compensate for the error west of the Tennessee River , or that the boundary be reset at 36 degrees , 30 minutes throughout . Tennessee 's commissioners rejected both proposals , asking instead that the Walker Line be accepted east of the Tennessee River and a more southerly line west of it , with reciprocal agreements between the states to honor existing land grants . Crittenden was inclined to accept the offer , but Rowan was not . The Kentucky commissioners proposed that the matter be submitted to arbitration , but Tennessee refused . In a report to the General Assembly , Crittenden recommended that Kentucky accept the Tennessee proposal . The legislators were swayed by Crittenden 's report , and the articles of agreement were signed on February 2 , 1820 .

Crittenden was elected to the board of trustees for Transylvania University in 1823 , possibly due to lobbying by Henry Clay . A year later , the faculty of the university awarded him an honorary doctor of laws . Crittenden also served as a trustee and attorney for the Kentucky Seminary in Frankfort . Crittenden used his influence in support of Clay in the 1824 presidential election until Clay was eliminated from contention . He then threw his support to Andrew Jackson until he learned that John Quincy Adams , if elected , would likely make Clay Secretary of State . Critics termed Adams ' alleged promise to Clay the " corrupt bargain " , but it resulted in Adams ' election . Upon his appointment as Secretary of State , Clay was prepared to recommend Crittenden to replace him as chief counsel in Kentucky for the Second Bank of the United States , but the bank chose not to hire a replacement .

Crittenden was drawn back into public service by the Old Court – New Court controversy . When legislation aimed at providing relief to the state 's debtors was struck down by the Kentucky Court of Appeals , supporters of the legislation in the General Assembly passed a bill abolishing the Court and creating a new court , which they stocked with sympathetic justices . Opponents of the legislation held that the Assembly 's action was unconstitutional , and for a time , both courts claimed authority as the court of last resort in the state . Though he had served as president of the New Court-backed Bank of the Commonwealth since its formation in 1820 , Crittenden publicly identified himself with the Old Court supporters in April 1825 . In the legislative election of 1825 , friends called on Crittenden to seek election to the state House of Representatives . Many believed that he was the only Old Court supporter that commanded enough respect to win one of the two seats allotted to Franklin County , a bastion of the New Court . When Crittenden consented to run , New Court supporters nominated the state 's Attorney General Solomon P. Sharp and Lewis Sanders , a prominent lawyer . Crittenden and Sharp were elected to the two seats .

In the early hours of the morning of November 7 , 1825 , the very morning the legislature was to convene , Sharp was assassinated . Charges were made that Old Court supporters had instigated the murder . Crittenden tried to blunt these charges by introducing a resolution condemning Sharp 's murder and offering $ 3,000 for the murderer 's capture . When assassin Jereboam O. Beauchamp was apprehended , it became clear that the motivation for the killing was personal , not political . ( Beauchamp 's wife had married him on the condition that he kill Sharp , who had refused to claim the child he had fathered with her previously . ) Despite this , Crittenden refused a request to represent Beauchamp in his murder trial because he wanted to avoid any implication in the matter . The court controversy dominated the legislative session . Crittenden joined the Old Court majority in the House in passing a measure to abolish the New Court . The bill was killed in the Senate , however , by the tie-breaking vote of Lieutenant Governor Robert B. McAfee . Crittenden later served on a committee of six to resolve the conflict , but to no avail . He was unwilling to accept a solution whereby all the justices resigned from both courts , and the governor would appoint a reorganized court made up equally of Old Court and New Court supporters . This position cost him the support of some New Court partisans that had voted for him in the previous election , and he was not returned to the House in 1826 . Ultimately , Old Court partisans gained control of both houses of the legislature , and the New Court was abolished permanently in December 1826 .

As a result of the Old Court – New Court controversy , Kentucky 's politicians became divided between the Democrats and the National Republicans . Crittenden 's alliance with Henry Clay and his own personal political views put him squarely in the National Republican Party . Because of Crittenden 's support of his presidential bid , President Adams appointed him United States district attorney for the district of Kentucky in 1827 . In 1828 , Adams nominated him to replace Kentuckian Robert Trimble as an associate justice of the Supreme Court , but Jackson supporters in the Senate refused to confirm him . When Jackson defeated Adams in the 1828 presidential election , he removed Crittenden from his post as district attorney because of his association with Clay and his opposition to Jackson 's financial policies . Crittenden supporters sought to make him the National Republican nominee for governor in the election of 1828 . Though his nomination was all but certain , Crittenden declined the opportunity , fearing that his association with Clay , who was losing popularity in the state , would cost his party the election . Instead , he threw his support behind Thomas Metcalfe , who went on to carry a very close election over Democrat William T. Barry . Crittenden instead sought another term in the Kentucky House , but was again denied the seat .

In 1829 , Crittenden was elected to the Kentucky House via a special election . He served as Speaker of the House for his entire term . In 1830 , he was the Whig nominee to replace John Rowan in the Senate . Secretly , the party wished to nominate Henry Clay , giving him a springboard from which to launch another presidential campaign , but it was unknown whether he would be able to secure enough votes for confirmation ; it was decided that Crittenden would be the nominee , and if the voting favored the Whigs by a large enough margin , Crittenden would withdraw and allow them to confirm Clay instead . The Democrats countered successively with Richard Mentor Johnson , John Rowan , Charles A. Wickliffe , and John Breathitt . None of them polled more than sixty-four of the sixty-nine votes needed for confirmation . Crittenden garnered sixty-eight votes on fourteen different ballots , but he refused to vote for himself because he wanted Clay to be the nominee . Some of Crittenden 's supporters , however , refused to vote for Clay , and the seat was left vacant . The following year , a clear majority of the House of Representatives were pledged to Crittenden for the open Senate seat . However , Clay allies pressured Crittenden to step aside and allow Clay to be the Whig nominee . Crittenden obliged , and Clay was elected by a margin of nine votes over Richard M. Johnson . Crittenden went on to manage both the unsuccessful gubernatorial campaign of Richard Aylett Buckner and the campaign to help Clay win Kentucky in the 1832 presidential election . After Clay 's defeat in 1832 , he offered to resign his Senate seat and allow Crittenden to succeed him , but Crittenden refused the offer . Later that year , Crittenden retired from the General Assembly .

Crittenden was active in organizing the Whig Party from the remnants of the defunct National Republican Party in 1834 . On July 4 , 1834 , he called to order the party 's first organizational meeting in the state at Cove Spring , Kentucky . He was chosen as chair of the committee on resolutions and in a speech on July 5 , bitterly condemned President Jackson . Later in 1834 , Kentucky governor James T. Morehead appointed Crittenden Secretary of State . In the August elections , Whigs won a majority in both houses of the General Assembly . When the Assembly convened , they elected Crittenden to the U.S. Senate over Democrat James Guthrie by a vote of 94 – 40 . Immediately upon taking his seat in the Senate , Crittenden was named to the Committee on Public Lands and the Committee on the Judiciary , probably due to Clay 's influence . Early in his term , Crittenden vociferously opposed Senator Thomas H. Benton 's proposal to spend the federal budget surplus on public land graduation and military fortifications along the eastern seaboard . He also blasted the Jackson administration for issuing the Specie Circular , requiring that all payment for government land be made in gold or silver . He pointed out that the principles of the circular had been presented in a resolution on the Senate floor , but had been tabled by a large majority . Crittenden maintained that the tabling of the resolution was a condemnation by the Senate , yet the administration issued the circular only months later , overstepping , as Crittenden saw it , the bounds of the executive branch 's authority . Crittenden debated the issue at length with Senator Benton , and Congress ultimately passed a bill requiring the government to accept the notes of specie-paying banks for the purchase of government lands , but President Jackson employed his pocket veto to prevent it from becoming law .

During his term , Crittenden remained an outspoken critic of Jackson and his successor , Martin Van Buren . He supported Henry Clay 's plan for distributing proceeds from the sale of public lands among the states , and also joined Clay in opposing the administration-backed Second Seminole War . One of the few administration proposals he supported was the recognition of the new Republic of Texas . During this period of Crittenden 's service in the Senate , the issue of slavery rose to prominence . Crittenden was regarded as a moderate on the issue , seeking to keep it out of politics altogether . In 1836 , he resisted petitions by the Quakers to abolish slavery in Washington , D.C. , but he also opposed radical pro-slavery measures such as John C. Calhoun 's proposal to ban abolitionist literature from being delivered by mail in the Southern states . In contrast to his usually conciliatory nature , Crittenden was drawn into a disagreement between congressmen Jonathan Cilley and William J. Graves that ended in a duel . On the floor of the House , Cilley had attacked the integrity of Whig newspaper editor James Watson Webb . Webb demanded a retraction of Cilley 's comments through his friend , Congressman Graves . When Cilley refused to receive the communication from Graves , Graves charged that Cilley was questioning Webb 's honor and challenged him to a duel . Graves , accompanied by Kentucky Congressman Richard Menefee and Virginia Congressman Richard Wise asked Crittenden to serve as a second for Graves in the duel ; Crittenden initially protested , but finally agreed . After two misses by both combatants , Cilley was killed on the third exchange . The House proposed the expulsion of Graves and the censure of the other participants ( excluding Crittenden , who was a senator and not subject to House censure ) . The resolutions of expulsion and censure were eventually tabled , but Crittenden personally felt the sting of what he considered an indirect censure and later regretted his actions .

In the 1840 presidential election , Crittenden again encouraged Kentucky Whigs to support the nomination of Henry Clay . After Clay lost the nomination , Crittenden supported eventual victor William Henry Harrison . Crittenden was re-elected to the Senate in 1840 even though he was widely expected to be named to a position in Harrison 's presidential cabinet . He was apparently given his choice of cabinet positions , and chose that of Attorney General . He resigned his Senate seat to take this post . As attorney general , Crittenden issued only one notable opinion . The plaintiff in the case was an individual whose property had been damaged during Andrew Jackson 's invasion of what would become the Florida Territory in 1818 . The case was still being adjudicated in 1841 . A Florida court found in favor of the plaintiff and ordered the federal government to compensate him for the damages and to pay him interest on his claim from the time the damages were incurred . Treasury Secretary Thomas Ewing asked Crittenden whether the court had the authority to award interest and whether or not it should be paid . Crittenden opined that it did not , and Ewing did not pay the interest . Crittenden 's opinion was used as a precedent in similar cases by future attorneys general .

Only a week after being appointed by Harrison , Crittenden was dispatched to New York to mediate tensions with Great Britain over the sinking of the steamboat Caroline by a group of Canadian rebels . In this diplomatic endeavor , Crittenden was acting separately from his official duties as attorney general . He spoke with New York Governor William H. Seward and secured his promise to pardon Alexander McLeod , who had seized and burned the Caroline , if he were convicted of a crime in New York . Ultimately , McLeod was acquitted . Shortly after the Caroline affair , President Harrison died and Vice-President John Tyler ascended to the presidency . Tyler resisted Clay 's attempts to set the Whig agenda , and vetoed two bank bills against Crittenden 's advice . Crittenden and the other Whigs in Tyler 's cabinet — excepting Daniel Webster — resigned in protest of Tyler 's deviation from the traditional Whig agenda . Crittenden 's resignation was effective September 11 , 1841 . He returned to Kentucky with no political office and very little money . A group of his friends in Woodford County purchased his boyhood home and presented it to him as a gift on his return to Kentucky .

Crittenden was appointed to the United States Senate in 1842 , filling the vacancy caused by Clay 's resignation . In January 1843 , he was elected to a full term over Richard Mentor Johnson . The Whigs ' feud with President Tyler continued unabated , and some even talked of impeaching him , but Crittenden condemned that course of action . During the 27th and 28th Congresses , he served on the Committee on Military Affairs . He was an advocate of moderate protective tariffs and federal internal improvements . He opposed giving states the option to forgo apportionment , which would have allowed them to elect their congressmen at-large .

Crittenden again supported Clay 's presidential bid in 1844 . Clay was widely considered the favorite not only for the Whig nomination , but to win the general election . None of the traditional campaign issues — Tyler 's " executive usurpation , " Clay 's " corrupt bargain " with John Quincy Adams , or the protective tariff — seemed to excite the electorate . However , the issue of the annexation of Texas changed the entire campaign . Clay made a tour of the South just before the Whig nominating convention and concluded that the sentiment in favor of annexation in that part of the country was not as strong as had been assumed in Washington , D.C. Acting on this belief , and against Crittenden 's advice , Clay sent a letter opposing annexation to Crittenden , asking him to have it published in the National Intelligencer . Clay believed the Democrats would again nominate Martin Van Buren , who was ardently opposed to annexation , and this would keep annexation from becoming an issue in the campaign . Clay was nominated by acclamation at the Whig convention in Baltimore a week later . At the Democratic nominating convention a month later , however , Van Buren was unable to secure his party 's nomination , and the Democrats instead nominated James K. Polk , who strongly favored annexation . Clay tried to moderate his views on annexation , but his changes of position drew opposition from supporters of both sides of the issue as he attempted to find a middle ground . Polk went on to win the election in a close race . This was the last time Clay would be nominated for president , and many Whigs believed that , following Clay 's defeat , Crittenden was the new leader of their party .

In 1845 , the Senate took up the question of ending the joint occupancy of the Oregon Territory with Great Britain . Lewis Cass , a senator from Michigan , supported an immediate termination of the joint occupation agreement and maintained that a war with the British over the matter was inevitable . Crittenden disagreed , and insisted that Britain be given two years notice before the joint occupation of the territory was ended in order to allow time for a diplomatic resolution . Ultimately , Crittenden 's position prevailed , and a compromise with Britain was effected , setting the dividing line between the two nations ' claims at the 49th parallel north . In 1846 , the United States entered the Mexican – American War in an attempt to gain control of Texas . Crittenden did not support the war , and after war was declared , he insisted that commissioners accompany the U.S. armies and attempt to broker peace at every opportunity . Throughout the war , he corresponded regularly with Generals Zachary Taylor and Winfield Scott . Crittenden 's sons , George and Thomas , both served in the war ; Thomas Crittenden served on Scott 's staff . President Polk consulted Crittenden regarding the terms of peace that should be accepted to end the war . Crittenden insisted that the terms of peace should not include the acquisition of territory to which the United States did not have a " just claim " , but the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo submitted to Congress in 1848 called for Mexico to give up not only its claims to Texas , but also to New Mexico , California , and all the territory in between . A few Whigs joined the Democratic majority in Congress to ratify the treaty and defeat the Wilmot Proviso , which would have banned slavery in the newly acquired territory .

Friends encouraged Crittenden to run for president in the 1848 election . A Nashville newspaper declared its support for him as early as 1846 . A Democratic senator from Rhode Island opined that Crittenden could win support from a sizable number of Democrats in addition to the support of his own party . George B. Kinkead desired to have the Kentucky General Assembly nominate Crittenden for president in 1847 . None of these overtures swayed Crittenden . " For Heaven 's sake don 't talk to me about the Presidency , " he said , rebuffing one early offer . Clay hoped Crittenden would again support him , but Crittenden concluded that Clay was no longer a viable candidate and threw his support behind Kentuckian Zachary Taylor . This decision caused a rift between the two friends , and they were not reconciled until years later when Clay lay on his deathbed .

The Whig Party was also divided in Kentucky , not only between Clay and Taylor , but between gubernatorial candidates . William J. Graves , out of politics since his fatal shooting of Representative Cilley , had the backing of sitting Whig governor William Owsley , while Archibald Dixon had secured support from former Whig governor Robert P. Letcher . Letcher wrote to Crittenden that a Whig split and Democratic victory in the gubernatorial election would have an injurious effect on Whig hopes of carrying Kentucky in the 1848 presidential election ; another former Whig governor , Thomas Metcalfe , concurred . At the Whig nominating convention , both Graves and Dixon withdrew their names and a delegate from Logan County put forward Crittenden 's name without his consent . The nomination easily carried before Crittenden 's friends could block it . The governorship was less prestigious and paid less than Crittenden 's position in the Senate . He would also have to abandon his growing legal practice before the Supreme Court and would lose input on national issues of importance to him such as the territorial questions that grew out of the Mexican War . Nevertheless , he believed that his candidacy would unite the Whigs and help Taylor win Kentucky 's electoral votes in the general election . He accepted the nomination a week after it was made .

Elijah Hise , Chief Justice of the Kentucky Court of Appeals , was the leading candidate for the Democratic gubernatorial nomination , but after the Whig nomination of Crittenden , Hise withdrew from consideration . The Democratic state convention then nominated Congressman Linn Boyd , but Boyd also declined the nomination . The Democrats were finally able to nominate Henderson lawyer Lazarus W. Powell . As Crittenden canvassed the state , his opponents charged him with disloyalty to Clay because he refused to support him in the 1848 election . Crittenden maintained that he supported Clay for the presidency over anyone else , but he had believed that Clay did not intend to seek the Whig nomination in 1848 . After Clay announced his candidacy , Crittenden said , he remained neutral in the Whigs ' choice . In the gubernatorial election , Crittenden defeated Powell by a vote of 65,860 to 57,397 . He resigned his Senate seat to assume the governorship . With his own campaign at a close , Crittenden resumed direction of Taylor 's presidential campaign , dispatching accomplished Whig speakers to all parts of the country . After Taylor was elected , he offered Crittenden the post of Secretary of State . Appeals came in from both Whig and Democratic leaders across the country urging him to serve in the cabinet ; Taylor was inexperienced , and many felt that without Crittenden to guide him , his administration would fail . Taylor personally visited Crittenden in Frankfort on February 15 , 1849 , in hopes of persuading him to accept the appointment . Crittenden refused Taylor 's overtures , and Taylor similarly rejected Crittenden 's appeals to appoint his friend , Robert P. Letcher , as Postmaster General . Crittenden 's input is believed to have contributed significantly to the appointments of John M. Clayton as Secretary of State and Orlando Brown as Commissioner of Indian Affairs .

During Crittenden 's term , he gave strong support to superintendent of public education , Robert Jefferson Breckinridge , who would come to be known as the " Father of public school system in Kentucky . " In response to Crittenden 's call for financial support for the improvement of public education , the General Assembly passed a common school law on February 26 , 1849 . This law established guidelines for several public officials regarding their administration of the common schools . The Assembly also reserved tolls collected on the Kentucky , Green , and Barren rivers for education , and passed a two percent property tax to fund the state 's schools . Crittenden ordered the refurbishing of the state penitentiary , which had been damaged by a fire , and called for an extensive state geological survey . He also advised the creation of a sinking fund to retire the state 's debt . The state adopted a new constitution during Crittenden 's term , though Crittenden was not a delegate to the constitutional convention and apparently had little influence on the drafting of the document . Most Whigs opposed the calling of a constitutional convention because it would necessarily involve reapportionment of the state 's legislative districts and threaten Whig dominance in the General Assembly ; nevertheless , Crittenden belatedly supported the call for a convention during his 1848 gubernatorial campaign .

Vice-President Millard Fillmore ascended to the presidency upon Taylor 's death and offered Crittenden the post of Attorney General . Believing the rift in the Whig Party was now much improved , he accepted the offer and resigned the governorship in 1850 . Fillmore , an opponent of slavery , requested an opinion from Crittenden on the constitutionality of the fugitive slave law , one of the bills involved in the Compromise of 1850 . Specifically , he asked if the law suspended the writ of habeas corpus . Crittenden said that it did not , opining that it discharged a duty placed on Congress by the Constitution to return runaway slaves . Crittenden 's opinion was probably motivated by a desire to see the Compromise pass and avert further sectional tension . Fillmore , his misgivings assuaged , signed the bill , keeping the Compromise intact . Questions regarding claims in Florida , some already considered by Crittenden during his first term as attorney general , continued during his second term . Specifically , some of the claimants objected to a legal provision , passed by Congress years after the Adams – Onís Treaty , that allowed the Secretary of the Treasury to refuse to pay claims awarded by Florida courts that he found not to be " just and equitable " . The claimants contended that this allowed an executive officer to overrule a judicial decision in violation of the doctrine of separation of powers . Crittenden held that the secretary 's ruling was just as much a judicial action as that of the Florida judges . Further , he reiterated his 1841 decision that no interest could be paid on claims arising from damages resulting from Jackson 's invasion . Despite this opinion , a Florida judge awarded interest to one of the claimants , and the government appealed the case to the Supreme Court , with Crittenden serving as the government 's counsel . The Court upheld Crittenden 's entire opinion in its ruling .

Crittenden was awarded an honorary Doctor of Laws degree from Harvard University in 1851 . Later that year , he acted as Secretary of State during the illness of Daniel Webster . In this capacity , he wrote a vigorous warning to both Britain and France about interfering in the question of Cuban independence . He also encouraged adherence to the United States ' traditional policy of non-interference in Europe during the celebrated visit of Hungarian revolutionary Louis Kossuth to the United States in 1851 . In November 1851 , the General Assembly convened to elect a successor to Senator Joseph R. Underwood . Underwood , whose term would expire in 1853 , desired re-election , and Whigs Charles S. Morehead and George Robertson had also announced their respective candidacies . Crittenden , whose term as attorney general also expired in 1853 , had publicly announced that he wished to return to the Senate after his service in President Fillmore 's cabinet , and upon learning this , Underwood and Morehead both withdrew from the race . Robertson was not expected to seriously challenge Crittenden , but following the withdrawals of the other candidates , Archibald Dixon entered the race . Historically an ally of Crittenden , Dixon 's entrance into the race after Crittenden 's announcement showed that he had switched his allegiance from Crittenden to Clay . Democrats , desirous to defeat Crittenden and embarrass the Whigs , pledged to vote against him at all costs , even if it meant electing Dixon . Crittenden 's friends , therefore , held back his name from nomination to spare him almost certain defeat . Balloting deadlocked for several days , with Clay supporters throwing their support to Dixon , Robertson , and Lieutenant Governor John B. Thompson , a compromise candidate . Another compromise was proposed whereby Clay , his health failing , would resign his Senate seat , creating two Senate vacancies and allowing both Dixon and Crittenden to be elected , but Clay refused to cooperate . Finally , on the night of December 11 , 1851 , the Whigs met in caucus and agreed to withdraw both Dixon and Crittenden and elect Thompson .

A week after the election , Clay resigned , but Crittenden now declined the appointment to fill his unexpired term . Instead , the legislature elected Dixon to the remainder of Clay 's term , set to expire in March 1855 . Three weeks before Clay 's death in 1852 , he sent for Crittenden , and the two were reconciled ; Critteden delivered a eulogy for Clay in September 1852 , publicly dispelling the feud . After Clay 's death , Crittenden became the most prominent Whig leader in Kentucky . He encouraged the party to support the nomination of Millard Fillmore for the presidency in 1852 , but the nomination ultimately went to Winfield Scott . Crittenden was proposed as the nominee for vice-president , but he declined . Democrat Franklin Pierce carried the state by 2,700 votes in the general election and Democrats also captured the governorship that year ; both were harbingers of the demise of the Whig Party in Kentucky .

On February 27 , 1853 , the twice-widower Crittenden married his third wife , Elizabeth Moss . Moss was twice-widowed , most recently to General William Henry Ashley . Moss was Crittenden 's wife until his death . Crittenden served as attorney general until the expiration of Fillmore 's term in 1853 . Following his service as attorney general , he returned to private life . He made a substantial amount of money establishing mining claims for his clients in the former Mexican territory . In 1853 , the legislature was to elect a successor to Senator Dixon . Now satisfied that the feud between Clay and Crittenden had ended , Dixon did not seek re-election , leaving Crittenden with no Whig opposition . On a joint vote of the two houses of the General Assembly , Crittenden was elected 78 – 59 over governor Lazarus Powell . In the period between his election and his taking office , Crittenden was the lead defense counsel in the murder trial of Matt F. Ward , the son of one of Crittenden 's lifelong friends . Ward 's younger brother had been disciplined by the principal at Louisville Male High School the preceding November , and the elder Ward went to argue with the principal on behalf of his brother . In the ensuing encounter , Ward shot and killed the principal with a pistol . Public sentiment was heavily against Ward , and the trial was moved to Hardin County . During the week-long trial , which began in April 1854 , Crittenden emphasized inconsistencies in the accounts of eyewitnesses and called prominent character witnesses such as Louisville mayor James Stephens Speed , Congressman William Preston , and Courier-Journal editor George D. Prentice . He presented a case that Ward had acted in self-defense . Because the prosecution sought the death penalty , Crittenden asserted that if the jury rendered an erroneous conviction , they would have no peace of mind knowing they had sentenced an innocent man to hang .

There was a tremendous public outcry when Ward was found not guilty . Newspapers across the nation condemned the verdict and Crittenden for his role in securing it . Only Prentice , in the Courier-Journal , defended Crittenden and the Ward family . Several public meetings passed resolutions calling for Crittenden 's resignation from the Senate . After one such meeting , a mob gathered and Crittenden , Prentice , the Wards , and the twelve jurors were burned in effigy . When he assumed his Senate seat in 1855 , Crittenden was sixty-nine years old , the eldest member of that body . The Whig Party had practically dissolved by this time , and he joined many of his fellow Kentuckians in associating with the Know Nothing Party . Although he did not agree with all of the party 's principles , he would not associate with the Democrats , the party he had spent much of his career denouncing , nor would he associate with the new Republican Party because of their stance against slavery . Despite his misgivings about some of the party platform , he campaigned on behalf of Millard Fillmore , the party 's candidate in the 1856 presidential election .

In the early part of his term , Crittenden was concerned with quelling the violence in Kansas Territory . An opponent of the Kansas – Nebraska Act of 1854 , Crittenden also opposed repealing the Missouri Compromise unless the North agreed to substitute popular sovereignty for the exclusion of slavery north of the 36 ° 30 ' line . In early 1856 , he proposed sending General Winfield Scott to the Kansas Territory to ensure that fair elections were held there , but the proposal was blocked by the Pierce administration . He did not agree with all of the act proposed by Robert Toombs to allow for a constitutional convention in Kansas Territory , but he supported it as a step to bring peace there . He regarded the ratifications of both the Topeka Constitution and the Lecompton Constitution as invalid , and made one of the most highly regarded speeches of his career in opposition to the latter . His substitute bill that would have resubmitted the Lecompton Constitution to Kansas for another ratification vote was supported by Republicans , but it was ultimately defeated . So great was Crittenden 's influence after his actions on the Kansas question that Abraham Lincoln felt that Crittenden 's endorsement of Stephen Douglas cost Lincoln the Illinois senatorial election in 1858 .

From 1858 to 1860 , Crittenden sought out moderates from all sections of the country to effect compromise on the territorial and slavery issues , thus averting war . In 1860 , he was named chair of the National Union Executive Committee , a group of congressmen and journalists who feared that sectional differences would destroy the Union . His efforts helped form the Constitutional Union Party later that year . Chosen as the keynote speaker at the party 's national convention on May 9 , 1860 , many urged him to become their nominee for president . At age seventy-three , however , Crittenden was already contemplating retirement and instead orchestrated the nomination of John Bell , whom he actively supported in the 1860 presidential race . Even after the election of Abraham Lincoln as president in 1860 , Crittenden rejected the idea that secession was inevitable and continued to work for the preservation of the Union . He believed that the current sectional crisis could — like all past disagreements in U.S. history — be resolved through compromise . However , he believed that this compromise must not be a simple legislative action , which could be altered or even repealed by a successive Congress , but amendments to the U.S. Constitution , which would be much more difficult to change . To that end , he proposed the Crittenden Compromise — a package of six constitutional amendments and four congressional resolutions — in December 1860 . Among the resolutions were a condemnation of Northern personal liberty laws and an assertion of the constitutionality of the fugitive slave law . The amendments would have restored the Missouri Compromise line and extended it to California as a line of demarcation between slave and free territories . Crittenden 's other amendments would have further guaranteed that slavery would remain legal indefinitely in Washington , D.C. , so long as it was legal in either Maryland or Virginia and that slaveholders would be reimbursed for runaway slaves . Also , the amendments denied Congress any power to interfere with the interstate slave trade or with slavery in the existing Southern states and made the fugitive slave law and Three-Fifths Compromise perpetual in duration .

The compromise proposal was referred to a special committee proposed by Crittenden 's fellow Kentucky senator , Lazarus Powell . Though it was believed that Republicans in general , including their representatives on the committee , were disposed to accept Crittenden 's compromise or one substantially similar to it , President-elect Lincoln had already instructed his trusted allies in the legislature to resist any plan to extend slavery into the territories . Consequently , when the committee held its first meeting , the Republican members blocked Crittenden 's plan and six others from coming to the floor for a vote . Despite their opposition , however , the Republicans presented no alternative plan . After the rejection of Crittenden 's plan in committee , Florida , Mississippi , Alabama , and Georgia followed South Carolina 's lead and passed ordinances of secession . On January 3 , 1861 , Crittenden tried to salvage his plan by recommending to the full Senate that it be submitted to the people in referendum . It was widely believed that a referendum would recommend adoption of Crittenden 's plan , and Republicans in Congress used a variety of procedures to prevent a vote on allowing it . On January 16 , with procedural delays exhausted , New Hampshire Senator Daniel Clark moved to substitute for Crittenden 's plan a resolution stating that constitutional amendments were unnecessary to preserve the Union , and that enforcement of the Constitution and the present laws would eliminate the need for special sectional guarantees . With the senators from southern states ( both those that had seceded and those that had not ) refusing to vote , Republicans were left with a majority in the chamber and passed Clark 's substitute resolution , effectively killing Crittenden 's proposal .

Crittenden remained in Washington for a few weeks after Congress adjourned . Having learned that John Archibald Campbell , an Alabaman serving on the Supreme Court , had decided to resign in light of his state 's secession , President Lincoln proposed to appoint Crittenden to the vacant seat . Lincoln 's cabinet approved , and the nomination papers were drafted , but Campbell belatedly reconsidered his resignation , and by the time he definitely determined to resign , Lincoln had changed his mind regarding Crittenden 's nomination . Having failed to secure compromise at the federal level , Crittenden returned to Kentucky in early 1861 , attempting to persuade his home state to reject the overtures of fellow southern states and remain in the Union . On May 10 , 1861 , a conference was held to decide Kentucky 's course in the war . Crittenden joined Archibald Dixon and S. S. Nicholas as Unionist representatives at the conference ; the Southern Rights position was represented by John C. Breckinridge , Governor Beriah Magoffin , and Richard Hawes . The conference failed to produce a united course of action , but adopted the policy of armed neutrality . Unionists in the legislature , however , feared that the state militia and its commander Simon Bolivar Buckner , had Confederate sympathies . To counter any threat that the militia would seize control of the state for the South , the General Assembly organized the Home Guard , a separate militia controlled by a five-man , pro-Union commission . Crittenden enlisted in the Home Guard as a private and was part of a group styled the " Union Defense Committee " that secured weapons for the Home Guard from the federal government .

In April , the General Assembly called a border states convention to be held in Frankfort in May . Slates of delegates were nominated by both the Unionists and Southern Rightists , but war broke out before the election of delegates ; the Southern Rights delegates withdrew from the election , and the Unionist slate , including Crittenden , was chosen by default . On May 27 , 1861 , Crittenden was chosen chair of the convention and called it to order . With war having largely precluded any good the meeting could have accomplished , only nine of Kentucky 's twelve delegates were present , along with four from Missouri ( out of seven elected ) , and one from Tennessee ( and his election was questionable ) ; Virginia , Maryland , and Delaware sent no delegates . Ultimately , the convention accomplished little beyond calling on the southern states to reconsider their secession and on the northern states to moderate their demands . Against his father 's wishes , Crittenden 's son George resigned his position as a lieutenant colonel in the U.S. Army to join the Confederate States Army ( in which he was promoted brigadier then major general ) , only to effectively lose his career in the early Confederate defeat at Mill Springs , Kentucky . George 's brother , Thomas Leonidas Crittenden , had been a member of Buckner 's State Guard , but joined the Union Army in September 1861 and was advanced to the rank of brigadier general , serving under Don Carlos Buell . Another son , Eugene , also served in the Union Army and attained the rank of colonel . One of John Crittenden 's grandsons , John Crittenden Coleman , enlisted with the Confederate Army , while another grandson , John Crittenden Watson , graduated from the U.S. Naval Academy and participated in David Farragut 's capture of New Orleans during the war .

President Lincoln called a special session of Congress to convene July 4 , 1861 , and Kentucky held special elections in June to select congressmen for the special session . Crittenden had expressed his desire to retire from public service and initially refused pleas to become a candidate , but he finally consented to run in late May . He was elected over secessionist candidate William E. Simms ; in all , nine of Kentucky 's ten congressional districts selected Unionist candidates in the special election . Upon taking his seat , he was assigned to the Committee on Foreign Affairs . On July 10 , 1861 , he accompanied Simon B. Buckner on a visit to President Lincoln to secure a renewed commitment from Lincoln to respect Kentucky 's neutrality ; Lincoln agreed only to issue a declaration that he had no present designs on Kentucky but would not commit to restrict his future actions . In order to calm the fears of border state citizens concerned about the Union 's objectives in the war , he introduced the Crittenden – Johnson Resolution , which blamed the secessionist states for the war and stated that the object of the war was not the subjugation of those states , but the defense of the Constitution and the preservation of the Union . When those ends were achieved , the resolution stated , the war should cease . Kentucky Representative Henry C. Burnett asked that the question be divided . Burnett was one of only two votes against the portion of the resolution blaming the Southern states for the war ; the only dissent on the remaining portion came from Wisconsin 's John F. Potter and Ohio 's Albert G. Riddle . In the Senate , the resolution passed 30 – 5 , with Kentucky senators Breckinridge and Powell voting in the minority . In December 1861 the House refused , by a vote of 76 – 65 , to reaffirm the resolution .

After Congress adjourned in late July 1861 , Crittenden returned home to Frankfort , but soon had to flee the city as Confederate generals Braxton Bragg and Edmund Kirby Smith invaded Kentucky , capturing both Frankfort and Lexington . He took up temporary residence at Louisville 's Galt House hotel and was still residing there when Union General William " Bull " Nelson was killed by a fellow soldier there in 1862 . He returned to his home in Frankfort shortly after the Battle of Perryville drove the Confederates from the state on October 8 , 1862 . Returning for the regular congressional session , he became the conduit through which many reports of unconstitutional military arrests in Kentucky were channeled . He spoke against the admission of West Virginia to the Union on the grounds that Virginia had not consented to the creation of the state from its territory . He also opposed the Emancipation Proclamation and the use of slaves as soldiers in the war . When he returned to Kentucky following the 37th Congress , Crittenden 's health was failing , and he frequently complained of shortness of breath and chest pain . He had determined to retire from Congress , but once again , friends persuaded him to stand for re-election . Shortly after his nomination , Crittenden and his wife were en route to an alum spring in Indiana to seek treatment to alleviate the symptoms of his failing health when he collapsed in Louisville . After remaining bedfast at the home of a local doctor , he returned home to Frankfort , where he died on July 26 , 1863 . He was interred at the State Cemetery in Frankfort . Among his other notable kinsmen were nephews Thomas Theodore Crittenden , congressman from Missouri , and Thomas Turpin Crittenden , a general in the Union Army . In Kentucky , Crittenden County and the town of Crittenden are named for him .

" Ballad of Sir Frankie Crisp ( Let It Roll ) " is a song by English musician George Harrison , released on his 1970 triple album All Things Must Pass . Harrison wrote the song as a tribute to Frank Crisp , a nineteenth-century lawyer and the original owner of Friar Park – the Victorian Gothic residence in Henley-on-Thames , Oxfordshire , that Harrison purchased in early 1970 . Commentators have likened the song to a cinematic journey through the grand house and the grounds of the estate . The recording features backing from musicians such as Pete Drake , Billy Preston , Gary Wright , Klaus Voormann and Alan White . It was co-produced by Phil Spector , whose heavy use of reverb adds to the ethereal quality of the song . AllMusic critic Scott Janovitz describes " Ballad of Sir Frankie Crisp ( Let It Roll ) " as offering " a glimpse of the true George Harrison – at once mystical , humorous , solitary , playful , and serious " . Crisp 's eccentric homilies , which the former Beatle discovered inscribed inside the house and around the property , inspired subsequent compositions of Harrison 's , including " Ding Dong , Ding Dong " and " The Answer 's at the End " . Together with the Friar Park-shot album cover for All Things Must Pass , " Ballad of Sir Frankie Crisp " established an association between Harrison and his Henley estate that has continued since his death in November 2001 . The composition gained further notability in 2009 when it provided the title for Harrison 's posthumous compilation Let It Roll . My Morning Jacket lead singer Jim James and Dhani Harrison are among the artists who have covered the song .

Since 1965 , George Harrison and his wife , Pattie Boyd , had lived in Kinfauns in Surrey , south of London . The house was a bungalow and too small to accommodate a home recording studio , so the couple began a year-long search for a larger property , concentrating on an area west of London encompassing the counties of Berkshire and Oxfordshire . In January 1970 , Harrison purchased the 120-room Friar Park , set on 33 acres of land , just west of Henley-on-Thames . Previously the home of an order of Roman Catholic nuns , the Salesians of Don Bosco , the four-storey house and its grounds were in a dilapidated state , and it was not until the start of March that the Harrisons moved from a worker 's cottage and into the main residence . The house was built in the 1898 , on the site of a thirteenth-century monastery , by Sir Frank Crisp , a successful City of London solicitor , microscopist and horticulturalist well known for his eccentricities . Harrison described Crisp as a cross between Lewis Carroll and Walt Disney . While compiling Harrison 's autobiography , I , Me , Mine , in the late 1970s , Derek Taylor observed that Harrison " frequently talks as if [ Crisp ] were still alive " . Clean-up work during the first few months at Friar Park unearthed various legacies of Crisp 's time there , such as stone and wood engravings containing whimsical homilies , some of which the Salesian nuns had concealed or painted over . The 10 acres of Crisp 's formal gardens were so overrun with weeds that Harrison and his friend from the Hare Krishna movement , Shyamasundar Das , used World War II-era flamethrowers to clear some of the land . Among the garden features was a series of tiered lakes connected by tunnels , to the south-east of the house , and an Alpine rock garden topped by a 100-foot replica of the Matterhorn , to the north-west .

On 17 March 1970 , despite the property 's state of disrepair , the Harrisons threw a party to celebrate Pattie 's 26th birthday and St Patrick 's Day . According to their friend and assistant Chris O 'Dell , the guest list comprised all the other Beatles and their wives , as well as insiders such as Derek and Joan Taylor , Neil Aspinall and his wife Susie , Peter Brown , and Klaus and Christine Voormann . In what was a rare social get-together for the Beatles , three weeks before Paul McCartney announced he was leaving the band , the party was a " great success " , O 'Dell writes . Shortly afterwards , Harrison invited members of the London-based Hare Krishna movement to help with the restoration work , primarily in the grounds of Friar Park , and accommodated the devotees and their families in a wing of the house . While satisfying Harrison 's spiritual convictions , these visitors proved less welcome to Boyd , who found herself shut out of her husband 's life .

Following the Beatles ' break-up on 10 April 1970 , and having long discussed the possibility of recording a solo album of his songs , Harrison committed to the project over dinner at Friar Park with Boyd , O 'Dell and Terry Doran , his friend and temporary estate manager . The following month , Harrison performed a selection of his compositions in London for Phil Spector , his co-producer on All Things Must Pass , one of which was " Everybody , Nobody " . With its reference to roads and the UK 's Highway Code , " Everybody , Nobody " has been described by musical biographer Simon Leng as Harrison 's first " motoring " song . Harrison soon completely rewrote the lyrics and took part of the melody for his first musical tribute to Crisp and Friar Park – titled " Ballad of Sir Frankie Crisp ( Let It Roll ) " . The result , in Leng 's opinion , was a signpost to its composer 's future involvement in film , an interest that , like gardening and motorsport , would flourish in a dwelling that offered " privacy without imprisonment " . Leng writes that the song 's lyrics read " like a movie script " , with verse one " panning " from the house outside to the garden :

In his book The Words and Music of George Harrison , Ian Inglis similarly views the song as " a guided tour of the house and grounds " , with Harrison " pointing out features of particular interest " . After " scene two " ' s setting – " among the weeds " and inside Friar Park 's formal maze – the third verse focuses on the property 's grottos and extended woodland . Verse three includes the lines " Through ye woode , here may ye rest awhile / Handkerchiefs and matching tie " , the last of which Leng describes as Harrison 's " first clear reference " to Monty Python , his favourite comedy troupe . The song 's " final scene " focuses on what Leng calls " the illusions within the illusion " , as the narrative returns to the interior of the house and the " real people " living there . The lyrics include mentions of housekeepers and " the spiritually awakened Lord and Lady " , Leng writes , before the scene " rolls off into the unknown beyond " : Rather than people , Inglis views the first of these lines as a reference to the " many extraordinary features Crisp had installed " , among them " fantastic statues , bizarre gargoyles , illuminated caverns ... and hidden stepping-stones " . In a song otherwise free of religiosity , theologian Dale Allison interprets " Fools illusions everywhere " as a typical Harrison statement regarding māyā – the illusory nature of human existence .

According to Harrison 's later recollection , Spector suggested that " Ballad of Sir Frankie Crisp " might attract a few cover versions if he changed the lyrics . In I , Me , Mine , Harrison acknowledges that the song was " a piece of personal indulgence " , but " those words were written because that 's what it was " – a tribute to Frank Crisp . A number of Crisp 's homilies directly inspired other Harrison songs during the first half of the 1970s , such as " Ding Dong , Ding Dong " and " The Answer 's at the End " . Harrison went on to identify philosophically with Crisp , of whom he writes elsewhere in I , Me , Mine : " Sir Frank helped my awareness ; whatever it was I felt became stronger , or found more expression by moving into that house , because everything stepped up or was heightened . " Leng considers that the song , along with " All Things Must Pass " , predicts Harrison 's eventual " retreat into an internal musical dialogue , set amid the woods and gardens of Friar Park " , a change of perspective marked by his 1979 eponymous solo album .

Harrison 's solo performance of " Everybody , Nobody " for Phil Spector took place at Abbey Road Studios on 20 May 1970 , a recording since made available unofficially on the Beware of ABKCO ! bootleg . Harrison completed the rewrite , " Ballad of Sir Frankie Crisp " , within a matter of weeks , judging by the appearance of pedal steel virtuoso Pete Drake on the session , which was held at Abbey Road between 26 May and early June . By late June , Drake was home in Nashville producing Ringo Starr 's second solo album , Beaucoups of Blues ( 1970 ) , the recording of which , author Bob Woffinden suggested in 1981 , " was probably completed more quickly than any one of the tracks on All Things Must Pass " . Part of the reason for Harrison taking so long to make his album was the interruption to recording caused by his frequent visits to Liverpool 's neurological hospital , where his mother was dying of cancer . Following her death on 7 July , Harrison invited his elder brothers Harry and Peter to live on the Friar Park estate and manage a team of full-time gardeners and botanists .

The released recording of " Ballad of Sir Frankie Crisp " , in Leng 's words , is as " an ethereal and echoey version of the Band 's minimalist melodicism " , in which Drake 's pedal steel guitar represents the " ectoplasmic " Crisp floating through the song , and Harrison " sounds like he 's recorded his vocal track in one of the park 's legendary caves " . The line-up of musicians included three keyboards players , which Leng and author Bruce Spizer list as Bobby Whitlock ( on piano ) , Billy Preston ( organ ) and Gary Wright ( electric piano ) . Whitlock himself has stated that he played piano very rarely during the All Things Must Pass sessions , however . In his song-by-song discussion of the album , Whitlock offers a line-up that includes Preston on piano and he writes of the other keyboard parts : " This track is swimming with the two Garys " – Wright and Gary Brooker . Although Leng credits the song 's two acoustic guitar parts to Harrison alone , Spizer suggests that guitarist Peter Frampton may have supplied one of these parts . Playing the bass , as he did on most of All Things Must Pass , was Klaus Voormann , who would be another to find sanctuary at Friar Park . Harrison offered him refuge from the media in March and April 1971 , when reports had Voormann linked to a supposed Beatles offshoot band , along with Harrison , Starr and John Lennon .

While relatively free of the Wall of Sound production style found elsewhere on the album , the song 's " sense of the mysterious " is conveyed through Spector 's liberal use of reverb , Alan Clayson writes , particularly on Alan White 's snare drum and Harrison 's murmured backing vocals following verses two and four . The words that Harrison half-sings are " Oh , Sir Frankie Crisp " ; this part and the lead vocal were overdubbed at Trident Studios in central London , at Spector 's suggestion . Aided by the swirling sound of Hammond organ , and Leslie treatment on the piano and pedal steel tracks , the effect of Spector 's production enshrouded " the whole tale in a reverb-induced haze " , as Scott Janovitz of AllMusic puts it .

Delayed from its intended release date by over a month due to the extended period of production , All Things Must Pass was issued on Apple Records in late November 1970 to great acclaim . The triple album featured a cover photo of Harrison dressed in gardening attire , seated on the main lawn of Friar Park 's south garden and surrounded by four figures from Crisp 's extensive collection of Bavarian gnomes . Having been stolen " in about 1871 " , according to photographer Barry Feinstein , the figures had just been returned to Friar Park and placed on the grass . Commentators interpret Feinstein 's photo as representing Harrison 's removal from the Beatles ' collective identity , and the cover helped establish a synonymity between Harrison and Friar Park that Alan Clayson has described as equalling that between Queen Elizabeth II and Windsor Castle . On release , " Ballad of Sir Frankie Crisp ( Let It Roll ) " ' s lyrical affectations provoked comment from American reviewers in particular . Ben Gerson of Rolling Stone remarked that there were " lots of ' Ye 's ' to remind us it 's a ballad " , but identified the song as part of the album 's " musical core " , the " brooding essays on living , loving , and dying " . Village Voice contributor Nicholas Schaffner recognised it as an " olde English ballad " dedicated to what he mistakenly called " George 's 17th-century castle " . To the NME 's Alan Smith , the track was a " meandering song-tale ... which may take a little longer for me to appreciate " . Acknowledging that listeners in 1970 – 71 might have been " mystified " by Harrison 's lyrics , Bruce Spizer has written of this " catchy ballad " : " its beautiful melody and hook-laden refrain ensured that it would be one of the album 's highlights . "

More recently , Clayson has described " Ballad of Sir Frankie Crisp " as " [ c ] ouched in mediaeval expression " and the most " Beatle-esque " of all the songs found on All Things Must Pass , featuring an arrangement that is " a breath of fresh air " . Former Mojo editor Mat Snow also acknowledges the cryptic quality of the lyrics – " unless one happened to know that George and Pattie had just moved to ... a magnificent Gothic pile near Henley-on-Thames " – and considers the song " hauntingly beautiful " . Less impressed , in The Rough Guide to the Beatles , Chris Ingham deems the track " drearily whimsical " and an example of how " the main song set [ on All Things Must Pass ] dips in the middle " . Along with his description of it as a " rolling filmic snapshot " of Friar Park , Simon Leng views " Ballad of Sir Frankie Crisp " as a " musical companion piece " to Feinstein 's album cover image : " [ The song ] conjures an allegorical dream world , populated by smirking gnomes ... a disembodied Victorian lawyer , and , in George Harrison , a refugee from the world 's attention . " Leng sees Harrison 's 1976 film clip for " Crackerbox Palace " as " the celluloid realization of the ' Let it Roll ' script " . Scott Janovitz likewise views the track as " a tour of the grounds " while praising its " darkly beautiful " melody . " Like no other Harrison song , " Janovitz adds , " ' The Ballad of Sir Frankie Crisp ' offers a glimpse of the true George Harrison – at once mystical , humorous , solitary , playful , and serious . "

The title of Harrison 's only career-spanning compilation album , Let It Roll : Songs by George Harrison ( 2009 ) , was derived from " Ballad of Sir Frankie Crisp ( Let It Roll ) " , which also appears on the album . Shortly after Harrison 's death on 29 November 2001 , My Morning Jacket lead singer Jim James recorded the track for his EP of George Harrison cover songs , Tribute To , issued in August 2009 . In 2010 , the producers of CBS 's situation comedy How I Met Your Mother used " Ballad of Sir Frankie Crisp " as a musical theme bookending season 6 of the show . Coinciding with the release of Martin Scorsese 's documentary George Harrison : Living in the Material World , a version of the song by Alessi 's Ark appeared on Harrison Covered , a tribute CD accompanying the November 2011 issue of Mojo magazine . Los Angeles band Big Black Delta and Harrison 's son Dhani performed " Ballad of Sir Frankie Crisp " on the US television show Conan in September 2014 . The performance was part of a week-long promotion for George Harrison 's The Apple Years 1968 – 75 box set .

The Muppets ' Wizard of Oz is a 2005 American-Canadian television film directed by Kirk Thatcher and starring Ashanti and The Muppets with supporting roles done by Jeffrey Tambor , Quentin Tarantino , David Alan Grier , and Queen Latifah . The film was produced by Bill Barretta and written by Debra Frank , Steve L. Hayes , Tom Martin , and Adam F. Goldberg based on a story by Frank and Hayes . A modernized adaptation of L. Frank Baum 's The Wonderful Wizard of Oz , the story follows young Dorothy Gale , who works in her Aunt Em 's diner , but dreams of becoming a singer somewhere beyond her small Kansas town . Swept up by a tornado , in her trailer home with pet prawn Toto , she lands in Oz and embarks on a journey to meet the Wizard who can help make her dreams come true . The film co-produced by The Muppets Studio , Touchstone Television , and Fox Television Studios , in association with The Jim Henson Company . Right after Disney bought the rights to The Muppets in 2004 , pre-production on The Muppets ' Wizard of Oz took place throughout February 2004 , and filming occurred during September 2004 . ABC made several changes to the film after the initial script was written , ultimately deciding to adapt plot elements from Baum 's original novel rather than the 1939 MGM film , The Wizard of Oz . As with the preceding Muppet films , The Muppets ' Wizard of Oz became a musical , and included five new songs written and composed by Michael Giacchino . The production marked the feature film debut of Eric Jacobson as the performer of Sam Eagle , a character originally performed by Frank Oz .

Dorothy Gale ( Ashanti ) is an orphaned teenage girl living in a trailer park in Kansas . Her Aunt Em ( Queen Latifah ) and Uncle Henry ( David Alan Grier ) own a diner , to which Dorothy works for room and board . Her dream of becoming a singer is slim , but when waiting on some truckers Dorothy overhears that the Muppets are conducting a cross-country show called " Star Hunt " and are looking for a backup singer . Aunt Em disapproves , but with Uncle Henry 's best wishes , she goes to the audition . However , the Muppets are about to end the audition , and Dorothy only manages to give them a demo CD that she created beforehand . In returning home , the civil defense sirens sound as a tornado is headed for Dorothy 's trailer park . When Aunt Em and Uncle Henry run into the county storm shelter for safety , Dorothy hurries back to her family 's mobile home to get Toto , her pet prawn . She does not make it out in time , and the two are swept by the tornado across the vast fields of Kansas . When Dorothy climbs out of the wreckage , she finds that Toto ( Pepé the King Prawn ) can talk and that she is no longer in Kansas .

Dorothy and Toto discover that they are in Munchkinland , a small town part of the vast Land of Oz . After discussing her situation with the town 's people , the Munchkins ( played by Rizzo the Rat and the other rats ) , she learns that the land 's ruler the Wizard , has the power to grant her wish of becoming a famous singer . She meets the Good Witch of the North ( Miss Piggy ) , and receives a pair of magic silver slippers from the Wicked Witch of the East ( Miss Piggy ) , the Witch of the North 's sister who was killed when Dorothy 's trailer fell on her . Soon after , she embarks on a journey with Toto on the yellow brick road to meet the Wizard of Oz , who lives in the Emerald City , the capital of Oz . On her journey , she meets three creatures : a Scarecrow ( Kermit ) , a Tin Thing ( Gonzo ) , and a Cowardly Lion ( Fozzie ) . They are also seeking the Wizard of Oz to give them a brain , heart , and courage , respectively . The group meets various obstacles involving a deep gorge where the Kalidah Critics ( Statler and Waldorf ) are heckling them and a Poppy Field Club run by Clifford which nearly puts them to sleep . After arriving at the Emerald City and meeting the Wizard , Dorothy and her friends are sent to retrieve the Wicked Witch of the West 's magic eye , a tool she uses to see anything she desires in the Land of Oz .

The group assumes that completing this task will result in the granting of their wishes . The Wicked Witch of the West ( Miss Piggy ) sees them coming and consults with her pet Foo-Foo and her henchman Johnny Fiama . When the Wicked Witch of the West plans to have either her pack of 40 great man-eating wolves , a flock of 40 crows of despair , a swarm of angry black bees , a group of vicious squirrels , or a group of bloodthirsty cockatoos to do away with them , Johnny tells her that the animals that work for her are unavailable due to various reasons . This forces her to resort to using her Magic Biker Cap to call Sal Minella and the other Flying Monkeys ( played by Sweetums , Crazy Harry , Black Dog , Calico , Old Tom , Spotted Dick , and Aretha from Fraggle Rock ) to deal with them . The Witch and the Flying Monkeys capture Dorothy and Lion while Scarecrow and Tin Thing are dismantled by the Flying Monkeys . After being threatened to be killed by her , Toto calls the Munchkins , who set Dorothy free and hold up the witch . During the final battle , it cuts away to a scene where Quentin Tarantino is with Kermit , discussing ideas for how Dorothy can defeat the Wicked Witch of the West . Tarantino 's ideas are deemed too expensive and too violent for a Muppet movie , so they agree for Dorothy to do a powerful kick on the witch . Cutting back to the action , Dorothy kicks the witch into her own " bottled water bath " which contains tap water ( to which she is severely allergic ) . Angel Marie admitted that he filled the water bottles with tap water to restock them . This action causes the Wicked Witch of the West to melt as Johnny averts Foo-Foo 's eyes . With the Wicked Witch of the West dead , Dorothy finds the magic eye unharmed and floating in the tub and grabs it .

Dorothy gains control of the Flying Monkeys by giving back the group 's Magic Biker Cap to Sal Minella . She has Scarecrow and Tin Thing rebuilt by the Flying Monkeys . Then she and her friends travel back to the Emerald City to have their wishes granted . When they all storm into the Wizard 's room , they discover it is merely a Hollywood effects stage and that the Wizard ( Jeffrey Tambor ) is just an ordinary man , pretending . He asked for the witch 's eye so that she could not see him for who he really was . Even so , he still proceeds to grant their wishes . Dorothy finally becomes a singer in the Land of Oz , but she realizes that all she ever really wanted was to go back home and be with her family . After traveling back to Munchkinland , she meets Glinda the Good Witch of the South ( Miss Piggy ) , who tells her that if she clicks her heels together three times , she will be able to go anywhere she desires , contrary to how the Good Witch of the North said to get to the Emerald City . She does so , saying " take me home to Aunt Em " .

She is then spun by the slippers ' charm into Kansas , and , much to her surprise , she finds out that Kermit was looking for her , saying that she had the best voice they heard on the whole search , and that she has been chosen to go on the Star Hunt . Dorothy , having been reunited with her aunt and uncle , and feeling that she is not ready to leave Kansas to become a real star , rejects , but Aunt Em says that she wants her to go with the Muppets on their Star Hunt , much to her even bigger surprise . She then sings " Good Life " on television with them as the film ends .

Jeffrey Tambor as The Wizard of Oz : The legendary Wizard of Oz . This is Tambor 's second appearance in a Muppet film , the first being Muppets from Space . Quentin Tarantino as Himself ( Extended version ) : In a short appearance with Kermit the Frog , Tarantino discusses ideas on how to stop the Wicked Witch of the West . Despite the fact that his role is small his name is still mentioned in the movie trailer and listed on the cover of both the Video and DVD . Kelly Osbourne as Dorothy Gale ( post-makeover ) ( Extended version ) : Appears in a brief cameo as Dorothy when she first comes out of the Magic Makeover Machine in Emerald City .

Kermit the Frog as Himself / Scarecrow : A scarecrow in search of a brain . Scarecrow is constantly mocked by the crows in Oz , as he is defenseless and cannot do anything to stop them . Prior to Dorothy 's journey , Kermit organizes a talent scout for a star for a new show . After Dorothy 's return , he hires her . Beaker : He appears as an Emerald City Technician . Beaker also appears at the end in the Muppets ' show . Rizzo the Rat as Mayor of Munchkinland / Himself . He occasionally aids Dorothy when she is in danger . Prior to Dorothy 's journey , Rizzo is seen assisting Bean Bunny in loading equipment into the Muppets ' bus . He returns for the Muppets ' show at the end of the film . The Great Gonzo as the Tin Thing / Himself : A robot in search of a heart . Originally human , the Tin Thing was turned into a robot by the Wicked Witch of the West who was angry at him for asking to leave her palace and marry his fiancée , Camilla the Chicken . He also appears at the end of the film in the Muppets ' show .

Dr. Bunsen Honeydew : He appears as an Emerald City Technician . He also appears at the end of the film in the Muppets ' show . Waldorf as Kalidah Critic # 2 . He and the other Kalidah Critic heckles Dorothy and her friends as they try to cross a log . Zoot : He performs backup for the songs " Naptime " , and for the " The Witch is in the House " , and appears at the end of the film in the Muppets ' new show . Pepé the King Prawn as Toto : Dorothy 's pet prawn and first companion on her journey . In Kansas , Toto was a prawn that lived in a fish bowl in Dorothy 's room . Strangely , Pepé doesn 't appear in the finale with the other Muppets . Dr. Teeth : He performs " Naptime " , and also performs in " The Witch is in the House " . He appears again at the end of the film in the Muppets ' show . Johnny Fiama : He appears as one of the henchmen of the Wicked Witch of the West , and is supposedly her love interest .

Lew Zealand : He briefly appears in Emerald City at the red carpet event , asking Dorothy to sign his boomerang fish . Bubba the Rat : He assists the Mayor of Munchkin Land in getting Dorothy and the Lion out of Poppyfields . Miss Piggy as Herself : She appears early on with Kermit , and tries to get rid of Dorothy . She returns at the end of the film for the Muppets ' show . as The Tattypoo the Good Witch of the North : The Good Witch that gives Dorothy the silver slippers . as The Glinda the Good Witch of the South : The other Good Witch that shows Dorothy how to get home . as The Wicked Witch of the East : The original owner of the magic slippers who was killed by Dorothy 's falling mobile home . Fozzie Bear as The Cowardly Bear / Himself : A nervous and frightened lion stand-up comic that accompanies Dorothy and the others on their journey . Fozzie shows up at the end of the film in the Muppets ' show . Sam Eagle : He appears as the Guardian of the Gates . Sam doesn 't appear in the Muppets ' show at the end of the film .

When The Walt Disney Company acquired the Muppets franchise from The Jim Henson Company in February 2004 , the Muppets were re-introduced to the public by marketing products and guest appearing on television shows such as Good Morning America and America 's Funniest Home Videos . After a new film titled The Muppets ' Wizard of Oz was announced by The Jim Henson Company , Fox Television Studios , Touchstone Television , and the Muppets Holding Company signed on to help produce it . Filming took place throughout September 2004 in Vancouver , British Columbia . Before filming , ABC announced that the production would adapt elements from the original 1900 book , rather than the 1939 film. such as the Silver Shoes instead of the Ruby slippers . On August 25 , 2004 , it was announced that Hilary Duff , Jessica Simpson , and Ashanti had auditioned for the role of Dorothy Gale , but Ashanti had won the part . When asked about how she felt about working with the Muppets , Ashanti replied , " I love children , and to me , the Muppets are just like little kids . " She also stated , " The director had to give me a few pointers and tips for acting with them , but the most important thing that I learned was to keep eye contact . " Also in August 2004 , BBC News reported that Quentin Tarantino would appear in the film .

Michael Giacchino , who had previously worked on a Muppet-related project which is video game Muppet Monster Adventure and would become an Academy Award-winning composer , worked with Jeannie Lurie , Adam Cohen , Debra Frank , and Steve Hayes to write five original songs for the film . The five songs created were " Kansas " , " When I 'm With You " , " It 's a Good Life " , " The Witch is in the House " , and " Nap Time " . " When I 'm With You " was later nominated for a Primetime Emmy in the Outstanding Music and Lyrics category , but lost to " Mary Jane / Mary Lane " from Reefer Madness . Ashanti and the Muppet cast , mainly Bill Barretta and Eric Jacobson , contributed the vocals for each of the songs . Ted Kryczko produced the album , Booker T. Washington White prepared the songs for recording , and Paul Silveira and Brandon Christy mixed the film 's songs .

The Muppets ' Wizard of Oz premiered on April 27 , 2005 at the Tribeca Film Festival . The television premiere was on May 20 , 2005 at 8 : 00pm on ABC in the US , where it was rated TV-PG . It aired in Canada on CBC Television , and in the UK on December 18 , 2005 . In the US , the film 's official soundtrack was released on May 17 , 2005 . Buena Vista Home Entertainment released the DVD and VHS in both the US and in international territories . The film was released to Region 1 DVD and VHS on August 9 , 2005 . The Canadian Home Video Classification System rated the film G for all home video releases within Canadian territories . The Region 2 DVD was released on April 3 , 2006 . The film was rated U by the British Board of Film Classification , K-3 in Finland , and G in Australia . The DVD and VHS were released under the title Extended Version in the US and Anniversary Edition outside the US . The extended version contains 20 minutes of footage cut from the feature film , including the footage of the Kelly Osbourne and Quentin Tarantino cameos . The DVD and VHS included an extended interview with Quentin Tarantino , a blooper reel , and a behind-the-scenes look at the film guided by Pepe the Prawn . In the US , the DVD and VHS release of the film was in a 1.33 : 1 ( fullscreen ) aspect ratio , whereas the international versions are in the original 1.78 : 1 ( widescreen ) aspect ratio . During Macy 's annual Flower Show promotion , the store 's windows along Broadway displayed flower arrangements illustrating six scenes from the movie , while the store sold The Muppets ' Wizard of Oz-related merchandise , such as plush dolls .

7.75 million viewers watched The Muppets ' Wizard of Oz on its television premiere night in the United States ; it ranked as the forty-second most-watched television program of the week . Michael Schneider of Variety wrote that it " performed solidly ... particularly with adults 18 – 34 , teens and kids . " The film received negative reviews from critics . At Rotten Tomatoes , the movie currently holds a 38 % " rotten " rating , with an average of three out of eight critics giving the film a positive review . For the film 's positive response , Kevin Carr stated that " When you dig down and actually find ( and watch ) the new Muppet material , some of the magic is still there . " MaryAnn Johanson of Flick Filosopher said that , " It 's not on a par with the Muppet movie madness of old , but it 's darn close . " According to the Bums Corner 's review the film was a " treat for all ages , and that it was a colorful , musical , humorous romp . " Keith Allen of Movie Rapture gave the film 2.5 stars out of 3 , explaining that the film 's humor was surprisingly clever , and that the film would frequently make you laugh . Mutant Reviewers commented that although the Muppet deal with Walt Disney was " disappointing " , the film managed to be funny and witty .

For the film 's " negative " response , David Nusair of Reel Film Reviews warned that the film was " strictly for kids " Nusair stated that although Ashanti can sing , she cannot act . Joshua Tyler of Cinema Blend explained that Dorothy visiting the Wizard of Oz to become a star instead of going back home was a big mistake , and that it showed how shallow society has become . R.J. Carter of The Trades gave the film a B- , also stating that Dorothy 's wish to become a star was a selfish one . Ultimate Disney 's review found that the extended version of the film did more harm than good ; Andy Dursin of The Aisle Seat said that the original film was " dull " and that the extended version was actually an improvement . Cold Fusion Video felt that although the film was entertaining , it lacked the heart and wit of Jim Henson 's Muppet films . Bryan Pope of DVD Verdict said that the film drained the Muppets of their spirit and was slightly gratuitous . Techtite TV reviews felt that the film was done poorly on all levels , and that the film was on the higher end of TV-PG .

Other reviewers felt that the film 's attempt to appeal to an older , more mature audience was ultimately a bad idea . Kerry Bennett of Parent Previews warned that it sometimes steered " dangerously off course " due to an excess of sexual content and violence . Referential humor to the marriage of Jennifer Lopez , Manolo Blahnik style silver shoes , and films such as Girls Gone Wild , The Passion of the Christ , Apocalypse Now , and Kill Bill : Volume 1 were seen as too mature . Cold Fusion Video judged the Kelly Osbourne cameo as " pointless " . Dursin contrasted the two guest appearances and found that the Tarantino cameo dragged the film down . Critics were split on the merits of ABC 's modernized adaptation to rely on plot elements from the original novel instead of the iconic 1939 film .

The mourning dove ( Zenaida macroura ) is a member of the dove family , Columbidae . The bird is also known as the turtle dove , American mourning dove or the rain dove , and was once known as the Carolina pigeon or Carolina Turtledove . It is one of the most abundant and widespread of all North American birds . It is also a leading gamebird , with more than 20 million birds ( up to 70 million in some years ) shot annually in the U.S. , both for sport and for meat . Its ability to sustain its population under such pressure is due to its prolific breeding ; in warm areas , one pair may raise up to six broods of two young each in a single year . The wings make an unusual whistling sound upon take-off and landing , a form of sonation . The bird is a strong flier , capable of speeds up to 88 km / h ( 55 mph ) . Mourning doves are light grey and brown and generally muted in color . Males and females are similar in appearance . The species is generally monogamous , with two squabs ( young ) per brood . Both parents incubate and care for the young . Mourning doves eat almost exclusively seeds , but the young are fed crop milk by their parents .

The mourning dove is closely related to the eared dove ( Zenaida auriculata ) and the Socorro dove ( Zenaida graysoni ) . Some authorities describe them as forming a superspecies and these three birds are sometimes classified in the separate genus Zenaidura , but the current classification has them as separate species in the genus Zenaida . In addition , the Socorro dove has at times been considered conspecific with the mourning dove , although several differences in behavior , call , and appearance justify separation as two different species . While the three species do form a subgroup of Zenaida , using a separate genus would interfere with the monophyly of Zenaida by making it paraphyletic . The ranges of most of the subspecies overlap a little , with three in the United States or Canada . The West Indian subspecies is found throughout the Greater Antilles . It has recently invaded the Florida Keys . The eastern subspecies is found mainly in eastern North America , as well as Bermuda and the Bahamas . The western subspecies is found in western North America , including parts of Mexico . The Panamanian subspecies is located in Central America . The Clarion Island subspecies is found only on Clarion Island , just off the Pacific coast of Mexico .

The mourning dove is sometimes called the " American mourning dove " to distinguish it from the distantly related mourning collared dove ( Streptopelia decipiens ) of Africa . It was also formerly known as the " Carolina turtledove " and the " Carolina pigeon " . The genus name was bestowed in 1838 by French zoologist Charles L. Bonaparte in honor of his wife , Princess Zénaide , and macroura is from Ancient Greek makros , " long " and oura , " tail " . The " mourning " part of its common name comes from its call . The mourning dove was thought to be the passenger pigeon 's closest living relative , based on morphological grounds . The mourning dove was even suggested to belong to the same genus , Ectopistes , and was listed by some authors as E. carolinensis .

The mourning dove has a large range of nearly 11,000,000 km2 ( 4,200,000 sq mi ) . The species is resident throughout the Greater Antilles , most of Mexico , the Continental United States , and southern Canada . Much of the Canadian prairie sees these birds in summer only , and southern Central America sees them in winter only . The species is a vagrant in northern Canada , Alaska , and South America . It has been spotted as an accidental at least seven times in the Western Palearctic with records from the British Isles ( 5 ) , the Azores ( 1 ) and Iceland ( 1 ) . In 1963 , the mourning dove was introduced to Hawaii , and in 1998 there was still a small population in North Kona . The mourning dove also appeared on Socorro Island , off the western coast of Mexico , in 1988 , sixteen years after the Socorro dove was extirpated from that island .

The mourning dove is a medium-sized , slender dove approximately 31 cm ( 12 in ) in length . Mourning doves weigh 112 – 170 g ( 4.0 – 6.0 oz ) , usually closer to 128 g ( 4.5 oz ) . The elliptical wings are broad , and the head is rounded . Its tail is long and tapered ( " macroura " comes from the Greek words for " large " and " tail " ) . Mourning doves have perching feet , with three toes forward and one reversed . The legs are short and reddish colored . The beak is short and dark , usually a brown-black hue . The plumage is generally light gray-brown and lighter and pinkish below . The wings have black spotting , and the outer tail feathers are white , contrasting with the black inners . Below the eye is a distinctive crescent-shaped area of dark feathers . The eyes are dark , with light skin surrounding them . The adult male has bright purple-pink patches on the neck sides , with light pink coloring reaching the breast . The crown of the adult male is a distinctly bluish-grey color . Females are similar in appearance , but with more brown coloring overall and a little smaller than the male . The iridescent feather patches on the neck above the shoulders are nearly absent , but can be quite vivid on males . Juvenile birds have a scaly appearance , and are generally darker .

All five subspecies of the mourning dove look similar and are not easily distinguishable . The nominate subspecies possesses shorter wings , and is darker and more buff-colored than the " average " mourning dove . Z. m. carolinensis has longer wings and toes , a shorter beak , and is darker in color . The western subspecies has longer wings , a longer beak , shorter toes , and is more muted and lighter in color . The Panama mourning dove has shorter wings and legs , a longer beak , and is grayer in color . The Clarion Island subspecies possesses larger feet , a larger beak , and is darker brown in color .

Most mourning doves migrate along flyways over land . On rare occasions , mourning doves have been seen flying over the Gulf of Mexico , but this is exceptional . Spring migration north runs from March to May . Fall migration south runs from September to November , with immatures moving first , followed by adult females and then by adult males . Migration is usually during the day , in flocks , and at low altitudes . However , not all individuals migrate . Even in Canada some mourning doves remain through winter , sustained by the presence of bird feeders .

This species ' call is a distinctive , plaintive cooOOoo-woo-woo-woooo , uttered by males to attract females , and may be mistaken for the call of an owl at first . ( Close up , a grating or throat-rattling sound may be heard preceding the first coo . ) Other sounds include a nest call ( cooOOoo ) by paired males to attract their mates to the nest sites , a greeting call ( a soft ork ) by males upon rejoining their mates , and an alarm call ( a short roo-oo ) by either male or female when threatened . In flight , the wings make a fluttery whistling sound that is hard to hear . The wing whistle is much louder and more noticeable upon take-off and landing .

Courtship begins with a noisy flight by the male , followed by a graceful , circular glide with outstretched wings and head down . After landing , the male will approach the female with a puffed-out breast , bobbing head , and loud calls . Mated pairs will often preen each other 's feathers . The male then leads the female to potential nest sites , and the female will choose one . The female dove builds the nest . The male will fly about , gather material , and bring it to her . The male will stand on the female 's back and give the material to the female , who then builds it into the nest . The nest is constructed of twigs , conifer needles , or grass blades , and is of flimsy construction . Mourning doves will sometimes requisition the unused nests of other mourning doves , other birds , or arboreal mammals such as squirrels . Most nests are in trees , both deciduous and coniferous . Sometimes , they can be found in shrubs , vines , or on artificial constructs like buildings , or hanging flower pots . When there is no suitable elevated object , mourning doves will nest on the ground .

The clutch size is almost always two eggs . Occasionally , however , a female will lay her eggs in the nest of another pair , leading to three or four eggs in the nest . The eggs are white , 6.6 ml ( 0.23 imp fl oz ; 0.22 US fl oz ) , 2.57 – 2.96 cm ( 1.01 – 1.17 in ) long , 2.06 – 2.30 cm ( 0.81 – 0.91 in ) wide , 6 – 7 g ( 0.21 – 0.25 oz ) at laying ( 5 – 6 % of female body mass ) . Both sexes incubate , the male from morning to afternoon , and the female the rest of the day and at night . Mourning doves are devoted parents ; nests are very rarely left unattended by the adults . When flushed from the nest , an incubating parent may perform a nest-distraction display , or a broken-wing display , fluttering on the ground as if injured , then flying away when the predator approaches it . Incubation takes two weeks . The hatched young , called squabs , are strongly altricial , being helpless at hatching and covered with down . Both parents feed the squabs pigeon 's milk ( dove 's milk ) for the first 3 – 4 days of life . Thereafter , the crop milk is gradually augmented by seeds . Fledging takes place in about 11 – 15 days , before the squabs are fully grown but after they are capable of digesting adult food . They stay nearby to be fed by their father for up to two weeks after fledging .

Mourning doves eat almost exclusively seeds , which make up more than 99 % of their diet . Rarely , they will eat snails or insects . Mourning doves generally eat enough to fill their crops and then fly away to digest while resting . They often swallow grit such as fine gravel or sand to assist with digestion . The species usually forages on the ground , walking but not hopping . At bird feeders , mourning doves are attracted to one of the largest ranges of seed types of any North American bird , with a preference for canola , corn , millet , safflower , and sunflower seeds . Mourning doves do not dig or scratch for seeds , though they will push aside ground litter ; instead they eat what is readily visible . They will sometimes perch on plants and eat from there . Mourning doves show a preference for the seeds of certain species of plant over others . Foods taken in preference to others include pine nuts , sweetgum seeds , and the seeds of pokeberry , amaranth , canary grass , corn , sesame , and wheat . When their favorite foods are absent , mourning doves will eat the seeds of other plants , including buckwheat , rye , goosegrass and smartweed .

Mourning doves can be afflicted with several different parasites and diseases , including tapeworms , nematodes , mites , and lice . The mouth-dwelling parasite Trichomonas gallinae is particularly severe . While a mourning dove will sometimes host it without symptoms , it will often cause yellowish growth in the mouth and esophagus that will eventually starve the host to death . Avian pox is a common , insect-vectored disease . The primary predators of this species are diurnal birds of prey , such as falcons and hawks . During nesting , corvids , grackles , housecats , or rat snakes will prey on their eggs . Cowbirds rarely parasitize mourning dove nests . Mourning doves reject slightly under a third of cowbird eggs in such nests , and the mourning dove 's vegetarian diet is unsuitable for cowbirds .

Like other columbids , the mourning dove drinks by suction , without lifting or tilting its head . It often gathers at drinking spots around dawn and dusk . Mourning doves sunbathe or rainbathe by lying on the ground or on a flat tree limb , leaning over , stretching one wing , and keeping this posture for up to twenty minutes . These birds can also waterbathe in shallow pools or bird baths . Dustbathing is common as well . Outside the breeding season , mourning doves roost communally in dense deciduous trees or in conifers . During sleep , the head rests between the shoulders , close to the body ; it is not tucked under the shoulder feathers as in many other species . During the winter in Canada , roosting flights to the roosts in the evening , and out of the roosts in the morning , are delayed on colder days .

Prince Alfred was born , on 22 September 1780 , at Windsor Castle , Windsor , England . His father was King George III , his mother Charlotte of Mecklenburg-Strelitz . The prince was baptised by Frederick Cornwallis , The Archbishop of Canterbury , in the Great Council Chamber at St James 's Palace on 21 October 1780 . His godparents were The Prince of Wales ( his eldest brother ) , The Prince Frederick ( his second brother ) and The Princess Royal ( his eldest sister ) . As his parents ' fourteenth child and ninth son , his birth was no surprise but it did bring joy to his family , especially to his older sister Sophia , who , their sister Elizabeth reported , called the new baby her " grandson " .

In 1782 , Prince Alfred was inoculated against smallpox . The sickness proved too much for the baby and in June he was taken to Deal with his nurse Lady Charlotte Finch to recover . It was hoped that the sea air , bathing in the water , and horseback riding would improve his condition . While he was there , Alfred endeared himself to many , including an old woman whom he waved to . In spite of his charming disposition , he continued to break out in spots and his chest was troubling him . When he returned to Windsor in August 1782 , the doctors inspected him and realized that the boy had only weeks to live . After suffering bouts of fever and continuing problems with his chest , Prince Alfred died on 20 August 1782 , at Windsor Castle , Berkshire , not even two years old . Although the household did not go into mourning ( it was not prescribed for royal children younger than fourteen ) , his parents took the loss harshly . According to Lady Charlotte Finch , the Queen " cried vastly " and was " very much hurt by her loss and the King also . " Alfred was buried at Westminster Abbey , though his remains were later moved to the Royal Vault in St. George 's Chapel , Windsor Castle on 11 February 1820 . His father continued to dwell on his death , and the sight of Alfred 's posthumous portrait in a family painting by Thomas Gainsborough nearly a year after Alfred 's death sent his three eldest sisters into tears . Six months after Alfred 's death , his elder brother Octavius succumbed to the smallpox virus , further devastating the king . During one of his bouts of madness in 1812 , George would have imaginary conversations with his two youngest sons .

The United States Assay Commission was an agency of the United States government from 1792 to 1980 . Its function was to supervise the annual testing of the gold , silver , and ( in its final years ) base metal coins produced by the United States Mint to ensure that they met specifications . Although some members were designated by statute , for the most part the commission , which was freshly appointed each year , consisted of prominent Americans , including numismatists . Appointment to the Assay Commission was eagerly sought after , in part because commissioners received a commemorative medal . These medals , different each year , are extremely rare , with the exception of the 1977 issue , which was sold to the general public . The Mint Act of 1792 authorized the Assay Commission . Beginning in 1797 , it met in most years at the Philadelphia Mint . Each year , the President of the United States appointed unpaid members , who would gather in Philadelphia to ensure the weight and fineness of silver and gold coins issued the previous year were to specifications . In 1971 , the commission met , but for the first time had no gold or silver to test , with the end of silver coinage . Beginning in 1977 , President Jimmy Carter appointed no members of the public to the commission , and in 1980 , he signed legislation abolishing it .

In January 1791 , Treasury Secretary Alexander Hamilton submitted a report to Congress proposing the establishment of a mint . Hamilton concluded his report : The remedy for errors in the weight and alloy of the coins , must necessarily form a part , in the system of a mint ; and the manner of applying it will require to be regulated . The following account is given of the practice in England , in this particular : A certain number of pieces are taken promiscuously out of every fifteen pounds of gold , coined at the Mint , which are deposited , for safe keeping , in a strong box , called the pix [ sic , more commonly " pyx " ] . This box , from time to time , is opened in the presence of the Lord Chancellor , the officers of the Treasury , and others , and portions are selected from the pieces of each coinage , which are melted together , and the mass assayed by a jury of the Company of Goldsmiths ... The expediency of some similar regulation seems to be manifest . In response to Hamilton 's report , Congress passed the Mint Act of 1792 . In addition to setting the standards for the new nation 's coinage , Congress provided for an American version of the British Trial of the Pyx :

That from every separate mass of standard gold or silver , which shall be made into coins at the said Mint , there shall be taken , set apart by the Treasurer and reserved in his custody a certain number of pieces , not less than three , and that once in every year the pieces so set apart and reserved , shall be assayed under the inspection of the Chief Justice of the United States , the Secretary and Comptroller of the Treasury , the Secretary for the Department of State , and the Attorney General of the United States , ( who are hereby required to attend for that purpose at the said Mint , on the last Monday in July in each year ) ... and if it shall be found that the gold and silver so assayed , shall not be inferior to their respective standards herein before declared more than one part in one hundred and forty-four parts , the officer or officers of the said Mint whom it may concern shall be held excusable ; but if any greater inferiority shall appear , it shall be certified to the President of the United States , and the said officer or officers shall be deemed disqualified to hold their respective offices .

The following January , Congress passed legislation changing the date on which the designated officials met to the second Monday in February . Meetings did not take place immediately ; the Mint was not yet striking gold or silver . Minting of silver began in 1794 and gold in 1795 , and some coins were saved for assay : the first Mint document mentioning assay pieces is from January 1796 and indicates that exactly $ 80 in silver had been put aside . The first assay commissioners did not meet until Monday , March 20 , 1797 , a month later than the prescribed date . Once they did , annual meetings took place each year until 1980 , except in 1817 as there had been no gold or silver struck since the last meeting ( until 1837 , the commission examined the coins since the last testing , rather than for a particular calendar year ) . In 1801 , the usual meeting was delayed , causing Mint Director Elias Boudinot to complain to President John Adams that depositors were anxious for an audit so the Mint could release coins struck from their bullion . Numismatist Fred Reed suggested that the delay was probably due to poor weather , making it difficult for officials to travel from the new capital of Washington , D.C. , to Philadelphia for the assay . In response , on March 3 , 1801 , Congress changed the designation of officials required to attend to " the district judge of Pennsylvania , the attorney for the United States in the district of Pennsylvania , and the commissioner of loans for the State of Pennsylvania " . The meeting finally took place on April 27 , 1801 . The 1806 and 1815 sessions were delayed because of outbreaks of disease in Philadelphia ; the one in 1812 was held a month late because of a heavy snowstorm which prevented the commissioners from reaching the Mint . No meeting took place in 1817 ; a fire had damaged the Philadelphia Mint in January 1816 , and no gold or silver awaited the commission . In 1818 , Congress substituted the Collector of the Port of Philadelphia for the Pennsylvania loans commissioner as a member of the Assay Commission . With the Coinage Act of 1834 , Congress removed the automatic disqualification of Mint officers in the event of an unfavorable assay , leaving the decision to the president .

The Mint Act of 1837 established the Assay Commission in the form it would have for most of the remainder of its existence . It provided that " an annual trial shall be made of the pieces reserved for this purpose [ i.e. , set aside for the assay ] at the Mint and its branches , before the judge of the district court of the United States , for the eastern district of Pennsylvania , the attorney of the United States , for the eastern district of Pennsylvania , and the collector of the port of Philadelphia , and such other persons as the President shall , from time to time , designate for that purpose , who shall meet as commissioners , for the performance of this duty , on the second Monday in February , annually " . The usual procedure for members of the public to be named to the commission after public appointments began was for the Mint Director to send the president a list of candidates for his approval . According to Jesse P. Watson in his monograph on the Bureau of the Mint , the admission of members of the public to the Assay Commission meant " that permanency and high official dignity were no longer characteristic of the commission " .

In 1861 , as the American Civil War broke out , North Carolina joined the Confederate States . The Charlotte Mint , taken over by the Confederacy , eventually closed as the dies that had been shipped from the Philadelphia Mint wore out , and it could obtain no more . Nevertheless , 12 half eagles ( $ 5 gold coins ) were sent from Charlotte to Philadelphia , through enemy lines , in October 1861 . They were duly tested by the 1862 Assay Commission , and were found to be correct . In 1864 , with the metal nickel , used in the cent in short supply , Mint Director James Pollock asked that year 's commission to opine on a substitute for the copper-nickel used in the cent . The members endorsed French bronze ( 95 % copper and 5 % tin or zinc ) as a metal to be used in the cent and a proposed two-cent piece . Pollock sent the conclusions to Treasury Secretary Salmon P. Chase , who forwarded them ( and draft legislation ) to Maine Senator William P. Fessenden , chairman of the Senate Finance Committee . The Coinage Act of 1864 was signed by President Abraham Lincoln on April 22 , 1864 .

The Coinage Act of 1873 revised the laws relating to coinage and the Mint and retired several denominations including the two-cent piece . The act also changed the officers required to serve on the Assay Commission : That to secure a due conformity in the gold and silver coins to their respective standards of fineness and weight , the judge of the district court of the United States for the eastern district of Pennsylvania , the Comptroller of the Currency , the assayer of the assay-office at New York , and such other persons as the President shall , from time to time , designate , shall meet as assay-commissioners , at the mint in Philadelphia , to examine and test , in the presence of the Director of the Mint , the fineness and weight of the coins reserved by the several mints for this purpose , on the second Wednesday in February , annually . The act also required the Mint to put aside one of every thousand gold coins struck , and one of every two thousand silver coins for the assay . It provided the procedure for putting the coins aside , sealing them in envelopes , and placing them in a pyx to be opened by the assay commissioners .

The 1881 Assay Commission found that approximately 3,000 silver dollars struck at the Carson City Mint ( 1881-CC ) had been struck in .892 silver rather than the legally mandated .900 . It is unclear if the Treasury took any steps to attempt to recover the issued pieces . The 1885 commission detected a single silver dollar which was 1.51 grains ( 0.098 g ) below specifications , the permitted tolerance being 1.50 grains ( 0.097 g ) . In 1921 , the Assay Commission found that some coins struck at the Denver Mint were struck in .905 or .906 silver , above the legal .900 by more than the permitted tolerance . Investigation found that ingots which had been rejected and were intended for melting had instead been used for coin . In the early 20th century , the San Francisco Mint struck silver coins for the Philippines , then a US possession ; those pieces were included in the assay . Proof coins struck by the Mint for collectors were included in the assay ; pieces struck under contract with foreign governments were not . The pyx was a rosewood box , 3 feet ( 0.91 m ) square , of European work , and sealed by heavy padlocks . It was not filled by the coins put aside for the 1934 Assay Commission , of which there were 759 with a total face value of $ 12,050 . This had increased by 1940 to 79,847 coins , all silver as gold coins were no longer being struck , and by 1941 , many reserved coins could not be kept in the pyx , instead being placed in packing boxes , overflowing with sealed envelopes . By the late 1940s , more than ten million coins were being struck each day at Philadelphia alone ; in 1947 , Congress reduced the number of silver coins required to be put aside for assay from one in 2,000 to one in 10,000 . This was done at the urging of the Department of the Treasury , as having to store so many assay coins was a burden to the Mint , and it felt that the number of coins available to the commission would still be sufficient .

By the 1950s , there was considerable competition among numismatists to be appointed an assay commissioner . Appointees received no compensation , but the appointment was prestigious and carried with it a prized assay medal . The procedure was changed so that the Mint Director submitted the names of more individuals than would actually be appointed to the White House , where the final choices were made . It remained possible for the director to ask for special consideration for certain individuals . Later nominations were also screened by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and by the IRS . The Mint Director received nominations for assay commissioner from legislators , political organizations , government officials , and from members of the public . In 1971 , for the first time , the Assay Commission had no silver coins to test ; none were struck by the Mint for circulation in 1970 . Although part-silver Kennedy half dollars were struck in 1970 , they were only for collectors and were not put aside for assay . Commissioners could instead test 21,975 dimes and 11,098 quarters , all made from copper-nickel clad , though as the Associated Press , reporting on the 1973 Assay Commission , put it , " a discovery of a bum coin hasn 't occurred in years . " Only one in every 100,000 clad or silver-clad pieces was put aside for the Assay Commission , and only one in every 200,000 dimes . At the 1974 meeting , one copper-nickel Eisenhower dollar was discovered which weighed 15 grains ( 0.97 g ) below specification ; after reference to the rules , the coin was deemed barely within guidelines . Numismatist Charles Logan , in his 1979 article about the impending end of the Assay Commission , stated that this incident pointed out " the basic problem with the annual trial . First , the members were not exactly sure how their job was done , or what the requirements were . Second , they really did not want to report a fault in the coinage . Finally , even if the one dollar coin had been found faulty , [ it would have had ] little consequence , except to prompt greater vigilance at the Mint . "

In early 1977 , outgoing Mint Director Mary Brooks sent a list of 117 nominees to the new president , Jimmy Carter , from which it was expected that about two or three dozen names would be selected . Carter refused to make any public appointments , feeling the Assay Commission was unneeded given that the Mint performed the same work through routine internal checks and that the $ 2,500 appropriated each year was a poor use of taxpayer money . Only government members served on the Assay Commission in 1977 – 1980 . Even so , hundreds of numismatists applied to be on the 1978 commission . Carter made no appointments that year ; the only members were those designated by statute . The 1979 meeting , attended by the government-employed commission members and Mint Director Stella Hackel Sims , was held eight days late on February 22 due to schedule conflicts . In June 1979 , Carter 's Presidential Reorganization Project recommended the abolition of the Assay Commission and two other small agencies . The report estimated that having an Assay Commission cost the federal government about $ 20,000 and that the work was done better by vending machine manufacturers to avoid having their machines jam . In August , columnist Jack Anderson deemed the commission an example of wasteful spending in Washington , characterizing its activities , " more than a decade ago , the government stopped putting either gold or silver in its coins — but the commission continues to hold its annual luncheon meeting . Solemnly , the commissioners measure the amounts of nonprecious metals in U.S. coins , and strike a medal to commemorate their activities . This useless exercise costs the taxpayers about $ 20,000 a year . " As coin collector and columnist Gary Palmer put it in 1979 , " who really cares if the weight of a cupro-nickel quarter is off by a grain or two ? "

On March 14 , 1980 , Carter approved legislation abolishing the Assay Commission , as well as the other two agencies , as recommended by his Reorganization Project . The President wrote in a signing statement that with the end of gold and silver coinage , the need for the commission had diminished . Numismatic leaders objected to the ending of the commission , considering the expense small and the tradition worth keeping , although they concurred the commission " had become an anachronism " . At the time of its abolition , the Assay Commission was the oldest existing government commission . In 2000 and 2001 , New Jersey Congressman Steven Rothman introduced legislation to revive the Assay Commission , stating that re-establishing the commission would assure public confidence in the gold , silver , and platinum bullion coins struck by the Mint . The bills died in committee .

The general function of the Assay Commission was to examine the gold and silver coins of the Mint and ensure they met the proper specifications . Assay commissioners were placed on one of three committees in most years : the Counting , Weighing , and Assaying Committees . The Counting Committee verified that the number of each type of coin in packets selected from the pyx matched what Mint records said should be there . The Weighing Committee measured the weight of coins from the pyx , checking them against the weight required by law . The Assaying Committee worked with the Philadelphia Mint 's assayer as he measured the precious metal content of some of the coins . In some years there was a Committee on Resolutions — in 1912 , it urged that a leaflet be published for visitors to the Mint 's coin collection , and that a medal be struck to commemorate the collection . The full Assay Commission adopted that committee 's report . Congress in 1828 had required that the weights kept by the Mint Director be tested for accuracy in the presence of the assay commissioners each year . By statute passed in 1911 , the commission was required to inspect the weights and balances used in assaying at the Philadelphia Mint , and to report on their accuracy . This included the government 's official standard pound weight that had been brought from the United Kingdom .

According to a description of the 1948 meeting , silver coins selected for assay were first placed between steel rollers until the thickness was reduced to .0001 inches ( 0.0025 mm ) , and then were chopped into fine pieces and dissolved in nitric acid . The fineness of the silver in the coin could be determined by the amount of salt solution needed to precipitate all the silver in the liquid . Numismatist Francis Pessolano-Filos described the work of the Assay Commission : Using balances and weights , the commission weighed several examples of each type of coin , then used calipers to examine them for proper thickness , and finally , using various acids and solvents , determined the amount of alloy used in manufacture of the planchets . Ledgers and journal books on the mint were also examined . If there were any imperfections or deviations from the legal standards in the coins examined , the information was immediately sent to the president of the United States . The commission operated under rules first adopted by the 1856 commission , and then passed down , year to year , and amendable by any Assay Commission , although in practice little change was made . Under the rules , the Director of the Mint called the assay commissioners to order , then introduced the federal judge who was an ex officio member , who presided over the meetings ; if the judge was absent , the members elected a chairman . The chairman divided the members into the committees . If there had been a change of officers at a mint , commissioners examined coins from before and after . After the committees completed their work , the members re-assembled to report their findings and to vote on their report .

Every Assay Commission passed the coinage that it was called upon to examine . If pieces varying from the standard were found , that was also noted ; the 1885 Assay Commission reported the one substandard silver coin , which came from the Carson City Mint , but urged the president to take no action , noting that the coin was underweight by an amount too small to be measured by the scales at Carson City . Remains of coins used in the assay were melted by the Mint ; those put aside for the Assay Commission that were not used were placed in circulation from Philadelphia , and were not marked or distinguished in any way . There were thousands of coins for the commission , of which only a few were assayed . Commissioners often purchased some of the remaining pieces as souvenirs , although commemorative coins could not be purchased if Congress had given the exclusive right to sell them to a sponsoring organization — they were instead destroyed .

Appointments of members of the public to the Assay Commission by the president are known to have been made as early as 1841 ; the final ones were made in 1976 . Many early commissioners were chosen for their scientific or intellectual attainments . Such qualifications were not required of later public appointees , who included such prominent figures as Ellin Berlin , wife of songwriter Irving Berlin . The first women to be appointed to the Assay Commission were Mrs. Kellogg Fairbanks of Chicago and Mrs. B.B. Munford of Richmond , Virginia , both in 1920 . The recordholder for service as a commissioner is Herbert Gray Torrey , 36 times an assay commissioner between 1874 and 1910 ( missing only 1879 ) by virtue of his office as assayer of the New York Assay Office . The recordholder as a presidential appointee is Dr. James Lewis Howe , head of the Department of Chemistry at Washington and Lee University , 18 times an assay commissioner , serving in 1907 and then each year from 1910 to 1926 . An employee of the National Bureau of Standards was included in the presidential appointments each year ; he brought with him the weights used in the assay , which were checked by the agency in advance . Although no future president served as an assay commissioner , Comptroller of the Currency Charles G. Dawes was a commissioner in 1899 and 1900 ; he was Vice President of the United States from 1925 to 1929 .

Among those appointed was coin collector and Congressman William A. Ashbrook , 14 times an assay commissioner between 1908 and 1934 . Ashbrook 's presence on the 1934 Assay Commission has led to speculation that he might have used his position as an assay commissioner ( he left Congress in 1921 ) to secure one or more 1933 Saint-Gaudens double eagles , almost all of which were melted due to the end of gold coinage for circulation . Assay commissioners were traditionally allowed to purchase coins from the pyx that were not assayed , and numismatic historian Roger Burdette speculates that Ashbrook , generally well-treated by the Treasury Department due to his onetime congressional position , might have exchanged other gold pieces for the 1933 coins . The three known specimens of the 1873-CC quarter , without arrows by the date , and the only known dime of that description , may have been salvaged from assay pieces , as the remainder of those coins had been ordered melted as underweight . A similar mystery attends the 1894 Barber dime struck at San Francisco ( 1894-S ) of which the published mintage is 24 , although it is not certain whether this total includes the one sent to Philadelphia to await the 1895 Assay Commission . The fact that one of the 1895 assay commissioners was Robert Barnett , chief clerk of the San Francisco Mint , has led numismatic writers Nancy Oliver and Richard Kelly to speculate that he may have been made an assay commissioner in order to retrieve the dime . The 1895 Assay Commission report confirms that the dime was there , as it was counted by the Counting Committee . The dime is not mentioned as having been either weighed or assayed ; Oliver and Kelly , in a May 2011 article in The Numismatist , suggest that Barnett used that privilege of assay commissioners to obtain the rarity . He is not known , however , to have written or spoken of the matter before his murder in 1904 .

In 1964 , former assay commissioners formed the Old Time Assay Commissioners Society ( OTACS ) . When President Carter stopped appointing public members to the commission in 1977 , the OTACS fundraised in an unsuccessful attempt to induce the government to continue that tradition . The society met annually through 2012 , usually at the site of the yearly convention of the American Numismatic Association ( ANA ) . With the number of surviving OTACS members at less than three dozen , the society plans no further meetings ; its 2012 session in conjunction with the ANA convention in Philadelphia included an event at the mint .

Assay Commission medals were struck from a variety of metals , including copper , silver , bronze , and pewter . The first Assay Commission medals were struck in 1860 at the direction of Mint Director James Ross Snowden . The initial purpose in having medals struck was not principally to provide keepsakes to the assay commissioners , but to advertise the Mint 's medal-striking capabilities . The nascent custom lapsed when Snowden left office in 1861 . Numismatists R.W. Julian and Ernest E. Keusch , in their work on Assay Commission medals , theorize that the resumption of Assay Commission medal striking in 1867 was at the request of Mint Engraver James B. Longacre to new Mint Director William Millward . Medals to be given to assay commissioners were struck each year after that until public members ceased to be appointed to the Assay Commission in 1977 . Early assay medals featured on the obverse a bust of Liberty or figure of Columbia , and on the reverse a wreath surrounding the words " annual assay " and the year . The 1870 obverse , by Longacre 's successor William Barber , features Moneta surrounded by implements of the assay , such as scales and the pyx . The distinctive designs for each year would sometimes be topical — the 1876 medal bears a design for the centennial of American Independence , and 1879 's depicted the recently deceased Mint Director Henry Linderman . Beginning in 1880 , they most often featured the president or Treasury Secretary . The medals in 1901 and from 1903 to 1909 were rectangular , a style popular at the time . The 1920 reverse , by Engraver George T. Morgan , had a design which symbolized the ending of World War I ; in 1921 , an extra medal was struck in gold , given by the assay commissioners to outgoing President Woodrow Wilson as a mark of respect .

The 1936 issuance was a mule of the Mint 's medals for the president at the time , Franklin Roosevelt , and the first president , George Washington . Bearing the words , " annual assay 1936 " on the edge , the medal was prepared in this manner by order of Mint Director Nellie Tayloe Ross after Mint officials realized that they had forgotten to prepare a special design for an assay medal . The 1950 medal illustrates a meeting of three 1792 officeholders ( Secretary of the Treasury Hamilton , Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson and Chief Justice John Jay ) . Although they were officeholders designated by the Mint Act of 1792 , no assay took place until 1797 , by which time all three had left those offices . There was no specially designed medal in 1954 ; instead , the assay commissioners , who met in Philadelphia on Lincoln 's Birthday , February 12 , 1954 , chose to receive the Mint 's standard presidential medal depicting Abraham Lincoln , with the commissioner 's name on the edge . The final medals , 1976 and 1977 , were oval and of pewter . The 1977 medal , depicting Martha Washington , was not needed for presentation , as no public assay commissioners were appointed . They were presented to various Mint and other Treasury officials , and when there was public objection , more were struck and were placed on sale for $ 20 at the mints and other Treasury outlets in 1978 . Material was available for about 1,500 medals , and they were initially not available by mail . They were still available in person , and by mail order , in 1980 .

All Assay Commission medals are extremely rare . Except for the 1977 medal , none is believed to have been issued in a quantity of greater than 200 , and in most years fewer than 50 were struck . Additional copies of several 19th-century issues are known to have been illicitly struck ; the Mint ended such practices in the early 20th century . The obverse of the 1909 issue , depicting Treasury Secretary George Cortelyou , was reused as Cortelyou 's entry in the Mint 's series of medals honoring Secretaries of the Treasury . The later pieces were struck with a blank reverse , but in the early 1960s , the reverse design from the Assay Commission issue was used with the Cortelyou obverse , and an unknown number sold to the public . The restrikes are said to be less distinctly struck than the originals .

The fortifications of Mdina ( Maltese : Is-Swar tal-Imdina ) are a series of defensive walls which surround the former capital city of Mdina , Malta . The city was founded as Maleth by the Phoenicians in around the 8th century BC , and it later became part of the Roman Empire under the name Melite . The ancient city was surrounded by walls , but very few remains of these have survived . The city walls were rebuilt a number of times , including by the Byzantine Empire in around the 8th century AD , the Arabs in around the 11th century , and the Kingdom of Sicily in the medieval period until the 15th century . Most of the extant fortifications were built by the Order of Saint John between the 16th and 18th centuries . The city has withstood a number of sieges , and it was defeated twice – first by the Aghlabids in 870 and then by Maltese rebels in 1798 . Today , the city walls are still intact except for some outworks , and they are among the best preserved fortifications in Malta . Mdina has been on Malta 's tentative list of UNESCO World Heritage Sites since 1998 .

The city of Mdina occupies the tip of a plateau located on high ground in the northern part of the island of Malta , far away from the sea . The site has been inhabited since prehistory , and by the Bronze Age it was a place of refuge since it was naturally defensible . The Phoenicians colonized Malta in around the 8th century BC , and they founded the city of Maleth on this plateau . It was taken over by the Roman Republic in 218 BC , becoming known as Melite . The Punic-Roman city was about three times the size of present-day Mdina , extending into a large part of modern Rabat . Melite 's walls had a thickness of around 5 m ( 16 ft ) and were surrounded by a 700 m ( 2,300 ft ) -long ditch . Very little remains of the Punic-Roman walls of Melite still survive . The remains of a city gate or tower were discovered in Saqqajja in modern Rabat , about 5 m ( 16 ft ) below the current street level . Parts of the ditch have survived under present-day St. Rita Street and the Church of St. Paul . The lower foundations of some Punic-Roman ramparts , consisting of rusticated ashlar blocks three courses high still in situ , were found near the Magazine Curtain in the western part of Mdina . The only other remains of the ancient walls are Punic-Roman masonry blocks which were reused in the medieval period . These include a wall around Greeks Gate , and some stones which were discovered in excavations at Inguanez Street and the Xara Palace .

At some point following the fall of the Western Roman Empire , a retrenchment was built within the city , reducing it to its present size . This was done to make the city 's perimeter more easily defensible , and similar reductions in city sizes were common around the Mediterranean region in the early Middle Ages . Although it was traditionally assumed that the retrenchment was built by the Arabs , it has been suggested that it was actually built by the Byzantine Empire in around the 8th century , when the threat from the Arabs increased . In 870 , Melite was captured by the Aghlabids , who massacred its inhabitants and " demolished its fortress " according to the chronicler Al-Himyarī . This account further mentions that Malta remained almost uninhabited until it was resettled in around 1048 or 1049 by a Muslim community and their slaves , who built a settlement called Medina on the site of Melite . Archaeological evidence suggests that the city was already a thriving Muslim settlement by the beginning of the 11th century , so 1048 – 49 might be the date when the city was officially founded and its walls were constructed . The Byzantines besieged Medina in 1053 – 54 , but were repelled by its defenders .

Medina surrendered peacefully to Roger I of Sicily after a short siege in 1091 , and Malta was subsequently incorporated into the County and later the Kingdom of Sicily , being dominated by a succession of feudal lords . The fortifications of Mdina were rebuilt and modified a number of times over the following centuries . A castle known as the Castellu di la Chitati or the castrum civitas was built on the southeast corner of the city near the main entrance , probably on the site of an earlier Byzantine fort . The city withstood a siege by Hafsid invaders in 1429 . By the 15th century , most of Mdina 's enciente had a system of double walls . The land front was flanked by four towers , one near Greeks Gate , another at the centre of the land front , the Turri Mastra ( also known as Turri dila bandiera ) near the main entrance and the Turri di la Camera at the southeast corner of the city . A barbican was built near Mdina 's main entrance sometime after 1448 . In the 1450s there were fears of a Barbary or Ottoman attack , so efforts were made to improve Mdina 's walls . The main ditch was completed , and the Castellu di la Chitati was partially demolished by royal licence in 1453 , due to its ruinous state and the excessive cost for its upkeep .

By 1474 , cannons had been introduced in Mdina . Other extensive preparations for an attack were made in the 1480s , when the fortifications were once again improved under the direction of Sicilian military engineers . At this point , some buildings in Rabat were demolished to clear the fortifications ' line of fire . By 1522 , the fortifications were being modernized with the construction of embrasures . However , the walls were still regarded as obsolete , since they lacked bastions and could not resist bombardment from modern artillery . Most of the medieval walls of Mdina were gradually dismantled between the 1530s and 1720s , when the city 's fortifications were being upgraded by the Hospitallers . One of the most significant visible remnants of the medieval fortifications is the Greeks Gate and the surrounding curtain walls , which still retains its medieval form apart from the outer portal which was built in the 18th century . Parts of the double walls , including the remains of two gun loops , still stand between the gate and the Torre dello Standardo . Most of the northern and eastern walls date back to the medieval period , although some sections were rebuilt by the Hospitallers . The northern ramparts contain a medieval wall tower , while the remains of Byzantine antemurals and the foundations of a late 15th-century artillery platform have been found in the eastern walls .

When the Order of Saint John took over in Malta in 1530 , the nobles ceremoniously handed over the keys of the city to Grand Master Philippe Villiers de L 'Isle-Adam . The Order settled in Birgu and Mdina lost its status as capital city , but L 'Isle-Adam converted the remaining part of the Castellu di la Chitati into a palace , which became the meeting place of the civil administrative council known as the Università . The first major upgrade of Mdina 's fortifications occurred in the 1540s , during the magistracy of Juan de Homedes y Coscon . Two new bastions were built at the extremities of the land front , possibly to designs of the military engineer Antonio Ferramolino . Parts of the eastern walls were also rebuilt en crémaillère , the only instance this style is found in Malta . The 15th-century barbican in front of the main gate was demolished in 1551 since it obstructed the line of fire of the newly built bastions . That year , the city withstood a brief Ottoman attack . Mdina was not attacked directly during the Great Siege of Malta , but it nonetheless played a crucial role in the siege . Ottoman general Lala Mustafa Pasha wanted to take over the poorly-defended city first , but was overruled by Piali Pasha who wanted to attack Fort Saint Elmo . The fort was taken over after a month of heavy fighting , but the Ottomans had lost crucial time in doing so . On 7 August 1565 , the Order 's cavalry in Mdina attacked the unprotected Ottoman field hospital , which led in the invaders abandoning a major assault on the main fortifications in Birgu and Senglea . The Ottomans tried to take over the city in September so as to winter there , but abandoned their plans when Mdina fired its cannon , leading them to believe that the city had ammunition to spare .

After the siege , Maltese military engineer Girolamo Cassar drew up plans to reduce Mdina 's size by half and turning it into a fortress , but these were never implemented due to protests by the city 's nobles . The city 's main gate was reconstructed in the early 17th century , but the next major alterations were not made until the 1650s , when the large De Redin Bastion was built at the centre of the land front . Despite these modifications , by 1658 there were also proposals to abandon or demolish the entire fortress due to its state of disrepair , although these plans were opposed by the locals . In the late 17th century , some of Mdina 's medieval double walls began to be encased in sloping ramparts . A major restoration of Mdina 's fortifications was undertaken in the 1720s by the French military engineer Charles François de Mondion , during the magistracy of António Manoel de Vilhena . L 'Isle-Adam 's palace , including the remaining parts of the Castellu di la Chitati , were demolished to make way for Palazzo Vilhena , while the main gate was walled up and a new city gate was built in the Baroque style . A Baroque portal was also added to the Greeks Gate . The remaining medieval towers in the land front were demolished and the Torre dello Standardo was built on the site of the Turri Mastra , while the entire western walls of the city were demolished to make way for a single casemated curtain wall known as Magazine Curtain . D 'Homedes Bastion was modified with the addition of a bastionette , while traverse-like batteries were built at the extremities of the land front . The city was further protected with the construction of outworks , including a covertway , two places-of-arms and a glacis .

Mondion also made further plans to strengthen Mdina 's fortifications , but they were not implemented since the Order focused on building its fortifications in the harbour area . The only major addition to the Mdina fortifications after Mondion 's reconstruction was Despuig Bastion , which was built during the reign of Ramon Despuig between 1739 and 1746 . On 10 June 1798 , Mdina was captured by French forces without much resistance during the French invasion of Malta . A French garrison remained in the city , but a Maltese uprising broke out on 2 September of that year . The following day , rebels entered the city through a sally port in Despuig Bastion and massacred the garrison of 65 men . These events marked the beginning of a two-year uprising and blockade , which ended in 1800 with Malta becoming a British protectorate . Mdina 's fortifications remained in use during the British period , and some minor alterations such as the installation of gun emplacements were made in the 19th century . By the end of the century , the city was regarded as forming part of the defensive system of the Victoria Lines . In the 1890s , the battery near St. Peter Bastion was demolished and a gateway known as the Għarreqin Gate was opened within the Magazine Curtain . This was done in order to facilitate access to the newly-built railway station located nearby . The fortifications were included on the Antiquities List of 1925 .

Sections of the medieval walls of Mdina were rediscovered by Dr. Stephen C. Spiteri and Mario Farrugia while they were surveying the bastions in 2002 . The first plans to undertake a major restoration of Mdina 's walls were made in 2006 , as part of a project that also included restoration of the fortifications of Valletta , Birgu and the Cittadella . In the case of Mdina , the main focus was to consolidate the terrain , since the city is built on a blue clay plateau which is prone to subsidence . The multimillion-euro restoration was partially financed by the European Regional Development Fund . Works began in early 2008 by the Restoration Unit . The process of restoration was documented by Dr. Spiteri . In 2011 , steel rods were inserted into D 'Homedes Bastion in order to prevent the walls from slipping down the clay slopes . The ditch was inaugurated as a public garden in March 2013 . All ERDF-financed work was completed in late 2013 , but the Restoration Directorate later restored other parts of the fortifications , including the northern walls , St. Peter Bastion and the area around Greeks Gate . The project was fully completed in early 2016 .

Throughout the course of the restoration , a number of archaeological discoveries were made . Excavations along the eastern part of the city walls unearthed Byzantine antemurals and the base of a late 15th-century cubete artillero ( artillery platform ) . In 2010 , remains of foundations of the Punic-Roman walls were found when excavations were made along the Magazine Curtain . A late 14th-century stone block bearing the coat of arms of Guglielmo Murina , possibly originating from the Castellu di la Chitati , was discovered in 2012 during the restoration of D 'Homedes Bastion . This block is now displayed at the Fortifications Interpretation Centre in Valletta .

The present configuration of Mdina 's fortifications consists of an irregular perimeter of curtain walls stiffened by a number of bastions . The northern , western and eastern walls are built on the perimeter of the natural plateau , so they were difficult to attack . The southern perimeter of the city is built on level ground , along what is now the border with Rabat . It was the only realistic direction to assault the city , and was hence known as the Mdina Land Front . The southern perimeter contains an arrowhead-shaped bastion with rectangular orillons on each extremity , with a large pentagonal bastion in the centre : St. Peter Bastion , also known as Greeks Gate Bastion – built in the 1550s during the magistracy of Juan de Homedes y Coscon D 'Homedes Bastion , also known as St. Paul Bastion or the belguardo del Palacio – built between the 1540s and 1551 during the magistracy of Juan de Homedes y Coscon It is further defended by a bastionette . The two gates into the city , Mdina Gate and Greeks Gate , are located within the curtain walls of the land front . Remains of the medieval double walls as well as the 18th-century Torre dello Standardo are located just within the city walls . The land front is surrounded by a deep ditch , and a traverse-like battery is located in its eastern extremity .

Most of the eastern walls of the city consist of an en crémaillère enciente built in the mid-16th century , although parts of the walls date back to the medieval period . The pentagonal Despuig Bastion , built in the 1740s during the magistracy Ramon Despuig , is grafted below the walls on the northeastern corner of the city . The northern walls of Mdina still retain their medieval form with a few Hospitaller modifications , and they contain the only surviving tower in the city walls . St. Mary 's Bastion or Ta ' Bachar Bastion , which was built in the 16th century , is grafted on the northwest corner of the city . This is linked to St. Peter Bastion by the Magazine Curtain , a long casemated curtain wall built in the 1720s in the western part of the city . The Għarreqin Gate , built by the British in the 19th century , is located within this curtain wall .

Werner Mölders ( 18 March 1913 – 22 November 1941 ) was a World War II German Luftwaffe pilot and the leading German fighter ace in the Spanish Civil War . Mölders became the first pilot in aviation history to claim 100 aerial victories — that is , 100 aerial combat encounters resulting in the destruction of the enemy aircraft , and was highly decorated for his achievements . He was instrumental in the development of new fighter tactics that led to the finger-four formation . He died in an air crash in which he was a passenger . Mölders joined the Luftwaffe in 1934 at the age of 21 . In 1938 , he volunteered for service in the Condor Legion , which supported General Francisco Franco 's Nationalist side in the Spanish Civil War , and shot down 15 aircraft . In World War II , he lost two wingmen in the Battle of France and the Battle of Britain , but shot down 53 enemy aircraft . With his tally standing at 68 victories , Mölders and his unit , the Jagdgeschwader 51 ( JG 51 ) , were transferred to the Eastern Front in June 1941 for the opening of Operation Barbarossa . By the end of 22 June 1941 , the first day of Barbarossa , he had added another four victories to his tally and a week later , Mölders surpassed Manfred von Richthofen 's 1918 record of 80 victories . By mid-July , he had 100 World War II victories .

Prevented from flying further combat missions for propaganda reasons , at the age of 28 Mölders was promoted to Oberst , and appointed Inspector General of Fighters . He was inspecting the Luftwaffe units in the Crimea when he was ordered to Berlin to attend the state funeral of Ernst Udet , the World War I flying ace . On the flight to Berlin , the Heinkel He 111 in which he was traveling as a passenger encountered a heavy thunderstorm during which one of the aircraft 's engines failed . While attempting to land , the Heinkel crashed at Breslau , killing Mölders and two others . The German Wehrmacht of the Third Reich and the Bundeswehr of the Federal Republic of Germany both honoured him by naming two fighter wings , a destroyer and barracks after him . However , in 1998 , the German Parliament decided that members of the Condor Legion such as Mölders , should " no longer be honoured " . Therefore , in 2005 , the German Ministry of Defence decided to remove the name " Mölders " from the fighter wing still bearing his name .

Mölders was born on 18 March 1913 in Gelsenkirchen , the son of teacher Viktor Mölders and his wife Annemarie , née Riedel . He was the third of four children , with an older sister , Annemarie , an older brother , Hans , and a younger brother , Victor . After his father , a Reserve Leutnant in the King 's 145th Infantry Regiment , was killed in action on 2 March 1915 in the Argonne Forest in France , his mother moved the family into her parents ' house in Brandenburg an der Havel . In Brandenburg , Mölders found a father figure in Chaplain Erich Klawitter , who instilled firm religious beliefs in him . From 1919 to 1931 , Mölders attended , first , the elementary school and then the Saldria-Gymnasium , or secondary school . At school he discovered his love for water sports , especially rowing . He joined two rowing clubs , first the Saldria-Brandenburg and later the Brandenburger Ruderclub , and enjoyed success at rowing-regattas . He was also a member of the Bund Neudeutschland in der katholischen Jugendbewegung , a Catholic youth organisation . Mölders graduated from school in early 1931 with the Abitur ( diploma ) and expressed a desire to become an officer in the armed forces .

Mölders joined the II . / 2 infantry regiment of the Reichswehr in Allenstein , East Prussia on 1 April 1931 , serving as an officer cadet in the infantry . He attained the rank of Fahnenjunker-Gefreiter on 1 October 1931 , rising to Fahnenjunker-Unteroffizier on 1 April 1932 . After completing his basic military training in October 1932 , he transferred to the Military School Dresden . On 1 June 1933 , he successfully completed his training in Dresden and was promoted to ensign . He again was transferred , this time to the 1st Prussian Pioneer Battalion ( Infantry Regiment 2 ) at the Pioneer School in Munich . During his training years , Mölders made his first attempt to fulfil his dream of flying and volunteered for pilot training , but was declared unfit for flying . He tried again and was given conditional permission ( bedingt tauglich — with constraints ) to begin flight training . After his promotion to Oberfähnrich on 1 February 1934 , Mölders began his pilot training at the Deutsche Verkehrsfliegerschule ( German transport flying school ) in Cottbus , lasting from 6 February 1934 to 31 December 1934 . On 1 March 1934 , he was promoted to Leutnant and assigned to the recently established Luftwaffe . In the early stages of his pilot training , he suffered continually from nausea and vomiting , but he eventually overcame these problems and finished the course at the top of his class . The next phase of his military pilot 's training was from 1 January 1935 to 30 June 1935 at the combat flying school in Tutow and the Jagdfliegerschule ( fighter pilot school ) at Schleißheim near Munich . He received the newly created Pilot 's Badge of the Luftwaffe on 21 May 1935 .

On 1 July 1935 , Leutnant Mölders was posted to Fliegergruppe Schwerin ( I. / JG 162 " Immelmann " ) . On 7 March 1936 , during the remilitarisation of the Rhineland , Mölders and his squadron ( Staffel ) flew from Lippstadt across the Ruhr region ; his unit was the first to arrive in Düsseldorf . During this period , Mölders met Luise Baldauf , whom he was to marry a few years later , shortly before his death . On 20 April 1936 , Adolf Hitler 's birthday , numerous promotions were handed out , and Mölders advanced to Oberleutnant , effective as of 1 April 1936 . At the same time , he became leader of the fighter training squadron of the 2nd Group of Jagdgeschwader 134 " Horst Wessel " . This group was under the command of Major Theo Osterkamp , who became another of Mölders ' early mentors . Mölders was appointed squadron leader ( Staffelkapitän ) of the 1st squadron of Jagdgeschwader 334 on 15 March 1937 and served as an instructor in Wiesbaden .

In 1936 , the Germans sent a Luftwaffe force , the Condor Legion , to assist the Nationalists in the Spanish Civil War . Mölders volunteered for service , and arrived by sea in Cadiz on 14 April 1938 . He was assigned to the 3rd squadron of Jagdgruppe 88 ( J 88 ) commanded by Oberleutnant Adolf Galland . The unit , stationed at the Valencia – Ebro front , was equipped with the Heinkel He 51 , but later switched to the Messerschmitt Bf 109 B-2 . Mölders assumed command of the squadron on 24 May 1938 , when Galland returned to Germany . He claimed his first aerial victory , shooting down a Polikarpov I-15 " Chato " ( " Curtiss " to the Germans ) near Algar , on 15 July 1938 . Over the remaining months of the year , Mölders became the leading ace of the Condor Legion , shooting down 15 aircraft in Spain : two I-15 " Curtiss " , 12 I-16 " Rata " and one Tupolev SB ( one " Rata " claimed on 23 September 1938 was not confirmed ) . In recognition of his exceptional performance as a commander and fighter pilot , Mölders was promoted to Hauptmann ( captain ) on 18 October 1938 , effective as of 1 October 1938 . He claimed his 14th and final confirmed aerial victory of the conflict by downing a Polikarpov I-16 " Rata " near Mola on 3 November 1938 and returned to Germany on 5 December 1938 . From 6 December 1938 until March 1939 , Mölders was a member of the 1st group of Jagdgeschwader 133 ( JG 133 ) and held a staff position with the Inspector of Fighters at the Reichsluftfahrtministerium ( Imperial Air Ministry ) in Berlin . His task was to devise new fighter pilot tactics . In March 1939 he was given command as Staffelkapitän of 1 . / JG 133 , taking over command from Oberleutnant Hubertus von Bonin . JG 133 was later renamed Jagdgeschwader 53 Pik As ( Ace of Spades ) .

For his achievements in Spain , Mölders was honoured with the Spanish Medalla de la Campaña and Medalla Militar on 4 May 1939 and the German Spanish Cross in Gold with Swords and Diamonds ( Spanienkreuz in Gold mit Schwertern und Brillanten ) on 6 June 1939 . The Condor Legion officially returned to Germany on 6 June 1939 and troops marched through Berlin to the Lustgarten , where the fallen were honoured . A formal state banquet for the most highly decorated soldiers was held in the marble gallery of the Reich Chancellery . Mölders was seated at table 1 , with General der Flieger Hugo Sperrle , General Don Antonio Aranda , General Gonzalo Queipo de Llano , Oberst Walter Warlimont , Oberstleutnant von Donat , Leutnant Reinhard Seiler and Oberfeldwebel Ignatz Prestele .

With other airmen in Spain , Mölders developed the formation known as the " finger-four " . This improved the all-round field of vision and combat flexibility of a flight ( Schwarm ) , enhanced mutual protection , and encouraged pilot initiative . In the " finger-four " , the aircraft assumed positions corresponding to the fingertips of an outstretched hand . The fighters flew in two elements ( Rotten ) of two aircraft each ; two Rotten ( four aircraft ) made up a Schwarm ( swarm ) . Mölders is often credited with inventing the cross-over turn . An early version of the manoeuvre , as used by a " Vic " of five aircraft ( a tight formation forming the letter " V " ) , appeared in the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) Training Manual of 1922 , and the manoeuvre may even date back to 1918 . However , it had fallen into disuse due to the difficulty of performing it in a multi-aircraft formation with the contemporary spacing of less than 100 feet ( 30 m ) between aircraft . The wide lateral separation of 1,800 feet ( 550 m ) introduced by J 88 both necessitated such a turning manoeuvre , to enable a Schwarm to turn as a unit , and minimised the risk of midair collisions previously associated with it .

At the outbreak of World War II on 1 September 1939 , Mölders ' Staffel was stationed in the west protecting Germany 's border in the Mosel – Saar – Pfalz region . On 8 September 1939 , Mölders ' fighter suffered an engine failure ; he crash-landed , flipping the aircraft over and injuring his back . The injury kept him out of combat for several days . He returned to flying on 19 September . The following day , between Contz and Sierck , at the apex of the Dreiländereck , over the three borders area , he shot down his first aircraft of the war , a Curtiss P-36 ( according to other historians , it was one of a trio of French Hawk H-75As ) , of Groupe de Chasse II / 5 ( Sgt Queginer bailed out ) . Thanks to that victory , he earned the Iron Cross 2nd Class . He recalled his first victory : On 26 September 1939 , JG 53 was ordered to form its III . Gruppe . Mölders relinquished command of 1 . / JG 53 to Oberleutnant Hans-Karl Mayer and organised the formation of III . / JG 53 at Wiesbaden – Erbenheim ; within two weeks , Gruppenkommandeur Mölders reported that the Gruppe was conditionally operational with 40 pilots and 48 aircraft .

On 22 December , Mölders , leading four Bf 109s from III . / JG 53 , engaged three Hawker Hurricanes over the Saar River , between Metz and Thionville , that were trying to intercept an unidentified aircraft . Mölders and Hans von Hahn shot down two Hurricanes flown by Sergeants R.M. Perry and J. Winn , becoming the first German fighter pilots to shoot down a Hawker Hurricane . Mölders shot down another Hurricane on 2 April , when he forced Flight Lieutenant C.D. " Pussy " Palmer of No. 1 Squadron RAF , to bail out , and on 20 April , he destroyed a French Curtiss P-36 Hawk ( H-75A ) east of Saarbrücken . By the time the Phoney War ended and Operation Case Yellow ( Fall Gelb , the invasion of France and the Low Countries on 10 May 1940 ) opened the Battle of France , Mölders ' tally of aerial victories on the Western Front had increased to nine . This number included one Bristol Blenheim , two Curtiss P-36 Hawks , two Morane-Saulnier M.S.406s and four Hawker Hurricanes . On 14 May , while engaging enemy bombers over Sedan , Mölders was shot down , but bailed out safely . He claimed his 19th and 20th victories on 27 May 1940 , downing two Curtiss Hawks 15 kilometres ( 9.3 mi ) southwest of Amiens . Subsequently , he became the first fighter pilot to be awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes ) and on 29 May 1940 was honourably mentioned in the Wehrmachtbericht radio report , the first of 11 such mentions .

On 5 June 1940 , on his 133rd combat mission of the war , engaging in aerial combat for the 32nd time , Mölders was shot down near Compiègne at about 18 : 40 by Sous lieutenant René Pomier Layrargues , flying a French Air Force Dewoitine D.520. Mölders was taken prisoner but liberated three weeks later upon the armistice with France . While in French captivity , Mölders asked to shake hands with the pilot who had shot him down , and learned that Pomier-Layrargues had been killed in action 30 minutes after their encounter . His initial experience in French captivity was harsh ; he sustained abrasions to his face and his Knight 's Cross was stolen from him . A French officer , Capitaine Giron , intervened , ensured he was treated fairly , and returned the stolen medal . When a French soldier was later sentenced to death by the Germans for beating Mölders , Mölders approached Hermann Göring and requested clemency , which was granted .

Returning to Germany , Mölders was promoted to Major on 19 July 1940 and took command the following day of Jagdgeschwader 51 ( JG 51 ) from the recently promoted Generalmajor Theo Osterkamp . At the time , JG 51 were based at Saint-Inglevert , Pas-de-Calais , France . Mölders flew his first combat sortie with JG 51 on 28 July , attacking a No. 41 Squadron Supermarine Spitfire flown by Flying Officer A.D.J. Lovell . On this mission , according to legend , Mölders was hit in a dogfight over Dover by the South African ace Sailor Malan , sustaining three splinter wounds in the lower leg , one in the knee and one in the left foot . Oberleutnant Richard Leppla shot down the pursuing Spitfire , and Mölders was able to make an emergency landing at Wissant , France . Recent research suggests Mölders was actually wounded in combat by Flight Lieutenant J.T ( John Terence ) " Terry " Webster DFC in a Spitfire of 41 Squadron . Webster was killed in action on 5 September 1940 . Mölders wounds , although not serious , kept him from further operational flying for a month . Generalmajor Osterkamp briefly led the Geschwader again during Mölders ' convalescence . On 7 August 1940 , Mölders returned to the Geschwader without medical clearance for combat , to participate in Operation Eagle Attack ( code name Adlertag ) . Adolf Hitler had issued Führer Directive no . 17 ( Weisung Nr. 17 ) on 1 August 1940 ; the strategic objective was to engage and defeat the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) so as to achieve air superiority in preparation for Operation Sea Lion ( Unternehmen Seelöwe ) , the proposed amphibious invasion of Great Britain .

Mölders returned to approved operational flying status and flew his next two combat missions on 28 August 1940 . His aide and wingman , Oberleutnant Kircheis , was shot down and taken prisoner during one of these missions ; Oberleutnant Georg Claus took his place . Mölders claimed two Hurricanes on 31 August and was mentioned again in the Wehrmachtbericht . Oberleutnant Victor Mölders , his younger brother , who had been appointed Staffelkapitän of the 2 . / JG 51 on 11 September , was shot down and taken prisoner of war on 7 October 1940 by Archie McKellar . Two Spitfires of No. 92 Squadron RAF ( Sgt PR Eyles and P / O HP Hill both killed ) were shot down near Dungeness on 20 September increased Mölders ' tally of aerial victories to 40 . He was the first fighter pilot to reach this number during the war and was awarded the 2nd Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes mit Eichenlaub ) on 21 September 1940 . The award was presented by Adolf Hitler on 23 September in the new Reichskanzlei in Berlin . After the award ceremony , Hermann Göring invited Mölders to his hunting lodge in the Rominter Heide .

Mölders returned to his unit by the end of September and continued to win aerial victories . On 11 October , Mölders claimed his 43rd victory . The 66 Squadron Spitfire I X4562 was flown by Pilot Officer J. H. T. Pickering , who bailed out , wounded , over Canterbury . Three Hurricanes on 12 October brought his tally to 51 victories , and he received a preferential promotion to Oberstleutnant in recognition of his 50 victories on 25 October 1940 . While a severe bout of influenza then kept him grounded for a few weeks , his wingman in over 60 aerial combats , Oberleutnant Georg Claus , was killed over the Thames . On 1 December , Mölders claimed his last and 55th victory of 1940 , 25 of which occurred in the Battle of France and 30 in the Battle of Britain . Mölders and members of JG 53 spent a couple of weeks of R & R skiing in the Vorarlberg before continuing operations against the RAF over the Channel and occupied France during early 1941 . His new wingman from January 1941 was Oberleutnant Hartmann Grasser . Mölders claimed his first aerial victory after the lengthy vacation on 10 February 1941 ; his tally reached 60 on 26 February and stood at 68 when the Geschwader was recalled from the Channel front . His logbook showed 238 combat missions plus an additional 71 reconnaissance flights ; he had engaged in aerial combat 70 times .

In June 1941 , JG 51 and the majority of the Luftwaffe were transferred to the Eastern Front in preparation for Operation Barbarossa , the invasion of the Soviet Union . On the first day of combat operations , 22 June 1941 , Mölders shot down three Tupolev SB bombers and one Curtis Hawk , earning him the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes mit Eichenlaub und Schwertern ) . Mölders was only the second German serviceman to receive this award ; Adolf Galland , Fighter Squadron Commodore ( Geschwaderkommodore ) of Jagdgeschwader 26 " Schlageter " ( JG 26 ) , had received one the day before . The award was presented by Adolf Hitler on 3 July 1941 in the Wolfsschanze Hitler 's Headquarters in Rastenburg . On 30 June , Mölders had become the highest-scoring fighter pilot in the history of aerial warfare after downing five Soviet bombers and bringing his tally to 82 , two more than the record set in World War I by the " Red Baron " , Manfred von Richthofen . On 12 July 1941 , JG 51 under the leadership of Mölders reported that it had destroyed 500 Soviet aircraft since the beginning of hostilities against the Soviets on 22 June , and had suffered three casualties . That day , JG 51 also reported its 1,200th aerial victory of the war , the credit going to Hauptmann Leppla . Three days later , on 15 July 1941 , Mölders surpassed the C mark , claiming victories Nos. 100 and 101 , and celebrated with a victory roll over the airfield . The following day he received news that he had been awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves , Swords and Diamonds ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes mit Eichenlaub , Schwertern und Brillanten ) . Mölders was the first of 27 German servicemen to receive this award . The diamonds added to the Knight 's Cross were introduced officially on 28 September 1941 , more than two months after Mölders earned the award . Mölders was promoted to Oberst on 20 July 1941 , effective immediately , and banned from further combat flying . Surrendering command of JG 51 to Major Friedrich Beckh he was transferred to the Reich Air Ministry , a temporary position he held until 6 August 1941 . Mölders was summoned to the Wolfsschanze again , where he received the Diamonds from Adolf Hitler on 26 July 1941 . On 7 August 1941 , he was appointed Inspector of Fighters ( Inspekteur der Jagdflieger ) .

An Oberst at 28 , Mölders was appointed Inspector General of Fighters , a post responsible for deciding the ongoing tactical and operational doctrine of the Luftwaffe 's fighter strategies . Returning to Russia in September 1941 , he set up a command post at Chaplinka airfield , from where he flew in his personal Fieseler Fi 156 Storch ( stork ) on tours of the Jagdwaffe and personally directed German fighter operations . Mölders also flew unofficially on missions , and actively commanded his old unit , JG 51 , for several more months . On 9 August 1941 , he took Herbert Kaiser on a " teaching " mission against a formation of Il-2 Sturmoviks . Mölders showed Kaiser how to shoot them down . He recalled later : " He positioned himself off to one side of-and some distance away from-the last Il-2 in a formation of six . He then turned in quickly and opened fire at the enemy 's cockpit from an angle of some 30 degrees . The Il-2 immediately burst into flames and crashed . ' Do you see how it 's done ? ' , Oberst Mölders ' voice came over the R / T. ' Right , now you take the next one . ' I carried out the same manoeuvre and , sure enough , the next Il-2 went down on fire . ' And again ! ' It was like being on a training flight . Another short burst and the third Il-2 was ablaze . The whole lesson had lasted no more than 12 minutes ! " In this way , Kaiser scored his 23rd and 24th kills . But because Mölders was officially banned from operational flying , the first Soviet aircraft was never officially credited to him . Within the next two months , it is speculated that Mölders unofficially shot down around another 30 Soviet aircraft . At least six of Mölders ' unofficial victories are recorded in his fellow pilots ' private log books .

On 22 November 1941 , Mölders travelled as a passenger in a Heinkel He 111 of Kampfgeschwader 27 " Boelcke " from the Crimea to Germany to attend the funeral of his superior , Ernst Udet , who had committed suicide . Attempting to land at Breslau during a thunderstorm , the aircraft crashed . Mölders , pilot Oberleutnant Kolbe and flight engineer Oberfeldwebel Hobbie were killed . Major Dr. Wenzel and radio operator Oberfeldwebel Tenz survived the crash landing . Dr. Wenzel sustained a broken arm and leg as well as a concussion , and Tenz a broken ankle . Mölders ' fatal injuries included a broken back and a crushed ribcage . Accident investigators then and since have speculated whether Mölders would have survived the crash if he had used his seat belt . Mölders was given a state funeral in Berlin on 28 November 1941 . His coffin was laid out in the honour court of the Imperial Air Ministry . The guard of honour consisted of Johann Schalk , Günther Lützow , Walter Oesau , Joachim Müncheberg , Adolf Galland , Wolfgang Falck , Herbert Kaminski and Karl-Gottfried Nordmann . Mölders was buried next to Ernst Udet and Manfred von Richthofen at the Invalidenfriedhof in Berlin . The 8.8 cm flak in Berlin Tiergarten fired a salute ; Hermann Göring gave the eulogy .

Mölders was well known for his strength of character . His men nicknamed him " Vati " ( Daddy ) , in recognition of his paternal attitude toward them , and the care he took of their well-being . He was a devoutly religious individual who demanded that all Allied aviators captured by those under his command be treated civilly , and often would invite captured pilots to dine with him . Mölders married Luise Baldauf , née Thurner , the widow of a friend who had been killed in active service , on 13 September 1941 . Erich Klawitter , Mölders ' childhood mentor , performed the religious ceremony in Falkenstein , Taunus . Witnesses to the wedding included Leutnant Erwin Fleig and Oberleutnant Hartmann Grasser . The marriage produced a posthumous daughter , Verena . Third Reich authorities disapproved of his choice of a Catholic marriage ceremony , performed by Klawitter . Klawitter had been barred from membership in the Reichskulturkammer ( Reich Culture Chamber ) and was considered politically unreliable after a 1936 breach of the Pulpit Law , a remnant of the 1870s Kulturkampf that among other religions barred Catholics from criticizing the state from the pulpit .

Werner Mölders ' old unit , Jagdgeschwader 51 , was renamed " Mölders " in his honour , on 22 November 1941 , only hours after his death . Its members were entitled to wear the " Mölders " cuffband . His death , however , was also put to other uses . Shortly after Mölders died , the British Intelligence agency dropped a flyer over Germany . The so-called Möldersbrief ( Mölders-letter ) was a copy of correspondence supposedly written by Mölders to the provost of Schwerin . In this letter , he expressed his strong belief in Catholicism and stated that , especially in the face of death , many supporters of National Socialism still find strength and courage with Catholicism . Mölders ' premature death , just shortly after Udet 's own suicide , was too great an opportunity for Sefton Delmer , the chief of the British black propaganda in the Political Warfare Executive ( PWE ) , to ignore . His idea was to use Mölders ' popularity in Germany , distributing a letter thus creating the assumption that Mölders strong belief led him to oppose the Nazi regime in Germany . The letter was extremely well conceived . It did not bluntly call for opposition against the state . It never even mentioned the National Socialists by name but rather used metaphors like " the godless " . Nevertheless , every German reader knew what was meant .

The Invalidenfriedhof , where Mölders is buried , lay in East Berlin and in 1975 East German officials ordered all the graves leveled . After the 1990 German reunification , Mölders ' grave was rebuilt and rededicated on 11 October 1991 by Mölders ' school friend and Domherr of the St. Hedwig 's Cathedral , Heribert Rosal . The ceremony was witnessed by guests from the United States , Great Britain , Austria , Spain and Hungary . After the war , on 13 April 1968 , a destroyer of the Bundesmarine ( Federal German Navy ) was christened Mölders in Bath , Maine ( USA ) . It was in service between 1969 and 2003 . As of 24 June 2005 , it is the central attraction at the Navy Museum in Wilhelmshaven . On 9 November 1972 , a base of a battalion of the 34th Signal Regiment of the Bundeswehr ( Federal German Army ) in Visselhövede received the name " Mölders " . Most recently , the Fighter Wing 74 ( Jagdgeschwader 74 ) , stationed in Neuburg an der Donau , received the name " Mölders " in 1973 . Fighter Ace Generalleutnant Günther Rall presented the cuffbands .

Mölders ' career and legacy offer an example of the challenges posed in placing the heroism of the German armed forces in the post-war cultural , political and social setting . In 1998 , on the occasion of the 61st anniversary of the bombing of the Spanish town of Guernica during the Spanish Civil War , the German Parliament decided that members of the Condor Legion , such as Mölders , should " no longer be honoured " . In 2005 , the German Ministry of Defence ( Bundesministerium der Verteidigung ) decided to remove the name " Mölders " from the JG 74 . The decision was confirmed on 11 March 2005 by the Federal Minister of Defence Peter Struck , and at 10 : 00 , the flags and cufftitles were removed . Mölders ' supporters challenged the ruling , and pointed out that Mölders had been posted to Spain well after the bombing of Guernica . They pointed to his equivocal political attitude towards National Socialism and his unequivocal moral commitment to Catholicism . Not only did he have a Catholic religious marriage ceremony but Klawitter , regarded by the Third Reich as politically " unreliable , " had performed the ceremony . Furthermore , Mölders had joined the Catholic youth organisation Bund Neudeutschland ( Union for New Germany ) on 1 October 1925 and had been a youth leader of the organisation from 1929 to 1931 . The Third Reich clearly had considered the Bund Neudeutschland as a threat : The Völkischer Beobachter ( The People 's Observer , the official newspaper of the party ) had reported on 26 January 1938 that the Bund had been outlawed for its proven subversive activities against the Reich , based on the Verordnung des Reichspräsidenten zum Schutz von Volk und Staat ( Reich Presidential Decree for the Protection of People and State ) of 28 February 1933 . Despite petitions from politicians and high-ranking active and retired servicemen , among them Horst Seehofer , Günther Rall and Jörg Kuebart , the Office for Military History ( MGFA ) noted that Mölders ' membership in the Bund Neudeutschland did not provide sufficient evidence of his having been critical of the regime , but rather showed the contrary and concluded that it was questionable whether Mölders had distanced himself enough from National Socialism before his death in 1941 . Consequently , the decision remained in force .

Other evidence has surfaced illustrating Mölders ' ambiguous relationship with the National Socialist regime . Mölders may have been in contact with bishop Clemens August Graf von Galen , who was highly critical of the Nazi regime . Von Galen publicly criticised the regime for the Gestapo 's tactics and the deportation and euthanasia of the mentally ill . According to the diary kept by Heinrich Portmann , von Galen 's secretary and chaplain , Mölders threatened to return his awards if von Galen 's euthanasia accusation turned out to be true . Furthermore , Portmann stated that Hitler had asked Mölders during the presentation of the Diamonds to the Knight 's Cross if there was anything he wished for . Mölders reportedly responded , " Please leave the bishop of Münster alone . " Hitler assured him that " Yes , nothing will happen to the bishop of Münster . " The MGFA concluded in 2004 that this story was most likely false . The MGFA revised its position again on 28 June 2007 , concluding that there had been contact between Mölders and von Galen . Evidence also demonstrates Mölders ' propensity to value friendships over political expediency . According to Viktor Mölders , his brother had saved Georg Küch , one of Werner Mölders ' closest friends , who had been classified as a half-Jew by the Nuremberg Laws , from death in the concentration camps . Mölders ' and Küch 's friendship dated to their school days at the Saldria-Gymnasium in Brandenburg an der Havel . Küch 's mother , Alice née Siegel , was of Jewish birth . Küch 's father , Richard Küch , owned and operated a pharmacy in Brandenburg . Georg , himself a pharmacy student , was expelled from university under the Nuremberg Laws , just two semesters shy of his graduation . In 1940 , Richard Küch fell ill , and owning and operating the pharmacy became a bureaucratic problem for the family . Georg Küch contacted his friend Mölders in mid-February 1941 , asking for help . Werner Mölders immediately responded to Küch on 16 February 1941 , stating that he had taken care of the matter and asking Küch not to pursue the issue on his own . When Richard Küch died in June 1941 , his wife was able to sell the pharmacy for fair market value . Normally , since she was Jewish , it would have been confiscated . She also remained exempt from wearing the detested yellow badge until late 1943 . She was then taken to the Theresienstadt concentration camp , where she worked as a cook . Georg Küch , Alice Küch , and Georg 's sister Friedel survived the Holocaust . Friedel Küch repeatedly stated that Werner Mölders had been responsible for protecting the family ; the mantle of his protection had persisted beyond his death . The MGFA ruled this assertion " highly speculative , " and did not investigate further .

Brainard Homestead State Park , and alternatively Brainerd Homestead State Park , is a 25 acre undeveloped Connecticut state park located in the town of East Haddam , Connecticut , United States . A farmhouse was built on the site by Timothy Green in 1842 before being purchased by Selden Tyler Brainerd in March 1854 . The ownership of the property was willed to Geraldine W. Hayden . Upon her death in 1929 , the property was willed to the State of Connecticut with the condition that William Brainerd be able to use the property for life . William Brainerd died in 1936 , the buildings were later dismantled , but the Brainard Homestead State Park was established prior to May 1 , 1932 . The undeveloped park is said to offer bird watching , sports fields and hiking according to the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection . As of 2012 , the fields were noted to be actively farmed and there were no established trails for hiking .

The known history of Brainard Homestead State Park begins in 1842 when Timothy Green constructed a farmhouse on the property . Green never lived in the farmhouse , but leased it to Jonathan Morgan . In March 1854 , the property was sold to Selden Tyler Brainerd . Brainerd with his wife , Harriet , raised five children in the 30 feet ( 9.1 m ) by 25 feet ( 7.6 m ) farmhouse . At some point ownership of the property was transferred to Geraldine W. Hayden in a will . In March 1929 , Hayden died and willed the property to the State of Connecticut so that the homestead could be utilized as a memorial to her grandfather . A report by the Connecticut State Park and Forest Commission noted that it was not an ideal situation due the concerns about identifying a proposed site in advance and establishing the adaptability of the land for public use . The report also notes that Mrs. Hayden was unknown to the commissioners and despite the land having significant liabilities was waiting to become a state park by 1930 . The delay in its transformation stemmed from a request that William Brainerd , one of Selden and Harriet 's sons , have life use of the property . William Brainerd died in 1936 and the terms of the will were completed . At a later date , the State of Connecticut dismantled the buildings and established the Brainard Homestead State Park .

Land use records show that two fields on the farm were once leased and used by Mortimer Gelston , but the fields surrounding or on the Brainard Homestead State Park continue to be actively farmed . Leary writes that the park preserves the Brainard Homestead and notes that the foundations and cellar pits are visible and provides a picture of the fieldstone foundation . The establishment date of the Brainard Homestead State Park is unknown , but it predates the death of William Brainard . The 1934 State of Connecticut Register and Manual lists the Brainard Homestead State Park as the 39th State Park and consists of 25 acres . Though it is unspecific , the 1932 State of Connecticut Register and Manual notes that there were 40 state parks as of May 1 , 1932 .

The Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection website highlights three activities for Brainard Homestead State Park : bird watching , field sports and hiking . In 2004 , Leary noted that the open fields were perfect for field sports and picnics . Use of field for sports seem to have ended soon after because a geocache placed within Brainard Homestead State Park and referenced on the Geocaching website notes that the fields were used for farming . In 2012 , the " The A to Z of CT State Parks " Tumblr website noted that the fields were unusable and were currently being farmed . The Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection website continues to note the park 's " field sports " use as of 2014 . Also " The A to Z of CT State Parks " states that there were no established trails for hiking . Leary writes that there are limited views of the Connecticut River in winter , but the foliage in summer " precludes much of a vista . " Al Braden writes in his book that the park provides access to the Salmon River with parking , boat ramp and docks , but this is the " Salmon River Boat Launch East Haddam " and not a part of the state park .

Tropical Storm Nicole was a short-lived and unusually asymmetric tropical cyclone that caused extensive rainfall and flooding in Jamaica during the 2010 Atlantic hurricane season . It was the sixteenth tropical cyclone and the fourteenth named storm of the season , as well as the last of a record eight tropical storms to form in September . Originating from a broad monsoonal low , Nicole became a tropical depression over the northwestern Caribbean Sea on September 28 . It maintained an unusual structure as it tracked northeastward , with a poorly defined wind circulation and few thunderstorms near its center . Nicole approached the coast of Cuba as a weak tropical storm , losing its status as a tropical cyclone over the territory on September 29 . The remnants emerged over the Bahamas and eventually became absorbed by a separate extratropical system . Due to Nicole 's atypical structure , the strongest thundershowers were well removed from the center ; most of the weather activity occurred over the north-central Caribbean . In Jamaica , the storm triggered widespread power outages across more than 288,000 residences . Extreme precipitation of up to 37.42 inches ( 940 mm ) caused disastrous flooding in several parishes , severely damaging or destroying 528 houses . The devastation extended to the island 's farmland and environment , which suffered from expansive water pollution . In all , Nicole wrought an estimated $ 240 million ( 2010 USD ) in damage throughout Jamaica , and there were sixteen fatalities . Elsewhere , minor flooding occurred in Cuba , Florida , and the Cayman Islands . The remnants of the storm contributed to a large disturbance along the East Coast of the United States , causing additional damage and deaths .

In late September 2010 , a wide band of disturbed weather and low pressure associated with the monsoon trough and remnant tropical moisture from Tropical Storm Matthew meandered over the northwestern Caribbean Sea . With a broad upper ridge anchored along the Yucatán coast , diffluence aloft in the vicinity of the disturbance provided focus for the development of scattered convection . The National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) noted an environment supportive of tropical development , and by September 27 a broad surface low formed amid the convection . The next day , surface pressures steadily dropped as sustained winds around the low increased to near tropical storm force . Throughout the development process , moderate westerly wind shear over the region caused the disturbance to exhibit a rather asymmetric structure ; it developed an elongated low-pressure center by September 28 , well to the northwest of its strongest wind field . Despite the asymmetry , the NHC initiated advisories on a tropical depression around 15 : 00 UTC that day , after surface and satellite observations revealed a sufficiently defined circulation center west of the deep convection . Post-season reassessments , however , indicated that a tropical storm had in fact formed three hours earlier , about 75 miles ( 120 km ) south of Cuba 's Isle of Youth .

For most of its duration , Nicole maintained a generally northeastward motion , caught in the steering flow between a large mid- to upper-level trough and an anticyclone to the west . Within hours of the storm 's formation , observations from a Hurricane Hunters flight confirmed a composition similar to the one initially discerned , with the strongest gusts and thunderstorms dislocated 250 mi ( 400 km ) east from the ill-defined center . In comparison , the core consisted of light winds and sporadic convection — a structure rather characteristic of a North Indian Ocean monsoon depression . The system 's ambiguous nature led to disagreement among weather specialist over its classification : while the NHC maintained its tropical cyclone status , Cuban meteorologist José Rubiera stated that " no tropical storm exists over [ Cuba ] , or near it , " noting a lack of significant winds in the country 's vicinity . Over the course of September 29 , radar data showed the convection increasing over the northern half of the storm ; bands of intense thunderstorms in the southeastern periphery also formed closer to the center , and weather buoys and ships in that region observed sustained tropical-storm-force winds . Around 12 : 00 UTC , Nicole attained an estimated peak intensity of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) winds and a minimum pressure of 995 mbar ( hPa ; 29.38 inHg ) , just south of Cuba . Despite the increase in strength , Nicole 's circulation soon became exceedingly elongated and untrackable over central Cuba , prompting the NHC to declassify it as a tropical cyclone by 15 : 00 UTC . The remnant low began interacting with the neighboring trough that had steered Nicole in its tropical stages , resulting in significant amounts of precipitation along the southeastern coastlines of the United States . Accelerating toward the northeast , the system acquired frontal characteristics and became extratropical over the Bahamas by 0600 UTC , September 30 , twelve hours before merging with a developing system over eastern North Carolina . Lingering low pressure and broad cyclonic flow over the north-central Caribbean in Nicole 's wake contributed to the development of Hurricane Paula in the first weeks of October .

In anticipation of a tropical storm , warnings were issued for the Cayman Islands , the northwestern and central Bahamas , and the Cuban provinces of Matanzas , Cienfuegos , Villa Clara , Sancti Spíritus , and Ciego de Ávila on September 28 . However , the warnings were discontinued the following day after reports of the storm 's prompt dissipation . After forecasters warned of severe weather across the Cayman Islands , schools and government offices closed in low-lying areas , and emergency teams cleaned out storm drains and readied shelters . Thunderstorms in Grand Cayman forced Cayman Airways to cancel all express flights to Cayman Brac and Little Cayman on October 29 ; weather-resistant jet service was provided to stranded passengers . A marine warning was required for all three islands due to rough sea conditions . In Jamaica , a flash flood warning remained in effect for flood-prone regions for four days , ultimately discontinued on October 3 . Schools and several businesses , including the US Embassy in Kingston , closed on September 29 – 30 as the island braced for heavy rains . Public transit was suspended islandwide on the evening of September 29 , and shipping interests were cautioned to secure their vessels . At the height of the storm , army and police officials patrolled the island in case of emergencies .

Tropical storm warnings were issued for the Florida Keys , the Florida Bay , and from the Jupiter Inlet coast southward to Cape Sable on September 28 . A tropical storm watch was in place for the mainland north from the Jupiter Inlet to the Sebastian Inlet and north of East Cape Sable to Chokoloskee . The warnings and watch were discontinued the next day , after a direct impact was no longer expected . At the time , a flood watch remained in effect for Palm Beach , Broward , Miami-Dade , Collier , and Monroe counties into September 30 . An airport weather warning was issued for Orlando International Airport and Executive Airport on September 28 ; arriving flights were put on hold , and pilots rerouted to other airports if possible . Eight Southwest Airlines flights were diverted to the airports of Tampa and Jacksonville , and one JetBlue flight to West Palm Beach . Though airport officials later reported normalized conditions , an additional 26 flights were canceled at Miami International Airport the next day . In Brunswick and New Hanover counties , North Carolina , officials readied shelters on September 29 to accommodate stranded residents unable to access their homes . Multiple schools in New Hanover and Pender County remained closed the next morning due to worsening storm conditions from the disturbance succeeding Nicole . At the threat of prolonged rainfall , a flood watch was issued for Kent County , Maryland , from September 30 to October 1 . Also in the area , the National Weather Service declared both a coastal flood advisory and wind advisory for September 30 .

For several days , Nicole and its precursor disturbance brought great amounts of rainfall to much of Jamaica . A maximum total of 37.42 inches ( 940 mm ) was recorded in Belleisle , Westmoreland Parish , from September 26 to 30 ; most other parishes received over 12 in ( 300 mm ) during this time . With a return period of 30 years , these quantities tripled the monthly rainfall average for September at several locations . Though the broad-scale wind regime over the island remained gentle , the storm 's intense convective bands produced three microbursts — small downdrafts of intense winds . Following the degradation of river banks and waterways , the heaviest impact was due to landslides and particularly severe flooding across numerous communities , primarily in the southern parishes . The disaster affected a total of 507,831 people ; it resulted in 16 deaths — 14 of which confirmed — and 42 injuries . In Saint Andrew Parish 's Sandy Park , a house next to a street gully succumbed to the effects of the storm ; five bodies were recovered near the site , while the remaining missing inhabitant was later presumed dead . Elsewhere in Saint Andrew , three construction workers were killed when the shed in which they were sleeping caved in . A girl was crushed to death under the weight of a collapsed board house in Saint Catherine Parish . Rushing waters in different parts of the island swept away three people , all of whom drowned . A waterspout hit Westmoreland Parish 's capital of Savanna-la-Mar amid a microburst , tearing the roofs off buildings and hospitalizing five residents . In the wake of the storm , a body was recovered from debris along a road in Saint Catherine . Nationwide , floods trapped hundreds of residents in their homes . The obstruction of roads and bridges isolated various communities across seven of the island 's parishes .

Jamaica 's infrastructure was devastated in the deluge , accounting for most of the material damage on the island . At the height of the storm , more than 288,000 residences lost power due to downed electricity lines and poles , and over 40 percent of the island 's water supply was disrupted . Dozens of bridges collapsed under the force of swollen rivers and creeks . In Kingston , underpasses suffered severe flooding as prolonged rainfall overwhelmed storm drains ; subsequent surface inundations left several of the city 's roads impassable . Destruction to the transport infrastructure was especially extensive in Westmoreland , Saint Elizabeth , and Hanover parishes , though overall 543 of the island 's principle roads sustained some degree of damage . The value of costs linked to the infrastructure neared J $ 20 billion ( US $ 235.4 million ) . Nicole wreaked widespread property damage , encompassing 2,169 houses : 474 sustained severe damage , while 54 were beyond repair . The losses totaled J $ 274.3 million ( US $ 3.2 million ) , J $ 75.6 million ( US $ 890,000 ) hereof required to replace destroyed housing units . With much of its crops and livestock washed away , the island 's agricultural sector suffered about J $ 576.5 million ( US $ 6.8 million ) in losses , including 40 percent of the season 's banana produce . The storm had a discernible impact on the environment , which plays a crucial role in the Jamaica 's economy and tourism . Surface runoffs and spills along industrial zones and sewage systems infiltrated wide stretches of land , leading to scattered pollution , coastal erosion , and deterioration in the ecosystems of the affect regions . In addition , light damage occurred to vegetation as evidenced by uprooted trees .

While intensifying offshore , Nicole 's outer bands produced heavy downpours over drought-stricken Cuba . Locally , rain along the southeastern coast was particularly high ; a 48-hour total of 9.22 inches ( 235 mm ) fell at Cape Cruz , in the mountainous Granma Province . The region briefly observed gale-force winds , gusting to 53 mph ( 85 km / h ) at Guantánamo Bay . Throughout eastern Cuba , 300 people sought refuge during the storm . As rivers overflowed in Granma , eight houses collapsed and more than 300 others endured flooding in the coastal town of Pilón . Several roads were obstructed , with part of the highway between Granma and Santiago de Cuba destroyed . The floods resulted in 5,000 lbs ( 2.5 tons ) of losses in crops and livestock . These effects were nevertheless considered minor , and the rains helped alleviate a persistent dry spell in the country . In the Cayman Islands , gusts to 51 mph ( 82 km / h ) stirred up a rough sea with 8 – 10 ft ( 2.5 – 3 m ) high waves , causing light erosion along south and western shores . Though heavy rainfall over the region was widespread , the greatest quantities fell on Grand Cayman , where the Owen Roberts International Airport recorded 9.02 in ( 229 mm ) of rain over a period of two days . The storm flooded low-lying areas , caused roof leaks , and knocked out the power in parts of eastern Grand Cayman , but overall damage across the islands was limited .

The extratropical remnants of Nicole retained plenty of moisture and ultimately combined with a large low-pressure system slowly tracking up the US East Coast . The resultant disturbance produced torrential thunderstorms over entire coastlines and inland as far north as Canada , resulting in widespread power outages and shattering numerous precipitation records throughout the region . The most extreme weather was concentrated over Eastern North Carolina ; in the week of September 24 – October 1 , most communities recorded rainfall totals of 8 – 10 in ( 200 – 250 mm ) . Wilmington measured 22.54 inches ( 573 mm ) of rain , the most it had received over a five-day period since 1871 , while Kinston recorded 15 in ( 380 mm ) during that time . The rains caused widespread flooding exacerbated by overflowing creeks and rivers , surrounding and isolating several homes . About 150 roads were closed due to the hazardous conditions ; traffic accidents across the state nonetheless resulted in seven deaths . In the Mid-Atlantic , the event broke daily rainfall records for September 30 at several locations including the Norfolk , Baltimore – Washington , and Ronald Reagan Washington airports , which recorded 7.85 in ( 199 mm ) , 6.02 in ( 153 mm ) , and 4.66 in ( 118 mm ) respectively . In Maryland , two buses collided amid the stormy weather , injuring 26 passengers . With localized estimates of up to 8 in ( 200 mm ) , the state of New York experienced some of its most historic rainfall ; an official 4.24 in ( 108 mm ) shattered the 24-hour record for any calendar day in Binghamtom . Flash floods throughout the state led to one drowning and about US $ 10,000 in damage . Considerable flooding also occurred in Vermont and Pennsylvania , with a 24-hour rainfall maximum of 10.5 in ( 265 mm ) observed in Moscow . Farther north , the remnant low enhanced a pressure gradient over southern New England , generating strong winds that knocked out power in Litchfield County . Rainfall there additionally caused minor flooding . In Quebec , torrents following 3.5 in ( 90 mm ) of rainfall inundated basements and caused two drownings . Despite the deaths and damage , the rains alleviated prolonged drought conditions in those regions .

On October 5 , a national disaster was declared for Jamaica due to the effects of Nicole . In response , the USAID 's Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance provided US $ 50,000 for the purchase and delivery of relief supplies and fuel for emergency vehicles . About J $ 4 million ( US $ 46,800 ) was donated by the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries to the Greenhouse Growers Association for the repair of greenhouses . In conjunction with the Food and Agriculture Organization , an estimated J $ 12 million ( US $ 140,400 ) was made available to initiate the planting of about 50,000 crop seedlings . The Veterinary Division provided financial assistance to livestock farmers and dispatched animal technicians providing prophylactic medication and vitamins to avert foot rot disease in small ruminants , including goats and sheep . The cost of the medication was estimated at J $ 2 million ( US $ 23,400 ) . The Banana Board 's Catastrophe Fund , which at the time comprised J $ 50 million ( US $ 585,000 ) , delivered both monetary support and human resources to local banana and plantain farmers . Eleven days after the storm , the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies allocated CHF150,644 ( US $ 156,221 ) to sustain the Jamaica Red Cross in distributing aid to about 500 families — or 2,500 beneficiaries — in need of life supplies . In late December 2010 , the Jamaica – Canadian Association in Toronto , Canada raised a total of CDN $ 10,153.87 ( US $ 10,221.33 ) in relief funds to assist flood victims . The Hanover Parish Council requested J $ 30 million ( US $ 351,000 ) to assist the Saint James Parish Council and other municipal authorities across the country in post-storm clean-up and beautification work . A grant of J $ 279 million ( US $ 3.26 million ) was approved for the reconstruction of a major roadway section in Westmoreland Parish .

John Madden Football ' 93 is a 1992 sports video game developed by Blue Sky Productions ( later Looking Glass Studios ) and Electronic Arts and published by EA Sports Network . Based on the sport of American football , the game puts the player in control of a football team in modes such as tournament play and sudden death . It was officially endorsed by John Madden . The game 's Sega Genesis version was developed by Blue Sky Productions , which was simultaneously creating Ultima Underworld : The Stygian Abyss . John Madden Football ' 93 adds new animations and features , and it allows players to play as and against famous teams such as the Oakland Raiders of 1976 . Aside from Madden Football 64 , the game was the last in the Madden franchise to lack the NFL license , which was featured in Madden NFL ' 94 onward . With over one million units in sales , John Madden Football ' 93 was a commercial success . Critics awarded the game high scores and praised its updated graphics ; but several reviewers complained that little had changed since John Madden Football ' 92 . Royalties from the game funded the expansion of Blue Sky Productions , and the company 's director , Paul Neurath , later commented that the size of these royalties led Electronic Arts to develop future Madden titles in-house .

John Madden Football ' 93 is an adaptation of American football that takes place from an isometric perspective in a two-dimensional environment . The player begins each match by selecting such variables as the game mode , weather conditions and team . Game modes include 16-team tournaments and sudden death , among other things . In addition to the game 's single-player mode , two-player competitive and cooperative modes are available . Unlike prior games in the series , a coin toss at the beginning of every match determines which team will defend each goal , and which team will kick off . Between every down , the player selects a formation , play and , on defense , coverage shell from a menu . The game contains fifty-five offensive plays and seventy-one defensive plays , such as screen and play-action passes , blitzes and man-to-man defense . During a down , the player may control one team member at a time or allow the entire team to execute a play automatically . On offense , depending on the play , the player controls the quarterback , running back or kicker . After a pass , control automatically changes to the ball receiver . On defense , the player may at any time switch control between any members of the team . Instant replay is available to review plays .

New features in John Madden Football ' 93 include no-huddle offense , overturning certain calls made by referees , taunting , stumbling , head-butting and one-handed catches . As with its predecessors , the game features updated statistics for the twenty-eight NFL teams in the game , based on their performance in the previous season . In addition to these teams , eight famous team line-ups , such as the Oakland Raiders of 1976 and the Dallas Cowboys of 1977 , are available . Two " All-Madden Greats " teams are compiled from the best players in the history of the sport . No official player or team names , colors , or stadium names are used . A rental-only version of the game , John Madden Football : Championship Edition , uses only " championship caliber " line-ups from the 1966-1991 era . Although it still lacks official names , this version features correct team colors .

John Madden Football ' 93 was developed for the Sega Genesis by Blue Sky Productions ( credited as " Looking Glass Technology " ) , which was simultaneously working on Ultima Underworld : The Stygian Abyss . The game was not a port , but was rather an original work by the company . They were approached by Electronic Arts soon after production on Ultima Underworld began , an event that company head Paul Neurath later attributed to contacts he had within the publisher , thanks to his involvement with the Electronic Arts project Chuck Yeager 's Advanced Flight Trainer . Neurath said that Electronic Arts was dissatisfied with the work that another studio had been doing on John Madden Football ' 93 , and that the publisher was " scrambling to find a [ replacement ] team " to meet the game 's rapidly approaching deadline . Blue Sky received the source code of John Madden Football ' 92 and had to develop a sequel in five months . Neurath later said that development was " part out-of-house and part in-house " . The game 's visuals were made by Doug Wike , who also created graphics for Ultima Underworld . In 1991 , Neurath contracted the outside programmer Mark Lesser , who had previously worked on Mean 18 , to develop the game 's technical aspects . According to Lesser , this was necessary because none of Blue Sky 's employees had experience programming for the Sega Genesis .

Neurath believed that Blue Sky introduced " some nice improvements " to the franchise . A preview in Mega noted that the game had " a lot of added animation " compared to its predecessors . A writer for Mega Drive Advanced Gaming believed that " the most obvious addition is the digitised speech " , which did not appear in the game 's Super Nintendo Entertainment System ( SNES ) version . In its November 1992 issue , Electronic Gaming Monthly estimated that the game was " 100 % complete " . The game 's Genesis and SNES versions were released at the same time . As with earlier John Madden Football titles , John Madden Football ' 93 lacks the NFL license , which prevented the inclusion of official teams , colors , player names and stadiums . Sega 's competing title , the Joe Montana-endorsed NFL Sports Talk Football ' 93 , had received the license that year .

John Madden Football ' 93 was a commercial success , with over one million copies sold . It has been cited as the highest-selling game developed by Looking Glass Studios , and Neurath later called it " one of the most successful games I 've ever worked on " . Paul Mellerick of Mega commented that " the only noticeable difference between [ John Madden Football ' 93 ] and its two predecessors is the animation " . He wrote that this new animation " makes the game incredibly good to look at " and that new motions like stumbling increase the game 's difficulty . Although he believed that the " two-player mode is just as exciting as ever " , he was disappointed by the lack of a full-season mode , which he called " unforgivable " in light of this feature 's appearance in Sega 's NFL Sports Talk Football ' 93 . He concluded that John Madden Football ' 93 was " the best game the Mega Drive has to offer " , but he wrote , " If you own John Madden Football ' 92 , or even the original John Madden American Football for that matter , then you should ignore this game completely " .

A writer for GamePro noted that John Madden Football ' 93 was " at first glance " largely identical to its predecessor ; but he believed that , " once you get down to serious business , you 'll notice a wealth of All-Star enhancements " . He wrote that the " game play is now faster and smoother " , and that " the graphics are sharper , more detailed , and even better animated " . He believed that " Electronic Arts has [ ... ] made the best even better " , and he concluded , " John Madden Football ' 93 is even more fun to play than Madden ' 92 " . The staff of Mean Machines Sega called the game " hopelessly redundant " and " very , very disappoint [ ing ] " , and they believed that the John Madden Football series was " on its last legs " . They considered the game to be arguably worse than its predecessors , largely because of framerate problems . The reviewers concluded that it was " not a bad game at all " , but they suggested that readers buy " the slightly better John Madden Football ' 92 if [ they are ] after the definitive American Football game " .

Reviewing the SNES version of John Madden Football ' 93 , a GamePro writer believed that it was " a major improvement " over the previous SNES John Madden Football title . He wrote that the game 's visuals were the biggest leap , particularly after the " slow and chunky " graphics of the earlier release . He enjoyed its sound effects , but he noted the lack of voice clips present in the Genesis version . He concluded that the series was now roughly even across the two consoles , and he wrote that the game was " a strong candidate for SNES Sports Cart of the Year " . A writer for Nintendo Power wrote , " Madden ' 93 is easy to play and has the feel of the real game " . He believed that the most noticeable additions were the new teams and " new play options " , although he found it " awkward " to select plays . He finished , " Really the only thing missing is an option to play an entire season " . Carl Rowley of N-Force called the visuals " sharper than ever " and believed that the character sprites were " small but well defined " . He found that the game played " brilliantly " , and he praised the instant replay feature as " superb " and " amazing " . He wrote that his " only niggle is the lack of sampled speech " , which he considered to be " a bit of a let down " . Finishing his review , Rowley wrote that the game was the " best American football game available " .

After the game 's development concluded , programmer Mark Lesser was contracted by Electronic Arts to work on NHL ' 94 , a series that he remained on " for many years " . Neurath said that the royalties Blue Sky ( later Looking Glass Studios ) received from John Madden Football ' 93 " were quite substantial " , and that " it was really the royalties of Madden more than anything else [ ... ] that allowed us to grow the [ company ] " . Neurath believed that the size of these royalties led Electronic Arts to develop future Madden games in-house , in order to maximize profit . Aside from Madden Football 64 , John Madden Football ' 93 was the last game in the Madden franchise to lack the NFL license , which the series first obtained with Madden NFL ' 94 . In 2012 , Michael Rundle wrote in The Huffington Post that John Madden Football ' 93 " really set the bar " for the franchise , and he believed that its gameplay was superior to that of Madden NFL 13 .

Beyond Fantasy Fiction was a US fantasy fiction magazine edited by H. L. Gold , with only ten issues published from 1953 to 1955 . The last two issues carried the cover title of Beyond Fiction , but the publication 's name for copyright purposes remained as before . Although not a commercial success , it included several significant short stories by distinguished authors , such as Isaac Asimov , Ray Bradbury and Philip K. Dick . The publication has been described by critics as a successor to the tradition of Unknown , a fantasy magazine that ceased publication in 1943 . It was noted for printing fantasy with a rational basis such as werewolf stories that included scientific explanations . A selection of stories from Beyond was published in paperback form in 1963 , also under the title Beyond . James Gunn , a historian of science fiction , regarded the magazine as the best of the fantasy magazines launched in the early 1950s , and science fiction encyclopedist Donald H. Tuck contended it printed very good material . Not every critic viewed Beyond as completely successful , however ; P. Schuyler Miller , in a 1963 review , commented that the stories were most successful when they did not try to emulate Unknown .

Beyond Fantasy Fiction was a fantasy-oriented companion to the more successful Galaxy Science Fiction , which launched in 1950 ; Beyond had been planned by editor H. L. Gold from the time Galaxy was launched , but it had to wait until Galaxy was firmly established . Beyond 's first issue , dated July 1953 , included an editorial by Gold in which he laid out the magazine 's scope , excluding ( in his words ) only " the probably possible " and " the unentertaining " . Gold recruited Sam Merwin , who had recently quit as editor of Fantastic Universe , to help in editing , though the masthead of both magazines listed Gold as editor . A typical issue of Beyond included several stories that were long enough to be listed as novellas or novelettes , with the contents augmented with shorter works , usually for a total of at least seven stories . The first issue featured Theodore Sturgeon , Damon Knight , Frank M. Robinson , and Richard Matheson . Other writers who appeared in the magazine included Jerome Bixby , John Wyndham , James E. Gunn , Fredric Brown , Frederik Pohl ( both under his own name and with Lester del Rey under the joint pseudonym " Charles Satterfield " ) , Philip José Farmer , Randall Garrett , Zenna Henderson , and Algis Budrys .

Five of the ten covers were surrealist , which was an unusual artistic choice for a genre magazine . The cover painting for the first issue was by Richard M. Powers ; Gold was one of the very few American magazine editors to use his work , though Powers was prolific in providing artwork for paperback covers . In addition to Powers , René Vidmer and Arthur Krusz ( among others ) contributed cover art . The magazine also carried interior artwork , usually multiple illustrations , for almost every story ; in addition , each story included a facsimile of the author 's signature , set at the end of the text . The best-known interior artist Beyond used was Ed Emshwiller , though there were several other regular artists . The magazine carried almost no non-fiction , though there were occasional " filler " pieces to occupy spaces at the end of stories . The publication contained no book reviews , and only the first issue carried an editorial . The magazine was not commercially successful : at that time circulation figures were not required to be published annually , as they were later , so the actual circulation figures are not known . Its demise after less than two years can be attributed in part to the decreasing popularity of fantasy and horror fiction . In a 1958 advertisement in Galaxy for complete sets of the magazine for $ 3.50 , the publisher described Beyond as " a princely experiment to determine whether there were enough readers to support a truly handsome , fantastically high-quality fantasy fiction magazine . There weren 't " , " as the rest of the country seemed to be ... out of town at the time and missed it on the newsstands " .

According to science-fiction historian Donald H. Tuck , Beyond published " some very good material , " with appearances by many well-known authors , and the magazine is often cited as being the successor to the unusual fantasy tradition of Unknown . Author James Gunn said of the new fantasy magazines that appeared in the 1950s that " the best of these was Beyond , created by Horace Gold as a companion fantasy magazine to Galaxy , which he had created three years before . Beyond Fantasy Fiction aimed at the same rationalized fantasy niche that Unknown had established and to which Gold had contributed stories . " Not everyone thought the magazine was completely successful in emulating Unknown , however ; P. Schuyler Miller , reviewing an anthology drawn from the pages of Beyond , was generally approving but commented that " Except for Budrys , Pohl , Brown and Sturgeon , these stories from Beyond are rather self-conscious . They are best when they are not trying to be like Unknown . " Miller 's assessment of the magazine overall was that it " made a pass at the same position [ as Unknown ] but didn 't make it . "

Beyond 's selection of stories has been described by science fiction historian Michael Ashley as " seeking to achieve … high quality fantasy fiction acceptable to all readers " ; he adds that Beyond was more successful than Fantastic Science Fiction , a competitor in this niche , because Gold " had a clearer vision and was more determined … to achieve it . … despite sales problems , Gold persisted in publishing fiction that sought to stretch the boundaries of imagination . " " The Watchful Poker Chip " , by Ray Bradbury ( March 1954 ) . Generally reprinted under the title " The Watchful Poker Chip of H. Matisse " " The Green Magician " , by L. Sprague de Camp and Fletcher Pratt ( November 1954 ) . Part of the Incompleat Enchanter series Although no Hugo Awards were presented in 1954 , the 2004 World Science Fiction Convention awarded " Retro Hugos " for that year . Two Beyond stories appeared as runners-up : Sturgeon 's " … And My Fear Is Great … " placed third in the novella category , and Cogswell 's " The Wall Around the World " fifth in the novelette category . In addition , Gold placed fifth in the editor category , though this recognized his work at Galaxy as well as at Beyond .

The publisher was Galaxy Publishing Corporation , New York . The magazine was initially titled Beyond Fantasy Fiction , and this remained the title on the masthead throughout the ten-issue run . However , issue 9 changed the title to simply Beyond Fiction on the cover , spine , and table of contents . Issue 10 used the new , shorter title on the cover and spine , but reverted to Beyond Fantasy Fiction for the table of contents . As a result , the magazine is often listed as having changed its name for the last two issues . The magazine began as a 160-page digest , priced at 35 cents . The price stayed the same throughout the run , but the page count was cut to 128 for the eighth issue , September 1954 . The magazine was bimonthly , but issues 9 and 10 did not carry month and year dates , which has led different bibliographers to catalogue them in different ways . However , the masthead for these issues indicates that the magazine remained bimonthly , and so they are now usually catalogued as November 1954 and January 1955 , respectively ; the copyright dates on the last two issues correspond to these dates . The volume numbering was completely regular ; volume 1 had six numbers , and volume 2 ceased with its fourth number . The stories were printed in the two-column format usual to digest magazines .

HMS Majestic was a Majestic-class pre-dreadnought battleship of the Royal Navy . Commissioned in 1895 , she was the largest predreadnought launched at the time . She served with the Channel Fleet until 1904 , following which she was assigned to the Atlantic Fleet . In 1907 , she was part of the Home Fleet , firstly assigned to the Nore Division and then with the Devonport Division . From 1912 , she was part of the 7th Battle Squadron . When World War I broke out Majestic , together with the rest of the squadron , was attached to the Channel Fleet during the early stages of the war before being detached for escort duties with Canadian troop convoys . She then had spells as a guard ship at the Nore and the Humber . In early 1915 , she was dispatched to the Mediterranean for service in the Dardanelles Campaign . She participated in bombardments of Turkish forts and supported the Allied landings at Gallipoli . On 27 May 1915 , she was torpedoed by a U-boat at Cape Helles , sinking with the loss of 49 men .

Majestic was laid down at the Portsmouth Dockyard in February 1894 . She was launched on 31 January 1895 , after which fitting-out work commenced . She was commissioned into the Royal Navy less than a year later , in December 1895 . The ship was 421 feet ( 128 m ) long overall and had a beam of 75 ft ( 23 m ) and a draft of 27 ft ( 8.2 m ) . She displaced up to 16,060 t ( 15,810 long tons ; 17,700 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two 3-cylinder triple expansion engines powered by eight coal-fired cylindrical boilers . By 1907 – 1908 , she was re-boilered with oil-fired models . Her engines provided a top speed of 16 knots ( 30 km / h ; 18 mph ) at 10,000 indicated horsepower ( 7,500 kW ) . The Majestics were considered good seaboats with an easy roll and good steamers , although they suffered from high fuel consumption . She had a crew of 672 officers and enlisted men . The ship was armed with four BL 12-inch Mk VIII guns in twin turrets , one forward and one aft . The turrets were placed on pear-shaped barbettes ; six of her sisters had the same arrangement , but her sisters Caesar and Illustrious and all future British battleship classes had circular barbettes . Majestic also carried twelve QF 6-inch / 40 guns . They were mounted in casemates in two gun decks amidships . She also carried sixteen QF 12-pounder guns and twelve QF 2-pounder guns . She was also equipped with five 18 in ( 460 mm ) torpedo tubes , four of which were submerged in the ship 's hull , with the last in a deck-mounted launcher . Majestic and the other ships of her class had 9 inches ( 229 mm ) of Harvey armour , which allowed equal protection with less cost in weight compared to previous types of armour . This allowed Majestic and her sisters to have a deeper and lighter belt than previous battleships without any loss in protection . The barbettes for the main battery were protected with 14 in ( 360 mm ) of armour , and the conning tower had the same thickness of steel on the sides . The ship 's armoured deck was 2.5 to 4.5 in ( 64 to 114 mm ) thick .

HMS Majestic commissioned into the Channel Squadron on 12 December 1895 , and served at the Portsmouth division . She was present at the Fleet Review at Spithead for the Diamond Jubilee of Queen Victoria on 26 June 1897 , and was later flagship to Vice-Admiral Sir Harry Rawson , Commander-in-Chief of the Channel Fleet . Captain George Egerton was appointed in command on 28 June 1899 , and paid off in April 1901 , when Captain Edward Eden Bradford was appointed in command as she became the flagship of Rear-Admiral Arthur Wilson , who had been appointed Commander-in-Chief of the Channel Squadron . She was present at the Coronation Review for King Edward VII on 16 August 1902 . She underwent a refit at Portsmouth from February to July 1904 , and then became a unit of the Atlantic Fleet when a reorganisation resulted in the Channel Fleet becoming the Atlantic Fleet in January 1905 . On 1 October 1906 , she paid off into reserve at Portsmouth . Majestic recommissioned at Portsmouth on 26 February 1907 to become flagship of the Nore Division in the new Home Fleet , stationed at the Nore . She began a refit later that year in which she received radio and new fire control systems . When the flag was transferred to another ship in January 1908 , she became a private ship in the Nore Division . In June 1908 , Majestic transferred to the Devonport Division of the Home Fleet , stationed at Devonport . Her refit was completed in 1909 , and in March 1909 she transferred to the 3rd Division at Devonport , then in August 1910 to the 4th Division at Devonport , where she underwent another refit in 1911 . In May 1912 , Majestic became part of the 7th Battle Squadron in the 3rd Fleet at Devonport . On 14 July 1912 she collided with her sister ship Victorious during manoeuvres , suffering no serious damage .

Upon the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , Majestic and the rest of the 7th Battle Squadron were assigned to the Channel Fleet . Majestic underwent a refit in August and September 1914 , then covered the passage of the British Expeditionary Force to France in September 1914 . She was detached from the 7th Battle Squadron from 3 October 1914 to 14 October 1914 to escort the first Canadian troop convoy . At the end of October 1914 , Majestic was transferred to the Nore to serve as guard ship there . On 3 November 1914 , she transferred to the Humber to serve as guard ship there . In December 1914 she became a unit of the Dover Patrol , and combined with battleship Revenge to bombard German coastal artillery from off of Nieuwpoort , Belgium , on 15 December 1914 . In January 1915 , she was based at Portland .

In February 1915 , Majestic was assigned to participate in the upcoming Dardanelles Campaign to open the Turkish Straits , and she departed early that month under the command of Captain H. F. G. Talbot to join the Mediterranean Fleet . Upon arriving at Malta , she was fitted with what was termed " mine-catching " gear so that she could serve as a " mine-bumper " . She joined the Dardanelles force on 24 February 1915 , and on 26 February 1915 departed Tenedos to bombard the Ottoman Turkish inner forts at the Dardanelles that morning . On 26 February 1915 , Majestic and battleships Albion and Triumph became the first Allied heavy ships to enter the Turkish Straits during the campaign , firing on the inner forts from 0914 until 1740 hours . Majestic took a hit below the waterline , but was able to continue operations and patrolled the area again on 27 February 1915 . She supported the early landings , shelling the forts from 1125 until 1645 hours on 1 March 1915 and again while patrolling on 3 March 1915 . She arrived at Mudros on 8 March 1915 . On 9 March 1915 , Majestic circumnavigated the entrance to the Dardanelles and bombarded Ottoman Turkish positions from 1007 until 1215 hours . She returned to Tenedos on 10 March 1915 , patrolled off the Dardanelles again on 15 March 1915 , and again returned to Tenedos on 16 March 1915 . Majestic participated in the final attempt to force the straits by naval power alone on 18 March 1915 . She opened fire on Fort 9 at 1420 hours and also engaged Turkish field guns hidden in woods . She shelled Fort 9 until she ceased fire at 18 : 35 ; the fort meanwhile fired on the mortally damaged battleship Ocean . Majestic was hit four times , twice in her lower tops and twice on her forecastle , and returned to Tenedos at 2200 hours with one dead and some wounded crew members . Majestic returned to patrol duties on 22 March 1915 . She shelled Turkish positions on 28 March 1915 from 0950 to 1015 and from 1250 to 1340 hours and again opened fire on 14 April at 1458 hours . On 18 April , she fired on the abandoned British submarine E15 aground near Fort Dardanos and in danger of being captured ; two picket boats , one from Majestic and one from Triumph , destroyed E15 with torpedoes , although the boat from Majestic was itself sunk by Turkish shore batteries while retiring . Majestic returned to Tenedos on 21 April 1915 .

On 25 April 1915 , Majestic was back in action , signalling London that Allied landings had begun at Gallipoli and supporting them with coastal bombardments until 1915 hours . She brought 99 wounded troops aboard at 2110 hours and recovered all her boats before anchoring off Gallipoli for the night . On 26 April 1915 , she was back in action early , opening fire at 0617 hours . On 27 April 1915 she exchanged fire with Turkish guns , with several Turkish shells achieving very near misses before both sides ceased firing at 1130 hours . On 29 April 1915 she again was anchored off Gallipoli . Majestic relieved Triumph as flagship of Admiral Nicholson , commanding the squadrons supporting the troops ashore off Cape Helles , on 25 May 1915 .

On 27 May 1915 , while stationed off W Beach at Cape Helles , Majestic became the third battleship to be torpedoed off the Gallipoli peninsula in two weeks . Around 0645 hours , Commander Otto Hersing of the German submarine U-21 fired a single torpedo through the defensive screen of destroyers and anti-torpedo nets , striking Majestic and causing a huge explosion . The ship began to list to port and in nine minutes had capsized in 54 feet ( 16 m ) of water , killing 49 men . Her masts hit the mud of the sea bottom , and her upturned hull remained visible for many months until it was finally submerged when her foremast collapsed during a storm .

Spoken For is the second studio album by Christian rock band MercyMe . Released on October 1 , 2002 , Spoken For sold 28,000 copies in its first week , debuting at number 41 on the Billboard 200 ; it also peaked at number two on the Christian Albums chart and number six on the Top Pop Catalog Albums chart . The album received a generally positive reception from critics , some of whom praised the album as being both a lyrical and musical progression from their debut album Almost There . Several critics also noted a shift in sound from Almost There , describing Spoken For as having a roots rock sound . At the 34th GMA Dove Awards , Spoken For was nominated for Pop / Contemporary Album of the Year ; the album was certified Gold by the RIAA in October 2003 . Three singles were released in promotion of Spoken For . The lead single and title track , " Spoken For " , peaked at number one on the Radio & Records Christian AC and INSPO charts . The second single from the album , " Word of God Speak " , spent a record 23 weeks at the top of the Billboard Christian Songs chart , and also topped the Billboard Hot Christian AC chart and the Radio & Records Christian AC and INSPO charts . " The Change Inside of Me " was released as the final single from the album , and peaked at number eight on the Radio & Records Christian CHR chart .

All songs on the album were written and composed by MercyMe personnel , Bart Millard , Jim Bryson , Robby Shaffer , Mike Scheuchzer , Nathan Cochran , and Pete Kipley . Mark Stuart also contributed to " All the Above " . Discussing the progression from MercyMe 's first album Almost There to the songs on Spoken For , MercyMe 's lead singer Bart Millard said in an interview : " Our goal early on was to make sure our songs were ' singable ' and make sure they fit on power point because we wanted to write songs for corporate worship . Spoken For is filled with songs that I pray the church will use . " He added that this album leaned more toward rock than Almost There . Millard said of the origin of the album title : " Over the last year I ’ ve been consumed with the idea that God is so crazy in love with us — just knowing that we are part of something bigger and we worship a God who ’ s in complete control no matter how good or bad things get . The phrase " spoken for " really stuck with me . "

Spoken For was recorded in several locations : Luminous Sound in Dallas , Texas , The Sound Kitchen in Franklin , Tennessee , Indigo Room in Franklin , Tennessee , HydeAway Sound Lab in Jeckyll Island , Georgia , The Scwoodio in Greenville , Texas , Mountain View Recorders in Glorieta , New Mexico , and Playground Recording in Wylie , Texas . It was mastered by Richard Dodd at Vital Recordings , and mixed by F. Reid Shippen at Recording Arts in Nashville , Tennessee , with the exceptions of " All Because of This " , " Word of God Speak , and " Love of God " , ( which were mixed at Salvo Mix by Salvo ) , and " Go " ( which was mixed by J. R. McNeely ) .

MercyMe had considered themselves a rock band when they started out . On Spoken For they have progressed to sound " like a solid roots rock band " while retaining an " inspirational adult contemporary sound . " Several critics described the overall sound of the album as roots rock , also regarding Spoken For as a progression or shift beyond the sound of Almost There . The lyrical content has been described as ' refreshingly deep ' and ' thoughtful ' . The instrumentation on Spoken For includes electric guitar , acoustic guitar , bass guitar , and keyboard ; string instruments are also present . The songs on Spoken For are generally guitar-driven , although " Word of God Speak " features only piano and strings over Millard 's vocals . " Spoken For " , the title track , " offers a look at Jesus recognizing His children at heaven ’ s gate " and has been referred to as ' worshipful ' . Among the individual tracks on the album , " The Change Inside of Me " has been described as " firmly on the pop side of adult contemporary music " , as well as " upbeat pop / rock " . " All The Above " has also been described as ' pop ' ; lyrically , it describes " the elation that rang through the heavens when we became children of God " . " Your Glory Goes On " is also an upbeat pop / rock song . " Crazy " is described as a driving ballad " which explores the merits of heaven over earth " , with its opening bars sounding " a little like a slower version of The Police 's " Every Little Thing She Does Is Magic " . " Come One , Come All " sounds like a cross between the sounds of Sonicflood and John Mellencamp .

" Spoken For " was released as the lead single from Spoken For ; it peaked at number one on the Radio & Records Christian AC and INSPO charts , spending seven and six weeks respectively at the top of the charts . It also peaked at number six on the Radio & Records Christian CHR chart . " Word of God Speak " was released as the second single from the album , and peaked at number one on the Billboard Christian Songs and Hot Christian AC charts , as well as at number one Radio & Records Christian AC and INSPO charts , and at number 25 on the Radio & Records Christian CHR chart . " Word of God Speak " spent 23 weeks atop the Christian Songs chart , a record for that chart . A third and final single , " The Change Inside pf Me " , peaked at number eight on the Christian CHR chart .

Spoken For was released on October 1 , 2002 . It sold 23,000 copies in its first week , debuting at number 41 on the Billboard 200 and number two on the Christian Albums chart and at number six on the Top Pop Catalog Albums chart . Spoken For ranked at number ten on the 2003 year-end Christian Albums chart , and at number 20 on the 2004 year-end Christian Albums chart . It also ranked at number 46 on the 2000s decade-end Christian Albums chart . The RIAA certified Spoken For Gold in 2003 , signifying shipments of over 500,000 copies .

Critical reception to Spoken For was generally positive . Kevin McNeese of NewReleaseTuesday gave the album four out of five stars , comparing the album favorably to MercyMe 's previous material . Marcia Bartenhagen of CCM Magazine gave the album a positive review , noting a progression in musical focus , songwriting , and vocals . Russ Breimeier of Christianity Today praised the album for its cohesiveness , and found the album an improvement upon the band 's debut album Almost There in its songwriting ; he also praised what he regarded as a shift to a roots rock musical style . Tony Cummings of Cross Rhythms gave the album seven out of ten stars , praising the songs as being " beautifully crafted " . Wendy Lee Nentwig of Crosswalk.com praised the band 's musical and lyrical growth since their debut effort , as well as the " passionate intensity and emotion " of lead singer Bart Millard 's vocals . Marcia Bartenhagen of CCM Magazine concluded : " While not a perfect sophomore effort , as the group occasionally sways to the triteness so often found on AC / pop projects , MercyMe has progressed in musical focus , songwriting and vocals . "

The Flying Eagle cent is a one-cent piece struck by the Mint of the United States as a pattern coin in 1856 , and for circulation in 1857 and 1858 . The coin was designed by Mint Chief Engraver James B. Longacre , with the eagle in flight based on the work of Longacre 's predecessor , Christian Gobrecht . By the early 1850s , the large cent ( about the size of a half dollar ) being issued by the Mint was becoming both unpopular in commerce and expensive to coin . After experimenting with various sizes and compositions , the Mint decided on an alloy of 88 % copper and 12 % nickel for a new , smaller cent . After the Mint produced patterns with an 1856 date and gave them to legislators and officials , Congress formally authorized the new piece in February 1857 . The new cent was issued in exchange for the worn Spanish colonial silver coin that had circulated in the U.S. until then , as well as for its larger predecessor . So many cents were issued that they choked commercial channels , especially as they were not legal tender and no one had to take them . The eagle design did not strike well , and was replaced in 1859 by Longacre 's Indian Head cent .

The cent was the first official United States coin to be struck at the Philadelphia Mint in 1793 . These pieces , today known as large cents , were made of pure copper and were about the size of a half dollar . They were struck every year , except 1815 due to a shortage of metal , but were slow to become established in commerce . Worn Spanish colonial silver pieces were then commonly used as money throughout the United States . The Mint then struck silver or gold in response to deposits by those holding bullion , and made little profit from those transactions . By the 1840s , profits , or seignorage , from monetizing copper into cents helped fund the Mint . In 1849 , copper prices rose sharply , causing the Department of the Treasury to investigate possible alternatives to the large one-cent pieces . The cent was unpopular in trade ; as it was not a legal tender , nobody had to take it , and banks and merchants often refused it . The cent was disliked for its large size as well . In 1837 , the eccentric New York chemist Lewis Feuchtwanger had experimented with a smaller cent size in making model coins as part of a plan to sell his alloy ( similar to base-metal German silver ) to the government for use in coinage . His pieces circulated as hard times tokens in the recession years of the late 1830s and early 1840s .

By 1850 , it was no longer profitable for the Mint to strike cents , and on May 14 , New York Senator Daniel S. Dickinson introduced legislation for a cent made out of billon , copper with a small amount of silver . At the time , it was widely felt that coins should contain a large proportion of their face value in metal . The coin would be annular ; that is , it would have a hole in the middle . The Mint struck experimental pieces , and found that it was difficult to eject such pieces from the presses where they were struck , and that it was expensive to recover the silver from the alloy . Provisions for a smaller cent were dropped from the legislation that gave congressional approval for the three-cent piece in 1851 . Numismatic historian Walter Breen suggested that one factor in rejecting the holed coins was that they reminded many of Chinese cash coins with their minimal purchasing value . A drop in copper prices in 1851 and early 1852 made the matter of a smaller cent less urgent at the Department of the Treasury , which supervised Mint activities .

Copper prices resurged in late 1852 and into 1853 past the $ 0.40 per pound that the Mint viewed as the break-even point for cent manufacture after considering the cost of production ; 1 pound ( 0.45 kg ) of copper made 42 ⅔ large cents . In 1853 , patterns using a base-metal alloy were struck using a quarter eagle obverse die , about the size of a dime . Some of the proposed alloys contained the metal nickel . Also considered for use in the cent was " French bronze " ( 95 % copper with the remainder tin and zinc ) and various varieties of German silver . In his 1854 annual report , Mint Director James Ross Snowden advocated the issue of small , bronze cents , as well as the elimination of the half cent , which he described as useless in commerce . A number of pattern cents were struck in 1854 and 1855 . These featured various designs , including several depictions of Liberty and two adaptations of work by the late Mint chief engraver , Christian Gobrecht : one showing a seated Liberty , which Gobrecht had placed on the silver coins in the 1830s , and another of a flying eagle , which Gobrecht had created based upon a sketch by Titian Peale .

In early 1856 , Snowden proposed legislation to allow him to issue a smaller cent , but leaving the size and metallic composition up to him and Secretary of the Treasury James Guthrie . Under the plan , the new piece would be legal tender , up to ten cents . It would be issued in exchange for the old Spanish silver still circulating in the United States . In the exchange , the Spanish silver would be given full value ( 12 ½ cents per real , or bit ) when normally such pieces traded at about a 20 % discount due to wear . The loss the government would take on the trade would be paid for by the seignorage on the base-metal pieces . The new cents would also be issued for the old cents , and in exchange for the same value in half cents — that denomination was to be discontinued . The bill was introduced in the Senate on March 25 , 1856 . The old cent weighed 168 grains ( 10.9 g ) ; on April 16 , the bill was amended to provide for a cent of at least 95 % copper weighing at least 96 grains ( 6.2 g ) and passed the Senate in that form .

While the legislation was being considered , Mint Melter and Refiner James Curtis Booth was conducting experiments on alloys that might be appropriate for the new cent . In July 1856 , Snowden wrote to Guthrie , proposing an alloy of 88 % copper and 12 % nickel as ideal and suggesting amendments to the pending bill that would accomplish this . Booth also wrote to Guthrie to boost the alloy ; both men proposed a weight of 72 grains ( 4.7 g ) as convenient as 80 cents would equal a troy pound ( 373 g ) , although the avoirdupois pound ( 454 g ) was more commonly used for base metals . The Mint 's chief engraver , James B. Longacre , was instructed to prepare designs for pattern coins . Initially , Longacre worked with Liberty head designs such as were common at the time , but Snowden asked that a flying eagle design be prepared . This occurred as Booth 's experiments continued ; the first cent patterns with the flying eagle design were about the size of a quarter . To promote the new alloy , the Mint had 50 half cents struck in it , and had them sent to Washington for Treasury officials to show to officials and congressmen . In early November 1856 , Longacre prepared dies in what would prove to be the final design , depicting a flying eagle on the obverse and a wreathed denomination on the reverse , in the size sought by Booth .

The Mint struck at least several hundred patterns using Longacre 's flying eagle design in the proposed composition . In an effort to secure public acceptance of the new pieces , these were distributed to various congressmen and other officials , initially in November 1856 . Two hundred were sent to the House Committee on Coinage , Weights and Measures , while four were given to President Franklin Pierce . At least 634 specimens were distributed , and possibly several thousand ; extra were available on request . This was the origin of the highly collectable 1856 Flying Eagle cent , which is considered by numismatists as part of the Flying Eagle series although it was actually a pattern or transition piece , not an official coin , as congressional approval had not yet been granted . Additional 1856 small cents were later struck by Snowden for illicit sale , and to exchange for pieces the Mint sought for its coin collection . In December 1856 , Snowden wrote to Missouri Representative John S. Phelps , hoping for progress with the legislation , and stating that he was already " pressed on all hands , and from every quarter , for the new cent — in fact , the public are very anxious for its issue " . When the legislation , amended to include the weight and alloy the Mint had decided on , was debated in the House of Representatives on December 24 , it was opposed by Tennessee Congressman George Washington Jones over the legal tender provision ; Jones felt that under the Constitution , only gold and silver should be made legal tender . Phelps defended the bill on the ground that Congress had the constitutional power to regulate the value of money , but when the bill was brought back up to be considered on January 14 , 1857 , the legal tender provision had been removed . This time , the bill was opposed by New York Congressman Thomas R. Whitney , who objected to a provision in the bill that legalized the Mint 's practice of designing and striking medals commissioned by the public , feeling that the government should not compete with private medallists . The provision was removed , and the bill passed the following day . The House version was then considered by the Senate , which debated it on February 4 , and passed it with a further amendment allowing the redemption of the Spanish coins for a minimum of two years . The House agreed to this on February 18 , and President Pierce signed the bill on the 21st . The act made foreign gold and silver coins no longer legal tender , but Spanish dollars were redeemable at their nominal value for two years in exchange for the new copper-nickel cents . The half cent was abolished . The new pieces would be the same size ( 19 mm ) , though somewhat heavier , than cents are today .

In anticipation of the success of the legislation , most of the 333,456 large cents struck in 1857 never left the Philadelphia Mint , and were later melted . Snowden purchased a new set of rollers and other equipment so that the Mint could produce its own cent planchets , the first time it had done so in over 50 years . Although the legislation was still a day from final passage , Snowden recommended Longacre 's designs to Guthrie on February 20 . Guthrie approved them on the 24th , though he requested that the edge of the coin be made less sharp ; Snowden promised to comply . Flying Eagle cents were struck beginning in April 1857 and were held pending official release . The Mint stored the pieces pending accumulation of a sufficient supply ; in mid-May , Snowden notified Philadelphia newspapers that distribution would begin on May 25 .

Longacre 's obverse of an eagle in flight is based on that of the Gobrecht dollar , struck in small quantities from 1836 to 1839 . Although Gobrecht 's model is not known with certainty , some sources state that the bird in flight was based on Peter the eagle , a tame bird fed by Mint workers in the early 1830s until it was caught up in machinery and killed . The bird was stuffed , and is still displayed at the Philadelphia Mint . Despite its derivative nature , Longacre 's eagle has been widely admired . According to art historian Cornelius Vermeule in his book on U.S. coins , the flying eagle motif , when used in the 1830s , was " the first numismatic bird that could be said to derive from nature rather than from colonial carving or heraldry " . Vermeule described the Flying Eagle cent 's replacement , the Indian Head cent , as " far less attractive to the eye than the Peale-Gobrecht flying eagle and its variants " . Sculptor Augustus Saint-Gaudens , when commissioned in 1905 to provide new designs for American coinage , sought to return a flying eagle design to the cent , writing to President Theodore Roosevelt , " I am using a flying eagle , a modification of the device which was used on the cent of 1857 . I had not seen that coin for many years , and was so impressed by it that I thought if carried out with some modifications , nothing better could be done . It is by all odds the best design on any American coin . " Saint-Gaudens did return the flying eagle to American coinage , but his design was used for the reverse of the double eagle rather than the cent .

The Philadelphia Mint released the new cents to the public on May 25 , 1857 . In anticipation of large popular demand , Mint authorities built a temporary wooden structure in the courtyard of the Philadelphia facility . On the morning of the date of release , hundreds of people queued , one line for those exchanging Spanish silver for cents , the other for those bringing in old copper cents and half cents . From 9 am clerks paid out cents for the old pieces ; outside the Mint precincts , early purchasers sold the new cents at a premium . Snowden wrote to Guthrie , " the demand for them is enormous ... we had on hand this morning $ 30,000 worth , that is three million pieces . Nearly all of this amount will be paid out today . " The 1856 specimen became publicly known about the time of issuance , and had the public checking their pocket change ; 1856 small cents sold for as much as $ 2 by 1859 . The public interest in the new cents set off a coin collecting boom : in addition to seeking the rare 1856 cent , some tried to collect sets of large cents back to 1793 , and found they would have to pay a premium for the rarer dates .

The Mint had trouble striking the new design . This was due to the hard copper-nickel alloy and the fact that the eagle on one side of the piece was directly opposite parts of the reverse design ; efforts to bring out the design more fully led to increased die breakage . Many Flying Eagle cents show weaknesses , especially at the eagle 's head and tail , which are opposite the wreath . In 1857 , Snowden suggested the replacement of the eagle with a head of Christopher Columbus . Longacre replied that as there had been objections to proposals to place George Washington on the coinage , there would also be to a Columbus design . Despite the difficulties , the 17,450,000 Flying Eagle cents struck at Philadelphia in 1857 constituted the greatest production of a single coin in a year at a U.S. mint to that time . In 1858 , the Mint tried to alleviate the breakage problem using a new version of the cent with a shallower relief . This attempt led to the major variety of the series , as coins of the revised version have smaller letters in the inscriptions than those struck earlier . The two varieties are about equally common , and were probably struck side by side for some period as the Mint used up older dies . Efforts to conserve dies were the probable cause of another variety , the 1858 / 7 , as 1857-dated dies were overstruck to allow them to be used in the new year .

The Mint prepared pattern coins with a much smaller eagle in 1858 , which struck well , but which officials disliked . Snowden directed Longacre to prepare various patterns that he could select from for a new piece to replace the Flying Eagle cent as of January 1 , 1859 . The Mint produced between 60 and 100 sets of twelve patterns showing various designs ; these were circulated to officials and also were quietly sold by the Mint over the next several years . Longacre 's design showing Liberty wearing an Indian-style headress was adopted , with a wreath with lower relief for the reverse of the Indian Head cent , solving the metal flow issues . On November 4 , 1858 , Snowden wrote to the Treasury Department , stating that the Flying Eagle cent had proved " not very acceptable to the general population " as they felt the bird was not true to life , and that the Native American design would " giv [ e ] it the character of America " . By September 1857 , the volume of Spanish silver coming to the Mint had been so large that Snowden gave up the idea of being able to pay for it just with cents , authorizing payment with gold and silver coins . On March 3 , 1859 , the redemption of the foreign pieces was extended for an additional two years . As commerce was choked with the new cents , Congress repealed this provision in July 1860 , though Snowden continued the practice for more than a year without authorization from Congress . Bankers Magazine for October 1861 reported the end of the exchange , and quoted the Philadelphia Press : " the large issue of the new nickel cents has rendered them almost as much of a nuisance as the old Spanish currency " . According to Breen , " the foreign silver coins had been legal tender , receivable for all kinds of payments including postage stamps and some taxes ; the nickel cents were not . They quickly filled shopkeepers ' cashboxes to the exclusion of almost everything else ; they began to be legally refused in trade . " The glut was ended by the hoarding of all federal coinage in the wake of the economic upset caused by the Civil War .

After the war , the hoarded Flying Eagle cents re-entered circulation . Many remained there only a few years , being pulled out from among the new bronze cents in Treasury Department redemption programs in the 1860s and 1870s — thirteen million copper-nickel cents were retired by exchange for other base-metal coinage . By the 1880s , it was a rarity in circulation . Today , Flying Eagle cents are relatively inexpensive in well-worn grades . The 2015 edition of R.S. Yeoman 's A Guide Book of United States Coins lists the 1857 , 1858 large letters , and 1858 small letters each at $ 28 in Good-4 condition , the lowest collectable grade . The 1856 is $ 7,000 in that grade , rising to $ 22,000 in uncirculated MS-63 . The 1858 / 7 starts at $ 75 in G-4 , rising to $ 10,000 in MS-63 . An 1856 cent in MS-66 condition sold at auction in January 2004 for $ 172,500 .

" Looking After Our Own " is the second episode of the British espionage television series Spooks . It first aired on BBC One in the United Kingdom on 20 May 2002 . The episode was written by series creator David Wolstencroft , and directed by Bharat Nalluri . The episode focuses on MI5 's efforts in bringing down right-wing leader Robert Osbourne ( Kevin McNally ) , who is believed to be planning a series of race riots across the UK . The storyline was originally slated for the finale of the first series , but was pushed forward when the producers were pressured to deliver the story to the BBC . Filming took two weeks , around December 2001 . After its original broadcast , the episode was viewed by over eight million Britons , a decline of one million from the first episode , but was still the strongest performer in its time slot . The episode marked the death of a main character , Helen Flynn ( Lisa Faulkner ) , which was met with considerable controversy due to its perceived violence ; at 250 complaints , it marked the highest number of complaints for a television programme in 2002 .

MI5 suspect that right-wing leader Robert Osbourne is planning a series of race riots in the UK . A team led by Danny Hunter ( David Oyelowo ) attempts to bug his home , only to find it impossible because of the home 's high-tech countersurveillance equipment . What MI5 does find is that Osbourne abuses his wife Claire ( Debra Stephenson ) ; believing Claire is vulnerable for recruitment , Section D start " Operation Greensleeves " and tasks a " runner " to befriend her before recruiting . However , vetting did not pick up on the runner 's alcoholism after she becomes involved in a road traffic accident while inebriated . Harry Pearce ( Peter Firth ) appoints Tom Quinn ( Matthew Macfadyen ) and junior administrative officer Helen Flynn ( Lisa Faulkner ) to step in and pose as a married couple who are substitute tutors at the same Romford community college Claire is attending . The two initially succeed , and are invited to dinner with Osbourne at his home . However , during their visit , Osbourne catches Helen out by addressing Tom as her boyfriend rather than husband ; Helen 's improvising makes Osbourne more suspicious of the two . Later , one of Osbourne 's contacts , Nick Thomas ( Tom Goodman-Hill ) , is revealed to be freelance journalist Kieran Harvey . When Osbourne discovers this , he has Harvey murdered . Tom and Helen gain Claire 's trust and recruit her ; she agrees to help the two in exchange for a £ 600-a-week account and transport to anywhere in the world .

In the meantime , a cargo of illegal immigrants from Chechnya is intercepted by HM Customs and Excise ; the traffickers throw their cargo overboard , drowning them . Believing the traffickers will change their routes , Tessa Phillips ( Jenny Agutter ) and Zoe Reynolds ( Keeley Hawes ) investigate and discover a link between the shipment and Osbourne . With the information gathered from " Greensleeves " , they discover that Osbourne intends to choke the asylum system by overcrowding the holding centres , and after his followers stir up the race riots , Osbourne would encourage independent Member of Parliament ( MP ) Bill Watson ( Jasper Jacob ) to raise the issue of asylum seekers in the House of Commons . Tom and Helen prepare to move out , but are kidnapped by Osbourne 's gang and taken to the kitchen of his waste management plant for interrogation . Knowing they are MI5 officers , Osbourne demands everything Tom knows about their operation ; when Tom fails to cooperate , Osbourne forces Helen 's hand , followed by her head into a deep fryer , before shooting her . Before Tom can suffer the same fate , Claire throws a cigarette into the vat , which ignites , buying Tom time to escape and return to Thames House . However , Tom and Harry are disgusted to hear that the powers-that-be will take no action against Osbourne , in order to track the movements of all far-right groups . At the end of the episode . Harry has Osbourne assassinated . Bill Watson receives photographs of the dead refugees washed up on a beach , presumably sent by MI5 , along with a note reading " are you happy with your wash ? "

The episode 's storyline , including Helen 's death , was meant to be in the first series finale . However , by then , the second episode was not yet written , and series producer Kudos were due to deliver the story to the BBC in one month . As a result , the episode was brought forward to the second slot . Since the first episode began Spooks " with a bang " , series creator and writer David Wolstencroft , was under pressure to top the efforts of the first episode with the second , but not by much . During the writing stage , he introduced a story arc involving Danny Hunter and his obsession with money and spending , apparently mirroring the writer ; the arc was created for the temptations that the officers may have . In the original screenplay , Danny was to spend on his mother . Wolstencroft included some suggestions from his friends and girlfriend . An early scene was to take place in a shower room , but was rewritten when the producers thought it would be " too racy " for a 9 : 00 p.m. audience . In another instance , a long sequence would take place at sea concerning the smugglers dropping off illegal immigrants into the water ; the scenes were cut before filming due to time constraints . Also , before deciding on waste disposal , Osbourne was originally going to head a security company . The funeral scene towards the end of the episode was inspired by The Godfather II . In the end , the script was rewritten four times before the BBC took the final version of the episode .

Filming took place over a 13 to 14 days period in December 2001 . It was not filmed on order of the script ; the scenes set around the Osbourne residence for instance , were all filmed at once , during two to three days , though during the episodes , the scenes took place in separate parts of the episode . Parts of the introduction scenes , where Danny 's team break into Osbourne 's house , was actually filmed on the Grid set . Parts of the sequence were originally filmed without sound ; the sound would later be added during post production . The footage of the drowned immigrants found at the shore were shot by the second unit headed by producer Simon Crawford Collins on a pebbled courtyard in Kensington to double as a beach . Some of the exterior scenes at night were filmed with the street wet down so that the lights could kick off the ground . Also in the episode , the editing suite , where the series was edited , was used as a set . The West12 shopping centre in Shepherd 's Bush , London was used in one scene as an airport , as well as the shopping centre itself in another . The Chadford Community College was filmed at a rugby club . The safe house Tom and Helen were appointed to was filmed in two separate locations . One of those locations was used before in the Mary Kane interrogation scene in the pilot episode " Thou Shalt Not Kill " . In one scene where Tom was driving to the operation the car was in fact towed ; an error was made in the episode where the car looked taller than the other cars on the road during the shoot .

Wolstencroft wrote the death scene with the intention of giving the audience the impression that no one in the series is safe . According to producer Jane Featherstone , the idea to kill off a main character involved a female getting " her head set on fire " later in the series , but she decided " let 's move the most dramatic thing you 've got to episode two and kill off the only actress the audience recognise [ Faulkner was considered the only recognisable cast member when the series was introduced ] and then you 've got them hooked . " Matthew Macfadyen stated that the shooting of the death scene , although not emotionally draining , was rather tough , and gruelling to perform . The part where Osbourne forces Flynn 's arm into the fryer was done with a rubber arm made to double Faulkner 's arm . Furthermore , the " oil " was in fact cold tea with food colour . Director Bharat Nalluri wanted as little of the torture to be seen as possible , because he wanted the sequence to be more psychological to make it easier to frighten the audience , since they know the physicality of being burnt , whereas if Helen was shot , not as many would . Producer Stephen Garrett wanted to show a more realistic sense of violence , rather than a fantastical " cartoon violence " " in which blows to the head with iron bars leave small bruises rather than crushed skulls , gunshot wounds leave neat abrasions in conveniently fleshy parts of the anatomy rather than eviscerating their victims ; and fights that would hospitalise Mike Tyson are walked away from with barely a mark . "

The episode was first broadcast on 20 May 2002 , during the 9 to 10 pm time slot . It achieved overnight viewing figures of 7.8 million , with a 35 per cent audience share . Ratings were down over one million from the pilot episode the previous week . Regardless " Looking After Our Own " won its time slot ; the finale episode of ITV1 drama Helen West came second , with 4.9 million viewers and a 21 per cent share . The final numbers posted on the Broadcasters ' Audience Research Board website went up slightly to 8.1 million viewers , making the episode the ninth most viewed BBC One broadcast , and the nineteenth most viewed broadcast in total the week it aired . The episode attracted controversy following the demise of Helen Flynn after her hand and head were forced into a deep fryer . The death scenes attracted over 250 complaints , 154 of them to the television watchdog , the Broadcasting Standards Commission , the highest number of complaints for a television programme in 2002 . In the wake of the complaints , BBC insiders had admitted that the scenes " clearly disturbed " some of the viewers , but also defended their decision to show the scene as it would show the audience " the kind of threat which might be faced by agents engaged in the fight against terrorism . " The Broadcasting Standards Commission stated that despite the shocking content ; " in the context was acceptable and important for the later narrative , " however the watchdog still criticised the BBC for failing to warn viewers of the violence to come . Garrett refuted this , stating : " Not only was there a clear warning before the programme began , but for anyone who missed that , the subject matter of the episode ( a conspiracy to stir up inter-racial violence perpetrated by a man who clearly beat his wife ) was hardly the stuff of which chirpy little bucolic fantasies are made . "

Wolstencroft stated that after watching the episode with his friends , they both commended and criticised his work : " I got some angry phone calls from my friends the next day saying ' how could you , but well done , but how could you , but she was so nice , but how could you , but well done ' . " Oyelowo also responded to the controversy , believing that it came from a result of Faulkner 's male fans . Comedian Charlie Brooker however , commended the scene , as well as the series in general , stating in his Guardian column : " The moment her head was forced into the deep-fat-fryer , viewers reared on the formulaic , it 'll-be-alright-in-the-end blandness of cookie-cutter populist dramas like Casualty and Merseybeat sat up and blinked in disbelief : here was a major BBC drama series that actually had the nerve to confound expectation . " In a January 2010 poll , fans of the show voted Helen 's death as the " most shocking death scene " in the series , drawing 49 % of the votes .

" Do or Die " is a song by American rock band Thirty Seconds to Mars , featured on their fourth studio album Love , Lust , Faith and Dreams ( 2013 ) . Written and produced by lead vocalist Jared Leto , " Do or Die " explores the feeling of standing up and living one 's dreams . The song is styled in electronic rock and imbued with elements of arena rock . It was serviced to mainstream radio in July 2013 in Europe , and was released as a promotional single in the United States in March 2014 . A version of the song remixed by Dutch music producer Afrojack was digitally released in March 2014 and later included on the deluxe edition of Afrojack 's debut studio album Forget the World ( 2014 ) . " Do or Die " received positive reviews from music critics , who hailed its musical diversity and its grand and euphoric nature . It charted in some nations due to digital sales from the parent album . The accompanying music video , directed by Leto , features live footage of Thirty Seconds to Mars onstage as well as stories from their fans , personally interviewed by Leto . The video garnered general acclaim from critics , who lauded its atmosphere and simplicity . The song was included in the setlist of the band 's Love , Lust , Faith and Dreams Tour and the subsequent Carnivores Tour .

" Do or Die " was written and produced by Jared Leto . It was engineered by Jamie Reed Schefman and mixed by Serban Ghenea . John Hanes engineered it for mixing at Mixstar Studios in Virginia Beach , Virginia . The song was recorded at The International Centre for the Advancement of the Arts and Sciences of Sound in Los Angeles , California and mastered by Howie Weinberg and Dan Gerbarg at Howie Weinberg Mastering . Thirty Seconds to Mars unveiled six songs from their fourth studio album Love , Lust , Faith and Dreams , including " Do or Die " , during a preview event held at the Electric Lady Studios in New York City on March 14 , 2013 . " Do or Die " is an electronic rock song with influences and elements from arena rock . It opens with a female voiceover introducing the song 's title in the Chinese language , after which there is an electronic introduction . This is followed by the sound of guitars , drum beats and synthesizers . After the first verse , the pre-chorus follows , with Leto voicing the line , " I will never forget the moment " . The full-throated chorus then follows , which features heavy use of synthesizers and drums . The song includes a contribution from the band 's fans , credited as the Knights of the White Shadow , who provide additional vocals recorded at the band 's studio .

In an interview with PureVolume , Leto explained that the song is " about standing up and living out your dreams " . Markos Papadatos , in his review for Digital Journal , called it an " upbeat " song which " deals with one taking their own stance on their beliefs , and living life to the fullest " . In a preview of the record , Jeff Benjamin from Fuse described the song by saying that the band goes " the synthy dance route on the track 's intro before fire-alarm guitars and pummeling drums roar in and smash the Korg keyboards to bits " .

" Do or Die " was released as a promotional single in Europe in July 2013 through Virgin Records . The song debuted at number 98 on the Ultratip chart of Belgium 's Flemish region on August 24 . The following week , it jumped to number 73 and peaked at number 40 on September 21 . On August 30 , 2013 , it debuted at number 75 on the Ö3 Austria Top 40 . In the Czech Republic , the song entered the national airplay chart at number 91 on the week ending October 20 , 2013 . In Slovakia , it debuted at number 67 on September 22 , 2013 and eventually peaked at number 29 on January 26 , 2014 . Polydor Records released " Do or Die " in the United Kingdom on September 9 , 2013 . It entered the UK Rock Chart at number 38 . After four weeks , the song peaked at number seven on the issue dated September 28 , 2013 . " Do or Die " was used by Major League Baseball as the theme song for the 2013 Major League Baseball Postseason . In March 2014 , it was announced that Dutch music producer Afrojack and Thirty Seconds to Mars had collaborated on a remixed version of the song . It became commercially available for download in March 2014 and was later included on the deluxe edition of Afrojack 's debut studio album Forget the World . Leto described the collaboration by saying , " It was a lot of fun , and it 's kind of our little summer song . I think it 's good to do things that are unexpected . It keeps it exciting and collaboration is always an interesting thing . " The remixed version of " Do or Die " entered the Dutch Top 40 at number 53 on April 19 , 2014 . After five weeks , it peaked at number 42 . The song debuted at number 46 on US Dance / Electronic Songs and reached a peak of number 33 on June 7 , 2014 .

" Do or Die " received generally positive reviews from music critics . Emily Zemler , of Billboard , wrote that between the album 's " eclectic experimentation " and " voiceless soundscapes " , the band " slotted in this propulsive rocker , an arena-ready anthem " . She considered " Do or Die " to be one of the album 's " most straightforward tracks " . Dan Slessor of Alternative Press praised it as one of the album 's highlights , in which Thirty Seconds to Mars exercises their capacity for writing " titanic choruses full of sweeping drama in a manner that is almost untouchable " . Brent Faulkner from PopMatters gave a mixed response , writing that the song " relies on a familiar beat as well as liberal layering " . Writers for Contactmusic commended " Do or Die " as one of the standout songs on Love , Lust , Faith and Dreams and a " slow-burning hit of epic , synth-heavy electronica " . Kaitlyn Hodnicki from Stature magazine was impressed with the song , calling it one of the album 's more upbeat tracks , which " blooms into another epic soundscape led by [ Leto 's ] vocals and some brilliantly used electronic elements " . She felt that the fans ' vocal contribution to the song harks back to previous album This Is War without sounding " cliché or overdone " . Sarah O ' Hara from Lowdown also responded positively to the track , writing that " glorious chants fuel the uplifting ' Do or Die ' " . In a mixed review , John Watt from Drowned in Sound called the song " half-baked synth-rock . " Markos Papadatos from Digital Journal rated it an A and wrote that " the band soars as whole on this tune " , calling Leto 's vocals " raw , powerful and captivating . "

The music video for " Do or Die " was directed by Leto , who was credited as pseudonym Bartholomew Cubbins . Leto developed its concept as a companion piece to the music video of " Closer to the Edge " ( 2010 ) , shot during the Into the Wild Tour . " Do or Die " was filmed in the summer of 2013 , during a European leg of the Love , Lust , Faith and Dreams Tour and features live footage of Thirty Seconds to Mars onstage as well as fan commentary . It premiered on August 5 , 2013 . Leto personally interviewed the band 's fans , termed as the Echelon , who shared stories about the importance of music in their lives , some personal struggles and their own dreams . In an interview with MTV News , the frontman explained that he was inspired by the will to document the personal changes experienced by the band and its audience . " Most of the interviews " , Leto explained , " I did myself , so they 're really intimate . It 's me , it 's them , and it 's the camera . What I 've found is , that if you talk to everybody long enough , you find an incredible story . Every single person has a moment in their life , something that they 've found a solution for , a story to tell . Some are funny , some are really intriguing , and if you ask the right questions , you get interesting answers . "

The music video begins with a German boy who Leto had previously met in Berlin . He spoke about the loss of his father and how he had played a Thirty Seconds to Mars song at the funeral . After Leto again met the German fan again at a concert in Austria , he asked him to share his story on camera . Leto explained , " At the show in Austria , where there were tens of thousands of people , and I ran into him and interviewed him ; he was the first interview of the summer , and he shared this story about losing his father , and what it taught him , it was really an organic and serendipitous and beautiful way to begin . He shared a really personal part of himself and we 're really grateful to him , and that continued throughout all the interviews . "

Upon its release , the video received general acclaim from critics and fans . James Montgomery from MTV described it as a love-letter to the band 's fans and a document of life on the road . He also considered it the " spiritual sequel to their stirring 2010 live clip " for " Closer to the Edge " . Karen Bliss of Noisecreep was impressed with the video and opened her review by writing , " Thirty Seconds to Mars never fails to impress with what they can do within the confines of a music video . " She believed that its simplicity turned out to be " impactful , touching and uniting " . Garon Cockrell from The Pratt Tribune gave the video a positive review , calling it " excellent " . John Walker from MTV felt that throughout the fans ' personal struggles " music has helped these individuals persevere and continue to enjoy life . Likewise , Thirty Seconds to Mars seem so moved by the audience 's emotions every time they perform live , ' Do or Die 's concept seems to be that they want to return the favor . " Writers for MuchMusic noticed the band 's tradition for producing unconventional music videos and praised " Do or Die " calling it " another epic " short film . Markos Papadatos of Digital Journal found it " compelling and visually striking " , noticing real-life people from all over the world telling their " moving stories " about their aspirations and dreams . Sean Fitz-Gerald , writing for Mashable , called the video " an inspiring anthem featuring heartfelt , fan-filmed messages " .

" Do or Die " was first performed at special concerts , dubbed as Church of Mars , in May 2013 , shortly before the release of the album . The song later became a set-fixture of the Love , Lust , Faith and Dreams Tour , usually appearing as the penultimate song before " Up in the Air " . However , after the festival tour in June 2013 , which saw the band travel to Rock am Ring and Rock im Park as headline act , the song was moved to the middle of the setlist , usually played before Leto 's acoustic B-stage set . " Do or Die " was also included in the Carnivores Tour , which Thirty Seconds to Mars co-headlined with Linkin Park , and usually appeared approximately halfway through the set . Reviewing a concert , Payal Patel from AXS called " Do or Die " a " sweeping rock anthem " , while Ben Jolley of the Nottingham Post described a performance of the song as energetic and inspirational . On September 23 , 2014 , Thirty Seconds to Mars performed the song on The Ellen DeGeneres Show , featuring a ten-person choir . During the performance , Leto swung a flag bearing messages in support of certain social goals , and invited the audience to join the band on stage towards the finale , as confetti fell from the ceiling . Markos Papadatos , writing for Digital Journal , commented that the performance was another indication that Jared Leto is one of the " most charismatic live performers " in contemporary rock and that Thirty Seconds to Mars " is always able to put on a high-energy show " .

Illmatic is the debut studio album by American rapper Nas , released on April 19 , 1994 , by Columbia Records . After signing with the label with the help of MC Serch , Nas recorded the album in 1992 – 1993 at Chung King Studios , D & D Recording , Battery Studios , and Unique Recording Studios in New York City . Its production was handled by DJ Premier , Large Professor , Pete Rock , Q-Tip , L.E.S. and Nas himself . Styled as a hardcore hip hop album , Illmatic features multi-syllabic internal rhymes and inner-city narratives based on Nas 's experiences in Queensbridge , New York . The album debuted at # 12 on the U.S. Billboard 200 chart , selling 59,000 copies in its first week . However , its initial sales fell below expectations and its five singles failed to achieve significant chart success . Despite the album 's low initial sales , Illmatic received rave reviews from most music critics , who praised its production and Nas ' lyricism . On January 17 , 1996 , the album was certified Gold by the Recording Industry Association of America , and on December 11 , 2001 it earned a Platinum certification after shipping one million copies in the United States .

As a teenager , Nas wanted to pursue a career as a rapper and enlisted his best friend and neighbor , Queensbridge , Queens-native Willy " Ill Will " Graham , as his DJ . He initially went by the nickname " Kid Wave " before adopting the alias " Nasty Nas " . At 15 , he met producer Large Professor from Flushing , and was introduced to his group Main Source . Nas made his recorded debut with them , performing the opening verse on " Live at the Barbeque " from their 1991 album Breaking Atoms . Nas subsequently made his solo debut on his 1992 single " Halftime " for the soundtrack to the film Zebrahead . The single added to the buzz surrounding Nas , earning him comparisons to influential golden age rapper Rakim . Despite his buzz in the underground scene , Nas did not receive an offer for a recording contract , being rejected by major rap labels such as Cold Chillin ' and Def Jam Recordings . Nas and Ill Will continued to work together , but their partnership was cut short when Graham was murdered by a gunman in Queensbridge on May 23 , 1992 ; Nas 's brother was also shot that night , but survived . Nas has cited that moment as a " wake-up call " for him .

In mid 1992 , MC Serch , whose group 3rd Bass had dissolved , began working on a solo project and approached Nas . At the suggestion of producer T-Ray , Serch collaborated with Nas for " Back to the Grill " , the lead single for Serch 's 1992 solo debut album Return of the Product . At the recording session for the song , Serch discovered that Nas did not have a recording contract and subsequently contacted Faith Newman , an A & R executive at Sony Music Entertainment . As Serch recounted , " Nas was in a position where his demo had been sittin ' around , ' Live at the Barbeque ' was already a classic , and he was just tryin ' to find a decent deal ... So when he gave me his demo , I shopped it around . I took it to Russell first , Russell said it sounded like G Rap , he wasn 't wit ' it . So I took it to Faith . Faith loved it , she said she 'd been looking for Nas for a year and a half . They wouldn 't let me leave the office without a deal on the table . "

Once MC Serch assumed the role of executive producer for Nas 's debut project , he attempted to connect Nas with various producers . Based on his buzz at the time , numerous New York-based producers were eager to work with him and went to Power House Studios with Nas . Among those producers was DJ Premier , recognized at the time for his raw , aggressive production with jazz-based samples and heavy scratching , and for his work with rapper Guru as a part of hip hop duo Gang Starr . After his production on Lord Finesse & DJ Mike Smooth 's Funky Technician ( 1990 ) and Jeru the Damaja 's The Sun Rises in the East ( 1994 ) , Premier began recording exclusively at D & D Studios in New York City before working with Nas on Illmatic .

Prior to recording , DJ Premier had listened to Nas 's debut single , later stating " When I heard ' Halftime ' , that was some next shit to me . That 's just as classic to me as ' Eric B For President ' and ' The Bridge ' . It just had that type of effect . As simple as it is , all of the elements are there . So from that point , after Serch approached me about doing some cuts , it was automatic . You 'd be stupid to pass that up even if it wasn 't payin ' no money . " Serch later noted the chemistry between Nas and DJ Premier , recounting that " Primo and Nas , they could have been separated at birth . It wasn 't a situation where his beats fit their rhymes , they fit each other . " While Serch reached out to DJ Premier , Large Professor contacted Pete Rock to collaborate with Nas on what became " The World Is Yours " . Shortly afterwards , producers Q-Tip and L.E.S. chose to work on the album . Nas 's father , Olu Dara , also contributed with a cornet solo on " Life 's a Bitch " , which features rapper AZ .

In an early promotional interview , Nas claimed that the name " Illmatic " ( meaning " beyond ill " or " the ultimate " ) was a reference to his incarcerated Queensbridge friend , Illmatic Ice . Nas later described the title name as " supreme ill . It 's as ill as ill gets . That shit is a science of everything ill . " At the time of its recording , expectations in the hip hop scene were high for Illmatic . In a 1994 interview for The Source , which dubbed him " the second coming " , Nas spoke highly of the album , saying that " this feels like a big project that 's gonna affect the world [ ... ] We in here on the down low [ ... ] doing something for the world . That 's how it feels , that 's what it is . For all the ones that think it 's all about some ruff shit , talkin ' about guns all the time , but no science behind it , we gonna bring it to them like this . " AZ recounted recording on the album , " I got on Nas ' album and did the ' Life 's a Bitch ' song , but even then I thought I was terrible on it , to be honest . But once people started hearing that and liking it , that 's what built my confidence . I thought , ' OK , I can probably do this . ' That record was everything . To be the only person featured on Illmatic when Nas is considered one of the top men in New York at that time , one of the freshest new artists , that was big . " During the sessions , Nas composed the song " Nas Is Like " , which he later recorded as a single for his 1999 album I Am … .

Concerning the recording of the album 's opening song " N.Y. State of Mind " , producer DJ Premier later stated " Nas — he 's one of our saviors now . When we did ‘ N.Y. State of Mind , ’ at the beginning when he says , ‘ Straight out the dungeons of rap / Where fake niggas don ’ t make it back , ’ then you hear him say , ‘ I don ’ t know how to start this shit , ’ ’ cause he had just written it . He 's got the beat running in the studio , but he doesn ’ t know how he 's going to format how he 's going to convey it . So he 's going , ‘ I don ’ t know how to start this shit , ’ and I ’ m counting him in [ to begin his verse ] . One , two , three . And then you can hear him go , ‘ Yo , ’ and then he goes right into it . " DJ Premier later discussed the unexpectedness of Nas 's delivery during the recording , stating " He didn ’ t know how he was gonna come in , but he just started going because we were recording . I ’ m actually yelling , ‘ We ’ re recording ! ’ and banging on the [ vocal booth ] window . ‘ Come on , get ready ! ’ You hear him start the shit : Rappers … . And then everyone in the studio was like , ‘ Oh , my God ’ , ’ cause it was so unexpected . He was not ready . So we used that first verse . And that was when he was up and coming , his first album . So we was like , ' Yo , this guy is gonna be big . ' "

Illmatic contains discerning treatment of its subject matter : gang rivalries , desolation , and the ravages of urban poverty . Nas , who was twenty years old when the album was released , focuses on depicting his own experiences , creating highly detailed first-person narratives that deconstruct the troubled life of an inner city teenager . One writer describes the theme of the album as a “ [ S ] tory of a gifted writer born into squalor , trying to claw his way out of the trap . It 's somewhere between The Basketball Diaries and Native Son … . ” The narratives featured in Illmatic originate from Nas 's own experiences as an adolescent growing up in Queensbridge , as the lyrics allude to the housing projects located in the Long Island City-section of Queens , New York . Nas said in an interview in 2001 : “ When I made Illmatic I was a little kid in Queensbridge trapped in the ghetto . My soul was trapped in Queensbridge projects . ” In a 2012 interview , he explained his inspiration for exploring this subject matter : " [ W ] hen my rap generation started , it was about bringing you inside my apartment . It wasn 't about being a rap star ; it was about anything other than . I want you to know who I am : what the streets taste like , feel like , smell like . What the cops talk like , walk like , think like . What crackheads do — I wanted you to smell it , feel it . It was important to me that I told the story that way because I thought that it wouldn 't be told if I didn 't tell it . I thought this was a great point in time in the 1990s in [ New York City ] that needed to be documented and my life needed to be told . "

When depicting life in the projects , Nas alternates from moments of pain and pleasure to frustration and braggadocio . The columnist for OhWord.com wrote : " [ His ] narrative voice swerves between personas that are cynical and optimistic , naïve and world-weary , enraged and serene , globally conscious and provincial " . Music writer Jeff Weiss of Pitchfork describes the " enduring image " often associated with Nas 's narrated stream of consciousness : " [ A ] baby-faced Buddha monk in public housing , scribbling lotto dreams and grim reaper nightmares in dollar notebooks , words enjambed in the margins . The only light is the orange glow of a blunt , bodega liquor , and the adolescent rush of first creation . Sometimes his pen taps the paper and his brain blanks . In the next sentence , he remembers dark streets and the noose . " Critic and blogger Kenny Waste comments on the significance of Queensbridge as a setting in Illmatic , writing , “ The songs are made up largely of recollections or Nas describing his emotions , which range from feeling trapped to overt optimism about his abilities to escape the ' hands of doom ' . But they always remain within the walls of his Queensbridge home . ”

Along with its narratives , Illmatic is also distinct for its many portrayals and descriptions of places , people , and interactions . In his songs , Nas often depicts the corners and boulevards of Queensbridge , while mentioning the names of streets , friends , local crews and drug dealers , and utilizing vernacular slang indigenous to his hometown . Poet and author Kevin Coval describes this approach to songwriting as that of a “ hip-hop poet-reporter ... rooted in the intimate specificity of locale . ” Commenting on Nas 's use of narrative , Sohail Daulatzai , Professor of Film and Media Studies at University of Southern California , compares the album to cinema , citing its " detailed descriptions , dense reportage , and visually stunning rhymes ... " In Born to Use Mics : Reading Nas 's Illmatic , he writes : " Like the 1965 landmark masterpiece film The Battle of Algiers , which captured the Algerian resistance against French colonialism , Illmatic brilliantly blurred the lines between fiction and documentary , creating a heightened sense of realism and visceral eloquence for Nas 's renegade first-person narratives and character-driven odes . ”

Many of the themes found in Illmatic revolve around Nas ’ s experience living in an environment where poverty , violence , and drug use abound . Throughout the 1980s and early 1990s , residents of Queensbridge experienced intense violence , as the housing development was overrun by the crack epidemic . Illmatic contains imagery inspired by this prevalence of street crime . In " N.Y. State of Mind " , Nas details the trap doors , rooftop snipers , street corner lookouts , and drug dealers that pervade his urban dreamscape . Sohail Daulatzai describes this language as " chilling " and suggests that it “ harrowingly describes and imagines with such surreal imagery , with so much noir discontent and even more fuck-you ambition , the fragile and tenuous lives of ghetto dwellers … ” Author Adam Mansbach interprets Nas 's violent aesthetics as a metaphoric device meant to authenticate the rough edges of his persona : " Nas 's world and worldview are criminal and criminalized . Hence , he uses metaphoric violence as a central trope of his poetic . ” Writer and musician Gregory Tate regards this violent imagery as part of a trend towards dark subject matter that came to prevail among East Coast rappers in the hardcore hip hop scene . He writes , “ [ S ] ome of the most memorably dark , depressive but flowing lyrics in hip hop history were written by Nas , Biggie , and members of the Wu-Tang Clan on the death knell of the crack trade .

Other writers , such as Mark Anthony Neal , have described these lyrical themes as a form of “ brooding introspection ” , disclosing the tortured dimensions of drug crime and its impressions on an adolescent Nas . Critic Sam Chennault wrote , " Nas captures post-crack N.Y.C. in all its ruinous glory ... [ r ] ealizing that drugs were both empowering and destructive , his lyrics alternately embrace and reject the idea of ghetto glamour " . According to Steve Juon of RapReviews.com , Nas " illustrates the Queensbridge trife life of his existence [ sic ] , while at the same time providing hope that there is something greater than money , guns and drugs . " Richard Harrington of The Washington Post described Nas 's coming-of-age experience as " balancing limitations and possibilities , distinguishing hurdles and springboards , and acknowledging his own growth from roughneck adolescent to a maturing adult who can respect and criticize the culture of violence that surrounds him .

The content of Illmatic is also informed by notions of artistic authenticity . The promotional press sheet that accompanied the album 's release implied Nas ’ s refusal to conform to commercial trends , stating : “ While it 's sad that there 's so much frontin ' in the rap world today , this should only make us sit up and pay attention when a rapper comes along who 's not about milking the latest trend and running off with the loot . ” At the time of the album 's release , the hip hop community was embroiled in a debate about artistic authenticity and commercialism in popular music . Rapper Common , describes in the preface to Born to Use Mics : Reading Nas 's Illmatic the concerns that were felt by him and his contemporaries : “ It was that serious for so many of us . We didn ’ t just grow up with hip hop ; we grew up with hip-hop as hip-hop was also growing , and so that made for a very close and intimate relationship that was becoming more and more urgent – and we felt it . Our art was being challenged in many ways as the moneymen began to sink their teeth into us . ”

In the context of this debate , music writers have interpreted Illmatic as an admonishment for hip hop purists and practitioners . In the opening track , " The Genesis " , Nas bemoans the lack of legitimacy among other MCs in the projects , insisting that he has " Been doin ' this shit since back then . " Citing songs such as “ Life 's a Bitch ” , Guthrie Ramsay Jr. argues that Nas “ set a benchmark for rappers in an artistic field consumed by constantly shifting notions of ' realness ' , authenticity , and artistic credibility . " Sohail Daulatzai writes : " Though Illmatic was highly anticipated release , far from under the radar , Nas 's taking it back to ' the dungeons of rap ' was … a kind of exorcism or purging ( ' where fake niggas don ’ t make it back ' ) that was at the very least trying to claim a different aesthetic of resistance and rebellion that was all too aware of hip-hop 's newfound mainstream potential . "

In addition to its lyrical content , many writers have commented on the thematic significance of Illmatic 's musical endowments . “ Drawing on everything from old school hip-hop , to blues , to fairly avant-garde jazz compositions , ” writes music blogger Kenny Waste , “ the sampling choices within Illmatic reflect an individual with not only a deep appreciation for but also a deep knowledge of music . ” Musicologist and pianist Guthrie Ramsay Jr. describes Illmatic as “ an artistic emblem ” that “ anchors itself in the moment while reminding us that powerful musical statements often select past material and knowledge for use in the present and hope for the future . ” Kevin Coval considers the sampling of artists Craig G and Biz Markie in ' Memory Lane ' as an attempt to build upon the hip hop tradition of Queens , most notably the Juice Crew All Stars . These samples are intended to serve as tributes to “ Nas 's lyrical forebearers [ sic ] and around-the-way influences . He is repping his borough ’ s hip hop canon . ” The involvement of older artists , including Nas ’ s father , has also been cited as a formative influence in the making of Illmatic . Author Adam Mansbach argues , “ It 's the presence of all these benevolent elders – his father and the cadre of big brother producers steering the album – that empowers Nas to rest comfortably in his identity as an artist and an inheritor of tradition , and thus find the space to innovate . ”

Music writers have also characterized the album 's contents as a commentary on hip-hop 's evolution . As Princeton University professor Imani Perry writes , Illmatic “ embodies the entire story of hip-hop , bearing all of its features and gifts . Nas has the raw lyrics of old schoolers , the expert deejaying and artful lyricism of the 1980s , the slice of hood life , and the mythic ... The history of hip-hop up to 1994 is embodied in Illmatic . ” In the song , " Represent " , Nas alludes to the Juice Crew 's conflict with Boogie Down Productions , which arose as a dispute over the purported origins of hip hop . Princeton University professor Eddie S. Glaude Jr. claims that this " situates Queensbridge and himself within the formative history of hip-hop culture . " The opening skit , ' The Genesis , ' also contains an audio sample of the 1983 film , Wild Style , which showcased the work of early hip-hop pioneers such as Grand Master Flash , Fab Five Freddy , and the Rock Steady Crew . After the music of Wild Style is unwittingly rejected by one of his peers , Nas admonishes his friend about the importance of their musical roots . Kenny Waste suggests that embedded deep within this track " is a complex and subtle exposition on the themes of Illmatic . ” Similarly , Professor Adilifu Nama of California State University Northridge writes , “ ’ [ T ] he use of Wild Style ... goes beyond a simple tactic to imbue Illmatic with an aura of old-school authenticity . The sonic vignette comments on the collective memory of the hip hop community and its real , remembered , and even imagined beginning , as well as the pitfalls of assimilation , the importance of history , and the passing of hip-hop 's ' age of innocence ' . ”

Illmatic has been noted by music writers for Nas 's unique style of delivery and lyrical & poetic substance . His lyrics contain layered rhythms , multi-syllabic compounded rhymes , internal half rhymes , assonance , and ear-bending enjambment . Music critic Marc Lamont Hill of PopMatters elaborates on Nas 's lyricism and delivery throughout the album , stating " Nas ' complex rhyme patterns , clever word play , and impressive vocab took the art [ of rapping ] to previously unprecedented heights . Building on the pioneering work of Kool G Rap , Big Daddy Kane , and Rakim , tracks like ' Halftime ' and the laid back ' One Time 4 Your Mind ' demonstrated a [ high ] level of technical precision and rhetorical dexterity . " Hill cites " Memory Lane ( Sittin ' in da Park ) " as " an exemplar of flawless lyricism " , while critic Steve Juon wrote that the lyrics of the album closer , " It Ain 't Hard to Tell " , are " just as quotable if not more-so than anything else on the LP – what album could end on a higher note than this ? " :

Focusing on poetic forms found in his lyrics , Princeton University professor Imani Perry describes Nas 's performance as that of a " poet-musician " indebted to the conventions of jazz poetry . She suggests that Nas 's lyricism might have been shaped by the " black art poetry album genre , " pioneered by Gil Scott-Heron , The Last Poets , and Nikki Giovanni . Chicago-based poet and music critic Kevin Coval attributes Nas 's lyricism to his unique approach to rapping , which he describes as a " fresh-out-the-rhyme-book presentation " : " It 's as if Nas , the poet , reporter , brings his notebook into the studio , hears the beat , and weaves his portraits on top with ill precision . " Coval also comments on the rapper 's vignettes of inner-city life , which are depicted using elaborate rhyme structures : " All the words , faces and bodies of an abandoned post-industrial , urban dystopia are framed in Nas 's tightly packed stanzas . These portraits of his brain and community in handcuffs are beautiful , brutal and extremely complex , and they lend themselves to the complex and brillantly compounded rhyme schemes he employs . "

Illmatic also garnered praise for its production . According to critics , the album 's four major producers ( Large Professor , DJ Premier , Pete Rock , and Q-Tip ) extensively contributed to the cohesive atmospheric aesthetic that permeated the album , while still retaining each 's individual , trademark sound . ' For instance , DJ Premier 's production on the album is noted by critics for his minimalist style , which featured simple loops over heavy beats . Charles Aaron of Spin wrote of the producers ' contributions , " nudging him toward Rakim-like-rumination , they offer subdued , slightly downcast beats , which in hip hop today means jazz , primarily of the ' 70s keyboard-vibe variety " . Q magazine noted that " the musical backdrops are razor sharp ; hard beats but with melodic hooks and loops , atmospheric background piano , strings or muted trumpet , and samples ... A potent treat . " One music critic wrote that " Illmatic is laced with some of the finest beats this side of In Control Volume 1 " . The majority of the album consists of vintage funk , soul , and jazz samples . Commenting on the album and its use of samples , Pitchfork ' s Jeff Weiss claims that both Nas and his producers found inspiration for the album 's production through the music of their childhood : " The loops rummage through their parent 's collection : Donald Byrd , Joe Chambers , Ahmad Jamal , Parliament , Michael Jackson . Nas invites his rolling stone father , Olu Dara to blow the trumpet coda on " Life 's a Bitch " . Jazz rap fusion had been done well prior , but rarely with such subtlety . Nas didn 't need to make the connection explicit — he allowed you to understand what jazz was like the first time your parents and grandparents heard it . " Similarly , journalist Ben Yew comments on the album 's nostalgic sounds , " The production , accentuated by infectious organ loop [ s ] , vocal sample [ s ] , and synthesizer-like pads in the background , places your mind in a cheerful , reminiscent , mood . "

The intro , " The Genesis " , is composed as an aural montage that begins with the sound of an elevated train and an almost-inaudible voice rhyming beneath it . Over these sounds , a snatch of dialogue , two men arguing . It samples Grand Wizard Theodore 's " Subway Theme " from the 1983 film Wild Style , the first major hip hop motion picture . Nas made another ode to Wild Style , while shooting the music video for his single , " It Ain 't Hard to Tell " , on the same stage as the finale scene for the film . His verse on " Live at the Barbeque " is played in the background of " The Genesis " . According to music writer Mickey Hess , in the intro , " Nas tells us everything he wants us to know about him . The train is shorthand for New York ; the barely discernible rap is , in fact , his " Live at the Barbeque " verse ; and the dialogue comes from Wild Style , one of the earliest movies to focus on hip hop culture . Each of these is a point of genesis . New York for Nas as a person , ' Live at the Barbeque ' for Nas the rapper , and Wild Style , symbolically at least , for hip hop itself . These are my roots , Nas was saying , and he proceeded to demonstrate exactly what those roots had yielded . "

Setting the general grimy , yet melodic , tone of the album , " N.Y. State of Mind " features a dark , jazzy piano sample by DJ Premier . It opens with high-pitched guitar notes looped from jazz and funk musician Donald Byrd 's " Flight Time " ( 1972 ) , while the prominent groove of piano notes was sampled from the Joe Chambers composition " Mind Rain " ( 1978 ) . The lyrics of " N.Y. State of Mind " have Nas recounting his participation in gang violence and philosophizing that " Life is parallel to Hell , but I must maintain " , while his rapping spans over forty bars . " N.Y. State of Mind " focuses on a mind state that a person obtains from living in Nas 's impoverished environment in New York City . Critic Marc Hill of PopMatters wrote that the song " provides as clear a depiction of ghetto life as a Gordon Parks photograph or a Langston Hughes poem . " In other songs on Illmatic , Nas celebrates life 's pleasures and achievements , acknowledging violence as a feature of his socio-economic conditions rather than the focus of his life . " Life 's a Bitch " contains a sample of The Gap Band 's hit " Yearning for Your Love " ( 1980 ) , and has guest vocals from East New York-based rapper AZ . It also features Nas 's father , legendary jazz player Olu Dara , playing trumpet as the music fades out . A columnist for OhWord.com wrote that Dara 's contribution to the song provides a " beautifully wistful end to a track that feels drenched in the dying rays of a crimson sunset over the city . " " The World Is Yours " provides a more optimistic narrative from Nas 's viewpoint , as he cites political and spiritual leader Gandhi as an influence in its verse , in contrast to the previous Scarface references of " N.Y. State of Mind " . While citing " Life 's a Bitch " as " possibly the saddest hip-hop song ever recorded " , Rhapsody 's Sam Chennault wrote that " The World Is Yours " " finds optimism in the darkest urban crevices " . " The World Is Yours " was named the seventh greatest rap song by About.com.

The nostalgic " Memory Lane ( Sittin ' in da Park ) " contains a Reuben Wilson sample , which comprises the sound of a Hammond organ , guitar , vocals and percussion , and adds to the track 's ghostly harmonies . Spence D. of IGN wrote that the lyrics evoke " the crossroads of Old School and New School . " " One Love " is composed of a series of letters to incarcerated friends , recounting mutual acquaintances and events that have occurred since the receiver 's imprisonment , and address unfaithful girlfriends , emotionally tortured mothers , and underdog loyalty . The phrase " one love " signifies street loyalty in the song . After delivering " shout-outs to locked down comrades " , Nas chastises a youth who seems destined for prison in the final verse , " Shorty 's laugh was cold blooded as he spoke so foul / Only twelve tryin to tell me that he liked my style [ ... ] Words of wisdom from Nas , try to rise up above / Keep a eye out for Jake , shorty-wop , one love " . Produced by Q-Tip , " One Love " samples the double bass and piano from the Heath Brothers ' " Smilin ' Billy Suite Part II " ( 1975 ) and the drum break from Parliament 's " Come In Out the Rain " ( 1970 ) , complementing the track 's mystical and hypnotic soundscape .

" One Time 4 Your Mind " features battle rhyme braggadocio by Nas . With a similar vibe as " N.Y. State of Mind " , the rhythmic " Represent " has a serious tone , exemplified by Nas ' opening lines , " Straight up shit is real and any day could be your last in the jungle / get murdered on the humble , guns will blast and niggaz tumble " While the majority of the album consists of funk , soul and jazz samples , " Represent " contains a sample of " Thief of Bagdad " by organist Lee Erwin from the 1924 film of the same name . Nas discusses his lifestyle in an environment where he " loves committin ' sins " and " life ain 't shit , but stress , fake niggas and crab stunts " , while describing himself as " The brutalizer , crew de-sizer , accelerator / The type of nigga who be pissin ' in your elevator " . " It Ain 't Hard to Tell " is a braggadocio rap : " Vocals 'll squeeze glocks , MC 's eavesdrop / Though they need not to sneak / My poetry 's deep , I never fail / Nas 's raps should be locked in a cell " It opens with guitars and synths of Michael Jackson 's " Human Nature " ( 1983 ) ; the song 's vocals are sampled for the intro and chorus sections , creating a swirling mix of horns and tweaked-out voices . Large Professor looped in drum samples from Stanley Clarke 's " Slow Dance " ( 1978 ) and saxophone from Kool & the Gang 's " N.T. " ( 1971 ) .

On the vinyl and cassette pressings of Illmatic , Nas replaces the traditional Side A and Side B division with " 40th Side North " and “ 41st Side South , ” respectively – the main streets that form the geographic boundaries that divide the Queensbridge housing projects . Professor Sohail Daulatzai views this labeling as significant , since it transforms Illmatic into " a sonic map . " The album serves as the legend for Nas ’ s ghetto cartography , as he narrates his experiences and those who live in the Queensbridge ” In a 2009 interview with XXL , Nas discussed the purpose behind the album artwork among other promotional efforts , stating " Really the record had to represent everything Nasir Jones is about from beginning to end , from my album cover to my videos . My record company had to beg me to stop filmin ' music videos in the projects . No matter what the song was about I had ' em out there . That 's what it was all about for me , being that kid from the projects , being a poster child for that , that didn ’ t exist back then . "

The album cover of Illmatic features a picture of Nas as a child , which was taken after his father , musician Olu Dara , returned home from an overseas tour . The original cover was intended to have a picture of Nas holding Jesus Christ in a headlock , reflecting the religious imagery of Nas 's rap on " Live at the Barbeque " ; " When I was 12 , I went to hell for snuffing Jesus " . The accepted cover , designed by Aimee Macauley , features a photo of Nas as a child superimposed over a backdrop of a New York city block , taken by Danny Clinch . In a 1994 interview , Nas discussed the concept behind the photo of him at age 7 , stating " That was the year I started to acknowledge everything [ around me ] . That 's the year everything set off . That 's the year I started seeing the future for myself and doing what was right . The ghetto makes you think . The world is ours . I used to think I couldn 't leave my projects . I used to think if I left , if anything happened to me , I thought it would be no justice or I would be just a dead slave or something . The projects used to be my world until I educated myself to see there 's more out there . " As yet , Nas has not pointed to any outside influence for the artwork of his album cover . Yet according to Ego Trip , the cover of Illmatic is " reputedly " believed to have been inspired by a jazz album , Howard Hanger Trio 's A Child Is Born ( 1974 ) -- whose cover also features a photograph of a child , superimposed on an urban landscape .

Since its release , the cover art of Illmatic has also gained an iconic reputation - having been subject to numerous parodies and tributes . Music columnist Byron Crawford later called the cover for Illmatic " one of the dopest album covers ever in hip-hop . " Commenting on the cover 's artistic value , Rob Marriott of Complex writes , " Illmatic 's poignant cover matched the mood , tone , and qualities of this introspective album to such a high degree that it became an instant classic , hailed as a visual full of meaning and nuance . " XXL magazine called the album cover a " high art photo concept for a rap album " and described the artwork as a " noisy , confusing streetscape looking through the housing projects and a young boy superimposed in the center of it all . " The XXL columnist also compared the cover to that of rapper Lil Wayne 's sixth studio album Tha Carter III ( 2008 ) , stating that it also " reflects the reality of disenfranchised youth today . " On the song " Shark Niggas ( Biters ) " from his debut album Only Built 4 Cuban Linx ... ( 1995 ) , rapper Raekwon with Ghostface Killah criticized the cover of The Notorious B.I.G. ' s Ready to Die ( 1994 ) , which was released a few months after Illmatic , for featuring a picture of a baby with an afro , implying that his cover had copied the idea from Nas . This generated longstanding controversy between the rappers , resulting in an unpublicized feud which Nas later references in his 2002 album God 's Son , on the song " Last Real Nigga Alive . "

Illmatic was released on April 19 , 1994 through Columbia Records in the United States . The album also featured international distribution that same year in countries including France , the Netherlands , Canada and the United Kingdom . In its first week of release , Illmatic made its debut on the Billboard 200 albums chart at number 12 , while selling 59,000 copies . In spite of this , initial record sales fell below expectations . The album 's five radio singles failed to obtain considerable Billboard success , as each single did not gain significant charting on the Billboard Hot 100 . The lead single " Halftime " only charted on the Hot Rap Singles chart at number 8 , while " Life 's a Bitch " did not chart at all . The album also suffered from extensive bootlegging prior to its release . " Regional demand was so high , " writes music critic Jeff Weiss , " that Serch claimed he discovered a garage with 60,000 bootlegged copies . " While initial sales were low , the album was eventually certified gold in sales by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) on January 17 , 1996 after shipping 500,000 copies ; the RIAA later certified Illmatic platinum on December 11 , 2001 , following shipments in excess of one million copies . As of April 20 , 2014 , the album sold 1,686,000 copies in the US . In April 2002 , the album was also certified gold by the Canadian Recording Industry Association for shipments in excess of 50,000 copies in Canada .

Illmatic received universal acclaim from contemporary music critics , who hailed it as a hip hop masterpiece . NME called its music " rhythmic perfection " , and Greg Kot of the Chicago Tribune cited it as the best hardcore hip hop album " out of the East Coast in years " . Dimitri Ehrlich of Entertainment Weekly credited Nas for giving his neighborhood " proper respect " while establishing himself and said that the clever lyrics and harsh beats " draw listeners into the borough 's lifestyle with poetic efficiency . " Touré , writing for Rolling Stone , hailed Nas as an elite rapper because of his articulation , detailed lyrics , and Rakim-like tone , all of which he said " pair [ Illmatic 's ] every beautiful moment with its harsh antithesis . " Christopher John Farley of Time praised the album as a " wake-up call to [ Nas ' ] listeners " and commended him for rendering rather than glorifying " the rough world he comes from " . USA Today 's James T. Jones IV cited his lyrics as " the most urgent poetry since Public Enemy 's " and also commended Nas for honestly depicting dismal ghetto life without resorting to the sensationalism and misogyny of contemporary gangsta rappers . Richard Harrington of The Washington Post praised Nas for " balancing limitations and possibilities , distinguishing hurdles and springboards , and acknowledging his own growth from roughneck adolescent to a maturing adult who can respect and criticize the culture of violence that surrounds him " .

In a mixed review , Heidi Siegmund of the Los Angeles Times found most of Illmatic hampered by " tired attitudes and posturing " , and interpreted its acclaim from East Coast critics as " an obvious attempt to wrestle hip-hop away from the West " . Charles Aaron of Spin felt that the comparisons to Rakim " will be more deserved " if Nas can expand on his ruminative lyrics with " something more personally revealing " . In his review for Playboy , Robert Christgau called it " New York 's typically spare and loquacious entry in the post-gangsta sweepstakes " and recommended it to listeners who " crave full-bore authenticity without brutal posturing " . A February 19 , 2014 Village Voice cover story ranked Illmatic as the Most New York City album ever .

Upon its release , The Source gave Illmatic a five mic rating , their highest rating and a prestigious achievement at the time , given the magazine 's influence in the hip hop community . Jon Shecter , co-founder of The Source , had received a copy of the album eight months before its scheduled release , after which he raved about it , and soon lobbied for it to receive a five mic rating . In his twitter blog , Schecter recounts hearing Illmatic in a meeting with editors on the staff : It 's about 9pm … I get to the office and I gather all the heads in the conference room . I remember who was there : @ MatteoGlen [ the twitter account of Matty C , then The Source 's " Unsigned Hype " editor ] @ CeeWild [ twitter account of Chris Wilder , another editor ] , @ FrozenFiles [ twitter account of Schott ' Free ' Jacobs , another contemporary editor ] . Everyone is nodding their heads , eyes wide , mouths open , it 's hip-hop paradise . We had a pretty shitty system in there but it didn ’ t matter , I pop in the tape and the powerful musical magic emits from the speakers . When those funky / eerie / powerful xylophone notes from ' One Love ' come on , I remember @ FrozenFiles is literally lying on the floor … He can ’ t comprehend how good it is . None of us can . It 's the best shit we ’ ve heard in our lives … Internally , we start debating how we ’ re gonna handle this . I say right away that it 's gotta get a " 5 "

Eventually , the review for Illmatic was handled by the magazine 's columnist Minya Oh ( then writing under the nom de plume , " shortie " ) , who shared Schecter 's enthusiasm for Nas 's album . In her review of Illmatic , Minyah wrote , " I must maintain this is one of the best hip-hop albums I have ever heard " and wrote of its content , " Lyrically , the whole shit is on point . No cliched metaphors , no gimmicks . Never too abstract , never superficial . " She also commented on the impact of Nas 's " poetic realism " writing : “ Nas ’ images remind me of the personal memories and people , both passed and present … All this may sound like melodrama but it not just me . I 've been hearing similar responses all over . While ' Memory Lane ' is my shit , my homies claim ' The World Is Yours , ' and if you 've got peoples doing time , then ' One Love ' may hit you the hardest . " . With the backing of Schecter and the other editors on the staff , Minya awarded Illmatic with the magazine 's highest rating .

At the time , it was unheard of for a debuting artist to receive the coveted rating . Author Matthew Gasteier writes , “ It 's difficult to overestimate the impact of receiving the five out of five mics , the first such rating given to any new release by the magazine since its then-editor Reginald Dennis put a moratorium on them . " Reginald Dennis , former music editor of the magazine and XXL co-founder , later recounted , " Awarding records 5 mics – classic status – has always been , on some levels , troubling to me . I mean , we are not only saying that a particular piece of music is superior to everything that is out now , but it will be better than most things released in the future as well [ ... ] I only gave one 5 under my watch and it went to Nas 's Illmatic . " Dennis cited it as " the only time I ever broke the ' no 5 ' rule " and added , " I told Jon that we 'd work all of that stuff out when it was time to review the album . But everyday , Jon was like , ' yo , this album is 5 mics — seriously , Reg , 5 mics ! '

The rating did not come without its share of controversy . Reginald Dennis described to the reaction that followed Minya Oh 's review : " I was happy , Jon was happy , Nas was happy , everybody was happy — except for all of the people who felt that The Chronic should have also gotten a 5 . " Only two years prior , Dr. Dre 's groundbreaking The Chronic failed to earn the coveted rating , despite redefining the musical landscape of hip hop . It was later revealed that while everybody at the magazine knew it was an instant classic , they decided to comply with the strict policy of staying away from a perfect rating . Subsequently , when Nas 's album was exempted from this moratorium , many fans pointed to this decision as a confirmation of journalistic bias towards East Coast hip hop . Despite receiving criticism over his staff 's earlier review of The Chronic , Reginald Dennis continues to defend the decision to award Illmatic with the magazine 's highest rating : " I ’ m just happy that Illmatic is universally acclaimed as a classic , so no one can accuse me of dropping the ball ... And if I hadn ’ t gone through what I did with The Chronic , I wouldn ’ t have had the flexibility to allow for the bending of my policy . So I think it all worked out well . ”

Since its initial reception , Illmatic has been viewed by music writers as one of the quintessential hip hop recordings of the 1990s , while its rankings near the top of many publications ' " best album " lists in disparate genres have given it a reputation as one of the greatest hip hop albums of all time . Jon Pareles of The New York Times cited Illmatic as a " milestone in trying to capture the ' street ghetto essence ' " . The album has been described by a number of writers and critics as " classic " . Chris Ryan , writing in The New Rolling Stone Album Guide ( 2004 ) , called Illmatic " a portrait of an artist as a hood , loner , tortured soul , juvenile delinquent , and fledgling social critic , " and wrote that it " still stands as one of rap 's crowning achievements " . Similar to The Source 's initial sentiment , XXL later gave the album a classic " XXL " rating in a retrospective review . In a retrospective review for MSN Music , Christgau said the record was " better than I thought at the time for sure — as happens with aesthetes sometimes , the purists heard subtleties principled vulgarians like me were disinclined to enjoy " , although he still found it inferior to The Notorious B.I.G. ' s debut album Ready to Die ( 1994 ) . In 2002 , Prefix Mag 's Matthew Gasteier re-examined Illmatic and its musical significance , stating :

Illmatic is the best hip-hop record ever made . Not because it has ten great tracks with perfect beats and flawless rhymes , but because it encompasses everything great about hip-hop that makes the genre worthy of its place in music history . Stylistically , if every other hip-hop record were destroyed , the entire genre could be reconstructed from this one album . But in spirit , Illmatic can just as easily be compared to Ready to Die , It Takes a Nation of Millions to Hold Us Back , and Enter the Wu-Tang as it can to Rites of Spring , A Hard Day 's Night , Innervisions , and Never Mind the Bollocks . In Illmatic , you find the meaning not just of hip-hop , but of music itself : the struggle of youth to retain its freedom , which is ultimately the struggle of man to retain his own essence . Illmatic has been included in numerous publications ' " best album " lists in disparate genres . Pitchfork listed the album at number 33 on its list of the Top 100 Albums of the 1990s , and the publication 's columnist Hartley Goldstein called the album " the meticulously crafted essence of everything that makes hip-hop music great ; it 's practically a sonic strand of the genre 's DNA . " It was listed as one of 33 hip hop / R & B albums in Rolling Stone 's " Essential Recordings of the 90s " . It was ranked number five in " The Critics Top 100 Black Music Albums of All Time " and number three in Hip Hop Connection 's " Top 100 Readers Poll " . The album was also ranked number four in Vibe 's list of the Top 10 Rap Albums and number two on MTV 's list of The Greatest Hip Hop Albums of All Time . In 1998 , it was selected as one of The Source 's 100 Best Rap Albums . In 2003 , Rolling Stone ranked the album number 400 on its list of The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time ; it was ranked number 314 in a revised list in 2012 . On March 30 , 2004 , Illmatic was remastered and re-released with a bonus disc of remixes and new material produced by Marley Marl and Large Professor , in commemoration of its tenth anniversary . Upon its 2004 re-release , Marc Hill of PopMatters dubbed it " the greatest album of all time " and stated , " Ten years after its release , Illmatic stands not only as the best hip-hop album ever made , but also one of the greatest artistic productions of the twentieth century . " The album was also included in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die .

Illmatic has been noted as one of the most influential hip hop albums of all time , with pundits describing it as an archetypal East Coast hip hop album . Jeff Weiss of Pitchfork writes : " No album better reflected the sound and style of New York , 94 . The alembic of soul jazz samples , SP-1200s , broken nose breaks , and raw rap distilled the Henny , no chaser ideal of boom bap . " Citing Illmatic as part of a string of notable albums released in 1994 , David Drake of Stylus Magazine writes " This was the critical point for the East Coast , a time when rappers from the New York area were releasing bucketloads of thrilling work " . John Bush of Allmusic compares Illmatic to another DJ Premier production , The Sun Rises in the East ( 1994 ) , as " one of the quintessential East Coast records " . Along with the critical acclaim of the Wu-Tang Clan 's debut album Enter the Wu-Tang ( 36 Chambers ) ( 1993 ) and the success of The Notorious B.I.G. ' s debut Ready to Die ( 1994 ) , Illmatic was also instrumental in restoring interest in the East Coast hip hop scene . " Rarely has the birthplace of hip-hop , " wrote Rob Marriott of Complex , " been so unanimous in praise of a rap record and the MC who made it . " As Nas later recounted : " It felt amazing to be accepted by New York City in that way ... at the time a lot of West Coast hip-hop was selling ; East Coast wasn 't selling as much , especially for a new artist . So back then you couldn 't tell in the sales , but you could tell in the streets " .

Illmatic has been noted as a creative high point for East Coast hip hop , since it featured production from renowned New York-based producers Large Professor , Pete Rock and DJ Premier . The album solidified the reputation of these producers , whose contributions to Illmatic became influential in shaping the soundscape of New York 's regional scene . According to music writer Rob Marriott , Illmatic helped to establish DJ Premier as " the go-to producer for the jazz-and-blues-inflected knock that became so central to East Coast sound . " Following the album 's release , hip hop artists increasingly began to draw upon a broad stable of producers for their projects . At the time , the assembly of big-name producers was unprecedented , since most hip hop albums had primarily been the work of one dedicated producer and sometimes an embedded production team . Yet author Adam Mansbach reflects on the impact of Illmatic 's noteworthy producers , writing : " The psychological impact on the listener of having all these elite producers – some of whom , like Q-Tip , really weren ’ t known yet for doing outside production work at all – coming together to lace the debut of this kid from Queensbridge was tremendous . " This same template would also be used by other successful East Coast rappers . In an article on New York hip hop , Mosi Reeves of Creative Loafing wrote that " Nas ' Illmatic . . . is the first to draw together top hip hop producers in the recording industry . That formula , most successfully mined by the late Notorious B.I.G. ( 1997 's Life After Death ) , Puff Daddy ( 1997 's No Way Out ) and Jay-Z ( 1998 's Vol . 2 ... Hard Knock Life ) , is what most N.Y. prospects still use today . " Jon Caramanica of The New York Times writes that after Illmatic 's release , “ [ I ] t became commonplace for rappers to search around for different producers who could enhance their sound . "

Yet while hip-hop artists continue to draw upon this template for album production , the practice has earned some criticism . In an article titled , " How Nas ' " Illmatic " Ruined Hip-Hop , " Insanul Ahmed of Complex argues that one " unintended consequence " of Illmatic was the overall decline in the cohesion and quality of rap albums : " Next thing you knew , rap albums started having a different producer for every song . And like a film that has a different director for every scene , albums became unfocused affairs . This also meant that producers weren ’ t tied to artists anymore . "

Illmatic is also credited with reviving the Queensbridge rap scene . Once home to prestigious pioneers such as Marley Marl , MC Shan , Roxanne Shanté , Queensbridge had been one of the most productive hip hop scenes in the country during the 1980s . In an April 2006 article , an XXL columnist wrote of the history and impact of the Queensbridge hip hop scene , stating " Since the 1980s , New York City 's Queensbridge Housing Projects has been documented perhaps better than any other geographic location . Starting with super producer Marley Marl 's dominant Juice Crew in the ’ 80s all the way through ’ 90s mainstays like Nas , Cormega and Capone , the Bridge has produced the highest per-capita talent of any ’ hood . " Yet during the early 1990s , the Queensbridge rap scene was otherwise stagnant . According to Nas : " I was coming from the legacy of Marley Marl , MC Shan , Juice Crew kind of vibe . Knowing these guys out in the neighborhood . At that time , the Queensbridge scene was dead . Dropping that album right there said a lot for me to carry on the legacy of the Queensbridge pioneers . "

Following Illmatic 's release , Queensbridge returned to prominence after years of obscurity , with the ascendancy of the influential hardcore rap group , Mobb Deep ( who gained credibility due to their affiliation with Nas ) and later with the emergence of the trend-setting duo , Capone-n-Noreaga . Nas appeared on Mobb Deep 's critically acclaimed studio album The Infamous ( 1995 ) . Furthermore , the album is credited with launching the career of the East New York-based rapper , AZ . AZ , who gained instant exposure and underground credibility due to his appearance on " Life 's a Bitch " , became a frequent collaborator of Nas , who appeared on his debut album Doe or Die ( 1995 ) .

Illmatic was one of the first major recordings to emerge from New York 's burgeoning hardcore hip hop scene , at a time when much of East Coast hip hop was still dominated by alternative hip hop acts such as A Tribe Called Quest and De La Soul ( groups often known for their jazz-inspired production and playful sensibilities ) . Adam Heimlich of The New York Press comments on the appeal of alternative hip-hop in New York City 's music scene , and points out that , " In 1994 , there appeared likely to be more money ( and definitely more cultural rewards ) in working with Arrested Development or Digable Planets . " Yet according to Heimlich , Illmatic provided an " explosive , explicit rejection of the cultural assimilation of most previous hip-hop , " due to its rugged use of language and its uncompromising portrayal of crime . Heimlich cites Nas ' role in the resurgent hardcore movement , writing : " [ Nas ] came on the scene as hardcore 's golden child . Along with Wu-Tang Clan , Nas and Mobb Deep . . . all but invented 90s New York rap , back when the notion of an ' East Coast gangsta ' still meant Schoolly D or Kool G. Rap . Those three ... designed the manner and style in which New York artists would address what Snoop and Dre had made rap 's hottest topics : drugs and violence . " Similarly , Duke University Professor , Mark Anthony Neal , writes , “ Nas was at the forefront of a renaissance of East Coast hip hop ” in which “ ... a distinct East Coast style of so-called gangsta rap appeared , ” as heard in similarly styled recordings such as Wu-Tang Clan 's “ C.R.E.A.M. ” and Notorious B.I.G. ' s " Everyday Struggle " .

According to Steve Huey of Allmusic , while Illmatic contains strong elements of jazz rap , it nonetheless signaled a major regional shift towards hardcore aesthetics , marking " the beginning of a shift away from Native Tongues-inspired alternative rap . " Professor Sohail Dalautzai of the University of Southern California comments on Illmatic 's indebtedness to hardcore hip hop : “ [ B ] ecause in bridging the gap and embodying the street swagger of Kool G Rap , the metaphysics of Rakim , and the revolutionary lumpen philosophies of Ice Cube , Nas ... unified the disparate threads of urban rebellion that were conflagrating from hip-hop 's street corner ciphers . ”

The critical acclaim surrounding the album also helped to shift attention away from the melodious , synth-driven , and funk-induced G-funk subgenre , which dominated the charts for some time after Dr. Dre 's The Chronic ( 1992 ) . Citing the example of Snoop Dogg 's wildly popular Doggystyle ( released six months prior to Nas ' debut ) author Matthew Gasteier writes , " The first thing immediately noticeable about the [ Source magazine ] review , is that , like essentially every other review about Illmatic in publications like Vibe , Spin , Rolling Stones , and The New York Times , it mentions Snoop Doggy Dogg 's Doggystyle in the first paragraph . " That nearly every reviewer felt the need to contextualize their response to Illmatic within the frame of West Coast G-Funk " is a reminder of just how pervasive the style was within the hip hop world and the music community as a whole . " Yet according to writer Mickey Hess , Illmatic was among those East Coast records that helped " create sparse , rough and rugged soundscapes that clearly differed from Dre 's multi-layered melodies . " As Allmusic 's Steve Huey writes , " It helped spearhead the artistic renaissance of New York hip hop in the post-Chronic era , leading a return to street aesthetics . " Contrasting these aesthetics with the themes found in G-Funk , writer and filmmaker Dream Hampton writes , " Illmatic was a dirty bomb thrown at the orchestral sonic soundtrack that was The Chronic ... This wasn ’ t a backyard bikini barbeque where the Ohio Players and DJ Quik were mashed up ; this was a three-month bid on Rikers Island , a dirty dice game , blunts of brown Brooklyn sparked in the park after dark . "

Despite these regional differences , Hampton credits Illmatic with providing a common artistic ground for rappers on the West Coast and East Coast rap scenes . In the 2009 essay " Born Alone , Die Alone , " she recounts the album 's impact on West Coast artist , Tupac Shakur . While working as a journalist for The Source in 1994 , Hampton covered three court cases involving Tupac . Around this time , she received an advance-copy of Illmatic and immediately dubbed a cassette version for Tupac , who became " an instant convert " of the album . The next day , she writes , Tupac " arrived in his assigned courtroom blasting Illmatic so loudly that the bailiff yelled at him to turn it off before the judge took his seat on the bench . " In her essay , Hampton implies that Nas ' lyricism might have influenced Tupac 's acclaimed album , Me Against the World , which was recorded that same year . West Coast artist The Game also recounts the impact of Illmatic for fans like himself outside of New York . In his collaboration with Nas on " Hustlers " ( 2006 ) , he retells an episode taking place during his youth , where he decided to shoplift both Illmatic and The Chronic : " 1995 , eleven years from the day / I 'm in the record shop with choices to make Illmatic on the top shelf , The Chronic on the left , homie / Wanna cop both but only got a twenty on me / So fuck it , I stole both , spent the twenty on a dub-sack / Ripped the package of Illmatic and bumped that / For my niggas it was too complex when Nas rhymed / I was the only Compton nigga with a New York State of Mind "

During the time of its release , Illmatic brought a renewed focus on lyricism to hip hop — hearkening back to the heyday of Kool G Rap , Big Daddy Kane , and Rakim . Music journalist Kelefa Sanneh of The New York Times wrote of Illmatic , stating that Nas " perfected a dense , rat-a-tat rhyme style that built upon the legacy of 1980s pioneers like Rakim and Big Daddy Kane . " In his book To the Break of Dawn : A Freestyle on the Hip Hop Aesthetic , William Jelani Cobb writes of Nas ' impact on lyricism and the comparisons to eminent rapper Rakim at the time : Nas , the poetic sage of the Queensbridge projects , was hailed as the second coming of Rakim — as if the first had reached his expiration date . [ ... ] Nas never became ' the next Rakim , ' nor did he really have to . Illmatic stood on its own terms . The sublime lyricism of the CD , combined with the fact that it was delivered into the crucible of the boiling East-West conflict , quickly solidified [ his ] reputation as the premier writer of his time .

Despite its initial low sales , the album had a profound impact on the hip hop underground circuit , and marked a major stylistic change in hip hop music by introducing a new standard of lyricism . Before the album 's release , hip-hop lyricism was mostly defined by two popular forms . One was characterized by a fast-paced ragga-flow accompanied with a whimsical , often nonsensical lyrical delivery , and had been popularized by the Brooklyn-based groups Das EFX and The Fu-Schnickens . The other was characterized by a slurred " lazy drawl " that sacrificed lyrical complexity for clarity and rhythmic cadence , and was exemplified by West Coast hip hop emcees including Snoop Doggy Dogg and Warren G. However , Nas ' content , verbal pace , and intricate internal rhyme patterns inspired several rappers to modify their lyrical abilities . Music critic Rob Marriott notes , " [ R ] appers like Mobb Deep , Tragedy Khadafi , Nature , Cormega , Noreaga , Capone , Raekwon , Ghostface , and even the Windy City wordsmith Common seemed to find new inspiration in Nas ' self awareness , internal rhyme schemes , and mastery of street detail . " Marriott also describes the impact of Illmatic 's " poetic approach " on Jay-Z , writing : " The Brooklyn MC switched his style up from his fast-talking Jaz-O days enough to produce Reasonable Doubt , an album marked by Nas-like introspection ... "

Many rappers have taken note of Illmatic 's influence on their lyricism . Ghostface Killah recounted , “ When I used to listen to Nas back in the days , it was like , ‘ Oh shit ! He murdered that . ’ That forced me to get my pen game up ... The whole Illmatic album forced you to go ahead and do shit ... It was inspiration . " Detroit rapper Elzhi states , " [ A ] round the time Nas did Illmatic , it made me wanna step my game up ... He 's one of the reasons I did go off into storytelling because his pictures were so vivid . When he displayed his rhyme schemes and his word play and his songs , it made me wanna create visual pictures as well . " Casey Veggies also recounts the impact Nas ' lyricism had on his own work as an underground rapper in the 2000s : “ I [ got into ] Illmatic when I was 14 , 15 . I didn ’ t get onto to it till late , but when I did , that 's probably the only thing I listened to for six months to a year ... After I got heavy on Illmatic , I put out Sleeping In Class ( 2010 ) . That 's when I really tried to sharpen my skills and get better . ”

In addition to his rapping , Nas achieved significance for his poetic use of language . Professor Adilifu Nama of California State University Northridge writes , “ With Illmatic , hip-hop witnessed the birth of an urban griot telling hard-boiled tales of ghetto alienation and triumph like a spoken-word of a Chester Himes novel " Author and music writer Todd Boyd wrote of Nas ' urban realism , stating that his " poetic lyrics are some of the most poignant words ever to describe the postindustrial urban experience . His spoken-word like delivery and his vivid use of metaphor placed him at the top of the game in terms of overall skills as an MC and as a cultural commentator . " An OhWord.com columnist similarly described Nas as a " genius introvert who rose out of the rubble of Reaganomics to bless the mic with a forward brand of introspective , redemptive street poetry " . Princeton University professor Imani Perry also describes Illmatic as " ars poetica , a definitive statement for the art of hip-hop poetry . " According to author and poet Kevin Coval , Nas “ raise [ d ] the bar for MCs ” by advancing his lyricism “ from punch lines and hot lines to whole thought pictures manifest in rhyme form . ” Together with Paul Beatty ’ s seminal collection of poems , Joker Joker Deuce ( 1994 ) Coval cites the release of Illmatic as a " generational moment " that marked the development of hip hop poetry . Just as hip-hop poetics were being written and published for the first time on paper , Nas provided a sonic production that definitively captured " the poetic response " to hip hop music . “ It is from this point on , ” he writes , “ that style , technique and craft merge with collage / pastiche , braggadocio , stark portrait-painting from the margins , frenetic , fun and funny wordplay , and the rupture of linear storytelling schemes . These become tropes in a burgeoning school of American letters that 's moving toward an aesthetics of hip-hop poetics . "

Many of the poetic tropes found in Illmatic have also become terms and phrases within hip-hop lexicon . " ' The World Is Yours , ' Nas ' reference to the blimp in Scarface , " writes Rob Marriott , " has remained a trope hip-hop has taken to heart ... Even the word " Illmatic " itself [ ... ] became synonymous with anything surprisingly excellent , street-born and / or out of left field . " In 2013 , music writer Jeff Weiss commented on the extensive vernacular usage of Illmatic , writing : " The phrases and images are so deeply rooted in rap consciousness to have become cliché . Over the last 19 years , a million secret handshakes and scratched hooks have been executed to lines from Illmatic . "

Many respected mainstream and underground rappers have acknowledged Illmatic 's influence . These wide range of artists include the battle rappers , SunN.Y. and Reef The Lost Cauze , conscious rappers Talib Kweli and Lupe Fiasco , the producers Just Blaze and 9th Wonder , as well as the platinum-selling artists Wiz Khalifa , Alicia Keys and The Game , who makes references to the album on his debut , The Documentary In 2006 , Illmatic was featured in a list of acclaimed hip hop albums , compiled by Clipse . Malice , a member of the hip hop duo , claimed : " Illmatic captured the whole New York state of mind for me . It embraced everything I knew New York to be . The album had 10 songs , all of them flawless . Me and my homies got great memories of rolling around listening to that , huslin ' , smokin ' , chillin ' . That embodied everything that was right with hip-hop . That CD never came out my deck . " Speaking in 2012 , British producer , DJ Semtex described Illmatic as " an exemplary album of perfection that forced the evolution of lyricism and production values within hip hop . Eighteen years later it remains omnipotent . "

In 2006 , Marc Mac of the electronic music duo 4hero , produced a cover version of " The World Is Yours " as part of his jazz and hip-hip fusion project , The Visioneers . Lyrics from Illmatic have also been sampled by other rappers , most notably Big L 's " Ebonics " ( which samples " It Ain 't Hard to Tell " ) , Milkbone 's " Keep It Real " ( which samples " Life 's a Bitch " ) , Real Live 's " Real Live Shit " ( which samples " It Ain 't Hard to Tell " ) , Damu the Fudgemunk 's " Prosper " ft . Raw Poetic ( which samples " N.Y. State of Mind " ) , Blu & Exile 's " In Remembrance " ( which samples " The World Is Yours " and " One Love " ) , Mac Miller 's " Nikes On My Feet " ( which samples " The World Is Yours " ) and Jay-Z 's " Rap Game / Crack Game " ( which samples " Represent " ) and " Dead Presidents II " ( which samples " The World Is Yours " ) .

Since its release , Illmatic has become a benchmark for upcoming rappers whose albums are widely anticipated by critics . Hip hop pundits have viewed debut albums as crucial in generating publicity and shaping the legacy of an artist 's career . Given the historic anticipation and acclaim surrounding Nas ' debut , Illmatic has become a byword for this sort of phenomenon . As one columnist for the Complex Magazine writes , " Think about the question that pops into your head whenever a new rapper drops his first album : ' Is it the next Illmatic ? ' " In 2012 , the release of Kendrick Lamar 's album , Good Kid , M.A.A.D City , drew comparisons to Illmatic from critics and journalists . In an interview with 2 Dope Boyz , Lamar commented on these comparisons , stating : “ Illmatic ? For people to even put my album in the light of that , is an accomplishment . It 's crazy to even be mentioned with it but it 's scary at the same time ... That era – I wanna say the age range now would be 30 , 30 to 40 – they can recognize this was the album . Illmatic ’ s the album for the ’ 90s era when I was growing up ... it 's just a weird feeling to be in that same type of light , ‘ cus it takes a whole lot of responsibility to keep that up in the long run and longevity , and that 's something I don ’ t have yet … so Illmatic will always be # 1 . ”

Illmatic has also been cited as a musical template for other hip hop artists . Common 's critically acclaimed album Be ( 2005 ) has been said to have been molded after Illmatic . In 2010 , underground hip hop artist Fashawn released the mixtape Ode to Illmatic to " pay homage , ' cause Illmatic was one of them kinda albums that really impacted my life ” . Detroit rapper Elzhi released a remake of Illmatic titled Elmatic ( 2011 ) . Taking note of a trend of tributes to Illmatic in 2011 , Richard Watson of The Guardian wrote , " To quote Nasir Jones himself ... ' It Ain 't Hard To Tell ' why today 's rappers are paying tribute to his debut album . Illmatic has become a totem , a work that both looked back into hip-hop history and pointed towards its future . "

Illmatic has also received notable attention from scholars and authors outside the music industry . Since its release , the album has become the subject of scholarship within academic and literary circles . In 2009 , as part of the 33 ⅓ book series , author Matthew Gasteier published a deconstruction of Illmatic , that focuses on the dualities that inform its narratives . In 2012 , playwright Shaun Neblett created a tribute play titled Homage 3 : Illmatic , which tells the story of an aspiring artist and explores the themes found in Nas ' debut . " [ A ] s its title suggests , " writes one reviewer , " ... the play is completely based on and acts as a tribute to Nas ’ Illmatic album . The rappers ’ bars come alive on stage through Homage 3 , which deliberately shows how intellectually well-versed Nas truly is , and much bigger than that , how much Hip-Hop has to offer , culturally , outside of the radio , clubs and the street . " Illmatic is also the focus of a significant work of hip-hop scholarship , Born to Use Mics : Reading Nas 's Illmatic ( 2009 ) , edited by Michael Eric Dyson and Sohail Daulatzai . With contributions from figures such as Greg Tate , Adam Mansbach , Eddie Glaude , Dream Hampton , Marc Lamont Hill , and Suheir Hammad , Born to Use Mics ... is the first academic project to assemble a group of scholars , poets , filmmakers , journalists , novelists , and musicians to reflect on a specific hip hop album . In the introduction , Daulatzai explains the singular focus on Illmatic , writing :

[ S ] ome might ask , why Illmatic ? Why not Boogie Down Productions ’ Criminal Minded , Public Enemy ’ s It Takes a Nation to Hold Us Back , or Ice Cube ’ s AmeriKKKa 's Most Wanted ? No doubt these were great albums , coming at a moment when hip hop was cutting its teeth on social commentary and refining its ear on dusty breaks , hard snares , and sonic mayhem . But there is something about Illmatic that transcends the categories that have ever existed about hip-hop . Something complex about its simplicity , something elusive that we felt we wanted to explore . Straight up though , Illmatic is just a dope album , embodying everything that is hip-hop while mastering what matters most : beats and rhymes .

Illmatic has also helped to shape the attitudes and perceptions of hip hop fans , who cherish it as a music template that defines the genre 's conventions . As music critic Jeff Weiss writes , “ Illmatic is the gold standard that boom-bap connoisseurs refer to in the same way that Baby Boomers talk about Highway 61 Revisited . The evidence they point to when they want to say : this is how good it can be . ” New York Times columnist Jon Caramanica also credits the album with inadvertently spawning hip hop 's counterculture . " Illmatic " he writes , " mobilized a national network of dissidents craving something true to the streets but eager to distance themselves from what was beginning to be perceived as a scourge – gangster rap . " According to Caramanica , Nas ' debut was received by these fans as a " rebuke " towards trends that were beginning to shape mainstream rap : " the pop crossover , the exuberant production values , [ and ] the splintering of rap into blithe and concerned wings . " For this reason , Caramanica considers Illmatic to be " unusually significant to the intellectual development of the [ hip-hop ] genre " yet he also remains critical of the divisiveness spawned by its " zealots . " In his essay , " ' Night Time is More Trife Than Ever ' : The Many Misuses of Nas , " he writes : " Illmatic is responsible for countless pointless ' rap versus hip-hop debates , ' a shocking amount of hip-hop self-righteousness , the emergence of the backpack movement as something more than a regional curio , and the persistence of the idea that lyricism is the only standard great rap music should be held to . " Commenting on these polarized debates , Jeff Weiss suggests that Illmatic is " best heard by ignoring the dogma , culture wars , Nas clones , and would-be saviors that have accreted since April of 1994 . Who cares whether it 's the greatest rap album of all-time or not ? It 's an example of how great rap can be , but not necessarily the way it should be . " '

While its success helped Nas ' career immeasurably , hip hop aficionados have cited the album as his inextricable " gift and curse " . Due to its critical fame , Nas ' subsequent studio albums have been weighed against Illmatic , despite all of them outselling his debut . Against this standard , they are often critically deemed as mediocre follow-ups . After manager Steve Stoute convinced Nas to aim his efforts in a more commercial direction for his follow-up album It Was Written ( 1996 ) , he enlisted the production team Trackmasters , who were known for their mainstream work at the time . It was criticized for its embrace of gangsta / mafioso themes and materialistic subject matter , but proved to be a commercial success , selling over three million copies . Critics gave it mixed reviews , and general consensus was that it failed to live up to the classic status of Illmatic . Many fans of Illmatic labeled his subsequent efforts as ' selling out ' , due to his crossover sensibilities ( e.g. his participation with the hip hop group The Firm ) and radio-friendly hits aimed at the pop charts , such as " If I Ruled the World ( Imagine That ) " ( 1996 ) and " Hate Me Now " ( 1999 ) .

When he released his third and fourth studio albums , I Am … and Nastradamus ( 1999 ) , which underwent editing due to bootlegging of the recording sessions , many fans and critics feared that his career was deteriorating , as both albums received further criticism for their commercially oriented sound . Reflecting this widespread perception in the hip hop community and adding to his ongoing feud with Nas at the time , Jay-Z mocked him in the song " Takeover " ( 2001 ) for having a " one hot album [ Illmatic ] every ten year average " . A journalist writing for The Source commented on the demanding legacy of Nas ' debut : " Blame excellence , blame perfection and aggression . Blame one of hip-hop 's most beautiful moments for the prison that traps Nasir Jones today – blame Illmatic . " Nas , however , made something of a comeback with his fifth album Stillmatic ( 2001 ) and the acclaimed follow-up God 's Son ( 2002 ) , as well as The Lost Tapes ( 2002 ) , a compilation of previously unreleased tracks from the I Am … and Nastradamus sessions . Afterwards , his subsequent albums have all been well received by critics . Nevertheless , most fans have regarded Illmatic as his definitive album .

In 2011 , Nas performed the album in its entirety at Rock the Bells music festival . The show featured the album 's personnel , including Pete Rock , DJ Premier , and AZ , and a stage design depicting the urban landscape of Queensbridge , with graffiti-lined streets , a subway entrance , and models of Queensbridge 's housing project . In 2012 , he also performed the album in its entirety at South by Southwest music festival , with the same personnel and stage design . Illmatic will be reissued as a deluxe CD bundled with a 48-page hardcover book featuring photos , reproduced artwork , lyrics , and liner notes courtesy of The Source founder Jon Schecter . In 2014 Nas announced Illmatic XX , the 20th Anniversary Edition of the original album Illmatic , released April 15 , 4 days prior to the 20th Anniversary of the original 's release date ( April 19 ) . Illmatic XX includes a remastered version of Illmatic , an extra disc of demos , remixes , and unreleased records from that era of Nas ' career . He also announced his plans for a tour where he will perform the whole album front to back on each stop .

The Second Arab siege of Constantinople in 717 – 718 ( 98 – 100 AH ) was a combined land and sea offensive by the Muslim Arabs of the Umayyad Caliphate against the capital city of the Byzantine Empire , Constantinople . The campaign marked the culmination of twenty years of attacks and progressive Arab occupation of the Byzantine borderlands , while Byzantine strength was sapped by prolonged internal turmoil . In 716 , after years of preparations , the Arabs , led by Maslama ibn Abd al-Malik , invaded Byzantine Asia Minor . The Arabs initially hoped to exploit Byzantine civil strife and made common cause with the general Leo III the Isaurian , who had risen up against Emperor Theodosius III . Leo , however , tricked them and secured the Byzantine throne for himself . After wintering in the western coastlands of Asia Minor , the Arab army crossed into Thrace in early summer 717 and built siege lines to blockade the city , which was protected by the massive Theodosian Walls . The Arab fleet , which accompanied the land army and was meant to complete the city 's blockade by sea , was neutralized soon after its arrival by the Byzantine navy through the use of Greek fire . This allowed Constantinople to be resupplied by sea , while the Arab army was crippled by famine and disease during the unusually hard winter that followed . In spring 718 , two Arab fleets sent as reinforcements were destroyed by the Byzantines after their Christian crews defected , and an additional army sent overland through Asia Minor was ambushed and defeated . Coupled with attacks by the Bulgars on their rear , the Arabs were forced to lift the siege on 15 August 718 . On its return journey , the Arab fleet was almost completely destroyed by natural disasters and Byzantine attacks .

Following the first Arab siege of Constantinople ( 674 – 678 ) , the Arabs and Byzantines experienced a period of peace . After 680 , the Umayyad Caliphate was in the throes of the Second Muslim Civil War and the consequent Byzantine ascendancy in the East enabled the emperors to extract huge amounts of tribute from the Umayyad government in Damascus . In 692 , as the Umayyads emerged as victors from the Muslim Civil War , Emperor Justinian II ( r . 685 – 695 and 705 – 711 ) re-opened hostilities . The result was a series of Arab victories that led to the loss of Byzantine control over Armenia and the Caucasian principalities , and a gradual encroachment upon Byzantine borderlands . Year by year , the Caliphate 's generals , usually members of the Umayyad family , launched raids into Byzantine territory and captured fortresses and towns . After 712 , the Byzantine defensive system began to show signs of collapse : Arab raids penetrated further and further into Asia Minor , border fortresses were repeatedly attacked and sacked , and references to Byzantine reaction in the sources become more and more scarce . In this , the Arabs were aided by the prolonged period of internal instability that followed the first deposition of Justinian II in 695 , in which the Byzantine throne changed hands seven times in violent coups . In the words of the Byzantinist Warren Treadgold , " the Arab attacks would in any case have intensified after the end of their own civil war ... With far more men , land and wealth than Byzantium , the Arabs had begun to concentrate all their strength against it . Now they threatened to extinguish the empire entirely by capturing its capital . "

The Arab successes opened the way for a second assault on Constantinople , an undertaking already initiated under Caliph al-Walid I ( r . 705 – 715 ) . Following his death , his brother and successor Sulayman ( r . 715 – 717 ) took up the project with increased vigour , according to Arab accounts because of a prophecy that a Caliph bearing the name of a prophet would capture Constantinople ; Sulayman ( Solomon ) was the only member of the Umayyad family to bear such a name . According to Syriac sources , the new Caliph swore " to not stop fighting against Constantinople before having exhausted the country of the Arabs or to have taken the city " . The Umayyad forces began assembling at the plain of Dabiq north of Aleppo , under the direct supervision of the Caliph . As Sulayman was too sick to campaign himself , however , he entrusted command to his brother Maslama ibn Abd al-Malik . The operation against Constantinople came at a time when the Umayyad state was undergoing a period of continuous expansion to the east and west . Muslim armies advanced into Transoxiana , India and the Visigothic Kingdom of Hispania .

Arab preparations , especially the construction of a large fleet , did not go unnoticed by the worried Byzantines . Emperor Anastasios II ( r . 713 – 715 ) sent an embassy to Damascus under the patrician and urban prefect , Daniel of Sinope , ostensibly in order to plea for peace , but in reality to spy on the Arabs . Anastasios , in turn , began to prepare for the inevitable siege : the fortifications of Constantinople were repaired and equipped with ample artillery ( catapults and other siege weapons ) , while food stores were brought into the city . In addition , those inhabitants who could not stockpile food for at least three years were evacuated . Anastasios strengthened his navy and in early 715 dispatched it against the Arab fleet that had come to Phoenix — usually identified with modern Finike in Lycia , it may also be modern Fenaket across Rhodes , or perhaps Phoenicia ( modern Lebanon ) , famed for its cedar forests — to collect timber for their ships . At Rhodes , however , the Byzantine fleet , encouraged by the soldiers of the Opsician Theme , rebelled , killed their commander John the Deacon and sailed north to Adramyttium . There , they acclaimed a reluctant tax collector , Theodosius , as emperor . Anastasios crossed into Bithynia in the Opsician Theme to confront the rebellion , but the rebel fleet sailed on to Chrysopolis . From there , it launched attacks against Constantinople , until , in late summer , sympathizers within the capital opened its gates to them . Anastasios held out at Nicaea for several months , finally agreeing to resign and retire as a monk . The accession of Theodosios , who from the sources comes across as both unwilling and incapable , as a puppet emperor of the Opsicians provoked the reaction of the other themes , especially the Anatolics and the Armeniacs under their respective strategoi ( generals ) Leo the Isaurian and Artabasdos .

In these conditions of near-civil war , the Arabs began their carefully prepared advance . In September 715 , the vanguard , under general Sulayman ibn Mu 'ad , marched over Cilicia into Asia Minor , taking the strategic fortress of Loulon on its way . They wintered at Afik , an unidentified location near the western exit of the Cilician Gates . In early 716 , Sulayman 's army continued into central Asia Minor . The Umayyad fleet under Umar ibn Hubayra cruised along the Cilician coast , while Maslama ibn Abd al-Malik awaited developments with the main army in Syria . The Arabs hoped that the disunity among the Byzantines would play to their advantage . Maslama had already established contact with Leo the Isaurian . French scholar Rodolphe Guilland theorized that Leo offered to become a vassal of the Caliphate , although the Byzantine general intended to use the Arabs for his own purposes . In turn , Maslama supported Leo hoping to maximize confusion and weaken the Empire , easing his own task of taking Constantinople . Sulayman 's first objective was the strategically important fortress of Amorium , which the Arabs intended to use as a base the following winter . Amorium had been left defenceless in the turmoil of the civil war and would have easily fallen , but the Arabs chose to bolster Leo 's position as a counterweight to Theodosios . They offered the city terms of surrender if its inhabitants would acknowledge Leo as emperor . The fortress capitulated , but still did not open its gates to the Arabs . Leo came to the vicinity with a handful of soldiers and executed a series of ruses and negotiations to garrison 800 men in the town . The Arab army , thwarted in its objective and with supplies running low , withdrew . Leo escaped to Pisidia and , in summer , supported by Artabasdos , was proclaimed and crowned as Byzantine emperor , openly challenging Theodosios .

Leo 's success at Amorium was fortunately timed , since Maslama with the main Arab army had in the meantime crossed the Taurus Mountains and was marching straight for the city . In addition , as the Arab general had not received news of Leo 's double-dealing , he did not devastate the territories he marched through — the Armeniac and Anatolic themes , whose governors he still believed to be his allies . On meeting up with Sulayman 's retreating army and learning what had transpired , Maslama changed direction : he attacked Akroinon and from there marched to the western coastlands to spend the winter . On his way , he sacked Sardis and Pergamon . The Arab fleet wintered in Cilicia . Leo , in the meantime , began his own march on Constantinople . He captured Nicomedia , where he found and captured , among other officials , Theodosios 's son , and then marched to Chrysopolis . In spring 717 , after short negotiations , he secured Theodosios 's resignation and his recognition as emperor , entering the capital on 25 March . Theodosios and his son were allowed to retire to a monastery as monks , while Artabasdos was promoted to the position of kouropalates and received the hand of Leo 's daughter , Anna .

From the outset , the Arabs prepared for a major assault on Constantinople . The late 8th-century Syriac Zuqnin Chronicle reports that the Arabs were " innumerable " , while the 12th-century Syriac chronicler Michael the Syrian mentions a much-inflated 200,000 men and 5,000 ships . The 10th-century Arab writer al-Mas 'udi mentions 120,000 troops , and the account of Theophanes the Confessor 1,800 ships . Supplies for several years were hoarded , and siege engines and incendiary materials ( naphtha ) were stockpiled . The supply train is said to have numbered 12,000 men , 6,000 camels and 6,000 donkeys , while according to the 13th-century historian Bar Hebraeus , the troops included 30,000 volunteers ( mutawa ) for the Holy War ( jihad ) . Whatever the true numbers , the attackers were considerably more numerous than the defenders ; according to Treadgold , the Arab host may have outnumbered the entire Byzantine army . Little is known on the detailed composition of the Arab force , but it appears that it mostly consisted of and was led by Syrians and Jazirans of the elite ahl al-Sham ( " People of Syria " ) , the main pillar of the Umayyad regime and veterans of the struggle against Byzantium . Alongside Maslama , Umar ibn Hubayra , Sulayman ibn Mu 'ad , and Bakhtari ibn al-Hasan are mentioned as his lieutenants by Theophanes and Agapius of Hierapolis , while the later Kitab al- ' Uyun replaces Bakhtari with Abdallah al-Battal .

Although the siege consumed a large part of the Caliphate 's manpower and resources , it was still capable of launching raids against the Byzantine frontier in eastern Asia Minor during the siege 's duration : in 717 , Caliph Sulayman 's son Daud captured a fortress near Melitene and in 718 Amr ibn Qais raided the frontier . On the Byzantine side , the numbers are unknown . Aside from Anastasius II 's preparations ( which may have been neglected following his deposition ) , the Byzantines could count on the assistance of the Bulgars , with whom Leo concluded a treaty that may have included alliance against the Arabs .

In early summer , Maslama ordered his fleet to join him and with his army crossed the Hellespont ( Dardanelles ) at Abydos into Thrace . The Arabs began their march on Cοnstantinople , thoroughly devastating the countryside , gathering supplies , and sacking the towns they encountered . In mid-July or mid-August , the Arab army reached Constantinople and isolated it completely on land by building a double siege wall of stone , one facing the city and one facing the Thracian countryside , with their camp positioned between them . According to Arab sources , at this point Leo offered to ransom the city by paying a gold coin for every inhabitant , but Maslama replied that there could not be peace with the vanquished , and that the Arab garrison of Constantinople had already been selected . The Arab fleet under Sulayman ( often confused with the Caliph himself in the medieval sources ) arrived on 1 September , anchoring at first near the Hebdomon . Two days later , Sulayman led his fleet into the Bosphorus and the various squadrons began anchoring by the European and Asian suburbs of the city : one part sailed south of Chalcedon to the harbours of Eutropios and Anthemios to watch over the southern entrance of the Bosporus , while the rest of the fleet sailed into the strait , passed by Constantinople and began making landfall on the coasts between Galata and Kleidion , cutting the Byzantine capital 's communication with the Black Sea . But as the Arab fleet 's rearguard , twenty heavy ships with 2,000 marines , was passing the city , the southerly wind stopped and then reversed , drifting them towards the city walls , where a Byzantine squadron attacked them with Greek fire . Theophanes reported that some went down with all hands , while others , burning , sailed down to the Princes ' Islands of Oxeia and Plateia . The victory encouraged the Byzantines and dejected the Arabs , who , according to Theophanes , had originally intended to sail to the sea walls during the night and try to scale them using the ships ' steering paddles . The same night , Leo drew up the chain between the city and Galata , closing the entrance to the Golden Horn . The Arab fleet became reluctant to engage the Byzantines , and withdrew to the safe harbour of Sosthenion further north on the European shore of the Bosporus .

The Arab army was well-provisioned , with Arab accounts reporting high mounds of supplies piled up in their camp , and had even brought along wheat to sow and harvest the next year . The failure of the Arab navy to blockade the city , however , meant that the Byzantines too could ferry in provisions . In addition , the Arab army had already devastated the Thracian countryside during its march and could not rely on it for foraging . The Arab fleet and the second Arab army , which operated in the Asian suburbs of Constantinople , were able to bring in limited supplies to Maslama 's army . As the siege drew into winter , negotiations opened between the two sides , extensively reported by Arab sources but ignored by Byzantine historians . According to the Arab accounts , Leo continued to play a double game with the Arabs . One version claims that he tricked Maslama into handing over most of his grain supplies , while another claims that the Arab general was persuaded to burn them altogether , so as to show the inhabitants of the city that they faced an imminent assault and induce them to surrender . The winter of 718 was extremely harsh ; snow covered the ground for over three months . As the supplies in the Arab camp ran out , a terrible famine broke out : the soldiers ate their horses , camels , and other livestock , and the bark , leaves and roots of trees . They swept the snow of the fields they had sown to eat the green shoots , and reportedly resorted to cannibalism and eating their own excrement . Consequently , the Arab army was ravaged by epidemics ; with great exaggeration , the Lombard historian Paul the Deacon put the number of their dead of hunger and disease at 300,000 .

The situation looked set to improve in spring when the new Caliph , Umar II ( r . 717 – 720 ) , sent two fleets to the besiegers ' aid : 400 ships from Egypt under a commander named Sufyan and 360 ships from Africa under Izid , all laden with supplies and arms . At the same time , a fresh army began marching through Asia Minor to assist in the siege . When the new fleets arrived in the Sea of Marmara , they kept their distance from the Byzantines and anchored on the Asian shore . The Egyptians were in the Gulf of Nicomedia near modern Tuzla and the Africans south of Chalcedon ( at Satyros , Bryas and Kartalimen ) . Most of the Arab fleets ' crews were composed of Christian Egyptians , however , and they began deserting to the Byzantines upon their arrival . Notified by the Egyptians of the advent and disposition of the Arab reinforcements , Leo launched his fleet in an attack against the new Arab fleets . Crippled by the defection of their crews , and helpless against Greek fire , the Arab ships were destroyed or captured along with the weapons and supplies they carried . Constantinople was now safe from a seaborne attack . On land too the Byzantines were victorious : their troops managed to ambush the advancing Arab army under a commander named Mardasan and destroy it in the hills around Sophon , south of Nicomedia .

Constantinople could now be easily resupplied by sea and the city 's fishermen went back to sea , as the Arab fleet did not sail again . Still suffering from hunger and pestilence , the Arabs lost a major battle against the Bulgars , who killed , according to Theophanes , 22,000 . It is unclear , however , whether the Bulgars attacked the Arab encampment because of their treaty with Leo or whether the Arabs strayed into Bulgar territory seeking provisions , as reported by the Syriac Chronicle of 846 . Michael the Syrian mentions that the Bulgars participated in the siege from the beginning , with attacks against the Arabs as they marched through Thrace and subsequently on their encampment , but this is not corroborated elsewhere . The siege had clearly failed , and Caliph Umar sent orders to Maslama to retreat . After thirteen months of siege , on 15 August 718 , the Arabs departed . The date coincided with the feast of the Dormition of the Theotokos ( Assumption of Mary ) , and it was to her that the Byzantines ascribed their victory . The retreating Arabs were not hindered or attacked on their return , but their fleet lost more ships in a storm in the Marmara Sea while other ships were set afire by ashes from the volcano of Santorini , and some of the survivors were captured by the Byzantines , so that Theophanes claims that only five vessels made it back to Syria . Arab sources claim that altogether 150,000 Muslims perished during the campaign , a figure which , according to the Byzantinist John Haldon , " while certainly inflated , is nevertheless indicative of the enormity of the disaster in medieval eyes " .

The expedition 's failure weakened the Umayyad state . As historian Bernard Lewis commented , " Its failure brought a grave moment for Umayyad power . The financial strain of equipping and maintaining the expedition caused an aggravation of the fiscal and financial oppression which had already aroused such dangerous opposition . The destruction of the fleet and army of Syria at the sea walls of Constantinople deprived the regime of the chief material basis of its power " . The blow to the Caliphate 's might was severe , and although the land army did not suffer losses in the same degree as the fleet , Umar is recorded as contemplating withdrawing from the recent conquests of Hispania and Transoxiana , as well as a complete evacuation of Cilicia and other Byzantine territories that the Arabs had seized over the previous years . Although his advisors dissuaded him from such drastic actions , most Arab garrisons were withdrawn from the Byzantine frontier districts they had occupied in the lead-up to the siege . In Cilicia , only Mopsuestia remained in Arab hands as a defensive bulwark to protect Antioch . The Byzantines even recovered some territory in western Armenia for a time . In 719 , the Byzantine fleet raided the Syrian coast and burned down the port of Laodicea and , in 720 or 721 , the Byzantines attacked and sacked Tinnis in Egypt . Leo also restored control over Sicily , where news of the Arab siege of Constantinople and expectations of the city 's fall had prompted the local governor to declare an emperor of his own , Basil Onomagoulos . It was during this time , however , that effective Byzantine control over Sardinia and Corsica ceased . Besides this , the Byzantines failed to exploit their success in launching attacks of their own against the Arabs . In 720 , after a hiatus of two years , Arab raids against Byzantium resumed , although now they were no longer directed at conquest , but rather seeking booty . The Arab attacks would intensify again over the next two decades , until the major Byzantine victory at the Battle of Akroinon in 740 . Coupled with military defeats on the other fronts of the overextended Caliphate , and the internal instability which culminated in the Abbasid Revolution , the age of Arab expansion came to an end .

The second Arab siege of Constantinople was far more dangerous for Byzantium than the first as , unlike the loose blockade of 674 – 678 , the Arabs launched a direct , well-planned attack on the Byzantine capital , and tried to cut off the city completely from land and sea . The siege represented a final effort by the Caliphate to " cut off the head " of the Byzantine Empire , after which the remaining provinces , especially in Asia Minor , would be easy to capture . The Arab failure was chiefly logistical , as they were operating too far from their Syrian bases , but the superiority of the Byzantine navy through the use of Greek fire , the strength of Constantinople 's fortifications , and the skill of Leo III in deception and negotiations also played important roles . The failure of the Arab siege led to a profound change in the nature of warfare between Byzantium and the Caliphate . The Muslim goal of conquest of Constantinople was effectively abandoned , and the frontier between the two empires stabilized along the line of the Taurus and Antitaurus Mountains , over which both sides continued to launch regular raids and counter-raids . In this incessant border warfare , frontier towns and fortresses changed hands frequently , but the general outline of the border remained unaltered for over two centuries , until the Byzantine conquests of the 10th century . Indeed , with the exception of the advance of the Abbasid army under Harun al-Rashid up to Chrysopolis in 782 , no other Arab army would ever come within sight of the Byzantine capital again . Consequently , on the Muslim side the raids themselves eventually acquired an almost ritual character , and were valued mostly as a demonstration of the continuing jihad and sponsored by the Caliph as a symbol of his role as the leader of the Muslim community .

The outcome of the siege was of considerable macrohistorical importance . The Byzantine capital 's survival preserved the Empire as a bulwark against Islamic expansion into Europe until the 15th century , when it fell to the Ottoman Turks . Along with the Battle of Tours in 732 , the successful defence of Constantinople has been seen as instrumental in stopping Muslim expansion into Europe . As military historian Paul K. Davis wrote , " By turning back the Moslem invasion , Europe remained in Christian hands , and no serious Moslem threat to Europe existed until the fifteenth century . This victory , coincident with the Frankish victory at Tours ( 732 ) , limited Islam 's western expansion to the southern Mediterranean world . " Thus the historian John B. Bury called 718 " an ecumenical date " , while the Greek historian Spyridon Lambros likened the siege to the Battle of Marathon and Leo III to Miltiades . Consequently , military historians often include the siege in lists of the " decisive battles " of world history .

Among Arabs , the 717 – 718 siege became the most famous of their expeditions against Byzantium . Several accounts survive , but most were composed at later dates and are semi-fictional and contradictory . In legend , the defeat was transformed into a victory : Maslama departed only after symbolically entering the Byzantine capital on his horse accompanied by thirty riders , where Leo received him with honour and led him to the Hagia Sophia . After Leo paid homage to Maslama and promised tribute , Maslama and his troops — 30,000 out of the original 80,000 that set out for Constantinople — departed for Syria . The tales of the siege influenced similar episodes in Arabic epic literature . A siege of Constantinople is found in the tale of Omar bin al-Nu 'uman and his sons in the Thousand and One Nights , while both Maslama and the Caliph Sulayman appear in a tale of the Hundred and One Nights from the Maghreb . The commander of Maslama 's bodyguard , Abdallah al-Battal , became a celebrated figure in Arab and Turkish poetry as " Battal Gazi " for his exploits in the Arab raids of the next decades . Similarly , the 10th-century epic Delhemma , related to the cycle around Battal , gives a fictionalized version of the 717 – 718 siege .

Later Muslim and Byzantine tradition also ascribed the building of Constantinople 's first mosque , near the city 's praetorium , to Maslama . In reality , the mosque near the praetorium was probably erected in about 860 , as a result of an Arab embassy in that year . Ottoman tradition also ascribed the building of the Arap Mosque ( located outside Constantinople proper in Galata ) to Maslama , although it erroneously dated this to around 686 , probably confusing Maslama 's attack with the first Arab siege in the 670s . The passing of the Arab army also left traces at Abydos , where " Maslama 's Well " and a mosque attributed to him were still known in the 10th century . Eventually , following their repeated failures before Constantinople , and the continued resilience of the Byzantine state , the Muslims began to project the fall of Constantinople to the distant future . Thus the city 's fall came to be regarded as one of the signs of the arrival of the end times in Islamic eschatology . The siege became a motif in Byzantine apocalyptic literature as well , with decisive final battles against the Arabs before the walls of Constantinople being featured in the early 8th-century Greek translation of the Syriac Apocalypse of Pseudo-Methodius and the Apocalypse of Daniel , written either at about the time of the siege or a century later .

Denmark Street is a street on the edge of London 's West End running from Charing Cross Road to St Giles . It is near St Giles in the Fields Church and Tottenham Court Road station . The street was developed in the late 17th century and named after Prince George of Denmark . Since the 1950s it has been associated with British popular music , first via publishers and later by recording studios and music shops . A blue plaque was unveiled in 2014 commemorating the street 's importance to the music industry . The street was originally residential , but became used for commercial purposes in the 19th century . At first , metalwork was a popular trade but it became most famous as Britain 's " Tin Pan Alley " housing numerous music publishers ' offices . This market declined in the 1960s to be replaced by music shops and independent recording studios . The Rolling Stones recorded at Regent Sound Studio at No. 4 and popular musicians often socialised around the Gioconda café at No. 9 , including David Bowie and the Small Faces . Elton John and Bernie Taupin wrote songs at offices on the street through the 1960s , while the Sex Pistols lived above No. 6 , and recorded their first demos there . The comic book store , Forbidden Planet and the Helter Skelter music bookshop have also been based on the street . In the 2010s , the surrounding area was redeveloped . Parts of Denmark Street are listed to protect them , but other parts , away from the street itself , are planned to be demolished .

The land on which Denmark Street lies was formerly part of the grounds for St Giles Hospital , founded as a house for lepers in the early 12th century by Henry I 's wife , Matilda ( Maud ) . In 1612 , it was recorded as being owned by Tristram Gibbs . The grounds were laid out for development during the reign of James II and developed by Samuel Fortrey and Jacques Wiseman in the late 1680s . Historical evidence suggests the street was formed between 1682 and 1687 , as it was not shown on Morden and Lea 's Map of 1682 . It was named after Prince George of Denmark , who had married Princess Anne in 1683 . By 1691 , 20 houses had been completed , of which eight remain standing . Dr John Purcell , a London physician who published A Treatise on Vapours or Hysteric Fits , lived at number 10 in 1730 , while the Reverend Doctor John James Majendie – who became Canon of Windsor – lived there from 1758 to 1771 . The painter Johann Zoffany lived at number 9 . In the late 18th century , the Jacobite Sir John Murray , lived there until the day he was " carried off by a party of strange men " .

The area around the street was known as the rookery of St Giles , which developed in the 18th century as an unplanned slum to the west of the City , and described as a " Pandora 's box of pollution , plague and pestilence " . Though much of the area was cleared by the end of the 19th century , Denmark Street is the only street in London to retain 17th century terraced facades on both sides . In 2010 , a study by Camden London Borough Council suggested that only six other streets in London have a comparable heritage to Denmark Street . A small court connected by passages ( originally known as Dudley Court , then Denmark Court and now known as Denmark Place ) runs along the back of the north side of the street , connecting to it via an opening at No. 27 . The street started being used for commercial purposes at the beginning of the 19th century and houses were converted for this use . Ground floors became used as shops , while upper floors and back rooms were used as workshops , particularly for metalwork . Augustus Siebe , the pioneer of the diving helmet , lived and worked on the street , and today there is an English Heritage blue plaque commemorating him on the house where he lived .

Lawrence Wright was the first music publisher to set up premises on Denmark Street in 1911 . He was initially based at No. 8 and moved to No. 11 after World War I. He subsequently founded the musicians ' journal Melody Maker in 1926 . The same year , another music publisher , Campbell Connelly , moved from their original offices in Tottenham Court Road to Denmark Street . The New Musical Express was founded at No. 5 in 1952 and remained there until 1964 . By the end of the 1950s , the street had established itself as Britain 's " Tin Pan Alley " and housed numerous music publishers and other venues connected with the business . Larry Parnes became a successful manager and entrepreneur of pop singers during the mid-1950s , and regularly took material from songwriters and publishers based in Denmark Street . Lionel Bart , writer of the musical Oliver ! , started his writing career for publishers and was subsequently known as " the king of Denmark Street " .

The music publishing trade on Denmark Street began to decline during the 1960s , as the traditional producers lost touch with changing tastes and groups like the Rolling Stones showed it was possible to write their own material . For example , Paul Simon was based in London at this time but Mills Music at number 20 , told him that his songs " Homeward Bound " and " The Sound of Silence " were uncommercial . Recording studios began to be operated in the street . Regent Sound Studio at No. 4 was founded in July 1961 to serve as a unit for publishers to record their songs . The studio was based above the offices of Essex Music and was frequently used by then Stones manager Andrew Loog Oldham . The band recorded their first album at Regent in 1964 and the single " Not Fade Away " became their first major hit to be recorded there . Oldham liked the atmosphere in the studio as he could " stretch out a bit , experiment and learn from our mistakes " . The studios eventually expanded and moved into new premises on Tottenham Court Road , while the Denmark Street premises became the sales office . They were subsequently bought by Eddie Kassner at the end of the 1960s . Publishers Box & Cox had their offices at number 7 . Their greatest hit was " I 've Got a Lovely Bunch of Coconuts " . Southern Music , at No. 8 , also had a studio in the ground floor , which was used to record Donovan 's hit , " Catch The Wind " .

The Carter & Lewis songwriting partnership evolved when John Carter and Ken Lewis arrived in London in 1959 and decided " if you want to be in the music business , that [ Denmark Street ] was the place to be , that was the rule " . Session musicians such as Jimmy Page and John Paul Jones regularly played in Denmark Street studios . In 1964 , The Kinks with Page on guitar and Jon Lord ( later to form Deep Purple ) on piano , recorded " You Really Got Me " in one of the basement studios . Musicians often socialised around the Gioconda café at No. 9 . David Bowie recruited his first backing band , The Lower Third , in the bar , while the Small Faces formed after the original members socialised around the Gioconda . Other regular patrons included David Bowie and Jimi Hendrix . In April 2014 , a number of music industry figures , including disc jockey Mike Read , unveiled a blue plaque above the premises that included a QR Code to access a multimedia presentation about the history of music .

In 1970 Bernie Taupin and Elton John wrote " Your Song " , John 's first hit single , at No. 20 Denmark Street . John had started work at a music publisher in the street in 1963 , and Taupin wrote the lyrics while sitting on the roof ( " I sat on the roof and kicked off the moss " ) while waiting for John one morning . They mentioned the street in their 1974 song " Bitter Fingers " , on the semi-autobiographical concept album Captain Fantastic and the Brown Dirt Cowboy . Also in 1970 , a song named " Denmark Street " appeared on the Kinks ' album Lola versus Powerman and the Moneygoround , Part One . Manager Malcolm McLaren asked architect Ben Kelly to refurbish a basement rehearsal room he had bought from Badfinger . The Sex Pistols rehearsed in this room , lived above No. 6 , and recorded their first demos there . Johnny Rotten drew cartoons of the members as graffiti which turned up later in an archaeological survey of the site . Scott Gorham bought his first guitar with Thin Lizzy on Denmark Street . He had turned up at the audition with a Japanese Les Paul Copy — when he got the job , Phil Lynott took him shopping on Denmark Street . After being told several guitars were too expensive , he settled on a Sunburst Gibson Les Paul Deluxe . Andy 's Guitars was established in 1978 at No. 27 and survived for many years before closing in 2007 because of increased shop rates .

By 1980 , there were a number of unlicensed nightclubs operating on Denmark Place , running adjacent to the street . The clubs were housed in buildings that had previously functioned as a hostel for musicians , which adjoined a music shop on the street , and the fire brigade had insisted that a fire escape be fitted . By the time the clubs were in operation , the shop had closed and the fire escape had fallen into disrepair . 18 Denmark Place was home to two such clubs ; on the first floor was " Rodo 's " , a salsa club popular with South American immigrants and above that " The Spanish Rooms " on the second floor which was a late night bar frequented by locals including Irish and Jamaican immigrants . On 14 August 1980 John Thompson , a local petty criminal , was ejected from The Spanish Rooms following a fight which may have been caused by a dispute about being overcharged . Thompson returned shortly thereafter and poured petrol into the ground floor of the building and ignited it . The inferno resulting from this act of arson killed 37 people from eight different nationalities and was described as the worst fire in London in terms of loss of life since World War II . Thompson was imprisoned having been convicted of murder and died in prison in 2008 on the anniversary of the tragedy .

Numbers 1 – 3 had become a Job Centre by the 1980s , specialising in vacancies for the catering industry . The serial killer Dennis Nilsen worked there and brought in a large cooking pot , in which he had boiled his victims heads , as a utensil for preparing a Christmas 1980 party . The last major music publisher in the street , Peer Music , moved from No. 8 in 1992 , completing the gradual transformation of premises from publishers to instrument stores . In May 1990 , Andy Preston , owner of Andy 's Guitars , set up a traders association and attempted to have the street re-branded as " Music Land " , similar to Drury Lane being marked Theatreland and Gerrard Street as Chinatown . Helter Skelter was set up as a bookshop dedicated to music titles in 1995 by Sean Body . The shop operated at the old Essex Music and Regent Sound building at No. 4 until rising rents forced it to close in 2004 .

In 2009 , Denmark Street was identified in English Heritage 's " Heritage at Risk " register as being at risk in view of the nearby development of Crossrail . Particular attention was drawn to No. 26 , which is a Grade II listed building . In 2010 , Camden London Borough Council identified the street and adjacent properties as a Conservation Area . In 2013 , the council announced that Denmark Street would be redeveloped by the architectural firm ORMS as part of a major development in conjunction with the Crossrail construction work around Tottenham Court Road tube station and Centre Point . The proposed development includes the construction of an 800-seat subterranean performance venue . Numbers 1 – 6 and 17 – 21 Denmark Place , which run parallel along the back of the street , and the York and Clifton Mansions will be demolished , along with partial demolition of No. 21 Denmark Street . The scheme has been condemned by the local music industry and shopkeepers . Writer Henry Scott-Irvine launched a petition to stop the planned redevelopment , which has gathered 10,000 signatures . In an interview to Mojo , Scott-Irvine said " This should be stopped " , adding that Denmark Street " should be given full heritage status like Covent Garden Market , Hatton Garden and Savile Row " . He discovered that , although demolition was scheduled to start in late 2014 , the plans were approved by the newly elected borough council . Consolidated Developments , developers for the new site , stated they were " committed to preserving and enhancing the rich musical heritage of Tin Pan Alley " .

In January 2015 , following the closure of the 12 Bar Club and clearance of Enterprise Studios on Denmark Place , a group of musicians and supporters squatted in the club 's premises and staged a demonstration in the street , protesting against redevelopment . Former Oasis manager and head of Creation Records , Alan McGee supported the protestors , saying " you really couldn ’ t say a bad word against any of them . And they know the law , so they can 't just be thrown out of there . " However , a report in the Independent judged the protest to be misguided , as most shops along the street are still trading .

On the corner of the street with Charing Cross Road is Chris Bryant 's Musical Instruments . Denmark Street Guitars claims to have over 3,000 instruments in stock and to have the largest selection of guitars in the UK . Regent Sounds , formerly the recording studio , which specialises in Fender and Gretsch guitars and Essex Music at No. 4 ; the Alleycat Bar and Club sits in the basement below the store . No.Tom Vintage and Classic Guitars has a store at No. 6 . Macaris , a guitar retailer , was established in 1958 and specialises in Gibson models . As well as their shop at No. 25 , they have an additional shop nearby on Charing Cross Road . The sheet music shop Argents is currently based at No. 19 . It was founded by The Zombies ' Rod Argent as a keyboard shop and was previously based next door , at No. 20 . Since then it has undergone two changes of owners and now specialises in sheet music and DVD sales , covering a wide variety of styles including jazz and classical . Rose Morris have been established in Denmark Street since 1919 . Originally based at No. 11 , they now occupy No. 10 in the former offices of Southern Music Publishing . The company became the first British distributor of Rickenbacker guitars in 1962 , which had a surge in popularity after musicians noticed the Beatles ' John Lennon playing one . Rose Morris purchased instruments directly from Rickenbacker 's factory instead of their sales office , in order to keep up with demand . The British models carry unique serial numbers such as the 325 , the Rose Morris 1996 . The Early Music Shop 's London branch is based on the first floor of number 11 , above Rose Morris . The shop contains early music instruments including recorders and sheet music .

There has been a recording studio in the basement of No. 22 since Tin Pan Alley Studios was established in 1954 . It was originally founded by session violinist Ralph Elman , and was previously the premises of the Acid Jazz Records label . In 2013 , producer Guy Katsav took over management of the premises , renaming them Denmark Street Studios . The 12 Bar Club was at No. 26 , a small live music venue with a capacity of about 100 people which was established in 1994 . The building was originally stables , built in 1635 , before becoming a blacksmiths until after World War I. It closed in January 2015 as part of the redevelopment work .

" Pokey Mom " is the tenth episode of the twelfth season of the American animated sitcom The Simpsons . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on January 14 , 2001 . In the episode , Marge befriends Jack Crowley , a convict who she believes has some artistic potential . With Marge 's help , Jack is granted parole and finds a mural-painting job at Springfield Elementary School . Meanwhile , Homer suffers from a back injury and goes to see a chiropractor . Despite this his pain remains and it is not until he accidentally falls backwards onto a garbage can that his back injury disappears . Homer makes a successful business out of this injury-healing garbage can , much to the dismay of chiropractors in town . The episode was written by Tom Martin and directed by Bob Anderson , and it features guest appearances from Michael Keaton as Jack , Charles Napier as a prison warden , Robert Schimmel as a prisoner , and Bruce Vilanch as himself . " Pokey Mom " has been met with generally negative reviews from critics , being described as bland and drawn out . The staff members of the series received complaints from chiropractors after it aired , and some chiropractors have characterized the portrayal of the profession in the episode as stereotypical . Around 8.79 million American homes tuned in to watch the episode during its original airing , and in 2009 it was released on DVD along with the rest of the episodes of the twelfth season .

The Simpson family attends a prison rodeo where Marge meets Jack Crowley , a convict whom she believes to have great artistic potential after becoming impressed with his work . She later teaches a class on being an artist to the prisoners and befriends Jack . With Marge 's help , Jack is granted parole under her custody . Marge soon finds a mural-painting job at Springfield Elementary School for him . Jack paints a powerful , epic mural symbolizing school spirit with a warrior woman riding a puma , which the whole school likes , but Principal Skinner ( who hates it ) demands that he tone it down using Skinner 's own childish idea of kittens in a fantasy land . Jack reluctantly gives into Skinner 's wishes ; however , upon its unveiling , the new mural is panned by everyone in town ( even Ned Flanders ) . Skinner blames Jack and fires him . Sometime later , the mural is set on fire by a mystery arsonist . There are no suspects ; however , everyone in the school immediately assumes that Jack did it to get back at Skinner . While the police are out searching for Jack , Marge stumbles upon him hiding in the school playground . He swears to her that he did not start the fire , and Marge believes him . She then distracts Skinner and Chief Wiggum so he can escape ; however , instead , he immediately sets fire to Skinner 's car as he did to the mural , and dances around it laughing maniacally . Jack is arrested , and Marge is furious that he looked her in the eye and flat-out lied to her . When Jack attempts to lie to her again — claiming this time that although he did burn the mural , he did not burn Skinner 's car ( despite the fact that she had just seen him do it ) — she ends all her involvement with him , and on the way to jail , Jack and Wiggum make conversation .

Meanwhile , Homer begins suffering from a back injury and goes to see a chiropractor . However , he fails to follow the instructions given to him by the chiropractor and his suffering continues . Later , Homer accidentally falls backwards onto a round garbage can at home and discovers that it solved his back problems . He names the garbage can " Dr. Homer 's Miracle Spine-o-Cylinder " , and makes a business out of his discovery . It turns out to be a successful method of solving problems with pain , causing the chiropractic business to go in decline until the chiropractors in town denounce the method and destroy the garbage can at the Simpsons ' home .

" Pokey Mom " was written by Tom Martin and directed by Bob Anderson as part of the twelfth season of The Simpsons ( 2000 – 2001 ) . According to then-showrunner Mike Scully , the story of this episode originated from the fact that the staff members of The Simpsons wanted to do an episode about Marge but felt they did not want it to revolve around her getting a new job , as that had been seen on the show " too often " . They decided to explore one of Marge 's attributes that had been seen in earlier episodes , eventually choosing her interest in art . Martin conceived of the sub-plot surrounding Homer following a visit to a chiropractor . He has said that the " heart " of that story is that the chiropractors in Springfield become opposed to Homer 's method of healing people and try to stop it after losing business , in reference to how chiropractors in real-life " are a bit hated by the AMA ( American Medical Association ) " and how the AMA has tried to restrict their businesses in the past . Martin has also noted that the episode shows how " a lot of chiropractors are these great healers and they do great work , and then there 's some that are crooked . "

Several famous Americans made guest appearances in the episode . Actor Michael Keaton guest starred as Jack Crowley , while stand-up comedian Robert Schimmel appeared as a prisoner in Marge 's art class that wants to smell her clothes . Actor Charles Napier voiced the prison warden that commentates the rodeo at the prison and later grants Jack his parole . Comedy writer and actor Bruce Vilanch guest starred in the episode as himself at the unveiling of Jack 's mural painting . There , Principal Skinner jokes to the audience that " when Superintendent Chalmers suggested a school mural , I almost thought he said a ' school Muriel ' , " referencing Chalmers ' sister Muriel . When no one laughs at his joke and the audience is dead silent , Skinner sarcastically says " Well , thank you , Bruce Vilanch , " to which Vilanch replies " Whoopi would 've made it work . " This is a reference to the fact that Vilanch has written comedy material for actress Whoopi Goldberg .

The episode originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on January 14 , 2001 . It was viewed in approximately 8.79 million households that night . With a Nielsen rating of 8.6 , " Pokey Mom " tied with an episode of 60 Minutes for the 38th place in the ratings for the week of January 8 – 14 , 2001 . It was the third highest-rated broadcast on Fox that week , following episodes of Temptation Island and Boston Public . On August 18 , 2009 , " Pokey Mom " was released on DVD as part of the box set The Simpsons – The Complete Twelfth Season . Staff members Tom Martin , Bob Anderson , Mike Scully , Ian Maxtone-Graham , John Frink , Don Payne , Matt Selman , and Joel H. Cohen , as well as cast members Dan Castellaneta and Joe Mantegna , participated in the DVD audio commentary for the episode . Deleted scenes from the episode were also included on the box set . Critics have given " Pokey Mom " generally negative reviews . Nancy Basile of About.com said she " loathed " it . DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson commented that " Other than a nice guest turn from Michael Keaton , ' Mom ' doesn ’ t do much to stand out from the crowd . Oh , like much of Season 12 , it keeps us interested , but that ’ s not exactly a strong endorsement . ' Mom ' provides a watchable show but nothing more . " Den of Geek critic Matt Haigh wrote that the episode " starts well , but begins to feel tired and drawn out , and there just doesn 't seem to be much of a story there . "

Following the original broadcast of the episode , the staff members of the series received several complaints from chiropractors . The February 26 , 2001 issue of the magazine Dynamic Chiropractic featured an article about the episode that noted : " [ The Simpsons ] has poked fun at numerous people , and about every institution and profession imaginable . On January 17 , it was chiropractic 's turn . " In an article of the magazine Canadian Chiropractor , Steven R. Passmore ( D.C. , M.S. ) and Lorraine Kochanowski-Sutter ( D.C. ) analyzed the portrayal of chiropractors in the media . They gave " Pokey Mom " as an example of how " chiropractors on sitcoms pok [ e ] fun at themselves as they prescribe the duration of a course of care . [ ... ] Dr. Steve on The Simpsons corroborates this stereotype when telling Homer that he will need to see him ' three times a week for many years . ' " Passmore and Kochanowski-Sutter also noted that in the episode " we see a dreamcatcher on the wall behind Dr. Steve as he treats Homer . This strategically placed decoration could suggest that the chiropractor is in touch with native and / or natural healing , or it could be a jab at the field ’ s more esoteric practitioners . "

The preschool educational television program Sesame Street was first aired on public broadcasting television stations November 10 , 1969 , and will reach its 46th season in 2016 . The history of Sesame Street has reflected changing attitudes to developmental psychology , early childhood education and cultural diversity . Featuring Jim Henson 's Muppets , animation , live shorts , humor and celebrity appearances , it was the first television program of its kind to base its content and production values on laboratory and formative research , and the first to include a curriculum " detailed or stated in terms of measurable outcomes " . Initial responses to the show included adulatory reviews , some controversy and high ratings . By its 40th anniversary in 2009 , Sesame Street was broadcast in over 120 countries , and 20 independent international versions had been produced . The show was conceived in 1966 during discussions between television producer Joan Ganz Cooney and Carnegie Corporation vice president Lloyd Morrisett . Their goal was to create a children 's television show that would " master the addictive qualities of television and do something good with them " , such as helping young children prepare for school . After two years of research , the newly formed Children 's Television Workshop ( CTW ) received a combined grant of $ 8 million from the Carnegie Corporation , the Ford Foundation and the U.S. federal government to create and produce a new children 's television show .

By the show 's tenth anniversary in 1979 , nine million American children under the age of six were watching Sesame Street daily , and several studies showed it was having a positive educational impact . The cast and crew expanded during this time , including the hiring of women in the crew and additional minorities in the cast . In 1981 , the federal government withdrew its funding , so the CTW turned to other sources , such as its magazine division , book royalties , product licensing and foreign income . During the 1980s , Sesame Street 's curriculum expanded to include topics such as relationships , ethics and emotions . Many of the show 's storylines were taken from the experiences of its writing staff , cast and crew , most notably the death of Will Lee — who played Mr. Hooper — and the marriage of Luis and Maria . In recent decades , Sesame Street has faced societal and economic challenges , including changes in the viewing habits of young children , more competition from other shows , the development of cable television and a drop in ratings . After the turn of the 21st century , the show made major structural adaptations , including changing its traditional magazine format to a narrative format . Because of the popularity of the Muppet Elmo , the show incorporated a popular segment known as " Elmo 's World " . Sesame Street has won eight Grammys and over a hundred Emmys in its history — more than any other children 's show .

In the late 1960s , 97 % of all American households owned a television set , and preschool children watched an average of 27 hours of television per week ; programs created for them were widely criticized for being too violent and for reflecting commercial values . Producer Joan Ganz Cooney called children 's programming a " wasteland " , and she was not alone in her criticism . Many children 's television programs were produced by local stations , with little regard for educational goals , or cultural diversity and the use of children 's programming as an educational tool was " unproven " and " a revolutionary concept " . According to children 's media experts Edward Palmer and Shalom M. Fisch , children 's television programs of the 1950s and 1960s duplicated " prior media forms " . For example , they tended to show simple shots of a camera 's-eye view of a location filled with children , or they recreated storybooks with shots of book covers and motionless illustrated pages . The hosts of these programs were " insufferably condescending " , though one exception was Captain Kangaroo , created and hosted by Bob Keeshan , which author Michael Davis described as having a " slower pace and idealism " that most other children 's shows lacked .

Early childhood educational research had shown that when children were prepared to succeed in school , they earned higher grades and learned more effectively . Children from low-income families had fewer resources than children from higher-income families to prepare them for school . Research had shown that children from low-income , minority backgrounds tested " substantially lower " than middle-class children in school-related skills , and that they continued to have educational deficits throughout school . The field of developmental psychology had grown during this period , and scientists were beginning to understand that changes in early childhood education could increase children 's cognitive growth . Because of these trends in education , along with the great societal changes occurring in the United States during this era , the time was ripe for the creation of a show like Sesame Street .

Since 1962 , Cooney had been producing talk shows and documentaries at educational television station WNDT , and in 1966 had won an Emmy for a documentary about poverty in America . In early 1966 , Cooney and her husband Tim hosted a dinner party at their apartment in New York ; experimental psychologist Lloyd Morrisett , who has been called Sesame Street 's " financial godfather " , and his wife Mary were among the guests . Cooney 's boss , Lewis Freedman , whom Cooney called " the grandfather of Sesame Street " , also attended the party , as did their colleague Anne Bower . As a vice-president at the Carnegie Corporation , Morrisett had awarded several million dollars in grants to organizations that educated poor and minority preschool children . Morrisett and the other guests felt that even with limited resources , television could be an effective way to reach millions of children . A few days after the dinner party , Cooney , Freedman and Morrisett met at the Carnegie Corporation 's offices to make plans ; they wanted to harness the addictive power of television for their own purposes , but did not yet know how . The following summer , despite Cooney 's lack of experience in the field of education , Morrisett hired her to conduct research on childhood development , education and media , and she visited experts in these fields across the United States and Canada . She researched their ideas about the viewing habits of young children and wrote a report on her findings .

Cooney 's study , titled " Television for Preschool Education " , spelled out how television could be used to help young children , especially from low-income families , prepare for school . The focus on the new show was on children from disadvantaged backgrounds , but Cooney and the show 's creators recognized that in order to achieve the kind of success they wanted , it had to be equally accessible to children of all socio-economic and ethnic backgrounds . At the same time , they wanted to make the show so appealing to inner-city children that it would help them learn as much as children with more educational opportunities . This was the show 's primary criterion for success . Cooney proposed that public television , even though it had a poor track record in attracting inner-city audiences , could be used to improve the quality of children 's programming . She suggested using the television medium 's " most engaging traits " , including high production values , sophisticated writing , and quality film and animation , to reach the largest audience possible . In the words of critic Peter Hellman , " If [ children ] could recite Budweiser jingles from TV , why not give them a program that would teach the ABCs and simple number concepts ? " Cooney wanted to create a program that would spread values favoring education to nonviewers — including their parents and older siblings , who tended to control the television set . To this end , she suggested that humor directed toward adults be included , which , as Lesser reported , " may turn out to be a pretty good system in forcing the young child to stretch to understand programs designed for older audiences " . Cooney also believed cultural references and guest appearances by celebrities would encourage parents and older siblings to watch the show together .

As a result of Cooney 's proposal , the Carnegie Corporation awarded her a $ 1 million grant in 1968 to establish the Children 's Television Workshop ( CTW ) to provide support to the creative staff of the new show . Morrisett , who was responsible for fundraising , procured additional grants from the United States federal government , the Corporation for Public Broadcasting , and the Ford Foundation for the CTW 's initial budget , which totaled $ 8 million ; obtaining funding from this combination of government agencies and private foundations protected the CTW from economic pressures experienced by commercial networks . Sesame Street was an expensive program to produce because the creators decided they needed to compete with other programs that invested in professional , high quality production . The producers spent eighteen months preparing the new show , something unprecedented in children 's television . The show had an " impressive " budget of $ 28,000 per episode . After being named executive director of the CTW , Cooney began to assemble a team of producers : Jon Stone was responsible for writing , casting , and format ; David Connell took over animation and volume ; and Samuel Gibbon served as the show 's chief liaison between the production staff and the research team . Stone , Connell , and Gibbon had worked on Captain Kangaroo together , but were not involved in children 's television when Cooney recruited them . At first , Cooney planned to divide the show 's production of five episodes a week among several teams , but she was advised by CBS vice-president Mike Dann to use only one . This production team was led by Connell , who had gained experience producing many episodes in a short period of time , a process called " volume production " , during his eleven years working on Captain Kangaroo .

The CTW hired Harvard University professor Gerald S. Lesser to design the show 's educational objectives and establish and lead a National Board of Advisers . Instead of providing what Lesser called " window dressing " , the Board actively participated in the construction of educational goals and creative methods . At the Board 's direction , Lesser conducted five three-day curriculum planning seminars in Boston and New York City in summer 1968 . The purpose of the seminars was to ascertain which school-preparation skills to emphasize in the new show . The producers gathered professionals with diverse backgrounds to obtain ideas for educational content . They reported that the seminars were " widely successful " , and resulted in long and detailed lists of possible topics for inclusion in the Sesame Street curriculum ; in fact , the seminars produced more suggested educational objectives than could ever be addressed by one television series . Instead of focusing on the social and emotional aspects of development , the producers decided to follow the suggestions of the seminar participants and emphasize cognitive skills , a decision they felt was warranted by the demands of school and the wishes of parents . The objectives developed during the seminars were condensed into key categories : symbolic representation , cognitive processes , and the physical and social environment . The seminars set forth the new show 's policy about race and social issues and provided the show 's production and creative team with " a crash course " in psychology , child development , and early childhood education . They also marked the beginning of Jim Henson 's involvement in Sesame Street . Cooney met Henson at one of the seminars ; Stone , who was familiar with Henson 's work , felt that if they could not bring him on board , they should " make do without puppets " .

The producers and writers decided to build the new show around a brownstone or an inner-city street , a choice Davis called " unprecedented " . Stone was convinced that in order for inner-city children to relate to Sesame Street , it needed to be set in a familiar place . Despite its urban setting , the producers decided to avoid depicting more negativity than what was already present in the child 's environment . Lesser commented , " [ despite ] all its raucousness and slapstick humor , Sesame Street became a sweet show , and its staff maintains that there is nothing wrong in that " . The new show was called the " Preschool Educational Television Show " in promotional materials ; the producers were unable to agree on a name they liked and waited until the last minute to make a decision . In a short , irreverent promotional film shown to public television executives , the producers parodied their " naming dilemma " . The producers were reportedly " frantic for a title " ; they finally settled on the name that they least disliked : Sesame Street , inspired by Ali Baba 's magical phrase , although there were concerns that it would be too difficult for young children to pronounce . Stone was one of the producers who disliked the name , but , he said , " I was outvoted , for which I 'm deeply grateful " .

The responsibility of casting for Sesame Street fell to Jon Stone , who set out to form a cast where white actors were in the minority . He did not begin auditions until spring 1969 , several weeks before five test shows were due to be produced . He filmed the auditions , and Palmer took them into the field to test children 's reactions . The actors who received the " most enthusiastic thumbs up " were cast . For example , Loretta Long was chosen to play Susan when the children who saw her audition stood up and sang along with her rendition of " I 'm a Little Teapot " . Stone reported that casting was the only aspect that was " just completely haphazard " . Most of the cast and crew found jobs on Sesame Street through personal relationships with Stone and the other producers . Stone hired Bob McGrath ( an actor and singer best known at the time for his appearances on Mitch Miller 's sing-along show on NBC ) to play Bob , Will Lee to play Mr. Hooper , and Garrett Saunders to play Gordon .

Sesame Street was the first children 's television program that used a curriculum with clear and measurable outcomes , and was the first to use research in the creation of the show 's design and content . Research in Sesame Street had three functions : to test if the show was appealing to children , to discover what could be done to make the show more appealing , and to report to the public and the investors what impact the show had on its young viewers . Ten to fifteen percent of the show 's initial budget of $ 8 million was devoted to research , and researchers were always present in the studio during the show 's filming . A " Writer 's Notebook " was developed to assist writers and producers in translating the research and production goals into televised material ; this connected the show 's curriculum goals and its script development . The Muppet characters were created to fill specific curriculum needs : Oscar the Grouch , for example , was designed to teach children about their positive and negative emotions . Lesser called the collaboration between researchers and producers , as well as the idea of using television as an educational tool , the " CTW model " . Cooney agreed , commenting , " From the beginning , we — the planners of the project — designed the show as an experimental research project with educational advisers , researchers , and television producers collaborating as equal partners " .

The producers of Sesame Street believed education through television was possible if they captured and sustained children 's attention ; this meant the show needed a strong appeal . Edward Palmer , the CTW 's first Director of Research and the man Cooney credited with building the CTW 's foundation of research , was one of the few academics in the late 1960s researching children 's television . He was recruited by the CTW to test if the curricula developed in the Boston seminars were reaching their audience effectively . Palmer was also tasked with designing and executing the CTW 's in-house research and with working with the Educational Testing Service ( ETS ) . His research was so crucial to Sesame Street that Gladwell asserted , " ... without Ed Palmer , the show would have never lasted through the first season " . Palmer and his team 's approach to researching the show 's effectiveness was innovative ; it was the first time formative research was conducted in this way . For example , Palmer developed " the distractor " , which he used to test if the material shown on Sesame Street captured young viewers ' attention . Two children at a time were brought into the laboratory ; they were shown an episode on a television monitor and a slide show next to it . The slides would change every seven seconds , and researchers recorded when the children 's attention was diverted away from the episode . They were able to record almost every second of Sesame Street this way ; if the episode captured the children 's interest 80 – 90 % of the time , the producers would air it , but if it only tested 50 % , they would reshoot . By the fourth season of the show , the episodes rarely tested below 85 % .

During the production of Sesame Street 's first season , producers created five one-hour episodes to test the show 's appeal to children and examine their comprehension of the material . Not intended for broadcast , they were presented to preschoolers in 60 homes throughout Philadelphia and in day care centers in New York City in July 1969 . The results were " generally very positive " ; children learned from the shows , their appeal was high , and their attention was sustained over the full hour . However , the researchers found that although children 's attention was high during the Muppet segments , their interest wavered during the " Street " segments , when no Muppets were on screen . This was because the producers had followed the advice of child psychologists who were concerned that children would be confused if human actors and Muppets were shown together . As a result of this decision , the appeal of the test episodes was lower than the target . The Street scenes , as Palmer described them , were " the glue " that " pulled the show together " , so producers knew they needed to make significant changes . On the basis of their experience on Captain Kangaroo , Cannell , Stone , and Gibbon thought the experts ' opinions were " nonsense " ; Cooney agreed . Lesser called their decision to defy the recommendations of their advisers " a turning point in the history of Sesame Street " . The producers reshot the Street segments ; Henson and his coworkers created Muppets that could interact with the human actors , specifically Oscar the Grouch and Big Bird , who became two of the show 's most enduring characters . In addition , the producers found Saunders ' role as Gordon not to be as likable by children watching the show , resulting in the character being recast by Matt Robinson , who was initially the show 's filmed segments producer . These test episodes were directly responsible for what Gladwell called " the essence of Sesame Street — the artful blend of fluffy monsters and earnest adults " .

Two days before the show 's premiere , a thirty-minute preview entitled This Way to Sesame Street aired on NBC . The show was financed by a $ 50,000 grant from Xerox . Written by Stone and produced by CTW publicist Bob Hatch , it was taped the day before it aired . Newsday called the preview " a unique display of cooperation between commercial and noncommercial broadcasters " . Sesame Street premièred November 10 , 1969 . It was widely praised for its originality , and was well received by parents as well as children . The show reached only 67.6 % of the nation , but earned a 3.3 Nielsen rating , meaning 1.9 million households and 7 million children watched it each day . In Sesame Street 's first season , the ETS reported that children who watched the show scored higher in tests than less-frequent viewers . In November 1970 , the cover of Time magazine featured Big Bird , who had received more fan mail than any of the show 's human hosts . The magazine declared , " ... It is not only the best children 's show in TV history , it is one of the best parents ' shows as well " . David Frost , speaking about the versions of Sesame Street that were being produced in other countries , declared it was " a hit everywhere it goes " . An executive at ABC , while recognizing that Sesame Street was not perfect , said the show " opened children 's TV to taste and wit and substance " and " made the climate right for improvement " . Other reviewers predicted commercial television would be forced to improve its children 's programming , something that did not substantially occur until the 1990s . Sesame Street won a Peabody Award , three Emmys , and the Prix Jeunesse award in 1970 . President Richard Nixon sent Cooney a congratulatory letter , and Dr. Benjamin Spock predicted the program would result in " better-trained citizens , fewer unemployables in the next generation , fewer people on welfare , and smaller jail populations " .

Sesame Street was not without its detractors ; there was little criticism of the show in the months following its premiere , but it increased at the end of its first season and beginning of the second season . In May 1970 , a state commission in Mississippi voted to not air the show on the state 's newly launched public television network . A member of the commission leaked the vote to The New York Times , stating that " Mississippi was not yet ready " for the show 's integrated cast . Cooney called the ban " a tragedy for both the white and black children of Mississippi " . The state commission reversed its decision after the vote made national news . The producers of Sesame Street made a few changes in its second season . Segments that featured children became more spontaneous and allowed more impromptu dialogue , even when it meant cutting other segments . Since federal funds had been used to produce the show , more segments of the population insisted upon being represented on Sesame Street ; for example , the show was criticized by Hispanic groups for the lack of Latino characters in the early years of production . A committee of Hispanic activists , commissioned by the CTW in 1970 , called Sesame Street " racist " and said the show 's bilingual aspects were of " poor quality and patronizing " . The CTW responded to these critics by hiring Hispanic actors , production staff , and researchers . By the mid-70s , Morrow reported that " the show included Chicano and Puerto Rican cast members , films about Mexican holidays and foods , and cartoons that taught Spanish words " .

While New York Magazine reported criticism of the presence of strong single women in the show , organizations like the National Organization for Women ( NOW ) expressed concerns that the show needed to be " less male-oriented " . For example , members of NOW took exception to the character Susan , who was originally a housewife . They complained about the lack of , as Morrow put it , " credible female Muppets " on the show ; Morrow reported that Henson 's response was that " women might not be strong enough to hold the puppets over the long hours of taping " . The show 's producers responded by making Susan a nurse and by hiring a female writer .

By the mid-1970s , Sesame Street , according to Davis , had become " an American institution " . ETS conducted two " landmark " studies of the show in 1970 and 1971 which demonstrated Sesame Street had a positive educational impact on its viewers . The results of these studies led to the producers securing funding for the show over the next several years , and provided the CTW with additional ways to promote it . By the second season , Sesame Street had become so popular that the design of ETS ' experiments to track the show 's educational outcomes had to be changed : instead of comparing viewers with a control group of non-viewers , the researchers studied the differences among levels of viewing . They found that children who watched Sesame Street more frequently had a higher comprehension of the material presented . Producer Jon Stone was instrumental in guiding the show during these years . According to Davis , Stone " gave Sesame Street its soul " ; without him " there would not have been Sesame Street as we know it " . Frank Oz regarded Stone as " the father of Sesame Street " , and Cooney considered Stone " the key creative talent on Sesame Street and " probably the most brilliant writer of children 's material in America " . Stone was able to recognize and mentor talented people for his crew . He actively hired and promoted women during a time when few women earned top production jobs in television . His policies provided the show with a succession of female producers and writers , many of whom went on to lead the boom in children 's programming at Nickelodeon , the Disney Channel , and PBS in the 1990s and 2000s . One of these women was Dulcy Singer , who later became the first female executive producer of Sesame Street .

After the show 's initial success , its producers began to think about its survival beyond its development and first season and decided to explore other funding sources . The CTW decided to depend upon government agencies and private foundations to develop the show . This would protect it from the financial pressures experienced by commercial networks , but created problems in finding continued support . This era in the show 's history was marked by conflicts between the CTW and the federal government ; in 1978 , the US Department of Education refused to deliver a $ 2 million check until the last day of the CTW 's fiscal year . As a result , the CTW decided to depend upon licensing arrangements , publishing , and international sales for its funding . Henson owned the trademarks to the Muppet characters : he was reluctant to market them at first , but agreed when the CTW promised that the profits from toys , books , and other products were to be used exclusively to fund the CTW . The producers demanded complete control over all products and product decisions ; any product line associated with the show had to be educational , inexpensive , and not advertised during its airings . The CTW approached Random House to establish and manage a non-broadcast materials division . Random House and the CTW named Christopher Cerf to assist the CTW in publishing books and other materials that emphasized the curriculum . In 1980 , the CTW began to produce a touring stage production based upon the show , written by Connell and performed by the Ice Follies .

Shortly after the premiere of Sesame Street , the CTW was approached by producers , educators , and officials in other nations , requesting that a version of the show be aired in their countries . Former CBS executive Mike Dann left commercial television to become vice-president of the CTW and Cooney 's assistant ; Dann began what Charlotte Cole , vice president for the CTW 's International Research department , called the " globalization " of Sesame Street . A flexible model was developed , based upon the experiences of the creators and producers of the original show . The shows came to be called " co-productions " , and they contained original sets , characters , and curriculum goals . Depending upon each country 's needs and resources , different versions were produced , including dubbed versions of the original show and independent programs . By 2009 , Sesame Street had expanded into 140 countries ; The New York Times reported in 2005 that income from the CTW 's international co-productions of the show was $ 96 million . Sesame Street 's cast expanded in the 1970s , better fulfilling the show 's original goal of greater diversity in both human and Muppet characters . The cast members who joined the show were Sonia Manzano ( Maria ) , who also wrote for the show , Northern Calloway ( David ) , Alaina Reed ( Olivia ) , Emilio Delgado ( Luis ) , Linda Bove ( Linda ) , and Buffy Sainte-Marie ( Buffy ) . In 1975 , Roscoe Orman became the third actor to play Gordon , succeeding Hal Miller , who had briefly replaced Matt Robinson .

New Muppet characters were introduced during the 1970s . Count von Count was created and performed by Jerry Nelson , who also voiced Mr. Snuffleupagus , a large Muppet that required two puppeteers to operate . Richard Hunt , who , in Jon Stone 's words , joined the Muppets as a " wild-eyed 18-year-old and grew into a master puppeteer and inspired teacher " , created Gladys the Cow , Forgetful Jones , Don Music , and the construction worker Sully . Telly Monster was performed by Brian Muehl ; Marty Robinson took over the role in 1984 . Frank Oz created Cookie Monster . Matt Robinson created the " controversial " ( as Davis called him ) character Roosevelt Franklin . Fran Brill , the first female puppeteer for the Muppets , joined the Henson organization in 1970 , and originated the character Prairie Dawn . In 1975 , Henson created The Muppet Show , which was filmed and produced in London ; Henson brought many of the Muppet performers with him , so opportunities opened up for new performers and puppets to appear on Sesame Street . The CTW wanted to attract the best composers and lyricists for Sesame Street , so songwriters like Joe Raposo , the show 's music director , and writer Jeff Moss were allowed to retain the rights to the songs they wrote . The writers earned lucrative profits , and the show was able to sustain public interest . Raposo 's " I Love Trash " , written for Oscar the Grouch , was included on the first album of Sesame Street songs , The Sesame Street Book & Record , recorded in 1970 . Moss ' " Rubber Duckie " , sung by Henson for Ernie , remained on the Top-40 Billboard charts for seven weeks that same year . Another Henson song , written by Raposo for Kermit the Frog in 1970 , " Bein ' Green " , which Davis called " Raposo 's best-regarded song for Sesame Street " , was later recorded by Frank Sinatra and Ray Charles . " Sing " , which became a hit for The Carpenters in 1973 , and " Somebody Come and Play " , were also written by Raposo for Sesame Street .

In 1978 , Stone and Singer produced and wrote the show 's first special , the " triumphant " Christmas Eve on Sesame Street , which included an O Henry-inspired storyline in which Bert and Ernie gave up their prized possessions — Ernie his rubber ducky and Bert his paper clip collection — to purchase each other Christmas gifts . Bert and Ernie were played by Frank Oz and Jim Henson , who in real life were , like the puppets they played , colleagues and friends . To Davis , this demonstrated the puppeteers ' remarkable ability to play " puppetry 's Odd Couple " . In Singer 's opinion , the special — which Stone also wrote and directed — demonstrated Stone 's " soul " , and Sonia Manzano called it a good example of what Sesame Street was all about . The special won Emmys for Stone and Singer in 1979 . By the show 's tenth anniversary in 1979 , nine million American children under the age of six were watching Sesame Street daily . Four out of five children had watched it over a six-week period , and 90 % of children from low-income inner-city homes regularly viewed the show .

In 1984 , the Federal Communications Commission ( FCC ) deregulated commercial restrictions on children 's television . Advertising during network children 's programs almost doubled , and deregulation resulted in an increase in commercially oriented programming . Sesame Street was successful during this era of deregulation despite the fact that the United States government terminated all federal funding of the CTW in 1981 . By 1987 , the show was earning $ 42 million per year from its magazine division , book royalties , product licensing , and foreign income — enough to cover two-thirds of its expenses . Its remaining budget , plus a $ 6 million surplus , was covered by revenue from its PBS broadcasts . According to Davis , Sesame Street 's second decade was spent " turning inward , expanding its young viewers ' world " . The show 's curriculum grew to include more " affective " teaching — relationships , ethics , and positive and negative emotions . Many of the show 's storylines were taken from the experiences of its writing staff , cast , and crew . In 1982 , Will Lee , who had played Mr. Hooper since the show 's premiere , died . For the 1983 season , the show 's producers and research staff decided they would explain Mr. Hooper 's death to their preschool audience , instead of recasting the role : the writer of that episode , Norman Stiles , said , " We felt we owed something to a man we respected and loved " . They convened a group of psychologists , religious leaders , and other experts in the field of grief , loss , and separation . The research team conducted a series of studies before the episode to ascertain if children were able to understand the messages they wanted to convey about Mr. Hooper 's death ; the research showed most children did understand . Parents ' reactions to the episode were , according to the CTW 's own reports , " overwhelmingly positive " . The episode , which won an Emmy , aired on Thanksgiving Day in 1983 so parents could be home to discuss it with their children . Author David Borgenicht called the episode " poignant " ; Davis called it " a landmark broadcast " and " a truly memorable episode , one of the show 's best " . Caroll Spinney , who played Big Bird and who drew the caricatures prominently used in the episode , reported the cast and crew were moved to tears during filming .

In the mid-1980s , Americans were becoming more aware of the prevalence of child abuse , so Sesame Street 's researchers and producers decided to " reveal " Mr. Snuffleupagus in 1985 . " Snuffy " had never been seen by any of the adults on the show and was considered Big Bird 's " imaginary friend " . The show 's producers were concerned about the message being sent to children ; " If children saw that the adults didn 't believe what Big Bird said ( even though it was true ) , they would be afraid to talk to adults about dramatic or disturbing things that happened to them " . For the 1988 and 1989 seasons , the topics of love , marriage , and childbirth were addressed when the show presented a storyline in which the characters Luis and Maria fall in love , marry , and have a child named Gabi . Sonia Manzano , the actress who played Maria , had married and become pregnant ; according to the book Sesame Street Unpaved , published after the show 's thirtieth anniversary in 1999 , Manzano 's real-life experiences gave the show 's writers and producers the idea . Before writing began , research was done to gain an understanding of what previous studies had revealed about preschoolers ' understanding of love , marriage , and family . The show 's staff found that at the time that there was very little relevant research done about children 's understanding of these topics , and no books for children had been written about them . Studies done after the episodes about Maria 's pregnancy aired showed that as a result of watching these episodes , children 's understanding of pregnancy increased .

Davis called the 1990s a " time of transition on Sesame Street " . Several people involved in the show from its beginnings died during this period : Jim Henson in 1990 at the age of 53 " from a runaway strep infection gone stubbornly , foolishly untreated " ; songwriter Joe Raposo from non-Hodgkin 's lymphoma fifteen months earlier ; long-time cast member Northern Calloway of cardiac arrest in January 1990 ; puppeteer Richard Hunt of AIDS in early 1992 ; CTW founder and producer David Connell of bladder cancer in 1995 ; director Jon Stone of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in 1997 ; and writer Jeff Moss of colon cancer in 1998 . By the early 1990s , Sesame Street was , as Davis put it , " the undisputed heavyweight champion of preschool television " . Entertainment Weekly reported in 1991 that the show 's music had been honored with eight Grammys . The show 's dominance , however , was soon challenged by another PBS television show for preschoolers , Barney & Friends , and Sesame Street 's ratings declined . The producers of Sesame Street responded , at the show 's twenty-fifth anniversary in 1993 , by expanding and redesigning the show 's set , calling it " Around the Corner " . New human and Muppet characters were introduced , including Zoe ( performed by Fran Brill ) , baby Natasha and her parents Ingrid and Humphrey , and Ruthie ( played by comedian Ruth Buzzi ) . The " Around the Corner " set was dismantled in 1997 . Zoe , one of the few characters that survived , was created to include another female Muppet on the show : her spunky and fearless personality was intended to break female stereotypes . According to Davis , she was the first character developed on the show by marketing and product development specialists , who worked with the researchers at the CTW . ( The quest for a " break-out " female Muppet character continued into 2006 with the creation of Abby Cadabby , who was created after nine months of research . ) In 1998 , for the first time in the show 's history , Sesame Street pursued funding by accepting corporate sponsorship . Consumer advocate Ralph Nader , who had been a guest on the show , urged parents to protest the move by boycotting the show .

For Sesame Street 's 30th anniversary in 1999 , its producers researched the reasons for the show 's lower ratings . For the first time since the show debuted , the producers and a team of researchers analyzed Sesame Street 's content and structure during a series of two-week-long workshops . They also studied how children 's viewing habits had changed in the past thirty years . They found that although the show was produced for those between the ages of three and five , children began watching it at a younger age . Preschool television had become more competitive , and the CTW 's research showed the traditional magazine format was not the best way to attract young children 's attention . The growth of home videos during the ' 80s and the increase of thirty-minute children 's shows on cable had demonstrated that children 's attention could be sustained for longer periods of time , but the CTW 's researchers found that their viewers , especially the younger ones , lost attention in Sesame Street after 40 to 45 minutes . Beginning in 1998 , a new 15-minute segment shown at the end of each episode , " Elmo 's World " , used traditional elements ( animation , Muppets , music , and live-action film ) , but had a more sustained narrative . " Elmo 's World " followed the same structure each episode , and depended heavily on repetition . Unlike the realism of the rest of the show , the segment took place in a stylized crayon-drawing universe as conceived by its host . Elmo , who represented the three- to four-year-old child , was chosen as host of the closing segment because he had always tested well with this segment of their audience . He was created in 1980 and originally performed by Brian Muehl , and later Richard Hunt , but did not become what his eventual portrayer , Kevin Clash , called a " phenomenon " until Clash took over the role in 1985 . Eventually , Elmo became , as Davis reported , " the embodiment " of Sesame Street , and " the marketing wonder of our age " when five million " Tickle Me Elmo " dolls were sold in 1996 . Clash believed the " Tickle Me Elmo " phenomenon made Elmo a household name and led to the " Elmo 's World " segment . Michael Jeter was a favorite with younger audiences in his role as Mr. Noodle 's brother , Mister Noodle on Sesame Street from 1999 to 2003 .

In 2002 , Sesame Street 's producers went further in changing the show to reflect its younger demographic , fundamentally changing the show 's structure , which had relied on " Street scenes " interrupted by live-action videos and animation . The target age for Sesame Street shifted downward , from four years to three years , after the show 's 33rd season . As co-executive producer Arlene Sherman stated , " We basically deconstructed the show " . The producers expanded upon the " Elmo 's World " by changing from a magazine format to a narrative format , which made the show easier for young children to navigate . Sherman called the show 's new look " startlingly different " . Following its tradition of addressing emotionally difficult topics , Sesame Street 's producers chose to address the attacks of 9 / 11 during this season on its premiere episode , which aired February 4 , 2002 . This episode , as well as a series of four episodes that aired after Hurricane Katrina in 2005 , were used in Sesame Workshop 's Community Outreach program . In 2006 , the United States Department of State called Sesame Street " the most widely viewed children 's television show in the world " . Over half of the show 's international co-productions were made after 2001 ; according to the 2006 documentary The World According to Sesame Street , the events of 9 / 11 inspired the producers of these co-productions . In 2003 , Takalani Sesame , a South African co-production , elicited criticism in the United States when its producers created Kami , the first HIV-positive Muppet , whose purpose was educating children in South Africa about the epidemic of AIDS . The controversy , which surprised the Sesame Workshop , was short-lived and died down after Kofi Annan and Jerry Falwell praised the Workshop 's efforts . By 2006 , Sesame Street had won more Emmy Awards than any other children 's show , including winning the outstanding children 's series award for twelve consecutive years — every year the Emmys included the category . By 2009 , the show had won 118 Emmys throughout its history , and was awarded the Outstanding Achievement Emmy for its 40 years on the air .

By Sesame Street 's 40th anniversary , it was ranked the fifteenth most popular children 's show on television . When the show premiered in 1969 , 130 episodes a year were produced ; in 2009 , because of rising costs , twenty-six episodes were made . In 2009 , the Children 's Television Workshop , which had changed its name to the Sesame Workshop ( SW ) in June 2000 to better reflect its entry into non-television and interactive media , launched a website with a library of free video clips and free podcasts from throughout the show 's history . The 2008 – 2009 recession , which led to budget cuts for many nonprofit arts organizations , severely affected Sesame Street ; in spring 2009 , the SW had to lay off 20 % of its staff . Sesame Street 's 40th anniversary was commemorated by the 2008 publication of Street Gang : The Complete History of Sesame Street , by Michael Davis , which has been called " the definitive statement " about the history of the show . Starting in 2009 , the producers of Sesame Street took steps to bring back older viewers ; it was also successful in increasing its audience viewership among 3-to-5 year-olds by the end of the 40th season . In 2012 , the show 's 43rd season , Elmo 's World was replaced with Elmo the Musical , which was targeted at the program 's older viewers . Subsequently in September 2014 , starting with the show 's 45th season , Sesame Workshop began distributing a half-hour version of the program to PBS member stations . The new version , which complemented the existing hour-long broadcast and focuses more on interstitial segments ( although certain segments such as Elmo the Musical or Abby 's Flying Fairy School are omitted from that version ) , was added because of increasing mobile and online viewing among children as well as growing competition for preschoolers on linear and online television , an increase in use of PBS Kids ' mobile video app during 2013 and decreasing broadcast viewership ; the half-hour version airs weekday afternoons on PBS member television stations ( with the hour-long version continuing to air in the morning ) and was made available for streaming online and on mobile devices through PBS ' website , mobile app and Roku channel .

On August 13 , 2015 , as part of a five-year programming and development deal , Sesame Workshop announced that first-run episodes of Sesame Street would move to premium television service HBO ( which had not aired any original children 's programming since 2005 ) in late 2015 . Sesame Workshop sought the deal because of declining revenue from viewer donations , and decreases in distribution fees paid by PBS member stations and licensing for merchandise sales ( particularly through Sesame Workshop 's dependence upon revenue from DVD sales ) , with the intent to having the show remain on PBS in some fashion ( HBO already had involvement in public television at the time of the deal , providing funding for the talk show Charlie Rose ) ; the deal also came in the wake of changing viewer habits of American children over the previous ten years . HBO will hold first-run rights to all newer episodes of the series starting with season 46 , after which they will air on PBS member stations following a nine-month exclusivity window , with no charge to the stations for airing the content ; however , HBO has not announced whether first-run episodes will air on the pay service 's main channel or its multiplex channel HBO Family . The agreement also gives HBO exclusive rights to stream past and future Sesame Street episodes on HBO Go and HBO Now – assuming those rights from Amazon Video and Netflix . On August 14 , Sesame Workshop announced that it would phase out its in-house subscription streaming service , Sesame Go , as a standalone service ; instead of shutting it down entirely , it intends to scale back its offerings to either provide access to a reduced slate of free content or act as a portal for Sesame Street 's website .

" Hands All Over " is a song recorded by American band Maroon 5 , for their 2010 third studio album of the same name . It was written by Adam Levine , Jesse Carmichael , Sam Farrar , while the production was done by Robert John " Mutt " Lange . A funk metal and rock song , " Hands All Over " features an instrumentation consisting of electronic tones , drums , guitar , piano and percussion accompanied with heavy backing vocals ; lyrically , the song speaks of sexiness . The song received generally positive reviews from music critics , with some of them calling it the best track on the album . It received comparison to the works of Prince , Nine Inch Nails and most notably to English band Def Leppard . Upon the release of the album , " Hands All Over " debuted on national charts in South Korea and Spain ; it peaked at number 20 on the Gaon Chart and 38 on the Spanish Singles Chart , respectively . A music video for the song was shot by Don Tyler was released on December 24 , 2010 . It features a nude animated woman flirting and dancing for the band members .

Maroon 5 began writing material for their third studio album , Hands All Over , after completion of a world tour that was launched in support of their 2007 studio album It Won 't Be Soon Before Long . Months later , the band received a phone call from Robert John " Mutt " Lange , who had heard that the band were beginning to write a new album , and expressed an interest in producing it . In a press release on their official website , the album is described as " a killer hybrid of rock , pop , funk and R & B. " The band 's frontman Adam Levine described Mutt as one of the most successful producers who have ever lived . Jesse Carmichael , the band ’ s keyboardist , said , " Mutt really helped us play to the best of our ability . And it drove us to be bigger and better than ever . " Hands All Over was released on September 21 , 2010 in the United States . It received generally favorable reviews from music critics and debuted at number two on the US Billboard 200 . The album 's title track was written by Levine , Jesse Carmichael and Sam Farrar , while the production was done by Mutt . The additional production , engineering and programming was provided by Farrar and Noah " Mailbox " Passovoy . The song was recorded at Mutt 's studio in Vevey ( Lake Geneva ) , Switzerland by Olle Romo who also provided the Pro-Tools . Mike Shipley did the additional recording and also mixed " Hands All Over " . Additional engineering of the song was done by Isha Erskine , while Eric Rose and Chad Hugo did the additional programming . Scott Cooke and Lenny Castro played the percussion . Brad Blackwood from Euphonic Masters was the mastering engineer .

" Hands All Over " is a funk metal and rock song with a length of three minutes and thirteen seconds ( 3 : 13 ) . It has an instrumentation consisting of drums , guitar , piano and percussion . Bill Lamb of About.com wrote for the song , " crunchy guitars and a rock star sway animate the title song " . Contactmusic 's Nima Baniamer stated that " Hands All Over " , follows a trend consisting of heavy percussions and more heavier backing vocals . Melinda Newman of HitFix wrote that the song " is a heavy thump of a song that sounds pure Lange with a big kick drum propelling it forward . " In a review of the album , Fraser McAlpine of BBC Music wrote that the track contains a " rude guitar sleaze " , while according to Ben Czajkowski of 411mania " Hands all Over " borders on anthemic rock with a biting guitar technique " . Written in the key of C minor , the song is placed in common time , with a moderate funk tempo . " Hands " All Over " starts with dark and shadowed electronic undertones before " sudden " bursts of electronic guitars start playing before transitioning into a " rock-studded " production . The track also contains a lot of electronic guitar solo 's in the chorus and the verses , in the verses and the bridges and so forth . According to a reviewer of Billboard , at some points during the duration of the song , the guitars " just bleed " throughout the verses . " Put your hands all over me " , " Levine bellows over burly power chords " according to Jody Rosen of Rolling Stone . Thomas Conner of Chicago Sun-Times wrote that , lyrically , " Hands All Over " together with " Never Gonna Leave This Bed " speak of sexiness .

The song received generally positive reviews from music critics . Jakob Dorof of Slant Magazine wrote that " Hands All Over " is " the one real gamble " ; despite the fact that it tries to hard to find a missing connection between the works of Prince , Queen and Nine Inch Nails , " it 's certainly one of the more interesting things the band has ever recorded . " Similarly , McAlpine of BBC Music wrote that on songs like " Hands All Over " and " Stutter " , the Maroon 5 shows a band " who are really at their best when they play pop music like the sleazy rockers they clearly are . " Contactmusic 's Banimaer stated that although the track is a little repetitive , it shows what kind of band Maroon 5 wants to be . Rosen of Rolling Stone magazine wrote that it is a " big , silly arena-rock song reminiscent of Def Leppard " . She further noted , " but Maroon 5 are too meticulous , a little too uptight , to make good on the song 's party-hearty promise . Levine and crew could be blue-eyed-soul godheads , the 21st-century Hall and Oates . But they need to loosen up first . " Leah Greenblat of Entertainment Weekly also spotted the Def Leppard influence on " Hands All Over " . Writing for the Bay of Plenty Times , Tamlyn Stewart said that the song is sexy and funky and is similar to the band 's works on their second studio album It Won 't Be Soon Before Long ( 2007 ) . Billboard 's reviewer labeled " Hands All Over " the best track among others including " Give a Little More " , " Misery " and " Out of Goodbyes " .

A music video for the song was released on December 24 , 2010 . It was directed by Don Tyler , who previously worked on videos for the bands A Day to Remember and Flyleaf . It was digitally released on June 14 , 2011 via iTunes Store and the same day was also uploaded on the band 's Vevo channel on YouTube . Shot in an animated technique , the video starts with an animated version of lead singer Levine singing on a microphone while hands are behind his back touching his body . As the video progresses , a nude animated woman is shown dancing around him and flirting with the other members of the band . Several animation effects such as angel wings and devil elements are shown behind Levine as he is singing , while the woman is also dancing for the other members . The video finishes with a close shot of Levine 's face .

The Glassheart Tour was the second headlining concert tour by British recording artist Leona Lewis . It was launched in support of her third studio album , Glassheart ( 2012 ) . Announced on 8 October 2012 , with an initial run of sixteen dates in the United Kingdom , the Glassheart Tour was extended to include five dates in Germany and one in Switzerland . English singer-songwriter Ryan Keen served as the support act . It marks the first time that Lewis has performed material in Europe as part of a headline tour ; her previous tour The Labyrinth ( 2010 ) , only visited the UK . Lewis was inspired by American hip hop artist and music producer Kanye West 's style of performance and noted British playwright William Shakespeare as inspiration for the tour . Lewis performed the set list with her band which consisted mostly of a string quartet and acoustic song arrangements . It was the acoustic performances and Lewis ' vocals that garnered the most praise from critics ; however , there was a mixed reaction to some of the arrangements such as the reggae influences on " Better in Time " . Critics were also divided over the lack of diversity from previous live performances though Lewis ' stage presence was commended .

Lewis released her third studio album Glassheart on 12 October 2012 , almost a year after the original release date of November 2011 . The album had been conceptualised in July 2010 , following Lewis ' completion of her first tour , The Labyrinth . The album title Glassheart was inspired from a conversation that Lewis had with Ryan Tedder . During the conversation , Tedder asked Lewis about her past experiences with love and life in general . Lewis ' response led him to the word " Glassheart . " During an interview with Clyde 1 radio , Lewis said " Glassheart represents protecting your heart , yourself and protecting your emotions , its very poignant " . On 8 October 2012 , a week before the album 's UK release , Lewis announced her supporting tour of the same name . The tour is named after the album , and although Lewis said she is not American hip hop artist and music producer Kanye West 's " biggest fan " , she was inspired by his tour performances where he appeared on stage alone and just " did his thing " . During an interview with Digital Spy , Lewis told Tom Eames that Glassheart has a running theme about " star-crossed lovers that can 't be together " , and so it was likely that this idea would feature on the tour . Lewis also cited William Shakespeare as another source of inspiration . She spent the three days of the final tour rehearsals at The Backstage Centre in Purfleet , Essex ( UK ) . The Glassheart Tour was scheduled to visit twenty-one venues across Germany and the United Kingdom . The tour was expected to begin on 15 April in Berlin . The list had expanded from an initial sixteen to include five dates in Germany . Lewis would then proceed with UK dates beginning in Glasgow , including two dates at London 's Royal Albert Hall before finishing on 18 May in Plymouth . Speaking about the tour , Lewis said " I can 't wait to get out there and play my new songs . I had such fun on my last tour and I 'm really excited about doing it again next year . " Barclaycard ran a competition which gave fans the chance to win tickets to 6 May concert at Birmingham 's National Indoor Arena .

In a review for the Express & Star , Elizabeth Joyce said although Lewis was not like her contemporaries : " meat dress-wearing " Lady Gaga or the Russell Brand-marrying Katy Perry , " no one can reach those soft lows or soaring highs quite like her " . Joyce praised the concert for showing the best of Lewis ' vocal abilities . Focussing predominately on songs from Spirit ( 2007 ) and Glassheart ( 2012 ) , the concert was largely acoustic music with a band and string quartet . In particular Joyce praised Lewis ' performances of " First Time Ever I Saw Your Face " and " Bleeding Love " which earned her standing ovations , in addition to the " note perfect " rendition of " Run " . Katherine Hollisey-McLean for the Worthing Herald largely agreed , commenting that if anyone expected Lewis to be " belting out song after song " they were right . Hollisey-McLean praised the decisions to switch the song arrangements , for example adding reggae beats to " Better in Time " and performing the acoustic version of " Trouble " . She ended by saying that Lewis ' vocals were " flawless " and that her stage presence and confidence had vastly improved over the last seven years .

The Guardian 's Malcolm Jack was less impressed ; he stated that when Lewis tried to diversify the show by dancing or switching the arrangements , she risked becoming the British diva that pop music forgot . Jack said that during a " sassy dance routine " for " Forgive Me " Lewis came off as a " budget Beyoncé " , whilst on the " cringey windin ' and grindin ' reggae take on ' Better in Time ' song " she comes across like a " reasonably priced Rihanna " . Jack concluded by saying the show was in need of a shot of " adrenaline " . In writing for the Nottingham Post , Paul Hindle agreed , saying that when the tempo increased and choreography was introduced " Lewis looked endearingly uncomfortable " ; however , Hindle was positive about Lewis ' vocals , calling her vocal performance " virtuoso " . He concluded that Lewis ' " spellbinding rendition " of " Run " was a highlight of the concert , and that fans should not have left disappointed .

Route 177 was the shortest state highway recorded in Somerset County , New Jersey and the second shortest around the entire state of New Jersey . ( New Jersey Route 59 is the shortest recorded route in the state at 0.15-mile ( 0.24 km ) long . ) Route 177 went for a short , 0.24 miles ( 0.39 km ) state-maintained portion of Bridge Street in Somerville . One of only three state highways in Somerset County after the 1953 state highway renumbering , Route 177 was the only one to be decommissioned later on . ( The other two highways are Route 27 further south and Route 28 further north ) The short-lived designation went from U.S. Route 206 in Somerville , up Bridge Street near the Old Cemetery to Fifth Street , where state maintenance terminated . In 1974 , the Department of Transportation turned maintenance of this short highway over to the borough of Somerville for future use .

Route 177 began at a traffic light intersection with U.S. Route 206 in the city of Somerville . At the intersection , southbound traffic on Route 206 had to use a jughandle to connect to Route 177 . The state highway went northeastward , progressing along as South Bridge Street through a curve . Heading northward , the route passed the Somerville Old Cemetery before intersecting with Fifth Street . There , state-maintenance ended , and the designation of Route 177 terminated . Entering downtown Somerville , South Bridge Street continued northward into a large residential community . Passing to the east and west of several residential homes , South Bridge Street continued into the downtown portion , crossing the current-day Raritan Valley Line tracks maintained by New Jersey Transit and served the Somerville train station . After a couple of blocks of residential homes and businesses , South Bridge Street came to an intersection with New Jersey Route 28 , where it switched to North Bridge Street .

The alignment of Route 177 was a former alignment of State Highway Route 31 through Somerville . The highway was instated in 1926 as U.S. Route 206 and 1927 as State Highway Route 31 by the New Jersey State Highway Department and the Federal Highway Administration respectively . By 1930 , Routes 206 and 31 was shifted off of Bridge Street , running along a partially completed bypass of Somerville . By 1938 , this was completed and Route 206 was shifted to the southern terminus of Bridge Street south of the old cemetery . Bridge Street remained unnumbered until the second state highway renumbering on January 1 , 1953 . That day , the unnumbered alignment became Route 177 , running from US 206 to Fifth Street , where it met US 206 's former alignment . The route remained intact for a couple of decades , as one of three state highways in Somerset County ( along with Route 28 and Route 27 ) until 1974 , when the route was decommissioned and turned over to the borough of Somerville .

George Wild Galvin ( 20 December 1860 – 31 October 1904 ) , better known by the stage name Dan Leno , was a leading English music hall comedian and musical theatre actor during the late Victorian era . He was best known , aside from his music hall act , for his dame roles in the annual pantomimes that were popular at London 's Theatre Royal , Drury Lane , from 1888 to 1904 . Leno was born in St Pancras , London , and began to entertain as a child . In 1864 , he joined his parents on stage in their music hall act , and he made his first solo appearance , aged nine , at the Britannia Music Hall in Coventry . As a youth , he was famous for his clog dancing , and in his teen years , he became the star of his family 's act . He adopted the stage name Dan Leno and , in 1884 , made his first performance under that name in London . As a solo artist , he became increasingly popular during the late 1880s and 1890s , when he was one of the highest-paid comedians in the world . He developed a music hall act of talking about life 's mundane subjects , mixed with comic songs and surreal observations , and created a host of mostly working-class characters to illustrate his stories . In 1901 , still at the peak of his career , he performed his " Huntsman " sketch for Edward VII at Sandringham . The monarch was so impressed that Leno became publicly known as " the king 's jester " .

Leno also appeared in burlesque and , every year from 1888 to 1904 , in the Drury Lane Theatre 's Christmas pantomime spectacles . He was generous and active in charitable causes , especially to benefit performers in need . Leno continued to appear in musical comedies and his own music hall routines until 1902 , although he suffered increasingly from alcoholism . This , together with his long association with dame and low comedy roles , prevented him from being taken seriously as a dramatic actor , and he was turned down for Shakespearean roles . Leno began to behave in an erratic and furious manner by 1902 , and he suffered a mental breakdown in early 1903 . He was committed to a mental asylum , but was discharged later that year . After one more show , his health declined , and he died aged 43 .

Leno was born in St Pancras , London . He was the youngest of six children , including two elder brothers , John and Henry , and an elder sister , Frances . Two other siblings died in infancy . His parents , John Galvin ( 1826 – 1864 ) and his wife Louisa ( née Dutton ; 1831 – 1891 ) , performed together in a music hall double act called " The Singing and Acting Duettists " . They were known professionally as Mr. and Mrs. Johnny Wild . They were not very successful , and the family struggled in poverty . Having had very little schooling , and being raised by performers , Leno learned to entertain as a child . In 1862 , Leno 's parents and elder brothers appeared at the Surrey Music Hall in Sheffield , then performed in northern cities later in the year . In 1864 , at the age of four , Leno joined his parents on stage for the first time , at the Cosmotheca Music Hall in Paddington , under the billing " Little George , the Infant Wonder , Contortionist , and Posturer " . When Leno was still four , his father , an alcoholic , died at the age of 37 . The family moved to Liverpool a few months later , where his mother married William Grant ( 1837 – 1896 ) , on 7 March 1866 . Grant was a comedian of Lancastrian and Irish descent , who performed in music halls throughout the British provinces under the stage name of William Leno . He was a seasoned actor and had previously been employed by Charles Kean in his theatre company at the Princess 's Theatre in London . In 1866 , the family home in Marylebone was demolished to make way for St Pancras railway station and , as a result , Leno 's sister Frances was sent to live with an uncle , while his brother John , who performed occasionally with his parents , took full-time employment . Leno , his mother , stepfather and brother Henry moved north and settled in Liverpool , where they performed in various halls and theatres , including the Star Music Hall , but they often returned to London to perform in the capital 's music halls .

In 1865 , Leno and his brother Henry , who first taught Leno to dance , formed a clog dancing double act known as " The Great Little Lenos " . This was the first time that Leno used his stepfather 's stage name , " Leno " , which he never registered legally . The same year , Leno also appeared in his first pantomime , in Liverpool , where he had a supporting part as a juvenile clown in Fortunatus ; or , The Magic Wishing Cap alongside his parents , who appeared as " Mr and Mrs Leno – Comic Duettists " . On 18 July 1866 , Leno , Henry and their parents appeared on the opening night of the Cambridge Music Hall in Toxteth , Liverpool , under the billing " Mr. and Mrs. Leno , the Great , Sensational , Dramatic and Comic Duettists and The Brothers Leno , Lancashire Clog , Boot and Pump Dancers " . The following year , the brothers made their first appearance without their parents at the Britannia music hall in Hoxton . Although initially successful , the pair would experience many bouts of unemployment and often busked outside London pubs to make a living . Tired of surviving on little or no money , Henry left the clog dancing act to take up a trade in London , forcing Leno to consider a future as a solo performer . Henry later founded a dance school . Soon , however , Henry was replaced intermittently in the act by the boys ' uncle , Johnny Danvers , who was a week older than Leno . Leno and Danvers were close from an early age .

Leno made his debut as a solo performer in 1869 , returning to the Britannia music hall in Hoxton , where he became known as " The Great Little Leno , the Quintessence of Irish Comedians " . The name was suggested by his stepfather , William , who thought the Irish connection would appeal to audiences on their upcoming visit to Dublin . Arriving in Ireland the same year , the Lenos were struggling financially and stayed with William 's relatives . In addition to his performances as part of the family act , young Leno appeared as a solo act under an Irish-sounding stage name , " Dan Patrick " . This allowed him to earn a separate fee of 23 shillings per performance plus living expenses . The name " Dan " was chosen to honour Dan Lowery , a northern music hall comedian and music hall proprietor whom the Lenos had met a few months earlier . During this tour of Ireland , the Lenos appeared in Dublin in a pantomime written by Leno 's father : Old King Humpty ; or , Harlequin Emerald Isle and Katty of Killarney ( 1869 ) , in which Leno received praise from Charles Dickens , who was in the audience and told him : " Good little man , you 'll make headway ! "

In 1870 , the Lenos appeared in another pantomime by Leno 's father , Jack the Giant Killer ; or , Harlequin Grim Gosling , or the Good Fairy Queen of the Golden Pine Grove , in which Leno played the title character and also featured in the variety entertainment that preceded the pantomime . This was his last theatrical role until 1886 . Throughout the 1870s , Leno and his parents performed as " The Comic Trio ( Mr. & Mrs. Leno and Dan Patrick ) In Their Really Funny Entertainments , Songs and Dances " . In the family act with his parents and Danvers , young Leno often took the leading role in such sketches as his stepfather 's The Wicklow Wedding . Another of their sketches was Torpedo Bill , in which Leno played the title role , an inventor of explosive devices . His parents played a " washerwoman " and a " comic cobbler " . This was followed by another sketch , Pongo the Monkey . Opening at Pullan 's Theatre of Varieties in Bradford on 20 May 1878 , this burlesque featured Leno as an escaped monkey ; it became his favourite sketch of the period .

The teenage Leno 's growing popularity led to bookings at , among others , the Varieties Theatre in Sheffield and the Star Music Hall in Manchester . At the same time , Leno 's clog dancing continued to be so good that in 1880 he won the world championship at the Princess 's Music Hall in Leeds , for which he received a gold and silver belt weighing 44.5 oz ( 1.26 kg ) . His biographer , the pantomime librettist J. Hickory Wood , described his act : " He danced on the stage ; he danced on a pedestal ; he danced on a slab of slate ; he was encored over and over again ; but throughout his performance , he never uttered a word " .

In 1878 , Leno and his family moved to Manchester . There , he met Lydia Reynolds , who , in 1883 , joined the Leno family theatre company , which already consisted of his parents , Danvers and Leno . The following year , Leno and Reynolds married ; around this time , he adopted the stage name " Dan Leno " . On 10 March 1884 , the Leno family took over the running of the Grand Varieties Theatre in Sheffield . The Lenos felt comfortable with their working class Sheffield audiences . On their opening night , over 4,000 patrons entered the theatre , paying sixpence to see Dan Leno star in Doctor Cut ' Em Up . In October 1884 , facing tough competition , the Lenos gave up the lease on the theatre . In 1885 , Leno and his wife moved to Clapham Park , London , and Leno gained new success with a solo act that featured comedy patter , dancing and song . On the night of his London debut , he appeared in three music halls : the Foresters ' Music Hall in Mile End , Middlesex Music Hall in Drury Lane and Gatti 's-in-the-Road , where he earned £ 5 a week in total ( £ 487 in 2016 adjusted for inflation ) . Although billed as " The Great Irish Comic Vocalist and Clog Champion " at first , he slowly phased out his dancing in favour of character studies , such as " Going to Buy Milk for the Twins " , " When Rafferty Raffled his Watch " and " The Railway Guard " . His dancing had earned him popularity in the provinces , but Leno found that his London audiences preferred these sketches and his comic songs . Leno 's other London venues in the late 1880s included the Collins Music Hall in Islington , the Queen 's Theatre in Poplar and the Standard in Pimlico .

Leno was a replacement in the role of Leontes in the 1888 musical burlesque of the ancient Greek character Atalanta at the Strand Theatre , directed by Charles Hawtrey . It was written by Hawtrey 's brother , George P. Hawtrey , and it starred Frank Wyatt , Willie Warde and William Hawtrey . The Illustrated Sporting and Dramatic News praised Leno 's singing and dancing and reported that : " He brings a good deal of fun and quaintness to the not very important part of Leontes . " Leno accepted the role at short notice , with no opportunity to learn the script . But his improvised comedy helped to extend the life of the show . When Leno and another leading actor left a few months later , the production closed .

During the 1890s , Leno was the leading performer on the music hall stage , rivalled only by Albert Chevalier , who moved into music hall from the legitimate theatre . Their styles and appeal were very different : Leno 's characters were gritty working-class realists , while Chevalier 's were overflowing in romanticism , and his act depicted an affluent point of view . The two represented the opposite poles of cockney comedy . For his music hall acts , Leno created characters that were based on observations about life in London , including shopwalkers , grocer 's assistants , beefeaters , huntsmen , racegoers , firemen , fathers , henpecked husbands , garrulous wives , pantomime dames , a police officer , a Spanish bandit , a fireman and a hairdresser . One such character was Mrs. Kelly , a gossip . Leno would sing a verse of a song , then begin a monologue , often his You know Mrs. Kelly ? routine , which became a well-known catchphrase : " You see we had a row once , and it was all through Mrs. Kelly . You know Mrs. Kelly , of course . ... Oh , you must know Mrs. Kelly ; everybody knows Mrs. Kelly . "

For his London acts , Leno purchased songs from the foremost music hall writers and composers . One such composer was Harry King , who wrote many of Leno 's early successes . Other well-known composers of the day who supplied Leno with numbers included Harry Dacre and Joseph Tabrar . From 1890 , Leno commissioned George Le Brunn to compose the incidental music to many of his songs , including " The Detective " , " My Old Man " , " Chimney on Fire " , " The Fasting Man " , " The Jap " , " All Through A Little Piece of Bacon " and " The Detective Camera " . Le Brunn also provided the incidental music for three of Leno 's best-known songs that depicted life in everyday occupations : " The Railway Guard " ( 1890 ) , " The Shopwalker " and " The Waiter " ( both from 1891 ) . The songs in each piece became instantly distinctive and familiar to Leno 's audiences , but his occasional changes to the characterisations kept the sketches fresh and topical . " The Railway Guard " featured Leno in a mad characterisation of a railway station guard dressed in an ill-fitting uniform , with an unkempt beard and a whistle . The character was created by exaggerating the behaviour that Leno saw in a real employee at Brixton station who concerned himself in other people 's business while , at the same time , not doing any work . " The Shopwalker " was full of comic one-liners and was heavily influenced by pantomime . Leno played the part of a shop assistant , again of manic demeanour , enticing imaginary clientele into the shop before launching into a frantic selling technique sung in verse . Leno 's depiction of " The Waiter " , dressed in an oversized dinner jacket and loose-fitting white dickey , which would flap up and hit his face , was of a man consumed in self-pity and indignation . Overworked , overwrought and overwhelmed by the number of his customers , the waiter gave out excuses for the bad service faster than the customers could complain :

Leno 's first London appearance in pantomime was as Dame Durden in Jack and the Beanstalk , which he performed at London 's Surrey Theatre in 1886 , having been spotted singing " Going to Buy Milk " by the Surrey Theatre manager , George Conquest . Conquest also hired Leno 's wife to star in the production . The pantomime was a success , and Leno received rave reviews ; as a result , he was booked to star as Tinpanz the Tinker in the following year 's pantomime , which had the unique title of Sinbad and the Little Old Man of the Sea ; or , The Tinker , the Tailor , the Soldier , the Sailor , Apothecary , Ploughboy , Gentleman Thief . After these pantomime performances proved popular with audiences , Leno was hired in 1888 by Augustus Harris , manager at the Theatre Royal , Drury Lane , to appear in that year 's Christmas pantomime , Babes in the Wood . Harris 's pantomime productions at the huge theatre were known for their extravagance and splendour . Each one had a cast of over a hundred performers , ballet dancers , acrobats , marionettes and animals , and included an elaborate transformation scene and an energetic harlequinade . Often they were partly written by Harris . Herbert Campbell and Harry Nicholls starred with Leno in the next fifteen Christmas productions at Drury Lane . Campbell had appeared in the theatre 's previous five pantomimes and was a favourite of the writer of those productions , E. L. Blanchard . Blanchard left the theatre when Leno was hired , believing that music hall performers were unsuitable for his Christmas pantomimes . This was not a view shared by audiences or the critics , one of whom wrote :

I am inclined to think " the cake " for frolicsome humour is taken by the dapper new-comer , Mr. Dan Leno , who is sketched as the galvanic baroness in the wonderfully amusing dance which sets the house in a roar . The substantial " babes " , Mr. Herbert Campbell and Mr. Harry Nicholls , would have no excuse if they did not vie in drollery with the light footed Dan Leno . Babes in the Wood was a triumph : the theatre reported record attendance , and the run was extended until 27 April 1889 . Leno considerably reduced his music-hall engagements as a consequence . Nevertheless , between April and October 1889 , Leno appeared simultaneously at the Empire Theatre and the Oxford Music Hall , performing his one-man show . By this time , Leno was much in demand and had bookings for the next three years . On 9 May 1889 he starred for George P. Hawtrey in a matinee of Penelope , a musical version of a famous farce The Area Belle , to benefit the Holborn Lodge for Shop Girls . In this benefit , he played the role of Pitcher opposite the seasoned Gilbert and Sullivan performer Rutland Barrington . The Times considered that his performance treated the piece " too much in the manner of pantomime " . During Leno 's long association with the Drury Lane pantomimes , he appeared chiefly as the dame . After Harris died in 1896 , Arthur Collins became the manager of the theatre and oversaw ( and often helped to write ) the pantomimes .

In their pantomimes , the diminutive Leno and the massive Campbell were a visually comic duo . They would often deviate from the script , improvising freely . This was met with some scepticism by producers , who feared that the scenes would not be funny to audiences and observed that , in any event , they were rarely at their best until a few nights after opening . George Bernard Shaw wrote of one appearance : " I hope I never again have to endure anything more dismally futile " , and the English essayist and caricaturist Max Beerbohm stated that " Leno does not do himself justice collaborating with the public " . He noted , however , that Leno " was exceptional in giving each of his dames a personality of her own , from extravagant queen to artless gossip " . In Sleeping Beauty , Leno and Campbell caused the audience to laugh even when they could not see them : they would arrive on stage in closed palanquins and exchange the lines , " Have you anything to do this afternoon , my dear ? " – " No , I have nothing on " , before being carried off again . Leno and Campbell 's pantomimes from 1889 were Jack and the Beanstalk ( 1889 and 1899 ) , Beauty and the Beast ( 1890 and 1900 ) , Humpty Dumpty ( 1891 and 1903 ) , Little Bo-Peep ( 1892 ) , Robinson Crusoe ( 1893 ) , Dick Whittington and His Cat ( 1894 ) , Cinderella ( 1895 ) , Aladdin ( 1896 ) , Babes in the Wood ( 1897 ) and the Forty Thieves ( 1898 ) .

Leno considered the dame roles in two of his last pantomimes , Bluebeard ( 1901 ) and Mother Goose ( 1902 ) , written by J. Hickory Wood , to be his favourites . He was paid £ 200 ( £ 19,582 in 2016 adjusted for inflation ) for each of the pantomime seasons . Leno appeared at Drury Lane as Sister Anne in Bluebeard , a character described by Wood as " a sprightly , somewhat below middle aged person who was of a coming on disposition and who had not yet abandoned hope " The Times drama critic noted : " It is a quite peculiar and original Sister Anne , who dances breakdowns and sings strange ballads to a still stranger harp and plays ping-pong with a frying-pan and potatoes and burlesques Sherlock Holmes and wears the oddest of garments and dresses her hair like Miss Morleena Kenwigs , and speaks in a piping voice – in short it is none other than Dan Leno whom we all know " . Mother Goose provided Leno with one of the most challenging roles of his career , in which he was required to portray the same woman in several different guises . Wood 's idea , that neither fortune nor beauty would bring happiness , was illustrated by a series of magical character transformations . The poor , unkempt and generally ugly Mother Goose eventually became a rich and beautiful but tasteless parvenu , searching for a suitor . The production was one of Drury Lane 's most successful pantomimes , running until 28 March 1903 .

In 1896 , the impresario Milton Bode approached Leno with a proposal for a farcical musical comedy vehicle devised for him called Orlando Dando , the Volunteer , by Basil Hood with music by Walter Slaughter . Leno 's agent declined the offer , as his client was solidly booked for two years . Bode offered Leno £ 625 ( £ 82,880 in 2016 adjusted for inflation ) for a six-week appearance in 1898 . Upon hearing this , the comedian overrode his agent and accepted the offer . Leno toured the provinces in the piece and was an immediate success . So popular was his performance that Bode re-engaged him for a further two shows : the musical farce In Gay Piccadilly ! ( 1899 ) , by George R. Sims , in which Leno 's uncle , Johnny Danvers appeared ( The Era said that Leno was " attracting huge houses " and called him " excruciatingly funny " ) ; and the musical comedy Mr. Wix of Wickham ( 1902 ) . Both toured after their original runs . In 1897 , Leno went to America and made his debut on 12 April of that year at Hammerstein 's Olympia Music Hall on Broadway , where he was billed as " The Funniest Man on Earth " . Reviews were mixed : one newspaper reported that the house roared its approval , while another complained that Leno 's English humour was out of date . His American engagement came to an end a month later , and Leno said that it was " the crown of my career " . Despite his jubilation , Leno was conscious of the few negative reviews he had received and rejected all later offers to tour the United States and Australia .

The same year , the comedian lent his name and writing talents to Dan Leno 's Comic Journal . The paper was primarily aimed at young adults and featured a mythologised version of Leno – the first comic paper to take its name from , and base a central character on , a living person . Published by C. Arthur Pearson , Issue No. 1 appeared on 26 February 1898 , and the paper sold 350,000 copies a year . Leno wrote most of the paper 's comic stories and jokes , and Tom Browne contributed many of the illustrations . The comedian retained editorial control of the paper , deciding which items to omit . The Journal was known for its slogans , including " One Touch of Leno Makes the Whole World Grin " and " Won 't wash clothes but will mangle melancholy " . The cover always showed a caricature of Leno and his editorial staff at work and play . Inside , the features included " Daniel 's Diary " , " Moans from the Martyr " , two yarns , a couple of dozen cartoons and " Leno 's Latest – Fresh Jokes and Wheezes Made on the Premises " . After a run of nearly two years the novelty wore off , and Leno lost interest . The paper shut down on 2 December 1899 .

A journalist wrote , in the late 1890s , that Leno was " probably the highest paid funny man in the world " . In 1898 , Leno , Herbert Campbell and Johnny Danvers formed a consortium to build the Granville Theatre in Fulham , which was demolished in 1971 . Leno published an autobiography , Dan Leno : Hys Booke , in 1899 , ghostwritten by T. C. Elder . Leno 's biographer J. Hickory Wood commented : " I can honestly say that I never saw him absolutely at rest . He was always doing something , and had something else to do afterwards ; or he had just been somewhere , was going somewhere else , and had several other appointments to follow . " That year , Leno performed the role of " waxi omo " ( a slang expression for a black-face performer ) in the Doo-da-Day Minstrels , an act that included Danvers , Campbell , Bransby Williams , Joe Elvin and Eugene Stratton . The troupe 's only performance was at the London Pavilion on 29 May 1899 as part of a benefit . Leno 's song " The Funny Little Nigger " greatly amused the audience . His biographer Barry Anthony considered the performance to be " more or less , the last gasp of black-face minstrelsy in Britain " .

Between 1901 and 1903 , Leno recorded more than twenty-five songs and monologues on the Gramophone and Typewriter Company label . He also made 14 short films towards the end of his life , in which he portrayed a bumbling buffoon who struggles to carry out everyday tasks , such as riding a bicycle or opening a bottle of champagne . On 26 November 1901 , Leno , along with Seymour Hicks and his wife , the actress Ellaline Terriss , was invited to Sandringham House to take part in a Royal Command Performance to entertain King Edward VII , Queen Alexandra , their son George and his wife , Mary , the Prince and Princess of Wales . Leno performed a thirty-five-minute solo act that included two of his best-known songs : " How to Buy a House " and " The Huntsman " . After the performance , Leno reported , " The King , the Queen and the Prince of Wales all very kindly shook hands with me and told me how much they had enjoyed it . The Princess of Wales was just going to shake hands with me , when she looked at my face , and couldn 't do it for some time , because she laughed so much . I wasn 't intending to look funny – I was really trying to look dignified and courtly ; but I suppose I couldn 't help myself . " As a memento , the king presented Leno with a jewel-encrusted royal tie pin , and thereafter , Leno became known as " the King 's Jester " . Leno was the first music hall performer to give a Royal Command Performance during the king 's reign .

In 1883 , Leno met Sarah Lydia Reynolds ( 1866 – 1942 ) , a young dancer and comedy singer from Birmingham , while both were appearing at King Ohmy 's Circus of Varieties , Rochdale . The daughter of a stage carpenter , Lydia , as she was known professionally , was already an accomplished actress as a teenager : of her performance in Sinbad the Sailor in 1881 , one critic wrote that she " played Zorlida very well for a young artiste . She is well known at this theatre and with proper training will prove a very clever actress . " She and Leno married in 1884 in a discreet ceremony at St. George 's Church , in Hulme , Manchester , soon after the birth of their first daughter , Georgina . A second child died in infancy , and John was born in 1888 . Their three youngest children – Ernest ( b . 1889 ) , Sidney ( b . 1891 ) and May ( b . 1896 ) – all followed their father onto the stage . Sidney later performed as Dan Leno , Jr . After Leno 's mother and stepfather retired from performing , Leno supported them financially until their deaths .

The Terriers Association was established in 1890 to help retired artists in need of financial help . Leno was an active fundraiser in this and in the Music Hall Benevolent Fund , of which he became President . He was an early member of the entertainment charity Grand Order of Water Rats , which helps performers who are in financial need , and served as its leader , the King Rat , in 1891 , 1892 and 1897 . Near the end of his life , Leno co-founded The Music Hall Artistes Railway Association , which entered a partnership with the Water Rats to form music hall 's first trade union . Some of Leno 's charity was discreet and unpublicised . In the late 1890s , Leno formed a cricket team called the " Dainties " , for which he recruited many of the day 's leading comedians and music hall stars . They played for charity against a variety of amateur teams willing to put up with their comedic mayhem , such as London 's Metropolitan Police Force ; Leno 's and his teammates ' tomfoolery on the green amused the large crowds that they drew . From 1898 to 1903 , the Dainties continued to play matches across London . Two films of action from the matches were produced in 1900 for audiences of the new medium of cinema . In September 1901 , at a major charity match , the press noted the carnival atmosphere . The comedians wore silly costumes – Leno was dressed as an undertaker and later as a schoolgirl riding a camel . Bands played , and clowns circulated through the crowd . The rival team of professional Surrey cricketers were persuaded to wear tall hats during the match . 18,000 spectators attended , contributing funds for music hall and cricketers ' charities , among others .

Leno began to drink heavily after performances , and , by 1901 , like his father and stepfather before him , he had become an alcoholic . He gradually declined physically and mentally and displayed frequent bouts of erratic behaviour that began to affect his work . By 1902 , Leno 's angry and violent behaviour directed at fellow cast members , friends and family had become frequent . Once composed , he would become remorseful and apologetic . His erratic behaviour was often a result of his diminishing ability to remember his lines and inaudibility in performance . Leno also suffered increasing deafness , which eventually caused problems on and off stage . In 1901 , during a production of Bluebeard , Leno missed his verbal cue and , as a result , was left stuck up a tower for more than twenty minutes . At the end of the run of Mother Goose in 1903 , producer Arthur Collins gave a tribute to Leno and presented him , on behalf of the Drury Lane Theatre 's management , with an expensive silver dinner service . Leno rose to his feet and said : " Governor , it 's a magnificent present ! I congratulate you and you deserve it ! "

Frustrated at not being accepted as a serious actor , Leno became obsessed with the idea of playing Richard III and other great Shakespearean roles , inundating the actor – manager Herbert Beerbohm Tree with his proposals . After his final run of Mother Goose at the Drury Lane Theatre in early 1903 , Leno 's delusions overwhelmed him . On the closing evening , and again soon afterwards , he travelled to the home of Constance Collier , who was Beerbohm Tree 's leading lady at His Majesty 's Theatre , and also followed her to rehearsal there . He attempted to persuade her to act alongside him in a Shakespearean season that Leno was willing to fund . On the second visit to her home , Leno brought Collier a jewellery box holding a diamond-encrusted plaque . Recognising that Leno was having a mental breakdown , she sadly and gently refused his offer , and Leno left distraught . Two days later , he was admitted into an asylum for the insane . Leno spent several months in Camberwell House Asylum , London , under the care of Dr. Savage , who treated Leno with " peace and quiet and a little water colouring " . On his second day , Leno told a nurse that the clock was wrong . When she stated that it was right , Leno remarked , " Well if it 's right , then what 's it doing here ? " Leno made several attempts to leave the asylum , twice being successful . He was found each time and promptly returned .

Upon Leno 's release from the institution in October 1903 , the press offered much welcoming commentary and speculated as to whether he would appear that year in the Drury Lane pantomime , scheduled to be Humpty Dumpty . Concerned that Leno might suffer a relapse , Arthur Collins employed Marie Lloyd to take his place . By the time of rehearsals , however , Leno persuaded Collins that he was well enough to take part , and the cast was reshuffled to accommodate him . Leno appeared with success . Upon hearing his signature song , the audience reportedly gave him a standing ovation that lasted five minutes . He received a telegram from the King congratulating him on his performance . Leno 's stage partner Herbert Campbell died in July 1904 , shortly after the pantomime , following an accident at the age of fifty-seven . The death affected Leno deeply , and he went into a decline . At that time , he was appearing at the London Pavilion , but the show had to be cancelled owing to his inability to remember his lines . So harsh were the critics that Leno wrote a statement , published in The Era , to defend the show 's originality . On 20 October 1904 , Leno gave his last performance in the show . Afterwards , he stopped at the Belgrave Hospital for Children in Kennington to leave a donation of £ 625 ( £ 60,527 in 2016 adjusted for inflation ) .

Leno died at his home in London on 31 October 1904 , aged 43 , and was buried at Lambeth Cemetery , Tooting . The cause of death is not known . His death and funeral were national news . The Daily Telegraph wrote in its obituary : " There was only one Dan . His methods were inimitable ; his face was indeed his fortune ... Who has seen him in any of his disguises and has failed to laugh ? " Max Beerbohm later said of Leno 's death : " So little and frail a lantern could not long harbour so big a flame " . His memorial is maintained by the Grand Order of Water Rats , which commissioned the restoration of his grave in 2004 .

The Cincinnati Reds won the West division the previous season with the Astros finishing 1.5 games back in second , and the Dodgers 11.5 back in third . However , the Reds went on to lose the 1979 NLCS in three games to the Pittsburgh Pirates , ending their season . The Astros acquired Joe Morgan and Nolan Ryan via free agency during the offseason and the Dodgers signed Dave Goltz . Dave Kindred of the Washington Post , George Vecsey of The New York Times , and Astros ' relief pitcher Joe Sambito all credited Morgan 's leadership with the Astros ' success in 1980 . The Reds maintained early success in 1980 with an eight-game winning streak to open the season and held at least a share of first place in the division until April 30 . They were not as successful over the remainder of the season , only occasionally taking the division lead and last holding it on August 16 . The Astros held the lead for the majority of the season thereafter , including a three-game lead over Los Angeles entering the final series of the season . The series matched the Astros with the Dodgers for three games at Dodger Stadium . The Dodgers won all three games , all by a single run , stopping the Astros from clinching a division championship as the two teams sat tied at 92 – 70 . Kindred described the Astros as losing each game of the series by " fail [ ing ] to make elementary fielding plays . " The final game included a run-scoring pinch hit single by Manny Mota , who had been almost exclusively a coach and not a player that season , and a home run by Ron Cey which also scored Steve Garvey , who had reached base in the previous at bat on an error . The Dodgers needed each of these runs as they won the game 4 – 3 .

Box score for Monday October 6 , 1980 — 3 : 10 p.m. ( PT ) at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles , California The Astros took their lead early , scoring in the top of the first inning . Terry Puhl led off the game reaching base on an error by the second baseman . Enos Cabell followed Puhl with a single and , while Joe Morgan batted , stole second base to put runners at second and third . Morgan struck out and José Cruz appeared to hit into a fielder 's choice but a catching error by the catcher allowed Puhl to score , Cabell to advance to third base , and Cruz to reach safely all with no out recorded . Cabell then scored on a César Cedeño ground out to make the game 2 – 0 . Art Howe singled to advance Cruz to third , but Dodgers ' starting pitcher Dave Goltz escaped the inning without further scoring . The Astros ' Joe Niekro retired the Dodgers in order in the first and second innings . The Astros added to their lead in the top of the third as Cedeño singled , stole second ( after Cruz had been caught stealing earlier in the inning ) , and scored on Art Howe 's home run to make the game 4 – 0 . Niekro allowed two successive singles to lead off the bottom of the inning , but proceeded to retire three straight Dodgers without allowing either runner to score . The Astros further added to their lead in the fourth , as Puhl singled on a bunt to third base and then stole second and third base while Cabell batted . Both he and Morgan walked to load the bases with one out . Puhl scored on a Cruz sacrifice fly , Cedeño walked to re-load the bases , and finally a Howe single gave the Astros another two runs to make the game 7 – 0 .

Houston 's win clinched the team 's first postseason berth in franchise history . The Astros lost the five-game NLCS to the Phillies 3 – 2 , ending their season . Due to the 1981 Major League Baseball strike , the following season was split into halves and the winner of each half advanced to the postseason . The Dodgers won the first half and the Astros the second and so met in the first National League Division Series . The Dodgers won , and went on to win the 1981 World Series . The Astros did not return to the NLCS until 1986 and did not win a NL pennant until 2005 , leading to a loss in the 2005 World Series . In baseball statistics , tie-breakers count as regular season games , with all events in them added to regular season statistics . Niekro , for example , reached his 20th win to break a tie with Jim Bibby for the 2nd most wins in the NL that season . Similarly , Steve Garvey played in his 163rd game of the season , leading the league with a figure which could not have been equaled by anyone not on the Astros or Dodgers . Dusty Baker won a Silver Slugger Award and Steve Howe , who pitched the final two scoreless innings of the tie-breaker for the Dodgers in relief , won the Rookie of the Year Award for their performances in the regular season . Additionally six Dodgers ( Garvey , Davey Lopes , Bill Russell , Reggie Smith , Jerry Reuss , and Bob Welch ) and two Astros ( J. R. Richard and Cruz ) were named to the National League 's All-Star team .

The Hutchinson Letters Affair was an incident that increased tensions between the colonists of the Province of Massachusetts Bay and the British government prior to the American Revolution . In June 1773 letters written several years earlier by Thomas Hutchinson and Andrew Oliver , governor and lieutenant governor of the province at the time of their publication , were published in a Boston newspaper . The content of the letters was propagandistically claimed by Massachusetts radical politicians to call for the abridgement of colonial rights , and a duel was fought in England over the matter . The affair served to inflame tensions in Massachusetts , where implementation of the 1773 Tea Act was met with resistance that culminated in the Boston Tea Party in December 1773 . The response of the British government to the publication of the letters served to turn Benjamin Franklin , one of the principal figures in the affair , into a committed Patriot .

During the 1760s , relations between Great Britain and some of its North American colonies became strained by a series of Parliamentary laws ( including the 1765 Stamp Act and the 1767 Townshend Acts ) , intended to raise revenue for the crown , and to assert Parliament 's authority to pass such legislation despite a lack of colonial representation . These laws had sparked strong protests in the Thirteen Colonies ; the Province of Massachusetts Bay in particular saw significant unrest and direct action against crown officials . The introduction of British Army troops into Boston in 1768 further raised tensions that escalated to the Boston Massacre in 1770 . In the years after the enactment of the Townshend Acts , Massachusetts Lieutenant Governor Thomas Hutchinson and his colonial secretary ( and brother-in-law ) Andrew Oliver wrote a series of letters concerning the acts , the protests against them , and containing suggestions on how to respond , to Thomas Whately , an assistant to Prime Minister George Grenville . Whateley died in 1772 , and his papers were turned over to his brother William . Whateley at one point gave access to his brother 's papers to John Temple , another colonial official who sought to recover letters of his own from those papers .

Hutchinson was appointed governor of Massachusetts in 1770 , following the critical publication by opposition politicians of letters written by his predecessor , Francis Bernard . Over the next two years Hutchinson engaged in an extended and rancorous written debate with the provincial assembly and the governor 's council , both of which were dominated by radical leadership hostile to Parliamentary authority . The debate centered on the arbitrariness of executive prerogative and the role of Parliament in colonial governance , and greatly deepened divisions in the province . The Massachusetts debate reached a pitch in England when the colonial secretary , Lord Dartmouth , insisted that Benjamin Franklin , then acting as agent for Massachusetts in London , demanded that the Massachusetts assembly retract its response to a speech the governor gave early in 1772 as part of this ongoing debate . Franklin had acquired a packet of about twenty letters that had been written to Whately . Upon reading them , Franklin concluded that Hutchinson and Oliver had mischaracterized the situation in the colonies , and thus misled Parliament . He felt that wider knowledge of these letters would then focus colonial anger away from Parliament and at those who had written the misleading letters . Franklin sent the letters to Thomas Cushing , the speaker of the Massachusetts assembly , in December 1772 . He insisted to Cushing that they not be published or widely circulated . He specifically wrote that they should be seen only by a few people , and that he was not " at liberty to make the letters public . "

The letters arrived in Massachusetts in March 1773 , and came into the hands of Samuel Adams , then serving as the clerk of the Massachusetts assembly . By Franklin 's instructions , only a select few people , including the Massachusetts Committee of Correspondence , were to see the letters . Alarmed at what they read , Cushing wrote Franklin , asking if the restrictions on their circulation could be eased . In a response received by Cushing in early June , Franklin reiterated that they were not to be copied or published , but could be shown to anyone .

A longtime opponent of Hutchinson 's , Samuel Adams narrowly followed Franklin 's request , but managed to orchestrate a propaganda campaign against Hutchinson without immediately disclosing the letters . He informed the assembly of the existence of the letters , after which it designated a committee to analyze them . Strategic leaks suggestive of their content made their way into the press and political discussions , causing Hutchinson much discomfort . The assembly eventually concluded , according to John Hancock , that in the letters Hutchinson sought to " overthrow the Constitution of this Government , and to introduce arbitrary Power into the Province " , and called for the removal of Hutchinson and Oliver . Hutchinson complained that Adams and the opposition were misrepresenting what he had written , and that nothing he had written in them on the subject of Parliamentary supremacy went beyond other statements he had made . The letters were finally published in the Boston Gazette in mid-June 1773 , causing a political firestorm in Massachusetts and raising significant questions in England .

The letters were written primarily in 1768 and 1769 , principally by Hutchinson and Oliver , although the published letters also included some written by Charles Paxton , a customs official and Hutchinson supporter , and Hutchinson 's nephew Nathaniel Rogers . The letters written by Oliver ( who became lieutenant governor when Hutchinson became governor ) proposed a significant revamping of the Massachusetts government to strengthen the executive , while those of Hutchinson were ruminations on the difficult state of affairs in the province . Historian Bernard Bailyn confirms Hutchinson 's own assertion that much of the content of his letters expressed relatively little that had not already been publicly stated . According to Bailyn , Hutchinson 's ruminations included the observation that it was impossible for colonists have the full rights they would have in the home country , essentially requiring an " abridgement of what are called English liberties " . Hutchinson , unlike Oliver , made no specific proposals on how the colonial government should be reformed , writing in a letter that was not among those published , " I can think of nothing but what will produce as great an evil as that which it may remove or will be of a very uncertain event . " Oliver 's letters , in contrast , specifically proposed that the governor 's council , whose members where then elected by the assembly with the governor 's consent , be changed to one whose members were appointed by the crown .

In England , speculation ran rampant over the source of the leak . William Whately accused John Temple of taking the letters , which Temple denied , challenging Whately to a duel . Whately was wounded in the encounter in early December 1773 , but neither participant was satisfied , and a second duel was planned . In order to forestall that event , Franklin on Christmas Day published a letter admitting that he was responsible for the acquisition and transmission of the letters , to prevent " further mischief " . He justified his actions by pointing out that the letters had been written between public officials for the purpose of influencing public policy . When Hutchinson 's opponents in Massachusetts read the letters , they seized on key phrases ( including the " abridgement " phrase ) to argue that Hutchinson was in fact lobbying the London government to make changes that would effect such an abridgement . Combined with Oliver 's explicit recommendations for reform , they presented this as a clear indication that the provincial leaders were working against the interests of the people and not for them . Bostonians were outraged at the content of the published letters , burning Hutchinson and Oliver in effigy on Boston Common . The letters were widely reprinted throughout the British North American colonies , and acts of protest took place as far away as Philadelphia . The Massachusetts assembly and governor 's council petitioned the Board of Trade for Hutchinson 's removal . In the Privy Council hearing concerning Hutchinson 's fate , in which the aftermath of the Boston Tea Party was also discussed , Franklin stood silently while he was lambasted by Solicitor General Alexander Wedderburn for his role in the affair . He was accused of thievery and dishonor , and called the prime mover in England on behalf of Boston 's radical Committee of Correspondence . The Board of Trade dismissed Franklin from his post as colonial Postmaster General , and dismissed the petition for Hutchinson 's removal as " groundless " and " vexatious " . Parliament then passed the so-called " Coercive Acts " , a package of measures designed to punish Massachusetts for the tea party . Hutchinson was recalled , and the Massachusetts governorship was given to the commander of British forces in North America , Lieutenant General Thomas Gage . Hutchinson left Massachusetts in May 1774 , never to return . Andrew Oliver suffered a stroke and died in March 1774 .

A number of candidates have been proposed as the means by which Benjamin Franklin acquired the letters . John Temple , despite his political differences with Hutchinson , was apparently able to convince the latter in 1774 that he was not involved in their acquisition . He did , however , claim to know who was involved , but refused to name him , because that would " prove the ruin of the guilty party . " Several historians ( including Bernard Bailyn and Bernard Knollenberg ) have concluded that Thomas Pownall was the probable source of the letters . Pownall was Massachusetts governor before Francis Bernard , had similar views to Franklin on colonial matters , and had access to centers of colonial administration through his brother John , the colonial secretary . Other individuals have also been suggested , but all appear to have an only tenuous connection to Franklin or the situation . Historian Kenneth Penegar believes the question will remain unanswerable unless new documents emerge to shed light on the episode .

" Massive Attack " is a song by American rapper Nicki Minaj and American recording artist Sean Garrett . Written by Minaj , co-written and produced by Garrett and Alex da Kid , " Massive Attack " was released on April 13 , 2010 . It was initially intended to be the first single from Minaj 's debut studio album Pink Friday , but the release was later scrapped in favor of " Your Love " . The song was a distinct change in Minaj 's previous work on mixtapes and features , thus receiving mixed to positive reviews from critics , commending lyrical content and distinctiveness , and critiquing that it did not fit her " Barbie " persona well . An accompanying music video which features a helicopter chase , and militaristic jungle and desert scenes , was positively received . Commercially , the song had limited success , reaching number 65 on the US Hot R & B / Hip-Hop Songs chart but only managing to bubble under the Billboard Hot 100 at 22 . Later in an interview with Billboard magazine , Garrett revealed that the song would not be included on Pink Friday and that the poor performance of the song was out of his control , " I was only able to do as much as I was allowed to do . Sometimes you have to step back and get off the wheel . I didn 't have control of the entire creative process . A lot of [ other ] artists trust me enough and allow me to do what I know is best to do as a producer " .

In an interview with Rap-Up in March 2010 , Minaj revealed the title to the song , and Garrett later hinted around details around his single with Minaj , stating , " I just did Nicki ’ s first single featuring me . It ’ s gonna be a fucking bomb . It ’ s very , very explosive ! It ’ s a club banger . It ’ s a lot broader than what people would expect her to come with . The record puts her in the game in a way that says she should ’ ve been here a long time ago . She has a real way of how she wants to do this . It ’ s just gonna be a surprise when it comes . She just wants to make it as huge as possible . " Additionally , co-producer Alex da Kid said , " I started on the train and finished in the studio . I knew it was special from the start . It wasn 't like I was aiming for Nicki with this track ; I had a idea I thought was crazy . Nicki heard it and the rest was history . " In an interview with MTV News , Minaj stated when she first heard the song she felt she was in Africa and fell in love with the drum beats , and commented , " It 's a very rare . ... You 're not gonna get the song the first time you hear it . After the second or third time , you 're gonna be like , ' Whoa , what is this ? ' It sounds nothing like anything that 's out right now . " She also called the song " next-level futuristic " , and said that she chose Garrett for the song in that he would be the best to " illustrate Nicki Minaj " , as he got her and her personality " . In an interview on the set of the video shoot for " Massive Attack " , Minaj said , " I 'm excited for people to hear me ... doing more than one verse . It 's really creative . I wanted to be theatrical , but I am very serous about what I do . " Also on the set of the video , Garrett said , " We wanted to give her something that was global , " he continued . " We wanted to give her something that was urban ; we wanted to give her something that was mainstream pop , you know what I mean , that the world could get a chance to see her out on this pedestal . And of course , you know , I had to come along with her , because I 've got an album dropping soon . " The song made its debut March 29 , 2010 on WQHT . The song leaked onto the Internet on March 30 , 2010 , the day before its music video premiere on 106 & Park . The single 's art cover was revealed on April 1 , 2010 , featuring a still of Minaj in the music video as a ninja and comic book font designs . Alex da Kid said that a lot of artists wanted the beat such as Jamie Foxx and Young Jeezy but he gave it to Nicki because it fit her " quirky , left-field vibe . "

Alex da Kid was also interviewed by Rap-Up , and when asked about the commercial flop of the song and he said , " My whole thing [ is that ] I don ’ t want to do anything that ’ s the same as what ’ s out there , I think ' Massive Attack ' may have been too different . If we would 've put a big feature on it , like a Kanye or Rihanna or someone , I think it might 've done a bit better . It needed something familiar about it . "

Monica Herrera of Billboard gave the single a mixed review , stating that Minaj , being " one of the most visually distinctive rappers to come along in years " , that the single was an " anticlimatic coming out song " , " considering the hype Minaj has generated through mixtapes , cameos and her co-starring role in Lil Wayne 's Young Money project " . However Hererra did commend the lyrical content , stating " her sassy one-liners are as entertaining as always " , and the overall production although it didn 't suit Minaj 's " her mental-patient delivery nearly as well as , say , Kane Beatz ' simpler track for Young Money 's " BedRock " . Robbie Daw of ' Idolator ' said , " we wouldn ’ t expect Nicki to do any less than come out of the gate charging full force , lyrically , on her debut single . That said , we were expecting maybe a tad more of a melody on the track . " Chris Ryan of ' MTV Buzzworthy ' gave the song a positive review , stating " you get the feeling , listening to the song 's air-raid keyboards and thunderous beats , that the Young Money princess really wants to separate herself from the rap pack and carve out a space all her own " . Ryan also said , " her verbal dexterity , complex flow and humor , Nicki is reminiscent of classic Missy Elliott -- and that 's a compliment of the highest order " .

A music video for the single was shot on March 15 , 2010 in the deserts of Lancaster , California , directed by Hype Williams . When talking to ' MTV News ' about the video Minaj stated , " I didn 't want to shoot the typical new-artist vision . Thank God I have a wonderful label that stands behind me and my vision . I met Hype in a freakin ' airport ... and it happened to be a week before I wanted to shoot a video . I told him the idea . Of course , I had to let Baby and Slim know and hope they would understand my expensive taste . It all came together . " It 's just beautiful — the clothes , everything . The ambiance .. It 's for all the girls that like to play dress-up . They 're gonna love this one ... we get on the walkie-talkie , like , ' Mayday ! Mayday ! ' It 's really fashion and beauty shots , and we 're acting like we 're doing something important . We wanted to make it pretty in the dirt . We wanted to have a very crazy contrast . I didn 't want to do everything clean . I like the dirt . All that pink stuff looks even prettier in the dirt . "

Sean Garrett appears in the video and Birdman , Amber Rose , and Ringmasters of Season 3 of America 's Best Dance Crew make cameos . The video premiered on BET 's 106 & Park on March 31 , 2010 The video comprises a helicopter chase and militaristic desert and jungle scenes . The music video begins with Birdman giving Minaj a stack of money to carry to an unknown area in the desert . As the song begins Minaj appears in a blonde wig with a pink background which than cuts to Minaj riding in a pink Lamborghini with Amber Rose driving as a potential new take on Thelma & Louise in a helicopter chase . Shots of desert creatures and Minaj in her Barbie wig are shown during the first hook . As the helicopter chase progresses , Minaj is seen singing to the camera in military gear and is later shown walking in an attacking line with her Harajuku Army , which are all dressed in the same gear with pink wigs under helmets . During the chorus of the song , a shirtless Garrett is shown singing into the camera while clips of the helicopter chase are interpreted . During the second verse Minaj is in the jungle as a ninja with a long pink braid running down her back as she crawls on the ground and walks around the jungle . Some clips of two men ( from Ringmasters ) dancing with double-jointed shoulders are also shown . During the climax of the song Minaj is still in the jungle this time with a green wig were dancing in the mud and comes out of the water , crawling through the forest . The video ends as clips of the entire video are shown and closes with Minaj and Rose escaping in the pink Lamborghini .

The video garnered media attention , with Monica Herrera of Billboard commenting on a review for the single , " It figures , then , that discussion of her debut single , " Massive Attack , " would take a back seat to its Hype Williams-directed , B-movie-inspired video . " Chris Ryan of MTV News commented on the video , saying , " We L-U-V Barbie because she 's a trendsetter and a strident , unique artist . But with great style comes great responsibility . Her video for ' Massive Attack , ' the first single off her long-awaited debut album , is bananas " . On June 11 , 2010 Hollywood Exotic Car Rental filed a lawsuit against Minaj for damages and unpaid rental charges on the car . They claimed that the vehicle was driven " off-road " and damaged “ in the approximate amount of $ 11,589.41 . " Along with damages to the car , Minaj rented the car for $ 1,750 a day , and used the vehicle an additional three days totaling in an extra $ 5,250 owed . The rental company is suing for unpaid rental charges , property damage , and punitive damage .

Shepseskare or Shepseskara ( Egyptian for " Noble is the Soul of Ra " ) was an Ancient Egyptian pharaoh , the fourth or fifth ruler of the Fifth Dynasty ( 2494 – 2345 BC ) during the Old Kingdom period . Shepseskare lived in the mid-25th century BC and was probably the owner of an unfinished pyramid in Abusir , which was abandoned after a few weeks of work in the earliest stages of its construction . Following historical sources , Shepseskare was traditionally believed to have reigned for seven years , succeeding Neferirkare Kakai and preceding Neferefre on the throne , making him the fourth ruler of the dynasty . He is the most obscure ruler of this dynasty and the Egyptologist Miroslav Verner has strongly argued that Shepseskare 's reign lasted only a few months at the most , after that of Neferefre . This conclusion is based upon the state and location of Shepseskare 's unfinished pyramid in Abusir as well as the very small number of artefacts attributable to this king . Verner 's arguments have now convinced several Egyptologists such as Darrell Baker and Erik Hornung . Shepseskare 's relations to his predecessor and successor are not known for certain . Verner has proposed that he was a son of Sahure and a brother to Neferirkare Kakai , who briefly seized the throne following the premature death of his predecessor and probable nephew , Neferefre . Shepseskare may himself have died unexpectedly or he may have lost the throne to another of his nephews , the future pharaoh Nyuserre Ini . The possibility that Shepseskare was a short-lived usurper from outside the royal family cannot be totally excluded .

Shepseskare was a king of Ancient Egypt , the fourth or fifth ruler of the Fifth Dynasty . Egypt was unified at the time , with its capital located at Memphis . Shepseskare is the least-known king of the Fifth Dynasty as very few artefacts dating to his reign have survived to this day . Only two cylinder seals of Shepseskare are known : one , made of bronze , bears Shepseskare 's Horus name and was uncovered in the ruins of Memphis in the early 20th century . The second seal , of unknown provenance , is made of black serpentine and reads " Shepseskare beloved of the gods , Shepseskare beloved of Hathor " . Beyond these two seals the only surviving artefacts attributable to Shepseskare are five fragments of seal impressions on clay from Abusir and six further fragments discovered in the mortuary temple and Sanctuary of the Knife of the Pyramid of Neferefre , also in Abusir . These fragments probably come from three different seals and were most likely placed on the doors of magazine rooms in the temple . Finally , there is a single scarab seal reading " Shepeskare " [ sic ] that the Egyptologist Flinders Petrie attributed to Shepseskare at the end of the 19th century . Modern scholars doubt this attribution and rather believe the scarab to be a work of the much later Saite period ( 685 – 525 BC ) executed in archaic style . Equally , the scarab could belong to Gemenefkhonsbak Shepeskare , an obscure kinglet of Tanis during the 25th Dynasty ( 760 – 656 BC ) .

The only ancient Egyptian king list mentioning Shepseskare is the Saqqara Tablet ( on the 28th entry ) . The tablet was inscribed during the reign of Ramesses II ( 1279 – 1213 BC ) , around 1200 years after Shepseskare 's lifetime , and records the dynastic succession Neferikare → Shepseskare → Neferkhare ( a variant name of Neferefre ) . Shepseskare is completely absent from another king list dating to the same period : the Abydos king list , written during the reign of Seti I ( 1294 – 1279 BC ) . He is also absent from the Turin canon ( reign of Ramses II ) , although in this case a lacuna affects the papyrus on which the list is written at the place where Shepseskare and Neferefre 's names should have been . Of the two entries concerning Shepseskare and Neferefre on the king list , only one reign length is still legible and it has been variously read as one year , eleven years or one to four months . The damaged state of the papyrus also makes it impossible to decide safely whose reign length this is . Shepseskare was also likely mentioned in the Aegyptiaca , a history of Egypt written in the 3rd century BC during the reign of Ptolemy II ( 283 – 246 BC ) by the Egyptian priest Manetho . No copies of the Aegyptiaca have survived to this day and it is now known only through later writings by Sextus Julius Africanus and Eusebius . Africanus relates that the Aegyptiaca mentioned the succession " Nefercheres → Sisires → Cheres " for the mid Fifth Dynasty . Nefercheres and Cheres are believed to be the hellenized forms for Neferirkare and Neferkhare ( that is Neferefre ) , respectively . Thus , " Sisires " is traditionally believed to be the Greek name of Shepseskare , making Manetho 's reconstruction of the Fifth Dynasty in good agreement with the Saqqara tablet . Furthermore , according to Africanus , Manetho credits Sisires with seven years of reign while other sources report Manetho 's figure as nine years .

Both the relative chronological position and absolute dates of Shepseskare 's reign are uncertain . The Saqqara Tablet records Shepseskare as the successor of Neferirkare Kakai and the predecessor of Neferefre , which became the traditional opinion among Egyptologists . Following discoveries in the early 1980s , the Czech Egyptologist Miroslav Verner advocates the hypothesis that Shepseskare succeeded , rather than preceded , Neferefre . In support of this hypothesis , Verner first emphasizes the presence of several clay seal impressions bearing Shepseskare 's Horus name " Sekhemkaw " ( meaning " He whose apparitions are powerful " ) in the oldest part of Neferere 's mortuary temple , which was not built " until Neferefre 's death " . This appears to suggest that Shepseskare ruled after — rather than before — Neferefre . Verner 's second argument concerns the alignment of pyramids of Sahure , Neferirkare Kakai and Neferefre : they form a line pointing to Heliopolis , just as the three pyramids of Giza do . In contrast , Shepseskare 's unfinished pyramid does not fall on the line to Heliopolis , which strongly suggests that Neferefre 's pyramid had already been in place when Shepseskare started his . Finally , Verner observes that Neferefre is known to have been Neferirkare 's eldest son and around 20 years old when his father died so that he was in optimal position to inherit the throne . Shespeskare thus most likely took the throne after Neferefre . As Verner notes , while Shepseskare is noted as the immediate predecessor of Neferefre in the Saqqara tablet , " this slight discrepancy can ... be attributed to the [ political ] disorders of the time and its dynastic disputes . "

In two articles published in 2000 and 2001 Verner argues that , contrary to what Manetho indicates , Shepseskare must have reigned for a couple of months at the most , an hypothesis already proposed by the French Egyptologist Nicolas Grimal in 1988 . Verner 's conclusion is based on the archeological record , in particular Shepseskare 's intended pyramid at Abusir . Verner emphasizes that the progress of the pyramid , which is unfinished , was interrupted [ and ] corresponds to the work of several weeks , perhaps no more than one or two months . In fact , the place was merely leveled and the excavation of the pit for the construction of the underground funerary apartment had only commenced . Moreover , the owner of the building obviously wanted to demonstrate by his choice of place ( half-way between Sahure 's pyramid and the sun temple of Userkaf ) his relationship to either Sahure or Userkaf . Theoretically , only two kings of the Fifth Dynasty whose pyramids had not yet been identified can be taken into consideration – Shepseskara or Menkauhor . However , according to a number of contemporaneous documents , Menkauhor ... probably completed [ his ] pyramid elsewhere , in North Saqqara or Dahshur . Shepseskara , therefore , seems to be the likelier owner of the unfinished platform for a pyramid in North Abusir . Anyway , the builder of the platform [ viz . , Shepseskare ] must have reigned for a very short time .

The rediscovery in 2008 of the Headless Pyramid in Saqqara and its subsequent attribution to Menkauhor Kaiu by the excavators under the direction of Zahi Hawass confirms Verner 's attribution of the unfinished pyramid of Abusir to Shepseskare . Unlike the other kings of the Fifth Dynasty , Shepseskare 's name appears neither in the personal names of people of the time nor in the names of funerary estates . He is also absent from the titles and biographies of state officials . For example , the stela of the Fifth Dynasty official Khau-Ptah lists an uninterrupted sequence of kings whom he served under , namely Sahure , Neferirkare , Neferefre and Nyuserre . The omission of Shepseskare , be it between Neferirkare and Neferefre or between Neferefre and Nyuserre , indicates that his reign must have been very short . Since Manetho 's Aegyptiaca dates to the 3rd century BC , Khau-Ptah 's contemporary account can be regarded as a more accurate indication of the political situation during the Fifth Dynasty . Verner 's arguments together with the scarcity of artefacts attributable to Shepseskare have now convinced many Egyptologists , such as Darrell Baker and Erik Hornung , that Shepseskare 's reign was indeed ephemeral .

In view of the scarcity of sources concerning Shepseskare , nothing is known for certain about his relation to his predecessors . He was most likely a member of the royal family , although the possibility that he was a usurper unrelated to his predecessors cannot be totally excluded . Verner has proposed that Shepseskare was a son of Sahure who managed to briefly seize power after the premature death of Neferefre . This would explain the proximity of Shepseskare 's unfinished pyramid to that of Sahure . Lending credence to this theory is the discovery by Verner and Tarek El Awady in 2005 of reliefs from the causeway of Sahure 's pyramid complex showing him , his wife Meretnebty and their two sons Ranefer and Netjerirenre . The relief gives both sons the title of " king 's eldest son " , indicating that they were possibly twins . The relief further indicates that Ranefer took the throne as " Neferirkare king of Upper and Lower Egypt " . Verner and Awady thus speculate that while Ranefer and his son Neferefre became kings , Netjerirenre could have attempted to seize the throne at the death of the latter . In this hypothesis Shepseskare would be the throne name of Netjerirenre .

Shepseskare 's reign may have been cut short by his unexpected death or his claim to the throne could have been thwarted by Nyuserre Ini , Neferefre 's younger brother and the younger son of King Neferirkare and Queen Khentkaus II . Khentkaus II 's pivotal role in Nyuserre 's eventual accession to the throne might explain her high esteem in Egyptian folklore and " the additional enlargement and upgrading of her mortuary temple " by Nyuserre . Nyuserre also seemed to have been favored by powerful courtiers and officials , foremost among whom was Ptahshepses , who would become Nyuserre 's son-in-law and vizier .

An unfinished pyramid located in north Abusir , between the sun temple of Userkaf and the Pyramid of Sahure , is believed to belong to Shepseskare . The structure was discovered in 1980 by a Czechoslovakian archaeological team led by Miroslav Verner and seems to have been abandoned after no more than a few weeks or months of work . A square area of roughly 100 m2 ( 1,100 sq ft ) was leveled and the digging of a T-shaped ditch was just started in its center . This ditch was to be left open during the pyramid construction to allow for simultaneous works on the pyramid filling and its substructures . This construction technique is common to all pyramids of the Fifth Dynasty and can directly be seen in the case of the Pyramid of Neferefre , which was also left unfinished . This technique as well as the location of the unfinished pyramid in the royal necropolis of the Fifth Dynasty indicates that it belonged in all likeliness to Shepseskare , the pyramids of the other kings of the dynasty being already known . If finished according to the established pattern , the pyramid would have reached 73 m ( 240 ft ) high , similar to the Pyramid of Neferirkare .

Kaplony has proposed that Shepseskare started to build a sun temple named Ḥtp-jb-Rˁ , reading " Hotepibre " and meaning " Satisfied is the heart of Ra " . Although all the kings of the early to mid-Fifth Dynasty , from Userkaf to Menkauhor Kaiu , did build sun temples , Verner regards Kaplony 's hypothesis as " sheer speculation " since it is based on the tentative reconstruction of a single clay seal . Verner first argues that this seal is not inscribed with Shepseskare 's name but rather bears traces of a Horus name which could equally well be that of Djedkare Isesi . Second , Verner notes that the name of a sun temple is rarely found with that of the king who built it : more often it is found with the name of another king during whose reign the seal was made . Finally , he doubts that the sign reading Ḥtp , " Hotep " , is really part of the name of a sun temple . Instead , he believes it is more probable that the seal either refers to the sun temple of Neferirkare , named St-jb-Rˁ.w , that is " Setibraw " ; or to that of Nyuserre , which was called Šsp-jb-Rˁ , " Shesepibraw " .

It is possible that Shepseskare continued the construction of the funerary complex of his predecessor . As Neferefre had died after a short reign , his pyramid complex was far from finished and neither the burial chamber nor the mortuary temple had been built . The planned pyramid was thus hastily changed into a square mastaba representing a stylized primeval hill and the accompanying mortuary temple was completed during the reign of Nyuserre . The presence of seals of Shepseskare in the oldest part of Neferefre 's mortuary temple could indicate that the former also undertook construction works there . The evidence for such works is uncertain : these seals could have been placed on boxes which were later moved into the magazine rooms of the temple . For example , seals of Userkaf , Sahure and Neferirkare Kakai were also found in the temple , while these three pharaohs died before Neferefre 's reign .

Lum You was among the many Chinese laborers who came to Washington near the turn of the century . A proud , sociable dandy , You was well-liked in the white community . He spoke a little English , and acted as an agent between the Chinese workers and their employers . In 1894 You approached the South Bend police chief , Marion Egbert , complaining that a fellow Chinese resident by the name of Ging had threatened him . Egbert brushed You off and suggested he deal with the situation himself . You took this advice , attacking Ging with an axe . For this act he was convicted of assault ; he was fined $ 500 and was sentenced to a prison term of six months . In the summer of 1901 , You was employed as a cannery worker and living in Bay Center . While playing cards on August 6 of that year , he was assaulted , threatened , and robbed by Oscar Bloom , a white man with a reputation as a bully . This time You did not approach the police , but instead immediately took matters into his own hands : he went to his room to retrieve his gun , sought out and shot Bloom in the abdomen , and then fled the scene . Bloom survived long enough to swear a deathbed affidavit identifying You as his killer .

Public sympathy for You was high , but white employers of the Chinese workers pressed officials for action to be taken against him . Accordingly , You was arrested on August 7 and in October 1901 was tried and convicted for the murder of Oscar Bloom . Contrary to the jurors ' belief that You would receive a light sentence , the judge ordered that You be hanged . The execution was scheduled for January 31 , 1902 . Even after his conviction You continued to enjoy public support . Petitions for clemency , one of which was signed by one of the jurors , were sent to the state governor . County officials sympathized with You , supposedly leaving his cell door unlocked at night and encouraging him to escape . You eventually did escape , early in the morning of January 14 : one news report claimed the improvised lock to his cell door had been picked with the aid of a confederate . You hid in the environs of South Bend for several days , during which he was hunted by a squad led by sheriff Thomas A. Roney . On January 15 he was sighted by two men ; the following day the county commissioners met and agreed to offer a reward of $ 200 for You 's capture . On January 17 You was finally apprehended by a three-man posse . You offered no resistance , and when asked how he escaped , said only that the door was open and he walked out .

On January 27 governor Henry McBride rejected one of the petitions for clemency on procedural grounds , and on January 30 confirmed by wire that he would not be commuting You 's sentence . Anticipation of the execution became so great that Roney was besieged with requests to attend . Roney issued 500 invitation cards , some examples of which survive . You 's hanging proceeded as planned inside the courthouse of the county seat , South Bend , on the morning of January 31 , 1902 . Though it had been expected that he would break down , You ate fairly well that morning and went to the gallows without assistance . He bade his friends goodbye and then uttered his last words , to his executioners : " Kill me good . " The trap was sprung by means of a rope which , along with three dummy ropes , extended into an adjoining room . Each of the four executioners concealed in that room pulled his rope simultaneously , but only the sheriff knew which was the trigger . You 's was the first and only official execution ever to take place in Pacific County . A month after his arrest , a new act of the Washington State Legislature took effect which required executions for any future crimes to be carried out at the Washington State Penitentiary in Walla Walla .

Henry William Allingham ( 6 June 1896 – 18 July 2009 ) was a British supercentenarian , the oldest British man ever , First World War veteran and , for one month , the verified oldest living man in the world . He is also the second-oldest military veteran ever , and at the time of his death , he was the 12th-verified oldest man of all time . Allingham was the oldest ever surviving member of any of the British Armed Forces and one of the oldest surviving veterans of the First World War . He was the last survivor of the Battle of Jutland , the last surviving member of the Royal Naval Air Service ( RNAS ) and the last surviving founding member of the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) . In 2001 he became the face of the First World War veterans ' association and made frequent public appearances to ensure that awareness of the sacrifices of the First World War was not lost to modern generations . He received many honours and awards for his First World War service and his longevity .

Allingham was born in 1896 in Clapton , County of London . When he was 14 months old , his father , Henry Thomas Allingham ( 1868-1897 ) , died at age 29 of tuberculosis . Henry is recorded in the 1901 census with his widowed mother Amy Jane Allingham ( née Foster ) ( 1873-1915 ) , a laundress forewoman , living with her parents and brother at 23 Verulam Avenue , Walthamstow . His mother remarried in 1905 to Hubert George Higgs and in 1907 the family moved to Clapham , London . Henry and his mother are recorded in the 1911 Census living at 21 Heyford Avenue , Lambeth , while his stepfather was lodging away from home working as a wheelwright . Henry attended a London County Council school before attending the Regent Street Polytechnic . Allingham remembered seeing the City Imperial Volunteers return from the Second Boer War , and also recalled watching W. G. Grace play cricket . On leaving school , Allingham started work as a trainee surgical instrument maker at St. Bartholomew 's Hospital . He did not find this job very interesting , and so left to work for a coachbuilder specialising in car bodies .

Allingham wanted to join the war effort in August 1914 as a despatch rider , but his critically ill mother managed to persuade him to stay at home and look after her . However , after his mother died in 1915 , aged 42 , Allingham enlisted with the Royal Naval Air Service ( RNAS ) . He became formally rated as an Air Mechanic Second Class on 21 September 1915 , and was posted to Chingford before completing his training at Sheerness , Kent . His RNAS serial number was RNAS F8317 . After graduation , Allingham was posted to the RNAS Air Station at Great Yarmouth where he worked in aircraft maintenance . On 13 April 1916 , King George V inspected the air station and its aircraft . Allingham later reported disappointment at barely missing an opportunity to speak with the king . Allingham also worked in Bacton , Norfolk , further up the coast , where night-flying was conducted and was later involved in supporting anti-submarine patrols . A typical patrol would last two or three days and would involve the manual labour of hoisting a seaplane in and out of the water by means of a deck-mounted derrick .

During the preparations for what has become known as the Battle of Jutland , Allingham was ordered to join the naval trawler HMT Kingfisher . Onboard was a Sopwith Schneider seaplane that was used to patrol the surrounding waters for the German High Seas Fleet . Allingham 's responsibilities included helping to launch this aircraft . Although the Kingfisher was not directly involved in the battle ( it shadowed the British Grand Fleet and then the High Seas Fleet ) , Allingham still rightfully claimed to be the last known survivor of that battle and could recall " seeing shells ricocheting across the sea . " In September 1917 , Allingham , by then an Air Mechanic First Class , was posted to the Western Front to join No. 12 Squadron RNAS . This unit acted as a training squadron for other RNAS squadrons based on the Western Front . There is also some evidence that the squadron was involved in combat operations . When Allingham arrived at Petite-Synthe , both the Royal Flying Corps ( RFC ) and the RNAS were involved in the Ypres offensive . Allingham also instrumented the very first reconnaissance aircraft camera during the First World War . On 3 November 1917 , he was posted to the aircraft depot at Dunkirk , France where he remained for the rest of the war , on aircraft repair and recovery duties . He recalls being bombed from the air and shelled from both the land and the sea .

He transferred to the Royal Air Force when the RNAS and the RFC were merged on 1 April 1918 . The creation of the Royal Air Force did not initially have a big impact on Allingham and he later remarked that at that time he still considered himself a navy man . In the RAF he was ranked as a Rigger Aero , Aircraft Mechanic Second Class and was given a new service number : 208317 . Allingham returned to the Home Establishment in February 1919 and was formally discharged to the RAF Reserve on 16 April 1919 . During the last few years of his life Allingham was recognized as the last surviving founding member of the RAF . Speaking with Dennis Goodwin of the First World War Veterans ' Association , Allingham said , " It is a shock as well as a privilege to think that I am the only man alive from that original reorganisation when the RAF was formed . "

Allingham met Dorothy Cator ( 1895 – 1970 ) in Great Yarmouth , Norfolk in 1918 . They married the same year in Romford , when she was 22 . They moved to Eastbourne , Sussex in 1960 and remained married until she died there from acute and chronic lymphatic leukaemia . They had two daughters , Betty ( born 1920 ) and Jean ( 1923 – 2001 ) . Jean emigrated to the United States and died aged 78 in 2001 . At the time of his death Allingham believed that Betty had died . He had lost touch with her in the 1970s following a family rift after the death of his wife in 1970 . In fact Betty Hankin was still alive aged 89 when her father died , and living in Stroud , Gloucestershire . In addition to his one remaining daughter Betty , at the time of his death Allingham had seven grandchildren , 16 great-grandchildren , 14 great-great-grandchildren , and one great-great-great-grandchild .

After the Second World War Allingham continued to work for Ford until he retired in 1960 . After Denis Goodwin of the First World War Veterans ' Association tracked him down in 2001 , Allingham took a prominent role in telling his story so that later generations would not forget . On 16 October 2003 , he helped launch the 2003 Royal British Legion Poppy Appeal with model Nell McAndrew aboard the cruiser HMS Belfast . He was quoted as saying " [ The veterans ] have given all they have got for the country ... I owe them ... we all owe them . " A ceremony at the Cenotaph in Whitehall , London on 4 August 2004 , marked the 90th anniversary of Britain 's entry into the First World War . Allingham attended , together with three other First World War veterans , William Stone , Fred Lloyd and John Oborne . Allingham also marched past the Cenotaph on Remembrance Sunday in 2005 and laid wreaths at memorials in Saint-Omer on Armistice Day . That was the last time a First World War veteran marched past the Cenotaph and it marked the end of an era . No First World War veterans were present at the Cenotaph for the 2006 Remembrance Sunday Parade .

As the last surviving member of the RNAS , and the last living founding member of the RAF , Allingham was an honoured guest when the British Air Services Memorial was unveiled at Saint-Omer on 11 September 2004 . During the ceremony Allingham was given the Gold Medal of Saint-Omer , which marked the award of the Freedom of the Town . The group of RAF technical trainees that joined him at this ceremony continued to visit Allingham at his retirement home in Eastbourne , demonstrating the bond of respect that these men had for Allingham . In November 2005 Allingham accepted an invitation from the International Holographic Portrait Archive to have his holographic portrait taken . His image was recorded for posterity in December 2005 . At the same time , an exhibition was being planned for London 's floating naval museum on board HMS Belfast , entitled the Ghosts of Jutland . A copy of this portrait was donated to the museum and HRH The Duchess of Gloucester unveiled the portrait to mark the opening of the exhibition . Allingham was awarded the freedom of his home town of Eastbourne by the mayor on 21 April 2006 . He lived on his own until May 2006 when , one month before his 110th birthday and with failing eyesight , he moved to St Dunstan 's , a charity for blind ex-service personnel , at Ovingdean , near Brighton . Aside from his poor eyesight , he was reportedly in good health , with visitors remarking on his memory and voice . Allingham attended the 1 July 2006 commemorations at the Thiepval Memorial to the Missing . He did not attend the 2006 Remembrance Day parade on 11 November at the Cenotaph as he was in France at a wreath-laying ceremony and to receive the Freedom of The Town of Saint-Omer . He did , however , launch the Eastbourne Poppy Appeal before leaving for this trip .

On 18 April 2007 Allingham visited Wilnecote High School in Tamworth , Staffordshire to answer students ' questions about the First World War , after they wrote to veterans asking them about their experiences . In October 2007 he was honoured at the Pride of Britain Awards . Between his 110th and 111th birthdays Allingham made over 60 public appearances , including a visit to The Oval on 5 June 2007 , the day before his 111th birthday , where he was wheeled around the boundary in front of the spectators . On his 111th birthday , a Royal Marines band played to Allingham on board HMS Victory before he returned with friends and relatives to the Queen 's Hotel on the Portsmouth seafront for afternoon tea . Asked how it felt , Allingham replied , " I 'm pleased to be seeing another tomorrow . It 's just the same as it was as at any age , it 's no different . I 'm happy to be alive and I 'm looking forward to the celebrations . I never imagined I 'd get to 111 . " On 1 April 2008 , the 90th anniversary of the establishment of the Royal Air Force , Allingham was guest of honour at the celebratory events at RAF Odiham in Hampshire . By then , Allingham was the only surviving founder member of the RAF .

Allingham celebrated his 112th birthday with members of his family at RAF Cranwell , Lincolnshire as the guest of honour at a luncheon at the college . During the day the Battle of Britain Memorial Flight performed a flypast which was followed by an aerobatic display from two Tutor aircraft . In June 2008 , at his personal request , Allingham was taken on a guided tour of the Eurofighter Typhoon aircraft at BAE Systems in Warton , Lancashire , as part of the National Veterans ' Day celebrations . On 23 September 2008 , Allingham launched a book about his life , co-written by Denis Goodwin , with an event at the RAF Club in London . On 11 November 2008 , marking the 90th anniversary of the end of the First World War , together with Harry Patch and Bill Stone , Allingham laid a commemorative wreath for the Act of Remembrance at The Cenotaph in London . Allingham was invested as a Scout on 18 November 2008 , 100 years after he first joined as a youth . He said he was only able to spend six weeks with his local group as a boy . Allingham celebrated his 113th birthday on HMS President , at an event hosted by the Royal Navy . He received a signed birthday card from First Sea Lord Sir Jonathon Band and saw a Mark 8 Royal Navy Lynx flying overhead while he was sitting outside in his wheelchair . When asked the secret of his long life , Allingham said , " I don 't know , but I would say , be as good as you possibly can . "

Allingham credited " cigarettes , whisky and wild , wild women – and a good sense of humour " for his longevity . Allingham overtook George Frederick Ives as the longest lived member of the British Armed Forces on 1 November 2007 . He was therefore the longest lived British First World War veteran to date . Following the death of Tomoji Tanabe on 19 June 2009 , Allingham became the oldest living man . At his death , he was the oldest living veteran of the First World War , but not the longest lived member of any armed force in any conflict ; this record is held by Emiliano Mercado del Toro of Puerto Rico , who also served in the First World War . Allingham was the oldest living man in England for several years . Official recognition by Guinness World Records came in January 2007 . On 8 February 2007 , when 110-year-old Antonio Pierro died , Allingham became the oldest known living veteran of the First World War , and the third-oldest living man in the world . After French supercentenarian Maurice Floquet died on 10 November 2006 , Allingham was the oldest validated living man in Europe . After Japanese man Sukesaburo Nakanishi died on 22 August 2007 , Allingham shared the position of second-oldest man in the world with George Francis , an American man also born on 6 June 1896 , for more than a year until Francis died on 27 December 2008 . On 29 March 2009 , Allingham became the oldest British man of all time . With the death of Tomoji Tanabe on 19 June 2009 he became the oldest living man in the world ; after Allingham died , that title passed to Walter Breuning of Montana .

On 13 February 2007 , he became Britain 's second-oldest living person , behind Florrie Baldwin , and on 29 March 2009 , he became the oldest ever British man , surpassing Welshman John Evans who died aged 112 years and 295 days . He was also the first ever verified British man to reach the age of 113 . On 18 July 2009 , Allingham died of natural causes aged 113 years and 42 days . As the number of First World War veterans dwindled , calls grew to give the last remaining veteran a state funeral . The calls resulted in Her Majesty 's Government approving on 27 June 2006 a National Memorial Service at Westminster Abbey to take place after the death of the last known British First World War veteran . Prior to this announcement Allingham often said that he tried not to think about the prospect , but has also been quoted as saying " I don 't mind — as long as it 's not me . " Allingham received a letter from Member of Parliament Tom Watson on 14 July 2006 explaining the reasoning for a national memorial service rather than a state funeral , as the intention is to commemorate the entire generation that fought in the war rather than single out an individual .

20 July 2003 – Oldest verified living British veteran of the First World War upon the death of Jack Davis 1 November 2007 – Oldest ever member of any British armed forces , surpassing George Ives who died in 1993 aged 111 years and 146 days 13 March 2008 – Oldest ever English man , surpassing John Mosely Turner who died in 1968 aged 111 years and 280 days 29 March 2009 – Oldest ever British man , surpassing Welshman John Evans who died in 1990 aged 112 years and 295 days 18 July 2009 – Died aged 113 years 42 days , the second oldest man ever to die in Europe , behind only Joan Riudavets of Spain who died in 2004 aged 114 years and 81 days .

Allingham was awarded four medals , two of which were medals from the First World War . The Gold Medal of Saint-Omer was awarded to Allingham on 11 September 2004 when he was given the Freedom of the Town of Saint-Omer . He was also awarded France 's highest military honour , the Légion d 'honneur , in which he was appointed a chevalier in 2003 and promoted to officier in 2009 . The remaining two medals are British Campaign Medals from the First World War : the British War Medal and the Victory Medal ; those two medals are colloquially known as " Mutt and Jeff " . These two medals are replacement medals supplied by the Ministry of Defence after discovering at a recent cenotaph parade that Allingham 's original campaign medals were destroyed during the Blitz of the Second World War .

As well as the above-mentioned decorations , Allingham won several awards and honorary memberships . Examples include the Pride of Britain award , and a position as an honorary member of the Fleet Air Arm Association . Although not formally qualified he was recognised by the Institute of Mechanical Engineers ( IMechE ) who presented him with a Chartered Engineer award on 19 December 2008 . Since entering the engineering profession I always hoped to become a chartered engineer , but when I was younger we just couldn ’ t afford it . It ’ s something I never thought would happen for me , so to receive this honorary certificate from IMechE is a lifetime ’ s goal finally realised . I am very grateful to the Institution for presenting me with the award . This was followed on 22 May 2009 with the award of an honorary doctorate in engineering at the Southampton Solent University by the university 's chancellor , the former First Sea Lord Alan West , for his contribution to Britain and its allies during two world wars and his continuing charity work , especially connected with veteran servicemen and women .

Allingham died of natural causes in his sleep at 3 : 10 am on 18 July 2009 at his care home , St Dunstan 's Centre in Ovingdean near Brighton , aged 113 years and 42 days . After his death Walter Breuning took over as the world 's oldest man . Allingham 's funeral took place at St Nicholas ' Church , Brighton at noon on 30 July 2009 , with full military honours . His coffin was carried by three Royal Navy seamen and three RAF airmen . The service was preceded by a half-muffled quarter peal on the church 's bells , rung by local ringers and members of the RAF and Royal Navy change ringing associations . Among the mourners were the Duchess of Gloucester , representing the Queen , and Veterans ' Minister Kevan Jones . Senior Royal Navy and Royal Air Force officers , including Vice-Admiral Sir Adrian Johns and Air Vice-Marshal Peter Dye , represented the two services of which Allingham had been a member . Allingham 's surviving daughter , Betty Hankin , 89 , attended the funeral , with several members of her family . The funeral was followed by a flypast of five replica First World War aircraft ; British and French buglers played the Last Post and Reveille ; and a bell was tolled 113 times , once for each year of his life .

Âsâr-ı Tevfik ( Ottoman Turkish : God 's Favor ) was an ironclad warship of the Ottoman Navy built in the 1860s , the only member of her class . She was built as part of a major expansion program for the Ottoman fleet in the 1860s following the Crimean War . Âsâr-ı Tevfik was a 4,600-metric-ton ( 4,500-long-ton ; 5,100-short-ton ) barbette ship armed with a main battery of eight 220-millimeter ( 8.7 in ) guns in a central battery . In 1903 – 1906 , the ship was extensively rebuilt in Germany and a new battery of 150 mm ( 5.9 in ) and 120 mm ( 4.7 in ) quick-firing guns replaced the older weapons . Âsâr-ı Tevfik served in the Ottoman fleet for more than four decades . During this period , she saw action in two major wars , the Russo-Turkish War of 1877 – 88 and the First Balkan War in 1913 . During the first conflict , she was torpedoed by a Russian torpedo boat but was only slightly damaged . She took part in the abortive Battle of Elli against the Greek Navy in December 1912 during the First Balkan War . While operating against Bulgarian positions in February 1913 , she ran aground ; Bulgarian field artillery then shelled the ship . The damage they inflicted , coupled with heavy seas , destroyed the ship .

Âsâr-ı Tevfik was 83.01 meters ( 272.3 ft ) long between perpendiculars and she had a beam of 16 m ( 52 ft ) and a draft of 6.5 m ( 21 ft ) . She displaced 4,687 metric tons ( 4,613 long tons ; 5,167 short tons ) normally . The ship had an iron hull with a partial double bottom and a ram bow , as was customary for ironclads of the period . She had a crew of 320 officers and enlisted men . In 1903 – 06 , the ship was substantially rebuilt . Both ends were cut down , a single military mast was installed amidships , and a new conning tower was built . The ship was powered by a single horizontal compound steam engine that drove one screw propeller . Steam was provided by six box boilers , which were trunked into a single funnel amidships . The engines and boilers were both manufactured by her builder at the La Seyne shipyard . The engines were rated at 3,560 indicated horsepower ( 2,650 kW ) for a top speed of 13 knots ( 24 km / h ; 15 mph ) , though by 1895 poor maintenance over her career had reduced her top speed to 8 knots ( 15 km / h ; 9.2 mph ) . The steam engine was supplemented by a barque sailing rig . During the reconstruction , the sailing rig was removed and the old boilers were replaced with newer Niclausse boilers . She also received a new engine , the performance of which is unknown .

Âsâr-ı Tevfik was armed with a main battery of eight 220-millimeter ( 8.7 in ) muzzle-loading guns manufactured by Armstrong Whitworth . Six of the guns were mounted in an armored battery amidships , with three on each broadside , and the other two were placed directly above in open barbettes . In 1891 , the two barbette guns were replaced with 210 mm ( 8.3 in ) breech-loading guns built by Krupp , and several smaller Krupp guns were installed . These included a pair of 87 mm ( 3.4 in ) guns and a pair of 63.5 mm ( 2.5 in ) guns . Two 25.4 mm ( 1 in ) Nordenfelt guns were also added . The ship 's armament was radically revised during the 1903 – 06 reconstruction . All of the old guns were removed and a battery of medium-caliber quick-firing ( QF ) guns manufactured by Krupp was installed . Three 150 mm ( 5.9 in ) SK L / 40 guns in single shielded mounts were placed forward , with one on the forecastle and the other two abreast of the conning tower . The central battery guns were replaced with six 120 mm ( 4.7 in ) SK L / 40 guns , with a seventh gun mounted on the stern . Six 57 mm ( 2.2 in ) and two 37 mm ( 1.5 in ) QF guns were also added .

The ship saw action during the Russo-Turkish War of 1877 – 88 . She spent the war in the Black Sea squadron . The Ottoman fleet , commanded by Hobart Pasha , was vastly superior to the Russian Black Sea Fleet ; the only ironclads the Russians possessed there were the two Admiral Popov-class ships , circular vessels that had proved to be useless in service . The presence of the fleet did force the Russians to keep two corps in reserve for coastal defense , but the Ottoman high command failed to make use of its naval superiority in a more meaningful way , particularly to hinder the Russian advance into the Balkans . Hobart Pasha took the fleet to the western Black Sea , where he was able to make a more aggressive use of it to support the Ottoman forces battling the Russians in the Caucasus . The fleet bombarded Poti and assisted in the defense of Batumi . In June , the Russian Baltic Fleet began a campaign to neutralize the Ottoman ironclads using torpedo boats equipped with towed and spar torpedoes . On the night of 23 – 24 August 1877 , three Russian torpedo boats , Miner , Navarin , and Sinop , attempted to sink the ship with spar torpedoes while she was moored in Sukhumi . Gunfire from the Ottoman ships , along with troops on the shore , made the Russian attack difficult . Sinop detonated her torpedo against a boat that was protecting Âsâr-ı Tevfik , causing only minor damage to the ironclad , though the Russians initially believed they had sunk her . The ship was able to steam to Batumi , where she was repaired . The attackers had been aided by a fire burning on the beach , which illuminated the Ottoman vessels in the harbor . The Ottoman fleet continued to support the Ottoman garrison at Batumi , when held out against constant Russian attacks to the end of the war . After the end of the war , the ship was laid up in 1878 at Constantinople , the Ottoman capital .

From 1890 to 1892 , the ship was re-boilered at the Imperial Arsenal on the Golden Horn . Following the Greco-Turkish War in 1897 , which highlighted the seriously degraded state of the Ottoman fleet , the government decided to begin a naval reconstruction program . The first stage was to rebuild the older armored warships , including Âsâr-ı Tevfik . Requests for proposals were sent to foreign shipyards , and in October 1898 the Gio . Ansaldo & C. shipyard in Genoa requested permission to survey the ship and the ironclad Mesudiye . Both vessels were accordingly sent to Genoa in January 1899 , arriving on the 28th . There she was briefly laid up . Instead , Âsâr-ı Tevfik was transferred to the Germaniawerft shipyard in Kiel , Germany for a major reconstruction , arriving on 29 May 1900 , with the transport İzmir . After docking in Kiel , the men from Âsâr-ı Tevfik were transferred to İzmir , but with no funds to buy coal , the men were stranded in Germany . Germaniawerft stripped down Âsâr-ı Tevfik , but then halted work to await the first Ottoman payment . By mid-1901 , the men had accumulated significant debt and the Ottoman government had made no effort to return them or pay the installments for the modernization program . Even Kaiser Wilhelm II became involved in an attempt to press the Ottoman government to settle the debts incurred by the sailors . Instead , the Ottomans demanded that Krupp , the owner of the Germaniawerft shipyard , make an advance of 6,000 lira so that İzmir could be prepared for the voyage back to Constantinople . The Ottomans were at the time negotiating for a large armament contract with Krupp for the Army , and used this as leverage ; by late 1901 , Krupp conceded , rather than risk the lucrative contract . The debts in Kiel were paid and İzmir finally departed for home .

No work was done to the ship over the following two years . On 18 January 1904 , Ottoman negotiators began a new round of talks with Krupp , demanding a reduction in the cost of the modernization from 282,000 lira to 65,000 lira ; this amount does not cover the preparatory work that had been initially carried out , let alone the reconstruction . In return , the Ottoman government would order a pair of torpedo cruisers — the Peyk-i Şevket class — from Germaniawerft . With the armament contract still under negotiation , Krupp was forced to concede , despite the significant financial loss the reconstruction deal represented . By April , the armament contract was signed , and so work began slowly on Âsâr-ı Tevfik . Work was completed by late 1906 . The reconstructed ship departed Kiel on 19 November , and arrived in Constantinople on 4 January 1907 . In 1909 , she participated in the first fleet maneuver conducted by the Ottoman Navy in twenty years . During the Italo-Turkish War of 1911 – 12 , Âsâr-ı Tevfik was assigned to the Reserve Division , along with Mesudiye and the torpedo cruiser Berk-i Satvet . She did not see action during the conflict , since the Ottoman fleet spent the war in port . This was in part due to the rising tensions in the Balkans that presaged the Balkan Wars ; the Ottomans kept their fleet in port so it could be prepared for the inevitable conflict .

The ship saw significant service during the First Balkan War of 1912 – 13 . At the start of the war , Âsâr-ı Tevfik was suffering from boiler trouble , which necessitated repairs that lasted until 9 November . She was then sent to support the Ottoman troops defending the Çatalca Line against Bulgarian troops . She took up a position off Tekirdağ to provide gunfire support . After the Bulgarians occupied the town , she bombarded their positions , but the attack had little effect . The ship was then moved to Büyükçekmece , where she joined the rest of the fleet . They had no contact with Bulgarian forces during this period . She took part in the Battle of Elli , the first Ottoman surface action involving major warships since the Russo-Turkish War , on 16 December 1912 . Âsâr-ı Tevfik joined a fleet consisting of the pre-dreadnought battleships Barbaros Hayreddin and Turgut Reis , Mesudiye , and several smaller warships . The Ottoman fleet sortied from the Dardanelles at 9 : 30 ; the smaller craft remained at the mouth of the straits while the battleships sailed north , hugging the coast . The Greek flotilla , which included the armored cruiser Georgios Averof and three Hydra-class ironclads , sailing from the island of Lemnos , altered course to the northeast to block the advance of the Ottoman battleships .

The Ottoman ships opened fire on the Greeks at 9 : 40 , from a range of about 15,000 yd ( 14,000 m ) . Five minutes later , Georgios Averof crossed over to the other side of the Ottoman fleet , placing the Ottomans in the unfavorable position of being under fire from both sides . At 9 : 50 and under heavy pressure from the Greek fleet , the Ottoman ships completed a 16-point turn , which reversed their course , and headed for the safety of the straits . The turn was poorly conducted , and the ships fell out of formation , blocking each other 's fields of fire . By 10 : 17 , both sides had ceased firing and the Ottoman fleet withdrew into the Dardanelles . When they approached the straits , Âsâr-ı Tevfik and Mesudiye took up positions to cover the withdrawal of the damaged pre-dreadnoughts . The ships reached port by 13 : 00 and transferred their casualties to the hospital ship Resit Paşa . Âsâr-ı Tevfik had not been hit in the engagement . The battle was considered a Greek victory , because the Ottoman fleet remained blockaded . On 10 January 1913 , Âsâr-ı Tevfik supported another sortie by the fleet , this time patrolling off the Dardanelles while the rest of the fleet raided Imbros . While protecting the fleet 's flank , she encountered Greek destroyers and forced them to withdraw after firing a few shots . Neither side scored any hits in the engagement . The ship was lost while operating in the Black Sea against Bulgarian forces . On 7 February , the ship was ordered to proceed to Yalıköy to support a raid by the Army . The following day , the raid was launched on the town , but was quickly forced to withdraw from heavy Bulgarian resistance ; Âsâr-ı Tevfik was ordered to move in and shell the town , but ran aground on an uncharted sandbank at 12 : 45 . On 10 February , salvage work began , beginning with the removal of equipment . By the 12th , all armament and coal had been removed , but the ship could not be freed . Heavy seas and Bulgarian artillery damaged the wreck , which rendered her a total loss .

Detective Chief Inspector Jillian " Jill " Marsden is a fictional character in the BBC soap opera EastEnders , played by Sophie Stanton . She made her first appearance on 5 March 2001 investigating the shooting of Phil Mitchell ( Steve McFadden ) , which was part of the whodunit storyline " Who Shot Phil ? " . Marsden returned in 2002 , 2003 and 2009 ( for another whodunit storyline , " Who Killed Archie ? " ) . She returned on 5 January 2012 for her third whodunit storyline , " Who 's Stalking Phil ? " , departing four months later on 10 May 2012 . Marsden returned for two episodes on 17 August 2012 to conclude the latter storyline . On 16 July 2015 , she returned for part of the " Who Killed Lucy Beale ? " whodunit storyline . When she was brought back in 2009 , Marsden 's feelings were explored in a segment of the BBC EastEnders homepage entitled " Marsden 's Video Diaries " , documenting the character 's thoughts about the storyline in which she was involved . Marsden 's relationship with Phil has been explored since her first appearance , with the BBC describing their relationship as a " romance in negative ... her ultimate dream is that some day she 'll get [ Phil ] behind bars " and the Daily Mirror 's Tony Stewart calling her Phil 's " arch enemy " .

Marsden first arrives in Albert Square in March 2001 , investigating Phil Mitchell 's shooting in her first case as detective chief inspector . She identifies the five main suspects : Ian Beale ( Adam Woodyatt ) , Dan Sullivan ( Craig Fairbrass ) , Steve Owen ( Martin Kemp ) , Mark Fowler ( Todd Carty ) and Lisa Shaw ( Lucy Benjamin ) . Marsden arrests Dan for the shooting , although he is later acquitted due to lack of evidence . Dan was set up by Phil but it was , in fact , Lisa who shot him . Marsden later arrests Little Mo Slater ( Kacey Ainsworth ) for the attempted murder of her husband Trevor Morgan ( Alex Ferns ) . Little Mo claims self-defence , since she has been a victim of domestic violence at the hands of Trevor . The trial ends , with Trevor 's treatment of Little Mo revealed . In 2003 , Sonia Jackson ( Natalie Cassidy ) visits Marsden with evidence that Phil killed his ex-girlfriend Lisa . Jill helps set up a honey-trap for Phil in order to obtain a confession from him , with PC Kate Morton ( Jill Halfpenny ) and DI Dominic Price ( Paul Brennen ) , but it fails when Kate falls in love with Phil and Marsden fires her . Marsden arrests Phil , but with insufficient evidence and no confession he is released . It later emerges that Lisa is safe and well , and Phil is innocent . Marsden later arrests Phil when Dennis Rickman ( Nigel Harman ) and Den Watts ( Leslie Grantham ) set him up in an armed robbery .

Marsden reappears on Albert Square in 2009 when Archie Mitchell ( Larry Lamb ) is murdered . She arrives on the scene when several people say they suspect Janine Butcher ( Charlie Brooks ) , but Marsden waits before questioning her , and questions the Mitchells first . She makes a televised appeal for witnesses and later interviews Phil , but he is provided an alibi by his girlfriend Shirley Carter ( Linda Henry ) . A few days later , a red fingernail is found at the scene of the murder ; Marsden visits the female locals , checking their hands . Seeing an upset Heather Trott ( Cheryl Fergison ) , knowing that she is vulnerable and lives with Shirley , she talks to Heather about Christmas Day and Heather accidentally tells Marsden that Phil wasn 't there . Marsden interviews Phil and later visits his home , asking to see the clothes he was wearing on Christmas Day . Shirley shows her a clean shirt ; Marsden closes the laundrette , hoping anyone with blood-stained clothes will not be able to wash them . After a tip-off Marsden arrests Sam Mitchell ( Danniella Westbrook ) ; Sam accuses her mother , Peggy Mitchell ( Barbara Windsor ) , of the murder . Marsden confirms that she was there to talk to Peggy , questioning Peggy and Sam at the police station . Peggy is released without charge ; however , Sam is detained for jumping bail . Marsden visits Janine , who insists that people will say anything to get her in trouble . She asks Janine why she was out in the cold on Christmas Day , and asks if Janine knows where Archie 's laptop as it had gone missing .

On 18 January , Marsden arrests Ian after Janine told her that Ian took advantage of her , stole Archie 's laptop , which had a recording of them having sex on it , and dumped it in the canal . Ian refuses to talk , but when Marsden shows him CCTV footage of him dumping the laptop , and then shows him the recovered laptop , he admits visiting Archie on Christmas Day , claiming that Archie was threatening him . He wanted to delete the recording and denies murdering Archie , but Marsden charges him . Days later , Janine tells Marsden she saw Ian leave the Queen Victoria on Christmas Day but the bust of Queen Victoria was on the bar after he left . Marsden places Janine at the scene , but she also denies murdering Archie . Marsden tells Ian that although the murder charge will be dropped , he will still be charged with burglary and theft of Archie 's laptop . She and DC Wayne Hughes ( Jamie Treacher ) attend Archie 's funeral , watching people 's reactions in the hope of a new lead . Peggy returns to Archie 's grave ; when Marsden asks why , she explains that she didn 't believe him when he said his cancer had returned .

The following week , Ronnie Mitchell ( Samantha Womack ) spots her ex-boyfriend Jack Branning ( Scott Maslen ) talking to Marsden ; Jack tells Ronnie that he was fishing for information . With no new leads , Marsden 's boss threatens to take her off the case . She reviews the suspects and decides to question Jack , since he is asking more questions than he has answered . In the café Marsden and Hughes discuss new information she has obtained , ensuring that she is overheard . Chinese whisper-style rumours circulate , ending with the certainty that Marsden would arrest Ronnie . Ronnie sees Marsden in the Square , and a struggle ensues . She knocks Marsden down , is arrested and charged with assaulting a police officer but is released on bail . Marsden suspects Ronnie further , saying that she has now shown her true colours . Later , DC Jasmine Field ( Karen Ascoe ) enters the pub with other officers to arrest a suspect ; frightened , Ronnie leaves Walford . The police officers are there to arrest Dot Branning ( June Brown ) , who was accused by Dotty Cotton ( Molly Conlin ) after Dot slapped her . Jack confronts Marsden for unnecessarily sending a uniformed officer to arrest Dot and unsettling the locals , and realises there was no new information .

Janine tells Marsden that Ronnie has fled , but Marsden finds her at the Queen Vic . Marsden remarks that a new forensic profile has been found , and DNA screening of white males will shortly begin . After Hughes accepts a bribe from Jack to make the DNA samples disappear , Marsden receives an anonymous tip-off . The police search Janine 's flat , finding the engagement ring that went missing the night of Archie 's murder , and Janine is arrested but later released for lack of evidence . Becca Swanson ( Simone James ) calls the police , saying that Bradley Branning ( Charlie Clements ) attacked Archie on Christmas Day , and the police arrive to arrest him . Marsden spots him when his phone rings ; two officers chase him to the roof , where he stumbles and falls to his death . The investigation ends , since the police believe that Bradley had killed Archie ; however , his killer was actually Stacey Slater ( Lacey Turner ) .

In January 2012 , Denise Fox ( Diane Parish ) gives Marsden a letter incriminating Phil in the death of a homeless man , who died when he torched the car lot in an insurance scam in 1994 ; she adds that Phil also murdered Stella Crawford ( Sophie Thompson ) , and Marsden thanks Denise for the information . Marsden arrives in Walford and begins trailing Phil . She asks Denise not to tell Phil that she is in town , wanting to ensure Phil 's imprisonment . Marsden then targets Phil 's son Ben ( Joshua Pascoe ) , interviewing him about Stella 's death . Ben was abused by Stella and finds Marsden 's questions distressing ; however , she continues to press him . After a falling-out with Phil Ben changes his statement , telling Marsden that Phil told Stella to jump off a building or he would push her . Marsden then arrests Phil for murder , and Ben reveals he was stalking him . She informs Phil 's partner , Shirley , that he has been charged with Stella 's murder . Ben pleads with Marsden to keep his statement a secret from the Mitchells , but she tells him he must accept that his father will learn about Ben 's involvement in his arrest eventually . After discovering Ben 's lies about Phil , Ian then passes this information on to Marsden and Ben is arrested . On the day of Phil 's release he helps Ben hide his involvement in Heather 's murder ; Marsden tells Phil at the police station she will contact him about Ben 's accusations . The charges against Ben are dropped ; Marsden visits Phil , taunting him that he will eventually slip up , and suggests that Ben may ultimately bring Phil down .

Nicknamed the " female sleuth " by the Daily Record , Marsden 's profile on the EastEnders website describes her as " fearless , [ a ] no-nonsense copper and the scourge of Walford ’ s criminal fraternity . " The East Anglian Daily Times described Marsden as " tough " , Ian Hyland from The Mirror called her " scary " and Nancy Banks-Smith from The Guardian characterised her as " strict " . Naomi Mcelroy described Marsden as a " curly-haired copper " , but said as a detective she was " rubbish " ; Polly Hudson from The Daily Mirror similarly opined , saying she was " useless " ( as did Mcelroy ) , and stated that Marsden was " making a right pig 's ear " of investigating Archie 's ( Lamb ) murder . The Daily Mirror 's Tony Stewart characterised her as " vindictive " .

Marsden first appeared on 5 March 2001 in the " Who Shot Phil ? " storyline . In the whodunit storyline the five main suspects were Dan Sullivan , Steve Owen , Lisa Shaw , Ian Beale and Mark Fowler . A source in the Daily Record said , " Sooner or later the truth will out . But until then there 's going to be a lot of probing going on . " She left on 27 March 2001 after unsuccessfully identifying the shooter ( who turned out to be Lisa ) . In 2002 she appeared in January , April and from 14 November to 6 December . In November , when Marsden returns , the police suspect that Phil has murdered his ex-wife Lisa . The Daily Mirror said , " They are the words Phil Mitchell has heard many times before . ' You 're nicked ' , baldy . Intrepid DCI Marsden may not be a Jane Tennison , but she 's nabbed her prime suspect . " I 've got some good news for you , Phil , " she says , after arresting him on suspicion of murder . " The police in Portugal found your jacket . Unfortunately for you , it 's covered in blood . Mrs Fowler 's blood ... " In 2003 , Marsden returned in March July , August , November and for a longer stint in December .

In November 2009 , it was reported that Stanton would reprise her role as Jill . Digital Spy forum members had previously pointed out that her return was hinted at in a photo on the official EastEnders website and in a feature ( " Script Peek " ) where Phil is quoted as saying , " I know exactly what makes her tick " before adding " I 've wriggled off her hook so many times . She 's already picturing me standing in the dock " in the 29 December episode . Marsden returned to investigate the murder of Archie Mitchell . A source told Digital Spy , " Marsden has a score to settle with Phil . She was never far behind Phil when he put a foot out of place all those years ago and she 's back with a vengeance ... With so many people in the frame for Archie 's murder , Marsden has a difficult job on her hands if she wants to pin it on Phil . " Of her return she said , " It came completely out of the blue , and knocked me for six . " ... I really thought Marsden was no more . It was a really great surprise because I ’ d just finished a year ’ s run at the National Theatre , appearing in a new play called England People Very Nice – so it couldn ’ t have come at a better time . " She returned on 28 December 2009 .

Although Stanton did not know who murdered Archie , she guessed that it could be Stacey Slater ( which turned out to be correct ) . Speaking of this , she said that Sophie was one of the few to correctly guess it was Stacey . " I had an epiphany about a week before the live episode . It was a memory of the whole Who Shot Phil ? storyline , and how there were eight different suspects , including some really hard blokes , and it turned out to be Lisa . I knew DCI Marsden wasn ’ t going to get the culprit , because of a couple of scenes of the following episode we ’ d shot in December , and I thought that narratively , Stacey was the only person who the audience would forgive , and who could get away with it . That was my theory and it turned out to be right ! " Naomi Mcelroy from The Sunday Mirror thought that Marsden could be Archie 's killer . Marsden left on 22 February 2010 , and returned on 5 January 2012 . She returned after Phil is framed for Kevin Wicks ' ( Phil Daniels ) ' s death and that of a homeless man , who died accidentally in a car-lot fire ( part of an insurance scam ) . According to Inside Soap the police would begin questioning Phil 's former fiancée Stella Crawford 's death , teasing Marsden 's return : " The investigation is set to bring Phil face to face with his old nemisis , DCI Marsden – and this time she 'll stop at nothing to put the bad boy permanently behind bars " . Digital Spy reported that Marsden re-opens the investigation into Stella 's death , " suspecting that all is not what it seems " . Finally , Marsden returned for two single episodes on 17 August 2012 .

The BBC used viral promotion on the EastEnders homepage to further develop the storyline of Who Killed Archie ? , with Marsden the main character in the nine videos . A new section ( " Marsden 's Video Diaries " ) was launched , encompassing events on the show from 25 December 2009 onwards in diary style from Marsden 's point of view . Insight was provided on the character 's thoughts and feelings on the events surrounding her each week , beginning with the introduction : " Christmas Day . I should be at home with my feet up eating a mince pie and watching the Doctor Who Christmas special . Instead , I ’ ve been called into work . Murder . A bloody one too . The victim , one Archibald Mitchell . Not the first time a Mitchell 's ruined my night . Still , if this leads to Phil Mitchell all wrapped up in Walford nick by New Years day , might be the best present I ’ ve ever had . " On the videos Marsden discussed evidence , suspects she had brought in and her relationship with Phil . During the next three video diaries , Marsden talks about the suspects and the evidence against them . In episode three it is Ronnie , Peggy and Sam ; in episode four she talks about Janine Butcher , and in episode five she discusses Ian 's motives . Towards the end of the series ( in episode seven ) , Marsden 's boss threatens to fire her if she does not capture the culprit : " I ’ ve got to get someone . I ’ ve got to pin this on someone . Every address in the immediate area door-stopped . Five suspects questioned , one arrest . Nothing . They tell me nothing . Mitchell , the ex wife , the daughter , Beale , Butcher , [ Jack ] Branning , I ’ m getting closer , I just need time . Of course my boss is putting pressure on . Says I ’ m losing my touch , That he 'll take the case of me . This is my case . Somebody 's going down for it and it ain ’ t going to be me . " In the penultimate episode , Marsden announces that the DNA results have come through ; this is aired on EastEnders . The final episode of Marsden 's Video Diaries aired on 19 February 2010 , three days before Marsden 's departure in 2010 . In this episode ( " Case Closed " ) , the Lionel Richie song " Hello " plays as the " Who Killed Archie ? " storyline replays with the focus on Marsden . The BBC described the episode : " DCI Marsden 's caught Archie 's killer – or she 's collared someone for it at least . But Hello ! ? Was it Phil she was looking for ? Don 't tell us you didn 't spot the latent chemistry between this pair . Shirley must have been livid . We wouldn 't like to surmise what the DCI planned to do with Phil if she got him behind bars . But we do hope this is one Endless Love that will be revisited ... "

When Marsden returned in December 2002 , Ian Hyland of The Mirror said he disliked the " smouldering " sexual tension between Phil and Marsden . Jo Atkison of the Western Mail discussed the Marsden-Kate-Phil storyline , saying , " Betrayal with a capital B is the order of the day in the Square this week . It 's the cop Kate plot I 'm interested in . To shop or not to shop is a dilemma that Kate finds hard to cope with as she waits for the confession that will nail Phil for good " . In an interview with the East Anglian Daily Times , Stanton remarked that she was frequently asked to have her photo taken due to her role in EastEnders . Real-life police detectives criticised the portrayals of detectives Marsden and her colleague DC Wayne Hughes in the show , saying that viewers who see them talking to residents about the case and accepting bribes may believe that the police operate that way in reality . The BBC insisted that a police consultant was used , adding that " this is heightened fiction and all the things that we show might not always represent real life . " A spokesperson said , " We always have a police consultant on shows like this that we go to before casting . " Jane Simon and Brian Mclver described Marsden as having an " appetite for making random arrests " . Simon added , " While the list of suspects includes the entire northern hemisphere , it 's time for DCI Marsden to make another of her daily arrests . Like a Formula One pit stop , she has got it down to a fine art . " Kevin O 'Sullivan of the Sunday Mirror commented on the " Who Killed Archie ? " storyline : " Despite widespread apathy , Albert Square 's Cockney rabble trundle on with the life-sapping saga of Who Killed Archie ? Who gives a toss ? While potential murderers Phil , Ian , Bradley ( Charlie Clements ) and the gang hint furtively at their guilt , the absurd DCI Marple – sorry Marsden – keeps arresting bunny-boiler Ronnie without a shred of evidence . " I 've spent 20 years building a career on hunches , " bragged Miss Marsden . Yeah , and you 've made it all the way to Walford nick . A real high flyer ! "

Roxy Ann Peak is a 3,576-foot-tall ( 1,090 m ) mountain in the Western Cascade Range at the eastern edge of Medford , Oregon . Composed of several geologic layers , the majority of the peak is of volcanic origin and dates to the early Oligocene . It is primarily covered by oak savanna and open grassland on its lower slopes , and mixed coniferous forest on its upper slopes and summit . Despite the peak 's relatively small topographic prominence of 753 feet ( 230 m ) , it rises 2,200 feet ( 670 m ) above Medford and is visible from most of the Rogue Valley . The mountain is Medford 's most important viewshed , open space reserve , and recreational resource . The peak was originally settled 8,000 to 10,000 years ago by ancestors of the Latgawa Native American tribe . In the early 1850s , a sudden influx of non-indigenous settlers resulted in the Rogue River Wars . After the wars , the Latgawa were forced away from the region onto reservations . The peak was named in the late 1850s after one of its first landowners , Roxy Ann Bowen . In 1883 , the city of Medford was established to the west of the mountain , and became incorporated two years later . After acquiring a large amount of land from the Lions Club and the federal government between 1930 and 1933 , the city created the 1,740-acre ( 704 ha ) Prescott Park in 1937 . The park protects much of the upper slopes and summit of the peak and remains largely undeveloped . The peak 's southern foothills have some quickly expanding single-family residential subdivisions .

Roxy Ann Peak is part of the old and deeply eroded Western Cascades , along with nearby Pilot Rock , Grizzly Peak , and Baldy . It is composed of several distinct geologic layers . The oldest layer , the 35- to 50-million-year-old Payne Cliffs Formation , forms the base of the peak and consists of sedimentary sandstone , shale , and conglomerates . Most of the rest of the mountain is made up of 30- to 35-million-year-old volcanic basalt , breccias , and agglomerates , known as the Roxy Formation . These rocks are some of the oldest in the Cascades . At the summit , younger basalt dikes and intrusions K – Ar dated to 30.82 ± 2 million years ago form a relatively erosion-resistant cap , likely contributing to the peak 's isolation and familiar conical shape . Much of the lower slopes of Roxy Ann are covered by a 4-to-5-foot-thick ( 1.2 to 1.5 m ) layer of dense , sticky clay . Due to the clay 's low shear strength , the soil is prone to creep , earthflows , and landslides . Several large subdivisions lie on top of these deposits , some of which are up to 20 feet ( 6.1 m ) thick .

Humans have lived in the vicinity of Roxy Ann Peak for the past 8,000 to 10,000 years . The first inhabitants were semi-nomadic , most likely living off edible bulbs and large mammals such as mastodons and giant bison . Within the last millennium , the region became home to the Latgawa Native American tribe , who called the peak Al-wiya . They probably used the mountain for gathering acorns and hunting black-tailed deer and small birds , animals which are still abundant there . The first European Americans to visit the area were a group of fur trappers led by Peter Skene Ogden who traveled north through the Rogue Valley on February 14 , 1827 . The first non-indigenous settlers arrived a few decades later . The sudden increase in population created conflicts with the Latgawa , which ultimately led to the Rogue River Wars of 1855 and 1856 . After the wars , the remaining Latgawa were forced hundreds of miles north to the Siletz Reservation on the central Oregon Coast . Early settlers named the peak Skinner Butte , after Alonzo A. Skinner , the Rogue Valley Indian agent between 1851 and 1853 . The current name of the mountain originates from one of its first residents , Roxy Ann Bowen . Two couples — Roxy Ann and her husband John McKee and Stephen and Mary Taylor — claimed almost the entire peak in 1853 , and by the late 1850s , it came to be known as Roxy Ann Peak .

In November 1883 , the Oregon and California Railroad was built through the center of the Rogue Valley , bypassing Jacksonville , the county seat . The railroad company also constructed a train depot halfway between Central Point and Phoenix , and platted 82 city blocks around it . The townsite was named Medford in December . In 1884 , residents celebrated the town 's first Independence Day by firing 38 cannon blasts — one for each U.S. state — from Roxy Ann Peak 's summit . Medford grew quickly , and was incorporated on February 24 , 1885 . Beginning in the early 1900s , the mountain 's foothills were predominantly used for pear orchards and lignite mining . Mining ceased at the onset of World War I , and many of the orchards were abandoned during the Great Depression , but some still remain .

In 1929 , the Lions Club purchased two sizable portions of land on the peak , and deeded 200 acres ( 80.9 ha ) to Medford for recreational use the following year . In 1931 , the city acquired another 1,500 acres ( 607.0 ha ) via the Recreation and Public Purposes Act , and 40 acres ( 16 ha ) more in 1933 . The park was dedicated in 1937 to George J. Prescott , a Lions Club leader and Medford police officer who was killed on duty on March 16 , 1933 . Starting in 1933 , the Civilian Conservation Corps ( CCC ) made the first improvements to Prescott Park , including constructing 18 miles ( 29 km ) of trails and a 16-foot-wide ( 4.9 m ) access road ( Roxy Ann Road ) , creating several picnic areas and overlooks , and digging drainage ditches . The CCC stopped work in 1942 , soon after the beginning of World War II . Park maintenance ceased due to municipal budget problems , and gasoline rationing caused the number of visitors to drop markedly . By 1956 , the CCC 's improvements had suffered $ 110,000 in damage . The trend of disrepair continued for several decades .

During the late 1990s , the park experienced a surge in vandalism , littering , and wildfires caused by off-roading , and Roxy Ann Road became nearly impassable because of lack of maintenance . Medford police officers had to devote much of their time to patrolling the mountain , made difficult by the park 's remote location . To alleviate these problems , the city regraded Roxy Ann Road in 1998 , and installed two gates near the park entrance two years later . By 2006 , vandalism had decreased by 70 percent . At 1,740 acres ( 704.2 ha ) , Prescott Park is Medford 's largest park , covering much of the upper slopes and summit of Roxy Ann . It is two and a half times larger than the city 's other parks combined .

Prescott Park and Roxy Ann Peak 's upper slopes remain relatively undeveloped , being outside of Medford 's city limits and urban growth boundary . The summit of the peak is home to a 180-foot-tall ( 54.9 m ) radio tower built in 2007 ; the new tower replaced three of four existing 80-foot ( 24 m ) towers . Roxy Ann Peak and nearby Baldy are the only two primary transmitter station sites in the Rogue Valley . Residential development of the mountain 's southern foothills has been on the rise for several years , primarily in the form of single-family residences . Construction costs have continued to rise as well , in part because of a bill passed in 2003 . Oregon House Bill 3375 required that new construction on slopes of 20 percent or greater with unstable soil undergo increased regulation and an extended approval process . The bill doubled the cost of new foundations to around $ 20,000 to $ 30,000 , and the cost of retrofitting an existing structure approached $ 100,000 . Roxy Ann Peak 's southern foothills are also home to the RoxyAnn Winery , a Rogue Valley AVA winery founded in 2002 . On the opposite side of the mountain is the first bioreactor landfill in Southern Oregon , the Dry Creek Landfill , which began a program in 2006 to generate power from collected methane .

Roxy Ann Peak 's high biodiversity is due to its wide range of elevations and its location between the Cascade , Klamath , and Eastern Cascade ecoregions . The lower slopes of the peak support chaparral , oak savanna , and open grassland . Scattered California black oak , Oregon white oak , and Pacific madrone trees grow in these areas , as do sclerophyllous shrubs such as birchleaf mountain mahogany , sticky whiteleaf manzanita , buckbrush , antelope bitterbrush , and Pacific poison oak . Common grasses include blue wildrye and prairie Junegrass . Wildflowers including Southern Oregon buttercup , common yarrow , and Tolmie star-tulip also grow in these regions . At higher elevations , the vegetation transitions to mixed coniferous forest , dominated by Douglas fir , ponderosa pine , incense cedar , western juniper , and Pacific madrone trees . Shrubs such as common snowberry , bearbrush , greenleaf manzanita , sticky whiteleaf manzanita , deerbrush , and Pacific poison oak make up the understory of the forest , along with herbaceous plants such as creeping snowberry and Idaho fescue . The peak is home to many species of birds , including blue-gray gnatcatchers , lazuli buntings , oak titmice , acorn woodpeckers , and California quail on the lower slopes , and mountain quail , mountain chickadees , and red-breasted nuthatches on the upper slopes . Wild turkeys and raptors such as Cooper 's hawks , golden eagles , bald eagles , and prairie falcons are also common . A few species migrate to the peak in the winter , including ruby-crowned kinglets , yellow-rumped warblers , and golden-crowned sparrows . Mammals that inhabit the mountain include black-tailed deer , cougars , bobcats , skunks , raccoons , coyotes , bears , weasels , and squirrels . A large herd of Roosevelt elk frequent the peak 's western foothills . The herd swelled to over 100 individuals in the mid-2000s , causing traffic problems and severe damage to local pear orchards , but shrank to about 40 members by 2009 after an Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife relocation effort . Other common animals on the peak include western rattlesnakes and western blacklegged ticks .

Roxy Ann Peak and Prescott Park serve as Medford 's most important viewshed , open space reserve , and recreational resource . Popular recreational activities on the peak include picnicking and hiking , mountain biking , and horseback riding on the 4 miles ( 6 km ) of designated trails in Prescott Park , which range in difficulty from moderate to steep . In August 2013 , the city of Medford and the International Mountain Bicycling Association released a conceptual plan detailing future improvements to the park 's trail system . The plan would add 30 miles ( 48 km ) of new multi-use trails throughout the park , improve existing trails and trail signage , and add a new trailhead on the mountain 's western slope , at an estimated cost of between $ 360,000 and $ 720,000 . If approved , construction on the first phase could begin by 2015 . A challenge course opened in Prescott Park in April 2012 , operated by the Tigard-based company Synergo . The course has 15 elements — eight low and seven high — each formed by various combinations of ropes , wires , platforms , ladders , and swings . They range from 2 to 40 feet ( 0.61 to 12 m ) above the ground .

The peak and park can be accessed via Roxy Ann Road on the southern side of the mountain . There are two gates on the road ; the first is near the base of the peak and is opened and closed on a set schedule , and the second is about one mile beyond it at the park boundary , and is closed to all unauthorized motor vehicles . One mile past the second gate , the road splits into a 2.7-mile-long ( 4.3 km ) loop around the summit . Tower Road begins on the north side of the loop and ascends to the summit of the peak . The peak offers expansive views of the surrounding landscape , including the Rogue Valley , Mount Ashland , Mount McLoughlin , Pilot Rock , the Crater Lake rim , and even Mount Thielsen , 66 miles ( 110 km ) to the north , and Mount Shasta , 72 miles ( 120 km ) to the south .

" I Take Thee Quagmire " is the 21st episode of season four of Family Guy , originally broadcast on March 12 , 2006 . Peter wins free maid service for a week ; he intentionally creates extra work for the maid , Joan . Quagmire meets her and instantly falls in love with her , leading him to propose to her after the second date . After the marriage , Quagmire comes to regret his new relationship , but learns that Joan will kill him and herself if he leaves her , so he fakes his own death . The episode was written by Tom Maxwell , Don Woodard and Steve Callaghan and directed by Seth Kearsley . It received mostly positive reviews from critics for its storyline and many cultural references . According to Nielsen ratings , it was viewed in 8.06 million homes in its original airing . The episode featured guest performances by Adam Carolla , Stephan Cox , Bryan Cranston , Darrel Heath , Beth Littleford , Christy Carlson Romano , Nicole Sullivan , Fred Tatasciore , Alex Thomas , and Alex Trebek , as well as several recurring voice actors for the series .

Peter is a contestant on Wheel of Fortune , advances to the bonus round , and wins , despite choosing Z , 4 , three Qs , and the Batman symbol for his consonants and vowel , and taking a self-described " shot in the dark " with his answer , " Alex Karras in ' Webster ' " , managing to get the correct answer on his first try , to Pat 's shock . He chooses , among several other prizes , one week of free maid service . When his maid Joan arrives , Peter has her pull items out of his belly button ( including , among other things , a ColecoVision set and a carton of Parliament Cigarettes to the shock of Peter , who says he hasn 't smoked in ten years ) , and rides her back to the store . Peter decides to over-work Joan on her last night by giving Meg a watermelon filled with chocolate pudding and firecrackers , which explodes in her face . After being introduced to her by Peter , Quagmire falls in love with her . After dating Joan , Quagmire proposes marriage to her , which she accepts and the couple prepare their marriage ceremony . Lois , Peter and their neighbors visit Quagmire 's house , finding that he has changed his personality significantly . Peter still believes this to be a prank and shows Quagmire porn magazines in an attempt to change him back to his former ways . Meanwhile , Lois begins to question whether she should keep breastfeeding Stewie , as he 's hurting her when feeding .

By the time of Quagmire 's wedding , Lois ' breasts have gotten very large after deciding to wean Stewie , on the advice of Brian . While at the reception , the top of her shirt rips open . Peter notices that Quagmire is staring at Lois ' huge breasts , and spills champagne on them . Peter then " helps " Lois by shaking her , which makes her large breasts jiggle . This arouses Quagmire , and he realizes that he has made a mistake by marrying Joan . He informs Joan that some of his friends think they should get an annulment after discussing it with Peter , Joe and Cleveland , but she threatens to cut herself and him if he annuls their marriage . As a result , Peter decides to help Quagmire fake his death . He shows Joan a video of Quagmire being attacked by a ninja ( Joe ) , a Nazi ( Cleveland ) , a " pots and pans " robot ( Peter ) , and the body being consumed by a dinosaur held by Peter ( to the theme of Jurassic Park ) . Joan is unconvinced by the video . Peter and his friends then operate plan B , which consists of Quagmire pretending to suffer a heart attack and die . Quagmire is buried in a coffin with enough oxygen to last him a short period of time so Peter can return after the funeral has finished and dig him up . However , when Mayor West announces that all coffins must be buried in concrete ( to guard against zombies ) , Peter exclaims that Quagmire is not dead , and brings him out of the coffin , alive . Death shows up to retrieve his body . Joan pleads for Quagmire 's life , and touches Death 's arm , which kills her instantly . Death takes Joan instead , as " she was suicidal and her last name was Quagmire . " However , before he leaves , Quagmire asks Death to leave the body for another five minutes , thus turning him back into his old usual self .

Meanwhile , Stewie has been having drug-like withdrawals since Lois decided to wean him . He becomes so desperate that when he and Lois are at the park , he jumps on a woman breastfeeding her baby and greedily suckles on her , but is pulled off by Lois . One night , he then tries to milk Lois in her sleep . He pumps her breasts and succeeds , but spills and desperately tries licking it up . Stewie realizes how pathetic he is and accepts his weaning . He comes to Brian and informs that he is now off breast milk , but Lois has other plans . Lois allows Stewie to be breastfed again , thus delighting him .

This episode starts by depicting the game show Wheel of Fortune . When Brian is watching Malcolm in the Middle on television , a scene begins showing the mother of the fictional family screaming at the children and father . Jane Kaczmarek was asked to do the voice as she was the original actor in the series , however she refused . MacFarlane said that he gets a message that Kaczmarek wishes to portray that character as likable , and does not wish to jeopardize that . The father during that scene was voiced by Bryan Cranston , the original actor in the series , who accepted the role . Seth MacFarlane comments that " this is the first real Quagmire story we 've ever done . " A scene was made of Stewie attending a meeting similar to those at Alcoholics Anonymous , however the meeting was designed for those who are too addicted to breast milk . The format of Wheel of Fortune is somewhat similar to the layout of the modern-day program , but the scene also features several aspects which are now no longer broadcast , such as not automatically being given R , S , T , L , N , and E , and were featured in the 1980s .

Two scenes during this episode were censored for television broadcasting . When Quagmire meets Joan and invites her out on a date , Cleveland asks , " Is that a banana in your pocket , or a erection in your pocket ? " Although this entire scene was not censored , Fox Broadcasting Company bleeped " erection " , which , according to DVD commentary , made what Cleveland said sound worse than what was intended . The scene where Peter is promoting ' Crystal Pepsi ' was shown only on the DVD , because it is prohibited to promote one product over another on television . There is also a scene after the watermelon exploding trick where Meg was supposed to say " Fuck you , asshole ! I 'll kick your ass to hell ! " , but Fox also censored the line and was replaced by " I hate you ! I hate you ! " instead . In addition to the regular cast , voice actor Adam Carolla , actor Stephan Cox , actor Bryan Cranston , actor Darrel Heath , actress Beth Littleford , actress Christy Carlson Romano , voice actress Nicole Sullivan , voice actor Fred Tatasciore , actor Alex Thomas , and game show host Alex Trebek guest starred in the episode . Recurring voice actors Ralph Garman , Mike Henry , writer Danny Smith , actress Jennifer Tilly , and writer John Viener made minor appearances in the episode . Recurring guest voice actors Patrick Warburton and Adam West made appearances in the episode as well .

In the opening scene of the episode , Peter is shown playing on the gameshow Wheel of Fortune , with hosts Pat Sajak and Vanna White also appearing . When Mayor West is playing as a contestant on Jeopardy ! , he spells the name of the host , Alex Trebek backwards ( Kebert Xela ) , sending him back to the fifth dimension ; this is a reference to when DC Comics supervillain and nemesis to Superman , Mister Mxyzptlk , is sent to the fifth dimension when someone makes him say his own name backwards . A Family Guy fan later did this in a real life episode of Jeopardy ! When Peter and the children are flying through space and singing , this is a reference to The Great Space Coaster . The two Asian men who meet Peter at the traffic lights when riding Joan 's back speak in a very similar tone to Howard Cosell , a reference to the 1985 cult film Better Off Dead . When Quagmire fantasizes about being alone in the forest with Joan and speaking to her in Elvish , this is a reference to a scene from The Lord of the Rings ; Quagmire goes on to imagine himself with Joan dancing dressed as the title characters from Beauty and the Beast , eating a plate of spaghetti similar to that shown in Lady and the Tramp , and flying on a magic carpet dressed as Aladdin and Princess Jasmine . They also fly through Baghdad which is in ruins from terrorism . Adam West 's response to seeing the Statue of Liberty is taken from the original Planet of the Apes . Also , there is a scene where Brian watches Malcolm in the Middle . In the scene , Lois nags the boys so much that she will go on strike , so Hal ends up killing her with a refrigerator door and walks away blissfully with the boys . Twice during the episode Quagmire engraves his name with his nose much like Woody Woodpecker . In the end , he engraves " giggity giggity goo " in the same fashion .

" Episode 3 " , later also known as " Rest in Pain " , is the fourth episode of the first season of the American mystery television series Twin Peaks . The episode was written by Harley Peyton , and directed by Tina Rathborne . " Episode 3 " features series regulars Kyle MacLachlan , Michael Ontkean and Ray Wise , and introduces Sheryl Lee 's second role , Maddy Ferguson . Rathborne has highlighted the episode 's introduction of Jungian analytical psychology to the series . She also described MacLachlan 's character Dale Cooper as not only a wholesome , grounded anchor against which the series ' more bizarre elements could be contrasted ; but as the central component of the series ' coming-of-age " Bildungsroman " narrative . " Episode 3 " was first broadcast on April 26 , 1990 , and was viewed by approximately 18 percent of the available audience in its initial airing . The episode received positive reviews from critics , with its mix of comedy and tragedy seen as a highlight , and Miguel Ferrer 's character Albert Rosenfield singled out as a particularly successful example of this . The episode also drew praise from The New York Times for its compelling and unusual cast of characters .

The small town of Twin Peaks , Washington , has been shocked by the murder of schoolgirl Laura Palmer ( Sheryl Lee ) and the attempted murder of her friend Ronette Pulaski ( Phoebe Augustine ) . Federal Bureau of Investigation special agent Dale Cooper ( Kyle MacLachlan ) has come to the town to investigate , and initial suspicion has fallen upon Palmer 's boyfriend Bobby Briggs ( Dana Ashbrook ) and the man with whom she was cheating on Briggs , James Hurley ( James Marshall ) . However , other inhabitants of the town have their own suspicions : the violent , drug-dealing truck driver Leo Johnson ( Eric Da Re ) is seen as a possible suspect . Cooper experiences a surreal dream in which a dwarf and a woman resembling Laura reveal the identity of the killer .

Cooper and Audrey Horne ( Sherilyn Fenn ) share breakfast , as he realizes she had slipped a note under his hotel room door ; the note referred to One-Eyed Jacks , a brothel over the Canadian border . When she leaves , Cooper discusses his dream with Sheriff Harry S. Truman ( Michael Ontkean ) , believing it to be a coded solution to the murder . Cooper 's colleague , Albert Rosenfield ( Miguel Ferrer ) wishes to conduct a further post-mortem on Laura 's body , but it is due to be released for the funeral that day . As the argument grows more heated , Truman ends it by punching Rosenfield and knocking him down . Later , Rosenfield shares what he has found ; Laura had been bound when she was killed , had been addicted to cocaine , and had been clawed by a bird . An unidentified plastic shard was also found in her stomach . Leland Palmer ( Ray Wise ) is at home when he is visited by his niece , Madeline Ferguson ( Lee ) . Ferguson is identical to Laura save for having black hair , not blonde . At the same time , Cooper and Truman question Johnson about Laura 's death , believing him to be lying when he denies knowing her . Later , Hurley arrives at Laura 's funeral late , watching from a distance . Briggs begins to accost the mourners , accusing them of doing nothing when they knew Laura had been troubled . Hurley intervenes and the two begin fighting ; Leland falls on the casket as it is being lowered into the grave , sobbing uncontrollably .

That night , Cooper , Truman , Deputy Hawk ( Michael Horse ) and Ed Hurley ( Everett McGill ) meet at the RR Diner . Truman explains that someone has been smuggling cocaine into town ; he suspects that Jacques Renault ( Walter Olkewicz ) , bartender at the town 's Roadhouse Bar , is involved . He also explains that the woods around the town seem to contain a " darkness " , and reveals that there is a secret society of men gathered to stand watch against this : the Bookhouse Boys . Truman and the others bring Cooper to their headquarters , where James has Jacques ' brother Bernard ( Clay Wilcox ) bound and gagged . They question Bernard but he denies any crime . Elsewhere , Jacques realizes his brother is in trouble , and calls Johnson for help . When Johnson leaves , his abused wife Shelley ( Mädchen Amick ) hides a gun in a secret drawer . Meanwhile , sawmill owner Josie Packard ( Joan Chen ) tells Truman , her lover , that her sister-in-law Catherine Martell ( Piper Laurie ) is scheming to take over the mill . Packard knows there are two account books , one fake and one real , but cannot locate the real one Martell has been hiding .

" Episode 3 " was the first of the series to be written by Harley Peyton ; Peyton returned to pen a number of other episodes across both seasons . The episode was directed by Tina Rathborne , who would also go on to helm " Episode 17 " in the second season . Rathborne had previously worked with series co-creator David Lynch when she had cast him in her 1988 feature film Zelly and Me . The episode introduces the character of Maddy Ferguson , Laura 's nearly identical cousin , the second role in the series played by Sheryl Lee . Lee had been a stage actor living in Washington , where " Pilot " was filmed , and had remained there after production moved to Los Angeles as she believed that , with her character dead , she would have no further part in the series . However , Lynch was impressed with her performance and called to ask her to return , telling her he would " figure [ ... ] out " a way for her to continue appearing . Rathborne chose to open the episode with a shot centered on Sherilyn Fenn , finding the actress to be " seductive " and " absorbing " in a similar manner to screen icon Marilyn Monroe . Rathborne had initially worried that the episode featured too many static scenes of characters sitting and talking , with little action , and asked Lynch if she could borrow some of the imagery of the previous episode 's surreal dream sequence to keep these conversations more interesting , adding brief snippets of footage as Cooper discussed the dream with the others . Rathborne has noted that this dream-centric approach to the character of Cooper is rooted in Carl Jung 's theories of analytical psychology . She felt this was something that had not been seen on television before , and credits Lynch with introducing it to the series . She has also described the narrative , both of " Episode 3 " and of Twin Peaks as a whole , as a " Bildungsroman " showing Cooper 's development into a more rounded and enlightened person .

Working on studio sets was a new experience for Rathborne , whose previous work had all been filmed on location . She also found it refreshing to work with the series ' ensemble cast , recalling that Miguel Ferrer often had the cast and crew laughing at the way he approached his material , imbuing the atmosphere during filming with a mix of comedy and drama . Rathborne has also noted the use of ordinary , almost banal , daily life in the series , finding it a necessary element to be able to play the series ' more violent and surreal elements against effectively . She particularly singled out Cooper as a wholesome " boy next door " character who allowed the town 's more unusual residents to stand out more starkly .

" Episode 3 " was first broadcast by the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) on April 19 , 1990 . In its initial airing , it was viewed by 11.3 percent of US households , representing 18 percent of the available audience . This marked a slight decline from the previous episode , which had attracted 13.1 percent of the population and 21 percent of the available audience . The A.V. Club 's Keith Phipps rated the episode a B + , finding that it struggled to live up to the preceding episode ; however , he felt that this was understandable , as " after pushing television to the limits of sanity there was nowhere to go but back " . Phipps also described the funeral scene as a highlight of the episode , finding that he grew to appreciate its mix of tragic and comic more over repeated viewings . Writing for Allrovi , Andrea LeVasseur rated the episode four stars out of five . John J. O 'Connor , writing for The New York Times praised the episode , stating that it features " the most bizarrely compelling collection of characters ever to hit prime time " . O 'Connor spoke positively of the intricate plot seen in the episode and the series as a whole , noting that " the overall narrative is paramount " and affirming his belief that the series " seems to have been mapped out carefully " by Lynch and Frost . Television Without Pity 's Daniel J. Blau praised the episode 's black humour , singling out in particular the scene in which Ferrer 's character is punched after an argument in the town morgue . However , Blau was critical of guest stars Olkewicz and Wilcox , finding their attempted French-Canadian accents particularly poor . Writing for Digital Spy , Tony Delgado has also praised Ferrer 's role as Rosenfield , adding that his dialogue " may not appear to be the epitome of wit , but the way [ Ferrer ] delivered such lines caused plenty of howling hysterics in living rooms across the globe " .

Gunther Erich Rothenberg was born in Berlin . His family was a culturally assimilated German Jewish family . In 1937 , Rothenberg moved to the Netherlands with his mother ; his father later joined them . The family moved next to Britain , where Rothenberg had some schooling . In 1939 , he moved to Mandatory Palestine , then under British rule . There he joined the Zionist movement and Hashomer Hatzair ( The Youth Guard ) , a Socialist-Zionist youth movement . He retained his passion for a Jewish homeland throughout his life . On 13 July 1941 , his parents emigrated to the United States on the Villa de Madrid , an overcrowded ocean-liner that left Barcelona on 20 June . His father , Erich Joseph Rothenberg , was an importer , and both his parents spoke English , Hebrew , French , and German . Their visas , issued in Lisbon , Portugal , claimed Cuban citizenship . At the age of 57 , his father registered for the fourth draft in 1942 , listing his residence as New York City , and his next of kin as his wife , Lotte . In 1941 , Gunther Rothenberg volunteered for the British army , serving in an all-Jewish unit . He was wounded in North Africa . He transferred from the Royal Army Service Corps to the Intelligence Corps and fought with the Eighth Army . He served in the Italian campaign , in the Yugoslav war of liberation and in Austria . His service continued in the occupation of Austria until 1946 . He was a civilian employee of U.S. Intelligence 1946-1948 . Rothenberg returned to Palestine and joined the Haganah for Israel 's War of Independence . He rose to the rank of captain in the Israel Defense Forces .

By 1948 , Rothenberg 's father had died and his mother , Lotte ( 1894 – 1990 ) , had become a naturalized United States citizen . To be with her in New York City , Rothenberg journeyed to Canada , arriving in Halifax , Nova Scotia ; traveling from there to Toronto , he lived for a while at Wycliffe College , where he worked briefly as a construction laborer . On 19 November 1948 , he crossed the international border into the United States at Buffalo , with $ 12.00 in his pocket . In 1951 , he volunteered for the United States Army , transferred to the Air Force , and served in the Korean War until 1955 . He remained guided by a deep sense of duty and a strong sense of American patriotism throughout his life .

After military service in the United States Air Force , he graduated from the University of Illinois with an undergraduate degree . Two years later , he had a master 's degree from the University of Chicago . In 1959 he finished his doctoral degree at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign . He retired from Purdue University , was appointed Professor Emeritus , and lived in Canberra , Australia , where he continued to write about the Napoleonic Wars . He wrote several ground-breaking books on the organization of the Habsburg military and the military reforms of Archduke Charles in the first decade of the Napoleonic Wars . His last book , The Emperor 's Last Victory , about the Battle of Wagram in 1809 , was published posthumously . Although he had never finished high school , with the help of the GI Bill , Rothenberg completed a bachelor 's degree from the University of Illinois in 1954 . He attended graduate school at the University of Chicago , where he was recognized as an argumentative , sometimes abrasive , graduate student with a keen mind . As a graduate student , Rothenberg reviewed W.E.D. Allen 's Caucasian Battlefields : A History of the Wars on the Turco-Caucasian Border , 1828 – 1921 ( Cambridge University Press , 1953 ) for Journal of Modern History , He wrote his 1956 masters ' thesis entitled General Crook and the Apaches , 1871 – 1874 : the campaign in the Tonto Basin . Rothenberg received his doctorate from the University of Illinois : his 1959 dissertation , Antemurales Christianitatis : then military border in Croatia , 1522 – 1749 , was published in 1960 by the University of Chicago Press , as The Military Border in Croatia , 1522 – 1749 ; he followed this with a second study , The Military Border in Croatia , 1750 – 1888 : a study of an imperial institution in 1966 , also published by University of Chicago Press . Both volumes were translated into German in 1970 .

In part-time temporary teaching positions in Illinois and four years at the Southern Illinois University , Rothenberg taught European and world history , and published an instructor 's manual on history of the world , with Henry C. Boren . In 1962 , Rothenberg joined the faculty of the University of New Mexico ; over the following ten years , he rose to the position of full professor . In 1972 , he accepted a position at Purdue University . There , he taught courses in military and European history . As a teacher , his popular course on World War II attracted more than 250 undergraduates annually . In the 1970s , Rothenberg also established himself as an international Napoleonic scholar with The Art of Warfare in the Age of Napoleon , published in 1977 . He also mentored hundreds of graduate and doctoral students . He regularly published in such peer-reviewed publications as Journal of Military History and served on the editorial board of War in History . In 1985 , Rothenberg was a visiting Fulbright fellow in the Department of History in the Faculty of Military Studies at the Australian Royal Military College , Duntroon . He retired from Purdue in 1999 and was named Professor Emeritus .

From 1995 – 2001 , Rothenberg was a visiting fellow at the School of Historical Studies , Monash University . After his retirement , he moved to Melbourne , Australia , and then to Canberra , where his third wife , Eleanor Hancock , taught at the Australian Defence Force Academy . Although retired , he continued to teach , lecture , and publish reviews . He also wrote two more books . Life in Australia did not always please him ; he missed both his colleagues in North America and his Purdue students . His politics — he " was anything but politically correct " — did not mesh well with Australia 's leftist atmosphere . He wrote indignantly to a friend in the United States that he regretted moving to Australia when the authorities confiscated his muzzle loaders , which were prohibited " Down Under . " In 2004 , he returned to the United States to present the keynote address at the 34th Annual Conference of the Consortium on Revolutionary Europe . He had recently completed The Emperor ’ s Last Victory : Napoleon and the Battle of Wagram , which was published posthumously in November 2004 . He died at the age of 80 .

Rothenberg 's legacy is not only the generations of scholars he prepared , but also his vast historiographical contribution to understanding the Revolutionary era . For many years , his Army of Francis Joseph ( 1976 ) was the standard and the only English language analysis of the Habsburg Army in the French Revolutionary and the Napoleonic wars . He changed the widespread perception of Archduke Charles ' military acumen . A masterful historian , Rothenberg was known furthermore as an eminently fair scholar . After publishing a critique of a publication , the author contacted him , and proved the critique unjust ; Rothenberg immediately wrote to a review retracting the criticism , and the two scholars remained friends for the remainder of his life . Some of his colleagues considered Rothenberg " the greatest scholar of the Napoleonic era of our day . " His adventurous life and diverse experiences gave him a deep understanding of human nature . This made him a valuable colleague and a treasured mentor for his many graduate students .

His first marriage in 1952 ended in a 1967 divorce . In 1969 , Rothenberg married Ruth Gillah Smith , a widow with three daughters ( Judith Goris , Laura Allman , Georgia Jones ( all born Herron ) ) , whom he helped to raise ; she died in 1992 . In 1995 , he married for a third time , to Eleanor Hancock , a lecturer at Monash University in Australia . She is now a Senior Lecturer in History at the Australian Defence Force Academy at the University of New South Wales , and has written the first biography of Ernst Julius Röhm . Her 1988 doctoral thesis , National Socialist Leadership And Total War , 1941 – 45 for the Australia National University was published by St. Martin 's Press in 1992 .

Rothenberg , Gunther Erich ( 1960 ) . The Austrian Military Border in Croatia , 1522 – 1747 . Urbana , IL : University of Illinois Press . LCCN 60015931 . Retrieved 2014-02-01 . Rothenberg , Gunther Erich ( 1966 ) . The Austrian Military Border in Croatia , 1740 – 1881 ; a Study of an Imperial Institution . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . LCCN 66013887 . Retrieved 2014-02-01 . Rothenberg , Gunther Erich ( 1976 ) . The army of Francis Joseph . West Lafayette , Indiana : Purdue University Press . ISBN 0911198415 . LCCN 75016051 . Retrieved 2014-02-01 . Rothenberg , Gunther Erich ( 1979 ) . The anatomy of the Israeli army . London : B. T. Batsford . ISBN 0713419660 . LCCN 79321715 . Rothenberg , Gunther Erich ( 1982 ) . Napoleon 's Great Adversaries : the Archduke Charles and the Austrian Army , 1792 – 1814 . Bloomington : Indiana University Press . ISBN 0253339693 . LCCN 82047512 . Retrieved 2014-02-01 . ( Subsequent editions titled Napoleon 's Great Adversary : the Archduke Charles and the Austrian Army . ) Rothenberg , Gunther Erich ( 1978 ) . The Art of Warfare in the Age of Napoleon . Bloomington : Indiana University Press . ISBN 0-253-31076-8 . LCCN 77086495 . Retrieved 2014-02-01 .

Rothenberg , Gunther Erich ( 2000 ) . Keegan , John , ed . The Napoleonic Wars . London : Cassell . ISBN 0304352675 . LCCN 2001347125 . Rothenberg , Gunther Erich ( 2004 ) . The Emperor 's Last Victory : Napoleon and the Battle of Wagram . London : Weidenfeld & Nicolson . ISBN 0297846728 . LCCN 2005440770 . Retrieved 2014-02-01 . Király , Béla Kalman ; Rothenberg , Gunther E. , eds . ( 1979 ) . Special topics and generalizations on the 18th and 19th centuries . New York : Brooklyn College Press . ISBN 0930888049 . LCCN 79051780 . Distributed by Columbia University Press Rothenberg , Gunther E. ; Király , Béla K. ; Sugar , Peter F. , eds . ( 1982 ) . East Central European society and war in the prerevolutionary eighteenth century . New York : Boulder Social Science Monographs . ISBN 0930888197 . LCCN 81050886 . Distributed by Columbia University Press

Rothenberg , Gunther E. ( June 1960 ) . " The Origins of the Austrian Military Frontier in Croatia and the Alleged Treaty of 22 December 1522 " . The Slavonic and East European Review ( Modern Humanities Research Association ) 38 ( 91 ) : 493 – 498 . Retrieved 2014-02-01 . Rothenberg , Gunther E. ( 1961 ) . " Venice and the Uskoks of Senj : 1537 – 1618 " . The Journal of Modern History 33 ( 2 ) : 148 – 156. doi : 10.1086 / 238780 . Rothenberg , Gunther E. ( 1963 ) . " Aventinus and the Defense of the Empire Against the Turks " . Studies in the Renaissance 10 : 60 – 67. doi : 10.2307 / 2857048 . Rothenberg , Gunther E. ( 1964 ) . " The Croatian Military Border and the Rise of Yugoslav Nationalism " . The Slavonic and East European Review 43 ( 100 ) : 34 – 45 . Rothenberg , Gunther E. ( 1964 ) . " The Struggle Over the Dissolution of the Croatian Military Border , 1850- 1871 " . Slavic Review 23 ( 1 ) : 63 – 78. doi : 10.2307 / 2492376 .

Rothenberg , Gunther E. ( 1968 ) . " The Austrian Army in the Age of Metternich " . The Journal of Modern History 40 ( 2 ) : 155 – 165. doi : 10.1086 / 240187 . Rothenberg , Gunther E. ( 1972 ) . " Toward a National Hungarian Army : The Military Compromise of 1868 and its Consequences " . Slavic Review 31 ( 4 ) : 805 – 816. doi : 10.2307 / 2493764 . Rothenberg , Gunther E. ( 1973 ) . " The Austrian Sanitary Cordon and the Control of the Bubonic Plague : 1710 – 1871 " . Journal of the History of Medicine and Allied Sciences. doi : 10.1093 / jhmas / XXVIII.1.15. Rothenberg , Gunther E. ( 1973 ) . " The Habsburg Army in the Napoleonic Wars " . Military Affairs : The Journal of Military History , Including Theory and Technology 37 ( 1 ) : 1 – 5. doi : 10.2307 / 1986561 . Rothenberg , Gunther E. ( 1976 ) . " Nobility and Military Careers : The Habsburg Officer Corps , 1740-1914 " . Military Affairs : The Journal of Military History , Including Theory and Technology 40 ( 4 ) : 182 – 186. doi : 10.2307 / 1986702 .

The Symphony Six were a group of Canadian musicians under contract to the Toronto Symphony Orchestra ( TSO ) who were denied entry to the United States for a concert tour in November 1951 . Coming at the height of the McCarthy era in the US , the six musicians – Ruth Budd , Dirk Keetbaas , William Kuinka , Abe Mannheim , John Moskalyk , and Steven Staryk – were denied visas on the suspicion of being involved in communist activities . The TSO sent other musicians in their place and completed its tour . The six musicians resumed playing with the orchestra upon its return to Canada . At the end of the 1951-1952 season , the TSO refused to renew the contracts of these musicians , stating that they had not fulfilled their contractual agreements . The six musicians appealed this decision to its union , the Toronto Musicians ' Association ; the Mayor of Toronto ; the Canadian Civil Liberties Association ; and many other bodies , without success . They received support from the Federation of Canadian Artists and the Canada Council for the Arts , but not from the Canadian Congress of Labour . The incident garnered extensive media coverage in both Canada and the United States , and sparked a protest against the TSO 's decision . The orchestra 's director , Ernest MacMillan , did not speak about the matter in public , which also prompted criticism , and two members of the TSO board resigned . The six musicians were viewed with suspicion by their colleagues and people avoided them to protect themselves from guilt by association . Budd and Staryk later returned to the TSO , while the four other musicians continued their careers elsewhere .

The Toronto Symphony Orchestra was founded by Luigi von Kunits in 1922 . From 1931 to 1956 it was conducted by Sir Ernest MacMillan , who achieved renown as " the leading figure in Canadian music " . By the 1940s the orchestra 's popularity had increased , but its financial condition did not allow it to tour or invite many guest conductors and soloists . In 1951-52 it received CA $ 56,000 in donations and grants , CA $ 10,000 less than the amount raised by the smaller Vancouver Symphony Orchestra . Some TSO musicians freelanced for the CBC Symphony Orchestra and a few left the TSO to work for the CBC . MacMillan hoped that the TSO could boost its reputation through international engagements .

The Toronto Symphony Orchestra was invited to perform at the Detroit Masonic Temple auditorium on November 27 , 1951 as part of the Major Symphony Series , which also featured the Boston Symphony Orchestra , the Chicago Symphony Orchestra , the Cleveland Orchestra , and the Philadelphia Orchestra . TSO director MacMillan viewed this first-ever US invitation as a golden opportunity to garner more international invitations for the orchestra . He added vocal soloist Lois Marshall to the orchestra , as well as a piece by an American composer , Herbert Elwell 's work Pastorale , and Edward Elgar 's Enigma Variations , to the repertoire . At this time in the United States , McCarthyism was at its height , generating fear and suspicion of entertainment industry figures , academics , military figures , and government officials by accusing them of real or suggested links to communist activities . The TSO was required to submit to United States immigration authorities all the names of its musicians and other staff who would be accompanying the tour . The immigration department approved visas for all but seven musicians , suspecting them of communist activities . One of the musicians was later cleared , leaving six musicians who were denied entry .

Ruth Budd , double bassist . Born in Winnipeg , she joined the TSO in 1947 , becoming Canada 's first professional female bassist . Dirk Keetbaas , Jr . , principal flautist . Born in the Netherlands , Keetbaas was a naturalized Canadian citizen . He also performed in the CBC Symphony Orchestra and in chamber music groups . He joined the TSO in 1949 . William Kuinka , double bassist . Born in British Columbia , he had served in the Second World War . He was self-taught in mandolin and guitar as well . The 1951-1952 season was his first and last year in the TSO . Abe Mannheim , bassist . This was his fourth season with the orchestra . Immigration officials had questioned him for 4 hours . Steven Staryk , violinist . Born in Toronto , he studied violin as a child with , among others , John Mosklyk , and performed in his first recital on CBC Radio at the age of 14 . He joined the TSO in 1950 when he was still in his teens . Several of the six musicians had been involved with Canadian-Russian friendship organizations formed in the 1940s for the purposes of artistic collaboration ; however , they denied charges of political involvement . Staryk related that he had played at Ukrainian and other ethnic events , and Budd admitted to being a member of a left-wing youth group . John Moskalyk 's surname was listed in the TSO 's programs as " Moscow " ; he had conducted the Budapest orchestra for two concert performances in August 1949 . Keetbaas could not recall any association with left-wing groups . Harry Freedman , who was on the board of the Toronto Musicians ' Association at the time and whose vote thwarted unanimous decisions against the Symphony Six , stated that he was not aware of any of the six musicians promoting communism . Later , he felt that he should have taken " more direct action " .

MacMillan himself had been involved in the National Council for Canadian-Soviet Friendship in the 1940s , though he had since quit that organization . In 1950 , with an eye to taking the orchestra on international tours , he had written a letter to the American consul in Toronto admitting his former affiliation . He received his visa in November 1951 without any difficulties . After the six musicians were denied entry and before the orchestra had left for the United States , MacMillan solicited help for them from the Canadian ambassador in Washington , but his plea was unsuccessful . In January 1952 he wrote to US immigration officials trying to clear Staryk 's name , lauding him as " an exceptionally talented violinist and valuable member of the orchestra . I have no reason to doubt that he has no Communist affiliations other than that he played from ages twelve to fourteen with a Ukrainian orchestra that is under some suspicion " . His entreaties on behalf of Staryk did not help to exonerate the musician . The TSO board sent other musicians in place of the six who had been denied visas , and the concert went on as planned . The orchestra 's performance was a success and received positive reviews from both the American and Canadian press . After the TSO returned to Canada , the six musicians resumed their positions .

At the end of the 1951-1952 season , with more American concerts planned for the orchestra in Boston , New York , and Philadelphia in the coming season , the TSO did not renew its contracts with all six musicians . Jack Elton , manager of the orchestra , discussed the problem of these six players with the TSO board in a meeting held on April 21 , 1952 . At the meeting , Elton said that " for artistic reasons there could be no substitutes for such an important concert " . The board agreed with Elton 's arguments and contended that the six musicians had not fulfilled their contractual agreement to join the orchestra on international tours , and that being barred from entering the United States would prevent them from joining the orchestra in future US appearances . Ernest MacMillan was not present at the meeting . The incident and the board 's decision not to renew the musicians ' contracts created controversy when it became public , garnering media attention both nationally and internationally . Members of the press castigated the TSO for not cancelling the US tour in protest over the immigration department ’ s decision , citing a similar case in which the Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra of Amsterdam had cancelled its US tour when several of its musicians were denied entry . One reporter , Langford Dixon of The Globe and Mail , " defended the six so vehemently that it led to his dismissal from the paper " . Many people wrote letters to the TSO and some even cancelled their subscriptions . For its part , the TSO board blamed the newly established Canadian television for the unprecedented decline in subscriptions . A letter to the editor of Toronto Daily Star called the firing " an offence against Canadian independence . "

The TSO board gave orchestra manager Jack Elton the authority to decide what steps should be taken . Elton asked the Toronto Musicians ' Association to intervene . The union upheld the board 's decision . The six musicians appealed but the union turned them down , stating that they had not fulfilled their contractual agreements and so the orchestra had the right not to renew their contracts . Walter Murdoch , president of the Toronto Musicians ' Association , said that it was " a straight contractual matter " and " there is nothing wrong in the orchestra 's not rehiring musicians " . On May 26 , 1952 twelve members of the TSO board met to review their decision not to renew the contracts . Nine of the members voted in favor of the decision while three voted against it . It was decided that the contracts would not be renewed , but if the United States immigration officials would issue entry permits to the six musicians by September 1 , the TSO would renew the contracts . This decision created a controversy and a split within the TSO board , which eventually led to the resignation of two members , Mrs. Edmund Boyd and Mrs. R. B. Whitehead , although these two remained members of the orchestra 's women 's committee .

The Assembly for the Canadian Arts called a rally in support of the Symphony Six on May 29 . The Toronto Musicians ' Association instructed its members not to attend and sent members to stand outside the entrance " to intimidate members from entering " . Aspersions were cast on the Assembly for the Canadian Arts as being a communist front organization , and the Toronto Evening Telegram called the gathering " a communist meeting " . Several members of the Assembly quit the group in fear " of being labelled communists " . On June 4 the United Church of Canada urged the TSO board to reconsider its decision . The controversy continued into the orchestra 's 1952-1953 season . The six musicians appealed again to the TSO board and the Toronto Musicians ' Association , but made no headway . The musicians also held meetings with the Canadian Civil Liberties Association and the Toronto Board of Control , and pleaded their case to the Mayor of Toronto , Allan A. Lamport , and the American Federation of Musicians , without success . While the Federation of Canadian Artists and the Canada Council for the Arts supported the six musicians , the Canadian Congress of Labour rejected a proposal to back them . In 1952 then-Canadian foreign minister Lester Pearson was quoted as saying that it would not " serve any useful purpose to take the matter up again " . Pearson blamed the Cold War for such incidents , and added that the Canadian government was also denying entries to people wishing to attend communist meetings and was providing US officials with " security information " . A special committee was set up by the TSO board to screen all its members .

MacMillan stayed out of the matter ; he did not attend meetings of the TSO board and maintained a public silence through the spring and summer of 1952 . According to TSO archivist Warren , MacMillan 's correspondence indicates that he supported the board 's decision not to rehire the six musicians . While the Symphony Six garnered support from many corners , they did not receive widespread support from their peers . While some orchestra members were " genuinely supportive " , according to Budd , many others publicly shunned them for fear of being perceived as communist sympathizers and losing their own jobs .

Only two of the Symphony Six eventually returned to the Toronto Symphony Orchestra : Ruth Budd and Stephen Staryk . After her contract was not renewed , Budd played with orchestras in Halifax and other Canadian cities . She was rehired by the TSO in 1964 and continued as a double bassist until 1989 , becoming " one of the most beloved members of the orchestra " . Staryk played in the CBC Symphony Orchestra from 1952 to 1956 and then traveled to London , where he was appointed concertmaster of the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra . In 1960 he became concertmaster of the Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra in Amsterdam and toured the US with them , although he had not been officially cleared by the US immigration department . Staryk was the first Canadian concertmaster of the Chicago Symphony Orchestra from 1963 to 1967 . He returned to the Toronto Symphony Orchestra in 1982 , serving as concertmaster until 1986 . Keetbaas became the principal flautist for the Winnipeg Symphony Orchestra and the CBC Winnipeg Orchestra from 1953 to 1968 . From 1956 to 1966 he directed and performed with the Dirk Keetbaas Players , a wind quintet featuring flute , oboe , clarinet , bassoon , and French horn .

Kuinka performed with the Toronto Renaissance Quintet from 1963 to 1965 . In 1964 he formed the Toronto Mandolin Chamber Ensemble , which existed until 1969 . He also performed with the orchestra of the National Ballet of Canada . He received a research grant from the Canada Council to study European teaching methods and repertoire in 1966 . Mannheim later performed in the Vancouver Symphony Orchestra and the Rochester Philharmonic Orchestra . Moskalyk joined the Faculty of Music at the University of Toronto and also became a faculty member of The Royal Conservatory of Music . The TSO board had not renewed the musicians ' contracts hoping that it would receive more concert invitations from the United States . However , it received only eight invitations in the following four years , all from the state of Michigan . The eighth tour had to be cancelled because of a snowstorm . In a letter written to Dan Cameron , President of the Canadian Federation of Music Teachers , in November 1952 , MacMillan reflected that " the orchestra , far from suffering musically , has in some respects improved . "

Alisia Dragoon ( Japanese : アリシアドラグーン , Hepburn : Arishia Doragūn ) is a 1992 platform game developed by Game Arts for the Sega Genesis . The player controls Alisia , a young woman who is on a quest to avenge her father and save the world . She can fire lightning from her hands and summon four faithful beasts to aid her . The game was released outside of Japan by Sega , who packaged the heroine as a rugged gladiator instead of the dainty-looking sorceress she originally was . Due to the lack of publicity for the game internationally , Alisia Dragoon did not make a big impact on the video game market , despite the critical acclaim it received .

In Alisia Dragoon , the player controls the female protagonist , Alisia , in her quest to save the world by defeating the evil forces that killed her father . The game consists of eight levels of side-scrolling environments ; Alisia has to jump across gaps and kill the enemies that stand in her way . Each stage is completed by defeating the boss at the end . Alisia attacks by shooting streaks of lightning from her hands . The attack automatically targets enemies in range but gets weaker with each volley as Alisia 's power is depleted . Her power recharges when she stops attacking ; when fully charged , it allows her to unleash a smart-bomb-like attack , hitting every enemy on the screen . The energy system introduces an element of strategy , encouraging the player to manage Alisia 's power to have her able to defend herself at critical moments . Helping Alisia in her quest are her pet monsters . These creatures fly around the heroine on their own , attacking her foes , and blocking enemy attacks from hitting her . There are four pets , each with its own type of attack . The Dragon Frye spits fireballs , and the Boomerang Lizard hurls boomerangs . The Thunder Raven emits a thunder blast that affects enemies across the screen , and the Ball O ' Fire burns enemies on contact . Only one pet can fight alongside Alisia in her quest , but the player can select any of the four ( or none ) as the active companion at any time .

Over the course of the game , Alisia and her monsters can improve their abilities by collecting power-ups . These enhancement items are placed throughout the first seven stages , mostly in hidden locations . The various power-ups can heal Alisia and her monsters , increase their maximum life bars , improve their attacks , or grant invulnerability for a certain time . Life bars are lost by taking damage from enemy attacks and traps . When Alisia 's pets lose all their life bars , they are removed from play and cannot be brought back until a " Revive " power-up is collected . If Alisia loses all her life bars , she can restart the level by expending a continue . The game ends if all the continues have been used . Alisia Dragoon has no features for saving the player 's progress . After the game is completed , a screen is shown , charting the overall performance of the player based on the number of kills , the power level of Alisia 's attack , and the frequency the pet monsters are used .

Similar to most action games on the Sega Genesis , the plot in Alisia Dragoon is simple and short . The game goes straight into the action , tasking Alisia to kill everything in sight . After defeating the final boss , the player is treated to a cinematic cutscene of Alisia 's triumphant return to her home . For the Japanese release , much of the back-story was described in the manual . Alisia is the daughter of a sorcerer who has imprisoned the main villain , Baldour , in a cocoon and sent it into outer space . Her father is in turn tortured to death by Baldour 's followers . When the villain crashes back to the planet and begins to awaken , Alisia sets out to defeat him and his followers . The American and European versions of the game promoted a different back-story , with Alisia as a gladiator who champions the cause of the people with her four pet companions . Her task is to eradicate the evil monsters and the source of their production , a " silver star " that has crashed to Earth .

In 1992 , Japanese animation studio Gainax was in a collaboration with Game Arts , the makers of the Lunar role-playing games , to produce an action video game . Gainax 's video game product line tended to target a niche crowd who generally preferred dating simulations and anime-based adventure games . Alisia Dragoon is a departure from this tradition . The animation studio handled the artistic end of the production , writing the story and creating the artwork that would be used for the design of the game 's environments and characters . Several of its founders had worked on Hayao Miyazaki 's animated films , and the influences of Miyazaki 's 1984 science fiction animated film Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind were evident in certain levels of the game . Similarly , due to the predominance of mixing science fiction with fantasy themes in the Japanese animation circles at that time , Alisia Dragoon featured high-tech spaceships and robots alongside mythical zombies and dragons . The composition of the soundtrack was delegated to Mecano Associates , who had produced the music for other works from Game Arts , such as the action games Fire Hawk : Thexder 2 and Silpheed . Game Arts , however , did most of the work in producing Alisia Dragoon , adapting the artwork into environments and creatures that can be rendered by the console hardware , and writing them as lines of software code .

Due to a small customer base in Japan , Alisia Dragoon sold few copies on its release ( April 24 , 1992 ) ; the console it was made for , the Sega Mega Drive , was not a popular device in Japan , selling 3 – 3.5 million units ( 10 % of all Mega Drives / Genesis sold around the world ) . The game was published earlier by Sega for North America and Europe , on March 30 . However , it was a subdued release ; Sega did not place major advertisements for the game in the media . To localize the contents for the Western market , the video game publisher made several cosmetic changes to Alisia Dragoon . Instead of a big-eyed heroine drawn in typical anime styling , Alisia was portrayed as a golden bikini-wearing female barbarian on the box covers outside Japan . The Western version of Alisia was likened to the scantily clad females in artist Boris Vallejo 's work . Westerners were more enthusiastic toward the game than were the Japanese , although there were a few negative appraisals . GamePro magazine opined Alisia Dragoon 's responsive controls , coupled with the hectic action and handsome graphics , made the game highly desirable for owners of the Genesis console . The Lessers of Dragon magazine were equally impressed with the gameplay , praising Alisia Dragoon for its " solid arcade action " that satisfied their " need for fast reflexes " . Mean Machines 's Julian Rignall praised the game for its pet monsters design , calling the management of the pets in the game an encouragement toward tactics . His fellow reviewer , Richard Leadbetter , wrote the game was visually attractive with " beautiful sprites " and " amazing backdrops " . He found the gameplay challenging , being forced to conserve energy as the game " [ threw ] everything but the kitchen sink at [ him ] " . Rignall agreed with Leadbetter on the game 's difficulty , which along with the secret rooms and power-ups to be discovered made Alisia Dragoon an excellent action platform game that had long-lasting appeal . Of the hundreds of Genesis games , Mega magazine rated Alisia Dragoon among the top 100 games , calling it " [ probably ] the best dragon-based platform game around . " Despite the positive sentiments , sales of the game outside Japan were weak .

Sixteen years after the game 's release , Todd Ciolek of Anime News Network reviewed Alisia Dragoon and repeated much of the same sentiments as the Mean Machines reviewers . Noting Gainax 's catalog of games , he noted that Alisia Dragoon was very different from the rest ; instead of targeting hardcore fans of anime and focusing on exploitive themes , the game 's appeal was for everyone . In light of this , Ciolek called Alisia Dragoon " the best video game Gainax ever touched " and " a spectacular ride in its own right " . Alisia Dragoon has been recognized retrospectively as a relatively early video game to challenge a gender bias prevalent in the industry at the time . In the early 1990s , the video game market was skewed toward the young male demographic , and games often portrayed women as " damsels in distress " , submissive and requiring rescue by the male protagonists . Along with contemporary games like Streets of Rage or Wurm : Journey to the Center of the Earth , Alisia Dragoon featured a female leading character who can defend herself without the help of a male hero .

" Maurice , or the Fisher 's Cot " is a children 's story by the Romantic writer Mary Shelley . Written in 1820 for Laurette Tighe , a daughter of friends of Percy and Mary Shelley , Mary Shelley tried to have it published by her father , William Godwin , but he refused . The text was lost until 1997 , when a manuscript copy was discovered in Italy . " Maurice " tells the story of a boy searching for a home and his encounters with a traveller who turns out to be his long-lost father . The story is narrated in a melancholy tone from several points of view and focuses on the theme of loss , particularly the separation of parents and children . Shelley explored this partly autobiographical theme in other works written at the same time , including her novel Mathilda and her play Proserpine . The story 's straightforward language reflects that of the Romantic poet William Wordsworth , whose works Shelley was reading while she composed " Maurice " .

In 1814 , the seventeen-year-old Mary Shelley ( Mary Godwin , at the time ) ran off with Percy Bysshe Shelley to continental Europe , accompanied by Claire Clairmont , Mary 's stepsister . After six weeks of travelling , they returned to England but continued to live together . Mary returned pregnant with Percy 's child , but their infant daughter died soon after her premature birth . Percy was alienated from his family and received little financial support from them ; he was therefore harassed by creditors . In 1816 , Mary and Percy had a second child , William . The same year , Claire Clairmont began an affair with the poet Lord Byron , and in January 1817 she had a daughter by him , Allegra . The group spent the summer of 1817 with Byron at Lake Geneva , where Mary Shelley wrote Frankenstein . That fall , Percy 's wife , Harriet , committed suicide , and in December Percy and Mary were married . In September 1817 , Mary and Percy had another child , Clara . The group traveled to Italy in early 1818 . They first surrendered Allegra to Byron in April , much to Claire 's distress . In August , Percy Shelley took Claire to see Allegra , at her request . Percy arrived in Venice , telling Byron he had the entire family . Mary was thus summoned to Venice to substantiate Percy 's story . However , baby Clara Shelley was sick and traveling made her even more ill . She died shortly after arriving in Venice . In the winter of 1818 , Percy registered a child in Naples to himself and Mary : Elena Adelaide . However , it is unclear who this child 's parents really were .

In 1819 , the group moved to Rome , where Mary and Percy Shelley 's son William died . Mary Shelley had now lost all three of her children and was very depressed . Claire became increasingly concerned about Allegra , as Byron refused to allow her to see their daughter or reveal where she was . Mary , however , became pregnant again , with Percy Florence , and the group traveled from Rome to Pisa and Florence . En route , they became friends with a couple who helped and inspired them : Lady Mountcashell , who as Margaret King had been an eager pupil of Mary Shelley 's mother , Mary Wollstonecraft ; and George William Tighe , the agricultural theorist for whom she had left her husband and children . Both were poets and , like the Shelleys , were republicans and freethinkers . Lady Mountcashell referred to herself as " Mrs. Mason " after a character from Wollstonecraft 's own children 's story Original Stories from Real Life ( 1788 ) . The couple had two children , Anna Laura Georgiana ( called Laurette ) and Nerina , who quickly became attached to Mary and Claire .

After traveling to Florence , Mary Shelley wrote to Lady Mountcashell , praising Laurette 's " simplicity and frankness " . By way of her mother , Laurette inquired after Mary 's health and requested her presence . Mary Shelley invited Laurette to stay with her in Florence two months after the birth of Percy Florence , but the girl 's mother could not bear to part with her . In early 1820 , the group moved to Pisa and Claire became like an elder sister to Laurette , taking her to operas and the Carnival . In the summer , the group moved again , from Pisa to Livorno , and Mary Shelley began researching her historical novel Valperga . Throughout the summer , Claire wrote anxiously to Byron , begging to see Allegra . Believing that the Shelleys were careless parents who were responsible for the deaths of their children and concerned that the children were not receiving proper religious training , he consistently refused to let Claire see their daughter .

Mary Shelley wrote " Maurice " for Laurette Tighe on 10 August 1820 . Shelley 's journal for that day notes : " Thursday 10 — Write a story for Laurette — Walk on the mountain — Le Buche delle Fate [ fairy grottoes or caves ] — The weather is warm & delightful " . Claire Clairmont and Laurette had spent Laurette 's birthday together in Pisa and the following day on the coast with Mary Shelley ; this excursion may have inspired the story , which may have been a birthday present . Shelley suggested that her father , philosopher William Godwin , publish Maurice as part of his Juvenile Library , but he refused . He may have thought it was too short or that it too closely resembled a story by Caroline Barnard entitled The Fisher-boy of Weymouth that he had just published in 1819 . In his article on " Maurice " , L. Adam Mekler suggests that Godwin may also have rejected the story because of the " strong biographical parallels " with the history of the Shelleys and the Godwins . The manuscript was lost until Cristina Dazzi discovered it in the summer of 1997 in the home of the Dazzi family , Casa Cini , in San Marcello Pistoiese . She was looking through a box of old papers , searching for " something interesting " to add to an exhibit about the winter of 1827 – 28 when the poet Giacomo Leopardi had visited and met Lady Mountcashell and her daughter . Excerpts were first published in an Italian book about Lady Mountcashell by Mario Curreli in 1997 . One year later , Percy Shelley and Mary Wollstonecraft biographer Claire Tomalin published the entire story , along with a lengthy introduction and a typescript of the manuscript .

In " Part I " , a traveller arrives in Torquay , Devonshire . He sees a funeral procession passing by and notices a beautiful , distressed young boy taking part . The traveller goes to a local inn , where a countryman tells the story of Maurice and the late-dead Old Barnet . Old Barnet was a fisherman married to Dame Barnet . She had died a little over a year ago and Old Barnet was distraught ; he had no wife to come home to . One day , Maurice showed up and volunteered to help him out around the house while he was out fishing . Poor and sickly , Maurice could not perform difficult tasks , but he was diligent . Old Barnet grew to love Maurice , as did the villagers . " Part II " opens with Old Barnet 's brother informing Maurice that he must leave the cottage after one week . Maurice spends his days mourning the fisherman . One day the traveller returns to the village and seeks out Maurice ; he stops at the cottage and asks to stay the night . He and Maurice talk and Maurice tells of his plans to leave the cottage and find work on a farm . He also tells the traveller of his poor family and how he does not want to be a bother to them , revealing that his father used to beat him because he did not believe Maurice was really ill . The traveller and Maurice sit together , enjoying nature , and discuss the pleasures of country life and reading . The traveller offers to care for Maurice and to educate him .

The traveller explains in " Part III " how he is the son of an Oxford mathematics professor . When young , he loved to read outdoors and wanted to know how the world worked . He became an architect and travelled throughout Europe . Eventually he married a lovely woman with whom he had a son , Henry . One day the couple left their son with his nurse during an outing and she fell asleep . When they returned , their son was gone , and he could not be found . The traveller spent years searching the countryside for his son ; one day he met the woman , Dame Smithson , who had stolen his son . To please her sailor husband who wanted a child , she lied to him and said she was pregnant . Before his return , she needed a child , so she stole the traveller 's . Unused to the harsh life of a peasant , the child suffered and became sickly . As a result , the woman 's husband disliked him and beat him , believing him to be worthless . Hearing this story , Maurice reveals himself to be the traveller 's son ; he had changed his name to avoid the person he believed to be his cruel father . Overjoyed to be reunited with his son , the traveller buys the cottage for him and they return every once in a while . Maurice is educated , grows up , and travels widely . He returns to see that the cottage has disintegrated ; he builds a new one for another poor fisherman 's family , beside the lot of the old one .

Maurice is divided into three parts , perhaps reflecting the trend for triple-decker novels for adults at the time , and contains multiple narrators . It is written in a melancholy tone , beginning with a funeral and finishing with the decay of the cottage . However , in her review of the Tomalin edition in the New York Times , Marina Warner writes that the story " contains little of the seething originality , moral complexity or sinister Gothic speculativeness of Frankenstein " . Mary Shelley was reading the poetry of William Wordsworth while she wrote Maurice . Tomalin has argued that " Wordsworth does seem to preside over Maurice , with its clear , straightforward language , and its setting among simple people and poor labourers , and against elemental backgrounds of rocks and trees , cliffs and seashore " . Maurice 's natural goodness never wavers in the story . Unlike Shelley 's Frankenstein , which suggests that environment determines a person 's morality , Maurice assumes that people can be innately good . Maurice even forgives Dame Smithson , who stole him from his nurse . The story aims to generate sympathy in its readers . In contrast with other children 's stories of its day , it lacks didacticism and draws no clear distinctions between virtue and vice .

Despite the appeal to sympathy , loss is the predominant theme of Maurice : parents lose their child ; a mother yearns for a child to the point that she steals one ; and " Maurice " loses his sense of identity . The overarching themes of the story are Romantic , according to Tomalin : " the vulnerability of childhood , and of parenthood ; displacement , loss , pain , death and rehabilitation ; delight in the natural world ; and the power of time both to heal and to destroy " . The loss of children , in particular , may have had autobiographical and biographical resonances . Lady Mountcashell had separated from her husband and been forced to give up her children . A court had ruled Percy Bysshe Shelley unfit to raise the children from his marriage to his deceased first wife and placed them in the care of a court-appointed guardian . A third reference may be to the death of three of Mary and Percy 's children . Literary critic A. A. Markley points out that Shelley wrote other works at this time that engaged with the issue of child-parent separation , most notably her novel Mathilda and the children 's drama Proserpine , both of which she worked on in 1820 . Markley explains that Maurice is a reworking of Mathilda , " in which a long deferred reunion of father and child is orchestrated with happy rather than tragic results " . This theme is also explored in Mary Shelley 's short stories " The Mourner " , " The Evil Eye " , and " The Pilgrims " , as well as her novel Lodore ( 1835 ) .

Mekler argues that the story may be a veiled criticism of Mary Shelley 's stepmother , Mary Jane Clairmont . Dame Smithson lies to her husband regarding her children , a possible allusion to the origins of Mary Jane Clairmont 's own first two children and to her " propensity for falsehood " . ( Clairmont represented herself as a widow , with legitimate children , which was not the case . ) Mekler speculates that " in her theft of the first-born son , Dame Smithson replicates in metaphorical fashion Mary Jane 's usurpation of the role as mother of the male heir that had originally belonged to Mary Wollstonecraft " .

A concurrent use registration , in United States trademark law , is a federal trademark registration of the same trademark to two or more unrelated parties , with each party having a registration limited to a distinct geographic area . Such a registration is achieved by filing a concurrent use application ( or by converting an existing application to a concurrent use application ) and then prevailing in a concurrent use proceeding before the Trademark Trial and Appeal Board ( " TTAB " ) , which is a judicial body within the United States Patent and Trademark Office ( " USPTO " ) . A concurrent use application may be filed with respect to a trademark which is already registered or otherwise in use by another party , but may be allowed to go forward based on the assertion that the existing use can co-exist with the new registration without causing consumer confusion . The authority for this type of registration is set forth in the Lanham Act , which permits concurrent use registration where the concurrent use applicant made a good-faith adoption of the mark prior to the registrant filing an application for registration . Such registrations are most commonly achieved by agreement of the parties involved , although the USPTO must still determine that no confusion will be caused .

The authority of the USPTO to issue a concurrent use registration is set forth in the Lanham Act , section 2 ( d ) , enacted in 1947 and coded at 15 U.S.C. § 1052 , which states in relevant part : Through these provisions , the Act effectively places three requirements on marks for which a later applicant seeks a concurrent use registration : 1 ) the later applicant must have used the mark in commerce prior to the time that the earlier registrant filed its application for registration , unless the senior registrant consents to the junior user 's registration ; The statute essentially codifies the Tea Rose-Rectanus doctrine , established by the United States Supreme Court in two cases decided in 1916 and 1918 . The Court had established in those cases that a junior user of a mark that is geographically remote from the senior user of the mark may establish priority over a senior user 's claim to the mark in the junior user 's area . Any party may voluntarily limit the geographic scope of its application while conceding the rights of another party to a different geographic territory . A concurrent use application may not be filed based on a party 's intent to use a mark , but must rely on actual use in commerce . The concurrent use application must identify all other parties who are entitled to use the mark , and provide the names and addresses of the parties identified . Instead of making the usual assertion that no other party has the right to use the mark , the applicant must assert that no other party " except as specified in the application " has such a right .

By the terms of the Act , the critical dates with respect to concurrent registration are the date of the applicant ’ s first use and the earliest filing date of any other registrant . In other words , as the Trademark Trial and Appeal Board Manual of Procedure ( " TBMP " ) states , " an application seeking concurrent registration through a concurrent use proceeding normally must assert a date of first use in commerce prior to the earliest application filing date of the application ( s ) ... involved in the proceeding . " The Lanham Act requires that an Applicant ’ s use in commerce must have been lawful . The TTAB ( and its predecessor , the United States Court of Customs and Patent Appeals ( " CCPA " ) ) has read this to mean that the applicant 's use must not have infringed another party 's use at the time that applicant adopted its mark . Therefore , one potential pitfall facing applicant is that " [ g ] enerally , concurrent rights arise when a party , in good faith , and without knowledge of a prior party ’ s use in another geographic area , adopts and uses the same or similar mark for the same or similar goods or services within its own geographic area . "

The factors under which the TTAB evaluates the likelihood of confusion were established in In re E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Co . , and are commonly referred to as the " du Pont factors " . ( 1 ) The similarity or dissimilarity of the marks in their entireties as to appearance , sound , connotation and commercial impression . ( 2 ) The similarity or dissimilarity and nature of the goods or services as described in an application or registration or in connection with which a prior mark is in use . ( 4 ) The conditions under which and buyers to whom sales are made , i.e. " impulse " vs. careful , sophisticated purchasing . ( 8 ) The length of time during and conditions under which there has been concurrent use without evidence of actual confusion . ( 9 ) The variety of goods on which a mark is or is not used ( house mark , " family " mark , product mark ) . ( b ) agreement provisions designed to preclude confusion , i.e. limitations on continued use of the marks by each party . ( 11 ) The extent to which applicant has a right to exclude others from use of its mark on its goods .

The procedures to acquire such a registration are set forth in the TBMP Chapter 1100 . They are initiated when a concurrent use application is submitted to the USPTO , which will initiate a concurrent use proceeding to determine if the applicant is entitled to such registration . An existing application that has been denied registration because of a conflict with an existing mark may be converted into a concurrent use application against that existing mark . In either case , the applicant must assert that its mark was used in commerce before the owner of the existing registration , called the " senior registrant " , had filed its own application for registration . The applicant must also demonstrate that the marks can both be used in their specific geographic areas without causing a likelihood of confusion . The USPTO will contact the senior registrant to inform that party of the claim against their mark . The proceeding in which the respective rights of the parties are determined is like a trial in which the applicant must submit evidence showing that the applicant had adopted the mark in good faith , that the applicant had adopted the mark prior to the senior registrant 's date of registration , and that the confusion is not likely . The senior registrant may present evidence to the contrary , in order to prevent the loss of control over the use of the registered mark in the applicant 's claimed territory . Both parties may take discovery in the form of requests for admission , interrogatories , requests for production , and depositions . As with a regular trial , the TTAB may be called upon to resolve disputes over whether discovery requests are overbroad , and whether discovery responses are inadequate .

The senior registrant in such a proceeding has ample incentive to oppose the grant of a concurrent use registration , because a registered trademark is presumed to apply throughout the entire United States . Thus , the grant of a concurrent use registration carves out some geographic territory from the senior registrant 's exclusive control . As 15 U.S.C. § 1052 ( d ) indicates , a concurrent use registration may also be issued " when a court of competent jurisdiction has finally determined that more than one person is entitled to use the same or similar marks in commerce . " As a matter of right , the TTAB will issue such a registration pursuant to a court order that an applicant has the right to use its mark in certain geographic area . Where a court has issued such an order , a concurrent use proceeding is not needed , as evidence has already been taken in the court proceeding , and the rights of the parties have already been determined . Most concurrent use proceedings result in a legal settlement between the parties . Frequently , one party will surrender its concurrent use claim and instead receive a trademark license from the other party . In other situations , each party may agree to geographic limitations on its use of the mark at issue , which the TTAB will honor if the settlement stipulates to facts which show that no confusion is likely . A benefit of such an agreement is that the parties can agree to terms beyond the scope of the TTAB 's decision , such as specific restrictions on time and place of advertising , or modifications to the appearance of either mark . However , irrespective of the agreement reached , the TTAB must still make an independent finding that no consumer confusion is likely to result from the concurrent use registration . Even if both parties assert that no confusion is likely , the TTAB may still make findings of fact which demonstrate that confusion is likely , and deny registration to the junior user of the mark .

A pivotal factor in assessing the likelihood of confusion in such a circumstance " is whether the parties whose marks are in question have agreed , in some form , to memorialize methods of avoiding confusion . " In that case , the court held that such an agreement " is viewed in light of the parties ’ interests and the prevailing marketplace " , further stating : Furthermore , the issuance of concurrent use registrations need not prevent either party from engaging in advertising or other activities which might result in the incidental publication of one registrant ’ s mark in the territory of the other registrant . In the Amalgamated Bank case , the Federal Circuit found acceptable a term in the agreement that " nothing in this agreement will preclude Amalgamated New York from conducting advertising which might enter in the State of Illinois or from dealing with customers who happen to be located in the State of Illinois . " Courts have similarly held that a concurrent use registration does not curtail either party from advertising over the Internet , particularly where the junior user includes a disclaimer of some form on their website .

A concurrent use registration can be very detailed in the geographic divisions laid down . It may , for example , allow one party to own the right to use a mark within a fifty-mile radius around a handful of selected cities or counties , while the other party owns the right to use the same mark everywhere else in the country . It may even divide the rights to use a mark within a particular city by reference to roads or other landmarks in that city . The TTAB has found that in concurrent use proceedings , " [ t ] he area for which registration is sought is usually more extensive than the area in which applicant is actually using the mark . " " As a general rule , a prior user of a mark is entitled to a registration covering the entire United States limited only to the extent that the subsequent user can establish that no likelihood of confusion exists and that it has concurrent rights in its actual area of use , plus its area of natural expansion . " Between lawful concurrent users of the same mark in geographically separate markets , the senior registrant has the right to maintain his registration for at least those market areas in which it is using the mark . However , the senior registrant does not always maintain the right to use the mark in territories not yet occupied by either party . In Pinocchio 's Pizza , for example , the first applicant ( but the junior user of the mark in commerce ) owned one small restaurant in Maryland and had expressed no plans for expansion , while the second applicant ( but senior user of the mark in commerce ) owned multiple restaurants in Texas and was planning aggressive expansion . The TTAB held that " purpose of the statute is best served by granting [ the second ] applicant a registration for the entire United States except for registrant ’ s trading area . " The TTAB therefore restricted the first applicant ’ s registration to permit exclusive use in Maryland , and within 50 miles of the first applicant ’ s restaurant in areas crossing into other states .

Furthermore , although the general rule provides that the entire United States should be covered by the respective registrations , it is permissible for parties to a proceeding to resolve the issue of territorial rights in a way that leaves some part of the country uncovered entirely . In a contested proceeding In re Beatrice Foods Co . , the court held that the senior user of a mark was entitled to a registration covering the entire United States , outside of the junior user 's area of actual use . However , the court went on to say : The few courts that have considered the antitrust implications of concurrent use registration have determined that it does not raise any violation of antitrust laws . Although it is considered a violation of such laws for companies to agree to divide up geographic territories for the sale of goods , concurrent use agreements dividing up trademark territories are specifically provided for by Congress . Furthermore , even with such an agreement in place , a company can still sell competing products in the trademark territory of another company , so long as the intruding party sells that product under a different mark .

The availability of concurrent use registration is not commonly invoked , even where the applicant might stand an excellent chance of demonstrating the existence of geographically distinct markets . Proceedings before the TTAB , like proceedings before any court , can be expensive and time-consuming . A contested concurrent use proceeding may last for two or three years before the resolution of a claim , and the outcome will remain uncertain until the end . The outcome of the proceeding will then be subject to an appeal before the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit , or to a collateral challenge in a United States District Court . Perhaps the most notable instance of a continuing concurrent use registration is that of Holiday Inn . Although the national chain owns numerous trademark registrations , there is one registration for an unrelated " Holiday Inn " which is " restricted to the area comprising the town of Myrtle Beach , S.C. " . The Myrtle Beach hotel had used that name since the 1940s , and initiated a concurrent use proceeding in 1970 . While this proceeding was pending , the national chain commenced an action in the United States District Court . The concurrent use proceeding was suspended during the pendency of the federal litigation , which resulted in a judgment in 1973 authorizing the Myrtle Beach hotel to use a distinctive , noninfringing Holiday Inn service mark within the Town of Myrtle Beach . The concurrent use proceeding resumed , and in 1976 , the United States Court of Customs and Patent Appeals awarded the Myrtle Beach hotel a federal trademark registration .

Even where a concurrent use registration is issued , the parties may eventually come to an agreement under which one party will surrender its registration . In some instances , a party will simply happen to cease using the mark in favor of a new brand name , and the registration will lapse . In other cases , the larger company will eventually acquire the smaller . A final note is that concurrent use registration was devised before the advent of the Internet , which serves to diminish geographic distinctions between sellers . John L. Welch , a Harvard-educated attorney who writes a well-known blog on the proceedings of the TTAB , has noted that " vigorously contested proceedings may well make it clear that concurrent use registrations are , in this Internet Age , a dying breed " .

TV Everywhere ( also known as authenticated streaming or authenticated video on-demand ) refers to a business model wherein access to streaming video content from a television channel requires users to " authenticate " themselves as current subscribers to the channel , via an account provided by their participating pay television provider , in order to access the content . Under the model , broadcasters offer their customers the ability to access content from their channels through internet-based services and mobile apps — either live or on-demand , as part of their subscription to the service . Time Warner Cable first proposed the concept in 2009 ; in 2010 , many television providers and networks began to roll out TV Everywhere services for their subscribers , including major networks such as TBS and TNT ( whose owner was an early supporter of the concept ) , ESPN , and HBO among others . Broadcast television networks also began to adopt TV Everywhere restrictions for their online content . Although providers have touted the advantages of being able to access content across multiple platforms ( including on the internet , and on mobile devices such as smartphones and tablets ) as part of their television subscription , TV Everywhere services have been criticized for being difficult for end-users to set up , while media activists have criticized the concept for being a paywall that extends the existing oligarchy of the subscription television industry to the internet , and considering it to be collusion against " cord cutters " — those who drop cable and satellite entirely in favor of accessing content via terrestrial television , the internet , and subscription video on demand ( SVOD ) services .

TV Everywhere services were developed in an attempt to compete with the market trend of " cord cutting " , where consumers drop traditional pay television subscriptions in favor of accessing TV content exclusively through over-the-air television and / or online on-demand services , including Hulu , Netflix , YouTube , and other sources . Authenticated streaming and video on-demand services allow traditional television providers to directly compete with these competitors , and add value to existing television subscriptions in an effort to retain subscribers . In particular , broadcasters and providers have emphasized the use of TV Everywhere services to allow multi-platform access to their content , on devices such as personal computers , smartphones , tablets , and video game consoles .

ESPN first introduced a TV Everywhere-like concept with ESPN360 , a service which allowed users to stream sports programming from its networks either live or on-demand through a website . However , access to ESPN360 was restricted to the users of internet service providers who had negotiated deals with ESPN to offer the service ; a model closer in nature to cable television carriage . Similar tactics were soon used by several other channels , such as NFL Network ( who used the technique to restrict access to its Game Extra service for Thursday Night Football ) and Epix . David Preschlack , ESPN 's executive vice president for affiliate sales and marketing , foresaw a future in the model , believing that access to exclusive content would soon play a greater role in competition between high-speed internet providers . Although the model was deemed a violation of the principles of net neutrality by critics , the FCC 's policies on net neutrality only apply to ISPs and not content providers .

In 2009 , Time Warner Cable announced an initiative known as TV Everywhere , a set of principles which were " designed to serve as a framework to facilitate deployment of online television content in a way that is consumer friendly , pro-competitive . " The concept would enable users of their respective cable television services to access live and on-demand online content from channels that they subscribe to by using an account-based authentication system . TWC CEO Jeffrey Bewkes believed that the TV Everywhere principles were " good concepts " that are " likely to be the general direction for all TV networks and all the distribution connections that are out there . " That summer , both TWC and Comcast began trials of services based on the system ; Turner Broadcasting was an early supporter of the system , providing access to TBS and TNT content as part of the trials . Comcast officially launched a public beta of its TV Everywhere-based portal , Xfinity Fancast , in December 2009 for all double-play television and internet customers . Afterwards , other providers began to follow suit . In 2010 , broadcasters and television providers began a wider roll-out of TV Everywhere-based services ; for the 2010 Winter Olympics , NBC Sports offered live and video on-demand access to events throughout the Games that required users to authenticate for access . Also in February , HBO launched HBO Go , a video on demand service exclusive to HBO subscribers on participating providers . In September 2010 , Disney would begin launching an array of TV Everywhere-based services , including WatchESPN ( allowing users to stream ESPN 's entire suite of channels ) , accompanied by the later launches of similar " Watch " services for Disney Channel and Disney XD .

In August 2011 , Fox became the first over-the-air network to restrict on-demand access with a TV Everywhere-based system ; " next day " on-demand episodes ( either through its website or Hulu , itself a joint venture between Fox , NBC , and ABC at the time ) would only be available online to users authenticating themselves as a subscriber to a cable or satellite provider , or those who subscribe to the Hulu Plus service . All other users would be subject to an 8-day delay . On September 1 , 2011 , fellow Fox property Big Ten Network ( a college sports network dedicated to the Big Ten Conference , operated in partnership with Fox Sports ) also launched a TV Everywhere service known as BTN2Go .

Matt Strauss , Comcast senior vice president of digital and emerging platforms , considered the 2012 Summer Olympics to be a " watershed " event for TV Everywhere services ; NBCUniversal announced that a total of nearly 10 million authenticated devices accessed its online coverage during the Games across both the NBCOlympics.com site and NBC Olympics Live Extra app ; in particular , parent company Comcast accounted for 3.3 million devices from 1.5 million users . Following the Games , the NBC Olympics Live Extra app was re-launched as NBC Sports Live Extra , serving as a general TV Everywhere app for NBC Sports . TV Everywhere services also began to appear in Canada , with the Canadian launch of HBO Go in 2012 , and the 2013 announcement of TV Everywhere services from Bell Media ( beginning with Bravo Go , and also including CTV Go and TSN Go ) and Shaw Media ( beginning with Global ) . The majority of Canadian broadcasters are vertically integrated ; both Bell and Shaw operate internet service providers and national satellite television services . In May 2013 , ABC released its Watch ABC mobile app , which allows viewers on participating providers to access live streams from participating ABC affiliates . In December 2013 , ABC confirmed that it would impose a similar restriction to Fox for " next day " on-demand episodes beginning on January 6 , 2014 , with 7-day exclusivity for authenticated users and Hulu Plus subscribers . NBC unveiled its own plans for a similar TV Everywhere app to its affiliate board in April 2014 .

In November 2015 , after negotiations surrounding revenue sharing and infrastructural mandates ( including a proposed requirement that the games only be available through the league 's existing apps ) , Major League Baseball reached a three-year deal with Fox to allow it to offer in-market online streaming on Fox Sports Go ( though streamed using MLB Advanced Media infrastructure ) for the 16 teams that it holds regional rights to through the Fox Sports Networks division . In December 2015 , Discovery Communications , a long hold-out on the concept , launched Discovery Go , a centralized TV Everywhere service and mobile app for Discovery Channel , TLC , as well as sister networks American Heroes Channel , Animal Planet , Destination America , Discovery Life , Investigation Discovery , Science Channel , and Velocity .

The TV Everywhere concept has been met with mixed reception . Some broadcasters were initially hesitant to introduce TV Everywhere services , with concerns that they might affect advertising revenue and not be adequately counted by Nielsen ratings . Media activists have criticized the system for protecting the existing closed , regionalized oligarchy of multichannel television by tying internet-based content to traditional television providers , thus harming competitors that are purely internet-based . Public Knowledge believed that " under the ' TV Everywhere ' plan , no other program distributors would be able to emerge , and no consumers will be able to ' cut the cord ' because they find what they want online . As a result , consumers will be the losers . " In 2010 , Free Press released a report entitled " TV Nowhere : How the Cable Industry Is Colluding to Kill Online TV " , contending that " under TV Everywhere , traditional cable TV distributors will continue to serve only consumers within their current geographically limited footprints , not competing with providers in other areas " and that " by tying programming to local cable subscriptions , while denying content to pure online TV distributors , the incumbent industry hopes to artificially reproduce the lack of competition for TV distribution to which it is accustomed , based on geographical fiefdoms and turf . " The National Cable and Telecommunications Association ( NCTA ) denied many of Free Press ' arguments , stating that " [ TV Everywhere ] is an effort to ensure more content than ever is distributed over the Internet at no extra charge to consumers . " On the other hand , Songwriters Guild of America president Rick Carnes praised the TV Everywhere concept and other recent developments for helping to provide easier , legal access to premium content online .

Despite efforts by broadcasters to educate viewers on TV Everywhere services and how to utilize them ( including Fox , who featured a promotional video with Jane Lynch as her Glee character Sue Sylvester , describing the process as being less painful than waterboarding ) , critics and end-users criticized the registration and authentication processes for being frustrating and difficult . In response , providers took steps to improve their user experiences ; Disney reported that use of its TV Everywhere services increased after it simply changed its process to use the term " verify " instead of " authenticate " , Comcast and Cablevision introduced systems that automatically verify users with their residential gateways , and Synacor ( a provider of authentication platforms used by providers ) added the ability for users to link their provider account to a social network login , such as Facebook or Twitter . For the 2012 Summer Olympics and 2014 Winter Olympics , NBC worked closer with providers to help educate users , and produced customized marketing materials and video tutorials featuring Carson Daly ( 2012 ) and Ryan Seacrest ( 2014 ) to help inform users . As an incentive , NBC also allowed authenticated users to enter a sweepstakes to win a trip to London ( 2012 ) or Rio de Janeiro ( 2014 ) . Still , dissatisfaction with the system and the quality of NBC 's overall coverage led to an increase in the use of virtual private network ( VPN ) services to access the more comprehensive online coverage of the Games being provided by broadcasters in Canada ( CTV in London , CBC in Sochi ) and the United Kingdom ( BBC ) , which did not use authentication , but cannot normally be viewed inside the United States due to territorial rights restrictions .

In April 2014 , the Cable & Telecommunications Association for Marketing ( CTAM ) unveiled an industry-wide initiative for marketing and educating subscribers about TV Everywhere services provided by broadcasters and providers ; these efforts include a stylized " tv everywhere " logo which the organization intends providers to use as a unified brand to denote TV Everywhere services . The logo consists of interlocking rectangles , representing multiple " screens " ( platforms ) for viewing content . The association also provided design recommendations for TV Everywhere user experiences , aiming to alleviate the confusion that had been experienced by users during the authentication process .

In a December 2013 survey of 4,205 pay television subscribers , NPD Group found that 21 % of them used a TV Everywhere service at least once per month , and that 90 % of them were satisfied with the experience . NPD analyst Russ Crupnick felt that " aggressive " use of the model was helping to counter cord cutting , which " speaks to the level of engagement they have with programming and a comfort in using the Internet to both access and interact with that programming . " The study also found that 3 out of 10 pay television subscribers who were also subscribed to an SVOD service used TV Everywhere services at least once a week ( in comparison to 2 out of 10 for those who were not ) . Amid criticism of NBC 's coverage , adoption of NBC 's TV Everywhere services during the 2014 Winter Olympics was still significantly large : on February 21 , 2014 , coverage of the Men 's hockey semi-final featuring the U.S. and Canada recorded the largest Live Extra audience in NBC Sports history , with 2.12 million unique viewers , augmenting the average NBCSN television audience of 3.9 million . ESPN 's coverage of the 2014 FIFA World Cup drew similarly heavy online viewership : during a group stage match between the U.S. and Portugal , at least 1.7 million concurrent viewers were using WatchESPN ( though , not all of the viewers were necessarily watching the game ) .

In December 2015 , research firm GfK estimated that 53 % of the United States ' pay television subscribers have used a TV Everywhere service — an increase from 42 % in 2012 , that overall use had doubled since 2012 , and 79 % of those surveyed found the login process easy . However , only 25 % of those surveyed were aware of the term " TV Everywhere " or the CTAM logo , leading to the firm believing that consumer awareness and education was still a " critical missing piece " in the adoption of these services .

In 2014 , Comcast was criticized for its decision to arbitrarily block access to HBO Go on PlayStation 3 and Roku devices , but still allowing its use on competing Apple TV and Xbox 360 . Comcast similarly blocked access to Showtime Anytime on Roku as well . A spokesperson for the provider stated that " with every new website , device or player we authenticate , we need to work through technical integration and customer service which takes time and resources . Moving forward , we will continue to prioritize as we partner with various players . " During both the FCC 's net neutrality hearings and comments regarding Comcast 's then-proposed merger with Time Warner Cable ( which , by contrast , allows HBO Go access on all supported devices ) , Roku criticized the provider for contradicting the TV Everywhere concept by discriminating against specific devices , thus prioritizing its own on-demand platform over external services . The company argued that providers could selectively favor certain platforms over others , further stating that " a large and powerful MVPD may use this leverage in negotiations with content providers or operators of streaming platforms , ultimately favoring parties that can either afford to pay for the privilege of authentication , or have other business leverage that can be used as a counterweight to discriminatory authentication . "

Stanley Internment Camp ( Chinese : 赤柱拘留營 ) was a civilian internment camp in Hong Kong during World War II . Located in Stanley , on the southern end of Hong Kong Island , it was used by the Japanese imperial forces to hold non-Chinese enemy nationals after their victory in the Battle of Hong Kong , a battle in the Pacific campaign of World War II . About 2,800 men , women , and children were held at the non-segregated camp for 44 months from early January 1942 to August 1945 when Japanese forces surrendered . The camp area consisted of St. Stephen 's College and the grounds of Stanley Prison , excluding the prison itself .

In 1939 , the British government had drawn up evacuation plans for the British and other European residents of Hong Kong , which was a Crown colony of the United Kingdom ( UK ) at the time . The War Office by the Chief of the Imperial General Staff thought the city would inevitably fall to Japanese forces in the event of an attack , so it should not be reinforced with more defensive forces . The presence of a large number of British women and children would have been an " embarrassment " for the government when the Japanese forces take Hong Kong , and additionally it was thought the internment of thousands of British civilians would cause unnecessary suffering and serve the Japanese as propaganda material . In July 1940 , the colonial government of Hong Kong received orders from the UK to proceed with the evacuations . By 3 August , all service families and registered non-service British women and children were moved to the Philippines . However , the hurried compulsory evacuations prompted criticism from many evacuees , their husbands , and their employees , who felt the evacuations were premature and unnecessary . According to Bernice Archer and Kent Fedorowich , respectively of the University of Essex and the University of the West of England , the local Chinese population were angered by their exclusion from the evacuations and condemned the plans as racist . Additionally , the plans excluded British passport holders who were not of European ancestry . Amidst the criticism , the government subsequently made the evacuations non-compulsory . Existing evacuations already ordered were cancelled provided evacuees volunteered for auxiliary roles , such as nursing or administrative work .

On 8 December 1941 , Japanese forces attacked Hong Kong , marking the start of the Battle of Hong Kong . Seventeen days later , on Christmas Day of 1941 , which came to be known as " Black Christmas " , the Hong Kong government surrendered , and Hong Kong came under Japanese occupation . On 4 January 1942 , a notice appeared in an English-language newspaper that all " enemy nationals " were to assemble on Murray Parade Grounds . Many people did not see the notice , but about 1,000 people were eventually gathered on the grounds . In addition to those who gathered voluntarily , there were people forcibly removed from their homes . The people assembled were marched to and initially interned in hotel-brothels on the waterfront near the present-day Macau Ferry Pier . The conditions there were dirty and overcrowded , and the food was poor . After 17 days , the internees were taken by boat to Stanley . The " enemy nationals " who failed to assemble on Murray Parade Grounds avoided internment at the hotel-brothels . However , by the end of January , most of the civilians to be interned were moved to Stanley . Upon arrival at camp , the internees discovered little was prepared for them there . There were no cooking facilities , no furniture , little crockery or cutlery . The toilet facilities were dirty , inadequate , and without water . The rooms were soon overcrowded with random assortments of people unrelated to each other , and with little attention paid to hygiene or public health .

The Stanley site was chosen by the Japanese through consultation with two Hong Kong government officials – Dr. P. S. Selwyn-Clarke , Director of Medical Services , and F. C. Gimson , the Colonial Secretary . Located on Stanley Peninsula , which was about nine kilometres from the city at the time , the camp consisted of St. Stephen 's College and the grounds of Stanley Prison , excluding the prison itself ; the prison was used by the Japanese authorities to hold what they considered " criminals " from Hong Kong . Several hundred internees lived at St. Stephen 's , while the majority of them lived on the prison grounds . Prior to Japanese occupation , St. Stephen 's was a secondary school whose facilities , in addition to classrooms , included an assembly hall , bungalows for teachers , and science laboratories . Over twenty internees occupied each bungalow , which was built for one family , and more than that occupied each science laboratory , living between partitions of sacking and old blankets . Almost all the buildings in the camp were used for housing . The Prison Officers ' Club was used for multiple functions ; it was used as a canteen , a kindergarten , Catholic church , and recreation centre .

Two main divisions of quarters existed – the Warders ' Quarters and the Indian Quarters . Before the war , the Warders ' Quarters housed European warders , with large flats designed for one family each , and the Indian Quarters housed Indian prison guards , built with smaller flats . An average of thirty internees lived in each Warders ' Quarters flat , and an average of six internees lived in each Indian Quarters flat . A building which had housed single Indian warders before the war was turned into a hospital called Tweed Bay Hospital . Two houses , originally used as homes for the prison superintendent and the prison doctor , were turned into the Japanese headquarters for the camp . The cemetery on the grounds became a popular spot for quiet relaxation as well as a place for intimate meetings between male and female internees .

The internees numbered at 2,800 , where an estimated 2,325 to 2,514 were British . The adult population numbered at 1,370 men and 858 women , and children 16 years of age or younger numbered at 286 , with 99 of whom were below the age of 4 . The camp was under the control of the Japanese Foreign Affairs Department , but according to historian Geoffrey Charles Emerson , the Japanese forces had not made plans for dealing with enemy civilians in Hong Kong . As such , the camp was provided with few necessities , and the internees were left to govern the camp themselves . Committees were formed for such matters as housing , food , and medical care . The national groups remained mostly independent of each other except for matters of welfare and medical care . Very few government servants were selected to serve on these committees , due to anti-government sentiments ; most internees blamed the government for the quick surrender of Hong Kong . The biggest concern was food ; ensuring there was enough food occupied most of the internees ' time . Little food was provided by the Japanese authorities , and it was of poor quality – frequently containing dust , mud , rat and cockroach excreta , cigarette ends , and sometimes dead rats . Everyday , the internees were served rice congee at 8 am , and meals consisting of rice with stew at both 11 a.m. and 5 p.m. Additionally , they relied on food mailed from friends or relatives in the city , Red Cross aid , garden-grown vegetables , and bought food from the canteen or the black market .

Another concern was the health and medical care of the internees . Although medical facilities were inadequate , the internees counted amongst them about 40 doctors , 2 dentists , 6 pharmacists , 100 trained nurses , and a large number of volunteer auxiliary nurses . Because of this , according to historian G. B. Endacott , no major epidemic occurred . The most common sickness amongst the internees were malaria , malnutrition and its associated diseases , beriberi , and pellagra . The shortage of medical supplies and equipment posed a challenge for those in charge of medical care , with the lack of soap and disinfectant being a particularly troublesome concern . The women and children contributed to a sense of normality as their presence provided conventional social , family , and gender relations . The internees believed the children 's presence made them less selfish , as it forced them to think of the latter 's welfare . The women organised Christmas and birthday celebrations . Other diversions such as musicals , plays , recitals , and variety shows were also staged . Although the camp lacked books and educational equipment , the teachers and educational administrators amongst the internees were able to provide lessons for the children at the primary and secondary levels . Additionally , extensive adult education was available for the adults : language courses for Chinese , Malay , and French , and also lectures on photography , yachting , journalism , and poultry-keeping . In addition to the personal diaries kept by internees , many of them now held by the Imperial War Museum , a record of life in the camp was created using a double bed sheet . The Day Joyce Sheet was embroidered and appliquéd with 1100 names , signs and figures including a diary in code .

Records show that 121 internees died in the camp , mostly due to illness , with half the deaths being of internees over the age of 50 . There were also a few accidental deaths . Two internees died from falls and one child had drowned . The worst camp accident occurred on 16 January 1945 , when an American plane accidentally bombed Bungalow 5 at St. Stephen 's College , killing 14 internees . These internees were buried at Stanley Military Cemetery . Another seven internees were executed by the Japanese authorities . These internees had possessed a radio set which they used to pass messages in and out of camp . The radio was discovered by the Japanese and the internees were arrested . The other internees were forced to watch their public torture . Military trials were subsequently held and on 29 October 1943 , some of the internees were executed by being shot and at least one , John Fraser , was beheaded . Aside from this , the Japanese authorities had executed by decapitation , three Chinese policemen for bringing cigarettes and tobacco to the camp 's internees .

A number of factors made escape attempts daunting for the internees ; they would have to navigate through Japanese-occupied territory , find food , and , as few internees actually spoke Cantonese , they would also have to deal with language difficulties in Hong Kong if they succeeded in escaping . Despite the difficulties , there were three major escape attempts , with two being successful in March 1942 . One group of eight internees escaped on a small boat to neighbouring Macau . Another group , consisting of two internees , escaped through the New Territories and into mainland China . The third group , four policemen , in April 1942 managed to escape the camp grounds but were caught within a few miles of camp . They were subsequently imprisoned and released back to camp after a few weeks .

Repatriation was one of the two most talked-about subject at camp ( the other being the subject of food ) . On 6 May 1942 , the Japanese authorities informed the internees repatriation for the Americans would take place on 15 June . Japanese treatment of the American internees improved during this period before the actual repatriation took place ; more and better food was given to them , and they were allowed contacts with Chinese friends outside of camp . American journalists were interviewed by a Japanese news agency and asked questions about the war and the camp . The internees came to find out later the interview became war propaganda for the Japanese , in the form of an article claiming that American journalists had complimented the Japanese military and the camp itself , stating the camp was " probably the most comfortable in the world . " It was not until 29 June that repatriation for the Americans finally took place , after Japanese and Thai citizens held in the US and South America boarded ships in late June in preparation for exchange of internees . Those being repatriated were given smallpox vaccination , cholera inoculation , and thorough medical examinations . No books , bibles , diaries , or addresses were allowed to leave with the Americans , but the remaining internees were each allowed to write a 150-word letter for the Americans to take with them . The American internees boarded the ship , the Asama Maru , along with other Americans who had been allowed to stay in Hong Kong outside of the camp . After picking up Americans for repatriation from other locations in Asia , the Asama Maru arrived at Maputo , Mozambique ( then called Lourenço Marques ) on 22 July , where the Americans and Japanese exchanged internees . The Americans were to finally reach New York City on 25 August . Reportedly a total of 377 Americans were repatriated from Hong Kong .

Repatriation of Canadian internees and remaining American internees were announced in August 1943 ( not all American internees had been repatriated in June 1942 ) . Preparations similar to the prior repatriation were made , including messages and reports to be delivered . The ship , the Teia Maru , reached Hong Kong on 23 September , taking on board 73 Canadian internees , 24 American internees , and 13 Latin American internees . The ship sailed to Goa , where an exchange of prisoners and internees with Japan took place . There were indications and notices to the British internees that their repatriation was possible ; Gimson told them a Swiss Red Cross representative had spoken " encouragingly " about repatriation , the Japanese authorities twice informed them ( on 24 May 1943 and 2 November 1943 ) that they would be repatriated , and 25 May 1943 issue of the Hong Kong News reported negotiations for repatriation were " going on rather smoothly " . Despite this , the British internees were not repatriated until the end of the war .

The internees were freed on 16 August 1945 , the day after Emperor Hirohito broadcast his acceptance of the Potsdam Proclamation in surrender . About two weeks later , the British fleet came for the internees , and several weeks after that , the camp was closed . Many internees went back to the city and began to adjust back to their former lives , and many others , particularly those of poor health , remained on the camp grounds to await for ships to take them away . Historian Geoffrey Charles Emerson wrote the " probable " reason the British internees were not repatriated before the end of the war was related to the Allied forces refusing to release Japanese nationals held in Australia . These nationals were the only sizeable group of Japanese nationals held by the Allies after the repatriation of the American and Canadian internees . They had been pearl fishermen in Australia before the war , and knew the Australian coastline well . Their knowledge would have been " militarily important " to the Japanese if an invasion of Australia was attempted , hence the Allied refusal to release them .

In 1948 , the US government , through the War Claims Act , authorised the payment of US $ 60 for every month an adult spent in an internment camp , and US $ 25 per month for child internees . Some also received US $ 1 per day for " missed meals " . In the UK , from 1952 to 1956 , about 8,800 British internees , specifically those who normally resided in the UK when the war began , received a sum of ₤ 48.50 as reparation . Payments for American and British internees were made from the proceeds of Japanese assets seized per the Treaty of San Francisco . Dutch internees each received a sum of US $ 100 , with the payments funded by a separate agreement signed between the Dutch and the Japanese in 1957 . The rise of Japan as an economic power and the opening of World War II files at the UK 's Public Record Office created a sentiment in the 1990s that not enough had been done to redress the suffering of internees and prisoners-of-war . In November 2000 , the British government announced a compensation scheme for British civilians who had been interned in World War II . The scheme called for a package of £ 167 million , and by February 2001 , the first raft of payments of £ 10,000 were being made . Initially , the plan excluded British persons who had no " bloodlink " to Britain , a point of distinction that was made between those who were " British citizens " and those who were " British subjects " .

In reaction to this , former Stanley internee Diana Elias launched a civil action case against the British government , alleging the distinction of " bloodlink " made by the compensation scheme was discriminatory , and that the Japanese authorities had made no such distinction in their treatment of the internees . Elias ' family , including her parents and her grandparents , were all holders of British passports . The " bloodlink " distinction , however , made her ineligible for compensation because she is of Iraqi Jewish ancestry . In July 2005 , the High Court in London ruled in her favour , and was subsequently backed by the Court of Appeals when the Ministry of Defence appealed the High Court 's decision . This allowed for hundreds of surviving civilian internees to collect the compensation earlier denied to them by the " bloodlink " distinction .

Monster Inc. is an American company that manufactures and markets 6,000 different products , but is best known for audio and video cables . It also produces speakers , headphones , power strips , mobile accessories and audio devices for automobiles . The company was founded by an audiophile and engineer , Noel Lee , in 1979 by experimenting with different ways to build audio cables . It grew by doing demonstrations to convince the industry that audio cables made a difference in audio quality and by establishing relationships with retailers that were attracted to the cable 's profit margins . Over the years it created new divisions like Monster Music , Monster Game , Monster Mobile , Monster Photo and Monster Power . In the 2000s , Monster had legal trademark disputes regarding other companies or products that have " Monster " in their name , such as Monster.com and the film Monsters , Inc . Monster said it needed to defend its premium brand , while critics said it was pursuing litigation against companies that do not have confusingly similar products . It began manufacturing headphones in a partnership with Dr. Dre in 2008 , which ended in 2012 , and it created other celebrity branded or Monster-branded headphone products .

Monster was founded in 1979 by Noel Lee as Monster Cable Products . Lee , an audiophile and engineer , was experimenting with different copper qualities , wire constructs and winding methods of audio cables in his family 's garage and comparing them while listening to Tchaikovsky 's 1812 Overture . He became convinced that audio cables could be engineered to improve audio quality by conducting electricity more efficiently . Using a borrowed portion of somebody 's booth at the 1978 Consumer Electronics Show , he did demonstrations of his cables in comparison to standard wires . After a positive reception at CES , he quit his job at Lawrence Berkeley Lab and started Monster Cable Products with $ 250,000 in bank financing . Monster 's first cables were manufactured by Lee by hand and sold door-to-door . Initial sales were slow , because at the time electronics retailers provided low-cost lamp cords to consumers for free or at low prices and audiophiles didn 't believe audio cables made a difference in the sound . Monster is credited with creating the market for high-end audio cables in the 1980s through Lee 's " marketing prowess . " He did demonstrations comparing the audio of standard cables to Monster cables for retailers and trained their salespeople to do the same for customers .

In 1980 , Monster Cable Products moved out of Lee 's garage and into a San Francisco facility . It also introduced its second audio cable , Interlink . The company grew through word-of-mouth and an increasing number of retailers that carried Monster products . It attempted to enter the market for audio devices for automotive briefly , but withdrew to focus on home entertainment . Its first product intended for the mass-market was introduced in 1987 . Monster re-entered the auto audio market in the early 1990s with a new line of speaker cables and its first speaker product , the Persona One . Its high-end M-series product line was introduced in 1992 . It also expanded internationally , especially in Asia . Monster had a Taiwanese distributor file its trademark in the region , which led to the distributor continuing to sell products under the Monster brand after their agreement with Monster was terminated . This led to a lengthy legal battle and eventually a settlement . Monster acquired the Entec in-car audio brand in 1998 . Monster 's program for retailers was formalized in 1993 as the M4 Dealer Success Program . The " M4 " stands for four " M " s : Mix ( product mix ) , Merchandising ( displays ) , Monsterization ( training ) and Management commitment . In the 1990s , the business grew from $ 20 million in annual revenues to $ 100 million . By 1998 , Monster was producing 1,000 different products out of a distribution and manufacturing center in Brisbane , California that was established that year . It had created a record label company , Monster Music , in 1989 , which was followed by Monster Power for power products such as power cords and surge protectors , in 1998 , Monster Game for video game accessories in 2000 and the Monster Mobile division which markets cell phone and digital camera accessories in 2001 . A Monster Photo product line was created in 2003 that includes power cells , cables and bags for digital cameras , followed by Monster Signature Series Power . In 2004 , it created a spin-off called M-Design , run by Lee 's son , which sells furniture with electronics built in .

In September 2004 , Monster paid $ 6 million in an agreement with the San Francisco 49ers and the city of San Francisco to rename the football team 's home stadium from Candlestick Park to Monster Park for four years . $ 3 million of it was given to the football team and the other $ 3 million to the San Francisco Recreation and Parks Department . Critics of local politician Matt Gonzales said it was inappropriate for the city to sell the name of a public facility to a corporation and a ballot was passed ensuring that the name of the park reverted back to Candlestick Park in 2008 . Monster 's first wireless products , a receiver and transmitter for connecting televisions and devices was introduced in 2008 . In 2012 , the company changed its name from " Monster Cable Products " to just " Monster Inc . " .

As of 2004 , Monster owned about 300 trademarks , 70 of which are related to the word " Monster " . By 2009 , the company had made 190 filings with the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office . Most filings were to delay potentially infringing trademark applications so Monster could study them . Some were formal oppositions and about 30 have resulted in lawsuits . Most lawsuits were settled with non-disclosed terms . Critics and defendants say that Monster is too aggressive in pursuing trademark protections against companies that do not have confusingly similar products and that it is trying to own a common word , not protect a brand . Monster representatives say they are doing what most " premium " brands do to protect their marks and that their products include things like clothes , mints and music . In the 2000s , Monster had legal disputes over its trademarks with the Discovery Channel for its show Monster Garage . Monster also had trademark disputes with Bally Gaming International over its slot machines , Monster Slots , with Hansen Beverage Co. for its Monster Energy drink , and the Chicago Bears , who use the nickname " Monsters of the Midway . " Other trademark disputes include a 2001 lawsuit against The Walt Disney Company for products related to the film Monsters , Inc . , and a claim against an online used clothing retailer , MonsterVintage LLC . In 2004 , Monster filed a complaint about the trademark application from Snow Monsters , a video website with skiing content for kids . The Snow Monsters owner initiated a lawsuit against Monster pre-emptively . It has also had a trademark dispute with the job site , Monster.com.

In 2006 Monster brought a suit against Monster Mini Golf , a company selling franchise Mini Golf locations throughout the US . After an unsuccessful legal mediation , Monster Mini Golf launched a grassroots campaign against Monster Cable on the Internet . As a result , Monster received more than 200 complaints from the public . Monster Cable dropped the lawsuit and agreed to pay up to $ 200,000 of Monster Mini Golf 's legal fees . In 2009 Monster Cable CEO Noel Lee said on Fox Business that the company has had to balance their trademark protection efforts with the public 's point-of-view .

Monster established a partnership with rap artist Dr. Dre and Interscope Records in 2007 to design and manufacture the Beats Electronics line of headphones called " Beats by Dr. Dre " . This led to a trend among headphone manufacturers to create celebrity-endorsed products . Monster created similar partnerships with Lady Gaga for the Heartbeats brand of headphones in 2009 , PDiddy 's Diddybeats in May 2010 and LeBron James later that year . In 2010 , Monster began developing a series of products for the Chinese market that were co-branded with basketball player Yao Ming . According to analyst firm NPD Group , the Beats brand that Monster distributed exclusively grew to own 53 percent of a $ 1 billion headphones market . A 51 percent interest in Beats was sold to HTC in August 2011 . At the end of the five-year agreement between Monster and Dr. Dre in 2012 , Dre decided not to renew . According to Bloomberg , both parties said the separation was " amicable " but they had disagreements on who deserves credit and the share of revenues . The partnership was responsible for a substantial portion of Monster 's revenues . After the split , Monster created its own headphones product line and other celebrity-branded headphones with music groups Earth , Wind & Fire and Miles Davis .

Monster manufactures 6,000 different products , including headphones , speakers , surge protectors , televisions , and accessories for cars and mobile devices . The company is best known for its speaker cable . It created the market for high-end audio cables in the 1980s . According to a reporter from SoundStage Network , it " has retained a huge lead " for high-end audio cables ever since . Monster also makes cables for TVs , DVDs , computers , printers , gaming consoles , cameras and for audio equipment in cars . As high-definition televisions grew in popularity , the company expanded into HDMI and high-def cables , including a lower-cost HDMI Basic and HDMI cables with five different speed ratings . It also produces cables intended for specific gaming consoles and Apple products . Monster began manufacturing and marketing USB and ethernet cables as well as power strips and power management products in 2009 . It 's been producing its own line of headphones since 2012 and also manufactures celebrity-branded headphones . Monster sells speakers under the Clarity and Katana brands and mobile accessories like an iPod dock and a line-up of Tron-branded products . In the 2000s , it entered into markets for " lifestyle products " like amplifiers , speakers and furniture with electronics built-in , as well as wireless products .

Many audiophiles and reporters disagree on whether more expensive cables have an effect on audio quality . In 1980 Speaker Builder said that Monster audio cables were " a reasonable investment " and that they out-perform generic 24- or 18- gauge cables . Tests by Stereo Review Magazine in 1983 concluded that Monster cables did not make a difference in the sound and were " indistinguishable " from 16-gauge lamp cord . Smaller gauge numbers equate to larger wire , so this is a comparison to heavier ( 16 gauge ) wire than 18 or 24 gauge speaker wires . The same publication in 1990 said that whether the cables are worth it depends on the application and the user 's willingness to pay a premium . Whether someone can hear the difference varies from person to person . Many reporters and audiophiles have done double-blind a / b listening tests and are unable to hear the difference . The New York Times and PC World have reported not hearing a difference in the sound , while USA Today said Monster had " a slight edge . " According to PC Magazine , Monster is " often accused of selling over-priced cables that you can buy elsewhere for a fraction of the price . "

Gizmodo tested Monster-branded HDMI cables and compared them to generic cables using a Digital Serial Analyzer . They found that the cables performed relatively equally over a short distance of 6 feet ( 1.8 m ) , but inexpensive cables experienced distortion when ran over longer distances . WIRED also said Monster 's HDMI cables made a difference over 10-metre ( 33 ft ) distances , but that , " with Monster , you pay a staggering premium for durability and good looks . " In tests by PC World , Monster 's M500CV video cables had the least distortion out of all the cables tested , being within 1 ohm of the standard 75 ohm impedance . Monster CEO Noel Lee claims the average consumer may not be able to tell the difference on-screen , but that Monster 's video cables have higher bandwidth , are future-proofed , are more durable and that they perform better over long distances . Many reviewers stress in turn that Monster cables are not needed for lower-resolution televisions or over short distances and that the difference in audio quality is not substantial enough .

Monster Cable and similar " boutique " cables are a substantial source of revenue for retailers of electronics , such as DVD players and TVs . While the profit margins of DVD players and TVs may be low , the profit margins of Monster Cables and similar products provide supplemental revenue for these retailers . Employees of such retailers are trained to market and bundle Monster Cable and similar products in order to increase profitability . According to The New York Times , profit margins for retailers can be 40 percent or more and The Consumerist reported that one retailer was selling some cables at an 80 percent markup . This has led to criticisms that sales staff are motivated to sell high-end cable products to customers that don 't need them and to be aggressive in order to obtain incentives . Monster has responded by saying that markups are determined by the retailer and are usually less than those found on clothing , jewelry and furniture . As of 1998 , Monster spent $ 13 million a year in training and incentive programs for salespeople . The sales staff are provided data on their performance in selling the cables and top-performers are sent on all-expenses-paid vacations . Monster also hosts its Retailer Awards at CES each year , which the Las Vegas Sun called , " one of the biggest events on the CES party circuit . "

SummerSlam ( 2007 ) was the twentieth annual SummerSlam professional wrestling pay-per-view event produced by World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) . It was presented by THQ 's Stuntman Ignition . It took place on August 26 , 2007 , at the Continental Airlines Arena in East Rutherford , New Jersey and featured talent from each of WWE 's three brands : Raw , SmackDown , and ECW . Tickets for SummerSlam went on sale December 30 and sold out in forty minutes . The main feud , a staged rivalry between wrestlers , heading into the event from the Raw brand was between John Cena and Randy Orton . On the July 23 episode of Raw , Jonathan Coachman announced Orton as the number one contender to the WWE Championship . Over the proceeding weeks , Orton provoked Cena by interfering and attacking him during his matches . From SmackDown , the predominant feud was between The Great Khali and Batista . After Khali defeated Batista and Kane in a Triple Threat match , a match between three wrestlers contested under standard rules , Theodore Long booked Khali to defend the World Heavyweight Championship against Batista at SummerSlam . The primary feud from ECW was between John Morrison and CM Punk . By defeating Morrison in a 15 Minutes of Fame match , Punk became the number one contender to the ECW Championship at SummerSlam .

Several of the existing feuds carried on after the event . Notably , CM Punk continued to face John Morrison , defeating him for the ECW Championship the following month on ECW on Sci Fi . The day after SummerSlam , Orton , as part of the scripted events , interfered in a match between Cena and King Booker and intensified the feud by attacking Cena 's father . Khali and Batista faced each other at Unforgiven , the following pay-per-view , as part of a Triple Threat match ; Batista was victorious in this match and won the World Heavyweight Championship .

World Wrestling Entertainment had originally planned a storyline between the cast of the Jackass TV series and Umaga , with the conclusion in a match at SummerSlam . It was scheduled to begin at the previous pay-per-view event , The Great American Bash , but was canceled after the Jackass cast dropped out due to the negative media attention surrounding the Chris Benoit double murder and suicide . The main staged rivalry heading into SummerSlam on the Raw brand was between John Cena and Randy Orton over the WWE Championship . At The Great American Bash , Cena defeated Bobby Lashley to retain the WWE Championship . The next night on Raw , one of three main television programs of WWE ( along with WWE SmackDown and ECW on Sci Fi ) , after a Handicap match involving Cena , Orton came out and executed an RKO on Cena . Shortly thereafter , Executive Assistant Jonathan Coachman announced Orton as the new number-one contender to the WWE Championship . Before that , Orton claimed that he had never faced Cena in a one-on-one WWE Championship match . On the July 30 episode of Raw , Carlito defeated Cena in a non-title match after Orton interfered and distracted Cena . Three weeks later , on the August 18 episode of Saturday Night 's Main Event , Cena faced off against Carlito in another non-title match , which Cena won . After the match , Orton came out and attacked Cena , which led to a RKO from Orton through a steel chair .

The main storyline on the SmackDown brand was between The Great Khali and Batista over the World Heavyweight Championship . On the July 6 episode of SmackDown , Khali issued an open challenge for a match at The Great American Bash , which was accepted by Batista later that night . On SmackDown the following week , the match between Khali and Batista was made official after a contract signing . That same night , then-World Heavyweight Champion Edge , who was scheduled to face Kane for the title at The Great American Bash , suffered a real injury — a left pectoral muscle tear — after Kane interrupted his Mardi Gras style celebration . On the July 20 episode of SmackDown , Edge was forced to vacate the World Heavyweight Championship due to the severity of his injury . He later commented- I ’ m still the rightful champion . My pectoral muscle is hanging on by a single fiber ; literally hanging from the bone . Theodore Long comes out and strips me of what I ’ ve worked for my entire career — from childhood until now . My mood is obviously not great right now . I ’ m disgusted .

I go out there and put my body through hell . I ’ ve broken my neck , dislocated my shoulder twice , torn my other pec , my elbows are mush , I have two protruding discs in my lower back . I even got bit by a brown recluse spider that turned into a flesh-eating disease — the list goes on . I still go out there and prove that I am the best . Why do I still do this ? Not for them . I do it for my pride . I don 't give a rat 's ass what the fans think . I never have . That 's not how I operate . I know that fans will be happy with this , and that pisses me off . I 've come to the realization that our fans never will appreciate me . But they had to live with me as their champion , and when I return and become a four-time World Champion , they 'll have to deal with me again . SmackDown General Manager Theodore Long then announced that there would be a 20-man Battle Royal later that night to determine a new World Heavyweight Champion . Khali won the Battle Royal and became the new World Heavyweight Champion by last eliminating Kane and Batista . Khali defeated the two and retained the title at The Great American Bash . Five days later on SmackDown , Batista interrupted Khali 's celebration and challenged him to a match at SummerSlam . The next week , on the August 3 episode of SmackDown , Long announced that Khali would defend his title against Batista at SummerSlam .

Another main rivalry on the Raw brand heading into SummerSlam was between the returning Triple H against King Booker . At New Year 's Revolution , during a World Tag Team Championship match between Rated-RKO ( Edge and Randy Orton ) and D-Generation X ( Shawn Michaels and Triple H ) , Triple H suffered a legitimate torn right quadriceps during the match that left him out of action . On July 16 , Booker T , who is referred as King Booker after winning the 2006 King of the Ring tournament started using Triple H 's entrance music " King of Kings " . King Booker declared that neither Triple H nor Jerry Lawler could be known as " The King " . On August 6 episode of Raw , King Booker defeated Lawler in a match where the loser had to crown the winner the next week . When the time came , Lawler refused , declaring that Triple H was still a king and announcing that King Booker would face Triple H at SummerSlam . Booker then attacked Lawler , throwing him into the ring post and hitting him with a TV monitor . The predominant staged rivalry from the ECW brand was between John Morrison and CM Punk over the ECW Championship . Morrison won the title at Vengeance : Night of Champions , the pay-per-view two months before SummerSlam by defeating CM Punk . At the following pay-per-view , The Great American Bash , Morrison defeated Punk to retain the ECW Championship . On the July 31 episode of ECW on Sci Fi , Punk defeated Tommy Dreamer and Elijah Burke in a Triple threat match to earn a 15 Minutes of Fame match with Morrison . The following week , on ECW on Sci Fi , Punk defeated Morrison by pinfall after executing a GTS ( Go To Sleep ) . As a result of this victory , Punk earned himself a championship match against Morrison at SummerSlam .

One of the primary preliminary matches was a standard one-on-one match between Rey Mysterio and Chavo Guerrero . Their storyline first began in July 2006 at The Great American Bash . Guerrero interfered in Mysterio 's World Heavyweight Championship match with King Booker by hitting Mysterio with a steel chair . Guerrero defeated Mysterio the following month at SummerSlam 2006 , winning the match after performing a frog splash At No Mercy , the pay-per-view two months after SummerSlam , Mysterio defeated Guerrero in a Falls Count Anywhere match , pinning him after performing a crossbody off a guard rail . Two weeks later , Guerrero defeated Mysterio in an " I Quit " match forcing him to quit after hitting his left knee repeatedly with a steel chair . During the match , Mysterio suffered a real injury — an ACL and patella tendon tear in his left knee . Ten months later , on the August 3 episode of SmackDown ! , a match between Mysterio and Guerrero was booked for SummerSlam .

The first match that aired was between Kane and Finlay . Kane controlled the opening minutes of the match , performing a variety of moves including a scoop slam and a big boot . After some back and forth action , Finlay was able to hit Kane with a shillelagh in the ribs . Kane kicked out of the pin attempt and executed a chokeslam , pinning him afterwards for the win . Next was a Triple Threat match for the WWE Intercontinental Championship that involved Umaga , Carlito , and Mr. Kennedy . Kennedy attempted to form an alliance with Carlito in the beginning , but Umaga quickly turned the match in his favor . Kennedy and Carlito soon gained the upper hand after Carlito dropkicked Umaga to the outside . Shortly thereafter , Carlito turned on Kennedy and attempted to pin him with a roll-up . After a back and forth match between the three , Umaga regained control and performed a Samoan Spike on Kennedy , which led to Umaga pinning Kennedy for the win and successfully retaining the WWE Intercontinental Championship . The third match was Rey Mysterio versus Chavo Guerrero , which was Mysterio 's first match since Guerrero injured his knee in October 2006 . Mysterio gained the early advantage when he was able to perform an arm drag and a plancha on Guerrero . Mysterio then performed a low dropkick to Guerrero 's left knee , followed by a diving hurricanrana . Towards the end of the match , Guerrero was able to perform a Gory Bomb on Mysterio after Mysterio had missed a crossbody . Mysterio kicked out of the pin attempt and performed a 619 followed by a springboard splash for the pinfall victory .

Next was an Interpromotional Divas Battle Royal involving Beth Phoenix , Melina , Mickie James , Jillian Hall , and Maria from Raw , Michelle McCool , Torrie Wilson , Kristal Marshall , and Victoria from SmackDown , and Kelly Kelly , Layla , and Brooke from ECW . Shortly after the match began , Phoenix threw Brooke over the top rope . Soon after , Hall eliminated Maria and Layla was thrown out by Melina . Kristal then eliminated Victoria , but was then thrown over the ropes by James and accidentally knocked off the apron by McCool . Shortly after , Phoenix and Hall eliminated Kelly , and Hall and James began pulling each other over the ropes . Wilson threw Hall out to the floor whilst Melina knocked James off the apron . McCool and Wilson then worked together to eliminate Melina . The two continued their alliance , but Phoenix was able to get the upper hand , first eliminating Wilson , followed by throwing McCool over the ropes to win the match and a future WWE Women 's Championship match . Shortly after the match ended , WWE United States Champion Montel Vontavious Porter ( MVP ) came to the ring and challenged Matt Hardy to a beer drinking contest . Hardy declined and named a replacement , Stone Cold Steve Austin . Austin came out and mocked MVP by doing several warm-up exercises similar to those MVP does before a match . As the contest was set to start , Austin delivered a Stone Cold Stunner to MVP and left the ring .

Next on the card was John Morrison versus CM Punk for the ECW Championship . Punk gained early control when he was able to perform a scoop slam as well as a springboard dropkick ; however , Morrison was able to counter a shoulder block attempt into a neckbreaker on the ring apron . After Morrison controlled the match for several minutes , Punk was able to put the match back in his favor after performing a diving crossbody followed by an enzuigiri . Morrison , however , countered a Frankensteiner attempt into a pin-cover while using the ropes for leverage . He got the win , thus retaining the ECW Championship .

The sixth match of the event was between the returning Triple H and King Booker , who was accompanied by Queen Sharmell . Triple H gained the early advantage as the match began ; however , Booker was able to gain control after performing a low dropkick . Triple H regained control after countering Booker and performing a variety of moves , which included a corner clothesline and a spinebuster . Booker put the match back in his favor after reversing a clothesline attempt into a Book End , which was followed by a sidewalk slam . After Booker missed a diving somersault leg drop , Triple H was able to recover and perform a Pedigree . Triple H pinned Booker afterwards to gain the victory . The World Heavyweight Championship match between champion The Great Khali and challenger Batista was next . Khali controlled most of the match and performed a variety of moves , which included a brain chop , a big boot , and multiple clotheslines . Batista won the match after Khali intentionally disqualified himself by hitting him with a steel chair . Since a championship cannot change hands via countout or disqualification , Khali retained the title .

Next was the main event , which saw John Cena defend the WWE Championship against Randy Orton . After back and forth action in the opening minutes , Orton gained the advantage over Cena after Cena missed a flying shoulder block attempt . Orton followed up by applying a reverse chinlock and attacking Cena 's leg . After Orton controlled the match for several minutes , Cena gained the advantage and performed various maneuvers , which included a twisting belly to belly side slam and the Five Knuckle Shuffle ; Orton , however , was able to counter an FU attempt into an inverted headlock backbreaker . Cena countered a running punt attempt into the STFU submission hold . Orton , however , got to the bottom rope , and performed an RKO . Cena kicked out of the pin attempt and performed an FU for the pinfall victory , thus retaining the WWE Championship .

During the event , John Cena provoked his feud with Randy Orton . On the August 27 episode of Raw , Cena faced King Booker in a non-title match . When Cena appeared close to winning , Randy Orton interfered and attacked him , causing Booker to lose by disqualification . After the match ended , Orton attacked Cena 's father , who was sitting at ringside , and kicked him in the head . The two faced each other in a rematch at Unforgiven for the WWE Championship . Cena was disqualified in the match for continuously punching Orton . Orton won the match but not the title . Afterwards , Cena 's father kicked Orton in the head , in the same way Orton had kicked his one-month prior . On the August 31 episode of SmackDown , Rey Mysterio , Finlay , Kane , and Batista participated in a four-man Championship Competition tournament . Mysterio defeated Batista and Finlay and became the number-one contender for the World Heavyweight Championship at Unforgiven . On the September 7 episode of SmackDown , Mysterio defeated Chavo Guerrero in an " I Quit " match . After the match , The Great Khali attacked Mysterio until Batista came out and executed a spear on Khali . Batista was then included in the one-on-one title match at Unforgiven , making it a Triple Threat match . At the event , Batista won the championship for a third time .

The feud between Matt Hardy and Montel Vontavious Porter ( MVP ) continued when they were forced to team up against Deuce ' n Domino on the August 31 episode of SmackDown . They won the match and the WWE Tag Team Championship . The following month at Unforgiven , MVP and Hardy defeated Deuce ' n Domino to retain the WWE Tag Team Championship . That October , at No Mercy , Hardy defeated MVP in a pizza-eating contest . On the November 16 episode of SmackDown , MVP and Hardy lost the WWE Tag Team Championship to the team of The Miz and John Morrison . Umaga lost the WWE Intercontinental Championship to Jeff Hardy on the September 3 episode of Raw . Afterwards , Umaga started a feud with Triple H and faced off against him in a Street Fight two months later at Cyber Sunday . At Unforgiven , Candice Michelle defeated Beth Phoenix to retain the WWE Women 's Championship . Phoenix , however , later defeated Candice at No Mercy to win the title . On the September 4 episode of ECW on Sci Fi , CM Punk defeated John Morrison to win the ECW Championship . At Cyber Sunday , Punk retained the title by defeating The Miz . The following month , at Survivor Series , Punk defeated Morrison and The Miz in a Triple Threat match to retain the ECW Championship .

The event grossed over US $ 1 million in ticket sales from an attendance of 17,441 out of a 17,040 maximum capacity building . Due to the production of the event , however , the capacity of the arena was set at a lower standard , and as a result the arena reached its maximum capacity . This was confirmed by the ticket sales and by WWE 's official website on August 28 , 2007 . According to a press release by WWE in late-2007 , the event received 537,000 buys , which was higher than the previous year 's SummerSlam buys of 529,000 . The buys from SummerSlam helped the promotion 's revenue , which was $ 18.8 million , a sum lower than the prior year of $ 19.7 million . Canadian Online Explorer and its professional wrestling section rated the entire event a 6.5 out of 10 . The rating was higher than the previous year 's SummerSlam rating , a 5.5 out of 10 . The main event from the Raw brand was rated a 7.5 out of 10 ; while the main event from the SmackDown brand was rated a 1 out of 10 . The event had 537,000 buys , up slightly on the SummerSlam 2006 figure of 529,000 buys .

The event was released on DVD on September 25 , 2007 . The DVD was distributed by the label , Genius Products . The DVD reached a peak position of first on Billboard 's Weekly Video Sales chart for the week of October 27 , 2007 . The DVD remained on the charts for twelve consecutive weeks ; though , after the week of October 27 , 2007 , the DVD ranked lower . During its final week on the chart , January 18 , 2008 , it ranked 19th . The DVD also received reviews from customers , as the average customer rating from Amazon.com was a 3.5 out of 5 . The average customer rating however , from CD Universe was a 5 out of 5 stars .

Magia ( English : Magic ) is the debut album by Colombian singer-songwriter Shakira . It was released in June 1991 by Sony Music Colombia , with whom she signed a three-album recording contract . The record is a collection of pop ballads Shakira wrote since she was eight years old , with themes inspired from the experience hanging out with males , adventure stories , and dreams of living on the coast . The album 's live performances helped Shakira receive attention on Colombian media , and the LP earned her an award at the Viña del Mar International Song Festival . However , it was not a commercial success , with sales estimated at between 1,000 and 1,200 copies . By Shakira 's request , Magia and its follow-up Peligro ( 1993 ) were removed from music markets . " Magia " was released as promotional single in 1991 .

Born in Barranquilla , Colombia , Shakira began writing songs at the age of eight years , her first one being " Tus Gafas Oscuras " . Her performances at local competitions led to a meeting with local theater producer Monica Ariza , who later held an audition for her in Bogotá . She performed three songs for executives of Sony Music Columbia , who were impressed enough to sign her , at the age of 13 , to record three albums , which were Magia , Peligro and Pies Descalzos . The low-budget Magia was put in almost three months of pre-production , which involved choreography of live performances for the album , singing lessons for Shakira , and arranging the songs . The concept of the music still reflected her personality , despite the fact that it was managed by the record label . The tracks deal with emotions of a person 's first time falling in love , and range from a love poem ( " Sueños " ) to a celebration of dance ( " Esta noche voy contigo " ) . These were influenced from experiences with males such as her ex-boyfriend Oscar Pardo , stories told by her father , and dreams of living on the coast . In the book Shakira : Woman Full of Grace , Ximena Diego wrote that the album " demonstrated her [ Shakira 's ] indisputable potential . "

Magia is a collection of songs written by Shakira between the ages of 8 and 12 , and mainly consists of pop ballads . It was produced by Miguel E. Cubillos and Pablo Tedeschi , and recorded at Aga Studios in Bogotá , when Shakira was 13 . A Sony Music Columbia representative said that the recording process was simple and went perfectly fine . But for Shakira , the process was problematic , as she had no ability to decide which tracks would be included and no input into the rhythmic structure or artistic production of the songs .

To promote the launch of the album , as a suggestion from Shakira , live performances were held in locations such as Teatro Amira de la Rosa , Cartagena , Santa Marta , Riohacha , Medellín , Cali , Bogotá , and other various theaters and events , all of which received print , radio and television coverage . The performances featured additional dancers and background vocalists such as Cesar Navarro , Guillermo Gomez , Mauricio Pinilla , and Richard Ricardo . A music video was done for " Magia " , which Navarro also starred in . Navarro found working with Shakira enjoyable and relaxing , and recalled her as sensitive and energetic : " She was a tireless worker , but more than anything , she was a total blast . " The choreography for the performances was done by Gary Julio and Ray Silva . The album won an award at the Viña del Mar International Song Festival in 1991 , although Shakira was not able to attend the ceremony due to her age of under 16 years . Despite the live performances and the amount of media coverage , the LP did not fare well commercially ; between 1,000 and 1,200 copies were sold in her home country . Shakira has refused to allow the re-release of both Magia and her next album , Peligro , because of their " immaturity " ; neither has ever been released in the U.S.

Goodies is the debut studio album by American recording artist Ciara . It was released on September 28 , 2004 via LaFace Records . After writing songs for several established acts , Ciara 's talents were noticed by Jazze Pha , and she began to work on what became Goodies . The album 's conception came through the which the title track , created as a female crunk counterpart to Usher 's " Yeah " and Petey Pablo 's " Freek-a-Leek . " Ciara worked with several writers and producers on the album , including Jazze Pha , Lil Jon , Bangladesh , R. Kelly , Johntá Austin , Sean Garrett , and Keri Hilson , among others . With Goodies , Ciara was hailed as the " Princess " or " First Lady of Crunk & B. " The album uses dance music while utilizing pop , R & B , and hip-hop influences . The album delivers contradictory lyrical content , featuring female empowerment and independence-promoting lyrics in songs like the title track , while others show interest in adult activities . Critics gave the album positive to mixed reviews , commending the " Goodies " -esque songs , while deeming others as unoriginal and noting Ciara 's limited vocal abilities . Most critics compared the work to singer Aaliyah , and also said it had qualities of Destiny 's Child .

Commercially the album was a success , in the United States , the album debuted at number three on the Billboard 200 , selling 124,750 copies in its opening week . It was later certified triple platinum by the RIAA , and as of June 2010 , had sold over 2.7 million copies in the United States . The album also fared well internationally being certified Platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association ( CRIA ) and Silver by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) . Goodies earned Ciara two Grammy nominations at the 48th Grammy Awards including Best New Artist and Best Rap / Sung Collaboration for " 1 , 2 Step . "

In her mid-teens , Ciara formed the all-girl group Hearsay with two of her friends . The group recorded demos , but as time went on , they began to have differences and eventually parted ways . Despite this setback , Ciara was still determined to reach her goal and signed a publishing deal as a songwriter . After leaving the group Hearsay , Texas native Ciara earned a writing job via her manager , for Atlanta 's Tricky Stewart and The-Dream 's RedZone Entertainment , penning songs for Mýa and Fantasia among others . According to Ciara , no one believed in her dreams of hearing her own music on the radio until she met producer Jazze Pha in 2002 . Within five months of meeting her , Pha signed her to his Sho 'nuff label and they had already recorded five tracks . About Ciara , Jazze Pha said , " What was really lacking is the Janet Jackson , high-energy dance [ music ] . Ciara fills that void . She 's pretty , she can dance , she can write music , and kids love her . Everyone loves her . "

After graduating from Riverdale High School in Riverdale , Georgia in 2003 , she was signed by LaFace Records executive , L.A. Reid , whom she was introduced to by Jazze Pha . She began production on her debut album later that year . Recording sessions for the album took place at Chocolate Factory , Chicago , IL ; Circle House Studios , Miami , FL ; Darp Studios , Atlanta , GA ; Doppler Studios , Atlanta , GA ; Futuristic Recording Studios , Atlanta , GA ; Ground Breaking Studios , Atlanta , GA ; Hit Factory Criteria , Miami , FL ; Hitco , Atlanta , GA ; Patchwerk Recordings , Atlanta , GA ; Phoenix Ave . Studios , Atlanta , GA ; Sony Music Studios , New York , NY ; Studio 609 Recordings , Philadelphia , PA ; The Studio , Philadelphia , PA . In early 2004 , Ciara wrote a demo with record producer , Sean Garrett , co-writer of Usher 's crunk hit " Yeah . " After hearing a demo , crunk producer Lil Jon , who also produced and was featured on " Yeah " , began to work on the full record , to have it released on LaFace , which was also Usher 's label . Originally , Ciara was reluctant to work with the track produced by Lil Jon , reportedly disliking crunk music at first . However , she decided to use the song to go against the grain and deliver lyrics in contrast of female promiscuity lines delivered by fellow female artists . To give her a title to stand out , Lil Jon dubbed Ciara as the " Princess of Crunk & B. " Dubbed the female counterpart to " Yeah " and fellow crunk hit " Freek-a-Leek " by Petey Pablo , it looked to capitalize on the success of the previous songs . In addition to working with Jazze Pha , whom produced most of the album , Lil Jon , and Garrett , she worked with several other Atlanta-based writers and producers including Bangladesh , Johntá Austin , Jasper Cameron , and others , while featuring collaborations from Atlanta 's T.I. and Ludacris . R & B singer R. Kelly wrote and produced a track .

When talking about the album 's theme , Ciara said it was universal , stating , " It 's about everybody . You 'll have songs with different emotions , happy , sad , ' my heart is broken . ' What everybody goes through . " On her success with the preluding title track , Ciara said , " I 'm very content right now . I take everything a day at a time . Every time I hear good news , I 'm shouting out , ' Praise God . ' Everybody around me is so excited , I still haven 't got it . I haven 't really felt it like they 're feeling it for me . "

The album consists of bouncy dance music mixed with crunk , combined with either R & B , pop or hip hop music . The ballads on the set utilize Ciara 's breathy vocals , as the uptempo pieces . Lyrical content varies on the album . Songs like " Goodies " issue a message of female empowerment and abstinence , and this is contradicted as she hints at teasing sex . Slant Magazine compared this to Britney Spears-esque " layer of tease to the mature " in her early work . Utilizing influences from 80 's dance music , qualities of the work of Destiny 's Child and Aaliyah are evident . " Goodies " is heavily influenced by male counterpart crunk song " Yeah " and also has been compared to Kelis 's " Milkshake . " The song makes use of a repeated whistle , " faux operated vocals " in parts and a western guitar riff near the end . " 1 , 2 Step , " which continues the club music theme , is built around a simple dance and features Missy Elliott in a pas de deux. and according to Mike Pattensden of The Times , " owes plenty to classic New York electro . " " Oh , " a downtempo song , features a heavy bassline and has been called " brooding electronic grind , " and , according to Dorian Lynskey of The Guardian , " sounds like R & B reimagined by Gary Numan . " " Pick Up the Phone " was described as a rip-off of Aaliyah 's " Rock the Boat " by Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine . " Next to You , " written by R. Kelly , is part of the album 's second half of ballads , and was said to capture " Ciara 's youthful indecisiveness . " " Hotline " features a " funky clap " and beatboxing .

Goodies ' lead single , the title track , featuring Petey Pablo , was released on June 8 , 2004 . Conceived as a crunk female counterpart to Usher 's " Yeah , " the lyrical content goes against the grain , speaking of abstinence , rejecting advances because " the goodies will stay in the jar . " Critics hailed it as an " anthem of the summer " and one of the best singles of the year , complementing its dance-feel and beat , and the irony of the " clever " lyrics . The single performed well worldwide , topping the charts in Canada , the United States and the United Kingdom , and charting in the top ten of other charts , receiving Platinum certification in the United States . The music video shot for the song features Ciara partying with friends . " 1 , 2 Step , " featuring Missy Elliott , was released as the second single , incorporating a hip-hop and dance-pop feel , deriving influences from 1980s electro music . While topping the charts in Canada , it additionally appeared the in top ten of six other countries , and was certified Platinum or Gold in multiple regions . The accompanying music video features Ciara and others performing the dance . The song was nominated for Best Rap / Sung Collaboration at the 48th Annual Grammy Awards .

" Oh , " featuring Ludacris , proclaimed as a love song to Atlanta , was released as the album 's third single on March 5 , 2005 . Carrying a slow , dark tone , critics noted " Oh " as a standout track from Goodies . The song performed well worldwide , appearing the top ten of seven charts , and certified either Platinum or Gold in multiple regions . The song 's music video , which is similar to that of " Goodies , " takes place at a block party , and was nominated for Best R & B Video at the 2005 MTV Video Music Awards . The album 's final single , " And I , " was released on August 30 , 2005 , and only managed to peak at ninety-six on the Billboard Hot 100 . The music video for " And I " is loosely based on the 1992 film , The Bodyguard , and NBA player Carmelo Anthony portrayed Ciara 's love interest .

Raymond Fiore of Entertainment Weekly gave the album a B and commented , " If Aaliyah had lived to make another CD , it might have sounded like Goodies , " and said that other album cuts " prove she 's no one-track pony . " Noting the singles " Goodies , " " 1 , 2 Step , " and " Oh " as standout tracks , Allmusic gave the album three and a half out of five stars . Steve Jones of USA Today said , " The voice doesn 't blow you away , but as with Goodies , she takes a lyrically intriguing offbeat path from time to time . Though not every song is a goodie , she does have a few treats in store . " Even though he said the album wasn 't a perfect work , Azeem Ahmad of musicOMH said , " The talent is obviously there but if we are to carry out Ciara 's wish of forgetting about " the other chicks " then there 's some fine-tuning needed . For now there 's no direct threat to any other hip-hop divas , but the void left by Aaliyah is still there for someone to try and fill . There 's no reason why Ciara can 't one day hold her own with the best . " Jalylah Burrell of PopMatters commented that " Goodies is nothing new , but it is executed well . "

Although pointing out the flaws of Goodies , Dorian Lynskey of The Guardian said , " Ciara has no conviction as a sweet-talker but her disconnected style clicks perfectly with the cold , clinical ( in a good way ) hits . " Mike Pattenden of The Times said , " Goodies has some tasty treats , but they 're all stacked on top of the jar , " commenting that Ciara 's " whispery , girlish voice that is often relegated to the background by stronger performers , suggesting she is little more than a pretty mouthpiece for Jon and his posse of producers . " Slant Magazine 's Sal Cinquemani compared it to the work to Aaliyah , stating some of it was not up to par with the late singer , but complimented the title track-esque tracks .

The album debuted at number three on the US Billboard 200 , selling 124,750 copies in its initial week . It topped the Top R & B / Hip-Hop Albums chart , before being dethroned by the Usher 's Confessions . Goodies had a seventy-one week stint on the Billboard 200 , and certified three times-platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America on October 10 , 2006 , and has sold around 2.7 million copies in the United States as of June 2010 . Charting at twenty-two on the Canadian Albums Chart , it was certified Platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association . The album charted at twenty-six in on the UK Albums Chart , and spent twenty weeks on the chart . It was certified Silver by the British Phonographic Industry , remaining to be Ciara 's sole certified album in the UK . Goodies charted moderately in other countries , including the top forty on the New Zealand Albums Chart and Irish Albums Chart .

With the release of her debut single " Goodies " , Ciara was referred to as the Princess of Crunk & B. Allison Stewart of The Washington Post commented that she has a " reedy , agile voice , capable of conveying the only three emotions ( sexy , sassy , sad ) an R & B singer needs . Randall Roberts of Los Angeles Times commented that " Ciara has been the most synthetic of the R & B divas over the past decade , an electro-leaning vocalist whose instrumental palate has heavily favored stark 808 beats , sassy and seductive vocal lines . " In the early to mid-2000s , some crunk music hits like " Get Low " , " Goodies " , " Yeah ! " and " Freek-a-Leek " produced by Lil Jon climbed to the Top 10 of the Billboard Hot 100 charts . Both " Yeah ! " and " Goodies " were the first tracks to introduce the substyle of crunk music and contemporary R & B , called crunk & B , to the public . Both of those tracks ( performed by Usher and Ciara , respectively ) were the main mainstream hits of 2004 . Since then , crunk & B has been one of the most popular genres of sung African-American music , along with electropop , the genre that replaced crunk and crunk & B in the charts in 2008 . After the album 's lead single reached the summit of the US Billboard Hot 100 , it spent seven weeks at number one , becoming the longest-running number-one debut single by a female artist since 1977

The album 's lead singles success exemplified urban music 's commercial dominance during the early 2000s , which featured massive crossover success on the Billboard charts by R & B and hip hop artists . In 2004 , all 12 songs that topped the Billboard Hot 100 were African-American recording artists and accounted for 80 % of the number-one R & B hits that year . Along with Usher 's streak of singles , Top 40 radio and both pop and R & B charts were topped by OutKast 's " Hey Ya ! " , Snoop Dogg 's " Drop It Like It 's Hot " , Terror Squad 's " Lean Back " , and Ciara 's " Goodies " . Chris Molanphy of The Village Voice later remarked that " by the early 2000s , urban music was pop music . " The work helped Ciara earn several nominations , including Best New Artist at the 48th Annual Grammy Awards . Several Goodies singles received several nominations at different ceremonies , which included " 1 , 2 Step " being nominated at the 48th Grammy Awards for Best Rap / Sung Collaboration . The song " 1 , 2 Step " from the album Goodies has received numerous awards , including both " Best Performed Songs in the ASCAP Repertory " and " Most Performed Songs " from the American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers , " Best Collaboration " from the BET Awards , and " Best Dance Cut " from the Soul Train Lady of Soul Music Awards , and " Choice Music R & B / Hip Hop Track " from the Teen Choice Awards . Ciara has received nine nominations from the BET Awards , winning one of them .

The 2012 – 13 Big Ten men 's basketball season began with practices in October 2012 , followed by the start of the 2012 – 13 NCAA Division I men 's basketball season in November . Conference play began in early-January 2013 , and concluded in March with the 2013 Big Ten Men 's Basketball Tournament at the United Center in Chicago . All conference regular season and tournament games were broadcast nationally . For the 37th consecutive season , the conference led the nation in attendance . The conference enjoyed nine postseason invitations including seven to the 2013 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament ( NCAA Tournament ) . Eight of the nine posteason participants posted at least one win . The Conference compiled a 19 – 9 postseason record including a 14 – 7 record in the NCAA Tournament . Michigan was runner up in the NCAA Tournament and Iowa was runnerup in the 2013 National Invitation Tournament . Trey Burke won almost every National Player of the Year award ( Oscar Robertson Trophy , John R. Wooden Award , Associated Press POY , Sports Illustrated POY , NABC Player of the Year and Naismith College Player of the Year ) , while Victor Oladipo won the Sporting News POY and Adolph Rupp Trophy . Oladipo also shared NABC Defensive Player of the Year with Jeff Withey . Four Big Ten athletes ( Burke , Oladipo , Cody Zeller and Deshaun Thomas ) earned 2013 NCAA All-American recognition ( Burke , Oladipo and Zeller as consensus All-Americans ) . In addition , Jordan Hulls won the Senior CLASS Award and Aaron Craft earned Men 's Basketball Academic All-American of the Year . Burke was the Big Ten Conference Men 's Basketball Player of the Year , Oladipo was the Big Ten Defensive Player of the Year , and Craft was the Most Outstanding Player at the 2013 Big Ten Tournament . Craft earned national defensive player of the year recognition by CBSSports.com. Burke also earned the Bob Cousy Award .

By achieving high rankings throughout the season , the Big Ten was able to keep at least three teams in the top 10 of the national polls during 10 of the 11 weeks of the conference portion of the season . As a result , the Big Ten set a record for most matchups between two top 10 opponents in conference play with a total of 9 such games . Michigan played in six with a 3 – 3 record and Indiana played in five , winning all of them . Michigan State , Minnesota and Ohio State also played in top 10 games .

The Big Ten entered seven teams in the 2013 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament , ranging from Indiana making its 37th trip and earning a number one seed to Minnesota making its 8th appearance and earningn an eleven seed . The Big Ten became the first conference to send four teams to the Sweet Sixteen in back-to-back years since the 1997 and 1998 tournaments . Although it was the Big Ten 's fifth time advancing four teams , it was the first time with consecutive occurrences . Entering Sweet Sixteen round with four strong contenders spread across four regions , there was talk of the conference matching or surpassing the 1985 Big East Conference performance with three final four entrants . Only Michigan advanced . Burke was named South Regional Tournament Most Outstanding Player . Michigan made its fourth appearance in the final four , giving the conference a total of 43 such appearances . Michigan was part of the highest attendance National Championship game to date with an attendance of 74,326 .

Junior Deshaun Thomas declared for the draft on April 5 . On April 9 , junior Oladipo entered the draft . On April 10 sophomore Zeller announced plans to enter the draft . On April 14 , sophomore Burke entered the Draft . On April 17 , Hardaway declared for the NBA Draft . Those 5 first team All-Big Ten selections were the only players from the conference to declare early for the NBA Draft . Burke , Hardaway , Trevor Mbakwe , Oladipo , Brandon Paul , Thomas , and Zeller were among the 60 players invited to the 2013 NBA Draft Combine . The following all-conference selections were listed as seniors : Jared Berggren , Mbakwe , Paul , Christian Watford and D. J. Richardson . Victor Oladipo ( 2nd ) , Cody Zeller ( 4th ) and Burke ( 9th ) combined to give the Big Ten its first top ten trio since the 1990 NBA Draft . Hardaway ( 24th ) joined his father ( 14th in 1989 NBA Draft ) as a first round selection .

Jordan Hulls was named a finalist for the Senior CLASS Award , making him one of ten Senior All-Americans . Craft , a repeat Academic All-America selection , was named the Men 's Basketball Academic All-America Team Members of the Year . He was joined on the Academic All-America first team by Zeller , and Hulls was a third team selection . Burke and Oladipo were named a first-team All-American by Sporting News ( TSN ) on March 11 , while Thomas was a second-team selection and Zeller was named to the third-team . Burke and Oladipo were also named to the first team by the USBWA On March 18 , while Zeller was named to its second team . Burke and Zeller were named All-American by Sports Illustrated ( SI ) on March 19 . On March 20 Burke and Oladipo were named to the CBSSports.com All-American first team , while Thomas was a second team selection , Zeller was a third team selection and Craft was Defensive Player of the Year . On March 26 , Burke , Oladipo , Thomas , and Zeller were selected to the 21-man 2013 Lute Olson All-America Team . On March 28 , Burke and Oladipo were named first team All-American by the NABC , while Zeller was a second team selection and Thomas was a third team selection . On April 1 , the Associated Press gave the Big Ten the same recognitions as the NABC : 1st team : Burke and Oladipo , 2nd team : Zeller and 3rd team : Thomas . On the same day , Burke , Oladipo , Zeller and Thomas were named to the 10-man Wooden All-American team of finalists for the Wooden Award . Also on April 1 , Glenn Robinson III and Gary Harris were named to the 21-man 2013 Kyle Macy Freshman All-America team .

" Cool Hand Peter " is the eighth episode of the tenth season of the animated comedy series Family Guy . The episode originally aired on Fox in the United States on December 4 , 2011 . In the episode , Peter Griffin and his friends Joe , Quagmire and Cleveland ( who has returned to Quahog ) decide to go on a road trip to New Orleans , Louisiana . Whilst driving they are stopped by a police officer , arrested and thrown in jail by the sheriff who abuses his power , and plants marijuana in their car . The group then attempt to escape the prison due to their stay being extended indefinitely , and return to Quahog . The episode served as a follow-up to the exit of the main character Cleveland Brown , who left Family Guy in order to star in his own Fox spin-off , entitled The Cleveland Show . Main cast member and former series writer Mike Henry returned to the series to provide the voice of Cleveland . The episode also featured a crossover between Family Guy and The Cleveland Show , both of which were created by executive producer Seth MacFarlane , and included cameo appearances by two of The Cleveland Show 's main characters .

First announced at the 2011 San Diego Comic-Con International , the episode was written by Artie Johann and Shawn Ries , and directed by Brian Iles . The episode received mixed reviews , praising its structure and humor , but criticizing it for not living up to the 1967 drama film Cool Hand Luke , which the episode was named after . According to Nielsen ratings , it was watched by 7.14 million people in its original airing . The episode featured guest performances by Ralph Garman , Bob Gunton , Sanaa Lathan , Julius Sharpe , and Jennifer Tilly , along with several recurring guest voice actors from the series .

When Cleveland Brown returns to Quahog for a week , he visits his old friends Peter , Joe and Quagmire . When Peter gets tired of his wife constantly demanding that he do chores , the group decides to take a road trip to New Orleans . While their husbands are away , Lois , Bonnie and Donna proceed to enjoy " girl time " , eventually resulting in wine-induced childish antics , such as making Brian wear a bumblebee costume . While driving through a rural area in Georgia , Peter and his group are pulled over by the local sheriff , and Peter makes every effort to talk as annoyingly and rudely to him as possible . The Sheriff is more offended by Cleveland 's attempt to calmly explain themselves , prompting him to punch out one of their headlights and plant a bag of marijuana in their trunk . The group is then sentenced to work at a county work camp for two weeks . As their stay nears its scheduled end , the warden approaches them and tells them that their stay has been extended , without any judicial oversight . Learning from another prisoner that they might be locked up forever , the group decides to break out of the prison when the prison guard 's eyes are diverted . Successful in their attempt , they soon come across a house where they discover a set of handcuff and shackle keys .

They then discover that they are in the sheriff 's home , who returns soon after . Peter , who almost gives them away after accidentally farting , pretends to be the sheriff 's wife while hiding in a closet , and he convinces the sheriff to let the fugitives go free . This exchange ends with the sheriff asking for a hug , prompting Peter to jump out of the closet and reveal the group , causing the sheriff to give chase to them after revealing that he was never married . The entire police force then chases them , until they are able to jump on a train and arrive in Quahog , only to be met by the Georgia sheriff and his deputies . Joe , however , had called ahead and arranged for the Quahog police department to arrive and rescue them . Joe then smashes the sheriff 's vehicle and shoots him in the leg as retribution for the sheriff 's corruption and abuse towards the group . Joe tells the sheriff that just because he has a badge does not mean he can treat anyone the way he wants to . Without hesitation , Joe angrily demands that the sheriff and his deputies leave Quahog , which they reluctantly do . The gang congratulates Joe when Mayor West appears , riding on a bike and says , " Hey , what are you guys , on a date ? Gay ! " At the end of the show , Peter acknowledges that they 've done a wrap-up of what they 've learned hundreds of times and just mumbles the cadence , which is then picked up by Lois and the family .

The episode was directed by series regular Brian Iles and written by Artie Johann and Shawn Ries , in their first episode of the series . Series regulars Peter Shin and James Purdum served as supervising directors , with Andrew Goldberg , Alex Carter , Spencer Porter , Anthony Blasucci , Mike Desilets , and Deepak Sethi serving as staff writers for the episode . Composer Walter Murphy , who has worked on the series since its inception , returned to compose the music for the episode . The episode saw the re-appearance of former main cast member Mike Henry as the voice of Cleveland Brown . The actor had previously left the role on Family Guy , in order to star as the character in his own spinoff , entitled The Cleveland Show , which was co-created by Henry . Sanaa Lathan , who portrays Donna Tubbs on The Cleveland Show , also guest starred as her character in the episode . " Cool Hand Peter " was first announced at the 2011 San Diego Comic-Con International on July 23 , 2011 by series showrunners and executive producers Steve Callaghan and Mark Hentemann . In addition to the regular cast and Lathan , actor Bob Gunton , voice actor Julius Sharpe , and actress Jennifer Tilly , who portrayed the sheriff , warden , UPS Guy and Bonnie Swanson , respectively , guest starred in the episode . Recurring guest voice actors Danny Smith , writer Alec Sulkin , voice actor Ralph Garman , and writer John Viener made minor appearances throughout the episode . Recurring cast members Adam West , and Patrick Warburton also appeared in the episode , portraying the characters of Adam West and Joe Swanson , respectively . Bob Gunton 's voicing of the warden is probably a nod to his most famous role , that of the warden in the film The Shawshank Redemption .

The title of the episode is a reference to the 1967 American film Cool Hand Luke . In the opening scene of the episode , while Peter , Joe , Cleveland and Quagmire are drinking at the local bar , Peter 's wife , Lois , calls him on his phone . The theme song from The Cleveland Show then begins playing as Peter 's ringtone . While the group drives to New Orleans , they attempt to pass the time by playing various games in the car . One of the games involves deciding whether to be a " hobo , " or former German Nazi leader Adolf Hitler . After the group is pulled over by the sheriff , and arrested for drug possession , they are all taken to court , where the jury is revealed to be various characters from the Fox animation series The Simpsons . The warden of the prison resembles the warden in the movie The Shawshank Redemption , who is also authoritarian and cruel . In fact , the voice of the warden is the voice of Bob Gunton , the actor who portrayed the warden in The " Shawshank Redemption " . After the group escapes from jail , Peter remarks that he is filled with hunger , and would like to stop at a " Burger Queen " or " McDaniels " along the way back to Quahog , a reference to the American fast food restaurants Burger King and McDonalds , as indicated by Quagmire .

" Cool Hand Peter " was broadcast on Fox in the United States on December 4 , 2011 . It was watched by 7.14 million viewers , according to Nielsen ratings , despite airing simultaneously with the Desperate Housewives on ABC , The Good Wife on CBS and Sunday Night Football on NBC . The episode also acquired a 3.6 / 8 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , beating Allen Gregory and The Cleveland Show , in addition to significantly edging out both shows in total viewership . The episode 's ratings increased significantly from the previous week 's episode , " Amish Guy " . The episode received mixed reviews , with Kevin McFarland of The A.V. Club calling the storyline " disappointing . " He wrote of the episode , " At this juncture , disappointment is an expectation , something I have to fight against whenever I sit down to watch the show in an attempt to give each episode a fair shake . " He continued , " This week , I was at a bit of a loss , because despite a return to an older , more successful formula , with a clearly plotted path , Family Guy didn 't muster up enough material to fill out the A-plot of a half hour . " McFarland also stated that the episode did not live up to the 1967 drama film Cool Hand Luke , that the title of the episode was named after . He concluded his review of the episode by giving the episode a grade of C. Terren R. Moore of Ology also found the episode to be unimpressive , noting , " It 's good fun while it 's on , but nothing here really sticks or adds to anything new to love about Family Guy . " Moore also commented , " it 's a pretty weak episode of Family Guy , where the most memorable joke of the night involves a thought bubble where Quagmire pulls a string of beads out of a woman 's vagina . " In the conclusion of the review , Moore gave the episode a 6 / 10 score .

The University of Campinas ( Portuguese : Universidade Estadual de Campinas ) , commonly called Unicamp , is a public research university in the state of São Paulo , Brazil , and one of the best universities in the country and in Latin America . Established in 1962 , Unicamp was designed from scratch as an integrated research center unlike other top Brazilian universities , usually created by the consolidation of previously existing schools and institutes . Its research focus reflects on almost half of its students being graduate students , the largest proportion across all large universities in Brazil , and also in the large number of graduate programs it offers : 153 compared to 70 undergraduate programs . It also offers several non-degree granting open-enrollment courses to around 8,000 students through its extension school . Its main campus occupies 3.5 square kilometres ( 860 acres ) located in the Barão Geraldo district , a suburban area 12 kilometres ( 7.5 mi ) from the center of Campinas , and , built shortly after the creation of the university . It also has satellite campuses in Limeira , Piracicaba and Paulínia , and manages two technical high schools located in Campinas and Limeira . Funding is provided almost entirely by the state government and , like other Brazilian public universities , no tuition fees or administrative fees are charged for undergraduate and graduate programs .

Unicamp is responsible for around 15 % of Brazilian research , a disproportionately high number when compared to much larger and older institutions in the country such as the University of São Paulo . It also produces more patents than any other research organization in Brazil , being second only to the state-owned oil company , Petrobras . Multiple international university rankings place it amongst the best universities in the world , with QS placing it in the Top 200 globally and ranking it the 11th best university under 50 years , and in 2015 it was rated as the best university in the country by Brazil 's Ministry of Education .

In the early 1960s the Government of the State of São Paulo planned to open a new research center in the interior of the state to promote development and industrialization in the region , and commissioned Zeferino Vaz , founder of the University of São Paulo 's School of Medicine in Ribeirão Preto , to organize it . In parallel , a medical school was being planned in Campinas , a demand from the local population that dated from the early 1940s . The School of Medicine of Campinas was created by law in 1959 , but actual implementation never took place . The new university was created by law on December 28 , 1962 , but effective functioning begun in 1966 . Before that , only the School of Medicine functioned . In April of 1963 the first vestibular , the general admissions exam , happened , with 1,592 candidates competing for 50 spots in the medicine program . The first lecture in the newly created University of Campinas took place on May 20 of the same year . By 1965 , the organizing commission for the new university started looking for a location for a new campus .

A large area comprising 110 hectares ( 270 acres ) was donated by the Almeida Prado family , located in a valley in the district of Barão Geraldo in the city of Campinas , near the intersections of multiple highways . Until then , Barão Geraldo was a small village surrounded by farmland , in particular sugar cane plantations . The new development brought dramatic change to the district , resulting in entire new neighborhoods being zoned , planned and built , usually by the same Almeida Prado family . Work on the new campus begun on October 5 , 1966 , and the first building completed was the Institute of Biology , followed by administrative buildings . In the same year , Zeferino Vaz was nominated the rector . In parallel to the new campus , new units were opened in other cities , absorbing local schools . The Dental School of Piracicaba was absorbed in 1967 , and in 1969 the Engineering School of Limeira .

Over the following two decades , the new university expanded rapidly . The campus quickly grew to 19 institutes and schools , and after Zeferino Vaz died in 1981 was named after him . With the campus construction completed , the School of Medical Sciences ( formerly the School of Medicine of Campinas ) was moved into the new campus , and its teaching hospital , Hospital de Clínicas , became the largest public hospital in the region . Expansion on the campus continued rapidly , with new buildings , institutes and expansions being added nearly every year . But by the late 1970s , the university faced a crisis . During its fast expansion , it relied on draft bylaws , mostly borrowed from the University of São Paulo , and lacked formal internal regulations with the aging Zeferino Vaz , while no longer the rector , acting as a moderating force between parties with conflicting interests , in particular the leftist academic community and the State 's government , appointed by the conservative military regime ruling the country . After Zeferino 's death in 1981 , a conflict took place between the university 's General Coordinator , appointed and backed by the government , and the Directive Council , composed of directors of the different institutes . The rector introduced new rules reducing the power of the General Coordinator . As retaliation , the State 's government removed 6 members of the Directive Council , replacing them with people from the state 's Education Council , loyal to the governor , Paulo Maluf .

Tensions between the academic community and the government-appointed counselors increased , with the future Minister of Education , Paulo Renato Costa Souza , then president of the Faculty Association , classifying the episode as a " white intervention " . Following the dismissal of several institute heads and members of the administration , the administrative workers went on strike , with the support of students and faculty . With activities in the university frozen by the strike , the governor declared a formal intervention in the university in October 1981 . Despite the police-backed intervention , the university continued on strike . The appointed institute heads failed to break the stalemate between internal and external forces , and by early 1982 , discussions begun on a new list of candidates to the rectorship . Eventually , José Aristodemo Pinotti , a former dean of the School of Medical Sciences generally considered a moderate , was selected by the academic community and accepted by the governor . In the following week , on April 19 , 1982 , the intervention was lifted , and academic activities resumed normally . After the crisis , Unicamp saw a period of renewal and restructuring . In 1983 the bylaws were rewritten , ensuring the autonomy of the academic community , and the new management structure for the campus was implemented . In 1986 the newly created University Council replaces the previous Directive Council as the supreme body of the university . The last years of the 1980s saw a reformulation of the admissions exam , expansion of the laboratories and the completion of the first units of the student housing .

With a new administrative structure capable of supporting continuous growth and with its autonomy secured , Unicamp went through a period of consolidation in the 1990s . There was an increase in night programs , created to provide an alternative for low-income students who had to work during the day , and to increase utilization of classrooms and the existing infrastructure , reaching one third of total available places . The period also saw an expansion of the technology industry in the region , centered around Unicamp , with Motorola , IBM , Solectron , Lucent Technologies and many others set up research labs and production centers in the region driven by the large number of highly qualified students graduating every year , culminating in the opening of the Institute of Computing in 1996 . In the 2000s Unicamp consolidated itself as one of the leading research and education centers in Latin America but also brought new challenges : just as with other public universities in Brazil , the high payroll costs ( over 90 % of the total budget ) constrain investment and expansion . This is further aggravated by the economic depression that Brazil is facing since 2014 , the largest in the country 's history .

The campus has a unique design , with the main library , student service buildings and restaurant in a central circular plaza , and most of the academic buildings located in blocks emanating from the center in a radial fashion . The different areas of study are grouped in larger sections , but neighboring other areas with which they share similarities : the philosophy buildings mark the frontier between human sciences , mathematics and economics , while the School of Food Engineering is bordered by the chemical engineering and biology buildings . The architect responsible for the overall design of the campus was João Carlos Bross . Streets are named after significant contributors to each field , including Elis Regina and Carlos Gomes Streets , a Brazilian singer and a composer , respectively , Alan Turing Avenue and others .

The area occupied by the campus was part of the much larger Rio das Pedras farm , owned by the prominent Almeida Prado family . To set up a new campus , Zeferino Vaz was looking for a large , flat area in the outskirts of the city , where he would have the freedom to design the campus and its surroundings from scratch . Interested in developing the area of the farm around Barão Geraldo , the family donated an initial area of 110 hectares ( 270 acres ) to the university . The remainder of the farmland was eventually zoned and developed into multiple neighborhoods , but the main historical farmhouse and its surroundings remain , now a protected heritage site and a natural reserve . With the land secured , the campus was designed in a way to ensure the maximum collaboration between the different sciences , with buildings laid along radial streets emanating from a central circular plaza , which also hosted administrative buildings . The layout of the campus would eventually be used on the design of the university 's logo , created by Max Schiefer , which is essentially a simplified map of the core circle of the campus . This design is similar to the University of California , Irvine campus , build around the same time .

Construction started in 1966 , with General Castello Branco , the first president of Brazil 's military regime , laying the cornerstone of the Institute of Biology , which was inaugurated in 1968 , and classes started in the new campus on the following year . In 1971 the area of the campus was expanded by 130 hectares ( 320 acres ) , more than doubling its size , to accommodate the move of the School of Medical Sciences , until then located across several buildings in Campinas , to the new campus . This expansion saw the construction of a massive public hospital , the Hospital das Clínicas ( HC ) , which began serving the public in 1979 . While initial construction was considered complete by 1978 , the campus has grown through continuous addition of new buildings and institutes . In 2014 , after years of negotiation , the university decided to buy the Argentina Farm , located on the east side of the campus , increasing the total area by 60 % to 350 hectares ( 860 acres ) . This purchase will allow for expansion of the medical sciences and athletics areas , as well as new laboratories .

Unicamp 's main campus houses the School of Medical Sciences ' teaching hospital , the Hospital das Clinicas . Construction started in 1975 and the hospital opened its first clinics and patient facilities in 1979 , but was only fully operational in 1985 , when the School of Medical Sciences was transferred from Campinas ' maternity to the new campus . The hospital has almost 1,000 beds , and serves half a million people every year through Brazil 's unified public health system , SUS , performing on average 40 surgeries and 13 births every day . In the 2000 's , the hospital was changed from a primary and secondary care to a specialized tertiary care center , receiving complex cases from other hospitals and clinics in the region , but around 60 % of patients in the hospital are still cases that could be handled by local health centers . The hospital directly employs 3,100 people , and also serves as a practice center for the university 's faculty and a training and residency center for the students of medicine , nursery and speech therapy .

While not part of Unicamp , the National Synchrotron Light Laboratory ( LNLS ) is a research institution focused on physics , structural biology and nanotechnology that maintains close ties with the university and is operated as part of the National Center for Research in Energy and Materials ( CNPEM ) . The laboratory was designed in 1983 and began operating in 1997 , located next to the main campus . The LNLS has Latin America 's only particle accelerator , a synchrotron , used as a synchrotron light source designed and built in Brazil for various physical , chemical , geological , and biological studies .

Unicamp 's presence in Limeira , a city about 50 kilometres ( 31 mi ) from Campinas , dates from the late 1960s , when the young university absorbed the Engineering School of Limeira , which became the School of Civil Engineering . While this school was eventually transferred to the Campinas campus in 1989 , new programs were launched by the university in Limeira , creating CESET , the School of Technology of Limeira , which still exists and is located near the center of the city , focused on technical higher education . In 2008 Unicamp decided to establish a new campus in Limeira , and in 2008 the School of Applied Sciences was created , offering programs such as public administration , business management , nutrition and industrial engineering . The total undergraduate class size for the new campus is 480 students per year .

In addition to the higher education programs , Unicamp is also responsible for running and funding two technical high schools , the Technical High School of Campinas ( COTUCA ) and the Technical High School of Limeira ( COTIL ) . Cotuca was located for 50 years in a historical building near the center of the city built in 1918 which also housed Unicamp for a brief period before the current campus was built . In 2014 it was transferred to the main campus as the old building went through renovations . Both schools are amongst the best public high schools in the country , and are highly competitive , with admissions done through a selection exam open to middle-school students .

Similarly to other Brazilian institutions , Unicamp is composed of several semi-autonomous teaching units , designated as schools and institutes . Each unit is headed by a director from the faculty , equivalent to a dean , elected by the faculty and student representatives . The university 's administration is structured in a way similar to other public universities in Brazil . The supreme decision body is the University Council ( CONSU ) , composed of all deans , plus several representatives from the academic community , students , administrative staff and the external community . The council meets roughly 4 to 5 times per year , ruling on high level administrative decisions such as approving the budget and has the final word in internal administrative processes . Routine administration is left to the rector , similar to a university chancellor in English-speaking countries , and the rectorate .

The rector is chosen by the governor of the State of São Paulo from a list of 3 candidates elected by the university 's community , including students and administrative staff . Traditionally , the governor always selects the candidate with the largest number of votes , but it retains the power to choose a different one should it decide to do so . The rector serves for a term of 4 years before a new election is held , and can not be reelected in the following term . Zeferino Vaz was the first rector and held the position for 12 years until his mandatory retirement .

Like other public universities in Brazil , Unicamp is almost entirely funded by the government , in this particular case of the State of São Paulo . Funding is provided mainly from sales taxes , but a small percentage of total budget is obtained from donations , paid extension programs and corporate sponsors . The total budget proposed for 2016 is of R $ 2.3 billion , a decrease by almost 7 % in real terms when compare to 2015 . Fixed costs ( payroll , interest and debt service ) will account for 92.2 % of the government funding . And additional 4 % is spent on student assistance and 2 % on utilities . A problem faced by Unicamp , and other public universities in Brazil , is the high dependency on economic conditions , that directly impact tax earnings , while most of the expenses , payroll specially , are indexed to inflation . While not as critical as in similar universities ( at the University of São Paulo payroll accounted for over 106 % of the total funding available in 2014 ) , Unicamp currently faces a funding crisis , with total funding expected to decrease in real terms while payroll , which takes around 85 % of total university funding , is expected to increase in line with inflation . This situation is aggravated by the long-running trend of raising staff salaries above inflation as a response to the annual strikes led by the workers ' union , STU .

Unicamp offers 70 different degree-granting undergraduate programs , covering nearly all different areas of science . Completing an undergraduate program grants either a bachelor 's degree or a licentiate degree , although some programs offer both degrees . In line with the Brazilian educational system , no graduate education is required to practice any profession , including law and medicine , so undergraduate programs vary in length to provide all the necessary training . Most programs at Unicamp last a total of 4 years , with engineering programs typically lasting 5 years and medicine lasting 6 years . The academic year is aligned with the calendar year , with classes usually starting in late February , and ending in early December , the beginning of summer in Brazil . The year is divided into two semester terms , and all courses are a semester long . While there is a suggested curriculum for each program , students are free to choose any classes to attend during a specific semester , and class attribution is done in the basis of grade average , with higher-graded students having priority when choosing classes . Students are admitted to a single program and are expected to take all the classes required to complete that program in the number of semesters prescribed , although they can take 50 % longer before facing administrative measures . While each program is usually managed by a single school or institute ( exceptions apply , such as Computer Engineering , co-managed by the Institute of Computing and the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering ) , classes are usually ministered across different institutes or schools .

Unicamp offers over one thousand extension programs to the community , with different levels of minimum requirements ( high school degree , undergraduate degree , etc . ) and across all areas of study , focusing mainly on specialization courses and community outreach . The programs are mainly coordinated by the Pro-Rectorate for Extension and Outreach ( Pró-Reitoria de Extensão e Assuntos Comunitários , PREAC ) . PREAC aims to promote actions of extension and culture through integration with society , disseminating and acquiring knowledge through the academic community . Specialization programs are either offered by Unicamp 's extension school , Extecamp , or directly by the schools and institutes . In the past 25 years , over 100,000 students have been reached and in 2014 , Unicamp joined Coursera and currently eight online courses are being offered , two of them are between the most popular Coursera courses in Brazil . Outreach actions take a variety of forms , including events , publications , technological , educational , cultural and social products and services . The Department for Cultural Development hosts several events , usually open for the surrounding community . Events are also held at the Casa do Lago Cultural Space and at the Cultural Center for Social Inclusion and Integration .

Unicamp employs close to 1,800 professors , nearly all with at least a doctoral degree . The faculty career is structured in three major tiers : Doctor Professor ( Professor Doutor , equivalent to assistant professor ) : candidates must have a doctoral or equivalent degree Associate Professor ( Professor Associado ) : candidates must have a Livre Docente title , similar to the German Habilitation Tenured Professor ( Professor Titular ) – MS-6 ( top rank , only MS-6 professors are allowed to hold positions such as Dean of a Faculty / School or Rector of the University ) Hiring is done through a civil service examination , including a written test , a teaching examination , academic history analysis and other additional criteria . The same process is required for professors changing tiers : an associate professor pursuing a tenure position must go through the same examination process compete with other external candidates for the position . The two initial tiers also include sub levels , and professors are promoted between them for merit . Monthly starting salary for a full-time assistant professorship is around R $ 10 thousand , and for a tenured position around R $ 15 thousand . Uniquely among public universities in Brazil , Unicamp has a career focused on full-time research . Currently there are approximately 100 full-time researchers at the university .

The university 's library system ( Sistema de Bibliotecas da Unicamp ; SBU ) comprises a large central library named in honor of César Lattes , and 27 other satellite libraries , located in the individual institutions , housing over 1 million volumes , in addition to hundreds of thousands of ebooks and academic journals . The system was officially created in 1983 , aggregating the several independent libraries that operated across the university . The large central library was inaugurated six years later , in 1989 . The library system is automated and its collections may be accessed and searched on the Internet . Its Digital Library section supports a database with more than 25,000 dissertations presented in the university , as well access to the largest electronic libraries of academic journals in the world . It also includes several historical libraries and media archives focused on specific authors and topics , such as the Edgard Leuenroth Archive and collections honoring César Lattes , Sérgio Buarque de Holanda , Monteiro Lobato and others .

Similarly to other Brazilian public universities , admissions to undergraduate programs are through a comprehensive general examination , called vestibular . While other Brazilian public universities , specially federally managed ones , which use the National High School Exam ( ENEM , in Portuguese Exame Nacional do Ensino Médio ) as an entrance exam , Unicamp has its own national entrance exam applied yearly by its Vestibular Commission ( COMVEST , in Portuguese Comissão Permanentes para os Vestibulares ) in two rounds . Generally , the first round happens in November and is a test composed of 90 multiple-choice general knowledge questions . Students applying to programs that require specific skills ( such as music , architecture , dance , and others ) must take a specific knowledge test even before the first phase . Selection in the admissions process is program-specific . Applicants that score a minimum standardized grade in the first round are selected to participate in the second round , which takes place over three days in January , where they must answer 48 short-answer written questions , plus write two long-form essays , on themes selected by the evaluation board . The Unicamp national exam is very competitive and is considered one of the most difficult in Brazil . In 2015 there were 77,145 applications for only 3,320 possible places , with 23 candidates competing for each position in an undergraduate program , an average acceptance rate of 4.3 % . The exam covers all topics taught in the Brazilian high school system , including Portuguese , mathematics , Brazilian and world history , geography , biology , physics , chemistry , sociology , philosophy , arts and English . Despite that , questions in the exams are generally interdisciplinary .

The most competitive undergraduate programs are Medicine with a 0.5 % acceptance rate , Architecture and Urbanism with 0.6 % , and Communication with 2 % . Such high competitivity leads many students to take preparatory courses during or after the last regular high school year called cursinhos in Portuguese , generally privately offered or managed by some association or organization . Many private cursinhos have special classes focused on highly competitive programs like medicine , making them very expensive . It is common to find students admitted in Medicine , Engineering and other programs after several years of preparatory courses . While the selection process is need-blind and race-blind , most of the best high schools and preparatory schools in Brazil are private and very expensive , and represent a majority of admissions in Brazilian public universities , leading to increased inequality in the country . To remedy this , Unicamp introduced in 2004 the Social Inclusion and Affirmative Action Program ( PAAIS , in Portuguese Programa de Ação Afirmativa e Inclusão Social ) that allows high schoolers coming from public schools to receive a bonus score in their overall vestibular score . While not focused on racial and ethnical factors , over the years , the PAAIS initiative has increased the number of admission of minorities from public high school , especially black and native-Brazilians , historically the most economical and social fragile groups in Brazil . With this program , around 30 % of admissions come from public schools , and the participation of minorities increased from 10 % to around 30 % .

Similarly to other Brazilian universities , Unicamp offers no large-scale in-campus housing , and most students live either near the campus or in Campinas . A student tradition in Brazil , inherited from the Portuguese universities , is the república , a fraternity-style private housing where multiple students rent large houses or apartments and live together . Dues to the suburban campus and the large number of students coming from other cities , repúblicas play a key role in the student life , serving as centers for social life , parties and also study and work areas . While some repúlicas have existed for decades , sometimes moving from one house to another , most are formed by students in the same or similar classes , and last for a few years . Besides repúblicas , studio apartments are very common around the university . While more expensive than the shared houses , they afford more privacy and have more flexible contracts , are well as being furnished .

Unicamp provides a limited amount of free housing to low income students in the Student Residence compound . Built in 1992 , it is located near the center of Barão Geraldo , about four kilometers from Unicamp , and is served by a university shuttle that takes student to the campus and back free of charge . The compound has 226 houses of 60 square metres ( 650 sq ft ) , with a capacity of four students per house , and 27 studios of 46 square metres ( 500 sq ft ) , for couples with children , a total of 904 vacancies in houses and 54 adults in the studios . Assignment criteria is means-based , with lower income students receiving priority . The Student Residence supports several cultural projects developed by voluntary and worker students and open to the participation of internal and external community . It encourages interdisciplinary training and integration between the resident students and the external community . The diversity of races and cultures , brought by colleagues from other states and countries is an advantage for the residents who live in the house , facilitating full citizenship , through the exercise of their rights and duties within the community .

There are multiple restaurants operated and subsidized by the university serving only the academic community . Commonly called bandejão ( " large tray " in Portuguese ) due to the metal trays used to serve the students , the restaurants provide up to three meals per day , each one costing R $ 2 , a price that has not been updated in over a decade , despite the strong inflation . The main bandejão is located near the center of the circular campus , receiving students from all different areas of the university and acting as the informal social heart of the university where events , parties and political campaigns are announced to the students . The restaurants at the University are staffed with nutritionists and food engineers , often students at the university , offering balanced menu that meets the nutritional needs of the university population , serving over 10 thousand meals per day at the main campus . The menu usually consists of rice and beans , a traditional staple food in Brazil , a type of meat ( chicken , beef , sausage , pork , etc . ) , textured soy protein for vegetarians , salad , juice , and dessert .

There are no university-sponsored athletic programs at Unicamp , and sporting competitions , either internal or played with other schools , are entirely organized by the students . The Liga das Atléticas da Unicamp , a university-wide league of the different athletic associations , is responsible for organizing internal sporting events , such as the Unicamp Olympics . In addition to internal competitions , there are multiple external competitions between several universities focused on different areas of study : in the Intermed medical students from different universities compete against each other , and in the Engenharíadas , engineering students gather to play sports . The games are usually held in the city of one of the participating universities over a long weekend , with students being housed in public schools , farms and hotels . The university has a sports center with courts for basketball , volleyball , a full size regulation football field , an athletics field with running tracks , a competition swimming pool , a covered gymnasium for indoor spectator sports , attached to a convention center .

Ones ( Spanish : Unos ) is the twelfth compilation album by American Tejano singer Selena , released in the United States on October 1 , 2002 by EMI Latin . It was released on November 11 , 2002 in Spanish-speaking countries , while the limited edition included a bonus DVD of her music videos . Ones was released building on the popularity of the 1997 biographical film Selena . The singer 's father Abraham Quintanilla , Jr. and sister Suzette Quintanilla told CBS TV host Julie Chen that the album was aimed at Selena 's new generation of fans . Ones was released as part of the Selena : 20 Years of Music collection — a nine-disc series of her studio , live , soundtrack and compilation albums . The recording features six number one singles namely , " Amor Prohibido " , " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " , " No Me Queda Más " , " Fotos y Recuerdos " , and her duets with Alvaro Torres on " Buenos Amigos " and Barrio Boyzz on " Donde Quiera Que Estés " . Selena 's brother , A.B. Quintanilla III , remixed three of her singles ( " Amor Prohibido " , " Como la Flor " and " Si Una Vez " ) into a medley mash-up entitled " Con Tanto Amor Medley " , the same tracks found on the album . The track was released as a promotional single to radio stations , and received a mixed response from music critics . The album also received a mixed reception , with Jon O 'Brien of AllMusic noting that the record label ignored Selena 's self-titled debut album from the track listing on Ones . The recording peaked at number four on the US Billboard Top Latin Albums and Latin Pop Albums charts . Ones peaked at number 159 on the Billboard 200 chart and was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , signifying shipments of 500,000 copies in the United States .

Selena 's family was interviewed by Julie Chen of The Early Show about Ones . Chen asked Selena 's father and manager , Abraham Quintanilla , Jr . , about his intention to re-release her songs on Ones . Quintanilla , Jr. told Chen that because of the success of the 1997 biopic about Selena 's life , many new fans know who she was . Chris Pérez , her widower , told Chen that the recording was released for Selena 's new fans ; building on the film 's popularity , explaining that the family used the DVD to showcase the singer for those who never saw her perform live . The recording was released as part of the Selena : 20 Years of Music collection series , a retrospective of Selena 's musical career . Ones was released on October 1 , 2002 by EMI Latin , and included audio statements by her family , friends and members of Selena y Los Dinos , her former band . On November 11 , 2002 , Unos was released in Spanish-speaking countries with the same track listing as the American edition .

The first of Selena 's number ones on the album was " Buenos Amigos " , a duet with Salvadoran singer Álvaro Torres . " Baila Esta Cumbia " and " No Quiero Saber " are from Selena 's second studio album , Ven Conmigo ( 1990 ) ; the latter track peaked at number six on the US Billboard Hot Latin Tracks chart . " Como la Flor " , Selena 's signature song , and " La Carcacha " are both originally on 1992 's Entre a Mi Mundo . " Como la Flor " launched her on the Latin music scene , according to journalists . The song was acclaimed by music critics and was credited as Selena 's first solo number one single in popular culture despite Billboard 's official record of the single peaking at number six . " No Debes Jugar " , the lead single from 1993 's Live ! , and " La Llamada " made the album cut . Sally Jacobs of the Boston Globe called " No Debes Jugar " one of " her cumbia signature songs " and " most popular cumbia song [ s ] " . Four of the six number ones on the album are singles from Selena 's last studio album , Amor Prohibido ( 1994 ) . The song of the same name was number one on the Hot Latin Tracks chart for nine consecutive weeks , one week short of the record for most weeks at number one on the Hot Latin Songs chart . " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " , the second single off of Amor Prohibido , spent five consecutive weeks at the top of the Hot Latin Tracks chart . The third single from Amor Prohibido to be featured on the album , " No Me Queda Más " , peaked at number one for seven weeks .

" Si Una Vez " peaked at number four on the Regional Mexican Songs chart , while " El Chico del Apartamento 512 " failed to chart . Her posthumous number one single " Fotos y Recuerdos " spent seven consecutive weeks atop the Hot Latin Tracks chart . " Techno Cumbia " peaked at number four on Billboard 's Latin charts . " Donde Quiera Que Estés " , a duet with the Barrio Boyzz , is Selena 's second number one duet . " I Could Fall in Love " and " Dreaming of You " are the only English-language tracks on Ones , and are her most recognizable recordings to American music fans . Both tracks were taken from her crossover attempt , Dreaming of You ( 1995 ) , which was released posthumously . The only other track from that album , " Tú Sólo Tú " , also appears on Ones , Selena 's sixth number one single on the album . " Siempre Hace Frio " was originally released on Siempre Selena ( 1996 ) , her first remix album . Quintanilla III and Pete Astudillo composed " Con Tanto Amor Medley " , a medley mash-up of " Amor Prohibido " , " Si Una Vez " and " Como la Flor " . The track was produced by Kike Santander and Jose Luis Arroyae . Tatiana Morales of CBS called it a " beautiful ballad " , but John Lannert had the impression that the medley was composed to " fit [ in ] various Latin radio formats . " He noted that the recording had a pop twist with acoustic guitar and " discreet strings " , calling it " tasteful bolero-like percussion " . Because of the mariachi trumpets used in the " Como la Flor " part of the medley , Lannert thought the track was aimed at regional Mexican radio stations . He was disappointed by the dissolution of the " saucy cumbia beats " that " originally took these songs to the top of the charts " , but called " Con Tanto Amor Medley " " [ a ] rare medley that achieves a seamless transition from track to track " and " manages to sound cohesive , generic arrangements notwithstanding " . Lannert ended his review by calling the track " an appropriate balance for an homage . "

The album was met with mixed reviews from music critics . Ramiro Burr of the San Antonio Express News compared Ones to the greatest hit collections of musicians such as Buddy Holly , Janis Joplin and Jimi Hendrix . Jon O 'Brien of AllMusic wrote that Ones ignores Selena 's self-titled EMI debut album , focusing on her career between 1990 and 1995 . Ones was nominated for Latin Greatest Hits Album of the Year at the 2003 Billboard Latin Music Awards . It debuted ( and peaked ) at number four on the US Billboard Top Latin Albums and Latin Pop Albums chart , achieving a Hot Shot Debut on October 19 , 2002 . The album debuted at number 162 on the Billboard 200 chart . It peaked two weeks later at number 159 the week of November 9 , 2002 . Ones was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) in February 2003 , signifying 100,000 units shipped in the United States . The recording became the 13th Top Latin Album of 2002 and the ninth Top Latin Pop Album of that year , ranking number 88 on the Top Latin Album of the 2000s chart .

Ones reentered the Top Latin Albums chart the week of February 7 , 2004 at number 74 before slipping off and reentering the chart the week of March 13 at number 65 . After 77 weeks of release , Ones was in 70th position on the Top Latin Albums chart the week of April 10 , 2004 . The following week ( April 17 ) it rose to number 11 , achieving " greatest gainer " status from its previous position . Ones slipped off the chart the week of May 29 from number 66 . The 14th anniversary of Selena 's death sparked a 51-percent increase in sales for Ones , which rose to number four on the Top Latin Albums chart ( up 61 percent from its previous position ) . In February 2010 the RIAA certified the album gold , denoting shipments of 500,000 copies in the United States .

" Day One " is the second episode of the first series of the British science fiction television series Torchwood . Directed by Brian Kelly , the episode was first broadcast on the digital channel BBC Three on 22 October 2006 with the series pilot , " Everything Changes " , and later repeated on terrestrial channel BBC Two on 25 October . It was the first work in the Doctor Who universe to be written by future Doctor Who showrunner Chris Chibnall . The episode centres on Gwen Cooper ( Eve Myles ) working her first case with Torchwood Three in Cardiff . A purple alien gas is loose in the city and takes Carys Fletcher ( Sara Lloyd Gregory ) host ; the gas kills its victims by orgasm , leaving behind a pile of dust . Over the course of the episode , the team hunt for Carys before the gas kills her . In the end they track her down to a fertility clinic ; the gas leaves Carys to take Gwen host , but is stopped by a portable prison cell and dies out . Originally entitled " New Girl " , the episode was written to interpret Gwen 's " first day in hell " . On the sex gas , series creator Russell T Davies stated " when we 're launching a new adult science fiction drama , it 's kind of inevitable you 're going to do the sex monster " . The episode was filmed during a three- to four-week period in May 2006 , with much of it filmed before the first episode in the same production block . " Day One " was originally seen by 2.3 million viewers , making it one of the highest-rated BBC Three broadcasts of all time , but was met with generally mixed reviews .

A date between Gwen Cooper and her boyfriend Rhys Williams ( Kai Owen ) is cut short when they witness a meteor crashing outside Cardiff . Gwen receives a message on her mobile phone , and is called into action . As the Army secures the area , Torchwood investigate the meteor . Colleague Owen Harper ( Burn Gorman ) taunts Gwen by calling her the " new girl " . In an attempt to retaliate , she throws a chisel at him , but misses and cracks open the meteor , allowing a purple gas entity to escape . The gas finds a young woman , Carys Fletcher , outside a nightclub and takes her host . In the club , a possessed Carys seduces a man and takes him to a restroom , where they proceed to have sex . At the moment of climax however , the man dissolves into dust while Carys absorbs the energy that remains . The Torchwood team become aware of the bizarre death and realises through CCTV that the gas has taken over Carys . Gwen feels guilty at having caused the man 's death , but team leader Captain Jack Harkness ( John Barrowman ) assures her that everybody makes mistakes . Gwen also learns that she is the only team member who 's in a relationship , as the others are too busy working to find time . They later find where Carys lives and arrives there before she could harm a postman . When she tries to escape , Owen traps her using a portable prison cell , much to Jack 's chagrin , as he forbids the removal of alien technology from Torchwood 's base without his permission .

Carys is placed in a Torchwood holding cell . As tests are run on Carys , Gwen feels uncontrollable urges to kiss her , showing that Carys is emitting high levels of pheromones , effectively becoming a " walking aphrodisiac " , but the gas is also slowly killing her . Later , Carys escapes from her cell after seducing Owen . Jack attempts to apprehend her , but she manages to get hold of a jar containing a severed hand , which Jack finds valuable . He allows her to leave for the jar 's safety , but she destroys it anyway . In an attempt to capture her again , the team run on Toshiko Sato 's ( Naoko Mori ) hunch that she will be after her ex-boyfriend ; they arrive at his house to find Carys already killed him . Later they discover Carys works as a temp at a fertility clinic . They race to the clinic to find Carys has been inside for some time killing some of the clients . After eventually cornering Carys , they find that she has moments before she dies . Jack buys her some time by kissing her , transferring some of his " excess " of life onto her . Gwen offers the gas presence her own body as a host to save Carys ; it leaves Carys , but before it could enter Gwen , Jack throws the portable prison cell at it . Since it cannot survive in Earth 's atmosphere for long , the gas dies out . As Jack inspects its remains , Gwen kisses Jack on the lips , saying " thank you " , leaving Jack puzzled .

The working title for the episode was " New Girl " , which changed to the current " Day One " by the beginning of October 2006 . Head writer Chris Chibnall , who wrote the episode , found that writing the second episode was hard , as there was a challenge to demonstrate how Torchwood works , and set the formula for the rest of the series . He wanted to write an episode that would centre on Gwen about her " first day in hell " , and show the audience that Torchwood is unlike any normal job , as one small mistake can have major ramifications on the city . The scene where Gwen accidentally opens the meteor was meant to " extend the metaphor of breaking the photocopier on your first day at work " . It is also set to show the separate dynamic between the team and Gwen . Series creator Russell T Davies stated that as the rest of the team are for the aliens , science , technology and mythology , Gwen is for " the people " ; she 's the only person in the team who cares about what happens to Carys . Eve Myles also noted in the episode 's audio commentary that throughout the episode , it added a mix between her domestic life and the science fiction .

The idea behind using the sex gas came from Chibnall , but he admitted to having " genuinely no idea where the episode came from " . Davies stated " when we 're launching a new adult science fiction drama , it 's kind of inevitable you 're going to do the sex monster . " He also emphasised that the episode is not solely about " having a laugh " with the sex gas , as it also has " something to say about the world " . The scene where Carys walks down the street featuring sex in advertisements and couples kissing in public was one of Davies ' favourite scenes in the episode , as it explores how sexualised the Western world is . The episode was originally much lighter in tone , however , the majority of the comedic moments had to be cut on the final script , as they got in the way of the plot . Also , Carys was originally meant to have two or three boyfriends , but because of scheduling restrictions , there could only be one . This ended up being beneficial to the episode , as it made it more emotive . There was a scene that would be filmed with Carys and a second boyfriend , but that would be cut and added on the deleted scenes on the DVD boxset of the first series .

Much of the episode was filmed in the first production block along with " Everything Changes " , but much of it was filmed before the pilot . It took place during a three- to four-week period in May 2006 in and around Cardiff , the city where the series was set . The majority of the episode was filmed during the night , to keep with the style that the majority of the series is set during the night as well . However , because it was approaching summer , where nights are shorter , night sequences had to be shot between 10 pm and 4 : 30 am during each night of filming . Even the scenes set in the Torchwood hub were mostly filmed at nighttime . The first sequence to be shot was where the team stop Carys from having sex with the postman . However , the sequence had to be shot again twelve days later . The meteor crash site was filmed at a natural erosion site just outside Cardiff , which the location managers found by chance , and felt it was the perfect location for a crash site . The producers included an easter egg in the Torchwood Hub set by including the picture of Craig-y-Nos Castle , used as a location of Torchwood House in the Doctor Who episode " Tooth and Claw " ; in the end of the episode the Torchwood Institute was established by Queen Victoria . To film the scene where Gwen and Carys kiss , actresses Eve Myles and Sara Gregory discussed how they would execute it beforehand and agreed that they have to imagine Gregory as Johnny Depp , and Myles as Brad Pitt . To film the exploding rat sequence , episode director Brian Kelly filmed a rat in a cage , and then replace it with a fur covered condom filled with " chicken bits " and red dye to simulate guts , then exploded with a squib .

" Day One " was broadcast on Sunday , 22 October 2006 on BBC Three , just after the first episode , " Everything Changes " . The second episode received overnight viewing figures of 2.3 million with a 13.8 % audience share , holding the majority of the audience from the first episode . Together both episodes received the largest multichannel audience for a UK-originated non-sports programme and the at the time largest audience for BBC Three . The finale figure for the episode was 2.498 million viewers . The record would be held until the broadcast of EastEnders Live : The Aftermath on 19 February 2010 . The repeat of " Day One " on analogue channel BBC Two on 25 October was seen by 2.8 million with a 13 % audience share . " Day One " was given an Appreciation Index of 83 . Daniel Montesinos-Donaghy of Den of Geek stated " After the excellent pilot episode , ' Day One ' is both a step forward and a step backward . As silly as the idea of a nymphomaniac extra-terrestrial gas is , the cast throw themselves into it with aplomb , quipping their way to the relatively gripping conclusion . " Patrick Holm of Total Sci-Fi felt that the second episode " equates the word ' adult ' with sex and swearing – more of a playground definition than a serious drama . In the conclusion of his review , Jonathan Capps of Noise to Signal felt that the episode was " certainly nothing to get excited about , but I think it won 't be too indicative of later episodes , as we 're still getting to know these characters , and that has to take the fore in the first few episodes . However , Chris ' [ Chibnall ] painfully simplistic , heavy-handed and often clichéd interpretation of sci-fi ( some of Jack 's techno-babble is frankly embarrassing ) could prove to be a worrying factor later in the series . " A reviewer of TV Fodder felt " Day One " was a " great second episode " , adding " there doesn 't seem to be anything I don 't like about this show " .

808s & Heartbreak is the fourth studio album by American recording artist Kanye West , released on November 24 , 2008 , by Roc-A-Fella Records . It was recorded during September and October 2008 at Glenwood Studios in Burbank , California and Avex Recording Studio in Honolulu , Hawaii , with the help of producers No I.D. , Jeff Bhasker and others . Conceived in the wake of a series of distressing personal events , 808s & Heartbreak marked a major musical departure for West from his previous rap records , instead featuring a sparse , electronic sound and West singing through an Auto-Tune vocal processor . His lyrics explored themes of loss , alienated fame , and heartache , while the album 's production abandoned conventional hip hop sounds in favor of a minimalist sonic palette , which included prominent use of the titular Roland TR-808 drum machine . Despite varying responses from audiences , the album received positive reviews from most critics and was named one of 2008 's best records in several year-end lists . 808s & Heartbreak debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 , selling 450,145 copies in its first week . By 2013 , it had sold 1.7 million copies in the United States . Four singles were released to promote the record , including the hit singles " Love Lockdown " and " Heartless " . In the years since its release , 808s & Heartbreak has been cited as a prominent influence on subsequent hip hop , pop , and R & B music , as a new wave of rappers , singers , and producers came to adopt aspects of its style and thematic content . In 2014 , Rolling Stone named it one of the 40 most groundbreaking albums of all time .

Following the release of his third studio album Graduation , the remainder of 2007 and the following year featured events that profoundly affected Kanye West . On November 10 , 2007 , West 's mother Donda West died due to complications arising from cosmetic surgery involving a tummy tuck and breast reduction procedure . Months later , West and fiancée Alexis Phifer ended their engagement and their long-term intermittent relationship , which had begun in 2002 . At the same time , West struggled to adapt to his newfound pop star status he had once striven to achieve , often becoming the subject of media scrutiny . The loss , loneliness and longing for companionship and a sense of normality served to inspire 808s & Heartbreak . West stated that " This album was therapeutic – it 's lonely at the top . " A photograph taken by Danny Clinch of West kissing his mother on the cheek was included in the album 's booklet liner notes . West felt that his emotions could not be fully expressed simply through rapping , which he said had limitations . There were " melodies that were in me " , he explained . " What was in me I couldn 't stop . " West went to classify 808s & Heartbreak as a pop album , asserting his disdain towards the contemporary backlash to the concept of pop music and expressed admiration for what some pop stars have accomplished in their careers . He later stated that he wishes to present the music as a new genre called " pop art , " clarifying that he was well aware of the visual art movement of the same name and wished to present a musical equivalent . " Either call it ' pop ' or ' pop art , ' either one I 'm good with , " he later stated .

The album was recorded over a span of approximately three weeks from September to October 2008 . Recording sessions took place at Glenwood Studios in Burbank , California and at Avex Recording Studio in Honolulu , Hawaii . As implied by its title , 808s & Heartbreak prominently features the Roland TR-808 drum machine . Drawing inspiration from 1980s synthpop and electropop performers such as Phil Collins , Gary Numan , TJ Swan and Boy George , West felt that the 808 is a resourceful instrument that can be used to evoke emotion ; the concept was introduced to him by Jon Brion . West utilized the sounds created by the 808 and manipulated its pitch to produce a distorted , electronic sound , an effect he referred to as " heartbreak " . He felt the characteristic of the sound was representative of his state of mind . According to West , the fact that Hawaii 's area code was " 808 " was coincidental , as he had already developed the album 's title before being informed . The realization inspired him to pursue his direction with the album , however . In terms of musical direction , West 's intentions , according to Mike Dean , were to go against the typical sound of hip hop beat , instead evoking the presence of tribal drums . Overall , West maintained a " minimal but functional " approach towards the album 's studio production .

The album makes prominent use of the voice audio processor technology of Auto-Tune . West had previously experimented with the technology on The College Dropout for the background vocals of " Jesus Walks " and " Never Let Me Down " , but he had not used it for lead vocals until 2008 . " We were working on the remixes for Lil Wayne 's ' Lollipop ' and Young Jeezy 's ' Put On ' and he fell in love with the Auto-Tune " , producer Mike Dean explained . Towards the end , West enlisted T-Pain for coaching on how to utilize the technology . West himself openly stated that he loved using Auto-Tune and was dismayed that the term has been commonly associated with being " wack " . He considers the technology " the funnest thing to use " and compared the situation to when he was a child and thought the color pink was cool until someone told him " it was gay " , producing an analogy of how the views of society can rob people of their confidence and self-esteem . He later went on to state that he enjoyed the electronic feel produced by Auto-Tune and sought out to juxtapose the mechanical sounds with the traditional sounds of taiko drums and choir monks .

Rapper Kid Cudi , who had signed onto West 's G.O.O.D. Music label , contributed to two of the album 's songs . Young Jeezy contributed a rap verse on the track " Amazing " while " See You in My Nightmares " is a duet with Lil Wayne . Singer-songwriter Esthero provided the few female vocals found on the album ; credited under birth name Jenny-Bea Englishman , she co-wrote three tracks . When " RoboCop " appeared on the Internet , West disclaimed responsibility and was upset that the leak had occurred as the track was an unfinished version . Mike Dean had previously stated that the track was expected to receive additional treatment by Herbie Hancock before the album 's release .

808s & Heartbreak is a radical departure from West 's previous hip hop albums . According to 33 ⅓ writer Kirk Walker Graves , 808s & Heartbreak is an avant-garde electropop album . Rolling Stone magazine called it an " introspective , synthpop album , " while The 405 described it as West 's " experimental pop record . " According to The Independent , West abandoned his customary hip hop sound in favor of sparse , drum machine-based electropop . Pitchfork Media 's Scott Plagenhoef also categorized the album as " an introspective , minimal electro-pop record " , but added that it is " steeped in regret , pain , and even more self-examination than a typical Kanye West album " . Music writer Robert Christgau called it a " slow , sad-ass and self-involved ... breakup album " and analyzed that West 's choice to " robotize as well as pitch-correct his voice both undercuts his self-importance and adds physical reality to tales of alienated fame that might otherwise be pure pity parties " . Christgau asserted that its final track " Pinocchio Story " is " the only track here about what 's really bringing [ West ] down : not the loss of his girlfriend but the death of his mother , during cosmetic surgery that somewhere not too deep down he 's sure traces all too directly to his alienated fame . " Andre Grant of HipHopDX wrote that " to combat this trenchant melancholia , he poured himself into an all-autotunes R & B album " which would prove divisive in hip hop . West 's singing has been characterized as " flat " and " nearly unmelodic " which " underscores his own cyborgish detachment . " Canadian writer Stephen Marche viewed that West used " the shallow musical gimmickry of Auto-Tune , a program designed to eliminate individuality , and produced a hauntingly personal album . "

The music of 808s & Heartbreak draws heavily on electronic elements , particularly virtual synthesis , the Roland TR-808 drum machine , and explicitly auto-tuned vocal tracks . Tracks on the album utilize step input drum machine and synth-bass parts . Step input sequencing , a product of vintage analogue devices limited to recording only 16 individual notes , was popular in music production during the 1980s , but also became available in digital workstations . The album 's music features austere production and elements such as dense drums , lengthy strings , droning synths , and somber piano . Andy Kellman of AllMusic writes of the music , " Several tracks have almost as much in common with irrefutably bleak post-punk albums , such as New Order 's Movement and The Cure 's Pornography , as contemporary rap and R & B. " These musical elements help convey moods of despair and dejection that reflect the album 's subject matter . Critic Trist McCall wrote that the record " stripped modern art-pop down to its iconic rudiments — beats , charismatic personalities , hand-selected melodies , and computer-assisted vocals . " Most of the lyrics are directed at an ex-lover ; West refers to her treatment of him as " the coldest story ever told " on " Heartless " , and on " RoboCop " , she is called a " spoiled little L.A. girl " and is compared to the antagonist in the 1990 film Misery . On " Welcome to Heartbreak " , West 's character faces an existential crisis as he dispassionately recounts sitting alone on a flight , with a laughing family seated ahead of him . He longs for his late mother on the album 's penultimate track " Coldest Winter " , which samples the desolate 1983 song " Memories Fade " by Tears for Fears .

On September 24 , West announced that he had finished the album and would be releasing it sometime in November . In his blog post , he wrote " I changed my album to November something cause I finished the album and I felt like it .. I want y 'all to hear it as soon as possible " . West later stated that the album would be released on November 25 , 2008 . However , Island Def Jam , the distributing label , brought the date forward by one day to capitalize on Thanksgiving weekend . 808s & Heartbreak was also released on November 24 , 2008 in the United Kingdom and the Philippines . A limited edition in a digipak case was first released in Germany on November 21 , 2008 . A special edition of the album was released on December 16 that contains the album in CD and dual LP format , and also features album artwork redone by the artist of the original cover , KAWS . On October 16 , West released an excerpt of " Coldest Winter " on the radio station Power 106 in Los Angeles . The track recreates elements of the song " Memories Fade " by the band Tears for Fears . The song " Paranoid " later leaked onto the Internet and features Mr. Hudson in the chorus . A remixed version of " Paranoid " was reported to feature pop singer Rihanna , but did not materialize . Also appearing prior to the release date were " Amazing " featuring Young Jeezy , " See You in My Nightmares " featuring Lil Wayne , " Street Lights " , " Say You Will " , " Welcome to Heartbreak " and " Bad News " . An additional track , " Pinocchio Story " is a freestyle recorded at a live concert in Singapore . It was included in the album at the request of Beyoncé Knowles .

On October 14 , West , in collaboration with Italian artist Vanessa Beecroft , hosted a promotional album listening event at Ace Gallery . Over 700 guests were invited to preview the entirety of 808s & Heartbreak . Under Beecroft 's guidance , the event featured approximately forty nude women wearing nothing besides wool masks who silently stood in the center of the room . The women were illuminated by multicolored lights that would change as the music progressed . When it came time for him to speak , West stated that he 'd been a fan of Beecroft 's work and strong imagery , saying that he liked the idea of nudity because " society told us to wear clothes at a certain point " . Beecroft had been contacted a month prior and conceptualized and generated the installation in a week . Beecroft admitted that while he had caught her offguard , she had the opportunity to hear the album for herself and heard things that touched her own life . Five days later , promotional photos for the album by photographer Willy Vanderperre were released . The images portrayed West wearing a grey glen plaid suit , large browline glasses , and a heart-shaped pin .

In October 2009 , West was scheduled to embark on a tour , Fame Kills : Starring Kanye West and Lady Gaga tour , in promotion of Gaga 's The Fame , and West 's 808s & Heartbreak . It was canceled on October 1 , 2009 , without reason . Several songs from the album were performed by West during his live VH1 Storytellers performance , such as " Heartless " , " Amazing " and " Say You Will . " In the interim , director Nabil Elderkin directed two additional promotional videos for the album . " Welcome to Heartbreak " , which featured an artistic use of liberal compression artifacts , was released in June 2009 . A remixed version of " Coldest Winter " was released in February 2010 . This video featured a woman in a wedding gown running away from a cult group through a moonlit forest .

Before its release , reaction to 808s & Heartbreak was mixed , ranging from anticipation to bewilderment and indifference to the album 's concept . Upon the unveiling of the lead single " Love Lockdown " at the 2008 MTV Video Music Awards , music audiences were taken aback by the uncharacteristic production style and the presence of Auto-Tune . The negative feedback intensified when West revealed that the entire album would be primarily sung with Auto-Tune rather than rapped and would focus on themes of love and heartache . Numerous hip hop fans and certain rappers mocked West for becoming " sappy " while others deemed the upcoming LP as a throwaway experimental album . Comparisons were drawn to Electric Circus , an album recorded by West 's labelmate and close friend Common . MTV eventually interviewed Common to share his thoughts and views on the artistic direction of the album . Common expressed both his understanding and his support for West 's intentions , stating " I love it . I 'mma tell you , as an artist , you wanna be free . I 'mma do what I feel . You can 't just cater to the audience . You gotta say , ' Hey , y 'all , this is where I 'm at . ' For him to do an album called 808s and Heartbreak , you know that 's where he is at this moment . I heard some songs , and I think it 's fresh . I think the people are ready for it . "

West received similar approval from Lil Wayne and Young Jeezy , both of whom contributed to the album . During an interview , when asked what music today inspires him , Wayne stated " everybody 's doing their thing , but they 're not exciting . Everybody is doing the same thing . That 's terrible . Do I love the music that 's out right now ? I love it with a passion . Does it motivate me ? Not one bit . That 's because 808s & Heartbreak isn 't out yet . " Despite the approval from the rap superstars , as well as the record-breaking chart performances of the first two singles , hip hop audiences remained indifferent towards the album , predicting it would flop . Responding to reviews , West stated that he didn 't care about sales or getting good ratings , saying that it came from the heart and that 's all that matters to him . When asked about the current state of hip hop , West compared it to a high school , stating that hip hop used to be all about being fearless and standing out , and that now it is about being afraid and fitting in .

In its first week of sales , 808s & Heartbreak reached the number one spot on Billboard 200 , selling 450,145 units in its first week . In the last week of the year , 808s & Heartbreak sold 165,100 copies , jumping from the eleventh spot back up to the number five on the Billboard 200 . The album moved up again the following week , selling 70,900 units and landing at number three . On January 27 , 2009 , 808s & Heartbreak was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America , serving as West 's fourth album to ship one million copies in the United States . As of June 14 , 2013 , it has sold 1.7 million copies in the US , according to Nielsen SoundScan . Despite the debate and uncertainty surrounding the album 's conception , its preceding singles demonstrated outstanding chart performances . Upon its release , the lead single " Love Lockdown " debuted at number three on the Billboard Hot 100 and became a " Hot Shot Debut " . It is the highest debut of West 's career , the second highest debut on the Hot 100 that year and the tenth song of the millennium to debut in the top three . Grossing over 1.3 million copies at the iTunes Store alone , the single was certified platinum by the RIAA by the end of the year . On August 18 , 2010 , it was certified triple platinum by the RIAA , for shipments of three million units in the US . The single was also met by positive reviews from music critics , eventually culminating with being crowned " Song of the Year " by Time . The second single , " Heartless " performed similarly and became his second consecutive " Hot Shot Debut " by debuting at number four on the Billboard Hot 100 . It was certified double platinum by the RIAA , having shipped two million units in the US . Due in part to the momentum produced by the album 's release , certain tracks were met by chart success despite not actually being released as singles . The tenth track " See You in My Nightmares " became yet another " Hot Shot Debut , " peaking at number twenty-one in the US and at number twenty-two in Canada while the fourth track " Amazing " charted at 81 on the Hot 100 . Following suit , " Welcome to Heartbreak " peaked at number eighty-seven on the Pop 100 .

808s & Heartbreak received generally positive reviews from critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream publications , the album received an average score of 75 , based on 36 reviews . Chris Richards from The Washington Post called it " an information-age masterpiece " , while USA Today critic Steve Jones said " West deftly uses the 808 drum machine and Auto-Tune vocal effect to channel his feelings of hurt , anger and doubt through his well-crafted lyrics " . Dan Cairns from The Times stated , " This so should not work ... Yet 808s & Heartbreak is a triumph , recklessly departing from the commercially copper-bottomed script and venturing far beyond West ’ s comfort zone . " Rolling Stone 's Jody Rosen commended West 's incorporation of the Roland TR-808 drum machine and described the album as " Kanye 's would-be Here , My Dear or Blood on the Tracks , a mournful song-suite that swings violently between self-pity and self-loathing " . In the Chicago Tribune , Greg Kot called it West 's " most radical yet " and said while West 's fans may be disappointed , " this one is for him . It remains to be seen if he goes back to making records for everybody else . For now , this is one fascinatingly perverse detour . " PopMatters critic Dave Heaton was impressed by West 's " song and album construction , and with the way he captures a particular feeling through unusual , evocative , carefully crafted music that ’ s both simple and complex , cold and warm , mechanical and human , melodic and harsh " . Writing for MSN Music , Robert Christgau found it " brilliant " with a unique " dark sound " and " engaging tunes " , despite a second-half drop-off , and praised West 's use of Auto-Tune , which he felt " both undercuts his self-importance and adds physical reality to tales of alienated fame that might otherwise be pure pity parties " .

In a less enthusiastic review , The Independent found West 's " immersion in personal misery " uncomfortable and commented that the " stylistic tropes quickly become irritating " . AllMusic editor Andy Kellman stated " no matter its commendable fearlessness , the album is a listless , bleary trudge along West 's permafrost " . Charles Aaron of Spin criticized the songs ' musical structures , calling the album " a long processional that starts and restarts and never reaches the ceremony " . Slant Magazine 's Wilson McBee panned West 's singing , while Jon Caramanica from The New York Times singled it out as the " weakness for which this album will ultimately be remembered , some solid songs notwithstanding . " Caramanica wrote that , " at best , it is a rough sketch for a great album , with ideas he would have typically rendered with complexity , here distilled to a few words , a few synthesizer notes , a lean drumbeat . At worst , it ’ s clumsy and underfed , a reminder that all of that ornamentation served a purpose " . Chicago Sun-Times writer Jim DeRogatis stated , " If West had interspersed the more mechanical tracks with some that were the exact opposite — say , simple piano interludes provided by his old collaborators John Legend or Jon Brion — he might have made a masterpiece . Instead , he 's merely given us an extremely intriguing , sporadically gripping , undeniably fearless and altogether unexpected piece of his troubled soul . "

808s & Heartbreak was voted the tenth best album of 2008 in the Pazz & Jop , an annual poll of prominent American critics . The album was also named one of the ten best albums of 2008 by a number of publications , including the Associated Press ( number four ) , The Hartford Courant ( number seven ) , NOW ( number four ) , The Observer ( number eight ) , Vibe ( no order ) and Time ( number six ) . Pitchfork Media named 808s & Heartbreak the twenty-first best album of 2008 . Dan Leroy of LA Weekly cited it as one of the top ten hip hop albums of the year . Jam ! named it the top album of 2008 . Chicago Sun-Times writer Jim DeRogatis included the album on his list of the year 's ten best albums and wrote , " With every listen , the poignancy of these personal tales of loss grows deeper , perfectly matched by the cold , lonely , robotic but nevertheless winning grooves that accompany them . Upon further reflection , it is a brave and daring 4-star effort that deserves to be heard by any fan of adventurous pop music . " Time Out New York featured the album on its list of the Best and Worst Albums of 2008 . The magazine 's writer Colin St. John cited 808s & Heartbreak as one of the worst of 2008 , and editor Steve Smith named it third on his best-of list , while calling the album " the year 's most misunderstood triumph . "

Despite its accolades , 808s & Heartbreak was largely overlooked as a contender for the 52nd Grammy Awards . According to Vibe magazine editor-in-chief Jermaine Hall , West 's controversial incident at the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards and the ensuing backlash against West " probably hurt him " , but perceived West 's stylistic change on the album as the primary reason for it not being nominated . West received one solo nomination , Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group for " Amazing " , and five other nominations for his guest appearances and collaborational work . 808s & Heartbreak received a nomination for Outstanding Album at 40th annual NAACP Image Awards . The album also received a nomination for Best Album at the 2009 MOBO Awards . In 2009 , Rolling Stone ranked it number 63 on its list of the 100 Best Album of the Decade , and Q named it the decade 's 81st best record . On similar lists , Slant Magazine and PopMatters ranked it 124th and 42nd , respectively .

Although West designed it as a melancholic pop album , 808s & Heartbreak had a significant effect on hip hop music . While his decision to sing about love , loneliness , and heartache for the entirety of the album was at first heavily criticized by music audiences and the album predicted to be a flop , its subsequent critical acclaim and commercial success encouraged other mainstream rappers to take greater creative risks with their music . During the release of The Blueprint 3 , New York rap mogul Jay-Z revealed that his next studio album would be an experimental effort , stating , " ... it 's not gonna be a # 1 album . That 's where I 'm at right now . I wanna make the most experimental album I ever made . " Jay-Z elaborated that like West , he was unsatisfied with contemporary hip hop , was being inspired by indie-rockers like Grizzly Bear and asserted his belief that the indie rock movement would play an important role in the continued evolution of hip hop . The album impacted hip hop stylistically and laid the groundwork for a new wave of hip hop artists who generally eschewed typical rap braggadocio for intimate subject matter and introspection , including B.o.B , Kid Cudi , Childish Gambino , Frank Ocean , The Weeknd , and Drake . Jake Paine of HipHopDX dubbed the album as " our Chronic " , noting West 's effect on hip hop with 808s & Heartbreak as " a sound , no different than the way Dr. Dre 's synthesizer challenged the boom-bap of the early ' 90s . " Fact described the record as an " art-pop masterpiece [ which ] broke the shackles of generations of one-upmanship [ in hip hop ] . " Rolling Stone journalist Matthew Trammell asserted that the record was ahead of its time and wrote in a 2012 article , " Now that popular music has finally caught up to it , 808s & Heartbreak has revealed itself to be Kanye ’ s most vulnerable work , and perhaps his most brilliant . "

According to Greg Kot , 808s & Heartbreak initiated the " wave of inward-looking sensitivity " and " emo " -inspired rappers during the late 2000s : " [ It ] presaged everything from the introspective hip-hop of Kid Cudi 's Man on the Moon : The End of Day ( 2009 ) to the wispy crooning , plush keyboards and light mechanical beats of Bon Iver 's Justin Vernon and British dub-step balladeer James Blake . " Consequence of Sound credited it with shaping subsequent developments in " indie R & B or electropop or whatever you want to call it " : " 808s ' is flooded with R & B and it digitizes the raw emotion and isolated feelings that [ James Blake and The Weeknd ] have carved their brands out of today . " Craig D. Linsey from The Village Voice wrote that the album 's " naked humanity ... practically set off the emo-rap / r & b boom that everyone from Drake to Frank Ocean to The Weeknd now traffic in . " Marcus Scott of GIANT said rappers such as B.o.B , Drake , and Kid Cudi followed West 's album with similarly-minded works , citing West 's introspective , emotional themes and synthpop / " Vangelis-inspired " music as influences . In the opinion of Billboard senior editor Alex Gale , the album was " the equivalent of ( Bob ) Dylan going electric , and you still hear that all the time , in hip-hop and outside of hip-hop . " Drake 's 2009 mixtape So Far Gone received comparisons from critics to 808s & Heartbreak . Todd Martens of the Los Angeles Times cited 808s & Heartbreak as " the template [ ... ] for essentially the entirety of Drake 's young career " , and that wrote that he " shares West 's love for mood and never-ending existential analysis " . In a 2009 interview , Drake cited West as " the most influential person " in shaping his own sound .

The known history of supernova observation goes back to 185 CE , when , supernova SN 185 appeared , the oldest appearance of a supernova recorded by humankind . Several additional supernovae within the Milky Way galaxy have been recorded since that time , with SN 1604 being the most recent supernova to be observed in this galaxy . Since the development of the telescope , the field of supernova discovery has expanded to other galaxies . These occurrences provide important information on the distances of galaxies . Successful models of supernova behavior have also been developed , and the role of supernovae in the star formation process is now increasingly understood .

The supernova explosion that formed the Vela Supernova Remnant most likely occurred 10,000 – 20,000 years ago . In 1976 , NASA astronomers suggested that inhabitants of the southern hemisphere may have witnessed this explosion and recorded it symbolically . A year later , archaeologist George Michanowsky recalled some incomprehensible ancient markings in Bolivia that were left by Native Americans . The carvings showed four small circles flanked by two larger circles . The smaller circles resemble stellar groupings in the constellations Vela and Carina . One of the larger circles may represent the star Capella . Another circle is located near the position of the supernova remnant , George Michanowsky suggested this may represent the supernova explosion as witnessed by the indigenous residents . In 185 CE , Chinese astronomers recorded the appearance of a bright star in the sky , and observed that it took about eight months to fade from the sky . It was observed to sparkle like a star and did not move across the heavens like a comet . These observations are consistent with the appearance of a supernova , and this is believed to be the oldest confirmed record of a supernova event by humankind . SN 185 may have also possibly been recorded in Roman literature , though no records have survived . The gaseous shell RCW 86 is suspected as being the remnant of this event , and recent X-ray studies show a good match for the expected age .

In 393 CE , the Chinese recorded the appearance of another " guest star " , SN 393 , in the modern constellation of Scorpius . Additional unconfirmed supernovae events may have been observed in 369 CE , 386 CE , 437 CE , 827 CE and 902 CE . However these have not yet been associated with a supernova remnant , and so they remain only candidates . Over a span of about 2,000 years , Chinese astronomers recorded a total of twenty such candidate events , including later explosions noted by Islamic , European , and possibly Indian and other observers . The supernova SN 1006 appeared in the southern constellation of Lupus during the year 1006 CE . This was the brightest recorded star ever to appear in the night sky , and its presence was noted in China , Egypt , Iraq , Italy , Japan and Switzerland . It may also have been noted in France , Syria , and North America . Egyptian physician , astronomer and astrologer Ali ibn Ridwan gave the brightness of this star as one-quarter the brightness of the Moon . Modern astronomers have discovered the faint remnant of this explosion and determined that it was only 7,100 light-years from the Earth .

Supernova SN 1054 was another widely observed event , with Arab , Chinese , and Japanese astronomers recording the star 's appearance in 1054 CE . It may also have been recorded by the Anasazi as a petroglyph . This explosion appeared in the constellation of Taurus , where it produced the Crab Nebula remnant . At its peak , the luminosity of SN 1054 may have been four times as bright as Venus , and it remained visible in daylight for 23 days and was visible in the night sky for 653 days . There are fewer records of supernova SN 1181 , which occurred in the constellation Cassiopeia just over a century after SN 1054 . It was noted by Chinese and Japanese astronomers , however . The pulsar 3C58 may be the stellar relic from this event . The Danish astronomer Tycho Brahe was noted for his careful observations of the night sky from his observatory on the island of Hven . In 1572 he noted the appearance of a new star , also in the constellation Cassiopeia . Later called SN 1572 , this supernova was associated with a remnant during the 1960s . A common belief in Europe during this period was the Aristotelian idea that the world beyond the Moon and planets was immutable . So observers argued that the phenomenon was something in the Earth 's atmosphere . However Tycho noted that the object remained stationary from night to night — never changing its parallax — so it must lie far away . He published his observations in the small book De nova et nullius aevi memoria prius visa stella ( Latin for " Concerning the new and previously unseen star " ) in 1573 . It is from the title of this book that the modern word nova for cataclysmic variable stars is derived .

The most recent supernova to be seen in the Milky Way galaxy was SN 1604 , which was observed October 9 , 1604 . Several people noted the sudden appearance of this star , but it was Johannes Kepler who became noted for his systematic study of the object . He published his observations in the work De Stella nova in pede Serpentarii . Galileo , like Tycho before him , tried in vain to measure the parallax of this new star , and then argued against the Aristotelian view of an immutable heavens . The remnant of this supernova was identified in 1941 at the Mount Wilson Observatory .

The true nature of the supernova remained obscure for some time . Observers slowly came to recognize a class of stars that undergo long-term periodic fluctuations in luminosity . Both John Russell Hind in 1848 and Norman Pogson in 1863 had charted stars that underwent sudden changes in brightness . However these received little attention from the astronomical community . Finally , in 1866 , English astronomer William Huggins made the first spectroscopic observations of a nova , discovering lines of hydrogen in the unusual spectrum of the recurrent nova T Coronae Borealis . Huggins proposed a cataclysmic explosion as the underlying mechanism , and his efforts drew interest from other astronomers . In 1885 , a nova-like outburst was observed in the direction of the Andromeda galaxy by Ernst Hartwig in Estonia . S Andromedae increased to 6th magnitude , outshining the entire nucleus of the galaxy , then faded in a manner much like a nova . In 1917 , George W. Ritchey measured the distance to the Andromeda Galaxy and discovered it lay much farther than had previously been thought . This meant that S Andromedae , which did not just lie along the line of sight to the galaxy but had actually resided in the nucleus , released a much greater amount of energy than was typical for a nova .

Early work on this new category of nova was performed during the 1930s by Walter Baade and Fritz Zwicky at Mount Wilson Observatory . They identified S Andromedae , what they considered a typical supernova , as an explosive event that released radiation approximately equal to the Sun 's total energy output for 107 years . They decided to call this new class of cataclysmic variables super-novae , and postulated that the energy was generated by the gravitational collapse of ordinary stars into neutron stars . The name super-novae was first used in a 1931 lecture at Caltech by Zwicky , then used publicly in 1933 at a meeting of the American Physical Society . By 1938 , the hyphen had been lost and the modern name was in use . Although supernovae are relatively rare events , occurring on average about once every 50 years in the Milky Way , observations of distant galaxies allowed supernovae to be discovered and examined more frequently . The first supernova detection patrol was begun by Zwicky in 1933 . He was joined by Josef J. Johnson from Caltech in 1936 . Using a 45-cm Schmidt telescope at Palomar observatory , they discovered twelve new supernovae within three years by comparing new photographic plates to reference images of extragalactic regions .

In 1938 , Walter Baade became the first astronomer to identify a nebula as a supernova remnant when he suggested that the Crab Nebula was the remains of SN 1054 . He noted that , while it had the appearance of a planetary nebula , the measured velocity of expansion was much too large to belong to that classification . During the same year , Baade first proposed the use of the Type Ia supernova as a secondary distance indicator . Later , the work of Allan Sandage and Gustav Tammann helped refine the process so that Type Ia supernovae became a type of standard candle for measuring large distances across the cosmos . The first spectral classification of these distant supernovae was performed by Rudolph Minkowski in 1941 . He categorized them into two types , based on whether or not lines of the element hydrogen appeared in the supernova spectrum . Zwicky later proposed additional types III , IV , and V , although these are no longer used and now appear to be associated with single peculiar supernova types . Further sub-division of the spectra categories resulted in the modern supernova classification scheme . In the aftermath of the Second World War , Fred Hoyle worked on the problem of how the various observed elements in the universe were produced . In 1946 he proposed that a massive star could generate the necessary thermonuclear reactions , and the nuclear reactions of heavy elements were responsible for the removal of energy necessary for a gravitational collapse to occur . The collapsing star became rotationally unstable , and produced an explosive expulsion of elements that were distributed into interstellar space . The concept that rapid nuclear fusion was the source of energy for a supernova explosion was developed by Hoyle and William Fowler during the 1960s .

The modern standard model for Type Ia supernovae explosions is founded on a proposal by Whelan and Iben in 1973 , and is based upon a mass-transfer scenario to a degenerate companion star . In particular , the light curve of SN1972e in NGC 5253 , which was observed for more than a year , was followed long enough to discover that after its broad " hump " in brightness , the supernova faded at a nearly constant rate of about 0.01 magnitudes per day . Translated to another system of units , this is nearly the same as the decay rate of cobalt-56 ( 56Co ) , whose half-life is 77 days . The degenerate explosion model predicts the production of about a solar mass of nickel-56 ( 56Ni ) by the exploding star . The 56Ni decays with a half-life of 6.8 days to 56Co , and the decay of the nickel and cobalt provides the energy radiated away by the supernova late in its history . The agreement in both total energy production and the fade rate between the theoretical models and the observations of 1972e led to rapid acceptance of the degenerate-explosion model . Through observation of the light curves of many Type Ia supernovae , it was discovered that they appear to have a common peak luminosity . By measuring the luminosity of these events , the distance to their host galaxy can be estimated with good accuracy . Thus this category of supernovae has become highly useful as a standard candle for measuring cosmic distances . In 1998 , the High-Z Supernova Search and the Supernova Cosmology Project discovered that the most distant Type Ia supernovae appeared dimmer than expected . This has provided evidence that the expansion of the universe may be accelerating .

Although no supernova has been observed in the Milky Way since 1604 , it appears that a supernova exploded in the constellation Cassiopeia about 300 years ago , around the year 1667 or 1680 . The remnant of this explosion , Cassiopeia A — is heavily obscured by interstellar dust , which is possibly why it did not make a notable appearance . However it can be observed in other parts of the spectrum , and it is currently the brightest radio source beyond our solar system . In 1987 , Supernova 1987A in the Large Magellanic Cloud was observed within hours of its start . It was the first supernova to be detected through its neutrino emission and the first to be observed across every band of the electromagnetic spectrum . The relative proximity of this supernova has allowed detailed observation , and it provided the first opportunity for modern theories of supernova formation to be tested against observations . The rate of supernova discovery steadily increased throughout the twentieth century . In the 1990s , several automated supernova search programs were initiated . The Leuschner Observatory Supernova Search program was begun in 1992 at Leuschner Observatory . It was joined the same year by the Berkeley Automated Imaging Telescope program . These were succeeded in 1996 by the Katzman Automatic Imaging Telescope at Lick Observatory , which was primarily used for the Lick Observatory Supernova Search ( LOSS ) . By 2000 , the Lick program resulted in the discovery of 96 supernovae , making it the world 's most successful Supernova search program .

In the late 1990s it was proposed that recent supernova remnants could be found by looking for gamma rays from the decay of titanium-44 . This has a half-life of 90 years and the gamma rays can traverse the galaxy easily , so it permits us to see any remnants from the last millennium or so . Two sources were found , the previously discovered Cassiopeia A remnant , and the RX J0852.0-4622 remnant , which had just been discovered overlapping the Vela Supernova Remnant This remnant ( RX J0852.0-4622 ) had been found in front ( apparently ) of the larger Vela Supernova Remnant . The gamma rays from the decay of titanium-44 showed that it must have exploded fairly recently ( perhaps around 1200 AD ) , but there is no historical record of it . The flux of gamma rays and x-rays indicates that the supernova was relatively close to us ( perhaps 200 parsecs or 600 ly ) . If so , this is a surprising event because supernovae less than 200 parsecs away are estimated to occur less than once per 100,000 years .

The " SN 2003fg " was discovered in a forming galaxy in 2003 . The appearance of this supernova was studied in " real-time " , and it has posed several major physical questions as it seems more massive than the Chandrasekhar limit would allow . First observed in September 2006 , the supernova SN 2006gy , which occurred in a galaxy called NGC 1260 ( 240 million light-years away ) , is the largest and , until confirmation of luminosity of SN 2005ap in October 2007 , the most luminous supernova ever observed . The explosion was at least 100 times more luminous than any previously observed supernova , with the progenitor star being estimated 150 times more massive than the Sun . Although this had some characteristics of a Type Ia supernova , Hydrogen was found in the spectrum . It is thought that SN 2006gy is a likely candidate for a pair-instability supernova . SN 2005ap , which was discovered by Robert Quimby who also discovered SN 2006gy , was about twice as bright as SN 2006gy and about 300 times as bright as a normal type II supernova . On May 21 , 2008 , astronomers announced that they had for the first time caught a supernova on camera just as it was exploding . By chance , a burst of X-rays was noticed while looking at galaxy NGC 2770 , 88 million light-years from Earth , and a variety of telescopes were aimed in that direction just in time to capture what has been named SN 2008D . " This eventually confirmed that the big X-ray blast marked the birth of a supernova , " said Alicia Soderberg of Princeton University .

One of the many amateur astronomers looking for supernovae , Caroline Moore , a member of the Puckett Observatory Supernova Search Team , found supernova SN 2008ha late November 2008 . At the age of 14 she has now been declared the youngest person ever to find a supernova . However , in January 2011 , 10-year-old Kathryn Aurora Gray from Canada was reported to have discovered a supernova , making her the youngest ever to find a supernova . Ms. Gray , her father , and a friend spotted SN 2010lt , a magnitude 17 supernova in galaxy UGC 3378 in the constellation Camelopardalis , about 240 million light years away . In 2009 , researchers have found nitrates in ice cores from Antarctica at depths corresponding to the known supernovae of 1006 and 1054 AD , as well as from around 1060 AD . The nitrates were apparently formed from nitrogen oxides created by gamma rays from the supernovae . This technique should be able to detect supernovae going back several thousand years . On November 15 , 2010 , astronomers using NASA 's Chandra X-ray Observatory announced that , while viewing the remnant of SN 1979C in the galaxy Messier 100 , they have discovered an object which could be a young , 30-year-old black hole . NASA also noted the possibility this object could be a spinning neutron star producing a wind of high energy particles .

On August 24 , 2011 , the Palomar Transient Factory automated survey discovered a new Type Ia supernova ( SN 2011fe ) in the Pinwheel Galaxy ( M101 ) shortly after it burst into existence . Being only 21 million lightyears away and detected so early after the event started , it will allow scientists to learn more about the early developments of these types of supernovae . On January 22 , 2014 , students at the University of London Observatory spotted an exploding star SN 2014J in the nearby galaxy M82 ( the Cigar Galaxy ) . At a distance of around 12 million light years , the supernova is one of the nearest to be observed in recent decades .

William Butler Yeats ( / ˈjeɪts / ; 13 June 1865 – 28 January 1939 ) was an Irish poet and one of the foremost figures of 20th-century literature . A pillar of both the Irish and British literary establishments , in his later years he served as an Irish Senator for two terms . Yeats was a driving force behind the Irish Literary Revival and , along with Lady Gregory , Edward Martyn , and others , founded the Abbey Theatre , where he served as its chief during its early years . In 1923 , he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature as the first Irishman so honoured for what the Nobel Committee described as " inspired poetry , which in a highly artistic form gives expression to the spirit of a whole nation " . Yeats is considered to be one of the few writers who completed their greatest works after being awarded the Nobel Prize ; such works include The Tower ( 1928 ) and The Winding Stair and Other Poems ( 1933 ) . William Butler Yeats was born in Sandymount , Ireland and educated there and in London ; he spent his childhood holidays in County Sligo . He studied poetry in his youth and from an early age was fascinated by both Irish legends and the occult . Those topics feature in the first phase of his work , which lasted roughly until the turn of the 20th century . His earliest volume of verse was published in 1889 , and its slow-paced and lyrical poems display Yeats 's debts to Edmund Spenser , Percy Bysshe Shelley , and the poets of the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood . From 1900 , Yeats 's poetry grew more physical and realistic . He largely renounced the transcendental beliefs of his youth , though he remained preoccupied with physical and spiritual masks , as well as with cyclical theories of life .

Of Anglo-Irish descent , William Butler Yeats was born at Sandymount in County Dublin , Ireland . His father , John Butler Yeats ( 1839 – 1922 ) , was a descendant of Jervis Yeats , a Williamite soldier , linen merchant , and well-known painter who died in 1712 . Benjamin Yeats , Jervis 's grandson and William 's great-great-grandfather , had in 1773 married Mary Butler of a landed family in County Kildare . Following their marriage , they kept the name Butler in the family name . Mary was a descendant of the Butler of Ormond family from the Neigham ( pronounced Nyam ) Gowran branch of the family . They were descendants of the first Earls of Ormond . At the time of his marriage , William 's father John Yeats was studying law but abandoned his studies to study art at Heatherley 's Art School in London . His mother , Susan Mary Pollexfen , came from a wealthy merchant family in Sligo , who owned a milling and shipping business . Soon after William 's birth the family relocated to the Pollexfen home at Merville , Sligo to stay with her extended family , and the young poet came to think of the area as his childhood and spiritual home . Its landscape became , over time , both literally and symbolically , his " country of the heart " . The Butler Yeats family were highly artistic ; his brother Jack became an esteemed painter , while his sisters Elizabeth and Susan Mary — known to family and friends as Lollie and Lily — became involved in the Arts and Crafts Movement .

Yeats grew up as a member of the former Protestant Ascendancy at the time undergoing a crisis of identity . While his family was broadly supportive of the changes Ireland was experiencing , the nationalist revival of the late 19th century directly disadvantaged his heritage , and informed his outlook for the remainder of his life . In 1997 , his biographer R. F. Foster observed that Napoleon 's dictum that to understand the man you have to know what was happening in the world when he was twenty " is manifestly true of W.B.Y. " Yeats 's childhood and young adulthood were shadowed by the power shift away from the minority Protestant Ascendancy . The 1880s saw the rise of Parnell and the home rule movement ; the 1890s saw the momentum of nationalism , while the Catholics became prominent around the turn of the century . These developments had a profound effect on his poetry , and his subsequent explorations of Irish identity had a significant influence on the creation of his country 's biography . In 1867 , the family moved to England to aid their father , John , to further his career as an artist . At first the Yeats children were educated at home . Their mother entertained them with stories and Irish folktales . John provided an erratic education in geography and chemistry , and took William on natural history explorations of the nearby Slough countryside . On 26 January 1877 , the young poet entered the Godolphin school , which he attended for four years . He did not distinguish himself academically , and an early school report describes his performance as " only fair . Perhaps better in Latin than in any other subject . Very poor in spelling " . Though he had difficulty with mathematics and languages ( possibly because he was tone deaf ) , he was fascinated by biology and zoology . For financial reasons , the family returned to Dublin toward the end of 1880 , living at first in the suburbs of Harold 's Cross and later Howth . In October 1881 , Yeats resumed his education at Dublin 's Erasmus Smith High School . His father 's studio was nearby and William spent a great deal of time there , where he met many of the city 's artists and writers . During this period he started writing poetry , and , in 1885 , the Dublin University Review published Yeats 's first poems , as well as an essay entitled " The Poetry of Sir Samuel Ferguson " . Between 1884 and 1886 , William attended the Metropolitan School of Art — now the National College of Art and Design — in Thomas Street .

His first known works were written when he was seventeen , and included a poem — heavily influenced by Percy Bysshe Shelley — that describes a magician who set up a throne in central Asia . Other pieces from this period include a draft of a play about a bishop , a monk , and a woman accused of paganism by local shepherds , as well as love-poems and narrative lyrics on German knights . The early works were both conventional and , according to the critic Charles Johnston , " utterly unIrish " , seeming to come out of a " vast murmurous gloom of dreams " . Although Yeats 's early works drew heavily on Shelley , Edmund Spenser , and on the diction and colouring of pre-Raphaelite verse , he soon turned to Irish mythology and folklore and the writings of William Blake . In later life , Yeats paid tribute to Blake by describing him as one of the " great artificers of God who uttered great truths to a little clan " . In 1891 , Yeats published " John Sherman " and " Dhoya " , one a novella , the other a story .

The family returned to London in 1887 . In March 1890 Yeats joined the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn . That same year Yeats and Ernest Rhys co-founded the Rhymers ' Club , a group of London-based poets who met regularly in a Fleet Street tavern to recite their verse . Yeats later sought to mythologize the collective , calling it the " Tragic Generation " in his autobiography , and published two anthologies of the Rhymers ' work , the first one in 1892 and the second one in 1894 . He collaborated with Edwin Ellis on the first complete edition of William Blake 's works , in the process rediscovering a forgotten poem , " Vala , or , the Four Zoas " . In a late essay on Shelley , Yeats wrote , " I have re-read Prometheus Unbound ... and it seems to me to have an even more certain place than I had thought among the sacred books of the world . " Yeats had a life-long interest in mysticism , spiritualism , occultism and astrology . He read extensively on the subjects throughout his life , became a member of the paranormal research organisation " The Ghost Club " ( in 1911 ) and was especially influenced by the writings of Emanuel Swedenborg . As early as 1892 , he wrote : " If I had not made magic my constant study I could not have written a single word of my Blake book , nor would The Countess Kathleen ever have come to exist . The mystical life is the centre of all that I do and all that I think and all that I write . " His mystical interests — also inspired by a study of Hinduism , under the Theosophist Mohini Chatterjee , and the occult — formed much of the basis of his late poetry . Some critics disparaged this aspect of Yeats 's work ; W. H. Auden called it the " deplorable spectacle of a grown man occupied with the mumbo-jumbo of magic and the nonsense of India . "

His first significant poem was " The Island of Statues " , a fantasy work that took Edmund Spenser and Shelley for its poetic models . The piece was serialized in the Dublin University Review . Yeats wished to include it in his first collection , but it was deemed too long , and in fact was never republished in his lifetime . Quinx Books published the poem in complete form for the first time in 2014 . His first solo publication was the pamphlet Mosada : A Dramatic Poem ( 1886 ) , which comprised a print run of 100 copies paid for by his father . This was followed by the collection The Wanderings of Oisin and Other Poems ( 1889 ) , which arranged a series of verse that dated as far back as the mid-1880s . The long title poem contains , in the words of his biographer R.F. Foster , " obscure Gaelic names , striking repetitions [ and ] an unremitting rhythm subtly varied as the poem proceeded through its three sections " ; " The Wanderings of Oisin " is based on the lyrics of the Fenian Cycle of Irish mythology and displays the influence of both Sir Samuel Ferguson and the Pre-Raphaelite poets . The poem took two years to complete and was one of the few works from this period that he did not disown in his maturity . Oisin introduces what was to become one of his most important themes : the appeal of the life of contemplation over the appeal of the life of action . Following the work , Yeats never again attempted another long poem . His other early poems , which are meditations on the themes of love or mystical and esoteric subjects , include Poems ( 1895 ) , The Secret Rose ( 1897 ) , and The Wind Among the Reeds ( 1899 ) . The covers of these volumes were illustrated by Yeats ' friend Althea Gyles .

During 1885 , Yeats was involved in the formation of the Dublin Hermetic Order . The society held its first meeting on 16 June , with Yeats acting as its chairman . The same year , the Dublin Theosophical lodge was opened in conjunction with Brahmin Mohini Chatterjee , who travelled from the Theosophical Society in London to lecture . Yeats attended his first séance the following year . He later became heavily involved with the Theosophical Society and with hermeticism , particularly with the eclectic Rosicrucianism of the Golden Dawn . During séances held from 1912 , a spirit calling itself " Leo Africanus " apparently claimed it was Yeats 's Daemon or anti-self , inspiring some of the speculations in Per Amica Silentia Lunae . He was admitted into the Golden Dawn in March 1890 and took the magical motto Daemon est Deus inversus — translated as Devil is God inverted or A demon is a god reflected . He was an active recruiter for the sect 's Isis-Urania Temple , and brought in his uncle George Pollexfen , Maud Gonne , and Florence Farr . Although he reserved a distaste for abstract and dogmatic religions founded around personality cults , he was attracted to the type of people he met at the Golden Dawn . He was involved in the Order 's power struggles , both with Farr and Macgregor Mathers , and was involved when Mathers sent Aleister Crowley to repossess Golden Dawn paraphernalia during the " Battle of Blythe Road " . After the Golden Dawn ceased and splintered into various offshoots , Yeats remained with the Stella Matutina until 1921 .

In 1889 , Yeats met Maud Gonne , then a 23-year-old English heiress and ardent Irish Nationalist . Gonne was eighteen months younger than Yeats and later claimed she met the poet as a " paint-stained art student . " Gonne had admired " The Island of Statues " and sought out his acquaintance . Yeats developed an obsessive infatuation with her beauty and outspoken manner , and she had a significant and lasting effect on his poetry and his life thereafter . In later years he admitted , " it seems to me that she [ Gonne ] brought into my life those days — for as yet I saw only what lay upon the surface — the middle of the tint , a sound as of a Burmese gong , an over-powering tumult that had yet many pleasant secondary notes . " Yeats ' love initially remained unrequited , in part due to his reluctance to participate in her nationalist activism . In 1891 , he visited Gonne in Ireland and proposed marriage , but she rejected him . He later admitted that from that point " the troubling of my life began " . Yeats proposed to Gonne three more times : in 1899 , 1900 and 1901 . She refused each proposal , and in 1903 , to his horror , married the Irish nationalist Major John MacBride . His only other love affair during this period was with Olivia Shakespear , whom he first met in 1894 , and parted from in 1897 .

Yeats continually sought to deride and demean John MacBride both in his letters and his poetry , but there were two main reasons why he was horrified by Gonne 's marriage to him . Firstly , to lose his muse to another man affected his reputation with the public . Secondly , Gonne converted to Catholicism before her marriage , and Yeats was Protestant / agnostic . He worried his muse would come under the influence of the priests and do their bidding . Gonne 's marriage to MacBride , as forecast by both their sets of friends and relations , was a disaster early on . This pleased Yeats , as Gonne began to visit him in London . After the birth of her son , Seán MacBride , in 1904 , Gonne and MacBride agreed to end the marriage , although they were unable to agree on the child 's welfare . Despite the use of intermediaries , a divorce case ensued in Paris in 1905 . Gonne made a series of allegations against her husband with Yeats as her main ' second , ' though he did not attend court or travel to France . A divorce was not granted as the only accusation that held up in court was that MacBride had been drunk once during the marriage . A separation was granted with Gonne having custody of the baby and John having visiting rights .

Yeats 's friendship with Gonne persisted , and , in Paris , in 1908 , they finally consummated their relationship . " The long years of fidelity rewarded at last " was how another of his lovers described the event . Yeats was less sentimental and later remarked that " the tragedy of sexual intercourse is the perpetual virginity of the soul . " The relationship did not develop into a new phase after their night together , and soon afterwards Gonne wrote to the poet indicating that despite the physical consummation , they could not continue as they had been : " I have prayed so hard to have all earthly desire taken from my love for you and dearest , loving you as I do , I have prayed and I am praying still that the bodily desire for me may be taken from you too . " By January 1909 , Gonne was sending Yeats letters praising the advantage given to artists who abstain from sex . Nearly twenty years later , Yeats recalled the night with Gonne in his poem " A Man Young and Old " : In 1896 , Yeats was introduced to Lady Gregory by their mutual friend Edward Martyn . Gregory encouraged Yeats ' nationalism , and convinced him to continue focusing on writing drama . Although he was influenced by French Symbolism , Yeats concentrated on an identifiably Irish content and this inclination was reinforced by his involvement with a new generation of younger and emerging Irish authors . Together with Lady Gregory , Martyn , and other writers including J. M. Synge , Seán O 'Casey , and Padraic Colum , Yeats was one of those responsible for the establishment of the " Irish Literary Revival " movement . Apart from these creative writers , much of the impetus for the Revival came from the work of scholarly translators who were aiding in the discovery of both the ancient sagas and Ossianic poetry and the more recent folk song tradition in Irish . One of the most significant of these was Douglas Hyde , later the first President of Ireland , whose Love Songs of Connacht was widely admired .

In 1899 , Yeats , Lady Gregory , Edward Martyn and George Moore established the Irish Literary Theatre for the purpose of performing Irish and Celtic plays . The ideals of the Abbey were derived from the avant-garde French theatre , which sought to express the " ascendancy of the playwright rather than the actor-manager à l 'anglais . " The group 's manifesto , which Yeats wrote , declared , " We hope to find in Ireland an uncorrupted & imaginative audience trained to listen by its passion for oratory ... & that freedom to experiment which is not found in the theatres of England , & without which no new movement in art or literature can succeed . " The collective survived for about two years but was not successful . Working with two Irish brothers with theatrical experience , William and Frank Fay , Yeats 's unpaid yet independently wealthy secretary Annie Horniman , and the leading West End actress Florence Farr , the group established the Irish National Theatre Society . Along with Synge , they acquired property in Dublin and on 27 December 1904 opened the Abbey Theatre . Yeats 's play Cathleen Ní Houlihan and Lady Gregory 's Spreading the News were featured on the opening night . Yeats remained involved with the Abbey until his death , both as a member of the board and a prolific playwright . In 1902 , he helped set up the Dun Emer Press to publish work by writers associated with the Revival . This became the Cuala Press in 1904 , and inspired by the Arts and Crafts Movement , sought to " find work for Irish hands in the making of beautiful things . " From then until its closure in 1946 , the press — which was run by the poet 's sisters — produced over 70 titles ; 48 of them books by Yeats himself .

In 1909 , Yeats met the American poet Ezra Pound . Pound had travelled to London at least partly to meet the older man , whom he considered " the only poet worthy of serious study . " From that year until 1916 , the two men wintered in the Stone Cottage at Ashdown Forest , with Pound nominally acting as Yeats 's secretary . The relationship got off to a rocky start when Pound arranged for the publication in the magazine Poetry of some of Yeats 's verse with Pound 's own unauthorised alterations . These changes reflected Pound 's distaste for Victorian prosody . A more indirect influence was the scholarship on Japanese Noh plays that Pound had obtained from Ernest Fenollosa 's widow , which provided Yeats with a model for the aristocratic drama he intended to write . The first of his plays modelled on Noh was At the Hawk 's Well , the first draft of which he dictated to Pound in January 1916 . The emergence of a nationalist revolutionary movement from the ranks of the mostly Roman Catholic lower-middle and working class made Yeats reassess some of his attitudes . In the refrain of " Easter , 1916 " ( " All changed , changed utterly / A terrible beauty is born " ) , Yeats faces his own failure to recognise the merits of the leaders of the Easter Rising , due to his attitude towards their ordinary backgrounds and lives .

Yeats was an Irish Nationalist at heart , looking for the kind of traditional lifestyle displayed through poems such as ' The Fisherman ' . However , as his life progressed , he sheltered much of his revolutionary spirit and distanced himself from the intense political landscape until 1922 , when he was appointed Senator for the Irish Free State . In the earlier part of his life , Yeats was a member of the Irish Republican Brotherhood . Due to the escalating tension of the political scene , Yeats distanced himself from the core political activism in the midst of the Easter Rising , even holding back his poetry inspired by the events until 1920 .

By 1916 , Yeats was 51 years old and determined to marry and produce an heir . John MacBride had been executed by British forces for his role in the 1916 Easter Rising , and Yeats thought that his widow might remarry . His final proposal to Maud Gonne took place in mid-1916 . Gonne 's history of revolutionary political activism , as well as a series of personal catastrophes in the previous few years of her life , including chloroform addiction and her troubled marriage to MacBride made her a potentially unsuitable wife and biographer R.F. Foster has observed that Yeats 's last offer was motivated more by a sense of duty than by a genuine desire to marry her . Yeats proposed in an indifferent manner , with conditions attached , and he both expected and hoped she would turn him down . According to Foster " when he duly asked Maud to marry him , and was duly refused , his thoughts shifted with surprising speed to her daughter . " Iseult Gonne was Maud 's second child with Lucien Millevoye , and at the time was twenty-one years old . She had lived a sad life to this point ; conceived as an attempt to reincarnate her short-lived brother , for the first few years of her life she was presented as her mother 's adopted niece . When Maud told her that she was going to marry , Iseult cried and told her mother that she hated MacBride . At fifteen , she proposed to Yeats . In 1917 he proposed to Iseult , but was rejected .

That September , Yeats proposed to 25-year-old Georgie Hyde-Lees ( 1892 – 1968 ) , known as George , whom he had met through Olivia Shakespear . Despite warnings from her friends — " George ... you can 't . He must be dead " — Hyde-Lees accepted , and the two were married on 20 October . Their marriage was a success , in spite of the age difference , and in spite of Yeats 's feelings of remorse and regret during their honeymoon . The couple went on to have two children , Anne and Michael . Although in later years he had romantic relationships with other women and possibly affairs , George herself wrote to her husband " When you are dead , people will talk about your love affairs , but I shall say nothing , for I will remember how proud you were . " During the first years of his marriage , he and George experimented with automatic writing , and George contacted a variety of spirits and guides they called " Instructors " while in a trance . The spirits communicated a complex and esoteric system of philosophy and history , which the couple developed into an exposition using geometrical shapes : phases , cones , and gyres . Yeats devoted much time to preparing this material for publication as A Vision ( 1925 ) . In 1924 , he wrote to his publisher T. Werner Laurie admitting : " I dare say I delude myself in thinking this book my book of books " .

In December 1923 , Yeats was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature , " for his always inspired poetry , which in a highly artistic form gives expression to the spirit of a whole nation " . He was aware of the symbolic value of an Irish winner so soon after Ireland had gained independence , and sought to highlight the fact at each available opportunity . His reply to many of the letters of congratulations sent to him contained the words : " I consider that this honour has come to me less as an individual than as a representative of Irish literature , it is part of Europe 's welcome to the Free State . " Yeats used the occasion of his acceptance lecture at the Royal Academy of Sweden to present himself as a standard-bearer of Irish nationalism and Irish cultural independence . As he remarked , " The theatres of Dublin were empty buildings hired by the English travelling companies , and we wanted Irish plays and Irish players . When we thought of these plays we thought of everything that was romantic and poetical , because the nationalism we had called up — the nationalism every generation had called up in moments of discouragement — was romantic and poetical . " The prize led to a significant increase in the sales of his books , as his publishers Macmillan sought to capitalise on the publicity . For the first time he had money , and he was able to repay not only his own debts , but those of his father .

By early 1925 , Yeats ' health had stabilised , and he had completed most of the writing for " A Vision " ( dated 1925 , it actually appeared in January 1926 , when he almost immediately started rewriting it for a second version ) . He had been appointed to the first Irish Senate in 1922 , and was re-appointed for a second term in 1925 . Early in his tenure , a debate on divorce arose , and Yeats viewed the issue as primarily a confrontation between the emerging Roman Catholic ethos and the Protestant minority . When the Roman Catholic Church weighed in with a blanket refusal to consider their anti position , the Irish Times countered that a measure to outlaw divorce would alienate Protestants and " crystallise " the partition of Ireland . In response , Yeats delivered a series of speeches that attacked the " quixotically impressive " ambitions of the government and clergy , likening their campaign tactics to those of " medieval Spain . " " Marriage is not to us a Sacrament , but , upon the other hand , the love of a man and woman , and the inseparable physical desire , are sacred . This conviction has come to us through ancient philosophy and modern literature , and it seems to us a most sacrilegious thing to persuade two people who hate each other ... to live together , and it is to us no remedy to permit them to part if neither can re-marry . " The resulting debate has been described as one of Yeats 's " supreme public moments " , and began his ideological move away from pluralism towards religious confrontation .

His language became more forceful ; the Jesuit Father Peter Finlay was described by Yeats as a man of " monstrous discourtesy " , and he lamented that , " It is one of the glories of the Church in which I was born that we have put our Bishops in their place in discussions requiring legislation " . During his time in the Senate , Yeats further warned his colleagues : " If you show that this country , southern Ireland , is going to be governed by Roman Catholic ideas and by Catholic ideas alone , you will never get the North ... You will put a wedge in the midst of this nation " . He memorably said of his fellow Irish Protestants , " we are no petty people " . In 1924 , he chaired a coinage committee charged with selecting a set of designs for the first currency of the Irish Free State . Aware of the symbolic power latent in the imagery of a young state 's currency , he sought a form that was " elegant , racy of the soil , and utterly unpolitical " . When the house finally decided on the artwork of Percy Metcalfe , Yeats was pleased , though he regretted that compromise had led to " lost muscular tension " in the finally depicted images . He retired from the Senate in 1928 because of ill health .

Towards the end of his life — and especially after the Wall Street Crash and Great Depression , which led some to question whether democracy could cope with deep economic difficulty — Yeats seems to have returned to his aristocratic sympathies . During the aftermath of the First World War , he became sceptical about the efficacy of democratic government , and anticipated political reconstruction in Europe through totalitarian rule . His later association with Pound drew him towards Benito Mussolini , for whom he expressed admiration on a number of occasions . He wrote three " marching songs " — never used — for the Irish General Eoin O 'Duffy 's Blueshirts . At the age of 69 he was ' rejuvenated ' by the Steinach operation which was performed on 6 April 1934 by Norman Haire . For the last five years of his life Yeats found a new vigour evident from both his poetry and his intimate relations with younger women . During this time , Yeats was involved in a number of romantic affairs with , among others , the poet and actress Margot Ruddock , and the novelist , journalist and sexual radical Ethel Mannin . As in his earlier life , Yeats found erotic adventure conducive to his creative energy , and , despite age and ill-health , he remained a prolific writer . In a letter of 1935 , Yeats noted : " I find my present weakness made worse by the strange second puberty the operation has given me , the ferment that has come upon my imagination . If I write poetry it will be unlike anything I have done " . In 1936 , he undertook editorship of the Oxford Book of Modern Verse , 1892 – 1935 .

He died at the Hôtel Idéal Séjour , in Menton , France , on 28 January 1939 . He was buried after a discreet and private funeral at Roquebrune-Cap-Martin . Attempts had been made at Roquebrune to dissuade the family from proceeding with the removal of the remains to Ireland due to the uncertainty of their identity . His body had earlier been exhumed and transferred to the ossuary . Yeats and George had often discussed his death , and his express wish was that he be buried quickly in France with a minimum of fuss . According to George , " His actual words were ' If I die bury me up there [ at Roquebrune ] and then in a year 's time when the newspapers have forgotten me , dig me up and plant me in Sligo ' . " In September 1948 , Yeats ' body was moved to Drumcliff , County Sligo , on the Irish Naval Service corvette LÉ Macha . The person in charge of this operation for the Irish Government was Sean MacBride , son of Maud Gonne MacBride , and then Minister of External Affairs . His epitaph is taken from the last lines of " Under Ben Bulben " , one of his final poems :

Yeats is generally considered one of the twentieth century 's key English language poets . He was a Symbolist poet , in that he used allusive imagery and symbolic structures throughout his career . Yeats chose words and assembled them so that , in addition to a particular meaning , they suggest other abstract thoughts that may seem more significant and resonant . His use of symbols is usually something physical that is both itself and a suggestion of other , perhaps immaterial , timeless qualities . Unlike other modernists who experimented with free verse , Yeats was a master of the traditional forms . The impact of modernism on his work can be seen in the increasing abandonment of the more conventionally poetic diction of his early work in favour of the more austere language and more direct approach to his themes that increasingly characterises the poetry and plays of his middle period , comprising the volumes In the Seven Woods , Responsibilities and The Green Helmet . His later poetry and plays are written in a more personal vein , and the works written in the last twenty years of his life include mention of his son and daughter , as well as meditations on the experience of growing old . In his poem , " The Circus Animals ' Desertion " , he describes the inspiration for these late works :

During 1929 , he stayed at Thoor Ballylee near Gort in County Galway ( where Yeats had his summer home since 1919 ) for the last time . Much of the remainder of his life was lived outside Ireland , although he did lease Riversdale house in the Dublin suburb of Rathfarnham in 1932 . He wrote prolifically through his final years , and published poetry , plays , and prose . In 1938 , he attended the Abbey for the final time to see the premier of his play Purgatory . His Autobiographies of William Butler Yeats was published that same year . In 1913 , Yeats wrote the preface for the English translation of Rabindranath Tagore 's Gitanjali ( Song Offering ) for which Tagore received Nobel Prize in literature . While Yeats 's early poetry drew heavily on Irish myth and folklore , his later work was engaged with more contemporary issues , and his style underwent a dramatic transformation . His work can be divided into three general periods . The early poems are lushly pre-Raphaelite in tone , self-consciously ornate , and , at times , according to unsympathetic critics , stilted . Yeats began by writing epic poems such as The Isle of Statues and The Wanderings of Oisin . His other early poems are lyrics on the themes of love or mystical and esoteric subjects . Yeats 's middle period saw him abandon the pre-Raphaelite character of his early work and attempt to turn himself into a Landor-style social ironist .

Critics who admire his middle work might characterize it as supple and muscular in its rhythms and sometimes harshly modernist , while others find these poems barren and weak in imaginative power . Yeats 's later work found new imaginative inspiration in the mystical system he began to work out for himself under the influence of spiritualism . In many ways , this poetry is a return to the vision of his earlier work . The opposition between the worldly minded man of the sword and the spiritually minded man of God , the theme of The Wanderings of Oisin , is reproduced in A Dialogue Between Self and Soul . Some critics claim that Yeats spanned the transition from the nineteenth century into twentieth-century modernism in poetry much as Pablo Picasso did in painting while others question whether late Yeats has much in common with modernists of the Ezra Pound and T. S. Eliot variety . Modernists read the well-known poem The Second Coming as a dirge for the decline of European civilisation in the mode of Eliot , but later critics have pointed out that this poem is an expression of Yeats 's apocalyptic mystical theories , and thus the expression of a mind shaped by the 1890s . His most important collections of poetry started with The Green Helmet ( 1910 ) and Responsibilities ( 1914 ) . In imagery , Yeats 's poetry became sparer and more powerful as he grew older . The Tower ( 1928 ) , The Winding Stair ( 1933 ) , and New Poems ( 1938 ) contained some of the most potent images in twentieth-century poetry .

Yeats 's mystical inclinations , informed by Hindu Theosophical beliefs and the occult , provided much of the basis of his late poetry , which some critics have judged as lacking in intellectual credibility . The metaphysics of Yeats 's late works must be read in relation to his system of esoteric fundamentals in A Vision ( 1925 ) . His 1921 poem , " The Second Coming " contains some of literature 's most potent images of the twentieth century . Here , Yeats incorporates his ideas on the gyre – a historical cycle of about 2000 years . He first published this idea in A Vision , which predicted the anarchy expected to be released around 2000 years after the birth of Christ . According to some interpretations " the best " referred to the traditional ruling classes of Europe who were unable to protect the traditional culture of Europe from materialistic mass movements . The concluding lines also refer to Yeats 's belief that history was cyclic , and that his age represented the end of the cycle that began with the rise of Christianity .

" The Baby Show " is the ninth episode of the first season of the American television comedy series 30 Rock . It was written by co-executive producer Jack Burditt and directed by Michael Engler . The episode originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) in the United States on January 4 , 2007 . Guest stars in this episode include Katrina Bowden , Rachel Dratch , John Lutz , Bridget Moloney , Maulik Pancholy , Chris Parnell , Keith Powell , and Lonny Ross . In the episode , Cerie Xerox ( Bowden ) gets engaged so that she can be a " young hot mom " , causing Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) to think about marriage and having a family . Meanwhile , Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) has trouble dealing with his own domineering mother , who wants to move in with him , and at the same time , Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) becomes upset by Josh Girard 's ( Ross ) impression of him . " The Baby Show " received mixed reviews from television critics . According to the Nielsen ratings system , the episode was watched by 5.9 million households during its original broadcast , and received a 3.0 rating / 7 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic .

Cerie Xerox ( Katrina Bowden ) announces her engagement during a gathering for Jenna Maroney 's ( Jane Krakowski ) birthday , and says that she wants to be a " young hot mom " . Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) confronts her own marital and maternal status . She speaks with Jenna about this , and Jenna proceeds to tell all of the men in the office — Frank Rossitano ( Judah Friedlander ) , James " Toofer " Spurlock ( Keith Powell ) , and J. D. Lutz ( John Lutz ) — that Liz is looking for someone to get her pregnant . Later that day , Liz sees Cerie in the makeup department getting herself made up . Anna ( Bridget Moloney ) , the makeup artist has her baby at work with her . She asks Liz to hold the baby for a while , so Liz takes the baby for a stroll around the 30 Rock building . Suddenly she realizes that she is no longer in the building , but is now in her apartment . She hurries back to the office with the baby , and Pete Hornberger ( Scott Adsit ) fixes the situation .

Meanwhile , Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) is being harassed by his mother over the phone . She calls him repeatedly , with the intention of moving in with him . The situation causes him to exhibit some stress-eating tendencies . At the same time , Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) and Josh Girard ( Lonny Ross ) begin to hang out , but Tracy gets annoyed of Josh 's impression of him . He demands that Liz fire Josh , but she refuses , so instead she tries to fix the situation , but Tracy threatens to go to Jack if she does not . Josh tries to avoid getting in trouble by calling Tracy and impersonating Jack , and then calling Jack and impersonating Tracy . It is not long before he is caught and Jack and Tracy have their revenge on him . As part of his punishment , Jack forces Josh talk to his mother " Every day , for the rest of your or her life . "

" The Baby Show " was written by co-executive producer Jack Burditt and directed by Michael Engler . This was Burditt 's second writing credit , having written the episode " Jack Meets Dennis " , and was Engler 's first directed episode . " The Baby Show " originally aired on January 4 , 2007 on NBC as the ninth episode of the show 's first season and overall of the series . This was the first of several episodes to make reference to Liz 's desire to become a mother . This plot came to a head in the third season episode " Do-Over " in which Liz attempts to adopt a child . Rachel Dratch , longtime comedy partner and fellow Saturday Night Live ( SNL ) alumna of series ' creator , executive producer and lead actress Tina Fey , the latter who was the show 's head writer from 1999 until 2006 , was originally cast to portray Jenna Maroney . Dratch played the role in the show 's original pilot , but in August 2006 , actress Jane Krakowski was announced as Dratch 's replacement . Executive producer Lorne Michaels announced that while Dratch would not be playing a series regular , she would appear in various episodes in a different role . In the pilot and in this episode , Dratch played Greta Johansen , the The Girlie Show 's cat wrangler . In this episode , Greta tells Liz Lemon that she would be interested in carrying her baby , after hearing that Liz was looking for someone to get her pregnant . Actor Chris Parnell appeared as Dr. Leo Spaceman in " The Baby Show " , in which Liz calls him for fertility purposes . Various other cast members of SNL have appeared on 30 Rock . These cast members include : Fred Armisen , Kristen Wiig , Will Forte , Jason Sudeikis , Molly Shannon , Horatio Sanz , and Jan Hooks . Fey and Tracy Morgan have both been part of the main cast of SNL .

According to the Nielsen ratings system , " The Baby Show " was watched by 5.9 million households , the same as the previous week 's episode " The Break-Up " , in its original American broadcast . It received a 3.0 rating / 7 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic . This means that it was seen by 3.0 percent of all 18- to 49-year-olds , and 7 percent of all 18- to 49-year-olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . IGN contributor Robert Canning said the episode " had plenty of standout bits " but that it " represented a major flaw " and " perhaps in the program as a whole " , citing that " [ t ] here seems to be more of an emphasis on comedic ' bits ' rather than comedic ' situations , ' which doesn 't bode well for a situation comedy . " He explained that " The Baby Show " in particular " felt very disjointed , bouncing between jokes more than storylines . It even opened with a Jenna surprise-birthday segment that was funny for what it was , but had absolutely nothing to do with the rest of the show . " Canning gave the episode a 7.0 out 10 rating . TV Guide 's Matt Mitovich liked that Josh had a story in this episode , and said that his impression of Tracy was " pretty good " . He remarked that " The Baby Show " was " a solid episode , if a bit too theme-y for my broad-sitcom liking . "

SMS Prinz Adalbert was an ironclad warship of the Prussian Navy , originally ordered by the Confederate States Navy . Prussia purchased the ship during the Second Schleswig War against Denmark , though the vessel was not delivered until after the war . The vessel was designed as an armored ram , but also carried three guns : one 21 cm ( 8.3 in ) and two 17 cm ( 6.7 in ) pieces in armored turrets . She was named after Prince Adalbert of Prussia , an early proponent of German naval power . The ship was poorly constructed and as a result had a very limited service career . She was heavily modified after her delivery to Prussia in 1865 and briefly served with the fleet between 1866 and 1871 . During the Franco-Prussian War in 1870 – 1871 , the ship was assigned as a guard ship in Hamburg . After the war , it was discovered that the internal wood construction was badly rotted ; she was therefore removed from service in October 1871 . Prinz Adalbert was stricken from the naval register in May 1878 and broken up for scrap that year .

Prinz Adalbert was 50.48 meters ( 165.6 ft ) long at the waterline and 56.96 m ( 186.9 ft ) long overall . She had a beam of 9.92 m ( 32.5 ft ) and a draft of 4.96 m ( 16.3 ft ) forward and 5.02 m ( 16.5 ft ) aft . She was designed to displace 1,440 metric tons ( 1,420 long tons ; 1,590 short tons ) at a normal load and up to 1,560 t ( 1,540 long tons ; 1,720 short tons ) at combat load . The ship 's hull was constructed from transverse frames , and included both iron and timber . The hull was sheathed in copper to protect it from parasites . The Prussians regarded the ship as a poor sea boat . The ram bow caused the vessel to ship a great deal of water . It was , however , responsive to commands from the helm and had a very tight turning radius . Prinz Adalbert had a crew of ten officers and 120 enlisted men . Prinz Adalbert 's propulsion system was provided by Mazeline , based in Le Havre . The ship was powered by a pair of 2-cylinder single expansion engines , each of which drove a four-bladed screw that was 3.6 m ( 11 ft 10 in ) in diameter . The engines were placed in a single engine room . Two trunk boilers , also in a single boiler room , supplied steam to the engines at 1.5 standard atmospheres ( 150 kPa ) . Two rudders were fitted side by side to control the vessel . The ship was initially fitted with a 740 square meter ( 2,428 sq ft ) brig rig , though this was subsequently replaced with a 677 square meter topsail schooner rig .

As built , Prinz Adalbert was armed with three rifled 36 pounder muzzle-loading guns . One was placed in an integral five-port bow turret , while the other two were located in a fixed two-port turret amidships . After delivery in 1865 , the French guns were replaced with a 21-centimeter ( 8.3 in ) L / 19 gun in the bow and two 17 cm ( 6.7 in ) L / 25 guns in a revolving turret . The forward gun was supplied with 76 rounds of ammunition while the central guns had 71 shells each . Prinz Adalbert was armored with wrought iron , which was mounted on the wooden hull . The armored belt , which protected the waterline of the ship , was 127 millimeters ( 5.0 in ) thick . The turrets were protected by 114 mm ( 4.5 in ) of armor plating on the sides .

Prinz Adalbert was built under the cover name Cheops by the French shipyard of the Arman brothers in Bordeaux . Her sister ship , built under the cover name Sphinx , was delivered to the Confederate Navy and renamed CSS Stonewall . The French emperor , Napoleon III , ordered the Arman brothers to sell Cheops to another navy immediately ; Prussia purchased the ship on 25 May 1864 . The Second Schleswig War between Denmark and Prussia and its ally Austria delayed delivery of the ship . Cheops was commissioned into the Prussian fleet on 29 October 1865 as Prinz Adalbert . Along with the turret ship Arminius , Prinz Adalbert was among the first armored vessels acquired by the Prussian Navy . The ship was named for Prince Adalbert of Prussia , one of the creators of the German fleet . While conducting trials off Denmark in June 1865 , Prinz Adalbert ran aground . During the Austro-Prussian War in 1866 , Prinz Adalbert was mobilized in Kiel under the command of Admiral Jachmann , but due to the lack of opponents in the North and Baltic Seas , the ship remained in the Baltic for the duration of the war .

The ship did not last long in service due to her poor construction ; this necessitated significant refurbishment , which was carried out at the naval depot at Geestemünde in 1868 – 1869 . Her armor plating had to be removed and reinstalled , a breakwater was installed at the stern of the ship , and the main mast had to be relocated . She was re-rigged to a schooner rig during this refit . Prinz Adalbert also suffered from severe leaking throughout her short career . In 1870 , shortly before the outbreak of the Franco-Prussian War , the Prussian fleet was mobilized for a training cruise into the Atlantic . Prinz Adalbert and the recently commissioned broadside ironclad König Wilhelm steamed to Plymouth , England , where they rendezvoused with the rest of the fleet . While in Plymouth , the squadron received news of imminent hostilities with France , and made for safety in Wilhelmshaven , arriving on 16 July , three days before the outbreak of war . For the duration of the conflict , Prinz Adalbert served as a harbor guard ship in Hamburg . Her timber hull was found to be rotten in 1871 , which forced her decommissioning . She was removed from service on 23 October 1871 and disarmed in 1875 – 1876 . The ship was formally stricken from the naval register on 28 May 1878 . She was broken up that year in Wilhelmshaven , and her engines were removed and reused .

The Battle of Lissa ( sometimes called the Battle of Vis ; French : Bataille de Lissa ; Italian : Battaglia di Lissa ; Croatian : Viška bitka ) was a naval action fought between a British frigate squadron and a larger squadron of French and Venetian frigates and smaller ships on 13 March 1811 during the Adriatic campaign of the Napoleonic Wars . The engagement was fought in the Adriatic Sea for possession of the strategically important island of Lissa ( also known as Vis ) , from which the British squadron had been disrupting French shipping in the Adriatic . The French needed to control the Adriatic to supply a growing army in the Illyrian Provinces , and consequently dispatched an invasion force in March 1811 consisting of six frigates , numerous smaller craft and a battalion of Italian soldiers . The French invasion force under Bernard Dubourdieu was met by Captain William Hoste and his four ships based on the island . In the subsequent battle , Hoste sank the French flagship , captured two others , and scattered the remainder of the Franco-Venetian squadron . The battle has been hailed as an important British victory , due to both the disparity between the forces and the signal raised by Hoste , a former subordinate of Horatio Nelson . Hoste had raised the message " Remember Nelson " as the French bore down , and had then manoeuvred to drive Dubourdieu 's flagship ashore and scatter his squadron in what has been described as " one of the most brilliant naval achievements of the war " .

The Napoleonic Wars , the name for a succession of connected conflicts between the armies of the French Emperor Napoleon and his European opponents , were nine years old when the War of the Fifth Coalition ended in 1809 . The Treaty of Schönbrunn that followed the war gave Napoleon possession of the final part of Adriatic coastline not under his control : the Illyrian Provinces . This formalised the control the French had exercised in Illyria since 1805 and over the whole Adriatic Sea since the Treaty of Tilsit in 1807 . In the Treaty of Tilsit , Russia had granted France control over the Septinsular Republic and withdrawn their own forces from the region , allowing Napoleon freedom of action in the Adriatic . At Schönbrunn , Napoleon made the Illyrian Provinces part of metropolitan France and therefore under direct French rule , unlike the neighbouring Kingdom of Italy which was nominally independent but in reality came under his personal rule . Thus , the Treaty of Schönbrunn formalised Napoleon 's control of almost the entire coastline of the Adriatic and , if unopposed , would allow him to transport troops and supplies to the Balkans . The French army forming in the Illyrian Provinces was possibly intended for an invasion of the Ottoman Empire in conjunction with the Russians ; the two countries had signed an agreement to support one another against the Ottomans at Tilsit .

To disrupt the preparations of this army , the British Royal Navy , which had controlled most of the Mediterranean since the Battle of Trafalgar in 1805 , seized the Dalmatian Island of Lissa in 1807 and used it as a base for raiding the coastal shipping of Italy and Illyria . These operations captured dozens of ships and caused panic and disruption to French strategy in the region . To counter this , the French government started a major shipbuilding programme in the Italian seaports , particularly Venice , and despatched frigates of their own to protect their shipping . Commodore Bernard Dubourdieu 's Franco-Venetian forces were unable to bring the smaller British force under William Hoste to a concerted action , where Dubourdieu 's superior numbers might prove decisive . Instead , the British and French frigate squadrons engaged in a campaign of raids and counter-raids during 1810 . In October 1810 , Dubourdieu landed 700 Italian soldiers on Lissa while Hoste searched in vain for the French squadron in the Southern Adriatic . The island had been left in the command of two midshipmen , James Lew and Robert Kingston , who withdrew the entire population of the island into the central mountains along with their supplies . The Italian troops were left in possession of the deserted main town , Port St. George . The French and Italians burnt several vessels in the harbour and captured others , but remained on the island for no more than seven hours , retreating before Hoste returned . The remainder of the year was quiet , the British squadron gaining superiority after being reinforced by the third-rate ship of the line HMS Montagu .

Early in 1811 the raiding campaigns began again , and British attacks along the Italian coast prompted Dubourdieu to mount a second invasion of Lissa . Taking advantage of the temporary absence of Montagu , Dubourdieu assembled six frigates and numerous smaller craft and embarked over 500 Italian soldiers under Colonel Alexander Gifflenga . The squadron amassed by Dubourdieu not only outnumbered the British in terms of men and ships , it was also twice as heavy in weight of shot . Dubourdieu planned to overwhelm Hoste 's frigate squadron and then invade and capture the island , which would eradicate the British threat in the Adriatic for months to come .

Dubourdieu ( as commodore ) led a squadron consisting of six frigates ( four of 40 guns and two of 32 guns ) , a 16-gun brig , two schooners , one xebec , and two gunboats . Three of his ships were from the French Navy , and the others from the Navy of the Kingdom of Italy . In addition the squadron carried 500 Italian soldiers . In the absence of Montagu , Hoste 's squadron consisted of three frigates ( one of 38 guns and two of 32 guns ) and one 22-gun post ship . The island of Lissa itself was defended by a small number of local troops under the command of two midshipmen . Dubourdieu 's squadron was spotted approaching the island of Lissa at 03 : 00 on 12 March 1811 by Captain Gordon in HMS Active , which had led the British squadron from Port St George on a cruise off Ancona . Turning west , the British squadron awaited the French approach in line ahead , sailing along the north coast of the island within half a mile of the shoreline . By 06 : 00 , Dubourdieu was approaching the British line from the north-east in two divisions , leading in Favorite at the head of the windward or western division . Dubourdieu hoped to pass ahead of Active at the head of the British line and cross it further east with Danaé , which led the leeward division . Dubourdieu intended to break the British line in two places and destroy the British squadron in the crossfire .

Over the next three hours the squadrons continued to close , light winds restricting them to a little over three knots . A protege of Nelson , Hoste recalled the inspirational effect of Nelson 's signal before the Battle of Trafalgar and raised his own : " Remember Nelson " , which was greeted with wild cheering from the squadron . As he closed with Hoste 's force , Dubourdieu realised that he would be unable to successfully cross Active 's bow due to the British ship 's speed , and would also be unable to break through their line due to the British ships ' close proximity to one another . He instead sought to attack the second ship in the British line , Hoste 's flagship HMS Amphion . Dubourdieu possessed not only a significant advantage in ships but also in men , the Italian soldiers aboard giving him the opportunity to overwhelm the British crews if he could board their frigates successfully . The first shots of the battle were fired at 09 : 00 , as the British used their wider field of fire to attack the leading French ships , Favorite and Danaé , unopposed for several minutes . The French squadron held their fire , Dubourdieu gathering his troops and sailors into Favorite 's bow in order to maximise the effect of his initial attack once his flagship came into contact with Amphion .

Hoste was aware of Dubourdieu 's intentions and the French advantage in numbers , and consequently ordered a large 5.5-inch ( 140 mm ) howitzer on Amphion 's deck triple-shotted until the cannon contained over 750 musket balls Once Favorite was within a few yards of Amphion 's stern , Hoste gave permission for the gun to be fired and the cannon 's discharge instantly swept the bow of Favorite clear of the French and Italian boarding party . Among the dozens killed and wounded were Dubourdieu and all the frigate 's officers , leaving Colonel Gifflenga in command of Favorite . As Favorite and Amphion closed with one another , firing continued between the British rear and the French leeward division , led by Danaé . Several of the French ships came at an angle at which they could bring their guns to bear on HMS Cerberus , the rearmost British ship , and both sides were firing regular broadsides at one another .

Following the death of Dubourdieu , Captain Péridier on Flore ordered the French and Venetian ships to attack the British line directly . The battered Favorite led with an attempt to round Amphion and rake her before catching her in crossfire , as had been Dubourdieu 's original intention . The remainder of the Franco-Venetian squadron followed this lead and attempted to bring their superior numbers to bear on the British squadron . Hoste was prepared for this eventuality and immediately ordered his ships to wear , turning south and then east to reverse direction . This movement threw the Franco-Venetian squadron into confusion and as a result the squadron 's formation became disorganised . Favorite , which had lost almost its entire complement of officers , was unable to respond quickly enough to the manoeuvre and drove onto the rocky coastline in confusion , becoming a total wreck . Thrown into further confusion by the loss of Favorite , the French and Venetian formation began to break up and the British squadron was able to pull ahead of their opponents ; the leading French ships Flore and Bellona succeeded in only reaching Amphion , which was now at the rear of the British line . Amphion found herself caught between the two frigates and this slowed the British line enough that the French eastern division , led by Danaé , was able to strike at HMS Volage , now the leading British ship after overtaking Cerberus during the turn . Volage was much smaller than her opponent but was armed with 32-pounder carronades , short range guns that caused such damage to Danaé that the French ship was forced to haul off and reengage from a longer range . The strain of combat at this greater distance ruptured Volage 's short-ranged carronades and left the ship much weakened , with only a single gun with which to engage the enemy .

Behind Volage and Danaé , the Venetian Corona had engaged Cerberus in a close range duel , during which Cerberus took heavy damage but inflicted similar injuries on the Italian ship . This exchange continued until the arrival of Active caused the Danaé , Corona and Carolina to sheer off and retreat to the east . To the rear , Amphion , succeeded in closing with and raking Flore , and caused such damage that within five minutes the French ship 's officers threw the French colours overboard in surrender . Captain Péridier had been seriously wounded in the action , and took no part in Flore 's later movements . Amphion then attacked Bellona and in an engagement that lasted until 12 : 00 , forced the Italian ship 's surrender . During this combat , the small ship Principessa Augusta fired on Amphion from a distance , until the frigate was able to turn a gun on them and drive them off . Hoste sent a punt to take possession of Bellona but due to the damage suffered was unable to launch a boat to seize Flore . Realising Amphion 's difficulty , the officers of Flore , who had made hasty repairs during the conflict between Amphion and Bellona , immediately set sail for the French harbour on Lesina ( Hvar ) , despite having already surrendered .

Active , the only British ship still in fighting condition , took up pursuit of the retreating enemy and at 12 : 30 caught the Corona in the channel between Lissa and the small island of Spalmadon . The frigates manoeuvred around one another for the next hour ; captains Gordon and Pasqualigo each seeking the best position from which to engage . The frigates engaged in combat at 13.45 , Active forcing Corona 's surrender 45 minutes later after a fire broke out aboard the Italian ship . Active too had suffered severely and as the British squadron was not strong enough to continue the action by attacking the remaining squadron in its protected harbour on Lesina , the battle came to an end . The survivors of the Franco-Venetian squadron had all reached safety ; Carolina and Danaé had used the conflict between Active and Corona to cover their escape while Flore had indicated to each British ship she passed that she had surrendered and was in British possession despite the absence of a British officer on board . Once Flore was clear of the British squadron she headed for safety , reaching the batteries of Lesina shortly after her Carolina and Danaé and ahead of the limping British pursuit . The smaller craft of the Franco-Venetian squadron scattered during the battle 's final stages and reached Lesina independently .

Although Favorite was wrecked , over 200 of her crew and soldier-passengers had reached the land and , having set fire to their ship , prepared to march on Port St. George under the leadership of Colonel Gifflenga . Two British midshipmen left in command of the town organised the British and indigenous population into a defensive force and marched to meet Gifflenga . The junior British officers informed Gifflenga that the return of the British squadron would bring overwhelming numbers of sailors , marines and naval artillery to bear on his small force and that if he surrendered immediately he could expect better terms . Gifflenga recognised that his position was untenable and capitulated . At Port St. George , the Venetian gunboat Lodola sneaked unnoticed into the harbour and almost captured a Sicilian privateer , Vincitore . The raider was driven off by the remaining garrison of the town without the prize , while attempting to manoeuvre her out of the bay . In the seas off Lissa , British prize crews were making strenuous efforts to protect their captures ; Corona was heavily on fire in consequence of her engagement with Active and the British prize crew fought the blaze alongside their Italian prisoners . The fire was eventually brought under control , but not without the death of five men and several more seriously burnt when the blazing mainmast collapsed . Problems were also experienced aboard Bellona , where Captain Duodo planned to ignite the powder magazine and destroy the ship following its surrender . Duodo had been mortally wounded in the action , and so ordered his second in command to light the fuse . The officer promised to do so , but instead handed control of the magazine to the British prize crew when they arrived . Duodo died still believing that the fuse had been lit .

Hoste also remained at sea , cruising in the battered Amphion beyond the range of the shore batteries on Lesina . Hoste was furious at the behaviour of Flore 's officers and sent a note into Lesina demanding that they give up the ship as indicated by its earlier surrender . In surrendering and then escaping , the officers of Flore had breached an informal rule of naval conflict under which a ship that voluntarily struck its flag submitted to an opponent in order to prevent continued loss of life among its crew . Flore had been able to pass unmolested through the British squadron only because she was recognised to have surrendered , and to abuse this custom in this way was considered , in the Royal Navy especially , to be a dishonourable act . The French at Lesina did not respond to Hoste 's note , and the British squadron was eventually forced to return to Lissa to effect repairs .

Casualties of the action were heavy on both sides . The British ships suffered 190 killed or wounded in the battle and a number lost afterwards in the fire aboard Corona . Captains Hoste and Hornby were both badly wounded and the entire British squadron was in need of urgent repair before resuming the campaign . In the French and Italian squadron the situation was even worse , although precise losses are not known . At least 150 had been killed aboard Favorite either in the action or the wreck , and the 200 survivors of her crew and passengers were all made prisoner . Bellona had suffered at least 70 casualties and Corona 's losses were also severe . Among the ships that escaped less is known of their casualties , but all required repair and reinforcement before the campaign could resume . Total French and Italian losses are estimated at no less than 700 . Losses among the officers of the combined squadron were especially high , with Commodore Dubourdieu and captains Meillerie and Duodo killed and Péridier seriously wounded . The immediate aftermath saw renewed efforts by Hoste to induce the French to hand over Flore , efforts that were rebuffed by the captain of the Danaé , who had assumed command of the French squadron . The surviving French and Venetian ships were initially laid up in Ragusa ( Dubrovnik ) awaiting supplies to continue the campaign , but a separate British squadron discovered and sank the supply ship at Parenzo ( Poreč ) , necessitating a full French withdrawal from the area . In Britain , Hoste 's action was widely praised ; the squadron 's first lieutenants were all promoted to commander and the captains all presented with a commemorative medal . Nearly four decades later the battle was also recognized in the issue of the clasp Lissa to the Naval General Service Medal , awarded to all British participants still living in 1847 . On their arrival in Britain , Corona and Bellone were repaired and later purchased for service in the Royal Navy , the newly built Corona being named HMS Daedalus and Bellone becoming the troopship HMS Dover . Daedalus was commissioned in 1812 under Captain Murray Maxwell , but served less than a year ; wrecked off Ceylon in July 1813 .

British numerical superiority in the region was assured ; when French reinforcements for the Adriatic departed Toulon on 25 March they were hunted down and driven back to France by Captain Robert Otway in HMS Ajax before they had even passed Corsica . Throughout the remainder of 1811 however , British and French frigate squadrons continued to spar across the Adriatic , the most significant engagement being the action of 29 November 1811 , in which a second French squadron was destroyed . The action had significant long-term effects ; the destruction of one of the best-trained and best-led squadrons in the French Navy and the death of the aggressive Dubourdieu ended the French ability to strike into the Balkans against the Ottoman Empire .

Jean-Mathieu-Philibert Sérurier , 1st Comte Sérurier ( 8 December 1742 – 21 December 1819 ) led a division in the War of the First Coalition and became a Marshal of France under Emperor Napoleon . He was born into the minor nobility and in 1755 joined the Laon militia which was soon sent to fight in the Seven Years ' War . After transferring into the regular army as an ensign , he was wounded at Warburg in 1760 . He fought in the Spanish-Portuguese War in 1762 . He married in 1779 after a promotion to captain . A newly minted major in 1789 , the French Revolution sped up promotion so that he was colonel of the regiment in 1792 . After leading Army of Italy troops in a number of actions , he became a general of brigade in 1793 and a general of division the following year . Sérurier led a division in Napoleon Bonaparte 's Italian campaign of 1796 , except during bouts of illness . He especially distinguished himself at the Battle of Mondovì and the Siege of Mantua . In 1799 , he again fought in Italy during the War of the Second Coalition at Verona , Magnano and Cassano , being captured in the latter action . After being paroled , he supported Napoleon 's rise to political power in the Coup of 18 Brumaire in late 1799 . The apex of his career occurred on 19 May 1804 when Napoleon appointed him a Marshal of the Empire . His active military career over , Sérurier served in the French Senate and was ennobled by Napoleon . In 1814 as the First French Empire was crumbling , he burned all the many flags captured by the French armies . His troops called him the " Virgin of Italy " for his rigorous standards of discipline and honesty in an army known for generals who enriched themselves by plundering the conquered territories . His surname is one of the names inscribed under the Arc de Triomphe , on Column 24 .

Sérurier was born at Laon on 8 December 1742 , the son of Mathieu-Guillaume Sérurier . The family formed part of the minor provincial nobility , his father holding the title Seigneur de Sort and the job of mole-catcher to the king 's breeding stud . After 1750 his father 's title became Seigneur de Saint-Gobert . Sérurier got a good education and was of sober character . He received a commission as lieutenant in the Laon militia battalion on 25 March 1755 , his uncle being the unit 's commander . He transferred to the Soissons militia battalion on 12 June 1758 . When he heard that the Laon battalion was called to serve in the Seven Years ' War he switched back to his old unit on 30 November 1758 . After sustaining a bayonet wound , he transferred into the Mazarin Infantry Regiment as a cadet on 1 October 1759 . At the Battle of Warburg on 31 July 1760 , Duke Ferdinand of Brunswick surprised the French under Louis Nicolas Victor de Felix d 'Ollieres , Count Du Muy . While defending a critical post , Sérurier was hit on the right side of his face by a bullet , which broke his jaw and left a lasting scar . The injury also cost him most of his teeth . He was promoted to second lieutenant on 25 April 1762 .

Sérurier 's regiment was ordered to Bayonne where it joined a force under Charles Juste de Beauvau , Prince of Craon . These troops entered Spain on 3 June 1762 to take part in the Spanish-Portuguese War . The first battalion , in which Sérurier served , participated in the siege of Almeida which fell to the Franco-Spanish on 25 August 1762 . The unit returned to France in November that year and after the Treaty of Paris was renamed the Beauce Regiment . After the peace Sérurier was demoted to sous-lieutenant and spent six years as a drill instructor . He was promoted to second lieutenant again on 21 February 1767 and was shipped to Corsica in 1770 . The Republic of Genoa transferred Corsica to France in 1764 but Pasquale Paoli led an insurrection against the occupiers which resulted in a few skirmishes . His superiors called Sérurier an " excellent officer " but he was not promoted to first lieutenant until 28 February 1778 . A year later he was promoted to captain . He married Louise-Marie-Madeleine Itasse on 3 July 1779 . Her father was the Registrar of the bail bondsmen of Laon . On 29 July 1781 Sérurier was awarded the Order of Saint-Louis . On 10 May 1782 he assumed the rank of captain commandant and on 1 June 1783 he took command of the regiment 's Chasseur company . Irked by the lack of promotion , he asked to retire on pension on 8 September 1788 . His commanding officer argued to retain such a good officer and Sérurier transferred into the Médoc Regiment as a major on 17 May 1789 . He became lieutenant colonel on 1 January 1791 . Since the French Revolution the garrison at Perpignan became agitated so the regiment was sent there to calm down the other troops . Instead , the Médoc Regiment itself became affected by the troubles . On 23 July 1791 , fearing that Sérurier was about to leave the country with the regiment 's colors , a body of soldiers removed them from his quarters . In January 1792 , 19 officers from the regiment emigrated to Spain . A story existed that Sérurier and a companion tried to flee to Spain but were nearly caught by a patrol and only his companion made it across the border . In June 1792 the Médoc , renamed the 70th Infantry Regiment , marched to the Camp of Tournoux in the Alps . Sérurier became the commanding officer of the 70th with the rank of colonel on 7 August 1792 .

On 29 September 1792 , a 10,000-man division under Jacques Bernard d 'Anselme crossed the Var River and occupied Nice , then part of the Kingdom of Sardinia . This force was part of the Army of the Midi which was split on 1 October 1792 , with the troops on the Alpine front becoming the Army of the Alps . On 7 November d 'Anselme 's division became the Army of Italy , which included the 70th Regiment . At about this time Sérurier was arrested for harboring royalist sentiments , but Paul Barras got his rank restored . On 19 May 1793 , the new army commander Gaspard Jean-Baptiste Brunet sent him with a column to occupy Saint-Sauveur-sur-Tinée . Sérurier moved north up the Tinée River and captured Isola on the 21st . With 3,000 troops , he attacked the Col de Raus west of Belvédère but was repulsed on 8 June . During the First Battle of Saorgio he led a major attack on the Massif de l 'Authion on 12 June , but it was defeated with losses of 280 dead and 1,252 wounded . At the end of July Brunet made another assault on Massif de l 'Authion while Sérurier attacked the Col de Raus again but both efforts failed . The representatives on mission were pleased with Sérurier 's performance and nominated him general of brigade on 25 June ; the promotion was confirmed on 22 August 1793 . Meanwhile , Brunet was arrested and executed on 15 November 1793 .

In September 1793 the Sardinian army tried to recapture the County of Nice . The French right flank held its ground , but on the left Sérurier gave up the east bank of the Vésubie River and fell back to Utelle on 10 September . Jacques François Dugommier took command of the left wing three days later and Sérurier took charge of the right wing of the Army of the Alps at Entrevaux . Sérurier was arrested for retreating too much and for being of noble blood . He was reinstated after the representatives on mission and the War Minister Jean Baptiste Noël Bouchotte termed the charges as unimportant while the citizens of Laon sent a petition vouching for his patriotism . After the fighting petered out in the December snow , Sérurier 's division was transferred to form the left flank of the Army of Italy . In January 1794 he was denounced for listening to aristocratic songs and for not caring about desertions , but Bouchotte and the representatives brushed aside these charges . Under army commander Pierre Jadart Dumerbion a French offensive began on 5 April and Oneglia was seized . André Masséna commanded the 20,000-man main column on the right wing while François Macquard directed the center division and Pierre Dominique Garnier led the left division . Sérurier , who commanded Garnier 's left brigade , reoccupied Isola and went on to seize the Colle delle Finestre against weak resistance . In the Second Battle of Saorgio on 24 April 1794 , Masséna defeated Michelangelo Alessandro Colli-Marchi , the French inflicting 2,800 casualties on the Sardinians while losing 1,500 killed and wounded . In the aftermath , Macquard occupied Saorge and the Col de Tende while Masséna held Ormea in the Tanaro valley . At the end of June , Sérurier took part in a small operation in the Valle Stura di Demonte .

In September 1794 the Sardinians and Austrians advanced to Carcare , threatening to cut the French link to Genoa , where supplies were obtained . Advised by his artillery chief Napoleon Bonaparte , Dumerbion struck back on 15 September . While Sérurier feinted at Vinadio on the left and Macquard feinted at Limone Piemonte in the center , Masséna mounted the main thrust on the right . In the First Battle of Dego on 21 September , 18,000 French troops beat Olivier , Count of Wallis and 8,000 Austro-Sardinians . Though the allies escaped encirclement , the French later seized the port of Vado Ligure . Dumerbion and Garnier both recommended Sérurier 's promotion and he was nominated general of division on 22 December 1794 . Given command of the right flank division in place of Masséna who was sick , his brigadiers were Barthélemy Catherine Joubert and Sextius Alexandre François de Miollis .

On 4 November 1794 , Barthélemy Louis Joseph Schérer replaced the ill Dumerbion as army commander . Schérer wrote that Sérurier was " a very good officer , devoted to his duties ; his patriotism has been attacked in the time of Hébert and his consorts ; he has emerged victorious from all these charges . In my opinion he is worthy of the post he holds on the right of the active army . " Sérurier 's promotion was not confirmed until 13 June 1795 . The Austro-Sardinian commander Joseph Nikolaus De Vins attacked the French lines on 24 June . Most of the assaults failed but since a few positions were captured and could not be retaken , the French withdrew from Vado to Borghetto Santo Spirito by 5 July . In the new line , Masséna with 14,000 troops held the coast while Sérurier and 6,000 men defended Ormea . On 5 July Sérurier reported that a key position had been partly lost , causing consternation at army headquarters . Later that day he reported that one of his brigadiers , Louis Pelletier , retook the position . Curiously , this incident did not count against him ; instead Sérurier was given command of the left wing in place of Garnier . On the evening of 31 August , his headquarters at Saint-Martin-Vésubie was surrounded by the enemy . Though only 318 soldiers were at hand , Sérurier resisted successfully until early the following morning when he attacked and scattered his attackers , capturing 86 of them . The enemy commander , the émigré Chevalier Bonnaud committed suicide . Not only was he a good soldier , but Sérurier 's troops liked him , he treated the local civilians with decency and his diplomacy allowed him to serve as a link between his army and the neighboring Army of the Alps . François Christophe Kellermann then in command of both armies , wrote , " It is to the coolness and courage of this excellent officer that was due the success of this glorious day . "

On 23 – 24 November 1795 , the Battle of Loano was fought . Schérer deployed Pierre Augereau with 6,961 troops on the right , Masséna with 13,276 men in the center and Sérurier with 5,155 soldiers on the left . The plan called for Sérurier to pin down the Allied right while Masséna broke through the center and rolled up the Allied left with the help of Augereau . By luck , Wallis replaced De Vins in command of the Allies on 22 November . That day Sérurier 's attack on the Colle San Bernardo was repulsed but it tied down Colli 's division . The plan was carried out with success . Masséna and Augereau both defeated the forces in front of them . The Austro-Sardinians suffered losses of 3,000 killed and wounded , 4,000 prisoners , 48 guns and five colors while French losses numbered 2,500 killed and wounded and 500 captured . Snow soon compelled both armies to withdraw into winter quarters . The French soldiers were in a wretched state , with very little food ; they became insubordinate and the generals quarreled . Sérurier got into a dispute with Schérer and nearly left the army . On 18 March 1796 Sérurier 's division refused to obey orders .

After the winter campaign , Schérer placed the divisions in the positions where they would start the 1796 campaign . From right to left , they were Masséna with two divisions on the coast , Augereau on the Bormida River , Sérurier on the Tanaro , Macquard at the Col de Tende and Garnier on the far left . On 27 March 1796 Bonaparte arrived to take command of the Army of Italy . At this date Sérurier was 53 years old with 40 years of military service . He applied to retire on a pension due to his age , health and wounds , but after meeting Bonaparte he decided to stay . Masséna later wrote that Bonaparte did not impress his generals at first . Then the new commander put on his hat and sharply questioned them ; the generals went away believing that they had a true leader at last . Bonaparte 's plan was to mass over 20,000 men under Masséna and Augereau near Carcare where the Austrian and Sardinian armies linked . Sérurier 's division would join the others near Ceva as they moved west . His 9,448-strong division consisted of the 39th , 69th and 85th Line Infantry Demi-brigades .

In the Montenotte Campaign , the French won victories at Montenotte , Millesimo and Dego between 11 and 15 April . In the Battle of Ceva Colli 's Sardinians repelled Augereau 's attack but they retreated to the west when Sérurier 's division appeared . Colli detailed Jean-Gaspard Dichat de Toisinge with 8,000 Sardinians and 15 guns to defend San Michele Mondovi against a French attack . On 19 April , Sérurier formed his division into two 3,000-man brigades under Pascal Antoine Fiorella and Jean Joseph Guieu plus a reserve under his personal command . The Corsaglia River was unfordable due to the spring thaw and the French attack soon stalled . However , some of Guieu 's skirmishers found an unguarded footbridge and made a lodgement on the west bank . The French captured San Michele but the unpaid , hungry soldiers went on a looting spree . Led by a company of Swiss troops , Colli organized a counterattack which drove Sérurier 's division out of the town , though Guieu 's brigade maintained its bridgehead . The repulse cost the French about 600 casualties while the Sardinians lost 300 . Colli 's troops withdrew toward Mondovì on the night of 20 April , but the move was soon discovered by the French who caught up with them at Vicoforte at mid-morning . In the Battle of Mondovì on 21 April , the brigades of Fiorella , Guieu and Elzéar Auguste Cousin de Dommartin fought their way into Vicoforte and routed the Sardinians . Dichat was killed and Henri Christian Michel de Stengel mortally wounded . Mondovì surrendered in the late afternoon . There was no looting but large requisitions of food were made from the town . Auguste de Marmont recalled of Sérurier , " To form his men into three columns , put himself at the head of the central one , throw out a cloud of skirmishers , and march at the double , sword in hand , ten paces in front of his column : that is what he did . A fine spectacle , that of an old general , resolute and decided , whose vigor was revived by the presence of the enemy . I accompanied him in this attack , the success of which was complete " . On 28 April the Armistice of Cherasco was signed , taking Sardinia out of the war .

In May 1796 , Bonaparte detailed Sérurier to demonstrate with his division at Valenza while the rest of the army crossed the Po River near Piacenza . After the Battle of Lodi , Bonaparte divided the Army of Italy into a cavalry reserve and four divisions including one under Sérurier . During the Battle of Borghetto on 30 May , his division feinted at the upper Mincio River while other troops made the main thrust against Johann Peter Beaulieu 's army at Valeggio sul Mincio . On 1 June , the 4,700-strong division took position on the north side of the fortress of Mantua . On 8 June , Sérurier , artillerist Augustin de Lespinasse and engineer Francois , marquis de Chasseloup-Laubat reconnoitered the fortress . Two days later Bonaparte put Sérurier in charge of the Siege of Mantua with about 8,000 soldiers . Soon after , Bonaparte wrote to the French Directory , " I shall not speak to you of the conduct of the intrepid General Sérurier , whose military reputation is established , and to whom we owe , amongst other things since the campaign began , the victory of Mondovi " . Because of the approach of Dagobert Sigmund von Wurmser 's Austrian army , the siege was raised on 31 July , the heavy cannons were buried and the division withdrew behind the Oglio River . Sérurier then became feverish with malaria , so that Fiorella and Gaspard Amédée Gardanne directed the division during the Battle of Castiglione . The general returned to France to recuperate . On 14 August 1796 Bonaparte wrote a confidential assessment of his generals to the Directory . In it he wrote , " Sérurier , fights like a private , takes nothing on himself , firm ; has not a good enough opinion of his troops , is ill " .

After his recovery Sérurier took command at Livorno ( Leghorn ) but he was thrilled to get the order to return to the army . On 27 December 1796 he resumed command of the Mantua siege corps , replacing Charles Edward Jennings de Kilmaine who had also become ill . The corps consisted of 10,000 men in two divisions under Thomas-Alexandre Dumas and Claude Dallemagne . On 14 – 15 January 1797 Bonaparte defeated József Alvinczi in the Battle of Rivoli , inflicting terrible losses on the Austrians . Meanwhile , a relief column under Giovanni Marchese di Provera reached the north side of Mantua and on 16 January there was a battle . The Mantua garrison launched a sortie led by Karl Philipp Sebottendorf that made progress at first but was beaten back by reinforcements under Claude Perrin Victor . At the same time , Sérurier and 1,500 troops at La Favorita Palace blocked Provera from joining the garrison . By noon Provera was hemmed in by French reinforcements and at 2 : 00 pm he surrendered to Sérurier with 7,000 men , 22 field guns , a pontoon train and a food convoy . Afterward , Sérurier got into a dispute with Dumas , who had commanded armies but was now a mere division commander . Angry that his contributions were not recognized , Dumas sent an abusive note to the army chief of staff Louis-Alexandre Berthier and was demoted by Bonaparte . On 30 January , Wurmser began negotiations with Sérurier for the capitulation of Mantua ; this was signed on 2 February 1797 by the two generals . The articles permitted Wurmser , his staff , his generals , 700 soldiers and six artillery pieces to go free , but 16,324 men of the garrison became prisoners of war .

For the spring 1797 campaign , Bonaparte organized his army into eight divisions of which the 3rd Division under Sérurier counted 6,543 soldiers . In the Battle of Valvasone on 16 March , Bonaparte drove back the rear guard of Archduke Charles , Duke of Teschen . During the operation Sérurier 's division was in reserve , but in the subsequent advance it was on the right flank while Jean-Baptiste Bernadotte 's division was in the center and Guieu 's division was on the left flank . On 19 March Bernadotte attacked Gradisca d 'Isonzo and was repulsed . After Sérurier 's division swung around the south side of Gradisca and gained the heights in the rear of the town , the garrison surrendered . The French captured four battalions of Austrian infantry totaling 2,500 soldiers , 10 guns and eight colors . While Bernadotte continued advancing to the east , Guieu 's division followed by Sérurier turned north in pursuit of a column under Adam Bajalics von Bajahaza . At this time Sérurier fell ill and command of his division passed to Louis François Jean Chabot . Trapped between Massena and Guieu , Bajalics was forced to surrender with 4,000 men in the Battle of Tarvis . After recovering , Sérurier resumed command of his division at Graz on 20 April and after the Treaty of Leoben the unit withdrew from Austria and took position at Sacile .

On 3 June 1797 Bonaparte notified the French government that he was sending Sérurier with 22 captured colors . He wrote that he , " has in the last two campaigns displayed as much talent as bravery and patriotism ... General Sérurier is extremely severe with himself : he is sometimes so with others . A strict friend of discipline , and of the order and virtues most necessary to the maintenance of society , he disdains intrigue and intriguers , which has sometimes made him enemies amongst those men who are always ready to accuse of unpatriotism any one who wishes to see them submitted to their superiors " . He was received in Paris by a large audience of government officials on 28 June who he assured of his loyalty and that of his soldiers . He was back with his division on 9 August and missed the Coup of 18 Fructidor . A little later Louis Desaix described him , " tall , 55 years old ... honest , estimable in every respect , considered to be an aristocrat but supported by General Bonaparte , who values and admires him " . Venice was occupied by French troops but by the recent treaty was to be handed over to Austria . Bonaparte ordered Sérurier to carry out the unpleasant job of removing all military stores and ships as well as all works of art . Over the objection of the Austrians and the inhabitants , the city was thoroughly plundered . Although he was the target of anger and abuse , Sérurier did not personally benefit from the looting and did his best to prevent others from doing so . He confiscated the salt and biscuits in the Venice arsenal but that was to raise money to pay his soldiers . In the same army , Masséna and Augereau were notorious for looting for personal gain , and many lesser officers also did it . Sérurier earned such a reputation for honesty that his soldiers called him the " Virgin of Italy " .

Early in 1798 Sérurier temporarily commanded the divisions left in Italy where he had his hands full trying to calm unpaid soldiers who were on the verge of mutiny . Bonaparte did not take him on the French campaign in Egypt and Syria because he was too old . Sometime after February 1798 , he was ordered to the Army of England where he made his headquarters at Rennes . On 15 September he became Inspector General of the troops in the interior of France . On 5 November 1798 he transferred back to Italy to serve under Army of Italy commander Joubert . Sérurier was ordered by Joubert to occupy Livorno , but instructions soon changed to invade the Republic of Lucca . His cavalry entered Lucca on 22 December 1798 and extorted large sums of cash and clothing for the army 's use . Sérurier 's 6,000 infantry arrived at the city on 2 January 1799 . After declaring that Lucca was a French-style republic on 25 January , he handed it over to Miollis on 5 February and returned to Mantua . At that time , the Army of Italy was led by Schérer who gave Sérurier command of the Tyrol Division with a paper strength of 8,328 men .

The outbreak of the War of the Second Coalition saw Schérer with 43,000 troops facing Paul Kray with 50,700 Austrians near Verona and 24,551 Russians under Alexander Suvorov marching up in support . Hoping to maul Kray before his Russians allies arrived , Schérer opted to attack . On 26 March 1799 in the Battle of Verona , the French gained a success at Pastrengo in the north , fought to a draw in front of Verona and were drubbed in the south at Legnago . In the north Sérurier drove the Austrians from Rivoli Veronese . On the 27th Kray rapidly shifted his strength to the north to assist his outnumbered right wing . Schérer shuffled the positions of his divisions which exhausted the soldiers without accomplishing anything . Belatedly , Schérer tried push his advantage in the north by sending Sérurier with 6,000 troops to advance on Verona from the north . On 30 March he ran into 15,000 Austrians at Parona and was badly defeated , losing 600 killed and wounded and 1,177 prisoners . Austrian casualties numbered only 390 . The Battle of Magnano on 5 April 1799 resulted in a French defeat . In the fighting Sérurier 's division included three battalions each of the 18th , 29th and 30th Light Infantry Demi brigades , one battalion of the 1st Light , 180 grenadiers , 850 cavalry and 60 gunners . Both armies advanced , Sérurier successfully capturing Villafranca on the left . However , the divisions of Claude Perrin Victor and Paul Grenier were routed on the right . The French lost 7,000 – 8,000 men , seven colors and eight cannons , while Kray 's army sustained 5,228 casualties . The worst casualty was the confidence of the French generals and the morale of the troops . When Schérer found that 12,000 Austrians were marching from the County of Tyrol to turn his north flank , he withdrew from the line of the Mincio , leaving 12,000 soldiers to defend Mantua . During the retreat many Italian and Swiss allies deserted from the Army of Italy .

By the end of April 1799 , Schérer had 28,000 troops behind the Adda River , strung out on a line 115 kilometres ( 71 mi ) in length . The army was arranged in three small corps under Sérurier on the left , Grenier in the center and Victor on the right . By the morning of 27 April , Suvorov 's Austro-Russian army had won crossings over the Adda at Capriate San Gervasio and Brivio . That day Jean Victor Marie Moreau replaced Schérer in command of the Army of Italy and the Allies defeated the French in the Battle of Cassano . After a struggle , Grenier 's soldiers were beaten at Trezzo while the Austrians broke through Victor 's defenses at Cassano . The French withdrew toward Milan leaving Sérurier isolated and without orders between Trezzo and Brivio . During the night the old veteran entrenched 2,600 – 4,000 troops in an all-around defense near Verderio . Finding the French in his path , Josef Philipp Vukassovich split his division into three columns and enveloped Sérurier 's position . Vukassovich reported that his enemies put up a " desperate " fight , but out of ammunition , Sérurier surrendered on the evening of 28 April . By the terms of the capitulation , the general and his officers were released on parole to France . The Austrians reported capturing 243 officers and 3,487 soldiers . Vukassovich 's troops suffered 2,750 casualties , over half of the Allied losses at Cassano . Sérurier 's left wing near Lake Como escaped and rejoined the main army .

Suvorov invited the captured general to dinner and found it impossible to coax any military information from him . The Russian wondered why such a reputable man should be fighting for the First French Republic . Sérurier retorted , " My father , in giving me my sword , expressly ordered me to use it only to defend my country " . Historian Ramsay Weston Phipps considered Verderio to be the biggest blunder of Sérurier 's career . He suggested that the general was accustomed to seeing Bonaparte save dire situations with brilliant maneuvers . When Moreau next saw the paroled general , he severely reprimanded him but later admitted to the government that Sérurier 's only mistake was hewing to his orders too rigidly . This was the last time Sérurier led troops in combat . Meanwhile , the French Directory sank in popularity after military defeats and mismanagement . Back in Paris , Sérurier became part of the Bonaparte faction , having seen nothing but disaster since serving under the military genius . Bonaparte launched the Coup of 18 Brumaire on 9 November 1799 during which Sérurier led a reserve detachment of soldiers at the Pont-du-Jour . The next day , the coup almost collapsed when Bonaparte had to be rescued from the Council of Five Hundred . However , Lucien Bonaparte convinced the Council 's own guard battalion that only a minority of members opposed his brother . These soldiers soon evicted the lawmakers from their own hall . During these events , Sérurier 's troops arrived at Saint-Cloud and the general was heard addressing them , " The wretches ! They wished to kill General Bonaparte . Do not stir soldiers ; wait until you get orders " . In the aftermath of the coup , Sérurier was put on a commission to determine how to use auxiliary battalions on 15 November 1799 . He became a member of the Sénat conservateur ( Senate ) on 27 December .

In time Sérurier became vice-president of the Senate and in 1803 was appointed president of a commission that determined the border between France and Piedmont . In 1804 he was named governor of Les Invalides , a hospital and retirement home for veterans . On 19 May that year Emperor Napoleon named him an honorary Marshal of France . Out of 18 marshals appointed on this date , the other three honorary ones were Bon Adrien Jeannot de Moncey , François Christophe de Kellermann and Catherine-Dominique de Pérignon . Sérurier was awarded the Grand Eagle of the Légion d 'Honneur and the Grand Cordon of the Order of the Iron Crown . He was ennobled as a Count of the Empire in 1808 and granted a pension of 40,000 francs per year . On 31 March 1814 , upon the arrival of the Sixth Coalition armies at Paris , Sérurier publicly destroyed the 1,417 captured enemy flags and personally burned the sword and sash of Frederick the Great as to not let them fall into the Allies ' hands . The restored King Louis XVIII made Sérurier a Peer of France , but he joined Napoleon during the Hundred Days , when the former emperor briefly returned to power . This caused him to lose his post at Les Invalides and his marshal 's salary after Napoleon 's second downfall . Despite his Bonapartist sympathies , as Peer Sérurier voted in favour of the death penalty for Marshal Michel Ney .

Santos ( birth name : Daniel Doroteo Santos Betancourt ) was born and raised with his three sisters , Sara , Rosa Lydia and Luz América in Trastalleres , a poor section of Santurce , Puerto Rico . He attended Las Palmitas Elementary School . Although he was doing well in school his father Rosendo took him out of school when he was in the fourth grade and forced him to shine shoes because of his family 's poverty . In 1924 , his family moved to New York City looking for a better way of life . When his parents , Rosendo and María enrolled him in school , he had to start from the first grade again because he did not know enough English . Santos joined his high school 's choir , but he dropped out of high school in his second year and moved out of his parents ' apartment . When he was fifteen years old he began looking for work in Manhattan . Santos moved into a small apartment , where , one day , he started to sing " Te Quiero , Dijiste " ( You said ' I Love You ' ) . A member of the Trío Lírico was passing by and heard him sing . He then knocked on Santos ' door . The trio member invited Daniel to join the trio and he accepted . Santos debuted with them on September 13 , 1930 ; he sang in various social events and was paid a dollar for every song that he sang . He returned to Puerto Rico only to return once more to Manhattan after he unsuccessfully tried to acquire a job as a singer at WKAQ , which was one of the island 's main radio stations .

In late 1933 and 1934 , Santos performed in a nightclub named Los Chilenos located near Broadway and was paid twenty dollars per weekend . Personally , Santos led a life of excesses , including maintaining several romantic relationships at once . In 1938 , Santos was working at the Cuban Casino Cabaret in Manhattan , which was normally visited by Puerto Ricans and other Latinos . His chores included singing , waiting on tables and on occasions he was the master of ceremonies for which he was paid a salary of thirty dollars . On one occasion , he was singing " Amor Perdido " ( Lost Love ) , without knowing that the composer of the song Pedro Flores was in the audience . Flores liked what he heard and invited Santos to join his group " El Cuarteto Flores " which also included Myrta Silva , and would in the future also include Pedro Ortiz Davila ( also known by his stage name " Davilita " ) . Santos recorded many songs with the Cuarteto Flores and started to gain fame . Among the songs he recorded were : " Perdon " ; " Amor " ; " El Ultimo Adios " " Si Yo Fuera Millonario " by singer / composer Miguel Poventud and Borracho no Vale ' .

In the early 1940s , many young Puerto Rican men were drafted for World War II , among them Santos . Santos recorded " Despedida " ( My Good-bye ) , a farewell song written by Flores from the viewpoint of an Army recruit who had to leave behind his girlfriend and his ailing mother , which became a hit . Santos recalled in an interview once that he had to hold back tears while recording the song , since his draft papers had just arrived and he would soon have to live a situation similar to what the song 's lyrics described , but that a friend started mocking him at the control booth , to which he decided to curse him on the spot , trading the word mama 'o ( an expletive in Puerto Rican Spanish ) for mamá ( mother ) . This incident produced two mannerisms that Santos eventually adopted in his singing style : chopped delivery ( almost syllable by syllable , as suggested by Flores ) and stretched last vowel in the last verse of each stanza , in almost every song he recorded afterwards . He was sent to Maui Island , after completing his basic military training in Kentucky . In Maui , he was assigned to a US Army infantry unit which was used to replenish casualties in the Pacific theatre . Santos would joke that he escaped the " replenishment levies " because of his guitar playing skills . Nevertheless , he was sent to Okinawa towards the end of the war . While in the military Santos teamed up with Juanito Jiménez as a part of a duo dubbed Los Cumbancheros . After the war concluded Santos returned to New York , where he received a tribute upon his arrival . There he recorded " Linda " , written specially for him by Flores for one of Santos ' old girlfriends .

Santos became active in the Puerto Rican Independence Movement and identified himself with the Puerto Rican Nationalist Party and its president Pedro Albizu Campos after he was discharged from the military because of the prejudice which he experienced within the Army . His devotion for Albizu lasted throughout his life , to the point of commissioning , later in his life , a bronze bust of Albizu for his estate in Puerto Rico . With Davilita , he recorded " Patriotas " ( " Patriots " ) and " La Lucha por la Independencia de Puerto Rico " ( " The Fight for Puerto Rico 's Independence " ) , which was adopted from one of Juan Antonio Corretjer 's poems . On March 1946 , Santos inaugurated a bar and restaurant named Borinquen , and administrated the establishment for some weeks . Two months later he began singing Mexican music and boleros at Greenwich Village . Later that year he visited the Dominican Republic , where he had legal problems and was jailed briefly .

By this time Santos ' fame had grown and he decided to travel to Cuba , establishing a residence in Havana in 1946 . At the moment Cuba was experiencing economic growth and Santos developed an interest in the island . Upon arriving he experienced success , making presentations in Paseo del Prado , Miramar and Vedado . These included a special presentation titled Alegrias de Hatuey , which was broadcast by " Radio Progreso " , a radio station . He participated and sang for several other stations , including RHC-Cadena Azul and CMQ , where he participated in a program named Cascabel . This exposition came after he established friendships with local public figures . The Cuban public created two names adopted by Santos , these were Inquieto and Anacobero , which he later fused and became known as El Inquieto Anacobero . He also made five presentations in theaters , among them the Martí theater . In 1948 , Santos was invited to perform in the Cuban National Palace by the president in office , Carlos Prío Socarrás . This year also marked Santos ' debut with La Sonora Matancera , where he served as vocalist . His first successful single was titled Bigote de Gato , based on an area of Havana named " Luyano " , which was infamous for serving as the home for fortune tellers . Later that year Santos was arrested after becoming involved in a fight where he accidentally injured a woman after trying to defend himself . Santos was subsequently pardoned by Prío Socarrás , but he asked to remain in jail twelve additional days to spend the Christmas celebration with some of the inmates . While in prison he composed a single named El Preso and was asked to write Amnistía as part of a campaign to promote the well-being of inmates . This was followed by several successful productions with the Sonora Matancera . These included Dos gardenias and Pa ' fricasé los pollos , which were based on Cuban music . Among several other contemporary records were : El juego de la vida , El 5 y 6 , El ajiaco , El niño majadero , Ramoncito campeón and El tíbiri tábara .

On March 10 , 1952 , Fulgencio Batista organized a successful coup d 'état and took control of the island 's government . Santos , known for his Puerto Rican independentist preferences , was never in the good graces of the dictator . He made his nationalistic and democratic views well known throughout Latin America . As many people during those days , he viewed Fidel Castro 's fight against Batista very favorably . In 1958 , forbidden by Batista from returning to the island , he composed the song " Sierra Maestra " , which borrowed parts of the official hymn of the 26th of July Movement . Santos donated the profits from " Sierra Maestra " to the Cuban Revolution .

He returned to the island later that year and began an international tour on 1953 , among the countries visited were Venezuela , Colombia and Mexico . In 1954 , he returned to Puerto Rico and performed in hotels located in San Juan before continuing his tour throughout America which extended from 1955 to 1956 . The tour concluded with a presentation in New York and he his returned to Cuba . Later that year he visited Ecuador for the first time in his artistic career . Here he was contracted to perform in a theater named " Apolo " , where he worked with a band named the " Costa Rica Swing Boys " . During his third presentation Santos lost his voice without completing the scheduled show , he tried to explain the situation to the public but was unable to calm them down and a riot erupted . While in Ecuador he composed two successful singles , Cataplum pa ' and Cautiverio . Late in 1956 , Santos recorded with a Venezuelan record label named " Discomoda " . In 1959 , he briefly returned to Cuba . It was during this trip that he confronted Raul Castro and Ernesto " Che " Guevara about the political nature of the Cuban Revolution he had supported . He left Cuba abruptly , never to return , when Castro and Guevara failed to convince him that the Cuban Revolution was " nationalistic " . A self proclaimed " anti-communist " , he explained that he had supported the Cuban Revolution because its leadership had assured him that it was not communist .

During the last years of his life , Santos toured the United States and Latin-America , while experiencing health problems . He continued performing with several music groups . While he performed with the Sonora Matancera , Santos suffered a heart attack while he was sleeping in a hotel located in La Reforma after eating dinner . Santos continued performing during the following decades , making presentations in several Latin American countries . He continued to sing the songs which he had written during his career until he finally retired and established a residence in Florida . In 1991 , Santos visited some friends in New York City 's Barrio Latino , during this visit Santo 's was walking through the street on a Saturday evening when he fainted and collapsed . He was attended by some bystanders and residents of the neighborhood who called the New York City Police Department . When the police arrived at the scene they transported him to a local hospital , Santos was released two days after . During this time Santos was also suffering from mental illnesses , including memory loss due to Alzheimer 's disease . Despite his health he made final presentations in some of Puerto Rico 's municipalities where he received recognitions in San Juan and Ponce . Santos was also invited to participate in a music festival in Cuba , where he was supposed to receive a homage , but he was unable to attend .

Over the course of his life Daniel Santos was legally married on twelve separate occasions . His first marriage took place in 1934 , where he married Lucy Montilla when he was eighteen years old . In 1947 , he married Cuban socialite Eugenia Perez Portal , who gave him his first son in 1948 , Daniel Jr . After this he was involved in several relationships with women of several Latin American countries , on occasions having more than one consecutively . When he was fifty-six years old he married Luz Dary Pedredín in a ceremony organized on Colombia . The couple had two children , Danilú and David Albizu . Santos ' last marriage was with Ana Rivera , who was originally of Puerto Rico . Daniel Santos died on November 27 , 1992 , aged 76 , at his ranch , " Anacobero 's Ranch " in Ocala , Florida . He is buried at what is virtually Puerto Rico 's national pantheon , the St. Mary Magdalene of Pazzis cemetery in Old San Juan , geographically quite close to where Albizu Campos and Pedro Flores were interred . Due to the scarcity of empty space in the cemetery , when fellow Puerto Rican singer and Santos boyhood friend Eladio Peguero ( commonly known as " Yayo El Indio " ) later died , he was also buried in Santos ' tomb .

The 2007 Bernard Matthews H5N1 outbreak was an occurrence of avian influenza in England caused by the H5N1 subtype of Influenza virus A that began on 30 January 2007 . The infection affected poultry at one of Bernard Matthews ' farms in Holton in Suffolk . It was the third instance of H5N1-subtype detected in the United Kingdom and a range of precautions were instituted to prevent spread of the disease including a large cull of turkeys , the imposition of segregation zones , and a disinfection programme for the plant . The cause of the outbreak was not determined . However , it was considered significant that Bernard Matthews regularly transports turkeys and turkey products between the UK and its plant in Hungary , and that the H5N1 strains previously found in Hungary , and those found at Suffolk , were effectively genetically identical .

H5N1 is a subtype of the Influenza A virus , the viruses responsible for influenza in humans and many other animal species . A bird-adapted strain of H5N1 , called HPAI A ( H5N1 ) for " highly pathogenic avian influenza virus of type A of subtype H5N1 " , is the causative agent of H5N1 flu . HPAI A ( H5N1 ) is considered an avian disease , although there is some evidence of limited human-to-human transmission of the virus . A risk factor for contracting the virus is handling of infected poultry , but transmission of the virus from infected birds to humans is inefficient . Poultry farming practices have changed due to H5N1 . The cost of poultry farming has increased , while the cost to consumers has gone down , due to fears from H5N1 driving demand below supply .

Initial signs of the outbreak occurred on Tuesday , 30 January when 55 turkey poults died and 16 had to be killed because they were sick . At least 185 more died the following day . It was not until 1 February that the deaths were reported to Defra . The farm was sealed off while tests were carried out , on samples taken from the dead birds , at the Veterinary Laboratories Agency in Weybridge , Surrey . Another 1,500 birds died on 2 February . Then on 3 February 2007 the H5N1 causation was confirmed . A 3 km protection zone , 10 km surveillance zone and a restricted zone encompassing 2000 km2 were set up . Another 159,000 turkeys were slaughtered with the cull being completed on the evening of 5 February . Also on 5 February there was criticism that nearby farmers had not been advised as to the action to be taken . Around 320 workers at the plant were given anti-viral drugs . Although a vet from the site was admitted into hospital , suffering from a ' mild respiratory illness ' during the evening of 6 February , it was found not to be bird flu . The plant was thoroughly disinfected , with cleaning complete on 12 February , and permission being given for production to resume .

The Government , on 8 February , admitted that the outbreak may have been caused by semi-processed turkey meat imported directly from Hungary , where the disease is prevalent , despite earlier in the week the Environment Secretary , David Miliband assuring the House of Commons that there was " no Hungarian connection " . Bernard Matthews had been importing 38 tons of partly processed turkey meat on a weekly basis from their Saga Foods company , in Sárvár , Hungary , to a processing plant next to the farm . Though Saga Foods lies 165 miles ( 266 km ) from where the recent Hungarian H5N1 outbreak had occurred , a company director admitted it was " possible " that some of the meat could have come from the exclusion zone . In response to this revelation , Whitehall expressed concern over biosecurity and whether any meat may have been distributed for human consumption in Britain . On 9 February 2007 the Hungarian authorities started an investigation to try to establish whether there was a connection between the Suffolk and Hungarian outbreaks . On 11 February the investigation revealed that turkey products were still being transported , in both directions , between the plant and Hungary with EU regulations being cited as the reason why a transport ban could not be imposed .

The Hungary link was dismissed by the European Commission on 12 February . Even so , the H5N1 bird flu strains found in Hungary and Britain were shown to be 99.96 % genetically identical and , according to an analysis of the viruses by the Veterinary Laboratories Agency in Weybridge , Surrey , were almost certainly linked . A leak from the Government 's COBRA emergency committee indicated that the authorities were not aware of the Hungarian connection until an investigator found a Gallfoods delivery wrapper in a Bernard Matthews bin . This raised the possibility that the outbreak was due to a " third party abattoir , Gallfoods in Hungary , just outside the restricted zone " . This abattoir might have been a middle man for contaminated poultry farming tools , feed , or product from within the restricted zone , such as a Bernard Matthews owned subsidiary in Hungary . In response to the incident and allegations of a cover-up , Bernard Matthews himself stated on 14 February " I 'm sorry - but this has not been of our making . There 's been absolutely no cover up at our end . I 've been upset about allegations that we may have withheld information . That is completely untrue . "

By 8 February there was a lengthening list of countries that had banned the importation of poultry products from Britain including South Africa , Russia , Japan , and many others but a spokesman for the European Commission condemned the bans as " totally disproportionate " and the British Poultry Council pointed out that exports were less than 9 % of the level of domestic sales . Supermarket sales of Bernard Matthews branded turkeys halved after the onset of the outbreak as shoppers sought out alternatives . One of the biggest ongoing surveys of consumer confidence revealed that , by 13 February 2007 , Bernard Matthews was the least respected and trusted brand in Britain . Following the outbreak the company confirmed , on 19 February 2007 , that 130 workers would be laid off for a period of twenty days due to a drop in product sales . The Transport and General Workers ' Union then called for the government to provide compensation to the workers affected . The Transport and General Workers ' Union paid out hardship monies from union funds to union members , on top of any state benefits to which the laid-off workers were entitled and a one-off £ 100 payment from Bernard Matthews .

Norman Whiteside ( born 7 May 1965 ) is a former Northern Ireland international footballer who played in two World Cups . He played both as a midfielder and as a striker . Whiteside began his career at Manchester United , signing professional forms in 1982 at the age of 17 and quickly becoming a key member of the side . He scored 68 goals in 278 league and cup appearances for the club over the next seven years , picking up two FA Cup winners medals in 1983 and 1985 , as well as playing in the 1982 FA Youth Cup final , the 1983 League Cup final , and the FA Charity Shield in 1983 . He remained with United until July 1989 , when he was sold to Everton for £ 600,000 . However , he retired from playing two years later , aged only 26 , due to a knee injury . Whiteside holds records as the youngest player to take part in a World Cup , the youngest player to score in a League Cup and FA Cup final , and the youngest player to score a senior goal for Manchester United . Winning 38 caps for Northern Ireland , he played at the 1982 and 1986 World Cups , and also helped his country to win the last ever British Home Championship in 1984 . After retiring as a player he became a podiatrist , and still works at the corporate hospitality department at Old Trafford .

Born in Belfast to Norman and Aileen Whiteside , he grew up on Shankill Road , and because of his aggressive , physical playing style he was later nicknamed the " Shankill Skinhead " by Manchester United supporters . The family later moved to 10 Danube Street , and the family 's poverty meant that Whiteside had to share a bed with his two brothers . He remained relatively unscathed by The Troubles as his Protestant parents kept a firm watch on their children to ensure that they did not stray far from home and that none of them became involved with Ulster loyalism . At the age of around seven he joined the Boys ' Brigade , and quickly showed his natural talent for football , scoring ten goals in a game against boys almost twice his age . He was educated at Cairnmartin High School , and became famous in the Shankill area as a footballing prodigy by the age of 11 . He was said to have been discovered by Ipswich Town scout Jim Rodgers ( his goals at schoolboy level meant that he was already well known to all the football scouts in Northern Ireland ) , who was told by manager Bobby Robson to wait until Whiteside grew older . Instead , it was Manchester United 's 80-year-old Ulster scout Bob Bishop , who previously unearthed Belfast-born George Best and Sammy McIlroy for the club , who first offered him a trial at an English club . Whiteside 's family were Manchester United supporters , though the youngster himself held no particular allegiance . He found that he had been offered schoolboy terms at the club during a school trip to the United States ; on the trip , he and his classmates met President Jimmy Carter at the Oval Office , a rare and extraordinary occasion for children from a disadvantaged background .

A few days before Whiteside was old enough to sign schoolboy terms with Manchester United , he was offered a trial at Liverpool , causing United 's chief scout Joe Brown to fly over to Belfast to immediately offer him the schoolboy contract to sign . Whiteside remained in Belfast , and flew over to Manchester every weekend for training . From age 14 , he was constantly compared to the now-retired George Best , and did little to cease such comparisons when he told a journalist that " the only thing I have in common with George Best is that we come from the same place , play for the same club and were discovered by the same man " . His injury problems started as early as 1980 , when he was 15 years old and saw Glentoran 's physio Bobby McGregor to resolve a groin strain ; Whiteside said that the highly physical massage he was subjected to damaged his pelvis and robbed him of his natural pace . His lack of pace was later seen as the one weakness in his game . Six weeks into his apprenticeship , in July 1981 , and an innocuous looking challenge by a Preston North End player in an ' A ' team game saw Whiteside requiring an operation on his right knee . Had the injury occurred a couple of years later he would have been able to have pioneering keyhole surgery , which could potentially have saved his career . After a seven-month lay-off and a further operation to remove cartilage , he returned to fitness in January 1982 . He had to adapt his playing style to compensate for his damaged knee and pelvis , and developed well under youth team coach Eric Harrison .

Whiteside became United 's youngest first team player since Duncan Edwards in 1953 , when he made his debut as a substitute against Brighton & Hove Albion in a 1 – 0 league win at the Goldstone Ground on 24 April 1982 , two weeks before his 17th birthday . He later played in the FA Youth Cup final defeat to Watford , though it would be just another year before he appeared in the final of the senior competition . He turned professional at Old Trafford on his 17th birthday , signing a three-year contract , and he shared a room with Steve Coppell , who was heading into retirement due to a knee injury of his own . He also struck up a close friendship with Paul McGrath , who would also face similar problems with his knee . On the final day of the season , eight days after his 17th birthday , he became the club 's youngest goalscorer in a 2 – 0 home win over Stoke City . His performances at the World Cup convinced manager Ron Atkinson to start Whiteside alongside Frank Stapleton at the front of United 's attack for the 1982 – 83 season . The pair were similar players in that they held the ball up and made frequent runs into the box , allowing midfielder Bryan Robson to join in the attack . Whiteside scored four goals in the first five games of the campaign , before entering a seventeen-game drought . He scored six goals in 16 games in domestic cup competitions that season , helping Manchester United to the finals of both the League Cup and FA Cup , notably by scoring past Arsenal in the FA Cup semi-finals . At the age of 17 years and 323 days , he beat Liverpool centre-half Alan Hansen to score in the League Cup final defeat at Wembley , making him the youngest player to score in a League Cup final ; his consistent performances against Liverpool during the 1980s earned him the moniker of the " Scourge of the Scousers " from United supporters . He gave an assist to Stapleton in the FA Cup Final , which finished as a 2 – 2 draw with Brighton & Hove Albion . At the age of 18 years and 18 days , he then scored a headed goal in the replay , which United won 4 – 0 , to become the youngest player score in an FA Cup Final . He also became the first player to score in both domestic cup finals in the same season . He played 57 times in all competitions that season and missed just three league games , scoring a total of 14 goals .

Manchester United later accepted a £ 1.5 million offer for Whiteside from A.C. Milan , and offered him £ 100,000 in cash to accept the transfer . He refused the move as he felt he still had a good future with Manchester United and because he was given only a brief time to consider whether or not to relocate to a club and location he knew little about . He continued to impress , despite on-loan striker Garth Crooks being tipped to take his first team place and sign a permanent contract ( which never happened ) . United were trophyless however in 1983 – 84 , exiting both domestic cup competitions to Third Division sides . He did though play a part in the memorable 3 – 0 win over Barcelona at Old Trafford in the Third Round of the Cup Winners ' Cup . He lost his starting place to Mark Hughes for the semi-final clash with Juventus at the Stadio Olimpico di Torino , which ended in a 2 – 1 defeat . By February 1985 , he had started just eight games in the 1984 – 85 season , having fallen behind in the pecking order to Stapleton , Hughes , and new signing Alan Brazil . However , injury to midfielder Remi Moses left an opening at the centre of the field , and Whiteside proved to be a revelation in the role with his intelligent play and positioning skills , and stayed in midfield for the rest of manager Ron Atkinson 's time at the club . He formed a solid partnership with Bryan Robson , despite the two being similarly attacking players , and United lost just one of their first 15 games with this new midfield partnership in operation . Whiteside scored the only hat-trick of his professional career in a 4 – 2 home win over West Ham United on 9 March 1985 , in the FA Cup quarter-finals ; it was a ' perfect hat-trick ' in that he scored once with each foot and once with his head . He went on to score the winning goal in the 1985 FA Cup Final , curling a shot in from the right hand side in the 20th minute of extra time , to give ten-man United victory over Everton , and Whiteside his second FA Cup winner 's medal . The goal required vision , timing , and precise shooting ; and The Guardian praised his " cool footballing brain " and " clever concealment of the shot " . After this success he negotiated a new contract of £ 60,000 a year .

United won 13 and drew two of their opening 15 league matches of the 1985 – 86 campaign , and seemed destined to win the First Division title . However they dropped off in mid-season and won just six of their final 18 games to end the season in fourth place . The press blamed the decline in form on the club 's drinking culture and Ron Atkinson 's lax disciplinary attitude , though in his autobiography Whiteside denies that this was to blame , and states that stories of the player 's drinking sessions were exaggerated . Then came a decline in his career at such a young age which began soon after the arrival of new manager Alex Ferguson in November 1986 , the change of manager coming after a dismal start to the season led to the decision to sack Ron Atkinson . Whiteside , still only 21 , was facing trouble from his right knee which was now beginning to require serious medical procedures to prevent it from causing his retirement . Ferguson put Whiteside back up front , and in turn he scored three times in his first four games back from injury . Ferguson did though have to rebuke Whiteside after some of his numerous drinking sessions . He ended the 1986 – 87 season with 10 goals in 37 appearances , however United could only manage an 11th-place finish .

" I felt the excitement that is felt by watching a player of the highest class . He had self-assurance that was extraordinary in a twenty-one-year-old . The excellence of his technique gave him easy mastery of the ball and he had the gift of making time for himself in the stamp of quality . He was an island of composure , looking up and unhurriedly making his decisions . He rarely surrendered possession and he increased the angle and weight of his passes so well that the receiver never had to fight the ball . His eyes were as cold as steel and he had the temperament to match . As a player he was close to the genius category . " At the start of the 1987 – 88 season , Whiteside represented the Football League in a game against the ' Rest of the World ' to celebrate the league 's centenary . He formed a solid partnership with Brian McClair , scoring 10 goals in 35 appearances , though United finished second in the league behind Liverpool , and he often found himself back in midfield or on the bench when Peter Davenport was selected to play alongside McClair . However he felt that he was due a better contract , and decided to ' call the bluff ' of the club by handing in a transfer request . Recovering from injury and abuse from some supporters for his transfer request , he put what many United fans call the best performance of his career at Anfield on 4 April 1988 , when he came off a substitute with his team 3 – 1 down to help United to salvage a point .

He ruptured his Achilles midway through the 1987 – 88 season and missed almost a year of first team action . Whiteside 's goal in a 2 – 1 win over Derby County in a league match at the Baseball Ground on 10 February 1988 would prove to be his last for Manchester United . He was limited to just six goalless appearances in 1988 – 89 . In the summer of 1988 , he came close to joining American club Portland Timbers , before injury put negotiations on hold . In view of Whiteside 's medical reports , Ferguson rejected bids of £ 500,000 from Osasuna of Spain and from Ron Atkinson 's new club Sheffield Wednesday , before accepting a bid of £ 600,000 ( with £ 150,000 to follow if Whiteside reached 50 games ) from Everton in July 1989 . This was to the dismay of some of the club 's supporters , who felt that there was still hope that he could re-establish himself as the key player he had been at the club as recently as three years earlier . Ferguson intended to build his own team having signed midfield duo Neil Webb and Mike Phelan , and also in the hunt for other players including Paul Ince , Gary Pallister and Danny Wallace .

Whiteside signed a four-year contract with Everton , and Alex Ferguson helped him to negotiate a pay deal that would see him earn more in two years at Goodison Park than he had done during his eight years in Manchester . He was also offered £ 50,000 to put his name to a tabloid article criticising Ferguson , though he declined the offer . At the time Everton boasted more recent success than Manchester United , having won two league titles , an FA Cup and the European Cup Winners ' Cup . Manager Colin Harvey was planning to boost the " Toffees " chances of more silverware , and also in 1989 signed Mike Newell , Martin Keown , Stefan Rehn and Raymond Atteveld . Whiteside became Everton 's playmaker in 1989 – 90 , and formed an effective partnership with Stuart McCall in midfield to score 13 goals in his 35 appearances . Everton finished the season in sixth place , some 20 points behind rivals Liverpool . However intense running sessions ran by coach Mick Lyons took their toll on his right knee , and on 20 September 1990 he took a knock in a practice match , which required him to have yet another operation on his right knee . After the return of Howard Kendall as manager in November 1990 , Whiteside managed to appear in a few reserve team games , but this only delayed the inevitable , and he was forced to retire from the game at the age of 26 in June 1991 . He had a testimonial game between Manchester United and Everton at Old Trafford in May 1992 , but as United lost the title the previous week , only 7,434 turned out for the occasion .

Whiteside broke Pelé 's record as the youngest player to appear in a World Cup , when he debuted for Northern Ireland aged 17 years and 41 days at the 1982 World Cup in Spain . When selected for the World Cup squad by manager Billy Bingham , he had played just two competitive games at club level . The opening game against Yugoslavia at the La Romareda in Zaragoza on 17 June was his international debut ; he received a yellow card in the second half for a challenge on Nenad Stojković , and the game finished goalless . Five days later he helped " Norn Iron " to a 1 – 1 draw with Honduras , which was a disappointment , and many believed had doomed Northern Ireland 's chances of advancing in the competition . They needed a win against hosts Spain in the third and final group game at the Mestalla Stadium in Valencia . They faced a partisan atmosphere with a mostly Spanish crowd and a Spanish speaking referee in Héctor Ortiz who was unwilling to punish dirty play from the Spanish players . However a mistake from goalkeeper Luis Arconada gifted Gerry Armstrong the only goal of the game , and despite having Mal Donaghy sent off on 60 minutes , Northern Ireland went on to record an historic 1 – 0 win . Whiteside played at left-midfielder for the 2 – 2 draw with Austria at the Vicente Calderón Stadium . A win against France would take them into the semi-finals , however a French team inspired by Michel Platini won 4 – 1 and therefore eliminated Northern Ireland from the competition .

He featured in qualifying for UEFA Euro 1984 , as the " Green and White Army " suffered heartbreak after winning their final group game 1 – 0 over West Germany , Whiteside managing to get the better of one of the world 's best man-markers in Karlheinz Förster . However the Germans secured the only qualification place in the group in their final match of the group with a late winner over Albania . The nation did though achieve some glory that year , when Whiteside helped Northern Ireland win the 100th and last edition of the British Home Championship in 1984 . Northern Ireland won qualification to the World Cup for a second successive tournament with a goalless draw with England in their final group game ; Whiteside scored three goals during the qualification process , with his strike again Romania at Windsor Park proving to be crucial as they ended up qualifying at the Romanian 's expense . At the 1986 FIFA World Cup finals in Mexico , he scored in his country 's only result in the tournament , a 1 – 1 draw against Algeria at the Estadio Tres de Marzo . They were beaten in their other two group games , losing 2 – 1 to Spain and 3 – 0 to Brazil . Whiteside won a total of 38 caps and scored nine times in eight years playing for Northern Ireland .

He married wife Judy on 4 October 1987 ; the two had met when Whiteside was 16 and she was 20 . The relationship blossomed despite fears of reprisal on Shankill , with him being a Protestant and Judy being a Catholic . The marriage ended acrimoniously in 2001 , after the couple had 20 years together and three children : Della , Blaine and Clodagh . He subsequently married Denise . Upon retirement , Whiteside studied to become a podiatrist , graduating with a degree from the University of Salford , and served Northwich Victoria as their assistant manager / physio from October 1991 until March 1992 . He quit the role as he did not enjoy the amount of time spent travelling between games . During his playing career , he had attended courses at Lilleshall to pick up his coaching badges , but he did not wish to go into coaching . He instead became an after-dinner speaker . He also worked for the Professional Footballers ' Association , while taking a postgraduate course at Manchester Metropolitan University . He later took up private practice as a podiatrist in Manchester . Since 1994 , he has also worked at the corporate hospitality department at Old Trafford . In 2003 , he released a book entitled My Memories of Manchester United . With the help of writer Rob Bagchi , he released his autobiography entitled Determined in August 2007 , published by Headline , and with a foreword by actor James Nesbitt . When Saturday Comes magazine reviewer Joyce Woolridge wrote that " Determined is an entertaining , well written account of one of the less ordinary 1980s footballers , with the added twist of how Whiteside was able to rebuild his life , if not his knee . " The next month it was reported that Whiteside had been diagnosed with irregular heart rhythms . Whiteside worked as a pundit on ITV 's coverage of UEFA Euro 2016 .

Horace Greeley ( February 3 , 1811 – November 29 , 1872 ) was editor of the New-York Tribune , among the great newspapers of its time . Long active in politics , he served briefly as a congressman from New York , and was the candidate of the Democratic and Liberal Republican parties in the 1872 presidential election . He was defeated by President Ulysses S. Grant , and died before the casting of the electoral vote . Born to a poor family in New Hampshire , Greeley was apprenticed to a printer in Vermont , and in 1831 went to New York City to seek his fortune . He wrote for or edited several publications , and involved himself in Whig Party politics , taking a significant part in William Henry Harrison 's successful 1840 presidential campaign . The following year , he founded the Tribune , which through weekly editions sent by mail became the highest-circulating newspaper in the country . Among many other issues , he urged the settlement of the American West , which he saw as a land of opportunity for the young and the unemployed . He popularized the phrase " Go West , young man , and grow up with the country , " although it is uncertain whether it originated with him .

Greeley 's alliance with William H. Seward and Thurlow Weed led to him serving three months in the House of Representatives , where he angered many by investigating Congress in his newspaper . He helped found the Republican Party in 1854 , but about then broke with Seward and Weed , backing other presidential candidates against Seward at the 1860 Republican National Convention , and supporting the nominee , Abraham Lincoln . When the Civil War broke out , he mostly supported Lincoln , though urging him to commit to the end of slavery before the president was willing to do so . After Lincoln 's assassination , he supported the Radical Republicans in opposition to President Andrew Johnson . Leading against the corruption of Grant 's Republican administration , Greeley was the new Liberal Republican Party 's candidate in the 1872 U.S. presidential election . Despite having the additional support of the Democratic Party , he lost in a landslide . Devastated at the defeat , he died three weeks later . Greeley is the only major-party presidential candidate to have died prior to the electoral vote being cast .

Horace Greeley was born on February 3 , 1811 , on a farm about five miles from Amherst , New Hampshire . He could not breathe for the first twenty minutes of his life . It is suggested that this deprivation may have caused him to develop Asperger 's syndrome — some of his biographers , such as Mitchell Snay , maintain that this condition would account for his eccentric behaviors in later life . Greeley was the son of poor farmers Zaccheus and Mary ( Woodburn ) Greeley . Zaccheus was not successful , and moved his family several times , as far west as Pennsylvania . Horace attended the local schools , and was a brilliant student . He was of English descent , and his forebears included early settlers of Massachusetts and New Hampshire . Seeing the boy 's intelligence , some neighbors offered to pay Horace 's way at Phillips Exeter Academy , but the Greeleys were too proud to accept charity . In 1820 , Zaccheus 's financial reverses caused him to flee New Hampshire with his family lest he be imprisoned for debt , and settle in Vermont . Even as his father struggled to make a living as a hired hand , Horace Greeley read everything he could — the Greeleys had a neighbor who let Horace use his library . In 1822 , Horace ran away from home to become a printer 's apprentice , but was told he was too young .

In 1826 , at age 15 , he was made a printer 's apprentice to Amos Bliss , editor of the Northern Spectator , a newspaper in East Poultney , Vermont . There , he learned the mechanics of a printer 's job , and acquired a reputation as the town encyclopedia , reading his way through the local library . When the paper closed in 1830 , the young man went west to join his family , living near Erie , Pennsylvania . He remained there only briefly , going from town to town seeking newspaper employment , and was hired by the Erie Gazette . Although ambitious for greater things , he remained until 1831 to help support his father . While there , he became a Universalist , breaking from his Congregationalist upbringing .

In late 1831 , Greeley went to New York City to seek his fortune . There were many young printers in New York who had likewise come to the metropolis , and he could only find short-term work . In 1832 , Greeley worked as an employee of the publication Spirit of the Times . He built his resources and set up a print shop in that year . In 1833 , he tried his hand with Horatio D. Sheppard at editing a daily newspaper , the New York Morning Post , which was not a success . Despite this failure and its attendant financial loss , Greeley published the thrice-weekly Constitutionalist , which mostly printed lottery results . On March 22 , 1834 , he published the first issue of The New-Yorker in partnership with Jonas Winchester . It was less expensive than other literary magazines of the time and published both contemporary ditties and political commentary . Circulation reached 9,000 , then a sizable number , yet it was ill-managed and eventually fell victim to the economic Panic of 1837 . He also published the campaign news sheet of the new Whig Party in New York for the 1834 campaign , and came to believe in its positions , including free markets with government assistance in developing the nation .

Soon after his move to New York City , Greeley met Mary Young Cheney . Both were living at a boarding house run on the diet principles of Sylvester Graham , eschewing meat , alcohol , coffee , tea , and spices , as well as abstaining from the use of tobacco . Greeley was subscribing to Graham 's principles at the time , and to the end of his life rarely ate meat . Mary Cheney , a schoolteacher , moved to North Carolina to take a teaching job in 1835 . They were married in Warrenton , North Carolina on July 5 , 1836 , and an announcement duly appeared in The New-Yorker eleven days later . Greeley had stopped over in Washington , D.C. on his way south to observe Congress . He took no honeymoon with his new wife , returning to work while his wife took up a teaching job in New York City . One of the positions taken by The New-Yorker was that the unemployed of the cities should seek lives in the developing American West ( in the 1830s , the West encompassed today 's Midwestern states ) . The harsh winter of 1836 – 1837 and the financial crisis that developed soon after made many New Yorkers homeless and destitute . In his journal , Greeley urged new immigrants to buy guide books on the West , and Congress to make public lands available for purchase at cheap rates to settlers . He told his readers , " Fly , scatter through the country , go to the Great West , anything rather than remain here ... the West is the true destination . " In 1838 , he advised " any young man " about to start in the world , " Go to the West : there your capabilities are sure to be appreciated and your energy and industry rewarded . "

In 1838 , Greeley met Albany editor Thurlow Weed . Weed spoke for a liberal faction of the Whigs in his newspaper the Albany Evening Journal . He hired Greeley as editor of the state Whig newspaper for the upcoming campaign . The newspaper , the Jeffersonian , premiered in February 1838 and helped elect the Whig candidate for governor , William H. Seward . In 1839 , Greeley worked for several journals , and took a month-long break to go as far west as Detroit . Greeley was deeply involved in the campaign of the Whig candidate for president in 1840 , William Henry Harrison . He published the major Whig periodical the Log Cabin , and also wrote many of the pro-Harrison songs that marked the campaign . These songs were sung at mass meetings , many organized and led by Greeley . According to biographer Robert C. Williams , " Greeley 's lyrics swept the country and roused Whig voters to action . " Funds raised by Weed helped distribute the Log Cabin widely . Harrison and his running mate John Tyler were easily elected .

By the end of the 1840 campaign , the Log Cabin 's circulation had risen to 80,000 and Greeley decided to establish a daily newspaper , the New-York Tribune . At the time , New York had many newspapers , dominated by James Gordon Bennett 's New York Herald , which with a circulation of about 55,000 had more readers than its combined competition . As technology advanced , it became cheaper and easier to publish a newspaper , and the daily press came to dominate the weekly , which had once been the more common format for news periodicals . Greeley borrowed money from friends to get started , and published the first issue of the Tribune on April 10 , 1841 — the day of a memorial parade in New York for President Harrison , who had died after a month in office and been replaced by Vice President Tyler . In the first issue , Greeley promised that his newspaper would be a " new morning Journal of Politics , Literature , and General Intelligence " . New Yorkers were not initially receptive ; the first week 's receipts were $ 92 and expenses $ 525 . The paper was sold for a cent a copy by newsboys who purchased bundles of papers at a discount . The price of advertising was initially four cents a line , but was quickly raised to six cents . Through the 1840s , the Tribune was four pages , that is , a single sheet folded . It initially had 600 subscribers and 5,000 copies were sold of the first issue .

In the early days , Greeley 's chief assistant was Henry J. Raymond , who a decade later founded The New York Times . To place the Tribune on a sound financial footing , Greeley sold a half-interest in it to attorney Thomas McElrath , who became publisher of the Tribune ( Greeley was editor ) and ran the business side . Politically , the Tribune backed Kentucky Senator Henry Clay , who had unsuccessfully sought the presidential nomination that fell to Harrison , and supported Clay 's American System for development of the country . Greeley was one of the first newspaper editors to have a full-time correspondent in Washington , an innovation quickly followed by his rivals . Part of Greeley 's strategy was to make the Tribune a newspaper of national scope , not merely local . One factor in establishing the paper nationally was the Weekly Tribune , created in September , 1841 when the Log Cabin and The New-Yorker were merged . With an initial subscription price of $ 2 a year , this was sent to many across the United States by mail , and was especially popular in the Midwest . In December 1841 , Greeley was offered the editorship of the national Whig newspaper , the Madisonian . He demanded full control , and declined when not given it .

Greeley , in his paper , initially supported the Whig program . As divisions between Clay and President Tyler became apparent , he supported the Kentucky senator and looked to a Clay nomination for president in 1844 . However , when Clay was nominated by the Whigs , he was defeated by the Democrat , former Tennessee governor James K. Polk , though Greeley worked hard on Clay 's behalf . Greeley had taken positions in opposition to slavery as editor of The New-Yorker in the late 1830s , opposing the annexation of the slaveholding Republic of Texas to the United States . In the 1840s , Greeley became an increasingly vocal opponent of the expansion of slavery . Greeley hired Margaret Fuller in 1844 as first literary editor of the Tribune , for which she wrote over 200 articles . She lived with the Greeley family for several years , and when she moved to Italy , he made her a foreign correspondent . He promoted the work of Henry David Thoreau , serving as literary agent and seeing to it that Thoreau 's work was published . Ralph Waldo Emerson also benefited from Greeley 's promotion . Historian Allan Nevins explained :

The Tribune set a new standard in American journalism by its combination of energy in news gathering with good taste , high moral standards , and intellectual appeal . Police reports , scandals , dubious medical advertisements , and flippant personalities were barred from its pages ; the editorials were vigorous but usually temperate ; the political news was the most exact in the city ; book reviews and book-extracts were numerous ; and as an inveterate lecturer Greeley gave generous space to lectures . The paper appealed to substantial and thoughtful people . Greeley , who had met his wife at a Graham boarding house , became enthusiastic about other social movements that did not last , and promoted them in his paper . He subscribed to the views of Charles Fourier , a French mathematician and social thinker , then recently deceased , who proposed the establishment of settlements called " phalanxes " with a given number of people from various walks of life , who would function as a corporation and among whose members profits would be shared . Greeley , in addition to promoting Fourierism in the Tribune , was associated with two such settlements , both of which eventually failed , though the town that eventually developed on the site of the one in Pennsylvania was after his death renamed Greeley .

In November 1848 , Congressman David S. Jackson , a Democrat , of New York 's Sixth District was unseated for election fraud . Jackson 's term was to expire in March 1849 , but during the 19th century Congress convened annually in December , making it important to fill the seat . Under the laws then in force , the Whig committee from the Sixth District chose Jackson 's replacement and they chose Greeley , though they did not select him as their candidate for the seat in the following Congress . The Sixth District , or Sixth Ward as it was commonly called , was mostly Irish-American , and Greeley proclaimed his support for Irish efforts towards independence from Great Britain . He took his seat when Congress convened in December 1848 . Greeley 's selection was procured by the influence of his ally , Thurlow Weed . As a congressman for three months , Greeley introduced legislation for a homestead act that would allow settlers who improved land to purchase it at low rates — a fourth of what speculators would pay . He was quickly noticed because he launched a series of attacks on legislative privileges , taking note of which congressmen were missing votes , and questioning the office of House Chaplain . This was enough to make him unpopular . But he outraged his colleagues when on December 22 , 1848 the Tribune published evidence that many congressmen had been paid excessive sums as travel allowance . In January 1849 , Greeley supported a bill that would have corrected the issue , but it was defeated . He was so disliked , he wrote a friend , that he had " divided the House into two parties — one that would like to see me extinguished and the other that wouldn 't be satisfied without a hand in doing it . "

Other legislation , all failed , introduced by Greeley included attempts to end flogging in the Navy , and to ban alcohol from its ships . He tried to change the name of the United States to " Columbia " , abolish slavery in the District of Columbia , and increase tariffs . One lasting effect of the term of Congressman Greeley was his friendship with a fellow Whig , serving his only term in the House , Illinois 's Abraham Lincoln . Greeley 's term ended after March 3 , 1849 , and he returned to New York and the Tribune , having , according to Williams , " failed to achieve much except notoriety " .

By the end of the 1840s , Greeley 's Tribune was not only solidly established in New York as a daily paper , it was highly influential nationally through its weekly edition , which circulated in rural areas and small towns . Journalist Bayard Taylor deemed its influence in the Midwest second only to that of the Bible . According to Williams , the Tribune could mold public opinion through Greeley 's editorials more effectively than could the president . Greeley sharpened those skills over time , laying down what future Secretary of State John Hay , who worked for the Tribune in the 1870s , deemed the " Gospel according to St. Horace " . The Tribune remained a Whig paper , but Greeley took an independent course . In 1848 , he had been slow to endorse the Whig presidential nominee , General Zachary Taylor , a Louisianan and hero of the Mexican-American War . Greeley opposed both the war and the expansion of slavery into the new territories seized from Mexico , and feared Taylor would support expansion as president . Greeley considered endorsing former president Martin Van Buren , candidate of the Free Soil Party , but finally endorsed Taylor , who was elected ; the editor was rewarded for his loyalty with the congressional term . Greeley vacillated on support for the Compromise of 1850 , which gave victories to both sides of the slavery issue , before finally opposing it . In the 1852 presidential race , he supported the Whig candidate , General Winfield Scott , but savaged the Whig platform for its support of the Compromise . " We defy it , execrate it , spit upon it . " Such party divisions contributed to Scott 's defeat by former New Hampshire senator Franklin Pierce .

In 1853 , with the party increasingly divided over the slavery issue , Greeley printed an editorial disclaiming the paper 's identity as Whig and declaring it to be nonpartisan . He was confident that the paper would not suffer financially , trusting in reader loyalty . Some in the party were not sorry to see him go : the Republic , a Whig organ , mocked Greeley and his beliefs : " If a party is to be built up and maintained on Fourierism , Mesmerism , Maine Liquor laws , Spiritual Rappings , Kossuthism , Socialism , Abolitionism , and forty other isms , we have no disposition to mix with any such companions . " When in 1854 , Illinois Senator Stephen Douglas introduced his Kansas-Nebraska Bill , allowing residents of each territory to decide whether it would be slave or free , Greeley strongly fought the legislation in his newspaper . After it passed , and the Border War broke out in Kansas Territory , Greeley was part of efforts to send free-state settlers there , and to arm them . In return , proponents of slavery recognized Greeley and the Tribune as adversaries , stopping shipments of the paper to the South and harassing local agents . Nevertheless , by 1858 , the Tribune reached 300,000 subscribers through the weekly edition , and it would continue as the foremost American newspaper through the years of the Civil War .

The Kansas-Nebraska Act helped destroy the Whig Party , but a new party with opposition to the spread of slavery at its heart had been under discussion for some years . Beginning in 1853 , Greeley participated in the discussions that led to the founding of the Republican Party and may have coined its name . Greeley attended the first New York state Republican Convention in 1854 , and was disappointed not to be nominated either for governor or lieutenant governor . The switch in parties coincided with the end of two of his longtime political alliances : in December 1854 , Greeley wrote that the political partnership between Weed , William Seward ( who was by then senator after serving as governor ) and himself was ended " by the withdrawal of the junior partner " . Greeley was angered over patronage disputes , and felt Seward was courting the rival The New York Times for support . In 1853 , Greeley purchased a farm in rural Chappaqua , New York , where he experimented with farming techniques . In 1856 , he designed and built Rehoboth , one of the first concrete structures in the United States .

The Tribune continued to print a wide variety of material . In 1851 , its managing editor Charles Dana recruited Karl Marx as a foreign correspondent in London . Marx collaborated with Friedrich Engels on his work for the Tribune , which continued for over a decade , covering 500 articles . Greeley felt compelled to print , " Mr. Marx has very decided opinions of his own , with some of which we are far from agreeing , but those who do not read his letters are neglecting one of the most instructive sources of information on the great questions of current European politics . " In 1859 , Greeley traveled across the continent to see the West for himself , to write about it for the Tribune , and to publicize the need for a transcontinental railroad . He also planned to give speeches to promote the Republican Party . He went to Chicago , then to Lawrence in Kansas Territory , and was unimpressed by the local people . Greeley took one of the first stagecoaches to Denver , seeing the town then in course of formation as a mining camp of the Pike 's Peak Gold Rush . Sending dispatches back to be published in the Tribune , Greeley took the Overland Trail , reaching Salt Lake City , where he conducted a two-hour interview with the Mormon leader , Brigham Young , the first newspaper interview Young had given . Greeley encountered Native Americans , and was sympathetic , but like many of his time , deemed Indian culture inferior . In California , he explored widely and gave many addresses .

Although he remained on cordial terms with Senator Seward , Greeley never seriously considered supporting him in his bid for the Republican nomination for president . Instead , during the run-up to the 1860 Republican National Convention in Chicago , he pressed the candidacy of former Missouri representative Edward Bates , an opponent of the spread of slavery who had freed his own slaves . In his newspaper , in speeches , and in conversation , Greeley pushed Bates as a man who could win the North and even make inroads in the South . Nevertheless , when one of the dark horse candidates for the Republican nomination , Abraham Lincoln , came to New York to give an address at Cooper Union , Greeley urged his readers to go hear Lincoln , and was among those who accompanied him to the platform . Greeley thought of Lincoln as a possible nominee for vice president . Greeley attended the convention as a substitute for a delegate from Oregon who was unable to attend . In Chicago , he promoted Bates but deemed his cause hopeless and felt that Seward would be nominated . In conversations with other delegates , he predicted that , if nominated , Seward could not carry crucial battleground states such as Pennsylvania . Greeley 's estrangement from Seward was not widely known , giving the editor more credibility . Greeley ( and Seward ) biographer Glyndon G. Van Deusen noted that it is uncertain how great a part Greeley played in Seward 's defeat by Lincoln — he had little success gaining delegates for Bates . On the first two ballots , Seward led Lincoln , but on the second only by a small margin . After the third ballot , on which Lincoln was nominated , Greeley was seen among the Oregon delegation , a broad smile on his face . According to Pulitzer Prize-winning historian Doris Kearns Goodwin , " it is hard to imagine Lincoln letting Greeley 's resentment smolder for years as Seward did " .

Seward 's forces made Greeley a target of their anger at the senator 's defeat . One subscriber cancelled , regretting the three-cent stamp he had to use on the letter ; Greeley supplied a replacement . When he was attacked in print , Greeley responded in kind . He launched a campaign against corruption in the New York Legislature , hoping voters would defeat incumbents and the new legislators would elect him to the Senate when Seward 's term expired in 1861 ( senators were until 1913 elected by state legislatures ) . But his main activity during the campaign of 1860 was boosting Lincoln and denigrating the other presidential candidates . He made it clear that a Republican administration would not interfere with slavery where it already was , and denied that Lincoln was in favor of voting rights for African Americans . He kept up the pressure until Lincoln was elected in November . Lincoln soon let it be known that Seward would be Secretary of State , meaning he would not be a candidate for re-election to the Senate . Weed wanted William M. Evarts elected in his place , while the anti-Seward forces in New York gathered around Greeley . The crucial battleground was the Republican caucus , as the party held the majority in the legislature . Greeley 's forces did not have enough votes to send him to the Senate , but they had enough strength to block Evarts 's candidacy . Weed threw his support to Ira Harris , who had already received several votes , and who was chosen by the caucus and elected by the legislature in February 1861 . Weed was content to have blocked the editor , and stated that he had " paid the first installment on a large debt to Mr. Greeley " .

After Lincoln 's election , there was talk of secession in the South . The Tribune was initially in favor of peaceful separation , with the South becoming a separate nation . According to an editorial on November 9 @,@ If the Cotton States shall become satisfied that they can do better out of the Union than in it , we insist on letting them go in peace . The right to secede may be a revolutionary one , but it exists nevertheless .... And whenever a considerable section of our Union shall deliberately resolve to go out , we shall resist all coercive measures designed to keep it in . We hope never to live in a republic where of one section is pinned to the residue by bayonets . Similar editorials appeared through January 1861 , after which Tribune editorials took a hard line on the South , opposing concessions . Williams concludes that " for a brief moment , Horace Greeley had believed that peaceful secession might be a form of freedom preferable to civil war " . This brief flirtation with disunion would have consequences for Greeley — it was used by his opponents against him when he ran for president in 1872 .

In the days leading up to Lincoln 's inauguration , the Tribune headed its editorial columns each day , in large capital letters : " No compromise ! / No concession to traitors ! / The Constitution as it is ! " Greeley attended the inauguration , sitting close to Senator Douglas , as the Tribune hailed the beginning of Lincoln 's presidency . When southern forces attacked Fort Sumter , the Tribune regretted the loss of the fort , but applauded the fact that war to subdue the rebels , who formed the Confederate States of America , would now take place . The paper criticized Lincoln for not being quick to use force . Through the spring and early summer of 1861 , Greeley and the Tribune beat the drum for a Union attack . " On to Richmond " , a phrase coined by a Tribune stringer , became the watchword of the newspaper as Greeley urged the occupation of the rebel capital of Richmond before the Confederate Congress could meet on July 20 . In part because of the public pressure , Lincoln sent the half-trained Union Army into the field at the First Battle of Manassas in mid-July where it was soundly beaten . The defeat threw Greeley into despair , and he may have suffered a nervous breakdown .

Restored to health by two weeks at the farm he had purchased in Chappaqua , Greeley returned to the Tribune and a policy of general backing of the Lincoln administration , even having kind words to say about Secretary Seward , his old foe . He was supportive even during the military defeats of the first year of the war . Late in 1861 , he proposed to Lincoln through an intermediary that the president provide him with advance information as to its policies , in exchange for friendly coverage in the Tribune . Lincoln eagerly accepted , " having him firmly behind me will be as helpful to me as an army of one hundred thousand men . " By early 1862 , however , Greeley was again sometimes critical of the administration , frustrated by the failure to win decisive military victories , and perturbed at the president 's slowness to commit to the emancipation of the slaves once the Confederacy was defeated , something the Tribune was urging in its editorials . This was a change in Greeley 's thinking which began after First Manassas , a shift from preservation of the Union being the primary war purpose to wanting the war to end slavery . By March , the only action against slavery that Lincoln had backed was a proposal for compensated emancipation in the border states that had remained loyal to the Union , though he signed legislation abolishing slavery in the District of Columbia . Lincoln supposedly asked a Tribune correspondent , " What in the world is the matter with Uncle Horace ? Why can 't he restrain himself and wait a little while ? "

Greeley 's prodding of Lincoln culminated in a letter to him on August 19 , 1862 , reprinted on the following day in the Tribune as the " Prayer of Twenty Millions " . By this time , Lincoln had informed his Cabinet of the preliminary Emancipation Proclamation he had composed , and Greeley was told of it the same day the prayer was printed . In his letter , Greeley demanded action on emancipation , and strict enforcement of the Confiscation Acts . Lincoln must " fight slavery with liberty " , and not fight " wolves with the devices of a sheep " . Lincoln 's reply would become famous , much more so than the prayer that provoked it . " My paramount object in this struggle is to save the Union , and is not either to save or to destroy slavery . If I could save the Union without freeing any slave , I would do it , and if I could save it by freeing all the slaves I would do it ; and if I could save it by freeing some and leaving others alone I would also do that . What I do about slavery , and the colored race , I do because it helps to save the Union ; and what I forbear , I forbear because I do not believe it would help to save the Union . " Lincoln 's statement angered abolitionists ; William Seward 's wife Frances complained to her husband that Lincoln had made it seem " that the mere keeping together a number of states is more important than human freedom . " Greeley felt Lincoln had not truly answered him , " but I 'll forgive him everything if he 'll issue the proclamation " . When Lincoln did , on September 22 , Greeley hailed the Emancipation Proclamation as a " great boon of freedom " . According to Williams , " Lincoln 's war for Union was now also Greeley 's war for emancipation . "

After the Union victory at Gettysburg in early July 1863 , the Tribune wrote that the rebellion would be quickly " stamped out " . A week after the battle , the New York City draft riots erupted . Greeley and the Tribune were generally supportive of conscription , though feeling that the rich should not be allowed to evade it by hiring substitutes . Support for the draft made them targets of the mob , and the Tribune Building was surrounded , and at least once invaded . Greeley secured arms from the Brooklyn Navy Yard and 150 soldiers kept the building secure . Mary Greeley and her children were at the farm in Chappaqua ; a mob threatened them , but dispersed without doing harm . In August 1863 , Greeley was requested by a firm of Hartford publishers to write a history of the war . Greeley agreed , and over the next eight months penned a 600-page volume , which would be the first of two , entitled The American Conflict . The books were very successful , selling a total of 225,000 copies by 1870 , a large sale for the time . Throughout the war , Greeley played with ideas as to how to settle it . In 1862 , Greeley had approached the French minister to Washington , Henri Mercier , to discuss a mediated settlement . However , Seward rejected such talks and the prospect of European intervention receded after the bloody Union victory at Antietam in September 1862 . In July 1864 , Greeley received word that there were Confederate commissioners in Canada , empowered to offer peace . In fact , the men were in Niagara Falls , Canada to aid Peace Democrats and otherwise undermine the Union war effort. but they played along when Greeley journeyed to Niagara Falls , at Lincoln 's request : the president was willing to consider any deal that included reunion and emancipation . The Confederates had no credentials and were unwilling to accompany Greeley to Washington under safe conduct . Greeley returned to New York , and the episode , when it became public , embarrassed the administration . Lincoln said nothing publicly concerning Greeley 's credulous conduct , but privately indicated that he had no confidence in him anymore .

Greeley did not initially support Lincoln for nomination in 1864 , casting about for other candidates . In February , he wrote in the Tribune that Lincoln could not be elected to a second term . Nevertheless , no candidate made a serious challenge to Lincoln , who was nominated in June , which the Tribune applauded slightly . In August , fearing a Democratic victory and acceptance of the Confederacy , Greeley engaged in a plot to get a new convention to nominate another candidate , with Lincoln withdrawing . The plot came to nothing . Once Atlanta was taken by Union forces on September 3 , Greeley became a fervent supporter of Lincoln . Greeley was gratified both by Lincoln 's re-election and continued Union victories .

As the war drew to a close in April 1865 , Greeley and the Tribune urged magnanimity towards the defeated Confederates , arguing that making martyrs of Confederate leaders would only inspire future rebels . This talk of moderation ceased when Lincoln was assassinated by John Wilkes Booth . Many concluded that Lincoln had fallen as the result of a final rebel plot , and the new president , Andrew Johnson , offered $ 100,000 for the capture of fugitive Confederate president Jefferson Davis . After the rebel leader was caught , Greeley initially advocated that " punishment be meted out in accord with a just verdict " . Through 1866 , Greeley editorialized that Davis , who was being held at Fortress Monroe , should either be set free or put on trial . Davis 's wife Varina urged Greeley to use his influence to gain her husband 's release . In May 1867 , a Richmond judge set bail for the former Confederate president at $ 100,000 . Greeley was among those who signed the bail bond , and the two men met briefly at the courthouse . This act resulted in public anger against Greeley in the North . Sales of the second volume of his history ( published in 1866 ) declined sharply . Subscriptions to the Tribune ( especially the Weekly Tribune ) also dropped off , though they recovered during the 1868 election .

Beginning as a supporter , Greeley soon became disillusioned with President Johnson , whose Reconstruction policies allowed the quick formation of state governments without provision for suffrage for the freedman . When Congress convened and gradually took control of Reconstruction , Greeley generally supported their actions , favoring universal male suffrage and , his anger against the Confederates having cooled , amnesty . While Greeley generally supported the Radical Republicans , he did not like the harshness of Thaddeus Stevens . Greeley ran for Congress in 1866 , but lost badly , and for Senate in the legislative election held in early 1867 , to be defeated by Roscoe Conkling . As president and Congress battled , Greeley remained firmly opposed to Johnson , and when the president was impeached in 1868 , Greeley and the Tribune strongly supported his removal , strongly attacking Johnson . Nevertheless , the president was acquitted by the Senate , much to Greeley 's disappointment . Also in 1868 , Greeley sought the Republican nomination for governor , but was frustrated by the Conkling forces . Greeley supported the successful Republican presidential nominee , General Ulysses S. Grant in the 1868 election .

In 1868 , Whitelaw Reid joined the Tribune ' s staff as managing editor . In Reid , Greeley had found a reliable second-in-command . Also on the Tribune 's staff in the late 1860s was Mark Twain ; Henry George sometimes contributed pieces , as did Bret Harte . In 1870 , Lincoln 's assistant private secretary , John Hay , joined the staff as an editorial writer . Greeley soon pronounced Hay the most brilliant at that craft ever to write for the Tribune . Greeley maintained his interest in associationism . Beginning in 1869 , he was heavily involved in an attempt to found a utopia on the prairie in a scheme led by Nathan Meeker . Named Greeley , Colorado Territory , its namesake served as treasurer of the town association , bought two lots there , which he inspected in 1870 , and lent Meeker money to keep the colony afloat . Greeley 's close friend P. T. Barnum also interested himself in the project , and built a hotel there . After early struggles , the colony survived under Meeker 's leadership , though adopting a normal municipal government . In 1871 , Greeley published a book What I Know About Farming , based on his childhood experience and that from his country home in Chappaqua .

As had been the case for much of the 19th century , political parties continued to be formed and to vanish after the Civil War . In September 1871 , Missouri Senator Carl Schurz formed the Liberal Republican Party , founded on opposition to President Grant , opposition to corruption , and support of civil service reform , lower taxes , and land reform . He gathered around him an eclectic group of supporters whose only real link was their opposition to Grant , whose administration had proved increasingly corrupt . The party needed a candidate , with a presidential election upcoming . Greeley was one of the best-known Americans , as well as being a perennial candidate for office . He was more minded to consider a run for the Republican nomination , fearing the effect on the Tribune should he bolt the party . Nevertheless , he wanted to be president , as a Republican if possible , if not , as a Liberal Republican . The Liberal Republican national convention met in Cincinnati in May 1872 . Greeley was spoken of as a possible candidate , as was Missouri Governor Benjamin Gratz Brown . Schurz was ineligible as foreign-born . On the first ballot , Supreme Court Justice David Davis led , but Greeley took a narrow lead on the second ballot . Former minister to Britain Charles Francis Adams took the lead , but on the sixth ballot , after a " spontaneous " demonstration staged by Reid , Greeley gained the nomination , with Brown as vice presidential candidate .

The Democrats , when they met in Baltimore in July , faced a stark choice — either nominate Greeley , long a thorn in their side , or split the anti-Grant vote and go to certain defeat . They chose the former , and even adopted the Liberal Republican platform , calling for equal rights for African Americans . This was the first time one man had been nominated for president by two political parties . Greeley resigned as editor of the Tribune for the campaign , and , unusually for the time , embarked on a speaking tour to bring his message to the people . As it was more usual for candidates for major office to not actively campaign , he was attacked as a seeker after office . Nevertheless , in late July , Greeley ( and others , such as former Ohio governor Rutherford B. Hayes ) thought he would very likely be elected . Greeley campaigned on a platform of intersectional reconciliation , arguing that the war was over and the issue of slavery was resolved . It was time to restore normalcy and end the continuing military occupation of the South . The Republican counterattack was well-financed , accusing Greeley of support for everything from treason to the Ku Klux Klan . The anti-Greeley campaign was famously and effectively summed up in the cartoons of Thomas Nast , whom Grant later credited with a major role in his re-election . Nast 's cartoons showed Greeley giving bail money for Jefferson Davis , throwing mud on Grant , and shaking hands with John Wilkes Booth across Lincoln 's grave . The Crédit Mobilier scandal — corruption in the financing of the Union Pacific Railroad — broke in September , but Greeley was unable to take advantage of the Grant administration 's ties to the scandal as he had stock in the railroad himself , and some alleged it had been given him in exchange for favorable coverage .

Greeley 's wife Mary had returned ill from a trip to Europe in late June . Her condition worsened in October , and he effectively broke off campaigning after October 12 to be with her . She died on October 30 , plunging him into despair a week before the election . Poor results for the Democrats in those states that had elections for other offices in September and October presaged defeat for Greeley , and so it proved . He received 2,834,125 votes to 3,597,132 for Grant , who secured 286 electors to 66 chosen for Greeley . The editor-turned-candidate won only six states : Georgia , Kentucky , Maryland , Missouri , Tennessee and Texas .

Greeley resumed the editorship of the Tribune , but quickly learned there was a movement under way to unseat him . He found himself unable to sleep , and after a final visit to the Tribune on November 13 ( a week after the election ) remained under medical care . At the recommendation of a family physician , Greeley was sent to the asylum of Dr. George S. Choate at Pleasantville , New York . There , he continued to worsen , and died on November 29 , with his two surviving daughters and Whitelaw Reid at his side . His death came before the Electoral College convened . His 66 electoral votes were divided among four others , principally Indiana governor-elect Thomas A. Hendricks and Greeley 's vice presidential running mate , Benjamin Gratz Brown . Although Greeley had requested a simple funeral , his daughters ignored his wishes and arranged a grand affair . He is buried in Brooklyn 's Green-Wood Cemetery . Among the mourners were old friends , Tribune employees including Reid and Hay , his journalistic rivals , and a broad array of politicians , led by President Grant .

Despite the venom that had been spewed over him in the presidential campaign , Greeley 's death was publicly mourned . Harper 's Weekly , which had printed Nast 's cartoons , wrote , " Since the assassination of Mr. Lincoln , the death of no American has been so sincerely deplored as that of Horace Greeley ; and its tragical circumstances have given a peculiarly affectionate pathos to all that has been said of him . " Henry Ward Beecher wrote in the Christian Union , " when Horace Greeley died , unjust and hard judgment of him died also " . Harriett Beecher Stowe noted Greeley 's eccentric dress , " That poor white hat ! If , alas , it covered many weaknesses , it covered also much strength , much real kindness and benevolence , and much that the world will be better for " . Greeley 's view of freedom was based in the desire that all should have the opportunity to better themselves . According to his biographer , Erik S. Lunde , " a dedicated social reformer deeply sympathetic to the treatment of poor white males , slaves , free blacks , and white women , he still espoused the virtues of self-help and free enterprise " . Van Deusen stated : " His genuine human sympathies , his moral fervor , even the exhibitionism that was a part of his makeup , made it inevitable that he should crusade for a better world . He did so with apostolic zeal . "

Nevertheless , Greeley 's effectiveness as a reformer was undermined by his idiosyncrasies : according to Williams , he " must have looked like an apparition , a man of eccentric habits dressed in an old linen coat that made him look like a farmer who came into town for supplies " . Van Deusen wrote , " Greeley 's effectiveness as a crusader was limited by some of his traits and characteristics . Culturally deficient , he was to the end ignorant of his own limitations , and this ignorance was a great handicap . " The Tribune remained under that name until 1924 , when it merged with the New York Herald to become the New York Herald-Tribune , which ceased to publish in 1966 . The name survived until 2013 , when the International Herald-Tribune became the International New York Times . There is a statue of Greeley in City Hall Park in New York , donated by the Tribune Association . Cast in 1890 , it was not dedicated until 1916 . A second statue of Greeley is located in Greeley Square in Midtown Manhattan . Greeley Square , at Broadway and 33rd Street , was named by the New York City Common Council in a vote after Greeley 's death . Van Deusen concluded his biography of Greeley :

More significant still was the service that Greeley performed as a result of his faith in his country and his countrymen , his belief in infinite American progress . For all his faults and shortcomings , Greeley symbolized an America that , though often shortsighted and misled , was never suffocated by the wealth pouring from its farms and furnaces ... For through his faith in the American future , a faith expressed in his ceaseless efforts to make real the promise of America , he inspired others with hope and confidence , making them feel that their dreams also had the substance of realty . It is his faith , and theirs that has given him his place in American history . In that faith he still marches among us , scolding and benevolent , exhorting us to confidence and to victory in the great struggles of our own day .

Stede Bonnet ( c.1688 – 10 December 1718 ) was an early 18th-century Barbadian pirate , sometimes called " The Gentleman Pirate " because he was a moderately wealthy landowner before turning to a life of crime . Bonnet was born into a wealthy English family on the island of Barbados , and inherited the family estate after his father 's death in 1694 . In 1709 , he married Mary Allamby , and engaged in some level of militia service . Because of marital problems , and despite his lack of sailing experience , Bonnet decided to turn to piracy in the summer of 1717 . He bought a sailing vessel , named it Revenge , and traveled with his paid crew along the Eastern Seaboard of what is now the United States , capturing other vessels and burning other Barbadian ships . Bonnet set sail for Nassau , Bahamas , to the haven for pirates known as the ' Pirates ' republic ' , but he was seriously wounded en route during an encounter with a Spanish warship . After arriving in Nassau , Bonnet met Edward Teach , the infamous pirate Blackbeard . Incapable of leading his crew , Bonnet temporarily ceded his ship 's command to Blackbeard . Before separating in December 1717 , Blackbeard and Bonnet plundered and captured merchant ships along the East Coast . After Bonnet failed to capture the Protestant Caesar , his crew abandoned him to join Blackbeard aboard the Queen Anne 's Revenge . Bonnet stayed on Blackbeard 's ship as a guest , and did not command a crew again until summer 1718 , when he was pardoned by North Carolina governor Charles Eden and received clearance to go privateering against Spanish shipping . Bonnet was tempted to resume his piracy , but did not want to lose his pardon , so he adopted the alias " Captain Thomas " and changed his ship 's name to Royal James . He had returned to piracy by July 1718 .

In August 1718 , Bonnet anchored the Royal James on an estuary of the Cape Fear River to careen and repair the ship . In late August and September , Colonel William Rhett , with the authorisation of South Carolina governor Robert Johnson , led a naval expedition against pirates on the river . Rhett and Bonnet 's men fought each other for hours , but the outnumbered pirates ultimately surrendered . Rhett arrested the pirates and brought them to Charleston in early October . Bonnet escaped on 24 October , but was recaptured on Sullivan 's Island . On 10 November , Bonnet was brought to trial and charged with two acts of piracy . Judge Nicholas Trott sentenced Bonnet to death . Bonnet wrote to Governor Johnson to ask for clemency , but Johnson endorsed the judge 's decision , and Bonnet was hanged in Charleston on 10 December 1718 .

Bonnet is believed to have been born in 1688 , as he was christened at Christ Church parish on 29 July 1688 . His parents , Edward and Sarah Bonnet , owned an estate of over 400 acres ( 1.6 km2 ) southeast of Bridgetown , which was bequeathed to Bonnet upon his father 's death in 1694 . It is not known where Bonnet received his education , but many who knew him described him as bookish , and Judge Nicholas Trott alluded to Bonnet 's liberal education when sentencing him . Bonnet married Mary Allamby in Bridgetown on 21 November 1709 . They had three sons — Allamby , Edward , and Stede — and a daughter , Mary . Allamby died before 1715 , while the other children survived to see their father abandon them for piracy . Edward 's granddaughter , Anne Thomasine Clarke , was the wife of General Robert Haynes , for 36 years Speaker of the Assembly of Barbados . In A General History of the Pyrates , Charles Johnson wrote that Bonnet was driven to piracy by Mary 's nagging and " [ d ] iscomforts he found in a married State . " Details of Bonnet 's military service are unclear , but he held the rank of major in the Barbados militia . The rank was probably due to his land holdings , since deterring slave revolts was an important function of the militia . Bonnet 's militia service coincided with the War of the Spanish Succession , but there is no record that he took part in the fighting .

During the spring of 1717 , Stede Bonnet decided to become a pirate , despite having no knowledge of shipboard life . He contracted a local shipyard to build him a sixty-ton sloop , which he equipped with six guns and named the Revenge . This was unusual , as most pirates seized their ships by mutiny or boarding , or else converted a privateer vessel to a pirate ship . Bonnet enlisted a crew of more than seventy men . He relied on his quartermaster and officer for their knowledge of sailing , and as a result , he was not highly respected by his crew . In another break from tradition , Bonnet paid his crew wages , not shares of plunder as most pirates did . Royal Navy intelligence reported that he departed Carlisle Bay , Barbados under cover of darkness . Bonnet 's initial cruise took him to the coast of Virginia near the entrance of the Chesapeake Bay , where he captured and plundered four vessels , and burned the Barbadian ship Turbet to keep news of his crimes from his home island . He then sailed north to New York , taking two more ships , and picking up naval supplies and releasing captives at Gardiners Island . By August 1717 , Bonnet had returned to the Carolinas , where he attacked two more ships , a brigantine from Boston and a Barbadian sloop . He stripped the brigantine , but brought the cargo-filled Barbadian sloop to an inlet off North Carolina to use for careening and repairing the Revenge . After the Barbadian sloop 's tackle was used to careen the Revenge , the ship was dismantled for timber , and the remains were then burned . In September 1717 , Bonnet set course for Nassau , which was then an infamous pirate den on the island of New Providence in the Bahamas . En route , he encountered , fought , and escaped from a Spanish man of war . The Revenge was badly damaged , Bonnet was seriously wounded , and half the crew of the sloop was killed or wounded in the encounter . Putting in at Nassau , Bonnet replaced his casualties and refitted the Revenge , increasing the sloop 's armament to twelve guns .

While at Nassau , Bonnet met Captain Benjamin Hornigold and Edward Teach for the first time ; Teach , better known as Blackbeard , played a large role in the remainder of Bonnet 's life . Disabled by his wounds , Bonnet temporarily ceded command of the Revenge to Blackbeard , but remained aboard as a guest of the more experienced pirate captain . Blackbeard and Bonnet weighed anchor and sailed northward to Delaware Bay , where they plundered eleven ships . On 29 September 1717 , the Revenge , captained by Blackbeard , plundered the sloop Betty , which had a cargo full of Madeira wine . Captain Codd , whose merchant ship was taken on 12 October , described Bonnet as walking the deck in his nightshirt , lacking any command and still unwell from his wounds . The Revenge later captured and looted the Spofford and Sea Nymph , which were leaving Philadelphia . On 22 October , the Revenge stopped and robbed the Robert and Good Intent of their supplies . Blackbeard and Bonnet left Delaware Bay and returned to the Caribbean in November , where they successfully continued their piracy . On 17 November , a 200-ton ship named the Concorde was attacked by two pirate craft nearly 100 miles ( 160 km ) away from the island of Martinique . The lieutenant on board described the pirate vessels as one having 12 guns and 120 men and the other having eight guns and 30 men . The crew of the Concorde put up a fight , but surrendered after the pirates bombarded them with " two volleys of cannons and musketry . " Blackbeard took the Concorde and sailed south into the Grenadines , where he renamed the ship Queen Anne 's Revenge , possibly as an insult to King George I of Great Britain . Some time after 19 December , Bonnet and Blackbeard separated . Bonnet now sailed into the western Caribbean . In March 1718 , he encountered the 400-ton merchant vessel Protestant Caesar off Honduras . The ship escaped him , and his frustrated crew became restive . When Bonnet encountered Blackbeard again shortly afterward , Bonnet 's crew deserted him to join Blackbeard . Blackbeard put a henchman named Richards in command of the Revenge . Bonnet , surprised that his colleague had betrayed him , found himself as a guest aboard the Queen Anne 's Revenge . Bonnet confided in a few loyal crew members that he was ready to give up his criminal life if he could exile himself in Spain or Portugal . Bonnet would not exercise command again until the summer of 1718 .

Under Captain Richards , the Revenge captured a Jamaican sloop , the Adventure , captained by David Herriot . Herriot joined the pirates , and Blackbeard now possessed three ships . Bonnet accompanied Blackbeard to South Carolina , where Blackbeard 's four vessels blockaded the port of Charleston in the late spring of 1718 . Needing a place to rest and refit their vessels , Blackbeard and Bonnet headed north to Topsail Inlet , where the Queen Anne 's Revenge ran aground and was lost . Leaving the remaining three vessels at Topsail Inlet , Blackbeard and Bonnet went ashore and journeyed to Bath , which was then capital of North Carolina . Once there , both men accepted pardons from Governor Charles Eden under King George 's Act of Grace , putatively on condition of their renouncing piracy forever . While Blackbeard quietly returned to Topsail Inlet , Bonnet stayed in Bath to get a " clearance " to take the Revenge to Denmark 's Caribbean colony of St. Thomas , where he planned to buy a letter of marque and go privateering against Spanish shipping . Eden granted Bonnet this clearance .

Bonnet returned to Topsail Inlet to find that Blackbeard had beached the majority of their former crew , robbed the Revenge and two other vessels of the squadron of most of their supplies , and sailed away for parts unknown aboard the sloop Adventure , carrying all the loot with him . Bonnet now ( probably late June or early July 1718 ) resumed command of the Revenge . Few , if any , of his original crew from Barbados were still aboard . Bonnet reinforced the Revenge by rescuing a number of men whom Blackbeard had marooned on a sandbar in Topsail Inlet . Shortly after Bonnet resumed command , a bumboat 's crew told him that Blackbeard was moored in Ocracoke Inlet . Bonnet set sail at once to hunt down his treacherous ex-confederate , but could not find him , and Bonnet never met Blackbeard again . Although Bonnet apparently never discarded his hopes of reaching St. Thomas and getting his letter of marque , two pressing problems now tempted him back into piracy . First , Blackbeard had stolen the food and supplies he and his men needed to subsist ( one pirate testified at his trial that no more than ten or eleven barrels remained aboard the Revenge ) . Second , St. Thomas was now in the midst of the Atlantic hurricane season , which would last until autumn . However , returning to freebooting meant nullifying Bonnet 's pardon .

Hoping to preserve his pardon , Bonnet adopted the alias " Captain Thomas " and changed the Revenge 's name to the Royal James . The name Royal James that Bonnet conferred on his sloop was presumably a reference to the younger Prince James Stuart , and may suggest that Bonnet or his men had Jacobite sympathies . One of Bonnet 's prisoners further reported witnessing Bonnet 's men drinking to the health of the Old Pretender and wishing to see him king of the English nation . Bonnet further tried to disguise his return to piracy by engaging in a pretense of trade with the next two vessels he robbed . Soon afterward , Bonnet quit the charade of trading and reverted to naked piracy . In July 1718 , he cruised north to Delaware Bay , pillaging another eleven vessels . He took several prisoners , some of whom joined his pirate crew . While Bonnet set loose most of his prizes after looting them , he retained control of the last two ships he captured : the sloops Francis and Fortune . On 1 August 1718 , the Royal James and the two captured sloops sailed southward from Delaware Bay . The captured sloops lagged behind , and Bonnet threatened to sink them if they did not stay closer . During the passage , Bonnet and his crew divided their loot into shares of about £ 10 or £ 11 and distributed them amongst themselves . This is the only time Bonnet is known to have practiced this important pirate custom , and it suggests he had by then abandoned his unorthodox practice of paying regular wages to his crew .

Twelve days out of Delaware Bay , Bonnet entered the estuary of the Cape Fear River and anchored near the mouth of a small waterway now known as Bonnet 's Creek . The Royal James had begun to leak badly and was in need of careening . Shortly afterward , a small shallop entered the river and was captured . Bonnet had the shallop broken up to help repair the Royal James . The work of careening was done , in whole or in part , by the prisoners Bonnet had captured . Bonnet threatened at least one man with marooning if he did not work the Royal James ' pumps . Bonnet remained in the Cape Fear River for the next 45 days . According to Bonnet 's boatswain , Ignatius Pell , the pirates intended to wait out the hurricane season there .

By the end of August , news had reached Charleston that Bonnet 's vessels were moored in the Cape Fear River . Robert Johnson , governor of South Carolina , authorised Colonel William Rhett to lead a naval expedition against the pirates , even though the Cape Fear River was in North Carolina 's jurisdiction . After a false start due to the appearance of another pirate ship near Charleston , Rhett arrived at the mouth of the Cape Fear River on 26 September with two eight-gun sloops , the Henry and the Sea Nymph , and a force of 130 militia men . Bonnet initially mistook Rhett 's squadron for merchantmen and sent three canoes to capture them . Unfortunately for Rhett , his flagship Henry had run aground in the river mouth , enabling Bonnet 's canoe crews to approach , recognise the heavily armed and manned sloops as hostile and return uninjured to warn Bonnet . The sun had set by the time the rising tide lifted the Henry off the river bottom . The 46 pirates were scattered among the three sloops . During the night , Bonnet brought all of them aboard the Royal James and planned to fight his way out to sea in the morning rather than risk the Cape Fear River 's narrow channels in the dark . Bonnet also wrote a letter to Governor Johnson , threatening to burn all the ships in Charleston harbor . At daybreak , on 27 September 1718 , Bonnet set sail toward Rhett 's force , and all three sloops opened fire , initiating the Battle of Cape Fear River . The two South Carolinian sloops split up in an effort to bracket the Royal James . Bonnet tried to avoid the trap by steering the Royal James close to the river 's western shore , but ran aground in the process . Rhett 's closing sloops also ran aground , leaving only the Henry in range of the Royal James .

The battle was at a stalemate for the next five or six hours , with all the participants immobilised . Bonnet 's men had the advantage that their deck was heeled away from their opponents , giving them cover , while the Henry 's deck was tilted toward the pirates , thus exposing Rhett 's men to punishing musket volleys . Bonnet 's force suffered twelve casualties while killing ten and wounding fourteen of Rhett 's 70-man crew . Most of Bonnet 's men fought enthusiastically , challenging their enemies to board and fight hand to hand , and tying a knot in their flag as a mock signal to come aboard and render aid . Bonnet himself patrolled the deck with a pistol drawn , threatening to kill any pirate who faltered in the fight . Nevertheless , some of the prisoners who had been forced to join the pirate crew refused to fire on Rhett 's men , and one narrowly escaped death at Bonnet 's hands in the confusion of the engagement . The battle was ultimately decided when the rising tide lifted Rhett 's sloops free while temporarily leaving the Royal James stranded . Bonnet was left helpless , watching while the enemy vessels repaired their rigging and closed to board his paralysed vessel . Outnumbered almost three to one , Bonnet 's men would have had little hope of winning a boarding action . Bonnet ordered his gunner , George Ross , to blow up the Royal James 's powder magazine . Ross apparently attempted this , but was overruled by the remainder of the crew , who surrendered . Rhett arrested the pirates and returned to Charleston with his prisoners on 3 October .

In Charleston , Bonnet was separated from the bulk of his crew and held for three weeks in the provost marshal 's house along with his boatswain , Ignatius Pell , and his sailing master , David Herriott . On 24 October , Bonnet and Herriott escaped , probably by colluding with local merchant Richard Tookerman . Governor Johnson at once placed a £ 700 bounty on Bonnet 's head and dispatched search teams to track him down . Bonnet and Herriott , accompanied by a slave and an Indian , obtained a boat and made for the north shore of Charleston Harbor , but foul winds and lack of supplies forced the four of them onto Sullivan 's Island . Governor Johnson sent a posse under Rhett to Sullivan 's Island to hunt for Bonnet . The posse discovered Bonnet after an extensive search , and opened fire , killing Herriott and wounding the two slaves . Bonnet surrendered and was returned to Charleston . While awaiting trial , some sort of civil uprising in his support took place within the city , an event authorities would later describe as having nearly resulted in the burning of the town and the overthrow of the government .

On 10 November 1718 , Bonnet was brought to trial before Sir Nicholas Trott , sitting in his capacity as Vice-Admiralty judge . Trott had already sat in judgment on Bonnet 's crew and sentenced most of them to hang . Bonnet was formally charged with only two acts of piracy , against the Francis and the Fortune , whose commanders were on hand to testify against Bonnet in person . Ignatius Pell had turned King 's evidence in the trial of Bonnet 's crew and now testified , somewhat reluctantly , against Bonnet himself . Bonnet pleaded not guilty and conducted his own defence without assistance of counsel , cross-examining the witnesses to little avail , and calling a character witness in his favor . Trott rendered a damning summation of the evidence , and the jury delivered a guilty verdict . Two days later , after treating the convicted man to a stern lecture on his violation of Christian duties , Trott sentenced Bonnet to death . While awaiting his execution , Bonnet wrote to Governor Johnson , begging abjectly for clemency and promising to have his own arms and legs cut off as assurance that he would never again commit piracy . Charles Johnson wrote that Bonnet 's visibly disintegrating mind moved many Carolinians to pity , particularly the female population , and London papers later reported that the governor delayed his execution seven times . Bonnet was eventually hanged at White Point Garden , in Charleston , on 10 December 1718 .

The actual degree of authority any pirate captain exercised over his crew was questionable , as he had no access to the procedures and sanctions of admiralty law that supported legitimate captains . Many pirate captains were elected by their crews and could be deposed in the same manner . Because of his ignorance of nautical matters , Bonnet was in an even weaker position than other pirate captains , as is demonstrated by the utter domination Blackbeard exercised over him during their collaboration . During Bonnet 's early career , his crew seems to have been less than loyal to him and to have greatly preferred the more charismatic and experienced Blackbeard . At his trial , Bonnet downplayed his own authority over his pirate crew . He told the court that his crew engaged in piracy against his will , and said he had warned them that he would leave the crew unless they stopped robbing vessels . He further stated that he had been asleep during the capture of the sloop Francis . The court did not accept these protestations . Boatswain Ignatius Pell testified that Bonnet 's quartermaster , Robert Tucker , had more power than Bonnet . A powerful quartermaster appears to have been a common feature of pirate crews in the early modern era .

Nevertheless , Bonnet 's crew represented him as being a leader , and it appears likely that , after his rescue of Blackbeard 's marooned crewmen , he became at least a co-equal commander aboard the Royal James . He appears to have been entrusted with the company 's treasure , and made most major command decisions such as the direction of the ship and what vessels to attack . Most significantly , at Delaware Bay he ordered two of his crew to be flogged for breaches of discipline . Pirates did not lightly submit to flogging , as they resented the frequent use of this punishment in the naval and merchant services from which most of them came , and thus only a leader who commanded the obedience of his crew could successfully order such penalties .

Bonnet 's flag is traditionally represented as a white skull above a horizontal long bone between a heart and a dagger , all on a black field . Despite the frequent appearance of this flag in modern pirate literature , no known early-Georgian period source describes any such device , much less attributes it to Bonnet . This version of Bonnet 's flag is probably one of a number of pirate flags appearing on an undated manuscript with unknown provenance in Britain 's National Maritime Museum , which was donated by Dr. Philip Gosse in 1939 . Bonnet 's crew and contemporaries generally referred to him flying a " bloody flag " , which likely means a dark red flag . There is also a report from the 1718 Boston News-Letter of Bonnet flying a death 's-head flag during his pursuit of the Protestant Caesar , with no mention of color or of any long bone , heart , or dagger .

Bonnet has been portrayed several times in literature . He is a major character in Tim Powers ' On Stranger Tides , along with other famous piratical characters , particularly Blackbeard . In this novel , Bonnet takes up piracy after having been framed by Blackbeard , who has used Bonnet 's hatred for his wife ( only married two years in the novel ) against him . Kate Bonnet : The Romance of a Pirate 's Daughter , by 19th century author Frank Stockton , is a satirical novel relating the adventures of a fictional daughter of Bonnet named Kate . Portrayals of Bonnet also extend to video games , such as Sid Meier 's Pirates ! and Assassin 's Creed IV : Black Flag A plaque commemorating Bonnet stands near Bonnet 's Creek in Southport , North Carolina , on the Cape Fear River . The Yacht Basin Provision Company also holds an annual Stede Bonnet Regatta near Southport , commemorating the infamous pirate 's dash for the ocean .

Henry DeWolf " Harry " Smyth ( / ˈhɛnri dəˈwʊlf ˈsmaɪθ / ; May 1 , 1898 – September 11 , 1986 ) was an American physicist , diplomat , and bureaucrat . He played a number of key roles in the early development of nuclear energy , as a participant in the Manhattan Project , a member of the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission ( AEC ) , and U.S. ambassador to the International Atomic Energy Agency ( IAEA ) . Educated at Princeton University and the University of Cambridge , he was a faculty member in Princeton 's Department of Physics from 1924 to 1966 . He chaired the department from 1935 to 1949 . His early research was on the ionization of gases , but his interests shifted toward nuclear physics beginning in the mid-1930s . During World War II he was a member of the National Defense Research Committee 's Uranium Section and a consultant on the Manhattan Project . He wrote the Manhattan Project 's first public official history , which came to be known as the Smyth Report . On the AEC from 1949 to 1954 , Smyth argued unsuccessfully against a crash course to develop the hydrogen bomb and in favor of international control of nuclear weapons . He was the sole member of the commission to vote against stripping J. Robert Oppenheimer 's security clearance . As IAEA ambassador from 1961 to 1970 he played an important role in the realization of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty .

Smyth was born May 1 , 1898 , in Clinton , New York , to Ruth Anne Phelps and Charles Henry Smyth , Jr . , a professor of geology at Hamilton College . Woodrow Wilson , then President of Princeton University , convinced Smyth pére to join the faculty at Princeton , and in 1905 the family moved to Princeton , New Jersey . Henry DeWolf Smyth 's elder brother , Charles Phelps Smyth , attended the same primary and secondary schools as Henry . The elder brother also received undergraduate and master 's degrees from Princeton , but in chemistry . He earned his Ph.D. at Harvard University but like Henry and their father became a faculty member at Princeton . Both brothers served in the Chemical Warfare Service in World War I and on the Manhattan Project . Henry DeWolf Smyth married Mary de Coningh on June 30 , 1936 . He was a member of the Democratic Party .

In Princeton , Smyth attended Miss Fine 's School , which later became the Princeton Day School , and the Lawrenceville School . After graduating from Lawrenceville in 1914 , he entered Princeton University , where he received a classical education and graduated first in his class in 1918 . He was elected to Phi Beta Kappa and Sigma Xi . Smyth remained at Princeton to do graduate work ; he and Allen Shenstone were the only graduate students in the Department of Physics . Smyth earned a master 's degree and Ph.D. in physics from Princeton in 1920 and 1921 , respectively , studying under Karl Taylor Compton . The U.S. National Research Council awarded Smyth a fellowship , and he joined the Cavendish Laboratory at the University of Cambridge . There he studied under Ernest Rutherford and earned a second Ph.D. in 1923 . At Cambridge he was affiliated with Caius College and formed a friendship with Pyotr Kapitsa , a Soviet physicist who would go on to win the Nobel Prize in Physics and work briefly on the Soviet atomic bomb project .

During World War I , Smyth worked in the Chemical Warfare Service and at the Aberdeen Proving Ground . After earning his second Ph.D. , he returned to Princeton for the last year of his NRC fellowship . During his early years on the Princeton faculty he lived in the Graduate College west of the main campus . He was appointed an instructor in 1924 , an assistant professor in 1925 , an associate professor in 1929 , and a full professor in 1936 . In 1935 he became chairman of the Department of Physics , a position he held until 1949 . During 1931 – 32 he was a Guggenheim Fellow at the University of Göttingen , where he studied the spectra of triatomic molecules , particularly carbon dioxide , with James Franck . Smyth 's early research was in spectroscopy , focusing on ionization of gases by impact with electrons as a means to study the gases ' critical energy levels . He published his first research article , on the radiating potentials of nitrogen gas , in 1919 ; this became the basis of his first dissertation . In a 1922 article , he described a method for determining the ionization energy of a molecule using anode rays and demonstrated the method on mercury vapor . In the following year he used this same method to study nitrogen . He also published on the ionization of hydrogen , carbon dioxide , nitrous oxide , nitrogen dioxide , water vapor , sulfur dioxide , and carbon disulfide . As Robert H. Dicke , Val Logsdon Fitch , and Rubby Sherr wrote in 1989 , " By 1935 his 30 published papers established him as a leading experimentalist " in the field . In 1929 Kenneth Bainbridge completed his Ph.D. dissertation at Princeton working under Smyth , using anode rays to search for element 87 .

In the mid-1930s , Smyth began to shift his interest to nuclear physics , inspired by James Chadwick 's discovery of the neutron , John Cockcroft and Ernest Walton splitting the atom , and Ernest Lawrence 's invention of the cyclotron . Three of his last research articles concerned detection of triatomic hydrogen and helium-3 . His appointment as department chair forced him to devote more time to administrative work , at the expense of research . As department chair , he had two cyclotrons built at Princeton , one in 1935 and the other in 1946 . He was a member of the subcommittee on physics of the National Research Council from 1928 to 1935 . In 1936 Smyth responded to media criticism of basic science research as " useless " by suggesting that seemingly useless research could turn out to be very useful later .

During World War II , Smyth was involved in helping the United States build the atomic bomb . From 1941 – 43 he was a member of the National Defense Research Committee ( NDRC ) ' s Uranium Section charged with producing fissile material for the bomb . Smyth proposed the electromagnetic methods that were used to enrich the first large U-235 samples for the project . He also oversaw a nuclear fission-related project for the Office of Scientific Research and Development ( OSRD ) . During 1943 – 45 he was a consultant to the Manhattan Project , which built and tested the weapon , and associate director of the University of Chicago 's Metallurgical Laboratory , which contributed to the Manhattan Project . At the Metallurgical Laboratory he headed research on heavy water . He remained chairman of Princeton 's physics department throughout the war , and the attendant obligations forced him to participate less actively in the project 's later stages . In August 1944 General Leslie Groves , director of the Manhattan Project , appointed Smyth to the Postwar Policy Committee , which was charged with proposing government policy for research and development of atomic energy after the war was over . The committee recommended that a national commission modeled on the OSRD fund and oversee continued production and fundamental research in government laboratories , universities , and the private sector .

Smyth advocated within the NDRC for a comprehensive report to be released to the public following the weapon 's first use . Vannevar Bush , who as civilian director of the OSRD oversaw the NDRC , agreed , and selected Smyth to write the report following the recommendation of NDRC chairman James Bryant Conant . Groves granted Smyth unlimited access , waiving his usual security-minded insistence on compartmentalization . Smyth wrote what became known as the Smyth Report in his office in Princeton 's Palmer Laboratory , which later became the Frist Campus Center . The report was first released to the press on August 12 , 1945 , days after the attacks on Hiroshima and Nagasaki . The Government Printing Office could not print enough copies to meet demand , so Smyth persuaded the director of the Princeton University Press to print more . By the end of the Press 's 1946 fiscal year it had printed 103,000 copies . Smyth held the copyright to the work to prevent others from claiming it , but he permitted widespread reproduction , essentially releasing it into the public domain . He later reported that " my financial balance from the Smyth Report is minus two dollars , the copyright fee . "

In the report , Smyth called it " a semi-technical report which it is hoped men of science in this country can use to help their fellow citizens in reaching wise decisions " in the new Atomic Age . At the urging of his superiors , he removed several discussions of the bomb 's moral implications and its creators ' unease . Rebecca Press Schwartz argues that Smyth 's academic background and his report 's security-driven focus on physics at the expense of engineering caused the Smyth Report to promote a public perception of the Manhattan Project as primarily an achievement of physicists .

Following the war , Smyth returned full-time to his duties at Princeton . He continued to chair the Physics Department and was named the Joseph Henry Professor of Physics in 1946 . During this time he spoke and wrote regularly about nuclear energy and science policy and worked to expand the physics department . In early 1949 , physicist Robert Bacher stepped down from the Atomic Energy Commission . He and AEC Chairman David Lilienthal wanted a physicist to replace Bacher , and they ultimately recommended Smyth for the position . President Harry Truman nominated Smyth to the AEC later that year , prompting Smyth resign as Physics Department chairman . ( His old colleague Allen Shenstone took up the post . ) Smyth was the commission 's only scientist . He spent his first weeks in the position attending hearings of the U.S. Congress 's Joint Committee on Atomic Energy . Led by Senator Bourke Hickenlooper , the hearings inquired into a small amount of uranium that was alleged to be unaccounted for in AEC labs . Smyth later condemned the hearings as grounded in misconceptions about the work of nuclear scientists . Following the Soviet Union 's successful nuclear test in August 1949 , the U.S. was considering a crash course to develop a hydrogen bomb . The AEC 's nine-member General Advisory Committee , chaired by J. Robert Oppenheimer , recommended unanimously against such a course , and Smyth was one of three of the five AEC commissioners to agree . Smyth urged Truman to endorse international control of nuclear weapons , but Truman decided instead to authorize a hydrogen bomb program . In his autobiography , Smyth 's Princeton colleague John Archibald Wheeler recalled that Smyth recruited him to the Ivy Mike hydrogen bomb project and expressed support for the project in response to the Soviet test .

In 1953 Smyth and John A. Hall served as principal advisors to President Dwight Eisenhower in preparing his Atoms for Peace speech to the United Nations . The IAEA traces its origins to this speech . In 1954 the AEC was considering rescinding Oppenheimer 's security clearance on suspicion that he was a Communist . Smyth was still the only scientist on the commission . Despite his personal dislike of Oppenheimer and pressure from the commission 's new chairman , Lewis Strauss , Smyth was the sole commissioner to vote against stripping Oppenheimer 's clearance on June 29 , 1954 . Smyth resigned from the AEC on September 30 of that year out of frustration with Strauss . Eulogizing Oppenheimer in 1967 , Smyth said of Oppenheimer 's treatment , " Such a wrong can never be righted ; such a blot on our history never erased .... We regret that his great work for his country was repaid so shabbily " . Smyth returned to Princeton and served on several high-level administrative committees . This work included advising on the construction of a particle accelerator built jointly with the University of Pennsylvania and overseeing Project Matterhorn , which became the Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory . He chaired the committee that chose Robert F. Goheen to succeed Harold W. Dodds as President of Princeton . He also served as a consultant on nuclear power to Congress , the AEC , and private industry . He retired from Princeton in 1966 .

President John F. Kennedy appointed Smyth as the representative of the United States to the IAEA , a position with the rank of Ambassador . Smyth assumed the position on June 13 , 1961 , following confirmation by the U.S. Senate . Smyth shared the organization 's stated goal of developing nuclear technology for peaceful purposes . He helped develop what Glenn Seaborg later called " an unprecedented atmosphere of rapport " at the IAEA and played a crucial role in the adoption of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty in 1970 . He retired from the IAEA on August 31 , 1970 . In September 1961 , Harlan Cleveland , then Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs , appointed Smyth to chair a committee to review U.S. policy toward the IAEA . The committee 's report affirmed the importance of civilian uses of nuclear energy . In 1962 Cleveland again tapped Smyth , this time as an adviser to the State Department on the IAEA . In this position Smyth advocated for a transfer of national nuclear safeguards to the IAEA . In December 1965 , Smyth was elected Chairman of the Board of the Universities Research Association . During Smyth 's tenure , the URA signed a contract with the U.S. government to construct and operate the National Accelerator Laboratory , which later became known as Fermilab . Construction began , and research programs were planned . Smyth stepped down as chairman in 1970 but remained on the board . He also served on the board of Associated Universities , Inc . , which operated the Brookhaven National Laboratory and National Radio Astronomy Observatory .

Sebaceous glands are microscopic exocrine glands in the skin that secrete an oily or waxy matter , called sebum , to lubricate and waterproof the skin and hair of mammals . In humans , they occur in the greatest number on the face and scalp , but also on all parts of the skin except the palms of the hands and soles of the feet . The type of secretion of the sebaceous glands is referred to as holocrine . In the eyelids , meibomian glands , also called tarsal glands , are a type of sebaceous gland that secrete a special type of sebum into tears . Fordyce spots are ectopic ( misplaced ) sebaceous glands found usually on the lips , gums and inner cheeks . Areolar glands surround the female nipples . Preputial glands also known as Tyson 's glands are found in the genitals of both sexes of mice and rats . Several related medical conditions involve sebum — including acne , sebaceous cysts , hyperplasia , and sebaceous adenoma . These are usually attributable to overactive sebaceous glands , which produce excess sebum .

The sebaceous glands are found throughout all areas of the skin except the palms of the hands and soles of the feet . There are two types of sebaceous gland , those connected to hair follicles , in pilosebaceous units , and those that exist independently . Sebaceous glands are found in hair-covered areas , where they are connected to hair follicles . One or more glands may surround each hair follicle , and the glands themselves are surrounded by arrector pili muscles . The glands have an acinar structure ( like a many-lobed berry ) , in which multiple glands branch off a central duct . The glands deposit sebum on the hairs , and bring it to the skin surface along the hair shaft . The structure consisting of hair , hair follicle , arrector pili muscles , and sebaceous gland is an epidermal invagination known as a pilosebaceous unit . Sebaceous glands are also found in hairless areas ( glabrous skin ) of the eyelids , nose , penis , labia minora , the inner mucosal membrane of the cheek , and nipples . Some sebaceous glands have unique names . Sebaceous glands on the lip and mucosa of the cheek are known as Fordyce spots , and glands on the eyelids are known as meibomian glands . Sebaceous glands of the breast are also known as Montgomery 's glands .

Sebaceous glands are first visible from the 13th to the 16th week of fetal development , as bulgings off hair follicles . Sebaceous glands develop from the same tissue that gives rise to the epidermis of the skin . Overexpression of the signalling factors Wnt , Myc and SHH all increase the likelihood of sebaceous gland presence . The sebaceous glands of a human fetus secrete a substance called vernix caseosa , a waxy , translucent white substance coating the skin of newborns . After birth , activity of the glands decreases until there is almost no activity during ages 2 – 6 years , and then increases to a peak of activity during puberty , due to heightened levels of androgens .

Sebaceous glands secrete the oily , waxy substance called sebum ( Latin : fat , tallow ) that is made of triglycerides , wax esters , squalene , and metabolites of fat-producing cells . Sebum waterproofs and lubricates the skin and hair of mammals . Sebaceous secretions in conjunction with apocrine glands also play an important thermoregulatory role . In hot conditions , the secretions emulsify the sweat produced by the eccrine glands and this produces a sheet of sweat that is not readily lost in drops of sweat . This is of importance in delaying dehydration . In colder conditions , the nature of sebum becomes more lipid and in coating the hair and skin , rain is effectively repelled . Sebum is produced in a holocrine process , in which cells within the sebaceous gland rupture and disintegrate as they release the sebum and the cell remnants are secreted together with the sebum . The cells are constantly replaced by mitosis at the base of the duct .

Sebum , secreted by the sebaceous gland in humans , is primarily composed of triglycerides ( ~ 41 % ) , wax esters ( ~ 26 % ) , squalene ( ~ 12 % ) , and free fatty acids ( ~ 16 % ) . The composition of sebum varies across species . Wax esters and squalene are unique to sebum and not produced as final products anywhere else in the body . Sapienic acid is a sebum fatty acid that is unique to humans , and is implicated in the development of acne . Sebum is odorless , but its breakdown by bacteria can produce strong odors . Sex steroids are known to affect the rate of sebum secretion ; androgens such as testosterone have been shown to stimulate secretion , and estrogens have been shown to inhibit secretion . Dihydrotestosterone acts as the primary androgen in the prostate and in hair follicles .

Sebaceous glands are part of the body 's integumentary system and serve to protect the body against germs . Sebaceous glands secrete acids that form the acid mantle . This is a very fine , slightly acidic film on the surface of the skin that acts as a barrier to bacteria , viruses , and other potential contaminants that might penetrate the skin . The pH of the skin is between 4.5 and 6.2 , and this acidity helps to neutralise the primarily alkaline nature of contaminants . Sebaceous lipids make an important contribution in maintaining the integrity of the skin barrier , and express both pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory properties . Sebum may act as a delivery system for antioxidants , antimicrobial lipids , pheromones , and hydration of the stratum corneum . The insoluble fatty acids contained within sebum have broad antimicrobial activity . Additionally , sebaceous gland secretion provides vitamin E to the upper layers of facial skin .

During the last three months of fetal development , the sebaceous glands of the fetus produce vernix caseosa , a waxy white substance that coats the skin to protect it from amniotic fluid . The areolar glands are in the areola that surrounds the nipple in the female breast . These glands secrete an oily fluid that lubricates the nipple , and also secrete volatile compounds that are thought to serve as an olfactory stimulus for the newborn . During pregnancy and lactation these glands , also called Montgomery 's glands , become enlarged . Meibomian glands , in the eyelids , secrete a form of sebum called meibum onto the eye , that slows the evaporation of tears . It also serves to create an airtight seal when the eyes are closed and its lipid quality also prevents the eyelids from sticking together . The meibomian glands are also known as tarsal glands , Zeis glands and palpebral glands . They attach directly to the follicles of the eyelashes , which are arranged vertically within the tarsal plates of the eyelids . Fordyce spots , or Fordyce granules , are ectopic sebaceous glands found on the genitals and oral mucosa . They show themselves as yellowish-white milia ( milkspots ) .

Acne is a very common problem , particularly during puberty in teenagers , and is thought to relate to an increased production of sebum due to hormonal factors . The increased production of sebum can lead to a blockage of the sebaceous gland duct . This can cause a comedo , ( commonly called a blackhead or a whitehead ) , which can lead to infection , particularly by the bacteria Propionibacterium acnes . This can inflame the comedones , which then change into the characteristic acne lesions . Comedones generally occur on the areas with more sebaceous glands , particularly the face , shoulders , upper chest and back . Comedones may be ' black ' or ' white ' depending on whether the entire pilosebaceous unit , or just the sebaceous duct , is blocked . Sebaceous filaments — innocuous build-ups of sebum — are often mistaken for whiteheads . There are many treatments available for acne from reducing sugars in the diet , to medications that include antibiotics , benzoyl peroxide , retinoids and hormonal treatments . Retinoids reduce the amount of sebum produced by the sebaceous glands . Should the usual treatments fail , the presence of the Demodex mite could be looked for as the possible cause .

Sebaceous hyperplasia , referring to excessive proliferation of the cells within the glands , and visible macroscopically as small papules on the skin , particularly on the forehead , nose and cheeks . Seborrhoeic dermatitis , a chronic , usually mild form of dermatitis effected by changes in the sebaceous glands . In newborn infants seborrhoea dermatitis can occur as cradle cap . Seborrheic-like psoriasis ( also known as " Sebopsoriasis , " and " Seborrhiasis " ) is a skin condition characterized by psoriasis with an overlapping seborrheic dermatitis . Sebaceous adenoma , a benign slow-growing tumour — which may , however , in rare cases be a precursor to a cancer syndrome known as Muir-Torre syndrome . Sebaceous cyst is a term used to refer to both an epidermoid cyst and a pilar cyst , though neither of these contain sebum , only keratin and do not originate in the sebaceous gland and so are not true sebaceous cysts . A true sebaceous cyst is relatively rare and is known as a steatocystoma .

The word sebaceous , meaning " consisting of sebum " , was first termed in 1728 and comes from the Latin for tallow . Sebaceous glands have been documented since at least 1746 by Jean Astruc , who defined them as " ... the glands which separate the fat . " He describes them in the oral cavity , on the head , eyelids and ears , as " universally " acknowledged . , viii Astruc describes them being blocked by " small animals " that are " implanted " in the excretory ducts , and attributes their presence in the oral cavity to apthous ulcers , noting " these glands naturally [ secrete ] a viscous humour , which puts on various colours and consistencies ... in its natural state is very mild , balsamic , and intended to wet and lubricate the mouth " In The Principles of Physiology 1834 , A. Combe noted that the glands were not present in the palms of the hands or soles of the feet .

The preputial glands of mice and rats are large modified sebaceous glands that produce pheromones used for territorial marking . These and the scent glands in the flanks of hamsters have a similar composition to human sebaceous glands , are androgen responsive , and have been used as a basis for study . Sebaceous adenitis is an autoimmune disease that affects sebaceous glands . It is mainly known to occur in dogs , particularly poodles and akitas , where it is thought to be generally autosomal recessively inherited . It has also been described in cats , and one report describes this condition in a rabbit . In these animals , it causes hair loss , though the nature and distribution of the hair loss differs greatly .

Nansen 's Fram expedition was an 1893 – 1896 attempt by the Norwegian explorer Fridtjof Nansen to reach the geographical North Pole by harnessing the natural east – west current of the Arctic Ocean . In the face of much discouragement from other polar explorers , Nansen took his ship Fram to the New Siberian Islands in the eastern Arctic Ocean , froze her into the pack ice , and waited for the drift to carry her towards the pole . Impatient with the slow speed and erratic character of the drift , after 18 months Nansen and a chosen companion , Hjalmar Johansen , left the ship with a team of dogs and sledges and made for the pole . They did not reach it , but they achieved a record Farthest North latitude of 86 ° 13.6 ′ N before a long retreat over ice and water to reach safety in Franz Josef Land . Meanwhile , Fram continued to drift westward , finally emerging in the North Atlantic Ocean . The idea for the expedition had arisen after items from the American vessel Jeannette , which had sunk off the north coast of Siberia in 1881 , were discovered three years later off the south-west coast of Greenland . The wreckage had obviously been carried across the polar ocean , perhaps across the pole itself . Based on this and other debris recovered from the Greenland coast , the meteorologist Henrik Mohn developed a theory of transpolar drift , which led Nansen to believe that a specially designed ship could be frozen in the pack ice and follow the same track as the Jeannette wreckage , thus reaching the vicinity of the pole .

Nansen supervised the construction of a vessel with a rounded hull and other features designed to withstand prolonged pressure from ice . The ship was rarely threatened during her long imprisonment , and emerged unscathed after three years . The scientific observations carried out during this period contributed significantly to the new discipline of oceanography , which subsequently became the main focus of Nansen 's scientific work . Fram 's drift and Nansen 's sledge journey proved conclusively that there were no significant land masses between the Eurasian continents and the North Pole , and confirmed the general character of the north polar region as a deep , ice-covered sea . Although Nansen retired from exploration after this expedition , the methods of travel and survival he developed with Johansen influenced all the polar expeditions , north and south , which followed in the subsequent three decades .

In September 1879 the Jeannette , an ex-Royal Navy gunboat converted by the US Navy for Arctic exploration , and commanded by George Washington De Long , entered the pack ice north of the Bering Strait . She remained ice-bound for nearly two years , drifting to the area of the New Siberian Islands , before being crushed and sunk on 13 June 1881 . Her crew escaped in boats and made for the Siberian coast ; most , including De Long , subsequently perished either during the boat journey or in the wastelands of the Lena River delta . Three years later , relics from the Jeannette appeared on the opposite side of the world , in the vicinity of Julianehaab on the southwest coast of Greenland . These items , frozen into the drifting ice , included clothing bearing crew members ' names and documents signed by De Long ; they were indisputably genuine . In a lecture given in 1884 to the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters Dr. Henrik Mohn , one of the founders of modern meteorology , argued that the finding of the Jeannette relics indicated the existence of an ocean current flowing from east to west across the entire Arctic ocean . The Danish governor of Julianehaab , writing of the find , surmised that an expedition frozen into the Siberian sea might , if its ship were to prove strong enough , cross the polar ocean and land in South Greenland . These theories were read with interest by the 23-year-old Fridtjof Nansen , then working as a curator at the Bergen Museum while completing his doctoral studies . Nansen was already captivated by the frozen north ; two years earlier he had experienced a four-month voyage on the sealer Viking , which had included three weeks trapped in drifting ice . An expert skier , Nansen was making plans to lead the first crossing of the Greenland icecap , an objective delayed by the demands of his academic studies , but triumphantly achieved in 1888 – 89 . Through these years Nansen remembered the east – west Arctic drift theory and its inherent possibilities for further polar exploration , and shortly after his return from Greenland he was ready to announce his plans .

In February 1890 Nansen addressed a meeting of the Norwegian Geographical Society in Oslo ( then called Christiania ) . After drawing attention to the failures of the many expeditions which had approached the North Pole from the west , he considered the implications of the discovery of the Jeannette items , along with further finds of driftwood and other debris from Siberia or Alaska that had been identified along the Greenland coast . " Putting all this together , " Nansen said , " we are driven to the conclusion that a current flows ... from the Siberian Arctic Sea to the east coast of Greenland , " probably passing across the Pole . It seemed that the obvious thing to do was " to make our way into the current on that side of the Pole where it flows northward , and by its help to penetrate into those regions which all who have hitherto worked against [ the current ] have sought in vain to reach . " Nansen 's plan required a small , strong and manoeuvrable ship , powered by sail and an engine , capable of carrying fuel and provisions for twelve men for five years . The vessel would follow Jeannette 's route to the New Siberian Islands , and in the approximate position of Jeannette 's sinking , when ice conditions were right " we shall plough our way in amongst the ice as far as we can . " The ship would then drift with the ice towards the pole and eventually reach the sea between Greenland and Spitsbergen . Should the ship founder , a possibility which Nansen thought very unlikely , the party would camp on a floe and allow itself to be carried towards safety . Nansen observed : " If the Jeannette Expedition had had sufficient provisions , and had remained on the ice-floe on which the relics were found , the result would doubtless have been very different from what it was . "

When Nansen 's plans became public knowledge The New York Times was enthusiastic , deeming it " highly probable that there is a comparatively short and direct route across the Arctic Ocean by way of the North Pole , and that nature herself has supplied a means of communication across it . " However , most experienced polar hands were dismissive . The American explorer Adolphus Greely called it " an illogical scheme of self-destruction " ; his assistant , Lieutenant David Brainerd , called it " one of the most ill-advised schemes ever embarked on " , and predicted that it would end in disaster . Sir Allen Young , a veteran of the searches for Sir John Franklin 's lost expedition , did not believe that a ship could be built to withstand the crushing pressure of the ice : " If there is no swell the ice must go through her , whatever material she is made of . " Sir Joseph Hooker , who had sailed south with James Clark Ross in 1839 – 43 , was of the same opinion , and thought the risks were not worth taking . However , the equally experienced Sir Leopold McClintock called Nansen 's project " the most adventurous programme ever brought under the notice of the Royal Geographical Society " . The Swedish philanthropist Oscar Dickson , who had financed Baron Nordenskiöld 's conquest of the North-East Passage in 1878 – 79 , was sufficiently impressed to offer to meet Nansen 's costs . With Norwegian nationalism on the rise , however , this gesture from their union partner Sweden provoked hostility in the Norwegian press ; Nansen decided to rely solely on Norwegian support , and declined Dickson 's proposal .

Nansen 's original estimate for the total cost of the expedition was NOK 300,000 . After giving a passionate speech before the Parliament of Norway ( the Storting ) , Nansen was awarded a grant of NOK 200,000 ; the balance was raised from private contributions which included 20,000 kroner from King Oscar II of Norway and Sweden . The Royal Geographical Society in London gave £ 300 ( about NOK 6,000 ) . Unfortunately , Nansen had underestimated the financing required — the ship alone would cost more than the total at his disposal . A renewed plea to the Storting produced a further NOK 80,000 , and a national appeal raised the grand total to NOK 445,000 . According to Nansen 's own account , he made up the remaining deficiency from his own resources . His biographer Roland Huntford records that the final deficit of NOK 12,000 was cleared by two wealthy supporters , Axel Heiberg and an English expatriate , Charles Dick .

To design and build his ship Nansen chose Colin Archer , Norway 's leading shipbuilder and naval architect . Archer was well known for a particular hull design that combined seaworthiness with a shallow draught , and had pioneered the design of " double-ended " craft in which the conventional stern was replaced by a point , increasing manoeuvrability . Nansen records that Archer made " plan after plan of the projected ship ; one model after another was prepared and abandoned " . Finally , agreement was reached on a design , and on 9 June 1891 the two men signed the contract . Nansen wanted the ship in one year ; he was eager to get away before anyone else could adopt his ideas and forestall him . The ship 's most significant external feature was the roundness of the hull , designed so that there was nothing upon which the ice could get a grip . Bow , stern and keel were rounded off , and the sides smoothed so that , in Nansen 's words , the vessel would " slip like an eel out of the embraces of the ice " . To give exceptional strength the hull was sheathed in South American greenheart , the hardest timber available . The three layers of wood forming the hull provided a combined thickness of between 24 and 28 inches ( 60 – 70 cm ) , increasing to around 48 inches ( 1.25 metres ) at the bow , which was further protected by a protruding iron stem . Added strength was provided by crossbeams and braces throughout the length of the hull .

The ship was rigged as a three-masted schooner , with a total sail area of 6,000 square feet ( 560 m2 ) . Its auxiliary engine of 220 horse-power was capable of speeds up to 7 knots ( 13 km / h ; 8.1 mph ) . However , speed and sailing qualities were secondary to the requirement of providing a safe and warm stronghold for Nansen and his crew during a drift that might extend for several years , so particular attention was paid to the insulation of the living quarters . At around 400 gross register tonnage , the ship was considerably larger than Nansen had first anticipated , with an overall length of 128 feet ( 39 m ) and a breadth of 36 feet ( 11 m ) , a ratio of just over three to one , giving her an unusually stubby appearance . This odd shape was explained by Archer : " A ship that is built with exclusive regard to its suitability for [ Nansen 's ] object must differ essentially from any known vessel . " On 6 October 1892 , at Archer 's yard at Larvik , the ship was launched by Nansen 's wife Eva after a brief ceremony . The ship was named Fram , meaning " Forward " .

For his Greenland expedition of 1888 – 89 Nansen had departed from the traditional dependence on large-scale personnel , ships and backup , relying instead on a small well-trained group . Using the same principle for the Fram voyage , Nansen chose a party of just twelve from the thousands of applications that poured in from all over the world . One applicant was the 20-year-old Roald Amundsen , future conqueror of the South Pole , whose mother stopped him from going . The English explorer Frederick Jackson applied , but Nansen wanted only Norwegians , so Jackson organised his own expedition to Franz Josef Land . To captain the ship and act as the expedition 's second-in-command Nansen chose Otto Sverdrup , an experienced sailor who had taken part in the Greenland crossing . Theodore Jacobsen , who had experience in the Arctic as skipper of a sloop , signed on as Fram 's mate , and a young naval lieutenant , Sigurd Scott Hansen , took charge of meteorological and magnetic observations . The ship 's doctor , and the expedition 's botanist , was Henrik Blessing , who graduated in medicine just before Fram 's sailing date . Hjalmar Johansen , an army reserve lieutenant and dog-driving expert , was so determined to join the expedition that he agreed to sign on as stoker , the only position by then available . Likewise Adolf Juell , with 20 years ' experience at sea as mate and captain , took the post of cook on the Fram voyage . Ivar Mogstad was an official at Gaustad psychiatric hospital , but his technical abilities as a handyman and mechanic impressed Nansen . The oldest man in the party , at 40 , was the chief engineer , Anton Amundsen ( no relation of Roald ) . The second engineer , Lars Pettersen , kept his Swedish nationality from Nansen , and although it was soon discovered by his shipmates , he was allowed to remain with the expedition , the only non-Norwegian in the party . The remaining crew members were Peter Henriksen , Bernhard Nordahl and Bernt Bentzen , the last – named joining the expedition in Tromsø at very short notice .

Before the start of the voyage Nansen decided to deviate from his original plan : instead of following Jeannette 's route to the New Siberian Islands by way of the Bering Strait , he would make a shorter journey , taking Nordenskiöld 's North-East Passage along the northern coast of Siberia . Fram left Christiania on 24 June 1893 , seen on her way by a cannon salute from the fort and the cheers of thousands of well-wishers . This was the first of a series of farewells as Fram sailed round the coast and moved northward , reaching Bergen on 1 July ( where there was a great banquet in Nansen 's honour ) , Trondheim on 5 July and Tromsø , north of the Arctic Circle , a week later . The last Norwegian port of call was Vardø , where Fram arrived on 18 July . After the final provisions were taken on board , Nansen , Sverdrup , Hansen and Blessing spent their last hours ashore in a sauna , being beaten with birch twigs by two young girls . The first leg of the journey eastward took Fram across the Barents Sea towards Novaya Zemlya and then to the North Russian settlement of Khabarova where the first batch of dogs was brought on board . On 3 August Fram weighed anchor and moved cautiously eastward , entering the Kara Sea the next day . Few ships had sailed the Kara Sea before , and charts were incomplete . On 18 August , in the area of the Yenisei River delta , an uncharted island was discovered and named Sverdrup Island after Fram 's commander . Fram was now moving towards the Taimyr Peninsula and Cape Chelyuskin , the most northerly point of the Eurasian continental mass . Heavy ice slowed the expedition 's progress , and at the end of August it was held up for four days while the ship 's boiler was repaired and cleaned . The crew also experienced the dead water phenomenon , where a ship 's forward progress is impeded by energy dissipation caused by a layer of fresh water lying on top of heavier salt water . On 9 September a wide stretch of ice-free water opened up , and next day Fram rounded Cape Chelyuskin — the second ship to do so , after Nordenskiöld 's Vega in 1878 — and entered the Laptev Sea .

After being prevented by ice from reaching the mouth of the Olenyok River , where a second batch of dogs was waiting to be picked up , Fram moved north and east towards the New Siberian Islands . Nansen 's hope was to find open water to 80 ° north latitude and then enter the pack ; however , on 20 September ice was sighted just south of 78 ° . Fram followed the line of the ice before stopping in a small bay beyond the 78 ° mark . On 28 September it became evident that the ice would not break up , and the dogs were moved from the ship to kennels on the ice . On 5 October the rudder was raised to a position of safety and the ship , in Scott Hansen 's words , was " well and truly moored for the winter " . The position was 78 ° 49 ′ N , 132 ° 53 ′ E.

On 9 October Fram had her first experience of ice pressure . Archer 's design was quickly vindicated as the ship rose and fell , the ice being unable to grip the hull . Otherwise the first weeks in the ice were disappointing , as the unpredictable drift moved Fram in gyratory fashion , sometimes north , sometimes south ; by 19 November , after six weeks , Fram was south of the latitude at which she had entered the ice . After the sun disappeared on 25 October the ship was lit by electric lamps from a wind-powered generator . The crew settled down to a comfortable routine in which boredom and inactivity were the main enemies . Men began to irritate each other , and fights sometimes broke out . Nansen attempted to start a newspaper , but the project soon fizzled out through lack of interest . Small tasks were undertaken and scientific observations maintained , but there was no urgency . Nansen expressed his frustration in his journal : " I feel I must break through this deadness , this inertia , and find some outlet for my energies . " And later : " Can 't something happen ? Could not a hurricane come and tear up this ice ? " Only after the turn of the year , in January 1894 , did the northerly direction become generally settled . The 80 ° mark was finally passed on 22 March .

Based on the uncertain direction and slow speed of the drift , Nansen calculated that it might take the ship five years to reach the pole . In January 1894 he had first discussed with both Henriksen and Johansen the possibility of making a sledge journey with the dogs , from Fram to the pole , though they made no immediate plans . Nansen 's first attempts to master dog-driving were an embarrassing failure , but he persevered and gradually achieved better results . He also discovered that the normal cross-country skiing speed was the same as that of dogs pulling loaded sledges . Men could travel under their own power , skiing , rather than riding on the sledge , and loads could be correspondingly increased . This , according to biographer and historian Roland Huntford , amounted to a revolution in polar travel methods . On 19 May , two days after the celebrations for Norway 's National Day , Fram passed 81 ° , indicating that the ship 's northerly speed was slowly increasing , though it was still barely a mile ( 1.6 km ) a day . With a growing conviction that a sledge journey might be necessary to reach the pole , in September Nansen decreed that everyone would practice skiing for two hours a day . On 16 November he revealed his intention to the crew : he and one companion would leave the ship and start for the pole when the 83 ° mark was passed . After reaching the pole the pair would make for Franz Josef Land , and then cross to Spitsbergen where they hoped to find a ship to take them home . Three days later Nansen asked Hjalmar Johansen , the most experienced dog-driver among the crew , to join him on the polar journey .

The crew spent the following months preparing for the forthcoming dash for the pole . They built sledges that would facilitate fast travel over rough terrain and constructed kayaks on the Inuit model , for use during the expected water crossings . There were endless trials of special clothing and other gear . Violent and prolonged tremors began to shake the ship on 3 January 1895 , and two days later the crew disembarked , expecting the ship to be crushed . Instead the pressure lessened , and the crew went back on board and resumed preparations for Nansen 's journey . After the excitement it was noted that Fram had drifted beyond Greely 's Farthest North record of 83 ° 24 , and on 8 January was at 83 ° 34 ′ N.

On 17 February 1895 Nansen began a farewell letter to his wife , Eva , writing that should he come to grief " you will know that your image will be the last I see . " He was also reading everything he could about Franz Josef Land , his intended destination after the pole . The archipelago had been discovered in 1873 by Julius Payer , and was incompletely mapped . It was , however , apparently the home of countless bears and seals , and Nansen saw it as an excellent food source on his return journey to civilization . On 14 March , with the ship at 84 ° 4 ′ N , the pair finally began their polar march . This was their third attempt to leave the ship ; on 26 February and again on the 28th , damage to sledges had forced them to return after travelling short distances . After these mishaps Nansen thoroughly overhauled his equipment , minimised the travelling stores , recalculated weights and reduced the convoy to three sledges , before giving the order to start again . A supporting party accompanied the pair and shared the first night 's camp . The next day , Nansen and Johansen skied on alone .

The pair initially traveled mainly over flat snowfields . Nansen had allowed 50 days to cover the 356 nautical miles ( 660 km ; 410 mi ) to the pole , requiring an average daily journey of seven nautical miles ( 13 km ; 8.1 mi ) . On 22 March a sextant observation showed that the pair had travelled 65 nautical miles ( 120 km ; 75 mi ) towards the pole at a daily average of over nine nautical miles ( 17 km ; 10 mi ) . This had been achieved despite very low temperatures , typically around − 40 ° F ( − 40 ° C ) , and small scale mishaps including the loss of the sledgemeter that recorded mileage . However , as the surfaces became uneven and made skiing more difficult , their speeds slowed . A sextant reading on 29 March of 85 ° 56 ′ N indicated that a week 's travel had brought them 47 nautical miles ( 87 km ; 54 mi ) nearer to the pole , but also showed that their average daily distances were falling . More worryingly , a theodolite reading that day suggested that they were at only 85 ° 15 ′ N , and they had no means of knowing which of the readings was correct . They realised that they were fighting a southerly drift , and that distances travelled did not necessarily equate to northerly progression . Johansen 's diary indicated his failing spirits : " My fingers are all destroyed . All mittens are frozen stiff ... It is becoming worse and worse ... God knows what will happen to us " .

On 3 April , after days of difficult travel , Nansen privately began to wonder if the pole might , after all , be out of reach . Unless the surface improved , their food would not last them to the pole and then on to Franz Josef Land . The next day they calculated their position at a disappointing 86 ° 3 ' ; Nansen confided in his diary that : " I have become more and more convinced we ought to turn before time . " After making camp on 7 April Nansen scouted ahead on snowshoes looking for a path forward , but saw only " a veritable chaos of iceblocks stretching as far as the horizon " . He decided that they would go no further north , and would head for Cape Fligely in Franz Josef Land . Nansen recorded the latitude of their final northerly camp as 86 ° 13.6 ′ N , almost three degrees ( 169.6 nautical miles , or 314 km ) beyond Greely 's previous Farthest North mark .

The change of direction to south-west provided much better travelling conditions , probably because the course to Franz Josef Land was broadly parallel to the lines of disturbance in the ice instead of perpendicular to them . Progress was swift : " If this goes on , " Nansen recorded on 13 April , " the return journey will be quicker than I thought . " However , the same diary entry records a mishap that day : both men 's watches had stopped . Although Nansen 's journal comment is mild , the incident was potentially disastrous . Without the correct time they could not calculate their longitude and thus maintain the correct course to Franz Josef Land . They restarted the watches based on Nansen 's guesswork that their longitude was 86 ° E , but the pair were no longer certain where they were . If they were farther west than Nansen 's assumption , they might miss Franz Josef Land altogether , and head for the open Atlantic . The direction of the drift became northerly , hampering the pair 's progress . By 18 April , after 11 days ' travel from Farthest North , they had only made 40 nautical miles ( 74 km ; 46 mi ) to the south . They now travelled over much more broken terrain with wide open leads of water . On about 20 April they were cheered by the sight of a large piece of driftwood stuck in a floe , the first object from the outside world they had seen since Fram had entered the ice . Johansen carved his and Nansen 's initials on it , with the latitude and date . A day or two later they spotted the tracks of an Arctic fox , the first trace of a living creature other than their dogs since leaving Fram . Other tracks soon appeared , and Nansen began to believe that land might be near .

The latitude calculated on 9 May , 84 ° 3 ′ N , was disappointing — Nansen had hoped they were farther south . However , as May progressed they began to see bear tracks , and by the end of the month seals , gulls and whales were plentiful . By Nansen 's calculations , they had reached 82 ° 21 ′ N on 31 May , placing them only 50 nautical miles ( 93 km ; 58 mi ) from Cape Fligely at the northern extremity of Franz Josef Land , if his longitude estimate was accurate . In the warmer weather the ice began to break up , making travel more difficult . Since 24 April dogs had been killed at regular intervals to feed the others , and by the beginning of June only seven of the original 28 remained . On 21 June the pair jettisoned all surplus equipment and supplies , planning to travel light and live off the now plentiful supplies of seal and birds . After a day 's travel in this manner they decided to rest on a floe , waterproof the kayaks and build up their own strength for the next stage of their journey . They remained camped on the floe for a whole month .

On 23 July , the day after leaving the camp , Nansen had the first indisputable glimpse of land . He wrote : " At last the marvel has come to pass — land , land , and after we had almost given up our belief in it ! " In the succeeding days the pair struggled towards this land , which seemingly grew no nearer , although by the end of July they could hear the distant sound of breaking surf . On 4 August they survived a polar bear attack ; two days later they reached the edge of the ice , and only water lay between them and the land . On 6 August they shot the last two Samoyed dogs , converted the kayaks into a catamaran by lashing sledges and skis across them , and raised a sail . Nansen called this first land " Hvidtenland " ( " White Island " ) . After making camp on an ice foot they ascended a slope and looked about them . It was apparent that they were in an archipelago , but what they could see bore no relation to their incomplete map of Franz Josef Land . They could only continue south in the hopes of finding a geographical feature they could pinpoint with certainty . On 16 August Nansen tentatively identified a headland as Cape Felder , marked on Payer 's maps as on the western coast of Franz Josef Land . Nansen 's objective was now to reach a hut and supplies that had been left by an earlier expedition at a location known as Eira Harbour , at the southern end of the islands . However , contrary winds and loose ice made further progress in the kayak hazardous , and on 28 August Nansen decided that , with another polar winter drawing near , they should stay where they were and await the following spring .

As the base for their winter quarters , Nansen and Johansen found a beach in a sheltered cove on what is now called Jackson Island , with a plentiful supply of stones and moss for building materials . They excavated a hole three feet deep , raised walls around it using loose rocks and stones , and stretched walrus skins over the top to form a roof . A chimney was improvised using snow and walrus bones . This shelter , which they called " The Hole " , was finally ready on 28 September , and was to be their home for the next eight months . Their situation was uncomfortable , but not life-threatening ; there was a plentiful supply of bear , walrus and seal to stock up their larder . The chief enemy was boredom ; to pass time they were reduced to reading Nansen 's sailing almanac and navigation tables by the light of their blubber lamp , and then reading them again . At Christmas the pair celebrated with chocolate and bread from their sledging rations . On New Year 's Eve Johansen recorded that Nansen finally adopted the familiar form of address , having until then maintained formalities ( " Mr Johansen " , " Professor Nansen " ) throughout the journey . In the New Year they fashioned themselves simple outer clothing — smocks and trousers — from a discarded sleeping bag , in readiness for the resumption of their journey when the weather grew warmer . On 19 May 1896 , after weeks of preparation , they were ready . Nansen left a note in the hut to inform a possible finder : " We are going south west , along the land , to cross over to Spitsbergen " .

For more than two weeks they followed the shoreline southwards . Nothing they saw seemed to fit with their rudimentary map of Franz Josef Land , and Nansen speculated whether they were in uncharted lands between Franz Josef Land and Spitsbergen . On 4 June a change in conditions allowed them to launch their kayaks for the first time since leaving their winter quarters . A week later , Nansen was forced to dive into the icy waters to rescue the kayaks which , still tied together , had drifted away after being carelessly moored . He managed to reach the craft and , with a last effort , to haul himself aboard . Despite his frozen condition he shot and retrieved two guillemots as he paddled the catamaran back . On 13 June walruses attacked and damaged the kayaks , causing another stop for repairs . On 17 June , as they prepared to leave again , Nansen thought he heard a dog bark and went to investigate . He then heard voices , and a few minutes later encountered a human being . It was Frederick Jackson , who had organised his own expedition to Franz Josef Land after being rejected by Nansen , and had based his headquarters at Cape Flora on Northbrook Island , the southernmost island of the archipelago . Jackson 's own account records that his first reaction to this sudden meeting was to assume the figure to be a shipwrecked sailor , perhaps from the expedition 's supply ship Windward which was due to call that summer . As he approached , Jackson saw " a tall man , wearing a soft felt hat , loosely made , voluminous clothes and long shaggy hair and beard , all reeking with black grease " . After a moment 's awkward hesitation , Jackson recognised his visitor : " You are Nansen , aren 't you ? " , and received the reply " Yes , I am Nansen . "

Johansen was rescued , and the pair taken to the base at Cape Flora , where they posed for photographs ( in one instance re-enacting the Jackson – Nansen meeting ) before taking baths and haircuts . Both men seemed in good health , despite their ordeal ; Nansen had put on 21 pounds ( 9.5 kg ) in weight since the start of the expedition , and Johansen 13 pounds ( 5.9 kg ) . In honour of his rescuer , Nansen named the island where he had wintered " Frederick Jackson Island " . For the next six weeks Nansen had little to do but await the arrival of Windward , worrying that he might have to spend the winter at Cape Flora , and sometimes regretting that he and Johansen had not pressed on to Spitsbergen . Johansen noted in his journal that Nansen had changed from the overbearing personality of the Fram days , and was now subdued and polite , adamant that he would never undertake such a journey again . On 26 July Windward finally arrived ; on 7 August , with Nansen and Johansen aboard , she sailed south and on 13 August reached Vardø . A batch of telegrams was sent , informing the world of Nansen 's safe return .

Before his departure from Fram , Nansen appointed Sverdrup as leader of the rest of the expedition , with orders to continue with the drift towards the Atlantic Ocean unless circumstances warranted abandoning the ship and marching for land . Nansen left precise instructions about keeping up the scientific work , especially the ocean depth soundings and the tests for the thickness of the ice . He concluded : " May we meet in Norway , whether it be on board of this vessel or without her . " Sverdrup 's main task now was to keep his crew busy . He ordered a thorough spring cleaning , and set a party to chip away some of the surrounding ice which was threatening to destabilise the ship . Although there was no immediate danger to Fram , Sverdrup oversaw the repair and overhaul of sledges , and the organisation of provisions should it after all be necessary to abandon ship and march to land . With the arrival of warmer weather as the 1895 summer approached , Sverdrup resumed daily ski practice . Amid these activities a full programme of meteorological , magnetic and oceanographic activities continued under Scott Hansen ; Fram had become a moving oceanographic , meteorological and biological laboratory .

As the drift proceeded the ocean became deeper ; soundings gave successive depths of 6,000 feet ( 1,800 m ) , 9,000 feet ( 2,700 m ) and 2,000 feet ( 610 m ) , a progression which indicated that no undiscovered land mass was nearby . On 15 November 1895 Fram reached 85 ° 55 ′ N , only 19 nautical miles ( 35 km ; 22 mi ) below Nansen 's Farthest North mark . From this point on , the drift was generally to the south and west , although progress was for long periods almost imperceptible . Inactivity and boredom led to increased drinking ; Scott Hansen recorded that Christmas and New Year passed " with the usual hot punch and consequent hangover " , and wrote that he was " getting more and more disgusted with drunkenness " . By mid-March 1896 , the position was 84 ° 25 ′ N , 12 ° 50 ′ E , placing the ship north of Spitsbergen . On 13 June a lead opened and , for the first time in nearly three years , Fram became a living ship . It was a further two months , on 13 August 1896 , before she found open water and , with a blast from her cannon , left the ice behind . She had emerged from the ice just north and west of Spitsbergen , close to Nansen 's original prediction , proving him right and his detractors wrong . Later that same day a ship was sighted — Søstrone , a seal hunter from Tromsø . Sverdrup rowed across for news , and learned that nothing had been heard from Nansen . Fram called briefly at Spitsbergen , where the Swedish explorer-engineer Salomon Andrée was preparing for the balloon flight that he hoped would take him to the pole . After a short time ashore , Sverdrup and his crew began the trip south to Norway .

In the course of the expedition , rumours circulated that Nansen had reached the North Pole , the first as early as April 1894 , in the French Newspaper Le Figaro . In September 1895 Eva Nansen was informed that messages signed by Nansen had been discovered , " sent from the North Pole " . In February 1896 The New York Times ran a dispatch from Irkutsk , in Siberia , from a supposed Nansen agent , claiming that Nansen had reached the pole and found land there . Charles P. Daly of the American Geographical Society called this " startling news " and , " if true , the most important discovery that has been made in ages . " Experts were sceptical of all such reports , and Nansen 's arrival in Vardø quickly put paid to them . In Vardø , he and Johansen were greeted by Professor Mohn , the originator of the polar drift theory , who was in the town by chance . The pair waited for the weekly mail steamer to take them south , and on 18 August arrived in Hammerfest to an enthusiastic reception . The lack of news about Fram was preying on Nansen 's mind ; however , on 20 August he received news that Sverdrup had brought the ship to the tiny port of Skjervøy , south of Hammerfest , and was now continuing with her to Tromsø . The next day , Nansen and Johansen sailed into Tromsø and joined their comrades in an emotional reunion .

After days of celebration and recuperation the ship left Tromsø on 26 August . The voyage south was a triumphal procession , with receptions at every port . Fram finally arrived in Christiania on 9 September , escorted into the harbour by a squadron of warships and welcomed by thousands — the largest crowds the city had ever seen , according to Huntford . Nansen and his crew were received by King Oscar ; on the way to the reception they passed through a triumphal arch formed by 200 gymnasts . Nansen and his family stayed at the palace as special guests of the king ; by contrast , Johansen remained in the background , largely overlooked , and writing that " reality , after all , is not so wonderful as it appeared to me in the midst of our hard life . "

The traditional approach to Arctic exploration had relied on large-scale forces , with a presumption that European techniques could be successfully transplanted into the hostile polar climate . Over the years this strategy had brought little success , and had led to heavy losses of men and ships . By contrast , Nansen 's method of using small , trained crews , and harnessing Inuit and Sami expertise in his methods of travel , had ensured that his expedition was completed without a single casualty or major mishap . Although it did not achieve the objective of reaching the North Pole , the expedition made major geographical and scientific discoveries . Sir Clements Markham , president of Britain 's Royal Geographical Society , declared that the expedition had resolved " the whole problem of Arctic geography " . It was now established that the North Pole was located not on land , nor on a permanent ice sheet , but on shifting , unpredictable pack ice . The Arctic Ocean was a deep basin , with no significant land masses north of the Eurasian continent — any hidden expanse of land would have blocked the free movement of ice . Nansen had proved the polar drift theory ; furthermore , he had noted the presence of a Coriolis force driving the ice to the right of the wind direction , due to the effect of the Earth 's rotation . This discovery would be developed by Nansen 's pupil , Vagn Walfrid Ekman , who later became the leading oceanographer of his time . From its programme of scientific observation the expedition provided the first detailed oceanographic information from the area ; in due course the scientific data gathered during the Fram voyage would run to six published volumes .

Throughout the expedition Nansen continued to experiment with equipment and techniques , altering the designs of skis and sledges and investigating types of clothing , tents and cooking apparatus , thereby revolutionising methods of Arctic travel . In the era of polar exploration which followed his return , explorers routinely sought Nansen 's advice as to methods and equipment — although sometimes they chose not to follow it , usually to their cost . According to Huntford , the South Pole heroes Amundsen , Scott , and Ernest Shackleton were all Nansen 's acolytes . Nansen 's status was never seriously challenged , although he did not escape criticism . American explorer Robert Peary wondered why Nansen had not returned to the ship when his polar dash was thwarted after a mere three weeks away . " Was he ashamed to go back after so short an absence , or had there been a row ... or did he go off for Franz Josef Land from sensational motives or business reasons ? " Adolphus Greely , who had initially dismissed the entire expedition as infeasible , admitted that he had been proved wrong but nevertheless drew attention to " the single blemish " — Nansen 's decision to leave his comrades hundreds of miles from land . " It passes comprehension " , Greely wrote , " how Nansen could have thus deviated from the most sacred duty devolving on the commander of a naval expedition . " Nansen 's reputation nevertheless survived ; a hundred years after the expedition the British explorer Wally Herbert called the Fram voyage " one of the most inspiring examples of courageous intelligence in the history of exploration " .

The Fram voyage was Nansen 's final expedition . He was appointed to a research professorship at the University of Christiania in 1897 , and to a full professorship in oceanography in 1908 . He became independently wealthy as a result of the publication of his expedition account ; in his later career he served the newly independent kingdom of Norway in different capacities , and was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for 1922 , in recognition of his work on behalf of refugees . Hjalmar Johansen never settled back into normal life . After years of drifting , debt and drunkenness he was given the opportunity , through Nansen 's influence , to join Roald Amundsen 's South Pole expedition in 1910 . Johansen quarreled violently with Amundsen at the expedition 's base camp , and was omitted from the South Pole party . He committed suicide within a year of his return from Antarctica . Otto Sverdrup remained as captain of Fram , and in 1898 took the ship , with a new crew , to the Canadian Arctic for four years ' exploration . In later years Sverdrup helped to raise funds that enabled the ship to be restored and housed in a permanent museum . He died in November 1930 , seven months after Nansen 's death .

" The Monkey Suit " is the twenty-first episode of the seventeenth season of the American animated sitcom The Simpsons . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on May 14 , 2006 . In the episode , Ned Flanders is shocked after seeing a new display at the museum about evolution . Together with Reverend Lovejoy , he spreads the religious belief of creationism in Springfield , and at a later town meeting , teaching evolution is made illegal . As a result , Lisa decides to hold secret classes for people interested in evolution . However , she is quickly arrested and a trial against her is initiated . J. Stewart Burns wrote " The Monkey Suit " , for which he received inspiration from the 1925 Scopes Monkey Trial . The episode features a few references to this legal case , as well as several references to popular culture . Many analysts have commented on the episode 's treatment of the creation – evolution controversy , a dispute about the origin of humanity between those who support a creationist view based upon their religious beliefs , versus those who accept evolution , as supported by scientific evidence .

On the last day of summer vacation , Lisa brings the family to the museum to see a weaving exhibit as her summer activity , but they quickly discover that it has been canceled and replaced by a " History of Weapons " exhibit . Faced with an incredibly long line , Homer notices Ned Flanders and his children at the front of the line and cuts in front of them . Others start taking advantage of Ned ’ s kindness as well , until the Flanders family is stuck at the end . At the end of the day , they are still waiting , and are denied entry , as it is closing time for the weapons exhibit . They therefore decide to check out the evolution exhibit next door . Ned is horrified to hear that humans evolved from apes and that the creation account in the Genesis is characterized as a myth . Covering his children 's eyes , he drags them out of the exhibit . Ned meets up with the church council to suggest promotion of creationism . The next day , he and Reverend Lovejoy blackmail Principal Skinner into introducing creationism in the school . Lisa is perturbed by this , and at a town meeting asks everyone to make a choice between creationism and Darwinism , as there is only one truth . The townspeople vote for creationism , much to her chagrin , and the act of teaching or learning Darwinism and evolution is made illegal . Lisa therefore decides to start holding secret classes for people interested in evolution . However , just as the first lesson is about to begin , she is arrested by Chief Wiggum . She asks why she 's being arrested when there are far worse crimes out there , and embarrassed he tells her they only have enough manpower to enforce the last three laws passed , even stating that it 's the worst law system there is . Lisa is brought to trial , which is dubbed Lisa Simpson v. God . Representing her is Clarice Drummond , a despised American Civil Liberties Union ( ACLU ) lawyer , while on God ’ s ( i.e. , Ned 's ) side is Wallace Brady , a beloved , overweight , southern lawyer . The trial does not go smoothly for Lisa , as Professor Frink ( called by Clarice ) gives ambiguous answers regarding God 's existence , while a creationist scientist says that evolution cannot be real , as there is no proof of a " missing link " ( depicted in a picture as a savage hominid , holding a rock over his head ) .

With Lisa now facing a long jail sentence , Marge decides to help her out . She starts reading Charles Darwin 's The Origin of Species and becomes addicted to it . When the trial resumes , Marge tells Lisa that she now knows a way that she can help her . While Ned is being cross-examined by Clarice , Marge gives Homer a cold beer . Homer , ecstatic at getting a beer , tries to open it unsuccessfully . The more he tries , the more primitive he gets , hooting and banging the bottle on the bench , disrupting the trial . Finally , Ned loses his cool and refers to Homer as a " big monkey-faced gorilla . " Clarice then asks Ned to compare the picture of the " missing link " and Homer shaking the beer over his head , and asks if he truthfully believes Homer cannot be related to apes . Ned cannot and concedes victory to Lisa . Lisa kindly tells Ned that she fully respects religious beliefs , but she just does not think it is proper for the church to dominate the school , the same way that Mr. Flanders and Reverend Lovejoy do not want scientists taking over the church . Ned agrees and offers to take Lisa and his kids out for ice cream .

" The Monkey Suit " was written by J. Stewart Burns and directed by Raymond S. Persi as part of the seventeenth season of The Simpsons ( 2005 – 2006 ) . Burns received inspiration for the episode from the Scopes Monkey Trial , a 1925 legal case in which high school science teacher John Scopes was accused of violating Tennessee 's Butler Act which made teaching evolution unlawful . Clarice Drummond , the ACLU lawyer who represents Lisa , is a reference to the ACLU lawyer Clarence Darrow who defended Scopes , while Wallace Brady is a reference to William Jennings Bryan , an attorney in the Scopes Monkey Trial . American actor Larry Hagman guest starred in the episode as Wallace Brady , while American actress Melanie Griffith played herself as the narrator of an audio tour at the museum . Burns did research for " The Monkey Suit " by reading Richard Dawkins ' book The Selfish Gene and watching Inherit the Wind ( a film based on the Scopes Monkey Trial ) . He also visited a natural history museum . The opening of the episode , in which Bart rushes to do everything he planned on doing during summer vacation , was originally written and animated for the season fourteen episode " I 'm Spelling as Fast as I Can " ( 2003 ) but was cut . This episode came in short , and to fill in time , the sequence was added . Burns has said commented the episode " ended up being incredibly short because when you do an episode where there 's really just one good side of an argument [ creation vs. evolution ] , you don 't fill out as much time as you need to . " The opening sequence features a large number of allusions to popular culture , including references to The Natural ( 1984 film ) , Happy Days ( television sitcom ) , and Men in Black ( 1997 film ) .

" The Monkey Suit " is an episode that tackles the creation – evolution controversy , and according to Theresa Sanders in her book Approaching Eden : Adam and Eve in Popular Culture , " skewered antievolution legislation . " The authors of the book Chronology of the Evolution-Creationism Controversy commented that the episode " caricatures creationism as an intellectual joke . " Burns has cited the episode as " a nice example of The Simpsons really taking one clear side " . However , as pointed out by Sanders , it " should be pointed out that though the Simpsons episode clearly sides with Darwin , evolutionists come in for criticism as well . When Ned and his sons go into the museum 's Hall of Man , one of the exhibits they see in support of evolution is a collection of dinosaur bones with the title ' Indisputable Fossil Records . ' The cartoon 's inclusion of the sign can be interpreted as mocking the pretension that science knows all and may not be questioned . " Sanders cited another scene as an example of this ; at the trial , Drummond asks Professor Frink if " this theory of evolution necessarily mean that there is no God ? " , to which he replies , " No , of course not . It just says that God is an impotent nothing from nowhere with less power than the undersecretary of Agriculture . " Sanders wrote that " His arrogance is clear , and equally clear is the show 's satirical presentation of science 's hubris . "

Ted Gournelos analyzed " The Monkey Suit " in his 2009 book Popular Culture and the Future of Politics : Cultural Studies and the Tao of South Park , writing : " More than anything , the episode is used to critique the demonization of evolutionary theory by religious propaganda , by an instructional video used in the school ( that shows a drunken Charles Darwin passionately kissing Satan ) as well as by the prosecuting attorney . This allows for a somewhat leftist discussion of the issue , but ultimately is unable to address the rise of Christian fundamentalism in the United States [ ... ] " . Gournelos noted that the episode focuses on the old Scopes Monkey Trial and does not address contemporary creation – evolution debates , adding : " Interestingly , The Simpsons continues to place creationism at a higher popular plain than evolution , as the jury and trial audience are obviously biased towards the creationists ( who , unlike in contemporary cases , are the prosecutors rather than the plaintiffs ) . " Gournelos concluded that the episode " pokes gentle fun at media rhetoric and the questioning of evolutionary theory [ ... ] , but is unable or unwilling to address the rise of intelligent design or contemporary court battles ( in Pennsylvania [ see Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District ] , Kansas [ see Kansas evolution hearings ] , and elsewhere ) that might encourage debate in its audience . "

The episode originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on May 14 , 2006 . During this broadcast , it was seen by approximately 8.41 millions viewers , finishing forty-sixth in the ratings for the week of May 8 – 14 , 2006 . Since airing , the episode has received generally positive reviews from critics . In a retrospective that was published on the twentieth anniversary of The Simpsons in 2010 , writers for BBC News selected " The Monkey Suit " as one of the show 's " 10 classic episodes " , one they said demonstrated that " the writers still have fire in their bellies . " TV Squad critic Adam Finley wrote that " Last night 's episode had some good moments , but it did feel like they were treading upon somewhat familiar ground and not saying anything especially new , " referring to the fact the issue of science and religion has been dealt with before on the show , " most notably in the ' Lisa the Skeptic ' episode in which the supposed skeleton of a dead angel is found . " In 2007 , " The Monkey Suit " won an award from the Independent Investigations Group ( IIG ) for being " one of those rare shows in the media that encourage science , critical thinking , and ridicule those shows that peddle pseudoscience and superstition . " J. Stewart Burns , the writer of the episode , was present at the awards ceremony to accept the award .

While reviewing the seventeenth season of The Simpsons , Jesse Hassenger of PopMatters noted that he thought the show had declined in quality compared to its earlier years , and added that the stronger episodes in the later seasons are that ones that " satirize topical issues " , giving " The Monkey Suit " as an example . Similarly , Fort Worth Star-Telegram staff writer Robert Philpot commented that " Even in its weak seasons , this show has always been good for at least one belly laugh per episode . Not this year [ season seventeen ] . Aside from an installment that took on the evolution -vs.-creationism edge and a couple of other bits , the satirical edge has really dulled , making the announcement that it will have at least two more seasons a cause for concern rather than celebration . " In the July 26 , 2007 issue of Nature , the scientific journal 's editorial staff listed among " The Top Ten science moments in The Simpsons " the scene from the episode in which " Flanders is flabbergasted that the science museum 's exhibit on the origins of man both highlights evolution and makes light of creationism — and , to top it all , has a unisex bathroom . "

The horse ( Equus ferus caballus ) is one of two extant subspecies of Equus ferus . It is an odd-toed ungulate mammal belonging to the taxonomic family Equidae . The horse has evolved over the past 45 to 55 million years from a small multi-toed creature , Eohippus , into the large , single-toed animal of today . Humans began to domesticate horses around 4000 BC , and their domestication is believed to have been widespread by 3000 BC . Horses in the subspecies caballus are domesticated , although some domesticated populations live in the wild as feral horses . These feral populations are not true wild horses , as this term is used to describe horses that have never been domesticated , such as the endangered Przewalski 's horse , a separate subspecies , and the only remaining true wild horse . There is an extensive , specialized vocabulary used to describe equine-related concepts , covering everything from anatomy to life stages , size , colors , markings , breeds , locomotion , and behavior . Horses ' anatomy enables them to make use of speed to escape predators and they have a well-developed sense of balance and a strong fight-or-flight response . Related to this need to flee from predators in the wild is an unusual trait : horses are able to sleep both standing up and lying down . Female horses , called mares , carry their young for approximately 11 months , and a young horse , called a foal , can stand and run shortly following birth . Most domesticated horses begin training under saddle or in harness between the ages of two and four . They reach full adult development by age five , and have an average lifespan of between 25 and 30 years .

Horse breeds are loosely divided into three categories based on general temperament : spirited " hot bloods " with speed and endurance ; " cold bloods " , such as draft horses and some ponies , suitable for slow , heavy work ; and " warmbloods " , developed from crosses between hot bloods and cold bloods , often focusing on creating breeds for specific riding purposes , particularly in Europe . There are more than 300 breeds of horse in the world today , developed for many different uses . Horses and humans interact in a wide variety of sport competitions and non-competitive recreational pursuits , as well as in working activities such as police work , agriculture , entertainment , and therapy . Horses were historically used in warfare , from which a wide variety of riding and driving techniques developed , using many different styles of equipment and methods of control . Many products are derived from horses , including meat , milk , hide , hair , bone , and pharmaceuticals extracted from the urine of pregnant mares . Humans provide domesticated horses with food , water and shelter , as well as attention from specialists such as veterinarians and farriers .

Depending on breed , management and environment , the modern domestic horse has a life expectancy of 25 to 30 years . Uncommonly , a few animals live into their 40s and , occasionally , beyond . The oldest verifiable record was " Old Billy " , a 19th-century horse that lived to the age of 62 . In modern times , Sugar Puff , who had been listed in Guinness World Records as the world 's oldest living pony , died in 2007 at age 56 . Regardless of a horse or pony 's actual birth date , for most competition purposes a year is added to its age each January 1 of each year in the Northern Hemisphere and each August 1 in the Southern Hemisphere . The exception is in endurance riding , where the minimum age to compete is based on the animal 's actual calendar age . Colt : A male horse under the age of four . A common terminology error is to call any young horse a " colt " , when the term actually only refers to young male horses . Foal : A horse of either sex less than one year old . A nursing foal is sometimes called a suckling and a foal that has been weaned is called a weanling . Most domesticated foals are weaned at five to seven months of age , although foals can be weaned at four months with no adverse physical effects .

The height of horses is usually measured at the highest point of the withers , where the neck meets the back . This point is used because it is a stable point of the anatomy , unlike the head or neck , which move up and down in relation to the body of the horse . In English-speaking countries , the height of horses is often stated in units of hands and inches : one hand is equal to 4 inches ( 101.6 mm ) . The height is expressed as the number of full hands , followed by a point , then the number of additional inches , and ending with the abbreviation " h " or " hh " ( for " hands high " ) . Thus , a horse described as " 15.2 h " is 15 hands plus 2 inches , for a total of 62 inches ( 157.5 cm ) in height . The size of horses varies by breed , but also is influenced by nutrition . Light riding horses usually range in height from 14 to 16 hands ( 56 to 64 inches , 142 to 163 cm ) and can weigh from 380 to 550 kilograms ( 840 to 1,210 lb ) . Larger riding horses usually start at about 15.2 hands ( 62 inches , 157 cm ) and often are as tall as 17 hands ( 68 inches , 173 cm ) , weighing from 500 to 600 kilograms ( 1,100 to 1,320 lb ) . Heavy or draft horses are usually at least 16 hands ( 64 inches , 163 cm ) high and can be as tall as 18 hands ( 72 inches , 183 cm ) high . They can weigh from about 700 to 1,000 kilograms ( 1,540 to 2,200 lb ) .

Ponies are taxonomically the same animals as horses . The distinction between a horse and pony is commonly drawn on the basis of height , especially for competition purposes . However , height alone is not dispositive ; the difference between horses and ponies may also include aspects of phenotype , including conformation and temperament . The traditional standard for height of a horse or a pony at maturity is 14.2 hands ( 58 inches , 147 cm ) . An animal 14.2 h or over is usually considered to be a horse and one less than 14.2 h a pony , but there are many exceptions to the traditional standard . In Australia , ponies are considered to be those under 14 hands ( 56 inches , 142 cm ) , For competition in the Western division of the United States Equestrian Federation , the cutoff is 14.1 hands ( 57 inches , 145 cm ) The International Federation for Equestrian Sports , the world governing body for horse sport , uses metric measurements and defines a pony as being any horse measuring less than 148 centimetres ( 58.27 in ) at the withers without shoes , which is just over 14.2 h , and 149 centimetres ( 58.66 in ) , or just over 14.2 ½ h , with shoes .

Height is not the sole criterion for distinguishing horses from ponies . Breed registries for horses that typically produce individuals both under and over 14.2 h consider all animals of that breed to be horses regardless of their height . Conversely , some pony breeds may have features in common with horses , and individual animals may occasionally mature at over 14.2 h , but are still considered to be ponies . Ponies often exhibit thicker manes , tails , and overall coat . They also have proportionally shorter legs , wider barrels , heavier bone , shorter and thicker necks , and short heads with broad foreheads . They may have calmer temperaments than horses and also a high level of intelligence that may or may not be used to cooperate with human handlers . Small size , by itself , is not an exclusive determinant . For example , the Shetland pony which averages 10 hands ( 40 inches , 102 cm ) , is considered a pony . Conversely , breeds such as the Falabella and other miniature horses , which can be no taller than 30 inches ( 76 cm ) , are classified by their registries as very small horses , not ponies .

Horses exhibit a diverse array of coat colors and distinctive markings , described by a specialized vocabulary . Often , a horse is classified first by its coat color , before breed or sex . Horses of the same color may be distinguished from one another by white markings , which , along with various spotting patterns , are inherited separately from coat color . Many genes that create horse coat colors and patterns have been identified . Current genetic tests can identify at least 13 different alleles influencing coat color , and research continues to discover new genes linked to specific traits . The basic coat colors of chestnut and black are determined by the gene controlled by the Melanocortin 1 receptor , also known as the " extension gene " or " red factor , " as its recessive form is " red " ( chestnut ) and its dominant form is black . Additional genes control suppression of black color to point coloration that results in a bay , spotting patterns such as pinto or leopard , dilution genes such as palomino or dun , as well as graying , and all the other factors that create the many possible coat colors found in horses .

Horses which have a white coat color are often mislabeled ; a horse that looks " white " is usually a middle-aged or older gray . Grays are born a darker shade , get lighter as they age , but usually keep black skin underneath their white hair coat ( with the exception of pink skin under white markings ) . The only horses properly called white are born with a predominantly white hair coat and pink skin , a fairly rare occurrence . Different and unrelated genetic factors can produce white coat colors in horses , including several different alleles of dominant white and the sabino-1 gene . However , there are no " albino " horses , defined as having both pink skin and red eyes .

Gestation lasts approximately 340 days , with an average range 320 – 370 days , and usually results in one foal ; twins are rare . Horses are a precocial species , and foals are capable of standing and running within a short time following birth . Foals are usually born in the spring . The estrous cycle of a mare occurs roughly every 19 – 22 days and occurs from early spring into autumn . Most mares enter an anestrus period during the winter and thus do not cycle in this period . Foals are generally weaned from their mothers between four and six months of age . Horses , particularly colts , sometimes are physically capable of reproduction at about 18 months , but domesticated horses are rarely allowed to breed before the age of three , especially females . Horses four years old are considered mature , although the skeleton normally continues to develop until the age of six ; maturation also depends on the horse 's size , breed , sex , and quality of care . Larger horses have larger bones ; therefore , not only do the bones take longer to form bone tissue , but the epiphyseal plates are larger and take longer to convert from cartilage to bone . These plates convert after the other parts of the bones , and are crucial to development .

Depending on maturity , breed , and work expected , horses are usually put under saddle and trained to be ridden between the ages of two and four . Although Thoroughbred race horses are put on the track as young as the age of two in some countries , horses specifically bred for sports such as dressage are generally not put under saddle until they are three or four years old , because their bones and muscles are not solidly developed . For endurance riding competition , horses are not deemed mature enough to compete until they are a full 60 calendar months ( five years ) old .

The horse skeleton averages 205 bones . A significant difference between the horse skeleton and that of a human is the lack of a collarbone — the horse 's forelimbs are attached to the spinal column by a powerful set of muscles , tendons , and ligaments that attach the shoulder blade to the torso . The horse 's legs and hooves are also unique structures . Their leg bones are proportioned differently from those of a human . For example , the body part that is called a horse 's " knee " is actually made up of the carpal bones that correspond to the human wrist . Similarly , the hock contains bones equivalent to those in the human ankle and heel . The lower leg bones of a horse correspond to the bones of the human hand or foot , and the fetlock ( incorrectly called the " ankle " ) is actually the proximal sesamoid bones between the cannon bones ( a single equivalent to the human metacarpal or metatarsal bones ) and the proximal phalanges , located where one finds the " knuckles " of a human . A horse also has no muscles in its legs below the knees and hocks , only skin , hair , bone , tendons , ligaments , cartilage , and the assorted specialized tissues that make up the hoof .

The critical importance of the feet and legs is summed up by the traditional adage , " no foot , no horse " . The horse hoof begins with the distal phalanges , the equivalent of the human fingertip or tip of the toe , surrounded by cartilage and other specialized , blood-rich soft tissues such as the laminae . The exterior hoof wall and horn of the sole is made of keratin , the same material as a human fingernail . The end result is that a horse , weighing on average 500 kilograms ( 1,100 lb ) , travels on the same bones as would a human on tiptoe . For the protection of the hoof under certain conditions , some horses have horseshoes placed on their feet by a professional farrier . The hoof continually grows , and in most domesticated horses needs to be trimmed ( and horseshoes reset , if used ) every five to eight weeks , though the hooves of horses in the wild wear down and regrow at a rate suitable for their terrain .

Horses are adapted to grazing . In an adult horse , there are 12 incisors at the front of the mouth , adapted to biting off the grass or other vegetation . There are 24 teeth adapted for chewing , the premolars and molars , at the back of the mouth . Stallions and geldings have four additional teeth just behind the incisors , a type of canine teeth called " tushes " . Some horses , both male and female , will also develop one to four very small vestigial teeth in front of the molars , known as " wolf " teeth , which are generally removed because they can interfere with the bit . There is an empty interdental space between the incisors and the molars where the bit rests directly on the gums , or " bars " of the horse 's mouth when the horse is bridled . An estimate of a horse 's age can be made from looking at its teeth . The teeth continue to erupt throughout life and are worn down by grazing . Therefore , the incisors show changes as the horse ages ; they develop a distinct wear pattern , changes in tooth shape , and changes in the angle at which the chewing surfaces meet . This allows a very rough estimate of a horse 's age , although diet and veterinary care can also affect the rate of tooth wear .

Horses are herbivores with a digestive system adapted to a forage diet of grasses and other plant material , consumed steadily throughout the day . Therefore , compared to humans , they have a relatively small stomach but very long intestines to facilitate a steady flow of nutrients . A 450-kilogram ( 990 lb ) horse will eat 7 to 11 kilograms ( 15 to 24 lb ) of food per day and , under normal use , drink 38 to 45 litres ( 8.4 to 9.9 imp gal ; 10 to 12 US gal ) of water . Horses are not ruminants , they have only one stomach , like humans , but unlike humans , they can utilize cellulose , a major component of grass . Horses are hindgut fermenters , Cellulose fermentation by symbiotic bacteria occurs in the cecum , or " water gut " , which food goes through before reaching the large intestine . Horses cannot vomit , so digestion problems can quickly cause colic , a leading cause of death .

The horses ' senses are based on their status as prey animals , where they must be aware of their surroundings at all times . They have the largest eyes of any land mammal , and are lateral-eyed , meaning that their eyes are positioned on the sides of their heads . This means that horses have a range of vision of more than 350 ° , with approximately 65 ° of this being binocular vision and the remaining 285 ° monocular vision . Horses have excellent day and night vision , but they have two-color , or dichromatic vision ; their color vision is somewhat like red-green color blindness in humans , where certain colors , especially red and related colors , appear as a shade of green . Their sense of smell , while much better than that of humans , is not quite as good as that of a dog . It is believed to play a key role in the social interactions of horses as well as detecting other key scents in the environment . Horses have two olfactory centers . The first system is in the nostrils and nasal cavity , which analyze a wide range of odors . The second , located under the nasal cavity , are the Vomeronasal organs , also called Jacobson 's organs . These have a separate nerve pathway to the brain and appear to primarily analyze pheromones .

A horse 's hearing is good , and the pinna of each ear can rotate up to 180 ° , giving the potential for 360 ° hearing without having to move the head . Noise impacts the behavior of horses and certain kinds of noise may contribute to stress : A 2013 study in the UK indicated that stabled horses were calmest in a quiet setting , or if listening to country or classical music , but displayed signs of nervousness when listening to jazz or rock music . This study also recommended keeping music under a volume of 21 decibels . An Australian study found that stabled racehorses listening to talk radio had a higher rate of gastric ulcers than horses listening to music , and racehorses stabled where a radio was played had a higher overall rate of ulceration than horses stabled where there was no radio playing . Horses have a great sense of balance , due partly to their ability to feel their footing and partly to highly developed proprioception — the unconscious sense of where the body and limbs are at all times . A horse 's sense of touch is well developed . The most sensitive areas are around the eyes , ears , and nose . Horses are able to sense contact as subtle as an insect landing anywhere on the body .

All horses move naturally with four basic gaits : the four-beat walk , which averages 6.4 kilometres per hour ( 4.0 mph ) ; the two-beat trot or jog at 13 to 19 kilometres per hour ( 8.1 to 11.8 mph ) ( faster for harness racing horses ) ; the canter or lope , a three-beat gait that is 19 to 24 kilometres per hour ( 12 to 15 mph ) ; and the gallop . The gallop averages 40 to 48 kilometres per hour ( 25 to 30 mph ) , but the world record for a horse galloping over a short , sprint distance is 70.76 kilometres per hour ( 43.97 mph ) . Besides these basic gaits , some horses perform a two-beat pace , instead of the trot . There also are several four-beat " ambling " gaits that are approximately the speed of a trot or pace , though smoother to ride . These include the lateral rack , running walk , and tölt as well as the diagonal fox trot . Ambling gaits are often genetic in some breeds , known collectively as gaited horses . Often , gaited horses replace the trot with one of the ambling gaits .

Horses are prey animals with a strong fight-or-flight response . Their first reaction to threat is to startle and usually flee , although they will stand their ground and defend themselves when flight is impossible or if their young are threatened . They also tend to be curious ; when startled , they will often hesitate an instant to ascertain the cause of their fright , and may not always flee from something that they perceive as non-threatening . Most light horse riding breeds were developed for speed , agility , alertness and endurance ; natural qualities that extend from their wild ancestors . However , through selective breeding , some breeds of horses are quite docile , particularly certain draft horses . Horses are herd animals , with a clear hierarchy of rank , led by a dominant individual , usually a mare . They are also social creatures that are able to form companionship attachments to their own species and to other animals , including humans . They communicate in various ways , including vocalizations such as nickering or whinnying , mutual grooming , and body language . Many horses will become difficult to manage if they are isolated , but with training , horses can learn to accept a human as a companion , and thus be comfortable away from other horses . However , when confined with insufficient companionship , exercise , or stimulation , individuals may develop stable vices , an assortment of bad habits , mostly stereotypies of psychological origin , that include wood chewing , wall kicking , " weaving " ( rocking back and forth ) , and other problems .

Studies have indicated that horses perform a number of cognitive tasks on a daily basis , meeting mental challenges that include food procurement and identification of individuals within a social system . They also have good spatial discrimination abilities . Studies have assessed equine intelligence in areas such as problem solving , speed of learning , and memory . Horses excel at simple learning , but also are able to use more advanced cognitive abilities that involve categorization and concept learning . They can learn using habituation , desensitization , classical conditioning , and operant conditioning , and positive and negative reinforcement . One study has indicated that horses can differentiate between " more or less " if the quantity involved is less than four . Domesticated horses may face greater mental challenges than wild horses , because they live in artificial environments that prevent instinctive behavior whilst also learning tasks that are not natural . Horses are animals of habit that respond well to regimentation , and respond best when the same routines and techniques are used consistently . One trainer believes that " intelligent " horses are reflections of intelligent trainers who effectively use response conditioning techniques and positive reinforcement to train in the style that best fits with an individual animal 's natural inclinations .

Horses are mammals , and as such are warm-blooded , or endothermic creatures , as opposed to cold-blooded , or poikilothermic animals . However , these words have developed a separate meaning in the context of equine terminology , used to describe temperament , not body temperature . For example , the " hot-bloods " , such as many race horses , exhibit more sensitivity and energy , while the " cold-bloods " , such as most draft breeds , are quieter and calmer . Sometimes " hot-bloods " are classified as " light horses " or " riding horses " , with the " cold-bloods " classified as " draft horses " or " work horses " . " Hot blooded " breeds include " oriental horses " such as the Akhal-Teke , Arabian horse , Barb and now-extinct Turkoman horse , as well as the Thoroughbred , a breed developed in England from the older oriental breeds . Hot bloods tend to be spirited , bold , and learn quickly . They are bred for agility and speed . They tend to be physically refined — thin-skinned , slim , and long-legged . The original oriental breeds were brought to Europe from the Middle East and North Africa when European breeders wished to infuse these traits into racing and light cavalry horses .

Muscular , heavy draft horses are known as " cold bloods " , as they are bred not only for strength , but also to have the calm , patient temperament needed to pull a plow or a heavy carriage full of people . They are sometimes nicknamed " gentle giants " . Well-known draft breeds include the Belgian and the Clydesdale . Some , like the Percheron , are lighter and livelier , developed to pull carriages or to plow large fields in drier climates . Others , such as the Shire , are slower and more powerful , bred to plow fields with heavy , clay-based soils . The cold-blooded group also includes some pony breeds . " Warmblood " breeds , such as the Trakehner or Hanoverian , developed when European carriage and war horses were crossed with Arabians or Thoroughbreds , producing a riding horse with more refinement than a draft horse , but greater size and milder temperament than a lighter breed . Certain pony breeds with warmblood characteristics have been developed for smaller riders . Warmbloods are considered a " light horse " or " riding horse " . Today , the term " Warmblood " refers to a specific subset of sport horse breeds that are used for competition in dressage and show jumping . Strictly speaking , the term " warm blood " refers to any cross between cold-blooded and hot-blooded breeds . Examples include breeds such as the Irish Draught or the Cleveland Bay . The term was once used to refer to breeds of light riding horse other than Thoroughbreds or Arabians , such as the Morgan horse .

Horses are able to sleep both standing up and lying down . In an adaptation from life in the wild , horses are able to enter light sleep by using a " stay apparatus " in their legs , allowing them to doze without collapsing . Horses sleep better when in groups because some animals will sleep while others stand guard to watch for predators . A horse kept alone will not sleep well because its instincts are to keep a constant eye out for danger . Unlike humans , horses do not sleep in a solid , unbroken period of time , but take many short periods of rest . Horses spend four to fifteen hours a day in standing rest , and from a few minutes to several hours lying down . Total sleep time in a 24-hour period may range from several minutes to a couple of hours , mostly in short intervals of about 15 minutes each . The average sleep time of a domestic horse is said to be 2.9 hours per day . Horses must lie down to reach REM sleep . They only have to lie down for an hour or two every few days to meet their minimum REM sleep requirements . However , if a horse is never allowed to lie down , after several days it will become sleep-deprived , and in rare cases may suddenly collapse as it involuntarily slips into REM sleep while still standing . This condition differs from narcolepsy , although horses may also suffer from that disorder .

The horse adapted to survive in areas of wide-open terrain with sparse vegetation , surviving in an ecosystem where other large grazing animals , especially ruminants , could not . Horses and other equids are odd-toed ungulates of the order Perissodactyla , a group of mammals that was dominant during the Tertiary period . In the past , this order contained 14 families , but only three — Equidae ( the horse and related species ) , the tapir , and the rhinoceros — have survived to the present day . The earliest known member of the family Equidae was the Hyracotherium , which lived between 45 and 55 million years ago , during the Eocene period . It had 4 toes on each front foot , and 3 toes on each back foot . The extra toe on the front feet soon disappeared with the Mesohippus , which lived 32 to 37 million years ago . Over time , the extra side toes shrank in size until they vanished . All that remains of them in modern horses is a set of small vestigial bones on the leg below the knee , known informally as splint bones . Their legs also lengthened as their toes disappeared until they were a hooved animal capable of running at great speed . By about 5 million years ago , the modern Equus had evolved . Equid teeth also evolved from browsing on soft , tropical plants to adapt to browsing of drier plant material , then to grazing of tougher plains grasses . Thus proto-horses changed from leaf-eating forest-dwellers to grass-eating inhabitants of semi-arid regions worldwide , including the steppes of Eurasia and the Great Plains of North America .

By about 15,000 years ago , Equus ferus was a widespread holarctic species . Horse bones from this time period , the late Pleistocene , are found in Europe , Eurasia , Beringia , and North America . Yet between 10,000 and 7,600 years ago , the horse became extinct in North America and rare elsewhere . The reasons for this extinction are not fully known , but one theory notes that extinction in North America paralleled human arrival . Another theory points to climate change , noting that approximately 12,500 years ago , the grasses characteristic of a steppe ecosystem gave way to shrub tundra , which was covered with unpalatable plants .

A truly wild horse is a species or subspecies with no ancestors that were ever domesticated . Therefore , most " wild " horses today are actually feral horses , animals that escaped or were turned loose from domestic herds and the descendants of those animals . Only two never-domesticated subspecies , the Tarpan and the Przewalski 's Horse , survived into recorded history and only the latter survives today . The Przewalski 's horse ( Equus ferus przewalskii ) , named after the Russian explorer Nikolai Przhevalsky , is a rare Asian animal . It is also known as the Mongolian wild horse ; Mongolian people know it as the taki , and the Kyrgyz people call it a kirtag . The subspecies was presumed extinct in the wild between 1969 and 1992 , while a small breeding population survived in zoos around the world . In 1992 , it was reestablished in the wild due to the conservation efforts of numerous zoos . Today , a small wild breeding population exists in Mongolia . There are additional animals still maintained at zoos throughout the world . The tarpan or European wild horse ( Equus ferus ferus ) was found in Europe and much of Asia . It survived into the historical era , but became extinct in 1909 , when the last captive died in a Russian zoo . Thus , the genetic line was lost . Attempts have been made to recreate the tarpan , which resulted in horses with outward physical similarities , but nonetheless descended from domesticated ancestors and not true wild horses .

Periodically , populations of horses in isolated areas are speculated to be relict populations of wild horses , but generally have been proven to be feral or domestic . For example , the Riwoche horse of Tibet was proposed as such , but testing did not reveal genetic differences from domesticated horses . Similarly , the Sorraia of Portugal was proposed as a direct descendant of the Tarpan based on shared characteristics , but genetic studies have shown that the Sorraia is more closely related to other horse breeds and that the outward similarity is an unreliable measure of relatedness .

Besides the horse , there are seven other species of genus Equus in the Equidae family . These are the ass or donkey , Equus asinus ; the mountain zebra , Equus zebra ; plains zebra , Equus quagga ; Grévy 's zebra , Equus grevyi ; the kiang , Equus kiang ; and the onager , Equus hemionus . Horses can crossbreed with other members of their genus . The most common hybrid is the mule , a cross between a " jack " ( male donkey ) and a mare . A related hybrid , a hinny , is a cross between a stallion and a jenny ( female donkey ) . Other hybrids include the zorse , a cross between a zebra and a horse . With rare exceptions , most hybrids are sterile and cannot reproduce .

Domestication of the horse most likely took place in central Asia prior to 3500 BC . Two major sources of information are used to determine where and when the horse was first domesticated and how the domesticated horse spread around the world . The first source is based on palaeological and archaeological discoveries ; the second source is a comparison of DNA obtained from modern horses to that from bones and teeth of ancient horse remains . The earliest archaeological evidence for the domestication of the horse comes from sites in Ukraine and Kazakhstan , dating to approximately 3500 – 4000 BC . By 3000 BC , the horse was completely domesticated and by 2000 BC there was a sharp increase in the number of horse bones found in human settlements in northwestern Europe , indicating the spread of domesticated horses throughout the continent . The most recent , but most irrefutable evidence of domestication comes from sites where horse remains were interred with chariots in graves of the Sintashta and Petrovka cultures c . 2100 BC . Domestication is also studied by using the genetic material of present-day horses and comparing it with the genetic material present in the bones and teeth of horse remains found in archaeological and palaeological excavations . The variation in the genetic material shows that very few wild stallions contributed to the domestic horse , while many mares were part of early domesticated herds . This is reflected in the difference in genetic variation between the DNA that is passed on along the paternal , or sire line ( Y-chromosome ) versus that passed on along the maternal , or dam line ( mitochondrial DNA ) . There are very low levels of Y-chromosome variability , but a great deal of genetic variation in mitochondrial DNA . There is also regional variation in mitochondrial DNA due to the inclusion of wild mares in domestic herds . Another characteristic of domestication is an increase in coat color variation . In horses , this increased dramatically between 5000 and 3000 BC .

Feral horses are born and live in the wild , but are descended from domesticated animals . Many populations of feral horses exist throughout the world . Studies of feral herds have provided useful insights into the behavior of prehistoric horses , as well as greater understanding of the instincts and behaviors that drive horses that live in domesticated conditions . There are also semi-feral horses in many parts of the world , such as Dartmoor and the New Forest in the UK , where the animals are all privately owned but live for significant amounts of time in " wild " conditions on undeveloped , often public , lands . Owners of such animals often pay a fee for grazing rights .

The concept of purebred bloodstock and a controlled , written breed registry has come to be particularly significant and important in modern times . Sometimes purebred horses are incorrectly or inaccurately called " thoroughbreds " . Thoroughbred is a specific breed of horse , while a " purebred " is a horse ( or any other animal ) with a defined pedigree recognized by a breed registry . Horse breeds are groups of horses with distinctive characteristics that are transmitted consistently to their offspring , such as conformation , color , performance ability , or disposition . These inherited traits result from a combination of natural crosses and artificial selection methods . Horses have been selectively bred since their domestication . An early example of people who practiced selective horse breeding were the Bedouin , who had a reputation for careful practices , keeping extensive pedigrees of their Arabian horses and placing great value upon pure bloodlines . These pedigrees were originally transmitted via an oral tradition . In the 14th century , Carthusian monks of southern Spain kept meticulous pedigrees of bloodstock lineages still found today in the Andalusian horse . Breeds developed due to a need for " form to function " , the necessity to develop certain characteristics in order to perform a particular type of work . Thus , a powerful but refined breed such as the Andalusian developed as riding horses with an aptitude for dressage . Heavy draft horses developed out of a need to perform demanding farm work and pull heavy wagons . Other horse breeds developed specifically for light agricultural work , carriage and road work , various sport disciplines , or simply as pets . Some breeds developed through centuries of crossing other breeds , while others descended from a single foundation sire , or other limited or restricted foundation bloodstock . One of the earliest formal registries was General Stud Book for Thoroughbreds , which began in 1791 and traced back to the foundation bloodstock for the breed . There are more than 300 horse breeds in the world today .

Worldwide , horses play a role within human cultures and have done so for millennia . Horses are used for leisure activities , sports , and working purposes . The Food and Agriculture Organization ( FAO ) estimates that in 2008 , there were almost 59,000,000 horses in the world , with around 33,500,000 in the Americas , 13,800,000 in Asia and 6,300,000 in Europe and smaller portions in Africa and Oceania . There are estimated to be 9,500,000 horses in the United States alone . The American Horse Council estimates that horse-related activities have a direct impact on the economy of the United States of over $ 39 billion , and when indirect spending is considered , the impact is over $ 102 billion . In a 2004 " poll " conducted by Animal Planet , more than 50,000 viewers from 73 countries voted for the horse as the world 's 4th favorite animal . Communication between human and horse is paramount in any equestrian activity ; to aid this process horses are usually ridden with a saddle on their backs to assist the rider with balance and positioning , and a bridle or related headgear to assist the rider in maintaining control . Sometimes horses are ridden without a saddle , and occasionally , horses are trained to perform without a bridle or other headgear . Many horses are also driven , which requires a harness , bridle , and some type of vehicle .

Historically , equestrians honed their skills through games and races . Equestrian sports provided entertainment for crowds and honed the excellent horsemanship that was needed in battle . Many sports , such as dressage , eventing and show jumping , have origins in military training , which were focused on control and balance of both horse and rider . Other sports , such as rodeo , developed from practical skills such as those needed on working ranches and stations . Sport hunting from horseback evolved from earlier practical hunting techniques . Horse racing of all types evolved from impromptu competitions between riders or drivers . All forms of competition , requiring demanding and specialized skills from both horse and rider , resulted in the systematic development of specialized breeds and equipment for each sport . The popularity of equestrian sports through the centuries has resulted in the preservation of skills that would otherwise have disappeared after horses stopped being used in combat . Horses are trained to be ridden or driven in a variety of sporting competitions . Examples include show jumping , dressage , three-day eventing , competitive driving , endurance riding , gymkhana , rodeos , and fox hunting . Horse shows , which have their origins in medieval European fairs , are held around the world . They host a huge range of classes , covering all of the mounted and harness disciplines , as well as " In-hand " classes where the horses are led , rather than ridden , to be evaluated on their conformation . The method of judging varies with the discipline , but winning usually depends on style and ability of both horse and rider . Sports such as polo do not judge the horse itself , but rather use the horse as a partner for human competitors as a necessary part of the game . Although the horse requires specialized training to participate , the details of its performance are not judged , only the result of the rider 's actions — be it getting a ball through a goal or some other task . Examples of these sports of partnership between human and horse include jousting , in which the main goal is for one rider to unseat the other , and buzkashi , a team game played throughout Central Asia , the aim being to capture a goat carcass while on horseback .

There are certain jobs that horses do very well , and no technology has yet developed to fully replace them . For example , mounted police horses are still effective for certain types of patrol duties and crowd control . Cattle ranches still require riders on horseback to round up cattle that are scattered across remote , rugged terrain . Search and rescue organizations in some countries depend upon mounted teams to locate people , particularly hikers and children , and to provide disaster relief assistance . Horses can also be used in areas where it is necessary to avoid vehicular disruption to delicate soil , such as nature reserves . They may also be the only form of transport allowed in wilderness areas . Horses are quieter than motorized vehicles . Law enforcement officers such as park rangers or game wardens may use horses for patrols , and horses or mules may also be used for clearing trails or other work in areas of rough terrain where vehicles are less effective . Although machinery has replaced horses in many parts of the world , an estimated 100 million horses , donkeys and mules are still used for agriculture and transportation in less developed areas . This number includes around 27 million working animals in Africa alone . Some land management practices such as cultivating and logging can be efficiently performed with horses . In agriculture , less fossil fuel is used and increased environmental conservation occurs over time with the use of draft animals such as horses . Logging with horses can result in reduced damage to soil structure and less damage to trees due to more selective logging .

Modern horses are often used to reenact many of their historical work purposes . Horses are used , complete with equipment that is authentic or a meticulously recreated replica , in various live action historical reenactments of specific periods of history , especially recreations of famous battles . Horses are also used to preserve cultural traditions and for ceremonial purposes . Countries such as the United Kingdom still use horse-drawn carriages to convey royalty and other VIPs to and from certain culturally significant events . Public exhibitions are another example , such as the Budweiser Clydesdales , seen in parades and other public settings , a team of draft horses that pull a beer wagon similar to that used before the invention of the modern motorized truck . Horses are frequently seen in television , films and literature . They are sometimes featured as a major character in films about particular animals , but also used as visual elements that assure the accuracy of historical stories . Both live horses and iconic images of horses are used in advertising to promote a variety of products . The horse frequently appears in coats of arms in heraldry , in a variety of poses and equipment . The mythologies of many cultures , including Greco-Roman , Hindu , Islamic , and Norse , include references to both normal horses and those with wings or additional limbs , and multiple myths also call upon the horse to draw the chariots of the Moon and Sun . The horse also appears in the 12-year cycle of animals in the Chinese zodiac related to the Chinese calendar .

People of all ages with physical and mental disabilities obtain beneficial results from association with horses . Therapeutic riding is used to mentally and physically stimulate disabled persons and help them improve their lives through improved balance and coordination , increased self-confidence , and a greater feeling of freedom and independence . The benefits of equestrian activity for people with disabilities has also been recognized with the addition of equestrian events to the Paralympic Games and recognition of para-equestrian events by the International Federation for Equestrian Sports ( FEI ) . Hippotherapy and therapeutic horseback riding are names for different physical , occupational , and speech therapy treatment strategies that utilize equine movement . In hippotherapy , a therapist uses the horse 's movement to improve their patient 's cognitive , coordination , balance , and fine motor skills , whereas therapeutic horseback riding uses specific riding skills . Horses also provide psychological benefits to people whether they actually ride or not . " Equine-assisted " or " equine-facilitated " therapy is a form of experiential psychotherapy that uses horses as companion animals to assist people with mental illness , including anxiety disorders , psychotic disorders , mood disorders , behavioral difficulties , and those who are going through major life changes . There are also experimental programs using horses in prison settings . Exposure to horses appears to improve the behavior of inmates and help reduce recidivism when they leave .

Horses have been used in warfare for most of recorded history . The first archaeological evidence of horses used in warfare dates to between 4000 and 3000 BC , and the use of horses in warfare was widespread by the end of the Bronze Age . Although mechanization has largely replaced the horse as a weapon of war , horses are still seen today in limited military uses , mostly for ceremonial purposes , or for reconnaissance and transport activities in areas of rough terrain where motorized vehicles are ineffective . Horses have been used in the 21st century by the Janjaweed militias in the War in Darfur .

Horses are raw material for many products made by humans throughout history , including byproducts from the slaughter of horses as well as materials collected from living horses . Products collected from living horses include mare 's milk , used by people with large horse herds , such as the Mongols , who let it ferment to produce kumis . Horse blood was once used as food by the Mongols and other nomadic tribes , who found it a convenient source of nutrition when traveling . Drinking their own horses ' blood allowed the Mongols to ride for extended periods of time without stopping to eat . The drug Premarin is a mixture of estrogens extracted from the urine of pregnant mares ( pregnant mares ' urine ) , and was previously a widely used drug for hormone replacement therapy . The tail hair of horses can be used for making bows for string instruments such as the violin , viola , cello , and double bass . Horse meat has been used as food for humans and carnivorous animals throughout the ages . It is eaten in many parts of the world , though consumption is taboo in some cultures , and a subject of political controversy in others . Horsehide leather has been used for boots , gloves , jackets , baseballs , and baseball gloves . Horse hooves can also be used to produce animal glue . Horse bones can be used to make implements . Specifically , in Italian cuisine , the horse tibia is sharpened into a probe called a spinto , which is used to test the readiness of a ( pig ) ham as it cures . In Asia , the saba is a horsehide vessel used in the production of kumis .

Horses are grazing animals , and their major source of nutrients is good-quality forage from hay or pasture . They can consume approximately 2 % to 2.5 % of their body weight in dry feed each day . Therefore , a 450-kilogram ( 990 lb ) adult horse could eat up to 11 kilograms ( 24 lb ) of food . Sometimes , concentrated feed such as grain is fed in addition to pasture or hay , especially when the animal is very active . When grain is fed , equine nutritionists recommend that 50 % or more of the animal 's diet by weight should still be forage . Horses require a plentiful supply of clean water , a minimum of 10 US gallons ( 38 L ) to 12 US gallons ( 45 L ) per day . Although horses are adapted to live outside , they require shelter from the wind and precipitation , which can range from a simple shed or shelter to an elaborate stable . Horses require routine hoof care from a farrier , as well as vaccinations to protect against various diseases , and dental examinations from a veterinarian or a specialized equine dentist . If horses are kept inside in a barn , they require regular daily exercise for their physical health and mental well-being . When turned outside , they require well-maintained , sturdy fences to be safely contained . Regular grooming is also helpful to help the horse maintain good health of the hair coat and underlying skin .

In Burley , Idaho , an undertaker and his wife are brutally murdered by some sort of flying creature . Later , Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) and John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) , who has been assigned to the X-Files , begin talking about the case . Scully explains about the death of the undertaker and his wife and notes that the cause of death being blood loss from human bite marks on their bodies . Scully and Doggett arrive at the crime scene in Idaho and meet Detective Yale Abbott . He says they are less sure that the bites were made by a human and draws their attention to the strange footprint , believing that wild animals fed on the bodies after the fact . Scully points out that there is only one footprint , which looks ominously human , and that if it were left by an animal there would be more footprints leading to the bodies . Scully and Doggett check out the house and find prints leading upstairs and into the attic . Inside , Scully and Doggett find the missing fingers of the undertaker . They look like they have been regurgitated by something and the claw marks in the attic suggest something was hanging from the rafters . Meanwhile , elderly Mrs. McKesson is killed in her attic while looking at a photo album .

At the morgue , Scully explains that she studied the bite wounds and discovered that they are similar , but intrinsically different , than human bites ; the saliva on the regurgitated fingers has anti-coagulants in it , which only bats have in their saliva . Doggett finds the evidence interesting , due to the newspaper article he brought Scully : in 1956 , a series of deaths was reported that ended when a group of hunters killed a man-bat creature and brought it to the county morgue in part of Montana . The coroner said the creature was neither bat nor man . Then the coroner was killed a few days later and soon after a few more people were killed or disappeared . Scully and Doggett join the investigation at McKesson ’ s home . Scully suggests a connection between the burned body of Ariel McKesson who disappeared in 1956 and her mother , the latest victim . Scully believes that the burned body should be exhumed to potentially learn the connection with the other deaths . Later , the gravediggers already have the coffin excavated when Detective Abbott shows up at the town cemetery . They tell him that they did not have to dig because somebody already dug the coffin up and scratched the lid up . While they drive off with the body , Abbott inspects a dead tree . The creature is within and it eviscerates Abbott .

The police are upset about Abbott ’ s death and blame Scully while Doggett reminds them that only the thing that killed Abbott and the others is to blame . Scully explains Ariel McKesson died of heart failure and then was burned to cover something up . She realizes that all the victims were people who came in contact with the body of Ariel McKesson : Abbott investigated the crime , her mother identified the body , the undertaker prepared the body , and Myron Stefaniuk pulled the body from the river . All but Myron Stefaniuk are now dead . Doggett and Scully find Myron and ask him about Ernie Stefaniuk , one of the hunters from 1956 , who he reveals disappeared along time ago . The two eventually track down Ernie Stefaniuk , who tells them that he hid on an island in the middle of the town 's lake with his wife , Ariel , for 44 years . Ernie says that the bat creature kills anyone with Ernie ’ s scent on them , so he had burned his wife ’ s body to try and cover up the scent . He informs them that it hunts only at night and Myron is in danger . Doggett goes back to find Myron only to be attacked and badly torn up by the creature at the river .

" Patience " was written and directed by series creator Chris Carter . The episode , inspired by the " back-to-basics stand alones [ … ] of the earlier seasons " , was the first episode of The X-Files to neither feature actor David Duchovny nor feature his name in the opening credits . After settling his contract dispute with Fox , Duchovny quit full-time participation in the show after the seventh season . In order to explain Mulder 's absence , Duchovny 's character was abducted by aliens in the seventh season finale , " Requiem " , and as such , did not appear in " Patience " . The episode 's main villain , the human-bat hybrid , was inspired by the 1970s comic book villain , Man-Bat , one of the arch-nemeses of Batman . During the filming of the episode , live bats were used ; the type of bat used in " Patience " was the Egyptian Fruit Bat . Furthermore , the episode was the first to test Doggett 's skepticism of paranormal activity . As Robert Patrick explained , " [ ' Patience ' ] is where it starts to toy with my willingness to believe in the paranormal and strange happenings . You 've got a guy that 's a bat , which is sort of out of the norm . "

" Patience " first aired on Fox on November 19 , 2000 . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 8.2 , meaning that it was seen by 8.2 % of the nation 's estimated households . The episode was viewed by 8.27 million households , and 13.3 million viewers . The episode ranked as the 42nd most-watched episode for the week ending November 19 . The episode subsequently aired in the United Kingdom on the BBC Two on July 28 , 2002 . Fox promoted the episode with the tagline " More deadly than a man . More ruthless than a bat . A hungry predator waits in the darkness for its next prey ... Scully and Doggett . "

" Patience " received mixed to negative reviews from critics . Jay Anderson , writing for What Culture , was positive toward the episode . While noting the show 's return to its " dark , creepy [ ... ] roots " in the eighth season , Anderson described the episode as an " early success at returning to the realm of the scary " . Anderson ranked the human bat as the eighth creepiest creature of the show . Television Without Pity writer Jessica Morgan rated the episode a D and criticized the episode 's references to Mulder 's absence , most notably the scene wherein Scully put Mulder 's nameplate away , asking , sardonically , " Is that supposed to be symbolic , I wonder ? " Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X-Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode two-and-a-half stars out of five . The two noted that , despite the fact that " a lot of [ the episode ] works [ … ] because the scenes between Doggett and Scully are so good " , the positive aspects of the episode were not " put to better use in a more exciting episode ; this particular case hardly stretched anyone 's deductive prowess . " Shearman and Pearson later wrote that if the episode had been " a Mulder and Scully adventure , this would have been bottom of the barrel stuff . "

Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club awarded the episode a " C + " and criticized both its monster , and its guest cast . Concerning the former , he wrote that it was " just ridiculous " and that its design was " bland and generic " . Concerning the latter , he wrote that the cast was filled with " actors hamming it up " . VanDerWerff did note that the episode was better " than its reputation " suggested , but that it still was " undone by some very strange story choices and a dumb monster " . Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a negative review and awarded it one-and-a-half stars out of four . Vitaris bluntly wrote , " if you 're looking for a suspenseful , bite-your-nails , monster-of-the-week X-Files episode … this isn 't it . " Furthermore , she criticized the villain , calling it " a dull monster in fake-looking make-up " .

The Machecoul massacre is one of the first events of the War in the Vendée , a revolt against mass conscription and the civil constitution of the clergy . The first massacre took place on 11 March 1793 , in the provincial city of Machecoul , in the district of the lower Loire . The city was a thriving center of grain trade ; most of the victims were administrators , merchants and citizens of the city . Although the Machecoul massacre , and others that followed it , are often viewed ( variously ) as a royalist revolt , or a counter-revolution , twenty-first century historians generally agree that Vendee revolt was a complicated popular event brought on by anti-clericalism of the Revolution , mass conscription , and Jacobin anti-federalism . In the geographic area south of the Loire , resistance to recruitment was particularly intense , and much of this area also resented intrusion by partisans of the republic , called " blue coats " , who brought with them new ideas about district and judicial organization , and who required reorganization of parishes with the so-called juring priests ( those who had taken the civil oath ) . Consequently , the insurgency became a combination of many impulses , at which conscription and the organization of parishes led the list . The response to it was incredibly violent on both sides .

In 1791 , two representatives on mission informed the National Convention of the disquieting condition of Vendée , and this news was quickly followed by the exposure of a royalist plot organized by the Marquis de la Rouerie . It was not until the social unrest combined with the external pressures from the Civil Constitution of the Clergy ( 1790 ) and the introduction of a levy of 300,000 on the whole of France , decreed by the National Convention in February 1793 , that the region erupted . The Civil Constitution of the Clergy required all clerics to swear allegiance to it and , by extension , to the increasingly anti-clerical National Constituent Assembly . All but seven of the 160 French bishops refused the oath , as did about half of the parish priests . Persecution of the clergy and of the faithful was the first trigger of the rebellion . Those who refused the oath , called non-juring priests , had been exiled or imprisoned . Women on their way to Mass were beaten in the streets . Religious orders had been suppressed and Church property , confiscated . On 3 March 1793 , most of the churches were ordered closed . Soldiers confiscated sacramental vessels and the people were forbidden to place crosses on graves .

Nearly all the purchasers of church land were bourgeois ; very few peasants benefited from the sales . To add to this insult , on 23 February 1793 the Convention required the raising of an additional 300,000 troops from the provinces , an act which enraged the populace , who took up arms instead as The Catholic Army ; the term " Royal " was added later . This army fought first and foremost for the reopening of parish churches with the former priests . In March 1793 , as word of the conscription requirements filtered into the countryside , many Vendéans refused to satisfy the decree of the levee en masse issued on 23 February 1793 . Within weeks the rebel forces had formed a substantial , if ill-equipped , army , the Royal and Catholic Army , supported by two thousand irregular cavalry and a few captured artillery pieces . Most of the insurgents operated on a much smaller scale , using guerrilla tactics , supported by the local knowledge and the good-will of the people .

The irregular army raised in the countryside had not reached Machecoul , but the officials from the conscription officers had . On Monday , 11 March 1793 , a crowd arrived in the center of the town , from the surrounding countryside ; they started the chant Pas de milice ( no enlistments ) and surrounded the Republic 's conscription officers in the town . A nervous soldier opened fire and the enraged crowd retaliated . Between 22 and 26 soldiers were killed , including their lieutenant , Pierre-Claude Ferré . The immediate victims also included the juring priest , Pierre Letort , who was bayoneted to death and whose body was mutilated , Pagnot the magistrate , and Étienne Gaschignard , the principal of the college . The National Guard was routed , and the rebels , including many women , seized those they called " patriots " — also called the " Blues " , or the people who supported the republican cause — and led them to prison in the old castle and the convent of Sisters of Cavalry . There they killed the guardsmen and some notable inhabitants , about 20 in total , although according to some testimony , as many as 26 were killed on the first day and 18 the next day . Alfred Lallié , another witness , gave 22 as the count of dead .

The situation then spiraled out of control . In the following days , the insurgents swelled to some six thousand men and women , and some of the republican adherents and their families fled to Nantes and other strongholds . On 19 March , many counter-revolutionary suspects were rounded up and the republicans inflicted their own massacres : in La Rochelle , six non-juring priests were hacked to death and their heads ( and other body parts ) shown throughout the city . About a week later , the insurgents from Machecoul seized the neighboring harbor town of Pornic ( approximately 10 miles ( 16 km ) to the northwest ) on 23 March , this time joined by some of the irregular army that had been forming elsewhere , and sacked it . A republican patrol surprised the Vendeans , who were carousing on liberated cellars , and killed between 200 and 500 of them . The angry peasants returned to Machecoul and in reprisal killed another dozen prisoners on 27 March . In total , about 200 died ( not all in the battle ) , and when the survivors of Pornic returned to Machecoul , they pulled the detained " blue coats " out of the prisoner and shot them , a process that lasted over the next few weeks , into mid-April .

Tales of brutality , some of which may have been true , abounded ; numbers of those killed escalated . Current research suggests that 150 were executed in the town overall , but contemporary republican reports put the figure at 500 . Despite the demonization of the insurgents , though , twenty-two " blue coats " from the parish were saved by the request of their own neighborhoods ; others were even cleared by tribunals established to monitor executions , and overseen by the local jurist , René François Souchu . Souchu , a lawyer and judge by profession , directed the execution of approximately 50 republican officials and adherents on 3 April ; they were shot down and buried in a field outside of the city .

The most influential of the contemporary reports came from Citizen Boullemer , and was published in over 1000 pamphlets later in the year . Boullemer claimed to be among the few surviving eyewitnesses : " there arrived from all exits of the city , five to six thousand peasants , women and children , armed [ with ] guns , scythes , knives , shovels and pikes . They shouted , running the streets : peace ! peace ! " Boullemer 's account continues : they descended on Machecoul , confronted a detachment of the National guard that had come to enforce the levy . One hundred National Guardsmen and police defended the town against them . Louis-Charles-César Maupassant , a farmer , merchant and a deputy to the Convention , tried to harangue the attackers into quiescence , but could not be heard above the din . Most of the Republican troops and officials scattered before the threatening crowd . According to Louis Mortimer-Ternaux , another eye-witness , only three officers and five or six gendarmes remained at their posts . At that time , according to him , some national guardsmen who had tried to escape through an alley were ambushed by peasants , pursued , and finally brought down by the crowd at the feet of the deputy , Maupassant . The crowd then pulled him off his horse and killed him with a stroke of a shovel .

Boullemer 's wrote his sensational account well after the fact , in the safety of Rennes , where he was taken after being rescued by republican forces . Boullemer admitted that he had spent most of the six weeks of the upheaval at Machecoul in the safety of his granary , hiding from the peasants . His account of the terror , though lost nothing in the fact that he had seen little : the peasants in the town sounded the tocsin , he wrote , and others exploded from the surrounding fields . Within a short time the entire affair had become a wholesale massacre of republican troops , the constitutional priest , known radical sympathizers and anyone involved with the municipal administration . Prisoners had their hands tied behind their backs , and were linked with a rope passed under their armpits , in a so-called rosary ; then they were dragged into fields and forced to dig their own graves before being gunned down . Patriots , those who supported the revolution , were hunted down , lashed to trees , and emasculated . Patriot women were raped and cut down in orchards . Boullemer placed the count of the dead at 552 .

From the Jacobin clubs , the Convention , and the streets and alleyways in Paris , this could only be viewed as insurrection . For them , the Revolution meant a France indivisible . Anything that divided France — anything that varied from the path set the revolutionary government — was dangerous to the success for the revolution itself . Any idea , an action , or thought that ran counter to the revolutionary ideology smacked of federalism or , worse , of royalist sentiment . The historians ' debate over federalism and the French Revolution reaches almost to the days of the Revolution itself . To be called a " federalist " in 1793 , 1794 , or 1795 , or any other time in the revolution , for that matter , was tantamount to being labeled as an anti-revolutionary ; to be called anti-revolutionary meant one was de facto a royalist . It was a convenient epithet : to be called a federalist alienated one from the principal radical goal of the revolution , which was to create a single , unified French Republic . Any notion of sectionalism — the possibility that a department or departments could establish for themselves a set of conditions and a government — must be labeled as anti-revolutionary . For the moderate Girondins and the radical Montagnards , federalism meant the watering-down of the Revolution , the violation of the civic body , and the loss of their dreams . If the peasants of the Vendée did not want to fight for the Revolution , if they preferred their priests and their ( dead ) king to their liberty , then they must be against the Revolution and , consequently , they must be severed from its benefits .

This uncompromising vision of revolutionary goals implied a plain and brutal truth : " convert heads or chop them off . " One deputy complained , " if there were only 30,000 , it would be a simple matter of putting them all to the sword , but there are so many ! " Boullemer 's written description of the event was published as a pamphlet in November 1793 , and the representative on mission , Jacques Garnier , sent a thousand copies to the Convention , the Executive Council and to all departments ; it also served as a basis for the official report that François Toussaint Villers presented to the Convention .

There were other levy riots across France , when the departments started to draft men into the army in response to the Levy Decree but reaction in the northwest in March was particularly pronounced with large scale rioting verging on insurrection . By early April , in areas north of the Loire , order had been restored by the revolutionary government , but south of the river , in the four departments that became known as the Vendée Militaire , there were few troops to control rebels and what had started as rioting quickly took on the form of a full insurrection led by priests and the local nobility . Evidence links these events to local dissatisfaction with the reorganization of the church into a government entity . The unrest began half way through Lent ; Easter that year occurred on 31 March 1793 , and , significantly , the initial violence was directed at the local priest Letort . Letort personified the revolution , and the republican government in Paris by taking the Civil Oath of the Clergy , essentially becoming a puppet of the republicans in Paris , at least in the eyes of the insurgents . The violence followed what Raymond Jonas called a singular pattern of logic : it targeted those who personified the revolution in their function or status : National Guard Lieutenant Ferré , such prominent townsmen as Deputy Maupassant , and the constitutional priest Letort . Yet , the local district administrator , the jurist Souchu , was left alone : apparently he was known for his anti-republican sentiments and actually threw his lot in with the insurgents . After the furor in Machecoul died down later in the spring , the former pastor at Machecoul , the non-juring priest François Priou , refused to celebrate at the now " liberated " church because the schismatic constitutional priest had profaned it . Instead , he said the Mass outside on a makeshift altar .

Class differences were not as great in the Vendée as in Paris or in other French provinces . In the rural Vendée , the local nobility seems to have been more permanently in residence and less bitterly resented than in other parts of France . Alexis de Tocqueville noted that most French nobles lived in cities by 1789 . An Intendants ' survey showed one of the few areas where they still lived with the peasants was the Vendée . Consequently , the conflicts that drove the revolution in Paris , for example , were also lessened in this particularly isolated part of France by the strong adherence of the populace to their Catholic faith .

The Ersatz Yorck class was a group of three battlecruisers ordered for the Imperial German Navy in April 1915 . The name derived from the fact that the lead ship was intended as a replacement ( German : ersatz ) for the armored cruiser Yorck , lost to mines in 1914 . They were a slightly enlarged version of the Mackensen-class battlecruiser , armed with 38 cm ( 15 in ) guns as opposed to the 35 cm ( 13.8 in ) weapons on the preceding design . The boilers would have been trunked into a single massive funnel . The three ships were originally ordered as part of the Mackensen class but the design was changed when details of the British Admiral-class battlecruisers became known to German intelligence . The vessels were ordered under the provisional names Ersatz Yorck , Ersatz Gneisenau , and Ersatz Scharnhorst . They were considered to be replacements for the armored cruisers Yorck , which had been sunk by German mines in 1914 , and Gneisenau and Scharnhorst , both of which had been sunk at the Battle of the Falkland Islands also in 1914 . As with the Mackensens , the three ships of the Ersatz Yorck class were never completed . This was primarily due to shifting wartime construction priorities ; U-boats were deemed more important to Germany 's war effort , and so work on other types of ships was slowed or halted outright . The lead ship , Ersatz Yorck , was the only vessel of the three to have construction begin , though she was over two years from completion by the time work was abandoned . With the hull incomplete , the ship could not be launched and towed to ship-breakers ; as a result , Ersatz Yorck was broken up in situ .

The Ersatz Yorck-class ships were an enlargement of the previous Mackensen-class ships . They were 227.80 m ( 747 ft 5 in ) long , compared to 223 m ( 731 ft 8 in ) on the earlier vessels . Ersatz Yorck had the same beam as the earlier vessels , at 30.40 m ( 99 ft 9 in ) , and the same draft of 9.30 m ( 30 ft 6 in ) . The ships were planned to displace 33,500 tonnes ( 33,000 long tons ) at standard weight , and up to 38,000 t ( 37,000 long tons ) fully laden . This was approximately 2,500 t ( 2,500 long tons ) heavier than the Mackensens . The Ersatz Yorck-class ships ' hulls were to have been constructed with longitudinal steel frames with the outer plating riveted on .

As with all German battlecruisers that had been built , the Ersatz Yorck-class ships would have been equipped with four sets of Parsons turbine engines , each of which drove a 3-bladed screw that was 4.20 m ( 13 ft 9 in ) in diameter . The turbines were supplied with steam by 24 coal-fired Schulz-Thornycroft single ended boilers and 8 oil-fired Schulz-Thornycroft double ended boilers . Ersatz Yorck and Ersatz Gneisenau were intended to use Föttinger fluid transmission for their turbines , while Ersatz Scharnhorst 's turbines retained direct coupled geared transmissions . The ships were to have electrical power provided by diesel generators . The Ersatz Yorcks were intended to mount a pair of twin rudders alongside each other for steering . The power plant was rated 90,000 shaft horsepower and 295 revolutions per minute , the same as the preceding Mackensen-class ships . Their slightly greater size reduced their speed somewhat , from 28 knots ( 52 km / h ; 32 mph ) in the Mackensen-class ships to 27.3 knots ( 50.6 km / h ; 31.4 mph ) for the new vessels . The ships were designed to store 850 t ( 840 long tons ) of coal and 250 t ( 250 long tons ) of oil in purpose-designed fuel bunkers . However , the areas of the hull between the torpedo bulkhead and the outer wall of the ship were also used for fuel storage . This additional space provided an increased total of 4,000 t ( 3,900 long tons ) of coal and 2,000 t ( 2,000 long tons ) of oil . With fuel stores topped off , the ships were estimated to have been able to steam for 5,500 nautical miles ( 10,200 km ; 6,300 mi ) at a cruising speed of 14 kn ( 26 km / h ; 16 mph ) .

The ships ' main battery was to have consisted of eight 38 cm ( 15 in ) SK L / 45 guns in four Drh LC / 1913 twin gun turrets , placed in superfiring pairs fore and aft of the superstructure . These were the same " Langer Max " guns as those mounted on the Bayern-class battleships . The guns could initially depress to − 8 degrees and elevate to 16 degrees ; this provided maximum range of 20,400 m . The gun mountings were modified to allow elevation up to 20 degrees ; the range was correspondingly increased to 23,200 m . The turrets could train 150 degrees to either side of the centerline . The main battery was supplied with a total of 720 shells or 90 rounds per gun . The guns had a rate of fire of around 2.5 shells per minute . Post-war tests conducted by the British Royal Navy showed that the guns on the battleship Baden could be ready to fire again 23 seconds after firing ; this was significantly faster than their British contemporaries , the 38 cm guns on the Renown class , which took 36 seconds between salvos . The guns fired 750 kg ( 1,650 lb ) armor-piercing shells with a 277 kg ( 610 lb ) RPC / 12 propellant charge in a brass cartridge . The shells were fired at a muzzle velocity of 800 meters per second ( 2,625 fps ) . Each gun was expected to fire 300 shells before replacement was required .

Three ships were ordered for the new design . Ersatz Yorck , a replacement for the armored cruiser Yorck , was ordered from AG Vulcan in Hamburg , laid down in July 1916 under construction number 63 . After 1917 , work on the ship only took place in order to keep dockyard workers occupied . Construction was suspended to concentrate on the U-boat program , and the hull frames that had been assembled were subsequently scrapped on the slip . Ersatz Gneisenau , a replacement for the armored cruiser Gneisenau , was ordered from Germaniawerft in Kiel under construction number 250 . Work was not started due to shifting priorities , though some material had been constructed . The diesel engines that had been built were subsequently installed on the first four Type U 151 U-boats U-151 , U-152 , U-153 , and U-154 . Ersatz Scharnhorst , a replacement for the armored cruiser Scharnhorst , was ordered from Blohm + Voss in Hamburg under construction number 246 . Construction never began on her as well , due to shifting priorities . However , the design formed the basis for the Scharnhorst-class battleships built by the Kriegsmarine in the mid-1930s .

Rameswaram , ( also spelt as Ramesvaram , Rameshwaram or Ramisseram ) is a town and a second grade municipality in the Ramanathapuram district in the South Indian state of Tamil Nadu . It is located on Pamban Island separated from mainland India by the Pamban channel and is about 50 kilometres from Mannar Island , Sri Lanka . It is situated in the Gulf of Mannar , at the very tip of the Indian peninsula . Pamban Island , also known as Rameswaram Island , is connected to mainland India by the Pamban Bridge . Rameswaram is the terminus of the railway line from Chennai and Madurai . Together with Varanasi , it is considered to be one of the holiest places in India to Hindus , and part of the Char Dham pilgrimage . It is said that this is the place from where the Hindu god Rama built a bridge across the sea to Lanka to rescue his wife Sita from her abductor Ravana . The Ramanathaswamy Temple , dedicated to the Hindu god Shiva , is located at the centre of the town and is closely associated with Rama . The temple , along with the town , is considered a holy pilgrimage site for both shaivas and vaishnavas .

Rameswaram is the closest point from which to reach Sri Lanka from India , and geological evidence suggests that the Rama Sethu was a former land connection between India and Sri Lanka . The town has been in the news over the Sethusamudram Shipping Canal Project , Kachchatheevu , Sri Lankan Tamil refugees and capturing local fishermen for alleged cross-border activities by Sri Lankan Forces . Rameswaram is administered by a municipality established in 1994 . The town covers an area of 53 km2 and had a population of 44,856 as of 2011 . Tourism and fishery employ the majority of workforce in Rameswaram .

Rameswara means " Lord of Rama " in Sanskrit , an epithet of Shiva , the presiding deity of the Ramanathaswamy Temple . According to Hindu epic Ramayana , Rama , the seventh avatar of the god Vishnu , prayed to Shiva here to absolve any sins that he might have committed during his war against the demon-king Ravana in Sri Lanka . According to the Puranas ( Hindu scriptures ) , upon the advice of sages , Rama along with his wife Sita and his brother Lakshmana , installed and worshipped the lingam ( an iconic symbol of Shiva ) here to expiate the sin of Brahmahatya incurred while killing of the Brahmin Ravana . To worship Shiva , Rama wanted to have the largest lingam and directed his monkey lieutenant Hanuman to bring it from Himalayas . Since it took longer to bring the lingam , Sita built a small lingam , which is believed to be the one in the sanctum of the temple . This account is not supported by the original Ramayana authored by Valmiki , nor in the Tamil version of the Ramayana authored by Tamil poet , Kambar ( 1180 – 1250 CE ) . Support for this account is found in some of the later versions of the Ramayana , such as the one penned by Tulasidas ( 15th century ) . Sethu Karai is a place 22 km before the island of Rameswaram from where Rama is believed to have built a floating stone bridge , the Ramsetu bridge , that further continued to Dhanushkodi in Rameswaram till Talaimannar in Sri Lanka . According to another version , as quoted in Adhyatma Ramayana , Rama installed the lingam before the construction of the bridge to Lanka .

The history of Rameswaram is centred around the island being a transit point to reach Sri Lanka ( Ceylon historically ) and the presence of Ramanathaswamy Temple . Tevaram , the 7th – 8th century Tamil compositions on Shiva by the three prominent Nayanars ( Saivites ) namely Appar , Sundarar and Thirugnanasambandar . The Chola king Rajendra Chola I ( 1012 – 1040 CE ) had a control of the town for a short period . The Jaffna kingdom ( 1215 – 1624 CE ) had close connections with the island and claimed the title Setukavalan meaning custodians of the Rameswaram . Hinduism was their state religion and they made generous contribution to the temple . Setu was used in their coins as well as in inscriptions as marker of the dynasty . According to Firishta , Malik Kafur , the head general of Alauddin Khilji , the ruler of Delhi Sultanate , reached Rameswaram during his political campaign in spite of stiff resistance from the Pandyan princes in the early 14th century . He erected a mosque by name Alia al-Din Khaldji in honour of victory of Islam . During the early 15th century , the present day Ramanathapuram , Kamuthi and Rameswaram were included in the Pandya dynasty . In 1520 CE , the town came under the rule of Vijayanagara Empire . The Sethupathis , the breakaway from Madurai Nayaks , ruled Ramanathapuram and contributed to the Ramanathaswamy temple . The most notable of them are the contributions of Muthu Kumara Ragunatha and Muthu Ramalinga Sethupathi , who transformed the temple to an architectural ensemble . The region was repeatedly captured several times by Chanda Sahib ( 1740 – 1754 CE ) , Arcot Nawab and Muhammed Yusuf Khan ( 1725 – 1764 CE ) in the middle of 18th century . In 1795 CE , Rameswaram came under the direct control of the British East India Company and was annexed to the Madras Presidency . After 1947 , the town became a part of Independent India .

Rameswaram has an average elevation of 10 metres ( 32 feet ) . The island is spread across an area of 61.8 square kilometres and is in the shape of a conch . 74 % of the area has sandy soil due to the presence of sea and it has many islands surrounding it , the Palk Strait in the north west and Gulf of Mannar in the south East . The Ramanathaswamy Temple occupies major area of Rameswaram . The beach of Rameswaram is featured with no waves at all – the sea waves rise to a maximum height of 3 cm and the view looks like a very big river . Rameswaram has dry tropical climate with low humidity , with average monthly rainfall of 75.73 mm , mostly from North East monsoon from October to January . The highest ever temperature recorded at Pamban station was 37 ° C and the lowest was 17 ° C. Ramsetu Bridge is a chain of limestone shoals , between Rameswaram and Mannar Island , off the northwestern coast of Sri Lanka . Geological evidence suggests that this bridge is a former land connection between India and Sri Lanka . The bridge is 18 miles ( 30 km ) long and separates the Gulf of Mannar ( north east ) from the Palk Strait ( South West ) . It was reportedly passable on foot up to the 15th century until storms deepened the channel . The temple records record that Rama ’ s Bridge was completely above sea level until it broke in a cyclone in 1480 CE . The bridge was first mentioned in the ancient Indian Sanskrit epic Ramayana of Valmiki . The name Rama 's Bridge or Rama Setu ( Sanskrit ; setu : bridge ) refers to the bridge built by the Vanara ( ape men ) army of Rama in Hindu mythology , which he used to reach Lanka and rescue his wife Sita from the demon king Ravana . The Ramayana attributes the building of this bridge to Rama in verse 2-22-76 , naming it as Setubandhanam . The sea separating India and Sri Lanka is called Sethusamudram meaning " Sea of the Bridge " . Maps prepared by a Dutch cartographer in 1747 CE , available at the Tanjore Saraswathi Mahal Library show this area as Ramancoil , a colloquial form of the Tamil Raman Kovil ( or Rama 's Temple ) . Many other maps in Schwartzberg 's historical atlas and other sources such as travel texts by Marco Polo call this area by various names such as Sethubandha and Sethubandha Rameswaram .

According to 2011 census , Rameswaram had a population of 44,856 with a sex-ratio of 969 females for every 1,000 males , much above the national average of 929 . A total of 5,022 were under the age of six , constituting 2,544 males and 2,478 females . Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes accounted for 6.8 % and .03 % of the population respectively . The average literacy of the town was 73.36 % , compared to the national average of 72.99 % . The town had a total of 10579 households . There were a total of 16,645 workers , comprising 69 cultivators , 20 main agricultural labourers , 148 in house hold industries , 15,130 other workers , 1,278 marginal workers , 11 marginal cultivators , 26 marginal agricultural labourers , 44 marginal workers in household industries and 1,197 other marginal workers . The total number of households below poverty lane ( BPL ) in 2003 were 976 , which is 10.45 % of the total households in the town and these were raised to 3003 ( 29.12 % ) in 2007 . As per the religious census of 2011 , Rameswaram had 87.4 % Hindus , 4.36 % Muslims , 8.13 % Christians , 0.03 % Sikhs , 0.01 % Buddhists , and 0.07 % following other religions .

According to the Madras Presidency Panchayat Act of 1885 , Rameswaram was declared a panchyat union during British times . It became a township during 1958 and was declared a municipality in 2004 . Rameswaram is a 3rd grade municipality having 21 wards , out of which 6 are General wards for women and one is reserved for SC ( Scheduled Caste ) women . The major sources of budgeted income for Rameswaram municipality comes from Devolution Fund of ₹ 17 million ( US $ 0.3 million ) and property tax of ₹ 2.4 million ( US $ 43,000 ) . The major expense heads are for salaries of ₹ 06 million ( US $ 0.1 million ) , operating expenses of ₹ 03.7 million ( US $ 65,000 ) and repair & maintenance expenditure of ₹ 02.3 million ( US $ 42,000 ) . The functions of the municipality are devolved into six departments : General , Engineering , Revenue , Public Health , Town planning and the Computer Wing . All these departments are under the control of a Municipal Commissioner who is the supreme executive head . The legislative powers are vested in a body of 21 members , one each from the 21 wards . The legislative body is headed by an elected Chairperson assisted by a Deputy Chairperson .

Rameswaram comes under the Ramanathapuram assembly constituency and it elects a member to the Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly once every five years . The current MLA of the constituency is Dr. Manikandan from the AIADMK . Rameswaram is a part of the Ramanathapuram ( Lok Sabha constituency ) – it has been realigned in 2008 to have the following assembly constituencies – Paramakudi ( SC ) , Ramanathapuram , Mudukulathur , Aranthangi , Tiruchuli ( newly created ) . The constituency was traditionally a stronghold of the Indian National Congress that won 6 times till the 1991 elections , after which it was won twice each by the All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam ( ADMK ) and the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam ( DMK ) . The current Member of Parliament from the constituency is A. Anwhar Raajhaa from the AIADMK party . India 's renowned scientist and former President of India , A. P. J. Abdul Kalam , was born in Rameswaram .

Being a pilgrimage town , the majority of the population is involved in tourism related industry consisting of trade and services . Service sector increased from 70 % in 1971 to 98.78 % in 2001 , while the agricultural sector reduced from 23 % in 1971 to 0.13 % in 2001 . Rameswaram is an industrially backward town – there has been no demarcation for industrial land due to the pilgrim sanctity and ecological fragile geography . Being an island town , the traditional occupation was fishing , but due to poor returns , the people in fishing community have gradually shifted to other professions . Banks such as State Bank of India , Indian Bank and RDCC Bank have their branches in Rameswaram .

Pamban Bridge is a cantilever bridge on the Palk Strait that connects Rameswaram to mainland India . The railway bridge is 6,776 ft ( 2,065 m ) and was opened to traffic in 1914 . The railroad bridge is a double-leaf bascule bridge section that can be raised to let ships pass under it . The railway bridge historically carried metre-gauge trains on it , but Indian Railways upgraded the bridge to carry broad-gauge trains in a project that finished on 12 August 2007 . Historically , the two leaves of the bridge were opened manually using levers by workers . About 10 ships – cargo carriers , coast guard ships , fishing vessels and oil tankers pass through the bridge every month . After completion of bridge , metre-gauge lines were laid from Mandapam up to Pamban Station , from where the railway lines bifurcated into two directions , one towards Rameswaram about 6.25 miles ( 10.06 km ) up and another branch line of 15 miles ( 24 km ) terminating at Dhanushkodi . The noted Boat Mail ran on this track between 1915 and 1964 from Chennai Egmore up to Dhanushkodi , from where the passengers were ferried to Talaimannar in Ceylon . The metre-gauge branch line from Pamban Junction to Dhanushkodi was abandoned after it was destroyed in a cyclone in 1964 .

There are daily express trains connecting major cities in Tamil Nadu like Chennai , Madurai , Trichy and Coimbatore . There are weekly express trains connecting Coimbatore , Varanasi and Bhubaneswar . Passenger trains ply from Rameswaram to Madurai and Trichy daily , making railways as the major mode of transportation . The Ramanathapuram – Rameswaram National Highway is the main connecting link from Rameswaram to the mainland . Prior to the 1914 train service linking the mainland with Rameswaram , boats were the only mode of transport to Rameswaram island . The National highway NH 49 connects Madurai to Dhanushkodi , linking major towns like Manamadurai , Paramakkudi , and Ramanathapuram in the Ramanathapuram district . The Rameswaram municipality covers a total road length of 52 km and 20 km of national highway covering about 80 percent of the town . The Tamil Nadu State Transport Corporation runs daily services connecting various cities to Rameswaram and operates a computerised reservation centre in the municipal bus stand of Rameswaram . Rameswaram is the important port among all the ports in the district , having a ferry service to Talaimannar of Sri Lanka , though not operational throughout the year . Limited foreign trade is conducted with Jaffna , Kaits , Talaimannar and Colombo .

Ramanathapuram district has one of the lowest literacy rates in the state of Tamil Nadu and Rameswaram , following the district statistics has a lower literacy rate . There are a couple of Government high schools , one each for boys and girls . There are seven other schools namely , Swami . Vivekananda vidyalaya Matriculation School ( which provide excellent education in the island and secure district and state level ranks in board exams frequently ) , St. Joseph Higher Secondary School , Mandapam Panchayat Union 9 – School , Micro Matriculation School , Sri Sankara Vidhyalaya , Holy Island Little Flower School and Kendriya Vidhyalaya School . Alagappa University Evening College is the only college present in the town and all the nearest colleges are located in Ramanathapuram and Paramakudi . Electricity supply to the town is regulated and distributed by the Ramanathapuram circle of Tamil Nadu Electricity Board ( TNEB ) . Water supply is provided by the Rameswaram Municipality – the head works is located at Nambunayaki Amman Kovil , Meyyambuli , Semmamadam & Natarajapuram and distributed through four over head tanks having a total capacity of 1430,000 litres . About 6 metric tonnes of solid waste are collected from the town every day in the four zones covering the whole of the town . Rameswaram does not have a sewerage system for disposal of sullage and the disposal system consists of septic tanks and public conveniences . Roadside drains carry untreated sewage out of the town to let out raw into the sea or accumulates in low-lying area .

The Ramanathaswamy Temple is the most notable historic landmark of the town . Located in the centre of town , Ramanathaswamy Temple is a famous Hindu temple dedicated to the god Shiva . The temple is one of the 12 Jyotirlinga shrines , where Shiva is worshipped in the form of a Jyotirlinga meaning " pillar of light " . It is also one of the 275 Paadal Petra Sthalam temples and is glorified in hymns by the three of the most revered Nayanar saints ( 7th century Saivite saints ) , Appar , Sundarar and Tirugnana Sambandar . The temple in its current structure was built during the 12th century by Pandya Dynasty . The temple has the longest corridor among all Hindu temples in India . The breadth of these columned corridors varies from 17 to 21 feet with a height of 25 feet . Each pillar is sculpted in Nayak style as in Madurai Meenakshi Amman Temple . The contribution of the kings of the Sethupathy dynasty ( 17th century ) to the temple was considerable . Large amount of money was spent during the tenure of Pradani Muthirulappa Pillai towards the restoration of the pagodas which were falling into ruins – the Chockattan Mantapam or the cloistered precincts of the temple was reconstructed by him . The rulers of Sri Lanka contributed to the temple – Parakrama Bahu ( 1153 – 1186 CE ) was involved in the construction of the sanctum sanctorum of the temple . The eastern tower and shrine of Nataraja were built by Dalavai Sethupathy in 1649 CE . The second enclosure is ascribed to Chinna Udayar Sethupathy and his son Ragunatha Thirumalai ( 1500 – 1540 CE ) . The third enclosure was constructed by Muthu Ramalinga Sethupathy ( 1725 – 1771 CE ) – his statue is located in the entrance of the corridor .

There are sixty-four Tīrthas or Theerthams ( holy water bodies ) in and around Rameswaram . According to the Skanda Purana , twenty-four of them are important . Of the 24 , 14 are in the form of tanks and wells within the precincts of the temple . Bathing in these tanks is a major aspect of the pilgrimage to Rameswaram and is considered equivalent to penance . Twenty-two of the tanks are within the Ramanathaswamy Temple . The foremost one is called Agni Theertham , the sea ( Bay of Bengal ) . Jatayu , King of the Birds , who fought in vain with the demon-king Ravana to save Sita , is said to have fallen down at Jadayu Theertham as his wings were severed . Villoondi Theertham literally translates to ' buried bow ' , is located around 7 kilometres from the main temple on the way to Pamban . It is believed to be the place where Rama quenched the thirst of Sita by dipping the bow into the sea water . Other major holy bodies are Hanuman Theertham , Sugreeva Theertham and Lakshmana Theertham .

Rameswaram is significant for many Hindus as a pilgrimage to Varanasi is considered to be incomplete without a pilgrimage to Rameswaram . The town along with the Ramanathaswamy temple is one of the holiest Hindu Char Dham ( four divine sites ) sites comprising Badrinath , Puri and Dwarka . Though the origins are not clearly known , the Advaita school of Hinduism established by Sankaracharya , attributes the origin of Char Dham to the seer . The four monasteries are located across the four corners of India and their attendant temples are Badrinath Temple at Badrinath in the North , Jagannath Temple at Puri in the East , Dwarakadheesh Temple at Dwarka in the West and Ramanathaswamy Temple at Rameswaram in the South . Though ideologically the temples are divided between the sects of Hinduism , namely Saivism and Vaishnavism , the Char Dham pilgrimage is an all Hindu affair . The journey across the four cardinal points in India is considered sacred by Hindus who aspire to visit these temples once in their lifetime . Traditionally the trip starts at the eastern end from Puri , proceeding in clockwise direction in a manner typically followed for circuambulation in Hindu temples . The temple is one of the famous pilgrimage sites historically – the Maratha kings who ruled Thanjavur established chatrams or rest houses all through Mayiladuthurai and Rameswaram between 1745 and 1837 CE and donated them to the temple .

During the intense civil war of Sri Lanka , post 1980 , Rameswaram acted as one of the focal points of smuggling and intense patrolling was carried out during the period . There are a total of 65,940 registered destitute Sri Lankan refugees dwelling in 129 Refugee camps situated in different parts of Tamil Nadu as of Apr 2000 and a majority of them enter via Rameswaram . There are an additional 20,667 non-camp refugees who entered via Rameswaram , registered in Mandapam transit camp and opted to reside outside the camps in various parts of Tamil Nadu . On 11 March 1990 , a record number of 2,337 refugees in 38 boats arrived from Talaimannar in Sri Lanka to Rameswaram – this was the largest number of refugees arriving in a single day since the ethnic violence from July 1983 . As of October 2006 , an estimated 200,000 refugees have been reported in Mandapam Camp . Sivarasan , one of the mastermind behind the Assassination of Rajiv Gandhi , the ex-prime minister of India registered as refugee in Rameswaram camp on 12 September 1990 .

Being an island , a significant population is involved in fishery traditionally . There have been incremental cases of Rameswaram fishermen allegedly killed or arrested by Sri Lankan navy along the maritime borders of India and Sri Lanka from the time of Sri Lankan civil war during 1983 . In the face of simmering tension after the 1985 January Colombo bound Yaldevi train attack in which 22 Sri Lankan soldiers and 16 civilians were killed , Rameswaram fishermen dared to venture to seas spelling acute hardship for the 10,000 fishermen family . An estimated 381 fishermen have been killed in the sea due to shoot outs from 1983 to 2009 . The Sri Lankan army attributed the killings to the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam ( LTTE ) , but the casualty continues even after the end of LTTE in the region . The Tamil Nadu state government has increased the compensation of casualty from the original ₹ 100,000 to 500,000 ( US $ 1,800 to $ 9,000 ) . There has not been a single prosecution in any of the 381 killings committed so far from the Indian judiciary . The cases not being filed is attributed to the fact that people killed beyond the maritime boundary of India are not eligible for compensation and not many file complaints against the Sri Lankan navy . Though the Indian judiciary has provisions to prosecute foreigners , there is little progress due to the diplomatic overheads involved . Indian government has also ventured into the use of technology like use of Global positioning system ( GPS ) by the fishermen and enabling cellphone blips to alert their mobile phones whenever they are crossing into Sri Lankan waters . The Sri Lankan navy has confirmed reports on Indian fishermen risking the international boundary due to depleted catch in Indian waters .

There is a yearly 45-day ban on fishery with motorboats in the region . The fishing ban for the year 2012 was effective during the months of April – May . The jetty at Rameswaram is the largest landing centre for fishing boats in the region and it usually comes alive after the ban , with the arrival of fishermen , boat captains , shore workers and others from their native places . Sea World Aquarium is a natural habitat lying opposite to the Rameswaram Bus Stand , having an assortment of underwater creatures – it is the only one of its kind in the state , filled with such varied marine life forms including exotic species .

Another focal point on the simmering tension between Indian and Sri Lankan governments is over the use of Kachchatheevu , an uninhabited island 15 km north of Rameswaram , belonging to Sri Lanka . The accord of 1974 allows fishermen of both the countries for resting and soaking the nets in the island . Repeated allegations on attacks by the Lankan navy , which on many occasions killed Indian fishermen , prevented them from making it to the island . The annual two-day Saint Anthony fest at the island draws huge number of people from the fishermen community of both the countries . The number of pilgrims for the 2012 function crossed 4,000 , the largest attendance in the past two decades . The feast also provides an opportunity for the Indian fishermen to meet their Sri Lankan counterparts and exchange views on their mutual problems . The event served as a meeting point to find brides and grooms from both countries , but this practice has now been stopped from the 90s due to political constraint of fishermen family living in different countries .

Sethusamudram Shipping Canal Project proposes linking the Palk Bay and the Gulf of Mannar between India and Sri Lanka by creating a shipping canal through the shallow sea sometimes called Setu Samudram , and through the chain of islands variously known as Ram Sethu or the Rama 's Bridge . A few organisations are opposing the dredging of Ramasethu on religious , environmental and economical grounds . Many of these parties and organisations support implementation of this project using one of the five alternative alignments considered earlier without damaging the structure considered sacred by Hindus . With 22 km of dredging remaining , the project is held from March 2010 by a Supreme Court order seeking the Central Government to clarify the status of the bridge as a national monument .

" Archaeoraptor " is the informal generic name for a fossil from China in an article published in National Geographic magazine in 1999 . The magazine claimed that the fossil was a " missing link " between birds and terrestrial theropod dinosaurs . Even prior to this publication there had been severe doubts about the fossil 's authenticity . Further scientific study showed it to be a forgery constructed from rearranged pieces of real fossils from different species . Zhou et al. found that the head and upper body actually belong to a specimen of the primitive fossil bird Yanornis . A 2002 study found that the tail belongs to a small winged dromaeosaur , Microraptor , named in 2000 . The legs and feet belong to an as yet unknown animal . The scandal brought attention to illegal fossil deals conducted in China . Although " Archaeoraptor " was a forgery , many true examples of feathered dinosaurs have been found and demonstrate the evolutionary connection between birds and other theropods .

" Archaeoraptor " was unveiled at a press conference held by National Geographic magazine in October 1999 . At the same press conference , plans were announced to return the fossil to Chinese authorities , as it was illegally exported . In November 1999 National Geographic featured the fossil in an article written by art editor Christopher Sloan . The article in general discussed feathered dinosaurs and the origin of birds . It claimed the fossil was " a missing link between terrestrial dinosaurs and birds that could actually fly " and informally referred to it as " Archaeoraptor liaoningensis " , announcing it would later be formally named as such . This name means " ancient robber of Liaoning " . This drew immediate criticism from Storrs L. Olson , Curator of Birds at the National Museum of Natural History in Washington , D.C. Writing in Backbone , the newsletter of his museum , he denounced the publication of a scientific name in a popular journal , without peer review , as a " nightmare " . On February 3 , 2000 , National Geographic issued a press release stating that the fossil could be a composite , and that an internal investigation had begun . In that same month Bill Allen , National Geographic editor , told Nature that he was " furious " to learn that the fossil might have been faked . In the March issue , in the forum section , a letter from Dr. Xu Xing pointed out that the tail section probably did not match the upper body . In October 2000 National Geographic published the results of their investigation , in an article written by Pulitzer Prize-winning investigative journalist Lewis M. Simons . Simons concluded that the fossil was a composite and that virtually everyone involved in the project had made some mistakes .

According to National Geographic 's report , the story of " Archaeoraptor " begins in July 1997 in Xiasanjiazi , China , where farmers routinely dug in the shale pits with picks and sold fossils to dealers for a few dollars . This was an illegal practice , but it was common then . In this case one farmer found a rare fossil of a toothed bird , complete with feather impressions . The fossil broke into pieces during collection . Nearby , in the same pit , he found pieces including a feathered tail and legs . He cemented several of these pieces together in a manner that he believed was correct . He apparently knew that it would make a more complete-looking and , thus , more expensive fossil . It was sold in June 1998 to an anonymous dealer and smuggled to the United States . According to authorities in Beijing , no fossils may leave China legally . By the fall 1998 annual meeting of the Society of Vertebrate Paleontology , held in Utah , United States , rumors were circulating about a striking fossil of a primitive bird that was in private hands . This fossil was presented by an anonymous dealer at a gem show in Tucson , Arizona . The Dinosaur Museum in Blanding , Utah , purchased it in February 1999 . The museum is run by Stephen A. Czerkas and his wife , Sylvia Czerkas . Mr. Czerkas does not hold a university degree , but he is a dinosaur enthusiast and artist . He arranged for patrons of his museum , including trustee Dale Slade , to provide $ 80,000 for the purchase of the fossil , in order to study it scientifically and prevent it from disappearing into an anonymous private collection .

The Czerkases contacted paleontologist Phil Currie , who contacted the National Geographic Society . Currie agreed to study the fossil on condition that it was eventually returned to China . The National Geographic Society intended to get the fossil formally published in the peer-reviewed science journal Nature , and then follow up immediately with a press conference and an issue of National Geographic . Editor Bill Allen asked that all members of the project keep the fossil secret , so that the magazine would have a scoop on the story . Slade and the Czerkases intended the fossil to be the " crown jewel " of the Dinosaur Museum and planned to keep it on display there for five years . Sloan says that he flew to Utah in the spring of 1999 to convince Stephen Czerkas to return the fossil to China immediately after publication , or he would not write about it for National Geographic and Currie would not work on it . Czerkas then agreed . Currie then contacted the Institute of Vertebrate Paleontology and Paleoanthropology in Beijing , and National Geographic flew the IVPP 's Xu Xing to Utah to be part of the " Archaeoraptor " team .

During the initial examination of the fossil on March 6 , 1999 it had already become clear to Currie that the left and right feet mirrored each other perfectly and that the fossil had been completed by using both slab and counterslab . He also noticed no connection could be seen between the tail and the body . In July 1999 , Currie and the Czerkases brought the fossil to the High-Resolution X-ray CT Facility of the University of Texas ( Austin ) founded and operated by Dr. Timothy Rowe to make CT scans . Rowe , having made the scans on July 29 , determined that they indicated that the bottom fragments , showing the tail and the lower legs , were not part of the larger fossil . He informed the Czerkases on August 2 that there was a chance of the whole being a fraud . During a subsequent discussion Rowe and Currie were pressured by the Czerkases to keep their reservations private . Currie in the first week of September sent his preparator , Kevin Aulenback , to the Dinosaur Museum in Blanding to prepare the fossil for better study . Aulenback concluded that the fossil was " a composite specimen of at least 3 specimens ... with a maximum ... of five ... separate specimens " , but the Czerkases angrily denied this and Aulenbeck only reported this to Currie . Currie did not inform National Geographic of these problems .

On August 13 , 1999 , the team submitted a manuscript titled " A New Toothed Bird With a Dromaeosaur-like Tail " under the names of Stephen Czerkas , Currie , Rowe , and Xu , to the journal Nature in London . The paper mentions in two places , and includes a figure illustrating the point that , one of the legs and the tail are counterparts that were composited into the main slab . On August 20 Nature rejected the paper , indicating to the Czerkases that National Geographic had refused to delay publication , leaving too little time for peer review . The authors then submitted the paper to Science , which sent it out for peer review . Two reviewers informed Science that " the specimen was smuggled out of China and illegally purchased " and that the fossil had been " doctored " in China " to enhance its value . " Science then rejected the paper . According to Sloan , the Czerkases did not inform National Geographic about the details of the two rejections . By that time the November issue of National Geographic was already in preparation for printing , but " Archaeoraptor " was never formally published in any peer-reviewed journal .

National Geographic went ahead and published without peer review . The fossil was unveiled in a press conference on October 15 , 1999 , and the November 1999 National Geographic contained an article by Christopher P. Sloan — a National Geographic art editor . Sloan described it as a missing link that helped elucidate the connection between dinosaurs and birds . The original fossil was put on display at the National Geographic Society in Washington , DC , pending return to China . In the article Sloan used the name " Archaeoraptor liaoningensis " but with a disclaimer ( so that it would not count as a nomenclatural act for the purposes of scientific classification ) in anticipation of Czerkas being able to publish a peer-reviewed description at some point in the future . After the November National Geographic came out , Storrs L. Olson , curator of birds in the National Museum of Natural History of the Smithsonian Institution published an open letter on 1 November 1999 , pointing out that " the specimen in question is known to have been illegally exported " and protesting the " prevailing dogma that birds evolved from dinosaurs . " Olson complained that Sloan , a journalist , had usurped the process of scientific nomenclature by publishing a name first in the popular press : " This is the worst nightmare of many zoologists — that their chance to name a new organism will be inadvertently scooped by some witless journalist . "

In October 1999 , after having been informed by Currie of the problems and seeing the specimen for the first time , Xu noticed that the tail of " Archaeoraptor " strongly resembled an unnamed maniraptoran dinosaur that he was studying — later to be named Microraptor zhaoianus . He returned to China and traveled to Liaoning Province where he inspected the fossil site and contacted a number of fossil dealers . He eventually found a fairly complete fossil of a tiny dromaeosaur , and the tail of this new fossil corresponded so exactly to the tail on the " Archaeoraptor " fossil that it had to be the counterslab — it even had two matching yellow oxide stains . On December 20 , 1999 Xu Xing sent e-mails to the authors and Sloan , announcing that the fossil was a fake . On February 3 , 2000 The National Geographic News issued a press release stating that the " Archaeoraptor " fossil might be a composite , and that an internal investigation had begun . In the March issue of National Geographic Xu 's letter ran in the Forum section of the magazine , and Bill Allen had Xu change the word " fake " to " composite " .

On April 4 , 2000 Stephen Czerkas told a group of paleontologists in Washington that he and Sylvia had made " an idiot , bone-stupid mistake " . Currie , Allen and Sloan all expressed regret . Rowe felt vindicated , claiming the affair as evidence that his scans were correct . Rowe published a Brief Communication in Nature in 2001 describing his findings . He concluded that , apart from the top part , several specimens had been used to complete the fossil : a first for the left femur , a second for the tibiae , a third for both feet and at least one more for the tail , which alone consisted of five separate parts . In June 2000 the fossil was returned to China . In the October 2000 issue , National Geographic published the results of their investigation .

In 2002 the Czerkases published a volume through their Dinosaur Museum titled Feathered Dinosaurs and the Origin of Flight . In this journal they described and named several species . Of the six species named in the book , five are disputed . Despite the work of Zhou et al . ( 2002 ) , Czerkas and co-author Xu Xing described the upper portion of the " Archaeoraptor " fossil as a new bird genus , Archaeovolans , in the Dinosaur Museum Journal . The article does include the caveat that it might actually be a specimen of Yanornis . Thus , this same fossil specimen has been named " Archaeoraptor " , Archeovolans , and Yanornis , in different places . Across the monographs in the Dinosaur Museum Journal , Stephen Czerkas built a case for his controversial view that maniraptoran dinosaurs are secondarily flightless birds . In so doing , he criticized prominent paleontologists . In the text on Cryptovolans , Czerkas accused Dr. Mark Norell of misinterpreting the fossil BPM 1 3-13 as having long leg feathers due to the " blinding influences of preconceived ideas . " In fact , though , Norell 's interpretation was correct , and Czerkas added leg feathers to his own reconstruction of the fossil in the art that promotes the traveling exhibit .

Two other taxa that Czerkas and his co-authors named were later treated as junior synonyms by other authors . Czerkas ' Cryptovolans was treated as Microraptor , and his Scansoriopteryx was treated as Epidendrosaurus . Czerkas described Omnivoropteryx , noting that it was similar to Sapeornis . Later specimens of Sapeornis with skulls demonstrated that the two were probably synonymous . Another taxon that Czerkas assigned to the pterosauria and named Utahdactylus was reviewed by Dr. Chris Bennett . Bennett found multiple misidentifications of bones and inconsistencies between Czerkas ' diagrams and the actual fossils . Bennett found the specimen to be an indeterminate diapsid and criticized the previous authors for publishing a species name when no diagnostic characters below the class level could be verified . He made Utahdactylus a nomen dubium .

In 2001 Stephen and Sylvia Czerkas compiled a traveling exhibit containing 34 other Chinese fossils . The show is titled Feathered Dinosaurs and the Origin of Flight . The San Diego Natural History Museum paid a set fee to the Dinosaur Museum to display this show in 2004 . When the show opened , Dr. Ji Qiang told reporters from Nature that about a dozen of the fossils had left China illegally . Ji arranged with the Czerkases to assign accession numbers to three of the most valuable specimens , thus formally adding them to the collection of Chinese Academy of Geological Sciences in Beijing , although they remain in the possession of the Czerkases . Stephen Czerkas denied Ji 's assertion that the fossils were illegal . Sylvia Czerkas told Nature magazine that she had worked out an agreement with officials of Liaoning Province in 2001 to borrow the fossils , and that they were to be repatriated in 2007 . Through March 2009 , however , the show is scheduled for the Fresno Metropolitan Museum of Art and Science in California . According to Nature , the Czerkases refused requests to make the officials from Liaoning available for interview .

Many scientists consider it unethical to work on fossils if there is any chance that they have been smuggled , and many disregard privately owned fossils altogether . Some professionals feel that private collectors put fossils in private hands where science may not be able to access or study them . Some believe that private collectors may damage important fossils , subject them to forgery , and obscure their origins or evidence about their ages . Illegal dealers have also participated in , and may encourage , governmental corruption . Another philosophy argues that if scientists could bend their ethics and agree to publish on important private fossils , this would encourage private holders to make them available for study .

In April 2000 Olson published an article in Backbone , the newsletter of the National Museum of Natural History . In this article he justified his views on the evolution of birds , but also revised and redescribed the species " Archaeoraptor liaoningensis " by designating just the tail of the original fraudulent specimen as the type specimen . To prevent the tainted name " Archaeoraptor " from entering paleornithological literature , this redescription assigned the name to that part of the chimeric specimen least likely to be classified under Aves , rather than to the portion which was later shown to represent a true bird species . Olson presumed that the National Geographic article had already validly named the fossil , and he therefore failed to explicitly indicate the name was new , as demanded by article 16 of the ICZN as a condition for a name to be valid . Several months afterwards Xu , Zhou and Wang published their description of Microraptor zhaoianus in Nature .

The scandal is sometimes used by creationists like Kent Hovind , Kirk Cameron , and Ray Comfort to cast doubt on the hypothesis that birds evolved from dinosaurs . Many creationists insist that no missing links between birds and dinosaurs have been found , and commonly point to " Archaeoraptor " as evidence of misconduct performed to support the evolutionary theory . They see " Archaeoraptor " as a real " Piltdown Bird " . However , contrary to the Piltdown Man , " Archaeoraptor " was not a deliberate hoax . Furthermore , the authenticity of " Archaeoraptor " would not have been an essential proof for the hypothesis that birds are theropods , as this is sufficiently corroborated by other data ; paleontologist Christopher Brochu concluded in November 2001 : " That birds are derived theropod dinosaurs is no longer the subject of scholarly dispute . " Though playing the role of " terrestrial dinosaur " in the " Archaeoraptor " affair , Microraptor , showing wings and clear traces of rectrices , is generally assumed to have had at least a gliding capacity and is itself an excellent example of a transitional fossil .

Limited reliable information is available about the life of Buddhaghosa . Three primary sources of information exist : short prologues and epilogues attached to Buddhaghosa 's works ; details of his life recorded in the Mahavamsa , a Sri Lankan chronicle ; and a later biographical work called the Buddhaghosuppatti . A few other sources discuss the life of Buddhaghosa , but do not appear to add any reliable material . His name means " Voice of the Buddha " ( Buddha + ghosa ) in Pali . The biographical excerpts attached to works attributed to Buddhaghosa reveal relatively few details of his life , but were presumably added at the time of his actual composition . Largely identical in form , these short excerpts describe Buddhaghosa as having come to Sri Lanka from India and settled in Anuradhapura . Besides this information , they provide only short lists of teachers , supporters , and associates of Buddhaghosa , whose names are not generally to be found elsewhere for comparison . The Mahavamsa records that Buddhaghosa was born into a Brahmin family in the kingdom of Magadha . He is said to have been born near Bodh Gaya , and to have been a master of the Vedas , traveling through India engaging in philosophical debates . Only upon encountering a Buddhist monk named Revata was Buddhaghosa bested in debate , first being defeated in a dispute over the meaning of a Vedic doctrine and then being confounded by the presentation of a teaching from the Abhidhamma . Impressed , Buddhaghosa became a bhikkhu ( Buddhism monk ) and undertook the study of the Tipiṭaka and its commentaries . On finding a text for which the commentary had been lost in India , Buddhaghosa determined to travel to Sri Lanka to study a Sinhalese commentary that was believed to have been preserved .

In Sri Lanka , Buddhaghosa began to study what was apparently a very large volume of commentarial texts that had been assembled and preserved by the monks of the Anuradhapura Maha Viharaya . Buddhaghosa sought permission to synthesize the assembled Sinhalese-language commentaries into a comprehensive single commentary composed in Pali . The elder monks sought to first test Buddhaghosa 's knowledge by assigning him the task of elaborating the doctrine regarding two verses of the suttas ; Buddhaghosa replied by composing the Visuddhimagga . His abilities were further tested when deities intervened and hid the text of his book , twice forcing him to recreate it from scratch . When the three texts were found to completely summarize all of the Tipiṭaka and match in every respect , the monks acceded to his request and provided Buddhaghosa with the full body of their commentaries . Buddhaghosa went on to write commentaries on most of the other major books of the Pali Canon , with his works becoming the definitive Theravadin interpretation of the scriptures . Having synthesized or translated the whole of the Sinhalese commentary preserved at the Anuradhapura Maha Viharaya , Buddhaghosa reportedly returned to India , making a pilgrimage to Bodh Gaya to pay his respects to the Bodhi Tree .

The details of the Mahavamsa account cannot readily be verified ; while it is generally regarded by Western scholars as having been embellished with legendary events ( such as the hiding of Buddhaghosa 's text by the gods ) , in the absence of contradictory evidence it is assumed to be generally accurate . While the Mahavamsa claims that Buddhaghosa was born in northern India near Bodh Gaya , the epilogues to his commentaries make reference to only one location in India as being a place of at least temporary residence : Kanci in southern India . Some scholars thus conclude ( among them Oskar von Hinüber and Polwatte Buddhadatta Thera ) that Buddhaghosa was actually born in South India and was relocated in later biographies to give him closer ties to the region of the Buddha . The Buddhaghosuppatti , a later biographical text , is generally regarded by Western scholars as being legend rather than history . It adds to the Mahavamsa tale certain details , such as the identity of Buddhaghosa 's parents and his village , as well as several dramatic episodes , such as the conversion of Buddhaghosa 's father and Buddhaghosa 's role in deciding a legal case . It also explains the eventual loss of the Sinhalese originals that Buddhaghosa worked from in creating his Pali commentaries by claiming that Buddhaghosa collected and burnt the original manuscripts once his work was completed .

Buddhaghosa was reputedly responsible for an extensive project of synthesizing and translating a large body of Sinhala commentaries on the Pāli Canon . His Visuddhimagga ( Pāli : Path of Purification ) is a comprehensive manual of Theravada Buddhism that is still read and studied today . The Mahavamsa ascribes a great many books to Buddhaghosa 's composition , some of which are not believed to have been his work , but rather were composed later and attributed to him . Below is a listing of the fourteen commentaries on the Pāli Canon traditionally ascribed to Buddhaghosa , the Aṭṭhakathā : While traditional accounts list Buddhaghosa as the author of all of these works , the current consensus among scholars accepts only the Visuddhimagga and the commentaries on the first four nikayas as Buddhaghosa 's work .

In the 12th century , the Sri Lankan monk Sariputta became the leading scholar of the Theravada following the reunification of the Sri Lankan monastic community by King Parakramabahu I. Sariputta incorporated many of the works of Buddhaghosa into his own interpretations . In subsequent years , many monks from Theravada traditions in Southeast Asia sought ordination or re-ordination in Sri Lanka because of the reputation of the Sri Lankan Mahavihara lineage for doctrinal purity and scholarship . The result was the spread of the teachings of the Mahavihara tradition — and thus Buddhaghosa — throughout the Theravada world . Buddhaghosa 's commentaries thereby became the standard method by which the Theravada scriptures were understood , establishing Buddhaghosa as the definitive interpreter of Theravada doctrine . In later years , Buddhaghosa 's fame and influence inspired various accolades . His life story was recorded , in an expanded and likely exaggerated form , in a Pali chronicle known as the Buddhaghosuppatti , or " The Development of the Career of Buddhaghosa " . Despite the general belief that he was Indian by birth , he later may have been claimed by the Mon people of Burma as an attempt to assert primacy over Sri Lanka in the development of Theravada tradition . Other scholars believe that the Mon records refer to another figure , but whose name and personal history are much in the mold of the Indian Buddhaghosa .

Finally , Buddhaghosa 's works likely played a significant role in the revival and preservation of the Pali language as the scriptural language of the Theravada , and as a lingua franca in the exchange of ideas , texts , and scholars between Sri Lanka and the Theravada countries of mainland Southeast Asia . The development of new analyses of Theravada doctrine , both in Pali and Sinhalese , seems to have dried up prior to Buddhaghosa 's emergence in Sri Lanka . In India , new schools of Buddhist philosophy ( such as the Mahayana ) were emerging , many of them making use of classical Sanskrit both as a scriptural language and as a language of philosophical discourse . The monks of the Mahavihara may have attempted to counter the growth of such schools by re-emphasizing the study and composition in Pali , along with the study of previously disused secondary sources that may have vanished in India , as evidenced by the Mahavamsa . Early indications of this resurgence in the use of Pali as a literary language may be visible in the composition of the Dipavamsa and the Vimuttimagga , both dating to shortly before Buddhaghosa 's arrival in Sri Lanka . The addition of Buddhaghosa 's works — which combined the pedigree of the oldest Sinhalese commentaries with the use of Pali , a language shared by all of the Theravada learning centers of the time — provided a significant boost to the revitalization of the Pali language and the Theravada intellectual tradition , possibly aiding the Theravada school in surviving the challenge to its position posed by emerging Buddhist schools of mainland India .

The Visuddhimagga reflects changes in interpretation which appeared during the centuries since the Buddha 's time . The Australian Buddhist monastic Shravasti Dhammika is critical of contemporary practice . He concludes that Buddhaghosa did not believe that following the practice set forth in the Visuddhimagga will really lead him to Nirvana , basing himself on the postscript to the Visuddhimagga : Even Buddhaghosa did not really believe that Theravada practice could lead to Nirvana . His Visuddhimagga is supposed to be a detailed , step by step guide to enlightenment . And yet in the postscript [ ... ] he says he hopes that the merit he has earned by writing the Vishuddhimagga will allow him to be reborn in heaven , abide there until Metteyya ( Maitreya ) appears , hear his teaching and then attain enlightenment . According to Kalupahana , Buddhaghosa was influenced by Mahayana-thought , which were subtly mixed with Theravada orthodoxy to introduce new ideas . Eventually this led to the flowering of metaphysical tendencies , in contrast to the original stress on anattā in early Buddhism

Idiotest ( a portmanteau of " idiot " and " test " and stylized as Id ! otest ) is an American television game show broadcast by Game Show Network ( GSN ) . Hosted by Ben Gleib , the series features contestants in teams of two competing to answer brain teaser and puzzle questions . The winning team advances to a bonus round for an opportunity to increase their winnings to $ 10,000 . The series was announced at GSN 's upfront presentation in March 2014 ; the first episode premiered on August 12 of that year . Critical reception for the series has been mixed , with one writer calling it " enjoyable " while another called it " uninteresting . " Additionally , GSN released an online game midway through the first season that allows users to answer questions from the series ' past episodes .

The main game features two pairs of contestants answering brain teaser questions . In the first round , each team faces two questions , taking the form of a visual puzzle . Contestants can work together and must answer by pointing to the correct answer ( or answers depending on what the question is asking them ) on the screen . The question is often phrased so that the contestants may be misled if they do not read it correctly ( for example , " Touch the largest greenhouse " could be misread as " Touch the largest green house " ) The value of the question begins at $ 300 , with $ 20 deducted for every second the team takes in answering ; the money begins counting down when the puzzle first appears on the screen . The money stops counting down when the contestants submit an answer on the touchscreen . For all questions , a correct answer earns the remaining money , while a wrong answer or no answer earns nothing . In round two , there are 4 questions with each contestant working alone and cannot confer with their partners . The opening value of the question is $ 500 , decreasing by $ 25 each second until an answer is given . In the third round , one contestant from each team faces the same question simultaneously . Contestants have their own money countdown , which starts at $ 1,000 and decreases by $ 50 per second . The other contestant from each team then faces a more difficult question , with an opening value of $ 2,500 and decreasing by $ 100 per second . The host usually reads the question to the contestants during this round . After this second question , the team that has more money wins it and plays the bonus round for $ 10,000 . If the game ended in a tie , the team who solves their puzzles the fastest are the winners .

In the bonus round , entitled the " Smart Money Round " , each member of the winning team plays the same question individually . While the first contestant is asked the question , the second is isolated offstage so that they cannot see or hear the question . The two teammates have a total of 40 seconds to answer ( in seasons 1 and 2 , the time limit was 30 seconds ) ; the clock stops when the first contestant submits an answer , and resumes when the second contestant first sees the question . If one team member answers the question correctly , they receive an additional $ 1,000 ; if both answer correctly , their winnings are augmented to $ 10,000 . Midway through the first season , another version of the " Smart Money Round " was introduced requiring a team to correctly answer five questions in 60 seconds , with five-second penalties for wrong answers . Each correct answer is worth $ 500 , with five correct answers winning $ 10,000 .

The show received very little advanced press before it was announced at GSN 's 2014 – 15 upfront presentation on March 18 , 2014 . At the presentation , GSN revealed plans to order 40 episodes of the series , while confirming August 12 as the premiere date on June 19 , 2014 . On October 28 , 2014 , the show was renewed for a 65-episode second season , which began airing April 1 , 2015 . The series was renewed for a third season on March 16 , 2016 , with the season premiere airing on April 12 . The series has also produced some special editions featuring contestants from a preexisting rivalry . These episodes have included competitions between USC and UCLA graduates , as well as an Election Day special between pairs of Democrats and Republicans . This theme was revived with a special episode entitled Political Idiotest , which both taped and aired April 20 , 2016 and featured brain teasers referring to political subjects .

The series has received mixed reviews from critics . Carrie Grosvenor of About Entertainment argued the series to be " truly enjoyable to watch " while calling Gleib 's hosting " sarcastic and funny " . Conversely , Tim Conroy of Media Life Magazine argued that the show " just doesn 't do the trick " and thought Gleib had a difficult time " drawing amusing responses from the contestants " . Neil Genzlinger of The New York Times was equally unimpressed , saying that the show had " low ambitions " and arguing that Gleib 's hosting made the show " even more uninteresting " . Paired with the mixed critical reception , the series has seen a wide range of ratings for new episodes , bringing in between 245,000 and 561,000 total viewers during the first season .

In Puzzlejuice , the player turns falling tetrominos into letters , and those letters into words and points . The player taps and drags on the touchscreen to rotate and position multicolored tetrominos that fall from the top of the screen . When the player completes a solid row of tiles , or arranges the fallen blocks such that four or more like-colored tiles touch , the color tiles turn into letters . Players connect these letter tiles with their eight adjacent tiles ( in ordinal directions ) to make words . Words of sufficient length are cleared from play as well as their adjacent tiles — thus longer words clear more blocks . The iPhone version shows a magnified version of the tile obscured by the player 's finger near the finger . The game has been compared to a cross between Boggle , Tetris , and tile-matching . The game also offers objectives to be accomplished over multiple sessions , like making a six-letter word , or clearing three or more rows at once . This unlocks power-ups that occasionally provide opportunities such as halting the rate of new tetromino drops , and removing blocks from the screen . Up to three power-ups can be selected to be used in each game .

The object of the game is to get the highest score . There are two play modes : Zen and Core . There is a 90-second time limit in Zen mode . In Core mode , players play until the screen fills with poorly placed tetrominos , similar to Tetris . Core has two difficulties . On the easiest difficulty , three-letter words suffice , but harder modes require five-letter words at a minimum . A score multiplier grows as players maintain a combo of multiple words created in succession , and resets if players are too slow . Scores are uploaded to Game Center .

Puzzlejuice was built by a group called Collaboratory and later renamed Sirvo . The three-person team consisted of programmer Asher Vollmer , artist Greg Wohlwend , and composer Jimmy Hinson . The game began as Vollmer 's idea . He later reached out to Wohlwend for aesthetic advice , which resulted in a 365-message chain email and the final product . Wohlwend and Vollmer did not speak a word to each other — or use a medium outside of Gmail and Twitter — throughout the entire development process . The title was inspired by what Vollmer described as the " EXTREME " American culture of the 1990s , exemplified by the board game Crossfire and juice-filled Gushers fruit snacks . A similar game , Spelltower , was released during Puzzlejuice 's development , but Vollmer and Wohlwend ultimately considered their game sufficiently different to proceed . Puzzlejuice was selected for the PAX 10 , a spotlighted group of indie games , in July 2012 . The game was released as a universal app for iPhone and iPad on January 19 , 2012 . Vollmer expressed an interest in bringing the game to Steam Greenlight in August 2012 .

The game received " generally favorable " reviews , according to video game review score aggregator Metacritic . Multiple reviewers compared its core mechanics to a combination of Boggle , Tetris , and a tile-matching game , such as Bejeweled or Puyo Puyo . Comparing word games , Edge called it the " fast-paced action-adventure " to Spelltower 's " survival horror " . Multiple reviewers mentioned the difficulty in mentally balancing the various components of the game , which VideoGamer.com compared to " doing open heart surgery while playing Dance Dance Revolution " . Edge suggested playing on the game 's hardest difficulty , which they found the most engaging . They called it " mayhem , ... elegantly handled " . Pocket Gamer 's Harry Slater said the game " forces your brain to think in ways that it 's never been asked to before " . Edge compared the game 's challenges to Jetpack Joyride 's missions , and complimented the connection between Vollmer 's " magpie " design and Wohlwend 's " luminously flat pastel-colored art " . Phil Eaves of Slide to Play wrote that the player should play with headphones or else miss a " wonderful " chiptune soundtrack .

Edge called the game " too hectic and exhausting " to return to often . VideoGamer.com 's Mark Brown struggled with registering the right input on the small screen , and found himself inadvertently making words from letters instead of moving color blocks . Slide to Play 's Eaves was also troubled by the controls , and recommended the iPad version for the extra screen space . Pocket Gamer 's Slater said it was too easy to clear the board with three-letter words , and thus that the design execution was not as robust as the concept , never being " more than the sum of its strange combination of parts " . While TouchArcade 's Troy Woodfield called the gameplay " not ... totally original " in how it combines three common game ideas , he still found the combination " a stroke of genius " , and highly recommended the game as " a breath of fresh air " . Brown of VideoGamer.com agreed that Puzzlejuice distinguished itself from the crowded iOS puzzle game genre , and Slide to Play 's Eaves called its balance between game types " perfect " .

The Potlatch River is in the state of Idaho in the United States . About 56 miles ( 90 km ) long , it is the lowermost major tributary to the Clearwater River , a tributary of the Snake River that is in turn a tributary of the Columbia River . Once surrounded by arid grasslands of the Columbia Plateau adjacent to the western foothills of the Rocky Mountains , the Potlatch today is used mainly for agriculture and irrigation purposes . Its name derives from potlatch , a type of ceremony held by the indigenous people of the Pacific Northwest ; one such tribe lived along the river for hundreds of years before the arrival of whites . Pioneers settled the watershed and established farms and ranches in the late 19th century . After that , logging eliminated most of the forests within the watershed and the ecology of the river is still in the process of recovery . Fishing , hiking and camping are popular recreational activities on the river ; 14 percent the watershed lies on public lands . Before logging and agriculture , many varieties of riparian and forest plants once populated the catchment , and several species of fish still swim the river and its tributaries .

The Hoodoo Mountains are the source of the Potlatch River . The Potlatch 's course traces a southwesterly line across the eastern Columbia Plateau in the arid Rocky Mountain foothills . Two forks form the river 's headwaters in the southern part of the Idaho Panhandle . The West Fork drains part of Latah County and the East Fork is in Clearwater County . These two forks combine near Helmer , and soon the river descends into a canyon that continues all the way to the mouth . While in the canyon , it receives Pine , Big Bear , Middle Potlatch and Little Potlatch Creeks from the north , and Boulder and Cedar Creeks from the south . Idaho State Highway 3 follows part of the lower canyon , and the town of Juliaetta is located at the Middle Potlatch Creek confluence . The river merges with the Clearwater at the elevation of 801 feet ( 244 m ) between the towns of Myrtle and Spalding . Its average discharge at the mouth , according to a USGS stream gauge , is 379.8 cubic feet per second ( 10.75 m3 / s ) . A peak flow of 8,150 cubic feet per second ( 231 m3 / s ) was recorded there in 2006 . The river reaches its highest peaks in the winter and early spring , while it reduces to a trickle by summer and autumn . The river mainly flows over and through coarse Columbia River basalts that comprise the Columbia Plateau , similar in geology to the Palouse River farther west .

Native Americans of the Nez Perce tribe have lived along the Potlatch River for hundreds of years . The Potlatch River area was once a broad sweep of dry grassland bordered by forested mountains , on the eastern edge of the arid Columbia Plateau . Because of its location just southwest of the foothills of the Rockies , the Potlatch River receives much more rainfall than watersheds just to the west , such as the Palouse and Tucannon Rivers . In 1805 and again in 1806 , the Lewis and Clark Expedition passed the mouth of the Potlatch River while traveling down the Clearwater River . They referred to it as " a large creek " and named it Colter 's Creek , in honor of John Colter , a member of the expedition . It is not known if they were the first whites to see the river . The modern name of the river was adopted in 1897 . The native environment stayed relatively intact until settlers began to arrive in western Idaho in great numbers in the 1870s , and miners also were attracted by a gold strike at nearby Orofino , on the banks of the Clearwater River . Many of these emigrants set up dryland farms and ranches in the prairies surrounding the Potlatch River . Soil conditions generally improve as one travels southwards through the watershed , but there was a major drawback to growing crops in the southern part of the basin : the inaccessibility of water . Already scarce in the arid Potlatch River drainage , the river 's water was hard to reach because of the steep canyon it passes through in most of its lower course . Farmers were restricted to growing crops that did not require irrigation , and many of the lands that did not have access to abundant-enough water were relegated to pasture or hay producing status .

At first , the forests of the watershed were not significantly affected , but after logging operations sprung up near the start of the 20th century , most of the virgin timber in the watershed was cleared . The first sawmills were built to provide lumber for local uses , such as building houses and barns . Soon , however , the Washington , Idaho and Montana Railway extended its tracks into the area , allowing lumber to be exported out of the basin . Logging turned out to be a very profitable industry but had a lasting negative effect on the ecology of the Potlatch River watershed . Splash dams , greased chutes , railroad landings , railroad branch lines and steam donkey operations were among the strategies utilized to exploit the watershed 's resources of timber . Unfortunately , railroad embankments and fills used to build up tributaries had artificially straightened them in the process , and erosion increased dramatically on the barren hillside , causing many streams to become much siltier than they naturally would be . Nearly all the old-growth forest in the watershed is now gone , and the forests that remain are mostly second-growth stands .

At one time the river 's watershed was dominated by grassland mostly consisting of Idaho fescue and bluebunch wheatgrass . Cottonwoods , quaking aspen , maple , and alder formed the riparian zone along the Potlatch River . In the foothills , a meadow steppe environment abounding with black hawthorn , snowberry and small conifers flourished , while along the banks of smaller tributaries , hawthorn and mock orange grew . Camas and forbs thrived in the thinly distributed seasonal wetlands along the river and its larger tributary creeks . The forests were mainly a mix of Douglas fir and ponderosa pine , interspersed with rare stands of grand fir , western redcedar , western white pine , and larch , and an understory of oceanspray , ninebark , serviceberry , wild rose and snowberry . Wildfires burned through the watershed from time to time , clearing the way for new growth . After human intervention , these vegetation communities continued to persist , but in lesser numbers , and the grasslands have mostly been wiped out by farming . The average annual precipitation ranges from 15 to 50 inches ( 380 to 1,270 mm ) per year , and annual variations in temperature are around 25 to 100 ° F ( − 4 to 38 ° C ) .

According to a study from 2003 – 2004 , there were 13 different species of fish in the Potlatch River watershed , including speckled dace , longnose dace , rainbow trout ( both wild and farm-raised ) , brook trout , largemouth bass , pumpkinseed , northern pikeminnow , redside shiner , sculpin , bridgelip sucker , largescale sucker , and yellow perch . Migration of steelhead , the anadromous phase of rainbow trout , has been impacted by the construction of dams downstream on the Snake and Columbia Rivers . The two species of dace were cumulatively the largest individual fish population in the watershed , while steelhead accounted for 58.4 % of the biomass . Of all the streams sampled during the study , the West Fork Potlatch River had the highest diversity because of its relatively pristine condition . The lower section of the river suffers from chronic pollution caused by agricultural runoff . From 2005 to 2008 , the population of steelhead ( rainbow ) trout in the watershed was recorded by the Potlatch River Steelhead Monitoring and Evaluation Program ( PRSME ) . There was no data for steelhead populations in the main stem but 197 adult steelhead were recorded in the East Fork of the river , while an average of 226 was recorded annually in one of the river 's larger tributaries , Big Bear Creek . Over 1,000 steelhead are estimated to return to the Potlatch drainage in strong run years . Outmigration of steelhead smolt from the East Fork was estimated at 6,976 fish while the average for Big Bear Creek was 9,491 . The Idaho Department of Fish and Game began a series of seven projects in 2009 in order to conserve fish habitat in the Potlatch .

Many of the mountainous and forested sections of the drainage basin lie protected under national forest lands . There are several campgrounds overseen by the U.S. Forest Service in the headwaters of the Potlatch River watershed . Fishing is also good in the Potlatch River and many of its tributaries . Anglers are only permitted to catch brook trout , cutthroat trout , and rainbow and steelhead trout . The Department of Fish and Game annually stocks fish in the river . Fishing is permitted on the Potlatch from its mouth upstream to where Moose Creek joins the river near Bovill , as well as on the East Fork .

When You Reach Me is a Newbery Medal-winning science fiction and mystery novel by Rebecca Stead , published in 2009 . It takes place in the Upper West Side in New York during 1978 and 1979 and follows the protagonist , Miranda Sinclair . She receives a strange note asking her to record future events and write down the location of her spare key . As the novel progresses , Miranda receives three more notes with requests . The novel contains three storylines — the appearance of Miranda 's mom on the game show , The $ 20,000 Pyramid , Miranda 's best friend Sal suddenly not talking with Miranda , and the appearance of a laughing man . Central themes in the novel include independence , redemption and friendship . Stead also wanted to demonstrate the possibilities that she saw in time travel . The author hoped to show her children what New York was like in her childhood , and demonstrate how in an earlier time children were more independent . When You Reach Me was inspired by a newspaper article about a man suffering from amnesia , and by parts of her childhood and her favorite book , A Wrinkle in Time . After completing much of the novel , Stead gave the draft to her editor , Wendy Lamb , who liked it . They expanded on the initial concepts and published When You Reach Me on July 14 , 2009 , under Wendy Lamb Books , an imprint of Random House . The book was well received by critics , who praised its realistic setting and the author 's deft handling of small details . The novel has reached the best-seller lists of The New York Times , Los Angeles Times and USA Today . In addition to receiving the 2010 Newbery Medal , When You Reach Me won several Best Book of the Year awards .

The two main characters are Miranda , and the laughing man . Stead began writing When You Reach Me in 2007 after reading an article in The New York Times gave her an idea for a novel about traveling in time to save someone 's life . The article was about a man who woke up in Denver suffering from amnesia , having forgotten who he was or why he was there . Many people worked with the man to help him regain his memory . Under hypnosis , he spoke about his apparent wife , Penny , and two daughters who died in a car crash . However , when he and Penny reunited , the man found out she was only his fiancée — and they had no children . Upon reading this , Stead wondered if somehow the man had returned to the past to prevent an accident but lost his memory along the way . In addition , the article reminded Stead of a strange old man , called the ' laughing man ' , who lived near her house as a child . While the news story initially inspired Stead , she also tied in parts of her childhood into the novel . Besides the laughing man , she included her primary school , her apartment and a sandwich store where she used to work . Stead also added memories of herself acting mean without reason . Slowly the novel became " more and more about these ordinary mysteries of life and less about the fantastic time-travel-y one " . After developing the basic idea , Stead began researching the science behind time travel to make sure her ideas would be logical . She asked her father for help with the science and complicated technical aspects , since he enjoyed mathematical puzzles . As they talked about time travel , Stead " just kept falling into the same hole with the logic , and he really helped me straighten it out " .

When Stead was only halfway done , she hit a wall : she wondered if she had focused the novel too much on her own personal life and problems . By her 40th birthday in January 2008 , she had stopped writing . One week after her birthday celebration , Stead went to a writers ' conference where the presenter advised attendees to stop thinking and just write . This speech worked as an antidote to Stead 's writer 's block ; she started working on When You Reach Me again . After she had written two-thirds of the novel , Stead sent the draft to her editor Wendy Lamb at Random House . Perusing the script , Lamb found herself absorbed and wanted to help develop the book . Unlike Stead 's debut novel First Light , which Lamb heavily edited , Lamb modified nothing on the first draft of When You Reach Me . Throughout the process , Stead helped Lamb understand the complicated concepts in the book and had drafts read by others to make sure " revision hadn 't created any holes or contradictions in the plot " .

Throughout the story , the main character Miranda is often reading Madeleine L 'Engle 's A Wrinkle in Time , Stead 's favorite book as a child ; she read and reread it multiple times . She recalls that L 'Engle was the only author she met in her childhood . Stead described the novel as a talisman for Miranda ; she included it in the first draft and planned to remove it , " because you can 't just toss A Wrinkle in Time in there casually " . Her editor suggested leaving it in if it could be better tied into the story . Stead was aware that she did not want A Wrinkle in Time to have too big an influence on When You Reach Me . Keeping this in mind , she reread A Wrinkle in Time through the perspective of different characters , which enabled her to develop new connections and ideas in her own work .

When You Reach Me takes place during the 1978-1979 school year of Miranda , the main character . Stead placed Miranda 's home in the Upper West Side , New York City , where Stead grew up . Many parts of the novel explore " the same streets where Stead grew up , and riffs on some of her experiences " . Stead was inspired to use this setting because she moved into an apartment near her childhood home early in the development of the story . There she had experienced her first independence while exploring the streets , only to find a scary man near her house . Wondering why he was there , Stead later used this encounter as " the anchor as she wrote When You Reach Me " .

When You Reach Me follows a sixth-grade protagonist , Miranda . She lives with her single mother who has a kindhearted boyfriend , Richard . Miranda 's best friend Sal , who she knew since she was a small child , had recently started ignoring Miranda after he had been punched in the stomach by another boy , Marcus . A homeless man lives on the corner of Miranda 's street . She calls him the " laughing man " for his tendency to laugh without cause . Miranda notices that he always utters the words " book bag pocket shoe " . The phrase refers to the order and place he will send Miranda notes — her library book , a bread bag , her coat pocket and Richard 's shoe . The first three notes instruct Miranda to write a letter describing the future events . The notes , whose writer claims to be coming to Miranda 's time to save a life , offer three signs of the truth of the messages . As the plot develops , the proofs come true , and Miranda is intrigued . Miranda and her new friends , Annemarie and Colin find a sandwich shop on the corner , wondering if they can get paid for a job there . The owner , Jimmy , agrees , but he does not wish to pay them with money instead he intends to give a free pop and a sandwich each day of their work . Miranda , Annemarie and Colin discover a Flintstone bank in the back of sandwich shop . Colin , wanting to see more of the bank , is pulled way by Annemarie insisting that Jimmy could find them . The next day , Jimmy fires the three workers , thinking that one of them stole the Flintstone bank , when it was actually Marcus who stole it . The workers write a card , give it to Jimmy and insist that they did not steal the bank . Jimmy believes them and let them work at the sandwich shop . He then tells them that he figured out who stole the bank . He thinks that it is Julia , a classmate in their class , and a best friend to Annemarie . He thinks she did it because she is African American . This upsets Annemarie greatly and she immediately quits her job .

At school , Julia starts shouting at Miranda for letting Annemarie drink soda and eat sandwiches . Julia explains that because Annemarie is epileptic she has to eat a special diet . Miranda explains that she didn 't know any of that . Colin was later hanging out with Sal . Miranda was home alone until her mom got home from work . Someone did a type of tap on her door which scares her because she doesn 't know anyone that knocks like that . She looks though the peep hole and sees Colin . She opens the door and he looks at her then kisses her . She then kisses him back . Colin smiles and then runs off . In a later scene , Marcus encounters Sal . Marcus wants to apologize for his misbehavior , and chases Sal when he flees . Sal runs onto a street right ahead of an oncoming truck . Before the truck can hit Sal , the laughing man kicks Sal out of the way , sacrificing his own life for Sal 's . Miranda finds the fourth note in Richard 's shoe and learns that the laughing man came from the future to save Sal 's life . The note asks Miranda to prepare a chronicle of recent events and deliver it by hand . Miranda obeys this command .

Miranda 's mom is expected to appear on the $ 20,000 Pyramid . In hopes of winning the money and having a better life , Miranda and her mom 's boyfriend Richard prep her for the show . Miranda and Sal are friends again . While her mother is on-stage , Miranda reminisces about a conversation with Marcus about how no one would recognize a time-traveler from a different age . She suddenly realizes that the laughing man is an older incarnation of Marcus , who has come from the future to save Sal 's life . He needed to deliver the notes to the young Marcus through Miranda , who is conveniently her friend . The novel ends as Miranda reflects on the events in an epilogue .

When You Reach Me is classified in the science fiction and mystery genres , but includes features of some other genres . Monica Edinger of The New York Times found When You Reach Me to be " a hybrid of genres , it is a complex mystery , a work of historical fiction , a school story and one of friendship , with a leitmotif of time travel running through it . " Augusta Scattergood of the Christian Science Monitor wondered , " Is When You Reach Me science fiction ? Time travel ? A highly imaginative girl 's completely conceived experience ? Maybe it 's historical fiction . After all , it is set in 1979 . " According to Mary Quattlebaum of The Washington Post , the novel is of the science fiction and time travel genres . Quattlebaum found that , unlike the usual time travel stories , When You Reach Me does not involve " cheesy time travel machines and rock- ' em-sock- ' em action [ but instead ] far surpasses the usual whodunit or sci-fi adventure to become an incandescent exploration of ' life , death , and the beauty of it all . ' " Both Kirkus Reviews and Publishers Weekly found that despite the book 's science-fiction devices , the setting was still " firmly rooted in reality . "

Some reviewers have placed parts the novel in the mystery genre . Edinger found that despite the broad genres , the novel is mainly " a thrilling puzzle " . She relates the pieces slowly ; clues are found in the story itself , on the map , in words and chapter titles . At the end of the book everything is tied together and makes sense . Ann Crewdson of School Library Journal found that each note Miranda receives foreshadows the next event . Each note is " skillfully " integrated into the novel , along with subsequent clues , until the climax is reached and all the clues come together . Stead 's editor Lamb agreed with the mystery genre , in that " there 's plenty to wonder about after you finish the book . Just as we wonder why our feelings change so suddenly , or why someone like the laughing man appears on the corner one day . " Gurdon of The Wall Street Journal concurred with Lamb , adding that although the novel is clearly a mystery , the mystery itself is not revealed until the end where the last note comes and where everything ties together .

Aaron Mead found that , " the novel addresses the question of how to hold on to old friendships without stifling them , and it insightfully brings out the stabilizing effect that new friendships can have in the effort to preserve or reclaim old ones " . He noted that the novel deeply helps children in middle school . Crewdson opined that the book deals with the " intricacies of friendship " . This theme of friendship is explored when Sal abandons his friendship with Miranda after he is hit by Marcus . Elli Housden of The Courier-Mail found that Miranda is forced to deal with the fact that Sal seemingly abandons their friendship and ignores her for no apparent reason . Scattergood considered the novel an " ordinary friendship story " with Sal ignoring Miranda to find other friends . Julie Long from Reading Time noted how the incident forces Miranda to find new friends and become more active in school , where she starts learning the dynamics of that environment . Mead noted that " the book builds toward second chances for Miranda 's mother — both vocationally and relationally . " As the novel progresses , Miranda gives second chances to Julia , a girl whom Miranda initially hates , and Alice , a girl who always needs to use the bathroom but never does . Miranda previously considered Julia " a competitor for Annemarie 's affection , and Alice as the weird kid who waited too long to go to the bathroom " . By the end of the book , she finds Julia to be Annemarie 's friend and discovers that Alice is an insecure girl .

Stead finds that kids today are much less independent since her childhood . She wrote , " [ F ] rom age nine , my friends and I were on the streets , walking home , going to each other 's houses , going to the store . I really wanted to write about that : the independence that 's a little bit scary but also a really positive thing in a lot of ways . And I 'm not sure that most kids have that today " . Throughout the novel , Miranda and her friends often walk around town without any adults . They are even found working in a sandwich store at lunch and walking home from school while trying to avoid the laughing man . While writing the novel , Stead hoped to show her sons the time period in which she lived , " send [ ing ] them on a little time-travel journey of their own " . Laura Miller of The New Yorker found that this lack of independence in today 's youth is mainly due to the fact that kids now grow up with adults constantly watching them . Miller noted how , despite the lower crime rate in current times , the " characters , middle-class middle school students , routinely walk around the Upper West Side by themselves , a rare freedom in today 's city . "

Julianna Helt from the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette found that time travel forms a central theme as Miranda constantly wonders how time travel could be possible . In When You Reach Me , Marcus helps Miranda realize that the three old ladies from A Wrinkle in Time lied to Meg by promising they would return five minutes before they left . Marcus explains : " So the garden is where they appear when they get home at the end of the book . Remember ? They land in the broccoli . So if they had gotten home five minutes before they left , like those ladies promised they would , then they would have seen themselves get back . Before they did " . Roger Sutton from Horn Magazine felt that the moment Marcus explains this flaw to Miranda is the first exchange that shows the novel to be complicated and mysterious . Quattlebaum noted , " The story 's structure – an expert interweaving of past , present and future – brilliantly contradicts Miranda 's commonsensical belief that the end can 't happen before the middle . " Stead explained her view of time travel in her novel , where going back in time is fulfilling the future , rather than changing it . She hoped to make the time travel element logical to show that " Miranda wasn 't struggling to understand the seeming randomness and infinity of the universe , but learning that her world has value and that people do care about her " .

The audiobook adaption of When You Reach Me was released by Listening Library and contains four disks . In praise of Cynthia Holloway 's performance of Miranda , M.V.P from Horn Book Magazine stated that her tone " emphasized the novel 's interpersonal aspects " . The reviewer found it beneficial that the chapter titles were added to the audio , since they seemed to add more detail about the book , but can be easily skipped over when reading . M.V.P criticized the voicing of Miranda 's mom . AudioFile praised Halloway for " a strong reading ... [ that ] makes listeners curious about this story 's nonlinear structure " and for managing the different elements of the story .

When You Reach Me was published on July 14 , 2009 , in hardcover format by Wendy Lamb Books , an imprint of Random House Children 's Books . Reception of When You Reach Me was positive . Reviewers praised the details and characters . The novel has reached many bestseller lists ; it was on the New York Times Best Seller list for 16 weeks ending May 9 , 2010 . It was number 127 on USA Today 's bestseller list during the week of January 28 , 2010 . On April 22 , 2010 , after staying at number 15 for two weeks , When You Reach Me left the Los Angeles Times bestseller list . Reviewers lauded the realistic setting and characters . Ilene Cooper of Booklist acknowledged that although she was unsure if the ending was logical , " everything else is quite wonderful " . She praised the realistic portrayal of New York and mentioned that " the characters , children and adults ... are honest bits of humanity " . Julianna M. Helt of The Post Gazette felt that along with the " wonderful sense of middle school dynamics " , Stead 's depiction of New York City in the 1970s was superb . Quattlebaum considered no character to be minor ; each plays an important part in the story . Caitlin Augusta of School Library Journal found the setting to be " consistently strong . The stores — and even the streets — in Miranda 's neighborhood act as physical entities and impact the plot in tangible ways " .

Reviewers praised how Stead made every small detail matter . Augusta Scattergood of the Christian Science Monitor enjoyed the detailed work : " The beauty of Stead 's writing is found in the way she weaves subplots and settings together seamlessly . Richard 's stolen shoe drops into place . A reference to forbidden grapes is tied up sweetly . Stolen $ 2 bills ? Another part of the enigma explained by the end . " Edginer agreed , commenting that despite the small size of the novel compared to other popular books , When You Reach Me is a " taut novel , every word , every sentence , has meaning and substance . " Publishers Weekly added that even the smallest of details — Miranda 's name , her strange habits and why she carries A Wrinkle in Time with her — have a reason for their inclusion by the end of the novel .

Stead won the annual Newbery Medal recognizing When You Reach Me as the year 's " most distinguished contribution to American literature for children " . The judges chose the novel for making the small details important to the plot . Chairwoman of the Newbery committee Katie O 'Dell felt that " Every scene , every nuance , every word is vital both to character development and the progression of the mystery that really is going to engage readers and satisfy them " . The committee was " very excited about this book because it is exceptionally conceived , finely crafted and highly original " . On January 18 , 2010 , a worker at Random House had tweeted the result 17 minutes prior the official announcement . The tweet was quickly taken down when the mistake was noticed .

Flekkefjord Station ( Norwegian : Flekkefjord stasjon ) is a former railway station located in Flekkefjord , Norway . It served as the terminus of the 1,067 mm ( 3 ft 6 in ) gauge Flekkefjord Line from 1904 to 1990 . The station building was designed by Paul Armin Due and was built in brick Art Nouveau . The station was important for transport along the coast until 1944 , when the completion of the Sørland Line made Flekkefjord a branch station . At the same time , the line was converted to standard gauge , the number of station tracks was reduced , and the station received an overhaul . The station building was demolished in 1970 , but the station was still served until the line closed in 1990 . The tracks and depot buildings still exist .

The Flekkefjord Line ran from Egersund to Flekkefjord , as an extension of the Jæren Line , that ran from Stavanger to Egersund . The Norwegian Parliament voted in favor of the line in 1894 , and construction started two years later . While initial plans were to open the line in 1902 , the station and line did not open until 1 November 1904 . The line was built as a 3 ft 6 in ( 1,067 mm ) gauge line , and the first rolling stock was reallocated from the Voss Line . Initially , there were four trains daily in each direction , reduced to three on holidays . The most important train was the one that coordinated with the west-bound steam ship ; the train would wait up to 45 minutes if the ship was delayed . This become the dominant route for people to get from Stavanger to cities along the South Coast , as well as to Oslo . In addition to passengers , major cargo shipments included seasonal shipments of herring , as well as lumber from the surrounding areas . Coal for the trains was imported by steam ship to Flekkefjord .

With the arrival of the Kragerø Line to Kragerø in 1927 , and the Sørland Line to Arendal in 1935 , buses were used between Flekkefjord and the terminus cities , allowing land connection between Stavanger and Oslo via Flekkefjord . At the same time , diesel multiple units were introduced on the " lightning trains " , cutting travel time to Stavanger by 50 minutes to 3 hours 15 minutes . The Flekkefjord Line was planned as part of the Sørland Line , that would make Flekkefjord a station on the line between Oslo , Kristiansand and Stavanger . Instead , the route of the Sørland Line was chosen to traverse an inner route , and the Flekkefjord Line became a 17.1 km ( 10.6 mi ) branch line of the Sørland Line in 1944 . As part of the construction , the Flekkefjord Line was converted in 1940 – 41 to standard gauge . The first standard gauge train , a NSB Class 18 , operated on 8 August 1941 . The large traffic during the reconstruction period caused so much damage to the wharf that it had to be taken out of service . The speed on the line was also reduced to 40 kilometres per hour ( 25 mph ) , as the gauge conversion was done without changing the right-of-way profile . Dual gauge was kept until 1 March 1944 . At the same time the four tracks at the station were reduced to three . The cargo building was also moved three metres . In June 1945 , twelve people were employed at the station .

With the introduction of standard gauge , Flekkefjord went from being an important hub for transport along the south coast , to merely being a branch station . However , the number of daily trains to Sira and Moi had increased to twelve , operated with Class 86 and Class 87 multiple units . The Class 87 was used until 1956 , when Class 86 came into service . In 1966 , Class 87 was reintroduced . Important cargo customers at the time were Draco ( who made boats ) and Halvorsens Kjelfabrikk ( who made boilers ) . From 1981 , the Class 89 came into use , remaining until the station was closed in 1990 .

As the only proper station on the line , Flekkefjord was built in brick in Art Nouveau . The two-story 338 m2 ( 3,640 sq ft ) building which was designed by Paul Armin Due had a ground floor with a ticket office , four offices and three waiting rooms . The second story was an apartment for the station master . Due chose to design the building symmetrically around the waiting room . It had arched widows and doors , curved corners and two round towers . This gave both a tight and soft form in organic interaction . It has been considered one of Due 's best works of Art Nouveau . Beside the station there was a 196 m2 ( 2,110 sq ft ) single story restaurant building . In addition to a large main building , the station had a freight building , a wharf , a locomotive and wagon depot , and a loading area . There were four tracks past the station , in addition to two track to the cargo area . The cargo building had room for three wagons . The locomotive depot had places for six steam locomotives . The restaurant was converted into housing in the 1950s , and in May 1970 the station building was demolished to make room for a new bus station . The cargo building was refurbished to serve as a station building for passengers and as offices . The wharf was sold by the municipality in 1987 , and the last train to serve the station departed on 31 December 1990 . Most of the line and infrastructure is however intact .

The Case of the Dean of St Asaph , formally R v Shipley , was the 1784 trial of William Davies Shipley , the Dean of St Asaph , for seditious libel . In the aftermath of the American War of Independence , electoral reform had become a substantial issue , and William Pitt the Younger attempted to bring a Bill before Parliament to reform the electoral system . In its support Shipley republished a pamphlet written by his brother-in-law , Sir William Jones , which noted the defects of the existing system and argued in support of Pitt 's reforms . Thomas FitzMaurice , the brother of British Prime Minister Earl of Shelburne , reacted by indicting Shipley for seditious libel , a criminal offence which acted as " the government 's chief weapon against criticism " , since merely publishing something that an individual judge interpreted as libel was enough for a conviction ; a jury was prohibited from deciding whether the material was actually libellous . The law was widely seen as unfair , and a Society for Constitutional Information was formed to pay Shipley 's legal fees . With financial backing from the society Shipley was able to secure the services of Thomas Erskine KC as his barrister .

Shipley was tried in 1784 by Mr Justice Buller and a specially convened jury at Shrewsbury . Edward Bearcroft , counsel for the prosecution , argued that on the basis of the existing system the jury could not decide on the nature of the pamphlet , while Erskine argued not only that they could , but that the material did not constitute seditious libel , containing as it did " a solemn protest against all sedition " . Persuaded by Erskine 's arguments , the jury ruled that Shipley was neither " guilty " or " not guilty " , but instead " guilty of publication only " , a confusing and non-standard ruling which , after a long dialogue , Mr Justice Buller declared to mean " guilty on all charges " . Erskine appealed the decision to the Court of King 's Bench on 8 November , where the judges again ruled that juries could not decide whether material was libellous , but nevertheless released Shipley on a technicality ; his freedom was greeted with fireworks and bonfires , and Erskine was rewarded with the Freedom of the City of Gloucester . Still seeking to reform the law , Erskine sent the court records to Charles James Fox and Lord Camden , who , after much effort , passed the Libel Act 1792 , which secured the right of juries to decide whether material was libellous .

Following the end of the American War of Independence , British public attention had turned to the need for Parliamentary reform – specifically , the lack of franchise in many towns and the presence of rotten boroughs . In response , William Pitt the Younger brought the idea of reform before Parliament and , in support of his actions , Sir William Jones wrote and published a pamphlet titled A Dialogue between a Farmer and a Country Gentleman on the Principles of Government , which covered the " virtues of government and defects in the representation of the people " . In 1783 Shipley , Jones 's father-in-law , recommended it to a group of Welsh constitutional reformers and had it reprinted in Welsh with his own preface suggesting it was " just , rational and constitutional " . As a result , Thomas FitzMaurice , the brother of the Earl of Shelburne , indicted Shipley for seditious libel , specifically for " publishing a false , scandalous and malicious libel ... to raise seditions and tumults within the kingdom , and to excite His Majesty 's subjects to attempt , by armed rebellion and violence , to subvert the state and constitution of the nation " .

The law dealing with seditious libel was particularly strict . Acting as " the government 's chief weapon against criticism " , it followed principles laid down in De Libellis Famosis and R v Carr : that seditious libel was a criminal offence , that the intention of the publisher or the truth of the allegations was irrelevant , that mere publication was sufficient for a conviction , and that juries were only allowed to deliver a verdict on whether the material had been published by the defendant , not whether it was libellous . Traditionally , matters of fact were left to the jury and matters of law to the judge , but with seditious libel " matters of law " was construed very widely ; it was the judge 's job to decide if the material was libellous , what constituted " seditious libel " , and the nature of " publication " , which was understood to include almost anything . Even a private letter , if intercepted , could lead to a prosecution . Because of public disquiet with these principles , Shipley 's trial acted as a " test case " for the law of seditious libel ; a Society for Constitutional Information was formed by concerned citizens and began raising money to pay for his defence . Able to afford the best representation , the society gave the brief to Thomas Erskine KC , a noted defence barrister . The trial was to be heard by Lord Kenyon , then Chief Justice of Chester , at Wrexam ; after travelling 200 miles to the court Erskine discovered that a paper had been circulated in the area arguing that in libel cases juries were allowed to decide whether a publication was libellous , as well as whether it had been published . Citing the paper 's circulation , the prosecution asked for a postponement ; ignoring claims that a delay would cause Shipley hardship , Kenyon agree to postpone the trial . The case was eventually heard on 6 August 1784 by Mr Justice Buller , at Shrewsbury .

Edward Bearcroft , lead counsel for the prosecution , described the Dialogue as libel and argued that the truth of this was not a question for the jury to decide on ; they were bound to convict the defendant as long as they decided that he had published the Dialogue , regardless of the contents . Those contents , Bearcroft went on , sought to persuade the public that " every man of age had a right to choose his own representative in Parliament " . Erskine , in his reply , argued that the Dialogue was not libellous ( it opened with a preface containing " a solemn protest against all sedition " ) , and insisted that the jury had the right to decide what constituted libel : If they know that the subject of the paper is the topic that agitates the country around them ; if they see danger in that agitation , and have reason to think that the publisher must have intended it , they say he is guilty . If , on the other hand , they consider the paper to be legal and enlightening in principle ; likely to promote a spirit of activity and liberty , in times when the activity of such a spirit is essential to the public safety , and have reason to believe it to be written and published in that spirit ; they say , as they ought to do , that the writer or the publisher is not guilty .

To demonstrate his feelings on the subject , Erskine asked the jury to consider him a fellow defendant , since he intended to publish the pamphlet himself as soon as possible ; he then went through the Dialogue line by line , showing that not only would most people agree with it , but that it was the foundation of Pitt 's Reform Bill . After Erskine concluded his arguments , again stating that the jury should feel free to debate whether the material constituted libel , Mr Justice Buller began his summing up , instructing the jury that they were only allowed to decide on whether Shipley had published the work . The jury retired , and after half an hour of discussion returned to declare Shipley " guilty of publishing only " . After a long and " confounding " debate between Erskine , Buller , and the jury , Buller declared Shipley guilty on all counts . Erskine immediately appealed the decision to the Court of King 's Bench , where he argued on 8 November that Buller 's statement had misdirected the jury , and that as the jury was traditionally not given the right to investigate Shipley 's actual guilt , the previous trial was invalid ; a jury should be permitted to determine not only whether a statement was published , but whether it was libellous . With the exception of Mr Justice Wiles , the court unanimously declared that Erskine 's arguments were incorrect , and that the jury had no such role ; accordingly , his appeal was denied . Shipley was , however , later freed when the King 's Bench held that the initial indictment had been invalid because " there were no averments to point the application of the paper as a libel on the king and government " .

Although the case did not directly lead to legal change , it was nevertheless widely seen as a victory ; upon his release Shipley was greeted with fireworks and bonfires , and Erskine was rewarded with the Freedom of the City of Gloucester . Erskine , however , perceived it differently , and had records of the entire trial printed and sent to Charles James Fox and Lord Camden . Taking this as a hint , Fox ( after much delay ) introduced a Bill to Parliament in May 1791 , seeking to reform the law relating to libel . After it was passed through the Commons it went to the House of Lords , where members of the judiciary attempted to delay it ; in response Lord Camden , then 78 , rose and bluntly stated that if the judges were to be the sole arbiters of public opinion , nothing would be able to appear that criticised the government , leading to a stifling of the freedom of the press . His appeal was successful – without it , historian H. M. Lubasz writes , the Bill would never have passed the Lords – and within three weeks Parliament had formally passed the Libel Act 1792 , commonly known as Fox 's Libel Act , allowing juries for the first time to decide precisely what constituted libel .

Major General Colin Hall Simpson , CBE , MC , VD ( 13 April 1894 – 23 August 1964 ) was an Australian Army officer who rose to the rank of major general as Signal Officer in Chief during the Second World War . He was one of the founders of Amcal , the largest retail pharmacy chain in Australia . Simpson joined the First Australian Imperial Force in 1916 , and served on the Western Front in the Battle of Messines and Battle of Passchendaele . He was twice wounded , and was mentioned in despatches and awarded the Military Cross . After the war he worked as a pharmacist , and rose to the rank of colonel in the Militia . He transferred to the Australian Corps of Signals on its formation in 1925 . During the Second World War he participated in the campaigns in Greece and Syria as Chief Signals Officer of the I Corps . He returned to Australia in 1942 to become the Australian Army 's Signal Officer in Chief . He also became the first Australian Corps of Signals officer to reach the rank of major general .

Colin Hall Simpson was born in St Kilda , Victoria , on 13 April 1894 , the son of Colin Simpson , a plumber , and his wife Elizabeth Fulton Simpson , née Jordan . He was educated at St Kilda Primary School , and , from 1911 , at Caulfield Grammar School . While at Caulfield Grammar , Simpson joined the Australian Army Cadets , rising to the rank of sergeant . After leaving school he became an apprentice pharmacist . He served with the 49th ( Prahran ) Battalion in which he was commissioned as a second lieutenant on 1 March 1914 . He became its assistant adjutant on 12 April 1915 and was promoted to lieutenant on 1 July 1915 .

Simpson was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the First Australian Imperial Force ( AIF ) on 1 May 1916 , and posted to the 3rd Pioneer Battalion , part of the 3rd Division , which was then being raised in Australia . He embarked from Port Melbourne on the transport HMAT Wandilla on 6 June 1916 , arriving in England on 26 July 1916 . The 3rd Division trained on the Salisbury Plain in England , where he was promoted to lieutenant on 13 October 1916 . He was transferred to the 3rd Division Signal Company on 16 November 1916 . Soon after , the 3rd Division moved to the Western Front , moving into the line near Armentières . Simpson was mentioned in despatches on 4 January 1917 . The 3rd Division carried out its first offensive at the Battle of Messines in June 1917 . For his part in the battle , Simpson was awarded the Military Cross . His citation read : For conspicuous gallantry and devotion to duty . He organised the Brigade Signal Service so thoroughly that communication was maintained with every unit throughout . He was continually under shell-fire , but personally supervised all repairs , by his vigorous and cheerful manner impressing all ranks in the highest degree .

Simpson participated in the Battle of Passchendale where he was gassed and wounded . He was evacuated to England on 22 October 1917 . While in hospital he applied for nine months ' leave to return to Australia and complete his pharmaceutical studies . He had passed the Intermediate Examination before leaving Australia but not the Final Examination . This was granted , and he embarked for home on the transport HMAT Persic on 21 December 1917 . He passed the Final Examination , and was registered as a pharmacist on 10 July 1918 . He never returned to the front , and his AIF appointment was terminated on 9 August 1918 .

Simpson remained in the Army as a reservist . He was posted to the 2 / 14th Infantry on 1 October 1918 , and was promoted to captain on 16 April 1920 . In the post-war reorganisation of the Army , the 2 / 14th was absorbed into the 14th Infantry Battalion in March 1921 . In May , he transferred to the Royal Australian Engineers and joined the 3rd Division Signals Company . He was promoted to major on 1 July 1922 , and became its commander , with the rank of lieutenant colonel , on 1 September 1922 . On 1 January 1925 , the signal units were separated from the Engineers to form the Australian Corps of Signals , and he was transferred to the new corps . He commanded the 39th Infantry Battalion from 1 July 1929 to 30 June 1933 , after which he was on the unattached list for two years before resuming command of the 3rd Division Signals Company . On 1 May 1939 , he assumed command of the 6th Infantry Brigade , with the temporary rank of colonel . Simpson opened his own chemist shop in Brunswick West in 1918 . On 12 August 1919 he married Jean Elizabeth Watson at the Congregational Church in Ascot Vale , Victoria . Their marriage produced two children , a son who died in infancy and a daughter , Jean Marjorie . One of the witnesses at their wedding ceremony was a fellow Militia officer , Alan Ramsay , who later married Jean 's sister Edna . In 1937 , Simpson banded together with D. E. Robertson and A. E. Moore to create the Allied Master Chemists of Australia Ltd , today better known as Amcal . They invited other pharmacists to join them to compete against the growing market power of major retailers . The business grew from 12 members in 1937 to over 100 by 1946 . Today Amcal is the largest retail pharmacy chain in Australia .

Simpson joined the Second Australian Imperial Force on 15 October 1939 with the rank of lieutenant colonel . He was allocated the AIF service number VX79 , and assumed command of the Australian Corps Signals . When the I Corps was formed in April 1940 , Lieutenant General Sir Thomas Blamey was appointed its commander , and Simpson its Chief Signals Officer , with a promotion to the rank of colonel . Simpson embarked on the transport Nieuw Holland on 15 September 1940 , arriving in Kantara , Egypt , on 12 October . He met with his British counterparts , and discussed arrangements for the creation of an AIF Signals School in the Middle East . Some negotiation was required before this proposal was finally accepted . He was disappointed at the standard of training that had been achieved by the I Corps and 6th Division signals units in the Middle East , and just as disappointed with the reinforcements arriving from Australia . Both the standard of training of the units and the establishment of the schools intended to remedy the situation were hampered by a serious shortage of equipment . The 6th Division 's list of critical shortfalls — by no means restricted to signals equipment — included 120 telephones and 120 miles ( 190 km ) of electrical cable . Not until January 1941 — after the 6th Division had been committed to battle in Libya — did the cable become available in Australia . Some units equipped themselves with captured enemy materiel .

Simpson arrived in Greece on 7 March 1941 as part of the I Corps advance party . The Battle of Greece presented a major challenge for Simpson 's signals units , as rugged terrain , enemy action and frequent troop movements conspired to frustrate their efforts to maintain reliable communications . The news that Yugoslavia had offered to surrender reached Blamey from a BBC broadcast on 15 April picked up on a receiver built into a kerosene case that Simpson had insisted that he take . Much signals equipment was lost during the fighting , and some had to be destroyed following the order to evacuate Greece . Simpson embarked for Crete on HMS Phoebe on 25 April . From there he took a flying boat to Alexandria . His first priority on arrival was arranging for the lost equipment to be replaced . The shortage of signals equipment was an important factor in the delay in committing the I Corps to the Syria – Lebanon campaign until it became clear that General Sir Henry Maitland Wilson could not adequately control operations from his headquarters at the King David Hotel in Jerusalem . Once again , the signallers had to battle with inhospitable terrain . The hills and atmospheric conditions made reception difficult for the radio operations , and those same hills , along with shortages of cable , made the linesmen 's task no less difficult . He was mentioned in dispatches , and made a Commander of the Order of the British Empire for " maintenance of communications under difficult conditions in the Grecian campaign " .

Within days , Simpson was heading east again , taking a flying boat to Batavia , where he joined the advance party of the I Corps , which was being sent from the Middle East to the Dutch East Indies to counter the Japanese threat . He met there with the local authorities regarding signals arrangements for the defence of Java . These were soon well in hand , but the tactical situation rapidly deteriorated to the extent that the I Corps was ordered to leave Java on 21 February 1942 . Simpson departed on the troop ship Orcades , which arrived in Adelaide on 14 March . Blamey was appointed Commander in Chief of the Australian Military Forces on 27 March . He instituted a sweeping reorganisation of the Army , replacing officers with men who had experience in the Middle East . Simpson became the Signal Officer in Chief on 6 April , with the rank of major general , the first Australian Corps of Signals officer to reach that rank . One of Simpson 's first tasks was to confer with the Chief Signals Officer at General Douglas MacArthur 's General Headquarters ( GHQ ) South West Pacific Area , Brigadier General Spencer B. Akin . The two established mechanisms to divide responsibility for the theatre 's communications between the two armies , which often worked together on the same projects . An important outcome of their first meeting was the creation of the Central Bureau as a combined signals intelligence organisation . Simpson had been thinking about such an organisation while on the Orcades . Blamey had an appreciation of signals intelligence from his time as Deputy Commander in Chief in the Middle East , and readily gave his support . After a slow start , signals intelligence became an important element of the war in the South West Pacific .

Perhaps Simpson 's most ambitious project was the laying of a submarine cable between Cape York and New Guinea . A cable laying ship , the SS Mernoo , was chartered , and two old cables that ran across the Bass Strait were lifted and re-laid across the Torres Strait in October 1943 . When the land connections were completed in December 1943 , it became possible to send a message all the way from Melbourne to Port Moresby . Simpson , who was on an inspection tour of New Guinea , was on hand for the receipt of the first message . In November 1944 , he visited the front in the Netherlands , Belgium and France , returning to Australia via the United States and Canada . To man his signals units , Simpson sought to obtain some 4,000 Australian Women 's Army Service ( AWAS ) personnel . Two special signal training battalions were activated to cater for them , and Simpson inspected the 2nd Signal Training Battalion ( AWAS ) at Ivanhoe Grammar School with Lieutenant Colonel Sybil Irving on 6 July 1942 . By 1945 , the Australian Corps of Signals numbered some 25,000 men and women . The large numbers of women serving in Signals units caused friction between Irving and Simpson over what degree of control he exercised over them .

Simpson handed over the position of Signal Officer in Chief to Brigadier A. D. Malloy on 23 May 1946 . He was placed on the retired list with the honorary rank of major general on 19 December 1946 . He served as Colonel Commandant for the Australian Corps of Signals in Southern Command from June 1958 to June 1963 , and was Colonel Commandant of the corps from September 1959 to December 1960 . In 1946 he was appointed director of the Columbia Graphophone Company ( Australia ) . Simpson was a keen supporter of the Essendon Football Club , serving as its vice president from 1947 to 1964 . He was awarded a life membership in 1957 . He was elected Victorian State President of the Australian Legion of Ex-Servicemen and Women in 1948 . He resigned in October after a dispute with the State Council over its suspension of two members for being communists , which Simpson opposed . Yet Simpson was no communist sympathiser ; far from it . He organised The Association , a clandestine right wing paramilitary organisation headed by Blamey which was established to counter a possible communist coup . The Association disbanded in 1950 .

Simpson died of cancer in Heidelberg Repatriation Hospital on 23 August 1964 . He was survived by his wife and daughter . He was buried in St Kilda Cemetery after a funeral service at St Cuthbert 's Church in Brighton , Victoria . His pall bearers included Lieutenant General Sir Edmund Herring and Major General Alan Ramsay . Simpson Barracks at Watsonia in Melbourne was named in his honour in 1986 . It is considered the home of the Royal Australian Corps of Signals , and contains the Defence Force School of Signals and the Royal Australian Corps of Signals Museum .

Prince of Wales was a transport ship in the First Fleet , assigned to carry convicts for the European colonisation of Australia . There is some ambiguity about her origins and she was probably launched in 1779 at Sidmouth and rebuilt at London in 1786 . Still , in 1787 she set sail for Australia , and reached Botany Bay in January 1788 . On a difficult return voyage in 1788 – 89 she became separated from her convoy , was taken eastward around the world instead of west and drifted helplessly off Rio de Janeiro for a day while her crew was incapacitated with scurvy . After her return to Britain her owners deployed her as a whaler in the South Seas Fisheries . They then sold her and she became a privateer and letter of marque , before performing a voyage as a slave ship . During this voyage a French privateer captured Prince of Wales ; in a process that is currently unclear , she returned to British , albeit new , hands . Her new owners then employed her trading between London and the West Indies , the Mediterranean , and the West Indies again . She was last listed in 1810 .

Prince of Wales was a square-sterned barque of 300 to 350 tons ( bm ) , 103 feet ( 31 m ) long and 31 feet ( 9.4 m ) wide and with a height between decks of 5 feet 8 inches ( 1.73 m ) amidships and 5 feet 9 inches ( 1.75 m ) fore and aft . By one account , she was built in 1779 at Sidmouth as a West Indiaman with ship 's master James Johnston . By another account , she was built on the River Thames in 1786 , by the firm Christopher Watson and Co. of Rotherhithe , which had also built HMS Sirius . Both accounts give her owner as Cornhill merchant John Mather , who had previously purchased and disposed of Captain Cook 's Endeavour after that vessel had returned from Botany Bay . It is possible to reconcile these accounts somewhat . There is no mention of Prince of Wales in Lloyd 's Register until 1787 , when she appears in the supplemental pages as being of 300 tons ( bm ) , launched in 1779 at Sidmouth , with master J. Mason , and owner John Mather . The reconciliation between the two origins may rest in the notation that she had been almost totally rebuilt in 1786 . It is therefore quite reasonable to suppose that she was launched at Sidmouth in 1779 and rebuilt at Rotherhithe in 1786 .

The entry in Lloyd 's Register , however , adds further confusion of a different sort . It reports that in 1786 Prince of Wales had been named Hannibal . The situation is more complex than that . If one works back from 1787 , the only thing that is clear is that vessels have been bought , disposed of , and renamed . What appears to have occurred is a mixing of records and a confusion of names . One may conjecture that one vessel was the South Carolina-built slaver Heart of Oak , launched in 1762 , repaired in 1784 , of 310 tons ( bm ) , and renamed Hannibal in 1786 . The other was the West Indiaman Hannibal , Sidmouth-built , launched in 1779 , not yet rebuilt , and of 300 tons ( bm ) , and eventually renamed Prince of Wales . Unfortunately , Lloyd 's Register for 1785 is not readily available on-line . Furthermore , in 1784 , although J. Mather apparently owned 17 vessels , including Heart of Oak , none was built in Sidmouth in 1779 . Nor is there any other vessel listed built in Sidmouth in 1779 . Full resolution of the issue may have to await primary research .

The south London shipbroker William Richards contracted Prince of Wales in 1787 for the First Fleet voyage . Richards selected her after consultation with Royal Marine officers Watkin Tench and David Collins . Both officers would sail with the Fleet to Australia , Tench as a captain of marines , and Collins as judge-advocate for the new colony . She was the second-smallest of the First Fleet transports after Friendship , and the last to be contracted to join the voyage . The Navy Board assigned Prince of Wales to the First Fleet on 2 March 1787 under the immediate command of ship 's master John Mason , and the overall command of naval officer and future Governor of New South Wales , Arthur Phillip aboard Sirius . She was the last transport added to the Fleet before it sailed . She left Portsmouth on 13 May 1787 with a crew of around 25 , and was accompanied by the other vessels of the Fleet : five transports , three storeships and two Royal Navy vessels . The 24-gun post ship HMS Hyaena accompanied the Fleet through the Channel as fleet escort , departing when the ships reached Atlantic waters . Prince of Wales arrived in Tenerife on 5 June , where she was resupplied . A second resupply took place in August in the Portuguese port of Rio de Janeiro , including the delivery aboard Prince of Wales of quantities of fresh fruit and vegetables , seeds , and some rum for the marines . Prince of Wales then turned southeast with the Fleet , reaching Cape Town in October and entering the Great Southern Ocean on 13 November for the last leg of the voyage to Australia . The first death among the crew occurred on the night of 24 November when a seaman fell overboard from the topsail yard and could not be rescued . A week later a second seaman , Yorgan Younginson , drowned after being washed overboard in heavy seas .

By mid-December the ship 's supply of flour and butter for the voyage had been exhausted and Philip authorised Mason to broach the stores set aside for the future colony in order to continue to feed the convicts . A month later , on 20 January 1788 , Prince of Wales reached Australia 's Botany Bay . Six days later she sailed for Sydney Cove as part of the relocation of the convict settlement to Port Jackson . Leaving Botany Bay she collided with Friendship , losing her mainmast staysail and topsail , but the damage was swiftly repaired and she was able to enter Port Jackson in line with her fellow transports . There she landed 49 convicts , 31 marines and 23 civilians .

Prince of Wales carried 47 female convicts on departure from Portsmouth . After five days at sea , 2 males were also brought across from Scarborough , ringleaders of a failed mutiny . They remained aboard Prince of Wales for the remainder of the voyage to Australia . Convict health was comparatively good during the voyage , with a report by Governor Philip showing only nine cases of illness aboard Prince of Wales by the time she reached Tenerife , the least for any First Fleet transport . Indeed , Phillip wrote to Admiralty advising that " the convicts are not so sickly as when we sailed , " though the women aboard Prince of Wales had no new clothing and were still in the ragged apparel they had worn in prison . There was no ship 's surgeon aboard but Chief Surgeon John White , periodically came on board from Sirius when weather and sailing conditions permitted . As the Fleet headed toward Rio in July , humid conditions and heavy rains generated a " plague of bugs " below decks with more than a hundred insects found in one small sleeping area alone . There were also reports of rats , fleas and lice , and an outbreak of scurvy in late December .

Despite this , serious illness remained rare and the first convict death was from accidental causes rather than disease . On 24 July the ship 's longboat fell from a boom and struck 22-year-old Jane Bonner in the head ; she died from her injuries six days later . A second convict , John Hartley , died of unknown causes on 5 August . These two deaths compared favourably with those on other transports , particularly Alexander ; Alexander recorded 30 deaths , a consequence of overcrowding and an overflowing bilge . Convict discipline was also well maintained , except for prostitution between the female convicts and the crew , which was rampant on Prince of Wales , Friendship and Lady Penrhyn . The first recorded punishment of a convict aboard Prince of Wales was in October 1787 , nearly nine months after she had sailed ; six lashes for a woman caught stealing from her fellows while they were " at prayer . "

The ship also carried a contingent of 31 marines of the New South Wales Marine Corps , comprising lieutenants Thomas Davey and Thomas Timins , five non-commissioned officers , and 24 privates . Sixteen of the marines embarked with their wives , and there were six children . Discipline was poor . In June 1787 two marines were court-martialed for disobeying orders ; one received 300 lashes . Later in the voyage , two sergeants refused to share a mess after one insulted the other 's wife . Drunkenness was also common . In June one drunken marine sergeant fell through an open hatchway and injured the pregnant wife of another marine , for which offence he was placed in legcuffs for two weeks and then transferred to Alexander . Then in late October , First Lieutenant James Maxwell , who had recently transferred aboard from Charlotte , was found incoherently drunk on duty and promptly returned to Charlotte . Two more children were born to the wives of marines during the voyage . In October 1787 the wife of marine drummer Benjamin Cook died from an unspecified illness and was buried at sea after a brief ceremony . James Scott , a Sergeant of Marines , wrote an account of the voyage in his journals , now held at the State Library of New South Wales

Prince of Wales remained anchored in Sydney Cove for five months after her voyage , while her stores were unloaded . A shipboard inspection during this time found her hull was rotten with shipworm and on 23 May 1788 she was careened on the beach for repairs . In July she was released from government service and set sail for England on the 14th of that month , in convoy with her First Fleet sister ships Alexander , Borrowdale and Friendship , and under the overall command of Lieutenant John Shortland in Alexander . The plan was that the convoy sail north to rendezvous at Lord Howe Island , then set a course broadly parallel to the Great Barrier Reef with the aim of reaching the Dutch port of Batavia . From there the convoy would sail west through the Sunda Straits to the Cape of Good Hope , then north through the Atlantic to England . This route was comparatively well mapped – the first part largely mirroring that of James Cook in his first voyage in the Pacific from 1768 to 1771 , and the remainder from Batavia being the traditional route of Dutch East Indiamen returning to Europe . Shortland estimated the voyage would take the convoy between six and ten months .

This navigation plan was abandoned when both Prince of Wales and Borrowdale lost sight of Alexander and Friendship during a severe storm in late July , and found themselves alone and off course by the time the weather cleared . The two lost ships anchored while their masters , John Mason in Prince of Wales and Hobson Reed in Borrowdale , consulted . Neither considered it likely they could reach the Lord Howe Island rendezvous . They were also reluctant to hazard the voyage to Batavia through the Great Barrier Reef without Alexander in the lead . Instead , they agreed to turn their ships southeast into the open ocean and to return to England by sailing the other way around the world , via Cape Horn and Rio de Janeiro and then northeast across the Atlantic to Europe . The Pacific weather proved favourable but by August the two ships had lost sight of each other and continued their voyage separately . On 23 August Prince of Wales rounded Cape Horn alone and headed northeast and north on a path to Rio . Throughout the voyage her crew had been heavily reliant on a diet of salted meat and by early September scurvy had incapacitated the majority . Mason died from the condition on 9 October , and another 13 men were too ill to leave their bunks . When Rio was finally sighted on 13 October the crew were too sick to bring the ship to port . She drifted helplessly in the outer harbor until Rio 's harbourmaster sighted her the following morning and had additional seamen rowed out to assist . Twelve of Prince of Wales ' sickest crew members were hospitalised in Rio while the remainder recovered on board .

Mather & Co. sold Prince of Wales to Clayton Tarleton in 1793 . Tarleton armed her with twenty 6-pounder guns and placed her under the command of William Scales . Scales received a letter of marque on 1 March 1793 . The letter indicated that Prince of Wales had a crew of 100 men , many more than she needed to sail her , suggesting that Tarleton intended her to sail as a privateer . Prince of Wales departed on a cruise and on 7 April she captured the French merchant vessel " Le Federatis " , which was sailing from Cap-François to Bordeaux with a cargo valued at £ 40,000 , or £ 32,000 . Prince of Wales brought her prize into Hoylake a week later . Plans changed , and Tarleton appointed Captain James Thomson ( or Thompson ) to command of Prince of Wales , with the intent of sailing her on the Liverpool-Africa trade , i.e. , as a slaver . James Thomson received a letter of marque on 4 September 1793 . His letter indicated that he would have a crew of 40 men . In late 1793 , Thompson sailed from Viana ( probably Viana do Castello , Portugal ) , for Dartmouth , in company with the Somme . On 8 October he captured the Maryland , which was sailing from Baltimore to Bordeaux with a cargo of coffee , sugar , and barrel staves . He sent her into " Montserrat " . In December he recaptured the Best , which had been sailing from Lancaster to the West Indies when a French man-of-war had captured her . Thompson brought Best into the Mersey .

On 1 January 1794 , Thomson spoke with a ship that was sailing for Botany Bay . The ship had encountered a French privateer , of 14 guns , which the British ship managed to drive off after an engagement that lasted almost two hours . Reportedly , Prince of Wales went on to recapture a British brig that a French 74-gun ship of the line had captured . Prince of Wales sent the brig into Oporto . However , this may have been the Best . Lastly , in early 1974 , Prince of Wales captured and brought in the Flugen , of Malmö , which had been carrying wine , brandy , and bale goods from Bordeaux to Saint-Domingue .

Later in 1794 a new captain replaced Thomson . Radcliffe Shimmin received a letter of marque on 11 June 1794 . A database of slave voyages by Liverpool-registered ships also names Shimmin as master of Prince of Wales . Shimmin 's voyage was ill-fated . Lloyd 's List reported that as Prince of Wales was approaching Barbados , having sailed from West Africa for the West Indies , she encountered a French privateer . The privateer , possibly built in Baltimore , was armed with 28 guns and carried a crew of 300 men . She captured Prince of Wales and took her into Saint Thomas , then a Danish colony , and hence neutral. the capture took place in late 1794 or early 1795 .

What is perhaps more surprising is that Prince of Wales returned to British ownership . There is an entry for her in the supplemental ( i.e. , late addition ) pages for the 1797 volume . One suspects that the Royal Navy recaptured her in the West Indies , but so far evidence for the conjecture is lacking . Barclay and Co. sailed Prince of Wales between the West Indies and London , and particularly Martinique and London , from 1797 to 1800 . They then sold her to Fairbridge & Co . Under the command of Captain " Farbidge " , she sailed between London and the Mediterranean between 1801 and 1805 . In 1806 Prince of Wales received a large repair and new deck and sides . Fairbridge also rearmed her with six 6-pounder guns . From 1805 or so , she was under the command of Captain Stoker , who then sailed in the London-St Vincent trade . She was still listed as sailing in 1810 .

The Garbage Museum was a waste-management themed museum located in Stratford , Connecticut , United States . Constructed and opened in 1994 , the recycling facility and museum was constructed for a cost of $ 5 million and funded through a group of 19 local municipalities , collectively known as the Southwest Connecticut Recycling Committee . The museum was operated by the Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority which focused on empowering visitors with knowledge about waste management and allowed visitors to watch the sorting process of recyclables . The most iconic exhibit was Trash-o-saurus , a dinosaur sculpture made of garbage . Funding for the museum dropped in 2009 due to expiring contracts , but remained open until 2011 . The closure of the museum followed a failed fundraising campaign . In 2014 , the Connecticut General Assembly approved a measure to fund the museum by allowing the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection to award a grant of up to $ 100,000 to the Connecticut Resource Recovery Authority .

The recycling facility and museum was constructed for a cost of $ 5 million and opened in 1993 . Funding for the museum was provided through a group of 19 local municipalities , known as the Southwest Connecticut Recycling Committee , which transported recyclables to the facility for processing . The museum was part of an active recycling operation that allows visitors to follow the recyclable materials through the sorting processes to the crushing and baling process before they are shipped to processors to be recycled into new products . The museum was overseen and operated by the Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority .

The museum 's goal was to empower its visitors to make good choices and be knowledgeable about waste management in the midst of a " waste crisis " . The center director of the museum , Valerie Knight-Di-Gangi said , " We 've created exhibits that encourage children to explore serious environmental issues , and do so in a fun way to have lasting impact and empower them to take responsibility for the environment . " The museum was operated by the Southwest Connecticut Regional Recycling Operating Committee which staffed the museum with " educational specialists who design [ ed ] and conduct [ ed ] the educational programs " . The Garbage Museum was an operating recycling facility and featured a viewing area for the operation which processes around 60,000 tons of recyclables from 20 local towns . Educational exhibits focused on the benefits of recycling drink cans and mining bauxite , the main source of aluminum , and reducing air pollution and water pollution . Another exhibit features a walk-through tunnel depicting a compost pile . Interactive exhibits included a general store and a " Trash Bash " activity in which " imprison [ ed ] helmet-wearing contestants ... answer questions . If the answer is wrong , others are given the green light to dump trash on them from an overhead opening . " There were also art exhibits made from recyclable material including a " life-size mannequin made from crushed and colored milk containers strung together with pipe cleaners " . In 2004 , a new exhibit showcasing the trash-to-energy process was created by Mike Blasavage as part of a project funded by the Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority . The exhibit follows trash , represented as marbles , being transferred from bins to toy trucks , the trucks transfers the trash to the energy plant that generates energy to open and close a drawbridge .

A popular and unique exhibit was Trash-o-saurus , a 12 feet ( 3.7 m ) tall and 24 feet ( 7.3 m ) long dinosaur made out of junk that was prominently on display in the Garbage Museum . The one-ton sculpture was created by Leo Sewell of Pennsylvania and made of " no parking " signs , cell phones , license plates , and other materials . The sculpture represents the average amount of garbage and recyclables that a person in Connecticut discards each year . The exhibit was focused on the importance of recycling and had an interactive checklist of items to find the comprise the sculpture . In April 2011 , the museum celebrated the 16th birthday of the Trash-o-saurus with a birthday party .

In 2009 , the fate of the Garbage Museum became uncertain due to financial problems when the recycling plant 's contracts expired on June 30 and the commodity prices dropped due to the economic recession . The museum began fundraising efforts and started collecting $ 2 for entrance fees in September 2008 . The United States Internal Revenue Service also ruled that museum donations could be tax-deductible increasing opportunities for fundraising . The Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority also applied for federal funding as a " shovel-ready " project to upgrade and automate the recycling center 's operations . In 2009 , Nonnenmacher stated that the museum 's operational costs were between $ 200,000 and $ 250,000 per year . Interest in the museum also came from a group of East Haven High School students who produced a short documentary video about the Garbage Museum , it went on to win a state award and attract some international interest . Prior to its close in 2011 , the operating budget was $ 341,000 , which funded staffing , educational programs , and the museum 's heating and lighting . In July 2011 , Milford 's Board of Aldermen approved allocating $ 26,000 via a $ 0.75 tax per ton of municipal solid waste , then representing the latest addition to a $ 100,000 fundraising drive . On August 25 , 2011 , the museum was closed after the Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority Board of Directors voted to close the Garbage Museum immediately . In 2013 , Connecticut State Senator Kevin C. Kelly introduced legislation to reopen the museum , but the amendment failed to garner support . In 2014 , the Connecticut General Assembly approved a measure to fund the museum by allowing the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection to award a grant of up to $ 100,000 to the Connecticut Resource Recovery Authority via funding of the Municipal Tipping Fee Fund .

The 96th Boat Race took place on 1 April 1950 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side-by-side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . The Cambridge crew contained three Olympic silver medallists from the 1948 Summer Olympics ; six of their crew rowed for Lady Margaret Boat Club . In a race umpired by the Olympic medallist and former Cantabrigian rower Kenneth Payne , Cambridge won by three-and-a-half lengths in a time of 20 minutes 15 seconds , taking the overall record in the event to 52 – 43 in their favour .

The Cambridge crew weighed an average of 12 st 8.25 lb ( 79.8 kg ) , 4.75 pounds ( 2.2 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Oxford saw three rowers return to the boat with experience of the event , including number five G. C. Fisk who was rowing in his third consecutive Boat Race . Cambridge 's crew contained five rowers who had taken part in the Boat Race previously , including Paul Bircher who was also making his third appearance in the race . Four of the participants in the race were registered as non-British , two in each crew . Oxford 's Fisk and Calvert came from Australia , as did Cambridge 's Charles Lloyd , while Light Blue W. T. Arthur was South African . The Cambridge crew contained three rowers who had won silver medals at the 1948 Summer Olympics : Paul Massey , Bircher and Lloyd were in the crew that came second in the men 's eight in London . Chris Davidge , the Oxford University Boat Club president , was forced to drop out of the race through illness . Five of the Oxford rowers were educated at Eton College ; six of the Cambridge rowers were studying at St John 's College and so rowed for Lady Margaret Boat Club .

Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station , handing the Middlesex side of the river to Cambridge . Umpire Payne started the race at 12 : 30 p.m. , with the Dark Blues making a slightly faster start ; after a minute they were about a canvas-length ahead of their opponents . Although having the outside of the first bend , they had extended their lead to a quarter of a length by Craven Cottage . By the time the crews passed the Mile Post , Cambridge were leading by a quarter-length which they extended to half a length by Harrods Furniture Depository . Cambridge 's stroke Crick increased his crew 's rate ; his opposite number Cavenagh responded to prevent the Light Blues going clear . While the conditions were not too rough , both crews slowed their stroke rate , with Cambridge passing below Hammersmith Bridge still half a length ahead . As they passed The Doves pub , Oxford slowly began to gain , rating marginally higher . Cavenagh pushed on again before Chiswick Eyot but could not prevent the Light Blues extending their lead to nearly a length by the time the crews passed Chiswick Steps . Despite further spurts from Oxford , Cambridge 's " better stride " saw them pass below Barnes Bridge two and a half lengths ahead . Cambridge passed the finishing post leading by three and a half lengths in a time of 20 minutes 15 seconds , their fourth consecutive win in the slowest time since the 1947 race . The victory took the overall record in the event to 52 – 43 in their favour . The rowing correspondent for The Times noted that " Cambridge rowed far better than they have recently " while " Oxford surpassed what anyone could reasonably have expected from them . " The Manchester Guardian 's rowing correspondent declared that Cambridge 's crew was " generally acknowledged to be one of the best seen on the tideway " , and that " Oxford could not , short of shipwreck or piracy , win the race " . Writing in The Observer , G. I. F. Thomson noted of Cambridge that " all through practice they had shown more promising form and power , as well as unity " while Oxford had " made great strides ... and were never out of the running . "

Sandsfoot Castle , also known historically as Weymouth Castle , is an artillery fort constructed by Henry VIII near Weymouth , Dorset . It formed part of the King 's Device programme to protect against invasion from France and the Holy Roman Empire , and defended the Weymouth Bay anchorage . The stone castle had an octagonal gun platform , linked to a residential blockhouse , and was completed by 1542 at a cost of £ 3,887 . Earthwork defences were built around the landward side of the castle , probably in 1623 . Sandsfoot saw service during the English Civil War , when it was held by Parliament and Royalists in turn during the conflict . It survived the interregnum but , following Charles II 's restoration to the throne , the fortress was withdrawn from military use in 1665 . By the early 18th century , Sandsfoot was in ruins , its stonework taken for use in local building projects . The clay cliffs on which the castle had been built had always been unstable and subject to erosion . The castle 's gun platform began to collapse into the sea and , by the 1950s , had been entirely destroyed . The ruins were closed to visitors on safety grounds , although civic gardens were planted alongside it in 1951 . Repairs were undertaken between 2009 and 2012 at a total cost of £ 217,800 , enabling the site to be reopened to the public . Historic England considers Sandsfoot to be " one of the most substantial examples " of the 16th-century blockhouses to survive in England .

Sandsfoot Castle was built as a consequence of international tensions between England , France and the Holy Roman Empire in the final years of the reign of King Henry VIII . Traditionally the Crown had left coastal defences to the local lords and communities , only taking a modest role in building and maintaining fortifications , and while France and the Empire remained in conflict with one another , maritime raids were common but an actual invasion of England seemed unlikely . Modest defences , based around simple blockhouses and towers , existed in the south-west and along the Sussex coast , with a few more impressive works in the north of England , but in general the fortifications were very limited in scale . After 1533 , Henry broke with popes Pope Clement VII and Paul III in order to annul the long-standing marriage to his wife , Catherine of Aragon , and remarry . Catherine was the aunt of Charles V , the Holy Roman Emperor , and Charles took the annulment as a personal insult . This resulted in France and the Empire declaring an alliance against Henry in 1538 , and the Pope encouraging the two countries to attack England . An invasion of England appeared certain . In response , Henry issued an order , called a " device " , in 1539 , giving instructions for the " defence of the realm in time of invasion " and the construction of forts along the English coastline .

Sandsfoot Castle was built to protect the Weymouth Bay anchorage , being placed on cliffs overlooking the waterway , opposite Portland Castle on the other side . Sandsfoot was a blockhouse , intended to defeat enemy ships using a battery of heavy artillery , and had minimal protection against an attack from the land . It was completed by 1541 , run by a captain appointed by the Crown , and cost £ 3,887 to build . There was probably an early agreement that the nearby village of Wyke Regis had a responsibility to support the castle , and in exchange they came to traditionally enjoy an exemption from taxes and militia duties . The antiquarian John Leland visited the castle soon after its construction , describing it as " a right goodlie and warlyke castle " with " one open barbican " , probably referring to the castle 's gun platform . Coastal erosion quickly began to threaten the castle , causing what was reported as a " great gulf " on its seaward side , and repairs costing £ 383 were necessary by 1583 . During the invasion scare that accompanied the Spanish Armada of 1588 , the normal garrison of Sandsfoot was supplemented by another 50 men .

Repairs were made to the castle between 1610 and 1611 by the captain , Sir George Bampfield , at a cost of £ 211 . A survey in 1623 carried out by Sir Richard Morryson showed the castle to be equipped with ten iron guns – one culverin , five demi-culverins , two sakers , a minion and a falcon – and garrisoned by its captain , five gunners and three soldiers . It was in a poor condition , and one corner of the gun platform had been undermined by the sea ; Morryson 's team estimated the likely costs of repairs to amount to £ 459 . During the English Civil War between the supporters of Charles I and Parliament , Weymouth was predominantly Parliamentarian in loyalty and the surrounding forts were held by their garrisons . Robert Dormer , the Earl of Carnarvon , entered Dorset with an army in 1643 and Weymouth surrendered , resulting in Sandsfoot Castle being controlled by the Royalists between August 1643 and June 1644 . During this period the castle may have been used as a Royalist mint . Robert Devereux , the Earl of Essex , then retook the county for Parliament ; Colonel William Ashburnham , the Royalist governor of Weymouth , retreated to Portland Castle without a fight . Devereux approached Sandsfoot and , after three hours of negotiations , the fort surrendered to him . In 1647 , Parliament ordered the garrison at the castle to be demobilised but this did not occur , and John Hayne was appointed as its new captain .

Charles II was restored to the throne in 1660 and the next year a fresh order was given to demobilise the garrison at Sandsfoot . An argument then broke out between Humphrey Weld , the lieutenant-governor of Portland and captain of Sandsfoot Castle , and Charles Stewart , the Duke of Richmond , over the control of the local defences . The village of Wyke Regis petitioned Weld in a bid to prevent the demobilisation , concerned that their traditional exemptions from militia service would be revoked by the Duke . Weld championed their case but was dismissed from his post as lieutenant-governor , and the Duke occupied Sandsfoot with his militia . Weld appealed to the government and in 1665 a compromise was announced in which Weld would be reappointed to his role as lieutenant-governor , while Sandsfoot would be declared redundant and be demolished . The order for its destruction was never carried out , and the castle was used as a storehouse until at least 1691 . By 1725 , the castle had become ruinous . Early in the century , the remains of the castle was sold to the town of Weymouth , whose people reused some of the stone to construct their new town bridge . Local tradition in the 19th century maintained that several houses in Weymouth were also constructed using stone taken from the castle . In 1825 , the carved stone Elizabethan arms of the castle were moved to All Saints Church in Wyke Regis . Captains continued to be formally appointed , however , and Gabriel Stewart held the post as late as 1795 .

The majority of the gun platform collapsed into the sea as the cliffs eroded . It is uncertain precisely when this occurred ; in a prolonged historical debate over this during the late 19th and early 20th centuries , the historian Henry Symonds argued that the first falls occurred during the 18th century , W. Norman placed the main fall in 1835 , and T. Groves argued in favour of a more recent collapse in the second half of the 19th century . The ruined castle was drawn and painted by various artists in the 18th and 19th centuries , including Samuel Buck , J. H. Grimm , C. Sawyer and Edward Pritchard . The castle featured in Joseph Drew 's short novel " the Poisoned Cup " in 1876 .

In 1902 , the Weymouth Corporation purchased the castle for the town from the Department of Woods and Forests for a total of £ 150 . During the Second World War the castle probably housed an anti-aircraft battery as part of the defences created around Portland Harbour . Despite the construction of the Portland breakwaters nearby , the unstable clay cliffs remained vulnerable to erosion ; in 1930 the ruins were closed to the public due to safety concerns and the remaining embrasure of the gun platform collapsed during in the 1950s . In 2009 , £ 23,100 was awarded by the Heritage Lottery Fund for an initial survey of the site , which by now had been placed on English Heritage 's register of listed buildings at risk of decline , followed by a further £ 194,700 in 2011 for substantial repair work . As part of the work , a three-dimensional laser scan of the stonework was undertaken , and a steel and oak walkway was installed around the interior of the castle . The castle reopened to the public in 2012 , and the following year it was removed from English Heritage 's at risk register . The castle is protected under UK law as a grade II * listed building and as a scheduled ancient monument .

Sandsfoot Castle was built from Portland stone with ashlar facings and a rubble core . It comprised a main blockhouse attached to an octagonal gun room , overlooking the sea . The two-storey blockhouse is 42 by 32 feet ( 12.8 by 9.8 m ) across , with a gate-tower on its landward side . It probably originally had four rooms for the accommodation and cooking facilities for the garrison , with staircases leading up to the first floor and down into its basement . The gate-tower held a small room on the first floor and was designed to hold a portcullis . The one-storey gun room was approximately 36 by 28 feet ( 11.0 by 8.5 m ) across with five embrasures for guns and a flat roof that also probably supported artillery . Both the gun room and the main block were probably protected by parapets . The gun room has been lost to erosion , although the south-western embrasure is still visible where it fell onto the beach below . The ashlar facings of the blockhouse have been largely robbed , although some elements remain , and the roof and floors have been lost . Historic England considers that the castle " represents one of the most substantial examples " of an unaltered 16th-century blockhouse in England .

The castle originally had an outer ward , reached over a bridge , and stables , although these have been both been lost . Protective rectangular earthworks were constructed to protect the castle on the landward side , probably in 1623 , with two bastions in the north and west corners , and some form of stone structure along the earthworks . In the 18th century these earthworks were described as forming a " deep trench " and mid-19th century accounts suggested that they were around 12 feet ( 3.7 m ) deep . Now only 100 feet ( 30 m ) of the bank and ditch survives , with the earthworks approximately 10 metres ( 33 ft ) wide overall and 2.2 metres ( 7 ft 3 in ) deep between the top of the bank and the base of the ditch . The north bastion still survives largely intact , although the west has been mostly destroyed . Outside the entrance to the earthworks are the Sandsfoot Gardens , civic gardens dating from 1951 , designed in a Tudor style with an ornamental pond .

Salvia divinorum ( also known as sage of the diviners , ska maría pastora , seer 's sage , yerba de la pastora and just salvia ) is a psychoactive plant which can induce visions and other altered and spiritual experiences . Its native habitat is in cloud forest in the isolated Sierra Mazateca of Oaxaca , Mexico , where it grows in shady and moist locations . The plant grows to over a meter high , has hollow square stems , large leaves , and occasional white flowers with violet calyxes . Botanists have not determined whether Salvia divinorum is a cultigen or a hybrid ; native plants reproduce vegetatively , rarely producing viable seed . Mazatec shamans have a long and continuous tradition of religious use of Salvia divinorum , using it to facilitate visionary states of consciousness during spiritual healing sessions . Most of the plant 's local common names allude to the Mazatecs ' post-Columbian belief that the plant is an incarnation of the Virgin Mary , with its ritual use also invoking that relationship . Its chief active psychoactive constituent is a structurally unique diterpenoid called salvinorin A , a potent κ-opioid and D2 receptor agonist . Salvia divinorum is generally understood to be of low toxicity ( high LD50 ) and low addictive potential since it is a κ-opioid agonist and a great deal of research has indicated that κ-opioid agonist activation of the kappa opioid receptor as shown by salvia may , in fact , serve as a potent addiction treatment therapy .

Salvia divinorum remains legal in most countries and , within the United States , is legal in the majority of states . However , some have called for its prohibition . While not currently regulated by US federal drug laws , several states have passed laws criminalizing the substance . Some proposed state bills have failed to progress and have not been made into law ( with motions having been voted down or otherwise dying in committee stages ) . There have not been many publicized prosecutions of individuals violating anti-salvia laws in the few jurisdictions in which it is prohibited .

Salvia divinorum is native to the Sierra Mazateca in Oaxaca , Mexico , where it is still used by the Mazatec , primarily to facilitate shamanic visions in the context of curing or divination . S. divinorum is one of several species with hallucinogenic properties that are ritually used by Mazatec shamans . Others include certain morning glory seeds ( Turbina corymbosa ) , psilocybin mushrooms , and various coleus species . In their rituals , the shamans use only fresh S. divinorum leaves . They see the plant as an incarnation of the Virgin Mary , and begin the ritual with an invocation to Mary , Saint Peter , the Holy Trinity , and other saints . Ritual use traditionally involves being in a quiet place after ingestion of the leaf — the Maztec shamans say that " La Maria ( S. divinorum ) speaks with a quiet voice . " It is also used remedially at lower dosages as a diuretic , and to treat ailments including diarrhea , anemia , headaches , rheumatism , and a semi-magical disease known as panzón de borrego , or a swollen belly ( literally , " lamb belly " ) .

Salvia divinorum was first recorded in print by Jean Basset Johnson in 1939 while he was studying Mazatec shamanism . He later documented its usage and reported its effects through personal testimonials . It was not until the 1990s that the psychoactive mechanism was identified by a team led by Daniel Siebert . Gordon Wasson tentatively postulated that the plant could be the mythological pipiltzintzintli , the " Noble Prince " of the Aztec codices . Wasson 's speculation has been the subject of further debate amongst ethnobotanists , with some scepticism coming from Leander J. Valdés , and counterpoints more supportive of Wasson 's theory from Jonathan Ott . The identity of another mysterious Aztec entheogen , namely that of poyomatli , has also been suggested as being Salvia divinorum . Here too there are other candidate plants , notably Cacahuaxochitl ( Quararibea funebris ) , again suggesting that there is no consensus .

The genus name , Salvia , was first used by Pliny for a plant that was likely Salvia officinalis ( common sage ) and is derived from the Latin salvere . The specific epithet , divinorum , was given because of the plant 's traditional use in divination and healing. it is often loosely translated as " diviner 's sage " or " seer 's sage " . Albert Hofmann , who collected the first plants with Wasson , objected to the new plant being given the name divinorum : I was not very happy with the name because Salvia divinorum means " Salvia of the ghosts " , whereas Salvia divinatorum , the correct name , means " Salvia of the priests " , But it is now in the botanical literature under the name Salvia divinorum . There are many common names for S. divinorum , most of them relating to the plant 's association with the Virgin Mary . The Mazatec believe the plant to be an incarnation of the Virgin Mary , so they take great care in handling the plant . The name " Ska Maria Pastora " , often shortened to " Ska Maria " or " Ska Pastora " , refers to " the leaf or herb of Mary , the Shepherdess . " Other Spanish names include " hojas de Maria " , " hojas de la Pastora " , " hierba ( yerba ) Maria " , and " la Maria " . A plant believed to be S. divinorum was referred to as " hoja de adivinacion " ( leaf of prophecy ) by the Cuicatec and Mazatec . S. divinorum is also known as la hembra ( " the female " ) , when it is included by the Mazatec as part of a family of similar religious hallucinogens . The others it is connected with are Coleus pumila , called el macho ( " the male " ) , and two forms of Coleus blumei which are called el nene ( " the child " ) and el ahijado ( " the godson " ) .

Salvia divinorum has become both increasingly well-known and available in modern culture . The Internet has allowed for the growth of many businesses selling live salvia plants , dried leaves , extracts , and other preparations . Medical experts , as well as accident and emergency rooms , have not been reporting cases that suggest particular salvia-related health concerns , and police have not been reporting it as a significant issue with regard to public order offences ; in any case , Salvia divinorum has attracted negative attention from the media and some lawmakers . Media stories generally raise alarms over Salvia divinorum 's legal status and are sometimes headlined with generally ill-supported comparisons to LSD or other psychoactive substances . Parental concerns are raised by focusing on salvia 's usage by younger teens — the emergence of YouTube videos purporting to depict its use being an area of particular concern in this respect . The isolated and controversial suicide of Brett Chidester received much media attention . Salvia divinorum was the subject of the first use of YouTube within drug-behavioral research when scientists at San Diego State University rated randomly selected videos of salvia users to study observed impairment . Their findings corroborate reports that the most profound effects of smoking salvia appear almost immediately and last about eight minutes . Effects include temporary speech and coordination loss .

Salvia divinorum has large green ovate ( often also dentate ) leaves , with a yellow undertone that reach 10 to 30 cm ( 4 to 12 in ) long . The leaves have no hairs on either surface , and little or no petiole . The plant grows to well over 1 metre ( 3 ft ) in height , on hollow square stems which tend to break or trail on the ground , with the plant rooting quite readily at the nodes and internodes . The flowers , which bloom only rarely , grow in whorls on a 30-centimetre ( 12 in ) inflorescence , with about six flowers to each whorl . The 3-centimetre ( 1.2 in ) flowers are white , curved and covered with hairs , and held in a small violet calyx that is covered in hairs and glands . When it does bloom in its native habitat , it does so from September to May . Early authors erred in describing the flowers as having blue corollas , based on Epling and Játiva 's description . The first plant material they received was dried , so they based the flower color on an erroneous description by Hofmann and Wasson , who didn 't realize that their " blue flowers , crowned with a white dome " were in fact violet calyces with unopened white corollas .

Salvia divinorum produces few viable seeds even when it does flower — no seeds have ever been observed on plants in the wild . For an unknown reason , pollen fertility is also comparatively reduced . There is no active pollen tube inhibition within the style , but some event or process after the pollen tube reaches the ovary is aberrant . The likeliest explanations are inbreeding depression or hybridity . All of the Mazatec populations appear to be clonal . The plant 's square stems break easily and tend to trail on the ground , rooting easily at the nodes and internodes .

Salvia divinorum was first documented in 1939 , but it was many years before botanists could identify the plant due to Mazatec secrecy about the growing sites . Flowers were needed for a definitive identification of the species . In 1962 , the Swiss chemist Albert Hofmann , and ethnomycologist R. Gordon Wasson , traveled throughout the Sierra Mazateca researching Mazatec rituals and looking for specimens of the plant . They were unable to locate live plants . Eventually , the Mazatec provided them some flowering specimens . These specimens were sent to botanists Carl Epling and Carlos D. Játiva , who described and named the plant as Salvia divinorum , after its use in divination and healing by the Mazatec . By 1985 , up to fifteen populations of the plant had been found . Until 2010 , there were differing opinions on whether Salvia divinorum is an interspecific hybrid . The plant 's partial sterility was suggestive of a hybrid origin , though no two parent species have been found with an obvious affinity to Salvia divinorum . One other possibility for the plant 's partial sterility is that long-term cultivation and selection have produced an inbred cultigen .

In 2010 , a molecular phylogenetic approach by DNA sequencing of Salvia divinorum and a number of related species strongly suggest that the species is not a hybrid . One earlier proposed parent was Salvia cyanea ( a synonym for Salvia concolor ) , which Epling and Játiva believed to be closely allied to Salvia divinorum . The 2010 study demonstrated Salvia divinorum 's closest relative to be Salvia venulosa — a rare and endemic Salvia that is native to Colombia , growing in shaded , wooded gullies at 1,500 to 2,000 m ( 4,900 to 6,600 ft ) elevation . It also showed that Salvia divinorum does not belong to the Salvia section Dusenostachys , as believed earlier . The genetic study also indicated that Salvia venulosa was likely misplaced into Salvia section Tubiflorae , and that it may not be related to other Colombia Salvia species , though further tests are needed . The origin of Salvia divinorum is still a mystery , one of only three plants in the extensive Salvia genus ( approximately 900 species ) with unknown origins — the other two are Salvia tingitana and Salvia buchananii .

There are two commonly cultivated strains which are known to be distinct . One is the strain that was collected in 1962 by ecologist and psychologist Sterling Bunnell ( the Bunnell strain ) , colloquially mis-attributed as the Wasson-Hofmann strain . The other was collected from Huautla de Jiménez in 1991 by anthropologist Bret Blosser ( the Blosser or Palatable strain ) . There are other strains that are not as well documented , such as the Luna strain ( possibly Bunnell ) isolated from a Hawaiian patch of Salvia divinorum clones , featuring unusually serrated and rounded rather than ovate leaves .

The known active constituent of Salvia divinorum is a trans-neoclerodane diterpenoid known as salvinorin A ( chemical formula C23H28O8 ) . This compound is present in the dried plant at about 0.18 % . Salvinorin A is not an alkaloid , ( meaning it does not contain a basic nitrogen ) , unlike most known opioid receptor ligands . Salvinorin A is the first documented diterpene hallucinogen . Similar to many psychoactive herbs , Salvia divinorum synthesizes and excretes its active constituent ( salvinorin A ) via trichomes , of the peltate-glandular morphology , located just beneath the cuticle ( subcuticular ) layer .

By mass , salvinorin A " is the most potent naturally occurring hallucinogen . " It is active at doses as low as 200 µg . Synthetic chemicals , such as LSD ( active at 20 – 30 µg doses ) , can be more potent . Research has shown that salvinorin A is a potent and selective κ-Opioid ( kappa-Opioid ) receptor agonist . It has been reported that the effects of salvinorin A in mice are blocked by κ-Opioid receptor antagonists . However , it is an even more potent D2 receptor partial agonist , and it is likely this action plays a significant role in its effects as well . Salvinorin A has no actions at the 5-HT2A serotonin receptor , the principal molecular target responsible for the actions of ' classic ' hallucinogens , such as mescaline and LSD , nor is it known to have affinity for any other sites to date . Salvinorin 's potency should not be confused with toxicity . Rodents chronically exposed to dosages many times greater than those to which humans are exposed show no signs of organ damage .

Salvinorin A is capable of inhibiting excess intestinal motility ( e.g. diarrhea ) , through a combination of κ-opioid and cannabinoid ( mainly CB1 receptor ) receptors in inflamed but not normal gut in vivo . The mechanism of action for Salvinorin A on ileal tissue has been described as ' prejunctional ' , as it was able to modify electrically induced contractions , but not those of exogenous acetylcholine . Results from a small study by an assistant professor at the University of Iowa indicate that it may have potential as an analgesic and as a therapeutic tool for treating drug addictions . A pharmacologically important aspect of the contraction-reducing ( antispasmodic ) properties of ingested Salvinorin A on gut tissue is that it is only pharmacologically active on inflamed and not normal tissue , thus reducing possible side-effects .

Mazatec shamans crush the leaves to extract leaf juices from about 20 to 80 ( about 50g / 2 oz to 200g / 7 oz . ) or more fresh leaves . They usually mix these juices with water to create an infusion or ' tea ' which they drink to induce visions in ritual healing ceremonies . Chewing and swallowing a large number of fresh leaves is the other Mazatec method . Oral consumption of the leaf makes the effects come on more slowly , over a period of 10 to 20 minutes . The experience , from the onset of effects , lasts from about 30 minutes up to one and a half hours . Doses for chewing vastly exceed doses used for smoking . By calculating the concentrations per leaf ( " an average concentration of 2.45 mg per gram " of leaf ) , the average weight per leaf ( " about 50 g " per 20 leaves , or 2.5g / leaf ) , and the standard dose for chewing ( about 8-28 leaves ) , the doses can range from about 50 mg to 172 mg .

Modern methods of ingestion include smoking or chewing the leaf , or using a tincture , as described in the following sections . Salvia divinorum is becoming more widely known and used in modern culture . The National Survey on Drug Use and Health , an annual US based survey sponsored by the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration ( SAMHSA ) , for 2006 estimated that about 1.8 million persons aged 12 or older had used Salvia divinorum in their lifetime , of which approximately 750,000 had done so in that year . The following year , 2007 , saw the annual figure rise from 750,000 to 1 million US users .

Dry leaves can be smoked in a pipe , or through the use of a water pipe to cool the smoke . The temperature required to release salvinorin from the plant material is quite high ( about 240 ° C ) . A cooler flame will work , but the direct application of a more intense flame , such as that of a torch lighter , is often preferred . Some find that untreated dry leaf produces unnoticeable or only light effects . Concentrated preparations or extracts which may be smoked in place of untreated leaves , have become widely available . This enhanced ( or " fortified " ) leaf is described by a number followed by an x ( e.g. 5x , 10x ) , the multiplicative factors being generally indicative of the relative amounts of leaf concentrate , though there is no accepted standard for these claims . Other sources may use a system of color codes to form their own standards of potency ; for example , " green " , " yellow " , and " red . " These grades of potency may be roughly indicative of the relative concentration of the active principle , ( salvinorin A ) , but the measure should not be taken as absolute . Overall extract potency will depend on the ( naturally varying ) strength of the untreated leaf used in preparing the extract , as well as the efficiency of the extraction process itself . Extracts reduce the overall amount of inhalations needed to ingest a given amount of active principle , thus facilitating more powerful experiences .

The traditional method of chewing the leaves has continued in modern use . However , salvinorin A is generally considered to be inactive when orally ingested , as salvinorin A is effectively deactivated by the gastrointestinal system . Therefore , in what 's understood to be a modern innovation , the ' quid ' of leaves is held in the mouth as long as possible in order to facilitate absorption of the active constituents through the oral mucosa . ' Quid ' refers to the fact that at the end of this method the user spits out the leaves rather than swallowing them because ingesting the leaves has no known effect . Chewing consumes more of the plant than smoking , and produces a longer-lasting experience .

Less commonly , some may ingest salvia in the form of a tincture . This is administered sublingually , usually with the aid of a glass dropper . It may be taken diluted with water just before use , which may slightly reduce the intensity of its effects , but can also serve to lessen or avoid a stinging sensation in the mouth caused by the presence of alcohol . Tinctures vary in potency , and the effects can range from inducing a mild meditative state to bringing about a more intense visionary one . When taken as a tincture the effects and duration are similar to other methods of oral ingestion , though they may be significantly more intense , depending on extract potency .

Psychedelic experiences are necessarily somewhat subjective and variations in reported effects are to be expected . Aside from individual reported experiences there has been a limited amount of published work summarising the effects . D.M. Turner 's book Salvinorin — The Psychedelic Essence of Salvia Divinorum quotes Daniel Siebert 's summarisation , mentioning that the effects may include : There also may be synesthetic experiences . Glossolalia ( speaking in tongues ) has been reported by Reason . A survey of salvia users found that 38 % described the effects as unique in comparison to other methods of altering consciousness . 23 % said the effects were like yoga , meditation or trance . One firsthand journalistic account has been published in the UK science magazine New Scientist ( note : the dose for this experience was not reported ) : The salvia took me on a consciousness-expanding journey unlike any other I have ever experienced . My body felt disconnected from ' me ' and objects and people appeared cartoonish , surreal and marvellous . Then , as suddenly as it had began , it was over . The visions vanished and I was back in my bedroom . I spoke to my ' sitter ' — the friend who was watching over me , as recommended on the packaging — but my mouth was awkward and clumsy . When I attempted to stand my coordination was off . Within a couple of minutes , however , I was fine and clear-headed , though dripping with sweat . The whole experience had lasted less than 5 minutes .

There have been few books published on the subject . One notable example is Dale Pendell 's work " Pharmako / Poeia — Plant Powers , Poisons , and Herbcraft " , which won the 1996 Firecracker Alternative Book Award and has a chapter dedicated to Salvia divinorum . It includes some experience accounts : It 's very intense , I call it a reality stutter , or a reality strobing . I think that having been a test pilot , and flying in that unforgiving environment with only two feet between our wingtips , helped to prepare me for this kind of exploration . Other users have written extensive prose and / or poetry about their experiences ; some describe their visions pictorially , and there exist examples of visionary art which are ' salvia-inspired ' . Others claim musical inspiration from the plant : including " Salvia divinorum " by 1200 Micrograms , " Salvia " by Deepwater Sunshine , and " Flight 77 " by Paul Dereas .

Dale Pendell expresses some concerns about the use of highly concentrated forms of salvia . In its natural form salvia is more balanced and benevolent , and quite strong enough , he argues . High strength extracts on the other hand can show " a more precipitous , and more terrifying , face " and many who try it this way may never wish to repeat the experience . The Salvia Divinorum User 's Guide recommends having a trip sitter present to those who are new to salvia , are experimenting with a stronger form , or are using a more effective method of ingestion . The guide says that while the effects of salvia are generally quite different from those of alcohol , like alcohol , it impairs coordination . It also emphasizes that salvia is not a ' party drug.' Salvia is not ' fun ' in the way that alcohol or cannabis can be . If you try to party with salvia you probably will not have a good experience . Salvia is a consciousness-changing herb that can be used in a vision quest , or in a healing ritual . In the right setting , salvia makes it possible to see visions . It is an herb with a long tradition of sacred use . It is useful for deep meditation . It is best taken in a quiet , nearly dark room ; either alone , or with one or two good friends present .

Daniel Siebert cautions that inhaling hot air can be irritating and potentially damaging to the lungs . Vapor produced by a heat gun needs to be cooled by running it through a water pipe or cooling chamber before inhalation . The vaporizers that have been reported effective for use with dried S. divinorum leaves are those that use a paint stripper “ heat gun ” as the heat source . These get very hot , and people have reported that they work quite well sometimes too well — for smoking dried S. divinorum leaves ; we have heard of several people using this type of vaporizer who had experiences that were too intense , including one report of someone passing out . Measuring an accurate dose with these devices can be quite tricky , and they are not recommended . An experienced salvia user who is chewing a quid , may often choose to do it alone , and may be quite safe in doing so . But having a pleasant , sensible , sober sitter is an absolute must if you are trying vaporization , smoking high doses of extract-enhanced leaves , or using pure salvinorin .

Differing studies suggest no consensus so far with regard to the long-term effects of Salvia divinorum on mood . It is well-established that some k-opioid agonists can cause dysphoria in humans . One study using rats in forced-swim tests has been used to suggest that Salvia divinorum may have " depressive-like " effects , although this conclusion has been contradicted by subsequent research . However , a report has been published detailing an individual case of Salvia divinorum use as self-medicated treatment for depression , and Baggott 's survey of 500 people with firsthand experience of salvia found that 25.8 % of respondents reported improved mood and " antidepressant-like effects " lasting 24 hours or longer . Only 4.4 % reported persisting ( 24 hours or more ) negative effects ( most often anxiety ) on at least one occasion . There has been one report of salvia precipitating psychosis . The authors state that they suspect this patient was genetically predisposed to schizophrenia , but their own clinical report shows no family psychiatric history , no personal psychiatric history , and no abnormal lab results . It has been suggested that the long-term effects of salvia use may include feelings of déjà vu .

The Baggott survey found little evidence of addictive potential ( chemical dependence ) in its survey population . 0.6 % percent of respondents reported feeling addicted to or dependent on salvia at some point , and 1.2 % reported strong cravings . About this the researchers said " there were too few of these individuals to interpret their reports with any confidence " . Most users report no hangover or negative after-effects ( e.g. withdrawal , comedown or rebound effect ) the next day . This is consistent with the apparent low toxicity of salvia indicated by research conducted at the University of Nebraska .

Aside from individual reports of self-medicated use in the treatment of depression , research suggests that Salvia divinorum , in line with the studied effects of other κ-opioid agonists , may have further therapeutic potential . Professor Bryan L. Roth , director of the National Institute on Mental Health 's Psychoactive Drug Screening Program , has said : We think that drugs derived from the active ingredient could be useful for a range of diseases : Alzheimer 's , depression , schizophrenia , chronic pain and even AIDS or HIV . There may be some derivatives that could be made that would actually be active against cancer and HIV [ ... ] At the present time , there are a lot of therapeutic targets that have many people excited . An ABC news story which reported on this went on to suggest " the excitement could vanish overnight if the federal government criminalized the sale or possession of salvia , as the Drug Enforcement Agency [ sic ] is considering doing right now . " A proposed Schedule I classification would mean ( among other things ) that there 's no " currently accepted medical use " as far as the United States government is concerned . Scientists worry that such legislation would restrict further work . Mendelsohn said scheduling salvia could scare away a great deal of research and development into salvia 's therapeutic promise .

Interest in Salvia divinorum has been escalating in the news media , particularly in the United States , where an increasing number of newspaper reports have been published and television news stories broadcast . These stories generally raise alarms over salvia 's legal status , for example comparing it to LSD , or describing it as " the new pot " , with parental concerns being raised by particular focus on salvia 's use by younger teens . Story headlines may also include ' danger ' keywords , such as " Dangerous Herb is Legal ... " or " Deadly Dangers Of A Street Legal High " . Mainstream news coverage and journalistic opinion has widely been negative on the subject . In a local news report aired on ABC affiliate WJLA in Washington , DC on July 11 , 2007 , the anchors are seen to exchange expressions of incredulity when referring to a salvia story with the following introduction " Now , an exclusive I-Team investigation of a hallucinogenic drug that has begun to sweep the nation . What might amaze you is that right now the federal government is doing nothing to stop it " . In March 2008 a Texas news report aired with the story " A legal drug that teenagers are now using to get high could soon be banned here in San Antonio - all because of a Fox News 4 investigation " , going on to say , " The drug is legal in Texas , at least for now . But a News 4 investigation could lead to a new ordinance to protect your kids . "

Many salvia media stories headline with comparisons to LSD . However , while LSD and salvinorin A may have comparative potencies , in the sense that both can produce their effects at low dosages , they are otherwise quite different . The two substances are not chemically similar or related , as salvinorin A is found naturally in a single plant while LSD is chemically semisynthesized from lysergamides like ergotamine . They are ingested in different ways and produce different effects , which manifest themselves over different timescales . For example , the effects of salvia when smoked typically last for only a few minutes as compared to LSD , whose effects can persist for 8 – 12 hours .

A particular focus of many US media stories is the long-running coverage of the case of Brett Chidester , a 17-year-old Delaware student who committed suicide in January 2006 by carbon monoxide poisoning . Reportedly , some months before this , Brett 's mother Kathleen Chidester had learned about his salvia use and questioned him about it . Brett said that he had ceased his experimentation , but his parents did not believe that he was telling the truth . They have instead argued that salvia-induced depression was largely to blame for his death . Some of Brett 's earlier writings about his salvia experiences have been used to suggest that it made him think " existence in general is pointless . " Some media stories have referred to these earlier written experience reports as if they were part of Brett 's suicide note . In any case , a law was soon passed in Delaware classifying the herb as a Schedule I controlled substance in that state . This legislation was nicknamed Brett 's law ( formally referred to as Senate bill 259 ) . Although the Chidester story has been given continued exposure by US media , there has not been anywhere else , either before or since this controversial incident , any other reported cases involving or alleging Salvia divinorum as a serious factor in suicide , overdose , accidental , or any other kind of death . Regarding this , San Francisco attorney Alex Coolman has commented , " It 's remarkable that Chidester 's parents , and only Chidester 's parents , continue to be cited over and over again by the mainstream media in their coverage of the supposed ' controversy ' over the risks of Salvia divinorum . "

A reported concern has been the emergence of YouTube videos showing alleged salvia users laughing uncontrollably , apparently unable to perform simple tasks or to communicate . In an interview with California-based newspaper the San Francisco Chronicle , published in June 2007 , Daniel Siebert was quoted as saying : " Those videos are certainly not going to help the situation . They make salvia look like some horrible drug that makes people nuts and dangerous [ ... ] " and " The sad thing is it creates this public image where people don 't realize there are sensible ways to use something like this . " The New York Times has reported that " in state after state [ ... ] the YouTube videos have become Exhibit A in legislative efforts to regulate salvia . " Waco Representative Charles Anderson ( R ) , who is sponsoring one of several bills to ban salvia in Texas saying , " When you see it , well , it sure makes a believer out of you . " Anderson told colleagues at a legislative hearing about a video that depicts a salvia user behind the wheel of a car . " What we really worry about , " said Mr. Anderson at the hearing , " is youngsters doing this and then getting in a vehicle or getting on a motorcycle or jumping in a pool somewhere . "

Michigan Representative Michael Sak ( D ) submitted a bill which proposed Schedule I classification of Salvia divinorum and salvinorin A. He said that if people had questions about the deleterious effects of salvia , they should go on YouTube to watch the videos . A reporter questioned Sak as to whether he had ever seen a " Girls Gone Wild " video , and whether that would incite him to make alcohol illegal ( Sak replied that he hadn 't yet had a chance to review the material ) . " Anytime anything 's on YouTube it 's an issue , " and " Legislators , parents , grandparents , we need to be on top of these things , " [ ... ] " We need to protect our children ... " Senator McDonald of Nebraska proposed Schedule I listing Salvia divinorum as part of their Controlled Substances Act , under which possession of salvia would have been considered a Class IV felony with a penalty of up to five years and trafficking would have fallen under a Class III felony with up to a 20 year penalty . In Massachusetts , YouTube videos were shown by a retired police officer to public health and judiciary committees as evidence in favor of outlawing it there .

At present Salvia divinorum remains legal in most countries . Countries where it is controlled in some manner include : Belgium , Canada , Denmark , Estonia , Italy , Japan , the United States , Russia , Spain , Sweden , Finland , and Romania . The prohibitive degree of Salvia divinorum legislation varies widely from country to country . Australia has imposed its strictest ' schedule 9 ' ( US Schedule I equivalent ) , and Italy has also placed salvia in its ' Table I ' of controlled substances ( also US Schedule I equivalent ) . In Spain , there are controls focusing only on the commercial trade of Salvia divinorum , personal cultivation ( i.e. for non-commercial use ) is not targeted . Legislation may prove difficult to enforce . The plant has a nondescript appearance ; unlike many other drug plants , the leaves are non-descript , and without a detectable odour . Salvia divinorum can be grown as an ordinary houseplant without the need of special equipment such as hydroponics or high-power lights .

National legislation for amendment of the Controlled Substances Act to place salvinorin A and Salvia divinorum in Schedule I at the federal level in the United States was proposed in 2002 by Representative Joe Baca ( D- California ) . Those opposed to bill HR 5607 include Daniel Siebert , who sent a letter to Congress arguing against the proposed legislation , and the Center for Cognitive Liberty and Ethics ( CCLE ) , who sent key members of the US Congress a report on Salvia divinorum and its active principle , along with letters from an array of scientists who expressed concern that scheduling Salvia divinorum would negatively impact important research on the plant . The bill did not pass . Although salvia is not regulated under the Controlled Substances Act , some American states , including Alabama , Delaware , Illinois , Louisiana , Michigan , Missouri , Ohio , Texas and others , have passed their own laws . Several other states have proposed legislation against salvia , including Alaska , California , Florida , Iowa , Maryland , New Jersey , New York , Oregon , and Pennsylvania . Many of these proposals have not made it into law , with motions having failed , stalled or otherwise died , for example at committee review stages .

Concerns expressed by some politicians on the subject of salvia reflect those of the media , with comparisons to LSD and particular focus on " protecting our children " being echoed ; and with legislative proposals following soon after news stories breaking . Some arguments against salvia have been of a preventative nature , " We need to stop this before it gets to be a huge problem not after it gets to be a huge problem , " or of an imitative nature , " The Australians have clearly found a problem with it . There 's obviously a risk in people taking it . " Concerns about driving while under the influence of salvia have also been expressed . Opponents of more prohibitive measures against salvia argue that such reactions are largely due to an inherent prejudice and a particular cultural bias rather than any actual balance of evidence , pointing out inconsistencies in attitudes toward other more toxic and addictive drugs such as alcohol and nicotine . While not objecting to some form of legal control , in particular with regard to the sale to minors or sale of enhanced high-strength extracts , most salvia proponents otherwise argue against stricter legislation .

New York State Route 251 ( NY 251 ) is an east – west state highway in western New York in the United States . It extends for 17.79 miles ( 28.63 km ) from NY 383 in Scottsville , Monroe County , to NY 96 in the town of Victor , Ontario County . NY 251 connects to Interstate 390 ( I-390 ) in Rush and serves the village of Honeoye Falls ( via NY 65 ) and the hamlet of Mendon within the town of the same name . The route , a two-lane , rural highway for much of its length , also intersects NY 15 and NY 64 , two north – south highways leading to the Southern Tier and the Finger Lakes , respectively . Two sections of the route — from south of Scottsville to Rush and from Mendon to western Victor — follow linear east – west alignments . All but 3 miles ( 5 km ) of the route are located in Monroe County . From 1911 to 1921 , the north – south section of modern NY 251 near Scottsville was part of Route 15 , an unsigned legislative route assigned by the New York State Legislature . The first portion of what is now NY 251 to receive a posted designation was the segment east of NY 64 in Mendon , which was part of the signed NY 15 from 1924 to 1930 . In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , NY 251 was assigned to an alignment extending from Gates to Victor via Scottsville , utilizing modern NY 386 north of Scottsville and its current alignment east of the village . NY 251 was truncated to begin at NY 383 in Scottsville in the late 1970s , at which time the former routing of NY 251 between Scottsville and Gates became part of an extended NY 386 .

NY 251 begins at an intersection with NY 383 in the center of the village of Scottsville , located within the town of Wheatland . It departs Scottsville to the south as River Road and crosses over Oatka Creek before meeting Quaker Road at a rural intersection just south of the village . While River Road continues southward as the unsigned NY 940H , NY 251 turns east to begin its east – west trek across the mostly undeveloped southern portion of Monroe County . After roughly 0.5 miles ( 0.8 km ) , it crosses over the Genesee River and into the town of Rush , becoming Rush – Scottsville Road in the process . Just inside the town line , NY 251 passes through the hamlet of Industry , a location centered around NY 251 's grade crossing with the Livonia , Avon and Lakeville Railroad and the adjacent Rochester & Genesee Valley Railroad Museum . Midway through the town of Rush , NY 251 widens from two to four lanes and meets I-390 at exit 11 . Just east of the freeway , NY 251 intersects NY 15 , which is also served by exit 11 by way of a pair of short collector / distributor roads paralleling I-390 from NY 251 to NY 15 . Past NY 15 , the route reverts to a two-lane highway and veers southeast to parallel Honeoye Creek into the hamlet of Rush . Here , the route passes through a more populated area as it intersects NY 15A in the center of the community , at which point it becomes Rush – Mendon Road . NY 251 continues to follow Honeoye Creek through progressively less developed areas and into the town of Mendon , where the creek curves southward toward Honeoye Falls at Rochester Junction . The highway , however , turns northeastward to meet NY 65 at a roundabout . The northeasterly routing of NY 251 continues to Mendon Center , a small hamlet near the southern tip of Mendon Ponds Park , where it turns eastward once more .

NY 251 continues across open fields to the densely populated hamlet of Mendon , where it has a junction with NY 64 in the center of the community . East of the junction , NY 251 becomes Victor – Mendon Road as it heads out of Mendon . About 0.5 miles ( 0.8 km ) from NY 64 , the open surroundings return as the route crosses into the Ontario County town of Victor . NY 251 continues on a virtual east – west line for its first 1.5 miles ( 2.4 km ) in the county , heading through slightly more developed but still sparsely populated areas . At Phillips Road , the route curves southeastward for 1 mile ( 1.6 km ) before making one final turn to the northeast . On this last stretch , NY 251 crosses the Ontario Central Railroad at a grade crossing and ends at a junction with NY 96 northwest of the village of Victor .

The westernmost portion of what is now NY 251 between NY 383 in Scottsville and the junction of River and Quaker Roads south of the village was once part of Route 15 , an unsigned legislative route assigned by the New York State Legislature . Route 15 was extended northward from its original terminus in Caledonia to Scottsville via River Road on July 24 , 1911 ; however , it was realigned on March 1 , 1921 , to enter Scottsville on modern NY 383 instead . When the first set of posted routes were assigned in New York in 1924 , this piece of modern NY 251 did not receive a designation . Another section did , however , as the portion extending from Mendon east to Victor was designated as part of NY 15 . In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , NY 15 was rerouted between Victor and Pittsford to follow current NY 96 . The former routing of NY 15 from Victor to Mendon became part of NY 251 , a new highway extending from NY 15 in Victor to NY 33 in Gates via Chili and Scottsville . West of Scottsville , NY 251 was routed on modern NY 383 and NY 386 .

From 1930 to c . 1938 , the River Road section of NY 251 overlapped with NY 35 , which initially entered Monroe County on the former routing of legislative Route 15 and continued north to Rochester on current NY 383 . The southwestern end of NY 35 was moved to Mumford c . 1938 , shifting the location of the overlap to Main Street in Scottsville . The concurrency was replaced with one with NY 383 when it supplanted most of NY 35 in the early 1940s . In the late 1970s , NY 251 was truncated to begin at the eastern end of its overlap with NY 383 in Scottsville . The former routing of NY 251 from the west end of the concurrency in Scottsville to Gates became an extension of NY 386 , which was a simple connector in northern Gates and southern Greece prior to the change .

Tropical Storm Lester was a weak tropical storm that paralleled the Mexican coastline in October 2004 . The 16th tropical cyclone and 12th named storm of the 2004 Pacific hurricane season , Lester originated from an area of disturbed weather that persisted southwest of the Gulf of Tehuantepec . After organizing , the system was designated as a tropical depression on October 11 . The depression was upgraded to a tropical storm the next day , and moved northwestward , just off the Mexican coastline . Due to the interaction with land among other factors , the storm degenerated on October 13 . The storm dropped locally heavy rainfall , which caused minor flooding and mudslides . No fatalities or significant damage were reported .

By October 10 , 2004 , an area of disturbed weather was situated well to the southwest of the Gulf of Tehuantepec . Later that day , a surface low pressure system developed , and convection began to organize into slightly curved bands . The disturbance continued to in this manner , and at 1800 UTC on October 11 , the low level circulation had become sufficiently organized to be designated as a tropical depression . At the time , the depression consisted of a well-defined circulation , with some deep thunderstorm activity . Despite weak steering currents , the system started what was initially thought to be a westward drift , though just a few hours later was found to be towards the northwest . A small cyclone , a burst of deep convection formed at around the same time , and was said could have produced tropical storm-force winds . Continuing its slow , northwestward track under the weal steering currents of a weak mid-level ridge to its north , and a broad cyclonic circulation to its southwest , it was upgraded to Tropical Storm Lester at 1800 UTC on October 12 . Originally , it was unclear whether the center of circulation would remain slightly offshore , or move inland . Due to the presence of a weak upper-level anticyclone that was centered just east of the system , favorable atmospheric conditions for strengthening prevailed , and the storm reached its peak intensity with winds of 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) about 6 – 12 hours after being upgraded to a tropical storm . Early on October 13 , radar imagery from Acapulco , Mexico indicated that Lester remained a small and well-organized cyclone as it passed just offshore . At the same time , light southwesterly wind shear began to develop . The interaction with land , combined with influence from the low to the southwest , started to weaken the storm , and it was downgraded to a tropical depression at 1200 UTC on October 13 . By later that day , reports from an Air Force Reserve Unit Hurricane Hunter Aircraft indicated that the cyclone had degenerated into a trough on the northeastern side of the larger low to the southwest .

On October 12 , in response to Lester , the Mexican government issued a tropical storm watch for the coast between Punta Maldonado to Zihuatanejo . It was upgraded to a warning later that day . It was extended to Lázaro Cárdenas on October 13 . Later that day , the warning was lifted when Lester dissipated . Lester brought rains to parts of Oaxaca and Guerrero , reaching 3 to 5 inches ( 76 to 127 mm ) . The highest 24-hour total peaked at 106.5 mm ( 4.19 in ) , recorded on October 12 . Localized flooding was likely caused by the storm , though no reports of deaths were received by the National Hurricane Center . However , the storm capsized two ships , and washed two more ashore . The heavy rain caused mudslides , which buried one man in his home ; he was later rescued by his family . In and around the port of Acapulco , about 14 trees were downed , and minor pooling of water was reported .

Tvrđa ( Citadel ) is the Old Town of the city of Osijek in Croatia . It is the best-preserved and largest ensemble of Baroque buildings in Croatia and consists of a Habsburg star fort built on the right bank of the River Drava . Tvrđa has been described by the World Monuments Fund as " a unique example of an eighteenth-century baroque military , administrative , and commercial urban center " . The star fort was constructed in the immediate vicinity of medieval Osijek after the defeat of the Ottoman forces in 1687 , due to Osijek 's strategic importance . Constructed starting in 1712 to plans by Mathias von Kaiserfeld and then Maximilian Gosseau de Henef , all five planned bastions and two gates were complete by 1715 . By 1735 , the inner town was finished and three northern bastions had been added . When complete , it was the largest and most advanced Habsburg fortress on the border with the Ottoman Empire , consisting of eight bastions and featuring armories , depots , a garrison headquarters , military court , construction office , a garrison physician , guardhouse , officers ' apartments , a military hospital and seven barracks . The completed fort was entirely surrounded with walls and palisades and had four main gates at each side ( north , south , east , west ) . Tvrđa had street lights by 1717 and was the site of the first public water supply in Croatia , opened in 1751 .

Tvrđa 's military importance decreased after the Berlin Congress of 1878 , with the increasing stability of the surrounding region . Most of the fort walls and fortifications were destroyed in the 1920s due to the obstacle they presented to the development of Osijek . While the fortifications have largely been removed , the fort 's interior core remains intact and is now home to churches , museums , schools and other public buildings , as well as numerous bars and restaurants . Of the fortification system , only the northern side of the walls now remain intact , as well as parts of the first and eighth bastions along with the northern gate known as the ' water gate ' ( ' vodena vrata ' ) . Tvrđa sustained significant damage during the Croatian War of Independence during the 1990s and was featured on the 1996 World Monuments Watch List of Most Endangered Sites . It now features on Croatia 's ' tentative list ' for consideration as a nominee for a World Heritage Site .

The new name of Osijek first appeared in 1196 . The center of medieval Osijek was on the banks of the River Drava where Tvrđa now stands . The town was a trade and port settlement from the early 12th century due to its position on the way from Pécs and Buda southwards . The site was home to the Romanesque church of the Holy Trinity . Between 1526 and 1687 Osijek was ruled by the Ottomans , who did not change the layout of the settlement in any substantial way but introduced Islamic places of worship , giving the area an Oriental appearance . Traces of medieval and Ottoman towns remain to this day , including a remnant of the old Ottoman fortress wall , known today as the " Turkish Wall " ( Turski zid ) or " Filibey 's Fort " ( Filibejeva utvrda ) , lying next to the Tvrđa access road . During the Ottoman period , Osijek was internationally known because of the Suleiman Bridge . The construction of the bridge was begun by İbrahim Pasha on 16 August 1526 following the orders of Suleiman the Magnificent . The bridge , which connected Osijek and Darda , took the form of a wooden road on piers and was approximately 7 kilometres ( 4.3 mi ) long and 6 metres ( 20 ft ) wide . Seen as a great threat to Christian Europe the bridge was attacked several times , being destroyed in 1664 , when it was set on fire on the orders of Croatian feudal lord Nicholas VII of Zrin ( Croatian : Nikola VII . Zrinski , Hungarian : VII . Zrínyi Miklós ) . The bridge was rebuilt during the rule of Suleiman II . Finally , it was burned down by the Habsburg armies in 1686 .

Development of the military settlement at Tvrđa started in 1687 when the Habsburg armies drove the Ottomans out of the city during the Great Turkish War . The chief commander of the Imperial army , Louis William , Margrave of Baden-Baden , saw Osijek as a location of exceptional strategic importance in the war against the Ottomans . He urged the repair of the city walls , and proposed construction of a new fort according to Vauban 's principles of military engineering . The town magistrate was established in 1690 , while the plans for the new fort were still being drawn up , and one of its documents from August of the same year described the condition of the settlement as " ruinous " . Two months later , on 29 October , the Ottoman army suddenly attacked . The attack was repulsed only thanks to a well-organised defense , and the Turks withdrew on 6 November , after a brief siege . The event was a clear lesson that the construction of the fort must not be delayed any further . The first phase of Tvrđa 's conversion into a Baroque fortress was based on the plan devised by the engineer Mathias von Kaiserfeld from 1691 .

The original plan for Tvrđa was drafted because of the need to reinforce the town walls , but did not include provisions to redesign the interior and envisaged largely uncontrolled development . New plans for a fort on the right bank of the River Drava were drawn up by Maximilian Gosseau de Henef . Gosseau took over planning of the fort when construction was already under way . Starting in August 1712 , Austrian engineers , supervised by the fort 's commander , General Johann Stephan von Beckers , built barracks , staff headquarters , churches and monasteries , surrounded by system of moats , bastions and gun positions , respecting Gosseau 's design . The design followed the model of lowland Dutch military fortifications of the period . By 1715 , all five planned bastions and two gates were complete . An additional , western , gate leading to the Upper Town was added in 1716 . The construction of the outwork on the opposite bank of the River Drava , designed to offer protection from the north and to serve as a bridgehead , was completed by 1721 . The final , fourth gate , leading to the Lower Town , was not added until 1783 . Construction of the inner town was completed by 1733 , and in 1735 three additional northern bastions were completed , along with a post office , the fort 's construction office and a hospital . The completed fort had " eight bastions , two armories , two major depots , garrison headquarters , military court , construction office , garrison physician , guardhouse , officer apartments , military hospital and seven barracks " . Based on the ' ring model ' , the fortifications took up an area of 80 hectares ( 200 acres ) , making Tvrđa the largest fortress on the border with the Ottoman Empire .

Gosseau 's plan left space for churches to be built where mosques had once stood . Initially , converted mosques were used as churches , but Franciscans started to build a Baroque church in 1709 and it was consecrated in 1732 . A Franciscan monastery was built between 1699 and 1705 , with a new wing being added between 1731 and 1733 , which subsequently became a new monastery in 1761 . In 1725 , the Jesuits commenced construction of the parish church of St. Michael ( Croatian : Sveti Mihovil ) , following the construction of their own monastery . This church was in use after 1734 , despite being incomplete . A Holy Trinity column was erected in the fort 's main square in 1730 as a plague monument featuring volutes with pedestals on which four protectors against the plague are placed . Four additional pedestals were added to the monument in 1784 , each featuring a statue of a saint . Tvrđa had street lighting as early as 1717 . The first system to supply public water in Croatia was opened in Tvrđa in 1751 . In the mid-18th century there were reportedly more than 35 inns in Tvrđa , estimated to an account for one in three of the fort 's buildings . Crown prince Joseph stayed in one of the inns when visiting Osijek . In 1786 , as Joseph II , he decreed the merger of the Upper Town , Lower Town and Tvrđa into one single town council .

As early as the second half of the 18th century there was little or no new constructions taking place in Tvrđa , and even maintenance of the fort became a burden . In 1809 Osijek was granted free royal town status . Osijek 's council was accommodated in a building at the south-eastern corner of Tvrđa 's main square . Tvrđa 's military importance decreased after the Berlin Congress of 1878 as a result of increasing political and military stability in the region . Two north-western bastions were demolished in the 1870s , making way for Ambrose 's Park ( Croatian : Ambrozijev perivoj ) . Construction of the Royal Grammar School started in 1881 , and the Royal General Secondary School was completed in 1890 . Episcopal seminary was also built in the south-western corner of the main square in 1898 . These were the only buildings erected within Tvrđa walls in the last three decades of the 19th century . As Osijek grew as a city , the fort 's presence hindered the potential for urban development . The demolition of most of the fort walls happened between 1923 and 1926 , with the construction of an electric tramway . The last gunpowder magazine , located behind the church of St. Michael , was demolished in 1958 . While most of the fortifications have been demolished ( only the first and eighth bastions and the northern wall with its so-called ' water gate ' were kept ) , the center of Tvrđa remains intact . The Yugoslav People 's Army maintained a garrison and a military hospital in Tvrđa , but in the 1980s these buildings were gradually being abandoned , and adapted into ateliers for local painters and sculptors .

After the fortress 's military importance decreased at the end of the 19th century , Tvrđa became a center of administrative , educational , cultural , and scholarly life in Osijek and the entire region . The first school in Osijek was organized at Tvrđa ; the first scholarly curriculum was introduced in 1707 , to be later expanded and renewed , and the first printing press started working in 1735 . The significance of educational institutions of Tvrđa are best underlined by the fact that Croatian Nobel Prize laureates , Lavoslav Ružička and Vladimir Prelog , along with Serbian scientist Milutin Milanković ( Milankovitch cycles ) , were all alumni ( graduates ) of the Tvrđa schools . The Faculty of Agriculture of the Josip Juraj Strossmayer University of Osijek has occupied the former general headquarters since 1995 after its previous site was destroyed in the Croatian War of Independence . The Faculty of Food Technology has been relocated to a building that served as the first military hospital in Osijek , from the mid-17th century until the beginning of the 1990s . Other present-day educational institutions in Tvrđa include the II and the III Gymnasium , Franjo Kuhač Music School ( former Roman Catholic Seminary ) , Jesuit Classical Gymnasium ( former logistics barracks built in the mid-18th century ) , and the Secondary School of Economics ( former grammar school for girls ) .

According to the 2001 census , within the Tvrđa city district , there are 10,277 inhabitants living in 3,310 households . The fort interior is now a centre of Osijek 's nightlife . There are numerous bars and restaurants in Tvrđa . The fort hosts the Museum of Slavonia , the largest general-type museum in Croatia , located in Tvrđa since 1946 . The former town museum and archives building today houses the State Directorate for Monument Protection , a department of the Croatian Ministry of Culture . The patron saint of the Tvrđa is Saint Michael , and his feast day of September 29 is celebrated as the day of the Tvrđa city district .

" I have seen many European towns , but have never found an identical development whereby an existing urban nucleus was turned into a fortification , or a similar town-planning solution " . The World Monuments Fund has described Tvrđa as " a unique example of an eighteenth-century baroque military , administrative , and commercial urban center " . Tvrđa is on Croatia 's ' Tentative List ' for consideration as nominee for the World Heritage Site . During the 1991 – 95 conflict in Croatia , 90 per cent of the buildings in Tvrđa were damaged to some extent and the fort was featured on the 1996 World Monuments Watch List of Most Endangered Sites . It has not appeared on the list , published every two years , since . The building of the general headquarters , dating from 1726 , and the ground plan of the fortress are depicted on the reverse of the Croatian 200 kuna banknote , issued in 1993 and 2002 . The Agency for Restoration of Osijek Tvrđa ( Croatian : Agencija za obnovu osječke Tvrđe ) was established in 1999 . Its stated goals are protection , restoration and revitalization of Tvrđa . The restoration process aims to preserve architectural , historical and aesthetic qualities of Tvrđa in full accordance with the restoration principles set by the International Council on Monuments and Sites , while maintaining its multifunctional character . International cooperation is also envisioned , in particular with the Council of Europe . The Agency is jointly funded by the Government of Croatia , Osijek-Baranja County and the City of Osijek .

The bigeye thresher ( Alopias superciliosus ) is a species of thresher shark , family Alopiidae , found in temperate and tropical oceans worldwide . Like other thresher sharks , nearly half its total length consists of the elongated upper lobe of the tail fin . Its common name comes from its enormous eyes , which are placed in keyhole-shaped sockets that allow them to be rotated upward . This species can also be distinguished by a pair of deep grooves on the top of its head , from which its scientific name is derived . The large eyes of the bigeye thresher are adapted for hunting in low light conditions . It is one of the few sharks that conduct a diel vertical migration , staying in deep water during the day and moving into surface waters at night to feed . To protect its sensitive brain and eyes from the temperature changes accompanying these movements , the bigeye thresher has a vascular exchange system called the rete mirabile around those organs . This species feeds mainly on fish and squid , which are stunned via whip-like strikes of the long tail . Bigeye threshers are ovoviviparous , usually bearing litters of two pups . The embryos are oophagous and feed on ova produced by the mother while inside the uterus . This shark is caught by commercial fisheries across its range ; the meat is not highly regarded but the skin , fins , and liver oil are valued . It has been assessed as Vulnerable by the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) .

British biologist Richard Thomas Lowe was the first to scientifically describe the bigeye thresher , in papers published in Proceedings of the Royal Society of London ( 1840 ) and Transactions of the Zoological Society of London ( 1849 , sometimes given as 1839 ) . He based his description on a specimen caught off Madeira in the eastern Atlantic Ocean . However , Lowe 's description was subsequently overlooked by researchers and this species was known by different names until the 1940s , when new specimens from Cuba and Florida prompted its original scientific name to be resurrected . The specific epithet superciliosus is from the Latin super meaning " above " , and ciliosus meaning " eyebrow " , referring to the distinct lateral grooves above the eyes . An allozyme analysis conducted by Blaise Eitner in 1995 showed that the closest relative of the bigeye thresher is the pelagic thresher ( A. pelagicus ) , with which it forms a clade . Fossil remains of the bigeye thresher dating to the Middle Miocene ( 16.0 – 11.6 Ma ) have been found in the Hokuriku region of Japan .

The bigeye thresher has a virtually circumtropical distribution . In the western Atlantic Ocean , it has been reported from New York to Florida , the Bahamas , Cuba , Venezuela , Tobago and southern Brazil . In the eastern Atlantic , it is known from Portugal , Madeira , Senegal , Guinea to Sierra Leone , Angola , and the Mediterranean Sea . In the western Indian Ocean , it occurs off South Africa , Madagascar , and the Arabian Sea . In the Pacific Ocean , it is known from southern Japan , Taiwan , New Caledonia , northwestern Australia , and New Zealand , and eastward to Hawaii , southern California , the Gulf of California , and west of the Galapagos Islands . Analysis of mitochondrial DNA has shown that Atlantic and Indo-Pacific populations are somewhat genetically divergent from each other . Bigeye threshers are usually found over the continental shelf and in the open sea , though they are occasionally encountered in shallow coastal waters . They occur in surface temperatures of 16 – 25 ° C ( 61 – 77 ° F ) , but have been tracked as far down as 723 m ( 2,372 ft ) , where the temperature is only 5 ° C ( 41 ° F ) . Little is known of their geographical movements ; one individual has been documented moving from New York to the Gulf of Mexico , a straight-line distance of 2,767 km ( 1,719 mi ) .

The eyes of the bigeye thresher can measure up to 10 cm ( 3.9 in ) across in adults . Each eye is taller than wide , with a bulbous upper portion . The orbits extend onto the dorsal surface of the head , allowing the eyes to orient upwards . There are also a pair of distinctive lateral grooves that extend from above the eyes to over the gill slits , giving it a " helmet " -like appearance . The snout is moderately long and bulbous , and there are no labial furrows at the corners of the mouth . The teeth are moderately large with a single , narrow cusp . There are 19 – 24 teeth in the upper jaw and 20 – 24 teeth in the lower jaw ; their shapes are similar in both jaws . There are large and small dermal denticles , with the smaller ones more numerous and interspersed amongst the larger ones . The smaller denticles taper to a point . Up to half the body length is taken up by the long upper lobe of the caudal fin , which is broader than in other threshers . The large pectoral fins have a curved anterior margin and broad tips . The first dorsal fin is placed further back than in the other thresher sharks , with the free rear tip located above or just before the pelvic fins . Its coloration is a deep , metallic violet to purplish brown above and creamy white below . This color rapidly fades to a dull gray after death . Most bigeye threshers are 3.3 – 4.0 m ( 10.8 – 13.1 ft ) long and weigh 160 kg ( 350 lb ) . The largest known bigeye thresher measured 4.9 m ( 16 ft ) long and weighed 364 kg ( 802 lb ) , and was caught near Tutukaka , New Zealand , in February 1981 .

The size and upward orientation of the bigeye thresher 's eyes are adapted to search for the silhouettes of prey in dim light . This species is one of a handful of shark species that conducts a diel vertical migration , spending daytime in deeper water between 300 – 500 m ( 980 – 1,640 ft ) , beneath the thermocline where the temperature ranges from 6 to 12 ° C ( 43 to 54 ° F ) , and ascending above it to water less than 100 m ( 330 ft ) deep during nighttime . This migration likely relates to finding prey at night and avoiding predators during the day . The sharks ' daytime swimming patterns are usually steady , while at night they have a pattern of slow ascents and rapid descents . Bigeye threshers are likely preyed upon by larger sharks and marine mammals . Known parasites of the bigeye thresher include the copepod Pagina tunica , and the tapeworm Litobothrium janovyi . Sea lampreys ( Petromyzon marinus ) have been seen attached near the cloaca of this shark . The bigeye thresher appears to be an ecological competitor of the blue shark ( Prionace glauca ) , and the numbers of the two species are negatively correlated such as that only one of two occurs in any given location .

The bigeye thresher has larger teeth than other threshers and feeds on a wider variety of prey . Known food items include schooling forage fish such as mackerel and herring , benthic fishes such as hake and whiting , larger pelagic fishes such as lancetfish and small billfish , squid such as lycoteuthids and ommastrephids , and possibly crab megalopae . They likely use their long tails to stun their prey prior to capture , as they are often found hooked by their tails on longlines and with the bait fish in their stomachs . The shape of their eye sockets give them binocular vision in an upward direction to better aim their strikes . In the Mediterranean , they are strongly associated with schools of frigate mackerel ( Auxis rochei ) , suggesting that these sharks follow concentrations of their prey from place to place . It is said that the bigeye thresher uses its long tail to smack down birds .

Like other mackerel sharks , bigeye threshers are ovoviviparous and bear litters of two pups , one in each uterus . Very rarely , the litter size may be one , three , or four . There is no defined breeding season and most adult females are pregnant throughout the year without any apparent lag time between pregnancies . The gestation period is unknown . The developing fetuses are initially nourished by a yolk sac , and later on exhibit oophagy , in which they consume infertile eggs produced by their mother ( and possibly also uterine fluid ) . There is no evidence of sibling cannibalism as in the sand tiger shark ( Carcharias taurus ) . Unborn embryos are similar in appearance to adults , with proportionally larger heads and eyes . They are covered with a thin layer of epithelium that prevents the uterine wall from being abraded by the embryo 's sharp dermal denticles ; this has not been observed in the young of other thresher sharks . The young measure 1.35 – 1.4 m ( 4.4 – 4.6 ft ) long at birth . Males mature at a length around 2.7 – 2.9 m ( 8.9 – 9.5 ft ) and at an age of 9 – 10 years , while females mature at a length around 3.3 – 3.6 m ( 11 – 12 ft ) and at an age of 12 – 14 years . The maximum lifespan of this species is believed to be 19 years for a male and 20 years for a female . A female bigeye thresher is estimated to produce only 20 young over her entire life .

There is conflicting evidence on whether the bigeye thresher is warm-bodied like the common thresher ( A. vulpinus ) . In a 1971 study , Carey et al. probed the swimming muscles of two bigeye threshers with a thermistor needle and reported finding a temperature elevation of 1.8 and 4.3 ° C ( 3.8 and 9.1 ° F ) compared to the ambient environment . However , an anatomical examination conducted by Sepulveda et al. in 2005 found that though the bigeye thresher possesses the aerobic red muscles responsible for generating heat in the common thresher , these muscles are arranged in two strips along the flanks just beneath the skin , as opposed to near the core of the body . There is also no blood vessel countercurrent exchange system ( the rete mirabile ) in the trunk to limit the loss of metabolic heat to the water . Based on these differences , the authors questioned earlier measurements and concluded it was unlikely that the bigeye thresher maintains an elevated body temperature . The bigeye thresher does possess a highly developed rete system around its brain and eyes . This is thought to function in buffering those sensitive organs against temperature changes during the shark 's daily migrations up and down the water column , which can be as much as 15 – 16 ° C ( 27 – 29 ° F ) .

The bigeye thresher shark is rarely encountered by divers underwater and poses no danger . This species is or was taken by longline fisheries operated by many countries , including the United States , Japan , Spain , Brazil , Uruguay , and Mexico , and constitutes about 10 % of the pelagic shark catch . The bigeye thresher comprises 20 % of the longline catch off Cuba , where it is attracted at night using cyalume sticks ( chemical lights ) . It is also significant to Taiwanese fisheries , which land about 220 metric tons annually . The meat is marketed fresh , smoked , or dried and salted , though it is not highly regarded due to its mushy texture . The skin is used to make leather products , the liver oil for vitamins , and the fins for shark fin soup . In the waters of the United States , this species is considered a nuisance bycatch of longlines , gillnets , and trawls . It is also occasionally caught in shark nets around beaches in South Africa . Along with the other thresher species , the bigeye thresher is listed as a game fish by the International Game Fish Association ( IGFA ) , and is pursued by recreational anglers off the United States , South Africa , and New Zealand . The bigeye thresher is highly susceptible to over-exploitation due to its low lifetime fecundity . All three thesher shark species were assessed as Vulnerable by the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) in 2007 .

Daring was ordered on 2 February 1931 under the 1930 Naval Estimates , and was laid down at John I Thornycroft 's yard at Woolston , Southampton on 18 June 1931 . She was launched on 7 April 1932 and completed on 25 November 1932 , at a total cost of £ 225,536 , excluding equipment supplied by the Admiralty , such as weapons , ammunition and wireless equipment . The ship was initially assigned to the 1st Destroyer Flotilla in the Mediterranean and made a brief deployment to the Persian Gulf and Red Sea in September – October 1933 . Lord Louis Mountbatten assumed command on 29 April 1934 , and Daring was given a refit at Sheerness Dockyard from 3 September to 24 October to prepare the ship for service on the China Station . In December 1934 she sailed to join the 8th Destroyer Flotilla in the Far East and served there until the outbreak of war . Upon the ship 's arrival at Singapore , Lord Mountbatten was transferred to command HMS Wishart and Commander Geoffrey Barnard assumed command . The ship and her sisters Duncan , Diana , and Dainty were transferred to the Mediterranean Fleet shortly before World War II began in September 1939 . Daring was kept in the Red Sea for escort and patrol work until November 1939 . She was overhauled in Malta from 25 November to 20 December . The ship escorted the Union-Castle Line ocean liner SS Dunnottar Castle to Belfast in early 1940 and was under repair at Portsmouth until 25 January . Daring joined the 3rd Destroyer Flotilla in Scapa Flow on 10 February 1940 for escort duties . While escorting Convoy HN12 from Norway , she was torpedoed on 18 February in position 58 ° 39 ′ N 01 ° 40 ′ W by U-23 , under the command of Otto Kretschmer . Daring capsized and sank very quickly after having her stern blown off ; 157 of the ship 's company were lost . The five survivors were rescued by the submarine HMS Thistle , which had witnessed the attack .

The Kaga Rebellion or Chōkyō Uprising was a large-scale revolt in Kaga Province ( present-day southern Ishikawa Prefecture ) , Japan , in late 1487 through 1488 . Togashi Masachika , who ruled Kaga Province as shugo , had been restored to power in 1473 with aid from the Asakura clan as well as the Ikkō-ikki , a loose collection of lesser nobility , monks , and farmers . By 1474 , however , the Ikkō-ikki grew discontent with Masachika , and launched some initial revolts , which were easily quelled . In 1487 , when Masachika left on a military campaign , between one hundred thousand and two hundred thousand Ikkō-ikki revolted . Masachika returned with his army , but the Ikkō-ikki , backed by several disaffected vassal families , overwhelmed his army and surrounded him in his palace , where he committed seppuku . The former vassals of Masachika granted the position of shugo to Masachika 's uncle Yasutaka , but over the next several decades the Ikkō-ikki increased their political hold on the province , which they would effectively control for almost a century .

During the 15th century in Japan , peasant revolts , known as ikki , became much more commonplace . During the turmoil of the Ōnin War ( 1467 – 1477 ) and subsequent years , these rebellions increased in both frequency and success . Many of these rebels became known as Ikkō-ikki , a collection of peasant farmers , Buddhist monks , Shinto priests , and jizamurai ( lesser nobles ) who all espoused belief in the Jōdo Shinshū sect of Buddhism . Rennyo , the Hongan-ji abbot who led the Jōdo Shinshū movement , attracted a large following in Kaga and Echizen Province , but distanced himself from the political goals of the ikki , advocating violence only for self-defense or defense of one 's religion . During the mid-15th century , a civil war broke out among the Togashi clan over the position of shugo . Togashi Masachika had been driven out of Kaga by his younger brother , Kochiyo . When the Ōnin War broke out in 1467 , Masachika sided with Hosokawa and Kochiyo with Yamana . In 1473 , Masachika requested aid from Asakura Toshikaga , the lord of Echizen and ally of Hosokawa , as well as from the priests of Yoshizaki , who were associated with Rennyo . Masachika promised the ikki that if restored to power , he would lift his supporters out of their poverty . Further motivating the ikki to support Masachika were the religious policies of Kochiyo : Kochiyo patronized the Takada school of Jōdo Shinshū , a fierce rival to the Hongan-ji for control of the Shinshū sect , and persecuted followers of the Hongan-ji . Toshikaga pledged his support , as did the Yoshizaki priests , the latter prior to any approval from Rennyo . Rennyo eventually granted his approval to the actions of the Yoshizaki priests , and with Toshikaga providing military aid and the Ikkō-ikki rioting throughout Kaga , Masachika quickly overthrew his brother . But Ikkō-ikki support of Masachika was short-lived . By 1474 , the Ikkō-ikki were in dispute with Masachika as they claimed that he did not fulfill his promises of economic reward , and they attempted a rebellion . Rennyo refused to support their actions and the rebels were quickly defeated and forced to take refuge in Etchū Province . In 1475 , Shimotsuma Rensu , a disciple of Rennyo , falsely claimed that Rennyo supported a renewed uprising in Kaga . The revolt failed , and Rennyo excommunicated Rensu . Tiring of his efforts to restrain the unruly Ikkō-ikki , Rennyo left Yoshizaki for the capital region .

Despite the previous revolts having been easily suppressed , unrest continued to simmer in Kaga under Masachika 's governance . The Ikkō-ikki who remained in Kaga grew bolder , refusing to pay taxes and even seizing tax revenue and land , despite Rennyo 's continued protestations . In 1487 , Masachika left with a large army for Ōmi Province in response to a call for aid from shogun Ashikaga Yoshihisa , who was attempting to suppress the robber baron Rokkaku Tokoyori . In Masachika 's absence , the Ikkō-ikki , led by Rengo , Renkō , and Rensei , three sons of Rennyo , launched their revolt and between one hundred thousand and two hundred thousand members took up arms . Masachika quickly returned from his military expedition , and defeated the rebels in several battles . However , several vassal families , discontent with Masachika , joined with the rebels . The rebels cut off Masachika from reinforcements from his allies in the bordering Echizen , Etchū , and Noto Provinces , and besieged his castle . Masachika , trapped in a burning castle and faced with certain defeat , committed seppuku . In his place , the vassal families who rebelled against Masachika put forward his uncle and ex-shugo , Yasutaka , as a candidate to be the new shugo .

Following the overthrow of Masachika , Kaga became known as " hyakusho no motaru kuni " ( " the kingdom of peasants " , or " province ruled by peasants " ) . Shogun Yoshihisa , a friend and ally of Masachika , demanded that Rennyo excommunicate the Kaga ikki . However , Hosokawa Masamoto , an influential political figure who was also a close friend and patron of Rennyo , negotiated a deal which permitted Rennyo to merely reprimand the ikki while Masamoto would join the Hongan-ji . In Kaga , Togashi Yasutaka took power as shugo , ruling the province until his death in 1504 . Afterward , under the rule of his son , Taneyasu , the ikki began to assert their influence over the vassal families that supported them in the uprising . The ikki soon split into rival political factions and initiated a series of political struggles which culminated in a civil war in 1531 . The heads of the three predominant Hongan-ji temples in Kaga , as well as Taneyasu , were defeated when Renjun , a son of Rennyo , brought in Ikkō-ikki troops from Mikawa Province . Upon Renjun 's victory , the office of shugo was abolished and the leaders of the opposition were exiled . The Ikkō-ikki would control Kaga until 1580 , when forces loyal to Oda Nobunaga defeated them .

Clavaria zollingeri , commonly known as the violet coral or the magenta coral , is a widely distributed species of fungus . It produces striking tubular , purple to pinkish-violet fruit bodies that grow up to 10 cm ( 3.9 in ) tall and 7 cm ( 2.8 in ) wide . The extreme tips of the fragile , slender branches are usually rounded and brownish . A typical member of the clavarioid or club fungi , Clavaria zollingeri is saprobic , and so derives nutrients by breaking down organic matter . The fruit bodies are typically found growing on the ground in woodland litter , or in grasslands . Variations in branching and color can often be used to distinguish C. zollingeri from similarly colored coral fungi such as Alloclavaria purpurea and Clavulina amethystina , although microscopy is required to reliably identify the latter species .

The species was first described scientifically by French mycologist Joseph-Henri Léveillé in 1846 . It was named after German botanist Heinrich Zollinger , who researched the genus Clavaria , and collected the type specimen in Java , Indonesia . Léveillé considered the dichotomous branching to be the prominent characteristic that separated this species from the otherwise similar Clavaria amethystina . American Charles Horton Peck published a species collected from Stow , Massachusetts as Clavaria lavendula in 1910 , but this is a synonym . The mushroom is commonly known as the " violet coral " , or the " magenta coral " . In a 1978 classification of the genus Clavaria , Ronald Petersen placed C. zollingeri in the subgenus Clavaria , a grouping of species with clamp connections absent from all septa in the fruit body ; others in the subgenus included C. purpurea , C. fumosa , and the type , C. vermicularis . A large-scale molecular analysis of the phylogenetic distributions and limits of clavarioid fungi in the family Clavariaceae was published by Bryn Dentiger and David McLaughlin in 2006 . Based on their analysis of ribosomal DNA sequences , C. zollingeri shared the greatest genetic similarity with Clavulinopsis laeticolor . Petersen 's concept of the infrageneric classification of Clavaria was largely rejected in this analysis , as two of the three subgenera he proposed were found to be polyphyletic .

The coloring of the fruit bodies is quite variable , ranging from violet to amethyst , or violet shaded with brown or red . The colors may be variable over the fruit body ; in one instance the outside branches were brown while the inner branches in the center of the bundle were light violet . Dried specimens may lose their coloring almost entirely , as the pigments may be sensitive to light or dryness . The fruit body is typically 5 to 10 cm ( 2.0 to 3.9 in ) tall and 4 to 7 cm ( 1.6 to 2.8 in ) wide . The stem , or base , is short , and the branching starts a short distance above the ground . The surfaces of the fragile branches are smooth and dry ; the branches are 2 – 6 thick , typically with rounded tips . It has no distinguishable odor , and a taste somewhat like radishes or cucumber . Although edible in small quantities , the fragile fruit bodies are of limited culinary value , and may have a laxative effect . In mass , the spores ( produced on the surface of the branches ) are white . Light microscopy reveals additional details : the spores are roughly spherical to broadly elliptical , with dimensions of 4 – 7 by 3 – 5 μm . They have a clear apiculus about 1 μm long , and a single large oil droplet . The basidia ( spore-bearing cells ) are four-spored , do not have clamps , and measure 50 – 60 by 7 – 9 μm , gradually widening at the apex .

Other lavender to violet-colored corals include Clavulina amethystinoides , which is so multiply branched so as to appear toothed , and Clavulina amethystina , which can only be reliably distinguished by its two-spored basidia in comparison to the four-spored basidia of Clavaria species . In Alloclavaria purpurea , the branching is reduced and the color usually a duller purple . The Australian coral Clavaria versatilis is also similar in appearance to Clavaria zollinger , but has branch tips that end in two short and blunt processes that are the same color as the rest of the fruit body . Ramariopsis pulchella — a small , violet-colored coral fungus rarely taller than 3 cm ( 1.2 in ) — could be mistaken for a small C. zollingeri . It has roughly spherical spores measuring 3.0 – 4.5 by 2.5 – 3.5 μm .

The fruit bodies of Clavaria zollingeri grow either solitarily , in groups , or in clusters on the ground in grassy spots , usually near hardwood trees , or with mosses . It is a saprobic species , deriving nutrients by breaking down organic matter . It has a widespread distribution , and has been found in Australia , New Zealand , North America , South America , and Asia ( including Brunei , India , and Korea ) . In North America , the distribution is restricted to the northeastern regions of the continent . Rare in Europe , it is listed in the Red Lists of threatened species in Denmark and Great Britain . In Ireland , it is used as an indicator species to help assess the fungal diversity of nutrient-poor grasslands , a habitat under threat . It was recorded from the Netherlands for the first time in 2006 .

Ashdod ( Hebrew : אַשְׁדּוֹד ( audio ) ; Arabic : اشدود , إسدود Isdud ) is the sixth-largest city in Israel , located in the Southern District of the country , on the Mediterranean coast where it is situated between Tel Aviv to the north ( 32 kilometres ( 20 miles ) away ) and Ashkelon to the south ( 20 km ( 12 mi ) away ) . Jerusalem is 53 km ( 33 mi ) to the east . Ashdod is Israel 's largest port , accounting for 60 % of the country 's imported goods . The city is also an important regional industrial center . Modern Ashdod covers the territory of two ancient twin towns , one inland and one on the coast , which were for most of their history two separate entities , connected though by close ties with each other . This article is dealing with both these historic towns and other ancient sites now located within the territory of modern Ashdod . The first documented urban settlement at Ashdod dates to the Canaanite culture of the 17th century BCE , making the city one of the oldest in the world . Ashdod is mentioned 13 times in the Bible . During its pre-1956 history the city was settled by Philistines , Israelites , colonists coming in the wake of Alexander 's conquests , Romans and Byzantines , Arabs , Crusaders , and Ottoman Turks .

Modern Ashdod was established in 1956 on the sand hills near the site of the ancient town , and incorporated as a city in 1968 , with a land-area of approximately 60 square kilometres ( 23 sq mi ) . Being a planned city , expansion followed a main development plan , which facilitated traffic and prevented air pollution in the residential areas , despite population growth . According to the Israel Central Bureau of Statistics , Ashdod had a population of 217,959 in 2014 , with an area of 47,242 dunams ( 47.242 km2 ; 18.240 sq mi ) .

The site of Ashdod in the Bronze Age and Iron Ages was at a tell just south of the modern city . It was excavated by archaeologists in nine seasons between 1962 and 1972 . The effort was led during the first few years by David Noel Freedman of the Pittsburgh Theological Seminary and Moshe Dothan . The remaining seasons were headed by Dothan for the Israel Antiquities Authority . The earliest major habitation in Ashdod dates to the 17th century BCE , when the acropolis of the tell was fortified . Ashdod is first mentioned in written documents from Late Bronze Age Ugarit , which indicate that the city was a center of export for dyed woolen purple fabric and garments . At the end of the 13th century BCE the Sea Peoples conquered and destroyed Ashdod . By the beginning of the 12th century BCE , the Philistines , generally thought to have been one of the Sea Peoples , ruled the city . During their reign , the city prospered and was a member of the Philistine Pentapolis , which included Ashkelon and Gaza on the coast and Ekron and Gath farther inland , in addition to Ashdod .

In 950 BCE Ashdod was destroyed during Pharaoh Siamun 's conquest of the region . The city was not rebuilt until at least 815 BCE . Asdûdu led the revolt of Philistines , Judeans , Edomites , and Moabites against Assyria after expulsion of king Ahimiti , whom Sargon had installed instead of his brother Azuri . Gath ( Gimtu ) belonged to the kingdom of Ashdod at that time . Assyrian king Sargon II 's commander-in-chief ( turtanu ) , whom the King James Bible calls simply " Tartan " , Isaiah 20 : 1 regained control of Ashdod in 712 / 711 BCE and forced the usurper Yamani to flee . Sargon 's general destroyed the city and exiled its residents , including some Israelites who were subsequently settled in Media and Elam . Mitinti was king at the time of Sargon 's son Sennacherib ( r . 705 – 681 BCE ) , and Akhimilki in the reign of Sennacherib 's son Esarhaddon ( r . 681 – 669 BCE ) . Psamtik I of Egypt ( r . 664 – 610 BCE ) is reported to have besieged the great city Azotus for twenty-nine years ( Herodotus , ii . 157 ) ; the biblical references to the remnant of Ashdod ( Jeremiah 25 : 20 ; cf Zephaniah 2 : 4 ) are interpreted as allusions to this event .

There are Biblical episodes referencing Ashdod but they remain uncorroborated by archaeological finds : Upon Joshua 's conquest of the Promised Land , Ashdod was allotted to the Tribe of Judah ( Book of Joshua 15 : 46 ) . In I Samuel 6 : 17 Ashdod is mentioned among the principal Philistine cities . After capturing the Ark of the covenant from the Israelites , the Philistines took it to Ashdod and placed it in the temple of Dagon . The next morning Dagon was found prostrate before the Ark ; on being restored to his place , he was on the following morning again found prostrate and broken . The people of Ashdod were smitten with boils ; a plague of mice was sent over the land ( 1 Samuel 6 : 5 ) . According to the Bible , during the 10th century BCE Ashdod became , along with all the kingdom of Philistia , a patronage area of the Kingdom of Israel under the control of King David . The capture of the city by King Uzziah of Judah shortly after 815 BCE is mentioned within 2 Chronicles ( 26 : 6 ) and in the Book of Zechariah ( 9 : 6 ) , speaking of the false Jews .

Once Hellenised , the city changed its name to the more Greek-sounding Αzotus ( Greek : Άζωτος ) and prospered until the Hasmonean Revolt . During the rebellion Judas Maccabeus " took it , and laid it waste " ( Antiquities of the Jews Book 12 , 8 : 6 ) His brother Jonathan conquered it again in 147 BCE and destroyed the temple of Dagon of biblical fame ( Antiquities Book 13 , 4 : 4 ; 1 Samuel 5 : 1-5 ) . During the rule of Alexander Jannæus , Ashdod was part of his territory ( Antiquities Book 13 , 15 : 4 ) .

After the destruction wreaked during the succession wars between Hyrcanus II and Aristobulus II , Pompey restored the independence of Azotus , as he did with all Hellenising coastal cities ( Antiquities Book 14 , 4 : 4 ) . A few years later , in 55 BCE , after more fighting , Roman general Gabinius helped rebuild Ashdod and several other cities left without protective walls ( Antiquities Book 14 , 5 : 2 ) . In 30 BCE Ashdod came under the rule of King Herod , who then bequeathed it to his sister Salome ( Antiquities Book 17 , 8 : 1 ) . By the time of the First Jewish – Roman War ( 66-70 ) , there must have been a large enough Jewish presence in Ashdod for Vespasian to feel compelled to place a garrison in the city . Despite its location four miles ( 6 km ) from the coast , Ptolemy ( c . 90 – c . 168 CE ) described it as a maritime city , as did Josephus in Antiquities Book 13 , 15 : 4 . The same Josephus though describes Ashdod as " in the inland parts " ( Antiquities Book 14 , 4 : 4 ) . This curious contradiction may refer to Ashdod 's control of a separate harbor , called Azotus Paralios , or Ashdod-on-the-Sea ( παράλιος - " paralios " , Greek for " on the coast " ) . The landlocked city was called by the Romans Hippinos , " of the horsemen " , and by the Greeks until late in the medieval period , Azotus mesogaios or " inland Azotus " .

The prominence of Hellenised , then Christian Azotus continued until the 7th century , when it came under Muslim rule . A coastal fort was erected by the Umayyad Caliph Abd al-Malik , the builder of the Dome of the Rock , at or near the former Azotus Paralios , which was later reconstructed by the Fatimids and Crusaders . The medieval Arabic name of the port town was Mahuz Azdud , " harbour of Azdud " , a very interesting combination between the by then already ancient Aramaic word for harbour , mahuz , and " Azdud " , a return to a form much closer to the old Semitic name " Ashdod " . The geographer Ibn Khordadbeh ( c . 820 – 912 ) referred to the inland city as " Azdud " and described it as a postal station between al-Ramla and Gaza .

The location of the village on Via Maris enhanced the city 's importance during the Ottoman rule . In 1596 CE , administrated by nahiya ( " subdistrict " ) of Gaza under the liwa ' ( " district " ) of Gaza , the population of Ashdod numbered about 413 . The villagers paid taxes on wheat , barley , sesame and fruit crops , as well as goats and beehives . In the late nineteenth century , Isdud was described as a village spread across the eastern slope of a low hill , covered with gardens . A ruined khan stood southwest of the village . Its houses were one-storey high with walls and enclosures built of adobe brick . There were two main sources of water : a pond and a masonry well . Both were surrounded by groves of date-palm and fig-trees .

In the 1922 census of Palestine , conducted by the British Mandate authorities , Isdud had a population of 2,566 ; 2,555 Muslims and 11 Christians , where the Christians were all Catholics . The population increased in the 1931 census to 3,240 ; 3,238 Muslims and 2 Christians , in a total of 764 houses . During the Mandatory period , Isdud had two elementary schools ; one for boys which was opened in 1922 , and one for girls which started in 1942 . By the mid-1940s the boy-school had 371 students , while the girl-school had 74 . In 1945 Isdud had a population of 4,620 Arabs and 290 Jews , with a total of 47,871 dunams of land , according to an official land and population survey . Of this , 3,277 dunams were used citrus and bananas , 8,327 for plantations and irrigable land , 23,762 for cereals , while 131 dunams were built-up land .

The village of Isdud was occupied by the Egyptian army on May 29 , 1948 and became the Egyptians ' northernmost position during the 1948 Arab-Israeli War . While the Israelis failed to capture territory , and suffered heavy casualties , Egypt changed its strategy from offensive to defensive , thus halting their advance northwards . Egyptian and Israeli forces clashed in the surrounding area , with the Egyptians being unable to hold the Ad Halom bridge over the Lachish River . Israeli forces surrounded the town during Operation Pleshet , and shelled and bombed it from the air . For three nights from 18 October the Israeli Air Force bombed Isdud and several other locations . Fearing encirclement , Egyptian forces retreated on October 28 , 1948 and the majority of the residents fled . The 300 townspeople who remained were driven southwards by the Israel Defense Forces .

In 1950 , the moshavim of Sde Uziyahu and Shtulim were established to the east of Isdud , and in 1949 and 1953 , Bnei Darom and Gan HaDarom were established north of Isdud . According to Khalidi , they were established on the village lands . The modern city of Ashdod was founded in 1956 . On May 1 , 1956 , then finance minister Levi Eshkol approved the establishment of the city of Ashdod . " Ashdod Company Ltd . " , a daughter company of City-Builders Company Ltd . , was created for that purpose by Oved Ben-Ami and Philipp Klutznick . The first settlers , 22 families from Morocco , arrived in November 1956 , followed by a small influx of immigrants from Egypt . In July 1957 , the government granted a 24 square kilometres ( 9 square miles ) , approximately 32 kilometres ( 20 mi ) from Tel Aviv , to the Ashdod Company Ltd . , for building the modern city of Ashdod . The building of the Eshkol A power station in Ashdod was completed in 1958 and included 3 units : 2 units of 50 megawatt , and one unit of 45 megawatt ( with sea water desalination capabilities ) .

The first local council was appointed in October 1959 . Dov Gur was appointed the first local council head on behalf of the Israeli Ministry of Interior . The Magistrates ' Court in the city was inaugurated in 1963 . The building of the port of Ashdod began in April 1961 . The port was inaugurated in November 1963 , and was first utilized in November 1965 , with the coming of the Swedish ship " Wiengelgad " . Large-scale growth of the city began in 1991 , with the massive arrival of immigrants from the Soviet Union and Ethiopia and infrastructure development . From 1990 to 2001 the city accepted more than 100,000 new inhabitants , a 150 % growth . Ashdod was one of six cities that won the 2012 Education Prize awarded by the Israel Ministry of Education .

The modern city of Ashdod city was built outside the historic settlement site , on virgin sands . The development followed a main development plan . The planners divided the city into seventeen neighborhoods of ten to fifteen thousand people . Wide avenues between the neighborhoods make traffic flow relatively freely inside the city . Each neighborhood has access to its own commercial center , urban park , and health and education infrastructure . The original plan also called for a business and administrative center , built in the mid-1990s , when the city population grew rapidly more than doubling in ten years . Three industrial zones were placed adjacent to the port in the northern part of the city , taking into account the prevailing southern winds which take air pollution away from the city . The plan had its problems , however , including asymmetric growth of upscale and poorer neighborhoods and the long-time lack of a main business and administrative center . The city was planned for a maximum of 250,000 inhabitants , and an additional area in the south was reserved for further development . In 2012 , a plan to build an industrial zone on part of the Ashdod Sand Dune was approved . The plan calls for a hi-tech industrial park , events halls , and coffee shops to be built adjacent to the train station . It will cover 400 dunams ( 0.4 km2 ; 0.2 sq mi ) , including 130 dunams of built-up space , with the rest of the area being preserved as a nature reserve . In addition , the Port of Ashdod is undergoing a massive expansion program , and a private hospital will be built in the city .

Ashdod has a Mediterranean climate with hot summers , pleasant spring and fall , and cool , rainy winters . As a seaside town , the humidity tends to be high many times year round , and rain occurs mainly from November to March . In winter , temperatures seldom drop below 5 ° C ( 41 ° F ) and are more likely to be in the range of 10 – 15 ° C ( 50 – 59 ° F ) , while in summer the average is 27 ° C ( 81 ° F ) . The average annual rainfall is 510 mm ( 20 in ) .

Ashdod is one of the most important industrial centers in Israel . All industrial activities in the city are located in northern areas such as the port area , the northern industrial zone , and around the Lachish River . The port of Ashdod is the largest port in Israel , handling about 60 % of Israel 's port cargo . It was mainly upgraded in recent years and will be able to provide berths for Panamax ships . Various shipping companies offices are also located in the port area which also is home to an Eshkol A power station and coal terminal . The Northern industrial zone is located on Highway 41 and includes various industry including an oil refinery , which is one of only two in the country . The heavy industry zone located south of the Lachish River was once the main industrial center in Ashdod . Recently , however , leisure facilities have moved into the area . There is still some industry here , however , such as a Teva Pharmaceutical Industries plant , construction components producer Ashtrom , and Solbar a soybean oil producer . Ashdod is also home to Elta , a part of Israel Aircraft Industries where radar equipment , electronic warfare systems , and ELINT are developed .

Historically each neighborhood of Ashdod had its own commercial center . In 1990 , however , when the mall shopping culture developed in Israel , the main commercial activity in Ashdod moved to malls . The first mall to open in Ashdod was the Forum Center in the industrial zone . Restaurants , bars and night clubs were opened in the area . Today , the Forum center is mainly used for offices . Lev Ashdod Mall , which opened in 1993 , has been enlarged and upgraded since then . Ashdod Mall , billed at the time as the city 's largest shopping mall , has also been redesigned since its opening in 1995 . City Mall , Ashdod was opened in a combined building with the central bus station in 1996 , following the examples of the Tel Aviv Central Bus Station and the Jerusalem Central Bus Station . The Sea Mall , a three-story mall near the government offices , has a climbing wall and movie theater . Star Center doubled in size in 2007 .

Ashdod is located on the historic Via Maris . Highway 4 was developed following this route along the southern sea shore of Israel ; it serves as the main connection to the north , towards the Tel Aviv metropolitan area , and to the south , towards Ashkelon.Ad Halom junction was planned as the main entrance to the city from the east . Ashdod Interchange was opened in 2009 . The interchange continues the freeway section of Highway 4 further south , by removing the traffic light at this junction , and also added grade separation with the railway . The other main road in the area is Highway 41 which served the city from the start of its modern history . This road runs from west to east towards Gedera and it is the main transport link to the port of Ashdod and the industrial zones , and connects to Highway 4 with an interchange . In late 2012 , Ashdod won a NIS 220 million grant from the Israeli Transport Ministry to improve public transportation and decrease private car use . According to the municipality 's plans , a 20-kilometer ring of road arteries will be given priority in public transportation . These arteries will carry four bus rapid transit lines . In the city 's more crowded areas , such as Herzl Boulevard or the western part of Menachem Begin Boulevard , a public transportation lane will be paved in the center of the road . In other areas , the right-hand lane will be reserved for public transportation . Buses will also be given priority at traffic lights ; electronic devices will allow a bus to signal its approach , causing the light to turn green . In addition , an electric-powered bicycle rental network will be set up , and 22 kilometres ( 14 miles ) of bicycle paths will be paved in the city .

The passenger railway connection to Ashdod opened in 1992 after the renovation of the historical railway to Egypt . Ashdod railway station is on Israel Railways ' Binyamina / Netanya – Tel Aviv – Ashkelon line and it is located near Ad Halom Junction . The station was upgraded in 2003 when a new terminal building was built . The station building is modern , but proper road access to it was only organized on September 23 , 2008 , when a new road to the station was opened . There is also heavy freight traffic in the area . Port of Ashdod has its own railway spur line as well as a special terminal for potash brought from the Sodom area and exported abroad .

A new central bus station opened in 1996 . It serves as the terminus both for inter- and intracity lines . The central bus station is attached to the City Mall . Intercity bus lines connect the city with most population centers in central and southern Israel . Following is the list of bus companies serving routes at the central bus station : The Egged Ta 'avura company has been operating urban buses in Ashdod since 2007 . In addition , a share taxi service exists in Ashdod , operated by Moniyot HaIr . Most share taxi lines coincide with intracity bus lines .

According to the Israel Central Bureau of Statistics , Ashdod had a population of about 204,400 at the end of 2006 , making it the fifth largest city in Israel . The annual population growth rate is 2.6 % and the ratio of women to men is 1,046 to 1,000 . The population age distribution was recorded as 19.7 % under the age of 10 , 15.7 % from age 10 to 19 , 14.9 % from 20 to 29 , 19.1 % from 30 to 44 , 19.1 % from 45 to 64 , and 11.3 % were 65 or older . The population of Ashdod is significantly younger than the Israeli average because of the large number of young couples living in the city . The city is ranked medium-low in socio-economic grading , with a rating of 4 out of 10 . 56.1 % of 12th grade students in Ashdod were eligible for matriculation certificates in 2000 . The average salary in 2000 was NIS 4,821 compared to the national average of NIS 6,835 .

Ashdod has seen much of its growth as the result of absorption of immigrants . The first settlers were Jewish immigrants from Morocco and Egypt . In the 1960s Ashdod accepted a large number of immigrants from Romania , followed by a large number from Georgia ( then part of the Soviet Union ) in the 1970s . More than 60,000 Russian Jews from the former Soviet Union who immigrated to Israel in the 1990s following the collapse of the Soviet Union settled in Ashdod . Recent demographic figures suggest that about 32 % of the city 's population are new immigrants , 85 % of whom are originally from the former Soviet Union . During the 1990s the city absorbed a large number of Beta Israel immigrants from Ethiopia , and in more recent years Ashdod absorbed a large number of immigrants from the United States , United Kingdom , France , Argentina , and South Africa . Many of the 60,000 Marathi-speaking Bene Israel from Maharashtra , India who moved to Israel also settled there . Ashdod also receives a significant amount of internal migration , especially from the Gush Dan region .

Over 95 % of Ashdod 's population is Jewish , over 30 % of whom are religiously observant . Despite this , the city is generally secular , although most of the non-Jewish population is a result of mixed marriages . About 100 families are affiliated with the Pittsburg Hasidic group , established here in 1969 by Grand Rabbi Avraham Abba Leifer and continued today by his son , Grand Rabbi Mordechai Yissachar Ber Leifer . Ashdod has many synagogues serving different streams of Judaism . The city is also home to the world 's largest Karaite community , about five thousand strong . There is also a Scandinavian Seamen Protestant church , established by Norwegian Righteous Among the Nations pastor Per Faye-Hansen .

Ashdod was declared a city in 1968 . The Ashdod City Council has twenty-five elected members , one of whom is the mayor . The mayor serves a five-year term and appoints six deputies . The current mayor of Ashdod , Yehiel Lasri , was last elected in 2008 after Zvi Zilker has been in office continuously since 1989 . Within the city council there are various factions representing different population groups . The headquarters of the Ashdod Municipality and the mayor 's office are at city hall . This new municipal building is located in the main culture and business area .

Ashdod is home to the Israeli Andalusian Orchestra , which performs Andalusian classical music . It is an Arabic music style that originates from Moorish Iberia or Al-Andalus , has been jealously preserved in its original form by Arab and Jewish musicians of the Maghreb over the centuries , and has left its mark on the cante flamenco , the flamenco singing style , perhaps better known in the West . The orchestra was awarded the Israel Prize in 2006 . Ashdod also has one of the biggest open theaters in Israel - Amphi Ashdod that can hosts more than 6,400 guests . The Amphi hosts Ashdod 's international art festival " Méditerranée " . The MonArt Centre for the Arts , which includes a ballet school , a music center and the Ashdod Museum of Art , is a performing arts center which comprises different galleries , art schools , studios and events . The ambitious architectural complex has been inaugurated in 2003 . Theatre and concerts are hosted in several cultural venues ; the most important are performed at the Ashdod Performing Arts Center , a new 938-seat concert hall of distinct elegance and originality designed by Israeli architect Haim Dotan and inaugurated in 2012 in the city 's cultural center . Ashdod plays host to many national and international music festivals , including the annual Super Jazz Ashdod Festival managed by Leonid Ptashka .

Ashdod 's football team , F.C. Ashdod represents the city in Ligat ha 'Al , Israel 's Premier League . The club is known for its successful soccer school . The city 's top basketball team is Maccabi Ashdod . The men squad plays in First League , Israel 's First tier league , and the women squad Maccabi Bnot Ashdod plays in top division . Ashdod plays host to many national and international sporting tournaments , including the annual Ashdod International Chess Festival . The city has a cricket team , a rarity in Israel . It is run and organized by citizens of Indian descent . Ashdod 's beaches are a venue for water sports , like as windsurfing and Scuba diving . The Ashdod Marina offers yachting services .

Héctor Headley López Swainson ( born July 9 , 1929 ( possibly April 8 , 1932 ) ) is a former left fielder and third baseman in Major League Baseball who played for the Kansas City Athletics and New York Yankees from 1955 to 1966 . He is notable as the first black manager at the AAA baseball level , as the third outfielder on the Maris / Mantle Yankees , and as the Kansas City Athletics franchise hitting streak record holder . López was on World Series Championship teams for the Yankees in 1961 and 1962 . In various seasons , he finished among the top 10 American League hitters in hits , runs batted in , runs scored , doubles , triples , slugging percentage , sacrifice flies , sacrifice hits , games played , times hit by pitch and at bats . He was also known for his hustle , his clutch hitting and poor fielding . López was the second Panamanian-born major league baseball player and continues to be one of the country 's most revered world champion athletes . Although Humberto Robinson ( 102 games played / 5 seasons ) debuted in the major leagues 22 days earlier than López , López ( 1,450 games played / 12 seasons ) was the first of the 49 major leaguers born in Panama to have an extensive career . He was the first Panamanian-born major leaguer to finish in the top 10 in any official statistical category ( sacrifice hits , 1956 ) ; first to lead his league in any official statistic ( sacrifice flies , 1958 ) ; first to play in the World Series ( with the 1960 Yankees ) ; and the first to win a World Championship ( with the 1961 Yankees ) .

He was an infielder for the Athletics , and later was often the third outfielder on the Maris / Mantle Yankees of the early and mid-1960s . López had his most successful season in 1959 , but continued to contribute effectively during the early 1960s during their pennant successes . The utility player divided his career almost equally between infield and outfield positions . After retiring from baseball , he went on to become a groundbreaking manager in minor league baseball as the first to break the baseball color line as a black manager at the AAA level for the Buffalo Bisons and then served in various international managerial and coaching positions .

Prior to the 1952 season , López was acquired by the Philadelphia Athletics from the Drummondville Cubs of the Class-C Provincial League for $ 1,500 ( $ 13,367 today ) . In 1954 , López won baseball 's Triple Crown in the Winter League . Throughout his professional career , he played in the Panama winter league where he won three batting titles and regularly led the league in home runs . López developed in the A 's farm system , and when the team relocated to Kansas City in 1955 he was recalled to the major league club . López made his major league debut in 1955 . That season he finished second to Carlos Paula among rookies in batting average and was overshadowed by American League strikeout-leading pitcher Herb Score for the Rookie of the Year . He usually played second or third base during his time with the Athletics . During his rookie season , he finished third on the team in home runs , trailing only Gus Zernial ( 30 ) and Vic Power ( 19 ) . He tied Jim Finigan for third on the team in RBIs with 68 , trailing only Zernial and Power , who had 84 and 76 , respectively . López was the team 's regular third baseman , and was the youngest regular starter on the team . In 1956 , the team finished with a 52 – 102 record , but López had a career-high 153 hits . He also set then-career highs in home runs ( 18 ) and runs batted in ( 69 ) . In his early years , black and white players did not room together on the road , so he roomed with Vic Power even though Power 's closest friend on the team was Clete Boyer . In 1957 , he had a 22-game hitting streak , that is the All-time Kansas City Athletics team record for the thirteen seasons the franchise played there .

He earned a position in the top-10 in the American League in both games played and at bats in 1956 and 1958 , as well as leading the AL in sacrifice flies and times grounded into double plays in 1958 . López also was in the top 10 in doubles and runs scored in 1958 and in sacrifice hits in 1956 . On June 26 , 1958 , López hit three home runs in a game against the Washington Senators . During his career with the Athletics , he hit .278 with 67 home runs and 269 RBIs , and scored 298 runs . However , his talents were wasted on a team that never finished above 6th place . On May 26 , 1959 , he was traded with Ralph Terry to the New York Yankees for Johnny Kucks , Tom Sturdivant , and Jerry Lumpe . For all his offensive skills , López led American League third basemen in errors in each of his four full seasons in Kansas City . Baseball writer and Kansas City Athletics fan Bill James wrote that López was as bad a defensive player as you would ever want to see . The Authors of The Great American Baseball Card Flipping , Trading and Bubble Gum Book wrote of López 's defense " I would like to go on record right here and now as declaring Hector López the all-time worst fielding major league ballplayer . "

In his first season with the Yankees after being traded , he played 35 games in the outfield , the first time in his career he played more than 20 outfield games . He still played 76 games at third base for the team . In his 33 games with Kansas City at the start of the 1959 Major League Baseball season , he had played exclusively at second base . In his next five seasons with the Yankees from 1960 to 1964 , he mostly played in the outfield as he was part of five consecutive pennant winners . During his time with the Yankees , he was often the third outfielder of the Maris / Mantle Yankees that won two of the five consecutive World Series they played in from 1960 to 1964 . He logged the most games in left field during the back-to-back World Series Championship seasons of 1961 & 1962 ( 129 vs. Berra-109 , Tresh-43 ) . During the five pennant years , with Roger Maris playing right field and Mickey Mantle playing center field , López logged 406 games in left field . This was the most by any Yankee during this period ( Tom Tresh-195 , Yogi Berra-129 ) . López is one of eleven Yankees to have been on these five consecutive pennant winners and along with Whitey Ford , Elston Howard , Bobby Richardson , & Clete Boyer is one of seven Yankees to have been part of the entire Maris / Mantle Yankee era . In 1965 and 1966 , he made the majority of his outfield appearances in right field . However , in 1965 Mantle did not play center field . Mantle did return to center field for the majority of his appearances in 1966 ( the final year of the Maris / Mantle Yankees and the final year of López ' career ) .

In 1959 , he finished in the top 10 in slugging percentage , hits , doubles and RBI . In 1960 he was among the top 10 in triples and sacrifice hits . During the 1961 World Series , López replaced Mantle ( who only had six Series at bats ) in Game 4 and recorded a 2-run single on the way to a 7 – 0 victory . In Game 5 , which was the Series-clinching game , he homered and tripled , driving in five runs , and caught Vada Pinson 's fly ball for the final out of the Series . His three for seven , 7 run batted in performance continues to be remembered by New Yorkers as a highlight of the series .

López was the manager of the Buffalo Bisons in 1969 . This made him the first black manager at the AAA level . This was six years before Frank Robinson became the first black manager in the major leagues . López was one of three black men ( along with Sam Bankhead and Gene Baker ) to manage in the minor leagues in the twenty-five years after Jackie Robinson broke the color barrier in 1947 . In 1990 , he coached Malverne High School of Malverne , New York in Nassau County on Long Island in addition to working in the parks department in the Town of Hempstead . López has also managed in Venezuela and been a player-manager in Panama . He was the manager of the Panama national baseball team in the 2009 World Baseball Classic .

He paved the way as a role model for the first three Panamanian Major League All-Stars , Ben Oglivie and Manny Sanguillén also from Colón , and Rod Carew a Colonense born in neighboring Gatun . López recorded many firsts among Panamanian baseball players ; he was the first regular major leaguer , since 1955 was his rookie season , whereas Robinson did not qualify as a rookie until 1958 ( the season in which he recorded his 50th career inning pitched ) and Webbo Clarke , who also debuted in 1955 , never qualified as a rookie . López ' 1955 rookie season , when he batted .290 , was also the first by a Panamanian to qualify for baseball 's statistical leadership by recording the minimum number of plate appearances or innings pitched . Thus , although he was not the first to appear in the major leagues , he was in a sense the first Panamanian everyday player . None of the other major leaguers born in Panama who played in the 1950s ( Robinson , Clarke , Pat Scantlebury , Tom Hughes ) played in the major league postseason , which then only included the World Series , before López did so with the 1960 Yankees . No other Panamanian was part of a World Series champion before López with the 1961 Yankees . He was the first Panamanian to record many statistical accomplishments , such as a stolen base , home run , double , triple , walk or strikeout . His 1956 season was the first by a Panamanian with more than 150 hits , more than 25 doubles , 90 runs scored , or more than 60 walks . His 1959 season was the first with more than 20 home runs or 90 runs batted in . López twice had .350 on-base percentages , but in each season he recorded over 400 plate appearances without recording the qualifying number for unofficial league leadership . Thus , his career high on-base percentage in a season in which he qualified for statistical leadership was .347 in 1956 . He was the first to finish among the top 10 in his league in each of the aforementioned statistical categories , and the first to lead his league in any official statistical batting category ( sacrifice flies in 1958 ) . López was the first Panamanian to accumulate a sufficient number of career appearances to qualify for career statistical leadership ( which depending upon the source is based on 3000 , 4000 or 5000 at bats ) , although his career .269 batting average , .330 on-base percentage and .415 slugging percentage are not historically significant .

Maria Goeppert Mayer ( June 28 , 1906 – February 20 , 1972 ) was a German-born American theoretical physicist , and Nobel laureate in Physics for proposing the nuclear shell model of the atomic nucleus . She was the second female Nobel laureate in physics , after Marie Curie . A graduate of the University of Göttingen , Goeppert Mayer wrote her doctorate on the theory of possible two-photon absorption by atoms . At the time , the chances of experimentally verifying her thesis seemed remote , but the development of the laser permitted this . Today , the unit for the two-photon absorption cross section is named the Goeppert Mayer ( GM ) unit . Maria Goeppert married Joseph Edward Mayer and moved to the United States , where he was an associate professor at Johns Hopkins University . Strict rules against nepotism prevented Johns Hopkins University from taking her on as a faculty member , but she was given a job as an assistant and published a landmark paper on double beta decay in 1935 . In 1937 , she moved to Columbia University , where she took an unpaid position . During World War II , she worked for the Manhattan Project at Columbia on isotope separation , and with Edward Teller at the Los Alamos Laboratory on the development of the Teller 's " Super " bomb .

Maria Göppert was born on June 28 , 1906 , in Kattowitz ( now Katowice , Poland ) , a city in Prussia , the only child of Friedrich Göppert and his wife Maria née Wolff . In 1910 , she moved with her family to Göttingen when her father , a sixth-generation university professor , was appointed as the professor of pediatrics at the University of Göttingen . Goeppert was closer to her father than her mother . " Well , my father was more interesting , " she later explained . " He was after all a scientist . " Göppert was educated at the Höhere Technische in Göttingen , a school for middle-class girls who aspired to higher education . In 1921 , she entered the Frauenstudium , a private high school run by suffragettes that aimed to prepare girls for university . She took the abitur , the university entrance examination , at age 17 , a year early , with three or four girls from her school and thirty boys . All the girls passed , but only one of the boys did . In the Spring of 1924 , Göppert entered the University of Göttingen , where she studied mathematics . A purported shortage of women mathematics teachers for schools for girls led to an upsurge of women studying mathematics at a time of high unemployment , and there was even a female professor of mathematics at Göttingen , Emmy Noether , but most were only interested in qualifying for their teaching certificate .

Instead , Goeppert became interested in physics , and chose to pursue a Ph.D. In her 1930 doctoral thesis she worked out the theory of possible two-photon absorption by atoms . Eugene Wigner later described the thesis as " a masterpiece of clarity and concreteness " . At the time , the chances of experimentally verifying her thesis seemed remote , but the development of the laser permitted the first experimental verification in 1961 when two-photon-excited fluorescence was detected in a europium-doped crystal . To honor her fundamental contribution to this area , the unit for the two-photon absorption cross section is named the Goeppert-Mayer ( GM ) unit . One GM is 10 − 50 cm4 s photon − 1 . Her examiners were three future Nobel prize winners : Max Born , James Franck and Adolf Otto Reinhold Windaus . On January 19 , 1930 , Goeppert married Joseph Edward Mayer , an American Rockefeller fellow who was one of James Franck 's assistants . The two had met when Mayer had boarded with the Goeppert family . The couple moved to Mayer 's home country of the United States , where he had been offered a position as associate professor of chemistry at Johns Hopkins University . They had two children , Maria Ann and Peter Conrad .

Strict rules against nepotism ostensibly prevented Johns Hopkins University from hiring Goeppert Mayer as a faculty member , but she was given a job as an assistant in the Physics Department working with German correspondence . She received a very small salary , a place to work and access to the facilities . She taught some courses , published an important paper on double beta decay in 1935 . There was little interest in quantum mechanics at Johns Hopkins , but Goeppert Mayer worked with Karl Herzfeld , collaborating on a number of papers . She also returned to Göttingen in the summers of 1931 , 1932 and 1933 to work with her former examiner Born , writing an article with him for the Handbuch der Physik . This ended when the NSDAP came to power in 1933 , and many academics , including Born and Franck , lost their jobs . Goeppert Mayer and Herzfeld became involved in refugee relief efforts . Joe Mayer was fired in 1937 . He attributed this to the hatred of women on the part of the dean of physical sciences , which he thought was provoked by Goeppert Mayer 's presence in the laboratory . Herzfeld agreed and added that , with Goeppert Mayer , Franck and Herzfeld all at Johns Hopkins , some thought that there were too many German scientists there . There were also complaints from some students that Mayer 's chemistry lectures contained too much modern physics . Mayer took up a position at Columbia University , where the chairman of the Physics Department , George B. Pegram , arranged for Goeppert Mayer to have an office , but she received no salary . She soon made good friends with Harold Urey and Enrico Fermi , who arrived at Columbia in 1939 . Fermi asked her to investigate the valence shell of the undiscovered transuranic elements . Using the Thomas – Fermi model , she predicted that they would form a new series similar to the rare earth elements . This proved to be correct .

In December 1941 , Goeppert Mayer took up her first paid professional position , teaching science part-time at Sarah Lawrence College . In the spring of 1942 , with the United States embroiled in World War II , she joined the Manhattan Project . She accepted a part-time research post from Urey with Columbia University 's Substitute Alloy Materials ( SAM ) Laboratories . The objective of this project was to find a means of separating the fissile uranium-235 isotope in natural uranium ; she researched the chemical and thermodynamic properties of uranium hexafluoride and investigated the possibility of separating isotopes by photochemical reactions . This method proved impractical at the time , but the development of lasers would later open the possibility of separation of isotopes by laser excitation . Through her friend Edward Teller , Goeppert Mayer was given a position at Columbia with the Opacity Project , which researched the properties of matter and radiation at extremely high temperatures with an eye to the development of the Teller 's " Super " bomb , the wartime program for the development of thermonuclear weapons . In February 1945 , Joe was sent to the Pacific War , and Goeppert Mayer decided to leave her children in New York and join Teller 's group at the Los Alamos Laboratory . Joe came back from the Pacific earlier than expected , and they returned to New York together in July 1945 .

In February 1946 , Joe became a professor in the Chemistry Department and the new Institute for Nuclear Studies at the University of Chicago , and Goeppert Mayer was able to become a voluntary associate professor of Physics at the school . When Teller also accepted a position there , she was able to continue her Opacity work with him . When the nearby Argonne National Laboratory was founded on July 1 , 1946 , Goeppert Mayer was also offered a part-time job there as a senior physicist in the Theoretical Physics Division . She responded " I don 't know anything about nuclear physics . " She programmed the Aberdeen Proving Ground 's ENIAC to solve criticality problems for a liquid metal cooled reactor using the Monte Carlo method .

During her time at Chicago and Argonne in the late 1940s , Goeppert Mayer developed a mathematical model for the structure of nuclear shells , which she published in 1950 . Her model explained why certain numbers of nucleons in an atomic nucleus result in particularly stable configurations . These numbers are what Eugene Wigner called magic numbers : 2 , 8 , 20 , 28 , 50 , 82 , and 126 . Enrico Fermi provided a critical insight by asking her : " Is there any indication of spin orbit coupling ? " She realised that this was indeed the case , and postulated that the nucleus is a series of closed shells and pairs of neutrons and protons tend to couple together . She described the idea as follows : Think of a room full of waltzers . Suppose they go round the room in circles , each circle enclosed within another . Then imagine that in each circle , you can fit twice as many dancers by having one pair go clockwise and another pair go counterclockwise . Then add one more variation ; all the dancers are spinning twirling round and round like tops as they circle the room , each pair both twirling and circling . But only some of those that go counterclockwise are twirling counterclockwise . The others are twirling clockwise while circling counterclockwise . The same is true of those that are dancing around clockwise : some twirl clockwise , others twirl counterclockwise .

Three German scientists , Otto Haxel , J. Hans D. Jensen , and Hans Suess , were also working on solving the same problem , and arrived at the same conclusion independently . Their results were announced in the issue of the Physical Review before Goeppert Mayer ' s announcement in June 1949 . Afterwards , she collaborated with them . Hans Jensen co-authored a book with Goeppert Mayer in 1950 titled Elementary Theory of Nuclear Shell Structure . In 1963 , Goeppert Mayer , Jensen , and Wigner shared the Nobel Prize for Physics " for their discoveries concerning nuclear shell structure . " She was the second and most recent female Nobel laureate in physics , after Marie Curie .

In 1960 , Goeppert Mayer was appointed full professor of physics at the University of California at San Diego . Although she suffered from a stroke shortly after arriving there , she continued to teach and conduct research for a number of years . She was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1965 . Goeppert Mayer died in San Diego , California , on February 20 , 1972 , after a heart attack that had struck her the previous year left her comatose . She was buried at El Camino Memorial Park in San Diego . After her death , the Maria Goeppert Mayer Award was created by the American Physical Society to honor young female physicists at the beginning of their careers . Open to all female physicists who hold Ph.D.s , the winner receives money and the opportunity to give guest lectures about her research at four major institutions . Two of her former universities also honor her . The Argonne National Laboratory presents an award each year to an outstanding young woman scientist or engineer , while the University of California at San Diego hosts an annual Maria Goeppert Mayer symposium , bringing together female researchers to discuss current science . Crater Goeppert Mayer on Venus with a diameter of about 35 km is also named after Goeppert-Mayer . In 2011 , she was included in the third issuance of the American Scientists collection of US postage stamps , along with Melvin Calvin , Asa Gray , and Severo Ochoa . Her papers are in the Geisel Library at the University of California , San Diego , and the university 's physics department is housed in Mayer Hall , which is named after her and her husband .

Powhatan Beaty ( October 8 , 1837 – December 6 , 1916 ) was an African American soldier and actor . During the American Civil War , he served in the Union Army 's 5th United States Colored Infantry Regiment throughout the Richmond – Petersburg Campaign . He received America 's highest military decoration , the Medal of Honor , for taking command of his company at the Battle of Chaffin 's Farm after all officers had been killed and / or wounded . Following the war , he became an orator and actor , appearing in amateur theater productions in his home of Cincinnati , Ohio . His most well-known stage performance was an 1884 appearance at Ford 's Opera House on 9th Street in Washington , D.C. , opposite Henrietta Vinton Davis .

Beaty was born into slavery on October 8 , 1837 , in Richmond , Virginia . He moved to Cincinnati , Ohio , in 1849 , where he received an education . He gained his freedom sometime on or before April 19 , 1861 ; the exact date is unknown and may have been before his move to Ohio . While in school , he developed an interest in theater and made his public acting debut at a school concert . After leaving school , he was apprenticed to a black cabinet maker and eventually worked as a turner . He continued to study acting privately and received training in the field from several coaches , including James E. Murdock , a retired professional stage actor from Philadelphia . A year after the outbreak of the Civil War , with the Confederate victory at the Battle of Richmond , Kentucky , on August 30 , 1862 , rumors of an impending Confederate attack on Cincinnati began to circulate . Richmond was one hundred miles to the south of Cincinnati , and no organized Union troops lay between the two cities . An attack by Confederate Colonel John Hunt Morgan , who had led his cavalry on a raid behind Union lines in Kentucky the previous month , was also feared . On September 2 , the men of Cincinnati were organized into work units to build fortifications around the city .

Although Cincinnati 's African Americans were initially pressed into service at bayonet point , after the appointment of William Dickson as commander of the black troops their treatment improved significantly . Dickson promised that they would be treated fairly and kept together as a distinct unit , to be called the Black Brigade . He then allowed them to return home to prepare for military service , with orders to report the next morning for duty . About four hundred men were released that day , September 4 , and the next morning about seven hundred reported for duty . Among those men was Beaty , who served in Company Number 1 of the Brigade 's 3rd Regiment . Despite the danger of Confederate attack , the unarmed unit was assigned to build defenses near the Licking River in Kentucky , far in advance of the Union lines . For the next fifteen days , they cleared forests , constructed forts , magazines and roads , and dug trenches and rifle pits . The brigade was disbanded on September 20 , the threat of attack having receded .

By June 1863 , Ohio had not yet fielded an African American combat unit , but Ohio blacks were being recruited for service in the regiments of other states . Beaty enlisted from Cincinnati on June 7 , 1863 for a three-year term of service in the Union Army ; he was among a group of men recruited for a Massachusetts regiment . He joined as a private but was promoted to sergeant only two days later . He was placed in charge of a squad of forty-seven other recruits and ordered to report to Columbus , Ohio , from where they would be sent to Boston . Upon arriving in Columbus on June 15 , however , they learned that the Massachusetts regiments were full and unable to accept their service . The Governor of Ohio , David Tod , immediately requested permission from the Department of War to form an Ohio regiment of African Americans . Permission was granted , and on June 17 , Beaty and his squad became the first members of the 127th Ohio Volunteer Infantry , later re-designated the 5th United States Colored Troops . After three months of recruitment and organization in Camp Delaware , on the Olentangy River outside of Delaware , Ohio , the unit set out for Virginia .

By the Battle of Chaffin 's Farm on September 29 , 1864 , Beaty had risen to the rank of first sergeant in Company G. His regiment was among a division of black troops assigned to attack the center of the Confederate defenses at New Market Heights . The defenses consisted of two lines of abatis and one line of palisades manned by Brigadier General John Gregg 's Texas Brigade . The attack was met with intense Confederate fire and was turned back after reaching a line of abatis . During the retreat , Company G 's color bearer was killed ; Beaty returned through about 600 yards of enemy fire to retrieve the flag and return it to the company lines . The regiment had suffered severe casualties in the failed charge . Of Company G 's eight officers and eighty-three enlisted men who entered the battle , only sixteen enlisted men , including Beaty , survived the attack unwounded . With no officers remaining , Beaty took command of the company and led it through a second charge at the Confederate lines . The second attack successfully drove the Confederates from their fortified positions , at the cost of three more men from Company G. By the end of the battle , over fifty percent of the black division had been killed , captured , or wounded . For his actions , Beaty was commended on the battlefield by General Benjamin Butler and seven months later , on April 6 , 1865 , awarded the Medal of Honor .

After the war , Beaty returned to Cincinnati and raised his family . His son , A. Lee Beaty , became an Ohio state legislator and an assistant U.S. District Attorney for southern Ohio . He resumed his career as a turner and pursued amateur acting and public speaking engagements . He gave public readings for charitable causes and became a well-known elocutionist among the African American community of Cincinnati . Through the 1870s he acted in local theaters and directed music and drama exhibitions in the city . He wrote a play about a rich southern planter entitled Delmar , or Scenes in Southland , which was performed in January 1881 with himself in the lead role . Set in Kentucky , Mississippi , and Massachusetts , the work covered the end of slavery and transition to freedom for blacks from 1860 to 1875 . The privately run play was well received , but Beaty did not engage in self-promotion and it never moved into public theaters . In January 1884 , Beaty was working as an assistant engineer at the Cincinnati water works when Henrietta Vinton Davis , a prominent African American actress , came to perform in the city . Together , he and Davis put on a large musical and dramatic festival in Melodeon Hall which proved to be very successful . Included in the show were productions of Ingomar , the Barbarian and Robert Montgomery Bird 's The Gladiator , in which Beaty took the role of Spartacus . The culmination of the festival was a performance of selected scenes from Macbeth , with Beaty playing the title role and Davis as Lady Macbeth . Newspapers in both the black and white communities of Cincinnati praised the performances of the two actors , with the Commercial stating that Beaty " threw himself into his part with masterly energy and power " .

The successful festival led to Beaty being invited to play as a principal actor in a Washington , D.C. , Shakespearean production organized by Davis . A company including Davis , Beaty , and amateur actors from the D.C. area performed Richard III almost in entirety , three scenes from Macbeth , and one scene from Ingomar , the Barbarian . Davis , the premier black Shakespearean actress of the time , was the star of the show and Beaty played opposite her as Macbeth , King Henry VI , and Ingomar . The May 7 , 1884 , production was played in Ford 's Opera House to a full house of more than 1,100 people ; among them was Frederick Douglass . There was some heckling during the play , primarily from some of the white attendees , however a reviewer from The Washington Post reported that " the earnestness and intelligence of several of the leading performers were such as to command the respect of those most disposed to find cause for laughter in everything that was said or done " . Washington newspapers praised the principal actors , but noted that the inexperience of some of the supporting cast was evident . Reviewers for African American newspapers were especially pleased to see such a production in an important venue like Ford 's Theater . The New York Globe wrote of the performance " [ t ] hus leap by leap the colored man and woman encroach upon the ground so long held sacred by their white brother and sister " .

Ra.One is a 2011 Indian science fiction superhero film directed by Anubhav Sinha , and starring Shah Rukh Khan , Arjun Rampal , Kareena Kapoor , Armaan Verma , Shahana Goswami and Tom Wu in pivotal roles . The script , written by Anubhav Sinha and Kanika Dhillon , originated as an idea that Anubhav Sinha got when he saw a television commercial , and which he subsequently expanded . The film follows Shekhar Subramanium ( Shah Rukh Khan ) , a game designer who creates a motion sensor-based game in which the antagonist ( Ra.One ) is more powerful than the protagonist ( G.One ) . The former escapes from the game 's virtual world and enters the real world ; his aim is to kill Lucifer , the game ID of Shekhar 's son and the only player to have challenged Ra.One 's power . Relentlessly pursued , the family is forced to bring out G.One from the virtual world to defeat Ra.One and protect them . Principal photography began in March 2010 and took place in India and the United Kingdom , and was overseen by an international crew . The post-production involved 3-D conversion and the application of visual effects , the latter being recognised as a technological breakthrough among Indian films . With a budget of ₹ 150 crore ( US $ 22 million ) , inclusive of publicity costs , Ra.One was one of the most expensive Indian films at the time of release . The producers spent ₹ 150 crore ( US $ 22 million ) out of a ₹ 52 crore ( US $ 7.7 million ) marketing budget , which involved a nine-month publicity campaign , brand tie-ups , merchandise , video games and viral marketing .

Ra.One was initially scheduled to release on 3 June 2011 , but delays due to a lengthy post-production process and escalating costs pushed back the release date . The film also faced controversies involving plagiarism , content leaks and copyright challenges . Consequently , Ra.One was theatrically released on 26 October 2011 , the beginning of the five-day Diwali weekend , in 2D , 3D and dubbed versions , with three international premieres being held between October 24 & 26 , 2011 . The film witnessed the largest international theatrical release for an Indian film as of 2011 , and was preceded by high audience and commercial expectations . Upon release , Ra.One received mixed reviews , with critics praising the visuals and music , but criticising the script and direction . Commercially , the film became the third highest-grossing Bollywood film of 2011 domestically , the highest-grossing Bollywood film of 2011 worldwide , and broke a number of opening box office records , though it failed to sustain at the box office after its extended opening weekend . Although the film earned more than Rs 170 crores it was still not considered as a hit film as the distributors failed to recover their investment . The film subsequently won a number of awards for its technical aspects , notably one National Film Award , one Filmfare Award and four International Indian Film Academy Awards .

Shekhar Subramanium ( Shah Rukh Khan ) , a game designer who works for the London-based Barron Industries , has delivered a number of commercial failures ; an irate Barron ( Dalip Tahil ) gives him his last chance to develop a successful game . To impress his sceptical son Prateek ( Armaan Verma ) , and upon the request of his wife Sonia ( Kareena Kapoor ) , Shekhar uses his son 's idea that the antagonist should be more powerful than the protagonist . His colleague , computer programmer Jenny ( Shahana Goswami ) , uses Shekhar 's face as a model for that of the game 's protagonist G.One ( Shah Rukh Khan ) ( Technically Good One and in Hindi Jeevan , which means life ) , while the shape-shifting antagonist Ra.One ( Technically Random Access Version One and in Hindi Ravan , a mythical demon ) is made faceless . Another colleague , Akashi ( Tom Wu ) , implements the characters ' movements . The game , named Ra.One , contains three levels , the final level being the only one in which either character can be killed . Each character possesses a special device – the H.A.R.T ( Hertz Amplifying Resonance Transmitter ) which gives them their powers . Upon reaching the last level , the characters gain a gun with one bullet ; the other character can be killed by this bullet but only if his H.A.R.T is attached .

When Ra.One undergoes final tests , Akashi notices unusual glitches but chooses to ignore them . When the game is officially launched , it receives a standing ovation from the audience ; an enamored Prateek insists on playing it immediately . He logs in under the ID Lucifer and proceeds to the second level , but is interrupted by Akashi . Ra.One , unable to end his turn with Lucifer and angry that a player has proceeded so far , becomes determined that Lucifer will die . He uses a wireless technology ( which Jenny had introduced in a conference ) to enter the real world , a process which causes the mainframe to malfunction . Akashi informs Shekhar , who partially understands the situation and rushes home , fearing for his son 's life . Meanwhile , Ra.One murders Akashi and assumes his appearance ; he goes to find Lucifer , and meets Shekhar in the process . In an attempt to save his son , Shekhar claims that he is Lucifer , but his lie is exposed when Ra.One scans his identity card . Consequently , Ra.One kills Shekhar and makes it look like a car accident .

Sonia , devastated after Shekhar 's death , tells Prateek that the family will return to India after Shekhar 's funeral . A suspicious Prateek notices digital patterns on the fateful road and realises that Ra.One has come to life . He convinces Jenny of the same when they see the destroyed game laboratory , and the latter tries to bring G.One into the real world . Meanwhile , Ra.One , having taken the form of Akashi , chases the family on their way to the airport , but G.One enters the real world and causes a gas explosion which temporarily destroys Ra.One. G.One takes Ra.One 's H.A.R.T. and accompanies the family to Mumbai after Sonia realises that she needs him . Subsequently , Ra.One returns to life , takes the form of a billboard model ( Arjun Rampal ) , and tracks down G.One to Prateek 's birthday party . Hypnotising Sonia , he assumes her form to kidnap Prateek . Ra.One then instructs G.One to give him his H.A.R.T. back , and sends the real Sonia in a malfunctioning local train . The train crashes into the Chatrapati Shivaji Terminus , but G.One saves Sonia in time . To save Prateek , he returns to the virtual world and fights Ra.One ; both reach the third level , the former left with little power . G.One tricks Ra.One into shooting him without his H.A.R.T. attached , leaving Ra.One helpless ; furious , the latter creates ten copies of himself . Prateek , unable to identify the real Ra.One , asks G.One to quote Shekhar : " If you join the forces of evil , its shadows shall always follow you " . The duo realise that only one of the ten Ra.Ones has a shadow : the original one . G.One shoots and destroys him , absorbs Ra.One 's remains and disappears .

The major characters of Ra.One were played by protagonists Shahrukh Khan and Kareena Kapoor , and primary antagonist Arjun Rampal . Supporting roles were played by Tom Wu , Shahana Goswami and child artist Armaan Verma . The film featured cameo appearances by Rajinikanth playing the Enthiran character Chitti , Sanjay Dutt and Priyanka Chopra , the latter two being characters in a dream sequence . Additional minor roles were played by Dalip Tahil and Satish Shah , and an important voice-over was provided by Amitabh Bachchan . Khan performed both as Shekhar and G.One. The titular character Ra.One was enacted by three actors – Rampal , Wu and Kapoor , signifying the character 's shape-shifting ability . Khan was the first actor to be cast in the film . Three actors had initially been considered for the lead female role ; Kapoor was ultimately chosen because she insisted on playing the part . Rampal accepted the role of Ra.One after Sinha expressed a strong desire to cast him in the film . Wu was contracted to the film in July 2010 , and Goswami was cast one month later . Bachchan agreed to be a part of the film after being requested by Khan and Sinha . Several cast members prepared extensively for their roles ; Rampal and Kapoor followed special diets to lose weight , and Verma learnt capoeira . Khan and Verma performed their own stunts , and Kapoor subsequently did so as well despite initial reluctance .

However , the cast did encounter problems during production . Khan faced difficulties with his superhero suit and prosthetic makeup , and injured his left knee . The decision to cast Rampal was met with scepticism due to " questionable acting abilities , " a statement Sinha criticised . In addition , Rampal encountered back problems ( which were treated by the time production began ) , prompting speculation of a possible replacement by Vivek Oberoi . Jackie Chan had initially been approached for the role of Akashi , but he declined the offer . Rajnikanth suffered from health problems which caused a delay in the filming of his cameo appearance . Dutt faced a scheduling conflict with Agneepath ( 2012 ) , which was later resolved .

According to director Anubhav Sinha , the idea of Ra.One originated when he saw an advertisement on television which showed children remotely controlling a human . He was attracted to the concept and wrote a script based on it . Sinha then approached Khan , who liked the story and decided to produce the film under his production company Red Chillies Entertainment . Sinha was apprehensive of retaining Khan 's support after the former 's previous film Cash ( 2007 ) became a commercial failure , but Khan reportedly " remained unchanged " . Shahrukh Khan felt that the film possessed significant commercial potential , in addition to being a fulfilment of his " childhood dream " to be a superhero and to fly . He stated that he wanted to " make a film that gives me the right to deserve the iconic status that I 've got for 20 years . " He also said that he wanted to make a film dedicated to father-son relationships , which were , in his opinion , " neglected " in Bollywood . Khan 's idea was to make a simple family drama which expanded into an action film . He declined to make the film in English to increase its appeal for Western audiences , feeling that " cracking Hollywood on their terms " was unnecessary . Both Khan and Sinha credited their children for providing encouragement , and regularly " approving " the film 's execution .

Red Chillies Entertainment continued to work on other projects before finalising the production aspects of Ra.One. After providing the visual effects for My Name Is Khan ( 2010 ) , the studio focused solely on Ra.One and did not take up any other films . Khan initially approached a number of directors to helm the film , including Aditya Chopra and Karan Johar , but they declined ; eventually , Sinha was made the film 's director . To prepare the film 's premises and characterisation , Sinha spent several months viewing video clips , digital art portals and comic books . Sinha and Khan also watched around 200 superhero films from all over the world . The storyboards were designed by Atul Chouthmal , who was contracted after he met Khan at Yash Raj Studios . While the former began work on the storyboards , the producers hired a storyboard artist from Hollywood . Chouthmal revealed that Khan and the other artist differed on their visions of the film , and so he was brought back . Before filming , Khan reportedly took tips from actor Kamal Hassan regarding the production of large-scale films , having been impressed by Hassan 's Dasavathaaram ( 2008 ) .

The title of the film received significant media attention due to it being the name of the antagonist rather than the protagonist . The move was considered innovative , and noted as a sign of the " rising importance of the villain in Bollywood . " According to Sinha , the title had not been planned as such , and was ultimately chosen because Ra.One " sounded cooler " than G.One. Khan was advised to name the film after his own character ; he declined to do so , citing the inter-dependence between good and evil . He also called Alfred Hitchcock as his inspiration , and pointed out that the antagonists in films like Sholay , Mr. India and Sadak were better remembered than the protagonists .

The crew of Ra.One featured both Indian and overseas personnel . Nicola Pecorini served as the director of photography , with V. Manikandan providing assistance . Andy Gill and Spiro Razatos were hired as the stunt supervisors , and Nino Pansini was hired as the stunt cinematographer . Sabu Cyril and Marcus Wookey were responsible for the production design . The film 's producer was Bobby Chawla , but Gauri Khan later stepped in after the former suffered a brain haemorrhage . Filming took place at a number of studios , notably Filmistan Studios , Film City and Yash Raj Studios in India and the Black Hangar Studios in the UK . Principal photography was initially set to begin in Miami , but the idea was abandoned due to budget constraints . The first phase of filming began in Goa on 21 March 2010 and continued until May . The second and third phases took place in London with the entire cast , beginning in July 2010 and ending in August . The next phase was split into two schedules ; the first schedule commenced at Filmistan Studios in the first week of September 2010 , while the second schedule began in December 2010 and took place over a seven-day period . The remaining portions were filmed in July 2011 at Film City . A cameo appearance and a music video were filmed in the weeks leading up to the release , the former at the Whistling Woods Studios in Mumbai .

As with the filming crew , the post-production crew of the film included both Indian and overseas personnel . Prime Focus carried out the film 's 3-D conversion , with London-based colorist Richard Fearon performing the color grading . Red Chillies VFX partnered with a number of visual effects studios around the world , and undertook the incorporation of the visual effects under the supervision of Jeffrey Kleiser . Nvidia provided the information technology – based software utilised for the effects , while Edwark Quirk supervised over the computer-generated imagery used in the film . Resul Pookutty was responsible for the film 's sound design . The idea for converting the film to 3-D was put forth during filming , and was implemented in July 2011 due to a revived interest in 3-D films . The process required 2,600 artists to convert 4,400 shots of the film . The sound design involved bridging the real and the virtual world , and the required sound enhancements were achieved by using the Dolby Surround 7.1 system . Incorporating the visual effects began in April 2010 , and was preceded by extensive research . 1,200 artists worked for 2 ½ years to complete the visual effects work . A number of complex procedures were executed , including cubical transformations and the design of the faceless form of Ra.One.

Despite precautions , the post-production faced significant delays owing to the digital inter-mediation , increased work-load due to the 3-D and dubbed versions of the film , and delays in the completion of the visual effects . The post-production also faced budget constraints and witnessed an overuse of CGI according to the cinematographer . The delays left only two days for printing the film and sending it to theatres , generating significant anxiety over a possible delay in the release . Khan subsequently kept strict tabs on the progress of work , and postponed his knee surgery to complete the film on time .

The body suits worn by Khan and Rampal were designed by Robert Kurtzman and Tim Flattery , and made by a team of specialists based in Los Angeles . Sinha spent around three months conceptualising the costumes , watching various superhero films to design a costume not created already . He then wrote a 23-page document with his sketches and details of what he wanted , and gave it to the designers to work upon . To create the suit , Khan was required to enter a small chamber where a warm latex-like liquid was released up to his neck and allowed to solidify , forming the mould which was then peeled off his body . The suit was joined by a concealed zipper and subsequently modified . Computer-generated embellishments such as light beams and electricity were added to the suits after Khan expressed dissatisfaction with the initial rushes of the film . A total of 21 costumes were made for the film , with each suit reportedly costing ₹ 10 million ( US $ 150,000 ) . Khan 's suit was made of reinforced latex , coloured steel-blue and fitted with micro-computer circuitry . Rampal 's suit was made of three-inch thick solid rubber , and was red in color . Both actors were required to wear additional suits inside their body suits to prevent skin contact . Wearing the suits created a number of difficulties for the actors . It took 20 minutes to put on the suits and 40 minutes to remove them . In addition , the non-porous nature of the suits created intense heat inside , causing excessive perspiration despite the presence of special air conditioning ducts . Khan later felt that the suits ' conception had been a mistake since filming occurred during the day ; digital adjustments to the suits brought " all the efforts to naught . "

The soundtrack of Ra.One was composed by Vishal-Shekhar , with the lyrics being written by Atahar Panchi , Vishal Dadlani and Kumaar . A. R. Rahman provided the background score for a single sequence . Sinha announced that R & B singer Akon and the Prague Philharmonic Orchestra would be a part of the soundtrack ; the former lent his vocals for " Chammak Challo " and " Criminal " , while the latter performed in " Bhare Naina " . The composers obtained the official license to use Ben E. King 's " Stand By Me , " on which they based the song " Dildaara . " The soundtrack contains fifteen tracks , including seven original songs , four remixes , three instrumentals and an international version of " Chammak Challo " . The music rights were bought by T-Series for ₹ 150 million ( US $ 2.2 million ) . The Hindi version of the soundtrack was released on 12 September 2011 ; the Tamil and Telugu versions were released on 10 October 2011 , featuring six tracks each .

In India , the Hindi version of Ra.One was released across more than 4,000 plus screens worldwide- 3,100 screens in 2,100 theatres , breaking the record for the widest Bollywood release previously held by Bodyguard ( 2011 ) . The Tamil and Telugu versions were released on 275 prints and 125 prints respectively . A week before the release , multiplex owners throughout India decided to allot 95 % of the total available screen space to the film . Overseas , Ra.One was released in 904 prints . This including 600 prints in Germany , 344 prints in the USA , 200 – 300 prints in South Korea , 202 prints in the UK , 79 prints in the Middle East , 75 prints in Russia , 51 prints in Australia , 49 prints in Canada and 25 prints in New Zealand and Taiwan . In early October 2011 , a partnership deal was being finalised by the distributors to allow the film to be released in China across 1,000 prints . In addition , the film was released in Pakistan and non-traditional territories like Brazil , Spain , Italy , Greece and Hong Kong . The 3D version was released in 550 screens across the world . Ra.One was noted for the extensive use of digital prints , reportedly making up 50 – 60 % of the total release ; in India , the film was exhibited in over 1,300 digital theatres , breaking the record previously held by Bodyguard . The wide digital release was implemented to lower distribution costs , make the film accessible to a wider audience and reduce piracy . However , despite the measures taken , pirated versions of Ra.One were available on the Internet within hours of the film 's release .

The producers of Ra.One spent ₹ 100 million ( US $ 1.5 million ) out of a ₹ 520 million ( US $ 7.7 million ) marketing budget , ₹ 150 million ( US $ 2.2 million ) of this was utilised for internet promotions alone . The film 's first theatrical poster was released in December 2010 , and was followed by the release of two teaser trailers during the 2011 ICC Cricket World Cup . The first theatrical trailer premiered three months later . Khan and Sinha undertook a multi-city tour during which they unveiled a 3,600 feet-long piece of fan mail to collect audience messages . The official website of Ra.One was launched on 31 May 2011 , and an official YouTube channel for the film was subsequently unveiled . On 20 October 2011 , Khan held a live chat with fans on Google Plus , the first time an Indian film personality had done so . Rampal 's look in the film , which had been kept secret , was revealed in late October 2011 . The film 's marketing utilised merchandise and games to facilitate the creation of a franchise . Khan marketed merchandise related to the film , which included toys , tablets and apparel . On 14 October 2011 , a gaming tournament featuring games like Call of Duty was conducted in Mumbai and telecast live on YouTube . Red Chillies Entertainment partnered with Sony Computer Entertainment Europe to create " Ra.One – The Game , " a game for PlayStations which was released on 5 October 2011 . The producers further collaborated with UTV Indiagames to design a social game titled Ra.One Genesis , with an independent plot based on G.One , in addition to designing digital comics based on the film 's characters .

In May 2011 , the first rushes of Ra.One were shown to the cast of Khan 's other home production Always Kabhi Kabhi ( 2011 ) . Subsequently , the film was screened for test audiences to study and gauge the film 's appeal across different age groups . A few days prior to the theatrical release , Khan arranged a special screening of the film 's final cut in Yash Raj Studios , where he invited close friends , his family and the film 's crew . Between 24 and 26 October 2011 , Ra.One had international premieres in Dubai , London and Toronto , all of which were chosen due to their international significance and large South Asian populations . The premiere in Dubai was held on 24 October 2011 at the Grand Cinemas , Wafi . A high-profile dinner and charity auction followed , where Khan raised AED30,000 ( approximately US $ 8,200 ) to build a workshop for children with special needs . The premiere included three simultaneous screenings of the film , for which tickets were placed on sale for the public . The premiere in London took place at the O2 Cineworld the following day , and the premiere in Toronto took place at the TIFF Bell Lightbox on 26 October 2011 .

Ra.One was submitted to the Central Board of Film Certification on 14 October 2011 to receive its viewership rating . The Board raised strong objections to the film 's action scenes , fearing that they would influence young children to emulate the stunts . The police and the Indian Railways security force had made similar objections to the train-based stunts in the film , claiming that youngsters would " blindly imitate them " and hence put their lives at risk . The film was finally passed with a ' U ' certificate without cuts , but under the condition that prominent disclaimers were shown , stating that the stunts were computer-generated and should not be imitated . The British Board of Film Classification rated the film 12A for " moderate fantasy violence " . In March 2012 , a Mid-Day report alleged that Ra.One had received a favourable rating , pointing out that the producers had violated the rules by meeting the Board officials during the screening .

The film faced allegations of plagiarism with similarities to Terminator 2 : Judgment Day ( 1991 ) , the Batman series , Iron Man ( 2008 ) , The Sorcerer 's Apprentice ( 2010 ) and Tron : Legacy ( 2010 ) . Khan denied the allegations , saying , " I got inspired from a lot of superhero movies but the movie is original . In fact , Ra.One will be the first superhero-based movie in the world in which the superhero lives in a family . " A few days before the release , screenwriter Yash Patnaik claimed that Ra.One resembled a concept that he had developed several years before . Patnaik appealed to the Bombay High Court to delay the film 's release , until he was given due credit or 10 % of the film 's overall profit . The court , observing prima facie evidence that there had been copyright violations , asked the filmmakers to deposit ₹ 10 million ( US $ 150,000 ) with the court on 21 October 2011 before releasing the film . However , Patnaik challenged the court 's decision and demanded that the producers give him credit and not cash . Sinha later claimed that he alone had developed the film 's story .

Ra.One also faced cybertheft and hacking issues . On 3 June 2011 , three days after its launch , the official website of the film was hacked by suspected Pakistani cyber criminals who stated that the act was in revenge for a similar attack on a Karachi press club website . The hackers defaced the homepage and left a note threatening the Indian Press Club . Despite precautions , the song " Chammak Challo " was leaked several months before the official release of the soundtrack . Khan clarified that the leaked song was a " rough version " of the actual song , and that the person responsible for the leak was being looked for . He subsequently refuted claims that the leak had been engineered as a publicity stunt .

The television broadcasting rights for Ra.One were bought by Star India for a then-record sum of ₹ 350 million ( US $ 5.2 million ) , surpassing 3 Idiots ( 2009 ) . The Indian television premiere of Ra.One took place on 21 January 2012 on STAR Gold , garnering a 28 % market sharefor the channel and a TVR of 6.7 . Star India subsequently syndicated the television screening rights to Disney XD , where it premiered on 2 June 2012 . In May 2012 , International Media Distribution announced that Ra.One would be televised on Comcast and Cox , as a part of the celebrations of the Asian Pacific American Heritage Month . Discovery Channel tied up with Red Chillies Entertainment to produce a one-hour program titled " Revealed : The Making of Ra.One , " which aired on the channel on 30 March 2012 . The program discussed the making of the film in detail , including the visual effects and the challenges faced while filming . Eros International released the DVD of Ra.One on 13 December 2011 across all regions in one-disc and two-disc packs complying with the NTSC format . The DVD of the film contained alternate endings . Initially , Khan had wanted to add alternate endings to the theatrical release itself , but later deemed it risky . The DVD version was made interactive as well . VCD and Blu-Ray versions of the film were also released .

Upon release , Ra.One received mixed reviews from critics in India and generally positive reviews overseas . Review aggregate website Rotten Tomatoes reported that 69 % of 16 critics gave Ra.One a positive review , with an average critic rating of 5.6 / 10 , granting the film a " Fresh " consensus . On Metacritic , which assigns a weighted mean from film reviews , Ra.One holds a rating of 60 % based on eight reviews , signifying " mixed or average reviews . " Positive reviews described the film as an ambitious initiative and a technological success , with some critics thinking that Ra.One had put Indian films on par with Hollywood . The visual effects received near-universal praise , though dissenting opinions stated that they were " all over the place " . The action sequences were also widely praised . Other aspects of the film received more polarising opinions , and one very positive review was criticised for " over-rating " the film . Mixed views were opined regarding the plot 's gaming concept , with some critics deeming it " far-fetched " and others lauding the " gaming-style aesthetics " . Similarly , some critics called the emotional scenes " fulfilling " while others felt them to be " lacking in connect with the audience " .

The story was negatively received by several critics , with a number of them deeming it to be disappointing and lacking in originality ; one critic praised the original idea but criticised its " Bollywoodization " . The direction was criticised in a number of reviews , though a few critics praised Sinha 's pacing of the film and the execution of the action sequences . Some critics pointed to the presence of scenes which were not child-friendly , despite Ra.One being promoted as a children 's film . Particular reviews criticised the lack of character development and the film 's " incoherently hackneyed morality " . A few critics panned the film as a whole , describing it as a " mess " ; one review commented , " It 's convenient to say that if you have no expectations from the film , you wouldn 't be disappointed . " After its release , Ra.One received numerous nominations and awards in India and abroad , a majority of them for its technical aspects . The film notably won the National Film Award and the Filmfare Award for Best Special Effects , and four International Indian Film Academy Awards . The film also received several business awards for its marketing and distribution . On the other hand , the film received negative ( " dishonorable " ) awards as well . Ra.One won the titles of Worst Film and Worst Director at the Golden Kela Awards , and also won the Worst Film award at the Ghanta Awards .

The budget of Ra.One was the subject of significant speculation prior to its release . A number of estimates placed the budget between ₹ 1.4 billion ( US $ 21 million ) and ₹ 2 billion ( US $ 30 million ) . It was universally accepted that the film was the most expensive Bollywood film of all time , with certain sources stating that the film was the most expensive Indian film ever . The original budget was revealed to be ₹ 1.30 billion ( US $ 19 million ) after promotional expenses . Khan stated that he had " worked very hard " to finance the film without borrowing money , and reportedly hosted a television show just to finance the film . Ra.One earned ₹ 1.32 billion ( US $ 20 million ) from pre-release revenue sources , setting a new record for Bollywood films . The extensive marketing campaign greatly increased audience expectations of the film . Ra.One set records for the level of pre-release buzz for a Bollywood film , and also topped a number of polls gauging the most awaited Bollywood films of the year . Anticipation for the film was equally high among the trade analysts , with some commenting that the film would pass the ₹ 1 billion ( US $ 15 million ) mark in one week and the ₹ 3 billion ( US $ 45 million ) mark in over three weeks . Advance bookings commenced on 20 October 2011 on a limited scale , and expanded later . While initial ticket sales were low , they picked up considerably near the release date . A few days prior to the release , the advance booking was described as " phenomenal , " with an overall advance booking rate of 20 – 25 % across the country . A number of advantages of the film 's release were pointed out , such as the festive season and higher 3D ticket prices , though there had been doubt regarding the timely release of the 3D version .

In India , Ra.One debuted at the beginning of the five-day Diwali weekend , and subsequently broke the Diwali opening day record . The film then set the records for the biggest single-day net revenue and the biggest three-day opening weekend earned by a Bollywood film , breaking the previous records held by Bodyguard . Subsequently , the film began to suffer significant drops in its collections , with its five-day extended weekend and nine-day extended week coming second to the records of Bodyguard . The film faced an 84 percent drop in collections in its second week and fell a further 90 percent in its third week , the latter primarily due to the release of Rockstar . The dubbed versions showed similar trends . The Tamil and Telugu versions together earned around ₹ 50 million ( US $ 740,000 ) nett . In overseas markets , Ra.One earned the highest three-day and five-day opening weekends among the Bollywood releases of 2011 ; by its second weekend , the film had become the highest-grossing Bollywood film of 2011 in overseas markets , but the collections suffered drops throughout . In general , families and children formed the major portion of the film 's audience , and the 3D version is regarded as a success .

Reports of a planned sequel of Ra.One began surfacing prior to the film 's release , though the extent of real progress on the sequel is unknown . Both Khan and Sinha admitted to formulating plans for a sequel , though the former noted that it would be " presumptuous " to start the sequel before the first film 's release . Khan later refuted the speculations , saying that a sequel was unlikely due to his other commitments . After Ra.One won a National Award , an " overjoyed " Khan said that the film 's world could be further explored . He stated that the sequel , if made , would be titled G.One and not Ra.Two , and that he would make it " faster , bigger and better " than Ra.One. Khan was reported to be looking for a script , without a fixed release date . In April 2012 , Mushtaq Sheikh said that the pre-production of the sequel had begun . A number of reports stated that Kareena Kapoor would not be a part of the sequel . Despite Khan 's enthusiasm for the idea of a sequel , the film industry expressed mixed opinions regarding it . Filmmaker Rajkumar Gupta commented , " It would be challenging to take forward a story that has not worked earlier . " Producer Ramesh Taurani responded negatively to the idea , saying , " It is important for the film to be appreciated so that a sequel can be made . " Trade analyst Atul Mohan called the sequel " a bad idea . " Conversely , others were supportive of the sequel . Producer Goldie Behl brushed aside arguments about the success of the first film , saying , " If the people think that they can earn some more , then it doesn 't matter how big or small the hit was . " Director Kunal Kohli also reacted positively , saying , " Certain ideas naturally lend themselves to sequels . So why not use that investment of your time and effort to make a sequel that will take the brand further ? "

Jonathan Strange & Mr Norrell is the 2004 debut novel of British writer Susanna Clarke . An alternative history set in 19th-century England around the time of the Napoleonic Wars , it is based on the premise that magic once existed in England and has returned with two men : Gilbert Norrell and Jonathan Strange . Centred on the relationship between these two men , the novel investigates the nature of " Englishness " and the boundaries between reason and unreason , Anglo-Saxon and Anglo-Dane , and Northern and Southern English cultural tropes / stereotypes . It has been described as a fantasy novel , an alternative history , and a historical novel . It inverts the Industrial Revolution conception of the North-South divide in England : in this book the North is romantic and magical , rather than rational and concrete . It can be usefully compared and contrasted with Elizabeth Gaskell 's attempts at synthesising a unitary English identity in her fiction . The narrative draws on various Romantic literary traditions , such as the comedy of manners , the Gothic tale , and the Byronic hero . The novel 's language is a pastiche of 19th-century writing styles , such as those of Jane Austen and Charles Dickens . Clarke describes the supernatural with mundane details . She supplements the text with almost 200 footnotes , outlining the backstory and an entire fictional corpus of magical scholarship .

The novel opens in autumn 1806 in northern England with The Learned Society of York Magicians , made up of " theoretical magicians " , who believe that magic died out several hundred years earlier . The group is stunned to learn of a " practising magician " , Mr Gilbert Norrell , who owns a large collection of " books of magic " , which he has spent years purchasing to keep them out of the hands of others . Norrell proves his skill as a practical magician by making the statues in York Cathedral speak . John Childermass , Mr Norrell 's long-time servant , convinces a member of the group , John Segundus , to write about the event for the London newspapers . Segundus 's article generates considerable interest in Mr Norrell , who moves to London to revive practical English magic . He enters society with the help of two gentlemen about town and meets a Cabinet Minister , Sir Walter Pole . To ingratiate himself , Mr Norrell attempts to recall Sir Walter 's fiancée , Emma Wintertowne , from the dead . He summons a fairy — " the gentleman with thistle-down hair " — who strikes a bargain with Mr Norrell to restore Emma : half of her life will be spent with the fairy . After news spreads of Emma 's resurrection and happy marriage to Sir Walter , magic becomes respectable ; and Mr Norrell performs various feats to aid the government in their ongoing war against Napoleon .

While living in London , Mr Norrell encounters Vinculus , a street-magician , who relates a prophecy about a nameless slave and two magicians in England , but Norrell dismisses it . While travelling , Vinculus later meets Jonathan Strange , a young gentleman of property from Shropshire , and recites the same prophecy , prompting Strange to become a magician . Meanwhile , the gentleman with thistle-down hair takes a liking to Stephen Black , Sir Walter 's capable black butler , and promises to make him a king . Emma ( now Lady Pole ) lapses into lassitude . She rarely speaks , and her attempts to communicate her situation are confounded by magic . No doctor can cure her , and Mr Norrell claims that her problems cannot be solved by magic . Without the knowledge of the other characters , each evening she and Stephen are forced to attend balls held by the gentleman with thistle-down hair in the Faerie kingdom of Lost-Hope , where they dance all night long .

Volume II opens in Summer 1809 with Strange learning of Mr Norrell and travelling to London to meet him . They immediately clash over the importance of John Uskglass ( the legendary Raven King ) to English magic . Strange argues that " without the Raven King there would be no magic and no magicians " while Norrell retorts that the Raven King made war upon England and should be forgotten . Despite their differing opinions and temperaments , Strange becomes Norrell 's pupil . Norrell , however , deliberately keeps some knowledge from Strange . Lady Pole and Strange 's wife , Arabella , become friends ; several times Lady Pole attempts to tell Arabella about her forced nights of dancing at the fairy 's castle in Lost-Hope , but each time she tells an unrelated story . Arabella also meets the gentleman with thistle-down hair at the Poles ' , but she assumes he is simply a resident . Without her husband 's knowledge , the fairy plots to enchant her , although Stephen Black continually attempts to dissuade him . The Stranges become a popular couple in London . The Cabinet ministers find Strange easier to deal with than Norrell , and they send him to assist the Duke of Wellington on his Peninsular Campaign . For over a year , Strange helps the army : he creates roads , moves towns , and makes dead men speak . After he returns , he fails to cure George III 's madness , although Strange manages to save the king from becoming enchanted by the gentleman with thistle-down hair , who is determined to make Stephen a king . Strange then helps defeat Napoleon at the horrific Battle of Waterloo .

Volume III opens in January 1816 with Childermass experiencing strong magic that is not produced by either Norrell or Strange . At the same time , Lady Pole attempts to shoot Mr Norrell as he is returning home . Childermass takes the bullet himself but is not killed . Afterwards , Lady Pole is cared for in the country by John Segundus , who has an inkling of the magic surrounding her . During travels in the north , Stephen meets Vinculus , who recites his prophecy : " the nameless slave shall be a king in a strange country ... " Stephen believes it applies to him , but the gentleman with thistle-down hair argues that it applies to the Raven King . Strange settles in Venice and meets Flora Greysteel . They become fond of each other and Strange 's friends believe he may marry again . However , after experimenting with dangerous magic that threatens his sanity to gain access to Faerie , he discovers that Arabella is alive and being held captive . Immediately after he discovers this , the gentleman with the thistledown hair curses him with Eternal Night , an eerie darkness that engulfs him and follows him wherever he goes . Thereafter , Strange 's strenuous efforts to rescue her take their toll , and his letters to friends begin to appear crazed . At Strange 's request , Flora moves with her family to Padua and secludes herself inside her home , along with a mirror given to her by Strange . Drawlight is sent by Lascelles and Norrell to Venice to only enquire about Strange but is brought before him by Strange 's magic . Strange instructs Drawlight with several tasks and re-invokes the old alliances within England between the forces of nature and John Uskglass . In England , this reawakening sparks a magical renaissance , but Norrell fails to grasp its significance . Strange returns and gives Childermass instructions which allow him to free Lady Pole from the fairy 's enchantment . Strange , bringing " Eternal Night " with him , asks Norrell to help him undo Arabella 's enchantment by summoning John Uskglass .

Childermass meanwhile indirectly receives the message meant for him by Strange and uses it to break the enchantment over Lady Pole . Enraged by this the gentleman with the thistledown hair first murders Vinculus forcing Stephen Black to watch . Then after begins to place a second curse upon Lady Pole that would lead to her imminent death for cheating him of his prize . In parallel , Norrell and Strange attempt a spell intended to pay homage from the forces of England to John Uskglass . Their same belief as the gentleman with the thistledown hair that the ' nameless slave ' applies to Uskglass ends up in them devoting their power to Stephen who uses his momentary control of England to destroy the man with the thistledown hair . Amongst the confusion , Stephen leaves down one of the newly opened Faerie roads , and becomes the new king of the now blossoming Lost-Hope . Between the death of Vinculus and the gentleman with the thistledown hair , Childermass notes that tattooed upon Vinculus 's body is the last works of John Uskglass . As he tries to preserve the tattoos in memory , a man appears . Between calling Childermass his servant ( leading him to believe it is Norrell in disguise ) and trivially performing other feats of great magic , the unknown man brings Vinculus back to life .

As a result of the imprecision of the fairy 's curse , which was placed on " the English magician , " Norrell is trapped along with Strange in the " Eternal Night , " and they cannot move more than a certain distance from each other . Upon the gentleman with the thistledown hair 's death , Arabella comes through the mirror in Venice , where Flora is waiting for her upon instruction of Strange . The penultimate scene is of the now infamous Childermass releasing the contract upon The Learned Society of York Magicians , telling them they can study magic again , and showing the now restored Vinculus as proof that one last book remains , tattooed upon his body . Two months later , Strange has a conversation with the now stronger Arabella still living in Venice , explaining that he and Norrell are working to undo the eternal darkness they are both trapped in , but are planning to adventure into other worlds . Neither wish to take her to Faerie again , so he instead promises to return to her when he dis-spells the darkness and tells her not to be a widow till then , which she agrees to .

Clarke first developed the idea for Jonathan Strange & Mr Norrell during a year spent teaching English in Bilbao , Spain : " I had a kind of waking dream ... about a man in 18th-century clothes in a place rather like Venice , talking to some English tourists . And I felt strongly that he had some sort of magical background – he 'd been dabbling in magic , and something had gone badly wrong . " She had also recently re-read J. R. R. Tolkien 's The Lord of the Rings and afterwards was inspired to " trying writing a novel of magic and fantasy " . After she returned from Spain in 1993 , Clarke began to think seriously about writing her novel . She signed up for a five-day fantasy and science-fiction writing workshop , co-taught by writers Colin Greenland and Geoff Ryman . The students were expected to prepare a short story before attending , but Clarke only had " bundles " of material for her novel . From this she extracted " The Ladies of Grace Adieu " , a story about three women secretly practising magic who are discovered by the famous Jonathan Strange . Greenland was so impressed with the story that , without Clarke 's knowledge , he sent an excerpt to his friend , the fantasy writer Neil Gaiman . Gaiman later said , " It was terrifying from my point of view to read this first short story that had so much assurance ... It was like watching someone sit down to play the piano for the first time and she plays a sonata . " Gaiman showed the story to his friend , science-fiction writer and editor Patrick Nielsen Hayden . Clarke learned of these events when Nielsen Hayden called and offered to publish her story in his anthology Starlight 1 , which featured pieces by well-regarded science-fiction and fantasy writers . She accepted , and the book won the World Fantasy Award for best anthology in 1997 .

Clarke spent the next ten years working on the novel in her spare time , while editing cookbooks full-time for Simon & Schuster in Cambridge . She also published stories in Starlight 2 and Starlight 3 ; according to the New York Times Magazine , her work was known and appreciated by a small group of fantasy fans and critics on the internet . She was never sure , however , if she would finish her novel or if it would be published . Clarke tried to write for three hours each day , beginning at 5 : 30 am , but struggled to keep this schedule . Rather than writing the novel from beginning to end , she wrote in fragments and attempted to stitch them together . Clarke , admitting that the project was for herself and not the reader , " clung to this method " " because I felt that if I went back and started at the beginning , [ the novel ] would lack depth , and I would just be skimming the surface of what I could do . But if I had known it was going to take me ten years , I would never have begun . I was buoyed up by thinking that I would finish it next year , or the year after next . " Clarke and Greenland fell in love while she was writing the novel and moved in together . Greenland did not read the novel until it was published .

Around 2001 , Clarke " had begun to despair " , and started looking for someone to help her finish and sell the book . Giles Gordon became her agent and sold the unfinished manuscript to Bloomsbury in early 2003 , after two publishers rejected it as unmarketable . Bloomsbury were so sure the novel would be a success that they offered Clarke a £ 1 million advance . They printed 250,000 hardcover copies simultaneously in the United States , Britain , and Germany . Seventeen translations were begun before the first English publication was released . Jonathan Strange & Mr Norrell was first published in the United States on 8 September 2004 , in the United Kingdom on 30 September , and in other countries on 4 October .

Clarke 's style has frequently been described as a pastiche , particularly of nineteenth-century British writers such as Charles Dickens , Jane Austen , and George Meredith . Specifically , the novel 's minor characters , including sycophants , rakes , and the Duke of Wellington , evoke Dickens ' caricatures . Laura Miller , in her review for Salon , suggests that the novel is " about a certain literary voice , the eminently civilized voice of early 19th century social comedy " , exemplified by the works of Austen . The novel even uses obsolete spellings — chuse for choose and shewed for showed , for example — to convey this voice as well as the free indirect speech made famous by Austen . Clarke herself notes that Austen 's influence is particularly strong in the " domestic scenes , set in living rooms and drawing rooms where people mostly chat about magic " where Dickens 's is prominent " any time there 's more action or description " . While many reviewers compare Clarke 's style to that of Austen , Gregory Feeley argues in his review for The Weekly Standard that " the points of resemblance are mostly superficial " . He writes that " Austen gets down to business briskly , while Clarke engages in a curious narrative strategy of continual deferral and delay . " For example , Clarke mentions Jonathan Strange on the first page of the novel , but only in a footnote . He reappears in other footnotes throughout the opening but does not appear as a character in the text proper until a quarter of the way through the novel .

In Jonathan Strange & Mr Norrell , Clarke infuses her dry wit with prosaic quaintness . For example , the narrator notes : " It has been remarked ( by a lady infinitely cleverer than the present author ) how kindly disposed the world in general feels to young people who either die or marry . Imagine then the interest that surrounded Miss Wintertowne ! No young lady ever had such advantages before : for she died upon the Tuesday , was raised to life in the early hours of Wednesday morning , and was married upon the Thursday ; which some people thought too much excitement for one week . " As Michel Faber explains in his review for The Guardian , " here we have all the defining features of Clarke 's style simultaneously : the archly Austenesque tone , the somewhat overdone quaintness ( " upon the Tuesday " ) , the winningly matter-of-fact use of the supernatural , and drollness to spare . " Gregory Maguire notes in The New York Times that Clarke even gently ridicules the genre of the novel itself : " [ A gentleman ] picks up a book and begins to read ... but he is not attending to what he reads and he has got to Page 22 before he discovers it is a novel – the sort of work which above all others he most despises – and he puts it down in disgust . " Elsewhere , the narrator remarks , " Dear Emma does not waste her energies upon novels like other young women . " The narrator 's identity has been a topic of discussion , with Clarke declaring that said narrator is female and omniscient rather than a future scholar from within the real storyline as some had suggested .

Clarke 's style extends to the novel 's 185 footnotes , which document a meticulous invented history of English magic . At times , the footnotes dominate entire pages of the novel . Michael Dirda , in his review for The Washington Post , describes these notes as " dazzling feats of imaginative scholarship " , in which the anonymous narrator " provides elaborate mini-essays , relating anecdotes from the lives of semi-legendary magicians , describing strange books and their contents , speculating upon the early years and later fate of the Raven King " . This extensive extra-textual apparatus is reminiscent of postmodernist works , such as David Foster Wallace 's Infinite Jest ( 1996 ) and Thomas Pynchon 's Mason & Dixon ( 1997 ) , particularly as Clarke 's notes humorously refer to previous notes in the novel . Clarke did not expect her publisher to accept the footnotes . Feeley explains that Romantic poet John Keats 's " vision of enchantment and devastation following upon any dealings with faeries " informs the novel , as the passing reference to the " cold hillside " makes clear . The magic in Jonathan Strange & Mr Norrell has been described as " wintry and sinister " and " a melancholy , macabre thing " . There are " flocks of black birds , a forest that grows up in the canals of Venice , a countryside of bleak moors that can only be entered through mirrors , a phantom bell that makes people think of everything they have ever lost , a midnight darkness that follows an accursed man everywhere he goes " . The setting reflects this tone , as " dark , fog , mist and wet give the book much of its creepy , northern atmosphere . " According to Nisi Shawl in her review for The Seattle Times , the illustrations reinforce this tenor : " Shadows fill the illustrations by Portia Rosenberg , as apt as Edward Gorey 's for Dickens ' ' Bleak House ' . " Author John Clute disagrees , arguing that they are " astonishingly inappropriate " to the tone of the novel . Noting that Clarke refers to important nineteenth-century illustrators George Cruikshank and [ Thomas Rowlandson ] , whose works are " line-dominated , intricate , scabrous , cartoon-like , savage and funny " , he is disappointed with the " soft and wooden " illustrations provided by Rosenberg .

Reviewers variously describe Jonathan Strange & Mr Norrell as a fantasy novel , an alternative history , a historical fiction , or as a combination of these styles . Clarke herself says , " I think the novel is viewed as something new ... blending together a few genres – such as fantasy and adventure and pastiche historical – plus there 's the whole thing about slightly knowing footnotes commenting on the story . " She explains in an interview that she was particularly influenced by the historical fiction of Rosemary Sutcliff as well as the fantasies of Ursula K. Le Guin and Alan Garner , and that she loves the works of Austen . In his review for The Boston Globe , John Freeman observes that Clarke 's fantasy , like that of Franz Kafka and Neil Gaiman , is imbued with realism . He argues that the footnotes in particular lend an air of credibility to the narrative : for example , they describe a fictional biography of Jonathan Strange and list where particular paintings in Norrell ’ s house are located . In an interview , Clarke describes how she creates this realist fantasy : " One way of grounding the magic is by putting in lots of stuff about street lamps , carriages and how difficult it is to get good servants . " To create this effect , the novel includes many references to real early-nineteenth century people and things , such as : artists Francisco Goya , Cruikshank , and Rowlandson ; writers Frances Burney , William Beckford , Monk Lewis , Lord Byron , and Ann Radcliffe ; Maria Edgeworth 's Belinda and Austen 's Emma ; publisher John Murray ; politicians Lord Castlereagh and George Canning ; The Gentleman 's Magazine and The Edinburgh Review ; Chippendale and Wedgwood furnishings ; and the madness of King George III . Clarke has said that she hopes the magic is as realistic as that in Le Guin 's Earthsea trilogy . This realism has led other reviewers , such as Polly Shulman , to argue that Clarke 's book is more of an historical fiction , akin to the works of Patrick O 'Brian . As she explains , " Both Clarke 's and O 'Brian 's stories are about a complicated relationship between two men bound together by their profession ; both are set during the Napoleonic wars ; and they share a dry , melancholy wit and unconventional narrative shape . " Shulman sees fantasy and historical fiction as similar because both must follow rigid rules or risk a breakdown of the narrative .

As well as literary styles , Clarke pastiches many Romantic literary genres : the comedy of manners , the Gothic tale , the silver-fork novel , the military adventure , the Byronic hero , and the historical romance of Walter Scott . In fact , Clarke 's novel maps the literary history of the early nineteenth century : the novel begins with the style and genres of Regency England , an " Austenian world of light , bright , sparkling dialogue and well-mannered gentility " , and gradually transforms into a dark , Byronic tale . Clarke combines these Romantic genres with modern ones , such as the fantasy novel , drawing on the works of J. R. R. Tolkien , Philip Pullman , T. H. White , and C. S. Lewis . As Maguire notes , Clarke includes rings of power and books of spells that originate in these authors ' works . In contrast , Sacha Zimmerman suggests in The New Republic that while Tolkien 's world is " entirely new " , Clarke 's world is more engaging because it is eerily close to the reader 's . Although many reviewers compare Jonathan Strange & Mr Norrell to the Harry Potter series , Annie Linskey contends in The Baltimore Sun that " the allusion is misleading " : unlike J. K. Rowling 's novels , Clarke 's is morally ambiguous , with its complex plot and dark characters .

Reviewers focus most frequently on the dynamic between Norrell and Strange , arguing that the novel is about their relationship . In her review for the Times Literary Supplement , Roz Kaveney writes that the two illustrate Harold Bloom 's notion of the " anxiety of influence " in addition to romantic friendship . The two are a " study in contrasts " , with Norrell " exceptionally learned but shy and fussy " while Strange is " charming , young , fashionable and romantic " . As one reviewer remarks , " Clarke could have called the book Sense and Sensibility if the title weren 't already taken . "

The novel is not about the fight between good and evil but rather the differences between madness and reason — and it is the fairy world that is connected to madness ( mad people can see fairies , for example ) . Lady Pole , who is taken away into the fairyland of Lost-Hope every night , appears insane to those around her . She is hidden away , like the character type examined by Sandra Gilbert and Susan Gubar in their seminal book The Madwoman in the Attic ( 1979 ) . Developing a " divided consciousness " , she is passive and quiet at home at the same time she is vengeful and murderous in the fairy land .

Clarke 's book is identified as distinctively English not only because of its style but also because of its themes of " vigorous common sense " , " firm ethical fiber " , " serene reason and self-confidence " , which are drawn from its Augustan literary roots . The " muddy , bloody , instinctual spirit of the fairies " is equally a part of its Englishness , along with " arrogance , provincialism and class prejudice " . The fairy tradition that Clarke draws on is particularly English ; she alludes to tales from children 's literature and others which date back to the medieval period . As Feeley notes , " The idea of fairies forming a hidden supernatural aristocracy certainly predates Spenser and Shakespeare , and seems to distinguish the English tales of wee folk from those of Scotland and Ireland . " In these medieval English stories , the fairies are depicted as " capricious , inconsistent in their attitude toward humankind , [ and ] finally unknowable " , characteristics which Clarke integrates into her own fairies . Clarke notes in an interview that she drew the idea of unpredictable , amoral fairies from the works of Neil Gaiman .

In an interview with Locus , Clarke explains why and how she integrated the theme of " Englishness " into Jonathan Strange : " I wanted to explore my ideas of the fantastic , as well as my ideas of England and my attachment to English landscape . ... Sometimes it feels to me as though we don 't have a fable of England , of Britain , something strong and idealized and romantic . I was picking up on things like Chesterton and Conan Doyle , and the sense ( which is also in Jane Austen ) of what it was to be an English gentleman at the time when England was a very confident place " . In particular , " it 's the sort of Englishness which is stuffy but fundamentally benevolent , and fundamentally very responsible about the rest of the world " , which connects Conan Doyle 's Sherlock Holmes to Clarke 's Jonathan Strange .

Using techniques of the genre of alternative history , Clarke creates events and characters that would have been impossible in the early nineteenth century . She also explores the " silencing " of under-represented groups : women , people of colour , and poor whites . Both Strange and Norrell suppress the voices of these groups in their rise to power . Mr Norrell , for example , attempts to buy up all the books of magic in England to keep anyone else from acquiring their knowledge . He also barters away half of Emma Wintertowne 's ( Lady Pole 's ) life for political influence , a deal about which , due to an enchantment , she cannot speak coherently . Clarke explores the limits of " English " magic through the characters of Stephen Black and Vinculus . As Clarke explains , " If you put a fairy next to a person who is also outside English society ... suddenly the fact that there is this alien race seems more believable , because you 've got another alien and the two of them can talk about the English in this very natural way . " The gentleman with the thistle-down hair sees Stephen as a noble savage and enslaves him — like Lady Pole , Stephen is silenced . Both " suffer under a silencing spell that mimics gaps in the historical record " . Furthermore , the gentleman 's desire to acquire Stephen for his dancing hall is reminiscent of the English objectification of black slaves . Stephen vows to hate all white Englishmen after he discovers that they enslaved his mother , but when the gentleman shows him the hanging of the white Vinculus , he weeps . Both Strange and Norrell see the essence of Englishness in the Raven King , a character who was raised by fairies and could not speak English . As Elizabeth Hoiem explains , " The most English of all Englishmen , then , is both king and slave , in many ways indistinguishable from Stephen Black . This paradox is what ultimately resolves the plot . When Strange and Norrell summon ' the nameless slave ' , the Raven King 's powerful alliances with nature are transferred to Stephen Black , allowing Stephen to kill the Gentleman and free himself from slavery . " In the end , it is Strange and Norrell who are trapped in everlasting darkness while the silenced women , people of colour , and poor whites defeat the antagonist .

To promote Jonathan Strange & Mr Norrell , Bloomsbury — who also published the Harry Potter series — launched what The Observer called " one of the biggest marketing campaigns in publishing history " . Their campaign included plans for newspaper serialisations , book deliveries by horse and carriage , and the placement of " themed teasers " , such as period stationery and mock newspapers , in United States coffeeshops . 7,500 advance readers ' copies were sent out , a limited number wrapped in paper and sealed with wax . These sold for more than US $ 100 each on eBay in England in the weeks leading up to publication . By 2005 , collectors were paying hundreds of pounds for signed copies of a limited edition of the novel . The book debuted at No. 9 on the New York Times best-seller list , rising to No. 3 two weeks later . It remained on the list for eleven weeks . Four weeks after the book 's initial publication , it was in Amazon 's top ten . Clarke went on a 20-city tour to promote the novel , after its near-simultaneous publication in 20 countries . Endorsements from independent booksellers helped the book sell out its first printing ; by the end of September 2004 , it had gone through eight printings .

The novel met with " a crackle of favorable reviews in major papers " . The New Republic hailed it as " an exceptional work " , both " thoughtful and irrepressibly imaginative " . The Houston Chronicle described Clarke as " a superb character writer " , and the Denver Post called her a " superb storyteller " . The reviews praised Clarke 's " deft " handling of the pastiche of styles , but many criticised the novel 's pace , The Guardian complaining that " the plot creaks frightfully in many places and the pace dawdles " . In his review for Science Fiction Weekly , Clute suggested that " almost every scene in the first 300 pages should have been carefully and delicately trimmed " ( emphasis in original ) since they do little to advance the story . He argued that , at times , Clarke 's Austenesque tone gets in the way of plot development . On the other hand , The Baltimore Sun found the novel " a quick read " . Complaining that the book leaves the reader " longing for just a bit more lyricism and poetry " , The Washington Post reviewer noted , with others , that " sex plays virtually no role in the story ... [ and ] one looks in vain for the corruption of the innocent " . The New Statesman reviewer , Amanda Craig , praised the novel as " a tale of magic such as might have been written by the young Jane Austen – or , perhaps , by the young Mrs Radcliffe , whose Gothic imagination and exuberant delicacy of style set the key . " However , she also criticised the book : " As fantasy , it is deplorable , given that it fails to embrace the essentially anarchic nature of such tales . What is so wonderful about magicians , wizards and all witches other than Morgan le Fay is not just their magical powers , but that they possess these in spite of being low-born . Far from caring about being gentlemen , wizards are the ultimate expression of rank 's irrelevance to talent " . However , reviewers were not in universal agreement on any of these points . Maguire wrote in the New York Times :

What keeps this densely realised confection aloft is that very quality of reverence to the writers of the past . The chief character in Jonathan Strange and Mr. Norrell isn 't , in fact , either of the magicians : it 's the library that they both adore , the books they consult and write and , in a sense , become . Clarke 's giddiness comes from finding a way at once to enter the company of her literary heroes , to pay them homage and to add to the literature . While promoting the novel , Neil Gaiman said that it was " unquestionably the finest English novel of the fantastic written in the last 70 years " , a statement which has most often been read hyperbolically . However , as Clute explains , what Gaiman meant was that Jonathan Strange is " the finest English novel of the fantastic since Hope Mirrlees 's great Lud-in-the-Mist ( 1926 ) , which is almost certainly the finest English fantasy about the relationship between England and the fantastic yet published " ( emphasis in original ) . Clute writes that " a more cautious claim " would be : " if Susanna Clarke finishes the story she has hardly begun in Strange ... she may well have then written the finest English novel of the fantastic about the myth of England and the myth of the fantastic and the marriage of the two ever published , bar none of the above , including Mirrlees . "

On 15 October 2004 , New Line Cinema announced that it had bought a three-year option on the film rights to Jonathan Strange & Mr Norrell . Clarke received an undisclosed " seven-figure sum " , making the deal " one of the biggest acquisitions of film rights for a book in recent years " . New Line chose Christopher Hampton , whose adaptation of Dangerous Liaisons won an Academy Award , to write it ; New Line executives Mark Ordesky and Ileen Maisel were overseeing the production . On 7 November 2005 , The Daily Telegraph reported that Hampton had finished the first draft : " As you can imagine , it took a fair amount of time to work out some way to encapsulate that enormous book in a film of sensible length ... [ b ] ut it was lots of fun – and very unlike anything I have ever done before . " At that time , no director or cast had yet been chosen . As of June 2006 , Hampton was still working on the screenplay . Julian Fellowes then took over writing duties before the collapse of New Line Cinema .

The 32-hour audio book of Jonathan Strange & Mr Norrell was released by Audio Renaissance in 2004 . According to a review in The Boston Globe , reader Simon Prebble " navigates this production with much assuredness and an array of accents . ... Prebble 's full voice is altered to a delicate softness for young ladies of a certain breeding , or tightened to convey the snarkiness often heard in the costive Norrell . " Prebble interrupts the main text to read the footnotes , announcing them with the word footnote . According to the AudioFile review , the " narrative flow suffers " because of these interruptions and the reviewer recommends listening " with text in hand " . Each note is on its own track , so listeners have the option of skipping them without missing text from the main narrative . When doing public readings , Clarke herself skips the notes .

Union Bank of Switzerland ( UBS ) was a large integrated financial services company located in Switzerland . The bank , which at the time was the second largest bank in Switzerland , merged with Swiss Bank Corporation in 1998 , to become UBS to form what was then the largest bank in Europe and the second largest bank in the World . UBS was formed in 1912 through the merger of the Bank in Winterthur and Toggenburger Bank , both founded in the early 1860s . UBS then continued to grow through acquisitions , including Aargauische Kreditanstalt in 1919 , Eidgenössische Bank in 1945 , Interhandel Basel in 1967 , Phillips & Drew in 1986 , and Schröder , Münchmeyer , Hengst & Co. in 1997 among others . The historical UBS logo features a horizontal acronym " UBS " referring to the " Union Bank of Switzerland " , " Union de Banques Suisses " or " Unione di Banche Svizzere " . The vertical acronym " SBG " refers to the name of the bank in German " Schweizerische Bankgesellschaft " . " UBS " ceased to be considered a representational abbreviation for the Union Bank of Switzerland after the bank 's 1998 merger with Swiss Bank Corporation and is today considered a standalone brand .

By the 1980s , the bank had undertaken a major push into the securities business internationally . The bank established a position as a leading European underwriter of Eurobonds and pulled off a major coup in 1985 by pricing a large bond offering for Nestlé , Rockwell , IBM , and Mobil at below market rates . The bank also made two major acquisitions in 1986 , first it purchased Phillips & Drew an established British brokerage and asset management firm , founded in 1895 . However , UBS initially had issues integrating Phillips & Drew . The firm lost £ 15 million when a rush of orders overwhelmed the firm ’ s settlement system in 1987 . Then the bank lost £ 48 million as a result of Philips & Drew positions in the October 1987 stock market crash . Between April 1987 and February 1988 , UBS was required to spend as much as £ 115 million to shore up Phillips & Drew . Phillips & Drew unit returned to profitability in 1992 after years of losses . UBS also expanded into West Germany , acquiring Deutsche Länderbank in 1986 . In 1991 , UBS made its first acquisition in the United States , purchasing Chase Investors Management Corporation , the asset management business of Chase Manhattan Bank . Chase Investors , which was established in 1972 , was subsequently folded into UBS Asset Management after the acquisition . At the time of the acquisition , which resulted in approximately US $ 100 million for Chase , the business managed in excess of US $ 30 billion in public and private pension plans , as well as various financial assets of corporations , governments , foundations and endowments .

UBS also entered the life insurance business in 1993 establishing UBS Life . UBS formed a joint venture with Swiss Life in 1995 , known as UBS Swiss Life . UBS took a 25 % ownership position in Swiss Life in exchange for a 50 % share in the joint venture . UBS entered the 1990s clearly the largest and most conservative of the three large Swiss Banks . Unlike Swiss Bank and Credit Suisse , which had both made aggressive international acquisitions in trading and investment banking , UBS ’ s investments had been more conservative in businesses such as asset management and life insurance while 60 % of the bank 's profits came from its even more conservative Swiss banking operations . In 1993 , Credit Suisse outbid UBS for Switzerland 's Swiss Volksbank , the fifth largest bank in Switzerland which had run into financial difficulties in the early 1990s . The acquisition propelled Credit Suisse ahead of UBS as the largest bank in Switzerland for the first time . UBS instead settled on a group of less audacious acquisitions , purchasing a group of smaller banks in Switzerland in 1994 and then acquiring the Cantonal Bank of Appenzell-Ausserrhoden in 1996 .

During the mid-1990s , UBS came under fire from dissident shareholders , critical of bank 's relatively conservative management and lower return on equity . Martin Ebner , through his investment trust , BK Vision became the largest shareholder in UBS and attempted to force a major restructuring of the bank ’ s operations . The battles between Ebner and UBS management proved a distraction to the bank in the mid-1990s . Looking to take advantage of the situation , Credit Suisse approached UBS about a merger that would have created the second largest bank in the world in 1996 . UBS 's management and board unanimously rebuffed the proposed merger . Ebner , who supported the idea of a merger , led a major shareholder revolt that resulted in the replacement of UBS 's chairman , Robert Studer . Studer 's successor Mathis Cabiallavetta would be one of the key architects of the merger with Swiss Bank Corporation . On 8 December 1997 , Union Bank of Switzerland and Swiss Bank Corporation announced an all stock merger . At the time of the merger , Union Bank of Switzerland and Swiss Bank Corporation were the second and third largest banks in Switzerland , respectively both trailing Credit Suisse . Discussions between the two banks had begun several months earlier , less than a year after rebuffing Credit Suisse 's merger overtures .

The all-stock merger resulted in the creation UBS AG , a huge new bank with total assets of more than US $ 590 billion . Also referred to as the " New UBS " to distinguish itself from the former Union Bank of Switzerland , the combined bank became the second largest in the world , at that time , behind only the Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi . Additionally , the merger pulled together the banks ' various asset management businesses to create the world 's largest money manager , with approximately US $ 910 billion in assets under management . The merger , which was billed as a merger of equals , resulted in UBS 's shareholders receiving 60 % of the combined company and Swiss Bank 's shareholders receiving the remaining 40 % of the bank 's common shares . UBS 's Mathis Cabiallavetta became chairman of the new bank while Swiss Bank 's Marcel Ospel was named chief executive officer . However , it quickly became evident that from a management perspective , it was Swiss Bank that was buying UBS as nearly 80 % of the top management positions were filled by legacy Swiss Bank professionals . Additionally , UBS professionals suffered more headcount reductions , particularly in the investment banking unit where there were heavy cuts in the corporate finance and equities businesses . The more severe cuts at UBS were an acknowledgment that prior to the merger Swiss Bank Corporation had built a global investment banking business , Warburg Dillon Read through its acquisitions of Dillon Read in New York and S.G. Warburg in London . Swiss Bank was generally considered to be further along than UBS in developing its international investment banking business , particularly in the higher margin advisory businesses where Warburg Dillon Read was considered to be the more established platform . UBS , on the other hand had a stronger retail and commercial banking business in Switzerland and both banks had notably strong asset management capabilities .

Prior to its merger with Swiss Bank Corporation , UBS operated as a full-service bank and a provider of wholesale financial services through its retail banking , commercial banking , investment banking , asset management and wealth management businesses . In 1997 , prior to its merger with Swiss Bank Corporation , UBS operated 275 branches in Switzerland and 82 branches , subsidiaries and representative offices outside Switzerland . The company had approximately 27,611 employees , of which 19,355 worked in Switzerland and the remaining 8,256 employees were outside Switzerland . The bank had total assets of nearly CHF578 billion and shareholders ' equity of nearly CHF28 billion as of the end of 1997 .

In 1862 , The Bank in Winterthur was founded in Winterthur , Switzerland , with an initial share capital of CHF5 million . The Bank in Winterthur operated primarily as a commercial bank , providing financing for a range of companies and projects . The bank would be involved in funding the Swiss Locomotive and Machine Works , the hotel Baur au Lac in Zurich and many other companies . The bank capitalized on its location at an important Swiss railroad junction and its large warehousing facilities allowed the bank to take advantage of the dramatic rise in cotton prices caused by the American Civil War . The Bank in Winterthur saw its share capital double by the end of the war . Meanwhile , in 1863 , the Toggenburger Bank was founded in Lichtensteig , Switzerland with an initial share capital of CHF1.5 million . The Toggenburger Bank was a savings and mortgage bank for individual customers with a branch office network in Eastern Switzerland . In 1882 , Toggenburger Bank opened a branch in St. Gallen in eastern Switzerland and began to shift its operations there through the end of the 19th century . The Union Bank of Switzerland was formed in 1912 when the Bank in Winterthur merged with the Toggenburger Bank . The combined bank had total assets of CHF202 million and a total shareholders ' equity of CHF46 million . This combination was part of a larger trend toward concentration in the banking sector in Switzerland at the time . Through the next few years , the bank would begin to shift its operations to Zurich from its historical headquarters in the cities of Winterthur and St. Gallen , Switzerland . In 1917 , UBS completed construction of a new headquarters in Zurich on Bahnhofstrasse , considered to be the Wall Street of Switzerland .

The new bank used different names in its three core languages : German , French and English . In German , the bank was Schweizerische Bankgesellschaft and was known by the initials SBG . The original English name for the combined bank was the Swiss Banking Association , but it was later changed to Union Bank of Switzerland in 1921 to mirror the French form of the name : Union de Banques Suisses . The bank 's logo , introduced in 1966 , would later reflect both the German SBG and the English and French name UBS . UBS acquired a number of banks in its first decade as a combined bank and expanded its branch network , establishing representation throughout Switzerland by 1923 . UBS acquired a controlling interest in Aargauische Creditanstalt in 1913 and Banque Ch . Masson & Cie. in 1916 . Although the bank suffered during World War I and the postwar economic crises in Europe , UBS continued to make acquisitions after the conclusion of World War I. The bank purchased the remaining stake in Aargauische Creditanstalt in 1919 that it had not acquired in 1913 . Also in 1919 , the bank acquired Commandit-AG Weibel & Cie. in Fleurier and William Cuénod & Cie . In 1920 , UBS acquired Banca Svizzera-Americana with branches in Locarno and Lugano ; Unionbank Geneva and Banque Henry Rieckel & Cie . , based in La Chaux-de-Fonds . Three years later , in 1923 , UBS acquired the Schweizerische Vereinsbank in Bern establishing representation in the last of the major cities in Switzerland .

Through the Great Depression , UBS pared its assets considerably shrinking from CHF993 million in 1929 to CHF441 million at the end of 1935 . The bank saw its shareholders ' capital decline from CHF100 million in 1929 to CHF80 million in 1933 and then further to CHF40 million by 1936 . However , the bank continued to acquire smaller , weaker competitors , purchasing Banca Unione di Credito in Lugano and Chiasso in 1935 followed by Berner Handelsbank in Bern in 1938 . In 1937 , UBS established Intrag AG , an asset management business responsible for investment trusts ( i.e. , mutual funds ) and set up the " America-Canada Trust Fund AMCA " . Over the years , Intrag would set up a series of other funds , including the " Mutual Fund for Swiss Stocks FONSA " and the " South Africa Trust Fund SAFIT " . The Bank in Winterthur and the Toggenburger Bank merge to form the Schweizerische Bankgesellschaft . Its French name is Union de Banques Suisses ( UBS ) and its Italian name is Unione di Banche Svizzere ( UBS ) . The English name of the bank at first is Swiss Banking Association . In 1921 that somewhat inappropriate name is changed into Union Bank of Switzerland ( UBS ) .

The merged bank shows the following figures for 1912 : Total assets : CHF202 million . Shareholders ' Equity : CHF46 million . Profit : CHF2.4 million . First Chairman of the Board of Directors of the merged bank from 1912 until 1941 is Rudolf Ernst , of Winterthur , until 1921 alternating with C. Emil Grob-Halter of Lichtensteig . After the merger of the Bank in Winterthur and the Toggenburger Bank to form Union Bank of Switzerland ( UBS ) , Dr. Rudolf Ernst became the merged bank 's first chairman in 1912 . Following his resignation in 1941 , he was elected as an Honorary chairman of Union Bank of Switzerland . Rudolf Ernst joined the Bank in Winterthur in 1895 . He was also financial director of the City of Winterthur for 16 years . At the young age of 36 , he was elected in 1901 to the Board of Directors of the Bank in Winterthur and as its chairman at the same time . During his chairmanship , the bank changed its focus from its original lending business and began to expand its issuing and asset management franchise . With the acquisition of the Bank in Baden in 1906 , the bank gained a branch in Zurich and a seat on the stock exchange , one of the cornerstones for the successful merger in 1912 with the Toggenburger Bank to form Union Bank of Switzerland . Rudolf Ernst also held directorships on the boards of various industrial and insurance companies . Between 1912 and his retirement in 1941 , he was chairman of the Board of Union Bank of Switzerland , in an alternating capacity with Carl Emil Grob-Halter , who held the chairmanship in 1916 and 1918 as the representative of the merger partner Toggenburger Bank .

On the eve of World War II , UBS was the recipient of a large influx of foreign funds for safekeeping . During the war , the bank 's traditional business fell off and the Swiss government became their largest clients . Still , unlike many of its peers , UBS 's business lagged through much of the war . Decades after the war , it was demonstrated that Union Bank of Switzerland likely took active roles in trading stolen gold , securities and other assets during World War II . The issue of " unclaimed property " of Holocaust victims became a major issue for UBS in the mid-1990s and a series of revelations in 1997 brought the issue to the forefront of national attention in 1996 and 1997 . UBS confirmed that a large number of accounts that had gone unclaimed as a result of the bank 's policy of requiring death certificates from family members to claim the contents of the account . UBS 's handling of these revelations were largely criticized and the bank received significant negative attention in the U.S. UBS came under significant pressure , particularly from American politicians , to compensate Holocaust survivors who were making claims against the bank .

In January 1997 , Christoph Meili , a night watchman at the Union Bank of Switzerland , found employees shredding archives compiled by a subsidiary that had extensive dealings with Nazi Germany . The shredding was in direct violation of a recent Swiss law adopted in December 1996 protecting such material . UBS acknowledged that it had " made a deplorable mistake " , but an internal historian maintained that the destroyed archives were unrelated to the Holocaust . Criminal proceedings then began against the archivist for possible violation of a recent Federal Document Destruction decree and against Meili for possible violation of bank secrecy , which is a criminal offence in Switzerland . Both proceedings were discontinued by the District Attorney in September 1997 . Meili was suspended from his job at the security company that served UBS , following a criminal investigation . Meili and his family left Switzerland for the United States where they were granted political asylum . By contrast , in the U.S. , Meili was largely regarded as a hero and whistleblower and received a particularly warm reception from the American Jewish community . In 1997 , the World Jewish Congress lawsuit against Swiss banks ( WJC ) was launched to retrieve deposits made by victims of Nazi persecution during and prior to World War II . Negotiations involving Union Bank of Switzerland , Credit Suisse , the WJC and Stuart Eizenstat , on behalf of the U.S. , ultimately resulted in a settlement of US $ 1.25 billion in August 1998 . The settlement , which coincided with UBS 's merger with Swiss Bank , together with the bank 's embarrassment in the Long Term Capital Management collapse in 1998 brought a degree of closure to the issue .

Shortly after the end of World War II , UBS completed the acquisition of Eidgenössische Bank , a large Zurich-based bank that became insolvent . As a result of the merger , UBS exceeded CHF1 billion of assets for the first time and completed the transition of its operations to Zurich . Although UBS opened an office in New York in 1946 , the bank remained primarily focused on its domestic business . Prior to the end of World War II , the Swiss banking landscape was dominated by Swiss Bank Corporation and Credit Suisse . UBS was among the next group of large banks that included Schweizerische Volksbank ( Swiss Volksbank or Swiss Popular Bank ) and Bank Leu . Throughout the 1950s and 1960s , the Union Bank of Switzerland , which was at best the third largest bank in Switzerland would catch up to its larger peers and by the 1970s surpass them in terms of size . UBS opened branches and acquired a series of banks in Switzerland growing from 31 offices in 1950 to 81 offices by the beginning of the 1960s . Throughout the 1950s , UBS was the most acquisitive bank in Switzerland , acquiring Banque Palézieux & Cie . ( 1948 ) , Volksbank Interlaken ( 1952 ) , Weck , Aebi & Cie ( 1954 ) , Banque Tissières fils & Cie . ( 1956 ) , Banque de Sion ( 1956 ) , Banque de Brigue ( 1957 ) , the Crédit Gruyérien ( 1957 ) , Crédit Sierrois ( 1957 ) , Bank Cantrade AG ( 1960 ) and Volksbank in Visp ( 1960 ) .

In addition to these bank acquisitions , UBS also acquired an 80 % stake in Argor SA , a Swiss precious metal refinery founded in 1951 , through whom they started to issue UBS branded gold bars . In 1973 , the bank increased the stake to full 100 % ownership only to withdraw by 1999 with ownership of the refinery changing to Hereaus & Management . Nevertheless , UBS continues to issue gold bars via Argor-Heraeus which is famous for the unique kinebar holographic technology it uses to provide enhanced protection against bank gold bar counterfeiting . By 1962 , UBS reached CHF6.96 billion of assets , narrowly edging ahead of Swiss Bank Corporation to become the largest bank in Switzerland temporarily . Through 1979 , SBC was consistently the largest of the three major Swiss banks by assets , except for short periods in 1962 and then again in 1968 when UBS temporarily moved ahead of SBC . After 1979 , UBS would firmly establish itself as the largest Swiss bank . UBS would retain this position for the next 15 years until Credit Suisse leapfrogged into the top spot following its 1993 acquisition of Schweizerische Volksbank ( Swiss Volksbank ) and later Winterthur Group .

UBS continued its rapid growth in the 1960s punctuated by the acquisition of Interhandel ( Industrie- und Handelsbeteiligungen AG ) in 1967 . Interhandel , originally , was a large Swiss conglomerate that up until the 1960s had both financial as well as industrial holdings . Interhandel was the corporate successor of I.G. Chemie , which the U.S. government had claimed was a front for Germany 's I.G. Farben during World War II . During the war , the U.S. government seized General Aniline & Film ( later GAF Corporation ) , an Interhandel subsidiary , and it was not until 1963 that the long-running dispute between Interhandel and the U.S. government was resolved . The shares in GAF Corporation were sold in a highly competitive auction in 1965 and the proceeds were split between Interhandel and the U.S. government . As a result of the sale of GAF , at the time of its merger with UBS , Interhandel held substantial amounts of cash . The addition of the Interhandel capital , which propelled UBS into the top spot among Swiss banks in 1968 , also made UBS one of the strongest banks in Europe and helped fuel the bank ’ s further expansion in the late 1960s and 1970s . UBS consolidated four affiliated mortgage lenders and assumed their domestic retail operations . The bank further expanded into consumer lending through the acquisition of a series of Swiss financial businesses in 1969 , including Banque Orca , Abri Bank Bern , Aufina Bank and AKO Bank .

UBS also began to intensify its overseas expansion . In 1967 , UBS opened a full branch office in London , its first such office outside Switzerland . Prior to this , UBS had operated through a series of correspondent banks and representative offices . Three years later , UBS opened a branch office in New York . The bank also established a UK subsidiary in 1975 and a U.S. subsidiary in 1979 to focus on building the bank ’ s presence in the underwriting of debt and equity securities . Nevertheless , UBS , which had traditionally concentrated its efforts on the domestic Swiss market , was the last of the three largest Swiss banks to establish a branch office in the U.S. and its securities operations were overshadowed by those of its two Swiss peers .

Union Bank of Switzerland , suffering criticism of its conservative business model , was looking for ways to catch up to its key Swiss rivals and viewed LTCM as the type of client that could help accelerate the bank 's growth . In 1997 , UBS entered into a financing arrangement with LTCM and the hedge fund quickly became the bank 's largest client , generating US $ 15 million in fees for UBS . Union Bank of Switzerland sold LTCM a 7-year European call option on 1 million shares in LTCM , then valued at about US $ 800 million . It hedged this option by purchasing a US $ 800 million interest in LTCM and invested a further US $ 300 million in the hedge fund . Following the merger , Swiss Bank managers were surprised to discover the massive exposure to LTCM at UBS . Ultimately , UBS was unable to sell or hedge its interest in LTCM as its value declined in the summer of 1998 . By November 1998 , UBS 's losses from its exposure to LTCM were estimated at approximately CHF790 million . UBS would prove to be the largest single loser in the LTCM collapse , ultimately writing off CHF950 million . The Federal Reserve Bank of New York organized a bailout of US $ 3.625 billion by the hedge fund 's major creditors to avoid a wider collapse in the financial markets . UBS contributed US $ 300 million to the bailout effort , which would largely be recovered . In the aftermath of the LTCM collapse , Mathis Cabiallavetta resigned as chairman of UBS along with three other executives .

Ginga Legend Weed ( Japanese : 銀牙伝説ウィード , Hepburn : Ginga Densetsu Wīdo , lit . Silver Fang Legend Weed ) is a Japanese manga series written and illustrated by Yoshihiro Takahashi . It is a sequel to Takahashi 's 1980s manga Ginga : Nagareboshi Gin , and focuses on Weed , the son of Gin , the original series ' protagonist . Weed , named after the English word for wild plant , leaves his birthplace to search for his father in the Ōu Mountains . Upon arriving , Weed immediately begins protecting Ōu and its soldiers from dangerous threats . As the series progresses , Weed and his allies journey throughout Japan , aiding those in need and preventing takeovers . Ginga Legend Weed was originally serialized in the magazine Weekly Manga Goraku from 1999 to 2009 . Publisher Nihon Bungeisha released 60 bound volumes and later reprinted early volumes . ComicsOne licensed the series for release in Canada and the United States , but issued only three volumes before it went out of business . Ginga Legend Weed has not been relicensed and distributed in the English language . In addition to the main series , Takahashi authored several side stories and books relating to Weed and the supporting cast . In 2005 , Studio Deen produced an anime series that aired on Animax . The show was released on several DVDs between 2006 and 2007 in Japan , and was licensed and distributed in Taiwan and several Nordic countries . Takahashi also published a prequel to Ginga Legend .

Several years after the events of Ginga : Nagareboshi Gin , Gin 's son is born in the Japanese Alps . After the puppy 's mother Sakura dies from an illness , an English Setter named GB pledges to bring him to the Ōu Mountains and reunite him with his father . GB decides to name the pup Weed , after the English word for wild plant , because he is " small but powerful " . Upon arriving at Ōu , the pair learn that a monstrous creature is wreaking havoc and Ōu has fallen into turmoil . Gin is away , on a desperate search for his mate . Weed , GB , and other Ōu soldiers meet a team of dogs led by the German shepherd Jerome . Jerome explains that the monster is a mutated dog that escaped from a laboratory after killing several scientists . Weed 's group joins them and they succeed in killing the monster , though lose several soldiers in the process , among them Gin 's old ally , Smith . The series then introduces Hōgen and Genba , Great Dane brothers who plan to create an army and overthrow Gin . When Gin and his close friends John and Akame are found by Hōgen and his troops , Akame escapes to alert Ōu , while Gin , John , and Hiro ( a dog loyal to Gin ) are taken as hostages . John escapes , but is killed while acting as a diversion for Hiro . Akame locates Weed and explains the situation , prompting him to search for dogs to join Ōu 's army . Gin escapes and starts recruiting soldiers . Hōgen , alone after having to mercy kill Genba , launches his attack on Ōu . Weed clashes with Hōgen and is injured , but spirits of dead Ōu soldiers appear to give him strength . Weed defeats Hōgen but chooses not to kill him . Hōgen stumbles away and is found by Shōji Sudou , a policeman whose partner was killed by Genba and Hōgen . Shōji shoots and kills Hōgen .

Later , Weed encounters a dog named Yukimura , and learns that a group of monkeys have been terrorizing the area . Leading them is Shōgun , a vicious baboon that feeds on young monkeys and puppies . Shōgun had previously attacked Yukimura and his family , permanently damaging his adopted father Saheiji . Weed , his comrades , Yukimura , and several rebellious monkeys attack Shōgun and his followers . Yukimura is able to injure Shōgun enough to ensure his death , but dies in the process . Saheiji reveals that Yukimura was Weed 's brother : Sakura , too sick to care for all of her children , had given two of her puppies to Saheiji to raise as foster sons . While Jerome is in Hokkaidō , he is captured by a Russian German shepherd named Victor , who aims to conquer the island . Jerome escapes and alerts Hakurō , a former Ōu soldier who resides in Hokkaidō . Hakurō and several of his sons are attacked and killed by Victor 's forces . Gin and Weed go to Hokkaidō , but are unable to defeat Victor 's troops . Jerome rejoins the Ōu soldiers with Lydia and Maxim , two subordinates of Victor . Angry at Maxim 's betrayal , Victor orders a friend of Maxim , Alam , to kill him . Alam feels an intense regret for following orders , but later learns that Maxim survived . Alam decides to drown Victor by dragging him underwater and entangling him in seaweed . With Victor gone , Lydia chooses to stay with Jerome while Maxim and his remaining subordinates swim back to Russia .

While traveling , Weed meets his other brother , Joe . Joe dislikes Gin for leaving Sakura unattended in the Alps . He is unaware that Sakura had left Ōu under the false impression that Gin was dead , and that Gin had been unaware of Sakura 's leaving . Joe explains that a large hybrid bear has attacked and killed his mate , Hitomi . Weed 's group joins Joe to defeat the animal . During the battle , GB dies saving Weed , and Weed vows to avenge him . Weed knocks himself and the bear into a river . The bear dies after hitting a floodgate and Weed manages to survive . He returns to Ōu and learns that his mate , Koyuki , is pregnant . Weeks later , she gives birth to four pups .

Ginga Legend Weed was written and illustrated by Yoshihiro Takahashi . It is a sequel to his 1980s series Ginga : Nagareboshi Gin , and follows the son of Gin , the title character from the original series . It began serialization in Weekly Manga Goraku magazine in 1999 . The Japanese publisher Nihon Bungeisha released the series in collected volumes from January 2000 to September 2009 . Cumulatively , 60 volumes were published . In October 2006 , Nihon Bungeisha released the first volume of a reprinted edition of Ginga Legend Weed . The company has released 22 volumes of the reprint edition , with the latest published in December 2007 . The American company ComicsOne licensed the series for release in the United States and Canada in 2000 with the first three volumes released between March and June 2001 . Additionally , they provided an Adobe Digital Editions e-book version . ComicsOne later went bankrupt . American publisher DrMaster acquired the rights to some of ComicsOne 's titles , but not Ginga Legend Weed . While the physical copies are out-of-print , the e-book version is still available . Under their G-Comics imprint , Nihon Bungeisha released several Ginga Legend Weed omnibus editions labeled as " specials " . A series of three specials were released in April 2004 called Gajō no Kettō Hen ( 牙城の血闘編 ) . Throughout 2009 and 2010 , another set of eight " specials " were produced : Tabidachi Hen ( September 2009 ) , Senshi no Shōmei Hen ( October 2009 ) , Inuzoku no Tsutome Hen ( November 2009 ) , Otoko no Yakusoku Hen ( December 2009 ) , Taiman Shōbu Hen ( January 2010 ) , Taishō no Utsuwa Hen ( February 2010 ) , Dōshu Taiketsu Hen ( March 2010 ) , and Uketsuga Reshi Kiba Hen ( April 2010 ) .

Nihon Bungeisha released several books authored by Takahashi that relate to the main series . Ginga Legend Weed Gaiden ( 銀牙伝説ウィード外伝 ) , first released on August 9 , 2001 and re-released in December 2007 , is a collection of four short stories , including a side-story about a Golden Retriever named Mel , who is a character in the main series , and the story of Takahashi 's past dog Hanako . My Dog , My Weed ( ぼくの犬 僕のウィード ) , a collection of art , essays , and personal experiences pertaining to the attachment between people and animals , was released in November 2001 . In 2002 , Nihon Bungeisha released a magazine called Weed World , which centered around Ginga Legend Weed and related material . In total , 5 issues were published between March and May . In January 2002 , an art book entitled Ginga Legend Weed : Gengashū ( 銀牙伝説ウィード原画集 ) was released . Ginga Legend Weed : Meishōbu Retsuden ( 銀牙伝説ウィード名勝負列伝 ) , a book containing character biographies and statistics , was released in May 2003 . In November 2005 , Ginga Densetsu Weed Tokubetsu Han ( 銀牙伝説ウィード特別版 ) , an omnibus volume containing the prequel Ginga Legend Riki and Weed Gaiden , was released .

In 2005 , Studio Deen produced a 26-episode animated adaptation of Ginga Legend Weed , directed by Toshiyuki Kato . In Japan , the series aired from November 3 , 2005 to May 11 , 2006 on Animax with the SKY PerfecTV ! service . Dohatsuten , a Japanese band , performed both the opening and ending themes , Ginga Densetsu Weed and Tsuki Akari ( つきあかり ) , respectively . On December 7 , 2005 , Imperial Records released a single containing the themes and karaoke versions . The full soundtrack for the series , composed by Y2 DOGS , was released by Imperial Records on January 25 , 2006 . The entirety of Ginga Legend Weed was initially released on 13 DVDs published between February 17 , 2006 and March 1 , 2007 . On August 29 , 2008 , a complete box set containing all 13 discs was released . The electronics company Sankyo created a Ginga Legend Weed pachinko game that utilizes the anime character designs . Top-Insight International licensed Ginga Legend Weed for release in Taiwan . The company released seven individual DVDs , and one complete box set . The series aired in Taiwan on China Television . Future Film licensed and released the series in Finland . The company released Ginga Legend Weed on eight separate DVDs between August 2 , 2006 and December 5 , 2006 . On November 14 , 2007 , Future Film released the entire series on a collector 's edition . The release was bundled with a Weed booklet and mobile phone charm . In Sweden , AudVid distributed the series in one box set on June 15 , 2007 . The set included an extra 16-page booklet . The Finnish and Swedish releases included both Swedish and Finnish subtitles . In Denmark , Scanbox Entertainment released eight DVDs containing the series in 2007 , and in 2008 produced two box sets containing episodes 1-13 and 14-26 , respectively . In addition to a Danish dub , Scanbox 's release included Danish and Norwegian subtitles .

The 55th volume of Ginga Legend Weed was listed as number 30 on the Oricon sales chart in Japan for the week December 9 – 15 , 2008 . Its sales numbers for the week were 20,059 copies , for a cumulative total of 21,320 since its release . Ginga Legend Weed was featured on Jason Thompson 's House of 1000 Manga segment on Anime News Network . He praised the series for its story and took note of the " flavor " of having a combination of physically realistic dogs , " shōnen tropes " , the dogs ' knowledge of the human world ( such as job occupations and dog breeds ) , and dog behavior involving honor , loyalty , honorifics , and auras . However , Thompson noted that the " noble melodrama sometimes gets to be a little much " , and felt that several characters , with the exception of Weed , began " to blur together " due to the difficulty of drawing a very large cast of dogs . Additionally , he commented that the fights weren 't visually " exciting " , as dogs are " lacking prehensile arms " . Overall , Thompson felt that the series was unique , stating that " no one else [ is ] making manga quite like this . " In a later installment of House of 1000 Manga , Thompson expressed his preference for Takahashi 's original work , Ginga : Nagareboshi Gin , stating that it felt " more exciting and natural " than its " stiffer and more pompous " sequel .

In 2002 , Takahashi began publishing Ginga Legend Riki ( 銀牙伝説リキ , lit . Silver Fang Legend Riki ) , a prequel to Ginga Legend Weed and Ginga : Nagareboshi Gin . It was originally serialized in the Weed-centric magazine Weed World , published by Nihon Bungeisha , between March 31 , 2002 and December 10 , 2002 . In March 2003 , Nihon Bungeisha released the collected chapters in a single book and in December 2005 , it was included in the omnibus Ginga Densetsu Weed Tokubetsu Han with Weed Gaiden . A reprinted edition of Ginga Legend Riki was released in March 2007 . The one-shot follows Riki , father of Gin and former leader of the Ōu soldiers . Riki , though sired by the prized bear hound Shiro , is born a runt and never homed . After his mother Yamabuki is returned to her owner , Riki , stricken with sadness , decides to visit her . During his trek , Riki is attacked by a pack of dogs and falls into a river . Riki is rescued by his father , Shiro , who advises him about the importance of strength and leaves , not knowing Riki is his son . Influenced by Shiro , Riki aims to become strong and continually visits his mother . On a later trip , Riki sees a young boy , Daisuke , hit by a truck on a mountain road and sent over the road railing . Riki howls for help , but instead attracts the dogs that had attacked him . Riki defends Daisuke until Shiro and his owner , Gohei , arrive . Shiro learns that Riki is his son . The book ends with Gohei and Shiro fighting the bear Akakabuto . A bullet becomes lodged in Akakabuto 's brain , driving him insane . Riki watches as the bear grabs Shiro and they fall off a cliff .

Takahashi began a sequel to Ginga Legend Weed , entitled Ginga Legend Weed : Orion ( 銀牙伝説ウィード オリオン , Ginga Densetsu Wīdo : Orion , lit . Silver Fang Legend Weed : Orion ) , in issue # 2173 of Manga Goraku , released on July 24 , 2009 . The first collected volume was released by Nihon Bungeisha in November 2009 . 30 volumes have been published and the series as of July 2014 . The new series follows Weed 's offspring : Bellatrix , Rigel , Sirius , and , in particular , Orion . They are all named after astronomical phenomenon : Orion after the Orion constellation , Rigel after the star Rigel , Sirius after the star Sirius , and Bellatrix after the star Bellatrix . Orion bears a close physical resemblance Riki and possesses an inborn strength , but is rude and hot-headed . Rigel shares Orion 's fiery personality , while Sirius , who resembles his father , is level-headed and a peace-keeper . Bellatrix , Weed 's only daughter , is portrayed as immature and whiny . An earthquake and subsequent volcanic eruption separates Orion from his parents and siblings . Joe locates Orion and brings him to safety but disappears in the process , while the other siblings are put under the charge of the Ōu soldier Sasuke . With the Ōu Mountains in complete disarray , new threats arrive to exploit its weaknesses . Three sons of the Irish Wolfhound Kamakiri , a platoon leader for Hōgen , wish to avenge their father 's death . Kurohabaki Masamune , the leader of the Kurohabaki Clan of ninja dogs , aims to take over Ōu and strengthen his army . He is the adoptive son of the former Kurohabaki leader , Terumune , and was previously denied leadership of the clan , despite his striving for approval . Instead , Terumune decided that his blood-related son Yamabiko , born after Masamune 's arrival , would become leader . Thereafter , Masamune banished Terumune and took control of the clan . He holds a grudge against Yamabiko and plans to find and kill him . Meanwhile , members of the Kurohabaki clan roam Ōu , gathering recruits and killing those who resist .

Manuel Máximiliano Alberti ( 28 May 1763 – 31 January 1811 ) was a priest from Buenos Aires , when the city was part of the Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata . He had a curacy at Maldonado , Uruguay during the British invasions of the Río de la Plata , and returned to Buenos Aires in time to take part in the May Revolution of 1810 . He was chosen as one of the seven members of the Primera Junta , which is considered the first national government of Argentina . He supported most of the proposals of Mariano Moreno and worked at the Gazeta de Buenos Ayres newspaper . The internal disputes of the Junta had a negative effect on his health , and he died of a heart attack in 1811 .

Manuel Alberti was born in Buenos Aires on 28 May 1763 to Antonio Alberti and Juana Agustina Marín . He was baptized on the following 1 June at the Concepción parish ; his godparents were Juan Javier Dogan and Isabel de Soria y Santa Cruz . He had three brothers , Isidoro , Manuel Silvestre and Félix , and three sisters , Casimira , Juana María and María Clotilde . The Alberti family became benefactor of the House of Spiritual Works of Buenos Aires by donating them a land plot so it could move its headquarters . He made his first studies at the Real Colegio de San Carlos in February 1777 , graduating in philosophy , logic , physics and metaphysics . He studied with Hipólito Vieytes , and ended his secondary education on 17 February 1779 . He moved to Córdoba the following year , to get university studies of theology at the National University of Córdoba . Despite a brief return to Buenos Aires during his second year because of health problems , he could finish all the syllabus . He got his doctorate in theology and physics on 16 July 1785 . He got his degree at the Church of the Company from interim provost Fray Pedro Gaitán .

He received the presbyterate in the first months of 1786 , and was appointed for the Concepción parish , the same one where he was baptized . He also worked at the aforementioned House of Spiritual Works of Buenos Aires . He got the curacy of Magdalena on 12 September 1790 , but resigned a year later because of health problems . He returned in 1793 , and resigned definitively on 21 February 1794 . After this , he moved to Maldonado . There are few historical records of his activities in those curacies . The territory fell briefly under British rule during the British invasions of the Río de la Plata . There was looting after the failed resistance , and Alberti hid all the valuable things from the half-built parish . In defiance of the new British rule , Alberti gave medical aid to the Spanish soldiers and Catholic burials to the deceased , and mailed the Spanish forces with details about the British troops located in the city . As a result , he was jailed . He was released by the British Juan Jaime Backhouse in order to restore religious practices ( the invaders did not attempt to enforce Protestantism in the population ) , but under military escort . The British would be defeated by Santiago de Liniers , and driven away from the viceroyalty .

He returned to Buenos Aires in 1808 , and got the curacy of San Benito de Palermo . This was supposed to be a new jurisdiction split from the one of San Nicolás de Bari , but such change was never enforced , so he was actually in charge of both . He became involved with politics as well , joining the groups of Miguel de Azcuénaga and Nicolás Rodríguez Peña . Those groups sought to generate great political and social changes , and would lead to the May Revolution . He was selected to take part in the open cabildo celebrated on 22 May to decide the fate of Baltasar Hidalgo de Cisneros , as well as other twenty-seven ecclesiastics . He was among the nineteen that voted for the removal of the viceroy , supporting the proposal of Cornelio Saavedra . He also supported Juan Nepomuceno Solá and Ramón Vieytes , who proposed the calling of deputies from the other cities of the viceroyalty . His brother Manuel Silvestre Alberti signed the popular petition formulated on 25 May that aimed to draft the composition of the Primera Junta that would replace Cisneros in power . On that day Alberti moved to Azcuénaga 's house and from it he observed the events in the plaza , along with many other patriots gathered there . He was there when he came to know that he was chosen as a member of the new Junta . The reasons of Alberti 's inclusion in the Junta are unclear , as with all its members . A common accepted theory considers it to be a balance between Carlotists and Alzaguists , and Alberti in particular may have been elected to serve as chaplain of the government .

In the Junta , Alberti was aligned with most of the reformist proposals of Mariano Moreno , as well as Juan Larrea and Juan José Castelli . He signed most of the rulings that shaped the new political system , such as those related to popular sovereignty , representative and republican principles , separation of powers , publicity of the government actions , freedom of speech and the bases of political federalism . However , he did not support the actions of the Junta that contradicted his religious formation , regardless of the context . He refused to sign the death penalty for Santiago de Liniers , captured after the defeat of his counter-revolution . He signed the harsh commands given to Castelli for the first Upper Peru campaign , but noticing next to his signature that he made an exception with the articles involving capital punishment . He was also concerned by the role of the church in the new political system and headed a dispute against the Cabildo about it . He considered that the Cabildo should not have any authority over the Junta in ecclesiastic topics , to prevent the former abuses of the absolutist governments .

Manuel Alberti worked in journalism as well , at the Gazeta de Buenos Ayres newspaper created by the Junta . The ruling that created this newspaper gave Alberti the duty of selecting the news reports to publish . This duty was exclusive of Alberti and not shared with the other members of the Junta . Some historians also consider that Alberti may be the real author of the newspaper 's editorials , as they were not signed and the style is not similar to other reports by Mariano Moreno , who is usually considered the author . The first conflict between Alberti and Moreno was caused by the arrival of Gregorio Funes , dean of Córdoba with similar ideas to those of Cornelio Saavedra , president of the Junta . Moreno was keeping an internal dispute with Saavedra , and expected Alberti to write against Funes . He did not , and Moreno made harsh comments about it . Alberti would be further distanced from Moreno when the Junta voted for the incorporation of the deputies from other cities into the Junta . At first , both of them opposed the proposal , but Alberti ultimately voted accepting it , stating that he did so just out of political convenience . The Primera Junta was thus turned into the Junta Grande . Mariano Moreno , left in a minority group , resigned .

The inclusion of new deputies increased disputes within the Junta . He opposed both Saavedra and Funes , albeit in a more moderate manner than Moreno . Those fights affected his health , and he had a mild heart attack on 28 January 1811 . Fearing for his life , he wrote his will and received the Anointing of the Sick . Three days later he had another strong disagreement with Funes , and had another heart attack when he was returning to his house . He was buried in the cemetery of San Nicolás de Bari , as requested in his will . The death certificate states that he hadn 't been given last rites because his unanticipated death did not allow for time . Alberti was the first member of the Primera Junta to die .

All members of the Junta Grande assisted to Alberti 's funeral , even his political enemy Gregorio Funes . Domingo Matheu was the most affected one by his death , to the point of crying for it . Alberti was replaced in the Junta by Nicolás Rodríguez Peña , a decided morenist . Saavedra and Funes did not like him , but with the social commotion generated by Alberti 's death , they avoided to offer resistance to his nomination . Alberti requested in his will to avoid pageantry or complex funerals , and inherited his properties ( house , farm , furniture , slaves , clothing , books , etc . ) to his siblings Juana María , Matilde , Casimira and Manuel Silvestre . His personal diaries are kept , but with some parts of them being lost due to poor keeping . Still , his personal bibliography is used by historians to reconstruct his influences and ideological background . It included many works of theology , studies of the Bible , scholastic theologists and juridical studies . Alberti 's remains were lost when the chapel was demolished to make way for an expansion of 9 de Julio Avenue .

Horses in the Middle Ages differed in size , build and breed from the modern horse , and were , on average , smaller . They were also more central to society than their modern counterparts , being essential for war , agriculture , and transport . Consequently , specific types of horse developed , many of which have no modern equivalent . While an understanding of modern horse breeds and equestrianism is vital for any analysis of the medieval horse , researchers also need to consider documentary ( both written and pictorial ) and archaeological evidence . Horses in the Middle Ages were rarely differentiated by breed , but rather by use . This led them to be described , for example , as " chargers " ( war horses ) , " palfreys " ( riding horses ) , cart horses or packhorses . Reference is also given to their place of origin , such as " Spanish horses , " but whether this referred to one breed or several is unknown . Another difficulty arising during any study of medieval documents or literature is the flexibility of the medieval languages , where several words can be used for one thing ( or , conversely , several objects are referred to by one word ) . Words such as ' courser ' and ' charger ' are used interchangeably ( even within one document ) , and where one epic may speak disparagingly of a rouncey , another praises its skill and swiftness .

Significant technological advances in equestrian equipment , often introduced from other cultures , allowed for significant changes in both warfare and agriculture . In particular , improved designs for the solid-treed saddle as well as the arrival of the stirrup , horseshoe and horse collar were significant advances in medieval society . Consequently , the assumptions and theories developed by historians are not definitive , and debate still rages on many issues , such as the breeding or size of the horse , and a number of sources must be consulted in order to understand the breadth of the subject .

During the decline of the Roman Empire and the Early Middle Ages , much of the quality breeding stock developed during the classical period was lost due to uncontrolled breeding and had to be built up again over the following centuries . In the west , this may have been due in part to the reliance of the British and Scandinavians on infantry-based warfare , where horses were only used for riding and pursuit . However , there were exceptions ; in the 7th century a Merovingian kingdom still retained at least one active Roman horse breeding centre . The Spanish also retained many quality horses , in part due to the historic reputation of the region as a horse-breeding land , and partially due to the cultural influences related to the Islamic conquest of the Iberian peninsula between the 8th and 15th centuries . The origins of the medieval war horse are obscure , although it is believed they had some Barb and Arabian blood through the Spanish Jennet , a forerunner to the modern Friesian and Andalusian horse . It is also possible that other sources of oriental bloodstock came from what was called the Nisaean breed ( possibly akin to the Turkoman horse ) from Iran and Anatolia , another type of oriental horse brought back from the Crusades . " Spanish " horses , whatever their breeding , were the most expensive . In fact , in Germany the word spanjol became the term for quality war horses . However , German literary sources also refer to fine horses from Scandinavia . France also produced good war horses . Some scholars attribute this to the strong Feudal society there , but an equally probable explanation is the historic influence of the Roman horse breeding traditions preserved by the Merovingians , combined with the addition of valuable Spanish and oriental bloodstock captured in the wake of the victory of Charles Martel over the Islamic Umayyad invaders at the Battle of Tours in 732 . Following this battle , the Carolingians began to increase their heavy cavalry , which resulted in the seizure of land ( for fodder production ) , and a change in tribute payment from cattle to horses .

As the importance of horse breeding to successful warfare was realized , planned breeding programs increased . Many changes were due to the influence of Islamic culture through both the Crusades and the Moorish invasions of Spain ; the Arabs kept extensive pedigrees of their Barb and Arabian horses via an oral tradition . Some of the earliest written pedigrees in recorded European history were kept by Carthusian monks , who were among those who bred the Spanish Jennet . Because they could read and write , thus kept careful records , monastics were given the responsibility for horse breeding by certain members of the nobility , particularly in Spain . In England , a common source of warhorses were the wild moorland ponies , which were rounded up annually by horse-breeders , including the Cistercians , for use as campaign riding horses , or light cavalry ; one such breed was the Fell pony , which had similar ancestry to the Friesian horse . It is also hard to trace what happened to the bloodlines of destriers when this type seems to disappear from record during the 17th century . Many modern draft breeds claim some link to the medieval " great horse , " with some historians considering breeds such as the Percheron , Belgian and Suffolk Punch likely descendants of the destrier . However , other historians discount this theory , since the historical record suggests the medieval warhorse was quite a different ' type ' to the modern draught horse Such a theory would suggest the war horses were crossed once again with " cold blooded " work horses , since war horses , and the destrier in particular , were renowned for their hot-blooded nature .

Throughout the period , horses were rarely considered breeds , but instead were defined by type : by describing their purpose or their physical attributes . Many of the definitions were not precise , or were interchangeable . Prior to approximately the 13th century , few pedigrees were written down . Thus , many terms for horses in the Middle Ages did not refer to breeds as we know them today , but rather described appearance or purpose . One of the best-known of the medieval horses was the destrier , renowned and admired for its capabilities in war . It was well trained , and was required to be strong , fast and agile . A 14th-century writer described them as " tall and majestic and with great strength " . In contemporary sources , the destrier was frequently referred to as the " great horse " because of its size and reputation . Being a subjective term , it gives no firm information about its actual height or weight , but since the average horse of the time was 12 to 14 hands ( 48 to 56 inches , 122 to 142 cm ) , thus a " great horse " by medieval standards might appear small to our modern eyes . The destrier was highly prized by knights and men-at-arms , but was actually not very common , and appears to have been most suited to the joust .

Coursers were generally preferred for hard battle as they were light , fast and strong . They were valuable , but not as costly as the destrier . They were also used frequently for hunting . A more general-purpose horse was the rouncey ( also rounsey ) , which could be kept as a riding horse or trained for war . It was commonly used by squires , men-at-arms or poorer knights . A wealthy knight would keep rounceys for his retinue . Sometimes the expected nature of warfare dictated the choice of horse ; when a summons to war was sent out in England , in 1327 , it expressly requested rounceys , for swift pursuit , rather than destriers . Rounceys were sometimes used as pack horses ( but never as cart horses ) . The well-bred palfrey , which could equal a destrier in price , was popular with nobles and highly ranked knights for riding , hunting and ceremonial use . Ambling was a desirable trait in a palfrey , as the smooth gait allowed the rider to cover long distances quickly in relative comfort . Other horse types included the jennet , a small horse first bred in Spain from Barb and Arabian bloodstock . Their quiet and dependable nature , as well as size , made them popular as riding horses for ladies ; however , they were also used as cavalry horses by the Spanish .

The hobby was a lightweight horse , about 13 to 14 hands ( 52 to 56 inches , 132 to 142 cm ) , developed in Ireland from Spanish or Libyan ( Barb ) bloodstock . This type of quick and agile horse was popular for skirmishing , and was often ridden by light cavalry known as Hobelars . Hobbies were used successfully by both sides during the Wars of Scottish Independence , with Edward I of England trying to gain advantage by preventing Irish exports of the horses to Scotland . Robert Bruce employed the hobby for his guerilla warfare and mounted raids , covering 60 to 70 miles ( 97 to 113 km ) a day .

While light cavalry had been used in warfare for many centuries , the medieval era saw the rise of heavy cavalry , particularly the European knight . Historians are uncertain when the use of heavy cavalry in the form of mounted shock troops first occurred , but the technique had become widespread by the mid-12th century . The heavy cavalry charge itself was not a common occurrence in warfare . Pitched battles were avoided if at all possible , with most offensive warfare in the early Middle Ages taking the form of sieges , or swift mounted raids called chevauchées , with the warriors lightly armed on swift horses and their heavy war horses safely in the stable . Pitched battles were sometimes unavoidable , but were rarely fought on land suitable for heavy cavalry . While mounted riders remained effective for initial attacks , by the 14th century , it was common for knights to dismount to fight . Horses were sent to the rear , and kept ready for pursuit . By the Late Middle Ages ( approx 1300-1550 ) , large battles became more common , probably because of the success of infantry tactics and changes in weaponry . However , because such tactics left the knight unmounted , the role of the war horse also changed . By the 17th century , the medieval charger had become a thing of the past , replaced by lighter , unarmoured horses . Throughout the period , light horse , or prickers , were used for scouting and reconnaissance ; they also provided a defensive screen for marching armies . Large teams of draught horses , or oxen , were used for pulling the heavy early cannon . Other horses pulled wagons and carried supplies for the armies .

Tournaments and hastiludes began in the 11th century as both a sport and to provide training for battle . Usually taking the form of a melee , the participants used the horses , armour and weapons of war . The sport of jousting grew out of the tournament and , by the 15th century , the art of tilting became quite sophisticated . In the process , the pageantry and specialization became less war-like , perhaps because of the knight 's changing role in war . Horses were specially bred for the joust , and heavier armour developed . However , this did not necessarily lead to significantly larger horses . Interpreters at the Royal Armouries , Leeds , re-created the joust , using specially bred horses and replica armour . Their horses accurately represented the medieval mount , being compactly built and not particularly tall .

The most well-known horse of the medieval era of Europe is the destrier , known for carrying knights into war . However , most knights and mounted men-at-arms rode smaller horses known as coursers and rounceys . ( A common generic name for medieval war horses was charger , which was interchangeable with the other terms ) . In Spain , the jennet was used as a light cavalry horse . Stallions were often used as war horses in Europe due to their natural aggression and hot-blooded tendencies . A 13th-century work describes destriers " biting and kicking " on the battlefield , and , in the heat of battle , war horses were often seen fighting each other . However , the use of mares by European warriors cannot be discounted from literary references . Mares were the preferred war horse of the Moors , Islamic invaders who attacked various European nations from AD 700 through the 15th century . They also were preferred by the Mongols . War horses were more expensive than normal riding horses , and destriers the most prized , but figures vary greatly from source to source . Destriers are given a values ranging from seven times the price of an ordinary horse to 700 times . The Bohemian king Wenzel II rode a horse " valued at one thousand marks " in 1298 . At the other extreme , a 1265 French ordinance ruled that a squire could not spend more than twenty marks on a rouncey . Knights were expected to have at least one war horse ( as well as riding horses and packhorses ) , with some records from the later Middle Ages showing knights bringing twenty-four horses on campaign . Five horses was perhaps the standard .

There is dispute in medievalist circles over the size of the war horse , with some notable historians claiming a size of 17 to 18 hands ( 68 to 72 inches , 173 to 183 cm ) , as large as a modern Shire horse . However , there are practical reasons for dispute over size . Analysis of existing horse armour located in the Royal Armouries indicates the equipment was originally worn by horses of 15 to 16 hands ( 60 to 64 inches , 152 to 163 cm ) , or about the size and build of a modern field hunter or ordinary riding horse . Research undertaken at the Museum of London , using literary , pictorial and archaeological sources , supports military horses of 14 to 15 hands ( 56 to 60 inches , 142 to 152 cm ) , distinguished from a riding horse by its strength and skill , rather than its size . This average does not seem to vary greatly across the medieval period . Horses appear to have been selectively bred for increased size from the 9th and 10th centuries , and by the 11th century the average warhorse was probably 14.2 to 15 hands ( 58 to 60 inches , 147 to 152 cm ) , a size verified by studies of Norman horseshoes as well as the depictions of horses on the Bayeux Tapestry . Analysis of horse transports suggests 13th-century destriers were a stocky build , and no more than 15 to 15.2 hands ( 60 to 62 inches , 152 to 157 cm ) . Three centuries later , warhorses were not significantly bigger ; the Royal Armouries used a 15.2 hands ( 62 inches , 157 cm ) Lithuanian Heavy Draught mare as a model for the statues displaying various 15th- and 16th-century horse armours , as her body shape was an excellent fit .

Perhaps one reason for the pervasive belief that the medieval war horse had to be of draught horse type is the assumption , still held by many , that medieval armour was heavy . In fact , even the heaviest tournament armour ( for knights ) weighed little more than 90 pounds ( 41 kg ) , and field ( war ) armour 40 to 70 pounds ( 18 to 32 kg ) ; barding , or horse armour , more common in tournaments than war , rarely weighed more than 70 pounds ( 32 kg ) . For horses , Cuir bouilli ( a type of hardened leather ) , and padded caparisons were more common , and probably as effective . Allowing for the weight of the rider and other equipment , horses can carry approximately 30 % of their weight ; thus such loads could certainly be carried by a heavy riding horse in the 1,200 to 1,300 pounds ( 540 to 590 kg ) range , and a draught horse was not needed . Although a large horse is not required to carry an armoured knight , it is held by some historians that a large horse was desirable to increase the power of a lance strike . However , practical experiments by re-enactors have suggested that the rider 's weight and strength is of more relevance than the size of the mount , and that little of the horse 's weight is translated to the lance .

Further evidence for a 14-16 hand ( 56 to 64 inches ( 140 to 160 cm ) ) war horse is that it was a matter of pride to a knight to be able to vault onto his horse in full armour , without touching the stirrup . This arose not from vanity , but necessity : if unhorsed during battle , a knight would remain vulnerable if unable to mount by himself . In reality , of course , a wounded or weary knight might find it difficult , and rely on a vigilant squire to assist him . Incidentally , a knight 's armour served in his favour in any fall . With his long hair twisted on his head to form a springy padding under his padded-linen hood , and his helm placed on top , he had head protection not dissimilar to a modern bicycle or equestrian helmet .

Throughout the Middle Ages it was customary for people of all classes and background to travel , often widely . The households of the upper classes and royal courts moved between manors and estates ; the demands of diplomacy , war and crusades took men to distant countries ; priests travelled between churches , monasteries and formed emissaries to Rome ; people of all classes went on pilgrimage , or travelled to find work ; others travelled as a pastime . Most people undertook small journeys on foot and hired horses for longer journeys . For the upper classes , travel was accompanied by a great deal of pomp and display , with fine horses , large retinues and magnificent cavalcades in order to display their wealth as well as to ensure personal comfort . For example , in 1445 , the English royal household contained 60 horses in the king 's stable and 186 kept for " chariots " ( carriages ) and carts . During much of the Middle Ages , there was no system of interconnected roads and bridges . Though parts of Europe still had remnants of Roman roads built before the collapse of the Roman Empire , most had long fallen into disrepair . Because of the necessity to ride long distances over uncertain roads , smooth-gaited horses were preferred , and most ordinary riding horses were of greater value if they could do one of the smooth but ground-covering four-beat gaits collectively known as an amble rather than the more jarring trot .

Mule trains , for land travel , and barges , for river and canal travel , were the most common form of long-distance haulage , although wheeled horse-drawn vehicles were used for shorter journeys . In areas with good roads , regular carrier services were established between major towns . However , because medieval roads were generally so poor , carriages for human passengers were rare . When roads permitted , early carriages were developed from freight wagons . Carriage travel was made more comfortable in the late 14th century with the introduction of the chariot branlant , which had strap suspension . The speed of travel varied greatly . Large retinues could be slowed by the presence of slow-paced carts and litters , or by servants and attendants on foot , and could rarely cover more than fifteen to twenty miles a day . Small mounted companies might travel 30 miles a day . However , there were exceptions : stopping only for a change of horses midway , Richard II of England once managed the 70 miles between Daventry and Westminster in a night . For breeding , war and travel purposes , it was also necessary to be able to transport horses themselves . For this purpose , boats were adapted and built to be used as horse transports . William of Normandy 's invasion of England in 1066 required the transfer of over 2000 horses from Normandy . Similarly , when travelling to France in 1285 – 6 , Edward I of England ferried over 1000 horses across the English Channel to provide the royal party with transport .

Riding horses were used by a variety of people during the Middle Ages , and so varied greatly in quality , size and breeding . Knights and nobles kept riding horses in their war-trains , saving their warhorses for the battle . The names of horses referred to a type of horse , rather than a breed . Many horses were named by the region where they or their immediate ancestors were foaled . For example , in Germany , Hungarian horses were commonly used for riding . Individual horses were often described by their gait ( ' trotters ' or ' amblers ' ) , by their colouring , or by the name of their breeder . The best riding horses were known as palfreys ; other riding horses were often called hackneys , from which the modern term " hack " is derived . Women sometimes rode palfreys or small , quiet horses known as jennets .

A variety of work horses were used throughout the Middle Ages . The pack horse ( or " sumpter horse " ) carried equipment and belongings . Common riding horses , often called " hackneys " , could be used as pack horses . Cart horses pulled wagons for trading and freight haulage , on farms , or as part of a military campaign . These draught horses were smaller than their modern counterparts ; pictorial and archaeological evidence suggests that they were stout but short , approximately 13 to 14 hands ( 52 to 56 inches , 132 to 142 cm ) , and capable of drawing a load of 500 to 600 pounds ( 230 to 270 kg ) per horse . Four-wheeled wagons and two-wheeled carts were more common in towns , such as London and , depending on type of vehicle and weight of the load , were usually pulled by teams of two , three , or four horses harnessed in tandem . Starting in the 12th century , in England the use of oxen to pull carts was gradually superseded by the use of horses , a process that extended through the 13th century . This change came because horse-drawn transport moved goods quicker and over greater distances than ox-drawn methods of transport .

The Romans had used a two-field crop rotation agricultural system , but from the 8th century on , a three-field system became more common . One field would be sown with a winter crop , the second with a spring crop , and the third left fallow . This allowed a greater amount of spring crop of oats to be grown , which provided fodder for horses . Another advance during the Middle Ages was the development of the heavy mouldboard plough , which allowed dense and heavy soils to be tilled easily ; this technology required the use of larger teams of draught animals including oxen and horses , as well as the adoption of larger fields . Particularly after the 12th century , the increased use of both the horse collar and use of iron horse shoes allowed horsepower to be directed more efficiently . Horse teams usually were four horses , or perhaps six , as compared to eight oxen , and the lesser numbers compensated for the fact that the horses needed to be fed grain on top of pasture , unlike oxen . The increased speed of horses also allowed more land to be ploughed in a day , with an eight ox plough team averaging half of an acre per day , but a horse team averaged a full acre per day .

For farm work , such as ploughing and harrowing , the draught horse utilized for this purpose was called an affrus ( or stott ) , which was usually smaller and cheaper than the cart horse . While oxen were traditionally used as work animals on farms , horses began to be used in greater numbers after the development of the horse collar . Oxen and horses were sometimes harnessed together . The transition from oxen to horses for farm work was documented in pictorial sources ( for example , the 11th-century Bayeux tapestry depicts working horses ) , and also clear from the change from the Roman two-field crop-rotation system to a new three-field system , which increased the cultivation of fodder crops ( predominantly oats , barley and beans ) . Horses were also used to process crops ; they were used to turn the wheels in mills ( such as corn mills ) , and transport crops to market . The change to horse-drawn teams also meant a change in ploughs , as horses were more suited to a wheeled plough , unlike oxen .

The development of equestrian technology proceeded at a similar pace as the development of horse breeding and utilisation . The changes in warfare during the Early Middle Ages to heavy cavalry both precipitated and relied on the arrival of the stirrup , solid-treed saddle , and horseshoe from other cultures . The development of the nailed horseshoe enabled longer , faster journeys on horseback , particularly in the wetter lands in northern Europe , and were useful for campaigns on varied terrains . By providing protection and support , nailed horse shoes also improved the efficiency of draught horse teams . Though the Romans had developed an iron " hipposandal " that resembled a hoof boot , there is much debate over the actual origins of the nailed horseshoe , though it does appear to be of European origin . There is little evidence of nailed-on shoes prior to AD 500 or 600 , though there is speculation that the Celtic Gauls were the first to nail on metal horseshoes . The earliest clear written record of iron horseshoes is a reference to " crescent figured irons and their nails " in a list of cavalry equipment from AD 910 . Additional archaeological evidence suggests they were used in Siberia during the 9th and 10th centuries , and had spread to Byzantium soon afterward ; by the 11th century , horseshoes were commonly used in Europe . By the time the Crusades began in 1096 , horseshoes were widespread and frequently mentioned in various written sources .

The saddle with a solid tree provided a bearing surface to protect the horse from the weight of the rider . The Romans are credited with the invention of the solid-treed saddle , possibly as early as the 1st century BC , and it was widespread by the 2nd century AD . Early medieval saddles resembled the Roman " four-horn " saddle , and were used without stirrups . The development of the solid saddle tree was significant ; it raised the rider above the horse 's back , and distributed the rider 's weight , reducing the pounds per square inch carried on any one part of the horse 's back , thus greatly increasing the comfort of the horse and prolonging its useful life . Horses could carry more weight when distributed across a solid saddle tree . It also allowed a more built up seat to give the rider greater security in the saddle . From the 12th century on , the high war-saddle became more common , providing protection as well as added security . The built up cantle of a solid-treed saddle enabled horsemen to use lance more effectively . Beneath the saddle , caparisons or saddle cloths were sometimes worn ; these could be decorated or embroidered with heraldic colours and arms . War horses could be equipped with additional covers , blankets and armour collectively referred to as barding ; this could be for decorative or protective purposes . Early forms of horse armour , usually restricted to tournaments , comprised padded leather pieces , covered by a trapper ( a decorated cloth ) , which was not particularly heavy . Mail and plate armour was also occasionally used ; there are literary references to horse armour ( an " iron blanket " ) starting in the late 12th century .

The solid tree allowed for effective use of the stirrup . The stirrup was developed in China and in widespread use there by 477 AD . By the 7th century , primarily due to invaders from Central Asia , such as the Avars , stirrups arrived in Europe , and European riders had adopted them by the 8th century . Among other advantages , stirrups provided greater balance and support to the rider , which allowed the knight to use a sword more efficiently without falling , especially against infantry . The increased use of the stirrup from the 8th century on aided the warrior 's stability and security in the saddle when fighting . This may have led to greater use of shock tactics , although a couched lance could be used effectively without stirrups . In particular , Charles Martel recognized the military potential of the stirrup , and distributed seized lands to his retainers on condition that they serve him by fighting in the new manner . A theory known as The Great Stirrup Controversy argues that the advantages in warfare that stemmed from use of the stirrup led to the birth of feudalism itself . Other scholars , however , dispute this assertion , suggesting that stirrups provided little advantage in shock warfare , being useful primarily for allowing a rider to lean farther to the left and right on the saddle while fighting , and simply reduce the risk of falling off . Therefore , it is argued , they are not the reason for the switch from infantry to cavalry in Medieval militaries , nor the reason for the emergence of Feudalism .

There was a variety of headgear used to control horses , predominantly bridles with assorted designs of bits . Many of the bits used during the Middle Ages resemble the bradoon , snaffle bit and curb bit that are still in common use today . However , they often were decorated to a greater degree : the bit rings or shanks were frequently covered with large , ornamental " bosses . " Some designs were also more extreme and severe than those used today.The curb bit was known during the classical period , but was not generally used during the Middle Ages until the mid-14th century . Some styles of snaffle bit used during the Middle Ages had the lower cheek extended , in the manner of the modern half-cheek or full cheek snaffle . Until the late 13th century , bridles generally had a single pair of reins ; after this period it became more common for knights to use two sets of reins , similar to that of the modern double bridle , and often at least one set was decorated . Spurs were commonly used throughout the period , especially by knights , with whom they were regularly associated . A young man was said to have " won his spurs " when he achieved knighthood . Wealthy knights and riders frequently wore decorated and filigreed spurs . Attached to the rider 's heel by straps , spurs could be used both to encourage horses to quickly move forward or to direct lateral movement . Early spurs had a short shanks or " neck " , placing the rowel relatively close to the rider 's heel ; further developments in the spur shape lengthened the neck , making it easier to touch the horse with less leg movement on the part of the rider .

A significant development which increased the importance and use of horses in harness , particularly for ploughing and other farm work , was the horse collar . The horse collar was invented in China during the 5th century , arrived in Europe during the 9th century , and became widespread throughout Europe by the 12th century . It allowed horses to pull greater weight than they could when hitched to a vehicle by means of yokes or breastcollars used in earlier times . The yoke was designed for oxen and not suited to the anatomy of horses , it required horses to pull with their shoulders rather than using the power of their hindquarters . Harnessed in such a manner , horse teams could pull no more than 500 kg . The breastplate-style harness that had flat straps across the neck and chest of the animal , while useful for pulling light vehicles , was of little use for heavy work . These straps pressed against the horse 's sterno-cephalicus muscle and trachea , which restricted breathing and reduced the pulling power of the horse . Two horses harnessed with a breastcollar harness were limited to pulling a combined total of about 1,100 pounds ( 500 kg ) . In contrast , the horse collar rested on horses ' shoulders and did not impede breathing . It allowed a horse to use its full strength , by pushing forward with its hindquarters into the collar rather than to pull with its shoulders . With the horse collar , a horse could provide a work effort of 50 % more foot-pounds per second than an ox , because it could move at a greater speed , as well as having generally greater endurance and the ability to work more hours in a day . A single horse with a more efficient collar harness could draw a weight of about 1,500 pounds ( 680 kg ) .

A further improvement was managed by altering the arrangement of the teams ; by hitching horses one behind the other , rather than side by side , weight could be distributed more evenly , and pulling power increased . This increase in horse power is demonstrated in the building accounts of Troyes , which show carters hauling stone from quarries 50 miles ( 80 km ) distant ; the carts weighed , on average , 5,500 pounds ( 2,500 kg ) , on which 5,500 pounds ( 2,500 kg ) of stone was regularly loaded , sometimes increasing to 8,600 pounds ( 3,900 kg ) – a significant increase from Roman-era loads .

The elite horseman of the Middle Ages was the knight . Generally raised from the middle and upper classes , the knight was trained from childhood in the arts of war and management of the horse . In most languages , the term for knight reflects his status as a horseman : the French chevalier , Spanish caballero and German Ritter . The French word for horse-mastery – chevalerie – gave its name to the highest concept of knighthood : chivalry . A large number of trades and positions arose to ensure the appropriate management and care of horses . In aristrocratic households , the marshal was responsible for all aspects relating to horses : the care and management of all horses from the chargers to the pack horses , as well as all travel logistics . The position of marshal ( literally " horse servant " ) was a high one in court circles and the king 's marshal ( such as the Earl Marshal in England ) was also responsible for managing many military matters . Also present within the great households was the constable ( or " count of the stable " ) , who was responsible for protection and the maintenance of order within the household and commanding the military component and , with marshals , might organise hastiludes and other chivalrous events . Within lower social groupings , the ' marshal ' acted as a farrier . The highly skilled marshal made and fitted horseshoes , cared for the hoof , and provided general veterinary care for horses ; throughout the Middle Ages , a distinction was drawn between the marshal and the blacksmith , whose work was more limited .

It was not uncommon for a girl to learn her father 's trade and for a woman to share her husband 's trade , since the entire family often helped run medieval shops and farms . Many guilds also accepted the membership of widows , so they might continue their husband 's business . Under this system , some women trained in horse-related trades , and there are records of women working as farriers and saddle-makers . On farms , where every hand was needed , excessive emphasis on division of labour was impracticable , and women often worked alongside men ( on their own farms or as hired help ) , leading the farm horses and oxen , and managing their care . Despite the difficulties of travel , it was customary for many people , including women , to travel long distances . Upper-class wives frequently accompanied their husbands on crusade or to tournaments , and many women traveled for social or family engagements ; both nuns and laywomen would perform pilgrimages . When not on foot , women would usually travel on horseback or , if weakened or infirm , be carried in a wagon or a litter . If roads permitted , women sometimes rode in early carriages developed from freight wagons , pulled by three or four horses . After the invention of better suspension systems , travel in carriages became more comfortable . Women of the nobility also rode horses for sport , accompanying men in activities that included hunting and hawking .

Most medieval women rode astride . Although an early chair-like sidesaddle with handles and a footrest was available by the 13th century and allowed women of the nobility to ride while wearing elaborate gowns , they were not universally adopted during the Middle Ages . This was largely due to the insecure seat they offered , which necessitated a smooth-gaited horse being led by another handler . The sidesaddle did not become practical for everyday riding until the 16th-century development of the pommel horn that allowed a woman to hook her leg around the saddle and hence use the reins to control her own horse . Even then , sidesaddle riding remained a precarious activity until the invention of the second , " leaping horn " in the 19th century . It was not unknown for women to ride war horses , and take their part in warfare . Joan of Arc is probably the most famous female warrior of the medieval period , but there were many others , including the Empress Matilda who , armoured and mounted , led an army against her cousin Stephen of Blois , and Stephen 's wife Matilda of Boulogne in the 12th century . The 15th-century writer Christine de Pizan advised aristocratic ladies that they must " know the laws of arms and all things pertaining to warfare , ever prepared to command her men if there is need of it . "

William Henry " Billy " Meredith ( 30 July 1874 – 19 April 1958 ) was a Welsh professional footballer . He was considered one of the early superstars of football due to his performances , notably for Manchester City and Manchester United . He won each domestic trophy in the English football league and gained 48 caps for Wales , for whom he scored 11 goals and won two British Home Championship titles . His favoured position was outside right , and his key skills were dribbling , passing , crossing and shooting . A dedicated and extremely fit professional , his habit of chewing on a toothpick during games made him instantly recognisable . In 27 seasons in the Football League from 1892 to 1924 ( not including the four seasons lost to the First World War and the 1905 – 06 season in which he was banned for bribing an opposition player ) , he scored 176 goals in 740 league and cup appearances . He played for Chirk , before joining Northwich Victoria in 1892 . His career took off when he signed with Manchester City in 1894 and turned professional in January 1895 . He captained the team to the club 's first major honour , a 1 – 0 victory over Bolton Wanderers in the 1904 FA Cup Final . He moved to Manchester United in May 1906 after being banned for bribing Aston Villa half-back Alex Leake £ 10 to lose a match . There he won the league title in 1907 – 08 and 1910 – 11 , the FA Cup in 1909 , as well as two FA Charity Shields . He also helped to set up the Players ' Union , which was a fore-runner of the Professional Footballers ' Association . He returned to Manchester City in 1921 at the age of 47 and played a further 32 games before retiring in 1924 , making him the oldest ever player for City , United and Wales . He later ran the Stretford Road Hotel and helped to coach the short-lived Manchester Central .

Meredith was born in 1874 in Chirk , a small mining town in Denbighshire , North Wales , just south of Wrexham . He started work at Black Park Colliery as a pit pony driver at the age of 12 . His family were Primitive Methodists , and Meredith himself remained a lifelong teetotaller . He spent eight years working in the mines , and worked during a tough time for the industry , enduring a 25 % pay cut which led to strike action in 1893 ; this experience helped to shape his political views , which would become significant later in his life . An interest in football was kindled by his elder brothers . Elias , the eldest , was a train driver for the Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway . His work allowed him to take Meredith to watch professional teams such as Everton . Football was a keen pastime for the miners , and the standard of amateur teams from towns and villages in north east Wales was high as a result ; Chirk won the Welsh Cup five times between 1887 and 1894 , with miners making up a large proportion of the team . All the Meredith brothers played football , but Sam , two years older than Billy , was the first to make an impression . He left Chirk to attempt a professional career , and went on to play for Stoke City as a full-back .

Meredith made his debut for the Chirk first team in September 1892 . The club played in The Combination , a league which contained a mixture of town clubs and reserve teams of clubs from big cities . At the end of his first season Meredith played in the 1893 Welsh Cup final , which Chirk lost 2 – 1 to Wrexham . Meredith formed a solid understanding with inside-right William Owen , a former Wales international . Chirk withdrew from The Combination and entered only the Welsh league in 1893 due to low attendances caused by the coal miners ' strike . In an attempt to make ends meet , Meredith not only played for Chirk , but accepted an offer to play for Football League club Northwich Victoria as well , who gave him a small fee on top of his expenses . Northwich were a struggling side , who withdrew from the Football League at the end of the 1893 – 94 season after finishing bottom of the Second Division . The club won just three league matches ; Meredith featured in each win . Back at Chirk , Meredith gained his first honour as part of the team that beat Westminster Rovers to win the 1894 Welsh Cup .

Meredith 's performances for Northwich gained the attention of several other clubs in the Football League . Bolton Wanderers full-back Di Jones , a former Chirk player , spoke with him about a possible move , but Bolton secretary J.J. Bentley felt Meredith was too inexperienced and his frame too slight . Lawrence Furniss , an official at Ardwick , had first noticed him while refereeing a Northwich match . Meredith also played in both meetings between the clubs that season . Later in 1894 , Ardwick , by then known as Manchester City , vigorously pursued Meredith 's signature . Two club officials travelled to Wales to meet the player . One was secretary-manager Joshua Parlby , the other either Furniss or chairman John Chapman . The pair were met with suspicion . Anecdotes by contemporary figures suggest they were initially chased away by locals , and were only allowed to speak to Meredith after they bought drinks for his mining colleagues . Meredith did not wish to abandon life in Chirk . His mother was particularly against the idea : " It is all very well for you gentlemen to leave your big cities and come to our villages to steal our boys away ... Our boys are happy and healthy , satisfied with their work and innocent amusements ... if Billy takes my advice he will stick to his work and play football for his own amusement when work is finished . " Meredith did eventually sign for Manchester City , but as an amateur . He continued to work at the pit for at least a year , commuting back and forth for matches .

Meredith made his Manchester City debut in November 1894 in a 5 – 4 loss to Newcastle United . The following week he played his first home match for the club at Hyde Road , and scored two goals against Newton Heath – who later became Manchester United – in the first Manchester derby to take place in the league . Newton Heath won the match 5 – 2 . He turned professional in January 1895 , and ended the 1894 – 95 season with 12 goals in 18 appearances , just three strikes behind top-scorer Pat Finnerhan , who had played an extra 12 games . In his first full season at Manchester City , Meredith finished as top scorer . He was appointed club captain in his second season at the club , aged just 21 . The club finished as Second Division runners-up in 1895 – 96 , but were denied promotion after heavy defeats to West Bromwich Albion and Small Heath in the test matches . After the departure of strike partner Pat Finnerhan to Liverpool in March 1897 , Meredith remained as City 's star player . His new partner for the 1897 – 98 season was William Smith ( known as " Stockport Smith " to differentiate him from another William Smith in the team ) , whilst Billie Gillespie was placed at centre-forward . Meredith provided Gillespie with many crosses into the box , picking up numerous assists as Gillespie outscored Meredith by 19 goals to 12 . Meredith also acted as a mentor for the slightly younger Gillespie , steering him away from drinking sessions by taking him along on fishing trips . The final match of the season saw Meredith score his first hat-trick for the club in an emphatic 9 – 0 win against Burton Swifts .

City dominated the Second Division in the 1898 – 99 season , and won promotion as champions . Helping them to keep them in winning ways in the close season was late signing Jimmy Ross , a veteran forward who Meredith considered to be his " favourite hero " . Meredith claimed 30 goals in 35 games , including hat-tricks against Grimsby Town , Loughborough , Darwen and Barnsley . Meredith scored City 's first goal in the First Division on the opening day of the 1899 – 1900 season in a 4 – 3 defeat to Blackburn Rovers at Ewood Park on 2 September . Seven days later he claimed two goals in a 4 – 0 home victory over Derby County , and " led the field that day " by dribbling the ball almost the whole length of the pitch before launching a powerful shot that settled into the corner of Jack Fryer 's net . The Athletic News reported that " for real brilliance the right-wing [ Meredith and Ross ] took the biscuit " . First Division defences managed to limit Meredith 's contribution in the 1900 – 01 campaign by singling him out for rough treatment , though Liverpool manager Tom Watson felt compelled to write a letter to Manchester City denying that a Liverpool director had stated that " all that the opposition had to do was watch Meredith – the rest are no good " . He finished the season with just seven goals in 35 appearances .

Meredith found the net eight times in 38 games in the 1901 – 02 campaign , as City were relegated back out of the First Division . The club 's secretary , Sam Ormerod , selected 29 different players as the club slumped to defeat in 13 of the opening 20 games . Ormerod was forced to step down , as new business figures took control behind the scenes and began to sign promising young Scottish players . New manager Tom Maley was more willing than his predecessor to confront Meredith over his tendency to stray out of position and attempt to dominate the City attack . City won immediate promotion as Second Division champions in 1902 – 03 , with Meredith scoring 22 goals in 37 appearances and claiming a hat-trick against Chesterfield Town . Maley managed to find him a suitable inside-right partner in Jimmy Bannister , who was unselfish in his play and willing to feed the ball through to Meredith . He also played Sammy Frost at half-back , who was able to win the ball and bring Meredith into the play , and signed outside-left Frank Booth to balance the attack . Maley encouraged teamwork , meaning there was less pressure on Meredith from opposition defenders .

Meredith was partnered with George Livingstone for the 1903 – 04 campaign , who was able to supply him and the rest of the team with quality passes . Drawn against a strong Sunderland outfit in the First Round of the FA Cup , Meredith was the " raider-in-chief " as City claimed a 3 – 2 victory at Hyde Road . City then defeated Woolwich Arsenal and Middlesbrough to reach the semi-finals . There they faced The Wednesday at Goodison Park , and Meredith scored one goal ( bundled in by Gillespie ) and claimed two assists as City won the game 3 – 1 . Their opponents in the final at Crystal Palace were mid-table Second Division outfit Bolton Wanderers , and Meredith was cautiously optimistic before the match , stating " We ought to win ... if we play anything like our normal game the cup is ours ... but this is the cup final and , well , anything might happen . " With just over 20 minutes played , Livingstone found Meredith with a long ball , who then beat goalkeeper Dai Davies to score the only goal of the game ; Bolton supporters long maintained that Meredith had been offside . As captain , Meredith was handed the trophy by Prime Minister Arthur Balfour .

He scored nine goals in 36 games in the 1904 – 05 season , as City came within two points and two places of champions Newcastle United . The season ended in controversial circumstances at Villa Park , and with a 3 – 2 defeat to Aston Villa ending any hopes of winning the league , Sandy Turnbull and Villa captain Alex Leake exchanged blows . The Football Association launched an investigation into the violence , and the findings shocked the sporting world as Meredith was suspended for the entirety of the 1905 – 06 season for ( unsuccessfully ) attempting to bribe Alex Leake . No evidence was taken from Meredith , who denied the charge , and the evidence was not made public . The club , fearful of FA sanctions , refused to pay Meredith during the campaign . He was transfer listed in May 1906 after he claimed that he had only attempted to bribe Leake on the orders of manager Tom Maley and that illegal payments were common practice at Hyde Road . The FA acted on his information , and fined Manchester City £ 900 for illegal payments and suspended numerous players , boardroom members and staff members .

In May 1906 , while still serving his ban , Meredith moved to Manchester United . He joined on a free transfer and received a £ 500 signing-on fee from United ; Manchester City reluctantly accepted the transfer as they had previously signed an undertaking promising Meredith a benefit match , and he was willing to forego on the agreement if the club instead granted his transfer . He returned from suspension on 1 January 1907 , and marked his debut at Bank Street with an assist for Sandy Turnbull to score the only goal of the game against Aston Villa . In addition to Turnbull , Meredith was joined at United by former City teammates Jimmy Bannister and Herbert Burgess . This new forward line made the team into a powerful force , as they already possessed a dominant half-back line in captain Charlie Roberts , Dick Duckworth and Alex Bell . They ended the 1906 – 07 season in eighth place in the First Division . Manager Ernest Mangnall signed Jimmy Turnbull , and the forward line of Meredith , Bannister , Jimmy Turnbull and Sandy Turnbull were dominant in the 1907 – 08 campaign . United won the title with a nine-point margin over second-placed Aston Villa , and secured the 1908 FA Charity Shield ( the first ever Charity Shield ) with a 4 – 0 win over Queens Park Rangers at Stamford Bridge .

United slipped to a disappointing 13th-place finish in 1908 – 09 . Meredith was suspended for the month of January in punishment for kicking a Brighton & Hove Albion player in an FA Cup match . The club reached the 1909 FA Cup Final , knocking out Brighton , Everton , Blackburn Rovers , Burnley and Newcastle United . Their cup final opponents at Crystal Palace were Bristol City , captained at centre-half by Billy Wedlock – England captain and staunch opponent of the Players ' Union . A Sandy Turnbull goal settled the tie , which was described as quite a boring game ; Meredith himself dismissed reports of the match , stating " it was a good game for dashing , keen , thrilling football , great goalkeeping and narrow escapes at either end " . Meredith and his teammates celebrated the victory with music hall stars such as George Robey . United finished fifth in 1909 – 10 and exited the FA Cup at the First Round with a defeat to Burnley at Turf Moor . However the club continued to advance under the generous chairmanship of John Henry Davies , and Old Trafford was opened in February 1910 .

Harold Halse was to partner Meredith at inside-right for the 1910 – 11 season , but proved too much of a " free-spirit " and was replaced by Jack Picken , a " plodder [ who ] understands what Meredith requires " . A defeat at Villa Park in the penultimate game of the season left United needing to beat third-place Sunderland and hope that Aston Villa failed to beat Liverpool . United were a goal down when Meredith provided Enoch West with a cross which West sent into the net for the equalising goal . Four more goals came and they won the game 5 – 1 and left the field as champions of England for the second time . Meredith played in the 1911 FA Charity Shield , as United beat Swindon Town 8 – 4 at Stamford Bridge . However the 1911 – 12 campaign ended in a disappointing 13th-place finish and Mangnall left the club to manage rivals Manchester City . Meredith 's Benefit match was played on 7 September 1912 , between Manchester United and Manchester City , and the Welsh FA also donated the proceeds of two trial matches to the fund . There were 39,911 spectators and a total of £ 1,400 was raised .

New manager John Bentley led United to a fourth-place finish in 1912 – 13 . He dropped Meredith to blood a young Jackie Sheldon . By this time , Meredith made headlines primarily due to his squabbling with the club over them stalling payment of his benefit matches and his dissatisfaction at being dropped . The club dropped to 14th spot in 1913 – 14 , and only avoided relegation on the last day of the 1914 – 15 season after bribing Liverpool to lose 2 – 0 at Old Trafford ; Meredith this time played no part in the resulting bribery scandal . He instead claimed to be baffled as to why his teammates refused to pass to him during the game . During the First World War he actually played a match against United , making a guest appearance for Port Vale , with Vale recording a 5 – 2 victory at the Old Recreation Ground . Frustrated with the club for delaying payments over his benefit match , he also played as a guest for Manchester City . After the war ended he demanded a free transfer , and was repulsed that the club demanded a transfer fee , stating that the transfer market was a " degrading business " for players . On 7 May 1921 , at 46 years , 281 days , he became United 's oldest ever player when he took to the field in a league game against Derby County .

In 1921 he returned to Manchester City on a free transfer . He played 25 first team games in the 1921 – 22 season , helping City to record a derby victory over rivals Manchester United . He featured once in the 1922 – 23 campaign , playing the club 's final game at Hyde Road . He played four FA Cup and two First Division games in the 1923 – 24 season . Mangnall , now his manager at City , shocked Manchester when he selected Meredith for the cup game with Brighton & Hove Albion at the Goldstone Ground , but was vindicated with a 5 – 1 victory ; Meredith also scored a goal , though this was due to a poor mistake from the Brighton goalkeeper . He played both games against Cardiff City in the next round , a 0 – 0 draw at Maine Road and 1 – 0 win at Ninian Park , and claimed an assist in the goal that settled the tie . His last match was against Newcastle United in the semi-finals at the age of 49 years and 245 days , making him City 's oldest ever player ; the game ended in a 2 – 1 defeat .

Meredith won his first cap for Wales in a 2 – 2 draw with Ireland on 16 March 1895 in Belfast . He won 12 caps in the 1890s , but was forced to miss six games as his club would not let him play in games that clashed with league fixtures . Wales could compete with Ireland , but were regularly beaten by Scotland and England . On 26 March 1900 , Wales played for the first time in South Wales , at Cardiff Arms Park , and Meredith scored a goal to earn the Welsh a celebrated 1 – 1 draw with England . After serving his suspension , he returned to Wales for the British Home Championship title victory in 1907 , the nation 's first success in the competition . In those three games , he scored against Ireland in a 3 – 2 victory , and captained Wales to a 1 – 0 win over Scotland and a 1 – 1 draw with England . Wales were denied a late penalty against the English , and Meredith was later recorded to have said " never mind , little Wales will win some day [ against England ] . May I be there at the death . "

After draws with Ireland and Scotland , Meredith " wept unashamedly " as he helped Wales to beat England 2 – 1 at Highbury to claim the 1920 British Home Championship . It was only his second victory against the English in 20 attempts , and it marked the last of his 48 caps . Though his record number of caps was later surpassed , at 45 years and 229 days he remains the oldest player to win a Wales cap . He was actually chosen by the selectors for 71 consecutive matches , but only made 48 appearances as his clubs regularly refused to release him for international duty .

Meredith was able to avoid injury throughout his career , despite the extremely physical nature of the game during the period . This was due in part to his extraordinary balance and agility , which allowed him to avoid clumsy challenges , and the toughness he had built up from spending his adolescence working in the mines . A model professional , he spent his spare time improving his game with extra training sessions and maintained peak physical fitness by avoiding alcohol and tobacco . His " gimmick " was to chew on a toothpick during matches , and this unusual trait was picked up on by cartoonists of the time . Writing a 1947 critique of Stanley Matthews , Meredith criticised the lack of direct play on show in the 1940s and stated that when he was playing that " I knew what was expected of me – to beat the wing-half and the full-back , take the ball down to the corner flag and centre " . His ball control skills were unparalleled , leaving opposition players unable to tackle him . He also was an extremely accurate passer and crosser of the ball . His dribbling and crossing gave him a large advantage over rival wingers , who relied solely on speed to beat opposition full-backs . In addition to wing-play , he was also highly skilled at sending in long-range shots across the face of the goal , and could be relied upon to meet crosses from his left-winger with a powerful volley .

Meredith had to deal with extremely physical defences , and was often boxed into the corner of the pitch by as many as four players . As his talents became widely regarded , more well organised defences would designate him with a man-marker , to try and isolate him from his teammates . This often left him reliant on an unselfish inside-right partner willing to fetch and carry the ball for him without expecting much in terms of goals or glory in return . A hard-working wing-half would also improve Meredith 's effectiveness by winning the ball and sending him a pass down the flank . The best teams he played in also had a centre-forward able to make the most of his accurate crosses .

Meredith organised the first meeting of the Players ' Union ( PU ) in December 1907 . Meredith had previously been involved with the Association Footballers ' Union ( the " AFU " ) , the first attempt by football players in England to organise a trade union . The Players ' Union , like the AFU before it , sought the relaxation of restrictions on transfers and wages . Others made the argument that a free market wage structure would ruin the amateur principles the sport was founded on , but Meredith felt that these words rang hollow considering that club directors and shareholders made vast profits . At the first annual meeting in December 1908 , the PU stated their aims as to allow unlimited wages , the right to transfer from club to club , and for players to take a percentage of any transfer fee . With the union threatening strike action , particularly at international matches , in April 1909 the Football Association insisted that all players agree to leave the union and pledge loyalty to the FA . Manchester United refused to issue the revised contracts to its players , and FA suspended the entire squad . The club then refused to pay the players in lieu of their suspension , and so the players instead took away ornaments from the club 's office before Mangnall persuaded them to return the items . The players continued to train , and captain Charlie Roberts came up with the name of Outcasts F.C. The FA organised a meeting of 200 players , excluding the Outcasts , but a rambling speech from chairman Charles Clegg failed to win them over , and an agreement was reached where the PU would be recognised by the FA .

He married Ellen Negus in 1901 , and the couple had two daughters . He was a supporter of the Liberal Party . He ran businesses throughout his career , with little success , and was declared bankrupt in July 1909 after his outfitting shop was damaged by fire.Harding 1998 , p . 135 During the 1910s he ran a public house ( despite being a teetotaller ) and later pursued an interest in the film industry by buying shares in numerous Stretford cinemas in the 1930s . He also starred in 1926 picture The Ball of Fortune , playing himself as a football trainer ; the film received generally positive reviews . In 1928 , together with former colleague Charlie Roberts he became a coach for the ambitious but short-lived Manchester Central . Meredith 's son-in-law , former City captain Charlie Pringle , was a player . He retained a passion for football , and spent much of his retirement discussing the game with former colleagues and regulars at his hotel , the Stretford Road Hotel , which he ran from 1930 to 1945 . He rarely missed the chance to attend a Wales game in the 1920s and 1930s .

Meredith died in Withington , Manchester in April 1958 at the age of 83 , two months after the Munich air disaster , which claimed the lives of eight Manchester United players . After he spent many years in an unmarked grave , the Professional Footballers ' Association , the Welsh FA , Manchester City and Manchester United all agreed to cover the cost of upkeep on a new headstone . Meredith is honoured in the hall of fame at the City of Manchester Stadium . It was announced in August 2007 that Meredith was one of the 10 new inductees for 2007 to the English Football Hall of Fame .

Jean Abraham Grill ( 21 July 1736 – 12 March 1792 ) , sometimes called Johan Abraham Grill , was a Swedish merchant , supercargo , director of the Swedish East India Company ( SOIC ) and ironmaster at Godegård with several factories . Grill journeyed to China twice as the representative for the SOIC . He lived in Canton ( now known as Guangzhou ) as well as Macao for a total of almost ten years , doing trade for the company during the arrival of three Swedish ships . In China he lived the life of an adventurer ; survived a shipwreck , traded with other East Asian countries together with his partner Michael Grubb and smuggled opium from India to China . He returned to Sweden in 1768 , a wealthy man and lived the rest of his life in Swedish high society , writing minor essays about his travels as member of the Royal Swedish Academies of Sciences and Music . He married Lovisa Ulrika Lüning and bought the Godegård Manor and several ironworks , which he renovated and improved . When Grill died in 1792 , his wife took over his business and ran the ironworks and factories .

One of the Grill family , Jean Abraham Grill was the eldest son of merchant Abraham Grill , the Younger ( 1707 – 68 ) and Anna Maria Petersen ( 1713 – 54 ) . He was born in Helsingør where his father was the Swedish consul at that time . In 1746 , the family moved to Gothenburg where his father had started a trading house . When Jean Abraham was 14 years old , he started working as an apprentice in his fathers office , and three years later he became a clerk at the Swedish East India Company ( SOIC ) . Through his fathers mediation he was appointed to second assistant on the ship Sophia Albertina for its journey to Canton ( now known as Guangzhou ) between 1755 and 1756 . Being ambitious , Grill aimed for the higher positions in the SOIC , and to achieve that he had to learn more and gain more experience . So when he returned to Sweden from China , he decided to go abroad again as soon as possible . He started out at the trading office of Kristian Holm , Swedish consul to France , in Montpellier where he worked for about six months . He stayed in France for five years , and in 1758 , he was employed by the Mallet & Blancheney firm in Marseille . Grill 's letters to his family during those years indicates that he enjoyed his time in France and was interested in style and his own appearance . His initial plans had been to set up a business in Marseille , but his family , especially his uncle Claes Grill , advised against it . Claes had started out as a merchant in the European market , but he soon moved on to the more lucrative Canton trade and encouraged his nephew to do the same .

Grill followed his uncle Claes ' advice and went to Canton as third supercargo on the Fredric Adolph in 1761 , during the second carter of the SOIC . On 3 September 1761 , the ship ran aground at the Pratas Islands in the South China Sea . The ship 's captain , Daniel Shierman , did what he could to lighten the ship and tried to get it afloat again , but to no avail . Seven hours later the ship was a wreck , resting on the rocks and everyone aboard went into the boats . Twenty men stayed behind to guard the ship , while 122 men , including Grill , immediately set off for the nearest port . Five days later they landed on the Chinese mainland , in the " province of Catsi " [ sic ] , where they eventually got permission from the Chinese authorities to proceed to Canton . In Canton they met with the men left to guard the ship , now 17 in number , who had arrived two weeks earlier . Three expeditions with divers , one of them led by Grill , went to recover the cargo from the wreck . They managed to salvage about two-thirds of the silver , tin , iron , coral , lead and copper from the cargo , plus one cat and a dog .

After the shipwreck , Grill remained in Canton as resident supercargo for seven years . As such he was the company 's representative in Canton , contacting Chinese merchants as well as buying goods and cargo for the ships . He was supercargo for the arrival of three more ships of the SIOC : the Stockholms Slott ( outward journey ) in 1762 , the Stockholms Slott ( resident supercargo in Canton ) in 1765 and the Cron Prins Gustaf ( journey home ) 1768 . One of his tasks in Canton was to make sure that the Swedish factory at the Thirteen Factories was in good order and maintained . The Swedes rented factories or houses from the mandarins at other locations as well , but the one on 13 : e Faktorigatan ( the 13 : th Factory street ) operated as their main building . Grills records of the Swedish factory are detailed and provide good insight into life in Canton at that time . He also started a successful private company in partnership with the older and more experienced Michael Grubb , one of the directors of the SOIC and founder of the first Swedish trading office in Canton . They traded in Canton and Macao , which technically was against the rules and regulations in the charter of the SOIC . Grill took advantage of the fact that his father was a director of the SOIC , and until his father 's death shipped his own goods on board SOIC ships . From Europe the ships brought objets d 'art , corals from the Mediterranean Sea , expensive clocks and other mechanical automatons known to the Chinese as sing-songs . Such goods were appreciated by the Emperor and the rich mandarins .

The Grubb-Grill company used Chinese junks to trade with India , Java , Indochina , Philippines and Japan . From these places they traded in Japanese silk , pigments , spices , gold and silver treads , pearls and lacquerware . The most profitable product in that trade was opium , the smuggling of which became Grill 's own private business . During his time in Canton he smuggled " considerable quantities " from India to Macao . It is documented that he in 1767 received a shipment of 150 chests of opium sent from Madras ( now known as Chennai ) by Jacob Hahr , another supercargo . Consequently , Grill became Sweden 's first major drug runner . The resident supercargo was responsible for buying goods such as tea , porcelain , silk , arrack , sago and miscellaneous for the next ship arriving from Sweden . The SOIC traded mainly with the Chinese merchant Puankhequa , who had his factory next to the Swedish , and judging from their letters , Puankhequa and Grill became friends . Grill was entrusted with funds from the SOIC for buying tea and other goods during off-season when the price was at its lowest . He bought most of the tea from Puankhequa , and several contracts are preserved . However , he did not buy the tea from the Chinese merchant on the SOIC 's behalf but instead bought it through his own company and sold it on to the SOIC at a slightly higher price . After some time the SOIC became suspicious and director David Sandberg was sent to Canton to investigate the matter in 1766 . Grill and his companions , Grubb and Hahr , had to sign an agreement not to misuse their position within the SOIC . In 1768 , Grill was ordered to return home as supercargo on the ship Cron Prins Gustaf . Even so , Hahr stayed behind in Canton , continued their business and was able to transfer Grill 's share of the profit through international bank notes .

Grill wrote a number of essays for the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences about his observations and experiences in Canton , and in 1773 , he became a member of the academy . In 1774 , Grill became its preses or president . He was also an accomplished flute player , and on 16 June 1772 , he was elected as member no . 46 of the Royal Swedish Academy of Music . Grill was also interested in porcelain . Part of his orders may have been just a way to get his money transferred from China to Sweden after he was ordered to return home in 1768 , but he also ordered his own armorial dinner service .

When Grill returned to Sweden in 1768 , he first lived in Stockholm where he occupied himself with trade . He owned a malmgård ( suburban manor ) at Ersta in the south part of Stockholm , where he established a crucible steel factory with the help of Bengt Andersson Qvist in 1770 . Grill married Lovisa Ulrika Lüning ( 1744 – 1824 ) in Stockholm in 1772 . They had ten children . She was the daughter of wholesaler Johan Christian Lüning and Margaretha Sabbath . In 1775 , Grill sold the manor and the steel factory to Qvist and moved to Godegård where he had bought the manor and the ironworks from the estate of Jean de Geer . In doing so he followed the pattern of other supercargos who made their fortunes abroad during a short period of time in the East India trade and on their return invested their money in Swedish factories and farms . Aside from renovating the factories in Godegård ( the largest ironworks in Östergötland ) he also had an English park planned and built at his manor in Godergård . The park had an orangery , canals , bridges and pavilions and was modelled after the larger park at Drottningholm Palace with its Chinese Pavilion . The Godegård estate also included Mariedamm with the Trehörnings blast furnace and the De Geersfors manufacturing house . Grill also bought the Bona estate in Västra Ny , where he built a wrought iron factory and the Medevi seat farm in 1779 , ( sold the following year ) . In 1782 , he bought the Flerohopp ironworks .

Grill established a small scale trade monopoly at Godegård in 1775 . Before he became owner of the ironworks , the farmers around Godegård had refined the wrought iron from the factory into large quantities of nails using small trip hammers . The nails were sold in Askersund . As a trader Grill would not abide this . First he decreed that the farmers had to buy all their goods at the ironworks ' general store . Second , he forbade the farmers and tenant farmers to sell nails to the merchants at Askersund , at that time a center for nail trade . In this way Grill assumed control over all nail trade himself . Jean Abraham Grill died on 12 March 1792 , in Norrköping under " mysterious circumstances " and was interred in the Grill family grave at the Godegård Church . When Grill died , his wife Lovisa Ulrika took over and ran the ironworks and factories until their children succeeded her .

Throughout his life Grill kept meticulous notes of his business . Some of these are in the Gothenburg University library , and most of them , along with Grill 's letters and correspondence , are now in the Godegård Archive in the Nordic Museum . Most of the 7,000 documents in the archive have been digitized following a request from the Macau Historical Archives in 2003 . They are available online , including documentation , letters , cargo lists , provisions for the ships and accounts for the Swedish factory in Canton during Grill 's time with the SOIC .

Metabolism ( from Greek : μεταβολή metabolē , " change " ) is the set of life-sustaining chemical transformations within the cells of living organisms . The three main purposes of metabolism are the conversion of food / fuel to energy to run cellular processes , the conversion of food / fuel to building blocks for proteins , lipids , nucleic acids , and some carbohydrates , and the elimination of nitrogenous wastes . These enzyme-catalyzed reactions allow organisms to grow and reproduce , maintain their structures , and respond to their environments . The word metabolism can also refer to the sum of all chemical reactions that occur in living organisms , including digestion and the transport of substances into and between different cells , in which case the set of reactions within the cells is called intermediary metabolism or intermediate metabolism . Metabolism is usually divided into two categories : catabolism , the breaking down of organic matter , for example , by cellular respiration , and anabolism , the building up of components of cells such as proteins and nucleic acids . Usually , breaking down releases energy and building up consumes energy . The chemical reactions of metabolism are organized into metabolic pathways , in which one chemical is transformed through a series of steps into another chemical , by a sequence of enzymes . Enzymes are crucial to metabolism because they allow organisms to drive desirable reactions that require energy that will not occur by themselves , by coupling them to spontaneous reactions that release energy . Enzymes act as catalysts that allow the reactions to proceed more rapidly . Enzymes also allow the regulation of metabolic pathways in response to changes in the cell 's environment or to signals from other cells .

The metabolic system of a particular organism determines which substances it will find nutritious and which poisonous . For example , some prokaryotes use hydrogen sulfide as a nutrient , yet this gas is poisonous to animals . The speed of metabolism , the metabolic rate , influences how much food an organism will require , and also affects how it is able to obtain that food . A striking feature of metabolism is the similarity of the basic metabolic pathways and components between even vastly different species . For example , the set of carboxylic acids that are best known as the intermediates in the citric acid cycle are present in all known organisms , being found in species as diverse as the unicellular bacterium Escherichia coli and huge multicellular organisms like elephants . These striking similarities in metabolic pathways are likely due to their early appearance in evolutionary history , and their retention because of their efficacy .

Proteins are made of amino acids arranged in a linear chain joined together by peptide bonds . Many proteins are enzymes that catalyze the chemical reactions in metabolism . Other proteins have structural or mechanical functions , such as those that form the cytoskeleton , a system of scaffolding that maintains the cell shape . Proteins are also important in cell signaling , immune responses , cell adhesion , active transport across membranes , and the cell cycle . Amino acids also contribute to cellular energy metabolism by providing a carbon source for entry into the citric acid cycle ( tricarboxylic acid cycle ) , especially when a primary source of energy , such as glucose , is scarce , or when cells undergo metabolic stress .

Lipids are the most diverse group of biochemicals . Their main structural uses are as part of biological membranes both internal and external , such as the cell membrane , or as a source of energy . Lipids are usually defined as hydrophobic or amphipathic biological molecules but will dissolve in organic solvents such as benzene or chloroform . The fats are a large group of compounds that contain fatty acids and glycerol ; a glycerol molecule attached to three fatty acid esters is called a triacylglyceride . Several variations on this basic structure exist , including alternate backbones such as sphingosine in the sphingolipids , and hydrophilic groups such as phosphate as in phospholipids . Steroids such as cholesterol are another major class of lipids .

The two nucleic acids , DNA and RNA , are polymers of nucleotides . Each nucleotide is composed of a phosphate attached to a ribose or deoxyribose sugar group which is attached to a nitrogenous base . Nucleic acids are critical for the storage and use of genetic information , and its interpretation through the processes of transcription and protein biosynthesis . This information is protected by DNA repair mechanisms and propagated through DNA replication . Many viruses have an RNA genome , such as HIV , which uses reverse transcription to create a DNA template from its viral RNA genome . RNA in ribozymes such as spliceosomes and ribosomes is similar to enzymes as it can catalyze chemical reactions . Individual nucleosides are made by attaching a nucleobase to a ribose sugar . These bases are heterocyclic rings containing nitrogen , classified as purines or pyrimidines . Nucleotides also act as coenzymes in metabolic-group-transfer reactions .

Metabolism involves a vast array of chemical reactions , but most fall under a few basic types of reactions that involve the transfer of functional groups of atoms and their bonds within molecules . This common chemistry allows cells to use a small set of metabolic intermediates to carry chemical groups between different reactions . These group-transfer intermediates are called coenzymes . Each class of group-transfer reactions is carried out by a particular coenzyme , which is the substrate for a set of enzymes that produce it , and a set of enzymes that consume it . These coenzymes are therefore continuously made , consumed and then recycled . One central coenzyme is adenosine triphosphate ( ATP ) , the universal energy currency of cells . This nucleotide is used to transfer chemical energy between different chemical reactions . There is only a small amount of ATP in cells , but as it is continuously regenerated , the human body can use about its own weight in ATP per day . ATP acts as a bridge between catabolism and anabolism . Catabolism breaks down molecules and anabolism puts them together . Catabolic reactions generate ATP and anabolic reactions consume it . It also serves as a carrier of phosphate groups in phosphorylation reactions .

A vitamin is an organic compound needed in small quantities that cannot be made in cells . In human nutrition , most vitamins function as coenzymes after modification ; for example , all water-soluble vitamins are phosphorylated or are coupled to nucleotides when they are used in cells . Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide ( NAD + ) , a derivative of vitamin B3 ( niacin ) , is an important coenzyme that acts as a hydrogen acceptor . Hundreds of separate types of dehydrogenases remove electrons from their substrates and reduce NAD + into NADH . This reduced form of the coenzyme is then a substrate for any of the reductases in the cell that need to reduce their substrates . Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide exists in two related forms in the cell , NADH and NADPH . The NAD + / NADH form is more important in catabolic reactions , while NADP + / NADPH is used in anabolic reactions .

Inorganic elements play critical roles in metabolism ; some are abundant ( e.g. sodium and potassium ) while others function at minute concentrations . About 99 % of a mammal 's mass is made up of the elements carbon , nitrogen , calcium , sodium , chlorine , potassium , hydrogen , phosphorus , oxygen and sulfur . Organic compounds ( proteins , lipids and carbohydrates ) contain the majority of the carbon and nitrogen ; most of the oxygen and hydrogen is present as water . The abundant inorganic elements act as ionic electrolytes . The most important ions are sodium , potassium , calcium , magnesium , chloride , phosphate and the organic ion bicarbonate . The maintenance of precise ion gradients across cell membranes maintains osmotic pressure and pH . Ions are also critical for nerve and muscle function , as action potentials in these tissues are produced by the exchange of electrolytes between the extracellular fluid and the cell 's fluid , the cytosol . Electrolytes enter and leave cells through proteins in the cell membrane called ion channels . For example , muscle contraction depends upon the movement of calcium , sodium and potassium through ion channels in the cell membrane and T-tubules .

Transition metals are usually present as trace elements in organisms , with zinc and iron being most abundant of those . These metals are used in some proteins as cofactors and are essential for the activity of enzymes such as catalase and oxygen-carrier proteins such as hemoglobin . Metal cofactors are bound tightly to specific sites in proteins ; although enzyme cofactors can be modified during catalysis , they always return to their original state by the end of the reaction catalyzed . Metal micronutrients are taken up into organisms by specific transporters and bind to storage proteins such as ferritin or metallothionein when not in use .

Catabolism is the set of metabolic processes that break down large molecules . These include breaking down and oxidizing food molecules . The purpose of the catabolic reactions is to provide the energy and components needed by anabolic reactions . The exact nature of these catabolic reactions differ from organism to organism and organisms can be classified based on their sources of energy and carbon ( their primary nutritional groups ) , as shown in the table below . Organic molecules are used as a source of energy by organotrophs , while lithotrophs use inorganic substrates and phototrophs capture sunlight as chemical energy . However , all these different forms of metabolism depend on redox reactions that involve the transfer of electrons from reduced donor molecules such as organic molecules , water , ammonia , hydrogen sulfide or ferrous ions to acceptor molecules such as oxygen , nitrate or sulfate . In animals these reactions involve complex organic molecules that are broken down to simpler molecules , such as carbon dioxide and water . In photosynthetic organisms such as plants and cyanobacteria , these electron-transfer reactions do not release energy , but are used as a way of storing energy absorbed from sunlight .

The most common set of catabolic reactions in animals can be separated into three main stages . In the first , large organic molecules such as proteins , polysaccharides or lipids are digested into their smaller components outside cells . Next , these smaller molecules are taken up by cells and converted to yet smaller molecules , usually acetyl coenzyme A ( acetyl-CoA ) , which releases some energy . Finally , the acetyl group on the CoA is oxidised to water and carbon dioxide in the citric acid cycle and electron transport chain , releasing the energy that is stored by reducing the coenzyme nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide ( NAD + ) into NADH .

Macromolecules such as starch , cellulose or proteins cannot be rapidly taken up by cells and must be broken into their smaller units before they can be used in cell metabolism . Several common classes of enzymes digest these polymers . These digestive enzymes include proteases that digest proteins into amino acids , as well as glycoside hydrolases that digest polysaccharides into simple sugars known as monosaccharides . Microbes simply secrete digestive enzymes into their surroundings , while animals only secrete these enzymes from specialized cells in their guts . The amino acids or sugars released by these extracellular enzymes are then pumped into cells by active transport proteins .

Carbohydrate catabolism is the breakdown of carbohydrates into smaller units . Carbohydrates are usually taken into cells once they have been digested into monosaccharides . Once inside , the major route of breakdown is glycolysis , where sugars such as glucose and fructose are converted into pyruvate and some ATP is generated . Pyruvate is an intermediate in several metabolic pathways , but the majority is converted to acetyl-CoA and fed into the citric acid cycle . Although some more ATP is generated in the citric acid cycle , the most important product is NADH , which is made from NAD + as the acetyl-CoA is oxidized . This oxidation releases carbon dioxide as a waste product . In anaerobic conditions , glycolysis produces lactate , through the enzyme lactate dehydrogenase re-oxidizing NADH to NAD + for re-use in glycolysis . An alternative route for glucose breakdown is the pentose phosphate pathway , which reduces the coenzyme NADPH and produces pentose sugars such as ribose , the sugar component of nucleic acids . Fats are catabolised by hydrolysis to free fatty acids and glycerol . The glycerol enters glycolysis and the fatty acids are broken down by beta oxidation to release acetyl-CoA , which then is fed into the citric acid cycle . Fatty acids release more energy upon oxidation than carbohydrates because carbohydrates contain more oxygen in their structures . Steroids are also broken down by some bacteria in a process similar to beta oxidation , and this breakdown process involves the release of significant amounts of acetyl-CoA , propionyl-CoA , and pyruvate , which can all be used by the cell for energy . M. tuberculosis can also grow on the lipid cholesterol as a sole source of carbon , and genes involved in the cholesterol use pathway ( s ) have been validated as important during various stages of the infection lifecycle of M. tuberculosis .

Amino acids are either used to synthesize proteins and other biomolecules , or oxidized to urea and carbon dioxide as a source of energy . The oxidation pathway starts with the removal of the amino group by a transaminase . The amino group is fed into the urea cycle , leaving a deaminated carbon skeleton in the form of a keto acid . Several of these keto acids are intermediates in the citric acid cycle , for example the deamination of glutamate forms α-ketoglutarate . The glucogenic amino acids can also be converted into glucose , through gluconeogenesis ( discussed below ) .

In oxidative phosphorylation , the electrons removed from organic molecules in areas such as the protagon acid cycle are transferred to oxygen and the energy released is used to make ATP . This is done in eukaryotes by a series of proteins in the membranes of mitochondria called the electron transport chain . In prokaryotes , these proteins are found in the cell 's inner membrane . These proteins use the energy released from passing electrons from reduced molecules like NADH onto oxygen to pump protons across a membrane . Pumping protons out of the mitochondria creates a proton concentration difference across the membrane and generates an electrochemical gradient . This force drives protons back into the mitochondrion through the base of an enzyme called ATP synthase . The flow of protons makes the stalk subunit rotate , causing the active site of the synthase domain to change shape and phosphorylate adenosine diphosphate – turning it into ATP .

The energy in sunlight is captured by plants , cyanobacteria , purple bacteria , green sulfur bacteria and some protists . This process is often coupled to the conversion of carbon dioxide into organic compounds , as part of photosynthesis , which is discussed below . The energy capture and carbon fixation systems can however operate separately in prokaryotes , as purple bacteria and green sulfur bacteria can use sunlight as a source of energy , while switching between carbon fixation and the fermentation of organic compounds . In many organisms the capture of solar energy is similar in principle to oxidative phosphorylation , as it involves the storage of energy as a proton concentration gradient . This proton motive force then drives ATP synthesis . The electrons needed to drive this electron transport chain come from light-gathering proteins called photosynthetic reaction centres or rhodopsins . Reaction centers are classed into two types depending on the type of photosynthetic pigment present , with most photosynthetic bacteria only having one type , while plants and cyanobacteria have two . In plants , algae , and cyanobacteria , photosystem II uses light energy to remove electrons from water , releasing oxygen as a waste product . The electrons then flow to the cytochrome b6f complex , which uses their energy to pump protons across the thylakoid membrane in the chloroplast . These protons move back through the membrane as they drive the ATP synthase , as before . The electrons then flow through photosystem I and can then either be used to reduce the coenzyme NADP + , for use in the Calvin cycle , which is discussed below , or recycled for further ATP generation .

Anabolism is the set of constructive metabolic processes where the energy released by catabolism is used to synthesize complex molecules . In general , the complex molecules that make up cellular structures are constructed step-by-step from small and simple precursors . Anabolism involves three basic stages . First , the production of precursors such as amino acids , monosaccharides , isoprenoids and nucleotides , secondly , their activation into reactive forms using energy from ATP , and thirdly , the assembly of these precursors into complex molecules such as proteins , polysaccharides , lipids and nucleic acids . Organisms differ in how many of the molecules in their cells they can construct for themselves . Autotrophs such as plants can construct the complex organic molecules in cells such as polysaccharides and proteins from simple molecules like carbon dioxide and water . Heterotrophs , on the other hand , require a source of more complex substances , such as monosaccharides and amino acids , to produce these complex molecules . Organisms can be further classified by ultimate source of their energy : photoautotrophs and photoheterotrophs obtain energy from light , whereas chemoautotrophs and chemoheterotrophs obtain energy from inorganic oxidation reactions .

Photosynthesis is the synthesis of carbohydrates from sunlight and carbon dioxide ( CO2 ) . In plants , cyanobacteria and algae , oxygenic photosynthesis splits water , with oxygen produced as a waste product . This process uses the ATP and NADPH produced by the photosynthetic reaction centres , as described above , to convert CO2 into glycerate 3-phosphate , which can then be converted into glucose . This carbon-fixation reaction is carried out by the enzyme RuBisCO as part of the Calvin – Benson cycle . Three types of photosynthesis occur in plants , C3 carbon fixation , C4 carbon fixation and CAM photosynthesis . These differ by the route that carbon dioxide takes to the Calvin cycle , with C3 plants fixing CO2 directly , while C4 and CAM photosynthesis incorporate the CO2 into other compounds first , as adaptations to deal with intense sunlight and dry conditions . In photosynthetic prokaryotes the mechanisms of carbon fixation are more diverse . Here , carbon dioxide can be fixed by the Calvin – Benson cycle , a reversed citric acid cycle , or the carboxylation of acetyl-CoA . Prokaryotic chemoautotrophs also fix CO2 through the Calvin – Benson cycle , but use energy from inorganic compounds to drive the reaction .

In carbohydrate anabolism , simple organic acids can be converted into monosaccharides such as glucose and then used to assemble polysaccharides such as starch . The generation of glucose from compounds like pyruvate , lactate , glycerol , glycerate 3-phosphate and amino acids is called gluconeogenesis . Gluconeogenesis converts pyruvate to glucose-6-phosphate through a series of intermediates , many of which are shared with glycolysis . However , this pathway is not simply glycolysis run in reverse , as several steps are catalyzed by non-glycolytic enzymes . This is important as it allows the formation and breakdown of glucose to be regulated separately , and prevents both pathways from running simultaneously in a futile cycle . Although fat is a common way of storing energy , in vertebrates such as humans the fatty acids in these stores cannot be converted to glucose through gluconeogenesis as these organisms cannot convert acetyl-CoA into pyruvate ; plants do , but animals do not , have the necessary enzymatic machinery . As a result , after long-term starvation , vertebrates need to produce ketone bodies from fatty acids to replace glucose in tissues such as the brain that cannot metabolize fatty acids . In other organisms such as plants and bacteria , this metabolic problem is solved using the glyoxylate cycle , which bypasses the decarboxylation step in the citric acid cycle and allows the transformation of acetyl-CoA to oxaloacetate , where it can be used for the production of glucose .

Fatty acids are made by fatty acid synthases that polymerize and then reduce acetyl-CoA units . The acyl chains in the fatty acids are extended by a cycle of reactions that add the acyl group , reduce it to an alcohol , dehydrate it to an alkene group and then reduce it again to an alkane group . The enzymes of fatty acid biosynthesis are divided into two groups : in animals and fungi , all these fatty acid synthase reactions are carried out by a single multifunctional type I protein , while in plant plastids and bacteria separate type II enzymes perform each step in the pathway . Terpenes and isoprenoids are a large class of lipids that include the carotenoids and form the largest class of plant natural products . These compounds are made by the assembly and modification of isoprene units donated from the reactive precursors isopentenyl pyrophosphate and dimethylallyl pyrophosphate . These precursors can be made in different ways . In animals and archaea , the mevalonate pathway produces these compounds from acetyl-CoA , while in plants and bacteria the non-mevalonate pathway uses pyruvate and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate as substrates . One important reaction that uses these activated isoprene donors is steroid biosynthesis . Here , the isoprene units are joined together to make squalene and then folded up and formed into a set of rings to make lanosterol . Lanosterol can then be converted into other steroids such as cholesterol and ergosterol .

Organisms vary in their ability to synthesize the 20 common amino acids . Most bacteria and plants can synthesize all twenty , but mammals can only synthesize eleven nonessential amino acids , so nine essential amino acids must be obtained from food . Some simple parasites , such as the bacteria Mycoplasma pneumoniae , lack all amino acid synthesis and take their amino acids directly from their hosts . All amino acids are synthesized from intermediates in glycolysis , the citric acid cycle , or the pentose phosphate pathway . Nitrogen is provided by glutamate and glutamine . Amino acid synthesis depends on the formation of the appropriate alpha-keto acid , which is then transaminated to form an amino acid . Amino acids are made into proteins by being joined together in a chain of peptide bonds . Each different protein has a unique sequence of amino acid residues : this is its primary structure . Just as the letters of the alphabet can be combined to form an almost endless variety of words , amino acids can be linked in varying sequences to form a huge variety of proteins . Proteins are made from amino acids that have been activated by attachment to a transfer RNA molecule through an ester bond . This aminoacyl-tRNA precursor is produced in an ATP-dependent reaction carried out by an aminoacyl tRNA synthetase . This aminoacyl-tRNA is then a substrate for the ribosome , which joins the amino acid onto the elongating protein chain , using the sequence information in a messenger RNA .

Nucleotides are made from amino acids , carbon dioxide and formic acid in pathways that require large amounts of metabolic energy . Consequently , most organisms have efficient systems to salvage preformed nucleotides . Purines are synthesized as nucleosides ( bases attached to ribose ) . Both adenine and guanine are made from the precursor nucleoside inosine monophosphate , which is synthesized using atoms from the amino acids glycine , glutamine , and aspartic acid , as well as formate transferred from the coenzyme tetrahydrofolate . Pyrimidines , on the other hand , are synthesized from the base orotate , which is formed from glutamine and aspartate .

All organisms are constantly exposed to compounds that they cannot use as foods and would be harmful if they accumulated in cells , as they have no metabolic function . These potentially damaging compounds are called xenobiotics . Xenobiotics such as synthetic drugs , natural poisons and antibiotics are detoxified by a set of xenobiotic-metabolizing enzymes . In humans , these include cytochrome P450 oxidases , UDP-glucuronosyltransferases , and glutathione S-transferases . This system of enzymes acts in three stages to firstly oxidize the xenobiotic ( phase I ) and then conjugate water-soluble groups onto the molecule ( phase II ) . The modified water-soluble xenobiotic can then be pumped out of cells and in multicellular organisms may be further metabolized before being excreted ( phase III ) . In ecology , these reactions are particularly important in microbial biodegradation of pollutants and the bioremediation of contaminated land and oil spills . Many of these microbial reactions are shared with multicellular organisms , but due to the incredible diversity of types of microbes these organisms are able to deal with a far wider range of xenobiotics than multicellular organisms , and can degrade even persistent organic pollutants such as organochloride compounds .

Living organisms must obey the laws of thermodynamics , which describe the transfer of heat and work . The second law of thermodynamics states that in any closed system , the amount of entropy ( disorder ) cannot decrease . Although living organisms ' amazing complexity appears to contradict this law , life is possible as all organisms are open systems that exchange matter and energy with their surroundings . Thus living systems are not in equilibrium , but instead are dissipative systems that maintain their state of high complexity by causing a larger increase in the entropy of their environments . The metabolism of a cell achieves this by coupling the spontaneous processes of catabolism to the non-spontaneous processes of anabolism . In thermodynamic terms , metabolism maintains order by creating disorder .

As the environments of most organisms are constantly changing , the reactions of metabolism must be finely regulated to maintain a constant set of conditions within cells , a condition called homeostasis . Metabolic regulation also allows organisms to respond to signals and interact actively with their environments . Two closely linked concepts are important for understanding how metabolic pathways are controlled . Firstly , the regulation of an enzyme in a pathway is how its activity is increased and decreased in response to signals . Secondly , the control exerted by this enzyme is the effect that these changes in its activity have on the overall rate of the pathway ( the flux through the pathway ) . For example , an enzyme may show large changes in activity ( i.e. it is highly regulated ) but if these changes have little effect on the flux of a metabolic pathway , then this enzyme is not involved in the control of the pathway . There are multiple levels of metabolic regulation . In intrinsic regulation , the metabolic pathway self-regulates to respond to changes in the levels of substrates or products ; for example , a decrease in the amount of product can increase the flux through the pathway to compensate . This type of regulation often involves allosteric regulation of the activities of multiple enzymes in the pathway . Extrinsic control involves a cell in a multicellular organism changing its metabolism in response to signals from other cells . These signals are usually in the form of soluble messengers such as hormones and growth factors and are detected by specific receptors on the cell surface . These signals are then transmitted inside the cell by second messenger systems that often involved the phosphorylation of proteins .

A very well understood example of extrinsic control is the regulation of glucose metabolism by the hormone insulin . Insulin is produced in response to rises in blood glucose levels . Binding of the hormone to insulin receptors on cells then activates a cascade of protein kinases that cause the cells to take up glucose and convert it into storage molecules such as fatty acids and glycogen . The metabolism of glycogen is controlled by activity of phosphorylase , the enzyme that breaks down glycogen , and glycogen synthase , the enzyme that makes it . These enzymes are regulated in a reciprocal fashion , with phosphorylation inhibiting glycogen synthase , but activating phosphorylase . Insulin causes glycogen synthesis by activating protein phosphatases and producing a decrease in the phosphorylation of these enzymes .

The central pathways of metabolism described above , such as glycolysis and the citric acid cycle , are present in all three domains of living things and were present in the last universal ancestor . This universal ancestral cell was prokaryotic and probably a methanogen that had extensive amino acid , nucleotide , carbohydrate and lipid metabolism . The retention of these ancient pathways during later evolution may be the result of these reactions having been an optimal solution to their particular metabolic problems , with pathways such as glycolysis and the citric acid cycle producing their end products highly efficiently and in a minimal number of steps . The first pathways of enzyme-based metabolism may have been parts of purine nucleotide metabolism , while previous metabolic pathways were a part of the ancient RNA world . Many models have been proposed to describe the mechanisms by which novel metabolic pathways evolve . These include the sequential addition of novel enzymes to a short ancestral pathway , the duplication and then divergence of entire pathways as well as the recruitment of pre-existing enzymes and their assembly into a novel reaction pathway . The relative importance of these mechanisms is unclear , but genomic studies have shown that enzymes in a pathway are likely to have a shared ancestry , suggesting that many pathways have evolved in a step-by-step fashion with novel functions created from pre-existing steps in the pathway . An alternative model comes from studies that trace the evolution of proteins ' structures in metabolic networks , this has suggested that enzymes are pervasively recruited , borrowing enzymes to perform similar functions in different metabolic pathways ( evident in the MANET database ) These recruitment processes result in an evolutionary enzymatic mosaic . A third possibility is that some parts of metabolism might exist as " modules " that can be reused in different pathways and perform similar functions on different molecules .

Classically , metabolism is studied by a reductionist approach that focuses on a single metabolic pathway . Particularly valuable is the use of radioactive tracers at the whole-organism , tissue and cellular levels , which define the paths from precursors to final products by identifying radioactively labelled intermediates and products . The enzymes that catalyze these chemical reactions can then be purified and their kinetics and responses to inhibitors investigated . A parallel approach is to identify the small molecules in a cell or tissue ; the complete set of these molecules is called the metabolome . Overall , these studies give a good view of the structure and function of simple metabolic pathways , but are inadequate when applied to more complex systems such as the metabolism of a complete cell . An idea of the complexity of the metabolic networks in cells that contain thousands of different enzymes is given by the figure showing the interactions between just 43 proteins and 40 metabolites to the right : the sequences of genomes provide lists containing anything up to 45,000 genes . However , it is now possible to use this genomic data to reconstruct complete networks of biochemical reactions and produce more holistic mathematical models that may explain and predict their behavior . These models are especially powerful when used to integrate the pathway and metabolite data obtained through classical methods with data on gene expression from proteomic and DNA microarray studies . Using these techniques , a model of human metabolism has now been produced , which will guide future drug discovery and biochemical research . These models are now used in network analysis , to classify human diseases into groups that share common proteins or metabolites .

Bacterial metabolic networks are a striking example of bow-tie organization , an architecture able to input a wide range of nutrients and produce a large variety of products and complex macromolecules using a relatively few intermediate common currencies . A major technological application of this information is metabolic engineering . Here , organisms such as yeast , plants or bacteria are genetically modified to make them more useful in biotechnology and aid the production of drugs such as antibiotics or industrial chemicals such as 1,3-propanediol and shikimic acid . These genetic modifications usually aim to reduce the amount of energy used to produce the product , increase yields and reduce the production of wastes .

The term metabolism is derived from the Greek Μεταβολισμός – " Metabolismos " for " change " , or " overthrow " . The first documented references of metabolism were made by Ibn al-Nafis in his 1260 AD work titled Al-Risalah al-Kamiliyyah fil Siera al-Nabawiyyah ( The Treatise of Kamil on the Prophet 's Biography ) which included the following phrase " Both the body and its parts are in a continuous state of dissolution and nourishment , so they are inevitably undergoing permanent change . " The history of the scientific study of metabolism spans several centuries and has moved from examining whole animals in early studies , to examining individual metabolic reactions in modern biochemistry . The first controlled experiments in human metabolism were published by Santorio Santorio in 1614 in his book Ars de statica medicina . He described how he weighed himself before and after eating , sleep , working , sex , fasting , drinking , and excreting . He found that most of the food he took in was lost through what he called " insensible perspiration " . In these early studies , the mechanisms of these metabolic processes had not been identified and a vital force was thought to animate living tissue . In the 19th century , when studying the fermentation of sugar to alcohol by yeast , Louis Pasteur concluded that fermentation was catalyzed by substances within the yeast cells he called " ferments " . He wrote that " alcoholic fermentation is an act correlated with the life and organization of the yeast cells , not with the death or putrefaction of the cells . " This discovery , along with the publication by Friedrich Wöhler in 1828 of a paper on the chemical synthesis of urea , and is notable for being the first organic compound prepared from wholly inorganic precursors . This proved that the organic compounds and chemical reactions found in cells were no different in principle than any other part of chemistry .

It was the discovery of enzymes at the beginning of the 20th century by Eduard Buchner that separated the study of the chemical reactions of metabolism from the biological study of cells , and marked the beginnings of biochemistry . The mass of biochemical knowledge grew rapidly throughout the early 20th century . One of the most prolific of these modern biochemists was Hans Krebs who made huge contributions to the study of metabolism . He discovered the urea cycle and later , working with Hans Kornberg , the citric acid cycle and the glyoxylate cycle . Modern biochemical research has been greatly aided by the development of new techniques such as chromatography , X-ray diffraction , NMR spectroscopy , radioisotopic labelling , electron microscopy and molecular dynamics simulations . These techniques have allowed the discovery and detailed analysis of the many molecules and metabolic pathways in cells .

" Bangla Desh " is a song by English musician George Harrison . It was released as a non-album single in July 1971 , to raise awareness for the millions of refugees from the country formerly known as East Pakistan , following the 1970 Bhola cyclone and the outbreak of the Bangladesh Liberation War . Harrison 's inspiration for the song came from his friend Ravi Shankar , a Bengali musician , who approached Harrison for help in trying to alleviate the suffering . " Bangla Desh " has been described as " one of the most cogent social statements in music history " and helped gain international support for Bangladeshi independence by establishing the name of the fledgling nation around the world . In 2005 , United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan identified the song 's success in personalising the Bangladesh crisis , through its emotive description of Shankar 's request for help . " Bangla Desh " appeared at the height of Harrison 's popularity as a solo artist , following the break-up of the Beatles and the acclaim afforded his 1970 triple album All Things Must Pass . It was pop music 's first charity single , and its release took place three days before the Harrison-sponsored Concert for Bangladesh shows at New York 's Madison Square Garden . The single became a top ten hit in the United Kingdom and elsewhere in Europe , and peaked at number 23 on America 's Billboard Hot 100 . The recording was co-produced by Phil Spector and features contributions from Leon Russell , Jim Horn , Ringo Starr and Jim Keltner . The Los Angeles session for the song marked the start of two enduring musical associations in Harrison 's solo career , with Keltner and Horn .

Backed by these musicians and others including Eric Clapton and Billy Preston , Harrison performed " Bangla Desh " at the UNICEF concerts , on 1 August 1971 , as a rousing encore . In a review of the Concert for Bangladesh live album for Rolling Stone magazine , Jon Landau identified this reading as " the concert 's single greatest performance by all concerned " . The studio recording appeared on the 1976 compilation The Best of George Harrison , which remained its only official CD release until September 2014 , when it was included as a bonus track on the Apple Years 1968 – 75 reissue of Harrison 's Living in the Material World album . Artists who have covered the song include Stu Phillips & the Hollyridge Strings and Italian saxophonist Fausto Papetti .

By the spring of 1971 , George Harrison had established himself as the most successful ex-Beatle during the former band members ' first year as solo artists ; in the words of biographer Elliot Huntley , he " couldn 't have got any more popular in the eyes of the public " . Just as importantly , writes Peter Lavezzoli , author of The Dawn of Indian Music in the West , Harrison had " amassed such good will in the music community " during that time . Rather than looking to immediately follow up his All Things Must Pass triple album , he had spent the months since recording ended in October 1970 repaying favours to the friends and musicians who had helped make the album such a success . These included co-producer Phil Spector , whose wife , Ronnie Spector , Harrison supplied with songs for a proposed solo album on Apple Records ; Ringo Starr , whose " It Don 't Come Easy " single he produced and prepared for release , following the original session for the song in March 1970 ; Bobby Whitlock , singer and keyboard player with the short-lived Derek and the Dominos , whose eponymous debut solo album featured Harrison and Eric Clapton on guitar ; and former Spooky Tooth pianist Gary Wright , whose Footprint album ( 1971 ) Harrison also guested on , along with All Things Must Pass orchestrator John Barham .

Another project was a documentary on the life and music of Ravi Shankar , Howard Worth 's Raga ( 1971 ) , for which Harrison had stepped in at the last minute to provide funding and distribution through Apple Films . With Harrison also serving as record producer for the accompanying soundtrack album , work began with Shankar in Los Angeles during April 1971 and resumed in late June , following Harrison-produced sessions in London for the band Badfinger . A Bengali by birth , Shankar had already brought the growing humanitarian crisis in Bangladesh to Harrison 's attention , while staying at the ex-Beatle 's house , Friar Park , earlier in the year . The state formerly known as East Pakistan ( and before that , East Bengal ) had suffered an estimated 300,000 casualties when the Bhola cyclone hit its shores on 12 November 1970 , and the indifference shown by the ruling government in West Pakistan , particularly by President Yahya Khan , was just one reason the Bengali national movement sought independence on 25 March 1971 . This declaration resulted in an immediate military crackdown by Khan 's troops , and three days later the Bangladesh Liberation War began . By 13 June , details of the systematic massacre of citizens were beginning to emerge internationally via the publication in London 's Sunday Times of an article by Anthony Mascarenhas . Along with the torrential rains and intensive flooding that were threatening the passage of millions of refugees into north-eastern India , this news galvanised Shankar into approaching Harrison for help in trying to alleviate the suffering . " I was in a very sad mood , having read all this news , " Shankar later told Rolling Stone magazine , " and I said , ' George , this is the situation , I know it doesn 't concern you , I know you can 't possibly identify . ' But while I talked to George he was very deeply moved ... and he said , ' Yes , I think I 'll be able to do something . ' "

As a result , Harrison committed to staging the Concert for Bangladesh at Madison Square Garden , New York , on Sunday , 1 August . Six weeks of frantic activity ensued as Harrison flew between New York , Los Angeles and London , making preparations and recruiting other musicians to join him and Shankar for the shows . While conceding that Harrison was no " natural sloganeer " in the manner of his former bandmate John Lennon , author Robert Rodriguez has written : " if any ex-Fab had the cachet with his fan base to solicit good works , it was the spiritual Beatle . "

Foreign journalists had been deported from East Pakistan shortly before the Pakistani army 's Operation Searchlight , and even after Mascarenhas ' first-hand observations had been published , Shankar and Harrison were concerned that the mainstream media in the West were showing a reluctance to report all the facts . That summer , it also emerged that America was supporting General Khan 's military offensive , both financially and with weaponry – despite the Blood telegram in April , in which officials at the US Consulate in Dacca advised their State Department of the " genocide " taking place and accused the US Government of " moral bankruptcy " . Realising the need to create greater awareness of the situation in Bangladesh , and particularly the refugee camps of India that had become " infectious open-air graveyards " with the outbreak of cholera , Harrison quickly composed a song for the cause . " Bangla Desh " was " written in ten minutes at the piano " , he would later recall . The title translates as " Bengal nation " , and the fact that Harrison spelt it as two words is indicative of how little the new country name had been acknowledged by the Western media at this time .

As with the concerts , Harrison made a point of steering clear of the politics behind the problem , his lyrics focusing instead on the human perspective . At the suggestion of Leon Russell , who had participated in the recent Ronnie Spector and Badfinger sessions , Harrison began the song with a brief verse outlining his own introduction to the Bangladesh crisis : These lines refer to Shankar 's request for help , and " [ in ] deference to the Shankar context " , musical biographer Simon Leng suggests , Harrison set the opening verse as a rock version of Indian music 's traditional alap – " a slow introductory statement of the main ideas " . Lyrically , the remainder of the song concentrates on the uncompromising message " We 've got to relieve Bangla Desh " as thousands of refugees , particularly children , fell victim to the effects of famine and disease . The final verse-chorus reflects a point that former US Fund for UNICEF president Charles Lyons has identified as a perennial obstacle when addressing global issues of poverty – that the problems appear to be too big and too distant for individuals to be able to solve :

With little time to begin rehearsing for the New York shows , the " Bangla Desh " single was rush-recorded in Los Angeles . Sources differ over the venue and date : the Record Plant West seems the most likely studio , with sessions taking place on 4 – 5 July and horn overdubs perhaps on 10 July . Phil Spector again co-produced , but as with the recording details for the sessions , the exact line-up of musicians is a matter of conjecture . According to Simon Leng , who consulted Klaus Voormann and Jim Horn for his book While My Guitar Gently Weeps , the line-up comprised Harrison , Leon Russell ( piano ) , Horn ( saxophones ) , Voormann ( bass ) , Starr , Jim Keltner ( both on drums ) and Billy Preston ( organ ) . Leng and Beatles author Bruce Spizer credit a " horn section " led by Jim Horn , which could include regular partner Chuck Findley and even the rest of the six-piece section , christened " the Hollywood Horns " , that would go on to perform in New York on 1 August . The recording begins with Harrison 's emotive introduction backed by what Lavezzoli describes as a " rolling piano figure " from Russell . Following the words " help us save some lives " , the piano sets up the song 's " driving groove " , Lavezzoli continues , as the rhythm section and Harrison 's electric guitar join in , creating the same musical blend of gospel and rock that Harrison had adopted on much of All Things Must Pass . In a review for the NME in August 1971 , Derek Johnson wrote of " Bangla Desh " : " Opens almost like a sermon , then the beat come is ... as George wails fervently to a backing of a solid rhythm section and handclaps . " The track retains an " urgent ' live ' mood " , Leng notes , although it is possible that Starr 's contribution was overdubbed after the main session , due to his filming schedule for the Western movie Blindman ( 1971 ) , in Spain . The song features solos shared between Russell , Horn ( on tenor sax ) and Harrison ( slide guitar ) , and fades out with the ensemble playing in double time , similar to a fast gat section ( or drut ) used in Hindustani classical music .

" Bangla Desh " marked the first occasion that Harrison worked with Horn , who would go on to become a regular collaborator . Already a veteran of the LA music scene by 1971 , Horn recalls his " jaded " mindset before meeting Harrison , but describes the session as a " real turning point " in his career , " because we were doing something for a cause " . It was also the first time that Keltner played on a George Harrison session , the two musicians having already worked together on Lennon 's Imagine album ( 1971 ) . The " Bangla Desh " session was the beginning of a lifelong friendship , with the pair remaining " as brothers " , Keltner has said , until Harrison 's death in 2001 . Together with Clapton , Preston , Bob Dylan and the group Badfinger , all these musicians joined Harrison and Shankar on stage at Madison Square Garden . Ravi Shankar cut a benefit disc of his own at this time , the Harrison-produced Joi Bangla EP . The A-side featured two vocal compositions sung in Bengali – the title track ( which translated to mean " Victory to Bangladesh " ) and " Oh Bhaugowan " – while on the reverse was a six-minute recital of " Raga Mishra Jhinjoti " , featuring Shankar , sarod master Ali Akbar Khan , and Shankar 's regular tabla player , Alla Rakha .

At Harrison 's urging , Capitol Records , Apple 's distributor in the United States , set all four of its manufacturing plants to producing copies of the " Bangla Desh " single ; one-sided , white label promo discs were also rushed through to ensure immediate radio play for the song . For the US picture sleeve , designer Tom Wilkes chose a suitably topical image , incorporating headlines and text from New York Times articles about the Bangladesh crisis . The articles made mention of vultures being the " happiest creatures " amid the chaos in Dacca , and India 's " wait and see " policy regarding events in East Pakistan . The front of the picture sleeve was topped with the line " ( We 've Got to Relieve ) " before the words " Bangla Desh " , leading a number of publications to include the parenthetical text as part of the official song title . Boxed off at the foot of the front sleeve were details of the George Harrison – Ravi Shankar Special Emergency Relief Fund ( care of UNICEF 's New York headquarters ) , to which proceeds of the single would go and further donations were encouraged . The back cover of the US sleeve was taken from a UPI news agency photograph – an " emotional " image showing a mother comforting her starving child . This photo was also used in the aid project 's magazine advertising campaign , as well as for the front of the single 's picture sleeve in Denmark and Japan .

Backed with the well-regarded " Deep Blue " , the " Bangla Desh " single was issued on 28 July 1971 in the United States ( as Apple 1836 ) , with a UK release following two days later ( R 5912 ) . It peaked at number 10 on Britain 's national singles chart and number 23 on the Billboard Hot 100 in America ; the other US chart compilers , Cash Box and Record World , placed the single at number 20 and number 13 , respectively . " Bangla Desh " attracted sustained airplay in the days leading up to the concerts , and lent the relief project an authentic social and political significance . A Bangladeshi academic , Professor Farida Majid , would later write : " To the utter consternation of [ US President ] Nixon and [ Secretary of State ] Kissinger , George Harrison 's ' Bangla Desh ' hit the chart . It was a thrilling moment in the midst of all the sad news emanating from the battlefront . Even the Western journalists covering the civil war in East Pakistan were not yet using the word ' Bangladesh ' . " The studio recording was also played at the Concert for Bangladesh shows , following Shankar 's opening set , over footage of the refugees and scenes from the war .

Despite the song having been a hit – and its status as the first-ever pop charity single , fourteen years before Band Aid and USA for Africa – " Bangla Desh " was mostly ignored by record-company repackagers following 1971 . Over a period of 43 years , the studio version received an album release only on the 1976 compilation The Best of George Harrison , which was issued on CD in 1987 . The song has since been included as a bonus track , remixed by Paul Hicks , on the 2014 reissue of Harrison 's Living in the Material World album , part of the eight-disc Apple Years 1968 – 75 box set .

On release , Billboard magazine described " Bangla Desh " as " a musical appeal to help our fellow-man " that " should find immediate and heavy chart action " . In his contemporary review for the NME , Derek Johnson considered the song to be " [ n ] ot so strong melodically as ' My Sweet Lord ' , but still nagging and insistent " , and added : " one can immediately detect the despair and pity in [ Harrison 's ] voice as he sings of the appalling plight of the East Pakistanis ... his lyric is bound to cause some heart-searching . " A wave of public goodwill accompanied the single 's release in 1971 , as was the case with the two benefit concerts , the subsequent live album , and the 1972 concert film . Simon Leng has identified genuine friendship as being key to the success of Harrison and Shankar 's relief project : the friendship between the two of them that saw the ex-Beatle become involved , and the friendships Harrison had cultivated with Dylan , Clapton and Starr that ensured their participation . Leng notes that the opening lyrics to " Bangla Desh " ( " My friend came to me ... " ) could equally have applied to Harrison 's efforts to enlist the reluctant Dylan and heroin-sidelined Clapton .

In his concert review for The Village Voice , Don Heckman described " Bangla Desh " as " a song which expresses far better than words what kind of man Harrison is " . Heckman went on to compare Harrison 's philanthropy with the activities of two of his former bandmates , saying : " I have no quarrel with John Lennon 's endless clattering around inside his psyche , or Paul McCartney 's search for sweetness and light , but at the moment I have to have stronger feelings about George Harrison 's active efforts to do something about the misery in the world around him . How surprising that the most introspective of the Beatles should be the one who , in the long run , takes the most effective actions . " Away from its context as a song designed purely to bring attention to the Bengalis ' cause , as Harrison himself described it , " Bangla Desh " has often been viewed by commentators as a rushed and underwhelming composition . Robert Rodriguez qualifies this opinion , however : " As a single , the song was possibly not the most commercial of records , but as a call to service , it could scarcely have been improved upon . " " Bangla Desh " ' s standing as rock music 's first charity single is not overlooked , with Ian Inglis stating : " ' Bangla Desh ' serves as a model for the charity singles that would become commonplace in the decades ahead , although , in this instance , the power of Harrison 's song lies not in its assembly of famous performers but in its literal and absolute commitment . " On this point , Leng deems the song as having " as much raw energy as anything [ Lennon 's ] Plastic Ono Band ever offered " . In The Dawn of Indian Music in the West , Peter Lavezzoli writes : " Harrison 's lyric and vocal were concise and powerful , a direct call for action in a specific crisis . As such , ' Bangla Desh ' remains one of the most cogent social statements in music history . "

In his interview for the 2005 reissue of Saul Swimmer 's Concert for Bangladesh film , UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan acknowledged Harrison and Shankar as " pioneers " in their efforts for the people of Bangladesh , and credited the song 's opening verse for personalising the crisis by showing " the man behind the music " . Thirty-three years before this , on 5 June 1972 , UNICEF officially recognised Harrison and Shankar with its annual Child Is the Father of the Man award . In 2004 , " Bangla Desh " was played during the final episode of the BBC television series Himalaya with Michael Palin , in which Palin travels south from Bhutan to Bay of Bengal and reflects on Bangladesh 's struggle for independence . Writing for Blender magazine in April that year , Paul Du Noyer described the song as a " fine 1971 single " . In the 2005 " Beatles Solo " edition of NME Originals , Adrian Thrills rated " Bangla Desh " second among Harrison 's " ten solo gems " ( behind " What Is Life " ) , referring to it as a " jazz-blues-rock shuffle " that " set the template for Band Aid " . Writing in The Cambridge Companion to the Beatles in 2009 , Michael Frontani said that with his Bangladesh relief effort , Harrison " pioneered the whole idea of the charity album and single , as well as of the rock concert fundraiser " . While bemoaning the song 's omission from the 2009 Harrison compilation Let It Roll , Jon Cummings of popdose.com described " Bangla Desh " as " no great artistic achievement " within itself , but " a key moment ... in the evolution of pop-music activism " .

Harrison played " Bangla Desh " as an encore at both of the Madison Square Garden shows on 1 August 1971 , with the evening performance being selected for inclusion on the Concert for Bangladesh triple live album . After the familiar introduction to the song , the band " threw their full weight behind Harrison " , Lavezzoli writes , " playing the darkest and heaviest music of the show " . On release that December , Jon Landau of Rolling Stone identified the song as " the concert 's single greatest performance by all concerned " , and added that by the close of the show , the lyrics to Harrison 's single were " no longer an expression of intent but of an accomplished mission – help has been given , people have been reached , an effort has been made and results will be felt " . In his album review for Melody Maker , Richard Williams wrote that the live version of " Bangla Desh " " roars and rages to a stunning close " . Played at a faster tempo than the studio recording , it features what Spizer terms a " blistering " saxophone solo from Horn , and a vocal by Harrison that Leng describes as " astonishingly powerful " and " a pure act of zeal " . As shown in the concert film , following his brief guitar solo towards the end of the song , Harrison repeats the line " Relieve the people of Bangla Desh " before exiting the stage to great applause , as the band plays on without him . In his book on the Beatles ' first decade as solo artists , Rodriguez views this live performance as perhaps Harrison 's " high water mark of public esteem " .

Although he was reportedly eager to repeat the experience of these New York shows , Harrison never played " Bangla Desh " in concert after 1971 and he did not perform live again until his 1974 North American tour with Shankar . By that point , the Bangladesh Liberation War had long ended , with India 's defeat of the Pakistani army in December 1971 , but Bangladesh was now experiencing a devastating famine that would account for up to 1.5 million lives . During a concert in Los Angeles on 11 November , Harrison responded to requests for the song " Bangla Desh " with a suggestion that the audience instead chant " Krishna , Krishna , Krishna " and use the positive power of mantra to help the Bangladeshi population .

Harrison biographer Alan Clayson has written of the " triumph " of the Bangladesh concerts leading to a host of imitators and tribute acts replicating the shows ' programme , among which was a French band 's cover version of " Bangla Desh " . Another example was the Tribe 's Bangla Desh ( 1972 ) , a full album of highlights from the concerts , including Harrison 's " Bangla Desh " , " My Sweet Lord " and " Here Comes the Sun " . The previous year , Stu Phillips & the Hollyridge Strings released an easy listening version of " Bangla Desh " on their Beatles tribute album The George , John , Paul & Ringo Songbook ( 1971 ) . Another 1971 cover version , re-released in 2002 on the compilation When They Was Fab – A Tribute to the Solo Beatles , was recorded by the Top of the Poppers . Following Jim Horn 's prominent contribution to the original Harrison recording , Italian saxophonist Fausto Papetti recorded the song for his 1972 album 14a Raccolta . Alternative band B.A.L.L. covered " Bangla Desh " on their 1988 album Bird , as part of their parody of early 1970s rock stars such as the former Beatles .

Anna Andreyevna Gorenko ( 23 June [ O.S. 11 June ] 1889 – 5 March 1966 ) , better known by the pen name Anna Akhmatova ( / ɑːkˈmɑːtɔːvə / ; Russian : Анна Ахматова , IPA : [ ɐxˈmatəvə ] ) , was a Russian modernist poet , one of the most acclaimed writers in the Russian canon . Akhmatova 's work ranges from short lyric poems to intricately structured cycles , such as Requiem ( 1935 – 40 ) , her tragic masterpiece about the Stalinist terror . Her style , characterised by its economy and emotional restraint , was strikingly original and distinctive to her contemporaries . The strong and clear leading female voice struck a new chord in Russian poetry . Her writing can be said to fall into two periods – the early work ( 1912 – 25 ) and her later work ( from around 1936 until her death ) , divided by a decade of reduced literary output . Her work was condemned and censored by Stalinist authorities and she is notable for choosing not to emigrate , and remaining in Russia , acting as witness to the events around her . Her perennial themes include meditations on time and memory , and the difficulties of living and writing in the shadow of Stalinism .

Akhmatova was born at Bolshoy Fontan , near the Black Sea port of Odessa . Her father , Andrey Antonovich Gorenko , a naval engineer , and her mother , Inna Erazmovna Stogova , were both descended from the Russian nobility . She wrote : No one in my large family wrote poetry . But the first Russian woman poet , Anna Bunina , was the aunt of my grandfather Erasm Ivanovich Stogov . The Stogovs were modest landowners in the Mozhaisk region of the Moscow Province . They were moved here after the insurrection during the time of Posadnitsa Marfa . In Novgorod they had been a wealthier and more distinguished family . Khan Akhmat , my ancestor , was killed one night in his tent by a Russian killer-for-hire . Karamzin tells us that this marked the end of the Mongol yoke on Russia . [ ... ] It was well known that this Akhmat was a descendant of Genghiz Khan . In the eighteenth century , one of the Akhmatov Princesses – Praskovia Yegorvna – married the rich and famous Simbirsk landowner Motovilov . Yegor Motovilov was my great-grandfather ; his daughter , Anna Yegorovna , was my grandmother . She died when my mother was nine years old , and I was named in her honour . Several diamond rings and one emerald were made from her brooch . Though my fingers are thin , still her thimble didn 't fit me .

Her family moved north to Tsarskoye Selo , near St. Petersburg when she was eleven months old . The family lived in a house on the corner of Shirokaya Street and Bezymyanny Lane ; ( the building is no longer there today ) , spending summers from age 7 to 13 in a dacha near Sevastopol . She studied at the Mariinskaya High School , moving to Kiev ( 1906 – 10 ) and finished her schooling there , after her parents separated in 1905 . She went on to study law at Kiev University , leaving a year later to study literature in St Petersburg . Akhmatova started writing poetry at the age of 11 , and was published in her late teens , inspired by the poets Nikolay Nekrasov , Jean Racine , Alexander Pushkin , Evgeny Baratynsky and the Symbolists ; however , none of her juvenilia survives . Her sister Inna also wrote poetry though she did not pursue the practice and married shortly after high school . Akhmatova 's father did not want to see any verses printed under his " respectable " name , so she chose to adopt her grandmother 's distinctly Tatar surname ' Akhmatova ' as a pen name .

She met a young poet , Nikolay Gumilev , on Christmas Eve in 1903 . Gumilev , encouraged her to write and pursued her intensely , making numerous marriage proposals starting in 1905 . At 17 years old , in his journal Sirius , she published her first poem which could be translated as " On his hand you may see many glittering rings " , ( 1907 ) signing it " Anna G. " She soon became known in St Petersburg 's artistic circles , regularly giving public readings . That year , she wrote unenthusiastically to a friend , “ He has loved me for three years now , and I believe that it is my fate to be his wife . Whether or not I love him , I do not know , but it seems to me that I do . ” She married Gumilev in Kiev in April 1910 ; however , none of Akhmatova ’ s family attended the wedding . The couple honeymooned in Paris , and there she met and befriended the Italian artist Amedeo Modigliani . In late 1910 , she came together with poets such as Osip Mandelstam and Sergey Gorodetsky to form the Guild of Poets . It promoted the idea of craft as the key to poetry rather than inspiration or mystery , taking themes of the concrete rather than the more ephemeral world of the Symbolists . Over time , they developed the influential Acmeist anti-symbolist school , concurrent with the growth of Imagism in Europe and America . From the first year of their marriage , Gumilev began to chafe against its constraints . She wrote that he had " lost his passion " for her and by the end of that year he left on a six-month trip to Africa .

She had " her first taste of fame " , becoming renowned , not so much for her beauty , as her intense magnetism and allure , attracting the fascinated attention of a great many men , including the great and the good . She returned to visit Modigliani in Paris , where he created at least 20 paintings of her , including several nudes . She later began an affair with the celebrated Acmeist poet Osip Mandelstam , whose wife , Nadezhda , declared later , in her autobiography that she came to forgive Akhmatova for it in time . Akhmatova 's son , Lev , was born in 1912 , and would become a renowned Neo-Eurasianist historian .

In 1912 , the Guild of Poets published her book of verse Evening ( Vecher ) – the first of five in nine years . The small edition of 500 copies quickly sold out and she received around a dozen positive notices in the literary press . She exercised a strong selectivity for the pieces – including only 35 of the 200 poems she had written by the end of 1911 . ( She noted that Song of the Last Meeting , dated 29 September 1911 , was her 200th poem ) . The book secured her reputation as a new and striking young writer , the poems Grey-eyed king , In the Forest , Over the Water and I don ’ t need my legs anymore making her famous . She later wrote " These naïve poems by a frivolous girl for some reason were reprinted thirteen times [ ... ] And they came out in several translations . The girl herself ( as far as I recall ) did not foresee such a fate for them and used to hide the issues of the journals in which they were first published under the sofa cushions " . Her second collection , The Rosary ( or Beads – Chetki ) appeared in March 1914 and firmly established her as one of the most popular and sought after poets of the day . Thousands of women composed poems " in honour of Akhmatova " , mimicking her style and prompting Akhmatova to exclaim : " I taught our women how to speak , but don 't know how to make them silent " . Her aristocratic manners and artistic integrity won her the titles " Queen of the Neva " and " Soul of the Silver Age , " as the period came to be known in the history of Russian poetry . In Poem Without a Hero , the longest and one of the best known of her works , written many decades later , she would recall this as a blessed time of her life . She became close friends with Boris Pasternak ( who , though married , proposed to her many times ) and rumours began to circulate that she was having an affair with influential lyrical poet Alexander Blok . In July 1914 , Akhmatova wrote “ Frightening times are approaching / Soon fresh graves will cover the land " ; on August 1 , Germany declared war on Russia , marking the start of " the dark storm " of world war , civil war , revolution and totalitarian repression for Russia . The Silver Age came to a close .

Akhmatova had a relationship with the mosaic artist and poet Boris Anrep ; many of her poems in the period are about him and he in turn created mosaics in which she is featured . She selected poems for her third collection , Belaya Staya ( White Flock ) , in 1917 , a volume which poet and critic Joseph Brodsky later described as writing of personal lyricism tinged with the “ note of controlled terror ” . She later came to be memorialised by his description of her as " the keening muse " . Essayist John Bayley describes her writing at this time as " grim , spare and laconic " . In February 1917 , the revolution started in Petersburg ( then named Petrograd ) ; soldiers fired on marching protestors , and others mutinied . They looked to a past in which the future was " rotting " . In a city without electricity or sewage service , with little water or food , they faced starvation and sickness . Her friends died around her and others left in droves for safer havens in Europe and America , including Anrep , who escaped to England . She had the option to leave , and considered it for a time , but chose to stay and was proud of her decision to remain . :

In 1921 , Akhmatova 's former husband Nikolay Gumilev was prosecuted for his alleged role in a monarchist anti-Bolshevik conspiracy and on 25 August was shot along with 61 others . According to the historian Rayfield , the murder of Gumilev was part of the state response to the Kronstadt Rebellion . The Cheka ( secret police ) blamed the rebellion on Petrograd 's intellectuals , prompting the senior Cheka officer Yakov Agranov to forcibly extract the names of ' conspirators ' , from an imprisoned professor , guaranteeing them amnesty from execution . Agranov 's guarantee proved to be meaningless . He sentenced dozens of the named persons to death , including Gumilev . Maxim Gorky and others appealed for leniency , but by the time Lenin agreed to several pardons , the condemned had been shot . Within a few days of his death , Akhmatova wrote : The murders had a powerful effect on the Russian intelligentsia , destroying the Acmeist poetry group , and placing a stigma on Akhmatova and her son Lev ( by Gumilev ) . Lev 's later arrest during the purges and terrors of the 1930s was based on being his father 's son . From a new Marxist perspective , Akhmatova 's poetry was deemed to represent an introspective " bourgeois aesthetic " , reflecting only trivial " female " preoccupations , not in keeping with these new revolutionary politics of the time . She was roundly attacked by the state , by former supporters and friends , and seen to be an anachronism . During what she termed " The Vegetarian Years " , Akhmatova 's work was unofficially banned by a party resolution of 1925 and she found it hard to publish , though she didn 't stop writing poetry . She made acclaimed translations of works by Victor Hugo , Rabindranath Tagore , Giacomo Leopardi and pursued academic work on Pushkin and Dostoyevsky . She worked as a critic and essayist , though many USSR and foreign critics and readers concluded she had died .

She had little food and almost no money ; her son was denied access to study at academic institutions by dint of his parents ' alleged anti-state activities . The impact of the nationwide repression and purges had a decimating effect on her St Petersburg circle of friends , artists and intellectuals . Her close friend and fellow poet Mandelstam was deported and then sentenced to a Gulag labour camp , where he would die . Akhmatova narrowly escaped arrest , though her son Lev was imprisoned on numerous occasions by the Stalinist regime , accused of counter-revolutionary activity . She would often queue for hours to deliver him food packages and plead on his behalf . She describes standing outside a stone prison : One day somebody in the crowd identified me . Standing behind me was a woman , with lips blue from cold , who had , of course , never heard me called by name before . Now she started out of the torpor common to us all and asked me in a whisper ( everyone whispered there ) : ' Can you describe this ? ' Akhmatova wrote that by 1935 every time she went to see someone off at the train station as they went into exile , she 'd find herself greeting friends at every step as so many of St Petersburg 's intellectual and cultural figures would be leaving on the same train . In her poetry circles Mayakovsky and Esenin committed suicide and Marina Tsvetaeva would follow them in 1941 , after returning from exile .

In 1939 , Stalin approved the publication of one volume of poetry , From Six Books ; however , the collection was withdrawn and pulped after only a few months . In 1993 , it was revealed that the authorities had bugged her flat and kept her under constant surveillance , keeping detailed files on her from this time , accruing some 900 pages of " denunciations , reports of phone taps , quotations from writings , confessions of those close to her " . Although officially stifled , Akhmatova 's work continued to circulate in secret . Akhmatova 's close friend , chronicler Lydia Chukovskaya described how writers working to keep poetic messages alive used various strategies . A small trusted circle would , for example , memorise each other 's works and circulate them only by oral means . She tells how Akhmatova would write out her poem for a visitor on a scrap of paper to be read in a moment , then burnt in her stove . The poems were carefully disseminated in this way , however it is likely that many complied in this manner were lost . " It was like a ritual , " Chukovskaya wrote . " Hands , matches , an ashtray . A ritual beautiful and bitter . "

During World War II , Akhmatova witnessed the 900 day Siege of Leningrad ( now St Petersburg ) . In 1940 , Akhmatova started her Poem without a Hero , finishing a first draft in Tashkent , but working on " The Poem " for twenty years and considering it to be the major work of her life , dedicating it to " the memory of its first audience – my friends and fellow citizens who perished in Leningrad during the siege " . She was evacuated to Chistopol in spring of 1942 and then to greener , safer Tashkent in Uzbekistan , along with other artists , such as Shostakovitch . During her time away she became seriously ill with typhus ( she had suffered from severe bronchitis and tuberculosis as a young woman ) . On returning to Leningrad in May 1944 , she writes of how disturbed she was to find " a terrible ghost that pretended to be my city " . She regularly read to soldiers in the military hospitals and on the front line ; her later pieces seem to be the voice of those who had struggled and the many she has outlived . She moved away from romantic themes towards a more diverse , complex and philosophical body of work and some of her more patriotic poems found their way to the front pages of Pravda . She was condemned for a visit by the liberal , western , Jewish philosopher Isaiah Berlin in 1945 , and Official Andrei Zhdanov publicly labelled her " half harlot , half nun " , her work " the poetry of an overwrought , upper-class lady " , her work the product of " eroticism , mysticism , and political indifference " . He banned her poems from publication in the journals Zvezda and Leningrad , accusing her of poisoning the minds of Soviet youth . Her surveillance was increased and she was expelled from the Union of Soviet Writers .

Berlin described his visit to her flat : It was very barely furnished — virtually everything in it had , I gathered , been taken away — looted or sold — during the siege .... A stately , grey-haired lady , a white shawl draped about her shoulders , slowly rose to greet us . Anna Akhmatova was immensely dignified , with unhurried gestures , a noble head , beautiful , somewhat severe features , and an expression of immense sadness . Akhmatova 's son Lev was arrested again at the end of 1949 and sentenced to 10 years in a Siberian prison camp . She spent much of the next years trying to ensure his release , to this end , and for the first time , she published overtly propagandist poetry , “ In Praise of Peace , ” in the magazine Ogoniok , openly supporting Stalin and his regime . Lev remained in the camps until 1956 , well after Stalin 's death , his final release potentially aided by his mother 's concerted efforts . Bayley suggests that her period of pro-Stalinist work may also have saved her own life ; notably however , Akhmatova never acknowledged these pieces in her official corpus . Akhmatova 's stature among Soviet poets was slowly conceded by party officials , her name no longer cited in only scathing contexts and she was readmitted to Union of Writers in 1951 , being fully recognised again following Stalin 's death in 1953 . With the press still heavily controlled and censored under Nikita Khrushchev , a translation by Akhmatova was praised in a public review in 1955 , and her own poems began to re-appear in 1956 . That same year Lev was released from the camps , embittered , believing that his mother cared more about her poetry than for him and that she had not worked hard for his release . Akhmatova 's status was confirmed by 1958 , with the publication of Stikhotvoreniya ( Poems ) and then Stikhotvoreniya 1909 – 1960 ( Poems : 1909 – 1960 ) in 1961 . Beg vremeni ( The flight of time ) , collected works 1909 – 1965 , published 1965 , was the most complete volume of her works in her lifetime , though the long damning poem Requiem , condemning the Stalinist purges , was conspicuously absent . Isaiah Berlin predicted at the time that it could never be published in the Soviet Union .

During the last years of her life she continued to live with the Punin family in Leningrad , still translating , researching Pushkin and writing her own poetry . Though still censored , she was concerned to re-construct work that had been destroyed or suppressed during the purges or which had posed a threat to the life of her son in the camps , such as the lost , semi-autobiographical play Enûma Elish . She worked on her official memoirs , planned novels and worked on her epic Poem without a hero , 20 years in the writing . Akhmatova was widely honoured in the USSR and the West . In 1962 she was visited by Robert Frost ; Isaiah Berlin tried to visit her again , but she refused him , worried that her son might be re-arrested due to family association with the ideologically suspect western philosopher . She inspired and advised a large circle of key young Soviet writers . Her dacha in Komarovo was frequented by such poets as Yevgeny Rein and Joseph Brodsky , whom she mentored . Brodsky , arrested in 1963 and interned for social parasitism , would go on to win the Nobel Prize in Literature ( 1987 ) and become Poet Laureate ( 1991 ) as an exile in the U.S.

As one of the last remaining major poets of the Silver Age , she was newly acclaimed by the Soviet authorities as a fine and loyal representative of their country and permitted to travel . At the same time , by virtue of works such as Requiem , Akhmatova was being hailed at home and abroad as an unofficial leader of the dissident movement , and reinforcing this image herself . She was becoming representative of both the Soviet Union and Tsarist Russia , more popular in the 1960s than she had ever been before the revolution , this reputation only continuing to grow after her death . For her 75th birthday in 1964 , new collections of her verse were published . Akhmatova was able to meet some of her pre-revolutionary acquaintances in 1965 , when she was allowed to travel to Sicily and England , in order to receive the Taormina prize and an honorary doctoral degree from Oxford University , accompanied by her lifelong friend and secretary Lydia Chukovskaya . Akhmatova 's Requiem in Russian finally appeared in book form in Munich in 1963 , the whole work not published within USSR until 1987 . Her long poem The Way of All the Earth or Woman of Kitezh ( Kitezhanka ) was published in complete form in 1965 .

In November 1965 , soon after her Oxford visit , Akhmatova suffered a heart attack and was hospitalised . She was moved to a sanatorium in Moscow in the spring of 1966 and died of heart failure on March 5 , at the age of 76 . Thousands attended the two memorial ceremonies which were held in Moscow and in Leningrad . After being displayed in an open coffin , she was interred at Komarovo Cemetery in St Petersburg . The widespread worship of her memory in Soviet Union today , both as an artist and as an unsurrendering human being , has , so far as I know , no parallel . The legend of her life and unyielding passive resistance to what she regarded as unworthy of her country and herself , transformed her into a figure [ ... ] not merely in Russian literature , but in Russian history in [ the Twentieth ] century . In 1988 , to celebrate what would have been Akhmatova 's 100th birthday , the University of Harvard held an international conference on her life and work . Today her work may be explored at the Anna Akhmatova Literary and Memorial Museum in St. Petersburg .

Akhmatova joined the Acmeist group of poets in 1910 with poets such as Osip Mandelstam and Sergey Gorodetsky , working in response to the Symbolist school , concurrent with the growth of Imagism in Europe and America . It promoted the use of craft and rigorous poetic form over mysticism or spiritual in-roads to composition , favouring the concrete over the ephemeral . Akhmatova modeled its principles of writing with clarity , simplicity , and disciplined form . Her first collections Evening ( 1912 ) and Rosary ( 1914 ) received wide critical acclaim and made her famous from the start of her career . They contained brief , psychologically taut pieces , acclaimed for their classical diction , telling details , and the skilful use of colour . Evening and her next four books were mostly lyric miniatures on the theme of love , shot through with sadness . Her early poems usually picture a man and a woman involved in the most poignant , ambiguous moment of their relationship , much imitated and later parodied by Nabokov and others . Critic Roberta Reeder notes that the early poems always attracted large numbers of admirers : " For Akhmatova was able to capture and convey the vast range of evolving emotions experienced in a love affair , from the first thrill of meeting , to a deepening love contending with hatred , and eventually to violent destructive passion or total indifference . But [ ... ] her poetry marks a radical break with the erudite , ornate style and the mystical representation of love so typical of poets like Alexander Blok and Andrey Bely . Her lyrics are composed of short fragments of simple speech that do not form a logical coherent pattern . Instead , they reflect the way we actually think , the links between the images are emotional , and simple everyday objects are charged with psychological associations . Like Alexander Pushkin , who was her model in many ways , Akhmatova was intent on conveying worlds of meaning through precise details . "

Akhmatova often complained that the critics " walled her in " to their perception of her work in the early years of romantic passion , despite major changes of theme in the later years of The Terror . This was mainly due to the secret nature of her work after the public and critical effusion over her first volumes . The risks during the purges were very great . Many of her close friends and family were exiled , imprisoned or shot ; her son was under constant threat of arrest , she was often under close surveillance . Following artistic repression and public condemnation by the state in the 1920s , many within literary and public circles , at home and abroad , thought she had died . Her readership generally did not know her later opus , the railing passion of Requiem or Poem without a Hero and her other scathing works , which were shared only with a very trusted few or circulated in secret by word of mouth ( samizdat ) . Between 1935 and 1940 Akhmatova composed , worked and reworked the long poem Requiem in secret , a lyrical cycle of lamentation and witness , depicting the suffering of the common people under Soviet terror . She carried it with her as she worked and lived in towns and cities across the Soviet Union . It was conspicuously absent from her collected works , given its explicit condemnation of the purges . The work in Russian finally appeared in book form in Munich in 1963 , the whole work not published within USSR until 1987 . It consists of ten numbered poems that examine a series of emotional states , exploring suffering , despair , devotion , rather than a clear narrative . Biblical themes such as Christ 's crucifixion and the devastation of Mary , Mother of Jesus and Mary Magdelene , reflect the ravaging of Russia , particularly witnessing the harrowing of women in the 1930s . It represented , to some degree , a rejection of her own earlier romantic work as she took on the public role as chronicler of the Terror . This is a role she holds to this day .

Her essays on Pushkin and Poem Without a Hero , her longest work , were only published after her death . This long poem , composed between 1940 and 1965 , is often critically regarded as her best work and also one of the finest poems of the twentieth century . It gives a deep and detailed analysis of her epoch and her approach to it , including her important encounter with Isaiah Berlin ( 1909 – 97 ) in 1945 . Her talent in composition and translation is evidenced in her fine translations of the works of poets writing in French , English , Italian , Armenian , and Korean .

Isaac ( / ˈaɪzək / ; Hebrew : יִצְחָק , Modern Yitshak , Tiberian Yiṣḥāq , ISO 259-3 Yiçḥaq , " [ he ] will laugh " ; Ancient Greek : Ἰσαάκ Isaak Arabic : إسحاق or إسحٰق ʼIsḥāq ) as described in the Hebrew Bible and the Qur 'an , was the second son of Abraham , the only son Abraham had with his wife Sarah , and the father of Jacob and Esau . According to the Book of Genesis , Abraham was 100 years old when Isaac was born , and Sarah was past 90 . According to Genesis , Abraham brought Isaac to Mount Moriah , where , at God 's command , Abraham built a sacrificial altar to sacrifice Isaac . This event served as a test of Abraham 's faith . At the last moment , Abraham was stopped by the angel of the Lord . Isaac was one of the three patriarchs of the Israelites . Isaac was the only biblical patriarch whose name was not changed , and the only one who did not move out of Canaan . Compared to Abraham and Jacob , the Bible relates fewer incidents of Isaac 's life . He died when he was 180 years old , making him the longest-lived of the three .

The anglicized name Isaac is a transliteration of the Hebrew term Yiṣḥāq which literally means " He laughs / will laugh . " Ugaritic texts dating from the 13th century BCE refer to the benevolent smile of the Canaanite deity El . Genesis , however , ascribes the laughter to Isaac 's parents , Abraham and Sarah , rather than El . According to the biblical narrative , Abraham fell on his face and laughed when Elohim imparted the news of their son 's eventual birth . He laughed because Sarah was past the age of childbearing ; both she and Abraham were advanced in age . Later , when Sarah overheard three messengers of the Lord renew the promise , she laughed inwardly for the same reason . Sarah denied laughing when Elohim questioned Abraham about it .

It was prophesied to the patriarch Abraham that he would have a son and that his name should be Isaac . When Abraham became one hundred years old , this son was born to him by his first wife Sarah . Though this was Abraham 's second son it was Sarah ’ s first and only child . On the eighth day from his birth , Isaac was circumcised , as was necessary for all males of Abraham 's household , in order to be in compliance with Yahweh 's covenant . After Isaac had been weaned , Sarah saw Ishmael mocking , and urged her husband to cast out Hagar the bondservant and her son , so that Isaac would be Abraham 's sole heir . Abraham was hesitant , but at God 's order he listened to his wife 's request .

At some point in Isaac 's youth , his father Abraham brought him to Mount Moriah . At God 's command , Abraham was to build a sacrificial altar and sacrifice his son Isaac upon it . After he had bound his son to the altar and drawn his knife to kill him , at the very last moment an angel of God prevented Abraham from proceeding . Rather , he was directed to sacrifice instead a nearby ram that was stuck in thickets . This event served as a test of Abraham 's faith in God , not as an actual human sacrifice .

When Isaac was 40 , Abraham sent Eliezer , his steward , into Mesopotamia to find a wife for Isaac , from his nephew Bethuel 's family . Eliezer chose the Aramean Rebekah for Isaac . After many years of marriage to Isaac , Rebekah had still not given birth to a child and was believed to be barren . Isaac prayed for her and she conceived . Rebekah gave birth to twin boys , Esau and Jacob . Isaac was 60 years old when his two sons were born . Isaac favored Esau , and Rebekah favored Jacob . Isaac is unique among the patriarchs for remaining faithful to his wife , and for not having concubines .

At the age of 75 , Isaac moved to Beer-lahai-roi after his father died . When the land experienced famine , he removed to the Philistine land of Gerar where his father once lived . This land was still under the control of King Abimelech as it was in the days of Abraham . Like his father , Isaac also deceived Abimelech about his wife and also got into the well business . He had gone back to all of the wells that his father dug and saw that they were all stopped up with earth . The Philistines did this after Abraham died . So , Isaac unearthed them and began to dig for more wells all the way to Beersheba , where he made a pact with Abimelech , just like in the day of his father .

Isaac grew old and became blind . He called his son Esau and directed him to procure some venison for him , in order to receive Isaac 's blessing . While Esau was hunting , Jacob , after listening to his mother 's advice , deceived his blind father by misrepresenting himself as Esau and thereby obtained his father 's blessing , such that Jacob became Isaac 's primary heir and Esau was left in an inferior position . According to Genesis 25 : 29-34 , Esau had previously sold his birthright to Jacob for " bread and stew of lentils " . Thereafter , Isaac sent Jacob into Mesopotamia to take a wife of his mother 's brother 's house . After 20 years working for his uncle Laban , Jacob returned home . He reconciled with his twin brother Esau , then he and Esau buried their father , Isaac , in Hebron after he died at the age of 180 .

In rabbinical tradition , the age of Isaac at the time of binding is taken to be 37 which contrasts with common portrayals of Isaac as a child . The rabbis also thought that the reason for the death of Sarah was the news of the intended sacrifice of Isaac . The sacrifice of Isaac is cited in appeals for the mercy of God in later Jewish traditions . The post-biblical Jewish interpretations often elaborate the role of Isaac beyond the biblical description and primarily focus on Abraham 's intended sacrifice of Isaac , called the aqedah ( " binding " ) . According to a version of these interpretations , Isaac died in the sacrifice and was revived . According to many accounts of Aggadah , unlike the Bible , it is Satan who is testing Isaac as an agent of God . Isaac 's willingness to follow God 's command at the cost of his death has been a model for many Jews who preferred martyrdom to violation of the Jewish law . According to the Jewish tradition , Isaac instituted the afternoon prayer . This tradition is based on Genesis chapter 24 , verse 63 ( " Isaac went out to meditate in the field at the eventide " ) .

Isaac was the only patriarch who stayed in Canaan during his whole life and though once he tried to leave , God told him not to do so . Rabbinic tradition gave the explanation that Isaac was almost sacrificed and anything dedicated as a sacrifice may not leave the Land of Israel . Isaac was the oldest of the biblical patriarchs at the time of his death , and the only patriarch whose name was not changed . Rabbinic literature also linked Isaac 's blindness in old age , as stated in the Bible , to the sacrificial binding : Isaac 's eyes went blind because the tears of angels present at the time of his sacrifice fell on Isaac 's eyes .

The early Christian church continued and developed the New Testament theme of Isaac as a type of Christ and the Church being both " the son of the promise " and the " father of the faithful " . Tertullian draws a parallel between Isaac 's bearing the wood for the sacrificial fire with Christ 's carrying his cross. and there was a general agreement that , while all the sacrifices of the Old Law were anticipations of that on Calvary , the sacrifice of Isaac was so " in a pre-eminent way " . The Eastern Orthodox Church and the Roman Catholic Church consider Isaac as a Saint along with other biblical patriarchs . Along with those of other patriarchs and the Old Testament Righteous , his feast day is celebrated in the Eastern Orthodox Church and the Byzantine rite of the Catholic Church on the Second Sunday before Christmas ( December 11 – 17 ) , under the title the Sunday of the Forefathers .

The New Testament states Isaac was " offered up " by Abraham his father , and that Isaac blessed his sons . Paul contrasted Isaac , symbolizing Christian liberty , with the rejected older son Ishmael , symbolizing slavery ; Hagar is associated with the Sinai covenant , while Sarah is associated with the covenant of grace , into which her son Isaac enters . The Epistle of James chapter 2 , verses 21-24 , states that the sacrifice of Isaac shows that justification ( in the Johannine sense ) requires both faith and works . In the Epistle to the Hebrews , Abraham 's willingness to follow God 's command to sacrifice Isaac is used as an example of faith as is Isaac 's action in blessing Jacob and Esau with reference to the future promised by God to Abraham In verse 19 , the author views the release of Isaac from sacrifice as analogous to the resurrection of Jesus , the idea of the sacrifice of Isaac being a prefigure of the sacrifice of Jesus on the cross .

Isaac ( Arabic : إسحاق [ note A ] ʾIsḥāq ) is revered by Muslims to be a prophet of Islam . Islam considers Isaac as a prophet of Islam , and describes him as the father of the Israelites and a righteous servant of God . Isaac , along with Ishmael , is highly important for Muslims for continuing to preach the message of monotheism after his father Abraham . Among Isaac 's children was the follow-up Israelite patriarch Jacob , who too is venerated an Islamic prophet . Isaac is mentioned fifteen times by name in the Qur 'an , often with his father and his son , Jacob . The Qur 'an states that Abraham received " good tidings of Isaac , a prophet , of the righteous " , and that God blessed them both ( 37 : 12 ) . In a fuller description , when angels came to Abraham to tell him of the future punishment to be imposed on Sodom and Gomorrah , his wife , Sarah , " laughed , and We gave her good tidings of Isaac , and after Isaac of ( a grandson ) Jacob " ( 11 : 71-74 ) ; and it is further explained that this event will take place despite Abraham and Sarah 's old age . Several verses speak of Isaac as a " gift " to Abraham ( 6 : 84 ; 14 : 49-50 ) , and 24 : 26-27 adds that God made " prophethood and the Book to be among his offspring " , which has been interpreted to refer to Abraham 's two prophetic sons , his prophetic grandson Jacob , and his prophetic great-grandson Joseph . In the Qur 'an , it later narrates that Abraham also praised God for giving him Ishmael and Isaac in his old age ( 14 : 39-41 ) .

Elsewhere in the Qur 'an , Isaac is mentioned in lists : Joseph follows the religion of his forefathers Abraham , Isaac and Jacob ( 12 : 38 ) and speaks of God 's favor to them ( 12 : 6 ) ; Jacob 's sons all testify their faith and promise to worship the God that their forefathers , " Abraham , Ishmael and Isaac " , worshiped ( 2 : 127 ) ; and the Qur 'an commands Muslims to believe in the revelations that were given to " Abraham , Ishmael , Isaac , Jacob and the Patriarchs " ( 2 : 136 ; 3 : 84 ) . In the Qur 'an 's narrative of Abraham 's near-sacrifice of his son ( 37 : 102 ) , the name of the son is not mentioned and debate has continued over the son 's identity , though many feel that the identity is the least important element in a story which is given to show the courage that one develops through faith .

The Qur 'an mentions Isaac as a prophet and a righteous man of God . Isaac and Jacob are mentioned as being bestowed upon Abraham as gifts of God , who then worshipped God only and were righteous leaders in the way of God : And We bestowed on him Isaac and , as an additional gift , ( a grandson ) , Jacob , and We made righteous men of every one ( of them ) . And We made them leaders , guiding ( men ) by Our Command , and We sent them inspiration to do good deeds , to establish regular prayers , and to practise regular charity ; and they constantly served Us ( and Us only ) .

Some scholars have described Isaac as " a legendary figure " while others view him " as a figure representing tribal history , or " as a seminomadic leader . " The stories of Isaac , like other patriarchal stories of Genesis , are generally believed to have " their origin in folk memories and oral traditions of the early Hebrew pastoralist experience . " The Cambridge Companion to the Bible makes the following comment on the biblical stories of the patriarchs : Yet for all that these stories maintain a distance between their world and that of their time of literary growth and composition , they reflect the political realities of the later periods . Many of the narratives deal with the relationship between the ancestors and peoples who were part of Israel ’ s political world at the time the stories began to be written down ( eighth century B.C.E. ) . Lot is the ancestor of the Transjordanian peoples of Ammon and Moab , and Ishmael personifies the nomadic peoples known to have inhabited north Arabia , although located in the Old Testament in the Negev . Esau personifies Edom ( 36 : 1 ) , and Laban represents the Aramean states to Israel ’ s north . A persistent theme is that of difference between the ancestors and the indigenous Canaanites … In fact , the theme of the differences between Judah and Israel , as personified by the ancestors , and the neighboring peoples of the time of the monarchy is pressed effectively into theological service to articulate the choosing by God of Judah and Israel to bring blessing to all peoples . ”

According to Martin Noth , a scholar of the Hebrew Bible , the narratives of Isaac date back to an older cultural stage than that of the West-Jordanian Jacob . At that era , the Israelite tribes were not yet sedentary . In the course of looking for grazing areas , they had come in contact in southern Philistia with the inhabitants of the settled countryside . The biblical historian , A. Jopsen , believes in the connection between the Isaac traditions and the north , and in support of this theory adduces Amos 7 : 9 ( " the high places of Isaac " ) . Albrecht Alt and Martin Noth hold that , " The figure of Isaac was enhanced when the theme of promise , previously bound to the cults of the ' God the Fathers ' was incorporated into the Israelite creed during the southern-Palestinian stage of the growth of the Pentateuch tradition . " According to Martin Noth , at the Southern Palestinian stage of the growth of the Pentateuch tradition , Isaac became established as one of the biblical patriarchs , but his traditions were receded in the favor of Abraham .

Form critics variously assign passages like Genesis chapter 26 , verses 6-11 , to the Jahwist source , and Genesis chapter 20 verses 1-7 , chapter 21 , verse 1 to chapter 22 , verse 14 and chapter 22 , verse 19 to the Elohist . According to the compilation hypothesis , the formulaic use of the word toledoth ( generations ) indicates that Genesis chapter 11 , verse 27 to chapter 25 , verse 19 is Isaac 's record through Abraham 's death ( with Ishmael 's record appended ) , and Genesis chapter 25 , verse 19 to chapter 37 , verse 2 is Jacob 's record through Isaac 's death ( with Esau 's records appended ) .

The earliest Christian portrayal of Isaac is found in the Roman catacomb frescoes . Excluding the fragments , Alison Moore Smith classifies these artistic works in three categories : " Abraham leads Isaac towards the altar ; or Isaac approaches with the bundle of sticks , Abraham having preceded him to the place of offering .... Abraham is upon a pedestal and Isaac stands near at hand , both figures in orant attitude .... Abraham is shown about to sacrifice Isaac while the latter stands or kneels on the ground beside the altar . Sometimes Abraham grasps Isaac by the hair . Occasionally the ram is added to the scene and in the later paintings the Hand of God emerges from above . "

Dubrovnik was a flotilla leader built for the Royal Yugoslav Navy by Yarrow Shipbuilders in Glasgow between 1930 and 1931 . She was one of the largest destroyers of her time . Resembling contemporary British designs , Dubrovnik was a fast ship with a main armament of four Czechoslovak-built Škoda 140 mm ( 5.5 in ) guns in single mounts . Intended to be the first of three flotilla leaders built for Yugoslavia , she was the only one completed . During her service with the Royal Yugoslav Navy , Dubrovnik undertook several peacetime cruises through the Mediterranean , the Turkish Straits and the Black Sea . In October 1934 , she conveyed King Alexander to France for a state visit , and carried his body back to Yugoslavia following his assassination in Marseille . During the German-led Axis invasion of Yugoslavia in April 1941 , Dubrovnik was captured by the Italians . After a refit , which included the replacement of some of her weapons and the shortening of her mainmast and funnels , she was commissioned into the Royal Italian Navy as Premuda . In Italian service she was mainly used as an escort and troop transport . In June 1942 , she was part of the Italian force that attacked the Allied Operation Harpoon convoy attempting to relieve the island of Malta . In July 1943 , she broke down and put in to Genoa for repair and a refit . Premuda was the most important and effective Italian war prize ship of World War II .

At the time of the Italian surrender to the Allies in September 1943 , Premuda was still docked in Genoa , and was seized by Germany . Plans to convert her into a radar picket for night fighters were abandoned . In August 1944 , following the replacement of her armament , she was commissioned into the German Navy as a Torpedoboot Ausland ( foreign torpedo boat ) with the designation TA32 . The ship saw action shelling Allied positions on the Italian coast and laying naval mines . In March 1945 , she took part in the Battle of the Ligurian Sea against two Royal Navy destroyers , during which she was lightly damaged . She was scuttled the following month as the Germans retreated from Genoa .

Following the demise of the Austro-Hungarian Empire and the creation of the Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes ( KSCS ) , Austria-Hungary transferred the vessels of the former Austro-Hungarian Navy to the new nation . The Kingdom of Italy was unhappy with this , and convinced the Allies to share the Austro-Hungarian ships among the victorious powers . As a result , the only modern sea-going vessels left to the KSCS were 12 torpedo boats , and they had to build their naval forces from scratch . During the 1920s , many navies were pursuing the flotilla leader concept , building large destroyers similar to the World War I Royal Navy V and W-class destroyers . In the interwar French Navy , these ships were known as contre-torpilleurs , and were intended to operate with smaller destroyers , or as half-flotillas of three ships . The idea was that such a half-flotilla could defeat an Italian light cruiser of the Condottieri-class . The Navy of the KSCS decided to build three such flotilla leaders , ships that would have the ability to reach high speeds and with a long endurance . The long endurance requirement reflected Yugoslav plans to deploy the ships into the central Mediterranean , where they would be able to operate alongside French and British warships .

At the time the decision was made , French shipyards were heavily committed to producing vessels for the French Navy . So , despite its intention to develop a French concept , the KSCS engaged Yarrow Shipbuilders in Glasgow , Scotland to build the ships . Unlike the French , who preferred to install guns of their own manufacture , Yarrow was happy to order the guns from the Czechoslovak firm Škoda . The initial Yarrow design was based on an expanded version of the British Shakespeare-class , with five Skoda 14 cm / 56 naval guns . Excessive top weight resulted in the deletion of one of the guns , to be replaced with a seaplane mounting . The final version replaced the seaplane mounting with improved anti-aircraft armament . The intention to build three flotilla leaders was demonstrated by the fact that Yarrow ordered a total of 12 Škoda 140 mm ( 5.5 in ) guns , four per ship . In the late summer of 1929 , the KSCS ( the Kingdom of Yugoslavia from 3 October 1929 ) signed a contract with Yarrow for a destroyer named Dubrovnik . Soon after she was ordered , the onset of the Great Depression meant that only one ship of the planned half-flotilla was ever built .

Dubrovnik was similar in many respects to the British destroyers being manufactured at the same time , having a square box-like bridge , a long forecastle , and a sharp raked stem similar to the later Tribal-class . Her rounded stern was adapted for minelaying . She had an overall length of 113.2 metres ( 371 ft 5 in ) , with a 10.67 m ( 35 ft ) beam and a mean draught of 3.58 m ( 11 ft 9 in ) ( maximum draught of 4.1 m ( 13 ft 5 in ) ) . Her standard displacement was 1,880 long tons ( 1,910 t ) , ( 2,400 long tons ( 2,439 t ) at full load ) . Dubrovnik had two Parsons geared steam turbines , each driving a single propeller shaft . Steam for the turbines was provided by three Yarrow water-tube boilers , located in separate boiler rooms , and the turbines were rated at 48,000 shp ( 36,000 kW ) . As designed , the ship had a maximum speed of 37 knots ( 69 km / h ; 43 mph ) . In 1934 , under ideal conditions , she achieved a maximum speed of 40.3 knots ( 74.6 km / h ; 46.4 mph ) . A separate Curtis turbine , rated at 900 shp ( 670 kW ) , was installed for cruising , with which she could achieve a range of 7,000 nautical miles ( 13,000 km ; 8,100 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . She carried 470 tonnes ( 460 long tons ) of fuel oil .

Her main armament consisted of four Škoda 140 mm ( 5.5 in ) L / 56 superfiring guns in single mounts , two forward of the superstructure and two aft . For air defence , Dubrovnik had twin-mounted Škoda 83.5 mm ( 3.29 in ) L / 55 guns , and six Škoda 40 mm ( 1.6 in ) / L67 anti-aircraft guns , arranged in two twin mounts and two single mounts . She was also equipped with two triple 533 mm ( 21 in ) torpedo tubes , two depth charge throwers and two depth charge rails , two Škoda 15 mm ( 0.59 in ) machine guns and 40 mines . Her crew comprised 20 officers and 220 ratings . She was laid down on 10 June 1930 , and was launched on 11 October 1931 .

Dubrovnik was completed at the Yarrow shipyards in Glasgow in 1932 , at which time her main guns and light anti-aircraft guns had been installed . After sailing to the Bay of Kotor in the southern Adriatic , she was fitted with her heavy anti-aircraft guns . She was commissioned with the Royal Yugoslav Navy in 1932 , and her captain was Armin Pavić . In late September 1933 , the ship left the Bay of Kotor and sailed through the Turkish Straits to Constanța on the Black Sea coast of Bulgaria , where she embarked King Alexander and Queen Maria of Yugoslavia . She then visited Balcic in Romania and Varna in Bulgaria , before returning via Istanbul and the Greek island of Corfu in the Ionian Sea , arriving back at the Bay of Kotor on 8 October . On 6 October 1934 , King Alexander left the Bay of Kotor on board Dubrovnik for a state visit to France , arriving in Marseille on 9 October . He was killed that same day by a Bulgarian assassin , and Dubrovnik conveyed his body back to Yugoslavia , escorted by French , Italian and British ships . Soon after , Vladimir Šaškijević replaced Pavić as captain . In August 1935 , Dubrovnik visited Corfu and Bizerte in the French protectorate of Tunisia . In August 1937 , Dubrovnik visited Istanbul and the Greek ports of Mudros in the northern Aegean Sea and Piraeus near Athens .

The Italians captured Dubrovnik in the Bay of Kotor on 17 April 1941 ; she had been damaged by Yugoslav civilians prior to her seizure . Dubrovnik was sailed to Taranto in southern Italy on 21 May , where she underwent repairs and a refit . She was renamed Premuda , after the Dalmatian island near which an Italian motor torpedo boat had sunk the Austro-Hungarian dreadnought Szent István in June 1918 . Her aft deckhouse and emergency bridge was removed and replaced with an anti-aircraft platform , and her mainmast and funnels were shortened . Her twin Škoda 83.5 mm ( 3.29 in ) L / 55 anti-aircraft guns were replaced by a 120 mm ( 4.7 in ) / L15 howitzer firing star shells for illumination , while the six Škoda 40 mm ( 1.6 in ) / L67 anti-aircraft guns were replaced by four Breda Model 35 20 mm ( 0.79 in ) / L65 machine guns in single mounts . Later in her Italian service , the 120 mm ( 4.7 in ) howitzer was replaced by a twin Breda 37 mm ( 1.5 in ) / L54 anti-aircraft gun mount . In Italian service , her crew consisted of 13 officers and 191 enlisted ranks .

Premuda was commissioned in the Italian Navy ( Italian : Regia Marina ) in February 1942 . Later that month she rescued British prisoners of war who survived the sinking of the SS Ariosto , an Italian ship ferrying them from Tripoli to Sicily . In early June , the Italian submarine Alagi fired on Premuda , mistaking her for a British destroyer due to her similarities with a British H-class destroyer . The attack missed Premuda and struck the Navigatori-class destroyer Antoniotto Usodimare , sinking her . From 12 – 16 June 1942 , Premuda took part in operations against the Allied Operation Harpoon convoy attempting to reach the beleaguered island of Malta from Gibraltar . As part of the 10th Destroyer Flotilla , Premuda supported the Italian 7th Cruiser Squadron , comprising the light cruisers Eugenio di Savoia and Raimondo Montecuccoli . The force that attacked the Operation Harpoon convoy included most of the fighting power of the Italian Navy , including two battleships and two heavy cruisers . The Allied naval escort lost one cruiser , three destroyers and several merchant ships to a combination of air attacks , submarines and naval mines . One Italian battleship was damaged , and the Trento-class cruiser Trento was sunk . One of the other damaged Italian ships was the Navigatori-class destroyer Ugolino Vivaldi , and Premuda was tasked to tow her to safety in the harbour of Pantelleria , an island in the Strait of Sicily , under escort from the destroyer Lanzerotto Malocello .

On 6 – 7 January 1943 , Premuda and 13 other Italian destroyers transported troops to the Axis-held port of Tunis in North Africa , completing two more such missions over the next two months . On 17 July , she developed serious engine problems in the Ligurian Sea near La Spezia , and was brought to Genoa for a major boiler and engine overhaul . It was decided to rebuild her along the lines of the Navigatori-class , including a wider beam to improve her stability . As shells for her Škoda-built main guns were in short supply , the decision was made to replace them with Italian-made 135 mm ( 5.3 in ) / L45 guns in single mounts . The rebuild had not been completed when Italy surrendered to the Allies , and Premuda was seized by Germany at Genoa on 9 September 1943 . Premuda was the most important and effective Italian war prize ship of World War II .

When she was captured by the Germans , Premuda 's new guns had not been completed . Their initial plans called for the ship to serve as a radar picket for night fighters , with three 105 mm ( 4.1 in ) / L45 anti-aircraft guns in single mounts , Freya early-warning radar , Würzburg gun-laying radar and a FuMO 21 surface fire-control system . These plans were soon abandoned due to the German lack of destroyers and torpedo boats in the Mediterranean , and the decision was made to commission her as a Torpedoboot Ausland ( foreign torpedo boat ) with a DeTe radar instead of the Freya and Würzburg radar sets . Her armament was replaced with four 105 mm ( 4.1 in ) / L45 naval guns , eight 37 mm ( 1.5 in ) anti-aircraft guns and between thirty-two and thirty-six 20 mm ( 0.79 in ) anti-aircraft guns in quadruple and twin mounts . The number of torpedo tubes was reduced from six to three . The number of 37 mm ( 1.5 in ) anti-aircraft guns was later increased to ten , in four twin and two single mounts . In German service , she had a total crew of 220 officers and men .

She was commissioned in the German Navy ( German : Kriegsmarine ) on 18 August 1944 , as TA32 , under the command of Kapitänleutnant Emil Kopka . She served in the Ligurian Sea with the 10th Torpedo Boat Flotilla , and was immediately committed to shelling Allied positions on the Italian coast , then scouting and minelaying tasks in the western Gulf of Genoa . On 2 October 1944 , TA32 , along with TA24 and TA29 , sailed towards Sanremo to lay mines , where they encountered the destroyer USS Gleaves . After exchanging fire , the three ships returned to Genoa without being hit . By mid-March 1945 , TA32 , TA24 and TA29 were the only ships of the 10th Torpedo Boat Flotilla that remained operational . On the night of 17 – 18 March 1945 , TA32 placed 76 naval mines off Cap Corse , the northern tip of Corsica , in an offensive minelaying operation , along with TA24 and TA29 . After being detected by a shore based radar , the ships were engaged by the destroyers HMS Lookout and HMS Meteor , in what would become known as the Battle of the Ligurian Sea . Outgunned , TA24 and TA29 were sunk , while TA32 managed to escape with light damage to her rudder , after firing a few rounds and making an unsuccessful torpedo attack . TA32 was finally scuttled at Genoa on 24 April 1945 , as the Germans retreated . Her wreck was raised and broken up in 1950 .

" Sozin 's Comet : The Final Battle " is the series finale for the Nickelodeon television series Avatar : The Last Airbender . It was directed by Ethan Spaulding , Giancarlo Volpe , and Joaquim Dos Santos , and written by Michael Dante DiMartino , Bryan Konietzko , and Aaron Ehasz . Although the finale is split into four episodes , it aired as a two-hour four-part movie on July 19 , 2008 . Before the week of July 14 – 19 , no episodes had been shown since November 30 , 2007 . The Saturday airing of Sozin 's Comet acted as a climax to a week of ten new episodes that concluded Avatar 's third season . The finale focuses on series protagonist Aang 's non-violent personality and his reluctance to kill Fire Lord Ozai . The finale also follows the exploits of many of Aang 's friends and allies , including Sokka , Toph and Suki 's struggle to destroy a Fire Nation airship armada , Zuko and Katara 's battle against Zuko 's sister Azula , and Iroh , King Bumi , and the Order of the White Lotus ' attempt to liberate Ba Sing Se .

Sozin 's Comet received positive reception from critics and fans alike . The initial showing averaged 5.6 million viewers , a 195 % increase in ratings compared with ratings from mid-July 2007 . The premiere of episodes 52 – 61 throughout the week of Sozin 's Comet 's release received over 19 million views , of which 5.6 million were from the premiere of Sozin 's Comet . At the 2008 Annie Awards , the director of the third part of Sozin 's Comet won an award for " Best Directing in an Animated Television Production " . Although " Sozin 's Comet " is the series finale , Avatar : The Last Airbender has continued as an ongoing graphic novel series , taking place after the finale and before the sequel series The Legend of Korra , which has been published by Dark Horse Comics since January 2012 , with each annual story arc split into three parts .

Aang suddenly abandons his Firebending lesson with Zuko to have a beach party , causing Zuko to attack him in his frustration . Aang explains he plans to challenge Fire Lord Ozai only after Sozin 's Comet and its enhancement of Firebending have come and gone , due to his own self-perceived lack of Firebending skills at the moment . When Zuko tells the group Ozai plans to use the comet 's power to burn down the Earth Kingdom , Aang resolves to face him before the comet arrives . Sokka decides to have a simulation fight against a scarecrow , but Aang refuses to kill it due to his pacifistic nature and non-violent upbringing , and even berates his friends as they tell him that he may eventually have no choice but to kill Ozai . That night , Aang sleepwalks to an island not to be found in the morning . After the group fails to locate him , Zuko takes them to June , a tracker who might be able to locate Aang . Meanwhile , Fire Lord Ozai proclaims himself to be ruler of the world , under the title " Phoenix King " , and declares Azula to be the new Fire Lord , setting off to burn the world and rebuild it under his new order .

Zuko 's tracker , June , is unable to locate Aang , but he is reunited with his uncle , Iroh , who reconcile with each other after Zuko 's betrayal in Ba Sing Se . He and several other characters ( Katara 's Waterbending master Pakku , Aang 's first Firebending instructor Jeong Jeong , Aang 's Earthbender friend King Bumi , and Sokka 's swordmaster Piandao ) are part of an otherwise non-aligned group known as the " Order of the White Lotus " , which plans to liberate the Earth Kingdom capital , Ba Sing Se , from Fire Nation rule . Zuko and Katara decide to fight Azula in the Fire Nation capital while Sokka , Toph , and Suki attempt to destroy the airship fleet . Meanwhile , Aang awakens on a floating island . Frustrated with his inability to find a way to defeat Ozai without killing him , he asks four of his past lives for advice . Unsatisfied with their answers , he asks the island for help . The island , which is actually a giant " lion-turtle " , provides Aang with the power of energybending and leaves him on the Earth Kingdom shores while Ozai readies his airship fleet for takeoff .

The Comet appears in the sky , and Azula 's coronation takes place . Azula banishes nearly all of her subjects ( including her Dai Li agents ) in fear of betrayal , haunted by the actions of former friends Mai and Ty Lee in " The Boiling Rock , Part 2 " . Her paranoia and loneliness begin to drive her insane . Before she is crowned , Zuko and Katara arrive . Zuko accepts Azula 's challenge of an Agni Kai , or " fire duel " , because he feels that something is wrong with Azula and he does not want Katara injured . Just as Zuko is on the verge of defeating Azula , she shoots a bolt of lightning at Katara instead of Zuko . Zuko throws himself in front of her and intercepts the lightning , preventing Katara from getting hurt , but he gravely injures himself after he fails to correctly redirect the lightning . Meanwhile , Sokka , Toph , and Suki hijack a Fire Nation airship , and use it to destroy many others , effectively stopping Ozai 's plan of incinerating the Earth Kingdom . In Ba Sing Se , the Order of the White Lotus , led by Iroh , lays siege to the Fire Nation forces within the city , with the sole intention of re-conquering it in the name of the Earth Kingdom . Aang reappears and begins to duel the Fire Lord . However , when Aang successfully redirects lightning he intentionally aims it into the sky to avoid killing Ozai . Because of Aang 's pacifism , Ozai begins to gain the advantage .

Zuko lies on the ground twitching as Katara and Azula fight . After several minutes of running and being unable to gain the advantage at first , Katara freezes Azula and chains her to the ground defeating her . Katara then uses her waterbending to revive and heal Zuko . As a result of her defeat by two people she considers less than worthless , Azula 's mind finally snaps and she screams and sobs in fury , breathing blue fire out of her mouth , yet unable to escape her chains . After a fierce battle , Ozai slams Aang into a rock , hitting the scar on his back from Azula 's lightning in the previous season and inadvertently releasing his locked seventh chakra , allowing Aang to enter the Avatar State . With the combined power of his past lives , Aang quickly overwhelms Ozai . Once Ozai is subdued , Aang refuses to kill him , instead locking him down with earth ; understanding the lion-turtle 's meaning , he uses Energybending to strip Ozai of his Firebending powers , removing his ability to wage war . Then Aang raises and lowers the nearby ocean to undo the damage from the Fire Nation ; Sozin 's Comet vanishes beyond the horizon afterward .

The Order of the White Lotus liberates Ba Sing Se in the name of the Earth King . During his coronation , Zuko promises to aid the world in the postwar reconstruction . Sometime after the ceremony , Zuko visits Ozai 's prison and demands he tell him the location of the banished Ursa , Zuko 's mother . Zuko and Mai finally reconcile . Ty Lee joins the Kyoshi warriors , having bonded with them in prison and shared some chi-blocking techniques . A final scene depicts the main cast gathered in Iroh 's new tea shop , the Jasmine Dragon , and with Aang and Katara officially confirming their genuinely strong and close romantic relationship with a loving hug and passionate kiss .

Co-creators Michael Dante DiMartino and Bryan Konietzko wrote the majority of the finale ; DiMartino wrote parts one , three , and four , and Konietzko assisted with parts three and four . Aaron Ehasz , co-executive producer and head writer of the show , wrote part two . Ethan Spaulding directed part one , Giancarlo Volpe directed part two , and Joaquim Dos Santos directed parts three and four . Dos Santos was nominated for an Annie Award for his directing of part three , " Into the Inferno " . Although Sozin 's Comet was originally written as a three-part story , the creators noticed that the length had grown beyond what they had predicted from the initial script . To avoid pacing issues , they split the final part in two , adding several scenes to fill the remaining time . Although Avatar is not considered anime because of its American origin , Tasha Robinson of the SciFi Channel observed that " Avatar blurs the line between anime and [ US ] domestic cartoons until it becomes irrelevant . " An IGN reviewer commented that Sozin 's Comet " had that classic anime-look that I 've always loved to see when watching old anime movies . The story through the animation was perfectly done . " The special 's music was written and composed by " The Track Team " , led by Jeremy Zuckerman . However , unlike past episodes , a music track produced by a live orchestra was used , rather than one in MIDI format .

During the San Diego Comic-con , it was announced that a reunion between Zuko and his mother , Ursa , had been arranged and made into a storyboard . However , it was dropped just before the finale was finished , as requested by show co-creator Michael Dante DiMartino , who felt that it resolved Ursa 's disappearance in an unsatisfactory way and that wasn 't the way the story should be told . The cast of Sozin 's Comet includes all of the key characters from season three . Protagonists Aang , Katara , Sokka , and Toph are voiced by Zach Tyler Eisen , Mae Whitman , Jack DeSena , and Jessie Flower respectively . Iroh is voiced by Greg Baldwin and Zuko is voiced by Dante Basco . Grey DeLisle and Mark Hamill voice the two antagonists , Azula and Fire Lord Ozai , respectively . The co-creators also lend their voices to two minor characters in the third part , " Into the Inferno " . Avatar : The Last Airbender borrows extensively from East Asian art to create its fictional universe . Four " bending " arts exist in the universe ; they are based on different styles and variations of Chinese martial arts : Baguazhang for Airbending , Hung Gar and Southern Praying Mantis for Earthbending , Northern Shaolin for Firebending , and T 'ai chi for Waterbending . Additionally , series borrows heavily from the Taoist concept of balance and order . The Avatar , an incarnation of a divine being , is supposed to maintain the world 's order .

Sozin 's Comet received many positive critical reviews ; Ed Liu of Toon Zone stated that it made Avatar " one of the finest animated television series ever made " , and IGN stating that this " film " deserved an Academy Award . Toon Zone praised the skill of the animation directors in designing the sweeping movements of the battle scenes , as well as the slower scenes , " including one moving reconciliation and the quiet coda that ties off many of the remaining loose ends of the series " . IGN reviewer Tory Ireland Mell wrote that she would " put it in the top ten films of all time " . She also praised the artistic skill of the designers , stating that the " whole dark tone was gorgeous to look at " , especially the " art of the Lion Turtle " . She thought that Sozin 's Comet lacked plot holes , as well as unnecessary plot devices , stating that the " story moved and kept us moving right along with it from beginning to end " . She gave Sozin 's Comet a 10 out of 10 " Masterful " rating .

Sozin 's Comet has received its share of criticism as well . Reviewers commented about the difficulty in understanding the voice of a new character : the Lion Turtle . The Lion Turtle was designed by Bryan Konietzko and character designer Jae Woo Kim . Bryan Konietzko disliked how the Lion Turtle turned out ; he felt that the art was not up to standards of the original design he had received . CraveOnline felt that because " the series was for children , the writers were at a loss of ideas to work around the murder angle , " and the decision not to kill the Fire Lord introduced " so many convenient plot twists [ that ] set us up for a humongous deus ex machina that allows the Fire Lord to be thwarted without dying " . The premiere of Sozin 's Comet averaged 5.6 million viewers , 195 % more viewers than Nickelodeon had received in mid-July 2007 . During the week of July 14 , 2008 , it ranked as the most-viewed program for the under-14 demographic . The premiere of episodes 52 – 61 throughout the week of Sozin 's Comet ' s release received a total of 19 million views , and Avatar reached Neilsen 's list of Top 20 Cable Results for the week ending June 20 , 2008 four times . It also appeared on iTunes ' top ten list of best-selling television episodes during that same week . Sozin 's Comet ' s popularity affected online media as well ; " Rise of the Phoenix King " , a Nick.com online game based on Sozin 's Comet , generated almost 815,000 game plays within three days . A video game loosely based on the third season , Avatar : The Last Airbender – Into the Inferno , was released on October 13 , 2008 .

Sven Magnus Øen Carlsen ( Norwegian : [ sʋɛn ˈmɑŋnʉs øːn ˈkɑːɭsn ̩ ] ; born 30 November 1990 ) is a Norwegian chess grandmaster , and the current World Chess Champion . Carlsen is a former chess prodigy . He became a Grandmaster in 2004 , at the age of 13 years , 148 days . This made him the third youngest grandmaster in history . In November 2013 Carlsen became World Champion by defeating Viswanathan Anand in the World Chess Championship 2013 . On the May 2014 FIDE rating list , Carlsen reached his peak rating of 2882 , which is the highest in history . He successfully defended his title in November 2014 , once again defeating Anand . The same year , he also won the World Rapid Championship and the World Blitz Championship , thus holding all three world championship titles . In 2015 Carlsen won the inaugural Grand Chess Tour , a series of three supertournaments featuring the 10 best chess grandmasters in the world . Carlsen was known for his attacking style as a teenager , but he has since developed into a more universal player . He does not rely on opening preparation as much as other top players , and plays a variety of openings in order to make it more difficult for opponents to prepare against him . Carlsen 's positional mastery and endgame prowess have drawn comparisons to those of former world champions Bobby Fischer , José Raúl Capablanca , Vasily Smyslov , and Anatoly Karpov .

Carlsen was born in Tønsberg , Norway , on 30 November 1990 , to Sigrun Øen and Henrik Albert Carlsen , both engineers ( sivilingeniør ) by profession . The family spent one year in Espoo , Finland , and then in Brussels , Belgium , and in 1998 returned to Norway and settled in Lommedalen , Bærum . They later moved to Haslum . Carlsen showed an aptitude for intellectual challenges at a young age : at two years , he could solve 50-piece jigsaw puzzles ; at four , he enjoyed assembling Lego sets with instructions intended for children aged 10 – 14 . His father taught him to play chess at the age of 5 , although he initially showed little interest in the game . The first chess book Carlsen read was Find the Plan by Bent Larsen , and his first book on openings was Eduard Gufeld 's The Complete Dragon . Carlsen developed his early chess skills by playing by himself for hours at a time — moving the pieces around the chessboard , searching for combinations , and replaying games and positions shown to him by his father . Simen Agdestein emphasises Carlsen 's extreme memory , claiming that he was able to recall the areas , population numbers , flags and capitals of all the countries in the world by the age of five . Later , Carlsen had memorised the areas , population numbers , coat-of-arms and administrative centres of " virtually all " Norwegian municipalities . Carlsen participated in his first tournament — the youngest division of the 1999 Norwegian Chess Championship — at the age of 8 years and 7 months , scoring 6 ½ / 11 .

Carlsen was later coached at the Norwegian College of Elite Sport by the country 's top player , Grandmaster ( GM ) Simen Agdestein , who in turn cites Norwegian football manager Egil " Drillo " Olsen as a key inspiration for his coaching strategy . In 2000 , Agdestein introduced Carlsen to Torbjørn Ringdal Hansen , an International Master ( IM ) and former Norwegian junior champion , as Ringdal served a one-year siviltjeneste ( an alternative civilian service programme ) at the college . Over the course of this year , Carlsen 's rating rose from 904 in June 2000 , to 1907 . Carlsen 's breakthrough occurred in the Norwegian junior teams championship in September 2000 , where Carlsen scored 3 ½ / 5 against the top junior players of the country , and a performance rating ( PR ) of about 2000 . Apart from chess , which Carlsen studied about three to four hours a day , his favourite pastimes included football , skiing , and reading Donald Duck comics . Carlsen also practiced ski jumping until the age of ten . His personal best is 21 metres . From autumn 2000 to the end of 2002 , Carlsen played almost 300 rated tournament games , as well as several blitz tournaments , and participated in other minor events . In October 2002 , he placed sixth in the European Under-12 Championship in Peñiscola . In the following month , he tied for first place in the World Under-12 Championship in Heraklio , placing second to Ian Nepomniachtchi on tiebreak . After this , he obtained three IM norms in relatively quick succession ; his first was at the January 2003 Gausdal Troll Masters ( score 7 / 10 , 2345 PR ) , the second was at the June 2003 Salongernas IM-tournament in Stockholm ( 6 / 9 , 2470 PR ) , and the third and final IM norm was obtained at the July 2003 Politiken Cup in Copenhagen ( 8 / 11 , 2503 PR ) . He was officially awarded the IM title on 20 August 2003 . After finishing primary school , Carlsen took a year off to participate in international chess tournaments held in Europe during the fall season of 2003 , returning to complete secondary education at a sports school . During the year away from school , he finished in a tie for third in the European Under-14 Championship and placed ninth in the World Under-14 Championship . Both events were won by Sergei Zhigalko .

Carlsen made headlines after his victory in the C group at the Corus chess tournament in Wijk aan Zee . Carlsen obtained a score of 10 ½ / 13 , losing just one game ( against the highest-rated player of the C group , Duško Pavasovič ) . As a result of the victory , he earned his first GM norm , and achieved a PR of 2702 . Particularly notable was his win over Sipke Ernst in the penultimate round , when Carlsen sacrificed material to give mate in just 29 moves . The first 23 moves in that game had already been played in another game — Almagro Llanas – Gustafsson , Madrid 2003 ( which ended in a draw ) — but Carlsen 's over-the-board novelty immediately led to a winning position . Carlsen 's victory in the C group qualified him to play in the B group in 2005 , and it led Lubomir Kavalek , writing for the Washington Post , to give him the title " Mozart of chess " . Agdestein said that Carlsen had an excellent memory and played an unusually wide range of openings . Carlsen 's prowess caught the attention of Microsoft , which became his sponsor .

Carlsen obtained his second GM norm at the Moscow Aeroflot Open in February . On 17 March , in a blitz chess tournament in Reykjavík , Iceland , Carlsen defeated former World Champion Anatoly Karpov . The blitz tournament was a preliminary event leading up to a rapid knockout tournament beginning the next day . In that event , Carlsen was paired with Garry Kasparov , then the top-rated player in the world . Carlsen achieved a draw in their first game and lost the second one , and was thus knocked out of the tournament . In the sixth Dubai Open Chess Championship , held 18 – 28 April , Carlsen obtained his third and final GM norm . This caused him to become the world 's youngest GM at the time , as well as the third-youngest GM in history ( after Sergey Karjakin , who earned the title at the age of 12 years and 7 months and Parimarjan Negi ) . Carlsen played in the FIDE World Chess Championship , thus becoming the youngest player ever to participate in one , but was knocked out in the first round by Levon Aronian . In July , Carlsen and Berge Østenstad ( then the reigning Norwegian champion ) tied for first in the Norwegian Chess Championship , each scoring 7 / 9 . A two-game match between them was arranged to decide the title . Both games were drawn , which left Østenstad the champion because he had superior tiebreaks in the tournament .

In the Smartfish Chess Masters event at the Drammen International Chess Festival 2004 – 05 , Carlsen defeated Alexei Shirov , then ranked No. 10 in the world , as well as the co-winner of the tournament . In the semifinals of the Ciudad de León rapid chess tournament in June , Carlsen played a four-game match against Viswanathan Anand , who was ranked No. 2 in the world at the time and had won the 2003 World Rapid Chess Championship . Anand won 3 – 1 . In the Norwegian Chess Championship , Carlsen again finished in shared first place , this time with his mentor Simen Agdestein . A playoff between them was played between 7 and 10 November . This time , Carlsen had the better tiebreaks , but the rule giving the title to the player with better tiebreak scores in the event of a 1 – 1 draw had been revoked previously . The match was closely fought — Agdestein won the first game , Carlsen the second — so the match went into a series of two-game rapid matches until there was a winner . Carlsen won the first rapid game , Agdestein the second . Then followed three draws until Agdestein won the championship title with a victory in the sixth rapid game .

At the end of 2005 , Carlsen participated at the Chess World Cup in Khanty-Mansiysk , Russia . In the knockout tournament , he upset the 44th-ranked Zurab Azmaiparashvili in round one , and proceeded to defeat Farrukh Amonatov and Ivan Cheparinov to reach the round of 16 . There , Carlsen lost to Evgeny Bareev , but then won against Joël Lautier and Vladimir Malakhov before losing again to Gata Kamsky . Thus , Carlsen finished in tenth place and became the youngest player to be an official World Championship Candidate . In October , he took first place at the Arnold Eikrem Memorial in Gausdal with a score 8 / 9 and a PR of 2792 .

Carlsen qualified for a place in the Corus B group due to his first-place finish in Corus group C in 2004 . His shared first place with Alexander Motylev with 9 / 13 ( + 6 − 1 = 6 ) qualified him to play in the Corus group A in 2007 . At the traditional international ' Bosna ' tournament in Sarajevo 2006 , Carlsen shared first place with Liviu-Dieter Nisipeanu ( who won on tiebreak evaluation ) and Vladimir Malakhov ; this could be regarded as Carlsen 's first “ A ” elite tournament win , although it was not a clear first . Carlsen was close to winning the 2006 Norwegian Chess Championship outright , but a last-round loss to Berge Østenstad dropped him into another tie for first place with Agdestein . It also prevented Carlsen from beating Agdestein 's record as the youngest Norwegian champion ever . Nonetheless , in the playoff held from 19 – 21 September , Carlsen won 3 – 1 . After two draws at standard time controls , Carlsen won both rapid games in round two , securing his first Norwegian championship win . Carlsen won the Glitnir Blitz Tournament in Iceland . He achieved a 2 – 0 win over Viswanathan Anand in the semifinals and achieved the same score in the finals . He scored 6 / 8 in the 37th Chess Olympiad and achieved a PR of 2820 .

In the Midnight Sun Chess Tournament in Tromsø , Carlsen finished second behind Sergei Shipov . In the Biel Grandmaster Tournament , he placed second , beating the tournament winner Alexander Morozevich twice . In the NH Chess Tournament held in Amsterdam in August , Carlsen participated in an " Experience " vs. " Rising Stars " Scheveningen team match . The " Rising Stars " won the match 28 – 22 , with Carlsen achieving the best individual score for the Rising Stars team ( 6 ½ / 10 ) and a 2700 PR , thus winning the right to participate in the 2007 Melody Amber tournament . With a score of 7 ½ / 15 , Carlsen placed 8th out of 16 participants at the World Blitz Championship in Rishon LeZion , Israel . In the rapid chess tournament Rencontres nationales et internationales d 'échecs in Cap d 'Agde , France , he reached the semifinal , losing there to Sergey Karjakin . In November , Carlsen achieved a shared 8th place of 10 participants in the Mikhail Tal Memorial in Moscow with two losses and seven draws . He finished ninth in a group of 18 participants in the associated blitz tournament , which was won by Anand .

Playing in the top group of the Corus chess tournament for the first time , Carlsen placed last with nine draws and four losses , scoring 4 ½ / 13 . In the prestigious Linares chess tournament , Carlsen played against the following top-rated players : Veselin Topalov , Viswanathan Anand , Peter Svidler , Alexander Morozevich , Levon Aronian , Peter Leko , and Vassily Ivanchuk . Despite being rated significantly lower than any of them , he finished in second place on tiebreaks with 7 ½ / 14 , having scored four wins , seven draws and three losses , and achieving a PR of 2778 . Carlsen played for the first time in the Melody Amber blind and rapid chess tournament in Monte Carlo in March . In the 11 rounds , he achieved eight draws and three losses in the blindfold games , as well as three wins , seven draws and one loss in the rapid games . This resulted in a shared ninth place in the blindfold , shared second place in the rapid ( behind Anand ) , and a shared eighth place in the overall tournament . In May and June , he participated in the Candidates Tournament for the FIDE World Chess Championship 2007 , facing Levon Aronian in a six-game match at standard time controls , which Carlsen drew ( + 2 − 2 = 2 ) by coming from behind twice . The four-game rapid playoff was drawn as well ( + 1 − 1 = 2 ) , with Carlsen winning the last game to stay in the match . Eventually , Aronian eliminated Carlsen from the tournament after winning both tiebreak blitz games .

In July and August , Carlsen won the Biel Grandmaster Tournament with a 6 / 10 record and a PR of 2753 . His score was matched by Alexander Onischuk and they played a match to break the tie . After drawing two rapid and two blitz games , Carlsen won the armageddon game . Immediately after the Biel tournament , Carlsen entered the open Arctic Chess Challenge in Tromsø , but his fourth-place result with + 5 = 4 was a slight underperformance in terms of rating . In the first round , Carlsen , surprisingly , conceded a draw to his classmate Brede Hagen ( rated 2034 ) after having a lost position at one point . A game which attracted some attention was his sixth-round win over his father , Henrik Carlsen . Carlsen reached the semifinal round of the World Chess Cup in December , after defeating Michael Adams in the round of 16 and Ivan Cheparinov in the quarterfinals . In the semifinal , he was eliminated by the eventual winner , Gata Kamsky , scoring ½ – 1 ½ .

In the top group A of the Corus chess tournament , Carlsen scored 8 / 13 , achieving a PR of 2830 . Carlsen won five games , lost two and drew six , sharing first place with Levon Aronian . At the Linares chess tournament , Carlsen had another 2800 + PR , scoring 8 / 14 . He finished in sole second place , ½ point behind the winner World Champion Viswanathan Anand . In March , Carlsen played for the second time in the Melody Amber blind and rapid chess tournament , held in Nice for the first time . In the 11 rounds he achieved four wins , four draws and two losses in the blindfold , and three wins , two losses , and six draws in the rapid . This resulted in a shared fifth place in the blindfold , shared third place in the rapid and a shared second place in the overall tournament . Carlsen was one of 21 players in the six-tournament FIDE Grand Prix 2008 – 2009 , a qualifier for the World Chess Championship 2012 . In the first tournament , in Baku , Azerbaijan , he finished in a three-way tie for first place , with another 2800 PR . Carlsen later withdrew from the Grand Prix cycle despite his initial success , criticizing how FIDE was " changing the rules dramatically in the middle of a [ World Championship ] cycle " .

Carlsen won a rapid match against Peter Leko held in Miskolc , Hungary , scoring 5 – 3 . In June , Carlsen won the annual Aerosvit chess tournament , finishing undefeated with 8 / 11 in a category 19 field and achieving a PR of 2877 , his best PR at that point in his career . Playing in the category 18 Biel Grandmaster Tournament , Carlsen finished third with 6 / 10 , with a PR of 2740 . In the Mainz World Rapid Chess Championship , Carlsen finished in second place after losing the final to defending champion Anand 3 – 1 . In the qualification round Carlsen scoring 1 ½ – ½ against Judit Polgár , 1 – 1 against Anand and 1 – 1 against Alexander Morozevich . In the category 22 Bilbao Masters , Carlsen tied for second with a 2768 PR .

Playing in Group A of the Corus chess tournament , Carlsen tied for fifth with a 2739 PR . In the Linares chess tournament , Carlsen finished third with a 2777 PR . Carlsen tied for second place with Veselin Topalov at the M-Tel Masters ( category 21 ) tournament in Sofia , Bulgaria . He lost to eventual winner Alexei Shirov in their final game , dropping him from first . Carlsen won the category 21 Nanjing Pearl Spring tournament , 2 ½ points ahead of second-place finisher Topalov , the world 's highest-rated player at the time . He scored an undefeated 8 / 10 , winning every game as white ( against Topalov , Wang Yue , Leko , Teimour Radjabov , and Dmitry Jakovenko ) , and also winning as black against Jakovenko . By rating performance , this was one of the greatest results in history , with a PR of 3002 . Chess statistician Jeff Sonas has declared it one of the 20 best tournament performances of all time , and the best chess performance of all time by a teenager . In the Tal Memorial , played from 5 to 14 November , Carlsen started with seven straight draws , but finished with wins over former FIDE World Champion Ruslan Ponomariov and Peter Leko . This result put Carlsen in shared second place behind former World Champion Vladimir Kramnik and equal with Ivanchuk . After the Tal Memorial , Carlsen won the World Blitz Championship , played from 16 to 18 November in Moscow , Russia . His score of 28 wins , 6 draws and 8 losses left him three points ahead of Anand , who finished in second place .

Carlsen entered the London Chess Classic as the top seed in a field including Kramnik , Hikaru Nakamura , Michael Adams , Nigel Short , Ni Hua , Luke McShane and David Howell . He defeated Kramnik in round one and went on to win the tournament with 13 / 21 ( three points were awarded for a win , and one for a draw ; using classical scoring he finished with 5 / 7 ) and a PR of 2844 , one point ahead of Kramnik . This victory propelled him to the top of the FIDE rating list , surpassing Veselin Topalov . Based on his average ranking from the July 2009 and January 2010 FIDE lists , Carlsen qualified for the Candidates Tournament that would determine the challenger to World Champion Viswanathan Anand in the World Chess Championship 2012 . In November 2010 , however , Carlsen announced he was withdrawing from the Candidates Tournament . Carlsen described the 2008 – 12 cycle as " [ not ] sufficiently modern and fair " , and wrote that " Reigning champion privileges , the long ( five year ) span of the cycle , changes made during the cycle resulting in a new format ( Candidates ) that no World Champion has had to go through since Kasparov , puzzling ranking criteria as well as the shallow ceaseless match-after-match concept are all less than satisfactory in my opinion . "

Carlsen won the Corus chess tournament played 16 – 31 January with 8 ½ points . His ninth-round loss to Kramnik ended a streak of 36 rated games undefeated . Carlsen appeared to struggle in the last round against Fabiano Caruana , but saved a draw , leaving him half a point ahead of Kramnik and Shirov . In March it was announced that Carlsen had split from Kasparov and would no longer use him as a trainer , although this was put into different context by Carlsen himself in an interview with the German magazine Der Spiegel , in which he stated that they would remain in contact and he would continue to attend training sessions with Kasparov . In 2011 , Carlsen said : " Thanks to [ Kasparov ] I began to understand a whole class of positions better . ... Kasparov gave me a great deal of practical help . " In 2012 , when asked what he learnt from working with Kasparov , Carlsen answered : " Complex positions . That was the most important thing . " Carlsen shared first place alongside Ivanchuk in the Amber blindfold and rapid tournament . Scoring 6 ½ / 11 in the blindfold and 8 / 11 in the rapid , Carlsen accumulated 14 ½ from a possible 22 points . In May it was revealed that Carlsen had helped Anand prepare for the World Chess Championship 2010 against challenger Veselin Topalov , which Anand won 6 ½ – 5 ½ to retain the title . Carlsen had also helped Anand prepare for the World Chess Championships in 2007 and 2008 .

Carlsen played in the Bazna Kings Tournament in Romania on 14 – 25 June . The tournament was a double round robin involving Wang Yue , Boris Gelfand , Ruslan Ponomariov , Teimour Radjabov , and Liviu-Dieter Nisipeanu . He finished with 7 ½ / 10 and a 2918 PR , winning the tournament by two points ahead of Radjabov and Gelfand . Carlsen then played in a rapid tournament 28 – 30 August at the Arctic Securities Chess Stars tournament in Kristiansund , Norway . The field featured World Champion Viswanathan Anand , female world No. 1 Judit Polgár , and Jon Ludvig Hammer . In the preliminary round robin , Carlsen scored 3 ½ / 6 to qualify for the final , second behind Anand . In the final , Carlsen defeated Anand 1 ½ – ½ to win the championship . Following this event , Carlsen suffered setbacks in his next two tournaments . In the 39th Chess Olympiad from 19 September to 4 October , he scored 4 ½ / 8 , losing three games , to Baadur Jobava , Michael Adams , and Sanan Sjugirov ; these were his first losses with the black pieces in more than a year . His team , Norway , finished 51st out of 149 teams .

Carlsen 's next tournament was the Grand Slam Masters Final on 9 – 15 October , which he had qualified for automatically by winning three of the previous year 's four Grand Slam chess events ( 2009 Nanjing Pearl Spring , 2010 Corus , 2010 Bazna Kings ) . Along with Carlsen , the finals consisted of World Champion Anand and the highest two scorers from the preliminary stage held in Shanghai in September : Kramnik and Shirov . The average Elo of the participants at the time was 2789 , making the Grand Slam Final the strongest chess tournament in history . In the first round , Carlsen lost with black to Kramnik ; this was Carlsen 's second consecutive loss to Kramnik , and placed his hold on the world No. 1 ranking in serious jeopardy . In his second round , Carlsen lost with the white pieces to Anand ; this was his first loss as White since January 2010 . Carlsen recovered somewhat in the latter part of the tournament , achieving a win over Shirov , and finishing with 2 ½ / 6 . The tournament was won by Kramnik with 4 / 6 . Carlsen finished this tournament with a rating of 2802 , two points behind Anand at 2804 who temporarily ended Carlsen 's reign at world No. 1 . These setbacks called into question from some whether Carlsen 's activities outside chess , such as modelling for G-Star Raw , were distracting him from performing well at the chessboard . Carlsen said he did not believe there was a direct connection .

Carlsen 's next tournament was the Pearl Spring chess tournament on 19 – 30 October in Nanjing , China , against Anand , Topalov , Vugar Gashimov , Wang Yue , and Étienne Bacrot . This was the only tournament in 2010 to feature Anand , Carlsen and Topalov , at the time the top three players in the world , and was the first tournament in history to feature three players rated at least 2800 . With early wins over Bacrot , Wang Yue , and Topalov with white , Carlsen took the early lead , extending his winning streak with white in Nanjing to eight . This streak was halted by a draw to Anand in round seven , but in the penultimate round Carlsen secured first place by defeating Topalov with black . This was his second victory in the tournament over the former world No. 1 ; his final score of 7 / 10 ( with a PR of 2903 ) was a full point ahead of runner-up Anand . In the World Blitz Championship , held in Moscow on 16 – 18 November , Carlsen attempted to defend his 2009 title . With a score of 23 ½ / 38 , he finished in third place behind Radjabov and winner Levon Aronian . After the tournament , Carlsen played a private 40-game blitz match against Hikaru Nakamura , winning with a score of 23 ½ – 16 ½ .

Carlsen won the London Chess Classic on 8 – 15 December in a field comprising World Champion Anand , Vladimir Kramnik , Nakamura , and British players Adams , Nigel Short , David Howell , and Luke McShane . Carlsen had a rocky start , losing his games to McShane and Anand in rounds 1 and 3 , but winning with white against Adams and Nakamura in rounds 2 and 4 . He joined the lead with a win over Howell in round 5 , and managed to stay in the lead following a harrowing draw against Kramnik in round 6 , before defeating Short in the last round . Since the tournament was played with three points for a win , Carlsen 's + 4 − 2 = 1 score put him ahead of Anand and McShane who scored + 2 = 5 ( a more traditional two-points-for-a-win system would have yielded a three-way tie , with Carlsen still on top , having the better tiebreaker due to four games with black — Anand and McShane played only three times with black ) .

Carlsen competed in the GM-A group of the Tata Steel Chess Tournament ( formerly called Corus Chess Tournament ) on 14 – 30 January in Wijk aan Zee in an attempt to defend his title ; the field included World Champion Viswanathan Anand , Levon Aronian , former World Champion Vladimir Kramnik , Alexander Grischuk , Hikaru Nakamura , Ruslan Ponomariov , among others . Despite losing games with white against Anish Giri and reigning Russian champion Ian Nepomniachtchi , Carlsen finished with 8 / 13 , including victories over Kramnik and tournament winner Nakamura . Although Carlsen 's performance raised his rating from 2814 to 2815 , Anand 's 8 ½ / 13 score elevated his rating to 2817 , making him the world No. 1 for the March 2011 FIDE rating list . The first tournament victory of the year came in the Bazna Kings tournament , a double round robin played in Mediaș , Romania on 11 – 21 June . Carlsen finished with 6 ½ / 10 , equal with Sergey Karjakin but with a better tiebreak score . Carlsen won his White games against Nakamura , Nisipeanu , and Ivanchuk and drew the rest of the games .

The Grand Slam Chess Final was held as a double round robin with six players , in São Paulo ( 25 September – 1 October ) and Bilbao ( 5 – 11 October ) . Although Carlsen had a slow start , including a loss against bottom-ranked Francisco Vallejo Pons , he finished + 3 − 1 = 6 , equal with Ivanchuk ( whose + 4 − 3 = 3 finish was equal due to three points for a win ) . Carlsen then won the blitz tiebreak against Ivanchuk . The other players were Anand , Aronian , Nakamura , and Vallejo Pons . Another tournament victory was achieved in the Tal Memorial in Moscow 16 – 25 November as a round robin with ten players . Carlsen won two games , against Gelfand and Nakamura , and drew the rest . Although he finished equal on points with Aronian , he placed ahead since the tiebreak was determined by the number of black games ; Carlsen had five black games , while Aronian only had four . In the London Chess Classic , played 3 – 12 December , Carlsen 's streak of tournament victories ended when he finished third , behind Kramnik and Nakamura . Carlsen won three games and drew five . Although he did not win the tournament , Carlsen gained rating points , rising to a new personal record of 2835 .

At the Tata Steel Chess Tournament held on 14 – 29 January in Wijk aan Zee , Carlsen finished in a shared second place with 8 / 13 , behind Aronian , and equal with Radjabov and Caruana . Carlsen defeated Gashimov , Aronian , Gelfand , and Topalov , but lost against Karjakin . At the blitz chess tournament at Tal Memorial , held in Moscow on 7 June , Carlsen shared first place with Morozevich . In the main event ( a category 22 ten-player round robin ) , he won two games and drew seven . He finished in first place , ahead of Radjabov and Caruana . Carlsen then went on to finish second in the Biel Grandmaster Tournament , with 18 points , just one point behind Wang Hao using the 3 – 1 – 0 scoring system . As in the Tal Memorial earlier in 2012 , Carlsen managed to finish the tournament without any losses ( + 4 − 0 = 6 ) . He also defeated the winner Wang in both of their individual games . In the exhibition blitz tournament at Biel before the GM tournament , Carlsen was eliminated ( + 1 − 2 = 0 ) in the first round by Étienne Bacrot . Bacrot deprived Carlsen of a win in the classical tournament by holding him to a draw in the final round . Carlsen would have won the classical tournament on the traditional 1 – ½ – 0 scoring system , with 7 / 10 .

The Grand Slam Chess Final was again held as a double round robin with six players , in São Paulo and Bilbao . Carlsen started with a loss against Caruana , but after three wins in the second ( Bilbao ) round , finished + 4 − 1 = 5 , equal first with Caruana , and ahead of Aronian , Karjakin and Anand . Carlsen won the tournament by winning both tiebreak games against Caruana . From 24 to 25 November , Carlsen took part in the chess festival " Segunda Gran Fiesta Internacional de Ajedrez " in Mexico City . As part of it , Carlsen took on an online audience ( dubbed as " The World " ) with the white pieces and won . He then took part in the knockout exhibition event " Cuadrangular UNAM " . Carlsen first beat Lázaro Bruzón 1 ½ – ½ , thus qualifying for a final against Judit Polgár ( who had in turn beat Manuel León Hoyos 1 ½ – ½ ) . Carlsen lost the first game , but won the second one , and in the tiebreak defeated Polgár 2 – 0 . Carlsen won the London Chess Classic in December with five wins ( over McShane , Aronian , Gawain Jones , Adams and Judit Polgár ) and three draws ( against Kramnik , Nakamura and Anand ) . This win , the third time Carlsen had won the tournament in the past four years , increased his rating from 2848 to a new record of 2861 , breaking Kasparov 's 13-year record of 2851 . By rating performance , this was one of the best results in history , with a PR of 2994 .

Carlsen played in the 75th Tata Steel Chess Tournament from 11 to 27 January in Wijk aan Zee . In the 13-round tournament , he scored 10 points ( + 7 − 0 = 6 ) , winning clear first 1 ½ points ahead of second-place finisher Aronian . On 1 February , Danish GM Peter Heine Nielsen joined the team of assistants who helped Carlsen prepare for the Candidates Tournament in March . Before this , Nielsen was on Viswanathan Anand 's team . Carlsen played in the 2013 Candidates Tournament , which took place in London , from 15 March to 1 April . He finished with + 5 − 2 = 7 , and won the tournament on tiebreak over Vladimir Kramnik . As a result , he earned the right to challenge Anand for the World Champion title . In May , Carlsen played in the first edition of Norway Chess tournament . He finished second , scoring 5 ½ / 9 ( + 3 − 1 = 5 ) , half a point behind Sergey Karjakin . Carlsen played in the Tal Memorial from June 12 to June 23 . He finished second , with 5 ½ / 9 , half a point behind Boris Gelfand . Carlsen ended the tournament with + 3 − 1 = 5 , losing to Caruana but beating Anand , Kramnik and Nakamura . Later that month , Carlsen played a four-game friendly rapid match against Borki Predojević , which he won 2 ½ – 1 ½ .

From 29 January to 4 February , Carlsen played in the Zurich Chess Challenge , winning the preliminary blitz event ( + 2 − 1 = 2 ) and the classical event ( + 3 − 0 = 2 ) . He performed less well in the rapid event ( + 1 − 2 = 2 ) , which counted towards the overall standings , but retained enough of a lead to win the tournament . The other players in the event were Aronian , Nakamura , Caruana , Gelfand and Anand . Carlsen played a game for his club Stavanger in the final team match for promotion to the Norwegian Premier League on 22 March . His win over Vladimir Georgiev helped his team to a 3 ½ – 2 ½ win over Nordstrand . Carlsen won the Vugar Gashimov Memorial in Şəmkir , Azerbaijan , played from 20 – 30 April . He played in the A group along with Caruana , Nakamura , Karjakin , Shakhriyar Mamedyarov and Radjabov . Carlsen started the tournament with 2 / 2 , beating Mamedyarov and Nakamura . He then drew Karjakin , only to lose two games in a row for the first time in four years , losing to Caruana with black and then with white to Radjabov . In the second half of the tournament , Carlsen scored 4 / 5 , beating Mamedyarov and Nakamura again , and securing the tournament victory by beating Caruana in the final round , finishing with + 5 − 2 = 3 .

On 8 May Carlsen played an exhibition game at Oslo City against the people of Norway , assisted by a grandmaster panel consisting of Simen Agdestein , Leif Erlend Johannessen , and Jon Ludvig Hammer . Each of the panel members proposed a move and the public could then vote over the proposed moves . Each panel member was allowed three chances to let chess engine Houdini propose a move during the game . Norway 's moves were executed by Oddvar Brå who was disguised in a red spandex suit for the occasion . The game was drawn when Carlsen forced a perpetual check . Carlsen placed second ( to Sergey Karjakin ) in the second edition of Norway Chess , a ten-player round robin , from 2 June to 13 June . Other players in the event were Aronian , Caruana , Topalov , Svidler , Kramnik , Grischuk , Giri and Agdestein . Carlsen won FIDE World Rapid Championships held in Dubai from 16 June to 19 June . He went on to claim the World Blitz Championships two days later , becoming the first player to simultaneously hold the title in all three FIDE rated time controls .

Carlsen played nine games for Norway in the 41st Chess Olympiad , scoring five wins , two draws , and two losses ( against Arkadij Naiditsch and Ivan Šarić ) . Carlsen placed second to Fabiano Caruana in the Sinquefield Cup , a six-player double round robin in Saint Louis , Missouri from 27 August to 7 September . Billed as the strongest chess tournament ever held , the remaining 4 players in the event were Levon Aronian , Hikaru Nakamura , Veselin Topalov , and Maxime Vachier-Lagrave . He lost to Fabiano Caruana in Round 3 and defeated Levon Aronian and Hikaru Nakamura in Rounds 5 and 7 , respectively . He finished the tournament in second place , with 5.5 / 10 ( + 2-1 = 7 ) , behind Caruana .

In January , Carlsen won the Tata Steel Chess Tournament , which was played mainly in Wijk aan Zee on 9 – 25 January . Carlsen had a poor start to the tournament with two draws and a loss in the third round to Radosław Wojtaszek , which left him in tenth place among the fourteen players . However , a string of six wins in a row thrust Carlsen into clear first place . Drawing the final four games was sufficient to win the tournament with 9 points out of 13 , half a point ahead of Anish Giri , Maxime Vachier-Lagrave , Wesley So and Ding Liren . In February , Carlsen won the 3rd Grenke Chess Classic in Baden-Baden after a five-game tiebreak with Arkadij Naiditsch . Carlsen finished equal first with Naiditsch on 4.5 / 7 , beating Michael Adams , Anand , and David Baramidze , and losing to Naiditsch in their classical encounter . This tournament victory meant that Carlsen began 2015 by winning two out of two tournaments . Carlsen continued his streak in April , winning Shamkir Chess with a score of 7 / 9 , beating Mamedyarov , Caruana , Vachier-Lagrave , Kramnik , and Rauf Mamedov , going + 5-0 = 4 . With a performance rating of 2981 , this was Carlsen 's third best tournament result ever . His performance was only bested in Nanjing 2009 ( 3002 TPR ) and London 2012 ( 2993 TPR ) . Carlsen had a poor result in the Norway Chess event of 15 – 26 June . In the first round he obtained a winning position against Topalov after pressing in a long endgame , only to lose on time when he mistakenly thought that he would receive 15 minutes of extra time at move 60 . He was then outplayed by Caruana in the second round , missed a win against Anish Giri in round 3 , and lost to Anand in round 4 . He won against Grischuk in round 5 , drew against Nakamura and Vachier-Lagrave in rounds 6 and 7 , and defeated Aronian in round 8 , but he lost the last round against Jon Ludvig Hammer , leaving him tied for seventh and eighth place . Carlsen finished 2nd place at the 2015 Sinquefield Cup with 5 points , one point below tournament winner Levon Aronian . He defeated the 2014 Sinquefield Cup 's winner Fabiano Caruana , French # 1 Maxime Vachier-Lagrave , and wild-card Wesley So , but lost to Veselin Topalov and Alexander Grischuk .

In October , Carlsen successfully defended his title in the FIDE World Rapid Championships held in Berlin , as the first world rapid champion to do so in history , going + 8-0 = 7 . He reached the highest live rapid rating in history after the tournament , and was at that point ranked # 1 in all three disciplines simultaneously . However , Carlsen quickly lost his # 1 blitz spot after he had a weak second day in the World Blitz Championship , causing him to lose his title to Alexander Grischuk . In November 2015 , Carlsen participated in the European Team Chess Championship , playing for the Norwegian team . He started off poorly , scoring 0.5 points out of 3 games - losing to Levon Aronian , drawing against Sune Berg Hansen , and losing again to Yannick Pelletier due to a blunder . He finished the tournament strongly , scoring victories against Peter Leko and Radoslaw Wojtaszek , the latter of whom he had lost to earlier in the year . However , his performance was not enough to earn his team a medal , and he lost 16 rating points during the event . In December 2015 , Carlsen participated in the final leg of the Grand Chess Tour , the London Chess Classic . He scored + 2-0 = 7 in the event , defeating Hikaru Nakamura ( and inflicting Nakamura 's 12th classical loss to Carlsen ) and Alexander Grischuk . In the 3-way tiebreak between Anish Giri and Maxime Vachier-Lagrave , he was the top seed , meaning he faced the winner of the two-game match between Giri and Vachier-Lagrave . He eventually won against the match , the Classic , and the overall inaugural Grand Chess Tour , earning him $ 75,000 for the London Chess Classic and the Grand Chess Tour bonus prizes . In late-December 2015 , Carlsen won first place at the 2nd edition of the Qatar Masters Open , defeating Grandmaster Yu Yangyi in a tie-break after both players had finished on a + 5 score . This concluded his final tournament for the 2015 year .

From January 15 to 31 , 2016 , Carlsen participated in the 78th Tata Steel Chess Tournament , held in Wijk Aan Zee , The Netherlands . Carlsen won the tournament by scoring 9 points out of 13 ( + 5-0 = 8 ) , earning him his 5th Wijk Aan Zee title . In the 2016 World Chess Championship in New York City , Carlsen will face Sergey Karjakin for the World Chess Championship . The match will take place from 11 – 30 November . On April 29th , 2016 , Magnus Carlsen won the 4th edition of the Norway Chess Tournament , after scoring a final round victory against Pavel Eljanov . In July 2016 , Carlsen won the 9th edition of the Bilbao Masters Final , scoring 17 points out of 10 games ( + 4-1 = 5 ) . Wins were awarded with 3 points , a draw with 1 point and losses with 0 points .

Carlsen won the Chess Oscars for 2009 , 2010 , 2011 , 2012 and 2013 . The Chess Oscar , conducted by the Russian chess magazine 64 , is awarded to the year 's best player according to a worldwide poll of leading chess critics , writers , and journalists . The Norwegian tabloid Verdens Gang ( VG ) has awarded him " Name of the Year " ( Årets navn ) twice , in 2009 and 2013 . VG also named him " Sportsman of the year " in 2009 and in the same year he won the Folkets Idrettspris , a people 's choice award from the newspaper Dagbladet . In 2011 , he was given the Peer Gynt Prize , a Norwegian honour prize awarded annually to " a person or institution that has achieved distinction in society " ; the following year , he repeated as winner of Folkets Idrettspris . In 2013 , Time magazine named Carlsen one of the 100 most influential people in the world .

Carlsen had an aggressive style of play as a youth , and , according to Agdestein , his play was characterised by " a fearless readiness to offer material for activity " . Carlsen found as he matured that this risky playing style was not as well suited against the world elite . When he started playing in top tournaments he was struggling against top players , and had trouble getting much out of the opening . To progress , Carlsen 's style became more universal , capable of handling all sorts of positions well . Carlsen opens with both 1.d4 and 1.e4 , as well as 1.c4 , and , on occasion , 1.Nf3 , thus making it harder for opponents to prepare against him . Evgeny Sveshnikov has criticised Carlsen 's opening play , claiming in a 2013 interview that without a more " scientific " approach to preparation , his " future doesn 't look so promising " . Garry Kasparov , who coached Carlsen from 2009 to 2010 , said that Carlsen has a positional style similar to that of past world champions such as Anatoly Karpov , José Raúl Capablanca , and Vasily Smyslov , rather than the tactical style of Alexander Alekhine , Mikhail Tal , and Kasparov himself . According to Carlsen , however , he does not have any preferences in playing style . Kasparov said in 2013 that " Carlsen is a combination of Karpov [ and ] Fischer . He gets his positions [ and ] then never lets go of that bulldog bite . Exhausting for opponents . " Carlsen has also stated that he follows in the traditions of Karpov and Fischer , but also mentions Reuben Fine as a player who " was doing in chess similar to what I am doing . " Anand has said of Carlsen : " The majority of ideas occur to him absolutely naturally . He 's also very flexible , he knows all the structures and he can play almost any position . ... Magnus can literally do almost everything . " Kasparov expressed similar sentiments : " [ Carlsen ] has the ability to correctly evaluate any position , which only Karpov could boast of before him . " In a 2012 interview , Vladimir Kramnik attributed much of Carlsen 's success against other top players to his " excellent physical shape " and his ability to avoid " psychological lapses " , which enables him to maintain a high standard of play over long games and at the end of tournaments , when the energy levels of others have dropped . Tyler Cowen gave a point of view on Carlsen 's playing style : " Carlsen is demonstrating one of his most feared qualities , namely his ' nettlesomeness , ' to use a term coined for this purpose by Ken Regan . Using computer analysis , you can measure which players do the most to cause their opponents to make mistakes . Carlsen has the highest nettlesomeness score by this metric , because his creative moves pressure the other player and open up a lot of room for mistakes . In contrast , a player such as Kramnik plays a high percentage of very accurate moves , and of course he is very strong , but those moves are in some way calmer and they are less likely to induce mistakes in response . "

Carlsen 's endgame prowess has been described as among the greatest in history . Jon Speelman , analysing several of Carlsen 's endgames from the 2012 London Classic ( in particular , his wins against McShane , Aronian , and Adams ) , described what he calls the " Carlsen effect " : ... through the combined force of his skill and no less important his reputation , he drives his opponents into errors . ... He plays on for ever , calmly , methodically and , perhaps most importantly of all , without fear : calculating superbly , with very few outright mistakes and a good proportion of the " very best " moves . This makes him a monster and makes many opponents wilt .

In the January 2006 FIDE list , at the age of 15 years , 32 days , he attained a 2625 Elo rating , which made Carlsen the youngest person to surpass 2600 Elo ( the record has since been broken by Wesley So , Wei Yi and John M. Burke ) . In the July 2007 FIDE list , at the age of 16 years , 213 days , Carlsen attained a 2710 Elo rating , which made him the youngest person to surpass 2700 Elo ( the record has since been broken by Wei Yi at the age of 15 years , 9 months ) . On 5 September 2008 , after winning round 4 in the Bilbao Grand Slam chess championship , Carlsen , just 17 years , 280 days old , briefly became No. 1 on the unofficial live ratings list . Carlsen 's September – October 2009 victory in the Nanjing Pearl tournament raised his FIDE rating to 2801 , making him at age 18 years , 336 days , the youngest player ever to break 2800 . The youngest before him was Vladimir Kramnik at age 25 . Before Carlsen , only Kasparov , Topalov , Kramnik , and Anand had achieved a 2800 + rating . After the Tal Memorial ( November 2009 ) he became No. 1 on the unofficial live chess rating list with his new peak rating of 2805.7 , 0.6 point over the No. 2 ranked player , Veselin Topalov .

The FIDE rankings from January 2010 , which took into account the 16 games played at the Tal Memorial and the London Chess Classic , were enough to raise Carlsen 's rating to 2810 . This meant that Carlsen started 2010 by being , at the age of 19 years , 32 days , the youngest ever world No. 1 , and also the first player from a Western nation to reach the top of the FIDE rating list since Bobby Fischer in 1971 . The press coverage of this feat included an interview and article in Time magazine . The March 2010 FIDE rating list showed Carlsen with a new peak rating of 2813 , a figure that only Kasparov had bettered at that time . On the January 2013 FIDE rating list , Carlsen reached 2861 , thus surpassing Garry Kasparov 's 2851 record from July 1999 . On list from May 2014 , Carlsen achieved an all-time high record of 2882 .

Carlsen – Garry Kasparov , Reykjavík Rapid ( 2004 ) , Queen 's Gambit Declined : Cambridge Springs Variation ( D52 ) , ½ – ½ At the age of just 13 years , Carlsen had serious winning chances in a rapid game against Garry Kasparov , ranked No. 1 in the world at that time , and considered by many to be the greatest chess player of all time . Carlsen – Veselin Topalov , M-Tel Masters ( 2009 ) , Semi-Slav Defense : General ( D43 ) , 1 – 0 This was Carlsen 's first win against a 2800 + player . Carlsen – Boris Gelfand , Tal Memorial ( 2011 ) , Slav Defense : Quiet Variation . Schallopp Defense ( D12 ) , 1 – 0 The No. 1 Israeli player and future World Championship challenger creates a seemingly decisive rook invasion into White 's back rank , but Carlsen vanquishes his threats . Carlsen called it " one of the most interesting games I have played in recent times " . Carlsen – Hikaru Nakamura , London Chess Classic ( 2011 ) , Italian Game : Classical Variation . Giuoco Pianissimo ( C53 ) , 1 – 0 Facing the No. 1 American player , Carlsen demolishes Black 's pawn structure .

Carlsen modelled for G-Star Raw 's Autumn / Winter 2010 advertising campaign with actress Liv Tyler . The campaign was shot by Dutch film director and photographer Anton Corbijn . The campaign was coordinated with the RAW World Chess Challenge in New York , an event where Carlsen played an online team of global chess players who voted on moves suggested by three GMs : Maxime Vachier-Lagrave , Hikaru Nakamura , and Judit Polgár . Carlsen , playing White , won in 43 moves . Film director J. J. Abrams offered Carlsen a role in the movie Star Trek Into Darkness as " a chess player from the future " , but he had to decline , unable to get a US work permit in time for shooting . In 2012 , Carlsen was featured in a 60 Minutes segment , and appeared as a guest on The Colbert Report . He was also interviewed by Rainn Wilson for SoulPancake . Carlsen was selected as one of the " sexiest men of 2013 " by Cosmopolitan . In August 2013 , Carlsen became an ambassador for Nordic Semiconductor . As of 2012 , Carlsen is the only active chess professional with a full-time manager . Espen Agdestein , brother of Carlsen 's former trainer Simen , and a FIDE Master and twice member of the Norwegian team at the Chess Olympiads , began working as an agent for Carlsen in late 2008 . His work consisted initially of finding sponsors and negotiating media contacts , but since 2011 , he has taken over management tasks formerly performed by Carlsen 's father Henrik . Carlsen reportedly earned roughly US $ 1.2 million in 2012 , the bulk of which was from sponsorships .

In October 2013 , Carlsen started his majority-owned company , Play Magnus AS . Based in Oslo , Norway , Play Magnus ' first product is an iOS app that allows a user to play a Magnus Carlsen-tuned chess engine at 21 different ages ( from ages 5 to 25 ) . The chess engine was created using a database of thousands of Carlsen 's recorded games from the age of 10 . Carlsen 's goal is to use Play Magnus as a platform to encourage more people to play chess . In 2008 during a Q & A session with Nettavisen , when Carlsen was asked whether he had a form of autism spectrum disorder , he replied " well , isn 't that obvious ? " In December 2013 , in an interview with Norwegian tabloid Verdens Gang , he clarified that he had meant " obviously not " , and said that he considers himself to have " normal social skills and to be functioning normally . " In February 2014 , Carlsen appeared in G-Star Raw 's Spring / Summer 2014 campaign along with actress and model Lily Cole .

Valaker , O ; Carlsen , M. ( 2004 ) . Lær sjakk med Magnus [ Learn Chess with Magnus ] . Gyldendal Norsk Forlag . ISBN 978-82-05-33963-7 . Opedal , Hallgeir ( 2011 ) . Smarte trekk . Magnus Carlsen : Verdens beste sjakkspiller [ Smart Moves . Magnus Carlsen : The World 's Best Chess Player ] . Kagge . ISBN 978-82-489-1050-3 Mikhalchishin , Adrian ; Stetsko , Oleg . ( 2012 ) . Fighting Chess with Magnus Carlsen ( Progress in Chess ) . Edition Olms . ISBN 978-3-283-01020-1 . Crouch , Colin ( 2013 ) . Magnus Force : How Carlsen Beat Kasparov 's Record . Everyman Chess . ISBN 978-1-78194-133-1 . Kotronias , Vassilios & Logothetis , Sotiris ( 2013 ) . Carlsen 's assault on the throne . Quality Chess . ISBN 978-1-906552-22-0 .

Louis Antoine Léon de Saint-Just ( French pronunciation : ​ [ sɛ ̃ ʒyst ] ; 25 August 1767 – 28 July 1794 ) was a military and political leader during the French Revolution . The youngest of the deputies elected to the National Convention in 1792 , Saint-Just rose quickly in their ranks and became a major leader of the government of the French First Republic . He spearheaded the movement to execute King Louis XVI and later drafted the radical French Constitution of 1793 . He became a close friend of Maximilien Robespierre , and served with him as one of the commissioners of the powerful Committee of Public Safety . Dispatched as a commissar to the army during its rocky start in the French Revolutionary Wars , Saint-Just imposed severe discipline , and he was credited by many for the army 's subsequent revival at the front . Back in Paris , he supervised the consolidation of Robespierre 's power through a ruthless and bloody program of intimidation . In his relatively brief time on the historical stage , he became the enduring public face of the Reign of Terror and was dubbed the " Angel of Death " by later writers . Saint-Just organized the arrests and prosecutions of many of the most famous figures of the Revolution .

Louis Antoine de Saint-Just was born at Decize in the former Nivernais province of central France . He was the eldest child of Louis Jean de Saint-Just de Richebourg ( 1716 – 1777 ) , a retired French cavalry officer , knight of the Order of Saint Louis , and of the 20-years younger Marie-Anne Robinot ( 1736 – 1811 ) , the daughter of a notary . He had two younger sisters , born in 1768 and 1769 . The family later moved north and in 1776 settled in the village of Blérancourt in the former Picardy province , establishing themselves as a countryside noble family living out of the rents from their land . A year after the move , Louis Antoine 's father died leaving his mother with the three children . She saved diligently for her only son 's education , and in 1779 he was sent to the Oratorian school at Soissons . After a promising start , Saint-Just acquired a reputation as a troublemaker , augmented by infamous stories ( almost certainly apocryphal ) of how he led a students ' rebellion and tried to burn down the school . Nonetheless , he earned his graduation in 1786 .

His restive nature , however , did not diminish . As a young man , Saint-Just was " wild , handsome , [ and ] transgressive " . Well-connected and popular , he showed a special affection toward a young woman of Blérancourt , Thérèse Gellé . She was the daughter of another wealthy notary , a powerful and autocratic figure in the town ; he was still an undistinguished adolescent . He is said to have proposed marriage to her ; she is said to have desired it . Though no hard evidence exists regarding their relationship , official records show that on 25 July 1786 , Thérèse was married to Emmanuel Thorin , the scion of a prominent local family . Saint-Just was out of town and unaware of the event , and tradition portrays him as brokenhearted . Whatever his true state , it is known that a few weeks after the marriage he abruptly left home for Paris – without an announcement , but not without gathering up a pair of pistols and a good quantity of his mother 's silver . His venture turned short when his mother had him seized by police and sent to a reformatory ( maison de correction ) where he stayed from September 1786 to March 1787 . Chastened , Saint-Just attempted to begin anew : he enrolled as a student at the School of Law , Reims University . After a year , however , he drifted away from law school and returned to his mother 's home in Blérancourt penniless , without any occupational prospects .

At a young age Saint-Just had shown a fascination with literature , and during his stay at the reformatory he used his time to begin writing a lengthy poem . He published it anonymously more than two years later , in May 1789 , at the very outbreak of the Revolution . The 21-year-old Saint-Just thereby added his own touch to the social tumult of the times with Organt , poem in twenty cantos . The poem , a medieval epic fantasy , relates the quest of young Antoine Organt . It extols the virtues of primitive man , praising his libertinism and independence while blaming all present-day troubles on modern inequalities of wealth and power . Written in a style mimicking Ariosto , it gave a juvenile foreshadowing of his own political extremism . Spiked with brutal satire and scandalous pornographic episodes , it also made unmistakable attacks upon the monarchy , the nobility , and the Church . Contemporaries regarded Organt as something of a salacious novelty and it was quickly banned , but censors who tried to confiscate it discovered that few copies were available anywhere . It did not sell well and resulted in a financial loss for its author . The public 's taste for literature had changed in the prelude to the Revolution , and Saint-Just 's taste changed with it : aside from a few pages of an unfinished novel found amidst his papers at the end of his life , Saint-Just devoted his future writing entirely to undecorated essays of social and political theory . With his previous ambitions of literary and lawyerly fame unfulfilled , Saint-Just directed his focus on the single goal of revolutionary command .

Blérancourt 's traditional power structure was reshaped by the events of 1789 . The notary Gellé , previously an undisputed town leader , was challenged by a group of reformists who were led by several of Saint-Just 's friends , including the husband of his sister Louise . Their attempts were not successful until 1790 when Blérancourt held its first open municipal elections . Mandated by the National Constituent Assembly , the new electoral structure allowed Saint-Just 's friends to assume authority in the village as mayor , secretary , and , in the case of his brother-in-law , head of the local National Guard . The jobless Saint-Just , despite not meeting the legal age and tax qualifications , was allowed to join the Guard . Saint-Just immediately exhibited the ruthless disciplinarianism for which he would be famous . Within a few months he was the commanding officer , at the rank of lieutenant-colonel . At local meetings he moved attendees with his patriotic zeal and flair : in one much-repeated story , Saint-Just brought the town council to tears by thrusting his hand into the flame of a burning anti-revolutionary pamphlet , swearing his devotion to the Republic . He had powerful allies when he sought to become a member of his district ’ s electoral assembly , and he initiated correspondence with well-known leaders of the Revolution like Camille Desmoulins . In late 1790 , he wrote to Robespierre for the first time , asking him to consider a local petition . The letter was filled with the highest of praise , beginning : “ You , who uphold our tottering country against the torrent of despotism and intrigue ; you whom I know , as I know God , only through his miracles ... ” Through their correspondence , the two developed " a deep and mysterious friendship that would last until the day [ they ] died . "

While Saint-Just waited for the next election , he composed an extensive work , L 'Esprit de la Revolution et de la constitution de France , published in the spring of 1791 . His writing style had shed all satire and now adopted the stern and moralizing tone of classical Romans so adored by French revolutionaries . It revealed an unexpectedly moderate set of principles deeply influenced by Montesquieu , and remained fully confined to a paradigm of constitutional monarchy . He expressed abhorrence at the violence in the Revolution thus far , and he disdained the character of those who partook in it as little more than " riotous slaves " . Instead , he heaped his praise upon the people 's representatives in the Legislative Assembly , whose sober virtue would guide the Revolution best . Spread out over five books , L 'Esprit de la Revolution is inconsistent in many of its assertions but still shows clearly that Saint-Just no longer saw government as oppressive to man 's nature but necessary to its success : its ultimate object was to " edge society in the direction of the distant ideal . " The new work , like its predecessor , attracted minimal readership . On 21 June 1791 , just days after it was published , all attention became focused on King Louis XVI 's ill-fated flight to Varennes , and Saint-Just 's theories about constitutional monarchy were made suddenly irrelevant . Yet the episode had another effect – it fostered a public anger toward the king which simmered all year until finally a Parisian mob attacked the Tuileries Palace on 10 August 1792 . In response , the Assembly declared itself ready to step down ahead of schedule and called for a new election , this one under universal male suffrage . The timing was excellent for Saint-Just , who turned the legal age of twenty-five before the end of the month . The fear inspired by the invasion of the Tuileries made most of his opponents retire from the scene , and Saint-Just was elected as one of the deputies for the département of Aisne . He left for Paris to join the National Convention as its youngest member .

Among the deputies , Saint-Just was watchful but interacted little at first . He joined the Parisian Jacobin Club but he remained aloof from Girondins and Montagnards alike . He waited until 13 November 1792 to give his first speech to the Convention , but when he did the effect was spectacular . What brought him to the lectern was the discussion over how to treat the king after Varennes . In dramatic contrast to the earlier speakers , Saint-Just delivered a blazing condemnation of the king . He demanded that " Louis Capet " should be judged not as a king or even a citizen , but as a traitor , an enemy who deserves death . " As for me , " he declared , " I see no middle ground : this man must reign or die ! He oppressed a free nation ; he declared himself its enemy ; he abused the laws : he must die to assure the repose of the people , since it was in his mind to crush the people to assure his own . ” The young deputy 's speech electrified the Convention . Saint-Just was interrupted frequently by bursts of applause and towards the end of his speech he uttered his eerily universal observation , " No one can reign innocently . " Robespierre was particularly impressed – he spoke from the lectern the next day in terms almost identical to those of Saint-Just , and their views became the official position of the Jacobins . By December , that position had become law : the king was taken to a trial before the Convention , sentenced to death , and executed by guillotine on 21 January 1793 .

Because the first French Constitution had included a role for the king , it was long since invalid and needed to be updated for the Republic . A large number of drafts had been circulating within the Convention since the king 's execution , and Saint-Just submitted his own lengthy proposal on 24 April 1793 . His draft incorporated the most common assertions of the others : the right to vote , the right to petition , and equal eligibility for employment were among the basic principles that made his draft tenable . Where he stood apart from the rest was on the issue of elections . Saint-Just dismissed all complex systems of voting and eligibility and supported only the classical style of a simple majority of citizens in a nationwide vote . Amid a flurry of proposals by other deputies , Saint-Just held inflexibly to his " one man one vote " plan , and this conspicuous homage to Greco-Roman traditions ( which were particularly prized and idealized in French culture during the Revolution ) enhanced his political cachet . When no plan gained enough votes to pass , a compromise was made which tasked a small body of deputies as official constitutional draftsmen , and Saint-Just was among the five elected members . In recognition of the importance of their mission , the draftsmen were all added to the powerful new Committee of Public Safety .

The Convention had given the Committee extraordinary authority to provide for state security ever since the outbreak of the French Revolutionary War in early 1793 . Committee members were originally intended to serve for periods of only thirty days before replacements were elected , so they needed to work quickly . Saint-Just took charge of the issue and led the development of the French Constitution of 1793 . Before the end of his first term , the new document was completed , submitted to the Convention , and ratified as law on 24 June 1793 . The new constitution remained a showpiece for Saint-Just but little more . However much he may have wanted to see it implemented , emergency measures for wartime were in effect . The war had called for ( or provided cover for ) a moratorium on constitutional democracy . It gave supreme power to the sitting Convention , with the Committee of Public Safety at the top of its administrative pyramid . Robespierre , with Saint-Just 's assistance , fought vigorously to ensure that the government would remain under emergency measures – " revolutionary " – until victory .

During the time that Saint-Just was working on the constitution , dramatic political warfare was taking place . The sans-culottes – deemed " the people " by many radicals , and represented by the Paris Commune – had grown antipathetic to the moderate Girondins and on 2 June 1793 , in a mass action supported by National Guardsmen , they surrounded the Convention and exacted the arrest of the Girondin deputies . The deputies – even the Montagnards , who had long enjoyed an informal alliance with the sans-culottes – resented the intimidation but they were compelled to make some obeisance . The Girondin leader Jacques Pierre Brissot was indicted for treason and scheduled for trial , but the other Brissotins were imprisoned ( or pursued ) without formal charges . The Convention debated their fate and the political disorder lasted for weeks . Saint-Just had previously remained silent about the Girondins , but now clearly stood with Robespierre who had been thoroughly opposed to most of them for a long time . When the initial indictment by the Committee was served , it was Saint-Just who delivered the report to the Convention . In its secret negotiations , the Committee of Public Safety was initially unable to form a consensus concerning the jailed deputies , but as some Girondins fled to the provinces and attempted to incite an insurrection , its opinion hardened . By early July , Saint-Just was able to address the Convention with a lengthy report in the name of the Committee , and his damning attack left no room for any further conciliation . The Girondins ' trials must proceed , he said , and any verdicts must be severe . The proceedings dragged on for months , but Brissot and twenty of his allies were eventually condemned and sent to the guillotine on 31 October 1793 . Saint-Just used their situation to gain approval for intimidating new laws , culminating in the Law of Suspects ( 17 September 1793 ) which gave the Committee vast new powers of arrest and punishment .

Saint-Just made the proposal that deputies from the Convention should directly oversee all military efforts , which was approved on 10 October 1793 . Amid worsening conditions at the front in the fall of that year , several deputies were sent to the critical area of Alsace to shore up the disintegrating Army of the Rhine . Results were not sufficiently forthcoming , so at the end of the month Saint-Just himself was sent there along with an ally from the Convention , Philippe-François-Joseph Le Bas . The two men were charged with " extraordinary powers " to impose discipline and reorganize the troops . From the start , Saint-Just dominated the mission . He was relentless in demanding results from the commanders as well as sympathetic to the complaints of common soldiers . On his first day at the front , he issued a proclamation promising " examples of justice and severity as the Army has not yet witnessed . " Within a short time , many officers were dismissed and many more were executed by firing squad , including at least one general . The entire army was placed immediately under the harshest discipline . Among soldiers and civilians alike , Saint-Just repressed opponents of the Revolution but he did not agree to the mass executions ordered by some of the other deputies on the mission . He vetoed much of the deputies ' work and had many of them recalled to Paris . Local politicians were even more vulnerable to him : even the powerful Eulogius Schneider , the revolutionary leader of Alsace 's largest city and called the " Marat of Strasbourg " , was arrested by Saint-Just 's orders and rapidly dispatched to the guillotine . Saint-Just worked closely only with General Charles Pichegru , a reliable Jacobin whom he respected . Under Saint-Just 's unblinking surveillance , Pichegru and General Lazare Hoche ably secured the frontier and began an invasion of the German Rhineland .

With the republican army advancing and the Girondins destroyed , the left-wing Montagnards , led by the Jacobins and Robespierre , controlled the Convention . In these circumstances , on the first day of Ventôse in Year II of the Revolution ( 19 February 1794 ) , Saint-Just was elected president of the National Convention . With this new power he persuaded the chamber to pass the radical Ventôse Decrees , under which the régime would confiscate aristocratic émigré property and distribute it to needy sans-culottes . But these acts of wealth redistribution , arguably the most revolutionary acts of the French Revolution , never went into operation . The Committee faltered in creating procedures for their enforcement , and the frantic pace of unfolding political events left them behind . Opponents of the Jacobins saw the Ventôse Decrees as a cynical ploy to appeal to the militant extreme left . Sincere or not , Saint-Just made impassioned arguments for them . One week after their adoption , Saint-Just urged that the Decrees be exercised vigorously , and hailed them for ushering in a new era : " Eliminate the poverty that dishonors a free state ; the property of patriots is sacred but the goods of conspirators are there for the wretched . The wretched are the powerful of the earth ; they have the right to speak as masters to the governments who neglect them . "

As the spring of 1794 approached , the Committee of Public Safety , led by Robespierre , Couthon , Lebas and Saint-Just , exercised near complete control over the government . Despite the vast reach of their powers , however , rivals and enemies remained . One of the thorniest problems , at least to Robespierre , came in the shape of the populist agitator Jacques Hébert , who discharged torrents of criticism against bourgeois Jacobinism in his newspaper , Le Père Duchesne . Ultra-radical Hébertists in the Cordeliers Club undermined Jacobin efforts to court and manage the sans-culottes , and the most extreme Hébertists even called openly for insurrection . Saint-Just , in his role as president of the Convention , announced unequivocally that " whoever vilified or attacked the dignity of the revolutionary government should be condemned to death " , and the Convention agreed in a vote on 13 Ventôse . Hébert and his closest associates were arrested the following day . Saint-Just vowed , " No more pity , no weakness towards the guilty ... Henceforth the government will pardon no more crimes , " and on 4 Germinal ( 24 March 1794 ) , the Revolutionary Tribunal sent Hébert , Ronsin , Vincent and most other prominent Hébertists to the guillotine .

The ongoing political combat – bloody enough since at least the time of the arrest of the Girondins to be known as the Reign of Terror – spread more and more widely . When the Hébertists fell , Robespierre felt compelled to eliminate his other rivals in the Cordeliers , starting with Fabre d 'Églantine and his close friend Georges Danton . These powerful deputies were difficult prey , but a financial scandal involving the French East India Company provided a " convenient pretext " . Robespierre again sent Saint-Just to the Convention to deliver a Committee " report " ( 31 March 1794 ) in which he announced the arrest of Danton and " the last partisans of royalism " . After a tumultuous show-trial , Fabre , Desmoulins , and other top supporters of Danton went to the scaffold with their leader on 16 Germinal ( 5 April 1794 ) . In his report , Saint-Just had promised that this would be a " final cleansing " of the Republic 's enemies . The violent removal of the Hébertists and Dantonists provided only a mirage of stability for Saint-Just and Robespierre . The deaths caused deep resentment and their absence only made it more difficult for the Jacobins to influence the dangerously unpredictable masses of sans-culottes . This lack of support in the street would prove fatal during the events of Thermidor .

As the deliverer of Committee reports , Saint-Just served as the public face of the Terror , and he became known widely as the " Angel of Death " . After the events of Germinal , Saint-Just intensified his control over the state-security apparatus . He created a new bureau of " general police " for the Committee of Public Safety which matched – and usurped – the powers that had been given officially to the Committee of General Security . Shortly after its establishment , however , administration of the new bureau passed to Robespierre when Saint-Just left Paris once more for the front lines .

Sent back on mission to the army in Belgium , Saint-Just again took supreme oversight of the Army of the North and contributed to the victory at Fleurus . This hotly contested battle on 26 June 1794 sent the Austrian army into retreat and marked the turning point in the War of the First Coalition . France would remain on the offensive until its eventual victory in 1797 . After his return from the battle , Saint-Just was treated as a hero and " cheered from all sides . " Back in Paris , Saint-Just discovered that Robespierre 's political position had degraded significantly . As the Terror reached its apogee – the so-called " Great Terror " – the danger of a counterstrike by his enemies became almost inevitable . Saint-Just , however , remained unshakable in his alliance with Robespierre . The French victory at Fleurus , and others which followed , reduced the need for national security during the war which had been predicated as a justification for the Terror . " The excuse for the Terror was at an end . " Opponents of the Terror used Saint-Just 's own words against him by demanding a full implementation of the constitution of 1793 .

With political combat reaching a fever pitch , the Committee introduced a bill to establish a newer version of the " Law of Suspects " – the Law of 22 Prairial . With it , a new category of " enemies of the people " was established in terms so vague that virtually anyone could be accused . Defendants were not permitted legal counsel and the Revolutionary Tribunal was instructed to impose no sentence other than death . The bill was swiftly shepherded into law by Robespierre , and although Saint-Just was not directly involved in its composition , he was certainly supportive . The new statutes defined the Great Terror : in their first month , the average of executions in Paris rose from five per day to seventeen , soaring in the following month to twenty-six . The Law of Prairial was the breaking point for opponents of Robespierre . Resistance to the Terror spread throughout the Convention , and Saint-Just was compelled to address the division . Barère and other Thermidorians have claimed that he proposed a dictatorship for Robespierre , but nonetheless some of them considered him to be redeemable , or at least useful – until he delivered his uncompromising public defence of Robespierre on 9 Thermidor ( 27 July 1794 ) .

On the dais , Saint-Just declared the absolute necessity of current law , and conspiring deputies buzzed angrily as he spoke . Finally several of them physically shoved him away from the lectern , and each started his own address in which they called for the removal of Robespierre and all his supporters . Amid the uproar , recalled Barras , Saint-Just " did not leave the platform , in spite of the interruptions which would have driven any one else away . He only came down a few steps , then mounted again , to continue his discourse proudly ... Motionless , unmoved , he seemed to defy everyone with his calm . " Saint-Just saved his dignity at the lectern but not his life . Rising in his support , Robespierre sputtered and lost his voice ; his brother Augustin , Philippe Lebas , and other key allies all tried to sway the deputies , but failed . The meeting ended with an order for their arrest . Saint-Just , still on the platform , remained unmoved and " looked on contemptuously " at the scene . His confidence seemed validated when troops from the Paris Commune under Hanriot arrived to liberate them , but within hours the entire group was confined to the Hôtel de Ville . When soldiers finally broke inside , a number of the defeated Jacobins tried to commit suicide ; Saint-Just stood beside Lebas who shot himself in the head . Any contemplation of his own suicide is unclear , but he alone emerged unruffled from the wild , violent final arrest – among the captured , " only St. Just , his hands bound but his head held high , was able to walk . " Robespierre , Saint-Just and twenty of their allies were guillotined the next day , and Saint-Just reputedly accepted his death with coolness and pride . At a last formality of identification , he gestured to a copy of the Constitution of 1793 and said , " I am the one who made that . "

Throughout his lifetime , Saint-Just continued to work on books and essays about the meaning of the Revolution , but he did not survive to see any of them published . They have been collected and edited in various Œuvres complètes . These include Organt , L 'Esprit de la Revolution , published speeches and legislative proposals , as well as military orders , notes , drafts , and private correspondence . Many of Saint-Just 's legislative proposals were compiled after his death to form an outline for a communal and egalitarian society – they were published as a single volume , Fragments sur les institutions républicaines . The proposals were far more radical than the constitution of 1793 , and identify closely with the legendarily fearsome traditions of ancient Sparta . Many of them are interpreted as proto-socialist precepts : the overarching theme is equality , which Saint-Just at one point summarizes as " Man must be independent ... There should be neither rich nor poor . "

Saint-Just also composed a lengthy draft of his own philosophical views , De la Nature , which remained hidden in obscurity until its transcription by Albert Soboul in 1951 . Soboul first published this work in 1951 under the title " Un manuscrit oublié de Saint-Just " in the Annales historiques de la révolution française , No. 124 . An expanded version is included in Alain Liénard 's Saint-Just , théorie politique and later versions of Œuvres complètes . De la Nature outlines Saint-Just 's ideas on the nature of society ; the actual date it was written is disputed , but the most agreed upon range is between 1791 and 1792 . Based on the assumption that man is a social animal , Saint-Just argues that in nature there is no need for contracts , legislation , or acts of force . These constructs only become necessary when a society is in need of moral regeneration and serve merely as unsatisfactory substitutes for the natural bonds of free people . Such constructs permit small groups to assume unwarranted powers which , according to Saint-Just , leads to corruption within society . Because a return to the natural state is impossible , Saint-Just argues for a government composed of the most educated members of society , who could be expected to share an understanding of the larger social good . Outside the government itself , Saint-Just asserts there must be full equality between all men , including equal security in material possessions and personal independence . Property must be protected by the state but , in order to secure universal independence , all citizens ( including women ) must own property .

Ambitious and active-minded , Saint-Just worked urgently and tirelessly towards his goals : " For Revolutionists there is no rest but in the tomb . " He was repeatedly described by contemporaries as arrogant , believing himself to be a skilled leader and orator as well as having proper revolutionary character . This self-assurance manifested itself in a superiority complex , and he always “ made it clear … that he considered himself to be in charge and that his will was law . ” Camille Desmoulins once wrote of Saint-Just , " He carries his head like a sacred host . " Saint-Just 's rise to power wrought a remarkable change in his personality . Freewheeling and passionate in his youth , Saint-Just quickly became focused , " tyrannical and pitilessly thorough . " He became " the ice-cold ideologist of republican purity , " " as inaccessible as stone to all the warm passions . " A measure of his change can be inferred from the experience of Thérèse Gellé , who is known to have left her husband and taken up residence in a Parisian neighborhood near Saint-Just in late 1793 . Saint-Just – who had already developed something of a relationship , tepid but potentially expedient , with the sister of his colleague Lebas – refused to see her . Gelle stayed there for over a year , returning to Blérancourt only after Saint-Just was dead . No record exists of any exchanges they might have had , but Saint-Just is known to have written to a friend complaining impatiently about the rumors connecting him to " citizen Thorin " .

In his public speaking , Saint-Just was even more daring and outspoken than his mentor Robespierre . Regarding France 's internal strife , he spared few : “ You have to punish not only the traitors , but even those who are indifferent ; you have to punish whoever is passive in the republic , and who does nothing for it . ” He thought the only way to create a true republic was to rid it of enemies , to enforce the “ complete destruction of its opposite . ” Regarding the war , he declared without regret to the Convention , “ The vessel of the Revolution can arrive in port only on a sea reddened with torrents of blood . ” He urged the deputies to embrace the notion that “ a nation generates itself only upon heaps of corpses . ” Despite his flaws , Saint-Just is often accorded respect for the strength of his convictions . Although his words and actions may be viewed as reprehensible , his commitment to them is rarely questioned : he was " implacable but sincere " . Like Robespierre , he was incorruptible in the sense that he exhibited no attraction to material benefits but devoted himself entirely to the advancement of a political agenda .

In Albert Camus 's The Rebel ( 1951 ) , Saint-Just is discussed extensively in the context of an analysis of rebellion and man 's progression towards enlightenment and freedom . Camus identifies Saint-Just 's successful argument for the execution of Louis XVI as the moment of death for monarchical divine right , a Nietzschean Twilight of the Idols . Saint-Just 's dedication to " the sovereignty of the people and the sacred power of laws " is described as " a source of absolutism " and indeed " the new God " . His kind of " deification of the political " is examined as the source of the creeping totalitarianism which grew so powerfully in Camus ' own lifetime .

Representations of Saint-Just include those found in the novel Stello ( 1832 ) by Alfred de Vigny , and in the plays Danton 's Death ( 1835 , by Georg Büchner ) and Poor Bitos ( Pauvre Bitos , ou Le dîner de têtes , 1956 , by Jean Anouilh ) . In film , Saint-Just has been portrayed by Abel Gance in Napoléon ( 1927 ) ; Jess Barker in Reign of Terror ( 1949 ) ; Bogusław Linda in Danton ( 1983 ) ; and Christopher Thompson in La Révolution française ( 1989 ) . Jean-Pierre Léaud plays a surreal caricature of Saint-Just in Jean-Luc Godard 's Week End ( 1967 ) . Saint-Just is the main character in the fantasy novel Light from Aphelion : Rising from Dust ( 2016 , by Martine Carlsson ) .

" Feeling This " is a song recorded by American rock band Blink-182 for their eponymously titled fifth studio album ( 2003 ) . The song was released as the lead single from Blink-182 on October 2 , 2003 through Geffen Records . It was written by guitarist Tom DeLonge , bassist Mark Hoppus , and drummer Travis Barker , and was produced and mixed by Jerry Finn . The song originated on the first day of producing the album . Its lyrics are purely sexual in nature ; the band attempted to juxtapose lust and passion between verses and choruses , thematically connected with a wistful , regretful tone . The song 's composition contains elements of spoken word in the verses and a Latin-inspired backbeat in the chorus , and the song ends in a melodic , harmonized duet split between DeLonge and Hoppus . Elements of the song were inspired by rock groups Led Zeppelin and the Beach Boys . The song 's music video , photographed by David LaChapelle , depicts a dystopian correctional facility that is overtaken by its inmates . An early version of the song , erroneously titled " Action " , was released on the soundtrack for the video game Madden NFL 2004 .

" Feeling This " was the first track that was recorded for Blink-182 in early 2003 . On the first day of pre-production on the album , bassist Mark Hoppus asked an engineer to explain Pro Tools to him , as it was the first time the band would record their music digitally . He began recording guitar and bass parts and experimenting with the software . When guitarist Tom DeLonge and drummer Travis Barker arrived , they too began adding new tracks to the project . The song was written in one day . " I think if I sit there and try to analyze everything , what would be cool here or there , I just feel like I get so far away from what I would do , and I think your gut instinct is usually the best thing , " said Barker at the time . The lyrics were written with Hoppus and DeLonge going into separate rooms — Hoppus writing the choruses and DeLonge writing the verses . The two had not spoken to each other about the lyrics ahead of time , and it turned out that the two had both written about sex . When put together , the song represents the lustful side of sex during the verses , the passionate side in the bridge and the romantic side in the chorus , creating a juxtaposition between both voices . It has been interpreted as a description for failed romance , one that " illustrates a scenario of lust , ambivalence and regret . " For Barker , the song 's drum track was " super in respect to John Bonham . [ ... ] We were kind of messing around with the verse . It ’ s like , ' Well , I want to do a four-bar drum intro and just see how it works for the song . ' And we never second-guessed it . We were like , ' That sounds rad . ' "

According to engineer Ryan Hewitt , the track contains " four distinct drum sounds created by old school tape editing . " The song was recorded " part-by-part , committing to different sounds by changing relative levels , EQ , and compression throughout , " and the engineers would slightly move microphones used to record Barker 's drum kit to tailor the natural ambience of the home it was recorded in . Upon playback of a rough mix of the song , the engineer automated the music to fade at the song 's conclusion , but mistakenly forgot to do the same for the vocal tracks . Hoppus , who had been listening to the Beach Boys at the time , liked the a cappella interplay of their voices . All agreed to keep it in the final version of the song .

The song is composed in the key of E major and is set in time signature of common time with a tempo of 173 beats per minute . The vocal range spans from E3 to B4 . " Feeling This " opens with flanged drums . Although computer technology offered it during the album ’ s production , according to Hoppus , the band opted to produce the effect " the old school way " , opting for two tape machines . Originally taking root as a faster-paced drum ' n ' bass-inspired track , Barker imitated that genre 's groove on open hi-hats . The influence of John Bonham is most explicit in the song 's first few seconds , in which Barker performs eighth-note triplets on his bass drum , much like the Led Zeppelin song " Good Times Bad Times " ( 1969 ) . Following a sample from Captain America ( 1990 ) — " Get ready for action ! — the song moves into a " stabbing guitar rhythm " over the verses , which are " half-barked " and contain delivery reminiscent of hip-hop . The " harmony-rich " chorus of the song , which contains the refrain " Fate fell short this time , smile fades in the summer / Place your hand in mine , I 'll leave when I wanna " , is replete with a " syncopated Latin-flavored backbeat . " In the chorus , Barker plays a cowbell , which he initially included as a joke , believing Hoppus and DeLonge would " hate it . "

The song is particularly memorable for a section of the chorus of the song ( right before the bridge begins ) , in which guitarist Tom DeLonge sings the vocals loudly and off-key . According to the liner notes for Blink-182 , DeLonge stated that the recording was done in a 30-foot-long ( 9.1 m ) living room at the home previously mentioned , with microphones 10 to 15 feet ( 3.0 to 4.6 m ) away . The end of the song is a melodic duet between the band 's two vocalists , both singing conflicting but harmonizing parts .

Blink-182 first performed " Feeling This " alongside other new songs from Blink-182 during their performances at the 2003 Reading and Leeds festivals . The band picked " Feeling This " as the first single because they felt it representative of the transition they had undergone since their fourth studio album , Take Off Your Pants and Jacket ( 2001 ) . A slightly different version of the song had been released previously as part of the soundtrack for the video game Madden NFL 2004 under the erroneous title " Action " . Barker explained in an interview that " ' Action ' just sounded kind of dorky to us . Like we would always call it ' Feeling This ' and then someone at our label , I think , like wrote it as ' Action ' one time and sent out singles to people . And it was always supposed to be ' Feeling This ' . " To promote Blink-182 , the group performed " Feeling This " , as well as their past hit " Dammit " on Total Request Live on November 11 , 2003 , and on the late-night talk show Jimmy Kimmel Live ! in November 26 , 2003 . Richard Cheese covered the song on their 2004 album I 'd Like a Virgin .

" Feeling This " debuted at number 40 on Billboard 's Modern Rock Tracks chart on October 18 , 2003 , jumping to number 13 in its second week , which was at that time the fourth-biggest move in the history of that chart . The song moved upwards on the chart over the following weeks , eventually achieving a peak of number two on November 29 , 2003 . It remained at number two for two more weeks before dropping to number three , after which it continued dropping before exiting the top 20 on February 21 , 2004 . In total , it spent nine weeks on the chart . It spent eight weeks on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles , which acts as an extension to the Billboard Hot 100 chart ; it peaked at number two on December 20 , 2003 . In the United Kingdom , " Feeling This " debuted at number 15 on the UK Singles Chart for the week ending date November 30 , 2003 . It dropped to number 35 the following week before exiting the chart on December 28 ; in all , it spent ten weeks on the chart .

" Feeling This " received favorable reviews from music critics . Kelefa Sanneh , writing for The New York Times felt the song was an " appealing hybrid , " while noting the growing popularity of emo could have influenced the " more anguished " tone . Greg Kot of Entertainment Weekly praised the vocal harmonies , calling them reminiscent of Queen . Joshua Klein of The Washington Post similarly complimented the interplay between DeLonge and Hoppus and its " multiple-perspective portrait of first love . " Andy Doerschuk of Drum ! praised Barker 's " fat , syncopated beat " and noted elements of Bonham as well as James Brown 's drummers . Rolling Stone 's Jenny Eliscu made note of its " catchy hooks " , while Stephen Thompson , writing for The A.V. Club , considered it among many songs on the album that were " straightforwardly conventional . "

The video follows students at a dystopian-based correctional facility who rebel and take over the establishment , intertwined with shots of the band performing outside the prison in a cage , providing a " soundtrack to the chaos . " Hoppus described their idea for the facility : " It 's kind of a combination of prep school and reform school , and it 's very repressed and kids are being held down . There is a lot of authority and a lot of strict regiment , and the kids lash out and take over the school and destroy the place . " The band 's main goal for the video was for it to resemble an art piece , much in the same way they viewed the production of the album , to keep in line with tone . To this end , they enlisted director David LaChapelle . LaChapelle 's input — which " ranges from an evil prison warden cracking a whip at marching school kids to escapees ripping their uniforms and doing acrobatic moves down the hallways " — was regarded by the band as " completely wacked out and twisted , which is exactly what we love . "

Scipione Piattoli ( Italian pronunciation : [ ʃiˈpjoːne ˈpjattoli ] ; November 10 , 1749 – April 12 , 1809 ) was an Italian Catholic priest — a Piarist — an educator , writer and political activist , and a major figure of the Enlightenment in Poland . After ten years as a professor at the University of Modena in Italy , he migrated to the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth , where he became associated with several magnate families — the Potockis , Lubomirskis and Czartoryskis . He was a member of the Duchess Dorothea von Medem 's court in Courland ( Lithuania ) and of King Stanisław August Poniatowski 's court in the Commonwealth . Piattoli was politically active in Warsaw during and after the Four-Year Sejm ( 1788 – 92 ) . He served as intermediary between the reformist Patriotic Party and King Stanisław August Poniatowski , and as an aide to the King ( 1789 – 93 ) . He is best remembered for his participation in drafting the Constitution of May 3 , 1791 , a milestone act in the history of Polish political legislation . He was one of the organizers of the Kościuszko Insurrection against Russian influence in 1794 , which was the last armed struggle to be held under the banners of the Commonwealth . After the Third Partition of Poland in 1795 , Piattoli was interned by the Austrians for several years , together with another Polish activist of the Constitution movement , Hugo Kołłątaj . Freed in 1800 , he worked several years with Polish and Russian statesman Prince Adam Jerzy Czartoryski in the service of Russia , before retiring to Courland .

Scipione Piattoli was born in Florence on November 10 , 1749 , to a family of painters ( father , Gaetano Piattoli ; mother , Maria Anna Bacherini ; brother , Giuseppe Piattoli ) . In 1763 he joined the Piarist order , taking the name Urban . Some historians have questioned whether he ever took Holy Orders ; in any case he was known for a rather secular lifestyle . He taught rhetoric in Piarist schools in Messa and Corregio , and got his doctorate from the University of Florence . From 1772 to 1782 he was a professor at the University of Modena , teaching religious history and Greek . Soon he became involved in political activism , and in 1774 he published ( anonymously ) a brochure titled Saggio intorno al luogo del seppellire , which focused on the issue of hygiene and burials near churches . Also in 1774 he received permission to leave the Piarists , and resumed using the name Scipione . He would , however , keep and use the title of " the priest " ( l 'abbé ) for most of his life . By the turn of the decade , Piattoli found himself in a faction that was losing in the politics of Modena , and decided to move , giving up his professorship in 1782 .

Piattoli arrived in the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth that year , as a tutor for the sons of Piotr Potocki , a member of the magnate Potocki family . It was said in a contemporary account that his entire material wealth at that time was composed of a “ sizable library ” . Piattoli ended his service with the Potocki family around 1784 due to personal disagreements with Pelagia Potocka and Maria Radziwiłł . In the meantime , he became associated with the Lubomirski family — Izabela Lubomirska in particular — and through them befriended Stanisław Kostka Potocki and Grzegorz Piramowicz . Through Potocki and Piramowicz he became a member of the Society for Elementary Books in 1784 . In the Society he was tasked with writing a textbook on the history of science . Around that time he was also active in Warsaw freemasonry . Piattoli traveled through Europe in the retinue of the Lubomirski family , including Izabela , and as a tutor of young Henryk Lubomirski . During that time he developed extensive contacts at various European courts in Courland , Austria ( Vienna ) , Italy ( Turin ) and France ( Paris ) . During his three-year stay in the Lubomirskis ' Parisian residence , he was in touch with many important men of the Age of Enlightenment . He met — often through another Florentinian , Filippo Mazzei — Johann Wolfgang von Goethe , Thomas Jefferson , the Marquis de Lafayette , Luigi Landriani , Girolamo Lucchesini , and the Marquis de Condorcet . He also corresponded with J. G. Herder . In Poland , he developed close contacts with Ignacy Potocki and Julian Ursyn Niemcewicza . From 1787 he also tutored Adam Jerzy Czartoryski , later an important politician in the Russian Empire , on whom Piattoli would retain significant influence .

Piattoli developed contacts with notable figures on the Polish political scene , initially from the group opposed to the royal faction . By the end of his stay in Paris , he likely became a supporter of reforms in France and Poland , and begun taking his first serious steps in political activism , through the involvement in the Quattuowirat , a group of magnates planning a ( never realized ) confederacy . He became a foreign member of the Société des Amis des Noirs . Through his freemason contacts with Pierre Maurice Glayre , Piattoli won the confidence of Poland 's King Stanisław August Poniatowski , becoming his agent in Paris and , by the end of 1789 , his private secretary and librarian , although without any official title . Acting as a sort of cultural aide , Piattoli , who had strong ties to the reformist and often anti-royal opposition , became an important link between the reformers — Ignacy Potocki in particular — and the king . In the words of a Swedish diplomat , L. Engstrom , he was “ like a tireless spring ” , constantly mediating between the two factions . Due to his association with the reformers , in conservative Rome he became infamous as a staunch supporter of revolutionary ideals and was accused of " democratism " . Vatican diplomats criticized the king for hiring such a " revolutionary " , but the king defended Piattoli quite vividly . In any case , many such claims were exaggerations or rumours spread by his political enemies : according to one such rumour , Piattoli was alleged to incite crowds in France to kill the king . In reality , Piattoli supported the Monarchiens of the French Revolution 's early stages , but more in the direction of peaceful transformation into a constitutional republic than the regicidal excesses .

Between 1790 and 1792 , Piattoli was sent on several sensitive diplomatic missions for the king to Berlin and other places . He was involved in the negotiations of the Polish-Prussian alliance . He collaborated with Ignacy Potocki , helping draft many texts connected with Potocki 's work in the Sejm , the legislature of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth . He was also an active supporter of Poniatowski 's plan for a hereditary succession . Piattoli , as Poniatowski 's secretary and a resident of the Royal Castle in Warsaw , has been credited with winning the King over to the idea of social reforms and with playing a part in the drafting of the Constitution of May 3 , 1791 . The exact nature of Piattoli 's role in regard to the Constitution remains uncertain ; modern historians disagree to what degree he was an executor , a mediator , or an initiator . He played a role in convincing the King to collaborate with the leaders of the Patriotic Party on drafting a constitution . He might have prepared or expanded drafts of the document , based on discussions among the principal authors , including the King , Hugo Kołłątaj ( another politically active Roman Catholic priest ) and Ignacy Potocki . At a minimum , he seems to have helped catalyze the process . Historian Emanuel Rostworowski describes him as a vital secretary-editor , who certainly participated in related discussions and influenced both Potocki and the king , and calls Piattoli 's quarters in the Royal Palace a “ creche ” of the constitution . Piattoli was , finally , involved in the final preparations for the vote that took place during the Sejm session on May 3 .

During the War in Defence of the Constitution in 1792 , Piattoli found himself on another diplomatic mission to Dresden , where he stayed after the Commonwealth 's defeat at the hands of Imperial Russia resulted in the Second Partition of Poland . In Dresden and nearby Leipzig , Piattoli was active in the circles of Polish patriotic emigres , who included Potocki and Kolłątaj . In 1793 he officially parted ways with Poniatowski , receiving a letter in which he was discharged from his service . In 1794 he was involved in the preparations for the Kościuszko Insurrection against Russian influence , and in negotiations with the newly republican France , in which Polish reformists proposed an alliance with France , promising to turn Poland into a second republic in Europe . At the same time , he was involved in much more conservative negotiations with Russians . In July 1794 he and several other activists were exiled from Leipzig , and Piattoli was soon arrested by the Austrian authorities . After the failure of the Kościuszko Insurrection later in 1794 , many prisoners were set free , but Piattoli was kept imprisoned , together with Kołłątaj , as the Russian authorities insisted that the two were “ extremely dangerous ” . Hence , even after the final Partitions of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth in 1795 , Piattoli was kept interned in Prague by the Austrian Empire authorities until 1800 , despite requests for his release from Poniatowski and even Napoleon Bonaparte . His release in 1800 seems to have been the result of efforts of the Czartoryski family and Duchess Dorothea .

After his release he returned to Dorothea 's Courland court , where he served as a tutor for her daughter . Around 1803 he began cooperating with Adam Jerzy Czartoryski , who was now working for the Russian authorities . Around that time , he and Czartoryski authored a plan for a European federal organization of states intended to prevent armed conflicts and to maintain perpetual peace . Piattoli , through Czartoryski , briefly worked in the diplomatic service and administration of the Russians , too . Like Czartoryski , Piattoli tried to push for a more lenient and friendly attitude towards Poland at the Russian court , but with little success . In 1807 Scipione Piattoli returned to Courland . There he finally settled , abandoned the priesthood , and married one of the ladies of the court . In his final years in Courland he was involved with Courland 's educational system , and hoped to pursue some scientific studies , a lifelong dream for which he never found enough time . He died of a lung infection in Altenburg on April 12 , 1809 . He was buried in a park in Löbichau .

General of the Army Raden Soedirman ( Perfected Spelling : Sudirman ; 24 January 1916 – 29 January 1950 ) was a high-ranking Indonesian military officer during the Indonesian National Revolution . The first commander-in-chief of the Indonesian Armed Forces , he continues to be widely respected in the country . Born in Purbalingga , Dutch East Indies , Sudirman moved to Cilacap in 1916 and was raised by his uncle . A diligent student at a Muhammadiyah-run school , he became respected within the community for his devotion to Islam . After dropping out of teacher 's college , in 1936 he began working as a teacher , and later headmaster , at a Muhammadiyah-run elementary school . After the Japanese occupied the Indies in 1942 , Sudirman continued to teach , before joining the Japanese-sponsored Defenders of the Homeland as a battalion commander in Banyumas in 1944 . In this position he put down a rebellion by his fellow soldiers , but was later interned in Bogor . After Indonesia proclaimed its independence on 17 August 1945 , Sudirman led a break-out then went to Jakarta to meet President Sukarno . Tasked with overseeing the surrender of Japanese soldiers in Banyumas , he established a division of the People 's Safety Body there . On 12 November 1945 , at an election to decide the military 's commander-in-chief in Yogyakarta , Sudirman was chosen over Oerip Soemohardjo in a close vote . While waiting to be confirmed , Sudirman ordered an assault on British and Dutch forces in Ambarawa . The ensuing battle and British withdrawal strengthened Sudirman 's popular support , and he was ultimately confirmed on 18 December .

During the following three years Sudirman saw negotiations with the returning Dutch colonial forces fail , first after the Linggadjati Agreement – which Sudirman participated in drafting – and then the Renville Agreement ; he was also faced with internal dissent , including a 1948 coup d 'état attempt . He later blamed these issues for his tuberculosis , which led to his right lung being collapsed in November 1948 . On 19 December 1948 , several days after Sudirman 's release from the hospital , the Dutch launched an assault on the capital . Sudirman and a small contingent escaped Dutch forces and left the city , making their headquarters at Sobo , near Mount Lawu . There Sudirman commanded military activities throughout Java , including a show of force in Yogyakarta on 1 March 1949 . When the Dutch began withdrawing , in July 1949 Sudirman was recalled to Yogyakarta and forbidden to fight further . In late 1949 Sudirman 's tuberculosis relapsed , and he retired to Magelang , where he died slightly more than a month after the Dutch recognised Indonesia 's independence . He is buried at Semaki Heroes ' Cemetery in Yogyakarta . Sudirman 's death was grieved throughout Indonesia , with flags flown at half-mast and thousands gathering to see his funeral convoy and procession . He continues to be highly respected in Indonesia . His guerrilla campaign has been credited with developing the army 's esprit de corps , and the 100-kilometre ( 62 mi ) long route he took must be followed by Indonesian cadets before graduation . Sudirman featured prominently on the 1968 series of rupiah banknotes , and has numerous streets , museums , and monuments named after him . On 10 December 1964 he was declared a National Hero of Indonesia .

Sudirman was born to Karsid Kartawiraji ( father ) and Siyem while they lived with Siyem 's sister Tarsem , one of three women married to the sub-district head Raden Cokrosunaryo , in Rembang , Bodas Karangjati , Purbalingga , Dutch East Indies . According to the family 's records , Sudirman – named by his uncle – was born on a pon Sunday in the month of Maulud in the Javanese calendar ; the Indonesian government later established 24 January 1916 as Sudirman 's birthday . As Cokrosunaryo was in a better financial situation , he adopted Sudirman and gave him the title Raden , reserved for Javanese nobility ; however , Sudirman was not told that Cokrosunaryo was not his birth father until he was eighteen . When Cokrosunaryo retired from his position as chief in late 1916 , Sudirman went with the family to Manggisan , Cilacap , where he was raised . In Cilacap Karsid and Siyem had another son , Muhammad Samingan . Karsid died when Sudirman was six , at which time Siyem left the boys with her brother-in-law and went back to her village at Parakan Onje , Ajibarang . Sudirman was raised with stories of heroic deeds and taught the etiquette and ways of the priyayi , or noble caste , as well as the work ethic and simplicity of the wong cilik , or commoners . For his religious education , he studied Islam under Kyai Hajji Qahar with his brother ; Sudirman was a religious child , and always prayed on time . He was soon entrusted with performing both the adhan and iqama , or calls to prayer . When he was seven years old , Sudirman was enrolled at a school for natives ( hollandsch inlandsche school ) , where he was an average student . The family , although it had enough to live by , was not rich . During his tenure as sub-district head , Cokrosunaryo had not accumulated much wealth , and in Cilacap he became a distributor of Singer sewing machines .

In his fifth year of school , Sudirman asked to leave his studies , concerned with the ridicule he faced at the government-run school ; this request was at first refused , but Sudirman was transferred to a junior high school run by Taman Siswa in his seventh year of school . In his eighth year , Sudirman transferred to Wirotomo Junior High School after the Taman Siswa School was found to be unregistered and closed under the Wild School Ordinance . Many of Sudirman 's teachers at Wirotomo were Indonesian nationalists , which influenced his views of the Dutch colonists . Sudirman studied diligently at school ; his teacher Suwarjo Tirtosupono later recalled that Sudirman would already be studying second-term lessons while the class was still in term one . Although he performed poorly in Javanese calligraphy , Sudirman was strong in mathematics , science , and writing in both Dutch and Indonesian . Sudirman also became more religious under the guidance of his teacher Raden Mohamad Kholil ; his classmates named him " hajji " because of his devotion to his prayers , and Sudirman took up preaching to other students . Aside from his studies and religious activities , Sudirman also served in the school 's musical troupe and on the football team , on which he was a defender . Although Cokrosunaryo 's death in 1934 left the family poor , Sudirman was allowed to continue his studies without paying until he graduated later that year ; after his step-father 's death , Sudirman also devoted more time to studying the Sunnah and prayer . By age 19 , Sudirman had become a pupil teacher at Wirotomo .

While at Wirotomo Sudirman was a member of the Wirotomo Student Union , drama club , and band . He helped establish a branch of the Hizboel Wathan , an organisation similar to the Boy Scouts , which was run by the Islamic establishment Muhammadiyah . Sudirman became the leader of the Cilacap division after graduating from Wirotomo ; he was tasked with deciding and planning his groups ' activities . He emphasised the need for religious studies , insisting that the contingents from Cilacap attend Muhammadiyah conferences throughout Java . He taught the younger members about the history of Islam and the importance of morality , while with older members he enforced near-military discipline .

After graduating from Wirotomo , Sudirman spent a year at a Muhammadiyah-run teacher 's college in Surakarta , but later dropped out owing to a lack of funds . In 1936 he returned to Cilacap to teach at a Muhammadiyah-run elementary school , having been trained by his teachers at Wirotomo ; that year he married Alfiah , a former schoolmate and the daughter of the rich batik merchant Raden Sastroatmojo . After the marriage Sudirman lived at his father-in-law 's house in Cilacap so he could save money for his own home . The couple went on to have three sons , Ahmad Tidarwono , Muhammad Teguh Bambang Tjahjadi , and Taufik Effendi , and four daughters , Didi Praptiastuti , Didi Sutjiati , Didi Pudjiati , and Titi Wahjuti Satyaningrum . As a teacher , Sudirman taught his students lessons on morality using examples from the lives of the prophets and traditional wayang stories . One of his students later recalled that Sudirman was an even-handed and patient teacher who would mix humour and nationalism in his lessons ; this made him popular with the students . A hard-working teacher despite poor pay , within several years Sudirman had become headmaster despite not having a teacher 's certificate . As a result , his monthly wages quadrupled from three gulden to twelve and a half . As headmaster , Sudirman worked on numerous administrative duties , including finding middle ground between feuding teachers . A coworker later recalled that Sudirman was a moderate , democratic leader . He was also active in fundraising , both for the needs of his school and the construction of others .

During this time Sudirman also continued to serve as a member of the Muhammadiyah Youth Group . Within the group he was known as a keen negotiator and mediator , working to resolve issues between members ; he also preached at the local mosque . He was elected as Chair of the Banyumas District of the Muhammadiyah Youth Group at the end of 1937 . In this role he enacted policies facilitating members ' studies and activities , both religious and secular . He was later put in charge of Youth Group activities throughout Central Java and spent much of his free time travelling and preaching Islam , putting an emphasis on self-awareness . Alfiah was also active in Muhammadiyah-sponsored activities through the group 's branch for women , Nasyiatul Aisyiyah .

When World War II broke out in Europe , it was expected that the Japanese , who had already made aggressive moves against mainland China , would try to invade the Indies . In response , the Dutch colonial government – which had previously limited military training for native Indonesians – began teaching the populace how to deal with air raids . To co-ordinate the preparations , the Dutch formed Air Raid Preparation teams . Sudirman , respected in the community , was asked to lead the Cilacap chapter . Aside from teaching local citizens the safety procedures for dealing with an air raid , Sudirman established watchposts throughout the area . He and the Dutch would also have passing aircraft drop materials to simulate a bombing run ; this was intended to improve response time . After the Japanese began occupying the Indies in early 1942 , winning several battles against Dutch and Dutch-trained forces of the Royal Netherlands East Indies Army ( Koninklijk Nederlands Indisch Leger , or KNIL ) , on 9 March 1942 Governor-General Tjarda van Starkenborgh Stachouwer and head of the KNIL General Hein ter Poorten capitulated . This brought drastic changes in the governance of the archipelago and reduced the quality of life for non-Japanese in the Indies , many of whom suffered from widespread human rights violations at the hands of the Japanese . In Cilacap , Sudirman 's school had been closed and turned into a military outpost ; this was part of a widespread effort to close private schools . After Sudirman convinced the Japanese to reopen the school , he and the other teachers were forced to use substandard supplies . Sudirman was also involved in several social and humanitarian organisations during this period , including as chair of the Indonesian People 's Cooperation . This brought him greater recognition among the people of Cilacap .

In early 1944 , after a year as a representative at the Japanese-run regency council board ( Syu Sangikai ) , Sudirman was asked to join the Defenders of the Homeland ( Pembela Tanah Air , or PETA ) ; the Japanese occupation government had established PETA in October 1943 to help repel any Allied invasion , and were focused on recruiting younger men , those who had " not yet been ' contaminated ' " by Dutch rule . After a few days of hesitance , caused in part by a knee injury he had occurred as a youth , Sudirman agreed to begin training in Bogor . Owing to his standing in the community , Sudirman was made a commander ( daidanco ) and trained with other persons of that rank . Trained by Japanese officers and soldiers , the cadets were armed with confiscated Dutch equipment . After four months of training Sudirman was put in charge of the battalion stationed at Kroya , Banyumas , Central Java , not far from Cilacap . Sudirman 's time as a PETA commander passed uneventfully until 21 April 1945 , when PETA troops under the command of Kusaeri began to rebel against the Japanese . Ordered to stop the rebellion , Sudirman agreed to do so only if the PETA rebels would not be harmed , and places harbouring them not razed ; this condition was accepted by the Japanese commander , and Sudirman and his troops began searching for the rebels . Although Kusaeri 's men initially shot at the commander , after Sudirman used a loudspeaker to tell them they would not be harmed , they backed down . Kusaeri surrendered on 25 April . This garnered support for Sudirman within the occupation forces , although several high-ranking Japanese officers expressed concern over Sudirman 's support for Indonesian independence . Sudirman and his men were soon sent to a camp in Bogor , ostensibly for training ; however , they were tasked with hard labour as a way to prevent a further uprising , and rumours circulated that the PETA officers would be killed .

After news of the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki reached the Indies in early August 1945 , followed by the proclamation of Indonesian independence on 17 August , it was evident that Japanese control was weakening . Sudirman led a break out from the camp in Bogor . Although his fellow internees wanted to attack the Japanese soldiers , Sudirman convinced them against it . After ordering the others to their hometowns , Sudirman made his way to Jakarta and met with President Sukarno , who asked him to lead resistance against Japanese forces in the city . Unfamiliar with Jakarta , Sudirman refused , instead offering to lead forces in Kroya . He left for his former command on 19 August 1945 . At the same time , Allied forces were in the process of retaking the Indonesian archipelago for the Netherlands . The first British forces arrived on 8 September 1945 . In late August , Sukarno established the People 's Safety Body ( Badan Keamanan Rakjat , or BKR ) , which united troops from the former PETA , Heihō , and KNIL . The BKR served mostly as a police organisation , partly because the political leadership were intent on using diplomacy to garner international recognition of the new country and partly to avoid appearing overly aggressive to the Japanese forces still in the archipelago . Sudirman and several of his fellow PETA soldiers formed a BKR branch in Banyumas in late August , after stopping at Kroya and discovering that his battalion had been disbanded . In a meeting with the Japanese commander for the region , Saburo Tamura , and the resident of Banyumas , Iwashige , Sudirman and Iskak Cokroadisuryo forced the Japanese to surrender and hand over their weapons while a crowd of armed Indonesians encircled the Japanese camp . Many of these weapons were later used by Sudirman 's BKR unit , making it one of the best equipped in the country ; surplus weapons were distributed to other battalions .

As the newly independent nation did not yet have a professional military , on 5 October 1945 Sukarno passed a decree establishing the People 's Security Army ( Tentara Keamaanan Rakjat or TKR , now known as the Tentara Nasional Indonesia ) . Most officers were former KNIL officers , while rank-and-file soldiers were mostly PETA and Heihō . As the decreed Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces , Soeprijadi , failed to come forward , chief of staff Lieutenant General Oerip Soemohardjo served as an interim leader . That October British-led forces , tasked with disarming Japanese troops and repatriating Dutch prisoners of war , arrived in Semarang , then made their way south to Magelang . When the British began rearming repatriated Dutch prisoners and seemed to be preparing a military base in Magelang , Sudirman – now a colonel – sent some of his troops under Lieutenant Colonel Isdiman to drive them away ; the mission was successful , and the European soldiers withdrew to Ambarawa , midway between Magelang and Semarang . On 20 October Sudirman was put in command of the Fifth Division , after Oerip began dividing Java into different military commands . On 12 November 1945 , at the first general meeting of Army leadership , Sudirman was elected leader of the Army following two deadlocked votes . In the third round , Oerip had 21 votes to Sudirman 's 22 ; the division commanders from Sumatra voted unanimously for Sudirman and swayed the ballot in his favour . Sudirman , aged 29 at the time , was surprised at his selection and offered to relinquish the leadership position to Oerip , but the meeting did not allow it . Oerip himself , who had lost control of the meeting prior to the vote , was glad to no longer be in charge of the entire Army . Sudirman kept Oerip to serve as chief of staff under him . In accordance with his new role , Sudirman was promoted to general . After the meeting , Sudirman returned to Banyumas to await confirmation as leader of the TKR and began developing strategies on how repel Allied advances . The Indonesians feared that the Dutch , through the Netherlands Indies Civil Administration ( Nederlandsch Indië Civil Administratie , or NICA ) , would attempt to retake the archipelago ; soldiers of the Dutch-British alliance had landed in Java in September , and a large battle had occurred in Surabaya during late October and early November . This instability , as well as Sukarno 's uncertainty about Sudirman 's qualifications , led to a delay in Sudirman 's confirmation .

While waiting for his appointment to be confirmed , in late November Sudirman ordered the Fifth Division to attack Allied forces stationed in Ambarawa , once again with Isdiman in charge ; the city was considered strategically important owing to its military barracks and training facilities dating from the colonial period . This assault was countered by an air strike and the use of tanks , which forced the division to retreat ; Isdiman died in the battle , killed by a strafing P-51 Mustang Sudirman then led the Division in another assault against Allied forces ; the Indonesian troops were armed with a variety of weapons , ranging from bamboo spears and confiscated katanas to rifles , while the British were armed with modern equipment . Sudirman led from the front , wielding a katana . The Allies , whose air support had been cut off when guerrilla soldiers attacked Kalibanteng Airfield in Semarang , were forced onto the defensive and holed up in Willem Fortress . On 12 December Sudirman led a four-day siege , which resulted in the Allied force withdrawing to Semarang . The Battle of Ambarawa brought Sudirman greater attention at a national level , and generally silenced whispers that he was unfit for military command because of his lack of military experience and previous employment as a schoolteacher . Ultimately , Sudirman was chosen as his loyalty was undoubted , while Oerip 's former pledge of loyalty to the Dutch led to him being viewed with suspicion . Sudirman was confirmed as commander-in-chief on 18 December 1945 . He was replaced as head of the Fifth Division by Colonel Sutiro , and began to focus on strategic problems . This was done partly by establishing a board of advisors , which gave the general advice on both political and military issues . Oerip handled many of the military matters .

Together , Sudirman and Oerip were able to reduce the differences and mistrust between former KNIL and PETA troops , although some troops were reluctant to be subordinated to a central command , instead choosing to follow their popularly-selected battalion commanders . The government renamed the Army twice in January 1946 , first to the Peoples ' Salvation Army ( Tentara Keselamatan Rakjat ) , then to the Army of the Republic of Indonesia ( Tentara Repoeblik Indonesia , or TRI ) . This was followed by the formal establishment of a navy and air force in early 1946 . In the meantime , the Indonesian government had moved from Jakarta – now under Dutch control – to Yogyakarta in January ; delegates led by Prime Minister Sutan Sjahrir spent much of April and May unsuccessfully negotiating for Dutch recognition of Indonesian sovereignty . On 25 May Sudirman was reconfirmed as commander-in-chief of the expanded military , after its reorganisation . At the ceremony , Sudirman swore to protect the republic " until he shed his last drop of blood . " The leftist Minister of Defence Amir Sjarifuddin , who had received greater power in the reorganisation , began collecting socialist and communist troops under his direct control , as well as leftist paramilitary units ( laskar ) that were funded by and loyal to the various political parties . The minister instituted political education programmes in the army , which were meant to spread leftist ideology . This use of the military for political manoeverings disappointed both Sudirman and Oerip , who were at the time busy ensuring equal treatment for soldiers from different military backgrounds . However , rumours among the populace had spread that Sudirman was preparing for a coup d 'état ; although an attempt did occur in early July 1946 , Sudirman 's role , if any , is not certain . In July Sudirman addressed these rumours through a speech broadcast on Radio Republik Indonesia ( RRI ) , stating that he , like all Indonesians , was a servant of the State , and that , if he were offered the presidency , he would refuse it . In his later career he stated that the military had no place in politics , and vice versa .

Meanwhile , Sjahrir continued to work on negotiations with the Allied forces . On 7 October 1946 , Sjahrir and the former Dutch Prime Minister , Wim Schermerhorn , agreed to work towards a ceasefire . The discussions were to be moderated by the British diplomat Lord Killearn and involved Sudirman . He took a specially commissioned train to Jakarta , departing on 20 October . However , he ordered it to return to Yogyakarta when Dutch troops refused to allow him and his men to enter the city with their weapons , feeling that such an order violated his sense of honour ; the Dutch apologised , construing the events as a misunderstanding . Sudirman took another train in late October , arriving at Gambir Station in Jakarta on 1 November , where he was greeted by large crowds . The discussions in Jakarta resulted in the drafting of the Linggadjati Agreement on 15 November ; the agreement was ratified on 25 March 1947 , despite heavy opposition from Indonesian nationalists . Sudirman was vocally against the agreement , which he found to be detrimental to Indonesian interests , but considered himself obliged to follow his orders . In early 1947 , with the Linggadjati Agreement granting relative peace , Sudirman began work on consolidating the TKR with various laskar . As part of a committee , Sudirman began reorganising the military ; they reached an agreement in May 1947 , and on 3 June 1947 the Indonesian National Armed Forces ( Tentara Nasional Indonesia , or TNI ) was formalised ; it consisted of TKR forces and various laskar groups , which Sudirman had included only after realising the extent of their manipulation by the political parties . However , the ceasefire obtained through the Linggadjati Agreement was not long lasting . On 21 July 1947 the Dutch forces – which had occupied areas left by the British during their withdrawal – launched Operation Product , and quickly gained control of large swaths of Java and Sumatra ; the national government in Yogyakarta remained untouched . Sudirman called the army to fight , using the code " Ibu Pertiwi is calling ! Ibu Pertiwi is calling ! " , and later delivered several speeches over RRI in an unsuccessful attempt to encourage soldiers to fight against the Dutch . However , the Indonesian soldiers were unprepared and their lines crumbled quickly .

Pressured by the United Nations , which had looked at the situation in the former East Indies with disdain , on 29 August 1947 the Dutch established the Van Mook Line , which divided Dutch and Indonesian-controlled areas . Along this line a ceasefire was called . Sudirman recalled the Indonesian guerrillas hiding in Dutch-held lands , ordering them to return to Indonesian-held areas . To keep their spirits up , he referred to the withdrawal as a hijrah , reminiscent of Muhammad 's migration to Medina in 622 AD , implying that they would return . Over 35,000 troops left western Java at this order , travelling to Yogyakarta by train and ship . This boundary was formalised by the Renville Agreement on 17 January 1948 ; among the signatories was Amir Sjarifuddin , by then also serving as prime minister . Meanwhile , Sjarifuddin began rationalising the army , cutting back on the number of troops . At the time the regular army consisted of 350,000 men , with a further 470,000 in the laskar . In this programme , by presidential decree Sudirman was no longer commander-in-chief of the military starting on 2 January 1948 . He was demoted to lieutenant general , while Chief of the Air Force Soerjadi Soerjadarma was intended to be commander-in-chief . Shortly afterwards , Sjarifuddin was ousted in a vote of no confidence for his involvement in the Renville Agreement , and the new prime minister , Mohammad Hatta , worked to implement the rationalisation programme . This led to a several months-long debate between pro- and anti-rationalisation groups . Sudirman served as a rallying point and driving force for soldiers , including numerous older commanders , who were against the programme . Sudirman was formally reinstated on 1 June 1946 , upon which he effectively rescinded the command to rationalise . He chose Colonel Abdul Haris Nasution as his deputy , but remained a lieutenant general .

As the rationalisation programme was winding down , Sjarifuddin began gathering soldiers from the Socialist Party , Communist Party , and members of the All Indonesia Centre of Labour Organizations for a would-be proletarian revolution in Madiun , East Java , which occurred on 18 September 1948 . Sudirman , ill at the time , sent Nasution to deal with the revolution ; Sudirman also sent two other officers as peace feelers before the attacks . Although the revolutionary leader Muso was amenable to peace , Nasution and his soldiers had quashed the uprising by 30 September . Sudirman visited Madiun not long after the battle , later telling his wife that he had been unable to sleep there for all the bloodshed . This rebellion , and ongoing political instability , sapped Sudirman of much of his remaining strength . On 5 October 1948 , after celebrations of the military 's third anniversary , Sudirman collapsed . After being examined by numerous doctors , he was diagnosed with tuberculosis . At the end of the month he was brought to Panti Rapih Hospital and had his right lung collapsed , in hope that it would stop the spread of the disease . During his time at the hospital , he delegated most of his duties to Nasution . However , the two continued to discuss plans for the war against the Dutch , and Sudirman continued to receive status reports . They agreed that guerrilla warfare , which had been applied on raids into Dutch-held territory since May , would be best suited for their needs ; towards this goal , Sudirman issued a general order on 11 November , with Nasution handling most of the preparations . Sudirman was released from the hospital on 28 November 1948 .

Although he continued to issue orders , Sudirman only returned to active duty on 17 December ; in light of the growing tension between the Dutch and Indonesian forces , he ordered the TNI soldiers to maintain an increased level of awareness ; he also ordered large-scale military exercises as a in an unsuccessful attempt to convince the Dutch that the TNI was too strong to attack . Two days later , after a nighttime announcement that they were no longer bound by the Renville Agreement , on 19 December the Dutch launched Operation Kraai , an attempt to capture the capital at Yogyakarta . By 07 : 10 local time ( UTC + 7 ) , the airfield at Maguwo had been taken by paratroopers under the command of Captain Eekhout . Sudirman , upon becoming aware of the attack , had an order read over RRI which stated that soldiers should fight as they had been trained – as guerrillas . He then went to the Presidential Palace in central Yogyakarta , where the government leaders were discussing an ultimatum which stated that the city would be stormed unless the leadership accepted colonial rule . Sudirman urged that the president and vice-president leave the city and fight as guerrillas , actions they had previously promised , but this suggestion was rejected . Although his doctors forbade it , Sudirman received permission from Sukarno to join his men . The central government evacuated to the Kraton Ngayogyakarta Hadiningrat at the urging of Sultan Hamengkubuwana IX , but were captured and exiled .

Sudirman first went to his official home and gathered sensitive documents , which he burned to prevent them falling into Dutch hands . His convoy , consisting of Sudirman , a small group of soldiers , and his personal doctor , then made their way south , towards Kretek , Parangtritis , Bantul . There they were received by the district head at 18 : 00 . After several days in Kretek , during which time Sudirman sent undercover troops into the Dutch-occupied city for reconnaissance and to ask his wife for jewellery to sell and help fund the guerrilla movement , he and his group travelled east along the south coast to Wonogiri . Before the Dutch attack it had already been decided that Sudirman would be able to better control the guerrillas from eastern Java , where there were still several bases . Meanwhile , Alfiah and the children were ordered to stay in the Kraton . Aware that he was being pursued by the Dutch , on 23 December Sudirman ordered his troops to continue to Ponorogo , where they stopped at the home of Mahfuz , a kyai and Islamic religious leader ; Mahfuz gave the general a cane to help him walk , although Sudirman was , and continued to be , carried on a litter . They then continued east .

Outside of Trenggalek , Sudirman and his group were stopped by TNI soldiers belonging to 102 Battalion . These soldiers , who were told that Sudirman – who was in civilian clothes and unrecognised by the troops holding them – was a prisoner , refused to allow the group to pass ; they were suspicious as Sudirman 's convoy carried maps and notes on Indonesian military movements , things which may have belonged to spies . When the group 's commander , Major Zainal Fanani , came to check the situation , he realised that Sudirman was with them and apologised . Told that his men were right to guard their areas diligently , Fanani called a post in Kediri and ordered that a car be sent to pick up the general and his troops . After a time in Kediri , they continued further east ; as they left the city on 24 December , Dutch planes attacked Kediri . The constant Dutch attacks led Sudirman , perhaps at the suggestion of one of his men , to change his clothes and give his old outfit to one of his soldiers , Second Lieutenant Heru Kesser – who bore a resemblance to Sudirman . Kesser was ordered to head south with a large company of soldiers , remove the clothes , and furtively return north , while Sudirman waited in Karangnongko . The diversion was successful , and on 27 December Sudirman and his men made their way to Jambu Village . Arriving on 9 January 1949 , Sudirman met with several government ministers who had not been present during the Dutch attack on Yogyakarta : Supeno , Susanto Tirtoprojo , and Susilowati . With the politicians , Sudirman made his way to Banyutuwo , ordering some of his soldiers to linger back and hold off Dutch ground troops . In Banyutuwo , they held for over a week . However , on 21 January , when Dutch forces approached the village , Sudirman and his entourage were forced to leave , fighting their way out in heavy rain .

Sudirman and his troops continued to make their way through the jungles and forests , eventually arriving at Sobo , near Mount Lawu , on 18 February . During the journey , Sudirman used a radio set to convey orders to local TNI troops if he believed that the region was secure . Feeling weaker because of the physical hardships he had faced , including travelling through the forests and a lack of food , and believing the area to be safe , Sudirman decided that Sobo would serve as his guerrilla headquarters . The local commander , Lieutenant Colonel Wiliater Hutagalung , served as his go-between with the other TNI leaders . Aware that international opinion , which was beginning to condemn Dutch actions in Indonesia , could bring Indonesia greater recognition , Sudirman and Hutagalung discussed possible terms of action , before agreeing on a large-scale assault . Meanwhile , the Dutch began to spread propaganda claiming that they had captured Sudirman ; this claim was intended to break the morale of the guerrillas . Sudirman ordered Hutagalung to begin planning a full-scale assault , in which TNI soldiers – in uniform – would attack the Dutch and show their strength in front of foreign reporters and United Nations investigative teams . Hutagalung , together with officers under his commander Colonel Bambang Sugeng and government officials under Governor Wongsonegoro , spent several days discussing ways to ensure the attack could be successful . The discussion may have resulted in the General Offensive of 1 March 1949 , which saw TNI soldiers attack Dutch outposts throughout central Java . Troops under Lieutenant Colonel Suharto retook Yogyakarta for six hours before withdrawing , a successful show of force which caused the Dutch to lose face internationally ; they had previously declared the TNI eradicated . However , who truly ordered the offensive remains uncertain : Suharto and Hamengkubuwana IX claimed responsibility , while Bambang Sugeng 's brother reportedly overheard him ordering the assault .

Under increased pressure from the United Nations , on 7 May 1949 Dutch – Indonesian negotiations resulted in the Roem-Royen Agreement , a controversial measure which guaranteed Dutch withdrawal from Yogyakarta , among other points ; The Dutch withdrawal commenced in late June , and the Indonesian leadership began returning to Yogyakarta from exile in early July . Sukarno ordered Sudirman to return to Yogyakarta as well , but Sudirman refused to let the Dutch withdraw without a fight ; he considered the TNI to now be strong enough to defeat the dispirited Dutch . Although he was promised medicine and support in Yogyakarta , Sudirman refused to return to the political leadership , whom he considered acquiescent to the Dutch . He only agreed to return after receiving a letter , although sources disagree on its sender . On 10 July , Sudirman and his group returned to Yogyakarta , where they were greeted by thousands of civilians and warmly received by the political elite there . The reporter Rosihan Anwar , who was present when the letter was delivered , wrote in 1973 that " Sudirman had to return to Yogyakarta to avoid any perceptions of a rift among the republic 's top leaders " .

In early August Sudirman approached Sukarno and asked him to continue the guerrilla war ; Sudirman did not expect the Dutch to abide by the Roem-Royen Agreement , based on the failings of the previous agreements . Sukarno disagreed , which was a blow to Sudirman . When Sudirman threatened to resign his post , blaming the government 's inconsistency for his tuberculosis and Oerip 's death in November 1948 , Sukarno threatened to do so as well . As he thought that such a resignation would have a destabilising effect , Sudirman stayed his hand , and a Java-wide cease fire came into effect on 11 August 1949 . Continuing to suffer from tuberculosis , Sudirman was checked into Panti Rapih hospital , where he stayed until October , when he was transferred to a sanatorium in nearby Pakem . As a result of his illness , Sudirman made few public appearances . Sudirman was transferred to a home in Magelang in December . In the meantime , the Indonesian and Dutch governments held a several-month-long conference which resulted in Dutch recognition of Indonesian sovereignty on 27 December 1949 . Sudirman , despite his illness , was reconfirmed that day as commander-in-chief of the TNI , now serving the newly established Republic of the United States of Indonesia . On 28 December , Jakarta once again became the nation 's capital .

Sudirman died in Magelang at 18 : 30 on 29 January 1950 ; this was reported in a special broadcast over RRI . Upon receiving news of his death , the Sudirman family home received numerous visitors , including the entirety of the 9th Brigade , which was stationed nearby . The following morning Sudirman 's body was brought to Yogyakarta . As the funeral convoy passed , led by four tanks and consisting of eighty motor vehicles , thousands of mourners stood at the sides of the streets . The convoy was organised by members of the 9th Brigade . The viewing , held at the Great Mosque of Yogyakarta in the afternoon , was attended by numerous political and military elite from both Indonesia and foreign countries ; this included Prime Minister Abdul Halim , Minister of Defence Hamengkubuwana IX , Minister of Health Johannes Leimena , Minister of Justice Abdoel Gaffar Pringgodigdo , Minister of Information Arnold Mononutu , Chief of the Air Force Soerjadi Soerjadarma , Colonel Paku Alam VIII , and Suharto . The viewing was closed with a 24-gun salute . Sudirman 's body was brought to Semaki Heroes ' Cemetery on foot , with a crowd of mourners 2 kilometres ( 1.2 mi ) long trailing behind . He was interred next to Oerip , after another gun salute . His wife filled in the first scoop of dirt , followed by the government ministers . The national government ordered flags to be flown at half-mast throughout the country , and Sudirman was promoted to full general . Major-General Tahi Bonar Simatupang was selected as the new leader of the armed forces . Sudirman 's memoirs were published later that year ; a series of his speeches were also published in 1970 .

An obituary in the Yogyakarta-based daily Kedaulatan Rakjat wrote that Indonesia had lost a " brave and true hero " . Colonel Paku Alam VIII , in charge of the Yogyakarta area , told the national news agency Antara that all Indonesians , especially the armed forces , had " lost a father figure who did uncountable deeds for his country " . The Indonesian Muslim leader Haji Abdul Malik Karim Amrullah , writing soon after Sudirman 's death , described the general as a " symbol of the strength of spirit shown by Indonesian heroes , " while the Muslim politician Muhammad Isa Anshary described Sudirman as a " son of the revolution , as he was born in the revolution , and raised by the revolution . " In a radio speech , Hatta described Sudirman as impossible to control and hard-headed , but ultimately intent on doing what was right for the country ; Hatta noted that , although Sudirman often did not like the government 's position , he would generally obey his orders . However , Hamengkubuwana IX noted that KNIL trained soldiers such as Abdul Haris Nasution and Tahi Bonar Simatupang were disappointed in Sudirman because of his background and poor knowledge of military techniques .

Modern opinions in Indonesia tend to be laudatory . Sardiman , a professor of history at Yogyakarta State University , writes that Sudirman was as lively a speaker as Sukarno , who was known for his fiery speeches , and a devoted , incorruptible leader . The Indonesian historian and former Minister of Education and Culture Nugroho Notosusanto described Sudirman as " his only idol " , citing the general 's guerrilla period as the origin of the army 's esprit de corps . The general 's guerrilla campaign is emphasised in biographies of him because , during that period , the army had a greater role than the exiled political leadership ; beginning in the 1970s , all military cadets had to retrace the 100-kilometre ( 62 mi ) long route prior to graduation , a " pilgrimage " meant to instill a sense of struggle . Sudirman 's grave is also a pilgrimage destination , both for the military and general public . According to Katharine McGregor of the University of Melbourne , the Indonesian military has elevated Sudirman to a saint-like status . Sudirman received numerous awards from the national government posthumously , including the Bintang Sakti , Bintang Gerilya , Bintang Mahaputera Adipurna , Bintang Mahaputera Pratama , Bintang Republik Indonesia Adipurna , and Bintang Republik Indonesia Adipradana . On 10 December 1964 Sudirman was declared a National Hero of Indonesia by Presidential Decree 314 of 1964 . Oerip was declared a National Hero by the same decree . He was promoted to General of the Army in 1997 .

According to McGregor , the military increasingly used Sudirman 's image as a symbol of leadership as it gained more political power . An image of Sudirman was featured on every denomination of the 1968 series of rupiah . He featured as a major character in several war films , including Janur Kuning ( Yellow Coconut Leaf ; 1979 ) and Serangan Fajar ( Dawn Attack ; 1982 ) . Numerous museums have been dedicated to Sudirman . His childhood home in Purbalingga is now the Sudirman Museum , while his official home in Yogyakarta is now the Sasmitaloka Museum to General Sudirman . The house in Magelang where he died is also now the Sudirman Museum , established on 18 May 1967 and containing artefacts belonging to the general . Other museums , including the Monument Yogya Kembali in Yogyakarta and the Satriamandala Museum in Jakarta have rooms dedicated to him . Numerous streets are named after Sudirman , including a major street in Jakarta ; McGregor states that nearly every city in the country has a General Sudirman Street . Statues and monuments to him are spread throughout the archipelago , most of which were built after 1970 . Jenderal Soedirman University in Banyumas , established in 1963 , is named after him .

Jekyll is a British television drama serial produced by Hartswood Films and Stagescreen Productions for BBC One . The series also received funding from BBC America . Steven Moffat wrote all six episodes , with Douglas Mackinnon and Matt Lipsey each directing three episodes . The series is described by its creators as a sequel to the novella Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde , rather than an adaptation of it , with the Robert Louis Stevenson tale serving as a backstory within the series . It stars James Nesbitt as Tom Jackman , a modern-day descendant of Dr. Jekyll , who has recently begun transforming into a version of Mr. Hyde ( also played by Nesbitt ) . Jackman is aided by psychiatric nurse Katherine Reimer , played by Michelle Ryan . Gina Bellman also appears as Claire , Tom 's wife . Filming took place at various locations around southern England in late 2006 . The series was first transmitted on BBC One in June and July 2007 , receiving mainly positive reviews .

Doctor Tom Jackman ( James Nesbitt ) , a married father of two , has abandoned his family without explanation to live in a heavily fortified basement flat . He hires psychiatric nurse Katherine Reimer ( Michelle Ryan ) to help him with his unusual case . After explaining a set of elaborate security procedures to Reimer , he straps himself into a secured metal chair and undergoes a psychological transformation . Reimer observes that Jackman 's alter ego exhibits rage , heightened senses , greatly superior strength and speed , and a more playful and flirtatious manner . She assures this persona she will keep his secrets just as she keeps Jackman 's , but asks for guarantees he will not harm her . After being informed of the novella Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde , Jackman 's alter ego takes Hyde 's name for his own and the two agree to form an uneasy truce . While they share a body , neither remembers what the other did while dominant . They use a micro cassette recorder to leave messages for each other . Jackman began transforming into the violent , lecherous Hyde recently . Fearing for his family 's safety , he chose to isolate himself from them , but he cannot bring himself to cut off all contact , and visits his wife Claire ( Gina Bellman ) . During one such visit , Hyde assumes control and learns about Jackman 's family .

Miranda Callendar ( Meera Syal ) , a detective employed by Claire , learns about Hyde and informs Jackman that Jekyll and Hyde was not fiction , but a fictionalized version of actual events . Callendar shows Jackman a picture of the real Doctor Jekyll who lived in Edinburgh , Scotland in the 19th century . Jackman is startled to see that Jekyll looks exactly like him , and that he died at around Jackman 's current age ; and Callendar speculates that he is a descendant of the original Doctor Jekyll , except for the fact that Doctor Jekyll had died without children . Jackman is also being stalked by a private security team led by an American named Benjamin ( Paterson Joseph ) . Unbeknownst to him , the team works for his former employers at the biotechnology firm , Klein and Utterson , and is directed by his friend Peter Syme ( Denis Lawson ) . When Benjamin 's team puts Jackman 's children at risk , Hyde asserts himself , killing Benjamin and several of the men , and hospitalizing others . At the hospital he is approached by Sophia , an elderly woman who claims to be his mother , but before he can question her she disappears .

Jackman confronts Peter Syme , who attempts to drug him . This provokes Hyde to appear and take Syme and Claire hostage . Claire argues that they need to find a cure for Jackman 's condition . Syme insists that Klein and Utterson have had a cure for a long time . Jackman is captured and locked inside a metal coffin . Reimer and Callendar confront Syme , claiming they know the truth about Jackman . Callendar theorizes that Klein and Utterson have access to cloning technology and that Jackman is Jekyll 's clone . Syme denies this and orders them taken away to be killed . Syme reveals to Claire that the treatment Jackman is undergoing will stabilize into one persona : If it is Hyde , he will be kept for research in order to synthesize the potion that turned the original Jekyll into Hyde ; If it is Jackman , she is free to take him home . When the box is opened , Hyde is dominant . In a flashback triggered by genetic memory , Hyde has a vision of a meeting between Jekyll and Robert Louis Stevenson , the author of Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde . Stevenson agrees to write a fictional version of Jekyll 's case but reveals that he knows the truth : there is no potion . Instead , Jekyll was transformed into Hyde by his love for Alice , a maid within his household . Flashbacks into Jackman 's own life show his Hyde first manifesting fully during a seaside holiday with Claire , after the pair were accosted by hooligans .

Enraged by further threats to Jackman 's family , Hyde escapes from Klein and Utterson . Ms. Utterson , a ruthless redheaded American woman at the head of Klein and Utterson , takes Claire and her sons hostage at a private estate , locking the twins in miniature versions of the same coffin used on their father . Tom 's alleged mother , Sophia , appears on the premises and helps Claire escape her locked bedroom . She tells Claire how Klein and Utterson had indeed tried to clone Doctor Jekyll but had been unsuccessful . Claire meets several of the failed attempts in the lowest basement of the building . They are disfigured and in a near-vegetative state . Sophia explains that Jackman is a descendant of Doctor Jekyll , ( who died a virgin ) , through Mr Hyde , and by chance a perfect natural genetic duplicate , " a perfect throwback , a chance in a million " . Klein and Utterson had discovered this and had him under surveillance for almost his entire life , from when he was six-months-old . In order to trigger his transformation into Hyde , they created a clone of Alice , the maid whom Jekyll had loved . This clone is Claire herself .

Hyde tries to rescue Jackman 's family from Klein and Utterson , killing Syme and many other personnel . In the end there is a stand-off , with Jackman and Claire 's sons held hostage and suffocating . The Hyde personality is apparently killed when he is shot with multiple bullets and then manages to avoid ' sharing the damage ' by taking the wounds onto himself while allowing Jackman to assume his undamaged , healthy form , leaving Doctor Jackman as the only personality . Six months later , Jackman has tracked down Sophia , the woman who claimed to be his mother . When he questions her about his father , she reveals that she is the descendant of Hyde , the one through whom he had inherited the family curse from , and that it 's " never over " . As Jackman watches horrified , the powerless , tired , grey-haired Sophia transforms into her own version of the Hyde persona , the feral , red-headed Ms Utterson .

Jeffrey Tayor of Stagescreen Productions had the idea of a modern version of Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde in the mid-1990s . He attempted to get it produced in the United States three times , but all three attempts fell through for various reasons . He returned to England from the west coast of the United States and joined with Hartswood Films when Elaine Cameron was scouting for ideas for a supernatural thriller . Cameron then approached Steven Moffat for a script , and a six-part series was commissioned by the BBC 's Jane Tranter and John Yorke in November 2005 . BBC America signed on to provide co-production funding in March 2006 . The producers regularly met with Moffat for brainstorming sessions . Cameron 's assistant took notes from these conversations , after which they would look over the notes and start the process again . The producers invited Moffat to " write anything " , with the intention of cutting the material back later . However , they were reluctant to cut material once they saw it on the page . The first episode starts with Jackman already knowing about his alter ego . Because the plot of Jekyll begins after the story has developed for the characters , Nesbitt says that the show feels like it is a second series .

Moffat explicitly describes the series as a sequel , rather than an adaptation , stating the Jekyll of the original story really existed , and Jackman is his " modern-day descendant dealing with the same problems " . As Jekyll and Hyde is such a well-known phrase , Moffat labored over what to call the series , eventually deciding upon Jekyll because that word " carries the name Hyde " . The final episode replaces the title " Jekyll " with " Hyde " . Producer Elaine Cameron says the one word title gives the series a " very modern feel " . Moffat initially named the character Jekyll rather than Jackman , but found it cumbersome to constantly explain that the book had not been written in this alternate universe . Instead he chose a version where the book exists , but changed the name to Jackman . Otherwise , Cameron felt , the character would appear stupid by not realising what was happening when turning into Hyde . The scene between Tom and Katherine was expanded slightly in the sixth episode to keep their relationship active to facilitate a second series . However , no further episodes were commissioned . In an August 2007 interview , Moffat told Alan Sepinwall of The Star-Ledger that he had a sequel written for the miniseries " should the BBC be interested " . Following Jekyll , Moffat became a co-writer on Sherlock .

James Nesbitt and his agent attended a meeting with Jane Tranter in late 2005 regarding the 2006 series of Murphy 's Law . At the conclusion of the meeting , she offered him a script for Jekyll , suggesting that he might like the role . Nesbitt took the script role as a way of putting a distance between his previous work . The casting of Nesbitt as Tom Jackman and Hyde was publicised on 12 December 2005 , but filming was not scheduled to begin until September 2006 , increasing Nesbitt 's anticipation to play the roles . Writer Steven Moffat said that the dual-role required a very skilled actor , and a well-known actor was necessary because it was such an expensive show to produce . The production team decided Nesbitt 's two characters would be mainly differentiated over a change in performance rather than by extensive make-up because they wanted Hyde to be able to walk around in public without attracting attention . Michelle Ryan , known for her long-running role as Zoe Slater in the soap opera EastEnders , was revealed by tabloid newspaper The Sun to have been cast as " Jekyll 's sultry assistant " ( Katherine Reimer ) in August 2006 . Ryan believed herself to be too young for the part , though that aspect had already been written into the character . To prepare , she consulted the Royal College of Psychiatry . Ryan dyed her hair red for the role to help differentiate her from Tom Jackman 's wife . Denis Lawson was cast as Peter Syme . The actor consulted his post-graduate son for information on Syme 's job .

Moffat initially doubted Gina Bellman 's suitability for the role of Claire Jackman because he associated her too much with Jane Christie , the character she had played in his sitcom Coupling . Moffat did not imagine the character to be as beautiful as Bellman , but her audition was so good that he revised his vision of the character . Bellman originally auditioned for the role of Katherine , but the producers wanted someone younger to play that role . However , Bellman said that she talked herself out of the role by arguing that there should be an age gap between Katherine and Claire to avoid Katherine becoming a threat to the wife . Bellman approached her role as if Claire had become caught up in Tom 's mid-life crisis , an angle that impressed the producers . Meera Syal was attracted to her role because Miranda was not a clichéd private detective and she thought the humour was " fresh " . During the second filming block , Mark Gatiss briefly joined the cast , playing the small but important role of Robert Louis Stevenson in flashback scenes in episode five .

The series was filmed in two blocks of three episodes . The first three were directed by Douglas Mackinnon and the second three episodes by Matt Lipsey . It took an hour of make-up each day to turn Nesbitt into Hyde ; a hairpiece lowered his hairline and prosthetics were added to his chin , nose and ear lobes . He also wore black contact lenses to make Hyde " soulless " . After many debates , the producers decided that Hyde 's imminent arrival would be indicated by the flash of a black eye . The eye imagery evolved during filming , and did not appear in the script . Filming began in September 2006 with the zoo sequence from the second episode , in which Benjamin 's team have set Tom up to force out Hyde by placing his son , Eddie , in the lion 's den . Writing the sequence at a late stage in the production , Moffat wanted to compare Hyde 's natural instinct to kill to that of a lion . This was shot on location at Heythrop Zoo , a private zoo in Chipping Norton run by Jim Clubb , whose firm Amazing Animals specialises in training animals for cinema and television . The Norman Foster-designed building in Chertsey , Surrey , which then housed the European Headquarters of video game designer and publisher Electronic Arts , was used as The Klein & Utterson Institute . A large country estate near Henley-on-Thames and in Bognor Regis was used for some of the scenes whilst on the run and in flashbacks . A disused Boys ' school in Gloucestershire , and the Hammer House in Wardour Street , Soho were used in episode six . Filming concluded on 20 December 2006 .

The schedule was tight for a complex production . The production team had twelve days to shoot each episode , which director Douglas Mackinnon says was the biggest challenge of the project . The required amount of material was shot for most of the episodes . However , an extra twenty minutes of material was filmed for episode six . Director Matt Lipsey recalls that the team struggled to cut the extra material whilst maintaining the integrity of the episode . Lipsey credits Moffat for not " being precious " over his material during the editing process , and points out that his willingness to cut superfluous material means that he is taken seriously when he argues for something to be retained . The music was composed by Debbie Wiseman . The orchestra featured approximately 18 pieces . Some cues featured the vocals of Hayley Westenra to foreshadow the importance of a female voice .

Jekyll was broadcast on BBC One on Saturday nights from 9 p.m. A two-week break occurred between showings of the third and fourth episodes because the Live Earth benefit concert was broadcast during its timeslot on 7 July . The series began airing on BBC America from 4 August , as part of a " Supernatural Saturday " programming strand . In Australia , Jekyll began broadcasting on ABC1 , Sundays at 8.30 p.m. from 2 March 2008 with a double episode back-to-back each week . In Canada , Jekyll began broadcasting on Showcase , beginning at the end of August 2007 and on BBC Canada , Wednesdays at 10 : 00 p.m. from 26 March 2008 . Also in Hong Kong , Wednesday at 11 : 55 p.m. from 11 February 2009 on TVB Pearl . In the Netherlands , Jekyll was broadcast in the summer of 2009 on Sci-Fi Channel . Certain edits were made to the United Kingdom broadcasts in order to remove language unsuitable for Saturday night BBC One audiences . For example , a line spoken by Hyde in episode one was changed from " Who the fuck is Mr Hyde ? " to " Who the hell is Mr Hyde ? "

James Jackson of The Times rated the first episode four out of five stars , calling Nesbitt 's performance as Hyde " as entertainingly [ over the top ] as a dozen Doctor Who villains , with a palpable sense of menace to boot " . The conspiracy plot is praised as a storyline that distinguishes this series from other adaptations . The Daily Telegraph 's Stephen Pile criticised the script for " veering between Hammer horror and larky humour " and for being " cheesy " . He also criticised Hyde 's gravity-defying hijinks and mistook Michelle Ryan for a model . In the same newspaper , James Walton called the first episode a combination of " a good yarn with several nicely thoughtful touches " . David Cornelius of DVDTalk was full of compliments for the series , summing up its review with the statement " six episodes , 300 minutes , not a single one of them wasted . ' Jekyll ' is this year 's finest television event " . The Australian Broadcasting Corporation , commenting on the series being part of their 2008 line-up , said " This classic horror tale has been given a modern make-over that will leave you on the edge of your seat and begging for more . James Nesbitt is outstanding as the new Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde " . Nesbitt was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Performance by an Actor in a Mini-Series or Motion Picture Made for Television for his roles . Paterson Joseph received a mention in the nominations for the 2008 Screen Nation awards .

The BBFC rated all episodes as a 15 certificate on 11 June 2007 . Jekyll : Season One was released for region 2 on 30 July 2007 by Contender Home Entertainment . It includes uncut episodes , including restoration of some swearing cut from the BBC broadcasts . As DVD Verdict says about this uncut version , " the language is saucier , the violence a bit more bloody , and the sex more primal . " The disc contains audio commentaries on two episodes : producer Elaine Cameron , writer Steven Moffat and first-block director Douglas Mackinnon comment on episode one , while executive producer Beryl Vertue , second-block director Matt Lipsey and actress Gina Bellman comment upon the sixth episode . The set also contains two documentaries : " Anatomy of a Scene " focuses upon the production of the zoo sequence in episode two , while " The Tale Retold " covers the evolution of the series . The first Region 1 release occurred in the United States on September 18 , 2007 , although the Region 1 Canadian release was delayed until October 9 , following the Canadian broadcast of the series on Showcase , which commenced at the end of August 2007 .

István Szabó ( born February 18 , 1938 ) is a Hungarian film director , screenwriter , and opera director . Szabó is the most internationally famous Hungarian filmmaker since the late 1960s . Working in the tradition of European auteurism , he has made films that represent many of the political and psychological conflicts of Central Europe ’ s recent history , as well as of his own personal history . He made his first short film in 1959 as a student at the Hungarian Academy of Theatrical and Cinematic Arts , and his first feature film in 1964 . He achieved his greatest international success with Mephisto ( 1981 ) , which won the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film . Since then , most of Szabó 's films have been international co-productions filmed in a variety of languages and European locations . He has continued to make some films in Hungarian , however , and even in his international co-productions , he often films in Hungary and uses Hungarian talent . Szabó became involved in a national controversy in 2006 when the Hungarian newspaper Life and Literature revealed that he had been an informant of the Communist regime ’ s secret police .

Born in Budapest , Szabó is the son of Mária ( née Vita ) and István Szabó , the latter of whom was a doctor from a long line of doctors . Szabó came from a family of Jews who had converted to Catholicism , but were considered Jews by the Arrow Cross Party ( Hungarian Nazis ) . They were forced to separate and hide in Budapest sometime between October 1944 , when Nazi Germany occupied Hungary and installed the Arrow Cross in power , and February 1945 , when the Soviets defeated the German Army in Budapest . Szabó survived by hiding at an orphanage , but his father died of diphtheria shortly after the German defeat . Memories of these events would later appear in several of his films . In 2006 the Hungarian newspaper Life and Literature revealed that Szabó had been an informant of the Communist regime ’ s secret police . Between 1957 and 1961 , he submitted forty-eight reports on seventy-two people , mostly classmates and teachers at the Academy of Theatrical and Cinematic Arts . According to historian Istvan Deak , only in one case did Szabó 's informing cause significant damage , when an individual was denied a passport .

As a child , Szabó wanted to be a doctor like his father . By the age of 16 , however , he had been inspired by a book by Hungarian film theorist Béla Balázs to become a film director . Upon graduation from high school , he became one of 11 applicants out of 800 who were admitted to the Academy of Theatrical and Cinematic Arts . At the Academy , he studied with the famous director Félix Máriássy , who became something of a father figure to Szabó . Among his classmates were Judit Elek , Zsolt Kézdi-Kovács , Janos Rozsa , Pál Gábor , Imre Gyöngyössy , Ferenc Kardos , and Zoltán Huszárik . While at the Academy , Szabó directed several short films , culminating in his thesis film , Koncert ( 1963 ) , which won a prize at the International Short Film Festival Oberhausen . Thanks to János Herskó , head of the Hunnia Film Studio at which he apprenticed , Szabó was given his first opportunity to direct a feature film at the age of 25 , rather than being required to spend ten years working as an assistant director . The beginning of Szabó ’ s career coincided with the beginning of a “ new wave ” in Hungarian cinema , one of several new wave cinemas that occurred around this time throughout Western and Eastern Europe . The Eastern European new waves were caused by political liberalization , the decentralization of film industries , and the emergence of films as valuable commodities for export to Western European markets . The resulting films were more formally experimental , politically anti-establishment , and , especially in the case of Szabó , psychologically probing than the films of the previous generation . Hungarian filmmakers in particular experienced a significant increase in freedom of expression due to the reforms of the Kádár government .

Szabó 's first feature film , The Age of Illusions ( 1964 ) , is a partly autobiographical film about the struggles of Szabó ’ s generation in starting a career , encountering the obsolescence of the older generation , and establishing romantic relationships . The appearance of a poster for François Truffaut 's The 400 Blows in the background of a scene suggested Szabó 's artistic compatibility with Truffaut and the French New Wave . The film won the Silver Sail for Best First Work at the Locarno International Film Festival and a Special Jury Prize for Best Director at the Hungarian Film Festival . Father ( 1966 ) is a coming of age story that displays Szabó ’ s increasing fascination with history and memory . The main character copes with the childhood loss of his father against the backdrop of the Hungarian Revolution of 1956 and memories of the Arrow Cross dictatorship . The film won the Grand Prix at the 5th Moscow International Film Festival and the Special Jury Prize at Locarno , and established Szabó as the most internationally famous Hungarian filmmaker of his time , as well as an auteur in the European film tradition . In 2000 , Father appeared as number 11 on a list of the 12 best Hungarian films according to a group of Hungarian film critics .

Lovefilm ( 1970 ) focuses on a young man ’ s relationship with his childhood sweetheart , told through flashbacks that include the Arrow Cross dictatorship and 1956 , and rendered in an experimental , fragmented form . This experimental tendency in Szabó ’ s films reached its apotheosis in 25 Fireman Street ( 1973 ) , which began as a short film , Dream About a House ( 1971 ) . 25 Fireman Street takes place during the course of a long , hot night in Budapest , during which the residents of a single apartment building are plagued by dream-memories of pain and loss spanning thirty years , including both World Wars , the Arrow Cross dictatorship , the Communist takeover , and 1956 . While the film won the top prize at Locarno , Szabó was upset by its lack of success at the box office and at film festivals . Attributing this lack of success to the film 's complex structure , he decided to give his next film a simpler structure . In Budapest Tales ( 1976 ) , Szabó traded his earlier , complex narrative structures , characterized by flashbacks and dreams , for a more linear one . At the same time , he traded the literal representation of history for an allegorical one . The film follows a disparate group of people who come together on the outskirts of an unnamed city at the end of an unnamed war to repair a damaged tram and ride it into the city . Allegorically , the film was interpreted by critics variously as representing Hungarian history specifically or universal human responses to war and reconstruction more generally .

Szabó 's first four full-length films featured the actor András Bálint in roles based on Szabó himself . While Bálint also appeared in Budapest Tales , this was Szabó 's first feature film that did not contain a significant amount of autobiographical material . He did not make another autobiographical film until Meeting Venus , eighteen years later . Budapest Tales was even less successful than 25 Fireman Street at the box office and festivals . According to author David Paul , this may explain why Szabó shifted gears even more dramatically in his next film , Confidence ( 1980 ) , in which historical events are represented straightforwardly , and are filtered through neither memory nor allegory . The film focuses on the relationship between a man and woman who are forced to share a room as they hide from the Arrow Cross toward the end of the Second World War . It garnered a Best Director award for Szabó at the Berlin Film Festival and was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film at the 53rd Academy Awards .

Szabó ’ s next three films constituted a new phase in his career — moving away from Hungarian productions , in Hungarian , written by Szabó alone , and featuring Bálint , and moving toward international co-productions , in German , written by Szabó in collaboration with others , and featuring Austrian actor Klaus Maria Brandauer . The informal trilogy — Mephisto ( 1981 ) , Colonel Redl ( 1985 ) and Hanussen ( 1988 ) — features Brandauer in a series of roles based on historical figures who , as represented in the films , compromised their morals in order to climb the ladder of success within a context of authoritarian political power . In Mephisto , based on a novel by Klaus Mann , Brandauer plays an actor and theater director in Nazi Germany , a role based on Mann ’ s former brother-in-law Gustaf Gründgens . The film won the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film , and the award for Best Screenplay at the Cannes Film Festival , and greatly increased Szabó ’ s international prestige . In Colonel Redl , Brandauer plays Alfred Redl , counter-intelligence chief of the Austro-Hungarian Empire who was blackmailed into espionage for the Russians in order to prevent the revelation of his homosexuality . The film won top awards in Germany and the UK , but provoked a scandal in Austria , where several periodicals accused the film of bringing the country into disrepute . In Hanussen , Brandauer plays the real life clairvoyant performer Erik Jan Hanussen , whose growing fame brings him into increasingly close — and dangerous — contact with the Nazis .

After his Brandauer trilogy , Szabó continued to make international co-productions , filming in a variety of languages and European locations . He has continued to make some films in Hungarian , however , and even in his international co-productions , he often films in Hungary and uses Hungarian talent . Meeting Venus ( 1991 ) , the first of several English-language films directed by Szabó — and his first comedy — is based on his experience directing Tannhäuser at the Paris Opera in 1984 . Niels Arestrup plays a Hungarian directing the opera at an imaginary pan-European opera company , and encountering a multitude of pitfalls that symbolize the challenges of a united Europe . An inside joke was that the multinational characters were all named with translations of " Taylor " , which is the meaning of " Szabó " . With Sweet Emma , Dear Böbe ( 1992 ) , Szabó returned to a strictly Hungarian subject — this time , however , focused on a contemporary , rather than historical , social problem . The film follows two young , female teachers of Russian facing the obsolescence of their specialty after the fall of the socialist government , as well as a variety of types of sexual harassment in the new Hungary . The film won the top prize at the Berlin Film Festival .

Sunshine ( 1999 ) — a three-hour historical epic , and an English-language , international co-production — was viewed by many critics as Szabó ’ s most ambitious film , and , along with Mephisto , his most important . Hungary ’ s Jews had figured in either a marginal or coded fashion in several of Szabó ’ s earlier films , produced during the socialist period when discourse around the history of the country ’ s Jews was more circumscribed . In Sunshine , for the first time , Szabó focused explicitly on this aspect of Hungarian history , which he himself had experienced as a child during the Arrow Cross dictatorship . Ralph Fiennes plays three generations in the Sonnenschein family as they experience the trials of twentieth-century Hungarian Jewish history , from the late Austro-Hungarian Empire through the Holocaust to the 1956 Revolution . Several characters are based on real people , including the Zwack family , with their successful liquor business , the Olympic fencer Attila Petschauer , and the Jewish police official Ernö Szücs . The film won European Film Awards for Best Screenwriter , Best Actor , and Best Cinematographer . It received a rating of 74 % Fresh from review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes .

An example of an extremely positive review was that of Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times , who called it “ a movie of substance and thrilling historical sweep . ” A. O. Scott of the New York Times had a more mixed reaction , writing that , by the end , “ the movie has accumulated sufficient power and momentum to erase the memory of its earlier awkwardness . It shows such sympathy for its characters , and approaches its subject with such intelligence , that it 's easy to forgive the clumsy editing , the haphazard insertion of black-and-white newsreels , and the hyperventilating sexual ardor that seems to be a Sors family curse . ” In Taking Sides ( 2001 ) , Szabó returned to thematic territory he had explored in Mephisto . Stellan Skarsgård plays real life German conductor Wilhelm Furtwängler , and Harvey Keitel a U.S. Army investigator interrogating Furtwängler about his collaboration with the Nazis . The film won several awards at the Mar del Plata Film Festival in Argentina , including Best Director . Being Julia ( 2004 ) , based on a novel by W. Somerset Maugham , stars Annette Bening as a famous British actress experiencing a series of romantic and professional rivalries . Bening won a Golden Globe Award for her performance .

In 2005 , Szabó was awarded the Lifetime Achievement Award at the 27th Moscow International Film Festival . Rokonok ( 2006 ) was a Hungarian production based on a 1932 novel by Zsigmond Móricz about political corruption . Sándor Csányi plays a newly elected attorney general whose relatives ( rokonok ) come out of the woodwork looking for favors . It was entered into the 28th Moscow International Film Festival . The Door ( 2012 ) , an English language production based on a Hungarian novel by Magda Szabó ( no relation ) , focuses on the relationship between an affluent novelist ( Martina Gedeck ) and her poor , mysterious maid ( Helen Mirren ) . It opened the 13th Tbilisi International Film Festival , and won the Michael Curtiz Audience Award at the Hungarian Film Festival of Los Angeles . Szabó ’ s frequent collaborators have included actors András Bálint , Klaus Maria Brandauer , Péter Andorai , and Ildikó Bánsági ; cinematographer Lajos Koltai ; and screenwriters Péter Dobai and Andrea Vészits .

Several interconnected themes run through Szabó ’ s films , the most common being the relationship between the personal and the political or historical . On the personal level , his first three feature films deal with coming of age issues , but political / historical events form the backdrop of these issues and continually rupture the attempts of the characters to lead their private lives . In an interview in 2008 , Szabó said , “ My mother once told me , ‘ We had a nice childhood and our youth was beautiful , but our life was destroyed by politics and history . ’ ” The political / historical events most commonly depicted are the dominant traumatic events of mid-20th century Hungarian and Central European history — Nazism , the Second World War , and , in Hungary — or , more accurately , Budapest — the Arrow Cross dictatorship and the Holocaust , the Communist takeover , and the 1956 Revolution . Szabó himself has frequently referred to this theme as the search for security . A related theme is the moral compromises individuals make in order to succeed in immoral political systems . In an interview about Taking Sides , Szabó said , “ I don 't think that life is possible without making compromises . The question is only one of limits : how far to go . When one crosses the line , then the compromise starts to be a bad , even deadly , one . ” This theme is dominant in the Brandauer trilogy and , as Istvan Deak points out , may be related to Szabó ’ s own collaboration with the Communist secret police .

Szabó ’ s early films — culminating in Lovefilm and 25 Fireman Street — were influenced by the French New Wave in their experimentation with flashbacks , dream sequences , and unconventional narrative structures built on these techniques . Szabó emphasizes iconography in his films , insofar as he tends to invest certain objects and places with symbolic meaning . Tram cars play this role in many of his films , and one becomes the central image in Budapest Tales . Budapest itself plays an important role in many of his films , including scenes of the Danube and of buildings Szabó lived in when he was a child . Acting also plays a key role in Szabó ’ s films , as he values psychological complexity in his central characters . In his first several features , he tended to use the same lead actors over and over — first András Bálint , then Klaus Maria Brandauer . Consistent with this focus on acting , he frequently employs long close-up shots to emphasize the play of emotions on the faces of his characters .

In addition to writing and directing films , Szabó has also served in a variety of other capacities in the film industry , including writing and directing television movies and episodes , short films , and documentaries , as well as serving as assistant director , screenwriter , producer , and actor in films directed by others . In 1969 , he was a member of the jury at the 6th Moscow International Film Festival . Szabó has directed several operas , including Tannhäuser in Paris , Boris Godunov in Leipzig , Il Trovatore in Vienna , and Three Sisters in Budapest . He has taught at film schools in Budapest , London , Berlin , and Vienna . In 1989 , he was one of the founding members of the European Film Academy , and , in 1992 , of the Széchenyi Academy of Literature and Arts .

James " Jim " McCartney ( 7 July 1902 – 18 March 1976 ) and Mary Patricia McCartney ( née Mohan ) ( 29 September 1909 – 31 October 1956 ) were the parents of musician , author and artist Paul McCartney of the Beatles and Wings , and younger brother photographer and musician Mike McCartney ( better known professionally as Mike McGear ) , who worked with the comedy rock trio the Scaffold . Like many families in Liverpool , the McCartney and Mohin families are of Irish descent . Jim worked for most of his life in the cotton trade , as well as playing in ragtime and jazz bands in Liverpool , while Mary was a trained nurse and midwife . The McCartney family lived in council houses during Mary 's life , but Paul later bought his father a house called Rembrandt , in Heswall , Cheshire . Jim encouraged his two sons to take up music by buying instruments for them to learn , as well as improving their education . Mary was Paul 's inspiration for the song , " Let It Be " . After Mary 's death , Jim married Angela Williams and adopted her daughter from a previous marriage , Ruth McCartney .

Jim 's great-grandfather , James McCartney ( an upholsterer ) , was born in Ireland , but it was previously unknown where Jim 's grandfather , James McCartney II , was born . New evidence found in Scottish archives suggests that James McCartney moved with his family ( including James McCartney II ) from Ireland to Galloway , Scotland , around 1859 , before moving south and settling in Liverpool . James II ( a plumber and painter ) married Elizabeth Williams in 1864 , in Liverpool . The pair were both under-age when they were wed , but found a place to live together in Scotland Road . Jim 's father , Joseph " Joe " McCartney ( born 23 November 1866 ) was a tobacco-cutter by trade when he married Florence " Florrie " Clegg ( born 2 June 1874 ) in the Christ Church , Kensington , Liverpool , on 17 May 1896 . Joe never drank alcohol , went to bed at 10 o 'clock every night , and the only swear word he used was " Jaysus " . Florrie was known as " Granny Mac " in the neighbourhood and was often consulted when families had problems .

Jim was born at 8 Fishguard Street , Everton , Liverpool and was the third eldest of seven children . The McCartney children were John ( Jack ) , Edith , James ( Jim ) , Ann , Millie , Jane ( Jin ) and Joe ( who was named after a brother who died in infancy ) . Joe and Florrie McCartney moved shortly after Jim 's birth to 3 Solva Street in Everton , which was a run-down terraced house about three-quarters of a mile from the Liverpool city centre , where Jim attended the Steers Street Primary School off Everton Road . After leaving school at 14 , Jim found work for six shillings a week as a cotton " sample boy " , at A. Hanney & Co . ; a cotton broker in Chapel Street , Liverpool . Jim 's job entailed running up and down Old Hall Street with large bundles of cotton that had to be delivered to cotton brokers or merchants in various salesrooms . He worked ten-hour days , five days a week , although he received a bonus at Christmas that was almost double his annual salary . When World War II started Jim was too old to be called up for active service , as well as having previously been disqualified on medical grounds after falling from a wall and smashing his left eardrum when 10 years old . After the cotton exchange closed for the duration of the war , Jim worked as an inspector at Napier 's engineering works , which made shell cases that were later filled with explosives . He volunteered to be a fireman at night and often watched Liverpool burning from his rooftop observer 's position . Between 1940 and 1942 , Liverpool endured 68 air-raids , which killed or injured more than 4,500 of the population and destroyed more than 10,000 homes . After the war he worked as an inspector for Liverpool Corporation 's Cleansing Department before returning to the cotton trade in 1946 .

Jim avidly read the Liverpool Echo or Express , liked solving crosswords and instigated discussions about varied subjects . His attitude to life was based upon self-respect , perseverance , fairness and a strong work ethic . His political views were far from left-wing , as he insisted that there was nothing anyone could do about the situation the working classes were in at the time , and nothing would ever change . 62-year-old Jim was earning £ 10 a week in 1964 , but Paul suggested that his father should retire , and bought " Rembrandt " ; a detached mock-Tudor house in Baskervyle Road , Heswall , Cheshire , for £ 8,750 . He bought his father a horse called " Drake 's Drum " , and a couple of years later , the horse won the race immediately preceding the Grand National . Jim died of bronchial pneumonia on 18 March 1976 . His second wife , Angela McCartney ( née Williams ) said that his last words were " I 'll be with Mary soon . " Jim died two days before a Wings European tour ; his eldest son was unable to attend the funeral . Jim was cremated at Landican Cemetery , near Heswall , Merseyside on 22 March 1976 .

Mary Patricia Mohan was born at 2 Third Avenue , Fazakerley , Liverpool . After two years Mary 's father met and married his second wife , Rose , while on a trip to Monaghan , in Ireland . Rose arrived in Liverpool with two children from a previous marriage , but Mary , who had until then been looking after the Mohan family , realised that Rose did not care much for domesticity or her new husband 's children . After a year she chose to live with her aunts . In 1923 , at the age of 14 years , Mary started work as a nurse trainee at the Smithdown Road Hospital , and then took a three-year training course at Walton Road Hospital in Rice Lane , Liverpool ; eventually becoming a state registered nurse . Mary became a domiciliary health visitor and midwife , and was on-call day or night , riding a bicycle to houses where she was needed as a midwife . Her eldest son , Paul , said his first memory was watching her cycling away when it was snowing heavily . After she had been diagnosed with cancer , Mary still carried on cycling to work , but often doubled up in pain and had trouble breathing . The day Mary was due to have a mastectomy operation , she cleaned the McCartney house and laid her two sons ' school clothes out ; ready for the next day . She said to Dill Mohin , her sister-in-law , " Now everything 's ready for them in case I don 't come back . " Mary died of an embolism on 31 October 1956 , after an operation to stop the spread of breast cancer . Her last words to Dill Mohin were " I would love to have seen the boys growing up . " Mary was buried on 3 November 1956 at Yew Tree Cemetery , Finch Lane , Liverpool . Paul later named his daughter Mary after his mother , and Michael released an album entitled Woman in 1972 , including the song , " Woman , " with a photo of Mary on the front cover .

Mary met her future husband during an air raid on Liverpool in 1940 , when Jim was 38 years old , and had settled into what his friends thought was , " a confirmed bachelorhood . " Mary had been too career-conscious to think of marriage and , at the age of 31 years , was thought of as a spinster . They met in June 1940 , at 11 Scargreen Avenue , West Derby , the McCartney family home . Mary was staying with Jim 's sister , Jin , because of the lack of accommodation in Liverpool at the time . As Mary sat quietly in an armchair , the air-raid sirens sounded at 9 : 30 . At that time , the group moved to the Anderson shelter in the back garden to wait for the all-clear , but as there was an intensive bombing raid , the signal did not come and everyone was thus forced to sit in the cellar until dawn . Mary talked long enough with Jim to become romantically interested in him , and thought that he was " utterly charming and uncomplicated , " as well as being entertained by his " considerable good humour . " They took out a marriage licence at Liverpool Town Hall on 8 April 1941 , and were married a week later at St. Swithin 's Roman Catholic chapel in Gillmoss , West Derby , on 15 April 1941 . They first lived at 10 Sunbury Road , Anfield , and then resided for a short time at 92 Broadway , Wallasey , during November 1942 . Jim 's job at Napiers was classified as war work , so the McCartneys were given a small , but temporary , prefab house at 3 Roach Avenue , Knowsley .

Mary 's job enabled the McCartneys to move to a ground-floor flat at 75 Sir Thomas White Gardens , off St. Domingo Road in Everton , to live in a rent-free flat that was supplied by her employers . They moved shortly after , in February 1946 , to 72 Western Avenue in Speke . In 1948 , the family moved again to 12 Ardwick Road ( also in Speke ) which was part of a new estate in the suburbs of Liverpool . The frequent moves to better areas were Mary 's idea , as she wanted to raise her children in the best neighbourhood possible . In 1955 , the McCartney family moved for the last time to a small three-bedroomed brick-built terrace house at 20 Forthlin Road in Allerton , which is now owned by The National Trust . It only cost £ 1 : 6s : 0d per week , which was due to Mary 's seniority at the hospital . Before moving to Forthlin Road , Jim had been secretary of the Speke Horticultural Society , and had often sent his sons out to canvass for new members . Jim planted dahlias and snapdragons in the front garden of Forthlin Road and regularly trimmed the lavender hedge , although it was Paul 's job to collect horse manure from the local streets in a bucket to be dug into the flowerbeds . As Jim was a heavy smoker , Jim would first dry and then crush sprigs of Lavender and then burn them ( like incense ) in the ashtrays to kill the smell of his cigarette smoke .

Money was a problem in the McCartney house , as Jim only earned up to £ 6.00 a week , which was less than his wife . Because of their financial situation , the McCartney family could not afford to buy a television set until the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II in 1953 , and never owned a car . His two sons were the first in the McCartney family line to buy cars . When The Beatles became successful , Jim had to leave Forthlin Road because fans used to stand outside and stare through the windows , which made him feel uncomfortable and nervous . Eight years after Mary 's death , Jim married Angela Williams , on 24 November 1964 . Williams had a daughter from a previous marriage , Ruth , whom Jim legally adopted .

James Paul McCartney ( born 18 June 1942 ) and Peter Michael McCartney ( born 7 January 1944 ) were both delivered in the Walton General Hospital in Rice Lane , Liverpool , where Mary had previously worked as a nursing sister in charge of the maternity ward . Mary was welcomed back shortly before she gave birth to her first son by being given a bed in a private ward . Jim was not present at the birth as he was fighting a warehouse fire , but arrived at the hospital two hours later . As Mary was a Roman Catholic and Jim a Church of England Protestant — who later turned agnostic — their children were baptised Roman Catholic but raised non-denominationally , although Mary had married Jim on the promise that any children would be baptised in the Catholic faith . Although registered on his birth certificate as James Paul McCartney their first son was known as Paul thereafter . The two boys were not enrolled in Catholic schools , as their father believed that they leaned too much towards religion instead of education . Paul remembers his mother encouraging her children to use the Queen 's English and not the Liverpudlian dialect , which was unusual for the area they lived in .

Jim and Mary would often take Paul and Michael for a walk to the local rustic village of Hale ( home of the giant Childe of Hale 's gravesite ) . According to Paul , these frequent trips out of Liverpool to the countryside inspired his love of nature . The McCartneys had a full set of George Newnes encyclopedias which Jim encouraged Paul and Michael to use , and told his sons to look up any word they did not understand . After Paul had passed the Eleven-plus Exam — meaning he would automatically gain a place at the Liverpool Institute — it was hoped that Paul would become a doctor or a teacher . Michael would also attend the Liverpool Institute two years later . After Mary 's death , Paul and Michael were sent to live with Jim 's brother Joe , and his wife Joan , for two months , so as to let their father grieve in private . Jim depended heavily on his sisters , Jin and Millie , to help around the house . Jim later took part in the running of the household , as Cynthia Lennon remembered that when she and John Lennon used to visit Forthlin Road , Jim would often answer the door with his sleeves rolled up , a tea towel in his hand and an apron tied around his waist . When Paul later played at The Cavern during lunchtimes , Jim would drop off food there that Paul would later put in the oven at Forthlin Road . Ruth remembered that Jim was funny and musical with her , but also strict when she was young , and was insistent that she learned good table manners and etiquette when speaking to people .

Joe McCartney , Jim 's father , was a traditionalist who liked opera and played an E-flat tuba in the local Territorial Army band that played in Stanley Park , and the Copes ' Tobacco factory Brass Band where he worked . He also played the double bass at home , sang , and hoped to interest his children in music . Jim learned how to play the trumpet and piano by ear , and at the age of 17 started playing ragtime music . Joe McCartney thought that ragtime — the most popular music of the period — was " tin-can music " . Jim 's first public appearance was at St Catherine 's Hall , Vine Street , Liverpool , with a band that wore black masks as a gimmick , calling themselves the Masked Melody Makers . He later led Jim Mac 's Jazz Band in the 1920s , with his brother Jack on trombone , and composed his first tune , " Eloise " . Paul would later record it as , " Walking in The Park With Eloise " . Jim had an upright piano in the Forthlin Road front room that he had bought from Harry Epstein 's North End Music Store ( NEMS ) and Brian Epstein , Harry 's son , later became The Beatles ' manager .

Jim had a collection of old , 78 rpm records that he would often play , or perform his musical " party-pieces " — the hits of the time — on the piano . He used to point out the different instruments in songs on the radio to his sons , and took them to local brass band concerts . Jim also taught them a basic idea of harmony between instruments , and Paul credits Jim 's tuition as being helpful when later singing harmonies with Lennon . After Mary 's death , Jim bought Paul a nickel-plated trumpet as a birthday present . When skiffle music became popular , Paul swapped the trumpet for a £ 15 Framus Zenith ( model 17 ) acoustic guitar . Paul also played his father 's Framus Spanish guitar when writing early songs with Lennon . With encouragement from Jim , Paul started playing the family piano and wrote " When I 'm Sixty-Four " on it . Jim advised Paul to take some music lessons , which he did , but soon realised that he preferred to learn ' by ear ' ( as his father had done ) and because he never paid attention in music classes . After Paul and Michael became interested in music , Jim connected the radio in the living room to extension cords connected to two pairs of Bakelite headphones so that they could listen to Radio Luxembourg at night when they were in bed .

After first meeting Lennon , Jim warned Paul that he would get him " into trouble " , although he later allowed The Quarrymen to rehearse in the dining room at Forthlin Road in the evenings . Jim was reluctant to let the teenage Paul go to Hamburg with The Beatles until Paul said the group would earn £ 15 per week each . As this was more than he earned himself , Jim finally agreed , but only after a visit from the group 's then-manager , Allan Williams , who said that Jim should not worry . Jim was later present at a Beatles ' concert in Manchester when fans surrounded drummer Pete Best , and ignored the rest of The Beatles . Jim criticised Best by saying , " Why did you have to attract all the attention ? Why didn 't you call the other lads back ? I think that was very selfish of you " . Bill Harry recalled that Jim was probably " The Beatles ' biggest fan " , and was extremely proud of Paul 's success . Shelagh Johnson — later to become director of The Beatles ' Museum in Liverpool — said that Jim 's outward show of pride embarrassed his son . Jim enlisted Michael 's help when sorting through the ever-increasing sacks of fan letters that were delivered to Forthlin Road , with both composing " personal " responses that were supposedly from Paul . Michael would later have success on his own with the group The Scaffold .

Paul wrote " I Lost My Little Girl " just after Mary had died , and explained that it was a subconscious reference to his late mother . He also wrote " Golden Slumbers " at his father 's house in Heswall , and said the lyrics were taken from Ruth McCartney 's sheet-music copy of Thomas Dekker 's lullaby — also called " Golden Slumbers " — that Ruth had left on the piano at Rembrandt . Hunter Davies , who was at Jim 's house at the time doing an interview for his Beatles ' biography , remembered Jim listening to an acetate disc of " When I 'm Sixty-Four " . Davies wrote that Paul recorded the song specifically for his father , as Jim was then 64 years old and had married Angela two years previously . Paul wrote " Let It Be " , because of a dream he had in 1968 . He said that he had dreamt of his mother , and the " Mother Mary " lyric was about her . He later said , " It was great to visit with her again . I felt very blessed to have that dream . So that got me writing ' Let It Be ' . "

M-99 is a north – south state trunkline highway in the Lower Peninsula of the US state of Michigan . It runs from the Ohio state border , where it connects to State Route 15 ( SR 15 ) , north to Lansing , where it terminates at a junction with Interstate 496 ( I-496 ) and the Capitol Loop . The highway mainly serves local communities along the route as it passes through farm lands in the southern part of the state . One segment is routed concurrently with US Highway 12 ( US 12 ) in Jonesville while the northern end runs through urban areas on a street named for Martin Luther King , Jr. in Lansing . The current highway is the third to carry the M-99 designation . The others were located near Lake Michigan near Muskegon in the Lower Peninsula and Gulliver in the Upper Peninsula in the 1920s and 1930s . The current highway was first designated as parts of M-34 and M-64 in 1919 . These numbers were later dropped in favor of an M-9 designation in 1929 . For part of 1934 , a loop route was designated M-158 in Hillsdale County that was used for a rerouted M-9 in the area . The M-99 designation was applied to the highway in 1940 . Since then , the state has completed paving twice ; one segment was returned to gravel surface for two years in the 1950s . The southern section in Hillsdale County was rerouted in the 1960s , and sections were converted into divided highways in the late 1970s .

SR 15 ends at the Michigan state line just north of Pioneer , Ohio , where it becomes M-99 . The roadway travels northward from the state line on Pioneer Road , through mostly agricultural areas of Hillsdale County before reaching a junction with M-34 just west of Osseo . The trunkline turns westward on Hudson Road , which curves to the north around Baw Beese Lake just southeast of Hillsdale . M-99 passes through Hillsdale on a northwest course on Broad Street and Carlton Road , passing just a few blocks to the west of Hillsdale College . After leaving town , the road bends to the north as Olds Street as it runs parallel to the St. Joseph River to Jonesville . In that community , M-99 intersects US 12 . The two highways run concurrently through Jonesville for less than half a mile ( 0.8 km ) before M-99 returns to its northwesterly course . It leaves the town toward Litchfield continuing parallel to the river . In Litchfield , M-99 enters the town from the southeast , passing near downtown where it meets the northern terminus of M-49 . The highway leaves Litchfield heading northwest on Homer Road for a few miles before bending to the north as it crosses into Calhoun County . The trunkline passes through more farmland as it runs toward Homer on Hillsdale Street . In Homer , after passing through a roundabout , M-99 meets up with M-60 and the two highways run concurrently through the town to the northeast . The road briefly splits into a divided highway near the end of the concurrency . M-99 heads north , while M-60 continues eastward . From here , M-99 continues northward on 28 Mile Road toward the city of Albion . After crossing the Kalamazoo River in downtown , M-99 merges with Business Loop I-94 ( BL I-94 ) . M-99 continues east concurrently with the business loop on Michigan Avenue passing near Albion College before heading back north to an interchange with I-94 at exit 124 ; this interchange marks the end of BL I-94 and M-99 continues northward on Eaton Rapids Road .

M-99 heads north through farmland to the village of Springport where it turns eastward along Main Street as it passes through the town . The highway continues easterly on Eaton Rapids Road before turning northward to cross into Eaton County . Shortly after crossing the county line , M-50 comes in from the southwest to meet up with M-99 . The two highways travel together into Eaton Rapids . Together they form Main Street in the city before they separate on the north side of town . M-50 leaves to the northwest as Dexter Road , and M-99 continues to the northeast as Canal and Michigan streets . For the next few miles , the trunkline splits into a divided highway and runs parallel to the general course of the Grand River . M-99 crosses the river southeast of Diamondale after the opposing directions merge back together as an undivided highway . North of the river crossing , M-99 meets I-96 at the latter 's exit 101 on the southern border of Lansing . From I-96 , the road continues north through residential neighborhoods into Lansing as Martin Luther King Jr . Boulevard . The highway travels northeasterly through the southern side of the capital city , as far as Jolly Road . There it turns northward through the Old Everett Neighborhood . The street is bordered by commercial properties in this area . M-99 widens into a boulevard south of the intersection with Mount Hope Avenue before crossing the Grand River . North of the river , the highway is bordered by the site of the former Lansing Car Assembly plant , which for a century produced Oldsmobiles and other GM cars . M-99 ends at a junction with I-496 just north of the assembly plant area at exit 5 ; MLK Boulevard continues north from this interchange as the Capitol Loop .

In 1919 , the highway that is now M-99 was first signed as M-64 from the Ohio state line to Hillsdale and as M-34 from Hillsdale to the Litchfield area . In 1924 , the western terminus of M-34 was extended to Homer where it terminated at M-60 . Just a few years later , in 1926 , the western terminus was truncated , to end at Hillsdale , with the remainder to Jonesville becoming an extension of the M-64 . In 1929 , this version of M-64 was renumbered M-9 . In 1934 , M-9 traveled on Pioneer Road in Hillsdale County , from the Ohio border before turning west on Burt Road , north on Clark Road , west on Montgomery Road then north onto Hillsdale Road . During this time a loop was planned to continue north from the corner of Pioneer and Burt Roads to Montgomery Road where it turned west and met back up with M-9 at Clark Road . This short loop was designated M-158 , however later in the year the routing of M-9 was shifted onto the M-158 alignment , eliminating that route . By the middle of 1936 , the highway was extended northward to end in Lansing . The M-9 designation was replaced with M-99 in 1940 .

By 1947 , M-99 was completely paved . One segment between Litchfield and Homer was converted back to gravel surface in 1952 ; a change that was reverted two years later . By 1960 , the former US 12 / M-99 concurrency through Albion was redesignated Business US 12 through the city when the I-94 / US 12 freeway was completed . Within a year , that business loop was redesignated BL I-94 when the US 12 designation was removed from the freeway and applied to the former US 112 ; at the same time , the US 112 / M-99 concurrency in Jonesville became US 12 / M-99 as well . A new alignment of M-99 highway was opened from the Ransom area north to Osseo in 1966 ; the western terminus of M-34 was scaled back to end at the new highway near Osseo and M-99 supplanted M-34 from Osseo to Hillsdale . The divided highway section of M-99 was opened north of Eaton Rapids in 1979 .

The 1853 Atlantic hurricane season featured eight known tropical cyclones , none of which made landfall . Operationally , a ninth tropical storm was believed to have existed over the Dominican Republic on November 26 , but HURDAT – the official Atlantic hurricane database – now excludes this system . The first system , Tropical Storm One , was initially observed on August 5 . The final storm , Hurricane Eight , was last observed on October 22 . These dates fall within the period with the most tropical cyclone activity in the Atlantic . At two points during the season , pairs of tropical cyclones existed simultaneously . Four of the cyclones only have a single known point in their tracks due to a sparsity of data , so storm summaries for those systems are unavailable . Of the season 's eight tropical cyclones , four reached hurricane status . Furthermore , two of those four strengthened into major hurricanes , which are Category 3 or higher on the modern-day Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . The strongest cyclone of the season , the third hurricane , peaked at Category 4 strength with 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) winds . With a minimum barometric pressure of 924 mbar ( 27.3 inHg ) , it was the most intense tropical cyclone recorded in the Atlantic basin until the 1924 Cuba hurricane . The hurricane caused 40 fatalities after a brig went missing off the coast of North Carolina . Despite remaining offshore , Tropical Storm Five brought very strong winds to the Mexican city of Veracruz . Hurricane Eight brought strong winds and rough seas to North Florida and Georgia , causing significant damage in the latter .

Meteorologist William C. Redfield first observed the season 's third tropical storm south of Cape Verde on August 30 , which was the first Cape Verde-type hurricane ever recorded . Initially , the storm moved west-northwestward and gradually strengthened , becoming a hurricane on September 1 . Over the next two days , the hurricane intensified significantly and reached Category 2 strength early on September 2 . The system strengthened into a Category 4 hurricane by September 3 , attaining its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 924 mbar ( 27.3 inHg ) was recorded by the barque Hermann soon thereafter . It was the most intense storm in the Atlantic until the 1924 Cuba hurricane , a Category 5 hurricane with a minimum pressure of 910 mbar ( 27 inHg ) . The Great Havana Hurricane of 1846 may have been stronger , though it is discounted because HURDAT records did not begin until the 1851 season . By September 5 , the hurricane curved toward the northwest and began to weaken . Early on September 7 , it turned northward and fell to Category 3 intensity , situated about 340 miles ( 550 km ) east of Charleston , South Carolina . The hurricane passed offshore North Carolina later that day , and its outer rainbands produced heavy rainfall along the state 's southern coastlines . The brig Albermarle was lost at sea on September 7 with 40 of its crewmen missing ; they were later presumed to have drowned . The hurricane recurved east-northeastward and continued to deteriorate steadily , weakening to Category 1 status by September 9 . The storm was last observed late on September 10 , centered about 525 miles ( 845 km ) north-northwest of Flores Island in the Azores .

The ship Gilbert Gallatin encountered the fourth hurricane of the season on September 8 , which was centered about 1,000 miles ( 1,600 km ) east of the third hurricane . Sustained winds were initially observed to have reached 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) , indicative of a Category 3 hurricane . Several other ships reportedly encountered this storm as it tracked northeastward . With winds decreasing to 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) , it weakened to a Category 2 hurricane on September 10 . The storm was last noted by the ship Josephine later that day , while located about 615 miles ( 990 km ) north-northeast of Graciosa in the Azores .

The sixth hurricane of the season was first observed as a tropical storm to the southeast of Bermuda on September 26 . Initially , the storm headed north-northwestward , before curving north-northeastward on September 27 , while bypassing Bermuda . Later that day , the storm strengthened into a hurricane . The brig Samuel and Edward encountered the hurricane on September 2 , reporting winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) ; this was the maximum sustained wind speed associated with the storm . Thereafter , the storm executed a cyclonic loop , which lasted until September 30 . It curved northeastward on October 1 and was last noted at 0600 UTC , while located about 590 miles ( 950 km ) northeast of Bermuda .

The barque Edward reported a hurricane about 50 miles ( 80 km ) north of Grand Bahama on October 19 . Several other ships encountered the storm between October 19 and October 20 . It moved slowly north-northwestward and gradually strengthened . On October 20 , the storm reached maximum sustained winds of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) , making it a Category 2 hurricane . Additionally , ships reported a minimum barometric pressure of 996 mbar ( 29.4 inHg ) . After weakening back to a Category 1 hurricane on October 21 , the storm veered east-northeastward , avoiding a landfall in the Southeastern United States . It was last noted on October 22 , while centered about 80 miles ( 130 km ) east-southeast of Charleston , South Carolina . Strong winds , combined with tides in Jacksonville , Florida , pushed water over wharfs and onto Bay Street . William Gaston Captain Thomas E. Shaw reported that the gale at Brunswick , Georgia caused significant damage to the town . An engine-house belonging to the Brunswick Railroad Company was flattened , as was a large cotton shed , a blacksmith shop , and a new frame house , and a number of other buildings were damaged . The new railroad wharf was washed away and its remains were floating in the harbor . Offshore , there were numerous shipwrecks , including the schooners W. Mercer , G. W. Pickering , Mary Ann , and the Steamer Planter . Additionally , the schooner James House reported " a perfect hurricane " .

In addition to the four tropical cyclones of the season , there were four others with only a single point on their track , due to the sparsity of data . The barque W.B. Bowen encountered a gale with winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) near 33.5 ° N , 69.2 ° W on August 5 , which is located about 255 miles ( 410 km ) east of Bermuda . This system would later be listed in HURDAT records as Tropical Storm One . However , due to heavy prevailing weather , further data on this storm is unavailable . A publication by meteorologist Ivan R. Tannehill indicates that Tropical Storm Two was centered near Barbados on August 10 . However , due its weak nature – maximum sustained winds were only 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) – only a single data point is known of the storm 's path . Tropical Storm Five was reported to have existed on September 21 at 20 ° N , 95 ° W , which is located in the Bay of Campeche . The Elize and Crichton encountered a heavy " norther " upon arriving at Veracruz , Veracruz on that day . Although it was centered offshore , very strong winds were reported in Veracruz , possibly induced by the funneling effect from the Sierra Madre Oriental . Further information of this tropical storm is sparse . Two separate reports by meteorologists Ivan R. Tannehill and Edward B. Garriott indicate that the seventh tropical storm of the season existed at 15 ° N , 37 ° W on September 28 , which is located west of Cape Verde . Observations noted that maximum sustained winds reached 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . With only a single data point , no further information is available on this storm .

Egon Mayer ( 19 August 1917 – 2 March 1944 ) was a German Luftwaffe military aviator during World War II , a fighter ace credited with 102 enemy aircraft shot down in over 353 combat missions . His victories were all claimed over the Western Front and included 26 four-engine bombers , 51 Supermarine Spitfires and 12 P-47 Thunderbolts . Mayer was the first fighter pilot to score 100 victories entirely on the Western Front . Born in Konstanz , Mayer , who was a glider pilot in his youth , volunteered for military service in the Luftwaffe of the Third Reich in 1937 . Following flight training he was posted to Jagdgeschwader 2 " Richthofen " ( JG 2 — 2nd Fighter Wing ) in 1939 . He fought in the Battle of France and claimed his first aerial victory in that campaign on 13 June 1940 . Mayer was appointed Staffelkapitän ( squadron leader ) of the 7 . Staffel ( 7th squadron ) of JG 2 " Richthofen " in June 1941 . Two months later , following his 21st aerial victory , he received the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross on 1 August 1941 . He claimed 16 further victories and was awarded the German Cross in Gold on 16 July 1942 . In November 1942 , Mayer was appointed Gruppenkommandeur ( group commander ) of the III . Gruppe ( 3rd group ) of JG 2 " Richthofen " .

Mayer claimed his first victories over United States Army Air Forces ( USAAF ) four-engine bombers when he shot down two B-17 Flying Fortresses and a B-24 Liberator on 23 November 1942 . Together with fellow fighter ace Georg-Peter Eder , Mayer developed the head-on attack as the most effective tactic against the Allied daylight heavy combat box bomber formations . He received the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves on 16 April 1943 after 63 victories . On 1 July 1943 , he replaced Walter Oesau as Geschwaderkommodore ( wing commander ) of JG 2 " Richthofen " . He claimed his 90th victory on 31 December 1943 and on 5 February 1944 became the first pilot on the Channel Front to reach 100 victories . Mayer was killed in action on 2 March 1944 while leading an attack on a USAAF bomber formation ; he was shot down by P-47 Thunderbolt escort fighters near Montmédy , France . He was posthumously awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords that day .

Mayer , the son of a farmer , was born on 19 August 1917 in Konstanz at the Bodensee . Konstanz at the time was in the Grand Duchy of Baden of the German Empire . Mayer grew up on his parents ' farm named Hauserhof and spent his spare time at the glider airfield at the Bellenberg near Engen . He went to school at the Langemarck-Realgymnasium — a secondary school built on the mid-level Realschule to achieve the Abitur ( university entry qualification ) — in Singen . Today , the Langemarck-Realgymnasium , which had been named after the location of the World War I Battle of Langemarck , is the Hegau-Gymnasium . Following his graduation , Mayer volunteered for military service in the Luftwaffe on 1 November 1937 . His military training began at the 2nd Air Warfare School ( Luftkriegsschule 2 ) at Gatow , on the southwestern outskirts of Berlin . He was then trained as a fighter pilot and promoted to Leutnant ( second lieutenant ) on 1 August 1939 .

World War II in Europe began on Friday , 1 September 1939 , when German forces invaded Poland . Mayer received the Iron Cross 2nd Class ( Eisernes Kreuz 2 . Klasse ) on 25 October 1939 and was transferred to Jagdgeschwader 2 " Richthofen " ( JG 2 — 2nd Fighter Wing ) , named after the after World War I fighter ace Manfred von Richthofen , on 6 December 1939 . For his entire combat career , with the exception of a brief posting to the fighter pilot school at Werneuchen , Mayer would serve in JG 2 " Richthofen " . He claimed his first aerial victory on 13 June 1940 during the Battle of France , shooting down an Armée de l 'Air ( French Air Force ) Morane-Saulnier M.S.406. In the Battle of Britain , Mayer often flew over the English Channel as the wingman of Helmut Wick . He claimed three further victories in this campaign , all over Royal Air Force ( RAF ) Supermarine Spitfires , but was himself shot down or forced to land at the French Coast . Once he had to swim in the Channel for an hour before he was rescued . At the end of 1940 Mayer had four victories to his credit and JG 2 " Richthofen " was withdrawn from combat to replenish the heavy losses it had sustained . Following a short tour as fighter pilot instructor at the Jagdfliegerschule ( fighter pilot school ) in Werneuchen , Mayer was sent back to the Channel Front .

On 10 June 1941 , Oberleutnant ( First Lieutenant ) Mayer was appointed Staffelkapitän ( squadron leader ) of 7 . Staffel ( 7th squadron ) of JG 2 " Richthofen " , based at Saint-Pol-Brias . He claimed his 19th and 20th victory on 23 July 1941 and was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes ) on 1 August 1941 after his 21st aerial victory . He received the award with fellow JG 2 " Richthofen " pilots Oberleutnant Erich Leie and Oberleutnant Rudolf Pflanz on that day . The triple award presentation was recorded by the Deutsche Wochenschau ( German Weekly Review ) , a newsreel series released in the cinemas . His score had increased to 28 aerial victories by the end of 1941 . Mayer received the German Cross in Gold ( Deutsches Kreuz in Gold ) on 16 July 1942 . On 19 August , his 25th birthday , Mayer shot down two Spitfires over Dieppe during Operation Jubilee , his 49th and 50th victory .

In June 1943 , Mayer encountered Robert S. Johnson , a future ace from the 56th Fighter Group of the US Eighth Air Force . Johnson 's P-47 Thunderbolt had been badly shot-up by some Focke Wulf Fw 190s during a routine mission . As Johnson limped home , with a canopy that would not open and hydraulic fluid and oil covering his windscreen , Mayer pulled alongside him in his Fw-190 . Mayer looked the wounded P-47 over , and then circled to come in from Johnson 's six-o 'clock to give it the coup de grâce . The first gun pass failed to knock the heavy American fighter out of the sky . Mayer made two more runs on Johnson , without success . After running out of ammunition , Mayer pulled alongside Johnson , saluted him and headed for home . Johnson landed his plane , and counted more than 200 holes , without even moving around the airplane . He also saw that a 20 mm cannon shell had exploded just behind his headrest , which had made it impossible to open his canopy . On 22 June 1943 , a flight led by Mayer encountered an RAF Spitfire unit . During the course of the engagement , he claimed one Spitfire shot down and damage to another . He shot down three USAAF P-47s on 26 June 1943 .

Mayer was appointed Geschwaderkommodore ( wing commander ) of JG 2 " Richthofen " on 1 July 1943 , thus succeeding Oberst ( Colonel ) Walter Oesau . Command of III . Gruppe was passed on to the Staffelkapitän of 8 . Staffel , Hauptmann Bruno Stolle . He claimed three B-17s shot down within 19 minutes on 6 September . The Eighth Air Force was targeting Stuttgart that day and lost 45 aircraft . On 1 December 1943 , Mayer shot down three P-47 Thunderbolts . His claimed aerial victories increased to 90 on 30 December 1943 . Mayer was credited with four victories on 7 January 1944 , three B-24s and one B-17 shot down in the vicinity of Orléans . On 4 February 1944 he claimed his 100th victory , the first fighter pilot on the Channel Front to achieve this mark . Mayer 's final score stood at 102 when he was shot down and killed in action by a P-47 Thunderbolt near Montmédy on 2 March 1944 . Flying Focke-Wulf Fw 190 A-6 ( factory number 470468 ) , Mayer had led his Stabsschwarm ( headquarters unit ) and elements of III . Gruppe , 14 Fw 190s in total , in an attack on B-17s in the area of Sedan , but failed to detect the fighter escort of 29 P-47s 5,000 feet ( 1,500 meters ) above . His aircraft was seen taking hits at a range of 400 yards ( 370 meters ) in the nose and cockpit . It made a violent snap roll and went into a vertical dive , crashing within 1.5 miles ( 2.4 kilometers ) of Montmédy . He was posthumously decorated with the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes mit Eichenlaub und Schwertern ) that day .

The Alberta and Great Waterways Railway Scandal was a political scandal in Alberta , Canada in 1910 , which forced the resignation of the Liberal provincial government of Alexander Cameron Rutherford . Rutherford and his government were accused of giving loan guarantees to private interests for the construction of the Alberta and Great Waterways ( A & GW ) Railway that substantially exceeded the actual cost of construction , and which paid interest considerably above the market rate . They were also accused of exercising insufficient oversight over the railway 's operations . The scandal split the Liberal Party : Rutherford 's Minister of Public Works , William Henry Cushing , resigned from his government and publicly attacked its railway policy , and a large portion of the Liberal caucus voted to defeat the government in the Legislative Assembly of Alberta . Although the government survived all of these votes , and Rutherford largely placated the legislature by appointing a royal commission to investigate the affair , pressure from Lieutenant-Governor George Bulyea forced Rutherford 's resignation and his replacement by Arthur Sifton . The royal commission reported months after Rutherford had already resigned . The majority did not find Rutherford or his cabinet guilty of any wrongdoing , but criticized them for poor judgment , both in relation to the loan guarantees and in relation to the exemptions the A & GW received from provincial legislation ; a minority report was more sympathetic , and declared the allegations against them " disproved " . James Cornwall , a Liberal backbencher who supported Rutherford , fared somewhat worse : his personal financial involvement in the railway gave rise to " suspicious circumstances " , but he too was not proven guilty of any wrongdoing .

Alberta 's first years as a province were optimistic ones , and one way that this optimism manifested itself was in a desire for railroads . The public , media , and politicians all called for the rapid development of new lines and expansion of existing ones . Rutherford 's Liberals had set up a framework that allowed almost anybody to enter the railroad business , but few firms had done so by 1909 . The opposition Conservatives called for the government 's direct entry into the industry . Rutherford 's government instead opted for a regime of loan guarantees : the Grand Trunk Pacific Railway and the Canadian Northern Railway ( CNR ) had their bonds , which were to pay 4 % per year over their thirty-year term , guaranteed at a rate of $ 13,000 per mile of railway constructed . The legislature had the right to increase this to $ 15,000 . In exchange , the railways were subject to a minimum rate of line construction : the CNR was required to build 125 miles ( 201 km ) and the Grand Trunk Railway 50 miles ( 80 km ) before the end of 1909 .

Besides the established companies , guarantees were also offered to new companies . One company to take advantage of this was the Alberta and Great Waterways Railway , which was founded by two Kansas City bankers , William R. Clarke and Bertrand R. Clarke , and a Winnipeg accountant , William Bain . The company proposed to build a " line from Edmonton north-easterly to a point at or near the west end of Lac la Biche , thence to a point at or near Fort McMurray . " Guarantees to the so-called " A & GW " were more generous than to the established companies : $ 20,000 per mile for 350 miles ( 560 km ) and $ 400,000 for its Edmonton terminal . The bonds also paid better interest ( 5 % ) over a longer term ( fifty years ) than those of the established companies . Upon the bonds ' sale , the money was to be placed in a bank account controlled by the government , and paid to the railway as the line was constructed .

The Rutherford government had just been resoundingly re-elected in the 1909 provincial election , winning 36 of the legislature 's 41 seats , when the new legislature first met in February 1910 . There was initially no sign of controversy in relation to the A & GW Railway : William Clarke , A & GW President , had several months earlier announced that the line would be completed by the end of 1912 , ahead of schedule . When the A & GW bonds went on sale in London in November 1909 , the issue was oversubscribed . The following month , the contract for ties was awarded . Everything seemed to be progressing as planned when , at the beginning of the new legislative session , Liberal backbencher John R. Boyle asked the government a series of innocuous questions about the company and the guarantees made to it . Rutherford , Minister of Railways as well as Premier , responded to the questions in writing . Before he did so , however , a rumour began to circulate that William Henry Cushing , Minister of Public Works , had resigned from the cabinet . Boyle and Conservative leader R. B. Bennett questioned Rutherford about the rumours , but Rutherford initially refused to make any announcement . The next day , however , the rumour was confirmed when the Premier read Cushing 's letter of resignation in the legislature . In this letter , Cushing gave his reasons for resigning as disagreement with the government 's railway policy , which he claimed was developed without his involvement or consent . Rutherford disagreed with this claim , and expressed his regret for Cushing 's resignation .

On February 21 , Boyle gave notice of a resolution to expropriate the rights of the A & GW and build the line directly . He asserted that the government had guaranteed to the A & GW more than was necessary , as a line of 230 miles ( 370 km ) , barely two thirds what had been guaranteed , was sufficient . The next day , Boyle further alleged that Deputy Attorney-General S. B. Woods had tampered with the government 's files on the A & GW before Boyle and Bennett had viewed them . Attorney-General Charles Wilson Cross strongly disputed this allegation . Debate on Boyle 's resolution began February 25 , in front of a full public gallery . Cushing opened debate . He explained that the cabinet 's original intention had been for $ 20,000 per mile to be the maximum guarantee , with less promised for more easily built portions of the line . He claimed that he had taken ill at a time that this understanding was still in place , only to have Rutherford move responsibility for railways from Cushing 's Public Works department to a new Railways department , headed by Rutherford himself . He recounted his discomfort with Rutherford 's refusal to consult with Public Works engineers on the actual costs of constructing the line , and his relief at Rutherford 's assurance that Cushing himself would be consulted . He claimed that Rutherford had not followed-through on this pledge , and that , upon seeing the completed agreement between the A & GW and the government , Cushing had decided to resign . Rutherford disputed this version of events , noted that Cushing had been at all relevant cabinet meetings , and cited the report of government engineer R. W. Jones in disputing that the line could be constructed for less than $ 20,000 per mile .

Boyle followed , alleging that Rutherford had privately committed the government to the $ 20,000 figure as early as November 14 , 1908 , before a government engineer had even been appointed . He also accused the government of negligence in failing to verify the paid in capital of the A & GW before committing $ 7.4 million of government loan guarantees to it . He closed by repeating his demand that the government expropriate the company 's rights and build the line itself . Cross rebutted for the government , questioning Cushing 's sincerity and quoting a March 1909 speech in which the then-Minister of Public Works had defended the government 's railway policy against Bennett 's attacks . Cross also reminded the legislature that no money was to be paid to the A & GW until tracks were actually constructed . On February 28 Liberal member and Cushing-ally Ezra Riley proposed an amendment to Boyle 's resolution , striking out the proposals to expropriate and substituting a statement that " the contract and agreement entered into between the Government and the Alberta and Great Waterways Railway Company are not such as to commend them to the judgment and confidence of this house " . The same day , an amendment to this amendment was moved by Liberal John William Woolf and seconded by Liberal John Alexander McDougall . Woolf and McDougall proposed redrafting the agreement along the lines proposed by A & GW President Clarke in a letter to Rutherford . This letter suggested that the A & GW should offer to the government its construction equipment and other assets in guarantee of its construction pledges .

The Woolf-McDougall amendment was considered friendly to the government , but Rutherford was not yet in the clear . Independent Edward Michener attacked the government for receiving only par value for the bonds when they had been sold at ten percent above par . McDougall voiced his support for Michener 's argument ; though McDougall had seconded Woolf 's pro-government amendment , it became apparent that his reasons for doing so were less support for the government than a principled aversion to the province using its law-making power to extricate itself from inconvenient contracts . Opposition to the government came to a head March 2 when Conservative leader Bennett first spoke . Bennett was renowned as one of the province 's finest orators , and his five-hour speech earned plaudits even from the Liberal Edmonton Bulletin , which praised its " splendor in diction [ and ] the physical endurance of the orator " and called it a " high water mark for parliamentary debate in Alberta " . Bennett lashed out at the government 's handling of the A & GW file , accusing it of culpable negligence in failing to properly oversee the company 's activities . He claimed to have been approached directly by " great financial interests " intent on preventing his participation in the debate . He argued that the discrepancy in the sale price of the bonds and what the government had received for them meant that Clarke and his associates had realized a profit of between $ 200,000 and $ 300,000 at the government 's expense . He closed with an accusation that Cross had sent an emissary to a telephone company that wanted to install an automatic telephone system in Calgary agreeing to reverse his opposition to the deal in exchange for a $ 12,000 contribution to Cross 's campaign fund . These charges , corroborated by Cushing but hotly denied by Cross , were not related to the A & GW affair , but were designed to damage the credibility of the government 's de facto house leader on the eve of the vote on the Woolf-McDougall amendment . The government side adopted similar tactics : Agriculture Minister Duncan Marshall accused Boyle of being motivated by bitterness over having been denied the solicitorship of the A & GW ; Boyle admitted that he had applied for this position , but denied an accusation from Peace River MLA James Cornwall that he had requested Cornwall 's assistance in lobbying for it .

On March 9 , Cross suddenly resigned . His resignation was quickly followed by that of Woods , his deputy . The next day William Ashbury Buchanan , Minister without Portfolio , did the same ; though he had voted on the government 's side on the Woolf-McDougall motion , he harboured considerable doubts about the government 's railway policy . Rumours circulated that Agriculture Minister Marshall and Minister without Portfolio Prosper-Edmond Lessard had also resigned , though these proved false . Buchanan , Marshall , Lessard , and Rutherford made no comment on the situation to either the press or the legislature , but Cross was more forthcoming : he said that Rutherford had told him that Cushing had been asked to re-enter cabinet and had accepted , leading Cross to conclude that , in light of his public conflict with Cushing , he " could not , under the circumstances , remain a member of the Alberta government . " ( Woods , who as a deputy minister did not sit in the legislature , denied that his resignation had any political motivation at all ; he said that he had received an employment offer carrying three times his current salary . )

Cushing also made public statements and , as usual , his were not in line with Cross 's . While acknowledging that Rutherford had invited him to rejoin the cabinet , he claimed that the Premier had offered Cross 's resignation as one of the terms for Cushing 's re-entry . He further denied that he had ever accepted Rutherford 's offer , both because of persisting conflict between him and the Premier and because his re-entry was unanimously opposed by his fellow dissident Liberals . He directly accused Cross of having fabricated his claim that Rutherford had told him that Cushing had agreed to re-enter cabinet . Rutherford held his silence until March 11 , when he told the legislature that he had not accepted any resignations . He said that the only vacant cabinet post was the ministry of Public Works previously held by Cushing , and that he hoped to fill it soon . In the meantime , he intended to continue governing . While he eventually acknowledged Buchanan 's resignation March 14 , Cross remained in cabinet .

Following the passage of the Woolf-McDougall motion , the government took the offensive . On March 9 , Rutherford gave notice of a resolution to strike a provincial railway board , with a membership of Rutherford , Deputy Public Works Minister John Stocks , and provincial railway engineer R. W. Jones . The board would have the power to discharge any government responsibility under the Alberta Railway Act . Stocks , however , publicly repudiated the resolution , and announced that he would have nothing to do with it . On March 11 , government supporter Charles Stewart attempted to disclose a scandalous rumour about Boyle in the legislature , but was ruled out of order by Speaker Charles W. Fisher . The allegation was quickly printed in the Edmonton Bulletin instead : Boyle , who expected to be named Attorney-General in the event that Cushing formed a government , was accused of approaching Lucien Boudreau and Robert L. Shaw , two government supporters who were hoteliers in their extra-legislative careers , and offering them immunity from prosecution for liquor license violations in exchange for their support of the insurgency . That same day , Riley and Boyle moved a motion of no confidence in the government . It was defeated by a margin of twenty to seventeen . Ominously for Rutherford , two hitherto loyal Liberals , Buchanan and Henry William McKenney , switched their support to the rebels . More favourably , the ill member for Macleod , Colin Genge , was rumoured to be recovering from his illness and soon on his way to Edmonton , where he was expected to support the government ( in fact , Genge would die without ever taking his seat ) . The government was also encouraged by the motion of dissident George P. Smith to strike an apolitical commission to supervise the construction of the A & GW , since it corresponded closely to its own proposal to appoint a royal commission .

The commission first met in Edmonton March 29 . The three commissioners — Justices David Lynch Scott , Horace Harvey , and Nicholas Beck — were joined by counsel for the insurgents ( including Bennett himself ) , Cross , Rutherford , the A & GW , and Cornwall ( who had been accused of using his involvement with the Athabasca Railway for personal benefit during the scandal ) . The evidence they heard was reported in great detail by Alberta 's press , to the initial interest of the public . Before long , however , the details grew tedious , and the public became less engaged . The greatest surprise to emerge during the commission 's inquiry did not come from one of the forty-six witnesses to testify , but from one who did not : A & GW President Clarke moved back to the United States , and did not return for his scheduled testimony . While this disappearance did not prove the government 's guilt , in the eyes of the press it did prove Clarke 's . As the Edmonton Journal put it , the only question left to answer was " were the members of the government simple innocents whom Clarke worked through their credulity or were they in on it with him ? "

Though it was George Bulyea , Alberta 's first lieutenant governor , who had invited Rutherford to form the province 's first government in 1905 , the Premier never fully enjoyed Bulyea 's confidence . Bulyea preferred several other candidates to Rutherford , including federal Member of Parliament ( MP ) Peter Talbot , but when these proved unwilling he acquiesced with Rutherford , the choice of Alberta Liberals . Now , with Rutherford reeling , Bulyea saw his initial doubts validated and began the search for potential successors . The obvious choice was Cushing , but Bulyea felt little enthusiasm for him , doubting his political acumen ( in this opinion he was supported by other Liberal Party luminaries , including Frank Oliver , federal Minister of the Interior and proprietor of the Bulletin ) . He continued to prefer Talbot , but found that the insurgent Liberals , who favoured Cushing , would not accept him . Oliver was also a possibility , but he had no interest in leaving Ottawa . Talbot suggested Arthur Sifton , the province 's chief justice . Sifton was a Liberal , but as a judge he was remote from political mudslinging . However , he had been offered the office of Premier in 1905 , when it had seemed more desirable than it did now ; would he have any interest ? The question was answered May 26 , when the legislature reconvened . Bulyea entered the house and announced that he had accepted Rutherford 's resignation and that he had asked Sifton to form a government . Sifton had accepted .

The commission reported to the legislature November 10 , 1910 . Its findings were split into two reports : a majority report from Justices Scott and Harvey , and a minority report from Justice Beck . The majority report traced the origins of the A & GW scandal to 1905 , when a number of Albertans , including James Cornwall , were federally incorporated as the Athabasca Railway Company , chartered to construct a railway from Edmonton to Fort McMurray . The legal work for the incorporation had been done by the law firm of Charles Wilson Cross , Cornwall 's close friend and personal solicitor . In October 1906 Cornwall sold the ARC 's charter to a syndicate of Winnipegers for $ 2,500 and a one-sixth share in the syndicate . The syndicate costed out the construction of the railway , and found that cost per mile would be $ 13,700 from Edmonton to Lac la Biche , and one thousand dollars per mile more from Lac la Biche to Fort McMurray . It decided to undertake the venture if it could get a loan guarantee of $ 13,000 per mile from the Alberta government . At the end of 1906 , syndicate members visited Alberta , where Cornwall introduced them to members of the cabinet . Negotiations between the syndicate and the government continued for several years . During this time , new construction estimates prepared by the syndicate placed the cost of the railway at between eighteen and twenty thousand dollars per mile . February 2 , 1907 , Cornwall entered into an agreement with the syndicate whereby he would receive $ 544,000 in stock in the resulting railway company if he could secure the necessary loan guarantees ; this amount was later changed to $ 100,000 .

At the beginning of 1908 , Clarke appeared on the scene , and eventually acquired the syndicate 's full interest in the railway , including a purchase of Cornwall 's interest for $ 14,500 ( of an agreed-upon $ 25,000 ) . Shortly thereafter , Clarke met with members of cabinet in Calgary ; Cushing asserted that he had not been present for this meeting , while Rutherford insisted that he had been . While no formal guarantee was made at this meeting , Clarke left it confident that he would receive the necessary loan guarantee , and proceeded with construction plans . He obtained new cost estimates for the railroad of $ 27,000 per mile , though Clarke 's engineer confidentially advised him that it could be built for half this amount . By November 14 , 1908 , the cabinet , led by Rutherford and Cross , had agreed to the $ 20,000 per mile guarantee . The majority report was critical of Rutherford and Cross for this , and also for setting the bonds ' interest rate at 5 percent rather than 4 percent . The stated reason for this discrepancy was that the proposed railroad was likely to be difficult and expensive to build , crossing hundreds of miles of wilderness ; in response , the report pointed out that the provincial guarantee of $ 20,000 per mile took this difficulty into account , and that there was thus no need for a higher interest rate to lure investors .

The majority report also took a dim view of the exemptions from the province 's railway legislation that were built into the A & GW 's charter : unlike the province 's other railways , the A & GW was not required to have directors resident in Alberta and was exempt from the requirement that railway companies not commence business until 25 % of their capital was subscribed and 10 % paid up . The A & GW was held to a figure of less than 1 % for both , and even this requirement was met in an unusual manner : Clarke brought his personal account into overdraft to issue a $ 50,000 cheque to the company , thereby allowing the latter to meet its capital requirements and commence operations . The company then authorized a payment of the same amount to Clarke on account of expenses incurred by him on behalf of the company ; he used this payment to clear his overdraft . The majority declined to find Rutherford and Cross guilty of any wrongdoing beyond poor judgment , though its findings were hardly flattering : " As there is room for doubt that the inference of personal interest is the only reasonable inference to be drawn from the circumstances related , and in view of the positive denial , it can only be said that , in the opinion of your commissioners , the evidence does not warrant the finding that there was or is any personal interest on the part of Dr. Rutherford or Mr. Cross " . Its findings with regards to Cornwall were similar : his receipt of $ 14,500 and his expectation of $ 10,500 more constituted " suspicious circumstances " , but these " point to no definite conclusion ; and he has denied that he received any other benefit , or was interested in any other way in the enterprise , and it must be held that the evidence does not establish the contrary . "

Justice Beck 's minority report was more sympathetic to all three men . Beck declared himself perfectly satisfied that Cushing , despite his protestations to the contrary , had been aware of all details of the negotiations . While acknowledging that " in some instances the wisdom of their course may be doubtful " , he accepted Rutherford 's and Cross 's explanations for their actions and labelled the accusations against them " disproved " . He felt similarly about Cornwall , concluding that by the time he was using his position to advocate for the construction of the A & GW , he was free of any pecuniary interest in it .

Sifton was selected Premier in an effort to restore party unity , and his first cabinet reflected that . There were three ministers in addition to Sifton . Charles R. Mitchell had been , like Sifton , a judge during the scandal , and was therefore unattached to either side . Duncan Marshall had been a Rutherford cabinet minister , but not one identified strongly with its railway policy . Archibald J. McLean had voted with the rebels , but not been a leader among them . The cabinet thus included members of both factions , but none of those who inspired such strong opinions as to be overly divisive . In late 1910 , the new government introduced legislation to revoke the A & GW 's charter and confiscate the proceeds from the sale of bonds , which were still held by the province . In introducing the bill , Sifton made no commitment as to what would be done with the funds once confiscated . Many northern MLAs , including Cornwall and Cross , suspected that the Premier 's plans for the money did not include construction of a northern railway , and opposed the bill on that basis . Clarke re-surfaced in Winnipeg to deny Sifton 's charge that the A & GW had defaulted on any of its obligations , and Conservative leader Bennett opposed the confiscation out of stated respect for private property : " Clarke I despise but Clarke I am bound to respect because this province gave him a right by charter and if I know the United States I do not think it will allow this province to take his property ' without due process of law ' . "

The government won the vote 25 to 14 . Once the legislation was signed into law by Bulyea , the government immediately wrote cheques drawing on the bond money . The Royal , Dominion , and Union banks , where the funds were deposited , refused payment . The government sued , and the provincial supreme court ruled in its favour in 1912 . The Royal Bank subsequently requested that the federal government use its power of disallowance to invalidate the legislation and appealed the supreme court 's decision to the British privy council , at the time Canada 's highest court of appeal . While the federal government declined to act , in 1913 the privy council found that the provincial legislature did not have the authority to confiscate money that had been raised from investors from outside of the province . In its objective of smoothing over Liberal divisions , Sifton 's succession was only partially successful . Rutherford himself became increasingly distant from the party , and sought re-election in the next election as an independent Liberal , opposed to Sifton 's government . In fact , he offered to campaign for the Conservatives across the province if they would agree not to run a candidate against him in his own riding ; the Conservatives declined his offer , and Rutherford was defeated . He would go on to campaign for the Conservatives in the 1921 election . On the other side , Ezra Riley , a leader of the insurgency , resigned his seat in protest of Cushing 's exclusion from the new administration ; he was defeated in the ensuing by-election by a pro-Sifton candidate . It is possible that supporters of Cross would have taken a similar tack , but Sifton brought him back into cabinet before the next election . With the noisiest dissidents neutralized , the Liberals enjoyed a period relatively free of intra-party strife , until the Conscription Crisis of 1917 once again split the party .

A Short Walk in the Hindu Kush is a 1958 book by the English travel writer Eric Newby . It is an autobiographical account of his adventures in the Hindu Kush , around the Nuristan mountains of Afghanistan , ostensibly to make the first mountaineering ascent of Mir Samir . It has been described as a comic masterpiece , intensely English , and understated . Publications including The Guardian and The Telegraph list it among the greatest travel books of all time . It has sold over 500,000 copies in paperback . The book has 14 monochrome photographs taken mainly by Newby , and two hand-drawn maps . The novelist Evelyn Waugh wrote a preface that mentions the book 's whimsy and its Englishness . The action in the book moves from Newby 's life in the fashion business in London to Afghanistan . On the way Newby describes his very brief training in mountaineering in North Wales , a stop in Istanbul , and a nearly-disastrous drive across Turkey and Persia . They are driven out to the Panjshir Valley , where they begin their walk , with many small hardships described in a humorous narrative , supported by genuine history of Nuristan and brief descriptions of the rare moments of beauty along the way . Disagreements with Newby 's Persian-speaking companion Hugh Carless , and odd phrases in an antique grammar book , are exploited to comic effect .

In 1956 at the age of 36 , Newby ended his London career in fashion and decided impulsively to travel to a remote corner of Afghanistan where no Englishman had ventured for 60 years . He sent a telegraph to his friend the diplomat Hugh Carless , then due to take up his position as First Secretary in Tehran later that year , requesting he accompany him on an expedition to Northern Afghanistan . They were poorly prepared and inexperienced , but Newby and Carless vowed to attempt Mir Samir , a glacial and then unclimbed 20,000 foot peak in the Hindu Kush .

The book was illustrated with 14 monochrome photographs taken by Newby or Carless ; one depicts the explorer Wilfred Thesiger in his sleeping-bag . There are two hand-drawn maps . The " Map to illustrate a journey in Nuristan by Eric Newby and Hugh Carless in 1956 " , shows an area of 75 x 55 miles covering the Panjshir valley to the Northwest , and Nuristan and the Pushal valley to the Southeast ; it has a small inset of Central Asia showing the area 's location to the Northeast of Kabul . The other map , " Nuristan " , covers a larger area of about 185 x 140 miles , showing Kabul and Jalalabad to the South , and Chitral and the Pakistan region of Kohistan to the East .

A two-page preface by novelist Evelyn Waugh recommends the book , remarking on its " idiomatic , uncalculated manner " , and that the " beguiling narrative " is " intensely English " . He hopes that Newby is not the last of a " whimsical tradition " . He explains that Newby is not the other English writer of the same name and confesses ( or pretends ) that he began to read it thinking that it was the other man 's work . He sketches out the " deliciously funny " account of Newby selling women 's clothes , and the " call of the wild " ( he admits it is an absurdly trite phrase ) that led him to the Hindu Kush . Waugh ends by advising the " dear reader " to " fall to and enjoy this characteristic artifact . "

With Carless , they drive across Turkey to Persia ( present day Iran ) . They make an emergency stop on the road , just short of a dying nomad , and with difficulty convince the police they did not cause the death . Wanda returns home and the men cross Persia and Afghanistan , driving through Herat to Kandahar and Kabul . They had driven 5,000 miles ( 8,000 km ) in a month . There are comic touches , as when " The proprietor Abdul , a broken-toothed demon of a man , conceived a violent passion for Hugh . We sat with him drinking coffee ... ' Arrrh , CAHARLESS , soul of your father . You have ill-used your motor-car . ' He hit Hugh a violent blow of affection in the small of his back , just as he was drinking his coffee . ' Urggh ! ' "

Newby and Carless try to acclimatise to the altitude with a practice walk . They visit the Foreign Ministry , hire an Afghan cook , and buy a " very short " list of supplies . Newby describes the geography of Nuristan " walled in on every side by the most formidable mountains " and a little history , with the legend of descent from Alexander the Great , the British imperial adventures , and pre-war German expeditions . They are driven out from Kabul by a servant from the Embassy . They stay in a tall mud house in a place with mulberry trees , vines and willows by a river . Hugh puts the dinner guests to sleep with a complicated story " about an anaconda killing a horse " . They meet their three " very small " horses and their horse-drivers . The cook has to return to Kabul . Despite having horses , they decide to carry 40 pound ( 20 kg ) packs " to toughen ourselves up " . The local people insult them for carrying loads in the heat . The drivers are angry at having to walk in the heat . They agree the drivers ' pay .

They walk . They get upset stomachs and blisters . They find a man " with his skull smashed to pulp " ; the head driver suggests they should leave the place immediately . Two lammergeiers circle overhead . They become tired of each other 's company , and of the food they have brought . They come to a ruinous summer pasture village , and eat local food : boiled milk , the yellow crust that forms on cream , and fresh bread . They catch sight of their goal , Mir Samir . They find tracks of ibex and wolf . One of their drivers catches a snowcock by running after it . They look up at the awesome West wall of the mountain above them . They walk up the glacier wearing new crampons , probing for crevasses with their ice-axes . They cross the bergschrund and climb " a few feet of easy rock " . Carless suggests rappelling 200 feet ( 60 m ) to the next glacier . They agree " it would be difficult " to get back if they did that . They return to their base camp and try again the next morning , again finding their way blocked . They wish the climbing waitresses from Wales were with them .

An injured boy is dressed in a " devilish " goatskin to draw the poison from his wounds . Newby has to eat the tail of a fat-tailed sheep . They are escorted up the Chamar valley by a greedy farting albino . Newby tries to learn some phrases in the Bashguli or Kafir language from a 1901 Indian Staff Corps grammar , which contains sentences such as " A lammergeier came down from the sky and took off my cock " . Setting out at 5 a.m. , they attempt to climb the East ridge . It becomes very hot . The rock is gritty with sharp flakes of mica . They pretend to be " Damon Runyon characters trying to climb a mountain " to cheer themselves up . They get better at roped climbing . After six and a half hours the altimeter shows 18,000 feet . They reckon they could reach the top if they tried a different gully and started at 4 a.m. They go down . Carless 's hands are red and bleeding . They camp below a cliff . Rocks continually fall , bouncing over their heads . It is bitterly cold . There is a thunderstorm . They eat pea soup , tinned apple pudding , and jam straight from the tin . They try to sleep . They try to ascend a 70 degree ice slope . They reach the ridge , after five hours , not the estimated two . At 19,100 feet they have a tremendous view of the Hindu Kush , the Anjuman Pass , Tirich Mir , and the mountains that border Pakistan . Choughs croak above them . They are only 700 feet below the summit , but four hours away . They turn back . " The descent was terrible . " They return to camp at 9 p.m. after climbing for 17 hours .

Carless makes an impressive speech in Persian to convince the drivers to continue into Nuristan . They climb an extremely indistinct track to the pass . They descend into Nuristan : it grows hot . Men run to meet them : they are told they are the first Europeans ever to cross the pass ( Newby doesn 't believe this ) . They are given ice-cold milk to drink . They make camp in a loop of the river to reduce the risk of being murdered in the night . They are visited by two evil-looking men with an ancient Martini-Henry rifle , riding a horse . In the morning they try out the Bashguli grammar on a man ; he understands , but speaks a variant dialect or language . Newby tells the history of the Kafirs and the Russians . Their guide does not let them camp in a grove of mulberry trees full of " extremely handsome " girls and young women ; instead , he makes them camp under some cliffs in a place full of flies and excrement . They undress to wash in the river , discovering how thin they have become . A large audience gathers to watch them get up and cook . There is a violent storm . They reach Pushal , " the capital of the Ramgul Kafirs " . The headman gives them delicious apricots and tells tales of the old days . They admire the antique rifles of many kinds that the men have , all " in a disgraceful condition " . A mullah forbids them to go to a funeral where a bullock is to be slaughtered , in a holiday atmosphere . Instead , they sit under a walnut tree beside a river , with kingfishers , butterflies , hummingbird hawkmoths , a woodpecker drilling , and have " a rare moment of peace " . Newby shakes hands with two lepers . They all have dysentery . Newby spends hours negotiating the price of a complete male Nuristanis costume .

Walking down from Lustagam they pass hand-made irrigation canals of hollowed-out halved tree trunks on stone pillars . They are shown a large rock , the Sang Neveshteh , with an inscription said to be in Kufic script , supposedly recording the Emperor Timur Leng 's visit in 1398 A.D. Newby gives some pages of history " lifted almost in their entirety ... from Elliott [ sic ] and Dawson 's History of India , Vol . III , London , 1871 . " The emperor forcibly converted the Nuristanis to Islam , which Newby implies they still regret . The country becomes lusher , with both ordinary mulberries and the king mulberry , plums , sloes and soft apples . Then they cross a wooded country with watermills , wild raspberries and buttercups " like a summer morning in England , but a long time ago " . They climb back into the " wilderness " to Gadval , a village on a cliff , with picturesque privies over the streams . At Lake Mundul a mullah swims the horse with Newby 's camera and all their film and other possessions across the river . The headman shows a scar inflicted on him in deep snow by a black bear .

They climb 2,000 feet out of the valley to reach the Arayu . At Warna they rest by a waterfall with mulberry trees . They walk on . Newby dreams of cool drinks and hot baths . They struggle on over a high cold pass . The last village of Nuristan , Achagaur , is peopled by Rajputs who claim to come from Arabia . They reach the top of the Arayu pass , " one of the lonely places of the earth with all the winds of Asia droning over it " . Newby feels the place will continue " whatever disasters overtook the rest of mankind " . They feel very happy going down from the pass . They meet the explorer and author of Arabian Sands , Wilfred Thesiger . He is disgusted by their air-beds .

Edward Mace George , writing in The Guardian , notes that the book " is the comic masterpiece Newby will be remembered by " , though his finest work was Love and War in the Apennines ( 1971 ) . Kari Herbert notes in The Guardian 's list of travel writer 's favourite travel books that she inherited her father , English polar explorer Wally Herbert 's " well-loved copy " of Newby 's book . " Like Newby , I was in a soulless job , desperate for change and adventure . Reading A Short Walk was a revelation . The superbly crafted , eccentric and evocative story of his Afghan travels was like a call to arms . " John Gimlette , in the same list , chooses Newby 's Love and War in the Apennines . The Telegraph includes it as one of its " 20 best travel books of all time " , describing Newby and Carless 's meeting with the explorer Wilfred Thesiger as a " hilarious segment " . It quotes " We started to blow up our air-beds . ' God , you must be a couple of pansies , ' said Thesiger . " Outside magazine includes A Short Walk among its " 25 essential books for the well-read explorer " .

Margalit Fox , writing Newby 's obituary in the New York Times , notes that the trip was the one that made him famous , and states that " As in all his work , the narrative was marked by genial self-effacement and overwhelming understatement . " She cites a 1959 review in the same publication by William O. Douglas , later a Supreme Court judge , who called the book " a chatty , humorous and perceptive account " , adding that " Even the unsanitary hotel accommodations , the infected drinking water , the unpalatable food , the inevitable dysentery are lively , amusing , laughable episodes . " The Anmore Ladies Book Club ( Gentlemen welcomed ) called the book " an understated and very humorous travel story " , with " often ' laugh out loud ' funny " descriptions . While " the writing was a bit tedious at times , the general consensus was that [ the book ] was well worth the read " . Travel writer John Pilkington includes the book in his " Top 10 writer 's reads " in Geographical magazine , observing that it is " still unmatched after nearly 50 years in print " , and describing it as a " hilarious and nicely understated description of an ill-fated journey " .

American novelist Rick Skwiot enjoys the " blithely confident Brit 's " narrative style , finding echoes of its concept , structure and humour in Bill Bryson 's A Walk in the Woods . Skwiot notes the hazards of the journey as crevasses , precipices , thieves , bears , disease , thirst , hunger . " Somehow they blunder on toward their whimsical destination " , he remarks , the " seductive and tickling narrative " told with " understatement , self-effacement , savage wit , honed irony , and unrelenting honesty . " The reader is drawn in " by his endearingly flawed humanity . " Michael Shapiro , interviewing Newby for Travelers ' Tales , calls the book " a classic piece of old-school British exploration , and established Newby ’ s trademark self-deprecating wry humor . " In Varieties of Nostalgia in Contemporary Travel Writing , Patrick Holland and Graham Huggan observe that " travel writing , like travel itself , is generated by nostalgia " . But the " anachronistic gentleman " can only exist , they note , quoting Simon Raven , " in circumstances that are manifestly contrived or unreal " . The resulting " atmosphere of enhanced affectation is exploited to maximum comic effect " in books like A Short Walk , which they call " an acclaimed post-Byronic escapade in which gentlemanly theatrics come to assume the proportions of full-blown farce . "

The Austrian alpinist Adolf Diemberger wrote in a 1966 report that in mountaineering terms Newby and Carless 's reconnaissance of the Central Hindu Kush was a " negligible effort " , admitting however that they " almost climbed it " . The climb was more warmly described in the same year as " The first serious attempt at mountaineering in that country [ the Afghan Hindu Kush ] " by the Polish mountaineer Boleslaw Chwascinski . In January 2012 , an expedition under the auspices of the British Mountaineering Council , citing the " popular adventure book " , attempted the first winter ascent of Mir Samir , but it was cut short by an equipment theft and " very deep snow conditions and route finding difficulties " .

Philip Gregory Humber ( / ˈʌmbər / ; born December 21 , 1982 ) is an American former professional baseball pitcher . He pitched for the New York Mets , Minnesota Twins , Kansas City Royals , Chicago White Sox , and Houston Astros in seven seasons in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . Although he debuted in the major leagues in 2006 and had worked mostly as a starter in the minor leagues , he did not become a regular MLB starter until 2011 . Humber earned three Texas Little League state championships . He subsequently attended Carthage High School in Carthage , Texas , where he led the baseball team to the state championship game in 2001 , his senior season , winning state Player of the Year honors . He then attended Rice University , where he played college baseball for the Rice Owls baseball team . Humber was the winning pitcher in the clinching game of the 2003 College World Series . He has also represented the United States at the World University Baseball Championship . The Mets selected Humber with the third overall selection in the 2004 MLB draft . During his minor league career , he underwent ulnar collateral ligament reconstruction , before making his MLB debut with the Mets . It took him several years to regain his ability to throw with the same velocity that he had prior to the injury . After being included in a trade to the Twins for Johan Santana , Humber struggled to establish himself . He spent a year with the Royals organization and was briefly a member of the Oakland Athletics organization , before being claimed on waivers by the White Sox in 2011 , getting an opportunity to pitch in the White Sox ' starting rotation . On April 21 , 2012 , Humber pitched the 21st perfect game in MLB history , defeating the Seattle Mariners .

Born in Nacogdoches , Texas , Humber was raised in Carthage , Texas . Living in an area with an abundance of baseball fields , Humber grew up with a batting cage in his backyard . At the age of 11 , Humber visited the Chicago White Sox during spring training in Florida as the guest of Robert Ellis , a family friend of the Humbers , who then was a minor league baseball pitcher for the White Sox . Carthage was a Texas anomaly , its baseball athletes being the most admired role models rather than its football players . As of 2004 , the Panola County Dixie League teams had won 15 state championships in the preceding 20 years and Humber played for three state champions .

Humber attended Carthage High School . The Carthage Bulldogs had won the state title in 1990 and been one of the final four teams in the state tournament in 1994 . Humber was promoted from junior varsity midway through his sophomore season . He compiled a 4 – 0 win – loss record with a low 1.09 earned run average ( ERA ) . He went 7 – 2 as a junior , and posted a 13 – 1 record with a 0.90 ERA and 146 strikeouts as a senior . A capable batter , he also had a .371 batting average with six home runs . Humber threw a shutout in the Texas University Interscholastic League Class 4A semifinals against Cedar Park High School in 2001 , his senior season . Although Carthage lost the state championship to Western Hills High School in baseball that year , Humber was named Texas High School Class 4A Player of the Year by the Texas Sports Writers Association . According to former Major League Baseball prospect and East Texas native Alan Move : " Back in high school , he ( Humber ) threw harder than everyone else and changed speeds pretty well and that 's all you need in high school . "

Humber was drafted by the New York Yankees in the 29th round of the 2001 Major League Baseball draft . As the 875th pick overall , he described himself as " more of a draft-and-follow " prospect . The Yankees made Humber an offer in an attempt to lure him away from his college scholarship , but he did not sign , choosing instead to attend Rice University in order to play college baseball for the Rice Owls baseball team , competing in the Western Athletic Conference ( WAC ) of NCAA Division I. At Rice , Humber was coached by Wayne Graham . Humber 's first home appearance at Reckling Park was in the annual Rice Alumni game in February 2002 . After retiring his first two batters in relief , Humber faced a pair of Major League Baseball players . José Cruz , Jr. bounced the baseball off of the wall in center field and then Lance Berkman hit the ball over the scoreboard . After his inauspicious debut , he became a dominant pitcher during his three college seasons for the Rice Owls , stepping into the nationally ranked Owls ' starting rotation as a freshman . Humber finished his freshman season in 2002 with an 11 – 1 win – loss record , a 2.78 ERA , and a WAC-leading 130 strikeouts in 110 2 ⁄ 3 innings , earning National Freshman Player of the Year honors from Collegiate Baseball and All-America honors from several publications — Collegiate Baseball ( Second Team ) , Baseball America ( Second Team ) and Baseball Weekly ( Third Team ) . Humber 's strikeout total was the most for an Owl freshman since 1976 . That season , Rice reached the 2002 College World Series , but lost its first two games and was eliminated . Nonetheless , Humber earned an invitation to USA Baseball 's national team trials . He was the scheduled starter in the second of the two games , which was against the Notre Dame Fighting Irish on June 17 , but the team could not hold a 3 – 2 lead in the bottom of the ninth . He then competed for the United States national baseball team at the 2002 World University Baseball Championship , which was held in Messina , Sicily . On August 7 , he earned a victory for the United States in a game against the South Korean team . The United States won the silver medal in the tournament .

Entering his sophomore season , he was expected to be a key part of the starting pitching rotation . The 2003 season saw the development of Rice 's " Big Three " rotation , featuring Humber and sophomore classmates Wade Townsend and Jeff Niemann . Humber developed a curveball that season , to augment his arsenal that included a fastball , changeup and split-finger fastball . During the season , Humber achieved his 17th consecutive win in WAC play . He was recognized as a Third Team All-American by Collegiate Baseball and was a First Team All-Western Athletic Conference honoree . The trio entered the 2003 College World Series with gaudy numbers — Niemann ( 16 – 0 , 1.63 ERA ) and Townsend ( 10 – 1 , 1.90 ERA ) complementing Humber — and with Humber scheduled for the third game , if necessary . Humber finished with an 11 – 3 win – loss record with a 3.30 ERA , as Rice won its first national championship in any team sport . He pitched a complete game in the decisive third game of the series , a 14 – 2 win over the Stanford Cardinal . The game established a College World Series record for largest title game margin of victory . During the season , Rice established a school record 30-game winning streak . Upon his becoming the College World Series hero , June 26 , 2003 was declared ' Philip Humber Day ' in his hometown of Carthage , Texas in his honor . Following the season , all three pitchers competed in collegiate summer baseball in the Cape Cod Baseball League ; Humber pitched for the Yarmouth – Dennis Red Sox . Baseball America rated Humber as the seventh-best prospect in the Cape Cod League .

In his junior season of 2004 , Humber compiled a 13 – 4 win – loss record and 2.27 ERA . He struck out 154 batters and issued only 37 walks in 115 innings . He also set the Rice single-game record for strikeouts when he struck out 17 Hawaii Rainbow Warriors hitters on March 20 , 2004 . Rice entered the 64-team NCAA Baseball tournament as one of the eight national seeds . In the first game of the regional round of the tournament , Rice was upset by the Texas Southern Tigers . Humber entered the next game against the Texas A & M Aggies with the bases loaded and surrendered a first-pitch grand slam to Justin Ruggiano . For the season , Humber totaled 154 strikeouts in 115 innings pitched . Humber finished his three-year career with a 35 – 8 win – loss record and 2.80 ERA , striking out 422 in 354 innings pitched . Humber 's totals rank him with the third most wins in Rice baseball history and second most strikeouts . Among his honors for the season were selection to the 2004 Louisville Slugger All-America team by Collegiate Baseball and the 2004 USA TODAY / Sports Weekly All-America team . During the inaugural year for the Roger Clemens Award , which designates the top college pitcher , he was one of 10 named semifinalists . He was also among the 10 finalists for the Dick Howser Trophy in 2004 , in recognition of his performance as one of college baseball 's top players .

Following the early exit in the Houston Regional due to the upset by the Aggies , Humber looked forward to the Major League Baseball Draft . Niemann , and Townsend were all selected along with Humber in the first eight picks of the 2004 MLB Draft — the first time three teammates had ever gone so early in the same draft . Only twice had three teammates been taken in the first round , most recently when Steve Hosey , Tom Goodwin and Eddie Zosky of the Fresno State Bulldogs were selected in the first round of the 1989 Major League Baseball draft . Teammate David Aardsma , a relief pitcher , was also selected in the first round .

The New York Mets chose Humber out of Rice University with their first-round pick in the 2004 Major League Baseball draft , the third overall selection . The Mets chose Humber over Jered Weaver and Stephen Drew , who also received consideration , as they considered Humber to be the " safe " selection . They also scouted Justin Verlander , who the Detroit Tigers had chosen with the second overall pick . It was reported that the Mets preferred Verlander , and would have chosen him if the Tigers had selected Drew . On January 11 , 2005 , Humber and the Mets agreed to a five-year contract , ending a long holdout the day before the Mets began their two-day minicamp in Port St. Lucie , Florida . Humber and the Mets were motivated to complete a deal due to a change in federal tax law that made signing bonuses subject to Federal Insurance Contributions Act and Social Security taxes . There is some discrepancy about the value of the contract . According to MLB.com , Humber received a combined $ 3.7 million signing bonus and contract from the Mets . The Houston Chronicle reported the contract to be a $ 4.2 million deal with a $ 3 million signing bonus and that Humber would fly to minicamp . Six months later , Lee Jenkins of The New York Times also reported the signing bonus to be $ 3 million , but he claimed the contract was for $ 5 million in total . John Manuel of Baseball America reported the contract was worth a maximum of $ 5.116 million , with $ 4.2 million guaranteed .

Baseball America rated Humber as the 50th-best prospect in baseball heading into the 2005 season . Humber entered spring training in 2005 with the Mets . There , he clashed with Mets ' pitching coach Rick Peterson , who wanted Humber to adopt a different training regimen and change the manner with which he threw the ball to the plate . The Mets front office supported Humber , telling him to pitch how he felt comfortable . After the brief stint in spring training , the Mets assigned Humber to start his professional career with the St. Lucie Mets of the Class-A Advanced Florida State League , where , in fourteen starts , he posted a 2 – 6 win – loss record and a 4.99 ERA . Humber was then promoted to the Class-AA Binghamton Mets of the Eastern League . In one start , Humber gave up three earned runs in four innings . Humber left the game early due to elbow pain caused by bone spurs , which required ulnar collateral ligament reconstruction ( more commonly known as Tommy John surgery ) to repair a torn ligament in his elbow . The surgery was performed by Dr. James Andrews of the American Sports Medicine Institute . Coincidentally , his Rice pitching teammates , Townsend ( Tommy John surgery ) and Niemann ( arthroscopic shoulder surgery ) , also endured major surgeries that year . Rice coach Graham , who also coached MLB starters such as Roger Clemens and Andy Pettitte in college , shied away from any blame , noting that all three missed out on fall league play by holding out . In spite of his arm surgery , Humber was named the 20th-best prospect in the Florida State League by Baseball America , which ranked him as the fifth-best prospect in the Mets organization following the season .

On March 8 , he was assigned to the Mets minor league camp . After rehabilitating from surgery , Humber resumed pitching with St. Lucie in 2006 , posting a 2.37 ERA in seven starts . He compiled a 3 – 1 win – loss record . On July 31 , 2006 , a year after his surgery , Humber was once again promoted to Binghamton , where he was 2 – 2 with a 2.88 ERA . He was an early September call-up when the Major League rosters expanded on September 1 . However , Humber did not make his Major League Baseball debut until September 24 , 2006 . He made two appearances for the Mets as a relief pitcher , pitching two innings . However , Humber was unable to obtain his pre-surgery velocity . That fall , he began play in the Arizona Fall League but his participation was discontinued when he endured shoulder tendinitis . Before the 2007 season , Baseball America rated Humber as the fourth-best prospect in the Mets organization . That year , the Mets had nine pitchers competing for five spots in the starting rotation in spring training camp . Óliver Pérez , Tom Glavine , Orlando Hernández , and John Maine were the favorites for the spots in the rotation . Veterans Aaron Sele , Chan Ho Park and Jorge Sosa were also invited to camp so that the team could be patient with former first round draft choices Humber and Mike Pelfrey , who were considered the most promising pitchers in camp . Rated the 73rd-best prospect in baseball by Baseball America prior to the 2007 season , Humber competed for a spot on the Mets roster in spring training . However , Humber was optioned to the minor leagues during spring training in 2007 . Assigned to the New Orleans Zephyrs of the Class-AAA Pacific Coast League ( PCL ) , Humber had an 11 – 9 win – loss record and 4.27 ERA in 139 innings pitched . He allowed 129 hits and walked 44 while striking out 120 batters in 25 starts . For the season , Humber finished tied for fourth in the PCL in wins and had the tenth-best ERA . He had started the season by earning the PCL Pitcher of the week for the week ending April 22 . That week he allowed 2 earned runs in 13 innings of work over two starts , earning a win on April 16 against the Nashville Sounds with six innings of work and suffering a blown save after seven innings against the Albuquerque Isotopes on April 21 . He flirted with a no-hitter with the Zephyrs on August 22 when he entered the ninth inning without giving up a hit to the Iowa Cubs . In his subsequent start , he allowed only an unearned run on two hits over five innings , but he was removed from the game when a batted ball hit him in the shoulder .

Humber was promoted to the Mets , again as a September call-up , on September 2 . Though the Mets considered inserting him into the starting rotation immediately , they chose to start Pelfrey . Humber made two relief appearances for the Mets , on September 5 and 11 . The Mets , having lost eight of their previous 12 games and seen their lead over the Philadelphia Phillies in the National League East division race decrease from seven games to two , removed Pelfrey from the final rotation to give an extra day of rest to pitchers Pérez , Maine , and Pedro Martínez , and gave Humber his first Major League start on September 26 , 2007 , against the Washington Nationals , choosing him over Dave Williams . Although the Mets raced out to a 6 – 2 lead , Humber allowed five runs in four-plus innings , receiving a no decision in a game the Mets eventually lost , 9 – 6 . The decision to start Humber was seen as emblematic of the Mets ' desperation . As George Vecsey wrote in The New York Times , " How did it come to this ? How did the entire Mets ' season come to depend so much on a young pitcher , Philip Humber , who had never started in the major leagues until last night ? " He concluded his three Mets appearances in the 2007 season with a 7.71 ERA .

Following the 2007 season , the Mets began to discuss trading Humber to the Minnesota Twins in a package of prospects to acquire two-time Cy Young Award-winning pitcher Johan Santana . Eligible to become a free agent after the 2008 season , Santana had rejected a proposed four-year , $ 80 million contract extension from the Twins . Assuming that he was unlikely to resign with Minnesota , the Twins began to shop him to other MLB teams . On February 2 , 2008 , the Mets traded Humber , along with outfielder Carlos Gómez and pitchers Kevin Mulvey and Deolis Guerra , to the Twins for Santana . At the time Baseball America ranked Guerra , Gomez , Mulvey and Humber the second , third , fourth and seventh-best prospects in the Mets organization , respectively . During spring training , the Twins assigned Humber to Santana 's former place in the Twins ' clubhouse . While trying to earn a spot in the rotation , Humber compiled 11 consecutive scoreless innings in the Grapefruit League . By late March , Humber had a spring training ERA of 1.29 . Humber spent most of the 2008 season assigned to the Twins ' Class-AAA affiliate , the Rochester Red Wings of the International League . He started off slow with a 0 – 5 win – loss record and a 5.83 ERA in his first nine starts . With Rochester , Humber eventually compiled a 10 – 8 win – loss record with a 4.56 ERA in 31 games . He finished with a 6 – 1 win – loss record and a 2.67 ERA in the second half . His 4 – 1 win – loss record with a 2.74 ERA in August earned him the Minor League Pitcher of the Month Award . The Twins promoted Humber in August 2008 , and he appeared in five games for the Twins , all in relief . Humber pitched 11 2 ⁄ 3 innings , and posted a 4.63 ERA and six strikeouts for the Twins . Following the 2008 season , Humber was out of options , and could not be sent to the minor leagues without first being subjected to waivers , where other teams could claim him .

Humber made the Twins ' Opening Day roster in 2009 as a long reliever . Humber struggled at the start of the 2009 season , pitching to a 12.46 ERA over 4 1 ⁄ 3 innings , while giving up 11 hits and walking four batters . The Twins designated Humber for assignment on April 17 , 2009 to make room on their roster for Juan Morillo , who the Twins had claimed off waivers from the Colorado Rockies . Humber cleared waivers and the Twins assigned him to Rochester . The Twins recalled Humber in August 2009 due to an injury to Francisco Liriano , but outrighted him to the minor leagues ten days later . Humber was granted free agency after the 2009 season .

On December 15 , 2009 , Humber signed a minor league contract with the Kansas City Royals , receiving an invitation to spring training . After he pitched to an 11.74 ERA in four spring training games , the Royals reassigned Humber to their minor league camp on March 22 . Humber was assigned to start the year with the Omaha Royals of the PCL . On June 10 , 2010 , while pitching in a game for Omaha , Humber was hit in the face on a line drive by Luis Cruz . After lying on the mound for a few minutes , he was able to get up and walk on his own to the dugout . He was then transported to a local hospital , where he received eighteen stitches . He earned the second PCL Pitcher of the Week Award of his career for play during the week ending August 1 . He won the award based on having posted a complete game 4-hit 7-strikeout shutout against the Nashville Sounds on July 30 . However , Humber began to regain the velocity he had lost following Tommy John surgery in 2005 . Humber was called up by the Kansas City Royals on August 5 , 2010 , when Kansas City designated José Guillén for assignment . On August 25 , Humber pitched three relief innings for the Royals against the Detroit Tigers and earned his first MLB win . He finished the 2010 season with a 2 – 1 win – loss record and 4.15 ERA in eight games for the Royals , including one game started . He also appeared in 21 games , 20 of them starts , for the Omaha Royals , pitching to a 5 – 6 win – loss record and 4.47 ERA . The Royals designated Humber for assignment in December 2010 , in order to make room on the roster for newly signed Jeff Francoeur .

In December 2010 , the Royals waived Humber , and he was claimed by the Oakland Athletics , who had extra room on their 40-man roster at the time of the waiver claim . However , the team subsequently filled its 40-man roster and designated Humber for assignment later that off-season in order to make room on their roster for Guillermo Moscoso , who the Athletics acquired from the Texas Rangers in a trade during January 2011 . The Chicago White Sox claimed Humber off waivers from the Athletics on January 18 , 2011 . He signed a contract worth $ 500,000 for the season . White Sox pitching coach Don Cooper worked with Humber , as he replaced his cut fastball with a slider and improved his pitching mechanics in the fashion originally recommended by Peterson in 2005 . Humber debuted with the White Sox in their third game in relief . He made two pitches , both of which resulted in hits and base runners that came around to score . With Jake Peavy injured at the start of the 2011 season , the White Sox gave Humber the opportunity to pitch in their starting rotation . On April 9 , 2011 , Humber won his first start with the White Sox , pitching 6 2 ⁄ 3 innings and only allowing one run . Humber surprised the White Sox with his strong performance . On April 25 , in the sixth start of his career , he took a no-hitter into the seventh inning against the New York Yankees at Yankee Stadium , but with one out Alex Rodriguez singled up the middle . He finished with seven scoreless innings . He took a no-hitter into the sixth inning against the Washington Nationals on June 26 , but ended up earning a 2 – 1 loss when he surrendered a seventh inning home run to Danny Espinosa . In early July , when he led the major leagues with 103 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched and held an 8 – 4 record with a 2.69 ERA , he seemed like a probable selection for the 2011 Major League Baseball All-Star Game . In mid-July , the White Sox switched to a six-man rotation . By early August , Humber was in a slump . Humber denies the extra rest affected his pitch command . He spent time on the disabled list with a facial bruise after Kosuke Fukudome lined a baseball into his face above the right eye on August 18 . After he was hit , he was very concerned for his wife : " I thought , ' I 've got to get up because she 's in the stands , ' " Humber said . " As soon as I went in [ the clubhouse ] , I asked one of the guys to call her to make sure she knew I was OK . " , adding " My main concern was cheering up my wife . " He appeared in one rehabilitation start for the Charlotte Knights of the Class-AAA International League . Humber pitched seven scoreless innings in his major league return . Humber completed his first full season as an MLB starting pitcher with a 9 – 9 win – loss record with a 3.75 ERA in 163 innings .

As Humber performed better in the first half of the 2011 season ( 8 – 5 , 3.10 ERA ) than in the second half ( 1 – 4 , 5.01 ERA ) , which he attributed to general fatigue , Humber decided to add 20 pounds ( 9.1 kg ) during his offseason workouts . Humber signed a one-year contract in March for $ 530,000 , above the minimum salary for a player with his level of MLB experience . In the first season in which he did not have to battle for a roster spot in spring training , he made his final spring training start in his home state near Rice at Minute Maid Park in front of many relatives . Although the 2012 Chicago White Sox 's rotation was said to be made up of five number-three starters , Humber began the season as the number five starter . In Humber 's 30th career start in MLB , he pitched the 21st perfect game in MLB history against the Seattle Mariners on April 21 , 2012 . It was the third perfect game in White Sox history after those thrown by Charlie Robertson and Mark Buehrle , and the 18th no-hitter in White Sox history . It was Humber 's second start of the 2012 season and first career complete game .

Humber was named American League ( AL ) Player of the Week for the week ending April 22 . Humber went 1 – 0 with a 0.63 ERA in 14 1 ⁄ 3 innings while striking out 16 over two starts that week , including the perfect game . He received a congratulatory phone call from President Barack Obama , a noted White Sox fan . Humber appeared on the Late Show with David Letterman , where he read the " Top Ten List " . Humber 's perfect game will be memorialized with a plaque at the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum . Since the perfect game , Humber has struggled . He allowed 20 runs in his next three starts across 13 1 ⁄ 3 innings . He missed one month of the season due to a right elbow strain . Following the acquisition of Francisco Liriano , the White Sox removed Humber from the starting rotation .

The Houston Astros claimed Humber off waivers on November 30 , 2012 . Humber made the Astros ' starting rotation at the start of the 2013 season . Humber lost his spot in the starting rotation to Érik Bédard after opening the season with an 0 – 7 record and an ERA of 8.82 . Humber was designated for assignment on May 12 , after his record fell to 0 – 8 with a 9.59 ERA . After pitching in relief for the Oklahoma City RedHawks of the PCL , the Astros selected his contract on August 12 , when they traded Wesley Wright to the Tampa Bay Rays . On October 3 , the Astros declined a $ 3 million option for 2014 , instead paying him his guaranteed $ 500,000 and releasing him .

Humber relied on five pitches . He had a four-seam fastball ranging from 89 to 92 miles per hour ( 143 – 148 km / h ) , a two-seam fastball ( 89 to 92 miles per hour ( 143 – 148 km / h ) ) , a slider ( mid 80s ) , a changeup ( mid 80s ) , and a 12-6 curveball ( 78 to 81 miles per hour ( 126 – 130 km / h ) ) . He used his slider against right-handed hitters but preferred to use his changeup and curveball as off-speed pitches against left-handed hitters . Humber favored his curveball in two-strike situations . He used a conventional " three-quarters " arm slot to deliver his pitches .

Humber married his wife , Kristan , in November 2007 . They were introduced by mutual friends in 2005 . At the time of his perfect game , Humber 's wife was nine months pregnant with the couple 's first child , a son named John Gregory , who was born on May 1 . Humber comes from a large extended family . Humber is a registered member of the Republican Party . He has the Bible verse Colossians 3 : 23 inscribed in his baseball glove . He undertook a charitable mission to the Philippines in the 2011 – 12 offseason with Brett Carroll , where they instructed children about baseball and Christianity . Josh Tomlin , an MLB pitcher , is a close friend of Humber . From nearby Tyler , Texas , Tomlin competed against Humber in high school , and the two train together during offseasons . Humber is currently a Tyler resident .

Jonathan Allen Lethem ( born February 19 , 1964 ) is an American novelist , essayist and short story writer . His first novel , Gun , with Occasional Music , a genre work that mixed elements of science fiction and detective fiction , was published in 1994 . It was followed by three more science fiction novels . In 1999 , Lethem published Motherless Brooklyn , a National Book Critics Circle Award-winning novel that achieved mainstream success . In 2003 , he published The Fortress of Solitude , which became a New York Times Best Seller . In 2005 , he received a MacArthur Fellowship .

Lethem was born in Brooklyn , New York , to Judith Frank Lethem , a political activist , and Richard Brown Lethem , an avant-garde painter . He was the eldest of three children . His father was Protestant ( with Scottish and English ancestry ) and his mother was Jewish , from a family with roots in Germany , Poland , and Russia . His brother Blake became an artist , and his sister Mara became a photographer , writer , and translator . The family lived in a commune in the pre-gentrified Brooklyn neighborhood of North Gowanus ( now called Boerum Hill ) . Despite the racial tensions and conflicts , he later described his bohemian childhood as " thrilling " and culturally wide-reaching . He gained an encyclopedic knowledge of the music of Bob Dylan , saw Star Wars twenty-one times during its original theatrical release , and read the complete works of the science fiction writer Philip K. Dick . Lethem later said Dick ’ s work was " as formative an influence as marijuana or punk rock — as equally responsible for beautifully fucking up my life , for bending it irreversibly along a course I still travel . "

His parents divorced when Lethem was young . When he was thirteen , his mother Judith died from a malignant brain tumor , an event which he has said haunted him and has strongly affected his writing . ( Lethem discusses the direct relation between his mother and the Bob Dylan song " Like a Rolling Stone " in the 2003 Canadian documentary Complete Unknown . ) In 2007 , Lethem explained , " My books all have this giant , howling missing [ center ] — language has disappeared , or someone has vanished , or memory has gone . " Intending to become a visual artist like his father , Lethem attended the High School of Music & Art in New York , where he painted in a style he describes as " glib , show-offy , usually cartoonish " . At Music & Art he produced his own zine , The Literary Exchange , which featured artwork and writing . He also created animated films and wrote a 125-page novel , Heroes , still unpublished . After graduating from high school , Lethem entered Bennington College in Vermont in 1982 as a prospective art student . At Bennington , Lethem experienced an " overwhelming .... collision with the realities of class — my parents ’ bohemian milieu had kept me from understanding , even a little , that we were poor .... at Bennington that was all demolished by an encounter with the fact of real privilege . " This , coupled with the realization that he was more interested in writing than art , led Lethem to drop out halfway through his sophomore year . He hitchhiked from Denver , Colorado to Berkeley , California in 1984 , across " a thousand miles of desert and mountains through Wyoming , Utah , and Nevada , with about 40 dollars in my pocket , " describing it as " one of the stupidest and most memorable things I 've ever done . "

Lethem ’ s first novel , Gun , with Occasional Music , is a merging of science fiction and the Chandleresque detective story , which includes talking kangaroos , radical futuristic versions of the drug scene , and cryogenic prisons . The novel was published in 1994 by Harcourt Brace , in what Lethem later described as a " delirious " experience . " I 'd pictured my first novels being published as paperback originals , " he recalled , " and instead a prestigious house was doing the book in cloth .... I was in heaven . " The novel was released to little initial fanfare , but an enthusiastic review in Newsweek , which declared Gun an " audaciously assured first novel " , catapulted the book to wider commercial success . Gun , with Occasional Music was a finalist for the 1994 Nebula Award , and placed first in the " Best First Novel " category of the 1995 Locus Magazine reader 's poll . In the mid-1990s , film producer-director Alan J. Pakula optioned the novel 's movie rights , which allowed Lethem to quit working in bookstores and devote his time to writing . His next book was Amnesia Moon ( 1995 ) . Partially inspired by Lethem 's experiences hitchhiking cross-country , this second novel uses a road narrative to explore a multi-post-apocalyptic future landscape rife with perception tricks . After publishing many of his early stories in a 1996 collection , The Wall of the Sky , the Wall of the Eye , Lethem published his third novel , As She Climbed Across the Table ( 1997 ) . It starts with a physics researcher who falls in love with an artificially generated spatial anomaly called " Lack " , for whom she spurns her previous partner . Her ex-partner 's comic struggle with this rejection , and with the anomaly , constitute the majority of the narrative .

In 1996 , Lethem moved from the San Francisco Bay Area back to Brooklyn . His next book , published after his return to Brooklyn , was Girl in Landscape . In the novel , a young girl must endure puberty while also having to face a strange and new world populated by aliens known as Archbuilders . Lethem has said that Girl in Landscape 's plot and characters , including the figures of a young girl and a violently protective father figure , were " very strongly influenced " by the 1956 John Wayne Western The Searchers , a movie with which he is " obsessed . "

The first novel Lethem began after returning to New York City was Motherless Brooklyn , a return to the detective theme . He maintained objective realism while exploring subjective alterity through Lionel Essrog . His protagonist has Tourette syndrome and is obsessed with language . Lethem later said that Essrog ... obviously [ is ] the character I 've written with whom I most identify ... [ the novel ] stands outside myself ... It 's the only one which doesn 't need me , never did . It would have found someone to write it , by necessity . Upon its publication in 1999 , Motherless Brooklyn won the National Book Critics Circle Award for Fiction , The Macallan Gold Dagger for crime fiction , and the Salon Book Award ; it was named book of the year by Esquire . In 1999 , actor Edward Norton announced that he was planning to write , direct and star in a film adaptation of the novel . In March 2007 , Norton said he was still working on the screenplay . According to The New York Times , the mainstream success of Motherless Brooklyn made Lethem " something of a hipster celebrity " , and he was referred to several times as a " genre bender " . Critics cited the variety of Lethem 's novels , which were alternately hard-boiled detective fiction , science fiction , and autobiographical . ( Lethem credited his comfort in genre-mixing to his father 's art , which " always combined observed and imagined reality on the same canvas , very naturally , very un-self-consciously . " ) In Time magazine , Lev Grossman classed Lethem with a movement of authors similarly eager to blend literary and popular writing , including Michael Chabon ( with whom Lethem is friends ) , Margaret Atwood , and Susanna Clarke .

The fact is , I used to get very involved , six or seven years ago , and before that , in questions of taxonomy of genre , and in the idea — which is ultimately a political idea — that a given writer , perhaps me , could in some objective way alter or reorganize the boundaries between genres .... Nowadays , I 've come to feel that talking about categories , about " high " and " low " , about genre and their boundaries and the blurring of those boundaries , all consists only of an elaborate way to avoid actually discussing what moves and interests me about books — my own , and others ' . What I like are books in their homely actuality — the insides of the books , the mysterious movements of characters and situations and the emotions that accompany those movements . The play of sentences , their infinite variety . In the early 2000s , Lethem published a story collection , edited two anthologies , wrote magazine pieces , and published the 55-page novella This Shape We 're In ( 2000 ) . This Shape We 're In was one of the first offerings from McSweeney 's Books , the publishing imprint that developed from Dave Eggers ' McSweeney 's Quarterly Concern .

In November 2000 , Lethem said that he was working on an uncharacteristically " big sprawling " novel , about a child who grows up to be a rock journalist . The novel was published in 2003 as The Fortress of Solitude . The semi-autobiographical bildungsroman features dozens of characters in a variety of milieus , but features a tale of racial tensions and boyhood in Brooklyn during the late 1970s . The main characters are two friends of different backgrounds who grew up on the same block in Boerum Hill . It was named one of nine " Editor 's Choice " books of the year by The New York Times and has been published in fifteen languages . Lethem 's second collection of short fiction , Men and Cartoons , was published in late 2004 . In March 2005 , The Disappointment Artist , his first collection of essays , was released . On September 20 , 2005 , Lethem received a MacArthur Fellowship . I 'm writing short stories right now , that 's what I do between novels , and I love them . I 'm very devoted to it . You know , it 's funny . There seems to be some sort of law that you only get to be celebrated for one or the other . And then a couple of people will break it . Updike did . They didn 't review his story collections by saying , " Well , these are nice , but he 's a novelist . " Or review his novels by saying , " Well , too bad he can 't do the longer stuff . " Other people tend to get patronized on one end or the other — and I 'll take it . I have a very happy life as a novelist . But the story collections I 've published are tremendously important to me . And many of the uncollected stories — or yet-to-be-collected stories — are among my proudest writings . They 're very closely allied , obviously , to novel writing . But also very distinct , and , you know , there 's no need to choose .

In September 2006 , Lethem wrote the article , " The Genius of Bob Dylan " , a lengthy interview with Bob Dylan , which was published in Rolling Stone . The interview contained Lethem 's reflections on Dylan 's artistic achievements . It revealed Dylan 's dissatisfaction with contemporary recording techniques and his thoughts on his own status . After Motherless Brooklyn and The Fortress of Solitude , Lethem decided that " [ i ] t was time to leave Brooklyn in a literary sense anyway ... I really needed to defy all that stuff about place and memory . " In 2007 , he returned as a novelist to California , where some of his earlier fiction had been set , with You Don 't Love Me Yet , a novel about an upstart rock band . The novel revolves around a woman in the band , Lucinda , who answers phones for her friend 's complaint line and uses some of a caller 's words as lyrics . According to Lethem , the book was inspired by the years he spent as the lead singer in an upstart California band in the late 1980s and early 1990s , during what he called " the unformed posturing phase of life " . The novel received mixed reviews .

In 2005 , Lethem had announced that he was planning to revive the Marvel Comics character Omega the Unknown in a ten-issue series to be published in 2006 . After hearing of the project , Omega co-creator Steve Gerber expressed personal outrage over the use of the character without his participation , though he later discussed the project with Lethem and admitted that he had " misjudged " him . In May 2006 , Marvel Editor-in-Chief Joe Quesada explained that the series had been delayed to 2007 , saying that " winning the MacArthur Grant put additional and unexpected demands on [ Lethem 's ] time . " The revamped Omega the Unknown series was published in ten monthly issues from October 2007 to July 2008 ; the issues were published in a single volume in October 2008 . In early 2007 , Lethem began work on Chronic City , which was published on October 13 , 2009 . In July 2008 , Lethem said that Chronic City is " set on the Upper East Side of Manhattan , it ’ s strongly influenced by Saul Bellow , Philip K. Dick , Charles G. Finney and Hitchcock ’ s Vertigo and it concerns a circle of friends including a faded child-star actor , a cultural critic , a hack ghost-writer of autobiographies , and a city official . And it ’ s long and strange . "

His essay , " The Ecstasy of Influence : A Plagiarism " ( 2007 ) , is a passionate defense of plagiarism and a call for a return to a " gift economy " in the arts . He writes , The kernel , the soul — let us go further and say the substance , the bulk , the actual and valuable material of all human utterances — is plagiarism ... Don 't pirate my editions ; do plunder my visions . The name of the game is Give All . You , reader , are welcome to my stories . They were never mine in the first place , but I gave them to you . In 2011 , The Exegesis of Philip K. Dick , edited by Pamela Jackson and Lethem , was published by Houghton Mifflin Harcourt . Among other projects , Lethem published short books about John Carpenter 's film They Live ( published in October , 2010 as They Live ) and the Talking Heads album Fear of Music . Starting in 2011 , he served as the Roy E. Disney Professor in Creative Writing at Pomona College , a position formerly held by the late David Foster Wallace .

Lethem 's ninth novel , entitled Dissident Gardens , was released on September 10 , 2013 . According to Lethem in an interview with the Los Angeles Times , the novel concerns " American leftists " , very specifically " a red-diaper baby generation trying to figure out what it all means , this legacy of American Communism . " Regarding the novel 's setting , Lethem said in the same interview that it is " set in Queens and Greenwich Village , another New York neighborhood book , very much about the life of the city ... writing about Greenwich Village in 1958 was really a jump for me , it was as much of an imaginative leap as any of the more fantastical things I 've done . But really exciting , too . " Dissident Gardens was quickly followed up in February 2015 with Lucky Alan and Other Stories , Lethem 's fifth short story collection . Lethem 's next novel , his tenth , is scheduled for publication in October 2016 . Titled A Gambler 's Anatomy , the novel 's official plot description on the Penguin Books website alludes to it concerning " an international backgammon hustler who thinks he ’ s psychic " .

Nki National Park is a national park in southeastern Cameroon , located in its East Province . The closest towns to Nki are Yokadouma , Moloundou and Lomie , beyond which are rural lands . Due to its remoteness , Nki has been described as " the last true wilderness . " It has a large and varied ecosystem , and it is home to over 265 species of birds , and the forests of Cameroon contain some of the highest population density of forest elephants of any nation with an elephant density of roughly 2.5 per square kilometer for Nki and neighboring Boumba Bek National Park combined . These animals are victims of poaching , which has been a major problem since an economic depression in the 1980s . The indigenous people follow in the footsteps of the poachers , attracted by the financial opportunities . The removal of logging industries from the park , on the other hand , has been a success ; it is no longer considered a major threat to Nki 's wilderness .

The World Wildlife Fund has been in the process of conserving the park since the 1980s , including ridding the area of the logging business . This movement , however , has been met with some criticism , especially by members of the remote village of Ndongo , Cameroon . Before WWF arrived , Ndongo was a bustling logging town of 300 residents with fairly good roads and plentiful working opportunities . Once the organization established itself , it pressured the logging companies to operate in a more environmentally friendly manner . The logging companies pulled out of the town in 1988 , leaving broken machinery and severely damaging Ndongo 's economy . According to Leonard Usongo , manager of WWF projects in southeast Cameroon , " we cannot convince a community of the need to protect forests if we don ’ t acknowledge their problems or their poverty . " Today , logging is no longer a major problem , as " it would require a lot of investment to develop necessary infrastructure , such as roads , for [ its ] operations , especially in the southern portion of Nki . " According to the WWF 's scientific advisor in the region , Paul Robinson Ngnegueu , " poaching is the biggest threat to ... Nki . " It is a result of the late 1980s economic depression in Cameroon . The indigenous people followed the poachers , attracted by the financial opportunities . They would sell their product through " intermediaries " for money and more hunting supplies .

Cameroonian authorities fought poaching in Nki by applying repressive measures to the indigenous population . An example of this was in January 1997 , when Bakas were forced from their homes near Mambele . These actions turned the Bakas against the WWF , which they considered " an organization of whites who want to protect animals " . Every year , poachers travel up the Dja for central Nki , where elephant ivory is abundant . Strong currents on the river are a deterrent for half the year , but after that , according to freelance journalist Jemini Pandya , the fauna is easy to prey upon . Nonetheless , when Pandya of the WWF visited Nki National Park in the early 1990s , she described it as " the last true wilderness . " In 1995 , the park was named an Essential Protection Zone , its first official status . It was not formally established as a national park until the Cameroonian government decreed the creation of Boumba Bek and Nki National Parks on 17 October 2005 . This establishment was not without opposition ; the Bakas have continually asked to reduce the park 's boundaries and ask for higher usage rights , which invaded upon " their " land .

The park is located in a remote area of southeastern Cameroon , which " has helped maintain most of its pristine forest and beauty . " It has never been completely explored . Largely hilly in its terrain at an elevation of 350 – 650 m , it falls within the Sangha ecoregion . Nki is crossed by several large rivers , including the Dja River . A waterfall , Nki falls , is located on the river in the park , giving " a tinge of exoticism to the landscape . " The park is situated from latitude 2 ˚ 05 to 2 ˚ 50 N and longitude 14 ˚ 05 to 14 ˚ 50 E. It covers a surface area of 3,093 km2 ( 1,194 sq mi ) and straddles two administrative divisions in the East province : Ngoyla in Haut Nyon and Moloundou in Boumba et Ngoko Division . The closest towns to Nki are Yokadouma , Moloundou and Lomie , beyond which is rural lands . Seventy-three bais , or forest clearings , have been discovered in Nki National Park . In April 2006 , while looking for elephant groups , a WWF team discovered the largest bai in the region , Ikwa Bai . Dr. Mike Loomis , a member of the group , confirmed that this bai is slightly larger than Dzanga Sangha Bai ( Central African Republic ) , which had previously held the record . He also reported little human development adjacent to the bai , and noticed 21 elephants and 16 buffaloes in it simultaneously . The bai has a small creek running through its center , which sits atop a bed of rocks and sand . A large mineral pit is located next to the stream . It is the habitat of several wildlife species , the largest-numbering being chimpanzees , elephants , buffaloes , and gorillas .

The area around the park , as defined by the World Wildlife Fund , has a human population of 22,882 , mostly ethnic Bantus and , despite being named a minority in Cameroon 's constitution of 18 January 1996 , Baka Pygmies . These include the Djem , Bangando , Bakwele and Zime tribes . Non-indigenous employees of logging companies and traders make up a sizeable amount of the population . The population density of the region is about five people per square kilometer , concentrated along the main Yokadouma-Moloundou road . The villages around the park are mostly homogeneous as there are few non-natives , most of whom work as civil servants or traders .

Nki , according to the Environmental News Service , " encompass [ es ] a biodiverse group of plants and animals . " This has been confirmed by various studies over the years . Sitatunga , chimpanzees , forest antelope ( largely duikers ) , bushbucks , giant forest hogs , bush pigs , leopard , Nile crocodiles and bongos are all found in Nki National Park , along with " hundreds " of fish species . The forests of Cameroon contain some of the highest population density of forest elephants of any nation , and Nki is no different , with an elephant density of roughly 2.5 per square kilometer for Boumba Bek and Nki combined . The population has been steadily rising , from 1,547 in 1998 to 3,000 in 2006 . Gorillas are also reported to abundant ; there are an estimated 6,000 adults in Nki . The park is also home to diurnal primates , such as the threatened crested monkey , De Brazza monkey , and the black colobus , who reportedly only live east of the Dja River . A 20-day study held by BirdLife International discovered 265 species of birds in the park . Of these , the yellow-bellied form of forest robin is widespread . In the study , a pair of Ja River scrub warblers was discovered in a 1 hectare patch of Rhynchospora marsh ; its population must be small as there are few such marshes in Nki . Three species of forest nightjar have been observed in the park ; Bate 's and brown nightjars are common in southeastern Cameroon , while a rarer and unidentified third species ' call has been heard twice . It is likely that this is Prigogine 's nightjar , as its voice is identical to that of the only known specimen of this species which was found in the Democratic Republic of Congo . Two small owls , Sjostedt 's and African barred owlets coexist in Nki , due to similar habitat requirements .

The Mauritius women 's national football team is a women 's association football team that represents the country of Mauritius . They have played two matches in their history , playing Réunion on 3 June 2012 and 25 November 2012 . As Réunion are not a FIFA member , this match was not recognised by FIFA . They are controlled by the Mauritius Football Association and are members of FIFA , the Confederation of African Football ( CAF ) , and the Council of Southern Africa Football Associations ( COSAFA ) . As of 2012 the head coach is Alain Jules . The development of women 's football in the country and in Africa as a whole faces a number of challenges , with a programme for women 's football not being created in the country until 1997 . FIFA gives money to the Mauritius Football Association , 10 % of which is aimed at developing football in the country in areas that include women 's football , sport medicine and futsal .

In 1985 , almost no country in the world had a women 's national football team and Mauritius was no exception with a women 's football programme only being established in the country in 1997 . As of January 2013 , the team has not played in , nor have they scheduled , any FIFA sanctioned matches . The only match they have played to date was against Réunion on 3 June 2012 in Saint-Denis . This match ended in a 3 – 0 defeat . A return match was planned for July 2012 in Mauritius , but this was put back to November 2012 . The match was played in Bambous on 25 November 2012 , with Réunion winning again , this time by 2 goals to 1 . Mauritius was scheduled to compete in several competitions , which they ended up withdrawing from before playing a single match . The list includes the 2002 Confederation of Southern African Football Associations women 's tournament in Harare , Zimbabwe from which they withdrew . In 2005 , Zambia was supposed to host a regional Council of Southern Africa Football Associations ( COSAFA ) women 's football tournament , with several countries agreeing to send teams including South Africa , Zimbabwe , Mozambique , Malawi , Seychelles , Mauritius , Madagascar , Zambia , Botswana , Namibia , Lesotho and Swaziland . The tournament eventually took place in 2006 , but Mauritius did not send a team . Beyond that , they were scheduled to participate in the 2008 Women 's U-20 World Cup qualification , where they were scheduled to play Zimbabwe in the preliminary round ; however , Zimbabwe withdrew from the competition giving Mauritius an automatic bye into the first round . In that round Mauritius was supposed to play South Africa , but withdrew from the competition .

Women 's football in Africa as a whole faces several challenges , including limited access to education , poverty amongst women in the wider society , and fundamental gender inequality present in the society that occasionally allows for female specific human rights abuses . Another problem with the development for the national team , one faced throughout the continent , is if quality female football players are found , many leave the country seeking greater opportunity in Northern Europe or the United States . Women 's football was formally established in Mauritius in 1997 . As of 2009 , there was no national or regional women 's competition but a school competition existed . There are 17 clubs for women over the age of 16 and four youth clubs in the country . The country has three national women 's football teams : senior , under-15 , and under-19 . In the period between 2002 and 2006 , none of them played even one international match . 10 % of the money from the FIFA Financial Assistance Programme ( FAP ) is targeted at the technical development of the game , which includes women 's football , sport medicine and futsal . This compares to 15 % for men 's competitions and 4 % for youth football development . Between 1991 and 2010 in Mauritius , there was no FIFA FUTURO III regional course for women 's coaching , no women 's football seminar held in the country and no FIFA MA course held for women / youth football .

" Hari 's on Tour ( Express ) " is an instrumental by English musician George Harrison , released as the opening track of his 1974 album Dark Horse . It was also the B-side of the album 's second single – which was " Ding Dong , Ding Dong " in North America and most other territories , and " Dark Horse " in Britain and some European countries . Among Harrison 's post-Beatles solo releases , the track is the first of only two genuine instrumentals he released from 1970 onwards – the other being the Grammy Award-winning " Marwa Blues " , from his 2002 album Brainwashed . Harrison recorded " Hari 's on Tour " in April 1974 at a spontaneous session held at his home , Friar Park . A slide guitar-based composition , the track also features saxophonist Tom Scott and the latter 's jazz-rock band L.A. Express , who were touring as Joni Mitchell 's backing group at the time . It was the first Harrison song to feature Scott , who became a regular collaborator and served as band leader during Harrison 's only series of concerts in North America , the highly publicised " Dark Horse Tour " with Ravi Shankar . " Hari 's on Tour ( Express ) " was played as the opening number throughout this tour , over November and December 1974 .

George Harrison first worked with jazz saxophonist , flautist and arranger Tom Scott in April 1973 , during the Los Angeles sessions for Ravi Shankar 's Shankar Family & Friends album . The two musicians also contributed to Ringo Starr 's album Ringo around that time , as well as Cheech & Chong 's Los Cochinos . Outside of his session work , Scott 's main activities were leading his band , L.A. Express , and backing Joni Mitchell , both live and in the studio . Just as Harrison had long combined elements of Hindustani classical music with Western rock and gospel , and was now moving towards the funk and soul genres , Scott 's solo work fused jazz , funk , pop and Middle Eastern influences . His collaborations with Mitchell also coincided with her move from confessional folk songwriting towards pop and jazz , and eventually avant garde . Harrison , Scott and Mitchell soon developed a mutual rapport , according to L.A. Express bassist Max Bennett . In addition to carrying out further sessions for Shankar Family & Friends in Los Angeles , in March 1974 , Harrison had begun spending time there trying to set up his own record label , with the winding down of the Beatles ' Apple Records from mid 1973 onwards . In August 1973 , rumours in the music industry claimed that Harrison , Bob Dylan , Joan Baez and Paul Simon were forming a label together ; in fact , Harrison founded Dark Horse Records , one of the first releases of which was the Shankar album , and Dylan temporarily signed with David Geffen 's Asylum Records , which was Mitchell 's label .

Mitchell 's tour in support of her critically acclaimed Court and Spark album arrived in London in April 1974 . While backstage at her and Scott 's show at the New Victoria Theatre , Harrison invited the five members of the L.A. Express to come out to his Oxfordshire home , Friar Park , the following day . Bennett recalls that they arrived by limousine and he mistook the property 's grand gatehouse for the main residence . Scott later told music journalist Michael Gross that only a social visit was planned , but the band were impressed with Friar Park 's 16-track home studio , FPSHOT , and Harrison suggested they record something . The first song they worked on was an untitled instrumental tune that later became known as " Hari 's on Tour ( Express ) " , for which Scott made a lead sheet for the band . Part of the title was taken from " Hari Georgeson " , the latest pseudonym adopted by Harrison when working with non-EMI / Capitol artists , since he was still contracted to Apple until January 1976 . Harrison played slide guitar on the track , in his preferred open E tuning , adopting a similar sound to the one he had used three years earlier on John Lennon 's song " How Do You Sleep ? " Aside from Scott and Bennett 's contributions , on saxophone and bass , respectively , the other musicians were Robben Ford ( electric guitar ) , Roger Kellaway ( piano ) and John Guerin ( drums ) . Harrison 's musical biographer , Simon Leng , writes that the tune predominantly uses major chords , with the " main melodic interest " coming with a shift to C # minor seventh , which provides " a moment of softening sweetness " . Leng notes the contrast between Harrison 's Fender Stratocaster " roaring into action " on this song and the " opulence " of his previous album , Living in the Material World , and suggests that Harrison now " just wanted to be one of the boys " in a " working , rocking band " . The engineer at the session was Phil McDonald .

According to Scott , the basic track took " a couple of hours " before they had a satisfactory take . The musicians then recorded a second song , " Simply Shady " , which , like " Hari 's on Tour " , would be included on Harrison 's forthcoming album , Dark Horse . The five band members stayed over at Friar Park before Ford , Bennett , Kellaway and Guerin left for Denver the following day . Scott says he stayed on and worked further with Harrison at FPSHOT ; in addition to the various horn parts , he played organ on " Hari 's on Tour " . In the same interview with Gross , for Circus Raves magazine , Scott recalled that he was the first Western musician that Harrison approached about joining him and Shankar for a tour of the United States and Canada later in the year . The tour would be the first in North America by a former Beatle since the group 's 1966 US visit , and Harrison 's first live performances since his staging of the Concert for Bangladesh in August 1971 . Rather than include Beatles material on the 1974 tour , however , Harrison planned to present a varied program combining rock , soul / R & B , jazz , funk and Indian classical music . Eight Arms to Hold You authors Chip Madinger and Mark Easter suggest that " Hari 's on Tour ( Express ) " was written " simply as a show opener " for the North American concerts , which would also feature Harrison 's former Apple Records protégé Billy Preston .

Although his 1969 experimental album Electronic Sound consists of Moog synthesizer sounds and the 1968 Wonderwall Music soundtrack is almost entirely devoid of vocals , out of all the tracks released by Harrison as a solo artist after the Beatles ' break-up in 1970 , " Hari 's on Tour " is a rare example of a genuine instrumental composition . Only 2002 's " Marwa Blues " stands as another . Among other projects they worked on together through to the early 1980s , Harrison played on the instrumental " Appolonia ( Foxtrata ) " , from Scott 's 1975 album New York Connection , and Scott helped produce Harrison 's debut on Dark Horse Records , Thirty Three & 1 / 3 .

Harrison 's overcommittal of his time to Dark Horse acts Ravi Shankar and Splinter during 1974 resulted in him having to rush-record much of Dark Horse while preparing for the North American tour . Due to the pressure , Harrison developed laryngitis during rehearsals and damaged his voice . As well as placing further importance on the instrumentals in his setlist , which included " Hari 's on Tour ( Express ) " and Scott 's track " Tom Cat " , Harrison 's depleted vocals marred the concerts for many observers . In addition , while many critics admired the adventurousness of the musical program and reviewed the shows favourably , others , particularly in music publications such as Rolling Stone , wrote scathingly of Harrison 's reluctance to acknowledge the Beatles ' legacy , together with his willingness to share the spotlight so readily with Shankar 's orchestra of classical musicians and Preston . In his role as band leader , Scott spoke out in support of Harrison 's musical direction and refuted reports that the tour was not going well ; instead , he told Circus Raves , audience reaction had been " radically different from city to city " and dependent on whether concertgoers chose to listen , or came expecting to hear the Beatles .

Harrison played " Hari 's on Tour " as the opening song throughout the tour , which began on 2 November 1974 in Vancouver and ended in New York on 20 December . It was preceded by a recording of Monty Python 's " The Lumberjack Song " , played through the concert PA while the band took the stage . As the many bootlegs from the tour reveal , early on in each performance of " Hari 's on Tour " , Harrison often called out a greeting to the city or town in question . Some concert reviewers referred to the song as " Hari Good Boy Express " or " Hari Good Bye Express " . The first of these two titles is how Harrison named the track on the preliminary artwork included in the 2014 reissue of Dark Horse . The studio version appeared as the opening track on Dark Horse , followed by " Simply Shady " . Due to the delay in its completion , the album was released on 9 December in North America , towards the end of the Harrison – Shankar tour , and a few days before Christmas in Britain . Although Christmas shows in the UK had been under consideration , no such performances took place , and Harrison 's only tour after 1974 would be a series of Japanese concerts in December 1991 with Eric Clapton . Following its initial release , " Hari 's on Tour " was issued as the B-side to the second single off the album – " Ding Dong , Ding Dong " in the United States , Canada and a number of other territories , and " Dark Horse " in Britain and some other European countries .

Contrasting with his successes as a solo artist since 1970 , Dark Horse earned Harrison the worst critical notices of his career . " Hari 's on Tour ( Express ) " drew a favourable response during the 1974 tour , however , as reviewers commented on the energy with which the band performed the piece . In his feature article on the West Coast concerts , for Rolling Stone , Ben Fong-Torres described the song as a " well-arranged , tension-and-release number " , while the Pacific Sun called it " a zingy and classically melodic instrumental ... a touchstone of the Harrison style " . Reviewing the second show of the tour , D.P. Bond of the Seattle Post-Intelligencer wrote : " Harrison 's opening instrumental piece was beautiful : the fullest , finest explosion of rock ' n ' roll that I think I have ever heard . " The NME 's Bob Woffinden wrote a notably unfavourable assessment of the Dark Horse album , in which he found " Hari 's on Tour " to be " an unevenly paced boogie thing that has George blowing most of his licks straightaway and Tom Scott coming on with a few quasi-Jnr . Walker bursts " . Woffinden continued : " Which , you feel , would not be a bad appetiser for the real meat to follow . Unfortunately , Hari 's vegetarian . " In an equally unfavourable review of the album , Jim Miller of Rolling Stone dismissed the track as " banal " . Harrison biographer Alan Clayson refers to Hari 's on Tour " as " an instrumental that went in one ear and out the other " , while in The Beatles : An Illustrated Record , critics Roy Carr and Tony Tyler described it as sounding like " a backing track from which the vocal line has mysteriously been deleted " . Author Elliot Huntley acknowledges that the musicians " performed brilliantly " on the recording , but adds , " unfortunately brilliant musicians alone do not a good song make " .

Echoing the magazine 's earlier support for the tour , Brian Harrigan of Melody Maker praised Harrison 's " nifty slide guitar " on the opening song and throughout the album , which he felt " should certainly do a tremendous amount to salvage George 's battered reputation " . In his 1977 book The Beatles Forever , Nicholas Schaffner similarly opined that " Hari 's on Tour " " boasts some mean licks " while commenting that neither the tour nor the album " warrant [ ed ] all the abuse they got " . Writing more recently for AllMusic , Richard Ginell describes the recording as " Tom Scott 's L.A. Express churning out all-pro L.A.-studio jazz / rock " and adds that the song " gets the doomed project off to a spirited start " . Simon Leng views this " neat instrumental " as a collaborative effort between Harrison and Scott , and a logical step for the guitarist , given Harrison 's early appreciation of Chet Atkins ' instrumentals . Leng regrets Harrison 's apparent abandoning of his " meticulous approach " to recording in favour of uncharacteristic spontaneity , and concludes : " Ultimately , this good-time guitar showcase is as relevant as Dylan 's ' Nashville Skyline Rag ' . " Ian Inglis writes of Scott 's soprano sax producing an " atmosphere of anticipation " similar to a successful film or television theme , and identifies " Hari 's on Tour " as an indication that Harrison , some years before his career became focused on movie production , was able to " effectively incorporate the conventions of a soundtrack within the codes of rock " . Reviewing the 2014 reissue of Dark Horse , Joe Marchese of The Second Disc describes the track as " a bright opening to an album that would considerably darken in tone " .

Harrison recorded and filmed several of the 1974 concerts for a planned release , but only live versions of this instrumental and " For You Blue " have ever been issued officially . In 1992 , " Hari 's on Tour " appeared on the four-song EP accompanying Songs by George Harrison 2 , a limited-edition , hand-bound book produced by Genesis Publications . Text accompanying this disc gives the recording information as simply " live in Washington DC in 1974 " , referring to Harrison 's 13 December show at the Capital Centre in Landover , Maryland , a suburb of Washington . The book was limited to a print run of 2500 and published on 22 June 1992 . Described by Leng as " the leading performers of the period " , Harrison 's tour band comprised Scott and Robben Ford from the L.A. Express , Preston on keyboards , jazz percussionist Emil Richards , the rhythm section of Willie Weeks and Andy Newmark , and additional horn players Jim Horn and Chuck Findley . Jim Keltner joined as second drummer midway through the tour , and some of Ravi Shankar 's musicians played during Harrison 's portion of each show . The sound heard during the opening seconds of " Hari 's on Tour " is a sarangi , played by Sultan Khan , who was one of the fifteen musicians in Shankar 's orchestra .

The Washington stop was among the highlights of the tour . At the invitation of Jack Ford – son of US president Gerald Ford – Harrison , Shankar , Scott , Preston and others in the entourage visited the White House on 13 December , where Harrison met with President Ford . Surprised at the " good vibes " there so soon after the Watergate hearings , Harrison asked Ford to personally intercede in both John Lennon 's struggle to be allowed to remain in the United States , and the US Treasury 's audit of the funds raised through the Concert for Bangladesh . Madinger and Easter write that this released version of the song is most likely a composite of performances from the evening show at Landover and the 6 December matinee performance at Toronto 's Maple Leaf Gardens . As with all the tracks from the highly priced Songs by George Harrison volumes , " Hari 's on Tour ( Express ) " is available unofficially on bootleg compilations such as Pirate Songs .

Vine Street is a street in Westminster , London , running from Swallow Street , parallel to Regent Street and Piccadilly . It is now a dead end that was shortened from a longer road in the early 18th century owing to the building of Regent Street . From the 18th to 20th century , it was home to Vine Street Police Station , which grew from a watch-house into one of the busiest police stations in the world . The Marquess of Queensberry was charged with libel against Oscar Wilde here in 1895 . There was also a court house in the 18th and early 19th century . The street 's association with law has led to it being grouped with Bow Street and Marlborough Street on the standard British Monopoly board .

The street is named after The Vine , an 18th-century public house , which in turn may have been named after a former vineyard that was based at this location in Roman times . It was documented on ratebooks as Little Swallow Street in 1675 . It was laid out around 1686 and originally ran further , along what is now the Man in the Moon Passage . John Rocque 's Map of London , 1746 shows Vine Street extending from Piccadilly northeast to Warwick Street . In 1720 , the main properties on the street were a brewery and a carpenter 's yard . Vine Street was split into two sections following the construction of Regent Street between 1816 and 1819 . The Man in the Moon Passage was created at this time , named after a former pub at this location . The northern section towards Warwick Street was renamed Great Vine Street , and then a branch of Warwick Street itself . It ceased to exist after the reconstruction of the Regent Street Quadrant in 1920 . In 1853 , Charles Moreign purchased several small houses at the end of Vine Street so they could be redeveloped into St James 's Hall , Piccadilly . A rear entrance to the hall backed onto the street . The hall was demolished in 1905 and replaced by the Piccadilly Hotel , which also backs onto Vine Street .

Vine Street has long been associated with the police and law . Around 1751-2 , a court house was built at the western end of the street , on the corner of what is now Piccadilly Place . It closed in 1836 following the reorganisation of the court system around Westminster and was subsequently occupied by the lawyer Edward Gaffin . The Vine Street Police Station was at No. 10 . It was originally built as a watch-house around 1767 , and rebuilt following a fire in 1786 that destroyed several properties on and around the street . A school operated on the first floor , and two cells were in the basement . A further storey was added to the building in 1816 . It was renamed Vine Street Police Station in 1829 following the establishment of the Metropolitan Police District . The school moved from the building to Swallow Street in 1836 , where it stayed before closing in 1881 . The police station went on to become one of the main stations in Central London . In 1850 , it was extended over the 18th century courthouses . At one point in the 19th century it was one of the busiest police stations in the world . An Arts and Crafts extension wing was built on the station in 1897 , that faced onto Swallow Street . The Man in the Moon pub , adjacent to the station , was bought by the police receiver in 1931 .

The Dutch artist Peter Scheemakers moved into a house on the western edge of Vine Street around 1741 . He stayed there until 1769 , when he returned to Antwerp . On 2 September 1791 , composer Frantisek Kotzwara died at prostitute Susannah Hill 's house at No. 5 Vine Street from erotic asphyxiation following a sexual act that involved tying his neck to a doorknob . Hill was charged with Kotzwara 's murder but later acquitted . In 1895 , the Marquess of Queensbury was charged at Vine Street Police Station with libel against Oscar Wilde . This ultimately led to Wilde 's arrest and subsequent imprisonment . On 29 May 1901 , the stonemason James Schulty reported he had information about the murder of Mary Ann Austin but refused to reveal details anywhere except the Vine Street Police Station . The information was discarded by the Metropolitan Police as little value . In 1928 , an officer working at the station was sacked after it was revealed he had been gathering bribes from local nightclubs and brothels , acquiring over £ 17,000 ( now £ 924,000 ) in the process . The officer subsequently committed suicide and the station is believed to be haunted by his ghost . Related incidents include reports of papers being inexplicably moved , and an officer hearing footsteps despite knowing he was the only one in the station .

The street and station is mentioned in the Pogues ' song " The Old Main Drag " on their 1985 album Rum Sodomy & the Lash . It refers to the station and street 's unpopularity with some of London owing to their distrust of the police force . Because of its relatively hidden location and proximity to Piccadilly Circus , the street suffers from crime , which has led to Westminster City Council gating off the Man in the Moon Passage so service vehicles can access connecting buildings safely . The street features as a property with a purchase price of £ 200 on the British Monopoly board . It is one of a group of three , coded orange , with connections to law , and is named after the police station . The other two orange properties , Bow Street and Marlborough Street , which are both valued at £ 180 , are named after the Bow Street Runners and Marlborough Street Magistrates Court respectively . Since the Man in the Moon is now closed , students on a Monopoly board pub crawl drink in one of the nearby pubs , such as those on Swallow Street , instead .

" 4 Minutes " is a song by American singer and songwriter Madonna from her eleventh studio album Hard Candy ( 2008 ) , featuring vocals by American singers Justin Timberlake and Timbaland . It was released as the lead single from the album on March 17 , 2008 , by Warner Bros. Records . According to Madonna , the song is about saving the environment and " hav [ ing ] a good time while we are doing it " . She also cited the song as the inspiration for the documentary I Am Because We Are ( 2008 ) . The song was recorded at Sarm West Studios , in London , while the mixing of the track was finished at The Hit Factory studio , in Miami . Sound engineer Demo Castellon first worked on the vocals and then on the beats , while the synths were composed by Timbaland and Danja . An uptempo dance-pop song with an urban and hip hop style , " 4 Minutes " incorporates Timbaland 's characteristic bhangra beats and the instrumentation used in the song includes brass , foghorns and cowbells . The song 's lyrics carry a message of social awareness , inspired by Madonna 's visit to Africa and the human suffering she witnessed in the continent .

" 4 Minutes " received positive reviews from critics , who called it a busy dance track and complimented its music , which was compared to that of a marching band . Some reviewers noted that it was Madonna who appeared more of a featured artist on the track , rather than Timberlake . The song peaked at number three on the US Billboard Hot 100 , giving Madonna her 37th top-ten single , breaking the record previously held by Elvis Presley , as the artist with most top-ten hits . It remains Madonna 's best-selling digital single in the United States , with sales of over three million copies . Internationally , " 4 Minutes " topped the chart in 21 countries , including Australia , Canada , Germany , Italy , Spain and the United Kingdom . In the song 's accompanying music video , Madonna and Timberlake sing and run away from a giant black screen that devours everything in its path . At the end of the video , both of them are consumed by the screen . " 4 Minutes " was performed by Madonna on the promotional tour for Hard Candy and the 2008 – 09 Sticky & Sweet Tour . In the latter , the song served as the opener of the rave segment , where Madonna wore a futuristic robotic outfit . During performances of the song , Timberlake and Timbaland appeared on video screens and sang their lines . The song received two Grammy Award nominations for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals and Best Remixed Recording , Non-Classical at the 2009 ceremony .

Following the release of her tenth studio album , Confessions on a Dance Floor ( 2005 ) , Madonna wanted to record more dance music . When asked by producer Stuart Price what kind of music appealed to her , Madonna replied that she loved the records of singer Justin Timberlake and producer Timbaland , so she collaborated with them . " 4 Minutes " was written by all three artists , along with Nate " Danja " Hills , and produced by Timbaland , Timberlake and Danja . The song , initially named " 4 Minutes to Save the World " , was one of the last to be produced for Madonna 's album Hard Candy . In an interview with MTV News , Madonna said that the concept of the song was developed through discussions with Timberlake . She further explained the meaning of the song : I don 't think it 's important to take it too literally . I think the song , more than anything , is about having a sense of urgency ; about how we are you know , living on borrowed time essentially and people are becoming much more aware of the environment and how we 're destroying the planet . We can 't just keep distracting ourselves we do have to educate ourselves and wake up and do something about it . You know at the same time we don 't want to be boring and serious and not have fun so it 's kind of like well if we 're going to save the planet can we have a good time while we are doing it ?

Madonna clarified that her age did not have anything to do with the sense of urgency reflected in the track ; instead , it was just something that she had in mind for a long time and with " 4 Minutes " , the sense seeped into her music . Ingrid Sischy from Interview magazine said that the song felt like a ballad for the world , containing " the sounds of a great big marching band . It 's a giant dance song " . Madonna agreed with Sischy and responded that the song was " a funny paradox " and was one of the inspirations behind her documentary I Am Because We Are ( 2008 ) . The documentary dealt with the acute suffering and food shortage afflicting the African nation of Malawi .

The recording sessions for " 4 Minutes " took place at Sarm West Studios in West London , on a 72-channel SSL 9080 scratching tool . Paul Tingen from Sound on Sound magazine interviewed mixing and recording engineer Demacio " Demo " Castellon , who recalled that he did not attend the first recording sessions because he was working on another project . Over half of the song was already done by the time Castellon arrived , leaving him to do the programming in the intro and the end . At Sarm , Timbaland and Danja used Akai MPC3000 and Ensoniq ASR-10 sampling drum machines , Yamaha Motif workstation and synths to build the backing track for " 4 Minutes " . Castellon explained that the recording session took longer than expected . In total 46 tracks were used for drums and percussion and 16 stereo tracks for the bass . The whole session included 100 tracks , and further mixing was done on Pro Tools . In the case of ' 4 Minutes ' , Tim had a vision from the beginning of how things should go , especially sonically ... When I opened up the session of ' 4 Minutes ' , there was so much going on that I knew right away that the hard part would be to make sure that the vocals would cut through and were right in the pocket . Beginning with working on the vocals was the only way to achieve this . After that I formed all the other parts around the vocals . The other challenge was to make sure that everything in the track sounded clear and that you could hear every instrument , every syllable , every breath . Also , I do almost always work linear in time on a track . It 's easier , because when you 're done , you 're done . So I keep working on section after section , until I get to the end of the track and then I know the whole mix is pretty close .

Castellon said that he did not want the SSL 's internal automation to interfere with his blending of the music , instead used Pro Tools , with automatic levels . According to him , he " then ran everything through the SSL , on which [ he ] did EQ , compression and panning . " The mixing of the track was made at The Hit Factory studio , in Miami on a 96-channel SSL J-series desk . Considering the quantity of recorded backing tracks , Castellon 's challenge was to make sure that the music did not overpower the vocals . He accomplished this by first mixing the vocals , then adding the music and the drums , which was an unusual method for him . Minimal digital plug-ins were employed for the mix as Castellon preferred the sound of outboard gear . After the mixes were done , Castellon began working on Timbaland 's introduction , and continued with Madonna and Timberlake 's vocals . On Timbaland 's vocals , he utilized the SSL 's EQ to reduce " some bottom end " , and he set input levels to avoid clipping . For Madonna and Timberlake he used SSL 's dynamic range compression , and on Madonna 's voice he applied " an eighth-note delay from a [ Lexicon ] PCM42 " , a reverb from Eventide H3500 for the verse , and [ TC Electronic ] TC3000 for the hook . " These digital signal processors were employed to give Madonna 's vocals a sense of stereophonic space . Castellon applied Waves Audio " Renaissance Compressor " plug-in to control the level of kick drum . He recalled that " there was one particular kick sound there that clashed with the other tracks , so Tim replaced it with another kick that had a very different note and sound . " Using a Focusrite D2 equalizer let him " match the sound of that new kick drum to the other kick drum sounds " . Once the drums and percussion were added , the recording and mixing of " 4 Minutes " was finished .

" 4 Minutes " is an uptempo dance-pop song , composed in an urban , hip hop style . It incorporates the effect of a marching band , a clanging beat and instrumentation from a brass that is played in a " scale-like riff " , as described by Caryn Ganz from Rolling Stone . Other musical instruments used are foghorns and cow bells . In " 4 Minutes " , Madonna and Timberlake sing and trade verses , the rhythm moves towards a hard clanging beat as Madonna sings the lines that the " road to hell is paved with good intentions . " Madonna and Timberlake start singing the chorus with Timberlake singing the line of " We 've only got four minutes to save the world " . The track continues in the same momentum in the second verse and second chorus whence the track ends where every beat ceases except for Timbaland 's characteristic bhangra beats , the brass riffs and Madonna singing the words " tick-tock " repeatedly , after which it ends . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Alfred Publishing , the song is written in the key of G minor and is set in time signature of common time with a tempo of 115 beats per minute . Timbaland 's bhangra beats are featured at the start and the end of the song . Madonna and Timberlake 's vocal range spans two octaves , from F3 to Bb5 . The song has a sequence of D – G – C – F – B ♭ – D in the verses and E ♭ 5 – D5 – C5 – D5 in the chorus , as its chord progression . The lyrics of " 4 Minutes " carry a message of social awareness , inspired by Madonna 's visit to Africa and the human suffering she witnessed . Jon Pareles of The New York Times stated that " [ h ] owever , the song sounds as if four minutes is the time taken for a song to be a guaranteed pop hit or the time required for a quickie ; in reality it is the only song from Hard Candy album which contains a message of social awareness in it . " The sound of a clock ticking away emphasizes this message further . Madonna explained in New York magazine that the line " The road to hell is paved with good intentions " did not relate to her charity work . Instead it was her question to herself : " Do I understand this opinion that I 've adopted or this Zeitgeist that I 've allowed myself to be swept up in ? Because you could have the best intentions but not have enough information and make huge mistakes . " Regarding the line " Sometimes I feel what I need is a you intervention " , Madonna explained , " [ y ] eah , meaning , sometimes I think you need to save me . "

Caryn Ganz called it " a loud , busy , energetic track " , and commented that Timberlake did " his best Michael Jackson impression " . Billboard music reviewer and editor Chuck Taylor said that with the song , Madonna " is poised to score her first top 10 hit since 2005 's ' Hung Up ' . [ ... ] There 's an awful lot going on in the busy dance track [ ... ] but the trade-off chorus between Madge and Justin of ' We 've only got four minutes to save the world ' is hooky enough unto itself to sell the song . " He added that the song " qualifies as an event record between superpowers [ Madonna and Timberlake ] who not only share equal billing , but sound gangbusters together . " Mark Savage of BBC described the sound as " so futuristic it could realistically have been beamed in from the end of the world . " Andy Gill of The Independent called " 4 Minutes " one of Hard Candy 's saviors . He noted that " the Mardi Gras marching-band bumping rambunctiously along " , is one of the album 's " most ambitious offerings . " Joey Guerra of Houston Chronicle compared the track to the work of Nelly Furtado and felt that the composition was " a bid for radio play . "

According to Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine , the song is an " advertisement for the rest of the album . " Chris Williams of Entertainment Weekly called it a " flirty duet " . Ben Thompson of The Guardian said : " It has a hard to escape sense that all concerned are going through the motions [ of life ] – effortlessly , sometimes brilliantly . " Joan Anderman of The Boston Globe believed that the song is " chart-topper for its sheer star power as well as instant musical allure , and on the eve of Madonna 's 50th birthday [ ... ] ' 4 Minutes ' feels a lot like an icon 's can 't-miss gift to herself . " However , she noticed that the " shift in the power structure [ is nowhere ] more blatant than on ' 4 Minutes ' , where Madonna sounds like a featured guest trying to keep pace with Timbaland 's colossal beats and Timberlake 's nimble melody . " Freedom du Lac of The Washington Post complimented the song for being busy and brassy . She commented : " [ P ] ropelled by a detonative marching-band beat [ ... ] it 's one of the most thrilling things Madonna has done in this decade . "

Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic praised the melodic and rhythmic hook , but was disappointed that Madonna 's voice is " drowned out by Timbaland 's farting four-note synth – which might not have been so bad if the tracks were fresher and if the whole enterprise didn 't feel quite so joylessly mechanical . " At the 51st Grammy Awards , " 4 Minutes " garnered Madonna , Timberlake and Timbaland a nomination in the Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals category . Dutch musician Junkie XL also earned a nomination in the Best Remixed Recording , Non-Classical category for his remix of the song .

In the United States , " 4 Minutes " debuted at number 68 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart for the issue dated April 5 , 2008 , based solely on airplay . Within a week , the song had jumped 65 places , reaching number three on the chart . This leap was spurred by first-week digital sales of 217,000 , enabling the song to enter Billboard 's Digital chart at number two , behind Mariah Carey 's single " Touch My Body " . The song became Madonna 's first top-ten single since " Hung Up " ( 2005 ) , and was her 37th Hot 100 top-ten hit , breaking the record previously held by Elvis Presley . " 4 Minutes " was also her highest-charting single on the Hot 100 since " Music " reached the top of the chart in 2000 . For Timberlake , " 4 Minutes " became his ninth top-ten hit . On the Pop 100 chart , the song reached a peak of two . " 4 Minutes " was a success on Billboard 's dance charts , topping both the Hot Dance Club Play and the Hot Dance Airplay charts . Almost five months after its release , " 4 Minutes " was certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for sales of two million paid digital downloads . " 4 Minutes " was the tenth most downloaded song in the United States in 2008 with sales of 2.37 million , according to Nielsen SoundScan , and has sold over three million copies as of July 2012 .

In Canada , Nielsen Broadcast Data Systems ( BDS ) confirmed that " 4 Minutes " debuted at the top of the Canadian Contemporary Hit Radio chart . This marked the first time any song entered at the top of the CHR chart in BDS history . The song debuted at number 27 on the Canadian Hot 100 on March 27 , 2008 , and topped the chart the next week . By the end of the year , " 4 Minutes " was the fifth best selling digital song in Canada with sales of 143,000 copies , and ranked fourth on the year-end tabulation of the Canadian Hot 100 . " 4 Minutes " was also a success in Australia and New Zealand . The song debuted at number three on the Australian ARIA Singles Chart , and ascended to the number-one position two weeks later , where it stayed for three consecutive weeks . " 4 Minutes " was certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for the shipment of 70,000 copies . In New Zealand , " 4 Minutes " made its debut at number 14 on the New Zealand Singles Chart , and ascended to the top ten , finally peaking at number three . The song has been certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) for shipment of 7,500 copies .

In the United Kingdom , " 4 Minutes " debuted on the UK Singles Chart at number seven . The song became Madonna 's 60th UK top-ten single . It debuted on the airplay charts at number 19 , with first week tallies of 564 plays and 27.10 million listeners . The song rose to the top of the chart on April 20 , 2008 ( for the week ending date April 26 , 2008 ) , with sales of 40,634 copies , thus giving Madonna her 13th British number-one single . It remained at the top for four weeks . According to the Official Charts Company , it was the ninth best-selling song of 2008 and has sold 530,000 copies there as of 2016 , being certified Gold by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) . " 4 Minutes " was also number one on Billboard 's European Hot 100 Singles for four weeks . Overall , " 4 Minutes " reached number one in 21 countries worldwide .

The music video was directed by French duo Jonas & François in London , United Kingdom . It featured choreography by Jamie King , who worked on Madonna 's Confessions , Re-Invention and Drowned World tours as well as her video for the single " Sorry " ( 2006 ) . Japanese hip hop dancing duo Hamutsun Serve also made an appearance in the video . Before its release , Rolling Stone said that in the video Madonna and Timberlake act as if they were " superheroes " while they evade multiple obstacles . In the video , Madonna wore a cream colored corset , glistening black boots and styled her hair in platinum blond waves while Timberlake wore mainly denims and a scarf around his neck . Regarding the idea behind the music video , Madonna said that " it was conceptualistic " . She explained that the video was shot like a march past ; " It 's a movement , and we want to take everybody with us . " About the idea of a black screen devouring everything , Madonna said , None of us did [ understand the concept of the black screen ] . It was just , you know , it 's very conceptual . We basically gave the song to the two French directors [ Jonas & François ] and they came up with the only concept that I thought was interesting , with this black sort of amorphous graphic line slowly eating up the world . I just liked that as a concept .

The video used soft focus , gentle lighting and airbrushing looks on Madonna . It starts with Timbaland chanting the opening line in front of a giant timer screen that counts down from four minutes . As he sings , a black geometric patterned screen comes from behind and engulfs all of the musical devices present . Madonna and Timberlake enter a house but run away from it after finding the screen there , which starts eating the hands and legs of the inhabitants of the house , thus showing their insides . After a number of shots showing Madonna and Timberlake jumping on and over cars to escape from the screen , they finally move into a supermarket . The screen follows them , consuming the long lines of stalls and the people present there . As the second chorus starts , they arrive in front of the screen where Timbaland is singing . After choreographed dancing , Madonna performs a back arch as the timer reaches zero time . The last " tick-tock , tick-tock " sound is heard , Madonna and Timberlake dance again on a long stage ; the black screen approaches them from both sides . The video ends with both of them kissing , and the black screen devouring them . Timberlake 's bones and ribs , and Madonna 's cheeks are seen in the last shot .

Regarding the video , Madonna said it was like " [ g ] oody goody gum drops " , referring to the candy-oriented theme of the album . Virginia Heffernan from The New York Times called the video heart-pounding , and compared its momentum with the music video of " Thriller , " In the Air Tonight " and " Shadows of the Night " . However , Eric Wilson from the same newspaper commented that the video did not yield a breakout Madonna look compared to her videos from the 1980s . Singer Miley Cyrus created her own version of the video and posted it on her YouTube channel . Madonna responded to it in her own video and said , " All you people out there who are making videos to my new single , ' 4 Minutes , ' keep up the good work , nice job . " " 4 Minutes " was nominated for an award at the 2008 MTV Video Music Awards in the " Best Dancing in a Video " category , but lost to the Pussycat Dolls ' single " When I Grow Up " .

The song was performed during the Hard Candy Promo Tour and Sticky & Sweet Tour ( 2008 – 09 ) . At the promotional tour , " 4 Minutes " was performed as the third song of the setlist . Madonna wore a shiny black outfit with black tails , Adidas track pants and high-heeled , lace-up boots for the performance . Justin Timberlake made an appearance alongside Madonna , at the Roseland Ballroom in New York , to perform the song . As Timbaland appeared on the video screens , the beat of the song started . The four side-stage video screens began to glide across the stage , and swiveled around to reveal Timberlake behind one and Madonna behind the other . They performed the song in a similar choreography from the music video . During " 4 Minutes " performance on the Sticky & Sweet Tour , Madonna wore a futuristic robotic outfit designed by Heatherette . She coupled it with metallic plates on her shoulder and a wig with long curled hair . Madonna and her dancers emerged from behind backdrops , on which Timbaland and Timberlake appeared , to perform their lines . An apparent duet between Madonna and Timberlake ensues , with Timberlake singing and dancing his part from the screens . He joined Madonna in person , for the show at Los Angeles 's Dodger Stadium on November 6 , 2008 , the same show in which Britney Spears appeared alongside Madonna to perform " Human Nature " . They performed " 4 Minutes " in similar fashion to the promotional tour choreography . Timbaland sang his part of the song in person on November 26 , 2008 at Dolphins Stadium in Miami Gardens , Florida . " 4 Minutes " was also used as mashups during the performance of songs like " Vogue " and " Hung Up " .

" 4 Minutes " was used in the film Get Smart ( 2008 ) , in a scene and its film credits . It was one of the songs covered by the cast of Glee during the April 20 , 2010 episode " The Power of Madonna " . The fictional character Kurt Hummel , portrayed by Chris Colfer , sang Madonna 's parts while Mercedes Jones ( Amber Riley ) sang Timberlake 's . In the episode , the song is performed during a routine by the high-school cheering squad , accompanied by the school band . The version was released both as a digital downloadable single and on the EP , Glee : The Music , The Power of Madonna . " 4 Minutes " cover charted on the Hot Digital Songs of Billboard at number 55 on May 8 , 2010 , while reaching number 89 and number 70 on the Billboard Hot 100 and Canadian Hot 100 , respectively .

Greed is a 1924 American silent film , written and directed by Erich von Stroheim and based on the 1899 Frank Norris novel McTeague . It stars Gibson Gowland as Dr. John McTeague , ZaSu Pitts as his wife Trina Sieppe and Jean Hersholt as McTeague 's friend and eventual enemy Marcus Schouler . The film tells the story of McTeague , a San Francisco dentist , who marries his best friend Schouler 's girlfriend Trina . Shortly after their engagement , Trina wins a lottery prize of $ 5,000 , at that time a substantial sum . Schouler jealously informs the authorities that McTeague had been practicing dentistry without a license , and McTeague and Trina become impoverished . While living in squalor , McTeague becomes a violent alcoholic and Trina becomes greedily obsessed with her winnings , refusing to spend any of them , despite how poor she and her husband have become . Eventually McTeague murders Trina for the money and flees to Death Valley . Schouler catches up with him there for a final confrontation . Stroheim shot more than 85 hours of footage and obsessed over accuracy during the filming . Two months were spent shooting in Death Valley for the film 's final sequence and many of the cast and crew became ill . Greed was one of the few films of its time to be shot entirely on location . Stroheim used sophisticated filming techniques such as deep-focus cinematography and montage editing . He considered Greed to be a Greek tragedy , in which environment and heredity controlled the characters ' fates and reduced them to primitive bête humaines ( human beasts ) .

During the making of Greed , the production company merged into Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer , putting Irving Thalberg in charge of the production . Thalberg had fired Stroheim a few years earlier at Universal Pictures . Originally almost eight hours long , Greed was edited against Stroheim 's wishes to about two-and-a-half hours . Only twelve people saw the full-length 42-reel version , now lost ; some of them called it the greatest film ever made . Stroheim later called Greed his most fully realized work and was hurt both professionally and personally by the studio 's re-editing of it . The uncut version has been called the " holy grail " for film archivists , amid repeated false claims of the discovery of the missing footage . In 1999 Turner Entertainment created a four-hour version of Greed that used existing stills of cut scenes to reconstruct the film . Greed was a critical and financial failure upon its initial release , but by the 1950s it began to be regarded as one of the greatest films ever made ; filmmakers and scholars have praised it for its influence on subsequent films .

John McTeague is a miner working in Placer County , California . A traveling dentist calling himself Dr. " Painless " Potter visits the town , and McTeague 's mother begs Potter to take her son on as an apprentice . Potter agrees and McTeague eventually becomes a dentist , practicing on Polk Street in San Francisco . Marcus Schouler brings Trina Sieppe , his cousin and intended fiancée , into McTeague 's office for dental work . Schouler and McTeague are friends and McTeague gladly agrees to examine her . As they wait for an opening , Trina buys a lottery ticket . McTeague becomes enamored with Trina and begs Schouler for permission to court Trina . After seeing McTeague 's conviction , Schouler agrees . Trina eventually agrees to marry McTeague and shortly afterwards her lottery ticket wins her $ 5,000 . Schouler bitterly claims that the money should have been his , causing a rift between McTeague and Schouler . After McTeague and Trina wed , they continue to live in their small apartment with Trina refusing to spend her $ 5,000 . Schouler leaves the city to become a cattle rancher . Before he goes he secretly reports McTeague for practicing dentistry without a license in order to ruin his former friend . McTeague is ordered to shut down his practice or face jail . Even though she has saved over $ 200 in addition to the original $ 5,000 from the lottery ticket , Trina is unwilling to spend her money . Money becomes increasingly scarce , with the couple forced to sell their possessions . McTeague finally snaps and bites Trina 's fingers in a fit of rage . Later he leaves to go fishing to earn money , taking Trina 's savings ( now totaling $ 450 ) .

Trina 's bitten fingers become infected and have to be amputated . To earn money she becomes a janitor at a children 's school . She withdraws the $ 5,000 from the bank to keep it close to her , eventually spreading it on her bed so she can sleep on it . McTeague then returns , having spent the money he took and asks Trina for more . The following day McTeague confronts Trina at the school . After a heated argument McTeague beats Trina to death and steals her $ 5,000 . Now an outlaw , McTeague returns to Placer County and teams up with a prospector named Cribbens . Headed towards Death Valley , they find a large quantity of quartz and plan to become millionaires . Before they can begin mining , McTeague senses danger and flees into Death Valley with a single horse , the remaining money and one water jug . Several marshals pursue him , joined by Schouler . Schouler wants to catch McTeague personally and rides into Death Valley alone . The oppressive heat slows McTeague 's progress . Schouler 's progress is also beginning to wane when he spies McTeague and moves in to arrest him . After a confrontation , McTeague 's horse bolts and Schouler shoots it , puncturing the water container . The water spills onto the desert floor . The pair fight one last time , with McTeague proving the victor ; however , Schouler has handcuffed himself to McTeague . The film ends with McTeague left in the desert with no horse , no water , handcuffed to a corpse and unable to reach the remaining money .

Von Stroheim 's original edit contained two main sub-plots that were later cut . The point of these sub-plots was to contrast two possible outcomes of Trina and McTeague 's life together . The first depicted the lives of the junkman Zerkow and Maria Miranda Macapa , the young Mexican woman who collects junk for Zerkow and sold Trina the lottery ticket . Maria often talks about her imaginary solid gold dining set with Zerkow , who becomes obsessed by it . Eventually , believing she has riches hidden away , Zerkow marries her . He often asks about it , but she gives a different answer each time he mentions it . Zerkow does not believe her and becomes obsessed with prying the truth from her . He murders her and after having lost his mind , leaps into San Francisco Bay . The second sub-plot depicts the lives of Charles W. Grannis and Miss Anastasia Baker . Grannis and Baker are two elderly boarders who share adjoining rooms in the apartment complex where Trina and McTeague live . Throughout their time at the apartment complex , they have not met . They both sit close to their adjoining wall and listen to the other for company , so they know almost everything about each other . They finally meet and cannot hide their long-time feelings for each other . When they reveal their love , Grannis admits he has $ 5,000 , making him just as rich as Trina . But this makes little difference to them . Eventually , they marry and a door connects their rooms .

Greed is based on the American author Frank Norris 's 1899 novel McTeague : A Story of San Francisco . Stroheim 's interest in McTeague can be traced back to January 1920 , when he told a journalist that he wanted to film the novel . He had himself lived in San Francisco in the early 1910s , living there in poverty like that of the story 's characters . He eventually moved to Los Angeles and worked his way up in the film industry under pioneering director D. W. Griffith . By 1919 he had become a successful director at Universal Film Manufacturing Company , although one with a reputation of going over budget and over schedule . Upon the appointment of Irving Thalberg as general manager at Universal , Stroheim 's excesses were no longer tolerated . After Thalberg 's shutdown of his 1921 picture Foolish Wives ( which had been shooting nonstop for eleven months ) , and after six weeks of filming Merry-Go-Round , Stroheim was finally fired from the studio on October 6 , 1922 . This was a step unprecedented in Hollywood and heralded a new era in which the producer and the studio held artistic power over actors and directors . However , by this time Stroheim had received several offers of contracts with other studios , even before being fired from Universal . He had met with executives of the Goldwyn Company on September 14 , 1922 , less than a month before , and he formally signed with them in late November .

Stroheim chose his new studio because of the level of artistic freedom he was offered , which he had been denied at Universal under Thalberg . Since March 1922 Goldwyn had been run by Abe Lehr , who publicly promised that " each director will have his own staff and will be given every facility in putting into production his own individuality and personality . " Stroheim signed a one-year , three-feature deal with Goldwyn on November 20 , 1922 . The deal stipulated that each feature would be between 4,500 and 8,500 feet ( 1,400 and 2,600 m ) long , cost no more than $ 175,000 and be completed in fourteen weeks . It also promised von Stroheim $ 30,000 for each completed film . Lehr initially wanted Stroheim to film a big-budget version of The Merry Widow , which the producer saw as a guaranteed hit . Stroheim convinced Lehr to let him make Greed first , promising low costs . A press release of February 1923 said that although Stroheim had " run rather freely to large sets in the past , [ he ] seems to have reformed — or surrendered — for it is announced that he will not build any sets at all . "

Stroheim wrote a highly detailed 300-page script that contained camera movements , composition and tint cues . Among the changes that he made to Norris 's novel was giving McTeague the first name of John and omitting Norris 's anti-Semitism . McTeague had been filmed once before as Life 's Whirlpool , a five-reel short by William A. Brady 's World Pictures , starring Broadway star Holbrook Blinn as McTeague , which had been released in 1916 . Film critics disliked this version and Stroheim later criticized Blinn 's performance . According to film historian Kevin Brownlow , Life 's Whirlpool was also shot on location in Death Valley . Stroheim was known for his meticulous perfectionism and attention to detail , as well as his insolence towards studio executives . Working on Greed , Stroheim set out to make a realistic film about everyday people and rejected the Hollywood tropes of glamor , happy endings and upper-class characters . Before shooting began , Stroheim told a reporter : It is possible to tell a great story in motion pictures in such a way that the spectator forgets he is looking at beauteous Gertie Gefelta , the producer 's pet and discovers himself intensely interested , just as if he were looking out of a window at life itself . He will come to believe that what he is gazing at is real — a cameraman was present in the household and nobody knew it . They went on in their daily life with their joys , fun and tragedies and the camera stole it all , holding it up afterward for all to see .

In early January 1923 Stroheim arrived in San Francisco , where he scouted locations and finished writing the shooting script . While researching for Greed , he attended society functions in town and met many friends of Frank Norris , including his brother Charles and his sister-in-law Kathleen . To capture the authentic spirit of the story , Stroheim insisted on filming on location in San Francisco , the Sierra Nevada mountains , the Big Dipper Mine in Iowa Hill , and Death Valley . He rented some of the actual buildings that had inspired scenes in the novel . Other locations included Cliff House and San Francisco Bay . Norris had similarly scouted settings for his novel and chose the upstairs of a building on the corner of Polk and California street as McTeague 's dentist office , as well as many of the saloons and lunch counters in the area . Stroheim discovered that many of the locations that Norris had described , such as Polk Street , had been destroyed in the 1906 San Francisco earthquake , but he was able to find suitable period locations on Hayes and Laguna streets . For authenticity , Stroheim had no sets built in San Francisco and only redecorated existing locations , such as saloons , butcher shops , and wooden shacks , thus saving on construction costs .

With the exception of Jean Hersholt , all of the main actors in Greed were regulars of Stroheim 's earlier films , a group dubbed the " Stroheim Stock Company . " Gibson Gowland had previously appeared in Blind Husbands and returned to the U.S. from Scotland for the role of John McTeague . Cesare Gravina , who played the junkman Zerkow , and Dale Fuller , the lottery-ticket seller Maria , had both appeared in Foolish Wives and would later appear in The Merry Widow . Other actors in Stroheim 's Stock Company included Sidney Bracey , Mae Busch , George Fawcett , Maude George , Hughie Mack and George Nichols . Trina was the most difficult role to cast , and ZaSu Pitts was hired at the last minute , after Stroheim had rejected both Claire Windsor and Colleen Moore . Pitts had previously acted only in comedic roles ; Greed was her first dramatic part . The actress later appeared in both The Wedding March and Hello , Sister ! Stroheim said that Pitts was " the greatest psychopathological actress in the American cinema " and that " she should not be in comedy , for she is the greatest of all tragediennes . "

Stroheim had met casually with Jean Hersholt to discuss the role of Marcus Schouler , but he was initially reluctant to cast him . However , after Hersholt adjusted his appearance and wardrobe to more closely resemble Schouler , Stroheim changed his mind on the spot . With the exception of Gowland , Stroheim shot extensive screen tests of all the other actors at Goldwyn with cinematographer Paul Ivano . A scene from the Goldwyn film Souls for Sale is thought to be behind-the-scenes footage of Stroheim directing Greed , but it actually depicts him directing Hersholt during one of these screen tests .

Filming began in San Francisco on March 13 , 1923 , and lasted until late June . Despite the initial contract between von Stroheim and Goldwyn , Lehr agreed to double the film 's budget to $ 347,000 three days after shooting began . Von Stroheim had already worked twenty-hour days for over two months of pre-production and collapsed on set after a few days of filming . He remained in good health for the remainder of the shoot . This was not the only mishap on set ; during scenes shot at San Francisco Bay , Cesare Gravina got double pneumonia , making von Stroheim bitterly ashamed that Gravina 's entire performance was later cut from the film , despite the actor 's dedication to the role . Hersholt was knocked out by Gowland during the picnic scene in which McTeague and Schouler fight , and Pitts was almost run over by a trolley . In late May , Lehr visited von Stroheim on the set and praised the footage that he had seen , saying that " it has atmosphere , color and realism that could not possibly have been reproduced in the studio . " One scene that von Stroheim re-shot at the studio 's insistence depicted a younger McTeague in his apprenticeship with Potter . In the scene McTeague is too embarrassed to examine the teeth of a young woman and Potter has to take over . A thinly disguised ZaSu Pitts portrayed the woman so that the audience would see a resemblance to Trina , but the studio insisted that the scene was confusing and von Stroheim agreed to re-shoot it . Von Stroheim also conceded his original vision when shooting the bar confrontation between McTeague and Schouler . The director wanted to have a knife thrower actually throw a real knife at Gibson Gowland 's head . Von Stroheim was overruled by Gowland himself , who refused to allow such a dangerous stunt . A special-effect shot was used instead .

After filming in San Francisco wrapped in late June , the production traveled to Death Valley . Most Hollywood films that required desert scenes settled for the local Oxnard dunes north of Los Angeles , but von Stroheim insisted on authenticity . Death Valley had no roads , hotels , gas stations , or running water and was occupied by tarantulas , scorpions and poisonous snakes . The nearest populated area to the shoot was 100 miles ( 160 km ) away and insurance coverage was denied . Filming in Death Valley lasted for two months during midsummer , allowing actors Gowland and Hersholt time to grow the beards necessary for the sequence . Some members of the production reported temperatures between 91 and 161 ° F ( 33 and 72 ° C ) , but the highest temperature officially recorded in Death Valley during the period was 123 ° F ( 51 ° C ) . Of the 43 members of the cast and crew who worked on the Death Valley sequence , 14 became ill and were sent back to Los Angeles . While shooting , crew members would collapse of heat exhaustion every day . Hersholt spent a week in the hospital after shooting was completed , suffering from internal bleeding . Hersholt claimed to have lost 27 pounds ( 12 kg ) , and was covered in blisters by the end of filming . Despite the hardship Hersholt said that he considered it the best role of his career . In order to motivate Hersholt and Gibson during the scene where they fight , von Stroheim yelled at them , " Fight , fight ! Try to hate each other as you both hate me ! " Throughout filming , von Stroheim brought musicians on set to help create mood for the actors . He continued to use this for the Death Valley scenes with a harmonium and violin player . A theme , inspired by the music of Ruggero Leoncavallo , was composed and played throughout production . Other music used included the popular songs " Nearer , My God , to Thee , " " Hearts and Flowers , " " Oh Promise Me , " and " Call Me Thine Own . "

Filming moved to Placer County , California , on September 13 and continued for less than a month . The Big Dipper Mine had been closed for ten years , so von Stroheim convinced the Goldwyn Company to lease and renovate it for filming . While first visiting Placer County during pre-production , von Stroheim had met Harold Henderson , a local resident and fan of Norris whose brother had worked in the mine in the 1890s . Von Stroheim hired Henderson to oversee the renovation of the mine and other locations in Iowa Hill . Von Stroheim also wanted to restore the local cemetery for a newly invented scene depicting McTeague 's mother 's funeral , but the Goldwyn Company turned down this proposal . Inside the mine , von Stroheim usually shot at night between 9 pm and 6 am . Cinematographer William H. Daniels later said that von Stroheim insisted on descending 3,000 feet ( 900 m ) underground for realism , even though the setting would have looked exactly the same at 100 feet ( 30 m ) . Filming was completed on October 6 , 1923 , after 198 days . Despite his original contract stipulating that all films be under 8,500 feet ( 2,600 m ) , von Stroheim shot a total of 446,103 feet ( 135,972 m ) of footage for the film , running approximately 85 hours .

Stroheim 's biographer Arthur Lennig compared the director 's visual style to that of D. W. Griffith but felt that " unlike Griffith , who viewed scenes as though through a fourth wall , Stroheim shot from many sides and from different angles ; he also used deep-focus , meaningful foregrounds and effective camera movement . " Greed 's lighting included high contrast , chiaroscuro techniques with pools or shafts of lights illuminating an otherwise dark space . Examples of this technique include the scene where McTeague begs Trina for money in a pool of moonlight and the merry-go-round scene in which characters alternate between appearing only as dark silhouettes and being fully lit . Daniels was especially proud of the wedding scene , which has a funeral procession visible through the window and was difficult to light properly . Greed has often been praised for its use of deep-focus cinematography , seventeen years before its more-famous application in Citizen Kane . Daniels sometimes used incandescent lights instead of studio arc lights , due to the constraints of his locations . He later said that Stroheim " was one of the first to insist on no make-up for men , on real paint on the walls which were shiny , real glass in the windows , pure white on sets and in costumes ... everything up to then had been painted a dull brown " to mask the scratches on worn-down film prints . Although not officially credited , Ernest B. Schoedsack worked on the picture as a camera operator .

Stroheim favored " Soviet-style " montage editing . Greed often uses dramatic close-ups and cuts instead of long takes . One exception to this is the scene in which Schouler becomes angry with McTeague and breaks his pipe , which was shot in one long , unbroken take . Stroheim also used symbolic cross-cutting for dramatic effect , such as his use of animals in the film and a shot of a train when McTeague and Trina first kiss . In 1932 film theorist Andrew Buchanan called Stroheim a montage director , stating that " each observation would be captured in a ' close-up ' and at leisure , he would assemble his ' shots ' in just the order which would most forcibly illustrate the fact . " In the 1950s film critic André Bazin praised Stroheim 's use of mise en scène and noted his " one simple rule for directing . Take a close look at the world , keep on doing so and in the end it will lay bare for you all its cruelty and ugliness . " Despite Stroheim 's reputation as a perfectionist , Greed contains anachronisms . In the scenes on Polk Street , the main characters are clothed in 1890s fashions , but the extras wear 1920s clothing . Stroheim did his best to avoid such historical mistakes ; he shot only those buildings that were from the era Greed was set in , and he kept motor vehicles out of sight while filming . Daniels stated that , despite his desire for authenticity , Stroheim sometimes had walls knocked out of real locations to achieve a desired camera position .

Frank Norris 's novel belongs to the literary school of naturalism founded by French author Émile Zola . McTeague depicts the fate of its lower-class characters in terms of heredity and their environment , with the belief that " man 's nature , despite free will , is determined by genetic and environmental factors " and that heredity controls fate , despite efforts at upward mobility . This literary style was influenced by Charles Darwin and portrayed characters whose higher states of being , the rational and compassionate , are in conflict with their lower states , the bête humaine ( human beast ) . McTeague was first published in 1899 and was inspired by an October 1893 murder case in which Patrick Collins , a poor husband with a history of beating his wife Sarah , finally stole her money and stabbed her to death at her San Francisco workplace . Sarah Collins worked at the Lest Norris kindergarten , which was financed by Norris 's family . Von Stroheim did not see Greed as political and told a journalist that he considered it to be like a Greek tragedy . Despite the characters ' struggles with poverty and class , von Stroheim followed the naturalist technique of portraying characters whose lives are driven by fate and their inner nature . Von Stroheim employed variations of this theme in his other films , which often involved a commoner falling in love with an aristocrat or royal .

One of the cinematic techniques by which von Stroheim portrayed naturalism was animal symbolism . In Greed McTeague is associated with a canary , only briefly mentioned in the novel . Von Stroheim altered Norris 's original ending and has McTeague release the canary in Death Valley . McTeague buys Trina a female canary as a wedding gift and early in their marriage von Stroheim cuts from a shot of them kissing to birds fluttering wildly in their cage . Another scene with animal imagery includes cross-cutting between a cat attempting to pounce on the canaries in the scene where Schouler bids goodbye to McTeague and Trina without telling them that he has informed on McTeague . Dogs , cats and monkeys are associated with various supporting characters . Von Stroheim also used the naturalist technique of giving characters specific objects , gestures or phrases that repeat throughout the film as a visual leitmotif . For example , Trina tugs on her lips and McTeague fiddles with his birdcage . Throughout his career von Stroheim used grotesque imagery and characters . This is most apparent in the wedding-banquet scene , which includes a midget , a hunchback , a woman with buck teeth and a boy on crutches . The wedding guests violently and crudely devour their meal like animals . This scene was unlike any other in films of that period , which treated meals with dignity and a sense of communion . Other instances of grotesque imagery include Trina 's fingers becoming infected and amputated . Von Stroheim contrasted love scenes between McTeague and Trina with their ugly , lower-class environment , such as the sewer with the dead rat and a garbage truck driving by as they kiss .

As in his other films , von Stroheim used Christian imagery and symbols , such as crosses and churches . Trina first shows signs of greed on Easter Sunday and is murdered by McTeague on Christmas Eve . Christmas Eve was often depicted in von Stroheim 's films and was close to the date of his father 's death . Lennig asserted that the character of McTeague 's father ( who was only briefly mentioned in the novel ) is based on von Stroheim 's own father , while McTeague 's mother is a tribute to von Stroheim 's mother , to whom Greed is dedicated . Von Stroheim stated that he considered all of his good qualities to have come from his mother and all of his bad qualities to have come from his father .

Editing Greed took almost a year and von Stroheim 's contract did not include payment for his post-production work . He and his chief film cutter Frank Hull worked on the film for several months before completing a rough cut . Von Stroheim was indecisive during editing . He felt restricted by his contract 's limitation on the length of the film . Von Stroheim colored certain scenes with gold tinting by using the Handschiegl Color Process , in which individual frames are hand colored with stencils . Von Stroheim credited himself in the beginning titles with " Personally directed by Erich von Stroheim . " Other than studio personnel , only twelve people saw the original 42-reel version of Greed at a special screening in January 1924 ; they included Harry Carr , Rex Ingram , Aileen Pringle , Carmel Myers , Idwal Jones , Joseph Jackson , Jack Jungmeyer , Fritz Tidden , Welford Beaton , Valentine Mandelstam , and Jean Bertin . After the screening Jones , Carr and Ingram all agreed that they had just seen the greatest film ever made and that it was unlikely that a better film would ever be made . Carr wrote a review of the advance screening where he raved that he " saw a wonderful picture the other day — that no one else will ever see ... I can 't imagine what they are going to do with it . It is like Les Miserables . Episodes come along that you think have no bearing on the story , then 12 or 14 reels later it hits you with a crash . For stark , terrible realism and marvelous artistry , it is the greatest picture I have ever seen . But I don 't know what it will be like when it shrinks to 8 reels . " Jonathan Rosenbaum suggested that Carr was most likely referring to a cut sequence early in the film that introduced all of the characters who lived in McTeague 's building . The forty-minute scene depicted what the tenants did on a Saturday afternoon , and established cinematic atmosphere without furthering the plot . Rosenbaum compared the cut sequence to novels of the 19th century and to the first few hours of Jacques Rivette 's Out 1 . Jones publicly praised the advance screening and compared Greed to The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari and Dr. Mabuse the Gambler . However , Welford Beaton of The Film Spectator disliked the 42-reel version and criticized its excessive use of close-ups .

Many sources claim that the 42-reel version was only ever intended to be a rough cut , and that Von Stroheim chose to cut it down to 24 reels by March 18 , 1924 , with the intention of screening it with intermissions over two nights . The director had difficulty cutting the film down , telling his friend Don Ryan , " I could take out sequences and thus get the job over in a day . That would be child 's play . But I can 't do it . It would leave gaps that could only be bridged through titles . When you do such a thing you have illustrated subtitles instead of a motion picture . " Von Stroheim later claimed that at this time the Goldwyn Company wanted him to shoot a scene of McTeague waking up in his dentist chair , showing the entire film to have been a bad dream . While von Stroheim was editing the 24-reel cut June Mathis , who was the head of the Goldwyn Story Department , had made her own 13-reel version of Greed by January 21 , 1924 . She ordered even more cuts to be made on January 29 , but then left for Rome in early February to oversee the production of Ben-Hur and was uninvolved in the film 's editing for several months .

After having completed the 24-reel cut of Greed , von Stroheim told Goldwyn executives that he could not cut another frame . Goldwyn producers thought that this version was still too long and told him to cut it to a more manageable length . Von Stroheim then sent the film to his friend , director Rex Ingram , who turned it over to his editor , Grant Whytock . Whytock had worked with von Stroheim on The Devil 's Pass Key and was familiar with the director 's style and tastes . Whytock initially proposed that it be split in two , with one 8-reel film ending with the wedding and a second 7-reel film ending at Death Valley . Whytock eventually cut the film down to 18 reels . His only major cut was the entire subplot of Zerkow and Maria , which he thought was " very distasteful . " Otherwise he simply cut down scenes and cut out 1,200 feet ( 400 m ) of quick " flash " shots that only lasted a few frames . However , Whytock 's version of Greed retained the prologue and other subplots , as well as much of the humor that was later cut out of it .

Whytock and Ingram screened their version of Greed to studio executives , who responded favorably to it but worried that the tragic ending would be hard to sell to the public . Ingram then sent the 18-reel version to von Stroheim and told him , " If you cut one more frame I shall never speak to you again . " On April 10 , 1924 , the Goldwyn Company officially agreed to merge with Metro Pictures , putting von Stroheim 's nemesis Thalberg directly in charge of Greed . Von Stroheim and Louis B. Mayer had a lengthy confrontation over the film 's editing , which according to both men ended with von Stroheim claiming that all women were whores and Mayer punching him . Mayer disliked the film because of its lack of glamor , optimism or morality and considered it to be a guaranteed flop .

MGM executives screened Greed at full length once to meet contractual obligations . Idwal Jones , a San Francisco critic , attended the all-day screening and wrote that while some of the scenes were compelling , Stroheim 's desire that " every comma of the book [ be ] put in " was ultimately negative . MGM then took control and re-edited it . The studio ordered June Mathis to cut it down further ; she assigned the job to an editor named Joseph Farnham . Farnham was a well-known " titles editor , " who patched scenes together using title cards to keep continuity . His contributions to Greed include the notorious title cards " Such was McTeague " and " Let 's go over and sit on the sewer , " which were snickered at for years . Eventually Farnham reduced Greed to 10 reels , totaling 10,607 feet ( 3,233 m ) . Von Stroheim said that the film " was cut by a hack with nothing on his mind but his hat . " He later bitterly lamented that Greed was made before the financial success of Eugene O 'Neill 's four-hour play Strange Interlude in 1928 . Von Stroheim angrily disowned the final version , blaming Mathis for destroying his masterpiece .

The main cuts to Greed were the elimination of its two sub-plots and other entire sequences , while individual scenes were often not touched . Commenting about the cuts made in the film to the Los Angeles Times , Thalberg stated : This whole story is about greed — a progressive greed . It is the story of the way greed grew in Trina 's heart until it obsessed her . I found that the junk dealer 's greed was so much greater than hers that it almost destroyed the theme . His intense greed drowned out Trina 's greed just as a steam whistle drowns out a small street noise . Instead of hurting the picture , throwing out this junk dealer 's story made the picture stronger . Thalberg also stated that he " took no chances in cutting it . We took it around to different theaters in the suburbs , ran it at its enormous length , and then we took note of the places at which interest seemed to droop . " Individual scenes or sequences that were cut include McTeague and Trina 's early , happy years of marriage , the sequence showing McTeague and Trina eventually moving into their shack , the family life of the Sieppe family before Trina 's marriage , the prologue depicting McTeague 's mother and father at the Big Dipper mine and McTeague 's apprenticeship . Other cuts included the more suggestive and sexual close-up shots depicting McTeague and Trina 's physical attraction to each other , the scenes after McTeague has murdered Trina and roams around San Francisco and Placer County , additional footage of Death Valley , additional footage of Trina with her money , and a more gradual version of Trina 's descent into greed and miserly obsession .

Greed premiered on December 4 , 1924 , at the Cosmopolitan Theatre in Columbus Circle , New York City , which was owned by William Randolph Hearst . Frank Norris had once worked for Hearst as a foreign correspondent during the Spanish – American War and Hearst praised Greed , calling it the greatest film he had ever seen . Hearst 's newspapers promoted the film , but MGM did very little advertising . At the time of the release von Stroheim was in Los Angeles , having begun production on The Merry Widow on December 1 . In May 1926 Greed was released in Berlin , where its premiere famously caused a riot at the theater that may have been instigated by members of the then-fledgling Nazi party . Greed received mostly negative reviews . The trade paper Harrison 's Report said that " [ i ] f a contest were to be held to determine which has been the filthiest , vilest , most putrid picture in the history of the motion picture business , I am sure that Greed would win . " Variety Weekly called it " an out-and-out box office flop " only six days after its premiere and claimed that the film had taken two years to shoot , cost $ 700,000 and was originally 130 reels long . The review went on say that " nothing more morbid and senseless , from a commercial picture standpoint , has been seen on the screen for a long , long time " and that despite its " excellent acting , fine direction and the undoubted power of its story ... it does not entertain . " In its December 1924 – January 1925 issue , Exceptional Photoplays called it " one of the most uncompromising films ever shown on the screen . There have already been many criticisms of its brutality , its stark realism , its sordidness . But the point is that it was never intended to be a pleasant picture . " In the February 1925 issue of Theatre Magazine , Aileen St. John-Brenon wrote that " the persons in the photoplay are not characters , but types — they are well selected , weighed and completely drilled . But they did not act ; they do not come to life . They perform their mission like so many uncouth images of miserliness and repugnant animalism . " Mordaunt Hall of the New York Times gave the film a mostly positive review in regards to the acting and directing while criticizing how it was edited , writing that MGM " clipped this production as much as they dared ... and are to be congratulated on their efforts and the only pity is that they did not use the scissors more generously in the beginning . " In a Life Magazine article , Robert E. Sherwood also defended MGM 's cutting of the film and called von Stroheim " a genius ... badly in need of a stopwatch . " Iris Barry of the Museum of Modern Art ( MoMA ) disliked the tinting , saying " a not very pleasing yellow tinge is smudged in . " A March 1925 review in Pictureplay magazine stated , " perhaps an American director would not have seen greed as a vice . "

A more favorable review came from Richard Watts , Jr. of the New York Herald Tribune , who called Greed " the most important picture yet produced in America ... It is the one picture of the season that can hold its own as a work of dramatic art worthy of comparison with such stage plays as What Price Glory ? and Desire Under the Elms . " The April 20 , 1925 , edition of The Montreal Gazette claimed it " impresses as a powerful film " and described the " capacity audience " screening as " one of the few pictures which are as worthy of serious consideration ... which offer a real and convincing study of life and character and that secure their ends by artistic and intellectual means rather than by writing down to the level of the groundlings . " The review went on to describe the direction as " masterly , " citing " its remarkable delineation of character development and the subtle touches which convey ideas through vision rather than the written word , an all too-rare employment of the possibilities of the cinema play as a distinct branch of art capable of truthful and convincing revelation and interpretation of life 's realities . " A review in Exceptional Photoplays stated that " Mr. von Stroheim has always been the realist as Rex Ingram is the romanticist and Griffith the sentimentalist of the screen , and in Greed he has given us an example of realism at its starkest . Like the novel from which the plot was taken , Greed is a terrible and wonderful thing . "

Greed was a financial disappointment . On its initial run , it earned $ 224,500 in the United States , $ 3,063 in Canada and $ 47,264 in other markets . In total it earned $ 274,827 . Von Stroheim 's biographer Arthur Lennig stated that according to MGM 's records the final cost of Greed was $ 546,883 . Another biographer , Richard Koszarski , stated that its final cost was $ 665,603 : $ 585,250 for the production , $ 30,000 for von Stroheim 's personal fee , $ 54,971 for processing and editing , $ 53,654 for advertising and $ 1,726 for Motion Picture dues . Arthur Lennig asserted that MGM 's official budget for Greed was suspiciously high for a film with no stars , no built sets , a small crew and inexpensive film stock . Lennig suspects that MGM averaged the film 's cost with the more expensive The Merry Widow in order to prevent von Stroheim from getting a percentage of the more profitable film . The Merry Widow ended up being a hit and earned more profits than Greed had lost ; it cost $ 614,961 but earned $ 996,226 on its initial run .

In his final years , von Stroheim said that " of all my films , only Greed was a fully realized work , only Greed had a total validity . " In 1926 a British foundation of Arts and Sciences requested a copy of the original version of Greed to keep in their archive , but their request was denied by MGM . Henri Langlois screened the studio version of Greed for von Stroheim in 1950 . Von Stroheim said , " It was for me an exhumation . It was like opening a coffin in which there was just dust , giving off a terrible stench , a couple of vertebra and a piece of shoulder bone . " He went on to say that " It was as if a man 's beloved was run over by a truck , maimed beyond recognition . He goes to see her in the morgue . Of course , he still loves her but it 's only the memory of her that he can love — because he doesn 't recognize her anymore . " In the early 1950s Greed 's reputation began to grow and it appeared on several lists of the greatest films ever made . In 1952 at the Festival Mondial du Film et des Beaux Arts de Belgique , Greed was named the fifth greatest film ever made , with such directors as Luchino Visconti , Orson Welles and Billy Wilder voting for it . Later in 1952 Sight and Sound magazine published its first list of the " ten greatest films ever made . " Greed was tied for 7th place on that list , with such critics as Andre Bazin , Lotte Eisner , Curtis Harrington , Penelope Houston and Gavin Lambert voting for it . In 1962 it was tied for 4th on the same list . Since 1972 it has failed to reach a spot on the top ten . The Cinémathèque royale de Belgique released a list of " the most important and misappreciated American films of all time " in 1978 . Greed was third on its list after Citizen Kane and Sunrise : A Song of Two Humans . In a University of Southern California list of the " 50 Most Significant American Films " made by the school 's Performing Arts Council , Greed was listed as number 21 . In 1991 Greed was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant . "

Among those who have praised Greed over the years are Sergei Eisenstein ; Joseph von Sternberg , who said , " We were all influenced by Greed " ; Jean Renoir , who called it " the film of films " ; and Ernst Lubitsch , who called von Stroheim " the only true ' novelist ' " in films . More recently Guillermo del Toro called it " a perfect reflection of the anxiety permeating the passage into the 20th century and the absolute dehumanization that was to come . " and Norbert Pfaffenbichler said that " the last shot of the movie is unforgettable . " Jonathan Rosenbaum has stated that Greed was a major influence on the style and content of many films . Stroheim 's shots filming the sun predated Akira Kurosawa 's better-known uses of the technique in Rashomon ( 1950 ) . Rosenbaum compared specific shot set-ups in Greed to shots in King Vidor 's The Crowd , Jean Renoir 's Le Crime de Monsieur Lange , Orson Welles 's The Magnificent Ambersons , Howard Hawks ' To Have and Have Not and Michelangelo Antonioni 's L 'Avventura . In addition , he likened certain plot elements or characters in Greed to John Huston 's The Treasure of the Sierra Madre ( 1948 ) , Alfred Hitchcock 's Rear Window ( 1954 ) , Claude Chabrol 's Les Bonnes Femmes ( 1960 ) and Elaine May 's Mikey and Nicky ( 1975 ) . Rosenbaum singled out Stroheim 's influence on May , an American director , with Mikey and Nicky centering on the disintegration of a friendship over money and sex , and including grotesque elements and characters caught between innocence and corruption . Rosenbaum also asserts that Orson Welles ' use of satirical caricatures in all of his films is in " the spirit of von Stroheim . "

The two films most commonly compared to Greed are Huston 's The Treasure of the Sierra Madre and Welles ' The Magnificent Ambersons . Rosenbaum believes that besides Huston 's film ending with gold being lost in the desert and similarities between Trina 's descent into madness with Fred C. Dobbs own obsessions , the two films have little else in common . The Magnificent Ambersons and Greed both have characters who struggle with class differences that lead to their downfall . Ambersons was famously edited down drastically by its studio and the cut footage is now lost . Rosenbaum goes on to state that Greed influenced the methods in which novels are adapted into films and filmmakers like Welles , Huston and Bill Forsyth followed von Stroheim 's example by re-arranging the plot and adding new scenes to their films while still remaining faithful to the intentions of the original novels . The 1994 Jonathan Lynn film Greedy pays tribute to the film by giving the main characters the last name McTeague . Attempts to reconstruct the uncut version of Greed without use of the lost footage first began in 1958 . At the Brussels International Exposition , the Cinémathèque royale de Belgique named Greed as one of the twelve greatest films ever made and simultaneously published von Stroheim 's original , uncut script for Greed , which came directly from von Stroheim 's personal copy preserved by his widow Denise Vernac . This publication led to three separate books that all used von Stroheim 's script in order to reconstruct the original version of the film and compare it to the released version : a French book edited by Jacques-G. Perret in 1968 and two versions edited by Joel Finler and Herman G. Weinberg , both in 1972 . Weinberg 's book utilized 400 individual stills and production photos to reconstruct the uncut version of Greed , the first time that images from the uncut version were publicly available .

In 1999 , Turner Entertainment ( the film 's current rights holder ) decided to recreate , as closely as possible , the original version by combining the existing footage with over 650 still photographs of the lost scenes ( many of which had been used in Weinberg 's book ) , in accordance with an original continuity outline written by von Stroheim . All materials were provided by the Margaret Herrick Library . This restoration runs almost four hours . It was produced by film preservationist Rick Schmidlin and edited by Glenn Morgan . Schmidlin restored many characters and sub-plots from the original version . A new musical score was composed by Robert Israel . The reconstruction cost $ 100,000 to produce . Schmidlin called the finished product " a reconstruction of Von Stroheim 's lost narrative . " It premiered at the 1999 Telluride Film Festival and was later screened at the Venice Film Festival and the Pordenone Silent Film Festival before being aired on Turner Classic Movies in December 1999 . Film critic Todd McCarthy called the restored version of Greed a triumph . Roger Ebert called Greed a masterpiece and said that the restored Schmidlin cut illustrates the " prudish sensibilities [ that ] went into MGM 's chop job . " Rosenbaum praised the project , but claimed it could only be considered a " study version . " The re-construction won a special citation from the Los Angeles Film Critics Association Awards .

Stroheim was known to exaggerate events from his life and create myths about himself , such as his fictitious aristocratic origins and military record in Austria . He claimed that shortly after having moved to the US in the early 1910s , he had found a copy of McTeague in a motel in New York and had read it in one sitting . He also said that wanting to adapt the book inspired him to make a career in filmmaking . Georges Sadoul later stated that Stroheim had first read the novel in 1914 , while living in poverty in Los Angeles . Claims that Stroheim 's original cut was a completely unabridged version of McTeague are not accurate . Stroheim 's 300-page script was almost as long as the original novel , but he rethought the entire story and invented new scenes , as well as extensively elaborating existing ones . In the Norris novel , McTeague 's back story in Placer County and relationships with his father , mother and Potter were remembered as a flashback and took two paragraphs . In Stroheim 's original Greed , this sequence took up the first hour of the film and was not a flashback . Stroheim also modernized the novel 's time span to between 1908 and 1923 , a quarter-century later than the novel .

Greed has sometimes been said to be over 100 reels long . Stroheim said that his initial edit was 42 reels , although several of the people who saw this cut remembered it as being anywhere from 42 to 47 reels . Grant Whytock remembered the edited version that Stroheim initially sent to him as between 26 and 28 reels . MGM 's official studio files list the original cut of the film at 22 reels . As recently as 1992 , former MGM Story Editor Samuel Marx erroneously claimed that the original version of Greed was 70 reels . June Mathis is credited with co-writing the script due to her work on the 10-reel version . Mathis was the head of the Story Department at MGM and her contract stipulated that she would receive writing credit for all MGM films . She did not actually write any part of the screenplay . She is also said to have changed its title from McTeague to Greed during post-production ; however , a publicity still of the cast and crew taken during production clearly indicates that it was titled Greed before the MGM merger even took place . The film 's working title was " Greedy Wives , " a joke on Stroheim 's previous film Foolish Wives ; this working title was never considered as the film 's actual title .

The original version of Greed has been called the " holy grail " for film archivists . Various reports of the original version proved to be unfounded . Among these " sightings " are a claim that a copy existed in a vault in South America that was only screened once a year for invited guests on New Year 's Eve . Another claim was that a copy in the possession of a Texan millionaire was sold to Henri Langlois of Cinémathèque Française . Other claims include that a film society in Boston held a private screening of a print found by a World War II veteran in Berlin from a tip by Emil Jannings , that David Shepherd of the American Film Institute had found a copy at a garage sale , and that the head of a film society in Redwood City , California , owned " the longest existing version of Greed ( purchased in Europe ) . " Stroheim himself once stated that Benito Mussolini owned a personal copy of the film . Stroheim 's son Joseph von Stroheim once claimed that when he was in the Army during World War II , he saw a version of the film that took two nights to fully screen , although he could not remember exactly how long it was .

There were also reports that MGM had retained a copy of the original version . Iris Barry of the Museum of Modern Art claimed that a copy was locked in the MGM vaults , although Thalberg denied it . It was also reported that John Houseman had a private screening at MGM and that MGM owned two copies stored in a vault in a Utah salt mine . Lotte Eisner once claimed that in the 1950s and 1960s , several cans of films labeled " McTeague " were found in MGM 's vaults and destroyed by executives who did not know that it was footage from Greed . MGM executive Al Lewin said that several years after the film 's release Stroheim asked him for the cut footage . Lewin and editor Margaret Booth searched MGM 's vault but could not find any missing footage .

BabyFirst is a media company that produces and distributes content for babies through television , the internet and mobile apps . The content is intended to develop a baby 's skills , such as color recognition , counting and vocabulary . There are about 90 BabyFirst TV shows and 41 apps for mobile devices . As of 2014 , the network is distributed to 81 million homes , and is based in Los Angeles , California . BabyFirst was founded in 2004 by Guy Oranim and Sharon Rechter . Its first broadcast was through DirecTV in 2006 . It was founded by Regency Enterprises , Kardan , and Bellco Capital . Distribution expanded through agreements with the Echostar Dish Network , Comcast , AT & T U-verse and others . It also developed a premium BabyFirst YouTube channel , and mobile apps . One app developed with AT & T U-verse allows babies to interact with the television programming by drawing on a mobile device .

BabyFirst was founded in 2004 by Guy Oranim and Sharon Rechter . The network was launched on May 11 , 2006 on DirecTV and was later made available through EchoStar 's Dish Network that June . It was made available through EchoStar 's Dish Network that June . The BabyFirst network is based in Los Angeles and was initially funded by Regency Enterprises ( a Hollywood movie studio ) , Kardan ( a holding company ) and Bellco Capital ( a private fund ) . BabyFirst was controversial when it was introduced , because it was the first 24-hour channel for children six months to three years in age . However , the channel was popular among parents and grew quickly .

In 2007 , BabyFirst obtained agreements to distribute the channel in the United Kingdom through the BSkyB satellite network as well as in Mexico through Sky Mexico and Cablevision . A French version was introduced with CanalSat in 2007 . By the end of 2007 , it had arranged broadcasting agreements throughout Europe , the Middle-East and Canada among others . BabyFirst also started broadcasting in ten territories in the Asia Pacific , such as China and Korea . In October 2008 , SingTel started distributing the channel to the Singapore audience . It was also being broadcast in Africa and Latin America . In May 2008 , it signed a distribution agreement with Time Warner Cable . In 2009 , HBO Asia became the exclusive distributor for the channel in Asia . A bilingual Latin / English channel , BabyFirst Americas , was launched with Comcast in 2012 . A premium BabyFirst YouTube channel was introduced in June 2013 . In the early 2000s , the Federal Trade Commission responded to a complaint by the Campaign for a Commercial Free Childhood alleging that BabyFirst 's advertising that it helped babies develop skills was misleading . The FTC did not impose any sanctions . As of 2014 , it has 81 million viewers and is broadcast in 33 countries , in ten languages .

BabyFirst 's television channel provides 24-hour programming for babies . About 90 percent of the 90 shows BabyFirst produces are original content created at BabyFirst 's studios . It produces and broadcasts short videos three to five minutes in length that are either live-action or animated . The New York Times described the content as " decidedly unhurried " and said it makes extensive use of bright colors and upbeat music . Programming development is guided by child psychology experts and is designed to encourage a child 's skills development , such as counting , vocabulary and color recognition . The BabyFirst logo in the corner changes colors to indicate the skills a segment is intended to develop . Late-night programming is intended to lull viewers to sleep . There are also 41 BabyFirst apps for mobile devices . An app available to AT & T U-verse viewers allows children to draw on a mobile device and have the drawing appear on the television screen . Some experts argue that exposing children to television at such an early age is taking technology too far or that parents are using BabyFirst as a digital babysitter . Parents in-turn refute that argument , claiming that experts have lost touch with the realities of raising a child . BabyFirst suggests the programming is intended to be watched by parents and their children together in an interactive way . The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends against exposing children under the age of two to television , while a 2003 study by the Kaiser Family Foundation found that most children under two years of age are already watching TV . According to The Washington Post , very little is known about whether young children watching television has a negative or positive effect on them .

John Michael Wright ( May 1617 – July 1694 ) was a portrait painter in the Baroque style . Described variously as English and Scottish , Wright trained in Edinburgh under the Scots painter George Jamesone , and acquired a considerable reputation as an artist and scholar during a long sojourn in Rome . There he was admitted to the Accademia di San Luca , and was associated with some of the leading artists of his generation . He was engaged by Archduke Leopold Wilhelm of Austria , the governor of the Spanish Netherlands , to acquire artworks in Oliver Cromwell 's England in 1655 . He took up permanent residence in England from 1656 , and served as court painter before and after the English Restoration . A convert to Roman Catholicism , he was a favourite of the restored Stuart court , a client of both Charles II and James II , and was a witness to many of the political maneuverings of the era . In the final years of the Stuart monarchy he returned to Rome as part of an embassy to Pope Innocent XI . Wright is currently rated as one of the leading indigenous British painters of his generation , largely for the distinctive realism in his portraiture . Perhaps due to the unusually cosmopolitan nature of his experience , he was favoured by patrons at the highest level of society in an age in which foreign artists were usually preferred . Wright 's paintings of royalty and aristocracy are included amongst the collections of many leading galleries today .

John Michael Wright , who at the height of his career would interchangeably sign himself " Anglus " or " Scotus " , is of uncertain origin . The diarist John Evelyn called him a Scotsman , an epithet repeated by Horace Walpole and tentatively accepted by his later biographer , Verne . However , writing in 1700 , the English antiquarian Thomas Hearne claims Wright was born in Shoe Lane , London and , after an adolescent conversion to Roman Catholicism , was taken to Scotland by a priest . A London birth certainly seems supported by a baptismal record , dated 25 May 1617 , for a " Mighell Wryghtt " , son of James Wright , described as a tailor and a citizen of London , in St Bride 's Church , Fleet Street , London . What is known is that , on 6 April 1636 , the 19-year-old Wright was apprenticed to George Jamesone , an Edinburgh portrait painter of some repute . The Edinburgh Register of Apprentices records him as " Michaell , son to James W ( right ) , tailor , citizen of London " . The reasons for this move to Scotland are unclear , but may have to do with familial connections ( his parents may have been London Scots ) or the advent of plague in London . During his apprenticeship , Wright is likely to have lodged at the High Street tenement near the Netherbow Gate that served as Jameson 's workplace . The apprenticeship was contracted for five years , but may have been curtailed by Jameson 's imprisonment in late 1639 . There is no record of any independent work by Wright from this period ( his earliest known painting being a small portrait of Robert Bruce , 1st Earl of Ailesbury , painted in the early 1640s during his time in Rome ) .

There is evidence to suggest that Wright went to France following his apprenticeship , however his eventual destination was Italy . It is possible that he arrived in Rome as early as 1642 in the entourage of James Alban Gibbes ( a scholar of English descent ) , but he was certainly resident there from 1647 . Although details of his time there are sketchy , his skills and reputation increased so much so that by 1648 he had become a member of the prestigious Accademia di San Luca ( where he is recorded as " Michele Rita , pittore inglese " ) . At that time , the Accademia included numbers of established Italian painters as well as illustrious foreigners including the French Nicolas Poussin and Spaniard Diego Velázquez . On 10 February that year he was elected to the Congregazione dei Virtuosi al Pantheon , a charitable body promoting the Roman Catholic faith through art , which hosted an annual exhibition in the Pantheon . Wright was to spend more than ten years in Rome . During that time became an accomplished linguist as well as an established art connoisseur . He also became prosperous enough to build up a substantial collection of books , prints , paintings , gems and medals , including works attributed to Mantegna , Michelangelo , Raphael , Titian and Correggio . He acquired some forty paintings – perhaps as much through dealing as collecting . Richard Symonds , the amateur painter and royalist , catalogued Wright 's collection in the early 1650s ( and interestingly designated him as " Scotus " ) .

In 1654 , after a decade in Rome , Wright travelled to Brussels where his abilities were recognised by Archduke Leopold Wilhelm of Austria then governor of the Spanish Netherlands . Leopold employed him not as an artist , but as an advisor on antiquities . As the younger brother of the Emperor Ferdinand III and cousin of Philip IV of Spain , the Archduke had the wherewithal to amass a large collection of paintings and antiquities . Moreover , in the spring of 1655 , the Archduke was enjoying a period of cordial relations with Oliver Cromwell , then Lord Protector of England . ( Indeed , the two had been exchanging gifts of horses , and Leopold had provided Cromwell with choice tapestries and other artefacts for the refurbishment of the Palace of Whitehall . Cromwell also received an embassy from the Habsburgs congratulating him on his new office . ) Since the execution of Charles I in 1649 , Leopold had been purchasing artworks from the royal collections and those of various aristocrats , and , against this background , commissioned Wright to travel to London and acquire further specimens . A passport was issued to him as " ' Juan Miguel Rita , pintor Ingles , qua va a Inglaterra a procurar pinturas , medalas , antiguedades , y otras costa señaladas , que le hemosencargado ... " to allow him to travel to England . The passport is dated 22 May 1655 , and signed by the Archduke at Brussels , indicating that Wright had left Italy for Flanders by this time . ( The addition of the saint 's name name , John , probably marks his conversion to Roman Catholicism at some time prior . )

As one on an official mission , Wright would probably have offered greetings to Leopold 's ambassador extraordinary in London , the Marqués de Lede , and to Alonso de Cárdenas , the regular Habsburg ambassador , who had also been engaged since 1649 in art procurement for the Spanish Monarch . The lack of records means that the timing and duration of this visit remain uncertain . However , de Lede left in late June , and de Cárdenas a few weeks later – as relations between Cromwell and the Habsburgs deteriorated – so Wright probably arrived back in Flanders , with any acquisitions he had made , just in time to learn of the Archduke 's impending departure – and that of his huge art collection – from Brussels in the autumn of 1655 . However , after the relocation of his patron to Vienna , Wright again visited London . On 9 April 1656 he passed through Dover , and the register of visitors indicates : Michael Wright Englishman landed at Dover the 9th present out of the Pacquet boat from Dunkerque and came to London on the 12th and lodgeth at the house of Mrs Johnston in Weldstreet in the parish of Gyles in the fields in Middlesex and saith that having exercised the Art of Picture drawing in France & Italy & other parts the greatest part of his life , he intendeth shortly to returne to Italy where he left his family

Whatever his intentions , Wright did not return to Italy , rather he was joined in England by his family soon after . Despite his Roman Catholicism and the strong Protestantism of the Protectorate ( 1653 – 1659 ) , Wright seems to have been able to find prestigious work . Indeed , Waterhouse speaks of him engaging in " the most deliberate and unblushing toadying to Cromwell " in his 1658 painting of a small posthumous portrait of Elizabeth Claypole , Oliver Cromwell 's daughter ( now in the National Portrait Gallery ) . This is an allegorical portrait depicting Elizabeth as Minerva , leaning on a carved relief representing the goddess springing from the head of Jove with the motto " Ab Jove Principium " – an allusion to Cromwell himself , whose cameo portrait she holds . Seemingly , he was also willing to work the other side of the political divide : in 1659 he painted Colonel John Russell who was a player in the " Sealed Knot " conspiracy to restore Charles II to the throne . That particular portrait is regarded by at least one critic as Wright 's " masterpiece " . After the restoration of Charles II in 1660 , Wright 's Roman Catholicism became less of a handicap , due to the King 's preference for religious toleration . Never a good businessman , Wright encountered some financial difficulties and King Charles granted him the privilege of disposing of his collection of Old Masters by means of a lottery . The King himself acquired 14 of the paintings . By the early 1660s Wright had established a successful studio in London , and was described by diarist John Evelyn as " the famous painter Mr Write " . Later , the Great Plague of London ( 1665 ) drove Wright out to countryside , where he painted at least three members of the Catholic family of Arundell of Wardour .

Ironically , in the next year , the Great Fire of London ( 1666 ) was to be of benefit to him , when he received one of the City of London 's first new artistic commissions to paint twenty-two full length portraits of the so-called ' Fire Judges ' ( those appointed to assess the property disputes arising from the fire ) . These paintings , completed in 1670 , hung in London 's Guildhall until it was bombed during World War II ; today only two ( those of Sir Matthew Hale and Sir Hugh Wyndham ) remain in the Guildhall Art Gallery the remainder having been destroyed or dispersed .

Charles II , who promoted a number of Roman Catholics at court , granted Wright a measure of royal art patronage . In 1661 , soon after the coronation , he painted a formalised portrait of the monarch , seated in front of a tapestry representing the Judgement of Solomon , wearing St. Edward 's Crown , the robes of the Garter , and carrying the orb and sceptre . Wright was also commissioned to paint an allegorical ceiling for the King 's bedchamber at Whitehall Palace , and he was further appointed in 1673 to the office of " picture drawer in ordinary " , allowing him to exercise his right to sign his pictures " Pictor Regis " . However , to his disappointment , he did not receive the coveted office of King 's Painter , which was held in the 1660s by Sir Peter Lely alone . In contrast to Wright 's sympathetic realism , and carefully observed landscape backgrounds , Lely had a more glamorous style , favoured by the court , and based on Van Dyck 's pre-Civil War style . This prompted the diarist Samuel Pepys to remark , after an enjoyable visit to Lely 's studio , " thence to Wright 's the painters : but Lord , the difference that is between their two works " .

Unlike Lely , who was knighted , Wright never received significant recognition from King Charles . However , at least one admirer thought he did deserve it . In 1669 , Wright and the miniaturist Samuel Cooper had met Cosimo III de ' Medici , Grand Duke of Tuscany . Cosimo later called at Wright 's studio where he commissioned a portrait of the Duke of Albemarle from Wright . On 3 March 1673 , perhaps some time after Wright had painted his state picture of Charles II ( now in the Royal Collection ) , a strange letter was sent from an obscure " Mairie Lady Hermistan " ( evidently a fellow Roman Catholic ) to Cosimo , asking him to intercede with the King to grant Wright a baronetcy . However , nothing came of the request . As antipathy towards Catholics intensified in London from the late 1670s , Wright spent more time working away from court . He painted six family portraits for Sir Walter Bagot of Blithfield in Staffordshire in 1676 / 7 . In 1678 , he removed to Dublin for a number of years , perhaps due to the anti-Catholic hysteria generated by Titus Oates 's Popish Plot . Here , still styling himself " Pictor Regis " , he painted " The Ladies Catherine and Charlotte Talbot " , which is today in the National Gallery of Ireland . He also painted two full-lengths portraits of costumed chieftains , the " Sir Neil O 'Neill " ( c . 1680 ) , now in the Tate Collection , and the " Lord Mungo Murray " ( c.1683 ) , now in the Scottish National Portrait Gallery . Sir Neil O 'Neill was a fellow Roman Catholic , also in exile in Dublin . Wright portrayed him in the dress costume of an Irish chieftain , with suit of rare Japanese armour at his feet . The significance of this armour is that it is thought to be a coded symbol of a triumph over the persecutors of Roman Catholicism , of whom , at that time , the Japanese were notorious . The portrait of Mungo Murray ( the 5th son of the Royalist Marquis of Atholl ) is notable for being considered one of the first instance of Scottish tartan being portrayed in art .

In 1685 , when the openly Roman Catholic James II ascended the throne , Wright was able to return to royal service . However , significantly , James did not employ Wright as an artist , but gave him the " time consuming and futile post " of steward on a diplomatic embassy . He was appointed as steward to Roger Palmer , 1st Earl of Castlemaine husband of Barbara Villiers , the late King 's mistress . Wright 's knowledge of Rome and of the Italian language may have played a part in this , as Castlemaine was dispatched , in 1686 , on an embassy to Pope Innocent XI to demonstrate that England could become a player on the Roman Catholic side in impending European conflicts . Wright 's role in the embassy was to oversee the production of elaborate coaches , costumes and decorations for the procession , which secured a papal audience in January 1687 . He also arranged a stupendous banquet for a thousand guests in the Palazzo Doria Pamphilj , complete with sugar sculptures and a large state portrait of James II . While in Rome , Wright published an illustrated Italian account of the embassy , dedicated to the Duchess of Modena and , on his return , an English version was published in October 1687 , dedicated to her daughter Queen Mary .

Wright 's career came to an end in 1688 with the expulsion of King James II during the Glorious Revolution . He seems to have accepted the inevitable end of his royal favour with the accession to the throne of the Protestant William of Orange . He lived on , in relative poverty , for a further six years until 1694 . In March of that year , he made a will leaving his house in St Paul 's parish to his niece Katherine Vaux . His collection of drawings , prints and books were left to his nephew , the painter Michael Wright ; however a codicil to the will stated that the books were to be sold on behalf of his son Thomas , who was then abroad . The books were auctioned on 4 June and on 1 August 1694 , John Michael Wright was buried at St Martin-in-the-Fields .

Much of the scholarly appreciation of Wright 's work is fairly recent . In 1982 , an exhibition of his work : ‘ John Michael Wright – The King ’ s Painter ’ – in the Scottish National Portrait Gallery – led to a renewed interest in his contributions , and the catalogue ( edited by Sara Stevenson and Duncan Thomson ) re-wrote and uncovered much of the known biographical details . New works continue to be discovered and previously known ones re-attributed to him . Wright is now viewed as amongst the most successful of seventeenth-century Britain 's indigenous artists , and is rated alongside contemporaries such as Robert Walker and William Dobson . One modern exhibition catalogue described him as " the finest seventeenth century British-born painter " . Certainly , he was one of the few who painted the elite aristocracy of his day , and was responsible for some of the most magnificent royal portraiture surviving . This achievement is particularly significant in an age where even British patrons had tended to favour foreign artists like Holbein and Van Dyck , and would continue to favour immigrants such as Lely and Kneller . Indeed , part of the reason for Wright 's success is recognised as being his unusually cosmopolitan training : no prior British artist had so much exposure to European influence . During his Italian sojourn , and his participation in the Accademia di San Luca , not only had Wright collected works attributed to continental giants like Michelangelo , Raphael and Titian , he had also been influenced by , and even copied , much of their tone and style .

In his field and day , Wright was certainly eclipsed by his rival the more prolific Lely , to whom he is often compared . One critic , Millar , observes that any comparisons undertaken would " ruthlessly expose Wright 's weaknesses and mannerisms " but that positively " they would also demonstrate his remarkable independence , his unfailing integrity and charm , the sources of which must partly lie in his unusual origins , fragmented career and attractive personality " . Millar suggests that a particularly useful comparison can be made between Lely and Wright 's respective portrayals of the Duchess of Clevland ( Barbara Villiers ) ( above ) . Whereas Lely portrayed her as a " full-blown and palpably desirable strumpet " , the more seriously minded Wright , who was not really in sympathy with the morality of the new court and its courtesans , rendered a more puppet-like figure . However , even if Lely was considered the more masterly and fashionable of the two in seventeenth-century Britain , Wright is generally accepted as portraying the more lively and realistic likenesses of his subjects , a fact that reinforces Pepys 's observation that Lely 's work was " good but not like " . Neither should Wright 's realism be confused with a prudishness ; as can be seen , for example , in his portrait the lady , thought to be Ann Davis ( right ) . The picture , with the sitter 's clothing left undone and her modesty barely preserved by a red drape , has been described as exhibiting a fresh – even risky – reality : erotic by contemporary standards . Whereas Wright 's contemporaries might have used the ‘ disguise ’ of presenting the sitter in the guise of a classical goddess to protect against accusation of salaciousness , Wright 's portrait rather depends on his realism , notably in his flesh tones , and depth .

Peter Steiner , a cartoonist and contributor to The New Yorker since 1979 , said the cartoon initially did not get a lot of attention , but later took on a life of its own , and that he felt similar to the person who created the " smiley face " . In fact , Steiner was not that interested in the Internet when he drew the cartoon , and although he did have an online account , he recalled attaching no " profound " meaning to the cartoon ; it was just something he drew in the manner of a " make-up-a-caption " cartoon . In response to the comic 's popularity , he stated , " I can 't quite fathom that it 's that widely known and recognized . "

The cartoon marks a notable moment in the history of the Internet . Once the exclusive domain of government engineers and academics , the Internet had by then become a subject of discussion in general interest magazines like The New Yorker . Lotus Software founder and early Internet activist Mitch Kapor commented in a Time magazine article in 1993 that " the true sign that popular interest has reached critical mass came this summer when the New Yorker printed a cartoon showing two computer-savvy canines " . The cartoon symbolizes an understanding of Internet privacy that stresses the ability of users to send and receive messages in general anonymity . Lawrence Lessig suggests " no one knows " because Internet protocols do not force users to identify themselves ; although local access points such as a user 's university may , this information is privately held by the local access point and is not an intrinsic part of the Internet transaction . A study by Morahan-Martin and Schumacher ( 2000 ) on compulsive or problematic Internet use discusses this phenomenon , suggesting the ability to self-represent from behind the computer screen may be part of the compulsion to go online . The phrase can be taken " to mean that cyberspace will be liberatory because gender , race , age , looks , or even ' dogness ' are potentially absent or alternatively fabricated or exaggerated with unchecked creative license for a multitude of purposes both legal and illegal " , an understanding that echoed statements made in 1996 by John Gilmore , a key figure in the history of Usenet . The phrase also suggests the ability to " computer cross-dress " and represent oneself as a different gender , age , race , etc . On another level , " the freedom which the dog chooses to avail itself of , is the freedom to ' pass ' as part of a privileged group ; i.e. human computer users with access to the Internet " .

" I Am God " is the eighteenth episode of the second season of the American mystery television series Veronica Mars , and the fortieth episode overall . Written by Diane Ruggiero and Cathy Belben and directed by Martha Mitchell , the episode premiered on UPN on April 11 , 2006 . The series depicts the adventures of Veronica Mars ( Kristen Bell ) as she deals with life as a high school student while moonlighting as a private detective . In this episode , Veronica experiences persistent and vivid nightmares of the students who died in the bus crash , and she attempts to piece together the clues she 's gotten from these dreams . Meanwhile , Logan ( Jason Dohring ) and Wallace ( Percy Daggs III ) are forced to work together on a science experiment . During the filming of " I Am God " , several press members , primarily bloggers , were allowed to visit the show 's set , an event that was the first of its kind for Veronica Mars . Bloggers had been an important source of the show 's fandom and press coverage , and the event was set up by UPN executives as a public relations project . The episode also features a guest appearance by Kayla Ewell and the first appearance by James Jordan . The episode received 1.76 million viewers in its original US airing , and it received mixed reviews from television critics , with reviewers divided on the use of dream sequences as well as the episode 's emotional impact overall .

Veronica has a dream of the students who died in the bus crash , which takes place in " Normal Is the Watchword " , before she visits the guidance counselor , Rebecca ( Paula Marshall ) , who talks to her about her problems , and Veronica tells her about her nightmares . Veronica lists the bus crash victims and asks Rebecca about a janitor named Lucky ( James Jordan ) , whom Meg used to talk about a lot . Veronica describes some more dreams and tells Rebecca that she met with a student named Rhonda , who handed her a phone with a voice recording of Dick on the bus . Veronica recounts a dream encounter with her father , in which she discovered a piece of paper with the words “ I am God ” and pictures of nine coffins . Veronica talks to Logan about Lucky , the janitor , and Logan says that Veronica met Lucky before . Veronica talks to Dick about his relationship with Betina . Veronica talks to one of Betina ’ s friends , who says that Dick mistreated her , and Betina ’ s goal was for Dick to get her pregnant so she could get him in trouble . Veronica asks Keith about whether or not he has resumed a relationship with Rebecca , and Veronica gets into Stanford University . Veronica is pushed into second place at the Kane scholarship after Angie . Rebecca denies having a relationship with Keith , while Angie also gets into Stanford . Wallace points out Rhonda ’ s sister to Veronica , but she doesn ’ t give Veronica any information . Veronica asks Keith to dig into the financial records of the bus crash victims . Veronica learns that none of the families had very much money , except for Rhonda ’ s family , who got a $ 2 million bailout from Woody ( Steve Guttenberg ) .

Keith meets with Principal Clemmons and finds Veronica in the closet . Veronica talks to Mr. Wu about one of his students , Peter , who had feelings for Mr. Wu . However , Mr. Wu is not gay . That night , Veronica has a dream about Peter , who “ asks ” her why he would even want to go to a baseball stadium . Veronica talks to Beaver , who was pushed into a wall by Cervando , a PCHer who died in the bus crash . Keith solves a case for Principal Clemmons about students who get diagnosed with generalized anxiety disorder from the same doctor for better grades . Angie wins the experiment competition , and we learn that Angie was one of the students who was diagnosed with GAD for money . Principal Clemmons revokes exceptions for GAD students . Veronica has a dream about Cervando , who says that the perpetrator was probably in the vicinity of the bus crash . Veronica learns that the “ I am God ” image is actually an album cover . Keith tells Veronica that the perpetrator was probably targeting Dick and Beaver . Veronica has another , more frightening dream .

" I Am God " was written by Diane Ruggiero and Cathy Belben and directed by Martha Mitchell , marking Ruggiero 's eleventh writing credit for the series , Belben 's third and final writing credit ( after " Blast from the Past " and " Ahoy , Mateys ! " ) and Mitchell 's first and only directing credit for the show . Despite being credited , Duncan ( Teddy Dunn ) , Weevil ( Francis Capra ) , and Jackie ( Tessa Thompson ) do not appear in the episode . During the filming of " I Am God " , UPN and Warner Bros. set up a " Veronica Mars Press Day " , on which several members of the press visited the show 's set and wrote about their visit . Bloggers had been important to press coverage of Veronica Mars ; because of this , Joanna Massey , UPN 's senior vice president for media relations , decided to set up this event as a public relations project . On organizing the event , Massey elaborated : Once we sent out the invitations , there was instantly a lot of ( Internet ) chatter about why we invited certain people . Then there was chatter leading up to the trip , and there was chatter when everyone got back . And they instantly posted all of their photos , which I love . And then they will blog again when the episode runs . With the traditional media , when do you get that kind of coverage ?

Series creator Rob Thomas also appreciated bloggers ' contributions to Veronica Mars , stating " Sometimes I think bloggers are our journalists . [ … ] I feel like the bloggers made the show . In a way , a day like ( the press day ) is preaching to the choir , but I don 't know that we 'd exist without them . ” This was the first time that non-cast or crew members visited the set . After reaching Kearny Mesa , San Diego , where the show primarily films , the bloggers toured the set and talked with cast and crew members . One press member expressed that Ryan Hansen , Thomas , and Kristen Bell were especially kind and receptive to the visitors . On his role in the episode , Jason Dohring , who plays Logan , elaborated , " I think what 's funny is that he always gets what 's coming to him . Like a terrible thing happens to him , but he 's like that to other people . So it 's like in real life … what goes around comes around . " The episode features a guest-starring appearance by Kayla Ewell , who would eventually become most known for her role on The Vampire Diaries . The episode also features a guest appearance by James Jordan , as Lucky , the janitor . In season 3 , Jordan would become the first actor to have two different roles on Veronica Mars when he was cast as Tim Foyle , a teaching assistant .

The episode received mixed reviews . Rowan Kaiser , writing for The A.V. Club was very positive towards the episode , writing " ' I Am God ' is probably the strangest episode since ' Nobody Puts Baby in a Corner ' , but unlike that one 's somewhat random focus , ' I Am God ' is intently pointed at one thing : the bus crash . " While hoping that it had come earlier in the season , the reviewer wrote that " its intense style and emotional stakes put it on the shortlist of best Veronica Mars episodes . " Price Peterson of TV.com praised the dream sequences for their beauty , but criticized them for their complexity . " Man , I just could not get enough of the dream-flashbacks in which Veronica talked to the dead students . So beautiful and well-done . On the other hand , my poor brain is starting to have a hard time keeping all the facts straight . " Others were more negative towards the episode . Television Without Pity gave the episode a " B " , criticizing Paula Marshall 's reappearance , declaring her a " show killer . " BuzzFeed ranked the episode as the second-worst episode of Veronica Mars , writing that the dream sequences " [ looked ] like Bonnie Tyler videos and bad erotic movies from the ' 80s . " Reviewer Alan Sepinwall gave a mixed review , praising Logan and Wallace 's interactions and Kristen Bell 's performance , but criticizing the fact that the episode came so late in the season . " Had this been the season 's fourth or fifth episode , it would have been fine . As the fifth-to-last episode , it felt like exactly what it was : a belated correction for a season-long problem . " He also felt that " Keith 's subplot was missing a scene or two . "

The Katori class ( 香取型戦艦 , Katori-gata senkan ) was a two-ship class of pre-dreadnought battleships built for the Imperial Japanese Navy ( IJN ) in the early 1900s . As Japan lacked the industrial capacity to build such warships itself , they were designed and built in the UK . They were the last battleships to be built for Japan at overseas shipyards , and the last to be equipped with a ram . The ships were delivered after the end of the Russo-Japanese War of 1904 – 05 . They saw no action during World War I , although both were present when Japan joined the Siberian Intervention in 1918 . They were disarmed and scrapped in 1923 – 25 in accordance with the terms of the Washington Naval Treaty of 1922 .

The Katori-class ships were ordered under the 1903 Third Fleet Extension Program . As with the earlier battleships , Japan lacked the technology and capability to construct its own battleships , and turned again to the United Kingdom , placing orders with Armstrong and Vickers in January 1904 . The next class of battleships , the Satsuma class , were built in Japan . The design of the Katori class was a modified and improved version of the King Edward VII-class battleships of the Royal Navy . The Vickers-built Katori was slightly smaller than her sister ship , Kashima . They had an overall length of 456.25 – 470.6 feet ( 139.1 – 143.4 m ) , a beam of 78 – 78.16 feet ( 23.8 – 23.8 m ) , and a normal draught of 26.6 – 27 feet ( 8.1 – 8.2 m ) . They displaced 15,950 – 16,383 long tons ( 16,206 – 16,646 t ) at normal load . The crew consisted of 864 officers and enlisted men .

The ships were powered by a pair of four-cylinder vertical triple-expansion steam engines , each driving one propeller , using steam generated by 20 Niclausse boilers using a mixture of coal and fuel oil . The engines were rated at 15,600 – 16,600 indicated horsepower ( 11,600 – 12,400 kW ) and designed to reach a top speed of 18.5 knots ( 34.3 km / h ; 21.3 mph ) although they proved to be faster during their sea trials . Kashima reached a top speed of 19.24 knots ( 35.63 km / h ; 22.14 mph ) using 17,280 ihp ( 12,890 kW ) and Katori made 19.5 knots ( 36.1 km / h ; 22.4 mph ) from 18,500 ihp ( 13,800 kW ) . The ships carried a maximum of 2,150 tonnes ( 2,120 long tons ) of coal and 377 – 750 long tons ( 383 – 762 t ) of fuel oil which allowed them to steam for 12,000 nautical miles ( 22,000 km ; 14,000 mi ) at a speed of 11 knots ( 20 km / h ; 13 mph ) .

The Katori class were equipped with four 45-calibre Elswick Ordnance Company 12-inch ( 305 mm ) Type 41 guns mounted in twin-gun barbettes fore and aft of the superstructure that had armoured hoods to protect the guns and were usually called gun turrets . The barbettes were positioned fore and aft of the superstructure . These were more powerful than the 40-calibre guns on Mikasa and earlier Japanese battleships . They fired 850-pound ( 386 kg ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 2,800 ft / s ( 850 m / s ) . The King Edward VII class introduced an intermediate calibre of 9.2-inch ( 234 mm ) guns between the primary 12-inch guns and the secondary six-inch ( 152 mm ) guns and the Japanese upgraded these to 45-calibre 10-inch Type 41 guns in four single barbettes mounted at the corners of the superstructure . The guns had a muzzle velocity of 2,707 ft / s ( 825 m / s ) when firing 500-pound ( 227 kg ) shells . The Japanese added an additional pair of quick-firing ( QF ) 40-caliber six-inch Type 41 guns , making a total of 12 guns , compared to the 10 of the King Edward VIIs . Ten of these guns were mounted in the hull and the remaining two were placed in the superstructure between the 10-inch ( 254 mm ) gun turrets . Their 100-pound ( 45 kg ) shells had a muzzle velocity of 2,300 ft / s ( 700 m / s ) when fired by the Type 41 guns .

The waterline main belt of the Katori-class vessels consisted of Krupp cemented armour 7 feet 6 inches ( 2.3 m ) high , of which 2 feet 6 inches ( 0.8 m ) was above the waterline at normal load . It had a maximum thickness of 9 inches ( 229 mm ) amidships . It was only 2.5 inches ( 64 mm ) inches thick at the ends of the ship and was surmounted by a six-inch , 15-foot ( 4.6 m ) strake of armour that ran between the main gun barbettes and protected most of the secondary guns . The barbettes for the main guns were 5 – 12 inches ( 130 – 300 mm ) thick and those for the intermediate turrets were protected by six inches of armour . The armour of the main gun barbette hoods had a maximum thickness of nine inches and those of the intermediate barbettes were 6 – 8 inches ( 150 – 200 mm ) thick . The sides of the superstructure between the intermediate barbettes had 4 inches ( 102 mm ) of armour . The flat portion of the deck armour was 2 inches ( 51 mm ) thick and 3 inches ( 76 mm ) thick amidships where it sloped down to the bottom of the armour belt . This significantly improved the ships ' protection as any shell that penetrated their vertical armour also had to penetrate the sloping deck before it could reach the machinery compartments or magazines . Outside the central armoured citadel , the sloped deck had a thickness of 2.5 inches ( 64 mm ) . The conning tower was protected by nine inches of armour .

Whilst conducting gunnery training in Hiroshima Bay on 16 September 1907 , brown powder propellant in Kashima 's starboard rear 10-inch gun mount ignited when it came in contact with burning residue from the previous shot . The fire killed seven officers and 27 enlisted men ; wounding two officers and six enlisted men . When World War I began , Kashima was refitting while Katori was assigned to the 1st Battleship Squadron . The former was assigned to the 2nd Battleship Squadron when her refit was completed in 1915 and became the squadron 's flagship in 1916 . Katori began a refit in 1914 that lasted until late 1916 and was assigned to the 5th Battleship Squadron upon its completion . Kashima joined her sister in the 5th Battleship Squadron as its flagship in 1918 and both ships covered the landing of Japanese troops in Siberia in August of that year as Japan decided to intervene in the Russian Civil War . In 1921 , Katori , escorted by Kashima , carried Crown Prince Hirohito on his tour of Europe where he met King George V. Both ships were disarmed in 1923 and later scrapped to comply with the terms of the Washington Naval Treaty .

Sonnet 86 is one of 154 sonnets written by the English playwright and poet William Shakespeare . It is the final poem of the Rival Poet subsection of the Fair Youth sonnets in which Shakespeare writes about an unnamed young man and a rival poet competing for the youth 's attention . While the exact date of its composition is unknown , scholars generally agree that the Rival Poet series was written between 1598 and 1600 and published along with the rest of the sonnets in the 1609 Quarto . Within the sonnet , the speaker contemplates his inability to articulate his admiration for the Fair Youth , a fault he attributes to his jealousy of the Fair Youth 's appearance in the poems of the speaker 's Rival Poet . Sonnet 86 is notable within the Rival Poet subsection of sonnets because it allegedly provides important clues as to the historical identity of this Rival Poet . The sonnet is written in the typical Shakespearean sonnet form , containing 14 lines of iambic pentameter and ending in a rhymed couplet .

The poem , in which the speaker rhetorically asks why he has lost his ability to write poetry , uses boating references while staying closely connected to the poetic structure of a sonnet . Was it his ambitious poetry , which was written to win you , that stopped my ability to think ? Did it cause all of my ideas to die as soon as they were born ? Was it his heaven given ability , writing which was blessed by the gods , that stopped me in my tracks ? Neither he nor his companions who helped him were able to stop my poetic ability . Neither he nor the Muse which aids him each night can claim to have silenced me . For I am not afraid . However , when your beauty was gifted to him then I was lost and destroyed .

Shakespeare 's sonnets follow the fourteen line rhyme scheme of the ' English ' or ' Surreyan ' sonnet form ( abab cdcd efef gg ) . A sonnet originally referred to any short lyric . In 1573 , George Gascoigne tried to define the word sonnet . This definition , stated below , delineates the structure within which Shakespeare often wrote . I can best allowe to call those Sonnets which are of fourtene lynes , every line conteyning tenne syllables . The first twelve do ryme in staves of foure lines by crosse metre , and the last twoo ryming together do conclude the whole . While conventional English sonnet form described by Gascoigne is seen in Sonnet 86 , the Petrarchan sonnet form , which requires a pause between the first eight lines and the last six lines is also evident . At the end of line eight Shakespeare uses a period to bring the sonnet to a stop , changing the sonnet 's direction by moving away from rhetorical questions to a more decisive tone within the sestet , which seems to answer the distress of the octave . The Shakespearean sonnet is composed in iambic pentameter , a type of poetic metre based on five pairs of metrically weak / strong syllabic positions . The 6th line exemplifies a regular iambic pentameter :

Sonnet 86 is well known as the final sonnet of The Rival Poet sonnets , in Shakespeares 1609 edition of sonnets . The rival poet series , Sonnets 78-86 , is generally thought to be written around the years of 1598 – 1600 , based on vocabulary evidence and similarities found with the plays that were also written during this time period . There is no exact answer as to who this rival poet is since nearly every well-known poet contemporary with Shakespeare has , at some time , been suggested as the " rival poet " . Among the poets considered to be the rival poet , George Chapman and Christopher Marlowe , colleagues and literary competitors to Shakespeare , are generally considered to be two of the most likely contenders . Many of these potential identifications have been made using alleged clues found in Sonnet 86 . The second and third quatrains in particular have garnered much attention in this regard . The description of a poet " by spirits taught to write " has led several critics , including Katherine Duncan-Jones and William Minto , to name George Chapman as the likeliest candidate . This is due to his supposed spiritual inspiration by the ghost of Homer . Another scholar , Richard Levin , connects the line " Above a mortal pitch , that struck me dead ? " to Christopher Marlowe 's play Tamburlaine , saying that the reactions described in both are similar to each other .

While scholarly debate abounds as to the identities of the persons contemplated in the sonnet , there is general consensus as to Sonnet 86 's role within the Rival Poet subsection of the Fair Youth sonnets . As Joseph Pequigney notes , " Sonnet 86 is written in the past tense , as distinct from the present tense of the eight previous sonnets , to signal the end of the episode , " that is , the Rival Poet series of sonnets . As the final sonnet in the series , it is also the sonnet in which Shakespeare claims his ultimate victory over the rival poet , the situation " resolved in Shakespeare 's favor " as he relentlessly mocks his opponent . Though he admits to having experienced a poetic hesitation , Shakespeare maintains that it was not the Rival Poet who caused it . Katherine Duncan-Jones writes : " Undaunted by the splendour of his rival 's verses , the speaker quails only at [ his rival 's ] appropriation of the young man 's favour . "

The sonnet begins with the speaker rhetorically asking whether it was the " great verse " of his rival poet that had prevented the speaker from expressing his own " ripe thoughts . " According to Duncan-Jones , " the speaker claims to be unable to voice his thoughts of love ; they are ready for utterance ( ripe ) , but remain buried ( in-hearsed ) in his brain because he is intimidated by his rival . " However , as Harold Bloom contends , this intimidation is apparently not caused by the artistic skill of his rival . In the opening lines of the sonnet , " [ Shakespeare ] charmingly suggests an inhibition through jealousy , not of superior poetic powers , but of encountering the Fair Young Man 's portrait in a rival 's verses . " The significance behind the apparent flattery of this rival 's art seems open to interpretation . Kenneth Muir writes : " Whether " the proud full sail of his great verse " is sincere admiration or a hint that it is bombastic is still debated , " though contemporary scholars tend to gravitate toward the latter , more sarcastic interpretation . Pequiney , amongst others , asserts that this verse is a derogatory adversion to the ostentatious craft of his opponent , belittling the rival 's delusions of grandeur .

As noted above , many of the alleged clues as to the identity of the rival poet have been discovered within this quatrain . While Duncan-Jones and Minto interpret references of the poet " by spirits taught to write " as allusions to George Chapman , other scholars have posited poets from Marlowe to Gervase Markham as contenders . Eric Sams , for one , relies heavily on these descriptions of spiritual communication to reinforce his argument for Barnes as the Rival Poet , noting Barnes ' scandalous occultism in 16th century England . In addition to these claims ( which assume the existence of a historical counterpart ) , there are also scholars who argue that the significance of the spirit is overstated and that it simply refers to poetic inspiration . As these diverse interpretations attest , a definitive identification of the Rival remains far from determined . Bloom writes , " Nearly every contemporary with Shakespeare has been put forward , including Christopher Marlowe , Ben Jonson , Samuel Daniel , and Edmund Spenser " . Structurally , this quatrain both extends and answers the question previously advanced by the sonnet 's speaker . He again asks whether it was the spirit of his rival that extinguished the speaker 's inspiration , then responds that it was certainly not . Within this response , Shakespeare simultaneously attacks the merit of the Rival 's output , " underscoring his " spiritual " composition , not to say his quackery , " while thoroughly rejecting its influence on the speaker 's own poetry . An accurate reading of the eighth line ( " Giving him aid , my verse astonished . " ) must take note that the word " astonished " is herein found with its earliest definition : " bereft of sensation ; stunned , benumbed , " in describing the status of the speaker 's " verse . "

In the third quatrain , after again questioning the integrity of his rival 's work , Shakespeare continues to affirm his fearlessness in the face of his rival 's poetry . Lines nine and ten lend themselves to the same ambiguous interpretation found in the previous quatrain , with many scholars reading them as a reference to a specific poet . Of the " affable familiar ghost " found in line nine , Duncan-Jones writes : " The phrase seems to carry an allusion to some well-known relationship between a poet and his Muse or inspiring genius , such as Chapman 's with the spirit of Homer . " Shakespeare , however , mocks this relationship , stating that the Rival has been " gulled " by whatever spirit he may be communicating with and even this creative alliance is unable to claim the victory of the speaker 's silence . The final line of the quatrain ( " I was not sick of any fear from thence . " ) sets the stage for the couplet , alluding to the fact that , while his fear did not come from " thence , " i.e. , the rival poet , there is indeed a fear that has disrupted his poetic output .

The couplet of Sonnet 86 finally allows the reader a glimpse of the speaker 's true vulnerability . It is here that he sets aside his attack on the Rival Poet in order to admit the true cause of his work 's impediment . Pequigney writes " Shakespeare finishes the episode by acknowledging what had long been evident , that the focus and cause of the contention was centered on the youth , not on literary laurels . " Bloom calls this couplet " a climactic , if dispiriting , close for the speaker , " as it demonstrates that while the speaker may have defeated the Rival Poet on the grounds of artistry , there is still competition between the two for the favor of the Fair Youth . In terms of the Rival Poet 's identity , Sams uses the penultimate verse to strengthen his argument for Barnes , reading line 13 as a reference to Barne 's 1593 work Parthenophil and Parthenophe . Sams writes : " One phrase in Sonnet 86 echoes Barnes , namely " when your countenance filled up his line . " Barnes 's sonnet to Henry Wriothesley , 3rd Earl of Southampton includes the actual words " your countenance . " Thus Southampton 's favour is solicited for the love − lyrics of Parthenophil and Parthenophe , so " that with your countenance graced they may withstand " envy and criticism . The word " countenance " has indeed " filled up " Barnes 's line — to overflowing , since it adds an extra syllable . " Shakespeare 's verse , on the other hand , conforms to a traditional iambic scansion . This interpretation also reads this line as a final blow against the Rival Poet , demonstrating Shakespeare 's superior mastery of the sonnet form .

New York State Route 47 ( NY 47 ) was a 19.34-mile ( 31.12 km ) long state highway around Rochester in New York , in the United States . It formed a semicircle through the inner suburbs of Rochester , following expressways west and east of the city and surface streets south of Rochester . The western terminus of the route was at an interchange with NY 104 west of the city limits in Greece . The eastern terminus was at an intersection with Culver Road in Irondequoit mere yards from Lake Ontario . In between its western and eastern extents , NY 47 met Interstate 490 ( I-490 ) twice . The limited-access highway portions of the route were known as the Rochester Outer Loop ( or Outer Loop ) in contrast to the Inner Loop around downtown Rochester . NY 47 was originally routed along surface streets through the city when it was assigned c . 1937 . It began at NY 31 in Gates and followed Howard Road and Brooks Avenue southeast into Rochester , where it continued eastward on Genesee Park Boulevard and Elmwood Avenue . NY 47 remained on the latter through Brighton to an area known as Twelve Corners . At this point , the route turned north onto Winton Road and followed that street through the eastern fringe of the city to Irondequoit , where NY 47 ended at a junction with U.S. Route 104 ( US 104 , now NY 404 ) . The Outer Loop was constructed in stages , beginning with the portion of the Sea Breeze Expressway north of Ridge Road in the early 1950s . From that point on , construction progressed in a generally clockwise fashion around the city .

By the late 1960s and early 1970s , the Outer Loop was complete from NY 383 to US 104 west of the city and from modern I-590 exit 1 to the lakeshore east of Rochester . NY 47 followed the loop from US 104 south to NY 383 and from Elmwood Avenue north to modern NY 590 exit 8 ; north of that point , the expressway was part of US 104 and NY 18 . NY 47 was extended northward along the remainder of the Sea Breeze Expressway in 1970 . On March 18 , 1980 , the NY 47 designation was removed and replaced with several others , primarily I-390 , I-590 , NY 390 , and NY 590 .

NY 47 followed a half-circle routing around the city of Rochester , beginning northwest of downtown in the town of Greece and proceeding generally counterclockwise around the city before ending northeast of downtown at the Lake Ontario shoreline in Irondequoit . The limited-access highway portions of NY 47 were named the " Rochester Outer Loop " ( or " Outer Loop " ) in contrast to the Inner Loop around downtown Rochester . This moniker remains in use to this day , now referring to the designations that have since replaced NY 47 along the loop . Conceptually , NY 104 completes the Outer Loop along the north side of the city . However , only the section east of the Genesee River is expressway , leaving NY 104 from modern NY 390 to the Veterans Memorial Bridge as the only at-grade portion of the loop . The at-grade portion of NY 47 along Scottsville Road and Elmwood Avenue was known as the " Rochester Bypass " prior to the completion of the Outer Loop . The alignment described within this section is of NY 47 upon its removal in 1980 .

NY 47 began at an interchange with NY 104 ( now the interchange between NY 390 and NY 104 ) in Greece one mile ( 1.6 km ) west of the Rochester city limits . Although , at the time , the freeway terminated just north of the interchange , the interchange itself was roughly complete , with only ramps to and from future NY 390 north of the interchange missing . NY 47 followed the modern NY 390 alignment south to I-490 , where NY 47 continued onto what is now I-390 . The routings of NY 47 and current I-390 were identical to NY 383 ( Scottsville Road ) in Chili , where NY 47 was forced to grade level via a partially constructed interchange , as modern I-390 had yet to be constructed in the area southeast of NY 383 .

Off the expressway and now at-grade , NY 47 turned north onto NY 383 , forming a short concurrency with NY 383 into Rochester . At Elmwood Avenue , NY 47 and NY 383 departed Scottsville Road and proceeded eastward on Elmwood Avenue . Two blocks to the east , at an intersection with South Plymouth Avenue , NY 383 split from NY 47 , following Plymouth Avenue into downtown Rochester . NY 47 remained routed on Elmwood Avenue , crossing the Genesee River and passing north of Strong Memorial Hospital prior to intersecting NY 15 ( Mount Hope Avenue ) in the shadow of Mount Hope Cemetery . East of NY 15 , NY 47 progressed along Elmwood Avenue , intersecting several local streets before entering Brighton . Within Brighton , NY 47 continued on Elmwood Avenue through " Twelve Corners " , intersecting NY 31 ( Monroe Avenue ) at the location , to what is now I-590 . At the northbound entrance ramp of the modern interchange between I-590 and Elmwood Avenue , NY 47 separated from the latter , entering the freeway . While what is now I-590 was constructed and open from Winton Road to I-490 , it had no signed designation between Winton and Elmwood .

When NY 47 was first commissioned in the Rochester area c . 1937 , it was routed along previously unnumbered roadways , with its northwest terminus located at the intersection of NY 31 ( Lyell Avenue ) and Howard Road in Gates . NY 47 took Howard Road south , passing through Gates Center and intersecting NY 33 before crossing the then-New York Central Railroad main line ( now the CSX Transportation-owned Rochester Subdivision ) at-grade . The route remained on Howard Road until the intersection of Howard Road and Chili Avenue ( NY 33A ) , which also included Brooks Avenue at this juncture of time . NY 47 turned east onto Brooks Avenue and proceeded toward the Greater Rochester International Airport , joining the current routing of NY 204 at Beahan Road ( now Old Beahan Road ) . NY 47 followed the entire alignment of NY 204 to what is now I-390 and continued on Brooks Avenue into Rochester to Genesee Park Boulevard . Route 47 turned south onto the street , which circles around the southwestern quadrant of the city , and followed its length to Genesee Street , where it turned south for a short distance before resuming its eastward alignment on Elmwood Avenue . The route remained on Elmwood Avenue into Brighton , where it turned north onto South Winton Road at Twelve Corners . At Highland Avenue , NY 47 reentered Rochester and became North Winton Road at East Avenue ( NY 96 ) . The route remained on Winton through Rochester and Irondequoit before terminating at Empire Boulevard ( then US 104 , now NY 404 ) just west of Irondequoit Bay .

In the early 1950s , construction began on the Sea Breeze Expressway , a mostly limited-access highway linking the Lake Ontario shoreline to the proposed I-490 east of Rochester . The first portion of the road , a divided highway extending from East Ridge Road in Irondequoit to Culver Road just west of the Irondequoit Bay Outlet , was opened to traffic by 1954 as a realignment of NY 18 . Construction on a limited-access extension south to Empire Boulevard ( three blocks west of NY 47 's western terminus ) began at some point between 1956 and 1958 and was completed by 1960 as a realignment of US 104 . Another extension of the highway south to the partially complete I-490 in Brighton was completed c . 1961 and largely became part of a rerouted NY 47 by the following year . At the time , NY 47 left the expressway at Blossom Road and followed it west to Winton Road , where it rejoined its original routing . By 1964 , construction was underway on a new expressway leading south from I-490 at the Can of Worms to Elmwood Avenue east of Twelve Corners . The highway was completed c . 1965 , at which time NY 47 was realigned to follow the Sea Breeze Expressway and the new expressway south through the Can of Worms to its end at a partial interchange with Elmwood Avenue ( now I-590 exit 3 ) . It continued west on Elmwood Avenue to Twelve Corners , where it reconnected to its old alignment at Winton Road .

The first realignment of NY 47 west of the city occurred c . 1962 when it was rerouted between Chili and Elmwood Avenues to bypass the then-Rochester – Monroe County Airport to the south . Instead of turning east onto Brooks Avenue as it did prior to 1962 , the route continued south on Beahan Road to Scottsville Road ( NY 383 ) , where it turned to overlap NY 383 north to Elmwood Avenue . At the time , Beahan Road connected directly to Scottsville Road ( via modern Old Beahan Road ) as the primary runway southwest of the airport had yet to be extended to its present length . By 1962 , construction was underway on a new limited-access highway paralleling NY 47 ( Howard Road ) to the east between NY 31 and NY 33 . Within two years , work had begun on an extension of the highway south along the Erie Canal to Scottsville Road . Farther east , construction was underway on a new highway leading south from I-490 to Elmwood Avenue east of Twelve Corners . All of the limited-access highway between NY 31 and NY 383 opened to traffic c . 1965 . NY 47 was reconfigured to begin a half-mile ( 0.8 km ) to the east of Howard Road at modern NY 390 exit 21 and follow the new highway southeastward to its temporary end at what is now I-390 exit 17 east of the airport . At this point , NY 47 joined its pre-1965 routing and followed NY 383 northeastward into the city limits . By 1968 , construction was underway on a northward extension of the expressway to US 104 in Greece . It was completed and opened to traffic by 1971 .

NY 47 was officially extended on both ends on January 1 , 1970 , to terminate at Lake Ontario on opposite sides of Rochester . In Greece , the designation officially followed what is now NY 390 north to the Lake Ontario State Parkway ; however , the portion between US 104 and the parkway had yet to be constructed . To the east in Irondequoit , NY 47 was stretched northward along the Sea Breeze Expressway to Culver Road , resulting in overlaps with both US 104 and NY 18 . At the time , the overlap with US 104 existed only between Empire Boulevard and the Keeler Street Expressway , which became the new alignment of the route through Irondequoit after its completion in 1969 . The overlap with US 104 was eliminated entirely the following year when that route was realigned onto a new expressway alignment between NY 47 and Webster that traversed Irondequoit Bay via the newly built Irondequoit Bay Bridge . The overlap with NY 18 was eliminated c . 1973 when NY 18 was truncated to its current eastern terminus in Kodak Park . On March 18 , 1980 , the NY 47 designation was eliminated and split into four other routes . From NY 104 in Greece to I-490 , NY 47 became NY 390 . The section from I-490 south to NY 383 was designated as part of I-390 ; however , it would not connect to the existing portion of I-390 south of Rochester until 1981 , when the interchange between I-390 and I-590 was completed . The segment of NY 47 from Elmwood Avenue north to the Can of Worms became part of I-590 , which continued southwest along the freeway to Winton Road . From the Can of Worms to Lake Ontario , NY 47 was redesignated NY 590 .

Off the expressways , the former alignments of NY 47 now carry several designations . Howard Road , bypassed by the 1960s realignment in Gates , is still maintained by the New York State Department of Transportation as NY 940L , an unsigned reference route 2.37 miles ( 3.81 km ) in length . Beahan Road , also bypassed by the same 1960s rerouting , was reconfigured into its current alignment by 1971 due to an expansion by the airport . The section of Beahan Road that carried NY 47 is currently maintained by Monroe County as part of County Route 164 ( CR 164 ) , the county 's unsigned designation for all of Beahan Road . The portion of NY 47 on Elmwood Avenue from the Rochester city line to I-590 is also maintained by Monroe County as part of CR 87 . Lastly , the segments of Winton Road outside of the Rochester city limits are now part of CR 98 . The remainder of c . 1980 NY 47 and the former alignments of the route are currently locally maintained .

The Battle of Nanking ( or Nanjing ) was fought in early December 1937 during the Second Sino-Japanese War between the National Revolutionary Army of China and the Imperial Japanese Army for control of Nanking ( Nanjing ) , the capital of the Republic of China . Following the outbreak of war between Japan and China in July 1937 the Japanese government at first attempting to contain the fighting and sought a negotiated settlement to the war . However , after victory in the Battle of Shanghai expansionists prevailed within the Japanese military and on December 1 a campaign to capture Nanking was officially authorized . The task of occupying Nanking was given to General Iwane Matsui , the commander of Japan 's Central China Area Army , who believed that the capture of Nanking would force China to surrender and thus end the war . Chinese leader Chiang Kai-shek ultimately decided to defend the city and appointed Tang Shengzhi to command the Nanking Garrison Force , a hastily assembled army of local conscripts and the remnants of the Chinese units who had fought in Shanghai . Japanese soldiers marched from Shanghai to Nanking at a breakneck pace , rapidly defeating pockets of Chinese resistance . By December 9 they had reached the last line of defense , the Fukuo Line , behind which lay Nanking 's fortified walls . On December 10 Matsui ordered an all-out attack on Nanking , and after less than two days of intense fighting Chiang decided to abandon the city . Before fleeing , Tang ordered his men to launch a concerted breakout of the Japanese siege , but by this time Nanking was largely surrounded and its defenses were at the breaking point . Most of Tang 's units simply collapsed , their soldiers often casting off their weapons and uniforms in the streets in the hopes of hiding among the city 's civilian population .

The conflict which would become known as Second Sino-Japanese War started on July 7 , 1937 with a skirmish at Marco Polo Bridge which escalated rapidly into a full-scale war in northern China between the armies of China and Japan . China , however , wanted to avoid a decisive confrontation in the north and so instead opened a second front by attacking Japanese units in Shanghai in central China . The Japanese responded by dispatching the Shanghai Expeditionary Army ( SEA ) , commanded by General Iwane Matsui , to drive the Chinese Army from Shanghai . Intense fighting in Shanghai forced Japan 's Army General Staff , which was in charge of military operations , to repeatedly reinforce the SEA , and finally on November 9 an entirely new army , the 10th Army commanded by Lieutenant General Heisuke Yanagawa , was also landed at Hangzhou Bay just south of Shanghai . Although the arrival of the 10th Army succeeded at forcing the Chinese Army to retreat from Shanghai , the Japanese Army General Staff had decided to adopt a policy of non-expansion of hostilities with the aim of ending the war . On November 7 its de facto leader Deputy Chief of Staff Hayao Tada laid down an " operation restriction line " preventing its forces from leaving the vicinity of Shanghai , or more specifically from going west of the Chinese cites of Suzhou and Jiaxing . The city of Nanking is 300 kilometers ( 186 miles ) west of Shanghai .

However , a major rift of opinion existed between the Japanese government and its two field armies , the SEA and 10th Army , which as of November were both nominally under the control of the Central China Area Army led by SEA commander Matsui . Matsui made clear to his superiors even before he left for Shanghai that he wanted to march on Nanking . He was convinced that the conquest of the Chinese capital city of Nanking would provoke the fall of the entire Nationalist Government of China and thus hand Japan a quick and complete victory in its war on China . Yanagawa was likewise eager to conquer Nanking and both men chafed under the operation restriction line that had been imposed on them by the Army General Staff . On November 19 Yanagawa ordered his 10th Army to pursue retreating Chinese forces across the operation restriction line to Nanking , a flagrant act of insubordination . When Tada discovered this the next day he ordered Yanagawa to stop immediately , but was ignored . Matsui made some effort to restrain Yanagawa , but also told him that he could send some advance units beyond the line . In fact , Matsui was highly sympathetic with Yanagawa 's actions and a few days later on November 22 Matsui issued an urgent telegram to the Army General Staff insisting that " To resolve this crisis in a prompt manner we need to take advantage of the enemy 's present declining fortunes and conquer Nanking ... By staying behind the operation restriction line at this point we are not only letting our chance to advance slip by , but it is also having the effect of encouraging the enemy to replenish their fighting strength and recover their fighting spirit and there is a risk that it will become harder to completely break their will to make war . "

Meanwhile , as more and more Japanese units continued to slip past the operation restriction line , Tada was also coming under pressure from within the Army General Staff . Many of Tada 's colleagues and subordinates , including the powerful Chief of the General Staff Operations Division Sadamu Shimomura , had come around to Matsui 's viewpoint and wanted Tada to approve an attack on Nanking . On November 24 Tada finally relented and abolished the operation restriction line " owing to circumstances beyond our control " , and then several days later he reluctantly approved the operation to capture Nanking . Tada flew to Shanghai in person on December 1 to deliver the order , though by then his own armies in the field were already well on their way to Nanking .

On November 15 , near the end of the Battle of Shanghai , Chiang Kai-shek convened a meeting of the Military Affairs Commission 's Supreme National Defense Council to undertake strategic planning , including a decision on what to do in case of a Japanese attack on Nanking . Here Chiang insisted fervently on mounting a sustained defense of Nanking . Chiang argued , just as he had during the Battle of Shanghai , that China would be more likely to receive aid from the great powers , possibly at the ongoing Nine Power Treaty Conference , if it could prove on the battlefield its will and capacity to resist the Japanese . He also noted that holding onto Nanking would strengthen China 's hand in peace talks which he wanted the German ambassador Oskar Trautmann to mediate . Chiang ran into stiff opposition from his officers , including the powerful Chief of Staff of the Military Affairs Commission He Yingqin , the Deputy Chief of Staff Bai Chongxi , the head of the Fifth War Zone Li Zongren , and his German advisor Alexander von Falkenhausen . They argued that the Chinese Army needed more time to recover from its losses at Shanghai , and pointed out that Nanking was highly indefensible topographically . The mostly gently sloping terrain in front of Nanking would make it easy for the attackers to advance on the city , while the Yangtze River behind Nanking would cut off the defenders ' retreat .

Chiang , however , had become increasingly agitated over the course of the Battle of Shanghai , even angrily declaring that he would stay behind in Nanking alone and command its defense personally . But just when Chiang believed himself completely isolated , General Tang Shengzhi , an ambitious senior member of the Military Affairs Commission , spoke out in defense of Chiang 's position , although accounts vary on whether Tang vociferously jumped to Chiang 's aid or only reluctantly did so . Seizing the opportunity Tang had given him , Chiang responded by organizing the Nanking Garrison Force on November 20 and officially making Tang its commander on November 25 . The orders Tang received from Chiang on November 30 were to " defend the established defense lines at any cost and destroy the enemy ’ s besieging force " . Though both men publicly declared that they would defend Nanking " to the last man " , they were aware of their precarious situation . On the same day that the Garrison Force was established Chiang officially moved the capital of China from Nanking to Chongqing deep in China 's interior . Further , both Chiang and Tang would at times give contradictory instructions to their subordinates on whether their mission was to defend Nanking to the death or merely delay the Japanese advance .

On November 20 the Chinese Army and teams of conscripted laborers began to hurriedly bolster Nanking 's defenses both inside and outside the city . Nanking itself was surrounded by formidable stone walls stretching almost fifty kilometers ( 31 miles ) around the entire city . The walls , which had been constructed hundreds of years earlier during the Ming Dynasty , rose up to twenty meters ( 65 feet ) in height , were nine meters ( 30 feet ) thick , and had been studded with machine gun emplacements . By December 6 all the gates into the city had been closed and then barricaded with an additional layer of sandbags and concrete six meters ( 20 feet ) thick . Outside the walls a series of semicircular defense lines were constructed in the path of the Japanese advance , most notably an outer one about sixteen kilometers ( 10 miles ) from the city and an inner one directly outside the city known as the Fukuo Line , or multiple positions line . The Fukuo Line , a sprawling network of trenches , moats , barbed wire , mine fields , gun emplacements , and pillboxes , was to be the final defense line outside Nanking 's city walls . There were also two key high points of land on the Fukuo Line , the peaks of Zijinshan to the northeast and the plateau of Yuhuatai to the south , where fortification was especially dense . In order to deny the Japanese invaders any shelter or supplies in this area , Tang adopted a strategy of scorched earth on December 7 , ordering all homes and structures in the path of the Japanese within one to two kilometers ( 1.2 miles ) of the city to be incinerated , as well as all homes and structures near roadways within sixteen kilometers ( 10 miles ) of the city .

The defending army , the Nanking Garrison Force , was on paper a formidable army of thirteen divisions , including three elite German-trained divisions plus the super-elite Training Brigade , but in reality most of these units had trickled back to Nanking severely mauled from the fighting in Shanghai . By the time they reached Nanking they were physically exhausted , low on equipment , and badly depleted in total troop strength . In order to replenish some of these units , 16,000 young men and teenagers from Nanking and the rural villages surrounding it were speedily pressed into service as new recruits . An additional 14,000 fresh soldiers were brought in from Hankou to fill the ranks of the 2nd Army . However , due the unexpected rapidity of the Japanese advance , most of the new conscripts received only rudimentary training on how to fire their guns on their way to or upon their arrival at the frontlines . No definitive statistics exist on how many soldiers the Nanking Garrison Force had managed to cobble together by the time of the battle , but among leading estimates are those of David Askew who says 73,790 to 81,500 , those of Ikuhiko Hata who estimates 100,000 , and those of Tokushi Kasahara who argues in favor of about 150,000 .

But during this period Japan 's Navy Air Service was launching frequent air raids on the city , eventually totaling 50 raids according to the Navy 's own records . The Navy Air Service had struck Nanking for the first time on August 15 , and after winning air supremacy over the city on September 19 it began bombing the city night and day with impunity , hitting both military and civilian targets . In the face of Japanese bombs and the ongoing advance of the Japanese Army , the large majority of Nanking 's citizens fled the city . By early December Nanking 's population had dropped from its former total of more than one million to less than 500,000 , a figure which included Chinese refugees from rural villages burned down by their own government 's scorched earth policies . Most of those still in the city were very poor and had nowhere else to go . Foreign residents of Nanking were also repeatedly asked to leave the city which was becoming more and more chaotic under the strain of bombings , fires , looting by criminals , and electrical outages , but those few foreigners brave enough to stay behind strived to find a way to help the Chinese civilians who had been unable to leave . In late-November a group of them led by German citizen John Rabe established the Nanking Safety Zone in the center of the city , a self-proclaimed demilitarized zone where civilian refugees could congregate in order to hopefully escape the fighting . The safety zone was recognized by the Chinese government , and on December 8 Tang Shengzhi demanded that all civilians evacuate there .

By the start of December Japan 's Central China Area Army had swollen in strength to over 160,000 men , though only about 50,000 of these would ultimately participate in the fighting . The plan of attack against Nanking was a pincer movement which the Japanese called " encirclement and annihilation " . The two prongs of the Central China Area Army 's pincer were the Shanghai Expeditionary Army ( SEA ) advancing on Nanking from its eastern side and the 10th Army advancing from its southern side . To the north and west of Nanking lay the Yangtze River , but the Japanese planned to plug this possible escape route as well both by dispatching a squadron of ships up the river and by deploying two special detachments to circle around behind the city . The Kunisaki Detachment was to cross the Yangtze in the south with the ultimate aim of occupying Pukou on the river bank west of Nanking while the Yamada Detachment was to be sent on the far north route with the ultimate aim of taking Mufushan just north of Nanking . General Matsui , along with the Army General Staff , envisaged making a slow and steady march on Nanking , but his subordinates refused to play along and instead raced eagerly with each other to be the first to get to the city . Soon all units were roaring to Nanking at the breakneck pace of up to forty kilometers ( 25 miles ) per day . For instance , the 10th Army captured the key town of Guangde on November 30 three days before it was even supposed to start its planned advance , and the SEA captured Danyang on December 2 more than five days ahead of schedule . In order to achieve such speeds , the Japanese soldiers carried little with them except weaponry and ammunition . Because they were marching well ahead of most of their supply lines they had to purchase or loot their food from Chinese civilians along the way .

During their advance the Japanese overcame initially light resistance from the already battered Chinese forces who were being pursued by the Japanese from Shanghai in a " running battle " . Here the Japanese were aided by their complete air supremacy , their abundance of tanks , the improvised and hastily constructed nature of the Chinese defenses , and also by the Chinese strategy of concentrating their defending forces on small patches of relatively high ground which made them easy to outflank and surround . On December 5 , Chiang Kai-shek paid a visit to a defensive encampment near Jurong to heckle his men to keep up the fight , but he was forced to beat a hasty retreat when the Japanese Army burst onto the battlefield guns blazing . On that day the rapidly moving forward contingents of the SEA occupied Jurong and then arrived at Chunhuazhen , a key point of Nanking 's outer line of defense which would put Japanese artillery in range of the city . Here China 's 51st Division flung its main force into the fighting and repeatedly repulsed Japanese attacks before cracking on December 8 when the main force of the SEA arrived . The SEA also took the fortress at Zhenjiang and the spa town of Tangshuizhen on that day . Meanwhile , on the south side of the same defense line , armored vehicles of Japan 's 10th Army charged the Chinese position at Jiangjunshan and Niushoushan defended by China 's 58th Division . Valiant Chinese soldiers armed with hammers jumped onto the vehicles and banged repeatedly on their roofs shouting " Get out of there ! " , but after darkness fell on the battlefield the 58th Division was finally overwhelmed on December 9 after suffering , according to its own records , 800 casualties .

By December 9 Japan 's forces had reached Nanking 's last line of defense , the daunting Fukuo Line . At this point General Matsui had a " summons to surrender " drawn up which implored the Chinese to send military envoys to Nanking 's Zhongshan Gate to discuss terms for the peaceful occupation of the city , and he then had a Mitsubishi Ki-21 scatter thousands of copies of the message over the city . On December 10 a group of Matsui 's senior staff officers waited to see if the gate would be opened , but Tang Shengzhi had no intention of responding . Later that day Tang proclaimed to his men that , " Our army has entered into the final battle to defend Nanking on the Fukuo Line . Each unit shall firmly defend its post with the resolve to either live or die with it . You 're not allowed to retreat on your own , causing defense to collapse . " The American journalist F. Tillman Durdin , who was reporting on site during the battle , saw one small group of Chinese soldiers set up a barricade , assemble in a solemn semicircle , and promise each other that they would die together where they stood .

At 1 : 00 pm on December 10 General Matsui ordered all units to launch a full-scale attack on Nanking . That day the SEA assaulted China 's super-elite Training Brigade on the peaks of Zijinshan , which dominate Nanking 's northeast horizon . Clambering up the ridges of the mountain , the men of the SEA had to painstakingly wrest control of each Chinese encampment one by one in bloody infantry charges . Advancing along the south side of Zijinshan was no easier as General Matsui had forbidden his men from using artillery there due to his deep conviction that no damage should come to its two famous historical sites , Sun Yat-sen Mausoleum and Ming Xiaoling Mausoleum . Also on Nanking 's eastern side but further south , other units of the SEA faced the difficult task of fording the large moat standing between them and three of the city gates , Zhongshan Gate , Guanghua Gate , and Tongji Gate , though the speed of Japan 's earlier advance played in their favor as key Chinese units slated to be deployed here were not yet in position . That evening Japanese engineers and artillerymen closing in on Guanghua Gate managed to blow a hole in the wall . A Japanese battalion launched a daring attack through the gap and planted a Japanese flag on a portion of the gate , but was immediately pinned down by a series of determined Chinese counterattacks . The Chinese brought up reinforcements , including tanks , and they poured down grenades and even flaming , gasoline-soaked lumber onto the Japanese battalion , which was only saved from annihilation by timely bursts of concentrated artillery fire from the rest of their division . The battalion succeeded in holding its position for the rest of the battle despite losing eighty of its eighty-eight men .

At the same time Japan 's 10th Army was storming Yuhuatai , a rugged plateau situated directly in front of Zhonghua Gate on Nanking 's southern side . The 10th Army 's progress was slow and casualties were heavy as Yuhuatai was built like a fortress of interlocking pillboxes and trenches manned by three Chinese divisions , including the German-trained 88th Division , though the Chinese were also apt to counterattack and some Japanese units were forced to spend more time defending than attacking . Close to every single man that the 88th Division had deployed on Yuhuatai was killed in action , including four of its three regimental commanders and both of its brigade commanders , but in the process the Japanese were made to suffer 2,240 casualties including 566 dead . Yuhuatai was finally overrun at noon on December 12 . Behind Yuhuatai the 88th Division had stationed its barely trained new recruits atop Nanking 's Zhonghua Gate . The Japanese had already tried the previous night to infiltrate a " suicide squadron " bearing explosive picric acid up to this gate to blow a hole in it , but it got lost in the morning fog and failed to reach the wall . At noon on December 12 a team of just six Japanese soldiers made it across the moat in a small boat and succeeded in scaling the wall at Zhonghua Gate on a shaky bamboo ladder and raising the Japanese flag there . Five of them were killed by gunfire but the last man grabbed a Chinese machine gun and held the position singlehandedly . Soon after another Japanese team set a fire in front of the gate to create a smokescreen . By 5 : 00 pm more and more Japanese troops were crossing the moat and swarming Zhonghua Gate by fording makeshift bridges so rickety their engineers had to hold them aloft with their own bodies , and with the help of some well aimed Japanese artillery fire from atop Yuhuatai parts of the wall finally crumbled . Meanwhile , just west of Zhonghua Gate , other soldiers also of Japan 's 10th Army had punched a hole through Chinese lines in the wetlands south of Shuixi Gate and were launching a violent drive on that gate with the support of a fleet of tanks .

At the height of the battle Tang Shengzhi complained to Chiang that , " Our casualties are naturally heavy and we are fighting against metal with merely flesh and blood " , but what the Chinese lacked in equipment they made up for in the sheer ferocity with which they fought , though this was partially due to strict orders that no man or unit was to retreat one step without permission . Over the course of the battle roughly 1,000 Chinese soldiers were shot dead by other members of their own army for attempting to retreat , and on Yuhuatai Japanese soldiers noticed that many Chinese pillboxes were chained from the outside to prevent their occupants from fleeing . Nonetheless , the Japanese were gaining the upper hand over the hard-pressed and surrounded Chinese defenders . On December 12 the SEA captured Peak # 2 of Zijinshan and from this vantage point unleashed a torrent of artillery fire at Zhongshan Gate where a large portion of the wall suddenly gave way . After sunset the fires that blazed out of control on Zijinshan were visible even from Zhonghua Gate in the south which was completely occupied by Japan 's 10th Army on the night of December 12 to 13 .

Unbeknownst to the Japanese however , Chiang had already ordered Tang to abandon the defense . In spite of his earlier talk about holding out in Nanking to the bitter end , Chiang telegraphed an order to Tang on December 11 to abandon the city . Tang prepared to do so the next day on December 12 , but startled by Japan 's intensified onslaught he made a frantic last-minute bid to conclude a temporary ceasefire with the Japanese through German citizens John Rabe and Eduard Sperling . Only when it became clear that the negotiations could not be completed in time did Tang finally finish drawing up a plan calling for all his units to launch a coordinated breakout of the Japanese encirclement . They were to commence the breakout under cover of darkness at 11 : 00 pm that night and then muster in Anhui . Just after 5 : 00 pm on December 12 Tang arranged for this plan to be transmitted to all units , and then he crossed the Yangtze River , escaping through the city of Pukou on the opposite bank of the river less than twenty-four hours before it was occupied by Japan 's Kunisaki Detachment .

By the time Tang slipped out of the city , however , the entire Nanking Garrison Force was rapidly disintegrating with some units in open flight . Furthermore , contact had already been lost with many units who thus never received Tang 's message and continued to hold their positions as ordered , though even those that did receive it had little luck at slipping through the Japanese lines . China 's 66th and 83rd Corps made a bid to evade the Japanese as planned through a gap to the east but immediately ran into their own minefield . After that they were attacked in flight by Japanese units and lost two divisional chiefs of staff in combat . Though the two corps had started the battle at least 11,000 men strong , only 600 of them escaped Nanking . Near dawn on December 13 a portion of China 's 74th Corps was also annihilated in a bid to break through Japanese lines along the Yangtze River south of Nanking . One of the few units that did manage to get out of Nanking was China 's 2nd Army led by Xu Yuanquan situated just north of Nanking . Though Xu never received Tang 's order to abandon the defense , on the night of December 12 he had heard that Nanking had been captured and so decided to withdraw on his own accord . During the night he managed to evacuate most of his unit across the Yangtze River just before Japanese naval units blockaded the river .

By contrast , a massive crowd of thousands of Chinese soldiers and civilians from the south side of Nanking , who were fleeing in panic and disarray from the advance of Japan 's 10th Army on the same night , were prevented from reaching the harbor at Xiaguan by Chinese barrier troops who fired on the crowd for retreating without permission and managed to hold it back . At 9 : 00 pm a fleeing Chinese tank unit , which had also not received Tang 's parting message , charged the barrier troops and burst through their blockade , only for the crowd to then find that there were hardly any boats remaining in the harbor . The crowd fought to clamber aboard what few craft were available , but these soon became so overloaded that they sank midway . The rest of the Chinese soldiers took to the Yangtze 's rough and frigid waters en masse while clinging to logs and pieces of scrap lumber , though most were quickly swallowed up by the river . Furthermore , by this point the Japanese encirclement of Nanking was virtually complete and many who were attempting to brave the Yangtze soon found themselves being fired upon from both sides of the river . Others who saw this turned back to the city in despair .

Many of these tens of thousands of Chinese soldiers who could not escape the city responded by casting off their uniforms and weaponry , switching to civilian clothes often by stealing them from passersby , and then desperately seeking sanctuary in the Nanking Safety Zone by mingling with civilians . The American journalist F. Tillman Durdin " witnessed the wholesale undressing of an army that was almost comic . " " Arms were discarded along with uniforms , and the streets became covered with guns , grenades , swords , knapsacks , coats , shoes and helmets ... In front of the Ministry of Communications and for two blocks further on , trucks , artillery , busses , staff cars , wagons , machine-guns , and small arms became piled up as in a junk yard . "

The fighting in Nanking did not end entirely on the night of December 12 – 13 when the Japanese Army took the remaining gates and entered the city . During their mopping-up operations in the city the Japanese continued for several more days to beat back sporadic resistance from Chinese stragglers . Though Mufushan , just north of Nanking , was taken by Japan 's Yamada Detachment without much bloodshed on the morning of December 14 , pockets of resistance outside Nanking persisted for several more days . Meanwhile , the Japanese units on mopping-up duty in Nanking had decided that the former Chinese soldiers hiding in the city were a possible security risk and therefore carried out a thorough search of every building in Nanking and made frequent incursions into the Nanking Safety Zone in search of them . Japanese units attempted to distinguish former soldiers from civilians by checking if they had marks on their shoulders from wearing a backpack or carrying a rifle . However , the criteria used were often arbitrary as was the case with one Japanese company which apprehended all men with " shoe sores , callouses on the face , extremely good posture , and / or sharp-looking eyes " and for this reason many civilians were taken at the same time . What happened to the Chinese soldiers and civilians who were captured varied greatly from unit to unit , though many were summarily executed in an event that came to be known as the Nanking Massacre , which the foreign residents and journalists in Nanking made known internationally within days of the city 's fall . Though the Japanese also committed random acts of murder , rape , looting , and arson during their occupation of Nanking , military historian Masahiro Yamamoto notes that very few of the corpses buried in and around Nanking after the fall of the city were women or children , suggesting that the large majority of the victims of the massacre were adult Chinese men taken by the Japanese as former soldiers and massacred . Estimates for the total death toll of the Nanking Massacre vary widely .

The Japanese Army 's mopping-up operations and the large-scale massacres that accompanied them were over by the afternoon of December 17 when General Matsui entered Nanking for the victory parade . By the end of December most Japanese soldiers had left Nanking , though units of the Shanghai Expeditionary Army stayed on to occupy the city . The Nanking Self-Government Committee , a new municipal authority formed from local Chinese collaborators , was inaugurated on January 1 , 1938 , but it was not until February 25 that all restrictions on the free movement of civilians into and out of the city were lifted .

News of the massacre was tightly censored in Japan , where Nanking 's capture provoked a frenzy of excitement among the citizenry . Mass celebrations of every sort , either spontaneous or government-sponsored , took place throughout the country , including a number of resplendent lantern parades which were still vividly remembered by onlookers several decades later . F. Tillman Durdin noted even before Nanking had fallen that " Events in the field have renewed the belief of the Japanese people in the invincibility of their arms . " The conquest of Nanking had been quicker and easier than the Japanese had foreseen ; they lost only 1,953 soldiers in battle , plus 4,994 wounded . Japan 's casualties were undoubtedly dwarfed by those of China , though no precise figures exist on how many Chinese were killed in action . The Japanese claimed to have killed 84,000 enemy during the campaign whereas a contemporary Chinese source claimed that their army suffered 20,000 casualties , but Masahiro Yamamoto notes that the Japanese usually inflated their opponent 's body counts while the Chinese had reason to downplay the scale of their loss . Ikuhiko Hata estimates that 50,000 Chinese soldiers were killed in combat during the entire battle whereas Jay Taylor puts the number at 70,000 and states that proportionate to the size of the force committed , such losses were greater than those suffered in the devastating Battle of Shanghai . On the other hand , Chinese scholar Sun Zhaiwei estimates Chinese combat losses at 6,000 to 10,000 men .

An official report of the Nationalist Government argued that an excess of untrained and inexperienced troops was a major cause of the defeat , but at the time Tang Shengzhi was made to bear much of the blame and later historians have also criticized him . Japanese historian Tokushi Kasahara , for instance , has characterized his battlefield leadership as incompetent , arguing that an orderly withdrawal from Nanking may have been possible if Tang had carried it out on December 11 or if he had not fled his post well in advance of most of his beleaguered units . However , Chiang 's very decision to defend Nanking is also controversial . Masahiro Yamamoto believes that Chiang chose " almost entirely out of emotion " to fight a battle he knew he could only lose , and fellow historian Frederick Fu Liu concurs that the decision is often regarded as one of " the greatest strategical mistakes of the Sino-Japanese war " . Still , the historian Jay Taylor notes that Chiang was convinced that to run from his capital city " without a serious fight ... would forever be regarded as a cowardly decision . " In spite of its military accomplishment , Japan 's international reputation was blackened by the Nanking Massacre , as well as by a series of international incidents that occurred during and after the battle . Most notable among them were the shelling by Japanese artillery of the British steamship Ladybird on the Yangtze River on December 12 , and the sinking by Japanese aircraft of the American gunboat Panay not far downstream on the same day . The Allison Incident , the slapping of an American consul by a Japanese soldier , further increased tensions with the United States .

Furthermore , the loss of Nanking did not force China to capitulate as Japan 's leaders had predicted . Even so , buoyed by their victory , the Japanese government replaced the lenient terms for peace which they had relayed to the mediator Ambassador Trautmann prior to the battle with an extremely harsh set of demands that were ultimately rejected by China . On December 17 in a fiery speech entitled , " A Message to the People Upon Our Withdrawal from Nanking " , Chiang Kai-shek defiantly declared that , The outcome of this war will not be decided at Nanking or in any other big city ; it will be decided in the countryside of our vast country and by the inflexible will of our people ... In the end we will wear the enemy down . In time the enemy 's military might will count for nothing . I can assure you that the final victory will be ours . The Second Sino-Japanese War was to drag on for another eight years and ultimately end with Japan 's defeat in 1945 .

Eagle Boys is an Australian fast food chain specialising in Italian American cuisine , in particular pizza . With more than 160 stores throughout Australia , it is the third largest pizza chain in Australia , with 12 % of the share of the country 's pizza market recorded in June 2015 . Eagle Boys was founded in Albury , New South Wales by businessman Tom Potter in 1987 . Since 1992 , Eagle Boys national headquarters have been located in Annerley , Queensland . In 2007 NBC Capital , a Queensland-based venture capital group , bought Eagle Boys from Potter . At the chain 's peak , in 2013 , more than 340 Eagle Boys stores were operating across Australia . Outlet numbers fell drastically between the end of 2013 and the end of 2014 to around 170 . In July 2016 , administrators were bought in to identify restructuring options ahead of a potential sale of the business , although the move did not extend to franchisee-operated outlets .

The first Eagles Boys store opened in Albury , New South Wales in 1987 , a venture spearheaded by businessman Tom Potter in partnership with his mother , Barbara Potter , who guaranteed a $ 70,000 loan to enable him to open the store . The store was initially called " Beagle Boys " after the Disney Beagle Boys , but Potter dropped the ' B ' after a few months in operation , worrying that the naming may have been a copyright infringement . Potter went on to build the business and become CEO of the chain . In 1989 Potter started recruiting franchisees . Eagle Boys ' national headquarters were opened in 1992 in the Brisbane suburb of Annerley . Eagle Boys set up in New Zealand in 1996 when Stallone 's Pizza owner Gavin Cook agreed to merge with Eagle Boys to provide an established base in the South Island . Rapid expansion saw the Eagle Boys chain grow to 54 national outlets in the country by early April 2000 . In 2000 , all New Zealand stores were sold to Restaurant Brands for NZ $ 28m and converted to Pizza Hut outlets . The company developed an express system " Eaglexpress " between 1999 and 2002 , to serve two minute " express " pizzas ( limited range of four ) between 5 : 30 and 8 : 00 pm , which was achieved by constantly remaking their four most popular pizzas and keeping them in a warmer for sale . Unsold pizzas were discarded after 30 minutes . Between 2002 , when the Eaglexpress concept was launched , and 2003 , sales at the chain rose by around 40 % . The chain came to see the Eaglexpress two-minute pizza service and the its drive-through services as a " beachhead " to compete with its biggest fast-food competitors including Hungry Jack 's and KFC .

In March 2007 , Tom Potter handed his control of Eagle Boys on to NBC Capital , a Queensland-based venture capital group . He retained some shares in the company , and worked in a consultancy role advising the chain on operations for 12 months . By 2008 , Potter retained less than 10 % of the vote for corporate decision making and was no longer involved in operations . In late 2007 , Eagle Boys began trialing an online ordering system and announced plans to enable customers to order online from all of its stores by February 2008 . By the end of 2008 , the system was fully implemented .

In July 2008 , Eagle Boys entered into a deal to acquire the Pizza Haven chain across Australia . The deal saw Eagle Boys move into Sydney and South Australia for the first time . Between July 2008 and June 2009 , Eagle Boys opened 56 stores — the fastest growth the chain had experienced in its history . In February 2010 , Eagle Boys was named in BRW Magazine 's Fast Franchise list for the first time . By March 2011 , Eagle Boys had more than 25 stores in Sydney . It had also overtaken Pizza Hut to become the second largest pizza maker in Australia . However , Pizza Hut regained second position by July 2014 . CEO Todd Clayton departed Eagle Boys in 2012 , he had been in the role since NBC Capital acquired a majority stake in 2007 . At the time , the founder of NBC Bruce Scott stepped in as CEO . In July 2013 , Eagle Boys commenced operations in Papua New Guinea . Worldwide , stores numbered over 330 by September 2013 .

To capitalise on the benefits of cloud computing , Eagle Boys shifted its ordering system to Microsoft Azure in 2015 . Through providing improved website performance and uptime and providing more sophisticated performance metrics , the new hosting system should support more online orders , which the Eagle Boys IT chief says are worth 1.5 times the orders which are made in-store or by telephone . In May 2015 , Eagle Boys announced it was aiming to expand with a plan for 50 outlets in India by the end of 2015 . The same month a franchisee opened an Eagle Boys store in Suva , Fiji . Eagle Boys appointed Nick Vincent as the new CEO in October 2015 , replacing Bruce Scott . Vincent had previously been the company 's general manager of retail , since April 2014 .

On 15 July 2016 Eagle Boys Pizza appointed administrators to identify restructuring options ahead of a potential sale of the business . The administrators , SV Partners , took control of the day-to-day running of the business , and will attempt to find potential buyers and negotiate a sale . Eagle Boys announced that trade would continue as normal at franchisee-operated outlets during the administration . Fairfax Media outlets tipped Domino 's and Retail Food Group ( the owner of Pizza Capers and Crust ) as possible buyers . However , Retail Food Group confirmed it was not in discussions with the owners or administrators of the Eagle Boys franchise system in a statement on 19 July 2016 .

In 1992 , Eagle Boys registered its " pink glow " — the pink look of its logo — with IP Australia , the Australian Government intellectual property office . A customer survey in support of the company 's application found people strongly associated the pink glow with Eagle Boys stores . The distinctive colour scheme was designed to create a fun and upbeat feel . In 2007 , Eagle Boys launched the " Vote 1 Full Size Large Pizza " campaign bringing to task its competitors for selling smaller pizzas . Domino 's had reduced the size of their large pizzas in mid-2007 and Pizza Hut had changed their sizing in late 2006 . The campaign produced a sales uplift of over 27 % . In 2009 , the pizza chain announced a $ 7 million advertising campaign , called the " Real " campaign , that reinforced its " Bigger , Better " slogan . The campaign involved the VW " Real Mobile " driving around Australia offering Eagle Boys pizza and recording testimonials for a TV commercial . Later in the year , Eagle Boys launched another campaign comparing its pizzas to those of its competitors , this time built around the " blind taste test " which found almost half of test subjects preferred Eagle Boys pizzas to those of pizzas from Domino 's and Pizza Hut combined .

In 2010 , Eagle Boys launched a multimillion-dollar campaign " 31 New Menu Items – Each One Delicious ” . The campaign was the first to use Eagle Boys ' new phone name 1300 EAGLE BOYS . New pastas were among the 31 new menu offerings , Desserts were also included , among them a chocolate fudge mousse that received a Gold Medal at the 2010 Royal Queensland Food and Wine Show . The menu was tested over a 12-month period ahead of the launch . Eagle Boys told media it expected a 15 % spike in sales on the back of the launch . A gluten " friendly " base was also on the menu for the first time , with an Eagle Boys spokesperson claiming it was more transparent than claiming it could offer a gluten-free base — only food prepared in a gluten-free kitchen can make the claim that it is truly offering a gluten free range . The chain also announced it would scale back its social media spend . In 2011 , the chain released advertising " Our large pizzas are bigger than theirs " in another attempt to demonstrate their large pizza offered effectively an extra slice of pizza to their closest rival , Domino 's . Domino 's chief executive , in response , told media that " value is not in the size of a pizza . " Eagle Boys recorded a 20 % jump in sales in the first week of the campaign compared to the previous week . The pizza chain also announced it would be supporting the Cerebral Palsy Alliance , with a plan to donate more than $ 200,000 over three years to the charity , starting with $ 1 from every dessert sold during Cerebral Palsy week in August 2011 . In July 2011 , Eagle Boys received Halal accreditation for its Bexley store .

Rebranding in 2013 as part of the " making pizza happy " campaign involved introducing a new logo along with new pizza boxes and uniforms . The iconic eagle was dropped from the logo at time , with management citing pressure its client base to drop to eagle . The company introduced a " happy bell " to ring when customers were having a good time — aiming for a happier feeling for the in-store experience . The campaign was rolled out in stages , beginning in Far North Queensland , a decision an Eagle Boys spokesperson said was designed to pay homage to the chain 's regional heritage . By 2014 , around one-third of the pizza chain 's marketing budget was directed to digital spend . That year , the chain released a campaign leveraging off the release of Australian film Fat Pizza vs. Housos . It also announced a partnership with streaming company Quickflix , offering customers an exclusive deal on a one DVD and streaming bundle package . In 2014 the chain also donated more than 600kg of potatoes to food rescue charity OzHarvest . 2015 saw Eagle Boys launch the first " store of the future " in Bundaberg . The concept store , with a design including exposed brickwork and recycled timber , was developed based on research carried out on customer preferences and behaviours .

The wood thrush ( Hylocichla mustelina ) is a North American passerine bird . It is closely related to other thrushes such as the American robin and is widely distributed across North America , wintering in Central America and southern Mexico . The wood thrush is the official bird of the District of Columbia . The wood thrush is a medium-sized thrush , with brown upper parts with mottled brown and white underparts . The male and female are similar in appearance . The song of the male is often cited as being the most beautiful in North America . The wood thrush is an omnivore , and feeds preferentially on soil invertebrates and larvae , but will also eat fruits . In the summer , it feeds on insects continuously in order to meet daily metabolic needs . It is solitary , but sometimes forms mixed-species flocks . The wood thrush defends a territory that ranges in size from 800 to 28,000 m2 ( 960 to 33,490 sq yd ) . The wood thrush is monogamous , and its breeding season begins in the spring ; about 50 % of all mated pairs are able to raise two broods , ranging in size from two to four chicks .

The only member of the genus Hylocichla , the wood thrush was described by German naturalist Johann Friedrich Gmelin in 1789 . The generic name is a direct translation of its common name , derived from the Greek words hyle / ύλη " woodland " and cichle / κιχλη " thrush " or " fieldfare " . The specific name comes from the Latin mustela " weasel " . It is closely related to the other typical American thrushes of the genus Catharus , and is sometimes merged into that genus . It has been considered close to the long-distance migrant species of that genus , as opposed to the generally resident nightingale-thrushes , but this appears to be erroneous . The wood thrush also appears to be fairly closely related to the large Turdus thrushes , such as the American robin .

The adult wood thrush is 18 to 21.5 cm ( 7.1 to 8.5 in ) long , with a wingspan of 30 to 40 cm ( 12 to 16 in ) and a body mass of 48 to 72 g ( 1.7 to 2.5 oz ) . Among standard measurements , the wing chord is 9.6 to 11.6 cm ( 3.8 to 4.6 in ) , the bill is 1.6 to 2 cm ( 0.63 to 0.79 in ) and the tarsus is 2.8 to 3.3 cm ( 1.1 to 1.3 in ) . It is distinctly larger than the Catharus thrushes with which the species is often sympatric but slightly smaller than the common American robin . The longest known lifespan for a wood thrush in the wild is 8 years , 11 months . The crown , nape , and upper back are cinnamon-brown , while the back wings , and tail are a slightly duller brown . The breast and belly are white with large dark brown spots on the breast , sides , and flanks . It has white eye rings and pink legs . Other brownish thrushes have finer spotting on the breast . The juvenile looks similar to adults , but has additional spots on the back , neck , and wing coverts . The male and female are similar in size and plumage .

The wood thrush has been reported to have one of the most beautiful songs of North American birds . American naturalist Henry David Thoreau wrote : Whenever a man hears it he is young , and Nature is in her spring ; wherever he hears it , it is a new world and a free country , and the gates of Heaven are not shut against him . While the female is not known to sing , the male has a unique song that has three parts . The first subsong component is often inaudible unless the listener is close , and consists of two to six short , low-pitched notes such as bup , bup , bup . The middle part is a loud phrase often written ee-oh-lay , and the third part is a ventriloquial , trill-like phrase of non-harmonic pairs of notes given rapidly and simultaneously . The male is able to sing two notes at once , which gives its song an ethereal , flute-like quality . Each individual bird has its own repertoire based on combinations of variations of the three parts . Songs are often repeated in order . The bup , bup , bup phrase is also sometimes used as a call , which is louder and at a greater frequency when the bird is agitated . The wood thrush also use a tut , tut to signal agitation . The nocturnal flight call is an emphatic buzzing heeh .

The wood thrush 's breeding range extends from Manitoba , Ontario and Nova Scotia in southern Canada to northern Florida and from the Atlantic coast to the Missouri River and the eastern Great Plains . It migrates to southern Mexico through to Panama in Central America in the winter , mostly in the lowlands along the Atlantic and Pacific coasts . It generally arrives on the U.S. Gulf Coast during the first week of April . Fall migration usually begins in mid-August and continues through mid-September . Migration takes place at night , allowing them to find their direction from the stars and orient themselves by detecting the Earth 's magnetic field . The wood thrush prefers deciduous and mixed forests for breeding . It prefers late-successional , upland mesic forests with a moderately-dense shrub layer . Robert I. Bertin ( 1977 ) found that this thrush favors areas with running water , moist ground , and high understorey cover . The breeding habitat generally includes trees taller than 16 m ( 52 ft ) , a fairly open forest floor , moist soil , and leaf litter , with substrate moisture more important than either canopy cover or access to running water . The wood thrush can breed in habitat patches as small as 0.4 hectares ( 0.99 acres ) , but it runs the risk of higher predation and nest parasitism . The wood thrush 's breeding range has expanded northward , displacing the veery and hermit thrush in some locations . In recent times , as a result of fragmentation of forests , it has been increasingly exposed to nest parasitism by brown-headed cowbirds , as well as loss of habitat in the winter range .

The wood thrush has become a symbol of the decline of Neotropical songbirds of eastern North America , having declined by approximately 50 % since 1966 . Along with many other species , this thrush faces threats both to its North American breeding grounds and Central American wintering grounds . Forest fragmentation in North American forests has resulted in both increased nest predation and increased cowbird parasitism , significantly reducing their reproductive success . A study by the Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology was the first large-scale analysis that linked acid rain to this thrush 's decline . Continued destruction of primary forest in Central America eliminated preferred wood thrush wintering habitats , likely forcing the birds to choose secondary habitats where mortality rates are higher . In spite of this , the wood thrush is still considered to be of least concern .

The wood thrush is primarily solitary , but occasionally forms mixed-species flocks in the winter . Its breeding territory ranges from 800 to 8,000 m2 ( 960 to 9,570 sq yd ) in size , and are used for nesting , gathering nest materials , and foraging . Some wood thrushes also defend a feeding territory in the winter . Territorial interactions are usually settled without physical contact , but in high-intensity encounters or nest defense , physical interactions with the feet or bill have been observed . Defense behaviors in response to nest predators include wing flicks , tail flicks , and raising the crest , sometimes escalating to dives and strikes . This species has also been observed displaying a behavior known as " anting . " Anting occurs when a bird picks up a single ant or group of ants and rubs them on its feathers . The purpose of this behavior is unknown , but it is thought that the birds may be able to acquire defensive secretions from the ants possibly used for some medicinal purposes , or that it simply supplements the birds ' own preen oil .

Soil invertebrates and larvae make up most of the wood thrush 's omnivorous diet , but it will also eat fruits in the late summer , fall , and late winter . It occasionally feeds on arboreal insects , snails , and small salamanders . The young are fed insects and some fruit . After breeding and before migration , the wood thrush will switch from insects to fruits with high lipid levels . In the summer , low fruit consumption and lipid reserves require the bird to feed on insects continuously in order to meet its metabolic needs . The wood thrush forages mainly on the forest floor , flipping leaves over with their bills to reveal insects . It can be observed hopping around in leaf litter and on semi-bare ground under the forest canopy . Fruits are swallowed whole .

Wood thrushes are monogamous . Breeding pairs form in mid-April to early-May , and usually last throughout the breeding season . Most thrushes find a new mate each year , and mate guarding and extra-pair copulations have not been observed in this species . Some male wood thrushes arrive at the breeding grounds several days before the earliest females while other males arrive at the same time as the females , establishing territories ranging in size from 0.08 to 0.8 hectares ( one-fifth of an acre to two acres ) . The female typically leads silent circular flights 1 – 1.8 m ( 3.3 – 5.9 ft ) from the ground , with the male chasing . Six or more flights generally take place in succession . The pairs will perch together and feed each other in between flights . The male begins to sing at dawn and dusk a few days after arriving at breeding grounds . Early in the breeding season , the male sings from high perches in the tallest trees , but as the season progresses , it sings somewhat shorter and less elaborate songs from lower perches . Each day 's singing begins and is most intense just before sunrise . The male may sing throughout the day but especially at dusk . The song season is usually over by the end of July .

Typically , the female chooses the nest site and builds the nest . However , there has been some indication that the male is able to influence the selection of the nest site by perching nearby and singing . Usually , though , the female chooses whether or not to accept or reject the nest site suggested by the male . The nest is usually sited in a dense patch of vegetation in a tree or shrub that provides concealment and shade . It is usually made of dead grasses , stems , and leaves , and lined with mud , and placed in a fork at a horizontal branch . The nest is not reused . Usually , two broods are attempted , although three to four separate nests may be built before a pair succeeds . Two to four pale blue eggs are laid at the rate of one per day . The eggs are incubated by the female only for 11 to 14 days , with the average being 13 days . Like all passerines , the chicks are altricial at hatching , mostly naked with closed eyes . The female broods the chicks during the first four days after hatching . Both parents feed the nestlings and remove fecal sacs from the nest . The chicks fledge 12 – 15 days after hatching , but the parents continue to feed them until they become independent and leave the parents ' territory at 21 – 31 days old .

Kristen Anne Bell ( born July 18 , 1980 ) is an American actress and singer . She began her acting career starring in stage productions and attended the Tisch School of Arts in New York . In 2001 , she made her Broadway debut as Becky Thatcher in The Adventures of Tom Sawyer and starred in the Broadway revival of The Crucible the following year . In 2004 , she had a supporting role in the film Spartan and received praise for her first leading performance in Gracie 's Choice . Bell gained critical acclaim for her first major role as the title character in the teen noir drama television series Veronica Mars ( 2004 – 07 ) . For her performance she awarded a Saturn Award for Best Actress on Television . She reprised the eponymous role in the 2014 film continuation of the series . During her time on Veronica Mars , Bell appeared as Mary Lane in the 2005 film Reefer Madness : The Movie Musical , a reprise of the role she had played in the New York musical upon which the film was based . In 2007 , Bell joined the cast of the sci-fi series Heroes , playing the character Elle Bishop , for which she was nominated for a Saturn Award .

In 2008 , she had her breakout film role as the title character in Forgetting Sarah Marshall . She has since appeared in a number of comedy films , such as Couples Retreat ( 2009 ) , When in Rome ( 2010 ) , and You Again ( 2010 ) . Bell garnered further recognition for voicing Princess Anna in the 2013 Disney film Frozen and the 2015 short film Frozen Fever . She also starred as the female lead on the Showtime series House of Lies . Bell married actor Dax Shepard in 2013 , with whom she has two daughters .

Kristen Anne Bell was born on July 18 , 1980 and was raised in Huntington Woods , Michigan , a suburb of Detroit . Her mother , Lorelei ( née Frygier ) , is a registered nurse , and her father , Tom Bell , works as the television news director for CBS Television in Sacramento . Her parents divorced when she was two years old , and she has two half-sisters , Sara and Jody , from her father 's second marriage . Bell is of Scottish , Polish , German and Irish descent . Bell stated that she did not like her first name at the age of four . Bell 's mother convinced her to go by her middle name of Anne instead ; she used the name Annie until high school . Bell once broke both her wrists at the same time playing street hockey with friends . Just before her freshman year of high school , Bell 's parents decided to pull her from the public school system . She then attended Shrine Catholic High School in nearby Royal Oak , where she took part in the drama and music club . During her time at the school , she won the starring role in the school 's 1997 production of The Wizard of Oz , as Dorothy Gale and also appeared in productions of Fiddler on the Roof ( 1995 ) , Lady Be Good ( 1996 ) , and Li 'l Abner ( 1998 ) . In 1998 , the year she graduated , Bell was named the yearbook 's " Best Looking Girl " by senior class vote .

In 1992 , Bell went to her first audition and won a dual role as a banana and a tree in a suburban Detroit theater 's production of Raggedy Ann and Andy . Her mother had established her with an agent before Bell was 13 , which allowed her to appear in newspaper advertisements for several Detroit retailers and television commercials . She also began private acting lessons . In 1998 , she appeared with an uncredited role in the locally filmed film Polish Wedding . In 2001 , Bell left New York University to play a role as Becky Thatcher in the short-lived Broadway musical of The Adventures of Tom Sawyer . That same year , she made her credited film debut in Pootie Tang . Her one line in the film was cut and her appearance exists only as a scene shown during the credit sequence . Additionally , she auditioned for the television series Smallville for the role of Chloe Sullivan , a part eventually won by Allison Mack . In 2002 , she appeared in the Broadway revival of The Crucible with Liam Neeson , Angela Bettis and Laura Linney . Bell then moved to Los Angeles , California in 2002 because of her friendship with writers Kevin Murphy and Dan Studney , and appeared in a handful of television shows as a special guest , finding trouble gaining a recurring role in a television series . Bell had " tested like eight times and booked nothing and every show [ she ] tested for got picked up , " including auditions for Skin and a Norm Macdonald series .

In 2004 , Bell appeared in the Lifetime television film Gracie 's Choice , which received one of the network 's highest ratings . She made her debut in a theatrically released film , with David Mamet 's Spartan , as Laura Newton , the kidnapped daughter of the U.S. President , acting alongside Val Kilmer . Bell also guest-starred on the HBO drama Deadwood in a two-episode story arc ( " Bullock Returns to the Camp " and " Suffer the Little Children " ) . At 24 , she won the role of the title character in UPN 's drama Veronica Mars , which was launched in the fall of 2004 . Created by Rob Thomas , the series starred Bell as the seventeen-year-old anti-establishment high school student / detective . Bell drew on the parallels between the character of Veronica and her own life , since Bell 's parents had divorced and her best friend had also died . The series earned acclaim from television critics , as did Bell 's performance . Some critics asserted that her performance was overlooked , and deserved consideration for an Emmy Award . Aside from working on Veronica Mars , Bell starred in Reefer Madness : The Movie Musical , reprising the role she played in the short-lived 2001 off-broadway musical . The musical was a spoof of the 1936 exploitation film of the same name . Reefer Madness : The Movie Musical debuted on the Showtime network on April 16 , 2005 . Also in April , Bell starred as Gracie in Fifty Pills , an entry for the Tribeca Film Festival . She appeared in a short independent film called The Receipt and the horror film Roman , which was directed by her The Crucible co-star Angela Bettis . Released on August 11 , 2006 , Pulse starred Bell as the lead Mattie . A remake of the Japanese horror film Kairo , the film grossed US $ 27.9 million worldwide , ; however it garnered negative response from critics . Frank Scheck of The Hollywood Reporter commented , " despite the starring presence of Kristen Bell , [ the ] young actress has far less interesting material to work with here than she does as [ the character ] " Veronica Mars . " "

Veronica Mars continued on UPN for a second season ; for the third season , the show was renewed and appeared on the newly created The CW . On January 19 , 2007 , CW Entertainment President Dawn Ostroff announced that while she was pleased with the gradual improvement of Veronica Mars 's ratings , the series would be put on hiatus after February sweeps to air a new reality series , Pussycat Dolls Present . On May 17 , 2007 Ostroff announced the cancellation of the series . A two-hour series finale aired in the United States on May 22 , 2007 , and on June 11 , 2007 Thomas officially announced in an email to TV Guide 's Michael Ausiello that Veronica Mars had been canceled by the CW . A Veronica Mars feature film and comic book series continuation had been discussed , and for a short time there was talk of another collaboration between Bell and creator Thomas that would be unrelated to the Veronica Mars series . Following the cancellation of Veronica Mars , Bell voiced interest in appearing on Heroes because she was a fan . On July 29 , 2007 , during a train ride back to Los Angeles from the San Diego Comic-Con with Heroes actors Zachary Quinto and Masi Oka , and writers from the series , the writers had mentioned that if she " ever want [ ed ] to come on Heroes , give us [ writers ] a call , " to which Bell said she would " love to . " Meanwhile , there were discussions about a role on Lost , but Bell turned down the role of Charlotte Staples Lewis . Bell portrayed Elle Bishop on Heroes , a " mysterious young lady " with an " awesome power " . She did not have to audition for the role of Elle , who made her first appearance in an October 2007 episode , and appeared in at least thirteen episodes during the run of the series . The casting of Bell , Heroes creator Tim Kring explained , " was not easy to pull off " , but because of the large ensemble cast of the series and multiple story arcs , " we found a way to jump into a small window in [ Bell 's ] schedule . " . Bell lent her voice to the CW series Gossip Girl : she voiced the title character in every episode of the series , appearing in person only for a surprise cameo in the final episode , portraying herself .

Shortly after the cancellation of Veronica Mars in early 2007 , Bell filmed on location in Hawaii for a starring role as the title character in the Judd Apatow comedy Forgetting Sarah Marshall . She regarded the improvisational comedy in the film as " a lovely experience " . The film , written by and also starring Jason Segel , was released theatrically on April 18 , 2008 , and is considered to be Bell 's star-making role . Bell lent her voice and likeness to the video game Assassin 's Creed which was released on November 13 , 2007 for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 and April 8 , 2008 for the PC . Bell reprised her role of Lucy in Assassin 's Creed II released on November 17 , 2009 , and again in Assassin 's Creed : Brotherhood , released on November 16 , 2010 . In the spring of 2006 , she finished filming the Star Wars-themed comedy Fanboys , which had its release date pushed to January 14 , 2008 . This was due to additional funding given to director Kyle Newman to shoot new scenes , however , the busy schedules of the actors only allowed for filming in September 2007 , thus moving the release date to accommodate that . Bell also starred in the 2009 comedies Serious Moonlight , alongside Meg Ryan , and Couples Retreat , which chronicles four couples who partake in therapy sessions at a tropical island resort . Jason Bateman played her husband . She also provided the voice for Cora in Astro Boy . On March 31 , 2008 , Bell began shooting the Mark Steven Johnson-written Disney film When in Rome in locations in Rome and New York ; the film was released in 2010 . Bell reprised her role as Sarah Marshall for a cameo appearance in the film Get Him to the Greek , a spin-off sequel from Forgetting Sarah Marshall , released June 4 , 2010 .

In 2012 , Bell starred in the family drama film Big Miracle . She has also appeared in the music video for " Madder Red " by Brooklyn experimental rock band Yeasayer . Bell portrayed " Mary Magdalene " in The Truth & Life Dramatized Audio New Testament Bible , a 22-hour , celebrity-voiced , dramatized audio New Testament which uses the RSV-CE translation . Bell stars as Jeannie van der Hooven , the female lead on the Showtime series House of Lies , which premiered on January 8 , 2012 . Bell starred in The Lifeguard , written and directed by Liz W. Garcia , which began filming in July 2012 , and was released in August 2013 . She also voiced Anna in Frozen , which was released on November 22 , 2013 . In 2013 , for multiple episodes , Bell played Ingrid de Forest , an Eagleton City Councilwoman , on Parks and Recreation . On March 13 , 2013 , it was confirmed that a Veronica Mars film would finally be coming to fruition . Bell and series creator Rob Thomas , launched a fundraising campaign to produce the film through Kickstarter and attained the $ 2 million goal in less than ten hours . The main cast members of the series all reprised their roles in the feature film . Production of the film took place during summer 2013 , and it was released theatrically and on video-on-demand on March 14 , 2014 .

In September 2014 , Bell starred with her husband , Dax Shephard , in a commercial for the Samsung Galaxy Tab S. It was so popular ( with over 20 million YouTube views ) that they did another for the holiday season . The ad agency McKinney was behind both . In 2016 , Bell voiced the sloth Priscilla in the animated comedy film Zootopia and starred as Claire in the comedy film The Boss . She will appear in the 2016 comedy film Bad Moms , and the 2017 action comedy CHiPs . Bell will also star as the main character , Eleanor , in the NBC comedy series The Good Place , which is set to premiere in the fall of 2016 .

In 2006 and again in 2013 , Bell was selected " World 's Sexiest Vegetarian " on PETA 's yearly poll . She was placed No. 68 on Maxim 's 2005 " Hot 100 " list , No. 11 in Maxim 's 2006 " Hot 100 " list , and No. 46 in Maxim 's 2007 " Hot 100 " list in which she was stated to have " single-handedly saved the CW from becoming the worst network ever . " In 2006 , Maxim also placed Bell at the top of the " Fall TV 's Criminally Sexy Investigators " List . In 2008 , she was featured at No. 59 on Ask Men 's Top 99 Women of 2008 List . Reflecting on her admitted popularity with " geeks " , Bell was voted the fourth sexiest woman on TV by the staff at Wizard magazine . Bell stated she never thought of herself as womanly because " I always play and look and act 10 years younger than I am , " however , she said , " Something magical happened when I turned 25 — I looked in the mirror and was like , You might not get carded for an R-rated movie anymore . Like I didn 't have a little stick figure anymore . " Bell has said that many of her characters are tomboys because she was " not homely enough to play the nerdy girl and not nearly pretty enough to play the pretty girl " .

Bell has been associated with the idea that " nerdy is the new cool " , and she explained , " what was previously perceived as nerdy is now viewed as original . What I like about nerdiness , geekiness , is it doesn 't really matter what you 're into — it just means you 're not a follower . " She has also said , " I love nerds . Comic-Con junkies are the tastemakers of tomorrow . Isn 't that funny ? The tables have turned . " Vanessa Juarez of Entertainment Weekly commented that Bell 's roles on Veronica Mars , Heroes and as a Star Wars fanatic in Fanboys have " solidif [ ied ] her placement at the center of the geek universe " , while Rodney Rothman stated , " I guess she 's cornered the market on losers . " Bell 's work is often compared to Sarah Michelle Gellar 's portrayal of the title character on the cult television series Buffy the Vampire Slayer . Frank Scheck of The Hollywood Reporter stated that Bell was " arguably the television successor [ to Gellar 's portrayal of Buffy ] when it comes to fighting bad guys . " Bell is sometimes confused with Lauren Conrad from the show The Hills . " Yeah , sometimes fans yell , ' Hey , Lauren ' to me , but usually from a distance , " said Kristen .

Despite " new celebrity " status , Bell claimed that she was not concerned because " no one ever recognizes me anyway " . As Bell explained , " I hang out with Hayden quite a bit — they never take pictures of me . I just step to the side , and I push myself in front of her when she wants to get out of it , or put her in the car . " Bell was a recurring guest on The Late Late Show with Craig Ferguson , appearing in interviews as well as sketches . On The Late Late Show , she shows a humorous hostility towards Craig 's robot skeleton sidekick Geoff Peterson , claiming that she had wanted to be Craig 's sidekick on his show and taking it upon herself to cut Geoff down every chance she gets . Both Bell and Geoff Peterson appeared with Ferguson during the five Late Late Shows filmed in France .

In 2007 , Bell ended a five-year relationship with former fiancé Kevin Mann . She later told Complex magazine that dating " makes me want to vomit . And not out of grossness — OK , a little bit out of grossness , but just nerves ... I 've always been a serial monogamist . " Bell began dating actor Dax Shepard in late 2007 . The couple announced their engagement in January 2010 . They decided to delay marriage until the state of California passed legislation legalizing same-sex marriage . They co-starred in the 2010 film When In Rome and in the 2012 film Hit and Run . After section 3 of the Defense of Marriage Act fell on June 26 , 2013 , Bell asked Shepard to marry her through Twitter , which he accepted . They were married at the Beverly Hills County Clerk 's Office on October 17 , 2013 . They have two daughters : Lincoln Bell Shepard ( born March 28 , 2013 ) and Delta Bell Shepard ( born December 19 , 2014 ) .

At age 11 , Bell became a vegetarian . In an interview with PETA , Bell stated , " I have always been an animal lover . I had a hard time disassociating the animals I cuddled with — dogs and cats , for example — from the animals on my plate , and I never really cared for the taste of meat . I always loved my Brussels sprouts ! " By 2012 Bell became vegan with her husband after watching the documentary Forks Over Knives . During her time in Michigan , Bell fostered animals from Michigan Humane Society and she now supports the San Diego-based Helen Woodward Animal Center . Bell often attends fund raisers for the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals and other non-profit organizations dedicated to protecting animals . She has a Welsh Corgi-Chow Chow mix named Lola , a Welsh Corgi-Chihuahua mix named Shakey , and a black Labrador Retriever named Sadie , who was 11 years old when she was rescued from Hurricane Katrina and adopted by Bell in 2005 . Bell has also become a strong advocate of vaccination . Though initially skeptical she has since stated " I think it 's really important to acknowledge that we have something called the herd immunity , where there are people that cannot get immunizations because of autoimmune diseases or cancer treatments , " and that " If we don ’ t get the vaccinations to keep them safe , then they 're screwed . " Citing scientific research , she shares her belief that it is her duty to not only protect her children , but other children , too - especially those who may suffer from autoimmune diseases or cancer .

She and many of those who worked on Veronica Mars , including personal friend Ryan Hansen , are involved with the charity organization Invisible Children , Inc . The goal of the organization is to create awareness regarding the plight of Northern Ugandans who are caught in the midst of a civil war between the government and Joseph Kony 's Lord 's Resistance Army . Bell has also done a public service announcement for Do Something 's Healthy Living Campaign . In 2014 , Bell launched a Prizeo campaign offering fans a chance to win a date with her in return for donating to Invisible Children . Bell supported and campaigned for Barack Obama during the 2008 United States presidential election . Along with Rashida Jones , she visited college campuses in Missouri to discuss the candidates and encourage voter registration . Bell showed support for the Writers Guild of America in the writer 's strike , appearing in the picket lines in December 2007 stating , " the writers are just looking for some fairness . " Bell also has a strong liking of Tommy Wiseau 's 2003 cult film The Room . She hosts parties at her house for The Room , attended cinema screenings of it , and has said that " there is a magic about that film that is indescribable . "

Ratatouille ( / rætəˈtuːiː / ; French pronunciation : ​ [ ʁatatuj ] ) is a 2007 American computer-animated comedy film produced by Pixar and released by Buena Vista Pictures Distribution . It is the eighth film produced by Pixar , and was co-written and directed by Brad Bird , who took over from Jan Pinkava in 2005 . The title refers to a French dish , " ratatouille " , which is served at the end of the film , and is also a play on words about the species of the main character . The film stars the voices of Patton Oswalt as Remy , an anthropomorphic rat who is interested in cooking ; Lou Romano as Linguini , a young garbage boy who befriends Remy ; Ian Holm as Skinner , the head chef of Auguste Gusteau 's restaurant ; Janeane Garofalo as Colette , a rôtisseur at Gusteau 's restaurant ; Peter O 'Toole as Anton Ego , a restaurant critic ; Brian Dennehy as Django , Remy 's father and leader of his clan ; Peter Sohn as Emile , Remy 's older brother ; and Brad Garrett as Auguste Gusteau , a recently deceased chef . The plot follows Remy , who dreams of becoming a chef and tries to achieve his goal by forming an alliance with a Parisian restaurant 's garbage boy .

Development of Ratatouille began in 2000 when Pinkava wrote the original concepts of the film . In 2005 , Bird was approached to direct the film and revise the story . Bird and some of the film 's crew members also visited Paris for inspiration . To create the food animation used in the film , the crew consulted chefs from both France and the United States . Bird also interned at Thomas Keller 's French Laundry restaurant , where Keller developed the confit byaldi , a dish used in the film . Ratatouille premiered on June 22 , 2007 , at the Kodak Theatre in Los Angeles , California , with its general release June 29 , 2007 , in the United States . The film grossed $ 623.7 million at the box office and received positive reviews . The film later won the Academy Award for Best Animated Feature , among other honors .

Remy is an idealistic and ambitious young rat , gifted with highly developed senses of taste and smell . Inspired by his idol , the recently deceased chef Auguste Gusteau , Remy dreams of becoming a cook himself . When an old woman armed with a shotgun sees his clan , they are forced to abandon their home ; the gunshots cause Remy to be separated from his family . He ends up in the sewers of Paris and eventually finds himself at a skylight overlooking the kitchen of Gusteau 's restaurant . As Remy watches , a young man named Alfredo Linguini , is hired as a garbage boy by Skinner , the restaurant 's devious current owner and Gusteau 's former sous-chef . When Linguini spills a pot of soup and attempts to recreate it with disastrous results , Remy falls into the kitchen and uses other ingredients to complement the soup to perfection . Linguini catches Remy and is confronted by Skinner . As Skinner argues with Linguini , the soup is accidentally served and proves to be a success . Colette Tatou , the staff 's only female chef , convinces Skinner to retain Linguini , who is assumed to be the soup 's creator . After Skinner catches Remy in the act of escaping , he orders Linguini to take the rat far away and kill it . Linguini then discovers Remy 's intelligence and passion for food , so he keeps him .

On Linguini 's first day as a chef , he and Remy find a way to communicate ; Remy guides Linguini like a marionette by pulling on his hair while hidden under Linguini 's toque blanche , while Skinner assigns Colette to train his new cook . Suspicious , Skinner learns that the boy is Gusteau 's illegitimate son and the rightful heir to the restaurant , which threatens his use of the restaurant 's reputation to establish a packaged food franchise he started after Gusteau died . Remy discovers the evidence of Linguini 's inheritance and , after eluding Skinner , gives it to Linguini , who deposes Skinner as owner . The restaurant continues to thrive , and Linguini and Colette develop a budding romance , leaving Remy feeling left out . Meanwhile , Remy reunites with his father , Django , and his brother , Emile , who take him back to their new lair . Though thrilled that his family and clan are safe , he tells him that he cannot stay . In an attempt to rid his son from his like of humans , Django shows Remy a window display of dead rats , poison , and traps , but Remy leaves .

France 's top restaurant critic Anton Ego , whose previous review cost Gusteau 's one of its stars , announces he will be re-reviewing the restaurant the following evening . After an argument with Linguini , Remy leads his clan in a raid on the restaurant 's pantries . Linguini catches them and throws them out . Now aware of Remy 's skills , Skinner captures him in an attempt to use him to create a new line of frozen foods . However , Remy is freed by Django and Emile . He returns to the restaurant , only to find Linguini is unable to cook without him . Linguini apologizes and reveals the truth to the staff , but they leave , believing that Linguini has lost his mind . Colette later returns after recalling Gusteau 's motto , " Anyone can cook . " Django arrives with the rest of the clan , offering to help after seeing his son 's determination . Remy has the rats cook , while Linguini serves as waiter . For Ego ( and Skinner ) , Remy and Colette create a variation of ratatouille , which brings back an astonished Ego memories of his mother 's cooking . During the service , the rats are forced to tie up Skinner and a health inspector to prevent them from revealing their involvement in the cooking . When Ego requests to see the chef , Linguini and Colette make him wait until the rest of the diners have left before introducing Remy . Ego is stunned and leaves the restaurant , deep in thought . He writes a positive and thoughtful review for the newspaper the next day , stating that Gusteau 's chef ( Remy ) is " nothing less than the finest chef in France . "

Patton Oswalt as Remy . Director Brad Bird chose Oswalt after hearing his food-related comedy routine . Ian Holm as Skinner , a diminutive chef and owner of Auguste Gusteau 's restaurant . Since Gusteau 's death , Skinner has used the Gusteau name to market a line of cheap microwaveable meals . Skinner 's behavior , diminutive size , and body language are loosely based on Louis de Funès . Brad Garrett as Auguste Gusteau ( whose first and last names are anagrams of each other ) . Many reviewers believe that Gusteau is inspired by real-life chef Bernard Loiseau , who committed suicide after media speculation that his flagship restaurant , La Côte d 'Or , was going to be downgraded from three Michelin stars to two . La Côte d 'Or was one of the restaurants visited by Brad Bird and others in France . Julius Callahan as Lalo , Gusteau 's saucier and poissonnier . Callahan also voices François , Skinner 's advertising executive . Tony Fucile as Pompidou , Gusteau 's patissier . Fucile also voices Nadar Lessard , a health inspector employed by Skinner .

Jan Pinkava came up with the concept in 2000 , creating the original design , sets and characters and core storyline , but he was never formally named the director of the film . Lacking confidence in Pinkava 's story development , Pixar management replaced him with Bird in 2005 . Bird was attracted to the film because of the outlandishness of the concept and the conflict that drove it : that rats feared kitchens , yet a rat wanted to work in one . Bird was also delighted that the film could be made a highly physical comedy , with the character of Linguini providing endless fun for the animators . Bird rewrote the story , with a change in emphasis . He killed off Gusteau , gave larger roles to Skinner and Colette , and also changed the appearance of the rats to be less anthropomorphic . Because Ratatouille is intended to be a romantic , lush vision of Paris , giving it an identity distinct from previous Pixar films , director Brad Bird , producer Brad Lewis and some of the crew spent a week in the city to properly understand its environment , taking a motorcycle tour and eating at five top restaurants . There are also many water-based sequences in the film , one of which is set in the sewers and is more complex than the blue whale scene in Finding Nemo . One scene has Linguini wet after jumping into the Seine to fetch Remy . A Pixar employee ( Shade / Paint department coordinator Kesten Migdal ) jumped into Pixar 's swimming pool wearing a chef 's uniform and apron to see which parts of the suit stuck to his body and which became translucent from water absorption .

Ratatouille was originally going to be released in 2006 , however , in December 2004 , the date was changed to 2007 . The release date change was the same day Disney / Pixar changed the release date of Cars , from November 2005 to June 2006 , thus pushing Ratatouille to 2007 . A challenge for the filmmakers was creating computer-generated images of food that would appear delicious . Gourmet chefs in both the U.S. and France were consulted and animators attended cooking classes at San Francisco-area culinary schools to understand the workings of a commercial kitchen . Sets / Layout department manager Michael Warch , a culinary-academy trained professional chef before working at Pixar , helped teach and consult animators as they worked . He also prepared dishes used by the Art , Shade / Paint , Effects and Sets Modeling departments . Renowned chef Thomas Keller allowed producer Brad Lewis to intern in his French Laundry kitchen . For the film 's climax , Keller designed a fancy , layered version of the title dish for the rat characters to cook , which he called " confit byaldi " in honor of the original Turkish name . The same sub-surface light scattering technique that was used on skin in The Incredibles was used on fruits and vegetables , while new programs gave an organic texture and movement to the food . Completing the illusion were music , dialogue , and abstract imagery representing the characters ' mental sensations while appreciating food . The visual flavor metaphors were created by animator Michel Gagné inspired by the work of Oscar Fischinger and Norman McLaren . To create a realistic compost pile , the Art Department photographed fifteen different kinds of produce , such as apples , berries , bananas , mushrooms , oranges , broccoli , and lettuce , in the process of rotting .

According to Pixar designer Jason Deamer , " Most of the characters were designed while Jan [ Pinkava ] was still directing ... He has a real eye for sculpture . " For example , according to Pinkava , the critic Anton Ego was designed to resemble a vulture . Rat expert Debbie Ducommun ( a.k.a. the " Rat Lady " ) was consulted on rat habits and characteristics . A vivarium containing pet rats sat in a hallway for more than a year so animators could study the movement of the animals ' fur , noses , ears , paws , and tails as they ran . The cast members strove to make their French accents authentic yet understandable . John Ratzenberger notes that he often segued into an Italian accent . To save time , human characters were designed and animated without toes . Promotional material for Intel credits their platform for a 30 percent performance improvement in rendering software . They used Remy in some of their marketing materials .

Brad Bird reteamed with Michael Giacchino on the score for Ratatouille since they got along well during the scoring of The Incredibles . Giacchino had written two themes for Remy , one about his thief self and the other about his hopes and dreams . He also wrote a buddy theme for both Remy and Linguini that plays when they 're together . In addition to the score , Giacchino wrote the main theme song , " Le Festin " , about Remy and his wishes to be a chef . Camille was hired to perform " Le Festin " after Giacchino listened to her music and realized she was perfect for the song ; as a result , the song is sung in French in all versions of the film . The music for Ratatouille gave Giacchino his first Academy Award nomination for Best Original Score as well as his first Grammy Award for Best Score Soundtrack Album . Giacchino returned to Pixar to score their 2009 blockbuster Up .

Ratatouille 's world premiere was on June 22 , 2007 , at Los Angeles ' Kodak Theater . The commercial release was one week later , with the short film Lifted preceding Ratatouille in theaters . Earlier in the year , it had received an Academy Award nomination . A test screening of the film was shown at the Harkins Cine Capri Theater in Scottsdale , Arizona on June 16 , 2007 , at which a Pixar representative was present to collect viewer feedback . Disney CEO Bob Iger announced an upcoming theatrical re-release of the film in 3D at the Disney shareholders meeting in March 2014 .

The trailer for Ratatouille debuted with the release of its immediate predecessor , Cars . It depicts an original scene where Remy is caught on the cheese trolley in the restaurant 's dining area sampling the cheese and barely escaping the establishment , intercut with separate scenes of the rat explaining directly to the audience why he is taking such risks . Similar to most of Pixar 's teaser trailers , the scene was not present in the final film release . A second trailer was released on March 23 , 2007 . The Ratatouille Big Cheese Tour began on May 11 , 2007 , with cooking demonstrations and a film preview . Voice actor Lou Romano attended the San Francisco leg of the tour for autograph signings . Disney and Pixar were working to bring a French-produced Ratatouille-branded wine to Costco stores in August 2007 , but abandoned plans because of complaints from the California Wine Institute , citing standards in labeling that restrict the use of cartoon characters to avoid attracting under-age drinkers . In the United Kingdom , in place of releasing a theatrical trailer , a theatrical commercial featuring Remy and Emile was released in cinemas before its release to discourage obtaining unlicensed copies of films . Also in the United Kingdom , the main characters were used for a theatrical commercial for the Nissan Note , with Remy and Emile watching an original commercial for it made for the " Surprisingly Spacious " ad campaign and also parodying it respectively .

Disney / Pixar were concerned that audiences , particularly children , would not be familiar with the word " ratatouille " and its pronunciation . The title was therefore also spelled phonetically within trailers and on posters . For similar reasons , in the American release of the film , on-screen text in French was printed in English , such as the title of Gusteau 's cookbook and the sign telling kitchen staff to wash their hands , though in the British English release , these are rendered in French . In Canada , the film was released theatrically with text in English , but on DVD , the majority of the text ( including Gusteau 's will ) was in French .

Disney released Ratatouille on high-definition Blu-ray Disc and DVD in North America on November 6 , 2007 . A new animated short film featuring Remy and Emile entitled Your Friend the Rat was included as a special feature , in which the two rats attempt to entreat the viewer , a human , to welcome rats as their friends , demonstrating the benefits and misconceptions of rats towards humanity through several historical examples . The eleven-minute short uses 3D animation , 2D animation , live action and even stop motion animation , a first for Pixar . The disc also includes a CG short entitled Lifted , which screened before the film during its theatrical run . It depicts an adolescent extraterrestrial attempting to abduct a sleeping human . Throughout the sequence , he is graded by an adult extraterrestrial in a manner reminiscent of a driver 's licensing exam road test . The entire short contains no dialogue , which is typical of Pixar Shorts not based on existing properties . Also included among the special features are deleted scenes , a featurette featuring Brad Bird discussing filmmaking and chef Thomas Keller discussing culinary creativity entitled " Fine Food and Film " , and four easter eggs . Although the Region 1 Blu-ray edition has a French audio track , the Region 1 DVD does not , except for some copies marked as for sale only in Canada .

The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 96 % approval rating with an average rating of 8.4 / 10 based on 241 reviews . The site 's consensus reads : " Fast-paced and stunningly animated , Ratatouille adds another delightfully entertaining entry -- and a rather unlikely hero -- to the Pixar canon . " Another review aggregation website Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 top reviews from mainstream critics , calculated a score of 96 out of 100 based on 37 reviews , the highest of any Pixar film and the eighth-highest rated film on the site . A. O. Scott of The New York Times called Ratatouille " a nearly flawless piece of popular art , as well as one of the most persuasive portraits of an artist ever committed to film " ; echoing the character Anton Ego in the film , he ended his review with a simple " thank you " to the creators of the film . Wally Hammond of Time Out gave the film five out of five stars , saying " A test for tiny tots , a mite nostalgic and as male-dominated as a modern kitchen it may be , but these are mere quibbles about this delightful addition to the Pixar pantheon . " Andrea Gronvall of the Chicago Reader gave the film a positive review , saying " Brad Bird 's second collaboration with Pixar is more ambitious and meditative than his Oscar-winning The Incredibles . " Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly gave the film a B , saying " Ratatouille has the Pixar technical magic without , somehow , the full Pixar flavor . It 's Brad Bird 's genial dessert , not so much incredible as merely sweetly edible . " Peter Travers of Rolling Stone gave the film three and a half stars out of four , saying " What makes Ratatouille such a hilarious and heartfelt wonder is the way Bird contrives to let it sneak up on you . And get a load of that score from Michael Giacchino , a perfect compliment to a delicious meal . " James Berardinelli of ReelViews gave the film three out of four stars , saying " For parents looking to spend time in a theater with their kids or adults who want something lighter and less testosterone-oriented than the usual summer fare , Ratatouille offers a savory main course . " Christy Lemire of the Associated Press gave the film a positive review , saying " Ratatouille is free of the kind of gratuitous pop-culture references that plague so many movies of the genre ; it tells a story , it 's very much of our world but it never goes for the cheap , easy gag . " Justin Chang of Variety gave the film a positive review , saying " The master chefs at Pixar have blended all the right ingredients -- abundant verbal and visual wit , genius slapstick timing , a soupcon of Gallic sophistication -- to produce a warm and irresistible concoction . "

Michael Phillips of the Chicago Tribune gave the film four out of four stars , saying " The film may be animated , and largely taken up with rats , but its pulse is gratifyingly human . And you have never seen a computer-animated feature with this sort of visual panache and detail . " Rafer Guzman of Newsday gave the film three out of four stars , saying " So many computer-animated movies are brash , loud and popping with pop-culture comedy , but Ratatouille has the warm glow of a favorite book . The characters are more than the sum of their gigabyte-consuming parts -- they feel handcrafted . " Roger Moore of the Orlando Sentinel gave the film three out of five stars , saying " Has Pixar lost its magic recipe ? Ratatouille is filled with fairly generic animated imagery , a few modest chases , a couple of good gags , not a lot of laughs . " Scott Foundas of LA Weekly gave the film a positive review , saying " Bird has taken the raw ingredients of an anthropomorphic-animal kiddie matinee and whipped them into a heady brew about nothing less than the principles of artistic creation . " Colin Covert of the Star Tribune gave the film four out of four stars , saying " It 's not just the computer animation that is vibrantly three-dimensional . It 's also the well-rounded characters ... I defy you to name another animated film so overflowing with superfluous beauty . " Steven Rea of The Philadelphia Inquirer gave the film three and a half stars out of four , saying " With Ratatouille , Bird once again delivers not just a great , witty story , but dazzling visuals as well . " Bill Muller of The Arizona Republic gave the film four and a half stars out of five , saying " Like the burbling soup that plays a key part in Ratatouille , the movie is a delectable blend of ingredients that tickles the palette and leaves you hungry for more . "

Rene Rodriguez of the Miami Herald gave the film three out of four stars , saying " Ratatouille is the most straightforward and formulaic picture to date from Pixar Animation Studios , but it is also among the most enchanting and touching . " Jack Mathews of the New York Daily News gave the film four out of four stars , saying " The Pixar magic continues with Brad Bird 's Ratatouille , a gorgeous , wonderfully inventive computer-animated comedy . " Stephen Whitty of the Newark Star-Ledger gave the film three out of four stars , saying " Fresh family fun . Although there are those slightly noxious images of rodents scampering around a kitchen , the movie doesn 't stoop to kid-pandering jokes based on back talk and bodily gases . " David Ansen of Newsweek gave the film a positive review , saying " A film as rich as a sauce béarnaise , as refreshing as a raspberry sorbet , and a lot less predictable than the damn food metaphors and adjectives all us critics will churn out to describe it . OK , one more and then I 'll be done : it 's yummy . " Peter Hartlaub of the San Francisco Chronicle gave the film four out of four stars , saying " Ratatouille never overwhelms , even though it 's stocked with action , romance , historical content , family drama and serious statements about the creation of art . " Richard Corliss of Time gave the film a positive review , saying " From the moment Remy enters , crashing , to the final happy fadeout , Ratatouille parades the brio and depth that set Pixar apart from and above other animation studios . " Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times gave the film four out of four stars , saying " A lot of animated movies have inspired sequels , notably Shrek , but Brad Bird 's Ratatouille is the first one that made me positively desire one . " Peter Howell of the Toronto Star gave the film four out of four stars , saying " Had Bird gone the safe route , he would have robbed us of a great new cartoon figure in Remy , who like the rest of the film is rendered with animation that is at once fanciful and life-like . It 's also my pick for Pixar 's best . "

Joe Morgenstern of The Wall Street Journal gave the film a positive review , saying " The characters are irresistible , the animation is astonishing and the film , a fantasy version of a foodie rhapsody , sustains a level of joyous invention that hasn 't been seen in family entertainment since The Incredibles . " Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times gave the film four and a half stars out of five , saying " Brad Bird 's Ratatouille is so audacious you have to fall in love with its unlikely hero . " Claudia Puig of USA Today gave the film three and a half stars out of four , saying " Ratatouille is delicious fun sure to be savored by audiences of all ages for its sumptuous visuals , clever wit and irresistibly inspiring tale . " Miriam Di Nunzio of the Chicago Sun-Times gave the film three and a half stars out of four , saying " Ratatouille will make you wonder why animation needs to hide behind the mantle of ' it 's for children , but grownups will like it , too . ' This one 's for Mom and Dad , and yep , the kids will like it , too . " Michael Booth of The Denver Post gave the film three and a half stars out of four , saying " Writer and director Brad Bird keeps Ratatouille moving without resorting to the cute animal jokes or pop-culture wisecracking that ruined so many other recent animated films . " Tom Long of The Detroit News gave the film an A , saying " Ratatouille has the technical genius , emotional core and storytelling audacity to lift it into the ranks of [ the best ] Pixar films , the crème de la crème of modern animation . " Liam Lacey of The Globe and Mail gave the film three and a half stars out of four , saying " No sketchy backgrounds here -- Ratatouille 's scenes feels like deep-focus camera shots . The textures , from the gleam of copper pans to the cobblestone streets , are almost palpable . " Desson Thomson of The Washington Post gave the film a positive review , saying " Ratatouille doesn 't center on the over-familiar surfaces of contemporary life . It harks back to Disney 's older era , when cartoons seemed part of a more elegant world with less edgy characters . "

In its opening weekend in North America , Ratatouille opened in 3,940 theaters and debuted at number one with $ 47 million , the lowest Pixar opening since A Bug 's Life . However , in France , where the film is set , the film broke the record for the biggest debut for an animated film . In the UK , the film debuted at number one with sales over £ 4 million . The film has grossed $ 206,445,654 in the United States and Canada and a total of $ 623,722,818 worldwide , currently making it the sixth highest grossing Pixar film , just behind Toy Story 3 , Finding Nemo , Monsters University , Up , and The Incredibles .

Ratatouille was nominated for five Oscars including Best Original Score , Best Sound Editing , Best Sound Mixing , Best Original Screenplay and Best Animated Film , which it lost to Atonement , The Bourne Ultimatum ( for both Best Sound Editing and Best Sound Mixing ) and Juno , respectively , winning only the last one . At the time , the film held the record for the greatest number of Oscar nominations for a computer animated feature film , breaking the previous record held by Monsters , Inc . , Finding Nemo and The Incredibles at four nominations , but tied with Aladdin for any animated film . In 2008 , WALL-E surpassed that record with 6 nominations . As of 2013 , Ratatouille is tied with Up and Toy Story 3 for animated film with the second greatest number of Oscar nominations . Beauty and the Beast still holds the record for most Oscar nominations ( also 6 ) for an animated feature film . Furthermore , Ratatouille was nominated for 13 Annie Awards including twice in the Best Animated Effects , where it lost to Surf 's Up , and three times in the Best Voice Acting in an Animated Feature Production for Janeane Garofalo , Ian Holm , and Patton Oswalt , where Ian Holm won the award . It won the Best Animated Feature Award from multiple associations including the Chicago Film Critics , the National Board of Review , the Annie Awards , the Broadcast Film Critics , the British Academy of Film and Television ( BAFTA ) , and the Golden Globes .

Jonathan Daniel " Jon " Hamm ( born March 10 , 1971 ) is an American actor , director , and television producer best known for playing advertising executive Don Draper in the AMC drama series , Mad Men ( 2007 – 2015 ) . For much of the mid-1990s , Hamm lived in Los Angeles , making appearances in television series Providence , The Division , What About Brian , and Related . In 2000 , he made his feature film debut in the space adventure film Space Cowboys . The following year , he had a minor role in the independent comedy , Kissing Jessica Stein ( 2001 ) . Hamm gained wide recognition when Mad Men began airing in July 2007 . His performance earned him the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Television Series – Drama in 2008 and 2016 and the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series in 2015 . He also directed two episodes of the show . In 2008 , Hamm appeared in a remake of the science fiction film The Day The Earth Stood Still . His first leading film role was in the 2010 independent thriller Stolen . He also had supporting roles in The Town ( 2010 ) , Sucker Punch ( 2011 ) , and Bridesmaids ( 2011 ) . Hamm has received 16 Primetime Emmy Award nominations for his performances in Mad Men , 30 Rock ( 2006 – 2013 ) , and Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt ( 2015 – present ) .

Hamm was born in St. Louis , Missouri , the son of Deborah and Daniel Hamm . His father ran a family trucking company , and his mother was a secretary . He is of German , English , and Irish descent ; his surname originates with German immigrants . Hamm 's parents divorced when he was two years old , and he lived in Creve Coeur with his mother until her death from colon cancer , when he was 10 . Hamm then moved in with his father . Hamm 's first acting role was as Winnie the Pooh in first grade . At 16 , he was cast as Judas in Godspell , and enjoyed the experience , though he did not take acting seriously . Hamm attended the private John Burroughs School in Ladue , where he was a member of the football , baseball , and swim teams . During this time , he dated future actress Sarah Clarke . His father died when he was 20 . Following graduation in 1989 , Hamm enrolled at the University of Texas , where he was a member of the Upsilon Chapter of Sigma Nu fraternity . There , Hamm was arrested for participating in a violent hazing incident that occurred in November 1990 , involving another student , Mark Sanders . Sanders was beaten with a paddle and a broom , while Hamm was leading him around the fraternity house with the claw of a hammer beneath Sanders ' genitals , and Sanders ' clothes were set on fire . The incident led to the fraternity 's being shut down on campus . Hamm completed the terms of a deferred adjudication , and the charges were dismissed in August 1995 .

Hamm enrolled at the University of Missouri . At Missouri he answered an advertisement from a theater company looking for players in a production of A Midsummer Night 's Dream , auditioned , and was cast in the production . Other roles followed , such as Leon Czolgosz in Assassins . After graduating in 1993 with a Bachelor of Arts in English , Hamm returned to his high school to teach eighth-grade acting . One of his students was Ellie Kemper , who later became an actress and would go on to star in the Netflix original series Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt , in which Hamm has a recurring role ; another was Beau Willimon , who became a screenwriter .

Hamm has known actor Paul Rudd for many years , and visited him in Hollywood in 1992 . Not wishing to stay in a " normal career " , Hamm moved to Los Angeles permanently in 1995 with an automobile and $ 150 . He moved into a house with four other aspiring actors and began working as a waiter while attending auditions . He acted in theatre , including as Flavius in a production of Shakespeare 's Timon of Athens with the Sacred Fools Theater Company . Finding employment as an actor was difficult , despite representation by the William Morris Agency , because unlike other actors his age , he could not be cast in youth-oriented productions like Dawson 's Creek due to his older appearance . In 1998 , having failed to obtain any acting jobs after three years , he was dropped by William Morris . Hamm continued working as a waiter and , briefly , as a set designer for a softcore pornography film . After repeatedly failing to obtain promising roles , he set his 30th birthday as a deadline to succeed in Hollywood , stating : You either suck that up and find another agent , or you go home and say you gave it a shot , but that 's the end of that . The last thing I wanted to be out here was one of those actors who 's 45 years old , with a tenuous grasp of their own reality , and not really working much . So I gave myself five years . I said , if I can 't get it going by the time I 'm 30 , I 'm in the wrong place . And as soon as I said that , it 's like I started working right away .

In 2000 , Hamm obtained the role of romantic firefighter Burt Ridley on NBC 's drama series Providence . His one-episode contract grew to 19 , and led him to quit waiting tables . Hamm made his feature film debut with one line in Clint Eastwood 's space adventure Space Cowboys ( 2000 ) ; more substantial roles followed in the independent comedy Kissing Jessica Stein ( 2001 ) and the war film We Were Soldiers ( 2002 ) , during filming of which he turned 30 . His career was further bolstered when he played the recurring role of police inspector Nate Basso on Lifetime 's television series The Division , from 2002 to 2004 . Other minor roles followed on the television series What About Brian , CSI : Miami , Related , Numb3rs , The Unit , and The Sarah Silverman Program . Hamm 's Mad Men castmate Eric Ladin had said that one of the reasons he looks up to Jon is that while he " made it " later than most actors , Hamm never gave up on acting .

Hamm received his breakthrough role in 2007 , when he was cast from more than 80 candidates as the protagonist character Don Draper , in AMC 's drama series Mad Men . In the series , set in a fictional 1960s advertising agency , he plays a suave advertising executive with an obscure past . Hamm recalled , " I read the script for Mad Men and I loved it . [ ... ] I never thought they 'd cast me — I mean , I thought they 'd go with one of the five guys who look like me but are movie stars " , and that an actor with a " proven track record " would likely have been chosen if another network had aired the show . He went through numerous auditions and explained each time to the casting directors what he could bring to the character , if given the part . Alan Taylor and Mad Men creator Matthew Weiner initially thought Hamm was too handsome for the role but ultimately decided , " it was perfect to cast sort of the perfect male in this part " ; Weiner also sensed that the actor had not been raised by his parents , similar to Draper 's backstory .

Hamm used memories of his father to portray Draper , a well-dressed , influential figure in business and society hiding great inner turmoil and facing changes in the world beyond his control . Mad Men debuted on July 19 , 2007 , with almost 1.4 million viewers . It quickly developed a loyal audience , with Hamm receiving strong reviews . Robert Bianco of USA Today was complimentary of Hamm , noting that his interpretation of Draper was a " starmaking performance " . The Boston Globe 's Matthew Gilbert called Hamm a " brilliant lead " . For his work , Hamm won the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Television Series – Drama in 2008 . Also in 2008 , he was nominated for both the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor and the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series . In 2009 , Hamm was again nominated for the Golden Globe Award and Screen Actors Guild Award in the same category , and received another Primetime Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series . In 2010 , Hamm received his third Golden Globe Award nomination . Mad Men concluded its seven-season run on May 17 , 2015 . Hamm received his first Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series on September 20 , 2015 after receiving 12 Emmy nominations for acting on and producing the series .

Hamm 's next film role was in the 2008 science fiction film The Day the Earth Stood Still , a remake of the 1951 film of the same name . Although the film received mixed reviews , it was financially successful , earning $ 230 million worldwide at the box office . Hamm hosted Saturday Night Live , season 34 , episode 6 , on October 25 , 2008 , and played various roles , including Don Draper in two sketches . He returned to host again on January 30 and October 30 , 2010 . In 2009 , Hamm guest starred in three episodes of the NBC situation comedy show 30 Rock , as Drew Baird , a doctor who is a neighbor and love interest of Liz Lemon 's ( Tina Fey ) . For these performances , he received three nominations for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Series . Hamm 's film projects post-2009 include the independent mystery thriller Stolen ( 2009 ) and his first leading role , in which he plays a man trying to demystify the circumstances surrounding his son 's kidnapping . The Hollywood Reporter 's Frank Scheck stated that the feature never came together , and that Hamm was unable to do much with his " underwritten role " .

Hamm had a voice cameo in the animated feature Shrek Forever After ( released in May 2010 ) , as an ogre leader named Brogan . Also that year , he appeared as an FBI agent in The Town ( 2010 ) , with Ben Affleck ; after receiving " about 40 scripts that were all set in the 60s , or had me playing advertising guys " , Hamm was pleased that the film offered a role " the opposite to Don Draper " . The feature received generally favorable reviews and earned $ 144 million worldwide . His next acting role was as defense attorney Jake Ehrlich in the independent drama Howl , based on Allen Ginsberg 's eponymous 1956 poem . On December 12 , 2010 , Hamm made a guest appearance as an FBI supervisor on Fox 's animated series The Simpsons . Returning to film , he appeared in Zack Snyder 's action-fantasy movie Sucker Punch ( 2011 ) , as the character High Roller , and the doctor . He also had a supporting role in the comedy Bridesmaids as Kristen Wiig 's " rude and arrogant sex buddy " . Hamm was next seen in the independent feature Friends with Kids ( 2011 ) , which he produced alongside his then-partner Jennifer Westfeldt ; the story centers around a group of friends whose lives are changed as the couples in the group begin to have children .

He has a recurring role in the sitcom The Increasingly Poor Decisions of Todd Margaret , as the servant of sociopathic billionaire Dave Mountford ( Blake Harrison ) . The role is later revealed to , in fact , be a fictionalized version of Hamm complaining that being made into Dave 's servant has required him to be written out of four episodes of Mad Men . Hamm hosted the 21st ESPYS Awards on July 17 , 2013 and played sports agent J.B. Bernstein in Disney 's sports drama Million Dollar Arm the following year . Hamm starred alongside Daniel Radcliffe in the Ovation television dark comedy A Young Doctor 's Notebook , playing an older version of Radcliffe 's character , from December 2012 to December 2013 . He had a number of roles in 2015 , in the comedy shows Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt and Wet Hot American Summer : First Day of Camp , as well as the animated comedy Minions , as the voice of Herb Overkill . Minions was a major box office success ; despite mixed reviews , it grossed a total of over $ 1 billion worldwide . Hamm filmed the upcoming action comedy Keeping Up with the Joneses in the spring of 2015 , which also stars Zach Galifianakis and Gal Gadot and will be released in October 2016 after being pushed back seven months . His other upcoming film roles include the drama Aardvark , science fiction film Marjorie Prime ( both 2016 ) , and Edgar Wright 's comedy crime film Baby Driver in 2017 .

In 1997 , Hamm began a relationship with actress and screenwriter Jennifer Westfeldt . They jointly own homes in Los Angeles and the Upper West Side in New York . In an interview discussion about his relationship with Westfeldt , Hamm said : " We may not have a piece of paper that says we 're husband and wife , but after 10 years , Jennifer is more than just a girlfriend . What we have is much deeper and we both know that . To me , people [ should ] get married when they 're ready to have kids , which I 'm not ruling out . " Along with Westfeldt , Hamm has appeared in Gap-related campaign advertisements . In April 2009 , Hamm and Westfeldt formed their own production company , Points West Pictures . Hamm and Westfeldt are advocates of animal rescue and have adopted a mixed breed dog named Cora from the Much Love Animal Shelter in California . In September 2015 , Hamm and Westfeldt announced they were ending their relationship . Although his role as Don Draper required Hamm to smoke , he gave up smoking when he was 24 . On set he does not smoke actual cigarettes , but rather herbal cigarettes that do not contain tobacco or nicotine .

Hamm is an avid golfer and tennis player , and a devoted fan of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) team the St. Louis Blues ' ; he 's even appeared in two television spots advertising for the team . He is also a fan of the Major League Baseball ( MLB ) team the St. Louis Cardinals ' , and narrated the official highlight film for the 2011 World Series , which the Cardinals won . He is a cricket fan , too , having been introduced to the sport by Daniel Radcliffe when filming A Young Doctor 's Notebook .

USS Yancey ( AKA-93 / LKA-93 ) was an Andromeda-class attack cargo ship built by the Moore Dry Dock Company of Oakland , California for the United States Navy during World War II . The ship was named in honor of Yancey County , North Carolina . Yancey 's keel was laid in May 1944 , and the ship was launched in July , and commissioned in October . The ship operated in the Pacific during the war and was a participant in the amphibious landings at Iwo Jima in February 1945 and Okinawa in April . After Japan 's surrender in August , Yancey was in Tokyo Bay during the signing of the Japanese Instrument of Surrender on 2 September . The ship made voyages delivering troops for the occupation of Japan before returning to the United States in January 1946 . After spending most of the next year on the east coast , Yancey was ordered back into the Pacific in November , and took part in Operation Highjump , a Navy expedition to Antarctica in January 1947 ; Yancey Glacier was named in the ship 's honor . After spending most of the next decade in duties in the Western Pacific , Yancey was decommissioned in March 1958 and placed in reserve at Olympia , Washington . Yancey was reactivated in the aftermath of the Berlin Crisis of 1961 and recommissioned in November . During the October 1962 Cuban Missile Crisis she sailed in support of the U.S. blockade of Cuba , and during the April 1965 U.S. intervention in the Dominican Republic she carried almost a quarter of all of the evacuees from Santo Domingo . In January 1970 , Yancey was blown by a storm into the Chesapeake Bay Bridge-Tunnel which closed the structure for several weeks .

Yancey was laid down under a Maritime Commission contract ( MC hull 1193 ) on 22 May 1944 by the Moore Dry Dock Company at Oakland , California . The ship was launched on 8 July 1944 and was sponsored by Miss Beverly Bartlett . As built , Yancey was just over 459 feet ( 140 m ) long and 63 feet ( 19 m ) abeam . When fully loaded she had a displacement of 13,910 long tons ( 14,130 t ) and drew a little more than 26 feet ( 7.9 m ) . She was powered by a single steam turbine capable of generating 6,000 shaft horsepower ( 4,500 kW ) , and attained a top speed of 16.5 knots ( 30.6 km / h ) during her trials . Yancey was equipped to carry eight LCMs ( " Landing Craft Mechanized " ) , which were designed to land vehicles in amphibious landings ; one LCP ( L ) ( " Landing Craft , Personnel ( Large ) " ) ; and fifteen LCVPs ( " Landing Craft , Vehicle , Personnel " ) , or Higgins boats . Yancey was outfitted with primarily defensive weapons : one 5-inch ( 130 mm ) / 38 caliber dual-purpose gun mount , ; four twin 40-millimeter ( 1.6 in ) anti-aircraft ( AA ) gun mounts ; and sixteen 20-millimeter ( 0.79 in ) AA gun mounts .

The ship was commissioned as USS Yancey ( AKA-93 ) on 11 October 1944 under the command of Commander Edward R. Rice , USNR . After fitting out at San Francisco , California , Yancey received her boat group of 26 landing craft and conducted a shakedown cruise out of San Pedro , California . After post-shakedown alterations and repairs at San Diego , California , she sailed for San Francisco to load cargo from 18 to 24 November . Yancey sailed for Pearl Harbor the next day , and was assigned to Transport Division ( TransDiv ) 47 , Transport Squadron ( TransRon ) 16 upon her arrival on 2 December .

After remaining at Pearl Harbor until 27 January 1945 , Yancey departed for the Marianas with elements and cargo of the 5th Marine Division as part of Task Group ( TG ) 51.12 in support of the invasion of Iwo Jima . After stops for fuel and supplies at Eniwetok and invasion rehearsals at Tinian , the ship arrived off Iwo Jima at 06 : 24 on 19 February , D-day for the initial landing . During almost continuous operations for the first four days of the battle , Yancey only lost two landing craft ( LCVPs ) : one to enemy mortar fire , and another to heavy surf . Yancey received minor damage when she collided with Pensacola while transferring 8-inch ( 200 mm ) ammunition to the heavy cruiser . On 29 February , after the tactical situation ashore had improved sufficiently , Yancey anchored off " Red " beach to unload her general cargo . During this time the ship was hit by one long-range mortar shell , but suffered no casualties among her crew . Slowed by nightly air raids , and high surf that required cargo to be offloaded to LSTs , LSMs , and LCTs , Yancey completed her unloading on 2 March . The cargo ship sailed with three other transports and a pair of screening destroyers to Saipan and then to Espiritu Santo , where she rejoined her TransRon 16 squadron mates in embarking the 27th Infantry Division .

Yancey sailed on 25 March as a part of TG 51.3 , the designated " mobile reserve " for the invasion of Okinawa . As the group headed for a planned stop in the Carolines , Yancey took a disabled LSM under tow and delivered the vessel to Ulithi . TransDiv 47 was detached from TG 51.3 and arrived off Kerama Retto on 9 April , eight days after the battle had commenced . After receiving her orders , Yancey anchored off the Hagushi beaches on the 12th . During her four days of unloading , the crew was hampered by Japanese air raids and delayed — according to the ship 's commander — over 15 hours because of the attacks . Yancey 's number four 40 millimetres ( 1.6 in ) mount claimed a " sure assist " on a Nakajima Ki-43 " Oscar " fighter that crashed 3,000 yards ( 2,700 m ) from the ship . Despite delays caused by the air attacks , Yancey was the first attack cargo ship of her group to finish unloading , and sailed independently for the Marianas on the 16th . During her stay off the Okinawa beaches , the ship lost none of her boats and suffered three casualties : two men were wounded by shrapnel , and another broke an arm .

After a short rest-and-recreation stop at Guam , Yancey rejoined her squadron at Ultihi and underwent boiler repairs and intensive antiaircraft training ; her crew won numerous five-case " beer prizes " for shooting down target sleeves . Getting underway again on 8 May , Yancey spent the next two months shuttling men and materiel from rear area bases , calling at Manus in the Admiralty Islands ; Finschhafen , New Guinea ; Tulagi ; Hollandia , Dutch New Guinea ; and finally Guiuan , on the island of Samar , in the Philippines . She rejoined TransDiv 47 , TransRon 16 , at San Pedro Bay , Leyte Gulf , on 16 July and sailed with the rest of the division to Iloilo , on the island of Panay , to conduct amphibious training exercises with the United States Army 's 43rd Infantry Division . Yancey was in the Philippines when word of the Japanese surrender came in on 15 August . TransDiv 47 took on provisions at Iloilo after training exercises for the planned invasion of Japan were cancelled ; after arriving at Batangas , Luzon , Philippines , she embarked elements of the 1st Cavalry Division slated for the occupation of Japan .

After completing the loading process on 23 August , Yancey weighed anchor on the 25th as a member of Task Force ( TF ) 33 . However , the ships had to turn back because of a tropical storm in the vicinity . The typhoon delayed the task force for only a day , as the ships weathered the fringes of the storm at Subic Bay before again getting underway soon thereafter . Yancey entered Tokyo Bay on the morning of 2 September , the day Japan signed the formal articles of surrender on the deck of the battleship Missouri anchored there . Shortly after the conclusion of those ceremonies , the attack cargo ship headed into Yokohama harbor , the third ship in her squadron to enter that port and the first to start unloading . The ship completed her unloading in 19 hours and then proceeded to an anchorage off Yokohama .

Yancey 's squadron departed on 4 September 1945 and steamed via Leyte Gulf to Zamboanga . There , they commenced loading elements of the Army 's 41st Infantry Division from 16 to 18 September . Yancey and her sisters shifted soon thereafter to Bugo , Mindanao , where she picked up Army LCMs . After TG 54.28 had assembled in Leyte Gulf on 21 September , the group — which included Yancey — sailed for Japan 's Inland Sea . Due to minesweeping difficulties , however , the landings scheduled for the Kure – Hiroshima area were postponed ; and the task group sailed instead for Buckner Bay , Okinawa . On 28 September , the ship put to sea to evade another typhoon . On 1 October , she returned and anchored in Buckner Bay . Two days later , Yancey again headed for Japanese waters and entered Bungo Suido on the 5th , beginning the long , difficult passage up the Inland Sea along the channel swept through the minefields . The next morning — after spending the night anchored in the cleared channel — Yancey headed for Hiro Wan , where the landings were made . The ship completed her unloading in 48 hours . On 9 October , she was detached from TransRon 16 and reported to CinCPac for assignment . The following day , Yancey rode out a third typhoon with 130 fathoms ( 240 m ) of chain on deck , a second anchor ready to go , and steam at the throttle .

The attack cargo ship , remaining behind when the rest of her squadron was sent back to the United States on 11 October , headed instead to Haiphong , French Indochina to embark Chinese troops . After an 11-day delay , 1,027 officers and men of the 471st Regiment , 62nd Chinese Army — and one interpreter — boarded the American vessel for passage to Takao , Formosa . After arrival , the Chinese troops had all been offloaded by 17 : 00 on 17 November . After sailing to Manila , Yancey received orders to proceed to the United States on 25 November , one year to the day she had sailed from San Francisco . Yancey took on a capacity load of Army and Navy men returning to the United States for discharge and departed Manila harbor on 27 November . During the voyage , she flew a 310-foot ( 94 m ) " homeward-bound pennant " adorned with 27 stars . After a stop at Pearl Harbor for boiler repairs and to offload her Army passengers , Yancey sailed for Balboa , Panama Canal Zone , reaching there on the last day of the year ; she was the last ship to transit the Panama Canal in 1945 . On 6 January 1946 , Yancey cleared Cristobal , Canal Zone , bound for Louisiana . After a brief stop at New Orleans , the attack cargo ship proceeded on , via Jacksonville , Florida , to Norfolk , where she arrived on 29 January . Less than a month later , on 27 February , Yancey sailed farther north and reached the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard the following day .

Over the next few months , Yancey underwent a regular overhaul there and then operated off the eastern seaboard and into the western Atlantic . During that time , she called at Bayonne , New Jersey ; Bermuda ; San Juan , Puerto Rico ; Guantanamo Bay , Cuba ; Balboa , Canal Zone ; Jacksonville , Florida ; and made return calls at Norfolk , Bayonne , and Bermuda . In addition , the ship visited the New York Naval Shipyard and Davisville , Rhode Island , before being assigned tentatively to TF 68 effective on 9 November .

In compliance with her new orders , Yancey proceeded back to the west coast , sailing via Cristobal and the Panama Canal . After arriving at San Pedro , California , Yancey reported for duty with TF 68 and was reassigned to the Pacific Fleets Service Force and homeported at San Francisco , on 11 November . The next day , she shifted to Port Hueneme , California , where she began loading cargo for Operation Highjump , the U.S. Navy expedition to Antarctica . Departing Port Hueneme on 2 December , Yancey pressed southward , headed for Antarctica , and spent Christmas at sea . Two days later , she saw her first icebergs — visible evidence that she was entering the polar latitudes . She sighted the northern limit of the Antarctic pack ice on the 28th and spent the next two days investigating ice conditions . She fueled from USS Canisteo 10 nautical miles ( 19 km ) south of Scott Island , Antarctica , purportedly becoming the first ship to conduct an underway refueling below the Antarctic Circle . After threading her way through the pack ice over the ensuing weeks , Yancey finally arrived at Bay of Whales , Antarctica , mooring at the shelf ice on 18 January 1947 . Subsequently departing that " port " on 6 February for the area to the north of the ice floes , the attack cargo ship entered the pack ice on the 9th . Over the next three days , she pressed through the floes that extended for a width of almost 275 nautical miles ( 509 km ) .

On 13 February , Yancey joined TU 68.1.2 which also included the Coast Guard icebreaker , Northwind , towing the attack cargo ship Merrick . Within a week , the ships were riding out a fierce storm that justified — at least to Yancey sailors — the Antarctic 's title as " The World 's Stormiest Sea " . Yancey reached Port Chalmers , New Zealand , on 22 February and departed that port on 5 March , bound for Samoa . Subsequently departing Pago Pago on 27 March bound for Hawaii with YTL-153 in tow , the attack cargo ship arrived at Pearl Harbor on 14 April . She soon got underway for the west coast of the United States and reached Port Hueneme on 2 May 1947 . There , Yancey disembarked a unit of a construction battalion ( " Seabees " ) and discharged TF 68 cargo . Her duty with TF 68 thus completed on 15 May , Yancey reported for duty with Service Division ( ServDiv ) 12 . Shortly thereafter , Yancey shifted to San Pedro before heading to Terminal Island , California , for restricted availability on 20 May . After that period of repairs and alterations , Yancey returned to Port Hueneme to load cargo earmarked for shipment to Pearl Harbor and Guam .

Over the next decade , Yancey operated between west coast ports and advanced bases in the Western Pacific ( WestPac ) , including ports in Japan , Korea , and the Philippines . During that period , she also supported United Nations ( UN ) actions in Korea , operating in support of the initial attempts to fight the North Korean advance ; in the first UN counteroffensives in early 1951 ; and in the final phases of activity that preceded the armistice in the summer of 1953 . Yancey was awarded three battle stars for her Korean War service . In December 1957 , after having served continuously since 1944 , Yancey was deactivated at San Francisco . She was placed out of commission in March 1958 , and entered the Reserve Fleet at Olympia , Washington , on 11 October 1960 .

In the aftermath of the Berlin Crisis of 1961 , Yancey was reactivated as part of President John F. Kennedy 's bid to build up the U.S. Navy . On 17 November 1961 , Yancey was recommissioned at Portland , Oregon , with Captain Gordon R. Keating in command . The ship departed from San Diego on 12 January 1962 and reached Norfolk , her new assigned home port , on 2 February , there becoming the newest member of Amphibious Squadron ( PhibRon ) 12 . Over the next months , Yancey took part in a variety of exercises and maneuvers . Yancey participated in Operation Phiblex in the spring of 1962 , operating off Roosevelt Roads and Vieques , Puerto Rico . She later paid a port call at Charlotte Amalie , St. Thomas , Virgin Islands , before she returned to Roosevelt Roads and reloaded equipment and embarked Marines slated to return to Morehead City , North Carolina . Subsequently returning to Norfolk on 2 May , Yancey touched briefly at Charleston , South Carolina , to take on additional landing craft before returning to the Tidewater region to spend the remainder of May . Subsequently visiting Boston , and Rockland , Maine , Yancey participated in amphibious boat exercises at Provincetown , Massachusetts , before she got underway on 24 July for Davisville , Rhode Island . There , she loaded a Seabee unit and their equipment and headed eastward , bound for Rota , Spain . Offloading one Seabee unit and onloading another , Yancey then paused briefly at Gibraltar before touching at Lisbon on the return leg of her voyage to the United States . Disembarking the seabees and unloading their equipment at Davisville , Yancey headed back to Norfolk , reaching her homeport on 18 August 1962 .

On 23 October 1962 , President Kennedy ordered a naval quarantine of Cuba in response to the presence of Soviet missiles on the soil of that island nation . Yancey sortied in support of the American operations in the Caribbean , and remained on station until the missiles were removed and tensions were relaxed . Over the next few years , Yancey made regular deployments to the Mediterranean to take part in joint exercises with NATO forces . In April 1965 , Yancey was ordered to the Dominican Republic to support Operation Power Pack , the code name for the United States ' intervention in the Dominican Republic . The attack cargo ship arrived at Santo Domingo , the capital city , on 30 April . Yancey loaded nearly 600 evacuees from 21 nations . Among those on board the ship were the daughter of William Tapley Bennett Jr . , the United States Ambassador to the Dominican Republic ; the Belgian Ambassador to the Dominican Republic ; sixteen nuns from the Dominican Order ; and several large families . Yancey 's officers and crew vacated their quarters to allow room for female passengers and children , and many slept on the decks of the ship during the passage to San Juan , Puerto Rico . One of the passengers gave birth during the short trip , and gave her son the middle name of Yancey in honor of the ship .

After debarking her passengers at San Juan on 1 May , the ship took on supplies needed by the American ground forces in Santo Domingo : gasoline , oil , and ammunition . She docked in Santo Domingo on 2 May and exchanged her cargo for 450 more evacuees to be taken to San Juan . In all , Yancey carried almost a quarter of those fleeing the Dominican Republic . She returned to Norfolk soon thereafter , and resumed her role of training and cruising off the eastern seaboard and into the Caribbean basin . On 1 January 1969 , Yancey was redesignated as LKA-93 .

Toward the end of her career , Yancey made headlines . Yancey was at anchor near one stretch of the Chesapeake Bay Bridge-Tunnel near Norfolk on 21 January 1970 . Driven by the winds in a snowy gale that gusted up to 50 miles per hour ( 80 km / h ) , Yancey dragged her anchors and hit the bridge , knocking it out of service for several weeks . The Navy started a free shuttle service for commuters that normally used the route , using helicopters and LCUs . Fortunately , there were no vehicles on the bridge at the time of the collision , and no one was injured . Sources do not report on any damage to Yancey from the incident , but any damages suffered must have been easily repaired , because the ship deployed to the Mediterranean a few months later . After a return to the United States in mid-1970 , Yancey entered inactive status at Norfolk on 1 October of that year . The ship was decommissioned at Norfolk on 20 January 1971 , and entered the James River berthing area of the National Defense Reserve Fleet . Yancey was stricken from the Naval Vessel Register on 1 January 1977 . The vessel remained in the James River fleet until 16 August 1984 when she was withdrawn to be stripped of useful equipment by the U.S. Navy . She re-entered the fleet one year later , on 28 August 1985 , but was withdrawn for the final time on 15 December 1989 to be prepared for sinking as an artificial reef .

The Leopard 2E or Leopard 2A6E ( E stands for España , Spanish for Spain ) is a variant of the German Leopard 2 main battle tank , tailored to the requirements of the Spanish army , which acquired it as part of an armament modernization program named Programa Coraza , or Program Breastplate . The acquisition program for the Leopard 2E began in 1994 , five years after the cancellation of the Lince tank program that culminated in an agreement to transfer 108 Leopard 2A4s to the Spanish army in 1998 and started the local production of the Leopard 2E in December 2003 . Despite postponement of production owing to the 2003 merger between Santa Bárbara Sistemas and General Dynamics , and continued fabrication issues between 2006 and 2007 , 219 Leopard 2Es have been delivered to the Spanish army . The Leopard 2E is a major improvement over the M60 Patton tank , which it replaced in Spain 's mechanized and armored units . Its development represented a total of 2.6 million man-hours worth of work , 9,600 of them in Germany , at a total cost of 2.4 billion euros . This makes it one of the most expensive Leopard 2s built . Indigenous production amounted to 60 % and the vehicles were assembled locally at Sevilla by Santa Bárbara Sistemas . It has thicker armor on the turret and glacis plate than the German Leopard 2A6 , and uses a Spanish-designed tank command and control system , similar to the one fitted in German Leopard 2s . The Leopard 2E is expected to remain in service until 2025 .

By 1987 , the Spanish army was equipped with 299 French-designed AMX-30Es , assembled by Santa Bárbara Sistemas , and 552 American M47 and M48 Patton tanks . The AMX-30Es were put into service in 1970 , while the latter went into service in the mid-1950s . Although Spain 's M47s and M48s were modernized to M47Es and M48Es , bringing them to near equivalence with the M60 Patton tank , the Spanish army considered them antiquated . In 1984 , when deciding to replace its Patton tanks , the Spanish government declared its intention to produce a whole new main battle tank locally , since known as the Lince . Five companies expressed interest in bidding , including Krauss-Maffei in a partnership with Santa Bárbara Sistemas , GIAT with what became the Leclerc , General Dynamics with the M1 Abrams and Vickers with the Valiant . While the M1 Abrams and Valiant bids were not accepted , the bidding continued until 1989 when it was officially canceled . Instead , the Spanish government opted to replace its older Patton tanks with American M60 Patton tanks retired from Central Europe in accordance with the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe . Although the Spanish army was originally to receive 532 M60 and M60A1 tanks , only 260 M60A3s were ultimately delivered , of which 244 were put into active service in the army . In the late 1980s the Spanish Ministry of Defense approved a modernization program for 150 of its AMX-30Es and a reconstruction program for the remaining 149 vehicles of this type , restoring them to their original condition . However , neither the M60s nor the AMX-30s were a considerable improvement over Spain 's fleet of M47 and M48 Patton tanks .

In March 1994 , the Spanish Ministry of Defense created Programa Coraza 2000 ( Program Breastplate 2000 ) , which focused on the procurement and integration of new armament for the Spanish army 's modernization . The program included the Leopard 2E and the Pizarro infantry combat vehicle , as well as the Eurocopter Tiger attack helicopter . The program 's scope extended to the integration of 108 Leopard 2A4s , which were leased to Spain in late 1995 . Apart from procurement , Programa Coraza was meant to prepare the Spanish army logistically for the introduction of new matériel .

A memorandum of understanding was signed on 9 June 1995 between the German and Spanish governments , setting the foundations for an acquisition of up to 308 brand-new Leopard 2Es . These were to be assembled in Spain by Santa Bárbara Sistemas , with 60 – 70 percent of the components manufactured by Spanish companies , and production taking place between 1998 and 2003 . Furthermore , the German government agreed to lend the Spanish army 108 Leopard 2A4s for training purposes for a period of five years . These vehicles were delivered between November 1995 and June 1996 . In 1998 , Spain agreed to procure the ceded Leopard 2A4s and reduce production of the brand-new Leopard 2E to 219 vehicles . In 2005 it was declared that the 108 Leopard 2A4s were to cost Spain just € 16.9m , to be paid by 2016 . The Leopard 2A4s equipped X and XI Mechanized Infantry Brigade , which at the time formed part of Eurocorps . As production of the Leopard 2E began and these units received Leopard 2Es , their Leopard 2A4s re-equipped the Alcántara Armored Cavalry Regiment , based in Melilla . Spain 's Leopard 2E is based on the Leopard 2A6 , and incorporates the add-on wedge armor of the Leopard 2A5 on the turret . This armor maximizes the armor depth that a kinetic energy penetrator must travel through to enter the internal volume of the turret . Like the Swedish Leopard 2S ( Strv 122 ) , the Leopard 2E has increased armor thickness on the hull 's glacis plate , the turret frontal arc and the turret roof , bringing the vehicle 's weight close to 63 tonnes ( 69.4 tons ) . The vehicle 's protection is augmented by the added armor that is built into the tank during the manufacturing process , as opposed to being added on after assembly as is the case for German Leopard 2A5s and 2A6s . As a consequence , the Leopard 2E is one of the best-protected Leopard 2s in service .

The tank is armed with Rheinmetall 's 120-millimeter ( 4.7 in ) L / 55 tank-gun , and is capable of adopting a 140-millimeter ( 5.5 in ) gun . Both the tank commander and gunner have identical second generation thermal viewers , derived from those of the TOW 2B Light Launcher System . These are integrated into the tank by Indra and Rheinmetall Defense Electronics . Indra provides the tank 's command and control system , called the Leopard Information and Command Equipment ( LINCE ) , based on the Swedish and German Integrierte Führungssysteme ( IFIS ) . Other differences between the Spanish Leopard 2E and other Leopard 2A6s include an auxiliary power unit , manufactured by SAPA , an air conditioning system and new rubber pads for the vehicle 's tracks to increase their lifespan on the irregular Spanish terrain . About 60 % of each Leopard 2E was manufactured in Spain , as opposed to 30 % for the Swedish Leopard 2S , for example . Although the final contract for the production of Spanish Leopard 2Es was signed in 1998 , calling for a production rate of four tanks per month , the first Leopard 2Es were not manufactured until late 2003 . This was largely due to the merging of Santa Bárbara Sistemas with General Dynamics , and Krauss-Maffei 's reservations regarding the sharing of the Leopard 2 's technology with a rival company manufacturer of the M1 Abrams . Krauss-Maffei delivered 30 Leopard 2Es between 2003 and 2006 . Production by Santa Bárbara Sistemas was delayed after assembly had begun ; between January and November 2007 , for example , only three of the 43 Leopard 2Es to be delivered to the Spanish army were actually delivered — with 15 more being delivered before the end of the year to make up for the earlier production problems . By 1 July 2006 the Spanish army had received 48 Leopard 2Es and nine Büffel armored recovery vehicles , which was only a quarter of those contracted . Production of the Leopard 2E was planned to end by 2007 but was extended into 2008 .

The Spanish army replaced its M60 Patton tanks and AMX-30s with the Leopard 2 between 1995 and 2008 , a considerable improvement in capability . Previously , the Spanish army was equipped with M47 and M48 Patton tanks , which were upgraded to near M60 equivalency during the late 1970s and during the 1980s . Both the Leopard 2A4 and Leopard 2E sport a much more powerful gun than the AMX-30 and M60 tanks . The Leopard 2 's 1,500 horsepower ( 1,110 kW ) engine provides greater power than the M60A3 's 750 horsepower ( 559.27 kW ) and the AMX-30EM2 's 850 horsepower ( 633.84 kW ) engines . On the other hand , the Leopard 2 carries fewer , but larger rounds than the M60A3 .

In March 1944 , a force of three Imperial Japanese Navy ( IJN ) heavy cruisers raided Allied shipping in the Indian Ocean . The cruisers departed Japanese-held territory on 1 March with the support of other IJN vessels and aircraft . On 9 March , they encountered and sank the British steamer Behar , with the heavy cruiser Tone picking up over 100 survivors . Fearing detection , the Japanese force subsequently returned to the Netherlands East Indies ( NEI ) , arriving on 16 March . Two days later , most of Behar 's crew and passengers were murdered on board Tone . Following the war the commander of the raid , Rear Admiral Naomasa Sakonju , was executed for this war crime and Tone 's captain Haruo Mayuzumi ( ja : 黛治夫 ) was sentenced to seven years imprisonment .

In February 1944 , the Japanese Combined Fleet withdrew from its base at Truk in the Central Pacific to Palau and Singapore . The appearance of a powerful Japanese naval force at Singapore concerned the Allies , as it was feared that these ships could potentially conduct raids in the Indian Ocean and against Western Australia . In response , the Allies strengthened their naval and air forces in the area by transferring two British light cruisers from the Atlantic and Mediterranean as well as several U.S. Navy warships from the Pacific . The number of air units in Ceylon and the Bay of Bengal region was also increased . Admiral James Somerville , the commander of the British Eastern Fleet , feared that the Japanese would repeat their devastating Indian Ocean raid of early 1942 , and on 25 February requested permission to withdraw his fleet from its base at Trincomalee so that it was not at risk from the larger Japanese force . The Admiralty rejected this request , and directed that the fleet should remain at Trincomalee unless it was threatened by a superior Japanese force as its withdrawal would affect morale and harm Britain 's prestige in the region . It was agreed , however , that the Eastern Fleet should not engage superior Japanese forces and could withdraw if Somerville judged this necessary .

In late February , Vice-Admiral Shiro Takasu — the Commander in Chief , Southwest Area Fleet — ordered the heavy cruisers Aoba , Chikuma , and Tone to raid Allied shipping on the main route between Aden and Fremantle . This force was commanded by Vice Admiral Naomasa Sakonju on board Aoba . In his instructions to Sakonju , Vice Admiral Takasu directed that if the force captured Allied merchant seamen all prisoners , other than radio operators and other personnel who might possess useful information , were to be killed . Sakonju did not question this order . The Japanese cruisers embarked specialised boarding parties for this operation as it was hoped that they could capture merchant ships to alleviate Japan 's shipping shortage .

The three Japanese heavy cruisers departed from the Combined Fleet 's anchorage in the Lingga Islands on 27 February . The light cruisers Kinu and Ōi and three destroyers escorted the force through the Sunda Strait on 1 March . The raiders were supported by 10 medium bombers and three or four seaplanes based in Sumatra and west Java which conducted patrols in the direction of Ceylon . Three or four submarines from the 8th Flotilla also monitored Allied shipping movements near Ceylon , the Maldive Islands and Chagos Archipelago . The Allies did not detect the Japanese force 's departure , but reinforced their forces in Western Australia after an American submarine encountered Kinu and Ōi operating near the Lombok Strait on 6 March . The presence of these ships was taken to indicate that a hostile force had possibly been dispatched into the Indian Ocean . On 8 March , Somerville directed all Allied ships travelling between 80 and 100 ° east to divert to the south or west . After leaving the Sunda Strait , the Japanese heavy cruisers sailed south-west for the main route between Aden and Fremantle . The ships were spread 50 km ( 27 nmi ; 50 km ) by day and 20 km ( 11 nmi ; 12 mi ) by night and maintained radio silence . On the morning of 9 March , they encountered the 6,100 long tons ( 6,200 t ) British steamer Behar at 20 ° 32 ′ S 87 ° 10 ′ E , about midway between Fremantle and Colombo . The ship was travelling from Fremantle to Bombay as part of a voyage between Newcastle , New South Wales and the United Kingdom carrying a cargo of zinc .

Upon sighting the Japanese ships , Behar 's master , Captain Maurice Symons , ordered that his radio operator transmit the " RRR " code in order to notify other ships and Allied bases that the merchant ship was being attacked by surface raiders . Tone 's signals room picked up this message , and the cruiser opened fire on Behar . The Japanese cruiser did not attempt to capture the steamer , as it was judged too risky to sail her back to Japanese territory . Tone 's gunners scored hits on Behar 's prow and stern which killed three of her crew . Five minutes after the sighting , Behar 's crew and passengers abandoned ship . The steamer sank shortly afterwards and either 104 or 108 survivors were rescued by Tone . ( I ) The Behar survivors were maltreated by members of Tone 's crew . Japanese sailors forced the survivors to hand over all their personal belongings of any value , and then used ropes to tie the survivors in painful positions which caused them to have difficultly breathing . The merchant ship 's chief officer was beaten after he complained that treating civilians in such a way violated the Geneva Convention . However , the female survivors later had their ropes removed . When the survivors were taken below decks to be imprisoned they were badly beaten by Japanese sailors .

Following the attack , Sakonju judged that it was too dangerous to continue the raid as Behar 's distress message may have alerted the Allies to his force 's presence . Accordingly , the Japanese turned back for the NEI that day . The heavy cruisers were again escorted through the Sunda Strait by Kinu , Ōi and five destroyers , and arrived back at the NEI on 15 March . During this time , the Behar survivors were held in a small and extremely hot store room on board Tone , and were given little access to food and water , sanitary facilities and exercise . Despite Sakonju 's fears , the Allies were not immediately aware of the attack on Behar . Her distress signal had been picked up by only a single Allied merchant ship , which did not report it until she arrived at Fremantle on 17 March . In the meantime , Somerville had decided on 16 March that surface raiders no longer posed a threat to shipping in the Indian Ocean and allowed Allied vessels to resume their normal routing .

Shortly after the Behar survivors were rescued , Sakonju sent a radio message to Tone 's commanding officer , Captain Haruo Mayuzumi , reprimanding him for taking non-essential personnel prisoner and not capturing the merchant ship . In this message Sakonju ordered that the survivors be killed . Mayuzumi was unwilling to so , however , as he felt that this would violate his Christian religious beliefs . His executive officer , Commander Junsuke Mii , also opposed killing the prisoners . Mayuzumi radioed a request to Sakonju that the prisoners be put ashore , but this was rejected . The captain then visited Aoba to argue his case , but Sakonju remained unmoved and told Mayuzumi to " obey my orders " . Despite his misgivings , Mayuzumi decided to kill the prisoners . On 15 March the three heavy cruisers anchored at Tanjung Priok near Java . Following this , either 15 or 36 survivors were transferred to Aoba . ( II ) The party sent to Aoba included Symonds , the Behar 's chief officer and several of the senior officers as well as both of the ship 's female passengers . All of this group were later landed at Tanjung Priok .

Aoba , Chikuma and Tone arrived at Singapore on 25 March . The Indian Ocean raid was the last operation conducted by Axis surface raiders during World War II . As a result , Behar was the final Allied merchant ship to be sunk by surface raiders during the war . The raid is notable chiefly for the Behar massacre ; it achieved little militarily . The raid failed to disrupt Allied traffic in the region as the diversions ordered by Somerville on 8 March were rescinded by the 16th . The only tangible result was the sinking of one ship , the Behar ; by contrast Axis submarines sank three ships in the Indian Ocean during the same period . The raid was also less successful than comparable raids by surface ships in the region , such as that of the Admiral Scheer in 1941 . The Japanese made no attempt to capitalize on their numerical superiority in the region and by the end of the month it had vanished ; reinforcements to the Eastern Fleet enabled Somerville to start a series of carrier raids , commencing with the attack on Sabang on 19 April 1944 . The party of Behar survivors who had been landed at Tanjung Priok were initially interred in prisoner of war camps in Java ; the male prisoners were sent to a camp near Batavia and the women were held in a female camp nearby . After all the members of the group had been interrogated , the survivors were separated and sent to other camps in Java or to work as slave labourers in Japan . All the survivors were freed after the end of the war in August 1945 .

Geneforge is the first video game in the Geneforge series of role-playing video games created by Spiderweb Software . Players assume the role of an apprentice Shaper , a sect of mages who can create living creatures through force of will . The apprentice is cast away on Sucia , an island abandoned by the sect 200 years prior . The island contains groups of the Shapers ' creations , who have formed their own ideologies regarding their creators in the intervening years . The primary motivation of the player is to escape the island and , in the process , deal with the forces working to steal the Shaper secrets abandoned on Sucia Isle . The game 's setting stemmed from the idea of players being able to create and control a group of obedient creatures . The Shapers and the world of Geneforge were the result of Vogel imagining how would a being possess such power and how would they use it . The game 's setting , a mixture of science fiction and fantasy , differs from the pure science fiction setting the game had been envisioned as . Vogel had difficulties balancing gameplay with the powerful directed-energy weapons players would expect to use in a science fiction game . Sales exceeded the developer 's expectations , despite fears that the departure from Spiderweb 's Avernum series would deter players . Geneforge received a positive reception from reviewers , despite the quality of the graphics being rated as poor and the game containing one piece of music , the title theme . The plot and setting were praised by reviewers for uniqueness and detail .

Players create a character and travel around Sucia Island , a location Barred to the members of the player character 's sect . Whilst searching for a way off the island , the game 's ultimate goal , players can form alliances with the island 's inhabitants and complete quests through combat or other means . Geneforge is played in 45 ° axonometric perspective , movement through the game 's environs is real-time but switches to turn-based combat in the game 's playing field . The game world is divided up into 77 areas accessible through a world map . The first two areas serve as the game 's tutorial ; introducing players to navigation , controls and shaping creations . Clearing areas by defeating guardians or successfully traversing the terrain allows players to bypass those areas via the world map , reducing travelling time . The game has an always-visible auto-map , which begins each area completely darkened , and is revealed as the player explores . As the player 's party performs tasks or defeats enemies they receive experience , leading to increased levels and additional skill points . The player character 's skill points can be used to increase their statistics or to improve their aptitude in one of the fifteen available skills . Canisters which increase skills or add new abilities are scattered throughout the game .

Before starting the game , players choose from three basic character classes , each of which has a particular playing style . Guardians are fighters who excel in standard combat skills , especially hand-to-hand fighting . They are capable of shaping creations , but have little affinity for magic . Agents excel in spell casting and are capable of hand-to-hand combat , but have poor shaping skills . The Shaper is a summoner , capable of creating living creatures by using their own life essence . Shapers rely on their creations for protection . Every character class is referred to as " Shaper " in-game . Most objectives in the game must be completed via combat or diplomacy , but players can also use subterfuge to pass obstacles . All three character classes can use different methods , depending on which skills they are adept in . Some areas are difficult to pass , and some tasks are difficult to complete , unless the player character is a certain class . Each character class has a different combat style , the combat skills they are associated with cost fewer skill points to increase . Essence is used for both creating creatures and casting spells ; the number , type and strength of creations is limited by the player 's essence capacity . For instance , if a character with 70 maximum essence summons a creature which costs 20 essence , their maximum essence is reduced to 50 until the creation is destroyed , either through combat or being absorbed by the Shaper to regain essence . A total of 18 different creations are featured in the game , with larger and more powerful creatures costing more essence to create . The types and strengths of creations can be altered depending on the player 's combat style . Creations accompanying the player receive a percentage of the experience points received for completing quests or defeating foes , levelling up and receiving skill points in the same manner as the player character . These skill points can be spent to increase creations ' statistics , but every statistic increase costs more essence and reduces the amount of essence available to summon other creations or cast spells . Essence and health are regained from Shaper-designed pools or by entering a friendly town .

Combat is turn-based , with each character in the player 's party receiving action points at the beginning of the player 's turn . The number received is dependent on the items the player character has equipped and the skills the character or creations possess . Each action uses a specific number of points , for example , moving one square takes a single point and attacks or spells take five . Attacking or spellcasting with fewer than ten action points immediately ends the character 's turn , otherwise a character can continue to act until they run out of points . Most enemies will attack the player on sight , retreating in terror if they reach a certain threshold of damage without being killed . Other specialized behaviors are also present , including creatures which call for help , or creatures which act as sentries and retreat to an ambush location when threatened . Creations made by the player character can also be controlled by a similar artificial intelligence , or the player can invest more essence in the creation 's intelligence and control them manually . Geneforge 's dialogue is delivered through on-screen text . Encounters with intelligent creations or humans result in the player being given a series of pre-determined questions or responses . Conversation options and the outcome of those conversations change according to the player 's previous interactions. as well as which quests have been completed ; which items the player has ; which group the player belongs to and the player 's leadership skill . The player can collect items from defeated enemies and the game environments to improve their own equipment . Non-player characters can trade with the player , buying most items regardless of type . The shopkeeper has a fixed amount of gold at the start of the game which does not replenish itself . It is possible for the player to drain all shopkeepers of their gold reserves , making it impossible to sell further items .

The player begins as an initiate of a powerful sect of magicians , the Shapers . Members of the sect create living beings from the magical essence within themselves . Apprentices are sent to academies to learn the art of shaping and the player 's character has been accepted to do so . The player departs on a voyage to the academy aboard a specially modified Drayk , a dragon-like Shaper Creation . During the journey , the Shaper passes a group of islands , one of which is recognized as the Barred Sucia Island . Locations Barred by the Shapers are closed to both the sect and outsiders alike , meaning a catastrophe has occurred or something very valuable is located there . As the Shaper examines Sucia , lost in thought , the craft is attacked and mortally wounded by an unidentified sailing ship . After igniting the vessel 's sails with a fireball , the craft deposits the Shaper on an abandoned dockside before dying . The player is now stranded on Sucia Island and must find a way to leave . Exploration of the docks reveals a strange canister filled with swirling liquid . Thinking the canister contains healing or energizing properties , the Shaper breaks the seal and absorbs the contents . Instead the contents absorb into the Shaper 's body , strengthening and changing it . The changes become visibly apparent , the player character 's skin smoothens and glows slightly . The canisters also affect the user 's mental state , causing a more violent and arrogant temperament . Serviles remain on the island , having been abandoned when the island was Barred . They are intelligent creations of Shapers , designed to serve them without question or hesitation . These Serviles have had no contact with Shapers for two centuries , and have separated into three groups with differing philosophies regarding their creators . The Obeyers are still faithful to the Shapers , the Awakened believe that they should be treated as equals . The Takers have rejected Shapers completely and view the sect as oppressors to be fought .

After encountering the three servile groups , the player begins to learn of a group of foreigners known as Sholai , explorers who have been shipwrecked on the island . It was the Sholai , led by a man named Trajkov , who attacked the player with their last remaining ship . Trajkov controls a device called the Geneforge , created by the Shapers , which can rewrite the user 's DNA and make them incredibly powerful . This is the cause of the island 's Barred status , the device was deemed too dangerous in the wrong hands . Trajkov and his followers have allied themselves with the Takers , absorbing the contents of canisters and trying to claim Shaper powers as their own . The group have been unable to activate the Geneforge itself due to a Shaper being needed to activate the device . A Shaper named Goettsch was kidnapped for this purpose , in the same manner as the player-character . Goettsch fled and stole the shaping gloves needed to safely use the Geneforge , causing Trajkov to attempt to kidnap the player as a replacement . During these events , some Sholai have escaped from their increasingly violent and unpredictable leader .

The player is free to join any one of the servile groups and share common goals , or remain unaligned . Geneforge can be completed without joining any group . Trajkov can be killed through combat or tricked into killing himself by using the Geneforge . He can also be aided in activating the device , if the player steals the shaper gloves from Goettsch . Goettsch offers the player fake shaper gauntlets , which do not protect Trajkov from the Geneforge 's energy should he be convinced they are genuine shaping gloves . The player can complete the game by using the last boat on Sucia Island . The small vessel is moored in a guarded dock on the far side of the island . Finishing the game unlocks one of more than a dozen game endings , dependent on the player 's actions during the game .

Work on Geneforge began during the development of Avernum 2 , initially little information was revealed . In an interview published by RPGDot Vogel compared the game 's movement system to Fallout and revealed that a new game engine was being implemented . The project had initially been intended as pure science fiction but this was soon abandoned in favor of a mixed fantasy and science fiction setting . In an interview published on website RPG Codex , Vogel stated this was due difficulties maintaining game balance with futuristic weaponry which " should be devastating " . He added " I found it to be too difficult to model the weapons in a way that simultaneously felt sensible and maintained balance . " Geneforge stemmed from the idea of creating a horde of creatures and the ability to care for those creatures or send them to their deaths . The choice was to be made by the player . From this point , Vogel considered who would be able to gain such powers , how they would control them and how these creatures would be treated . The game was developed with the intention of giving players choices ; which factions to side with , how non-Shaper human outsiders are treated and whether to pursue goals through combat or diplomacy . Unlike most role-playing games , Geneforge was designed so that it would be possible to complete the game without using violence . Vogel cited Baldur 's Gate II : Shadows of Amn , Planescape : Torment , Deus Ex and EverQuest as influences .

Geneforge received positive reviews , the game 's story and lack of bugs received praise in particular . InsideMacGames ' Christopher Morin suggested that players interested in a " strong storyline and a unique take on magic " would be impressed , but not those who sought high quality graphics and sound . The game 's setting has been described as unique and fresh , the level of detail in Geneforge 's fictional world was praised by reviewers.Jeff Green of Computer Gaming World praised the game for its " story and gameplay " as something that high-budget games often lack . The quality of the game 's graphics was rated poorly by most reviewers , reviewers noted that the overall quality of the game made up for this deficiency . GameSpy 's Carla Harker described the graphics as " ... dated by about seven years " and the game as a " technological pariah " , despite calling it one of the best role-playing games released in the past year . Green similarly described graphics as dated and something to put up with in favor of gameplay . Website Just RPG 's Eric Arevalo described them as simplistic but noted the game 's story and the ability to control " fascinating mutant creatures " made up for this . The Entertainment Depot 's Nick Stewart differed , praising the graphics as " Simplistic without being plain , lavish without being overdone " as well as the fluidity of character animation and detail of character designs .

The almost total lack of music , except for the title screen theme song , and complete lack of voice acting was noted by reviewers . This highlighted the game 's sound effects and environmental sounds , such as weapons clashing and the background noise of towns . Nick Stewart found " a fairly decent variety of effects and noises scattered throughout " , that they " added somewhat to the experience " , but became irritated by the amount of hissing and popping in the environmental sounds after extended play . Carla Harker described the sound as " Almost non-existent " and Eric Arevalo found that there weren 't enough sound effects . RPGDot 's Val Sucher noted that the music player Winamp could be played in the background , due to the game 's small memory requirements .

The giant mouse lemurs ( members of the genus Mirza ) are a genus of strepsirrhine primates . Two species have been formally described ; the northern giant mouse lemur ( Mirza zaza ) and Coquerel 's giant mouse lemur ( Mirza coquereli ) . Like all other lemurs , they are native to Madagascar , where they are found in the western dry deciduous forests and further to the north in the Sambirano valley and Sahamalaza Peninsula . First described in 1867 as a single species , they were grouped with mouse lemurs and dwarf lemurs . In 1870 , British zoologist John Edward Gray assigned them to their own genus , Mirza . The classification was not widely accepted until the 1990s , which followed the revival of the genus by American paleoanthropologist Ian Tattersall in 1982 . In 2005 , the northern population was declared a new species , and in 2010 , the World Wide Fund for Nature announced that a southwestern population might also be a new species . Giant mouse lemurs are about three times larger than mouse lemurs , weighing approximately 300 g ( 11 oz ) , and have a long , bushy tail . They are most closely related to mouse lemurs within Cheirogaleidae , a family of small , nocturnal lemurs . Giant mouse lemurs sleep in nests during the day and forage alone at night for fruit , tree gum , insects , and small vertebrates . Unlike many other cheirogaleids , they do not enter a state of torpor during the dry season . The northern species is generally more social than the southern species , particularly when nesting , though males and females may form pair bonds . The northern species also has the largest testicle size relative to its body size among all primates and is atypical among lemurs for breeding year-round instead of seasonally . Home ranges often overlap , with related females living closely together while males disperse . Giant mouse lemurs are vocal , although they also scent mark using saliva , urine , and secretions from the anogenital scent gland .

Predators of giant mouse lemurs include the Madagascar buzzard , Madagascar owl , fossa , and the narrow-striped mongoose . Giant mouse lemurs reproduce once a year , with two offspring born after a 90-day gestation . Babies are initially left in the nest while the mother forages , but are later carried by mouth and parked in vegetation while she forages nearby . In captivity , giant mouse lemurs will breed year-round . Their lifespan in the wild is thought to be five to six years . Both species are listed as endangered due to habitat destruction and hunting . Like all lemurs , they are protected under CITES Appendix I , which prohibits commercial trade . Despite breeding easily , they are rarely kept in captivity . The Duke Lemur Center coordinated the captive breeding of an imported collection of the northern species , which rose from six individuals in 1982 to 62 individuals by 1989 , but the population fell to six by 2009 and was no longer considered a breeding population .

The first species of giant mouse lemur was described by the French naturalist Alfred Grandidier in 1867 based on seven individuals he had collected near Morondava in southwestern Madagascar . Of these seven specimens , the lectotype was selected in 1939 as MNHN 1867 – 603 , an adult skull and skin . Naming the species after the French entomologist Charles Coquerel , Grandidier placed Coquerel 's giant mouse lemur ( M. coquereli ) with the dwarf lemurs in the genus Cheirogaleus ( which he spelled Cheirogalus ) as C. coquereli . He selected this generic assignment based on similarities with fork-marked lemurs ( Phaner ) , which he considered to also be members of Cheirogaleus . The following year , the German naturalist Hermann Schlegel and Dutch naturalist François Pollen independently described the same species and coincidentally gave it the same specific name , coquereli , basing theirs on an individual from around the Bay of Ampasindava in northern Madagascar . Unlike Grandidier , they placed their specimen in the genus Microcebus ( mouse lemurs ) ; however , these authors also listed all Cheirogaleus under Microcebus and based the classification of their species on similarities with the greater dwarf lemur ( M. typicus , now C. major ) .

In 1870 , the British zoologist John Edward Gray placed Coquerel 's giant mouse lemur into its own genus , Mirza . This classification was widely ignored and later rejected in the early 1930s by zoologists Ernst Schwarz , Guillaume Grandidier , and others , who felt that its longer fur and bushy tail did not merit a separate genus and instead placed it in Microcebus . British anatomist William Charles Osman Hill also favored this view in 1953 , noting that despite its larger size ( comparable to Cheirogaleus ) , its first upper premolar was proportionally small as in Microcebus . In 1977 , French zoologist Jean-Jacques Petter also favored the Microcebus classification , despite the threefold size difference between Coquerel 's giant mouse lemur and the other members of the genus . The genus Mirza was resurrected in 1982 by American paleoanthropologist Ian Tattersall to represent an intermediate branch between Microcebus and Cheirogaleus , citing the Coquerel 's giant mouse lemur 's significantly larger size than the largest Microcebus and locomotor behavior more closely aligned with Cheirogaleus . Adoption of Mirza was slow , though in 1994 it was used in the first edition of Lemurs of Madagascar by Conservation International . In 1993 , primatologist Colin Groves initially favored the Microcebus classification in the second edition of Mammal Species of the World , but began supporting the resurrection of Mirza in 2001 . In 1991 , prior to adopting Mirza , Groves was the first to use the common name " giant mouse lemur " . Prior to that , they were popularly referred to as " Coquerel 's mouse lemur " .

In 2005 , Peter M. Kappeler and Christian Roos described a new species of giant mouse lemur , the northern giant mouse lemur ( M. zaza ) . Their studies compared the morphology , behavioral ecology , and mitochondrial cytochrome b sequences of specimens from both Kirindy Forest in central-western Madagascar and around Ambato in northwestern Madagascar , part of the Sambirano valley . Their study demonstrated distinct differences in size , sociality , and breeding , as well as sufficient genetic distance to merit specific distinction between the northern and central-western populations . Because Grandidier 's description was based on a southern specimen , they named the northern population as a new species . The World Wide Fund for Nature ( WWF ) announced in 2010 that a biodiversity study from 2009 in the gallery forest of Ranobe near Toliara in southwestern Madagascar revealed a population of giant mouse lemurs previously unknown to science , and possibly a new species . They noted a significant difference in coloration between the two known species and the specimen they observed . However , further testing was required to confirm the discovery .

The etymology of Mirza puzzled researchers for many years . Gray often created mysterious and unexplained taxonomic names — a trend not only continued with his description of Mirza in 1870 , but also with the genera Phaner ( fork-marked lemurs ) and Azema ( for M. rufus , now a synonym for Microcebus ) , both of which were described in the same publication . In 1904 , American zoologist Theodore Sherman Palmer attempted to document the etymologies of all mammalian taxa , but could not definitively explain these three genera . For Mirza , Palmer only noted that it derived from the Persian title mîrzâ ( " prince " ) , a view tentatively supported by Alex Dunkel , Jelle Zijlstra , and Groves in 2012 . However , because the reference to Persian princes might have come from Arabian Nights , a popular piece of literature at the time , Dunkel et al. also searched the general literature published around 1870 . The origin of all three names was found in a British comedy The Palace of Truth by W. S. Gilbert , which premiered in London on 19 November 1870 , nearly one and a half weeks prior to the date written on the preface of Gray 's manuscript ( also published in London ) . The comedy featured characters bearing all three names : King Phanor ( sic ) , Mirza , and Azema . The authors concluded that Gray had seen the comedy and then based the names of three lemur genera on its characters .

Based on studies using morphology , immunology , repetitive DNA , SINE analysis , multilocus phylogenetic tests , and mitochondrial genes ( mtDNA ) , giant mouse lemurs are most closely related to mouse lemurs within the family Cheirogaleidae , and together they form a clade with the hairy-eared dwarf lemur ( Allocebus ) . Both dwarf lemurs and fork-marked lemurs are more distantly related , with fork-marked lemurs being either a sister group of all cheirogaleids , or more closely related to sportive lemurs ( Lepilemur ) . Although Mirza , Microcebus , and Allocebus form a clade within Cheirogaleidae , the three lineages are thought to have diverged during a narrow window of time , so the relationships within this clade are difficult to determine and may change with further research . All three are thought to have diverged at least 20 mya ( million years ago ) , although another estimate using mtDNA places the divergence between Mirza and Microcebus at 24.2 mya . Divergence between the two recognized species of giant mouse lemur is estimated at 2.1 mya .

Though giant mouse lemurs are relatively small cheirogaleids , they are more than three times larger than the smallest members of the family , the mouse lemurs . Their body weight averages 300 g ( 11 oz ) . At around 300 mm ( 12 in ) , their bushy and long tail is longer than their head-body length , which averages 233 mm ( 9.2 in ) . Their forelimbs are shorter than the hind limbs ( with an intermembral index of 70 ) , a trait shared with mouse lemurs . The skull is similar to that of dwarf and mouse lemurs , and the auditory bullae are small . Like other cheirogaleids , the dental formula for giant mouse lemurs is 2.1.3.32.1.3.3 × 2 = 36 ; on each side of the mouth , top and bottom , there are two incisors , one canine , three premolars , and three molars — a total of 36 teeth . Their upper teeth converge towards the front of the mouth , but are straighter than those in mouse lemurs . The first upper premolar ( P2 ) is relatively small , but nearly as tall as the next premolar ( P3 ) . Unlike mouse lemurs and more like dwarf lemurs , giant mouse lemurs have a prominent anterior lower premolar ( P2 ) . Also more aligned with dwarf lemurs , the first two upper molars ( M1 – 2 ) have a more anterior hypocone that sits opposite the metacone , compared to the mouse lemurs ' more posterior hypocone , which is presumably a symplesiomorphic ( ancestral ) trait . Also on M1 and M2 , the cingulum ( a crest or ridge on the tongue side ) comprises two small cuspules . In all other dental characteristics , giant mouse lemurs are noticeably similar to both dwarf and mouse lemurs .

Giant mouse lemurs have two pairs of mammae , one on the chest ( pectoral ) and one on the abdomen ( abdominal ) . Their fur is typically grayish-brown on the dorsal ( back ) side and more gray in color on the ventral ( front ) side . The tail is typically black-tipped . The new population found by WWF in 2010 has an overall lighter color , along with reddish or rusty patches near the hands and feet on the dorsal side of the arms and legs . This population also has a red tail , which darkens at the end . Vibrissae are found above the eyes ( superciliary ) , above the mouth ( buccal ) , under the lower jaw ( genal ) , near the top of the jaw ( interramal ) , and on the wrist ( carpal ) . Like mouse lemurs , the ears are large and membranous . Ear size is one differentiating factor between the northern giant mouse lemur and Coquerel 's giant mouse lemur , with the former having shorter , rounded ears , while the latter has relatively large ears . The northern giant mouse lemur is generally larger and also has a shorter tail and shorter canine teeth . This species also has the largest testicles relative to body size of any living primate , with an average volume of 15.48 cm3 ( 0.945 cu in ) , corresponding to 5.5 % of its body weight . If human males had comparably sized testes , they would weigh 4 kg ( 8.8 lb ) and be the size of a grapefruit .

Coquerel 's giant mouse lemur has a spotty distribution across western Madagascar 's dry deciduous forests due to the forest fragmentation throughout the region . The dry forests in this lowland region vary in elevation from sea level to 700 m ( 2,300 ft ) . The range of this species is divided into northern and southern subpopulations , which are separated by several hundred kilometers . Both historical and current populations between these ranges are uncertain . The southern region is bound by the Onilahy River in the south and the Tsiribihina River in the north , while the northern population is found in the northwestern corner of the island at Tsingy de Namoroka National Park . They are most commonly found in forests near rivers and ponds . The northern giant mouse lemur is found in isolated forest patches along the northwest coast in both the more humid Sambirano valley and Sahamalaza Peninsula , as well as the Ampasindava Peninsula . Its range extends from the Maeverano River in the south to the Mahavavy River in the north . The new population reported by the WWF in 2010 is found in the gallery forests of Ranobe near Toliara in southwestern Madagascar .

Before the recognition of more than one species , differences in population density were noted between southern forests like Kirindy and northern forests near Ambanja . Later , it was recognized that Coquerel 's giant mouse lemur was found in lower densities than the northern giant mouse lemur . The former range between 30 and 210 individuals per square kilometer ( 250 acres ) , with lower densities in open areas of the forest , while the latter has been recorded with 385 to 1,086 individuals per km2 . However , in the case of the northern giant mouse lemur , populations were found in more isolated forest fragments and it is thought that their consumption of introduced cashew and mango help sustain these higher populations . According to studies of Coquerel 's giant mouse lemur , home ranges of both sexes vary from 1 to 4 hectares ( 2 to 10 acres ) with frequent overlap , particularly on the periphery of their range . Individuals most heavily use and aggressively defend a smaller core area within their range . Individuals can have up to eight neighbors . Home ranges of males tend to overlap with those of both females and other males , and typically expand to four times the size during the mating season . Female home ranges show no variability in size , and can remain stable for years . At Kirindy Forest , genetic studies showed that the home ranges of related females tend to clump closely together , while unrelated males may overlap their range , suggesting male dispersal and migration is responsible for gene flow .

Both species are strictly nocturnal , leaving their nests around sunset to stretch and self-groom for a few minutes . Both species typically forage between 5 and 10 m ( 16 and 33 ft ) above the forest floor , though Coquerel 's giant mouse lemur has been observed on the ground . They primarily move by quadrupedal running and occasionally leaping between branches , and use the same feeding postures as mouse lemurs , such as clinging to tree trunks . When moving through the trees , giant mouse lemurs scurry rapidly like mouse lemurs , unlike dwarf lemurs , which use more deliberate movement . Slow movements are usually seen in lower , denser foliage when hunting for insects , while more rapid motion and leaping is typically seen at moderate heights of 2 – 5 m ( 6.6 – 16 ft ) . Surveillance of the home range involves slower movements in lighter foliage near the tops of large trees , while movements along the border of a home range is more rapid and occurs at a lower height . Similar movement patterns have been observed in captivity as well . Giant mouse lemurs begin foraging moments before the sun disappears , occasionally participate in social activities during the last half of the night , and return to one of their nests prior to sunrise . Cold temperatures cause them to leave the nest later and return early , sometime during the second half of the night . During the first half of the night , giant mouse lemurs are more likely to rest for an hour or more , usually at the expense of social activities , but not feeding time . Rest periods are longer when temperatures are low . Unlike many other cheirogaleids , they remain active all year and do not enter daily or seasonal torpor .

Both species sleep in round nests up to 50 cm ( 20 in ) across made of interlaced lianas , branches , leaves , and twigs gathered from nearby trees and woven using the mouth and hands . Nests are typically between 2 and 10 m ( 6.6 and 33 ft ) above the ground in the fork of large tree branches or surrounded by dense lianas . Trees covered in thick lianas as well as trees with year-round leaf cover ( e.g. Euphorbiaceae ) are favored for nest construction , though large bare trees may be used by building the nest higher . In addition to nesting in dense lianas , individual giant mouse lemurs will rotate between 10 and 12 nests every few days to avoid predators . Only females have been observed building nests in the wild , though males , females , and young have been observed building nests in captivity . Multiple nests are sometimes built in the same tree or in nearby trees and are shared by neighboring giant mouse lemurs , fork-marked lemurs , and the introduced black rat ( Rattus rattus ) . Unlike most other nocturnal lemurs , giant mouse lemurs do not appear to sleep in tree holes .

Both species usually are solitary foragers , although the northern giant mouse lemur tends to be the most social , possibly due to its higher population density . Up to eight ( typically four ) adult males , adult females , and juveniles may be found in a northern giant mouse lemur nest , whereas Coquerel 's giant mouse lemurs do not nest communally , except when females share their nest with their offspring . Males do groom and call to females when they come into contact , and according to radio-tracking and direct observations at Analabe near Kirindy , they form pair bonds , sometimes briefly traveling together during the dry season . However , most interactions between adults are infrequent and typically occur later at night and particularly during the dry season in overlapping core areas , often involving chases and other agonistic behavior , and only rarely social grooming . During the mating season , males act aggressively towards one another , pulling out fur around the head and shoulders and biting the head . Giant mouse lemurs use at least eight vocalizations , the most common of which are contact calls , which sound like " hum " or a " hein " and are used when moving and when meeting familiar individuals . A " mother-infant meeting call " used at dawn before returning to the nest consists of short , modulated whistles . Both males and females have distinct single note calls used in territorial behavior ; the female call sounds like " pfiou " and the male call is a short , loud whistle . Both sexes use an alarm call , which sounds like a " croak " , and an agonistic call , which consists of repeated " tisk-tisk-tisk " sounds . Females exhibit a " waking call sequence " , sometimes referred to as " loud calls " , which start when foraging commences and then switch to quieter " hon " calls possibly to indicate their position to their neighbors . A long " sexual call sequence " consisting of soft whistle and several modulated , hoarse " brroak " calls is used by both sexes during estrus . Studies of captive individuals have found other vocalizations , but their purpose has not been determined . The northern giant mouse lemur appears to be the most vocal of the two species . Although vocalizations are the primary form of social communication , they also scent mark using saliva , urine , and secretions from the anogenital scent gland on small branches and other objects .

Reproduction starts in November for Coquerel 's giant mouse lemur at Kirindy Forest ; the estrous cycle runs approximately 22 days , while estrus lasts only a day or less . The mating season in this southern population is limited to a few weeks , whereas the northern giant mouse lemur is thought to breed throughout the year , a trend seen in only two other species of lemur : the aye-aye ( Daubentonia madagascariensis ) and the red-bellied lemur ( Eulemur rubriventer ) . The northern giant mouse lemur had been observed breeding year-round in captivity if their litter did not survive or was removed , but at the time this population was thought to be Coquerel 's giant mouse lemur . One to three offspring ( typically two ) are born after 90 days of gestation , weighing approximately 12 g ( 0.42 oz ) . Because they are poorly developed , they initially remain in their mother 's nest for up to three weeks , being transported by mouth between nests . Once they have grown sufficiently , typically after three weeks , the mother will park her offspring in vegetation while she forages nearby . After a month , the young begin to participate in social play and grooming with their mother , and between the first and second month , young males begin to exhibit early sexual behaviors ( including mounting , neck biting , and pelvic thrusting ) . By the third month , the young forage independently , though they maintain vocal contact with their mother and use a small part of her range .

Females start reproducing after ten months , while males develop functional testicles by their second mating season . Testicle size in the northern giant mouse lemur does not appear to fluctuate by season , and is so large relative to the animal 's body mass that it is the highest among all primates . This emphasis on sperm production in males , as well as the use of copulatory plugs , suggests a mating system best described as polygynandrous where males use scramble competition ( roaming widely to find many females ) . In contrast , male Coquerel 's giant mouse lemurs appear to fight for access to females ( contest competition ) during their breeding season . Males disperse from their natal range , and the age at which they leave varies from two years to several . Females reproduce every year , although postpartum estrus has been observed in captivity . In the wild , the lifespan of giant mouse lemurs is thought to rarely exceed five or six years , though in captivity they can live up to 15 years .

Both species are omnivorous , eating fruit , flowers , buds , insect excretions , tree gums , large insects , spiders , frogs , chameleons , snakes , small birds , and eggs . Coquerel 's giant mouse lemur is thought to opportunistically prey on mouse lemurs after an individual was found with a half-eaten gray mouse lemur ( M. murinus ) in a trap . During June and July , at the peak of the dry season , this species relies on sugary excretions from the larvae of hemipteran and cochineal insects as well as tree gums . The sugary excretions are obtained by either licking them from the back of the insect or collecting the crystallized sugars that accumulate beneath the insect colony . During this time of year , feeding on insect secretions can account for 60 % of feeding activity . In contrast , the northern giant mouse lemur relies on cashew fruits during the dry season . Giant mouse lemurs are often sympatric with mouse lemurs , such as M. murinus , though they are typically found higher in the canopy and favor thicker , taller gallery forests . At the Marosalaza forest ( north of Morondava ) , Coquerel 's giant mouse lemur is sympatric with four other nocturnal lemurs ( mouse lemurs , sportive lemurs , dwarf lemurs , and fork-marked lemurs ) , but manages niche differentiation by feeding at different times and specializing on insect secretions during the dry season .

In 2012 , the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) assessed both Coquerel 's giant mouse lemur and the northern giant mouse lemur as endangered . Prior to that , both species had been listed as vulnerable . Populations of both species are in decline due to habitat destruction , primarily for slash-and-burn agriculture and charcoal production . Also , they are both hunted for bushmeat . The population announced by the WWF in 2010 was found outside the limits of a nearby protected area , PK32-Ranobe , which was granted temporary protection status in December 2008 and is co-managed by the WWF . Its forests were not included in the protected area due to existing concessions for mining activities . As with all lemurs , giant mouse lemurs were first protected in 1969 when they were listed as " Class A " of the African Convention on the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources . This prohibited hunting and capture without authorization , which would only be given for scientific purposes or the national interest . In 1973 , they were also protected under CITES Appendix I , which strictly regulates their trade and forbids commercial trade . Although enforcement is patchy , they are also protected under Malagasy law .

Giant mouse lemurs are rarely kept in captivity , though they breed easily . In 1989 , the Duke Lemur Center held more than 70 % of the captive population ( 45 of 62 individuals ) . At the time , the DLC was coordinating a captive breeding program for Coquerel 's giant mouse lemur , and all individuals kept at American facilities were descended from six individuals imported by the DLC in 1982 from the region around Ambanja . As of 2009 , the International Species Information System ( ISIS ) recorded only six remaining individuals registered in the United States and Europe , all reclassified as northern giant mouse lemurs and considered a non-breeding population ; and in 2015 , only a single female remained on record .

The copper shark , bronze whaler , or narrowtooth shark ( Carcharhinus brachyurus ) is a species of requiem shark , family Carcharhinidae , and the only member of its genus found mostly at temperate latitudes . It is distributed in a number of separate populations in the northeastern and southwestern Atlantic , off southern Africa , in the northwestern and eastern Pacific , and around Australia and New Zealand , with scattered reports from equatorial regions . This species can be found from brackish rivers and estuaries , to shallow bays and harbors , to offshore waters 100 m ( 330 ft ) deep or more . Females are found apart from males for most of the year , and conduct seasonal migrations . A large species reaching 3.3 m ( 11 ft ) long , the copper shark is difficult to distinguish from other large requiem sharks . It is characterized by its narrow , hook-shaped upper teeth , lack of a prominent ridge between the dorsal fins , and plain bronze coloration . Feeding mainly on cephalopods , bony fishes , and other cartilaginous fishes , the copper shark is a fast-swimming predator that has been known to hunt in large groups , utilizing their numbers to their advantage ; however for most of the time they remain solitary . Off South Africa , this species associates closely with the annual sardine run , involving millions of southern African pilchard ( Sardinops sagax ) . Like other requiem sharks , it is viviparous , with the developing embryos mainly nourished through a placental connection formed from the depleted yolk sac . Females bear litters of 7 to 24 pups every other year in coastal nursery areas , after a gestation period of 12 or perhaps as long as 21 months . It is extremely slow-growing , with males and females not reaching maturity until 13 – 19 and 19 – 20 years of age respectively .

Because of its very patchy range , the copper shark has been scientifically described several times from different locales . The earliest valid description is presently considered to be British zoologist Albert Günther 's account of Carcharias brachyurus in the 1870 eighth volume of Catalogue of the fishes in the British Museum . The earliest name was once thought to be Auguste Duméril 's 1865 Carcharias remotus , until it was found that the type specimen associated with that name is actually a blacknose shark ( C. acronotus ) . Thus , this shark was often referred to as C. remotus in older literature . An even earlier name , Richard Owen 's 1853 Galeolamna greyi , is of questionable taxonomic status as it was based solely on a set of now-destroyed jaws that may or may not have belonged to a copper shark . Modern authors have assigned this species to the genus Carcharhinus . The specific epithet brachyurus is derived from the Greek brachys ( " short " ) and oura ( " tail " ) . The name " whaler " originated in the 19th century , applied by the crews of whaling vessels in the Pacific who saw large sharks of various species congregating around harpooned whale carcasses . This species may also be referred to as black-tipped whaler , cocktail shark or cocktail whaler , or New Zealand whaler , as well as by the shortened " bronze " , " bronzie " , or " cocktail " . Günther originally referred to four syntypes : a stuffed specimen from Antarctica and another from New Zealand , which have since been lost , and two fetuses from Australia that were later discovered to be bull sharks ( C. leucas ) . In the interests of taxonomic stability , in 1982 Jack Garrick designated a 2.4 m ( 7.9 ft ) long female caught off Whanganui , New Zealand as a new type specimen .

The first efforts to determine the evolutionary relationships of the copper shark were based on morphology and returned inconclusive results : in 1982 Jack Garrick placed it by itself as a grouping within Carcharhinus , while in 1988 Leonard Compagno placed it in an informal " transitional group " that also contained the blacknose shark ( C. acronotus ) , the blacktip reef shark ( C. melanopterus ) , the nervous shark ( C. cautus ) , the silky shark ( C. falciformis ) , and the night shark ( C. signatus ) . Gavin Naylor 's 1992 allozyme study concluded that the closest relative of the copper shark is the spinner shark ( C. brevipinna ) , but could not resolve their wider relationships with the rest of the genus . Fossilized teeth from the copper shark have been recovered from the Pungo River in North Carolina , dating to the Miocene ( 23 – 5.3 Ma ) , from Tuscany , dating to the Pliocene ( 5.3 – 2.6 Ma ) , and from Costa Mesa in California , dating to the Late Pleistocene ( 126,000 – 12,000 years ago ) .

The copper shark is the only member of its genus largely found in temperate rather than tropical waters , in temperatures above 12 ° C ( 54 ° F ) . It is widely distributed but as disjunct regional populations with little to no interchange between them . In the Atlantic , this shark occurs from the Mediterranean Sea to Morocco and the Canary Islands , off Argentina , and off Namibia and South Africa ( where there may be two separate populations ) , with infrequent records from Mauritania , the Gulf of Guinea , and possibly the Gulf of Mexico . In the Indo-Pacific , it is found from the East China Sea to Japan ( excluding Hokkaido ) and southern Russia , off southern Australia ( mostly between Sydney and Perth but occasionally further north ) , and around New Zealand but not as far as the Kermadec Islands ; there are also unconfirmed reports from the Seychelles and the Gulf of Thailand . In the eastern Pacific , it occurs from northern Chile to Peru , and from Mexico to Point Conception , California , including the Gulf of California . The copper shark is common off parts of Argentina , South Africa , Australia , and New Zealand , and rare elsewhere ; in many areas its range is ill-defined because of confusion with other species .

Copper sharks can be found from the surf zone to slightly beyond the continental shelf in the open ocean , diving to depths of 100 m ( 330 ft ) or more . This species commonly enters very shallow habitats , including bays , shoals , and harbors , and also inhabits rocky areas and offshore islands . It is tolerant of low and changing salinities , and has been reported from estuaries and the lower reaches of large rivers . Juveniles inhabit inshore waters less than 30 m ( 98 ft ) deep throughout the year , while adults tend to be found further offshore and regularly approach the coast only in spring and summer , when large aggregations can be readily observed in shallow water . Populations of copper sharks in both hemispheres perform seasonal migrations , in response to temperature changes , reproductive events , and / or prey availability ; the movement patterns differ with sex and age . Adult females and juveniles spend winter in the subtropics and generally shift to higher latitudes as spring nears , with pregnant females also moving towards the coast to give birth in inshore nursery areas . Adult males remain in the subtropics for most of the year , except in late winter or spring when they also move into higher latitudes , in time to encounter and mate with post-partum females dispersing from the nurseries . During migrations , individual sharks have been recorded traveling up to 1,320 km ( 820 mi ) . It is philopatric , returning to the same areas year after year .

The copper shark has a slender , streamlined body with a slightly arched profile just behind the head . The snout is rather long and pointed , with the nostrils preceded by low flaps of skin . The round , moderately large eyes are equipped with nictating membranes ( protective third eyelids ) . The mouth has short , subtle furrows at the corners and contains 29 – 35 upper tooth rows and 29 – 33 lower tooth rows . The teeth are serrated with single narrow cusps ; the upper teeth have a distinctive hooked shape and become more angled towards the corners of the jaw , while the lower teeth are upright . The upper teeth of adult males are longer , narrower , more curved , and more finely serrated than those of adult females and juveniles . The five pairs of gill slits are fairly long . The pectoral fins are large , pointed , and falcate ( sickle-shaped ) . The first dorsal fin is tall , with a pointed apex and a concave trailing margin ; its origin lies about even with the tips of the pectoral fins . The second dorsal fin is small and low , and positioned about opposite to the anal fin . There is usually no ridge between the dorsal fins . The caudal fin has a well-developed lower lobe and a deep ventral notch near the tip of the upper lobe . This species is bronze to olive-gray above with a metallic sheen and sometimes a pink cast , darkening towards the fin tips and margins but not conspicuously so ; the color fades quickly to a dull gray-brown after death . The underside is white , which extends onto the flanks as a prominent band . The copper shark is easily mistaken for other large Carcharhinus species , particularly the dusky shark ( C. obscurus ) , but can be identified by its upper tooth shape , absent or weak interdorsal ridge , and lack of obvious fin markings . It reportedly reaches a maximum length of 3.3 m ( 11 ft ) and weight of 305 kilograms ( 672 lb ) .

The copper shark feeds more towards the bottom of the water column than the top , consuming cephalopods , including squid ( Loligo spp . ) , cuttlefishes , and octopus ; bony fishes , including gurnards , flatfishes , hakes , catfishes , jacks , Australian salmon , mullets , sea breams , smelts , tunas , sardines , and anchovies ; and cartilaginous fishes , including dogfish sharks ( Squalus spp . ) , stingrays , skates , electric rays , and sawfishes . Cephalopods and cartilaginous fishes become relatively more important food for sharks over 2 m ( 6.6 ft ) long . Young sharks also consume scyphozoan jellyfish and crustaceans , including mud shrimps ( Callianassa ) and penaeid prawns . It does not attack marine mammals , though has been known rarely to scavenge on dolphins that had succumbed to fishing nets . The predominant prey of this species off South Africa is the southern African pilchard ( Sardinops sagax ) , which comprise 69 – 95 % of its diet . Every winter , schools of copper sharks follow the " run " of the pilchard from the Eastern Cape to KwaZulu-Natal . The gathering of millions of forage fish attract a multitude of predators , including several species of sharks , of which copper sharks are the most numerous .

Like other members of its family , the copper shark is viviparous , in which the yolk sac of the developing embryo , once depleted , is converted into a placental connection through which the mother delivers nourishment . Adult females have one functional ovary , on the right , and two functional uteruses . The male bites the female as a prelude to mating . In the Southern Hemisphere , mating takes place from October to December ( spring and early summer ) , when both sexes have migrated into offshore waters at higher latitudes . Birthing seems to occur from June to January , peaking in October and November . Female copper sharks make use of shallow inshore habitats , varying from stretches of open coast to more sheltered bays and inlets , as nurseries . These nurseries provide abundant food and reduce the likelihood of predation by larger members of the species . Known and suspected nursery areas occur off northern North Island from Waimea Inlet to Hawke Bay for New Zealand sharks , off Albany , in and around Gulf St Vincent , and in Port Phillip Bay for Australian sharks , off Niigata ( Japan ) for northwestern Pacific sharks , off the Eastern Cape for South Africa sharks , off Rhodes ( Greece ) , Nice ( France ) , and Al Hoceima ( Morocco ) for Mediterranean sharks , off Río de Oro ( Western Sahara ) for northwest African sharks , off Rio de Janeiro ( Brazil ) and Buenos Aires and Bahía Blanca ( Argentina ) for southwestern Atlantic sharks , and off Paita and Guanape Cove ( Peru ) , in Sebastián Vizcaíno Bay ( Mexico ) , and in and around San Diego Bay for eastern Pacific sharks .

Most sources estimate a gestation period of 12 months , though some data support the interpretation of a 15 – 21 month long gestation period instead . Females produce litters every other year , with the number of pups ranging from 7 to 24 and averaging 15 or 16 . Females off California and the Baja Peninsula tend to bear fewer young relative to other parts of the world . The newborns measure 55 – 67 cm ( 22 – 26 in ) long . The copper shark is among the slowest-growing Carcharhinus species : off South Africa , males reach sexual maturity at 2.0 – 2.4 m ( 6.6 – 7.9 ft ) long and an age of 13 – 19 years , while females mature at 2.3 – 2.5 m ( 7.5 – 8.2 ft ) long and an age of 19 – 20 years . Females off Australia mature at a comparable length of 2.5 m ( 8.2 ft ) , while females off Argentina mature at a slightly smaller length of 2.2 m ( 7.2 ft ) . The maximum lifespan is at least 30 years for males and 25 years for females .

Copper sharks attack humans infrequently , but the species places sixth in the number of unprovoked attacks on people . During the tracking period through 2013 , the University of Florida attributed 20 attacks to the species . ( In comparison , great white sharks topped the list , with 279 attacks . ) Though large and powerful , the copper shark is not particularly aggressive towards humans unless in the presence of food . Copper Sharks have been known to harass and attack spear fishers in an attempt to steal catches . Copper sharks have bitten several swimmers in Australia and New Zealand , where the species is common . ( The species is commonly called bronze whalers in this part of the world . ) Fatal attacks attributed to the copper shark ( bronze whaler ) include the 2014 death of a swimmer in Tathra , New South Wales , Australia , and the 1976 death of a swimmer in Te Kaha , New Zealand . Three out of ten shark attacks in New Zealand are attributed to Copper sharks . Witnesses also attributed a fatal attack on September 2011 in Bunker Bay , Western Australia to a copper shark .

Commercial fisheries for the copper shark exist off New Zealand , Australia ( though the " bronze whaler fishery " of Western Australia actually takes mostly dusky sharks ) , South Africa , Brazil , Uruguay , Argentina , Mexico , and China ; it also contributes to the bycatch of other commercial fisheries across its range . This species is caught in gillnets and on bottom longlines , and to a much lesser extent in bottom trawls and on pelagic longlines . The meat is sold for human consumption . The copper shark is also popular with recreational fishers in Namibia , New Zealand , Australia , South Africa , Argentina , Mexico and California , predominantly by anglers but also by bowfishers and gillnetters . In New Zealand , it is the Carcharhinus species most frequently caught by sport fishers and sustains a small , summer recreational fishery in northern North Island , that mainly captures pregnant and post-partum females and for the most part practices tag and release . A tag and release program is also practiced in Namibia .

The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has assessed the copper shark as Near Threatened worldwide . While the global population is unknown , the long maturation time and low reproductive rate of this species render it highly susceptible to overfishing . Regionally , the IUCN has listed this species under Least Concern off Australia , New Zealand , and South Africa , where fisheries are generally well-managed ; the local copper shark population for each of those three countries is contained almost entirely within their respective Exclusive Economic Zones ( EEZ ) . Reported catches by New Zealand have steadily declined from a peak of 40 tons in 1995 / 96 to 20 tons 2001 / 02 , though it is uncertain whether this reflects a genuine decline or changing fishing habits . In the eastern Pacific , the copper shark is rare and little fishery information is available , leading to an assessment of Data Deficient . However , catch declines across all shark and ray species have been documented in the heavily-fished Gulf of California . Off East Asia , the copper shark has been assessed as Vulnerable ; though species-specific data is unavailable , shark populations overall have been decimated in the region . The number of large adults have been too low to sustain targeted fisheries since the 1970s , and most of the current shark catch consists of small juveniles . Additional threats to this species include the degradation and destruction of its coastal nurseries from development , pollution , and aquaculture , mortality from shark nets used to protect beaches in South Africa and Australia , and persecution by fish farmers in southern Australia .

Fantastic was an American digest size fantasy and science fiction magazine , published from 1952 to 1980 . It was founded by Ziff Davis as a fantasy companion to Amazing Stories . Early sales were good , and Ziff Davis quickly decided to switch Amazing from pulp format to digest , and to cease publication of their other science fiction pulp , Fantastic Adventures . Within a few years sales fell , and Howard Browne , the editor , was forced to switch the focus to science fiction rather than fantasy . Browne lost interest in the magazine as a result and the magazine generally ran poor quality fiction in the mid-1950s , under Browne and his successor , Paul W. Fairman . At the end of the 1950s Cele Goldsmith took over as editor of both Fantastic and Amazing , and quickly invigorated the magazines , bringing in many new writers and making them , in the words of one science fiction historian , the " best-looking and brightest " magazines in the field . She helped to nurture the early careers of writers such as Roger Zelazny and Ursula K. Le Guin , but was unable to increase circulation , and in 1965 the magazines were sold to Sol Cohen , who hired Joseph Wrzos as editor and switched to a reprint-only policy . This was financially successful , but brought Cohen into conflict with the newly formed Science Fiction Writers of America . After a turbulent period at the end of the 1960s , Ted White became editor and the reprints were phased out .

White worked hard to make the magazine successful , introducing artwork from artists who had made their names in comics , and working with new authors such as Gordon Eklund . His budget for fiction was low , but he was occasionally able to find good stories from well-known writers which had been rejected by the other markets . Circulation continued to decline and in 1978 Cohen sold out his half of the business to his partner , Arthur Bernhard . White resigned shortly afterwards , and was replaced by Elinor Mavor , but within two years Bernhard decided to close down Fantastic , merging it with Amazing , which had always had slightly higher circulation .

In 1938 , Ziff-Davis , a Chicago-based publisher looking to expand into the pulp magazine market , acquired Amazing Stories . The number of science fiction magazines grew quickly ; several new titles appeared over the next few years , including Fantastic Adventures , which was launched by Ziff-Davis in 1939 as a companion to Amazing . Under the editorship of Raymond Palmer the magazines were reasonably successful but published poor quality work , and when Howard Browne took over as editor of Amazing in January 1950 he decided to try to move the magazine upmarket . Ziff-Davis agreed to back the new magazine , and Browne put together a sample copy , but when the Korean War broke out Ziff-Davis cut their budgets and the project was abandoned . Browne did not give up , and in 1952 received the go-ahead to try a new magazine instead , focused on high-quality fantasy , a genre which had recently become more popular . The first issue of Fantastic , dated Summer 1952 , appeared on March 21 of that year .

Sales were very good , and Ziff-Davis was sufficiently impressed to move the magazine from a quarterly to a bimonthly schedule after only two issues , and to switch Amazing from pulp format to digest-size to match Fantastic . Shortly afterwards the decision was taken to eliminate Fantastic Adventures : the March 1953 issue was the last , and the May – June 1953 issue of Fantastic added a mention of Fantastic Adventures to the masthead , though this disappeared with the following issue . Payment started at two cents per word for all rights , but could go up to ten cents at the editor 's discretion ; this put Fantastic in the second echelon of magazines , behind markets such as Astounding and Galaxy . The experiment with quality fiction did not last ; circulation dropped , which led to budget cuts , and in turn the quality of the fiction fell . Browne had wanted to separate Fantastic from Amazing 's pulp roots , but now found he had to print more science fiction ( sf ) and less fantasy in order to attract Amazing 's readers to its sister magazine . Fantastic 's poor results were probably a consequence of the overloaded sf magazine market ; far more magazines appeared in the early 1950s than the market was able to support . Ziff-Davis sales staff were able to help sell Fantastic and Amazing along with the technical magazines that it published , and the availability of a national sales network , even though it was not focused solely on Fantastic , undoubtedly helped the magazine to survive .

In November 1955 , Ziff-Davis hired an assistant , Cele Goldsmith , who began by helping with two new magazines under development , Dream World and Pen Pals . She also read the slush piles for all the magazines , and was quickly given more responsibility . In 1957 she was made managing editor of both Amazing and Fantastic , doing the administrative chores and reading unsolicited manuscripts ; and at the end of 1958 she became editor , replacing Fairman , who left to edit Ellery Queen 's Mystery Magazine . Goldsmith ( who became Cele Lalli when she married in 1964 ) stayed as editor for six and a half years . Circulation dropped for both Amazing and Fantastic ; in 1964 Fantastic had a paid circulation of only 27,000 . In 1965 Sol Cohen , who at that time was Galaxy 's publisher , set up his own publishing company , Ultimate Publishing , and bought both Amazing and Fantastic from Ziff-Davis . Cohen had decided to make the magazines as profitable as possible by filling them only with reprints . This was possible because Ziff-Davis had acquired second serial rights for all stories they had published , and since Cohen had bought the backfile of stories he was able to reprint them using these rights . Using reprints in this way saved Cohen about $ 8,000 a year between the two magazines . Lalli decided that she did not want to work for Cohen , and stayed with Ziff-Davis . Her last issue was June 1965 . Cohen replaced Lalli with Joseph Wrzos , who used the name " Joseph Ross " on the magazines . Cohen had met Wrzos at the Galaxy offices not long before ; Wrzos was teaching English full-time , but had worked for Gnome Press as an assistant editor in 1953 – 1954 .

Cohen also launched a series of reprint magazines , drawing from the backfile of both Amazing and Fantastic , again using the second serial rights he had acquired from Ziff-Davis . The first reprint magazine was Great Science Fiction ; the first issue , titled Great Science Fiction from Amazing , appeared in August 1965 . By early 1967 this had been joined by The Most Thrilling Science Fiction Ever Told and Science Fiction Classics . These increased the workload on Wrzos , though Cohen made the selection of stories , and Wrzos found himself able to work on Fantastic and Amazing only part-time . Cohen hired Herb Lehrman to help with the other magazines . Although Cohen felt that his deal with Ziff-Davis gave him the reprint rights he needed , the newly formed Science Fiction Writers of America ( SFWA ) received complaints about Cohen 's refusal to pay anything for the reprints . He was also reportedly not responding to requests for reassignment of copyright . SFWA organized a boycott of Cohen 's magazines ; after a year Cohen agreed to pay a flat fee for the reprints , and in August 1967 he agreed to a graduated scale of payments , and the boycott was withdrawn .

Harry Harrison had been involved in the negotiations between SFWA and Cohen , and when the agreement was reached in 1967 Cohen asked Harrison if he would take over as editor of both magazines . Harrison was available because SF Impulse , which he had been editing , had ceased publication in early 1967 . Cohen agreed to phase out the reprints by the end of the year , and Harrison took the job . Cohen added Harrison 's name to the masthead of two issues of Great Science Fiction , although Harrison had had nothing to do with that magazine , but the reprints in Fantastic and Amazing continued and Harrison decided to quit in February 1968 . He recommended Barry Malzberg as his replacement . Cohen had worked with Malzberg at the Scott Meredith Literary Agency , and felt Malzberg would be more cooperative than Harrison . Malzberg , however , turned out to be just as unwilling as Harrison to work with Cohen if the reprints continued , and soon regretted taking the job . In October 1968 Cohen refused to pay for a cover that Malzberg had commissioned ; Malzberg insisted , threatening to resign if Cohen did not agree . Cohen contacted Robert Silverberg , then the president of SFWA , and told him ( falsely ) that Malzberg had actually resigned . Silverberg recommended Ted White as a replacement . Cohen secured White 's agreement and then fired Malzberg ; White took over in October 1968 , but because there was a backlog of stories Malzberg had acquired , the first issue on which he was credited as editor was the June 1969 issue .

Like his immediate predecessors , White took the job on condition that the reprints would be phased out . It was some time before this was achieved : there was at least one reprinted story in every issue until the end of 1971 . The February 1972 issue contained some artwork reprinted from 1939 , and after that the reprints ceased . Fantastic 's circulation was about 37,000 when White took over ; only about 4 percent of this was subscription sales . Cohen 's wife filled the subscriptions from their garage , and according to White , Cohen regarded this as a burden , and never tried to increase the subscription base . Despite White 's efforts , Fantastic 's circulation fell , from almost 37,000 when he took over as editor to less than 24,000 in the summer of 1975 . Cohen was rumored to be interested in selling both Fantastic and Amazing ; among other possibilities , both Roger Elwood , at that time an active science fiction anthology editor , and Edward Ferman , the editor of The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction , approached Cohen with a view to acquiring the titles . Nothing came of it , however , and White was not aware of the possible sales . He was working at a low salary , with unpaid help from friends to read unsolicited submissions — at one point he introduced a 25-cent reading fee for manuscripts from unpublished writers ; the fee would be refunded if White bought the story . White sometimes found himself at odds with Cohen 's business partner , Arthur Bernhard , due to their different political views . White 's unhappiness with his working conditions culminated in his resignation after Cohen refused his proposal to publish Fantastic as a slick magazine , with larger pages and higher quality paper . White commented in an article in Science Fiction Review that he had brought to the magazines " a lot of energy and enthusiasm and a great many ideas for their improvement ... Well , I have put into effect nearly every idea which I was allowed to follow through on ... and have spent most of my energy and enthusiasm . " Cohen was able to persuade him to stay for another year ; in the event White stayed for another three .

White was unable to completely halt the slide in circulation , though it rose a little in 1977 . That year Cohen lost $ 15,000 dollars on the magazines , and decided to sell . He spent some time looking for a new publisher — editor Roy Torgeson was one of those interested — but on September 15 , 1978 , he sold his half of the business to Arthur Bernhard , his partner . White renewed his suggestions for improving the format of the magazine : he wanted to make Fantastic the same size as Time , and believed he could avoid the mistakes that had been made by other sf magazines that had tried that approach . White also proposed an increase in the budget and asked for a raise . Bernhard not only turned down White 's ideas , but also stopped paying him : White responded by resigning . His last official day as editor was November 9 ; the last issue of Fantastic under his control was the January 1979 issue . He returned all submissions to their authors , saying that he had been told to do so by Bernhard ; Bernhard denied this .

Bernhard brought in Elinor Mavor to edit both Amazing and Fantastic . Mavor had previously edited Bill of Fare , a restaurant trade journal , and was a long-time science fiction reader , but she had little knowledge of the history of the magazines . She was unaware , for example , that she was not the first woman to edit them , and so adopted a male pseudonym — " Omar Gohagen " — for a while . She suggested a campaign to increase circulation , and went so far as to gather information about costs while on a trip to New York in 1979 . Bernhard decided instead to merge the two magazines . Circulation was continuing to drop ; the figures for the last two years are not available , but sf historian Mike Ashley estimates that Fantastic paid circulation may have been as low as 13,000 . Bernhard felt that since Fantastic had never been profitable , whereas Amazing had made money , it was best to keep Amazing . Until the March 1985 issue , Amazing included a mention of Fantastic on the spine and on the contents page . In 1999 , the fiction magazine formerly known as Pirate Writings revived the Fantastic title and Cele Goldsmith-era logotype for several issues , ultimately unsuccessfully , though this was not intended as a continuation of the original magazine .

The first issue of Fantastic was impressive , with a cover that sf historian Mike Ashley has described as " one of the most captivating of all first issues " ; the painting , by Barye Phillips and Leo Summers , illustrated Kris Neville 's " The Opal Necklace " . The fiction included some stories by well known names ; in particular , Raymond Chandler 's " Professor Bingo 's Snuff " would have caught readers ' eyes — the story had appeared the year before in Park East magazine , but would have been new to most readers . It was a short mystery in which the fantasy element was invisibility , achieved by magical snuff . Isaac Asimov and Ray Bradbury also contributed stories , and the issue led with " Six and Ten Are Johnny " , by Walter M. Miller . The rear cover reprinted Pierre Roy 's painting " Danger on the Stairs " , which depicted a snake on a staircase ; it was an odd choice , but subsequent back covers were more natural fits for a fantasy magazine . The quality of the fiction continued to be high for the first year ; sf historian Mike Ashley comments that almost every story in the first seven issues was of high quality , and historian David Kyle regards it as an " outstandingly successful experiment " . Science fiction bibliographer Donald Tuck dissents , however , regarding the first few years as containing " little of note " , and James Blish wrote a contemporary review of the second issue which found it lacking : Blish dismissed three of the seven stories in the Fall 1952 issue as being essentially crime stories written for the sf market , and commented that of the remaining four , only two were " reasonably competent and craftsmanlike " .

Other well-known writers appeared in the early issues , including Shirley Jackson , B. Traven , Truman Capote and Evelyn Waugh . Mickey Spillane had written a story called " The Woman With Green Skin " , but had been unable to sell it ; Browne offered to buy it on condition that he had permission to rewrite it as he wished . This was agreed and Browne scrapped Spillane 's text completely , writing a new story called " The Veiled Woman " and publishing it as by Spillane in the November – December 1952 issue . The issue sold so well it was reprinted , with over 300,000 copies sold . The emphasis was on fantasy , and much of it was " slick " fantasy — the sort of genre fiction that the upmarket slick magazines , such as The Saturday Evening Post , were willing to buy . Some science fiction appeared as well in the first couple of years , including Isaac Asimov 's " Sally " , which portrays a world in which cars have been given robotic brains and are intelligent . In 1955 it was decided to move the focus from fantasy to sf : in Browne 's words , " Stories of straight fantasy were largely eliminated and straight science-fiction substituted , cover subject matter became of a scientific nature , the words " science fiction " appeared under the title , interior artwork was tightened up to replace the loose , ' arty ' kind of drawing we had been using . " Sales rose 17 % within two issues . Browne was uninterested in science fiction , however , and the quality of the fiction soon dropped , with a small stable of writers producing much of Fantastic 's fiction under house names over the next couple of years . By the start of 1956 the fiction in Fantastic was , in the opinion of sf historian Mike Ashley , " [ in ] a trough of hack predictability " , but there was some inventiveness evident from newer writers such as Robert Silverberg , Harlan Ellison and Randall Garrett .

Although Browne had been unable to make Fantastic successful by specializing in fantasy , he was still interested in the fantasy genre , and experimented in the December 1955 issue with the theme of wish fulfilment . He dropped the words " Science Fiction " from the cover , and published five stories , all of which dealt with male fantasies in one form or another . The cover showed a man walking through a wall to find a woman undressing ; the art was by Ed Valigursky and illustrated Paul Fairman 's " All Walls Were Mist " . Reader reaction , according to Browne , was almost entirely favorable , and he continued to publish occasional stories on the wish-fulfilment theme . The experiment was repeated with the October 1956 issue , which again ran without " Science Fiction " on the cover , and contained stories on the theme of " Incredible Powers " . Once again the cover illustrated a male fantasy : this time it showed a man materializing in a bath house where women were showering . Browne had left Ziff-Davis by the time this issue appeared , but Browne 's plans for a magazine around these themes were well advanced , and Fairman , who by this time was editing both Fantastic and Amazing , was given Dream World to edit as well . It ran for three quarterly issues , starting in February 1957 , but proved too narrow a market to succeed .

When Goldsmith took over as editor , there was some concern at Ziff-Davis that she might not be able to handle the job . A consultant , Norman Lobsenz , was brought in to help her ; Lobsenz 's title was " editorial director " , but in fact Goldsmith made the story selections . Lobsenz provided blurbs and editorials , read the stories Goldsmith bought , and met with Goldsmith every week or so . Goldsmith was not a long-time sf reader , and knew little about the field ; she simply looked for good quality fiction and bought what she liked . In Mike Ashley 's words , " the result , between 1961 and 1964 , was the two most exciting and original magazines in the field " . New writers whose first story appeared in Fantastic during this period included Phyllis Gotlieb , Larry Eisenberg , Ursula K. Le Guin , Thomas M. Disch , and Piers Anthony . The November 1959 issue was dedicated to Fritz Leiber ; it included " Lean Times in Lankhmar " , one of Leiber 's Fafhrd and the Gray Mouser stories . Goldsmith published another half-dozen stories in the series over the next six years , along with other similar ( and sometimes imitative ) fiction such as early work by Michael Moorcock , and John Jakes ' early stories of Brak the Barbarian . This helped to invigorate the nascent sword and sorcery subgenre . Goldsmith obtained an early story by Cordwainer Smith , " The Fife of Bodidharma " , which ran in the June 1959 issue , but shortly thereafter Pohl at Galaxy reached an agreement to get first refusal on all Smith 's work .

During the early 1960s Goldsmith managed to make Fantastic and Amazing , in the words of Mike Ashley , " the best-looking and brightest " magazines around . This applied both to the covers , where Goldsmith used artists such as Alex Schomburg and Leo Summers , and the content . Ashley also describes Fantastic as the " premier fantasy magazine " during Goldsmith 's tenure — at that time the only other magazine focused specifically on fantasy fiction was the British Science Fantasy . Goldsmith 's tastes were too diverse for Fantastic to be limited to genre fantasy , however , and her willingness to buy fiction she liked , regardless of genre expectations , allowed many new writers to flourish on the pages of both Amazing and Fantastic . Writers such as Ursula K. Le Guin , Roger Zelazny and Thomas M. Disch sold regularly to her at the start of their careers Le Guin later commented that Goldsmith was " as enterprising and perceptive an editor as the science fiction magazines ever had " . Not all Goldsmith 's choices were universally popular with the magazine 's subscribers : she regularly published fiction by David R. Bunch , for example , to mixed reviews from the readership .

Wrzos persuaded Cohen that both Amazing and Fantastic should carry a new story in every issue , rather than running nothing but reprints ; Goldsmith had left a backlog of unpublished stories , and Wrzos was able to stretch these out for some time . One such story was Fritz Leiber 's " Stardock " , another Fafhrd and Gray Mouser story , which appeared in the September 1965 issue ; it was subsequently nominated for a Hugo Award . The reprints were well received by the fans , because Wrzos was able to find good quality stories that were unavailable except in the original magazines , meaning that to many of Fantastic 's readers they were fresh material . Wrzos also reprinted " The People of the Black Circle " , a Robert E. Howard story from Weird Tales , in 1967 , when Howard 's Conan stories were becoming popular . In addition to the backlog of new stories from the Ziff-Davis era , Wrzos was able to acquire some new material . He was especially glad to acquire " For a Breath I Tarry " , by Roger Zelazny ; however , he had to wait for Cohen 's approval for his acquisitions . Cohen , perhaps uncertain because of the story 's originality , delayed until it appeared in the British magazine New Worlds before agreeing to publish it . Wrzos commented years later that he would " never forgive him [ Cohen ] his timidity at that time " . Wrzos bought Doris Piserchia 's first story , " Rocket to Gehenna " , and was the first editor to acquire a story by Dean Koontz . He had to work with Koontz to improve it , and the delay this caused , in addition to the slow publishing schedule for new material , meant that Koontz appeared in print with " Soft Come the Dragons " , in the August 1967 Fantasy & Science Fiction , before " A Darkness in My Soul " appeared in the January 1968 Fantastic .

After Wrzos 's departure , Harrison and Malzberg had little opportunity to reshape the magazine as between them they only took responsibility for a handful of issues before Ted White took over . However , Harrison did print James Tiptree 's first sale , " Fault " , in the August 1968 issue ; again the slow schedule meant that this was not Tiptree 's first appearance in print . Harrison added a science column by Leon Stover , but was unable to change Cohen 's position on the reprints , and so could not print much new fiction . When Malzberg took over from Harrison he published John Sladek , Thomas M. Disch , and James Sallis , all of whom were associated with New Wave science fiction , but his tenure was too short for him to have a significant impact on the magazine .

White was only able to offer his writers one cent per word , which was substantially lower than the leading magazines in the field — Analog Science Fiction and Fact paid five cents , and Galaxy and Fantasy & Science Fiction paid three . Most stories would only be submitted to White once the higher-paying markets had rejected them , but among the rejects White was sometimes able to find experimental material that he liked . For example , Piers Anthony had been unable to sell an early fantasy novel , Hasan ; White saw a review of the manuscript and promptly acquired it for Fantastic , where it was serialized starting in the December 1969 issue . White also took care to establish relationships with newer writers . White bought Gordon Eklund 's first story , " Dear Aunt Annie " , it appeared in the April 1970 issue and was nominated for a Nebula award . Eklund was unwilling to become a full-time writer , despite this success , because of the financial risks , so White agreed to buy anything Eklund wrote , on condition that Eklund himself believed it was a good story . The result was that much of Eklund 's fiction appeared in Amazing and Fantastic over the next few years . In addition to experimental work , White was able to obtain material by some of the leading sf writers of the day , including Brian Aldiss and John Brunner . White also acquired some early work by writers who became better known in other fields : Roger Ebert sold two stories in the early 1970s to Fantastic ; the first , " After the Last Mass " , appeared in the February 1972 issue ; and in 1975 White bought Ian McEwan 's second story , " Solid Geometry " . It was included in First Love , Last Rites , McEwan 's first short story collection , which won the Somerset Maugham Award in 1976 .

White had been an active science fiction fan before he became professionally involved in the field , and although he estimated that only 1 in 30 readers were active sf fans , he tried to use this fan base to help by urging the readership to give him feedback and to help with distribution by checking local newsstands for the magazines . White wanted to introduce established artists from outside the sf field , such as Jeff Jones , Vaughn Bodé , and Steve Hickman ; however , the company was saddled with cheap artwork acquired from European magazines to be used for the cover and he was instructed to make use of them . He commissioned a comic strip from Vaughn Bodé , but was outbid by Judy-Lynn Benjamin at Galaxy ; he subsequently told his readers that he 'd signed up Bodé again for interior artwork , but this never materialized . Instead a four-page comic strip by Jay Kinney appeared in December 1970 ; a second strip , by Art Spiegelman , was planned , but never published . Eventually White was allowed to commission original cover art ; he published early work by Mike Hinge , and Mike Kaluta made his first professional sale to Fantastic . He tried to hire Hinge as art director , but this fell through and White filled the role himself , sometimes using the pseudonym " J. Edwards " .

Because of poor distribution , Fantastic was never able to benefit from the increasing popularity of the fantasy genre , though White was able to publish several stories by well-known writers in the field , including a sword and sorcery novella by Dean R. Koontz , which appeared in the October 1970 issue , and an Elric story by Michael Moorcock in February 1972 . A revival of Robert E. Howard 's character Conan , in stories by L. Sprague de Camp and Lin Carter , was successful at increasing sales ; the first of these stories appeared in August 1972 , and White reported that sales of that issue were higher than for any other issue of Amazing or Fantastic that year . Each Conan story , according to White , increased sales of that issue by 10,000 copies . White also published several of Fritz Leiber 's Fafhrd and the Gray Mouser stories , and added " Sword and Sorcery " to the cover in 1975 . In the same year a companion magazine , Sword & Sorcery Annual , was launched , but the first issue was the only one to appear . The quality of the magazine remained high even as the financial stress was mounting in the late 1970s . White acquired cover artwork by Stephen Fabian and Douglas Beekman , and stories by some of the new generation of sf writers , such as George R. R. Martin and Charles Sheffield . White departed in November 1978 , but the first issue of Fantastic under Elinor Mavor 's editorial control was April 1979 . Because White had returned unsold stories she had very little to work with and was forced to fill the magazine with reprints . This led to renewed conflict with the sf community , which she did her best to defuse . At a convention in 1979 she met Harlan Ellison , who complained about the reprint policy ; she explained that it was temporary and was able to get him to agree to contribute stories , publishing two pieces by him in Amazing over the next three years . The January 1980 issue of Fantastic ( Mavor 's fourth issue ) was the last to contain reprinted stories . Once the reprints had been phased out , Mavor was able to find new writers to work with , including Brad Linaweaver and John E. Stith , both of whom sold their first stories to Fantastic . The last year of Fantastic showed " a steady improvement in content " , according to Mike Ashley , who cites in particular Daemon , a serialized graphic story , illustrated by Stephen Fabian . However , at the end of 1980 Fantastic 's independent existence ceased , and it was merged with Amazing .

The title changed multiple times , and was frequently inconsistently given between the cover , spine , indicia , and masthead . A British edition published by Thorpe & Porter ran for eight bimonthly issues from December 1953 to February 1955 ; the issues were not dated on the cover . These correspond to the US issues from September / October 1953 to December 1954 , and were numbered volume 1 , numbers 1 through 8 . Fantastic was digest-sized throughout its life . The page count began at 160 but dropped to 144 with the September / October 1953 issue , and then again to 128 pages with the very next issue , November / December 1953 . The July 1960 issue had 144 pages , but apart from that one issue the page count stayed at 128 until September 1965 , when it increased to 160 . In January 1968 it went back down to 144 pages , and it dropped to 128 pages from February 1971 through the end of its run . The first issue was priced at 35 cents ; thereafter the price went up as follows : 50 cents in May 1963 , 60 cents in December 1969 , 75 cents in July 1974 , $ 1.00 in October 1975 , $ 1.25 in April 1978 , and finally $ 1.50 from April 1979 until the last issue .

" Mountain of Madness " is the twelfth episode of The Simpsons ' eighth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on February 2 , 1997 . In the episode , Mr. Burns tries to encourage more cooperation among his employees and forces the workers of Springfield Nuclear Power Plant to go for a team-building hike in the mountains . Burns and Homer are paired together and trapped in a cabin that gets buried by multiple avalanches . " Mountain of Madness " was directed by Mark Kirkland and written by John Swartzwelder . The script underwent many rewrites and the story was completely rewritten . Several new designs and backgrounds had to be created for the wilderness scenes . The episode received mostly positive reviews .

Mr. Burns decides to hold a good old-fashioned fire drill in order to excite things up around the plant . Upon hearing the bells ring , the employees panic and fail to clear the plant within 15 minutes . Outraged , Burns declares that everyone will be subjected to a teamwork competition at Mt . Useful . Homer brings his family to the mountain , not realizing it was only for employees , so he leaves them in the visitor center . Homer ends up being partnered with Burns while Smithers has to journey on his own , fuming that he was not paired with his boss . The object of this competition is to reach a cabin at the top of the mountain ; the last team to arrive will be fired . Along the way , Burns talks Homer into cheating and they use a snowmobile ( which Burns refers to as a " horseless sleigh " ) to reach the cabin . Arriving several hours early , they settle down in the comfortable surroundings . Burns and Homer quickly become friends . However , while clinking their champagne glasses , they inadvertently cause an avalanche that buries the entire cabin . Despite Burns 's attempt to operate a telegraph machine or Homer 's attempt to dig a tunnel through the snow , they remain trapped . The pair attempt further tunneling escapes , but each time they speak , they cause more avalanches that place even more snow between them and freedom . Meanwhile , Bart and Lisa meet Smithers and offer to help him proceed to the cabin , though they cause more stalling than helping .

Back in the cabin , Burns and Homer are beset by cabin fever . They build snowmen to pass the time ( though Burns insists they build real men out of snow ) and clothe them at the expense of their own warmth . The other employees reach what appears to be their destination ; however , it is actually a ranger station and they begin to realize that something bad has happened to their colleagues . In the cabin , Homer and Burns stare at each other 's eyes , filling their minds with paranoia . They are both driven mad and attempt to kill each other . After a vicious struggle , Burns ignites the cabin 's propane tank , launching the building out of the snow and propelling it toward the horrified onlookers . Once it comes to a halt , Mr. Burns reminds everyone of the contest , and all the workers hurry inside . Lenny is the last person in the cabin , and is told he is fired . Burns is informed the completion time of the competition has set a new record , and then decides that no one will be fired after all ( although Lenny , who is outside and falls into a crevasse , does not know that ) . The episode ends with Mr. Burns and Homer alternately laughing and glaring at each other .

" Mountain of Madness " was written by John Swartzwelder , although the script underwent many rewrites . According to Josh Weinstein , " a Swartzwelder script is like a finely tooled crazy German machine and if you have the wrong engineers try to fix it , it blows up . And that 's the thing , ' cause it had great jokes but we sort of changed the story and went through a bunch of drafts . " The story was completely rewritten and as a result , the plot became odder and quirkier with the scenes of paranoia deriving from this . The original script was " really crazy " but a lot of the more insane material was cut . However , most of the rewrites were done during the script-writing and did not require any major animation changes . One change was the ending , which was added after the animatic . The episode features several pairings of established characters who had previously interacted little , such as Smithers with Bart and Lisa . Weinstein feels that this was one of the first episodes to really feature the duo of Lenny Leonard and Carl Carlson and developed them more .

The episode was directed by Mark Kirkland and a lot of new designs and backgrounds had to be created for the wilderness scenes . The backgrounds were designed by animator Debbie Silver . The design of the forest ranger was based on then-Vice President Al Gore . In the episode , Marge watches an old film which includes a comment from naturalist John Muir . The impression of Muir was done by Dan Castellaneta , who originally based the voice on an impersonator he met at Yosemite National Park . However , the producers asked him to make the voice older and crazier .

Descent : FreeSpace – The Great War is a 1998 space combat simulation IBM PC compatible computer game developed by Volition , Inc. when it was split off from Parallax Software . Published by Interplay Entertainment , it is also known as Conflict : FreeSpace – The Great War in Europe . In 2001 , it was ported to the Amiga platform as FreeSpace : The Great War by Hyperion Entertainment . The story places the player in the role of a human pilot in the Galactic Terran Alliance , as it engages in war with the alien Parliamentary Vasudan Empire . This war is interrupted by the appearance of the enigmatic and militant Shivans , who begin slaughtering Terrans and Vasudans alike . Putting aside their differences , the Terrans and Vasudans form an alliance , and the player is assigned to missions to stop the Shivans ' genocidal advance . The player pilots a starfighter , and alongside competent AI wingmen , completes these missions to determine the fate of two races . Important battles in the story feature capital ships , which dwarf the fighters piloted by the player , and explode spectacularly when destroyed . Descent : FreeSpace was well received as a single-player space simulation that integrated all the desired features of its genre , but its multiplayer mode was plagued by lag and inaccurate tracking of statistics . Its expansion , Silent Threat , which comprised additional missions , was also released in 1998 . Its sequel , FreeSpace 2 , was released to critical acclaim a year later in 1999 .

Descent : FreeSpace – The Great War puts the player in a starfighter flying out on missions to investigate , protect , or destroy certain targets . Some have categorized it as a flight simulator , since it has more controls and commands than a typical arcade game . However , its flight model is simple , akin to that of the game TIE Fighter , though it incorporates some elements of Newtonian physics such as precise collision physics . In the single-player mode , the player flies through a series of missions in a campaign . Before flying a mission , the player goes through a briefing , which details relevant information and objectives . Ships and weapons are selected following the briefing , adding an element of strategy to the missions . When flying , the game 's perspective is a first-person view from within the cockpit , but the only visible interface is that of the head-up display ( HUD ) . The player can customize the HUD by changing its color , or by toggling the information displays . Missions must be successfully completed for the campaign to advance . However , not all objectives must be met for a mission to be considered successful . Results of a mission can affect later missions ; for example , an enemy capital ship allowed to flee in a particular mission may return in a later mission . Completed missions can be replayed on the in-game mission simulator . Training missions are mixed in with the regular missions ( and can be skipped ) , gradually introducing players to advanced commands and techniques as the missions become more sophisticated . The game has been said to be easily playable with the keyboard alone , or together with a mouse or joystick .

The story begins in 2335 , 14 years after the start of the Terran – Vasudan war . A lone GTA pilot , Lt. Ash , calls out for aid while being chased by ships belonging to an unknown race of aliens , who attacked both the GTA and PVE without warning , yet despite his best efforts to alert anyone in the GTA , the unknown ships jump in and promptly destroy his fighter and the nearby GTA space station , Riviera . GTA command tries to cover up the incident as nothing more than an unsubstantiated rumor , as the player character is assigned as a fighter pilot to the Terran Orion-class destroyer Galatea . The player is tasked with engaging Vasudan forces in the contested Antares , Ribos , Beta Cygni and Betelgeuse systems . During these engagements between the GTA and PVE , the prototype of the Terran " Avenger " cannon is stolen by a rogue Terran officer , Lt. Alexander McCarthy , who promptly attempts to defect to the Vasudans . The player subdues McCarthy but as they attempt to return the prototypes to the GTA , the same unknown ships attack again . The unknowns ' attacks intensify and with their energy shielding technology making their fighters virtually invincible , the GTA and PVE are forced into a ceasefire , as the two sides attempt to reverse-engineer the shield technology for their own purposes as well as adapting their pre-existing weapons to be more effective against the shields .

This new species is dubbed " Shivans " , and the GTA has squadrons embark on several missions , alongside the Vasudans as allies , to catch up with the Shivans ' technological superiority by capturing Shivan supply depots , acquiring Shivan shield generator technology in the process , while fending off a Vasudan death cult , the Hammer of Light , who worship the Shivans and refuses to accept the peace between the GTA and PVE . During operations , the GTA-PVE alliance manage to capture a Shivan cruiser , the SC Taranis . But its capture is only celebrated for a short time , as a Shivan warship , a super-destroyer dubbed the Lucifer , suddenly appears , destroying the captured Taranis and many other allied ships , while spearheading an invasion into the Vasudan systems and Terran outer colonies . To the shock of the alliance , they find that the Lucifer utilizes a powerful shield that makes it immune to all conventional weaponry . While continuing to do what is possible to stop the Shivans and eliminate the Hammer of Light , a Shivan fighter , dubbed a Dragon , is captured , and used to scan vessels entering a Vasudan controlled system , providing much intel on the super-destroyer . Yet despite all efforts , the GTA fail to stop the Lucifer 's journey to the Vasudan 's homeworld , losing the GTD Galatea in the process . The Lucifer enters the Vasudan home system and soon bombards the species ' homeworld into oblivion , killing 4 billion Vasudans .

However a small Vasudan refugee fleet that managed to escape , sends out a transmission revealing that they were forced to land on an uncharted planet in the Altair system where they had discover the remnants of an extinct alien civilization dubbed " the Ancients " which were destroyed by the Shivans long ago ; their backstory is told through cutscenes at various points in the game . The Vasudans discover that the Ancients knew how to penetrate the Lucifer 's shields as well as how to track ships travelling through subspace . Learning that shield systems do not work in subspace , but that the Ancients could not capitalize on this and were wiped out , the GTA and PVE launch a desperate assault on the Lucifer . As the Lucifer begins heading for Earth through a jump node between the Sol and Delta Serpentis systems , squadrons of fighters and bombers follow it into subspace and manage to destroy the super-destroyer while its shields are offline , by hitting its reactors . While the plan works , the destruction of the Lucifer in the jump node causes it to collapse , along with the other jump nodes in the system , cutting Sol off from the rest of the Terran colonies .

FreeSpace was Volition 's first project after the split from Parallax Software , which also spawned Outrage Entertainment . It is not part of the canon of the Descent computer game series , and contained none of its ideas and only small portions of its code . It was only prefixed with Descent to avoid trademark issues with Mijenix Corporation 's " FreeSpace " , a disk compression utility . Volition also used the term " FreeSpace " in the game to initially describe what became later known as subspace . The game was conceived by Adam Pletcher , with all the features of space simulator games his team had found to be fun . The games TIE Fighter and Wing Commander were their primary inspirations , and those influences made their way into the game 's flight model , along with the influence of historical WWII dogfights . Themes from the fiction of Star Wars , Space : Above and Beyond , and Ender 's Game form a part in shaping the background and story of the FreeSpace world . The chaotic battles between masses of ships commonly found in science-fiction anime became one of the features of FreeSpace .

Begun with a crew of five , the project grew to a staff of 17 . The game 's code was built from scratch . Most of the software modules were interlinked with each other , increasing the job 's complexity and difficulty . The code incorporated small portions of Descent 's code for specific functions . Kulas , who had worked on several versions of Flight Simulator and Descent , brought his experience into the game 's artificial intelligence ( AI ) . The game 's difficulty levels are based on advancing the enemy AI , rather than simply increasing damage and " hit points " of enemies . Some realism was incorporated into the game 's physics , such that an impact on one part of a starfighter 's body will send it spinning appropriately , unlike sphere-based collision detection , in which an impact would simply ' push ' the starfighter in a particular direction . Due to time and budget constraints , many of the initially planned cutscenes and stories were cut from the final product . Examples of such cuts include a campaign path where the Terran-Vasudan alliance goes on a retreat , and scenes of racial tension within the alliance . Despite the promise of a deathmatch mode for multiplayer , it was cut from the final product . The expansion Silent Threat also suffered the same fate of cuts due to budgetary and time concerns .

Apogee Software announced on December 12 , 1997 that they would be exclusively publishing FreeSpace for the first three months before handing the publishing rights back to Interplay Entertainment . This was part of their agreement with Interplay for the latter 's purchase of the rights to Descent , and Apogee decided to release FreeSpace as shareware , with themselves as the merchant of the registered version . Interplay , however , bought the full rights to FreeSpace from Apogee in late April , 1998 , keeping the ownership of the game solely to themselves . Volition aimed for a quality release , and promised to deliver a product without major bugs . Minor bugs would be fixed in a prompt manner . The shipped game , however , had deficiencies admitted by the team , such as problems with the multiplayer code , and a few design issues . The game underwent four patches , which resolved most of the bugs , and improved the multiplayer performance . Complaints about an online mission giving unfair scores led to Volition removing the mission from scoring play . Another patch allowed EAX capability to be enabled for Creative Sound Blaster sound cards . Interplay played its part in drumming up the community 's interest by holding contests , and expanding material for the FreeSpace universe . Meanwhile , Volition created official star maps , and released Vasudan voice clips and story development notes . Interplay hired science-fiction writers such as Fred Saberhagen , Simon Hawke , and Jeff Grubb to write weekly FreeSpace stories for two months . Preparing for Silent Threat 's release , Interplay held a contest from July 28 to August 25 , 1998 , in which the submitted fan-designed missions could win their authors prizes such as free copies of Silent Threat , FreeSpace apparel , and gaming hardware . Entries were judged by a panel from PC Gamer , and qualified entries constituted half of the missions in Silent Threat .

On December 14 , 1999 , Hyperion Entertainment announced their acquisition of the license to port FreeSpace to the Amiga system . The publisher was changed to Haage & Partner Computer on October 18 , 2001 . Despite the game 's official release being announced for December 2001 , the approval to do so could only be gotten on January 7 , 2002 . The game was shipped without a printed manual , but had additional German and French language support . Hyperion had stated they would port over Silent Threat if the FreeSpace port sold well . To date , Silent Threat has yet to be ported over to the Amiga platform .

FreeSpace — which was placed 20th in PC Gamer UK 's 1999 Top 100 Awards — was frequently compared to Wing Commander : Prophecy and X-Wing vs. TIE Fighter in its reviews , and stood up well against them . It has been said to be a combination of the two games , possessing the better qualities of each ; the plot is fairly epic , but the player is still just a pilot caught up in it all , fighting amongst fleets of starships . As the game took inspiration from space simulation classics and offered comparatively little of its own innovation , it was called unoriginal by a few reviewers . Most reviewers glossed over the game 's story , but a few found it lacking the depth needed to captivate the player . Some suggested that the game would have been better if the player had a greater role in controlling the outcome of the story . Without this impetus , these reviewers found themselves simply playing a " very sweet looking arcade title " , and felt detached from their wingmen and environment . This feeling was made worse in Silent Threat with its " cold and inhuman " briefings and non-player characters .

Several reviewers praised FreeSpace 's graphics , claiming asteroids are realistically rendered against softly glowing nebulae , while galaxies and stars of varying colors lay in the background . Others felt differently , stating the 3D effects were less spectacular than those of the software rendered version , the nebulae were unconvincing , and the ships ' textures were blurry and lacking detail . However , reviewers unanimously agreed the explosions in FreeSpace were the most spectacular they had ever seen , and were impressed with the many small details of capital ships breaking up . Sharky Extreme was dismayed by the game 's inability to go beyond 640x480 screen size . The game 's AI also received praise from reviewers , as the player 's wingmen were competent on their own and could be trusted with orders , even to the extent of co-ordinating attacks on capital ships . Likewise , the player 's enemies acted in concert with each other to achieve their squadron 's objectives . Despite one reviewer 's glowing praise for the FreeSpace 's online multiplayer over cable modems , the majority at that time were on dial-up access and roundly condemned the online multiplayer mode . The chief complaint was lag . GameSpot 's Desslock was amazed the game dared to advertise as being able to support 16 players online when it could not even support two players on 56k modems . Combatsim.com 's Fitzgerald called the multiplayer " bug ridden " after experiencing many of his shots not registering hits or kills on enemy ships after over 40 minutes of play ; all of it due to lag . Other reviewers found their situations similar with their guns only firing seconds after depressing the trigger , and their ships randomly jumping over the playing area .

Silent Threat was judged to be a decent but uninspired add-on . The campaign missions were either standard escort or destroy missions , and offered no new equipment which were unable to compete against the older equipment . The stand-alone missions , however , were toasted for the way they were conceived . The contest-winning entries gave breadth to the game 's variety of missions . This was made possible with the free editor FreeSpace Editor , or FRED for short . With the ability to import personal audio and 3D animation files , the editor allows users the same capability as Volition to create their own missions . The possibilities offered by the editor resulted in a call to the community to stop the flood of " Battle of Endor " -type missions , and to design missions following Volition 's Jason Hoffoss ' Zen philosophy of accomplishing more with less .

King 's Highway 72 , commonly referred to as Highway 72 , is a provincially maintained highway in the northern half of the Canadian province of Ontario . The highway connects Highway 17 in Dinorwic with the town of Sioux Lookout , where there are connections with Highway 516 towards Savant Lake and Highway 642 towards Silver Dollar . Highway 72 was built as a trunk route by 1920 , and became a provincial highway in 1937 . It has remained largely unchanged since then , aside from the reconstruction and realignment of the Frog Rapids bridge , and the renumbering of the fork towards Hudson as Highway 664 . The length of the highway is 68.5 km ( 42.6 mi ) , the entirety of which is situated in Kenora District . There are no significant settlements between its endpoints .

Highway 72 is a 68.5 km ( 42.6 mi ) route which serves to connect Sioux Lookout with the Trans-Canada Highway . The route begins at Highway 17 , on the western edge of Dinorwic . From there it follows an old routing of Highway 17 along the northern edge of the village , but eventually turns to the north into the wilderness . Between this point and south of the Frog Rapids Narrows , where Highway 664 intersects the route , the highways passes through a remote forested region dotted with lakes and muskeg ; there is almost no human habitation . After crossing the Frog Rapids Narrows , the highway enters Sioux Lookout . It zig-zags through the town , crossing the old Grand Trunk Railroad , now a Canadian National Railway line , next to a large rail depot . It exits Sioux Narrows , ending at an intersection with the Ed Arlano Bypass , Highway 516 and Highway 642 just east of the town .

Sioux Lookout and Hudson were both originally accessible only by rail and water when they were established as stops on the Grand Trunk Railway shortly after 1900 ; roads would not reach the remote area until 1920 . The road connecting Sioux Lookout and Hudson with the Ignace – Dryden Road was initially under the upkeep of the Department of Northern Development . On April 1 , 1937 , that department was merged into the Department of Highways ( DHO ) , after which the provincial highway network was expanded into northern Ontario . Shortly after the merger , the DHO began to assume highways throughout northern Ontario . On October 6 , 1937 , Highway 72 was established , connecting Highway 17 with both Sioux Lookout and Hudson . On the 1938 – 39 Official Ontario Road Map , the distance from Dinorwic to Sioux Lookout is listed as 48.0 miles ( 77.2 km ) , and from Dinorwic to Hudson as 53.0 miles ( 85.3 km ) . This routing remained in place until at least 1953 . By 1954 , however , the branch leading to Hudson was renumbered as Highway 116 . Highway 72 has , aside from minor realignments , remained unchanged since then .

The Croatia – Serbia border dispute refers to differing views held by Croatia and Serbia regarding their border in the area of the Danube River . While Serbia holds the opinion that the thalweg of the Danube valley and the centerline of the river represents the international border between the two countries , Croatia disagrees and claims that the international border lies along the boundaries of the cadastral municipalities located along the river — departing from the course at several points along a 140-kilometre ( 87 mi ) section . The cadastre-based boundary reflects the course of the Danube which existed in the 19th century , before meandering and hydraulic engineering works altered its course . The area size of the territory in dispute is reported variously , up to 140 square kilometres ( 54 square miles ) . The dispute first arose in 1947 , but was left unresolved during the existence of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia . It became a contentious issue after the breakup of Yugoslavia . Particular prominence was given to the dispute at the time of Croatia 's accession to the European Union . As of September 2014 the dispute remains unresolved , and the line of control mostly corresponds to Serbia 's claim .

The Croatia – Serbia border dispute entails competing claims regarding the border at several points along the Danube River valley shared by the two countries . The disputed areas are located along a 140-kilometre ( 87 mi ) portion of the course , out of 188-kilometre ( 117 mi ) of the river course in the area . In that area , the border is defined differently by the neighbouring countries — either as following the course of the Danube , as claimed by Serbia , or following a line tracing the borders of cadastral municipalities having seat in either of the two countries , as claimed by Croatia . The cadastre-based boundary also traces the former riverbed of the Danube , which was changed by meandering and hydraulic engineering works in the 19th century , after the cadastre was established . The border dispute involves up to 140 square kilometres ( 54 square miles ) of territory . Other sources specify somewhat different figures , indicating a Croatian claim over 100 square kilometres ( 39 square miles ) on the eastern bank of the river , in Bačka , while saying that the cadastre-based boundary leaves 10 to 30 square kilometres ( 3.9 to 11.6 square miles ) of territory on the western bank of the Danube , in Baranja to Serbia . Yet another estimate cites a total area of 100 square kilometres ( 39 square miles ) in dispute , 90 % of which is located on the eastern bank of the Danube , controlled by Serbia .

The bulk of the territory in dispute is in the vicinity of the town of Apatin , while the Island of Šarengrad and the Island of Vukovar are cited as particularly contentious parts of the dispute . Further disputed areas are located near the town of Bačka Palanka , and in the municipality of Sombor , at the tripoint of Croatia , Hungary and Serbia . Croatia claims that the cadastre-based boundary was adopted by the Đilas Commission , set up in 1945 to determine the borders between federal constituents of Yugoslavia , while Serbia claims that the same commission identified the boundary as the course of the Danube in 1945 . In 1991 , the Arbitration Commission of the Peace Conference on Yugoslavia ruled that the border between federal units of Yugoslavia became inviolable international borders , without referring to locations of any specific claim or line . The opinion was rendered at the request of Serbia . Prior to the ruling , Serbia asserted that the borders were subject to change following the breakup of Yugoslavia and the independence of Croatia . Since the Croatian War of Independence , the line of control coincides with the Serbian claim .

On 28 July 2002 , warning shots were fired by a patrol boat of the Yugoslav Army at four boats carrying the prefect of Vukovar-Srijem County and the mayors of Vukovar and Bačka Palanka , as well as several other civilians to Bačka Palanka . The incident took place approximately 800 metres ( 2,600 feet ) away from Šarengrad Island . Shots were also fired at a Croatian patrol boat after it attempted to approach the vessel carrying the prefect and the mayor . There were no casualties , but the passengers and crew of the civilian boat were arrested . Four elderly individuals and four children were released immediately , while the rest were interviewed at a Yugoslav military barracks for two hours before being set free . Yugoslav foreign minister Goran Svilanović expressed regret over the incident , but Croatian Prime Minister Ivica Račan stated that Croatia was not satisfied with the gesture . The Serbian Army withdrew from the border in October 2006 , turning control over to the Serbian police .

In early 2000 , Croatia and Serbia set up a commission tasked with determining the border , but in its first ten years it convened only once or twice . Since 2010 , the issue has gained increasing prominence in the disputing countries . Plans for construction of a port in Apatin , on a piece of territory claimed by Croatia , added fuel to the dispute . After years of inactivity the inter-governmental commission established to identify and determine the border between Croatia and Serbia met in Zagreb in April 2010 , only to conclude that there was a difference of opinions on the matter . Later that month , the Serbian Radical Party ( SRS ) proposed a National Assembly resolution which would require that Serbian officials resolve the dispute in compliance with the Serbian claim . Months later , Radoslav Stojanović , a former legal representative of Serbia and Montenegro in the Bosnian Genocide Case and former ambassador to the Netherlands , likened the dispute to the Croatia – Slovenia border dispute in the Gulf of Piran . Stojanović said that the position held by Croatia in its dispute with Slovenia was favourable for Serbia and warned that Serbia might be in a disadvantageous position if Croatia joined the European Union ( EU ) before Serbia — which would allow it to impose its conditions to the process of accession of Serbia to the EU .

By 2011 , Serbian diplomats made several requests to the EU , asking it to pressure Croatia to resolve the dispute before Croatia 's accession to the union out of fear that it might follow the Slovene example and stall Serbian accession similar to the impasse between Croatia and Slovenia over their border disputes and the subsequent blockade of the Croatian EU accession negotiation process . The request was denied by the EU . Croatian President Ivo Josipović said that the dispute was the most contentious issue of Croatia – Serbia relations but added that it should not be difficult to resolve . In 2012 , Josipović stated that Croatia should not block Serbia 's EU accession over the issue and suggested that the dispute should be resolved through arbitration , which is considered to be an acceptable solution by both countries . In 2014 , the Croatian ambassador to Serbia reiterated Josipović 's stance from 2012 . On the other hand , Zoran Milanović , the Prime Minister of Croatia , said that the resolution of the border dispute would be Croatia 's condition placed before Serbia in its EU accession negotiations .

In 2015 , Vít Jedlička from the Czech Party of Free Citizens proclaimed the micronation Liberland on what he said is land left unclaimed by both Croatia and Serbia . Shortly after Liberland , another micronation project , the Kingdom of Enclava , was declared , eventually claiming the second largest pocket as their territory , founded in November 2014 Principality of Ongal claimed the all others pockets . The Croatian Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs has rejected these claims , stating that the differing border claims between Serbia and Croatia do not involve terra nullius , and are not subject to occupation by a third party . However , the Serbian Ministry of Foreign Affairs stated on 24 April 2015 that while Serbia does not consider " Liberland " to be an important matter , the " new state " does not impinge upon the Serbian border , which is delineated by the Danube River .

The evolution of the Croatia – Serbia border began in 1699 with the Treaty of Karlowitz , transferring Slavonia and a portion of Syrmia from the Ottoman Empire to the Habsburg Monarchy at the conclusion of the Great Turkish War . The rest of Syrmia was transferred to the Habsburg Monarchy through the Treaty of Passarowitz in 1718 . The transferred territories were organised within the monarchy into the Kingdom of Slavonia , with its eastern border established at the Danube , and the defensive belt of Military Frontier stretching along the Sava River , governed directly from Vienna . Subsequent territorial changes in the region included the proclamation of the short-lived Serbian Vojvodina during the Hungarian Revolution of 1848 , which included Syrmia as its territory . A year later Serbian Vojvodina was abolished and replaced by the crown land of the Voivodeship of Serbia and Temes Banat , which ceded Syrmia back to the Kingdom of Slavonia . In 1868 , following the Croatian – Hungarian Settlement , the Kingdom of Slavonia was incorporated into the Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia , before the Slavonian Military Frontier was fully annexed to Croatia-Slavonia in 1881 . At the end of World War I in 1918 , Croatia-Slavonia became a part of the Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes ( renamed Yugoslavia in 1929 ) , as did Bačka and Baranja , which were formed after the division of Hungarian Baranya and Bács-Bodrog Counties along the " Clemenceau line " established through the Treaty of Trianon of 1920 . The territory of southern Baranja was ceded to the Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes on the premise that it formed a natural hinterland of the city of Osijek . The territory south of the " Clemenceau line " was not distributed to any administrative divisions in existence before the whole of the country was reorganised administratively in 1922 .

The first general outline of the post-1945 borders of Croatia was made by the Anti-Fascist Council for the National Liberation of Yugoslavia on 24 February 1945 . Some issues regarding the border , such as Baranja , were left unresolved . The newly established Autonomous Province of Vojvodina , a part of the Socialist Republic of Serbia since April 1945 , sought to establish its border with the Socialist Republic of Croatia along the Drava River , thus including Baranja , the Danube and along the Vukovar – Županja line . To counter the claims made by Vojvodina , Croatian authorities staked counterclaims in the areas of Vukovar , Vinkovci , Baranja and in the area of Sombor . In order to settle the matter , the federal authorities set up a five-member commission presided over by Milovan Đilas in June 1945 . The commission identified three sets of disputed territories . Those were the districts of Subotica , Sombor , Apatin and Odžaci in Bačka , districts of Batina and Darda in Baranja , and districts of Vukovar , Šid and Ilok in Syrmia . The districts in Bačka were awarded to Vojvodina , while those in Baranja were awarded to Croatia , both primarily along ethnic lines . The commission also noted that if Yugoslavia managed to acquire the region of Baja from Hungary , the decision regarding Bačka would be reviewed . The district of Vukovar was also awarded to Croatia , while Ilok and Šid were assigned to Vojvodina . In case of Ilok , the decision was specified to be provisional until authorities are consolidated on either side of the boundary , when the issue would be reexamined .

Subsequently , the Serbian Parliament enacted a law establishing Vojvodina 's borders . It referred to the boundary proposed by the Đilas commission explicitly noting that it was temporary . The law noted that the border follows the Danube from the Hungarian border to Ilok , crosses the Danube leaving Ilok , Šarengrad and Mohovo in Croatia then moves south and leaves the cadastral municipalities of Opatovac , Lovas , Tovarnik , Podgrađe , Apševci , Lipovac , Strošinci and Jamena in Croatia , and everything east of the line in Vojvodina . The awarding of Ilok to Croatia was a departure from the findings of Đilas commission and it was based on a referendum held in the town on the matter in 1945 or 1946 , when its population voted to be added to Croatia .

In 1947 , Vojvodina 's Ministry of Agriculture complained to Serbia 's Ministry of Forestry that the authorities in Vukovar refused to hand over four river islands , and then to Croatia 's Ministry of Forestry regarding the same matter , asking for assistance . After Croatia refused the request , the Serbian authorities turned to the federal government . The federal authorities advised resolving the matter through mutual agreement and said that Vojvodina 's interpretation of the law on its borders — that the border runs along thalweg of the Danube valley , i.e. along the river 's midpoint — is erroneous because the law does not apply such wording . In a letter dated 18 April 1947 , Yugoslav authorities said that the disputed river islands were the territory of Vukovar district and that the territory could not be transferred to Vojvodina before the border was defined otherwise . By May 1947 , authorities in Vojvodina noted that there was a dispute between them and the authorities in Croatia regarding the interpretation of the position of the border along the Danube , and that the federal authorities , who were asked to mediate in the dispute , supported the position of Croatia . At the same time , Vojvodina requested that Croatia return the territories on the right bank of the Danube that had previously been ceded to it ( Varoš-Viza and Mala Siga ) . While in the Yugoslav framework , the issue received little further attention as its resolution was discouraged by the federal authorities , and because the area involved had limited economic value , was uninhabited and frequently flooded .

The Cambridge crew weighed an average of 13 st 3 lb ( 83.7 kg ) , 3 pounds ( 1.4 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Oxford 's crew had two rowers with Boat Race experience , including stroke G. Sorrell ( who was rowing in his third race ) and number four S. F. A. Miskin . Cambridge saw a single participant return in number three J. A. Pitchford . Two of the participants in the race were registered as non-British . Oxford 's number six , Rodd Rubin , hailed from America while Cambridge 's number five R. B. Ritchie was Australian . Cambridge 's James Sulley became the first cox to follow in his father 's footsteps : A. L. " Jimmy " Sulley steered the Light Blues in the 1928 race . Peter Rickett , the Light Blues ' number six , also followed his father ( and coach for this year ) Harold , while R. B. Ritchie 's father A. B. Ritchie and R. D. Carver 's father H. R. Carver also rowed for Cambridge , in the 1922 and 1925 races respectively . Oxford 's stroke , David Edwards was the son of Hugh " Jumbo " Edwards who rowed in the 1930 race while P. D. Rickett 's father and coach Harold rowed in three races for Cambridge , from 1930 to 1932 .

Cambridge , who went into the race as favourites , won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station , handing the Middlesex side of the river to Oxford . In conditions described in The Times as " wretched " with fog and rain , the race started at 1 : 30 p.m. Although Oxford out-rated Cambridge , the Light Blues ' length of stroke saw them hold a three-quarter length lead after the first minute . Continuing to pull away , Cambridge were clear by Beverley Brook , half a length clear by the time the crews passed Craven Steps and increased this to a length-and-a-half by the Mile Post . A spurt from Oxford at the Crab Tree pub made no impression on the lead . Oxford were still out-rating by Cambridge three strokes per minute as they passed below Hammersmith Bridge , two lengths adrift of the Light Blues . By Chiswick Steps , the lead was three lengths where Cambridge saw off another spurt , with Oxford now rowing six strokes per minute faster than their opponents . Able to relax , Cambridge passed the finishing post three and a half lengths clear of Oxford in a time of 18 minutes 15 seconds , the third fastest winning time in the event 's history . It was Cambridge 's fourth consecutive victory and the fastest winning time since the 1948 race . A correspondent writing in The Times described the victory as a " great success " and attributed the win to Cambridge 's " uniformity , precision , and properly covered blades ... not to the brilliance of any individuals in the boat . " Jack Beresford , writing in The Observer , suggested that Cambridge 's crew was " as good as any since the war " but that while Oxford " rowed gallantly and never gave up " , their technique was inadequate .

She — subtitled A History of Adventure — is a novel by H. Rider Haggard ( 1856 – 1925 ) , first serialised in The Graphic magazine from October 1886 to January 1887 . She is one of the classics of imaginative literature , and one of the best-selling books of all time , with over 100 million copies sold in 44 different languages as of 2013 . She was extraordinarily popular upon its release and has never been out of print . According to literary historian Andrew M. Stauffer , " She has always been Rider Haggard 's most popular and influential novel , challenged only by King Solomon 's Mines in this regard " . The story is a first-person narrative that follows the journey of Horace Holly and his ward Leo Vincey to a lost kingdom in the African interior . There they encounter a primitive race of natives and a mysterious white queen named Ayesha who reigns as the all-powerful " She " , or " She-who-must-be-obeyed " . In this work , Rider Haggard developed the conventions of the Lost World subgenre , which many later authors emulated . She is placed firmly in the imperialist literature of nineteenth-century England , and inspired by Rider Haggard 's experiences of South Africa and British colonialism . The story expresses numerous racial and evolutionary conceptions of the late Victorians , especially notions of degeneration and racial decline prominent during the fin de siècle . In the figure of She , the novel notably explored themes of female authority and feminine behaviour . It has received praise and criticism alike for its representation of womanhood .

A young Cambridge University professor , Horace Holly , is visited by a colleague , Vincey , who reveals that he will soon die . Vincey proceeds to tell Holly a fantastical tale of his family heritage . He charges Holly with the task of raising his young son , Leo ( whom he has never seen ) and gives Holly a locked iron box , with instructions that it is not to be opened until Leo turns 25 . Holly agrees , and indeed Vincey is found dead the next day . Holly raises the boy as his own ; when the box is opened on Leo 's 25th birthday they discover the ancient and mysterious " Sherd of Amenartas " , which seems to corroborate Leo 's father 's story . Holly , Leo and their servant , Job , follow instructions on the Sherd and travel to eastern Africa but are shipwrecked . They alone survive , together with their Arab captain , Mahomed ; after a perilous journey into an uncharted region of the African interior , they are captured by the savage Amahagger people . The adventurers learn that the natives are ruled by a fearsome white queen , who is worshiped as Hiya or " She-who-must-be-obeyed " . The Amahagger are curious about the white-skinned interlopers , having been warned of their coming by the mysterious queen .

Billali , the chief elder of one of the Amahagger tribes , takes charge of the three men , introducing them to the ways of his people . One of the Amahagger maidens , Ustane , takes a liking to Leo and , by kissing him and embracing him publicly , weds him according to Amahagger customs . Leo , likewise , grows very fond of her . Billali tells Holly that he needs to go and report the white men 's arrival to She . In his absence , some of the Amahagger become restless and seize Mahomed , intending to eat him as part of a ritual " hotpot " . Realising what is about to happen , Holly shoots several of the Amahagger , killing Mahomed in the process ; in the ensuing struggle Leo is gravely wounded , but Ustane saves his life by throwing herself onto his prostrate body to shield him from spears . All seems lost as the Amahagger resolve to kill Ustane along with the white men but Billali returns in the nick of time and declares that the three men are under the protection of She . Leo 's condition , however , worsens and he nears death as Ustane faithfully tends to him .

They are taken to the home of the queen , which lies near the ruins of the lost city of Kôr , a once mighty civilisation that predated the Egyptians . The queen and her retinue live under a dormant volcano in a series of catacombs built as tombs for the people of Kôr . There , Holly is presented to the queen , a white sorceress named Ayesha . Her beauty is so great that it enchants any man who beholds it . She , who is veiled and lies behind a partition , warns Holly that the power of her splendour arouses both desire and fear , but he is dubious . When she shows herself , however , Holly is enraptured and prostrates himself before her . Ayesha reveals that she has learned the secret of immortality and that she possesses other supernatural powers including the ability to read the minds of others , a form of telegnosis and the ability to heal wounds and cure illness ; she is also revealed to have a tremendous knowledge of chemistry , but is notably unable to see into the future . She tells Holly that she has lived in the realm of Kôr for more than two millennia , awaiting the reincarnated return of her lover , Kallikrates ( whom she had slain in a fit of jealous rage ) . Later , when Holly inadvertently and secretly discovers Ayesha in her hidden chamber , he learns that she may have some degree of power to reanimate the dead .

The next evening She visits Leo to heal him . But upon seeing his face , she is stunned and declares him to be the reincarnation of Kallikrates . She saves him and becomes jealous of Ustane . The latter is ordered to leave Leo and never to set her eyes on him again . Ustane refuses , however , and Ayesha eventually strikes her dead with magic . Despite the murder of their friend , Holly and Leo cannot free themselves from the power of Ayesha 's beauty and Leo becomes bewitched . In explaining her history , Ayesha shows Leo the perfectly preserved body of Kallikrates , which she has kept with her , but she then dissolves the remains with a powerful acid , confident that Leo is indeed the reincarnation of her former lover . In the climax of the novel , Ayesha takes the two men to see the Pillar of Fire , passing through the ruined city of Kôr into the heart of the ancient volcano . She is determined that Leo should bathe in the fire to become immortal and remain with her forever , and that together they can become the immortal and all-powerful rulers of the world . After a perilous journey , they come to a great cavern , but at the last Leo doubts the safety of entering the flame . To allay his fears , Ayesha steps into the Spirit of Life , but with this second immersion , the life-preserving power is lost and Ayesha begins to revert to her true age . Holly speculates that it may be that a second exposure undoes the effects of the previous or the Spirit of Life spews death on occasion . Before their eyes , Ayesha withers away in the fire , and her body shrinks . The sight is so shocking that Job dies in fright . Before dying , She tells Leo , " Forget me not . I shall come again ! "

Horace Holly – protagonist and narrator , Holly is a Cambridge man whose keen intellect and knowledge was developed to compensate for his ape-like appearance . Holly knows a number of ancient languages , including Greek , Arabic , and Hebrew , which allow him to communicate with the Amahagger ( who speak a form of Arabic ) and She ( who knows all three languages ) . Holly 's interest in archaeology and the origins of civilisation lead him to explore the ruins of Kôr . Leo Vincey – ward of Horace Holly , Leo is an attractive , physically active young English gentleman with a thick head of blond hair . He is the confidant of Holly and befriends Ustane . According to She , Leo resembles Kallikrates in appearance and is his reincarnation . Ayesha – the title character of the novel , called Hiya by the native Amahagger , or " She " ( She-who-must-be-obeyed ) . Ayesha was born over 2,000 years ago amongst the Arabs , mastering the lore of the ancients and becoming a great sorceress . Learning of the Pillar of Life in the African interior , she journeyed to the ruined kingdom of Kôr , feigning friendship with a hermit who was the keeper of the Flame that granted immortality . She bathed in the Pillar of Life 's fire .

Job – Holly 's trusted servant . Job is a working-class man and highly suspicious and judgmental of non-English peoples . He is also a devout Protestant . Of all the travellers , he is especially disgusted by the Amahagger and fearful of She . Ustane – an Amahagger maiden . She becomes romantically attached to Leo , caring for him when he is injured , acting as his protector , and defying She to stay with him . Kallikrates – an ancient Greek , the husband of Amenartas , and ancestor of Leo . Two thousand years ago , he and Amenartas fled Egypt , seeking a haven in the African interior where they met Ayesha . There , She fell in love with him , promising to give him the secret of immortality if he would kill Amenartas . He refused , and , enraged , She struck him down . Amenartas – an ancient Egyptian priestess and ancestress of the Vincey family . As a priestess of Isis , she was protected from the power of She . When Ayesha slew Kallikrates , she expelled Amenartas from her realm . Amenartas gave birth to Kallikrates ' son , beginning the line of the Vinceys ( Leo 's ancestors ) .

In 1875 , Haggard was sent to Cape Town , South Africa as secretary to Sir Henry Bulwer , the lieutenant-governor of Natal . Haggard wrote in his memoirs of his aspirations to become a colonial governor himself , and of his youthful excitement at the prospects . The major event during his time in Africa was Britain 's annexation of the Transvaal in 1877 . Haggard was part of the expedition that established British control over the Boer republic , and which helped raise the Union flag over the capital of Pretoria on 24 May 1877 . Writing of the moment , Haggard declared : Haggard had advocated the British annexation of the Boer republic in a journal article entitled " The Transvaal " , published in the May 1877 issue of Macmillan 's Magazine . He maintained that it was Britain 's " mission to conquer and hold in subjection " lesser races , " not from thirst of conquest but for the sake of law , justice , and order " . However , Boer resistance to British rule and the resulting Anglo-Zulu war caused the imperial government in London to withdraw from pursuing British sovereignty over the South African interior . Haggard considered this to be a " great betrayal " by Prime Minister Gladstone and the Liberal Party , which " no lapse of time ever can solace or even alleviate " . He became increasingly disillusioned with the realities of colonial Africa . Victorian scholar Patrick Brantlinger notes in his introduction to She : " Little that Haggard witnessed matched the romantic depictions of ' the dark continent ' in boys ' adventure novels , in the press , and even in such bestselling explorers ' journals as David Livingstone 's Missionary Travels and Researches in South Africa ( 1857 ) . "

During his time in South Africa , Haggard developed an intense hatred for the Boers , but also came to admire the Zulus . However , his admiration of the Zulus did not extend to other African peoples ; rather , he shared many of the assumptions that underlay contemporary Victorian politics and philosophy , such as those expressed by James Hunt , the President of the Anthropological Society of London : " the Negro is inferior intellectually to the European ... [ and ] can only be humanised and civilised by Europeans . The analogies are far more numerous between the Negro and apes , than between the European and apes . " The Victorian belief in the inherent inferiority of the ' darker races ' made them the object of a civilising impulse in the European Scramble for Africa . Although disenchanted with the colonial effort , Haggard remained committed to this ideology . He believed that the British " alone of all the nations in the world appear to be able to control coloured races without the exercise of cruelty " .

Rider Haggard returned to Britain in 1881 . At the time , England was increasingly beset by the social and cultural anxieties that marked the fin de siècle . One of the most prominent concerns was the fear of political and racial decline , encapsulated in Max Nordau 's Degeneration ( 1895 ) . Barely half a century earlier , Thomas Babington Macaulay had declared " the history of England " to be " emphatically the history of progress " , but late-Victorians living in the wake of Darwinian evolution had lost the earlier positivism of their age . Uncertainty over the immutability of Britain 's historical identity , what historian Tim Murray has called the " threat of the past " , was manifested in the Victorian obsession with ancient times and archaeology . Haggard was greatly interested in the ruins discovered at Zimbabwe in the 1870s . In 1896 , he provided the preface to a monograph that detailed a history of the site , declaring : Haggard was strongly influenced by archaeology and evolutionary theories , especially ideas about the " racialisation " of historical decline prevalent during the fin de siècle . His distaste for the Boers stemmed in part from their depiction as a ' mixed ' race , descended from various European stock and intermarried with African locals . Lack of racial purity was seen as leading to evolutionary degeneration and national decline , a concept which he embodied in the Amahagger people .

By the time that Haggard began writing She , society had more anxiety about the role of women . Debates regarding " The Woman Question " dominated Britain during the fin de siècle , as well as anxieties over the increasing position and independence of the " New Woman " . Alarm over social degeneration and societal decadence further fanned concerns over the woman 's movement and female liberalisation , which challenged the traditional conception of Victorian womanhood . The role and rights of women had changed dramatically since the early part of the century , as they entered the workforce , received better education , and gained more political and legal independence . Writing in 1894 , Haggard believed that marriage was the natural state for women : " Notwithstanding the energetic repudiations of the fact that confront us at every turn , it may be taken for granted that in most cases it is the natural mission of women to marry ; that – always in most cases – if they do not marry they become narrowed , live a half life only , and suffer in health of body and of mind . " He created the character of She-who-must-be-obeyed " who provided a touchstone for many of the anxieties surrounding the New Woman in late-Victorian England " .

According to Haggard 's daughter Lilias , the phrase " She-who-must-be-obeyed " originated from his childhood and " the particularly hideous aspect " of one rag-doll : " This doll was something of a fetish , and Rider , as a small child , was terrified of her , a fact soon discovered by an unscrupulous nurse who made full use of it to frighten him into obedience . Why or how it came to be called She-Who-Must-Be-Obeyed he could not remember " . Haggard wrote that " the title She " was taken " from a certain rag doll , so named , which a nurse at Bradenham used to bring out of some dark recess in order to terrify those of my brothers and sisters who were in her charge . " In his autobiography , Haggard spoke of how he composed She within a six-week period of February and March 1886 , having just completed Jess , which was published in 1887 . Haggard claimed that this period was an intensely creative moment : the text " was never rewritten , and the manuscript carries but few corrections " . Haggard went on to declare : " The fact is that it was written at white heat , almost without rest , and that is the best way to compose . " He admitted to having had no clear story in mind when he began writing :

Various scholars have detected a number of analogues to She in earlier literature . According to Brantlinger , Haggard certainly read and was aware of the stories of Edward Bulwer-Lytton , in particular A Strange Story ( 1862 ) which includes a mysterious , veiled woman called " Ayesha " , and The Coming Race ( 1871 ) about the discovery of a subterranean civilisation . Similarly , the name of the underground civilisation in She , known as Kôr , is derived from Norse mythological romance , where the " deathbed " of the goddess Hel is called Kör and means " disease " in Old Norse . In She , a plague destroyed the original inhabitants of Kôr . According to Haggard , he wrote the final scene of Ayesha 's demise while waiting for his literary agent , A. P. Watt , to return to his offices . Upon completion , he entered Watt 's office and threw the manuscript " ... on the table with the remark : ' There is what I shall be remembered by ' " . An interesting and obscure reference to She appears in Lieut . George Witton 's 1907 Book , Scapegoats of the Empire ; The True Story of the Bushveldt Carbineers :

She was first published as a serial story in the Graphic , a large folio magazine printed weekly in London , between October 1886 and January 1887 . The serialisation was accompanied with illustrations by E. K. Johnson . An American edition was published by Harper and Bros. in New York on 24 December 1886 ; this included the Johnson illustrations . On 1 January 1887 , an English edition was published by Longmans , Green , and Co . , but without any images . It was the first publication of She in book format , and featured significant textual revisions from the Graphic serial made by Haggard . He made further revisions for an 1888 edition , which included illustrations by Maurice Greiffenhagen and C. H. M. Kerr . In 2006 a Broadview publication of She became the first edition to reproduce the Graphic serial text since 1887 .

Haggard contended that romances such as She or King Solomon 's Mines were best left unrevised , because " wine of this character loses its bouquet when it is poured from glass to glass . " However , he made a number of alterations to the original Graphic version of She before its publication as a novel in 1887 . One of the most significant was to the third chapter concerning the sherd , which was substantially expanded from the original to include the tale of Amenartas in uncial and cursive Greek scripts . Facsimile illustrations were also included of an antique vase , made-up by Haggard 's sister-in-law Agnes Barber to resemble the sherd of Amenartas . A number of footnotes were also included containing historical references from the narrator . Haggard was keen to stress the historicity of the narrative , improving some of the information about geography and the history of ancient civilisations in chapters 4 , 13 , and 17 . The 1887 novel also featured a substantial rewrite of the " hotpot " scene in chapter eight , when Mahomed is killed . In the original serialisation of She , the cannibal Amahagger grow restless and hungry and place a large heated pot over the head of Mahomed , enacting the hotpotting ritual before eating him . Haggard 's stories were criticised at the time for their violence , and he toned down this scene for the novel publication . The novel revised the hotpotting incident , with Mahomed dying instead when Holly shoots him accidentally in the scuffle with the Amahagger . Comparing the serial and novel editions of She , Stauffer describes the more compact narrative of the original as a reflection of the intense but short burst of creativity in which Haggard composed the story , arguing that " the style and grammar of the Graphic [ edition ] is more energetic and immediate " , although as he noted , " sometimes more flawed " .

She is one of the foundational works of fantasy literature , coming around the time of The Princess and the Goblin ( 1858 ) by George MacDonald , William Morris ' The Wood Beyond the World and The Well at the World 's End , and the short stories of Lord Dunsany . It is marked by a strong element of " the marvelous " in the figure of Ayesha , a two-thousand-year-old sorceress , and the ' Spirit of the World ' , an undying fire that confers immortality . Indeed , Haggard 's story is one of the first in modern literature to feature " a slight intrusion of something unreal " into a very real world – a hallmark of the fantasy genre . Similarly , the carefully constructed " fantasy history " of She foreshadows the use of this technique that characterises later fantasies such as The Lord of the Rings and The Wheel of Time series , and which imparts a " degree of security " to the secondary world . However , the story of She is firmly ensconced in what fantasy theorists call ' primary world reality ' , with the lost kingdom of Kôr , the realm ruled by the supernatural She , a fantastic " Tertiary World " at once directly part of and at the same time indirectly set apart from normative " primary " reality . Along with Haggard 's prior novel , King Solomon 's Mines , She laid the blueprints for the " Lost World " subgenre in fantasy literature , as well as the convention of the " lost race " . As Brantlinger has noted of the novel 's importance to the development of the " secondary world " in fantasy literature : " Haggard may seem peripheral to the development of science fiction , and yet his African quest romances could easily be transposed to other planets and galaxies " . In his history of science fiction , Billion Year Spree , Brian Aldiss notes the frequency with which Ayesha 's death in the Pillar of Fire has been imitated by later science fiction and fantasy writers : " From Haggard on , crumbling women , priestesses , or empresses – all symbols of women as Untouchable and Unmakeable – fill the pages of many a scientific romance " .

She is part of the adventure subgenre of literature which was especially popular at the end of the 19th century , but which remains an important form of fiction to the present day . Along with works such as Treasure Island ( 1883 ) and Prince Otto ( 1885 ) by Robert Louis Stevenson , and Jules Verne 's A Journey to the Centre of the Earth ( 1871 ) and Around the World in Eighty Days ( 1875 ) , She had an important formative effect on the development of the adventure novel . Indeed , Rider Haggard is credited with inventing the romance of archaeological exploration which began in King Solomon 's Mines and crystallised in She . One of the most notable modern forms of this genre is the Indiana Jones movie series , as well as the Tarzan novels by Edgar Rice Burroughs and recently Alan Moore 's The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen ( 2000 ) . In such fictional narratives the explorer is the hero , with the drama unfolding as they are cast into " the nostrum of the living past " . Holly and Leo are prototypes of the adventurer , who has become a critical figure in modern fiction .

She is also one of the central texts in the development of Imperial Gothic . Many late-Victorian authors during the fin de siècle employed Gothic conventions and motifs in their writing , stressing and alluding to the supernatural , the ghostly , and the demonic . As Brantlinger has noted , " Connected to imperialist adventure fiction , these interests often imply anxieties about the stability of Britain , of the British Empire , or , more generally , of Western civilisation " . Novels like Dracula and the Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde present depictions of repressed , foreign , and demonic forces at the heart of the imperial polity . In She the danger is raised in the form of Ayesha herself : She 's threat to replace Queen Victoria with herself echoes the underlying anxiety over imperialism and European colonialism emblematic of the Imperial Gothic genre . Indeed , Judith Wilt characterises the narrative of She , in which British imperialist penetration of Africa ( represented by Holly , Leo , and Job ) suddenly suffers a potential " counter-attack " ( from Ayesha ) , as one of the archetypal illustrations of the " reverse colonalism " motif in Victorian Gothic . Similarly , She marks one of the first fictional examples to raise the spectre of the natural decline of civilisation , and by extension , British imperial power , which would become an increasingly frequent theme in Gothic and invasion literature until the onset of World War I.

Rider Haggard 's writing style was the source of much criticism in reviews of She and his other works . His harshest critic was Augustus Moore , who wrote " God help English literature when English people lay aside their Waverley novels , and the works of Defoe , Swift , Thackeray , Charlotte Brontë , George Eliot , and even Charles Reade for the penny dreadfuls of Mr Haggard " ; adding , " The man who could write ' he spoke to She ' can have no ear at all " . A more common sentiment was expressed by the review of She in Blackwood 's Edinburgh Magazine : " Mr. Rider Haggard is not an exquisite workman like Mr. [ Robert Louis ] Stevenson , but he has a great deal of power in his way , and rougher qualities which are more likely , perhaps , to ' take the town ' than skill more delicate " . Modern literary criticism has tended to be more circumspect . As Victorian scholar Daniel Karlin has noted , " That Haggard 's style is frequently bathetic or clumsy cannot be denied ; but the matter is not so easily settled " . Stauffer cites the passage where Holly is meditating as he tries to fall asleep as emblematic of " the charges against " Haggard 's writing . In this scene , Holly lays down ,

The passage concludes with a wry remark from Holly , " I at last managed to get to sleep , a fact for which anybody who reads this narrative , if anybody ever does , may very probably be thankful " . According to Stauffer , " the disarming deflation of the passage goes a long way toward redeeming it , and is typical of the winning contradictions of the narrator 's style " . Tom Pocock in Rider Haggard and the Lost Empire has also highlighted the " literary framework " that Haggard constructs throughout much of the narrative , referencing Keats , Shakespeare , and Classical literature to imbue the story with a " Gothic sensibility " . Yet as Stauffer notes , " Ultimately , however , one thinks of Haggard 's plots , episodes , and images as the source of his lasting reputation and influence .

She is set firmly in the imperialist literature of the late-Victorian period . The so-called " New Imperialism " marking the last quarter of the 19th century witnessed a further expansion of British power , particularly on the African continent , and was characterised by a seemingly confident sentiment in the merits of empire and English civilisation . Thus She " invokes a particularly British view of the world " as Rider Haggard projects concepts of the English self against the foreign otherness of Africa . One such example occurs when Holly is first ushered into the presence of Ayesha , walking into the chamber behind a grovelling Billali who warns Holly to follow his example , or " a surety she will blast thee where thou standest " . Indeed , She is preoccupied with stressing quintessential British qualities through the " adventure " of empire , usually in contrast to foreign barbarism . However , the notion of imperialism is further compounded by the figure of She , who is herself a foreign colonising force . " In a sense then " , writes Stauffer , " a single property line divides the realm of Queen Victoria and that of She-who-must-be-obeyed , two white queens who rule dark-skinned natives of the African continent " .

Like many of his Victorian contemporaries , Rider Haggard " proceeds on the assumption that whites are naturally superior to blacks , and that Britain 's imperial extensions into Africa are a noble , civilising enterprise " . Although Haggard penned a number of novels that portrayed Africans in a comparatively realistic light , She was not among their number . Even in King Solomon 's Mines , the representation of Umbopa ( who was based on an actual warrior ) and the Kukuanas , drew upon Haggard 's knowledge and understanding of the Zulus . In contrast , She makes no such distinctions . Ayesha , the English travellers , and the ancient inhabitants of Kôr are all white embodiments of civilisation , while the darker Amahagger , as a people , illustrate notions of savagery , barbarity , and superstition . Nonetheless , the " racial politics of the novel are more complex than they first appear " , given that Ayesha is in origin an ancient Arabian , Leo is descended from , and physically resembles a blond Hellenistic Greek , while Holly is said to resemble a baboon in facial appearance – an animal Victorians typically associated with black Africans . Whilst critics like Wendy Katz , Patricia Murphy , and Susan Gubar have analysed the strong racist undercurrent in She , Andrew Stauffer has taken note of the qualifications through which " the novel suggests deeper connections among the races , an ancient genealogy of ethnicities and civilizations in which every character is a hybrid " .

Indeed , there is a strong Darwinian undercurrent framing the representation of race in She , stemming from Haggard 's own interest in evolutionary theory and archaeological history . In particular the theme of racial degeneration is a prominent aspect in the novel . Moving into the fin de siècle , late-Victorians were increasingly concerned about cultural and national decline resulting from racial decay . In She , this evolutionary concept of degeneration is manifested in Ayesha and the Amahagger . Haggard represents the Amahagger as a debased mixture of ethnicities , " a curious mingling of races " , originally descended from the inhabitants of Kôr but having intermarried with Arabs and Africans . Racial hybridisation of any kind " entailed degeneration " to Victorians , a " decline from the pure blood " of the initial races , and thus " an aspect of their degeneration is the idea that the Amahagger have lost whatever elements of civilization their Kôr ancestors may have imparted to them " . Thus , Ayesha proudly proclaims her own racial purity as a quality to be admired : " for Arabian am I by birth , even ' al Arab al Ariba ' ( an Arab of the Arabs ) , and of the race of our father Yárab , the son of Khâtan [ ... ] of the true Arab blood " . However , the novel 's starkest evocation of the evolutionary principle occurs in the regressive demise of Ayesha . Stepping into the Pillar of Fire , the immortal She begins to wither and decay , undergoing as death what Judith Wilt describes as the " ultimate Darwinian nightmare " , evolution in reverse .

When Rider Haggard first conceived of She he began with the theme of " an immortal woman inspired by an immortal love " . Although ostensibly a romance , the novel is part of the wider discourse regarding women and womanhood in late-Victorian Britain . Many scholars have noted how She was published as a book in 1887 , the year of Queen Victoria 's Golden Jubilee , and Adrienne Munich argues that Haggard 's story " could fittingly be considered an ominous literary monument to Victoria after fifty years of her reign " . Indeed , in her devotion to Kallikrates ( two thousand years after his death ) , Ayesha echoes the long-lasting fidelity of Victoria to her husband , Albert . However , unlike the " benign " Victoria , the question of female authority is realised to the extreme in the figure of She-who-must-be-obeyed , whose autonomous will seemingly embodies Victorian anti-feminist fears of New Women desiring ' absolute personal independence coupled with supreme power over men ' . Haggard constantly emphasises this anxiety over female authority in She , so that even the rationally minded and misogynistic Holly , who has put his " heart away from such vanity as woman 's loveliness " , ultimately falls upon his knees and worships Ayesha " as never woman was worshipped " . Similarly , although the masculine and chivalric Leo is determined to reject Ayesha for killing the devoted native girl Ustane , he too quickly falls under her will . In fact , Ayesha 's absolute command over the male sex is one of the most startling and unnerving aspects of the story .

In her role as the seductive femme fatale , Ayesha is part of " a long tradition of male fantasy that includes Homer 's Circe , Shakespeare 's Cleopatra , and Keats 's ' La Belle Dame sans Merci ' " . Brantlinger identifies the theme of " the white ( or at least light-skinned ) queen ruling a black or brown-skinned savage race " as " a powerfully erotic one " with its opposite being " the image of the helpless white woman captured by savages and threatened , at least , with rape " . The figure of She both inspires male desire and dominates male sovereignty , represented in her conquest of the enlightened Victorians Holly and Leo . The two Englishmen embody the powers of manhood , with Leo a reflection of masculine physicality and Holly a representation of man 's intellectual strength ; but both are conquered by the feminine powers of She , who rules as much through sex-appeal as through sorcery , immortality , and will . Thus Steven Arata describes her as " the veiled woman , that ubiquitous nineteenth-century figure of male desire and anxiety , whose body is Truth but a Truth that blasts " . Similarly , Sarah Gilbert sees the theme of feminine sexuality and authority realised in Ayesha as critical to the novel 's success : " Unlike the women earlier Victorian writers had idealised or excoriated , She was neither an angel nor a monster . Rather , She was an odd but significant blend of the two types – an angelically chaste woman with monstrous powers , a monstrously passionate woman with angelic charms " .

After its publication in 1887 She became an immediate success . According to The Literary World " Mr. Rider Haggard has made for himself a new field in fiction " . Comparing the novel to King Solomon 's Mines the review declared : " The book before us displays all the same qualities , and we anticipate for it a similar popularity . There is even more imagination in the later than in the earlier story ; it contains scenes of greater sensuous beauty and also of more gruesome horror " . The Public Opinion was equally rapturous in its praise : The fantasy of She received particular acclaim from Victorian readers and critics . The review appearing in The Academy on 15 January was impressed by the " grown-up " vision of the novel , declaring " the more impossible it gets the better Mr. Haggard does it ... his astonishing imagination , and a certain vraisemblance [ " verisimilitude " ( French ) ] makes the most impossible adventures appear true " . This sentiment was echoed in The Queen : The Lady 's Newspaper , with the reviewer pronouncing that " this is a tale in the hands of a writer not so able as Mr. Haggard might easily have become absurd ; but he has treated it with so much vividness and picturesque power as to invest it with unflagging interest , and given to the mystery a port of philosophic possibility that makes us quite willing to submit to the illusion .

The Spectator was more equivocal in its appraisal of She . The review described the narrative as " very stirring " and " exciting " and of " remarkable imaginative power " , adding : " The ingenuity of the story ... is as subtle as ever romancer invented , and from the day when Leo and Holly land on the coast of Africa , to the day when the Pillar of Fire is revealed to them by the all but immortal ' She-who-must-be-obeyed ' , the interest of the tale rises higher and higher with every new turn in its course " . However , the review took issue with the characterisation of She and the manner of her demise : " To the present writer there is a sense of the ludicrous in the end of She that spoiled , instead of concluding with imaginative fitness , the thread of the impossible worked into the substance of this vivid and brilliantly told story " . Haggard was moved to respond to the criticism of Ayesha 's death , writing that " in the insolence of her strength and loveliness , she lifts herself up against the Omnipotent . Therefore , at the appointed time she is swept away by It ... Vengeance , more heavy because more long delayed , strikes her in her proudest part – her beauty " .

A number of reviews were more critical of Haggard 's work . Although the reviewer of She in Blackwood 's Edinburgh Magazine considered it better than King Solomon 's Mines , he opined , " Mr. Rider Haggard has not proved as yet that he has anything that can be called imagination at all ... It might be wrought up into an unparalleled stage effect : but it is rather a failure in pen and ink . The more fearful and wonderful such circumstances are intended to be , the more absurd is the failure of them " . Even more scathing was Augustus Moore in the May edition of Time : A Monthly Miscellany , who declared : " In Mr Haggard 's book I find none of the powerful imagination , the elaborate detail , the vivid English which would entitle his work to be described as a romance ... [ rather ] it seems to me to be the method of the modern melodrama " . Moore was particularly dismissive of the novel 's style and prose : " Mr Haggard cannot write English at all . I do not merely refer to his bad grammar , which a boy at a Boarding School would deserve to be birched for ... It can only have been written by a man who not only knew nothing , but cared nothing for ' English undefiled ' . " Haggard 's English was a common source of criticisms , but Moore was even dismissive of the character of She who widely garnered universal praise . " Ayesha " , Moore declares , " is about as impressive as the singing chambermaid who represents the naughty fairy of a pantomime in tights and a tow wig " . Concluding his review , Moore wondered at the success that had greeted She :

Feminist literary historians have tended to define the figure of She as a literary manifestation of male alarm over the " learned and crusading new woman " . In this view , Ayesha is a terrifying and dominant figure , a prominent and influential rendering of the misogynistic " fictive explorations of female authority " undertaken by male writers that ushered in literary modernism . Ann Ardis , for instance , views the fears Holly harbours over Ayesha 's plan to return to England as being " exactly those voiced about the New Woman 's entrance in the public arena " . According to the feminist interpretation of the narrative , the death of She acts as a kind of teleological " judgement " of her transgression of Victorian gender boundaries , with Ardis likening it to a " witch-burning " . However , to Rider Haggard , She was an investigation into love and immortality and the demise of Ayesha the moral end of this exploration : Indeed , far from being a radical or threatening manifestation of womanhood , recent academics have noted the extent to which the character of She conforms to traditional conceptions of Victorian femininity ; in particular her deferring devotion to Kallikrates / Leo , whom she swears wifely obedience to at the story 's climax : " ' Behold ! ' and she took his [ Leo 's ] hand and placed it upon her shapely head , and then bent herself slowly down till one knee for an instant touched the ground – ' Behold ! in token of submission do I bow me to my lord ! Behold ! ' and she kissed him on the lips , ' in token of my wifely love do I kiss my lord ' . " Ayesha declares this to be the " first most holy hour of completed womanhood " .

She is one of the most influential novels in modern literature , with authors like Rudyard Kipling , Henry Miller , Graham Greene , J.R.R. Tolkien , and Margaret Atwood all acknowledging the importance of the work to their own and others ' writing . With over 83 million copies sold , the work is one of the biggest selling fictional titles of all time and has been translated into 44 languages . According to Stauffer , " She has always been Rider Haggard 's most popular and influential novel , challenged only by King Solomon 's Mines in this regard " . Such was the popularity and influence of the novel that it was cited in the psychoanalytical theories of Sigmund Freud and Carl Jung , the latter describing the character of She as a manifestation of the anima figure . The story is one of the most important texts of imaginative literature and had a lasting impact on the fantasy genre , directly giving rise to the ' lost civilisation ' tales of Edgar Rice Burroughs and Sir Arthur Conan Doyle , and the creation of mythologised locations such as Shangri-la . Tolkien recognised the importance of She to his own fantasy works , especially in its foregrounding of a fictional history and narrative . The figure of She is also considered by many scholars to be a formative influence on Galadriel - Ayesha 's reflecting pool seems to be a direct precursor of Galadriel 's mirror . Other characters in Tolkien 's Legendarium also seem to have been influenced , including Shelob ( who is referred to as " She " and " Her " in the text ) , and the escape across the chasm is highly reminiscent of the escape of the Fellowship across the chasm in Moria . Indeed , Haggard 's characterisation of Ayesha became the prototype of the female antagonist in modern fantasy literature , most famously realised in the figure of the White Witch , Jadis , from C. S. Lewis 's The Chronicles of Narnia . Kor and Ayesha appear in Alan Moore 's Nemo : Heart of Ice

She has been adapted for the cinema at least ten times , and was one of the earliest films to be made in 1899 as La Colonne de feu ( The Pillar of Fire ) , by Georges Méliès . A 1911 version starred Marguerite Snow , a British-produced version appeared in 1916 and in 1917 Valeska Suratt appeared in a production for Fox which is lost . In 1925 a silent film of She , starring Betty Blythe , was produced with the active participation of Rider Haggard , who wrote the intertitles . The film combines elements from all the books in the series . A decade later another cinematic version of the novel was released , featuring Helen Gahagan , Randolph Scott and Nigel Bruce . This 1935 adaptation was set in the Arctic , rather than Africa , and depicts the ancient civilisation of the story in an Art Deco style , with music by Max Steiner . The 1965 film , She , was produced by Hammer Film Productions and starred Ursula Andress as Ayesha and John Richardson as her reincarnated love , with Peter Cushing and Bernard Cribbins as other members of the expedition .

In 2001 another adaption was released direct-to-video with Ian Duncan as Leo Vincey , Ophélie Winter as Ayesha and Marie Bäumer as Roxane . Tim McInnerny starred as Holly with Mia Soteriou as Ayesha and Oliver Chris as Leo in a two-part adaptation on BBC Radio 4 's Classic Serial , originally broadcast on 2 July and 9 July 2006 . In 2007 a rock-opera / musical version of She was recorded live at the Wyspianski Theatre , Katowice , Poland by Clive Nolan and was released on DVD . In February 2012 the Nolan version of She had its first UK performance at the Playhouse in Cheltenham .

Robert Lynn Bomar ( January 21 , 1901 – June 11 , 1964 ) was an American football end in the National Football League ( NFL ) . Bomar played college football , basketball and baseball for Vanderbilt University , following coach Wallace Wade and classmate Hek Wakefield there from prep school , and was a unanimous 1922 All-Southern selection and a consensus 1923 All-American selection in football . The latter season included a first-team All-American selection by Walter Camp , rare for a player in the South . A paralyzing injury ended Bomar 's college career , but he quickly recovered and sat on the bench for all of his team 's games . He played for the New York Giants in 1925 and 1926 , retiring abruptly after a separate injury . Bomar was nicknamed " the Blonde Bear " . He had a later career in law enforcement . In his position as Tennessee 's Commissioner of Public Safety and Patrol chief , Bomar supervised the ransacking of black households during the 1946 Columbia race riot . He was the warden of Tennessee State Prison from 1955 until his death , and oversaw several executions . In 1956 , Bomar was the first Vanderbilt football player elected to the College Football Hall of Fame .

Bomar then attended preparatory school at the Fitzgerald and Clarke Military Academy in Tullahoma , Tennessee . In 1920 , he was a member of teams which won the state prep-school football and basketball championships . In both sports Bomar played under head coach Wallace Wade . While Wade coached at Fitzgerald and Clarke , the school 's overall football record was 15 – 2 . With him on the football team was future college teammate and All-American Hek Wakefield . On March 14 , 1922 , while Bomar was in college , the school burned to the ground and was never rebuilt .

Bomar played for head coach Dan McGugin 's Vanderbilt Commodores football team at Vanderbilt University from 1921 to 1924 . Wallace Wade was hired as Vanderbilt football 's assistant and line coach for 1921 and head coach of the basketball and baseball teams for 1922 . Bomar and Wakefield enrolled at the school in the same class . He was prominent on Commodore teams which compiled a win – loss – tie record of 26 – 5 – 4 ( .800 ) and three straight conference titles during his four seasons . Bomar was an All-Southern and All-American selection in 1922 and 1923 . In addition to playing end and tackle ( offense and defense ) , he made the kickoffs . Bomar 's play was described : The Blonde Bear was one of the world 's greatest football players , who never missed an open field block . When one considers he made Walter Camp 's All-America team when he was backing up the line on defense and blocking and catching passes on offense , his greatness is realized . [ Bomar ] plucked passes out of the ozone that seemed impossible to get , and then raced through the enemy like they were tied . " Often he started games at fullback , shifted to halfback or end , and finished at tackle . In backing up the line , [ he ] hurled back all comers with the same savage vigor .

During Bomar 's freshman season at Vanderbilt , he was already a standout player as a starting fullback . In a game against the Longhorns at the Texas State Fair in Dallas , the Commodores won 20 – 0 after they were expected to lose by two touchdowns . Texas had been undefeated in 1920 , winning the Southwest Conference . The 1921 squad was considered possibly the best in Longhorns history , and Vanderbilt football seemed to be in decline when Georgia Tech defeated the Commodores 44 – 0 the previous year . Dan McGugin gave a speech invoking late former Vanderbilt quarterback Irby Curry before the game . According to Edwin Pope 's Football 's Greatest Coaches , " The Texas game , sparked by McGugin 's unforgettable oratory , was the big one ; and Vandy got out of the year without a loss . " Bomar scored on a 40-yard interception return for a touchdown in the fourth quarter , increasing the Commodore lead to two touchdowns . In the sixth game of the season , Vanderbilt defeated the Alabama Crimson Tide 14 – 0 at Birmingham . The victory was expected by insiders ( then often called the " dope " ) , with Vanderbilt favored by two touchdowns . Early in the first quarter several runs by Jess Neely , a long pass from Neely to Tot McCullough and a 17-yard run by Neely brought the ball to the nine-yard line . After a run by Frank Godchaux , Bomar bucked over the line for a touchdown . The game against the Georgia Bulldogs decided the Southern Intercollegiate Athletic Association ( SIAA ) championship that season , with Bomar excelling at linebacker . " Georgia would have trampled Vanderbilt to atoms but for Lynn Bomar , " wrote Nashville Tennessean sportswriter Blinkey Horn . " Lynn Bomar was the stellar performer of the game . In the first-half he made two-thirds of the tackles " , and reportedly prevented five Georgia touchdowns that day . The Commodores tied the Bulldogs 7 – 7 on a fourth-quarter onside kick for a share of the SIAA title , finishing the season with a 7 – 0 – 1 record .

Vanderbilt had its second straight undefeated season in 1922 , with Bomar playing his preferred position at end . He was a starter in the scoreless tie with Michigan at the dedication of Dudley Field , spending much of the game tackling Michigan runners . According to the school yearbook , Bomar " tore through the Wolverine line constantly , and always emerged after a play on the far side of the defense " and the game included a goal line stand . Another account read , " Thousands of cheering Vanderbilt fans inspired the surge of center Alf Sharp , guard Gus Morrow , tackle Tex Bradford , and end Lynn Bomar , who stopped Michigan cold in four attempts . " The next week against Texas at the Dallas State Fair , Vanderbilt won 20 – 10 . Bomar made an interception and caught a 23-yard pass from Jess Neely , running 20 yards to set up a Gil Reese touchdown . Against the Tennessee Volunteers , he scored the second of two touchdowns on a short pass from Neely in a 14 – 6 victory . Bomar 's best offensive performance that year was against Georgia . Neely made a long pass from a few yards behind the line of scrimmage at the 45-yard line ; Bomar caught it near the seven-yard line , and was tackled by Georgia halfback Loren Chester ( Teany ) Randall at around the three-yard line before Reese scored the touchdown . Neely and Bomar were among the best pass-receiver combinations in Vanderbilt history : " Bomar , unquestionably , was Vanderbilt 's best receiver , snatching everything thrown at him . "

A similar play in the game 's second half scored another touchdown . Quarterback Doc Kuhn dropped back for a more than 40-yard touchdown pass to Bomar . The pass went 28 yards in the air , with Bomar running the rest of the way . Georgia running back Dave Collings tackled him as he crossed the goal line ( injuring himself ) , and Bomar also made an interception in the 12 – 0 Vanderbilt victory . The season 's final game , against Vanderbilt 's oldest rival Sewanee , had a trick play by the Commodores . A fake run ended with Kuhn tossing the ball to Bomar , who was left open behind the defense and easily ran it in ; Vanderbilt won , 26 – 0 . After the season , Bomar received first-team All-American honors from Frank G. Menke . He was also chosen a second-team All-American by Walter Camp , a third-team All-American by Walter Eckersall and appeared on Billy Evans ' National Honor Roll . Bomar and Red Barron of Georgia Tech were the two unanimous All-Southern selections . Grantland Rice wrote the next year , " There was no better end in the country last fall " and Camp described Bomar :

Bomar , of Vanderbilt , is only shaded a little by two other ends , largely through the experienced gained by his rivals against stronger opposition . He weighs 200 pounds , is tremendously fast , and a hardy , defensive player . On attack he is able to pick the forward pass out of the air on the full run , and , running with a high-knee action quite like that of the redoubtable Ted Coy , if he cannot get by his man , runs him down and goes on over him , still on his feet .

In 1923 , assistant coach Wallace Wade was hired as head coach at Alabama and was replaced by former star tackle Josh Cody . A rematch against the Michigan Wolverines at Ferry Field was a 3 – 0 Vanderbilt loss , with consensus All-American center Jack Blott scoring Michigan 's field goal . According to the Michigan Alumnus , Harry Kipke could not return punts for fear of fumbling ; when he received the ball , Vanderbilt ends Hek Wakefield or Bomar would tackle him . In a diagram of the game 's plays , Vanderbilt 's only completed pass was from Bomar to Kuhn . Bomar excelled against Tulane , blocking a number of punts in a 17 – 0 victory . Times-Picayune sportswriter Ed Hebert wrote , " Take Bomar out of the Vandy lineup and Tulane would have won the game by three touchdowns . " A postseason charity game was played against former and contemporary Princeton Tigers all-stars . The game was a 7 – 7 tie , with Vanderbilt 's touchdown scored on an 18-yard pass from Kuhn to Bomar . Vanderbilt and Washington and Lee finished the season as Southern Conference co-champions . A sportswriters ' poll chose the Commodores as best team in the South , awarding them the Pickens Trophy ( awarded from 1923 to 1926 ) . Bomar was a consensus All-American , receiving first-team honors from Collier 's Weekly ( Walter Camp ) and second-team honors from Athletic World magazine . He was one of the first players from the South to receive first-team honors from Camp , who described the player :

Bomar of Vanderbilt is an experienced end of 200 pounds in weight , with speed , initiative , and an uncanny perception in diagnosing plays . Bomar can back up a line when needed , can not be swept out by swinging interference and is powerful enough to hold his own even when big guards and tackles come at him . As a receiver of a forward pass , he has , besides the skill , the excellent quality of being very hard to knock off his feet , and when he and the defense both try for the pass at the same time , Bomar is far more likely to get the ball on account of the fact that he outweighs the majority of defensive players . He has been used in all sorts of positions this year , both in attack and defense and this had broadened his scope and increased his value .

During Bomar 's senior season ( when he moved to halfback ) , the Commodores tied the Quantico Marines 13 – 13 . Bomar , picking up a fumble , ran 84 yards for a touchdown . According to a newspaper account , " It was Lynn Bomar 's gigantic figure that broke up what looked like a Marine cakewalk . After receiving the kickoff , the Marines drove steadily to Vanderbilt 's 10-yard line as Goettge repeatedly completed short passes . At the 10 , Groves dropped back . The pass from center was low . He missed it . He reached for the ball . It trickled off his fingers . The Commodores were boring in . Wakefield was in there . Then Bomar came charging through . He picked up the ball and with a twist was out of Groves ' grasp . He came out of the bunch with a long , charging run . Then he seemed a little undecided . One fleeting glance behind him and he struck out . Up came his free arm to brush off his headgear . His thin , yellow hair stood out . On he swept like a thundercloud of vengeance across the goal . Bedlam broke loose . " Captain and guard Tuck Kelly was injured during the game , making Bomar the interim captain two weeks later against the Georgia Bulldogs .

In the Georgia game Bomar had a brain hemorrhage after he was kicked in the chin , and half his body was paralyzed for two days . It was thought that he would never play football again : " Not a player on the team could talk of Bomar 's injury without tears coming to his eyes " , and Bomar sat on the bench for the rest of the season 's games . Known as a devastating blocker and " lightning fast , " he was the first Commodore football player elected to the College Football Hall of Fame in 1956 . At his induction Bomar said , " I just wish all the men who played with me at Vanderbilt between 1921 and 1924 could also receive this coveted award . They deserve it more than I do . After all , they made it possible for me to be chosen . " He was a member of the Kappa Sigma fraternity . Nashville sportswriter Fred Russell , who entered Vanderbilt in 1924 , told a story about Bomar in his autobiography Bury Me In An Old Press Box : " As a freshman I had pledged Kappa Sigma fraternity , which at that time had many varsity athletes . Among them was Lynn Bomar , selected All-American end in 1923 ... I also had the responsibility , as a freshman , of awakening Bomar in time for him to get to classes , and at the end of the school year I did this one morning by rolling the biggest lighted firecracker I ever saw under his bed . When it exploded I feared the whole corner of the fraternity house had been blown off , and I was so scared that even Bomar in his BVD 's chasing me across the street and deep into the campus couldn 't catch me . "

According to Vanderbilt 's All-Southern halfback and 1924 captain-elect Gil Reese , " He would never let them jump on me . Whenever anyone would threaten me , Bomar was always right there to say ' Keep your hands off that boy ' . They always did , too . Bomar always looked after me , and he always called back to me when we started on end runs . No one could run interference like Bomar . " Bomar and Reese were on an all-time Vanderbilt team in the school 's 1934 yearbook , and Bomar was chosen for an Associated Press Southeast Area all-time football team for the era from 1920 to 1969 .

The 1922 – 23 team had a 16 – 8 record , beating the LSU Tigers but losing to the Virginia Tech Hokies in the Southern Intercollegiate Athletic Association tournament . An account of the LSU game read , " Either Vanderbilt was in rare form or L.S.U. has a good fighting team with no shooting ability . Fans were treated to the most one-sided contest of opening day when these two clubs met , the Commodores scoring 13 points before the Louisianans had counted once , winning 36 to 10 . " Bomar scored two points in the game .

The team , coached by Josh Cody , had a 7 – 15 record . In the SoCon tournament , Vanderbilt defeated Clemson 42 – 13 and Bomar scored seven points . According to one account , " Reese and Bomar used to be famous for their forward pass work . They are still using it in basketball . Most of Bomar 's passes to Reese are caught over the right shoulder with the recipient facing away from the passer . " Along with Reese , All-Southern forward Alvin Bell was also a teammate . Vanderbilt lost the next game to the eventual tournament champions , Jack Cobb and Cartwright Carmichael-led North Carolina , 37 – 20 . When Bomar was sidelined by a football injury in 1924 , Gil Reese became the basketball team captain .

Bomar fully recovered from his injury and played professional football as an end for the inaugural 1925 New York Giants of the National Football League ( NFL ) with Jim Thorpe , Century Milstead , and Owen Reynolds . He was signed to the Giants by Harry March . The first noteworthy game for Bomar was a 14 – 0 loss to the Frankford Yellow Jackets . After the Giants ' poor first half , the Yellow Jackets led by 14 points . During the second half the Giants recovered somewhat , with good passes from Jack McBride to Bomar but no chance of a comeback . In a 13 – 0 victory over the Rochester Jeffersons , McBride threw a 27-yard touchdown pass to Bomar . A 13 – 12 win over the Providence Steam Roller had a 24-yard touchdown pass from McBride to Bomar and an interesting ending . The Giants were backed up near their end zone , faced with a fourth down and leading 13 – 10 . Providence was set for a blitz on the punter , but when he caught the ball he knelt in the end zone for a safety ( not enough for Providence to win ) . Against the Kansas City Cowboys , several passes from McBride to Bomar netted 24 yards in a 67-yard touchdown drive for a 9 – 3 victory . Bomar had possibly his best day in a 23 – 0 victory over the Dayton Triangles before a crowd of 18,000 . Six of McBride 's completed passes that day were to Bomar , including a 45-yarder for the Giants ' first touchdown . Bomar was selected to NFL president Joseph Carr 's all-star team .

Although the Giants played well , the team experienced financial hardship during its first year . Player salaries were so low that most had to take additional jobs to support themselves . The team 's brief practices , held at 4 : 30 pm each day to accommodate outside-work schedules , enabled little in-season improvement . Overshadowed by baseball , boxing and college football , professional football was not a popular sport in 1925 and owner Tim Mara spent $ 25,000 of his own money during the season to keep the team going . The financial struggle continued until the 11th game of the season , when the visiting Red Grange and the Chicago Bears drew more than 73,000 fans ( a pro-football record ) and an additional 20,000 were turned away . This gave the Giants much-needed revenue , possibly altering the team 's history . In the 19 – 7 Bears victory , Grange intercepted a pass intended for Bomar and returned it for a touchdown .

From the top of the American Radiator Building to the ground in Bryant Park , a drop of 324 feet ( 98.75 m ) , Bomar completed a pass to Hinkey Haines for a record on November 12 . Haines caught the ball on the fifth attempt . On Bomar 's first attempt , the New York Times reported that the ball " hit the sidewalk and burst " and the third pass knocked Haines over . The stunt took place two days before a game with the Los Angeles Buccaneers . " It was as much as anything a playful jab at Brick Muller " ( the Buccaneers ' end ) , who caught a pass thrown from atop the Telephone Building — a drop of 320 feet ( 97.5 m ) — in San Francisco the year before to advertise the first East-West Shrine Game .

After football and marriage , Bomar was assistant manager of the Colonial Hotel in Springfield , Tennessee for seven years . He sold life insurance , but found it dull . Bomar then began a long career in law enforcement , beginning in the United States Marshals Service office from 1934 to 1939 . In 1939 he became a division chief with the Knoxville Highway Patrol and a year later became director of public safety , overseeing the city 's police and fire departments . For a few months the public-safety position was eliminated , and Bomar was again the Highway Patrol division chief . Governor Prentice Cooper promoted him to chief on a trial basis in 1942 , when the incumbent went on active duty in World War II .

In 1946 , Bomar supervised the ransacking of African-American households in the Columbia Race Riot . A February 25 fight between James Stephenson , an African-American Navy veteran , and a white shopkeeper reportedly ignited the unrest . Later that day there was gunfire , fighting and rioting between whites and African Americans in Mink Slide , Columbia 's African-American business district . When black citizens shot out the street lights , three officers and a chief responded to the gunfire ; all four were shot . Bomar , described by one writer as commanding " the firing line of the State Highway Police , " led the team sent in after the shootings with permission from the state attorney general to search homes and businesses for weapons . None of the accused were granted bail or allowed legal counsel , and 12 were charged with attempted murder . Under oath in court , Bomar said that he had no search warrant and anticipated that he would not have a warrant the next time he searched similar properties . He called journalist Vincent Sheean a " lying Communistic yellow — — . " According to a contemporary account , " In this situation , even though it ’ s fair to say [ Bomar ] was just doing his job , it ’ s equally clear that he was a loose cannon . His personality dominated the scene , and it was the personality of a bully . "

Sitting Bull ( Lakota : Tȟatȟáŋka Íyotake in Standard Lakota Orthography , also nicknamed Húŋkešni or " Slow " ; c . 1831 – December 15 , 1890 ) was a Hunkpapa Lakota holy man who led his people during years of resistance to United States government policies . He was killed by Indian agency police on the Standing Rock Indian Reservation during an attempt to arrest him , at a time when authorities feared that he would join the Ghost Dance movement . Before the Battle of the Little Bighorn , Sitting Bull had a vision in which he saw many soldiers , " as thick as grasshoppers , " falling upside down into the Lakota camp , which his people took as a foreshadowing of a major victory in which a large number of soldiers would be killed . About three weeks later , the confederated Lakota tribes with the Northern Cheyenne defeated the 7th Cavalry under Lt. Col. George Armstrong Custer on June 25 , 1876 , annihilating Custer 's battalion and seeming to bear out Sitting Bull 's prophetic vision . Sitting Bull 's leadership inspired his people to a major victory . Months after their victory at the battle , Sitting Bull and his group left the United States for Wood Mountain , North-West Territories ( now Saskatchewan ) , where he remained until 1881 , at which time he and most of his band returned to US territory and surrendered to U.S. forces . A small remnant of his band under Waŋblí Ǧi decided to stay at Wood Mountain .

After working as a performer with Buffalo Bill 's Wild West show , Sitting Bull returned to the Standing Rock Agency in South Dakota . Because of fears that he would use his influence to support the Ghost Dance movement , Indian Service agent James McLaughlin at Fort Yates ordered his arrest . During an ensuing struggle between Sitting Bull 's followers and the agency police , Sitting Bull was shot in the side and head by Standing Rock policemen Lieutenant Bull Head ( Tatankapah Lakota : Tȟatȟáŋka Pȟá ) and Red Tomahawk ( Marcelus Chankpidutah Lakota : " Čhaŋȟpí Dúta " ) after the police were fired upon by Sitting Bull 's supporters . His body was taken to nearby Fort Yates for burial . In 1953 , his Lakota family exhumed what were believed to be his remains , reburying them near Mobridge , South Dakota , near his birthplace .

Sitting Bull was born in Dakota Territory . In 2007 , Sitting Bull 's great-grandson asserted from family oral tradition that Sitting Bull was born along the Yellowstone River , south of present-day Miles City , Montana . He was named Jumping Badger at birth , and nicknamed Hunkesi , or " Slow , " said to describe his careful and unhurried nature . When the boy was fourteen years old he accompanied a group of Lakota warriors ( which included his father and his uncle Four Horns ) in a raiding party to take horses from a camp of Crow warriors . Jumping Badger displayed bravery by riding forward and counting coup on one of the surprised Crow , which was witnessed by the other mounted Lakota . Upon returning to camp his father gave a celebratory feast at which he conferred his own name upon his son . The name , Tȟatȟaŋka Iyotȟaŋka ( Tatanka Iyotaka ) , which in the Lakota language means " Buffalo Bull Who Sits Down " , would later be abbreviated to " Sitting Bull " . Thereafter , Sitting Bull 's father was known as Jumping Bull . At this ceremony before the entire band , Sitting Bull 's father presented his son with an eagle feather to wear in his hair , a warrior 's horse , and a hardened buffalo hide shield to mark his son 's passage into manhood as a Lakota warrior .

During the Dakota War of 1862 , in which Sitting Bull 's people were not involved , several bands of eastern Dakota people killed an estimated 300 to 800 settlers and soldiers in south-central Minnesota in response to poor treatment by the government and in an effort to drive the whites away . Despite being embroiled in the American Civil War , the United States Army retaliated in 1863 and 1864 , even against bands which had not been involved in the hostilities . In 1864 , two brigades of about 2200 soldiers under Brigadier General Alfred Sully attacked a village . The defenders were led by Sitting Bull , Gall and Inkpaduta . The Lakota and Dakota were driven out , but skirmishing continued into August . In September , Sitting Bull and about one hundred Hunkpapa Lakota encountered a small party near what is now Marmarth , North Dakota . They had been left behind by a wagon train commanded by Captain James L. Fisk to effect some repairs to an overturned wagon . When he led an attack , Sitting Bull was shot in the left hip by a soldier . The bullet exited out through the small of his back , and the wound was not serious .

From 1866 to 1868 , Red Cloud as a leader of the Oglala Lakota fought against US forces , attacking their forts in an effort to keep control of the Powder River Country of Montana . In support of him , Sitting Bull led numerous war parties against Fort Berthold , Fort Stevenson , and Fort Buford and their environs from 1865 through 1868 . Sitting Bull also made guerrilla attacks on emigrant parties and smaller forts throughout the upper Missouri River region . By early 1868 , the U.S. government desired a peaceful settlement to Red Cloud 's War . It agreed to Red Cloud 's demands that the US abandon forts Phil Kearny and C.F. Smith . Gall of the Hunkpapa ( among other representatives of the Hunkpapa , Blackfeet , and Yankton Dakota ) signed a form of the Treaty of Fort Laramie on July 2 , 1868 at Fort Rice ( near Bismarck , North Dakota ) . Sitting Bull did not agree to the treaty . He told the Jesuit missionary , Pierre Jean De Smet , who sought him out on behalf of the government : “ I wish all to know that I do not propose to sell any part of part of my country . ” He continued his hit-and-run attacks on forts in the upper Missouri area throughout the late 1860s and early 1870s .

Sitting Bull 's band of Hunkpapa continued to attack migrating parties and forts in the late 1860s . When in 1871 the Northern Pacific Railway conducted a survey for a route across the northern plains directly through Hunkpapa lands , it encountered stiff Lakota resistance . The same railway people returned the following year accompanied by federal troops . Sitting Bull and the Hunkpapa attacked the survey party , which was forced to turn back . In 1873 , the military accompaniment for the surveyors was increased again , but Sitting Bull 's forces resisted the survey " most vigorously . " The Panic of 1873 forced the Northern Pacific Railway 's backers ( such as Jay Cooke ) into bankruptcy . This halted construction of the railroad through Lakota , Dakota , and Nakota territory . After the 1848 finding of gold in the Sierra Nevada and dramatic gains in new wealth from it , other men became interested in the potential for gold mining in the Black Hills . In 1874 , Lt. Col. George Armstrong Custer led a military expedition from Fort Abraham Lincoln near Bismarck , to explore the Black Hills for gold and to determine a suitable location for a military fort in the Hills . Custer 's announcement of gold in the Black Hills triggered the Black Hills Gold Rush . Tensions increased between the Lakota and whites seeking to move into the Black Hills .

Although Sitting Bull did not attack Custer 's expedition in 1874 , the US government was increasingly pressured by citizens to open the Black Hills to mining and settlement . Failing in an attempt to negotiate a purchase or lease of the Hills , the government in Washington had to find a way around the promise to protect the Sioux in their land , as specified in the 1868 Treaty of Fort Laramie.It was alarmed at reports of Sioux depredations ( encouraged by Sitting Bull ) . In November 1875 , President Grant ordered all Sioux bands outside the Great Sioux Reservation to move onto the reservation , knowing full well that not all would comply . As of February 1 , 1876 , the Interior Department certified as " hostile " those bands who continued to live off the reservation . This certification allowed the military to pursue Sitting Bull and other Lakota bands as " hostiles " . Based on tribal oral histories , historian Margot Liberty theorizes many Lakota bands allied with the Cheyenne during the Plains Wars because they thought the other nation was under attack by the US . Given this connection , she suggests the major war should have been called " The Great Cheyenne War " . Since 1860 , the Northern Cheyenne had led several battles among the Plains Indians . Before 1876 , the U.S. Army had destroyed seven Cheyenne camps , more than those of any other nation .

During the period 1868 – 1876 , Sitting Bull developed into the most important of Native American political leaders . After the Treaty of Fort Laramie ( 1868 ) and the creation of the Great Sioux Reservation , many traditional Sioux warriors , such as Red Cloud of the Oglala and Spotted Tail of the Brulé , moved to reside permanently on the reservations . They were largely dependent for subsistence on the US Indian agencies . Many other chiefs , including members of Sitting Bull 's Hunkpapa band such as Gall , at times lived temporarily at the agencies . They needed the supplies at a time when white encroachment and the depletion of buffalo herds reduced their resources and challenged Native American independence . In 1875 the Northern Cheyenne , Hunkpapa , Oglala , Sans Arc , and Minneconjou camped together for a Sun Dance , with both the Cheyenne medicine man White Bull or Ice and Sitting Bull in association . This ceremonial alliance preceded their fighting together in 1876 . Sitting Bull had a major revelation . At the climactic moment , " Sitting Bull intoned , ' The Great Spirit has given our enemies to us . We are to destroy them . We do not know who they are . They may be soldiers . ' Ice too observed , ' No one then knew who the enemy were – of what tribe . ' ... They were soon to find out . " ( Utley 1992 : 122 – 24 )

Sitting Bull 's refusal to adopt any dependence on the US government meant that at times he and his small band of warriors lived isolated on the Plains . When Native Americans were threatened by the United States , numerous members from various Sioux bands and other tribes , such as the North Cheyenne , came to Sitting Bull 's camp . His reputation for " strong medicine " developed as he continued to evade the European Americans . After the January 1st ultimatum of 1876 , when the US Army began to track down as hostiles those Sioux and others living off the reservation , Native Americans gathered at Sitting Bull 's camp . He took an active role in encouraging this " unity camp " . He sent scouts to the reservations to recruit warriors , and told the Hunkpapa to share supplies with those Native Americans who joined them . An example of his generosity was Sitting Bull 's taking care of Wooden Leg 's Northern Cheyenne tribe . They had been impoverished by Captain Reynold 's March 17 , 1876 attack and fled to Sitting Bull 's camp for safety . Over the course of the first half of 1876 , Sitting Bull 's camp continually expanded , as natives joined him for safety in numbers . His leadership had attracted warriors and families , creating an extensive village estimated at more than 10,000 people . Lt. Col. Custer came across this large camp on June 25 , 1876 . Sitting Bull did not take a direct military role in the ensuing battle ; instead he acted as a spiritual leader . A week prior to the attack , he had performed the Sun Dance , in which he fasted and sacrificed over 100 pieces of flesh from his arms .

Custer ’ s 7th Cavalry advance party attacked Cheyenne and Lakota tribes at their camp on the Little Big Horn River ( known as the Greasy Grass River to the Lakota ) on June 25 , 1876 . The U.S. Army did not realize how large the camp was . More than 2,000 Native American warriors had left their reservations to follow Sitting Bull . Inspired by a vision of Sitting Bull ’ s , in which he saw U.S. soldiers being killed as they entered the tribe ’ s camp , the Cheyenne and Lakota fought back . Custer 's badly outnumbered troops lost ground quickly and were forced to retreat . The tribes led a counter-attack against the soldiers on a nearby ridge , ultimately annihilating them . The Native Americans ' victory celebrations were short-lived . Public shock and outrage at Custer 's death and defeat , and the government 's knowledge about the remaining Sioux , led them to assign thousands more soldiers to the area . Over the next year , the new American military forces pursued the Lakota , forcing many of the Native Americans to surrender . Sitting Bull refused to surrender and in May 1877 led his band across the border into the North-West Territories , Canada . He remained in exile for four years near Wood Mountain , refusing a pardon and the chance to return . When crossing the border into Canadian territory , Sitting Bull was met by the Mounties of the region . During this meeting , James Morrow Walsh , commander of the North-West Mounted Police , explained to Sitting Bull that the Lakota were now on British soil and must obey British law . Walsh emphasized that he enforced the law equally and that every person in the territory had a right to justice . Walsh became an advocate for Sitting Bull and the two became good friends for the remainder of their lives .

While in Canada , Sitting Bull also met with Crowfoot , who was a leader of the Blackfeet , long-time powerful enemies of the Lakota and Cheyenne . Sitting Bull wished to make peace with the Blackfeet Nation and Crowfoot . As an advocate for peace himself , Crowfoot eagerly accepted the tobacco peace offering . Sitting Bull was so impressed by Crowfoot that he named one of his sons after him . Sitting Bull and his people stayed in Canada for 4 years . Due to the smaller size of the buffalo herds in Canada , Sitting Bull and his men found it difficult to find enough food to feed his people , who were starving and exhausted . Sitting Bull ’ s presence in the country led to increased tensions between the Canadian and the United States governments . Before Sitting Bull left Canada , he may have visited Walsh for a final time and left a ceremonial headdress as a memento .

Hunger and desperation eventually forced Sitting Bull , and 186 of his family and followers , to return to the United States and surrender on July 19 , 1881 . Sitting Bull had his young son Crow Foot surrender his Winchester lever-action carbine to Major David H. Brotherton , commanding officer of Fort Buford , Sitting Bull said to Major David H. Brotherton , " I , Takanka Iyotanka , wish it to be remembered that I was the last man of my tribe to surrender my rifle . " To the Oglala Lakotas , Dakotas and Nakota , " to surrender my rifle " in this context meant " We have killed enough white men with your own rifles so I give this rifle back to you , for Tunkasila Wakantanka ( Grandfather Great Mystery ) will use a different way to help us overcome the white man . " In the parlor of the Commanding Officer 's Quarters in a ceremony the next day , he told the four soldiers , 20 warriors and other guests in the small room that he wished to regard the soldiers and the white race as friends but he wanted to know who would teach his son the new ways of the world . Two weeks later , after waiting in vain for other members of his tribe to follow him from Canada , the Army transferred Sitting Bull and his band to Fort Yates , the military post located adjacent to the Standing Rock Agency . This reservation straddles the present-day boundary between North and South Dakota .

Sitting Bull and his band of 186 people were kept separate from the other Hunkpapa gathered at the agency . Army officials were concerned that he would stir up trouble among the recently surrendered northern bands . On August 26 , 1881 , he was visited by census taker William T. Selwyn , who counted twelve people in the Hunkpapa leader 's immediate family . Forty-one families , totaling 195 people , were recorded in Sitting Bull 's band . The military decided to transfer Sitting Bull and his band to Fort Randall , to be held as prisoners of war . Loaded onto a steamboat , the band of 172 people was sent down the Missouri River to Fort Randall ( near present-day Pickstown , South Dakota ) on the southern border of the state . There they spent the next 20 months . They were allowed to return north to the Standing Rock Agency in May 1883 . In 1883 , rumors were reported that Sitting Bull had been baptized into the Catholic Church . James McLaughlin , Indian agent at Standing Rock Agency , dismissed these reports , saying that " The reported baptism of Sitting-Bull is erroneous . There is no immediate prospect of such ceremony so far as I am aware . "

In 1884 show promoter Alvaren Allen asked Agent James McLaughlin to allow Sitting Bull to tour parts of Canada and the northern United States . The show was called the " Sitting Bull Connection . " It was during this tour that Sitting Bull met Annie Oakley in Minnesota . He was so impressed with Oakley 's skills with firearms that he offered $ 65 for a photographer to take a photo of the two together . The admiration and respect was mutual . Oakley stated that Sitting Bull made a " great pet " of her . In observing Oakley , Sitting Bull 's respect for the young sharpshooter grew . Oakley was quite modest in her attire , deeply respectful of others , and had a remarkable stage persona despite being a woman who stood only five feet in height . Sitting Bull felt that she was " gifted " by supernatural means in order to shoot so accurately with both hands . As a result of his esteem , he symbolically " adopted " her as a daughter in 1884 . He named her " Little Sure Shot " — a name that Oakley used throughout her career .

In 1885 , Sitting Bull was allowed to leave the reservation to go Wild Westing with Buffalo Bill Cody ’ s Buffalo Bill 's Wild West . He earned about $ 50 a week for riding once around the arena , where he was a popular attraction . Although it is rumored that he cursed his audiences in his native tongue during the show , the historian Utley contends that he did not . Historians have reported that Sitting Bull gave speeches about his desire for education for the young , and reconciling relations between the Sioux and whites . The historian Edward Lazarus wrote that Sitting Bull reportedly cursed his audience in Lakota in 1884 , during an opening address celebrating the completion of the Northern Pacific Railway . Sitting Bull stayed with the show for four months before returning home . During that time , audiences considered him a celebrity and romanticized him as a warrior . He earned a small fortune by charging for his autograph and picture , although he often gave his money away to the homeless and beggars .

Sitting Bull returned to the Standing Rock Agency after working in Buffalo Bill 's Wild West show . Tension between Sitting Bull and Agent McLaughlin increased and each became more wary of the other over several issues including division and sale of parts of the Great Sioux Reservation . During that period , in 1889 Indian Rights Activist Caroline Weldon from Brooklyn , New York , a member of the National Indian Defense Association " NIDA " , reached out to Sitting Bull , acting to be his voice , secretary , interpreter and advocate . She joined him , together with her young son Christy at his compound on the Grand River , sharing with him and his family home and hearth . A Paiute Indian , named Wovoka , spread a religious movement from Nevada eastward to the Plains in 1889 that preached a resurrection of the Native . This was a time of severe conditions of harsh winters and long droughts impacting the Sioux Reservation . It was known as the “ Ghost Dance Movement ” , because it called on the Indians to dance and chant for the rising up of deceased relatives and return of the buffalo . When the movement reached Standing Rock , Sitting Bull allowed the dancers to gather at his camp . Although he did not appear to participate in the dancing , he was viewed as a key instigator . Alarm spread to nearby white settlements as the Sioux added a new feature to the dance – shirts that were said to stop bullets .

In 1890 , James McLaughlin , the U.S. Indian Agent at Fort Yates on Standing Rock Agency , feared that the Lakota leader was about to flee the reservation with the Ghost Dancers , so he ordered the police to arrest him . On December 14 , 1890 , McLaughlin drafted a letter to Lt. Henry Bullhead ( noted as Bull Head in lead ) , an Indian agency policeman , that included instructions and a plan to capture Sitting Bull . The plan called for the arrest to take place at dawn on December 15 , and advised the use of a light spring wagon to facilitate removal before his followers could rally . Bullhead decided against using the wagon . He intended to have the police officers force Sitting Bull to mount a horse immediately after the arrest . Around 5 : 30 a.m. on December 15 , 39 police officers and four volunteers approached Sitting Bull 's house . They surrounded the house , knocked and entered . Lt. Bull Head told Sitting Bull that he was under arrest and led him outside . Sitting Bull and his wife noisily stalled for time , the camp awakened and men converged at the house . As Lt. Bullhead ordered Sitting Bull to mount a horse , he said the Indian Affairs agent needed to see the chief , and then he could return to his house . When Sitting Bull refused to comply , the police used force on him . The Sioux in the village were enraged . Catch-the-Bear , a Lakota , shouldered his rifle and shot Lt. Bullhead , who reacted by firing his revolver into the chest of Sitting Bull . Another police officer , Red Tomahawk , shot Sitting Bull in the head , and he dropped to the ground . He died between 12 and 1 p.m.

A close-quarters fight erupted , and within minutes several men were dead . The Lakota killed six policemen immediately and two more died shortly after the fight , including Lt. Bullhead . The police killed Sitting Bull and seven of his supporters at the site , along with two horses . Sitting Bull 's body was taken to Fort Yates , where it was placed in a coffin ( made by the Army carpenter ) and buried . A monument was installed to mark his burial site after his remains were reportedly taken to South Dakota . In 1953 Lakota family members exhumed what they believed to be Sitting Bull 's remains , transporting them for reinterment near Mobridge , South Dakota , his birthplace . A monument to him was erected there .

Following Sitting Bull 's death , his cabin on the Grand River was taken to Chicago for use as an exhibit at the 1893 World 's Columbian Exposition . Native American dancers also performed at the Exposition . On September 14 , 1989 , the United States Postal Service released a Great Americans series 28 ¢ postage stamp featuring a likeness of Sitting Bull . On March 6 , 1996 , Standing Rock College was renamed Sitting Bull College in his honor . Sitting Bull College serves as an institution of higher education on Sitting Bull 's home of Standing Rock in North Dakota and South Dakota . The American historian Gary Clayton Anderson of the University of Oklahoma published Sitting Bull and the Paradox of Lakota Nationhood ( 2010 ) , a revisionist examination of the Lakota medicine man . Anderson stresses the Little Big Horn in light of past successes of the Lakota Nation and the merits of Sitting Bull himself , rather than simply a mishap by Custer . In August 2010 , a research team led by Eske Willerslev , an ancient DNA expert at the University of Copenhagen , announced their intention to sequence the genome of Sitting Bull , with the approval of his descendants , using a hair sample obtained during his lifetime .

Sitting Bull was the subject of , or a featured character in , several Hollywood motion pictures and documentaries , which have reflected changing ideas about him and Lakota culture in relation to the United States . Among them are : Sitting Bull ( 1954 ) , with J. Carrol Naish in the title role , Iron Eyes Cody as Crazy Horse ; with Dale Robertson and William Tannen . Cheyenne ( 1957 ) , with Clint Walker in the title role of the episode " The Broken Pledge " ; Frank DeKova plays Sitting Bull , and Whit Bissell , George Custer As time passed , Sitting Bull has become a symbol and archetype of Native American resistance movements as well as a figure celebrated by descendants of his former enemies : Legoland Billund , the first Legoland park , contains a Lego sculpture of Sitting Bull , the largest sculpture in the park . Sitting Bull is featured as the leader for the Native American Civilization in the computer game Civilization IV . Sitting Bull is lionized as one of 13 great Americans in President Barack Obama 's children 's book , Of Thee I Sing : A Letter to My Daughters .

The Cambridge crew weighed an average of 12 st 0 lb ( 76.0 kg ) , 1.375 pounds ( 0.6 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Oxford 's crew contained five rowers with Boat Race experience , including A. K. Graham who was rowing in his third consecutive race . Cambridge saw four rowers return to their crew , including P. H. Thomas who was making his fourth appearance in the event . All of the participants in the race were registered as British . According to former Oxford rower and author George Drinkwater , the Dark Blues , while they " had no great difficulties in training ... never got really together or attained any great place " . Conversely , the Cambridge crew " suffered many misfortunes . " Old Etonian W. P. Wormald was forbidden from joining the crew by doctors , his replacement Stanley Bruce had to stand down soon after the Light Blues arrived at Putney , and he was replaced by novice P. H. Thomas who was unfit having recently returned from Africa .

Cambridge won the toss and elected to start from the Middlesex station , handing the Surrey side of the river to Oxford . The race started at 11 : 30 a.m. under the command of umpire Pitman , and the Dark Blues took the lead . According to Drinkwater , they " had the race well in hand at the Mile " and " won as they liked it . " Oxford won by three lengths in a time of 20 minutes 35 seconds . It was their first victory in four years and the narrowest winning margin since the 1901 race .

Tropical Storm Elena was a weak tropical storm that moved ashore along Texas in the 1979 Atlantic hurricane season . The sixth tropical storm of the season , Elena developed from a tropical wave to the south of Louisiana on August 29 . It tracked generally west-northwest , strengthening little before making landfall on Matagorda Island on September 1 as a minimal tropical storm ; the storm quickly dissipated over land . Elena dropped moderate rainfall along its path , causing two direct deaths in Houston from drowning ; storm damage was minor , amounting to less than $ 10 million ( 1979 USD , $ 28 million 2007 USD ) . Lightning from the storm set fire to an oil supertanker in Houston , causing three indirect deaths and 13 injuries .

A tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa on August 17 . It tracked westward , passing through the Lesser Antilles on August 22 , and on August 27 the weak wave axis crossed through Florida . A tropical disturbance organized along the wave axis , with ship and buoy reports indicating the development of a low-level circulation by August 29 . At 2308 GMT later that day , a Hurricane Hunters flight reported the existence of a tropical depression ; it was classified as Tropical Depression Thirteen , while located about 240 miles ( 390 km ) south of the mouth of the Mississippi River . With a ridge of high pressure located over the southeastern United States , the depression continued tracking generally westward and intensified into Tropical Storm Elena late on August 30 . Elena was the sixth tropical storm of the season , as Hurricane Frederic attained tropical storm status six hours prior to Elena . Unfavorable northerly vertical wind shear persisted through much of Elena 's duration , which prohibited the development of convection . An approaching frontal trough weakened the high pressure system to its north , which resulted in Elena turning northwestward toward the Texas coastline . The storm remained poorly organized , failing to strengthen further , and on September 1 it made landfall on Matagorda Island as a minimal tropical storm . The cyclone rapidly weakened after moving ashore , and early on September 2 Elena degenerated into a remnant low pressure area over southeastern Texas . Trapped between two high pressure systems , the remnant mid-level circulation drifted southwestward just inland for several days before dissipating on September 6 .

As Elena was upgraded to a tropical storm , the National Hurricane Center issued a gale warning from Port O 'Connor , Texas to Morgan City , Louisiana ; these remained in effect until the storm moved ashore . Winds were fairly minor in association with the storm ; a station in Galveston , Texas recorded a peak wind gust of 46 mph ( 74 km / h ) . As Elena moved ashore , it produced a 3 foot ( 0.9 m ) storm tide at Galveston and Baytown . Rainfall from the storm was generally limited to the coastline , and peaked at 10.3 inches ( 261 mm ) at Palacios ; light rainfall also extended along the coastline of Louisiana . Near Houston , 4.6 inches ( 117 mm ) of precipitation was reported , which caused two drownings from flooding . Overall storm damage was fairly minor , totaling to less than $ 10 million ( 1979 USD , $ 28 million 2007 USD ) . At a dock owned by Shell Oil Company in Deer Park near Houston , a lightning bolt from thunderstorms of Elena struck the oil supertanker SS Chevron Hawaii . The lightning started a fire on the ship , which expanded and wrecked one adjacent barge and burned nearby docks . The ship was nearly split in half from the lightning strike , and oil seeped into Houston Ship Channel for several hours . Firefighters combated the fire on the tanker in boats , but their efforts were hindered due to unsettled weather from Elena , as well as unsafe water to travel through . The fire caused three deaths and 13 injuries , and damage related to the incident totaled $ 27 million ( 1979 USD , $ 76 million 2007 USD ) .

Michigan State University ( MSU ) is a public research university in East Lansing , Michigan , United States . MSU was founded in 1855 and became the nation 's first land-grant institution under the Morrill Act of 1862 , serving as a model for future land-grant universities . The university was founded as the Agricultural College of the State of Michigan , one of the country 's first institutions of higher education to teach scientific agriculture . After the introduction of the Morrill Act , the college became coeducational and expanded its curriculum beyond agriculture . Today , MSU is the eighth-largest university in the United States ( in terms of enrollment ) and has approximately 540,000 living alumni worldwide . MSU pioneered the studies of packaging , hospitality business , botany , supply chain management , criminal justice , music therapy , and communication sciences . Michigan State frequently ranks among the top 30 public universities in the United States and the top 100 research universities in the world . U.S. News & World Report ranks many of its graduate programs among the best in the nation , including African history , criminology , industrial and organizational psychology , educational psychology , elementary and secondary education , osteopathic medicine , nuclear physics , rehabilitation counseling , supply chain / logistics , and veterinary medicine . MSU is a member of the Association of American Universities , an organization of 62 leading research universities in North America . The university 's campus houses the National Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory , the W. J. Beal Botanical Garden , the Abrams Planetarium , the Wharton Center for Performing Arts , the Eli and Edythe Broad Art Museum , the Facility for Rare Isotope Beams , and the country 's largest residence hall system .

The Michigan Constitution of 1850 called for the creation of an " agricultural school , " though it was not until February 12 , 1855 , that Michigan Governor Kinsley S. Bingham signed a bill establishing the United States ' first agriculture college , the Agricultural College of the State of Michigan . Classes began on May 13 , 1857 , with three buildings , five faculty members , and 63 male students . The first president , Joseph R. Williams , designed a curriculum that required more scientific study than practically any undergraduate institution of the era . It balanced science , liberal arts , and practical training . The curriculum excluded Latin and Greek studies , since most applicants did not study any classical languages in their rural high schools . However , it did require three hours of daily manual labor , which kept costs down for both the students and the College . Despite Williams ' innovations and his defense of education for the masses , the State Board of Education saw Williams ' curriculum as elitist . They forced him to resign in 1859 and reduced the curriculum to a two-year vocational program .

In 1860 , Williams became acting lieutenant governor and helped pass the Reorganization Act of 1861 . This gave the College a four-year curriculum and the power to grant master 's degrees . Under the act , a newly created body , known as the State Board of Agriculture , took over from the State Board of Education in running the institution . The College changed its name to State Agricultural College , and its first class graduated in the same year . As the Civil War had just begun , there was no time for an elaborate graduation ceremony . The first alumni enlisted to the Union Army . Williams died , and the following year , Abraham Lincoln signed the First Morrill Act of 1862 to support similar colleges , making the Michigan school a national model .

The college first admitted women in 1870 , although at that time there were no female residence halls . The few women who enrolled boarded with faculty families or made the arduous stagecoach trek from Lansing . From the early days , female students took the same rigorous scientific agriculture courses as male students . In 1896 , the faculty created a " Women Course " that melded a home economics curriculum with liberal arts and sciences . That same year , the College turned the old Abbot Hall male dorm into a women 's dormitory . It was not until 1899 that the State Agricultural College admitted its first African American student , William O. Thompson . After graduation , he taught at what is now Tuskegee University . President Jonathan L. Snyder invited its president Booker T. Washington to be the Class of 1900 commencement speaker . A few years later , Myrtle Craig became the first woman African-American student to enroll at the College . Along with the Class of 1907 , she received her degree from U.S. President Theodore Roosevelt , commencement speaker for the Semi-Centennial celebration . The City of East Lansing was incorporated that same year , and two years later the college officially changed its name to Michigan Agricultural College ( M.A.C. ) .

During the early 20th century , M.A.C. expanded its curriculum well beyond agriculture . By 1925 it had expanded enough that it changed its name to Michigan State College of Agriculture and Applied Science ( M.S.C. ) . In 1941 the Secretary of the State Board of Agriculture , John A. Hannah , became president of the College . He began the largest expansion in the institution 's history , with the help of the 1945 G.I. Bill , which helped World War II veterans to receive an education . One of Hannah 's strategies was to build a new dormitory building , enroll enough students to fill it , and use the income to start construction on a new dormitory . Under his plan , enrollment increased from 15,000 in 1950 to 38,000 in 1965 . In 1957 , Hannah continued MSU 's expansion by co-founding Michigan State University – Oakland , now Oakland University , with Matilda Dodge Wilson . Hannah also got the chance to improve the athletic reputation of M.S.C. when the University of Chicago resigned from the Big Ten Conference in 1946 . Hannah lobbied to take its place , gaining admission in 1949 .

Since the end of the Hannah era in 1969 , Michigan State has shifted its focus from increasing the size of its student body to advancing its national and global reputation . In September 2005 , president Lou Anna Simon called for MSU , one of the public ivy institutions , to become the global model leader for Land Grant institutions by the year 2012 . Her plans include creating a new residential college and increasing grants awarded from the National Institutes of Health past the US $ 100 million mark . While there are over 100 Land-grant universities in the United States , she has stated she would like Michigan State University to be the leader . Michigan State , the University of Michigan and Wayne State University created the University Research Corridor in 2006 . This alliance was formed to transform and strengthen Michigan 's economy by reaching out to businesses , policymakers , innovators , investors and the public to speed up technology transfer , make resources more accessible and attract new jobs to the state .

On May 1 , 2014 , Michigan State University was named one of fifty-five higher education institutions under investigation by the Office of Civil Rights “ for possible violations of federal law over the handling of sexual violence and harassment complaints ” by Barack Obama 's White House Task Force To Protect Students from Sexual Assault . " The investigation at Michigan State involves its response to sexual harassment and sexual assault complaints involving students , " according to one reporter . It was later reported in the same paper that " An investigation by the U.S. Department of Education into how Michigan State University handles sexual assault complaints was spurred by an incident in Wonders Hall in August 2010 , a spokesman said . "

MSU 's sprawling campus is in East Lansing , Michigan . The campus is perched on the banks of the Red Cedar River . Development of the campus started in 1856 with three buildings : a multipurpose building called College Hall , a dormitory later called " Saints ' Rest " , and a barn . Today , MSU 's contiguous campus consists of 5,200 acres ( 21 km2 ) , 2,000 acres ( 8.1 km2 ) of which are developed . There are 556 buildings : 100 for academics , 131 for agriculture , 166 for housing and food service , and 42 for athletics . Overall , the university has 22,763,025 square feet ( 2,114,754.2 m2 ) of indoor space . Connecting it all is 26 miles ( 42 km ) of roads and 100 miles ( 160 km ) of sidewalks . MSU also owns 44 non-campus properties , totaling 22,000 acres ( 89 km2 ) in 28 different counties .

The oldest part of campus lies on the north bank of the Red Cedar . It includes Collegiate Gothic architecture , plentiful trees , and curving roads with few straight lines . The College built its first three buildings here , of which none survive . Other historic buildings north of the river include the president 's official residence , Cowles House , and Beaumont Tower , a carillon clock tower marking the site of College Hall , the original classroom building . To the east lies Eustace – Cole Hall , America 's first freestanding horticulture laboratory . Other landmarks include the bronze statue of former president John A. Hannah , the W. J. Beal Botanical Garden , and the painted boulder known as " The Rock " , a popular spot for theatre , tailgating , and candlelight vigils . On the campus 's northwest corner is the University 's hotel , the Kellogg Hotel and Conference Center . The university also has a museum , initiated in 1857 . MSU Museum is one of the Midwest 's oldest museums and is accredited by the American Alliance of Museums .

The campus south of the river consists mostly of post-World War II International Style buildings , and is characterized by sparser foliage , relatively straight roadways , and many parking lots . The " 2020 Vision " Master Plan proposes replacing these parking lots with parking ramps and green space , but these plans will take many years to reach fruition . As part of the master plan , the University erected a new bronze statue of The Spartan in 2005 to be placed at the intersection of Chestnut and Kalamazoo , just south of the Red Cedar River . This replica replaced the original modernist terra cotta statue , which can still be seen inside Spartan Stadium . Notable academic and research buildings on the South Campus include the Cyclotron and the College of Law . This part of campus is home to the MSU Horticulture Gardens and the adjoining 4-H Children 's Garden . South of the gardens lie the Canadian National and CSX railroads , which divide the main campus from thousands of acres of university-owned farmland . The university 's agricultural facilities include the Horse , Dairy Cattle , Beef Cattle , Sheep , and Poultry Teaching and Research Farms , as well as the Air Quality Control Lab and the Diagnostics Center for Population and Animal Health .

The Kellogg Hotel and Conference Center doubles as a 4-star hotel and a business-friendly conference center . It is on the northwest corner of Michigan State University 's campus , across from the Brody Complex , on Harrison Road just south of Michigan Avenue . The hotel 's 160 rooms and suites can accommodate anyone staying in East Lansing for a business conference , sporting event or an on-campus visit , but it originally was a dormitory . Besides a lodging facility , the Kellogg Hotel and Conference Center is a " learning laboratory for the 300 – 400 students each year that are enrolled in The School of Hospitality Business and other majors . " The Kellogg Hotel and Conference Center strives to facilitate education by hosting conferences and seminars .

MSU runs a small campus at Dubai Knowledge Village , Dubai , United Arab Emirates . It first offered only one program , a master 's program in human resources and labor relations . In 2011 , it added a master 's program in Public Health . In April 2012 , MSU Dubai announced it hopes to begin in 2013 two programs in law : a LL.M program as well as a Master of Jurisprudence program . Previously , MSU established an education center in Dubai offering six undergraduate programs , thereby becoming the first American university with a presence in Dubai International Academic City . The University attracted 100 students in 2007 , its first year , but the school was unable to achieve the 100-150 new students per year needed for the program to be viable , and in 2010 MSU closed the program and the campus .

Michigan State offers a rolling admissions system , with an early admission deadline in October . MSU is considered " more selective " by the U.S. News & World Report . Its admissions are difficult ; for 2009 's entering class , the 25th / 75th percentiles for the SAT were 1030 and 1240 / 1600 , and its 25th / 75th percentiles on the ACT were 23 and 27 / 36 . For Fall 2014 , MSU received over 33,000 freshman applications , which is a record for the school , and admitted 66.1 % applicants . Incoming freshman had an average high school GPA of 3.66 . MSU has the seventh largest student body in the U.S. For the fiscal year of 2009 – 10 , the Office of the Registrar conferred 11,140 degrees . The student body is 55 % female and 45 % male . While 89 % of students come from all 83 counties in the State of Michigan , also represented are all 50 states in the U.S. and about 130 other countries . In 2011 – 2012 , 5,898 international students enrolled at MSU . The top five countries represented : China , Korea , India , Taiwan and Canada . According to a Brookings Institution report analyzing foreign student visa approvals from 2008-2012 , MSU has the third-highest enrollment of Chinese international students in the United States , with roughly 4,700 Chinese citizens enrolled during the period of the study .

MSU has about 4,500 faculty and 6,000 staff members , and a student / faculty ratio of 19 : 1 . Listed as a Public Ivy , Michigan State is a member of the Association of American Universities . Michigan State University Ombudsman is the longest continually operating ombudsman office at a college or university in the country . MSU 's study abroad program is the largest of any single-campus university in the United States with 2,461 students studying abroad in 2004 – 2005 in over 60 countries on all continents , including Antarctica . MSU has six faculty members elected to the National Academy of Sciences ( NAS ) ; Martin Bukovac ( 1983 ) , James Dye ( 1989 ) , Pamela Fraker ( 2007 ) , Richard Lenski ( 2006 ) , Michael Thomashow ( 2003 ) , and James Tiedje ( 2003 ) .

Michigan State ranks 99th in the world in 2015 , according to the Academic Ranking of World Universities . In its 2015-16 rankings , Times Higher Education World University Rankings also ranked it 99th in the world . The 2015 QS World University Rankings placed Michigan State University at 164th internationally . In its 2016 edition , U.S. News & World Report ranked it as tied for the 29th-best public university in the United States , tied for 75th nationally and tied for 82nd globally . The university has over 200 academic programs . U.S. News ranked MSU 's graduate-level programs in elementary teacher 's education , secondary teacher 's education , industrial and organizational psychology , and nuclear physics first in the nation for 2016 . U.S. News also ranks MSU third nationally for graduate education in African history and fourth nationally for graduate education in Educational Psychology . The Eli Broad College of Business was ranked No. 42nd among undergraduate institutions nationally by Businessweek . Ninety-four percent of the school 's graduates received job offers in 2014 . The 2016 U.S. News ranked Michigan State 's undergraduate supply chain management / logistics program in the Eli Broad College of Business 1st in the nation . In addition , the Eli Broad College of Business undergraduate accounting program is ranked 13th , the master 's accounting program is ranked 15th , and the doctoral program is ranked 11th , according to the 2013 Public Accounting Report 's Annual Survey of Accounting Professors . The MBA program is ranked 19th in the U.S. by Forbes magazine .

The College of Communication Arts and Sciences was established in 1955 and was the first of its kind in the United States . The college 's Media and Information Studies doctoral program was ranked No. 2 in 2007 by The Chronicle of Higher Education in the category of mass communication . The communication doctoral program was ranked No. 4 in a separate category of communication in The Chronicle of Higher Education 's 2005 Faculty Scholarly Productivity Index , published in 2007 . The college 's faculty and alumni include eight Pulitzer Prize winners and a two-time Emmy Award winning recording mixer . Other programs of note include criminal justice , hospitality business , packaging , political science , dietetics and communications . The Sustainable Endowments Institute awarded Michigan State with an overall grade of " B " on the 2009 Campus Sustainability Survey , including " A " s in the categories of Administration , Transportation , Endowment Transparency , and Investment Policies .

The university has a long history of academic research , and in 2013 – 14 spent $ 528 million toward it . In 1877 , botany professor William J. Beal performed the first documented genetic crosses to produce hybrid corn , which led to increased yields . MSU dairy professor G. Malcolm Trout invented the process for the homogenization of milk in the 1930s . In the 1960s , MSU scientists developed cisplatin , a leading cancer fighting drug . Albert Fert , an Adjunct professor at MSU , was awarded the 2007 Nobel Prize in Physics together with Peter Grünberg . Today , Michigan State continues its research with facilities such as the U.S. Department of Energy-sponsored MSU-DOE Plant Research Laboratory and a particle accelerator called the National Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory . The U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science named Michigan State University as the site for the Facility for Rare Isotope Beams ( FRIB ) . The $ 730 million facility will attract top researchers from around the world to conduct experiments in basic nuclear science , astrophysics , and applications of isotopes to other fields . In 2004 , scientists at the Cyclotron produced and observed a new isotope of the element germanium , called Ge-60 In that same year , Michigan State , in consortium with the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and the government of Brazil , broke ground on the 4.1-meter Southern Astrophysical Research Telescope ( SOAR ) in the Andes Mountains of Chile . The consortium telescope will allow the Physics & Astronomy department to study galaxy formation and origins . Since 1999 , MSU has been part of a consortium called the Michigan Life Sciences Corridor , which aims to develop biotechnology research in the State of Michigan . Finally , the College of Communication Arts and Sciences ' Quello Center researches issues of information and communication management .

Michigan State University is a participant in the Big Ten Academic Alliance . The Big Ten Academic Alliance ( BTAA ) is the academic consortium of the universities in the Big Ten Conference . Engaging in $ 10 billion in research in 2014-2015 , BTAA universities provide powerful insight into important issues in medicine , technology , agriculture , and communities . Students at participating schools are also allowed " in-house " borrowing privileges at other schools ' libraries . The BTAA uses collective purchasing and licensing , and has saved member institutions $ 19 million to date . Course sharing , professional development programs , study abroad and international collaborations , and other initiatives are also part of the BTAA .

MSU 's ( private , non-Morrill Act ) endowment started in 1916 when the Engineering Building burned down . Automobile magnate R.E. Olds helped the program stay afloat with a gift of $ 100,000 . There was a time when MSU lagged behind peer institutions in terms of endowments . As recently as the early 1990s , MSU was last among the eleven Big Ten schools , with barely over $ 100 million in endowment funds . This changed dramatically in the 2000s ( decade ) , when the University started a campaign to increase the size of the endowment . At the close of fiscal year 2004 – 2005 , the endowment had risen to $ 1.325 billion , raising the University to sixth of the 11 Big Ten schools in terms of endowment ; within $ 2 million of the fifth-rated school . The rapid increase in the size of the endowment will help to improve outdated facilities , such as the Music Building , which the College of Music hopes to soon replace with money from its alumni fundraising program .

MSU has several residential colleges , based on the Oxbridge " living-learning " model . By putting classes in student dormitories , these colleges improve student access to faculty and facilities . MSU 's first residential college , Justin Morrill College started in 1965 with an interdisciplinary curriculum . MSU closed Morrill College in 1979 , but today the university has three residential colleges , including the recent opening of the Residential College in Arts & Humanities ( RCAH ) located in Snyder and Phillips halls . Established in 1967 , James Madison College is a smaller component residential college featuring multidisciplinary programs in the social sciences , founded on a model of liberal education . James Madison College is housed in Case Hall . Classes in the college are small , with an average of 25 students , and most instructors are tenure track faculty . James Madison College has about 1150 students total , with each freshman class containing about 320 students . Each of Madison 's four majors — Social Relations and Policy , International Relations , Political Theory and Constitutional Democracy , and Comparative Cultures and Politics — requires two years of foreign language and one semester of " field experience " in an internship or study abroad program . Although Madison students make up about 4 % of MSU graduates , they represent around 35 % of the MSU 's Phi Beta Kappa members .

Also established in 1967 , Lyman Briggs College teaches math and science within social , historical and philosophical contexts . Many Lyman Briggs students intend to pursue careers in medicine , but the school supports over 30 coordinate majors , from human biology to computer sciences . Lyman Briggs is one of the few colleges that lets undergraduates teach as " Learning Assistants . " MSU 's newest residential college is the Residential College in Arts & Humanities . Founded October 21 , 2005 , the college provides around 600 undergraduates with an individualized curriculum in the liberal , visual and performing arts . Though all the students will graduate with the same degree , MSU encourages students in the college to get a second degree or specialization . The university houses the new college in a newly renovated Snyder-Phillips Hall , the location of MSU 's first residential college , Justin Morrill College .

The Michigan State University College of Law is an independent , non-profit corporation affiliated with the public institution . Founded in Detroit in 1891 as the Detroit College of Law , the law school moved to East Lansing in 1995 becoming an integral part of the university . Students attending MSU College of Law come from 42 states and 13 countries . The law school publishes the Michigan State Law Review , the Michigan State Journal of International Law , the Journal of Medicine Law , and the Journal of Business & Securities Law . The College of Law is the home of the Geoffrey Fieger Trial Practice Institute , the first trial practice institute in the United States . The Intellectual Property and Communications Law program was ranked seventeenth nationally , in 2006 . The Eli Broad College of Business has programs in accounting , information systems , finance , general management , human resource management , marketing , supply chain management , and hospitality business . The school has 2,066 admitted undergraduate students and 817 graduate students . The Eli Broad Graduate School of Management , which Businessweek magazine in 2012 ranked 35th in the nation and 14th among public institutions , offers three MBA programs , as well as joint degrees with the College of Law . The opening of the Eugene C. Eppley Center for Graduate Studies in Hotel , Restaurant and Institutional Management brought the first program in the United States to offer a Master of Business Administration degree in Hotel , Restaurant and Institutional Management to MSU .

The Michigan State University College of Osteopathic Medicine was the world 's first publicly funded college of osteopathic medicine . It has a long-standing tradition of retaining its alumni in Michigan to practice – more than two-thirds of the college 's graduates remain to practice in Michigan . In 2008 , the Michigan State University Board of Trustees approved a resolution endorsing the expansion of the College of Osteopathic Medicine to two sites in southeast Michigan , a move board members and college officials say will not only improve medical education in the state , but also address a projected physician shortage . According to U.S. News & World Report 's 2016 rankings , the College of Osteopathic Medicine ( D.O. degree ) ranked tied for 12th among U.S. medical schools for primary care , and the College of Human Medicine ( MD degree ) was ranked 70th among the U.S. medical schools for primary care . The College of Human Medicine graduates students with a Doctor of Medicine ( M.D. degree ) and is split into seven distinct campuses located in East Lansing , Kalamazoo , Flint , Saginaw , Marquette , Traverse City and Grand Rapids . Each campus is affiliated with local hospitals and other medical facilities professionals in the area . For example , the Lansing campus includes Sparrow Hospital and McLaren – Greater Lansing Hospital . The College of Human Medicine has recently gained attention for its expansion into the Grand Rapids area , with the new Secchia Center completed in the Fall of 2010 , that is expected to fuel the growing medical industry in that region .

In recent years , MSU 's music program has grown substantially . Music major enrollment increased more than 97 % between 1991 and 2004 . In early 2007 , this growth led the university board of trustees to spin the music program off into its own college unit : The MSU College of Music . The new college faces many new challenges , such as working with limited space and funding . Nevertheless , MSU 's music college plans on continued success , placing an annual average of 25 graduate students in tenure stream university positions . The College of Education at Michigan State University offers graduate and undergraduate degrees in several fields , including counseling , educational psychology , special education , teacher education and kinesiology . The graduate school has several programs ranked in the top five in the country by U.S. News & World Report for 2016 : elementary teacher education ( 1st ) , secondary teacher education ( 1st ) , curriculum and instruction ( 3rd ) , educational psychology ( 4th ) , and higher education administration ( 4th ) . The College of Education is housed in Erickson Hall . Founded in 1956 , the MSU Honors College provides individualized curricula to MSU 's top undergraduate students . Though the college offers no majors of its own , it has its own dean and academic advisers to help Honors students with their educational pursuits . High school students starting at MSU may join the Honors College if they are in the top 5 % of their high school graduating class and have an ACT score of at least 30 or an SAT total score of at least 1360 . Students can also be admitted after their first semester , generally if they 're in the top 10 % of their College in GPA . Once admitted , students must maintain a 3.20 GPA and complete eight approved honors courses to graduate with Honors College designation on their degree . If membership is relinquished , it cannot be reclaimed .

After three years of planning , The College of Engineering launched the first stages of its Residential Experience for Spartan Engineering , formally known as the Residential Option for Scientists and Engineers ( ROSES ) , the new program is in Wilson Hall after being housed in Bailey Hall for a number of years . The Residential program essentially combines with a brand new academic component , Cornerstone Engineering , where freshman engineering students not only get an overview of the engineering field ( s ) but get a hands-on experience along with it . Global Engineering is a new subject that is of interest for not only the Cornerstone Engineering and Residential Experience programs but the entire College of Engineering at MSU . Engineering in today 's society has shown to have a monumental impact on the global economy due to advancements in education , interdependence on economics with infrastructure , computers , transportation , technology and other manufactured goods as well as Michigan State University 's study-abroad program being ranked No. 1 in the nation , allowing for students to experience education and learn cultures in hundreds of countries . The newly established Cornerstone Engineering and Residential Experience programs for College of Engineering have started programs abroad for more courses in engineering including Study abroad seminars .

Michigan State 's NCAA Division I-A program offers 12 varsity sports for men and 13 for women . Since their teams are called the Spartans , MSU 's mascot is a Spartan warrior named Sparty . The university participates in the Big Ten Conference in all varsity sports , including the new Big Ten hockey conference , featuring 6 teams . The current athletic director is Mark Hollis , who was promoted to the position on January 1 , 2008 . Hollis replaced Ron Mason , who served as head hockey coach from 1979 to 2002 , retiring with a record total of 924 wins , and a 635 – 270 – 69 record at MSU . In 1888 Michigan State University ( then as known as Michigan Agricultural College ) along with Olivet , Albion and Hillsdale Colleges was a founding member of the nation 's oldest athletic conference , the Michigan Intercollegiate Athletic Association ( MIAA ) . MAC left the conference in 1907 .

Football has a long tradition at Michigan State . Starting as a club sport in 1884 , football gained varsity status in 1896 . MSU football teams won the Rose Bowl in 1954 , 1956 , 1988 , and 2014 . They won national championships in 1951 , 1952 , 1955 , 1957 , 1965 and 1966 . The Spartans accounted for four of the top eight selections in the 1967 NFL Draft , the only time a college football program has accomplished such a feat . Today , the football team competes in Spartan Stadium , a renovated 75,005 seat football stadium near the center of campus . The current coach is Mark Dantonio , who was hired on November 27 , 2006 . He led the team in its first season to a 7 – 6 record . In 2010 , the Spartans finished 11 – 2 ( 7-1 in conference play ) and were Co-Big Ten Champion along with Wisconsin and Ohio State . In 2011 , the Spartans finished 1st in the Legends Division of the Big Ten with a 7 – 1 ( 11 – 3 ) conference record , logging back-to-back 11 win seasons for the first time in Spartan history . In 2014 , MSU achieved an 11-2 overall record with losses only to the University of Oregon Ducks and The Ohio State Buckeyes , and ended the season ranked # 5 .

MSU 's men 's basketball team has won the National Championship twice : in 1979 and again in 2000 . In 1979 , Earvin " Magic " Johnson , along with Greg Kelser , Jay Vincent and Mike Brkovich , led the MSU team to a 75 – 64 win against the Larry Bird-led Indiana State Sycamores . In 2000 , three players from Flint , Morris Peterson , Charlie Bell and Mateen Cleaves , led the team to its second national title . Dubbed the " Flintstones " , they were the key to the Spartans ' win against the University of Florida . On December 13 , 2003 , Michigan State and Kentucky played in the Basketbowl , in which a record crowd of 78,129 watched the game in Detroit 's Ford Field . Kentucky won 79 – 74 . The basketball team plays at the Jack Breslin Student Events Center under head coach Tom Izzo , who has a 403 – 166 record as of February 2012 ( 70.8 % winning percentage ) . The student spirit section at Breslin is called the Izzone . Izzo 's coaching has helped the team make seven Final Fours since 1999 , winning the title in 2000 , and eighteen consecutive NCAA tournament appearances ( beginning in 1998 ) . In 2009 the Spartans made it to the National Championship game and lost 89 – 72 to North Carolina .

The Michigan State University men 's ice hockey team started in 1924 , though it has only been a varsity sport since 1950 . The team has since won national titles in 1966 , 1986 and 2007 . The Spartans came close to repeating the national title in 1987 , but lost the championship game to the University of North Dakota . They play at MSU 's Munn Ice Arena . Former head coach Ron Mason is college hockey 's winningest coach with 924 wins total and 635 at MSU . The current head coach is Tom Anastos . The MSU men 's ice hockey team competes in the Big Ten conference . They formerly competed in the Central Collegiate Hockey Association . Michigan State leads the CCHA in all-time wins , is second in CCHA Conference championships with 7 , and is first in CCHA Tournament Championships with 11 . Along with the University of Michigan ( U-M ) and the Ohio State University , it was one of three Big Ten schools in the CCHA . As with other sports , the hockey rivalry between MSU and U-M is a fierce one , and on October 6 , 2001 , MSU faced U-M in the Cold War , during which a world record crowd of 74,554 packed Spartan Stadium to watch the game end in a 3 – 3 tie . In the 2006 – 2007 season , the Men 's Ice Hockey team defeated Boston College for its third NCAA hockey championship .

Between World War I and World War II , Michigan State College competed in the Central Collegiate Conference , winning titles in 1926 – 1929 , 1932 , 1933 and 1935 . Michigan State also experienced success in the IC4A , at New York 's Van Cortlandt Park , winning 15 team titles ( 1933 – 1937 , 1949 , 1953 , 1956 – 1960 , 1962 , 1963 and 1968 ) . Since entering the Big Ten in 1950 , Michigan State has won 14 men 's team titles ( 1951 – 1953 , 1955 – 1960 , 1962 , 1963 , 1968 , 1970 and 1971 ) . Michigan State hosted the inaugural NCAA cross country championships in 1938 and every year thereafter through 1964 ( there was no championship in 1943 ) . The Spartans won NCAA championships in 1939 , 1948 , 1949 , 1952 , 1955 , 1956 , 1958 and 1959 .

East Lansing is very much a college town , with 60.2 % of the population between the ages of 15 and 24 . President John A. Hannah 's push to expand in the 1950s and 1960s resulted in the largest residence hall system in the United States . Around 16,000 students live in MSU 's 23 undergraduate halls , one graduate hall , and three apartment villages . Each residence hall has its own hall government , with representatives in the Residence Halls Association . Yet despite the size and extent of on-campus housing , the residence halls are complemented by a variety of housing options . 58 % of students live off-campus , mostly in the areas closest to campus , in either apartment buildings , former single-family homes , fraternity and sorority houses , or in a co-op . In 2014 there were approximately 50,085 students , 38,786 undergraduate and 11,299 graduate and professional . The students are from all 50 states and 130 countries around the world .

With over 3,000 members , Michigan State University 's Greek Community is one of the largest in the US . Started in 1872 and re-established in 1922 by Lambda Chi Alpha Fraternity , Alpha Gamma Rho Fraternity , and Alpha Phi Sorority ; the MSU Greek system now consists of 55 Greek lettered student societies . These chapters are in turn under the jurisdiction of one of MSU 's four Greek governing councils : National Panhellenic Conference , North American Interfraternity Council , National Pan-Hellenic Council , and Independent Greek Council . National Pan-Hellenic Council is made up of 9 organizations , 5 Fraternities and 4 Sororities , that were founded on Historically Black College and Universities ( HBCU 's ) . The Interfraternity Council and the Women 's Panhellenic Council are each entirely responsible for their own budgets , giving them the freedom to hold large fundraising and recruitment events . MSU 's fraternities and sororities hold many philanthropy events and community fundraisers . For example , in April 2011 the Greek Community held Greek Week to raise over $ 260,000 for the American Cancer Society , and $ 5,000 for each of these charities : Big Brothers Big Sisters , The Listening Ear and previous charities include : the Make-a-Wish Foundation ( MSU Chapter ) , Share Laura 's Hope , The Mary Beth Knox Scholarship , and the Special Olympics , in which fraternity and sorority members get to help each other participate .

The Associated Students of Michigan State University ( ASMSU ) is the all-university undergraduate student government of Michigan State University . It is unusual amongst university student governments for its decentralized bicameral structure , and the relatively non-existent influence of the Greek system . The structure has since changed to a single General Assembly as part of reorganization in the late 2000s . ASMSU representatives are nonpartisan and many are elected in noncompetitive races . Their mission is to enhance the individual and collective student experience through education , empowerment , and advocacy by education to the needs and interest of students . Some services they offer include : free blue books , low cost copies and printing , free yearbooks , interest free loans , funding for student organizations , free legal consultation , and iClicker and graphing calculator rentals . Students pay $ 18 per semester to fund the functions of the ASMSU , including stipends for the organization 's officers and activities throughout the year . Some students have criticized ASMSU for not having enough electoral participation to gain a student mandate . Turnout since 2001 has hovered between 3 and 17 percent , with the 2006 election bringing out 8 % of the undergraduate student body .

Student-run organizations beyond student government also have a large impact on the East Lansing / Michigan State University community . Student Organizations are registered through the Department of Student Life , which currently has a registry of over 800 student organizations . The Eli Broad College of Business includes 27 student organizations . The three largest organizations are the Finance Association ( FA ) , the Accounting Student Association ( ASA ) , and the Supply Chain Management Association ( SCMA ) . The SCMA is the host of the university 's largest major specific career fair . The fair attracts over 100 companies and over 400 students each year .

Activists have played a significant role in MSU history . During the height of the Vietnam War , student protests helped create co-ed residence halls , and blocked the routing of Interstate 496 through campus . In the 1980s , Michigan State students convinced the University to divest the stocks of companies doing business in apartheid South Africa from its endowment portfolio , such as Coca-Cola . MSU has many student groups focused on political change . Graduate campus groups include the Graduate Employees Union and the Council of Graduate Students . Michigan State also has a variety of partisan groups ranging from liberal to conservative , including the College Republicans , the College Democrats and several third party organizations . Other partisan activist groups include Young Americans for Freedom and Young Americans for Liberty on the right ; Young Democratic Socialists , Students for Economic Justice , Young Communist League and MEChA on the left . Given MSU 's proximity to the Michigan state capital of Lansing , many politically inclined Spartans intern for state representatives .

The MSU Office of Sustainability works with the University Committee for a Sustainable Campus to " foster a collaborative learning culture that leads the community to heightened awareness of its environmental impact . " The University is a member of the Chicago Climate Exchange , the world 's first greenhouse gas emission registry , and boasts the lowest electrical consumption per square foot among Big Ten universities . The University has set a goal of reducing energy use by 15 % , reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 15 % , reducing landfill waste by 30 % by 2015 . The university has also pledged to meet LEED-certification standards for all new construction . In July 2009 , the University completed construction of a $ 13.3 million recycling center , and hopes to double their 2008 recycling rate of 14 % by 2010 . The construction of Brody Hall , a residence hall of Michigan State University Housing , was completed in August 2011 and qualified for LEED Silver certification because the facility includes a rain water collection tank used for restroom fixtures , a white PVC roof , meters that will monitor utilities to make sure they are used efficiently , and the use of recycled matter and local sources for building materials .

The Environmental Steward 's program support 's president Simon 's " Boldness by Design " strategic vision to transform environmental stewardship on campus within the seven-year time frame . Environmental stewards promote environmental changes among co-workers and peers , be points of contact for their department for environment-related concerns , and be liaisons between the Be Spartan Green Team and buildings . The Student Organic Farm is a student-run , four-season farm , which teaches the principals of organic farming and through a certificate program and community supported agriculture ( CSA ) on ten acres on the MSU campus . The certificate program consists of year round crop production , course work in organic farming , practical training and management , and an off-site internship requirement .

MSU has a variety of campus media outlets . The student-run newspaper is the The State News and free copies are available online or at East Lansing newsstands . The paper prints 28,500 copies from Monday through Friday during the fall and spring semesters , and 15,000 copies Monday through Friday during the summer . The paper is not published on weekends , holidays , or semester breaks , but is continually updated online at statenews.com. The campus yearbook is called the Red Cedar Log . Red Cedar Review , Michigan State University 's premier literary digest for over forty years , is the longest running undergraduate-run literary journal in the United States . It is published annually by the Michigan State University Press . MSU also publishes a student-run magazine during the academic year called Ing Magazine . Created in 2007 by MSU alumnus Adam Grant , the publication is released at the beginning of each month and publishes 7 issues each school year . MSU also publishes a student-run fashion and lifestyle magazine called VIM Magazine once a semester . Electronic media include three radio stations and one public television station , as well as student-produced television shows . MSU 's Public Broadcasting Service affiliate , WKAR-TV , the station is the second-oldest educational television station in the United States , and the oldest east of the Mississippi River . Besides broadcasting PBS shows , WKAR-TV produces its own local programming , such as a high school quiz bowl show called " QuizBusters " . In addition , MSU has three radio stations ; WKAR-AM plays National Public Radio 's talk radio programming , whereas WKAR-FM focuses mostly on classical music programming . Michigan State 's student-run radio station , WDBM , broadcasts mostly alternative music during weekdays and electric music programming nights and weekends .

Important College leaders in the 19th century include John C. Holmes , who kept the Agriculture School from being a part of the University of Michigan and is widely credited with being the prime mover for the school 's founding ; Joseph R. Williams , the first president ; and Theophilus C. Abbot , the third president who stabilized the College after the Civil War . Also of importance was botany professor William J. Beal , an early plant ( hybrid corn ) geneticist who championed the laboratory teaching method . Another distinguished faculty member of the era was the alumnus / professor Liberty Hyde Bailey . Bailey was the first to raise the study of horticulture to a science , paralleling botany , which earned him the title of " Father of American Horticulture " . William L. Carpenter , a jurist who was elected to the Third Judicial Circuit of Michigan in 1894 , and member of the Michigan Supreme Court from 1902 until 1904 . Other famous 19th-century graduates include Ray Stannard Baker , a famed " muckraker " journalist and Pulitzer Prize winning biographer ; Minakata Kumagusu , a renowned environmental scientist ; and William Chandler Bagley , a pioneering education reformer .

There are currently around 442,000 living MSU alumni worldwide giving the school one of the largest number of alumni of any institution of higher learning . Famous MSU alumni include former Michigan governors James Blanchard and John Engler , U.S. Senators Debbie Stabenow and Tim Johnson , U.S. Ambassador to Brazil Donna Hrinak , Prime Minister of South Korea Lee Wan-koo , Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Director Richard Cordray , former Jordan prime minister Adnan Badran , billionaire philanthropists Tom Gores , Andrew Beal and Eli Broad , Chief Justice of the Texas Supreme Court Wallace B. Jefferson , trial lawyer Geoffrey Feiger , former Food and Drug Administration official Peter Rheinstein , Pulitzer Prize-winning novelist Richard Ford , Teamsters president James P. Hoffa , Quicken Loans founder and billionaire Cleveland Cavaliers owner Dan Gilbert , Sergeant at Arms of the U.S. House of Representatives Wilson Livingood , former Michigan U.S. Senator and Secretary of Energy Spencer Abraham , former Vice President of the Republic of Liberia Harry Moniba , and former U.S. Ambassador to Italy Peter Secchia . Alumni in Hollywood include actors such as James Caan , Anthony Heald , Robert Urich and William Fawcett ; comedian Dick Martin , comedian Jackie Martling , film directors Michael Cimino and Sam Raimi , and film editor Bob Murawski , as well as screenwriter David Magee Puerto Rican comedian Sunshine Logroño ( who has played the occasional Hollywood movie ) was a graduate student at MSU .

Composer Dika Newlin received her undergraduate degree from MSU , while lyricist , theatrical director and clinical psychologist Jacques Levy earned a doctorate in psychology . The university has also produced such jazz luminaries as pianist Henry Butler , vibraphonist Milt Jackson , and keyboardist / composer-arranger Clare Fischer . Journalists include NBC reporter Chris Hansen , AP White House correspondent Nedra Pickler , NPR Washington correspondent Don Gonyea , and veteran Michigan Capitol correspondent and PBS 's Off the Record host Tim Skubick . Novelist Michael Kimball graduated in 1990 . Novelist and true crime author R. Barri Flowers , who in 1977 a bachelors and in 1980 a masters in criminal justice , was inducted in 2006 into the MSU Criminal Justice Wall of Fame . Author Erik Qualman graduated with honors in 1994 and was also Academic Big-Ten in basketball . Susan K. Avery , the first woman president and director of the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution , received an MSU bachelor 's degree in physics . In addition , two of the Little Rock Nine attended Michigan State , including Ernest Green , the first black student to graduate from Little Rock Central High School , and Carlotta Walls LaNier . The University awarded an honorary degree to Robert Mugabe in 1990 , but revoked it in 2008 .

Spartans formerly or currently in the NBA include Earvin " Magic " Johnson , Greg Kelser , Jay Vincent , Steve Smith , Scott Skiles , Jason Richardson , Mateen Cleaves , Alan Anderson , Zach Randolph , Morris Peterson , Charlie Bell , Johnny Green , Maurice Ager , Shannon Brown , Draymond Green , Denzel Valentine and Deyonta Davis . On the American Football League 's All-Time Team are tight-end Fred Arbanas and safety George Saimes . In the National Football League , MSU alumni include Carl Banks , who was a member of the Giants teams that won Super Bowls XXI and XXV . Banks was a standout in their Super Bowl XXI victory in which he recorded 14 total tackles , including ten solo tackles , as well as being part of the NFL 's 1980 's All-Decade Team Morten Andersen , Plaxico Burress , Andre Rison , Derrick Mason , Muhsin Muhammad , T. J. Duckett , Flozell Adams , Julian Peterson , Charles Rogers , Jim Miller , Earl Morrall , Wayne Fontes , Bubba Smith and Drew Stanton . Former MSU quarterback Jeff Smoker now plays in the Arena Football League . Former Michigan State players in the National Hockey League include All Star Defensemen Duncan Keith , Rod Brind 'Amour , Anson Carter , Donald McSween , Adam Hall , John-Michael Liles , Justin Abdelkader , Corey Tropp , brothers Kelly Miller and Kip Miller , as well as their cousins , brothers Ryan Miller and Drew Miller .

Former Michigan State players in Major League Baseball include Hall of Fame inductee Robin Roberts , Kirk Gibson , Steve Garvey and Mark Mulder . Olympic gold medalists include Savatheda Fynes and Fred Alderman . The Spartans are also contributing athletes to Major League Soccer , as Kevin Reiman , Doug DeMartin , Dave Hertel , Greg Janicki , Kenzo Webster , Rauwshan McKenzie , John Minagawa-Webster and Ryan McMahen have all played in Major League Soccer . In addition , Alex Skotarek , Steve Twellman and Buzz Demling played in the North American Soccer League , with Demling playing in the 1972 Summer Olympics and the United States Men 's National Soccer Team in the 1970s . Miss Michigan 2015 , Emily Kieliszewski , is a 2013 graduate of MSU . Miss America 1961 , Nancy Fleming , is also a graduate of Michigan State . Verghese Kurien was an Indian social entrepreneur known as the " Father of the White Revolution " for his Operation Flood , the world 's largest agricultural development programme . He earned a Master of Science in Metallurgical Engineering from Michigan State University in 1948 .

Phoenix Wright : Ace Attorney − Justice for All , known in Japan as Gyakuten Saiban 2 ( Japanese : 逆転裁判2 , " Turnabout Trial 2 " ) , is a visual novel adventure video game developed and published by Capcom . It was originally released for the Game Boy Advance in 2002 in Japan , and has since been released on multiple platforms . The Nintendo DS version , initially released in 2006 in Japan , was released in English in the West in 2007 . The game is the second entry in the Ace Attorney series , following Phoenix Wright : Ace Attorney . The story follows Phoenix Wright , a defense attorney who defends his clients in four episodes . Among other characters are his partner Maya Fey , her cousin Pearl , and the rival prosecutor Franziska von Karma . The game is divided into two types of sections : courtroom sessions , where the player cross-examines witnesses and tries to uncover contradictions in their testimonies , and investigations , where the player gathers evidence and talks to witnesses . The game was directed and written by Shu Takumi , as the second entry in a planned Ace Attorney trilogy . It was originally intended to feature the first game 's prosecutor , Miles Edgeworth , in all episodes ; Franziska was created when the development team learned that Edgeworth had become popular among players , and Takumi wanted to use the character more carefully and sparingly . They only introduced one new gameplay mechanic in the game ; Takumi wanted to keep the game focused on the core concept of finding lies , and to keep it simple enough for his mother to play . The game was positively received by critics , who generally liked the writing , but criticized the game 's short length and the lack of the Nintendo DS-exclusive gameplay mechanics that appeared in the previous game .

Justice for All is a visual novel adventure game in which the player takes the role of Phoenix Wright , a defense attorney who defends people accused of murder in four different episodes . At first , only one episode is available ; as the player solves a case , a new episode is unlocked to play . The episodes are all divided into chapters , consisting of courtroom sections and investigation sections . During the investigation sections , the player investigates the case to gather evidence needed for the trial ; once enough evidence has been collected , the game moves on to the next chapter of the episode . During these sections , the player has access to a menu with four options : examine , move , present , and talk . By choosing " examine " , the player can move a cursor around the screen and look at various things in the environment ; by choosing " move " , the player reaches a sub-menu with all locations they can choose to move to ; by choosing " present " , the player can choose to show a piece of evidence or a character profile to a character at the location ; and by choosing " talk " , the player is able to pick a topic to discuss with a character who is present at the location . As the player talks to a character , the topics they have already discussed get marked with a checkmark .

If the player chooses a topic the witnesses does not want to discuss , the player is shown locks and chains on top of the character , referred to as " psyche-locks " ; additionally , a lock symbol is added to that topic in the talk menu . By presenting a magatama to the character , the player is able to start breaking the psyche-locks and unlock the topics ; this is done by showing the character evidence or character profiles that proves they are hiding something . The deeper the secret is that the character is hiding , the more psyche-locks appear ; by breaking all the locks , the topic gets unlocked and the player is given access to new information . During the courtroom sections , the player attempts to get the defendant declared innocent by questioning witnesses and presenting evidence to the judge and the prosecutor . Many witnesses lie during their testimonies ; the player is able to move back and forth through the testimony to try to find any inconsistencies . There are two options available during cross-examinations : " press " , which makes the player question a particular statement , which sometimes makes the witnesses change their testimony ; and " present " , which is used to show a piece of evidence or a character profile that the player thinks shows a contradiction in the witness 's currently shown statement . In the upper right corner of the screen , the player 's health bar is shown , representing the judge 's patience . The bar decreases if the player makes mistakes , such as presenting the wrong piece of evidence ; if it reaches zero , the defendant is declared guilty , and the player loses the game . While the player cannot lose the game while trying to break a psyche-lock , the bar will still decrease if the player presents the wrong evidence while trying to break psyche-locks . 50 % of the bar is restored when the player manages to break a psyche-lock , and 100 % is restored when an episode is completed .

The game 's first episode involves defense attorney Phoenix Wright getting amnesia after being hit on the head by Richard Wellington , a witness in the case . Phoenix is forced to defend Maggey Byrde , a policewoman who has been accused of murdering her boyfriend , with no memory of the case . Phoenix regains his memory with help from Byrde and his partner , the spirit medium Maya Fey , and deduces that Wellington is the true killer . The second episode takes place before the first , and involves Dr. Turner Grey requesting a spirit channeling from Maya Fey at the Kurain Village . During the channeling , Grey is killed , and Maya is arrested on suspicion of murder . When defending her , Phoenix faces prosecutor Franziska von Karma , who has never lost a case and has come to America to defeat Phoenix in court . Phoenix discovers that Grey 's death was plotted by a nurse who once worked under him and Maya 's aunt , Morgan Fey , who sought to displace Maya as the master of Kurain Village to allow her own 8-year-old daughter , Pearl Fey , to take the title instead . After the case , Morgan is arrested and placed into solitary confinement , and Maya and Phoenix step in to take care of Pearl . In the third episode , Maximillion Galactica , a magician at the Berry Big Circus , is charged with the ringmaster 's murder . Phoenix successfully defends him against Franziska von Karma , and the real killer is revealed to be one of the circus 's trapeze artists , who accidentally killed the ringmaster while trying to murder the ringmaster 's daughter as revenge for his brother .

In the fourth episode , Maya is kidnapped after the actor Matt Engarde has been suspected of murdering his media rival Juan Corrida . The kidnapper , the infamous assassin Shelly de Killer , promises to let Maya go if Phoenix can get a complete acquittal for Engarde . Phoenix learns that Engarde , Corrida , and their managers had a complicated romantic relationship , and that Engarde had hired de Killer to force Phoenix to defend him in court . During the case , de Killer shoots Franziska , wounding her and forcing a new prosecutor in the case to step in : Miles Edgeworth , who had just returned to the country in time . Edgeworth picks up on Phoenix 's unusual behavior in court and recognizes that Maya is in trouble , and helps extend the case to give the police more time to rescue Maya . When Phoenix reveals to de Killer that Engarde has blackmail evidence on de Killer 's actions , de Killer reneges his loyalty to Engarde , promising to kill him next . Engarde , terrified by de Killer 's promise , pleads guilty in order to escape his wrath . Maya is freed and reunited with Phoenix and Pearl , while Franziska , recovering from her wounds , decides to return home . If the player presents the wrong evidence towards the end of the trial , an alternate ending ensues , in which Engarde is freed and his manager is tried and convicted of Juan 's murder , causing Phoenix to be shunned forever by Maya and abandon his profession . In the regular ending following Engarde 's conviction , Edgeworth follows Franziska to the airport . Franziska says that she had planned to take revenge on Phoenix after he had proved her father 's guilt in a trial in the first game , but that she has failed . With Edgeworth 's encouragement , she vows to return as a better prosecutor .

After development of the original Phoenix Wright : Ace Attorney was finished , the writer and director Shu Takumi 's boss , Shinji Mikami , told him that they should make an Ace Attorney trilogy , with a grand finale in the third game 's last case . Development of the game began immediately when Takumi returned to work from his vacation : the producer , Atsushi Inaba , called him in to a meeting , and told Takumi that he wanted him to write the script for five episodes before the game went into full production , with a deadline of three and a half months . Takumi thought that this was " completely insane " , as it had taken him an average of more than a month to write each of the four episodes for the first Ace Attorney ; additionally , he felt that he did not have any " tricks " left to use for mysteries or any story threads to work off of . He wanted to protest , but still ended up having to do it . As soon as he returned to his desk , he drafted a work schedule : he scheduled two and a half month to write the dialogue , with half a month per episode , leaving him with a month to create the first prototype and figure out the " tricks " to be used in the mysteries . He doubted that he would be able to do it in time , but managed to write the whole script by the deadline . However , due to issues with memory on the game 's cartridge , one episode ended up having to be cut from the game ; it was later used as the third episode of the third game .

After finishing writing the dialogue , Takumi was called into another meeting with Inaba , and was told to add a new gameplay mechanic to the investigations . Takumi wanted to keep the gameplay simple enough for his mother to be able to play it , and keep it focused on the core concept of finding lies ; according to him , he immediately had a vision of the psyche lock system during the meeting with Inaba , but still asked for three days to come up with an idea . He found it easy to formulate the idea , but it took over a month to create the system ; the biggest problem was how to visually represent the psyche locks . Takumi also drew storyboards for the episodes ' openings , which consisted of series of detailed drawings that show what is happening . He also drew rough sketches of cut-in illustrations ; it was only decided after all the text had been written what scenes would have illustrations made for them . While the game 's opening features the judge , it was originally supposed to have featured a demon instead ; this was because Takumi was playing Devil May Cry at the time , and had liked its opening . As Takumi wanted the first three Ace Attorney games to be part of one larger work , he did not want the first game to look outdated in comparison to later ones , so it was decided to keep the same graphics for main characters such as Phoenix , Maya and Edgeworth throughout all their appearances , and not make updates to them . The game 's music was composed by Naoto Tanaka under the pseudonym Akemi Kimura .

As the dialogue-integrated " tutorial " in the first Ace Attorney was well received , the inclusion of one in Justice for All was considered a " major point " . While the first game 's tutorial involved Phoenix being helped through his first trial by his mentor Mia and the judge , this could not be used twice , which led to the idea of giving Phoenix a temporary amnesia from a blow to the head . Takumi included a circus and magic in the game 's third episode ; he really wanted to do this , as performing magic is a hobby of his . The episode includes two themes that he wanted to explore : the difficulties in forming a cohesive team with different people , and a person who against the odds tries to make something whole . The former was reflected in how the circus members come together at the end , while the latter was reflected in the character Moe . Several different versions of the fourth episode were created , partially because of them running out of memory on the game 's cartridge , but also because of the popularity of the character of Miles Edgeworth : Takumi had originally planned to let Edgeworth be the prosecutor in all episodes , but when they were in full production the development team learned that the character had become popular , which led to Takumi feeling that he had to use the character more carefully and sparingly . Because of this , he created the character Franziska von Karma , to save Edgeworth for the game 's last case , and avoid a situation where he – a supposed prodigy – loses every case . The character Pearl Fey was originally intended to be a rival character around the same age as Maya , only appearing in the game 's second episode ; one of the game 's designers suggested that it would be more dramatic if she were much younger , so Takumi wrote her as an eight-year-old . As he ended up liking her , he included her in other episodes as well .

The game was originally released by Capcom for the Game Boy Advance on October 18 , 2002 in Japan ; a Nintendo DS version followed on October 26 , 2006 in Japan , on January 16 , 2007 in North America , and on March 16 , 2007 in Europe . A PC port of the Game Boy Advance version , developed by a company called Daletto , was released in Japan in an episodic format , starting on April 15 , 2008 . A Wii version was released through WiiWare on January 26 , 2010 in Japan , on February 15 , 2010 in North America , and on February 19 , 2010 in Europe . A high-definition iOS version of the first three Ace Attorney games , Ace Attorney : Phoenix Wright Trilogy HD , was released in Japan on February 7 , 2012 , and in the West on May 30 , 2013 . Another collection of the first three games , Phoenix Wright : Ace Attorney Trilogy , was released for the Nintendo 3DS in Japan on April 17 , 2014 , in North America on December 9 , 2014 , and in Europe on December 11 , 2014 .

Starting with Justice for All , the series localization direction has been handled by Janet Hsu ; by the time she joined Capcom 's localization team in 2005 , the first Ace Attorney had already been localized , with the original localization team having decided to do a full localization , changing the setting from Japan to Los Angeles . While Hsu thought that this was the right choice to make , as it made the characters and dialogue more relatable and made for an emotional experience closer to what players of the Japanese version experience , it resulted in issues with each following game . According to the localization editor , Brandon Gay , Justice for All was one of their largest games to localize due to its focus on the story , and how it needs to convey the whole game world and its characters through just text ; this made it a challenge to make the characters relatable for an American audience . Another thing the localization team had to keep in mind was to ensure that recurring characters were consistent with how they behave in the first Ace Attorney . According to JP Kellams , another staff member working on the localization , there was a lot of pressure on them to make a good localization , as the first game 's localization had been well received ; he also felt that there was room for creativity due to the game 's style and subject , with room for humor that might not fit in other localizations . A lot of the humor in the original was based on Japanese wordplay ; these jokes had to be redone entirely for the English release . Hsu felt that the game was more demanding than previous projects she had worked on , as the localizers " almost have to become [ the characters ] " in order to get the nuance and motivations right due to their complexity .

According to Gay , characters with " extreme personality quirks " were both fun and stressful to write : for the clown Moe , he found it challenging to get the balance right between his silly jokes and the seriousness of his dialogue . Among other challenging characters to write for were Acro , who led to " heated arguments " about how to get his personality and tone right ; and Morgan Fey , whose " very old style " of speaking in the Japanese version was difficult to translate to English . One aspect they had to change due to cultural differences was a conversation with the lecherous character Director Hotti , where an animation of him grabbing in the air with his hands is played while he talks about Pearl . According to Hsu , the Japanese version is considered funny to Japanese people , as Hotti is set up as the " butt of the joke " , and Phoenix reacts negatively to him , while it would have been considered sickening to an American audience . They were unable to change the animation , so the dialogue was rewritten to instead be directed at an adult nurse .

Justice for All holds a score of 76 / 100 at the review aggregator Metacritic based on 51 critics , indicating generally favorable reviews . Writers for Famitsu praised the mix of seriousness and comedy , and liked the characters ' quirkiness and the pacing of the conversations . John Walker at Eurogamer called the game " splendidly crazy as ever " and " the most joyfully daft fun imaginable " . Tom East at Official Nintendo Magazine called the script fantastic . Joe Juba at Game Informer found the game entertaining , calling the writing hilarious and the problem-solving clever , with the two aspects complimenting each other well . Aaron Thomas at GameSpot liked the game , praising the game 's story and calling the characters its greatest strength . He thought that the pacing was better than the first Ace Attorney 's , but still found the game to be a step back : he felt that the game often reuses the same kinds of twists from the first . Gerald Villoria at GameSpy called the episodes well structured and stronger than the ones in first game , and called the dialogue sharp . Mikel Reparaz at GamesRadar said that the script , while entertaining , contains " long stretches of meaningless dialogue " and tends to leave the player knowing what happened and how to prove it before Phoenix does . He initially liked the new rival character Franziska , but thought that she only becomes increasingly obnoxious . Craig Harris at IGN said that the episodes are well-written , with enthusiasm and personality , making them hard to put down .

Walker found the court sections " maddening " due to how the game sometimes requires very specific evidence to be presented , with evidence that he found reasonable being rejected , forcing him to resort to guessing ; he wished that the health meter would have been replenished through correct answers , or that it had been removed from the game entirely . Bryan Vore at Game Informer found the investigation sections tedious at times , but found them to be helped by how the psyche-locks add " courtroom drama " to the investigations . Juba thought that the game 's reliance on text made the investigations move slowly , but that the game becomes an " irresistible adventure " when the text is mixed with gameplay in the trials . Thomas found the psyche-locks interesting , but underwhelming as the only new feature . East said that the psyche-locks were what made the investigations fun . Reparaz liked how the psyche-lock mechanic adds " a new dimension of weirdness " to the game . Both Harris and Thomas wished that the game had been less linear , with more possible wrong paths to take or more endings . Thomas , Reparaz and East wished that the Nintendo DS-exclusive gameplay features introduced in the first game 's final episode had been used in Justice for All , with Reparaz calling it disappointing but " not a huge deal " . Villoria and East said that the game does not last very long ; Walker did not consider it short , but found it to not last as long as the first game .

Vore said that the game is lacking in " advanced graphics and interface " , but felt that it makes up for it through its charm and intrigue . Thomas called the character designs outstanding , but thought that the reused art assets for returning characters and locations from the first game made it feel like Capcom had " cut some corners " . He called the music " uniformly outstanding and used masterfully " , both for conveying various moods throughout the story , and for characters ' personalities . Harris found the music " moody and appropriate " , but wished that there had been a full voice-over as an option . He said that the game 's art was nice , but not more than that . Thomas called the localization outstanding despite finding some errors , finding it impressive how smoothly Capcom was able to localize such a text-heavy game . Harris liked the game 's localization , saying that the localization team 's writing was what made the game design work so well . Walker called the localization incredible , and said that while there are a few spelling errors and grammatical errors in the text , it did not bother him much as the localization was included in the Japanese Nintendo DS release .

The Bjorøy Tunnel ( Norwegian : Bjorøytunnelen ) is a 2,012-metre ( 6,601 ft ) long subsea road tunnel in Hordaland county , Norway . The tunnel is part of the Norwegian County Road 207 which connects the island of Bjorøy in the municipality of Fjell to the mainland near Håkonshella and Hilleren in the city-municipality of Bergen . It crosses underneath the Vatlestraumen strait , reaching 88 metres ( 289 ft ) below mean sea level . It serves as a fixed link for the 900 residents of the islands of Bjorøy and Tyssøy as well as a large number of cottage owners who vacation on the islands . The first proposal was launched in 1980 , and construction started on 29 September 1993 . There were severe problems because the tunneling encountered an area of sandstone , causing a year 's delay . The total construction cost was NOK 59 million . It opened on 7 May 1996 and remained a toll road until 29 January 2005 .

The Bjorøy Tunnel is a subsea tunnel which runs below the Vatlestraumen strait between the island of Bjorøy and the mainland of Bergen . It carries two lanes of Hordaland County Road 207 . It is the only fixed link for the islands of Bjorøy and Tyssøy ( Tyssøy is connected to Bjorøy by a bridge ) . The tunnel is 2,012 metres ( 6,601 ft ) long and reaches 88 m ( 289 ft ) below mean sea level . The maximum gradient is 10 degrees ( about 18 % grade ) . It is one of few tunnels in Norway without mobile telephone coverage , although there are emergency telephones that connect to the operation center of the Norwegian Public Roads Administration , and the tunnel will receive coverage with the future Norwegian Public Safety Radio . Before the construction of the Bjorøy Tunnel , the geology of the area was thought to consist entirely of metamorphic basement rocks similar to those exposed on the surrounding islands . The Jurassic sediments encountered in the tunnel included breccia and conglomerate in contact with the underlying gneisses and a sandstone with coal fragments , some of which was quite unconsolidated . Spore and pollen samples gave an Oxfordian age ( Late Jurassic ) for the sequence . The sedimentary rocks appear to have been deposited into an eroded depression caused by a fault zone , which later reactivated , disrupting the bedding and causing steep dips .

Since 1966 , Bjorøy had been served by the Alvøen – Bjorøyhamn Ferry . The plans for a tunnel to Bjorøy were first launched by the engineer Jack Jahnsen in 1980 . These were based on the then under construction Vardø Tunnel , which became the first subsea tunnel in Norway when it opened in 1982 . He had a meeting at his place on 18 December 1980 , to which the three municipal councilors from Bjorøy also were invited , where he tried to get support for the tunnel , which would be the topic of a municipal council meeting on 20 December . The council unanimously voted in favour of establishing a committee to look into the tunnel . The committee was established on 6 January 1981 and concluded with that there were three alternative possibilities to build a fixed link to Bjorøy : a bridge from the island over Søre Steinsundet via Vestre Steinsundholmen , Kjerringholmen and Kaggen to Søre Snekkevik on Litlesotra ; a tunnel under Vatlestraumen to Håkonshella ; or a bridge over Vatlestraumen to Håkonshella or Kongshaug . At the time , a bridge to Litlesotra was estimated to cost NOK 111 million , a tunnel was estimated to cost NOK 36 million , while a bridge over Vatlestraumen was estimated to cost NOK 74 million . All three included a road connection to Tyssøy , with the bridge proposals costing NOK 16 million for the Tyssøy connection , and the tunnel having a cost of NOK 4 million , in part because the earthworks volume from the tunnel could be used to build a mole with a short bridge . Seismology tests were done in August 1983 , and they concluded that the ground had good conditions : the uncompacted material laid mostly only 1-meter ( 3 ft 3 in ) deep , albeit at times as deep as 7 meters ( 23 ft ) . The proposed tunnel crossing followed a mountain ridge , and the maximum depth was between 40 and 45 metres ( 131 and 148 ft ) , although the topography went steep down to those depths .

The plans were presented to Johan J. Jakobsen , Minister of Transport and Communications , and cooperation was started with the Norwegian Public Roads Administration to find a suitable connection to Tyssøy , so that they could also take advantage of the tunnel . To connect the two islands , it was chosen to build across Nautasundet , which was shallow and 175 metres ( 574 ft ) wide . In 1987 , Kaare Hartman joined the committee and proposed that the tunnel be built with borrowed money , guaranteed by land-owners on the islands , and repaid using tolls . At the time the project was not on any prioritized investment list , and this way the project was not dependent on public grants . On 7 September 1987 , Hartmann reached agreement with Norges Skibshypotek to borrow the estimated NOK 50 million . The bank had a guarantee in the income from the tunnel . However , Norges Skibshypotek had to withdraw , as it was not permitted to invest in non-shipping investments . Instead , a loan was taken in Bergens Skillingsbank . Four land-owners made a guarantee for NOK 9 million , with a judicial registration covering an area of 347 hectares ( 860 acres ) . They hoped that the value of their land would increase after the tunnel had been built . The same amount was also guaranteed by Fjell Municipality . Public grants were also secured , so the debt would be NOK 27 to 30 million . The planning was done by Chr . F. Grøner , for which the municipality paid the costs . Statistics from the ferry showed that 26,400 cars and 93,902 people had taken it in 1986 , which had grown to 40,400 and 121,000 in 1989 . The estimates were for a 90 % increase until 2000 , given an opening in 2002 . A bid for the project was gathered from Selmer – Furuholmen , which gave a maximum price of NOK 55 million , given that construction started in 1989 .

On 12 December 1989 , the committee sent an official offer to Hordaland Public Roads Administration whereby they , as a company under establishment , offered to fully finance the tunnel . The plans called for tolls of NOK 51 for a car and an investment cost of NOK 47 million . The plans were at first nearly discarded by the administration , as they felt it was impossible for a community of 400 people to finance such a large project without other grants . However , it became evident that the administration was spending NOK 2 million per year on the ferry service , and as the ferry soon would have to be replaced , this would increase to NOK 3 to 5 million per year . On 1 October 1990 , the issue was considered by Hordaland Transport Board , which approved the plans . This was followed up by Hordaland County Council on 19 June 1991 , which involved NOK 27 million being financed by debt and NOK 28 to 33 million being financed through reduced subsidies to the ferry . The plans were met with criticism from locals on the Bergen side where the tunnel would emerge . They stated that the plans had " cheap solutions " and had unnecessary negative impact on their local environment . This included the demolishing of a football field and lack of noise barriers . Bergen Municipality demanded that the costs of a new field be paid for by the project , and that the tunnel be slightly extended . A new estimate was made , which increased the price by NOK 10.3 million ; however , Hordaland Public Roads Administration protested , stating that it would give an inferior road technically , that the existing development plans permitted the construction , and that the noise would not exceed the permitted limits . They concluded that should these demands remain , the increased costs would terminate the project . On 16 November 1992 , Bergen City Council voted to allow the tunnel , under the condition that the tunnel project financed a new football field . The decision was appealed by lawyers representing the local community , but this was rejected by Hordaland County Governor on 30 August 1993 .

Originally the unlimited company Bjorøy og Tyssøy ANS had been attempted established with capital from locals , but instead the company Fastlandssambandet Bjorøy – Tyssøy AS was established on 29 September 1993 . Capital for NOK 40,000 was paid by Fjell Municipality , NOK 20,000 by Sund Municipality and NOK 10,000 by Jack Jahnsen . The plans were sent to the Ministry of Transport and Communications in October 1992 , who started working on a proposal for parliament in January 1993 . Issues raised by the ministry were that the loans had been issued in 1987 , and whether the land estimated value of the guaranteed real estate was real . The project was presented to the Parliament of Norway , who must approve all toll roads . By then the costs were estimated at NOK 61.5 million , including NOK 4.5 million in ordinary county grants and NOK 30 million in extraordinary county grants . The proposal estimated annual toll collection costs to NOK 825,000 , with the collection taking place on Bjorøy . It was originally planned that the toll plaza would be manned between 06 : 00 and 22 : 00 , meaning passing would be free at night .

An agreement was made between the ministry , the tunnel company and the county municipality on 6 January 1994 to build the tunnel . The company had the right to collect tolls for up to 15 years on fees dictated by the county municipality , and would have to pay NOK 27 million for the tunnel , with the county paying for the rest of the costs . The construction would be the responsibility of Hordaland Public Roads Administration , with the tunnel company only responsible for their part of the financing and the collection of tolls . An agreement was made with Selmer , whereby they would charge NOK 59,422,500 and take the risk of the project , including any expenditures for unknown geological conditions or similar costs increases . They were also responsible for an insurance to reclaim the investments should it be proven impossible to build the tunnel .

The construction of the tunnel started on 29 September 1993 , with the original plans calling for the tunnel to open on 15 June 1995 . The original construction consisted of blasting from Bjorøy , but by January 1994 there were problems with water leaks through cracks . The contractor described these as " common problems " when building tunnels , but that construction would be delayed by up to two weeks . To keep up with the schedule , the company started also blasting from the mainland . However , the problems increased , and by September the tunnel was leaking 600 liters ( 130 imp gal ; 160 U.S. gal ) per minute , which was 50 % more than estimated . This caused extra work to be done on the exterior to the tunnel , and costs had increased by several tens of millions of kroner . In particular , a different type of rock had been struck , and 60 tonnes ( 59 long tons ; 66 short tons ) of concrete had been injected without this giving the desired effects . On 30 September , Selmer stopped construction from the Bjorøy side , although it continued from the mainland . About 750 metres ( 2,460 ft ) from the Bjorøy side , the construction found a section of sandstone , the upper Jurassic Bjorøy formation , a condition that had never been encountered during subsea tunnel construction before . Geological engineers stated that there was no known solution to overcoming the problem , and that if the contractor had blasted into the area , the tunnel would have been filled with sand and water within minutes .

On a meeting on 10 October , O. T. Blindheim , a geological consulting company , and Selmer presented three alternatives : continued injection of cement , recommended by Blindheim ; freezing , recommended by Selmer because it was the cheapest , but would take more time ; and use of a water-tight shield . A technical committee was established , and on 16 December they recommended the use of cement injection combined with a ring of drainage holes around the tunnel before blasting . The method was to be continually tested , and if it was insufficient , freezing could be used . As the tunnel advanced , the hole was to be continuously secured using carbon fibre-reinforced carbon gunite , self-boring bolts , steel ribs and full pouring . Work was taken up after a meeting on 27 March 1995 , and on 16 August the final blast was made . Representatives from Selmer stated that the method they had chosen had resulted in international interest for the tunnel , and they had demonstrated it to several international delegations .

The grants were only given for the tunnel to Bjorøy , and not for the necessary roads that would connect Tyssøy to Bjorøy . This caused local controversy , as some people on Bjorøy disagreed that the tolls on the Bjorøy Tunnel should pay for the Tyssøy Bridge . On 13 May 1993 , the costs of the connection to Tyssøy were estimated at NOK 5 million . The issue was not resolved when the construction of the tunnel started . The original costs for the bridge were for NOK 11.4 million , including a 20 metres ( 66 ft ) long bridge with a clearance of 10 meters ( 33 ft ) . This was later reduced to 10 metres ( 33 ft ) length and 5 meters ( 16 ft ) , which reduced the costs to NOK 9.4 million . Of this , the county paid NOK 4 million , while the two municipalities had advanced the transporting earthwork from the tunnel to the sound . On 22 January 1996 , the tunnel company agreed to advance the construction costs and collect it from the tolls , with Sund Municipality guaranteeing for the debt . On 2 February 1996 , the tunnel company had an agreement with Bru og Tunnelskelskapet , which operates the Bergen Toll Ring , to collect the tolls in the tunnel using the Autopass automatic toll collection system . A manual collection system was estimated to cost NOK 1.4 million per year , while an automated system was estimated at NOK 0.4 million . The tunnel opened on 7 May 1996 , the same day the last ferry ran . Originally the plan was to charge tolls similar to the ferry . With a manual system , it would not be possible to charge for two-wheeled vehicles and passengers , so the fares for other vehicles were raised slightly . In 1995 , it had cost NOK 44 for a single passing with a car on the ferry . The tolls were set to NOK 120 for all types of vehicles , except two-wheelers , and NOK 72 was charged per travel with pre-paid ticket books . Bus riders had to pay for two extra zones . The toll plaza was open a few hour each week to allow people to purchase discounted tickets .

The contract for the construction of the bridge to Tyssøy was announced on 20 August 1996 , and was won by NCC Eeg-Henriksen Anlegg , who wanted NOK 8.5 million for the job . The link opened on 27 September 1997 . In 2000 , a public meeting was held in which it was proposed to reduce the rates and instead prolong the collection time , but this was rejected . In 1999 , the Norwegian Public Roads Administration reported that the Bjorøy Tunnel had the cheapest administration costs per passing , at NOK 7.32 , of all small toll companies . The tolls were removed on 29 January 2005 , after eight years and eight months , almost half the stipulated time . On 19 January 2004 , the freight ship Rocknes ran aground on the unmarked underwater bank of Revskolt in Vatlestraumen , located above the tunnel . The accident cost 18 people their lives and was the most extensive and costly oil spill in Norwegian history . In an attempt to avoid similar incidents occurring again , the Norwegian Coastal Administration started in May 2012 to blast away the bank , increasing the depth from 9 to 14 meters ( 30 to 46 ft ) . This allows the sailing width though Vatlestraumen to increase by 250 meters ( 820 ft ) . The work required the tarp covering the tunnel to be removed , causing increased leaks in the tunnel during the work period . The project was highly controversial amongst the islanders and the plans were approved by only a single decisive vote in the municipal council . Islanders were especially concerned that the work might damage the tunnel . Calculations conducted by the Coastal Administration conclude that there is no chance of this occurring , as the blasting is taking place 65 meters ( 213 ft ) above the tunnel .

Smedley Darlington Butler ( July 30 , 1881 – June 21 , 1940 ) was a United States Marine Corps major general , the highest rank authorized at that time , and at the time of his death the most decorated Marine in U.S. history . During his 34-year career as a Marine , he participated in military actions in the Philippines , China , in Central America and the Caribbean during the Banana Wars , and France in World War I. Butler is well known for having later become an outspoken critic of U.S. wars and their consequences , as well as exposing the Business Plot , an alleged plan to overthrow the U.S. government . By the end of his career , Butler had received 16 medals , five for heroism . He is one of 19 men to receive the Medal of Honor twice , one of three to be awarded both the Marine Corps Brevet Medal and the Medal of Honor , and the only Marine to be awarded the Brevet Medal and two Medals of Honor , all for separate actions . In 1933 , he became involved in a controversy known as the Business Plot , when he told a congressional committee that a group of wealthy industrialists were planning a military coup to overthrow Franklin D. Roosevelt , with Butler selected to lead a march of veterans to become dictator , similar to other Fascist regimes at that time . The individuals involved all denied the existence of a plot and the media ridiculed the allegations . A final report by a special House of Representatives Committee confirmed some of Butler 's testimony .

Smedley Butler was born July 30 , 1881 , in West Chester , Pennsylvania , the eldest of three sons . His parents , Thomas and Maud ( née Darlington ) Butler , were descended from local Quaker families . Both of his parents were of entirely English ancestry , all of which had been in what is now the United States since the 1600s . His father was a lawyer , a judge and , for 31 years , a Congressman and chair of the House Naval Affairs Committee during the Harding and Coolidge administrations . His maternal grandfather was Smedley Darlington , a Republican Congressman from 1887 to 1891 . Butler attended the West Chester Friends Graded High School , followed by The Haverford School , a secondary school popular with sons of upper-class Philadelphia families . A Haverford athlete , he became captain of its baseball team and quarterback of its football team . Against the wishes of his father , he left school 38 days before his seventeenth birthday to enlist in the Marine Corps during the Spanish – American War . Nevertheless , Haverford awarded him his high school diploma on June 6 , 1898 , before the end of his final year ; his transcript stated he completed the Scientific Course " with Credit " .

In the anti-Spanish war fervor of 1898 , Butler lied about his age to receive a direct commission as a Marine second lieutenant . He trained in Washington D.C. at the Marine Barracks on the corner of 8th and I Streets . In July 1898 , he went to Guantánamo Bay , Cuba , arriving shortly after its invasion and capture . His company soon returned to the U.S. and after a short break , he was assigned to the armored cruiser USS New York for four months . He came home to be mustered out of service in February 1899 , but on 8 April 1899 , he accepted a commission as a first lieutenant in the Marine Corps .

The Marine Corps sent him to Manila , Philippines . On garrison duty with little to do , Butler turned to alcohol to relieve the boredom . He once became drunk and was temporarily relieved of command after an unspecified incident in his room . In October 1899 , he saw his first combat action when he led 300 Marines to take the town of Noveleta , from Filipino rebels known as Insurrectos . In the initial moments of the assault , his first sergeant was wounded . Butler briefly panicked , but quickly regained his composure and led his Marines in pursuit of the fleeing enemy . By noon the Marines had dispersed the rebels and taken the town . One Marine had been killed and ten were wounded . Another 50 Marines had been incapacitated by the humid tropical heat . After the excitement of this combat , garrison duty again became routine . Butler had a very large Eagle , Globe , and Anchor tattoo made which started at his throat and extended to his waist . He also met Littleton Waller , a fellow Marine with whom he maintained a lifelong friendship . When Waller received command of a company in Guam , he was allowed to select five officers to take with him ; he chose Butler . Before they had departed , their orders were changed and they were sent to China aboard the USS Solace to help put down the Boxer Rebellion .

Once in China , Butler was initially deployed at Tientsin . He took part in the Battle of Tientsin on July 13 , 1900 and in the subsequent Gaselee Expedition , during which he saw the mutilated remains of Japanese soldiers . When he saw another Marine officer fall wounded , he climbed out of a trench to rescue him . Butler was then himself shot in the thigh . Another Marine helped him get to safety , but also was shot . Despite his leg wound , Butler assisted the wounded officer to the rear . Four enlisted men would receive the Medal of Honor in the battle . Butler 's commanding officer , Major Littleton W. T. Waller , personally commended him and wrote that " for such reward as you may deem proper the following officers : Lieutenant Smedley D. Butler , for the admirable control of his men in all the fights of the week , for saving a wounded man at the risk of his own life , and under a very severe fire . " Commissioned officers were not then eligible to receive the Medal of Honor , and Butler instead received a promotion to captain by brevet while he recovered in the hospital , two weeks before his nineteenth birthday .

He was eligible for the Marine Corps Brevet Medal when it was created in 1921 , and was one of only 20 Marines to receive it . His citation reads : The Secretary of the Navy takes pleasure in transmitting to First Lieutenant Smedley Darlington Butler , United States Marine Corps , the Brevet Medal which is awarded in accordance with Marine Corps Order No. 26 ( 1921 ) , for distinguished conduct and public service in the presence of the enemy while serving with the Second Battalion of Marines , near Tientsin , China , on 13 July 1900 . On 28 March 1901 , First Lieutenant Butler is appointed Captain by brevet , to take rank from 13 July 1900 .

Butler participated in a series of occupations , police actions , and interventions by the United States in Central America and the Caribbean , commonly called the Banana Wars because their goal was to protect American commercial interests in the region , particularly those of the United Fruit Company . This company had significant financial stakes in the production of bananas , tobacco , sugar cane , and other products throughout the Caribbean , Central America and the northern portions of South America . The U.S. was also trying to advance its own political interests by maintaining its influence in the region and especially its control of the Panama Canal . These interventions started with the Spanish – American War in 1898 and ended with the withdrawal of troops from Haiti and President Franklin D. Roosevelt 's Good Neighbor Policy in 1934 . After his retirement , Butler became an outspoken critic of the business interests in the Caribbean , criticizing the ways in which U.S. businesses and Wall Street bankers imposed their agenda on United States foreign policy during this period .

In 1903 , Butler was stationed in Puerto Rico on Culebra Island . Hearing rumors of a Honduran revolt , the United States government ordered his unit and a supporting naval detachment to sail to Honduras , 1,500 miles ( 2,414 km ) to the west , to defend the U.S. Consulate in Honduras . Using a converted banana boat renamed the Panther , Butler and several hundred Marines landed at the port town of Puerto Cortés . In a letter home , he described the action : they were " prepared to land and shoot everybody and everything that was breaking the peace " , but instead found a quiet town . The Marines re-boarded the Panther and continued up the coast line looking for rebels at several towns , but found none . When they arrived at Trujillo , however , they heard gunfire , and came upon a battle in progress that had been waged for 55 hours between rebels called Bonillista and Honduran government soldiers at a local fort . At the sight of the Marines , the fighting ceased and Butler led a detachment of Marines to the American consulate , where he found the consul , wrapped in an American flag , hiding among the floor beams . As soon as the Marines left the area with the shaken consul , the battle resumed and the Bonillistas soon controlled the government . During this expedition Butler earned the first of his nicknames , " Old Gimlet Eye " . It was attributed to his feverish , bloodshot eyes — he was suffering from some unnamed tropic fever at the time — which enhanced his penetrating and bellicose stare .

After the Honduran campaign , Butler returned to Philadelphia . He married Ethel Conway Peters of Philadelphia in Bay Head , New Jersey , on June 30 , 1905 . His best man at the wedding was his former commanding officer in China , Lieutenant Colonel Littleton W. T. Waller . The couple eventually had three children : a daughter , Ethel Peters Butler ( Mrs. John Wehle ) , and two sons , Smedley Darlington , Jr. and Thomas Richard . Butler was next assigned to garrison duty in the Philippines , where he once launched a resupply mission across the stormy waters of Subic Bay after his isolated outpost ran out of rations . In 1908 , he was diagnosed as having a nervous breakdown and received nine months sick leave which he spent at home . He successfully managed a coal mine in West Virginia , but returned to active duty in the Marine Corps at the first opportunity .

From 1909 to 1912 , Butler served in Nicaragua , enforcing U.S. policy , and once again led his battalion to the relief of a rebel-besieged city , this time Granada , and again , with a 104-degree fever . In December 1909 , he commanded the 3d Battalion , 1st Marine Regiment , on the Isthmus of Panama . On August 11 , 1912 , he was temporarily detached to command an expeditionary battalion with which he participated in the Battle of Masaya on September 19 , 1912 and the bombardment , assault and capture of Coyotepe Hill , Nicaragua in October 1912 . He remained in Nicaragua until November 1912 , when he rejoined the Marines of 3d Battalion , 1st Marine Regiment , at Camp Elliott , Panama .

Butler and his family were living in Panama in January 1914 when he was ordered to report as the Marine officer of a battleship squadron massing off the coast of Mexico , near Veracruz , to monitor a revolutionary movement . He did not like leaving his family and the home they had established in Panama and he intended to request orders home as soon as he determined he was not needed . On March 1 , 1914 , Butler and Navy Lieutenant ( later Admiral ) Frank Fletcher went ashore in Veracruz and made their way to Jalapa , Mexico and back . A purpose of the trip was to allow Butler and Fletcher to discuss the details of a future expedition into Mexico . Fletcher 's plan required Butler to make his way into the country and develop a more detailed invasion plan while inside its borders . It was a spy mission and Butler was enthusiastic to get started . When Admiral Fletcher explained the plan to the commanders in Washington , D.C. , they agreed to it . Butler was given the go-ahead . He entered Mexico and made his way to the U.S. Consulate in Mexico City , posing as a railroad official named " Mr. Johnson " . He and the chief railroad inspector scoured the city , saying they were searching for a lost railroad employee ; there was no lost employee , and in fact the employee they said was lost never existed . The ruse gave Butler access to various areas of the city . In the process of the so-called search , they located weapons in use by the Mexican army , and determined the sizes of units and states of readiness . They updated maps and verified the railroad lines for use in an impending US invasion . On March 7 , 1914 , he returned to Veracruz with the information he had gathered and presented it to his commanders . The invasion plan was eventually scrapped when authorities loyal to Victoriano Huerta detained a small American naval landing party in Tampico , Mexico , which became known as the Tampico Affair .

When President Woodrow Wilson discovered that an arms shipment was about to arrive in Mexico , he sent a contingent of Marines and sailors to Veracruz to intercept it on April 21 , 1914 . Over the next few days , street fighting and sniper fire posed a threat to Butler 's force , but a door-to-door search rooted out most of the resistance . By April 26 , the landing force of 5,800 Marines and sailors secured the city , which they held for the next six months . By the end of the conflict , the Americans reported 17 dead and 63 wounded and the Mexican forces had 126 dead and 195 wounded . After the actions at Veracruz , the United States decided to minimize the bloodshed and changed their plans from a full invasion of Mexico to simply maintaining the city of Veracruz . For his actions on April 22 , Butler was awarded his first Medal of Honor . The citation reads : For distinguished conduct in battle , engagement of Vera Cruz , 22 April 1914 . Major Butler was eminent and conspicuous in command of his battalion . He exhibited courage and skill in leading his men through the action of the 22d and in the final occupation of the city .

In 1915 , members of the populace killed the Haitian president Vilbrun Guillaume Sam . In response , the United States ordered the USS Connecticut to Haiti with Major Butler and a group of Marines on board . On October 24 , 1915 , an estimated 400 Cacos ambushed Butler 's patrol of 44 mounted Marines when they approached Fort Dipitie . Surrounded by Cacos the Marines maintained their perimeter throughout the night . The next morning , they charged the much larger enemy force by breaking out in three directions . The startled Haitians fled . In early November Butler and a force of 700 Marines and sailors returned to the mountains to clear the area . At their temporary headquarters base at Le Trou they fought off an attack by about 100 Cacos . After the Americans took several other forts and ramparts during the following days , only Fort Rivière , an old French-built stronghold atop Montagne Noire , was left . For the operation , Butler was given three companies of Marines and some sailors from the USS Connecticut , about 100 men . They encircled the fort , and gradually closed in on it . Butler reached the fort from the southern side with the 15th Company and found a small opening in the wall . The Marines entered through the opening and engaged the Cacos in hand-to-hand combat . Butler and the Marines took the rebel stronghold on November 17 , 1915 , an action for which he received his second Medal of Honor , as well as the Haitian Medal of Honor . The entire battle lasted less than twenty minutes . Only one Marine was injured in the assault when he was struck by a rock and lost two teeth . All 51 Haitians in the Fort were killed . Butler 's exploits impressed Assistant Secretary of the Navy Franklin D. Roosevelt , who recommended the award based upon Butler 's performance during the engagement . Once the medal was approved and presented in 1917 , Butler achieved the distinction , shared with Dan Daly , of being the only Marines to receive the Medal of Honor twice for separate actions . The citation reads :

For extraordinary heroism in action as Commanding Officer of detachments from the 5th , 13th , 23d Companies and the Marine and sailor detachment from the U.S.S. Connecticut , Major Butler led the attack on Fort Rivière , Haiti , 17 November 1915 . Following a concentrated drive , several different detachments of Marines gradually closed in on the old French bastion fort in an effort to cut off all avenues of retreat for the Caco bandits . Reaching the fort on the southern side where there was a small opening in the wall , Major Butler gave the signal to attack and Marines from the 15th Company poured through the breach , engaged the Cacos in hand-to-hand combat , took the bastion and crushed the Caco resistance . Throughout this perilous action , Major Butler was conspicuous for his bravery and forceful leadership . Subsequently , as the initial organizer and commanding officer of the Gendarmerie d 'Haïti , the native police force , Butler established a record as a capable administrator . Under his supervision , social order , administered by the dictatorship , was largely restored and many vital public works projects were successfully completed . He recalled later that , during his time in Haiti , he and his troops " hunted the Cacos like pigs . "

During World War I Butler was , to his disappointment , not assigned to a combat command on the Western Front . He made several requests for a posting in France , writing letters to his personal friend , Wendell Cushing Neville . While Butler 's superiors considered him brave and brilliant , they described him as " unreliable . " In October 1918 , he was promoted to the rank of brigadier general at the age of 37 and placed in command of Camp Pontanezen at Brest , France , a debarkation depot that funneled troops of the American Expeditionary Force to the battlefields . The camp had been unsanitary , overcrowded and disorganized . U.S. Secretary of War Newton Baker sent novelist Mary Roberts Rinehart to report on the camp . She later described how Butler tackled the sanitation problems . Butler began by solving the problem of mud : " [ T ] he ground under the tents was nothing but mud , [ so ] he had raided the wharf at Brest of the duckboards no longer needed for the trenches , carted the first one himself up that four-mile hill to the camp , and thus provided something in the way of protection for the men to sleep on . " General John J. Pershing authorized a duckboard shoulder patch for the units . This earned Butler another nickname , " Old Duckboard . " For his exemplary service he was awarded both the Army Distinguished Service Medal and Navy Distinguished Service Medal and the French Order of the Black Star . The citation for the Army Distinguished Service Medal states :

The President of the United States of America , authorized by Act of Congress , July 9 , 1918 , takes pleasure in presenting the Army Distinguished Service Medal to Brigadier General Smedley Darlington Butler , United States Marine Corps , for exceptionally meritorious and distinguished services to the Government of the United States , in a duty of great responsibility during World War I. Brigadier General Butler commanded with ability and energy Pontanezen Camp at Brest during the time in which it has developed into the largest embarkation camp in the world . Confronted with problems of extraordinary magnitude in supervising the reception , entertainment and departure of the large numbers of officers and soldiers passing through this camp , he has solved all with conspicuous success , performing services of the highest character for the American Expeditionary Forces . The President of the United States of America takes pleasure in presenting the Navy Distinguished Service Medal to Brigadier General Smedley Darlington Butler , United States Marine Corps , for exceptionally meritorious and distinguished services in France , during World War I. Brigadier General Butler organized , trained and commanded the 13th Regiment Marines ; also the 5th Brigade of Marines . He commanded with ability and energy Camp Pontanezen at Brest during the time in which it has developed into the largest embarkation camp in the world . Confronted with problems of extraordinary magnitude in supervising the reception , entertainment and departure of large numbers of officers and soldiers passing through the camp , he has solved all with conspicuous success , performing services of the highest character for the American Expeditionary Forces .

Following the war , he became Commanding General of the Marine Barracks at Marine Corps Base Quantico , Virginia . At Quantico , he transformed the wartime training camp into a permanent Marine post . During a training exercise in western Virginia in 1921 , he was told by a local farmer that Stonewall Jackson 's arm was buried nearby , to which he replied , " Bosh ! I will take a squad of Marines and dig up that spot to prove you wrong ! " Butler found the arm in a box . He later replaced the wooden box with a metal one , and reburied the arm . He left a plaque on the granite monument marking the burial place of Jackson 's arm ; the plaque is no longer on the marker but can be viewed at the Chancellorsville Battlefield visitor 's center .

From 1927 to 1929 , Butler was commander of the Marine Expeditionary Force in China and , while there , cleverly parlayed his influence among various generals and warlords to the protection of U.S. interests , ultimately winning the public acclaim of contending Chinese leaders . When Butler returned to the United States in 1929 he was promoted to major general , becoming , at age 48 , the youngest major general of the Marine Corps . He directed the Quantico camp 's growth until it became the " showplace " of the Corps . Butler won national attention by taking thousands of his men on long field marches , many of which he led from the front , to Gettysburg and other Civil War battle sites , where they conducted large-scale re-enactments before crowds of distinguished spectators . In 1931 , Butler violated diplomatic norms by publicly recounting gossip about Benito Mussolini in which the dictator allegedly struck and killed a child with his speeding automobile in a hit-and-run accident . The Italian government protested and President Hoover , who strongly disliked Butler , forced Secretary of the Navy Charles Francis Adams III to court-martial him . Butler became the first general officer to be placed under arrest since the Civil War . He apologized to Secretary Adams and the court-martial was canceled with only a reprimand .

At the urging of Butler 's father , in 1924 , the newly elected mayor of Philadelphia W. Freeland Kendrick asked him to leave the Marines to become the Director of Public Safety , the official in charge of running the city 's police and fire departments . Philadelphia 's municipal government was notoriously corrupt and Butler initially refused . Kendrick asked President Calvin Coolidge to intervene . Coolidge contacted Butler and authorized him to take the necessary leave from the Corps . At the request of the President , Butler served in the post from January 1924 until December 1925 . He began his new job by assembling all 4,000 of the city police into the Metropolitan Opera House in shifts to introduce himself and inform them that things would change while he was in charge . He replaced corrupt police officers and , in some cases , switched entire units from one part of the city to another , undermining local protection rackets and profiteering . Within 48 hours of taking over , Butler organized raids on more than 900 speakeasies , ordering them padlocked and , in many cases , destroyed . In addition to raiding the speakeasies , he also attempted to eliminate other illegal activities : bootlegging , prostitution , gambling and police corruption . More zealous than he was political , he ordered crackdowns on the social elite 's favorite hangouts , such as the Ritz-Carlton and the Union League , as well as on drinking establishments that served the working class . Although he was effective in reducing crime and police corruption , he was a controversial leader . In one instance he made a statement that he would promote the first officer to kill a bandit and stated , " I don 't believe there is a single bandit notch on a policeman 's guns [ sic ] in this city , go out and get some . " Although many of the local citizens and police felt that the raids were just a show , the raids continued for several weeks .

He implemented programs to improve city safety and security . He established policies and guidelines of administration , and developed a Philadelphia police uniform that resembled that of the Marine Corps . Other changes included military-style checkpoints into the city , bandit chasing squads armed with sawed-off shotguns , and armored police cars . The press began reporting on the good and the bad aspects of Butler 's personal war on crime . The reports praised the new uniforms , the new programs and the reductions in crime but they also reflected the public 's negative opinion of their new Public Safety director . Many felt that he was being too aggressive in his tactics and resented the reductions in their civil rights , such as the stopping of citizens at the city checkpoints . Butler frequently swore in his radio addresses , causing many citizens to suggest his behavior , particularly his language , was inappropriate for someone of his rank and stature . Some even suggested Butler acted like a military dictator , even charging that he wrongfully used active-duty Marines in some of his raids . Major R. A. Haynes , the federal Prohibition commissioner , visited the city in 1924 , six months after Butler was appointed . He announced that " great progress " had been made in the city and attributed that success to Butler .

Eventually Butler 's leadership style and the directness of actions undermined his support within the community . His departure seemed imminent . Mayor Kendrick reported to the press , " I had the guts to bring General Butler to Philadelphia and I have the guts to fire him . " Feeling that his duties in Philadelphia were coming to an end , Butler contacted General Lejeune to prepare for his return to the Marine Corps . Not all of the city felt he was doing a bad job , though , and when the news started to break that he would be leaving , people began to gather at the Academy of Music . A group of 4,000 supporters assembled and negotiated a truce between him and the mayor to keep him in Philadelphia for a while longer , and the President authorized a one-year extension for him . Butler devoted much of his second year to executing arrest warrants , cracking down on crooked police and enforcing prohibition . On January 1 , 1926 , his leave from the Marine Corps ended and the President declined a request for a second extension . Butler received orders to report to San Diego and he prepared his family and his belongings for the new assignment . In light of his pending departure , Butler began to defy the Mayor and other key city officials . On the eve of his departure , he had an article printed in the paper stating his intention to stay and " finish the job " . The mayor was surprised and furious when he read the press release the next morning and demanded his resignation . After almost two years in office , Butler resigned under pressure , stating later that " cleaning up Philadelphia was worse than any battle I was ever in . "

When Commandant of the Marine Corps Major General Wendell C. Neville died July 8 , 1930 , Butler , at that time the senior major general in the Corps , was a candidate for the position . Although he had significant support from many inside and outside the Corps , including John Lejeune and Josephus Daniels , two other Marine Corps generals were seriously considered , Ben H. Fuller and John H. Russell . Lejeune and others petitioned President Hoover , garnered support in the Senate and flooded Secretary of the Navy Charles Adams 's desk with more than 2,500 letters of support . With the recent death of his influential father , however , Butler had lost much of his protection from his civilian superiors . The outspokenness that characterized his run-ins with the Mayor of Philadelphia , the " unreliability " mentioned by his superiors when opposing a posting to the Western Front , and his comments about Benito Mussolini resurfaced . In the end , the position of Commandant went to Fuller , who had more years of commissioned service than Butler and was considered less controversial . Butler requested retirement and left active duty on October 1 , 1931 .

Even before retiring from the Corps , Butler began developing his post-Corps career . In May 1931 , he took part in a commission established by Oregon Governor Julius L. Meier . The commission laid the foundations for the Oregon State Police . He began lecturing at events and conferences and after his retirement from the Marines in 1931 , he took this up full-time . He donated much of his earnings from his lucrative lecture circuits to the Philadelphia unemployment relief . He toured the western United States , making 60 speeches before returning for his daughter 's marriage to Marine aviator Lieutenant John Wehle . Her wedding was the only time that he wore his dress blue uniform after he left the Marines .

Butler announced his candidacy for the U.S. Senate in the Republican primary in Pennsylvania in March 1932 as a proponent of Prohibition , known as a " dry " . Butler allied with Gifford Pinchot , but was defeated in the April 26 , 1932 primary election with only 37.5 % of the vote to incumbent Senator James J. Davis 's 60 % . A third candidate received the remainder of the votes . According to biographer Mark Strecker , Butler then moved politically to the far left , voting for Norman Thomas of the Socialist Party for president in 1936 .

During his Senate campaign , Butler spoke out forcefully about the veterans bonus . Veterans of World War I , many of whom had been out of work since the beginning of the Great Depression , sought immediate cash payment of Service Certificates granted to them eight years earlier via the World War Adjusted Compensation Act of 1924 . Each Service Certificate , issued to a qualified veteran soldier , bore a face value equal to the soldier 's promised payment , plus compound interest . The problem was that the certificates ( like bonds ) , matured 20 years from the date of original issuance , thus , under extant law , the Service Certificates could not be redeemed until 1945 . In June 1932 , approximately 43,000 marchers — 17,000 of whom were World War I veterans , their families , and affiliated groups — protested in Washington , D.C. The Bonus Expeditionary Force , also known as the " Bonus Army " , marched on Washington to advocate the passage of the " soldier 's bonus " for service during World War I. After Congress adjourned , bonus marchers remained in the city and became unruly . On July 28 , 1932 , two bonus marchers were shot by police , causing the entire mob to become hostile and riotous . The FBI , then known as the United States Bureau of Investigation , checked its fingerprint records to obtain the police records of individuals who had been arrested during the riots or who had participated in the bonus march .

The veterans made camp in the Anacostia flats while they awaited the congressional decision on whether or not to pay the bonus . The motion , known as the Patman bill , was decisively defeated , but the veterans stayed in their camp . Butler arrived with his young son Thomas , in mid-July the day before the official eviction by the Hoover administration . He walked through the camp and spoke to the veterans ; he told them that they were fine soldiers and they had a right to lobby Congress just as much as any corporation . He and his son spent the night and ate with the men , and in the morning Butler gave a speech to the camping veterans . He instructed them to keep their sense of humor and cautioned them not to do anything that would cost public sympathy . On July 28 , army cavalry units led by General Douglas MacArthur dispersed the Bonus Army by riding through it and using gas . During the conflict several veterans were killed or injured and Butler declared himself a " Hoover-for-Ex-President-Republican " .

He became widely known for his outspoken lectures against war profiteering , U.S. military adventurism , and what he viewed as nascent fascism in the United States . In December 1933 , Butler toured the country with James E. Van Zandt to recruit members for the Veterans of Foreign Wars ( VFW ) . He described their effort as " trying to educate the soldiers out of the sucker class . " In his speeches he denounced the Economy Act of 1933 , called on veterans to organize politically to win their benefits , and condemned the FDR administration for its ties to big business . The VFW reprinted one of his speeches with the title " You Got to Get Mad " in its magazine Foreign Service . He said : " I believe in ... taking Wall St. by the throat and shaking it up . " He believed the rival veterans ' group the American Legion was controlled by banking interests . On December 8 , 1933 , he said : " I have never known one leader of the American Legion who had never sold them out — and I mean it . " In addition to his speeches to pacifist groups , he served from 1935 to 1937 as a spokesman for the American League Against War and Fascism . In 1935 , he wrote the exposé War Is a Racket , a trenchant condemnation of the profit motive behind warfare . His views on the subject are summarized in the following passage from the November 1935 issue of the socialist magazine Common Sense :

I spent 33 years and four months in active military service and during that period I spent most of my time as a high class muscle man for Big Business , for Wall Street and the bankers . In short , I was a racketeer , a gangster for capitalism . I helped make Mexico and especially Tampico safe for American oil interests in 1914 . I helped make Haiti and Cuba a decent place for the National City Bank boys to collect revenues in . I helped in the raping of half a dozen Central American republics for the benefit of Wall Street . I helped purify Nicaragua for the International Banking House of Brown Brothers in 1902 – 1912 . I brought light to the Dominican Republic for the American sugar interests in 1916 . I helped make Honduras right for the American fruit companies in 1903 . In China in 1927 I helped see to it that Standard Oil went on its way unmolested . Looking back on it , I might have given Al Capone a few hints . The best he could do was to operate his racket in three districts . I operated on three continents .

In November 1934 , Butler claimed the existence of a political conspiracy by business leaders to overthrow President Roosevelt , a series of allegations that came to be known in the media as the Business Plot . A special committee of the House of Representatives headed by Representatives John W. McCormack of Massachusetts and Samuel Dickstein of New York , who was later alleged to have been a paid agent of the NKVD , heard his testimony in secret . The McCormack-Dickstein committee was a precursor to the House Committee on Un-American Activities . In November 1934 , Butler told the committee that one Gerald P. MacGuire told him that a group of businessmen , supposedly backed by a private army of 500,000 ex-soldiers and others , intended to establish a fascist dictatorship . Butler had been asked to lead it , he said , by MacGuire , who was a bond salesman with Grayson M – P Murphy & Co . The New York Times reported that Butler had told friends that General Hugh S. Johnson , former head of the National Recovery Administration , was to be installed as dictator , and that the J.P. Morgan banking firm was behind the plot . Butler told Congress that MacGuire had told him the attempted coup was backed by three million dollars , and that the 500,000 men were probably to be assembled in Washington , D.C. the following year . All the parties alleged to be involved publicly said there was no truth in the story , calling it a joke and a fantasy .

In its report , the committee stated that it was unable to confirm Butler 's statements other than the conversations with MacGuire . No prosecutions or further investigations followed , and historians have questioned whether or not a coup was actually contemplated . Historians have not reported any independent evidence apart from Butler 's report on what MacGuire told him . Schmidt says Maguire was an " inconsequential trickster . " The news media dismissed the plot , with a New York Times editorial characterizing it as a " gigantic hoax " . When the committee 's final report was released , the Times said the committee " purported to report that a two-month investigation had convinced it that General Butler 's story of a Fascist march on Washington was alarmingly true " and " ... also alleged that definite proof had been found that the much publicized Fascist march on Washington , which was to have been led by Major . Gen. Smedley D. Butler , retired , according to testimony at a hearing , was actually contemplated " . The individuals involved all denied the existence of a plot , despite evidence to the contrary . The media ridiculed the allegations , although a final report by a special House of Representatives Committee confirmed some of Butler 's accusations

Upon his retirement , Butler bought a home in Newtown Square , Pennsylvania , where he lived with his wife . In June 1940 , he checked himself into the hospital after becoming sick a few weeks earlier . His doctor described his illness as an incurable condition of the upper gastro-intestinal tract that was probably cancer . His family remained by his side , even bringing his new car so he could see it from the window . He never had a chance to drive it . On June 21 , 1940 , Smedley Butler died in the Naval Hospital in Philadelphia . The funeral was held at his home , attended by friends and family as well as several politicians , members of the Philadelphia police force and officers of the Marine Corps . He was buried at Oaklands Cemetery near West Chester , Pennsylvania . Since his death in 1940 , his family has maintained his home as it was when he died , including a large quantity of memorabilia he had collected throughout his varied career .

The USS Butler ( DD-636 ) , a Gleaves-class destroyer , was named in his honor in 1942 . This vessel participated in the European and Pacific theaters of operations during the Second World War . She was later converted to a high speed minesweeper . The Boston , Massachusetts , chapter of Veterans for Peace is called the Smedley D. Butler Brigade in his honor . In his book My First Days in the White House , Senator Huey Long of Louisiana stated that , if elected to the presidency , he would name Butler as his Secretary of War . His childhood home at West Chester , The Butler House , was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1980 .

Butler , Smedley ; Burks , Arthur J. ( 1927 ) . Walter Garvin in Mexico . Philadelphia : Dorrance . OCLC 3595275 . — — ; de Ronde , Philip ( 1935 ) . Paraguay : A Gallant Little Nation : The Story of Paraguay 's War with Bolivia . OCLC 480786605 . — — ( 1934 ) . Speech . Smedley Butler Talks on Black Shirts in America , Philadelphia . Hearst Vault Material , HVMc71r2 , 1447 . — — ; Venzon , Anne Cipriano . The Papers of General Smedley Darlington Butler , USMC , 1915 – 1918 . OCLC 10958085 . — — ; Venzon , Anne Cipriano ( 1992 ) . General Smedley Darlington Butler : The Letters of a Leatherneck , 1898 – 1931 . Praeger . ISBN 0-275-94141-8 . Retrieved October 14 , 2007 . — — ( July 1929 ) . " The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science " . American Marines in China . OCLC 479642987 . — — ( 1933 ) . Old Gimlet Eye . New York : Farrar & Rinehart . ISBN 0-940328-01-1 . OCLC 219896546 . — — ; Lejeune , John Archer ; Miller , J. Michael ( 2002 ) . My Dear Smedley : Personal Correspondence of John A. LeJeune and Smedley D. Butler , 1927 – 1928 . Marine Corps Research Center .

The king vulture ( Sarcoramphus papa ) is a large bird found in Central and South America . It is a member of the New World vulture family Cathartidae . This vulture lives predominantly in tropical lowland forests stretching from southern Mexico to northern Argentina . It is the only surviving member of the genus Sarcoramphus , although fossil members are known . Large and predominantly white , the king vulture has gray to black ruff , flight , and tail feathers . The head and neck are bald , with the skin color varying , including yellow , orange , blue , purple , and red . The king vulture has a very noticeable yellow fleshy caruncle on its beak . This vulture is a scavenger and it often makes the initial cut into a fresh carcass . It also displaces smaller New World vulture species from a carcass . King vultures have been known to live for up to 30 years in captivity . King vultures were popular figures in the Mayan codices as well as in local folklore and medicine . Although currently listed as least concern by the IUCN , they are decreasing in number , due primarily to habitat loss .

The king vulture was originally described by Carl Linnaeus in 1758 in the tenth edition of his Systema Naturae as Vultur papa , the type specimen originally collected in Suriname . It was reassigned to the genus Sarcoramphus in 1805 by French zoologist André Marie Constant Duméril . The generic name is a New Latin compound formed from the Greek words σάρξ ( sarx , " flesh " , the combining form of which is σαρκο- ) and ῥάμφος ( rhamphos , " crooked beak of bird of prey " ) . The genus name is often misspelled as Sarcorhamphus , improperly retaining the Greek rough breathing despite agglutination with the previous word-element . The bird was also assigned to the genus Gyparchus by Constantin Wilhelm Lambert Gloger in 1841 , but this classification is not used in modern literature since Sarcoramphus has priority as the earlier name . The species name is derived from Latin word papa " bishop " , alluding the bird 's plumage resembling the clothing of one . The king vulture 's closest living relative is the Andean condor , Vultur gryphus . Some authors have even put these species in a separate subfamily from the other New World vultures , though most authors consider this subdivision unnecessary .

There are two theories on how the king vulture earned the " king " part of its common name . The first is that the name is a reference to its habit of displacing smaller vultures from a carcass and eating its fill while they wait . An alternative theory reports that the name is derived from Mayan legends , in which the bird was a king who served as a messenger between humans and the gods . This bird was also known as the " white crow " by the Spanish in Paraguay . It was called cozcacuauhtli in Nahuatl , derived from cozcatl " collar " and cuauhtli " bird of prey " . The exact systematic placement of the king vulture and the remaining six species of New World vultures remains unclear . Though both are similar in appearance and have similar ecological roles , the New World and Old World vultures evolved from different ancestors in different parts of the world . Just how different the two are is currently under debate , with some earlier authorities suggesting that the New World vultures are more closely related to storks . More recent authorities maintain their overall position in the order Falconiformes along with the Old World vultures or place them in their own order , Cathartiformes . The South American Classification Committee has removed the New World vultures from Ciconiiformes and instead placed them in Incertae sedis , but notes that a move to Falconiformes or Cathartiformes is possible . Like other New World vultures , the king vulture has a diploid chromosome number of 80 .

The genus Sarcoramphus , which today contains only the king vulture , had a wider distribution in the past . The Kern vulture ( Sarcoramphus kernense ) , lived in southwestern North America during the mid-Pliocene ( Piacenzian ) , some 3.5 – 2.5 million years ago ) . It was a little-known component of the Blancan / Delmontian faunal stages . The only material is a broken distal humerus fossil , found at Pozo Creek , Kern County , California . As per Loye H. Miller 's original description , " [ c ] ompared with [ S. papa ] the type conforms in general form and curvature except for its greater size and robustness . " The large span in time between the existence of the two species suggests that the Kern vulture might be distinct , but as the fossil is somewhat damaged and rather non-diagnostic , even assignment to this genus is not completely certain . During the Late Pleistocene , another species probably assignable to the genus , Sarcoramphus fisheri , occurred in Peru . A supposed king vulture relative from Quaternary cave deposits on Cuba turned out to be bones of the eagle-sized hawk Buteogallus borrasi ( formerly in Titanohierax ) .

Little can be said of the evolutionary history of the genus , mainly because remains of other Neogene New World vultures are usually younger or even more fragmentary . The teratorns held sway over the ecological niche of the extant group especially in North America . The Kern vulture seems to slightly precede the main bout of the Great American Interchange , and it is notable that the living diversity of New World vultures seems to have originated in Central America . The Kern vulture would therefore represent a northwards divergence possibly sister to the S. fisheri – S. papa lineage . The fossil record , though scant , supports the theory that the ancestral king vultures and South American condors separated at least some 5 mya .

A " painted vulture " ( " Sarcoramphus sacra " or " S. papa sacra " ) is described in William Bartram 's notes of his travels in Florida during the 1770s . This bird 's description matches the appearance of the king vulture except that it had a white , not black , tail . Bartram describes the bird as being relatively common and even claimed to have collected one . However , no other naturalists record the painted vulture in Florida and sixty years after the sighting its validity began to be questioned , leading to what John Cassin described as the most inviting problem in North American ornithology . An independent account and painting was made of a similar bird by Eleazar Albin in 1734 . While most early ornithologists defended Bartram 's honesty , Joel Asaph Allen argued that the painted vulture was mythical and that Bartram mixed elements of different species to create this bird . Allen pointed out that the birds ' behavior , as recorded by Bartram , is in complete agreement with the caracara 's . For example , Bartram observed the birds following wildfires to scavenge for burned insects and box turtles . Such behavior is typical of caracaras , but the larger and shorter-legged king vultures are not well adapted for walking . The northern crested caracara ( Caracara cheriway ) was believed to be common and conspicuous in Bartram 's days , but it is notably absent from Bartram 's notes if the painted vulture is accepted as a Sarcoramphus . However , Francis Harper argued that the bird could , as in the 1930s , have been rare in the area Bartram visited and could have been missed .

Harper noticed that Bartram 's notes were considerably altered and expanded in the printed edition , and the detail of the white tail appeared in print for the first time in this revised account . Harper believed that Bartram could have tried to fill in details of the bird from memory and got the tail coloration wrong . Harper and several other researchers have attempted to prove the former existence of a king vulture relative in Florida at this late date , suggesting that the population was in the process of extinction and finally disappeared during a cold spell . Additionally , William McAtee , noting the tendency of birds to form Floridian subspecies , suggested that the white tail could be a sign that the painted vulture was a subspecies of the king vulture .

Excluding the two species of condors , the king vulture is the largest of the New World vultures . Its overall length ranges from 67 – 81 centimeters ( 27 – 32 in ) and its wingspan is 1.2 – 2 meters ( 4 – 6.6 ft ) . Its weight ranges from 2.7 – 4.5 kilograms ( 6 – 10 lb ) . An imposing bird , the adult king vulture has predominantly white plumage , which has a slight rose-yellow tinge to it . In stark contrast , the wing coverts , flight feathers and tail are dark grey to black , as is the prominent thick neck ruff . The head and neck are devoid of feathers , the skin shades of red and purple on the head , vivid orange on the neck and yellow on the throat . On the head , the skin is wrinkled and folded , and there is a highly noticeable irregular golden crest attached on the cere above its orange and black bill ; this caruncle does not fully form until the bird ’ s fourth year . The king vulture has the largest skull and braincase , and strongest bill of the New World vultures . This bill has a hooked tip and a sharp cutting edge . The bird has broad wings and a short , broad , and square tail . The irises of its eyes are white and bordered by bright red sclera . Unlike some New World vultures , the king vulture lacks eyelashes . It also has gray legs and long , thick claws .

The vulture is minimally sexually dimorphic , with no difference in plumage and little in size between males and females . The juvenile vulture has a dark bill and eyes , and a downy , gray neck that soon begins to turn the orange of an adult . Younger vultures are a slate gray overall , and , while they look similar to the adult by the third year , they do not completely molt into adult plumage until they are around five or six years of age . Jack Eitniear of the Center for the Study of Tropical Birds in San Antonio , Texas reviewed the plumage of birds in captivity of various ages and found that ventral feathers were the first to begin turning white from two years of age onwards , followed by wing feathers , until the full adult plumage was achieved . The final immature stages being a scattered black feathers in the otherwise white lesser wing coverts . The vulture 's head and neck are featherless as an adaptation for hygiene , though there are black bristles on parts of the head ; this lack of feathers prevents bacteria from the carrion it eats from ruining its feathers and exposes the skin to the sterilizing effects of the sun .

The king vulture inhabits an estimated 14 million km2 ( 5.4 million mi2 ) between southern Mexico and northern Argentina . In South America , it does not live west of the Andes , except in western Ecuador , north-western Colombia and far north-western Venezuela . It primarily inhabits undisturbed tropical lowland forests as well as savannas and grasslands with these forests nearby . It is often seen near swamps or marshy places in the forests . This bird is often the most numerous or only vulture present in primary lowland forests in its range , but in the Amazon rainforest it is typically outnumbered by the greater yellow-headed vulture , while typically outnumbered by the lesser yellow-headed , turkey and American black vulture in more open habitats . King vultures generally do not live above 1500 m ( 5000 ft ) , although are found in places at 2500 m ( 8000 ft ) altitude east of the Andes , and have been rarely recorded up to 3300 m ( 10000 ft ) They inhabit the emergent forest level , or above the canopy . Pleistocene remains have been recovered from Buenos Aires Province in central Argentina , over 700 km ( 450 mi ) south of its current range , giving rise to speculation on the habitat there at the time which had not been thought to be suitable .

The king vulture soars for hours effortlessly , only flapping its wings infrequently . While in flight , its wings are held flat with slightly raised tips , and from a distance the vulture can appear to be headless while in flight . Its wing beats are deep and strong . Birds have been observed engaging in tandem flight on two occasions in Venezuela by naturalist Marsha Schlee , who has proposed it could be a part of courtship behaviour . Despite its size and gaudy coloration , this vulture is quite inconspicuous when it is perched in trees . While perched , it holds its head lowered and thrust forward . It is non-migratory and , unlike the turkey , lesser yellow-headed and American black vulture , it generally lives alone or in small family groups . Groups of up to 12 birds have been observed bathing and drinking in a pool above a waterfall in Belize . One or two birds generally descend to feed at a carcass , although occasionally up to ten or so may gather if there is significant amount of food . King vultures have lived up to 30 years in captivity , though their lifespan in the wild is unknown . This vulture uses urohidrosis , defecating on its legs , to lower its body temperature . Despite its bill and large size , it is relatively unaggressive at a kill . The king vulture lacks a voice box , although it can make low croaking noises and wheezing sounds in courtship , and bill-snapping noises when threatened . Its only natural predators are snakes , which will prey upon the vulture 's eggs and young , and large cats such as jaguars , which may surprise and kill an adult vulture at a carcass .

The king vulture eats anything from cattle carcasses to beached fish and dead lizards . Principally a carrion eater , there are isolated reports of it killing and eating injured animals , newborn calves and small lizards . Although it locates food by vision , the role smell has in how it specifically finds carrion has been debated . Consensus has been that it does not detect odours , and instead follows the smaller turkey and greater yellow-headed vultures , which do have a sense of smell , to a carcass , but a 1991 study demonstrated that the king vulture could find carrion in the forest without the aid of other vultures , suggesting that it locates food using an olfactory sense . The king vulture primarily eats carrion found in the forest , though it is known to venture onto nearby savannas in search of food . Once it has found a carcass , the king vulture displaces the other vultures because of its large size and strong bill . However , when it is at the same kill as the larger Andean condor , the king vulture always defers to it . Using its bill to tear , it makes the initial cut in a fresh carcass . This allows the smaller , weaker-beaked vultures , which can not open the hide of a carcass , access to the carcass after the king vulture has fed . The vulture ’ s tongue is rasp-like , which allows it to pull flesh off of the carcass ’ s bones . Generally , it only eats the skin and harder parts of the tissue of its meal . The king vulture has also been recorded eating fallen fruit of the moriche palm when carrion is scarce in Bolívar state , Venezuela .

The reproductive behaviour of the king vulture in the wild is poorly known , and much knowledge has been gained from observing birds in captivity , particularly at the Paris Menagerie . An adult king vulture sexually matures when it is about four or five years old , with females maturing slightly earlier than males . The birds mainly breed during the dry season . King vultures mate for life and generally lay a single unmarked white egg in its nest in a hollow in a tree . To ward off potential predators , the vultures keep their nests foul-smelling . Both parents incubate the egg for the 52 to 58 days before it hatches . If the egg is lost , it will often be replaced after about six weeks . The parents share incubating and brooding duties until the chick is about a week old , after which they often stand guard rather than brood . The young are semi-altricial — they are helpless when born but are covered in downy feathers ( truly altricial birds are born naked ) , and their eyes are open at birth . Developing quickly , the chicks are fully alert by their second day , and able to beg and wriggle around the nest , and preen themselves and peck by their third day . They start growing their second coat of white down by day 10 , and stand on their toes by day 20 . From one to three months of age , chicks walk around and explore the vicinity of the nest , and take their first flights at about three months of age .

The king vulture is one of the most common species of birds represented in the Mayan codices . Its glyph is easily distinguishable by the knob on the bird ’ s beak and by the concentric circles that make up the bird ’ s eyes . Sometimes the bird is portrayed as a god with a human body and a bird head . According to Mayan mythology , this god often carried messages between humans and the other gods . It is also used to represent Cozcacuauhtli , the thirteenth day of the month in the Mayan calendar ( 13 Reed ) . An ocellated turkey ( Meleagris ocellata ) was also considered to be the bird depicted , but the hooked bill and wattle point to the raptor . The bird ’ s blood and feathers were also used to cure diseases . The king vulture is also a popular subject on the stamps of the countries within its range . It appeared on a stamp for El Salvador in 1963 , Belize in 1978 , Guatemala in 1979 , Honduras in 1997 , Bolivia in 1998 , and Nicaragua in 1999 . Because of its large size and beauty , the king vulture is an attraction at zoos around the world . The king vulture is one of several bird species with an AZA studbook , which is kept by Shelly Collinsworth of the Fort Worth Zoo .

Rear Admiral William Reynolds Purnell ( 6 September 1886 – 3 March 1955 ) was an officer in the United States Navy who served in World War I and World War II . A 1908 graduate of the United States Naval Academy , he captained destroyers during World War I. He was awarded the Navy Cross for his role in protecting convoys against German submarines as commander of the USS Lamson . He was promoted to rear admiral in November 1941 . During World War II , he was Chief of Staff of the ill-fated Asiatic Fleet at the start of the Pacific War . He later served as Assistant Chief of Naval Operations for Materiel . He was the Navy representative on the Joint Committee on New Weapons and Equipment , and , from September 1942 , the Navy representative on the Military Policy Committee , the three-man committee that oversaw the Manhattan Project . Purnell helped coordinate its activities with those of the Navy . In 1945 , he travelled to Tinian as the representative of the Military Policy Committee , and coordinated preparations for the atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki with senior Army and Navy commanders in the Pacific . He retired from the Navy in 1946 and died in 1955 .

William Reynolds Purnell was born in Bowling Green , Missouri , on 6 September 1886 . In 1908 , he graduated from the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis . He was commissioned as an ensign in 1910 . During World War I , he commanded the destroyers USS Lamson , USS Patterson , USS Rowan , and USS Montgomery . For his services , he was awarded the Navy Cross . His citation read : The President of the United States of America takes pleasure in presenting the Navy Cross to Lieutenant Commander William Reynolds Purnell , United States Navy , for distinguished service in the line of his profession as Commanding Officer of the USS Lamson , engaged in the important , exacting and hazardous duty of patrolling the waters infested with enemy submarines and mines , in escorting and protecting vitally important convoys of troops and supplies through these waters , and in offensive and defensive action , vigorously and unremittingly prosecuted against all forms of enemy naval activity during World War I. In January 1917 , while he was serving on the Rowan , he married Ada Dodge Curtiss , the daughter of Walter Phelps Dodge and the ex-wife of Gerald S. Curtiss . They had one son , William Reynolds Purnell , Jr .

Purnell became Chief of Staff of Admiral Thomas C. Hart 's Asiatic Fleet . Purnell represented the United States at a planning conference in Singapore in April 1941 at which American , British , Dutch , Australian , and New Zealand commanders attempted to coordinate their plans for an increasingly likely war with Japan . He was promoted to rear admiral in November 1941 . On 7 December , Purnell played golf with Hart . War broke out the next morning . The Japanese advanced quickly and the Asiatic Fleet moved from the Philippines to Java in January . As the Japanese closed in on Java , Purnell flew to Broome on 25 February . In Australia , Purnell became Chief of Staff to Vice Admiral William A. Glassford , the Commander , US Naval Forces , Southwest Pacific . When Glassford departed in May 1942 , Purnell took his place . He too left Australia in June 1942 , for duty in Washington , DC , in the Office of the Commander in Chief , United States Fleet , Admiral Ernest J. King . For his services , he was awarded the Navy Distinguished Service Medal . His citation read :

In February 1945 , Purnell arranged for Commander Frederick Ashworth to go to Guam to brief Fleet Admiral Chester Nimitz on the project . He provided Ashworth with a letter from King stressing the project 's importance and the need for secrecy . Ashworth selected a base site for the Manhattan Project 's operations . He inspected facilities on Guam and Tinian , and chose the latter . Tinian 's harbor suffered from congestion due to extensive base development work , and ships sometimes took months to unload . The director of the Manhattan Project , Major General Leslie R. Groves , Jr . , went to Purnell , who arranged for an order from King to Nimitz stating that all shipments related to the Manhattan Project and the 509th Composite Group had to be unloaded immediately on arrival , regardless of the consequent disruption to the port 's operations . Problems like this underlined the value of having high-ranking officers on hand to deal with local commanders to make decisions on the spot if necessary . In drawing up an organization for command of the Manhattan Project 's operations , Groves and Purnell agreed that Purnell should to be present on Tinian as both the representative of the Military Policy Committee and the personal representative of Admiral King . He was joined by Brigadier General Thomas F. Farrell , the Manhattan Project 's Deputy for Operations , and the two shared responsibility for coordinating the Manhattan Project 's activities with the senior Army and Navy commanders in the Pacific . Along with Captain William S. Parsons , the director of Project Alberta , they formed what became informally known as the " Tinian Joint Chiefs " .

Purnell was the first proponent of the idea that two atomic attacks , one following quickly after the other , would be required to end the war . This was something that Groves and Purnell discussed a number of times . " I knew that with him and Farrell on the ground at Tinian , " Groves wrote . " There would be no unnecessary delay in exploiting our success " after the bombing of Hiroshima . The main difficulty with the second mission , then scheduled for 11 August , was the weather , which was predicted to be good until 9 August but bad for at least five days starting on 10 August . Parsons agreed to work the assembly team around the clock to get the Fat Man bomb ready by the evening of 8 August . Before Major Charles Sweeney took off on the mission , Purnell took him aside and asked him if he knew how much the bomb cost . Sweeney did not know ; Purnell told him it was about $ 2 billion . He then asked if Sweeney knew how much his aircraft was worth . This Sweeney did know ; over half a million dollars . Purnell then told him : " I 'd suggest you keep those relative values in mind for this mission . "

Adam Air Flight 172 refers to an accident suffered by a Boeing 737-300 , when it landed in Surabaya at the end of a scheduled domestic passenger flight from Ngurah Rai Airport to Juanda Airport . On 21 February 2007 , the plane bent on landing , with the fuselage cracking in the middle of the passenger section . All six of Adam Air 's remaining 737s were immediately grounded , and five of them were back in regular service later that year . This incident caused further concerns regarding the safety of flights operated by Adam Air , which had received much criticism after the 1 January 2007 crash of Flight 574 .

The plane bent upon landing at Juanda International Airport , with the fuselage breaking in the middle of the passenger section . The landing was particularly hard , with baggage being ejected from cabin lockers into the cabin space . The tail section of the plane was bent down compared to the rest of the plane . Subsequent flights to the airport were diverted to alternate airports . Adam Air 's fleet of Boeing 737-300s were grounded for safety inspections in the interim . Immediately after the accident , Adam Air repainted the aircraft , covering the original orange livery with a plain white exterior . This is legally permissible , so long as no evidence is destroyed . Also in the immediate aftermath , a large number of passengers cancelled their flights with Adam Air , saying they had " lost faith " in the airline . They were all refunded in full .

As a result of the incident , all six remaining Adam Air 737s were immediately grounded awaiting safety checks . Vice-President of Indonesia , Jusuf Kalla , said that all Boeing 737-300s should be checked . He eventually decided the entire Indonesian fleet of 737s should be checked , but did not ground any more aircraft . There were also suggestions that Adam Air should be suspended from all operations until the entire fleet could be checked , with MP Abdul Hakim saying " It will be good for the company and the government ... until the flight authorities can determine if Adam Air is still worthy as national aircraft company " . The Indonesian Transport Ministry said that if the aircraft showed signs of problems , the checks would be expanded to cover all 737s operating in Indonesia . On 5 March , it was reported that five of the six aircraft had returned to normal operations , but the sixth was still undergoing a full maintenance overhaul at maintenance , repair and overhaul firm , GMF AeroAsia facility . Adam Air had resumed its normal schedule by 9 March 2007 .

The accident was investigated by the National Transportation Safety Committee ( INTSC ) . Investigators compiled data from the Indonesian weather agency and from the air traffic control center in Surabaya in an attempt to determine the cause . Officials state the aircraft did pass safety checks prior to its departure . Boeing announced that they would also provide technical assistance to both the authorities and the airline during the course of the investigation . The final report from the NTSC stated that the probable cause of the accident was an excessive sink rate upon touchdown , following an unstabilised approach . In the report , the INTSC noted that the approach was unstable below 200 feet ( 61 m ) , with a vertical speed occasionally greater than 2500 fpm . The vertical acceleration on landing was measured at 5 g . Additionally , the aircraft initially touched down with the right main gear approximately 4 metres ( 13 ft ) outside of the runway edge . The investigation further revealed that there was no technical malfunction on the aircraft prior to touchdown . The flight crew was criticised for not maintaining a sterile cockpit during the landing , with excessive non-flight related discussion going on throughout the flight .

The safety record of Adam Air was heavily criticised , especially in the aftermath of Flight 574 . Pilots reported repeated and deliberate breaches of international safety regulations , with aircraft being flown in non-airworthy states for months at a time . They claimed that there had been such incidents as requests to sign documents to allow an aircraft to fly while not having the authority to and while knowing the plane to be not airworthy , flying a plane for several months with a damaged door handle , swapping parts between aircraft to avoid mandatory replacement deadlines , being ordered to fly aircraft after exceeding the take-off limit of five times per pilot per day , flying an aircraft with a damaged window , using spare parts from other aircraft to keep planes in the air , and the ignoring of pilots ' requests not to take off due to unsafe aircraft . The Associated Press quoted one pilot as saying that " Every time you flew , you had to fight with the ground staff and the management about all the regulations you had to violate . " They also claim that if pilots confronted their seniors in the airline , they were grounded or docked pay .

The Indonesian government announced plans immediately after the accident to ban jets over ten years of age for any commercial purpose . The age limit had been 35 years or 70,000 landings . Indonesia also announced plans to reshuffle the Transportation Ministry in response to this incident , Flight 574 and the loss of the ferries MV Senopati Nusantara and MV Levina 1 . Among those to be replaced were the directors of air and sea transports and the chairman of the National Committee for Transportation Safety . Indonesia also intended to introduce a new system of ranking airlines according to their safety record , with a level one ranking meaning the airline has no serious issues , a level two ranking meaning the airline must fix problems , and a level three rating forcing the airline to be shut down .

Aonchotheca forresteri is a parasitic nematode that infects the marsh rice rat ( Oryzomys palustris ) in Florida . Occurring mainly in adults , it inhabits the stomach . It is much more common during the wet season , perhaps because its unknown intermediate host is an earthworm that only emerges when it rains . The worm was discovered in 1970 and formally described in 1987 . Originally classified in the genus Capillaria , it was reclassified in Aonchotheca in 1999 . A. forresteri is small and narrow-bodied , with a length of 13.8 to 19.4 mm in females and 6.8 to 9.2 mm in males . Similar species such as A. putorii differ in features of the alae and spicule ( organs in the male ) , the size of the female , and the texture of the eggs .

Aonchotheca forresteri was discovered during a survey of the endoparasites of Florida marsh rice rats ( Oryzomys palustris ) by John Kinsella from 1970 to 1972 , and is one of several new parasite species in this study , which was done because there were no previous comprehensive studies of the endoparasites of the species . Together with Danny Pence , Kinsella described the worm in a 1987 paper as Capillaria forresteri ; the specific name honors Donald J. Forrester of the College of Veterinary Medicine , University of Florida . Kinsella and Pence described it as one of many species of Capillaria , a large and taxonomically difficult genus . They suggested that it may be closest to some other small species that live in the digestive systems of mammals , such as the very similar C. putorii , which is found in a variety of carnivorans in North America and Europe . In 1982 , Moravec had placed Capillaria putorii and a number of related species in a separate genus , Aonchotheca , and in 1999 Pisanu and Bain transferred Capillaria forresteri and various other species to that genus from Capillaria . Thus , the species is now known as Aonchotheca forresteri .

Aonchotheca forresteri is a small , narrow-bodied worm . It is narrowest at the front and increases in width to about three fourths of its length . The cuticle , the surface layer , is smooth . Females are 13.8 to 19.4 mm long , averaging 16.9 mm , which makes them substantially longer than female A. putorii , and 55 to 70 ( average 62 ) μm wide . The eggs are smooth , lacking the elaborate pattern on the surface seen in A. putorii , and are 53 to 58 ( 54 ) μm long and 21 to 24 ( 21 ) μm broad . The esophagus , the frontmost part of the digestive system , is 2.9 to 3.9 ( 3.6 ) mm long and is lined by 36 to 45 ( 40 ) cells known as stichocytes . The vulva is located 66 to 105 ( 83 ) μm behind the end of the esophagus and the anus is near the end of the worm , which is rounded . At 6.8 to 9.2 ( 7.7 ) mm , males are only about half as long as females . Their maximum width is 34 to 42 ( 37 ) μm . The length of the esophagus is 2.3 to 3.0 ( 2.6 ) mm , of which the muscular pharynx makes up 260 to 315 ( 273 ) μm , and is lined by 35 to 42 ( 37 ) stichocytes . The back region of the worm is 4.5 to 6.2 ( 5.1 ) mm long . The back , or rectal , opening of the digestive tube is located near the end of the worm , and the length of the cloaca is 530 to 576 ( 550 ) μm . Near the back end , there are two alae ( ridges ) at the sides ( laterally ) , which are 40 to 55 ( 46 ) μm long ; these are located at 10 to 15 μm from another , small ala at the tip . In A. putorii , the lateral alae are much longer and reach the ala at the tip . The spicule , a spikelike structure that functions in reproduction , is curved at the tip and hardened and has a length of 380 to 426 ( 406 ) μm . It is smaller than that of the similar A. tamiasstriati from North American chipmunks and larger than that of A. murissylvatici from various North American and European small rodents , but about as long as that of A. putorii , which however lacks the curved tip .

Marsh rice rats from Paynes Prairie , Alachua County ; Cedar Key , Levy County ; and Lake Istokpoga , Highlands County , all in Florida , have yielded A. forresteri . In Paynes Prairie , the type locality , 82 of 178 animals examined were infected with 1 to 50 ( average 10 ) worms , but in Cedar Key only a single rat contained one worm . The worms were found in the front part , or fundus , of the stomach , with their front ends in the fundal tissue and their back ends projecting into the inside . In Paynes Prairie , there was no significant difference in rate of infection between males and females , but only 4 % of juveniles were infected , compared to 52 % of adults . Most species of Capillaria occur in multiple hosts , but A. forresteri has been found only in the marsh rice rat , even though several other small mammals ( the round-tailed muskrat , Neofiber alleni ; cotton mouse , Peromyscus gossypinus ; hispid cotton rat , Sigmodon hispidus ; and marsh rabbit , Sylvilagus palustris ) occur in Paynes Prairie . The rice rat eats more animal food than any of those , and perhaps A. forresteri has an intermediate host that is not eaten by the other species . A. forresteri is markedly more prevalent in the wet season ( spring ) than the dry season ( autumn ) , perhaps because rainfall patterns influence the habits of the rice rat in some way . One possibility is that the intermediate host is an earthworm or other oligochaete worm that moves to the surface when it rains .

Killswitch Engage is an American metalcore band from Westfield , Massachusetts , formed in 1999 after the disbanding of Overcast and Aftershock . Killswitch Engage 's current lineup consists of vocalist Jesse Leach , guitarists Joel Stroetzel and Adam Dutkiewicz , bassist Mike D 'Antonio , and drummer Justin Foley . The band has released seven studio albums and one DVD . Their latest album , Incarnate , was released on March 11 , 2016 . Killswitch Engage rose to fame with its 2004 release The End of Heartache , which peaked at number 21 on the Billboard 200 , and was certified gold by the RIAA in December 2007 for over 500,000 shipments in the United States . The title track , " The End of Heartache " , was nominated for a Grammy Award in 2005 for Best Metal Performance , and a live DVD titled ( Set This ) World Ablaze was released in 2005 . Killswitch Engage has performed at festivals such as Soundwave Festival , Wacken Open Air , Reading and Leeds Festivals , Ozzfest , Download Festival , Rock on the Range , Rock Am Ring , Mayhem Festival , Monsters of Rock , Pointfest , Knotfest and Heavy MTL . The band has sold over four million records in the U.S. and has been considered notable within the New Wave of American Heavy Metal .

Killswitch Engage formed following the disbandment of metalcore bands Overcast and Aftershock in 1999 . After Overcast broke up in 1998 , bassist Mike D 'Antonio jammed with Aftershock guitarist Adam Dutkiewicz . Dutkiewicz , now playing drums , recruited guitarist Joel Stroetzel from Aftershock and vocalist Jesse Leach of the band Nothing Stays Gold ( who were signed to a record label owned by Dutkiewicz 's brother Tobias , who was also the vocalist in Aftershock ) to form a new band , Killswitch Engage . The band 's name is derived from an episode of the television series The X-Files entitled " Kill Switch " , written by William Gibson , who gave the episode this title after meeting the industrial band Kill Switch ... Klick . In 1999 , Killswitch Engage recorded a demo containing four tracks , including " Soilborn " , the first song written by the band . The demo was first released at the band 's first show , opening for melodic death metal act In Flames , in November 1999 . They released their self-titled debut album the following year . Although initially the album was not a financial success and did not land on any charts , it attracted the interest of Carl Severson , who worked at Roadrunner Records at the time . Severson handed Killswitch Engage to several Roadrunner representatives . Mike Gitter , a talent agent of the company , contacted D 'Antonio , attended several of the band 's shows , and offered the band a recording contract with Roadrunner . Realizing that Roadrunner had the resources to promote and distribute Killswitch Engage releases , the band accepted his offer , declining several offers from smaller labels .

For a brief time in 2000 and 2001 , ex-Overcast guitarist Pete Cortese joined Killswitch Engage , but left when he became a father . Killswitch Engage began writing new material for their second album in November 2001 . Mixed in January at Backstage Studios by producer Andy Sneap , the album was titled Alive or Just Breathing for lyrics in the song " Just Barely Breathing " . A music video for the single " My Last Serenade " increased the band 's exposure , and the album peaked at number 37 on the Top Heatseekers chart . Following Alive or Just Breathing 's release , the album having been written and recorded for two guitarists , the band decided to expand and become a fivesome ; Dutkiewicz moved to guitar and former Aftershock drummer Tom Gomes filled in the vacant drummer position . After Leach was married on April 20 , 2002 and began touring again he fell into a depression . Leach left the band a few days before the band was meant to play a show and sent the band members an e-mail telling them he had quit . D 'Antonio said in an interview that " after three years of hanging out with the dude , and considering him a brother , to just get an email was a little bit harsh . "

The band immediately started to search for a replacement vocalist and found Howard Jones of Blood Has Been Shed . Jones disliked the band 's sound when he first heard it . He commented , " I was like , ' Meh . ' I come from hardcore and dirtier metal , and Killswitch sounded so clean . But the more I listened to it , I realized there 's some really good songs here " . After hearing about Leach 's vocal problems , Jones contacted the band and was accepted as the replacement . Philip Labonte of All That Remains tried out for lead vocals but lost to Jones , who had to quickly memorize seven songs for his debut at the 2002 Hellfest . The new lineup played on the Road Rage tour in the United Kingdom and the Netherlands in 2002 with 36 Crazyfists and Five Pointe O. Touring continued through the New Year 's Day , and in 2003 the first song to feature Jones , " When Darkness Falls " , appeared on the soundtrack of the 2003 horror film Freddy vs. Jason . Following the 2003 Ozzfest , drummer Gomes left the band because he wished to spend more time with his wife , to pursue his band Something of a Silhouette , and because he was tired of touring . He was replaced by Justin Foley of Blood Has Been Shed , and Foley 's first tour with the band was the MTV2 Headbangers Ball in 2003 .

The End of Heartache was released on May 11 , 2004 , and peaked at number 21 on the Billboard 200 with 38,000 sales in its first week , and it also peaked at number 39 on the Australian Albums Chart . The album went on to sell more than 500,000 copies in the U.S and was certified gold on December 7 , 2007 . The album received mostly positive reviews , with Jon Caramanica of Rolling Stone calling the album a " stunning collection , retaining much of their signature musical brutality " . Eduardo Rivadavia of AllMusic commented " riffs upon riffs are piled sky-high into each number that follows , it 's the unpredictable rhythmic shifts used to build and then relieve internal pressure that fuel the Killswitch Engage power source " . " The End of Heartache " became the main single for the movie Resident Evil : Apocalypse , and in 2005 the song was nominated for Best Metal Performance for the 47th Grammy Awards . In late 2004 , The End of Heartache was re-released as a special edition album , with a second disc featuring various live performances , a Japanese bonus track , and a re-recorded version of " Irreversal " . During the summer of 2005 , the band returned for Ozzfest , and on November 1 , 2005 , Alive or Just Breathing was re-released as part of Roadrunner Records ' 25th anniversary . On November 22 , 2005 , the live DVD ( Set This ) World Ablaze was released , which contained a live concert at the Palladium in Worcester , Massachusetts , an hour-long documentary , and all the band 's music videos . The DVD was certified gold in the US on April 8 , 2006 .

Killswitch Engage played the Reading and Leeds Festivals in August 2006 , having already played Australian dates without Dutkiewicz , who was suffering from back problems and needed corrective surgery . On May 23 , 2006 , the song " This Fire Burns " was released on the WWE Wreckless Intent album . The track was intended to be the new theme song for WWE wrestler Randy Orton ; however , it was scrapped and later became the theme song for the WWE Judgment Day 2006 pay-per-view . " This Fire Burns " was used as the entrance theme for WWE wrestler CM Punk ( along with his stables the Straight Edge Society and The New Nexus ) from 2006 until 2011 and was later re-released as " This Fire " on the As Daylight Dies Special Edition . Recorded in three months , As Daylight Dies was released on November 21 , 2006 and peaked at number 32 on the Billboard 200 chart with 60,000 sales in its first week . " As Daylight Dies " proved to be one of their biggest albums yet . It also entered the Australian Albums Chart at number 29 . Mixed by Dutkiewicz , the album received mostly positive reviews — Thom Jurek of Allmusic called it " a Top Five metal candidate for 2006 for sure " . Decibel Magazine contributor Nick Terry said " To call As Daylight Dies addictive would be an understatement . That it outdoes its already impressive enough predecessor could almost go without saying " . Cosmo Lee of Stylus Magazine commented " the album is astonishingly badly sequenced " , though he praised the album as being " less emotionally heavy-handed , and a lot more fun " . As of November 27 , 2007 , As Daylight Dies has sold more than 500,000 units in the US .

The album 's first single , " My Curse " , peaked at number 21 on the Hot Mainstream Rock Tracks chart , and is featured in the video games Sleeping Dogs , Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock , Burnout Dominator and Burnout Paradise and is available as downloadable content for the Rock Band series . " The Arms of Sorrow " peaked at number 31 on the same chart . The band 's cover of Dio 's " Holy Diver " , originally recorded for a Kerrang ! compilation album titled High Voltage , peaked at number 12 on the Mainstream Rock charts . Early in 2007 , the band had to cancel three of its European tour dates with The Haunted due to Dutkiewicz 's back problems . He required emergency back surgery and was replaced on the tour by Soilwork guitarist Peter Wichers . Due to Dutkiewicz 's back problems in early 2007 , he was replaced by Damageplan and The Mercy Clinic frontman Patrick Lachman during the No Fear Tour . Dutkiewicz recovered and was able to finish the No Fear tour , and the band began filming its video for As Daylight Dies 's second single , " The Arms of Sorrow " . On August 6 , 2007 , Dutkiewicz was forced to leave the Warped Tour so he could fully recover from his back surgery and continue daily physical therapy . He was replaced by Killswitch 's guitar technician Josh Mihlek for select songs , until his return on August 14 , 2007 .

Killswitch Engage entered the studio in October 2008 to start recording their next album with Dutkiewicz and Brendan O 'Brien co-producing the album . In mid-February , bassist Mike D 'Antonio confirmed in an interview with Metal Hammer that " drums were finished " , and that he had " finished up the last few bass fixes " . He also stated that Howard [ Jones ] was in Atlanta finishing vocals , and that " it shouldn 't be too much longer now . " From March to May , Killswitch Engage was a part of Disturbed 's Music as a Weapon IV festival along with Lacuna Coil , Chimaira , Suicide Silence , Bury Your Dead and more . On April 14 , the band announced the name of their album as Killswitch Engage , the second time the band has self-titled an album . The album was released on June 30 , 2009 , debuting at No. 7 on the Billboard 200 , marking the band 's highest chart position for an album . In July and August , Killswitch Engage took part in Mayhem Festival with headliners Marilyn Manson , Slayer , Bullet for My Valentine and others . In February 2010 , Killswitch Engage announced that vocalist Howard Jones would not be performing with Killswitch Engage during their winter tour with The Devil Wears Prada and Dark Tranquillity ; during the time , All That Remains vocalist Philip Labonte was substituting for Jones until he could return . At least one source speculated that Jones ' hiatus was due to back pain . On March 18 , 2010 , original vocalist Jesse Leach returned to the band for a series of songs . From then on , Leach and Labonte performed as substitute vocalists for the remainder of the tour .

In 2010 , the band contributed the track " My Obsession " to the God of War : Blood & Metal soundtrack . The band was later added as late replacement to 2010 's Download Festival in June , after original sub-headliner , Wolfmother could not attend as scheduled . Afterward , Killswitch Engage took a break from the road , and its members pursued other interests . Adam Dutkiewicz formed the band Times of Grace with Leach and released the debut album " The Hymn of a Broken Man " on January 18 , 2011 . Along with Dutkiewicz and Leach , Times of Grace added Joel Stroetzel to their tour lineup . Justin Foley provided the drum tracking for the band Unearth on their album " Darkness in the Light " , released on July 5 , 2011 . Foley also traveled with the band for their 2011 summer tour . D 'Antonio started the hardcore band Death Ray Vision , with Shadows Fall vocalist Brian Fair and former Killswitch Engage guitarist Pete Cortese .

In an interview with FTC , Gun Shy Assassin , Mike D 'Antonio had stated that the band was currently in the works for a sixth studio album . D 'Antonio stated , " Currently , everyone is individually writing demos for the next Killswitch Engage record . There is no release date yet , but I would assume it will be out early 2012 . " Adam Dutkiewicz followed that up with a statement on the Killswitch Engage Facebook , saying " YO ! Its Adam D ! We 're about to begin writing our new record . Thanks to all of our fans for waiting so friggin ' patiently ... now let 's turn on the " riff faucet " and RAGE ! " On December 1 , 2011 , Mike D 'Antonio posted online that Killswitch Engage should be entering the studio around February / March 2012 to record their sixth album expected around summer 2012 . He also stated that the band had eight demos finished for the new record . On January 4 , 2012 , the band announced via the band 's official website , along with their other official sources , that Howard Jones had left the band after his nine-year membership with them . In the statement , the band did not disclose the reason for this decision out of respect for Jones , but simply thanked him for his nine years with the band and wished him well , as well as thanking the fans for their support as they began the search for a new lead singer . Soon after the announcement of Jones 's departure , rumors began that Phil Labonte of All That Remains would officially take over lead vocals due to his previous history with the band , although Labonte quickly dispelled the rumor . Many vocalists were considered in the search for a new one for the band . The band 's search for a new singer concluded in February with the announcement that original lead vocalist Jesse Leach would return to the band , as the band felt that Leach 's energy , as well as his overall comfort and command of both the old and new material , made him the clear choice during auditions . Following Leach 's return , the band continued to the process of recording their new album and touring . On April 22 , 2012 , the band performed Leach 's first show since 2002 at the New England Metal and Hardcore Fest .

On June 20 , 2012 , the demo version of a new song titled " This Is Confrontation " was leaked on YouTube . Not long after the song was leaked , the videos were soon deleted . Later , the band took part in Metal Hammer 's " Trespass America Festival " headlined by Five Finger Death Punch with additional support from God Forbid , Emmure , Pop Evil , Trivium and Battlecross . The band performed this song live , confirming the song 's title " No End in Sight " . Not long after the album was confirmed , the song was streamed publicly again . In October 2012 , with Jesse back at the helm , Killswitch Engage announced they would be celebrating the ten year anniversary of their seminal album , " Alive or Just Breathing " with a US Tour through November / December 2012 , in which they would be playing the album live , in its entirety . Support on the tour came from fellow Massachusetts natives Shadows Fall and Acaro . The album Disarm the Descent was released April 1 , 2013 in the UK . The album debuted at # 15 in the UK charts while debuting at # 7 in the Billboard top 200 April 2 in the US . The first single " In Due Time " was released on February 5 , 2013 . The album has received critical acclaim from reviewers , and has been labeled as a " true standout " and " nothing short of amazing " . It was announced in December 2013 that " In Due Time " was nominated for " Best Metal Performance " at the 2014 Grammy Awards , but lost to " God Is Dead ? " by Black Sabbath . A tour in May 2013 was done to promote the new album . With Miss May I , Darkest Hour , The Word Alive and Affiance as support . As I Lay Dying was originally supposed to be on the tour but dropped due to criminal charges from frontman Tim Lambesis . The band also did a co-headliner with fellow Heavy Metal act Lamb of God in the October 2013 with Testament and Huntress as support for both bands . The band did a small headliner on the east coast for Halloween 2014 . With All That Remains , Death Ray Vision and City of Homes supporting .

In an interview with Wikimetal , Jesse Leach announced that the band will start demoing new material " in the coming months " . On February 25 , 2015 the band released a 40 second snippet of a new single titled " Loyalty " . The track appears on the Catch The Throne : The Mixtape Volume 2 to promote the HBO TV series Game of Thrones . The mixtape also features appearances from various other metal and rap acts such as Anthrax and Snoop Dogg . On March 30 , 2015 , Mike D 'Antonio stated that the band had completed demoing material for its next studio album . Killswitch Engage took part in a summer tour in July 2015 , opening up for Rise Against with support from letlive . The band also did a small Christmas 2015 tour on the East Coast with Unearth , Act of Defiance and 68 . On December 16 , 2015 it was revealed that the band 's upcoming seventh album , released on March 11 , 2016 , would be titled Incarnate . With a tour being set to take part in March of this year , Memphis May Fire and 36 Crazyfists will be the support .

Killswitch Engage primarily play metalcore , combining sounds from extreme metal and hardcore . Like some modern metalcore bands , Killswitch Engage vocally combine singing , screaming vocals , and growls in their music . Killswitch Engage 's music mixes " crushing " riffs , double bass drum patterns , power chords , dual-guitar harmonies , often punctuated with pinch harmonic squeals in their music and breakdowns that one can expect from the metalcore genre . Their music is influenced by gothenburg metal scene , New York hardcore and thrash metal . In 2009 , MTV , while naming " The Greatest Metal Bands of All Time " , said that Killswitch Engage have been " called one of the founders of metalcore " . Jason D. Taylor of Allmusic said Alive or Just Breathing is " a pure metal album that seemingly has ignored any fashionable trend and instead relies solely on skill and expertise to sculpt some of the meatiest heavy metal since the glory days of Metallica and Slayer . " Both current vocalist Jesse Leach and former vocalist Howard Jones write lyrics that are considered positive . Jesse Leach stated on ( Set This ) World Ablaze , that the lyrics contain " unity , positivity , [ and ] love . " On the lyrical themes of Killswitch Engage , Ultimate Guitar reviewer Amy Sciarretto notes :

Tomahawk is the debut studio album by American experimental rock band Tomahawk . Recorded after a meeting between vocalist Mike Patton and guitarist Duane Denison , the album features members of Faith No More , The Jesus Lizard , Helmet and Melvins . The band toured with Tool in support of the record , but were not well received by Tool 's fans . Released on October 30 , 2001 , through Patton 's record label Ipecac Recordings , Tomahawk has received positive attention from critics , with most appraisals drawing attention to the versatility of Patton 's vocals . The album charted in both Australia and the United States , reaching a peak of number 20 in the Billboard Independent Albums countdown .

For Tomahawk , the band is composed of Mike Patton , vocalist for Faith No More and Mr. Bungle ; Duane Denison , guitarist for The Jesus Lizard ; Kevin Rutmanis , bass player for Melvins ; and John Stanier , drummer for Helmet . Patton and Denison met in 2000 at a Mr. Bungle concert in Nashville , Tennessee , and began exchanging music . From there , the two began to jam together with a view to releasing an album . Patton described the new group as " the closest thing to a rock band I 've been involved with for a while " . The band hired Joe Funderburk to produce the album ; Funderburk had previously worked with Emmylou Harris and The Judds . The album was released through Ipecac Recordings , the record label owned by Patton and Greg Werckman . Ipecac is also home to Rutmanis ' band Melvins , whose vocalist and guitarist Buzz Osborne had previously collaborated with Patton as a member of Fantômas .

Tomahawk was released on October 30 , 2001 . The album was supported by a tour in which the band supported Tool ; however , Tools fans were unreceptive to Tomahawk and frequently booed their performances . Writing for AllMusic , Blake Butler rated Tomahawk four stars out of five , describing the album as " moody , violent , beautiful , sarcastic , vomitive , silly [ and ] heartstopping " . Butler praised Patton 's versatility , calling the vocalist " a complete and utter musical visionary , and a mind-blowing and standard-warping genius " . Pitchfork 's Luke Buckman award the album a rating of 7 out of 10 , similarly highlighting Patton 's vocals as exemplary . Buckman called Patton " one of the greatest male vocalists around today " ; and felt that " Flashback " and " Cul de Sac " were among the album 's best songs . Mark Reed of Drowned in Sound rated the album 8 out of 10 , noting the " wit " and " style " of the songwriting . Reed felt that the album was among the most conventional of those recorded by Patton , but still described it as featuring " supercatchy , earstretching vocals , dark lyrics rich in black humour , swathes of crunchy guitars and some of the most unusual rhythms to be played by human hands since time began " .

Writing for the Boston Herald , Butch Lazorchak rated Tomahawk three stars out of four , finding that it " makes mincemeat out of the new-metal Johnny-come-latelies " . Lazorchak described the album as having " an updated ' 70s hard rock approach that echoes Blue Öyster Cult at its sinister best " , and found the opening song " Flashback " to be a " head-crushing pleasure " . Reviewing a leg of the album 's supporting tour for The Irish Times , Peter Crawley felt that " Sir Yes Sir " was a highlight of the album , due to Patton 's " dark utterings " and Rutmanis ' " drilling bassline " . Writing for CMJ New Music Monthly , Dana Buoniconti compared the album to the soundtracks of David Lynch 's film and television work — specifically likening " Honeymoon " and " Sweet Smell of Success " to the Twin Peaks theme . Buoniconti found Tomahawk to be " unsettling and unwholesome " , but " thoroughly appealing " .

Pirates of the Caribbean is a series of fantasy swashbuckler films produced by Jerry Bruckheimer and based on Walt Disney 's theme park ride of the same name . Directors of the series include Gore Verbinski ( 1 – 3 ) , Rob Marshall ( 4 ) , and Joachim Rønning and Espen Sandberg ( 5 ) . The series was most notably written by Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio ( 1 – 4 ) ; other writers include Stuart Beattie ( 1 ) , Jay Wolpert ( 1 ) , and Jeff Nathanson ( 5 ) . The stories followed the adventures of Captain Jack Sparrow ( Johnny Depp ) , Hector Barbossa ( Geoffrey Rush ) , Joshamee Gibbs ( Kevin McNally ) , Will Turner ( Orlando Bloom ) , and Elizabeth Swann ( Keira Knightley ) . The films take place in a fictional historical setting ; a world ruled largely by alternative versions of the British Empire , the East India Company and the Spanish Empire , with pirates representing freedom from the ruling powers . The film series started with their first release on the big screen in 2003 with Pirates of the Caribbean : The Curse of the Black Pearl , which received positive reviews from the critics and grossed US $ 654 million worldwide . After the first film 's success , Walt Disney Pictures revealed that a trilogy was in the works . The franchise 's second film , subtitled Dead Man 's Chest , was released three years later in 2006 ; the sequel proved successful , breaking financial records worldwide the day of its premiere . Dead Man 's Chest ended up being the number one film of the year upon earning almost $ 1.1 billion to-date at the worldwide box office . The third film in the series , subtitled At World 's End , followed in 2007 , and Disney released a fourth film , subtitled On Stranger Tides , in 2011 in conventional 2D , Digital 3-D and IMAX 3D . On Stranger Tides succeeded in also grossing more than $ 1 billion , becoming the second film in the franchise and only the eighth film in history to achieve this .

Lord Cutler Beckett of the East India Trading Company arrests Will and Elizabeth for aiding Captain Jack Sparrow in the previous film . Beckett offers clemency if Will agrees to search for Jack 's compass in a bid to find the Dead Man 's Chest – and inside , the heart of villainous Davy Jones – which would give Beckett control of the seas . However , Jack wants the Chest to escape from an unpaid debt with Jones , who raised the Black Pearl from the seabed ( after it was sunk by Beckett ) and made Jack captain for 13 years in exchange for 100 years of service aboard Jones ' ship .

Captain Jack Sparrow is on a quest to find the fabled Fountain of Youth and crosses paths with a former lover , Angelica . She forces Jack aboard the Queen Anne 's Revenge , a ship captained by the infamous pirate Blackbeard , Angelica 's father . Both are also in search of the Fountain ; Angelica to save her father 's soul , Blackbeard to escape a prophecy of his demise at the hands of a one-legged man . Joining the hunt is former pirate captain Barbossa , now a privateer in King George II 's Navy , who is in a race against the Spanish for the Fountain of Youth .

Wenches Scarlett ( Lauren Maher ) and Giselle ( Vanessa Branch ) fix each other up for their wedding , in which they would each marry their groom . Upon realizing that both their grooms were the same man – Jack Sparrow – the two wenches find themselves in an auction led by the Auctioneer . The short film serves as a prequel to The Curse of the Black Pearl , explaining just why Jack Sparrow 's boat , the Jolly Mon , was seen sinking at the beginning of the whole story , and explaining why wenches Scarlett and Giselle were so upset with him , and it also implies how Cotton lost his tongue . The plot took inspiration from the " Auction scene " from the original ride . The short was directed by James Ward Byrkit , and was only included as a special feature in the US 15 disc 3D Blu-ray / 2D Blu-ray / DVD + Digital Copy box set that includes Pirates 1 – 4 ; and in the similar UK 5-disc set .

In the early 1990s screenwriters Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio conceived a supernatural spin on the pirate genre after completing work on Aladdin , but there was no interest from any studio . Undeterred , the writing team refused to give up the dream , waiting for a studio to pick up their take on a pirate tale . Disney had Jay Wolpert write a script based on the Pirates of the Caribbean , which producer Jerry Bruckheimer rejected , feeling it was " a straight pirate movie " . Bruckheimer brought Stuart Beattie in to rewrite the script in March 2002 , due to his knowledge of piracy , and later that month Elliott and Rossio were brought in . Elliott and Rossio , inspired by the opening narration of the Pirates of the Caribbean ride , decided to give the film a supernatural edge . As the budget rose , Michael Eisner and Robert Iger threatened to cancel the film , though Bruckheimer changed their minds when he showed them concept art and animatics . In June 2002 Gore Verbinski signed on to direct The Curse of the Black Pearl , and Johnny Depp and Geoffrey Rush signed on the following month to star . Verbinski was attracted to the idea of using modern technology to resurrect a genre , one that had disappeared after the Golden Age of Hollywood , and recalled his childhood memories of the ride , feeling the film was an opportunity to pay tribute to the " scary and funny " tone of it . Depp was attracted to the story as he found it quirky : rather than trying to find treasure , the crew of the Black Pearl were trying to return it in order to lift their curse ; also , the traditional mutiny had already taken place . Verbinski approached Rush for the role of Barbossa , as he knew he would not play it with attempts at complexity , but with a simple villainy that would suit the story 's tone . Orlando Bloom read the script after Rush , with whom he was working on Ned Kelly , suggested it to him . Keira Knightley came as a surprise to Verbinski : he had not seen her performance in Bend It Like Beckham and was impressed by her audition . Tom Wilkinson was negotiated with to play Governor Swann , but the role went to Jonathan Pryce , whom Depp idolized .

After seeing how well the first film was made , the cast and crew signed for two sequels to be shot back-to-back , a practical decision on Disney 's part to allow more time with the same cast and crew . Writers Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio knew that with an ensemble cast , they weren 't free to invent totally different situations and characters , as with the Indiana Jones and James Bond series , and so had to retroactively turn The Curse of the Black Pearl into the first of a trilogy . They wanted to explore the reality of what would happen after Will Turner and Elizabeth Swann 's embrace at the end of the first film , and initially considered the Fountain of Youth as the plot device . They settled on introducing Davy Jones , the Flying Dutchman and the Kraken , a mythology mentioned twice in the first film . They introduced the historical East India Trading Company ( also mentioned in the first film ) , which for them represented a counterpoint to the themes of personal freedom represented by pirates . Filming for the sequels began on February 28 , 2005 , with Dead Man 's Chest finishing on March 1 , 2006 , and At World 's End on January 10 , 2007 . The second film was also the first Disney theatrical feature film with the computer-generated Walt Disney Pictures logo .

Rossio and Elliot discovered the novel On Stranger Tides during production of Dead Man 's Chest and At World 's End and decided to use it as the basis for a fourth film . As Gore Verbinski was unavailable , Bruckheimer invited Rob Marshall to direct the film . Elliott and Rossio decided to do a stand-alone film , with a story that would support new characters , and incorporate elements from the novel , such as Blackbeard , the Fountain of Youth and mermaids — the latter two having been already alluded to in the previous films . Depp , Rush , Greg Ellis and Kevin McNally returned to their roles , and the cast saw the additions of Ian McShane as Blackbeard and Penélope Cruz as Angelica , Blackbeard 's daughter and Jack Sparrow 's love interest . A further addition was Richard Griffiths as King George II of Great Britain . After the costly production of two simultaneous films , Disney tried to scale down the fourth installment , giving a lower budget , which led to cheaper locations and fewer scenes with special effects . It was also filmed in 3D , with cameras similar to the ones used in Avatar .

On January 14 , 2011 , it was confirmed that Terry Rossio would write the screenplay for the fifth installment , without his co-writer Ted Elliott . On January 11 , 2013 , Jeff Nathanson signed on to write the script for the film . On May 29 , 2013 , it was announced that Norwegian directors Joachim Rønning and Espen Sandberg were selected to direct . On August 22 , 2013 , the two revealed that the title of the fifth film would be Dead Men Tell No Tales , alluding to the line well-known from the Pirates of the Caribbean theme park attractions . They also confirmed that they were working on the film , speaking highly of Jeff Nathanson 's " funny and touching " script and that they are inspired by the first film , The Curse of the Black Pearl . On September 10 , 2013 , Disney pushed back the film 's initial 2015 release , with sources indicating that a Summer 2016 release is likely . Producer Jerry Bruckheimer revealed that script issues were behind the delay , and that Jeff Nathanson was at work on a second attempt based on a well-received outline . While Disney originally announced a release on July 7 , 2017 , Dead Men Tell No Tales is now set to be released on May 26 , 2017 .

A spokesman for the Australian Arts Minister confirmed that the fifth installment was set to shoot in Australia after the government agreed to repurpose $ 20 million of tax incentives originally intended for the remake of 20,000 Leagues Under the Sea . According to Australian film industry sources , pre-production started in late September 2014 with filming expected to commence in February 2015 . This was officially confirmed by Disney and Ian Walker the Queensland Arts Minister on October 2 , 2014 , stating that filming will take place exclusively in Australia , being the largest production to ever shoot in the country . Village Roadshow Studios and Port Douglas were officially confirmed as filming locations . Production began in Australia on February 17 , 2015 and wrapped on July 9 , 2015 .

The Pirates of the Caribbean film series was successful at the box office , with each film grossing over $ 600 million , and all at some point ranking among the fifty highest-grossing films of all time . It became the first ever series to own two billion-dollar films , these being Dead Man 's Chest and On Stranger Tides , but other series have followed ( the Batman series , the Marvel Cinematic Universe and Transformers ) . The Curse of the Black Pearl was the third highest-grossing 2003 film in North America ( behind The Lord of the Rings : The Return of the King and Finding Nemo ) and fourth worldwide ( behind The Return of the King , Finding Nemo and The Matrix Reloaded ) . Dead Man 's Chest was the most successful film of 2006 worldwide , and At World 's End led the worldwide grosses in 2007 , though being only fourth in North America ( behind Spider-Man 3 , Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix and Shrek the Third ) . On Stranger Tides was the third highest-grossing film of 2011 worldwide ( behind Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 and Transformers : Dark of the Moon ) and the fifth in North America . All of the sequels broke box office records upon release , of which the most notable are the opening-weekend record in North America ( Dead Man 's Chest ) , the Memorial-Day weekend record in North America ( At World 's End ) and the opening-weekend record outside North America ( On Stranger Tides ) .

The series is noted for its high quality of acting talent , and is one of the aspects of the films that is always praised . The visual and practical effects are considered some of the best ever done on film , so much so that audiences believed certain CGI elements of the films were real and done practically . The plot and story to the first three sequels received mixed reviews , with the general consensus that they were too bloated and convoluted to follow . Pirates of the Caribbean is noted for reinvigorating the pirates genre of film after decades of either no pirate films , or failed films . The success of the series saw Disney try to replicate Pirates ' success by launching films such as Prince of Persia : The Sands of Time and The Lone Ranger .

State Route 266 begins at the western terminus of Nevada State Route 266 at the Nevada state line . The route travels west-northwest , then turns to the west for another 1.8 miles ( 2.9 km ) before approaching Oasis , the only unincorporated community that the route passes through . At Oasis , SR 266 intersects SR 168 , which serves as the gateway into the Owens Valley from Nevada . Upon leaving Oasis , SR 266 continues to the west briefly , then turns north-northwest . Within the last 7 miles ( 11 km ) , SR 266 slowly curves northwest as the route approaches the Nevada state line . The route ends at the state line at the southern terminus of Nevada State Route 264 . The section of SR 266 from the western terminus to the junction with SR 168 is designated by the California State Legislature as eligible by law for the State Scenic Highway System ; however , it has not officially been designated by Caltrans as such . The entire route , consisting of two lanes for two-way traffic , traverses on the flat land in the Fish Lake Valley east of the White Mountains , and it can serve as transportation of agricultural goods between California and Nevada via the route 's only junction State Route 168 . In the event that SR 168 is closed , SR 266 connects to Nevada State Route 264 , which intersects with U.S. Route 6 in order to provide an alternate access to California .

The segment of present-day SR 266 from Oasis to the Nevada state line ( now Nevada State Route 264 ) was incorporated into the State Highway System in 1931 as Legislative Route 63 ; it had formed part of the Midland Trail , one of the first auto trails crossing the entire country . The route remained unchanged until 1965 , when in that year the route 's name was designated as Mono County Road 101 . In 1984 , the definition was modified to redesignate the segment as an extension of State Route 168 in order for that route to be connected to Nevada . Two years later , in 1986 , there was a construction of a new segment traveling east from Oasis and connecting to Nevada State Route 266 . When the extension was complete , the two segments – the SR 168 extension and the newly completed – were assigned SR 266 .

Plasma ( from Greek πλάσμα , " anything formed " ) is one of the four fundamental states of matter , the others being solid , liquid , and gas . A plasma has properties unlike those of the other states . A plasma can be created by heating a gas or subjecting it to a strong electromagnetic field , applied with a laser or microwave generator . This decreases or increases the number of electrons , creating positive or negative charged particles called ions , and is accompanied by the dissociation of molecular bonds , if present . The presence of a significant number of charge carriers makes plasma electrically conductive so that it responds strongly to electromagnetic fields . Like gas , plasma does not have a definite shape or a definite volume unless enclosed in a container . Unlike gas , under the influence of a magnetic field , it may form structures such as filaments , beams and double layers . Plasma is the most abundant form of ordinary matter in the Universe ( of the forms proven to exist ; the more abundant dark matter is hypothetical and may or may not be explained by ordinary matter ) , most of which is in the rarefied intergalactic regions , particularly the intracluster medium , and in stars , including the Sun . A common form of plasma on Earth is produced in neon signs .

Plasma is an electrically neutral medium of unbound positive and negative particles ( i.e. the overall charge of a plasma is roughly zero ) . It is important to note that although the particles are unbound , they are not ‘ free ’ in the sense of not experiencing forces . When a charged particle moves , it generates an electric current with magnetic fields ; in plasma , the movement of a charged particle affects and is affected by the general field created by the movement of other charges . This governs collective behavior with many degrees of variation . Three factors are listed in the definition of a plasma stream : The plasma approximation : Charged particles must be close enough together that each particle influences many nearby charged particles , rather than just interacting with the closest particle ( these collective effects are a distinguishing feature of a plasma ) . The plasma approximation is valid when the number of charge carriers within the sphere of influence ( called the Debye sphere whose radius is the Debye screening length ) of a particular particle is higher than unity to provide collective behavior of the charged particles . The average number of particles in the Debye sphere is given by the plasma parameter , " Λ " ( the Greek uppercase letter Lambda ) .

Bulk interactions : The Debye screening length ( defined above ) is short compared to the physical size of the plasma . This criterion means that interactions in the bulk of the plasma are more important than those at its edges , where boundary effects may take place . When this criterion is satisfied , the plasma is quasineutral . Plasma frequency : The electron plasma frequency ( measuring plasma oscillations of the electrons ) is large compared to the electron-neutral collision frequency ( measuring frequency of collisions between electrons and neutral particles ) . When this condition is valid , electrostatic interactions dominate over the processes of ordinary gas kinetics .

For plasma to exist , ionization is necessary . The term " plasma density " by itself usually refers to the " electron density " , that is , the number of free electrons per unit volume . The degree of ionization of a plasma is the proportion of atoms that have lost or gained electrons , and is controlled mostly by the temperature . Even a partially ionized gas in which as little as 1 % of the particles are ionized can have the characteristics of a plasma ( i.e. , response to magnetic fields and high electrical conductivity ) . The degree of ionization , <formula> , is defined as <formula> , where <formula> is the number density of ions and <formula> is the number density of neutral atoms . The electron density is related to this by the average charge state <formula> of the ions through <formula> , where <formula> is the number density of electrons .

Plasma temperature is commonly measured in kelvins or electronvolts and is , informally , a measure of the thermal kinetic energy per particle . High temperatures are usually needed to sustain ionization , which is a defining feature of a plasma . The degree of plasma ionization is determined by the electron temperature relative to the ionization energy ( and more weakly by the density ) , in a relationship called the Saha equation . At low temperatures , ions and electrons tend to recombine into bound states — atoms — and the plasma will eventually become a gas . In most cases the electrons are close enough to thermal equilibrium that their temperature is relatively well-defined , even when there is a significant deviation from a Maxwellian energy distribution function , for example , due to UV radiation , energetic particles , or strong electric fields . Because of the large difference in mass , the electrons come to thermodynamic equilibrium amongst themselves much faster than they come into equilibrium with the ions or neutral atoms . For this reason , the ion temperature may be very different from ( usually lower than ) the electron temperature . This is especially common in weakly ionized technological plasmas , where the ions are often near the ambient temperature .

A plasma is sometimes referred to as being " hot " if it is nearly fully ionized , or " cold " if only a small fraction ( for example 1 % ) of the gas molecules are ionized , but other definitions of the terms " hot plasma " and " cold plasma " are common . Even in a " cold " plasma , the electron temperature is still typically several thousand degrees Celsius . Plasmas utilized in " plasma technology " ( " technological plasmas " ) are usually cold plasmas in the sense that only a small fraction of the gas molecules are ionized .

Since plasmas are very good electrical conductors , electric potentials play an important role . The potential as it exists on average in the space between charged particles , independent of the question of how it can be measured , is called the " plasma potential " , or the " space potential " . If an electrode is inserted into a plasma , its potential will generally lie considerably below the plasma potential due to what is termed a Debye sheath . The good electrical conductivity of plasmas makes their electric fields very small . This results in the important concept of " quasineutrality " , which says the density of negative charges is approximately equal to the density of positive charges over large volumes of the plasma ( <formula> ) , but on the scale of the Debye length there can be charge imbalance . In the special case that double layers are formed , the charge separation can extend some tens of Debye lengths . The magnitude of the potentials and electric fields must be determined by means other than simply finding the net charge density . A common example is to assume that the electrons satisfy the Boltzmann relation :

It is possible to produce a plasma that is not quasineutral . An electron beam , for example , has only negative charges . The density of a non-neutral plasma must generally be very low , or it must be very small , otherwise it will be dissipated by the repulsive electrostatic force . In astrophysical plasmas , Debye screening prevents electric fields from directly affecting the plasma over large distances , i.e. , greater than the Debye length . However , the existence of charged particles causes the plasma to generate , and be affected by , magnetic fields . This can and does cause extremely complex behavior , such as the generation of plasma double layers , an object that separates charge over a few tens of Debye lengths . The dynamics of plasmas interacting with external and self-generated magnetic fields are studied in the academic discipline of magnetohydrodynamics .

Plasma with a magnetic field strong enough to influence the motion of the charged particles is said to be magnetized . A common quantitative criterion is that a particle on average completes at least one gyration around the magnetic field before making a collision , i.e. , <formula> , where <formula> is the " electron gyrofrequency " and <formula> is the " electron collision rate " . It is often the case that the electrons are magnetized while the ions are not . Magnetized plasmas are anisotropic , meaning that their properties in the direction parallel to the magnetic field are different from those perpendicular to it . While electric fields in plasmas are usually small due to the high conductivity , the electric field associated with a plasma moving in a magnetic field is given by <formula> ( where <formula> is the electric field , <formula> is the velocity , and <formula> is the magnetic field ) , and is not affected by Debye shielding .

Plasmas are by far the most common phase of ordinary matter in the universe , both by mass and by volume . Essentially , all of the visible light from space comes from stars , which are plasmas with a temperature such that they radiate strongly at visible wavelengths . Most of the ordinary ( or baryonic ) matter in the universe , however , is found in the intergalactic medium , which is also a plasma , but much hotter , so that it radiates primarily as X-rays . In 1937 , Hannes Alfvén argued that if plasma pervaded the universe , it could then carry electric currents capable of generating a galactic magnetic field . After winning the Nobel Prize , he emphasized that : In order to understand the phenomena in a certain plasma region , it is necessary to map not only the magnetic but also the electric field and the electric currents . Space is filled with a network of currents which transfer energy and momentum over large or very large distances . The currents often pinch to filamentary or surface currents . The latter are likely to give space , as also interstellar and intergalactic space , a cellular structure .

By contrast the current scientific consensus is that about 96 % of the total energy density in the universe is not plasma or any other form of ordinary matter , but a combination of cold dark matter and dark energy . Our Sun , and all stars , are made of plasma , much of interstellar space is filled with a plasma , albeit a very sparse one , and intergalactic space too . Even black holes , which are not directly visible , are thought to be fuelled by accreting ionising matter ( i.e. plasma ) , and they are associated with astrophysical jets of luminous ejected plasma , such as M87 's jet that extends 5,000 light-years . In our solar system , interplanetary space is filled with the plasma of the Solar Wind that extends from the Sun out to the heliopause . However , the density of ordinary matter is much higher than average and much higher than that of either dark matter or dark energy . The planet Jupiter accounts for most of the non-plasma within the orbit of Pluto ( about 0.1 % by mass , or 10 − 15 % by volume ) .

Although the underlying equations governing plasmas are relatively simple , plasma behavior is extraordinarily varied and subtle : the emergence of unexpected behavior from a simple model is a typical feature of a complex system . Such systems lie in some sense on the boundary between ordered and disordered behavior and cannot typically be described either by simple , smooth , mathematical functions , or by pure randomness . The spontaneous formation of interesting spatial features on a wide range of length scales is one manifestation of plasma complexity . The features are interesting , for example , because they are very sharp , spatially intermittent ( the distance between features is much larger than the features themselves ) , or have a fractal form . Many of these features were first studied in the laboratory , and have subsequently been recognized throughout the universe . Examples of complexity and complex structures in plasmas include :

Striations or string-like structures , also known as birkeland currents , are seen in many plasmas , like the plasma ball , the aurora , lightning , electric arcs , solar flares , and supernova remnants . They are sometimes associated with larger current densities , and the interaction with the magnetic field can form a magnetic rope structure . High power microwave breakdown at atmospheric pressure also leads to the formation of filamentary structures . ( See also Plasma pinch ) Filamentation also refers to the self-focusing of a high power laser pulse . At high powers , the nonlinear part of the index of refraction becomes important and causes a higher index of refraction in the center of the laser beam , where the laser is brighter than at the edges , causing a feedback that focuses the laser even more . The tighter focused laser has a higher peak brightness ( irradiance ) that forms a plasma . The plasma has an index of refraction lower than one , and causes a defocusing of the laser beam . The interplay of the focusing index of refraction , and the defocusing plasma makes the formation of a long filament of plasma that can be micrometers to kilometers in length . One interesting aspect of the filamentation generated plasma is the relatively low ion density due to defocusing effects of the ionized electrons . ( See also Filament propagation )

Quasineutrality of a plasma requires that plasma currents close on themselves in electric circuits . Such circuits follow Kirchhoff 's circuit laws and possess a resistance and inductance . These circuits must generally be treated as a strongly coupled system , with the behavior in each plasma region dependent on the entire circuit . It is this strong coupling between system elements , together with nonlinearity , which may lead to complex behavior . Electrical circuits in plasmas store inductive ( magnetic ) energy , and should the circuit be disrupted , for example , by a plasma instability , the inductive energy will be released as plasma heating and acceleration . This is a common explanation for the heating that takes place in the solar corona . Electric currents , and in particular , magnetic-field-aligned electric currents ( which are sometimes generically referred to as " Birkeland currents " ) , are also observed in the Earth 's aurora , and in plasma filaments .

Narrow sheets with sharp gradients may separate regions with different properties such as magnetization , density and temperature , resulting in cell-like regions . Examples include the magnetosphere , heliosphere , and heliospheric current sheet . Hannes Alfvén wrote : " From the cosmological point of view , the most important new space research discovery is probably the cellular structure of space . As has been seen in every region of space accessible to in situ measurements , there are a number of ' cell walls ' , sheets of electric currents , which divide space into compartments with different magnetization , temperature , density , etc . "

Ultracold plasmas are created in a magneto-optical trap ( MOT ) by trapping and cooling neutral atoms , to temperatures of 1 mK or lower , and then using another laser to ionize the atoms by giving each of the outermost electrons just enough energy to escape the electrical attraction of its parent ion . One advantage of ultracold plasmas are their well characterized and tunable initial conditions , including their size and electron temperature . By adjusting the wavelength of the ionizing laser , the kinetic energy of the liberated electrons can be tuned as low as 0.1 K , a limit set by the frequency bandwidth of the laser pulse . The ions inherit the millikelvin temperatures of the neutral atoms , but are quickly heated through a process known as disorder induced heating ( DIH ) . This type of non-equilibrium ultracold plasma evolves rapidly , and displays many other interesting phenomena . One of the metastable states of a strongly nonideal plasma is Rydberg matter , which forms upon condensation of excited atoms .

Impermeable plasma is a type of thermal plasma which acts like an impermeable solid with respect to gas or cold plasma and can be physically pushed . Interaction of cold gas and thermal plasma was briefly studied by a group led by Hannes Alfvén in 1960s and 1970s for its possible applications in insulation of fusion plasma from the reactor walls . However , later it was found that the external magnetic fields in this configuration could induce kink instabilities in the plasma and subsequently lead to an unexpectedly high heat loss to the walls . In 2013 , a group of materials scientists reported that they have successfully generated stable impermeable plasma with no magnetic confinement using only an ultrahigh-pressure blanket of cold gas . While spectroscopic data on the characteristics of plasma were claimed to be difficult to obtain due to the high pressure , the passive effect of plasma on synthesis of different nanostructures clearly suggested the effective confinement . They also showed that upon maintaining the impermeability for a few tens of seconds , screening of ions at the plasma-gas interface could give rise to a strong secondary mode of heating ( known as viscous heating ) leading to different kinetics of reactions and formation of complex nanomaterials .

Fluid models describe plasmas in terms of smoothed quantities , like density and averaged velocity around each position ( see Plasma parameters ) . One simple fluid model , magnetohydrodynamics , treats the plasma as a single fluid governed by a combination of Maxwell 's equations and the Navier – Stokes equations . A more general description is the two-fluid plasma picture , where the ions and electrons are described separately . Fluid models are often accurate when collisionality is sufficiently high to keep the plasma velocity distribution close to a Maxwell – Boltzmann distribution . Because fluid models usually describe the plasma in terms of a single flow at a certain temperature at each spatial location , they can neither capture velocity space structures like beams or double layers , nor resolve wave-particle effects .

Kinetic models describe the particle velocity distribution function at each point in the plasma and therefore do not need to assume a Maxwell – Boltzmann distribution . A kinetic description is often necessary for collisionless plasmas . There are two common approaches to kinetic description of a plasma . One is based on representing the smoothed distribution function on a grid in velocity and position . The other , known as the particle-in-cell ( PIC ) technique , includes kinetic information by following the trajectories of a large number of individual particles . Kinetic models are generally more computationally intensive than fluid models . The Vlasov equation may be used to describe the dynamics of a system of charged particles interacting with an electromagnetic field . In magnetized plasmas , a gyrokinetic approach can substantially reduce the computational expense of a fully kinetic simulation .

Most artificial plasmas are generated by the application of electric and / or magnetic fields through a gas . Plasma generated in a laboratory setting and for industrial use can be generally categorized by : The pressure they operate at — vacuum pressure ( < 10 mTorr or 1 Pa ) , moderate pressure ( ~ 1 Torr or 100 Pa ) , atmospheric pressure ( 760 Torr or 100 kPa ) The temperature relationships within the plasma — thermal plasma ( <formula> ) , non-thermal or " cold " plasma ( <formula> ) The magnetization of the particles within the plasma — magnetized ( both ion and electrons are trapped in Larmor orbits by the magnetic field ) , partially magnetized ( the electrons but not the ions are trapped by the magnetic field ) , non-magnetized ( the magnetic field is too weak to trap the particles in orbits but may generate Lorentz forces )

Just like the many uses of plasma , there are several means for its generation , however , one principle is common to all of them : there must be energy input to produce and sustain it . For this case , plasma is generated when an electric current is applied across a dielectric gas or fluid ( an electrically non-conducting material ) as can be seen in the image to the right , which shows a discharge tube as a simple example ( DC used for simplicity ) . The potential difference and subsequent electric field pull the bound electrons ( negative ) toward the anode ( positive electrode ) while the cathode ( negative electrode ) pulls the nucleus . As the voltage increases , the current stresses the material ( by electric polarization ) beyond its dielectric limit ( termed strength ) into a stage of electrical breakdown , marked by an electric spark , where the material transforms from being an insulator into a conductor ( as it becomes increasingly ionized ) . The underlying process is the Townsend avalanche , where collisions between electrons and neutral gas atoms create more ions and electrons ( as can be seen in the figure on the right ) . The first impact of an electron on an atom results in one ion and two electrons . Therefore , the number of charged particles increases rapidly ( in the millions ) only " after about 20 successive sets of collisions " , mainly due to a small mean free path ( average distance travelled between collisions ) .

With ample current density and ionization , this forms a luminous electric arc ( a continuous electric discharge similar to lightning ) between the electrodes . Electrical resistance along the continuous electric arc creates heat , which dissociates more gas molecules and ionizes the resulting atoms ( where degree of ionization is determined by temperature ) , and as per the sequence : solid-liquid-gas-plasma , the gas is gradually turned into a thermal plasma . A thermal plasma is in thermal equilibrium , which is to say that the temperature is relatively homogeneous throughout the heavy particles ( i.e. atoms , molecules and ions ) and electrons . This is so because when thermal plasmas are generated , electrical energy is given to electrons , which , due to their great mobility and large numbers , are able to disperse it rapidly and by elastic collision ( without energy loss ) to the heavy particles .

Glow discharge plasmas : non-thermal plasmas generated by the application of DC or low frequency RF ( < 100 kHz ) electric field to the gap between two metal electrodes . Probably the most common plasma ; this is the type of plasma generated within fluorescent light tubes . Capacitively coupled plasma ( CCP ) : similar to glow discharge plasmas , but generated with high frequency RF electric fields , typically 13.56 MHz . These differ from glow discharges in that the sheaths are much less intense . These are widely used in the microfabrication and integrated circuit manufacturing industries for plasma etching and plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition . Cascaded Arc Plasma Source : a device to produce low temperature ( ~ 1eV ) high density plasmas ( HDP ) . Inductively coupled plasma ( ICP ) : similar to a CCP and with similar applications but the electrode consists of a coil wrapped around the chamber where plasma is formed . Wave heated plasma : similar to CCP and ICP in that it is typically RF ( or microwave ) . Examples include helicon discharge and electron cyclotron resonance ( ECR ) .

Arc discharge : this is a high power thermal discharge of very high temperature ( ~ 10,000 K ) . It can be generated using various power supplies . It is commonly used in metallurgical processes . For example , it is used to smelt minerals containing Al2O3 to produce aluminium . Corona discharge : this is a non-thermal discharge generated by the application of high voltage to sharp electrode tips . It is commonly used in ozone generators and particle precipitators . Dielectric barrier discharge ( DBD ) : this is a non-thermal discharge generated by the application of high voltages across small gaps wherein a non-conducting coating prevents the transition of the plasma discharge into an arc . It is often mislabeled ' Corona ' discharge in industry and has similar application to corona discharges . It is also widely used in the web treatment of fabrics . The application of the discharge to synthetic fabrics and plastics functionalizes the surface and allows for paints , glues and similar materials to adhere . Capacitive discharge : this is a nonthermal plasma generated by the application of RF power ( e.g. , 13.56 MHz ) to one powered electrode , with a grounded electrode held at a small separation distance on the order of 1 cm . Such discharges are commonly stabilized using a noble gas such as helium or argon .

Plasma was first identified in a Crookes tube , and so described by Sir William Crookes in 1879 ( he called it " radiant matter " ) . The nature of the Crookes tube " cathode ray " matter was subsequently identified by British physicist Sir J.J. Thomson in 1897 . The term " plasma " was coined by Irving Langmuir in 1928 , perhaps because the glowing discharge molds itself to the shape of the Crookes tube ( Gr. πλάσμα – a thing moulded or formed ) . Langmuir described his observations as : Except near the electrodes , where there are sheaths containing very few electrons , the ionized gas contains ions and electrons in about equal numbers so that the resultant space charge is very small . We shall use the name plasma to describe this region containing balanced charges of ions and electrons .

Neaira ( / nɪˈaɪrə / ; Greek : Νέαιρα ) , also Neaera ( / nɪˈɪərə / ) , was a hetaera who lived in the 4th century BC in ancient Greece . She was brought to trial between 343 and 340 BC , accused of marrying an Athenian citizen illegally and misrepresenting her daughter as an Athenian citizen . The speech made against Neaira in this trial by Apollodorus is preserved as Demosthenes ' fifty-ninth speech , though the speech is often attributed to Pseudo-Demosthenes , who seems to have worked on many of the speeches given by Apollodorus . The speech provides more details than any other about prostitutes of antiquity , and consequently a great deal of information about sex trade in the ancient Greek city-states ( poleis ) .

The speech Against Neaira is the source of most of the details of Neaira 's biography . It concerns a case brought against Neaira when she was about fifty by Apollodorus ' son-in-law Theomnestus , though apart from a brief introduction of the case given by Theomnestus , Apollodorus delivered the entirety of the speech . The case revolves around the accusation that Neaira , a foreigner , married an Athenian citizen , and that she was attempting to pass off her own children as Athenian citizens . While the speech revolves around the life of Neaira , this is of little importance to the substance of the accusations . The details seem to be part of the speech in the hope that the salacious accusations will hide the weakness of Apollodorus ' case . The accuracy of the evidence given in the speech has been questioned , and is known to contain both lies and inaccuracies . Despite this , the speech tells us much about the life of an accomplished hetaera , and is extremely valuable to historians as a source on women 's lives in classical Greece . Indeed , it is our most reliable extant source on prostitution in the classical world , and one of our best sources on women 's lives and gender relations in general for the period .

Neaira was probably born in the first decade of the fourth century BC . Her place of birth is unknown , and the earliest event in her life that we know of is her purchase when she was a young girl by Nikarete . Nikarete trained the girls she purchased to be hetaerae , calling them her daughters in order to increase the price her customers would pay , and lived with them in Corinth . Neaira 's work as a prostitute started before she reached puberty . She is twice described by Apollodorus as having sex for money before she came of age , though possibly due to her age he implies that she was not yet a hetaera . During this time , the orator Lysias was a prominent guest in Nikarete 's brothel and a regular customer of Metaneira , another of Nikarete 's girls . In order to reward her for her services , he arranged for her to be initiated into the Eleusinian Mysteries , and funded the journey . Neaira was at this time about twelve or thirteen , and Nikarete accompanied them . Neaira visited Athens again for the Great Panathenaea of 378 , this time accompanying Simus of Thessaly , a young aristocrat .

Around 376 BC , Timanoridas of Corinth and Eukrates of Lefkada paid thirty minae to purchase Neaira from Nikarete , at the high end of prices for hetaerae . When the men married , they agreed to let Neaira buy her freedom for twenty minae , which , with the aid of gifts and loans from her former customers , she did . As part of this deal , Neaira agreed to no longer work as a prostitute in Corinth , and so left the city for Athens with Phrynion , who had helped her buy her freedom . Neaira was certainly living with Phrynion in Athens by 373 BC , when he took her to a feast given by the general Chabrias to celebrate his victory in the Pythian Games . During this celebration , Apollodorus says , Neaira was sexually assaulted by the guests and slaves of Chabrias while she was drunk and asleep . Due to this and other mistreatment by Phrynion , in 372 BC Neaira left his household and went to Megara , taking with her her clothing and jewellery , two maids , and other possessions belonging to Phrynion .

In Megara , Neaira continued to work as a hetaera , and in 371 met Stephanus . Stephanus offered to act as her patron if she returned with him to Athens . Apollodorus claims that with her she brought two sons and a daughter to Athens , but modern commentators have largely concluded that the sons in question were in fact those of Stephanus , by an Athenian woman . Indeed , Christopher Carey points out that one of the sons , at least , was probably a legitimate son of Stephanus , being named after his father , and John Buckler notes that Apollodorus contradicts himself on whether Neaira 's alleged sons were hers by another man , or hers by Stephanus . Phrynion learnt that Neaira was back in Athens , and attempted to take her back from Stephanus . Stephanus resisted , claiming that as Neaira was a free woman he had no right ; a claim which Phrynion proceeded to challenge in court , though he was persuaded to settle the case by arbitration instead . The arbitrators decided that Neaira was indeed free , and that in addition to this she was her own kyria ( mistress ) ; this was an extremely unusual decision in a society where all citizen women , at least , had a kyrios ( master ) . Despite this unusual level of freedom , however , Neaira was compelled to split her time between the two men as they agreed , without any input herself .

Sometime between 343 and 340 BC , Neaira was brought to trial by Theomnestus on behalf of his father-in-law Apollodorus , accused of xenias ( representing herself as a citizen when in fact she was not ) . If she was convicted , the maximum penalty Neaira faced was being sold into slavery and having her property sold . Neaira herself would not have been permitted to speak at her trial , though she was probably present . The only surviving record of the trial is the speech given by Theomnestus and Apollodorus against Neaira and Stephanus , and the outcome is unknown . No records of Neaira exist after the trial . Modern commentators have noted the weaknesses in Apollodorus ' arguments , though as the outcome of an Athenian trial depended heavily on what the parties involved could persuade the jury to accept , and how much of their dishonesty they could get away with , we cannot say for certain that the suit failed .

Serranus Clinton Hastings ( November 22 , 1814 – February 18 , 1893 ) was a 19th-century politician , rancher and a prominent lawyer in the United States . He studied law as a young man and moved to the Iowa District in 1837 to open a law office . Iowa became a territory a year later , and he was elected a member of the House of Representatives of the Iowa Territorial General Assembly . When the territory became the state of Iowa in 1846 , he won an election to represent the state in the United States House of Representatives . After his term ended , he became Chief Justice of the Iowa Supreme Court . He resigned after one year in office and moved to California . He was appointed to the California Supreme Court as Chief Justice a few months later . He won an election to be Attorney General of California , and assumed office shortly after his term as Chief Justice ended . He began practicing law again as Attorney General . He earned a small fortune with his law practice and used that fortune to finance his successful real estate venture . In 1878 , he founded the Hastings College of the Law with a donation of US $ 100,000 .

Hastings was born in Watertown , Jefferson County , New York , on November 22 , 1814 to Robert Collins Hastings and Patience Brayton . Robert Collins Hastings was a good friend and supporter of DeWitt Clinton , whom Serranus gets his middle name from . When Robert died in 1824 , the family moved to St. Lawrence County , New York . He completed a six-year course at Gouverneur Academy , and in 1834 , he became taught and became the principal at Norwich Academy , located in Chenango County , New York . He introduced the Hamiltonian system of instruction and the Angletean system of mathematics to the academy . In 1835 , he resigned from his position at the academy to study law . Hastings began to study law with Charles Thorpe , Esq . , of Norwich . After a few months of study , he decided to move to Lawrenceburg , Indiana . He completed his legal studies there with Daniel S. Majors , Esq . He did not immediately enter the practice of law and instead became an editor of the Indiana Signal , where he supported Martin Van Buren in his presidential campaign . He moved to Terre Haute , Indiana , in December 1836 and underwent a legal examination by Judge Porters of the Circuit Court .

In January 1837 , Hastings moved to the Iowa District , which was part of the Wisconsin Territory . He settled in Burlington for a short time and then moved to Bloomington , which would later become Muscatine , Iowa . He was examined by Judge Irwin , was admitted to the bar , and opened a law office . Shortly after this , he was commissioned Justice of the Peace by Wisconsin Territorial Governor Henry Dodge . He had jurisdiction over the 90 miles between Burlington , Iowa , and Davenport , Iowa , the western boundary was undefined . He only had one case to deal with : a man accused of stealing US $ 30 from a citizen and $ 3 from the court . He found the man guilty and sentenced him to be tied to an oak tree , receive 33 lashes across his back , be transported across the Mississippi River to Illinois , and be banished from the territory forever . When Iowa Territory was organized in 1838 , he won an election to represent Muscatine County , Louisa County , and Slaughter County in the House of Representatives of the Iowa Territorial General Assembly . He served from November 12 , 1838 , to January 25 , 1839 . He was reelected to that position in 1839 , this time representing Muscatine County and Johnson County from November 4 , 1839 , to January 14 , 1840 . In 1840 , a border conflict with Missouri called the Honey War took place . He received the military title of Major and helped capture a sheriff . No battle took place , and the two states compromised on the border issue .

Hastings married Azalea Brodt on June 10 , 1840 , in Muscatine , Iowa . They had two children while living in Muscatine , Marshall and Clara L. He was elected to the Legislative Council that year , representing Muscatine County and Johnson County again , and served from November 3 , 1840 to January 15 , 1841 . He was re-elected the following year , and served from December 6 , 1841 to February 18 , 1842 . He was not elected to the Fifth and Sixth General Assemblies . He was elected President of the Legislative Council for the Seventh General Assembly , and also represented Muscatine County and Johnson County on the council . He served from May 5 , 1845 to June 11 , 1845 . He was elected to the council for the Eight General Assembly , which was also the final one since Iowa was to become a state on December 28 , 1846 . He represented the same counties he had previously , and served from December 1 , 1845 to January 19 , 1846 . During his time on the Legislative Council he helped compile the " Blue Book " of Iowa laws . It became known as the " Old Blue Book " and was the first legal code for the Iowa , Nebraska , Dakota , and Montana Territories .

In 1846 , Hastings was nominated to represent Iowa at large in the United States House of Representatives as a Democrat . On December 29 , 1846 , he was elected over the Whig candidate G. C. R. Mitchell . He was the second youngest member serving in Congress at that time . He served during the second session of the 29th United States Congress , which ended on March 3 , 1847 . Close to a year after his term ended as a member of the House of Representatives , Governor Ansel Briggs appointed him as the third Chief Justice of the Iowa Supreme Court . He started his term on January 26 , 1848 , and resigned on January 14 , 1849 to move to California , his family deciding to stay in Iowa . Hastings settled in Benicia , California , and a few months later , California legislature selected him to be the first Chief Justice of the California Supreme Court . He started his term on December 20 , 1849 , but the court did not assemble until March 4 , 1850 . In 1851 , his family moved from Iowa to live with him in California . During his term as Chief Justice he ran for the office of Attorney General of California . Elections were held on September 3 , 1851 , and he won with 52.2 % of the votes . The Whig candidate , William D. Fair , received the rest of the votes . His term as Chief Justice ended in December 1851 , and he assumed office as Attorney General on January 5 , 1852 . While serving as Attorney General , he could practice law as well , something he could not do as Chief Justice . The wealth he earned during this time became the foundation of the larger fortune he would later earn in real estate . He ended his two-year term on January 2 , 1854 .

Hastings continued to practice law after his term as Attorney General ended , and also became a member of the Henley , Hastings & Co. bank firm located in Sacramento , California . The banking firm failed , with little loss to him though . Around 1857 , he left professional life , and started investing in real estate . He and his wife had seven more children after this : Charles Foster Dio . , Douglas , Uhler , Robert Paul , Flora Azalea , Ella , and Lillie . He gradually acquired around one hundred lots of real estate in San Francisco , and bought large tracts of land in Solano , Napa , Lake , and Sacramento counties . In 1861 , he put up many four-room buildings in the south side of San Francisco for the poor with the money he earned in real estate . The rent was $ 10 a month , and as a business venture it was a success . By 1862 , he was worth $ 900,000 , which was largely attributed to his real estate investments . In 1865 , he traveled to Europe ; four years later he accompanied William H. Seward to view the recently purchased territory of Alaska . Hastings College of Law , the law department of the University of California , was founded on March 28 , 1878 with his donation of $ 100,000 . The college offered him the position of dean and he accepted the offer . He was professor of comparative jurisprudence at the college as well , a position he held until 1887 . He helped establish St. Catherine Academy in Benicia , California , with a donation of $ 6,000 . He also helped publish two volumes of the botany of the Pacific coast . His contribution to botany would later be recognized by having the plant genus Hastingsia named after him .

Datchet Bridge , also known as The Divided Bridge , was a road bridge which crossed the River Thames at Datchet from 1706 until it was demolished in 1848 . It was situated on the reach between Old Windsor Lock and Romney Lock and linked Windsor on the Berkshire bank to Datchet on the Buckinghamshire side . The bridge replaced a ferry service which had operated at the site since at least the middle of the 13th century . The first Datchet Bridge was a wooden bridge commissioned by Queen Anne as the crossing was a convenient back-way to Windsor Castle . Responsibility for the upkeep and maintenance of the crossing later passed to the counties of Berkshire and Buckinghamshire over whose boundary the bridge spanned . There followed many decades of dispute between the counties over who should pay for what . This culminated in 1836 with each county deciding to build their own half , in different materials and not touching in the middle . The resulting " crazy erection " , Buckinghamshire 's side in wood and Berkshire 's in iron , known as The Divided Bridge , was demolished in 1848 and is the only case on the Thames where an established bridge crossing site has completely disappeared .

Datchet on the north bank of the River Thames has existed as a settlement since before 990 but the first recorded mention of a river crossing is in 1224 when Henry III gave John le Passir a " great oak " with which to make a boat for " passage of Datchet " . In 1278 Edward I paid for William of Eton to a build a " great barge " for Datchet Ferry . Although the Crown had provided for the vessels , the right to operate the ferry and collect tolls sat with the Lord of the Manor of Datchet . This continued until 1680 when the then Lord of the Manor , Colonel Andrew Pitcairn Wheeler , sold the Manor of Datchet to Budd Wase but kept back the ferry rights which he subsequently mortgaged for £ 1000 ( equivalent to £ 146,000 today ) . In 1699 Wheeler wrote to William III complaining that a wall built by the King along the Windsor bank was adversely affecting the ferry trade . To settle the complaint the Crown purchased the ferry rights from Colonel Wheeler for £ 7000 ( equivalent to £ 883,000 today ) . The crossing was important to the Crown as the road through Datchet and across the Thames provided a convenient short route from London to Windsor Castle and the ferry was much used by Royalty and courtiers . Privy Purse records show two payments from Elizabeth of York to the Datchet ferryman in 1502 and similarly from Princess Mary in 1522 and her father Henry VIII between 1530 and 1532 . In Elias Ashmole 's account of the 1520 Procession of the order of the Garter he describes how Queen Catherine after watching the procession returned to Windsor Castle from Colnbrook by way of " the fery [ sic ] next way to the castle . " The ferry however did not always provide a quick and efficient service . In 1678 the ferryman , Matthew Hale , received a formal rebuke from Charles II 's Secretary of State , Henry Coventry , for unduly delaying a Royal Messenger . Coventry warned Hale in no uncertain terms :

In 1706 a wooden bridge was built by order of Queen Anne to replace the ferry between Datchet , Buckinghamshire and Windsor , Berkshire . It was made of oak provided by the Surveyor General of Woods South of the Trent , Edward Wilcox , who was ordered to fell " sufficient non-navy timber " from the Royal forest " for the better convenience of our passage from our Castle at Windsor " . The building work was supervised by the Surveyor General , Samuel Travers and the final cost was £ 1000 ( equivalent to £ 151,000 today ) The better convenience of passage was further enhanced by Queen Anne 's intimate friend Sarah Churchill , Duchess of Marlborough and her husband the first Duke who then lived at Langley and who had a carriage drive built from their house , over the bridge and on to Windsor Castle . Unlike the upstream toll bridges at Windsor and Maidenhead , the crossing at Datchet was toll-free for both River and road and quickly became a popular crossing . Seeking compensation for loss of income on their bridges , the corporations of Windsor and Maidenhead made claims to the Treasury . In 1708 Windsor was granted an ex-gratia payment of £ 55 ( equivalent to £ 8300 today ) plus £ 25 and £ 20 to two tenants ( equivalent to £ 3600 and £ 2900 respectively ) . Maidenhead 's complaint , not made until 1714 , was noted but no compensation paid .

The bridge was initially maintained by the Crown which paid £ 800 ( equivalent to £ 115,000 today ) for repairs in 1737 and in 1770 replaced the original all-wood structure with a bridge of ten wooden arches on stone piers . By 1794 the bridge was " absolutely dangerous for carriages to pass over it and a stone one [ was ] now in contemplation . " Later the same year the central arches of the new bridge collapsed during heavy flooding and King George III deciding that he did not wish to finance the rebuilding instead instated a temporary free ferry . There followed many years of wrangling between the Crown and the counties of Berkshire and Buckinghamshire over who should bear the cost of the building and maintenance of the bridge as the county boundary ran down the centre of the channel of the Thames thus cutting the bridge in half . The matter was forced by the intervention of John Richards , the Rector of Datchet who was also a lawyer ; Richards took legal action and the resulting judgement from the King 's Bench in 1809 was that the two counties must equally share the rebuilding costs , a total of £ 2,375 each ( equivalent to £ 155,400 today ) . The counties , forced to co-operate , built a new wooden bridge on the old stone piers which was opened by Queen Charlotte and Princess Elizabeth on 4 December 1812 .

The co-operation was short-lived and arguments over maintenance started again in 1834 when the Buckinghamshire side needed repairs and Berkshire refused to contribute . Lack of maintenance led to the bridge collapsing once more in 1836 and the counties came up with the unique solution of each building their own half . Buckinghamshire decided to rebuild with wooden railings whilst Berkshire built its half in iron suspended by chains . Kelly 's Directory of 1847 noted : " Datchet is separated from Windsor by the river Thames , over which is a very singular bridge ; one half of it is kept in repair by the county of Bucks and the other half by Berks . The former has a wooden railing and the latter an iron one , suspended by chains , but neither the Bucks nor Berks sides touch each other . " Even during the building the counties would not work together and had to be ordered by the Lord Chancellor to " proceed in such a manner as not to impede each other " . Consequently when the bridge was finished the two sides did not touch in the middle with Berkshire 's final span being cantilevered out from the last Berkshire stone pier thus needing no support from the Buckinghamshire side . The result was an unsatisfactory , ungainly structure , sarcastically noted on opening as having " scarce a bridge upon the River Thames which surpasses it " . The centre gap was apparent during the Divided Bridge 's whole lifetime and lacking structural integrity the " hideous monstrosity " quickly became unsafe :

" It was no wonder that when Wombwell took his caravans across the crazy erection , the elephant-van broke through and the beast in it nearly came to an untimely end . " The dispute between the counties was resolved once and for all in 1848 when the Windsor Improvement Act 1848 decreed the dismantling of the Divided Bridge and the building of two new road bridges , Victoria Bridge slightly upstream , and Albert Bridge slightly downstream . Both new bridges opened in 1851 . Once the Divided Bridge was demolished the old Windsor to Datchet road was rerouted over Victoria Bridge and the Berkshire side became part of the private grounds of Windsor Castle . This is the only case on the entire Thames where a main bridge crossing has completely disappeared .

A highway along the route of M-137 connecting US 31 south to the state park was added to the state highway system during the first half of 1930 , initially lacking a designation label on the state maps of the time . This routing was extended by 0.9 miles ( 1.4 km ) and labelled as M-137 on maps in 1931 . The former route through the campus of the Interlochen Center for the Arts was abandoned as a roadway on March 26 , 1956 , after M-137 was realigned to pass to the east of the school and extended further south through the state park area .

Vice Admiral Sir Henry Mackay Burrell , KBE , CB ( 13 August 1904 – 9 February 1988 ) was a senior commander in the Royal Australian Navy ( RAN ) . He served as Chief of the Naval Staff ( CNS ) from 1959 to 1962 . Born in the Blue Mountains , Burrell entered the Royal Australian Naval College in 1918 as a thirteen-year-old cadet . His first posting at sea was aboard the cruiser HMAS Sydney . During the 1920s and 1930s , Burrell served for several years on exchange with the Royal Navy , specialising as a navigator . Following the outbreak of World War II , he filled a key liaison post with the US Navy , and later saw action as commander of the destroyer HMAS Norman , earning a mention in despatches . Promoted captain in 1946 , Burrell played a major role in the formation of the RAN 's Fleet Air Arm , before commanding the flagship HMAS Australia in 1948 – 49 . He captained the light aircraft carrier HMAS Vengeance in 1953 – 54 , and was twice Flag Officer of the Australian Fleet , in 1955 – 56 and 1958 . Burrell was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire in 1955 and a Companion of the Order of the Bath in 1959 . As CNS , he began a major program of acquisitions for the Navy , including new helicopters , minesweepers , submarines and guided-missile destroyers . He also acted to reverse a plan by the government of the day to dismantle the Fleet Air Arm . Knighted in 1960 , Burrell retired to his farm near Canberra in 1962 and published his memoirs , Mermaids Do Exist , in 1986 . He died two years later , aged eighty-three .

Henry Mackay Burrell was born at Wentworth Falls , in the Blue Mountains district of New South Wales . He was the third child and only son of schoolteacher Thomas Burrell and his wife Eliza . Henry 's father , who had emigrated from England , joined the Australian Imperial Force at the age of fifty-five during World War I , seeing active service in Egypt . His grandfather and great-grandfather had served in the Royal Navy . Henry attended Parramatta High School before entering the Royal Australian Naval College , Jervis Bay , on 1 January 1918 , at the age of thirteen . A keen sportsman , he competed in rugby union , tennis and hockey , winning colours for hockey . Burrell graduated from the college in 1921 and became a midshipman the next year . He went to sea first aboard the light cruiser HMAS Sydney and then the destroyer HMAS Stalwart . Posted to the United Kingdom for further training in 1924 , he served on the light cruiser HMS Caledon and the battleship HMS Malaya . In April 1925 , he was promoted to sub-lieutenant , rising to lieutenant by July 1926 . After attending a Royal Navy course in 1930 , Burrell became a specialist navigator , and saw service aboard the minesweeper HMS Pangbourne , destroyers HMAS Tattoo and Stuart , and cruiser HMAS Brisbane . He married Margaret MacKay at Scots ' Church , Melbourne , on 27 December 1933 . Burrell was promoted to lieutenant commander in July 1934 , and graduated from an advanced navigation course the following year .

Burrell served on exchange with the Royal Navy as navigator aboard the cruisers HMS Coventry and HMS Devonshire , the latter during her tour of duty in the Spanish Civil War . Described as being " egalitarian " and " approachable " , his familiarity with ratings earned him the criticism of Devonshire 's captain ; Burrell however believed that a close relationship between officers and men was necessary for the smooth running of a ship . After completing the Royal Navy 's staff course in 1938 , he returned to Australia and was appointed staff officer ( operations ) at the Navy Office , Melbourne , in March 1939 . It was Burrell 's first shore-based position , and he spent the next four months bringing naval sections of the War Book ( preparations for war ) up to date .

Burrell was still based at the Navy Office when World War II broke out in September 1939 . A reorganisation of the headquarters in May 1940 saw him promoted to commander and given the new role of Director of Operations , overseeing troop convoys and their air cover , local defence , and staffing issues . Burrell 's " full knowledge of Australian naval plans and resources " led to Prime Minister Robert Menzies personally nominating him to participate in staff talks with representatives of the Royal Navy and US Navy in October . Soon after , he was posted as the first Australian naval attaché to Washington , D.C. , in an effort to improve communications with the US in light of the threat from Japan . Burrell was credited with helping to foster closer cooperation between the two navies in the Pacific region . He also warned the Australian government that Britain and the US would adopt a " Germany-first " strategy in the event of war with Japan , and that the US was prepared to weaken its Pacific fleet to help secure the Atlantic . Posted to Britain , Burrell was appointed commanding officer of the newly commissioned N-class destroyer HMAS Norman on 15 September 1941 . The ship 's first operation was transporting a Trade Union Congress delegation led by Sir Walter Citrine to Archangel , Russia . After returning to Britain , she steamed to the Indian Ocean to join Admiral Sir James Somerville 's Eastern Fleet at Addu Atoll , Maldives , on 26 February 1942 . Following the Eastern Fleet 's withdrawal to Kilindini , Kenya , Norman took part in the capture of Diego Suarez on Madagascar on 7 May . Later that month , she was reassigned to the Mediterranean and in June was involved in Operation Vigorous , an unsuccessful attempt to resupply the besieged island of Malta . Transferred back to the Indian Ocean , Burrell led Norman in the second campaign of the Battle of Madagascar in September , and was mentioned in despatches on 19 February 1943 for his " bravery and resource " during the operation . By this time Norman was escorting convoys in the Pacific , before deploying to the South Atlantic for anti-submarine duties in April – May .

On 23 June 1943 , Burrell relinquished command of Norman and returned to the Navy Office , Melbourne , as Director of Plans . Having been divorced from his first wife Margaret in November 1941 , he married mineralogist Ada Weller ( also known as Ada Coggan ) on 21 April 1944 ; the couple had a son and two daughters . Burrell took charge of the RAN 's latest Tribal-class destroyer , HMAS Bataan , at her commissioning in Sydney on 25 May 1945 . Arriving on the scene too late to see action , the ship was deployed to Japan via the Philippines in July , docking in Tokyo on 31 August . There she participated in the formal surrender ceremonies that took place on 2 September aboard USS Missouri . Bataan remained in Japan as Australian Squadron representative until November , assisting with the repatriation of inmates from Japanese prisoner-of-war camps . On a mission to one such camp at Sendai , Burrell located crewmen from the light cruiser HMAS Perth , which had been sunk in the early hours of 1 March 1942 during the Battle of Sunda Strait ; 320 of her complement of 680 survived the sinking , 105 dying in captivity .

Burrell 's first appointment following the cessation of hostilities was as commander of the 10th Destroyer Flotilla . He was promoted captain in June 1946 , and became Deputy Chief of the Naval Staff ( DCNS ) that October . As DCNS , Burrell played a major role in establishing the Navy 's Fleet Air Arm and preparing for the introduction of carrier-based aircraft . He was appointed an aide-de-camp to Governor-General William McKell in July 1947 . From October 1948 to the end of 1949 , Burrell served as commanding officer of the heavy cruiser HMAS Australia , flagship of the RAN . Posted to Britain in 1950 , he attended the Imperial Defence College , London , and spent two years as Assistant Australian Defence Representative . He took command of the light aircraft carrier HMAS Vengeance on 2 December 1952 , less than three weeks after she was commissioned into the RAN after transfer from the Royal Navy . The ship began working up for deployment to the Korean War in June 1953 , but in the end her place was taken by the carrier HMAS Sydney . Vengeance was involved in a collision with HMAS Bataan near the Cocos Islands on 5 April 1954 , while acting as part of the escort for the Royal Yacht of Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip during their inaugural tour of Australia , but continued on duty .

Completing his tour as captain of Vengeance , Burrell briefly resumed the role of Deputy Chief of the Naval Staff in August 1954 . The following month he was made an aide-de-camp to the Queen . Burrell was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire in the 1955 New Year Honours . In February he became Flag Officer of the Australian Fleet , with the acting rank of rear admiral ; this was made substantive in July . On 12 May 1956 , he hoisted his standard aboard the recently arrived aircraft carrier HMAS Melbourne , marking her replacement of sister ship HMAS Sydney as flagship of the RAN . Burrell was posted soon afterwards to the Navy Office , Canberra , to redevelop the service 's officer structure , leading to a new General List of officers ' seniority . He served as Second Naval Member ( Personnel ) from September 1956 until January 1958 , when he again became Flag Officer of the Australian Fleet . Appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath in the 1959 New Years Honours , Burrell was raised to vice admiral on 24 February and became First Naval Member , the Chief of the Naval Staff ( CNS ) . He succeeded Vice Admiral Sir Roy Dowling .

As CNS , Vice Admiral Burrell had to contend with a threat by Defence Minister Athol Townley to disband the Navy 's fixed-wing Fleet Air Arm capability by 1963 , but gained approval for a major vessel re-equipment drive that was to include new submarines , destroyers , minesweepers , and auxiliaries . This led among other things to the procurement of British Oberon-class submarines , selected by Burrell when his original preference for an Australian-built craft proved too expensive , as well as Ton-class minesweepers and the Navy 's first purpose-designed hydrographic survey ship , HMAS Moresby . The re-equipment program also resulted in augmentation of the RAN 's rotary-wing assets with Westland Wessex anti-submarine warfare helicopters . Most significant was the purchase of three Charles F. Adams-class guided-missile destroyers , a decision of " ingenuity and forethought " on the part of Burrell and Navy Minister John Gorton , according to historian Tom Frame . The CNS and his minister enjoyed a close working relationship ; Burrell declared that Gorton " deserves our thanks for his efforts " , and Gorton called Burrell " one of the most honest , sincere and most dedicated sailors " . The purchase of the destroyers signalled a shift in reliance for equipment from Britain to the United States that was contrary to prevailing Australian defence policy at the time , particularly in what historian Jeffrey Grey described as " the most British of the Australian services , the RAN " , and provoked pressure from the Royal Navy and UK shipbuilders , which had lobbied for purchase of their County-class destroyer . Burrell later declared that the superiority of the US weapons system was a key factor in his preference for the Adams design over the County class . On a mission overseas to discuss trends and acquisitions in January 1960 , he was rebuffed by Britain 's Chief of the Defence Staff , Admiral of the Fleet Lord Louis Mountbatten , who mistakenly thought him responsible for the imminent dissolution of the RAN 's Fleet Air Arm , but warmly welcomed by the US Chief of Naval Operations , Admiral Arleigh Burke . As it happened , Burrell would gain credit for maintaining the integrity of the FAA , and its fixed-wing component remained viable until the early 1980s . He was appointed a Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire in the Queen 's Birthday Honours , gazetted on 3 June 1960 . In June 1961 , he met with his opposite numbers in the Army and Air Force at a Chiefs of Staff Committee conference to discuss the necessity of Australia acquiring nuclear weapons ; the chiefs agreed that the probability such a capability would be required was remote but that it should remain an option under certain circumstances , a position the defence forces maintained during the ensuing decade .

Burrell made his farewell to the Australian Fleet aboard HMAS Melbourne at Jervis Bay on 8 February 1962 . He left the Navy on 23 February , and was succeeded as CNS by Vice Admiral Hastings Harrington . Burrell retired to Illogan Park , his property near Braidwood in the Southern Tablelands of New South Wales . His son Stuart followed him into the Royal Australian Naval College in 1963 . In retirement Burrell enjoyed horse racing both as a gambler and as the owner of several successful mounts . During the 1960s , he was also a member of the ACT Regional Selection Committee of the Winston Churchill Memorial Trusts . Burrell suffered a serious heart attack in 1980 , having been diagnosed with cardiac problems shortly after his retirement from the Navy . His wife Ada died in August the following year . In 1986 , Burrell published his memoirs as Mermaids Do Exist : The Autobiography of Vice-Admiral Sir Henry Burrell , reflecting on what he described as a " lucky " career , and offering his thoughts on maritime strategy . He died on 9 February 1988 in Woden Valley Hospital . Survived by his three children , Sir Henry Burrell was buried in Gungahlin , Australian Capital Territory , following a private funeral . The Burrell Cup doubles tennis trophy , established by the admiral in 1955 , completed its fifty-eighth year of competition in March 2013 .

Britain contributed to the Manhattan Project by helping initiate the effort to build the first atomic bombs in the United States during World War II , and helped carry it through to completion in August 1945 by supplying crucial expertise . Following the discovery of nuclear fission in uranium , scientists Rudolf Peierls and Otto Frisch at the University of Birmingham calculated , in March 1940 , that the critical mass of a metallic sphere of pure uranium-235 was as little as 1 to 10 kilograms ( 2.2 to 22.0 lb ) , and would explode with the power of thousands of tons of dynamite . The Frisch – Peierls memorandum prompted Britain to create its own atomic bomb project , known as Tube Alloys . Mark Oliphant , an Australian physicist working in Britain , was instrumental in making the British results known in the United States , and this encouraged the expansion of the American Manhattan Project . Initially the British project was larger and more advanced , but after the United States entered the war , the American project soon outstripped and dwarfed its British counterpart . The British government then decided to shelve its own nuclear ambitions , and participate in the American project .

In August 1943 , the prime minister , Winston Churchill , and President Franklin Roosevelt signed the Quebec Agreement , which provided for cooperation between the two countries . The Quebec Agreement established the Combined Policy Committee and the Combined Development Trust to coordinate the efforts of the United States , the United Kingdom and Canada . A British Mission led by Wallace Akers assisted in the development of gaseous diffusion technology in New York . Britain also produced the powdered nickel required by the gaseous diffusion process . Another mission , led by Oliphant who acted as deputy director at the Berkeley Radiation Laboratory , assisted with the electromagnetic separation process . As head of the British Mission to the Los Alamos Laboratory , James Chadwick led a multinational team of distinguished scientists that included Sir Geoffrey Taylor , James Tuck , Niels Bohr , Peierls , Frisch , and Klaus Fuchs , who was later revealed to be a Soviet atomic spy . Four members of the British Mission became group leaders at Los Alamos . William Penney observed the bombing of Nagasaki and participated in the Operation Crossroads nuclear tests in 1946 . Cooperation ended with the Atomic Energy Act of 1946 , known as the McMahon Act , and Ernest Titterton , the last British government employee , left Los Alamos on 12 April 1947 . Britain then proceeded with its own nuclear weapons programme , and became the third country to test an independently developed nuclear weapon in October 1952 .

The 1938 discovery of nuclear fission in uranium , by Lise Meitner and Otto Hahn , raised the possibility that an extremely powerful atomic bomb could be created . Refugees from Nazi Germany and other fascist countries were particularly alarmed by the notion of a German nuclear weapon project . In the United States , three of them , Leo Szilard , Eugene Wigner and Albert Einstein , were moved to write the Einstein – Szilárd letter to United States President Roosevelt warning of the danger . This led to the President creating the Briggs Advisory Committee on Uranium . In Britain , Nobel Prize in Physics laureates George Paget Thomson and William Lawrence Bragg were sufficiently concerned to take up the matter . Their concerns reached the Secretary of the Committee of Imperial Defence , Major General Hastings Ismay , who consulted with Sir Henry Tizard . Like many scientists , Tizard was sceptical of the likelihood of an atomic bomb being developed , reckoning the odds against success at 100,000 to 1 . Even at such long odds , the danger was sufficiently great to be taken seriously . Thomson , at Imperial College London , and Mark Oliphant , an Australian physicist at the University of Birmingham , were tasked with carrying out a series of experiments on uranium . By February 1940 , Thomson 's team had failed to create a chain reaction in natural uranium , and he had decided that it was not worth pursuing . But at Birmingham , Oliphant 's team had reached a strikingly different conclusion . Oliphant had delegated the task to two German refugee scientists , Rudolf Peierls and Otto Frisch , who could not work on the University 's radar project because they were enemy aliens and therefore lacked the necessary security clearance . They calculated the critical mass of a metallic sphere of pure uranium-235 , the only fissile isotope found in significant quantity in nature , and found that instead of tons , as everyone had assumed , as little as 1 to 10 kilograms ( 2.2 to 22.0 lb ) would suffice , which would explode with the power of thousands of tons of dynamite .

Oliphant took the Frisch – Peierls memorandum to Tizard , and the MAUD Committee was established to investigate further . It directed an intensive research effort , and in July 1941 , produced two comprehensive reports that reached the conclusion that an atomic bomb was not only technically feasible , but could be produced before the war ended , perhaps in as little as two years . The Committee unanimously recommended pursuing the development of an atomic bomb as a matter of urgency , although it recognised that the resources required might be beyond those available to Britain . A new directorate known as Tube Alloys was created to coordinate this effort . Sir John Anderson , the Lord President of the Council , became the minister responsible , and Wallace Akers from Imperial Chemical Industries ( ICI ) was appointed the director of Tube Alloys .

In July 1940 , Britain had offered to give the United States access to its scientific research , and the Tizard Mission 's John Cockcroft briefed American scientists on British developments . He discovered that the American project was smaller than the British , and not as far advanced . As part of the scientific exchange , the Maud Committee 's findings were conveyed to the United States . Oliphant , one of the Maud Committee 's members , flew to the United States in late August 1941 , and discovered that vital information had not reached key American physicists . He met the Uranium Committee , and visited Berkeley , California , where he spoke persuasively to Ernest O. Lawrence , who was sufficiently impressed to commence his own research into uranium at the Berkeley Radiation Laboratory . Lawrence in turn spoke to James B. Conant , Arthur H. Compton and George B. Pegram . Oliphant 's mission was a success ; key American physicists became aware of the potential power of an atomic bomb . Armed with British data , Vannevar Bush , the director of the Office of Scientific Research and Development ( OSRD ) , briefed Roosevelt and Vice President Henry A. Wallace in a meeting at the White House on 9 October 1941 .

The British and Americans exchanged nuclear information , but did not initially combine their efforts . British officials did not reply to an August 1941 offer by Bush and Conant to create a combined British and American project . In November 1941 , Frederick L. Hovde , the head of the London liaison office of OSRD , raised the issue of cooperation and exchange of information with Anderson and Lord Cherwell , who demurred , ostensibly over concerns about American security . Ironically , it was the British project that had already been penetrated by atomic spies for the Soviet Union . Yet the United Kingdom did not have the manpower or resources of the United States , and despite its early and promising start , Tube Alloys fell behind its American counterpart and was dwarfed by it . Britain was spending around £ 430,000 per year on research and development , and Metropolitan-Vickers was building gaseous diffusion units for uranium enrichment worth £ 150,000 ; but the Manhattan Project was spending £ 8,750,000 on research and development , and had let construction contracts worth £ 100,000,000 at the fixed wartime rate of four dollars to the pound . On 30 July 1942 , Anderson advised the prime minister , Winston Churchill , that : " We must face the fact that ... [ our ] pioneering work ... is a dwindling asset and that , unless we capitalise it quickly , we shall be outstripped . We now have a real contribution to make to a ' merger . ' Soon we shall have little or none . "

By then , the positions of the two countries had reversed from what they were in 1941 . The Americans had become suspicious that the British were seeking commercial advantages after the war , and Brigadier General Leslie R. Groves , Jr . , who took over command of the Manhattan Project on 23 September 1942 , wanted to tighten security with a policy of strict compartmentalisation similar to the one that the British had imposed on radar . American officials decided that the United States no longer needed outside help . The Secretary of War , Henry L. Stimson , felt that since the United States was doing " ninety percent of the work " on the bomb , it would be " better for us to go along for the present without sharing anything more than we could help " . In December 1942 , Roosevelt agreed to restricting the flow of information to what Britain could use during the war , even if doing so slowed down the American project . In retaliation , the British stopped sending information and scientists to America , and the Americans then stopped all information sharing . The British considered how they would produce a bomb without American help . A gaseous diffusion plant to produce 1 kilogram ( 2.2 lb ) of weapons-grade uranium per day was estimated to cost up to £ 3,000,000 in research and development , and anything up to £ 50,000,000 to build in wartime Britain . A nuclear reactor to produce 1 kilogram ( 2.2 lb ) of plutonium per day would have to be built in Canada . It would take up to five years to build and cost £ 5,000,000 . The project would also require facilities for producing the required heavy water for the reactor costing between £ 5,000,000 and £ 10,000,000 , and for producing uranium metal £ 1,500,000 . The project would need overwhelming priority , as it was estimated to require 20,000 workers , many of them highly skilled , 500,000 tons of steel , and 500,000 kW of electricity . Disruption to other wartime projects would be inevitable , and it was unlikely to be ready in time to affect the outcome of the war in Europe . The unanimous response was that before embarking on this , another effort should be made to obtain American cooperation .

By March 1943 Conant decided that British help would benefit some areas of the project . In particular , the Manhattan Project could benefit enough from assistance from James Chadwick , the discoverer of the neutron , and one or two other British scientists to warrant the risk of revealing weapon design secrets . Bush , Conant and Groves wanted Chadwick and Peierls to discuss bomb design with Robert Oppenheimer , and Kellogg still wanted British comments on the design of the gaseous diffusion plant . Churchill took up the matter with Roosevelt at the Washington Conference on 25 May 1943 , and Churchill thought that Roosevelt gave the reassurances he sought ; but there was no follow-up . Bush , Stimson and William Bundy met Churchill , Cherwell and Anderson at 10 Downing Street in London . None of them were aware that Roosevelt had already made his decision , writing to Bush on 20 July 1943 with instructions to " renew , in an inclusive manner , the full exchange with the British Government regarding Tube Alloys . " Stimson , who had just finished a series of arguments with the British about the need for an invasion of France , was reluctant to appear to disagree with them about everything , and spoke in conciliatory terms about the need for good post-war relations between the two countries . For his part , Churchill disavowed interest in the commercial applications of nuclear technology . The reason for British concern about the post-war cooperation , Cherwell explained , was not commercial concerns , but so that Britain would have nuclear weapons after the war . Anderson then drafted an agreement for full interchange , which Churchill re-worded " in more majestic language " . News arrived in London of Roosevelt 's decision on 27 July , and Anderson was dispatched to Washington with the draft agreement . Churchill and Roosevelt signed what became known as the Quebec Agreement at the Quebec Conference on 19 August 1943 .

The Quebec Agreement established the Combined Policy Committee to coordinate the efforts of the United States , United Kingdom and Canada . Stimson , Bush and Conant served as the American members of the Combined Policy Committee , Field Marshal Sir John Dill and Colonel J. J. Llewellin were the British members , and C. D. Howe was the Canadian member . Llewellin returned to the United Kingdom at the end of 1943 and was replaced on the committee by Sir Ronald Ian Campbell , who in turn was replaced by the British Ambassador to the United States , Lord Halifax , in early 1945 . Dill died in Washington , D.C. , in November 1944 and was replaced both as Chief of the British Joint Staff Mission and as a member of the Combined Policy Committee by Field Marshal Sir Henry Maitland Wilson . Even before the Quebec Agreement was signed , Akers had already cabled London with instructions that Chadwick , Peierls , Oliphant and Francis Simon should leave immediately for North America . They arrived on 19 August , the day it was signed , expecting to be able to talk to American scientists , but were unable to do so . Two weeks would pass before American officials learnt of the contents of the Quebec Agreement . Over the next two years , the Combined Policy Committee met only eight times .

The first occasion was on 8 September 1943 , on the afternoon after Stimson discovered that he was the chairman . The first meeting established a Technical Subcommittee chaired by Major General Wilhelm D. Styer . Because the Americans did not want Akers on the Technical Subcommittee due to his ICI background , Llewellin nominated Chadwick , whom he also wanted to be Head of the British Mission to the Manhattan Project . The other members were Richard C. Tolman , who was Groves 's scientific adviser , and C. J. Mackenzie , the president of the Canadian National Research Council . It was agreed that the Technical Committee could act without consulting the Combined Policy Committee whenever its decision was unanimous . The Technical Subcommittee held its first meeting on 10 September , but negotiations dragged on . The Combined Policy Committee ratified the proposals in December 1943 , by which time several British scientists had already commenced working on the Manhattan Project in the United States . There remained the issue of cooperation between the Manhattan 's Project 's Metallurgical Laboratory in Chicago and the Montreal Laboratory . At the Combined Policy Committee meeting on 17 February 1944 , Chadwick pressed for resources to build a nuclear reactor at what is now known as the Chalk River Laboratories . Britain and Canada agreed to pay the cost of this project , but the United States had to supply the heavy water . At that time , the United States controlled , by a supply contract , the only major production site on the continent , that of the Consolidated Mining and Smelting Company at Trail , British Columbia . Given that it was unlikely to have any impact on the war , Conant in particular was cool about the proposal , but heavy water reactors were of great interest . Groves was willing to support the effort and supply the heavy water required , but with certain restrictions . The Montreal Laboratory would have access to data from the research reactors at Argonne and the X-10 Graphite Reactor at Oak Ridge , but not from the production reactors at the Hanford Site ; nor would they be given any information about plutonium . This arrangement was formally approved by the Combined Policy Committee meeting on 19 September 1944 . The Canadian ZEEP ( Zero Energy Experimental Pile ) reactor went critical on 5 September 1945 .

Chadwick supported British involvement in the Manhattan Project to the fullest extent , abandoning any hopes of a British project during the war . With Churchill 's backing , he attempted to ensure that every request from Groves for assistance was honoured . While the pace of research was easing as the war entered its final phase , these scientists were still in great demand , and it fell to Anderson , Cherwell and Sir Edward Appleton , the Permanent Secretary of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research , which was responsible for Tube Alloys , to prise them away from the wartime projects in which they were invariably engaged . The September 1944 Hyde Park Agreement extended both commercial and military cooperation into the post-war period . Part of the Quebec Agreement specified that nuclear weapons would not be used against another country without mutual consent . In June 1945 , Wilson agreed that the use of nuclear weapons against Japan would be recorded as a decision of the Combined Policy Committee .

Tube Alloys made its greatest advances in gaseous diffusion technology , and Chadwick had originally hoped that the pilot plant at least would be built in Britain . Gaseous diffusion technology was devised by Simon and three expatriates , Nicholas Kurti from Hungary , Heinrich Kuhn from Germany , and Henry Arms from the United States , at the Clarendon Laboratory in 1940 . The prototype gaseous diffusion equipment , two two-stage models and two ten-stage models , was manufactured by Metropolitan-Vickers at a cost of £ 150,000 for the four units . Two single-stage machines were later added . Delays in delivery meant that experiments with the single-stage machine did not commence until June 1943 , and with the two-stage machine until August 1943 . The two ten-stage machines were delivered in August and November 1943 , but by this time the research programme they had been built for had been overtaken by events . The Quebec Agreement allowed Simon and Peierls to meet with representatives of Kellex , who were designing and building K-25 , the American gaseous diffusion plant , Union Carbide and Carbon , who would operate it , and Harold Urey 's Substitute Alloy Materials ( SAM ) Laboratories at Columbia University , the Manhattan Project 's centre tasked with research and development of the process . The year 's loss of cooperation cost the Manhattan Project dearly . The corporations were committed to tight schedules , and the engineers were unable to incorporate British proposals that would involve major changes . Nor would it be possible to build a second plant . Nonetheless , the Americans were still eager for British assistance , and Groves asked for a British mission to be sent to assist the gaseous diffusion project . In the meantime , Simon and Peierls were attached to Kellex .

The British mission consisting of Akers and fifteen British experts arrived in December 1943 . This was a critical time . Severe problems had been encountered with the Norris-Adler barrier . Nickel powder and electro-deposited nickel mesh diffusion barriers were pioneered by American chemist Edward Adler and British interior decorator Edward Norris at the SAM Laboratories . A decision had to be made whether to persevere with it or switch to a powdered nickel barrier based upon British technology that had been developed by Kellex . Up to this point , both were under development . The SAM Laboratory had 700 people working on gaseous diffusion and Kellex had about 900 . The British experts conducted a thorough review , and agreed that the Kellex barrier was superior , but felt that it would be unlikely to be ready in time . Kellex 's technical director , Percival C. Keith , disagreed , arguing that his company could get it ready and produce it more quickly than the Norris-Adler barrier . Groves listened to the British experts before he formally adopted the Kellex barrier on 5 January 1944 . The United States Army assumed responsibility for procuring sufficient quantities of the right type of powdered nickel . In this , the British were able to help . The only company that manufactured it was the Mond Nickel Company at Clydach in Wales . By the end of June 1945 , it had supplied the Manhattan Project with 5,000 long tons ( 5,100 t ) of nickel powder , paid for by the British government and supplied to the United States under Reverse Lend-Lease .

The Americans planned to have the K-25 plant in full production by June or July 1945 . Having taken two years to get the prototype stages working , the British experts regarded this as incredibly optimistic , and felt that , barring a miracle , it would be unlikely to reach that point before the end of 1946 . This opinion offended their American counterparts and dampened the enthusiasm for cooperation , and the British mission returned to the United Kingdom in January 1944 . Armed with the British Mission 's report , Chadwick and Oliphant were able to persuade Groves to reduce K-25 's enrichment target ; the output of K-25 would be enriched to weapons grade by being fed into the electromagnetic plant . Despite the British Mission 's pessimistic forecasts , K-25 was producing enriched uranium in June 1945 . After the rest of the mission departed , Peierls , Kurti and Fuchs remained in New York , where they worked with Kellex . They were joined there by Tony Skyrme and Frank Kearton , who arrived in March 1944 . Kurti returned to England in April 1944 and Kearton in September . Peierls moved on to the Los Alamos Laboratory in February 1944 ; Skyrme followed in July , and Fuchs in August .

On 26 May 1943 , Oliphant wrote to Appleton to say that he had been considering the problem of electromagnetic isotope separation , and believed that he had devised a better method than Lawrence 's , one which would result in a five to tenfold improvement in efficiency , and make it more practical to use the process in Britain . His proposal was reviewed by Akers , Chadwick , Peierls and Simon , who agreed that it was sound . While the majority of scientific opinion in Britain favoured the gaseous diffusion method , there was still a possibility that electromagnetic separation might be useful as a final stage in the enrichment process , taking uranium that had already been enriched to 50 per cent by the gaseous process , and enriching it to pure uranium-235 . Accordingly , Oliphant was released from the radar project to work on Tube Alloys , conducting experiments on his method at the University of Birmingham . Oliphant met Groves and Oppenheimer in Washington , D.C. , on 18 September 1943 , and they attempted to persuade him to join the Los Alamos Laboratory , but Oliphant felt that he would be of more use assisting Lawrence on the electromagnetic project . Accordingly , the Technical Subcommittee directed that Oliphant and six assistants would go to Berkeley , and later move on to Los Alamos . Oliphant found that he and Lawrence had quite different designs , and that the American one was frozen , but Lawrence , who had expressed a desire for Oliphant to join him on the electromagnetic project as early as 1942 , was eager for Oliphant 's assistance . Oliphant secured the services of a fellow Australian physicist , Harrie Massey , who had been working for the Admiralty on magnetic mines , along with James Stayers and Stanley Duke , who had worked with him on the cavity magnetron . This initial group set out for Berkeley in a B-24 Liberator bomber in November 1943 . Oliphant found that Berkeley had shortages of key skills , particularly physicists , chemists and engineers . He prevailed on Sir David Rivett , the head of the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research in Australia , to release Eric Burhop to work on the project . His requests for personnel were met , and the British mission at Berkeley grew in number to 35 , two of whom , Robin Williams and George Page , were New Zealanders .

Members of the British mission occupied several key positions in the electromagnetic project . Oliphant became Lawrence 's de facto deputy , and was in charge of the Berkeley Radiation Laboratory when Lawrence was absent . His enthusiasm for the electromagnetic project was rivalled only by Lawrence 's , and his involvement went beyond scientific problems , extending to policy questions such as whether to expand the electromagnetic plant , although in this he was unsuccessful . The British chemists made important contributions , particularly Harry Emeléus and Philip Baxter , a chemist who had been research manager at ICI , was sent to the Manhattan Project 's Clinton Engineering Works at Oak Ridge , Tennessee , in 1944 in response to a request for assistance with uranium chemistry , and became personal assistant to the general manager . His status as an ICI employee was of no concern to Groves . The British mission was given complete access to the electromagnetic project , both in Berkeley and at the Y-12 electromagnetic separation plant in Oak Ridge . While some of the British mission remained at Berkeley or Oak Ridge only for a few weeks , most stayed until the end of the war . Oliphant returned to Britain in March 1945 , and was replaced as head of the British mission in Berkeley by Massey .

When cooperation resumed in September 1943 , Groves and Oppenheimer revealed the existence of the Los Alamos Laboratory to Chadwick , Peierls and Oliphant . Oppenheimer wanted all three to proceed to Los Alamos as soon as possible , but it was decided that Oliphant would go to Berkeley to work on the electromagnetic process and Peierls would go to New York to work on the gaseous diffusion process . The task then fell to Chadwick . The original idea , favoured by Groves , was that the British scientists would work as a group under Chadwick , who would farm out work to them . This was soon discarded in favour of having the British Mission fully integrated into the laboratory . They worked in most of its divisions , only being excluded from plutonium chemistry and metallurgy . First to arrive was Otto Frisch and Ernest Titterton and his wife Peggy , who reached Los Alamos on 13 December 1943 . At Los Alamos Frisch continued his work on critical mass studies , for which Titterton developed electronic circuitry for high voltage generators , X-ray generators , timers and firing circuits . Peggy Titterton , a trained physics and metallurgy laboratory assistant , was one of the few women working at Los Alamos in a technical role . Chadwick arrived on 12 January 1944 , but only stayed for a few months before returning to Washington , D.C.

When Oppenheimer appointed Hans Bethe as the head of the laboratory 's prestigious Theoretical ( T ) Division , he offended Edward Teller , who was given his own group , tasked with investigating Teller 's " Super " bomb , and eventually assigned to Enrico Fermi 's F Division . Oppenheimer then wrote to Groves requesting that Peierls be sent to take Teller 's place in T Division . Peierls arrived from New York on 8 February 1944 , and subsequently succeeded Chadwick as head of the British Mission at Los Alamos . Egon Bretscher worked in Teller 's Super group , as did Anthony French , who later recalled that " never at any time did I have anything to do with the fission bomb once I went to Los Alamos . " Four members of the British Mission became group leaders : Bretscher ( Super Experimentation ) , Frisch ( Critical Assemblies and Nuclear Specifications ) , Peierls ( Implosion Hydrodynamics ) and George Placzek ( Composite Weapon ) . Niels Bohr and his son Aage , a physicist who acted as his father 's assistant , arrived on 30 December on the first of several visits as a consultant . Bohr and his family had escaped from occupied Denmark to Sweden . A De Havilland Mosquito bomber brought him to England where he joined Tube Alloys . In America , he was able to visit Oak Ridge and Los Alamos , where he found many of his former students . Bohr acted as a critic , a facilitator and a role model for younger scientists . He arrived at a critical time , and several nuclear fission studies and experiments were conducted at his instigation . He played an important role in the development of the uranium tamper , and in the design and adoption of the modulated neutron initiator . His presence boosted morale , and helped improve the administration of the laboratory to strengthen ties with the Army .

Nuclear physicists knew about fission , but not the hydrodynamics of conventional explosions . As a result , there were two additions to the team that made significant contributions in this area of physics . First was James Tuck whose field of expertise was in shaped charges used in anti tank weapons for armour piercing . In terms of the plutonium bomb the scientists at Los Alamos were trying to wrestle with the idea of the implosion issue . Tuck was sent to Los Alamos in April 1944 and used a radical concept of explosive lensing which was then put into place . Tuck also designed the Urchin initiator for the bomb working closely with Seth Neddermeyer . This work was crucial to the success of the plutonium atomic bomb : Italian-American scientist Bruno Rossi later stated that without Tuck 's work the plutonium bomb could not have exploded in August 1945 . The other was Sir Geoffrey Taylor , an important consultant who arrived a month later to also work on the issue . Taylor 's presence was desired so much at Los Alamos , Chadwick informed London , " that anything short of kidnapping would be justified " . He was sent , and provided crucial insights into the Rayleigh – Taylor instability . The acute need for scientists with an understanding of explosives also led Chadwick to obtain the release of William Penney from the Admiralty , and William Marley from the Road Research Laboratory . Peierls and Fuchs worked on the hydrodynamics of the explosive lenses . Bethe considered Fuchs " one of the most valuable men in my division " and " one of the best theoretical physicists we had . "

William Penney worked on means to assess the effects of a nuclear explosion , and wrote a paper on what height the bombs should be detonated at for maximum effect in attacks on Germany and Japan . He served as a member of the target committee established by Groves to select Japanese cities for atomic bombing , and on Tinian with Project Alberta as a special consultant . Along with Group Captain Leonard Cheshire , sent by Wilson as a British representative , he watched the bombing of Nagasaki from the observation plane Big Stink . He also formed part of the Manhattan Project 's post-war scientific mission to Hiroshima and Nagasaki that assessed the extent of the damage caused by the bombs . For the work of the theoretical division of the Los Alamos Project during the war the collaboration of the British Mission was absolutely essential ... It is very difficult to say what would have happened under different conditions . However , at least , the work of the Theoretical Division would have been very much more difficult and very much less effective without the members of the British Mission , and it is not unlikely that our final weapon would have been considerably less efficient in this case .

From December 1945 on , members of the British Mission began returning home . Peierls left in January 1946 . At the request of Norris Bradbury , who had replaced Oppenheimer as laboratory director , Fuchs remained until 15 June 1946 . Eight British scientists , three from Los Alamos and five from the United Kingdom , participated in Operation Crossroads , the nuclear tests at Bikini Atoll in the Pacific . With the Atomic Energy Act of 1946 , known as the McMahon Act , all British government employees had to leave . Titterton was granted a special dispensation , and remained until 12 April 1947 . The British Mission ended when he departed . Carson Mark remained , as he was a Canadian government employee . He remained at Los Alamos , becoming head of its Theoretical Division in 1947 , a position he held until he retired in 1973 . He became a United States citizen in the 1950s .

The Combined Development Trust was proposed by the Combined Policy Committee on 17 February 1944 . The declaration of trust was signed by Churchill and Roosevelt on 13 June 1944 . The trustees were approved at the Combined Policy Committee meeting on 19 September 1944 . The United States trustees were Groves , who was elected chairman , geologist Charles K. Leith , and George L. Harrison . The British trustees were Sir Charles Hambro , the head of the British Raw Materials Mission in Washington , D.C. , and Frank Lee from HM Treasury . Canada was represented by George C. Bateman , a deputy minister and member of the Canadian Combined Resources Board . Each of the three governments had its own raw materials resources staff , and the Combined Development Trust was a means of coordinating their efforts . The role of the Combined Development Trust was to purchase or control the mineral resources needed by the Manhattan Project , and to avoid competition between the three . Britain had little need for uranium ores while the war continued , but was anxious to secure adequate supplies for its own nuclear weapons programme when it ended . Half the funding was to come from the United States and half from Britain and Canada . The initial $ 12.5 million was transferred to Groves from an account in the office of the United States Secretary of the Treasury Henry Morgenthau , Jr . , that was not subject to the usual accounting auditing and oversight . By the time Groves resigned from the Trust at the end of 1947 , he had deposited $ 37.5 million into an account he controlled at the Bankers Trust . Payments were then made from this account .

Britain took the lead in securing control of the world 's major source of ore in the Belgian Congo . They also negotiated deals with Swedish companies to acquire ore from there . Oliphant had approached the Australian High Commissioner in London , Sir Stanley Bruce , in August 1943 about uranium supplies from Australia , and Anderson made a direct request to the prime minister of Australia , John Curtin , during the latter 's visit to Britain in May 1944 to initiate mineral exploration in Australia in places where uranium deposits were believed to exist . As well as uranium , the Combined Development Trust secured supplies of thorium from Brazil , Netherlands East Indies , Sweden and Portugal . At the time uranium was believed to be a rare mineral , and the more abundant thorium was seen as a possible alternative , as it could be irradiated to produce uranium-233 , another isotope of uranium suitable for making atomic bombs .

In December 1943 , Groves sent Robert R. Furman to Britain to establish a London Liaison Office for the Manhattan Project to coordinate scientific intelligence with the British government . Groves selected the head of the Manhattan District 's security activities , Captain Horace K. Calvert , to head the London Liaison Office with the title of Assistant Military Attaché . He worked in cooperation with Lieutenant Commander Eric Welsh , the head of the Norwegian Section of MI6 , and Michael Perrin from Tube Alloys . An Anglo-American intelligence committee was formed by Groves and Anderson in November 1944 , consisting of Perrin , Welsh , Calvert , Furman and R. V. Jones . At the urging of Groves and Furman , the Alsos Mission was created on 4 April 1944 under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Boris Pash to conduct intelligence in the field relating to the German nuclear energy project . The more experienced British considered creating a rival mission , but in the end agreed to participate in the Alsos Mission as a junior partner . In June 1945 , Welsh reported that the German nuclear physicists captured by the Alsos Mission were in danger of being executed by the Americans , and Jones arranged for them to be moved to Farm Hall , a country house in Huntingdonshire used for training by MI6 and the Special Operations Executive ( SOE ) . The house was bugged , and the conversations of the scientists were recorded .

Groves appreciated the early British atomic research and the British scientists ' contributions to the Manhattan Project , but stated that the United States would have succeeded without them . He considered British assistance " helpful but not vital " , but at the same time , acknowledged that " without active and continuing British interest , there probably would have been no atomic bomb to drop on Hiroshima . " He considered Britain 's key contributions to have been encouragement and support at the intergovernmental level , scientific aid , the production of powdered nickel in Wales , and preliminary studies and laboratory work . Cooperation did not long survive the war . Roosevelt died on 12 April 1945 , and the Hyde Park Agreement was not binding on subsequent administrations . In fact , it was physically lost . When Wilson raised the matter in a Combined Policy Committee meeting in June , the American copy could not be found . The British sent Stimson a photocopy on 18 July 1945 . Even then , Groves questioned the document 's authenticity until the American copy was located years later in the papers of Vice Admiral Wilson Brown , Jr . , Roosevelt 's naval aide , apparently misfiled by someone unaware of what Tube Alloys was , who thought it had something to do with naval guns .

Harry S. Truman , who had succeeded Roosevelt on the latter 's death , Clement Attlee , who had replaced Churchill as prime minister in July 1945 , Anderson and United States Secretary of State James F. Byrnes conferred while on a boat cruise on the Potomac River , and agreed to revise the Quebec Agreement . On 15 November 1945 , Groves , Robert P. Patterson and George L. Harrison met a British delegation consisting of Anderson , Wilson , Malcolm MacDonald , Roger Makins and Denis Rickett to draw up a communiqué . They agreed to retain the Combined Policy Committee and the Combined Development Trust . The Quebec Agreement 's requirement for " mutual consent " before using nuclear weapons was replaced with one for " prior consultation " , and there was to be " full and effective cooperation in the field of atomic energy " , but in the longer Memorandum of Intention , signed by Groves and Anderson , this was only " in the field of basic scientific research " . Patterson took the communiqué to the White House , where Truman and Attlee signed it on 16 November 1945 . The next meeting of the Combined Policy Committee on 15 April 1946 produced no accord on collaboration , and resulted in an exchange of cables between Truman and Attlee . Truman cabled on 20 April that he did not see the communiqué he had signed as obligating the United States to assist Britain in designing , constructing and operating an atomic energy plant . Attlee 's response on 6 June 1946 " did not mince words nor conceal his displeasure behind the nuances of diplomatic language . " At issue was not just technical cooperation , which was fast disappearing , but the allocation of uranium ore . During the war this was of little concern , as Britain had not needed any ore , so all the production of the Congo mines and all the ore seized by the Alsos Mission had gone to the United States , but now it was also required by the British atomic project . Chadwick and Groves reached an agreement by which ore would be shared equally .

The McMahon Act , which was signed by Truman on 1 August 1946 , and went into effect at midnight on 1 January 1947 , ended technical cooperation . Its control of " restricted data " prevented the United States ' allies from receiving any information . The remaining scientists were denied access to papers that they had written just days before . The terms of the Quebec Agreement remained secret , but senior members of Congress were horrified when they discovered that it gave the British a veto over the use of nuclear weapons . The McMahon Act fuelled resentment from British scientists and officials alike , and led directly to the British decision in January 1947 to develop its own nuclear weapons . In January 1948 , Bush , James Fisk , Cockcroft and Mackenzie concluded an agreement known as the modus vivendi , that allowed for limited sharing of technical information between the United States , Britain and Canada . As the Cold War set in , enthusiasm in the United States for an alliance with Britain cooled as well . A September 1949 poll found that 72 per cent of Americans agreed that the United States should not " share our atomic energy secrets with England " . The reputation of the British Mission to Los Alamos was tarnished by the 1950 revelation that Fuchs was a Soviet atomic spy . It damaged the relationship between the United States and Britain , and provided ammunition for Congressional opponents of cooperation like Senator Bourke B. Hickenlooper .

John Winston Ono Lennon , MBE ( born John Winston Lennon ; 9 October 1940 – 8 December 1980 ) was an English singer and songwriter who co-founded the Beatles , the most commercially successful band in the history of popular music . With fellow member Paul McCartney , he formed a lucrative songwriting partnership . Born and raised in Liverpool , Lennon became involved in the skiffle craze as a teenager ; his first band , the Quarrymen , evolved into the Beatles in 1960 . When the group disbanded in 1970 , Lennon embarked on a solo career that produced the albums John Lennon / Plastic Ono Band and Imagine , and songs such as " Give Peace a Chance " , " Working Class Hero " , and " Imagine " . After his marriage to Yoko Ono in 1969 , he changed his name to John Ono Lennon . Lennon disengaged himself from the music business in 1975 to raise his infant son Sean , but re-emerged with Ono in 1980 with the new album Double Fantasy . He was murdered three weeks after its release . Lennon revealed a rebellious nature and acerbic wit in his music , writing , drawings , on film and in interviews . Controversial through his political and peace activism , he moved to Manhattan in 1971 , where his criticism of the Vietnam War resulted in a lengthy attempt by Richard Nixon 's administration to deport him , while some of his songs were adopted as anthems by the anti-war movement and the larger counterculture .

As of 2012 , Lennon 's solo album sales in the United States exceeded 14 million and , as writer , co-writer , or performer , he is responsible for 25 number-one singles on the US Hot 100 chart . In 2002 , a BBC poll on the 100 Greatest Britons voted him eighth and , in 2008 , Rolling Stone ranked him the fifth-greatest singer of all time . He was posthumously inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame in 1987 , and into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame twice , as a member of the Beatles in 1988 and as a solo artist in 1994 .

Lennon was born in war-time England , on 9 October 1940 at Liverpool Maternity Hospital , to Julia ( née Stanley ) and Alfred Lennon , a merchant seaman of Irish descent , who was away at the time of his son 's birth . His parents named him John Winston Lennon after his paternal grandfather , John " Jack " Lennon , and then-Prime Minister Winston Churchill . His father was often away from home but sent regular pay cheques to 9 Newcastle Road , Liverpool , where Lennon lived with his mother ; the cheques stopped when he went absent without leave in February 1944 . When he eventually came home six months later , he offered to look after the family , but Julia — by then pregnant with another man 's child — rejected the idea . After her sister , Mimi Smith , twice complained to Liverpool 's Social Services , Julia handed the care of Lennon over to her . In July 1946 Lennon 's father visited Smith and took his son to Blackpool , secretly intending to emigrate to New Zealand with him . Julia followed them — with her partner at the time , ' Bobby ' Dykins — and after a heated argument his father forced the five-year-old to choose between them . Lennon twice chose his father , but as his mother walked away , he began to cry and followed her . It would be 20 years before he had contact with his father again .

Throughout the rest of his childhood and adolescence he lived with his aunt and uncle , Mimi and George Smith , who had no children of their own , at Mendips , 251 Menlove Avenue , Woolton . His aunt purchased volumes of short stories for him , and his uncle , a dairyman at his family 's farm , bought him a mouth organ and engaged him in solving crossword puzzles . Julia visited Mendips on a regular basis , and when John was 11 years old he often visited her at 1 Blomfield Road , Liverpool , where she played him Elvis Presley records , taught him the banjo , and showed him how to play " Ain 't That a Shame " by Fats Domino . In September 1980 , Lennon commented about his family and his rebellious nature : Part of me would like to be accepted by all facets of society and not be this loudmouthed lunatic poet / musician . But I cannot be what I am not ... I was the one who all the other boys ' parents — including Paul 's father — would say , ' Keep away from him ' ... The parents instinctively recognised I was a troublemaker , meaning I did not conform and I would influence their children , which I did . I did my best to disrupt every friend 's home ... Partly out of envy that I didn 't have this so-called home ... but I did ... There were five women that were my family . Five strong , intelligent , beautiful women , five sisters . One happened to be my mother . [ She ] just couldn 't deal with life . She was the youngest and she had a husband who ran away to sea and the war was on and she couldn 't cope with me , and I ended up living with her elder sister . Now those women were fantastic ... And that was my first feminist education ... I would infiltrate the other boys minds . I could say , " Parents are not gods because I don 't live with mine and , therefore , I know.'

He regularly visited his cousin , Stanley Parkes , who lived in Fleetwood . Seven years Lennon 's senior , Parkes took him on trips and to local cinemas . During the school holidays , Parkes often visited Lennon with Leila Harvey , another cousin , often travelling to Blackpool two or three times a week to watch shows . They would visit the Blackpool Tower Circus and see artists such as Dickie Valentine , Arthur Askey , Max Bygraves and Joe Loss , with Parkes recalling that Lennon particularly liked George Formby . After Parkes 's family moved to Scotland , the three cousins often spent their school holidays together there . Parkes recalled , " John , cousin Leila and I were very close . From Edinburgh we would drive up to the family croft at Durness , which was from about the time John was nine years old until he was about 16 . " He was 14 years old when his uncle George died of a liver haemorrhage on 5 June 1955 ( aged 52 ) . Lennon was raised as an Anglican and attended Dovedale Primary School . From September 1952 to 1957 , after passing his Eleven-Plus exam , he attended Quarry Bank High School in Liverpool , and was described by Harvey at the time as , " A happy-go-lucky , good-humoured , easy going , lively lad . " He often drew comical cartoons which appeared in his own self-made school magazine called The Daily Howl , but despite his artistic talent , his school reports were damning : " Certainly on the road to failure ... hopeless ... rather a clown in class ... wasting other pupils ' time . "

His mother bought him his first guitar in 1956 , an inexpensive Gallotone Champion acoustic for which she " lent " her son five pounds and ten shillings on the condition that the guitar be delivered to her own house , and not Mimi 's , knowing well that her sister was not supportive of her son 's musical aspirations . As Mimi was sceptical of his claim that he would be famous one day , she hoped he would grow bored with music , often telling him , " The guitar 's all very well , John , but you 'll never make a living out of it " . On 15 July 1958 , when Lennon was 17 years old , his mother , walking home after visiting the Smiths ' house , was struck by a car and killed . Lennon failed all his GCE O-level examinations , and was accepted into the Liverpool College of Art only after his aunt and headmaster intervened . Once at the college , he started wearing Teddy Boy clothes and acquired a reputation for disrupting classes and ridiculing teachers . As a result , he was excluded from the painting class , then the graphic arts course , and was threatened with expulsion for his behaviour , which included sitting on a nude model 's lap during a life drawing class . He failed an annual exam , despite help from fellow student and future wife Cynthia Powell , and was " thrown out of the college before his final year " .

At age 15 , Lennon formed the skiffle group , the Quarrymen . Named after Quarry Bank High School , the group was established by him in September 1956 . By the summer of 1957 , the Quarrymen played a " spirited set of songs " made up of half skiffle and half rock and roll . Lennon first met Paul McCartney at the Quarrymen 's second performance , held in Woolton on 6 July at the St. Peter 's Church garden fête , after which he asked McCartney to join the band . McCartney says that Aunt Mimi " was very aware that John 's friends were lower class " , and would often patronise him when he arrived to visit Lennon . According to Paul 's brother Mike , McCartney 's father was also disapproving , declaring Lennon would get his son " into trouble " , although he later allowed the fledgling band to rehearse in the McCartneys ' front room at 20 Forthlin Road . During this time , the 18-year-old Lennon wrote his first song , " Hello Little Girl " , a UK top 10 hit for The Fourmost nearly five years later .

McCartney suggested his friend George Harrison as the lead guitarist . Lennon thought Harrison ( then 14 years old ) was too young . McCartney engineered an audition on the upper deck of a Liverpool bus , where Harrison played " Raunchy " for Lennon and was asked to join . Stuart Sutcliffe , Lennon 's friend from art school , later joined as bassist . Lennon , McCartney , Harrison and Sutcliffe became " The Beatles " in early 1960 . In August that year , the Beatles engaged for a 48-night residency in Hamburg , Germany , and desperately in need of a drummer , asked Pete Best to join them . Lennon was now 19 , and his aunt , horrified when he told her about the trip , pleaded with him to continue his art studies instead . After the first Hamburg residency , the band accepted another in April 1961 , and a third in April 1962 . Like the other band members , Lennon was introduced to Preludin while in Hamburg , and regularly took the drug , as well as amphetamines , as a stimulant during their long , overnight performances . Brian Epstein , the Beatles ' manager from 1962 , had no prior experience of artist management , but had a strong influence on their early dress code and attitude on stage . Lennon initially resisted his attempts to encourage the band to present a professional appearance , but eventually complied , saying , " I 'll wear a bloody balloon if somebody 's going to pay me " . McCartney took over on bass after Sutcliffe decided to stay in Hamburg , and drummer Ringo Starr replaced Best , completing the four-piece line-up that would endure until the group 's break-up in 1970 . The band 's first single , " Love Me Do " , was released in October 1962 and reached No. 17 on the British charts . They recorded their debut album , Please Please Me , in under 10 hours on 11 February 1963 , a day when Lennon was suffering the effects of a cold , which is evident in the vocal on the last song to be recorded that day , " Twist and Shout " . The Lennon – McCartney songwriting partnership yielded eight of its fourteen tracks . With few exceptions — one being the album title itself — Lennon had yet to bring his love of wordplay to bear on his song lyrics , saying : " We were just writing songs ... pop songs with no more thought of them than that — to create a sound . And the words were almost irrelevant " . In a 1987 interview , McCartney said that the other Beatles idolised John : " He was like our own little Elvis ... We all looked up to John . He was older and he was very much the leader ; he was the quickest wit and the smartest . "

The Beatles achieved mainstream success in the UK during the beginning of 1963 . Lennon was on tour when his first son , Julian , was born in April . During their Royal Variety Show performance , attended by the Queen Mother and other British royalty , Lennon poked fun at his audience : " For our next song , I 'd like to ask for your help . For the people in the cheaper seats , clap your hands ... and the rest of you , if you 'll just rattle your jewellery . " After a year of Beatlemania in the UK , the group 's historic February 1964 US debut appearance on The Ed Sullivan Show marked their breakthrough to international stardom . A two-year period of constant touring , moviemaking , and songwriting followed , during which Lennon wrote two books , In His Own Write and A Spaniard in the Works . The Beatles received recognition from the British Establishment when they were appointed Members of the Order of the British Empire ( MBE ) in the 1965 Queen 's Birthday Honours . Lennon grew concerned that fans attending Beatles concerts were unable to hear the music above the screaming of fans , and that the band 's musicianship was beginning to suffer as a result . Lennon 's " Help ! " expressed his own feelings in 1965 : " I meant it ... It was me singing ' help ' " . He had put on weight ( he would later refer to this as his " Fat Elvis " period ) , and felt he was subconsciously seeking change . In March that year he was unknowingly introduced to LSD when a dentist , hosting a dinner party attended by Lennon , Harrison and their wives , spiked the guests ' coffee with the drug . When they wanted to leave , their host revealed what they had taken , and strongly advised them not to leave the house because of the likely effects . Later , in an elevator at a nightclub , they all believed it was on fire : " We were all screaming ... hot and hysterical . " In March 1966 , during an interview with Evening Standard reporter Maureen Cleave , Lennon remarked , " Christianity will go . It will vanish and shrink ... We 're more popular than Jesus now — I don 't know which will go first , rock and roll or Christianity . " The comment went virtually unnoticed in England but caused great offence in the US when quoted by a magazine there five months later . The furore that followed — burning of Beatles records , Ku Klux Klan activity and threats against Lennon — contributed to the band 's decision to stop touring .

Deprived of the routine of live performances after their final commercial concert on 29 August 1966 , Lennon felt lost and considered leaving the band . Since his involuntary introduction to LSD , he had made increasing use of the drug , and was almost constantly under its influence for much of 1967 . According to biographer Ian MacDonald , Lennon 's continuous experience with LSD during the year brought him " close to erasing his identity " . 1967 saw the release of " Strawberry Fields Forever " , hailed by Time magazine for its " astonishing inventiveness " , and the group 's landmark album Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band , which revealed Lennon 's lyrics contrasting strongly with the simple love songs of the Lennon – McCartney 's early years . In August , after having been introduced to the Maharishi Mahesh Yogi , the group attended a weekend of personal instruction at his Transcendental Meditation seminar in Bangor , Wales , and were informed of Epstein 's death during the seminar . " I knew we were in trouble then " , Lennon said later . " I didn 't have any misconceptions about our ability to do anything other than play music , and I was scared " . Led primarily by Harrison and Lennon 's interest in Eastern religion , the Beatles later travelled to Maharishi 's ashram in India for further guidance . While there , they composed most of the songs for The Beatles and Abbey Road .

The anti-war , black comedy How I Won the War , featuring Lennon 's only appearance in a non – Beatles full-length film , was shown in cinemas in October 1967 . McCartney organised the group 's first post-Epstein project , the self-written , -produced and -directed television film Magical Mystery Tour , released in December that year . While the film itself proved to be their first critical flop , its soundtrack release , featuring Lennon 's acclaimed , Lewis Carroll-inspired " I Am the Walrus " , was a success . With Epstein gone , the band members became increasingly involved in business activities , and in February 1968 they formed Apple Corps , a multimedia corporation composed of Apple Records and several other subsidiary companies . Lennon described the venture as an attempt to achieve , " artistic freedom within a business structure " , but his increased drug experimentation and growing preoccupation with Yoko Ono , and McCartney 's own marriage plans , left Apple in need of professional management . Lennon asked Lord Beeching to take on the role , but he declined , advising Lennon to go back to making records . Lennon approached Allen Klein , who had managed The Rolling Stones and other bands during the British Invasion . Klein was appointed as Apple 's chief executive by Lennon , Harrison and Starr , but McCartney never signed the management contract .

At the end of 1968 , Lennon was featured in the film The Rolling Stones Rock and Roll Circus ( not released until 1996 ) in the role of a Dirty Mac band member . The supergroup , composed of Lennon , Eric Clapton , Keith Richards and Mitch Mitchell , also backed a vocal performance by Ono in the film . Lennon and Ono were married on 20 March 1969 , and soon released a series of 14 lithographs called " Bag One " depicting scenes from their honeymoon , eight of which were deemed indecent and most of which were banned and confiscated . Lennon 's creative focus continued to move beyond the Beatles and between 1968 and 1969 he and Ono recorded three albums of experimental music together : Unfinished Music No.1 : Two Virgins ( known more for its cover than for its music ) , Unfinished Music No.2 : Life with the Lions and Wedding Album . In 1969 , they formed the Plastic Ono Band , releasing Live Peace in Toronto 1969 . Between 1969 and 1970 , Lennon released the singles " Give Peace a Chance " ( widely adopted as an anti-Vietnam-War anthem in 1969 ) , " Cold Turkey " ( documenting his withdrawal symptoms after he became addicted to heroin ) and " Instant Karma ! " In protest at Britain 's involvement in the Nigerian Civil War , its support of America in the Vietnam war and ( perhaps jokingly ) against " Cold Turkey " slipping down the charts , Lennon returned his MBE medal to the Queen , though this had no effect on his MBE status , which could not be renounced .

Lennon left the Beatles in September 1969 , and agreed not to inform the media while the group renegotiated their recording contract , but he was outraged that McCartney publicised his own departure on releasing his debut solo album in April 1970 . Lennon 's reaction was , " Jesus Christ ! He gets all the credit for it ! " He later wrote , " I started the band . I disbanded it . It 's as simple as that . " In later interviews with Rolling Stone magazine , he revealed his bitterness towards McCartney , saying , " I was a fool not to do what Paul did , which was use it to sell a record . " He spoke too of the hostility he perceived the other members had towards Ono , and of how he , Harrison , and Starr " got fed up with being sidemen for Paul ... After Brian Epstein died we collapsed . Paul took over and supposedly led us . But what is leading us when we went round in circles ? "

In 1970 , Lennon and Ono went through primal therapy with Arthur Janov in Los Angeles , California . Designed to release emotional pain from early childhood , the therapy entailed two half-days a week with Janov for four months ; he had wanted to treat the couple for longer , but they felt no need to continue and returned to London . Lennon 's emotional debut solo album , John Lennon / Plastic Ono Band ( 1970 ) , was received with high praise . Critic Greil Marcus remarked , " John 's singing in the last verse of ' God ' may be the finest in all of rock . " The album featured the songs " Mother " , in which Lennon confronted his feelings of childhood rejection , and the Dylanesque " Working Class Hero " , a bitter attack against the bourgeois social system which , due to the lyric " you 're still fucking peasants " , fell foul of broadcasters . The same year , Tariq Ali 's revolutionary political views , expressed when he interviewed Lennon , inspired the singer to write " Power to the People " . Lennon also became involved with Ali during a protest against Oz magazine 's prosecution for alleged obscenity . Lennon denounced the proceedings as " disgusting fascism " , and he and Ono ( as Elastic Oz Band ) released the single " God Save Us / Do the Oz " and joined marches in support of the magazine .

With Lennon 's next album , Imagine ( 1971 ) , critical response was more guarded . Rolling Stone reported that " it contains a substantial portion of good music " but warned of the possibility that " his posturings will soon seem not merely dull but irrelevant " . The album 's title track would become an anthem for anti-war movements , while another , " How Do You Sleep ? " , was a musical attack on McCartney in response to lyrics from Ram that Lennon felt , and McCartney later confirmed , were directed at him and Ono . However , Lennon softened his stance in the mid-1970s and said he had written " How Do You Sleep ? " about himself . He said in 1980 : " I used my resentment against Paul … to create a song … not a terrible vicious horrible vendetta [ … ] I used my resentment and withdrawing from Paul and the Beatles , and the relationship with Paul , to write ' How Do You Sleep ' . I don 't really go ' round with those thoughts in my head all the time . " Lennon and Ono moved to New York in August 1971 , and in December released " Happy Xmas ( War Is Over ) " . The new year saw the Nixon administration take what it called a " strategic counter-measure " against Lennon 's anti-war and anti-Nixon propaganda , embarking on what would be a four-year attempt to deport him . In 1972 , Lennon and Ono attended a post-election wake held in the New York home of activist Jerry Rubin after McGovern lost to Nixon . Embroiled in a continuing legal battle with the immigration authorities , Lennon was denied permanent residency in the US ( which wouldn 't be resolved until 1976 ) . Depressed , Lennon got intoxicated and had sex with a female guest , leaving Ono embarrassed . Her song " Death of Samantha " was inspired by the incident .

Recorded as a collaboration with Ono and with backing from the New York band Elephant 's Memory , Some Time in New York City was released in 1972 . Containing songs about women 's rights , race relations , Britain 's role in Northern Ireland and Lennon 's problems obtaining a green card , the album was poorly received — unlistenable , according to one critic . " Woman Is the Nigger of the World " , released as a US single from the album the same year , was televised on 11 May , on The Dick Cavett Show . Many radio stations refused to broadcast the song because of the word " nigger " . Lennon and Ono gave two benefit concerts with Elephant 's Memory and guests in New York in aid of patients at the Willowbrook State School mental facility . Staged at Madison Square Garden on 30 August 1972 , they were his last full-length concert appearances .

While Lennon was recording Mind Games ( 1973 ) , he and Ono decided to separate . The ensuing 18-month period apart , which he later called his " lost weekend " , was spent in Los Angeles and New York in the company of May Pang . Mind Games , credited to the " Plastic U.F.Ono Band " , was released in November 1973 . Lennon also contributed " I 'm the Greatest " to Starr 's album Ringo ( 1973 ) , released the same month ( an alternate take , from the same 1973 Ringo sessions , with Lennon providing a guide vocal , appears on John Lennon Anthology ) . In early 1974 , Lennon was drinking heavily and his alcohol-fuelled antics with Harry Nilsson made headlines . Two widely publicised incidents occurred at The Troubadour club in March , the first when Lennon placed a menstrual pad on his forehead and scuffled with a waitress , and the second , two weeks later , when Lennon and Nilsson were ejected from the same club after heckling the Smothers Brothers . Lennon decided to produce Nilsson 's album Pussy Cats and Pang rented a Los Angeles beach house for all the musicians but after a month of further debauchery , with the recording sessions in chaos , Lennon moved to New York with Pang to finish work on the album . In April , Lennon had produced the Mick Jagger song " Too Many Cooks ( Spoil the Soup ) " which was , for contractual reasons , to remain unreleased for more than 30 years . Pang supplied the recording for its eventual inclusion on The Very Best of Mick Jagger ( 2007 ) .

Settled back in New York , Lennon recorded the album Walls and Bridges . Released in October 1974 , it included " Whatever Gets You thru the Night " , which featured Elton John on backing vocals and piano , and became Lennon 's only single as a solo artist to top the US Billboard Hot 100 chart during his lifetime.b A second single from the album , " # 9 Dream " , followed before the end of the year . Starr 's Goodnight Vienna ( 1974 ) again saw assistance from Lennon , who wrote the title track and played piano . On 28 November , Lennon made a surprise guest appearance at Elton John 's Thanksgiving concert at Madison Square Garden , in fulfilment of his promise to join the singer in a live show if " Whatever Gets You thru the Night " — a song whose commercial potential Lennon had doubted — reached number one . Lennon performed the song along with " Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds " and " I Saw Her Standing There " , which he introduced as " a song by an old estranged fiancée of mine called Paul " .

Lennon co-wrote " Fame " , David Bowie 's first US number one , and provided guitar and backing vocals for the January 1975 recording . The same month , Elton John topped the charts with his cover of " Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds " , featuring Lennon on guitar and back-up vocals ( Lennon is credited on the single under the moniker of " Dr. Winston O 'Boogie " ) . He and Ono were reunited shortly afterwards . Lennon released Rock ' n ' Roll ( 1975 ) , an album of cover songs , in February . " Stand by Me " , taken from the album and a US and UK hit , became his last single for five years . He made what would be his final stage appearance in the ATV special A Salute to Lew Grade , recorded on 18 April and televised in June . Playing acoustic guitar and backed by an eight-piece band , Lennon performed two songs from Rock ' n ' Roll ( " Stand by Me " , which was not broadcast , and " Slippin ' and Slidin ' " ) followed by " Imagine " . The band , known as Etc . , wore masks behind their heads , a dig by Lennon who thought Grade was two-faced .

With the birth of his second son Sean on 9 October 1975 , Lennon took on the role of househusband , beginning what would be a five-year hiatus from the music industry during which he gave all his attention to his family . Within the month , he fulfilled his contractual obligation to EMI / Capitol for one more album by releasing Shaved Fish , a compilation album of previously recorded tracks . He devoted himself to Sean , rising at 6 am daily to plan and prepare his meals and to spend time with him . He wrote " Cookin ' ( In the Kitchen of Love ) " for Starr 's Ringo 's Rotogravure ( 1976 ) , performing on the track in June in what would be his last recording session until 1980 . He formally announced his break from music in Tokyo in 1977 , saying , " we have basically decided , without any great decision , to be with our baby as much as we can until we feel we can take time off to indulge ourselves in creating things outside of the family . " During his career break he created several series of drawings , and drafted a book containing a mix of autobiographical material and what he termed " mad stuff " , all of which would be published posthumously .

Lennon emerged from retirement in October 1980 with the single " ( Just Like ) Starting Over " , followed the next month by the album Double Fantasy , which contained songs written during a journey to Bermuda on a 43-foot sailing boat the previous June , that reflected his fulfilment in his new-found stable family life . Sufficient additional material was recorded for a planned follow-up album Milk and Honey ( released posthumously in 1984 ) . Released jointly by Lennon and Ono , Double Fantasy was not well received , drawing comments such as Melody Maker 's " indulgent sterility ... a godawful yawn " .

At around 10 : 50 p.m. ( EST ) on 8 December 1980 , as Lennon and Ono returned to their New York apartment in the Dakota , Mark David Chapman shot Lennon in the back four times at the entrance to the building . Lennon was taken to the emergency room of nearby Roosevelt Hospital and was pronounced dead on arrival at 11 : 00 p.m. ( EST ) . Earlier that evening , Lennon had autographed a copy of Double Fantasy for Chapman . Ono issued a statement the next day , saying " There is no funeral for John " , ending it with the words , " John loved and prayed for the human race . Please pray the same for him . " His body was cremated at Ferncliff Cemetery in Hartsdale , New York . Ono scattered his ashes in New York 's Central Park , where the Strawberry Fields memorial was later created . Chapman pleaded guilty to second-degree murder and was sentenced to 20-years-to-life . As of 2016 , he remains in prison , having been denied parole eight times .

Lennon and Cynthia Powell ( 1939 – 2015 ) met in 1957 as fellow students at the Liverpool College of Art . Although being scared of Lennon 's attitude and appearance , she heard that he was obsessed with French actress Brigitte Bardot , so she dyed her hair blonde . Lennon asked her out , but when she said that she was engaged , he screamed out , " I didn 't ask you to fuckin ' marry me , did I ? " She often accompanied him to Quarrymen gigs and travelled to Hamburg with McCartney 's girlfriend at the time to visit him . Lennon , jealous by nature , eventually grew possessive and often terrified Powell with his anger and physical violence . Lennon later said that until he met Ono , he had never questioned his chauvinistic attitude to women . The Beatles song " Getting Better " , he said , told his own story , " I used to be cruel to my woman , and physically — any woman . I was a hitter . I couldn 't express myself and I hit . I fought men and I hit women . That is why I am always on about peace " .

Recalling his reaction in July 1962 on learning that Cynthia was pregnant , Lennon said , " There 's only one thing for it Cyn . We 'll have to get married . " The couple were married on 23 August at the Mount Pleasant Register Office in Liverpool . His marriage began just as Beatlemania took hold across the UK . He performed on the evening of his wedding day , and would continue to do so almost daily from then on . Epstein , fearing that fans would be alienated by the idea of a married Beatle , asked the Lennons to keep their marriage secret . Julian was born on 8 April 1963 ; Lennon was on tour at the time and did not see his son until three days later . Cynthia attributed the start of the marriage breakdown to LSD , and as a result , she felt that he slowly lost interest in her . When the group travelled by train to Bangor , Wales , in 1967 , for the Maharishi Yogi 's Transcendental Meditation seminar , a policeman did not recognise her and stopped her from boarding . She later recalled how the incident seemed to symbolise the ending of their marriage . After arriving home at Kenwood , and finding Lennon with Ono , Cynthia left the house to stay with friends . Alexis Mardas later claimed to have slept with her that night , and a few weeks later he informed her that Lennon was seeking a divorce and custody of Julian on grounds of her adultery with him . After negotiations , Lennon capitulated and agreed to her divorcing him on the same grounds . The case was settled out of court in November 1968 , with Lennon giving her £ 100,000 ( $ 240,000 in US dollars at the time ) , a small annual payment and custody of Julian .

The Beatles were performing at Liverpool 's Cavern Club in November 1961 , when they were introduced to Epstein after a midday concert . Epstein was homosexual . According to biographer Philip Norman , one of his reasons for wanting to manage the group was that he was physically attracted to Lennon . Almost as soon as Julian was born , Lennon went on holiday to Spain with Epstein , leading to speculation about their relationship . Questioned about it later , Lennon said , " Well , it was almost a love affair , but not quite . It was never consummated . But it was a pretty intense relationship . It was my first experience with a homosexual that I was conscious was homosexual . We used to sit in a café in Torremolinos looking at all the boys and I 'd say , ' Do you like that one ? Do you like this one ? ' I was rather enjoying the experience , thinking like a writer all the time : I am experiencing this . " Soon after their return from Spain , at McCartney 's twenty-first birthday party in June 1963 , Lennon physically attacked Cavern Club MC Bob Wooler for saying " How was your honeymoon , John ? " The MC , known for his wordplay and affectionate but cutting remarks , was making a joke , but ten months had passed since Lennon 's marriage , and the honeymoon , deferred , was still two months in the future . To Lennon , who was intoxicated with alcohol at the time , the matter was simple : " He called me a queer so I battered his bloody ribs in " .

Lennon delighted in mocking Epstein for his homosexuality and for the fact that he was Jewish . When Epstein invited suggestions for the title of his autobiography , Lennon offered Queer Jew ; on learning of the eventual title , A Cellarful of Noise , he parodied , " More like A Cellarful of Boys " . He demanded of a visitor to Epstein 's flat , " Have you come to blackmail him ? If not , you 're the only bugger in London who hasn 't . " During the recording of " Baby , You 're a Rich Man " , he sang altered choruses of " Baby , you 're a rich fag Jew " .

Lennon 's first son , Julian , was born as his commitments with the Beatles intensified at the height of Beatlemania during his marriage to Cynthia . Lennon was touring with the Beatles when Julian was born on 8 April 1963 . Julian 's birth , like his mother Cynthia 's marriage to Lennon , was kept secret because Epstein was convinced public knowledge of such things would threaten the Beatles ' commercial success . Julian recalls how some four years later , as a small child in Weybridge , " I was trundled home from school and came walking up with one of my watercolour paintings . It was just a bunch of stars and this blonde girl I knew at school . And Dad said , ' What 's this ? ' I said , ' It 's Lucy in the sky with diamonds . ' " Lennon used it as the title of a Beatles song , and though it was later reported to have been derived from the initials LSD , Lennon insisted , " It 's not an acid song . " McCartney corroborated Lennon 's explanation that Julian innocently came up with the name . Lennon was distant from Julian , who felt closer to McCartney than to his father . During a car journey to visit Cynthia and Julian during Lennon 's divorce , McCartney composed a song , " Hey Jules " , to comfort him . It would evolve into the Beatles song " Hey Jude " . Lennon later said , " That 's his best song . It started off as a song about my son Julian ... he turned it into ' Hey Jude ' . I always thought it was about me and Yoko but he said it wasn 't . "

Lennon 's relationship with Julian was already strained , and after Lennon and Ono 's 1971 move to New York , Julian would not see his father again until 1973 . With Pang 's encouragement , it was arranged for him ( and his mother ) to visit Lennon in Los Angeles , where they went to Disneyland . Julian started to see his father regularly , and Lennon gave him a drumming part on a Walls and Bridges track . He bought Julian a Gibson Les Paul guitar and other instruments , and encouraged his interest in music by demonstrating guitar chord techniques . Julian recalls that he and his father " got on a great deal better " during the time he spent in New York : " We had a lot of fun , laughed a lot and had a great time in general . " In a Playboy interview with David Sheff shortly before his death , Lennon said , " Sean was a planned child , and therein lies the difference . I don 't love Julian any less as a child . He 's still my son , whether he came from a bottle of whiskey or because they didn 't have pills in those days . He 's here , he belongs to me , and he always will . " He said he was trying to re-establish a connection with the then 17-year-old , and confidently predicted , " Julian and I will have a relationship in the future . " After his death it was revealed that he had left Julian very little in his will .

Two versions exist of how Lennon met Ono . According to the first , told by the Lennons , on 9 November 1966 Lennon went to the Indica Gallery in London , where Ono was preparing her conceptual art exhibit , and they were introduced by gallery owner John Dunbar . Lennon was intrigued by Ono 's " Hammer A Nail " : patrons hammered a nail into a wooden board , creating the art piece . Although the exhibition had not yet begun , Lennon wanted to hammer a nail into the clean board , but Ono stopped him . Dunbar asked her , " Don 't you know who this is ? He 's a millionaire ! He might buy it . " Ono had supposedly not heard of the Beatles , but relented on condition that Lennon pay her five shillings , to which Lennon replied , " I 'll give you an imaginary five shillings and hammer an imaginary nail in . " The second version , told by McCartney , is that in late 1965 , Ono was in London compiling original musical scores for a book John Cage was working on , Notations , but McCartney declined to give her any of his own manuscripts for the book , suggesting that Lennon might oblige . When asked , Lennon gave Ono the original handwritten lyrics to " The Word " .

Ono began visiting and telephoning Lennon 's home and , when his wife asked for an explanation , Lennon explained that Ono was only trying to obtain money for her " avant-garde bullshit " . In May 1968 , while his wife was on holiday in Greece , Lennon invited Ono to visit . They spent the night recording what would become the Two Virgins album , after which , he said , they " made love at dawn . " When Lennon 's wife returned home she found Ono wearing her bathrobe and drinking tea with Lennon who simply said , " Oh , hi . " Ono became pregnant in 1968 and miscarried a male child they named John Ono Lennon II on 21 November 1968 , a few weeks after Lennon 's divorce from Cynthia was granted . During Lennon 's last two years in the Beatles , he and Ono began public protests against the Vietnam War . They were married in Gibraltar on 20 March 1969 , and spent their honeymoon at the Hilton Amsterdam campaigning with a week-long Bed-In for Peace . They planned another Bed-In in the United States , but were denied entry , so held one instead at the Queen Elizabeth Hotel in Montreal , where they recorded " Give Peace a Chance " . They often combined advocacy with performance art , as in their " Bagism " , first introduced during a Vienna press conference . Lennon detailed this period in the Beatles song " The Ballad of John and Yoko " . Lennon changed his name by deed poll on 22 April 1969 , adding " Ono " as a middle name . The brief ceremony took place on the roof of the Apple Corps building , made famous three months earlier by the Beatles ' Let It Be rooftop concert . Although he used the name John Ono Lennon thereafter , official documents referred to him as John Winston Ono Lennon , since he was not permitted to revoke a name given at birth . The couple settled at Tittenhurst Park at Sunninghill in Berkshire . After Ono was injured in a car accident , Lennon arranged for a king-sized bed to be brought to the recording studio as he worked on the Beatles ' last album , Abbey Road . To escape the acrimony of the band 's break-up , Ono suggested they move permanently to New York , which they did on 31 August 1971 .

ABKCO Industries , formed in 1968 by Allen Klein as an umbrella company to ABKCO Records , recruited May Pang as a receptionist in 1969 . Through involvement in a project with ABKCO , Lennon and Ono met her the following year . She became their personal assistant . After she had been working with the couple for three years , Ono confided that she and Lennon were becoming estranged from one another . She went on to suggest that Pang should begin a physical relationship with Lennon , telling her , " He likes you a lot . " Pang , 22 , astounded by Ono 's proposition , eventually agreed to become Lennon 's companion . The pair soon moved to California , beginning an 18-month period he later called his " lost weekend " . In Los Angeles , Pang encouraged Lennon to develop regular contact with Julian , whom he had not seen for two years . He also rekindled friendships with Starr , McCartney , Beatles roadie Mal Evans , and Harry Nilsson . Whilst drinking with Nilsson , after misunderstanding something Pang said , Lennon attempted to strangle her , relenting only when physically restrained by Nilsson .

Upon returning to New York , they prepared a spare room in their newly rented apartment for Julian to visit . Lennon , hitherto inhibited by Ono in this regard , began to reestablish contact with other relatives and friends . By December he and Pang were considering a house purchase , and he was refusing to accept Ono 's telephone calls . In January 1975 , he agreed to meet Ono who claimed to have found a cure for smoking . But after the meeting he failed to return home or call Pang . When Pang telephoned the next day , Ono told her Lennon was unavailable , being exhausted after a hypnotherapy session . Two days later , Lennon reappeared at a joint dental appointment , stupefied and confused to such an extent that Pang believed he had been brainwashed . He told her his separation from Ono was now over , though Ono would allow him to continue seeing her as his mistress .

When Lennon and Ono were reunited , she became pregnant , but having previously suffered three miscarriages in her attempt to have a child with Lennon , she said she wanted an abortion . She agreed to allow the pregnancy to continue on condition that Lennon adopt the role of househusband ; this he agreed to do . Sean was born on 9 October 1975 , Lennon 's 35th birthday , delivered by Caesarean section . Lennon 's subsequent career break would span five years . He had a photographer take pictures of Sean every day of his first year , and created numerous drawings for him , posthumously published as Real Love : The Drawings for Sean . Lennon later proudly declared , " He didn 't come out of my belly but , by God , I made his bones , because I 've attended to every meal , and to how he sleeps , and to the fact that he swims like a fish . "

Although his friendship with Starr remained consistently friendly during the years following the Beatles ' break-up in 1970 , Lennon 's relationships with McCartney and Harrison varied . He was close to Harrison initially , but the two drifted apart after Lennon moved to America . When Harrison was in New York for his December 1974 Dark Horse tour , Lennon agreed to join him on stage , but failed to appear after an argument over Lennon 's refusal to sign an agreement that would finally dissolve the Beatles ' legal partnership . ( Lennon eventually signed the papers while holidaying in Florida with Pang and Julian . ) Harrison offended Lennon in 1980 , when he published an autobiography that made little mention of him . Lennon told Playboy , " I was hurt by it . By glaring omission ... my influence on his life is absolutely zilch ... he remembers every two-bit sax player or guitarist he met in subsequent years . I 'm not in the book . " Lennon 's most intense feelings were reserved for McCartney . In addition to attacking him through the lyrics of " How Do You Sleep ? " , Lennon argued with him through the press for three years after the group split . The two later began to reestablish something of the close friendship they had once known , and in 1974 , they even played music together again before eventually growing apart once more . Lennon said that during McCartney 's final visit , in April 1976 , they watched the episode of Saturday Night Live in which Lorne Michaels made a $ 3,000 cash offer to get the Beatles to reunite on the show . The pair considered going to the studio to make a joke appearance , attempting to claim their share of the money , but were too tired . Lennon summarised his feelings towards McCartney in an interview three days before his death : " Throughout my career , I 've selected to work with ... only two people : Paul McCartney and Yoko Ono ... That ain 't bad picking . "

Along with his estrangement from McCartney , Lennon always felt a musical competitiveness with him and kept an ear on his music . During his five-year career break he was content to sit back so long as McCartney was producing what Lennon saw as mediocre material . When McCartney released " Coming Up " , in 1980 , the year Lennon returned to the studio and the last year of his life , he took notice . " It 's driving me crackers ! " he jokingly complained , because he could not get the tune out of his head . Asked the same year whether the group were dreaded enemies or the best of friends , he replied that they were neither , and that he had not seen any of them in a long time . But he also said , " I still love those guys . The Beatles are over , but John , Paul , George and Ringo go on . "

Lennon and Ono used their honeymoon as what they termed a " Bed-In for Peace " at the Amsterdam Hilton Hotel ; the March 1969 event attracted worldwide media ridicule . At a second Bed-In three months later at the Queen Elizabeth Hotel in Montreal Lennon wrote and recorded " Give Peace a Chance " . Released as a single , it was quickly taken up as an anti-war anthem and sung by a quarter of a million demonstrators against the Vietnam War in Washington , DC , on 15 November , the second Vietnam Moratorium Day . In December , they paid for billboards in 10 cities around the world which declared , in the national language , " War Is Over ! If You Want It " . Later that year , Lennon and Ono supported efforts by the family of James Hanratty , hanged for murder in 1962 , to prove his innocence . Those who had condemned Hanratty were , according to Lennon , " the same people who are running guns to South Africa and killing blacks in the streets . ... The same bastards are in control , the same people are running everything , it 's the whole bullshit bourgeois scene . " In London , Lennon and Ono staged a " Britain Murdered Hanratty " banner march and a " Silent Protest For James Hanratty " , and produced a 40-minute documentary on the case . At an appeal hearing years later , Hanratty 's conviction was upheld after DNA evidence matched . His family continued to appeal in 2010 .

Lennon and Ono showed their solidarity with the Clydeside UCS workers ' work-in of 1971 by sending a bouquet of red roses and a cheque for £ 5,000 . On moving to New York City in August that year , they befriended two of the Chicago Seven , Yippie peace activists Jerry Rubin and Abbie Hoffman . Another political activist , John Sinclair , poet and co-founder of the White Panther Party , was serving ten years in prison for selling two joints of marijuana after previous convictions for possession of the drug . In December 1971 at Ann Arbor , Michigan , 15,000 people attended the " John Sinclair Freedom Rally " , a protest and benefit concert with contributions from Lennon , Stevie Wonder , Bob Seger , Bobby Seale of the Black Panther Party , and others . Lennon and Ono , backed by David Peel and Rubin , performed an acoustic set of four songs from their forthcoming Some Time in New York City album including " John Sinclair " , whose lyrics called for his release . The day before the rally , the Michigan Senate passed a bill that significantly reduced the penalties for possession of marijuana and four days later Sinclair was released on an appeal bond . The performance was recorded and two of the tracks later appeared on John Lennon Anthology ( 1998 ) .

Following the Bloody Sunday incident in Northern Ireland in 1972 , in which 14 unarmed civil rights protesters were shot dead by the British Army , Lennon said that given the choice between the army and the IRA ( who were not involved in the incident ) he would side with the latter . Lennon and Ono wrote two songs protesting British presence and actions in Ireland for their Some Time in New York City album : " Luck of the Irish " and " Sunday Bloody Sunday " . In 2000 , David Shayler , a former member of Britain 's domestic security service MI5 , suggested that Lennon had given money to the IRA , though this was swiftly denied by Ono . Biographer Bill Harry records that following Bloody Sunday , Lennon and Ono financially supported the production of the film The Irish Tapes , a political documentary with a Republican slant . According to FBI surveillance reports ( and confirmed by Tariq Ali in 2006 ) Lennon was sympathetic to the International Marxist Group , a Trotskyist group formed in Britain in 1968 . However , the FBI considered Lennon to have limited effectiveness as a revolutionary since he was " constantly under the influence of narcotics " .

In 1973 , Lennon contributed a limerick called " Why Make It Sad To Be Gay ? " to Len Richmond 's The Gay Liberation Book . Lennon 's last act of political activism was a statement in support of the striking minority sanitation workers in San Francisco on 5 December 1980 . He and Ono planned to join the workers ' protest on 14 December . By this time , however , Lennon had also quietly renounced the counterculture views which he had helped promote during the 1960s and 1970s and became more aligned with conservatism , though whether he had actually aligned to a more conservative world view is disputed .

Following the impact of " Give Peace a Chance " and " Happy Xmas ( War Is Over ) " , both strongly associated with the anti – Vietnam War movement , the Nixon administration , hearing rumours of Lennon 's involvement in a concert to be held in San Diego at the same time as the Republican National Convention , tried to have him deported . Nixon believed that Lennon 's anti-war activities could cost him his re-election ; Republican Senator Strom Thurmond suggested in a February 1972 memo that " deportation would be a strategic counter-measure " against Lennon . The next month the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service ( INS ) began deportation proceedings , arguing that his 1968 misdemeanor conviction for cannabis possession in London had made him ineligible for admission to the United States . Lennon spent the next three and a half years in and out of deportation hearings until 8 October 1975 , when a court of appeals barred the deportation attempt , stating " ... the courts will not condone selective deportation based upon secret political grounds . " While the legal battle continued , Lennon attended rallies and made television appearances . Lennon and Ono co-hosted The Mike Douglas Show for a week in February 1972 , introducing guests such as Jerry Rubin and Bobby Seale to mid-America . In 1972 , Bob Dylan wrote a letter to the INS defending Lennon , stating :

John and Yoko add a great voice and drive to the country 's so-called art institution . They inspire and transcend and stimulate and by doing so , only help others to see pure light and in doing that , put an end to this dull taste of petty commercialism which is being passed off as Artist Art by the overpowering mass media . Hurray for John and Yoko . Let them stay and live here and breathe . The country 's got plenty of room and space . Let John and Yoko stay ! On 23 March 1973 , Lennon was ordered to leave the US within 60 days . Ono , meanwhile , was granted permanent residence . In response , Lennon and Ono held a press conference on 1 April 1973 at the New York City Bar Association , where they announced the formation of the state of Nutopia ; a place with " no land , no boundaries , no passports , only people " . Waving the white flag of Nutopia ( two handkerchiefs ) , they asked for political asylum in the US . The press conference was filmed , and would later appear in the 2006 documentary The US vs. John Lennon . Lennon 's Mind Games ( 1973 ) included the track " Nutopian International Anthem " , which comprised three seconds of silence . Soon after the press conference , Nixon 's involvement in a political scandal came to light , and in June the Watergate hearings began in Washington , DC . They led to the president 's resignation 14 months later . Nixon 's successor , Gerald Ford , showed little interest in continuing the battle against Lennon , and the deportation order was overturned in 1975 . The following year , his US immigration status finally resolved , Lennon received his " green card " certifying his permanent residency , and when Jimmy Carter was inaugurated as president in January 1977 , Lennon and Ono attended the Inaugural Ball .

After Lennon 's death , historian Jon Wiener filed a Freedom of Information Act request for FBI files documenting the Bureau 's role in the deportation attempt . The FBI admitted it had 281 pages of files on Lennon , but refused to release most of them on the grounds that they contained national security information . In 1983 , Wiener sued the FBI with the help of the American Civil Liberties Union of Southern California . It took 14 years of litigation to force the FBI to release the withheld pages . The ACLU , representing Wiener , won a favourable decision in their suit against the FBI in the Ninth Circuit in 1991 . The Justice Department appealed the decision to the Supreme Court in April 1992 , but the court declined to review the case . In 1997 , respecting President Bill Clinton 's newly instigated rule that documents should be withheld only if releasing them would involve " foreseeable harm " , the Justice Department settled most of the outstanding issues outside court by releasing all but 10 of the contested documents . Wiener published the results of his 14-year campaign in January 2000 . Gimme Some Truth : The John Lennon FBI Files contained facsimiles of the documents , including " lengthy reports by confidential informants detailing the daily lives of anti-war activists , memos to the White House , transcripts of TV shows on which Lennon appeared , and a proposal that Lennon be arrested by local police on drug charges " . The story is told in the documentary The US vs. John Lennon . The final 10 documents in Lennon 's FBI file , which reported on his ties with London anti-war activists in 1971 and had been withheld as containing " national security information provided by a foreign government under an explicit promise of confidentiality " , were released in December 2006 . They contained no indication that the British government had regarded Lennon as a serious threat ; one example of the released material was a report that two prominent British leftists had hoped Lennon would finance a left-wing bookshop and reading room .

Beatles biographer Bill Harry writes that Lennon began drawing and writing creatively at an early age with the encouragement of his uncle . He collected his stories , poetry , cartoons and caricatures in a Quarry Bank High School exercise book that he called the Daily Howl . The drawings were often of crippled people , and the writings satirical , and throughout the book was an abundance of wordplay . According to classmate Bill Turner , Lennon created the Daily Howl to amuse his best friend and later Quarrymen bandmate Pete Shotton , to whom he would show his work before he let anyone else see it . Turner said that Lennon " had an obsession for Wigan Pier . It kept cropping up " , and in Lennon 's story A Carrot in a Potato Mine , " the mine was at the end of Wigan Pier . " Turner described how one of Lennon 's cartoons depicted a bus stop sign annotated with the question , " Why ? " . Above was a flying pancake , and below , " a blind man wearing glasses leading along a blind dog — also wearing glasses " .

Lennon 's love of wordplay and nonsense with a twist found a wider audience when he was 24 . Harry writes that In His Own Write ( 1964 ) was published after " Some journalist who was hanging around the Beatles came to me and I ended up showing him the stuff . They said , ' Write a book ' and that 's how the first one came about " . Like the Daily Howl it contained a mix of formats including short stories , poetry , plays and drawings . One story , " Good Dog Nigel " , tells the tale of " a happy dog , urinating on a lamp post , barking , wagging his tail — until he suddenly hears a message that he will be killed at three o 'clock " . The Times Literary Supplement considered the poems and stories " remarkable ... also very funny ... the nonsense runs on , words and images prompting one another in a chain of pure fantasy " . Book Week reported , " This is nonsense writing , but one has only to review the literature of nonsense to see how well Lennon has brought it off . While some of his homonyms are gratuitous word play , many others have not only double meaning but a double edge . " Lennon was not only surprised by the positive reception , but that the book was reviewed at all , and suggested that readers " took the book more seriously than I did myself . It just began as a laugh for me " .

In combination with A Spaniard in the Works ( 1965 ) , In His Own Write formed the basis of the stage play The John Lennon Play : In His Own Write , co-adapted by Victor Spinetti and Adrienne Kennedy . After negotiations between Lennon , Spinetti and the artistic director of the National Theatre , Sir Laurence Olivier , the play opened at The Old Vic in 1968 . Lennon and Ono attended the opening night performance , their second public appearance together . In 1969 , Lennon wrote " Four in Hand " ‍ — ‌ a skit based on his teenaged experiences of group masturbation ‍ — ‌ for Kenneth Tynan 's play Oh ! Calcutta ! . After Lennon 's death , further works were published , including Skywriting by Word of Mouth ( 1986 ) ; Ai : Japan Through John Lennon 's Eyes : A Personal Sketchbook ( 1992 ) , with Lennon 's illustrations of the definitions of Japanese words ; and Real Love : The Drawings for Sean ( 1999 ) . The Beatles Anthology ( 2000 ) also presented examples of his writings and drawings .

Lennon 's playing of a mouth organ during a bus journey to visit his cousin in Scotland caught the driver 's ear . Impressed , the driver told Lennon of a harmonica he could have if he came to Edinburgh the following day , where one had been stored in the bus depot since a passenger left it on a bus . The professional instrument quickly replaced Lennon 's toy . He would continue to play harmonica , often using the instrument during the Beatles ' Hamburg years , and it became a signature sound in the group 's early recordings . His mother taught him how to play the banjo , later buying him an acoustic guitar . At 16 , he played rhythm guitar with the Quarrymen . As his career progressed , he played a variety of electric guitars , predominantly the Rickenbacker 325 , Epiphone Casino and Gibson J-160E , and , from the start of his solo career , the Gibson Les Paul Junior . Double Fantasy producer Jack Douglas claimed that since his Beatle days Lennon habitually tuned his D-string slightly flat , so his Aunt Mimi could tell which guitar was his on recordings . Occasionally he played a six-string bass guitar , the Fender Bass VI , providing bass on some Beatles numbers ( " Back in the U.S.S.R. " , " The Long and Winding Road " , " Helter Skelter " ) that occupied McCartney with another instrument . His other instrument of choice was the piano , on which he composed many songs , including " Imagine " , described as his best-known solo work . His jamming on a piano with McCartney in 1963 led to the creation of the Beatles ' first US number one , " I Want to Hold Your Hand " . In 1964 , he became one of the first British musicians to acquire a Mellotron keyboard , though it was not heard on a Beatles recording until " Strawberry Fields Forever " in 1967 .

When the Beatles recorded " Twist and Shout " , the final track during the mammoth one-day session that produced the band 's 1963 debut album , Please Please Me , Lennon 's voice , already compromised by a cold , came close to giving out . Lennon said , " I couldn 't sing the damn thing , I was just screaming . " In the words of biographer Barry Miles , " Lennon simply shredded his vocal cords in the interests of rock ' n ' roll . " The Beatles ' producer , George Martin , tells how Lennon " had an inborn dislike of his own voice which I could never understand . He was always saying to me : ' DO something with my voice ! ... put something on it ... Make it different . ' " Martin obliged , often using double-tracking and other techniques . As his Beatles era segued into his solo career , his singing voice found a widening range of expression . Biographer Chris Gregory writes of Lennon " tentatively beginning to expose his insecurities in a number of acoustic-led ' confessional ' ballads , so beginning the process of ' public therapy ' that will eventually culminate in the primal screams of " Cold Turkey " and the cathartic John Lennon / Plastic Ono Band . " Music critic Robert Christgau calls this Lennon 's " greatest vocal performance ... from scream to whine , is modulated electronically ... echoed , filtered , and double tracked . " David Stuart Ryan notes Lennon 's vocal delivery to range from " extreme vulnerability , sensitivity and even naivety " to a hard " rasping " style . Wiener too describes contrasts , saying the singer 's voice can be " at first subdued ; soon it almost cracks with despair " . Music historian Ben Urish recalls hearing the Beatles ' Ed Sullivan Show performance of " This Boy " played on the radio a few days after Lennon 's murder : " As Lennon 's vocals reached their peak ... it hurt too much to hear him scream with such anguish and emotion . But it was my emotions I heard in his voice . Just like I always had . "

Music historians Schinder and Schwartz , writing of the transformation in popular music styles that took place between the 1950s and the 1960s , say that the Beatles ' influence cannot be overstated : having " revolutionised the sound , style , and attitude of popular music and opened rock and roll 's doors to a tidal wave of British rock acts " , the group then " spent the rest of the 1960s expanding rock 's stylistic frontiers " . Liam Gallagher , his group Oasis among the many who acknowledge the band 's influence , identifies Lennon as a hero ; in 1999 he named his first child Lennon Gallagher in tribute . On National Poetry Day in 1999 , after conducting a poll to identify the UK 's favourite song lyric , the BBC announced " Imagine " the winner . In a 2006 Guardian article , Jon Wiener wrote : " For young people in 1972 , it was thrilling to see Lennon 's courage in standing up to [ US President ] Nixon . That willingness to take risks with his career , and his life , is one reason why people still admire him today . " For music historians Urish and Bielen , Lennon 's most significant effort was " the self-portraits ... in his songs [ which ] spoke to , for , and about , the human condition . "

In 2013 , Downtown Music Publishing signed a publishing administration agreement for the U.S. with Lenono Music and Ono Music , home to the song catalogs of John Lennon and Yoko Ono respectively . Under the terms of the agreement , Downtown represents Lennon 's solo works -- including " Imagine , " " Instant Karma ( We All Shine On ) , " " Power to the People , " " Happy X-Mas ( War Is Over ) , " " Jealous Guy , " " ( Just Like ) Starting Over " and others . Lennon continues to be mourned throughout the world and has been the subject of numerous memorials and tributes . In 2002 , the airport in Lennon 's home town was renamed the Liverpool John Lennon Airport . In 2010 , on what would have been Lennon 's 70th birthday , the John Lennon Peace Monument was unveiled in Chavasse Park , Liverpool , by Cynthia and Julian Lennon . The sculpture entitled ' Peace & Harmony ' exhibits peace symbols and carries the inscription " Peace on Earth for the Conservation of Life · In Honour of John Lennon 1940 – 1980 " .

The Lennon – McCartney songwriting partnership is regarded as one of the most influential and successful of the 20th century . As performer , writer or co-writer Lennon has had 25 number one singles on the US Hot 100 chart.a His album sales in the US stand at 14 million units . Double Fantasy was his best-selling solo album , at three million shipments in the US ; Released shortly before his death , it won the 1981 Grammy Award for Album of the Year . The following year , the BRIT Award for Outstanding Contribution to Music went to Lennon . Participants in a 2002 BBC poll voted him eighth of " 100 Greatest Britons " . Between 2003 and 2008 , Rolling Stone recognised Lennon in several reviews of artists and music , ranking him fifth of " 100 Greatest Singers of All Time " and 38th of " 100 Greatest Artists of All Time " , and his albums John Lennon / Plastic Ono Band and Imagine , 22nd and 76th respectively of " Rolling Stone 's 500 Greatest Albums of All Time " . He was appointed Member of the Order of the British Empire ( MBE ) with the other Beatles in 1965 ( returned in 1969 ) . Lennon was posthumously inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame in 1987 and into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1994 .

The 411th Engineer Brigade ( Theater Army ) is a combat engineer brigade of the United States Army headquartered in New Windsor , New York . It is a major engineer command of the United States Army Reserve . Tracing its lineage back to the 355th Engineer Regiment , the brigade assumed its predecessor 's campaign participation credit and honors , which were received fighting in the European Theater of World War II . The reserve brigade did not participate in any Cold War era fighting , and only saw periodic moves to various army bases around New York State . After the Cold War , however , the brigade saw several deployments to the Middle East in a supporting role for US-led contingencies . These included Operation Desert Storm , Operation Joint Endeavor , Operation Iraqi Freedom and Operation Enduring Freedom .

The 411th Engineer Brigade is a subordinate unit of the 412th Engineer Command and its Headquarters and Headquarters Company is stationed at New Windsor , New York . It contains two subordinate battalions and separate companies which are also reserve units . The 479th Engineer Battalion ( Combat ) ( Mechanized ) headquartered at Watertown , New York and the 854th Engineer Battalion located at Saugerties , New York are the Brigade 's two principal components . Additionally , the Brigade commands the 306th Engineer Company in Farmingdale , New York and the 328th Engineer Company ( Combat ) ( Heavy ) of Northfield , New Jersey , and the 417th Engineer Company ( Combat ) ( Heavy ) in Bullville , New York .

The 411th Engineer Brigade traces its lineage back to the 355th Engineer Regiment , which was first constituted on 15 October 1921 in the Organized Reserves . The regiment was organized in January 1922 with its headquarters at Chapel Hill , North Carolina . It was ordered into active duty military service on 1 September 1942 at Camp White , Oregon in preparation for deployment to Europe during World War II . During World War II , the regiment saw action in the European Theater , undertaking numerous bridging and mobility missions in Normandy , Northern France , the Rhineland and the Ardennes area . The Regiment was awarded the Meritorious Unit Commendation for its service during the war . After the war was over in 1945 , the regiment remained in the country until it was inactivated on 17 June 1946 in Germany . A year later , on 27 May 1947 the regiment was reactivated with its Headquarters in Detroit , Michigan . It was again deactivated on 31 December 1948 in Detroit . After the deactivation , the Regiment was broken up and its subordinate elements were redesignated . The regimental Headquarters and Headquarters Company and Service Company were reorganized on 25 February 1949 as Headquarters and Headquarters Company , 411th Engineer Brigade , allowing them a larger staff with the ability to take command of more subordinate units . The regiment 's 1st Battalion was reorganized and redesignated on 25 February 1949 as the 928th Engineer Construction Battalion . The 2nd Battalion was reorganized and redesignated on 15 March 1949 as the 929th Engineer Construction Battalion . The 3rd Battalion disbanded on 9 July 1953 . The two separated battalions retained separate lineage from this point and the 355th Engineer Regiment ceased to exist .

The 411th Engineer Brigade was activated on 14 March 1949 at New York City . It was reorganized on 22 December 1950 as the 411th Engineer Aviation Brigade . A few years later , the Organized Reserve Corps itself was redesignated as the Army Reserve , and the brigade was delegated to Reserve status . On 1 January 1957 , the brigade was again redesignated as the 411th Engineer Brigade . On 31 January 1968 , the brigade headquarters was relocated to Fort Tilden , New York . For most of its operational existence , the brigade remained in Reserve status except for a few brief activations in the Active Duty force . It was ordered into active military service on 24 March 1970 at Fort Tilden , New York , before being reverted to reserve status two days later . The brigade received its distinctive unit insignia on 28 January 1971 and its shoulder sleeve insignia on 20 December 1973 . On 3 January 1978 the brigade headquarters location was changed to Brooklyn , New York . The brigade was again ordered into active duty to play a supporting role in the Gulf War in 1990 . It officially switched to active service on 6 December 1990 at Brooklyn , New York . It participated in Operation Desert Shield and Operation Desert Storm and earned two campaign streamers for participation in the conflict . On 11 March 1991 it was released from active military service and reverted to reserve status . The next day , while still in the country , the brigade was one of numerous units thought to have been exposed to chemical agents released during the Khamisiyah Pit demolition . Much of the NATO invasion force in the country at the time is suspected to have been exposed to these agents .

The Brigade was alerted for deployment to Iraq in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom in late 2005 . In the summer of 2006 , it trained for three months at Fort McCoy , Wisconsin to prepare . Its mission in Iraq was to integrate other smaller engineer units and provide engineer support to the other Army units operating in the country . The brigade headquarters took command of several other engineer battalions during this deployment . Among the units under brigade 's control was the 502nd Engineer Battalion based in Hanau , Germany which worked on bridges around Baghdad , as well as the 875th Engineer Battalion of the Arkansas Army National Guard based at Camp Striker and the active duty 92nd Engineer Battalion . Also attached to the brigade 's command was the Us Air Force 's 557th Expeditionary RED HORSE Squadron , a contingent of Air Force engineers . The brigade arrived in Iraq in September 2006 . It assumed control of over 3,000 engineers from the US Army , US Navy , US Air Force and US Marine Corps , having taken over the duty from the 130th Engineer Brigade which was departing following the end of its deployment . During the deployment , the brigade had five principle duties : route clearance and sanitation , rapid crater repair , engineer support to the 3rd Infantry Division and other combat units , planning , design and construction of contingency operating bases , and command of tactical bridging assets . The first major project of the brigade after arriving in country in September 2006 was to assist Iraqi engineers in repairing and operating the run down and damaged water treatment plant at Al Bakir which provided a major source of fresh water from the Tigris River . The brigade allowed Iraqi engineers to lead this operation and played a supporting role in evaluating their work . One of the brigade 's major projects was the construction of Forward Operating Base ( FOB ) Hammer , which was completed in just 45 days . The base required construction materials from all over the country as well as foreign materials brought to Camp Victory and Balad Air Base . The 411th Brigade 's attached B CO 92nd EN BN soldiers focused primarily on land work , perimeter fences and ground fortifications totaling over nine kilometers , with a detachment from the RED HORSE USAF focused on construction of buildings and other " vertical " projects . After completion , the FOB had space for 4,000 soldiers , and was occupied by 3rd Brigade Combat Team , 3rd Infantry Division .

After the completion of the FOB , 411th Engineer Brigade soldiers commenced construction on other facilities throughout Camp Liberty for other incoming Army units . At the same time , other units in the brigade were responsible for route clearance in the areas of Logistics Support Area Anaconda along routes used for military supply as well as civilian traffic . The brigade 's soldiers used Buffalo mine protected vehicles to clear these routes of suspected Improvised Explosive Devices and other dangerous obstacles . During this deployment , the brigade completed over 200 projects on every major Forward Operating Base in the country , and three major projects supporting the Iraq War troop surge of 2007 . It completed over 400,000 kilometers of route clearance and blast hole repair using over 2,800 pieces of major equipment . The brigade headquarters returned home to New York in fall of 2007 , after one year of deployment to Iraq .

Sir Stanley Matthews , CBE ( 1 February 1915 – 23 February 2000 ) was an English footballer . Often regarded as one of the greatest players of the English game , he is the only player to have been knighted while still playing , as well as being the first winner of both the European Footballer of the Year and the Football Writers ' Association Footballer of the Year awards . Matthews ' nicknames included " The Wizard of the Dribble " and " The Magician " . Matthews kept fit enough to play at the top level until he was 50 years old . He was also the oldest player ever to play in England 's top football division and the oldest player ever to represent the country . He played his final competitive game in 1985 , at the age of 70 . Matthews was also an inaugural inductee to the English Football Hall of Fame in 2002 to honour his contribution to the English game . He spent 19 years with Stoke City , playing for the Potters from 1932 to 1947 , and again from 1961 to 1965 . He helped Stoke to the Second Division title in 1932 – 33 and 1962 – 63 . Between his two spells at Stoke he spent 14 years with Blackpool , where , after being on the losing side in the 1948 and 1951 FA Cup finals , he helped Blackpool to win the cup with a formidable personal performance in the " Matthews Final " of 1953 . Between 1934 and 1957 he won 54 caps for England , playing in the FIFA World Cup in 1950 and 1954 , and winning nine British Home Championship titles .

Stanley Matthews was born on 1 February 1915 in a terraced house in Seymour Street , Hanley , Stoke-on-Trent , Staffordshire . He was the third of four sons born to Jack Matthews , a local boxer who was also known as the " Fighting Barber of Hanley " . In the summer of 1921 , Jack Matthews took six-year-old Stanley to the Victoria Ground , home of the local club Stoke City , for an open race for boys under the age of 14 , with a staggered start according to age . His father placed a bet on his son winning , and he did . Matthews attended Hanley 's Wellington Road School , and later described himself as " in many respects a model pupil " . He also said the kickabout games the children played helped to improve his dribbling , and prepared the children for future life by giving them " a focus , a purpose , discipline , and in many respects an escape " . At home he also spent " countless hours " practising dribbling around kitchen chairs he placed in his backyard . Though he would later become indelibly associated with Stoke City , Matthews grew up supporting that club 's local rivals Port Vale . His father wanted him to follow in his footsteps and become a boxer , but Stanley decided at the age of 13 that he wanted to be a footballer . After a rigorous training session that made Matthews vomit , his mother , Elizabeth , stood firm and made Jack realise that his son , who had one more year at school , should follow his passion of football . His father conceded that should he be picked for England Schoolboys then he could continue his footballing career ; around this time his school football master picked Matthews as an outside-right , rather than as his then-preferred position of centre-half . Matthews played for England Schoolboys against Wales in 1929 , in front of around 20,000 spectators at Dean Court , Bournemouth .

Wolverhampton Wanderers , Birmingham City , Aston Villa and West Bromwich Albion were all rumoured to be interested in Matthews in the wake of his appearance for England Schoolboys . The Stoke City manager Tom Mather persuaded Matthews ' father to allow Stanley to join his club 's staff as an office boy on his 15th birthday for pay of £ 1 a week . Matthews played for Stoke 's reserve team during the 1930 – 31 season , coming up first against Burnley . After the game his father gave his usual realist assessment : " I 've seen you play better and I 've seen you play worse " . Matthews played 22 reserve games in 1931 – 32 , shunning the social scene to focus on improving his game . In one of these games , against Manchester City , he attempted to run at the left-back and take him on with a deft swerve as the defender committed himself to a challenge , rather than follow the accepted wisdom of the day which was to first wait for the defender to run at the attacker – his new technique " worked a treat " . The national press were already predicting a bright future for the teenager , and though he could have then joined any club in the country , he signed as a professional with Stoke on his 17th birthday . Paid the maximum wage of £ 5 a week ( £ 3 in the summer break ) , he was on the same wage as seasoned professionals before he even kicked a ball . Despite this his father insisted that Matthews save this money , and only spend any winning bonus money he earned . He made his first team debut against Bury at Gigg Lane on 19 March 1932 ; the " Potters " won the game 1 – 0 and Matthews learned how physical and dirty opponents could be – and get away with it .

After spending the 1932 – 33 pre-season training intensely by himself ( as opposed to playing golf with his teammates ) , Mather selected Matthews in 15 games , enough to earn him in a winners medal after Stoke were crowned Second Division champions , one point ahead of Tottenham Hotspur . On 4 March 1933 he scored his first senior goal in a 3 – 1 win over local rivals Port Vale at The Old Recreation Ground . He played 29 First Division games in 1933 – 34 , as Stoke secured their top-flight status with a 12th-place finish . He continued to progress in the 1934 – 35 campaign , and was selected by The Football League for an Inter-League game with the Irish League at The Oval , which finished 6 – 1 to the English . His England debut followed , and so did a further game for the Football League against the Scottish League . Stoke finished the season in 10th place . In 1935 – 36 Matthews continued to improve , and he added the double body swerve technique to his increasing arsenal of tricks . Largely out of the international picture , he put in 45 games for the " Potters " as Stoke finished fourth under Bob McGrory – the club 's best ever finish . He played 42 games in 1936 – 37 , including the club 's record 10 – 3 win over West Brom at the Victoria Ground . At the end of the season he was paid a loyalty bonus of £ 650 , though the Stoke board initially insisted he was only due £ 500 as he had spent his first two years at the club as an amateur – this attitude left a sour taste in Matthew 's mouth .

Stoke slipped down the league in an extremely tight 1937 – 38 season , and , annoyed by rumours circulating the city of resentment in the dressing room against him for his England success , Matthews requested a transfer in February ; his request was denied . His request became public knowledge , and , disturbed by the attention and harassment he was receiving from Stoke supporters urging him to stay , Matthews decided to take a few days off from the club to relax in Blackpool . Finding no peace there either , Stoke chairman Albert Booth told Matthews he would not be allowed to leave the club , and 3,000 City supporters organized a meeting to make their feelings known – they too demanded that he stay . Touched by their strength of feeling and worn out by the attention he was receiving , Matthews agreed to stay . Despite playing regularly for the national side , Matthews put in 38 games for Stoke in 1938 – 39 , helping them to a seventh-place finish – there would not be another full season of Football League action until 1946 . The war cost Matthews his professional career from the age of 24 to the age of 30 . He instead joined the Royal Air Force , and was based just outside Blackpool , with Ivor Powell his NCO . He rose to the rank of corporal , though he admitted to being one of the most lenient and easy-going NCOs in the forces . He played 69 Wartime League and Cup games for Stoke , and also made 87 guest appearances for Blackpool . In addition to these , he also played a handful of games for Scottish sides Airdrieonians , Morton and Rangers , and also played for Arsenal against FC Dynamo Moscow in extremely thick fog . He also played 29 times for England , though no caps were awarded as these were unofficial games . One of the last games of the period was an FA Cup Sixth Round second-leg tie clash between Stoke and Bolton Wanderers ; the match ended in tragedy in what would be known as the Burnden Park disaster – 33 people died and 500 were injured . Matthews sent £ 30 to the disaster fund and couldn 't bring himself to train for several days afterwards . Matthews ' father died in 1945 . From his deathbed he made his son promise him two things : to look after his mother , and to win an FA Cup Final .

The regular Football League returned in time for the 1946 – 47 season , during which Matthews played 23 league games and was a major contributor to 30 of the club 's 41 league goals . Stoke matched their record finish of fourth in the league , finishing just two points shy of champions Liverpool after losing to Sheffield United on the final day of the season . However , in February Matthews was returning from a knee injury when manager McGrory told him he was not in the first XI for the game against Arsenal ; the press reported this as a bust-up . Relations between McGrory , the Stoke City board , and Matthews had indeed always been sour – though once again a story that the players sided against Matthews were untrue . Recalled against Brentford , only after the game did he find out that this was only because he was a last-minute replacement for an injured Bert Mitchell . Matthews put in a second transfer request , which the Stoke board eventually accepted . He selected Blackpool as his next club as he still lived in the area following his service in the RAF ; the Stoke board sanctioned the move on the condition that the deal was to remain a secret until the end of the season , so as to not disrupt the club 's title bid . The secret was revealed in a matter of hours , as an unknown person informed the press .

On 10 May 1947 , immediately after a Great Britain versus Rest of Europe match in Glasgow ( Britain won 6 – 1 ) , he made the move for £ 11,500 , at the age of 32 . The match itself raised £ 30,000 for the four Home Nations Football Associations , and since the eleven British players received £ 14 each , Matthews questioned where exactly this money ended up – he doubted that much of it ended up as funding for grass-roots football . " You 're 32 , do you think you can make it for another couple of years ? " – Blackpool manager Joe Smith in 1947 . Smith told Matthews " there are no shackles here ... express yourself ... play your own game and whatever you do on the pitch , do it in the knowledge that you have my full support . " He assembled a talented frontline in Matthews , Stan Mortensen , Jimmy McIntosh , and Alex Munro ; with an emphasis on entertaining football . The Seasiders finished in ninth place and reached the 1948 FA Cup Final . On 23 April 1948 , the eve of the final , Matthews won the inaugural Football Writers ' Association Footballer of the Year award . Despite taking the lead twice in the match , Blackpool lost out 4 – 2 to Matt Busby 's Manchester United in the final , with Matthews assisting Mortensen for Blackpool 's second .

Injury limited him to only 28 appearances in 1948 – 49 , as Blackpool struggled to a 16th-place finish . He spent the summer touring theatres in a variety act with his brother Ronnie , though he was troubled by an ankle injury he picked up in a charity game . Blackpool finished seventh in 1949 – 50 , and though they were never title contenders vast crowds still turned out home and away to witness the entertaining football they displayed . At this time he received the maximum wage allowed for a professional player – £ 12 a week . In 1950 – 51 Blackpool stormed to a third-place finish , and Matthews played 44 games in league and cup . He cited his highlights of the season as a 2 – 0 win at Sunderland , a 4 – 4 draw at Arsenal , and a 4 – 2 defeat at Newcastle United . They also reached the 1951 FA Cup Final , where they were favourites to beat opponents Newcastle ; however Matthews ended up with a second runners-up medal thanks to a brace from Jackie Milburn . After picking up an ankle injury in November , he missed most of the 1951 – 52 campaign , and was forced to instead spent most of his time working at the hotel he and his wife ran . It was during this time that he cut red meat from his diet to begin his new near-vegetarian diet . At this point new Stoke manager Frank Taylor enquired as to whether he might bring Matthews back to the club ; all parties agreed to the idea in principle until Joe Smith put his foot down to ensure he stayed , with an inspirational speech he promised Matthews that an FA Cup winners medal was still possible , telling him that " a lot of people think I 'm mad , but even though you 're 37 , I believe your best football is still to come . "

Despite spending some three months of the season out with a muscle injury , the 1952 – 53 campaign proved Smith 's words to be accurate , as a 38-year-old Matthews won an FA Cup winners medal in a match which was , despite Mortensen 's hat-trick , subsequently dubbed the " Matthews Final " . Bolton were leading 3 – 1 with 35 minutes to go , but Matthews had " the game of his life " in " the greatest ever FA Cup final " and spurred his team on to a last gasp 4 – 3 victory . He always credited the team and especially Mortensen for the victory , and never accepted the nickname of the " Matthews Final " . He helped the Tangerines to record a sixth-place finish in 1953 – 54 , though hopes of retaining their FA Cup title were ended with a defeat to Port Vale at Vale Park in the Fifth Round . Matthews missed just eight league games in 1954 – 55 , though journalists were keen to write him off with every occasional off-performance and missed game – " it was all balderdash " , he replied . Despite his age , and more pertinently the media 's constant references to his age , Arsenal manager Tom Whittaker tried , unsuccessfully , to lure Matthews to Highbury with a lucrative , if somewhat illegal approach .

As Smith began to establish a new side with talents such as Jackie Mudie and Jimmy Armfield , Blackpool posted a second-place finish in 1955 – 56 , though they ended up some 11 points behind champions Manchester United . Matthews believed that the performance he gave in a 3 – 1 win over Arsenal on the opening day of the season was the finest he ever gave . At the end of the campaign Matthews was made the inaugural winner of the European Footballer of the Year award , having narrowly defeated Alfredo Di Stéfano 47 to 44 in the poll . Remaining a key first team member in 1956 – 57 , injury restricted him to 25 league appearances , though Blackpool claimed a creditable fourth-place finish . Matthews scored his 18th and final goal for Blackpool in a 4 – 1 league victory over Tottenham Hotspur at Bloomfield Road on 3 September 1956 . Blackpool finished seventh in 1957 – 58 , after which Joe Smith left the club . Smith 's replacement was Ron Suart , who wanted Matthews to stay out wide , and did not value his contribution in the way that Smith had done . Suart limited Matthews to 19 league appearances in 1958 – 59 . Matthews was then used just 15 times in 1959 – 60 , as Suart signed Arthur Kaye to take his place , and local lad Steve Hill also vied for the outside-right position . He enjoyed more games in 1960 – 61 , playing 27 league games as the club narrowly avoiding relegation by the odd point .

He started the 1961 – 62 season behind Hill in the pecking order , only getting his place back in time for a 4 – 0 win over Chelsea after Hill picked up an injury . He made his 440th and final appearance in a Blackpool shirt in a 3 – 0 defeat at Arsenal on 7 October 1961 . It was a fitting final bow as he always enjoyed playing against Arsenal , and he had " so many wonderful memories " at Highbury . With former team-mate and close friend Jackie Mudie at Stoke City , and with Tony Waddington keen to welcome Matthews back to the Victoria Ground , his return to his home-town club was sealed . However Matthews was not impressed when the Blackpool board demanded a £ 3,500 transfer fee , with one director being so bold as to tell him " You forget . As a player , we made you . " Having kept secret from Stoke a niggling knee injury Matthews had been carrying , Blackpool got their £ 3,500 for the player .

At Stoke , Matthews found himself playing Second Division football for the first time in 28 years . Despite Stoke being strapped for cash , Tony Waddington gave him a two-year contract at £ 50 a week – this was double the wages he received at Blackpool . The signing was broadcast live on Sportsweek , as Waddington whispered in his ear " Welcome home , Stan . For years this club has been going nowhere . Now we 're on our way " . Waddington delayed his return debut until 24 October 1961 , when Stoke played Huddersfield Town at the Victoria Ground , the attendance was 35,974 – more than treble the previous home game – and Matthews set up one of City 's goals in a 3 – 0 win . He went on to score three goals in 21 games in the rest of the 1961 – 62 campaign . Waddington signed hardman Eddie Clamp to protect Matthews in the 1962 – 63 season , and the two would also become close friends off the pitch . Along with veteran teammates Jackie Mudie , Jimmy O 'Neill , Eddie Stuart , Don Ratcliffe , Dennis Viollet , and Jimmy McIlroy , Stoke had the oldest team in the Football League . Matthews scored his only goal of the season in the final home game of the campaign , as Luton Town were beaten 2 – 0 , the result ensured Stoke gained promotion to the top flight . Stoke went up as Second Division champions , and Matthews was voted FWA Footballer of the Year for the second time in his career , 15 years after he was made the inaugural winner of the award .

After picking up an injury , he missed January onwards of the 1963 – 64 campaign , and thereby missed the 1964 Football League Cup Final defeat to Leicester City . Discovering that niggling injuries which would have cost him one day out of action now required more than two weeks worth of rest to recover from , Matthews decided to retire after one more season . He spent the 1964 – 65 season playing for the reserve side . On 1 January 1965 he became the only footballer to ever be knighted ( for services to football ) whilst still an active professional player ; though he never thought himself worthy of such an honour . His only first team appearance of the season was also the last Football League game of his career ; it came on 6 February 1965 , just after his 50th birthday , and was necessitated by injuries to both Peter Dobing and Gerry Bridgwood . The opponents that day were Fulham , and Stoke won the game 3 – 1 . Though he felt he had retired too early , and could have carried on playing for another two years , this brought an end to his 35-year professional career .

Stoke City arranged a testimonial match in honour of Matthews ; it was much needed as he had spent most of his career constricted to the tight maximum wage that had been enforced upon the English game . The game was played at the Victoria Ground on 28 April 1965 , by which time Matthews had decided to retire as a player , and the pre-match entertainment consisted of another match of two veteran teams featuring many legends of the game . Harry Johnston led out a team consisting of Bert Trautmann , Tim Ward , George Hardwick , Jimmy Hill , Neil Franklin , Don Revie , Stan Mortensen , Nat Lofthouse , Jimmy Hagan , Tom Finney and Frank Bowyer ( reserve ) . Walley Barnes led out an opposing team consisting of Jimmy O 'Neill , Jimmy Scoular , Danny Blanchflower , Jimmy Dickinson , Hughie Kelly , Bill McGarry , Jackie Mudie , Jackie Milburn , Jock Dodds , Ken Barnes , and Arthur Rowley ( reserve ) . In the main game itself , two teams of legends were formed , a Stan 's XI ( consisting of Football League players ) and an International XI . The International side won 6 – 4 , and Matthews was carried shoulder-high from the field at full time by Puskás and Yashin .

After playing for England Schoolboys , playing in a trial at Roker Park in front of the England selectors , and representing The Football League , Matthews was given his England debut at Ninian Park in 1934 . Matthews scored the third goal as England beat the Welsh 4 – 0 . His second game would be the infamous Battle of Highbury , where he set up Eric Brook for the first goal of a 3 – 2 win over world champions Italy . The Italians turned the match into a " bloodbath " , and it ended up as the most violent match that Matthews would ever be involved in . His third cap came in a 3 – 0 over Germany at White Hart Lane on 4 December 1935 , after Ralph Birkett was unable to play due to injury ; Matthews was outplayed by his opposite number Reinhold Münzenberg in both attack and defence . Matthews was jeered by England supporters and condemned by the press . He would have to wait until 17 April 1937 for another chance in an England shirt , when he was selected to play in front of 149,000 spectators against the auld enemy at Scotland 's Hampden Park . He was physically sick before the match , as he would be before any big game . The " Hampden Roar " a big factor , the Scots won 3 – 1 despite a good English performance . After another game against Wales , Matthews scored a hat-trick in a 5 – 4 win against Czechoslovakia .

In 1938 he played eight games for England , starting with defeat to a Scotland team containing a young Bill Shankly . He then travelled to Berlin for another encounter with Münzenberg , where pre-match he witnessed first hand the foreboding devotion the people showed the Führer when his motorcade drove past a café the England team were dining in . The game became infamous as The FA , themselves under instruction from the British government , informed the England team that they had to perform the Nazi salute as part of the strategy of appeasement . England won 6 – 3 with Matthews himself getting on the scoreboard having got the better of Münzenberg this time . The next game was a shock 2 – 1 defeat to Switzerland , which in turn was followed by a 4 – 2 win over France in Paris . Following the conclusion of this summer tour of the continent , Matthews scored in a 4 – 2 defeat to Wales in Cardiff , and then played in England 's 3 – 0 win over a Europe XI at Highbury , their 4 – 0 win over Norway in Newcastle , and their 7 – 0 win over Ireland at Old Trafford .

On 15 April 1939 , he returned to a muddy Hampden Park with England to claim a 2 – 1 victory in front of 142,000 rain-soaked supporters ; he set up Tommy Lawton for the winner with seconds to spare . That summer was the last time the England would tour Europe before Hitler 's Nazis were defeated . The first game was against Italy , who gave the English a warm reception despite Benito Mussolini 's breast-beating and the bad blood of five years previous . Again the World Champions , the Italians managed to salvage a 2 – 2 draw at the San Siro after scoring with a clear handball ; this time Matthews left the field with a chipped hip bone for his efforts . The next game was a 2 – 1 loss to Yugoslavia , with Matthews and captain Eddie Hapgood passengers in the game after picking up early injuries ; this injury forced him to sit out the following encounter with Romania . Following the war , his return for England came against Scotland on 12 April 1947 at Wembley , in a match which finished as a 1 – 1 draw . In the summer he took part in England 's tour of Switzerland and Portugal . Following a surprise defeat to the Swiss , England cantered to a 10 – 0 win over the Portuguese , with Matthews scoring the 10th . In September , he put in one of his finest performances in an England shirt as he set up all of England 's five goals in a 5 – 2 victory over Belgium .

In April 1948 he once again travelled with England to Hampden Park , helping his country to a 2 – 0 victory ; however after the match he was the subject of an FA inquiry after he claimed tea and scones on his expenses ( at the cost of sixpence ) . Regardless of this treatment by the FA , the next month he helped England record a 4 – 0 victory over Italy in Turin . Folklore told that he beat Alberto Eliani only to have the audacity to then pull a comb from his shorts pocket and comb his hair ; the reality was that he simply used his hand to wipe his sweating brow in the beating Italian sun . However the legend would follow him around the world in later life , and spectators in the crowd were convinced that they had witnessed it . Later in the year he played in a goalless draw with Denmark , a 6 – 2 win over Northern Ireland , a 1 – 0 win over Wales , and a 6 – 0 triumph over Switzerland . Manager Walter Winterbottom began to look for a more defensive winger , and so used Matthews just once in 1949 – a 3 – 1 defeat to Scotland in the British Home Championship . Only after impressing in an FA tour of Canada was he was named as a last minute inclusion in the England squad for the 1950 FIFA World Cup in Brazil . He did not play in the win over Chile or in the infamous defeat to the United States , but played just once , in the 1 – 0 defeat to Spain at the Estádio do Maracanã . The preparation was not ideal as the FA did not take the competition seriously , and the hotel had " unpalatable " food and no training facilities .

After playing only in two further games , a 4 – 4 draw with a Europe XI and a 3 – 1 win over Northern Ireland , he found himself back in the international scene following his heroics in the 1953 FA Cup Final . He was selected to play Hungary 's Golden Team on 25 November 1953 , in a 6 – 3 defeat that became known as the " Match of the Century " . He blamed the FA and the selectors for the heavy loss , though he had great admiration for the Hungarians , particularly Ferenc Puskás . He did not play in the England 's 7 – 1 defeat to Hungary in Budapest in May 1954 . However he was in the squad for the 1954 FIFA World Cup in Switzerland . Matthews helped England to a 4 – 4 draw with Belgium , though was left out of a win over Switzerland , before he returned to the first XI as England crashed out of the competition with a 4 – 2 defeat to Uruguay at the St. Jakob Stadium after mistakes from goalkeeper Gil Merrick . His third match of the year was a 2 – 0 win over Northern Ireland at Windsor Park in the 1955 British Home Championship , though on the pitch he did not gel well with Don Revie . Matthews then put in a superb in a 2 – 0 win over the Welsh , before he helped England to record a 3 – 1 victory over World Champions West Germany , though only three of the Germans used at Wembley had been in the first XI in the World Cup Final .

England beat Scotland 7 – 2 in April 1955 , and this time Matthews linked up much better with Revie , and 40-year-old Matthews was largely credited for the outstanding margin of victory . In this game Duncan Edwards was making his England debut ; when Matthews made his , Edwards had not even been born . Matthews went on England 's unsuccessful tour of the continent in 1955 , as the selectors erratic choices helped to ensure a 1 – 0 defeat to France , a 1 – 1 draw with Spain , and a 3 – 1 defeat to Portugal . Left out against Denmark , he was back in the team in October for a 1 – 1 draw with Wales . Having been awarded the inaugural Ballon d 'Or in 1956 , that May he was recalled to the England front line for an encounter with Brazil ; Brazil would go on to lift the World Cup in 1958 , but Matthews helped the English to record a 4 – 1 victory . He then refused to take part in that summer 's European tour , having already committed himself to his second summer of coaching in South Africa . In his next international game , against Northern Ireland on 6 October 1956 , aged 41 years and 248 days , he became the oldest England player ever to score an international goal .

He played three of England four qualification games for the 1958 FIFA World Cup : a 5 – 1 victory over the Republic of Ireland , and the 5 – 2 and 4 – 1 wins over Denmark . On 15 May 1957 , Matthews became the oldest player ever to represent England , when at 42 years and 104 days old he turned out for the victory over the Danes in Copenhagen . Despite calls by the press for him to be included in the 1958 World Cup squad , this time the selectors did not bow to the pressure . Yet at 23 years , nobody would ever enjoy a longer career with the England team . He was the subject of This Is Your Life in 1956 when he was surprised by Eamonn Andrews at the BBC Television Theatre .

Franz Beckenbauer said that the speed and skill Matthews possessed meant that " almost no one in the game could stop him " . John Charles noted that " he was the best crosser I 've ever seen – and he had to contend with the old heavy ball " . Johnny Giles said that " he had everything – good close control , great dribbling ability and he was lightning quick . He was also an intelligent player , who knew how to pass the ball " . Despite his great talents , he rarely tackled opponents and was not adept at heading the ball or using his left foot . Before 1937 – 38 he had scored 43 goals in four seasons , and full-backs began to mark him more tightly ; because of this he decided to drop deeper to collect the ball and aim to play pinpoint crosses as opposed to going for glory himself . Though he would never again score more than six goals in a season , this made him more an effective team player and a greater threat to the opposition . When running along Blackpool 's beach , at 7 am , no matter the weather , Matthews wore shoes that contained lead , so that when he changed into his football boots , his feet felt light , giving himself the impression that he could run faster . Having trained to a level of fitness few other players would reach , by the mid-1950s he was able to cut back on his intense training as his level of fitness was by then ingrained in his body . He never smoked ; instead , he was very conscious of every item of food and drink he consumed , and he maintained a rigid daily training regime from childhood up until his old age . In an interview with the FA he said , " I had some very good advice and started to eat more salads and fruit , and every Monday I had no food . Just one day , on a Monday , but I felt better . " The only time he knowingly consumed alcohol was when drinking champagne out of the FA Cup in 1953 .

In addition to his attention to detail in diet and fitness , he also afforded close scrutiny to his kit . 1950 – 51 he struck a boot sponsorship deal with the Co-op , though he instead began wearing a more lightweight pair of boots he had discovered on show at the World Cup – at the time they were not available to buy in England . He would wear the customized boots until his retirement , though they were so delicate that he got through countless pairs every season . An avid student of the game , in the 1950 FIFA World Cup Matthews stayed on to watch teams such as Brazil and Uruguay compete in the tournament after England 's elimination – the English FA , manager and media all returned home to , as Matthews said , " bury their heads in the sand . " Matthews regularly condemned the " blazer brigade " at the FA in his autobiography , slating them as " conservative " and stressing that many of them were Old Etonians ; in his view they treated players and supporters poorly , demonstrated arrogance by ignoring competitions they did not control ( the World Cup and European domestic competitions ) , and viewed innovations with excessive suspicion ( for example the FA sanctioned only the use of floodlights in 1952 despite artificial lighting having been experimented with as far back as 1878 , and for years insisted on using outdated kit such as heavy " reinforced " boots ) . Writing about the fact that the FA allocated only 12,000 of the 100,000 available tickets for the 1953 FA Cup Final to Blackpool supporters , Matthews wrote : " I couldn 't make my mind up whether they were dunderheads or simply didn 't care about the genuine supporters who were the lifeblood of the game " .

Matthews was appointed general manager at Stoke 's rivals Port Vale in July 1965 , alongside good friend Jackie Mudie ; Matthews was unpaid , though was given expenses . The pair had a plan of bringing through talented schoolboys and selling one or two off every so often to improve the club 's bleak financial picture , whilst at the same time advancing through the leagues ; in his autobiography he said that what Dario Gradi later achieved at Crewe Alexandra is what he had in mind for the Vale . Matthews concentrated his search in North East England and Central Scotland , where he discovered talented striker Mick Cullerton , though overlooked a teenage Ray Kennedy . Handed complete managerial control following Mudie 's resignation in May 1967 , Matthews couldn 't guide the club to success – instead , Port Vale were fined £ 4,000 in February / March 1968 and expelled from the Football League for financial irregularities . He was forced to use his name to plead with the other Football League clubs to re-elect the Vale , which they duly did . He stood down as manager in May 1968 , and despite being owed £ 9,000 in salary and expenses , agreed to stay at Vale Park to continue his work with the youth team . A " final settlement " was reached in December 1970 , Matthews was given £ 3,300 , with the other £ 7,000 he was owed to be written off . Player Roy Sproson later said that " he [ Matthews ] trusted people who should never have been trusted and people took advantage of him . I am convinced a lot of people sponged off him and , all the while , the club were sliding . " The experience " left a sour taste " in his mouth , and was enough to convince him never to try his hand as management in English football again .

Matthews gave up his summers every year between 1953 and 1978 to coach poor children in South Africa , Nigeria , Ghana , Uganda and Tanzania . In South Africa in 1975 , he ignored apartheid to form a team of black schoolboys in Soweto called " Stan 's Men " . The members of his team told him that it was their dream to play in Brazil , so Matthews organised a trip there ; they were the first black team ever to tour outside of South Africa . He did not have the money to fund the trip himself , though used his connections ( for the only time other than when he used them to save Port Vale in 1968 ) to arrange sponsorship from Coca-Cola and the Johannesburg Sunday Times newspaper . The South African authorities did not want to cause an international incident , so did not prevent Stan 's Men from getting on the plane to Rio de Janeiro , where they would meet legendary player Zico . It was on this trip that Matthews met Ronnie Biggs . On the way back from the trip , the Stan 's Men captain Gilbert Moiloa called Matthews " black man with the white face " .

Having toured the world coaching in Australia , the United States , Canada and especially in Africa , Matthews returned to Stoke-on-Trent with wife Mila in 1989 . He later served as president of Stoke City and honorary vice-president of Blackpool . Matthews died on 23 February 2000 , aged 85 , after falling ill while on holiday in Tenerife . Mila had died the previous year . It was a recurrence of an illness that he first suffered in 1997 . His death was announced on the radio just before the start of an England v Argentina friendly match . He was cremated following a funeral service in Stoke on 3 March 2000 . His funeral was attended by many of his fellow footballers , such as Bobby Charlton and Jack Charlton , Gordon Banks , Nat Lofthouse and Tom Finney . His ashes were buried beneath the centre circle of Stoke City 's Britannia Stadium , which he had officially opened in August 1997 . After his death , more than 100,000 people lined the streets of Stoke-on-Trent to pay tribute . As the cortège wound its way along the 12-mile route , employees downed tools and schoolchildren stood motionless to witness his final passing .

After his death , dozens of footballing legends paid tribute to him , and the epilogue to his autobiography contains several pages of quotations . Pelé said he was " the man who taught us the way football should be played " , and Brian Clough added that " he was a true gentleman and we shall never see his like again " . English goalkeeping legend Gordon Banks said that " I don 't think anyone since had a name so synonymous with football in England " , whilst World Cup winning German defender Berti Vogts commented that " It is not just in England where his name is famous . All over the world he is regarded as a true football genius " .

Stanley Matthews was inducted into the Ontario Sports Hall of Fame in 1995 . Matthews was made an inaugural inductee of the English Football Hall of Fame in 2002 in recognition of his talents . The International Federation of Football History & Statistics voted him the 11th greatest footballer of the 20th century . He was inducted into the Blackpool F.C. Hall of Fame at Bloomfield Road when it was officially opened by Jimmy Armfield in April 2006 . Organised by the Blackpool Supporters Association , Blackpool fans around the world voted on their all-time heroes . Five players from each decade are inducted ; Matthews is in the 1950s . The West Stand at Blackpool 's Bloomfield Road is named in his honour . He was also inducted into the Stoke-on-Trent Hall of Fame when it was opened in January 2011 . There is a statue of Matthews outside Stoke City 's Britannia Stadium and another in the centre of Hanley . The dedication on the former reads : " His name is symbolic of the beauty of the game , his fame timeless and international , his sportsmanship and modesty universally acclaimed . A magical player , of the people , for the people . "

In the summer of 1934 , Matthews married Betty Vallance , daughter of Stoke City trainer Jimmy Vallance , whom he first met on his 15th birthday in 1930 on his first day as office boy at the Victoria Ground . The couple had two children together : Jean ( born 1 January 1939 ) and Stanley Jr . ( born 20 November 1945 ) , who went on to become a tennis player under the tutelage of John Barrett . He became Wimbledon Boys ' Champion in 1962 , making him the last English player to do so . He never translated his success into the senior game , though , and instead moved to the United States to run the Four Seasons Racquet Club in Wilton , Connecticut . Jean married Robert Gough , whom she had met at their tennis club , in January 1963 ; she later said of her father that " He was a very good father and family man . He kept my brother and me out of the limelight , he was very protective . " In 1965 , Matthews became a grandfather after Jean gave birth to a son , Matthew Gough . She would have two other children — daughters Samantha and Amanda . Gough made Matthews a great-grandfather in 1999 when he and his wife had a son , Cameron . Matthews had six other great-grandchildren .

In 1967 , while on a tour of Czechoslovakia with Port Vale , Matthews met 40-year-old Mila , who was the group 's interpreter for the trip . Matthews was still married to Betty , but as he was convinced he had found the true love of his life in Mila , he and Betty divorced . He and Mila spent the ensuing years living at various times in Malta ( specifically Marsaxlokk ) , South Africa and Canada . They also travelled extensively as Matthews 's coaching jobs and guest appearances dictated . After Mila died in 1999 at the age of 71 , according to Les Scott ( who helped Matthews write his autobiography ) , Matthews " was never the same person " . " Self-willed , strong-minded , humorous , generous of spirit and , for all his fame as down to earth as the folk who once adorned the terraces in the hope of seeing him sparkle gold dust on to their harsh working lives . "

Matthews ' autobiography , The Way It Was , was released by Headline in 2000 . The book is dedicated to his wife Mila , who died the year before its publication . Matthews , then 84 , collaborated with Les Scott , his friend of 10 years , in the writing of the book over an 18-month period on an almost daily basis . " Stan , as he had been all his life , was an early riser , " wrote Scott in the epilogue . " Our collaborations were over by eleven in the morning and , without fail , took place in his den . He loved working on his book and , after I had left him , he would give the morning 's session more applied thought — more often than not ringing me at home to provide additional thoughts or anecdotes . "

The Choiseul pigeon ( Microgoura meeki ) is an extinct species of bird in the pigeon and dove family , Columbidae . It was endemic to the island of Choiseul in the Solomon Islands , although there are unsubstantiated reports that it may once have lived on several nearby islands . The last confirmed sighting was in 1904 . Other common names were Solomons crested pigeon , Solomon Islands crowned-pigeon and Kuvojo . The Choiseul pigeon was monotypic within the genus Microgoura and had no known subspecies . Its closest living relative is believed to be the thick-billed ground pigeon , and some authors have suggested that the Choiseul pigeon may be a link between that species and the crowned pigeons . The adult pigeon was largely blue-grey , with a buffy orange belly and a distinctive slaty-blue crest . It is unknown how this crest was held by the bird in life . The bird 's head sported a blue frontal shield surrounded by black feathers and a bicoloured beak . The wings were brown and the short tail was a blackish purple . It was described as having a beautiful rising and falling whistling call . As the bird became extinct before significant field observations could be made , not much is known about its behaviour . It is believed to have been a terrestrial species that laid a single egg in an unlined depression in the ground . It roosted in pairs or small groups of three or four in small shrubs and was reportedly very tame , allowing hunters to pick it up off its roost . The Choiseul pigeon lived in lowland forests , particularly in coastal swampy areas that lacked mangroves . It was only recorded by Albert Stewart Meek , who collected six adults and an egg from the northern part of the island in 1904 . Despite many subsequent searches , the bird has not been definitively reported since . It is believed to have been rare when Meek collected his specimens . The indigenous peoples reported that the species was driven to extinction due to the introduction of cats , as the pigeon had never previously confronted a carnivorous mammal on Choiseul . The last unconfirmed report of a Choiseul pigeon was in the early 1940s , and the species is considered extinct .

The Choiseul pigeon was described by Walter Rothschild in 1904 on the basis of six skins — three male and three female — and an egg collected by Albert Stewart Meek earlier that year . It was placed in the monotypic genus Microgoura , whose name comes from the Ancient Greek word mikros " small " , and goura , a New Guinean aboriginal name for the similarly-crested crowned pigeons of the genus Goura . Rothschild named the species after Meek , giving the bird the specific name meeki . Though its relationships are unclear , the Choiseul pigeon is believed to have been closest to the thick-billed ground pigeon ( Trugon terrestris ) from Indonesia and Papua New Guinea , which has similar plumage . It has been suggested that the Choiseul pigeon was a link between the thick-billed ground pigeon and the crowned pigeons ; however , other sources argue that it may not have been closely related to the crowned pigeons as its crest was quite different . Based on behavioural and morphological evidence , Jolyon C. Parish proposed that the Choiseul pigeon should be placed in the Gourinae subfamily along with the Groura pigeons , the dodo , the Rodrigues solitaire , and others . The Choiseul pigeon has no known subspecies .

Today , five skins and a partial skeleton are kept in the American Museum of Natural History , while a single skin and the egg are kept at the Natural History Museum at Tring . The Choiseul pigeon is also known as the Solomon crowned pigeon , Solomon Islands pigeon , Solomons crested pigeon , Solomon Islands crested pigeon , Choiseul crested pigeon , crested Choiseul pigeon , Meek 's pigeon , Meek 's ground pigeon , and dwarf goura . The indigenous peoples of Choiseul called the species either " kumku-peka " or " kukuru-ni-lua , " which translates literally as " pigeon-belong-ground . "

The Choiseul pigeon was about 31 cm ( 12 in ) long . The wing of the male was 195 – 197 mm ( 7.7 – 7.8 in ) , the tail 100 – 105 mm ( 3.9 – 4.1 in ) , the culmen 34 mm ( 1.3 in ) , and the tarsus was 60 mm ( 2.4 in ) . The wing of the female was 180 – 190 mm ( 7.1 – 7.5 in ) , the tail 100 mm ( 3.9 in ) , the culmen 33 mm ( 1.3 in ) , and the tarsus was 60 mm ( 2.4 in ) . Adult Choiseul pigeons of both sexes were blue-grey overall with a buffy orange belly . The pigeon had a distinctive long , rounded crest that had a hairy texture . This crest , like the crown , was slaty-blue and emerged from the bird 's hindcrown . Though many artists have speculated , it is unknown how the pigeon held its crest in life as Meek 's notes did not cover this subject . John Gerrard Keulemans ( who produced the illustration accompanying Rothschild 's original description ) , depicted the crest as being flat based on Meek 's specimens ; other artists have presented it as spread and scraggly like that of the crowned pigeons . It has been suggested that the crests of the museum specimens were flattened during preparation .

On the bird 's forehead was a naked and pale chalky-blue frontal shield . This was surrounded by short , velvety black feathers that extended from the base of the bill to the area just below and in front of the eye , while the area below the eye was a pinkish wash . The bird 's chin and throat were sparsely covered with black , velvety feathers , while the neck was a slaty-blue that transitioned into a brownish-grey breast . The abdomen and undertail-coverts were a rich orange , while the undertail was a blackish-grey . The wing was slaty with a hint of brown at its base and became a warm , dark brown by the wingtips ; the underwing was brown . The back was grey and transitioned into a browner rump , while the uppertail-coverts were a dark sooty-grey with blackish tips . The tail , which was short and rounded , was a very dark indigo that had a slightly purple iridescent sheen . The bill was bicoloured ; the upper mandible was chalky-blue with a black tip while the lower mandible was red . The plumage of the juvenile is unknown . The bird 's feet were a dull purplish-red and unfeathered up to the heel , while the iris was a dark brown .

Not much is known about the species ' behaviour , as it became extinct before significant field observations could be made . It is likely that the Choiseul pigeon was a largely terrestrial species , feeding and nesting near the forest floor . The indigenous people of the town of Vundutura said that the pigeon would roost in pairs or small groups of three or four in small shrubs close to the ground . They claimed that the species was very tame , allowing local hunters to approach it and pick it up off of its perch by hand . They reported that the species had stones in its gizzard . It laid a single dark , cream-coloured egg in an unlined depression on the ground . The egg was about 43 by 31.3 mm ( 1.69 by 1.23 in ) in size , which is considered small in proportion to the bird .

The Choiseul pigeon was non-migratory and is thought to have lived on the forest floor in lowland forests , including coastal swampy areas that lacked mangroves . The Choiseul pigeon is usually considered to have been endemic to the island of Choiseul in the Solomon Islands off the coast of New Guinea , where the only specimens were collected . The specimens Meek acquired were likely collected near Choiseul Bay in the northern part of the island . The last reports of the species from the indigenous population came from the Kolombangara River . It also reportedly lived on the neighboring islands of Santa Isabel and Malaita , and it is suspected that it may once have lived on Bougainville Island . However , these reports were never confirmed and must be considered anecdotal . It would be considered very unusual if the Choiseul pigeon were truly endemic to Choiseul as the island hosts no other endemic species , and the pigeon was never linked ecologically with another species on the island .

In January 1904 six specimens and an egg were collected by Albert Stewart Meek , a bird collector for Lord Walter Rothschild , near Choiseul Bay on Choiseul . Several local boys told Meek that the pigeon was also present on the nearby islands of Santa Isabel and Malaita . Though Meek did not travel to these islands , he did search for the Choiseul pigeon on the adjacent Bougainville Island , but did not find any evidence of its presence . No other specimens were ever collected or seen by Western scientists . The Choiseul pigeon was not searched for again until briefly in 1927 and again in October 1929 , when five veteran collectors belonging to the Whitney South Seas Expedition dedicated three months to searching for the pigeon in multiple locations across Choiseul without success . The indigenous people interviewed by this expedition largely believed that the pigeon was extinct in 1929 . The last reported indigenous sighting was sometime in the early 1940s near Sasamungga by the Kolombangara River , although this sighting was never confirmed . Searches of the small , cat-free islands of Rob Roy Island and Wagina off Choiseul 's southeast coast and Choiseul 's forested coastal swampland in the 1960s by British ornithologist Shane A. Parker did not discover any signs of the pigeon . American scientist Jared Diamond searched for the bird in 1974 without success .

This pigeon was a source of food for the local people , who would locate its roosting sites either due to the bird calling or by the droppings that had accumulated below its perches . It was well-remembered by the indigenous peoples , and stories of the delicious ground-dwelling pigeon were passed down by local elders after its extinction . One indigenous person implied that the gizzard stones of the pigeon may have had value locally . After the bird 's extinction , the indigenous people have occasionally confused the Choiseul pigeon with the arboreal crested cuckoo-dove in modern folklore , and several claims of the pigeon 's continued existence turned out to be based on the cuckoo-dove . After its discovery , several Western bird collections highly desired its skins ; the Whitney South Seas Expedition spent three months at high expense on Choiseul with the primary objective being the acquisition of the Choiseul pigeon . In 2012 the Choiseul pigeon was commemorated on a stamp from Mozambique along with several other extinct birds . The Choiseul pigeon is depicted on the flag of the Choiseul Province .

The indigenous population believed that the pigeon became extinct due to predation by feral cats and , to a lesser extent , feral dogs . As Choiseul has no indigenous carnivorous mammals , the ground-dwelling pigeon was particularly susceptible to the introduced cats . If the pigeon existed on islands that feral cats had never reached , it is believed that the clearance of its forest habitat would have led to its local extinction . As there have been no substantiated reports since 1904 despite multiple searches , the IUCN has declared it extinct . As several ornithologists had visited Choiseul and the nearby islands prior to Meek without noting any sign of the bird 's existence , it is likely that the Choiseul pigeon was already close to extinction in 1904 .

Charles Cunningham Boycott ( 12 March 1832 – 19 June 1897 ) was an English land agent whose ostracism by his local community in Ireland gave the English language the verb " to boycott " . He had served in the British Army 39th Foot , which brought him to Ireland . After retiring from the army , Boycott worked as a land agent for Lord Erne ( John Crichton , 3rd Earl Erne ) , a landowner in the Lough Mask area of County Mayo . In 1880 , as part of its campaign for the Three Fs ( fair rent , fixity of tenure , and free sale ) and specifically in resistance to proposed evictions on the estate , local activists of the Irish Land League encouraged Boycott 's employees ( including the seasonal workers required to harvest the crops on Lord Erne 's estate ) to withdraw their labour , and began a campaign of isolation against Boycott in the local community . This campaign included shops in nearby Ballinrobe refusing to serve him , and the withdrawal of services . Some were threatened with violence to ensure compliance . The campaign against Boycott became a cause célèbre in the British press after he wrote a letter to The Times . Newspapers sent correspondents to the West of Ireland to highlight what they viewed as the victimisation of a servant of a peer of the realm by Irish nationalists . Fifty Orangemen from County Cavan and County Monaghan travelled to Lord Erne 's estate to harvest the crops , while a regiment of the 19th Royal Hussars and more than 1,000 men of the Royal Irish Constabulary were deployed to protect the harvesters . The episode was estimated to have cost the British government and others at least £ 10,000 to harvest about £ 500 worth of crops .

Charles Cunningham Boycott was born in 1832 to Reverend William Boycatt and his wife Georgiana . He grew up in the village of Burgh St Peter in Norfolk , England ; the Boycatt family had lived in Norfolk for almost 150 years . They were of Huguenot origin , and had fled from France in 1685 when Louis XIV revoked civil and religious liberties to French Protestants . Charles Boycott was named Boycatt in his baptismal records . The family changed the spelling of its name from Boycatt to Boycott in 1841 . Boycott was educated at a boarding school in Blackheath , London . He was interested in the military — and in 1848 , entered the Royal Military Academy , Woolwich , in hopes of serving in the Corps of Royal Sappers and Miners . He was discharged from the academy in 1849 after failing a periodic exam , and the following year his family bought him a commission in the 39th Foot regiment for £ 450 . Boycott 's regiment transferred to Belfast shortly after his arrival . Six months later , it was sent to Newry before marching to Dublin , where it remained for a year . In 1852 , Boycott married Anne Dunne in St Paul 's Church , Arran Quay , Dublin . He was ill between August 1851 and February 1852 and sold his commission the following year , but decided to remain in Ireland . He leased a farm in County Tipperary , where he acted as a landlord on a small scale .

After receiving an inheritance , Boycott was persuaded by his friend , Murray McGregor Blacker , a local magistrate , to move to Achill Island , a large island off the coast of County Mayo . McGregor Blacker agreed to sublet 2,000 acres ( 810 ha ) of land belonging to the Irish Church Mission Society on Achill to Boycott , who moved there in 1854 . According to Joyce Marlow in the book , Captain Boycott and the Irish , Boycott 's life on the island was difficult initially , and in Boycott 's own words it was only after " a long struggle against adverse circumstances " that he became prosperous . With money from another inheritance and profits from farming , he built a large house near Dooagh . Boycott was involved in a number of disputes while on Achill . Two years after his arrival , he was unsuccessfully sued for assault by Thomas Clarke , a local man . Clarke said that he had gone to Boycott 's house because Boycott owed him money . He said that he had asked for repayment of the debt , and that Boycott had refused to pay him and told him to go away , which Clarke refused to do . Clarke alleged that Boycott approached him and said : " If you do not be off , I will make you . " Clarke later withdrew his allegations , and said that Boycott did not actually owe him any money .

Both Boycott and McGregor Blacker were involved in a protracted dispute with Mr Carr , the agent for the Achill Church Mission Estate , from whom McGregor Blacker leased the lands , and Mr O 'Donnell , Carr 's bailiff . The dispute began when Boycott and Carr supported different sets of candidates in elections for the Board of Guardians to the Church Mission Estate , and Boycott 's candidates won . Carr was also the local receiver of wrecks , which meant that he was entitled to collect the salvage from all shipwrecks in the area , and guard it until it was sold in a public auction . The local receiver had a right to a percentage of the sale and to keep whatever did not sell . In 1860 Carr wrote a letter to the Official Receiver of Wrecks stating that Boycott and his men had illegally broken up a wreck and moved the salvage to Boycott 's property . In response to this accusation , Boycott sued Carr for libel and claimed £ 500 in damages .

In 1873 , Boycott moved to Lough Mask House , owned by Lord Erne , four miles ( 6 km ) from Ballinrobe in County Mayo . Lord Erne , the third Earl of Erne , was a wealthy landowner who lived in Crom Castle in County Fermanagh . He owned 40,386 acres ( 163.44 km2 ) of land in Ireland , of which 31,389 were in County Fermanagh , 4,826 in County Donegal , 1,996 in County Sligo , and 2,184 in County Mayo . Lord Erne also owned properties in Dublin . Boycott agreed to be Lord Erne 's agent for 1,500 acres ( 6.1 km2 ) he owned in County Mayo . One of Boycott 's responsibilities was to collect rents from tenant farmers on the land , for which he earned ten per cent of the total rent due to Lord Erne , which was £ 500 each year . In his roles as farmer and agent , Boycott employed numerous local people as labourers , grooms , coachmen , and house-servants . Joyce Marlow wrote that Boycott had become set in his mode of thought , and that his twenty years on Achill had " ... strengthened his innate belief in the divine right of the masters , and the tendency to behave as he saw fit , without regard to other people 's point of view or feelings . "

During his time in Lough Mask before the controversy began , Boycott had become unpopular with the tenants . He had become a magistrate and was an Englishman , which may have contributed to his unpopularity , but according to Marlow it was due more to his personal temperament . While Boycott himself maintained that he was on good terms with his tenants , they said that he had laid down many petty restrictions , such as not allowing gates to be left open and not allowing hens to trespass on his property , and that he fined anyone who transgressed these restrictions . He had also withdrawn privileges from the tenants , such as collecting wood from the estate . In August 1880 , his labourers went on strike in a dispute over a wage increase .

In the nineteenth century , agriculture was the biggest industry in Ireland . In 1876 , the government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland commissioned a survey to find who owned the land in Ireland . The survey found that almost all land was the property of just 10,000 people , or 0.2 % of the population . The majority were small landlords , but the 750 richest landlords owned half of the country between them . Many of the richest were absentee landlords who lived in Britain or elsewhere in Ireland , and paid agents like Charles Boycott to manage their estates . Landlords generally divided their estates into smaller farms that they rented to tenant farmers . Tenant farmers were generally on one-year leases , and could be evicted even if they paid their rents . Some of the tenants were large farmers who farmed over 100 acres ( 0.40 km2 ) , but the majority were much smaller — on average between 15 and 50 acres ( 0.06 – 0.20 km2 ) . Many small farmers worked as labourers on the larger farms . The poorest agricultural workers were the landless labourers , who worked on the land of other farmers . Farmers were an important group politically , having more votes than any other sector of society .

In the 1850s , some tenant farmers formed associations to demand the three Fs : fair rent , fixity of tenure , and free sale . In the 1870s , the Fenians tried to organise the tenant farmers in County Mayo to resist eviction . They mounted a demonstration against a local landlord in Irishtown and succeeded in getting him to lower his rents . Michael Davitt was the son of a small tenant farmer in County Mayo who became a journalist and joined the Irish Republican Brotherhood . He was arrested and given a 15-year sentence for gun-running . Charles Stewart Parnell , then Member of Parliament for Meath and member of the Home Rule League , arranged to have Davitt released on probation . When Davitt returned to County Mayo , he was impressed by the Fenians ' attempts to organise farmers . He thought that the " land question " was the best way to get the support of the farmers for Irish independence . In October 1879 , after forming the Land League of Mayo , Davitt formed the Irish National Land League . The Land League 's aims were to reduce rents and to stop evictions , and in the long term , to make tenant farmers owners of the land they farmed . Davitt asked Parnell to become the leader of the league . In 1880 , Parnell was also elected leader of the Home Rule Party .

On 19 September 1880 , Parnell gave a speech in Ennis , County Clare to a crowd of Land League members . He asked the crowd , " What do you do with a tenant who bids for a farm from which his neighbour has been evicted ? " The crowd responded , " kill him , " " shoot him . " Parnell replied : I wish to point out to you a very much better way – a more Christian and charitable way , which will give the lost man an opportunity of repenting . When a man takes a farm from which another has been evicted , you must shun him on the roadside when you meet him – you must shun him in the streets of the town – you must shun him in the shop – you must shun him on the fair green and in the market place , and even in the place of worship , by leaving him alone , by putting him in moral Coventry , by isolating him from the rest of the country , as if he were the leper of old – you must show him your detestation of the crime he committed .

The Land League was very active in the Lough Mask area , and one of the local leaders , Father John O 'Malley , had been involved in the labourer 's strike in August 1880 . The following month Lord Erne 's tenants were due to pay their rents . He had agreed to a 10 per cent reduction owing to a poor harvest , but all except two of his tenants demanded a 25 per cent reduction . Boycott said that he had written to Lord Erne , and that Erne had refused to accede to the tenants ' demands . He then issued demands for the outstanding rents , and obtained eviction notices against eleven tenants . Three days after Parnell 's speech in Ennis , a process server and seventeen members of the Royal Irish Constabulary began the attempt to serve Boycott 's eviction notices . Legally , they had to be delivered to the head of the household or his spouse within a certain time period . The process server successfully delivered notices to three of the tenants , but a fourth , Mrs Fitzmorris , refused to accept the notice and began waving a red flag to alert other tenants that the notices were being served . The women of the area descended on the process server and the constabulary , and began throwing stones , mud , and manure at them , succeeding in driving them away to seek refuge in Lough Mask House .

The process server tried unsuccessfully to serve the notices the following day . News soon spread to the nearby Ballinrobe , from where many people descended on Lough Mask House , where , according to journalist James Redpath , they advised Boycott 's servants and labourers to leave his employment immediately . Boycott said that many of his servants were forced to leave " ... under threat of ulterior consequences . " Martin Branigan , a labourer who subsequently sued Boycott for non-payment of wages , claimed he left because he was afraid of the people who came into the field where he was working . Eventually , all Boycott 's employees left , forcing him to run the estate without help . Within days , the blacksmith , postman , and laundress were persuaded or volunteered to stop serving Boycott . Boycott 's young nephew volunteered to act as postman , but he was intercepted en route between Ballinrobe and Lough Mask , and told that he would be in danger if he continued . Soon , shopkeepers in Ballinrobe stopped serving Boycott , and he had to bring food and other provisions by boat from Cong .

Before October 1880 , Boycott 's situation was little known outside County Mayo . On 14 October of that year , Boycott wrote a letter to The Times about his situation : Sir , The following detail may be interesting to your readers as exemplifying the power of the Land League . On the 22nd September a process-server , escorted by a police force of seventeen men , retreated to my house for protection , followed by a howling mob of people , who yelled and hooted at the members of my family . On the ensuing day , September 23rd , the people collected in crowds upon my farm , and some hundred or so came up to my house and ordered off , under threats of ulterior consequences , all my farm labourers , workmen , and stablemen , commanding them never to work for me again . My herd has been frightened by them into giving up his employment , though he has refused to give up the house he held from me as part of his emolument . Another herd on an off farm has also been compelled to resign his situation . My blacksmith has received a letter threatening him with murder if he does any more work for me , and my laundress has also been ordered to give up my washing . A little boy , twelve years of age , who carried my post-bag to and from the neighbouring town of Ballinrobe , was struck and threatened on 27th September , and ordered to desist from his work ; since which time I have sent my little nephew for my letters and even he , on 2nd October , was stopped on the road and threatened if he continued to act as my messenger . The shopkeepers have been warned to stop all supplies to my house , and I have just received a message from the post mistress to say that the telegraph messenger was stopped and threatened on the road when bringing out a message to me and that she does not think it safe to send any telegrams which may come for me in the future for fear they should be abstracted and the messenger injured . My farm is public property ; the people wander over it with impunity . My crops are trampled upon , carried away in quantities , and destroyed wholesale . The locks on my gates are smashed , the gates thrown open , the walls thrown down , and the stock driven out on the roads . I can get no workmen to do anything , and my ruin is openly avowed as the object of the Land League unless I throw up everything and leave the country . I say nothing about the danger to my own life , which is apparent to anybody who knows the country .

After the publication of this letter , Bernard Becker , special correspondent of the Daily News , traveled to Ireland to cover Boycott 's situation . On 24 October , he wrote a dispatch from Westport that contained an interview with Boycott . He reported that Boycott had £ 500 worth of crops that would rot if help could not be found to harvest them . According to Becker , " Personally he is protected , but no woman in Ballinrobe would dream of washing him a cravat or making him a loaf . All the people have to say is that they are sorry , but that they ' dare not . ' " Boycott had been advised to leave , but he told Becker that " I can hardly desert Lord Erne , and , moreover , my own property is sunk in this place . " Becker 's report was reprinted in the Belfast News-Letter and the Dublin Daily Express . On 29 October , the Dublin Daily Express published a letter proposing a fund to finance a party of men to go to County Mayo to save Boycott 's crops . Between them , the Daily Express , Daily Telegraph , Daily News , and News Letter raised £ 2,000 to fund the relief expedition .

In Belfast in early November 1880 , The Boycott Relief Fund was established to arrange an armed expedition to Lough Mask . Plans soon gained momentum , and within days , the fund had received many subscriptions . The committee had arranged with the Midland Great Western Railway for special trains to transport the expedition from Ulster to County Mayo . Many nationalists viewed the expedition as an invasion . The Freeman 's Journal denounced the organisers of the expedition , and asked , " How is it that this Government do not consider it necessary to prosecute the promoters of these warlike expeditions ? " William Edward Forster , Chief Secretary for Ireland made it clear in a communication with the proprietor of the Dublin Daily Express that he would not allow an armed expedition of hundreds of men , as the committee was planning , and that 50 unarmed men would be sufficient to harvest the crops . He said that the government would consider it their duty to protect this group . On 10 November 1880 , the relief expedition consisting of one contingent from County Cavan and one from County Monaghan left for County Mayo . Additional troops had already arrived in County Mayo to protect the expedition . Boycott himself said that he did not want such a large number of Ulstermen , as he had saved the grain harvest himself , and that only ten or fifteen labourers were needed to save the root crops . He feared that a large number of Ulstermen would lead to sectarian violence . While local Land League leaders said that there would be no trouble from them if the aim was simply to harvest the crops , more extreme sections of the local population did threaten violence against the expedition and the troops .

On 27 November 1880 , Boycott , his family and a local magistrate were escorted from Lough Mask House by members of the 19th Hussars . A carriage had been hired for the family , but no driver could be found for it , and an army ambulance and driver had to be used . The ambulance was escorted to Claremorris railway station , where Boycott and his family boarded a train to Dublin , where Boycott was received with some hostility . The hotel he stayed in received letters saying that it would be boycotted if Boycott remained . He had intended to stay in Dublin for a week , but Boycott was advised to cut his stay short . He left Dublin for England on the Holyhead mail boat on 1 December . The cost to the government of harvesting Boycott 's crops was estimated at £ 10,000 : in Parnell 's words , " ... one shilling for every turnip dug from Boycott 's land . " In a letter requesting compensation to William Ewart Gladstone , then Prime Minister of the United Kingdom , Boycott said that he had lost £ 6,000 of his investment in the estate .

Boycotting had strengthened the power of the peasants , and by the end of 1880 there were reports of boycotting from all over Ireland . The events at Lough Mask had also increased the power of the Land League , and the popularity of Parnell as a leader . On 28 December 1880 , Parnell and other Land League leaders were put on trial on charges of conspiracy to prevent the payment of rent . The trial attracted thousands of people onto the streets outside the court . A Daily Express reporter wrote that the court reminded him " ... more of the stalls of the theatre on opera night . " On 24 January 1881 , the judge dismissed the jury , it having been hung ten to two in favour of acquittal . Parnell and Davitt received this news as a victory . After the boycotting , Gladstone discussed the issue of land reform , writing in an 1880 letter , " The subject of the land weighs greatly on my mind and I am working on it to the best of my ability . " In December 1880 , the Bessborough Commission , headed by Frederick Ponsonby , 6th Earl of Bessborough , recommended major land reforms , including the three Fs .

William Edward Forster argued that a Coercion Act — which would punish those participated in events like those at Lough Mask , and would include the suspension of Habeas Corpus — should be introduced before any Land Act . Gladstone eventually accepted this argument . When Forster attempted to introduce the Protection of Person and Property Act 1881 , Parnell and other Land League MP 's attempted to obstruct its passage with tactics such as filibustering . One such filibuster lasted for 41 hours . Eventually , the Speaker of the house intervened , and a measure was introduced whereby the Speaker could control the house if there was a three to one majority in favour of the business being urgent . This was the first time that a check was placed on a debate in a British parliament . The act was passed on 28 February 1881 . There was a negative reaction to the passing of the act in both England and Ireland . In England , the Anti-Coercion Association was established , which was a precursor to the Labour Party . In April 1881 , Gladstone introduced the Land Law ( Ireland ) Act 1881 , in which the principle of the dual ownership of the land between landlords and tenants was established , and the three Fs introduced . The act set up the Irish Land Commission , a judicial body that would fix rents for a period of 15 years and guarantee fixity of tenure . According to The Annual Register , the act was " ... probably the most important measure introduced into the House of Commons since the passing of the Reform Bill . "

According to James Redpath , the verb " to boycott " was coined by Father O 'Malley in a discussion between them on 23 September 1880 . The following is Redpath 's account : " Well , " I said , " When the people ostracise a land-grabber we call it social excommunication , but we ought to have an entirely different word to signify ostracism applied to a landlord or land-agent like Boycott . Ostracism won 't do – the peasantry would not know the meaning of the word – and I can 't think of any other . " He looked down , tapped his big forehead , and said : " How would it do to call it to Boycott him ? " According to Joyce Marlow , the word was first used in print by Redpath in the Inter-Ocean on 12 October 1880 . The coining of the word , and its first use in print , came before Boycott and his situation was widely known outside County Mayo . In November 1880 , an article in the Birmingham Daily Post referred to the word as a local term in connection to the boycotting of a Ballinrobe merchant . Still in 1880 , The Illustrated London News described how " To ' Boycott ' has already become a verb active , signifying to ' ratten ' , to intimidate , to ' send to Coventry ' , and to ' taboo ' " . In 1888 , the word was included in the first volume of A New English Dictionary on Historical Principles ( later known as the Oxford English Dictionary ) . According to Gary Minda in his book , Boycott in America : how imagination and ideology shape the legal mind , " Apparently there was no other word in the English language to describe this dispute . " The word also entered the lexicon of languages other than English , such as Dutch , French , German , Polish and Russian .

After leaving Ireland , Boycott and his family visited the United States . His arrival in New York generated a great deal of media interest ; the New York Tribune said that , " The arrival of Captain Boycott , who has involuntarily added a new word to the language , is an event of something like international interest . " The New York Times said , " For private reasons the visitor made the voyage incognito , being registered simply as ' Charles Cunningham . ' " The purpose of the visit was to see friends in Virginia , including Murray McGregor Blacker , a friend from his time on Achill Island who had settled in the United States . Boycott returned to England after some months . In 1886 , Boycott became a land agent for Hugh Adair 's Flixton estate in Suffolk , England . He had a passion for horses and racing , and became secretary of the Bungay race committee . Boycott continued to spend holidays in Ireland , and according to Joyce Marlow , he left Ireland without bitterness . In early 1897 , Boycott 's health became very poor . In an attempt to improve his health , he and his wife went on a cruise to Malta . In Brindisi , he became seriously ill , and had to return to England . His health continued to deteriorate , and on 19 June 1897 he died at his home in Flixton , aged 65 . His funeral took place in the church at Burgh St Peter , conducted by his nephew Arthur St John Boycott , who was at Lough Mask during the first boycott . Charles Boycott 's widow , Annie , was subsequently sued over the funeral expenses and other debts , and had to sell some assets . A number of London newspapers , including The Times , published obituaries .

Neighbours is an Australian television soap opera . It was first broadcast on the Seven Network on 18 March 1985 . It was created by TV executive Reg Watson , who proposed the idea of making a show that focused on realistic stories and portrayed adults and teenagers who talk openly and solve their problems together . Seven decided to commission the show following the success of Watson 's Sons and Daughters , which aired on the network . Although successful in Melbourne , Neighbours underperformed in the Sydney market and struggled for months before Seven cancelled it . The show was immediately bought by rival network Ten . After taking over production of the show , the new network had to build replica sets because Seven destroyed the originals to prevent its rival from obtaining them . Ten began screening Neighbours on 20 January 1986 , taking off where the previous series left off and commencing with episode 171 . Neighbours has since become the longest running drama series in Australian television and in 2005 , it was inducted collectively into the Logie Hall of Fame . On 11 January 2011 , Neighbours moved to Ten 's digital channel , Eleven .

The show 's storylines concern the domestic and professional lives of the people who live and work in Erinsborough , a fictional suburb of Melbourne , Victoria . The series primarily centres on the residents of Ramsay Street , a short cul-de-sac , and its neighbouring area , the Lassiters complex , which includes a bar , hotel , cafe , police station , lawyers ' office and park . Neighbours began with three families created by Watson – the Ramsays , the Robinsons and the Clarkes . Watson said that he wanted to show three families who are friends living in a small street . The Robinsons and the Ramsays had a long history and were involved in an ongoing rivalry . Pin Oak Court , in Vermont South , is the real cul-de-sac that has doubled for Ramsay Street since 1985 . All of the houses featured are real and the residents allow the production to shoot external scenes in their yards . The interior scenes are filmed at the Global Television studios in Forest Hill . Through its entire run in Australia , Neighbours has been screened as a twenty-two-minute episode each week night in an early-evening slot . In Australia it is currently broadcast each weeknight at 6 : 30 pm on Eleven . The show is produced by FremantleMedia and has been sold to over sixty countries around the world , making it one of Australia 's most successful media exports . Neighbours was first screened in the United Kingdom in October 1986 on BBC1 where it achieved huge popularity among British audiences in the late 1980s and 1990s . In 2008 , it moved to the UK 's Channel 5 .

Neighbours was created in the early-to-mid-1980s by Australian TV executive Reg Watson . Watson decided to create a soap opera after working on Crossroads and seeing how successful it and Coronation Street were in Britain . He had already created such successful Australian made soap operas as The Young Doctors , Prisoner and Sons and Daughters . Watson proposed the idea of making a show that would focus on more realistic stories and portray teens and adults who talk openly to each other and solve their problems together . Watson , who worked for the Grundy production company , decided to make his show appeal to both Australia and Britain . In 2005 , Darren Devlyn and Caroline Frost from the Herald Sun reported that Watson then took his idea to the Nine Network in 1982 , but it was rejected . Former Network Nine chief executive Ian Johnson commented that it was one of the " biggest missed opportunities " in his twenty-four years at the network . He added " I remember it being discussed , but I 'm not exactly sure what went against it . It may have had something to do with the fact we 'd picked up Sale of the Century with Tony Barber in 1980 and it was doing huge business , so we didn 't have a pressing need for a five-night-a-week show . " Watson then took his idea to the Seven Network , who commissioned the show , following the success of his other Seven Network soap opera , Sons and Daughters . Several titles for the show were discussed , including People Like Us , One Way Street , No Through Road and Living Together until the network programmers voted on Neighbours . The first episode was broadcast on 18 March 1985 and reviews for the show were favourable . However , the Melbourne-produced programme underperformed in the Sydney market and after a meeting of the general managers , Seven decided to drop the show in October 1985 . Seven 's Melbourne programme boss , Gary Fenton said Sydney chief Ted Thomas told the other general managers that Seven could not afford three dramas and argued that the Sydney-based A Country Practice and Sons and Daughters be retained .

Neighbours was immediately bought by Seven 's rival Network Ten . The new network had to build replica sets when it took over production after Seven destroyed the original sets to prevent the rival network obtaining them . Ten began screening the series with episode 171 on 20 January 1986 . In 1986 , the series was bought by the BBC as part of their new daytime schedule in the United Kingdom . Neighbours made its debut on BBC1 on 27 October 1986 starting with the pilot episode . It soon gained a loyal audience and the show became very popular within the student market and was watched by 16 million viewers . In 1988 Neighbours became the only television show to have its entire cast flown over to the UK to make an appearance at the Royal Variety Performance in front of the Queen . Neighbours has since become the longest running drama series in Australian television and the seventh longest running serial drama still on the air in the world . In 2005 , Neighbours celebrated its 20th anniversary and over twenty former cast members returned for a special episode , which saw them sitting down to watch a documentary about Ramsay Street . At the Logie Award ceremony that year , the show was inducted into the Logie Hall of Fame .

2007 saw the show undergo a revamp , which included a switch to recording in HDTV , the introduction of a new family , the departure of several existing characters and a new version of the show 's familiar theme song and opening titles . In addition , episode titles were abandoned , having been in use for the previous three years . Daniel Bennett , the new head of drama at Network Ten , announced that the crux of the Ramsay Street story would go " back to basics " and follow a less sensational path than of late with the emphasis on family relations and suburban reality . Executive producer Ric Pellizzeri said new writers , actors and sets would bring the soap back to its glory days . He added " We moved too far into event-driven stories rather than the character-driven stories that made Neighbours what it is " . The relaunch failed to attract more viewers in Australia . Pellizzeri left the series at the end of 2007 and former Neighbours scriptwriter , Susan Bower , became the new executive producer . In 2008 , Neighbours was branded " too white " by black and Asian viewers in Britain and in Australia there was talk of a " White Australia policy " when it came to casting actors for soaps . In response to the criticism , Bower made a decision to add more ethnically diverse extras , small walk on roles and speaking parts , as well as introducing the character of Sunny Lee ( played by Hany Lee ) an exchange student from South Korea .

On 18 March 2010 , Neighbours celebrated its 25th anniversary . In April , Channel 5 in the UK launched a search to find a female actress to play the part of Poppy Rogers . The search was similar to the Dolly magazine competition in Australia . August saw Neighbours air its 6000th episode . Digital Spy revealed that the week-long 6000th episode celebrations would see the wedding of regular characters , Donna Freedman ( Margot Robbie ) and Ringo Brown ( Sam Clark ) . It was later announced that an attempt on the life of long term regular , Paul Robinson ( Stefan Dennis ) would be the focus of the actual 6000th episode . Bower said " Last week I saw episode 6,000 . This marks Australian television history . The 6,000th episode falls on a Friday so the whole week is a special one . As Stefan Dennis – Paul Robinson – was in the first episode 25 years ago , it was decided that his character play a most important role in this very special event " . In late 2010 , TV Tonight reported that Neighbours would reduce crew operations in 2011 so production could be upgraded . The changes meant that the location manager and catering team were no longer required , studio shoots would be reduced from three cameras to two , and location shots will be mainly confined to the Ramsay Street and Lassiter 's complex sets , with occasional filming in one-off places . Of the changes , FremantleMedia said " Neighbours is undergoing a work flow upgrade to accommodate advances in technology and production techniques to ensure we are at the forefront of professionalism and efficiency . " They added that the show 's production model had been in place since 1985 and that it was time to evolve it . On 14 March 2011 , The Australian reported that Neighbours has become the first television show available to watch on a free iPhone application . Viewers are able to watch whole episodes within three hours of them airing on Eleven . Nick Spooner , the head of Ten digital media said " This is part of what we call our ' three-screen approach ' – broadcast , online and mobile – and it is intended to build viewer engagement with a show and our brand . This is a way for us to stay in touch with our audience and to keep them coming back . " To celebrate the wedding of Prince William of Wales and Kate Middleton , Neighbours filmed a specially commissioned scene for the UK episode airing on the same day as the wedding . The episode , which had already aired in Australia , marked the first time an Australian show recorded extra scenes for a UK broadcaster .

On 25 October 2011 , it was announced Bower would be leaving Neighbours in December 2011 to move into a new international role with FremantleMedia . Of her departure , Bower told Colin Vickery of the Herald Sun , " I love Neighbours , it is a wonderful show and because of this I felt it was important that fresh eyes and brains take over to keep this Australian icon contemporary . Having said that , I 'm really excited about the new role and thank FremantleMedia for this wonderful opportunity . " Former City Homicide producer , Richard Jasek , took over Bower 's role , while Alan Hardy took over the role of producer . On 4 December 2013 , it was confirmed that Jasek would be leaving Neighbours and Jason Herbison had been promoted to series producer . FremantleMedia 's head of drama Jo Porter became executive producer , while Laurence Wilson is the associate producer . In March 2015 , Neighbours celebrated its 30th anniversary and twelve former cast members returned for the anniversary episodes that revolved around an Erinsborough Festival . Network Ten and Channel 5 aired a documentary special titled Neighbours 30th : The Stars Reunite , which featured interviews with current and former cast members , including Kylie Minogue , Jason Donovan and Guy Pearce , reflecting on their time on the show .

Neighbours ' main focus is the fictional Ramsay Street , a residential cul-de-sac in the fictional Melbourne suburb of Erinsborough . The street was named after the grandfather of original character Max Ramsay ( Francis Bell ) . Other locations include Erinsborough High School and the Lassiter 's complex , which contains the Lassiter 's Hotel , Waterhole bar , Harold 's Store cafe , the lawyers office Rebecchi Law , and the police station . Ahead of the 25th anniversary the Erinsborough village set underwent a makeover . The cafe and bar remained the same , but the centre of the complex was upgraded . Lassiter 's Hotel was given a new logo and gained a second floor with outdoor seating area . Erinsborough Hospital and the police station received new facades , a used car lot was created near the garage and a new university set was created . Pin Oak Court , in Vermont South , is the real cul-de-sac that doubles for Ramsay Street . All of the houses featured in the show are real and the residents allow Neighbours to shoot external scenes in their front and back yards and on occasions , in their garages . Neighbours has been filmed in Pin Oak Court since the series began in 1985 and it has since become popular with tourists . Tours to the cul-de-sac run throughout the year . The interior scenes are filmed at the Global Television studios in Forest Hill , the adjoining suburb in which Pin Oak Court is located .

Through much of the show 's run , it was not stated in which Australian city Erinsborough was located . The rivalry between Sydney and Melbourne meant that scripts did not mention that Erinsborough was a suburb of the latter city , until 1994 . Since the 2000s , it has been explicitly stated that Erinsborough is a suburb of Melbourne . Other Australian locations mentioned and sometimes seen in the series include the fictitious suburbs of West Waratah , Eden Hills , and Anson 's Corner . Real-life Australian towns in the state of Victoria such as Colac , Frankston and Shepparton are sometimes referred to . Oakey in Queensland is also mentioned and sometimes seen . On 27 August 2010 , Neighbours filmed scenes in Sydney 's Darling Harbour and on board a cruise ship . The episodes marked only the third time that the show has filmed scenes outside of Victoria . In October 2011 , Neighbours filmed scenes in Port Douglas , Queensland and around the Great Barrier Reef region . The show filmed scenes in Geelong in 2016 . Filming locations outside of Australia have included Kenya , the United States and the UK , which has seen Neighbours episodes filmed there on three occasions . In February 1990 , Lyme Park in Cheshire doubled as the Ledgerwood estate set in Yorkshire . Derek Nimmo guest-starred as the fictitious Lord Ledgerwood in two of the episodes . In November 1992 , the characters Rick Alessi ( Dan Falzon ) and Debbie Martin ( Marnie Reece-Wilmore ) visited London to attend a Michael Jackson concert . The second London-based storyline was broadcast in late March 2007 , when Susan ( Jackie Woodburne ) and Karl Kennedy ( Alan Fletcher ) were seen taking a ride on the London Eye and being married on a boat on the River Thames .

Through its entire run in Australia , Neighbours has been screened as a 21-minute episode each weeknight in an early-evening slot . Neighbours is on air for approximately forty-four weeks per year . It is broadcast from early January to early December and goes off air for around four to five weeks during the Christmas and New Year period . The show currently airs at 6 : 30 pm . The last five aired episodes shown are available to watch on the Neighbours official Australian website , as a part of Network Ten 's Catch Up TV service . When the show began in 1985 , the first season was broadcast on the Seven Network , at 5 : 30 pm in Sydney , at 6 : 00 pm in Melbourne and Adelaide and at 7 : 00 pm in Brisbane . The show 's transmission in other areas was varied and many regional channels declined to purchase the series . When the show debuted on Network Ten in 1986 it screened at 7 : 00 pm . In 1992 the show moved to 6 : 30 pm to avoid direct competition from rival soap opera Home and Away on the Seven Network . Repeat episodes of Neighbours episodes from the 1988 – 1991 period were broadcast between 2000 and June 2003 on Network Ten . These episodes were seen at 3 : 30 pm , before moving to 11 : 30 am . During 2008 Ten HD broadcast the previous week 's episodes in an omnibus edition each Sunday . These omnibus editions did not return in 2009 as Ten HD was replaced by One HD from March 2009 .

In August 2010 , The Daily Telegraph reported that Neighbours would be moving to Ten 's new digital channel , to make way for a new current affairs show . They said " It 's part of a re-branding of Ten 's free-to-air channel , targeting the older demographic . The ' younger ' shows , like Neighbours , will go on to one of Ten 's digital channels " . It was later confirmed that the show would be moving to digital channel , Eleven . Network Ten 's programmer , David Mott said " We believe Neighbours is perfectly suited to Eleven 's audience strategy and will find a successful and enduring home on Eleven " . Neighbours moved to Eleven on 11 January 2011 , the channel 's launch day . An encore of the previous day 's episode is broadcast at 7 : 00 am weekdays on Network Ten . Eleven also broadcast the last five aired episodes shown in an omnibus edition each Sunday . Repeat episodes of Neighbours from the 2007 period , titled Old School Neighbours , were broadcast in 2013 on Eleven . These episodes were seen during weekdays at 9 : 30 am , before moving to 11 : 00 am .

Neighbours has been sold to over 60 countries around the world and is one of Australia 's most successful media exports . Neighbours has proved to be more popular in the United Kingdom than in Australia . It was screened on BBC One from 1986 until 2008 . The series started airing on 27 October 1986 , as part of BBC1 's revamped daytime schedules . Neighbours went out twice a day , with an earlier morning omnibus and then a showing at lunchtime . Michael Grade , the channel 's then controller , was advised by his daughter to move the series to 5 : 35 pm , as she and her friends kept missing it due to being at school , which took place from January 1988 . The show then started attracting larger audiences , peaking in 1990 at over 21 million . Towards the late 2000s , Neighbours was normally attracting an average of 3 million viewers for its lunchtime showing and 2.6 million viewers for its early-evening repeat . It was frequently the highest-rating daytime programme in the UK , outside of news bulletins . In 2008 , the UK broadcast moved to rival channel Channel 5 following the BBC 's decision not to keep the show after being asked to pay £ 300m over eight years by FremantleMedia ( three times the show 's usual fee ) . Both Channel 5 and FremantleMedia were owned at that time by the German RTL Group . The first episode to be shown on Channel 5 in February 2008 was watched by 2.2 million viewers ( an audience share of 14.2 % ) , a drop of 300,000 from the BBC 's average . However , the move boosted Channel 5 's usual share for the 5.30 pm slot by three and a half times . On 4 February 2009 , Neighbours ' 5 : 30 pm showing was seen by 1.94 million viewers and by 2012 , the teatime showing had averaged 1 million viewers . UK viewers are able to catch up with episodes with Channel 5 's video catch up service , Demand 5 , similar to the catch up service in Australia . Channel 5 also have a deal with YouTube , allowing viewers to watch episodes for free on the video sharing site after they have been transmitted .

From 4 January 2016 , Channel 5 began broadcasting episodes on the same day as Australia . Channel 5 's commissioning editor Greg Barnett explained that closing the transmission gap would reduce spoilers and the amount of viewers watching the show illegally online . From mid-2016 , the show also began airing every week-night on Nickelodeon as part of their Nick at Nite programming block , broadcasting the same episode that was earlier seen on Channel 5 . In New Zealand , Neighbours is broadcast on TV2 at 6 : 30 pm weekdays . In October 2010 , it began airing episodes at the same pace as Australia . The show was initially broadcast by TVNZ in 1988 , but by 1996 it was removed from the schedule . TV4 ( now C4 ) picked the show up and began broadcasting it from 1997 . They dropped it in 2000 and it returned to TV2 in 2002 . Repeats of the previous day 's episode of Neighbours were formerly shown at 2 : 30 pm weekdays and are now shown at 11.00 am weekdays . The show moved to 5 : 25 pm weeknights on TV One in late 2007 . After a couple of months , the show moved to 3 : 50 pm weekdays . The show eventually moved back to TV2 . The TV2 website offers viewers the chance to watch episodes online with its OnDemand service . In Ireland , Neighbours is broadcast on RTÉ Television at 1 : 55 pm on RTÉ One and repeated on RTÉ Two at 5 : 35 pm each weekday . FremantleMedia secured a long term deal with RTÉ in 2007 for them to transmit the show after the BBC pulled out of negotiations . In Kenya , Neighbours is broadcast on the KTN network Monday to Friday at 12 : 30 pm with an omnibus on Sunday mornings . In Barbados , Neighbours is broadcast on the CBC8 channel at 1 : 00 pm Monday to Friday . In Canada , CFMT-TV in Toronto broadcast Neighbours on weeknights at 11 : 00 pm , starting in September 1990 . From 20 May 1991 , CFMT moved the show to 4 : 00 pm . After announcing its cancellation , CFMT decided to keep Neighbours on its schedule throughout September 1994 , following numerous letters and telephone calls . In Belgium Neighbours airs Monday till Friday at 5.35pm. ( episodes are 7 months behind Australia ) After 27 years on air , it is still the most popular foreign soap in Belgium .

In the United States , Neighbours premiered on KCOP-TV in Los Angeles on 3 June 1991 at 5 : 30 pm weekdays . KCOP planned on cancelling the show by the end of the month due to low ratings , but brought it back due to viewer demand at a 9 : 30 am daily time slot from 1 July to 30 August 1991 . New York City station WWOR-TV showed Neighbours weekdays 5 : 30 pm from 17 June to 17 September 1991 . In April 2004 , the show began broadcasting nationally on the television channel Oxygen . A spokeswomen from the channel said " Now our viewers can join in on the good , the bad and the endlessly entertaining lives of our Aussie neighbours . " The episodes started from the Scully family 's arrival in 1999 and were aired for a six-week trial basis . The show was broadcast in the afternoon with two episodes being shown back to back at 1 : 00 pm and 2 : 00 pm . After a couple of weeks , the show was moved to a late-night time slot and it eventually left the air . On 7 July 2014 , Todd Spangler from Variety reported that FremantleMedia International had signed a deal with U.S. subscription service Hulu giving it exclusive rights to the most recent season of Neighbours . The soap began airing from 14 July , with new episodes airing daily from Monday through to Friday , on Hulu and Hulu Plus services . The episodes were four weeks behind the Australian broadcast . All past and current episodes of Neighbours were removed from Hulu on 19 September 2015 , stating they had lost the rights .

Neighbours initially aired on Seven Network where it struggled to attract high ratings leading to its cancellation by the network four months after it premiered . The series was then picked up by Network Ten . After the usual break in broadcast over the summer non ratings period the series made its debut on Ten in 1986 . Ten revamped the show , adding several new , younger cast members including Jason Donovan as Scott Robinson and Kylie Minogue as Charlene Mitchell . When the show began on Ten it initially attracted low ratings , so the Network worked hard to publicise the series . Ten 's publicity drive was designed to promote the show in a star-focused campaign recalling that of the Hollywood star system where stars were packaged to feed into a fan culture . This paid off and by the end of 1987 ratings had improved for the show . The episode featuring Scott and Charlene 's wedding achieved the highest ever ratings for Neighbours and it became one of the highest rating soap episodes ever in Australia . The same episode attracted 20 million viewers when it was aired in the United Kingdom . By the early 1990s , Australian audiences had decreased although viewing figures had recovered slightly by the end of the decade . In 1994 , Network Ten told TV Week that they would be introducing a " younger , livelier look with six regular characters under the age of 18 " in a bid to generate interest . It was then that they introduced the characters of Stonefish Rebecchi played by Anthony Engelman and Serendipity Gottlieb played by Raelee Hill .

In the 2000s , rival soap opera Home and Away emerged as more popular than Neighbours in Australia . As of 2004 , Neighbours was regularly attracting just under a million viewers per episode . In 2007 , Home and Away was averaging 1.4 million viewers in Australia to Neighbours ' 700,000 . During the revamp of 2007 , the episode broadcast on 23 July 2007 saw the introduction of a new family , updated sets , new theme music and graphics . Ratings for that episode averaged 1.05 million viewers in the 6 : 30 pm. slot . It was the first time the programme 's viewing figures had topped 1 million in 2007 . By the end of 2007 it was reported that producers had hoped the Neighbours revamp would push the ratings up to between 900,000 to 1 million an episode . It had , however , resulted in a more modest boost , with ratings hovering at about 800,000 a night . The same viewing period had shown an increase in ratings for Home and Away , which was now averaging 1.4 million viewers every night . In February 2008 , new executive producer , Susan Bower , announced that she would be implementing further changes to the programme . Bower promised to retain the return to traditional Neighbours values , but with an injection of drama that remains recognisable and relevant . Ratings rose to almost 900,000 in mid-2008 , but generally ratings begin to fall towards the end of each year , usually averaging around 700,000 . On 17 July 2009 , during the aftermath of the Parker family 's car accident and the dramatic death of Bridget Parker ( Eloise Mignon ) , Neighbours achieved higher ratings than Home And Away . Neighbours achieved 998,000 viewers and placed 6th for the night , Home And Away placed 7th .

In January 2010 , Neighbours returned to Australian screens to an audience of 563,000 . On 20 January , the ratings fell to a low of 426,000 , making it one of the programme 's lowest ever ratings in Australia . A July 2010 report showed figures had dropped 20 % , from having 1.2 million viewers in 1991 to a low of 618,000 in 2010 . A Network Ten spokesperson commented " Most of the show 's budget is covered by its UK deal with Channel 5 and the 50-odd other countries it is seen in , so it 's not a financial problem for Ten despite the low ratings . And Ten needs the show to score the Australian content and drama points required for it to hold on to a broadcasting licence " . On 29 October 2010 , Neighbours ' ratings dropped to a low figure of 386,000 viewers . Viewing numbers for Network Ten that night were down across all programmes . The show 's highest figure of the week was 590,000 on 25 October 2010 . Following its move to digital multichannel Eleven , Neighbours attracted 254,000 viewers for the first episode broadcast on 11 January 2011 . This was half the number of viewers that watched it on Network Ten ; the Herald Sun reported that it was a good result as " bosses were only expecting 133,000 . " Neighbours became Eleven 's most-watched show and the third highest rating show on digital multichannels that night . Programming chief , David Mott stated " Last night 's strong result for Neighbours already suggests the audience will follow the folks from Ramsay Street to their brand new neighbourhood on Eleven . " On 24 January 2011 , Neighbours achieved 330,000 viewers and three days later 355,000 viewers tuned in , becoming the show 's highest rating yet on Eleven . The show had more viewers than the Ten Evening News in the 16 – 39 and 18 – 49 demographic . On 13 June 2011 , Neighbours was watched by 455,000 viewers , making it the highest rating show on digital multichannels that night and breaking its previous ratings record on the channel . On 27 May 2013 , episode 6651 of Neighbours was watched by an audience of 405,000 viewers , which was the highest rating the series had achieved in nearly two years . Neighbours has traditionally rated between 250,000 and 350,000 since moving to Eleven in January 2011 .

Neighbours storylines frequently focus on family problems , intergenerational clashes , school problems , romances and domestic issues . Despite the restrictive 6 : 30 pm time slot , Neighbours has also covered many serious problems such as teenage pregnancy , marital breakdown , imprisonment , career problems , financial problems , pregnancy , abortion , eating disorders , alcoholism , adultery , drug use and drug trafficking , robbery , stalking , kidnapping , accidental death , hit-and-runs , murder , shootings , and incest . In the 2000s , the show dealt with controversial issues such as sexuality , gambling , prostitution , and surrogacy . Health issues were also focused on , including multiple sclerosis , bipolar disorder , epilepsy , amnesia , congenital diaphragmatic hernia , and alzheimer 's disease . In September 2014 , the show featured a natural disaster storyline , in which a tornado descended on Erinsborough and Ramsay Street .

In 1985 , Neighbours started out with three families created by Watson – the Ramsays , the Robinsons and the Clarkes . Watson said that he wanted to show three families living in a small street , who are friends . Max Ramsay ( Francis Bell ) , his wife Maria ( Dasha Blahova ) and their sons Shane ( Peter O 'Brien ) and Danny ( David Clencie ) lived at No.24 Ramsay Street . Single father , Jim Robinson ( Alan Dale ) lived next door with his children , Paul ( Stefan Dennis ) , Julie ( Vikki Blanche ) , Scott ( Darius Perkins ) and Lucy ( Kylie Flinker ) . His mother-in-law , Helen Daniels ( Anne Haddy ) also lived with him . Bachelor Des Clarke ( Paul Keane ) invited Daphne Lawrence ( Elaine Smith ) to live at No. 28 with him and they were later married . The Robinsons and the Ramsays had a long history in the street and they were often involved in an ongoing rivalry . When Network Ten picked up the show and revamped it , they brought in new and younger actors including Kylie Minogue as Charlene Mitchell and Jason Donovan , who replaced Darius Perkins as Scott Robinson . Many families , including the Alessi , Bishop , Hancock , Hoyland , Rebecchi , Scullys , Timmins ' and Willises have moved in and out of the street over the years .

When storylines for certain characters become tired , the scriptwriters simply move one family out and replace it with a new one . Ramsay Street is now a mixture of older characters like Lou Carpenter ( Tom Oliver ) , Toadfish Rebecchi ( Ryan Moloney ) , Karl ( Alan Fletcher ) and Susan Kennedy ( Jackie Woodburne ) , as well as newer characters such as the Canning and Turner families . Watson originally wanted to show young people communicating with older people , which means that the cast is a mix of young actors in their teens or early 20s and older , more experienced hands . The last remaining original character , Helen Daniels , departed the show in 1997 due to the ill-health of Anne Haddy . In 2004 , original cast member Stefan Dennis returned to Neighbours full-time as Paul Robinson . Paul is currently the only remaining original character in the series . In February 2009 , it was announced that producers would be introducing a new generation of the Ramsay family to the show , over a decade after the family had last appeared . Kate ( Ashleigh Brewer ) , Harry ( Will Moore ) and Sophie Ramsay ( Kaiya Jones ) made their first appearances in May 2009 .

The theme tune to Neighbours was composed by Tony Hatch whose then wife , Jackie Trent , wrote the lyrics . Since 1985 , there have been eight versions of the theme tune . The song has been voted the world 's most recognised television theme song and the lyrics were quoted by John Smith , then British Shadow Chancellor , in a House of Commons debate on Government economic policy . From 2007 , the theme tune to Neighbours was sung by Sandra de Jong . In February 2013 , Network Ten and FremantleMedia announced that they were searching across Australia and the United Kingdom for a singer to record a new version of the theme tune . The competition resulted in a tie and the new theme was sung as a duet by Daniel Boys and Stephanie Angelini . That version of the theme tune began airing from 15 April 2013 . A new retro-inspired theme tune sung by Garth Ploog debuted on 5 January 2015 as part of the show 's 30th anniversary celebrations .

Since Neighbours began in 1985 , it has used its opening titles sequence to introduce the major characters which currently feature in the show . The sequences often feature the characters in family or domestic groups . Each episode 's titles sequence was preceded by a recap of events from recent episodes featuring the characters who were to appear in the new episode . In 2002 , Neighbours debuted an all new style of titles with a remixed version of the theme tune . The titles showed characters together in groups according to gender , a change from the previous ones which were taken outside . 2007 saw Neighbours debut an updated theme , a new logo and new " optimistic , contemporary " titles . A photo booth montage was played and characters were seen rowing boats , walking along piers and eating outside . The sequence also contained shots of upcoming scenes . In August 2009 , Neighbours introduced a new titles format . The first episode of each week begins with a trailer previewing the week 's events . The usual recap of storylines switched to after the opening titles of each episode for the first time since 1998 . The end of episode teasers returned and are now made in-house by the Neighbours production team .

In September 2009 , Susan Bower announced that Neighbours would introduce new opening titles for the 25th anniversary and they would feature a bit of " bling " . The titles were created by Visual Playground , who shot a series of scenes featuring the cast in settings familiar to viewers . The titles made their debut on 18 March 2010 . A new set of opening titles made their debut on 15 April 2013 , along with a new version of the theme tune . Visual Playground once again created and produced the titles . The titles depict the Ramsay Street residents gathering outside their houses for a street party . A writer for Visual Playground explained that they " invented a bokeh graphic device that uses the play of light in a formation to locate the houses in the cul-de-sac . Six overlapping circles represent the six houses of Ramsay St and the off street cast members . All the circles together reinforce the sense of community that makes up Neighbours . " A new retro-inspired logo , theme tune and opening titles debuted on 5 January 2015 as part of the show 's 30th anniversary celebrations . The new logo is a reimagined contemporary version of the original Neighbours logo from 1985 . The titles show characters in a variety of familiar settings around Erinsborough and ends with a look at Ramsay Street from above .

Neighbours has received a wide variety of awards and nominations throughout its run . The show has received 81 Logie Award nominations , of which it has won 30 . It has also been nominated for " Most Popular Daytime Programme " at the UK 's National Television Awards in five of the six years from 2000 to 2006 . In 1997 , the show won an award for Best Episode in A Television Drama Serial at the Australian Film Institute Awards . Two Neighbours actors have been nominated for Rose D 'Or awards , once in 2004 for Ryan Moloney and again in 2005 for Jackie Woodburne . Neighbours has also won three Australian Writers ' Guild awards .

Since the show 's inception , several spin-offs have been produced , including books , music , DVDs and internet webisodes . In 1991 , an officially licensed video game of Neighbours was created by Ian Copeland and developed by Zeppelin Games under their Impulze label for the ZX Spectrum , Commodore 64 , Atari ST , and Amiga ; it was re-released by Zeppelin in 1992 on budget price . In the game , the player took on the role of Scott Robinson and had to skateboard around four whole courses . Episodes of Neighbours have been released on several DVDs . Neighbours : Defining Moments was the first DVD box set released in 2002 . It is a compilation of fifteen classic episodes and a photo gallery . The Neighbours : The Iconic Episodes Volume 1 DVD box set was released in 2008 and contains twenty-three episodes , the 1000th episode party celebration special and a photo gallery . Neighbours : The Iconic Episodes Volume Two contains twenty-four episodes over three discs . One disc is dedicated to the character of Charlene . In 2012 , early episodes of Neighbours were released on three DVD box sets in Germany . From April 2012 , Shock Entertainment began releasing DVD box sets of Neighbours episodes in broadcast order from the beginning . As of October 2014 , five box sets have been released .

Major Francis John William Harvey , VC ( 29 April 1873 – 31 May 1916 ) was an officer of the British Royal Marine Light Infantry during the First World War . Harvey was posthumously awarded the Victoria Cross , the highest military award for gallantry in the face of the enemy given to British and Commonwealth forces , for his actions at the height of the Battle of Jutland . A long serving Royal Marine officer descended of a military family , during his career Harvey became a specialist in naval artillery , serving on many large warships as gunnery training officer and gun commander . Specially requested for HMS Lion , the flagship of the British battlecruiser fleet , Harvey fought at the battles of Heligoland Bight , Dogger Bank and Jutland . At Jutland , Harvey , although mortally wounded by German shellfire , ordered the magazine of Q turret on the battlecruiser Lion to be flooded . This action prevented the tons of cordite stored there from catastrophically detonating in an explosion that would have destroyed the vessel and all aboard her . Although he succumbed to his injuries seconds later , his dying act may have saved over a thousand lives and prompted Winston Churchill to later comment : " In the long , rough , glorious history of the Royal Marines there is no name and no deed which in its character and consequences ranks above this " .

Harvey was born in Upper Sydenham , Kent , the son of Commander John William Francis Harvey , RN and Elizabeth Edwards Lavington Harvey née Penny . At age 11 in 1884 , Harvey moved with his family to Southsea and he attended Portsmouth Grammar School , achieving excellent academic results and showing proficiency in languages and debating . Harvey was descended from a military family ; his great-great-grandfather John Harvey had been killed in the Glorious First of June in 1794 and his great-grandfather Admiral Sir Edward Harvey , GCB , RN and grandfather Captain John Harvey of the 9th Regiment of Foot were also prominent military figures . After leaving school , Harvey chose a military career and was accepted by both the Royal Military College , Sandhurst and the Royal Naval College , Greenwich for officer training . Choosing the latter school as a Royal Marines officer cadet , Harvey graduated in 1892 and the following year was made a full lieutenant , joining HMS Wildfire for his first seagoing commission . After just a year at sea , Harvey was back on shore attending gunnery courses at HMS Excellent , qualifying in 1896 as an instructor first class in naval gunnery . Harvey was appointed to the cruiser HMS Phaeton when she was commissioned at Devonport on 8 June 1897 for service on the Pacific Station . In 1898 , whilst on the Phaëton , he was reprimanded by the Admiralty for an unfavourable report he released on San Diego Harbour . Returning home the same year , Harvey was given the position of Assistant Instructor for Gunnery at Plymouth Division . During this period , Harvey married Ethel Edye and had one son , John .

Between 1898 and 1904 Harvey spent much of his time attached to the Channel Fleet , aboard HMS Edgar and HMS Diadem , practising and instructing in gunnery . On 28 January 1900 he was promoted to captain . In 1903 he was posted aboard HMS Royal Sovereign , the first of a string of big ship appointments teaching gunnery to the heavy units of the Channel Fleet . By 1909 , Harvey had served on HMS Duke of Edinburgh , HMS St George and the new battlecruiser HMS Inflexible . In 1910 Harvey became Instructor of Gunnery at Chatham Dockyard and the following year was promoted to major , a report on the gunnery school commenting " Degree of efficiency in Gunnery Establishment at Chatham is very high both as regards general training and attention to detail . Great credit is due all concerned particularly to Major F.J.W. Harvey , the I of G " . The strength of this report subsequently gained Harvey a position as senior marine officer aboard HMS Lion , the 27,000 ton flagship of the British battlecruiser fleet . Lion had eight 13.5-inch guns and Harvey was stationed in an office under Q turret directing their operation and fire . Under her new commander , Admiral David Beatty , Harvey served as the senior marine officer on board into the First World War , his first military campaign .

Harvey did not have to wait long to see action , seeing combat for the first time at the Battle of Heligoland Bight just weeks into the war . On 28 August 1914 , Lion and her squadron of HMS Queen Mary and HMS Princess Royal , swept into the Heligoland Bight where German and British cruiser forces were already engaged in a bitter struggle . One German cruiser had already been sunk by the time Beatty 's force arrived , but the German flagship SMS Cöln and cruiser SMS Ariadne were surprised in the fog and destroyed by heavy calibre shells from Beatty 's battlecruisers . German Admiral Leberecht Maass and over 1,000 of his sailors were killed , Harvey 's guns scoring several hits on the cruisers . Six months later , Harvey 's guns again caused severe damage to a German force at the Battle of Dogger Bank . Over the previous months , a German battlecruiser squadron under Rear-Admiral Hipper had crossed the North Sea and bombarded British coastal towns on several occasions . On 24 January 1915 another attempt was made , but this time British signals analysts had detected the German movement and using this information the Admiralty dispatched Beatty 's force to intercept and destroy them . Beatty and Hipper 's squadrons collided at 09 : 00 and during the engagement that followed , Lion was left exposed by mis-communication between the ships , which led to HMS Tiger engaging the wrong ship , leaving SMS Moltke uncovered and so able to fire more accurately . The British flagship was hard pressed until one of Lion 's shots penetrated one of Seydlitz 's turrets . A huge explosion destroyed the neighbouring turret as well and killed 160 men , the German flagship only surviving due to the actions of sailor Wilhelm Heidkamp , who wrenched open the water valves to the magazines despite them glowing red hot .

Lion was badly damaged in the action by shells from the passing SMS Derfflinger and with her engines failing , dropped back to engage the already sinking SMS Blücher . Misread signals resulted in the rest of the British fleet returning to support Lion in this task , allowing the rest of the battered German fleet to retire as the British destroyed the hapless Blücher and 792 of her crew . Following the battle , Harvey remained aboard Lion at Rosyth for the whole of 1915 and the first five months of 1916 , continuing his gunnery training and preparations for major fleet action . His preparations came to fruition on the last day of May , when the British fleet sailed to engage the main body of the German High Seas Fleet at the Battle of Jutland . Just after Dogger Bank , Harvey had written to a fellow RMLI officer in HMS Orion describing his experiences :

Beatty 's battlecruisers led the British fleet in its attack , casting south into the North Sea to find the enemy during the afternoon of 31 May 1916 . At 14 : 15 , scouting cruisers spotted the German vanguard and Beatty closed to attack the enemy with his main force . Given time to prepare , Hipper was ready for Beatty with his battlecruisers in line to face Beatty 's approaching ships with their full broadsides . Hipper was also encouraged by the main German battleship fleet under Vice-Admiral Reinhard Scheer , which was steaming northwards close behind him . At 15 : 45 Beatty came within range of the German fleet and the vanguards engaged one another with their opening fusillades . As the two squadrons closed , the Germans found the range better and faster than the British , who were silhouetted against the sun . As a result , German shells pounded the British ships while the German ships remained untouched for the first 10 minutes of the engagement . During this stage of the battle Lion was hit by nine shells from SMS Lützow . One shell at 16 : 00 struck the right upper corner of the left hand gun port at the junction of the face plate and the roof , and punched a piece of the 9-inch face plate into the turret before detonating , blowing off the armoured roof of the turret and starting a fire , which a damage control party working from outside the turret fought to put out .

The initial explosion killed or wounded everyone stationed in the gun house itself . Harvey , despite severe wounds and burns , realised that the shell hoist leading to the ship 's main forward magazine was jammed open . With the hatch open , the flash fire would rapidly travel down to the main magazine resulting in an explosion that would tear the ship in two and kill everyone on board . Staggering across the wreckage of the turret , Harvey gave orders down the voice pipe for the magazine doors to be closed and the magazine compartments to be flooded , an action which would prevent the cordite in the magazines detonating . Turning to his sergeant , the one man still standing , Harvey instructed him to proceed to the bridge and give a full report to the ship 's captain Ernle Chatfield ( a standard drill in damage exercises ) . Seconds later , Harvey collapsed and died from his wounds . The sergeant went immediately to the bridge and notified the captain of Harvey 's actions before being taken below to have his wounds dressed . As soon as the turret had been hit the captain had ordered Q magazine doors closed and the magazine flooded , the order passing to the Transmitting Station below the armoured deck where Stoker 1st Class William Yeo was entrusted with passing the order on . The magazine was consequently flooded and locked up within minutes of the hit . However the cordite charges which had fallen down from gun house after the hit were not removed to safety , and there were still ready charges in the working chamber . A large number of crewmen still remained in the shell room , magazine handing room and working chamber . The fire which was thought to have been put out after the hit on the turret gained strength and ignited the remaining cordite charges , setting off a large explosion at 16 : 28 which killed the turret crewmen , the flame of the explosion reaching as high as the top of the ship 's masts . Even with the precautions taken in hand , the magazine doors were later found to be severely buckled – only the seawater in the magazine behind it prevented the blast reaching inside . Other ships of the battlecruiser fleet were less lucky ; at about the same time as Harvey 's death , HMS Indefatigable was torn to pieces by a series of magazine explosions that claimed 1,013 lives and just minutes after that HMS Queen Mary exploded " like a puffball " in one huge column of grey smoke , killing 1,275 sailors . Hours later during the main battlefleet engagement , Admiral Horace Hood 's flagship HMS Invincible was destroyed with 1,032 lives . All three ships were lost as the result of magazine explosions similar to the one narrowly avoided on Lion .

Harvey 's charred corpse was taken from the wreckage of Q turret in the aftermath of battle and buried at sea with full honours alongside the other 98 fatal casualties Lion had suffered . His bravery in the face of certain death did not go unnoticed ; he was mentioned by name in Admiral Jellicoe 's post-battle dispatch and he was posthumously awarded the Victoria Cross . Harvey 's widow Ethel was presented with the award at Buckingham Palace by King George V on 15 September 1916 . His medal group was later loaned to the Royal Marines Museum , Eastney Barracks by his son Lieutenant-Colonel John Malcolm Harvey of the King 's Regiment in 1973 . Harvey 's name is inscribed on the Chatham Naval Memorial to those with no known grave , administered by the Commonwealth War Graves Commission .

DayZ is a multiplayer open world survival third-person shooter modification designed by Dean Hall for the 2009 tactical shooter video game ARMA 2 and its 2010 expansion pack , ARMA 2 : Operation Arrowhead . The mod places the player in the fictional post-Soviet state of Chernarus , where a mysterious plague has infected most of the population , turning people into violent zombies . As a survivor with limited supplies , the player must scavenge the world for supplies such as food , water , weapons and medicine , while killing or avoiding both zombies and other players , and sometimes non-player characters , in an effort to survive the zombie apocalypse . DayZ has been praised for its innovative design elements . The mod reached one million players in its first four months on August 6 , 2012 , with hundreds of thousands of people purchasing ARMA 2 just to play it . The mod version of DayZ remains in continued development by its community , where as the standalone game was developed by ARMA 2 creators Bohemia Interactive . During the alpha , designer Dean Hall became part of Bohemia Interactive , and the mod , retitled to Arma II : DayZ Mod , was officially released on February 21 , 2013 .

DayZ attempts to portray a realistic scenario within the gameplay , with the environment having different effects on the player . A character may receive bone fractures from damage to their legs , go into shock from bullet wounds or zombie bites , receive infections from zombies or diseased players , or faint due to low blood pressure . Thirst and hunger must be kept under control by finding sustenance in either cities or the wilderness , with body temperature playing a key part in the character 's survival . The game focuses on surviving and the human elements of a zombie apocalypse by forcing the player to acknowledge basic human needs like thirst , hunger and shelter . These mechanics require the player to focus on immediate goals before they can consider long-term strategies . DayZ is praised for its level of emergent gameplay . BuzzFeed author Russell Brandom suggested that the mod has spawned the first photojournalist in a massively multiplayer online role-playing game , creating articles that are not only about a game world but journalism told from within it . Brandom claimed that DayZ is a unique example of the massively multiplayer online game genre in giving players the freedom to harm or murder each other , whilst adding no restrictions on how or why they may do it , quoting a player who described it as " the story of people " . The mod has been compared by Kotaku to The Walking Dead and its focus on interactions between the characters when faced with desperate situations . The players in DayZ are forced to deal with dilemmas in similar ways as portrayed in both the comics and TV series for The Walking Dead .

It has been proposed that DayZ provides some insight into people 's motivations and behaviors when reacting to real crisis events , mirroring controlled experiments of a similar nature . However , some critics of this theory argue that participants do not react as they would in a real world situation in which their life is truly threatened . Despite the game being biased towards self-interested , hostile competition , many players enter the game with their own perceptions and priorities . These varied approaches and experiences within the game suggest that even in a system that should theoretically promote rational behaviour , people act in unexpected ways . It has been proposed that this dispels the idea that chaos is an objective and defining feature of the system , rather it is what players make of it .

Dean Hall created the concept while he was a soldier in the New Zealand Army , as a suggestion for training soldiers through exposure to situations provoking emotion and relevant thought processes . He has stated he was inspired by experiences during jungle training while on exchange with the Singapore Armed Forces in Brunei , where he was badly injured in a survival skills exercise . Hall has stated that what he had endured then directly affected the development of DayZ , and the creation of immersion through forcing the player to experience emotion and tension as part of gameplay . Hall believed that early rapid success of the mod was largely due to social media and consumers ' desire for games that provided significant challenge . Hall has described the mod as something of an " anti-game " as it broke what he felt were generally considered to be basic rules of game design such as balance and not frustrating users . First requiring manual installation , DayZ now uses two third-party programs called Six Updater Suite and DayZ Commander to facilitate its installation . On August 7 , 2012 , Dean Hall announced on the game 's development blog that the mod was going to be made into its own game , with Bohemia Interactive as the developer , and himself as the project leader . On October 29 , 2012 , development of the mod officially transferred to a largely community driven effort with the release of version 1.7.3 .

DayZ acquired a large user base due to its unique gameplay . By August 2012 , three months after release , the mod had registered more than one million unique users . IGN called it one of the most popular PC games in the world " right now " four months after release . It was credited for over 300,000 unit sales of ARMA 2 within two months of the mod 's release , putting this three-year-old title in the top seller charts on Steam for over seven weeks , much of this time as the top selling game . Marek Španěl , CEO of ARMA 2 developer Bohemia Interactive , said the mod was directly driving sales of the game and applauded it for an addictive and thrilling experience , saying that it could stand as a gaming experience on its own . The mod was also praised by video game developers not involved with the series . Kristoffer Touborg from CCP ( EVE-Online ) said it was the best game he has played in several months and called it particularly innovative given the first-person shooter genre , which he considered to be one of gaming 's least innovative genres . Game designers Erik Wolpaw and Tim Schafer stated at PAX Prime 2012 that they believe that player-driven experiences such as DayZ are the future of gaming , commenting on what the title achieved without having a driving narrative .

The mod received widespread media acclaim . Edge called DayZ the mod of the year . Wired UK 's Quitin Smith said it could be the most terrifying game of 2012 , and Rock Paper Shotgun 's Jim Rossignol called it the best game he had played so far in 2012 . PC Gamer stated the game was one of the most important things to happen to PC gaming in 2012 and included it in their 2012 list of the top five scariest PC games of all time . Metro called it one of the best games to ever to come out of PC modding and one of the single most impressive experiences available on the system . Eurogamer called it the best zombie game ever made and the break out phenomenon of PC gaming in 2012 . Kotaku called it possibly the greatest zombie game of all time and the most interesting PC game of 2012 . PC PowerPlay said DayZ was the most important thing to happen to PC gaming in 2012 . Eurogamer 's Stace Harman suggested that the mod 's designer Dean Hall might be responsible for some of the most emotive stories to come from playing a video game . Chris Pereiraa of 1UP.com called it a " shining example of PC gaming at its finest " , stating the tension from interacting with other players leads to an experience unlike anything else he had experienced in gaming apart from making love in Heavy Rain , and cited the game as an example that PC gaming is not in decline , as the creation of such a mod is something that is only possible on a computer ( as opposed to video game consoles ) . According to bit-tech 's Joe Martin , no other game in the genre has offered so compelling take on a zombie apocalypse and its impact of the mod on the industry might be similar to that of Defense of the Ancients and Counter-Strike .

Theodore Robert Bundy ( born Theodore Robert Cowell ; November 24 , 1946 – January 24 , 1989 ) was an American serial killer , kidnapper , rapist , and necrophile who assaulted and murdered numerous young women and girls during the 1970s and possibly earlier . Shortly before his execution , after more than a decade of denials , he confessed to 30 homicides committed in seven states between 1974 and 1978 . The true victim count remains unknown , and could be much higher . Bundy was regarded as handsome and charismatic by many of his young female victims , traits he exploited to win their trust . He typically approached them in public places , feigning injury or disability , or impersonating an authority figure , before overpowering and assaulting them at more secluded locations . He sometimes revisited his secondary crime scenes for hours at a time , grooming and performing sexual acts with the decomposing corpses until putrefaction and destruction by wild animals made further interaction impossible . He decapitated at least 12 of his victims , and kept some of the severed heads in his apartment for a period of time as mementos . On a few occasions , he simply broke into dwellings at night and bludgeoned his victims as they slept .

Initially incarcerated in Utah in 1975 for aggravated kidnapping and attempted criminal assault , Bundy became a suspect in a progressively longer list of unsolved homicides in multiple states . Facing murder charges in Colorado , he engineered two dramatic escapes and committed further assaults , including three murders , before his ultimate recapture in Florida in 1978 . He received three death sentences in two separate trials for the Florida homicides . Ted Bundy died in the electric chair at Raiford Prison in Starke , Florida , on January 24 , 1989 . Biographer Ann Rule described him as " ... a sadistic sociopath who took pleasure from another human 's pain and the control he had over his victims , to the point of death , and even after . " He once called himself " ... the most cold-hearted son of a bitch you 'll ever meet . " Attorney Polly Nelson , a member of his last defense team , agreed . " Ted " , she wrote , " was the very definition of heartless evil . "

Bundy was born Theodore Robert Cowell at the Elizabeth Lund Home for Unwed Mothers ( now the Lund Family Center ) in Burlington , Vermont on November 24 , 1946 to Eleanor Louise Cowell ( 1924 – 2012 ; known for most of her life as Louise ) . His father 's identity has never been determined with certainty . His birth certificate assigns paternity to a salesman and Air Force veteran named Lloyd Marshall , but Louise later claimed that she had been seduced by " a sailor " whose name may have been Jack Worthington . ( Years later , investigators would find no record of anyone by that name in Navy or Merchant Marine archives . ) Some family members expressed suspicions that Bundy might have been fathered by Louise 's own violent , abusive father , Samuel Cowell , but no material evidence has ever been cited to support or refute this . For the first three years of his life Bundy lived in the Philadelphia home of his maternal grandparents , Samuel and Eleanor Cowell , who raised him as their son to avoid the social stigma that accompanied birth outside wedlock at the time . Family , friends , and even young Ted were told that his grandparents were his parents and that his mother was his older sister . Eventually he discovered the truth ; he told his girlfriend that a cousin showed him a copy of his birth certificate after calling him a " bastard " , but he told biographers Stephen Michaud and Hugh Aynesworth that he found the certificate himself . Biographer and true crime writer Ann Rule , who knew Bundy personally , believes that he located his original birth record in Vermont in 1969 . Bundy expressed a lifelong resentment toward his mother for lying about his true parentage and leaving him to discover it for himself .

Bundy spoke warmly of his grandparents in some interviews , and told Rule that he " identified with " , " respected " , and " clung to " his grandfather ; but he and other family members told attorneys in 1987 that Samuel Cowell was a tyrannical bully and a bigot who hated blacks , Italians , Catholics , and Jews , beat his wife and the family dog , and swung neighborhood cats by their tails . He once threw Louise 's younger sister Julia down a flight of stairs for oversleeping . He sometimes spoke aloud to unseen presences , and at least once he flew into a violent rage when the question of Ted 's paternity was raised . Bundy described his grandmother as a timid and obedient woman who periodically underwent electroconvulsive therapy for depression and feared leaving their house toward the end of her life . Ted occasionally exhibited disturbing behavior , even at that early age . Julia recalled awakening one day from a nap to find herself surrounded by knives from the Cowell kitchen ; her three-year-old nephew was standing by the bed , smiling . In 1950 Louise abruptly changed her surname from Cowell to Nelson , and at the urging of multiple family members , left Philadelphia with her son to live with cousins Alan and Jane Scott in Tacoma , Washington . In 1951 Louise met Johnny Culpepper Bundy , a hospital cook , at an adult singles night at Tacoma 's First Methodist Church . They married later that year and Johnny Bundy formally adopted Ted . Johnny and Louise conceived four children of their own , and although Johnny tried to include his adoptive son in camping trips and other family activities , Ted remained distant . He later complained to his girlfriend that Johnny wasn 't his real father , " wasn 't very bright " , and " didn 't make much money . "

Bundy 's Tacoma recollections varied from biographer to biographer : To Michaud and Aynesworth he described roaming his neighborhood , picking through trash barrels in search of pictures of naked women . To Polly Nelson he spoke of perusing detective magazines , crime novels , and true crime documentaries for stories involving sexual violence , particularly when illustrated with pictures of dead or maimed bodies ; yet in a letter to Rule he asserted that he " ... never , ever read fact-detective magazines , and shuddered at the thought [ that anyone would ] " . To Michaud , he described consuming large quantities of alcohol and " canvass [ ing ] the community " late at night in search of undraped windows where he could observe women undressing , or " whatever [ else ] could be seen . " Accounts of his social life also varied : He told Michaud and Aynesworth that he " chose to be alone " as an adolescent because he was unable to understand interpersonal relationships . He claimed that he had no natural sense of how to develop friendships . " I didn 't know what made people want to be friends , " he said . " I didn 't know what underlay social interactions . " Classmates from Woodrow Wilson High School told Rule , however , that Bundy was " well known and well liked " there , " a medium-sized fish in a large pond " .

After graduating from high school in 1965 Bundy spent a year at the University of Puget Sound ( UPS ) before transferring to the University of Washington ( UW ) in 1966 to study Chinese . In 1967 he became romantically involved with a UW classmate who is identified in Bundy biographies by several pseudonyms , most commonly Stephanie Brooks . In early 1968 he dropped out of college and worked at a series of minimum-wage jobs . He also volunteered at the Seattle office of Nelson Rockefeller 's presidential campaign , and in August , attended the 1968 Republican National Convention in Miami as a Rockefeller delegate . Shortly thereafter Brooks ended their relationship and returned to her family home in California , frustrated by what she described as Bundy 's immaturity and lack of ambition . Psychiatrist Dorothy Lewis would later pinpoint this crisis as " ... probably the pivotal time in his development . " Devastated by Brooks 's rejection , Bundy traveled to Colorado and then farther east , visiting relatives in Arkansas and Philadelphia , and enrolling for one semester at Temple University . It was at this time in early 1969 , Rule believes , that Bundy visited the office of birth records in Burlington and confirmed his true parentage .

Back in Washington in the fall of 1969 , he met Elizabeth Kloepfer ( identified in Bundy literature as Meg Anders , Beth Archer , or Liz Kendall ) , a divorcée from Ogden , Utah , who worked as a secretary at the University of Washington School of Medicine . Their stormy relationship would continue well past his initial incarceration in Utah in 1976 . In mid-1970 , now focused and goal-oriented , he re-enrolled at UW , this time as a psychology major . He became an honor student , well-regarded by his professors . In 1971 he took a job at Seattle 's Suicide Hotline crisis center . There he met and worked alongside Rule , a former Seattle police officer and aspiring crime writer who would later write one of the definitive Bundy biographies , The Stranger Beside Me . Rule saw nothing disturbing in Bundy 's personality at the time , describing him as " kind , solicitous , and empathetic " . After graduating from UW in 1972 Bundy joined Governor Daniel J. Evans 's reelection campaign . Posing as a college student , he shadowed Evans 's opponent , former governor Albert Rosellini , recording his stump speeches for analysis by Evans 's team . After Evans 's reelection he was hired as an assistant to Ross Davis , Chairman of the Washington State Republican Party . Davis thought well of Bundy , describing him as " smart , aggressive ... and a believer in the system . " In early 1973 , despite mediocre Law School Admission Test scores , Bundy was accepted into the law schools of UPS and the University of Utah on the strength of letters of recommendation from Evans , Davis , and several UW psychology professors .

During a trip to California on Republican Party business in the summer of 1973 Bundy rekindled his relationship with Brooks , who marveled at his transformation into a serious , dedicated professional , seemingly on the cusp of a distinguished legal and political career . He continued to date Kloepfer as well , though neither woman was aware of the other 's existence . In the fall of 1973 Bundy matriculated at UPS Law School and continued courting Brooks , who flew to Seattle several times to stay with him . They discussed marriage ; at one point he introduced her to Davis as his fiancée . In January 1974 , however , he abruptly broke off all contact ; her phone calls and letters went unreturned . Finally reaching him by phone a month later , Brooks demanded to know why Bundy had unilaterally ended their relationship without explanation . In a flat , calm voice , he replied , " Stephanie , I have no idea what you mean ... " and hung up . She never heard from him again . Later he explained , " I just wanted to prove to myself that I could have married her . " At about the same time Bundy began skipping classes at law school , and by April he had stopped attending entirely , as young women began to disappear in the Pacific Northwest .

There is no consensus on when or where Bundy began killing women . He told different stories to different people , and refused to divulge the specifics of his earliest crimes , even as he confessed in graphic detail to dozens of later murders in the days preceding his execution . He told Nelson that he attempted his first kidnapping in 1969 in Ocean City , New Jersey , but did not kill anyone until sometime in 1971 in Seattle . He told psychologist Art Norman that he killed two women in Atlantic City in 1969 while visiting family in Philadelphia . To homicide detective Robert D. Keppel he hinted at a murder in Seattle in 1972 , and another in 1973 involving a hitchhiker near Tumwater , Washington , but refused to elaborate . Rule and Keppel both believe that he may have started killing as a teenager . Circumstantial evidence suggests that he abducted and killed 8-year-old Ann Marie Burr of Tacoma in 1961 when he was 14 , an allegation he denied repeatedly . His earliest documented homicides were committed in 1974 when he was 27 years old . By then he had ( by his own admission ) mastered the skills needed — in the era before DNA profiling — to leave minimal incriminating evidence at a crime scene .

Shortly after midnight on January 4 , 1974 — around the time that he terminated his relationship with Brooks — Bundy entered the basement apartment of 18-year-old Karen Sparks ( identified as Joni Lenz or Terri Caldwell by various sources ) , a dancer and student at UW . After bludgeoning the sleeping woman with a metal rod from her bed frame he sexually assaulted her with a speculum , causing extensive internal injuries . She remained unconscious for 10 days but survived , with permanent brain damage . Less than a month later , in the early morning hours of February 1 , Bundy broke into the basement room of Lynda Ann Healy , a UW undergraduate who broadcast morning radio weather reports for skiers . He beat her unconscious , dressed her in blue jeans , a white blouse , and boots , and carried her away . Female college students continued disappearing at the rate of about one per month . On March 12 , Donna Gail Manson , a 19-year-old student at The Evergreen State College in Olympia , 60 miles ( 97 km ) southwest of Seattle , left her dormitory for a jazz concert on campus but never arrived . On April 17 , Susan Elaine Rancourt disappeared while on her way to a movie after an evening advisors ' meeting at Central Washington State College ( now Central Washington University ) in Ellensburg , 110 miles ( 180 km ) southeast of Seattle . Two female Central Washington students later came forward to report encounters — one on the night of Rancourt 's disappearance , the other three nights earlier — with a man wearing an arm sling , asking for help carrying a load of books to his brown or tan Volkswagen Beetle . On May 6 Roberta Kathleen Parks left her dormitory at Oregon State University in Corvallis , 260 miles ( 420 km ) south of Seattle , to have coffee with friends at the Student Union Building , but never arrived .

Detectives from the King County Sheriff 's Office and the Seattle Police Department grew increasingly concerned . There was no significant physical evidence , and the missing women had little in common , apart from being young , attractive , white college students with long hair parted in the middle . On June 1 , Brenda Carol Ball , 22 , disappeared after leaving the Flame Tavern in Burien , Washington near Seattle – Tacoma International Airport . She was last seen talking in the parking lot to a brown-haired man with his arm in a sling . In the early hours of June 11 , UW student Georgann Hawkins vanished while walking down the brightly lit alley between her boyfriend 's dormitory residence and her sorority house . The next morning three Seattle homicide detectives and a criminalist combed the entire alleyway on their hands and knees , finding nothing . After Hawkins 's disappearance was publicized , witnesses came forward to report seeing a man that night in the alley behind a nearby dormitory , on crutches with a leg cast , struggling to carry a briefcase . One woman recalled that the man asked her to help him carry the case to his car , a light-brown Volkswagen Beetle .

During this period Bundy was working at the Washington State Department of Emergency Services ( DES ) in Olympia , a government agency involved in the search for the missing women . There he met and dated Carole Ann Boone , a twice-divorced mother of two who , six years later , would play an important role in the final phase of his life . Reports of the six missing women and Sparks 's brutal beating appeared prominently in newspapers and on television throughout Washington and Oregon . Fear spread among the population ; hitchhiking by young women dropped sharply . While pressure mounted on law enforcement agencies , the paucity of physical evidence severely hampered them . Police could not provide reporters with the little information that was available for fear of compromising the investigation . Further similarities between the victims were noted : The disappearances all took place at night , usually near ongoing construction work , within a week of midterm or final exams ; all of the victims were wearing slacks or blue jeans ; and at most crime scenes there were sightings of a man wearing a cast or a sling , and driving a brown or tan Volkswagen Beetle .

The Pacific Northwest murders culminated on Sunday , July 14 with the broad-daylight abductions of two women from a crowded beach at Lake Sammamish State Park in Issaquah , 20 miles ( 32 km ) east of Seattle . Five female witnesses described an attractive young man wearing a white tennis outfit with his left arm in a sling , speaking with a light accent , perhaps Canadian or British . Introducing himself as " Ted " , he asked their help in unloading a sailboat from his tan- or bronze-colored Volkswagen Beetle . Four refused ; one accompanied him as far as his car , saw that there was no sailboat , and fled . Three additional witnesses saw him approach Janice Anne Ott , 23 , a probation case worker at the King County Juvenile Court , with the sailboat story , and watched her leave the beach in his company . About four hours later Denise Naslund , an 18-year-old woman who was studying to become a computer programmer , left a picnic to go to the restroom and never returned . While Bundy later told Stephen Michaud that Ott was still alive when he returned with Naslund — and that one was forced to watch as the other was murdered — he retracted that detail on the eve of his execution .

King County police , finally armed with a detailed description of their suspect as well as his car , posted fliers throughout the Seattle area . A composite sketch was printed in regional newspapers and broadcast on local television stations . Elizabeth Kloepfer , Ann Rule , a DES employee , and a UW psychology professor all recognized the profile , the sketch , and the car , and reported Ted Bundy as a possible suspect ; but detectives — who were receiving up to 200 tips per day — thought it unlikely that a clean-cut law student with no adult criminal record could be the perpetrator . On September 6 two grouse hunters stumbled across the skeletal remains of Ott and Naslund near a service road in Issaquah , 2 miles ( 3.2 km ) east of Lake Sammamish State Park . An extra femur and several vertebrae found at the site were later identified by Bundy as Georgann Hawkins 's . Six months later , forestry students from Green River Community College discovered the skulls and mandibles of Healy , Rancourt , Parks , and Ball on Taylor Mountain , where Bundy frequently hiked , just east of Issaquah . Manson 's remains were never recovered .

In August 1974 Bundy received a second acceptance from the University of Utah Law School and moved to Salt Lake City , leaving Kloepfer in Seattle . While he called Kloepfer often , he dated " at least a dozen " other women . As he studied the first-year law curriculum a second time , " he was devastated to find out that the other students had something , some intellectual capacity , that he did not . He found the classes completely incomprehensible . ' It was a great disappointment to me , ' he said . " A new string of homicides began the following month with two that went undiscovered until Bundy confessed to them shortly before his execution . On September 2 he raped and strangled a still-unidentified hitchhiker in Idaho , then either disposed of the corpse immediately in a nearby river or returned the next day to photograph and dismember the victim . On October 2 he seized 16-year-old Nancy Wilcox in Holladay , a suburb of Salt Lake City , and dragged her into a wooded area , intending to " de-escalate " his pathological urges , he said , by raping and releasing her . However , he strangled her — by accident , he claimed — in the process of trying to silence her . Wilcox was buried , he said , near Capitol Reef National Park , some 200 miles ( 320 km ) south of Holladay , but her remains were never found .

On October 18 Melissa Smith , the 17-year-old daughter of the police chief of Midvale , another Salt Lake City suburb , disappeared after leaving a pizza parlor . Her nude body was found in a nearby mountainous area nine days later . Postmortem examination indicated that she may have remained alive for up to seven days following her disappearance . On October 31 , 25 miles ( 40 km ) south in Lehi , Laura Ann Aime , also 17 , disappeared after leaving a café just after midnight . Her naked body was found by hikers 9 miles ( 14 km ) to the northeast in American Fork Canyon on Thanksgiving Day . Both women had been beaten , raped , sodomized , and strangled with nylon stockings . Years later Bundy described his postmortem rituals with Smith 's and Aime 's remains , including hair shampooing and application of makeup . In the late afternoon of November 8 , Bundy approached 18-year-old telephone operator Carol DaRonch at Fashion Place Mall in Murray , Utah , less than a mile from the Midvale restaurant where Melissa Smith was last seen . He identified himself as " Officer Roseland " of the Murray Police Department , told DaRonch that someone had attempted to break into her car , and asked her to accompany him to the station to file a complaint . When DaRonch pointed out that Bundy was driving on a road that did not lead to the police station , he immediately pulled to the shoulder and attempted to handcuff her . During their struggle he inadvertently fastened both handcuffs to the same wrist , and DaRonch was able to open the car door and escape . Later that evening Debra Kent , a 17-year-old student at Viewmont High School in Bountiful , 19 miles ( 31 km ) north of Murray , disappeared after leaving a theater production at the school to pick up her brother . The school 's drama teacher and a student told police that " a stranger " had asked each of them to come out to the parking lot to identify a car . Another student later saw the same man pacing in the rear of the auditorium , and the drama teacher spotted him again shortly before the end of the play . Outside the auditorium , investigators found a key that unlocked the handcuffs removed from Carol DaRonch 's wrist .

In November Elizabeth Kloepfer , having read that young women were disappearing in towns surrounding Salt Lake City , called King County police a second time . Detective Randy Hergesheimer of the Major Crimes division interviewed her in detail . By then , Bundy had risen considerably on the King County hierarchy of suspicion , but the Lake Sammamish witness considered most reliable by detectives failed to pick him from a photo lineup . In December , Kloepfer called the Salt Lake County Sheriff 's Office and repeated her suspicions . Bundy 's name was added to their list of suspects , but at that time no credible evidence linked him to the Utah crimes . In January 1975 Bundy returned to Seattle after his final exams and spent a week with Kloepfer , who did not tell him that she had reported him three separate times to police . She made plans to visit him in Salt Lake City in August . In 1975 Bundy shifted much of his criminal activity eastward to Colorado from his base in Utah . On January 12 , a 23-year-old registered nurse named Caryn Campbell disappeared while walking down a well-lit hallway between the elevator and her room at the Wildwood Inn ( now the Wildwood Lodge ) in Snowmass Village , 400 miles ( 640 km ) southeast of Salt Lake City . Her nude body was found a month later next to a dirt road just outside the resort . She had been killed by blows to her head from a blunt instrument that left distinctive linear grooved depressions on her skull ; her body also had deep cuts from a sharp weapon . A hundred miles ( 160 km ) northeast of Snowmass on March 15 , Vail ski instructor Julie Cunningham , 26 , disappeared while walking from her apartment to a dinner date with a friend . Bundy later told Colorado investigators that he approached her on crutches and asked that she help carry his ski boots to his car , where he clubbed and handcuffed her , then assaulted and strangled her at a remote secondary site near Rifle , Colorado , 90 miles ( 140 km ) west of Vail . Weeks later he made the six-hour drive from Salt Lake City to revisit her remains . Denise Oliverson , 25 , disappeared near the Utah – Colorado border in Grand Junction on April 6 while riding her bicycle to her parents ' house ; her bike and sandals were found under a viaduct near a railroad bridge . On May 6 Bundy lured 12-year-old Lynette Culver from Alameda Junior High School in Pocatello , Idaho , 160 miles ( 260 km ) north of Salt Lake City . He drowned and then sexually assaulted her in his hotel room , then disposed of her body in a river north of Pocatello ( possibly the Snake ) .

In mid-May three of Bundy 's Washington State DES coworkers , including Carole Ann Boone , visited him in Salt Lake City and stayed for a week in his apartment . Bundy spent a week in Seattle with Kloepfer in early June and they discussed getting married the following Christmas . Again , Kloepfer made no mention of her discussions with the King County Police and Salt Lake County Sheriff 's Office , and Bundy disclosed neither his ongoing relationship with Boone nor a concurrent romance with a Utah law student known in various accounts as Kim Andrews or Sharon Auer . On June 28 Susan Curtis vanished from the campus of Brigham Young University in Provo , 45 miles ( 72 km ) south of Salt Lake City . Curtis 's murder became Bundy 's last confession , tape-recorded moments before he entered the execution chamber . The bodies of Wilcox , Kent , Cunningham , Culver , Curtis , and Oliverson were never recovered . In August or September 1975 he was baptized into The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints , although he was not an active participant in services and ignored most church restrictions . He would later be excommunicated by the LDS Church following his 1976 kidnapping conviction . ( When asked his religious preference after his arrest , Bundy answered " Methodist " , the religion of his childhood . )

In Washington state , investigators were still struggling to analyze the Pacific Northwest murder spree that had ended as abruptly as it had begun . In an effort to make sense of an overwhelming mass of data , they resorted to the then-innovative strategy of compiling a database . They used the King County payroll computer , a " huge , primitive machine " by contemporary standards , but the only one available for their use . After inputting the many lists they had compiled — classmates and acquaintances of each victim , Volkswagen owners named " Ted " , known sex offenders , and so on — they queried the computer for coincidences . Out of thousands of names , 26 turned up on four separate lists ; one was Ted Bundy . Detectives also manually compiled a list of their 100 " best " suspects , and Bundy was on that list as well . He was " literally at the top of the pile " of suspects when word came from Utah of his arrest .

Bundy was arrested in August 1975 by a Utah Highway Patrol officer in Granger , another Salt Lake City suburb , after he failed to pull over for a routine traffic stop . The officer , noting that the Volkswagen 's front passenger seat was missing , searched his car ; he found a ski mask , a second mask fashioned from pantyhose , a crowbar , handcuffs , trash bags , a coil of rope , an ice pick , and other items initially assumed to be burglary tools . Bundy explained that the ski mask was for skiing , he had found the handcuffs in a dumpster , and the rest were common household items . However , Detective Jerry Thompson remembered a similar suspect and car description from the November 1974 DaRonch kidnapping , and Bundy 's name from Kloepfer 's December 1974 phone call . In a search of Bundy 's apartment police found a guide to Colorado ski resorts with a checkmark by the Wildwood Inn , and a brochure advertising the Viewmont High School play in Bountiful ( where Debra Kent had disappeared ) , but nothing sufficiently incriminating to hold him . He was released on his own recognizance . ( Bundy later said that searchers missed a collection of Polaroid photographs of his victims hidden in the utility room , which he destroyed after he was released . )

Salt Lake City police placed Bundy on 24-hour surveillance , and Thompson flew to Seattle with two other detectives to interview Kloepfer . She told them that in the year prior to Bundy 's move to Utah she had discovered objects she " couldn 't understand " in her house and in Bundy 's apartment : a set of crutches ; a bag of plaster of Paris that he admitted stealing from a medical supply house ; a meat cleaver , never used for cooking , that he packed when he moved to Utah ; surgical gloves ; an Oriental knife in a wooden case that he kept in his glove compartment ; and a sack full of women 's clothing . Bundy was perpetually in debt to everyone , and Kloepfer suspected he had stolen almost everything of significant value that he owned . Once , when she confronted him over a new TV and stereo , he warned her , " If you tell anyone , I 'll break your fucking neck . " She said Bundy became " very upset " whenever she considered cutting her hair — which was long and parted in the middle . She would sometimes awaken in the middle of the night to find him under the bed covers with a flashlight , examining her body . He kept a lug wrench , taped halfway up the handle , in the trunk of her car ( she too owned a Volkswagen Beetle , which Ted often borrowed ) " for protection " . The detectives confirmed that Bundy had not been with Kloepfer on any of the nights during which the Pacific Northwest victims had vanished , nor on the day Ott and Naslund were abducted . Shortly thereafter , Kloepfer was interviewed by Seattle homicide detective Kathy McChesney and learned of the existence of Stephanie Brooks and her brief engagement to Bundy around Christmas 1973 .

In September Bundy sold his Volkswagen Beetle to a Midvale teenager . Utah police impounded it , and FBI technicians dismantled and searched it . They found hairs matching samples obtained from Caryn Campbell 's body . Later , they also identified hair strands " microscopically indistinguishable " from those of Melissa Smith and Carol DaRonch . FBI lab specialist Robert Neill concluded that the presence of hair strands in one car matching three different victims who had never met one another would be " a coincidence of mind-boggling rarity " . On October 2 , detectives put Bundy in a lineup before DaRonch , who immediately identified him as " Officer Roseland " . Witnesses from Bountiful picked him from the same lineup as the stranger lurking about the high school auditorium . There was insufficient evidence linking him to Debra Kent ( whose body was never found ) , but more than enough to charge him with aggravated kidnapping and attempted criminal assault in the DaRonch case . He was freed on $ 15,000 bail , paid by his parents , and spent most of the time between indictment and trial in Seattle , living in Kloepfer 's house . Seattle police had insufficient evidence to charge him in the Pacific Northwest murders , but kept him under close surveillance . " When Ted and I stepped out on the porch to go somewhere , " Kloepfer wrote , " so many unmarked police cars started up that it sounded like the beginning of the Indy 500 . "

In November , the three principal Bundy investigators — Jerry Thompson from Utah , Robert Keppel from Washington , and Michael Fisher from Colorado — met and exchanged information with 30 detectives and prosecutors from five states in Aspen , Colorado . While officials left the meeting ( later known as the Aspen Summit ) convinced that Bundy was the murderer they sought , they agreed that more hard evidence would be needed before he could be charged with any of the murders . On February 23 , 1976 , Bundy stood trial for the DaRonch kidnapping , waiving his right to a jury on the advice of his attorney , John O 'Connell , due to the publicity surrounding the case . On March 1 , after a four-day trial and a weekend of deliberation , Judge Stewart Hanson Jr. found him guilty of kidnapping and assault . He was sentenced to 1 to 15 years in the Utah State Prison on June 30 . In October he was found hiding in bushes in the prison yard carrying an " escape kit " — road maps , airline schedules , and a social security card — and spent several weeks in solitary confinement . Later that month , Colorado authorities charged him with Caryn Campbell 's murder . After a period of resistance , he waived extradition proceedings and was transferred to Aspen in January 1977 .

On June 7 , 1977 , Bundy was transported 40 miles ( 64 km ) from the Garfield County jail in Glenwood Springs to Pitkin County Courthouse in Aspen for a preliminary hearing . He had elected to serve as his own attorney and as such was excused by the judge from wearing handcuffs or leg shackles . During a recess he asked to visit the courthouse 's law library to research his case . Concealed behind a bookcase , he opened a window and jumped from the second story , spraining his right ankle as he landed . After shedding an outer layer of clothing he walked through Aspen as roadblocks were being set up on its outskirts , then hiked southward onto Aspen Mountain . Near its summit he broke into a hunting cabin and stole food , clothing , and a rifle . The following day he left the cabin and continued south toward the town of Crested Butte , but became lost in the forest . For two days he wandered aimlessly on the mountain , missing two trails that led downward to his intended destination . On June 10 Bundy broke into a camping trailer on Maroon Lake , 10 miles ( 16 km ) south of Aspen , taking food and a ski parka ; but instead of continuing southward he walked back north toward Aspen , eluding roadblocks and search parties . Three days later he stole a car at the edge of Aspen Golf Course . Cold , sleep-deprived , and in constant pain from his sprained ankle , he drove back into Aspen , where two police officers noticed his car weaving in and out of its lane and pulled him over . He had been a fugitive for six days . In the car were maps of the mountain area around Aspen that prosecutors were using to demonstrate the location of Caryn Campbell 's body ( as his own attorney , Bundy had rights of discovery ) , indicating that his escape had been planned .

Back in jail in Glenwood Springs , Bundy ignored the advice of friends and legal advisors to stay put . The case against him , already weak at best , was deteriorating steadily as pretrial motions consistently resolved in his favor and significant bits of evidence were ruled inadmissible . " A more rational defendant might have realized that he stood a good chance of acquittal , and that beating the murder charge in Colorado would probably have dissuaded other prosecutors ... with as little as a year and a half to serve on the DaRonch conviction , had Ted persevered , he could have been a free man . " Instead , Bundy devised a new escape plan . He acquired a detailed floor plan of the jail and a hacksaw blade from other inmates and accumulated $ 500 in cash , smuggled in over a six-month period , he later said , by visitors — Carole Ann Boone in particular . During the evenings , while other prisoners were showering , he sawed a hole about one foot ( 0.30 m ) square between the steel reinforcing bars in his cell 's ceiling and , after losing 35 pounds ( 16 kg ) , was able to wriggle through it into the crawl space above . In the weeks that followed he made a series of practice runs , exploring the space . Multiple reports from an informant of movement within the ceiling during the night were not investigated .

By late 1977 , Bundy 's impending trial had become a cause célèbre in the small town of Aspen , and Bundy filed a motion for a change of venue to Denver . On December 23 the Aspen trial judge granted the request — but to Colorado Springs , where juries had historically been hostile to murder suspects . On the night of December 30 , with most of the jail staff on Christmas break and nonviolent prisoners on furlough with their families , Bundy piled books and files in his bed , covered them with a blanket to simulate his sleeping body , and climbed into the crawlspace . He broke through the ceiling into the apartment of the chief jailer — who was out for the evening with his wife — changed into street clothes from the jailer 's closet , and walked out the front door to freedom . After stealing a car , Bundy drove eastward out of Glenwood Springs , but the car soon broke down in the mountains on Interstate 70 . A passing motorist gave him a ride into Vail , 60 miles ( 97 km ) to the east . From there he caught a bus to Denver , where he boarded a flight to Chicago . In Glenwood Springs , the jail 's skeleton crew did not discover the escape until noon on December 31 , more than 17 hours later . By then Bundy was already in Chicago .

From Chicago , Bundy traveled by train to Ann Arbor , Michigan . There , on January 2 in a local tavern , he watched his alma mater UW defeat Michigan in the Rose Bowl . Five days later he stole a car and drove to Atlanta , where he boarded a bus and arrived in Tallahassee , Florida , on January 8 . He rented a room under the alias Chris Hagen at a boarding house near the Florida State University ( FSU ) campus . Bundy later said that he initially resolved to find legitimate employment and refrain from further criminal activity , knowing he could probably remain free and undetected in Florida indefinitely as long as he did not attract the attention of police ; but his lone job application , at a construction site , had to be abandoned when he was asked to produce identification . He reverted to his old habits of shoplifting and stealing credit cards from women 's wallets left in shopping carts . Sometime during the evening of January 14 or the early hours of January 15 , 1978 — one week after his arrival in Tallahassee — Bundy entered FSU 's Chi Omega sorority house through a rear door with a faulty lock . Beginning at about 2 : 45 am he bludgeoned Margaret Bowman , 21 , with a piece of oak firewood as she slept , then garroted her with a nylon stocking . He then entered the bedroom of 20-year-old Lisa Levy and beat her unconscious , strangled her , tore one of her nipples , bit deeply into her left buttock , and sexually assaulted her with a hair mist bottle . In an adjoining bedroom he attacked Kathy Kleiner , breaking her jaw and deeply lacerating her shoulder ; and Karen Chandler , who suffered a concussion , broken jaw , loss of teeth , and a crushed finger . Tallahassee detectives later determined that the four attacks took place in a total of less than 15 minutes , within earshot of more than 30 witnesses who heard nothing . After leaving the sorority house Bundy broke into a basement apartment eight blocks away and attacked FSU student Cheryl Thomas , dislocating her shoulder and fracturing her jaw and skull in five places . She was left with permanent deafness , and equilibrium damage that ended her dance career . On Thomas 's bed police found a semen stain and a pantyhose " mask " containing two hairs " similar to Bundy 's in class and characteristic " .

On February 8 Bundy drove 150 miles ( 240 km ) east to Jacksonville in a stolen FSU van . In a parking lot he approached 14-year-old Leslie Parmenter , the daughter of Jacksonville Police Department 's Chief of Detectives , identifying himself as " Richard Burton , Fire Department " , but retreated when Parmenter 's older brother arrived . That afternoon he backtracked 60 miles ( 97 km ) westward to Lake City . At Lake City Junior High School the following morning , 12-year-old Kimberly Diane Leach was summoned to her homeroom by a teacher to retrieve a forgotten purse ; she never returned to class . Seven weeks later , after an intensive search , her partially mummified remains were found in a pig farrowing shed near Suwannee River State Park , 35 miles ( 56 km ) northwest of Lake City . On February 12 , with insufficient cash to pay his overdue rent and a growing suspicion that police were closing in on him , Bundy stole a car and fled Tallahassee , driving westward across the Florida Panhandle . Three days later at around 1 : 00 a.m. , he was stopped by Pensacola police officer David Lee near the Alabama state line after a " wants and warrants " check showed his Volkswagen Beetle as stolen . When told he was under arrest , Bundy kicked Lee 's legs out from under him and took off running . Lee fired a warning shot and then a second round , gave chase , and tackled him . The two struggled over Lee 's gun before the officer finally subdued and arrested Bundy . In the stolen vehicle were three sets of IDs belonging to female FSU students , 21 stolen credit cards , and a stolen television set . Also found were a pair of dark-rimmed non-prescription glasses and a pair of plaid slacks , later identified as the disguise worn in Jacksonville . As Lee transported his suspect to jail , unaware that he had just arrested one of the FBI Ten Most Wanted Fugitives , he heard Bundy say , " I wish you had killed me . "

Following a change of venue to Miami , Bundy stood trial for the Chi Omega homicides and assaults in June 1979 . The trial was covered by 250 reporters from five continents , and was the first to be televised nationally in the United States . Despite the presence of five court-appointed attorneys , Bundy again handled much of his own defense . From the beginning , he " sabotaged the entire defense effort out of spite , distrust , and grandiose delusion " , Nelson later wrote . " Ted [ was ] facing murder charges , with a possible death sentence , and all that mattered to him apparently was that he be in charge . " According to Mike Minerva , a Tallahassee public defender and member of the defense team , a pre-trial plea bargain was negotiated in which Bundy would plead guilty to killing Levy , Bowman , and Leach in exchange for a firm 75-year prison sentence . Prosecutors were amenable to a deal , by one account , because " prospects of losing at trial were very good . " Bundy , on the other hand , saw the plea deal not only as a means of avoiding the death penalty , but also as a " tactical move " : He could enter his plea , then wait a few years for evidence to disintegrate or become lost , and for witnesses to die , move on , or retract their testimony . Once the case against him had deteriorated beyond repair , he could file a post-conviction motion to set aside the plea and secure an acquittal . At the last minute , however , Bundy refused the deal . " It made him realize he was going to have to stand up in front of the whole world and say he was guilty " , Minerva said . " He just couldn 't do it . "

At trial , crucial testimony came from Chi Omega members Connie Hastings , who placed Bundy in the vicinity of Chi Omega House that evening ; and Nita Neary , who saw him leaving the sorority house clutching the oak murder weapon . Incriminating physical evidence included the bite impressions Bundy left in Levy 's left buttock , which forensic odontologists Richard Souviron and Lowell Levine matched to castings of Bundy 's teeth . The jury deliberated less than seven hours before convicting him on July 24 , 1979 of the two murders , three counts of attempted first degree murder , and two counts of burglary . Trial judge Edward Cowart imposed death sentences for the murder convictions . Six months later , a second trial took place in Orlando for the abduction and murder of Kimberly Leach . Bundy was found guilty once again , after less than eight hours ' deliberation , due principally to the testimony of an eyewitness who saw him leading Leach from the schoolyard to his stolen van . Important material evidence included clothing fibers with an unusual manufacturing error , found in the van and on Leach 's body , which matched fibers from the jacket Bundy was wearing when he was arrested .

During the penalty phase of the trial , Bundy took advantage of an obscure Florida law providing that a marriage declaration in court , in the presence of a judge , constituted a legal marriage . As he was questioning former Washington State DES coworker Carole Ann Boone — who had moved to Florida to be near Bundy , had testified on his behalf during both trials , and was again testifying on his behalf as a character witness — he asked her to marry him . She accepted , and Bundy declared to the court that they were legally married . On February 10 , 1980 , Bundy was sentenced to death by electrocution for a third time . As the sentence was announced , he reportedly stood and shouted , " Tell the jury they were wrong ! " This third death sentence would be the one ultimately carried out nearly nine years later . In October 1982 , Boone gave birth to a daughter and named Bundy as the father . While conjugal visits were not allowed at Raiford Prison , inmates were known to pool their money to bribe guards to allow them intimate time alone with their female visitors .

Shortly after the conclusion of the Leach trial and the beginning of the long appeals process that followed , Bundy initiated a series of interviews with Stephen Michaud and Hugh Aynesworth . Speaking mostly in third person to avoid " the stigma of confession " , he began for the first time to divulge details of his crimes and thought processes . He recounted his career as a thief , confirming Kloepfer 's long-time suspicion that he had shoplifted virtually everything of substance that he owned . " The big payoff for me , " he said , " was actually possessing whatever it was I had stolen . I really enjoyed having something ... that I had wanted and gone out and taken . " Possession proved to be an important motive for rape and murder as well . Sexual assault , he said , fulfilled his need to " totally possess " his victims . At first he killed the women " as a matter of expediency ... to eliminate the possibility of [ being ] caught " ; but later , murder became part of the " adventure " . " The ultimate possession was , in fact , the taking of the life " , he said . " And then ... the physical possession of the remains . "

Bundy also confided in Special Agent William Hagmaier of the FBI Behavioral Analysis Unit . Hagmaier was struck by the " deep , almost mystical satisfaction " that Bundy took in murder . " He said that after a while , murder is not just a crime of lust or violence " , Hagmaier related . " It becomes possession . They are part of you ... [ the victim ] becomes a part of you , and you [ two ] are forever one ... and the grounds where you kill them or leave them become sacred to you , and you will always be drawn back to them . " Bundy told Hagmaier he considered himself an " amateur " , an " impulsive " killer in his early years , before moving into what he called his " prime " or " predator " phase at about the time of Lynda Healy 's murder in 1974 . This implied that he began killing well before 1974 — though he never explicitly admitted doing so . In July 1984 Raiford guards found two hacksaw blades hidden in Bundy 's cell . A steel bar in one of its windows had been sawed completely through at the top and bottom and glued back in place with a homemade soap-based adhesive . Several months later his cell was changed again after guards found a mirror .

Sometime during this period Bundy was attacked by a group of his fellow death row inmates . Though he denied having been assaulted , a number of inmates confessed to the crime , characterized by one source as a " gang rape " . Shortly thereafter he was charged with a disciplinary infraction for unauthorized correspondence with another high-profile criminal , John Hinckley , Jr . In October 1984 Bundy , who by then considered himself an expert on serial killers , contacted Robert Keppel and offered to share his self-proclaimed expertise in the ongoing hunt for his successor in Washington , the Green River Killer . Keppel and Green River Task Force detective Dave Reichert interviewed Bundy , but Gary Leon Ridgway remained at large for a further 17 years . Keppel published a detailed documentation of the Green River interviews , and later collaborated with Michaud on another examination of the interview material . In early 1986 an execution date ( March 4 ) was set on the Chi Omega convictions ; the Supreme Court issued a brief stay , but the execution was quickly rescheduled . In April , shortly after the new date ( July 2 ) was announced , Bundy confessed to Hagmaier and Nelson what they believed was the full range of his depredations , including details of what he did to some victims after their deaths . He told them that he revisited Taylor Mountain , Issaquah , and other secondary crime scenes , often several times , to lie with his victims and perform sexual acts with their decomposing bodies until putrefaction forced him to stop . In some cases he drove several hours each way and remained the entire night . In Utah he applied makeup to Melissa Smith 's lifeless face , and he repeatedly washed Laura Aime 's hair . " If you 've got time , " he told Hagmaier , " they can be anything you want them to be . " He decapitated approximately twelve of his victims with a hacksaw , and kept at least one group of severed heads — probably the four later found on Taylor Mountain ( Rancourt , Parks , Ball , and Healy ) — in his apartment for a period of time before disposing of them .

Less than 15 hours before the scheduled July 2 execution , the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals stayed it indefinitely and remanded the Chi Omega case for review of multiple technicalities — including Bundy 's mental competency to stand trial , and an erroneous instruction by the trial judge during the penalty phase requiring the jury to break a 6 – 6 tie between life imprisonment and the death penalty — that , ultimately , were never resolved . A new date ( November 18 , 1986 ) was then set to carry out the Leach sentence ; the Eleventh Circuit Court issued a stay on November 17 . In mid-1988 the Eleventh Circuit ruled against Bundy , and in December the Supreme Court denied a motion to review the ruling . Within hours of that final denial a firm execution date of January 24 , 1989 was announced . Bundy 's journey through the appeals courts had been unusually rapid for a capital murder case : " Contrary to popular belief , the courts moved Bundy as fast as they could ... Even the prosecutors acknowledged that Bundy 's lawyers never employed delaying tactics . Though people everywhere seethed at the apparent delay in executing the archdemon , Ted Bundy was actually on the fast track . "

With all appeal avenues exhausted and no further motivation to deny his crimes , Bundy agreed to speak frankly with investigators . To Keppel , he confessed to all eight of the Washington and Oregon homicides for which he was the prime suspect . He described three additional previously unknown victims in Washington and two in Oregon whom he declined to identify ( if indeed he ever knew their identities ) . He said he left a fifth corpse — Donna Manson 's — on Taylor Mountain , but incinerated her head in Kloepfer 's fireplace . ( " Of all the things I did to [ Kloepfer ] , " he told Keppel , " this is probably the one she is least likely to forgive me for . Poor Liz . " ) He described in detail his abduction of Georgann Hawkins from the brightly lit UW alley — how he lured her to his car , clubbed and handcuffed her , drove her to Issaquah and strangled her , spent the entire night with her body , and revisited her corpse on three later occasions . He also admitted , for the first time , that he returned the following morning to the UW alley . There , in the very midst of a major crime scene investigation , he located and gathered Hawkins 's earrings and one of her shoes where he had left them in the adjoining parking lot and departed , unobserved . " It was a feat so brazen , " wrote Keppel , " that it astonishes police even today . "

" He described the Issaquah crime scene [ where the bones of Ott , Naslund , and Hawkins were found ] , and it was almost like he was just there " , Keppel said . " Like he was seeing everything . He was infatuated with the idea because he spent so much time there . He is just totally consumed with murder all the time . " Nelson 's impressions were similar : " It was the absolute misogyny of his crimes that stunned me , " she wrote , " his manifest rage against women . He had no compassion at all ... he was totally engrossed in the details . His murders were his life 's accomplishments . " To detectives from Idaho , Utah , and Colorado , Bundy confessed to numerous additional homicides , including several that police had been unaware of . He explained that in Utah he could bring his victims back to his apartment , " where he could reenact scenarios depicted on the covers of detective magazines . " A new ulterior strategy quickly became apparent : He withheld many details , hoping to parlay the incomplete information into yet another stay of execution . " There are other buried remains in Colorado " , he admitted , but refused to elaborate . The new strategy — immediately dubbed " Ted 's bones-for-time scheme " — served only to deepen the resolve of authorities to see Bundy executed on schedule , and yielded little new detailed information . In cases where he did give details , nothing was found . Colorado detective Matt Lindvall interpreted this as a conflict between his desire to postpone his execution by divulging information and his need to remain in " total possession — the only person who knew his victims ' true resting places . "

When it became clear that no further stays would be forthcoming from the courts , Bundy supporters began lobbying for the only remaining option , executive clemency . Diana Weiner , a young Florida attorney and Bundy 's last purported love interest , asked the families of several Colorado and Utah victims to petition Florida Governor Bob Martinez for a postponement to give Bundy time to reveal more information . All refused . " The families already believed that the victims were dead and that Ted had killed them " , wrote Nelson . " They didn 't need his confession . " Martinez made it clear that he would not agree to further delays in any case . " We are not going to have the system manipulated " , he told reporters . " For him to be negotiating for his life over the bodies of victims is despicable . " Carole Ann Boone , who had championed Bundy 's innocence throughout all of his trials , felt " deeply betrayed " by his admission that he was , in fact , guilty . She moved back to Washington with her daughter and refused to accept his final , pre-execution phone call . " She was hurt by his relationship with Diana [ Wiener ] , " Nelson wrote , " and devastated by his sudden wholesale confessions in his last days . "

Hagmaier was present during Bundy 's final interviews with investigators . On the eve of his execution , he talked of suicide . " He did not want to give the state the satisfaction of watching him die " , Hagmaier said . Ted Bundy died in the Raiford electric chair at 7 : 16 a.m. EST on January 24 , 1989 ; he was 42 years old . Hundreds of revelers — including 20 off-duty police officers , by one account — sang , danced , and set off fireworks in a pasture across the street from the prison as the execution was carried out , then cheered loudly as the white hearse containing Bundy 's corpse departed the prison . His remains were cremated in Gainesville and the ashes scattered at an undisclosed location in the Cascade Range of Washington State in accordance with his will .

Bundy was an unusually organized and calculating criminal who used his extensive knowledge of law enforcement methodologies to elude identification and capture for years . His crime scenes were distributed over large geographic areas ; his victim count had risen to at least 20 before it became clear that numerous investigators in widely disparate jurisdictions were hunting the same man . His assault methods of choice were blunt trauma and strangulation , two relatively silent techniques that could be accomplished with common household items . He deliberately avoided firearms due to the noise they made and the ballistic evidence they left behind . He was a " meticulous researcher " who explored his surroundings in minute detail , looking for safe sites to seize and dispose of victims . He was unusually skilled at minimizing physical evidence . His fingerprints were never found at a crime scene , nor was any other incontrovertible evidence of his guilt , a fact he repeated often during the years in which he attempted to maintain his innocence . Other significant obstacles for law enforcement were Bundy 's generic , essentially anonymous physical features , and a curious chameleon-like ability to change his appearance almost at will . Early on , police complained of the futility of showing his photograph to witnesses ; he looked different in virtually every photo ever taken of him . In person , " ... his expression would so change his whole appearance that there were moments that you weren 't even sure you were looking at the same person " , said Stewart Hanson , Jr . , the judge in the DaRonch trial . " He [ was ] really a changeling . " Bundy was well aware of this unusual quality and he exploited it , using subtle modifications of facial hair or hairstyle to significantly alter his appearance as necessary . He concealed his one distinctive identifying mark , a dark mole on his neck , with turtleneck shirts and sweaters . Even his Volkswagen Beetle proved difficult to pin down ; its color was variously described by witnesses as metallic or non-metallic , tan or bronze , light brown or dark brown .

Bundy 's modus operandi evolved in organization and sophistication over time , as is typical of serial murderers , according to FBI experts . Early on , it consisted of forcible late-night entry followed by a violent attack with a blunt weapon on a sleeping victim . Some victims were sexually assaulted with inert objects ; all except Healy were left as they lay , unconscious or dead . As his methodology evolved Bundy became progressively more organized in his choice of victims and crime scenes . He would employ various ruses designed to lure his victim to the vicinity of his vehicle where he had pre-positioned a weapon , usually a crowbar . In many cases he wore a plaster cast on one leg or a sling on one arm , and sometimes hobbled on crutches , then requested assistance in carrying something to his vehicle . Bundy was regarded as handsome and charismatic by many of his victims , traits he exploited to win their confidence . " Ted lured females " , Michaud wrote , " the way a lifeless silk flower can dupe a honey bee . " Once near or inside his vehicle the victim would be overpowered , bludgeoned , and restrained with handcuffs . Most were sexually assaulted and strangled , either at the primary crime scene or ( more commonly ) after transport to a pre-selected secondary site , often a considerable distance away . In situations where his looks and charm were not useful , he invoked authority by identifying himself as a police officer or firefighter . Toward the end of his spree , in Florida , perhaps under the stress of being a fugitive , he regressed to indiscriminate attacks on sleeping victims .

At secondary sites he would remove and later burn the victim 's clothing , or in at least one case ( Cunningham 's ) deposit them in a Goodwill Industries collection bin . Bundy explained that the clothing removal was ritualistic , but also a practical matter , as it minimized the chance of leaving trace evidence at the crime scene that could implicate him . ( A manufacturing error in fibers from his own clothing , ironically , provided a crucial incriminating link to Kimberly Leach . ) He often revisited his secondary crime scenes to engage in acts of necrophilia , and to groom or dress up the cadavers . Some victims were found wearing articles of clothing they had never worn , or nail polish that family members had never seen . He took Polaroid photos of many of his victims . " When you work hard to do something right , " he told Hagmaier , " you don 't want to forget it . " Consumption of large quantities of alcohol was an " essential component " , he told Keppel , and later Michaud ; he needed to be " extremely drunk " while on the prowl in order to " significantly diminish " his inhibitions and to " sedate " the " dominant personality " that he feared might prevent his inner " entity " from acting on his impulses .

All of Bundy 's known victims were white females , most of middle-class backgrounds . Almost all were between the ages of 15 and 25 and most were college students . He apparently never approached anyone he might have met before . ( In their last conversation before his execution , Bundy told Kloepfer he had purposely stayed away from her " when he felt the power of his sickness building in him . " ) Rule noted that most of the identified victims had long straight hair , parted in the middle — like Stephanie Brooks , the woman who rejected him , and to whom he later became engaged and then rejected in return . Rule speculated that Bundy 's animosity toward his first girlfriend triggered his protracted rampage and caused him to target victims who resembled her . Bundy dismissed this hypothesis : " [ T ] hey ... just fit the general criteria of being young and attractive " , he told Hugh Aynesworth . " Too many people have bought this crap that all the girls were similar ... [ but ] almost everything was dissimilar ... physically , they were almost all different . " He did concede that youth and beauty were " absolutely indispensable criteria " in his choice of victims .

Bundy underwent multiple psychiatric examinations ; the experts ' conclusions varied . Dorothy Otnow Lewis , Professor of Psychiatry at the New York University School of Medicine and an authority on violent behavior , initially made a diagnosis of bipolar disorder , but later changed her impression more than once . She also suggested the possibility of a multiple personality disorder , based on behaviors described in interviews and court testimony : A great-aunt witnessed an episode during which Bundy " ... seemed to turn into another , unrecognizable person ... [ she ] suddenly , inexplicably found herself afraid of her favorite nephew as they waited together at a dusk-darkened train station . He had turned into a stranger . " Lewis recounted a prison official in Tallahassee describing a similar transformation : " He said , ' He became weird on me . ' He did a metamorphosis , a body and facial change , and he felt there was almost an odor emitting from him . He said , ' Almost a complete change of personality ... that was the day I was afraid of him . ' " Narcissistic personality disorder ( NPD ) has also been proposed in at least one subsequent retrospective analysis .

While experts found Bundy 's precise diagnosis elusive , the majority of evidence pointed away from bipolar disorder or other psychoses , and toward antisocial personality disorder ( ASPD ) . ASPD patients — frequently identified as " sociopaths " or " psychopaths " — are often outwardly charming , even charismatic ; but beneath the facade there is little true personality or genuine insight . Most sociopaths are not demonstrably psychotic ; they can readily distinguish right from wrong , but such ability has minimal effect on their behavior . They are devoid of feelings of guilt or remorse , a point readily admitted by Bundy himself . " Guilt doesn 't solve anything , really " , he said in 1981 . " It hurts you ... I guess I am in the enviable position of not having to deal with guilt . " Other hallmarks include narcissism , poor judgment , and manipulative behavior . " Sociopaths " , prosecutor George Dekle wrote , " are egotistical manipulators who think they can con anybody . " " Sometimes he manipulates even me " , admitted one psychiatrist . In the end , Lewis agreed with the majority : " I always tell my graduate students that if they can find me a real , true psychopath , I 'll buy them dinner " , she told Nelson . " I never thought they existed ... but I think Ted may have been one , a true psychopath , without any remorse or empathy at all . "

On the afternoon before he was executed Bundy granted an interview to James Dobson , a psychologist and founder of the Christian evangelical organization Focus on the Family . He used the opportunity to make new statements about violence in the media and the pornographic " roots " of his crimes . " It happened in stages , gradually " , he said . " My experience with ... pornography that deals on a violent level with sexuality , is once you become addicted to it ... I would keep looking for more potent , more explicit , more graphic kinds of material . Until you reach a point where the pornography only goes so far ... where you begin to wonder if maybe actually doing it would give that which is beyond just reading it or looking at it . " Violence in the media , he said , " particularly sexualized violence " , sent boys " down the road to being Ted Bundys . " The FBI , he suggested , should stake out adult movie houses and follow patrons as they leave . " You are going to kill me , " he said , " and that will protect society from me . But out there are many , many more people who are addicted to pornography , and you are doing nothing about that . "

Multiple biographers , researchers , and other observers have concluded that Bundy 's sudden condemnation of pornography was one last manipulative attempt to shift blame by catering to Dobson 's agenda as a longtime anti-pornography advocate , telling him precisely what he wanted to hear . While he asserted in the Dobson interview that detective magazines and other reading material had " corrupted " him and " fueled [ his ] fantasies ... to the point of becoming a serial killer " , in a 1977 letter to Ann Rule he wrote , " Who in the world reads these publications ? ... I have never purchased such a magazine , and [ on only ] two or three occasions have I ever picked one up . " He told Michaud and Aynsworth in 1980 , and Hagmaier the night before he spoke to Dobson , that pornography played a negligible role in his development as a serial killer . " The problem wasn 't pornography " , wrote Dekle . " The problem was Bundy . " Nelson expressed the minority view , that Bundy 's concern about the dangers of violent pornography was genuine . Rule and Aynesworth both noted that , for Bundy , the fault always lay with someone or something else . While he eventually confessed to 30 murders , he never accepted responsibility for any of them , even when offered that opportunity prior to the Chi Omega trial — which would have averted the death penalty . He deflected blame onto a wide variety of scapegoats , including his abusive grandfather , the absence of his biological father , the concealment of his true parentage , alcohol , the media , the police ( whom he accused of planting evidence ) , " society " in general , violence on television , and ultimately , true crime periodicals and pornography . He blamed television programming — which he watched mostly on sets that he had stolen — for " brainwashing " him into stealing credit cards . On at least one occasion he even tried to blame his victims : " I have known people who ... radiate vulnerability " , he wrote in a 1977 letter to Kloepfer . " Their facial expressions say ' I am afraid of you . ' These people invite abuse ... By expecting to be hurt , do they subtly encourage it ? "

Bundy was always surprised when anyone noticed that one of his victims was missing , because he imagined America to be a place where everyone is invisible except to themselves . And he was always astounded when people testified that they had seen him in incriminating places , because Bundy did not believe people noticed each other . " I don 't know why everyone is out to get me " , he complained to Lewis . " He really and truly did not have any sense of the enormity of what he had done , " she said . " A long-term serial killer erects powerful barriers to his guilt , " Keppel wrote , " walls of denial that can sometimes never be breached . " Nelson agreed . " Each time he was forced to make an actual confession , " she wrote , " he had to leap a steep barrier he had built inside himself long ago . "

Bundy confessed to 30 homicides , but the true total remains unknown . Published estimates have run as high as 100 or more , and Bundy occasionally made cryptic comments to encourage that speculation . He told Hugh Aynesworth in 1980 that for every murder " publicized " , there " could be one that was not . " When FBI agents proposed a total tally of 36 , Bundy responded , " Add one digit to that , and you 'll have it . " Years later he told attorney Polly Nelson that the common estimate of 35 was accurate , but Robert Keppel wrote that " [ Ted ] and I both knew [ the total ] was much higher . " " I don 't think even he knew ... how many he killed , or why he killed them " , said Rev. Fred Lawrence , the Methodist clergyman who administered Bundy 's last rites . " That was my impression , my strong impression . " On the evening before his execution , Bundy reviewed his victim tally with Bill Hagmaier on a state-by-state basis : in Washington , 11 ( including Parks , abducted in Oregon but killed in Washington ; and including 3 unidentified )

January 4 : Karen Sparks ( often identified as Joni Lenz in Bundy literature ) ( age 18 ) : Bludgeoned and sexually assaulted in her bed as she slept ; survived February 1 : Lynda Ann Healy ( 21 ) : Bludgeoned while asleep and abducted ; skull and mandible recovered at Taylor Mountain site March 12 : Donna Gail Manson ( 19 ) : Abducted while walking to a concert at The Evergreen State College ; body left ( according to Bundy ) at Taylor Mountain site , but never found April 17 : Susan Elaine Rancourt ( 18 ) : Disappeared after attending an evening advisors ' meeting at Central Washington State College ; skull and mandible recovered at Taylor Mountain site May 6 : Roberta Kathleen Parks ( 22 ) : Vanished from Oregon State University in Corvallis ; skull and mandible recovered at Taylor Mountain site June 1 : Brenda Carol Ball ( 22 ) : Disappeared after leaving the Flame Tavern in Burien ; skull and mandible recovered at Taylor Mountain site June 11 : Georgann ( often misspelled " Georgeann " ) Hawkins ( 18 ) : Abducted from an alley behind her sorority house , UW ; skeletal remains identified by Bundy as Hawkins 's recovered at Issaquah site

October 2 : Nancy Wilcox ( 16 ) : Ambushed , assaulted , and strangled in Holladay , Utah ; body buried ( according to Bundy ) near Capitol Reef National Park , 200 miles ( 320 km ) south of Salt Lake City , but never found October 18 : Melissa Anne Smith ( 17 ) : Vanished from Midvale , Utah ; body found in nearby mountainous area October 31 : Laura Ann Aime ( 17 ) : Disappeared from Lehi , Utah ; body discovered by hikers in American Fork Canyon November 8 : Carol DaRonch ( 18 ) : Attempted abduction in Murray , Utah ; escaped from Bundy 's car and survived November 8 : Debra Kent ( 17 ) : Vanished after leaving a school play in Bountiful , Utah ; body left ( according to Bundy ) near Fairview , Utah , 100 miles ( 160 km ) south of Bountiful ; minimal skeletal remains ( one patella ) found , but never positively identified as Kent 's

January 12 : Caryn Campbell ( 23 ) : Disappeared from hotel hallway in Snowmass , Colorado ; body discovered on a dirt road near the hotel March 15 : Julie Cunningham ( 26 ) : Disappeared on the way to a tavern in Vail , Colorado ; body buried ( according to Bundy ) near Rifle , 90 miles ( 140 km ) west of Vail , but never found April 6 : Denise Oliverson ( 25 ) : Abducted while bicycling to her parents ' house in Grand Junction , Colorado ; body thrown ( according to Bundy ) into the Colorado River 5 miles ( 8.0 km ) west of Grand Junction , but never found May 6 : Lynette Culver ( 12 ) : Abducted from Alameda Junior High School in Pocatello , Idaho ; body thrown ( according to Bundy ) into what authorities believe to be the Snake River , but never found June 28 : Susan Curtis ( 15 ) : Disappeared during a youth conference at Brigham Young University ; body buried ( according to Bundy ) near Price , Utah , 75 miles ( 121 km ) southeast of Provo , but never found

January 15 : Margaret Bowman ( 21 ) : Bludgeoned and then strangled as she slept , Chi Omega sorority , FSU ( no secondary crime scene ) January 15 : Lisa Levy ( 20 ) : Bludgeoned , strangled and sexually assaulted as she slept , Chi Omega sorority , FSU ( no secondary crime scene ) January 15 : Cheryl Thomas ( 21 ) : Bludgeoned as she slept , eight blocks from Chi Omega ; survived February 9 : Kimberly Diane Leach ( 12 ) : Abducted from her junior high school in Lake City , Florida ; skeletal remains found near Suwannee River State Park , 43 miles ( 69 km ) west of Lake City

Bundy remains a suspect in several unsolved homicides , and is likely responsible for others that may never be identified ; in 1987 he confided to Keppel that there were " some murders " that he would " never talk about " , because they were committed " too close to home " , " too close to family " , or involved " victims who were very young " . Ann Marie Burr , age 8 , vanished from her Tacoma home on August 31 , 1961 when Bundy was 14 . The Burr house was on Bundy 's newspaper delivery route . The victim 's father was certain that he saw Bundy in a ditch at a construction site on the nearby UPS campus the morning his daughter disappeared . Other circumstantial evidence implicates him as well , but detectives familiar with the case have never agreed on the likelihood of his involvement . Bundy repeatedly denied culpability and wrote a letter of denial to the Burr family in 1986 ; but Keppel has observed that Burr fits all three of Bundy 's " no discussion " categories of " too close to home " , " too close to family " , and " very young " . Forensic testing of material evidence from the Burr crime scene , in 2011 , yielded insufficient intact DNA sequences for comparison with Bundy 's .

Flight attendants Lisa E. Wick and Lonnie Trumbull , both 20 , were bludgeoned with a piece of lumber as they slept in their basement apartment in Seattle 's Queen Anne Hill district on June 23 , 1966 near the Safeway store where Bundy worked at the time , and where the women regularly shopped . Trumbull died . In retrospect , Keppel noted many similarities to the Chi Omega crime scene . Wick , who suffered permanent memory loss as a result of the attack , later contacted Ann Rule : " I know that it was Ted Bundy who did that to us , " she wrote , " but I can 't tell you how I know . " In the absence of incriminating evidence , Bundy 's involvement remains speculative . Vacationing college friends Susan Davis and Elizabeth Perry , both 19 , were stabbed to death on May 30 , 1969 . Their car was found that day abandoned beside the Garden State Parkway outside Somers Point , New Jersey , near Atlantic City , 60 miles ( 97 km ) south of Philadelphia ; and their bodies — one nude , one fully clothed — were found in nearby woods three days later . Bundy attended Temple University from January through May , 1969 and apparently did not move west until after Memorial Day weekend . While Bundy 's accounts of his earliest crimes varied considerably between interviews , he told forensic psychologist Art Norman that his first murder victims were two women in the Philadelphia area . Biographer Richard Larsen believed that Bundy committed the murders using his feigned-injury ruse , based on an investigator 's interview with Julia , Bundy 's aunt : Ted , she said , was wearing a leg cast due to an automobile accident on the weekend of the homicides , and therefore could not have traveled from Philadelphia to the Jersey Shore ; there is no official record of any such accident . Bundy is considered a " strong suspect " , but the case remains open .

Rita Curran , a 24-year-old elementary school teacher and part-time motel maid , was murdered in her basement apartment on July 19 , 1971 in Burlington , Vermont ; she had been strangled , bludgeoned and raped . The location of the motel where she worked ( adjacent to Bundy 's birthplace , the Elizabeth Lund Home for Unwed Mothers ) and similarities to known Bundy crime scenes led retired FBI agent John Bassett to propose him as a suspect . No evidence firmly places Bundy in Burlington on that date , but municipal records note that a person named " Bundy " was bitten by a dog that week , and long stretches of Bundy 's time — including the summer of 1971 — remain unaccounted for . Curran 's murder officially remains unsolved . Joyce LePage , 21 , was last seen on July 22 , 1971 on the campus of Washington State University , where she was an undergraduate . Nine months later her skeletal remains were found wrapped in carpeting and military blankets , bound with rope , in a deep ravine south of Pullman , Washington . Multiple suspects — including Bundy — have " never been cleared " , according to investigators . Whitman County authorities have said that Bundy remains a suspect .

Rita Lorraine Jolly , 17 , disappeared from West Linn , Oregon on June 29 , 1973 ; Vicki Lynn Hollar , 24 , disappeared from Eugene , Oregon on August 20 , 1973 . Bundy confessed to two homicides in Oregon without identifying the victims . Oregon detectives suspected that they were Jolly and Hollar , but were unable to obtain interview time with Bundy to confirm it . Both women remain classified as missing . Katherine Merry Devine , 14 , was abducted on November 25 , 1973 , and her body was found the next month in the Capitol State Forest near Olympia , Washington . Brenda Joy Baker , 14 , was seen hitchhiking near Puyallup , Washington on May 27 , 1974 ; her body was found in Millersylvania State Park a month later . Though Bundy was widely believed responsible for both murders , he told Keppel that he had no knowledge of either case . DNA analysis led to the arrest and conviction of William E. Cosden for Devine 's murder in 2002 . The Baker homicide remains unsolved . Sandra Jean Weaver , 19 , a Wisconsin native who had been living in Tooele , Utah , was last seen in Salt Lake City on July 1 , 1974 ; her nude body was discovered the following day near Grand Junction , Colorado . Sources conflict on whether Bundy mentioned Weaver 's name during the death row interviews . Her murder remains unsolved .

Carol L. Valenzuela , 20 , was last seen hitchhiking near Vancouver , Washington , on August 2 , 1974 . Her remains were discovered two months later in a shallow grave south of Olympia , along with those of another female later identified as Martha Morrison , 17 ( last seen in Eugene , Oregon on September 1 , 1974 ) . Both victims had long hair parted in the middle . In August 1974 Bundy drove from Seattle to Salt Lake City and could have passed through Vancouver and Eugene en route , but there is no evidence that he did . Both cases remain open . Melanie Suzanne " Suzy " Cooley , 18 , disappeared on April 15 , 1975 , after leaving Nederland High School in Nederland , Colorado , 50 miles ( 80 km ) northwest of Denver . Her bludgeoned and strangled corpse was discovered by road maintenance workers two weeks later in Coal Creek Canyon , 20 miles ( 32 km ) away . While gas receipts place Bundy in nearby Golden on the day Cooley disappeared , and Cooley is included on the list of Bundy victims in most Bundy literature , Jefferson County authorities say the evidence is inconclusive and continue to treat her homicide as a cold case .

Shelly ( or Shelley ) Kay Robertson , 24 , failed to show up for work in Golden , Colorado on July 1 , 1975 . Her nude , decomposed body was found in August , 500 feet ( 150 m ) inside a mine on Berthoud Pass near Winter Park Resort by two mining students . Gas station receipts place Bundy in the area at the time , but there is no direct evidence of his involvement ; the case remains open . Nancy Perry Baird , 23 , disappeared from the service station where she worked in Farmington , Utah , 20 miles ( 32 km ) north of Salt Lake City , on July 4 , 1975 and remains classified as a missing person . Bundy specifically denied involvement in this case during the death row interviews . Debbie Smith , 17 , was last seen in Salt Lake City in early February 1976 , shortly before the DaRonch trial began ; her body was found near the Salt Lake City International Airport on April 1 , 1976 . Though listed as a Bundy victim by some sources , her murder remains officially unsolved . Minutes before his execution , Hagmaier queried Bundy about unsolved homicides in New Jersey , Illinois , Vermont ( the Curran case ) , Texas , and Miami , Florida . Bundy provided directions — later proven inaccurate — to Susan Curtis 's burial site in Utah , but denied involvement in any of the open cases .

" Lovely " is the fifteenth episode of the sixth season of the American comedy-drama series , Desperate Housewives , and the 126th overall episode of the series . It originally aired on ABC in the United States on February 21 , 2010 . In the episode , former stripper Robin Gallagher ( Julie Benz ) interacts with each of the women of Wisteria Lane , drastically affecting their lives . She grows particularly close to Katherine Mayfair ( Dana Delany ) , with whom she shares a kiss during a bar outing . The episode was written by David Schladweiler and directed by David Warren . It included the second in a string of guest appearances by Benz , who had recently departed as a regular from the Showtime drama series , Dexter . " Lovely " introduced an ongoing storyline of Katherine exploring her sexuality , a subplot which was met with enthusiasm by actress Delany . The pairing between Robin and Katherine was the first lesbian relationship in Desperate Housewives . " Lovely " received generally mixed reviews , with detractors criticizing it for failing to advance the show 's plotlines . According to Nielsen ratings , the episode was seen by 10.9 million viewers , and matched the series low rating from the previous episode , " The Glamorous Life " , although the subsequent episode , " The Chase " , drew even poorer ratings . Viewership for " Lovely " suffered because of competition from the 2010 Winter Olympics .

Desperate Housewives focuses on the lives of several residents on the suburban neighborhood of Wisteria Lane . In recent episodes , Susan Mayer ( Teri Hatcher ) has encouraged a stripper Robin Gallagher ( Julie Benz ) to quit her job and turn her life around . Susan invited Robin to move into her house until she gets back on her feet . Katherine Mayfair ( Dana Delany ) has been admitted to a psychiatric hospital after suffering a mental breakdown stemming from the breakup of her relationship with Mike Delfino ( James Denton ) , who has since married Susan . Orson Hodge ( Kyle MacLachlan ) has recently learned that his wife , Bree Van de Kamp ( Marcia Cross ) , was having an affair with Susan 's ex-husband Karl Mayer ( Richard Burgi ) . Orson has been using a wheelchair since Christmas , as a result of a small passenger plane crash landing into a building he and Karl were inside ; Karl died as a result of the accident . Angie ( Drea de Matteo ) and Nick Bolen ( Jeffrey Nordling ) recently moved onto Wisteria Lane to escape circumstances that are yet to be fully explained ; however , Gabrielle ( Eva Longoria ) and Carlos Solis ( Ricardo Antonio Chavira ) overheard the Bolens arguing about their circumstances , and have grown concerned about their niece Ana ( Maiara Walsh ) dating the Bolens ' son , Danny ( Beau Mirchoff ) .

As Robin becomes integrated into Wisteria Lane , she gradually begins to affect the lives of several of her new neighbors . Lynette Scavo ( Felicity Huffman ) , who is in the middle of celebrating her wedding anniversary with Tom ( Doug Savant ) , grows angry when she learns her son Parker ( Joshua Logan Moore ) is spying on Robin while she showers next door . Lynette rudely confronts Robin , who tells Lynette that Parker offered her money to have sex with him . Later , Parker tells his parents he is the only one of his friends who have not had sex . Tom assures him it will happen when the time is right , and Lynette apologizes to Robin . Later , Robin learns Bree has had trouble connecting with Orson due to her recent affair . Robin suggests Bree restart their sex life , prompting Bree to later try giving Orson a lap-dance . The dance proves awkward , especially when Bree falls over and Orson runs over her foot with the wheelchair . Bree explains she wants to become intimate with her husband again , and the two share a romantic moment .

Meanwhile , Gabrielle and Carlos plot to break up Ana and Danny . Gabrielle arranges for an old photographer friend in New York City to help Ana with her modeling career , but she turns down the offer because of her relationship with Danny . After Robin tells Gabrielle that she gave up a career in ballet for a boy in her youth , only for the boy to break up with her two months later , and that she then got in a car crash ruining her chances of a future in ballet , Gabrielle convinces Robin to tell the story to Ana . Ana breaks up with Danny and leaves for New York , but after Robin realizes she has been used , she speaks to Danny , who secretly leaves town in a taxi to chase after Ana . Susan grows jealous when Robin starts giving Mike massages to ease his sore back . Susan tries to give Mike a massage , but being the klutz that Susan is , ends up putting him in the hospital . Susan confesses her jealousy to Robin , who decides to preserve their friendship by moving out . Robin becomes a roommate to Katherine , who is still feeling depressed after her recent stint in a mental hospital . Robin encourages Katherine to go out to a bar , and the two have a great time . When two men hit on Robin and show no interest in Katherine , Robin shows them up by kissing Katherine on the lips . Katherine initially laughs at the funny moment , but later learns Robin really is a lesbian . Katherine insists she is not interested in women when Robin suggests she explores the possibility , but later it appears that Katherine may be intrigued by the idea .

" Lovely " was written by David Schladweiler and directed by David Warren . It marked the second in a string of at least four guest appearances by actress Julie Benz as Robin Gallagher , a former stripper seeking a new life . Benz joined the show soon after her departure as a regular cast member from the Showtime drama series Dexter , where her character Rita Morgan was killed in the fourth season finale , " The Getaway " . Benz said of her role in Desperate Housewives , " I love the show so much , and I am honored to be part of the whole [ world ] of Wisteria Lane . And to work with all these great , amazing women ! I 've done a lot of male-dominated movies and television shows , so it 's so amazing for me to be a part of a show that is female-dominated . " " Lovely " introduced an ongoing storyline of Katherine Mayfair exploring her sexuality . Actress Dana Delany , who previously played a lesbian character in the Showtime series The L Word , said she felt the subplot was an excellent idea : " A lot of the ladies on the set have said , ' Why has this not happened before ? ' I think everybody wanted to be the one who got to do it . " In an interview with E ! Online , actress Marcia Cross jokingly said of the kiss scene , " I 'm a little jealous that I 'm not involved . What is going on ? " Delany said she did not know if the character would become a lesbian permanently , because the story lines change so often in Desperate Housewives , but that series creator Marc Cherry " is interested in playing the complexity of that " . The pairing between Robin and Katherine was the first lesbian relationship in Desperate Housewives .

Delany compared Katherine 's new realizations to that of actress Meredith Baxter , who realized she was a lesbian late in her life after entering into a relationship with a woman . Delany said she believed her character would be taken by surprise by the new feelings she is experiencing : " I think that she ’ s still so emotionally vulnerable from getting out of the loony bin , and I think she and Robin connect on a kind of wounded , emotional level . And I think if anything , she ’ s feeling this kind of emotional solace with her , and that draws her to Robin in a physical way , and that ’ s confusing to her . " Delany and Benz were both sick when they filmed their kiss scene . Benz said of the scene , " Dana 's a great kisser . " Delany said more male crew members were present for the filming of the lesbian kiss scene than usual due to the sensuality of the scene .

In its original American broadcast on February 21 , 2010 , " Lovely " was seen by 10.9 million viewers , according to Nielsen ratings , which is 20 percent below the season average . Among viewers between ages 18 and 49 , it received a 3.7 rating / 9 share ; a share represents the percentage of households using a television at the time the program is airing . This rating matched the previous episode , " The Glamorous Life " , for the lowest rating for an individual episode of Desperate Housewives in series history . However , it held that distinction only two weeks before " The Glamorous Life " , and the subsequent episode " The Chase " , received even lower ratings . " Lovely " continued a downward trend in the ratings : " The Glamorous Life " was seen by 11.82 million viewers , and the previous episode , " How About a Friendly Shrink ? " , was seen by 11.2 million viewers and achieved the lowest rating of the series at the time . " Lovely " suffered in the ratings partially due to competition from the NBC broadcast of the 2010 Winter Olympics . The day " Lovely " was originally broadcast , the 2010 Winter Olympics drew an average of 24.67 million viewers during the episode 's 9 p.m. timeslot . Desperate Housewives was also outperformed by the CBS reality series Undercover Boss which , in its third episode , drew 13.6 million viewers .

" Lovely " received generally mixed reviews . Gerrick D. Kennedy of the Los Angeles Times said he was initially skeptical of the Robin and Katherine romance subplot , but said he liked how it was presented . " It wasn ’ t contrived like other girl-on-girl scenes on television that we see . ... I just hate it when it ’ s used to seem ' edgy ' or to sell an episode , and I hope that isn 't the case here . " Kennedy said the Bree and Orson scenes led to " a tender moment " , but said Susan was annoying and the Lynette plotline was somewhat insulting toward women . Isabelle Carreau of TV Squad said he was surprised Robin 's back story was fleshed out so quickly , and speculated it could lead to a permanent role in the series . Carreau said the pairing of Robin and Katherine could be " very interesting " , and that the best part of the episode was the comical conversation between Robin and Karen McCluskey ( Kathryn Joosten ) at the end . Entertainment Weekly writer Tanner Stransky criticized " Lovely " for stringing together several uninteresting and unfunny segments rather than advancing existing plotlines or introducing new ones . He was particularly critical of the Susan and Lynette segments , but said the introduction of Katherine 's possible lesbianism was " intriguing for the moment " . Gael Fashingbauer Cooper of MSNBC also criticized the episode for failing to advance the plot , and sarcastically wrote of the Katherine development , " Oh , because lesbian storylines have worked so well on this show in the past , except , never . " Cooper said the segment involving Robin and Bree was the only one that didn 't feel " stilted and sad " .

Hurricane Blanca was the earliest recorded tropical cyclone to make landfall in Baja California in any given year . Forming as a tropical depression on May 31 , Blanca initially struggled to organize due to strong wind shear . However , once this abated , the system took advantage of high sea surface temperatures and ample moisture . After becoming a tropical storm on June 1 , Blanca rapidly intensified on June 2 – 3 , becoming a powerful Category 4 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale ; maximum sustained winds reached 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) at this time . The hurricane 's slow motion resulted in tremendous upwelling of cooler water , resulting in a period of weakening . Blanca gradually recovered from this and briefly regained Category 4 status on June 6 as it moved generally northwest toward the Baja California peninsula . Cooler waters and increased shear again prompted weakening on June 7 and the system struck Baja California Sur on June 8 as a weak tropical storm . It quickly degraded to a depression and dissipated early the next day . Although Blanca remained far from Jalisco , large swells and rip currents produced by the hurricane claimed four lives . In Northwestern Mexico , watches and warnings were raised prior to the storm 's landfall . Blanca caused generally light damage in the region , consisting of downed trees and power lines . Remnant moisture from the system spread across the Southwestern United States , resulting in several days of scattered thunderstorms . Flash flooding occurred in multiple states , washing out roads and damaging homes , though the overall effects were limited .

On May 26 , 2015 , a tropical wave traversed Central America and entered the Eastern Pacific . Little development occurred over the following few days as the system drifted westward . Convective activity finally blossomed on May 30 and following the consolidation of a surface low , it was classified as a tropical depression by 12 : 00 UTC on May 31 . At this time , the depression was situated 370 mi ( 595 km ) south-southwest of Acapulco , Mexico . The system initially drifted northwest along the edge of a weak ridge ; however , steering currents soon collapsed and left the depression to meander in the same general region for four days . Strong wind shear stemming from the nearby Hurricane Andres precluded intensification of the nascent depression . Other factors , including a moist atmosphere and sea surface temperatures of 86 ° F ( 30 ° C ) presented favorable conditions for development once the shear relaxed . Formation of a central dense overcast on June 1 marked the transition into a tropical storm , at which time the system was assigned the name Blanca . As shear steadily relaxed , conditions became exceptionally favorable for rapid intensification . Accordingly the Statistical Hurricane Intensity Prediction Scheme showed a 90 percent chance of winds increasing by 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) in 24 hours , among the highest probabilities seen by National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) forecaster Michael Brennan .

The upper-level environment became even more favorable during the overnight of June 1 – 2 as anticyclonic outflow developed above Blanca , providing necessary ventilation for intensification . Turning south along an erratic , drifting course , an eye feature developed within the storm 's convective mass on June 2 . Blanca reached hurricane strength by 18 : 00 UTC and underwent rapid intensification thereafter . A small , pinhole eye soon appeared on visible and infrared satellite imagery . Reaching major hurricane intensity by 12 : 00 UTC on June 3 , Blanca marked the earliest occurrence of a season 's second such storm on record . The system featured a small , well-defined eye surrounded by intense convection . Hours later , at 18 : 00 UTC , the hurricane achieved its estimated peak strength as a Category 4 on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale with maximum sustained winds of 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) and a barometric pressure of 936 mbar ( hPa ; 27.64 inHg ) . Given continued favorable conditions , forecasters at the NHC predicted Blanca to achieve Category 5 status — the highest ranking on the scale , indicating winds in excess of 156 mph ( 251 km / h ) .

Contrary to forecasts , the still quasi-stationary Blanca soon degraded . The hurricane 's persistence over the same location for several days resulted in tremendous upwelling of cooler waters , with temperatures underneath the storm falling from 30 to 21 ° C ( 86 to 70 ° F ) . Compounding the effects of cooler water was an eyewall replacement cycle . This resulted in rapid weakening , with Blanca 's winds falling to 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) by 12 : 00 UTC on June 5 . The previously small core of Blanca dramatically expanded to 65 mi ( 100 km ) across , with convection asymmetrically wrapping around it . During this period , a mid-level ridge north of the hurricane moved east and allowed Blanca to acquire a steady northwest track . Re-intensification ensued on June 6 as the hurricane moved away from its cold wake and traversed an area of warmer water . Throughout June 6 , Blanca 's convective structure became more symmetric as it completed its eyewall replacement cycle . Aided by impressive outflow , the hurricane regained Category 4 status by 12 : 00 UTC , marking its secondary peak intensity with winds of 130 mph ( 215 km / h ) . Soon thereafter , Blanca moved back over cooler waters and began weakening . A turn to the north-northwest also occurred at this time as it rounded a mid-level ridge over Mexico . The hurricane passed roughly 30 mi ( 45 km ) northeast of Socorro Island on June 7 . An automated weather station there recorded sustained winds of 74 mph ( 119 km / h ) , with a peak gust of 101 mph ( 163 km / h ) , before it ceased reporting . Additionally , a pressure of 977.3 mbar ( hPa ; 28.86 inHg ) was observed . Deep convection steadily weakened and the hurricane 's eye filled as the winds decreased .

Increasing wind shear accelerated the rate of weakening , causing Blanca 's mid- and low-level circulation centers to decouple . By 18 : 00 UTC on June 7 , the hurricane degraded to a tropical storm . Around 10 : 30 UTC on June 8 , Blanca made landfall over Isla Santa Margarita off the coast of Baja California Sur before striking the mainland , near Puerto Argudin , at 11 : 15 UTC . This marked the earliest known landfall in the state , and peninsula , on record during a calendar year . It surpassed the previous earliest — Tropical Storm Calvin on July 8 , 1993 — by a month . Turning back to the northwest , the system briefly emerged back over the Pacific Ocean before weakening to a tropical depression . Blanca made its third and final landfall near El Patrocinio around 20 : 30 UTC . With deep convection no longer present , the depression degraded into a remnant low early on June 9 over the central Baja California peninsula before dissipating hours later .

On June 3 , precautionary alerts were raised across the southern Baja California Peninsula and much of Western Mexico , due to potential impacts from the hurricane . Two days later , the Government of Mexico issued a tropical storm watch for parts of Baja California Sur before upgrading it to a warning on June 6 . Warnings ultimately extended northward to Punta Abreojos . A hurricane watch was temporarily in place ; however , Blanca 's abrupt weakening on June 7 prompted its discontinuation . All schools were closed in Baja California Sur on June 8 . A collective 3,300 troops from the Mexican Army and Navy were deployed to Baja California Sur to ensure the safety of residents . Under the threat of 16 ft ( 5 m ) waves , the port of Los Cabos suspended operations . Within Sonora , all schools in the Empalme , Guaymas , and Hermosillo municipalities were canceled for June 8 . Waves up to 16 ft ( 5 m ) damaged coastal installations in Puerto Vallarta , Jalisco . A surfer was pulled out by rip currents near Villa Obregón and required rescue ; however , the rescuer was also overcome and both drowned . Two fishermen ignored warnings to remain at port and died amid rough seas from the hurricane . Striking Baja California Sur on June 8 , Blanca brought tropical storm-force winds and heavy rain to the region . The highest sustained winds were observed at Cabo San Lucas International Airport , reaching 46 mph ( 74 km / h ) while gusts were measured at 52 mph ( 84 km / h ) in San Juanico . Across the state , high winds downed power lines and left 104,106 residents without electricity . However , around 90 percent of the outages were fixed within 12 hours of the storm . The winds also broke a few windows . Sinaloa experienced similar effects , with strong winds downing many trees and tearing apart billboards , primarily in Los Mochis and Guasave .

The remnants of Blanca , aided by an unusually late-season coastal low , later brought several days of scattered thunderstorms to the Southwestern United States . Effects in California were primarily concentrated across the Mojave Desert and southern Great Basin . Daily rainfall records were broken in several areas , though accumulations were generally less than 1 in ( 25 mm ) . Maricopa and Taft received 1.5 in ( 38 mm ) of rain in 30 minutes , triggering flash flooding that stranded vehicles and prompted the temporary closure of State Route 166 . Flooding and mud flows covered parts of State Route 190 in Inyo County , resulting in an accident that injured two people . Thunderstorm winds downed several trees , two of which fell on mobile homes . Hail up to 1 in ( 2.5 cm ) in diameter was observed in Ford City . Some flooding took place in Santa Barbara County . Damage across the state amounted to $ 67,000 . Record rainfall was observed in parts of Arizona , with Yuma recording measurable precipitation for only the seventeenth time in June since records began in 1876 . Rainfall amounted to 0.31 in ( 7.9 mm ) in the city , and 0.21 in ( 5.3 mm ) fell in Tucson . In Six Mile Canyon in Nevada , near the border of Lyon and Storey counties , 1.13 in ( 29 mm ) of rain fell in an hour , resulting in flash flooding . Damage was primarily to landscaping with minor effects to homes . The normally dry Pine Nut Creek in Dresslerville rose 4 to 5 ft ( 1.2 to 1.5 m ) in a short period of time , inundating nine homes and covering low water crossings . Multiple roads across Esmeralda , Eureka , and Lander counties were subjected to flooding . Damage across Nevada was $ 46,000 .

Following above-average rainfall since April , renewed precipitation in New Mexico led to flash flooding . Roads were washed away near Conchas Dam and minor flooding took place near Pojoaque . A strong thunderstorm over the Navajo Nation in New Mexico spawned a brief EF0 tornado near Napi Headquarters . Hail up to 1.75 in ( 4.4 cm ) in diameter was observed and rainfall caused the Animas River to overflow . Damage in the state reached $ 20,000 . Flash flooding also took place in Utah , including along the Paria River ; a stream gauge observed a peak flow of 1,160 ft3 ( 32.8 m3 ) per second . A peak wind gust of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) was observed on Flattop Mountain in Emery County .

Coral Springs , officially the City of Coral Springs , is a city in Broward County , Florida , approximately 20 miles ( 32 km ) northwest of Fort Lauderdale . As of the 2010 United States Census , the city had a population of 121,096 . The city is part of the Miami metropolitan area , which was home to 5,564,635 people in 2010 . The city , officially chartered on July 10 , 1963 , was master-planned and primarily developed by WCI Communities , then known as Coral Ridge Properties , a division of Westinghouse . The city 's name is derived from the company 's name , and was selected after several earlier proposals had been considered and rejected . Despite the name , there are no springs in the city ; Florida 's springs are found in the central and northern portions of the state . During the 1970s , 1980s , and 1990s the young city grew rapidly , adding over 35,000 residents each decade . Coral Springs has notably strict building codes , which are designed to maintain the city 's distinctive aesthetic appeal . The city government 's effective fiscal management has maintained high bond ratings , and the city has won accolades for its overall livability , its low crime rate , and its family-friendly orientation .

Coral Springs is a planned community . Prior to its incorporation as a city in July 1963 , the area which is now Coral Springs was part of 20,000 acres ( 81 km2 ) of marshy lands bought by Henry Lyons between 1911 and 1939 . After several floods in 1947 , Florida created the Central and Southern Florida Flood Control District ( now the South Florida Water Management District ) . Canals and levees drained much of the area upon which Coral Springs was built . After the land was drained and cleared , most of the area was used as a bean farm . After Lyons ' death in 1952 , his heirs changed the focus to cattle . A post-World War II real estate boom in South Florida attracted the interest of developers . Coral Ridge Properties , which already had several developments in Broward County , bought 3,869 acres ( 16 km2 ) of land from the Lyons family on December 14 , 1961 for $ 1 million . The City of Coral Springs was chartered on July 10 , 1963 . Other names that were considered for the new city included " Curran Village , " " Pompano Springs " and " Quartermore " . By 1964 , the company had developed a master plan for a city of 50,000 residents . On July 22 , 1964 , the first sale of 536 building lots netted $ 1.6 million . The landmark covered bridge was built that same year to promote the town . In 1965 , Coral Ridge Properties bought an additional 6,000 acres ( 24 km2 ) from the Lyons family , increasing the city 's land area to 16 square miles ( 41 km2 ) . The first city government elections were held in 1967 .

The city added nineteen public schools , a regional mall , shopping centers and parks during the last three decades of the twentieth century in response to rapid population growth . The construction of the Sawgrass Expressway in 1986 brought even more growth . A museum and a theater opened in the 1990s . The city reached residential build-out in 2003 and is very close to a commercial build-out . The city 's historically low crime rate was marred in the early 1990s , when teen gang violence made headlines , with fights and murders reported . The violence subsided and the city returned to its previously peaceful state in 1995 . Coral Springs was ranked as the 27th best city in the United States in which to live by Money Magazine in 2006 ; was named the 10th safest city in the US by Morgan Quitno in 2007 ; and was a multiple recipient of America 's Promise " 100 Best Cities for Young People " award , identified by the group as a three-time winner in 2008 . In 2007 , Coral Springs became the first state or local government in the nation to receive the Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award .

Coral Springs is located at 26 ° 16 ′ 14 ″ N 80 ° 15 ′ 33 ″ W. According to the United States Census Bureau , the city has a total area of 24.0 square miles ( 62.1 km2 ) , 23.8 square miles ( 61.6 km2 ) of which is land and 0.19 square miles ( 0.5 km2 ) of which is water ( 0.83 % ) . Coral Springs is bordered by the cities of Parkland to the north , Coconut Creek to the east , Margate and North Lauderdale to the southeast and Tamarac to the south . To the west lies The Everglades .

Coral Springs is a sprawling city , with few tall or prominent structures . The tallest building in the city is a 12 story condominium ( Country Club Tower ) , with five more buildings topping out at 10 stories , including three office buildings lining University Drive , one of the city 's main roads . Buildings include Preferred Exchange Tower ( originally the Bank of Coral Springs Building ) , 210 Tower , Bank of America Center and the Briarwood Towers . Coral Ridge Properties established strict landscaping and sign laws for the city — a question in the original version of Trivial Pursuit noted that the city hosted the first McDonald 's without the distinctive Golden Arches sign . Restrictions on commercial signs , exterior paint colors , roofing materials , recreational vehicle and boat storage , and landscaping specifications are all strictly enforced ; consequently , real estate values in the city are significantly higher than the county as a whole . In 2006 , the median price of a single family home in Coral Springs was US $ 415,000 , while the median price county-wide was US $ 323,000 . The city 's downtown is the focus of an extensive redevelopment plan , estimated to cost close to US $ 700 million . The plan to revitalize the city 's core started with an open-air shopping and entertainment center — " The Walk " — and progressed with the construction of " One Charter Place , " opened April 2007 . When completed , the redeveloped downtown area will offer office , retail , and a new government center , encompassing approximately three million square feet of floor space , in addition to approximately 1,000 residential units and a new hotel .

Average monthly rainfall is higher from April to September , with January and February as the driest months . The average monthly rainfall ranges from 2.8 inches ( 7 cm ) in January and February to 7.3 inches ( 19 cm ) in June . The hurricane season is from June to November , with September as the month during which hurricanes are most likely to occur . The most powerful hurricane to strike Coral Springs since its incorporation was Wilma in 2005 ; the eye of the hurricane passed directly over the city . The city estimated that " as a result of the numerous hurricanes and storms that hit Coral Springs in 2004 / 2005 , and especially as a result of Hurricane Wilma , the tree canopy coverage throughout the city has been reduced by about one third " .

As of 2010 , there were 45,433 households , with 8.1 % being vacant . As of 2000 , 19,151 ( 43.2 % ) households had children under the age of 18 living with them , 26,875 ( 60.6 % ) were married couples living together , 7,663 ( 17.3 % ) had a female householder with no husband present , and 8,387 ( 18.9 % ) were non-families . 5,922 of all households ( 13.4 % ) were made up of individuals and 1,408 ( 3.2 % ) had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 3.11 and the average family size was 3.45 . In 2000 , the city 's age distribution was as follows : 38,335 residents ( 27.8 % ) under the age of 18 , 14,560 ( 10.5 % ) from 18 to 24 , 35,927 ( 26.0 % ) from 25 to 44 , 39,821 ( 28.8 % ) from 45 to 64 , and 9,358 ( 6.8 % ) who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 35.7 years . For every 100 females there were 93.5 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 85.7 males .

In 2000 , the median income for a household in the city was US $ 69,808 , and the median income for a family was $ 76,106 . Males had a median income of $ 47,427 versus $ 34,920 for females . The per capita income for the city was $ 29,285 . About 5.8 % of families and 7.3 % of the population were below the poverty line , including 11.1 % of those under age 18 and 2.1 % of those age 65 or over . As of 2000 , those who spoke only English at home accounted for 74.6 % of residents . Other languages spoken at home included Spanish ( 15.0 % ) , French Creole ( 2.2 % ) , Portuguese ( 1.4 % ) , French ( 1.1 % ) , and Italian ( 0.8 % . ) As of 2000 , 2.1 % of the city 's population was from Haiti , 2.1 % of the population was from Colombia , and 1.7 % of the population was from Cuba .

Coral Springs uses the commission-manager form of municipal government , with all governmental powers resting in a legislative body called a commission . Coral Springs ' commission is composed of five elected commissioners , one of whom is the mayor of the city and another of whom is the vice-mayor . The mayor and vice-mayor serve a two-year term ; the commissioners serve four-year terms . The offices are non-partisan ; no candidate is allowed to declare a party affiliation . The role of the commission is to pass ordinances and resolutions , adopt regulations , and appoint city officials , including the city manager . While the mayor serves as a presiding officer of the commission , the city manager is the administrative head of the municipal government , and is responsible for the administration of all departments . The city commission holds its regular meetings biweekly . As of 2014 , the Mayor is Walter " Skip " Campbell . The Vice-Mayor is Larry Vignola , the other commissioners are Joy Carter , Lou Cimaglia & Dan Daley . The City Manager is Erdal Donmez . In-city buses are provided free of charge by the local government . Regional transportation is provided by Broward County Transit . The closest passenger airport to Coral Springs is Fort Lauderdale-Hollywood International Airport , located 27 miles ( 43 km ) southeast . The only limited-access highway in Coral Springs is the Sawgrass Expressway ( State Road 869 ) , which borders the city on its northern and western edges . Major roads in the city include Atlantic Boulevard , University Drive , and Sample Road .

Coral Springs is served by Broward Health , and is home to the 200-bed Coral Springs Medical Center . The hospital received a 99 ( out of 100 ) from the Joint Commission , ranking in the top 2 % of over 9,000 surveyed hospitals . Coral Springs ' water supply comes from the Biscayne Aquifer , South Florida 's primary source of drinking water . There are four different water districts within the city ; the providers are the City of Coral Springs Water District , Coral Springs Improvement District , North Springs Improvement District and Royal Utilities . The South Florida Water Management District provides flood control protection and water supply protection to local residents , controls all water shortage management efforts and assigns water restrictions when necessary . Collection and disposal of city 's trash or garbage is provided by Waste Pro . Electric power service is distributed by Florida Power & Light .

Of residents aged 16 years and over , 72.6 % were in the labor force , 95 % were employed and 5 % unemployed . 39.5 % of the population worked in management , professional , and related occupations ; 32.9 % in sales and office occupations ; 12.8 % in service occupations ; 7.6 % in construction , extraction , and maintenance occupations ; 7 % in production , transportation , and material moving occupations ; and 0.1 % in farming , fishing , and forestry occupations . The industries for which Coral Springs inhabitants worked were 17.6 % educational , health and social services ; 16.1 % retail trade ; 12.9 % professional , scientific , management , administrative , and waste management services ; 10.1 % finance , insurance , real estate , and rental and leasing ; 8.2 % arts , entertainment , recreation , accommodation and food services ; 7.0 % manufacturing ; 6.6 % construction ; 5.0 % wholesale trade ; 4 % transportation , warehousing , and utilities ; , 4.9 % other services ( except public administration ) ; 3.7 % information ; 3.6 % public administration ; and 0.2 % agriculture , forestry , fishing and hunting , and mining . 85.2 % of workers worked in the private sector , 9.6 % in government , 5 % self-employed in unincorporated businesses , and 0.3 % as unpaid family workers . The predominant method of commuting was driving alone in own car , accounting for 81.5 % of commuting trips , followed by 11.2 % who were carpoolers and 7.4 % who used other methods or worked from home .

Fitch , Moody 's , and Standard & Poor 's rate Coral Springs bonds as " AAA " . Standard & Poor 's , in a 2004 report , noted that Coral Springs had a " vibrant regional economy with above-average wealth levels and consistently low unemployment " and praised the city administration . In 2004 , the city 's industrial and commercial base represented 24 % of the city valuation — 50 % higher than the previous decade . The city 's tax rate of 3.8715 mils is the lowest in Broward County of cities with more than 70,000 people . The city has twice received the Florida Sterling Award for excellence in administration . First Data and Alliance Entertainment are the largest companies that have offices in the Corporate Park of Coral Springs . ABB Asea Brown Boveri and Royal Plastics Group have subsidiaries headquartered in the city as well . The biggest shopping mall in the city is Coral Square , which opened in October 1984 with 945,000 square feet ( 87,800 m2 ) of retail space and more than 120 stores . Preferred Exchange Tower is the largest office building in the city — it has 10 floors and 203,000 sq ft ( 18,900 m2 ) .

According to the 2005 American Community Survey ( conducted by the US Census Bureau ) , 39.2 % of all adults over the age of 25 in Coral Springs have obtained a bachelor 's degree , as compared to a national average of 27.2 % of adults over 25 , and 91.7 % of Coral Springs residents over the age of 25 have earned a high school diploma , as compared to the national average of 84.2 % . Coral Springs had approximately 29,900 students in 2006 . Three charter schools offer both primary and secondary education . Higher education is offered by Barry University , Nova Southeastern University and Broward College through a partnership with Coral Springs Charter School . Public primary and secondary education is handled by the Broward County Public Schools District ( BCPS ) . BCPS operates 3 high schools , 4 middle schools and 12 elementary schools within the city limits . Ramblewood Elementary School received a Florida Sterling Award for its efforts in 2006 . In 2008 the Florida Department of Education awarded all public schools in the city , with the exception of Coral Springs High School , " A " grades based on their performance on the Florida Comprehensive Assessment Test . In 2008 , Coral Springs High School received a " B , " and in 2010 the school received its first " A. " In 2009 , all public elementary , middle , and charter schools in the city received " A 's , " except for Broward Community Charter School West , which received a " B. "

Coral Springs does not have any professional sports teams , but has more than 25 amateur sports leagues . Coral Springs Youth Soccer had more than 3300 players in their 2006 season , playing for 284 teams in 20 separate leagues , divided by age group and sex . The Honda Classic golf tournament was played at the TPC at Eagle Trace from 1984 to 1991 and 1996 and then at the TPC at Heron Bay from 1997 to 2002 . The short-lived professional soccer team Coral Springs Kicks ( USISL ) was based in the city . The regional Sportsplex has a jogging path , an aquatic center , tennis courts , ice rinks and a dog park . The NHL 's Florida Panthers call the Saveology.com Iceplex , part of the Sportsplex , their official home and conduct much of their training there . The International Tennis Championships — an ATP International Series men 's tennis tournament was held at the Sportsplex from 1993 to 1998 . A number of professional athletes are from Coral Springs : MLS soccer player Stephen Herdsman , Latvian Higher League soccer player Nate Weiss , NFL football players Dan Morgan , Todd Weiner , Darius Butler , Steve Hutchinson , Cody Brown and Sam Young , and Major League Baseball player Anthony Rizzo of the Chicago Cubs .

Coral Springs is a part of the Miami-Fort Lauderdale-Hollywood media market , which is the twelfth largest radio market and the seventeenth largest television market in the United States . Its primary daily newspapers are the South Florida-Sun Sentinel and The Miami Herald , and their Spanish-language counterparts El Sentinel and El Nuevo Herald . The city is home to two local weekly newspapers , the Coral Springs Forum and Our Town News . Both publications focus on local issues and human interest stories . The Coral Springs Forum was founded in 1971 by local high school students , the publication was sold after their graduation to local residents . Later the company became a subsidiary of the Tribune Company , the South Florida-Sun Sentinel publisher . The Coral Springs Center for the Arts opened in 1990 . Originally planned to be a gymnasium , a US $ 4 million renovation in 1996 added a 1,471 seat theater . The theater presents a program of popular shows and a yearly Broadway series . The 8,000-square-foot ( 700 m2 ) Coral Springs Museum of Art has a small number of exhibits and focuses on art classes and programs for the local community . There is currently one public library in the city , the Northwest Regional Library , affiliated with the county-wide Broward County Library system . The band New Found Glory hails from Coral Springs and was formed in the city .

The " Our Town " Festival has been continuously held since 1979 , first sponsored by the Coral Springs Chamber of Commerce , and promoted by a non-profit organization since 1997 . The event has a car show , a beauty pageant and carnival rides . The festival attracted more than 100,000 attendees in 1984 , and the city estimated 200,000 visitors at the 1990 event . A parade was added to the event in 1985 ; since 1994 , the parade has been run as a separate event during the Christmas season . Several other festivals are held throughout the year , such as " Fiesta Coral Springs " , a Hispanic culture celebration , and the Festival of the Arts . At Coral Springs ' 25th Anniversary Party , the Guinness World Record for " Largest Hamburger and Milkshake " was broken on July 10 , 1988 . The hamburger measured 26 feet ( 8 m ) in diameter and weighed 5063 pounds . The record stood for just over a year . Coral Springs has two designated Florida Heritage sites . The Coral Springs Covered Bridge was the first structure built in the city , in 1964 . The steel bridge , 40 feet ( 12 m ) in length , is the only covered bridge in Florida in the public right-of-way . The American Snuff Company provided two historical designs for the bridge sides , to make the structure appear aged . The Covered Bridge is depicted in Coral Springs ' seal . The Museum of Coral Springs History started as a real estate office . Built outside the city limits , the single-room wooden structure was moved to Coral Springs and became its first administration building . Later it was used as the first police station , and as a Jaycees clubhouse ; it was moved to the city dump in 1976 , where it was used as a fire department training site for smoke drills . After it was inadvertently set on fire , public outcry prompted the building 's relocation to Mullins Park for restoration . Since 1978 , it has housed the city 's history museum . The exhibits in the museum are historic items and city models .

" Young Blood " is a song by English recording artist Sophie Ellis-Bextor from her fifth studio album Wanderlust ( 2014 ) . The song was released as the album 's lead single on 21 November 2013 . It was co-written by Ed Harcourt and Ellis-Bextor ; the former also produced it . The song is a chamber pop piano ballad , which features instrumentation from subdued drums and various string instruments . In the track , Ellis-Bextor sings with restrain , incorporating a low register in the verses and hitting her highest note in the chorus . A demo version of the track was offered online in March 2013 . " Young Blood " received mostly positive reviews from music critics , who complimented Ellis-Bextor 's vocals and the song 's tenderness . The song became her first single to enter the UK Singles Chart since her 2011 single " Bittersweet " . On its component UK Indie chart , the track peaked within the top five . Sophie Muller was commissioned to direct its video , which shows Ellis-Bextor on a pier and inside a living room . The song was performed on some television programmes in the United Kingdom .

As with the rest of Wanderlust , " Young Blood " was composed by the English musician Ed Harcourt , with additional songwriting from Ellis-Bextor . It was recorded at the State of the Ark studios , mixed and engineered by Richard Woodcruft , and mastered by Miles Showell . It is a chamber pop piano ballad , with a viola , a violin , muffled drums , a cello and a double bass . According to the sheet music published by Universal Music , it is set in a tempo of 60 beats per minute . It is written in the key of F major , and its verses follow the chord progression B ♭ mai7 — F. The song begins with a gentle piano melody , transitioning into Ellis-Bextor 's sung section . During the verses of the song , she sings in a low register , reaching her lowest note of F4 ; conversely , in the chorus , her voice reaches C6 and trembles . Throughout the song , her vocals are restrained and incorporate the melisma technique . The bridge of the song features " choral harmonies " . The song 's lyrics are written in first and second-person narrative , following the common verse – chorus form . According to Ludovic Hunter-Tilney from Financial Times , the track discusses " the joys of growing old with one 's spouse " .

For Time Out magazine , Clare Considine described " Young Blood " as a " delicate love song " and opined that the strings and piano melodies effectively complement Ellis-Bextor 's vocals . Michael Cragg of The Guardian stated that the song 's sonority " fits [ Ellis-Bextor ] like a glove " , and also deemed its melody " gorgeous " . James Gareth from Clash characterised the song as " sincerely beautiful " , and Digital Spy 's Robert Copsey agreed , calling it " doe-eyed " and " fantastically pretty " . From Virgin Media , Matthew Horton called the track " heart-stinging " , while Hermoine Hoby , writing for The Observer considered that the song is " surprisingly successfully " similar to the works of Adele . Sam Lansky of Idolator complimented the song for being " beautiful " and " timeless " . Louise Bruton from The Irish Times wrote that Ellis-Bextor 's " icy vocals forgive [ d ] " the " blunders " of Wanderlust , while musicOMH 's Kate Bennett provided a polarized review for the song . Although she praised Ellis-Bextor 's vocals , Bennett described the track as " heroine-gazing-forlornly-into-the-distance " due to its instrumentation . David Farrell , writing on behalf of PopMatters , commented that " Young Blood " was the best of the album and highlighted Ellis-Bextor 's vocal performance .

A demo version of " Young Blood " was released on 27 March 2013 , as a complimentary download on Ellis-Bextor 's website . Selected as the lead single of Wanderlust , the song was released as a standalone digital download on 21 November of that year . A CD single of the track was sent to radio stations in that month , including the album version of it as well as a radio edit ; the song was eventually playlisted by hot adult contemporary UK station BBC Radio 2 . Ellis-Bextor revealed that she chose " Young Blood " as the first single from Wanderlust because she found it representative of the album 's sound . The official music video of " Young Blood " was filmed by Sophie Muller , and released on 25 November 2013 . It mostly depicts Ellis-Bextor , dressed in a striped dress , lip-synching the song 's lyrics , walking through an abandoned pier " in terrible weather " . Those scenes are interspersed with clips of her sat on a red sofa , wearing a " buttoned up , Victorian-styled lace dress " inside a lounge room . Writing for Idolator , Mike Wass characterised the visual as " simple " , noting that it is adequate for the song 's tone . On 9 April 2014 , Ellis-Bextor performed " Young Blood " on ITV 's morning programme Daybreak ; fifteen days later , she sang it on the first episode of the channel 's Weekend , aired on 26 April 2014 . She performed the song in an unplugged setting on ZDF Morgenmagazin , a programme of German channel ZDF , on 23 January 2014 .

The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill , also known as UNC , or simply Carolina , is a public research university located in Chapel Hill , North Carolina , United States . After being chartered in 1789 , the university first began enrolling students in 1795 , which also allows it to be one of three schools to claim the title of the oldest public university in the United States . North Carolina is one of the original eight Public Ivy schools . The first public institution of higher education in North Carolina , the school opened its doors to students on February 12 , 1795 . The university offers degrees in over 70 courses of study through fourteen colleges and the College of Arts and Sciences . All undergraduates receive a liberal arts education and have the option to pursue a major within the professional schools of the university or within the College of Arts and Sciences from the time they obtain junior status . Under the leadership of President Kemp Plummer Battle , in 1877 North Carolina became coeducational and began the process of desegregation in 1951 when African-American graduate students were admitted under Chancellor Robert Burton House . In 1952 , North Carolina opened its own hospital , UNC Health Care , for research and treatment , and has since specialized in cancer care . The school 's students , alumni , and sports teams are known as " Tar Heels " .

The campus of North Carolina is located in Chapel Hill , North Carolina , a university town . The campus covers 729 acres ( 3 km2 ) over Chapel Hill 's downtown area , encompassing places like the Morehead Planetarium and the many stores and shops located on Franklin Street . Students can participate in over 550 officially recognized student organizations . The student-run newspaper The Daily Tar Heel has won national awards for collegiate media , while the student radio station WXYC provided the world 's first internet radio broadcast . North Carolina is one of the charter members of the Atlantic Coast Conference , which was founded on June 14 , 1953 . Competing athletically as the Tar Heels , North Carolina has achieved great success in sports , most notably in men 's basketball , women 's soccer , and women 's field hockey .

Chartered by the North Carolina General Assembly on December 11 , 1789 , the university 's cornerstone was laid on October 12 , 1793 , near the ruins of a chapel , chosen because of its central location within the state . The first public university chartered under the US Constitution , The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill is the oldest public university in the United States and the only such institution to confer degrees in the eighteenth century . During the Civil War , North Carolina Governor David Lowry Swain persuaded Confederate President Jefferson Davis to exempt some students from the draft , so the university was one of the few in the Confederacy that managed to stay open . However , Chapel Hill suffered the loss of more of its population during the war than any village in the South , and when student numbers did not recover , the university was forced to close during Reconstruction from December 1 , 1870 until September 6 , 1875 . Despite initial skepticism from university President Frank Porter Graham , on March 27 , 1931 , legislation was passed to group the University of North Carolina with the State College of Agriculture and Engineering and Woman 's College of the University of North Carolina to form the Consolidated University of North Carolina . In 1963 , the consolidated university was made fully coeducational , although most women still attended Woman 's College for their first two years , transferring to Chapel Hill as juniors , since freshmen were required to live on campus and there was only one women 's dorm . As a result , Woman 's College was renamed the " University of North Carolina at Greensboro " , and the University of North Carolina became the " University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill . " In 1955 , UNC Chapel Hill officially desegregated its undergraduate divisions .

During World War II , UNC Chapel Hill was one of 131 colleges and universities nationally that took part in the V-12 Navy College Training Program which offered students a path to a Navy commission . During the 1960s , the campus was the location of significant political protest . Prior to the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 , protests about local racial segregation which began quietly in Franklin Street restaurants led to mass demonstrations and disturbance . The climate of civil unrest prompted the 1963 Speaker Ban Law prohibiting speeches by communists on state campuses in North Carolina . The law was immediately criticized by university Chancellor William Brantley Aycock and university President William Friday , but was not reviewed by the North Carolina General Assembly until 1965 . Small amendments to allow " infrequent " visits failed to placate the student body , especially when the university 's board of trustees overruled new Chancellor Paul Frederick Sharp 's decision to allow speaking invitations to Marxist speaker Herbert Aptheker and civil liberties activist Frank Wilkinson ; however , the two speakers came to Chapel Hill anyway . Wilkinson spoke off campus , while more than 1,500 students viewed Aptheker 's speech across a low campus wall at the edge of campus , christened " Dan Moore 's Wall " by The Daily Tar Heel for Governor Dan K. Moore . A group of UNC Chapel Hill students , led by Student Body President Paul Dickson , filed a lawsuit in U.S. federal court , and on February 20 , 1968 , the Speaker Ban Law was struck down . In 1969 , campus food workers of Lenoir Hall went on strike protesting perceived racial injustices that impacted their employment , garnering the support of student groups and members of the University and Chapel Hill community .

From the late 1990s and onward , UNC Chapel Hill expanded rapidly with a 15 % increase in total student population to more than 28,000 by 2007 . This was accompanied by the construction of new facilities , funded in part by the " Carolina First " fundraising campaign and an endowment that increased fourfold to more than $ 2 billion in just ten years . Professor Oliver Smithies was awarded the Nobel Prize in Medicine in 2007 for his work in genetics . Additionally , Aziz Sancar was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 2015 for his work in understanding the molecular repair mechanisms of DNA . Notable leaders of the university include the 26th Governor of North Carolina , David Lowry Swain ( president 1835 – 1868 ) ; and Edwin Anderson Alderman ( 1896 – 1900 ) , who was also president of Tulane University and the University of Virginia . The current chancellor is Carol Folt , the first woman to hold the post .

UNC Chapel Hill 's 729-acre ( 3.0 km2 ) campus is dominated by two central quads : Polk Place and McCorkle Place . Polk Place is named after North Carolina native and university alumnus President James K. Polk , and McCorkle Place is named in honor of Samuel Eusebius McCorkle , the original author of the bill requesting the university 's charter . Adjacent to Polk Place is a sunken brick courtyard known as the Pit where students will gather , often engaging in lively debate with speakers such as the Pit Preacher . The Morehead – Patterson Bell Tower , located in the heart of campus , tolls the quarter-hour . In 1999 , UNC Chapel Hill was one of sixteen recipients of the American Society of Landscape Architects Medallion Awards and was identified as one of 50 college or university " works of art " by T.A. Gaines in his book The Campus as a Work of Art . The university 's campus is informally divided into three regions , usually referred to as " north campus , " " middle campus , " and " south campus . " North campus includes the two quads along with the Pit , Frank Porter Graham Student Union , and the Davis , House , and Wilson libraries . Almost all classrooms are located in north campus along with several undergraduate residence halls . Middle campus includes Fetzer Field and Woollen Gymnasium along with the Student Recreation Center , Kenan Memorial Stadium , Irwin Belk outdoor track , Eddie Smith Field House , Boshamer Stadium , Carmichael Auditorium , the Sonja Haynes Stone Center for Black Culture and History , School of Government , School of Law , George Watts Hill Alumni Center , Ram 's Head complex ( with a dining hall , parking garage , grocery store , and gymnasium ) , and various residence halls . South campus includes the Dean Smith Center for men 's basketball , Koury Natatorium , School of Medicine , UNC Hospitals , Kenan – Flagler Business School , and the newest student residence halls .

The principles of sustainability have been integrated throughout much of UNC Chapel Hill . In the area of green building , the university requires that all new projects meet the requirements for LEED Silver certification and is in the process of building the first building in North Carolina to receive LEED Platinum status . UNC Chapel Hill 's award-winning co-generation facility produces one-fourth of the electricity and all of the steam used on campus . In 2006 , the university and the Town of Chapel Hill jointly agreed to reduce greenhouse gas emissions 60 % by 2050 , becoming the first town-gown partnership in the country to do so . Through these efforts , the university achieved a " A − " grade on the Sustainable Endowment Institute 's College Sustainability Report Card 2010 . Only 14 out of 300 universities received a higher score than this .

The most enduring symbol of the university is the Old Well , a small neoclassical rotunda based on the Temple of Love in the Gardens of Versailles , in the same location as the original well that provided water for the school . The well stands at the south end of McCorkle Place , the northern quad , between two of the campus 's oldest buildings , Old East , and Old West . Also located in McCorkle Place is the Davie Poplar tree under which the university 's founder , William Richardson Davie , supposedly selected the location for the university . The legend of the Davie Poplar says that if the tree falls , so will UNC Chapel Hill . Because of the tree 's questionable health from damage caused by severe weather such as Hurricane Fran in 1996 , the university has planted two genetic clones nearby called Davie Poplar Jr. and Davie Poplar III . The second clone , Davie Poplar III , was planted in conjunction with the university 's bicentennial celebration in 1993 by President Bill Clinton . Another university landmark is the Confederate monument , known to students as Silent Sam , erected to commemorate UNC Chapel Hill students who died fighting for the Confederacy . The statue has at times been dogged by controversy , some critics claiming that the monument invokes memories of racism and slavery , while others counter that " Silent Sam " is simply historical and a part of the rich heritage of the South . The statue depicts a soldier armed with a rifle , but lacking a cartridge box . Thus , Silent Sam does not carry any ammunition and is a " benign " soldier . The statue was erected in 1913 by the United Daughters of the Confederacy to honor the school 's Confederate heroes . The student members of the university 's Dialectic and Philanthropic Societies are not allowed to walk on the grass of McCorkle Place out of respect for the unknown resting place of Joseph Caldwell , the university 's first president .

The Morehead – Patterson bell tower was commissioned by John Motley Morehead III , the benefactor of the prestigious Morehead Scholarship . The hedge and surrounding landscape was designed by William C. Coker , botany professor and creator of the campus arboretum . Traditionally , seniors have the opportunity to climb the tower a few days prior to May commencement . The historic Playmakers Theatre is located on Cameron Avenue between McCorkle Place and Polk Place . It was designed by Alexander Jackson Davis , the same architect who renovated the northern façade of Old East in 1844 . The east-facing building was completed in 1851 and initially served as a library and as a ballroom . It was originally named Smith Hall after North Carolina Governor General Benjamin Smith , who was a special aide to George Washington during the American Revolutionary War and was an early benefactor to the university . When the library moved to Hill Hall in 1907 , the School of Law occupied Smith Hall until 1923 . In 1925 , the structure was renovated and used as a stage by the university theater group , the Carolina Playmakers . It has remained a theater to the present day . Louis Round Wilson wrote in 1957 that Playmakers Theatre is the " architectural gem of the campus . " Playmakers Theatre was declared a National Historic Landmark in 1973 . Today , the building is a venue for student drama productions , concerts , and events sponsored by academic departments . In 2006 , the university began a renovation of Playmakers Theatre , which has included an exterior paint job and interior remodeling . The renovation is expected to be complete by the end of 2010 .

UNC Chapel Hill offers 71 bachelor 's , 107 master 's and 74 doctoral degree programs . The university enrolls more than 28,000 students from all 100 North Carolina counties , the other 49 states , and 47 other countries . It is the second largest university in North Carolina . State law requires that the percentage of students from North Carolina in each freshman class meet or exceed 82 % . The student body consists of 17,981 undergraduate students and 10,935 graduate and professional students ( as of Fall 2009 ) . Minorities comprise 30.8 % of UNC Chapel Hill 's undergraduate population and applications from international students have more than doubled in the last five years ( from 702 in 2004 to 1,629 in 2009 ) . Eighty-nine percent of enrolling first year students in 2009 reported a GPA of 4.0 or higher on a weighted 4.0 scale . UNC Chapel Hill students are strong competitors for national and international scholarships . In 2009 , two UNC Chapel Hill seniors won Rhodes Scholarships . The most popular majors at UNC Chapel Hill are Biology , Business Administration , Psychology , Media and Journalism , and Political Science . UNC Chapel Hill also offers 300 study abroad programs in 70 countries .

At the undergraduate level , all students must fulfill a number of general education requirements as part of the Making Connections curriculum , which was introduced in 2006 . English , social science , history , foreign language , mathematics , and natural science courses are required of all students , ensuring that they receive a broad liberal arts education . The university also offers a wide range of first year seminars for incoming freshmen . After their second year , students move on to the College of Arts and Sciences , or choose an undergraduate professional school program within the schools of medicine , nursing , business , education , pharmacy , information and library science , public health , or media and journalism . Undergraduates are held to an eight-semester limit of study .

UNC Chapel Hill 's admissions process is " most selective " according to U.S. News & World Report . State law requires that the percentage of in-state students per freshman class be at least 82 % , making out-of-state admissions very selective . For freshmen entering Fall 2015 , 9,510 were accepted out of 31,953 applicants , a 30 % acceptance rate , and 4,076 enrolled . Women constituted 59 % of the incoming class ; men 41 % . Among freshman students who enrolled in fall 2015 , SAT scores for the middle 50 % ranged from 600-710 for critical reading , 620-720 for math , and 590-700 for writing . ACT composite scores for the middle 50 % ranged from 28 – 33 . In terms of class rank , 77 % of enrolled freshmen were in the top 10 % of their high school classes .

The UNC Chapel Hill Department of Public Policy , established in 2001 , is a public policy program offering specializations in areas such as global health policy , education policy , tax policy , and social justice . Established in 1979 , the Curriculum in Public Policy Analysis was one of the first undergraduate degree programs in public policy , and a charter member of the national Association for Public Policy Analysis and Management . It was augmented in 1991 by an interdisciplinary PhD Curriculum in Public Policy Analysis . In 1995 the two curricula were combined and began recruiting their own core faculty . In 2001 the combined curriculum became the present Department of Public Policy .

The university has a longstanding Honor Code known as the " Instrument of Student Judicial Governance , " supplemented by an entirely student-run Honor System to resolve issues with students accused of academic and conduct offenses against the university community . The Honor System is divided into three branches : the Student Attorney General Staff , the Honor Court , and the Honor System Outreach . The Student Attorney General is appointed by the Student Body President to investigate all reports of Honor Code violations and determine whether or not to bring charges against the student as detailed in the " Instrument . " The Attorney General is supported by a select staff of around 40 students . The Honor Court is led by the Chair , who is appointed by the Student Body President , and supported by Vice Chairs who adjudicate all students ' hearings . The Honor Court as a whole is made up of some 80 selected students . The Honor System Outreach is a branch of the System solely devoted to promoting honor and integrity in the university community . UNC Chapel Hill is the only public university , with the exception of the military academies , that has a completely student-run system from the beginning to the end of the process .

UNC Chapel Hill 's library system includes a number of individual libraries housed throughout the campus and holds more than 7.0 million volumes in total . UNC Chapel Hill 's North Carolina Collection ( NCC ) is the largest and most comprehensive collection of holdings about any single state nationwide . The unparalleled assemblage of literary , visual , and artifactual materials documents four centuries of North Carolina history and culture . The North Carolina Collection is housed in Wilson Library , named after Louis Round Wilson , along with the Southern Historical Collection , the Rare Books Collection , and the Southern Folklife Collection . The university is home to ibiblio , one of the world 's largest collections of freely available information including software , music , literature , art , history , science , politics , and cultural studies . The Davis Library , situated near the Pit , is the main library and the largest academic facility and state-owned building in North Carolina . It was named after North Carolina philanthropist Walter Royal Davis and opened on February 6 , 1984 . The first book checked out of Davis Library was George Orwell 's 1984 . The R.B. House Undergraduate Library is located between the Pit area and Wilson Library . It is named after Robert B. House , the Chancellor of UNC Chapel Hill from 1945 to 1957 , and it opened in 1968 . In 2001 , the R.B. House Undergraduate Library underwent a $ 9.9 million renovation that modernized the furnishings , equipment , and infrastructure of the building . Prior to the construction of Davis , Wilson Library was the university 's main library , but now Wilson hosts special events and houses special collections , rare books , and temporary exhibits .

In 2015 , U.S. News & World Report ranked UNC Chapel Hill 5th among the top public colleges and universities in the United States . The university was named a Public Ivy by Richard Moll in his 1985 book The Public Ivies : A Guide to America 's Best Public Undergraduate Colleges and Universities , and in later guides by Howard and Matthew Greene . Many of UNC Chapel Hill 's professional schools have achieved high rankings in publications such as Forbes magazine , as well as annual U.S. News & World Report surveys . In 2016 , U.S. News & World Report ranked UNC Chapel Hill business school 's MBA program as the 16th best in the nation . In the 2011 edition , U.S. News & World Report ranked the UNC Chapel Hill Gillings School of Global Public Health as the top public school of public health in the United States , and the second ranked school of public health in the U.S. ( behind the top ranked school , Johns Hopkins and ahead of the third ranked school , Harvard ) . The UNC Chapel Hill Eshelman School of Pharmacy was ranked second among pharmacy schools in the United States in 2012 by U.S. News & World Report . In 2005 , Business Week ranked UNC Chapel Hill business school 's Executive MBA program as the 5th best in the United States . Other highly ranked schools include journalism and mass communication , law , library and information science , medicine , dentistry , and city and regional planning . Nationally , UNC Chapel Hill is in the top ten public universities for research . Internationally , the 2015 QS World University Rankings ranked North Carolina 79th in the world ( in 2010 Times Higher Education World University Rankings and QS World University Rankings parted ways to produce separate rankings ) .

UNC Chapel Hill 's undergraduate program is ranked 30th in the United States by U.S. News & World Report and is consistently ranked among the nation 's top five public universities , just behind UC Berkeley , University of Virginia , UCLA , and the University of Michigan . Kiplinger 's Personal Finance in 2015 ranked UNC Chapel Hill as the number one " best value " public college in the country . The university also topped The Princeton Review 's list of the Best Value Colleges in 2014 . Similarly , the university is first among public universities and ninth overall in " Great Schools , Great Prices " , on the basis of academic quality , net cost of attendance and average student debt . Along with one of the nation 's most acclaimed undergraduate honors programs in a public institution , UNC Chapel Hill also has the highest percentage of undergraduates studying abroad for any public institution . The University is also a large recipient of National Institute of Health grants and funds . For fiscal year 2014 , the university received $ 247,555,416 in NIH funds for research . This amount makes Chapel Hill the 7th overall recipient to research funds in the nation by the NIH .

For decades UNC Chapel Hill has offered an undergraduate merit scholarship known as the Morehead-Cain Scholarship . Recipients receive tuition , room and board , books , and funds for summer study for four years . Since the inception of the Morehead scholarship program , 29 alumni of the program have been named Rhodes Scholars . North Carolina also boasts the Robertson Scholars Program , a scholarship granting recipients the opportunity to attend both UNC Chapel Hill and neighboring Duke University . Additionally , the university provides merit-based scholarships , including the Carolina , Colonel Robinson , and Pogue Scholars programs , which offer full scholarships for out-of-state students . In 2003 , Chancellor James Moeser announced the Carolina Covenant , which provides a debt free education to low-income students who are academically qualified to attend the university . The program was the second in the nation ( following Princeton ) and the first of its kind at a public university . About 80 other universities have since followed suit . North Carolina is tied for the largest number of Rhodes Scholars among public universities ( 47 since 1902 ) with the University of Virginia . Additionally , many students have won Truman , Goldwater , Mitchell , Churchill , Fulbright , Marshall , Udall , and Mellon scholarships .

From 1993 to 2011 UNC Chapel Hill offered independent study courses within the Department of African and Afro-American Studies that consistently awarded high grades regardless of the quality of the work submitted . The final research papers generally received only a cursory review by an administrator without faculty oversight . During the 18-year period the courses saw 3,100 enrollees , of which slightly fewer than half were athletes . A report released in October 2014 by former federal prosecutor Kenneth L. Wainstein showed that a number of faculty and administrators , including some members of the athletic support department and the director of the Parr Center for Ethics , had varying levels of knowledge about the nature of the courses . Members of the athletic support staff raised concerns with the College of Arts and Sciences on multiple occasions , but they were repeatedly rebuffed by an Associate Dean , who claimed that professors are free to run their classes as they see fit ; nine employees were eventually terminated or placed under disciplinary review for their role in the classes . In June 2015 , the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools ' Commission on Colleges put UNC Chapel Hill on one year of probation .

North Carolina 's athletic teams are known as the Tar Heels . They compete as a member of the National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) Division I level ( Football Bowl Subdivision ( FBS ) sub-level for football ) , primarily competing in the Atlantic Coast Conference ( ACC ) for all sports since the 1953 – 54 season . Men 's sports include baseball , basketball , cross country , fencing , football , golf , lacrosse , soccer , swimming & diving , tennis , track & field and Wrestling ; while women 's sports include basketball , cross country , fencing , field hockey , golf , gymnastics , lacrosse , rowing , soccer , softball , swimming and diving , tennis , track & field and volleyball . The NCAA refers to UNC Chapel Hill as the " University of North Carolina " for athletics . As of Fall 2011 , the university had won 40 NCAA team championships in six different sports , eighth all-time . These include twenty one NCAA championships in women 's soccer , six in women 's field hockey , four in men 's lacrosse , five in men 's basketball , one in women 's basketball , and two in men 's soccer . The Men 's basketball team won its 5th NCAA basketball championship in 2009 , the second for Coach Roy Williams since he took the job as head coach . Other recent successes include the 2011 College Cup in men 's soccer , and four consecutive College World Series appearances by the baseball team from 2006 to 2009 . In 1994 , the university 's athletic programs won the Sears Directors Cup " all-sports national championship " awarded for cumulative performance in NCAA competition . Consensus collegiate national athletes of the year from North Carolina include Rachel Dawson in field hockey ; Phil Ford , Tyler Hansbrough , Antawn Jamison , Vince Carter , James Worthy and Michael Jordan in men 's basketball ; and Mia Hamm ( twice ) , Shannon Higgins , Kristine Lilly , and Tisha Venturini in women 's soccer .

The university 's teams are nicknamed the " Tar Heels , " in reference to the state 's eighteenth century prominence as a tar and pitch producer . The nickname 's cultural relevance , however , has a complex history that includes anecdotal tales from both the American Civil War and the American Revolution . The mascot is a live Dorset ram named Rameses , a tradition that dates back to 1924 , when the team manager brought a ram to the annual game against Virginia Military Institute , inspired by the play of former football player Jack " The Battering Ram " Merrit . The kicker rubbed his head for good luck before a game-winning field goal , and the ram stayed . There is also an anthropomorphic ram mascot who appears at games . The modern Rameses is depicted in a sailor 's hat , a reference to a United States Navy flight training program that was attached to the university during World War II .

Dean Smith was widely known for his idea of " The Carolina Way " , in which he challenged his players to , " Play hard , play smart , play together . " " The Carolina Way " was an idea of excellence in the classroom , as well as on the court . In Coach Smith 's book , The Carolina Way , former player Scott Williams said , regarding Dean Smith , " Winning was very important at Carolina , and there was much pressure to win , but Coach cared more about our getting a sound education and turning into good citizens than he did about winning . " The October 22 , 2014 release of the Wainstein Report alleging institutionalized academic fraud that involved over 3,100 students and student athletes , over an 18-year period from 1993 to 2011 that began during the final years of the Dean Smith era , marred " The Carolina Way " image . The report alleged that at least 54 players during the Dean Smith era were enrolled in what came to be known as " paper classes . " In response to the allegations of the Wainstein report , the NCAA launched their own investigation and on June 5 , 2015 accused the institution of five major violations ( including lack of institutional control ) . Sports Illustrated has since gone on to say , " The Carolina Way " is no longer shorthand for all that is admirable and salutary in college sports . "

The South 's Oldest Rivalry between North Carolina and its first opponent , the University of Virginia , was prominent throughout the first third of the twentieth century . The 119th meeting in football between two of the top public universities in the east occurred in October 2014 . One of the fiercest rivalries is with Durham 's Duke University . Located only eight miles from each other , the schools regularly compete in both athletics and academics . The Carolina-Duke rivalry is most intense , however , in basketball . With a combined ten national championships in men 's basketball , both teams have been frequent contenders for the national championship for the past thirty years . The rivalry has been the focus of several books , including Will Blythe 's To Hate Like This Is to Be Happy Forever and was the focus of the HBO documentary Battle for Tobacco Road : Duke vs Carolina . Duke was Carolina 's biggest rival from the 1930 's until the early 1960 's , when Duke 's declining athletic program shifted Carolina 's rival focus to North Carolina State . Carolina holds an in-state rivalry with fellow Tobacco Road school , North Carolina State University . Attention shifted back to Duke following a decline in NC State 's basketball program since the mid-1970 's ( and the resurgence of Duke 's basketball program ) , but the rivalry is sometimes still considered the most bitter in the state . Combined , the two schools hold seven NCAA Championships and 27 ACC Championships in basketball . Students from each school often exchange pranks before basketball and football games .

While students previously held " Beat Duke " parades on Franklin Street before sporting events , today students and sports fans have been known to spill out of bars and dormitories upon the victory of one of Carolina 's sports teams . In most cases , a Franklin Street " bonfire " celebration is due to a victory by the men 's basketball team , although other Franklin Street celebrations have stemmed from wins by the women 's basketball team and women 's soccer team . The first known student celebration on Franklin Street came after the 1957 men 's basketball team capped their perfect season with a National Championship victory over the Kansas Jayhawks . From then on , students have flooded the street after important victories . After a Final Four victory in 1981 and the men 's basketball team won the 1982 NCAA Championship , Franklin Street was painted blue by the fans who had rushed the street . This event has led local vendors to stop selling Carolina blue paint as the Tar Heels near the national championship .

Since the beginning of intercollegiate athletics at UNC Chapel Hill in the late nineteenth century , the school 's colors have been Carolina blue and white . The colors were chosen years before by the Dialectic ( blue ) and Philanthropic ( white ) Societies , the oldest student organization at the university . The school had required participation in one of the clubs , and traditionally the " Di " s were from the western part of North Carolina while the " Phi " s were from the eastern part of the state . Society members would wear a blue or white ribbon at university functions , and blue or white ribbons were attached to their diplomas at graduation . On public occasions , both groups were equally represented , and eventually both colors were used by processional leaders to signify the unity of both groups as part of the university . When football became a popular collegiate sport in the 1880s , the Carolina football team adopted the light blue and white of the Di-Phi Societies as the school colors .

Notable among a number of songs commonly played and sung at various events such as commencement , convocation , and athletic games are the university fight songs " I 'm a Tar Heel Born " and " Here Comes Carolina " . The fight songs are often played by the bell tower near the center of campus , as well as after major victories . " I 'm a Tar Heel Born " originated in the late 1920s as a tag to the school 's alma mater , " Hark The Sound " . " Hark the Sound " was usually played at the end of games , but as of late it has been played at the beginning of games as well . The Institute of Folk Music at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill was founded by Lamar Stringfield in 1930 , followed by the founding of the North Carolina Symphony in 1932 .

Most student organizations at UNC Chapel Hill are officially recognized and provided with assistance by the Carolina Union , an administrative unit of the university . Funding is derived from the student government student activity fee , which is allocated at the discretion of the student congress . The largest student fundraiser , the UNC Chapel Hill Dance Marathon , involves thousands of students , faculty , and community members in raising funds for the North Carolina Children 's Hospital . The organization conducts fundraising and volunteer activities throughout the year and , as of 2008 , had donated $ 1.4 million since its inception in 1999 . The university is also noted for its Campus Y , the social justice hub on campus that houses many service and internationally focused organizations . The Campus Y was founded in 1859 , and is noted as a " leader in on-campus discussion and dialogue and off-campus service and activism " . The Campus Y was at the center of many progressive movements within the university , including the racial integration of the student body , the effort to improve wages and working conditions for University employees , and the establishment of the Sonja Haynes Stones Center for Black Culture and History . The Y is a collection of many UNC Chapel Hill specific and outside organizations , such as Carolina Kickoff , STAND , Nourish International , Carolina Microfinance Initiative , Homeless Outreach & Poverty Eradication ( HOPE ) , and Project Literacy .

The student-run newspaper The Daily Tar Heel is ranked highly by The Princeton Review , and received the 2004 – 5 National Pacemaker Award from the Associated Collegiate Press . Founded in 1977 , WXYC 89.3 FM is UNC Chapel Hill 's student radio station that broadcasts 24 hours a day , 365 days a year . Programming is left up to student DJs . WXYC typically plays little heard music from a wide range of genres and eras . On November 7 , 1994 , WXYC became the first radio station in the world to broadcast its signal over the internet . A student-run television station , STV , airs on the campus cable and throughout the Chapel Hill Time Warner Cable system . Founded in 1948 as successor to the Carolina Magazine , the Carolina Quarterly , edited by graduate students , has published the works of numerous authors , including Wendell Berry , Raymond Carver , Don DeLillo , Annie Dillard , Joyce Carol Oates , and John Edgar Wideman . Works appearing in the Quarterly have been anthologized in Best American Short Stories and New Stories from the South and have won the Pushcart and O. Henry Prizes .

The Clef Hangers ( also known as the Clefs ) are the university 's oldest a cappella group , founded by Barry Saunders in 1977 . The group has since won several Contemporary A Cappella Recording Awards ( CARAs ) , including Best Soloist in the song Easy , featured on the 2003 album Breeze . They have won two more CARAs for Best Male Collegiate Songs for My Love on Time Out ( 2008 ) , and for Ain 't Nothing Wrong on Twist ( 2009 ) . Members have included Brendan James , who graduated in 2002 , and Anoop Desai , who graduated in 2008 . Since the spring of 2002 , the Clef Hangers have sung each year at Commencement . They hold fall and spring concerts , sometimes featuring special guests . The Residence Hall Association , the school 's third-largest student-run organization , is dedicated to enhancing the experience of students living in residence halls . This includes putting on social , educational , and philanthropic programs for residents ; recognizing outstanding residents and members ; and helping residents develop into successful leaders . The organization is run by 8 student executive officers ; 16 student governors that represent each residence hall community ; and numerous community government members . RHA is the campus organization of NACURH , the largest student organization in the world . In 2010 the organization won the national RHA Building Block Award , which is awarded to the school with the most improved RHA organization .

The athletic teams at the university are supported by the Marching Tar Heels , the university 's marching band . The entire 275-member volunteer band is present at every home football game , and smaller pep bands play at all home basketball games . Each member of the band is also required to play in at least one of five pep bands that play at athletic events of the 26 other sports . UNC Chapel Hill has a regional theater company in residence , the Playmakers Repertory Company , and hosts regular dance , drama , and music performances on campus . The school has an outdoor stone amphitheatre known as Forest Theatre used for weddings and drama productions . Forest Theatre is dedicated to Professor Frederick Koch , the founder of the Carolina Playmakers and the father American folk drama . Many fraternities and sororities on campus belong to the National Panhellenic Conference ( NPC ) , Interfraternity Council ( IFC ) , Greek Alliance Council , and National Pan-Hellenic Council ( NPHC ) . As of spring 2010 , eighteen percent of undergraduates were Greek ( 1146 men and 1693 women out of 17,160 total ) . The total number of community service hours completed for the 2010 spring semester by fraternities and sororities was 51,819 hours ( average of 31 hours / person ) . UNC Chapel Hill also offers professional and service fraternities that do not have houses but are still recognized by the school . Some of the campus honor societies include : the Order of the Golden Fleece , the Order of the Grail-Valkyries , the Order of the Old Well , the Order of the Bell Tower , and the Frank Porter Graham Honor Society .

Student government at Carolina is composed of an executive branch headed by the student body president , a legislative branch composed of a student-elected student congress , and a judicial branch which includes the honor court and student supreme court . The Judicial Reform Committee created the Instrument of Student Judicial Governance , which outlined the current Honor Code and its means for enforcement in 1974 . Currently , Carolina boasts one of the only student-run judicial systems in the nation . All academic and most conduct violations are handled by the student-run Honor System . Prior to that time , the Dialectic and Philanthropic Societies along with other campus organizations supported student concerns .

Lenoir Dining Hall was completed in 1939 and opened for service to students when they returned from Christmas holidays in January 1940 . The building was named for General William Lenoir , first chairman of the Board of Trustees of the university in 1790 . The new Rams Head Dining Hall seats 1,300 people and has a capacity for serving 10,000 meals per day . It has one large dining area , two medium size dining areas , food service staff offices , kitchen , food preparation areas , storage and a Starbucks coffee shop . Rams Head Dining Center was opened to the students in March 2005 . It includes the Rams Head Dining Hall , Starbucks , and the Rams Head Market . It was opened to offer more food service options to the students living on south campus . In addition the dining hall 's hours were extended to include the 9 pm – 12 am period , a time referred to as " Late Night " by students .

On campus , the Department of Housing and Residential Education manages thirty-two residence halls , grouped into thirteen communities . These communities range from Olde Campus Upper Quad Community which includes Old East Residence Hall , the oldest building of the university , to modern communities such as Manning West , completed in 2002 . In addition to residence halls , the university oversees an additional eight apartment complexes organized into three communities , Ram Village , Odum Village , and Baity Hill Student Family Housing . Along with themed housing focusing on foreign languages and substance-free living , there are also " living-learning communities " which have been formed for specific social , gender-related , or academic needs . An example is UNITAS , sponsored by the Department of Anthropology , where residents are assigned roommates on the basis of cultural or racial differences rather than similarities . Three apartment complexes offer housing for families , graduate students , and some upperclassmen . Along with the rest of campus , all residence halls , apartments , and their surrounding grounds are smoke-free . As of 2008 , 46 % of all undergraduates live in university-provided housing .

With over 300,000 living former students , North Carolina has one of the largest and most active alumni groups in America . Many Tar Heels have attained local , national , and international prominence . James K. Polk served as President of the United States for a single term , William R. King was the thirteenth Vice President of the United States . North Carolina has produced many United States Senators including Paul Wellstone and Thomas Lanier Clingman , along with multiple House Representatives such as Virginia Foxx and Ike Franklin Andrews . Algenon L. Marbley and Thomas Settle have received positions of federal judgeship . Former Secretary of War and Secretary of the Army Kenneth Claiborne Royall and the fifth White House Press Secretary Jonathan W. Daniels were graduates of North Carolina . Peaches Golding was appointed by HM Queen Elizabeth II as High Sheriff of the City and County of Bristol 2010-2011 , the first Black female High Sheriff and second only black High Sheriff in over 1,000 years . Tar Heels have also made a mark on pop culture . Andy Griffith and John Forsythe became successful actors . Stuart Scott , Woody Durham , and Mick Mixon have become sportscasters . Civil War historian and writer Shelby Foote , sportswriter Peter Gammons , and Pulitzer Prize winner Lenoir Chambers all graduated from North Carolina . Other notable writers who have attended UNC Chapel Hill include Thomas Wolfe , who has a memorial on campus ; National Book Award winners Walker Percy , Hayden Carruth , and Charles Frazier ; Dos Passos Prize winner Russell Banks ; National Book Critics Circle Award winner Ben Fountain ; Pulitzer Prize finalist Lydia Millet ; New Yorker columnist Joseph Mitchell ; National Geographic writer John Patric ; Armistead Maupin ; and the notable poets Lawrence Ferlinghetti and Bollingen Prize winner Edgar Bowers.Television journalist Charles Kuralt , honored with three Peabody Awards , is a UNC Chapel Hill graduate . Three-time Pulitzer Prize winner , political cartoonist Jeff MacNelly graduated from Carolina . Caleb Bradham , the inventor of the popular soft drink Pepsi-Cola , was a member of the Philanthropic Society and the class of 1890 .

Tar Heels have made their mark on the basketball court with Southern Methodist University head coach Larry Brown , title winning coach Roy Williams , Los Angeles Lakers general manager Mitch Kupchak , college player of the year award winners George Glamack , Lennie Rosenbluth , Antawn Jamison , and Tyler Hansbrough , Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame inductees Michael Jordan , Billy Cunningham , and Robert McAdoo , great defender Bobby Jones , and NBA All-Star Vince Carter . Other notable Tar Heels include football players Lawrence Taylor and Dré Bly , soccer stars Mia Hamm , Ashlyn Harris , Heather O 'Reilly , Meghan Klingenberg , Whitney Engen , Allie Long , Lori Chalupny and Tobin Heath , baseball standouts Dustin Ackley and B.J. Surhoff , and Olympians April Heinrichs and Vikas Gowda . Many Tar Heels have become business leaders . The leaders include Jason Kilar , former CEO of Hulu ; Howard R. Levine , chairman of the board and CEO of Family Dollar ; Paul Kolton , chairman of the American Stock Exchange ; Julian Robertson , founder of Tiger Management Corp. ; Bill Ruger , founder of Sturm , Ruger ; Warren Grice Elliott , former president of Atlantic Coast Line Railroad ; Allen B. Morgan , Jr . , founder and former CEO of Morgan Keegan & Company ; Ken Thompson , former chairman and CEO of Wachovia ; Hugh McColl , former CEO of Bank of America ; Sallie Krawcheck , former CFO of Citigroup Inc. and William Johnson , the current president and CEO of Progress Energy , and John A. Allison IV , former CEO of BB & T.

In July 2011 , the public universities in North Carolina had to share a budget cut of $ 414 million , of which the Chapel Hill campus lost more than $ 100 million in 2011 . This followed state budget cuts that trimmed university spending by $ 231million since 2007 ; Provost Bruce Carney said more than 130 faculty members have left UNC since 2009 . , with poor staff retention . On November 17 , 2011 , the Board of Trustees for UNC-CH recommended a 15.6 percent increase in tuition tuition increase , a historically larges increase . The budget cuts in 2011 greatly affected the university and set this increased tuition plan in motion UNC students angrily protested on November 17 , with the slogan " Strike the Hikes " . They believe that the university should dip into its $ 2.2 billion endowment , but UNC officials noted that they endowments are restricted for specific uses , such as scholarships and other financial aid . Mary Cooper ( Student Body President ) , the lone student representative , was the only trustee to vote against the proposal . On February 10 , 2012 , the UNC Board of Governors approved tuition and fee increases of 8.8 percent for in-state undergraduates across all 16 campuses

The Ames Project was a research and development project that was part of the larger Manhattan Project to build the first atomic bombs during World War II . It was founded by Frank Spedding from Iowa State College in Ames , Iowa as an offshoot of the Metallurgical Laboratory at the University of Chicago devoted to chemistry and metallurgy , but became a separate project in its own right . The Ames Project developed the Ames Process , a method for preparing pure uranium metal that the Manhattan Project needed for its atomic bombs and nuclear reactors . Between 1942 and 1945 , it produced over 1,000 short tons ( 910 t ) of uranium metal . It also developed methods of preparing and casting thorium , cerium and beryllium . In October 1945 Iowa State College received the Army-Navy " E " Award for Excellence in Production , an award usually only given to industrial organisations . In 1947 it became the Ames Laboratory , a national laboratory under the Atomic Energy Commission .

The discovery of the neutron by James Chadwick in 1932 , followed by that of nuclear fission by German chemists Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassmann in 1938 , and its theoretical explanation ( and naming ) by Lise Meitner and Otto Frisch soon after , opened up the possibility of a controlled nuclear chain reaction with uranium . On 20 December , soon after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor that brought the United States into World War II , the Nobel Prize-winning physicist Arthur H. Compton was placed in charge of the plutonium project , objective of which was to produce reactors to convert uranium into plutonium , to find ways to chemically separate plutonium from the uranium , and ultimately to design and build an atomic bomb . This became the Manhattan Project . Although a successful reactor had not yet been built , the scientists had already produced several different but promising design concepts . Compton established its Metallurgical Laboratory at the University of Chicago in February 1942 . Its mission was to build nuclear reactors to create plutonium that would be used in atomic bombs . For advice on assembling the laboratory 's Chemistry Division , Compton , a physicist , turned to Herbert McCoy , who had considerable experience with isotopes and radioactive elements . McCoy recommended Frank Spedding from Iowa State College in Ames , Iowa , as an expert on the rare earth elements , which were chemically similar to the actinide series that included uranium and plutonium . Compton asked Spedding to become the head of the Metallurgical Laboratory 's Chemistry Division .

Spedding started by recruiting two fellow scientists at Iowa State College to become his associate directors ; Harley A. Wilhelm , an expert in spectrochemistry , as the head of the Ames Project 's Metallurgy Division , and Iral B. Johns as the head of the Plutonium Division . Under them were eight section chiefs . The Ames Project grew to over 90 scientific staff . The total number of staff eventually exceeded 500 . Senior staff would meet on Sunday mornings to review the previous week 's work and set goals for the week ahead , a process that came to be called " Speddinars " . At first Spedding had to depart for Chicago soon after the meeting , but in early 1943 he was succeeded as head of the chemistry division at the Metallurgical Laboratory by James Franck , allowing Spedding to spend more times at Ames . He remained an associate director at the Metallurgical Laboratory . Spedding was fortunate in having the full support of Charles E. Friley , the president of Iowa State College , even though the nature of the work could not at first be disclosed to him until security checks were complete . Once this was complete , Friley brought in Harold V. Gaskill , the Dean of Science , as the Ames Project 's administrator . The United States Army Corps of Engineers took control of the Manhattan Project in June 1942 , and the Ames Project in late 1942 .

The first item on the agenda was to find uranium for the nuclear reactor that Enrico Fermi was proposing to build . Uranium ore was readily available . Some 1,200 short tons ( 1,100 t ) of high-grade ore from the Belgian Congo was in storage in a warehouse at Port Richmond on Staten Island . About 300 short tons ( 270 t ) per annum was being mined at the Eldorado Mine at Port Radium on the Great Bear Lake near the Arctic Circle in Canada 's Northwest Territories . The Eldorado company also operated a refinery at Port Hope , Ontario , where Canadian and Belgian ore was refined . The Manhattan Project 's estimated requirements for 1942 were 200 short tons ( 180 t ) , of which Compton required just 45 short tons ( 41 t ) for his proposed nuclear reactor . The major problem was impurities in the uranium oxide , which could act as neutron poisons and prevent a nuclear chain reaction . Due to the presence of impurities , references published before 1942 typically listed its melting point at around 1,700 ° C ( 3,090 ° F ) when pure uranium metal actually melts at 1,132 ° C ( 2,070 ° F ) . Peter P. Alexander , at Metal Hybrides Incorporated , gave in 1938 the first indications that the melting point of uranium was " as low as 1,100 ° C ( 2,010 ° F ) and even somewhat lower " .

The most effective way to purify uranium oxide in a laboratory was to take advantage of the fact that uranium nitrate is soluble in ether . Scaling this process up for industrial production was a dangerous proposition ; ether was explosive , and a factory using large quantities was likely to blow up or burn down . Compton and Spedding turned to Mallinckrodt in Saint Louis , Missouri , which had experience with ether . Spedding went over the details with Mallinckrodt 's chemical engineers , Henry V. Farr and John R. Ruhoff , on 17 April 1942 . Within a few months , sixty tons of highly pure uranium oxide was produced . The only uranium metal available commercially was produced by the Westinghouse Electric and Manufacturing Company , using a photochemical process . Uranium oxide was reacted with potassium fluoride in large vats on the roof of Westinghouse 's plant in Bloomfield , New Jersey . This produced ingots the size of a quarter that were sold for around $ 20 per gram . But Edward Creutz , the head of the Metallurgical Laboratory 's group responsible for fabricating the uranium , wanted a metal sphere the size of an orange for his experiments . With Westinghouse 's process , it would have cost $ 200,000 and taken a year to produce . The hydride or " hydramet " process , developed by Peter P. Alexander used calcium hydride as the reducing agent for the conversion of uranium ore to metal . By this means the Metal Hydrides plant in Beverly , Massachusetts , managed to produce a few pounds of uranium metal . Unfortunately , the calcium hydride contained unacceptable amounts of boron , a neutron poison , making the metal unsuitable for use in a reactor . Some months would pass before Clement J. Rodden from the National Bureau of Standards and Union Carbide figured out a means to produce sufficiently pure calcium hydride .

Spedding and Wilhelm began looking for ways to create the uranium metal . At the time , it was produced in the form of a powder , and was highly pyrophoric . It could be pressed and sintered and stored in cans , but to be useful , it needed to be melted and cast . Casting presented difficulty because uranium corroded crucibles of beryllium , magnesia and graphite . To produce uranium metal , they tried reducing uranium oxide with hydrogen , but this did not work . While most of the neighboring elements on the periodic table can be reduced to form pure metal and slag , uranium did not behave this way . In June 1942 they then tried reducing the uranium with carbon in a hydrogen atmosphere , with only moderate success . They then tried aluminum , magnesium and calcium , all of which were unsuccessful . The following month the Ames team found that molten uranium could be cast in a graphite container . Although graphite was known to react with uranium , this could be managed because the carbide formed only where the two touched . Around this time , someone from the Manhattan Project 's Berkeley Radiation Laboratory brought a 2-inch ( 51 mm ) cube of uranium tetrafluoride — the uranium compound being used in the calutrons — to the Metallurgical Laboratory to discuss the possibility of using it rather than uranium oxide in the reactor . Spedding began wondering whether it would be possible to produce uranium metal from this salt , bypassing the problems with oxygen . He took the cube back to Ames , and asked Wilhelm to investigate . The task was assigned to an associate , Wayne H. Keller . He investigated a process ( now known as the Ames process ) originally developed by J. C. Goggins and others at the University of New Hampshire in 1926 . This involved mixing uranium tetrachloride and calcium metal in a calcium oxide-lined steel pressure vessel ( known as a " bomb " ) and heating it . Keller was able to reproduce Goggin 's results on 3 August 1942 , creating a 20-gram ( 0.71 oz ) button of very pure uranium metal . The process was then scaled up . By September , bombs were being prepared in a 4-inch ( 10 cm ) steel pipes 15 inches ( 38 cm ) long , lined with lime to prevent corrosion , and containing up to 3 kilograms ( 6.6 lb ) of uranium tetrafluoride . C. F. Gray took these ingots and cast them into a 4,980-gram ( 10.98 lb ) 5-by-2-inch ( 12.7 by 5.1 cm ) billet of pure uranium .

On 24 September 1942 , Wilhelm took the ingot to Spedding at the Metallurgical Laboratory in Chicago and presented it to Compton , whose first reaction was of disbelief . He thought it must be hollow . Spedding had the ingot cut open . It was not hollow . A few days later , the Metallurgical Laboratory 's director , Richard L. Doan , went to Ames , where he drew up an Office of Scientific Research and Development ( OSRD ) contract for the Ames Project to produce 100 pounds ( 45 kg ) of pure uranium metal a day . This would be a pilot plant , with the process eventually being transferred to industry . The OSRD contract was superseded by a Manhattan Project contract in November 1942 . The initial contract was for $ 50,000 . By 31 December 1945 , the face value of contracts let to the Ames Project totalled $ 6,907,000 ; but the work was carried out for $ 4,000,000 . Spedding and Wilhelm found an old wooden building on the southeastern edge of the campus . It had been a home economics building until 1926 , and then had served as a women 's gymnasium until a new one was built in 1941 ; by 1942 it was mainly used for storage . The building was handed over to the Ames Project , and the wooden floor replaced with a concrete one , much to the disappointment of the university architect , who had been trying for some years to get the place torn down . The building officially became known as the Physical Chemistry Annex ; local people called it " Little Ankeny " , after the nearby town of Ankeny , Iowa , where there was an ordnance plant . Looking for machine tools , Wilhelm found a machine shop for sale in Ames . The owner , Bill Maitland , had once made gardening tools , but could no longer obtain the metal he needed due to wartime rationing . Wilhelm bought it for $ 8,000 . The Metallurgical Laboratory supplied two large 40,000 W reduction furnaces .

The Ames Project supplied two tons of uranium metal to the Metallurgical Laboratory for the construction of Chicago Pile-1 , the world 's first nuclear reactor , which achieved criticality on 2 December 1942 . The Ames Project would later supply over 90 percent of the uranium for the X-10 Graphite Reactor at the Clinton Engineer Works in Oak Ridge , Tennessee . The Ames Project was producing a ton of highly pure uranium metal a day . Production rose from 100 pounds ( 45 kg ) per day in December 1942 to 550 pounds ( 250 kg ) per day by the middle of January . For production , the process was changed to use magnesium instead of calcium ; magnesium was cheaper , more readily available , and purer . But it was also harder to start the reaction with magnesium than calcium , requiring more heating . The uranium tetrafluoride , known as green salt because of its characteristic color , was supplied by Mallinckrodt , DuPont and Harshaw Chemical , and was ground up on arrival , as was the magnesium . Bombs were normally 6-inch ( 15 cm ) pipes , 36-inch ( 91 cm ) long , although 10-inch ( 25 cm ) , 42-inch ( 110 cm ) long pipes could be used to produce 125-pound ( 57 kg ) ingots . They were heated to 650 ° C ( 1,202 ° F ) for 40 to 60 minutes , after which the mixture spontaneously reacted , reaching temperatures of 1,500 to 2,000 ° C ( 2,730 to 3,630 ° F ) . A microphone was used to detect the ignition , and the bomb would be moved to a spray chamber to cool . If everything worked , uranium metal biscuit and magnesium fluoride slag would be produced . After the bomb cooled , it would be opened and hammered until the two separated . The resulting biscuit would be stamped , and sent off to be cast .

Casting re-shaped the uranium into ingots and removed impurities . The metal biscuits were melted in a graphite crucible and poured into a mold . This produced rods between 1.5 and 5.0 inches ( 3.8 and 12.7 cm ) in diameter and 20 to 30 inches ( 51 to 76 cm ) long . The rods were stamped with a number and placed in wooden boxes for shipping to the Metallurgical Laboratory . From there they were sent to the Oak Ridge or the Hanford Site . By July 1943 , the Ames Project was producing 130,000 pounds ( 59,000 kg ) of uranium metal per month . The cost of a pound of uranium metal fell from $ 1,000 to around one dollar . Starting in July 1943 , Mallinckrodt , Electromet , and DuPont began producing uranium by the Ames process , and Ames phased out its own production by early 1945 . The Ames Project began a program of recovering uranium metal from scrap . A new building , known as Physical Chemistry Annex 2 , was constructed for the purpose in 1944 . Uranium turnings were washed , dried , passed through a magnet to remove iron impurities , and pressed into briquettes . They were then send to be remelted . The job was handed over to Metal Hydrides and a recovery plant at the Hanford Site in December 1945 , by which time the Ames Project had recovered 600,000 pounds ( 270 t ) of scrap metal . In all , the Ames Project produced over 1,000 short tons ( 910 t ) of uranium metal . All production ceased on 5 August 1945 , as did that at Metal Hydrides and DuPont , leaving Mallinckrodt as the only producer of uranium metal in the early post-war period .

In 1942 , Glenn T. Seaborg established that when thorium was bombarded with neutrons , it could be transformed into fissile uranium-233 . This was another possible route to an atomic bomb , especially if it turned out that uranium-233 could be more easily separated from thorium than plutonium from uranium . It was not pursued further because uranium-233 production would have required a complete redesign of the Hanford reactors ; but in April 1944 the Metallurgical Laboratory 's Thorfin R. Rogness calculated that a nuclear reactor containing thorium could produce enough uranium-233 to sustain its reaction without adding anything but more thorium . This was very interesting , because at the time it was thought that uranium might be scarce , whereas thorium was at least ten times more plentiful . In July and August 1943 , the Ames Project attempted to create thorium metal using something similar to the Ames Process . This was unsuccessful , because thorium has a much higher melting point than uranium . Efforts continued into 1944 , and it was found that with a zinc chloride booster they could produce a zinc-thorium alloy . Heating to 1,300 ° C ( 2,370 ° F ) in a graphite crucible could then melt the zinc , which could be drawn off . This left the thorium , which was cast into 150 pounds ( 68 kg ) ingots in beryllia crucibles . Some 4,500 pounds ( 2,000 kg ) was produced by 31 December 1945 . Thorium sold for $ 3 a gram before the war ; by its end , the Ames Project was producing it for less than 5 ¢ a gram .

Beryllium was used by the Manhattan Project as a neutron reflector , and as a component of modulated neutron initiators . Only one firm produced it commercially in the United States , Brush Beryllium in Lorain , Ohio . The Ames Project began working on a production process in December 1943 , reducing beryllium fluoride in a bomb with metallic magnesium and a sulphur booster . The main difficulty with working with beryllium was its high toxicity . A closed bomb was used to minimise the possibility of producing toxic beryllium dust . The process worked , but the high temperatures and pressures created by the magnesium sulphide meant that it was potentially explosive . An alternative was then developed using beryllium fluoride in a bomb with metallic calcium and a lead chloride booster . The metal was cast in a vacuum . Research was still ongoing when the war ended .

In mid-1944 , the Ames Project was asked to produce cerium . This was being used by the laboratories at Berkeley and Los Alamos for cerium sulphide , which was used in crucibles to cast plutonium . Again , the bomb method was used , this time to reduce anhydrous cerium chloride with calcium using an iodine booster . A special " dry room " was constructed for drying out the cerium chloride using hydrogen chloride gas . The resulting metal contained calcium and magnesium impurity , so it had to be recast to remove them . The opportunity was taken to make it into 0.75-inch ( 19 mm ) diameter rods 4 inches ( 100 mm ) long , the desired shape . Because cerium is so reactive , the remelting was done in a vacuum , using a calcium oxide or magnesium oxide crucible . The first shipment of cerium metal was made in August 1944 . The Ames Laboratory produced 437 pounds ( 198 kg ) of extremely ( more than 99 % ) pure cerium by August 1945 , when production ended .

Since uranium metal had been so scarce before the war , little was known about its metallurgy , but with uranium being used in the reactors , the Manhattan Project became keenly interested in its properties . In particular , with water being used for cooling , there was speculation about alloys with high thermal conductivity and resistance to corrosion . The Ames Project produced and tested uranium carbide , which had a potential to be used as a fuel in reactors instead of metallic uranium . So too was bismuth , because of its low neutron capture cross section , so the Ames Project produced and tested uranium-bismuth alloys . At one point a proposal was on the table to protect the uranium in a reactor from corrosion by jacketing it with copper . The Ames Project therefore studied uranium-copper alloys , which would occur at the interface . In practice , the uranium was canned in aluminum ; this too was studied , as were alloys with tin , which was used to solder the cans . Tests were also carried out with alloys of uranium with beryllium , calcium , cobalt , magnesium , manganese and thorium , which were being produced or in use elsewhere in the Ames Project . Attempts were made to separate plutonium from uranium through metallurgy , exploiting plutonium 's greater affinity with gold and silver , but the Manhattan Project chose to use the Bismuth phosphate process , a chemical separation method , instead .

The chemistry of uranium was the focus of multiple studies by the Ames Project . The properties of the various uranium oxides and uranium hydride were investigated . The latter of was particular interest because at one point the Los Alamos Laboratory considered using it in an atomic bomb instead of metallic uranium , but the idea was found to be inefficient , and was shelved . A process was developed to recovery depleted uranium metal from the uranium tetrafluoride left over from the electromagnetic isotope separation process and uranium hexafluoride left over from the gaseous diffusion process . This was operated as a pilot plant that produced kilogram quantities , before being turned over to the Manhattan Project 's SAM Laboratories for implementation on an industrial scale at Oak Ridge . If the chemistry and metallurgy of uranium was poorly understood , that of plutonium was practically unknown , as it had only existed in microscopic amounts . Samples began arriving from the reactors in 1943 , and although the locus of the Manhattan Project 's investigations into plutonium chemistry was at the Metallurgical Laboratory , the Ames Project investigated methods of separating plutonium metal from uranium and fission products .

Major General Leslie R. Groves Jr . , the director of the Manhattan Project , visited Iowa State College on 12 October 1945 , and presented the Army-Navy " E " Award for Excellence in Production for its part in producing uranium for the Manhattan Project . It was unprecedented for a college or university to receive this award , which was usually given to industrial organisations . The award came in the form of a banner sporting four white stars , representing two and a half years of service to the war effort . As of 2011 , the award was on display at Iowa State University in Spedding Hall . The Iowa State Board of Education created the Institute of Atomic Research ( IAR ) as a coordinating body for research throughout the Midwestern United States on 1 November 1945 , with Spedding as its director . The Manhattan Project continued to fund the activities of the Ames Project , but with the passage of the Atomic Energy Act of 1946 , responsibility passed to the newly-created Atomic Energy Commission ( AEC ) on 1 January 1947 . On 17 May 1947 , the AEC awarded the contract to run the Ames Laboratory , which now had the status of a national laboratory , to Iowa State College . The laboratory remained on the Iowa State College campus , and its faculty and graduate students made up most the staff . Spedding remained its director until he retired in 1968 . Administration was delegated to IAR . Permanent buildings were constructed that were opened in 1948 and 1950 , and subsequently named Wilhelm Hall and Spedding Hall . The Ames Laboratory retained a focus on chemistry and metallurgy , particularly of the rare earth metals .

Vildanden AS ( " The Wild Duck " ) was a virtual , regional airline based at Skien Airport , Geiteryggen in Norway , where it was the only airline . With operations starting in 2005 , it flew to Bergen , Trondheim and Stavanger using a Jetstream 32 and an ATR 42 , which is wet leased from Danish Air Transport ( DAT ) and Helitrans . Previously , the airline has also served Stockholm and Molde , and has also operated Saab 340 aircraft , operated by Coast Air , Air Aurora and Avitrans . The airline hadbeen in conflict with Coast Air about terminating the wet lease agreement . The company has had to be bailed out several times , including by the municipality , until it managed to make its first profit in 2009 . It ceased operations and filed for bankruptcy in January 2011 .

The airline was based at Skien Airport , Geiteryggen . It provides twenty weekly trips to Bergen and weekly trips to Stavanger . In 2009 , 50,000 people traveled with Vildanden . The company has one ATR 42 , which seats 48 passengers and is operated by Danish Air Transport , and one Jetstream 32 , which seats 19 and is operated by Helitrans . The airline used Sandefjord Airport , Torp as its reserve airport in case of bad weather . The airline is named after the play The Wild Duck ( Norwegian : Vildanden ) written by Henrik Ibsen , who was born in Skien . The slogan " The shortest path between Ibsen and Grieg " is a pun on the Bergen composer Edvard Grieg 's and Ibsen 's names . The largest owner is Magne Forland , who owns 70 % .

Vildanden was founded on 23 November 2004 by 18 local investors who wanted to start commercial scheduled flights from Skien Airport , Geiteryggen . For a long period , there had been a public debate about closing the airport . Owned by the municipality , the airport was receiving annual subsidies of NOK 2.5 million from the municipality , and NOK 3.8 million from the state . It was decided to operate Vildanden as a virtual airline ( one that owns none of its equipment , leasing everything from others ) , and wet lease operations from other companies . Initial plans had been started in 2003 to cooperate with Dutch airline Denim Air , with a 50-seater aircraft , but these plans did not work out . In October 2004 , a contract was signed with Haugesund-based Coast Air , who would operate Jetstream 31 aircraft between Skien and Bergen . The owner of Coast Air , Kystfly , also bought 20 % of Vildanden . Coast Air had previously operated routes from Skien to Western Norway , but had withdrawn in 1999 . Following the announcement from Vildanden and Coast Air , the municipality decided to not close the airport , and cover the estimated NOK 300,000 annual deficit , as well as upgrade the control tower for NOK 700,000 . The airport had been closed since 2002 , following the increased domestic and international traffic from near-by Sandefjord Airport , Torp .

Initial service would have 16 weekly departures to Bergen Airport , Flesland . The main market segment is the offshore petroleum industry , and the departure times were designed to mesh with helicopter routes to offshore installations . The company estimated that one-quarter of travellers would be people commuting to the North Sea . Norsk Hydro , who have a lot of employees in the Grenland area , stated that they could not start using Vildanden because they had an agreement with SAS Braathens ' services from Sandefjord . The first scheduled service flew on 24 January 2005 , carrying eight passengers . This first month , 972 passengers took the plane , and Vildanden announced that they would try to also start a route to Stavanger Airport , Sola , as well as potentially to Oslo Airport , Gardermoen .

On 19 April , a new Jetstream 32 aircraft was taken into service . This allowed capacity to increase from 12 to 19 passengers , and at the same time travel time was reduced from 47 to 39 minutes . By September , the most popular departures were being booked full , and Vildanden asked Coast Air for a larger aircraft , with about 30 seats . In addition to allowing more passengers , larger planes would give higher comfort , and allow a more flexible ticket pricing scheme . An agreement with Danish Air Transport ( DAT ) to operate an ATR 42 , with a capacity of 48 seats , was signed in mid-October . To be able to breach the agreement with Coast Air — who still had a wet leasing contract , but were not able to put into operation a larger aircraft — the company Skien Lufttransport AS was created , and it purchased all the revenue and passenger rights from Vildanden . At the same time , it became the legal counterpart for DAT . The new aircraft was put into service on 31 October , branded with the Vildanden logo . Coast Air chose to continue operating the route between Bergen and Skien in their own name , and used the same aircraft and slot times . At Skien Airport , the Vildanden passengers were given the choice between Coast Air and Vildanden , and all nineteen chose Vildanden . On the return flight , three passengers chose each airline . Both aircraft flew to Skien , but due to heavy rain , only the aircraft from DAT was able to land . The passengers who had taken the Coast Air aircraft , were forced to land at Sandefjord Airport instead .

The following day , Coast Air terminated their flights , but stated that they still had an agreement with Vildanden . Skien Lufttransport on their hand stated that Vildanden was now a sleeping company , and that the contract therefore was terminated . Both companies considered the incident a legal matter . In December , the two companies settled outside court . At the same time , the municipal council was considering the future of the airport . The city engineer estimated it would need a subsidy of NOK 2 million in 2006 , and the politicians , who wanted the airport to run without subsidies , demanded that Vildanden guarantee for the deficit . This was rejected by Vildanden — on the contrary , the company was in dire need for more capital , and issued a private placement for NOK 4 million in December 2005 . The company had since the start been losing money , and needed extra capital to get through the rough until it could make an operating profit . After the placement , 15 % of the company was owned by DAT , while Coast Air sold their shares . In 2005 , Vildanden had a revenue of NOK 15 million .

During 2006 , the ridership increased , and Vildanden started becoming more aggressive against Widerøe , which was flying to Bergen from Sandefjord Airport . Vildanden stated that they aimed to outperform Widerøe on price to Bergen . The ATR-42 turned out to be too large ; from 1 July , operations was taken over by the Czech company Air Aurora , with a smaller 30-seater Saab 340 . This reduced the monthly leasing costs from NOK 700,000 to NOK 550,000 . DAT remained responsible for the booking system . In October , an agreement was signed with the Avitrans of Sweden to take over operations . This also included a second aircraft , so the airline could start operations to Stavanger and Molde in 2007 . From 18 March , Vildanden also started three weekly departures from Skien to Stockholm-Skavsta Airport . The route was necessary to transport personnel from Avitrans ' hub at Bromma to Skien .

By October 2007 , Vildanden was in severe financial distress . An agreement was made with the municipal council , where the latter gave a credit loan to the airline . The route to Molde had given large deficits , and the company was forced to close it down . NOK 2.3 million , equal to the airlines debt to the airport , was granted to the municipal-owned airport operator , and the company allowed to make an agreement where half the debt was deleted , and the other half made interest and principal-free for two years . At the same time , the management of Vildanden had to raise new capital equal to at least half the companies accounts payable , which was NOK 8 million . The case raised local debate about whether it was the municipality 's job to subsidize the airport and the airline . The Federation of Norwegian Aviation Industries announced that they would consider reporting the subsidies to the EFTA Surveillance Authority ( ESA ) for violation of the European Community competition law . The fiscal year 2007 gave a revenue of NOK 61 million , and a deficit of NOK 13 million . During the airport strike in May 2008 — which closed Bergen Airport — Vildanden had full planes since they could land them on the short runway at near-by Stord Airport , Sørstokken . In 2008 , 50,000 people used Skien Airport , most of whom flew with Vildanden .

On 19 June 2008 , the municipal council voted to not give further subsidies to the airport . Upgrades for NOK 8 million were needed to meed safety standard . The airport operator had debt of NOK 12 million , and no realizeable assets . Vildanden was under certain conditions willing to pay some of the capital needed to perform the upgrades . The municipal council changed their opinion and voted — with a single decisive vote — to keep the airport running in July . The financial risk would be taken over by the municipal-owned Kontorbygg , who operate a range of offices and commercial buildings in Skien . The proposal was supported by the right-winged parties , and opposed by the socialist parties , as well as the chair of Kontorbygg . As a response , the Federation of Norwegian Aviation Industries reported the municipality to ESA , and demanded that NOK 20 million in illegal subsidies be repaid by Vildanden and the airport operator . The company had a loss of NOK 3.4 million in 2008 . In April 2009 , Vildanden terminated its agreement with Aviatrans with the intention of using larger aircraft . In July , an agreement was made with DAT to operate an ATR-42 on the Bergen route . From 1 August , the Stockholm route was terminated . The company stated that they had been considering having a stop-over at Moss Airport , Rygge on the Stockholm flights , but instead decided to terminate the route .

During the winter of 2008 – 09 , Vildanden was forced to land at Sandefjord Airport 50 times due to weather closing Geiteryggen . In March , Widerøe started a marketing campaign to attract people from Grenland to use their routes at Torp . Local Liberal Party politician Gustav Søvde stated that he was opposed to Widerøe advertising in the Telemark press for their services . At the same time , Asbjørn Anthonisen , previous chief of operations in Malmö Aviation , was hired as new CEO . Magne Forland increased his ownership in the company to 70 % in August , after he had previously given NOK 10.5 million in interest-free loans to the company . On 11 November 2009 , the German pilots on a flight from Skien to Bergen announced that only 28 of the passengers , without baggage , could take the ride . The reason was bad weather , which was described as " normal Norwegian rain " by the airline afterwards . This caused several commuters to miss their connecting flights on helicopters to offshore installations . The airline later stated that it was caused by the pilots not being aware of the safety equipment installed at Geiteryggen .

In December 2009 , Vildanden announced it plans to operate routes to Trondheim Airport , Værnes , but lacks financial maneuverability to commence operations . By October 2009 , Vildanden owed Kontorbygg , the operator of Geiteryggen , NOK 1.5 million in airport fees . Kontorbygg stated that if Vildanden did not pay , the airport would have to file for bankruptcy . Innovation Norway rejected to give Vildanden a loan for NOK 3.5 million in December 2009 . Kontorbygg stated that the operation of Geiteryggen had cost the municipality NOK 50 million in the course of the five years Vildanden had been operating from it . In February 2010 , the Municipality of Skien announced that it required Vildanden to pay back the NOK 3.1 million , plus NOK 200,000 in interest , that they borrowed in 2007 . The loan was renewed in March , after Vildanden paid NOK 385,000 . From 16 August , Helitrans took over as the operator , using an ATR 42 . From 6 September , the company started with flights to Trondheim . The company ceased operations after its last flight on 14 January 2011 .

" Your Love " is a song by Trinidadian-born recording artist Nicki Minaj , taken from her debut studio album Pink Friday ( 2010 ) . It was released on June 1 , 2010 by Young Money , Cash Money , and Universal Motown as the lead single of the album . The song was written by Minaj , Joseph Hughes , David Freedman , and Andrew " Pop " Wansel , and was produced by the latter . Minaj originally intended to release " Massive Attack " as the lead single from Pink Friday , though its release was scrapped after an underwhelming commercial performance . Described as a " rap ballad " , the song is a change of tempo compared to Minaj 's previous work , and according to Mariel Concepcion of Billboard , the song contains a " new brand of hood majesty . " The song heavily samples Annie Lennox 's 1995 cover version of the song " No More I Love You 's " ( 1986 ) by The Lover Speaks , using its background vocals with additional bass , hip-hop backbeats and drum loops added . The song peaked at numbers 14 and four on the US Billboard Hot 100 and Hot R & B / Hip-Hop Songs charts , respectively .

The first version of " Your Love " appeared on Minaj 's unofficial mixtape Barbie World ( 2010 ) , with different lyrics included in the pre-chorus along with a faster pace . Another version was later stolen and leaked online . The song underwent minor lyrical adjustments and mixing before being sent to mainstream radio , as the first official single from Minaj 's debut album Pink Friday ( 2010 ) . In an interview with Hot 93.7 radio , Minaj spoke about the leak of the song , saying " That was a leak and I was so upset they put it out ' cause I recorded that song like two years ago . Next thing you know , people started falling in love with it . " Whilst on set on the music video for " Your Love " , Minaj further explain about the song 's theft and leak , saying , " I was not planning on putting the song out at all . But then I heard it one day , somebody told me it was online . And I was like , ' No way , no way in the world that song is out . ' I went and listened to it and was really upset . It wasn 't mixed , it wasn 't finished , it wasn 't anything — I wasn 't gonna use it at all . But then radio started playing it . "

" Your Love " is a mid-tempo song with the heavy use of Auto-Tune in the chorus . It samples the instrumentals and background vocals of Annie Lennox 's cover version of " No More I Love You 's " by the Lover Speaks , with the addition of additional bass , drum-loops and hip-hop backbeats . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , " Your Love " is set in common time with a metronome of 94 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of E major with Minaj 's vocal range spanning from the low-note of B3 to the high-note of C ♯ 5 . Sara D. Anderson of AOL Radio Blog described the song as a " rap / singing mash-up . " Coined as a " new brand of hood majesty , " the song is accompanied by a simple beat , which includes finger snaps and " xylophone clings . " Lean Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly commented : " Rap 's spitfire explores her softer side , sampling Annie Lennox on her honey-tongued ode to a good man . " Greenblatt went on to compare the song to Jay-Z 's " kindred " " Young Forever . " Minaj makes several references in her lines to well known people , which includes Bruce Willis in Die Hard , as well as Adam and Eve . Minaj makes several connections to Superman including in the pre-chorus , " ' S ' on my chest , let me get my cape on . " The official remix featuring Cash Money labelmate Jay Sean was leaked via-internet on August 2 , 2010 , and later made available for purchase in Australia via iTunes . American rapper Flo Rida released an unofficial remix to the song , in which he adds a verse . Reggae recording artist Sean Paul also did a remix to the song where he ad-libs his verse throughout the original and later adds his own verse . Other remixes to the song include those done by American rapper Rick Ross and American R & B singer Chris Brown .

Rap-Up stated that Minaj " slows down her rapid-fire verses on the sticky and sweet " Your Love " ... with a sprinkling of Auto-Tune to top it off . Young Money ’ s First Lady even exercises her vocal chops . We demand another helping . " Robbie Daw of Idolator gave the song a positive review , while complimented Minaj 's dual rapping and singing , as well as the use of the sample . Backy Bain also of Idolator additionally gave the song a positive review stating " We were a bit worried that Harujuku Barbie would forever be the garnish on other people ’ s tracks instead of the main dish , but this sweet song proves otherwise . " Mariel Concepcion of Billboard commented on Minaj toning it down stating , " the Young Money rap princess puts the sleazy talk aside and finds herself smitten with a young man ... Minaj proves that even the wildest ones can be tamed . " While reviewing the music video , Brad Wete also of Entertainment Weekly reviewed the song positively , stating that Minaj was " [ .. ] slicing the competition to pieces with her second try . " David Jeffries of AllMusic deemed the song an album highlight , additionally adding that the song , " waltzes out of the speakers . In 2014 , Pitchfork named it the best Nicki Minaj single . "

" Your Love " debuted on the US Billboard Hot 100 at 51 , becoming Minaj 's first song to chart on the Hot 100 as a solo artist . It eventually peaked at No. 14 , becoming her first Top 20 in the country . It debuted at No. 23 on the US Hot R & B / Hip-Hop Songs chart , and peaked at number four . Your Love " peaked at No. 1 on the US Rap Songs chart for eight consecutive weeks . Minaj became the first female rapper to top the chart since Lil ' Kim 's " Magic Stick " , featuring 50 Cent . Minaj also became the first artist to lead the chart with a song without any features since Missy Elliott in 2003 with " Work It " . The song was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) denoting sales of over one million copies . On the Canadian Hot 100 , the song peaked at 43 . " Your Love " also charted in the United Kingdom , at a peak of 71 on the UK Singles Chart and at a peak of 22 on the UK R & B Chart . The song peaked at number 32 on the Australian Urban Singles chart .

A music video for the song was directed by Lil X on the weekend of July 4 , 2010 in Los Angeles . Minaj took to her Twitter , asking fans who they would like to see portray her love interest in the video . Minaj was interviewed on the set of " Your Love " by MTV News while wearing a pink and purple kimono as a geisha for the video . In the interview , Minaj said , " We wanted to have geisha themes , samurai themes , stuff like that . I wanted to tell a love story . It 's just kinda liking a guy , where he 's not really for you to like — the forbidden fruit — and me and this other girl happen to like him and we go to war . " The video premiered July 21 , 2010 on MTV.com. Actor Michael Jai White portrays Minaj 's love interest in the video .

The video is set to tell the story of a samurai-in-training , who falls in love with her master while a jealous peer fights for his affection . The video begins with Minaj delivering her lines over a red flowing fabric backdrop wearing a brown coat and a geisha costume with a blue flowing fabric backdrop , while White teaches a martial arts class . As Minaj and the instructor ( White ) begin to fall for one another , a student , who also has feelings for the instructor sees this and is jealous . This is intercut with scenes with Minaj donning a blonde wig and black bodysuit and in front of a green flowing backdrop . After seeing Minaj and White embrace each other on a bridge over blue-fabric " water " , Minaj and her peer rival have a confrontation , which results in a duel . According to MTV News , the scenes pay homage to Uma Thurman as The Bride and Lucy Liu as Cottonmouth in Kill Bill . Minaj loses and her rival walks away as Minaj bleeds a red fabric and White walks up and grieves over her body .

Robbie Daw of Idolator appreciated the plot twist of the video , commenting , " We really expected Nicki to waste that other warrior-in-training hater . The fact that she dies — and does so in such a beautiful way here — kind of makes us love her all the more . " Daw also inferred that the fancy attire from the " No More I Love You 's " video inspired Minaj 's in the " Your Love " video . Nicole Sia of MTV Buzzworthy stated that the video resembles Crouching Tiger , Hidden Dragon in its fight scene . Sia also commented on Minaj 's appearance stating " the camera cuts to Ms. Young Money soloing in front of billowing one-million-thread-count satin sheets , just to remind us how damn FINE she is . " Tray Hova of Vibe gave a list of the best and worst parts of the music video , stating the best were Minaj chopped through the blocks of cement , her crazy faces , silk sheets and headgear , and that the worst part was the " melodramatic ending " and " the return of those Freddy Krueger fingers . "

Miles Copeland is a fictional character from the Australian Channel Seven soap opera Home and Away , played by Josh Quong Tart . He debuted on-screen during the episode airing on 30 November 2007 . Ryley Mickle and Jackson Edwards played Miles in flashback sequences , showing him at ages three and eight years old respectively . During the early years of Home and Away , Sally Fletcher ( Kate Ritchie ) often spoke of an imaginary friend she called " Milco " . When Ritchie announced her departure from the soap , producers decided to introduce the real Milco , as regular character Miles Copeland . The development was described by the media as a " legacy storyline . " Quong Tart announced his departure from Home and Away in October 2011 . Miles departed on 23 November 2011 . Miles is characterised as being charming and quick witted . His clothes often consist of board shorts and crumpled shirts , with his long hair , this gives him a trademark " beachy " look . Miles ' style changed in 2010 following Quong Tart 's break from the show . Upon returning to Home and Away , the actor had lost weight , grown a beard and cut his hair short . Producers were impressed with the changes and wrote them into the scripts . Miles is often seen consuming large amounts of food , which stems from his time spent living hungry on the streets . This was a character trait created by Quong Tart . Some viewers have written to Home and Away to complain about Miles ' eating habits .

Miles ' storylines have often centred on his friendships and romantic relationships with other characters . He has become a surrogate father to several teenagers , including Jai Fernandez ( Jordan Rodrigues ) and Melody Jones ( Celeste Dodwell ) . Miles and Kirsty Sutherland ( Christie Hayes ) had a long relationship together , during which they lost an unborn child . Kirsty eventually left town , ending their relationship . After sharing a long friendship , Miles and Leah Patterson-Baker ( Ada Nicodemou ) entered into a romantic relationship in 2011 . Leah becomes pregnant and Miles proposes to her . Miles has earned a generally positive reception , while Quong Tart has been nominated for three Inside Soap Awards .

The character of Miles was introduced to Home and Away in 2007 , as Sally Fletcher 's ( Kate Ritchie ) brother , whom she had always referred to as " Milco " . For twenty years , viewers had been led to assume Milco was just Sally 's imaginary friend . Channel Seven ran an on-air promotion campaign , which promised viewers " a 20-year-old mystery " would be solved . In the 2007 season finale , Miles mysteriously arrives in Summer Bay and writes " Milco " in the sand on the beach . Quong Tart was cast in the role of Miles . He previously starred in the Home and Away spin-off headLand as Will Monk . In 2010 , Miles was briefly written out of the serial , while Quong Tart took a break from filming to rehearse for a play at the Sydney Opera House . In October 2011 , Quong Tart announced his departure from Home and Away . Of his time in the show , Quong Tart told TV Week , " I couldn 't have imagined how much fun I would have and the friends I would make on Home and Away . Playing Miles was a gift . " Rebecca Davies from Digital Spy reported the actor had already filmed his final scenes , while TV Week said the way in which Miles leaves the Bay was being kept secret . Miles departed on 23 November 2011 .

Quong Tart told Channel 5 that he liked the way Miles looks at the world and revealed that he shared similarities with the character 's personality . Miles is often shown consuming large amounts of food on-screen . Miles enjoys his food because of his time spent living hungry on the streets . This was a character choice made by Quong Tart . He thought it was important that viewers see his eating habits , staying true to " representing human beings . " However , Quong Tart stated that it sometimes reached a " point where it might not be very pleasant to watch . " Viewers had written letters to Quong Tart requesting that Miles should stop " pigging out on television . " In 2011 , Miles returns to Home and Away with a new look . Miles had lost weight , cut his hair short and grew a beard . Off-screen Quong Tart had such a busy schedule that he lost weight . When he revealed his new look to producers , they were so impressed they decided to change Miles ' image , because it suited the storyline . Miles secures employment as a teacher at Summer Bay High . One of his students , Ruby Buckton ( Rebecca Breeds ) , develops romantic feelings for him . Breeds said it was a " genuine teenage infatuation " and Ruby was drawn to Miles ' maturity rather than his physical appearance . Quong Tart said Miles was " taken back " when he was faced with accusations of kissing Ruby . He manages to prove they are false .

One of Miles ' first relationships is with Kirsty Sutherland ( Christie Hayes ) , which develops from a friendship . Miles is left upset over his foster child Jai Fernandez ( Jordan Rodrigues ) . His emotional state has an effect on Kirsty and she kisses him . Hayes told TV Week that as Kirsty 's feelings " take over in the moment " , Miles is left surprised because he had been harbouring feelings for her too . Hayes also said Miles did not want to scare Kirsty away and they agree to take their relationship slowly . Hayes later said that Miles and Kirsty 's relationship worked so well because " they talk about things and they 're mature about their relationship . " Kirsty decides that she needs to raise money for her husband Kane Phillips ' ( Sam Atwell ) trial . She secretly begins work as an escort behind Miles ' back . Hayes ' explained Kirsty was " terrified " that Miles would find out and hated lying to him , but " has no choice . " When Miles discovers the truth about Kirsty 's escorting , he feels " totally betrayed " and ends their relationship . However , when Kirsty nearly sleeps with a client , Miles comes to her aid . At this point Leah Patterson-Baker ( Ada Nicodemou ) tries to kiss Miles , as the two previously shared a connection . However , Miles defends Kirsty when he learns Leah had argued with Kirsty over her deceit . The state of their relationship remained troubled , though Hayes correctly predicted the couple would reunite .

In 2009 Hayes quit the serial and her exit storyline played out the same year . It was initially left unclear what impact her departure would have on Miles ' . Their relationship deteriorates after Kirsty miscarries their unborn baby . Kirsty is left distraught and feels she has to move with her life without Miles . However , Kirsty does not tell Miles she is leaving and leaves him a goodbye letter . Speaking of the scenes , Hayes said " I don 't agree with what she did or how she did it but Kirsty in her warped , grieving mind thinks it 's best for everybody . " She felt that Kirsty 's actions were " horrible and selfish . " She also described her as " emotionally detached " and Miles would have tried to talk her out of leaving if he had been made aware of her departure . Viewers were not shown the full content of the goodbye letter . Hayes said it was good because she wrote a private goodbye letter to Quong Tart , and noted the personal element was best left between the two . After Miles chances of a family are again ruined , Miles loses control . He starts drinking and on one occasion he tries to kiss Leah . Producers decided to introduce a character named Rabbit ( Mitzi Ruhlmann ) , who " brings a little fun back into Miles ' life . " Though Rabbit later turns out to be his dead daughter and a figment of Miles ' imagination .

In 2008 , Miles and Leah develop feelings for one another . Nicodemou who plays Leah said her character becomes " freaked out " when she realises they share a connection . At this point in the series Leah was still grieving for her late husband Dan Baker ( Tim Campbell ) . Leah is so ashamed of herself she " cuts Miles off " . Nicodemou added that the characters " bonded straight away " because Miles understands Leah and has supported her when she needed help . However , Miles " cannot deny the attraction " which sends Leah further into denial . She decides she is not ready to move on , Nicodemou said this was to respect Dan 's memory . Though , she concluded that Leah sees Miles as an " old sock you just feel comfortable with . " In January 2011 , Quong Tart revealed Miles was set to have a new love interest . The actor said he found his character 's new romance intriguing and explained Miles is " more surprised than anyone that it happens . " A few months later , the Daily Star reported Miles would confess his love to Leah , who is shocked by the declaration . Miles is left wondering whether he has ruined their friendship by revealing his feelings to her . An insider told the paper , " Miles and Leah have both been unlucky in love so if they could find happiness together it would be pretty special . Leah is shocked but once the confession starts to sink in she wonders whether they could work as a couple . She begins to consider making a go of it with him . " Nicodemou explained that Leah and Miles have tried to get together in the past , but the timing has never been right for them . She later told RTÉ TEN that she thinks Miles and Leah are well suited and hoped they find happiness with each other . Miles and Leah discuss their situation and Leah decides to take the first step and kisses Miles to see if they have any chemistry . Nicodemou said once Leah realises she and Miles have chemistry , she decides to go for it and they begin dating .

In August 2011 , Leah discovers she is pregnant . She realises that she does not want a baby as she previously had a miscarriage , which made her decide not to have children again . Of the impact the storyline would have on Miles and Leah , Nicodemou said " It 's a really interesting storyline for them . It makes everything serious because things have been quite light , so it 's good to see that side of them . There are some rocky times ahead for them because there are differences of opinion . " A week later it was announced Miles would propose to Leah in a bid to " solidify " their relationship . Miles confides in Alf Stewart ( Ray Meagher ) about his plans and Quong Tart said Alf is very excited and encourages Miles . Of Miles ' decision to propose to Leah , Quong Tart said " They 've dated for a while and they know each other so well , and I think it 's just one of those things that makes sense . "

Miles starts a relationship with Shandi Palmer ( Samantha Tolj ) , TV Week described them as a " kooky " pairing . However their relationship was short-lived , lasting only a number of weeks . Quong Tart said " It came and went like every romance in his life . " Miles " couldn 't believe his luck " with Shandi because of her attractive appearance . They were compatible because she was " beachy and hippy " and like Miles enjoyed to talk about the meaning of life . Miles drunkenly sleeps with Roo Stewart ( Georgie Parker ) , the next morning she reacts badly . A Home and Away spokesperson said Miles was one of the " nicest blokes in the Bay " and felt like a humiliated " idiot " . In various storylines Miles has taken in teenagers without homes . Jai Fernandez ( Jordan Rodrigues ) is the first to be taken into Miles ' care . Miles knew Jai from the Boxing Day Tsunami in which they both lost their families . Rodrigues said that Jai is " angry at the world " because Miles " ditched " him in Phuket . Miles tries to help Jai because he realises that he is having a tough time at the refuge . Off-screen Quong Tart mentored Rodrigues to improve his acting skill . He later takes in Melody Jones ( Celeste Dodwell ) , though she makes life hard for Miles by causing chaos at the school formal and running away to Melbourne . In the latter storyline Miles and Charlie Buckton ( Esther Anderson ) travel to Melbourne to search for Melody . The episodes marked the first time the cast had filmed in Melbourne . Location shoots took place at Queen Victoria Market , Docklands Studios Melbourne and St Kilda . Anderson told Inside Soap that " It 's a nice self-contained little storyline " and described it as a treat for British and Irish viewers . She added that Melody ends up on the streets and Charlie and Miles fail to locate her straightaway . The situation leaves them feeling " vulnerable " and they kiss . Anderson opined the kiss was " a rebound thing " and they feel " awkward the following morning . "

Miles and his twin Sally initially lived together with their alcoholic father Aaron ( Timothy Walter ) and mother Diana . Aaron used to beat Diana , so she left him and took Sally with her . When Miles was eight years old , Aaron read that Diana and her new husband Derek Wilson had been killed in a boating accident . Aaron and Miles went to find Sally , but after seeing Sally was better off with the Fletcher family , they left . In the serial Sally constantly insisted her imaginary friend Milco was real , it was actually Miles she was thinking about , but no one believed Sally and her bullying foster brother Brian " Dodge " Forbes ( Kelly Dingwall ) eventually stopped her believing in him . Aaron died of alcohol-related illness , so Miles became an English teacher . He married a woman called Louise and they had a daughter called Amber . They both died in the Boxing Day Tsunami whilst on holiday in Phuket . He then went on a downward spiral and became a homeless drifter .

Miles turns up in Summer Bay and decides to stick around after he thinks it is a familiar setting . He has nowhere to live and is starving . Irene Roberts ( Lynne McGranger ) becomes annoyed with him for stealing food out of the bins , but Roman Harris ( Conrad Coleby ) takes pity on him and feeds him . He sees Sally on the beach and writes Milco in the sand . They later become friends and she feels like she has a close connection . He reveals his family 's death to be the reason why he became a drifter . He eventually reveals the truth to Sally , that he is Milco and her twin brother . After it sinks in she is delighted with this and they become close . Miles stays with her and one night forgets to lock the door . Johnny Cooper ( Callan Mulvey ) enters the house and stabs Sally , however she survives but he blames himself . He decides to get his life back on track and becomes an English teacher at the school . Aden Jefferies ( Todd Lasance ) initially gives him a hard time , but he is well liked after he and Ric Dalby ( Mark Furze ) arrange a leaving party for Sally , who has decided to move away . At the party Steven Matheson ( Adam Willits ) and Carly Morris ( Sharyn Hodgson ) are startled to meet the person they heard so much about whilst growing up .

Miles becomes the new owner of the caravan park . He becomes good friends with Leah and falls in love with her . She feels it is to soon after husband Dan 's death and does not feel the same , leaving him upset . Morag Bellingham ( Cornelia Frances ) then helps him track down Jai , a boy from Phuket whom he told he would help , but never did . He comes to live with Miles , their relationship is strained by Jai 's reluctance to trust him , eventually they become close . Religious Christine Jones ( Elizabeth Alexander ) later starts a campaign to have Miles removed from his job when she does not agree with his choice of book used for teaching . Morag later helps rid of Christine and saves his career . He lets Melody Jones stay with him , but she rebells and causes trouble for him with her new-found bad attitude . He then has a brief relationship with Jazz Curtis ( Rachel Gordon ) . He gives Kirsty a place to stay . They start a relationship and he falls in love with her , however he finds out she has been working as an escort to raise money for husband Kane Phillips ' ( Sam Atwell ) trial and throws her out . Melody becomes more wild and runaway from home , he tracks her down with the help of Charlie , who he shares a kiss with . He lets Melody leave to live in New Zealand with her mother . Kirsty returns with Kane who attacks him and he has to admit they were never together . After Trey Palmer ( Luke Bracey ) makes advances on Kirsty and Miles supports her , they reconcile . Trey tries to attack Kirsty , but Miles pushes him over , Miles is then under investigation for assault , later Trey drops the charges . Whilst out fishing Miles falls overboard and is nearly eaten by a shark , he discovers Lou De Bono 's ( David Roberts ) body in the process . He promises to look after Nicole after Roman is sent to prison . Miles then decides he wants to try for a baby with Kirsty , she agrees but he is angry when he sees her taking the pill . She says he thought he would leave her , he reassures her this is not the case . Kirsty starts university studying teaching . He resents her for spending time at university with her new friends , he suspects she is having affair . Upon confrontation she admits she is actually pregnant . She is unhappy about it , but agrees to keep the baby . He breaks his promise of keeping the pregnancy a secret , Kirsty starts to feel more at ease about the baby . Kirsty has a series of fits causing her to miscarry . Their relationship becomes strained and Kirsty 's mother Shelley ( Paula Forrest ) convinces her to run away to the city with her . Miles is devastated she has left and becomes withdrawn from everyone .

After VJ Patterson ( Felix Dean ) is bullied by Riley Radcliffe ( Tani Edgecombe ) he goes to see his father Ian ( Ben Simpson ) but he laughs it off . Miles is attacked and beaten and presumes it was Ian . He later finds out it was in fact Riley and his friends . He tries to drag Riley to the police station but he breaks his wrist . Miles is arrested for assault . Ian blackmails him saying he will drop the charges for money , the police find out Ian was responsible for the injuries . However the newspapers published an article on Miles branding him a thug . Miles destroys a classroom and Gina Austin ( Sonia Todd ) forces him to take leave . He starts drinking heavily again , makes a pass at Leah and sleeps on the beach . Miles begins having visions of a girl called Rabbit , who tells him about future events . She convinces him to do good deeds . Miles becomes good friends with Elijah Johnson ( Jay Laga 'aia ) and he goes to Africa with him . On his return he is assaulted by Heath Braxton ( Daniel Ewing ) . He then gets drunk and kisses Roo Stewart ( Georgie Parker ) and wakes up next to her in the morning . He later confesses his love to Leah and they start a relationship . Elijah is initially annoyed , but they repair their friendship . Leah learns she is pregnant , which delights Miles . Leah is initially hesitant about going ahead with the pregnancy , but she and Miles talk and she decides to keep the baby . Miles proposes to Leah , but she turns him down , saying they are not ready . She later asks him to move in with her and VJ . Leah suffers a miscarriage , which devastates Miles . The couple struggle with their grief and Miles moves out . He and Leah later break up . Miles learns Elijah is still in love with Leah . Miles tells Marilyn that Sally has got him a teaching job in Thailand and he leaves the Summer Bay .

For his portrayal of Miles , Quong Tart was nominated for " Best Newcomer " at the 2008 Inside Soap Awards . The following year he received a nomination for " Best Actor " . At the 2011 Inside Soap Awards he was nominated for " Best Daytime Star " . The episode where Miles conquers his fear of water to save Jai Fernandez who feigns drowning earned Writer Sean Nash an Australian Writer 's Guild award nomination for " Best Television Serial " in 2009 . The episode featuring Miles finally letting go of his visions of Rabbit won the Australian Writers ' Guild Award in the same category the following year and was presented to the episode 's writer , Sam Meikle . The week ahead of the serial 's airing , Mark Patrick of the Sun-Herald said Milko , " an imaginary friend of one of the brats " was his favorite character . Michael Idato writing for The Sydney Morning Herald said Milco being not being imaginary seemed " ludicrous " . He said that Milco being revealed to be Miles , was Home and Away delivering a " plot twist equal to the genre 's best . " He opined that Miles ' " timely " arrival softened the blow of Sally 's departure . They said it was " a tender baton change that evokes memories of the iconic ' 80s soap Sons And Daughters " Idato later said Miles and Sally 's story was an example of " strong legacy storylines " Home and Away creates .

Ruth Deller of entertainment website Lowculture placed Miles at number nine on her best characters of February 2009 list . In July 2010 , she placed Miles second on her list of best soap characters . She spoke about how " ridiculous storylines " turn out to be great onscreen and referred to Miles 's visions of Rabbit , which she went on to praise . She said " Miles 's grief , his visions of Rabbit and his torment at everyone telling him she wasn 't real were devastating to watch , and this was a really interesting avenue to take one of the soap 's best-loved characters down that could have spectacularly backfired , but instead , had people bawling their eyes out . " Holy Soap have said that Miles 's most memorable moment is " When he found student Trey trying to kiss Kirsty , Miles pushed him and found his job as a teacher in jeopardy " . The website also named Miles as one their Summer Bay hunks . In 2010 , the Daily Record said that " poor old Miles " had a so many problems that " he was probably happier when everybody thought he was just sister Sally 's friend " . After Miles became involved with Shandi , they stated that true love " never ran smoothly in Summer Bay " and that with Shandi ; Miles got " a lot more than he first bargained for " . Australian television website Throng , said Miles looked completely different after Quong Tart lost weight . They said he looks " a lot older , thinner , has a new hair style and is sporting a dark beard ! "

Jaci Stephen of the Daily Mail criticised Home and Away for the amount of car accidents it features . When Miles nearly crashed his car , she asked if anyone in Summer Bay is capable of " sitting atop four wheels " without nearly getting killed . Stephen was not a fan of Miles ' long hair . When he returned in 2011 , she said " we can only hope that he ’ s seen a hairdresser since his departure . " When he left the series , Sarah Ellis of Inside Soap said that Home and Away " won 't be the same without Miles ' shaggy barnet " . Laura Morgan of All About Soap said that she and her colleagues were " in mourning " over Miles ' exit . She added that they " sorely missed " him .

The Bristol Type 175 Britannia was a British medium-to-long-range airliner built by the Bristol Aeroplane Company in 1952 to fly across the British Empire . During development two prototypes were lost and the turboprop engines proved susceptible to inlet icing which delayed entry into service while solutions were sought . By the time development was completed , " pure " jet airliners from France , United Kingdom and the United States were about to enter service , and consequently , only 85 Britannias were built before production ended in 1960 . Nevertheless , the Britannia is considered one of the landmarks in turboprop-powered airliner design and was popular with passengers . It became known by the title of " The Whispering Giant " for its quiet exterior noise and smooth flying , although the passenger interior remained less tranquil . Canadair purchased a licence to build the Britannia in Canada , adding another 72 variants . These were the stretched Canadair CL-44 / Canadair CC-106 Yukon , and the greatly modified Canadair CP-107 Argus patrol aircraft .

In 1942 , during the Second World War , Allied aircraft construction saw the UK of necessity concentrating on heavy bombers , leaving the production of transport aircraft to the USA . This would have left the UK with little experience in transport construction at the end of the war , so in 1943 , a committee under Lord Brabazon of Tara investigated the future of the British civilian airliner market . The Brabazon Committee called for several different aircraft to be developed to specifications composed by the committee for roles felt to fulfil Britain 's civilian aviation needs . Bristol won the Type I and Type III contracts , delivering their Type I design , the Bristol Brabazon in 1949 . The requirement for the 1946 British Overseas Airways Corporation ( BOAC ) Medium Range Empire ( MRE ) Requirements coincided with the Type III , Specification C.2 / 47 , issued in April 1947 by the Minister of Supply . The specifications called for an airliner capable of carrying 48 passengers and powered with Bristol Centaurus radial engines or Napier Nomad turbo-compound diesel engine . Turboprop options were also considered , but they were so new that Bristol could not guarantee the performance specifications .

Although in-company Proposals " X " for conversions of Lockheed Constellations to Centaurus 662 powerplants or " Y " for licence production of the Constellation were considered in late 1946 , BOAC decided that an entirely new design was preferred . After wrangling between the Ministry of Supply and BOAC over costs , the go-ahead for the project assigned the company designation Model 175 was given in July 1948 . Three prototypes were ordered as Mk 1 ( Centaurus 662 ) , with the second and third prototypes designated the Mk 2 ( to be convertible to Bristol Proteus turboprops , then under development ) . In October 1947 , with work already underway , Bristol had settled on a Centaurus-powered design , with an all-up weight of 103,000 lb ( 47,000 kg ) and a payload of 13,300 lb ( 6,000 kg ) . The anticipated Karachi-Cairo run necessitated a 48-seat limit with a requirement for sufficient fuel for the lengthy stage . On 5 July 1949 , the Ministry of Supply ordered five prototypes to this specification with the understanding that BOAC would contract for an additional 25 production examples . BOAC purchased options for 25 aircraft on 28 July , to be powered initially with the Bristol Centaurus engine but to be re-fitted with the Bristol Proteus when available . In November 1948 , the Type 175 design was revised again to accommodate 74 passengers and a longer span wing in a contemplated long-range version aimed at long-haul Empire and transatlantic routes rather than the medium-haul Empire routes originally planned . On reflection , BOAC decided that only a Proteus-engined aircraft was worth working on , necessitating a further redesign with Bristol eliminating the Centaurus option . Senior figures within BOAC such as the Deputy Chairman Whitney Straight , however , considered the Proteus engine to be " an obsolete contraption " . Despite BOAC 's desire to have a turboprop engine , the Type 175 project was contingent on the Proteus passing a 150-hour Type Test .

The name , " Britannia " was chosen in April 1950 with Britannia 101 the designation for first two prototypes powered by the early series Proteus 625 , the follow-up from the 600 series engine that had successfully completed its type trials . The first prototype , registered G-ALBO , with Bristol Chief Test Pilot A.J. " Bill " Pegg at the controls , flew for the first time on 16 August 1952 at Filton Aerodrome . The maiden flight was eventful as the over-sensitive flying controls led to a wild pitching before Pegg restored control . During the landing approach , smoke filled the cockpit and the main undercarriage bogie was stuck in its cycle , only fully deploying seconds before landing . The " snags " proved to be minor and by September , the prototype was cleared to perform at the 1952 SBAC Display at Farnborough where spectators commented on the " quietness " of the giant airliner . In November 1952 , Popular Science reported that by 1954 BOAC would have 25 of these aircraft on routes such as London-to-Tokyo over the Arctic and North Pole . However , in 1953 and 1954 , three de Havilland Comets crashed without explanation , and the Air Ministry demanded the Britannia undergo lengthy tests . Further delays were attributed to teething problems with the engine resulting in the loss in December 1953 of the second prototype , G-ALRX , caused by a failed reduction gear that led to an engine fire and the aircraft landing on the mudflats of the Severn Estuary . Resolving easily avoidable inlet icing issues - by selecting a slightly different cruising height than that specified - which were exaggerated by BOAC destroying the Britannia 's sales prospects and delaying the Britannia 's introduction by two years , also took time . The first prototype G-ALBO was subsequently modified to more closely approximate a production standard but was retained by the company to undergo engine testing and development .

Bristol revised the design into a larger transatlantic airliner for BOAC , resulting in the Series 200 and 300 , with the Britannia 300LR ( Long-Range ) seen as " eminently suitable " for BOAC 's services between London and Sydney . Qantas had been considering purchasing a fleet of Britannia aircraft , but the extended development time had worn away the advantage the aircraft would hold until newer aircraft such as the Douglas DC-8 and de Havilland Comet 4 came onto the market . Route-proving trials continued through 1955 , although orders were on the books from El Al and Canadian Pacific Air Lines as well as BOAC 's standing order . The purchase price paid by BOAC for each Britannia 100-series aircraft agreed on in 1955 was £ 768,000 . During the first eight months of operational trials , a total of 16 in-flight engine failures and 49 unscheduled engine changes punctuated the ongoing engine dilemma and delayed the in-service date until February 1957 , roughly two years late . The Britannia received a fair amount of attention in both the popular press and the British House of Commons , especially when it was revealed that BOAC had contemplated fitting Rolls-Royce Tynes to their fleet of Douglas DC-7s as an interim measure until the Britannia was cleared for service .

In 1954 , a licence was issued to Canadair to build the derivative Canadair CL-28 / CP-107 Argus , and the Canadair CL-44 / Canadair CC-106 Yukon . Based on the Britannia , the design of the Argus maritime patrol and anti-submarine warfare aircraft was optimised for endurance on long-range patrol , not speed , and used four Wright R-3350-32W Turbo-Compound engines that used less fuel at low altitude . Unlike its Britannia forebear , the Argus was a hybrid using the Britannia wings , tail surfaces and landing gear matched to a " purpose-built " , unpressurised fuselage . Another significant departure was being " Americanized " , substituting North American materials and standard parts for the British ones . The interior was well equipped with the tools to conduct anti-submarine warfare : navigation , communication and tactical electronic equipment along with weapon loads that included bombs , torpedoes , mines and depth charges . A total of 33 Argus aircraft were built in two series ( Mk 1 and Mk 2 ) , serving the Royal Canadian Air Force ( RCAF ) and Canadian Forces from 1957 to 1982 . Canadair also built 37 turboprop Rolls Royce Tyne-powered CL-44 passenger / cargo variants for the civil market , most of which were used as freighters . Four were built as CL-44Js with lengthened fuselages for service with the Icelandic " budget " airline Loftleiðir . Four CL-44D4s were also built with swing-tails to allow straight-in cargo loading and served with a variety of carriers , most notably Flying Tiger Line . The similar CC-106 Yukon was used by the RCAF in a solely passenger configuration . A final unique " one-off " development was the Conroy Skymonster , nicknamed Guppy , based on a Canadair CL-44D4 N447T . The most prominent modification was an enlarged fuselage , like the Mini Guppy which was produced by Jack Conroy 's previous company , Aero Spacelines . After a long operational career as a freighter , the Guppy was stored at Bournemouth Airport in 2003 and has recently been sold .

Following a long period of uneventful development flying trials and the fitting of a modified Proteus 765 series engine that greatly reduced breakdowns , a full Certificate of Airworthiness was awarded at the end of 1955 . The first two Model 102s were delivered to BOAC on 30 December 1955 for crew training . The Model 102 began scheduled service on 1 February 1957 with a BOAC flight from London to Johannesburg , flights to Sydney following in March and to Tokyo in July . By August 1957 , the first 15 Model 102 aircraft had been delivered to BOAC . The last 10 aircraft of the order were built as Series 300 aircraft for transatlantic flights . In April 1959 , a Model 102 Britannia was leased by BOAC to Ghana Airways for flights between Accra and London , and several more Britannias were purchased by the airline in the early 1960s . The Model 102 was eventually made available to other BOAC associates , including Cathay Pacific , Central Africa , East African , Nigeria and Malayan airlines . The next production series was based on the long-range , mixed passenger / freight Model 200 series that was intended for civil airline use but ultimately Bristol offered the series to the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) instead . The production series of three Model 252 and 20 Model 253 aircraft were purchased by RAF Transport Command in 1959 , assigned the designation Britannia C.2 ( first Model 252 series ) and C.1 ( Model 253 series ) . Those in RAF service were allocated the names of stars , such as " Arcturus " , " Sirius " and " Vega " . On retirement from the RAF in 1975 , many Model 200 series were subsequently used by independent civil operators for cargo operations , harkening back to their original intended role .

Although the Bristol Model 302 was built first as part of the original BOAC order , BOAC released this series to other airlines ; Aeronaves de Mexico took two Model 302s which entered service in December 1957 . The 18 Bristol Britannia 312s for BOAC were delivered from September 1957 with its service introduction on the first-ever non-stop flight from London to Canada on 19 December 1957 . In late December 1957 BOAC began regular Britannia flights from London to New York . Other airlines , such as Israel 's El Al , used the Britannia on transatlantic routes . In 1959 BOAC started flying the Britannia across the Pacific to Tokyo and Hong Kong , thus extending their network round the world . The westbound routing in 1959 for these intercontinental BOAC Britannia flights between the U.K. and Asia was London-New York-San Francisco-Honolulu-Wake Island-Tokyo-Hong Kong . On 1 April 1958 Canadian Pacific Air Lines took delivery of the first of six Model 314 Britannias , with an additional two Model 324s ( built to a 320 standard ) arriving later and sold to Cathay Pacific in 1961 . BOAC ordered seven Model 302s but never took delivery , instead they were taken on by airlines including Aeronaves de México and Ghana Airways . The main long-range series were the 310s , of which BOAC took 18 and , after deliveries began in September 1957 , put them into service between London and New York ; in March 1964 BOAC owned 50 aircraft , 10 being Britannia 312s . BOAC 's last scheduled Britannia flight was April 1965 .

The 310 series ( the Model 318 ) also saw transatlantic service with Cubana de Aviación starting in 1958 , in spite of the Cuban Revolution the airline had a special accord with British aircraft manufacturers to maintain this model of aircraft . In 1975 Cuban Britannias were used to transport hundreds of soldiers of the Cuban Revolutionary Armed Forces to Angola in Operation Carlota , a proxy war . Cubana de Aviación continued using various Britannias until March 1990 . Most aircraft were built by Bristol at Filton but 30 were built at Belfast by Short Brothers and Harland . Due to the extended development instead of a projected production of 180 Britannias , only 80 were sold . The negative experience with the development of the Britannia caused BOAC to be more cautious towards other British-made aircraft such as the Vickers VC-10 . Throughout the Britannia 's lifespan , the engine icing condition remained a " continual potential hazard " that flight crews ultimately learned to manage with a " high-lo " flight regime that minimized the danger , although the problems of the Britannia can mainly be linked to that of a manufacturer undertaking an innovative airframe design matched to an unproven engine , a design syndrome that remained particularly daunting . Squadron Leader David Berry who had 5,000 hours on the type characterised his experiences as flying " Beauty and the Beast . " A more fitting epitaph was recently proffered by the editors of Aeroplane as the " 100 Great British Aircraft " ( 2008 ) were analysed with the Bristol Britannia counted among the " greats " .

Originally ordered by the Ministry of Supply for intended lease to charter operators , but delivered to the Royal Air Force , as the Britannia C2 . Fitted with a heavy-duty floor in forward area of fuselage and cargo door , three built . Passenger / freight variant for the Royal Air Force , designated Britannia C1 . Fitted with full length heavy-duty floor and provision for rearwards-facing seats as preferred by the RAF . Capacity for 115 troops or equivalent in cargo , 20 built . Aircraft later sold on the civil market as freighters designated Series 253F .

Passenger only " stretched " version of the 200 series , incorporating 123 inches ( 3.1 m ) longer fuselage , capable of carrying up to 139 ( originally 99 ) passengers , medium-fuel capacity . One Filton-built company prototype , used the same wing and fuel capacity of the Model 100 ; first flew : 31 July 1956 . Belfast-built production , 10 ordered by BOAC but cancelled in favour of 305 ; seven were begun to this standard with two delivered to Aeronaves de Mexico . Five Belfast-built 302s modified for longer-range but with limited takeoff weight due to thinner fuselage skin and lighter landing gear . Originally ordered by Capital Airlines which were cancelled and then for Northeast Airlines which also cancelled . All modified to other variants . One former Series 305 leased to El Al pending delivery of last Series 315 . Later converted to Series 307 . Two of the ex-BOAC Northeast 305 order ( one formerly the El AL Series 307 ) to Air Charter Limited September 1958 and March 1959 , with a new designation : Model 307 . Later to British United Airways .

As 305 series , but with strengthened fuselage skin and undercarriage . Long-range fuel capacity and was originally known as 300LR . Production aircraft for Hunting-Clan Air Transport in 124 passenger trooping configuration , two built . Production aircraft for Cubana de Aviación , four built . Delivery taking place on 15 December 1958 , later one leased to Cunard Eagle in 1960 – 1961 and this same airliner leased to CSA in 1962 . Variant for North American market , order for Trans World Airlines not concluded , two built were completed as Series 324s . Two Series 320s built for Canadian Pacific Air Lines , later purchased by Cunard Eagle Airways in 1961 .

Fourteen Britannias were lost with a total of 365 fatalities between 1954 and 1980 . The worst accident was the 1967 Nicosia Britannia disaster with a loss of life totalling 126 . On 4 February 1954 , the second Britannia prototype crashed at Severn Beach , Gloucestershire . During the test flight , beginning with a loss of oil pressure , the No. 3 engine was shut down and restarted with a fire breaking out that could not be contained , consequently , No. 4 was shut down as a precaution . On approach to Filton Airport , there was concern that the uncontrolled fire would lead to a failure of the main spar , the pilot , William " Bill " Pegg , electing to make an emergency landing on the mudflats of the Severn Estuary . There were no fatalities . On 6 November 1957 , the 300 series prototype crashed during a test flight , killing the 15 occupants . On 24 December 1958 , a BOAC Britannia 312 on a test flight crashed at Winkton , killing nine of the passengers and crew on board . On 12 October 1967 , " Sirius " a Royal Air Force C1 was damaged beyond repair after over-running the runway at RAF Khormaksar , Aden .

On 22 July 1962 , a Canadian Pacific Air Lines Flight 301 a Britannia 314 was destroyed during an attempted " go-around " following a three-engined approach at Honolulu Airport , Hawaii . On 29 February 1964 , British Eagle International Airlines Flight 802 crashed into the Glungezer mountain near Innsbruck killing all 83 people aboard . On 1 September 1966 , a Britannia Airways Flight 105 crashed while landing at Ljubljana , Yugoslavia , resulting in a total of 98 fatalities out of 117 passengers and crew . The probable cause was the flight crew having failed to set their altimeter to QFE instead of QNH , creating a 980 feet ( 300 m ) error in indicated altitude . On 20 April 1967 , a Globe Air Britannia 313 was on a flight from Bangkok to Basel with intermediate stops at Colombo , Mumbai ( Bombay ) and Cairo . The crew didn 't fly to Cairo , but elected to fly to Nicosia instead , where a missed approach and subsequent low circuit ended in impact near the airport perimeter . On 30 September 1977 , an Interconair Britannia 253G was on a ferry flight , on approach to Shannon Airport severe vibration was experienced at an height of 300 feet . The approach to runway 24 was abandoned and an overshoot was commenced . The aircraft continued to sink and collided with the ground short and to the right of the runway . The Britannia aircraft bounced , the right wing broke off . The aircraft then skidded and caught fire .

On 16 February 1980 , a Britannia 253F of Redcoat Air Cargo crashed at Billerica , Massachusetts , shortly after taking off from Boston . The probable cause of the accident was degraded aerodynamic performance beyond the flight capabilities of the aircraft resulting from an accumulation of ice and snow on the airframe before takeoff and a further accumulation of ice when the aircraft was flown into moderate to severe icing conditions following takeoff . Contributing to the cause of the accident were encounters with wind shear , downdrafts , and turbulence during the climb . Of eight crew and passengers on board , there were seven fatalities with one seriously injured .

Forward fuselage is with the Bristol Aero Collection This is the second prototype aircraft , destroyed in the Severn Estuary crash . Removed from Kemble , and reassembled in early 2007 in Liverpool , England . Under restoration on the former airside apron behind the Crowne Plaza Liverpool John Lennon Airport Hotel , which was the original terminal building of Liverpool Speke Airport . On display at the Royal Air Force Museum , RAF Cosford , England , in Royal Air Force Air Support Command colours as XM497 " Schedar " . Derelict fuselage on the fire training dump at London Luton Airport , Luton , England , in Redcoat Air Cargo colours as G-AOVS " Christian " . Is visible from the Wigmore Valley Park playing fields .

The Tales series , known in Japan as the Tales of series ( 「 テイルズ オブ 」 シリーズ , " Teiruzu Obu " Shirīzu ) , is a franchise of fantasy Japanese role-playing video games published by Bandai Namco Entertainment ( formerly Namco ) , and developed by its subsidiary , Namco Tales Studio until 2011 and presently by Bandai Namco . First begun in 1995 with the development and release of Tales of Phantasia for the Super Famicom , the series currently spans sixteen main titles , multiple spin-off games and supplementary media in the form of manga series , anime series , and audio dramas . While entries in the series generally stand independent of each other with different characters and stories , they are commonly linked by their gameplay , themes and high fantasy settings . The series is characterized by its art style , which draws from Japanese manga and anime , and its action-based fighting system called the " Linear Motion Battle System " . Multiple people have become linked with the series , including character designers Kōsuke Fujishima and Mutsumi Inomata , producers Hideo Baba and Makoto Yoshizumi , and composer Motoi Sakuraba . The series was created by Yoshiharu Gotanda .

Most of the main Tales games have been localized for North America and Europe , although almost all of the spinoff titles have not been released abroad . While generally seen as a niche series in English speaking regions , Tales is considered a high-profile property in Japan , just behind other series such as Final Fantasy and Dragon Quest . The series has been gaining popularity in the West since the release of Tales of Symphonia , which is still considered one of its most popular titles . As of December 2013 , the series has sold 16 million units worldwide .

Since the first installment was released in 1995 , the Tales series has grown to include the main entries and multiple spin-offs that derive multiple gameplay and narrative elements from the main entries . Except when indicated by naming , the main Tales entries are separate from each other apart from gameplay mechanics and themes . While Tales titles are often ported to new consoles after their original release , these remakes are rarely localized . The 2007 Nintendo DS game Tales of the Tempest was originally seen as a main entry in the series , but in 2007 was classified as a spin-off .

The series debuted on the Super Famicom with Tales of Phantasia in 1995 , and introduced multiple elements that would become staples of the Tales series . It was released in the west on the Game Boy Advance in 2006 . It was also ported to the PlayStation , PlayStation Portable and iOS . The PlayStation received two original Tales games : Tales of Destiny in 1997 , which was the first title to be released in North America , and Tales of Eternia in 2000 , which was released in North America as Tales of Destiny 2 in 2001 . Five titles have been released on the PlayStation 2 . The true direct sequel to Destiny , Tales of Destiny 2 , was released on the PlayStation 2 in 2001 across Asian territories , and ported to the PlayStation Portable in Japan in 2007 ; both versions have yet to receive a western release . Tales of Symphonia was released in Japan on the PS2 and Nintendo GameCube . The GameCube version was also released North America and Europe . It was the first entry to feature 3D graphics for its characters and environments and the first to be released in Europe . Tales of Rebirth was released in 2004 , ported to the PlayStation Portable in 2008 , and has yet to receive a western localization . Tales of Legendia and Tales of the Abyss were both released in Japan in 2005 , with both being released in North America the following year . Legendia was the first and only Tales game developed by Namco internal development team " Project Melfes " , while Abyss was developed by the same team that developed Symphonia , and used its same graphics engine . Abyss was later ported to the Nintendo 3DS , and released in Japan , North America and Europe .

Tales of Innocence was released in Japan on the Nintendo DS in 2007 . A remake of the game , Innocence R was released on the PlayStation Vita in 2012 . Neither version has been released in the west . The first release on seventh-generation consoles , Tales of Vesperia for Xbox 360 , was released in Japan and North America in 2008 and in Europe in 2009 . A Japan-exclusive PlayStation 3 port was released in 2009 as well . Tales of Hearts was released on the Nintendo DS in 2008 . A remake , Hearts R , was released in 2013 in Japan and 2014 in North America and Europe . The twelfth entry , Tales of Graces , released on the Wii in Japan in 2009 . A PlayStation 3 port , Graces f , was released in 2009 in Japan , and in 2012 in North America and Europe . Tales of Xillia , the series ' 15th anniversary title , was released in Japan for PlayStation 3 in 2011 , and in North America and Europe in 2013 . Xillia 's direct sequel and the fourteenth main title , Tales of Xillia 2 , was released in 2012 in Japan and 2014 in North America and Europe . The fifteenth main title , Tales of Zestiria , was released in January 2015 in Japan and it was released in North America on October 20 , 2015 . The sixteenth main title , Tales of Berseria , is in production for PS3 and PlayStation 4 .

The series has received a small number of sequels , and a large amount of spin-off titles and subseries . With the exception of Tempest , worked on by multiple staff from the main series and treated a precursor to Innocence , they are derivative rather than original works . Three direct sequels have been produced : Destiny 2 , Xillia 2 and Tales of Symphonia : Dawn of the New World . Eternia received an MMORPG spin-off for PC platforms titled Tales of Eternia Online . Multiple crossover games have been made for mobile platforms , including Tales of Link , the Tales of Mobile series , Tales of Card Evolve , Tales of Kizna and Tales of Asteria . Two titles for the PlayStation Portable have been released in Japan : Tales of VS. in 2009 , and Tales of the Heroes : Twin Brave in 2012 . The main spin-off subseries is Tales of the World , which has grown to include ten games beginning with Tales of Phantasia : Narikiri Dungeon , released in Japan on the Game Boy Color in 2000 . Only Tales of the World : Radiant Mythology has been released in the west . A second subseries , Tales of Fandom , includes two games released respectively for the PlayStation and PlayStation 2 in 2002 and 2007 .

The Tales series has expanded into other media , including CD dramas , manga and anime . Multiple Tales games have been adapted into anime OAVs and TV series . The Symphonia OAV was released in three parts between 2007 and 2011 , and released as a single collection in 2013 . Abyss was adapted into a 26-episode TV series between October 2008 and March 2009 . Phantasia and Eternia have also received anime adaptations . The series ' first theatrical film , a prequel to Vesperia called Tales of Vesperia : The First Strike , was released in 2009 in Japan and 2012 in North America . A made-for-television anime based on the opening sections of Zestiria , Dawn of the Shepard , was produced as part of the 20th anniversary celebrations related to the title . It was also released on the game disc . A full series based on Zestiria will air in 2016 . Books and audio dramas have also been made . Phantasia received multiple CD dramas , including four collected into anthologies in January and March 2000. and a stand-alone drama in December 2001 . Symphonia received seven audio dramas following the game 's plot . Two CD dramas for Legendia were respectively released in August and September 2005 . A manga of Phantasia was written and serialized in 2008 and 2009 , while Abyss received three manga adaptations in the years after its release . Symphonia was adapted in both novelizations and a manga serial . Others to receive adaptations of these kinds are Destiny , Graces and Xillia .

The Tales series is classified as a role-playing video game series . Multiple gameplay elements carry over from entry to entry . The main unifying element is the combat system , the Linear Motion Battle System ( LMBS for short ) . Considered as one of the mainstays and building blocks for every main entry in the series , it undergoes multiple incremental changes and alterations from one installment to the next . Introduced in Phantasia , it is a real-time fighting system similar to a brawler , as opposed to the majority of RPGs at the time of Phantasia 's release which primarily used turn-based battle systems . Some features introduced in certain games have proven popular enough to remain in future installments like " Free Running " ( the ability for a character to freely roam the battlefield ) . Elements of turn-based combat are also present , though to a lesser degree : an example of this is Destiny 's " Chain Capacity " feature ( the number of skills a character can perform ) , which appears in later games in the series . The battle system for Legendia was deliberately designed to be similar to a brawler : the stated reason was that the team wished to combine brawler combat with the story and leveling mechanics of a Tales game . Characters generally use Artes , which are special attacks characters can perform in battle . Players can usually only control one character , though a multiplayer option was implemented for Destiny and has reappeared in later Tales games .

The battle system 's name for each installment is augmented with descriptive titles representative of features of that game 's battle system : examples are the " Style Shift " system from Graces ( characters shifting between two types of Artes ) and the " Fusionic-Chain " system from Zestiria ( a human character merging with a magical character for a brief period to deal greater damage ) . Characters are awarded with " Titles " , nicknames which sometimes grant boons to them in battle when assigned to them . In the majority of Tales games , when navigating the overworld or environment and encountering an enemy , combat took place on a separate battle screen . For Zestiria , combat took place in the same space as exploration . Most Tales games have skits , side conversations between different characters that can be both dramatic and comedic in nature . They are commonly portrayed as character portraits or profiles , with text along the bottom of the screen . They were first introduced in Tales of Destiny , though the majority were cut from the English release . In the original English GameCube release of Symphonia , the voice track for the skits was removed , but for its HD re-release , the Japanese voice track , and consequently the skit voice tracks , were included . The first English release to include fully voiced skits was Vesperia : they had been planned for Abyss , but were cut due to space issues . Another recurring feature is the Cooking system , where characters learn and prepare dishes to restore health and forms of experience points .

The prominent narrative theme of the Tales series is the issue of coexistence between different races . A particular example of this is Tales of Rebirth , which extensively explores themes of racism . Scenario writer Hiramatsu Masaki was inspired by the ethnic conflicts seen in Yugoslavia . Another recurring feature is the plot and characters , which are often rooted in and revolve around themes such as justice or faith . The theme for each entry in the series is decided by the series producer based on current world events . The chosen theme helps dictate what the game will be called : once the theme is decided , the team search through various languages to find a suitable representative word . The narratives of each story were described by Gamasutra as " very typical " during a 2008 interview with staff members , although it was not elaborated upon by the interviewer . The interviewees suggested that this point of view was based on the fact that western fans were not generally experienced in Japanese culture , and so would see the stories in each entry as similar . The writers for each game are hired on a per-project basis , with both freelancers and in-house story writers being involved . Two of the recurring writers are Takumi Miyajima ( Symphonia and Abyss ) , and Naoki Yamamoto ( Hearts , Xillia , Zestiria ) . There are very few mainline games that share a setting : Symphonia takes place along the same " time axis " as Phantasia , while Zestiria and Berseria take place on the same world at different time periods .

The settings for the stories are primarily high fantasy worlds , with the producers opting not to use a dark or science fiction-based setting . An exception is Xillia 2 , which mostly took place in a modern setting , and explored darker themes than usual . This direction was confirmed as a one-off experiment for the series . The main characters play a key role in the Tales games , as it is partially through them that the main theme of each entry is depicted . For Abyss , it was decided to take a risk and create an unorthodox protagonist that would be initially unlikable . For Vesperia , the team opted to raise the age limit of the target audience , showing this in the game by making the main protagonist a more mature type . A female main protagonist was included for the first time in Xillia in the form of Milla Maxwell alongside male protagonist Jude Mathis , although at the time it was stated that there were no solid plans to create a game with a single female protagonist . A sole female character , called Velvet , was eventually included in Berseria . The way the characters interact with each other during the narrative forms one of the core aspects of designing each game . Another main priority is for players to see a part of themselves in the characters .

Unique terminology is used when referring to games within the series . In 2007 , Yoshizumi announced two classes of Tales games , " Mothership Titles " and " Escort Titles " . " Mothership " essentially means " Main series " , where as " Escort " essentially means " Spinoff " . One of the recurring differences between the two game types internally is that " Escort " titles don 't supply inspiration for main entries in the series , but draw the most popular elements from them . The games are also frequently given what is called a " Characteristic Genre Name " , which is essentially a short subtitle or phrase that outlines the game 's overall theme . The main reason for this , as stated by Yoshizumi , was that the series was not seen as a role-playing series by the development team , but rather " Character Playing Game " , with the player learning about the game 's characters and watching them grow rather than using them as avatars : the genre names are meant to distinguish them from other role-playing games . The terms , however , are largely removed from the English localized versions . There are also terms that are used in remakes or ports of games : " R " stands for " remake " or " Re-imagination " ( as in Hearts R ) , while " F " in Graces f stood for " future " , in reference to the game 's extra story content .

The Tales series originated when Phantasia began production , based on an unpublished novel titled Tale Phantasia ( テイルファンタジア , Teiru Fantajia ) , written by the game 's scenario writer and lead programmer Yoshiharu Gotanda . During the story development process , several elements of the original novel were dropped or changed . The game was developed by Wolf Team , an independent game development studio founded in 1986 . Due to bad experiences at Telenet Japan , the previous employer of multiple Wolf Team members , the staff sought an independent publisher for the game . After an unsuccessful pitch to Enix , they entered a publishing contract with Bandai Namco ( then Namco ) . Phantasia had a troubled development cycle for the original Super Famicom version , with many creative disagreements between Wolf Team and Namco . The disagreements led to most of the Wolf Team staff leaving after the game in order to start a new company , tri-Ace , which would go on to make the Star Ocean series . Remaining members would continue to develop games in the Tales series . The studio remained independent until 2003 , when it was acquired by Bandai Namco and renamed Namco Tales Studio . The studio 's shares were divided between Bandai Namco , Telenet Japan and series director Eiji Kikuchi . In 2006 , Namco bought Telenet 's shares , then later Kikuchi 's , giving them full control over the studio . In mid 2011 , a financial report indicated that Namco Tales was in serious financial trouble , having a debt of 21 million dollars and posting a loss for the previous financial year . The studio 's absorption into its parent company was formally announced in November of that year . After the absorption of Namco Tales , former series brand manager Hideo Baba was appointed as series producer . He had previously been the producer of the original version of Hearts . Alongside Baba , the chief series producer is Makoto Yoshizumi , who had produced multiple titles including Destiny and Innocence .

The series is distinguished by its art style , which emulates manga and anime . According to Baba , the character designs are created once the main character 's story , personality , and environment are determined by the rest of the production team . Beyond that , the artist is allowed to use their imagination , though they can be asked to alter things like costume details , and facial expressions . One of the main designers for the series is manga artist Kōsuke Fujishima . He was first brought in to design the characters for Phantasia , and has since designed for multiple entries including Abyss and Xillia . Another designer , Mutsumi Inomata , first designed for the series with Destiny , and has contributed designs for multiple entries including Eternia , Rebirth and Xillia . A third regular artist is Daigo Okumura , who designed characters for Vesperia and Xillia 2 , as well as Dawn of the New World . Other designers to work on the series include Kazuto Nakazawa ( Legendia ) , Kouichi Kimura ( Xillia 2 ) , and Minoru Iwamoto ( Zestiria ) . The art design for each game 's world and characters has ranged between a cel-shaded anime style ( Vesperia ) to a more realistic style ( Xillia 2 ) . Skit character images are also directly inspired by anime art . The art style for each title is determined by the theme and story decided upon by the developers .

Anime cutscenes are included in each game , and are a primary focus for the production team as they help make the first impression on players . The series aims to avoid standard anime tropes and common narrative elements with each installment . The first game to feature such cutscenes was Destiny . The cutscenes were animated by Production I.G , which has provided cutscenes for the series until Xillia . For Xillia , aiming to demonstrate a new artistic direction for the series , production of the anime cutscenes was given to Ufotable . For the Nintendo DS release of Hearts , two identical versions of the game were released as an experiment by the production team , with one featuring traditional anime animation by Production I.G. , and one featuring computer-generated cutscenes by Shirogumi Ltd . The CGI cutscenes proved less popular with fans than the established anime style .

The engines for the games are generally developed in-house : the cited reasons for this included problems with outsourced development . Until Vesperia , the team worked on a by-project basis , creating new development tools and engines for each installment . Due to cost increases , the development process was altered and streamlined as more user-friendly software engines became available . The studio was divided into two teams : Team Destiny worked on 2D Tales titles such as Tales of Destiny , while Team Symphonia developed 3D titles . In-house , major distinctions were made between the two studios except for some core staff Namco Tales produced the majority of the mainline Tales games until its absorption in 2011 . The notable exceptions are Legendia , which was developed by an internal staff group at Bandai Namco , and Innocence , which was developed by Alfa System . Alfa System also developed many of the portable spin-off titles . After the absorption of Namco Tales by Bandai Namco , the teams and staff transferred to the new in-house development studio called Bandai Namco Studios . The size of the teams was reduced and the previous studio 's main divisions were merged . This allowed production to be streamlined , but also meant that the team could only focus on one game at a time , rather than working on two games simultaneously as they had done before .

The regular main composer for the Tales series is Motoi Sakuraba . His first work on the series was for Phantasia , and has since contributed to nearly every main entry since there in the capacity of a freelance composer . Sakuraba has become noted for his signature musical style , which is present in the majority of his Tales scores . He also frequently collaborates with Shinji Tamura . The entries Sakuraba has not worked on are Legendia , which was composed by Go Shiina , an in-house composer , and Innocence , whose composer was Kazuhiro Nakamura . Sakuraba and Shiina had collaborated on the score for Zestiria . Multiple titles in the series use licensed theme songs by multiple Japanese artists : among the artists are Garnat Crow ( Eternia ) , Deen ( Destiny / Hearts ) , Kokia ( Innocence ) and Ayumi Hamasaki ( Xillia / Xillia 2 ) . One recurring aspect of many earlier localizations was the removal of the Japanese theme song , such as with Symphonia , which had its theme song replaced with an orchestral version . The first western release of a Tales title to feature the theme song used in Japan was Vesperia .

Multiple Tales titles , the majority of which are spin-offs , have not been localized for the west or have only been released in North America : two examples of the former case for entries in the main series are Rebirth and Innocence , while an example of the latter is Legendia . Speaking in 2013 , Baba explained that the main priority for localizations was for the main series rather than spin-offs . In addition to this , he stated that their localization team was limited and they needed to " pick and choose " which game to bring to the west . For its western release , Eternia 's name was changed to " Destiny 2 " : this was due to a possible trademark conflict and the wish to exploit the popularity of Destiny . The 2006 PSP port of Eternia retained its original title . With Zestiria , Bandai Namco planned to attempt releasing the game in the west in the same year it was released in Japan . The deciding factor in this resolution was the delayed release of Xillia and its sequel , and the reaction of western fans to this . Fan localizations have also been created , such as for the original versions of Phantasia and Innocence . While the option of the Japanese voice tracks have been heavily requested for western releases by fans , licensing issues have mostly prevented Bandai Namco from implementing it . Localization for mobile titles is also a low priority due to them being co-developed by Japan-based mobile developers .

The series has generally sold well during its lifetime . The series ' strongest sales base has been Japan : in 2007 , sales distribution was 87 % in Japan , 8 % in North America , 3 % in Europe and 2 % in mainland Asia . The best-selling titles of the series at the time were Symphonia ( 953,000 copies for the GameCube , 486,000 for PlayStation 2 ) , Destiny ( 1.1 million copies for PlayStation ) , Xillia ( 1 million copies for PlayStation 3 ) and Destiny 2 ( 977,000 copies for PlayStation 2 ) . The sales data did not include mobile and online games . The success of entries has also been linked with the consoles they are released on : Vesperia 's release on the Xbox 360 caused the console to sell out for the first time in Japan , while Namco decided to release Zestiria on the PlayStation 3 due to the low sales prospects for next-gen consoles in their target audience . As of December 2013 , the series has shipped 16 million units worldwide across 100 different countries . While keeping a lower profile in English-speaking regions , in Japan , it is regarded as one of the biggest role-playing video game series . 1UP.com 's Jeremy Parish , speaking in 2001 , referred to it as the third biggest RPG series in Japan behind Final Fantasy and Dragon Quest . Gamasutra 's Brandon Sheffield echoed these sentiments , stating that " While the series doesn 't have quite the cultural cache of Final Fantasy in the West or Dragon Quest in Japan , it 's still a very popular brand worldwide " . IGN 's Anoop Gantayat additionally referred to it as the third biggest Japanese role-playing series in regards to sales . Multiple entries in the series , notably Destiny and Legendia have been favorably compared with fighting games and brawlers , especially the Street Fighter series . GameTrailers ranked the Linear Motion Battle System , with particular reference to Graces , as one of the top five JRPG battle systems . Their stories and characters have generally received a more mixed response from western critics : opinions on entries such as Legendia , Abyss , Xillia were mixed to positive , while others such as Symphonia , Graces and Xillia 2 were criticized . The main criticism for these games and Legendia was that the story was either predictable or cliché . The in-game graphics have also drawn mixed responses for several games in the series , including Destiny , Eternia , Graces and Xillia .

In 2013 , leading up to the release of Tales of Symphonia Chronicles , Baba called Symphonia the most successful title in the series in the west thus far , although the series ' main target audience was still in Japan . In an earlier interview , Baba commented that the team behind the series put a large amount of effort and development in keeping the series fresh while retaining the base elements across each installment . The positive reaction of gamers in the US to Symphonia influenced the way the various teams developed titles after that point . Speaking in 2014 , production manager Denis Lee said that , since Symphonia 's release , the popularity of the series has grown . In response , Bandai Namco have focused on getting more entries out in western territories . Much of their research about what titles to release or develop in the future revolves around direct conversation with Tales series fans at gaming conventions and special events .

The 1980 Zimbabwe women 's national field hockey team won the gold medal in women 's field hockey at that year 's Summer Olympics in Moscow , the capital of the Soviet Union . The squad of 16 women , all from Zimbabwe 's white minority , was assembled less than a month before the Olympics began to help fill the gaps the American-led Olympic boycott created in the women 's hockey competition . Zimbabwe 's subsequent victory in the round-robin tournament with three wins and two draws was regarded as a huge upset , particularly considering the team 's lack of preparation and experience ; it has been called an " irresistible fairy story " . Won at a time of great political transition in Zimbabwe , the gold medal was the country 's first Olympic medal of any colour . The 1980 Olympics were first to feature women 's hockey , and the first to include Zimbabwe under that name — barred from the last three Olympics for political reasons , the country had last competed as Rhodesia in 1964 . The women 's hockey matches , held between 25 and 31 July , were all played on artificial turf , which none of the Zimbabwean team members had ever seen ; they had also never played together until that month . After beating Poland and the USSR and drawing with Czechoslovakia and India , the Zimbabweans won the competition on the final day with a 4 – 1 victory over Austria . Dubbed the " Golden Girls " by the media of Zimbabwe , they were met by cheering crowds on their return home , and were briefly national celebrities . Zimbabwe did not win another Olympic medal until 2004 .

The 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow , the capital of the Soviet Union , were the first to include a competition in women 's field hockey . Pre-tournament favourites included Australia , the Netherlands and West Germany , but the American-led Western boycott of the Moscow Olympics led to these teams and others withdrawing , leaving only the Soviets in the women 's hockey event . The Soviet and international Olympic authorities filled the gaps by inviting teams from countries that had not qualified . Among the nations invited was Zimbabwe , which had become an internationally recognised country in April 1980 following seven years of civil war . Moscow marked the southern African nation 's return to the Olympics after 16 years ; as Rhodesia it had been excluded from the 1968 , 1972 and 1976 Games for political reasons following the mostly white government 's declaration of independence from Britain in 1965 . The Zimbabwe Olympic Committee received the invitation to send men 's and women 's hockey squads to Moscow on 14 June 1980 , 35 days before the Olympics were due to start . They were taken totally by surprise — they had not prepared hockey teams for the Games — but nevertheless agreed to send a women 's squad . No women 's hockey team representing the country had ever played overseas before .

A squad of 16 members , built around the core of the former Rhodesia team , was hastily assembled by Liz Dreyer , the president of the national women 's hockey association , who became the team 's manager . Every player and official was white . Ann Grant , the team 's 25-year-old sweeper , was appointed captain . Anthea Stewart , who had played for South Africa 25 times before retiring in 1974 , both coached the squad and played herself . Liz Chase , the only other team member with international experience ( having also represented South Africa ) was made vice-captain . At 35 years old , Stewart was the team 's oldest player , while Arlene Boxall , the 18-year-old reserve goalkeeper , was the youngest . The squad included twin sisters in Sandy Chick and Sonia Robertson . Entirely amateur , the team mostly comprised players with professions unrelated to sport — Grant , for example , was a bookkeeper , while Boxall was an operations clerk in the Air Force of Zimbabwe . Several had sporting relatives , most prominently Grant , whose brother was the international cricketer Duncan Fletcher . Audrey Palmer , a seasoned hockey official and referee who had played for Rhodesia from 1953 to 1961 , travelled with the team as a medic , trainer and general supervisor . The squad left on 7 July , travelling first to the Zambian capital Lusaka and then to Luanda in Angola , from where they flew to Moscow on an aircraft usually used for freighting meat . " The stench was terrible " , Grant later said . " There were no seats , so we all sat on the floor , strapped in and set off into the unknown . We didn 't even have the right shoes to play on the artificial hockey surface . "

The event was organised as a round-robin tournament in which each of the six teams would play each other once between 25 and 31 July . Two points were awarded for a win and one for a draw ; the team with the most points at the end would be the winner . The other competitors were Austria , Czechoslovakia , India , Poland and the USSR ; apart from the Soviets , all of these teams were competing as a result of the boycott , having failed to qualify initially . All of the matches were played at Dynamo Minor Arena in Moscow . Zimbabwe arrived two weeks before the hockey tournament was due to start , and warmed up with a number of matches against local teams . The players ' lack of preparation and unfamiliarity with artificial turf — " none of us had ever seen it before " , Chick recalled — were offset by what several members of the squad have described as a very strong team spirit . They considered themselves serious underdogs and did not expect to win a medal . Zimbabwe played in the first women 's Olympic hockey match , facing Poland on 25 July . Pat McKillop scored the first goal to put Zimbabwe ahead before Pat Davies , Linda Watson and Chase each added one more to round off a 4 – 0 victory . On 27 July , Zimbabwe and Czechoslovakia drew 2 – 2 ; McKillop and Chase scored . The next day , the Zimbabweans beat the Soviets 2 – 0 , McKillop scoring both goals . A 1 – 1 draw with India on 30 July put Zimbabwe in first place before the final round of matches on the 31st . Zimbabwe had to beat Austria to be sure of winning the gold .

Stewart declared the team 's first-choice white-and-blue outfit " lucky " on the basis that both Zimbabwe 's victories had been won wearing it ( as opposed to the two draws wearing green ) , and expressed joy that they would again be wearing white and blue in the deciding match . According to Glen Byrom , covering the event for the Herald newspaper , the Zimbabweans appeared nervous during the opening stages of the game , and were fortunate not to go behind after 15 minutes , when Austria missed a clear chance . Chick opened the scoring after 28 minutes , receiving the ball from a corner before cleanly stroking it into the net . Austria 's Brigitte Kindler equalised two minutes later from a penalty stroke , flicking the ball beyond Zimbabwean goalkeeper Sarah English into the top-left corner of the goal . With the score 1 – 1 at half time , Brenda Phillips replaced Christine Prinsloo at right-half . Urged on by a small but loud group of fellow Zimbabwean Olympians , the Zimbabweans improved after the break and , according to Byrom , " ke [ pt ] the Austrian goal under siege " throughout the second half . With 50 of the match 's 70 minutes gone , McKillop powerfully stroked a short corner that deflected off an opposing player 's stick and flew high into the net to give Zimbabwe the lead . Now appearing supremely confident , Byrom reported , the Zimbabweans " simply overran Austria with a splendid display of fast , attacking hockey " , forcing eight short corners and four long corners during the second period to Austria 's one long corner . Gillian Cowley made it 3 – 1 on 60 minutes , following up to score after Sandy Chick 's free hit was blocked . McKillop rounded up the win four minutes later , collecting a through pass from Chase and smashing the ball home . Byrom reported " incredible scenes of unrestrained joy " at the final buzzer — " the Zimbabweans , tears streaming from their eyes , danced about the field hugging and kissing each other " . Finally they hoisted Grant onto their shoulders and carried her off the field .

A few hours later , the Zimbabwean players returned to the field wearing their blue skirts and blue Zimbabwe Olympic blazers for the medals ceremony . After the third-placed Soviets and second-placed Czechoslovakians had received their medals , Grant led the team up to the podium to receive the first ever Olympic gold medal for women 's hockey . It was their country 's first Olympic medal of any colour . All 16 players received medals ; they then led the Czechoslovakian and Soviet teams on a walking lap of honour around the field . Zimbabwe finished the tournament undefeated , having scored the most goals and conceded the fewest of any team . The six goals from Pat McKillop , a housewife from Bulawayo , made her the competition 's joint top scorer with the USSR 's Natella Krasnikova . Chase , despite nursing a knee injury , played in all five matches and scored three goals . All of the Zimbabwean squad members played at least one match except for Boxall , who never came off the bench , but still received a gold medal .

The victorious hockey players were immediately dubbed the " Golden Girls " by Zimbabwean reporters . They were greeted by huge crowds on their return to Zimbabwe and briefly became national celebrities . Prime Minister Robert Mugabe welcomed them home at an official function . Each member of the team was promised an ox by the Prime Minister 's wife Sally , but ultimately received a polystyrene package of meat instead at a ceremony hosted by Mrs Mugabe . Many of the players emigrated over the following years , mostly to South Africa . Their victory continues to be celebrated in Zimbabwe today . The country did not win another Olympic medal until Kirsty Coventry won three swimming medals in Athens in 2004 . Robert Mugabe promptly applied the " golden girl " nickname to her on her return home . The Zimbabwean hockey team 's victory at the 1980 Olympics was widely considered a great upset . Sports historians have called it a " fairytale " and an " irresistible fairy story " . While the Zimbabweans were overjoyed by their unlikely status as the first ever Olympic gold medallists in women 's hockey , some , including Robert Sullivan of Sports Illustrated , felt that the Zimbabwean victory epitomised how the Western boycott had lowered competitive standards and , in their opinion , " ruined " the 1980 Olympics . While acknowledging this to an extent , Cathy Harris asserted in her 2008 retrospective on the team , published in The Sunday Times , that the victory still deserved to be recognised as a great achievement . " They freely acknowledge that they won the gold medal without competing against the best in the world " , she concludes , " but , like many athletes in Moscow in 1980 , they seized their chance . "

Air Greenland A / S is the flag carrier airline of Greenland , a subsidiary of the SAS Group , owned by the SAS Group , The Greenlandic Government and The Danish Government . It operates a fleet of 32 aircraft , including 1 airliner used for transatlantic and charter flights , 9 fixed-wing aircraft primarily serving the domestic network , and 22 helicopters feeding passengers from the smaller communities into the domestic airport network . Flights to heliports in the remote settlements are operated on contract with the government of Greenland . Founded in 1960 as Grønlandsfly , the airline started its first services with Catalina water planes and within the decade expanded to include DHC-3 Otters as well as Sikorsky S-61 helicopters , some of which remain in active service . The majority of operations were based on helicopters until the newly established Greenland Home Rule began investing in a network of short takeoff and landing airfields . These were very expensive to construct and Greenland 's airport fees are still among the highest in the world ; they also required a new fleet : DHC-7 turboprops uniquely suited to the harsh terrain and weather conditions in Greenland . The reliability of connections improved as the domestic airport network expanded in the 1990s : increasing use of the Dash 7s made the airline less restricted by inclement weather . In the late 1990s and early 2000s , Air Greenland acquired a Boeing 757 and an Airbus A330 , allowing it to open connections to Copenhagen , until then operated by SAS which also competed mid to late 2000s . In the 21st century , it competes with Air Iceland for international connections and small charter services domestically .

The airline was established on 7 November 1960 as Grønlandsfly A / S by the Scandinavian Airlines System ( now SAS ) and Kryolitselskabet Øresund , a Danish mining company involved with the cryolite operations at Ivittuut to provide transport and logistics for four American radar bases in Greenland . In 1962 , interests in the firm were acquired by the Provincial Council ( now the Greenland Home Rule Government ) and the Royal Greenland Trade Department ( now KNI ) . The first flights serving the American bases in Greenland operated lightweight DHC-3 Otters and Sikorsky S-55 helicopters chartered from Canada . After a crash in 1961 , Grønlandsfly used PBY Catalina water planes and DHC-6 Twin Otters on domestic routes . One of the Catalinas then crashed in 1962 . In 1965 , the Douglas DC-4 became the line 's first larger airplane . It was followed by Sikorsky S-61 helicopters , which have remained in use : in 2010 , they still served the communities of Kujalleq municipality in southern Greenland year-round and those of Disko Bay during the winter .

During the 1970s , Grønlandsfly upgraded its DC-4 to the newer DC-6 , but principally focused on expanding its helicopter fleet , purchasing five more S-61s . By 1972 , it opened up service to east Greenland with a helicopter based in Tasiilaq , and established Greenlandair Charter . Mining at Maamorilik in the Uummannaq Fjord required still more helicopters , and the airline purchased Bell 206s for the route . Grønlandsfly also picked up a Danish government contract to fly reconnaissance missions regarding the sea ice around Greenland . By the end of 1979 , the number of Grønlandsfly passengers served annually exceeded 60,000 , more than the population of Greenland . That year , the airline 's first international route was also opened , running between Greenland 's capital Nuuk and the town of Iqaluit in northern Canada . The route connected Greenland 's Kalaallit with Canada 's Inuit and was operated in conjunction with the Canadian First Air line , but the planes were generally run empty and the route was shuttered 13 years later .

The establishment of the Greenland Home Rule Government in 1979 led to investment in a regional network of true airports , with short take-off and landing ( STOL ) airfields constructed in Nuuk , Ilulissat ( 1984 ) , and Kulusuk . ( These early airports were built without de-icing equipment , a situation which has proven problematic during Greenland 's winters and continues to cause delays and losses for the airline . ) The decade also saw the company train and hire its first native Kalaallit pilots . To service the enlarged network , Grønlandsfly began acquiring DHC-7s , planes particularly suited to the often severe weather conditions in Greenland . The first was delivered on 29 September 1979 , followed by more over the next decade . These planes remain in active service , serving every airport except Nerlerit Inaat near Ittoqqortoormiit , whose operation is handled by Air Iceland under contract with Greenland Home Rule . In 1981 , Grønlandsfly opened its first route to Iceland , linking Reykjavík Airport to its main hub at Kangerlussuaq via Kulusuk . In 1986 , a route to Keflavík allowed the company to break SAS 's monopoly on flights between Greenland and Denmark via a Keflavík-Copenhagen leg operated by Icelandair . By 1989 , the airline employed more than 400 Greenlanders and carried more than 100,000 passengers annually .

The company saw its activity curtailed as the mines at Ivittuut ( 1987 ) and Maamorilik ( 1990 ) closed operation , leading to a recession in the Greenlandic economy . As the situation improved , the network of regional STOL airports was extended with Sisimiut Airport , Maniitsoq Airport , and Aasiaat Airport built in mid-western Greenland and Qaarsut Airport and Upernavik Airport built in northwestern Greenland . With the purchase of a fifth Dash 7 , Grønlandsfly was – for the first time since its inception – able to provide plane services to all major towns in Greenland . ( Uummannaq is served by Qaarsut Airport in conjunction with its heliport . ) Grønlandsfly also purchased its first jet aircraft , a Boeing 757 – 200 which began operation in May 1998 . The airliner was named Kunuunnguaq in honor of the Greenlandic explorer and ethnologist Knud Rasmussen , whose bust decorates in the terminal of Kangerlussuaq hub . The airliner allowed the company to run the profitable Kangerlussuaq – Copenhagen route directly , without affiliates or a layover in Iceland . Thus , in 1999 , the airline served 282,000 passengers , nearly triple the number at the end of the previous decade .

Around the turn of the millennium , the airline renewed its aging fleet , retiring several of its S-61 and 206 helicopters and replacing them with Bell 212s and Eurocopter AS350s . The company also sacked its CEO Peter Fich , who had proven unable to balance Greenland Home Rule 's demands for local Greenlander service with the board 's for expanded tourism , lower fares , and higher profits . Under his replacement Finn Øelund , Grønlandsfly initially posted a DKK 30 million loss as contractual obligations maintained unprofitable service while a strike ruined the summer tourist season and Post Greenland relocated a lucrative mail contract to the Danish-owned Air Alpha Greenland . In response , the company successfully pushed back against Greenland Home Rule 's large demands , high fees , and low subsidies and rebranded itself , anglicizing its name to Air Greenland and adopting a new logo and livery on 18 April 2002 . In 2003 , Finn Øelund left to head Maersk Air and was replaced as CEO by Flemming Knudson . Air Greenland opened a route from Copenhagen to Akureyri in Iceland ; the service lasted for six years before finally being deemed unprofitable and ended . Also in 2003 , SAS abandoned its Greenland service , leading Air Greenland to purchase its second airliner , an Airbus A330-200 named Norsaq . ( SAS briefly revived the service during the peak season in 2007 before dropping it again in January 2009 . ) Owing to SAS 's withdrawal from the market , Air Greenland received its contract with the U.S. Air Force for passenger service to and from Thule Air Base . Running from February 2004 , the contract was renewed for another five-year period in 2008 despite SAS 's brief return to the market .

The first takeover of another airline took place on 28 July 2006 : Air Greenland acquired the Danish carrier Air Alpha 's Greenland subsidiary . Air Alpha Greenland had operated helicopter flights in Disko Bay and in eastern Greenland . Since the takeover , the acquired Bell 222 helicopters have been used for passenger transfers between Nerlerit Inaat Airport and Ittoqqortoormiit Heliport . In 2007 , Flemming Knudson was moved to head the Royal Greenland fishing concern and current CEO Michael Binzer was hired with a mandate to lead the company towards greater commercialization and self-sufficiency under the Qarsoq 2012 ( " Arrow 2012 " ) plan . On 13 June , SAS announced its intention to sell its stake in Air Greenland , a move later incorporated into its restructuring program , but as of 2012 it has not found any buyers . On 1 October , the airline introduced its e-ticket system . Also in 2007 , Air Greenland began direct service with Baltimore / Washington International Airport in the United States of America . After sixty American visitors were stranded by a strike of Air Greenland employees and the company refused to make alternate arrangements for their return , ticket sales slumped and the route was closed in March 2008 .

In the 2010s , Air Greenland has curtailed some services . On 1 January 2010 , Air Greenland suspended its participation in SAS 's EuroBonus frequent-flyer program . In 2011 , nonstop service from Narsarsuaq to Copenhagen was suspended . However , some expansion is planned . In order to compete with Air Iceland , which operates service from Reykjavik Airport to Nuuk , Narsarsuaq , Ilulissat , and the east coast of Greenland and now controls about 15 % the market in Greenland-bound travel , Air Greenland may open a nonstop route between Nuuk and Keflavík International Airport in Iceland . Also , owing to improved technology and higher commodity prices , the Maarmorilik mines were due to reopen in November 2010 with zinc and iron ore reserves projected to last 50 years . As in the 1970s , the mine 's supply flights to the mine will be operated by Air Greenland , using Bell helicopters ( 212s ) based out of the Uummannaq Heliport . Air Greenland 's last remaining Twin Otter was sold in 2011 to Norlandair in exchange for cash and a one-fourth interest in the Icelandic company . Reopening the connection to Iqaluit , now the capital of Nunavut , was considered by Air Greenland in late 2009 , but finally happened in 2012 . However , this service ceased in 2015 .

Air Greenland 's domestic airport network includes all 13 civilian airports within Greenland . Outside Greenland , the airline currently operates transatlantic flights to Keflavík International Airport in Iceland , Copenhagen Airport in Denmark , and Iqaluit Airport in Canada . Two international airports capable of serving large airliners – Kangerlussuaq Airport and Narsarsuaq Airport – were constructed as U.S. Air Force military bases during World War II and continue to be used for transatlantic flights . All other regional airports are STOL-capable and are served with Dash 7 and Dash 8 fixed-wing aircraft . Smaller communities are served via heliports which connect with hubs located at Upernavik Airport in the Upernavik Archipelago in northwestern Greenland ; at Uummannaq Heliport in the Uummannaq Fjord region in northwestern Greenland ; at Ilulissat and Aasiaat Airports in the Disko Bay region in western Greenland ; at Qaqortoq and Nanortalik Heliports in southern Greenland ; and at Tasiilaq Heliport in southeastern Greenland . Of the 45 heliports in use , 8 are primary and equipt with a tarmac , a terminal building , and permanent staff . The other heliports are helistops with either a gravel or grass landing area . Often helicopters need to make more than one flight for each connection to a fixed-wing flight because of passenger capacity , causing longer total travel time .

The Bell 212 is the primary helicopter used for flights to district villages . The older Sikorsky S-61N machines are stationed in Ilulissat Airport and Qaqortoq Heliport . With a capacity to seat 25 passengers , the S-61 based in southern Greenland was used to shuttle passengers arriving from Copenhagen at Narsarsuaq Airport . The sale of the Boeing 757 in April 2010 contributed to the long-term decline of the airport , with the airline planning to remove the old helicopter from the fleet . Three of the Bell 222 helicopters are taken out of active service and remain stationed in Kangerlussuaq Airport having been put up for sale .

The Greenlandic Government and the SAS Group are the largest shareholders of the airline , owning a 37.5 % stake each . The Danish Government owns the remaining 25 % of the stock . The Ministry of Housing , Infrastructure , and Transport oversees the development of the transport industry in Greenland and controls Mittarfeqarfiit , the airport authority in Greenland . Between them , they control mandatory services , airport taxes , pricing policies , maritime connections , and tourism development , effectively allowing Greenland Home Rule to control the company in spite of the other stakeholders . The board of directors , chaired by Julia Pars of Greenland Home Rule , includes representatives of all three shareholders and the airline employees . Michael Binzer , previously heading the airline 's marketing and sales department , has been holding the position of chief executive officer since June 2007 . Headquartered in Nuuk , the airline had 668 employees in December 2009 . The airline 's technical base is located at Nuuk Airport .

The charter unit within Air Greenland is led by Hans Peter Hansen and employs 8 people , with 13 helicopters and 3 fixed-wing aircraft at its disposal . Excess capacity of airplanes is used for regular charters to tourist destinations in Europe , Asia , and Africa . The helicopters , primarily the AS350 , are used for special flights , such as search and rescue , air ambulance , charter flights to the Thule Air Base on contract with the U.S. Air Force , geological exploration , and supply flights to the mining sites and the research stations on the Greenland ice sheet . During the peak summer season , the helicopter crew is supplemented by freelance pilots from Norway and Sweden . Other charter flights include heliskiing shuttles , services for the energy industry such as facilitating oil exploration or surveying for hydroelectric stations , and environmental research counting polar bears and tracking other large Arctic fauna .

Air Greenland co-owns the Arctic Umiaq Line jointly ( 50 % each ) with Royal Arctic , Greenland 's government-owned shipping line . Arctic Umiaq runs the ferry M / S Sarfaq Ittuk among Greenland 's coastal communities from Ilulissat in the north to Narsaq in the south . The ferry has been unprofitable since its founding in 2006 , but Greenland Home Rule provided the owners with a loss guarantee through 2011 , allowing the subsidiary to break even . The deficit was DKK 8.1 million for 2011 and , on 16 March 2010 , Air Greenland announced plans to divest its stock . Greenland Home Rule avoided this by undertaking to continue the guarantee at least through 2016 .

Air Greenland operates helicopter flights to most settlements in Greenland ( " settlement flights " ) on contract with the government of Greenland , with the destination network subsidized and coordinated by the Ministry of Housing , Infrastructure , and Transport . Settlement flights are not featured in the company 's timetable , although they can be pre-booked . Departure times for these flights as specified during booking are by definition approximate , with the settlement service optimized on the fly depending on local demand for a given day . Settlement flights in the Disko Bay region are unique in that they are operated only during winter and spring . During summer and autumn , transportation between settlements is only by sea , with services operated by Diskoline , a government-contracted ferry service based in Ilulissat .

On 29 August 1961 , a DHC-3 Otter ( registration CF-MEX ) crashed 20 kilometers ( 12 mi ) from Kangerlussuaq . The aircraft was a non-scheduled service en route from Kangerlussuaq Airport to Aasiaat Airport when a fuel leak caused an in-flight fire . One of the pilots was killed , while the other pilot and the four passengers survived . On 12 May 1962 , a PBY Catalina flying boat ( registration CF-IHA ) crashed during landing at Nuuk Airport . The accident was caused by a mechanical malfunction in the nose wheel doors preventing them from closing during landing on water , resulting in the aircraft sinking . The accident killed 15 of the 21 people on board . On 25 October 1973 , the Akigssek ( " Grouse " ) , an Air Greenland S-61N ( registration OY-HAI ) , crashed about 40 kilometers ( 25 mi ) south of Nuuk , resulting in the loss of 15 lives . It was en route to Paamiut from Nuuk . The same helicopter had had an emergency landing on the Kangerlussuaq fjord 2 years earlier , due to a double flameout on both engines because of ice in its intake .

On 7 June 2008 , a Eurocopter AS350 crashed on the runway at Nuuk Airport . There were no injuries , but the helicopter was damaged beyond repair . On 29 January 2014 , the Paartoq an Air Greenland Dash 8-Q202 ( registration OY-GRI ) , was involved in a runway excursion accident at Ilulissat Airport ( BGJN ) , Greenland . Flight GL3205 originated in Kangerlussuaq Airport ( BGSF ) , Greenland. four passengers were taken to the hospital for observation , there were no fatalities or serious injuries . Evidence available so far indicates that the airplane landed on runway 07 at the time of the accident . It then went off the left side of the runway . It then went down a 10 – 15 m dropoff and came to rest on rocky terrain approximately abeam the runway 25 threshold . The weather at the time of the incident was reported : Wind 110 degrees at 29 knots , gusting at 40 knots

Murali Kartik ( Tamil : முரளி கார ் த ் திக ் pronunciation , born 11 September 1976 ) is an Indian cricketer who sporadically represented the India national cricket team from 2000 to 2007 . He is a specialist slow left arm orthodox bowler known for his loopy trajectory and ability to spin and bounce , but has found international selection blocked during his prime years by the presence of Anil Kumble and Harbhajan Singh . He is also a left-handed batsman , and although he has had some success with the bat at first-class level with 19 half-centuries , he has not been able to repeat this at international level . After starting out in the Delhi junior system , Kartik moved through the age group ranks at Railways , was selected for the Indian Under-19 team . He made his first-class debut in 1996 – 97 and after a few productive seasons at domestic level , made his Test debut in early-2000 as Kumble 's bowling partner . However , he ran into disciplinary problems and was expelled from the National Cricket Academy in the same year , while new national captain Sourav Ganguly was reluctant to entrust him with responsibility . Ganguly called for off spinner Harbhajan to be recalled in 2001 , and was rewarded with a series-winning performance against Australia . This entrenched the off spinner in the team and left Kartik on the outer .

For the next four years , Kartik was on the fringes of selection . He made his ODI debut in 2002 and had a short stint before being dropped and missing the 2003 Cricket World Cup because of mediocre performance . He was recalled in late-2003 for limited overs matches and played in around half of India 's matches for a six-month period , as well as one Test after Harbhajan suffered a serious injury . In late-2004 Kartik played in three Tests as India fielded three spinners , and claimed his only man-of-the-match award in Tests against Australia in Mumbai , but was again dropped two matches later . In late-2005 , Kartik became a regular member of the ODI team for a few months when the International Cricket Council introduced an experimental rule that allowed one substitute to be used , opening an extra vacancy in the national team . However , Kartik was unable to secure his position in the team and the rule was later revoked . In late-2007 , Kartik broke back into the ODI team and took 6 / 27 in one victory over Australia , but lost form soon after and was again dropped . He has not represented India since then . Aside from domestic cricket , Kartik plays for Royal Challengers Bangalore in the Indian Premier League and has been in demand in English county cricket as an overseas player , representing Lancashire , Middlesex , Somerset and Surrey .

Born in chennai Murali Karthik wanted to be a genetic engineer , he was a medium pacer in his early years , before switching to a left arm finger spinner in the classical mould , Kartik grew up trying to emulate past Indian orthodox spinners Bishen Singh Bedi , Maninder Singh and Venkatapathy Raju . He also garnered attention for what was perceived to be a fiery attitude , but took pride in coach Kapil Dev saying of him " I have never seen a player with such an attitude towards the game in my 20 years of international cricket " . Kartik started out in the junior system at Delhi . He broke into their Under-16 team in December 1992 , and took a match total of 10 / 74 on debut against Himachal Pradesh , as well as scoring 52 not out in an innings victory . He took 2 / 91 in the next match against Haryana , but could no longer play in the Under-16s because of his advancing age . He could not break into the Under-19s at Delhi , and played no further youth domestic matches for two years , when he transferred to Railways and broke into their Under-19 team .

In five matches for his new team during the 1994 – 95 , he took 24 wickets at 14.58 including a haul of 5 / 28 against Vidarbha . He was rewarded with selection in the Under-19 Central Zone team for the zonal one-day tournament , taking five wickets at 25.00 in four matches . He had little success with the bat , scoring 47 on one occasion during the season , but otherwise only aggregating nine runs in six innings . The following season in 1995 – 96 , Kartik had a more successful season for Railways Under-19s . He started with 5 / 73 and 5 / 55 against Madhya Pradesh and made it three five-wicket hauls in a row with 5 / 42 against Vidarbha . He took another five-wicket haul later in the season against Rajasthan and ended the competition with 38 wickets at 18.94 in seven matches . Railways made the final , where they faced Punjab . Kartik was Railways ' most effective bowler , taking 4 / 57 in Punjab 's first innings of 310 . He then made 14 not out as Railways ceded a first innings lead , which was enough to give Punjab the title as the match ended in a draw . Kartik took 3 / 138 in the second innings . After the final , newly crowned champions took on the Rest of India , and Kartik took 2 / 25 and 4 / 89 to help his team to a six-wicket victory . Kartik had a less successful time in the zonal one-dayers for Central , taking only one wicket in three matches . He also improved his batting marginally , scoring 57 and three other double-digit scores .

As a result of his performances during the season , Kartik was called up to the Indian Under-19 team for an international series against their counterparts from South Africa . In the youth Test , he took 4 / 40 as India dismissed South Africa for 159 to take a 19-run lead . In the second innings , he took 3 / 30 as South Africa fell for 107 in pursuit of 277 . In two youth one-day internationals that followed , Kartik was prominent in the Indian victories , taking 3 / 23 and 3 / 33 respectively .

The following season , 1996 – 97 , Kartik was promoted into the senior ranks of major cricket . In his first match , a List A fixture against Madhya Pradesh , Kartik took 2 / 27 from his allotment of ten overs but was unable to prevent a four-wicket loss . He made his first-class debut the next day against the same team and sent down 16 overs taking a total of 1 / 18 in a drawn match . In a close-run match , Madhya Pradesh were 8 / 89 , 17 runs short with two wickets in hand when time ran out . Kartik had scored a rearguard 47 in the second innings , without which Madhya Pradesh would have won . In his next first-class match , against Vidarbha , he took a hat trick in the first innings , ending with 6 / 28 , helping to bowl Vidarbha out for 130 . He then took 3 / 27 in the second innings as Vidarbha made only 95 to cede victory to Railways . He ended the season with 16 wickets at 19.37 , and 185 runs at 20.55 including a 74 against Bengal , but was overlooked for the Central Zone selection for the Duleep Trophy after taking only six wickets in his last four matches for the season . In four one-dayers for Railways , Kartik took seven wickets at 12.42 , including a match-winning 4 / 13 against Rajasthan .

The following season he managed 14 wickets at 18.42 in four matches , but was dropped in the later stages of the tournament . After taking a match total of 7 / 74 in helping to orchestrate an innings victory over Rajasthan in his third match of the season , Kartik went wicketless in the next match against Madhya Pradesh , and was dropped . He scored 70 runs at 23.33 during the tournament . In four one-dayers for Railways , he took four wickets at 29.75 at an economy rate of 3.30 . Despite being dropped by Railways , Kartik was called up to make his senior debut for Central Zone . He took two wickets at 63.00 in two first-class matches , and then took three wickets at 43.00 at an economy rate of 4.30 in three matches . Despite the modest returns during the season , Kartik was selected for an India A tour of Pakistan in February and March 1998 . In four first-class matches , which were persistently curtailed by the weather , Kartik bowled only 31 overs , and only two in the two matches against Pakistan A. He finished with four wickets at 27.50 . In the two one-dayers , he proved expensive , taking 1 / 53 and 0 / 73 from ten overs each , as Pakistan won both matches easily .

At the start of the 1998 – 99 season , Kartik took 23 wickets for Vijay Cricket Club in the Chennai League . He played more regularly in the 1998 – 99 Ranji Trophy , taking 29 wickets in seven matches at 19.3 to be the 13th highest wicket-taker . This included a 3 / 8 and 4 / 62 in an innings win over Rajasthan , and 5 / 84 and 5 / 55 in the last two matches of the campaign against Tamil Nadu and Delhi . He also added 29 and 53 with the bat against Tamil Nadu to help stave off a defeat after his team had trailed by over 200 on the first innings . He was rewarded with selection for Central Zone and after taking 4 / 133 against North Zone , claimed 5 / 73 and 2 / 22 in the final to help them defeat West Zone by 112 runs in Aurangabad to claim the Duleep Trophy , and was the leading wicket-taker during the tournament . He scored a total of 183 runs at 18.30 for the entire Indian first-class season . He took five wickets at 26.60 in four zonal one-dayers , and tasted victory in all four fixtures .

Kartik had a truncated but productive 1999 – 2000 Indian season . After taking a solitary wicket in a truncated match for India A against the touring New Zealand , Kartik snared 6 / 62 and 6 / 31 against Vidarbha , He then went on an India A tour to the West Indies , so his only other first-class match was a Ranji Trophy encounter against Rajasthan in which he took 4 / 53 . In four first-class matches in the Caribbean , Kartik took 18 wickets at 16.38 . This included two matches against West Indies A , in which he took 6 / 75 before claiming 3 / 64 and 5 / 73 in the second match , although he was unable to force a victory in either . In two one-day matches against their West Indian counterparts , Kartik took two wickets at 26.00 at an economy rate of 3.46 . Returning to India , he took 12 wickets at 13.08 in five matches for Railways and the Indian Board president 's XI , before playing in the zonal one-dayers with less success , managing only two wickets at 91.50 at an economy rate of 4.57 . Despite these struggles , he was selected for the India A team for the Challenger Trophy , where he took four wickets at 38.00 at the expensive economy rate of 5.84 .

Despite the downturn in his limited overs fortunes towards the end of the season , Kartik 's form was enough to earn him selection in the Indian Board president 's XI for the tour match against the visiting South Africans before the Tests . He had a match total of 2 / 122 , which was enough for him to secure national selection , playing in both Tests against South Africa in early 2000 at Mumbai and Bangalore as India sought a second spinner to accompany Anil Kumble , after Harbhajan Singh 's performance in the role in the previous season had been deemed inadequate . Kartik scored 14 before being bowled by Shaun Pollock as India batted first and made 225 . He then took 2 / 28 from 18 overs as the Indians restricted the tourists to 176 , before collapsing to be all out for 113 in the second innings , Kartik scoring only two before Pollock had him caught behind . Kartik took 1 / 50 in the second innings as South Africa ground their way to the target of 163 with four wickets in hand . In the Second Test , Kartik took 3 / 123 and scored a duck and two as India were crushed by an innings . Overall , Kartik performed steadily , taking six wickets at 33.50 .

Kartik was selected in 2000 for the first intake of the National Cricket Academy in Bangalore , after earlier having made his Test debut in early 2000 in a home series against South Africa . However , his stay was cut short along with that of Harbhajan , when they were expelled by the director Hanumant Singh over disciplinary issues . In the 2000 – 01 season , Kartik started in fine form as he set out to maintain a Test position . In the Irani Trophy , the traditional season opener between the reigning Ranji champions — Mumbai — and the Rest of India , Kartik orchestrated the demise of the title-holders . After taking 4 / 73 in Mumbai 's 260 , Kartik scored 22 in the Rest of India 's 389 . He then took 9 / 70 to cut down Mumbai for 184 , and his batting colleagues accumulated the 55 needed for victory without loss . Kartik then took 3 / 82 and 1 / 45 against Madhya Pradesh to secure his spot in the Test team . Kartik then played in one Test against Bangladesh and Zimbabwe respectively in India , taking match totals of 1 / 42 and 2 / 66 . He scored 43 in the nine-wicket win over Bangladesh but was not required to bat in the seven-wicket win over Zimbabwe . New captain Sourav Ganguly — who had taken over after Sachin Tendulkar resigned following the South African whitewash — did not show much confidence in him , by only affording him frequent but short spells . Kartik was dropped from the team after the First Test against Zimbabwe , and did not have an opportunity to immediately prove his captain wrong , as the one-day domestic circuit was in progress at the time . Kartik took nine wickets at 25.22 at an economy rate of 4.02 , and then had a chance to stake his claims for a Test recall in the Duleep Trophy .

Kartik struggled , taking 2 / 129 against East and then 0 / 178 in the first innings as North Zone accumulated 8 / 690 declared . He then had to endure the humiliation of not being trusted to bowl in the second innings as North reached 8 / 233 . In the last match against South , Kartik could only aggregate 1 / 87 . Although Kartik had scored 45 and 27 in his two innings , he totalled only three Duleep Trophy wickets at an average of 131.33 . The selectors were unsatisfied by these performances , and despite a shoulder injury to Kumble , Kartik was discarded as India hosted Australia in the 2001 Border Gavaskar Trophy . Harbhajan was recalled and took 32 wickets at 17 to engineer an Indian series win and permanently establish himself as India 's leading spinner alongside Kumble . Kartik played in one more match for Railways at the end of the season , and his poor season continued , managing only a total of 2 / 152 , although he did score 79 with the bat . Kartik started the new 2001 – 02 season well , taking 20 wickets at 15.40 in the first four first-class matches of the season , including five-wicket hauls against Rajasthan and Vidarbha , and 3 / 84 against the touring English Test team for a Board president 's XI , but this was not enough to force the selectors to recall him for the Tests . He continued his form for Railways in the one-dayers , taking seven wickets at 20.57 in four matches at an economy rate of 4.00 , before suffering a serious back injury that forced him to travel to Adelaide for treatment , which was funded by the Board of Control for Cricket in India . He made a successful comeback in January after a month-long layoff , and ended as fourth-highest wicket taker in the Ranji Trophy , with 34 at an average of 17 , taking 5 / 51 and 3 / 7 , and scoring 69 in his final match of the season to secure a win over Baroda . He batted well in the second half of the season , also scoring 42 and 58 . He also performed well in the Challenger Trophy and zonal one-dayers after his surgery , taking ten wickets at 21.70 in seven matches . At the end of the season , Kartik was rewarded with his debut in One Day Internationals ( ODIs ) ; he was punished by the Zimbabwean batsmen , conceding 47 runs without taking a wicket from eight overs , but India still won by five wickets .

Since then , Kartik was India 's third choice Test spinner behind Kumble and Harbhajan for most of the decade , only playing due to their injuries or when India selected three spinners . At the end of the 2001 – 02 season , Kartik was selected for an India A tour of South Africa . He struggled in the first two first-class matches , before taking 6 / 101 and scoring 59 in the second match against South Africa A to end the three games with ten wickets at 32.50 . He had more success in the one-dayers , taking four wickets at 17.50 at an economy rate of 2.50 in three matches . The West Indies toured India at the start of the 2002 – 03 season and Kartik had a chance to press his claims for Test selection in two tour matches against the visitors . However , he had little impact , taking 2 / 92 for the Board president 's XI and 0 / 117 for Railways against the Caribbean tourists , although he scored 72 with the bat in the latter match . He then took a total of 2 / 135 as Railways , the reigning Ranji Trophy holders , defeated the Rest of India in the Irani Trophy . With these lean returns , Kartik was overlooked for the Tests .

Kartik had opportunities in the ODI format following his strong form in domestic limited overs matches , playing in four consecutive matches against the West Indies . After going wicketless in the first of these matches , he broke through in the next match to take his maiden ODI wicket in his third appearance . Kartik then took 3 / 36 in the next match as India scraped home by three wickets , but he was punished in his fourth outing of the series , conceding 69 runs in nine overs without success , after which he was dropped . He had taken four wickets at 47.25 , at an economy rate of 4.84 . Kartik was called into the Test squad to tour New Zealand in late 2002 after Kumble withdrew , but in the warm-up match he bowled one only over , in which he was hammered for 23 runs . He then watched from the sidelines as India only fielded one spin bowler — Harbhajan — in the Tests , held on green , pace-friendly surfaces . Kartik returned to India and was ineffective in the zonal one-dayers , taking a total of 1 / 148 from 24 overs in three matches , conceding more than a run a ball . Combined with his results against the West Indies , the poor returns saw him left out of the 2003 Cricket World Cup squad , with Harbhajan and Kumble preferred .

While the World Cup was in progress , Kartik toured the West Indies with India A , playing against the domestic teams in five first-class matches . He took 14 wickets at 30.50 including a 5 / 105 against Barbados and 4 / 57 against Trinidad and Tobago . India A then toured England during the northern hemisphere summer and Kartik took 10 wickets at 40.00 and scored 79 runs at 26.33 including a 50 in four first-class matches , and three wickets at 44.33 in one-dayers . At the start of the 2003 – 04 season , Kartik took 2 / 118 and 2 / 41 for India A in a match against the touring New Zealanders , and was overlooked for the Test series against the visitors . He managed only a total of 1 / 84 from 18 overs in the Challenger Trophy but was called into the ODI team and gained semi-regular appearances during the TVS Trophy against New Zealand and Australia , competing with Kumble and Harbhajan for a regular position in the team . In four matches during the competition , he was economical although not very penetrative , taking four wickets at 38.25 at an economy rate of 3.82 .

After taking match figures of 6 / 117 and 5 / 140 for India A against Sri Lanka A , Kartik made his first overseas appearance for India , replacing the injured Harbhajan midway through the 2003 – 04 tour of Australia . He had little success in his first tour match , taking 1 / 64 and 1 / 53 against Australian A. He played in the final Test at the Sydney Cricket Ground when India fielded two spinners for the only time in the series . He was punished by the Australian batsmen , taking a total of1 / 211 from 45 overs , a run rate of 4.68 , in a high-scoring draw . Kartik then made sporadic appearances in the VB triangular ODI series , playing in four of India 's ten matches , as he and Kumble were brought in and out of the team in an attempt to challenge the Australian superiority . He continued to be punished by the Australian batsmen , taking a total of 1 / 178 from 26 overs , an economy rate of 6.84 . However , he did manage to resist the Australians with the bat ; in his only two innings he made 32 not out and 23 as the Indian batting was dismissed for only 203 and 151 respectively .

Despite these performances , Kartik was retained for the ODI tour of Pakistan with Harbhajan still injured , taking five wickets at 32.80 at an economy of 5.46 . He played in three of the five matches and India won all of these . Kartik was also in the Test squad , but saw not action as India opted to field only Kumble and took the series 2 – 1 . Kartik started the 2004 – 05 season by scoring 56 and 16 and taking 2 / 42 and 2 / 49 as the Rest of India defeated Mumbai in the Irani Trophy , but it was not enough to prevent Harbhajan from resuming his position in the team for the home Test series against Australia . He got an opportunity in the Third Test in Nagpur , when Harbhajan was ill , taking 3 / 57 and 2 / 74 as India were 342 runs to lose their first home series to Australia since 1969 – 70 . Kartik held his place when Harbhajan returned for the final Test in Mumbai as India fielded three spinners , and took 4 / 44 and 3 / 32 in a man of the match performance which saw India win by 13 runs . Both of these performances occurred under the captaincy of Rahul Dravid with Ganguly injured , in which Kartik netted his wickets at an average of 17.50 compared to 51.08 under Ganguly 's leadership . Kartik played the last of his eight Tests in a subsequent opening match against South Africa in Kanpur , taking a total of 2 / 93 under Ganguly 's command , being dropped after India chose to only use two spinners in subsequent matches . Kartik spent the next month watching from the sidelines as the reserve slow bowler , as only Kumble and Harbhajan played during the tour of Bangladesh . During this campaign , he was allowed to play in the second ODI , taking 2 / 43 as India lost to Bangladesh for the first time . Kartik returned to India and took seven wickets at 35.42 at an economy rate of 4.69 in the zonal one-dayers and Challenger Trophy , and then played four first-class matches to end the season , taking 10 wickets at 19.10 . At the end of the season , he took 2 / 54 in a home ODI against Pakistan , who scored 7 / 319 to overhaul the target .

He enjoyed more opportunities in the ODI arena in 2005 , when Kumble was dropped by newly appointed coach Greg Chappell due to his lack of athleticism , as well as the introduction of the experimental rules which allowed the use of one substitute , thus opening an extra position in the team . Kartik had a modest start under the new regime , taking 1 / 52 from nine overs in a win over a depleted host Zimbabwe team . He returned to India and started the new season in fine all-round form . After taking 2 / 34 in the first innings , he scored his highest first-class score of 96 to guide Railways to 311 , giving them a first-innings lead of 88 runs over the Rest of India in the Irani Trophy . He then took 3 / 28 to dismiss the Rest of India for 137 in their second innings , setting up a nine-wciket win . He then took seven wickets at 16.85 at an economy rate of 4.56 in three matches for India Seniors in the Challenger Trophy , including a match-winning 5 / 29 in the final against India B. Kartik was thus selected in the Indian ODI team for the home summer , and played in ten of the twelve ODIs that India hosted in late-2005 . He started well with 3 / 48 in a 152-run crushing of Sri Lanka in Nagpur , and went on to finish the series with eight wickets at 30.25 , playing in six of the seven matches . However , his form dissipated and he went wicketless in the South African series , conceding 126 runs in 28 overs , and giving away more than a run a ball in the last two matches . Kumble remained in favour for the Tests along with Harbhajan , and Kartik returned to Ranji competition while they bowled against Sri Lanka in the five-dayers . Kartik took 5 / 95 against Mumbai and then 8 / 40 against Delhi , and in three Ranji Trophy matches took 17 wickets at 19.94 .

In late-2006 , India 's ODI team began to hit rocky waters . After losing a bilateral series in the West Indies , they were knocked out of a triangular tournament in Malaysia ahead of the finals , and were eliminated in the first round of the 2006 ICC Champions Trophy on home soil . Kartik took four wickets at 34.00 and an economy rate of 5.36 in the Challenger Trophy and could not earn a recall . He had a steady domestic first-class season , taking 26 wickets at 25.53 in nine matches , never taking more than five wickets in a match . He took 13 wickets at 27.92 in eight one-day matches for the season , and was overlooked as Kumble and Harbhajan were the spinners selected for the 2007 Cricket World Cup . India were knocked out in the first round after losing to Bangladesh , and Harbhajan was dropped while Kumble retired from ODIs , but Kartik did not do enough to persuade the selectors to hand him a recall . In 2004 , Kartik played in the Lancashire League with Ramsbottom as their professional . In 19 games , he took 80 wickets at 9.92 and scored 464 runs at 25.77 . He scored three fifties with a best of 83 against Colne and took nine five-wicket innings hauls including a best of 9 / 30 against Enfield in addition to two other matches in which he took seven wickets .

In 2005 , he returned to Ramsbottom as their professional for a second season , with more effect . He took 83 wickets at 9.19 and scored 519 runs at 37.07 in 20 matches . He scored five fifties including a best of 66 , and took eight five-wicket innings hauls including a best of 9 / 47 against Church as well as 7 / 27 against Lowerhouse . These performances earned him notice , and in late-2005 , he appeared as a late-season overseas player substitute for Lancashire , and became the first overseas Lancashire player to take ten wickets on their debut , with 10 / 168 against Essex . This 5 / 93 and 5 / 75 helped Lancashire to an eight-wicket win , and in his only other first-class match , he took 4 / 43 and 2 / 49 was not enough as the Roses went down to Leicestershire by four runs . His sixteen wickets at 16.25 placed him second on the season 's bowling averages , and helped the team to be promoted from Second Division . In two one-day games , Kartik took five wickets at 13.40 . Despite these performances , he was not initially offered a contract for 2006 . Eventually in August 2006 , he was again signed as a late-season overseas player for Lancashire just in time to appear in the C & G Trophy final against Sussex , taking 2 / 28 and scoring a duck in a 15-run defeat . He took eight wickets at 17.25 in four one-dayers , and six wickets at 39.00 in three first-class matches with a best of 3 / 89 , as well a 40 with the bat against Hampshire .

In 2007 , he joined Middlesex as an overseas registration . He made his debut as the county club 's 700th first-class cricketer against Somerset at Taunton in April 2007 . He took 51 wickets at 24.96 in 12 matches and agreed to sign on for a further season in 2008 . A highlight of Kartik 's stint was a haul of 6 / 21 and 3 / 52 that helped set up an innings win over Glamorgan , and 6 / 85 and 3 / 83 that secured a 38-run win over Leicestershire . A third five-wicket haul , 5 / 38 against Derbyshire , was not enough to prevent a 15-run defeat . With the bat , Kartik contributed 209 runs at 19.00 with a best of 35 . Kartik was also prolific for his new county in the one-dayers , taking 21 wickets at 23.52 in 15 matches , taking three wickets in a match twice , both of which resulted in wins . During the T20 tournament , Kartik took nine wickets at 10.77 and an economy rate of 5.70 , including a haul of 5 / 13 in a vain attempt to halt an Essex run-chase .

In late-2007 , Kartik was recalled to the ODI team in place of the struggling Powar mid-way through the series against Australia . He played his first ODI in 18 months when he returned for the fourth match at Mohali . He took 1 / 48 , and conceded only two runs in the 48th over as Australia stumbled in a tight run chase to give India their first win of the series . Kartik took only one wicket in the next two matches , which Australia won . In the seventh and final match , Kartik took a career best of 6 / 27 from 10 overs at the Wankhede Stadium in Mumbai to bowl Australia out for 193 . The tourists had reached 2 / 117 after 19.4 overs , scoring at over six runs and over before Kartik removed Brad Hodge and Andrew Symonds from consecutive balls . He failed to get his hat-trick , but in the 32nd over he removed Brad Haddin from the first ball , and then Brad Hogg and Brett Lee from the fourth and fifth balls . Again Kartik missed the hat-trick opportunity , but returned to claim his six wicket . In reply , India had fallen to 8 / 143 before Kartik chipped in with an unbeaten 21 from 34 balls in an unbroken 52-run stand with Zaheer Khan , guiding India to a two-wicket victory . Kartik was recognised by being selected as the man of the match . Kartik then made his T20 international debut , taking 0 / 27 from four overs in an Indian win over Australia .

In the following series against Pakistan , Kartik was only selected in the first , third and fifth matches , and took two wickets at an average of 68.00 at an economy rate of 5.23 . As a result , Kartik was omitted from the ODI tour of Australia in favour of Chawla . Due to his international commitments , Kartik made only sporadic appearances during the Indian domestic scene in 2007 – 08 . He took nine wickets at 44.22 and scored 77 runs at 19.25 in three first-class fixtures . After being dropped from India 's limited-overs team , Kartik continued his strong one-day form at domestic level , taking six wickets at 25.33 at an economy rate of only 3.16 in six matches . Kartik was purchased by the Kolkata Knight Riders in the inaugural 2008 Indian Premier League . He played in six matches , taking three wickets at 42.33 , but was dropped because his economy rate was beyond eight runs an over . All of these came in one match in which he took 3 / 17 . Kartik was part of the Middlesex team that won the 2008 Twenty20 Cup in England , their first domestic title for 15 years . He played in 11 matches and took 14 wickets at 20.14 at an economy rate of 6.71 , claiming at least one wicket in all but one of the matches . Kartik represented Middlesex in the Stanford competition in October , taking two wickets at 25.50 at an economy rate of 6.37 .

His second first-class season with Middlesex was much less successful than the first ; Kartik took only 16 wickets at 34.06 in seven matches , with a best of 4 / 101 against Derbyshire . He scored 161 runs at 20.12 with a best of 44 against Warwickshire . His one-day form was also lean , yielding six wickets at 33.00 in six matches . Kartik returned to India and took 16 wickets at 32.75 in six matches for Railways in the Ranji Trophy . After taking 5 / 85 in the first innings of the season opener against Karnataka , his performances fell away and he managed only four wickets in his last three matches . Nevertheless , he was selected for Central Zone in the Duleep Trophy and took a total of 2 / 98 as they lost on first innings to South and were eliminated after one match . Kartik made some contributions with the bat , scoring 197 runs at 24.62 for the season , including a score of 56 against Maharashtra and two other efforts of 30 . Playing for both Railways and Central , Kartik took 12 wickets at 23.50 in the one-day matches for the season . He also scored 65 runs at 13.00 .

During the 2009 IPL season , which was held in South Africa , Kartik played in ten matches and took four wickets at 50.25 , but he was one of the most economical bowlers , conceding only 5.91 runs per over . Kolkata were wracked by infighting and came last . Kartik also scored 21 runs without being dismissed . In the 2009 English season , Kartik resumed service for Middlesex , and as in the IPL he was most effective as a stock bowler , taking only four wickets at 51.50 in eight T20 fixtures at an economy rate of 6.86 , never taking multiple wickets in a match . Middlesex , who had won the domestic title the previous year , only tasted victory in two of the Twenty20 matches that Kartik played in . Kartik played in ten first-class matches for Middlesex , taking 33 wickets at 22.87 . He took his season 's innings best of 5 / 65 and then 2 / 26 in the season opener against cross-London rivals Surrey , and then took 3 / 32 and 4 / 53 in a hard-fought 47-run win over Kent , and a total of 6 / 139 in the next match against Essex , but his season fell away at the end , managing only six wickets in the last three matches . With the bat , he made 336 runs at 24.00 , the most prolific season of his career with the willow , including 62 against Essex and 57 not out against Gloucestershire . He played in a solitary one-dayer , taking 2 / 19 against Northamptonshire .

The 2001 Gator Bowl was a post-season American college football bowl game between the Virginia Tech Hokies and the Clemson Tigers at Alltel Stadium in Jacksonville , Florida on January 1 , 2001 . The game was the final contest of the 2000 NCAA Division I-A football season for both teams , and ended in a 41 – 20 victory for Virginia Tech . Virginia Tech entered the game headed by star quarterback Michael Vick , who led the Hokies to a 10 – 1 regular-season record despite being injured for a part of the season . Clemson entered the game with a regular-season record of 9 – 2 under the command of head coach Tommy Bowden , who was in the second year of his tenure . The contest featured two high-scoring offenses that emphasized different aspects of the game . These aspects were exemplified in the game , which saw Clemson pass for more yards than Virginia Tech , while the Hokies ran for more yards than the Tigers . Virginia Tech jumped out to an early lead and maintained it throughout the game . Vick had a 23-yard touchdown run on the game 's opening drive , then helped the Hokies expand their lead to 14 – 0 by the end of the first quarter . The Tigers narrowed Tech 's lead to 14 – 10 in the second quarter , but the Hokies scored another touchdown before halftime and went into the second half with a 21 – 10 lead . Injuries knocked Clemson 's two leading running backs out of the game , and starting Clemson quarterback Woodrow Dantzler was removed from the game after he proved ineffective against the Virginia Tech defense . Despite these changes , the Tigers were unable to reduce Virginia Tech 's lead , which stood at 34 – 13 at the end of the third quarter . A late Clemson touchdown moved the Tigers within two touchdowns , but Virginia Tech answered with a touchdown of its own , making the final score 41 – 20 .

For the 2000 – 2001 college football season , the Gator Bowl had the right to select the No. 2 bowl-eligible team from both the Atlantic Coast Conference ( ACC ) and the Big East Conference . The bowl game 's administrators also had a contract to include Notre Dame if that school met certain entry requirements . The conference champions of the ACC and Big East were guaranteed a spot in a Bowl Championship Series game , and there also was the possibility of an at-large BCS selection for any team in each conference if it finished high enough in the BCS Poll but did not win the conference championship .

During the 1999 – 2000 college football season , Virginia Tech went undefeated during the regular season but lost to Florida State in the 2000 BCS National Championship Game . In the offseason following the championship-game loss , Tech fans and pundits anticipated a possible repeat of the Hokies ' undefeated regular season and national championship run . In the annual preseason poll of media members covering Big East Conference football , Virginia Tech was picked to finish second ; Tech received nine first-place votes to Miami 's 15 . In the preseason Associated Press college football poll , Virginia Tech was 11th . When games for the 2001 college football season were scheduled , Virginia Tech was picked to host the annual Black Coaches & Administrators Classic , the opening game of the national Division I-A season . Georgia Tech was picked as the opponent , but on the day of the game , severe lightning storms hit the Blacksburg , Virginia area . ESPN commentator Lee Corso 's rental car was struck by lightning , and the game was postponed due to severe weather . It was never rescheduled and eventually was canceled . After the BCA Classic was canceled , Virginia Tech opened the regular season with a 52 – 23 blowout win over Akron . This was followed by a 45 – 28 win over East Carolina and a 49 – 0 shutout of Rutgers . The three wins typified the early part of Virginia Tech 's schedule , which also featured wins against Boston College , Temple , West Virginia , Syracuse , and Pittsburgh . By virtue of winning its first eight games of the season , Tech rose to a No. 2 national ranking prior to facing No. 3 Miami on November 4 .

Virginia Tech star quarterback Michael Vick suffered a severely sprained ankle in the game against Pittsburgh , and strong-performing wide receiver Andre Davis was temporarily crippled by bursitis in his left foot . Despite these injuries , commentators predicted a high-scoring game that was sometimes referred to as " the Big East 's game of the year " . It was predicted that the winner likely would be a shoo-in for that year 's national championship game . With Vick injured , backup quarterback Dave Meyer started the game for the Hokies , who fell behind 14 – 0 in the first quarter . In desperation , Vick tried to play despite his injury , but he participated in only 19 plays before leaving the game for good . Miami quarterback Ken Dorsey threw three long touchdown passes , and Miami won the game , 41 – 21 . The loss knocked Tech out of contention for the national championship and the conference championship , since Miami was a fellow member of the Big East . The Hokies also fell to No. 8 in the AP Poll during the week after the game . In that week , they rebounded by beating the University of Central Florida , 44 – 21 . Ranked No. 6 after the win , Tech defeated in-state rival Virginia , 42 – 21 , in the annual battle for the Commonwealth Cup .

Though the loss to Miami knocked the Hokies out of contention for the Big East championship and its accompanying automatic BCS bid , there was the possibility that Tech could receive an at-large BCS game bid if it scored high enough in the final BCS poll and the administrators of a BCS game wanted to invite the Hokies . Tech was considered a long shot due to the availability of Oregon State and Notre Dame , two teams with large followings that would attract greater television revenue and ticket sales . Gator Bowl officials made plans based on different possibilities . If Virginia Tech was selected for a BCS bowl but Notre Dame was not , the Fighting Irish would play in the Gator Bowl . If both were selected , Big East No. 3 Pittsburgh would be given the nod for the Gator Bowl . On December 3 , the BCS selections were announced : The Fiesta Bowl selected No. 5 Oregon State and No. 10 Notre Dame instead of No. 6 Virginia Tech . This left the Hokies available for the Gator Bowl , which picked them on the next day .

The Clemson Tigers entered the 2000 – 2001 college football season after a 6 – 6 season in 1999 under first-year head coach Tommy Bowden . Fans and college football analysts predicted Bowden would continue Clemson 's resurgence from a 3 – 8 season during the year before Bowden was hired . Some pointed to Bowden 's undefeated season in the second year after assuming the head coaching job at Tulane University as a sign of what to expect from Clemson . Most analysts , however , anticipated a more moderate improvement over the previous year . In the annual preseason poll of media who covered Atlantic Coast Conference football , Clemson tied for second with Georgia Tech . Both teams were far behind perennial favorite Florida State , however . Nationally , Clemson debuted at No. 17 in the preseason AP Poll and No. 20 in the preseason coaches ' poll . The Tigers opened their season against Division I-AA opponent The Citadel , whom they beat handily , 38 – 0 . That victory was followed by two blowout wins : 62 – 9 against Missouri and 55 – 7 against ACC opponent Wake Forest . Those three games were typical of Clemson 's first eight , which the Tigers won in succession . After the win against Wake Forest , Clemson beat Virginia , Duke , North Carolina State , Maryland , and North Carolina . In the final win of that streak , starting quarterback Woodrow Dantzler was replaced by backup Willie Simmons in the second quarter due to an injury to Dantzler .

With an 8 – 0 record and a No. 5 national ranking , Clemson hosted Georgia Tech . In the game , the Yellow Jackets posted a school-record offensive effort in an upset victory over the Tigers . Clemson took a 28 – 24 lead with 1 : 52 remaining in the game , but the Yellow Jackets drove 80 yards in 11 plays before ending with a one-handed catch for a touchdown , giving Clemson its first loss of the season . The defeat eliminated the Tigers from national championship contention , but they still had a chance to win the conference championship if they defeated Florida State the following week . The Florida State Seminoles are coached by Bobby Bowden , father of Tommy Bowden . Their 2001 matchup marked only the second time that a father and son had faced each other as opposing head football coaches . The only other meeting had been the previous year , when Tommy lost by three points to his father . In the 2001 meeting , No. 4 Florida State dominated No. 10 Clemson from the start of the game . In an effort to impress BCS voters , Florida State ran up the score and the game ended with the Seminoles on top , 52 – 7 . The Seminoles ' win gave them the ACC football championship and dropped Clemson to a No. 16 ranking . With its spot as the No. 2 ACC team assured , Clemson accepted a bid to the Gator Bowl on November 14 , prior to its annual in-state rivalry game against South Carolina . In that game , South Carolina took a one-point lead with 59 seconds remaining , but Clemson drove the length of the field and kicked a field goal as time expired , giving the Tigers a 16 – 14 win to end the regular season .

In the weeks before the Gator Bowl , media and fan attention focused on Virginia Tech 's possible disappointment at not being selected for a BCS game , the coaching situations at the two schools , and the issue of whether or not Tech quarterback Michael Vick would return for another year of collegiate football . After the Virginia Tech-Clemson matchup was announced for the Gator Bowl , spread bettors favored Virginia Tech to win by 6.5 points . The betting line remained there throughout the month of December and until the game began . There were almost no off-field incidents involving players from either team : The only notable event involved two backup players from Clemson who were indicted for money counterfeiting and were suspended for the Gator Bowl . In exchange for appearing in the game , the teams were guaranteed to split a payout of $ 3,313,610 .

Immediately after the Fiesta Bowl bypassed Virginia Tech in favor of lower-ranked Notre Dame , protests from Tech fans and opponents of the BCS system erupted . Some said the selection was " unfair " , that Virginia Tech was " hosed " , or that the pick of Notre Dame was a " snub " of the Hokies . In an interview immediately after the selection , Vick said the Gator Bowl bid provided motivation to win the Gator Bowl . " We 're going to go out there and make a statement , play a great game and show the nation , " he said . Clemson , on the other hand , was enthusiastic about the Gator Bowl bid . A win in the game would have given the Tigers their first 10-win season since 1990 , and the Gator Bowl appearance marked a continued improvement over its showing the previous year . Clemson players viewed the game as a reward for a successful season , while Virginia Tech players perceived it from a more workmanlike point of view . Due to revenue-sharing agreements among Big East schools , Virginia Tech 's selection by the Gator Bowl resulted in a payment of $ 1.7 million less than if it had been selected by a BCS bowl game . Instead of receiving about $ 3.5 million from the revenue agreement and bowl payout , Tech received about $ 1.8 million .

Both Virginia Tech and Clemson endured questions about their coaching staffs in the weeks and months prior to the Gator Bowl . Virginia Tech head coach Frank Beamer was interviewed by North Carolina prior to the end of the regular season , and he debated whether or not to accept that school 's head football coaching job . On November 27 , one week before Tech 's selection by the Gator Bowl , Beamer announced that he would not be departing for North Carolina or any other school . Beamer also was considered for the vacant head-coaching position with the NFL 's Washington Redskins , but he also declined that position . Other Virginia Tech football coaches were targeted by teams to fill vacant head-coaching positions . Virginia Tech offensive coordinator Rickey Bustle was interviewed for a job at Toledo , but he declined the position . Virginia Tech defensive coordinator Bud Foster was interviewed for the head-coaching job at Virginia , but he likewise declined the job . Tech 's situation was not reflected at Clemson , where offensive coordinator Rich Rodriguez announced that he was leaving the team for the head football coach job at West Virginia University , where he competed as a player in the 1980s . Rodriguez did not participate in Clemson 's practices prior to the Gator Bowl , and he did not coach during the game . Replacing Rodriguez as temporary offensive coordinator was Brad Scott . Joining him in the press box during the Gator Bowl was Mike O 'Cain , who was hired as Clemson 's new quarterbacks coach . In an effort to prevent further defections , Clemson awarded head coach Tommy Bowden a seven-year contract extension worth $ 1.1 million annually plus incentives .

Throughout the regular season , a constant question hanging over the Virginia Tech Hokies football team was whether or not star quarterback Michael Vick would return for another year at the school . The National Football League requires that players be at least three years out of high school before they are eligible for the NFL Draft . Vick , who had not played during his freshman year at the school , would be three years out of high school in the spring following the Gator Bowl . Vick attempted to defuse the discussion when he announced on December 15 that he would be returning for his fourth year with the team . But in late December , Vick wavered on that decision when it became clear that if he left the team , he would be selected as the No. 1 overall pick in the draft . Heading into the Gator Bowl , his decision was still up in the air .

During the regular season , Clemson was No. 10 in rushing yards , averaging 236.4 per game . Its passing offense was somewhat weaker , ranked No. 63 and averaging 210.1 yards per game . In total , however , Clemson 's offense ranked No. 10 when the two amounts were added together . In scoring offense , the Tigers averaged 36.0 points per game , good enough for No. 14 in the country in that category . Clemson 's offense was led by quarterback Woodrow Dantzler , who finished the regular season having completed 58 percent of his passes for 1,691 yards , 10 touchdowns , and six interceptions . He also ran the ball extremely successfully , gaining 947 yards and 13 touchdowns on the ground . In the running game , Dantzler had the second-most yards on the team . No. 1 was running back Travis Zachery , who ran 201 times for 1,012 yards and 13 touchdowns . Zachery also was one of Dantzler 's favorite passing targets . He caught 27 passes for 288 yards and four touchdowns during the regular season . Wide receivers Rod Gardner and Jackie Robinson were the No. 1 and No. 3 recipients , respectively , of Dantzler 's passes . Gardner caught 51 passes for 956 yards and six touchdowns . Robinson , unrelated to the baseball player of the same name , caught 24 passes for 276 yards and three touchdowns .

Virginia Tech 's offense was No. 5 nationally in rushing yards , averaging 270.5 per game . Their passing offense was abysmal , however . The Hokies were ranked No. 100 in that category after averaging 155.9 yards per game during the regular season . Combined , Tech was ranked No. 20 in total offense . In scoring offense , they found success comparable to their rushing game . After averaging 40.3 points per game , they were ranked No. 5 . Virginia Tech 's offense was led by quarterback Michael Vick , who carried the ball 104 times for 617 yards and eight touchdowns despite an ankle injury that limited his mobility in the final six games of the regular season . Tech also had two successful running backs : Lee Suggs and Andre Kendrick . Suggs had 222 carries for 1,207 yards and 27 touchdowns during the regular season , while Kendrick had 102 rushes for 547 yards and three touchdowns . Suggs was the No. 1 rusher in the Big East in terms of touchdowns and rushing yards . In recognition of his accomplishments , he was given the Dudley Award , which recognizes the top college football player in Virginia .

Clemson 's defense was strongest against the rush . During the regular season , the Tigers allowed an average of 101.8 yards per game on the ground , good enough for No. 18 nationally . Their passing defense was not nearly as successful . On average , the Tigers allowed 238.6 yards per game through the air , making their pass defense the 97th best in division I-A football during the regular season . With both categories combined , the defense was ranked No. 37 . In terms of points allowed , rather than yardage , the Tigers were ranked No. 23 after giving up an average of 19.3 yards per game . Linebacker Chad Carson was the team 's defensive leader . He had 146 tackles ( the most on the team ) , two pass breakups , and one forced fumble during the regular season . Fellow linebacker Keith Adams was No. 2 on the team in tackles with 138 , including five sacks . He also had one interception , three forced fumbles , and three pass breakups . In pass defense , the Tigers ' highest achiever was cornerback Alex Ardley , who led the team in interceptions with five . He also had seven pass breakups .

Virginia Tech 's defense likewise was more successful against opponents ' rushing offense than their passing attack . Tech permitted an average of 99.3 yards per game on the ground ( 16th ) , but allowed 224.4 yards per game through the air ( 79th ) . In total , Tech was ranked the No. 27 defense in the country — slightly better than Clemson . In scoring defense , the Hokies allowed 22.6 points per game on average , good enough for No. 45 . In this category , they were worse than the Tigers . Linebacker Ben Taylor was the Hokies ' defensive leader . He was No. 1 on the team in tackles with 103 . That figure included 1.5 sacks . He also had two interceptions , five pass breakups , and one forced fumble . Four year starting linebacker Jake Houseright was the team 's No. 2 tackler . He had 75 , including five tackles for loss . He also had five pass breakups and recovered one fumble . Free safety Willie Pile , who was in his first year as a starter on the defense , was Tech 's leading performer in pass coverage . He had six interceptions — the most on the team — broke up 10 passes , forced one fumble , and recovered one fumble .

Clemson fielded the opening kickoff at the two-yard line and returned it to their 25-yard line , where the Tigers ' offense performed the game 's first offensive play , a one-yard scramble by Dantzler . A subsequent running play and an incomplete pass caused Clemson to go three-and-out before punting . Clemson punter Jamie Somaini mishandled the ball , however , and Virginia Tech 's defense tackled him at the Tigers ' 23-yard line . On Tech 's first play after the turnover , quarterback Michael Vick completed a 23-yard pass to Jared Ferguson for a touchdown . The extra point kick by Carter Warley was successful , and Virginia Tech had a 7 – 0 lead with 13 : 23 remaining in the first quarter . Virginia Tech 's post-touchdown kickoff was downed at the Clemson 26-yard line , where the Tigers began their second offensive possession . It began no better than the first , as Dantzler was tackled for a three-yard loss by defensive tackle Lamar Cobb . A rush for no gain and a short pass forced Clemson to again punt before gaining a first down . Somaini 's second punt was kicked cleanly , and the Hokies returned the punt to their 42-yard line . Two rushes and a pass to the 50-yard line were not enough for a first down , and Tech punted to the Clemson 17-yard line .

The Tigers ' third possession didn 't produce anything more than their first two possessions did . A running play was stopped for no gain , Dantzler was sacked for a loss of three yards by David Pugh , and a scramble by Dantzler gained only four yards . Clemson 's punt was downed at the Tech 41-yard line , and the Hokies had another chance on offense . On the first play of the drive , Vick scrambled for a nine-yard gain . On the next play , Tech gained a first down on a run by backup running back Andre Kendrick to the Clemson 46-yard line . After an incomplete pass , Vick completed a six-yard toss to Kendrick . A five-yard offsides penalty gave Tech a first down at the Clemson 35-yard line , then Vick completed a six-yard throw to wide receiver Emmett Johnson . This was followed by Vick scrambling for a first down at the Clemson 19-yard line . A reverse run by Johnson picked up five yards , then a run up the middle gained a first down at the Clemson nine-yard line . Two rushes by Kendrick failed to reach the five-yard line , then Vick ran six yards for Tech 's second touchdown of the game . The extra point was good , and Tech extended its lead to 14 – 0 with 1 : 08 remaining in the quarter .

The second quarter began with Clemson in possession of the ball and facing third and two at its 46-yard line . The Tigers gained a first down with the first play of the quarter , a four-yard rush by Zachery . From midfield , Dantzler threw an incomplete pass then ran for no gain . On third down , Dantzler completed a long pass to Justin Watts , who gained a first down at the Tech 23-yard line . On the next play , Dantzler completed a pass to Zachery , who ran into the end zone for Clemson 's first points of the game . During the play , Zachery broke his foot and was kept out of the rest of the game . The extra point was good , and the Tigers narrowed Tech 's lead to 14 – 7 with 13 : 34 remaining in the first half . Clemson 's post-touchdown kickoff was bobbled by kick returner Andre Kendrick at the Tech one-yard line , but Kendrick broke free of the Clemson defense for a 34-yard return to the 35-yard line . Tech 's first play after the return was an 11-yard run by Lee Suggs up the right side of the field . After the first down , Suggs ran straight ahead for a short gain , then Vick scrambled to the Clemson 37-yard line and another first down . Suggs then gained 18 yards on a run to the left side of the field . At the Clemson 19-yard line , Suggs was stopped for a loss of one yard , then Vick was sacked for a loss of five yards . The third-down play was an incomplete pass , and Carter Warley entered the game to attempt a 42-yard field goal . The kick bounced off the field goal crossbar but did not cross it , thus denying the Hokies three points . With 10 : 33 remaining in the half , Tech still had a 14 – 7 lead .

Following the missed field goal , Clemson 's offense started at its 25-yard line . On the first play of the drive , Dantzler completed a pass to wide receiver Rod Gardner , who ran for 25 yards and a first down at the 50-yard line . A nine-yard shovel pass play was followed by a run up the middle for a first down at the Tech 37-yard line . Dantzler completed an eight-yard pass , then a running play was stopped short of the first-down marker . On third down , Dantzler faked a quarterback sneak in order to attempt a long pass downfield . Dantzler was unable to pass , however , and was sacked for a four-yard loss . Rather than attempt a field goal or punt the ball , Clemson coach Tommy Bowden had his team attempt to gain a first down . Dantzler scrambled forward , but didn 't gain the five yards needed . The Tigers thus turned the ball over on downs at the Tech 28-yard line . Tech began its drive with an incomplete pass , which was followed by a short run . On third down , Vick prepared to throw the ball , but he was hit by Clemson defender Keith Adams and fumbled the ball . Fellow Clemson defender Terry Jolly recovered the loose football and returned it to the Tech 14-yard line before he was tackled . Following the turnover , Dantzler was stopped on a short run then threw two incomplete passes . Rather than again attempt to convert a fourth down , Bowden sent in kicker Aaron Hunt to attempt a 28-yard field goal . The kick soared through the uprights , and Clemson narrowed Virginia Tech 's lead to 14 – 10 with 5 : 45 remaining in the quarter .

Kendrick returned Clemson 's post-score kickoff to the Tech 23-yard line . A two-yard run by Suggs was followed by a pass to Davis at the Tech 39-yard line for a first down . Two running plays set up third down and two , then Vick completed a 50-yard pass to Kendrick , who picked up a first down at the Clemson four-yard line . From there , it took Suggs two rushes to pass the goal line for Virginia Tech 's third touchdown of the game . The extra point was good , and Tech extended its lead to 21 – 10 with 2 : 26 before halftime . Tech 's post-touchdown kickoff bounced to the Clemson two-yard line before it was returned to the Clemson 12-yard line . An incomplete pass on first down was followed by a first-down pass to Gardner at the 22-yard line . Dantzler then completed a pass to Watts at the 34-yard line for another first down . After an incomplete pass , Dantzler scrambled for a first down at the Clemson 47-yard line , where he completed a 17-yard pass to Robinson as time ticked below one minute remaining . From the Tech 36-yard line , Dantzler completed a pass to Gardner at the Tech 29-yard line . After a time out with 33 seconds remaining , Dantzler threw an incomplete pass . This was followed by another incomplete pass , and Clemson converted the first down with a pass to the Tech 24-yard line . An incomplete pass on first down was followed by another on second down . Following the play , there was only eight seconds left on the clock , and coach Bowden ordered Hunt into the game to attempt a 41-yard field goal . The kick was short and to the right , and Clemson turned the ball over with two seconds remaining . Vick took a knee to run the final seconds off the clock , and Virginia Tech entered halftime with a 21 – 10 lead .

Because Clemson received the ball to begin the game , Virginia Tech received the ball to begin the second half . Kendrick received the kickoff at the Tech goal line and returned it to the 20-yard line , where the Hokies started the first possession of the second half . On the first play , Virginia Tech committed a 10-yard holding penalty . Suggs gained five yards with a run up the middle , then Vick completed a pass to tight end Browning Wynn at the 28-yard line . On third down , the Hokies were stopped short of the first down marker and punted for only the second time in the game . During the kick , Clemson committed a 15-yard roughing the kicker penalty . The penalty allowed the Hokies to retain the football and gave them a first down at their 44-yard line . On the first play after the penalty , Vick completed a 55-yard pass to Davis at the Clemson one-yard line . After the pass , Suggs ran straight ahead for his second touchdown of the game . The extra point was missed by Warley , but Tech still extended its lead to 27 – 10 with 12 : 19 remaining in the quarter .

Virginia Tech 's kickoff was recovered and Clemson 's kick returner ran out of bounds at the Tigers ' 12-yard line . Dantzler scrambled for two yards , but Virginia Tech linebacker Jake Houseright was injured during the play and left the game . After a delay while the injured Houseright was helped off the field , Dantzler scrambled for six yards . Bernard Rambert gained a first down with a two-yard run , then he gained five yards on a run up the middle . Dantzler followed the gain with a 13-yard run of his own and a first down at the Clemson 40-yard line . Rambert caught a five-yard pass from Dantzler , then he ran for one yard up the left side of the field . During the play , Rambert was injured and had to be helped off the field . He was replaced by third-string freshman running back Keith Kelly . Dantzler threw an incomplete pass on third down , then Somaini punted the ball to Virginia Tech . The kick bounced off the chest of the Virginia Tech kick returner , and the loose ball was scooped up by Robert Carswell of Clemson . Following the turnover , Clemson 's offense had a first down at the Tech 20-yard line with 8 : 44 remaining in the quarter .

Kelly gained one yard on first down , then Dantzler picked up 11 yards and a first down on a run up the middle of the field . An incomplete pass was followed by a run for no gain and another incomplete pass . Facing fourth and goal at the eight-yard line , Bowden sent in his field-goal kicker . After the Tigers called a time out , Hunt completed a 27-yard field goal attempt and cut Virginia Tech 's lead to 27 – 13 with 7 : 19 remaining in the quarter . Clemson 's post-score kickoff was fielded at the five-yard line by Kendrick and returned to the Tech 25-yard line . The first play of the drive was an option run with Vick and Kendrick , who broke free of the Clemson defense for a 45-yard run and a first down at the Clemson 29-yard line . Two short rushes were followed by a pass to fullback Cullen Hawkins at the 10-yard line for a first down . Clemson committed a five-yard offsides penalty , then Ferguson ran straight ahead for a touchdown . The extra point kick was good , and Tech took a 34 – 13 lead with 5 : 14 left in the quarter .

The post-touchdown kickoff was returned to the Clemson 30-yard line , where it was fumbled . The loose football jetted forward and was recovered by a Clemson player at the 34-yard line , where the Tigers ' offense began another drive . The first play of the possession was a nine-yard pass from Dantzler to Kelly , and it was followed by a shovel pass to Kelly , who gained a first down at the Tech 47-yard line . From there , Kantzler ran straight ahead for 27 yards and a first down at the Tech 20-yard line . After two incomplete passes , Clemson completed a five-yard false-start penalty . A one-yard run by Dantzler was followed by an unsuccessful fourth-down conversion attempt . Dantzler attempted a pass downfield , but the ball was intercepted by Ronyell Whitaker , who returned the ball to the Tech 32-yard line . In possession of the ball and a large lead , Virginia Tech proceeded to start running out the clock by executing running plays , which do not halt the game clock at their conclusion as do incomplete passing plays . Suggs gained nine yards on a run up the middle , then Ferguson was tackled for a loss after an incomplete pass by Vick . Tech punted , and the ball was downed at the 26-yard line . Following the punt , Clemson put backup quarterback Willie Simmons into the game . On his first play , Simmons was sacked by Jim Davis for a five-yard loss . The second play was a repeat of the first , as Davis again sacked Simmons , this time for an 11-yard loss . On third down , Simmons threw an incomplete pass , and Clemson punted after going three and out .

The fourth quarter began with Clemson in possession of the ball and starting a drive at its 20-yard line following a touchback . On the first play of the drive , Simmons threw an interception to Virginia Tech defender Willie Pile at the 50-yard line . Following the turnover , the Hokies continued running out the clock with rushing plays up the middle of the field . A short gain by Suggs was followed by a five-yard offsides penalty against Clemson , which advanced the Hokies to the Clemson 45-yard line . Ferguson then gained a first down on a run to the 32-yard line . On first down , Vick was slightly injured after attempting to pitch the ball forward . He left the game and was replaced by backup quarterback Dave Meyer . Tech advanced the ball on short runs , setting up fourth down and seven . Tech coach Frank Beamer called a time out , allowing Vick to re-enter the game . The fourth-down play was an incomplete pass , and Tech turned the ball over on downs with 11 : 49 remaining in the game . Following the turnover , Clemson received the ball at its 28-yard line . Simmons ran the ball straight ahead for an eight-yard gain , gained one yard on a run , then Kelly ran for a first down at the 40-yard line . On first down , Simmons completed an 18-yard pass to Gardner at the Tech 42-yard line . Simmons then completed a six-yard pass before throwing a shovel pass to Kelly for a first down at the Tech 32-yard line . An incomplete pass was followed by six-yard toss and a pass to Watts at the 12-yard line . Simmons ran out of bounds for a two-yard loss , then completed a touchdown pass to Gardner . The extra point kick was good , and Clemson closed Virginia Tech 's lead to 34 – 20 with 7 : 19 remaining .

With limited time remaining , Clemson attempted an onside kick in an effort to retain possession and have a chance to make up some of the scoring deficit . The kick was recovered by Virginia Tech , however , and the Vick-led Tech offense returned to the field at the Clemson 44-yard line . Suggs was stopped for no gain on a run up the middle , Vick threw an incomplete pass , then he completed a 14-yard pass to Wynn for a first down at the Clemson 30-yard line . After the first down , Ferguson gained a few yards on a run up the middle , then Suggs advanced the ball to just short of the first-down marker . On third down , Suggs gained the first down with a run up the middle . Following the first down , Clemson defender Alex Ardley was called for a personal foul and ejected from the game . The penalty gave Virginia Tech a first down at the Clemson 10-yard line . From there , Clemson was called for a five-yard offsides penalty . On the first play after the consecutive penalties , Vick pitched the ball to Suggs , who ran into the end zone untouched . The extra point kick was good , and Virginia Tech extended its lead to 41 – 20 with 3 : 41 remaining in the game .

Virginia Tech 's post-touchdown kickoff was returned to the 23-yard line , and Clemson went three and out after Simmons threw three incomplete passes . The Tigers ' punt was returned to the Tech 30-yard line , and the Hokies began another possession . Vick was again replaced by Meyer at the quarterback position , and running back Dwayne Ward ran up the middle of the field for a short gain . Third-string running back Keith Burnell gained more yardage with a run up the middle , then Ward picked up a first down with a run up the left side of the field . During the play , Tech committed a 10-yard penalty , but the resulting yardage was still enough for a first down . Tech proceeded to run out the remaining seconds on the clock , and the Virginia Tech Hokies earned a 41 – 20 victory .

In recognition of his success in leading the Hokies to a bowl game win , Virginia Tech quarterback Michael Vick was named the most valuable player of the winning team . Vick finished the game having completed 10 of 18 passes for 205 yards , one touchdown , and one interception . Vick also ran the ball nine times for a gain of 21 yards and a touchdown . He was sacked twice , resulting in a loss of two yards . On the opposite side of the ball , Clemson wide receiver Rod Gardner was named the MVP of the losing team . He caught seven passes for 94 yards and a touchdown during the game . Virginia Tech outgained Clemson on the ground by a nearly 3 : 1 margin . Tech running back Lee Suggs carried the ball 20 times for 73 yards and three touchdowns . At the time , Suggs ' three touchdowns were a Virginia Tech bowl game record and tied the Gator Bowl record for most touchdowns by a player . Fellow running backs Andre Kendrick and Jarrett Ferguson gained 52 yards and 26 yards , respectively . Suggs ' scores and the two by Ferguson also marked the first time the Hokies had two players with two or more touchdowns in a bowl game .

On the other side of the ball , Clemson 's 44 pass attempts and 21 pass completions were the most allowed by Virginia Tech in any bowl game to that point . The Tigers outgained Virginia Tech through the air by almost 40 yards , and Clemson 's two quarterbacks performed consistently throughout the game . Dantzler completed 15 of 32 passes for one touchdown and 180 yards , while Simmons completed six of 12 passes for 63 yards , one touchdown , and two interceptions . On the ground , Dantzler led all rushers with 18 carries for 81 yards . Clemson 's No. 2 rusher was Zachery , who had five carries for 15 yards . Defensively , Virginia Tech intercepted two Clemson passes and sacked Clemson quarterbacks six times for a loss of 28 yards . The Tech defense held Clemson without a first down and to -2 yards of total offense until less than two minutes were left in the first quarter . Clemson 's defense sacked Vick twice for a total loss of two yards .

Virginia Tech 's win brought it to a final record of 11 – 1 , while Clemson 's loss lowered it to a final record of 9 – 3 . Despite the Hokies ' win , they did not advance in either the Associated Press or Coaches ' polls . Tech ended the year ranked No. 6 in both polls and No. 5 in the BCS . Clemson also remained relatively stationary in the polls . The Tigers remained at No. 16 in the Associated Press poll and dropped from No. 13 to No. 14 in the Coaches ' Poll . The victory was the first in three bowl trips for the Hokies . The loss was Clemson 's fifth straight in a bowl game and fourth in eight trips to the Gator Bowl at that point .

Immediately after the conclusion of the Gator Bowl , Vick was asked by an NBC broadcaster if he intended to return to Virginia Tech for another year of collegiate football . He responded that he would discuss matters with his family and Tech head coach Frank Beamer before making a decision . That announcement sparked a fresh round of speculation from sports pundits and fans wondering if Vick would choose to return to school or enter the 2001 NFL Draft . Virginia Tech , through its football coaching staff , began an intensive lobbying campaign in an effort to convince Vick to stay . On January 11 , 2001 , Vick held a press conference to announce that he would be forgoing his final two years of collegiate eligibility to enter the NFL Draft . Immediately after the announcement , he was predicted to be the No. 1 pick in the draft , a hypothesis realized on April 21 , when he was selected by the Atlanta Falcons , who had traded draft picks in order to have the right to select Vick .

Invisible Circles is the third studio album by Dutch symphonic metal band After Forever . It was released on 25 March 2004 , by the small Dutch label Transmission Records . It is After Forever 's first full-length album since the dismissal of guitarist and composer Mark Jansen , whose musical tastes had strongly influenced the sound of their first work Prison of Desire ( 2000 ) and their successful second offering Decipher ( 2001 ) . In this work After Forever choose a new musical direction , mostly revolving around elements of progressive metal instead of the gothic and symphonic metal of previous albums . The creative process for Invisible Circles took more than a year and required the use of three recording studios in the Netherlands and Germany . A long tour to support the album brought the band to some of the most important European rock festivals and to Central and South America . Invisible Circles is a concept album about the dynamics of quarrelsome families and psychological child abuse . The theme was inspired by guitarist Sander Gommans ' work as an art teacher , in direct contact with dysfunctional families and teen-age problems . It is also a metal opera , with a storyline that follows the lives of an abused child and her parents since her conception to adulthood . The album was received with mixed reviews , but entered the charts in the Netherlands and Belgium .

By the end of 2001 , After Forever appeared as rising stars on the dynamic scene of Dutch metal , which included bands like The Gathering , Within Temptation , Gorefest and Ayreon . Their second album Decipher ( 2001 ) had received very positive reviews and their name was well known in the underground scene of the Netherlands . Critics were impressed by the remarkable musicianship of the young members of the band and in particular by Floor Jansen ’ s vocals , both in studio and in live performances . In contrast with these premises for a bright future , the relationships within the band were not so idyllic . Soon after the release of Decipher , After Forever faced a strong creative contrast between founding member and guitarist Mark Jansen and the rest of the band . Mark Jansen had been the main composer of the band together with Sander Gommans and his love for movie soundtracks and classical music had had a strong influence on the musical style of After Forever ’ s first two albums , Prison of Desire ( 2000 ) and Decipher . Moreover , his interest for religious and moral themes had characterized his lyrics for many songs , often collected under a common title ( e.g. The Embrace That Smothers and My Pledge of Allegiance ) . In the next album , Mark Jansen meant to further explore complex interactions between classical instruments , choruses in Latin and death metal elements , while Gommans and the others preferred a more direct and aggressive approach to music , retaining some elements that made the sound of the band recognizable , but expanding it in new and different directions . These musical differences led to Mark Jansen leaving the band , in what he felt as an actual dismissal .

He quickly formed another band called Sahara Dust , which later developed into the symphonic metal band Epica . His place was taken by Bas Maas , who had been the guitar technician for After Forever during the tours of 2001 and 2002 . August and September 2002 were dedicated to a European tour , supporting Finnish act Nightwish and attending some rock festivals , which exposed the band to larger audiences and gained them even more favourable press . Further media exposure came from Floor Jansen 's collaboration with Dutch multi-instrumentalist and composer Arjen Anthony Lucassen , for the recording of Star One 's album Space Metal and the subsequent tour in late 2002 . Jansen 's activities , as well as the regular jobs and studies of the After Forever band members , reduced the band 's live performances for the rest of 2002 and half of 2003 . It was known that the band was working at a new album from the beginning of 2003 , but their first release was the EP Exordium in October 2003 , containing an instrumental track , three new songs and two covers . In Jansen ’ s words " the EP Exordium was like an introduction to this new full length album and the subjects of the lyrics are already connected to the concept ( ... ) meaning they are also dealing with modern , social problems " .

The concept of Invisible Circles was shaped by After Forever 's singer and lyricist Floor Jansen , taking inspiration from Sander Gommans ' job as an art teacher . His daily contact with children with social and family problems had given him the desire to make people aware of these problems by incorporating their stories into songs . He had also realized that those children 's problems often stemmed from the psychological traumas that their parents had experienced in their past . Gommans described the title and the concept of the album in these terms : " Invisible Circles describes the paths of life that someone can follow . Life consists of several circles that you can follow ; many times you will come back at the beginning of a circle , although you have tried to get out of that particular circle . " The plot revolves around a dysfunctional family , comprising a father , a mother , their daughter and the father 's mother . The story begins with two lovers , whose relationship is running dry . They decide to have a child , which the woman believes may save their relationship ( " Between Love and Fire " ) . The birth of a baby girl destroys in the mother her hopes for a brilliant professional career and smothers her passion . On the other hand , the newborn child causes in the father a stiffening of his feelings and the refusal to compromise his career for a " spoilt brat " ( " Sins of Idealism " ) . The girl , perceived in the family as an unwanted burden , tries to adapt to the psychological abuse she receives , but she is the object of frequent quarrels and grows sad and depressed ( " Beautiful Emptiness " ) . She searches for quietness and strength in her inner fantasy world , and friendship and love on the internet , becoming ever more detached from the real world and eccentric in the eyes of her schoolmates and parents ( " Eccentric " , " Digital Deceit " , " Through Square Eyes " ) . The line of pain that connects the child to her parents appears indestructible and the situation gets worse when the father thinks of leaving ( " Blind Pain " , " Two Sides " ) . The intervention of the girl 's grandmother reveals that the father was himself a neglected child and a victim of his family ( " Victim of Choices " ) . The father 's anger is a reaction to his abuse as a child and this realization seems to soften the girl 's pain , bringing her out of her defensive shell ( " Reflections " ) . In conclusion , the grown-up daughter , now a mother herself , faces the same dilemmas of her parents and is bound to repeat her parents ' mistakes , closing the invisible circle that endures from one generation to another ( " Life 's Vortex " ) .

Sander Gommans started the composition of the basic melodies for Invisible Circles at the beginning of 2003 in his home studio in Reuver , working at the same time on new songs for the EP Exordium . This part of the creative process had been shared with Mark Jansen for the previous albums and it would be shared with keyboard player Joost van den Broek for the following ones . Gommans wrote the songs for the new album with the precise idea of pushing the music of the band closer to progressive metal , reducing the gothic atmospheres of the previous releases to a minimum and adopting as many different musical styles as he felt necessary to the convey the message of the songs . Meanwhile , his fiancée Floor Jansen was writing the lyrics and shaping the plot for the concept album . The band reunited at Excess Studios in Rotterdam in July 2003 , a few weeks after recording Exordium , to arrange the new songs and to record the instrumental tracks , under supervision of producer Hans Pieters and sound engineer Dennis Leidelmeijer . Every member of the band contributed to the music , which is credited for the most part to all six musicians . When the instrumental tracks were ready , the band moved in August 2003 to Gate Studio in Wolfsburg , Germany , where all solo vocal parts were arranged by the band , under supervision of American singer and producer Amanda Somerville . She also contributed , along with Jay Lansford , the recited parts that connect the songs to each other and explain parts of the plot . The solo vocals of Jansen , Gommans and Bas Maas were recorded separately by producers Sascha Paeth and Michael “ Miro ” Rodenberg . Female soprano vocals , grunts and clean male vocals represent in the songs different feelings and behaviours of the characters . The final stage of the recording process was executed at Arts Music Recording studio in Rhoon from 20 to 24 October 2003 , under supervision of Peter Arts . The orchestra and choir parts were arranged there by Cees ’ Kieboom , who also contributed some additional keyboards to smooth the transition between the different instrumental parts . The final mixing of all the parts was executed by Sascha Paeth at The Pathway Studio in Wolfsburg , Germany in November and December 2003 , except the instrumental introduction " Childhood in Minor " mixed by Sander Gommans . The album was mastered at Sound Factory by Peter van ' t Riet for a release in early 2004 .

The artwork for the album was created by German designer Carsten Drescher and his graphics company Media Logistics . Drescher was responsible for the After Forever logo and the cover concepts of every After Forever album and single since then . The girl he photographed is in fact his daughter Aimee Drescher , who also appeared in the video clip for the song " Digital Diceit " . He inserted the photos in a dark urban landscape tinted blue , completing the front cover artwork with the digital overlay of circles in the water to evoke the title of the album . The same circles were extensively used in the CD booklet and in every other artwork related to the album . Together with the dominant blue colour the circles were also present in the live show scenography . The photos of the band were taken by Dutch photographer Angelique van Woerkom in November 2003 and each member dressed in a tight black and blue suit with a lightning motif , the same colors of the CD sleeve . The same suits were used for the video clip of the single " Digital Deceit " and sometimes appeared in live shows during the following tour .

The Invisible Circles tour started in February 2004 , just before the album release , in Mexico , home of the independent label Raw Metal Records , which distributed After Forever albums for all the American continent . An intensive European tour followed , touching the Netherlands , Germany and France . Two months after the release of the album , keyboard player Lando van Gils left the band on amicable terms . He played his last gig with the band at The Bosuil , Weert , on 14 May 2004 . He was replaced by keyboard player Joost van der Broek , coming from the Dutch progressive rock band Sun Caged , who completed the rest of the tour . Van den Broek had played with Floor Jansen during the Star One tour of 2002 , where he also met Gommans . The tour brought the band to play at the important Graspop , Pinkpop and Dynamo festivals in Belgium and the Netherlands . The Pinkpop Festival performance on 30 May 2004 , was televised for a Dutch TV station . The first leg of the tour culminated with the performance at the Wacken Open Air festival , on 7 August 2004 .

New dates of the tour were added at the end of the year , but some shows were cancelled when drummer André Borgman was admitted to a hospital and diagnosed with lung cancer at an initial stage . The official site of the band reported the news of Borgman ’ s illness and confirmed some shows , with Ayreon , Star One and Gorefest drummer Ed Warby standing-in for Borgman . The band spent the first half of 2005 concentrating on the material for the new album Remagine , while Borgman received intensive treatment to cure his cancer . Luckily , the cures were successful and Borgman was back behind his drum kit for the final leg of the Invisible Circles tour in South America in August 2005 .

After the almost unanimous praise received by the album Decipher and the perplexities raised by the new musical direction of the EP Exordium , there were great expectations for the new album by fans and specialized press alike . The complexity of the music and concept of Invisible Circles produced mixed reviews , ranging from highest praise to complete failure , even in the same publication . The bold move of making a concept album about such a controversial matter was generally appreciated but , as Eduardo Rivadavia said in his AllMusic review , this could be a " slightly overambitious creation " . The Maximum Metal reviewer states that " concept albums are always hard to pull off and not many bands can do it well " and " here is another failed attempt " . It was the general opinion of most reviewers that Floor Jansen 's lead vocals are at her best and " her performance here is powerful , dramatic and very impressive overall , no matter how she chooses to sing " . However , her lyrics were sometimes considered a weak point of the album , despite the fact that the band " placed as much emphasis " on them " as they did on the music " . Sam Grant of Sonic Cathedral Webzine considered them " trite " and " disappointing " . In particular , the spoken dialogue by Somerville and Lansford was generally considered badly acted and detrimental to the music which , on the contrary , was generally considered the strong point of the album . The change of musical direction , with the introduction of progressive metal elements , and the many variations of style adopted in the songs were generally praised , to the point that a Metal Storm reviewer compares After Forever to " Symphony X with Floor Jansen on vocals " . Only a few reviewers remained nostalgic of the gothic and symphonic sound of Decipher and denounced a " lack of direction " and " too much confusion " in the music of the album .

The Halifax Central Library is a public library in Halifax , Nova Scotia on the corner of Spring Garden Road and Queen Street . It serves as the flagship library of the Halifax Public Libraries , replacing the Spring Garden Road Memorial Library . A new central library was discussed by library administrators for several decades and approved by the regional council in 2008 . The architects , a joint venture between local firm Fowler Bauld and Mitchell and Schmidt Hammer Lassen of Denmark , were chosen in 2010 through an international design competition . Construction began later that year on a prominent downtown site that had been a parking lot for half a century . The new library opened in December 2014 and has become a highly popular gathering place . In addition to a book collection significantly larger than that of the former library , the new building houses a wide range of amenities including cafés , an auditorium , and community rooms . The striking architecture is characterised by the fifth floor 's cantilever over the entrance plaza , a central atrium criss-crossed by staircases , and the building 's transparency and relationship to the urban context . The library won a Lieutenant Governor ’ s Design Award in Architecture for 2014 .

The Spring Garden Road main library , opened in 1951 , had been considered inadequate by library administrators for several decades . The first report mentioning a replacement building was published in 1971 . An expansion built in 1974 was quickly outgrown . A 1987 assessment noted that the spaces within were " self-contained and inflexible " and that " study space and comfortable reading areas are presently the focus of serious public complaint ... services are cramped and over crowded . " In the mid-1990s the municipalities of Halifax , Dartmouth , Bedford , and Halifax County were amalgamated , and a new regional library board was created . In 1995 , the Joint Amalgamation Committee of the merged libraries " agreed that a new central library would be needed to serve the new Halifax Regional Library system and that the site should remain in the present downtown area . " They cited numerous problems with the original building . In addition to its small size ( 3,594 square metres [ 38,690 sq ft ] ) , technological improvements were hampered by poor wiring and difficulty laying cable in mid-floor locations . Accessibility was poor due to the numerous stairs , levels , and an undersized elevator . Other problems with the building included leaks , asbestos , inoperable windows , the lack of a sprinkler system , inadequate climate control , ceilings as low as 1.95 m ( 6 ft 5 in ) , and the lack of numerous services found at other modern libraries .

Following the merger , the new library board undertook extensive planning for a new facility in the hope that a new central library might be part of the 1999 commemoration of the 250th anniversary of the city . The library board commissioned an architectural study , released in 1997 , recommending a new central library of approximately 8,800 square metres ( 95,000 sq ft ) after concluding a renovation of the existing library would " not result in significant cost savings " and would lead to a less efficient building . Furthermore , it recommended building the new library on a different site in order to avoid costly temporary relocation . This study considered six different sites for the new library and recommended the lot at Queen and Clyde Streets , then a municipal parking lot . The projected cost of construction was just short of $ 24 million at 1997 prices . The recommendation for a new library was echoed in a 2004 needs assessment and master plan study for the overall library system . The central library was identified as the " first priority " for the library board in terms of capital development , with implementation recommended by 2009 . The study found agreement among survey respondents that the library should be located in downtown Halifax , being the core of the region and an anticipated area of growth in the regional plan .

Following the 2004 demolition of the nearby former Halifax Infirmary , planning and public consultation began , as part of the Spring Garden Road & Queen Street Joint Public Lands Study , in order to determine the future of the glut of vacant public lands in the area . The lot directly on this prime intersection was closely considered as the site of either a new central library or a justice centre , consolidating other courthouse facilities around the city . The site had been occupied by Bellevue House , the army commandant 's house from the 19th century until it was demolished in 1955 . It had then remained a parking lot into the 21st century . In June 2007 , regional council voted to approve " in principle , designation of the property at the corner of Spring Garden Road and Queen Street as the site of the Central Library " and to initiate negotiations for the acquisition of that land from the province . These negotiations , concluded in January 2010 , resulted in a land swap : the municipality acquired the Queen and Spring Garden site from the province in exchange for the former Queen Elizabeth High School and Birk 's ( Barrington and George streets ) lands , plus $ 1.9 million " in recognition of the higher value of the provincially owned land . "

The architects for the new library were chosen through an international competition for a design contract worth C $ 4.3 million . Four architectural teams were shortlisted , each a partnership between a local and a non-local firm . The winning scheme , a joint venture by Danish firm Schmidt Hammer Lassen and Fowler Bauld & Mitchell of Halifax , was selected in March 2010 . The other shortlisted teams were Lydon Lynch with HOK , Barrie and Langille with Moriyama and Teshima , and Shore Tilbe Irwin + Partners with John K. Dobbs . The library governance stated they sought to " involve as many people as possible in the public consultation process for the new central library . " It was suggested in The Coast , a weekly newspaper , that this emphasis on public involvement was a reaction to a negative public response toward a proposed redesign of Point Pleasant Park after its partial destruction in Hurricane Juan . Early planning was undertaken in three public consultation phases during 2008 . Five more public meetings and workshops were held in 2010 following the selection of the design architects . The final design was unveiled by the architects during the fifth of these meetings on 4 November 2010 . A final public event was held at Pier 21 on 14 November 2012 .

The Spring Garden Road Memorial Library was named after its status as a war memorial and displays several commemorative artefacts , including two Books of Remembrance containing the names of thousands of Halifax County residents who gave their lives in the First World War , Second World War , and Korean War . A page is turned in each book every Remembrance Day . A Silver Cross is also on display . The building contains a plaque reading , " This building was erected in memory of those who gave their lives in defence of their Country , 1914 – 1918 ; 1939 – 1945 . For their Faith , for their Courage , for their Sacrifice , We Will Remember Them . " Some residents voiced concern that with the closure of the former building the war memorial will effectively disappear . Local author and historian Blair Beed questioned why the term " memorial " was not carried over to the new building , and proposed that " Halifax Memorial Library " would be a more appropriate name lest wartime sacrifices be pushed aside and forgotten . He also worried about the fate of the historical artefacts on display . Another resident suggested that such concerns were not given serious consideration during the public consultation process .

Library management responded that the war commemoration would be incorporated into the local history section of the library , and that the two remembrance books would be joined by a third recognizing those who died in conflicts following the Korean War . They also stated that a " few elements of the existing wartime display such as the Silver Cross , flags and standards " would be transferred to the Maritime Command Museum at Admiralty House , CFB Halifax . The three Books of Remembrance are now on display in a glass case next to the local history room .

Before construction began , an archaeological dig was undertaken to evaluate the remains of Bellevue House . The land was originally purchased in 1800 by the Duke of Kent , who was based in the city in order to command British forces in North America . Subsequent British commanders took residence in the house , built 1801 and described as an " almost palatial residence " that hosted members of the Royal Family during visits to the colony . It was destroyed in a 1885 fire , but rebuilt . The British left in the early 20th century and the structure was demolished after it was acquired by the Nova Scotia Technical College in 1955 . The site then remained a parking lot for over half a century , meaning the foundation of older structures was preserved under the asphalt . This stands in contrast to the site of the former infirmary next door , where the deep foundation rendered the site archaeologically insignificant . In addition to the foundation of the residence , the archaeological dig uncovered numerous small artefacts including china , cutlery and an 1860 Nova Scotia penny . Construction of the library by EllisDon began shortly thereafter . Following excavation and blasting for the underground car park , the foundation was poured in 2012 . In May 2014 , the library hosted a tour for journalists and officials from all levels of government . Halifax mayor Mike Savage stated that the new library is " not simply something that ’ s nice to have . It is important and critical to the future of our city . Because more than ever , for a city to succeed , we need to be invested in the knowledge economy . We need to ensure that our citizens have access to all forms of learning . ”

The total cost of the building was $ 57.6 million , of which $ 18.3 million came from the federal government via the Building Canada Fund , $ 13 million from the provincial government , and the remainder ( $ 26.3 million ) from the municipality . The municipal contribution was primarily generated from the sale of the empty lots around the library site . The library was completed in late 2014 following the transfer of materials from the former library across the street , which closed on 30 August . It opened to the public on Saturday , 13 December 2014 to an estimated 12,000 visitors who enjoyed a day of performances and festivities . The first six weeks of operation saw 272,000 visitors , who collectively checked out over 167,700 items .

The library is a five-storey structure comprising about 11,000 square metres ( 120,000 sq ft ) of space , and was designed to accommodate a book collection 50 per cent larger than that of the former Spring Garden Memorial Library . A skylighted atrium , criss-crossed by stairs and walkways , spans the interior height of the structure . The main lobby and children 's collection are concentrated on the lower floors , while much of the upper floors are designated as quiet areas . A rooftop terrace with seating offers a broad view of Downtown , the South End , and Halifax Harbour . The design , said to resemble a stack of books , has garnered international attention and was featured by CNN as one of ten " eye-popping " new buildings of 2014 . The building topped a list of " high-design libraries " compiled by enRoute and was covered on numerous architecture websites . In the 2014 " Best of Halifax " awards , ranked annually by readers of The Coast , the library was voted the " Best Thing To Happen In Halifax In The Past Year " and the " Best Effort To Improve Halifax " . SNC-Lavalin , the structural and civil engineer , was awarded the " Engineering a Better Canada Award " by the Association of Canadian Engineering Companies for their work on the library . The building was also shortlisted for the World Building of the Year Award in the Civic and Community category at the 2015 World Architecture Festival in Singapore .

The Nova Scotia Association of Architects selected the library to receive the Award of Merit at the Lieutenant Governor ’ s Design Awards in Architecture . The award was presented in 2015 by Brigadier-General J.J. Grant . The awards jury commented : " Without doubt , the new Halifax Central Library has done more to transform the discussion of contemporary architecture in Halifax than any building in the past 40 years . The Halifax Central Library was a real catalyst of local , public and architectural conversation in Halifax ; its program and location has reconstructed the way locals and visitors interact with a building filled with knowledge . " An architect from Fowler , Bauld & Mitchell stated that the library now sees an average of 6,000 visitors daily , a " huge increase " in patronage over the former Spring Garden Road Memorial Library .

The library is fully wheelchair-accessible , with multiple elevators . There are public use touchscreen computers , a dedicated computer lab , wireless internet , and conference and community rooms . An automatic conveyor belt system links the book drops to a dedicated sorting room . It handled 80,000 books in July 2015 . The library 's open design and central location enables it to host community events and festivals . In the first year of operation it has served as a venue for major annual Halifax events including Nocturne and The Word on the Street . It hosted the Duke of Edinburgh 's Award ceremony in November 2015 attended by Prince Edward .

The building houses two café spaces , one at ground level and one on the fifth floor . Patrons of the latter café have access to a rooftop patio area as well as the " Halifax Living Room " housed in the cantilevered portion of the building overlooking Spring Garden Road . The Living Room was designed as an airy , indoor public space with views of both Citadel Hill and Halifax Harbour as well as the civic square below . The ground floor café , in the corner of the building nearest the intersection , opens earlier than the rest of the library . The concession to operate from both spaces was won by Pavia Gallery Espresso Bar and Café of Herring Cove , who beat out Second Cup and Uncommon Grounds . Pavia holds a ten-year contract with an option for an additional seven years . The ground floor space is the " main café " with the same offerings as Pavia 's Herring Cove location , while the smaller upstairs café serves light refreshments only . Pavia plans to hold three art-related panel discussions at the library each year .

Following a request for proposals seeking a " signature public artwork " to be incorporated into the new library , painter and NSCAD alumnus Cliff Eyland was awarded the $ 430,000 commission for his proposal to produce 5,000 miniature paintings on medium-density fibreboard cut to the size of old library catalog index cards . Eyland , who also worked as a curator at the former Technical University of Nova Scotia next door ( now Dalhousie University 's School of Architecture and Planning ) , ended up producing a total of 6,000 paintings divided into two installations . At the ground floor , Library Cards comprises 5,000 paintings behind the main reception . A further 1,000 paintings , " eye-popping , two-colour abstracts of books leaning against each other " , decorate the Living Room in the fifth floor cantilever . This smaller installation is titled Book Shelf Paintings . The Library Cards paintings cover a variety of themes and subjects , including landscapes , portraits , abstract pieces , and musings on history and libraries . The artist joked , " there are grey landscapes to remind you about why you stay indoors in Nova Scotia to read " and said that portraits of staff at the Spring Garden Road and Halifax North Memorial libraries , photographed by Mary Ann Archibald , were painted and had subsequently been recognized by some of their subjects . He also stated that the library commission is the biggest installation he has done to date .

The ground floor houses a 300-seat auditorium which also serves as a reading space when not in use for performances . Library CEO Judith Hare stated that the space would complement a recording studio , geared toward young people , planned elsewhere in the library : " people can make their own music ... but also they ’ ll have a place to perform as well . " In 2012 the auditorium was named Paul O ’ Regan Hall following a $ 1 million donation by the O ’ Regan family in honour of the late businessman and philanthropist . Government funding only covered the cost of the building , so donations will go toward expanding the book collection and purchasing new computers and special equipment . The hall is fitted with stowable seats , acoustic ceiling baffles , a video screen , and professional sound and lighting installations . The hall boasts a $ 62,000 Yamaha grand piano donated by local philanthropist and musician Peggy Corkum in May 2015 .

The building design aims to achieve LEED Gold certification from the Canada Green Building Council , in part by incorporating energy and water saving design features such as rainwater harvesting for flushing water , computerized building management , use of local species in landscape design , and automatic lighting control . Low-emission interior finishes have been used to improve indoor air quality , and a green housekeeping policy seeks to reduce exposure of occupants to contaminants . The library supports the use of public transportation and active transportation by virtue of its central location in a dense , walkable district served by numerous bus routes , and by providing onsite bike parking .

The Bombardment of Papeete occurred in French Polynesia when German warships attacked on 22 September 1914 , during World War I. The German armoured cruisers SMS Scharnhorst and Gneisenau entered the port of Papeete on the island of Tahiti and sank the French gunboat Zélée and freighter Walkure before bombarding the town 's fortifications . French shore batteries and a gunboat resisted the German intrusion , but were greatly outgunned . The main German objective was to seize the coal piles stored on the island , but these were destroyed by the French at the start of the action . The German vessels were largely undamaged but the French lost their gunboat . Several of Papeete 's buildings were destroyed and the town 's economy was severely disrupted . The main strategic consequence of the engagement was the disclosure of the cruisers ' positions to the British Admiralty , which led to the Battle of Coronel where the entire German East Asia Squadron defeated a Royal Navy squadron . The depletion of Scharnhorst 's and Gneisenau 's ammunition at Papeete also contributed to their subsequent destruction at the Battle of the Falklands .

Word of war reached Admiral Maximilian von Spee — of the German East Asia Squadron — while at Ponape ( 17 July – 6 August ) . He concentrated the majority of his squadron at Pagan Island in the nearby Mariana Islands , and then steamed off into the Pacific with the Scharnhorst-class armored cruisers SMS Scharnhorst and Gneisenau , the Königsberg-class light cruiser SMS Nürnberg , the auxiliary cruiser SMS Titania , and several colliers at his disposal . Nürnberg and Titania were sent to gather intelligence at Hawaii and raid the cable station at Fanning Island . Von Spee then learned that Australian and New Zealand forces had captured German Samoa , and he sailed off in his flagship Scharnhorst — along with her sister ship Gneisenau — to engage what Allied forces they could find there . Failing to catch the Samoa Expeditionary Force at Apia and having seen no action at all since leaving Pagan Island , the men of Admiral von Spee 's armored cruisers were eager to meet the enemy in battle . Von Spee decided to raid Papeete in Tahiti on his way to rendezvous with the rest of his squadron at Easter Island . The French held over 5,000 t ( 5,500 short tons ) of high-quality Cardiff coal at the port , and von Spee hoped to seize the coal piles to replenish his squadron 's supply . Additionally , von Spee aimed at destroying what allied shipping he could find in the harbour , and thought the raid might help raise his men 's morale . Von Spee intended to coal at Suwarrow Atoll before sailing to Papeete , but was prevented by foul weather . Instead , von Spee decided to take Scharnhorst and Gneisenau and attempt to resupply at Bora Bora while Nürnberg and Titania were dispatched to Nukuhiva to guard the fleet 's colliers . The German admiral intended to keep his vessels ' identities secret by disguising them as French ships , flying French flags , and only allowing French- and English-speaking members of his crew contact with the Frenchmen present there . Von Spee managed to replenish his food stores using gold seized by Titania and Nürnberg during their raid of Fanning , and was able to discover the strength of the French military in the region as well as the exact size and positions of the coal piles at Papeete .

The French had no heavy defenses at Papeete but had been warned that von Spee 's squadron might raid Tahiti and that a German squadron had been sighted off Samoa . Although Papeete was the capital of the French Settlements in Oceania , by 1914 it had become a colonial backwater , lacking a wireless station and having a garrison of only 25 colonial infantry and 20 gendarmes . In order to bolster the town 's defenses , Lieutenant Maxime Destremau — commander of the old wooden gunboat Zélée and the ranking officer at Papeete — had his ship 's 100 mm ( 3.9 in ) stern gun and all of her 65 mm ( 2.6 in ) and 37 mm ( 1.5 in ) guns removed from his vessel and placed ashore to be used in place of Papeete 's antiquated land batteries . Several Ford trucks were turned into impromptu armored cars by mounting them with Zélée 's 37-mm guns and 160 sailors and marines drilled in preparation to repel any German attempt at landing . Zélée retained only her 100-mm bow gun and 10 men under the ship 's second in command . In addition to the gunboat and harbor fortifications , the French also had at Papeete the unarmed German freighter Walkure , which had been captured by Zélée at the start of the war . Despite the French preparations , the two German cruisers were more than a match for the forces Destremau commanded at Papeete . Both Scharnhorst and Gneisenau heavily outgunned Zélée , each being armed with eight 210 mm ( 8.3 in ) guns , six 150 mm ( 5.9 in ) guns , eighteen 88 mm ( 3.5 in ) guns , and four torpedo tubes . Von Spee 's forces also outnumbered the French with over 1,500 sailors aboard their vessels , more than enough to form a landing party and overwhelm the forces Destremau had to oppose them .

At 07 : 00 on 22 September 1914 , the French sighted two unidentified cruisers approaching the harbor of Papeete . The alarm was raised , the harbor 's signal beacons destroyed , and three warning shots were fired by the French batteries to signal the approaching cruisers that they must identify themselves . The cruisers replied with a shot of their own and raised the German colors , signaling the town to surrender . The French refused the German demands , and von Spee 's vessels began to shell the shore batteries and town from a distance of 6,000 m ( 6,600 yd ) . The land batteries and the gunboat in the harbor returned fire , but scored no hits on the armored cruisers . Having difficulty in discovering the exact position of the French batteries , the German cruisers soon turned their attention to the French shipping in the harbor . The French commander — Destremau — had ordered the coal piles burned at the start of the action and now smoke began billowing over the town . Zélée and Walkure were sighted and fired upon by the Germans . The French had begun to scuttle their vessels when the action had begun , but both were still afloat when Scharnhorst and Gneisenau began firing upon them and finished the two ships off . By now , most of the Papeete 's inhabitants had fled and the town had caught fire from the German shelling , with two blocks of Papeete set alight . With the coal piles destroyed and the threat of mines in the harbor , von Spee saw no meaningful purpose in making a landing . Accordingly , the German admiral withdrew his ships from Papeete 's harbor by 11 : 00 . After leaving Papeete , the ships steamed out towards Nuku Hiva to meet Nürnberg , Titania , and colliers waiting there .

By the time von Spee withdrew his ships , large portions of the town had been destroyed . Two entire blocks of Papeete had burnt to the ground before the fires were finally put out . A copra store , a market , and several other buildings and residences were among those destroyed by the shellfire and resulting inferno . While the majority of Papeete 's civilians fled to the interior of the island as soon as the fighting began , a Japanese civilian and a Polynesian boy were both killed by German shellfire . Although the two French vessels in the harbor had been sunk , there were no military casualties on either side and the German vessels took no damage . Overall , the bombardment was estimated in 1915 to have caused over 2 million francs ' worth of property damage , some of which was recouped through the seizure of a German store on the island . In addition to the seizure of their property , several local Germans were interned and forced to repair the damage von Spee 's squadron had caused . Perhaps the most lasting effect of the bombardment on the French was the dramatic fall of copra prices in the region , as local suppliers had previously sold a majority of their produce to German merchants in the area who were now interned . Further havoc and distress spread throughout the island 18 days after von Spee 's squadron had left , when rumors started to spread that a second German bombardment was about to begin .

After withdrawing , Scharnhorst and Gneisenau rendezvoused with Nürnberg and Titania at Nuku Hiva , where they resupplied and their crews took shore leave before moving on to meet the rest of the squadron at Easter Island . Although the Germans had destroyed the shipping at Papeete and wreaked havoc in the town , they had been denied their primary objective of seizing the French coal piles and replenishing their own stocks . Von Spee 's raid allowed the British Admiralty to receive word on his position and heading , allowing them to inform Rear Admiral Christopher Cradock of the German intentions thus leading to the Battle of Coronel . Another effect was the reduction of ammunition available to the two German cruisers . The hundreds of shells fired by von Spee 's ships at Papeete were irreplaceable . The depletion of ammunition as a result of the action at Papeete contributed to the German East Asia Squadron 's failure to adequately defend itself at the Battle of the Falkland Islands against British battlecruisers . Lieutenant Destremau was chastised by his misinformed superior officer for his actions during the defense of Papeete and for the loss of the gunboat Zélée . He was summoned back to Toulon under arrest to be court-martialled , but died of illness in 1915 before the trial . In 1918 , Destremau was finally recognized for his actions at Papeete and was posthumously awarded the Légion d 'honneur .

Forbes Field was a baseball park in the Oakland neighborhood of Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , from 1909 to June 28 , 1970 . It was the third home of the Pittsburgh Pirates Major League Baseball ( MLB ) team , and the first home of the Pittsburgh Steelers , the city 's National Football League ( NFL ) franchise . The stadium also served as the home football field for the University of Pittsburgh " Pitt " Panthers from 1909 to 1924 . The stadium was named after British general John Forbes , who fought in the French and Indian War , and named the city in 1758 . The US $ 1 million ( $ 26.3 million today ) project was initiated by Pittsburgh Pirates ' owner Barney Dreyfuss , with the goal of replacing his franchise 's then-current home , Exposition Park . The stadium was made of concrete and steel ( one of the first of its kind ) in order to increase its lifespan . The Pirates opened Forbes Field on June 30 , 1909 against the Chicago Cubs , and would play the final game that was also against the Cubs on June 28 , 1970 . The field itself featured a large playing surface , with the batting cage placed in the deepest part of center field during games . Seating was altered multiple times throughout the stadium 's life ; at times fans were permitted to sit on the grass in the outfield during overflow crowds . The Pirates won three World Series while at Forbes Field and the other original tenant , the Pittsburgh Panthers football team had five undefeated seasons before moving in 1924 .

In 1903 , Pittsburgh Pirates ' owner Barney Dreyfuss began to look for ground to build a larger capacity replacement for the team 's then-current home , Exposition Park . Dreyfuss purchased seven acres of land near the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh , adjacent to Schenley Park , with assistance from his friend , industrialist Andrew Carnegie . The low-priced land was selected so Dreyfuss could spend more on the stadium itself . Dreyfuss signed a contract that he would " make the ballpark ... of a design that would harmonize with the other structures in the Schenley Park district . " The site was initially labeled " Dreyfuss 's Folly " due to its long distance — a 10-minute trolley ride — from downtown Pittsburgh , but the land around the park developed and criticisms were dropped . Official Pirates ' records show that Forbes Field cost US $ 1 million for site acquisition and construction , however some estimates place the cost at twice that amount . Dreyfuss announced that unlike established wooden ballparks such as the Polo Grounds , he would build a three-tiered stadium out of steel and concrete to increase longevity — the first of its kind in the nation . Charles Wellford Leavitt , Jr. was contracted to design the stadium 's grandstand . A civil engineer , Leavitt had founded an engineering and landscape architecture firm in 1897 . He had gained experience in steel and concrete constructs while designing the Belmont and Saratoga racetracks . Based on Dreyfuss ' architectural requirements , Leavitt presented a plan for Forbes Field — the only ballpark he would design . Pirates ' manager Fred Clarke also had input into the stadium 's design , giving groundskeepers advice on the field , in addition to designing and patenting a device to spread and remove a canvas tarpaulin over the infield in case of rain .

Initial work on the land began on January 1 , 1909 , but ground was not officially broken until March 1 . Nicola Building Company built the stadium in 122 days and play began less than four months after ground was broken , on June 30 . Though the scoreboard was operated by hand , the ballpark featured multiple innovations such as ramps and elevators to assist fan movement throughout the park , a room for the umpires , and a visiting team clubhouse similar to the Pirates ' . The facade of the stadium featured " buff-colored terra cotta " spelling out " PAC " for the Pittsburgh Athletic Company . The light green steelwork contrasted with the red slate of the roof . Some members of the press urged Dreyfuss to name the stadium after himself . However , the owner decided on Forbes Field , in honor of General John Forbes , who captured Fort Duquesne from the French in 1758 and rebuilt a new " Fort Pitt " at the site . In 1935 , after Dreyfuss ' death , there was renewed media interest in renaming the stadium " Dreyfuss Field " . His widow , Florence , resisted . However , a monument to Dreyfuss was placed in center field just in front of the wall .

On June 29 , 1909 , the Pittsburgh Pirates defeated the Chicago Cubs , 8 – 1 at Exposition Park . The two teams opened Forbes Field the following day . Fans began to arrive at the stadium six and one-half hours early for the 3 : 30 pm game . The game started at 3 : 30 p.m. Weather conditions were reported as clear skies with a temperature around 80 ° . Of the crowd , the Pittsburgh Press wrote , " the ceremonies were witnessed by the largest throng that ever attended an event of this kind in this or any other city in the country ... Forbes Field is so immense — so far beyond anything else in America in the way of a baseball park — that old experts , accustomed to judging crowds at a glance , were at a loss for reasonable figures . " Records show that the first game was attended by a standing-room only crowd of 30,338 . Various National League officials and owners were present for the opening pre-game ceremonies , including league president Harry Pulliam , Civil War veteran and manager of Pittsburgh 's first professional baseball team Al Pratt , and American League president Ban Johnson . Pittsburgh Mayor William A. Magee threw out the stadium 's ceremonial first pitch . The Chicago Cubs won the first game , 3 – 2 . Dreyfuss declared , " This is indeed the happiest day of my life . " The stadium was widely considered the best in the league .

It is more accurate to say Mayor Magee threw out the first ball . He was in the second tier and threw the ball to John M. Morin , Director of Public Safety , on the field below . Morin then went to the mound and threw the first pitch to the Pirate catcher . Pictures depict the flag at Forbes Field at half staff on opening day . This occurred to honor recently deceased presidents of the Philadelphia Phillies and the Boston Doves . The first batter at Forbes Field was future Hall of Famer Johnny Evers , the Cubs second baseman and lead off batter . He was hit by a pitch and later in the inning scored the first run . The first hit by a Pirate was by catcher George Gibson , who eventually became a Pirate manager .

Barney Dreyfuss " hated cheap home runs and vowed he 'd have none in his park " , which led him to design a large playing field for Forbes Field . The original distances to the outfield fence in left , center , and right field were 360 feet ( 110 m ) , 462 feet ( 141 m ) and 376 feet ( 115 m ) , respectively . In 1925 , the right field grandstand was extended into the corner and into fair territory , reducing the foul line distance from 376 feet ( 115 m ) to 300 feet ( 91 m ) . Due to the reduced distance , Dreyfuss erected a 28-foot ( 8.5 m ) high screen to limit home runs . Even at this long distance from home plate , the wall stood 12 feet ( 3.7 m ) in height all around the field , with the right field wall reduced to 9.5 feet ( 2.9 m ) following the 1925 construction ( topped by the screen ) . The backstop was set at 110 feet ( 34 m ) behind home plate , larger than the average of 60 feet ( 18 m ) in most stadiums of the time . Additional seating eventually cut down the plate-to-screen distance to a still larger-than-average 75 feet ( 23 m ) .

With such a large outfield space , triples and inside-the-park home runs were common . The Pirates hit a record eight triples in a single game , on May 30 , 1925 . Conversely , the stadium was one of the most difficult to hit over-the-fence home runs . The closeness of the right field line from 1925 onward was the only area that compromised Dreyfuss ' original design concept . Even at that , the right field wall angled sharply out to 375 feet ( 114 m ) , a typical distance for a major league power alley . The final three home runs of Babe Ruth 's career were hit in Forbes Field on May 25 , 1935 ; the third of these cleared the 89-foot ( 27 m ) right field roof and was considered the longest home run in the park 's history . Although Forbes Field developed a reputation as a " pitcher-friendly " ballpark , there was never a no-hitter thrown in the more than 4,700 games at the stadium . The batting cage was placed just to the left of the 457-foot ( 139 m ) center field " Death Valley " marker during games , because it was believed impossible to hit the ball that far . The open part of the cage faced the wall , the back of the cage effectively serving as a convex fence . In right- and left-center fields , light towers stood on the field , and like the batting cage and flagpole in center field , were in-play .

In 1947 , well after Dreyfuss ' death , and upon the arrival of veteran slugger Hank Greenberg , the bullpens were moved from foul territory to the base of the scoreboard in left field and were fenced in , cutting 30 feet ( 9.1 m ) from the left field area , from 365 feet ( 111 m ) to 335 feet ( 102 m ) down the line and 406 feet ( 124 m ) to 376 feet ( 115 m ) in left-center field . These were not abnormal major league outfield distances , but the obvious attempt to take advantage of Greenberg 's bat led the media to dub the area " Greenberg Gardens " . Greenberg retired after the season , but by then Ralph Kiner was an established slugger with the Pirates , and the bullpen was redubbed " Kiner 's Korner " . Kiner was traded after the 1953 season , and the field was restored to its previous configuration in time for the 1954 season . The final posted dimensions of the ballpark were left field line 365 feet ( 111 m ) , left-center field 406 feet ( 124 m ) , deepest left-center 457 feet ( 139 m ) , deep right-center 436 feet ( 133 m ) , right-center field 375 feet ( 114 m ) , and right field line 300 feet ( 91 m ) . The only marker in exact straightaway center field was the Barney Dreyfuss monument , which sat on the playing field just in front of the wall .

Forbes Field 's ivy-covered walls featured no advertising , except a 32-foot ( 9.8 m ) United States Marine Corps billboard during the 1943 season . The infield developed a " rock-hard " surface throughout the stadium 's history . During the final game of the 1960 World Series , Yankees shortstop Tony Kubek was struck in the neck with a ball that bounced off the hard dirt surface , breaking up a potentially rally-killing double play and causing Kubek to exit the game . Pittsburgh went on to win the game and the championship . Groundskeepers burned gasoline on the mound to dry it off . Because of the bounces , Pirates ' play-by-play announcer Bob Prince nicknamed the ballpark , The House of Thrills .

Forbes Field had an original capacity of 25,000 , the largest in the league at the time . Seating at the stadium was remodeled numerous times , peaking at a capacity of 41,000 in 1925 and closing in 1970 at 35,000 seats . On opening day , ticket prices ranged from $ 1.25 ( equal to $ 32.92 today ) for box seats and $ 1 ( equal to $ 26.34 today ) for reserved grand stand sections ; temporary bleachers were set up for the occasion and cost $ 0.50 . Ticket prices were considered high for the day and steel pillars supporting the roof occasionally blocked fans ' views of the field . 2,000 bleachers were situated along the left field side , tickets were sold for a maximum of $ 1 . When winning streaks would attract high attendance to games , fans were permitted to sit on the grass in right field , provided they would agree to allow a player to catch any ball hit in the area . The lowest season of attendance came in 1914 when 139,620 people attended games ; the highest at the stadium came in 1960 , when 1,705,828 people watched the Pirates play . On September 23 , 1956 , the stadium 's largest crowd , 44,932 , gathered to see the home team play the Brooklyn Dodgers . The game was cut short in the top of the ninth inning , after a rain delay forced it past the Pennsylvania Sunday curfew . The Dodgers won the game 8 – 2 the following day . At 200 people , June 10 , 1938 marked the smallest crowd to ever attend a Pirates game . On September 30 , 1962 , a crowd of 40,916 people saw the Steelers defeated by the New York Giants , at the Steelers ' highest-attended game at the stadium .

Though Forbes Field was praised upon its opening , it began to show its age after 60 years of use . The park was the second oldest baseball field in the league at the time – only Shibe Park in Philadelphia was older ( it too was replaced in 1971 by Veterans Stadium ) . The location of the park , which was initially criticized for not being developed , grew into a " bustling business district " which led to a lack of parking space . One sportswriter wrote that The House of Thrills had become " as joyless as a prison exercise yard " . Following a plan to expand their adjacent campus , the University of Pittsburgh purchased Forbes Field in 1958 , with an agreement to lease the stadium to the Pirates until a replacement could be built . A proposal for a new sports stadium in Pittsburgh was first made in 1948 , but plans did not attract much attention until the late 1950s . Construction began on Three Rivers Stadium on April 25 , 1968 . The Pittsburgh Pirates and the Chicago Cubs played a double-header on June 28 , 1970 . Pittsburgh won the first game 3 – 2 . In the later game Al Oliver hit the last home run in the park , and Matty Alou drove in two runs as the Pirates closed the 62-year-old stadium with a 4 – 1 victory . The 40,918 spectators in attendance stood and cheered as Dave Giusti retired Willie Smith for the final out at the stadium . Pirates Hall of Famer Roberto Clemente played 15 seasons at Forbes Field . He was emotional during the last game saying , " I spent half my life there . " After the game , home plate was dug up and taken by helicopter to Three Rivers Stadium to be installed in the artificial turf .

In 1955 , a statue of Honus Wagner was dedicated in Schenley Plaza adjacent to Forbes Field . Several thousand fans attended the dedication as well as Wagner himself . His failing health caused him to never leave his open convertible in which he arrived ( Wagner died near the end of that year ) . The 1,800 pound statue was moved to Three Rivers Stadium in 1970 . Today , the statue stands at the home plate entrance of PNC Park . The portion of the left field wall over which Bill Mazeroski hit his walk-off home run to end the 1960 World Series , between the scoreboard and the " 406 FT " sign , no longer stands at its original location . A portion of that wall , including the distance marker , had been sliced off and moved to the Allegheny Club at Three Rivers Stadium . Before the Three Rivers demolition , the section of the wall was salvaged , and in 2009 it was restored and placed on the Riverwalk outside of PNC Park . Meanwhile , the original location of that wall is outlined by bricks extending from the left-center field wall across Roberto Clemente Drive and into the sidewalk . A plaque embedded in the sidewalk marks the spot where Mazeroski 's home run cleared the wall . The left-center and center field brick wall with " 457 FT " and " 436 FT " painted on it still stands at its original location , along with the stadium 's flagpole , adjacent to the University of Pittsburgh 's Mervis and Posvar Halls . Despite not technically being the correct section of wall where Mazeroski 's famous home run cleared , it is often locally referred to as " Mazeroski 's Wall . " This portion of the wall remained after Forbes Field was torn down , and was refurbished in 2006 in time for the All-Star Game hosted in Pittsburgh . In addition , a wooden replica of an entrance to the stadium , including a ticket window and players entrance , was constructed and placed near the remaining wall in 2006 . The home plate used in the stadium 's final game remains preserved in the University of Pittsburgh 's Posvar Hall . However , its location has been altered ; author John McCollister wrote , " Had architects placed home plate in its precise spot about half of the Pirates fans could not view it . The reason : it would have to be on display in the fifth stall of the ladies ' restroom . " However , the original location of the home plate has been more recently determined by others to be approximately 81 feet away from its current display , just inside the GSPIA / Economics Library , and not in a restroom as has been popularly believed .

A ceremony is held each October 13 at the outfield wall in Oakland to listen to a taped broadcast of the final game of the 1960 World Series . The tradition was started by Squirrel Hill resident Saul Finkelstein , who at 1 : 05 pm on October 13 , 1985 , sat alone at the base of the flagpole and listened to the NBC radio broadcast of Chuck Thompson and Jack Quinlan . Finkelstein continued the tradition for eight more years , until word spread and other people began attending in 1993 . On October 13 , 2000 — the game 's 40th anniversary — over 600 people attended to listen to the broadcast , including Mazeroski himself . For the 50th anniversary , on October 13 , 2010 , a plaque honoring Mazeroski was dedicated and more than 1,000 attended the broadcast , including Mazeroski and several other former Pirates .

In 1909 , Forbes Field 's opening season , the Pirates beat the Detroit Tigers in the World Series . It would be the only meeting of eventual Hall of Famers Honus Wagner and Ty Cobb . On August 5 , 1921 , Forbes Field was the site of the first live radio broadcast of a Major League Baseball game in the United States . Harold W. Arlin announced the play-by-play action between the Pittsburgh Pirates and the Philadelphia Phillies over KDKA from a box seat next to the first-base dugout . Regular broadcasts began in 1936 by A. K. ′ ′ Rosey ′ ′ Rowswell , a local humorist and friend of owner Bill Benswanger . Rowswell is quoted as describing his broadcasting with , " It 's not just play-by-play that matters . It 's what you say in between the pitches that counts . " His style influenced junior partner Bob Prince , who began broadcasting in 1948 . Rowswell broadcast games at Forbes Field until his death in 1955 . In 1925 , the Pirates became the first team to come back from a three-game to one deficit to defeat the Washington Senators and win the World Series . Pittsburgh 's third and final World Series championship while they played at Forbes Field came in 1960 . Bill Mazeroski hit the first home run to end a World Series and as of 2015 , the only walk-off home run in World Series Game 7 history .

Two unassisted triple plays were turned at Forbes Field . The first took place on May 7 , 1925 , when Pittsburgh 's Glenn Wright achieved the feat . Two seasons later , in 1927 , Jimmy Cooney — who had been a victim of the first triple play — also acquired three outs by himself . On May 25 , 1935 , at Forbes Field , Babe Ruth hit the last three home runs of his career as his Boston Braves lost to the Pirates , 11-7 . His last home run cleared the right field stands roofline , making him the first player to ever do so . On October 8 , 1946 , 6 months before his major league debut Jackie Robinson played with his African American all-stars against Honus Wagner 's all-stars . Most of the game-action scenes from the 1951 film Angels in the Outfield were filmed at the stadium . On May 28 , 1956 , Dale Long of the Pirates took what one author has stated was the first-ever curtain call in baseball history , after hitting home runs in eight consecutive games caused fans to cheer for five minutes . The Homestead Grays of the Negro leagues played all home games at Forbes Field from 1922 to 1939 . Grays owner Cumberland Posey became friends with Dreyfuss , who rarely missed a Grays game . In 1930 , Josh Gibson made his premiere for the Grays at Forbes Field . Also in 1930 , the Grays and the Kansas City Monarchs played the first baseball game at night in Pittsburgh on July 18 , 1930 . A crowd of over 15,000 was expected . Floodlights were installed the day before the game after they were transported from Cleveland , where the Grays and Monarchs had played on July 16 . Six members of the Grays ' 1936 team have been inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame . Beginning in 1937 , the Grays won nine consecutive Negro National League championships .

The University of Pittsburgh 's football team moved from Exposition Park into Forbes Field upon its opening in 1909 and played there until 1924 when it moved into the larger Pitt Stadium only a few blocks away . In their first game at Forbes Field on October 16 , 1909 , the Panthers defeated Bucknell University 18 – 6 . In 1910 , Pitt 's second year at Forbes Field , the Panthers went undefeated without allowing a single point . The Panthers had several successful seasons while playing at Forbes Field , including five in which they went undefeated and were awarded national championship titles in 1910 , 1915 , 1916 , 1917 , and 1918 . During their years at Forbes Field , Pitt 's teams were led by Hall of Fame coaches Joe Thompson , Glenn " Pop " Warner and Jock Sutherland . Forbes Field was the site of yet another broadcasting first when on October 8 , 1921 , Harold W. Arlin announced live play-by-play action of the Pitt-West Virginia football game on radio station KDKA , the first live radio broadcast of a college football game in the United States . Pittsburgh native , Art Rooney founded his NFL team under the name the Pittsburgh Pirates , on July 8 , 1933 , for $ 2,500 ( $ 45,701 in present-day terms ) . The franchise 's first game , against the New York Giants , was held on September 20 , 1933 , at Forbes Field . The Giants won the game 23 – 2 in front of 25,000 people . Rooney wrote of the game , " The Giants won . Our team looks terrible . The fans didn 't get their money 's worth . " The Pirates would rebound to gain their first ever franchise victory a week later at Forbes Field , against the Chicago Cardinals . The NFL 's Pirates were renamed the Steelers in 1940 , and otherwise struggled during much of their three-decades of tenancy at Forbes . The club achieved its first winning record in 1942 ; its tenth season of existence . On November 30 , 1952 , the Steelers met the New York Giants at Forbes Field for a snowy afternoon game . Pittsburgh entered the game with a 3 – 6 record , but went on to set multiple team records , including scoring nine touchdowns , to win the game 63 – 7 . Excited by their team 's play , the 15,140 spectators ran onto the field and began to tear the field goal posts out of the ground . The University of Pittsburgh 's acquisition of Forbes Field in 1958 gave the Steelers some options , and they began transferring some of their home games to the much larger Pitt Stadium that year . The Steelers played their final game at Forbes Field on December 1 , 1963 . The franchise would move to Pitt Stadium exclusively the following season .

Boxing bouts were held at Forbes Field from the 1910s to the 1950s , attracting crowds of over 15,000 people . On June 23 , 1919 , Harry " The Pittsburgh Windmill " Greb — the only boxer to beat Gene Tunney — defeated Mike Gibbons in a ten round bout at Forbes Field . On July 18 , 1951 , the heavyweight boxing championship was held at the stadium . In seven rounds , Ezzard Charles was knocked out by Jersey Joe Walcott . Another bout on September 25 , 1939 , was attended by 17,000 people including Art Rooney and Pie Traynor . Pittsburgh native Billy Conn defended his light heavyweight title against Melio Bettina , whom he had beaten months earlier . Conn won the bout by decision in 15 rounds . Two years later , on June 18 , 1941 , Conn fought Joe Louis at New York City 's Polo Grounds , in an attempt to become the world heavyweight champion . The Pirates and the New York Giants , who were playing at Forbes Field , were called into their dugouts while the 24,738 fans in attendance listened to the radio broadcast of the hour-long bout . Conn led the bout into the final round , but fought for the knockout and was knocked out himself .

On Sunday , October 17 , 1909 at 3 : 00 p.m. a Communion Service was held at Forbes Field as the culmination of the International Centennial Celebration and Conventions of the Disciples of Christ marking the 100th anniversary of the signing of the " Declaration and Address " by Thomas Campbell in September 1809 . Campbell was a founding father of the American Restoration Movement ( Disciples of Christ , Christian Church , Churches of Christ ) . Delegates and members of churches from all over the world were present . The Mine Safety and Health Administration hosted a mine rescue and safety demonstration at Forbes on October 30 , 1911 . The event included first-aid and rescue demonstrations . Around 15,000 attended the event , including President William H. Taft . Forbes Field also hosted circuses and concerts .

Mark Nicholas Stimson ( born 27 December 1967 ) is an English former footballer and is currently manager of Thurrock . He signed his first professional contract with Tottenham Hotspur in 1985 , but was unable to gain a regular place in the team . In 1989 , he moved on to Newcastle United , where he made over 80 appearances in the Football League . He later played for Portsmouth , Southend United and Leyton Orient before dropping into non-League football . He was appointed manager of Grays Athletic in 2002 and remained in charge until 2006 when he took over as manager of Stevenage Borough . He led Grays to victory in the Final of the FA Trophy in 2005 and 2006 , and repeated the feat with Stevenage in 2007 . In November 2007 , he became manager of a Football League team for the first time when he took over at one of his former clubs , Gillingham , but he was unable to prevent the club 's relegation from League One at the end of the 2007 – 08 season . He led Gillingham back into League One the following season via the League Two play-off Final , but his contract was terminated after the team were relegated back to League Two the following season . On 1 June 2010 , Stimson was appointed as the new manager of League Two club Barnet , but he was sacked on New Year 's Day 2011 with the club near the bottom of the table . He later had a spell as manager with Conference club Kettering Town .

Born in Plaistow in east London , Stimson played for the Essex county representative football team and was on the books of Queens Park Rangers , before joining Tottenham Hotspur on an apprenticeship in July 1984 . A year later , he signed his first professional contract , at the age of 17 . He made his Football League debut against Everton in May 1987 , but struggled to gain a place in the first team , and was sent to Leyton Orient on loan in March 1988 , where he played ten times . During the following season , he was loaned out again , this time to Gillingham , whose manager , Keith Burkinshaw , had worked with him at Tottenham . Stimson made 18 appearances for the Kent-based club and , although he was unable to help the team avoid relegation from the Third Division , his contribution impressed the fans , who voted him into second place in the club 's player of the year ballot . At the end of the 1988 – 89 season , Stimson was transferred to Newcastle United , then in the Second Division , for a fee of £ 200,000 . He spent four years with the club and finally gained a regular first team place , making over 80 appearances . After Kevin Keegan took over as manager , however , Stimson found himself out of favour and he had a short spell on loan to Portsmouth in December 1992 , which led to a £ 100,000 transfer at the end of that season . He made over fifty appearances for Portsmouth but was also loaned out again , this time to Barnet during the early part of the 1995 – 96 season . In March 1996 , he was transferred to Southend United for a fee of £ 25,000 . His first season at the club was affected by a long lay-off due to injury , meaning that he did not play between August and November , but he ultimately made over 50 Football League appearances for the club . During his time at Roots Hall the club suffered two consecutive relegations , dropping from the First Division into the Second Division in 1997 and from there into the Third Division in 1998 . In March 1999 , having not played for Southend since the previous November , he returned to former club Leyton Orient on a free transfer . He played for the club in the semi-finals of the play-offs , but was restricted to an appearance as an unused substitute in the final , which Orient lost .

Prior to the 1999 – 2000 season , Stimson spent a short period on trial at another of his former clubs , Gillingham , but manager Peter Taylor decided against offering him a contract and he instead joined Isthmian League club Canvey Island . He helped the " Gulls " win the FA Trophy in the 2000 – 01 season , setting up the only goal and winning the man of the match award in Canvey 's 1 – 0 defeat of Forest Green Rovers in the final . He was also selected to play for the England National Game XI , the national team for semi-professional players , earning one cap against an equivalent team from the United States . He left Canvey in May 2002 to join Grays Athletic as player-coach .

In September 2002 , Stimson took over as manager of Grays after the sacking of Craig Edwards , initially as caretaker manager , but after leading the team to its first victory of the season , he was quickly given the job on an ongoing basis . Despite the signing of a number of former top-level players , such as Carl Leaburn and Jason Dozzell , the team escaped relegation by only one point . The following season , however , boosted by a switch to full-time professional status and helped by the goals of Freddy Eastwood , Grays finished in 6th place , sufficient to gain a place in the newly formed Conference South for the 2004 – 05 season . Grays won the Conference South at the first attempt by a margin of 23 points , thus achieving promotion to the Conference National , the top level of non-league football , for the first time in their history . In the same season , Stimson also led Grays to the FA Trophy Final , where the team beat Hucknall Town in a penalty shoot-out . Grays reached the FA Trophy Final again in the following season , and claimed a second successive win after a 2 – 0 victory over Woking at Upton Park . In the Conference , Grays finished in third place and qualified for the play-offs for promotion to the Football League , but lost to Halifax Town in the semi-finals .

Citing his disappointment at failing to gain promotion , Stimson resigned from his post at Grays on 16 May 2006 . He stated that at the time he had received no firm job offers from other clubs , and acknowledged that he was taking a gamble with his career , but said that if he was unable to find a new job as a manager he would move into youth coaching or open his own football school . He was linked with the managerial vacancy at League Two Peterborough United , but eventually took over as manager of Stevenage Borough on 28 May , and led the club to an eighth-place finish in the Conference National in his first season in charge . Stevenage also defeated Stimson 's former club Grays to reach the FA Trophy final , and beat Kidderminster Harriers 3 – 2 at the new Wembley Stadium in the final , giving Stimson a third consecutive Trophy win as a manager . In the early part of the 2007 – 08 season , speculation began to mount that Stimson would be approached to take over as manager of a Football League club , with Gillingham , Port Vale and Millwall all alleged to be interested in his services . He was offered a new contract by Stevenage on 16 October 2007 , but resigned the following day . On 1 November , he was appointed as the new manager of Gillingham , and quickly moved to sign a number of Stevenage players , including Adam Miller and John Nutter . He was unable to recreate his previous success , however , and at the end of the 2007 – 08 season Gillingham were relegated from League One . He was also criticised by departing player Aaron Brown , who acknowledged that Stimson had strong coaching skills but described his man-management as " shocking " . The following season the Gills finished fifth in League Two and beat Shrewsbury Town 1 – 0 in the play-off Final at Wembley Stadium to gain promotion , but in the 2009 – 10 season Gillingham were relegated back to League Two , after which Stimson 's contract was terminated " by mutual consent " on 10 May 2010 .

On 1 June , Stimson was appointed as the new manager of League Two club Barnet , but was sacked seven months later on 1 January 2011 due to a bad string of results which left the club near the bottom of the table . Towards the latter stages of the 2010 – 11 season , Stimson accepted a coaching role at Dagenham & Redbridge . After a brief spell at Dagenham , he was appointed manager of Conference National club Kettering Town on 7 September 2011 . On 4 January 2012 , Stimson left Kettering with the team placed in the Conference relegation places . Four months later he was appointed manager of Thurrock following the club 's relegation to the Isthmian League .

Stimson is married , and when he returned to former club Grays Athletic as manager of Stevenage Borough in 2007 , he and his wife were praised for visiting the clubhouse after the game to chat to home supporters . He has three children , including a son , Charlie , who in 2008 joined Gillingham 's youth team , but turned down the offer of a professional contract in 2010 after his father 's dismissal from the manager 's job . In 2000 , Stimson presented his Essex Senior Cup winner 's medal to a disabled Canvey Island fan , saying " it 's easy to forget the fans who come along and support us , often in pouring rain . "

James Stephen " Steve " Fossett ( April 22 , 1944 – c . September 3 , 2007 ) was an American businessman and a record-setting aviator , sailor , and adventurer . He was the first person to fly solo nonstop around the world in a balloon . He made his fortune in the financial services industry and was best known for many world records , including five nonstop circumnavigations of the Earth : as a long-distance solo balloonist , as a sailor , and as a solo flight fixed-wing aircraft pilot . A fellow of the Royal Geographical Society and the Explorers Club , Fossett set more than a hundred records in five different sports , sixty of which still stood at the time of his death . Fossett disappeared on September 3 , 2007 , while flying a light aircraft over the Great Basin Desert , between Nevada and California . Extensive searches proved unsuccessful , and he was declared legally dead in February of the following year . In September 2008 , a hiker found Fossett 's identification cards in the Sierra Nevada Mountains , California , leading shortly after to the discovery of the plane 's wreckage . Fossett 's only remains , two large bones presumably scattered by wild animals , were found half a mile from the crash site .

Fossett was born in Jackson , Tennessee and grew up in Garden Grove , California , where he graduated from Garden Grove High School . Fossett 's interest in adventure began early . As a Boy Scout , he grew up climbing the mountains of California , beginning with the San Jacinto Mountains . " When I was 12 years old I climbed my first mountain , and I just kept going , taking on more diverse and grander projects . " Fossett said that he did not have a natural gift for athletics or team sports , so he focused on activities that required persistence and endurance . His father , an Eagle Scout , encouraged Fossett to pursue these types of adventures and encouraged him to become involved with the Boy Scouts early . He became an active member of Troop 170 in Orange , California . At age 13 , Fossett earned the Boy Scouts ' highest rank of Eagle Scout . He was a Vigil Honor member of the Order of the Arrow , the Boy Scouts ' honor society , where he served as lodge chief . He also worked as a Ranger at Philmont Scout Ranch in New Mexico during the summer of 1961 . Fossett said in 2006 that Scouting was the most important activity of his youth .

In college at Stanford University , Fossett was already known as an adventurer ; his Sigma Alpha Epsilon fraternity brothers convinced him to swim to Alcatraz and raise a banner that read " Beat Cal " on the wall of the prison , closed two years previously . He made the swim , but was thwarted by a security guard when he arrived . While at Stanford , Fossett was a student body officer and served as the president of a few clubs . In 1966 , Fossett graduated from Stanford with a degree in economics . Fossett spent the following summer in Europe climbing mountains and swimming the Dardanelles .

In 1968 , Fossett received an MBA from the Olin School of Business at Washington University in St. Louis , Missouri , where he was later a longtime member of the Board of Trustees . Fossett 's first job out of business school was with IBM ; he then served as a consultant for Deloitte and Touche , and later accepted a job with Marshall Field 's . Fossett later said , " For the first five years of my business career , I was distracted by being in computer systems , and then I became interested in financial markets . That 's where I thrived . " Fossett then became a successful commodities salesman in Chicago , first for Merrill Lynch in 1973 , where he proved a highly successful producer of commission revenue for himself and that firm . He began working in 1976 for Drexel Burnham , which assigned him one of its memberships on the Chicago Board of Trade and permitted him to market the services of the firm from a phone on the floor of that exchange . In 1980 , Fossett began the process that eventually produced his enduring prosperity : renting exchange memberships to would-be floor traders , first on the Chicago Board Options Exchange .

After fifteen years of working for other companies , Fossett founded his own firms , Marathon Securities and Lakota Trading , from which he made millions renting exchange memberships . He founded Lakota Trading for that purpose in 1980 . In the early 1980s , he founded Marathon Securities and extended that successful formula to memberships on the New York stock exchanges . He earned millions renting floor trading privileges ( exchange memberships ) to hopeful new floor traders , who would also pay clearing fees to Fossett 's clearing firms in proportion to the trading activity of those renting the memberships . In 1997 , the trading volume of its rented memberships was larger than any other clearing firm on the Chicago exchange . Lakota Trading replicated that same business plan on many exchanges in the United States and also in London . Fossett would later use those revenues to finance his adventures . Fossett said , " As a floor trader , I was very aggressive and worked hard . Those same traits help me in adventure sports . " Fossett said he did not participate in any of the " interesting things " he had done in college during his time in exchange-related activities : " There was a period of time where I wasn 't doing anything except working for a living . I became very frustrated with that and finally made up my mind to start getting back into things . " He began to take six weeks a year off to spend time on sports and moved to Beaver Creek , Colorado in 1990 . Fossett later sold most of his business interests , although he maintained an office in Chicago until 2006 .

Steve Fossett was well known for his world records and adventures in balloons , sailboats , gliders , and powered aircraft . He was an aviator of exceptional breadth of experience . He wanted to become the first person to achieve a solo balloon flight around the world ( finally succeeding on his sixth attempt , in 2002 , becoming the first person to complete an uninterrupted and unrefueled solo circumnavigation of the world in any kind of aircraft ) . He set , with co-pilot Terry Delore , 10 of the 21 Glider Open records , including the first 2,000 km Out-and-Return , the first 1,500 km Triangle and the longest Straight Distance flights . His achievements as a jet pilot in a Cessna Citation X include records for U.S. Transcontinental , Australia Transcontinental , and Round-the-World westbound non-supersonic flights . Prior to Fossett 's aviation records , no pilot had held world records in more than one class of aircraft ; Fossett held them in four classes . In 2005 Fossett made the first solo , nonstop unrefueled circumnavigation of the world in an airplane , in 67 hours in the Virgin Atlantic GlobalFlyer , a single-engine jet aircraft .

In 2006 , he again circumnavigated the globe nonstop and unrefueled in 76 hours , 45 minutes in the GlobalFlyer , setting the record for the longest flight by any aircraft in history with a distance of 25,766 statute miles ( 41,467 km ) . He set 91 aviation world records ratified by Fédération Aéronautique Internationale , of which 36 stand , plus 23 sailing world records ratified by the World Sailing Speed Record Council . On August 29 , 2006 , he set the world altitude record for gliders over El Calafate , Argentina at 15,460 metres ( 50,720 ft ) . Management and sponsorship of the majority of his projects was handled by UK based sports marketing agency Project 100 Communications Ltd for whom Fossett had first driven at Le Mans in 1992 .

On February 21 , 1995 , Fossett landed in Leader , Saskatchewan , Canada , after taking off from South Korea , becoming the first person to make a solo flight across the Pacific Ocean in a balloon . In 2002 , he became the first person to fly around the world alone , nonstop in any kind of aircraft . He launched the 10-story high balloon Spirit of Freedom from Northam , Western Australia on June 19 , 2002 and returned to Australia on July 3 , 2002 , subsequently landing in Queensland . Duration and distance of this solo balloon flight was 13 days , 8 hours , 33 minutes ( 14 days 19 hours 50 minutes to landing ) , 20,626.48 statute miles ( 33,195.10 km ) . The balloon dragged him along the ground for 20 minutes at the end of the flight . The control center for the mission was in Brookings Hall at Washington University in St. Louis . Fossett 's top speed during the flight was 186 miles per hour ( 299 km / h ) over the Indian Ocean . Only the capsule survived the landing ; it was taken to the Smithsonian Institution in Washington , DC , where it was displayed . The trip set a number of records for ballooning : Fastest ( 200 miles per hour ( 320 km / h ) , breaking his own previous record of 166 miles per hour ( 270 km / h ) ) , Fastest Around the World ( 13.5 days ) , Longest Distance Flown Solo in a Balloon ( 20,482.26 miles ( 32,963.00 km ) ) , and 24-Hour Balloon Distance ( 3,186.80 miles ( 5,128.66 km ) on July 1 ) .

Fossett was one of the world 's most accomplished sailors . Speed sailing was his specialty and from 1993 to 2004 he dominated the record sheets , setting 23 official world records and nine distance race records . He is recognized by the World Sailing Speed Record Council as " the world 's most accomplished speed sailor . " On the maxi-catamaran Cheyenne ( formerly named PlayStation ) , Fossett twice set the prestigious 24 Hour Record of Sailing . In October 2001 , Fossett and his crew set a transatlantic record of 4 days 17 hours , shattering the previous record by 43 hours 35 minutes — an increase in average speed of nearly seven knots . In early 2004 , Fossett , as skipper , set the Around the world sailing record of 58 days , 9 hours in Cheyenne with a crew of 13 . In 2007 , Fossett held the world record for crossing the Pacific Ocean in his 125-foot ( 38 m ) sailboat , the PlayStation , which he accomplished on his fourth try . At the time of his death , a submarine , DeepFlight Challenger , was under construction to let him be the first solo submariner to reach the Challenger Deep .

Fossett made the first solo nonstop unrefueled fixed-wing aircraft flight around the world between February 28 and March 3 , 2005 . He took off from Salina , Kansas , where he was assisted by faculty members and students from Kansas State University , and flew eastbound with the prevailing winds , returning to Salina after 67 hours , 1 minute , 10 seconds , without refueling or making intermediate landings . His average speed of 342.2 mph ( 550.7 km / h ) was also the absolute world record for " speed around the world , nonstop and non-refueled . " His aircraft , the Virgin Atlantic GlobalFlyer , had a carbon fiber reinforced plastic airframe with a single Williams FJ44 turbofan engine . It was designed and built by Burt Rutan and his company , Scaled Composites , for long-distance solo flight . The fuel fraction , the weight of the fuel divided by the weight of the aircraft at take-off , was 83 percent . On February 11 , 2006 , Fossett set the absolute world record for " distance without landing " by flying from the Kennedy Space Center , Florida , around the world eastbound , then upon returning to Florida continuing across the Atlantic a second time to land in Bournemouth , England . The official distance was 25,766 statute miles ( 41,467 km ) and the duration was 76 hours 45 minutes .

The next month , Fossett made a third flight around the world in order to break the absolute record for " Distance over a closed circuit without landing " ( with takeoff and landing at the same airport ) . He took off from Salina , Kansas on March 14 , 2006 and returned on March 17 , 2006 after flying 25,262 statute miles ( 40,655 km ) . There are only seven absolute world records for fixed-wing aircraft recognized by the Fédération Aéronautique Internationale and Fossett broke three of them in the Virgin Atlantic GlobalFlyer . All three records were previously held by Dick Rutan and Jeana Yeager from their flight in the Voyager in 1986 . Fossett contributed the GlobalFlyer to the Smithsonian Institution 's permanent collection . It is on display at the Udvar-Hazy Center of the Smithsonian 's National Air and Space Museum . Fossett flew the plane to the Center and taxied the plane to the front door .

Fossett set two U.S. transcontinental fixed-wing aircraft records in the same day . On February 5 , 2003 , Fossett and co-pilot Doug Travis flew his Cessna Citation X jet from San Diego , California to Charleston , South Carolina in 2 hours , 56 minutes , 20 seconds , at an average speed of 726.83 mph ( 1,169.72 km / h ) to smash the transcontinental record for non-supersonic jets . He returned to San Diego , then flew the same course as co-pilot for fellow adventurer Joe Ritchie in Ritchie 's turboprop Piaggio Avanti . Their time was 3 hours , 51 minutes , 52 seconds , an average speed of 546.44 mph ( 879.41 km / h ) , which broke the previous turboprop transcontinental record held by Chuck Yeager and Renald Davenport . Fossett also set the east-to-west transcontinental record for non-supersonic fixed-wing aircraft on September 17 , 2000 . He flew from Jacksonville , Florida to San Diego , California in 3 hours , 29 minutes , at an average speed of 591.96 mph ( 952.67 km / h ) .

On July 2 , 2005 , Fossett and co-pilot Mark Rebholz recreated the first nonstop crossing of the Atlantic which was made by the British team of John Alcock and Arthur Whitten Brown in June 1919 in a Vickers Vimy biplane . Their flight from St. John 's , Newfoundland , Canada to Clifden , County Galway , Ireland in the open cockpit Vickers Vimy replica took 18 hours 25 minutes with 13 hours flown in instrument flight conditions . Because there was no airport in Clifden , Fossett and Rebholz landed on the 8th fairway of the Connemara Golf Links .

The team of Steve Fossett and Terry Delore ( NZ ) set ten official world records in gliders while flying in three major locations : New Zealand , Argentina , and Nevada , United States . An asterisk ( * ) indicates records subsequently broken by other pilots . 1,500 Kilometer Triangle World Record 119.11 km / h ( 74.01 mph ) , December 13 , 2003 . 1,250 Kilometer Triangle U.S. National Record 143.48 km / h ( 89.15 mph ) . Exceeded world record by 0.01 km / h , July 30 , 2003 . 1,000 km Out-and-Return World Record * 166.46 km / h ( 103.43 mph ) , December 12 , 2002 . 1,500 km Out-and-Return World Record * 156.61 km / h ( 97.31 mph ) , November 14 , 2003 . Out-and-Return Distance ( Declared ) World Record * 1,804.7 km , November 14 , 2003 . Fossett and co-pilot Einar Enevoldson flew a glider into the stratosphere on August 29 , 2006 . The flight set the Absolute Altitude Record for gliders at 15,460 metres ( 50,720 ft ) . Since the glider cockpit was unpressurized , the pilots wore full pressure suits ( similar to space suits ) so that they would be able to fly to altitudes above 45,000 feet ( 14,000 m ) . Fossett and Enevoldson had made previous attempts in three countries over a period of five years before finally succeeding with this record flight . This endeavor is known as the Perlan Project .

As a young adventurer , Fossett was one of the first participants in the Worldloppet , a series of cross country ski marathons around the world . While he had little experience as a skier , he was in the first group of ' citizen athletes ' to participate in the series debut in 1979 . And in 1980 , he became the eighth skier to complete all 10 of the long distance races , earning a Worldloppet medallion . He has also set cross-country skiing records in Colorado , setting an Aspen to Vail record of 59 h , 53 min , 30 s in February 1998 , and an Aspen to Eagle record of 12 hr , 29 min in February 2001 .

Fossett was a lifelong mountain climber and had climbed the highest peaks on six of the seven continents . In the 1980s , he became friends with Patrick Morrow , who was attempting to climb the highest peaks on all seven continents for the " Seven Summits " world record , which Morrow achieved in 1985 . Fossett accompanied Morrow for his last three peaks , including Vinson Massif in Antarctica , Carstensz Pyramid in Oceania , and Elbrus in Europe . While Fossett went on to climb almost all of the Seven Summits peaks himself , he declined to climb Mount Everest in 1992 due to asthma . He later returned to Antarctica to climb again .

Fossett competed in and completed premier endurance sports events , including the 1,165-mile ( 1,875 km ) Iditarod Trail Sled Dog Race , in which he finished 47th on his second try in 1992 after training for five years . He became the 270th person to swim across the English Channel on his fourth try in September 1985 with a time of 22 hours , 15 minutes . Although Fossett said he was not a good enough swimmer " to make the varsity swim team " , he found that he could swim for long periods . Fossett competed in the Ironman Triathlon in Hawaii ( finishing in 1996 in 15 : 53 : 10 ) , the Boston Marathon , and the Leadville Trail 100 , a 100-mile ( 160 km ) Colorado ultramarathon which involves running up elevations of more than 14,000 feet ( 4,300 m ) in the Rocky Mountains . Fossett raced cars in the mid-1970s and later returned to the sport in the 1990s . He competed in the 24 hours of Le Mans road race in 1993 and in 1996 , along with the Paris to Dakar Rally .

Fossett tried six times over seven years for the first solo balloon circumnavigation . His fifth attempt cost him $ 1.25 million of his own money ; his sixth and successful attempt was commercially sponsored . Two of the attempts were launched from Busch Memorial Stadium in St. Louis , Missouri . Washington University in St. Louis served as control center for four of the six flights , including the record-breaking one . In 1998 , one of the unsuccessful attempts at the ballooning record ended with a five-mile ( 8 km ) plummet into the Coral Sea off the coast of Australia that nearly killed Fossett ; he waited 72 hours to be rescued , at a cost of $ 500,000 . The first attempt began in the Black Hills of South Dakota and ended outside Hampton , New Brunswick 1,800 miles ( 2,900 km ) later . The second attempt , launched from Busch Stadium , cost $ 300,000 and lasted 9,600 miles ( 15,400 km ) before being downed halfway in a tree in India ; the trip set records at the time for duration and distance of flight ( with Fossett doubling his own previous record ) and was called Solo Spirit after Lindbergh 's Spirit of St. Louis . Fossett slept an average of two hours a night for the six-day journey , conducted in below-zero temperatures . After taking too much fuel to cross the Atlantic Ocean and circling Libya for 12 hours while officials decided whether or not to allow him into their airspace , Fossett did not have enough fuel to finish the flight . That year , Fossett flew farther for less money than better-financed expeditions ( including one supported by Richard Branson ) in part due to his ability to fly in an unpressurized capsule , a result of his heavy physical training at high altitudes . The Solo Spirit capsule was put on display at the Smithsonian 's National Air and Space Museum across from the Apollo 11 command module .

Fossett grew up in Garden Grove , California and earned the Eagle Scout award in 1957 . He credited his experience in Scouting as a foundation for much of his later success . " As a Scout , I learned how to set goals and achieve them , " he once said . " Being a Scout also taught me leadership at a young age when there are few opportunities to be a leader . Scouting values have remained with me throughout my life , in my business career , and now as I take on new challenges . " In his later years , he was described as a " legend " by fellow Scouts . As a national BSA volunteer , he served as Chairman of the Northern Tier High Adventure Committee , Chairman of the Venturing Committee , member of the Philmont Ranch Committee , and member of the National Advisory Council . He later became a member of the BSA National Executive Board , and in 2007 , Fossett succeeded Secretary of Defense Robert Gates as president of the National Eagle Scout Association . Fossett previously had served on the World Scout Committee . Fossett was honored with the Distinguished Eagle Scout Award in 1992 . In 1999 he received the Silver Buffalo Award , BSA 's highest recognition of service to youth .

In 2002 , Fossett received aviation 's highest award , the Gold Medal of the Fédération Aéronautique Internationale ( FAI ) and in July 2007 , he was inducted into the Aviation Hall of Fame . He was presented at the ceremony by Dick Rutan . In 1997 , Fossett was inducted into the Balloon and Airship Hall of Fame . In February 2002 , Fossett was named America 's Rolex Yachtsman of the Year by the American Sailing Association at the New York Yacht Club . He was the oldest recipient of the award in its 41-year history , and the only recipient to fly himself to the ceremony in his own plane . He received the Explorers Medal from the Explorers Club following his solo balloon circumnavigation . He was given the Diplôme de Montgolfier by the Fédération Aéronautique Internationale in 1996 . He received the Harmon Trophy , given annually " to the world 's outstanding aviator and aeronaut " , in 1998 and 2002 . He received the Grande Médaille of the Aéro-Club de France , and the British Royal Aero Club 's Gold Medal in 2002 . He received the Order of Magellan and the French Republic 's Médaille de l 'Aéronautique in 2003 .

At 8 : 45 am on the morning of Monday , September 3 , 2007 ( Labor Day ) , Fossett took off in a single-engine Super Decathlon light aircraft from the Flying-M Ranch private airstrip ( 38 ° 36 ′ 13 ″ N 119 ° 00 ′ 11 ″ W ) , near Smith Valley , Nevada . After failing to return , searches were launched about six hours later . The aircraft had tail number N240R registered to the " Flying M Hunting Club , Inc . " There was no signal from the plane 's emergency locator transmitter ( ELT ) designed to be automatically activated in the event of a crash , but it was of an older type notorious for failing to operate after a crash . It was first thought that Fossett may have also been wearing a Breitling Emergency watch with a manually operated ELT that had a range of up to 90 miles ( 140 km ) , but no signal was received from it . On September 13 , Fossett 's wife , Peggy , issued a statement clarifying that he owned such a watch but was not wearing it when he took off for the Labor Day flight .

Fossett took off with enough fuel for four to five hours of flight , according to spokesperson Major Cynthia S. Ryan , Public Information Officer with the Civil Air Patrol ( CAP ) . Searchers with CAP were told that Fossett had gone out for a short flight over favorite territory , possibly including the areas of Lucky Boy Pass and Walker Lake . At one point it was suggested that he might have been out scouting for potential sites to conduct a planned land speed run . A Federal Aviation Administration ( FAA ) spokesperson noted that Fossett apparently did not file a flight plan and was not required to do so . On the second day , Civil Air Patrol aircraft searched but found no trace of wreckage after initiating a complex and expanding search of what would later evolve into a nearly 20,000 square miles ( 52,000 km2 ) area of some of the most rugged terrain in North America . The search presented a severe challenge from the standpoint of safely flying hundreds of hours in very difficult conditions . On the first day of CAP searching , operations were suspended by mid-day due to high winds , according to Ryan . By the fourth day , the CAP was using fourteen aircraft in the search effort , including one equipped with the ARCHER system that could automatically scan detailed imaging for a given signature of the missing aircraft . By September 10 , search crews had found eight previously uncharted crash sites , some of which were decades old , but none related to Fossett 's disappearance . The urgency of what was still regarded as a rescue mission meant that minimal immediate effort was made to identify the aircraft in the uncharted crash sites , although some had speculated that one could have belonged to Charles Clifford Ogle , missing since 1964 . All told , about two dozen aircraft were involved in the massive search , operating from the primary search base at Minden , Nevada , with a secondary search base located at Bishop , California . CAP searchers came from Wings across the United States , including Nevada , Utah , California , Arizona , New Mexico , Idaho , Oregon , Pennsylvania and Texas .

On September 7 , Google Inc. helped the search for the aviator through its connections to contractors that provide satellite imagery for its Google Earth software . Richard Branson , a British billionaire and friend of Fossett , said he and others were coordinating efforts with Google to see if any of the high-resolution images might include Fossett 's aircraft . On September 8 , the first of a series of new high-resolution imagery from DigitalGlobe was made available via the Amazon Mechanical Turk beta website so that users could flag potential areas of interest for searching , in what is known as crowdsourcing . By September 11 , up to 50,000 people had joined the effort , scrutinizing more than 300,000 278-square-foot squares of the imagery . Peter Cohen of Amazon believed that by September 11 , the entire search area had been covered at least once . Amazon 's search effort was shut down the week of October 29 , without any measurable success . Major Cynthia Ryan later said it had been more of a hindrance than a help . She said that persons purporting to have seen the aircraft on the Mechanical Turk or have special knowledge clogged her email during critical days of the search , and for even months afterward . Many of the ostensible sightings proved to be images of CAP aircraft flying search grids , or simply mistaken artifacts of old images . Psychics flooded the search base in Minden with predictions of where the aviator could be found . Ryan got the majority of these calls personally , often at her home , in the middle of the night . One man from Canada was particularly persistent with daily calls to Ryan , interfering with her press briefings . Ryan asked her Incident Commander to issue a cease and desist order , backed up by the Royal Canadian Mounted Police ( RCMP ) if necessary . Ryan noted that every message , letter , or phone call was taken seriously – which swamped the USAF specialists assigned the task of reviewing every one of them without regard to apparent plausibility . In retrospect , the crowdsource effort was " not ready for prime time , " according to Ryan .

On September 17 , the Nevada Wing of the Civil Air Patrol said it was suspending all flights in connection with its search operations , but National Guard search flights , private search flights and ground searches continued . The National Transportation Safety Board ( NTSB ) began a preliminary investigation into the likely crash of the plane that Fossett was flying . The preliminary report originally stated that Fossett was " presumed fatally injured and the aircraft substantially damaged " , but was subsequently revised to remove that assumption . Fossett 's friend and fellow explorer , Sir Richard Branson , made similar public statements . On September 19 , 2007 , authorities confirmed they would stop actively looking for Fossett in the Nevada Desert , but would keep air crews on standby to fly to possible crash sites . " Nobody is giving up on this man " , said department spokesman . " The search is going to continue . It 's just going to be scaled back " , he said . On September 30 it was announced that after further analysis of radar data from the day of his disappearance , ground teams and two aircraft had resumed the search .

On May 1 , 2008 , the Las Vegas Review-Journal attributed to Nevada State Governor Jim Gibbons 's spokesman , Ben Kieckhefer , the Governor 's decision to direct the state to charge Steve Fossett 's family for the $ 687,000 expense of the search for Fossett . Kieckhefer later played that early report down , when he told the Tahoe Daily Tribune that Nevada did not intend to demand an involuntary payment from Fossett 's widow , but that such a payment would be voluntary : " We are going to request that they help offset some of these expenses , considering the scope of the search , the overall cost as well as our ongoing budget difficulties . " Hotelier Barron Hilton , from whose ranch Fossett had departed on the day he went missing , had previously volunteered $ 200,000 to help pay for the search costs . In his later comments to the Tahoe Daily Tribune , Kieckhefer denied outright that a bill for the family was being prepared , and he said , " It will probably be in the form of a letter " , which Kieckhefer indicated would include a financial outline of the steps taken by the state , the associated costs , and a mention of the state 's ongoing budget difficulties .

Days prior to this announcement , state Emergency Management Director Frank Siracusa noted that " there is no precedent where government will go after people for costs just because they have money to pay for it . You get lost , and we look for you . It is a service your taxpayer dollars pay for " , although he conceded that legally any decision would rest with Gibbons . At an April 10 , 2008 Legislature 's Interim Finance Committee hearing , Siracusa indicated that he had hired an independent auditor to review costs incurred by the state in searching for Fossett , but added , " We are doing an audit but not because we are critical of anybody or suspect something was done wrong " . Chairman Morse Arberry queried Siracusa as to why , since they lacked funds , had the state not billed the Fossett family for its search costs , to which Siracusa did not directly respond . In his later interview with the Las Vegas Review-Journal , he stated that his comments to the Committee may have given the false impression that he had hired an auditor for the purpose of later challenging the state 's financial burden incurred on its behalf by the National Guard during the search operation . Upon interview regarding reports that the state would seek payment , Arberry was recorded as stating that he was glad to hear steps were being taken to try to recoup some of the costs .

On September 29 , 2008 , a hiker found three crumpled identification cards in the Eastern Sierra Nevada in California about 65 miles ( 100 km ) south ( 186 degrees ) of Fossett 's take-off site . The items were confirmed as belonging to Fossett and included an FAA-issued card , his Soaring Society of America membership card and $ 1,005 in cash . On October 1 , late in the day , air search teams spotted wreckage on the ground at coordinates 37 ° 40 ′ 2.8 ″ N 119 ° 08 ′ 0 ″ W at an elevation of 10,100 feet ( 3,100 m ) and about 750 yards ( 690 m ) from where the personal items had been found . Later that evening the teams confirmed identification of the tail number of Fossett 's plane . The crash site is on a slope beneath the southwest side of a ridge line ( 600 feet ( 180 m ) lower than the top of the ridge ) in the Ansel Adams Wilderness in Madera County , California . Other named places near the crash site include Minaret Mine ( 2,000 feet ( 600 m ) west ) , Emily Lake ( 0.7 miles ( 1.1 km ) northeast ) , Minaret Lake ( 1.8 miles ( 2.9 km ) west-southwest ) , the Minaret peaks ( 3 miles ( 5 km ) west ) , Devils Postpile National Monument ( 4.5 miles ( 7.2 km ) southeast ) , and the town of Mammoth Lakes ( the nearest populated place , 9 miles ( 14 km ) east-southeast ) . The site is 10 miles ( 16 km ) east of Yosemite National Park .

Over the next two days , ground searchers found four bone fragments that were about 2 by 1.5 inches ( 5 by 4 cm ) in size . However , DNA tests subsequently showed that these fragments were not human . On October 29 , search teams recovered two large human bones that they suspected might belong to Fossett . These bones were found 0.5 miles ( 0.80 km ) east of the crash site . Tennis shoes with animal bite marks on them were also recovered . On November 3 , California police coroners said that DNA profiling of the two bones by a California Department of Justice forensics laboratory confirmed a match to Fossett 's DNA . Madera County Sheriff John Anderson said Fossett would have died on impact in such a crash , and that it was not unusual for animals to drag remains away .

On March 5 , 2009 , the NTSB issued its report and findings . It states that the plane crashed at an elevation of about 10,000 feet ( 3,000 m ) , 300 feet ( 90 m ) below the crest of the ridge . The elevation of peaks in the area exceeded 13,000 feet ( 4,000 m ) . However , the density altitude in the area at the time and place of the crash was estimated to be 12,700 feet ( 3,900 m ) . The aircraft , a tandem two-seater , was nearly 30 years old and Fossett had flown approximately 40 hours in this type . The plane 's operating manual says that at an altitude of 13,000 feet ( 4,000 m ) the rate of climb would be 300 feet per minute ( about 1.5 m / s ) . The NTSB report says that " a meteorologist from Salinas provided a numerical simulation of the conditions in the accident area using the WRF-ARW ( Advanced Research Weather Research and Forecasting ) numerical model . At 0930 [ the approximate time of the crash ] the model displayed downdrafts in that area of approximately 300 feet per minute . " There was no evidence of equipment failure . The report stated that a postmortem examination of the skeletal fragments had been performed under the auspices of the Madera County Sheriff 's Department . The cause of death was determined to be multiple traumatic injuries .

WCLG ( 1300 AM ) is an oldies and classic hits-formatted broadcast radio station licensed to Morgantown , West Virginia , serving Morgantown and Monongalia County , West Virginia . WCLG is owned and operated by Bowers Broadcasting Corporation . Launched on December 27 , 1954 , WCLG broadcast a " music-news " format . The station was originally intended to be a part of a statewide network of stations . Over the years , the station was subject to an equal-time rule complaint and was awarded for its coverage of the Farmington Number 9 mine disaster . Many different formats were heard on WCLG during the 1970s and 1980s , with its current format launched in 1991 . WCLG carries Cumulus Media Networks ' satellite-fed Classic Hits network . A planned 2013 sale of WCLG ( and its sister-station WCLG-FM ) was halted by the Federal Communications Commission ( FCC ) due to a complaint that the company buying the stations , AJG Corporation , has close connections with another local broadcaster , West Virginia Radio Corporation .

Martinsburg , West Virginia , businessman C. Leslie Golliday filed the initial application for the station with the FCC on September 1 , 1954 . In the application , Golliday estimated construction costs at $ 13,608 , with a first year operation cost of $ 36,000 . Golliday estimated an initial revenue of $ 60,000 . WCLG began testing equipment during the week of December 19 , 1954 , and filed its construction permit application two days later . WCLG broadcast for the first time on December 27 , 1954 . The station initially had a " music-news " format , using the Associated Press news service . In its early days , WCLG was a daytime-only broadcaster , with a power of 500 watts . Owner C. Leslie Golliday used his initials for the station 's call sign . Golliday , who also owned Martinsburg 's WEPM , envisioned a network of stations across the state of West Virginia . WCLG was officially granted its broadcast license by the FCC on January 18 , 1955 . Throughout its existence , WCLG 's studios have been at 343 High Street in Morgantown .

On March 10 , 1955 , WCLG filed an application to increase its power to 1,000 watts , proposing to continue daytime-only broadcasts . The application was granted on September 28 , 1955 . In 1958 , future owner Garry L. Bowers joined the station as an announcer . WCLG was bought by Freed Broadcasting Corporation for $ 67,000 on December 19 , 1959 . In May 1960 , Stanley R. Cox , a candidate in the Republican primary election for the House of Representatives , filed a equal-time rule complaint against WCLG . Cox objected that the station gave his opponent , Sheriff Charles Whiston , a five-minute long segment called " Sheriff 's Office Calling " . In the show " arrests and other activities of interest are recited " ; it ended with a 30-second " thought for the day " . Cox had been refused equal-time by the station " on the ground that the program is a public service feature . " The FCC upheld the complaint , deciding the content of the program was " determined by Sheriff Whiston and not by the station " and that remarks made by the sheriff were of an editorial nature . Whiston would go on to win the primary over Cox by about 300 votes .

The station 's coverage of the explosion at the Farmington Number 9 mine , which killed 78 , earned the station an the Associated Press Radio-Television Association ( APRTA ) in early 1969 . The station earned another APRTA award for " Outstanding News Coverage " the following year . Sister station WCLG-FM began broadcasting on September 28 , 1974 . Also during 1974 , WCLG began a Top 40 format . Another change in format took place in 1978 , with middle of the road ( MOR ) music taking the place of Top 40 . WCLG became part of the NBC Radio Network on October 2 , 1978 . In 1979 , Bowers became the station 's general manager . WCLG applied for another broadcasting power increase on November 4 , 1980 , to 2,500 watts , but remained a daytime-only station . The station added oldies to its MOR music format in 1983 . In 1985 , WCLG switched formats to a soft adult contemporary playlist . On March 15 of that year , Freed Broadcasting Corporation sold WCLG-FM and sister station WCLG to Bowers Broadcasting Corporation , owned by Garry Bowers , for $ 715,000 .

The station changed formats again in 1988 , this time to classic hits . Two years later , WCLG began broadcasting during the nighttime with 44 watts of power , enough to cover the city of Morgantown . Another format change took place in 1991 , when the station switched to golden oldies using the " Pure Gold " format from Satellite Music Network ( now Cumulus Media Networks ) . Bowers Broadcasting Corporation owner Garry L. Bowers died on December 24 , 2011 . On September 25 , 2013 , control of the company was transferred to Bowers ' widow , Linda K. Bowers .

On September 26 , 2013 , Linda Bowers entered into an agreement to sell WCLG and sister station WCLG-FM to AJG Corporation , for $ 1.8 million . Bowers also entered into a time brokerage agreement , allowing AJG to operate the station prior to the close of the sale . The Federal Communications Commission ( FCC ) rescinded the transfer-of-ownership application on October 21 , 2013 , after an objection by Joe Potter , Senior Vice President of IMG Sports . Potter contended there were " very close connections and operational control " between AJG Corporation and West Virginia Radio Corporation and AJG 's purchase of WCLG-AM / FM would " possibly in violation of FCC regulations . " The co-directors of West Virginia Radio Corporation , John and David Raese , operate AJG Corporation as a trust for their descendents . Potter 's complaint went on to say that " IMG was close to finalizing a contract to air WVU sports " but was " prevented by the terms of AJG 's purchase agreement " , which barred Bowers Broadcasting Corporation from " ' entering into any contract or agreement ' without the consent of AJG " .

Jim Slade , a Morgantown native , was hired as news director when the station launched in 1954 . Slade was later heard on WOWO and WIND , covering the assassinations of Martin Luther King , Jr. and Robert F. Kennedy on the latter station . He is best known , though , for his reporting on the Mutual Broadcasting System and at ABC News , where he covered space-related stories . Country music radio and stage performer Charlie Arnett hosted the " Old Trading Post " program on WCLG in 1959 . Arnett 's later career took him to the CBS Radio program " Renfro Valley Folks " and to Tampa , Florida , station WDAE . Eugene Cottilli started as sports director at WCLG , before becoming the press secretary to Senator Howard Metzenbaum of Ohio . As of 2013 , Cottilli is the Congressional Media Liaison for the United States Department of Commerce .

Edward Elric ( エドワード ・ エルリック , Edowādo Erurikku ) , commonly nicknamed Ed ( エド , Edo ) , is a fictional character and the protagonist of the Fullmetal Alchemist manga series created by Hiromu Arakawa . Edward , titled " Fullmetal Alchemist " ( 鋼の錬金術師 , Hagane no Renkinjutsushi , lit . " Alchemist of Steel " ) , is the youngest State Alchemist in the history of the fictional country of Amestris . His left leg was divinely severed in a failed attempt to resurrect his dead mother , and then his right arm was taken in exchange for his brother 's soul . His missing limbs have been replaced with sophisticated prosthetics called automail ( 機械鎧 ( オートメイル ) , ōtomeiru ) . He and his younger brother , Alphonse , who lost his entire body and is spiritually bound to a suit of armor , scour the world in search of the Philosopher 's Stone in the hopes of restoring their bodies . Ed has appeared in other media from the series , including video games , original video animations ( OVAs ) and light novels . Numerous publications in various media have been written on the subject of Edward 's character . Reviewers praised Edward as a balance between the typical clever kid and the stubborn kid persona . Additionally , his comedic moments have been celebrated as some of the best moments in the series . His Japanese and English voice actors , Romi Park and Vic Mignogna , have both been praised for their performances as Edward Elric and have won several awards for their work . Numerous pieces of merchandise have been released bearing Edward 's likeness , including key chains and action figures .

Edward Elric is the youngest State Alchemist to be selected by the State Military of the country , receiving the title of " Fullmetal Alchemist " shortly thereafter from the military head , King Bradley . He and his younger brother , Alphonse , seek to obtain the legendary Philosopher 's Stone in order to restore their bodies after a disastrous failed attempt to bring their mother back to life through alchemy . Edward was born in a small town named Resembool , where he lived with Alphonse and his parents , Trisha Elric and Van Hohenheim . After Hohenheim left the family on a journey early in his sons ' lives , and Trisha died of an illness years later , the two young boys concentrated on studying alchemy in the hopes of bringing their mother back to life , and trained with a skilled alchemist named Izumi Curtis . They attempt to revive their mother and failed , costing Edward his left leg , and Alphonse his entire body.During this first transmutation , Edward sees the Truth ( 真理 , Shinri ) , thus gaining great knowledge as well as the prodigious ability to perform transmutations just by clapping his hands together . Edward then performed a second transmutation , sacrificing his own right arm to bind Alphonse 's soul to a nearby suit of armor . In order to move with his lost limbs , Edward has had prosthetic " automail " limbs designed and implemented by his childhood friend , Winry Rockbell . Winry is often kept busy repairing Edward 's automail , as he regularly breaks and damages the machines during heavy bouts . As the series continues , the two progressively develop a romantic relationship , eventually confessing their feelings to each other by the series ' end .

Edward 's motivation stems from a love for his brother , Alphonse , whom he is desperately seeking to restore to human form after their mistake . He is extremely idealistic , and strongly believes in the alchemical concept of " Equivalent Exchange , " which states that every outcome requires an equal payment . Edward also behaves in a childish manner when confronted about his short height , tending to overreact to any negative comment regarding the subject , usually attacking people in a fit of rage . Unlike regular alchemists who use transmutation circles , Edward has the ability to create alchemical currents in his body simply by connecting his hands as a result of his failed human transmutation which gave him such trait . In addition to this , Edward is a formidable fighter as a result of his training with Izumi , who had extensively trained both brothers in martial arts . During their search for the Stone , they become targets of Scar , a vengeful Ishbalan , and the immortal creatures known as the homunculi . When Edward and Alphonse discover that the homunculi and the Philosopher 's Stone are related , they work together with their comrades in order to find them . However , after the Elric brothers meet the homunculi 's creator , " Father , " they are forced to keep working with the military by high-ranking officials who are secretly using their friends from Resembool as hostages . Unable to protect their friends , the Elrics travel to the northern area of the country in order to request help from General Olivier Mira Armstrong . Shortly after their arrival , the State Alchemist Solf J. Kimblee takes Winry to the north as a hostage , unknown to Winry , in order to force Edward to continue his work . When the brothers are ordered to capture Scar , they end up using his help to move Winry to a safe place . Upon their success , Edward learns when Father plans to make a human transmutation circle out of the entire country . Edward , Alphonse , and their allies thus unite in an effort to bring down Father . They make their way into the underground complex where Edward is to be used as a sacrifice for Father 's transmutation . While battling Father , Edward loses his automail arm , rendering him unable to perform alchemy . Alphonse transmutes his soul in order to restore Edward 's original flesh-and-blood arm . After defeating Father , Edward manages to restore Alphonse to his original body by sacrificing his own ability to use alchemy . Giving up on alchemy forever , they return to their hometown to live normal lives . Two years later , Edward decides to research alchemy by heading out west . In the epilogue he and Winry get married and have a son and daughter together .

Although Edward has the same background and characteristics in the manga and anime , Edward meets different people and fights against variable enemies . In the first anime , Edward learns the secret to destroying a homunculus during his encounter with Greed , whom he kills in an effort to save Alphonse . When he learns of Scar 's creation of a Philosopher 's Stone within Alphonse , Edward saves the people of Lior from being sacrificed for its creation . During his battle against the homunculi , Edward is killed by Envy , but Alphonse trades himself for his brothers ' revival . In doing so , however , Alphonse 's armor with the philosopher 's stone within it is used up and he disappears . After being revived , Edward sacrifices his own life to bring back his brother in exchange . As a result , Edward finds himself on the other side of the Gate , a parallel world , while Alphonse recovers his original body . Determined to return to Alphonse , Edward becomes involved in rocketry research in Germany , with the intention of using that technology to return to his home world . In the feature film , Fullmetal Alchemist the Movie : Conqueror of Shamballa , set two years after the end of the anime , Edward has been living in Germany and looks for a way to return to his world . At the film 's end , he decides to stay in the parallel world along with Alphonse so that they may try to protect both worlds .

Edward also appears in almost all the Fullmetal Alchemist original video animations ( OVAs ) . In the first OVA he appears as a super deformed version of himself at the movie 's wrap-up party ; in the second , he appears shortly as an old man living in modern-day Tokyo ; and in the third OVA , he plays a part in the battle against the first anime 's homunculi . As the series ' titular character , Edward is playable in all Fullmetal Alchemist video games . The three games for the PlayStation 2 – Fullmetal Alchemist and the Broken Angel , Curse of the Crimson Elixir and Kami o Tsugu Shōjo – feature exclusive stories in which the Elrics keep searching for the Philosopher 's Stone . In the Nintendo DS game , Fullmetal Alchemist Dual Sympathy , he and Alphonse replay the first anime series . He is also featured in the Fullmetal Alchemist Trading Card Game . There are two character CDs featuring tracks based on Edward 's character . The first is named Hagaren Song File – Edward Elric ( Hagaren Song File – エドワード ・ エルリック ) and the second Theme of Edward Elric . Both albums were performed by Ed 's Japanese voice actress , Romi Park . He also appears in each light novel written by Makoto Inoue which continue Ed and Al 's search for the Philosopher 's Stone and at the same time feature different stories from the ones appearing the manga and the anime .

Author Hiromu Arakawa integrated several social problems into the plot , such as the way Edward and Alphonse live as brothers after the death of their mother , Trisha . She also looks at how the brothers help people all over the country to gain an understanding of the meaning of family . When describing the character 's personality , Arakawa comments that after his father 's departure from home and his mother 's death , Edward tried to replace the role of the man for the Elric family . As a result , Van Hohenheim 's reappearance caused a shocking and terrified reaction in the character . Arakawa has noted that Edward is one of her favorite characters from the series , although she denied having the same personality as him when one of her assistants mentioned it . When comparing the two brothers during the time Alphonse obtained the ability to use alchemy without a circle like Edward , Arakawa stated nobody was better at alchemy as the two had different preferences in the same way as other alchemist appearing in the series . Although she claims she has not thought of the characters ' birthdates , Arakawa noted that she decided Edward 's birthdate during the series ' serialization . During a chapter in which it was mentioned that Edward was about to be 16 , winter was about to begin in Hokkaido , Arakawa 's birthplace , so it was decided Edward 's birthdate would be in winter . In a common slapstick gag from the series , Edward is often struck by Winry Rockbell 's wrench . While commenting that Edward has an ability easily dodge her , Arakawa comments that he gets hit on purpose as a result of his personality . The director of the first anime series , Seiji Mizushima , says that in the development of the story Edward " evolves and devolves " ; Mizushima comments that Edward is continuously overcoming inner struggles in order to determine how to grow up . The appearance of his automail in the anime is used to symbolize the intangibles of his character , making viewers note that Edward lost something important .

In a prototype from the series , Edward was an eighteen-year-old teenager travelling alongside his father whose soul sealed in a flying squirrel . Edward 's prototype had an average height , but retained his automail . In order to fit with the readers from the manga magazine Monthly Shonen Gangan , Edward 's traits were further modified , leaving his current one . His height was reduced in order to contrast with Alphonse 's huge armor . In the design of the character , Arakawa is often worried about not making his automail too bulky to avoid balancing it by increasing Edward 's muscles , making his appearance unsuitable for his age . She has also often drawn the character in full body length , but at one point noticed she made it too tall . As the manga continued serialization , Arakawa found that she drew Edward half naked several times even more than Alex Louis Armstrong who tends to show his torso . While stating that this was because she wanted to draw Edward 's automail , she commented that it was common for men to walk in underwear at their homes . In the Japanese version of Fullmetal Alchemist 's anime adaptations , Edward has been voiced by Romi Park . In the English version , the role has been played by Vic Mignogna . Mignogna has stated that performing Edward may be his biggest voice acting achievement since fans do not compare him with Park , noting that their voices are not similar and that he did not plan to sound like her . Additionally , in the upcoming live-action of the series , Edward will be portrayed by Ryosuke Yamada .

Edward 's character is well received by manga readers ; in each of the popularity polls made by Monthly Shōnen Gangan he has ranked first . Edward also won the Twenty-sixth Annual Animage Readers ' Poll , Anime Grand Prix , in the " Favorite Male Character " ; Romi Park , who voices Edward in Japanese , won in the " Favorite Seiyu " category . Edward maintained a high place in the next year 's poll in the same category . In the July 2009 issue of Newtype , Edward ranked at the top of the survey Male Character Rankings . In the August 2009 issue his rank changed to fourth . In a Newtype poll from March 2010 , Edward was voted as the fourth most popular male anime character from the 2000s . In the Anime Awards 2006 from About.com , Edward won in the category " Best Lead Character – Male " . He was also seventh in IGN 's 2009 Top 25 Anime Characters of All Time with writer Chris Mackenzie saying , " [ Edward ] and his kid brother Al make one of the best action-comedy teams in recent memory " . In 2014 , IGN ranked him as the eighth greatest anime character of all time , saying that " In Edward we had a character who was truly multidimensional . He could be comedic and pull off wild takes and sight gags . He could be placed in the most tragic circumstances and portray the deepest kind of sadness . He could be a complete badass , but he could also be the nicest guy on the planet . " Several pieces of merchandise have been released in Edward 's likeness , including plush toys , action figures , and key-chains . Vic Mignogna , who performs the voice of Edward in the English dub , was the winner in American Anime Awards in the category " Best Actor " for voicing Edward .

Several publications for manga , anime , and other pop culture media have provided both praise and criticism on Edward 's character . IGN writer Hilary Goldstein praises Edward as the perfect balance between the typical clever kid and the stubborn kid persona , explaining that this allows the character to " float between comical moments and underlying drama without seeming false . " Additionally , Melissa Harper from Anime News Network praises Edward 's facial expressions as some of the most humorous highlights of the series , including also the moments in which he reacts quite violently to comments about his small stature . They also praise him for not being a stereotypical shōnen character as it is noted that he has " very real skills , relationships , and personality " . Samuel Arbogast from T.H.E.M. Anime Reviews also comments that the interaction between the Elric brothers as they travel is interesting , and praises their humor scenes as they help to balance the dark parts of the series . Similarly , Mania Entertainment 's Jarred Pine liked the dynamic between the Elrics brothers as while Edward is often faced with following " dark paths " in the same way as villains with the series , he is always supported by Alphonse who makes sure he is okay . Judge Joel Pearce from DVD Verdict commented on Edward 's journey , considering it very complex morally because he is trying to do good within a morally questionable organization . Lydia Hojnacki listed Ed as one of the reasons she likes Fullmetal Alchemist , noting the progression of the character 's personality throughout the series , from simple maturity to a deeper sensitivity . The character was noted to go through a notable development in the manga after meeting his father by Holly Ellingwood from Active Anime as it made him decide to see the investigate from the human he and Alphonse created as children which led him to find a clue about how to recover his brother 's body . On the other hand , Maria Lin from Animefringe criticized Edward 's development in the first animated adaptation of Fullmetal Alchemist , as in the series ' finale he once again attempted to resurrect a human .

The Picardy Spaniel is a breed of dog developed in France for use as a gundog . It is related to the Blue Picardy Spaniel , and still has many similarities , but the Picardy Spaniel is the older of the two breeds . It is thought to be one of the two oldest continental spaniel breeds and was favoured by the French nobility , remaining popular for hunting after the French Revolution due to its weather resistant coat that enabled it to hunt in a variety of conditions and terrain . However its popularity waned following the influx of English hunting breeds in the early 20th century . Slightly smaller than an English Setter but larger than most of its spaniel cousins , it has no major health issues although as with many breeds with pendulous ears , it can be prone to ear infections .

The French Spaniel and the Picardy Spaniel are considered to be the two oldest continental breeds of spaniel . Both breeds are speculated to have stemmed from the Chien d ' Oysel described in the writings of Gaston Phoebus . Hunting during this period in France was one of the favourite sports of the nobility and the French type of Spaniel became the favourite hunting dog of the French Royalty . The breed can be seen in paintings dating from this period by artists Alexandre-François Desportes and Jean-Baptiste Oudry . They were also the first breed of dog to be admitted into salons . The breed became more popular still following the French Revolution and the aftermath in which hunting was no longer restricted to the nobility . Although spread throughout France , a large concentration was located in the north west where the weather resistant coat of the breed made it ideal for the wooded and swampy conditions . During the early 19th century , British hunters crossed the channel to hunt in the grounds of north west France . The British brought their own hunting dogs , and this resulted in a change of preference as French hunters switched to English breeds and caused a major blow to the existence of the Picardy Spaniel . In addition the infusion of blood from the English Setter into the local spaniel population created the Blue Picardy Spaniel .

The Epagneul Picard Club was formed in 1921 and was merged with the Club of Blue Picardy Spaniel on 28 July 1937 . A further merger took place on 21 May 1980 when these clubs merged with the Pont-Audemer Club to form the Club des Epagneuls Picards , Bleus de Picardie & Pont Audemer . The Picardy Spaniel is recognised by a variety of Kennel Clubs and associations including the North American Kennel Club , American Rare Breed Association , United Kennel Club , and the Fédération Cynologique Internationale . All four associations use the standard as set by the FCI . It is also recognised by the Continental Kennel Club , but unlike the closely related Blue Picardy Spaniel , it is not recognised by the Canadian Kennel Club .

Typical examples of the breed measure between 22 – 24 inches ( 56 – 61 cm ) at the withers , with the average weight between 20 – 25 kilograms ( 44 – 55 lb ) . The breed is similar in size to the English Setter , although is slightly smaller . Of the Spaniel type breeds , only the Large Münsterländer and Drentse Patrijshond are recognised as possibly growing to larger sizes , with the Drentse measuring 21.5 – 25.5 in ( 55 – 65 cm ) , and the Münsterländer slightly smaller with a narrower range at 23 – 25 in ( 58 – 64 cm ) . The breed has a squarely built muscular body and an oval shaped head with a long muzzle and long ears that hang fairly low . Its coat can vary in colours from chocolate , chestnut brown and white with sandy coloured markings on the head and white or grey spots on the legs . Its hair is abundant with a slight wave , enabling it to work in dense cover and even in water .

The Picardy Spaniel is a docile breed of dog and is fond of playing with children and bonds well with their master . It is described as having a gentle sociable nature , possessing a good character and being relatively easy to train . In France , the breed is used for hunting in wooded areas for Pheasants , and in swamps for Snipes . However it can also be used for hunting ducks , hares and rabbits . The breed excels at hunting in marshes and will not hesitate to jump into water . It can also adequately serve as a retriever should it be required . The dog is content with a small amount of space and could suit life in the city , but also loves open spaces .

The U-Drop Inn , also known as Tower Station and U-Drop Inn and Tower Café , was built in 1936 in Shamrock , Texas along the historic Route 66 highway . Inspired by the image of a nail stuck in soil , the building was designed by J. C. Berry . An unusual example of art deco architecture applied to a gas station and restaurant , the building features two flared towers with geometric detailing , curvilinear massing , glazed ceramic tile walls , and neon light accents . It has traditionally held two separate business : " Tower Station " , a gas station on the western side , and the " U-Drop Inn " , a café on the eastern side . Though it has passed hands several times in its history , the building has consistently housed the same types of businesses it was originally constructed for . Once considered a beautiful and impressive example of Route 66 architecture in Texas , the U-Drop Inn fell into disrepair with the decommissioning of Route 66 . It closed for business in the late 1990s . After it was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in September 1997 , the building was purchased by the First National Bank of Shamrock , which then gave it to the city . Primarily funded by a US $ 1.7 million federal grant , the city hired a firm specializing in historical renovation to restore the building to its original glory and adapt it into a museum , visitors ' center , gift shop , and the city 's chamber of commerce . In 2006 animated film Cars , the cartoon village of Radiator Springs was based on multiple real U.S. Route 66 landmarks from Peach Springs to Baxter Springs ; the U-Drop Inn 's distinctive architecture appears as Ramone 's automotive body and paint shop .

Opened on April 1 , 1936 , the U-Drop Inn was built by J.M. Tindall using a design created by his friend , John Nunn , who scratched the design on a patch of dirt in the driveway of a nearby motel . Tindall had Pampa architect J.C. Berry draw up the blueprints for the art deco structure , and construction began at the busy intersection of Route 66 and U.S. Route 83 . Nunn , whose family owned and ran the business , sponsored a contest to decide the name of the new building . An eight-year-old boy won a week 's worth of waitressing pay ( approximately $ 50.00 at the time ) with his entry of " U-Drop Inn " . In addition to a café , the building housed a gas station that sold Conoco brand fuel and a store . The store was never actually opened as a store , and became a ballroom and overflow dining area for the café . When the business opened , the local newspaper called it " the most up-to-date edifice of its kind on U.S. Highway 66 between Oklahoma City and Amarillo " , with the café considered " the swankiest of the swank eating places " . At the time of opening , the U-Drop was the only café within 100 miles ( 160 km ) of Shamrock , enjoying brisk business and becoming a successful establishment . Nunn sold the Inn after several years , but purchased it back in 1950 and renamed it Nunn 's Café . In 1957 , John Nunn died and his wife Bebe sold the café to Grace Brunner who again renamed it , this time to Tower Café , and added a Greyhound bus station .

After Nunn 's death , the building passed through the hands of a few more owners and the station sold gasoline from various other companies . In the 1970s , Fina took over the building , painting it red , white , and blue . In the early 1980s , James R. Tindall , Sr. purchased the building , the construction of which his father had originally financed , repainted it to its original colors , and changed the name back to the original name of U-Drop Inn . In the mid-1990s , the building was repossessed by the bank and closed completely in 1997 . Up through its closing , the café at the U-Drop was praised for its low-priced and tasty " home cooking " . With signing of the Federal Aid Highway Act of 1956 , Route 66 fell into decline , with segments being bypassed via turnpikes and newer highways . With the opening of Interstate 40 , Shamrock became one of the bypassed towns and the U-Drop Inn , which once served thousands of travelers fell into disrepair due to neglect . In 1984 , Route 66 was decommissioned by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials , seeming to seal the fate of the town and the U-Drop Inn . In 1990 , several state and local historical associations began efforts to preserve the architectural landmarks along the old route , particularly the many derelict or abandoned motels .

Called " one of the most impressive examples " of Route 66 architecture by the Texas Historical Commission , the U-Drop Inn was added to the National Register of Historic Places on September 18 , 1997 . In May 1999 , the First National Bank of Shamrock purchased the U-Drop Inn , then gave it to the city of Shamrock . The city of Shamrock began taking measures to revive the neglected structure as a tourist attraction . In 2000 , the city hired Phillips Swager Associates of Dallas and Architexas , a firm specializing in historical preservation , to begin implementing a phased restoration plan . The company adapted the old gas station and café to act as the community 's chamber of commerce and visitor center while preserving the building 's architectural features and historical authenticity . Old photographs and interviews with residents were used to aid the company in uncovering the buildings original details . They peeled away decades of paint layers and fabric to find the original interior and exterior colors . One of the more difficult aspects was in restoring the neon accents . While historical photographs showed where neon existed , they had all been taken during the daytime when the neon lights were off , making it difficult to determine what color the lights originally were .

The restoration also included turning the building into a museum of its own history , giving it the authentic appearance of a working 1940 gas station . With $ 1.7 million in funding by the Transportation Equity Act for the 21st Century , the restoration was completed in July 2003 . In May 2013 , the neon lighting of the restored U-Drop Inn was damaged by a hailstorm ; the damaged elements were replaced by LEDs in February 2014 . The café will serve fountain drinks , coffee and floats in 2014 after many years with no food or beverage service .

With its glazed brick , " zigzag " motif , strong vertical elements , and the decorative structure , particularly the metal " tulip " , the building is considered to be an excellent example of the Art Deco style . Art Deco was most commonly seen in large commercial and public buildings , so its use in a gas station and roadside restaurant was a rare sight . The U-Drop is one of the few Art Deco cafés built in the 1930s , and it stands out architecturally from its peers , as most depression-era cafés had simpler and similar wood-frame and clapboard designs or followed the Streamline Moderne offshoot of Art Deco . The original building was designed by John Nunn and architect J. C. Berry . The 1-story concrete and brick building has a modified rectangular layout with a flat roof . It features a flared tower over the gas station , and two canopies , one facing Route 66 and one facing Highway 83 over the front of the gas station office . In the rear , a second , shorter tower contained the restaurant . The main buildings were built of structural clay tile with terra-cotta glazed brick . The two towers are clad in stucco with decorative green and gold glazed terra-cotta tiles and cast concrete stepped forms . Designed to attract the attention of the passing motorists , the towers also feature geometric detailing , curvilinear massing , and are outlined with neon lighting added additional character and uniqueness to the building 's design .

Historically , the U-Drop Inn held two separate businesses that shared a single interior wall . The west side , commonly called " Tower Station " " is dominated by a large four-sided obelisk rising from the flat roof and topped by a metal " tulip " . " The tower displayed the station name , Conoco , in all capital letters on each side , with neon lighting on the corners . Vertical-rubbed detailing goes along the base of both towers , as well as two canopies that extend south and west from the western tower . The posts of the canopies were originally encased in decorative glazed tile and vintage metal signs . Between the canopy posts are fuel islands designed to hold three fuel pumps each . 1960s-vintage pumps are situated on the islands , with three on the western canopy and two on the southern . A chamfered corner separates the two canopies . Multiple-pane windows surround the glass doors of the office station , as well as dominating much of the southern side of the building . Situated between the office and the café are two service station bays with roll-up style overhead doors .

The east side of the building , commonly called the " U-Drop Inn café " has a similarly designed , three-sided , shorter version of the main tower . Mirroring the " Conoco " wording , it has " Café " written in the same green paint with drop shadowed lettering , and a small ornamental metal sphere perched at its top . Just below the tower , an outstretched metal and wooden sign , added in 1950 , displays the name of the building and points towards the recessed entrance . This side mirrors the tiled detail found in the station side , and once had a neon " starburst " around the sign and entryway . Inside the café , the eastern and southern interior walls are lined with booths . The northern wall holds two small restrooms , with the kitchen once located in the northeastern corner . On the southern wall , a recessed doorway flanked by large single-paned windows led into the café 's main dining room . The building 's exterior is pained beige with dark green accents . On the northern facade , the original brick remains unpainted .

" They Don 't Care About Us " is the fourth single from Michael Jackson 's album HIStory : Past , Present and Future , Book I , released on March 31 , 1996 . The song remains one of the most controversial pieces Jackson ever composed . In the US , media scrutiny surrounding allegations of antisemitic lyrics were the catalyst for Jackson issuing multiple apologies and re-recording the song with altered lyrics . The singer countered allegations of antisemitism , arguing that reviews had misinterpreted the context of the song , either unintentionally or deliberately . The song was also covered by Christian alternative metal band P.O.D. in 1998 as a bonus track on the special edition version of their album , The Fundamental Elements of Southtown . The album contains an uncensored version of the song . Christian stores removed the album when the special edition came out because of the controversial lyrics including " Jew me " and " Kike me . " The song was accompanied by two music videos directed by Spike Lee . The first was shot in two locations in Brazil , in Pelourinho , the historic city centre of Salvador , and in a favela of Rio de Janeiro called Dona Marta , where the state authorities had tried to ban all production over fears the video would damage their image , the area and prospects of Rio de Janeiro staging the 2004 Olympics . Still , the residents of the area were happy to see the singer , hoping their problems would be made visible to a wider audience . The second video was shot in a prison and contained video footage of multiple references to human rights abuses .

Commercially , the song became a top ten hit in all European countries and number one in Germany for three weeks . In the US , radio stations were reluctant to play the controversial composition ; it , however , managed to peak at number 30 on the Billboard Hot 100 . The song was remixed with parts of songs such as " Privacy " ( from the album Invincible ) and " Tabloid Junkie " , and released on the Immortal album , in November , 2011 . The song was performed during Jackson 's third and final concert series , the HIStory World Tour which ran from 1996 to 1997 as part of a medley with " Scream " and " In the Closet " . The song was set to be performed on Jackson 's This Is It comeback concert series at The O2 Arena in London from July 2009 to March 2010 but the shows were ultimately cancelled due to his sudden death on June 25 , 2009 .

The song begins with a child chanting , " Enough is enough of this garbage ! " and someone else helps sing the chorus — " All I wanna say is that they don 't really care about us " . According to the sheet music published on Musicnotes.com by Alfred Music Publishing " They Don 't Care About Us " is played in the key of D minor and the track 's time signature is common time . The song , which is cited as being a pop song , has a moderately slow tempo of 88 beats per minute . Instruments used include a piano and guitar . Jon Pareles stated that Jackson was calling himself " a victim of police brutality " and a " victim of hate " . He continued , " A listener might wonder just who ' Us ' is supposed to be ... To make the songs lodge in the ear , Jackson uses elementary singsong melodies – a ' nyah , nyah ' two-note motif in ' They Don 't Care About Us ' ... and he comes up with all kinds of surprises in the arrangements " . James Hunter of Rolling Stone magazine noted that musically , Jackson was no longer trying to hide any eccentricities he had , he expressed the opinion that in " They Don 't Care About Us " , the pop musician sounded more embattled than ever . Jim Farber of New York Daily News said that Jackson " snarled " while singing , that the song " clicked " and has an " original clattering rhythm " . The review of HIStory in The Washington Times noted of " They Don 't Care About Us " : " [ it ] follows fast , inviting more pathos – and more controversy . With haunting clapping and a police scanner in the background " . The Sacramento Bee described it as a " looped reggae-lite dance beat " .

In the UK , it peaked at number four and stayed on the chart for three months . The song found particular success in Europe , peaking within the top ten in all countries . European highlights came in Austria , Switzerland , France , Belgium and Sweden , in these countries the song became a top five hit and stayed in their respective charts for a minimum of 21 weeks . The song reached the top of the charts for three weeks in Germany and stayed a full 30 weeks in the survey . It is the longest consecutive chart run of a Michael Jackson song in the German charts . The lyrical controversy surrounding " They Don 't Care About Us " brought partial commercial disappointment in the US ; radio stations were reluctant to play the song . It peaked at number 30 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart , falling short of the record breaking success of the two previous singles " Scream / Childhood " and " You Are Not Alone " , yet the song peaked at number 10 on the US Billboard Hot R & B Singles chart .

Producing the first video proved to be a difficult task for Jackson . State authorities unsuccessfully tried to ban the singer filming in Salvador ( Pelourinho ) and in Rio de Janeiro . Officials in the state of Rio feared images of poverty might affect tourism and accused Jackson of exploiting the poor . Ronaldo Cezar Coelho , the state secretary for Industry , Commerce and Tourism demanded editing rights over the finished product , stating , " I don 't see why we should have to facilitate films that will contribute nothing to all our efforts to rehabilitate Rio 's image " . Some were concerned that scenes of poverty and human rights abuses would affect their chances of hosting the Olympics in 2004 . Others supported Jackson 's wish to highlight the problems of the region , arguing that the government were embarrassed by their own failings . A judge banned all filming but this ruling was overturned by an injunction . Although officials were angry , the residents were not and Jackson was surrounded by crowds of enthusiastic onlookers during filming . One woman managed to push through security to hug Jackson who continued dancing while hugging her . Another woman appeared and hugged him from behind . He then fell to the ground as police pulled the two women off him and escorted them away . After the director helped Jackson get up off the street , he continued to sing and dance . This incident made it into the music video . 1,500 policemen and 50 residents acting as security guards effectively sealed off the Dona Marta favela . Some residents and officials found it offensive that Jackson 's production team had negotiated with drug dealers in order to gain permission to film in one of the city 's shantytowns .

The music video was directed by Spike Lee . Asked why he chose Lee to direct the video , Jackson responded , " ' They Don 't Care About Us ' has an edge , and Spike Lee had approached me . It 's a public awareness song and that 's what he is all about . It 's a protest kind of song ... and I think he was perfect for it " . Jackson also collaborated with 200 members of the cultural group Olodum , who " swayed to the heavy beat of Salvador 's ' samba-reggae ' music " . The media interest surrounding the music video exposed Olodum to 140 countries around the world . It brought them worldwide fame and increased their credibility in Brazil . At the beginning of the video , a Brazilian woman says " Michael , eles não ligam pra gente " which means " Michael , they don 't care about us " . When Michael Jackson decided to shoot his new music video in a favela of Rio de Janeiro ... he used the favela people as extras in a visual super-spectacle ... All the while there is a vaguely political appeal in there ... The interesting aspect of Michael Jackson 's strategy is the efficiency with which it gives visibility to poverty and social problems in countries like Brazil without resorting to traditional political discourse . The problematic aspect is that it does not entail a real intervention in that poverty .

In 2009 , Billboard described the area as " now a model for social development " and claimed that Jackson 's influence was partially responsible for this improvement . For the first time in his career , Jackson made a second music video for a single . This second version was filmed in a prison with cell mates ; in the video Jackson is seen handcuffed . It also contains real footage of police attacking African Americans , the military crackdown of the protest in the Tiananmen Square , the Ku Klux Klan , war crimes , genocide , execution , martial law , and other human rights abuses . The first music video of the song appears on the box set Visionary : The Video Singles , and the video albums HIStory on Film , Volume II and Vision ; the latter additionally includes the prison version . The voice intro , " Michael , Michael , eles não ligam pra gente " ( portuguese for " they don 't care about us " ) , was recorded by Angélica Vieira , producer of Manhattan Connection .

In 2012 , Italian jazz trumpeter Enrico Rava released a version on his tribute album Rava on the Dance Floor . In 2014 , a Nigerian , King A-Maz , used the song to protest the Nigerian government 's nonchalance concerning the Boko Haram carnage going on at that time . The single was uploaded to YouTube , along with amateur footage , which caused a lot of controversy due to the newspaper clippings used in the footage . The Tupac Shakur album entitled Better Dayz ( 2002 ) features a song named " They Don 't Give a Fuck About Us " . With different lyrics , the song contained a similar theme and musical composition style . Tupac discusses the trials and tribulations of the black and working class communities , referring to " they " as the middle class , media , U.S. that did not understand him .

The New York Times reported the song contained racist and anti-Semitic content on June 15 , 1995 , just a day before the album 's release . The publication highlighted the lyrics , " Jew me , sue me , everybody do me / Kick me , kike me , don 't you black or white me . " Jackson responded directly to the publication , stating : When questioned further about the lyrics on the ABC News program Prime Time Live , Jackson stated , " It 's not anti-Semitic because I 'm not a racist person ... I could never be a racist . I love all races . " The singer also claimed that some of his closest employees and friends were Jewish . That same day , Jackson received support from his manager and record label , who described the lyrics as " brilliant " , that they were about opposition to prejudice and taken out of context . The following day , two leading members of the Jewish community stated that Jackson 's attempt to make a song critical of discrimination had backfired . They expressed the opinion that the lyrics used were unsuitable for a teenage audience that might not understand the song 's context , adding that the song was too ambiguous for some listeners to understand . They accepted that Jackson meant well and suggested that the entertainer write an explanation in the album booklet .

On June 17 , Jackson issued another public apology for his choice of words . He promised that future copies of the album would include an apology . By this point , however , two million copies of the record had already been shipped . The singer concluded , " I just want you all to know how strongly I am committed to tolerance , peace and love , and I apologize to anyone who might have been hurt . " The next day , in his review of HIStory , Jon Pareles of The New York Times alleged , " In ... ' They Don 't Care About Us ' , he gives the lie to his entire catalogue of brotherhood anthems with a burst of anti-Semitism . " On June 21 , Patrick Macdonald of The Seattle Times criticized Jackson , stating , " He may have lived a sheltered life , but there really is no excuse for using terms like ' Jew me ' and ' kike ' in a pop song , unless you make it clear you are denouncing such terms , and do so in an artful way . " Two days later , Jackson decided , despite the cost incurred , he would return to the studio and alter the offending wording on future copies of the album ; " Jew me " and " Kike me " would be substituted with " do me " and " strike me " . The music video and some copies of the album still carry the original words , but with loud , abstract noises partially drowning them out . He reiterated his acceptance that the song was offensive to some . Spike Lee claimed there was some kind of double standard in the music industry . " While the New York Times asserted the use of racial slurs in " They Don 't Care About Us " , they were silent on other racial slurs in the album . The Notorious B.I.G. says " nigga " on " This Time Around , " another song on the HIStory album , but it did not attract media attention , as well as , many years before , use in lyrics of word " nigger " by John Lennon .

Benzodiazepines ( BZD , BZs ) , sometimes called " benzos " , are a class of psychoactive drugs whose core chemical structure is the fusion of a benzene ring and a diazepine ring . The first such drug , chlordiazepoxide ( Librium ) , was discovered accidentally by Leo Sternbach in 1955 , and made available in 1960 by Hoffmann – La Roche , which , since 1963 , has also marketed the benzodiazepine diazepam ( Valium ) . In 1977 benzodiazepines were globally the most prescribed medications . Benzodiazepines enhance the effect of the neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid ( GABA ) at the GABAA receptor , resulting in sedative , hypnotic ( sleep-inducing ) , anxiolytic ( anti-anxiety ) , anticonvulsant , and muscle relaxant properties . High doses of many shorter-acting benzodiazepines may also cause anterograde amnesia and dissociation . These properties make benzodiazepines useful in treating anxiety , insomnia , agitation , seizures , muscle spasms , alcohol withdrawal and as a premedication for medical or dental procedures . Benzodiazepines are categorized as either short- , intermediate- , or long-acting . Short- and intermediate-acting benzodiazepines are preferred for the treatment of insomnia ; longer-acting benzodiazepines are recommended for the treatment of anxiety .

Benzodiazepines are generally viewed as safe and effective for short-term use , although cognitive impairment and paradoxical effects such as aggression or behavioral disinhibition occasionally occur . A minority of people can have paradoxical reactions such as worsened agitation or panic . Long-term use is controversial because of concerns about adverse psychological and physical effects , decreasing effectiveness , and physical dependence and withdrawal . As a result of adverse effects associated with the long-term use of benzodiazepines , withdrawal from benzodiazepines , in general , leads to improved physical and mental health . The elderly are at an increased risk of suffering from both short- and long-term adverse effects , and as a result , all benzodiazepines are listed in the Beers List of inappropriate medications for older adults . There is controversy concerning the safety of benzodiazepines in pregnancy . While they are not major teratogens , uncertainty remains as to whether they cause cleft palate in a small number of babies and whether neurobehavioural effects occur as a result of prenatal exposure ; they are known to cause withdrawal symptoms in the newborn . Benzodiazepines can be taken in overdoses and can cause dangerous deep unconsciousness . However , they are much less toxic than their predecessors , the barbiturates , and death rarely results when a benzodiazepine is the only drug taken ; however , when combined with other central nervous system ( CNS ) depressants such as ethanol and opioids , the potential for toxicity and fatal overdose increases . Benzodiazepines are commonly misused and taken in combination with other drugs of abuse .

Benzodiazepines possess sedative , hypnotic , anxiolytic , anticonvulsant , muscle relaxant , and amnesic actions , which are useful in a variety of indications such as alcohol dependence , seizures , anxiety , panic , agitation , and insomnia . Most are administered orally ; however , they can also be given intravenously , intramuscularly , or rectally . In general , benzodiazepines are well-tolerated and are safe and effective drugs in the short term for a wide range of conditions . Tolerance can develop to their effects and there is also a risk of dependence , and upon discontinuation a withdrawal syndrome may occur . These factors , combined with other possible secondary effects after prolonged use such as psychomotor , cognitive , or memory impairments , limit their long-term applicability . The effects of long-term use or misuse include the tendency to cause or worsen cognitive deficits , depression , and anxiety .

Because of their effectiveness , tolerability , and rapid onset of anxiolytic action , benzodiazepines are frequently used for the treatment of anxiety associated with panic disorder . However , there is disagreement among expert bodies regarding the long-term use of benzodiazepines for panic disorder . The views range from those that hold that benzodiazepines are not effective long-term and that they should be reserved for treatment-resistant cases to that they are as effective in the long term as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors . The American Psychiatric Association ( APA ) guidelines note that , in general , benzodiazepines are well tolerated , and their use for the initial treatment for panic disorder is strongly supported by numerous controlled trials . APA states that there is insufficient evidence to recommend any of the established panic disorder treatments over another . The choice of treatment between benzodiazepines , SSRIs , serotonin – norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors , tricyclic antidepressants , and psychotherapy should be based on the patient 's history , preference , and other individual characteristics . Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors are likely to be the best choice of pharmacotherapy for many patients with panic disorder , but benzodiazepines are also often used , and some studies suggest that these medications are still used with greater frequency than the SSRIs . One advantage of benzodiazepines is that they alleviate the anxiety symptoms much faster than antidepressants , and therefore may be preferred in patients for whom rapid symptom control is critical . However , this advantage is offset by the possibility of developing benzodiazepine dependence . APA does not recommend benzodiazepines for persons with depressive symptoms or a recent history of substance abuse . The APA guidelines state that , in general , pharmacotherapy of panic disorder should be continued for at least a year , and that clinical experience support continuing benzodiazepine treatment to prevent recurrence . Although major concerns about benzodiazepine tolerance and withdrawal have been raised , there is no evidence for significant dose escalation in patients using benzodiazepines long-term . For many such patients stable doses of benzodiazepines retain their efficacy over several years .

Guidelines issued by the UK-based National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence ( NICE ) , carried out a systematic review using different methodology and came to a different conclusion . They questioned the accuracy of studies that were not placebo-controlled . And , based on the findings of placebo-controlled studies , they do not recommend use of benzodiazepines beyond two to four weeks , as tolerance and physical dependence develop rapidly , with withdrawal symptoms including rebound anxiety occurring after six weeks or more of use . Nevertheless , benzodiazepines continue to be prescribed for the long-term treatment of anxiety disorders , although specific antidepressants and psychological therapies are recommended as the first-line treatment options with the anticonvulsant drug pregabalin indicated as a second- or third-line treatment and suitable for long-term use . NICE stated that long-term use of benzodiazepines for panic disorder with or without agoraphobia is an unlicensed indication , does not have long-term efficacy , and is , therefore , not recommended by clinical guidelines . Psychological therapies such as cognitive behavioural therapy are recommended as a first-line therapy for panic disorder ; benzodiazepine use has been found to interfere with therapeutic gains from these therapies .

Benzodiazepines have robust efficacy in the short-term management of generalized anxiety disorder ( GAD ) , but were not shown to be effective in producing long-term improvement overall . According to National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence ( NICE ) , benzodiazepines can be used in the immediate management of GAD , if necessary . However , they should not usually be given for longer than 2 – 4 weeks . The only medications NICE recommends for the longer term management of GAD are antidepressants . Likewise , Canadian Psychiatric Association ( CPA ) recommends benzodiazepines alprazolam , bromazepam , lorazepam , and diazepam only as a second-line choice , if the treatment with two different antidepressants was unsuccessful . Although they are second-line agents , benzodiazepines can be used for a limited time to relieve severe anxiety and agitation . CPA guidelines note that after 4 – 6 weeks the effect of benzodiazepines may decrease to the level of placebo , and that benzodiazepines are less effective than antidepressants in alleviating ruminative worry , the core symptom of GAD . However , in some cases , a prolonged treatment with benzodiazepines as the add-on to an antidepressant may be justified .

Benzodiazepines can be useful for short-term treatment of insomnia . Their use beyond 2 to 4 weeks is not recommended due to the risk of dependence . It is preferred that benzodiazepines be taken intermittently and at the lowest effective dose . They improve sleep-related problems by shortening the time spent in bed before falling asleep , prolonging the sleep time , and , in general , reducing wakefulness . However , they worsen sleep quality by increasing light sleep and decreasing deep sleep . Other drawbacks of hypnotics , including benzodiazepines , are possible tolerance to their effects , rebound insomnia , and reduced slow-wave sleep and a withdrawal period typified by rebound insomnia and a prolonged period of anxiety and agitation . The list of benzodiazepines approved for the treatment of insomnia is fairly similar among most countries , but which benzodiazepines are officially designated as first-line hypnotics prescribed for the treatment of insomnia can vary distinctly between countries . Longer-acting benzodiazepines such as nitrazepam and diazepam have residual effects that may persist into the next day and are , in general , not recommended . Since the release of nonbenzodiazepines in 1992 in response to safety concerns , individuals with insomnia and other sleep disorders have increasingly been prescribed nonbenzodiazepines ( 2.3 % in 1993 to 13.7 % of Americans in 2010 ) , less often prescribed benzodiazepines ( 23.5 % in 1993 to 10.8 % in 2010 ) . It is not clear as to whether the new nonbenzodiazepine hypnotics ( Z-drugs ) are better than the short-acting benzodiazepines . The efficacy of these two groups of medications is similar . According to the US Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality , indirect comparison indicates that side-effects from benzodiazepines may be about twice as frequent as from nonbenzodiazepines . Some experts suggest using nonbenzodiazepines preferentially as a first-line long-term treatment of insomnia . However , the UK National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence did not find any convincing evidence in favor of Z-drugs . NICE review pointed out that short-acting Z-drugs were inappropriately compared in clinical trials with long-acting benzodiazepines . There have been no trials comparing short-acting Z-drugs with appropriate doses of short-acting benzodiazepines . Based on this , NICE recommended choosing the hypnotic based on cost and the patient 's preference .

Prolonged convulsive epileptic seizures are a medical emergency that can usually be dealt with effectively by administering fast-acting benzodiazepines , which are potent anticonvulsants . In a hospital environment , intravenous clonazepam , lorazepam , and diazepam are first-line choices , clonazepam due to its stronger and more potent anticonvulsant action , diazepam due to its faster onset and lorazepam for its longer duration of action . In the community , intravenous administration is not practical and so rectal diazepam or ( more recently ) buccal midazolam are used , with a preference for midazolam as its administration is easier and more socially acceptable . When benzodiazepines were first introduced , they were enthusiastically adopted for treating all forms of epilepsy . However , drowsiness and tolerance become problems with continued use and none are now considered first-line choices for long-term epilepsy therapy . Clobazam is widely used by specialist epilepsy clinics worldwide and clonazepam is popular in the Netherlands , Belgium and France . Clobazam was approved for use in the United States in 2011 . In the UK , both clobazam and clonazepam are second-line choices for treating many forms of epilepsy . Clobazam also has a useful role for very short-term seizure prophylaxis and in catamenial epilepsy . Discontinuation after long-term use in epilepsy requires additional caution because of the risks of rebound seizures . Therefore , the dose is slowly tapered over a period of up to six months or longer .

Chlordiazepoxide is the most commonly used benzodiazepine for alcohol detoxification , but diazepam may be used as an alternative . Both are used in the detoxification of individuals who are motivated to stop drinking , and are prescribed for a short period of time to reduce the risks of developing tolerance and dependence to the benzodiazepine medication itself . The benzodiazepines with a longer half-life make detoxification more tolerable , and dangerous ( and potentially lethal ) alcohol withdrawal effects are less likely to occur . On the other hand , short-acting benzodiazepines may lead to breakthrough seizures , and are , therefore , not recommended for detoxification in an outpatient setting . Oxazepam and lorazepam are often used in patients at risk of drug accumulation , in particular , the elderly and those with cirrhosis , because they are metabolized differently from other benzodiazepines , through conjugation . Benzodiazepines are the preferred choice in the management of alcohol withdrawal syndrome , in particular , for the prevention and treatment of the dangerous complication of seizures and in subduing severe delirium . Lorazepam is the only benzodiazepine with predictable intramuscular absorption and it is the most effective in preventing and controlling acute seizures .

Benzodiazepines are sometimes used in the treatment of acute anxiety , as they bring about rapid and marked or moderate relief of symptoms in most individuals ; however , they are not recommended beyond 2 – 4 weeks of use due to risks of tolerance and dependence and a lack of long-term effectiveness . As for insomnia , they may also be used on an irregular / " as-needed " basis , such as in cases where said anxiety is at its worst . Compared to other pharmacological treatments , benzodiazepines are twice as likely to lead to a relapse of the underlying condition upon discontinuation . Psychological therapies and other pharmacological therapies are recommended for the long-term treatment of generalized anxiety disorder . Antidepressants have higher remission rates and are , in general , safe and effective in the short and long term .

They can be very useful in intensive care to sedate patients receiving mechanical ventilation or those in extreme distress . Caution is exercised in this situation due to the occasional occurrence of respiratory depression , and it is recommended that benzodiazepine overdose treatment facilities should be available . Benzodiazepines are effective as medication given a couple of hours before surgery to relieve anxiety . They also produce amnesia , which can be useful , as patients will not be able to remember any unpleasantness from the procedure . They are also used in patients with dental phobia as well as some ophthalmic procedures like refractive surgery ; although such use is controversial and only recommended for those who are very anxious . Midazolam is the most commonly prescribed for this use because of its strong sedative actions and fast recovery time , as well as its water solubility , which reduces pain upon injection . Diazepam and lorazepam are sometimes used . Lorazepam has particularly marked amnesic properties that may make it more effective when amnesia is the desired effect . Benzodiazepines are well known for their strong muscle-relaxing properties and can be useful in the treatment of muscle spasms , although tolerance often develops to their muscle relaxant effects . Baclofen or tizanidine are sometimes used as an alternative to benzodiazepines . Tizanidine has been found to have superior tolerability compared to diazepam and baclofen .

Benzodiazepines are also used to treat the acute panic caused by hallucinogen intoxication . Benzodiazepines are also used to calm the acutely agitated individual and can , if required , be given via an intramuscular injection . They can sometimes be effective in the short-term treatment of psychiatric emergencies such as acute psychosis as in schizophrenia or mania , bringing about rapid tranquillization and sedation until the effects of lithium or neuroleptics ( antipsychotics ) take effect . Lorazepam is most commonly used but clonazepam is sometimes prescribed for acute psychosis or mania ; their long-term use is not recommended due to risks of dependence . Clonazepam , a benzodiazepine is used to treat many forms of parasomnia . Rapid eye movement behavior disorder responds well to low doses of clonazepam . Restless legs syndrome can be treated using clonazepam as a third line treatment option as the use of clonazepam is still investigational . Benzodiazepines are sometimes used for obsessive – compulsive disorder ( OCD ) , although they are generally believed to be ineffective for this indication ; effectiveness was , however , found in one small study . Benzodiazepines can be considered as a treatment option in treatment resistant cases .

Because of their muscle relaxant action , benzodiazepines may cause respiratory depression in susceptible individuals . For that reason , they are contraindicated in people with myasthenia gravis , sleep apnea , bronchitis , and COPD . Caution is required when benzodiazepines are used in people with personality disorders or intellectual disability because of frequent paradoxical reactions . In major depression , they may precipitate suicidal tendencies and are sometimes used for suicidal overdoses . Individuals with a history of alcohol , opioid and barbiturate abuse should avoid benzodiazepines , as there is a risk of life-threatening interactions with these drugs .

In the United States , the Food and Drug Administration has categorized benzodiazepines into either category D or X meaning potential for harm in the unborn has been demonstrated . Exposure to benzodiazepines during pregnancy has been associated with a slightly increased ( from 0.06 to 0.07 % ) risk of cleft palate in newborns , a controversial conclusion as some studies find no association between benzodiazepines and cleft palate . Their use by expectant mothers shortly before the delivery may result in a floppy infant syndrome , with the newborns suffering from hypotonia , hypothermia , lethargy , and breathing and feeding difficulties . Cases of neonatal withdrawal syndrome have been described in infants chronically exposed to benzodiazepines in utero . This syndrome may be hard to recognize , as it starts several days after delivery , for example , as late as 21 day for chlordiazepoxide . The symptoms include tremors , hypertonia , hyperreflexia , hyperactivity , and vomiting and may last for up to three to six months . Tapering down the dose during pregnancy may lessen its severity . If used in pregnancy , those benzodiazepines with a better and longer safety record , such as diazepam or chlordiazepoxide , are recommended over potentially more harmful benzodiazepines , such as temazepam or triazolam . Using the lowest effective dose for the shortest period of time minimizes the risks to the unborn child .

The benefits of benzodiazepines are least and the risks are greatest in the elderly . The elderly are at an increased risk of dependence and are more sensitive to the adverse effects such as memory problems , daytime sedation , impaired motor coordination , and increased risk of motor vehicle accidents and falls , and an increased risk of hip fractures . The long-term effects of benzodiazepines and benzodiazepine dependence in the elderly can resemble dementia , depression , or anxiety syndromes , and progressively worsens over time . Adverse effects on cognition can be mistaken for the effects of old age . The benefits of withdrawal include improved cognition , alertness , mobility , reduced risk incontinence , and a reduced risk of falls and fractures . The success of gradual-tapering benzodiazepines is as great in the elderly as in younger people . Benzodiazepines should be prescribed to the elderly only with caution and only for a short period at low doses . Short to intermediate-acting benzodiazepines are preferred in the elderly such as oxazepam and temazepam . The high potency benzodiazepines alprazolam and triazolam and long-acting benzodiazepines are not recommended in the elderly due to increased adverse effects . Nonbenzodiazepines such as zaleplon and zolpidem and low doses of sedating antidepressants are sometimes used as alternatives to benzodiazepines .

Long-term use of benzodiazepines has been associated with increased risk of cognitive impairment , but its relationship with dementia remains inconclusive . The association of a past history of benzodiazepine use and cognitive decline is unclear , with some studies reporting a lower risk of cognitive decline in former users , some finding no association and some indicating an increased risk of cognitive decline . Benzodiazepines are sometimes prescribed to treat behavioral symptoms of dementia . However , like antidepressants , they have little evidence of effectiveness , although antipsychotics have shown some benefit . Cognitive impairing effects of benzodiazepines that occur frequently in the elderly can also worsen dementia .

The most common side-effects of benzodiazepines are related to their sedating and muscle-relaxing action . They include drowsiness , dizziness , and decreased alertness and concentration . Lack of coordination may result in falls and injuries , in particular , in the elderly . Another result is impairment of driving skills and increased likelihood of road traffic accidents . Decreased libido and erection problems are a common side effect . Depression and disinhibition may emerge . Hypotension and suppressed breathing ( hypoventilation ) may be encountered with intravenous use . Less common side effects include nausea and changes in appetite , blurred vision , confusion , euphoria , depersonalization and nightmares . Cases of liver toxicity have been described but are very rare . The long-term effects of benzodiazepine use can include cognitive impairment as well as affective and behavioural problems . Feelings of turmoil , difficulty in thinking constructively , loss of sex-drive , agoraphobia and social phobia , increasing anxiety and depression , loss of interest in leisure pursuits and interests , and an inability to experience or express feelings can also occur . Not everyone , however , experiences problems with long-term use . Additionally an altered perception of self , environment and relationships may occur .

The short-term use of benzodiazepines adversely affects multiple areas of cognition , the most notable one being that it interferes with the formation and consolidation of memories of new material and may induce complete anterograde amnesia . However , researchers hold contrary opinions regarding the effects of long-term administration . One view is that many of the short-term effects continue into the long-term and may even worsen , and are not resolved after stopping benzodiazepine usage . Another view maintains that cognitive deficits in chronic benzodiazepine users occur only for a short period after the dose , or that the anxiety disorder is the cause of these deficits . While the definitive studies are lacking , the former view received support from a 2004 meta-analysis of 13 small studies . This meta-analysis found that long-term use of benzodiazepines was associated with moderate to large adverse effects on all areas of cognition , with visuospatial memory being the most commonly detected impairment . Some of the other impairments reported were decreased IQ , visiomotor coordination , information processing , verbal learning and concentration . The authors of the meta-analysis and a later reviewer noted that the applicability of this meta-analysis is limited because the subjects were taken mostly from withdrawal clinics ; the coexisting drug , alcohol use , and psychiatric disorders were not defined ; and several of the included studies conducted the cognitive measurements during the withdrawal period .

Paradoxical reactions , such as increased seizures in epileptics , aggression , violence , impulsivity , irritability and suicidal behavior sometimes occur . These reactions have been explained as consequences of disinhibition and the subsequent loss of control over socially unacceptable behavior . Paradoxical reactions are rare in the general population , with an incidence rate below 1 % and similar to placebo . However , they occur with greater frequency in recreational abusers , individuals with borderline personality disorder , children , and patients on high-dosage regimes . In these groups , impulse control problems are perhaps the most important risk factor for disinhibition ; learning disabilities and neurological disorders are also significant risks . Most reports of disinhibition involve high doses of high-potency benzodiazepines . Paradoxical effects may also appear after chronic use of benzodiazepines .

While benzodizapines may have short-term benefits for anxiety , sleep and agitation in some patients , long-term ( i.e. , greater than 2 – 4 weeks ) use can result in a worsening of the very symptoms the medications are meant to treat . Potential explanations include exacerbating cognitive problems that are already common in anxiety disorders , causing or worsening depression and suicidality , disrupting sleep architecture by inhibiting deep stage sleep , withdrawal symptoms or rebound symptoms in between doses mimicking or exacerbating underlying anxiety or sleep disorders , inhibiting the benefits of psychotherapy by inhibiting memory consolidation and reducing fear extinction , and reducing coping with trauma / stress and increasing vulnerability to future stress . Anxiety , insomnia and irritability may be temporarily exacerbated during withdrawal , but psychiatric symptoms after discontinuation are usually less than even while taking benzodiazepines . Fortunately , for those with benzodiazepine-induced problems , functioning significantly improves within 1 year of discontinuation .

The main problem of the chronic use of benzodiazepines is the development of tolerance and dependence . Tolerance manifests itself as diminished pharmacological effect and develops relatively quickly to the sedative , hypnotic , anticonvulsant , and muscle relaxant actions of benzodiazepines . Tolerance to anti-anxiety effects develops more slowly with little evidence of continued effectiveness beyond four to six months of continued use . In general , tolerance to the amnesic effects does not occur . However , controversy exists as to tolerance to the anxiolytic effects with some evidence that benzodiazepines retain efficacy and opposing evidence from a systematic review of the literature that tolerance frequently occurs and some evidence that anxiety may worsen with long-term use . The question of tolerance to the amnesic effects of benzodiazepines is , likewise , unclear . Some evidence suggests that partial tolerance does develop , and that , " memory impairment is limited to a narrow window within 90 minutes after each dose " . A major disadvantage of benzodiazepines that tolerance to therapeutic effects develops relatively quickly while many adverse effects persist . Tolerance develops to hypnotic and myorelexant effects within days to weeks , and to anticonvulsant and anxiolytic effects within weeks to months . Therefore , benzodiazepines are unlikely to be effective long-term treatments for sleep and anxiety . While BZD therapeutic effects disappear with tolerance , depression and impulsivity with high suicidal risk commonly persist . Several studies have confirmed that long-term benzodiazepines are not significantly different from placebo for sleep or anxiety . This may explain why patients commonly increase doses over time and many eventually take more than one type of benzodiazepine after the first loses effectiveness . Additionally , because tolerance to benzodiazepine sedating effects develops more quickly than does tolerance to brainstem depressant effects , those taking more benzodiazepines to achieve desired effects may suffer sudden respiratory depression , hypotension or death . Most patients with anxiety disorders and PTSD have symptoms which persist for at least several months , making tolerance to therapeutic effects a distinct problem for them and necessitating the need for more effective long-term treatment ( e.g. , psychotherapy , serotonergic antidepressants ) .

Discontinuation of benzodiazepines or abrupt reduction of the dose , even after a relatively short course of treatment ( three to four weeks ) , may result in two groups of symptoms — rebound and withdrawal . Rebound symptoms are the return of the symptoms for which the patient was treated but worse than before . Withdrawal symptoms are the new symptoms that occur when the benzodiazepine is stopped . They are the main sign of physical dependence . The most frequent symptoms of withdrawal from benzodiazepines are insomnia , gastric problems , tremors , agitation , fearfulness , and muscle spasms . The less frequent effects are irritability , sweating , depersonalization , derealization , hypersensitivity to stimuli , depression , suicidal behavior , psychosis , seizures , and delirium tremens . Severe symptoms usually occur as a result of abrupt or over-rapid withdrawal . Abrupt withdrawal can be dangerous , therefore a gradual reduction regimen is recommended . Symptoms may also occur during a gradual dosage reduction , but are typically less severe and may persist as part of a protracted withdrawal syndrome for months after cessation of benzodiazepines . Approximately 10 % of patients will experience a notable protracted withdrawal syndrome , which can persist for many months or in some cases a year or longer . Protracted symptoms tend to resemble those seen during the first couple of months of withdrawal but usually are of a sub-acute level of severity . Such symptoms do gradually lessen over time , eventually disappearing altogether .

Benzodiazepines have a reputation with patients and doctors for causing a severe and traumatic withdrawal ; however , this is in large part due to the withdrawal process being poorly managed . Over-rapid withdrawal from benzodiazepines increases the severity of the withdrawal syndrome and increases the failure rate . A slow and gradual withdrawal customised to the individual and , if indicated , psychological support is the most effective way of managing the withdrawal . Opinion as to the time needed to complete withdrawal ranges from four weeks to several years . A goal of less than six months has been suggested , but due to factors such as dosage and type of benzodiazepine , reasons for prescription , lifestyle , personality , environmental stresses , and amount of available support , a year or more may be needed to withdraw . Withdrawal is best managed by transferring the physically dependent patient to an equivalent dose of diazepam because it has the longest half-life of all of the benzodiazepines , is metabolised into long-acting active metabolites and is available in low-potency tablets , which can be quartered for smaller doses . A further benefit is that it is available in liquid form , which allows for even smaller reductions . Chlordiazepoxide , which also has a long half-life and long-acting active metabolites , can be used as an alternative .

Nonbenzodiazepines are contraindicated during benzodiazepine withdrawal as they are cross tolerant with benzodiazepines and can induce dependence . Alcohol is also cross tolerant with benzodiazepines and more toxic and thus caution is needed to avoid replacing one dependence with another . During withdrawal , fluoroquinolone-based antibiotics are best avoided if possible ; they displace benzodiazepines from their binding site and reduce GABA function and , thus , may aggravate withdrawal symptoms . Antipsychotics are not recommended for benzodiazepine withdrawal ( or other CNS depressant withdrawal states ) especially clozapine , olanzapine or low potency phenothiazines e.g. chlorpromazine as they lower the seizure threshold and can worsen withdrawal effects ; if used extreme caution is required . Withdrawal from long term benzodiazepines is beneficial for most individuals . Withdrawal of benzodiazepines from long-term users , in general , leads to improved physical and mental health particularly in the elderly ; although some long term users report continued benefit from taking benzodiazepines , this may be the result of suppression of withdrawal effects .

Although benzodiazepines are much safer in overdose than their predecessors , the barbiturates , they can still cause problems in overdose . Taken alone , they rarely cause severe complications in overdose ; statistics in England showed that benzodiazepines were responsible for 3.8 % of all deaths by poisoning from a single drug . However , combining these drugs with alcohol , opiates or tricyclic antidepressants markedly raises the toxicity . The elderly are more sensitive to the side effects of benzodiazepines , and poisoning may even occur from their long-term use . The various benzodiazepines differ in their toxicity ; temazepam appears to be most toxic in overdose and when used with other drugs . The symptoms of a benzodiazepine overdose may include ; drowsiness , slurred speech , nystagmus , hypotension , ataxia , coma , respiratory depression , and cardiorespiratory arrest . A reversal agent for benzodiazepines exists , flumazenil ( Anexate ) . Its use as an antidote is not routinely recommended because of the high risk of resedation and seizures . In a double-blind , placebo-controlled trial of 326 patients , 4 patients suffered serious adverse events and 61 % became resedated following the use of flumazenil . Numerous contraindications to its use exist . It is contraindicated in patients with a history of long-term use of benzodiazepines , those having ingested a substance that lowers the seizure threshold or may cause an arrhythmia , and in those with abnormal vital signs . One study found that only 10 % of the patient population presenting with a benzodiazepine overdose are suitable candidates for treatment with flumazenil .

Individual benzodiazepines may have different interactions with certain drugs . Depending on their metabolism pathway , benzodiazepines can be divided roughly into two groups . The largest group consists of those that are metabolized by cytochrome P450 ( CYP450 ) enzymes and possess significant potential for interactions with other drugs . The other group comprises those that are metabolized through glucuronidation , such as lorazepam , oxazepam , and temazepam , and , in general , have few drug interactions . Many drugs , including oral contraceptives , some antibiotics , antidepressants , and antifungal agents , inhibit cytochrome enzymes in the liver . They reduce the rate of elimination of the benzodiazepines that are metabolized by CYP450 , leading to possibly excessive drug accumulation and increased side-effects . In contrast , drugs that induce cytochrome P450 enzymes , such as St John 's wort , the antibiotic rifampicin , and the anticonvulsants carbamazepine and phenytoin , accelerate elimination of many benzodiazepines and decrease their action . Taking benzodiazepines with alcohol , opioids and other central nervous system depressants potentiates their action . This often results in increased sedation , impaired motor coordination , suppressed breathing , and other adverse effects that have potential to be lethal . Antacids can slow down absorption of some benzodiazepines ; however , this effect is marginal and inconsistent .

Benzodiazepines work by increasing the efficiency of a natural brain chemical , GABA , to decrease the excitability of neurons . This reduces the communication between neurons and , therefore , has a calming effect on many of the functions of the brain . GABA controls the excitability of neurons by binding to the GABAA receptor . The GABAA receptor is a protein complex located in the synapses of neurons . All GABAA receptors contain an ion channel that conducts chloride ions across neuronal cell membranes and two binding sites for the neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid ( GABA ) , while a subset of GABAA receptor complexes also contain a single binding site for benzodiazepines . Binding of benzodiazepines to this receptor complex does not alter binding of GABA . Unlike other positive allosteric modulators that increases ligand binding , benzodiazepine binding acts as a positive allosteric modulator by increasing the total conduction of chloride ions across the neuronal cell membrane when GABA is already bound to its receptor . This increased chloride ion influx hyperpolarizes the neuron 's membrane potential . As a result , the difference between resting potential and threshold potential is increased and firing is less likely . Different GABAA receptor subtypes have varying distributions within different regions of the brain and , therefore , control distinct neuronal circuits . Hence , activation of different GABAA receptor subtypes by benzodiazepines may result in distinct pharmacological actions . In terms of the mechanism of action of benzodiazepines , their similarities are too great to separate them into individual categories such as anxiolytic or hypnotic . For example , a hypnotic administered in low doses will produce anxiety-relieving effects , whereas a benzodiazepine marketed as an anti-anxiety drug will at higher doses induce sleep .

The subset of GABAA receptors that also bind benzodiazepines are referred to as benzodiazepine receptors ( BzR ) . The GABAA receptor is a heteromer composed of five subunits , the most common ones being two αs , two βs , and one γ ( α2β2γ ) . For each subunit , many subtypes exist ( α1 – 6 , β1 – 3 , and γ1 – 3 ) . GABAA receptors that are made up of different combinations of subunit subtypes have different properties , different distributions in the brain and different activities relative to pharmacological and clinical effects . Benzodiazepines bind at the interface of the α and γ subunits on the GABAA receptor . Binding also requires that alpha subunits contain a histidine amino acid residue , ( i.e. , α1 , α2 , α3 , and α5 containing GABAA receptors ) . For this reason , benzodiazepines show no affinity for GABAA receptors containing α4 and α6 subunits with an arginine instead of a histidine residue . Once bound to the benzodiazepine receptor , the benzodiazepine ligand locks the benzodiazepine receptor into a conformation in which it has a greater affinity for the GABA neurotransmitter . This increases the frequency of the opening of the associated chloride ion channel and hyperpolarizes the membrane of the associated neuron . The inhibitory effect of the available GABA is potentiated , leading to sedatory and anxiolytic effects . For instance , those ligands with high activity at the α1 are associated with stronger hypnotic effects , whereas those with higher affinity for GABAA receptors containing α2 and / or α3 subunits have good anti-anxiety activity .

A benzodiazepine can be placed into one of three groups by its elimination half-life , or time it takes for the body to eliminate half of the dose . Some benzodiazepines have long-acting active metabolites , such as diazepam and chlordiazepoxide , which are metabolised into desmethyldiazepam . Desmethyldiazepam has a half-life of 36 – 200 hours , and flurazepam , with the main active metabolite of desalkylflurazepam , with a half-life of 40 – 250 hours . These long-acting metabolites are partial agonists . Short-acting compounds have a median half-life of 1 – 12 hours . They have few residual effects if taken before bedtime , rebound insomnia may occur upon discontinuation , and they might cause daytime withdrawal symptoms such as next day rebound anxiety with prolonged usage . Examples are brotizolam , midazolam , and triazolam . Intermediate-acting compounds have a median half-life of 12 – 40 hours . They may have some residual effects in the first half of the day if used as a hypnotic . Rebound insomnia , however , is more common upon discontinuation of intermediate-acting benzodiazepines than longer-acting benzodiazepines . Examples are alprazolam , estazolam , flunitrazepam , clonazepam , lormetazepam , lorazepam , nitrazepam , and temazepam .

The term benzodiazepine is the chemical name for the heterocyclic ring system ( see figure to the right ) , which is a fusion between the benzene and diazepine ring systems . Under Hantzsch – Widman nomenclature , a diazepine is a heterocycle with two nitrogen atoms , five carbon atom and the maximum possible number of cumulative double bonds . The " benzo " prefix indicates the benzene ring fused onto the diazepine ring . Benzodiazepine drugs are substituted 1,4-benzodiazepines , although the chemical term can refer to many other compounds that do not have useful pharmacological properties . Different benzodiazepine drugs have different side groups attached to this central structure . The different side groups affect the binding of the molecule to the GABAA receptor and so modulate the pharmacological properties . Many of the pharmacologically active " classical " benzodiazepine drugs contain the 5-phenyl-1H-benzo [ e ] [ 1,4 ] diazepin-2 ( 3H ) -one substructure ( see figure to the right ) . Benzodiazepines have been found to mimic protein reverse turns structurally which enable them with their biological activity in many cases . Nonbenzodiazepines also bind to the benzodiazepine binding site on the GABAA receptor and possess similar pharmacological properties . While the nonbenzodiazepines are by definition structurally unrelated to the benzodiazepines , both classes of drugs possess a common pharmacophore ( see figure to the lower-right ) , which explains their binding to a common receptor site .

The first benzodiazepine , chlordiazepoxide ( Librium ) , was synthesized in 1955 by Leo Sternbach while working at Hoffmann – La Roche on the development of tranquilizers . The pharmacological properties of the compounds prepared initially were disappointing , and Sternbach abandoned the project . Two years later , in April 1957 , co-worker Earl Reeder noticed a " nicely crystalline " compound left over from the discontinued project while spring-cleaning in the lab . This compound , later named chlordiazepoxide , had not been tested in 1955 because of Sternbach 's focus on other issues . Expecting the pharmacology results to be negative and hoping to publish the chemistry-related findings , researchers submitted it for a standard battery of animal tests . However , the compound showed very strong sedative , anticonvulsant , and muscle relaxant effects . These impressive clinical findings led to its speedy introduction throughout the world in 1960 under the brand name Librium . Following chlordiazepoxide , diazepam marketed by Hoffmann – La Roche under the brand name Valium in 1963 , and for a while the two were the most commercially successful drugs . The introduction of benzodiazepines led to a decrease in the prescription of barbiturates , and by the 1970s they had largely replaced the older drugs for sedative and hypnotic uses .

The new group of drugs was initially greeted with optimism by the medical profession , but gradually concerns arose ; in particular , the risk of dependence became evident in the 1980s . Benzodiazepines have a unique history in that they were responsible for the largest-ever class-action lawsuit against drug manufacturers in the United Kingdom , involving 14,000 patients and 1,800 law firms that alleged the manufacturers knew of the dependence potential but intentionally withheld this information from doctors . At the same time , 117 general practitioners and 50 health authorities were sued by patients to recover damages for the harmful effects of dependence and withdrawal . This led some doctors to require a signed consent form from their patients and to recommend that all patients be adequately warned of the risks of dependence and withdrawal before starting treatment with benzodiazepines . The court case against the drug manufacturers never reached a verdict ; legal aid had been withdrawn and there were allegations that the consultant psychiatrists , the expert witnesses , had a conflict of interest . This litigation led to changes in the British law , making class action lawsuits more difficult . Although antidepressants with anxiolytic properties have been introduced , and there is increasing awareness of the adverse effects of benzodiazepines , prescriptions for short-term anxiety relief have not significantly dropped . For treatment of insomnia , benzodiazepines are now less popular than nonbenzodiazepines , which include zolpidem , zaleplon and eszopiclone . Nonbenzodiazepines are molecularly distinct , but nonetheless , they work on the same benzodiazepine receptors and produce similar sedative effects .

In the United States , benzodiazepines are Schedule IV drugs under the Federal Controlled Substances Act , even when not on the market ( for example , nitrazepam and bromazepam ) . Flunitrazepam is subject to more stringent regulations in certain states and temazepam prescriptions require specially coded pads in certain states . In Canada , possession of benzodiazepines is legal for personal use . All benzodiazepines are categorized as Schedule IV substances under the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act . In the United Kingdom , the benzodiazepines are schedule 4 controlled drugs , except for flunitrazepam , temazepam and midazolam , which are schedule 3 controlled drugs and carry stronger penalties for possession and trafficking . In the Netherlands , since October 1993 , benzodiazepines , including formulations containing less than 20 mg of temazepam , are all placed on List 2 of the Opium Law . A prescription is needed for possession of all benzodiazepines . Temazepam formulations containing 20 mg or greater of the drug are placed on List 1 , thus requiring prescriptions to be written in the List 1 format . In East Asia and Southeast Asia , temazepam and nimetazepam are often heavily controlled and restricted . In certain countries , triazolam , flunitrazepam , flutoprazepam and midazolam are also restricted or controlled to certain degrees . In Hong Kong , all benzodiazepines are regulated under Schedule 1 of Hong Kong 's Chapter 134 Dangerous Drugs Ordinance . Previously only brotizolam , flunitrazepam and triazolam were classed as dangerous drugs .

Benzodiazepines are considered to be major drugs of abuse . Benzodiazepine abuse is mostly limited to individuals who abuse other drugs , i.e. , poly-drug abusers . On the international scene , benzodiazepines are categorized as Schedule IV controlled drugs by the INCB , apart from flunitrazepam which is a Schedule III drug under the Convention on Psychotropic Substances . Some variation in drug scheduling exists in individual countries ; for example , in the United Kingdom , midazolam and temazepam are Schedule III controlled drugs . British law requires temazepam ( but not midazolam ) to be stored in safe custody . Safe custody requirements ensures that pharmacists and doctors holding stock of temazepam must store it in securely fixed double-locked steel safety cabinets and maintain a written register , which must be bound and contain separate entries for temazepam and must be written in ink with no use of correction fluid ( although a written register is not required for temazepam in the United Kingdom ) . Disposal of expired stock must be witnessed by a designated inspector ( either a local drug-enforcement police officer or official from health authority ) . Benzodiazepine abuse ranges from occasional binges on large doses , to chronic and compulsive drug abuse of high doses .

Benzodiazepines are used recreationally and by problematic drug misusers . Mortality is higher among poly-drug misusers that also use benzodiazepines . Heavy alcohol use also increases mortality among poly-drug users . Dependence and tolerance , often coupled with dosage escalation , to benzodiazepines can develop rapidly among drug misusers ; withdrawal syndrome may appear after as little as three weeks of continuous use . Long-term use has the potential to cause both physical and psychological dependence and severe withdrawal symptoms such as depression , anxiety ( often to the point of panic attacks ) , and agoraphobia . Benzodiazepines and , in particular , temazepam are sometimes used intravenously , which , if done incorrectly or in an unsterile manner , can lead to medical complications including abscesses , cellulitis , thrombophlebitis , arterial puncture , deep vein thrombosis , and gangrene . Sharing syringes and needles for this purpose also brings up the possibility of transmission of hepatitis , HIV , and other diseases . Benzodiazepines are also misused intranasally , which may have additional health consequences . Once benzodiazepine dependence has been established , a clinician usually converts the patient to an equivalent dose of diazepam before beginning a gradual reduction program .

A 1999 – 2005 Australian police survey of detainees reported preliminary findings that self-reported users of benzodiazepines were less likely than non-user detainees to work full-time and more likely to receive government benefits , use methamphetamine or heroin , and be arrested or imprisoned . Benzodiazepines are sometimes used for criminal purposes ; they serve to incapacitate a victim in cases of drug assisted rape or robbery . Overall , anecdotal evidence suggests that temazepam may be the most psychologically habit-forming ( addictive ) benzodiazepine . Temazepam abuse reached epidemic proportions in some parts of the world , in particular , in Europe and Australia , and is a major drug of abuse in many Southeast Asian countries . This led authorities of various countries to place temazepam under a more restrictive legal status . Some countries , such as Sweden , banned the drug outright . Temazepam also has certain pharmacokinetic properties of absorption , distribution , elimination , and clearance that make it more apt to abuse compared to many other benzodiazepines .

Claire Hale Underwood is a fictional character in House of Cards , played by Robin Wright . She is the wife of the show 's protagonist Francis J. " Frank " Underwood . She is a lobbyist and runs an environmental nonprofit organization , but in later seasons ascends to the position of Second Lady of the United States , and finally First Lady of the United States and the United States Ambassador to the United Nations . Underwood made her first appearance in the series ' pilot episode , " Chapter 1 " . The character is based on Elizabeth Urquhart , a character from the British miniseries from which the current series is derived . Unlike the original character , however , Claire has her own storylines . The role has been critically acclaimed . Wright won the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Television Series Drama for this role at the 71st Golden Globe Awards , becoming the first actress to win a Golden Globe Award for a web television online-only role in a series . She was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series for this role at the 65th , 66th and 67th Primetime Emmy Awards .

Claire Hale Underwood is originally from the exclusive Highland Park enclave of Dallas , Texas . Her late father was a major Texas Republican . While at Radcliffe College in Cambridge , she met a Harvard Law student from South Carolina . That student was Francis J. Underwood . She is of wealthy background and the show characterizes her as a " Dallas Debutante " and " Lily White " . She recounts her father taking her to Dealey Plaza , where John F. Kennedy was assassinated , and that she felt “ so sad , so angry . ” She has a difficult relationship with her mother , Elizabeth Hale ( Ellen Burstyn ) , who despises Frank and is disappointed in Claire for marrying him . Brian Stelter of The New York Times described her as Frank Underwood 's conniving wife and described the Underwoods as " the scheming husband and wife at the center of ' House of Cards ' " . She is a woman " who will stop at nothing to conquer everything " . Hank Stuever of The Washington Post describes her as an " ice-queen wife " . The Independent 's Sarah Hughes echoes this description , saying she is so dedicated to the couple 's schemes that it is clear she will execute them herself if Frank wavers . Following season 4 , Robin Wright stated that she felt Claire Underwood was the equal of Frank Underwood and demanded equal pay for her performance . Netflix acquiesced .

In season 3 , when the Underwoods are President and First Lady of the United States , Claire 's marriage to Frank begins to falter , and she ultimately decides he is no longer " enough " for her . She leaves him in the season finale , but comes back in the fourth season , treating their marriage as a purely political arrangement to further her own career . When he is shot during a campaign event , Claire privately admits that she feels nothing for him . Throughout the season , she works behind the scenes to undermine Frank 's election campaign , before finally joining forces with him in order to become his vice president . She also has an affair with her speechwriter Tom Yates ( Paul Sparks ) , with Frank 's approval .

Claire is a lobbyist who runs an environmental group while serving as her husband 's primary accomplice . After President Garrett Walker ( Michel Gill ) goes back on his promise to make Frank Secretary of State , Frank enlists Claire to help him get revenge and propel them both to positions of power . She and Frank scheme nightly over a cigarette , and together they maneuver their way into Walker 's inner circle . Frank says of Claire : " I love that woman , I love her more than sharks love blood . " Claire is aware of Frank 's sexual relationship with reporter Zoe Barnes ( Kate Mara ) , and approves of it as long as it achieves their ends . She herself has an affair with an old boyfriend , Adam Galloway ( Ben Daniels ) . By the end of the season , Walker appoints Frank the Vice President of the United States , making Claire the Second Lady of the United States .

Claire 's main storyline in season 2 is her advocacy , as Second Lady , for a sexual assault prevention bill . During her campaign for the bill , a skeleton from her college days emerges : During a nationally televised interview , she admits that she was raped in college , and that her rapist , Dalton McGinnis ( Peter Bradbury ) , is now a high-ranking general . ( She had earlier had an uncomfortable encounter with McGinnis at a White House dinner , during which she had told Frank what the general had done to her . ) She also admits to having aborted a pregnancy that she claims was the result of the rape ; it is later revealed that she in fact aborted Frank 's child , with his consent . She then converts the focus on that issue into political support that becomes critical to the Underwoods ' ascension to the Oval Office . Claire becomes increasingly ruthless as the season progresses . When Galloway leaks an intimate photo of Claire to appease his jealous fiancee , Claire intimidates him into publicly stating that he fabricated the picture , ruining his reputation . When Gillian Cole ( Sandrine Holt ) , a pregnant former employee , returns to demand health care as part of her severance , Claire says , " I am willing to let your child wither and die inside you , if that ’ s what ’ s required , ... Am I really the sort of enemy you want to make ? " Claire also manipulates First Lady Patricia Walker ( Joanna Going ) into believing that her husband is having an affair in order to distract President Walker from Frank 's machinations . She shows remorse for her actions only once . When another of McGinnis ' victims , Megan Hennessy ( Libby Woodbridge ) , comes forward , Claire uses her as the poster girl for the sexual assault bill , leaving the fragile young woman open to public scrutiny and reprisals from the bill 's opponents . Before she can testify about her ordeal before Congress , however , Megan suffers a breakdown and attempts suicide . Upon realizing what she has caused Megan to go through , Claire bursts into tears .

In the season finale , she urges Frank to humble himself before President Walker , with whom he has fallen out of favor , in order to complete the plan : " Cut out your heart and put it in his fucking hands . " The gambit works : Walker keeps Frank as his Vice President , allowing Frank to succeed him when he resigns . Frank is now President of the United States , with Claire as the First Lady of the United States . According to Drew Grant of The New York Observer , Claire 's season-long storyline was similar to the real life efforts of United States Senator Kirsten Gillibrand 's to legislate an end to military sexual assault . Based upon the 4-episode preview , Alessandra Stanley of The New York Times says that in season 2 Claire " is still ruthlessly pursuing her own agenda as well as her husband ’ s . She remains an enigma even as she reveals more and more disturbing secrets from her past . " Claire remains composed and stylish with or without her husband and plays the press with aplomb .

In Season 3 , Claire feels the need to be something more " significant " than the First Lady , and asks Frank to nominate her to a United Nations post . He nominates her , but the Senate rejects her after a rocky hearing . Frank gives her the job anyway in a recess appointment , but her tenure is brief ; she ruins a treaty between the U.S. and Russia by publicly confronting Russian President Viktor Petrov ( Lars Mikkelsen ) about his anti-gay policies , and is forced to resign when Petrov uses her as a bargaining chip during a diplomatic crisis . During Frank 's election campaign , Claire begins to question whether she still loves him . In the season finale , she and Frank get into an ugly fight in which she says he is not enough for her ; Frank replies that without him , she is nothing . Season three ends with Claire leaving Frank as he prepares to go to the New Hampshire primary .

After leaving Frank , Claire goes back to Texas , where she has a tense reunion with her mother , who is dying of lymphoma . She sets her sights on running for a House of Representatives seat in Texas , with help from political consultant LeAnn Harvey ( Neve Campbell ) . Frank persuades her to resume public appearances with him by promising to support her run . However , he sandbags her prospective candidacy by endorsing a political ally 's daughter , in order to keep Claire focused on his campaign . Claire retaliates on the day the South Carolina primary by covertly leaking a photo of Frank 's father with a Klansman , imperiling Frank 's candidacy . Frank figures out that she was behind the leak and confronts her . Claire calmly admits what she did , and proposes that she join him in the ticket as his vice president . Frank rejects the idea . Shortly thereafter , Frank is shot by Lucas Goodwin in an assassination attempt , and falls into a coma . While Frank is in surgery , Claire helps guide Frank 's vice-president Donald Blythe through diplomatic oil crisis with Russia . While Frank is receiving a liver transplant , she declines going to the hospital in favor of negotiating a treaty with Petrov , and strong-arms him into accepting the U.S. ' terms . When Frank recovers from surgery , he agrees to let Claire be his vice president . He and Claire advocate for a controversial gun control bill for the sole purpose of creating an atmosphere divisive enough to pick off the potential running mates . In the ensuing open convention , they publicly endorse Secretary of State Catherine Durant ( Jayne Atkinson ) for the job , while working behind the scenes to undermine her and ensure that Claire wins enough delegates to be nominated . Meanwhile , she reluctantly honors her mother 's request to help her die . She and Frank then use the public sympathy from Elizabeth 's death to win the nomination ; they are now running mates .

When a group of homegrown ICO terrorists take an American family hostage , Claire negotiates with their imprisoned leader , Yusuf Al Ahmadi ( Farshad Farahat ) , who agrees to tell his followers to release the hostages . Al Ahmadi reneges on the deal , however , and tells them to kill the hostages . At the same time , Tom Hammerschmidt ( Boris McGiver ) publishes an investigative news story detailing Frank 's crimes . Claire gives Frank the idea to declare war on the terrorists and allow the public to see the hostage die in order to distract from the scandal and create an atmosphere of widespread fear that they can exploit .

Wright 's performance is described as " nuanced and compelling " . Claire has " chilly poise " but the " coolly regal doyenne " softens over the course of the first season according to New Republic 's Laura Bennet . Wright plays the role with " an almost terrifying froideur " . As a couple Frank and Claire are said to " reverberate with tension and wit " . Michael Dobbs , who wrote the trilogy of novels upon which the British miniseries is based , compares the compelling nature of the relationship between Frank and Claire favorably to the original characters in House of Cards and likens them to Macbeth and Lady Macbeth . He is not alone . In season 2 , she remains " equally steely " . Despite suggestions to the contrary , Wright insists that the character is not based on Hillary Clinton .

On July 18 , 2013 , Netflix earned the first Primetime Emmy Award nominations for original online only web television for the 65th Primetime Emmy Awards . Three of its web series , Arrested Development , Hemlock Grove , and House of Cards , earned nominations . Among those nominations was Wright 's portrayal of Claire Underwood for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series as well as Kevin Spacey 's portrayal of Frank Underwood for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series and Jason Bateman 's portrayal of Michael Bluth in Arrested Development for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Comedy Series , making these three roles the first three leading roles to be Primetime Emmy Award-nominated from a web television series . The role has also earned Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Television Series Drama award at the 71st Golden Globe Awards on January 12 , 2014 . In so doing she became the first actress to win a Golden Globe Award for an online-only web television series . For season 2 , Wright earned a Critics ' Choice Television Award for Best Actress in a Drama Series nomination at the 4th Critics ' Choice Television Awards . Wright was again nominated for Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series at the 66th Primetime Emmy Awards and Best Actress – Television Series Drama at the 72nd Golden Globe Awards . She was nominated for both Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Drama Series and Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series at the 21st Screen Actors Guild Awards .

The Utility of Force : The Art of War in the Modern World is a treatise on modern warfare written by General Sir Rupert Smith and published in 2005 . Smith is a retired general who spent 40 years in the British Army ; he commanded the 1st Armoured Division in the First Gulf War and served as General Officer Commanding Northern Ireland at the end of the Troubles . He was motivated to write the book by his experiences in the Balkans . He commanded the United Nations Protection Force ( UNPROFOR ) in Bosnia from 1995 to 1996 , during which time the Srebrenica massacre occurred and the capital , Sarajevo , was under siege by Serb forces . Smith was instrumental in the lifting of the siege by arranging for NATO air strikes and an artillery barrage . This enabled a ground assault by Bosnian and Croatian forces that ended the siege and led to the Dayton Agreement . Smith 's second involvement with the Balkans was in 1999 during the Kosovo War , when he was serving as NATO 's Deputy Supreme Allied Commander Europe , overseeing air strikes against Serb targets . Smith 's thesis , and the central theme of The Utility of Force , is that the world entered a new paradigm of conflict at the end of the 20th and beginning of the 21st centuries , which he calls " war amongst the people " , and that Western , industrialised armies are ill-suited to the new style of warfare . The defining characteristics of " war amongst the people " are that conflicts tend to be timeless , more political in nature , and fought between parties that are part of , and in amongst , the civilian population rather than between uniformed armies on a battlefield . To prove his theory , Smith provides a detailed history starting with Napoleon , who invented what Smith calls " industrial warfare " — the paradigm in which the entire resources of the nation were mustered and which culminated in the two world wars . In the second half of the book , Smith states that the advent of nuclear weapons rendered industrial warfare obsolete , but that Western governments and generals refused to acknowledge the new paradigm , which led to several significant defeats in the second half of the 20th century . He provides six themes which characterise modern conflicts and proceeds to analyse each in detail , before dedicating his final chapter to his reflections on his command in Bosnia . He concedes that he did not foresee the Srebenica massacre , but criticises UNPROFOR , believing that it was not in a position to act even had the massacre been foreseen and that it had no strategy for effectively intervening in the war . In his conclusion , Smith argues that military force is only part of the solution in modern conflicts , and that it must be combined with political initiatives which together will subdue but not necessarily end the conflict .

The Utility of Force was broadly praised by reviewers on both sides of the Atlantic . It was compared favourably with Carl von Clausewitz 's treatise On War and American reviewers felt that it contained important lessons for the United States military . Smith was criticised for over-emphasising the paradigm shift , with several reviewers observing that conventional wars are still fought and that the threat of such wars still exists , and for drawing too clear a distinction between " war amongst the people " and conventional war , particularly with his opening sentence " war no longer exists " . Reviewers also felt that Smith under-emphasised the extent to which " war amongst the people " has always existed . Nonetheless , reviewers praised Smith 's analysis of modern war and recommended that The Utility of Force ought to be read by politicians and military officers .

General Sir Rupert Smith is a retired career military officer who served in the British Army for 40 years . At the height of his career , Smith held several significant commands in both conventional conflicts and " wars amongst the people " . As a major general , he commanded the 1st Armoured Division during the first Gulf War ( 1990 – 91 ) . He went on to serve as Assistant Chief of the Defence Staff for operations and security from 1992 to 1995 , during which time he came to the conclusion that military force could only achieve one of four things when used to intervene in a political conflict : " ameliorate , contain , deter or coerce , and destroy " . Smith 's decision to write The Utility of Force was prompted by his experience in the Balkans . In late January 1995 , Smith was appointed to command the United Nations Protection Force ( UNPROFOR ) , sent to intervene in the Bosnian War . Smith was based in the Bosnian capital , Sarajevo , where he devised a strategy for the multi-national UN force that had been deployed effectively to carry out mainly humanitarian tasks but without a plan to bring the war to a successful conclusion . At the time of Smith 's deployment , Sarajevo was in the middle of a siege , which Smith was instrumental in lifting after arranging for NATO air strikes and an artillery barrage against Serb forces commanded by Ratko Mladic . A ground campaign by Bosnian and Croatian forces eventually led to the Dayton Agreement , which brought the war to an end . It was also during Smith 's command of UNPROFOR that the Srebrenica massacre — recognised by the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia as an act of genocide — took place . Historian Niall Ferguson was adamant that Smith bore no responsibility for the events at Srebrenica and was indeed one of the few British officials " to emerge with distinction " from the intervention in Bosnia ; nonetheless , Ferguson believed that the experience illuminates Smith 's theoretical writings .

The book opens with the statement that " war no longer exists " ; that is , war as " battle in a field between men and machinery " or " a massive deciding event in a dispute in international affairs " is unlikely to happen again . The premise of the book is that the world is experiencing a new paradigm of war in the late 20th and early 21st centuries , which Smith dubs " war amongst the people " , in which nebulous , open-ended conflicts have become the norm . Smith believes that Western , industrialised armies struggle to win in " wars amongst the people " because their opponents are not uniformed armies . He uses the term " rhizomatic " to describe terrorist and guerrilla movements ; he states his belief that such fighters can adapt much more easily than state institutions , and that they exhibit a greater understanding of the utility of force . Rather than being part of a recognisable army , the fighters are part of the civilian population , and their objectives are more political than military — they seek to " win hearts and minds " rather than take or hold territory . As a consequence , wars are no longer confined to a battlefield , but the theatre of operations is fluid , and commanders now operate inside the theatre .

To prove his theory , Smith provides a detailed history of modern warfare , using examples from history to illustrate his contentions . Throughout the book , Smith analyses the use of force in each of the examples , and how it was used to achieve particular aims . The discussion of history begins with Napoleon , who invented the paradigm of industrial warfare . Prior to Napoleon , wars were mostly fought for territory rather than ideology , and did not substantially alter the balance of power between nations . Napoleon 's concept of war involved using the entire resources of the nation with the aim of comprehensively defeating his opponent and replacing the political order ; in order to meet the new challenge , the Prussian Army undertook sweeping reforms . Napoleon 's strategy and the Prussian response influenced Prussian general Carl von Clausewitz in writing his treatise On War ( published posthumously in 1832 ) . Throughout the narrative , Smith analyses how armies applied force in order to achieve their objectives . He also discusses the emergence of guerrilla forces during the Peninsular War , which Smith believes was the first " war amongst the people " — irregular forces with no clear leadership structure conducting hit-and-run attacks on Napoleon 's forces , fighting to preserve the ideology of Spanish independence rather than for a battlefield victory . The concept of industrial war culminated in the early 20th century with the two world wars .

In the second half of the book , Smith states that the advent of the atomic bomb rendered industrial warfare obsolete , but that governments clung to the concept throughout the Cold War era — the Cold War itself being the last act of the old-style industrial war . The belief in industrial war tactics and institutions continued into the post-Cold War era , and Smith believes that political and military leaders refused to acknowledge the new paradigm of " war amongst the people " , which resulted in significant defeats , such as for France in Algeria , the United States in Vietnam , and the Soviet Union in Afghanistan , and caused problems for NATO operations in the Balkans , and later for the Western coalitions in Iraq and Afghanistan . Smith also notes that , in the new paradigm , soldiers are frequently being asked to undertake new tasks — such as humanitarian operations — while still equipped and trained for old-paradigm conflicts between massed armies . The ends for which we fight are changing from the hard objectives that decide a political outcome to those of establishing conditions in which the outcome may be decided On each occasion new uses are found for old weapons and organizations which are the products of industrial war

The sides are mostly non-state , comprising some form of multinational grouping against some non-state party or parties . Smith then proceeds to discuss each of the six themes in detail . Smith discusses modern guerrilla and insurgency campaigns , including various civil wars and ethnic conflicts in the Balkans , the Middle East , and Africa . The conflicts he discusses in the second half are almost all " wars amongst the people " and appear intractable to conventional forces . Smith analyses situations in which countries have adapted their tactics in order to respond to " war amongst the people " , such as those used by Israeli forces in response to the Palestinian Intifada , in which the Israelis resorted to targeted searches when superior firepower proved ineffective . He points out that modern wars are rarely fought between individual nations , but the parties often consist of supranational coalitions or sub-state entities , and that Western governments in particular fight in such a way as to keep casualties and material losses to a minimum . Smith is critical of the conduct of the American-led coalition in the Iraq War during the insurgency which followed the initial invasion and occupation of Iraq in 2003 ; he opines that the soldiers undertaking the counter-insurgency operations did not have the proper skills or equipment for the task . He believes that the commanders were working at a tactical rather than a strategic level , and that operations were not sufficiently guided by intelligence — relying too heavily on battlefield strength and assessments of the insurgents ' technical capabilities , rather than their political objectives .

Smith includes various anecdotes and personal reflections from his own career , and the final chapter of the book is dedicated to Smith 's reflections on his command of UNPROFOR in Bosnia . Ferguson describes Smith as " candid " in admitting that he did not foresee the events at Srebenica in the summer of 1995 , but Smith suggests that , even had the genocide been foreseen , UNPROFOR was not in any position to prevent it . He described the force as " reinforced camps of international troops attempting to defend the delivery of humanitarian aid , and often themselves " . Smith 's belief was that none of the governments that contributed soldiers to UNPROFOR had any intention of committing them to fight — that they had decided " to deploy forces with no intention to employ their force " , having been scared into inaction by inaccurate reporting and a lack of understanding of the war . In his conclusion , Smith states his belief that modern politicians and military leaders use force where it has no utility and commit military forces without fully defined political and strategic objectives . He believes that politicians and generals remain in the mindset of industrial war , which leads them to prepare for a decisive confrontation that never happens , and he condemns them for failing to recognise the shift in the way wars are fought . Discussing humanitarian interventions , such as those in the Balkans , Smith does not argue against intervention , but believes that the intervention must be based on a full understanding of the conflict and a clear strategy with defined objectives . According to Smith , " no act of force will ever be decisive " because the aim of modern conflicts is to win the will of the people , which will not be achieved by battlefield victory alone . He argues that whereas , in the industrial war paradigm , war led to victory and thus to peace , in the modern paradigm confrontation leads to conflict , which then reverts to confrontation . He asserts that force is only part of the solution to modern conflicts ; they require complex political and military solutions , which will subdue but not necessarily permanently end the conflict .

William Grimes , writing in the New York Times , described The Utility of Force as " a closely argued , searching textbook on strategy and the efficient use of military power in the post-Cold War era " . Grimes also described it as a " difficult , challenging book " , saying " you can almost hear the pointer hit the blackboard as he works his way rigorously through each argument and sub-arguments A , B and C , before proceeding to the next step . At times the history lecture becomes a forced march over very familiar terrain , but patient readers will discover that there is indeed a final destination " . In a second review for the New York Times in 2007 , Niall Ferguson , a history professor at Harvard University , described The Utility of Force as an update of Clausewitz 's On War " for our times " . Ferguson went on to criticise Smith for drawing too clear a distinction between " war amongst the people " and " war between peoples " , pointing out that in several conflicts there was no single , homogeneous " people " and that wars amongst the people can easily transform into wars between people , citing Bosnia as an example . Ferguson was underwhelmed by Smith 's recommendations for the future — Smith believes that new equipment and strategies are required in order for armies to be effective in the new paradigm , but does not offer any suggestions . Ferguson 's final criticism was what he described as the book 's " limited historical perspective " ; Smith argues that " war amongst the people " emerged in the second half of the 20th century during the proxy wars and de-colonisation campaigns of the Cold War era , but Ferguson gave examples of similar campaigns which pre-dated the Cold War , including the First Boer War ( 1880 – 81 ) and campaigns fought in Eastern Europe during the Second World War . Nonetheless , Ferguson concludes that The Utility of Force is " an impressive and absorbing work " , and described Smith as " the Clausewitz of low-intensity conflict and peacekeeping operations " .

Academic Eliot A. Cohen , professor of strategic studies at Johns Hopkins University wrote for The Washington Post that the British Army had " a higher quotient of sophisticated leaders who have thought hard about the profession of arms " than was found in other armed forces , including the US military , which he believed explained why it " produces generals who write [ ... ] serious , important books " such as the Utility of Force . Cohen wrote that Smith 's thesis , that the world has entered a new era of conflict , is of " central importance " for the United States military , which Cohen believed would have to undergo significant adaptation if Smith was correct . Cohen criticised the book for its limited historical perspective , noting that conventional wars are still fought ( for example the Kargil War in 1999 ) and that several confrontations in Asia threatened to spill over into conventional warfare . Nevertheless , Cohen concluded " Smith has clearly written one of the most important books on modern warfare in the last decade . We would be better off if the United States had a few more generals like him " .

The Guardian 's Martin Woollacott reviewed the book along with sociologist Martin Shaw 's The New Western Way of War : Risk-Transfer War and its Crisis in Iraq , which he believes makes similar arguments to Smith 's , though the two reach slightly different conclusions — Smith that force should only be used as part of a wider political strategy , Shaw that war should be avoided where at all possible but that use of force is sometimes inevitable . Woollacott described Smith as " a soldier trying to wrest some continuing purpose for his profession " , and described both books as " very worthwhile efforts to map difficult ground " . Sir Adam Roberts , professor of international relations at the University of Oxford , was more critical in reviewing The Utility of Force for The Independent . Roberts believed that Smith over-stated the transformation into the new paradigm of war by playing down the extent to which there have always been wars amongst the people , over-emphasised the role of technology in the shift from industrial warfare , and downplayed the continuation of industrial war . By way of example , Roberts points to the Iran – Iraq War and the role of precision bombing used by the United States in its campaigns since the end of the 20th century . In conclusion , Roberts states that " it is possible to quibble over many details " , but that " such quibbles miss the essential point of the book : that involvement in today 's crises , in the attempt to stop atrocities and bring wars to an end , requires a capacity for clear thought , a sensitivity to situation , and a talent for acting , that armed forces and their officers have not always possessed – and now badly need " .

Writing in the journal of the Royal United Services Institute ( RUSI ) , Christopher Coker , professor of international relations at London School of Economics , gave a detailed analysis of Smith 's opening sentence , " war no longer exists " . He concluded that war had metastasised , but that war was not over , and that Smith 's " eye-catching quote detracts from the force of his own argument " . Nevertheless , Coker praises Smith for the latter 's criticism of those who failed to recognise the shift in the paradigm of war , and of the lack of strategy in the military campaigns of the late 20th and early 21st centuries . Coker concludes with the statement : " [ Smith 's ] experience , distilled in a book sometimes too controversial for its own good , should become standard reading in every military academy " . In 2013 , General David Richards , then Chief of the Defence Staff , included The Utility of Force on a list of publications that he recommended to officers wishing to improve their leadership skills .

Although the first entry in Fighter Squadron records is dated 12 February 1934 , the official history of the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) between the wars refers to the unit as having been established for the specific purpose of operating Australia 's eight Bristol Bulldog fighters , which began entering service in May 1930 . Fighter Squadron was one of two formations raised at RAAF Point Cook , Victoria , under the auspices of No. 1 Flying Training School ( No. 1 FTS ) , the other being Seaplane Squadron , which operated Supermarine Southamptons among other types . No. 1 FTS had been the first unit to be formed as part of the new Australian Air Force on 31 March 1921 ( the prefix " Royal " was added in August that year ) . The single-seat Bulldogs were procured to give the RAAF a dedicated air defence capability following the retirement of the Royal Aircraft Factory S.E.5 fighter in 1928 . Although only a " token " combat force according to the official history , the Bulldogs represented the latest technology available and gave Fighter Squadron the aura of an elite formation . On 15 May 1930 , barely two weeks after delivery , one of the Bulldogs crashed due to structural failure while performing an inverted loop ; the pilot parachuted to safety , the first time an RAAF member had done so in an emergency . In September 1931 , Fighter Squadron began flight testing the prototype Wackett Warrigal general-purpose biplane ; testing was still under way when the aircraft 's undercarriage collapsed during landing , putting off its service trials until the following January .

As well as participating in training exercises , Fighter Squadron was often employed for aerobatic displays and flag-waving duties . The young Air Force was keen to show off its skills and equipment to the public , leading to regular participation in aerial pageants and races as far afield as Western Australia and Tasmania ; this had the added benefit of providing exposure to a variety of conditions on long-distance flights , as pilots were required to fly their aircraft to and from displays in remote areas . The commanding officer of Fighter Squadron , Squadron Leader Johnny Summers , considered that it gave personnel " most useful experience in the handling and maintenance of their aircraft under adverse conditions " . One of No. 1 FTS 's leading instructors during the early 1930s , Flight Lieutenant Frederick Scherger , was also a flight commander in Fighter Squadron . In October 1931 , during a flight to Adelaide to take part in an aero club pageant , Scherger had to land at Nhill , Victoria , in strong winds ; his Bulldog finished up on its nose but the damage was slight , allowing him to complete the journey and win his air race with a top speed of 160 mph ( 260 km / h ) .

Fighter Squadron 's public displays often involved mock dogfights and simulated dive bombing , sometimes at night . On 12 February 1934 , Summers , Scherger and another pilot demonstrated night-time combat tactics over the Exhibition Ground in Melbourne , the sky being lit with searchlights . In October and November that year , the Bulldogs took part in several aerial displays in Victoria to commemorate the visit of Prince Henry , Duke of Gloucester . The following month , Fighter Squadron aircraft escorted the Duke on his visit to Brisbane aboard HMAS Australia . The Bulldogs were also occasionally detailed for meteorological and photographic survey work . Throughout their existence , Fighter and Seaplane Squadrons remained under the control of No. 1 FTS and were " really little more than flights " , in the words of the official history . Fighter Squadron was dissolved in December 1935 when its six surviving Bulldogs were re-designated as fighter-bombers and transferred from Point Cook to nearby RAAF Laverton , where they joined the Hawker Demons of No. 1 Squadron . During its service with Fighter Squadron , the Bulldog had been the only single-seat fighter in the RAAF 's inventory , and no specialist fighter type took its place for the remainder of the decade .

One Times Square , also known as 1475 Broadway , the New York Times Building , the New York Times Tower , or simply as the Times Tower , is a 25 story , 363-foot ( 111-metre ) -high skyscraper , designed by Cyrus L. W. Eidlitz ( HLW International ) , located at 42nd Street and Broadway in New York City . The tower was originally built to serve as the headquarters of the local newspaper , The New York Times ( which also gave its name to the area as a whole , known as Times Square ) ; however , the Times stayed in the building for less than 10 years before moving to a new building on 229 West 43rd Street . Despite the Times leaving the building , One Times Square remained a major focal point of Times Square due to its annual New Year 's Eve " ball drop " festivities ( the ball itself has remained atop the tower year-round since 2009 ) , and the introduction of an electronic news ticker at street-level in 1928 . Following its sale to Lehman Brothers in 1995 , One Times Square was re-purposed as an advertising location to take advantage of its prime location within the square . Most of the building 's interior remains vacant ( aside from its only major tenant , a Walgreens pharmacy which occupies its lower levels ) , while its exterior features a large number of traditional and electronic billboards . Due to the large amount of revenue that its ads pull , One Times Square is considered one of the most valuable advertising locations in the world .

The building , on the site of the Pabst Hotel , was originally completed in 1904 to serve as the new headquarters of The New York Times , which officially moved into the building in January 1905 . The paper 's owner , Adolph Ochs , also successfully persuaded the city to rename the surrounding area ( then known as Longacre Square ) after the newspaper , becoming Times Square . To help promote the new headquarters , the Times held a New Year 's Eve event on December 31 , 1903 , welcoming the year of 1904 with a fireworks display set off from the roof of the building at midnight . The event was a success , attracting 200,000 spectators , and was continued annually until 1907 . For 1908 , Ochs replaced the display with what he thought would be a more spectacular event — the lowering of a lit ball down the building 's flagpole at midnight , patterned off the use of time balls to indicate a certain time of day ( the " ball drop " is still held on One Times Square to this day , attracting an average of one million spectators yearly ) .

In 1913 , only eight years after it moved to One Times Square , the Times moved its corporate headquarters to 229 West 43rd Street , which served as its home from 1913 to 2007 . The Times has since moved to The New York Times Building on nearby Eighth Avenue . After leaving One Times Square , the Times still maintained ownership of the tower . On November 6 , 1928 , an electronic news ticker known as the Motograph News Bulletin ( colloquially known as the " zipper " ) was introduced near the base of the building . The zipper originally consisted of 14,800 light bulbs , with the display controlled by a chain conveyor system inside the building ; individual letter elements ( a form of movable type ) were loaded into frames to spell out news headlines . As the frames moved along the conveyor , the letters themselves triggered electrical contacts which lit the external bulbs ( the zipper has since been upgraded to use modern LED technology ) . The first headline displayed on the zipper announced Herbert Hoover 's victory in that day 's presidential election . The zipper was used to display other major news headlines of the era , and its content later expanded to include sports and weather updates as well . On the evening of August 14 , 1945 , the zipper was famously used to announce Japan 's surrender from World War II to a packed crowd in Times Square .

The Times sold the building to advertising executive and sign designer Douglas Leigh in 1961 . Leigh then sold the building to Allied Chemical in 1963 . Allied Chemical greatly modified the building 's facade in a $ 10 million renovation , replacing intricate granite and terracotta elements with marble facing . In 1974 , the building was sold to investor Alex Parker for $ 6.25 million , and then to the Swiss-based investment group Kemekod . Kemekod later sold the tower to an investment group led by Lawrence I. Linksman in 1982 . Linksman promised further renovations to the building , including the possibility of using its north face for signage displays . Following the sale of the building by the Times , the zipper was operated on an inconsistent basis by various news outlets , and was shut off entirely between 1961 and 1965 , and again from 1977 to 1986 . In 1986 , the ticker was revived by Newsday , which operated it until December 31 , 1994 . The newspaper declined to renew its lease on the ticker , believing that they " [ didn 't ] get very much out of that sign " financially . Publishing company Pearson PLC operated the zipper for a period beginning on December 31 , 1994 , until ceding its role to Dow Jones & Company in June 1995 .

From 1990 to 1996 , Sony operated a Jumbotron on the exterior of the tower . Alongside its use for advertising and news , it was also frequently used by the producers of the late-night talk show Late Show with David Letterman , who could display a live feed from its studio on the screen as well . As a cost-saving measure , Sony declined to renew its lease of the space , leading to the subsequent removal of the Jumbotron in June 1996 . Due to its frequent use by Late Show , its producer Rob Burnett jokingly considered the removal of the Jumbotron to be " a sad , sad day for New York . "

In 1992 , the owners of One Times Square filed for bankruptcy protection . In March 1995 , One Times Square was sold to the financial services firm Lehman Brothers for $ 27.5 million . The new owners felt that it would not be cost-effective to house new tenants in the tower due to the cost of the extensive renovation required in order to make it suitable for tenants as compared to the relatively small rental revenue that its limited floor space would have brought in . Instead , they decided to market the tower as a location for advertising to capitalize on its prominent location within the Square . The entire exterior of One Times Square above the ticker was modified to add a grid frame for mounting billboard signs . Throughout 1996 , One Times Square 's first electronic billboards were installed , such as , a Cup Noodles billboard with steam effects was added to the front of the tower , later accompanied by an animated Budweiser sign . In October , a new 55-foot video screen sponsored by ITT Corporation was introduced to the top of the tower , which would feature video advertisements and community service announcements . In December 1996 , a new Panasonic display operated by NBC known as Astrovision was introduced as a replacement for Sony 's Jumbotron at the base of the tower .

Lehman Brothers sold One Times Square in 1997 to the Jamestown , L.P. for $ 117 million . Filings related to the sale revealed that the billboards on the tower had been generating a net revenue of $ 7 million yearly , representing a 300 % profit . With growing tourism and high traffic in the Times Square area ( with a yearly average of over 100 million pedestrians — alongside its prominence in media coverage of New Year 's festivities , seen by a wide audience yearly ) , annual revenue from the signs grew to over $ 23 million by the year 2012 — rivaling London 's Piccadilly Circus as the most valuable public advertising space in the world . Despite becoming primarily used for advertising , One Times Square continued to house tenants in its ground-level floors : in the late 1990s , a Warner Bros. retail store filled the first three floors . In early 2006 , the floors were occupied by a J. C. Penney pop-up store known as The J C. Penney Experience . In November 2008 , pharmacy chain Walgreens opened a new flagship store in the space , renting it in a lease valued at $ 4 million yearly . Walgreens also introduced a new digital sign to the building as part of its grand opening : designed by Gilmore Group and constructed by D3 LED , the 17,000-square-foot ( 1,600 m2 ) sign runs diagonally up both sides of the building and contains 12 million LEDs , surpassing the nearby NASDAQ sign as the largest LED sign in Times Square . The former electrical room in the tower 's basement currently serves as a " vault " for the storage of items relating to New Year 's Eve celebrations at Times Square , including the ball itself ( prior to 2009 ) , spare parts , numeral signage and other memorabilia .

From 1996 to 2006 , Nissin Foods operated a Cup Noodles billboard with smoke effects ( an effect that had also been famously used by other Times Square billboards , such as the Camel Cigarettes sign ) . The Cup Noodles billboard was replaced in 2006 by a General Motors billboard featuring a Chevrolet branded clock ; however , as a part of cutbacks resulting from GM 's bankruptcy and re-organization , the Chevrolet Clock was removed in 2009 and eventually replaced by the current Dunkin ' Donuts display . On August 19 , 1998 , Discover Card replaced ITT Corporation as the operator and sponsor of the top-most screen on One Times Square as part of a ten-year deal . The deal came alongside the announcement that Discover Card would be an official sponsor of Times Square 's New Year 's Eve 2000 festivities . In 2006 , News Corporation ( now 21st Century Fox ) replaced NBC as the operator and sponsor of the Astrovision screen . In 2010 , Sony returned to One Times Square by replacing the News Corp. Panasonic screen with a new high-definition LED display . In December 2007 , Toshiba took over sponsorship of the top-most screen of One Times Square from Discover Card in a 10-year lease . Throughout 2008 , upgrades began to be made to the upper portion of One Times Square ; including the installation of new Toshiba high definition LED displays ( known as ToshibaVision ) , and the redesign of its roof to accommodate a larger New Year 's Eve ball , which became a year-round fixture of the building beginning in 2009 .

USS Henry R. Mallory ( ID-1280 ) was a transport for the United States Navy during World War I. She was also sometimes referred to as USS H. R. Mallory or as USS Mallory . Before her Navy service she was USAT Henry R. Mallory as a United States Army transport ship . From her 1916 launch , and after her World War I military service , she was known as SS Henry R. Mallory for the Mallory Lines . Pressed into service as a troopship in World War II by the War Shipping Administration , she was torpedoed by the German submarine U-402 in the North Atlantic ocean and sank with the loss of 272 men — over half of those on board .

After the United States declared war on Germany in April 1917 , the United States Army , needing transports to get its men and materiel to France , had a select committee of shipping executives pore over registries of American shipping . The committee selected Henry R. Mallory and thirteen other American-flagged ships that were sufficiently fast , could carry enough fuel in their bunkers for transatlantic crossings , and , most importantly , were in port or not far at sea . After Henry R. Mallory discharged her last load of passengers and cargo , she was officially handed over to the Army on 24 May , one of the first three ships acquired . Before any troop transportation could be undertaken , all of the ships were hastily refitted . Of the fourteen ships , ten , including Henry R. Mallory , were designated to carry human passengers ; the other four were designated as animal ships . The ten ships designated to carry troops had all of their second- and third-class accommodations ripped out and replaced with berths for troops . Cooking and toilet facilities were greatly expanded to handle the large numbers of men aboard . Gun platforms were installed on each ship before docking at the Brooklyn Navy Yard to have the guns themselves installed . All the ships were manned by merchant officers and crews but carried two U.S. Navy officers , Navy gun crews , quartermasters , signalmen , and wireless operators . The senior Navy officer on board would take control if a ship came under attack .

The American convoy carrying the first units of the American Expeditionary Force was broken into four groups ; Henry R. Mallory was in the third group with San Jacinto and Finland , and escorts consisting of cruiser Charleston , armed collier Cyclops , and destroyers Allen , Preston , and McCall . Henry R. Mallory departed with her group on 14 June for Brest , France , steaming at a 13-knot ( 24 km / h ) pace . A thwarted submarine attack on the first convoy group , and reports of heavy submarine activity off of Brest resulted in a change in the convoy 's destination to Saint-Nazaire . After her return from France , Henry R. Mallory sailed again in the 5th convoy on 31 July , the 7th convoy on 8 September , and the 12th convoy on 26 November , all of which sailed from the New York embarkation point in Hoboken , New Jersey . In January 1918 , Henry R. Mallory became the first transport to sail from the Newport News embarkation port , when — loaded with eight aero squadrons — she sailed on 17 January . Departing again from Hoboken on 14 March in the 24th convoy , Henry R. Mallory began her last journey under Army charter . After arriving in France on 26 March and landing her troops , Henry R. Mallory began her return to the United States with Army transport Tenadores and Navy transport Mercury . At 11 : 45 on 4 April , a German submarine fired torpedoes at the group . Through evasive maneuvers , none of the ships were hit , and with timely gunfire targeting the sub , no more was seen of the threat . Arriving back in the United States on 13 April , Henry R. Mallory was handed over to the U.S. Navy .

After problems with crew discipline aboard Army transports Antilles and Finland when they were torpedoed , the U.S. Navy , led by the recommendations of Rear Admiral Albert Gleaves , insisted that all troop transports be manned entirely by Navy personnel . This was accomplished soon after so as to avoid the need for what Gleaves called " ignorant and unreliable men " who were " the sweepings of the docks " . Accordingly , Henry R. Mallory was handed over to the Navy on 13 April 1918 and commissioned on 17 April . Other than the official change command of the vessel , little else change for Henry R. Mallory . She sailed in her first convoy under Navy command on 23 April , and continued carrying troops to France , making five additional trips before the Armistice in November 1918 . In all , Henry R. Mallory carried 9,756 troops to France . With the fighting at an end , the task of bringing home American soldiers began almost immediately . Henry R. Mallory did her part by carrying home 14,514 healthy and wounded men in seven roundtrips . Henry R. Mallory returned from her last Navy voyage on 29 August 1919 , and was returned to the Mallory Lines the following day .

In the early stages of World War II for the United States , the War Shipping Administration requisitioned Henry R. Mallory for use as a civilian-manned troopship in July 1942 . Remaining under the operation of her owners , Agwilines , Inc . , she began operation on U.S. Army schedules in July 1942 , when she sailed from New York to Belfast . After her return to New York in August , she made way to Boston from whence she sailed to Saint John , Wabana , Newfoundland ; Sydney , Nova Scotia ; and Halifax , before returning to New York in October . After first sailing to Boston and Newport , Rhode Island , Henry R. Mallory departed New York as a part of Convoy SC-118 headed for Liverpool via Halifax on 24 January 1943 . The crew on board Henry R. Mallory consisted of 9 officers , 68 crewmen , and 34 Naval Armed Guards ( who manned the 11 guns on deck ) . Also on board were 383 passengers , consisting of 2 civilians , 136 from the U.S. Army , 72 from the U.S. Marine Corps , and 173 from the U.S. Navy . As the convoy , which consisted of 60 ships and 26 escorts , sailed near Iceland , a " wolfpack " of Kriegsmarine U-Boats attacked the convoy repeatedly over a four-day period . Some 20 U-boats participated , ultimately sinking 12 Allied ships , including Henry R. Mallory ; three U-boats were lost .

It was at 06 : 59 on 7 February 1943 when , traveling in station 33 of the convoy , Henry R. Mallory was hit by one torpedo launched from German submarine U-402 ( 2 ) around 600 nautical miles ( 1,100 km ) south-southwest of Iceland . Hit in the number three hold on the starboard side , the ship began settling by the stern and listing to port , and sank at about 07 : 30 . Of Henry R. Mallory 's ten lifeboats , only three were successfully launched , holding 175 men . Many other men jumped overboard for rafts in the water . None of the other ships in the convoy were aware of the Mallory 's predicament . American destroyer Schenck — searching for survivors from the convoy 's sunken rescue ship , SS Toward , sunk three hours earlier , also by U-402 — saw lights but was denied permission to investigate . Only when survivors were found by U.S. Coast Guard cutter Bibb some four hours later was the fate of Henry R. Mallory made clear . Bibb rescued 205 men , 3 of whom later died . Another Coast Guard cutter , Ingham , rescued a further 22 , of whom 2 later died . Among the 272 dead was the ship 's master , 48 crewmen , 15 armed guards , and 208 passengers .

Francesco Morosini was an ironclad battleship built in the 1880s and 1890s for the Italian Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) . The ship , named for Francesco Morosini , the 17th-century Doge of Venice , was the second of three ships in the Ruggiero di Lauria class , along with Ruggiero di Lauria and Andrea Doria . She was armed with a main battery of four 17-inch ( 432 mm ) guns , was protected with 17.75-inch ( 451 mm ) thick belt armor , and was capable of a top speed of 17 knots ( 31 km / h ; 20 mph ) . The ship 's construction period was very lengthy , beginning in August 1881 and completing in February 1888 . She was quickly rendered obsolescent by the new pre-dreadnought battleships being laid down , and as a result , her career was limited . She spent her career alternating between the Active and Reserve Squadrons , where she took part in training exercises each year with the rest of the fleet . The ship was stricken from the naval register in August 1909 ; the following month , she was expended as a target ship for experiments with torpedoes .

Francesco Morosini was 105.9 meters ( 347 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 19.84 m ( 65.1 ft ) and an average draft of 8.37 m ( 27.5 ft ) . She displaced 9,886 metric tons ( 9,730 long tons ) normally and up to 11,145 t ( 10,969 long tons ) at full load . Her propulsion system consisted of a pair of compound steam engines each driving a single screw propeller , with steam supplied by eight coal-fired , oval boilers . Her engines produced a top speed of 16 knots ( 30 km / h ; 18 mph ) at 10,000 indicated horsepower ( 7,500 kW ) . She could steam for 2,800 nautical miles ( 5,200 km ; 3,200 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . She had a crew of 507 – 509 officers and men . Francesco Morosini was armed with a main battery of four 17 in ( 432 mm ) 27-caliber guns , mounted in two pairs en echelon in a central barbette . She carried a secondary battery of two 6 in ( 152 mm ) 32-cal. guns , one at the bow and the other at the stern , and four 4.7 in ( 119 mm ) 32-cal. guns . As was customary for capital ships of the period , she carried five 14 in ( 356 mm ) torpedo tubes submerged in the hull . She was protected by steel armor ; her armored belt was 17.75 in ( 451 mm ) thick , and her armored deck was 3 in ( 76 mm ) thick . Her conning tower was armored with 9.8 in ( 249 mm ) of steel plate , and the barbette had 14.2 in ( 361 mm ) thick sides .

Francesco Morosini was under construction for nearly eight years . She was laid down at the Venetian Arsenal on 4 December 1881 and launched on 30 July 1885 . She was not completed for another four years , her construction finally being finished on 21 August 1889 . Because of the rapid pace of naval technological development in the late 19th century , her lengthy construction period meant that she was an obsolete design by the time she entered service . The year she entered service , the British began building the Royal Sovereign class ; these ships marked a significant advance over previous types of capital ships and set the standard for future vessels , which became known as pre-dreadnought battleships . In addition , technological progress , particularly in armor production techniques — first Harvey armor and then Krupp armor — rapidly rendered older vessels like Francesco Morosini obsolete . Francesco Morosini took part in the annual fleet maneuvers of 1894 in 2nd Division of the Active Squadron , along with the protected cruiser Ettore Fieramosca , the torpedo cruiser Tripoli , and four torpedo boats . She remained in the 2nd Division the following year , which now included the protected cruiser Etruria and the torpedo cruisers Euridice and Calatafimi . The Squadron was based at La Spezia at the time . The following year , she cruised off Crete as the flagship of the 2nd Division , under Rear Admiral E. Gaulterio . During that year 's summer maneuvers , held in July , Francesco Morosini continued as Gaulterio 's flagship ; the 2nd Division also included her sister Andrea Doria and the protected cruiser Giovanni Bausan . The 1st and 2nd Divisions of the Active Squadron were tasked with defending against a hostile fleet , simulated by older ships in reserve .

In 1898 , Francesco Morosini was transferred to the Reserve Squadron , along with Ruggiero di Lauria and the ironclad Lepanto and five cruisers . The following year , Francesco Morosini and her two sisters returned to the Active Squadron , which was kept in service for eight months of the year , with the remainder spent with reduced crews . The Squadron also included the ironclads Re Umberto , Sicilia , and Lepanto . In 1900 , Francesco Morosini and her sisters were significantly modified and received a large number of small guns for defense against torpedo boats . These included a pair of 75 mm ( 3.0 in ) guns , ten 57 mm ( 2.2 in ) 40-caliber guns , twelve 37 mm ( 1.5 in ) guns , five 37 mm revolver cannon , and two machine guns . In 1905 , Francesco Morosini and her two sisters were joined in the Reserve Squadron by the three Re Umberto-class ironclads and Enrico Dandolo , three cruisers , and sixteen torpedo boats . This squadron only entered active service for two months of the year for training maneuvers , and the rest of the year was spent with reduced crews . In 1908 , the Italian Navy decided to discard Francesco Morosini and her sister Ruggiero di Lauria . She was formally stricken from the naval register in August 1909 , and was thereafter used as a target ship for a torpedo experiment . On 15 September , she was sunk at La Spezia ; the experiment was conducted to test the effect of a torpedo hit in order to develop more a more effective hull design . The explosion tore a 50-square-meter ( 540 sq ft ) hole in the hull , causing her to list severely and sink on her side . Her wreck was later scrapped .

Hollywood Rip Ride Rockit is a steel roller coaster at Universal Studios Florida in Orlando , Florida . With a height of 167 feet ( 51 m ) , a length of 3,800 feet ( 1,200 m ) , and a top speed of 65 miles per hour ( 105 km / h ) , it is the largest X-Coaster ever built by German manufacturer Maurer Söhne . It was announced on March 19 , 2008 and officially opened on August 19 , 2009 though originally planned to open in the spring of that year . Some of the special features are that riders are recorded during the entire 1 minute and 37 second ride and can choose one of thirty songs to listen to during the experience .

During the second week of January 2008 , Universal Parks & Resorts filed a Notice of Commencement with Orange County , Florida indicating that they were to construct a ride system that they had code-named " Project Rumble . " The notice also stated that the contractor was " Maurer Rides GmbH , " located in Munich , Germany . After months of rumours , the new attraction was announced by Universal officials on March 19 , 2008 . Unlike usual announcements , officials did not reveal the specifications of the entire roller coaster . In the original press release , it stated that the roller coaster 's vertical lift hill would be 167 feet ( 51 m ) tall , and that the trains would reach a maximum speed of 65 miles per hour ( 105 km / h ) . The press release also mentioned that each train would be equipped with a multi-media package , LED lights , built in video recorders , and the option for riders to choose a song from a list to be played during the course of the ride . The ride would also include six near miss encounters . At the time , the new roller coaster was scheduled to open in Spring 2009 . Also , in the months after the announcement , Universal surveyed guests on what songs they think should be included in the roller coaster . Some of the artists that guests could choose from were : The Black Eyed Peas , Bee Gees , The Beach Boys , and Johnny Cash .

Construction began in May 2008 with preliminary land clearing . The first track pieces were installed during the week of December 7 , 2008 . In February 2009 , Universal launched a website for the attraction , which included a construction blog and photographs chronicling progress of the attraction 's construction . The track layout was completed at the end of April 2009 with the crowning of the lift hill . In April 2009 , Universal confirmed that the roller coaster would not open as originally planned and said it would open in the summer . Though Universal has never mentioned what the exact problem with the roller coaster was , it is believed by newspapers that issues with the anti-rollback devices on the lift hill that were not working correctly caused the delay . After the issues with the ride were resolved , Hollywood Rip Ride Rockit began public previews in mid-August 2009 . On August 19 , 2009 , Universal Studios Florida officially opened the attraction .

The station for the roller coaster is quite different than traditional stations . As the train enters , it slows down but does not stop . There is a moving sidewalk on both sides of the station moving at the same speed as the train so riders can load and unload . Riders have about 45 seconds to take their seat , lower the lap-bar and make their song choice . After the restraints are checked , the train immediately begins to climb the 167-foot ( 51 m ) vertical chain lift and the song that the rider picked begins to play while the on-ride video recorder begins recording . When the train reaches the top of the lift , it drops back to the ground reaching a maximum speed of 65 miles per hour ( 105 km / h ) . Following the drop , the train goes through a non-inverting loop ( meaning that the train doesn 't go through an inversion ) , which is nicknamed " The Double Take " . Then the train makes an upward right turn into one of the several mid-course brakes . It then drops back down going through a hole in a wall before entering a left upward helix . This section of the coaster is nicknamed " The Treble Clef " . Next the train enters a quick element nicknamed , " The Jump Cut " which is similar to a non-inverting corkscrew . The train then drops back down before climbing back up into the second mid-course brakes . Following a small drop to the left , it travels straight before making a right turn , followed by a left , and then another right leading into the third set of mid-course brakes . Another drop is followed by the brakes leading into an s-bend / turn . The train then travels into an inclined loop , then the train enters the fourth set of brakes after going back up . Finally , the train drops back down , and goes over a small hill before entering the final brake run where the train enters the station and the riders song ends .

The steel track of Hollywood Rip Ride Rockit is 3,800 feet ( 1,200 m ) long in length , and the height of the lift is approximately 167 feet ( 51 m ) . Because the lift hill is vertical , a special evacuation system is used in the event that a train stalls on the lift . Also , the track is filled with sand and gravel to reduce the noise when a train is on the track . Throughout the layout of the roller coaster , there are 5 sets of brakes to control the speed of the trains .

The roller coaster operates with seven stadium-style seating X-Car trains . Each train has two cars that can hold six riders each for a total of twelve riders per train . On the head rest of each seat there are two speakers that play music during the ride . The speakers have been designed so that only the rider 's selected music track will be audible . On the restraint is a small touch screen where riders can choose which song they want to listen to during the ride . Additionally , the trains are equipped with multi-coloured lights that can be seen during the night .

The initial announcement just said that there would be 5 categories of songs . The full track list was not released until July 6 , 2009 , with Universal Studios Florida unveiling thirty songs ( 6 in each category ) that can be played during the ride . After riders board the train and lower their restraint , attached to the restraint is a small screen containing the logo of the ride and five categories of songs the rider can pick from . The song that the rider picked begins as the train climbs the vertical lift hill . Depending on the song , it may not begin at the beginning and end early as the total cycle time of the roller coaster is 1 minute and 39 seconds .

Doreen Edith Dominy Valiente ( 4 January 1922 – 1 September 1999 ) was an English Wiccan who was responsible for writing much of the early religious liturgy within the tradition of Gardnerian Wicca . An author and poet , she also published five books dealing with Wicca and related esoteric subjects . Born to a middle-class family in Surrey , Valiente began practicing magic while a teenager . Working as a translator at Bletchley Park during the Second World War , she also married twice in this period . Developing her interest in occultism after the war , she began practicing ceremonial magic with a friend while living in Bournemouth . Learning of Wicca , in 1953 she was initiated into the Gardnerian tradition by its founder , Gerald Gardner . Soon becoming the High Priestess of Gardner 's Bricket Wood coven , she helped him to produce or adapt many important scriptural texts for Wicca , such as The Witches Rune and the Charge of the Goddess , which were incorporated into the early Gardnerian Book of Shadows . In 1957 , a schism resulted in Valiente and her followers leaving Gardner to form their own short-lived coven . After investigating the Wiccan tradition of Charles Cardell , in 1953 she was initiated into Raymond Howard 's Coven of Atho . In 1964 she then went to work with Robert Cochrane in his coven , the Clan of Tubal Cain , although she later broke from this group .

Eager to promote and defend her religion , she played a leading role in both the Witchcraft Research Association and then the Pagan Front during the 1960s and 1970s . That latter decade also saw her briefly involve herself in far right politics as well as becoming a keen ley hunter and proponent of Earth mysteries . As well as regularly writing articles on esoteric topics for various magazines , from the 1960s onward she authored a number of books on the subject of Wicca , as well as contributing to the publication of works by Wiccan friends Stewart Farrar , Janet Farrar , and Evan John Jones . In these works also she became an early advocate of the idea that anyone could practice Wicca without requiring initiation by a pre-existing Wiccan , while also contributing to and encouraging research into the religion 's early history . Living in Brighton during these years , she worked with both her partner and initiate Ron Cook and was a member of the Silver Malkin coven . In her final years she served as patron of the Sussex-based Centre for Pagan Studies prior to her death from pancreatic cancer . Valiente 's magical artefacts and papers were bequeathed to her friend John Belham-Payne , who entrusted them to a charitable trust , the Doreen Valiente Foundation , in 2011 . Having had a significant influence in the history of Wicca , she is widely revered in the Wiccan community as " the Mother of Modern Witchcraft " , and has been the subject of two biographies .

Valiente was born Doreen Edith Dominy on 4 January 1922 at Colliers Wood in the Southern English town of Mitcham , Surrey . Her father , Harry Dominy , was a civil engineer , and he lived with her mother Edith in Colliers Wood . Harry came from a Methodist background and Edith from a Congregationalist one , however Doreen was never baptised , as was the custom of the time , due to an argument that Edith had had with the local vicar . Doreen later claimed that she had not had a close or affectionate relationship with her parents , whom she characterised as highly conventional and heavily focused on social climbing . During her childhood they moved to Horley in Surrey , and it was there – according to her later account – that she had an early spiritual experience while staring at the moon . From there , her family moved to the West Country and then to the New Forest . In either late 1934 or 1935 , Doreen 's mother left her father and took her to live with maternal relatives in Southampton . Valiente first began practicing magic aged 13 , performing a spell to prevent her mother being harassed by a co-worker ; she came to believe that it had worked . Her early knowledge of magical practices may have derived from books that she found in the local library . Her parents were concerned by this behaviour and sent her to a convent school . She despised the school and left it at the age of 15 , refusing to return . She had wanted to go to art school , but instead gained employment in a factory , before moving on to work as a clerk and typist at the Unemployment Assistance Board .

During the Second World War , she became a Foreign Office Civilian Temporary Senior Assistant Officer , in this capacity working as a translator at Bletchley Park . In relation to this work , she was also sent to South Wales , and it was there , in the town of Barry , that she met Joanis Vlachopolous , a Greek seaman in the Merchant Navy . Entering a relationship , they were married in East Glamorgan on 31 January 1941 . However , in June 1941 he was serving aboard the Pandias when it was sunk by a U-boat off of the West African coast ; he was declared missing in action and presumed deceased . Widowed , during 1942 and 1943 Valiente had a number of short-term jobs in Wales , which were possibly a cover for intelligence work . After October 1943 she was transferred to the intelligence service 's offices in Berkeley Street in the Mayfair area of London , where she was involved in message decryption . In London she met and entered into a relationship with Casimiro Valiente , a Spaniard who had fled from the Spanish Civil War , where he had fought on the side of the Spanish Republican Army before later joining the French Foreign Legion , where he was wounded at the Battle of Narvik and evacuated to England . They were married on 29 May 1944 at St Pancras Registry Office . The couple moved to Bournemouth – where Doreen 's mother was then living – and here Casimiro worked as a chef . Valiente would later say that both she and her husband suffered racism after the war because of their foreign associations .

Developing an interest in occultism , she began practicing ceremonial magic with a friend , " Zerki " , at his flat . She had obtained the magical regalia and notebooks of a recently deceased doctor , who had been a member of the Alpha et Omega , a splinter group of the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn , and attempted to learn Hebrew , a language with uses in various forms of ceremonial magic . It was at this point that she selected " Ameth " as her magical name . She was particularly interested by John Symonds ' book The Great Beast , which was a biography of the occultist Aleister Crowley , who had founded the religion of Thelema in 1904 , and following this she avidly read a copy of Crowley 's Magick in Theory and Practice which she found in a local library . Alongside these , she also had some practical experience with the esoteric religions of Spiritualism and Theosophy , having attended the services of a local Christian Spiritualist church in Charminster .

She had also become familiar with the idea of a pre-Christian witch-cult surviving into the modern period through the works of Charles Godfrey Leland , Margaret Murray , and Robert Graves , although believed that the religion was extinct . It was in autumn 1952 that she read an article by the reporter Allen Andrews in Illustrated magazine titled " Witchcraft in Britain " . Discussing the recent opening of the Folklore Centre of Superstition and Witchcraft in Castletown on the Isle of Man , it mentioned the museum 's director , Cecil Williamson , and its " resident witch " , Gerald Gardner . Intrigued by the article , Valiente wrote a letter to Williamson in 1952 , who in turn put her in contact with Gardner . Valiente and Gardner wrote several letters back-and-forth , with the latter eventually suggesting that she meet him at the home of his friend and fellow Wiccan Edith Woodford-Grimes ( " Dafo " ) , who lived not far from Bournemouth , in the Christchurch area . Before she left the meeting , Gardner gave her a copy of his 1949 novel , High Magic 's Aid , in which he describes a fictionalised account of Wiccan initiates in the Middle Ages ; he allegedly did so in order to gauge her opinion on ritual nudity and scourging , both of which were present in his tradition of Gardnerian Wicca .

On Midsummer 1953 Gardner invited Valiente again to Woodford-Grimes 's house , and it was here that he initiated her into Wicca in a ritual during which they stood before an altar and he read from his Book of Shadows . The three of them then set off to the prehistoric monument of Stonehenge in Wiltshire , where they witnessed the Druids performing a ritual there . Gardner had lent a ritual sword which he owned to the Druids , who placed it within the monument 's Heel Stone during their rite . Valiente told her husband and mother about the visit to Stonehenge , but not about her initiation , of which , she feared , they would not have approved . Later in the year , Gardner invited Valiente to visit him at his flat in Shepherd 's Bush , West London , and it was there that she met the eight to ten members of his Bricket Wood coven , which met near St. Albans , north of London . She soon rose to become the coven 's High Priestess . The historian Ronald Hutton later commented that in doing so , she formed " the second great creative partnership of [ Gardner 's ] life " after that with Woodford-Grimes . Valiente recognised how much of the material in Gardner 's Book of Shadows was taken not from ancient sources as Gardner had initially claimed , but from the works of Crowley . She confronted Gardner with this , who claimed that the text he had received from the New Forest coven had been fragmentary and he had had to fill much of it using various sources . She took the Book of Shadows , and with Gardner 's permission , rewrote much of it , cutting out a lot of sections that had come from Crowley , fearing that his infamous reputation would sully Wicca . In 1953 she wrote " Queen of the Moon , Queen of the Stars " , an invocation for use in a Yule ritual which was inspired by a Hebridean song found in the Carmina Gadelica . With Gardner she also wrote " The Witches Rune " , a chant for use while dancing in a circle . She rewrote much of the Charge of the Goddess , with Hutton characterising this act as " her greatest single contribution to Wicca " , for her version of the Charge became " the principle expression of Wiccan spirituality " in coming years .

Gardner spent his summers at the Museum of Magic and Witchcraft on the Isle of Man , and thus often relied on Valiente to deal with his affairs in Southern England . He sent her to meet with the occult artist Austin Osman Spare when he wanted some talismans produced by the latter . Spare subsequently described Valiente as " a myopic stalky nymph ... harmless and a little tiresome " in a letter that he wrote to Kenneth Grant . At Gardner 's prompting , she also met with the occultist Gerald Yorke , who was interested in learning about Wicca ; Gardner insisted that she lie to Yorke by informing him that she was from a longstanding family of hereditary Wiccan practitioners . She also aided him in preparing his second non-fiction book about Wicca , The Meaning of Witchcraft , focusing in particular on those sections refuting the sensationalist accusations of the tabloid press . However Gardner 's increasing desire for publicity , much of it ending up negative , caused conflict with Valiente and other members of his coven like Ned Grove and Derek Boothby . She felt that in repeatedly communicating with the press , he was compromising the coven 's security . She was also not enthusiastic about two young people whom Gardner brought into the coven , Jack L. Bracelin and his girlfriend ' Dayonis ' , stating that " a more qualid pair of spivs it would be hard to find indeed " . Two factions emerged within the coven ; Valiente led a broadly anti-publicity group , while Gardner led a pro-publicity one . In 1957 , Valiente and Grove drew up a list of " Proposed Rules of the Craft " which were partly designed to curtail Gardner 's publicity seeking . From his home in the Isle of Man , he responded that this was not necessary as a series of rules already existed , at which point he produced the Wiccan Laws . These laws limited the control of the High Priestess , which angered Valiente , who later realised that Gardner had simply made them up in response to her own Proposed Laws . In summer 1957 , the coven split . According to Valiente , she and her followers " had had enough of the Gospel according to St. Gerald ; but we still believed that the real traditional witchcraft lived " . According to Pagan studies scholar Ethan Doyle White , " Wicca had experienced its first great schism " .

After breaking from Gardner 's Bricket Wood coven , Valiente formed her own coven with Grove as High Priest , still following the tradition of Gardnerian Wicca , albeit without the Wiccan laws , which she believed to be entirely an invention of Gardner 's . This coven however failed to last , breaking up amid arguments between its founders . In 1956 , Valiente , along with her husband and her mother , moved into a basement flat in Lewes Crescent , Kemptown , in the southern coastal town of Brighton , although in 1968 they moved into a flat nearer to the town centre . She befriended another Kemptown resident , the journalist Leslie Roberts , who shared her interest in the supernatural . He attracted much attention to himself in the local press through his claims that practitioners of black magic were also operating in the area . Valiente remained a good friend to Roberts until his death from heart disease in 1966 . She also got back in touch with Gardner , and mended their friendship , remaining on good terms until his death in 1964 , when he left her £ 200 in his will . During the early 1960s she also developed a correspondence with two Gardnerian initiates in Sheffield , Patricia Crowther and her husband Arnold Crowther , finally meeting them when the latter couple visited Brighton in 1965 .

After her mother 's death in August 1962 , Valiente felt that she could be more open about being a Wiccan herself . Eager to spread information about Wicca throughout Britain , she also began to interact with press , sending a 1962 letter to the Spiritualist newspaper Psychic News , and in 1964 being interviewed for her involvement with Wicca by Brighton 's Evening Argus . During the 1960s , she began producing articles about Wicca and other esoteric subjects on a regular basis , for such esoteric magazines as Light , Fate , and Prediction . In this capacity , she also began to make appearances on television and radio . She also involved herself in the newly formed Witchcraft Research Association ( WRA ) , becoming its second President after the resignation of Sybil Leek . Valiente 's letter of welcome was included in the first issue of the WRA 's newsletter , Pentagram , published in August 1964 , while she also gave a speech at the WRA 's Halloween dinner in October . It was at the speech that Valiente proclaimed the Wiccan Rede ; this was its first public appearance in a recognisable form , with Doyle White arguing that it was Valiente herself who both created and named the Rede . It was through the WRA that Valiente came to communicate with the journalist Justine Glass , who was then conducting research for her book Witchcraft , the Sixth Sense , and Us .

Valiente began visiting local libraries and archives in order to investigate the history of witchcraft in Sussex . On the basis of this research , the esoteric press Aquarian published her first book , Where Witchcraft Lives , in 1962 . Just as Gardner had done in his book Witchcraft Today , here Valiente did not identify as a practicing Wiccan , but as an interested scholar of witchcraft . It contained her own research into the history and folklore of witchcraft in her county of Sussex , which she had collected both from archival research and from the published work of the historian L 'Estrange Ewen . It interpreted this evidence in light of the discredited theories of Margaret Murray , which claimed that a pre-Christian religious movement had survived to the present , when it had emerged as Wicca . Hutton later related that it was " one of the first three books to be published on the subject " of Wicca , and that the " remarkable feature of the book is that it remains , until this date [ 2010 ] , the only one produced by a prominent modern witch that embodies actual original research into the records of the trials of people accused of the crime of witchcraft during the early modern period . " In 1966 , Valiente then produced a manuscript for a book titled I am a Witch ! , a collection of poems with a biographical introduction , however it was never published , with publishers not believing that it would be commercially viable .

Valiente learned of the non-Gardnerian Wiccan Charles Cardell from a 1958 article , and subsequently struck up a correspondence with him . Cardell suggested that they pool their respective traditions together , but Valiente declined the offer , expressing some scepticism regarding Cardell 's motives and conduct . In 1962 , Valiente began a correspondence course run by Raymond Howard , a former associate of Cardell 's ; this course instructed her in a Wiccan tradition known as the Coven of Atho . At Halloween 1963 she was then initiated into the Coven of Atho in a ritual overseen by Howard , entering the lowest rank of the course , that of ' Sarsen ' , and beginning to copy the teachings that she received into notebooks , where she was able to identify many of the sources from which Howard had drawn upon in fashioning his tradition . In 1964 , Valiente was introduced to the Pagan witch Robert Cochrane by a mutual friend , the ceremonial magician William G. Gray , who had met him at a gathering at Glastonbury Tor held by the Brotherhood of the Essenes . Although sceptical of Cochrane 's claims to have come from a hereditary family of witches , she was impressed by his charisma , his desire to avoid publicity , and his emphasis on working outdoors . Valiente was invited to join Cochrane 's coven , the Clan of Tubal Cain , becoming its sixth member . However , she became dissatisfied with Cochrane , who was openly committing adultery and constantly insulting Gardnerians , even at one point calling for " a Night of the Long Knives of the Gardnerians " , at which point Valiente openly criticised him and then left his Clan . In her own words , she " rose up and challenged him in the presence of the rest of the coven . I told him that I was fed up with listening to all this senseless malice , and that , if a ' Night of the Long Knives ' was what his sick little soul craved , he could get on with it , but he could get on with it alone , because I had better things to do " . Shortly after , Cochrane committed ritual suicide on Midsummer 1966 ; she authored the poem " Elegy for a Dead Witch " in his memory . She remained in contact with his widow and other members of the Clan , as well as with Gray , and proceeded to work on occasion with The Regency , a group founded by former members of the Clan .

Living in Brighton , Valiente took up employment in a branch of the Boots pharmacist . In 1971 she appeared on the BBC documentary , Power of the Witch , which was devoted to Wicca and also featured the prominent Wiccan Alex Sanders . That same year , she was involved in the founding of the Pagan Front , a British pressure group that campaigned for the religious rights of Wiccans and other Pagans . In November 1970 she developed a full moon inauguration ritual for local branches of the Front to use and on May Day 1971 she chaired its first national meeting , held at Chiswick , West London . It was she who developed the three principles that came to be central to the Pagan Front 's interpretation of their religion : adherence to the Wiccan Rede , a belief in reincarnation , and a sense of kinship with nature . In April 1972 her husband Casimiro died ; he had never taken an interest in Wicca or esotericism and Valiente later claimed that theirs had been an unhappy relationship . Newly widowed , she soon had to move as the local council decided that her home was unfit for human habitation ; she was relocated into council accommodation in the mid-1960s tower block of Tyson Place in Grosvenor Square , Brighton . Her flat was described by visitors as cramped , being filled with thousands of books . It was there that she met Ronald Cooke , a member of the apartment block 's residents ' committee ; they entered into a relationship and she initiated him into Wicca , where he became her working partner . Together they regularly explored the Sussex countryside , and went on several holidays to Glastonbury , further considering moving there . She also joined a coven that was operating in the local area , Silver Malkin , after it was established by the Wiccan High Priestess Sally Griffyn .

During the early 1970s , Valiente became a member of a far right white nationalist political party , the National Front , for about eighteen months , during which she designed a banner for her local branch . Valiente 's biographer Philip Heselton suggested that the party 's nationalistic outlook may have appealed to her strongly patriotic values and that she might have hoped that the Front would serve as a political equivalent to the Pagan movement . At the same time she also became a member of another , more extreme far right group , the Northern League . However , she allowed her membership of the National Front to lapse , sending a letter to her local branch stating that although she respected its leader John Tyndall and had made friends within the group , she was critical of the party 's opposition to women 's liberation , gay rights , and sex education , all of which she lauded as progressive causes . Heselton has also suggested that Valiente may have joined these groups in order to investigate them before reporting back to Britain 's intelligence agencies . It was also in the early 1970s that she read John Michell 's The View Over Atlantis and was heavily influenced by it , embracing Michell 's view that there were ley lines across the British landscape that channelled earth energies . Inspired , she began searching for ley lines in the area around Brighton . She also began subscribing to The Ley Hunter magazine , for which she authored several articles and book reviews . Valiente came to see the public emergence of Wicca as a sign of the Age of Aquarius , arguing that the religion should ally with the feminist and environmentalist movements in order to establish a better future for the planet .

In 1973 , the publishing company Robert Hale brought out Valiente 's second book , An ABC of Witchcraft , in which she provided an encyclopaedic overview of various topics related to Wicca and esotericism . In 1975 , Hale published Valiente 's Natural Magic , a discussion of what she believed to be the magical usages and associations of the weather , stones , plants , and other elements of the natural world . In 1978 Hale then published Witchcraft for Tomorrow , in which Valiente proclaimed her belief that Wicca was ideal for the dawning Age of Aquarius and espoused James Lovelock 's Gaia hypothesis . It also explained to the reader how they could initiate themselves into Wicca and establish their own coven . In 1978 she offered a book of poetry to Hale , although they declined to publish it , believing that there would not be sufficient market for such a publication . In 1982 she then submitted a book of short stories , The Witch Ball , to Hale , but again they declined to publish it . In 1978 , Valiente struck up a friendship with the Alexandrian Wiccans Stewart Farrar and Janet Farrar , who were then living in Ireland . With the Farrars , she agreed to publish the original contents of the Gardnerian Book of Shadows , in order to combat the garbled variants that had been released by Cardell and Lady Sheba . The original Gardnerian material appeared in the Farrars ' two books , Eight Sabbats for Witches and The Witches ' Way ( 1984 ) , both published with Hale at Valiente 's recommendation . In these works , Valiente and the Farrars identified differences between early recensions of the Book and identified many of the older sources that it drew upon . Hutton believed that later scholars such as himself had to be " profoundly grateful " to the trio for undertaking this task , while Doyle White opined that these publications , alongside Witchcraft for Tomorrow , helped contribute to " the democratisation of Wicca " by enabling any reader to set themselves up as a Wiccan practitioner . As an appendix to The Witches ' Way she also published the result of her investigations into " Old Dorothy " , the woman whom Gardner had claimed had been involved with the New Forest coven . The academic historian Jeffrey Burton Russell had recently suggested that Gardner invented " Old Dorothy " as an attempt to hide the fact that he had invented Wicca himself . Valiente sought to disprove this , discovering that " Old Dorothy " was a real person : Dorothy Clutterbuck . Valiente biographer Jonathan Tapsell described it as " one of Doreen 's greatest known moments " .

In the mid-1980s , Valiente began writing an autobiography in which she focused on her own place within Wiccan history . It would be published by Hale in 1989 as The Rebirth of Witchcraft . In this work she did not dismiss the Murrayite witch-cult theory , but she did undermine the belief that Wicca was the survival of it by highlighting the various false claims made by Gardner , Cochrane , and Sanders , instead emphasising what she perceived as the religion 's value for the modern era . She also provided a foreword for Witchcraft : A Tradition Renewed , a book published in 1990 by Hale . It had been written by Evan John Jones , a former member of the Clan of Tubal Cain who also lived in Brighton . Heselton has expressed the view that Valiente likely did more than this , and that she wrote a number of the chapters herself . As Valiente became better known , she came to correspond with a wide range of people within the Pagan and esoteric communities . Through this , she met the American Wiccan Starhawk – whom she greatly admired – on one of the latter 's visits to Britain . She also communicated with the American Wiccan and scholar of Pagan studies Aidan A. Kelly during his investigations into the early Gardnerian liturgies . She disagreed with Kelly that there had been no New Forest coven and that Gardner had therefore invented Wicca , instead insisting that Gardner had stumbled on a coven of the Murrayite witch-cult .

In 1997 Valiente discovered the Centre for Pagan Studies ( CPS ) , a Pagan organisation based in the Sussex hamlet of Maresfield that had been established in 1995 . Befriending its founders , John Belham-Payne and his wife Julie , she became the Centre 's patron and gave several lectures for the group . In 1997 Cooke died , leaving Valiente grief-stricken . Her final public speech was at the Pagan Federation 's annual conference , held at Croydon 's Fairfield Halls in November 1997 ; here she praised the work of early twentieth-century occultist Dion Fortune and urged the Wiccan community to accept homosexuals . Valiente 's health was deteriorating as she was diagnosed first with diabetes and then terminal pancreatic cancer ; increasingly debilitated , John Belham-Payne and two of her friends became her primary carers . In her last few days she was moved to the Sackville Nursing Home , there requesting that Belham-Payne publish an anthology of her poems after her death . She died on 1 September 1999 , with Belham-Payne at her side . Valiente 's body was kept at the CPS ' barn in Maresfield , where an all-night vigil was held ; those invited included Ralph Harvey , Janet Farrar , Gavin Bone , and Hutton . After this Pagan rite was completed , her coffin was cremated at Brighton 's Woodvale crematorium , in an intentionally low-key affair with no media publicity . As per her wishes , Valiente 's ashes were scattered in Sussex woodland . Her magical artifacts and manuscripts , including her Book of Shadows , were bequeathed to the Centre , although there was nevertheless public disagreement over her will . Her book of poems was published posthumously in 2000 , followed by an enlarged second edition in 2014 .

Hutton characterised Valiente as " a handsome woman of striking , dark-haired , aquiline looks , possessed of a strong , enquiring , candid , and independent personality , and a gift for poetry and ritual " . Belham-Payne noted that Valiente was " very tall , rather reserved and preferred to be in the background " , while Valiente 's friend Ashley Mortimer described her as " sensible , practical , decent , honest and , perhaps most importantly , pragmatic " . The writer Leo Ruickbie described her as " a plain , owlishly bespectacled woman with a slight stoop and a friendly twinkle in her eye " . Throughout her life , Valiente remained a believer in the Murrayite Witch-Cult theory despite the fact that it had been academically discredited by the 1970s . Valiente had a strong dislike of unexpected visitors , and would often refuse to answer the door to those who knocked unannounced . Valiente was an avid fan of football , and closely followed the World Cup , refusing to open the door to any visitors while she was watching the competition on television . She also enjoyed betting on horse races . Her favourite foods included cucumber sandwiches , cauliflower cheese , and baked potatoes .

Within the occult community , Valiente has become internationally known as the " Mother of Modern Witchcraft " , although she herself disliked this moniker . Heselton believed that Valiente 's influence on Wicca was " profound and far-reaching " , while Ruickbie characterised her as Gardner 's " most gifted acolyte " . In 2016 , Heselton expressed the view that Valiente was best known for her books , which are " still some of the most readable on the subject " of Wicca , further highlighting that they often appeared on Wiccan reading lists . The ritual liturgies that Valiente composed also proved highly influential within the Wiccan religion and constitute a core element of her legacy . Kelly asserted that Valiente " deserves credit for having helped transform the Craft from being the hobby of a handful of eccentric Brits into being an international religious movement " . Describing her as " a major personality in the development " of Wicca , Hutton also expressed the view that " her enduring greatness lay in the very fact that she was so completely and strong-mindedly dedicated to finding and declaring her own truth , in a world in which the signposts to it were themselves in a state of almost complete confusion " .

In 2009 , the CPS organised " A Day for Doreen " , an event in central London dedicated to Valiente . Sixteen speakers from within the Wiccan and Pagan community came to talk at the event , which was a sell-out . Following Valiente 's death , Belham-Payne received offers of substantial amounts of money from buyers seeking to purchase parts of her collection . In 2011 he entrusted the collection of artefacts that he had inherited from Valiente to the newly established Doreen Valiente Foundation . A charitable trust , the Foundation was designed to prevent the collection being broken up and sold , moreover allowing for future Wiccans and researchers to start " delving into it , protecting it , making it accessible and available for people to research , learn from and enjoy . " Belham-Payne became the group 's chairman , while Ashley Mortimer , Brian Botham , and Trish Botham were appointed as trustees . On 21 June 2013 the CPS unveiled a blue plaque at the Tyson Place tower block , Valiente 's final home . At the ceremony , a speech was given by Denise Cobb , the Mayor of Brighton . It had been preceded by an open solstice ritual in Brighton 's Steine Gardens , led by Ralph Harvey .

Lung cancer , also known as lung carcinoma , is a malignant lung tumor characterized by uncontrolled cell growth in tissues of the lung . If left untreated , this growth can spread beyond the lung by the process of metastasis into nearby tissue or other parts of the body . Most cancers that start in the lung , known as primary lung cancers , are carcinomas . The two main types are small-cell lung carcinoma ( SCLC ) and non-small-cell lung carcinoma ( NSCLC ) . The most common symptoms are coughing ( including coughing up blood ) , weight loss , shortness of breath , and chest pains . The vast majority ( 85 % ) of cases of lung cancer are due to long-term tobacco smoking . About 10 – 15 % of cases occur in people who have never smoked . These cases are often caused by a combination of genetic factors and exposure to radon gas , asbestos , second-hand smoke , or other forms of air pollution . Lung cancer may be seen on chest radiographs and computed tomography ( CT ) scans . The diagnosis is confirmed by biopsy which is usually performed by bronchoscopy or CT-guidance .

Prevention is by avoiding risk factors including smoking and air pollution . Treatment and long-term outcomes depend on the type of cancer , the stage ( degree of spread ) , and the person 's overall health . Most cases are not curable . Common treatments include surgery , chemotherapy , and radiotherapy . NSCLC is sometimes treated with surgery , whereas SCLC usually responds better to chemotherapy and radiotherapy . Worldwide in 2012 , lung cancer occurred in 1.8 million people and resulted in 1.6 million deaths . This makes it the most common cause of cancer-related death in men and second most common in women after breast cancer . The most common age at diagnosis is 70 years . Overall , 17.4 % of people in the United States diagnosed with lung cancer survive five years after the diagnosis , while outcomes on average are worse in the developing world .

Symptoms due to the cancer mass pressing on adjacent structures : chest pain , bone pain , superior vena cava obstruction , or difficulty swallowing If the cancer grows in the airways , it may obstruct airflow , causing breathing difficulties . The obstruction can lead to accumulation of secretions behind the blockage , and predispose to pneumonia . Depending on the type of tumor , paraneoplastic phenomena — symptoms not due to the local presence of cancer — may initially attract attention to the disease . In lung cancer , these phenomena may include hypercalcemia , syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone ( SIADH , abnormally concentrated urine and diluted blood ) , ectopic ACTH production , or Lambert – Eaton myasthenic syndrome ( muscle weakness due to autoantibodies ) . Tumors in the top of the lung , known as Pancoast tumors , may invade the local part of the sympathetic nervous system , leading to Horner 's syndrome ( dropping of the eyelid and a small pupil on that side ) , as well as damage to the brachial plexus . Many of the symptoms of lung cancer ( poor appetite , weight loss , fever , fatigue ) are not specific . In many people , the cancer has already spread beyond the original site by the time they have symptoms and seek medical attention . Symptoms that suggest the presence of metastatic disease include weight loss , bone pain and neurological symptoms ( headaches , fainting , convulsions , or limb weakness ) . Common sites of spread include the brain , bone , adrenal glands , opposite lung , liver , pericardium , and kidneys . About 10 % of people with lung cancer do not have symptoms at diagnosis ; these cancers are incidentally found on routine chest radiography .

Smoking , particularly of cigarettes , is by far the main contributor to lung cancer . Cigarette smoke contains at least 73 known carcinogens , including benzo [ a ] pyrene , NNK , 1,3-butadiene and a radioactive isotope of polonium , polonium-210 . Across the developed world , 90 % of lung cancer deaths in men during the year 2000 were attributed to smoking ( 70 % for women ) . Smoking accounts for about 85 % of lung cancer cases . Passive smoking — the inhalation of smoke from another 's smoking — is a cause of lung cancer in nonsmokers . A passive smoker can be defined as someone living or working with a smoker . Studies from the US , Europe and the UK have consistently shown a significantly increased risk among those exposed to passive smoke . Those who live with someone who smokes have a 20 – 30 % increase in risk while those who work in an environment with secondhand smoke have a 16 – 19 % increase in risk . Investigations of sidestream smoke suggest it is more dangerous than direct smoke . Passive smoking causes about 3,400 deaths from lung cancer each year in the USA .

Radon is a colourless and odorless gas generated by the breakdown of radioactive radium , which in turn is the decay product of uranium , found in the Earth 's crust . The radiation decay products ionize genetic material , causing mutations that sometimes turn cancerous . Radon is the second-most common cause of lung cancer in the USA , causing about 21,000 deaths each year . The risk increases 8 – 16 % for every 100 Bq / m ³ increase in the radon concentration . Radon gas levels vary by locality and the composition of the underlying soil and rocks . About one in 15 homes in the US has radon levels above the recommended guideline of 4 picocuries per liter ( pCi / l ) ( 148 Bq / m ³ ) .

Outdoor air pollution has a small effect on increasing the risk of lung cancer . Fine particulates ( PM2.5 ) and sulfate aerosols , which may be released in traffic exhaust fumes , are associated with slightly increased risk . For nitrogen dioxide , an incremental increase of 10 parts per billion increases the risk of lung cancer by 14 % . Outdoor air pollution is estimated to account for 1 – 2 % of lung cancers . Tentative evidence supports an increased risk of lung cancer from indoor air pollution related to the burning of wood , charcoal , dung or crop residue for cooking and heating . Women who are exposed to indoor coal smoke have about twice the risk and a number of the by-products of burning biomass are known or suspected carcinogens . This risk affects about 2.4 billion people globally , and is believed to account for 1.5 % of lung cancer deaths .

Numerous other substances , occupations , and environmental exposures have been linked to lung cancer . The International Agency for Research on Cancer ( IARC ) states there is " sufficient evidence " to show the following are carcinogenic in the lungs : Some metals ( aluminum production , cadmium and cadmium compounds , chromium ( VI ) compounds , beryllium and beryllium compounds , iron and steel founding , nickel compounds , arsenic and inorganic arsenic compounds , underground hematite mining ) Some products of combustion ( incomplete combustion , coal ( indoor emissions from household coal burning ) , coal gasification , coal-tar pitch , coke production , soot , diesel engine exhaust ) Some toxic gases ( methyl ether ( technical grade ) , Bis- ( chloromethyl ) ether , sulfur mustard , MOPP ( vincristine-prednisone-nitrogen mustard-procarbazine mixture ) , fumes from painting )

Similar to many other cancers , lung cancer is initiated by activation of oncogenes or inactivation of tumor suppressor genes . Carcinogens cause mutations in these genes which induce the development of cancer . Mutations in the K-ras proto-oncogene are responsible for 10 – 30 % of lung adenocarcinomas . About 4 % of non-small-cell lung carcinomas involve an EML4-ALK tyrosine kinase fusion gene . Epigenetic changes — such as alteration of DNA methylation , histone tail modification , or microRNA regulation — may lead to inactivation of tumor suppressor genes . The epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) regulates cell proliferation , apoptosis , angiogenesis , and tumor invasion . Mutations and amplification of EGFR are common in non-small-cell lung carcinoma and provide the basis for treatment with EGFR-inhibitors . Her2 / neu is affected less frequently . Other genes that are often mutated or amplified are c-MET , NKX2-1 , LKB1 , PIK3CA , and BRAF . The cell lines of origin are not fully understood . The mechanism may involve abnormal activation of stem cells . In the proximal airways , stem cells that express keratin 5 are more likely to be affected , typically leading to squamous-cell lung carcinoma . In the middle airways , implicated stem cells include club cells and neuroepithelial cells that express club cell secretory protein . Small-cell lung carcinoma may be derived from these cell lines or neuroendocrine cells , and may express CD44 .

Performing a chest radiograph is one of the first investigative steps if a person reports symptoms that may suggest lung cancer . This may reveal an obvious mass , widening of the mediastinum ( suggestive of spread to lymph nodes there ) , atelectasis ( collapse ) , consolidation ( pneumonia ) or pleural effusion . CT imaging is typically used to provide more information about the type and extent of disease . Bronchoscopy or CT-guided biopsy is often used to sample the tumor for histopathology . Lung cancer often appears as a solitary pulmonary nodule on a chest radiograph . However , the differential diagnosis is wide . Many other diseases can also give this appearance , including metastatic cancer , hamartomas , and infectious granulomas such as tuberculosis , histoplasmosis and coccidioidomycosis . Lung cancer can also be an incidental finding , as a solitary pulmonary nodule on a chest radiograph or CT scan done for an unrelated reason . The definitive diagnosis of lung cancer is based on histological examination of the suspicious tissue in the context of the clinical and radiological features . Clinical practice guidelines recommend frequencies for pulmonary nodule surveillance . CT imaging should not be used for longer or more frequently than indicated as extended surveillance exposes people to increased radiation .

The three main subtypes of NSCLC are adenocarcinoma , squamous-cell carcinoma and large-cell carcinoma . Nearly 40 % of lung cancers are adenocarcinoma , which usually originates in peripheral lung tissue . Although most cases of adenocarcinoma are associated with smoking , adenocarcinoma is also the most common form of lung cancer among people who have smoked fewer than 100 cigarettes in their lifetimes ( " never-smokers " ) and ex-smokers with a modest smoking history . A subtype of adenocarcinoma , the bronchioloalveolar carcinoma , is more common in female never-smokers , and may have a better long-term survival . Squamous-cell carcinoma accounts for about 30 % of lung cancers . They typically occur close to large airways . A hollow cavity and associated cell death are commonly found at the centre of the tumor . About 9 % of lung cancers are large-cell carcinoma . These are so named because the cancer cells are large , with excess cytoplasm , large nuclei and conspicuous nucleoli .

The lung is a common place for the spread of tumors from other parts of the body . Secondary cancers are classified by the site of origin ; e.g. , breast cancer that has spread to the lung is called metastatic breast cancer . Metastases often have a characteristic round appearance on chest radiograph . Primary lung cancers themselves most commonly metastasize to the brain , bones , liver and adrenal glands . Immunostaining of a biopsy is often helpful to determine the original source . The presence of Napsin-A , TTF-1 , CK7 and CK20 are helpful in confirming the subtype of lung carcinoma . SCLC derived from neuroendocrine cells may express CD56 , neural cell adhesion molecule , synaptophysin or chromogranin .

Lung cancer staging is an assessment of the degree of spread of the cancer from its original source . It is one of the factors affecting the prognosis and potential treatment of lung cancer . The evaluation of non-small-cell lung carcinoma ( NSCLC ) staging uses the TNM classification . This is based on the size of the primary tumor , lymph node involvement , and distant metastasis . Using the TNM descriptors , a group is assigned , ranging from occult cancer , through stages 0 , IA ( one-A ) , IB , IIA , IIB , IIIA , IIIB and IV ( four ) . This stage group assists with the choice of treatment and estimation of prognosis . Small-cell lung carcinoma ( SCLC ) has traditionally been classified as " limited stage " ( confined to one half of the chest and within the scope of a single tolerable radiotherapy field ) or " extensive stage " ( more widespread disease ) . However , the TNM classification and grouping are useful in estimating prognosis . For both NSCLC and SCLC , the two general types of staging evaluations are clinical staging and surgical staging . Clinical staging is performed prior to definitive surgery . It is based on the results of imaging studies ( such as CT scans and PET scans ) and biopsy results . Surgical staging is evaluated either during or after the operation , and is based on the combined results of surgical and clinical findings , including surgical sampling of thoracic lymph nodes .

While in most countries industrial and domestic carcinogens have been identified and banned , tobacco smoking is still widespread . Eliminating tobacco smoking is a primary goal in the prevention of lung cancer , and smoking cessation is an important preventive tool in this process . Policy interventions to decrease passive smoking in public areas such as restaurants and workplaces have become more common in many Western countries . Bhutan has had a complete smoking ban since 2005 while India introduced a ban on smoking in public in October 2008 . The World Health Organization has called for governments to institute a total ban on tobacco advertising to prevent young people from taking up smoking . They assess that such bans have reduced tobacco consumption by 16 % where instituted .

Cancer screening uses medical tests to detect disease in large groups of people who have no symptoms . For individuals with high risk of developing lung cancer , computed tomography ( CT ) screening can detect cancer and give a person options to respond to it in a way that prolongs life . This form of screening reduces the chance of death from lung cancer by an absolute amount of 0.3 % ( relative amount of 20 % ) . High risk people are those age 55-74 who have smoked equivalent amount of a pack of cigarettes daily for 30 years including time within the past 15 years . CT screening is associated with a high rate of falsely positive tests which may result in unneeded treatment . For each true positive scan there are about 19 falsely positives scans . Other concerns include radiation exposure and the cost of testing along with follow up . Research has not found two other available tests — sputum cytology or chest radiograph ( CXR ) screening tests — to have any benefit . The U.S. Preventative Services Task Force ( USPSTF ) recommends yearly screening using low-dose computed tomography in those who have a total smoking history of 30 pack-years and are between 55 and 80 years old until a person has not been smoking for more than 15 years . Screening should not be done in those with other health problems that would make treatment of lung cancer if found not an option . The English National Health Service was in 2014 re-examining the evidence for screening .

If investigations confirm NSCLC , the stage is assessed to determine whether the disease is localized and amenable to surgery or if it has spread to the point where it cannot be cured surgically . CT scan and positron emission tomography are used for this determination . If mediastinal lymph node involvement is suspected , the nodes may be sampled to assist staging . Techniques used for this include transthoracic needle aspiration , transbronchial needle aspiration ( with or without endobronchial ultrasound ) , endoscopic ultrasound with needle aspiration , mediastinoscopy , and thoracoscopy . Blood tests and pulmonary function testing are used to assess whether a person is well enough for surgery . If pulmonary function tests reveal poor respiratory reserve , surgery may not be possible . In most cases of early-stage NSCLC , removal of a lobe of lung ( lobectomy ) is the surgical treatment of choice . In people who are unfit for a full lobectomy , a smaller sublobar excision ( wedge resection ) may be performed . However , wedge resection has a higher risk of recurrence than lobectomy . Radioactive iodine brachytherapy at the margins of wedge excision may reduce the risk of recurrence . Rarely , removal of a whole lung ( pneumonectomy ) is performed . Video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery ( VATS ) and VATS lobectomy use a minimally invasive approach to lung cancer surgery . VATS lobectomy is equally effective compared to conventional open lobectomy , with less postoperative illness .

Radiotherapy is often given together with chemotherapy , and may be used with curative intent in people with NSCLC who are not eligible for surgery . This form of high-intensity radiotherapy is called radical radiotherapy . A refinement of this technique is continuous hyperfractionated accelerated radiotherapy ( CHART ) , in which a high dose of radiotherapy is given in a short time period . Postoperative thoracic radiotherapy generally should not be used after curative intent surgery for NSCLC . Some people with mediastinal N2 lymph node involvement might benefit from post-operative radiotherapy . For potentially curable SCLC cases , chest radiotherapy is often recommended in addition to chemotherapy . If cancer growth blocks a short section of bronchus , brachytherapy ( localized radiotherapy ) may be given directly inside the airway to open the passage . Compared to external beam radiotherapy , brachytherapy allows a reduction in treatment time and reduced radiation exposure to healthcare staff . Evidence for brachytherapy , however , is less than that for external beam radiotherapy . Prophylactic cranial irradiation ( PCI ) is a type of radiotherapy to the brain , used to reduce the risk of metastasis . PCI is most useful in SCLC . In limited-stage disease , PCI increases three-year survival from 15 % to 20 % ; in extensive disease , one-year survival increases from 13 % to 27 % .

The chemotherapy regimen depends on the tumor type . Small-cell lung carcinoma ( SCLC ) , even relatively early stage disease , is treated primarily with chemotherapy and radiation . In SCLC , cisplatin and etoposide are most commonly used . Combinations with carboplatin , gemcitabine , paclitaxel , vinorelbine , topotecan , and irinotecan are also used . In advanced non-small cell lung carcinoma ( NSCLC ) , chemotherapy improves survival and is used as first-line treatment , provided the person is well enough for the treatment . Typically , two drugs are used , of which one is often platinum-based ( either cisplatin or carboplatin ) . Other commonly used drugs are gemcitabine , paclitaxel , docetaxel , pemetrexed , etoposide or vinorelbine . Adjuvant chemotherapy refers to the use of chemotherapy after apparently curative surgery to improve the outcome . In NSCLC , samples are taken of nearby lymph nodes during surgery to assist staging . If stage II or III disease is confirmed , adjuvant chemotherapy improves survival by 5 % at five years . The combination of vinorelbine and cisplatin is more effective than older regimens . Adjuvant chemotherapy for people with stage IB cancer is controversial , as clinical trials have not clearly demonstrated a survival benefit . Chemotherapy before surgery in NSCLC that can be removed surgically also appears to improve outcomes .

Of all people with lung cancer in the US , 16.8 % survive for at least five years after diagnosis . In England , between 2005 and 2009 , overall five-year survival for lung cancer was less than 10 % . Outcomes are generally worse in the developing world . Stage is often advanced at the time of diagnosis . At presentation , 30 – 40 % of cases of NSCLC are stage IV , and 60 % of SCLC are stage IV . Survival for lung cancer falls as the stage at diagnosis becomes more advanced : the English data suggest that around 70 % of patients survive at least a year when diagnosed at the earliest stage , but this falls to just 14 % for those diagnosed with the most advanced disease . Prognostic factors in NSCLC include presence of pulmonary symptoms , large tumor size ( > 3 cm ) , nonsquamous cell type ( histology ) , degree of spread ( stage ) and metastases to multiple lymph nodes , and vascular invasion . For people with inoperable disease , outcomes are worse in those with poor performance status and weight loss of more than 10 % . Prognostic factors in small cell lung cancer include performance status , gender , stage of disease , and involvement of the central nervous system or liver at the time of diagnosis .

For NSCLC , the best prognosis is achieved with complete surgical resection of stage IA disease , with up to 70 % five-year survival . People with extensive-stage SCLC have an average five-year survival rate of less than 1 % . The average survival time for limited-stage disease is 20 months , with a five-year survival rate of 20 % . According to data provided by the National Cancer Institute , the median age at diagnosis of lung cancer in the United States is 70 years , and the median age at death is 72 years . In the US , people with medical insurance are more likely to have a better outcome .

Worldwide , lung cancer is the most common cancer among men in terms of both incidence and mortality , and among women has the third highest incidence , and is second after breast cancer in mortality . In 2012 , there were 1.82 million new cases globally , and 1.56 million deaths due to lung cancer , representing 19.4 % of all deaths from cancer . The highest rates are in North America , Europe and East Asia , with over a third of new cases in 2012 in China . Rates in Africa and South Asia are much lower . The population segment most likely to develop lung cancer is people aged over 50 who have a history of smoking . In contrast to the mortality rate in men , which began declining more than 20 years ago , women 's lung cancer mortality rates have been rising over the last decades , and are just recently beginning to stabilize . In the USA , the lifetime risk of developing lung cancer is 8 % in men and 6 % in women . For every 3 – 4 million cigarettes smoked , one lung cancer death occurs . The influence of " Big Tobacco " plays a significant role in the smoking culture . Young nonsmokers who see tobacco advertisements are more likely to take up smoking . The role of passive smoking is increasingly being recognized as a risk factor for lung cancer , leading to policy interventions to decrease undesired exposure of nonsmokers to others ' tobacco smoke . Emissions from automobiles , factories , and power plants also pose potential risks .

In the United States , black men and women have a higher incidence . Lung cancer rates are currently lower in developing countries . With increased smoking in developing countries , the rates are expected to increase in the next few years , notably in China and India . In the United States military veterans have a 25-50 % higher rate of lung cancer primarily due to higher rates of smoking . During World War Two and the Korean War asbestos also played a part and Agent Orange may have caused some problems during the Vietnam War . Lung cancer is the second most common cancer in the UK ( around 43,500 people were diagnosed with the disease in 2011 ) , and it is the most common cause of cancer death ( around 35,400 people died in 2012 ) . From the 1960s , the rates of lung adenocarcinoma started to rise relative to other types of lung cancer . This is partly due to the introduction of filter cigarettes . The use of filters removes larger particles from tobacco smoke , thus reducing deposition in larger airways . However , the smoker has to inhale more deeply to receive the same amount of nicotine , increasing particle deposition in small airways where adenocarcinoma tends to arise . The incidence of lung adenocarcinoma continues to rise .

Lung cancer was uncommon before the advent of cigarette smoking ; it was not even recognized as a distinct disease until 1761 . Different aspects of lung cancer were described further in 1810 . Malignant lung tumors made up only 1 % of all cancers seen at autopsy in 1878 , but had risen to 10 – 15 % by the early 1900s . Case reports in the medical literature numbered only 374 worldwide in 1912 , but a review of autopsies showed the incidence of lung cancer had increased from 0.3 % in 1852 to 5.66 % in 1952 . In Germany in 1929 , physician Fritz Lickint recognized the link between smoking and lung cancer , which led to an aggressive antismoking campaign . The British Doctors ' Study , published in the 1950s , was the first solid epidemiological evidence of the link between lung cancer and smoking . As a result , in 1964 the Surgeon General of the United States recommended smokers should stop smoking . The connection with radon gas was first recognized among miners in the Ore Mountains near Schneeberg , Saxony . Silver has been mined there since 1470 , and these mines are rich in uranium , with its accompanying radium and radon gas . Miners developed a disproportionate amount of lung disease , eventually recognized as lung cancer in the 1870s . Despite this discovery , mining continued into the 1950s , due to the USSR 's demand for uranium . Radon was confirmed as a cause of lung cancer in the 1960s .

The first successful pneumonectomy for lung cancer was performed in 1933 . Palliative radiotherapy has been used since the 1940s . Radical radiotherapy , initially used in the 1950s , was an attempt to use larger radiation doses in patients with relatively early-stage lung cancer , but who were otherwise unfit for surgery . In 1997 , continuous hyperfractionated accelerated radiotherapy was seen as an improvement over conventional radical radiotherapy . With small-cell lung carcinoma , initial attempts in the 1960s at surgical resection and radical radiotherapy were unsuccessful . In the 1970s , successful chemotherapy regimens were developed .

Current research directions for lung cancer treatment include immunotherapy , which encourages the body 's immune system to attack the tumor cells , epigenetics , and new combinations of chemotherapy and radiotherapy , both on their own and together . Many of these new treatments work through immune checkpoint blockade , disrupting cancer 's ability to evade the immune system . Ipilimumab blocks signaling through a receptor on T cells known as CTLA-4 which dampens down the immune system . It has been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) for treatment of melanoma and is undergoing clinical trials for both non-small cell lung cancer ( NSCLC ) and small cell lung cancer ( SCLC ) . Other immunotherapy treatments interfere with the binding of programmed cell death 1 ( PD-1 ) protein with its ligand PD-1 ligand 1 ( PD-L1 ) . Signaling through PD-1 inactivates T cells . Some cancer cells appear to exploit this by expressing PD-L1 in order to switch off T cells that might recognise them as a threat . Monoclonal antibodies targeting both PD-1 and PD-L1 , such as pembrolizumab and nivolumab are currently in clinical trials for treatment for lung cancer .

Epigenetics is the study of small , usually heritable , molecular modifications — or " tags " — that bind DNA and modify gene expression levels . Targeting these tags with drugs can kill cancer cells . Early-stage research in NSCLC using drugs aimed at epigenetic modifications shows that blocking more than one of these tags can kill cancer cells with fewer side effects . Studies also show that giving patients these drugs before standard treatment can improve its effectiveness . Clinical trials are underway to evaluate how well these drugs kill lung cancer cells in humans . Several drugs that target epigenetic mechanisms are in development . Histone deacetylase inhibitors in development include valproic acid , vorinostat , belinostat , panobinostat , entinostat , and romidepsin . DNA methyltransferase inhibitors in development include decitabine , azacytidine , and hydralazine . The TRACERx project is looking at how NSCLC develops and evolves , and how these tumors become resistant to treatment . The project will look at tumor samples from 850 NSCLC patients at various stages including diagnosis , after first treatment , post-treatment , and relapse . By studying samples at different points of tumor development , the researchers hope to identify the changes that drive tumor growth and resistance to treatment . The results of this project will help scientists and doctors gain a better understanding of NSCLC and potentially lead to the development of new treatments against the disease .

Canadians ( French : Canadiens ) are the people who are identified with the country of Canada . This connection may be residential , legal , historical , or cultural . For most Canadians , several ( or all ) of these connections exist and are collectively the source of their being Canadian . Canada is a bilingual and multicultural society home to people of many different ethnic , religious and national origins , with the majority of the population made up of Old World immigrants and their descendants . Following the initial period of French and then the much larger British colonization , different waves ( or peaks ) of immigration and settlement of non-aboriginal peoples took place over the course of nearly two centuries and continue today . Elements of Aboriginal , French , British and more recent immigrant customs , languages and religions have combined to form the culture of Canada and thus a Canadian identity . Canada has also been strongly influenced by its linguistic , geographic and economic neighbour , the United States . Canadian independence from Britain grew gradually over the course of many years since the formation of the Canadian Confederation in 1867 . World War I and World War II in particular gave rise to a desire among Canadians to have their country recognized as a fully-fledged sovereign state with a distinct citizenship . Legislative independence was established with the passage of the Statute of Westminster 1931 , the Canadian Citizenship Act of 1946 took effect on January 1 , 1947 , and full sovereignty was achieved with the patriation of the constitution in 1982 . Canada 's nationality law closely mirrored that of the United Kingdom . Legislation since the mid 20th century represents Canadians ' commitment to multilateralism and socioeconomic development .

As of 2010 , Canadians make up 0.5 % of the world 's total population , having relied upon immigration for population growth and social development . Approximately 41 % of current Canadians are first- or second-generation immigrants , and 20 percent of Canadian residents in the 2000s were not born in the country . Statistics Canada projects that , by 2031 , nearly one-half of Canadians above the age of 15 will be foreign-born or have one foreign-born parent . Aboriginal peoples , according to the 2011 Canadian Census , numbered at 1,400,685 or 4.3 % of the country 's 33,476,688 population .

The French originally settled New France , in present-day Quebec and Ontario ; and Acadia , in present-day Nova Scotia and New Brunswick , during the early part of the 17th century . Approximately 100 Irish-born families would settle the Saint Lawrence Valley by 1700 , assimilating into the Canadien population and culture . During the 18th and 19th century ; immigration westward ( to the area known as Rupert 's Land ) was carried out by " Voyageurs " ; French settlers working for the North West Company ; and by British settlers ( English and Scottish ) representing the Hudson 's Bay Company , coupled with independent entrepreneurial woodsman called " Coureur des bois " . This arrival of newcomers led to the creation of the Métis , an ethnic group of mixed European and First Nations parentage . The British conquest of New France was preceded by a small number of Germans and Swedes who settled alongside the Scottish in Port Royal , Nova Scotia , while some Irish immigrated to the Colony of Newfoundland . In the wake of the 1775 invasion of Canada by the newly formed Continental Army during the American Revolutionary War , approximately 60,000 United Empire Loyalist fled to British North America , a large portion of whom migrated to New Brunswick . After the War of 1812 , British ( including British army regulars ) , Scottish and Irish immigration was encouraged throughout Rupert 's Land , Upper Canada and Lower Canada .

Between 1815 and 1850 , some 800,000 immigrants came to the colonies of British North America , mainly from the British Isles as part of the great migration of Canada . These new arrivals included some Gaelic-speaking Highland Scots displaced by the Highland Clearances to Nova Scotia . The Irish Potato Famine of the 1840s significantly increased the pace of Irish immigration to Prince Edward Island and the Province of Canada , with over 35,000 distressed individuals landing in Toronto in 1847 and 1848 . Beginning in the late 1850s , the immigration of Chinese into the Colony of Vancouver Island and Colony of British Columbia peaked with the onset of the Fraser Canyon Gold Rush . The Chinese Immigration Act of 1885 eventually placed a head tax on all Chinese immigrants , in hopes of discouraging Chinese immigration after completion of the Canadian Pacific Railway . The population of Canada has consistently risen , doubling approximately every 40 years , since the establishment of the Canadian Confederation in 1867 . From the mid- to late 19th century , Canada had a policy of assisting immigrants from Europe , including an estimated 100,000 unwanted " Home Children " from Britain . Block settlement communities were established throughout western Canada between the late 19th and early 20th centuries . Some were planned and others were spontaneously created by the settlers themselves . Canada was now receiving a large number of European immigrants , predominantly Italians , Germans , Scandinavians , Dutch , Poles , and Ukrainians . Legislative restrictions on immigration ( such as the Continuous journey regulation and Chinese Immigration Act ) that had favoured British and other European immigrants were amended in the 1960s , opening the doors to immigrants from all parts of the world . While the 1950s had still seen high levels of immigration by Europeans , by the 1970s , immigrants were increasingly Chinese , Indian , Vietnamese , Jamaican and Haitian . During the late 1960s and early 1970s , Canada received many American Vietnam War draft dissenters . Throughout the late 1980s and 1990s , Canada 's growing Pacific trade brought with it a large influx of South Asians , who tended to settle in British Columbia . Immigrants of all backgrounds tend to settle in the major urban centres . The Canadian public as-well as the major political parties support immigration .

Canadian citizenship is typically obtained by birth in Canada or by birth or adoption abroad when at least one biological parent or adoptive parent is a Canadian citizen who was born in Canada or naturalized in Canada ( and did not receive citizenship by being born outside of Canada to a Canadian citizen ) . It can also be granted to a permanent resident who lives in Canada for three out of four years and meets specific requirements . Canada established its own nationality law in 1946 with the enactment of the Canadian Citizenship Act which took effect on January 1 , 1947 . The Immigration and Refugee Protection Act , was passed by the Parliament of Canada in 2001 as Bill C-11 , which replaced the Immigration Act of 1976 as the primary federal legislation regulating immigration . Prior to the conferring of legal status on Canadian citizenship , Canada 's naturalization laws consisted of a multitude of Acts beginning with the Immigration Act of 1910 . According to Citizenship and Immigration Canada , there are three main classifications for immigrants : Family class ( persons closely related to Canadian residents ) , Economic class ( admitted on the basis of a point system that accounts for age , health and labour-market skills required for cost effectively inducting the immigrants into Canada 's labour market ) and Refugee class ( those seeking protection by applying to remain in the country by way of the Canadian immigration and refugee law ) . In 2008 , there were 65,567 immigrants in the family class , 21,860 refugees , and 149,072 economic immigrants amongst the 247,243 total immigrants to the country . Canada resettles over one in 10 of the world ’ s refugees and has one of the highest per-capita immigration rates in the world .

As of a 2010 report by the Asia Pacific Foundation of Canada , there were 2.8 million Canadian citizens abroad . This represents about 8 % of the total Canadian population . Of those living abroad , the United States , Hong Kong , the United Kingdom , Taiwan , China , Lebanon , United Arab Emirates and Australia have the largest Canadian diaspora . Canadians in the United States constitute the greatest single expatriate community at over 1 million in 2009 , representing 35.8 % of all Canadians abroad . Under current Canadian law , Canada does not restrict dual citizenship but Passport Canada encourages its citizens to travel abroad on their Canadian passport , so they can access Canadian consular services .

Canada has 34 ethnic groups with at least 100,000 members each , of which 11 have over 1 million people and numerous others are represented in smaller amounts . According to the 2006 census , the largest self-reported ethnic origin is " Canadian " ( 32 % ) , followed by English ( 21 % ) , French ( 15.8 % ) , Scottish ( 15.1 % ) , Irish ( 13.9 % ) , German ( 10.2 % ) , Italian ( 4.6 % ) , Chinese ( 4.3 % ) , North American Indian ( 4.0 % ) , Ukrainian ( 3.9 % ) , and Dutch ( Netherlands ) ( 3.3 % ) . In the 2006 census , over five million Canadians identified themselves as a member of a visible minority . Together , they make up 16.2 % of the total population : most numerous among these are South Asian ( 4.0 % ) , Black ( 2.5 % ) , and Filipino ( 1.1 % ) . Aboriginal peoples are not considered a visible minority under the Employment Equity Act , and this is the definition that Statistics Canada also uses .

Canada 's culture is a product of its ethnicities , languages , religions , political and legal system ( s ) . Canada has been shaped by waves of migration that have combined to form a unique blend of art , cuisine , literature , humour and music . Today , Canada has a diverse makeup of nationalities and constitutional protection for policies that promote multiculturalism rather than cultural assimilation . In Quebec , cultural identity is strong , and many French-speaking commentators speak of a Quebec culture distinct from English Canadian culture . However , as a whole , Canada is a cultural mosaic : a collection of several regional , aboriginal , and ethnic subcultures . Canadian government policies such as official bilingualism ; publicly funded health care ; higher and more progressive taxation ; outlawing capital punishment ; strong efforts to eliminate poverty ; strict gun control ; leniency in regard to drug use , and , most recently , legalizing same-sex marriage are social indicators of Canada 's political and cultural values . American media and entertainment are popular , if not dominant , in English Canada ; conversely , many Canadian cultural products and entertainers are successful in the United States and worldwide . The Government of Canada has also influenced culture with programs , laws and institutions . It has created Crown corporations to promote Canadian culture through media and has also tried to protect Canadian culture by setting legal minimums on Canadian content .

Canadian culture has historically been influenced by Aboriginal , French and British cultures and traditions . Most of Canada 's territory was inhabited and developed later than other European colonies in the Americas , with the result that themes and symbols of pioneers , trappers , and traders were important in the early development of the Canadian identity . First Nations played a critical part in the development of European colonies in Canada , particularly for their role in assisting exploration of the continent during the North American fur trade . The British conquest of New France in the mid-1700s brought a large Francophone population under British Imperial rule , creating a need for compromise and accommodation . The new British rulers left alone much of the religious , political , and social culture of the French-speaking habitants , guaranteeing through the Quebec Act of 1774 the right of the Canadiens to practise the Catholic faith and to use French civil law ( now Quebec law ) . The Constitution Act of 1867 was designed to meet the growing calls of Canadians for autonomy from British rule , while avoiding the overly strong decentralization that contributed to the Civil War in the United States . The compromises made by the Fathers of Confederation set Canadians on a path to bilingualism , and this in turn contributed to an acceptance of diversity .

The Canadian Forces and overall civilian participation in the First World War and Second World War helped to foster Canadian nationalism , however in 1917 and 1944 conscription crisis ' highlighted the considerable rift along ethnic lines between Anglophones and Francophones . As a result of the First and Second World Wars , the Government of Canada became more assertive and less deferential to British authority . With the gradual loosening of political ties to the United Kingdom and the modernization of Canadian immigration policies , 20th-century immigrants with African , Caribbean and Asian nationalities have added to the Canadian identity and its culture . The multiple-origins immigration pattern continues today with the arrival of large numbers of immigrants from non-British or non-French backgrounds . Multiculturalism in Canada was adopted as the official policy of the government during the premiership of Pierre Elliot Trudeau in the 1970s and 1980s . The Canadian government has often been described as the instigator of multicultural ideology because of its public emphasis on the social importance of immigration . Multiculturalism is administered by the Department of Citizenship and Immigration and reflected in the law through the Canadian Multiculturalism Act and section 27 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms .

Canada as a nation is religiously diverse , encompassing a wide range of groups , beliefs and customs . The preamble to the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms references " God " , and the monarch carries the title of " Defender of the Faith " . However Canada has no official religion , and support for religious pluralism ( Freedom of religion in Canada ) is an important part of Canada 's political culture . With the role of Christianity in decline , having once been central and integral to Canadian culture and daily life ; commentators have suggested that Canada has come to enter a post-Christian period in a secular state , with irreligion in Canada on the rise . The majority of Canadians consider religion to be unimportant in their daily lives , but still believe in God . The practice of religion is now generally considered a private matter throughout society and within the state . The 2011 Canadian census reported that 67.3 % of Canadians identify as being Christians ; of this number , Catholics make up the largest group , accounting for 38.7 percent of the population . The largest Protestant denomination is the United Church of Canada ( accounting for 6.1 % of Canadians ) ; followed by Anglicans ( 5.0 % ) , and Baptists ( 1.9 % ) . About 23.9 % of Canadians declare no religious affiliation , including agnostics , atheists , humanists , and other groups . The remaining are affiliated with non-Christian religions , the largest of which is Islam ( 3.2 % ) , followed by Hinduism ( 1.5 % ) , Sikhism ( 1.4 % ) , Buddhism ( 1.1 % ) , and Judaism ( 1.0 % ) .

Before the arrival of European colonists and explorers , First Nations followed a wide array of mostly animistic religions . During the colonial period , the French settled along the shores of the Saint Lawrence River , specifically Latin Rite Roman Catholics , including a number of Jesuits dedicated to converting Aboriginals ; an effort that eventually proved successful . The first large Protestant communities were formed in the Maritimes after the British conquest of New France , followed by American Protestant settlers displaced by the American Revolution . The late nineteenth century saw the beginning of a substantive shift in Canadian immigration patterns . Large numbers of Irish and Southern Europeans immigrants were creating new Roman Catholic communities in English Canada . The settlement of the west brought significant Eastern Orthodox immigrants from Eastern Europe and Mormon and Pentecostal immigrants from the United States . The earliest documentation of Jewish presence in Canada occurs in the 1754 British Army records from the French and Indian War . In 1760 , General Jeffrey Amherst , 1st Baron Amherst attacked and won Montreal for the British . In his regiment there were several Jews , including four among his officer corps , most notably Lieutenant Aaron Hart who is considered the father of Canadian Jewry . The Islamic , Jains , Sikh , Hindu and Buddhist communities , although small , are as old as the nation itself . The 1871 Canadian Census ( first " Canadian " national census ) indicated thirteen Muslims among the populace , with approximately 5000 Sikh by 1908 . The first Canadian mosque was constructed in Edmonton , in 1938 , when there were approximately 700 Muslims in Canada . Buddhism first arrived in Canada when Japanese immigrated during the late 19th century . The first Japanese Buddhist temple in Canada was built in Vancouver in 1905 . The influx of immigrants in the late 20th century , with Sri Lankan , Japanese , Indian and Southeast Asian customs , has contributed to the recent expansion of the Jain , Sikh , Hindu and Buddhist communities .

A multitude of languages are used by 35 million Canadians , with English and French ( the official languages ) being the mother tongues of approximately 60 % and 20 % of Canadians respectively . In 2011 , nearly 6.8 million Canadians listed a non-official language as their mother tongue . Some of the most common non-official first languages include Chinese ( mainly Cantonese ; 1,072,555 first-language speakers ) , Punjabi ( 430,705 ) , Spanish ( 410,670 ) , German ( 409,200 ) , and Italian ( 407,490 ) . Less than one percent of Canadians ( just over 250,000 individuals ) can speak an aboriginal language . About half this number ( 129,865 ) reported using an aboriginal language on a daily basis . Additionally , Canadians speak several sign languages ; it is unknown the number of speakers of the most spoken languages , ASL and LSQ , nor of Maritime Sign Language or of Plains Sign Talk . There are only 47 speakers of the Inuit language Inuiuuk . English and French are recognized by the Constitution of Canada as official languages . Thus all federal government laws are enacted in both English and French with government services available in both languages . Two of Canada 's territories give official status to indigenous languages . In Nunavut , Inuktitut and Inuinnaqtun are official languages alongside the national languages of English and French , and Inuktitut is a common vehicular language in territorial government . In the Northwest Territories , the Official Languages Act declares that there are eleven different languages : Chipewyan , Cree , English , French , Gwich ’ in , Inuinnaqtun , Inuktitut , Inuvialuktun , North Slavey , South Slavey and Tłįchǫ . Multicultural media are widely accessible across the county and offer specialty television channels , newspapers and other publications in many minority languages .

In Canada , as elsewhere in the world of European colonies , the frontier of European exploration and settlement tended to be a linguistically diverse and fluid place , as cultures using different languages met and interacted . The need for a common means of communication between the indigenous inhabitants and new arrivals for the purposes of trade , and ( in some cases ) intermarriage , led to the development of Mixed languages . Languages like Michif , Chinook Jargon and Bungi creole tended to be highly localized and were often spoken by only a small number of individuals who were frequently capable of speaking another language . Reaching across Canada , the United States and into Mexico existed Plains Sign Talk which functioned originally as a trade language used to communicate internationally and across linguistic borders .

Prinzregent Luitpold was 172.4 m ( 565 ft 7 in ) long overall and displaced a maximum of 27,000 metric tons ( 26,570 long tons ) . She had a beam of 29 m ( 95 ft 2 in ) and a draft of 9.1 m ( 29 ft 10 in ) forward and 8.8 m ( 28 ft 10 in ) aft . She had a crew of 41 officers and 1,043 enlisted men . Prinzregent Luitpold was powered by two sets of Parsons steam turbines , supplied with steam by 14 coal-fired boilers . Unlike her four sisters , the ship was intended to use a diesel engine on the center shaft , but this was not ready by the time work on the ship was completed . The engine was never installed , and so Prinzregent Luitpold was slightly slower than her sisters , which were equipped with a third turbine on the center shaft . The powerplant produced a top speed of 21.7 knots ( 40.2 km / h ; 25.0 mph ) . She carried 3,600 metric tons ( 3,540 long tons ) of coal , which enabled a maximum range of 7,900 nautical miles ( 14,630 km ; 9,090 mi ) at a cruising speed of 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) .

Prinzregent Luitpold was armed with a main battery of ten 30.5 cm SK L / 50 guns in five twin turrets . The ship dispensed with the inefficient hexagonal turret arrangement of previous German battleships ; instead , three of the five turrets were mounted on the centerline , one forward and two of them arranged in a superfiring pair aft . The other two turrets were placed en echelon amidships , such that both could fire on the broadside . The ship was also armed with fourteen 15 cm ( 5.9 in ) SK L / 45 guns in casemates amidships , eight 8.8 cm ( 3.5 in ) SK L / 45 guns in casemates and four 8.8 cm L / 45 anti-aircraft guns . The ship 's armament was rounded out by five 50 cm ( 20 in ) torpedo tubes , all mounted in the hull ; one was in the bow , and the other four were on the broadside .

Ordered under the contract name Ersatz Odin as a replacement for the obsolete coastal defense ship Odin , Prinzregent Luitpold was laid down at the Howaldtswerke dockyard in Kiel in October 1910 . She was launched on 17 February 1912 and christened by Princess Theresa of Bavaria ; Ludwig III , the last king of Bavaria and the son of the ship 's namesake , Luitpold , Prince Regent of Bavaria , gave a speech . After fitting-out work was completed , the ship was commissioned into the fleet on 19 August 1913 . Prinzregent Luitpold was equipped with facilities for a squadron commander , and became the flagship of the III Battle Squadron upon commissioning . Directly after commissioning , Prinzregent Luitpold took part in the annual autumn maneuvers , which followed the fleet cruise to Norway . The exercises lasted from 31 August to 9 September . Unit drills and individual ship training were conducted in October and November . In early 1914 , Prinzregent Luitpold participated in additional ship and unit training . The annual spring maneuvers were conducted in the North Sea at the end of March . Further fleet exercises followed in April and May in the Baltic and North Seas . The ship went to Kiel Week that year . Despite the rising international tensions following the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand on 28 June , the High Seas Fleet began its summer cruise to Norway on 13 July . During the last peacetime cruise of the Imperial Navy , the fleet conducted drills off Skagen before proceeding to the Norwegian fjords on 25 July . The following day the fleet began to steam back to Germany , as a result of Austria-Hungary 's ultimatum to Serbia . On the 27th , the entire fleet assembled off Cape Skadenes before returning to port , where they remained at a heightened state of readiness . War between Austria-Hungary and Serbia broke out the following day , and in the span of a week all of the major European powers had joined the conflict .

Prinzregent Luitpold was present during the first sortie by the German fleet into the North Sea , which took place on 2 – 3 November 1914 . No British forces were encountered during the operation . A second operation followed on 15 – 16 December . This sortie was the initiation of a strategy adopted by Admiral Friedrich von Ingenohl , the commander of the High Seas Fleet . He intended to use the battlecruisers of Rear Admiral Franz von Hipper 's I Scouting Group to raid British coastal towns to lure out portions of the British Grand Fleet where they could be destroyed by the High Seas Fleet . Early on 15 December the fleet left port to raid the towns of Scarborough , Hartlepool , and Whitby . That evening , the German battle fleet of some twelve dreadnoughts — including Prinzregent Luitpold and her four sisters — and eight pre-dreadnoughts came to within 10 nmi ( 19 km ; 12 mi ) of an isolated squadron of six British battleships . However , skirmishes between the rival destroyer screens in the darkness convinced von Ingenohl that he was faced with the entire Grand Fleet . Under orders from Kaiser Wilhelm II to avoid risking the fleet unnecessarily , von Ingenohl broke off the engagement and turned the battle fleet back toward Germany .

Prinzregent Luitpold went into the Baltic for squadron training from 23 to 29 January 1916 . While on the maneuvers , the newer battleship König became the III Squadron flagship . Vice Admiral Reinhard Scheer , the commander of III Squadron , lowered his flag on 24 January and transferred it to König . The Kaiser removed von Ingenohl from his post on 2 February , following the loss of the armored cruiser SMS Blücher at the Battle of Dogger Bank the month before . Admiral Hugo von Pohl succeeded him as the commander of the fleet . Pohl continued the policy of sweeps into the North Sea to destroy isolated British formations . On 24 April , Prinzregent Luitpold ran aground in the Kaiser Wilhelm Canal , though she was freed without causing significant damage . A series of advances into the North Sea were conducted throughout the rest of 1915 ; Prinzregent Luitpold was present for the sweeps on 17 – 18 May , 29 – 30 May , 10 August , 11 – 12 September , and 23 – 24 October . The III Squadron completed the year with another round of unit training in the Baltic on 5 – 20 December .

Prinzregent Luitpold engaged the nearest target her gunners could make out , one of the Lion-class battlecruisers , at a range of some 22,300 yd ( 20,400 m ) , though her shots fell short . Beatty 's ships increased speed and at 17 : 51 veered away to further increase the distance to the III Squadron battleships . At 18 : 08 , Prinzregent Luitpold shifted her fire to the battleship Malaya at a range of 19,100 yd ( 17,500 m ) , though without any success . By 18 : 38 , Malaya disappeared in the haze and Prinzregent Luitpold was forced to cease fire . The British destroyers Nestor and Nomad , which had been disabled earlier in the engagement , lay directly in the path of the advancing High Seas Fleet . Prinzregent Luitpold and her three sisters destroyed Nomad with their secondary guns while the I Squadron battleships dispatched Nestor . At around 19 : 00 , the German battle line came into contact with the 2nd Light Cruiser Squadron ; Prinzregent Luitpold fired two salvos from her main battery at an unidentified four-funneled cruiser at 19 : 03 but made no hits . Shortly after 19 : 00 , the German cruiser Wiesbaden had become disabled by a shell from the British battlecruiser Invincible ; Rear Admiral Paul Behncke in König attempted to maneuver the III Squadron to cover the stricken cruiser . Simultaneously , the British 3rd and 4th Light Cruiser Squadrons began a torpedo attack on the German line ; while advancing to torpedo range , they smothered Wiesbaden with fire from their main guns . The eight III Squadron battleships fired on the British cruisers , but even sustained fire from the battleships ' main guns failed to drive off the British cruisers . The armored cruisers Defence , Warrior , and Black Prince joined in the attack on the crippled Wiesbaden . Between 19 : 14 and 19 : 17 , several German battleships and battlecruisers opened fire on Defence and Warrior . Instead of joining the fire on the much closer cruisers , Prinzregent Luitpold engaged the leading battleships of the British line , firing a total of 21 salvos . The gunners reported ranges of 17,500 to 18,800 yd ( 16,000 to 17,200 m ) , though this was an overestimation that caused the ship 's salvos to fall past their intended target .

By 20 : 00 , the German line was ordered to complete a 180-degree turn eastward to disengage from the British fleet . The maneuver , conducted under heavy fire , caused disorganization in the German fleet . Kaiserin had come too close to Prinzregent Luitpold and was forced to haul out of line to starboard to avoid a collision . Prinzregent Luitpold came up alongside Kaiserin at high speed , which forced Kaiserin to remain out of line temporarily . The turn reversed the order of the German line ; Prinzregent Luitpold was now the eighth ship from the rear of the German line , leading the III Squadron . At around 23 : 30 , the German fleet reorganized into the night-cruising formation . Kaiserin was the eleventh ship , in the center of the 24-ship line . After a series of night engagements between the leading battleships and British destroyers , the High Seas Fleet punched through the British light forces and reached Horns Reef by 04 : 00 on 1 June . The German fleet reached Wilhelmshaven a few hours later ; the I Squadron battleships took up defensive positions in the outer roadstead , and Prinzregent Luitpold , Kaiserin , Kaiser , and Kronprinz stood ready just outside the entrance to Wilhelmshaven . The remainder of the battleships and battlecruisers entered Wilhelmshaven , where those that were still in fighting condition replenished their stocks of coal and ammunition . In the course of the battle , Prinzregent Luitpold fired one-hundred and sixty-nine 30.5 cm shells and one-hundred and six 15 cm rounds . She and her crew emerged from the battle completely unscathed .

In early August , Prinzregent Luitpold and the rest of the operational III Squadron units conducted divisional training in the Baltic . On 18 August , Admiral Scheer attempted a repeat of the 31 May operation ; the two serviceable German battlecruisers — Moltke and Von der Tann — supported by three dreadnoughts , were to bombard the coastal town of Sunderland in an attempt to draw out and destroy Beatty 's battlecruisers . The rest of the fleet , including Prinzregent Luitpold , would trail behind and provide cover . During the operation , Prinzregent Luitpold carried the Commander of U-boats . On the approach to the English coast , Scheer turned north after receiving a false report from a zeppelin about a British unit in the area . As a result , the bombardment was not carried out , and by 14 : 35 , Scheer had been warned of the Grand Fleet 's approach and so turned his forces around and retreated to German ports . Another fleet advance followed on 18 – 20 October , though it ended without encountering any British units . Two weeks later , on 4 November , Prinzregent Luitpold took part in an expedition to the western coast of Denmark to assist two U-boats — U-20 and U-30 — that had become stranded there . The fleet was reorganized on 1 December ; the four König-class battleships remained in III Squadron , along with the newly commissioned Bayern , while the five Kaiser-class ships , including Prinzregent Luitpold , were transferred to IV Squadron . Prinzregent Luitpold became the flagship of the new squadron . In the Wilhelmshaven Roads on 20 January 1917 , the ship struck a steel hawser that became entangled in the ship 's starboard propeller . In March , Friedrich der Grosse was replaced as the fleet flagship by the newly commissioned battleship Baden . Friedrich der Grosse in turn replaced Prinzregent Luitpold as the flagship of IV Squadron . Steadily decreasing morale and discontent with rations provoked a series of small mutinies in the fleet . On 6 June and 19 July , stokers protested the low quality of the food they were given , and on 2 August , some 800 men went on a hunger strike . The ship 's officers relented and agreed to form a Menagekommission , a council that gave the enlisted men a voice in their ration selection and preparation . One of the ringleaders of the protests , however , was arrested and executed on 5 September .

The operation began on the morning of 12 October , when Moltke and the III Squadron ships engaged Russian positions in Tagga Bay while Prinzregent Luitpold and the rest of IV Squadron shelled Russian gun batteries on the Sworbe Peninsula on Ösel . Prinzregent Luitpold , along with Kaiser and Kaiserin , were tasked with silencing the Russian guns at Hundsort which had taken Moltke under fire . The ships opened fire at 05 : 44 , and by 07 : 45 , Russian firing had ceased and German troops were moving ashore . Two days later , Vice Admiral Wilhelm Souchon left Tagga Bay with Prinzregent Luitpold , Friedrich der Grosse , and Kaiserin to support German ground forces advancing on the Sworbe Peninsula . By 20 October , the fighting on the islands was winding down ; Moon , Ösel , and Dagö were in German possession . The previous day , the Admiralstab had ordered the cessation of naval actions and the return of the dreadnoughts to the High Seas Fleet as soon as possible . On the 24th , Prinzregent Luitpold was detached from the task force and returned to Kiel . After arriving in Kiel , Prinzregent Luitpold went into drydock for periodic maintenance , from which she emerged on 21 December . She then proceeded on to Wilhelmshaven , where she resumed guard duty in the Bight . On 17 March 1918 , the ship steamed to the Baltic for training exercises , and the following day the battlecruiser Derfflinger rammed her outside Kiel . The accident caused no serious damage , however . The ship participated in the fruitless advance to Norway on 23 – 25 April 1918 , after which she resumed guard duties in the German Bight .

Michèle Mouton ( born 23 June 1951 ) is a French former rally driver . Competing in the World Rally Championship for the Audi factory team , she took four victories and finished runner-up in the drivers ' world championship in 1982 . She is still the last woman to compete in top-level rallying . Mouton debuted in rallying as a co-driver but quickly moved to the driver 's seat , steering an Alpine-Renault A110 in national rallies . In 1975 , she competed in circuit racing and won the two-litre prototype class in the 24 Hours of Le Mans . After being signed by Fiat France for 1977 , Mouton finished runner-up to Bernard Darniche in the European Rally Championship . She went on to win the 1978 Tour de France Automobile and record consistent results in her home events in the WRC ; the Tour de Corse and the Monte Carlo Rally . For 1981 , Audi Sport signed Mouton to partner Hannu Mikkola . In her first year with the Audi Quattro , she took a surprise victory at the Rallye Sanremo . In the 1982 season , Mouton finished a close second overall to Walter Röhrl , after wins in Portugal , Brazil and Greece , and helped Audi to its first manufacturers ' title . Her campaign the following year resulted in fifth place . With the team having four top drivers for 1984 , Mouton 's participation on world championship level became part-time . In 1985 , she won the Pikes Peak International Hill Climb in the United States , setting a record time in the process . In 1986 , she moved to Peugeot and won the German Rally Championship as the first female driver to win a major championship in rallying . Soon after securing the title , Mouton retired from rallying due to the ban of Group B supercars . In 1988 , she co-founded the international motorsport event Race of Champions in memory of her former rival Henri Toivonen . Mouton became the first president of the FIA 's Women & Motor Sport Commission in 2010 and the FIA 's manager in the World Rally Championship in 2011 .

Michèle Mouton was born 23 June 1951 in Grasse , a town on the French Riviera known for its perfume industry , close to the mountain stages famously featured in French rallies . Her parents grew roses and jasmine on their large property . After graduating from high school , Mouton began law studies , but would soon drop out and concentrate on a career in rallying . Although Mouton began driving her father 's Citroën 2CV when she was 14 years old , she did not turn her interest to rallying until 1972 , when her friend Jean Taibi asked her to practise the Tour de Corse with him . Mouton later co-drove for him in the 1973 Monte Carlo Rally , the first-ever World Rally Championship ( WRC ) event . After a few more rallies , Mouton 's father suggested a switch to driving if she wanted to continue in rallying , and promised to buy her a car and give her one-year to prove herself . Driving an Alpine-Renault A110 , she debuted at the Critérium Féminin Paris-Saint-Raphaël and then tackled the Tour de France Automobile . In the Île de Beauté , a complementary event to the Tour de Corse at the end of 1973 , Mouton finished eighth overall .

In the World Rally Championship , Mouton made her driver debut in 1974 , finishing 12th in the Tour de Corse in an Alpine A110 . It was rumoured her good performances were the result of a special engine , however her car passed inspection by WRC scrutineers . At the end of the year , Mouton was crowned both French and European ladies ' champion . Re-entering the Tour de Corse the following season , she took seventh place . Mouton successfully defended her ladies ' titles , and also competed in circuit racing : In an all-female team with Christine Dacremont and Marianne Hoepfner , she won the two-litre prototype category of the 1975 24 Hours of Le Mans . Recalling the race in 2008 , Mouton said : " It started to rain I remember , and I started to pass everybody . I was running on slicks . In the pits they were saying ' Michele you must stop ' , but I did not want to because I was passing everyone . " Her results attracted a major sponsor in the form of the French oil company Elf . In 1976 , Mouton drove the A110 to 11th place in Monte Carlo and retired at the Rallye Sanremo . At the Tour de Corse , her debut in the newer A310 also ended in retirement .

For the 1977 season , Fiat France signed Mouton to partner Jean-Claude Andruet . She was not impressed by the handling of the Fiat 131 Abarth , stating it was " like a big truck , not a car " and " terrible to drive " . However , the car would prove successful and Mouton put in very consistent results , finishing eighth in the Tour de Corse in 1977 and fifth three years in a row from 1978 to 1980 . In 1980 , she had been running as high as second before her engine died for a time . In Monte Carlo , she drove the car to seventh place in 1979 and 1980 , equalling the result she had achieved in the event in a Lancia Stratos HF in 1978 . Outside the World Rally Championship , Mouton drove a Porsche Carrera RS to victory in the 1977 RACE Rallye de España and to second place in the 1977 Tour de France Automobile . She also finished runner-up to Bernard Darniche in the overall European Rally Championship ( ERC ) . Mouton went on to win the Tour de France with the 131 Abarth the following year . At the Rallye d 'Antibes , she finished third behind the Stratos drivers Darniche and Attilio Bettega . She placed fifth in the ERC standings and fourth in the Fédération Internationale de l 'Automobile ( FIA ) Cup for Drivers , the predecessor to the drivers ' world championship . In 1979 , Mouton finished second in the French Rally Championship , behind Porsche 911 SC driver Bernard Béguin .

In 1980 , Audi Sport , Audi 's new factory team , called Mouton and signed her for a World Rally Championship programme for the 1981 season . Mouton described Audi 's call as " a complete shock " . Audi 's decision to nominate her instead of established male rivals attracted a great deal of publicity . As the Audi Quattro , the first rally car to have over 300 bhp and both a turbocharger and four-wheel-drive , had not yet gained FIA homologation , Audi could only enter rallies as zero cars and not as competitive entries . Hannu Mikkola debuted the car in the Algarve Rally in October , and would have won by about thirty minutes had his times been officially registered . Mouton joined Freddy Kottulinsky for the final round of the Finnish Rally Championship , the Northern Lights , and also showed encouraging pace on the slippery surfaces . Mouton initially found the car understeering , but became more comfortable after switching to left-foot braking , as advised by Mikkola who was in charge of developing the car . Audi announced their participation in eight events in 1981 , although Mouton would not be entered in the Swedish Rally due to her lack of experience on driving on ice and snow .

Mouton 's first competitive run in the Quattro in Monte Carlo ended before it had even begun . She withdrew from the event before the start due to apparent engine problems . The team later discovered that dirt had got into the fuel system . At the Rally Portugal , she started her long partnership with the Italian co-driver Fabrizia Pons . Mouton won seven stages and took a career-best fourth place , despite suffering from electronic problems . This ended criticism of Audi for signing a female driver . After a retirement due to a broken camshaft in the Tour de Corse , Mouton set several fastest times at the Acropolis Rally in Greece . While Mikkola was leading and Mouton fifth , the stewards excluded the Quattros citing homologation infractions . Although Audi protested , the stewards upheld the decision . In her debut in the high-speed 1000 Lakes Rally in Finland , Mouton found it hard to get used to the rhythm changes . She recorded a few top-ten stage times and finished 13th . She was satisfied with her performance , and the local newspaper Keskisuomalainen described her debut as successful . At the Rallye Sanremo in Italy , a mixed surface event with tarmac and gravel , Mouton took the lead when the local star Michele Cinotto crashed and held off Henri Toivonen and Ari Vatanen to take the victory . This marked the first time a female driver had won a world championship event in rallying . Mouton 's male rivals were left speechless . Earlier during the weekend , Vatanen had been confident : " Never can nor will I lose to a woman . " Mouton recalled her debut win in a 2008 interview for RallySport Magazine :

I remember not just because it was a win , but also because it was a big fight right into the last night . Fabrizia reminded me the other night that we had a problem with the brake pads , so we lost a lot of time . We finished three days rallying ( with one day to go ) , night and day , 32 seconds in front of Ari Vatanen . We drove the last special stage for the night , came back to the hotel and I could not sleep at all , four hours in front of me and no sleep . Then I arrive at the special stage , it 's about 42km long , and I look at Fabrizia and I said " OK , we forget everything , and we are at the first stage of the rally again , because one of us will crash . " And so Ari hit a rock , and we won the rally . In the season-ending RAC Rally in Great Britain , Mouton continued her good performances by running third at half distance , despite having been uncomfortable about competing in a rally where pacenotes and practice are not allowed . However , her Quattro later incurred gearbox problems and she retired from fifth place after sliding off the road into a snow-filled ditch . Mouton would later state : " For me , rallying is England . No pacenotes – just you in the car having to do the fastest time . This , to me , is rallying . OK , it was not easy for me because I did not have experience there of the British championship , but it is really rallying . I like it very much . " Mouton finished the season in eighth place in the drivers ' championship , while Audi was fifth in the manufacturers ' standings .

Mouton 's 1982 season started with a big accident at the Monte Carlo Rally . On stage twelve in the small town Briançonnet in Provence , she missed a patch of ice and slid off the road , crashing into the stone wall of a large house at 110 km / h ( 70 mph ) . Mouton injured her knee while Pons suffered a concussion . She had been in third place , and had set the fastest time for the difficult Col de Turini mountain pass . The pair 's injuries were not serious and Mouton went on to make her debut in the Swedish Rally . She was running third when she slid into a snow bank , and crashed into the Quattro of teammate Hannu Mikkola who had gone off at the same place . She eventually finished fifth . In Portugal , Mouton recorded 18 stage wins on her way to a clear victory ahead of Toyota 's Per Eklund . She once admitted that to be competitive in the rally , she tried to think of the large crowds right by the side of the route as trees . At the Tour de Corse , she could not match the pace of the leaders and finished seventh . At the Acropolis Rally , Mouton won ahead of the Opel duo Walter Röhrl and Henri Toivonen , and closed to within 20 points of the championship leader Röhrl . The event was overshadowed by two serious accidents , one of which killed a spectator . Mouton had commented : " I 'm afraid that something might break in my car and I can no longer avoid hitting a spectator . "

In New Zealand , Mouton continued her good performances and traded the lead with Mikkola , Röhrl and Björn Waldegård . Soon after regaining the lead on stage twelve , she retired with a broken oil pump . After seven rounds , Mouton was second in the championship , 32 points behind Röhrl and 12 ahead of Eklund . The Rally of Brazil was marred by the fatal accident of Brazilian driver Thomas Fuchs , and featured chaotic conditions as parts of the course were not successfully closed for competition . Although only five teams made it to the finish , Mouton improved her title hopes by winning her duel with Röhrl after the German lost a wheel on the last day . At the 1000 Lakes , she clocked in the eighth fastest time for the famous Ouninpohja stage and placed seventh after the first day . On the following leg , Mouton drove too fast into a jump and damaged her Quattro while landing . After the next jump , her front wheels locked up and she rolled the car . Mouton was next locked in a tight battle for the win in Sanremo . Although she recorded nine stage wins and Audi took a one-two , she had to settle for fourth behind Röhrl .

Audi had not originally planned to participate in the African marathon events , but now found it necessary to enter the penultimate round , the Rallye Côte d 'Ivoire , due to their title battles with Opel . Just before the start of the event , Mouton received news that her father had succumbed to cancer in his house in Nice . His last wish was that Mouton start the rally . After a first day of over 1,200 kilometres ( 750 miles ) of racing in temperatures over 30 ° C ( 86 ° F ) , she was eight minutes clear of Mikkola and nearly half an hour ahead of title rival Röhrl . Mikkola said that he had never been in such a hot car , and Röhrl estimated that the temperature inside his car reached an " almost unbearable " 70 ° C. With just over half of the 5,000 km ( 3,100 mi ) behind , Mouton led from Röhrl by over an hour despite losing 25 minutes due to transmission problems . On the third day , both Mouton and Röhrl struggled with several reliability issues and her lead over Röhrl shrank to 18 minutes . The Toyota Celica GT2000s of Eklund and Waldegård were still over two hours behind . Should Mouton go on to hold off Röhrl , she would reduce Röhrl 's lead in the championship to just two points . As a driver 's seven best results counted towards the championship at the time , Mouton would only need a third place in the RAC Rally to take the title even if Röhrl would win . On the final day , she continued to suffer from mechanical problems and had the complete fuel injection system changed . For the next time control , Röhrl and Mouton arrived almost simultaneously . With only 600 km to go , Mouton went off the road and rolled her car . She drove the severely damaged Quattro for five more kilometres before giving up .

Röhrl inherited the win and became the first two-time world champion in rallying . Having lost her father , Mouton did not dwell on losing the title . Röhrl had earlier conceded that he " would have accepted second place in the championship to Mikkola " , but not to Mouton : " This is not because I doubt her capabilities as a driver , but because she is a woman . " He believed that defeat would have devalued his performances . At the RAC , Mouton edged out Toivonen to take second place behind Mikkola . This result made Audi the first German marque to win the manufacturers ' world title . At the inaugural Autosport Awards gala , Mouton won the International Rally Driver of the Year award .

The 1983 season started the Group B era of the WRC and Mouton was now at the wheel of the Audi Quattro A1 . She also had a new teammate ; Audi had signed Stig Blomqvist as their third regular driver . For the third year in a row , Mouton had a bad start to her season in Monte Carlo . She went off the road on a stage not far from her home town , and again hit a stone wall at over 100 km / h ( 60 mph ) . The car was destroyed , but Mouton and Pons were unharmed . Mouton explained to her team boss Roland Gumpert , later of Gumpert supercar fame , that she had had to dodge a photographer . Mouton went on to record successive points finishes . She finished fourth in Sweden in a quadruple win for Audi , after an early driving error that had sent her Quattro into a snow bank . In Portugal , Mouton finished second to Mikkola , ahead of Lancia 's Röhrl and Markku Alén . After the first section of the Safari Rally , totaling over 1,600 km ( 1,000 mi ) , Mouton arrived to the finish on three wheels and said she was " totally exhausted " from the effort . She eventually placed third behind Opel 's Ari Vatanen and her teammate Mikkola . After four events , Mikkola and Mouton were first and second in the drivers ' championship .

At the Tour de Corse , Audi debuted the Quattro A2 , which was 70 kg ( 155 lb ) lighter and had an engine producing 30 more horsepower . Mouton 's rally ended when her engine caught on fire . On the first stage in Greece , she rolled her car on a hairpin turn 18 km ( 11 mi ) from the start . Rally New Zealand was for Mouton a repetition of the previous year ; she took the lead on the seventh stage and held on to it until her A2 's engine failed , with only six of the 33 stages to go . The three retirements in a row dropped Mouton to fifth place in the championship . She then finished third behind Mikkola and Blomqvist at the Rally Argentina , but this would remain her last podium finish of the season . At the 1000 Lakes in Finland , Mouton finished the first day in seventh place after setting two top-five stage times . Her car later caught on fire , but she was able to continue in the event by following Mikkola 's advice and driving into a lake . With a string of top-ten times , she eventually finished 16th . In the Rallye Sanremo , the tarmac stages were dominated by the Lancia 037 and Mouton finished seventh after suffering from fuel injection problems . In the season-ending RAC Rally , she started well and held second place after the first twelve stages . An Audi mechanic later accidentally refilled Mouton 's fuel tank with pure water which resulted in time-consuming repairs . She eventually retired after crashing out , and placed fifth overall in the drivers ' championship . Although Mikkola beat Lancia 's Röhrl and Alén to the drivers ' title , Audi had lost the manufacturers ' title to Lancia after the latter 's triple win in Sanremo .

For the 1984 season , Audi added two-time world champion Walter Röhrl to their star line-up and Mouton now had a part-time role , competing in five WRC events . For the first time in nine years , she did not enter the Monte Carlo Rally . However , Mouton signed up to commentate the event for Radio Monte Carlo . She started her year well by finishing second at the Swedish Rally behind teammate and home favourite Blomqvist . Mouton later stated that " finishing second was fantastic . When you are out rallying on ice or snow in country like that it is like dancing . From one side to the other side . My dancing background helped my rallying . As soon as I started on gravel I liked it because of that . It was so nice to feel and move the car like that . Sweden , in ice and snow , like ballet ! " This would remain her last podium position in the World Rally Championship . In the Safari Rally , a rotor arm in Mouton 's Quattro failed and caused the turbo to break down as well . She retired after falling victim to the team 's ranking order ; as the repairs were expected to take too long , Gumpert ordered championship leader Blomqvist 's Quattro to be fixed by using Mouton 's sister car as spares . Her debut in the new Sport Quattro at the Acropolis Rally ended with engine overheating problems . In the 1000 Lakes , Mouton placed ninth after the short first day . She later crashed and continued without a windscreen , but the damage to her Quattro could not be repaired in service . Mouton retired and left Finland pointless for the fourth year in a row . In late October , she signed a contract extension with Audi . At the RAC Rally , a slight mistake led to a puncture and Mouton dropped from third to fifth . She went on to narrowly lose the final podium spot to Toyota 's Per Eklund . Mouton 's results placed her 12th in the drivers ' world championship , a point behind Röhrl . Outside the WRC , Mouton debuted in the Pikes Peak International Hill Climb in the United States , driving an Audi Sport Quattro together with her usual co-driver Fabrizia Pons . After her main opponent Martin Schanche got hampered by a flat right front tyre she won the open rally category ( now known as unlimited ) in a record time and placed second overall , leaving behind several specialised V8 single-seaters that had normally dominated the race .

Audi 's WRC programme was limited for the 1985 season due to the recent defeats to Peugeot Talbot Sport , Peugeot 's factory team headed by Jean Todt . Mouton and Mikkola were assigned to testing and development duties . She drove both the Sport Quattro and its follower , the Quattro S1 ( Sport E2 ) . Mouton considered the S1 the most difficult rally car she had driven : " For rallying on asphalt , I agree the limit had gone too far . We did not have the reflexes to control it properly . It was tough to drive the car , but not the short Quattro before . " Although Mouton competed in only one world championship event during the season , she contested a full six-round British Rally Championship . Her campaign was plagued by reliability problems and she recorded only one finish . In the National Breakdown Rally , Mouton stopped after damaging her Quattro in a jump . After technical problems led to an early retirement at the Circuit of Ireland , she finished second at the Welsh Rally behind Malcolm Wilson in another Quattro . At the Scottish Rally , Mouton had been closing in on the leading Wilson until a transmission problem forced her to retire . At the Ulster Rally , she set the fastest time for the first stage but then dropped out with a mechanical failure . In the season-ending Manx International Rally , Mouton struggled to start her Quattro and then crashed out five stages later .

Mouton 's only WRC event of the year was the long-distance Rallye Côte d 'Ivoire . She was co-driven by Arne Hertz as Pons was ill at the time of the start . Mouton started well and tied the lead with Toyota 's Juha Kankkunen after the first day . Her Quattro incurred severe engine problems on the next day , but was seemingly repaired by Audi mechanics off the route in the jungle . At the same time , the Sport Quattro " chase car " , a high-speed service car , retired and Audi faced accusations of swapping the cars . The team withdrew Mouton just before the finish and the controversy remains unresolved ; the stewards did not find proof but the media published evidence afterwards . Although her rallying year was a disappointment , Mouton made a successful return to the Pikes Peak , winning the event overall in her Sport Quattro . Despite slippery conditions caused by a hailstorm , she broke Al Unser , Jr . ' s 1982 record by about thirteen seconds . The Frenchwoman 's win irritated some of her male rivals . Bobby Unser was reputedly quite vocal about his loss , to which Mouton is said to have replied : " If you have the balls you can try to race me back down as well . "

Mouton broke off her contract with Audi in late 1985 to join Peugeot for the coming season . She contested the German Rally Championship and two WRC events in a Peugeot 205 Turbo 16 , with which the marque had captured last year 's world titles . To replace the newly-wed Pons , Mouton recruited Terry Harryman who had been left jobless after Ari Vatanen 's accident . Mouton , nicknamed " der schwarze Vulkan " ( The Black Volcano ) due to her temperament and long black hair , won six of the eight events in the German championship , including the Rallye Deutschland . Although the Hessen Rallye was stopped after the severe accident of Formula One driver Marc Surer , which claimed the life of his co-driver Michel Wyder , Mouton was declared the winner . She secured the German national title on the seventh and penultimate round , the Sachs Baltic , after taking her fifth win of the season . She became the first female driver to win a major championship in rallying . Mouton 's WRC outings were her home events : Monte Carlo Rally and Tour de Corse . In Monte Carlo , she was running in eighth place after eleven stages , but soon retired with oil pump problems . For the Tour de Corse in May , Mouton was given the second evolution of the car . She quickly showed good pace and held third place behind Lancia 's Henri Toivonen and teammate Bruno Saby . However , she ran into gearbox trouble on the tenth stage and was forced to retire . During the next day , Toivonen and his co-driver Sergio Cresto crashed out from the lead and died in their seats . Mouton was still in Corsica and remarked to her boyfriend that " if they stop the Group B now , it will be the end for me . " Within days , FISA announced new regulations and banned the Group B supercars for the following year .

In 1988 , Mouton co-founded the international motorsport event Race of Champions with Fredrik Johnsson , in memory of Toivonen and to celebrate the tenth anniversary of the world championship for rally drivers . The event originally included the world 's top rally drivers , but now features stars also from other disciplines , such as Formula One , NASCAR , Le Mans and MotoGP , competing against each other in identical cars . In 1988 and 1989 , Mouton participated in rally raids as part of Peugeot 's service team for Ari Vatanen and Jacky Ickx . At the 1988 Rally of Tunisia , Mouton drove a 205 T16 Grand Raid chase car and transported spare parts for Vatanen and Henri Pescarolo , but also classified sixth overall . She later took part in the Dakar Rally as a press driver in 2004 and 2009 . In 2000 , Mouton finished second in the London – Sydney Marathon driving a Porsche 911 , behind former teammate Stig Blomqvist . After 22 years , Mouton and Fabrizia Pons reunited to compete in the 2008 Otago Classic Rally in New Zealand . In 2010 , Mouton competed with a 911 in the Rallye du Maroc and finished second to Grégoire De Mévius .

In 2010 , Mouton became the first president of the FIA 's Women & Motor Sport Commission . She stated that " for many years people have asked me why there have been no women following in my footsteps . I really hope the Commission can help answer that question and that we can attract and support women in all areas of our sport . " Having already headed a working group on the future of rallying , Mouton was appointed FIA 's manager in the World Rally Championship in 2011 . Mouton also serves in the nomination committee of the Rally Hall of Fame . In March 2012 , she recused herself after becoming a candidate for nomination . Mouton was inducted into the Hall of Fame along with two-time world champion Carlos Sainz .

While announcing her retirement from rallying , Mouton stated her intention to start a family with Corsican sports journalist Claude Guarnieri . She had her daughter Jessie ( Jessica ) in 1987 . Mouton credited her father Pierre 's support as the secret for her success : " He loved driving . He loved fast cars . And I think he would have loved to do what I did . He was a prisoner of war for five years and when he came back he never had the opportunity to compete . But he came to all the rallies I did . And my mother came , too . " Mouton states that in her mind she did not try to beat her male rivals , but to be at their level . She noted that in rallying the time is the most important thing . David Evans of Autosport described her as " motorsport 's most successful ever female driver . " Rally journalist and historian Graham Robson credits Mouton , along with Pat Moss , as " the driver by whom all other females measure their skills and achievements . " Mouton and Moss were of different eras and did not compete directly against each other , although they both appeared at the 1973 Monte Carlo Rally where Mouton co-drove . In 1985 , they swapped cars in a private test session with Moss driving the Quattro and Mouton an Austin-Healey 3000 . Stirling Moss regarded Mouton as " one of the best " , and Niki Lauda described her as a " superwoman " .

Daniel Marc Borislow ( September 21 , 1961 – July 21 , 2014 ) was an American entrepreneur , sports team owner , inventor , and thoroughbred horse breeder . Originating in the Philadelphia , Pennsylvania area , Borislow attended Widener University and worked in cable construction and landscaping before going into the telephone business . He founded Tel-Save , Inc. to resell access to AT & T long-distance lines in 1989 . Borislow took the company public in 1995 , and two years later brokered a $ 100 million deal with AOL that made it the exclusive telephone service of its users . At its peak in early 1998 , Tel-Save had sales of $ 300 million and was valued by Wall Street investors at $ 2 billion . However , due to the financial strain of paying off the AOL deal , Tel-Save lost $ 221 million in 1999 , and Borislow sold his stock for a reported $ 200 to $ 300 million and retired . In his brief retirement , he focused on his horse racing career , sending Talk is Money to the 2001 Kentucky Derby although the thoroughbred did not complete the race . Borislow 's most successful horse yet has been Toccet , who won four graded stakes , among which are the Champagne and Hollywood Futurity in 2002 . After selling most of his horses in 2004 , Borislow set forth plans for a new voice-over-IP business which became the magicJack . Invented in 2007 , the magicJack is a small product which can be plugged into a computer 's USB port and allows for unlimited calling from regular telephones . In 2010 , YMAX , the company behind the magicJack , merged with an Israeli company and became a publicly traded corporation .

In 1989 , Borislow founded Tel-Save when he was in his 20s to resell access to AT & T long-distance lines . The company was based in New Hope , Pennsylvania , and its primary market was toward small and medium-sized businesses . Borislow took the company public in 1995 and had an initial public offering of three million shares . He then invested in his own long distance network by deploying five Lucent 5ESS-2000 switches throughout the United States . By 1997 , Tel-Save was making $ 20 million a year . In 1997 , Borislow negotiated a three-year deal with America Online that granted Tel-Save exclusive marketing rights to sell long-distance service to AOL users . AOL users , meanwhile , would now be billed online for their local , long distance , cellular , and internet services . His original asking price was $ 50 million , but after negotiations , the figure increased to $ 100 million , in addition to half of future profits and 15 percent of the company 's stock . Having rescued a reeling AOL from Chapter 11 , Borislow was compared to Ted Turner for his vision and marketing abilities by Bob Pittman , president of AOL . This deal with Borislow skyrocketed AOL 's stock prices 231 % over the next year and catapulted them to be the dominant online provider with no runner up in sight . In December of that year , Borislow was behind the merger of Tel-Save and STF , a similar company that provided telecommunications services to office buildings .

In 2005 , after retiring from business to focus on his horse racing career , Borislow set forth plans for a new voice-over-IP business , with an initial name of Talk4free . He created YMAX Communications Corporation in April 2006 as a communications and equipment service . YMAX 's profits come from the production of the magicJack , a small device which can be plugged into a computer 's USB port and allows for unlimited calling from regular telephones . CEO Borislow invented the product in 2007 and had applied for patents from the U.S. government while he and Donald Burns shared the payment of $ 25 million to start up the company . Before Borislow launched a widespread television campaign in January 2008 , the company sold less than 1,000 magicJacks per day . By June , he was selling 8,000-9,000 per day and had roughly 500,000 subscribers in total . Borislow attributes its success to its pricing , at $ 40 in the first year of service and $ 20 each year thereafter . Although its voice quality has been criticized , Ted Kritsonis of The Globe and Mail said the " MagicJack was still better than most cell phones I 've tried . "

In 2009 , Florida Attorney General Bill McCollum investigated a claim that Borislow falsely marketed the magicJack as having a free 30-day trial of the product . In reality , the customer must specifically cancel the trial prior to the 30-day mark , otherwise the credit card would be automatically billed . While Borislow maintained that his company 's actions were not illegal , he reached a settlement on April 15 , agreeing to pay the state of Florida $ 125,000 for the cost of the investigation . He said the company resolved over 500 complaints and added a disclaimer on the website clarifying the misconception . VocalTec , an Israeli telephone company , acquired YMAX in July 2010 . Since Borislow and other YMAX businessmen contributed most of the equity , they essentially run the merged business , which kept the " YMAX " moniker . VocalTec was a publicly traded company , so YMAX went on Nasdaq following the merger . In 2010 , YMAX had a market capitalization of $ 300 million and is expected to make $ 110 million to $ 125 million in sales .

After watching horse races at Philadelphia Park for some time , Borislow decided to go into the business in 1991 . He frequently wagered on trainer John Scanlan 's horses , so he requested Scanlan to be the conditioner for his horses . Among Borislow 's first acquisitions was broodmare Beautiful Bid , who gave birth to Breeders ' Cup Distaff winner and Eclipse champion Beautiful Pleasure . In 2000 , he sold Beautiful Bid for $ 2.6 million . Borislow bought a $ 1.8 million yearling in September 1999 that he named Talk Is Money . The thoroughbred was named after Tel-Save , with Borislow saying , " Every time someone was talking on the phone , I made money . " Talk Is Money 's best finish came at the Tesio Stakes in April 2001 , where the horse placed second . This qualified him for the 2001 Kentucky Derby , and Borislow hired jockey Jerry Bailey , who won the 2000 Breeders Cup Juvenile with Macho Uno . At 47-1 odds , Talk Is Money came in last in the Derby and did not finish the race . Borislow 's most successful horse was Toccet , who won four graded stakes , including the Champagne and Hollywood Futurity in 2002 . Toccet 's name is a misspelled tribute to former National Hockey League ( NHL ) player Rick Tocchet . The horse was named runner-up to Vindication for the American Champion Two-Year-Old Colt in 2002 , a part of the Eclipse Award . Once a favorite to enter the 2003 Kentucky Derby , Toccet was derailed by ankle injuries early in the year . He won one listed stakes after his juvenile season out of 15 starts and now stands at Castleton Lyons .

After a dispute with the Internal Revenue Service , Borislow sold a majority of his horses at the Fasig Tipton November sale in 2004 . In February 2005 , he was in a partnership with baseball manager Joe Torre and hockey player Keith Jones to buy Wild Desert . In June of that year , Wild Desert won the Queen 's Plate off a layoff of over 10 weeks . On 5 / 25 / 2014 , Borislow hit the Gulfstream Park Rainbow Six paying $ 6.6 million . His winning Rainbow 6 ticket of all / all / all / 1,4 / all / all cost $ 7,603.20 . He played two other similar tickets with a total cost of $ 22,809.60 .

In 2011 , Borislow bought Women 's Professional Soccer franchise Washington Freedom , moved it to South Florida , and renamed it magicJack . Borislow attracted stars of the United States national women 's soccer team such as Abby Wambach and Hope Solo with salaries well above the league average of $ 25,000 per year . Borislow was criticized for discriminatory treatment of lesser-known players . Cat Whitehill , a former player and sports broadcaster said , " There are so few superstars that the majority of players can be easily intimidated " She added that the stars " never deliberately meant for the other players on the roster to be treated badly . But it does appear that they didn 't consider what standing up to Borislow would mean for the rest of the team . " On 8 July 2011 , the non-National Team members of magicJack voted to file a grievance through their Player 's Union against Borislow . The grievance alleged that Borislow had violated the Standard Player Contract Provision , the FIFA Code of Ethics , WPS Media Policy and U.S. Soccer Federation Coaching Requirements . The suit alleged Borislow 's " practice of bullying and threatening players , and his creation of a hostile , oppressive , and intimidating work environment which adversely affects players ’ ability ( to ) perform " .

The only individual player to speak out publicly about Borislow was Ella Masar . Masar told of a team meeting in which Borislow demanded that the grievance be dropped or he would terminate the players and the magicJack season . Borislow also had problems with WPS staff and owners of other teams . In response to ongoing conflicts with Borislow , in June 2011 WPS moved to terminate his franchise at the end of the season for breach of contractual obligations . Borislow subsequently filed an injunction that would force the league into arbitration rather than settling the matter with the league ’ s Board of Governors . On October 25 , 2011 , the WPS voted to terminate the franchise , accusing Borislow of violations ranging from " unprofessional and disparaging treatment of his players to failure to pay his bills . " WPS also stated , " Mr. Borislow 's actions have been calculated to tarnish the reputation of the league and damage the league 's business relationships . " The team was disbanded on October 28 , 2011 . The ongoing legal battle with the WPS led to the cancelling of the 2012 season for " pending legal issues " on January 1 , 2012 and the magicJack soccer franchise ceased to exist .

D & K Charitable Foundation was established by Borislow in 1997 with a $ 21 million stock donation . In the first two years , he tried to use the charity to buy and preserve a tract of land in New Hope , Pennsylvania . This venture failed in 1998 when the property owner declined Borislow 's offer . Following this , D & K made donations to the Clearwater Endoscopy Center and the Center for Digestive Healthcare in Clearwater , Florida until 2001 . Since then , it has issued varied grants to causes Borislow supported , such as $ 2.75 million to two yeshivas and $ 173,450 to a West Palm Beach , Florida private school . Tax records indicate that Borislow and George Farley , the chief financial officer of the non-profit , split approximately $ 2.1 million in profits from 2001-2005 , while $ 1.6 million went to charitable causes . Borislow drew criticism in 2007 when he paid himself $ 1.7 million through the charity .

Borislow lived with his wife , Michele , and two children , Danny and Kylie , in Palm Beach County , Florida . The Borislows own three dogs , Magic , Jack , and Teddy . He also maintained a home in Brigantine , New Jersey . In his free time , he enjoyed playing soccer , watching sports , and deep sea fishing . Borislow 's yacht , dubbed The Triple Crown , has three bedrooms , nine flat screen televisions , and golden fixtures . On May 25 , 2014 , he won $ 6,678,939.12 with the only ticket to have the winners of the final six races on Gulfstream 's card . The winner of the biggest payoff in American racing history invested $ 7,603.20 on the bet , which has a 20-cent base wager . He covered the full fields in all but the sixth race , in which he had only the Nos. 1 and 4 . Borislow made 2 other similar bets on the race , total investment was $ 22,809.60 . Borislow died from a heart attack ( myocardial infarction ) in Jupiter , Florida on July 21 , 2014 , reportedly after playing in an adult league soccer match . On July 25 , 2014 , more than 500 mourners attended a memorial service at the Kravis Center in West Palm Beach .

The sarus crane ( Grus antigone ) is a large non-migratory crane found in parts of the Indian Subcontinent , Southeast Asia and Australia . The tallest of the flying birds , standing at a height of up to 1.8 m ( 5 ft 11 in ) , they are conspicuous and iconic species of open wetlands . The sarus crane is easily distinguished from other cranes in the region by the overall grey colour and the contrasting red head and upper neck . They forage on marshes and shallow wetlands for roots , tubers , insects , crustaceans and small vertebrate prey . Like other cranes , they form long-lasting pair-bonds and maintain territories within which they perform territorial and courtship displays that include loud trumpeting , leaps and dance-like movements . In India they are considered symbols of marital fidelity , believed to mate for life and pine the loss of their mates even to the point of starving to death . The main breeding season is during the rainy season , when the pair builds an enormous nest " island " , a circular platform of reeds and grasses nearly two metres in diameter and high enough to stay above the shallow water surrounding it . Sarus crane numbers have declined greatly in the last century and it has been estimated that the current population is a tenth or less ( perhaps 2.5 % ) of the numbers that existed in the 1850s . The stronghold of the species is in India , where it is traditionally revered and lives in agricultural lands in close proximity to humans . Elsewhere , the species has been extirpated in many parts of its former range .

The adult sarus crane is very large with grey wings and body ; a bare red head and part of the upper neck ; a greyish crown ; and a long greenish-grey pointed bill . In flight , the long neck is held straight , unlike that of an heron , which folds it back , and the black wing tips can be seen ; the crane 's long pink legs trail behind them . This bird has a grey ear covert patch , an orange-red iris and a greenish-grey bill . Juveniles have a yellowish base to the bill and the brown-grey head is fully feathered . The bare red skin of the adult 's head and neck is brighter during the breeding season . This skin is rough and covered by papillae , and a narrow area around and behind the head is covered by black bristly feathers . The sexes do not differ in plumage although males are on average larger than females ; male sarus of the Indian population can attain a maximum height of about 180 cm ( 5.9 ft ) making them the world 's tallest extant flying bird . The weight of nominate race individuals is 6.8 – 7.8 kg ( 15 – 17 lb ) , while five adult sharpii averaged 8.4 kg ( 19 lb ) . Across the distribution range , the weight can vary from 5 to 12 kg ( 11 to 26 lb ) , height typically from 115 to 167 cm ( 45.5 to 65.5 in ) and the wingspan from 220 to 250 cm ( 86.5 to 98.5 in ) .

While the northern populations are amongst the heaviest cranes , alongside the red-crowned and wattled cranes , and the largest in their range , birds from Australia tend to be smaller . In Australia , the sarus can easily be mistaken for the more widespread brolga . The brolga has the red colouring confined to the head and not extending into the neck . Body mass in Australian sarus cranes was found to average 6.68 kg ( 14.7 lb ) in males and 5.25 kg ( 11.6 lb ) in females , with a range for both sexes of 5 to 6.9 kg ( 11 to 15 lb ) . Thus , Australian sarus average about 25 % lighter than the northern counterparts and are marginally lighter on average than brolgas .

The species has historically been widely distributed on the lowlands of India along the Gangetic plains , extending south to the Godavari River , west to coastal Gujarat , the Tharparkar District of Pakistan , and east to West Bengal and Assam . The species no longer breeds in Punjab , though it winters regularly . Sarus cranes are rare and occur in very low numbers in West Bengal and Assam , and are no longer found in the state of Bihar . In Nepal , its distribution is restricted to the western lowland plains , with most of the population occurring in Rupandehi , Kapilvastu , and Nawalparasi districts . There are two distinct populations of sarus cranes in South-east Asia : the northern population in China and Burma , and the southern population in Cambodia and Vietnam . The sarus used to extend to Thailand and further east into the Philippines , but may now be extinct in both these countries . In 2011 , 24 captive bred cranes raised from five original founders were reintroduced into Thailand . In Australia they are found only in the northern parts , and are partly migratory in some areas . The global range has shrunk and the largest occupied area is now in India . With marshlands largely destroyed , these cranes are increasingly dependent on wet paddy fields in India . Although now found mainly at a low elevation on the plains , there are some historical records from highland marshes further north in Harkit Sar and Kahag in Kashmir . The sarus crane breeds in some high elevation regions such as near the Pong Dam in Himachal Pradesh , where populations may be growing in response to increasing rice cultivation along the reservoir . In rice-dominated districts of Uttar Pradesh , sarus crane abundance ( estimated as occupancy ) was highest in the western districts , intermediate in the central districts , and minimal in the eastern districts . Sarus crane abundance was positively associated with percentage of wetlands on the landscape , and negatively with the percentage of area under rice cultivation .

Two isolated populations exists in Australia , one from the western Kimberley region east to Arnhem Land in the Northern Territory and another population from Burketown eastwards and as far south as Townsville . Sarus cranes are not found on the Cape York Peninsula north of Weipa . They are commonly seen in Kakadu National Park , where the species is often hard to find among the more numerous brolga , and on the Atherton Tablelands in Queensland . Sarus cranes preferentially use wetlands or uncultivated patches amid flooded rice paddies ( locally called khet-taavadi ) for nesting in India . Breeding pairs are territorial and prefer to forage in natural wetlands , though wet crops like rice and wheat are also frequented . In south-western Uttar Pradesh , sarus crane numbers increased with wetland size , though they were found in wetlands of all sizes despite extensive use of wetlands by humans .

This species was described by Linnaeus in 1758 and placed in the genus Ardea that included the larger herons . Edward Blyth published a monograph on the cranes in 1881 in which he considered the " sarus crane " of India to be made up of two species , Grus collaris and Grus antigone . Most modern authors recognise one species with three disjunct populations that have been treated as subspecies , although the status of one extinct population from the Philippines is uncertain . The nominate subspecies from India is the largest , and in the east from Myanmar is replaced by race sharpii that extends into the Southeast Asian islands . The nominate form from the Indian subcontinent is well marked and differentiated by having a white collar below the bare head and upper neck , and white tertiary remiges . Some authors consider antigone and sharpii as representatives of a formerly continuous population that varied clinally . The race in Australia , initially placed in sharpii ( sometimes spelt sharpei but amended to conform to the rules of Latin grammar ) has been separated and named as the race gilliae ( sometimes spelt gillae or even gilli ) . The Australian race was designated only in 1988 , with the species itself first noticed in Australia in 1969 and regarded as a recent immigrant . Native Australians , however , differentiated the sarus and the brolga and called the sarus " the crane that dips its head in blood " . The Australian race has a distinctively darker plumage and a larger grey patch of ear coverts . This population shows the most recent divergence from the ancestral form with an estimated 3000 generations of breeding within Australia . An additional subspecies luzonica has been suggested for the population once found , but now extinct , in the Philippines . No distinctive character is known and it may be synonymous with either gilliae or sharpii .

Analysis of mitochondrial DNA , from a limited number of specimens , suggested that there was gene flow within the continental Asian populations until the 20th century reductions in range , and that Australia was colonized only in the Late Pleistocene , some 35000 years ago . This has been corroborated by nDNA microsatellite analyses with four times the sample size . This study further suggests that the Australian population is quite inbred . As there exists the possibility of ( limited ) hybridization with the genetically distinct brolga , the Australian sarus crane can be expected to be an incipient species .

Unlike many other cranes that make long migrations , sarus cranes are largely non-migratory ; they may however make short-distance movements in response to rain or dry-weather conditions . The only migratory population is in South-east Asia . Breeding pairs maintain territories that are defended from other cranes using a large repertoire of calls and displays . In Uttar Pradesh , less than a tenth of the breeding pairs maintain territories at wetlands and most pairs are scattered well away from the major wetlands . Non-breeding birds occur as flocks of various sizes that vary from 1 – 430 birds . In semi-arid areas , breeding pairs and successfully fledged juveniles depart from territories in the dry season and join non-breeding flocks . In areas with perennial water supply , like in the western plains of Uttar Pradesh , breeding pairs maintain perennial territories . The largest known flocks are from the 29 km2 Keoladeo National Park – as many as 430 birds , and from wetlands in Etawah and Mainpuri districts in Uttar Pradesh , ranging from 245 – 412 birds . Flocks of over 100 birds are also regularly reported from Gujarat and Australia . During the breeding season , breeding pairs displace non-breeding birds from some wetland sites , and local populations can appear to decline . Sarus crane populations in Keoladeo National Park have been noted to reduce from over 400 birds in summer to just 20 birds during the monsoon . In areas with perennial wetlands in the landscape such as western Uttar Pradesh , numbers of nonbreeding sarus cranes in flocks can be relatively stable throughout the year . In Etawah-Mainpuri districts , nonbreeding sarus cranes form up to 65 % of the regional population .

Sarus cranes forage in shallow water ( usually with less than 30 cm ( 0.98 ft ) depth of water ) or in fields , frequently probing in mud with their long bills . They are omnivorous , eating insects ( especially grasshoppers ) , aquatic plants , fish ( perhaps only in captivity ) , frogs , crustaceans and seeds . Occasionally tackling larger vertebrate prey such as water snakes ( Xenochrophis piscator ) , sarus cranes may in rare cases feed on the eggs of birds and turtles . Plant matter eaten includes tubers , corms of aquatic plants , grass shoots as well as seeds and grains from cultivated crops such as groundnuts and cereal crops such as rice .

Sarus cranes have loud trumpeting calls . These calls are , as in other cranes , produced by the elongated trachea that form coils within the sternal region . Pairs may indulge in spectacular displays of calling in unison and posturing . These include " dancing " movements that are performed both during and outside the breeding season and involve a short series of jumping and bowing movements made as one of the pair circles around the other . Dancing may also be a displacement activity when the nest or young are threatened . The cranes breed mainly during the monsoons in India ( from July to October although there may be a second brood ) , and there are records of breeding in all the months . They build large nests , platforms made of reeds and vegetation in wet marshes or paddy fields . The nest is constructed within shallow water by piling up rushes , straw , grasses with their roots and mud so that the platform rises above the level of the water to form a little island . The nest is unconcealed and conspicuous , being visible from afar . The nests can be more than two metres ( six feet ) in diameter and nearly a metre ( three feet ) high . Pairs shows high fidelity to the nest site , often refurbishing and reusing nests for as many as five breeding seasons . The clutch is one or two eggs ( rarely three or four ) which are incubated by both sexes for about 31 days ( range 26 – 35 days ) . Eggs are chalky white and weigh about 240 grams . When disturbed from the nest , parents may sometimes attempt to conceal the eggs by attempting to cover them with material from the edge of the nest . The eggshells are removed by the parents after the chicks hatch either by carrying away the fragments or by swallowing them . Approximately 30 % of all breeding pairs succeed in raising chicks in any year , and most of the successful pairs raise one or two chicks each , with brood sizes of three being rare . The chicks are fed by the parents for the first few days , but are able to feed independently after that and follow their parents for food . When alarmed , the parent cranes use a low korr-rr call that signals chicks to freeze and lie still . Young birds stay with their parents until the subsequent breeding season . In captivity , birds breed only after their fifth year . The sarus is widely believed to pair for life , however cases of " divorce " and mate replacement have been recorded .

Eggs are often destroyed at the nest by jungle ( Corvus macrorhynchos ) and house crows ( C. splendens ) . In Australia , predators of young birds include the dingo ( Canis dingo ) and fox ( Vulpes vulpes ) while brahminy kites ( Haliastur indus ) have been known to take eggs . Removal of eggs by farmers ( to reduce crop damage ) or children ( in play ) , or by migrant labourers for food or opportunistic egg collection during trips to collect forest resources are prominent causes of egg mortality . Between 31 and 100 % of nests with eggs can fail to hatch eggs for these reasons . Chicks are also prone to predation ( estimated at about 8 % ) and collection at the nest , but more than 30 % die of unknown reasons . Breeding success ( percentage of eggs hatching and surviving to fledging stage ) has been estimated at about 20 % in Gujarat and 51 – 58 % in south-western Uttar Pradesh . In areas where farmers are tolerant , nests in flooded rice fields and those in wetlands have similar rates of survival . Pairs that nest later in the season have a lower chance of raising chicks successfully , but this improves when territories have more wetlands . Nest success for 96 sarus nests that were protected by locals during 2009 – 2011 via a payment-for-conservation program was 87 % . More pairs are able to raise chicks in years with higher total rainfall , and when territory quality was undisturbed due to increased farming or development . Permanent removal of pairs from the population due to developmental activities caused reduced population viability , and was a far more important factor relative to breeding success due to changes in total annual rainfall .

Little is known about the diseases and parasites of the sarus crane , and their effects on wild bird populations . A study conducted at the Rome zoo noted that these birds were resistant to anthrax . Endoparasites that have been described include a trematode , Opisthorhis dendriticus from the liver of a captive crane at the London zoo and a Cyclocoelid ( Allopyge antigones ) from an Australian bird . Like most birds , they have bird lice and the species recorded include Heleonomus laveryi and Esthiopterum indicum . In captivity , sarus cranes have been known to live for as long as 42 years . Premature adult mortality is often the result of human actions . Accidental poisoning by monocrotophos , chlorpyrifos and dieldrin-treated seeds used in agricultural areas has been noted . Adults have been known to fly into power lines and die of electrocution , this is responsible for killing about 1 % of the local population each year .

There were about an estimated 15 – 20,000 mature sarus cranes left in the wild in 2009 . The Indian population is less than 10,000 , but of the three subspecies , is the healthiest in terms of numbers . They are considered sacred and the birds are traditionally left unharmed , and in many areas they are unafraid of humans . They used to be found on occasion in Pakistan , but have not been seen there since the late 1980s . The population in India has however declined . Estimates of the global population suggest that the population in 2000 was at best about 10 % and at the worst just 2.5 % of the numbers that existed in 1850 . Many farmers in India believe that these cranes damage standing crops , particularly rice , although studies show that direct feeding on rice grains resulted in losses amounting to less than one percent and trampling could account for grain loss of about 0.4 – 15 kilograms ( 0.88 – 33.07 lb ) . The attitude of farmers tends to be positive in spite of these damages , and this has helped in conserving the species within agricultural areas . The role of rice paddies may be particularly important for the birds ' conservation , since natural wetlands are increasingly threatened by human activity . The conversion of wetlands to farmland , and farmland to more urban uses are major causes for habitat loss and long-term population decline . Compensating farmers for crop losses has been suggested as a measure that may help . The Australian population is greater than 5,000 birds and may be increasing , however , the Southeast Asian subspecies has been decimated by war and habitat change ( such as intensive agriculture and draining of wetlands ) and by the mid-20th century had disappeared from large parts of its range which once stretched up to southern China ; some 1500 – 2000 birds are left in several fragmented subpopulations . Payment to locals to guard nests and help increase breeding success has been attempted in northern Cambodia . Nest success of protected nests was significantly higher than that of unprotected nests , and positive population-level impacts were apparent . However , the program also caused local jealousies leading to deliberate disturbance of nests , and did nothing to alleviate larger-scale and more permanent threats due to habitat losses reading to the conclusion that such payment-for-conservation programs are at best a complement and not a substitute to more permanent interventions that include habitat preservation and local management of resources . The little-known Philippine population became extinct in the late 1960s .

The species is venerated in India and legend has it that the poet Valmiki cursed a hunter for killing a sarus crane and was then inspired to write the epic Ramayana . The species was a close contender to the Indian peafowl as the national bird of India . Among the Gondi people , the tribes classified as " five-god worshippers " consider the sarus crane as sacred . The meat of the sarus was considered taboo in ancient Hindu scriptures . It is widely believed that the sarus pairs for life and that death of one partner leads to the other pining to death . They are a symbol of marital virtue and in parts of Gujarat , it is a custom to take a newly wed couple to see a pair of sarus cranes . Being ubiquitous in the flood plains of the Ganges , observations on their biology had been made by the Mughal emperor , Jahangir around AD 1607 . He noted , for instance , that the species always laid two eggs with an interval of 48 hours between them and that the incubation period was 34 days . Although venerated and protected by Indians , these birds were hunted during the colonial period . It was noted that killing a bird would lead to its surviving partner trumpeting for many days and it was traditionally believed that the other would starve to death . Even sport hunting guides discouraged shooting these birds . According to 19th-century British zoologist Thomas C. Jerdon , young birds were good to eat , while older ones were " worthless for the table " . Eggs of the sarus crane are however used in folk remedies in some parts of India .

Young birds were often captured and kept in menageries both in India and in Europe in former times . They were also successfully bred in captivity early in the 17th century by Emperor Jehangir and in Europe and the United States in the early 1930s . ... The young birds are easily reared by hand , and become very tame and attached to the person who feeds them , following him like a dog . They are very amusing birds , going through the most grotesque dances and antics , and are well worth keeping in captivity . One which I kept , when bread and milk was given to him , would take the bread out of the milk , and wash it in his pan of water before eating it . This bird , which was taken out of the King 's palace at Lucknow , was very fierce towards strangers and dogs , especially if they were afraid of him . He was very noisy — the only bad habit he possessed The Indian state of Uttar Pradesh uses the sarus crane as its official bird symbol . An Indian 14-seater propeller aircraft , the Saras , is named after this crane .

Matthiessen , Peter & Bateman , Robert ( 2001 ) . The Birds of Heaven : Travels with Cranes . North Point Press , New York . ISBN 0-374-19944-2 Weitzman , Martin L. ( 1993 ) . " What to preserve ? An application of diversity theory to crane conservation " . The Quarterly Journal of Economics 108 ( 1 ) : 157 – 183. doi : 10.2307 / 2118499 . ISSN 0033-5533 . JSTOR 2118499 . Haigh , J. C. & Holt , P. E. ( 1976 ) . " The use of the anaesthetic " CT1341 " in a Sarus crane " . Can Vet J. 17 ( 11 ) : 291 – 292 . PMC 1697384 . PMID 974983 . Duan , W. & Fuerst , P. A. ( 2001 ) . " Isolation of a sex-Linked DNA sequence in cranes " . J. Hered . 92 ( 5 ) : 392 – 397. doi : 10.1093 / jhered / 92.5.392 . PMID 11773245 . Menon , G. K. , R. V. Shah , and M. B. Jani . ( 1980 ) . " Observations on integumentary modifications and feathering on head and neck of the Sarus Crane , Grus antigone antigone " . Pavo 18 : 10 – 16 . CS1 maint : Multiple names : authors list ( link )

A United Nations Parliamentary Assembly ( UNPA ) is a proposed addition to the United Nations System that would allow for participation of member nations ' legislators and , eventually , direct election of United Nations ( UN ) parliament members by citizens worldwide . The idea was raised at the founding of the League of Nations in the 1920s and again following the end of World War II in 1945 , but remained dormant throughout the Cold War . In the 1990s and 2000s , the rise of global trade and the power of world organizations that govern it led to calls for a parliamentary assembly to scrutinize their activity . The Campaign for the Establishment of a United Nations Parliamentary Assembly was formed in 2007 to coordinate pro-UNPA efforts , which as of July 2013 has received the support of over 800 Members of Parliament from over 100 countries worldwide and is supported by over 5,000 people . The Commission on Global Security , Justice and Governance , chaired by former U.S. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright and former Nigerian Foreign Minister Ibrahim Gambari , has called for the creation of a United Nations Parliamentary Network " to raise greater awareness and participation by strengthening the voices of legislators in global institutions . " The Commission proposes that this Network " would be similar in initial composition to the Parliamentary Network on the World Bank and International Monetary Fund and the Parliamentary Conference on the World Trade Organization " .

Supporters have set forth possible UNPA implementations , including promulgation of a new treaty ; creation of a UNPA as a subsidiary body of the UN General Assembly ; and evolution of a UNPA from the Inter-Parliamentary Union or another non-governmental organization . Several proposals for apportionment of votes have been raised to address disparities in UN members ' population and economic power . CEUNPA advocates initially giving the UNPA advisory powers and gradually increasing its authority over the UN system . Opponents cite issues such as funding , voter turnout , and undemocratic UN member nations as reasons for abandoning the project altogether .

Proposals for a parliamentary assembly in the global organization of nations date back to at least the 1920s , when League of Nations founders considered ( and rejected ) plans to include a people 's assembly as part of the League 's structure . League and UN founding documents include few mechanisms for direct participation by citizens or legislators , aside from Article 71 provision allowing ECOSOC to grant consultative status to certain organizations , and the Chapter XVIII and XIX requirements that ratification and amendments be approved by member states " in accordance with their respective constitutional processes " which typically involve legislative and / or public input . In 1945 , a people 's world assembly was proposed by British politician Ernest Bevin , who said in the House of Commons that " There should be a study of a house directly elected by the people of the world to whom the nations are accountable . " On 16 October 1945 , before the UN Charter had even entered into force , retired U.S. Supreme Court Justice Owen J. Roberts and former New Hampshire Governor Robert P. Bass held a conference in Dublin , New Hampshire , which passed the Dublin Declaration . It stated that the UN Charter was inadequate to preserve peace and proposed the transformation of the U.N. General Assembly into a world legislature , opining , " Such a government should be based upon a constitution under which all peoples and nations will participate upon a basis of balanced representation which will take account of natural and industrial resources and other factors as well as population . It cannot be based on treaties ... in which the states ... act and vote as states " . It called for " limited but definite and adequate power for the prevention of war . " Grenville Clark and other participants in the Dublin conference went on to become active in the United World Federalists ( UWF ) and the global World Federalist Movement . UWF enjoyed some success in the postwar period , as 23 state legislatures passed bills supporting the organization ’ s goals , but McCarthyism prompted many prominent members to resign lest Senator Joseph McCarthy ruin their careers . In the United States , internationalism came to be associated with communism .

In the post-Cold War era , several factors contributed to a more favorable environment for UNPA proposals . A Trilateral Commission report notes that the shift from a world led by the two rival Soviet- and U.S.-led blocs meant a general diffusion of power . Growth of economic interdependence , proliferation of transnational actors , nationalism in weak states , spread of technology , and increasing numbers of issues ( such as global environmental problems and weapons of mass destruction containment ) that are both domestic and international generated stronger incentive to develop international cooperation than ever before . Democracy in general had spread ; in 2003 , Freedom House counted 121 electoral democracies , compared to 66 in 1987 and 30 in 1975 ( although by the mid-2000s , the trend appeared to have stagnated ) . The rapidly integrating European Union , a unique supranational body whose European Parliament was gradually growing in power , provided an example to the world of how a multi-nation parliament can evolve and function . The World Trade Organization and similar organizations generated great concern as they seemed to be gaining more influence and control over trade disputes , yet were not accountable to the people ; U.S. President Bill Clinton argued , " We must insist that international trade organizations be open to public scrutiny instead of mysterious , secret things subject to wild criticism . " A " new diplomacy " seemed to be taking shape in which NGOs and governments cooperated to create new global institutions such as the International Criminal Court . U.S. Advisory Commission on Public Diplomacy Chairman Harold C. Pachios of Preti , Flaherty , Beliveau & Pachios noted :

In early 1993 , the Canadian House of Commons Standing Committee on External Affairs and International Trade presented a report stating , " By way of building the public and political constituency for the United Nations , the Committee recommends that Canada support the development of a United Nations Parliamentary Assembly . " The Campaign for a Democratic United Nations ( CAMDUN ) , the International Network for a United Nations Second Assembly ( INFUSA ) , and the Global People 's Assembly Movement ( GPAM ) , began circulating UNPA proposals around 1995 , and other organizations , such as One World Trust , began publishing analyses of how to proceed in the current political situation . On 8 February 2005 , on the initiative of the Committee for a Democratic UN , 108 Swiss Parliamentarians signed an open letter to the Secretary-General calling for the establishment of just such a body . On 14 May 2005 , the Congress of the Liberal International issued a resolution stating that " the Liberal International calls on the member states of the United Nations to enter into deliberations on the establishment of a Parliamentary Assembly at the United Nations . " On 9 June 2005 , the European Parliament issued a resolution that contained an item stating that Europarl " calls for the establishment of a United Nations Parliamentary Assembly ( UNPA ) within the UN System , which would increase the democratic profile and internal democratic process of the organisation and allow world civil society to be directly associated in the decision-making process ; states that the Parliamentary Assembly should be vested with genuine rights of information , participation and control , and should be able to adopt recommendations directed at the UN General Assembly ; [ ... ] " In 2006 , Citizens for a United Nations People 's Assembly circulated a petition to UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan to " convene a High Level Panel to determine the steps required for the establishment of a Peoples ' Parliamentary Assembly within the United Nations Organization "

In April 2007 , international NGOs launched the International Campaign for the Establishment of a United Nations Parliamentary Assembly , the principal current movement for the establishment of a UNPA . Its Secretariat is led by the Committee for a Democratic U.N. Over 150 civil society groups and more than 550 parliamentarians from all over the world are taking part in the Campaign . As of November 2008 , CEUNPA 's appeal was endorsed by around 2400 signatories from over 120 countries , among them hundreds of parliamentarians , civil society leaders , leading academics and distinguished individuals such as former UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali , the President of the Pan-African Parliament , Gertrude Mongella , Academy Award winner Emma Thompson , SF-author Sir Arthur C. Clarke and Edgar Mitchell , former NASA astronaut and sixth human being to walk on the moon . On 25 September 2007 , the statement by H.E. Mr. José Sócrates , Prime Minister of Portugal , on behalf of the European Union , at the United Nations 62nd Session of the General Assembly , General Debate , stated , " We remain committed to the reform of its main bodies in order to enhance the Organization 's representativity , transparency and effectiveness . " On 24 October 2007 , the Pan African Parliament unanimously adopted a resolution calling for the establishment of a Parliamentary Assembly at the United Nations , noting , " in contrast to regional international bodies such as the African Union , the European Union , the Council of Europe , or Mercosur , the United Nations and its specialized organizations is one of the last international fora lacking an integrated and institutionalized Parliamentary Assembly . " So far , four international conferences of CEUNPA have taken place .

One of the most influential and well-known pro-UN organizations , UNA-USA has been on both sides of the issue . In 2003 , UNA-USA 's executive director of policy studies , Jeffrey Laurenti , wrote an article , An Idea Whose Time Has Not Come , arguing that there were important unresolved issues of inclusivity , authority , and efficiency with the UNPA . UNA 's position seemed to reverse in November 2006 , when the 38th plenary session of the World Federation of United Nations Associations issued a resolution stating that it " Supports the establishment of a United Nations parliamentary Assembly as a consultative body within the United Nations system as a voice of the citizens ; Calls upon the governments of the United Nations member states , parliamentarians and civil society representatives to jointly examine possible steps and options to create a United Nations Parliamentary Assembly . " According to Stefan Marschal , the post-World War II years , particularly the 1980s and 1990s , saw tremendous growth in parliamentary assemblies , with more than 40 established since 1949 . About 42 % of the world 's parliamentary assemblies are formally affiliated with an intergovernmental organization ; 32 % are informally affiliated ; and 26 % are unaffiliated . The spread in parliamentary assemblies was spurred by acceptance of parliamentarism as a means of legitimizing decisions ; initiatives for intergovernmental cooperation reaching a point at which stronger parliamentary backing was needed ; and regional integration . However , many global organizations , such as the UN and WTO , still lack a parliamentary assembly and " have been heavily criticized for what is supposed to be an institutional deficit . "

There are five main options for creating a U.N. Parliamentary Assembly , according to various assessments . Amending the UN Charter , possibly through a Charter Review Conference under Article 109 of the UN Charter , is a commonly cited possibility . This is difficult because it requires ratification by two-thirds of UN members , including all five permanent members of the Security Council . There have been only five amendments to the UN Charter since 1945 , and none of them were done through the Article 109 process . Louis Sohn and Grenville Clark , in their 1958 book World Peace Through World Law , proposed establishing a UN Parliamentary Assembly through this method . Another possibility is establishing the UNPA as a subsidiary body of the UN General Assembly . The General Assembly has authority to do this under Article 22 of the UN Charter . Erskine Childers and Sir Brian Urquhart endorsed this approach in their 1994 book , Renewing the United Nations System . The Committee for a Democratic UN also recommended the establishment of UNPA by Article 22 or by transformation of the Inter-Parliamentary Union in its report , Developing International Democracy . In 2006 , the Council of Europe passed a resolution noting , " A decisive step towards the development of a UN parliamentary dimension could be the establishment of an experimental parliamentary committee with consultative functions for General Assembly committees . "

Yet another option is to create the UNPA as a nongovernmental organization of democratically elected legislators . This would have the advantage of not requiring the cooperation of ( sometimes dictatorial ) national governments or world parliamentary organizations with dictatorial members , so only democratic legislators , parliaments and countries would be represented . The World Constitution and Parliament Association and other NGOs have attempted to set up workable parliaments . Dieter Heinrich critiqued this approach by saying , " If it did succeed on any scale , it would divert resources from pressuring governments on thousands of specific issues , which citizens are good at , into the operation of a pan-global institutional structure , which citizens ' groups are ill equipped to do ... And the resulting assembly would always be of doubtful legitimacy ( who does it really represent ? ) and of unlikely value as an evolutionary starting point for a real world parliament . " A UNPA could be created through a stand-alone treaty . This would have the advantage that as few as 20 or 30 economically and geographically diverse countries could establish a UNPA , and it could expand as more countries ratified the treaty . Strauss notes that this is the method by which most international bodies , such the World Health Organization , International Labour Organization , and International Criminal Court , were founded . The way to get started presumably would be to hold a conference of plenipotentiaries to draft the treaty ; then the ratification process would begin .

It might also be possible to use and / or transform the Inter-Parliamentary Union ( IPU ) , which was granted observer status in 2002 . The IPU 's Second World Conference of Speakers of Parliament adopted a resolution stating , " We would greatly welcome more substantive interaction and coordination with the United Nations , and call upon the world body to resort more frequently to the political and technical expertise which the IPU together with its Member Parliaments can provide . " Moreover , a 2005 article by IPU Secretary-General Anders B. Johnsson stated that , " It makes little practical or political sense to set up a separate parliamentary assembly alongside the existing governmental General Assembly . " Indeed , the Inter-Parliamentary Union seems to favor a reformed IPU as a substitute for a UNPA , saying , " The Union had the necessary experience , and further bureaucracy should be avoided . " Many national parliaments , however , are currently not members of the IPU .

The CEUNPA proposes that the UNPA 's begin as a consultative body whose powers could be augmented as it evolved into a directly elected assembly : " Step by step , it should be provided with genuine rights of information , participation and control vis-à-vis the UN and the organizations of the UN system . " An article in the Asian-Pacific Law & Policy Journal notes that precedents for this idea include the British Parliament , French Estates-General , U.S. Congress , and Europarl , which are all systems in which , over time , power shifted to directly elected officials : " In the past , fledgling democracy has always had to compromise with the realities of power and evolve step-by-step , where possible . This is often accomplished in the form of a ' non-democratic ' additional house in the parliamentary structure . Thus , in Britain , the necessity of compromise of the ' common people ' with the powers and interests of the armed and titled nobility necessitated a bicameral system incorporating the House of Lords , as well as the House of Commons . The French Estates-General included similar power blocs as ' estates ' or functional separate houses , and the United States Senate reflected a necessary compromise of the interests of less populous states hesitant to subject themselves to ' democratic inundation ' by the more populous states . "

World federalists often point out that a democratic union of peoples , rather than governments , is suggested by the opening words of the Preamble to the United Nations Charter , " We the peoples ... " This sentiment was expressed by Theo van Boven , who said , " A more democratic United Nations as envisaged by the campaign for a UN Parliament will strengthen the legitimacy of We the peoples of the United Nations in whose name the UN Charter was proclaimed . " According to the Committee for a Democratic UN , " The UNPA concept is the a first step towards a democratic world parliament " . World federalists typically view an empowered democratic assembly as a means of preventing war by providing everyone a peaceful means of pursuing their political objectives . Walter Cronkite , for instance , said , " Within the next few years , we must change the basic structure of our global community from the present anarchic system of war and ever more destructive weaponry to a new system governed by a democratic U.N. federation . " But there is some opposition to the idea of an empowered global parliament . A 2007 BBC poll of approximately 12,000 respondents asked , " How likely would you be to support a Global Parliament , where votes are based on country population sizes , and the global parliament is able to make binding policies ? " Of those polled , 19.1 % responded " Very unlikely – it is a bad idea " ; 14.9 % responded " Quite unlikely – but it might work " ; 23.1 % said " Quite likely – but with reservations " ; and 14.4 % said " Very likely – it is a good idea " . The poll was broken out by country , and the U.S. and Australia showed the strongest opposition . Potential challenge to the UNPA are political organizations such as the U.S. Constitution Party , and politicians such as 2008 U.S. presidential candidate Ron Paul , which favor withdrawal from the United Nations and other multilateral organizations altogether due to sovereignty concerns . Canadian Action Party leader Connie Fogal also opposes the UNPA , saying , " It is very revealing to see the NDP and the Greens as part of and promoting this ... Further , the European assembly has proven to be a rubber stamping mechanism of bureaucratic decisions . This is not democracy . " In addition , a Civicus article warns , " With an unexpected backlash against civil society in the offing ( despite the good efforts of the UN General Assembly President , Jan Eliasson , to reverse the trend ) , citizen participation at the UN is diminishing quickly . It would be safe to assume that Member States as a whole are not in the mood to consider a Parliamentary Assembly at this time . "

Herbert W. Briggs points out that while a UNPA could be established as a UNGA subsidiary body without any changes to international law , granting it the power to pass binding legislation would require UN Charter amendment or a new treaty . The UNGA plays a role in admitting , suspending and expelling UN members , approving the budget , and electing members to other UN bodies , but its powers as set forth in Chapter IV of the UN Charter are mostly advisory in nature . These include the power to " discuss , " " make recommendations , " " consider , " " call the attention of the Security Council to situations , " " initiate studies , " " receive ... reports , " etc . , as well as " establish such subsidiary organs as it deems necessary for the performance of its functions . " The Charter contains no provision allowing the UNGA to delegate any powers it does not itself possess . And while Article 25 states , " The Members of the United Nations agree to accept and carry out the decisions of the Security Council , " there is no requirement that members abide by the recommendations of the UNGA . On the other hand , Article 13 ( 1 ) ( a ) of the Charter tasks the UNGA with " encouraging the progressive development of international law and its codification . "

According to Oscar Schachter , there is some question as to whether the traditional international lawmaking process of state-by-state treaty ratification is adequate today : " The traditional case-by-case process of customary law cannot meet the necessity for common action to deal with the numerous problems raised by technological developments , demographic and environmental impacts , changing attitudes as to social justice , or the many requirements of international business . While all of these matters can be dealt with by multilateral treaties , the treaty processes are often complicated and slow , whereas UN resolutions can be more readily attained . " The Law of the Sea is an example of an agreement that has taken decades to pass in the U.S. ( although the Cato Institute views the delay as a good thing . ) George Monbiot argues , " The absence of an international legislature undermines the authority of an international judiciary ( such as the proposed criminal court ) . Judges presiding over the war-crimes tribunals at the Hague and in Arusha have been forced , in effect , to make up the law as they go along . " Proposals to give the UNGA legislative power – including the " binding triad " idea which would have made UNGA resolutions binding if passed by countries constituting a supermajority of the world 's states , population , and economic production – have made little headway . According to Heinrich , once the UNPA is established , it will be easier to gather support for empowering it . The assembly 's own members can be expected to play a major role in pushing for its evolution by seeking a UN Charter amendment to make it a " principal organ " in parallel with the General Assembly . With their political know-how , their access to the highest levels of their national governments , and their credibility with the world public and the media , the politicians in the UN Parliamentary Assembly can be expected to become a strong and persistent political force for organizing the assembly 's eventual transformation .

One of the main purposes for the creation of a UNPA is enhancing UN accountability and legitimacy . The United Nations System spent more than $ 1.8 billion of public money in 2005 and its own auditors have pointed out that it lacks adequate internal controls to protect against waste , fraud and mismanagement . By holding hearings , issuing reports , and passing resolutions , the UNPA could exercise oversight over other UN bodies . In a September 2007 press release , MEP Graham Watson expressed his hope that " in an era where the UN 's mandate has grown exponentially the UNPA would act as a watch-dog on its activities , monitoring its decision-making deadlines , its accountability and transparency " . London Mayor Ken Livingstone promised that , " a more democratic United Nations as envisaged by this campaign will strengthen the accountability and legitimacy of the UN . " The Pan African Parliament 's resolution mirrored this sentiment : " If democratization is a major means to legitimize and improve national governance , it is also the most reliable way to legitimize and improve international organization , making it more open and responsive by increasing participation . "

Canadian Senator Douglas Roche , O.C. , argues in The Case for a United Nations Parliamentary Assembly that even an indirectly elected UNPA consisting of delegates appointed by national parliaments could create additional checks and balances by providing for oversight by a parliamentary body that would be independent of member nations ' executive branches . It would open up the global policymaking process to a larger group of elected officials by shifting some power from the relatively small executive branches of countries to the larger legislative branches . According to Roche , globalization has tended to increase the power of the executive branch while marginalizing the legislative branch ; for instance , U.S. Presidents since George H. W. Bush have been given fast track authority to negotiate trade agreements , subject to a " yea or nay " scrutiny by the U.S. Congress on the negotiated deal . A Property and Environment Research Center report argues that changes in the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development are another example of how international regulation removes checks and balances between the branches of government : " The OECD was created by a 1961 treaty , ratified by the U.S. Senate , to help achieve economic growth . In April 1998 , a ministerial meeting reinterpreted the treaty , adding social and environmental considerations to the economic ones . The United States executive branch agreed to the changes , but the Senate had no opportunity to debate this treaty , even though it was significantly different from the 1961 treaty . The executive branch had essentially negotiated a new deal without Senate approval . " World Federalist Canada Briefing Paper No. 30 , however , suggests that UNPA proposals may spark opposition from the executive branches that stand to lose power : " Experience has shown that civil servants and diplomats working in national foreign ministries are less likely to support or see the need for a UNPA . They view the UN as a forum for discussion among sovereign states ; whatever action the UN takes is a result of bargaining and compromise among member states " .

A significant practical obstacle to a completely democratically elected and representative UNPA is that , in contrast to the situation in which the European Parliament functions , a significant number of UN members , including populous countries such as China are not electoral democracies . In the past , bodies such as the United Nations Commission on Human Rights were criticized for being dominated by abusive regimes . If UNPA representatives were to be drawn from member nations ' parliaments , it could create legitimacy concerns since some national legislatures are regarded as a rubber stamp for the rulers ' decrees . Some global parliament proponents , such as Prof. Lucio Levi , propose starting a federation limited to democracies : " Though the democratization of states all over the world hasn ’ t been completed , this does not preclude starting the democratization of the UN . Six Western European countries founded the European Community , starting its democratization without waiting for the democratization of the institutions of all the European states . " UNA-USA 's Jeff Laurenti notes the problems associated with excluding undemocratic countries from membership : " It is one thing to deny membership to a few small " rogue " dictatorships . It is quite another to exclude China , the vast majority of Arab countries , and two-thirds of Africa , and imagine that the resulting body can have a formal consultative or oversight role with United Nations agencies , be part of UN-sponsored negotiations on multilateral conventions ( the real work of international legislating ) , or pass on the resolutions of UN political bodies . "

Heinrich argues , " It is essential that the salary and travel costs of UN parliamentarians should be paid by the institution of the UN Parliamentary Assembly from its own budget ( which would be part of the UN budget ) , and not by the national governments individually . This is both to assure the independence of the UNPA politicians in their service to the UN and to assure equality of participation . " Article 17 of the UN Charter stipulates , " The expenses of the Organization shall be borne by the Members as apportioned by the General Assembly . " Thus , unless funded by private donors ( as the land for UN headquarters was in 1946 ) , presumably the UNPA would be funded like the rest of the UN system , with larger economies such as the U.S. paying larger shares of the contributions . This disparity might be offset by weighting members ' votes according to their gross national product or their contributions to the UN system . A Vancouver Sun article notes , " Another point of opposition would involve the notion of adding bureaucracy and complexity to the UN . Estimated cost of the new outfit runs $ 140 million to $ 280 million a year . "

A 1993 Parliamentarians for Global Action survey showed that a strong majority of parliamentary respondents thought that the public would support the idea of a UN Parliamentary Assembly , but they were less sure the public would be prepared to finance it . The analysis pointed out , " The possibility of a greater financial burden to support an enlarged UN is unlikely to evoke support unless it can be demonstrated that the return on investment is significant . Citizens are often known to express lofty globalist sentiments when questioned on general principles , and to surrender them when costs or trade offs are concerned . " A 1995 United Nations University report claimed , " it is difficult to see how the Parliamentary Assembly would be able to pay for the salaries and travel of what could be over 1,000 representatives ; this proposal could increase the duplication and waste that already exist within multilateral bodies . " CEUNPA 's response to this objection is that " it is true that a Parliamentary Assembly at the United Nations would be another player in the diplomatic scenery which governments and their executives in international organizations would have to take into account to a certain degree . On the other hand , being composed of elected parliamentarians , the assembly would be closer to the citizens and as such it would lend more credibility and legitimacy to international decisions in which it is involved . In this way , the parliamentary assembly actually would contribute to an increased efficiency of international action . "

A UNPA might begin as an inter-parliamentary institution – an assembly of parliamentarians from their respective countries ' legislatures – and then change to a directly elected body . This would be similar to the evolution of the European Parliament . Beginning with the European Common Assembly 's founding in 1952 , MEPs were appointed by each of the Member States ' national parliaments ; in 1979 , direct election was instituted . Sen. Douglas Roche , O.C. , in The Case for a United Nations Parliamentary Assembly , analyzes the tradeoffs between the two choices . A UNPA based on existing parliamentarians may be easier to establish , because it avoids several hurdles , such as decisions on electoral cycles , a universally acceptable electoral body , legitimacy of elections , and so on : " A body comprising national parliamentarians has the ' stamp of approval ' built-in . National parliamentarians can claim electoral legitimacy in their own right . Admittedly , the credibility of domestic franchised can be called into question , but the trend toward democracy has been strengthening rapidly . " National parliamentarians also generally have staff and money , which could ease the funding issues associated with forming a new world parliamentary assembly . Delegates to a directly elected UNPA , on the other hand , would have more time to devote to the global assembly , since its members would not be occupied with duties relating to their membership in their national legislature . Heinrich points out strategic advantages of an indirectly elected UNPA : " Another advantage to basing representation in a UN Parliamentary Assembly on national parliaments is that it may engage parliamentarians as allies in the cause of getting the assembly established , and , later , helping to build the political will for its evolution . The experience of being a UN parliamentarian will galvanize many of these politicians into going home as advocates for the UN , including the need for strengthening and democratizing the UN Parliamentary Assembly itself . "

A global parliamentary assembly could be structured to give populous states greater influence . The one state , one vote rule of the UN General Assembly gives small states a disproportionate amount of influence over the UN system . In Entitlement quotients as a vehicle for United Nations reform , University of Minnesota professor emeritus Joseph E. Schwartzberg notes , " The sixty-four least populous members – enough to block a two-thirds majority vote – comprise less than one percent of the world 's total population , and in theory , the 127 least populous members , accounting for barely eight percent of humanity , are enough to provide the two-thirds majority needed to pass a substantive resolution . " He continues this point in his essay , Overcoming Practical Difficulties in Creating a World Parliamentary Assembly : Schwartzberg 's weighted voting formula takes into account population ( the democratic / demographic principle ) , contribution to the UN budget ( the economic principle ) , and share of the total membership . The idea of weighting countries ' votes according to their financial contribution to the organization is not unprecedented , as the World Bank , International Monetary Fund and other Bretton Woods institutions use this method .

The Provisional People 's Assembly 's methodology gives each nation Population Seats based on a calculation that combines the Penrose method , which takes the square root of the millions of inhabitants of each country , Economic Seats equal to its portion of the world 's total gross domestic product , and classification as Free , Partially Free , or Unfree by Freedom House . Under one person , one vote , each country 's number of votes is directly proportional to its population . This would be similar to how U.S. states are represented in the United States House of Representatives . In The Future of Sovereignty - Rethinking a Key Concept of International Relations , Hasenclever et al. sum up the advantages and disadvantages of this system : " In a strict meaning of democracy based on individuals as subjects , every person 's vote would have to have exactly the same weight . None of the known proposals , however , supports such a strict interpretation , because the inequality among the states ' voting powers would be extreme with only four countries - China , India , the United States and the former USSR - disposing of an absolute majority . " A way to resolve the disparity in population between countries would be to apportion representation to regions instead of nations . This would , for example , place Suriname and Brazil , the least and most populated South American countries , in a single South American voting bloc of approximately 400 million people , preserving the one person , one vote system while eliminating extreme disparities in population . This approach , however , is dependent upon elected officials being entrusted to represent said regions and not just their home countries , and could potentially leave some less populated countries with no representatives from their country if they are either outvoted by people in more populated countries in their assigned region or if the people in less populated countries vote in large numbers for candidates or political parties from other countries .

A directly elected UNPA might have common election standards if it follows the example of European Parliament ( EP ) . The European Parliament has adopted certain minimum requirements , such as proportional representation , that each member country must abide by to be represented . Schwartzberg proposes a professional election commission " to ensure that assembly elections are carried out , to the maximum extent , on a level playing field " . Under Schwartzberg 's proposal , the commission would have several powers , including the authority to establish rules of fairness , determine in advance whether fairness criteria were being met , and foreclose polling where those criteria were not met . He proposes criteria that an election must meet to be considered valid , such as minimum participation rates that initially could be set as low as 20 % , and gradually increased .

Dave Stamper ( November 10 , 1883 – September 18 , 1963 ) was an American songwriter of the Tin Pan Alley and vaudeville eras , a contributor to twenty-one editions of the Ziegfeld Follies , writer for the Fox Film Corporation , and composer of more than one thousand songs , in spite of never learning to read or write traditional music notation . He may have written " Shine On Harvest Moon " , a claim supported by vaudeville performer and writer Eddie Cantor . He was also a charter member of the American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers or ASCAP .

Stamper was born in New York City on November 10 , 1883 , and took up piano at age ten . At seventeen , he left school and became a pianist at a Coney Island dance hall for two years before becoming a " song-plugger " for publisher F. A. Mills . Stamper was twenty when he met singer Nora Bayes and her husband Jack Norworth becoming her accompanist and touring widely for the next four years . After Stamper left Bayes ' employment , he resumed working as a song-plugger and vaudeville pianist . In 1910 he met Gene Buck , an artist who painted cover images for sheet music . The two started collaborating , with Buck providing lyrics for Stamper 's melodies . Their first published songs were In the Cool of the Evening , Daddy Has a Sweetheart ( and Mother Is Her Name ) and Some Boy . Stamper 's first marriage to Gertrude Springer ended in divorce after the birth of two children , Maurice and Regina Stamper . On 16 July 1926 he married " vaudeville and revue comedienne " Edna Leedom who had performed in the Follies of 1923 , 1924 and 1925 . The marriage ended within two years . On 16 August . 1928 he married Agnes White , a Follies performer who was in Stamper and Buck 's musical Take The Air ( 1927 ) . The couple were married for 40 years and produced one daughter , Susan Stamper , a dancer . One of their grandchildren is singer / songwriter Happy Rhodes .

In 1912 Stamper began writing songs for the Ziegfeld Follies of 1913 , contributing Just You and I and The Moon , Without You and Everybody Sometime Must Love Somebody . He is credited as " additional music " for the Follies of 1914 and 1915 , but he wrote the majority of the music for the Follies of 1916. and was on an equal billing with Louis A. Hirsch , Jerome Kern , and Irving Berlin . The music of the Follies of 1917 was written by Stamper and Raymond Hubbell and he was described as " an old hand " for his work with Louis A. Hirsch by the Follies of 1918 . In addition to his 1918 Follies work , he wrote all the music for Ziegfeld Midnight Frolic with Gene Buck , a series that also had editions in 1919 , 1920 and 1921 . The Follies of 1919 found Stamper branching out into writing lyrics as well as writing comic sketches . 1919 was a very busy year , with Stamper writing songs for the Follies as well as the Midnight Frolic and the Ziegfeld Nine O 'Clock Review both of which appeared in a theater on the roof of the New Amsterdam theater .

While his work with Ziegfeld encompassed the majority of his working life , Stamper and Gene Buck worked for other producers as well . He had songs in two plays - When Claudia Smiles ( 1914 ) and Broadway and Buttermilk ( 1916 ) prior to traveling to London with Buck to write songs for Zig Zag ! which ran for 648 performances at the London Hippodrome . Stamper returned to London in 1918 to write songs for another review Box O ' Tricks with Frederick Chapelle , which ran for 625 performances . During his first trip to London , Buck befriended a man who turned out to be a German spy . Two results of this event were fellow passenger Eddie Rickenbacker deciding to enlist to fly , and Dave Stamper having to prove to British police and a Judge that his pages covered with numbers were sheet music rather than a code . Stamper was fully occupied with work for Ziegfeld until 1927 , when Gene Buck hired Stamper to write the music for Take The Air ( 1927 ) . He also worked for the Schubert organization on Lovely Lady ( 1927 ) before returning to Ziegfeld for the 1931 Follies .

In 1928 , Stamper was signed by Fox Film Corporation as a staff composer , remaining there until 1930 . He contributed Dance Away the Night and Peasant Love Song to the film Married in Hollywood ( 1929 ) often called the first filmed operetta . The film Words and Music ( 1929 ) featured The Hunting Song , Take a Little Tip and Too Wonderful for Words all written with lyricist Harlan Thompson . In 1930 , he contributed Only One and The Gay Heart written with Clare Kummer and Once In A While written with Clare Kummer and Cecil Arnold to the " singing cowboy " movie One Mad Kiss. and the Bela Lugosi film Such Men Are Dangerous .

Stamper claimed to have written " Shine On , Harvest Moon " , while the writers of record were his former employers Nora Bayes and Jack Norworth . Stamper 's claim was supported by vaudeville comic Eddie Cantor in his 1934 book Ziegfeld , The Great Glorifier and David Ewen 's All the Years of American Popular Music . Stamper was working as a pianist rather than as a songwriter at the time the song appeared but never learned how to read or write using traditional music notation thus he would have not been able submit the song for copyright , or produce sheet music to prove his claim . Bayes and Norworth compelled Stamper at one point to wear stage make-up to appear Japanese , apparently to keep him from being interviewed by reporters .

Advanced Gemini is a number of proposals that would have extended the Gemini program by the addition of various missions , including manned low Earth orbit , circumlunar and lunar landing missions . Gemini was the second manned spaceflight program operated by NASA , and consisted of a two-seat spacecraft capable of maneuvering in orbit , docking with unmanned spacecraft such as Agena Target Vehicles , and allowing the crew to perform tethered extra-vehicular activities . A range of applications were considered for Advanced Gemini missions , including military flights , space station crew and logistics delivery , and lunar flights . The Lunar proposals ranged from reusing the docking systems developed for the Agena target vehicle on more powerful upper stages such as the Centaur , which could propel the spacecraft to the Moon , to complete modifications of the Gemini to enable it to land on the Lunar surface . Its applications would have ranged from manned lunar flybys before Apollo was ready , to providing emergency shelters or rescue for stranded Apollo crews , or even replacing the Apollo program . Some of the Advanced Gemini proposals used " off-the-shelf " Gemini spacecraft , unmodified from the original program , whilst others featured modifications to allow the spacecraft to carry more crew , dock with space stations , visit the Moon , and perform other mission objectives . Other modifications considered included the addition of wings or a parasail to the spacecraft , in order to enable it to make a horizontal landing .

Gemini was the second American manned orbital spaceflight program , after Mercury . It was intended to demonstrate technologies and techniques required for the Apollo program , such as extra-vehicular activities , rendezvous and docking , maneuvering in orbit and long duration flight . The Gemini spacecraft , which was built by McDonnell Aircraft , was derived from the earlier Mercury spacecraft , but modified to accommodate two astronauts . It was also equipped with a larger equipment module , allowing it to support longer missions , and maneuver in orbit . It was launched by the Titan II rocket flying from Launch Complex 19 at the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station . In total , twelve missions were launched , ten of which were manned . Following two unmanned test flights , the first manned flight , Gemini 3 , was launched on 23 March 1965 . The program concluded on 15 November 1966 , with the successful recovery of Gemini 12 . Many other applications were envisaged for the Gemini spacecraft at various stages before , during , and after the two years in which it was used by NASA for manned spaceflight . Although none of these proposals ever made it into operation , many were considered seriously , and in some cases flight hardware was constructed prior to cancellation . In the case of the Manned Orbital Laboratory , a Gemini spacecraft was launched on a suborbital demonstration flight in support of the program . In some cases technology developed in the Advanced Gemini program has been reintegrated into other programs , such as components from the Titan IIIM , which was to have launched MOL , being used to upgrade other Titan rockets .

The United States Air Force intended to use the Gemini spacecraft to transport astronauts to its proposed space stations , the Manned Orbital Development System and later the Manned Orbital Laboratory ( MOL ) . These stations would have been launched by Titan IIIM rockets , with a Gemini spacecraft atop , eliminating the need for rendezvous and docking maneuvers . For this purpose , several modifications were made to the Gemini capsule , including the installation of a hatch in the heat shield to allow access to the space station . In order to give its astronauts experience before these programs started , the Blue Gemini program was proposed , which would have seen USAF astronauts fly on NASA missions in order to practice various techniques required for their own missions . This would have first seen cooperative missions between NASA and the US Air Force , with two missions flying with crews composed of one astronaut from NASA , and one from the USAF , followed by two missions with all-USAF crews , but performing missions for NASA . After these flights , the US Air Force would have flown a number of missions of its own . Firstly , it would have flown a two-man Agena rendezvous and docking mission , followed by two one-man scientific or technology research missions . Other proposed missions included tests of the Astronaut Mobility Unit which was designed to assist with EVAs , inertial navigation systems , and flying a radar imaging system .

MOL Launches would have been conducted from Launch Complex 40 at the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station , and Space Launch Complex 6 at Vandenberg Air Force Base . In 1966 , a test flight was launched from LC-40 , using a Titan IIIC . It consisted of the Gemini B spacecraft , built from the spacecraft used for the Gemini 2 test flight , atop OPS 0855 , a boilerplate MOL space station . Gemini B was released on a suborbital trajectory , and descended to Earth to test modifications made to the heat shield , and ensure that the access hatch would not affect its performance . OPS 0855 continued on to orbit . Early MOL stations would have only been manned by a single crew , launched with the station . Later stations would have been designed to be resupplied , and support multiple crews , delivered by additional Gemini spacecraft , or derivatives . The MOL program was cancelled on 10 June 1969 , in favour of unmanned reconnaissance satellites . Some systems developed for the program were later used on unmanned missions , while the space suits which were under development were transferred to NASA . The Titan IIIM rocket which was to launch MOL never flew , however some of the upgrades that were built into it were later used to upgrade other Titan rockets — the stretched first and second stages became the Titan 34 , which was used as the core of some later Titan IIIB flights , and on the Titan 34D . The seven-segment solid rocket boosters were later introduced on the Titan IVA .

Several Gemini Ferry spacecraft were proposed to provide transportation of crews and cargo to NASA and USAF space stations in low Earth orbit . NASA contracted McDonnell to conduct a study into what modifications would be needed to allow the Gemini spacecraft to support this . Three spacecraft were envisioned ; a manned spacecraft to transport crew to the stations , a manned spacecraft with a cargo module for both crew and cargo delivery , and a dedicated unmanned spacecraft to resupply the station every three or four months . The studies looked at minimizing required modifications to the Gemini spacecraft . Three docking methods were considered . The first was use of the existing docking system used on Gemini-Agena missions . This would have allowed the mission to be accomplished with little modification to the Gemini spacecraft needed , however crew transfer could only have been accomplished by means of an Extra-vehicular activity ( EVA ) . Changes that would have been required included strengthening the nose , installing two solid rockets to be used for a separation burn , adding the necessary equipment to perform the transfer EVA , and providing provisions for flight to and from the station . The number of retro-rockets would have been increased from four to six . A second method would have seen the spacecraft dock in the same way , but after docking , the spacecraft would be swung round and attached to the side of the space station . A tunnel would then have been placed over the Gemini 's hatches , allowing the crew to transfer to the station without performing an EVA . Some modifications to the hatches would have been required . The final proposed docking method was to use a port mounted on the rear of the equipment module , which would have allowed the crew to transfer directly between the spacecraft and space station , through the docking port .

A modified version of the spacecraft was proposed , which would have included a cargo module attached to the back of a modified equipment module . The spacecraft would have approached the station , and docked backwards using a port on the rear of the cargo module . If one of the forward docking configurations had been used for the Gemini itself , the docking would have been controlled remotely from the station , with the Gemini then separating from the cargo module and flying around the station to dock normally on a different port . The rear-docking Gemini would have simply remained attached to the cargo module , with the crew boarding the station through it . Its docking would have been controlled by its own crew , from a station at the back of the cargo module . Two Gemini-derived spacecraft were considered for unmanned resupply flights . The first of these would have involved a Gemini spacecraft , with all systems for manned flight , re-entry and landing removed . The spacecraft would have docked using a port at the front of the spacecraft . Cargo would have been transferred through the nose of the spacecraft , where the re-entry attitude control system was located on the manned spacecraft . The spacecraft was equipped with a liquid propellant engine to perform rendezvous , and to reboost the space station . The other proposal was for a new spacecraft to be built for unmanned missions , but re-using as many Gemini systems as possible . It would have had a higher cargo capacity than the stripped-down version of the Gemini spacecraft .

Big Gemini , or Big G , grew out of a 1963 proposal called Gemini Transport , to develop an enlarged Gemini spacecraft with docking capability , which would take advantage of the increased capacity offered by the Saturn IB and Titan IIIM rockets . It was designed to transport between nine and twelve astronauts into space , and to be able to dock with space stations , in support of Apollo Applications and MOL missions . It would have been launched by a Heavy lift launch vehicle ; either a Titan IIIG or Saturn INT-20 , the former being intended for use on US Air Force missions and the latter being intended for NASA missions . The Titan IIIM was also considered , which would have launched a smaller version of the spacecraft due to its lower capacity , to resupply MOL space stations later in the program . NASA also proposed several Saturn IB derivatives with solid first stages as alternatives to the INT-20 , offering similar payload capacity . The shape and mass of the spacecraft would have varied depending on the rocket that was to launch it . The Saturn-launched version had a short , conical cargo module , and a total mass of 47,300 kilograms ( 104,300 lb ) whereas the Titan IIIG-launched version featured a longer , cylindrical module , with a total mass of 59,000 kilograms ( 130,000 lb ) . The Titan IIIM version would have been much shorter and lighter , with a mass of 15,600 kilograms ( 34,400 lb ) , as that rocket had less payload capacity than the Titan IIIG or Saturn . The IIIG variant would have carried twelve crew , whilst the others had a maximum capacity of nine . Use of the NASA variant with the Apollo Service Module was also considered .

Once in orbit , Big G would have docked with space stations using an Apollo docking probe mounted on the rear of the cargo module , which was in turn mounted on the rear of the re-entry module . The re-entry module itself would have been enlarged to accommodate the larger crew , and the modifications made to the spacecraft for the MOL program would have been incorporated , including the hatch in the heat shield , which would have been used to provide access to the cargo module . In the event of a launch failure , the launch escape system developed for the Apollo spacecraft would have been used to propel the re-entry module clear of the rocket . Big G would have made landings on land , using a parasail or paraglider to guide it onto a runway or dry lake , such as the one at Edwards Air Force Base . It would have landed using skids derived from the North American X-15 .

A number of studies investigated sending a Gemini spacecraft onto a circumlunar trajectory . Many of the proposals made for this involved a two launch architecture , with the Gemini spacecraft rendezvousing with an upper stage in orbit . Upper stages that were considered included the Transtage , the second stage of a Titan II , four different types of Centaur , including the S-V variant developed for the Saturn I , the Agena-D , an enlarged Agena , and two Agenas burning in parallel . Either a Titan or Saturn IB would have been used to launch the upper stage , whilst the Gemini would launch on the Titan II , as it had in the Gemini program . Other proposals involved launching the Gemini spacecraft on a Titan IIIC , and refueling in low Earth orbit before proceeding to the Moon , and a single launch architecture using a three-stage variant of the Saturn IB . The Gemini-Centaur proposal was predicted to have been able to achieve a 72-hour circumlunar flight . The Centaur would have performed trans-lunar injection , before separating from the Gemini spacecraft . Some concerns were raised that the Gemini spacecraft 's heat shield would not have been able to protect it during the higher speed ballistic reentry associated with the trajectory that would have been required . NASA proposed using a thicker heat shield and more insulation to protect the spacecraft . This and several other modifications made the spacecraft too heavy to be launched by the Titan II rocket which was used for the original twelve Gemini missions , so several solid rocket motors would have been added to allow this additional mass to be flown .

Using the Gemini spacecraft for a manned Lunar landing was considered as early as the original Mercury Mark II proposal which led to the Gemini program . The initial proposal was for a Lunar orbit rendezvous mission , using a Gemini spacecraft and a lightweight , open cockpit lander , launched by a Saturn C-3 rocket . It was the first time that Lunar orbit rendezvous was proposed as part of a lunar landing concept . The spacecraft would have been tested in Low Earth orbit before the Lunar missions , using two Titan II launches . The lander , which was designed by NASA 's Langley Research Center , would have had a mass of no more than 4,372 kilograms ( 9,639 lb ) . Some of the proposals had a mass as low as 1,460 kilograms ( 3,220 lb ) , with cryogenic propellants being used in place of heavier hypergolic propellant . The proposal was intended to provide a faster and lower-cost alternative to the Apollo program , which was at that time proposing a direct ascent landing . Another proposal would have used a Saturn V to achieve a direct ascent mission profile . The spacecraft consisted of four modules . The Retrograde Module would have been powered by an RL10 engine , and used to propel the spacecraft during the trans-lunar coast . During landing , it would be used for the initial phases of powered descent . At an altitude of 1,800 metres ( 5,900 ft ) above the Lunar surface , the RM would have been jettisoned , and a second module , the Terminal Landing Module , would have performed the final descent . After landing , the spacecraft would have stayed on the Moon for a day , before it was propelled back to Earth . Launch from the Lunar Surface and trans-Earth injection would have been performed by the Service Module , which would also have contained components of the life support system , and other systems which were located in the Equipment Module of the Earth orbit Gemini spacecraft . The Reentry Module was based on the Gemini capsule , but would have been modified to allow it to reenter the atmosphere at the higher velocity that would have been required by a Lunar flight . It was seen as the last effort by NASA managers and engineers who still advocated the direct ascent mission profile , and was intended to be cheaper , faster and safer than the Apollo lunar orbit rendezvous technique .

Due to the risks associated with the Lunar landing , a number of rescue spacecraft were proposed , to be used to allow the crew of an Apollo mission to return to Earth safely in the event of a problem . Many of these designs were based around the Gemini spacecraft . One of these proposals was the Gemini Lunar Orbit Rescue Vehicle , which was designed to retrieve the crew of an Apollo spacecraft stranded in orbit around the Moon . It was to have used a stretched reentry module to accommodate the three astronauts who would have been aboard the Apollo . This would have been attached to a modified Equipment Module . The Equipment Module contained engines which would be used for Lunar orbit insertion and trans-Earth injection , as well as life support equipment to keep the crew alive until they returned to Earth . Launch and trans-Lunar injection would have been performed by a Saturn V. Once the spacecraft was in Lunar orbit , the Apollo crew would have boarded it by means of an EVA . Another proposed spacecraft , the Gemini Lunar Surface Survival Shelter , was designed to be sent to the Moon ahead of an Apollo mission . It would have landed close to the planned Apollo landing site , and if the Apollo Lunar Module 's ascent stage failed to ignite , the crew would have performed an EVA to transfer to the LSSS . The shelter was not designed to take off again after landing , so an LSRS or another Apollo mission would then be sent to collect the crew , whilst the Command Module Pilot of the original Apollo mission would have returned to Earth alone aboard his spacecraft . It consisted of a Gemini Reentry Module , which would have housed the astronauts whilst they awaited rescue , and a descent stage containing life support systems , consumables , and the engine and propellant used to land the spacecraft .

The Gemini Lunar Surface Rescue Spacecraft was intended to fly a direct ascent mission , launched by a Saturn V. Descent stages , built from either the descent stage of the Apollo Lunar Module , or from the Apollo Service Module , would have reduced the spacecraft 's velocity as it approached the Moon . One configuration used two Service Modules and one LEM descent stage , with the LEM descent stage performing the final landing , and then being reused for ascent from the Lunar surface and trans-Earth injection . The other configuration used three LEM descent stages , with the second being used for landing and the third for ascent and TEI . The LSRS would have landed close to the Apollo Lunar Module on the Moon , and the Apollo crew would have transferred to it by EVA . Following the Apollo 1 fire in January 1967 , NASA conducted a safety review of the Apollo program . In response to this review , McDonnell proposed the Universal Lunar Rescue Vehicle , a repackaged version of the Lunar Surface Rescue Spacecraft with an enlarged capsule to make room for the three astronauts who were being rescued . It was intended to rescue an Apollo crew at almost any point whilst they were at the Moon , should an anomaly occur . Some ULRV designs included five seats , with two astronauts piloting it to the Moon . The proposal was considered , but rejected due to lack of funds .

The Manned Orbital Telescope was a proposal for a manned spacecraft for astronomical or solar observation . It would have used the larger reentry module which was also proposed for the Big Gemini spacecraft , and would have been launched on a Saturn IB . The enlarged reentry module was also considered for a spacecraft proposed at the same time , which would have been used to rescue the crews of manned spacecraft that were stranded in low Earth orbit . It would have launched atop a Titan IIIC , once in orbit it would have maneuvered by means of a Transtage integrated into the equipment module . The larger capsule would have been used to accommodate the crew of the spacecraft which required rescuing .

Another proposed mission would have seen a Gemini spacecraft rendezvous with a Pegasus satellite in low Earth orbit . The spacecraft would have either been launched directly into an orbit to rendezvous with the Pegasus , or into a lower orbit , subsequently docking with an Agena , and using that to raise its orbit . The Gemini would have flown around the Pegasus , and then one of the crew would have performed an EVA to recover a piece of one of the spacecraft 's micrometeoroid detection panels . This mission would have been used to prove that rendezvous could be accomplished with any spacecraft , to collect data on the satellite 's exposure to micrometeoroids — supporting data that the satellite had returned itself , and to demonstrate technology for military flights to inspect hostile satellites .

Another alternative landing concept was the US Air Force 's proposal to attach wings to the spacecraft . This proposal arose soon after the cancellation of the X-20 Dyna-Soar , and would have seen a Gemini spacecraft attached to a set of wings developed during the ASSET program . This would have been launched by a Titan II rocket , and would have been unable to maneuver in orbit . Another proposal saw the spacecraft being launched by a Titan IIIA or IIIC , using the Transtage for maneuvering . Once the mission was complete , the spacecraft would have been deorbited by means of five solid rocket motors .

There were also proposals to use the Gemini spacecraft to conduct long-duration missions to small , purpose-built space stations in low-Earth orbit . One proposal saw a space station based on the Agena , which would have been used to provide propulsion and attitude control for the station . A pressurized module between the Agena and the docking adapter would have been used by the crew for accommodation and to conduct experiments . The crew would have boarded the Agena by means of an inflatable tunnel between the hatches and its airlock . The Pecan spacecraft was a similar proposal .

MacPaint is a bitmap-based graphics painting software program developed by Apple Computer and released with the original Macintosh personal computer on January 24 , 1984 . It was sold separately for US $ 195 with its word processor counterpart , MacWrite . MacPaint was notable because it could generate graphics that could be used by other applications . Using the mouse , and the clipboard and QuickDraw picture language , pictures could be cut from MacPaint and pasted into MacWrite documents . Pictures could also be cut from MacPaint and pasted into the resource fork of any application via ResEdit , allowing application internationalization . The original MacPaint was developed by Bill Atkinson , a member of Apple 's original Macintosh development team . Early development versions of MacPaint were called MacSketch , still retaining part of the name of its roots , LisaSketch . It was later developed by Claris , the software subsidiary of Apple which was formed in 1987 . The last version of MacPaint was version 2.0 , released in 1988 . It was discontinued by Claris in 1998 because of diminishing sales .

MacPaint was written by Bill Atkinson , a member of Apple 's original Macintosh development team . The original MacPaint consisted of 5,804 lines of Pascal computer code , augmented by another 2,738 lines of 68000 assembly language . MacPaint 's user interface was designed by Susan Kare , also a member of the Macintosh team . Kare also beta-tested MacPaint before release . MacPaint uses two offscreen memory buffers to avoid flicker when dragging shapes or images across the screen . One of these buffers contained the existing pixels of a document , and the other contained the pixels of its previous state . The second buffer was used as the basis of the software 's undo feature . In April 1983 , the software 's name was changed from MacSketch to MacPaint . The original MacPaint was programmed as a single-document interface . The palette positions and sizes were unalterable , as was the document window . This was different from other Macintosh software at the time , which allowed the users to move windows and resize them . The original MacPaint did not incorporate a zoom function . Instead of a zoom function , a special magnification mode called FatBits was used . FatBits showed each pixel as a clickable rectangle with a white border . The FatBits editing mode set the standard for many future editors . MacPaint included a " Goodies " menu which included the FatBits tool . This menu was named the " Aids " menu in prerelease versions , but was renamed " Goodies " as public awareness of the AIDS epidemic grew in the summer of 1983 .

MacPaint was first advertised in an 18-page brochure in December 1983 , following the earlier announcement of the Macintosh 128K . The Macintosh was released on January 24 , 1984 with two applications , MacPaint and MacWrite . For a special post-election edition of Newsweek in November 1984 , Apple spent more than US $ 2.5 million to buy all 39 of the advertising pages in the issue . The Newsweek advertisement included many pages dedicated to explaining how MacWrite and MacPaint worked together . After launch , a New York Times reviewer noted how MacPaint unfolded numerous graphic possibilities for the personal computer ; he went further to say " it is better than anything else of its kind offered on personal computers by a factor of 10 . " MacPaint 2.0 was released on January 11 , 1988 by Claris . It added many improvements to the software , including the capability to open and use up to nine documents simultaneously . The original MacPaint operated as a single-document application with a non-movable window . MacPaint 2.0 eliminated this limitation , introducing a fully functioning document window , which could be sized up to 8 x 10 " . Several other features were introduced , such as a Zoom tool , MagicEraser tool for undo actions and stationary documents . MacPaint 2.0 was developed by David Ramsey , a developer at Claris . MacPaint 2.0 was sold for US $ 125 , with a US $ 25 upgrade available for existing users of MacPaint . Claris discontinued technical support for the original MacPaint in 1989 . Claris stopped selling MacPaint in early 1998 because of diminishing sales . There has been an unofficial update called MacPaint X which is 3.0 beta , mainly for people who wished to be able to use the program .

Since 2010 MacPaint 1.3 's source code ( written in a combination of Assembly and Pascal ) is available through the Computer History Museum , along with the QuickDraw source code , a library to draw bitmapped graphics , due to the support of Steve Jobs . MacPaint inspired other companies to release similar products for other platforms ; within a year a half-dozen clones existed for the Apple II and IBM PC . Some of these included Broderbund 's Dazzle Draw for the Apple II , Mouse Systems ' PC Paint for the PC , and IBM 's Color Paint for the IBM PCjr .

" Night Out " is the fifteenth episode of the fourth season of the American comedy television series The Office , and the show 's sixty-eighth episode overall . The episode was written by Mindy Kaling and directed by Ken Whittingham . It first aired in the United States on April 24 , 2008 on NBC . " Night Out " was viewed by a measured audience of over 7.5 million people , bringing in the lowest number of estimated viewers that The Office received among 12 episodes . " Night Out " received mixed reviews from critics . In the episode , Michael and Dwight travel to New York City to party with Ryan . Ryan starts acting erratically , and it is revealed that he is under the influence of drugs . Meanwhile , the remaining employees are going to be forced to work on a Saturday . Jim proposes that they work late on Friday , so they do not have to come in the next day . Once Jim and his co-workers finish working , they find that they are locked in , and everyone quickly places the blame on Jim .

Ryan Howard ( B. J. Novak ) arrives at the Scranton , Pennsylvania branch of the Dunder Mifflin Paper Company and is noticeably friendlier than on his previous visits . The employees , by now fed up with Ryan 's new website , angrily ask him questions about the website and their clients . Ryan shows the staff at the branch the new Dunder Mifflin website , " Dunder Mifflin Infinity 2.0 " , the previous version of which was shut down because sexual predators had invaded the social networking component of the site . As Ryan leaves , he tells Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) of the women he meets in clubs in New York City . Michael and Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) subsequently decide to go to New York , locate Ryan , attend parties with him , and try to meet women while doing so . In New York , Michael and Dwight locate Ryan after discovering which club Ryan frequents ; Ryan is thrilled to see them but appears to be under the influence of drugs though Michael and Dwight do not notice . Later , Michael , Dwight , Ryan and Ryan 's colleague , Troy Undercook ( Noel Petok ) ( who Dwight is certain is a Hobbit due to his short stature ) wait outside another club , but fail to get in because they do not have dates . Dwight comes to the rescue when he manages to pair each of them with members of a women 's basketball team , who are also waiting in line . Inside the club , Ryan 's dancing becomes erratic and aggressive , and he accidentally hits a girl , prompting her friends to attack Ryan . Dwight and Michael escort him out of the club , and after Troy advises them not to take Ryan to a hospital , he runs off . Michael and Dwight bring Ryan back to his apartment , where he tells them that he thinks his " friend Troy " has a drug problem , and asks what he should do about it . Michael , oblivious to the fact that Ryan is obviously referring to his own drug addiction , gives him hypothetical advice involving a wiretap and snitching on a drug dealer . He then tells the camera that he has been watching The Wire but does not understand what is going on in the show .

Back in Scranton , the rest of the employees are going to be forced to work on a Saturday to record their own sales as the website 's sales , which is , according to Ryan , " a temporary procedure to increase the legitimacy of the website . " With no one eager to participate , Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) decides to ask everyone to stay in the office late instead of coming in for the Saturday . They all agree to the plan , and after working until 9 : 00 pm , they are shocked to find the parking lot gates locked . Jim had forgotten to tell the security guard that they were staying late . They are unable to return to the office because Pam Beesly ( Jenna Fischer ) locked the door from the inside , and Dwight , miles away in New York , has both the spare and master keys . Jim repeatedly calls Hank the security guard ( Hugh Dane ) . Pam accidentally injures Meredith by hitting her head with a football that was found in the parking lot . Sitting in the lobby area waiting for the security guard to arrive , the employees are clearly frustrated with Jim , and even vote by a show of hands that Andy and Angela are a better couple than Jim and Pam .

" Night Out " was the seventh episode of the series directed by Ken Whittingham . It was written by Mindy Kaling , who also acts in the show as customer-service representative Kelly Kapoor . The episode was the eighth of the series to be written by Kaling . " Night Out " was the third new episode of The Office to be broadcast since the episode " The Deposition " on November 15 , 2007 , due to the effects of the 2007 – 2008 Writers Guild of America strike . Filming of The Office immediately halted on that date , because many members of the cast including Carell , Novak , Kaling , and Lieberstein are members of the WGA and refused to cross WGA picket lines . If not for the writers ' strike , this episode would have most likely been filmed in November 2007 . Most of " Night Out " was shot during the night . The scene that has Toby putting his hand on Pam 's knee was shot at 2 : 30 am on a Friday . The scene was shot about eight times because according to Kaling , " everyone kept breaking because Toby was so vulnerable and awkward . " Kate Flannery did her stunts in the scene where Pam throws a football and hits Customer and Supplier Relations worker Meredith Palmer ( Flannery ) in the face . Flannery had a stunt double on the set , but she was never needed for the scene . Kate recalls that she " didn 't get a scratch in all 14 takes that we shot . " Lieberstein on the other hand used a stunt double for the scene in which Toby climbs over the fence . Although Lieberstein offered to do the stunt himself , executive producer and show runner Greg Daniels decided against it .

When casting " Tall Girl # 1 " ( the woman who would kiss with Dwight ) , the show was looking for a girl 6 ' 1' ' or taller . Actress Cassie Fliegel , who is 5 ' 11 ' ' , auditioned for the part anyway . After getting a callback , Fliegel went to a gym to work out , attempting to gain muscle to look more like a basketball player . On the day of the callbacks , Fliegel remembers being next to a girl who was 6 ' 8' ' . Despite her size , Fliegel , a former basketball player herself , was cast for the part . Initially , she did not know that her character was going to make out with Dwight . Fliegel recalls that when she first heard about kissing Dwight she " was like , I don 't think so " . However , after finding out that she had her own trailer , Fliegel warmed up to the idea . The music in the club was chosen by Novak , Kaling 's then-boyfriend Benjamin Nugent , and Daniel Chun . When filming Ryan dancing in the club , the girl that Ryan hit was actually a stunt woman . Pads had been placed on the floor so Novak could fall down safely . The German lullaby that Dwight sang to Ryan was script supervisor Veda Semarne 's idea . Semarne 's Austrian grandmother sang the same song to her when she was a child .

" Night Out " received 4.0 / 10 in the ages 18 – 49 demographic in the Nielsen ratings . This means that four percent of all households with an 18- to 49-year-old living in it watched the episode , and ten percent had their televisions tuned to the channel at any point . The episode was watched by 7.56 million viewers . " Night Out " did not do as well as " Chair Model " did the week before , losing 20 percent of the previous episode 's viewers . Some attribute the loss of viewers to a lack of Grey 's Anatomy and a repeat of CSI the previous week . With 7.69 million , " Night Out " had fewer viewers than any other episode of The Office from the fourth season , except for " Job Fair " , which garnered only 7.16 million viewers . Reviews for " Night Out " were mixed . Zap2It 's Rick Porter thought that although it wasn 't " as sublime in its Needy Michael-ness as last week 's ( episode ) " and " in some ways , though , it was maybe even a little sadder " , " Night Out " was " still pretty darn funny " . Porter went on to praise the acting work of both B.J. Novak and Paul Lieberstein , as well as the writing of Mindy Kaling . TV Squad 's Jay Black said that Michael summed up " Night Out " perfectly when he said " Best . Night . Ever . " Black went on to praise both of the storylines , and the ability of the show to achieve success both in as well as out of the Dunder Mifflin Scranton building . Similar to Black 's statements , Gretchen Hansen of Entertainment Weekly stated that " ' Best . Night . Ever . ' Oh , so true , Michael . " She also stated that " I guess I knew it was going to be a good episode of The Office when I had two pages of scribbled notes before the first commercial break . " Hansen went on to praise both the acting and the writing of the episode as points that contributed to the success of the episode . Rachel Cericola , of TV Fodder , praised the writing of the episode by Mindy Kaling . She also praised the storyline of the episode that didn 't involve Michael and Dwight , saying " The second plotline was its usual funny filler . However , it was Toby 's revelation that made it all worthwhile . "

Travis Fickett of IGN said that the episode was " still satisfying , even when it 's not one of the show 's funnier episodes " , but " it 's a bit of a shame this episode wasn 't a home run , because having Dwight and Michael hit the clubs is a funny idea . " Fickett went on to praise the episode 's awkward moment between Toby and Pam , when Toby placed his hand on Pam 's leg , and Toby 's subsequent escape by hopping the fence . Fickett stated that , for Toby 's growing love of Pam , and growing jealousy of Jim , " this is pretty great pay off " . Claire Zulkey , a writer for the Los Angeles Times , was not as pleased with the episode . Zulkey wrote " that when it 's at its zaniest , The Office is at its worst " , and the episode was " just too silly to be funny " . Zulkey did say that " it was hilarious to see him ( Toby ) let his hand more-than-linger on her knee and then abruptly flee the premises by jumping over the fence and running home . " In a poll done by Office fansite OfficeTally.com , viewers ranked " Night Out " as the 13th-most popular episode out of the 14 episodes of season four .

" Raining Men " is a song by Barbadian recording artist Rihanna from her fifth studio album , Loud ( 2010 ) . Written by Melvin Hough II , Rivelino Wouter , Timothy Thomas , Theron Thomas and Onika Maraj , and produced by Mel & Mus , the song was sent to urban radio on December 7 , 2010 , as the album 's third single in the United States , and was re-sent to urban radio on January 25 , 2011 . A hip hop song , it features rap vocals by Nicki Minaj and instrumentation consisting of sirens and bass . The song 's lyrics revolve around how there is an endless supply of men available in the world . The song garnered a mixed response from music critics ; some praised the chemistry between Rihanna and Minaj , while others commented that it bore strong resemblances to Beyoncé 's song " Diva " with regard to its composition , and were critical of the notion . Upon the release of Loud , " Raining Men " charted on the singles charts in South Korea , the United Kingdom and the United States on the strength of digital download sales . In South Korea , the song peaked at number 41 , while in the United Kingdom it peaked at number 142 on the UK Singles Chart and number 31 on the UK R & B Chart . In the United States , it peaked at number 11 on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles , making this Rihanna 's third single that failed to reach the US Billboard Hot 100 chart ( " We Ride " , " Wait Your Turn " ) . Following the song 's release to US urban radio , " Raining Men " peaked at number 48 on the Hot R & B / Hip-Hop Songs chart . No music video was shot for the song , and it received no televised performances as part of promotion . The song was included on the set list of the Loud Tour ( 2011 ) . The performance featured Rihanna in a camouflage inspired outfit , accompanied by dancers in the same attire who held pink rifles .

" Raining Men " was written by Melvin Hough II , Rivelino Wouter , Timothy Thomas , Theron Thomas and Nicki Minaj ( credited as Onika Maraj ) , with instrumental production of the song done by Mel & Mus . It features rap vocals by Minaj ; Rihanna 's and Minaj 's vocals were recorded by Kuk Harrell , Josh Gudwin , Marcos Tovar and Aerial Chobaz at Platinum Sound Recording Studios ; Manhattan , New York City ; Electric Lady Studios , Greenwich Village , New York City and Glenwood Recording Studios , Burbank , California . Koby Hassi served as the assistant vocal recorder . The song 's music was recorded by Dana Nielsen , and was mixed by Jaycen Joshua . Jesus Garnica served as the mixing assistant .

" Raining Men " marked the second collaboration between Rihanna 's and Minaj , the first being Minaj 's song " Fly " , from her album Pink Friday ( 2010 ) , on which Rihanna appeared as a guest vocalist . During an interview with Capital FM radio station in London , England , Rihanna revealed that herself and Minaj had written songs together , specifically ballads , for possible inclusion on the formers fourth studio album , Rated R ( 2009 ) , however none of the songs made the final track listing . Rihanna concluded her statement by saying that she could not wait to collaborate with the rapper again for her fifth studio album , the at the time unreleased and unnamed Loud . When questioned about what " Raining Men " was like , the singer stated that it is " a really fun song . Nothing like the original . It 's quite uptempo but kind of quirky and funny . " In the same interview , Rihanna explained why she liked to collaborate with Minaj , saying " She has a great buzz and she has a ' thing ' to her . She is a star and that 's why people love her . She 's also really entertaining with her visual as well as her lyrics , and she has a great melody . " The singer continued to reveal how she was impressed with Minaj 's songwriting abilities , saying " I 'm really amazed that she can write like that . [ Nicki ] not only raps but she can write songs too ... It was really easy actually . We were going back and forth with the texts on how we were going to get to do it because we were in two different places and had two opposite schedules . " In an interview with DJ Semtex for BBC Radio , Minaj explained how the concept for her rap verse developed , revealing " I just wanted to be crazy , I wrote that track in bed actually . I had an off day , they sent me a record and said they needed it back in 24 hours and I wrote . " With regard to the original , " It 's Raining Men " , Minaj stated that she wanted to make " Raining Men " " more melodic and crazy . " " Raining Men " was sent for urban radio adds as the third single from Loud on December 7 , 2010 . On January 25 , 2011 , the song was re-released for urban radio adds .

" Raining Men " is a hip hop song , with a " shiny trap beat " . that lasts for a duration of 3 : 44 ( 3 minutes , 44 seconds ) . The song is not a cover of The Weather Girls song " It 's Raining Men " , composed by Paul Jabara and Paul Shaffer , however it is based on it with regard to its lyrical content and does sample it . Instrumentation consists of sirens and " mind-melting " bass . The song is written in the key of B ♭ major and is set in simple time with a moderated hip-hop groove , with a metronome of 80 beats per minute . " Raining Men " ' s composition was likened to the work of M.I.A. by Emily McKay for NME . Stacey Anderson for Spin commented on Minaj 's vocal stylizaion of the word " really , " writing that she projects the word as a " breathless contortion into its own fully demented sideshow , " with regard to the fast speed in which Minaj raps . James Reed for The Boston Globe described Minaj 's verse as a " manic guest rhyme " . Rihanna 's vocal range in the song spans from the low note of G3 to the high note of B ♭ 4 . According to Jon Pareles for The New York Times , the songs lyrics revolve around Rihanna and Minaj " singing and rapping about an endless supply of available men . " Lyrically , Kevin O 'Donnell of Spin described the song as Rihanna and Minaj 's own " female empowerment anthem .

The song was met with mixed reviews from music critics . Jon Pareles and Jon Caramanica of The New York Times commented that " Rihanna shares the mechanized , chattering beat of " Raining Men " with Nicki Minaj , singing and rapping about an endless supply of available men " . Stacey Anderson of Spin commented that the song is the highlight of the album , calling it " a gloriously eccentric collaboration with Nicki Minaj that entwines their minor-key hyperventilating , air sirens dissolving into mind-melting bass , and the scene-stealing Minaj 's breathless contortion of the simple word ' really ' into its own fully demented sideshow " . BBC Music also commended Minaj 's presence on the song , saying that " Nicki Minaj makes for a superb partner in crime on Raining Men , her wild , kinetic flow complementing Rihanna ’ s steely delivery to wicked effect " . Jim Farber for New York Daily News said that " Rihanna pairs just as well with Nicki Minaj , on a complete tear-down on the old Weather Girls disco standard ' It 's Raining Men . ' Here it 's not a gay song of lust but a statement of assurance that no man should incite too much worry , considering their sheer numbers " . Chris Richards of The Washington Post said that " Nicki Minaj , a quick-witted rapper able to assume the voices of a dozen characters in a single song , fails to impart any wisdom on her colleague with " Raining Men " . Emily Mackay of NME said that " Raining Men " is a bold collaboration between Rihanna and Minaj , which plays to both of their strengths in the " hip-pop " collaboration .

August Brown for Los Angeles Times said that " ' Cheers ( Drink to That ) ' and ' Raining Men , ' as foamy and spunky as they may be , are such a dogleg turn from Rated R that they come off as little more than image recalibration . That 's her prerogative as an artist , and it 's certainly earned . But it underscores the one thing we 've always wondered about Rihanna — what is she really feeling ? " . Ryan Dombal of Pitchfork Media was more critical of the song , commenting that " Raining Men is a shameless Beyoncé rip-off that would be quickly dismissed if not for the fact that it 's a pretty-damn-good Beyoncé rip off with a characteristically scene-stealing guest verse from Nicki Minaj " . James Reed of The Boston Globe also noticed the similarity between the song 's composition and the work of American R & B recording artist Beyoncé Knowles , saying " ' Raining Men ' , borrowing a digitized riff from Beyoncé 's ' Diva ' , features rising rapper Nicki Minaj on a typically manic guest rhyme . The song 's message doubles as the album 's mantra : Some cats really do have nine lives " . Idolator reviewer Becky Bain praised Minaj 's " infectious and energetic verse " and felt the song 's rhythm " fits Nicki 's quirkiness perfectly " .

Upon the release of Loud , " Raining Men " charted in South Korea , the United Kingdom and the United States on the strength of digital download sales . The song debuted at number 41 on the South Korea Gaon International Chart on November 14 , 2010 , and fell to number 85 the following week before dropping out of the chart . It debuted and peaked at number 142 on the UK Singles Chart on November 27 , 2010 . The song was more successful on the UK R & B Chart , where it peaked at number 30 in the same chart issue . " Raining Men " peaked at number 11 on the US Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles , a component chart which represents the 25 songs which failed to make an impact on the Billboard Hot 100 chart . The song debuted at number 69 US Hot R & B / Hip-Hop Songs chart for the week of December 25 , 2010 . It peaked at number 48 on the US Hot R & B / Hip-Hop Songs .

" Raining Men " was included on the set list of the Loud Tour in 2011 . The performance featured Rihanna in a camouflage inspired outfit , and was accompanied by dancers in the same attire who held pink rifles . The set included a pink tank which was also present on the Rated R supported tour , Last Girl on Earth Tour ( 2010 / 11 ) . It began with Rihanna appearing on stage sitting on the pink tank as it was wheeled from the back of the stage to the front while Minaj 's rap verse played ; Rihanna then concluded the song with her vocals . " Raining Men " was preceded by " Hard " and " Breakin ' Dishes " , and featured the singer wearing the same outfit and set design . Minaj has also performed her verse on her Pink Friday : Reloaded Tour .

Evan Brooks Laich ( / ˈlaɪk / ; born June 23 , 1983 ) is a Canadian ice hockey player currently playing for the Toronto Maple Leafs of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . Laich was originally drafted by the Ottawa Senators in the 2001 NHL Entry Draft , and was later traded to the Washington Capitals as part of the package for Peter Bondra . Before playing professionally , Laich spent time in the Western Hockey League ( WHL ) playing with the Moose Jaw Warriors and Seattle Thunderbirds . He has represented Canada internationally , capturing a silver medal at the 2003 World Junior Championships , and playing for Canada again at the 2010 World Hockey Championships .

Laich started his junior hockey career with the Moose Jaw Warriors of the Western Hockey League ( WHL ) during the 2000 – 01 season . He played in 71 games with the Warriors , scoring nine goals and adding 21 assists . Laich was a dedicated student in Moose Jaw , being awarded the club 's Scholastic Player of the Year for the 2000 – 01 season . After the season , he was drafted by the Ottawa Senators in the sixth round , 193rd overall , of the 2001 NHL Entry Draft . He started the 2001 – 02 season with the Warriors , but was traded to the Seattle Thunderbirds along with Tomáš Mojžíš for Craig Olynick and Stas Avksentiev . The deal was unpopular with Warriors fans , as Olynick left the club and Avksentiev never reported . Laich spent the rest of his junior career with the Thunderbirds . He started to develop more of an offensive game , finishing off the 2001 – 02 season with 58 points in the 47 games he played in Seattle . Laich has said that getting traded to Seattle was a good move for him , with coach Dean Chynoweth providing ample opportunities for him to display his skills . He was named the team 's Most Dedicated Player after the 2001 – 02 season . His offensive game flourished further in his first full season with the Thunderbirds ( 2002 – 03 ) , as he finished the season with 41 goals and 53 assists , leading the team . These stats placed him sixth overall in the WHL points race . He was named the WHL 's Western Conference MVP . He was also named to the WHL 's Western Conference First All-Star Team , and the Canadian Hockey League 's Third All-Star Team .

Laich attended the Ottawa Senators training camp before the 2002 – 03 season . He played his first professional game in the American Hockey League ( AHL ) for the Binghamton Senators in 2003 . He made his National Hockey League ( NHL ) debut with the Senators on February 3 , 2003 , against the New Jersey Devils . Later in the season , Laich was traded to the Washington Capitals , along with a second round draft pick , for Peter Bondra , a deal which ended Bondra 's 14-year career with the Capitals . After the trade , he reported to the Capitals ' AHL affiliate , the Portland Pirates , making his debut with the Capitals on March 12 , 2003 , against the Chicago Blackhawks . He finished the season playing with the Pirates , appearing in six playoff games . The NHL lockout saw Laich spend the entire 2004 – 05 season with the Pirates , playing in 68 games , finishing eighth on the team in scoring with 16 goals and 10 assists . During the 2005 – 06 season , Laich played in 104 regular season and playoff games between the Capitals and their new AHL affiliate , the Hershey Bears ; this tied him for the most games played in the organization with Boyd Gordon . After training camp , he started the season in the AHL , but was optimistic about his chances to play in the NHL , saying , " You 've just got to work hard . There 's spots up there , guys could go down with an injury , you want to be the first guy called up . " He spent most of the season at the NHL level , playing in 73 games and recording 21 points . After the Capitals ' season was over , Laich rejoined the Bears for their playoff run and scored eight goals in 21 games while helping the team capture the Calder Cup . Laich played the entire 2006 – 07 season with the Capitals , scoring eight goals and adding ten assists . After the season , Laich and the Capitals went to salary arbitration , where he was awarded a one-year contract worth $ 725,000 .

Laich played in all 82 games for the Capitals during the 2007 – 08 season , and set career highs in goals , assists and points . His 21 goals ranked third overall on the team . He led the Capitals with two short handed goals , and played in his 200th career regular season game . After a two-goal game against the Atlanta Thrashers , Laich summed up his philosophy towards scoring : " If you want money , go to the bank . If you want bread , go to the bakery . If you want goals , go to the net . " During the playoffs , Laich had a five-game point streak in the Eastern Conference quarter-finals against the Philadelphia Flyers . This tied him for the longest point streak during the first round of the playoffs . As a restricted free agent after the season , Laich signed a three-year deal with the team on July 9 , 2008 . The 2008 – 09 season saw Laich play in all 82 games for the Capitals again , where he set new career highs in goals , assists and points ; he scored 23 goals and added 30 assists , breaking the 50-point plateau for the first time in his career . During the Capitals ' playoff run , Laich played in 14 games and added seven points . He assisted on the overtime winning goal in Game 6 of the Eastern Conference Semi-Final against the eventual Stanley Cup champions Pittsburgh Penguins .

Laich 's streak of consecutive games played was broken in the 2009 – 10 season , when he missed four games with a cheekbone injury in February 2010 . He still managed to set new career highs in both goals ( 25 ) and assists ( 34 ) . On February 10 , shortly after returning from injury , Laich recorded his first career NHL hat trick , against the Montreal Canadiens . During the playoffs , Laich scored the last goal of the Capitals season during Game 7 against the Montreal Canadiens . During the 2010 – 11 season , the Capitals participated in the 2011 NHL Winter Classic against the Pittsburgh Penguins at Heinz Field , Pittsburgh . Leading up to the game , both teams were featured on HBO 's 24 / 7 , which offered a behind-the-scenes look at both teams as they prepared . Laich refused to blame the presence of the cameras for the team 's losing streak , saying , " There 's no using the HBO cameras as a crutch or an annoyance or anything like that . There 's no excuse . I don 't think HBO has played any bit of an ounce in how things have gone the last two weeks . " Laich was appreciative of the opportunities afforded by the outdoor game , and was happy to be able to share time with his family and friends on the outdoor rink set up at Heinz Field .

On June 28 , 2011 , Laich signed a six-year , $ 27 million contract extension worth $ 4.5 million per season . As the player representative for the Washington Capitals during the 2012 NHL-NHLPA CBA negotiations , Laich stated in support of the National Hockey League Players ' Association ( NHLPA ) that , " At some point you have to dig your heels in and fight . If we don ’ t this time , then what happens next ? Appeasement only makes the aggressor more aggressive , and the players really understand that . We believe in our cause and our leadership and I believe we ’ re more unified this time and ready for a fight . " Prior to the start of the lockout-shortened 2012-2013 playing season , Laich played for the Kloten Flyers of Switzerland 's National League . In 35 games for the Flyers , Laich posted 17 goals and a total of 38 points . He also reportedly suffered a groin injury , which limited his play upon his return stateside with the NHL . When play resumed for the 2012 – 13 season , Laich was limited to nine games .

On March 17 , 2014 , the Capitals announced via Twitter that Laich " underwent a successful procedure to release a tight adductor , " a part of the groin muscle . He is expected to miss the rest of the season with a recovery time of four-to-six weeks . Except for a minor shoulder injury resulting in him missing 16 games , Laich returned to full health in 2014-15 . He finished with seven goals and 20 points in 66 games played . In the 2015 – 16 season , Laich 's offensive production rapidly declined , while his $ 4.5 million cap hit stuck out as one of the only adverse aspects of a league-leading Capitals squad . On February 27 , 2016 , the Capitals placed Laich on waivers for the purpose of sending him to the Hershey Bears of the AHL . The following day , on the eve of the trade deadline , Laich , along with Connor Carrick and a second round selection in the 2016 draft , were traded to the Toronto Maple Leafs in exchange for Daniel Winnik and a fifth round pick in the 2016 draft . The purpose of the trade was to give the Capitals salary cap relief to use toward younger core player contracts that needed re-signing the following off-season . Capitals GM Brian Maclellan called the trade , when asked , the hardest thing he had done as General Manager of the team . Laich had been the longest tenured active professional Washington-area athlete at the time of the trade , concluding his service of 12 years with the franchise . In what easily stands as the most emotional trade in Capitals history since Laich was dealt to Washington in a package for Peter Bondra , one journalist wrote " It 's ironic that money is what ultimately forced the Caps to move Laich . This is a guy who loves the game so much , he 'd probably play for free . "

Laich debuted with Team Canada at the 2003 World Junior Championships , which were held in Halifax , Nova Scotia . In a game against Sweden , Laich scored Canada 's first goal of the tournament . He scored two goals and added four assists in six games at the tournament , where Canada won a silver medal . According to his father , Harold , his son had always dreamed of playing for Canada . Laich 's next experience with Team Canada came at the 2010 World Championships . He scored one goal in seven games as Canada finished seventh . During the tournament in a game against Russia , Laich raised the ire of his Capitals ' teammate Semyon Varlamov for slashing and cross-checking Alexander Ovechkin . Varlamov said of Laich 's play , " ... Brooks Laich was constantly trying to slash and cross-check him ( Ovechkin ) as painful [ sic ] as possible . After the game he certainly wished me luck and victory at the world championship , but the unpleasant impression still remains . "

In 2009 , Capitals ' Head Coach Bruce Boudreau believed that Laich had not yet reached his full potential , saying , " ... I still don 't think we 've seen the best of Brooks . I think he 's going to be a 25- , 30-goal scorer in this league and become a staple for a while . " Boudreau also said Laich is considered one of the hardest working players on the Capitals ' roster by his coaches and teammates . Part of Laich 's inspiration comes from his father , who , during a 34-year tenure as a high school principal , only missed three days of work . Laich plays on the Capitals power play and kills penalties in addition to his ice time at even strength . Superstar Alexander Ovechkin is the Capitals current captain , but Laich has been lauded for his leadership and was considered for a more formal role in the team 's leadership structure in 2009 . Laich is a hard worker , and dedicated to his team , saying , " If I asked you about your family , you would talk about them forever because it 's something you love . That 's the way I feel about this team . This team is my life , and I love playing here and I 'm passionate about playing hockey . So it 's easy for me to talk about it . " Boudreau has said , " You are never going to find a guy that cares more than Brooks Laich . " Laich spends time in the off-season with a power skating instructor , which he feels is key to a long career .

Laich has two siblings , an older sister and younger brother . His father worked as a high school teacher and principal . In his free time , he plays guitar and golfs . Colorado Avalanche star Joe Sakic was Laich 's favorite player growing up . He is actively involved in charity work , supporting charities related to multiple sclerosis and Athletes Against Autism . While still playing junior hockey , Laich helped his hometown of Wawota raise money to purchase a Zamboni for the local arena . Laich received national media attention when he stopped to help two stranded Capitals fans change their flat tire after a Game 7 loss in the 2010 playoffs . When he came across the woman and her teenaged daughter stranded on the Theodore Roosevelt Bridge , Laich stopped to install their spare and apologized for the club 's early loss in the playoffs . For his efforts , Laich was hockey analyst Michael Farber 's nominee for the 2010 Sports Illustrated Sportsman of the Year . When asked about the incident , Laich responded , " It 's not a big deal . It was just a tire . The lady was stranded on the side of the road , I saw that it was just a lady and her daughter , and I figured my tire expertise outweighed hers . "

Max Fenig ( Scott Bellis ) , last seen in Fallen Angel , is traveling on an airplane , Flight 549 , which flies over upstate New York . He watches another man on the plane who seems to be following him . The man heads to the plane 's bathroom , where he assembles a zip gun . However , when he comes back out , the airplane begins shaking and a bright light flashes outside , showing that the plane is encountering a UFO . The emergency door next to Max 's seat is opened . Elsewhere , Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) celebrate Scully 's birthday . They are approached by a woman named Sharon Graffia , who claims to be Max 's sister ; she tells them that Max planned to deliver something to Mulder , but that his flight to Washington has crashed . The agents head to the crash site in Northville , New York , and attend an NTSB meeting where Flight 549 's final transmissions are shown . Mulder theorizes that the plane was forced down by aliens attempting to abduct Max ; the NTSB team , led by chief investigator Mike Millar ( Joe Spano ) , dismisses his claims .

When Mulder and Scully survey the crash site , they realize that there is a nine-minute disparity between the crash and the time on the victims ' wristwatches , indicating missing time . Mulder believes that Max was abducted from the plane and that his body will not be found . Meanwhile , Scott Garrett , a Man in Black posing as an NTSB investigator , steals the zip gun from the assassin 's body and erases his face and fingerprints with acid . Larold Rehbun , a passenger who sat next to Max , is found alive . His injuries indicate exposure to radiation . Upon being confronted by Scully , Sharon denies that Max brought a radioactive substance aboard the plane , but divulges that she is not actually Max 's sister . She also gives up details about his underground life . Scully subsequently tells Mulder that Max worked at an environmental energy plant in Colorado under an alias , and believes that he may have caused the crash after bringing plutonium on board ; Mulder , however , believes that Max was taken off the plane by a UFO , and that Rehbun 's injuries were caused by exposure to the craft . Scully informs Mulder that Max 's body has already been pulled from the crash site . Meanwhile , Sharon is abducted from her hotel room .

After identifying Max 's body , Mulder finds that the wristwatches have been stolen from the other victims . He refutes the NTSB 's official explanation of malfunction as a cause of the crash , and is doubtful that the true cause will be found unless they discern what happened during the nine minutes of missing time . The agents visit Sergeant Louis Frish ( Tom O 'Brien ) , an air traffic controller from the U.S. Air Force who was on duty during the crash . Frish denies anything unusual happened . However , after the agents leave , Frish and a colleague argue over whether to reveal the " truth " about Flight 549 's demise . After finding Sharon 's trashed hotel room , Mulder meets with Millar , who tells him that the door was pulled off the plane from the outside while it was in flight . Later , Frish finds his colleague dead from a faked suicide . A group of commandos arrive to capture Frish , but he escapes . Frish goes to see Mulder and Scully , telling them that he lied before and that his commanding officer had ordered him to track the plane 's coordinates as it was being intercepted by a second aircraft . Seconds later , there was an explosion and the plane disappeared from his radar . Mulder believes that a third aircraft , a UFO , approached the plane and was destroyed by the second aircraft , also causing the Flight 549 crash . The agents leave with Frish and are soon chased by the commandos . Meanwhile , Millar returns to the crash site and encounters a UFO . He finds Sharon nearby , having just been returned by her abductors .

During the production of the third season , special effects supervisor Dave Gauthier constructed an elaborate mock-up of a Boeing 737 airplane in order to be able to simulate a crash . Series creator Chris Carter decided to make use of this rig during the fourth season . When conceiving of the episode , the desire to add to Fox Mulder 's emotional involvement by having someone he knew on board led to the writers bringing back the character of Max Fenig to be that person . Scott Bellis , who had previously portrayed Fenig in the first season episode " Fallen Angel " , had auditioned for other roles on the show in the interim , but had always been rejected by the producers because his character was felt to be too memorable . Bellis met series star David Duchovny at a gym several times , and learnt from him that the character of Max was being considered for a two-part episode . The episode 's co-writer Frank Spotnitz did not want to have Fenig 's appearance " milked " or do something the show had already done . As such he came up with the idea to kill off Fenig in the first part of the episode , which he felt was " a bold choice " .

Gauthier 's 737 rig — which required 400 U.S. gallons ( 1,500 L ) of hydraulic fluid to construct — was designed to move across multiple axes in order to better simulate turbulence ; it could rotate 22 degrees each way about its length , and move four feet to either side . The fuselage could be opened up at intervals every 6 feet ( 1.8 m ) to better allow cameras to record inside it . The show 's producers wanted the plane crash site and investigation to be as authentic as possible , so they used a National Transportation Safety Board official to act as their technical advisor on the episode to ensure that everything was properly recreated . The NTSB officials noted that the site was authentic in every way " except for the smell " ; Carter has noted that this level of verisimilitude left some of the crew members " frightened by their work " . Director Rob Bowman admitted that the episode exceeded its given budget , noting that Carter would often defend him from Fox studio officials angry at his production costs . Bellis ' abduction scene , in which his character is levitated through the door of the airplane , was achieved by pulling the actor out of the airplane rig with a harness ; additional coverage was achieved by repeating this with a stuntman , who Bellis notes was pulled out of the rig " a lot harder " .

" Tempus Fugit " premiered on the Fox network on March 16 , 1997 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC Two on January 14 , 1998 . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 11.9 with an 18 share , meaning that roughly 11.9 percent of all television-equipped households , and 18 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . A total of 18.85 million viewers watched this episode during its original airing . The episode received mixed to positive reviews from critics . Zack Handlen , writing for The A.V. Club , rated " Tempus Fugit " an A − . Handlen praised the effectiveness of the cold open , and noted the episode highlighted how " particularly ruthless " the series was with its recurring cast , noting " the mortality rate helps to create a mood of ever-encroaching doom , as if the darkness that seems about to swallow Mulder and Scully in so many scenes ... is as much symbolic as it is literal " . Paula Vitaris , writing for Cinefantastique , rated " Tempus Fugit " two-and-a-half stars out of four , describing it as " gripping " with " lots of action " . However , Vitaris felt that the fleeting use of guest star Scott Bellis was " a waste " , and that the discovery of an alien corpse towards the end " robs this story of any ambiguity " . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X-Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode four stars out of five , calling it " the best conspiracy episode we 've seen in nearly two years " . Shearman and Peason felt that " Tempus Fugit " was " told very clearly , with remarkably little baggage " , and praised the acting of guests Tom O 'Brien and Joe Spano . Twelve members of the show 's post-production crew won the 1997 Emmy Award for Outstanding Sound Editing For A Series for their work on this episode ; while four others received a nomination for Outstanding Sound Mixing for a Drama Series .

Pain in My Heart is the debut album of soul singer-songwriter Otis Redding . Redding recorded for Volt Records , a subsidiary of Stax Records , based in Memphis , Tennessee . Volt LPs were initially issued on the Atco label , which released this album ( the singles were issued on the Volt label ) . The album includes four successful singles , released in 1962 and 1963 : " These Arms of Mine " , " That 's What My Heart Needs " , " Security " , and the title track . Since Billboard did not publish an R & B singles chart from late 1963 to early 1965 , the R & B chart peaks of the latter two singles are unknown .

As a member of the Pat T. Cake and the Mighty Panthers , Redding toured in the Southern United States , mostly on the chitlin ' circuit , a string of nightclubs and dance halls hospitable to African-American musicians when racial segregation of performance venues was prevalent . Guitarist Johnny Jenkins , who helped Redding win a talent contest at the Hillview Springs Social Club 15 times in row and also at the talent show " The Teenage Party " , left the band to become a featured artist with the Pinetoppers . Around this time , Redding met Phil Walden , the future founder of the recording company Phil Walden and Associates ( even though without an associate ) , and later Bobby Smith , who ran Confederate Records , a small label . He signed with Confederate and recorded his second single , " Shout Bamalama " ( a rewrite of his " Gamma Lamma " ) , with his band Otis and the Shooters . Wayne Cochran , the only solo artist signed to Confederate , became the Pinetoppers ' bass guitarist . At the same time , Walden started to look for a record label . Atlantic Records representative Joe Galkin was interested in working with Jenkins and around 1962 proposed to send him to the Stax studio in Memphis . On the way to a Pinetoppers studio session , Redding drove for Jenkins , as the latter did not have a driver 's license . Jenkins performed with Booker T. & the M.G. ' s , and when the session ended early , Redding received the opportunity to perform two songs . The first was " Hey Hey Baby " , but studio chief Jim Stewart thought it sounded too much like Little Richard . Next , he sang " These Arms of Mine " , which became his first single for Stax . After that performance , Redding was signed by Stax .

Pain in My Heart includes songs from Redding 's 1962 – 1963 sessions . Stewart signed Redding for Stax and released Redding 's debut single , " These Arms of Mine " , with " Hey Hey Baby " on the B-side . " These Arms of Mine " was released by Volt , a subsidiary of Stax , in October 1962 , and charted in March the following year . It was one of his most successful songs , selling more than 800,000 copies . In the 1963 session , " That 's What My Heart Needs " and " Mary 's Little Lamb " were recorded and cut in June 1963 ; the latter became one of the worst-selling singles by Redding . Rob Bowman , in his book Soulsville , U.S.A. : The Story of Stax Records , wrote that in these two songs " Otis sings with a harsh , impassioned gospel voice reminiscent of Archie Brownlee of the Five Blind Boys of Mississippi " and further reckoned the ending of the first would have made Redding " a suberb gospel singer had he chosen to record in that idiom . " " That 's What My Heart Needs " became Redding 's second single on Stax .

The title track , recorded on September , the next year , sparked some copyright issues , as it sounded like Irma Thomas 's " Ruler of My Heart " . After a few months , " Pain in My Heart " , with the B-side " Something Is Worrying Me " , peaked at number 60 on Billboard 's Hot 100 chart . Rob Bowman observed that " with ' Pain in My Heart , ' Otis 's dynamic control is front and center as he uses his voice as a horn , swelling and decreasing in volume , swallowing syllables and worrying the word ' heart . ' ... It was Otis 's most successful effort to date , commercially and aesthetically . " The last single , " Security " , was released in April 1964 and reached number 97 on Billboard 's Hot 100 chart . According to Matthew Greenwald of Allmusic , the song is " a stinging , up-tempo groover " and " showed Otis Redding stretching his funky rock & roll roots . Aided by the usual gang of Stax musicians , it 's one of his tightest early records .... [ T ] he song could have easily succeeded as an instrumental . "

Pain in My Heart received positive critical reception . Bruce Eder of Allmusic gave the album 4 out of 5 stars , reckoning that the album " was practically a road map to Mick Jagger and any number of other would-be white soul shouters in the UK " , and finding elements of hard rock in " Hey Hey Baby " . He praised Redding 's version of " You Send Me " , considering it " the least stylized of any of his renditions of [ Sam ] Cooke 's songs " , but criticized Redding 's restraint , compared to future recordings , and the " somewhat less than memorable " writing , except on " Security " , " These Arms of Mine " and " That 's What My Heart Needs " . The reviewer concluded by saying " Redding exudes astonishing power , energy and boldness " . A review of several albums by Redding in Rolling Stone magazine observed that " [ t ] he title track on [ Pain in My Heart ] set the pattern for all his ballads to come — Otis triumphed at rendering agony . Signs of the singer 's virtuosity are already apparent in the almost teasing way he lingers over some lyrics and spits out others ; virtually never would he sing a line the same way twice " . The review gave the album 4 out of 5 stars .

Southampton 's town walls are a sequence of defensive structures built around the town in southern England . Although earlier Roman and Anglo-Saxon settlements around Southampton had been fortified with walls or ditches , the later walls originate with the move of the town to the current site in the 10th century . This new town was defended by banks , ditches and the natural curve of the river and coastline . The Normans built a castle in Southampton but made no attempts to improve the wider defences of the town until the early 13th century , when Southampton 's growing prosperity as a trading centre and conflict with France encouraged the construction of a number of gatehouses and stone walls to the north and east sides of the settlement . In 1338 Southampton was raided by French forces ; the town 's defences proved inadequate , particularly along the quays on the west and south of the city . Edward III ordered some immediate improvements to Southampton 's town walls but it was not until the 1360s that substantial work began . Over the coming decades the town was entirely enclosed by a 2 km ( 1.25-mile ) long stone wall , with 29 towers and eight gates . With the advent of gunpowder weapons in the 1360s and 1370s , Southampton was one of the first towns in England to install the new technology to existing fortifications and to build new towers specifically to house cannon .

Southampton 's town walls remained an important defensive feature during the 15th century , the gatehouses sometimes being used as important civic facilities , including acting as the town 's guildhall and housing the town 's gaol . From the end of the 17th century their importance steadily declined and the walls were slowly demolished or adapted for other uses throughout the 18th and 19th centuries . This process continued into the early 20th century until , in the post-war years , the walls were recognised as an important historical feature of Southampton . Conservation projects have since occurred and the walls are now promoted as a tourist attraction .

Several earlier settlements were built near modern Southampton featuring protective town walls . Following the Roman conquest of Britain in AD 43 the fortress settlement of Clausentum was established . It was an important trading port and a defensive outpost for the town of Winchester , located on the site of Bitterne Manor , today a suburb of modern Southampton . Clausentum was defended on its eastern , landwards side by a flint stone wall and two ditches . After the fall of the Roman Empire , in the 7th and 8th centuries the Anglo-Saxons built a planned settlement called Hamwic , close to the current location of Southampton , approximately on the location of the later St Mary 's church . At least some parts of this burh town had a ditch dug around it , 3 m ( 10 feet ) wide and 1.5 m ( 5 feet ) deep , and possibly was defended by a bank of earth . In the 10th century , Viking raids prompted the settlement of Southampton to move to its current location .

By the time that the Normans conquered England in 1066 , the town of Southampton occupied a rectangular area overlooking the mouth of the River Test , an important medieval waterway . It was protected by water on most sides and by protective ditches and banks to the north and east . Southampton at this time was a relatively large town , but not as significant as in the later medieval period . The Normans built a castle within the town on the site of a probable large English hall , and considerable damage was caused to the surrounding local buildings as space was opened up for the new fortification . During the years of the Anarchy , in which the Empress Matilda and Stephen fought for control of England , Southampton was held by William le Gros , the Bishop of Winchester and a supporter of Stephen . When Henry II came to the throne in 1153 , he took back Southampton and carried out improvements to the castle , as part of his attempt to improve the general standard of security in the south . By the second half of the 12th century , Southampton was increasingly important for coastal defence and as a base for operations on the continent . Following the threat of French invasion in the 1170s , Henry II invested modest additional resources in the castle , but no efforts were undertaken to improve the town 's ditches and banks .

By the 12th century , Southampton was an important trading port with trade routes to Normandy , the Levant and Gascony . Both the town and castle played an important role in this trade , in part forming a warehouse for the king 's imports , this process being managed by a Crown Bailiff . The former castle hall was turned into a subterranean vault in the 13th century , probably for storing wine . Stone houses , often combining accommodation and storage facilities , began to be built in Southampton by the wealthiest merchants , particularly in the prosperous western and southern parts of the town , but these properties could not be easily defended against attack . The English Channel was contested militarily between England and France during the 13th century , and Southampton was both an important base for naval operations and a tempting target for raiders . At the start of the 13th century additional work was therefore conducted to improve the town 's defences ; the king granted £ 100 in 1202 and again in 1203 to help develop the earth banks around the town . By 1217 East Gate had been built , probably of stone . In 1260 a murage grant was given to Southampton by Edward I , allowing the town to tax selected imports to build and maintain new stone walls ; these initial murage grants ran from 1260 to 1275 and were then renewed between 1282 and 1285 and from 1286 to 1291 . By the end of this work , many of the earth banks in the north and east of the town had been converted to stone . There appears to have been little interest in defending the west and south quays , however , probably because doing so would have hampered Southampton 's merchants when they moved their trading goods in and out of the town .

By 1300 , Southampton was a major port and a large provincial town , with a population of around 5,000 . The raising of money through murage grants began again in 1321 , possibly paying for the stone towers of the Bargate and some of the semi-circular wall towers . Work also appears to have begun on some stone walling to the south and west of the town , construction may have begun at the South Gate and a wooden barbican was constructed near the western docks . Later investigations by the Crown would suggest that some of the monies raised in these murage grants had been misspent , however , contributing to the poor standard of town defences , which included large gaps in the walled circuit . In 1338 there was a successful French attack on Southampton : the town 's defences , particularly in the west , proved quite inadequate and the French succeeded in burning numerous buildings down , particularly along the western quays , and damaging the castle . Edward III responded to the raid by taking immediate steps to shore up Southampton 's defences and ordering the town to be fully enclosed by stone walls . In 1339 the sheriff conscripted workmen and specialists to improve the defences , and money to pay for the building materials was raised by commuting the prison sentence of a senior official in Southampton to a fine . Murage grants were reinstated in 1345 , but the economy of Southampton had been temporarily devastated by the raids and indeed never fully recovered . The king 's instructions to fully enclose the town with walls could not be carried out . Nonetheless , by the 1350s , Southampton had mounted mangonel and springald siege engines on the existing walls .

In 1360 the king conducted an inquiry into Southampton 's defences and in 1363 he established a wider commission to examine how best to improve them . The commission came to a number of conclusions : the town walls should be better maintained and kept clear of housing and other obstructions ; the number of gateways in the walls should be reduced ; and a water-filled ditch should be built to further reinforce the walls on the west . The enquiry also concluded that the outer doors and ground floor windows of properties facing the sea should be filled in to form a more defensible line . The resulting work on Southampton 's defences resulted in considerable improvements : by the late 14th century , the town was completely encircled by 2 km ( 1.25 miles ) of stone walls . Some existing buildings , including a dovecote , were reinforced and pressed into service as part of the defences . South Gate was built to protect the southern quays , with a wide archway , complete with parapets and machicolations . The building work proved very expensive , however , and despite the mayor and bailiffs enforcing contributions and assistance from the citizens , Parliament had to be asked several times in the 1370s to assist by remitting arrears of taxes owed by Southampton .

In 1370 the French made a successful attack on Portsmouth , commencing a new sequence of raids along the English coast . In due course first Edward , then Richard II , responded by improving the defences in the south of England . Part of this involved improving the condition of Southampton Castle , where , owing in part to the theft of building materials , including stone and lead , by the citizens of the town , the defences were in a poor condition . Henry Yevele , who oversaw the improvements to the castle , probably also constructed the Arcades along the western walls in 1380 : this involved adopting the 1360 proposal to block up the properties along the western quay to form a solid wall , and adding three towers and gunports . Sir John Sondes and John Polymond were appointed by the king in 1386 to further improve the town walls , working with Sir John Arundel , the castle governor – Polymond and Arundel Towers were probably named after these men around this time . One of the major changes from the 1370s onwards was the adaptation of the town walls to mount gunpowder weapons . At this time cannon were still unreliable , only capable of reaching relatively short ranges and required the construction of specialist gunports . Cannons fired stone cannonballs , which did relatively little damage to stronger stone walls , and so were primarily used in defence of fortifications rather than as an offensive weapon by besiegers . The first gunports in Britain were installed in the 1360s on the Isle of Wight , but Southampton was not far behind . Around 1378 to 1379 the ongoing French threat led to gunports for handguns being built into the western Arcade wall , and by 1382 the town bought its own gun . God 's House Tower was built to defend the southern quays around 1417 and the sluices that controlled the level of the town 's moats , and equipped with numerous gunports rooftop firing points , and by 1439 Catchcold tower had also been constructed , again designed to accommodate gunpowder weapons .

Another change in the 1370s was the formalisation of the process of guarding and maintaining the walls . During the invasion scare of 1377 , Edward instructed the mayor to review these processes ; it appears that the four wards of the town were surveyed , and each property was assigned a piece of the wall to maintain , varying according to the size of the property . For these purposes , the walls were measured out in units called loupes , or embrasures . The four wards were also responsible for the security and policing of the town .

The threat of French attack continued throughout the 15th century . Instead of relying on murage grants , more funds for the town walls were directly granted by the king in 1400 , including an ongoing annual grant of £ 100 . Concerns increased significantly after the invasion scare of 1457 , when French troops successfully attacked the town of Sandwich on the south coast . Indeed , the guns on Southampton 's walls were fired at French raiding ships the same year . The walls continued to be maintained for the rest of the century , with £ 40 being allocated annually between 1478 and 1485 for this purpose . By contrast , the castle fell into a rapid decline and its inner bailey became used first as a rubbish tip , then for small-scale agriculture . Nonetheless , a report on the quality of the walls around 1460 noted that on the north and east sides of Southampton , the walls were still too thin to block a cannon shot or for a man to stand on them ; a wood and earth wall-walk had been built behind the walls , but this was proving very expensive to maintain . This contemporary assessment of the weakness of the eastern walls has been confirmed by modern archaeological excavation – in places it was only 0.76 m ( 2.49 feet ) thick , compared to a typical thickness in other English town walls of around 1 m ( 3.28 feet ) .

A survey in 1454 , undertaken against the background of another French invasion scare , shows that the 1377 system for maintaining the walls was still in operation . A town gunner had also been appointed by the 15th century , earning the highest salary of any local official and was responsible for maintaining the guns and manufacturing gunpowder . As late as the mid-16th century , additional improved rectangular gunports , similar to those on the Device Forts along the Channel , were added to the West Gate by the quays . Several of the gatehouses played an important part in the administration of the town in the 15th century . South Gate formed the main administrative centre for the port during the period , housing the Clerk of the King 's Ships and collecting customs revenue . It was expanded in the 1430s and 1440s , but was in poor condition again by the 1480s , resulting in fresh construction work around the site . Bargate was partially used as a prison from the 15th century , in a similar fashion to many other towns . The first floor of the building had been used as the town 's guildhall from at least 1441 onwards , and the treasury was kept in one of the towers . Elaborate feasts were served there on special occasions .

The town walls became less important for defence in the 17th century , although in 1633 , a footpath was built around the inside of the wall to help the watch and other law officers better pursue vagrants and criminals . The walls fared better than Southampton Castle , which was sold off to property speculators in 1618 , but they played no part in the English Civil War . Some of the masonry from the castle was reused to strengthen the town walls in 1650 during the Third English Civil War . In the 18th century onwards the town walls were often adapted for new uses or simply demolished . As early as 1641 , the chapel above East Gate had been leased out to private tenants . By 1707 , part of God 's House tower was being used as a prison ; from 1786 it became the official town gaol . As the century progressed , East Gate was demolished in 1774 , South Gate was mostly demolished in 1803 and Biddles Gate shortly afterwards , along with large sections of adjacent wall . As the 19th century progressed , the destruction and remodelling of the town walls continued . The upper stories of Polymond Tower were demolished in the 1820s , to be rebuilt by 1846 as a shorter , two-storey tower . The remains of the South Gate were turned into a hotel . God 's House tower continued to be used as a gaol , but was criticised by inspectors . An 1823 report described it as an " old and very awkward " facility , containing around a dozen prisoners in damp conditions , and where it was hard to separate the male and female prisoners in an appropriate fashion . In 1855 its role as a gaol was concluded , and the building fell into disuse .

In other areas , civic improvements were attempted . In 1853 the " Forty Steps " were built down the side of the west walls to make access to the town easier . Parts of the Arcades were blocked up to prevent homeless people from sleeping under the arches and disturbing the neighbourhood . The Bargate ceased to be used as the guildhall in 1888 and was heavily restored by the town in what was felt to be a more consistent medieval style . The urban growth of Southampton , as in many English walled towns and cities , put considerable pressure on the older fortifications . In 1898 to 1899 , for example , parts of the wall west of Biddles Gate , including a square tower , were demolished to create the Western Esplanade road . By the second half of the century , the Bargate and the surrounding walls were creating serious traffic congestion ; various options were considered to relieve this including demolition , but it was not until the 1930s that the decision was made to retain the gatehouse , but to destroy the walls on either side . Some parts of the Southampton walls were used to mount searchlights and machineguns on during the Second World War ; the walls escaped damage , unlike many other areas of the medieval city . In the post-war period the historic importance of the town walls was recognised and considerable conservation work has been conducted on the walls , including reversing the Victorian alterations to the Arcades . The town walls became seen as an important part of Southampton 's tourist industry ; health and safety concerns , however , prohibit tourists walking along most of the circuit . God 's House tower reopened in 1961 opened as Southampton 's Museum of Archaeology . Today the walls are protected as grade I listed buildings and as a scheduled monument .

Around half the length of the 2 km ( 1.25-mile ) long medieval town walls still survives in the 21st century , mainly on the north and west sides of Southampton , together with 13 of the 29 defensive towers and six out of the eight gates . The towers are a combination of circular and square designs , with many showing an " open-gorged " design , similar to those built in North Wales , that could be isolated from the rest of the walls by removing small wooden bridges . In general the town walls at Southampton were poorly built in a somewhat chaotic fashion over several years . By contrast , the surviving gatehouses are sophisticated and well designed , probably as a result of their civic importance . Historians Oliver Creighton and Robert Higham describe the surviving walls as " extremely well preserved " and containing " unique survivals in a British context " . In the south-east corner of the walls is God 's House tower . This is architecturally important as it was one of the first urban buildings to be built to hold gunpowder artillery – in this respect , it closely resembles Cow Tower in Norwich . The tower was built alongside God 's House Gate and is three storeys high . The gunports designed for handcannon can be seen on the outside , and the roof was designed to hold larger cannon . Adjacent to the tower is God 's House Gate , a two-storey building also equipped with a gun-port .

Little remains of the eastern walls , but in the north-east corner several towers still remain largely intact , including Polymond tower , a powerful drum tower largely reconstructed during the Victorian period . Further west is the Bargate ; this was originally a simple archway but was expanded with drum towers and arrow slits in the early 14th century , and then expanded again in the early 15th century with battlements and parapets , before being heavily restored in the 19th century . The Bargate remains an elaborate building , taking military symbolism and combining it with rich civic heraldry and decoration above the gateway . At the north-west corner of the walls stands Arundel tower , another large drum tower that originally overlooked a small cliff . South of this is Catchcold tower . Catchcold tower was designed to be defended with guns and has three gunports ; the need to support cannon leaves it much heavier in appearance than the other circular towers on the walls . The remains of machine gun mountings fitted to the tower in 1941 can still be seen . The Arcades form part of the surviving west walls and are a unique feature in England ; their closest architectural equivalent are in Rouen , France . The West Gate still stands three storeys high and was originally defended by two portcullises ; the windows on the west side of the gate are the original medieval designs . Along the south side of the walls one of the twin towers protecting the South Gate still stands , largely intact .

" Peter 's Two Dads " is the tenth episode of the fifth season of Family Guy . The episode originally aired on Fox on February 11 , 2007 . The plot follows Peter traveling to Ireland to find his biological father , after he accidentally kills his stepfather at his daughter 's birthday party . Meanwhile , Stewie undergoes a phase of selfishness , believing everything belongs to him . This results in Lois spanking him , which makes him realize he is a masochist . Also , Meg turns 17 in the episode . The episode was written by Danny Smith and directed by Cyndi Tang , with Greg Lovell as co-director . It received mostly positive reviews from critics for its storyline and many cultural references . According to Nielsen ratings , it was viewed in 7.97 million homes in its original airing . The episode featured guest performances by Dan Conroy , Phyllis Diller , Charles Durning and Fred Tatasciore . It was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Original Music and Lyrics , for the episode 's song entitled " Drunken Irish Dad " , at the 59th Primetime Creative Arts Emmy Awards .

Meg asks Lois and Peter if she can have a birthday party , preferably a teenager-type party with a band playing at her house . Unfortunately , Peter and Lois don 't even know how old Meg is going to be . They have bought sixteen candles , but Meg overreacts when telling them that she is turning seventeen years old , and calls them jerks . Meg notices that her birthday party is kiddie-type , with games such as Pin the Tail on the Donkey . At the party , Peter dresses up as " Pee Pants the Inebriated Hobo Clown " , " an adorable tramp who wears found clothing and eats out of your garbage can " . Peter then tells Meg that he got her a scarf for her birthday . Meg declines , while Peter then says he got her " a dozen scarves " which Peter then proceeds to regurgitate as one long scarf , as he has actually tied and swallowed them ( which Lois says he was not supposed to do ) . This causes him to cough and vomit . Peter hands Meg the long scarf from his tongue , but Meg refuses to hold it . Peter then urges Meg to hold them , and then asks if his long johns are tied to the end of them . When Meg says they are not , Peter then says " Oh , god " and regurgitates them as well , and then crouches in pain following the ordeal . Meg asks Lois if she can open her gifts , and Meg notices Stewie opening most of them . Peter gets drunk , and attempts to ride a unicycle down the steps , but falls off and crushes his father , Francis , who later dies in the hospital from the accident . Just before Francis dies , he calls Peter " a fat stinking drunk " .

Peter is disappointed since Francis did not care about him – so he gives up drinking and does crack instead . Brian notices this , and tells Peter that crack is not a good substitute for drinking . As a result , Peter sees a hypnotherapist , who helps him discover that Francis was not his biological father . When Peter goes to his mom , Thelma Griffin , about it , she reveals that she had an affair with Irish man named Mickey McFinnigan and that Mickey is Peter 's biological father . Brian and Peter travel to a village in Ireland to find Mickey , who they discover is the town drunk . At first horrified , Peter finds out it is considered an honorable position in Ireland by the locals . Mickey refuses to believe that Peter is his son and mocks him . When Peter sees the ghosts of Yoda , Obi-Wan Kenobi , Francis and Hayden Christensen , the first three call him a " fat stinking drunk " , Francis ' last words to Peter , which gives him an idea . In an attempt to persuade him , Peter challenges Mickey to a drinking contest , which Peter wins . During the contest , Peter and Mickey talk about American looks and diet in a drunk language . After the contest Mickey finally believes that Peter is his son , feeling that nobody but a member of his own family could beat him in something like a drinking contest . Although Peter 's excited to have formed a bond with his real father , Brian points out that while Francis may not have been Peter 's real father ( and obviously wasn 't the nicest person ever ) , he did raise Peter like he was his own son , showing that deep down , Francis really did love Peter . After Mickey says " So what ? " to Peter 's statement , " You knocked up my mom and never called her again . " Peter says " So what ? So let 's dance ! " . Peter , Mickey and the Irish crowd enter dancing and singing to " Drunken Irish Dad . " During the last few seconds of the dance , Mickey states that the Irish do not tan well .

This episode marks the third appearance of Francis Griffin . As of now , episode writer and series co-executive producer Danny Smith has written all Family Guy episodes to date to feature Francis when he was alive . Show creator Seth MacFarlane comments that the episode came together and played great from start to finish . Prior to the making of the episode , there had been several different ideas and disagreements for Peter 's father 's appearance . MacFarlane comments that he had always pictured Peter 's father to be a fat , drunk leprechaun . The negativity of Francis was becoming " dull to write for " , hence the storyline of Peter finding his biological father . MacFarlane also mentions not having ideas to write for Kevin , Joe Swanson 's son , who was mentioned in a later episode that he died in the war of Iraq ( Stew-Roids ) . A deleted scene showed Peter pretending to quit drinking , but continuing quietly was one of several scenes that was removed from airing as it and the others were described by the producers to be " not going anywhere . " The scene with Peter in the hypnotherapist 's office was censored from television , as Peter discusses his genitals and reproductive organs . When Peter comes to the realization that Francis is not his real father and when Stewie dreams about being tortured by Lois , a harp sound can be heard ; MacFarlane comments that even small things like that take a lot of work to produce . The alcohol bottles being pushed by the airplane that Peter and Brian are traveling on were animated by computer , as is the taxi driving along the street . On the DVD commentary , MacFarlane notes that the scene would not have looked good without computer aid . He said it makes the animations seem more realistic than without a computer . The two men circling each other for fifty years and waiting for the other to throw the first punch was not broadcast for television .

Stewie draws a picture of David Tua on the wall to try to get Lois to hit him . It also mocks the main character 's decisions in Pet Sematary when Peter buried Francis ' body at the same cemetery to resurrect him , but decided against it after Francis , as a zombie , jumped out of the grave in a jump scare , remarking " Okay , maybe I 'll bury him in a regular cemetery . " Peter briefly transforms into Wonder Woman after discovering his biological father is not Francis : this is a reference to Wonder Woman , and although the show could not receive rights to reproduce the original music , the scene was still broadcast . Before Peter and Brian leave to Ireland , Meg tells Peter she loves him , in which he replies , " That 'll do pig , that 'll do " , which is a reference to the film Babe . When Francis showed up as a ghost along with Yoda and Obi-Wan Kenobi , Hayden Christensen said " And I 'm Hayden Christensen " , as a reference to the ending of Return of the Jedi in the remastered DVD . The song Chris and Herbert sing at the party and up in a tree is " Friends and Lovers " by Gloria Loring and Carl Anderson .

In a significant decrease from the previous week , the episode was viewed in 7.97 million homes in its original airing , according to Nielsen ratings . The episode also acquired a 2.8 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , being slightly edged out by The Simpsons , while still winning over American Dad ! . A reviewer from Boxxet commented that " when I checked the schedule and saw the title of this episode was ' Peter 's Two Dads ' , I was a little torn . First , the Peter-centric episodes generally have a much higher chance of going off the rails , " following on to comment that " the episode that we did see still left me with something of a mixed reaction . " concluding with a positive comment that the episode " was well constructed . " IGN 's Ahsan Haque noted that " despite a couple of underdeveloped plotlines and an overabundance of offensive and uncomfortable jokes , this week 's episode of Family Guy somehow manages to succeed with just enough truly hilarious moments and actual story elements . " MacFarlane has said that this is one of his favorite episodes , alongside " PTV " and " Road to Rhode Island . "

The black mamba ( Dendroaspis polylepis ) is a large and extremely venomous snake endemic to parts of sub-Saharan Africa . Specimens vary in color from grey to dark brown , but not black . Juvenile black mambas tend to be lighter in color than adults and darken with age . It is the longest species of venomous snake indigenous to the African continent ; mature specimens generally exceed 2 meters ( 6.6 ft ) and commonly attain 3 meters ( 9.8 ft ) . Specimens of 4.3 to 4.5 meters ( 14.1 to 14.8 ft ) have been reported . Although most mamba species are tree-dwelling snakes , the black mamba is not generally arboreal , preferring lairs in terrestrial habitats in a range of terrains . These include savannah , woodlands , rocky slopes and in some regions dense forest . It is diurnal and chiefly an ambush predator , known to prey on hyrax , bushbabies and other small mammals as well as birds . It is also a pursuit predator ; in this it resembles some other long , speedy , highly-venomous species with well-developed vision . Over suitable surfaces it is possibly the speediest species of snake , capable of at least 11 km / h ( 6.8 mph ) over short distances . Adult mambas have few natural predators .

The black mamba is the species Dendroaspis polylepis in the genus Dendroaspis of the family Elapidae . The first formal description was by Albert Günther in 1864 . Although it had been known previously to missionaries and residents by the name " mamba " . Which was already established in the vernacular , presumably borrowed from the Zulu language . In 1873 , Wilhelm Peters described two subspecies : the nominotypical D.polylepis polylepis and also D.polylepis antinorii . However , these are no longer held to be distinct . In 1896 , Boulenger combined the species ( Dendroaspis polylepis ) as a whole with the eastern green mamba ( Dendroaspis angusticeps ) , a lumping diagnosis that remained in force until 1946 , when FitzSimons split them into separate species again . The generic name , Dendroaspis , derives from Ancient Greek dendro ( δένδρο ) , meaning " tree " , and aspis ( ασπίς ) , which is understood to mean " shield " , but also denotes " cobra " or simply " snake " , in particular " snake with hood ( shield ) " . Via Latin aspis , it is the source of the English word " asp " . In ancient texts , aspis or asp often referred to the Egyptian cobra ( Naja haje ) , in reference to its shield-like hood . Thus , " Dendroaspis " literally means tree asp , reflecting the arboreal nature of most of the species within the genus .

Dendroaspis polylepis is a large , round-bodied , slender , but powerful snake . It tapers smoothly towards the tail , but is of markedly more robust build than its distinctly gracile congeners Dendroaspis angusticeps and Dendroaspis viridis . The head is often said to be " coffin-shaped " with a somewhat pronounced brow ridge and a medium-sized eye . It is a highly proteroglyphous snake , with fangs up to 6.5 millimeters ( 0.26 in ) in length located at the front of the maxilla . The adult snake 's length ranges from 2 meters ( 6.6 ft ) to 3 meters ( 9.8 ft ) routinely but , according to some sources , specimens have grown to lengths of 4.3 to 4.5 meters ( 14.1 to 14.8 ft ) . Black mambas weigh about 1.6 kilograms ( 3.5 lb ) on average . A specimen of 1.41 meters ( 4.6 ft ) was found to have weighed 651.7 g ( 1.437 lb ) . Dendroaspis polylepis is the second longest venomous snake species , exceeded in length only by the king cobra . In spite of its common name , the black mamba is not actually black ; in fact the interior of the snake 's mouth is its only conspicuously black feature . Specimens vary considerably in color ; some are olive-brown to khaki , many are grey , and some individuals display dark mottling towards the posterior . Such mottling may appear in the form of oblique bars . The underbody is often pale yellow or cream colored and the eyes are dark brown to black with a silver or pale yellow corona surrounding the pupil . Juvenile snakes are lighter in color than adults , typically grey or olive green in appearance , and they darken with age .

The " black " mamba has been said to take its name from the color of the inside of its mouth , but this claim is an urban legend , a factoid that lacks objective or historical support . In particular , it was referred to as the " black mamba " decades before knowledge of the color of its oral mucosa was in common circulation . Common names for mambas are to be taken no more seriously than any other common names , and we find for example that attempts to impose the more logical common name " common mamba " for the " black mamba " , which after all is not black , have been abandoned in favor of applying " common mamba " to the Eastern green mamba , Dendroaspis angusticeps . In the mean time , since the late twentieth century , some authors have unquestioningly copied the claim that the name derived from the color of its open mouth .

The black mamba has a wide and fragmented range within sub-Saharan Africa . Specifically , it has been observed in : north east Democratic Republic of the Congo , south western Sudan to Ethiopia , Eritrea , Somalia , Kenya , eastern Uganda , Tanzania , Burundi , Rwanda , southwards to Mozambique , Swaziland , Malawi , Zambia , Zimbabwe and Botswana to KwaZulu-Natal in South Africa , and Namibia ; then north easterly through Angola to south eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo . The black mamba 's distribution contains gaps within the Central African Republic , Chad , Nigeria and Mali . These gaps may lead physicians to misidentify black mamba bites and administer an inappropriate antivenom . The black mamba was also recorded in 1954 in West Africa , in the Dakar region of Senegal . However , this observation , and a subsequent observation that identified a second specimen in the region in 1956 , has not been confirmed and thus the snake 's distribution in this area is inconclusive . The black mamba is not commonly found at altitudes above 1,000 metres ( 3,300 ft ) , although its distribution does reach 1,800 metres ( 5,900 ft ) in Kenya and 1,650 metres ( 5,410 ft ) in Zambia .

The black mamba is graceful but skittish and often unpredictable . It is agile and can move quickly . It is shy and secretive by nature and , like most snakes , avoids threats . In the wild , a black mamba seldom tolerates humans approaching more closely than about 40 meters . When confronted it can display great truculence and is likely to gape in a threat display , exposing its black mouth and flicking its tongue . It also is likely to form a hood by spreading its neck-flap as cobras do . The mamba 's hood however , is narrower than that of a typical cobra . The threat display may be accompanied by audible hissing . During the threat display , any sudden movement by the intruder may provoke the mamba into a series of rapid strikes leading to severe envenomation . Also , the size of the black mamba , plus its ability to raise its head well off the ground , enable it to launch as much as 40 % of its body length upwards , so that mamba bites in humans quite often are on the upper body , and correspondingly are likely to be difficult to treat . This behaviour also permits the snake to land a strike at unexpectedly long range . The black mamba 's reputed readiness to attack is often much exaggerated and usually is provoked by perceived threats , such as blocking its intended retreat , accidentally or otherwise .

For its slender body , the black mamba is deceptively powerful ; it is the fastest moving snake indigenous to Africa , and perhaps the fastest anywhere . It does however , move rather clumsily over soft sand , a surface to which it is not adapted . There have been many unrealistic stories concerning the black mamba 's speed , perhaps partly because the slender body exaggerates the impression of speed . These stories include the myth that it can outrun a galloping horse or a running human . On 23 April 1906 , on the Serengeti Plains , an intentionally provoked black mamba was recorded at a speed of 11 km / h ( 6.8 mph ) , over a distance of 43 m ( 141 ft ) . A black mamba would almost certainly not be able to exceed 16 km / h ( 9.9 mph ) , and like most reptiles it can maintain such relatively high speeds only for short distances .

The black mamba is diurnal and chiefly an ambush predator , though it has been recorded as hunting partly by pursuit , such as catching pigeons at a watering hole before they can gain sufficient height to escape . It usually goes hunting from a permanent lair , to which it will regularly return to providing that the hunting is good and it is not disturbed . It hunts mainly by sight and in doing so it commonly will raise much of its length well off the ground . The black mamba does not typically hold onto prey after biting , instead releasing its quarry and waiting for it to succumb to paralysis and die . This however depends on the type of prey ; for example , it typically will hold onto a bird till it stops struggling to escape . If prey attempts to escape or defend itself , the black mamba often may follow up its initial bite with a rapid series of strikes to incapacitate and quickly kill its prey . The snake has been known to prey on hyrax and rock hyrax , bushbabies , and bats . The black mamba has a potent digestive system and has been observed to digest prey fully within eight to ten hours .

Not many predators challenge an adult black mamba although it does face a few threats such as birds of prey , particularly snake eagles . Although all species of snake eagle commonly prey on snakes , there are two species in particular that do so with high frequency , including preying on black mambas . These are the black-chested snake eagle ( Circaetus pectoralis ) and the brown snake eagle ( Circaetus cinereus ) . The Cape file snake ( Mehelya capensis ) , which is apparently immune to all African snake venoms and preys on other snakes including venomous ones , is a common predator of black mambas ( limited only by the size it can swallow ) . Mongooses which also are partially immune to venom , and are often quick enough to evade a bite , will sometimes tackle a black mamba for prey . Humans do not usually consume black mambas , but they often kill them out of fear .

Black mambas breed annually and mating occurs in the early spring , when male mambas locate a female by following her scent trail . After finding a potential mate the male will inspect the female by flicking his tongue over her entire body . As in other species of snakes and many other reptiles , fertilization is internal and the intromittent organs of the males are in the form of hemipenes . Females lay clutches of eggs with an incubation period of some 80 to 90 days . Like most snakes female mambas are both oviparous and iteroparous . Egg-laying typically occurs during the middle of summer and egg clutches range from 6 to 17 eggs . During the mating season rival males may compete by wrestling , not by biting . Opponents attempt to subdue each other by intertwining their bodies and raising their heads high off the ground . Observers have on occasion mistaken such wrestling for mating . Black mambas are generally solitary , but not strictly so ; as a rule they interact very little except in male rivalry during the mating season . However , black mambas are well known to share retreats occasionally , either with other mambas , or sometimes with other species of snakes .

The venom of the black mamba is extremely toxic , commonly causing collapse in humans within 45 minutes or less from a single bite . Without effective antivenom therapy , death typically occurs in 7 – 15 hours . The venom is chiefly composed of neurotoxins , specifically dendrotoxin . The black mamba is capable of striking at considerable range and occasionally may deliver a series of bites in rapid succession . Despite its reputation for being highly aggressive , like most snakes , it usually attempts to flee from humans unless threatened or cornered . The black mamba 's venom is composed of neurotoxins ( dendrotoxin ) and cardiotoxins as well as other toxins such as fasciculins . In an experiment , the most abundant toxin found in black mamba venom was observed to be able to kill a mouse in as little as 4.5 minutes . Based on the murine median lethal dose ( LD50 ) values , the black mamba 's toxicity from all published sources is as follows : ( IP ) intraperitoneal : 0.30 mg / kg ( average ) , 0.941 mg / kg . 0.05 mg / kg ( the last quote doesn 't make it clear if is either intravenous or intraperitoneal ) .

Its bites can deliver about 100 – 120 mg of venom on average and the maximum dose recorded is 400 mg . It is reported that before antivenom was widely available , the mortality rate from a bite was nearly 100 % . The bite of a black mamba can potentially cause collapse in humans within 45 minutes , or less . Without effective antivenom therapy , death typically occurs in 7 – 15 hours . Presently , there is a polyvalent antivenom produced by the South African Institute for Medical Research to treat black mamba bites from many localities . A bite from a black mamba causes initial neurological and neuromuscular symptoms which may commonly include headache and a metallic taste in the mouth , which may be accompanied by a triad of paresthesias , profuse perspiration and salivation . Other symptoms may include ptosis and gradual bulbar palsy . Localised pain or numbness around the bite site is common but not typically severe ; therefore , application of a tourniquet proximal to the bite site is feasible and may assist in slowing the onset of prominent neurotoxicity . Without appropriate treatment , symptoms typically progress to more severe reactions such as tachydysrhythmias and neurogenic shock , leading to death by asphyxiation , cardiovascular collapse , or respiratory failure .

The black mamba is popularly regarded as the most dangerous and feared snake in Africa ; to South African locals the black mamba 's bite is known as the " kiss of death " . However , attacks on humans by black mambas are rare , as they usually try to avoid confrontation , and their occurrence in highly populated areas is not very common compared with some other species . Additionally , the ocellated carpet viper is responsible for more human fatalities due to snakebite than all other African species combined . A survey of snakebites in South Africa from 1957 to 1963 recorded over 900 venomous snakebites , but only seven of these were confirmed black mamba bites , at a time when effective antivenom was not widely available . Out of more than 900 bites , only 21 ended in fatalities , including all seven black mamba bites .

In 1998 , Danie Pienaar , now head of South African National Parks Scientific Services , survived the bite of a black mamba without antivenom . Although no antivenom was administered , Pienaar was in serious condition , despite the fact the hospital physicians declared it a " moderate " black mamba envenomation . At one point , Pienaar lapsed into a coma and his prognosis was declared " poor " . Upon arrival at hospital Pienaar was immediately intubated , given supportive drug therapy , put on mechanical ventilation and was placed on life support for three days , until the toxins were flushed out of his system . He was released from hospital on the fifth day . Pienaar believes he survived for a number of reasons . In an article in Kruger Park Times he said : " Firstly , it was not my time to go . " The article went on to state , " The fact that he stayed calmed and moved slowly definitely helped . The tourniquet was also essential . " In another case , 28-year-old British student Nathan Layton was bitten by a black mamba and died of a heart attack in less than an hour in March 2008 . The black mamba had been found near a classroom at the Southern African Wildlife College in Hoedspruit , where Layton was training to be a safari guide . Layton was bitten by the snake on his index finger while it was being put into a jar , but he didn 't realize he 'd been bitten . He thought the snake had only brushed his hand . Approximately 30 minutes after being bitten Layton complained of blurred vision . He collapsed and died of a heart attack , nearly an hour after being bitten . Attempts to revive him failed , and he was pronounced dead at the scene .

In 2013 , in a rare case of survival without treatment , American professional photographer Mark Laita was bitten on the leg by a black mamba during a photo-shoot of a black mamba at a facility in Central America . The bite ruptured an artery in his calf , and he was gushing blood profusely . Laita did not go to the doctor or the hospital , and except for the swollen fang marks giving him intense pain during the night , he was not affected and was fine physically . This led him to believe that the snake either gave him a " dry bite " ( meaning without injecting venom ) or that the heavy bleeding pushed the venom out . Some commenters to the story suggested that it was a venomoid snake ( in which the venom glands are surgically removed ) . Laita responded that it was not the case . Only later , Laita found that he had captured the snake biting his leg in a photograph .

Civil War tokens are token coins that were privately minted and distributed in the United States between 1861 and 1864 . They were used mainly in the Northeast and Midwest . The widespread use of the tokens was a result of the scarcity of government-issued cents during the Civil War . Civil War tokens became illegal after the United States Congress passed a law on April 22 , 1864 prohibiting the issue of any one or two-cent coins , tokens or devices for use as currency . On June 8 , 1864 an additional law was passed that forbade all private coinage . Civil War tokens are divided into three types — store cards , patriotic tokens , and sutler tokens . All three types were utilized as currency , and are differentiated by their designs . The collectible value of the tokens is determined chiefly by their rarity .

By 1862 , the second year of the Civil War , government-issued coinage began vanishing from circulation . American citizens hoarded all coins with gold and silver , and eventually began hoarding copper-nickel cents as well . This made it extremely difficult for businesses to conduct transactions . In response , many merchants turned to private minters to fill the void left by the hoarded coins . The first of these privately minted tokens appeared in the autumn of 1862 , by H. A. Ratterman , in Cincinnati , Ohio . New York issues followed in the spring of 1863 , first with Lindenmueller currency store card tokens issued by New York barkeep Gustavus Lindenmueller and then with Knickerbocker currency patriotic tokens issued by William H. Bridgens . It is estimated that by 1864 , there were 25,000,000 Civil War tokens ( nearly all redeemable for one cent ) in circulation , consisting of approximately 7,000 – 8,000 varieties . Lindenmueller currency , or " Lindenmueller tokens , " are one of the best-known and commonly struck types were store cards . Lindenmueller had more than one million of his one-cent tokens struck and placed into circulation in 1863 . One of the common uses for the token was for streetcar fare . The Third Avenue Railroad company of New York , which had willingly accepted a large quantity of the Lindenmueller tokens in lieu of actual currency , asked Lindenmueller to redeem them . He refused , and the railroad had no legal recourse . Incidents such as these eventually forced the government to intervene .

On April 22 , 1864 , Congress enacted the Coinage Act of 1864 . While the act is most remembered for the introduction of the phrase " In God We Trust " on the newly created two-cent piece , it also effectively ended the usage of Civil War tokens . In addition to authorizing the minting of the two-cent piece , the act changed the composition of the one-cent piece from a copper-nickel alloy ( weighing 4.67 grams ) to a lighter , less thick piece composed of 95 % copper ( weighing 3.11 grams ) . The new one-cent piece was much closer in weight to the Civil War tokens , and found greater acceptance among the public . While the Coinage Act made Civil War tokens impractical , the issue of their legality was decided on June 8 , 1864 , when Congress enacted 18 U.S.C. § 486 , which made the minting and usage of non-government issued coins punishable by a fine of up to $ 2,000 , a prison term of up to five years , or both . ( Chapter 25 of Title 18 deals specifically with counterfeit and forgery ) . It did not make it illegal to own Civil War tokens , however , and evidence exists that the tokens were viewed as collectibles as early as 1863 , when the first known listings of Civil War tokens were published .

Patriotic Civil War tokens typically displayed a patriotic slogan or image on one or both sides . Since the majority of these tokens were minted in Union states , the slogans and images were decidedly pro-Union . Some common examples of slogans found on patriotic tokens are " The Union Must and Shall Be Preserved , " " Union For Ever , " and " Old Glory " . Some of the images found on patriotic tokens were the flag of the United States , a 19th-century cannon , and the USS Monitor . Among the best-known varieties of patriotic tokens are the so-called " Dix tokens . " They are named for John Adams Dix , who served as Secretary of the Treasury in 1861 . In a letter from Dix to a revenue cutter captain , Lieutenant Caldwell , he orders Caldwell to relieve another cutter captain of his command for refusing an order to transfer from New Orleans to New York . The letter ends with the following sentence : " If any one attempts to haul down the American flag , shoot him on the spot . " The quote found its way to a number of patriotic tokens , albeit with a slightly modified wording ( " haul down " is usually replaced by " tear it down " ) .

There are several factors that determine the collectible value of Civil War tokens . The main factor is rarity , which is measured on a scale from 1 to 10 ( 1 being the most common type ) . The scale was developed by noted numismatic dealer and writer George Fuld . The material used to mint Civil War tokens can also affect collectibility . Civil war tokens were minted using a variety of materials , copper being a common choice ( often actually bronze ) . Other materials used for minting were nickel , tin , German silver , white metal , and silver . Examples of tokens minted using rubber are also known to exist .

Gulf Oil was a major global oil company from the 1900s to the 1980s . The eighth-largest American manufacturing company in 1941 and the ninth-largest in 1979 , Gulf Oil was one of the so-called Seven Sisters oil companies . Prior to its merger with Standard Oil of California , Gulf was one of the chief instruments of the Mellon family fortune ; both Gulf and Mellon Financial had their headquarters in Pittsburgh . Gulf 's former headquarters , originally referred to as " the Gulf Building " ( now the Gulf Tower office condos ) , is an art-deco skyscraper . The tallest building in Pittsburgh until 1970 , when it was eclipsed by the U.S. Steel Tower , it is capped by a step pyramid structure several stories high . Until the late 1970s , the entire top was illuminated , changing color with changes in barometric pressure to provide a weather indicator that could be seen for many miles . Gulf Oil Corporation ( GOC ) ceased to exist as an independent company in 1985 , when it merged with Standard Oil of California ( SOCAL ) , with both re-branding as Chevron in the United States . Gulf Canada , Gulf 's main Canadian subsidiary , was sold the same year with retail outlets to Ultramar and Petro Canada and what became Gulf Canada Resources to Olympia & York . However , the Gulf brand name and a number of the constituent business divisions of GOC survived . Gulf has experienced a significant revival since 1990 , emerging as a flexible network of allied business interests based on partnerships , franchises and agencies .

Gulf , in its present incarnation , is a " new economy " business . It employs very few people directly and its assets are mainly in the form of intellectual property : brands , product specifications and scientific expertise . The rights to the brand in the United States are owned by Gulf Oil Limited Partnership ( GOLC ) , which operates over 2,100 service stations and several petroleum terminals ; it is headquartered in Framingham , Massachusetts . The corporate vehicle at the center of the Gulf network outside the United States , Spain and Portugal is Gulf Oil International , a company owned by the Hinduja Group . The company 's focus is primarily in the provision of downstream products and services to a mass market through joint ventures , strategic alliances , licensing agreements , and distribution arrangements . Gulf Oil International has its head office in the City of Westminster , London .

The business that became Gulf Oil started in 1901 with the discovery of oil at Spindletop near Beaumont , Texas . A group of investors came together to promote the development of a modern refinery at nearby Port Arthur to process the oil . The largest investor was William Larimer Mellon of the Pittsburgh Mellon banking family . Other investors included many of Mellon 's Pennsylvania clients as well as some Texas wildcatters . Mellon Bank and Gulf Oil remained closely associated thereafter . The Gulf Oil Corporation itself was formed in 1907 through the amalgamation of a number of oil businesses , principally the J.M. Guffey Petroleum and Gulf Refining companies of Texas . The name of the company refers to the Gulf of Mexico where Beaumont lies . Output from Spindletop peaked at around 100,000 barrels per day ( 16,000 m3 / d ) just after it was discovered and then started to decline . Later discoveries made 1927 the peak year of Spindletop production , but Spindletop 's early decline forced Gulf to seek alternative sources of supply to sustain its substantial investment in refining capacity . This was achieved by constructing the 400-mile ( 640-km ) Glenn Pool pipeline connecting oilfields in Oklahoma with Gulf 's refinery at Port Arthur . The pipeline opened in September 1907 . Gulf later built a network of pipelines and refineries in the eastern and southern United States , requiring heavy capital investment . Thus , Gulf Oil provided Mellon Bank with a secure vehicle for investing in the oil sector .

Gulf promoted the concept of branded product sales by selling gasoline in containers and from pumps marked with a distinctive orange disc logo . A customer buying Gulf-branded gasoline could be assured of its quality and consistent standard . ( In the early 20th century , non-branded gasoline in the United States was often contaminated or of unreliable quality ) . Gulf Oil grew steadily in the inter-war years , with its activities mainly confined to the United States . The company was characterized by its vertically integrated business activities , and was active across the whole spectrum of the oil industry : exploration , production , transport , refining and marketing . It also involved itself in associated industries such as petrochemicals and automobile component manufacturing . It introduced significant commercial and technical innovations , including the first drive-in service station ( 1913 ) , complimentary road maps , drilling over water at Ferry Lake , and the catalytic cracking refining process ( Gulf installed the world 's first commercial catalytic cracking unit at its Port Arthur , Texas , refinery complex in 1951 ) . Gulf also established the model for the integrated , international " oil major , " which refers to one of a group of very large companies that assumed influential and sensitive positions in the countries in which they operated .

In Colombia , Gulf purchased the Barco oil concession in 1926 . The government of Colombia revoked the concession the same year , but after much negotiation Gulf won it back in 1931 . However , during a period of over-capacity , Gulf was more interested in holding the reserve than developing it . In 1936 Gulf sold Barco to the Texas Corporation , now Texaco . Gulf had extensive exploration and production operations in the Gulf of Mexico , Canada , and Kuwait . The company played a major role in the early development of oil production in Kuwait , and through the 1950s and ' 60s apparently enjoyed a " special relationship " with the Kuwaiti government . This special relationship attracted unfavourable attention since it was associated with " political contributions " ( see below ) and support for anti-democratic politics , as evidenced by papers taken from the body of a Gulf executive killed in the crash of a TWA aircraft at Cairo in 1950 . In 1934 , the Kuwait Oil Company ( KOC ) was formed as a joint venture by British Petroleum and Gulf . Both British Petroleum and Gulf held equal shares in the venture . KOC pioneered the exploration for oil in Kuwait during the late 1930s . Oil was discovered at Burgan in 1938 but it was not until 1946 that the first crude oil was shipped . Oil production started from Rawdhatain in 1955 and Minagish in 1959 . KOC started gas production in 1964 . It was the cheap oil and gas being shipped from Kuwait that formed the economic basis for Gulf 's diverse petroleum sector operations in Europe , the Mediterranean , Africa , and the Indian subcontinent . These last operations were coordinated by Gulf Oil Company , Eastern Hemisphere Ltd ( GOCEH ) from their offices at 2 Portman Street in London W1 .

Gulf expanded on a worldwide basis from the end of the Second World War . The company leveraged its international drilling experience to other areas of the world , and by mid-1943 had established a presence in the oil fields of Venezuela as Mene Grande Oil Company . Much of the company 's retail sales expansion was through the acquisition of privately owned chains of filling stations in various countries , allowing Gulf outlets to sell product ( sometimes through ' matching ' arrangements ) from the oil that it was " lifting " in Canada , the Gulf of Mexico , Kuwait , and Venezuela . Some of these acquisitions were to prove less than resilient in the face of economic and political developments from the 1970s on . Gulf invested heavily in product technology and developed many speciality products , particularly for application in the maritime and aviation engineering sectors . It was particularly noted for its range of lubricants and greases . Gulf Oil reached the peak of its development around 1970 . In that year , the company processed 1.3 million barrels ( 210,000 m3 ) of crude daily , held assets worth $ 6.5 billion ( $ 39.61 billion today ) , employed 58,000 employees worldwide , and was owned by 163,000 shareholders . In addition to its petroleum marketing interests , Gulf was a major producer of petrochemicals , plastics , and agricultural chemicals . Through its subsidiary , Gulf General Atomic Inc . , it was also active in the nuclear energy sector . Gulf abandoned its involvement in the nuclear sector after a failed deal to build atomic power plants in Romania in the mid-1970s .

In 1974 , the Kuwait National Assembly took a 60 percent stake in the equity of KOC with the remaining 40 percent divided equally between BP and Gulf . The Kuwaitis took over the rest of the equity in 1975 , giving them full ownership of KOC . This meant that Gulf ( EH ) had to start supplying its downstream operations in Europe with crude bought on the world market at commercial prices . The whole GOC ( EH ) edifice now became highly marginal in an economic sense . Many of the marketing companies that Gulf had established in Europe were never truly viable on a stand-alone basis . Gulf was at the forefront of various projects in the late 1960s intended to adjust the world oil industry to developments of the time including closure of the Suez Canal after the 1967 war . In particular , Gulf undertook the construction of deep water terminals at Bantry Bay in Ireland and Okinawa in Japan capable of handling Ultra Large Crude Carrier ( ULCC ) vessels serving the European and Asian markets respectively . In 1968 , the Universe Ireland was added to Gulf 's tanker fleet . At 312,000 long tons deadweight ( DWT ) , this was the largest vessel in the world and incapable of berthing at most normal ports .

Gulf also participated in a partnership with other majors , including Texaco , to build the Pembroke Catalytic Cracker refinery at Milford Haven and the associated Mainline Pipelines fuel distribution network . The eventual reopening of the Suez canal and upgrading of the older European oil terminals ( Europoort and Marchwood ) meant that the financial return from these projects was not all that had been hoped for . The Bantry terminal was devastated by the explosion of a Total tanker , the Betelgeuse , in January 1979 ( Whiddy Island Disaster ) and it was never fully reopened . The Irish government took over ownership of the terminal in 1986 and held its strategic oil reserve there . In the 1970s , Gulf participated in the development of new oilfields in the UK North Sea and in Cabinda , although these were high-cost operations that never compensated for the loss of Gulf 's interest in Kuwait . A mercenary army had to be raised to protect the oil installations in Cabinda during the Angolan civil war . The Angolan connection was another " special relationship " that attracted comment . In the late 1970s , Gulf was effectively funding a Soviet bloc regime in Africa while the US government was attempting to overthrow that regime by supporting the UNITA rebels led by Jonas Savimbi .

In 1975 , several senior Gulf executives , including chairman Bob Dorsey , were implicated in the making of illegal " political contributions " and were forced to step down from their positions . This loss of senior personnel at a critical time in Gulf 's fortunes may have had a bearing on the events that followed . Gulf 's operations worldwide were struggling financially in the recession of the early 1980s , so Gulf 's management devised the " Big Jobber " strategic realignment in 1981 ( along with a program of selective divestments ) to maintain viability . The Big Jobber strategy recognized that the day of the integrated , multi-national oil major might be over , since it involved concentrating on those parts of the supply chain where Gulf had a competitive advantage .

In the late 1930s , Gulf 's aviation manager , Maj. Alford J. Williams , had the Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corporation construct two modified biplanes , cleaned-up versions of the Grumman F3F Navy fighter , for promotional use by the company . Wearing Gulf Oil company colors and logos , the Grumman G-22 " Gulfhawk II " , registered NR1050 , was delivered in December 1936 , and in 1938 Maj. Williams flew it on a tour of Europe . A second scavenger pump and five drain lines were added to the engine installation that allowed the aircraft to be flown inverted for up to thirty minutes . This aircraft is now preserved in the National Air and Space Museum in Washington , D.C. A second airplane , the Grumman G-32 " Gulfhawk III " , registered NC1051 , was delivered on May 6 , 1938 . Impressed by the Army Air Force in November 1942 for use as a VIP transport and designated a UC-103 , it crashed in the southern Florida Everglades in early 1943 . Gulf Oil was the primary sponsor for NBC News special events coverage in the 1960s , notably for coverage of the U.S. space program . The company used the connection to its advantage by offering giveaway or promotional items at its stations , including sticker sheets of space mission logos , a paper punch-out lunar module model kit , and a book titled " We Came in Peace , " containing pictures of the Apollo 11 moon landing . Gulf was also a major sponsor of Walt Disney 's Wonderful World of Color , which also aired on NBC . Disney magazines and activity books were often given away with a gas fill-up . Gulf was also noted for its " Tourgide " road maps .

One particularly memorable Gulf advertisement carried by NBC during their coverage of the Apollo missions showed aerial and onboard views of the Universe Ireland with Tommy Makem and the Clancy Brothers singing " Bringin ' Home the Oil " – a tribute to the opening of Gulf 's operations in Bantry Bay . Gulf Oil was most synonymous for its association with auto racing , as it famously sponsored the John Wyer Automotive team in the 1960s and early ' 70s . The signature light blue and orange color scheme associated with its Ford GT40 and Porsche 917 is one of the most famous corporate racing colors and has been replicated by other racing teams sponsored by Gulf . Much of its popularity is attributed to the fact that in the 1971 film Le Mans , Steve McQueen 's character , Michael Delaney , drives for the Gulf team . As a result of McQueen 's increasing popularity following his death and the increasing popularity of the Heuer Monaco which he wore in the film , TAG Heuer released a limited edition of the watch with the Gulf logo and trademark color scheme . In the same era , Gulf Oil also sponsored Team McLaren during the Bruce McLaren days , which used a papaya orange color scheme with Gulf blue for lettering .

From 1963 to 1980 , Gulf Oil had a formal agreement with Holiday Inn , the world 's largest lodging chain , for which Holiday Inns in the U.S. and Canada would accept Gulf credit cards for food and lodging . In return , Gulf placed service stations on the premises of many Holiday Inn properties along major U.S. highways to provide one-stop availability for gasoline , auto service , food and lodging . Many older Holiday Inns still have those original Gulf stations on their properties , some in operation and some closed , but few operate today as Gulf stations . Gulf No-Nox gasoline was promoted with a bucking horse leaving an imprint of two horseshoes . Several promotions centered on the two horseshoes . In 1966 bright orange 3-D plastic self-adhesive horseshoes for car bumpers were given away . Another popular giveaway was during the 1968 election season , gold horseshoe lapel pins featuring either a Democratic donkey or a Republican elephant .

By 1980 , Gulf exhibited many of the characteristics of a giant corporation that had lost its way . It had a huge but poorly performing asset portfolio , associated with a depressed share price . The stock market value of Gulf started to drop below the break-up value of its assets . Such a situation was bound to attract the interest of corporate raiders , although a corporation in the top 100 of the Fortune 500 was in the early 1980s thought immune to takeover risk . Its undoing as an independent company began in 1982 when T. Boone Pickens , an Amarillo , Texas oilman and corporate raider ( or greenmailer ) , and owner of Mesa Petroleum , made an offer for the comparatively larger ( but still considered " non-major " oil company ) Cities Service Company ( more generally known by the name Citgo ) from Tulsa , Oklahoma , which was then trading in the low 20s . Pickens first privately offered $ 45 a share for a friendly takeover and then later made a $ 50 a share public offer when Cities ' CEO rejected the friendly offer . Gulf forestalled Mesa 's takeover attempt by offering $ 63 a share in a friendly offer which Cities ( by then trading at $ 37 ) accepted . Cities then bought out Pickens for $ 55 a share . Once Pickens was gone , Gulf reneged on its buyout offer , supposedly over a dispute regarding accuracy of Cities Service 's reserves , and the stock price of Cities plunged , triggering stockholder lawsuits as well as distrust for Gulf 's management on Wall Street and among financing investment banks who bet big in assisting Gulf to defeat Mesa only to be left broke when Gulf backed out . Cities Service was ultimately sold to Occidental Petroleum , and the retail operations were resold to Southland Corporation , the operators of 7-Eleven stores . Gulf 's termination of the Cities Service acquisition resulted in more than 15 years of shareholder litigation against Gulf ( and later Chevron ) .

With declining margins in the industry and left without Citgo 's reserves , Mesa and its investor partners kept hunting for a takeover target , only to discover while fighting Gulf for Citgo how increasingly top-heavy its portfolio and declining reserves were undervaluing its overall assets . They subtly but quickly acquired 4.9 percent of Gulf Oil 's stock by early fall 1983 , just shy of having to declare themselves and their intent at 5 percent to the SEC . In the ten days allowed to prepare the SEC filing , Mesa and its investor partners accelerated buying to 11 percent of the company 's stock , larger than the founding Mellon family 's share , by October 1983 . Gulf responded to Mesa 's interest by calling a shareholders ' meeting for late November 1983 and subsequently engaged in a proxy war on changing the corporation 's by-laws to minimize arbitrage . Pickens made loud criticisms of the existing Gulf management and offered an alternative business plan intended to release shareholder value through a royalty trust that management argued would " slim down " Gulf 's market share . Pickens had acquired the reputation of being a corporate raider whose skill lay in making profits out of bidding for companies but without actually acquiring them . During the early 1980s alone , he made failed bids for Cities Service , General American Oil , Gulf , Phillips Petroleum and Unocal . The process of making such bids would promote a frenzy of asset divestiture and debt reduction in the target companies . This is a standard defensive tactic calculated to boost the current share price , although possibly at the expense of long-term strategic advantage . The target shares would rise sharply in price , at which point Pickens would dispose of his interest at a substantial profit .

Gulf management and directors took the view that the Mesa bid represented an undervaluation of the Gulf business as a long-term going concern and that it was not in the interest of Gulf shareholders . James Lee , Gulf 's CEO and chairman , even claimed during the November 1983 shareholders meeting to address the Mesa ownership that Pickens ' royalty trust idea was nothing more than a " get-rich-quick scheme " that would undermine the corporation 's profit potential in the coming decades . Gulf , therefore , sought to resist Pickens by various means , including refiling as a Delaware corporation , voiding the ability of shareholders to cumulatively vote ( fearing that Pickens would use his shares to gain control of the board ) and listening to offers from Ashland Oil ( which would double Gulf 's price from its pre-Mesa level ) , General Electric ( two years before it took over the media company NBC / RKO ) and finally Chevron to act as its white knight in late 1984 . Gulf divested many of its worldwide operating subsidiaries and then merged with Chevron by the spring of 1985 . The Mesa group of investors was reported to have made a profit of $ 760 million ( $ 1,672.1 million today ) when it assigned its Gulf shares to Chevron . Pickens has claimed that after realizing a more than doubling of stock appreciation for Gulf shareholders ( as well as its management that fought him at every turn ) , Mesa 's shares were the last to be paid out by Chevron .

The forced merger of Gulf and Chevron was controversial , with the U.S. Senate considering legislation to freeze oil industry mergers for a year — before the Reagan administration made it known it opposed government intervention in the matter and would veto any bill . However , Pickens and Lee ( Gulf 's CEO ) were summoned to testify before the Senate months before the merger was hammered out and the matter was referred to the Federal Trade Commission ( FTC ) . The FTC only approved the deal subject to strict conditions . Never before had a " small operator " successfully taken apart a Fortune 500 corporation , or in Gulf 's case a " Fortune 10 " corporation . The merger sent even deeper shock waves through the long-time exclusive " Seven Sisters " club of major integrated oil companies that defined themselves as elevated from the " non-major independents " . A board member of Exxon even admitted in the mid-1980s that " mostly all we talk about in board meetings anymore is T. Boone Pickens " . Chevron , to settle with the government antitrust requirements , sold some Gulf stations and a refinery in the eastern United States to British Petroleum ( BP ) and Cumberland Farms in 1985 as well as some of the international operations .

The effect on the Pittsburgh area was severe as close to 900 PhD and research jobs and 600 headquarters ( accounting , law , clerical ) jobs were transferred to California or cut , a payroll of $ 54 million ( $ 123 million today ) and corporate charity to 50 Western Pennsylvania organizations worth $ 2 million / year ( $ 4.6 million / year today ) . These losses were mitigated some with the donation of Gulf Labs in suburban north Pittsburgh to the University of Pittsburgh to be used as a research business incubator along with $ 5 million ( $ 11 million today ) in maintenance and seed money . The " Gulf Labs " research complex consisted of 55 multi-story buildings with 800,000 square feet ( 74,000 m2 ) on 85 acres ( 34 ha ) and including several chemical labs , petroleum production and refining areas and even a nuclear laboratory complete with reactor in 1985 and employed close to 2,000 engineers and scientists operating with a $ 100 million budget ( $ 227.8 million today ) from Gulf / Chevron . After its donation , it was renamed the University of Pittsburgh Applied Research Center or U-PARC and opened to small technology , computer and engineering firms as well as graduate level research .

BP , Chevron , Cumberland Farms and other companies that acquired former Gulf operations continued to use the Gulf name through the early 1990s . This caused consumer confusion in the US retail market as the parent companies would not accept each other 's credit cards . All former Gulf stations franchised by BP and Chevron in the United States have since been converted to those names . Gulf Oil Limited Partnership ( GOLP ) , based in Framingham , Massachusetts , has bought a license for North American rights to the Gulf brand from Chevron . Chevron still owned the Gulf brand , but was making almost no direct use of it . In January 2010 , GOLP bought the entire brand from Chevron and began a nationwide expansion campaign . GOLP operates a distribution network reaching from Maine to Ohio . Most Gulf-branded filling stations in North America are owned by Cumberland Farms of Framingham , which owns a two-thirds interest in GOLP . In addition there are some independently owned franchises still operating under the Gulf brand within North America , such as the American Refining Group , which is licensed by Chevron to blend and distribute Gulf-branded lubricants .

Gulf Oil International ( GOI ) : [ 1 ] owns the rights to the Gulf brand outside the United States , Spain & Portugal . It is now owned by the Hinduja Group . After they acquired a large share from the Taher family , a major Saudi Arabian family lead by Dr. Abdulhadi H. Taher ( former governor of the Saudi Petroleum and Mineral organization and board member of Aramco ) . GOI trades mainly in lubricants , oils , and greases . GOI is also involved in franchising the Gulf brand to operators in the petroleum and automotive sectors ; Gulf-branded filling stations can be found in several countries including the UK , Belgium , Germany , Ireland , the Slovak & Czech Republics , the Netherlands , Jordan , Finland and Turkey . GOI has direct and indirect interests in a number of businesses that use the Gulf brand under license . The Canadian exploration , production , and distribution arm of Gulf Oil was sold to Olympia and York in 1985 . From 1992 it continued as an independent oil company ( Gulf Canada Resources ) until its acquisition by Conoco in 2002 . Most Gulf downstream operations in Europe were sold to the Kuwait Petroleum Corporation in early 1983 . The associated Gulf filling stations were converted to trade under the Q8 brand by 1988 . However , attempts to sell Gulf Oil ( Great Britain ) to KPC failed because of irrevocable GOC guarantees given earlier in regard to bonds issued to finance the construction of refinery facilities in the UK . GO ( GB ) was taken over by Chevron and its stations continued to use the Gulf brand name and insignia until 1997 when the network was sold to Shell , although by this stage a fairly large proportion of Gulf stations were supplied by jobbers rather than Gulf Oil ( GB ) . Gulf completely withdrew from the UK in 1997 . This represented the end of the last major " downstream " use of the Gulf brand by Chevron .

GOI and GOLP continue to sell Gulf-branded lubricants worldwide through a network of official licensed companies , joint ventures and wholly owned subsidiary companies . Many of these official Gulf distributors carry out local marketing and sponsorship which help to raise the profile of the brand . Of these wholly owned subsidiaries Gulf Oil Corporation India has raised the market profile of the Gulf brand in the Middle East . GOCL have emerged as one of leading lubricants brands in India and run many marketing sponsorships targeted at the ever-growing youth sector in the country . GOI licenses the Gulf brand and logo in the UK to the Bayford group , one of the largest independent fuel distributors . Starting in 2001 , a new Gulf network of independent stations is slowly reappearing across the UK . At present , many of these stations are notable for offering genuine leaded four-star petrol , for which Bayford has a special dispensation to sell . At the same time , Gulf Lubricants ( UK ) Ltd was set up to market Gulf products ( mostly manufactured by the Gulf Netherlands operation ) in the UK . This return by Gulf to the UK after a four-year absence used the slogan " The Return of the Legend . " The post-2001 Gulf presence in the UK is a wholly network-based operation . It involves almost no direct Gulf investment in fixed assets , corporate infrastructure , or manufacturing capability . This is a complete contrast to the pre-1997 presence .

In January 2010 , after using the name since 1986 , GOLP acquired all right , title and interest in the Gulf brand name in the United States and announced plans to expand the use of the Gulf brand beyond its parent company 's Northeastern United States base . Its promotions have included sponsorship of major sporting events in the area with advertisements for Gulf in New York City , Boston , Philadelphia , and Pittsburgh . To take one case as an illustrative example of the Gulf revival , after Texaco 's 2001 merger with Chevron , many former Texaco stations in Pittsburgh switched to Gulf since Chevron does not service the Greater Pittsburgh area . As a result , the Texaco brand name disappeared from the area in June 2004 when the nonexclusive rights agreement with Shell expired , with Shell itself expanding in the area by means other than Texaco but , on June 2006 Chevron gave exclusive rights to the Texaco brand name in the U.S. and sold some BP gas stations in the southeast which were Gulf gas stations . In New England , former Exxon stations have been rebranded as Gulf , in accordance with the consent decree that allowed the merger of Exxon and Mobil . Many of the former Exxon stations feature a rectangular logo that fit into the existing sign standards used by Exxon . Gulf refers to the look as its " sunrise " imaging .

The Gulf logo is still used around the world by various businesses . GOI uses it for their marketing activities to focus on the sponsorship of Le Mans race teams ( with the current team being Aston Martin Racing team ) This sponsorship is used across the world by Gulf distributors , alongside local activity demonstrating the GOI company ethos of " your local global brand " . In 2009 , the clothing store chain Old Navy began selling T-shirts bearing the old Gulf logo , along with the former logos of Standard Oil and Chevron . Between 1980 and 2000 , Gulf moved from being a monolithic , vertically integrated multinational corporation to being more of a network of allied business interests . This has given the entire Gulf enterprise a high degree of strategic and operational flexibility . It is a move that reflects fundamental change in the economics of international business . Alliances represent yet another shift in the organization of economic transactions from organizational hierarchies to networks ; from mass to flexible production ; from large , vertically integrated organizations to disintegration and horizontal networks of economic units ; from " Fordist " to " post-Fordist " companies .

In March 2016 Gulf MX Announced that will put their own Filling Stations in Mexico , its planned to begin operations on July of the Same Year to Compete with the Local company ( PEMEX ) ( as a Result of the Recent changes in the local laws in matter of Energy and Oil resources ) As said by Sergio De La Vega ( CEO of Gulf Mexico ) in order to improve a better service Gulf will make fidelity programs and dedicated Smartphone Apps. for customers ( improving fuel payment into the same , Fuel Administration and better experience with fidelity programs as another additional benefits benefits ) adding to modern Service Stations with more quality added services . Adding to that , Gulf will offer franchises to the existing filling station owners to convert them into Gulf Trademark .

In 1970 , there were nearly 25,000 filling stations in the UK , of which 10,000 were ' independents ' ( typically , privately owned and supplied by a major or jobber while using a brand under license ) . By the end of 1999 , the number of filling stations had dropped to 13,700 and to 9,700 at the end of 2005 . In recent years , filling stations have been closing at a rate of 50 per month . Many of the smaller and independent stations have succumbed to competition from out-of-town supermarkets that undercut local enterprises through sheer volume of sales and shared overheads . The Gulf brand in the UK is licensed by GOI to the Bayford group which specializes in operating service stations on minor trunk roads in rural areas . Bayford supplies about 185 Gulf-branded filling stations in the UK , all of which are independently owned . The Gulf filling stations provide outlets for Gulf-branded oils and lubricants . The illustration shows a typical Bayford / Gulf filling station in the UK , still associated with a service garage , restaurant and retailing facilities . It is in an isolated location , five miles ( 8 km ) south of Wooler in the Cheviot Hills , catering to both local residents and passing tourist traffic . It is not vulnerable to competition from supermarkets and provides something of a local community center .

For decades , Gulf operated filling stations on the Pennsylvania Turnpike toll highway system alongside the Howard Johnson 's restaurants at the Turnpike 's travel plazas ( which correspond to European motorway service areas ) . This began in 1950 with the opening of the Philadelphia Extension , and Gulf added more filling stations as the system was extended . The Standard Oil Company of Pennsylvania ( now part of Exxon ) had exclusive rights to provide filling station services on the sections of the system that opened prior to 1950 , principally the Irwin-to-Carlisle section . In the 1980s , Sunoco was awarded the franchise to operate the filling stations at the Sideling Hill and now-closed Hempfield travel plazas . This led to a bidding war among three of Pennsylvania 's most recognizable gasoline brands each time a travel plaza franchise came up for renewal . Gulf had the opportunity to become the exclusive provider of filling stations at travel plazas along the Pennsylvania Turnpike after Exxon withdrew from the Turnpike in 1990 . Cumberland Farms ( owner of the Gulf brand in the northeastern U.S. ) was awarded a new contract with the Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission , but the contract was sold to Sunoco two years later as part of the company 's bankruptcy proceedings . In June 1992 , all of the former Gulf filling stations on the Turnpike ( as with the Exxon ones before it ) converted to Sunoco . All of the travel plazas continue to sell Sunoco fuel today .

Most filling stations in Europe sell three types of fuel : unleaded , LRP , and diesel . Although these products lack any real brand differentiation , this has not always been the case . Until well into the 1970s , Gulf ( in common with other oil companies ) sold distinctive brands of petrol / gasoline including subregular Gulftane , Good Gulf regular , Gulf No-Nox premium , and Gulf Super Unleaded ( aka Gulfcrest ) . Gulf petrol was sold using the slogans " Good Gulf Gasoline , " and " Gulf – the Gas with Guts . " Gulf service stations often supplied customers with pens and key rings bearing these slogans . For a few years , beginning in 1966 , Gulf stations in the U.S. gave away orange plastic " Extra Kick Horseshoes " to customers who filled their tanks with Gulf 's No-Nox premium gasoline ( the novelty items were commonly mounted on bumpers ) . GOI still produces and sells a wide range of branded oil based products including lubricants and greases of all kinds . These include products for a variety of applications ranging from metal working oils to refrigeration oils . Car engine oils include the Gulf Formula , Gulf MAX , and Gulf TEC ranges . Heavy duty diesel engine lubricants include the Gulf Supreme and Gulf Superfleet ranges .

The iLoo ( short for Internet loo ) was a cancelled Microsoft project to develop a Wi-Fi Internet-enabled portable toilet . The iLoo , which was to debut at British summer festivals , was described as being a portable toilet with wireless broadband Internet , an adjustable plasma screen , a membrane wireless keyboard , a six-channel speaker system , and toilet paper embossed with popular web site addresses . The iLoo was also to have an extra screen and keyboard on the outside , and was to be guarded . It was intended as the next in a series of successful initiatives by MSN UK which sought to introduce the internet in unusual locations , including MSN Street , MSN Park Bench and MSN Deckchair . The project was announced by MSN UK on April 30 , 2003 , and was widely ridiculed before being declared a hoax by Microsoft on May 12 . On May 13 , another Microsoft press release stated that although the project had not been a hoax , it had been cancelled because it would do little to promote the MSN brand . There has since been speculation as to whether the project was cancelled for fear of being sued by Andrew Cubitt , who had invented the similarly named product " i-Loo " . The iLoo was described as a public relations " debacle " by Online Journalism Review .

The iLoo was designed to be a Wi-Fi Internet-enabled portable toilet that would allow users to surf the internet while using the loo . Internally , the facility would have a broadband connection via wireless 802.11b , a wireless waterproof keyboard , a swivel plasma screen running Windows XP Professional , a 6-channel surround-sound system beneath the sink , toilet paper embossed with popular URLs , and a suction toilet . Externally , the facility would feature an MSN logo and have a " Hotmail station " with an additional plasma screen and keyboard for waiting consumers . A security guard was to be stationed near the unit to ensure that it was being properly used and to prevent the unit from being stolen . The iLoo was to debut " at a majority of the summer season festivals " . The iLoo was to be deployed only in Britain .

The project was announced on April 30 , 2003 in press release by MSN UK , MSN 's British subsidiary , as part of a " series of MSN.co.uk initiatives which look at the changing nature of how we use the web as it constantly evolves " . The press release stated that : The UK ’ s most popular website msn.co.uk is creating the world ’ s first ‘ Internet Loo ’ . The iLoo will be mobile and is part of MSN ’ s mission to allow instant logging on ‘ anytime and any place ’ . In time for the summer festival season , MSN is in the process of converting a portable loo to create a unique experience for surfers looking for an alternative to the bog-standard festival loo experience . Users will be able to sit down , undock a wireless keyboard and conveniently access the first ever WWW.C. The press release also stated that " MSN is also in talks with toilet paper manufacturers to produce special web paper for those in need of URL inspiration " . News of the iLoo was widely circulated amongst mainstream media . The story became the most-emailed story on Yahoo ! News on May 1 , 2003 , being emailed over 4000 times . The iLoo was widely derided and press coverage subjected MSN and Microsoft to heavy criticism . On May 10 , The Inquirer published a story in which Andrew Cubitt alleged that " Microsoft stole his iLoo idea " from his i-Loo invention . On May 12 , Microsoft announced that the iLoo was a " hoax perpetrated by its British division " calling it an " April Fool 's joke " and issued an apology for the confusion . The Associated Press , however , stated that they had previously received confirmation of the project from two of Microsoft 's PR firms : Waggener Edstrom Worldwide and Red Consultancy . The Seattle Post-Intelligencer also stated that it received confirmation from Waggener Edstrom and was even provided with a schematic drawing . Furthermore , April Fools was almost a month before , and Microsoft had never before released a fake press release .

On May 13 , 2003 , Microsoft retracted the denial , stating that the iLoo had been a legitimate demonstration project that was to be released in Britain for summer music festivals , but had been terminated by Microsoft executives in Redmond , Washington who believed the iLoo was inappropriate with the final decision made by MSN senior vice president David Cole . MSN product manager Lisa Gurry stated that the project " didn 't really map to our global branding objectives " . Microsoft again apologized for the miscommunication stating " the confusion over the legitimacy of this effort was caused by people moving too quickly and who misspoke before gathering all of the relevant information " . Prior to the cancellation , an iLoo prototype was in the " early stages of construction " . MSN allows regional units to design their own marketing campaigns , and the UK division had developed a reputation for innovative campaigns , in this case involving British toilet humour . The iLoo which was designed for the UK as part of a " tongue-in-cheek marketing initiative " was " intended to be the next in line of a number of clever initiatives in the UK involving introducing the internet in interesting locations , including MSN Street , MSN Park Bench and MSN Deckchair " . The previous initiatives were well received . Microsoft stated that no employees were disciplined as a result of the debacle , although the company stated that it would conduct " internal discussions " .

Although the product was not publicly released , many questioned whether " Microsoft had lost its senses " and the product was widely derided . Critics contended that the product was a waste of money and doomed to fail . Concerns were raised about how the iLoo would serve to extend waiting lines , how hygienic it would be to share keyboards in a public loo , and what would happen if the keyboard were to be urinated upon . Critics also questioned whether users would spend enough time in the loo to make use of the internet facilities , noting that " most port-a-potty users stay only long enough to relieve themselves without having to inhale . " The iLoo , given its toiletry-related nature , subjected MSN and Microsoft to puns and jokes especially since Microsoft 's marketing slogan at the time was " where do you want to go today ? " with the PC being dubbed Pee-C. The Herald Sun wrote that the " iLoo is , unquestionably , very good news – mainly to journalists with a bottomless pit of laboured bum jokes " while the Seattle Times wrote " now the company has a credibility problem as well as a red face . " Other newspapers issued humorous headlines : Microsoft technology headed for toilet from the San Francisco Chronicle , Toilet mixes zeroes with ones and twos from the Washington Post , and Microsoft 's Gone Potty from The Daily Mirror .

After reading an article about the iLoo , Andrew Cubitt , inventor of the similarly named i-Loo , wrote to The Inquirer stating that iLoo " sounds remarkably similar ... it now seems that the clever people at Microsoft have cottoned onto the idea and even call it the i-Loo , the same as mine ! " Cubitt went on to say that " mine did everything that the Microsoft one is meant to do , but additionally printed information on toilet paper and didn 't use a keyboard for the interface due to hygiene reasons " . The i-Loo was prototyped by Cubitt as part of his thesis for his 2001 university degree in Product Design and Engineering at Brunel University . In an interview with The Inquirer , he noted " As it was designed at the university , they own the partial rights to the product so they will be watching the Microsoft ' invention ' very closely . " Microsoft never formally commented on Cubitt 's allegations and instead initially stated the iLoo was an April 's fool joke . As a result , Cubitt questioned whether this was " a very calculated ploy to destroy competition in its early stages , or is admitting they don 't even know what time of the month it is less embarrassing and ridding them of a potentially expensive situation ! " Cubitt went on to state that " as they have now discredited my idea as a joke , I will never be able to produce the idea " and as such was " consulting my law books now on defamatory statements " . Neither Cubitt , nor Brunel University have taken public legal action against Microsoft pertaining to the i-Loo .

The i-Loo internet toilet roll browser is a novel and unique product designed to make best use of the time you spend on the loo ! The product allows you to search the internet whilst sitting on the toilet and print out any web pages you are interested in on your toilet paper. i-Loo brings a whole new meaning to the word downloading . The unit is fixed in front of a toilet on the cubical [ sic ] wall . The product provides up to date information about new products , daily news and lottery results through an easy to navigate software package . Normal operation of the toilet and paper dispenser is evident . The i-Loo internet toilet roll browser was featured at the 2003 Daily Mail Ideal Home Show as part of the Future Concepts exhibition in Earls Court , London , where it was nominated for the MFI Bright Sparks 2003 awards . The i-Loo , which was sponsored by Epson Printers , received significant press coverage , and was featured on GMTV as well as various radio shows .

Major General William Curtis Chase ( 9 March 1895 – 21 August 1986 ) was an American soldier and General in the first half of the 20th century . He is best known for his service in the South West Pacific Area during World War II and in the Occupation of Japan . A graduate of Brown University , Chase enlisted in the Rhode Island National Guard in 1913 and served on the Mexican Border . Commissioned as a second lieutenant in the cavalry in January 1917 , he served on the Western Front in World War I and in the Occupation of the Rhineland . Between the wars , he attended the Command and General Staff College at Fort Leavenworth , later returning as an instructor . Chase was promoted to Brigadier General in March 1943 on assuming command of the 1st Brigade , 1st Cavalry Division . He was chosen to lead the assault on the Admiralty Islands in February 1944 . He resisted the temptation to swiftly overrun the island , and thereby overextend his forces , and formed a defensive perimeter that made good use of the terrain . From this position , he was able to defeat a series of counterattacks by the numerically superior Japanese garrison .

In February 1945 , Chase 's columns pushed into the northern outskirts of Manila , liberating some 3,700 internees at the University of Santo Tomas which had been turned into an internment camp . He took over command of the 38th Infantry Division , which was confronted by enemy fortifications at Zig-Zag Pass on the Bataan Peninsula that took a week of hard fighting to reduce . Chase assumed command of the 1st Cavalry Division on 1 August 1945 . He remained with it in the Occupation of Japan until he returned to the United States in January 1949 . Later , he was chief of staff of the Third Army at Fort McPherson and head of the Military Assistance Advisory Group in Taiwan . Retiring from the Army , he earned a Master of Arts degree in history from Trinity University and taught political science at the University of Houston .

On the afternoon of his graduation from Brown in 1916 , Chase , now a sergeant , joined A Battery at Quonset Point , Rhode Island , where it was mobilised for duty on the Mexican Border . The unit remained in the El Paso , Texas , area for a time , but saw no action . While there , Chase passed an examination for commissions in Regular Army . Chase was posted to Fort Leavenworth in January 1917 for a three month course for newly commissioned officers before being commissioned as a second lieutenant in the cavalry . Chase was assigned to the 3rd Cavalry , then based at Fort Sam Houston . Shortly after the United States declared war on Germany , he was promoted to first lieutenant and posted to the 6th Cavalry on the Mexican frontier . Chase attended a machine gun course at Fort Sill , after which he was posted to the 11th Machine Gun Battalion , part of the 4th Division , in April 1918 . He served on the Western Front with the 4th Division , participating in the Battle of Saint-Mihiel , but came down with jaundice and missed all but the last days of the Meuse-Argonne Offensive . He participated in the Occupation of the Rhineland before the 4th Division returned to the United States in July 1919 .

On return , Chase was posted to the 16th Cavalry , then in the Rio Grande Valley , although it soon returned to Fort Sam Houston . In 1921 he was posted to Michigan State College for duty with the Reserve Officers ' Training Corps . There he met Dorothea Marie Wetherbee . They were married in 1921 . They never had children . Chase attended the United States Army Cavalry School and United States Army Infantry School , followed by duty with the 14th Cavalry at Fort Sheridan , Illinois , from 1927 to 1929 . He then attended the Command and General Staff College at Fort Leavenworth . From 1931 to 1934 he served overseas with the 26th Cavalry ( Philippine Scouts ) at Fort Stotsenburg in the Philippines . Returning to the United States , he was posted as an Instructor in Tactics , first at the Cavalry School at Fort Riley and then , from 1938 to 1940 , at the Command and General Staff College .

In 1941 Chase , now a lieutenant colonel , was posted to VIII Corps , then commanded by Major General Walter Krueger . As such , he participated in the Louisiana Maneuvers . In December 1941 , he was posted to the Amphibious Force , Atlantic Fleet , then under the command of Major General Holland Smith . Based at Marine Corps Base Quantico , the Amphibious Force practiced Amphibious warfare tactics on Chesapeake Bay . In 1942 , Chase assumed command of the 113th Cavalry , an Iowa National Guard unit . Initially a horse-mechanized unit , the 113th Cavalry soon became fully mechanized . It moved from its original station at Fort Clark , Texas , to Camp Bowie and then to Fort Hood , where it provided school troops for the Tank Destroyer Center . Chase was promoted to Brigadier General in March 1943 on assuming command of the 1st Brigade , 1st Cavalry Division . The division was then stationed at Fort Bliss but was already preparing to move to the South West Pacific . The 1st Cavalry Division had therefore been dismounted , but the division and brigade commanders and their staffs were still on horseback . The 1st Cavalry Division staged at Camp Stoneman . Chase departed from San Francisco on 3 July on the transport USAT George Washington .

The 1st Cavalry Division arrived in Australia and continued its training at Strathpine , Queensland . Training there was more vigorous than at Fort Bliss , and Chase broke his heel bone in a training accident . In December 1943 , the 1st Cavalry Division sailed for Oro Bay , where it staged for its next operation , the Admiralty Islands campaign . Chase was chosen to lead the assault . Here , his tactical expertise came to the fore . He resisted the temptation to overrun the island of Los Negros , and thereby overextend his forces , and instead formed a defensive perimeter that made good use of the terrain . From this position , he was able to defeat a series of counterattacks by the numerically superior Japanese garrison . The crisis passed , Chase 's force was reinforced by the rest of the division , and the 1st Cavalry Division was then able to overrun the islands . Chase was awarded the Bronze Star for his role in the campaign . The 1st Cavalry Division remained in the Admiralty Islands until October , when it boarded ships there for the invasion of Leyte , which it assaulted on 20 October 1944 . Chase 's 1st Brigade 's initial mission was to reconnoiter the hills on the west side of the Tacloban Valley and establish observation posts from which it could command the entrances to the valley . In November , he was ordered to cover the flank of X Corps ' advance up the Leyte Valley , and later into the Ormoc Valley . Chase had to move his brigade across mountainous , roadless , uncharted jungle in frequently appalling wet weather . The advance made slow progress against Japanese troops that fought tenaciously all the way .

The 1st Cavalry Division was down to half strength when it was withdrawn from the front line on Leyte for a brief rest in January 1945 , but few reinforcements arrived before it was ordered to move to Luzon , where it disembarked over the beaches at San Fabian on 27 January 1945 . General of the Army Douglas MacArthur ordered the 1st Cavalry Division 's commander , Major General Vern D. Mudge , to conduct a rapid advance on Manila . For this , Mudge formed three flying columns . Initially , Chase 's 1st Brigade 's mission was to follow one of the columns but on 1 February he was relieved of responsibility for the main body of the 1st Brigade and placed in command of all three flying columns . On 3 February , Chase 's columns pushed into the northern outskirts of Manila and seized a vital bridge over the Tuliahan River , which separated them from the city proper . Chase , controlling his columns by radio , suffered slight burns to his hands when a Japanese truck exploded . A squadron of the 8th Cavalry , guided by two Filipino guerrillas reached the sprawling campus of the University of Santo Tomas which had been turned into an internment camp , liberating some 3,700 internees .

A Japanese raiding party destroyed the bridge over Tuliahan River ; Chase 's security was not good enough . This prevented the main body of the 1st Cavalry Division from linking up with Chase 's force in Manila . Supplies were dispatched through the 37th Infantry Division 's zone until engineers could build a new bridge . For his advance on Manila , Chase was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross . He was also awarded the Purple Heart for the burns to his hands . On 7 February 1945 , Chase took over command of the 38th Infantry Division , which was then confronted by enemy fortifications at Zig-Zag Pass on the Bataan Peninsula . It took Chase a week of hard fighting to reduce this position . A battalion of the 151st Infantry under Chase 's personal command landed at Mariveles on the southern tip of Bataan on 14 February . The 38th Infantry Division participated in the final actions on Corregidor . Units of the 38th Infantry Division assaulted and captured Caballo Island on 27 March , Fort Drum on El Fraile Island on 13 April , and Carabao Island on 16 April . Meanwhile , other elements of the 38th Infantry Division engaged enemy forces in the mountainous Fort Stotsenburg area . In the midst of these operations , Chase was promoted to Major General in March .

In late April 1945 , the 38th Infantry Division moved to the area east of Manila where it relieved the 6th Infantry Division . On 1 May , it began a series of probing attacks prior to an attack on 4 May aimed at capturing the Wawa Dam , an important part of Manila 's water supply . Chase had to reduce a series of strongly held Japanese positions . By the end of the month , the dam was secure and the Japanese Kobayashi Force was broken . Chase assumed command of the 1st Cavalry Division on 1 August 1945 . At this time , the division was in the Lucena City area but slated for Operation Downfall , in which it would assault Ariake , Kagoshima . The end of the war precluded this . Instead , the 1st Cavalry Division participated in the Occupation of Japan . It embarked from Batangas on 25 August and disembarked in Tokyo Bay on 2 September , becoming the first US division in Tokyo .

Chase remained with the 1st Cavalry Division on occupation duties until December 1948 , when he temporarily assumed command of IX Corps . He finally returned to the United States in January 1949 , and became chief of staff of the Third Army at Fort McPherson in April 1949 . From 1951 to 1955 he headed the Military Assistance Advisory Group in Taiwan . He retired from the Army on 31 July 1955 . Chase earned a Master of Arts degree in history from Trinity University . From 1957 to 1965 , he taught political science at the University of Houston . His wife Dorothea died in 1957 . In 1961 he married Mrs Hallie Barlow Olcott . Chase retired in 1965 , having reached the state of Texas ' mandatory retirement age . In 1974 , Chase joined a party of retired generals associated with General MacArthur on a visit to Australia as guests of Lieutenant General Sir Edmund Herring and Dame Mary Herring . In addition to Chase , Leif J. Sverdrup , Hugh John Casey , and LeGrande A. Diller and their wives also made the trip . Chase published his memoirs , entitled Front Line General : The Commands of Maj. Gen. Wm . C. Chase , in 1975 . He died on 21 August 1986 and was buried at Fort Sam Houston National Cemetery .

Tracheobronchial injury ( TBI ) is damage to the tracheobronchial tree ( the airway structure involving the trachea and bronchi ) . It can result from blunt or penetrating trauma to the neck or chest , inhalation of harmful fumes or smoke , or aspiration of liquids or objects . Though rare , TBI is a serious condition ; it may cause obstruction of the airway with resulting life-threatening respiratory insufficiency . Other injuries accompany TBI in about half of cases . Of those people with TBI who die , most do so before receiving emergency care , either from airway obstruction , exsanguination , or from injuries to other vital organs . Of those who do reach a hospital , the mortality rate may be as high as 30 % . TBI is frequently difficult to diagnose and treat . Early diagnosis is important to prevent complications , which include stenosis ( narrowing ) of the airway , respiratory tract infection , and damage to the lung tissue . Diagnosis involves procedures such as bronchoscopy , radiography , and x-ray computed tomography to visualize the tracheobronchial tree . Signs and symptoms vary based on the location and severity of the injury ; they commonly include dyspnea ( difficulty breathing ) , dysphonia ( a condition where the voice can be hoarse , weak , or excessively breathy ) , coughing , and abnormal breath sounds . In the emergency setting , tracheal intubation can be used to ensure that the airway remains open . In severe cases , surgery may be necessary to repair a TBI .

The trachea and bronchi form the tracheobronchial tree . The trachea is situated between the lower end of the larynx and the center of the chest , where it splits into the two bronchi at a ridge called the carina . The trachea is stabilized and kept open by rings made of cartilage that surround the front and sides of the structure ; these rings are not closed and do not surround the back , which is made of membrane . The bronchi split into smaller branches and then to bronchioles that supply air to the alveoli , the tiny air-filled sacs in the lungs responsible for absorbing oxygen . An arbitrary division can be made between the intrathoracic and cervical trachea at the thoracic inlet , an opening at the top of the thoracic cavity . Anatomical structures that surround and protect the tracheobronchial tree include the lungs , the esophagus , large blood vessels , the rib cage , the thoracic spine , and the sternum . Children have softer tracheas and a more elastic tracheobronchial trees than adults ; this elasticity , which helps protect the structures from injury when they are compressed , may contribute to the lower incidence of TBI in children .

Lesions can be transverse , occurring between the rings of the trachea , longitudinal or spiral . They may occur along the membranous part of the trachea , the main bronchi , or both . In 8 % of ruptures , lesions are complex , occurring in more than one location , with more than one type of lesion , or on both of the main bronchi and the trachea . Transverse tears are more common than longitudinal or complex ones . The laceration may completely transect the airway or it may go only partway around . Partial tears that do not go all the way around the circumference of the airway do not allow a lacerated airway to become completely detached ; tears that encircle the whole airway can allow separation to occur . Lacerations may also be classified as complete or incomplete . In an incomplete lesion , a layer of tissue surrounding the bronchus remains intact and can keep the air in the airway , preventing it from leaking into the areas surrounding the airways . Incomplete lacerations may require closer scrutiny to detect and may not be diagnosed right away . Bronchial injuries are divided into those that are accompanied by a disruption of the pleura and those that are not ; in the former , air can leak from the hole in the airway and a pneumothorax can form . The latter type is associated with more minor signs ; pneumothorax is small if it occurs at all , and although function is lost in the part of the lung supplied by the injured bronchus , unaffected parts of the lungs may be able to compensate .

Most TBI that results from blunt trauma occurs within the chest . The most common tracheal injury is a tear near the carina or in the membranous wall of the trachea . In blunt chest trauma , TBI occurs within 2.5 cm of the carina 40 – 80 % of the time . The injury is more common in the right main bronchus than the left , possibly because the former is near vertebrae , which may injure it . Also , the aorta and other tissues in the mid chest that surround the left main bronchus may protect it . Another possibility is that people with left main bronchus injuries are more likely to also have other deadly injuries and therefore die before reaching hospital , making them less likely to be included in studies that determine rates of injuries .

Signs and symptoms vary depending on what part of the tracheobronchial tree is injured and how severely it is damaged . There are no direct signs of TBI , but certain signs suggest the injury and raise a clinician 's suspicion that it has occurred . Many of the signs and symptoms are also present in injuries with similar injury mechanisms such as pneumothorax . Dyspnea and respiratory distress are found in 76 – 100 % of people with TBI , and coughing up blood has been found in up to 25 % . However , isolated TBI does not usually cause profuse bleeding ; if such bleeding is observed it is likely to be due to another injury such as a ruptured large blood vessel . The patient may exhibit dysphonia or have diminished breath sounds , and rapid breathing is common . Coughing may be present , and stridor , an abnormal , high-pitched breath sound indicating obstruction of the upper airway can also occur . Damage to the airways can cause subcutaneous emphysema ( air trapped in the subcutaneous tissue of the skin ) in the abdomen , chest , neck , and head . Subcutaneous emphysema , present in up to 85 % of people with TBI , is particularly indicative of the injury when it is only in the neck . Air is trapped in the chest cavity outside the lungs ( pneumothorax ) in about 70 % of TBI . Especially strong evidence that TBI has occurred is failure of a pneumothorax to resolve even when a chest tube is placed to rid the chest cavity of the air ; it shows that air is continually leaking into the chest cavity from the site of the tear . Air can also be trapped in the mediastinum , the center of the chest cavity ( pneumomediastinum ) . If air escapes from a penetrating injury to the neck , a definite diagnosis of TBI can be made . Hamman 's sign , a sound of crackling that occurs in time with the heartbeat , may also accompany TBI .

Injuries to the tracheobronchial tree within the chest may occur due to penetrating forces such as gunshot wounds , but are more often the result of blunt trauma . TBI due blunt forces usually results from high-energy impacts such as falls from height and motor vehicle accidents ; the injury is rare in low-impact mechanisms . Injuries of the trachea cause about 1 % of traffic-related deaths . Other potential causes are falls from high places and injuries in which the chest is crushed . Explosions are another cause . Gunshot wounds are the commonest form of penetrating trauma that cause TBI . Less commonly , knife wounds and shrapnel from motor vehicle accidents can also penetrate the airways . Most injuries to the trachea occur in the neck , because the airways within the chest are deep and therefore well protected ; however , up to a quarter of TBI resulting from penetrating trauma occurs within the chest . Injury to the cervical trachea usually affects the anterior ( front ) part of the trachea . Certain medical procedures can also injure the airways ; these include tracheal intubation , bronchoscopy , and tracheotomy . The back of the trachea may be damaged during tracheotomy . TBI resulting from tracheal intubation ( insertion of a tube into the trachea ) is rare , and the mechanism by which it occurs is unclear . However , one likely mechanism involves an endotracheal tube catching in a fold of membrane and tearing it as it is advanced downward through the airway . When an endotracheal tube tears the trachea , it typically does so at the posterior ( back ) membranous wall . Unlike TBI that results from blunt trauma , most iatrogenic injuries to the airway involve longitudinal tears to the back of the trachea or tears on the side that pull the membranous part of the trachea away from the cartilage . Excessive pressure from the cuff of an endotracheal tube can reduce blood supply to the tissues of the trachea , leading to ischemia and potentially causing it to become ulcerated , infected , and , later , narrowed .

The structures in the tracheobronchial tree are well protected , so it normally takes a large amount of force to injure them . In blunt trauma , TBI is usually the result of violent compression of the chest . Rapid hyperextension of the neck , usually resulting from vehicle crashes , can also injure the trachea , and trauma to the neck can crush the trachea against the vertebrae . A crush injury of the larynx or cervical trachea can occur in head-on collisions when the neck is hyperextended and strikes the steering wheel or dashboard ; this has been called a " dashboard injury " . The larynx and cervical trachea may also be injured in front-on collisions by the seat belt . Although the mechanism is not well understood , TBI due to blunt trauma is widely thought to be caused by any combination of three possible mechanisms : an increase in pressure within the airways , shearing , and pulling apart . The first type of injury , sometimes called an " explosive rupture " , may occur when the chest is violently compressed , for example when a driver strikes the steering wheel in a vehicle accident or when the chest is crushed . The pressure in the airways , especially the larger airways ( the trachea and bronchi ) , quickly rises as a result of the compression , because the glottis reflexively closes off the airways . When this pressure exceeds the elasticity of the tissues , they burst ; thus the membranous part of the trachea is more commonly affected by this mechanism of injury than cartilaginous portions .

The second mechanism may occur when the chest is suddenly decelerated , as occurs in vehicle accidents , producing a shearing force . The lungs are mobile in the chest cavity but their movement is more restricted near the hilum . Areas near the cricoid cartilage and carina are fixed to the thyroid cartilage and the pericardium respectively ; thus if the airways move , they can tear at these points of fixation . The third mechanism occurs when the chest is compressed from front to back , causing it to widen from side to side . The lungs adhere to the chest wall because of the negative pressure between them and the pleural membranes lining the inside of the chest cavity ; thus when the chest widens , they are pulled apart . This creates tension at the carina ; the airway tears if this tensile force exceeds its elasticity . This mechanism may be the cause of injury when the chest is crushed . Most TBI are probably due to a combination of these three mechanisms . When airways are damaged , air can escape from them and be trapped in the surrounding tissues in the neck ( subcutaneous emphysema ) and mediastinum ( pneumomediastinum ) ; if it builds up to high enough pressures there , it can compress the airways . Massive air leaks from a ruptured airway can also compromise the circulation by preventing blood from returning to the heart from the head and lower body ; this causes a potentially deadly reduction in the amount of blood the heart is able to pump out . Blood and other fluids can build up in the airways , and the injury can interfere with the patency of the airway and interfere with its continuity . However , even if the trachea is completely transected , the tissues surrounding it may hold it together enough for adequate air exchange to occur , at least at first .

Rapid diagnosis and treatment are important in the care of TBI ; if the injury is not diagnosed shortly after the injury , the risk of complications is higher . Bronchoscopy is the most effective method to diagnose , locate , and determine the severity of TBI , and it is usually the only method that allows a definitive diagnosis . Diagnosis with a flexible bronchoscope , which allows the injury to be visualized directly , is the fastest and most reliable technique . In people with TBI , bronchoscopy may reveal that the airway is torn , or that the airways are blocked by blood , or that a bronchus has collapsed , obscuring more distal ( lower ) bronchi from view . Chest x-ray is the initial imaging technique used to diagnose TBI . The film may not have any signs in an otherwise asymptomatic patient . Indications of TBI seen on radiographs include deformity in the trachea or a defect in the tracheal wall . Radiography may also show cervical emphysema , air in the tissues of the neck . X-rays may also show accompanying injuries and signs such as fractures and subcutaneous emphysema . If subcutaneous emphysema occurs and the hyoid bone appears in an X-ray to be sitting unusually high in the throat , it may be an indication that the trachea has been severed . TBI is also suspected if an endotracheal tube appears in an X-ray to be out of place , or if its cuff appears to be more full than normal or to protrude through a tear in the airway . If a bronchus is torn all the way around , the lung may collapse outward toward the chest wall ( rather than inward , as it usually does in pneumothorax ) because it loses the attachment to the bronchus which normally holds it toward the center . In a person lying face-up , the lung collapses toward the diaphragm and the back . This sign , described in 1969 , is called fallen lung sign and is pathognomonic of TBI ( that is , it is diagnostic for TBI because it does not occur in other conditions ) ; however it occurs only rarely . In as many as one in five cases , people with blunt trauma and TBI have no signs of the injury on chest X-ray . CT scanning detects over 90 % of TBI resulting from blunt trauma , but neither X-ray nor CT are a replacement for bronchoscopy .

Treatment of TBI varies based on the location and severity of injury and whether the patient is stable or having trouble breathing , but ensuring that the airway is patent so that the patient can breathe is always of paramount importance . Ensuring an open airway and adequate ventilation may be difficult in people with TBI . Intubation , one method to secure the airway , may be used to bypass a disruption in the airway in order to send air to the lungs . If necessary , a tube can be placed into the uninjured bronchus , and a single lung can be ventilated . If there is a penetrating injury to the neck through which air is escaping , the trachea may be intubated through the wound . Multiple unsuccessful attempts at conventional ( direct ) laryngoscopy may threaten the airway , so alternative techniques to visualize the airway , such as fiberoptic or video laryngoscopy , may be employed to facilitate tracheal intubation . If the upper trachea is injured , an incision can be made in the trachea ( tracheotomy ) or the cricothyroid membrane ( cricothyrotomy , or cricothyroidotomy ) in order to ensure an open airway . However , cricothyrotomy may not be useful if the trachea is lacerated below the site of the artificial airway . Tracheotomy is used sparingly because it can cause complications such as infections and narrowing of the trachea and larynx . When it is impossible to establish a sufficient airway , or when complicated surgery must be performed , cardiopulmonary bypass may be used — blood is pumped out of the body , oxygenated by a machine , and pumped back in . If a pneumothorax occurs , a chest tube may be inserted into the pleural cavity to remove the air .

People with TBI are provided with supplemental oxygen and may need mechanical ventilation . Employment of certain measures such as Positive end-expiratory pressure ( PEEP ) and ventilation at higher-than-normal pressures may be helpful in maintaining adequate oxygenation . However , such measures can also increase leakage of air through a tear , and can stress the sutures in a tear that has been surgically repaired ; therefore the lowest possible airway pressures that still maintain oxygenation are typically used . Mechanical ventilation can also cause pulmonary barotrauma when high pressure is required to ventilate the lungs . Techniques such as pulmonary toilet ( removal of secretions ) , fluid management , and treatment of pneumonia are employed to improve pulmonary compliance ( the elasticity of the lungs ) . While TBI may be managed without surgery , surgical repair of the tear is considered standard in the treatment of most TBI . It is required if a tear interferes with ventilation ; if mediastinitis ( inflammation of the tissues in the mid-chest ) occurs ; or if subcutaneous or mediastinal emphysema progresses rapidly ; or if air leak or large pneumothorax is persistent despite chest tube placement . Other indications for surgery are a tear more than one third the circumference of the airway , tears with loss of tissue , and a need for positive pressure ventilation . Damaged tissue around a rupture ( e.g. torn or scarred tissue ) may be removed in order to obtain clean edges that can be surgically repaired . Debridement of damaged tissue can shorten the trachea by as much as 50 % . Repair of extensive tears can include sewing a flap of tissue taken from the membranes surrounding the heart or lungs ( the pericardium and pleura , respectively ) over the sutures to protect them . When lung tissue is destroyed as a result of TBI complications , pneumonectomy or lobectomy ( removal of a lung or of one lobe , respectively ) may be required . Pneumonectomy is avoided whenever possible due to the high rate of death associated with the procedure . Surgery to repair a tear in the tracheobronchial tree can be successful even when it is performed months after the trauma , as can occur if the diagnosis of TBI is delayed . When airway stenosis results after delayed diagnosis , surgery is similar to that performed after early diagnosis : the stenotic section is removed and the cut airway is repaired .

Most people with TBI who die do so within minutes of the injury , due to complications such as pneumothorax and insufficient airway and to other injuries that occurred at the same time . Most late deaths that occur in TBI are attributed to sepsis or multiple organ dysfunction syndrome ( MODS ) . If the condition is not recognized and treated early , serious complications are more likely to occur ; for example , pneumonia and bronchiectasis may occur as late complications . Years can pass before the condition is recognized . Some TBI are so small that they do not have significant clinical manifestations ; they may never be noticed or diagnosed and may heal without intervention . If granulation tissue grows over the injured site , it can cause stenosis of the airway , after a week to a month . The granulation tissue must be surgically excised . Delayed diagnosis of a bronchial rupture increases risk of infection and lengthens hospital stay . People with a narrowed airway may suffer dyspnea , coughing , wheezing , respiratory tract infection , and difficulty with clearing secretions . If the bronchiole is completely obstructed , atelectasis occurs : the alveoli of the lung collapse . Lung tissue distal to a completely obstructed bronchiole often does not become infected . Because it is filled with mucus , this tissue remains functional . When the secretions are removed , the affected portion of the lung is commonly able to function almost normally . However , infection is common in lungs distal to a partially obstructed bronchiole . Infected lung tissue distal to a stricture can be damaged , and wheezing and coughing may develop due to the narrowing . In addition to pneumonia , the stenosis may cause bronchiectasis , in which bronchi are dilated , to develop . Even after an airway with a stricture is restored to normal , the resulting loss of lung function may be permanent .

Complications may also occur with treatment ; for example a granuloma can form at the suture site . Also , the sutured wound can tear again , as occurs when there is excessive pressure in the airways from ventilation . However , for people who do receive surgery soon after the injury to repair the lesion , outcome is usually good ; the long-term outcome is good for over 90 % of people who have TBI surgically repaired early in treatment . Even when surgery is performed years after the injury , the outlook is good , with low rates of death and disability and good chances of preserving lung function .

Rupture of the trachea or bronchus is the most common type of blunt injury to the airway . It is difficult to determine the incidence of TBI : in as many as 30 – 80 % of cases , death occurs before the person reaches a hospital , and these people may not be included in studies . On the other hand , some TBI are so small that they do not cause significant symptoms and are therefore never noticed . In addition , the injury sometimes is not associated with symptoms until complications develop later , further hindering estimation of the true incidence . However , autopsy studies have revealed TBI in 2.5 – 3.2 % of people who died after trauma . Of all neck and chest traumas , including people that died immediately , TBI is estimated to occur in 0.5 – 2 % . An estimated 0.5 % of polytrauma patients treated in trauma centers have TBI . The incidence is estimated at 2 % in blunt chest and neck trauma and 1 – 2 % in penetrating chest trauma . Laryngotracheal injuries occur in 8 % of patients with penetrating injury to the neck , and TBI occurs in 2.8 % of blunt chest trauma deaths . In people with blunt trauma who do reach a hospital alive , reports have found incidences of 2.1 % and 5.3 % . Another study of blunt chest trauma revealed an incidence of only 0.3 % , but a mortality rate of 67 % ( possibly due in part to associated injuries ) . The incidence of iatrogenic TBI ( that caused by medical procedures ) is rising , and the risk may be higher for women and the elderly . TBI results about once every 20,000 times someone is intubated through the mouth , but when intubation is performed emergently , the incidence may be as high as 15 % .

The mortality rate for people who reach a hospital alive was estimated at 30 % in 1966 ; more recent estimates place this number at 9 % . The number of people reaching a hospital alive has increased , perhaps due to improved prehospital care or specialized treatment centers . Of those who reach the hospital alive but then die , most do so within the first two hours of arrival . The sooner a TBI is diagnosed , the higher the mortality rate ; this is likely due to other accompanying injuries that prove fatal . Accompanying injuries often play a key role in the outcome . Injuries that may accompany TBI include pulmonary contusion and laceration ; and fractures of the sternum , ribs and clavicles . Spinal cord injury , facial trauma , traumatic aortic rupture , injuries to the abdomen , lung , and head are present in 40 – 100 % . The most common accompanying injury is esophageal perforation or rupture ( known as Boerhaave syndrome ) , which occurs in as many as 43 % of the penetrating injuries to the neck that cause tracheal injury .

Throughout most of history the mortality rate of TBI was thought to be 100 % . However , in 1871 a healed TBI was noted in a duck that had been killed by a hunter , thus demonstrating that the injury could be survived , at least in the general sense . This report , made by Winslow , was the first record in the medical literature of a bronchus injury . In 1873 , Seuvre made one of the earliest reports of TBI in the medical literature : a 74-year-old woman whose chest was crushed by a wagon wheel was found on autopsy to have an avulsion of the right bronchus . Long-term survival of the injury was unknown in humans until a report was made of a person who survived in 1927 . In 1931 , a report made by Nissen described successful removal of a lung in a 12-year-old girl who had had narrowing of the bronchus due to the injury . Repair of TBI was probably first attempted in 1945 , when the first documented case of a successful suturing of a lacerated bronchus was made . Prior to 1950 , the mortality rate was 36 % ; it had fallen to 9 % by 2001 ; this improvement was likely due to improvements in treatments and surgical techniques , including those for injuries commonly associated with TBI .

" Word of God Speak " is a song by Christian rock band MercyMe . Written by Bart Millard and Pete Kipley , " Word of God Speak " uses sparse instrumentation , featuring only piano and strings to accompany Millard 's vocals . The lyrics to " Word of God Speak " reflect on the idea that it is impossible to speak of an infinite God with a limited vocabulary . Released as the second single from MercyMe 's 2002 album Spoken For , Billboard magazine ranked the song at the top spot on their 2000s decade-end Christian Songs and Hot Christian AC charts . " Word of God Speak " spent 23 weeks atop the Billboard Christian Songs chart , a record for that chart ; it spent a total of 76 weeks on that chart altogether . It also topped the Billboard Hot Christian AC chart and the Radio & Records Christian AC and INSPO charts , and peaked at No. 25 on the Christian CHR chart . " Word of God Speak " also won the Dove Awards for Song of the Year and Pop / Contemporary Song of the Year at the 35th GMA Dove Awards .

MercyMe 's lead singer Bart Millard wrote " Word of God Speak " while touring in support of their single " I Can Only Imagine " . The travel was exhausting , and Millard commented in an interview that , on one of the nights on tour , he " went to bed just really frustrated ... It started feeling like everything I was saying was the same . I just thought , I have nothing else to say . So I went to bed with that on my mind " . After falling asleep , Millard woke up early in the morning and wrote several lines to the song in his journal before going back to sleep . Several weeks later , he was searching through his journal and found the notes again ; when he went to the band 's studio , he showed the notes to his producer , Pete Kipley . The two finished the lyrics to the song in less than thirty minutes , and recorded the piano track the same night ; they also brought in someone to compose a string track for the song . Millard wanted " Word of God Speak " to contain only piano , avoiding the big production that could assure the song success on the radio , as he felt the simple production would mirror the lyrics .

" Word of God Speak " is a contemporary Christian song with a length of three minutes and seven seconds . It is set in the key of C major and has a tempo of 69 beats per minute , with Millard 's vocal range spanning from C4-F5 . The music to " Word of God Speak " is stripped down , featuring piano and vocals ; a string track is also present . The simple production was intended to mirror the lyrics of the song , which reflect on the concept that it is impossible to speak of an infinite God with the limited vocabulary of humanity . A critic , Russ Breimier , also noted the song reminds that " prayer and worship are not flowery orations " .

" Word of God Speak " peaked at number one on the Billboard Christian Songs chart , and spent a record 23 weeks at the top of the chart , and a total of 76 weeks on the chart . On the Billboard Hot Christian AC chart , the song spent 21 weeks atop the chart , and spent 61 weeks on it in total . On the Radio & Records Christian AC chart , " Word of God Speak " spent 10 weeks at the top , and stayed on the chart for 46 weeks in total ; on the Radio & Records INSPO chart , the song spent nine weeks atop the chart , and spent 21 weeks on it in total . Additionally , the song peaked at No. 25 on the Radio & Records Christian CHR chart , and spent 12 weeks on that chart in total . " Word of God Speak " ranked at No. 5 on the 2004 year-end Billboard Hot Christian Singles & Tracks Titles chart , and at No. 9 on the 2004 year-end Billboard Hot Christian Adult Contemporary Titles chart . It ranked at No. 1 on both the 2000s decade-end Christian Songs chart and the 2000s decade-end Hot Christian AC chart .

James " Jim " Bowie ( pronounced / ˈbuːiː / BOO-ee ) ( c . 1796 – March 6 , 1836 ) was a 19th-century American pioneer , who played a prominent role in the Texas Revolution , culminating in his death at the Battle of the Alamo . Stories of him as a fighter and frontiersman , both real and fictitious , have made him a legendary figure in Texas history and a folk hero of American culture . Born in Kentucky , Bowie spent most of his life in Louisiana , where he was raised and where he later worked as a land speculator . His rise to fame began in 1827 on reports of the Sandbar Fight . What began as a duel between two other men deteriorated into a melée in which Bowie , having been shot and stabbed , killed the sheriff of Rapides Parish with a large knife . This , and other stories of Bowie 's prowess with a knife , led to the widespread popularity of the Bowie knife . Bowie 's reputation was cemented by his role in the Texas Revolution . After moving to Texas in 1830 , Bowie became a Mexican citizen and married Ursula Veramendi , the daughter of the Mexican vice governor of the province . His fame in Texas grew following his failed expedition to find the lost San Saba mine , during which his small party repelled an attack by a large Indian raiding party . At the outbreak of the Texas Revolution , Bowie joined the Texas militia , leading forces at the Battle of Concepción and the Grass Fight . In January 1836 , he arrived at the Alamo , where he commanded the volunteer forces until an illness left him bedridden . Bowie died with the other Alamo defenders on March 6 . Despite conflicting accounts of the manner of his death , the " most popular , and probably the most accurate " accounts maintain that he died in his bed after emptying his pistols into several Mexican soldiers .

According to his older brother John , James Bowie was born in Logan County , Kentucky , on March 10 , 1796 ( Historical marker : 36 ° 46 ' 25 " N 86 ° 42 ' 10 " W ) . Historian Raymond Thorp gave his birth date as April 10 , but Thorp did not provide any documentation for that date . Bowie 's surname was pronounced to rhyme with the French " Louis " ( / ˈbuːiː / BOO-ee ) . ( Although some works refer to the alternate pronunciation / ˈboʊ.i / BO-ee . ) Bowie was the ninth of ten children born to Elve Ap-Catesby Jones and John Bowie . His father had been wounded while fighting in the American Revolution , and in 1782 married the young woman who had nursed him back to health . The Bowies moved frequently , first settling in Georgia , before moving to Kentucky . At the time of Bowie 's birth , his father owned eight slaves , eleven head of cattle , seven horses , and one stud horse . The following year the family acquired 200 acres ( 80 ha ) along the Red River . They sold that property in 1800 and relocated to Missouri , before moving to Spanish Louisiana in 1802 , where they settled on Bushley Bayou in Rapides Parish .

The family moved again in 1809 , settling on Bayou Teche in Louisiana before finding a permanent home in Opelousas in 1812 . The Bowie children were raised on the frontier and even as small children were expected to help clear the land and plant crops . All the children learned to read and write in English , but James and his elder brother Rezin could also read , write , and speak Spanish and French fluently . The children learned to survive on the frontier and how to fish and run a farm and plantation . James Bowie became proficient with pistol , rifle , and knife , and had a reputation for fearlessness . When he was a boy , one of his Indian friends even taught him to rope alligators . In response to Andrew Jackson 's plea for volunteers to fight the British in the War of 1812 , James and Rezin enlisted in the Louisiana militia in late 1814 . The Bowie brothers arrived in New Orleans too late to participate in the fighting . After mustering out of the militia , Bowie settled in Rapides Parish , where he supported himself by sawing planks and lumber and floating them down the bayou for sale . In June 1819 , he joined the Long expedition , an effort to liberate Texas from Spanish rule . The group encountered little resistance and , after capturing Nacogdoches , declared Texas an independent republic . The extent of Bowie 's participation is unclear , but he returned to Louisiana before the invasion was repelled by Spanish troops .

Shortly before the senior Bowie died in 1818 or 1819 , he gave ten slaves as well as horses and cattle to both James and Rezin . For the next seven years , the brothers worked together to develop several large estates in Lafourche Parish and Opelousas . Louisiana 's population was growing rapidly , and the brothers hoped to take advantage of its rising land prices through speculation . Without the capital required to buy large tracts , they entered into a partnership with pirate Jean Lafitte in 1818 to raise money . By then , the United States had outlawed the importation of slaves , and most southern states allowed anyone who informed on a slave trader to receive half of what the imported slaves would earn at auction as a reward . Bowie made three trips to Lafitte 's compound on Galveston Island . On each occasion , he bought smuggled slaves and took them directly to a customhouse to inform on his own actions . When the customs officers offered the slaves for auction , Bowie purchased them and received back half the price he had paid , as allowed by the state laws . He then could legally transport the slaves and resell them at a greater market value in New Orleans or areas farther up the Mississippi River . Using this scheme , the brothers collected $ 65,000 to be used for their land speculation .

In 1825 , the two brothers joined with their younger brother Stephen to buy Acadia , a plantation near Alexandria . Within two years , they had established the first steam mill in Louisiana to be used for grinding sugar cane . The plantation became known as a model estate , but on February 12 , 1831 , they sold it and 65 slaves for $ 90,000 . With their profits , James and Rezin bought a plantation in Arkansas . Bowie and his brother John were involved in a major court case in the late 1820s over land speculation . When the United States purchased the Louisiana Territory in 1803 , it promised to honor all former land grant claims , and for the next 20 years efforts were made to establish who owned what land . In May 1824 , Congress authorized the superior courts of each territory to hear suits from those who claimed they had been overlooked . The Arkansas Superior Court received 126 claims in late 1827 from residents who claimed to have purchased land in former Spanish grants from the Bowie brothers . Although the Superior Court originally confirmed most of those claims , the decisions were reversed in February 1831 after further research showed that the land had never belonged to the Bowies and that the original land grant documentation had been forged . The U.S. Supreme Court upheld the reversal in 1833 . When the disgruntled purchasers considered suing the Bowies , they discovered that the documents in the case had been removed from the court ; left without evidence , they declined to pursue a case .

Bowie became internationally famous as a result of a feud with Norris Wright , the sheriff of Rapides Parish . Bowie had supported Wright 's opponent in the race for sheriff , and Wright , a bank director , had been instrumental in turning down a Bowie loan application . After a confrontation in Alexandria one afternoon , Wright fired a shot at Bowie , after which Bowie resolved to carry his hunting knife at all times . The knife he carried had a blade that was 9.25 inches ( 23.5 cm ) long and 1.5 inches ( 3.8 cm ) wide . The following year , on September 19 , 1827 , Bowie and Wright attended a duel on a sandbar outside of Natchez , Mississippi . Bowie supported duellist Samuel Levi Wells III , while Wright supported Wells 's opponent , Dr. Thomas Harris Maddox . The duellists each fired two shots and , as neither man had been injured , resolved their duel with a handshake . Other members of the groups , who had various reasons for disliking each other , began fighting . Bowie was shot in the hip ; after regaining his feet he drew a knife , described as a butcher knife , and charged his attacker , who hit Bowie over the head with his empty pistol , breaking the pistol and knocking Bowie to the ground . Wright shot at and missed the prone Bowie , who returned fire and possibly hit Wright . Wright then drew his sword cane and impaled Bowie . When Wright attempted to retrieve his blade by placing his foot on Bowie 's chest and tugging , Bowie pulled him down and disemboweled Wright with his large knife . Wright died instantly , and Bowie , with Wright 's sword still protruding from his chest , was shot again and stabbed by another member of the group . The doctors who had been present for the duel removed the bullets and patched Bowie 's other wounds .

Newspapers picked up the story , which became known as the Sandbar Fight , and described in detail Bowie 's fighting prowess and his unusual knife . Witness accounts agreed that Bowie did not attack first , and the others had focused their attack on Bowie because " they considered him the most dangerous man among their opposition . " The incident cemented Bowie 's reputation across the South as a superb knife fighter . There is disagreement among scholars as to whether the knife used in this fight was the same as what is now known as a Bowie knife , also called an Arkansas Toothpick . Multiple accounts exist of who designed and built the first Bowie knife . Some claim that Bowie designed it , while others attribute the design to noted knife makers of the time . In a letter to The Planter 's Advocate , Rezin Bowie claimed to have invented the knife , however , and many Bowie family members as well as " most authorities on the Bowie knife tend to believe it was invented by " Rezin . Rezin Bowie 's grandchildren , however , claimed that Rezin merely supervised his blacksmith , who was the creator of the knife .

After the Sandbar Fight and subsequent battles in which Bowie used his knife to defend himself , the Bowie knife became very popular . Many craftsmen and manufacturers made their own versions , and major cities of the Old Southwest had " Bowie knife schools " that taught " the art of cut , thrust , and parry . " His fame , and that of his knife , spread to England , and by the early 1830s many British manufacturers were producing Bowie knives for shipment to the United States . The design of the knife continued to evolve , but today a Bowie knife generally is considered to have a blade 8.25 inches ( 21.0 cm ) long and 1.25 inches ( 3.2 cm ) wide , with a curved point , a " sharp false edge cut from both sides " , and a cross-guard to protect the user 's hands .

In 1828 , after recovering from wounds suffered in the Sandbar Fight , Bowie decided to move to Coahuila y Texas , at that time a state in the Mexican federation . The 1824 Constitution of Mexico banned religions other than Roman Catholicism and gave preference to Mexican citizens in receiving land . Bowie was baptized into the Roman Catholic faith in San Antonio on April 28 , 1828 , sponsored by the alcalde ( chief administrator ) of the town , Juan Martín de Veramendi , and the wife of the administrator , Josefa Navarro . For the next 18 months , Bowie traveled through Louisiana and Mississippi . In 1829 , he became engaged to Cecilia Wells , who died in Alexandria , on September 29 , two weeks before they were to be married . On January 1 , 1830 , Bowie left Louisiana for permanent residency in Texas . He stopped at Nacogdoches , at Jared E. Groce 's farm on the Brazos River , and in San Felipe , where Bowie presented a letter of introduction to Stephen F. Austin from Thomas F. McKinney , one of the Old Three Hundred colonists . On February 20 , Bowie took an oath of allegiance to Mexico and then proceeded to San Antonio de Bexar . At the time , the city was known as Bexar and had a population of 2500 , mostly of Mexican descent , and Bowie 's fluency in Spanish helped him establish himself in the area . Bowie was elected a commander , with the rank of colonel , of the Texas Rangers later that year . Although the Rangers would not be organized officially until 1835 , Stephen F. Austin had founded the group by employing 30 men to keep the peace and protect the colonists from attacks by hostile Indians . Other areas assembled similar volunteer militias , and Bowie commanded a group of the volunteers .

Bowie renounced his American citizenship and became a Mexican citizen on September 30 , 1830 , after promising to establish textile mills in the state of Coahuila y Tejas . To fulfill his promise , Bowie entered into partnership with Veramendi to build cotton and wool mills in Saltillo . With his citizenship assured , Bowie now had the right to buy up to 11 leagues of public land . He convinced 14 or 15 other citizens to apply for land in order to turn it over to him , giving him 700,000 acres ( 280,000 ha ) for speculation . Bowie may have been the first to induce settlers to apply for empresario grants , which could then be sold in bulk to speculators as Bowie had . The Mexican government passed laws in 1834 and 1835 that stopped much of the land speculation . On April 25 , 1831 , Bowie married nineteen-year-old Maria Ursula de Veramendi , the daughter of his business partner , who had become the vice governor of the province . Several days before the ceremony , he signed a dowry contract promising to pay his new bride 15,000 pesos ( approximately $ 15,000 then , or $ 333,000 today ) in cash or property within two years of the marriage . At the time , Bowie claimed to have a net worth of $ 223,000 ( $ 4,960,000 today ) , mostly in land of questionable title . Bowie also lied about his age , claiming to be 30 rather than 35 . The couple built a house in San Antonio on land Veramendi had given them near the San José Mission . After a short time , however , they moved into the Veramendi Palace , living with Ursula 's parents , who supplied them with spending money . The couple had two children , Marie Elve ( b . March 20 , 1832 ) and James Veramendi ( b . July 18 , 1833 ) .

Shortly after his marriage Bowie became fascinated with the story of the " lost " Los Almagres Mine ( also known as the lost San Saba Mine and the lost Bowie Mine ) , said to be northwest of San Antonio near the ruin of the Spanish Mission Santa Cruz de San Saba . According to legend , the mine had been operated by local Indians before being seized by the Spanish . After Mexico won independence from Spain , government interest in the mining potential waned . A number of native groups roamed the area , including Comanche , Lipan Apache , Tawakoni , and Tonkawa . Without government troops to keep hostile natives at bay , mining and mineral exploration were impossible . Some believed that after the Mexican citizens left the area , the Lipan took over the mine . After obtaining permission from the Mexican government to mount an expedition into Indian territory to search for the legendary silver mine , Bowie , his brother Rezin , and ten others set out for San Saba on November 2 , 1831 . Six miles ( 10 km ) from their goal , the group stopped to negotiate with a large raiding party of Indians — reportedly more than 120 Tawakoni and Waco , plus another 40 Caddo . The attempts at parley failed and Bowie and his group fought for their lives for the next 13 hours . When the Indians finally retreated , Bowie reportedly had lost only one man , while more than 40 Indians had been killed and 30 were wounded . In the meantime , a party of friendly Comanche rode into San Antonio bringing word of the raiding party , which outnumbered the Bowie expedition by 14 to 1 . The citizens of San Antonio believed the members of the Bowie expedition must have perished , and Ursula Bowie began wearing widow 's weeds .

To the surprise of the town , the surviving members of the group returned to San Antonio on December 6 . Bowie 's report of the expedition , written in Spanish , was printed in several newspapers , further establishing his reputation . He set out again with a larger force the following month , but returned home empty-handed after two and a half months of searching . Bowie never talked of his exploits despite his increasing fame . Captain William Y. Lacey , who spent eight months living in the wilderness with Bowie , described him as a humble man who never used profanity or vulgarities .

Between 1830 and 1832 the Mexican Congress passed a series of laws that seemed to discriminate against Anglo colonists in the province of Coahuila y Tejas , increasing tension between the Anglo citizenry and Mexican officials . In response to the rumblings , Mexican troops established military posts in several locations within the province , including San Antonio de Béxar . Although much of the military supported the administration of President Anastasio Bustamante , Antonio López de Santa Anna led an insurrection against him in 1832 . Anglo colonists in Texas supported Santa Anna and General José Antonio Mexía , who led soldiers into Texas to oust commanders loyal to Bustamante . After hearing that the Mexican army commander in Nacogdoches , José de las Piedras , had demanded that all residents in his area surrender their arms , Bowie cut short a visit to Natchez in July 1832 to return to Texas . On August 2 , 1832 , he joined a group of other Texans and marched into Nacogdoches to " present their demands " to Piedras . Before the group reached the building housing the town officials , they were attacked by a force of 100 Mexican cavalry . The Texans returned fire and the Battle of Nacogdoches began . After the cavalry retreated , they initiated a siege of the garrison . After a second battle , in which Piedras lost 33 men , the Mexican army evacuated during the night . Bowie and 18 companions ambushed the fleeing army and , after Piedras fled , marched the soldiers back to Nacogdoches . Bowie later served as a delegate to the Convention of 1833 , which formally requested that Texas become its own state within the Mexican federation .

Several months later , a cholera epidemic struck Texas . Fearing the disease would reach San Antonio , Bowie sent his pregnant wife and their daughter to the family estate in Monclova in the company of her parents and brother . The cholera epidemic instead struck Monclova , and between September 6 and September 14 , Ursula , their children , her brother , and her parents all died of the disease . Bowie , on business in Natchez , heard of his family 's deaths in November . From then on , he drank heavily and became " careless in his dress . " The following year , the Mexican government passed new laws allowing land sale in Texas , and Bowie returned to land speculation . He was appointed a land commissioner and tasked with promoting settlement in the area purchased by John T. Mason . His appointment ended in May 1835 when President Antonio López de Santa Anna abolished the Coahuila y Tejas government and ordered the arrest of all Texans ( including Bowie ) doing business in Monclova . Bowie was forced to flee Monclova and return to the Anglo areas of Texas . The Anglos in Texas began agitating for war against Santa Anna , and Bowie worked with William B. Travis , the leader of the War Party , to gain support . Bowie visited several Indian villages in East Texas in an attempt to persuade the reluctant tribes to fight against the Mexican government . Santa Anna responded to the rumblings by ordering large numbers of Mexican troops to Texas .

The Texas Revolution began on October 2 , 1835 , with the Battle of Gonzales . Stephen F. Austin formed an army of 500 men to march on the Mexican forces in San Antonio with the cannon that had precipitated the fight . The name " Texian Army " sometimes is applied to this militia . On October 22 , Austin asked Bowie , now a colonel in the volunteer militia , and James W. Fannin to scout the area around the missions of San Francisco de la Espada and San José y San Miguel de Aguayo to find supplies for the volunteer forces . The scouting party left with 92 men , many of them members of the New Orleans Grays who had just arrived in Texas . After discovering a good defensive position near Mission Concepción , the group requested that Austin 's army join them . On the foggy morning of October 28 , Mexican General Domingo Ugartechea led a force of 300 infantry and cavalry soldiers and two small cannons against the Texian forces . Although the Mexican army was able to get within 200 yards ( 183 m ) , the Texian defensive position protected them from fire . As the Mexicans stopped to reload their cannon , the Texians climbed a bluff and picked off some of the soldiers . The stalemate ended shortly after Bowie led a charge to seize one of the Mexican cannons , at that time only 80 yards ( 73 m ) away . Ugartechea retreated with his troops , ending the Battle of Concepción . One Texian and ten Mexican troops had been killed . One of the men under Bowie 's command during the battle later praised him " as a born leader , never needlessly spending a bullet or imperiling a life , who repeatedly admonished ... Keep under cover boys , and reserve your fire ; we haven 't a man to spare . "

An hour after the battle ended , Austin arrived with the rest of the Texian army to begin a siege of San Antonio de Béxar , where General Martín Perfecto de Cós , the overall commander of Mexican forces in Texas , and his troops were garrisoned . Two days later , Bowie resigned from Austin 's army because he did not have an official commission in the army , and he disliked the " minor tasks of scouting and spying " . On November 3 , 1835 , Texas declared itself an independent state , and a provisional government was formed with Henry Smith of Brazoria elected provisional governor . Austin requested to be relieved of his command of the army , and Sam Houston was named army chief . Edward Burleson was chosen as temporary commander of the troops in San Antonio . Bowie appeared before the council at some point and spoke for an hour , asking for a commission . The council refused Bowie 's request , likely because of lingering animosity over his land dealings . Houston offered Bowie a commission as an officer on his staff , but Bowie rejected the opportunity , explaining that he wanted to be in the midst of the fighting . Instead , Bowie enlisted in the army as a private under Fannin . He distinguished himself again in the Grass Fight on November 26 . Cós had sent approximately 187 men to cut grass for his horses . As they returned to San Antonio , Bowie took 60 mounted men to intercept the party , which they believed carried valuable cargo . The Mexican troops quickened their pace in the hopes of reaching the safety of the city , but Bowie and his cavalry chased them . At the end of the fight , the Texians had two wounded men , but had captured many horses and mules .

Shortly after Bowie left San Antonio , Ben Milam led an assault on the city . In the ensuing fighting , the Texians suffered only a few casualties , while the Mexican army lost many troops to death and desertion . Cós surrendered and returned to Mexico , taking with him the last Mexican troops in Texas . Believing the war was over , many of the Texian volunteers left the army and returned to their families . In early January 1836 , Bowie went to San Felipe and asked the council to allow him to recruit a regiment . He again was turned down as he " was not an officer of the government nor army . "

After Houston received word that Santa Anna was leading a large force to San Antonio , Bowie offered to lead volunteers to defend the Alamo from the expected attack . He arrived with 30 men on January 19 , where they found a force of 104 men with a few weapons and a few cannons , but not many supplies and little gunpowder . Houston knew that there were not enough men to hold the fort in an attack and had given Bowie authority to remove the artillery and blow up the fortification . Bowie and the Alamo commander , James C. Neill , decided they did not have enough oxen to move the artillery , and they did not want to destroy the fortress . On January 26 , one of Bowie 's men , James Bonham , organized a rally which passed a resolution in favor of holding the Alamo . Bonham signed the resolution first , with Bowie 's signature second . Through Bowie 's connections because of his marriage and his fluency in Spanish , the predominantly Mexican population of San Antonio often furnished him with information about the movements of the Mexican army . After learning that Santa Anna had 4,500 troops and was heading for the city , Bowie wrote several letters to the provisional government asking for help in defending the Alamo , especially " men , money , rifles , and cannon powder " . In another letter , to Governor Smith , he reiterated his view that " the salvation of Texas depends in great measure on keeping Béxar out of the hands of the enemy . It serves as the frontier picquet guard , and if it were in the possession of Santa Anna , there is no stronghold from which to repel him in his march toward the Sabine . " The letter to Smith ended , " Colonel Neill and myself have come to the solemn resolution that we will rather die in these ditches than give it up to the enemy . "

On February 3 , Davy Crockett appeared with thirty Tennesseans . Neill went on furlough on February 11 to visit his sick family , leaving Travis , a member of the regular army , in command . Bowie was older than Travis with a better reputation and considered himself a colonel , thus outranking Travis , a lieutenant colonel . He refused to answer to Travis , who called an election for the men to choose their own commander . They chose Bowie , infuriating Travis . Bowie celebrated his appointment by getting very drunk and causing havoc in San Antonio , releasing all prisoners in the local jails and harassing citizens . Travis was disgusted , but two days later the men agreed to a joint command ; Bowie would command the volunteers , and Travis would command the regular army and the volunteer cavalry . On February 23 , the bells of San Fernando sounded the alarm of the approach of the Mexicans . Travis ordered all the Texan forces into the Alamo . James Bowie hurried to gather provisions and herd cattle into the Alamo compound . Fearing for the safety of his wife 's relatives in San Antonio , Bowie invited her cousins Getrudis Navarro and Juana Navarro Alsbury , as well as Alsbury 's 18-month-old son , Alijo Perez Jr . , to stay inside the walls of the Alamo . Bowie also brought several black servants , some of whom worked at the Veramendi Palace , into the security of the Alamo fortress . Bowie had been ill , and two doctors , including the fort surgeon , were unable to diagnose his illness . Travis became the sole commander of the forces when Bowie was confined to bed . Santa Anna and his army began a siege of the Alamo on February 24 . The Mexican army raised a red flag to warn the defenders that no quarter would be given .

Bowie and Travis began sending out couriers with pleas for provisions and assistance . Travis sent Juan Seguin on Bowie 's horse , to recruit reinforcements on February 25 , and 32 additional men arrived . On February 26 , David Crockett reported that Bowie , though suffering from his affliction , continued to crawl from his bed around noon every day and presented himself to the Alamo 's inhabitants , which much boosted the morale of his comrades . Thirty-five years after the Alamo fell , a reporter identified Louis " Moses " Rose as the only man to have " deserted " the Texian forces at the Alamo . According to the reporter 's version of Rose 's account , when Travis realized that the Mexican army would likely prevail , he drew a line in the sand and asked those willing to die for the cause to cross the line . At Bowie 's request Crockett and several others carried the cot over the line , leaving Rose alone on the other side . After its publication , several other eyewitnesses confirmed the account , but as Rose was deceased the story can only be authenticated by the word of the reporter , who admitted to embellishing other articles , " and thus many historians refuse to believe it . "

Bowie perished with the rest of the Alamo defenders on March 6 , when the Mexicans attacked . Most of the noncombatants in the fort , including Bowie 's relatives , survived . Santa Anna ordered the alcalde of San Antonio , Francisco Antonio Ruiz , to confirm the identities of Bowie , Travis , and Crockett . After first ordering that Bowie be buried , as he was too brave a man to be burned like a dog , Santa Anna later had Bowie 's body placed with those of the other Texians on the funeral pyre . When Bowie 's mother was informed of his death , she calmly stated , " I 'll wager no wounds were found in his back . " Various eyewitnesses to the battle gave conflicting accounts of Bowie 's death . A newspaper article claimed that a Mexican soldier saw Bowie carried from his room on his cot , alive , after the conclusion of the battle . The soldier maintained that Bowie verbally castigated a Mexican officer in fluent Spanish , and the officer ordered Bowie 's tongue cut out and his still-breathing body thrown onto the funeral pyre . This account has been disputed by numerous other witnesses , and it is thought to have been invented by the reporter . Other witnesses maintained that they saw several Mexican soldiers enter Bowie 's room , bayonet him , and carry him , alive , from the room . Various other stories circulated , with some witnesses claiming that Bowie shot himself and others saying he was killed by soldiers while too weak to lift his head . Alcalde Ruiz said that Bowie was found " dead in his bed . " According to Wallace O Chariton , The " most popular , and probably the most accurate " version is that Bowie died on his cot , " back braced against the wall , and using his pistols and his famous knife . " One year after the battle , Juan Seguin returned to the Alamo and gathered the remaining ashes from the funeral pyre . He placed these in a coffin inscribed with the names of Bowie , Travis , and Crockett . The ashes were interred at the Cathedral of San Fernando .

Despite his continual pronouncements of wealth , Bowie 's estate was found to be very small . His possessions were auctioned for only $ 99.50 . His larger legacy is his position as " one of the legendary characters of the American frontier . " Bowie left a " frustratingly sparse paper trail " of his life , and for many " where history failed , the legends prevailed . " Although Bowie 's name and knife were well known during his lifetime , his legend grew after October 1852 , when DeBow 's Review published an article written by his brother John Jones Bowie called , " Early Life in the Southwest — The Bowies . " The article focused primarily on the exploits of Jim Bowie . Beginning with that article , " romanticized stories " about Bowie began appearing in national press . In many cases , " these stories were pure melodrama , with Bowie rescuing some naïve planter 's son or damsel in distress . " Jim Bowie was inducted posthumously into the Blade Magazine Cutlery Hall of Fame at the 1988 Blade Show in Atlanta , Georgia , in recognition of the impact that his eponymous design made upon generations of knife makers and cutlery companies .

A number of films have depicted the events of the Battle of the Alamo , and Bowie has appeared as a character in each . From 1956 to 1958 , Bowie was the subject of a CBS television series , The Adventures of Jim Bowie , which was primarily set in 1830s Louisiana , although later episodes ventured into the Mexican province of Texas . The show , which starred Scott Forbes as Jim Bowie , was based on the 1946 novel Tempered Blade . Bowie also is the namesake of rock star David Bowie , who was born David Robert Hayward-Jones . Jones changed his name in the 1960s because he feared his name was too similar to Davy Jones , a member of the already famous The Monkees . He chose the surname Bowie because he admired James Bowie and the Bowie knife , although his pronunciation uses the BO-ee ( / ˈboʊ.i / ) variant . Bowie County in northeast Texas , and the city of Bowie in Montague County , Texas , were both named in honor of James Bowie .

Hygrophorus agathosmus , commonly known as the gray almond waxy cap or the almond woodwax , is a species of fungus in the Hygrophoraceae family . It was first described by Elias Magnus Fries in 1815 ; Fries gave it its current name in 1838 . A widespread species , it is distributed in the United States , Europe , Africa , and India , and can be found growing under spruce and pine in mixed forests . The fruit bodies are characterized by a light grayish cap that measures up to 8 cm ( 3.1 in ) in diameter , waxy gills , a dry stem , and the distinct odor of bitter almonds . An edible but bland-tasting mushroom , extracts of the fruit bodies have been shown in laboratory tests to have antimicrobial activity against various bacteria that are pathogenic to humans .

The species was originally named Agaricus agathosmus by Swedish mycologist Elias Fries in 1815 ; he later moved it into the genus Hygrophorus in 1838 . In the interim , English naturalist Miles Joseph Berkeley named the species Agaricus cerasinus in 1836 , although he too would later transfer the species to Hygrophorus in 1860 . In 1948 , Richard Dennis examined the type material , and concluded that the two names referred to the same species . Additional historical synonyms include Limacium pustulatum var. agathosmum ( Kummer , 1871 ) , and Limacium agathosmum ( Wünsch , 1877 ) . In their 1963 monograph of the Hygrophorus of North America , American mycologists Lexemuel Ray Hesler and Alexander H. Smith classified H. agathosmus in the subsection Camarophylli , a grouping of related species characterized by a dry stem , and the absence of a gelatinous outer veil . The specific epithet agathosmus is derived from the Greek word agathos meaning “ good ” , and osme meaning “ scent ” . Hygrophorus agathosmus is commonly known as the gray almond waxy cap , or the almond woodwax .

The cap is 4 – 8 cm ( 1.6 – 3.1 in ) in diameter , and initially convex with the edges rolled inwards . As it ages and the cap expands , it becomes flat , sometimes with the center slightly depressed , or sometimes with a slight central elevation . The color is a dull ashy gray , and when moist , the cap surface is sticky or tacky to the touch . It is smooth , although the edges can have a layer of minute , soft hairs . The flesh is soft , and whitish or watery gray . Hygrophorus agathosmus has a pronounced fragrant odor resembling cherry pits or bitter almonds ( occasionally the odor is weak ) . The gills have an adnate attachment to the stem , but in maturity the attachment becomes adnate-decurrent , meaning the gills start to extend down the length of the stem . The gills are white , but become grayish in maturity , close to distant ( 40 – 50 reach the stem ) , moderately narrow , rather thin . The stem is 4 – 8 cm ( 1.6 – 3.1 in ) long by 0.6 – 1.4 cm ( 0.2 – 0.6 in ) thick , whitish at first , and colored pale ashy in age . It is the same thickness throughout or somewhat narrowed toward the base . It is solid , dry or moist but has no gelatinous universal veil present . When young , the stem surface is evenly covered with tiny fibrils and a fine whitish powder ; over time it loses the hairs and the powder and becomes smooth .

When viewed in mass , such as with a spore print , the spores appear to be white . Viewed with a light microscope , the basidiospores are 8 – 10.5 by 4.5 – 5.5 µm , ellipsoid , smooth , and yellowish in Melzer 's reagent . The spore-bearing cells , the basidia , are four-spored and measure 48 – 65 long by 6 – 8 µm thick . Pleurocystidia and cheilocystidia ( specialized cystidia found on the gill faces and edges , respectively ) are absent in this species . The pileipellis ( cap cuticle ) is made of a broad ( 175 – 350 µm ) gelatinous zone , composed of loosely interwoven , slender ( 1.5 – 4 µm ) hyphae ; the surface hyphae are a fuscous — a dark brownish-gray color . This hyphal arrangement is called an ixocutis , in which the hyphal walls swell up and gelatinize , giving a translucence to the layer that stands out in contrast to the underlying flesh . The layer of gelatizined hyphae is tenacious , and may be peeled off the cap as a film . Although clamp connections are found on the hyphae that make up the flesh of the gill , none are found in the cap flesh nor in the pileipellis .

" Could 've Been You " is a rock song first performed by American rock singer Bob Halligan and later popularized by American singer-actress Cher . The song was written by Halligan and Arnie Roman for Halligan 's 1991 album , Window In The Wall . Cher 's cover version was produced by Peter Asher and released exclusively for the European market in early 1992 as the fourth single from Cher 's twenty-first studio album , Love Hurts . Lyrically , " Could 've Been You " is a message from the song 's protagonist to his or her ex . Cher 's version of " Could 've Been You " received positive reviews from critics and peaked at number thirty-one on the UK Singles Chart . Cher promoted the song through appearances at Top of the Pops and Aspel and Company .

In 1991 , Bob Halligan released his album Window In The Wall under Atco Records . The only single released from the album was its lead track , " Could 've Been You " , which Halligan had co-written with Arnie Roman . According to Halligan , Atco Records had been going through a " political upheaval " that year and his record " was one of several recordings that was allowed to slip gently into the night " . Halligan " dryly notes , ' [ " Could 've Been You " ] lasted three weeks at radio . It came out to the sound of one hand clapping ' " . Later the same year , Cher covered " Could 've Been You " for her album Love Hurts . Her version was produced by Peter Asher , who had previously worked with Cher on her 1991 UK number one hit " The Shoop Shoop Song ( It 's in His Kiss ) " . The B-side of the first UK 7 " single release was " One Small Step " , a duet with American singer-songwriter Richard Page , while the B-side of the second UK 7 " single was " Love and Understanding " . The second UK 7 " single and the Germany Maxi-single were both released with the same cover , an image of Cher in a baby doll dress , while the first UK 7 " was released with the same photo cut to show only Cher 's legs . The whole photo was later reused for the cover of the Love Hurts tourbook . The UK 12 " single was the last released ; its cover has a transparent vinyl and shows Cher in a long , smooth black wig . In 1993 , " Could 've Been You " was rereleased as the B-side of Cher 's " Whenever You 're Near " UK 7 " single .

" Could 've Been You " received positive reviews from critics . Rock critic Jim Farber of Entertainment Weekly said of the album that " [ i ] t 's that much more fun in numbers like ' Could 've Been You ' , in which , seeking revenge , she gets to reach between the jerk 's legs and squeeze . " David Wild of the Guilford County , North Carolina News & Record called " Love and Understanding " , " Save Up All Your Tears " and " Could 've Been You " " strong tracks " that " show that she is still an effective pop singer " . The review of the Worcester , Massachusetts Telegram & Gazette newspaper noted " Cher attempts to display her sexual prowess on the song , ... a great vehicle for her , an ' in-your-face ' song directed to a former lover " .

The Battle of Kalavrye ( also Kalavryai or Kalavryta ) was fought in 1078 between the Byzantine imperial forces of general ( and future emperor ) Alexios Komnenos and the rebellious governor of Dyrrhachium , Nikephoros Bryennios the Elder . Bryennios had rebelled against Michael VII Doukas ( r . 1071 – 78 ) and had won over the allegiance of the Byzantine army 's regular regiments in the Balkans . Even after Doukas 's overthrow by Nikephoros III Botaneiates ( r . 1078 – 81 ) , Bryennios continued his revolt , and threatened Constantinople . After failed negotiations , Botaneiates sent the young general Alexios Komnenos with whatever forces he could gather to confront him . The two armies clashed at Kalavrye on the Halmyros river in what is now European Turkey . Alexios Komnenos , whose army was considerably smaller and far less experienced , tried to ambush Bryennios 's army . The ambush failed , and the wings of his own army were driven back by the rebels . Alexios barely managed to break through with his personal retinue , but succeeded in regrouping his scattered men . At the same time , and despite having seemingly won the battle , Bryennios 's army fell into disorder after its own Pecheneg allies attacked its camp . Reinforced by Turkish mercenaries , Alexios lured the troops of Bryennios into another ambush through a feigned retreat . The rebel army broke and Bryennios was captured .

After the defeat at the Battle of Manzikert in 1071 against the Seljuk Turks and the overthrow of Romanos IV Diogenes ( r . 1068 – 71 ) , the Byzantine Empire experienced a decade of near-continuous internal turmoil and rebellions . The constant warfare depleted the Empire 's armies , devastated Asia Minor and left it defenceless against the increasing encroachment of the Turks . In the Balkans , invasions by the Pechenegs and the Cumans devastated Bulgaria , and the Serbian princes renounced their allegiance to the Empire . The government of Michael VII Doukas ( r . 1071 – 78 ) failed to deal with the situation effectively , and rapidly lost support among the military aristocracy . In late 1077 , two of the Empire 's leading generals , Nikephoros Bryennios the Elder , the doux of Dyrrhachium in the western Balkans , and Nikephoros Botaneiates , the strategos of the Anatolic Theme in central Asia Minor , were proclaimed emperors by their troops . Bryennios set out from Dyrrhachium towards the imperial capital Constantinople , winning widespread support along the way and the loyalty of most of the Empire 's Balkan field army . He preferred to negotiate at first , but his offers were rebuffed by Michael VII . Bryennios then sent his brother John to lay siege to Constantinople . Unable to overcome its fortifications , the rebel forces soon retired . This failure led the capital 's nobility to turn to Botaneiates instead : in March 1078 Michael VII was forced to abdicate and retire as a monk , and Nikephoros Botaneiates was accepted into the city as emperor .

At first , Botaneiates lacked enough troops to oppose Bryennios , who in the meantime had consolidated his control over his native Thrace , effectively isolating the capital from the remaining imperial territory in the Balkans . Botaneiates sent an embassy under the proedros Constantine Choirosphaktes , a veteran diplomat , to conduct negotiations with Bryennios . At the same time he appointed the young Alexios Komnenos as his Domestic of the Schools ( commander-in-chief ) , and sought aid from the Seljuk Sultan Suleyman , who sent 2,000 warriors and promised even more . In his message to Bryennios , the aged Botaneiates ( 76 years old at his accession ) offered him the rank of Caesar and his nomination as heir to the throne . Bryennios agreed in principle , but added a few conditions of his own , and sent the ambassadors back to Constantinople for confirmation . Botaneiates , who likely had initiated negotiations only to gain time , rejected Bryennios 's conditions , and ordered Alexios Komnenos to campaign against the rebel .

Bryennios had camped at the plain of Kedoktos ( a name deriving from the Latin aquaeductus ) on the road to Constantinople . His army comprised 12,000 mostly seasoned men from the regiments ( tagmata ) of Thessaly , Macedonia and Thrace , as well as Frankish mercenaries and the elite tagma of the Hetaireia . Alexios 's forces included 2,000 Turkish horse-archers , 2,000 Chomatenoi from Asia Minor , a few hundred Frankish knights from Italy , and the newly raised regiment of the Immortals , which had been created by Michael VII 's chief minister Nikephoritzes and was intended to form the nucleus of a new army . Estimates of Alexios 's total force vary from 5,500 – 6,500 ( Haldon ) to some 8,000 – 10,000 ( Birkenmeier ) , but it is clear that he was at a considerable disadvantage against Bryennios ; not only was his force considerably smaller , but also far less experienced than Bryennios 's veterans . Alexios 's forces set forth from Constantinople and camped on the shore of the river Halmyros — a small stream between Herakleia ( modern Marmara Ereğlisi ) and Selymbria ( modern Silivri ) , modern Kalivri Dere — near the fort of Kalavrye ( Greek : Καλαβρύη , modern Yolçatı ) . Curiously , and against established practice , he did not fortify his camp , perhaps so as not to fatigue or dishearten his men with an implicit admission of weakness . He then sent his Turkish allies to scout out Bryennios 's disposition , strength and intentions . Alexios 's spies easily accomplished their tasks , but on the eve of the battle some were captured and Bryennios too was informed of Alexios 's strength .

Bryennios arranged his army in the typical three divisions , each in two lines , as prescribed by the Byzantine military manuals . The right wing , under his brother John , was 5,000 strong and comprised his Frankish mercenaries , Thessalian cavalry , the Hetaireia , and the Maniakatai regiment ( descendants of the veterans of George Maniakes 's campaign in Sicily and Italy ) . His left wing , 3,000 men from Thrace and Macedonia , was placed under Katakalon Tarchaneiotes , and the centre , under Bryennios himself , comprised 3,000 – 4,000 men from Thessaly , Thrace and Macedonia . Again , according to standard doctrine , on his far left , about half a kilometer ( " two stadia " ) from the main force , he had stationed an outflanking detachment ( hyperkerastai ) of Pechenegs . Alexios deployed his smaller army in waiting near Bryennios 's camp , and divided it in two commands . The left , which confronted Bryennios 's strongest division , was commanded by himself and contained the Frankish knights to the right and the Immortals to the Franks ' left . The right command was under Constantine Katakalon , and comprised the Chomatenoi and the Turks . The latter , according to the Alexiad , were given the role of flank guard ( plagiophylakes ) and tasked with observing and countering the Pechenegs . Conversely , on the extreme left Alexios formed his own flanking detachment ( apparently drawn from among the Immortals ) , concealed from enemy view inside a hollow . Given his inferiority , Alexios was forced to remain on the defensive . His only chance at success was that his out-flankers , concealed by the broken terrain , would surprise and create enough confusion among Bryennios 's men for him and his strong left wing to break through their lines .

As the rebel forces advanced towards his enemy 's line , Alexios 's flankers sprung their ambush . Their attack did indeed cause some initial confusion , but Bryennios ( or , according to the Alexiad , his brother John , who commanded the right wing ) rallied his men and led forth the second line . This counter-attack broke Alexios 's flankers ; as they retreated in panic , they fell upon the Immortals , who also panicked and fled , abandoning their posts . Although they suffered some casualties from Bryennios 's pursuing men , most managed to escape well to the rear of Alexios 's army . Alexios , who was fighting with his retinue alongside the Franks , did not immediately realize that his left wing had collapsed . In the meantime , on his right wing , the Chomatenoi , engaged with Tarchaneiotes 's men , were outflanked and attacked in the rear by the Pechenegs , who had somehow evaded Alexios 's Turkish flank-guards . The Chomatenoi too broke and fled , and Alexios 's fate seemed sealed . At this point the Pechenegs failed to follow up their success , and instead turned back and began looting Bryennios 's own camp . After gathering what plunder they could , they left the battle and made for their homes .

Nevertheless , Bryennios 's victory seemed certain , for his wings began to envelop Alexios 's Franks in the centre . Realizing his position and despairing in the face of defeat ( and , as Bryennios the Younger records , because he had disobeyed imperial orders to wait for more Turkish reinforcements and feared punishment from Botaneiates ) , Alexios at first resolved to attempt an all-or-nothing attack on Bryennios himself to decapitate the enemy army , but was dissuaded by his servant . With only six of his men around him , he then managed to break through the surrounding enemy soldiers . Confusion reigned behind their lines as a result of the Pecheneg attack on the rebel camp , and in this tumult Alexios saw Bryennios 's imperial parade horse , with his two swords of state , being driven away to safety . Alexios and his men charged the escort , seized the horse , and rode away with it from the battlefield . Having reached a hill behind his army 's original position , Alexios began to regroup his army from the units that had broken . He sent out messengers to rally his scattered men with news that Bryennios had been killed , showing his parade horse as evidence . At the same time , the promised Turkish reinforcements began arriving at the scene , lifting his men 's morale . All the while , on the battlefield , Bryennios 's army had closed around Alexios 's Franks , who dismounted and offered to surrender . In the process the rebel army had become totally disordered , with units mixed and their formations disordered . Bryennios 's reserves had been thrown in confusion by the Pecheneg attack , while his front lines relaxed , thinking that the battle was over .

Having restored his surviving forces to order , and aware of the confusion in Bryennios 's forces , Alexios decided to counter-attack . The plan he laid out made far greater use of the particular skills of his Turkish horse-archers . He divided his force into three commands , of which two were left behind in ambush . The other , formed from the Immortals and the Chomatenoi under Alexios 's own command , was not arrayed in one continuous line , but broken up in small groups , intermingled with other groups of Turkish horse-archers . This command would advance on the rebels , attack them , then feign retreat and draw them into the ambush . The attack of Alexios 's division initially caught Bryennios 's men off guard , but , being veteran troops , they soon recovered and once again began to push it back . Retreating , Alexios 's troops , and especially the Turks , employed skirmishing tactics , attacking the enemy line and then withdrawing swiftly , thus keeping their opponents at bay and weakening the coherence of their line . Some among Alexios 's men chose to attack Bryennios , and the rebel general had to defend against several attacks himself .

The battle marked the end of Bryennios 's revolt , although Nikephoros Basilakes gathered up much of Bryennios 's defeated army and attempted to claim the throne for himself . He too was defeated by Alexios Komnenos , who then proceeded to expel the Pechenegs from Thrace . The elder Bryennios was blinded on Botaneiates 's orders , but the emperor later took pity on him and restored him his titles and his fortune . After Alexios Komnenos seized the throne himself in 1081 , Bryennios was further honoured with high dignities . He even held command during Alexios 's campaigns against the Pechenegs , and defended Adrianople from a rebel attack in 1095 . His son or grandson , Nikephoros Bryennios the Younger , was married to Alexios 's daughter Anna Komnene . He became a prominent general of Alexios 's reign , eventually raised to the rank of Caesar , and a historian .

" Down to Earth " is a song by Canadian recording artist Justin Bieber , included as a track on his debut release , My World , released on November 17 , 2009 . It was written by Bieber , who was assisted by Carlos and Steven Battey of The Jackie Boyz , as well as the song 's producers , Mason " MdL " Levy , and Kevin Risto and Waynne Nugent of Midi Mafia . " Down to Earth " is a teen pop song , with lyrics that were inspired by the divorce of Bieber 's parents . It also contains lyrical content about growing up . The song received positive reviews from critics , who embraced the song as a shift in the puppy love content of the album . After the release of My World , due to digital sales , the song charted in the lower regions of charts in the United States , Canada , and the United Kingdom .

" Down to Earth " was written by Bieber , Mason " MdL " Levy , Carlos and Steven Battey of The Jackie Boyz , and Kevin Risto and Waynne Nugent of Midi Mafia . It was recorded at Icon Studios in Atlanta , Georgia , and it was mixed at Larrabee Studios in North Hollywood , California . The track was one of three songs on the standard edition of My World that Bieber co-wrote . In an interview in the November 14 , 2009 issue of Billboard , Bieber explained the meaning behind the song stating , " It 's a ballad about the feelings I had when my parents split up and how I helped my family get through it . I think a lot of kids have had their parents split up , and they should know that it wasn 't because of something they did . I hope people can relate to it . " " Down to Earth " is a down-tempo pop song with a length of four minutes and five seconds , which includes influences of teen pop . Written in common time , with a tempo of 80 beats per minute , the song is composed in the key of D major . Bieber 's vocals span from the low note of B3 to the high note of D5 . It follows a simple chord progression of G-D-A-Bm . Monica Herrera of Billboard noted that lines such as " So we fight through the hurt , and we cry and cry and cry and cry / Then we live and we learn , and we try " revealed a " deeper side " to the singer . Bieber performed the song while accompanying Taylor Swift on the United Kingdom leg of the Fearless Tour , as well as his own My World Tour . During the latter performance , Bieber sits on a stool , accompanied by only a piano background .

Mark Hirsh of The Boston Globe noted " Down to Earth " was the essential track from My World . Allison Stewart of the Washington Post listed the song was one of her recommended tracks from the album . Jon Caramanica of The New York Times said that " Down to Earth " and " One Less Lonely Girl " were " uncomplicately beautiful and earnest . " Although Ashante Infantry of Toronto Star said a turn-off of the song was the " Mafia " tag by the production team , Midi Mafia , at the beginning of the song , she called " Down to Earth " one of the best tracks on the album . After praising Bieber 's delivery of " poignant lines " in the song , Monica Herrera of Billboard said " it 's hardly a stretch to imagine Bieber racking up more hits in the next decade to come . "

On the week ending December 5 , 2009 , due to digital sales after the release of My World , " Down to Earth " debuted on the US Billboard Hot 100 and the Canadian Hot 100 . The song debuted at number forty-three on the Hot Digital Songs chart in the US , and therefore consecutively appeared at number seventy-nine on the Hot 100 . In Canada , it debuted at number sixty-one . It dropped off both charts the following week . In both territories it was also the highest non-previously released song from My World to appear on the charts . In the United Kingdom , after the release of My World , " Down to Earth " appeared at number 149 on the UK Singles Chart .

Patrick Joseph Alexander " Paddy " Moran ( March 11 , 1877 – January 14 , 1966 ) was a Canadian professional ice hockey goaltender . Moran played all but one of his 16 seasons for the Quebec Hockey Club , from 1901 to 1917 ; in the 1909 – 10 season , Moran played for the All-Montreal and the Haileybury Comets . Moran was noted for protecting the area in front of his net by aggressively using his stick , and expectorating at opposing players while chewing tobacco . He won two Stanley Cups with Quebec in 1912 and 1913 . Moran was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1958 .

Moran began his playing career with the Quebec Hockey Club in the Canadian Amateur Hockey League ( CAHL ) . Over four seasons , Moran appeared in 30 games , winning 19 of them . For the 1905 – 06 season , the Quebec Hockey Club joined the Eastern Canada Amateur Hockey Association ( ECAHA ) . Over the next four years , Moran appeared in 38 games , but won only 11 of them , while his lowest goals-against average in a season during that span was 6.79 . In the 1909 – 10 season , Moran joined the Montreal All-Stars from the Canadian Hockey Association ( CHA ) and as the league folded , he then joined the Haileybury Comets of the National Hockey Association ( NHA ) . In his only season with the Comets , Moran posted a 3 – 8 record over 11 games , letting in 79 goals . For the 1910 – 11 season , Moran rejoined Quebec . That year , Quebec finished last in the league , winning only four games , and letting in 97 goals against . In the 1911 – 12 season , Moran went 10 – 8 over 18 games , with a 4.26 goals-against average . They won the O 'Brien Cup and the Stanley Cup after finishing with the best record in the league . In the Stanley Cup challenge against the Moncton Victorias of the Maritime Professional Hockey League ( MPHL ) , Quebec won the first game 9 – 3 , and the second game 8 – 0 . Moran finished with a 1.50 goals-against average , while Jack McDonald and Joe Malone combined for 14 out of the 17 Quebec goals as Quebec won the Stanley Cup .

The next season , Moran went 16 – 4 in the regular season in 20 games , with one shutout and a 3.70 goals-against average . Quebec repeated as O 'Brien Cup winners , and had a Stanley Cup challenge once more , playing against the Sydney Miners of the MPHL . Quebec repeated as champions , winning the three-game series 2 – 0 . In the first game , Quebec won 14 – 3 , as Malone scored nine goals , while in the second one , Quebec emerged with a slimmer margin of victory , winning 6 – 2 . Moran finished his career with the Bulldogs , retiring after the NHA 's last season . He played four more seasons , during which he played 69 games , winning 34 of them . Over his career , Moran 's teams often had losing records , or they had a winning percentage barely over 50 % . Some hockey legends often recalls that he was the best goaltender of them all . He was elected to the Hall of Fame in 1958 , with the help of Senator Chubby Power , once a teammate . He is still the earliest goaltender in HHOF , starting his senior hockey venture in 1901 .

Moran was a stand-up style goaltender . At 5 ft 11 in ( 1.80 m ) and 180 lb ( 82 kg / 12 st 12 lb ) , he was considered a big goaltender for his era . In Moran 's era , goaltenders were not allowed to drop down to the ice to make saves , so his style suited him well . Moran was especially noted for his aggressive defense of the area in front of his net . He used his stick to slash opposing players within reach . Moran often chewed tobacco while on the ice , and another favorite tactic of his was to expectorate at opposing players . Moran 's stick work was described as attempts to " slash [ other players ' ] heads off with lightning strokes of his blade " . Moran often wore oversized sweaters , claiming that they kept him warm in the cold arenas ; however , he kept it unbuttoned , and often used it to catch shots .

Moran retired after the 1916 – 17 season , at the age of 39 . He was proud to have built his own house with his ice hockey earnings , which cost CAN $ 4,000 . In 1919 , Moran became a custom house builder , and continued in this career for at least 35 years . In 1944 at age 66 , Moran was interviewed about his playing days , along with contemporary goaltender Percy LeSueur , who is noted for his Stanley Cup wins in 1909 and 1911 with the Ottawa Senators . Later in his life , Moran became an avid follower of the Quebec Aces . He was inducted into the Quebec Hockey Hall of Fame . In 1958 , Moran was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame . He died on January 14 , 1966 .

Typhoon Halong , known in the Philippines as Typhoon Inday , passed just south of Guam one week after Typhoon Chataan struck the island and left heavy damage . The seventh named storm of the season , Halong developed near the same location as Chataan on July 5 near the Marshall Islands . For much of its duration , the storm moved toward the northwest , gradually intensifying . Early on July 10 , Halong passed just south of Guam as a tropical storm , producing high waves and gusty winds on the island . The storm disrupted relief efforts from Chataan , causing additional power outages but little damage . After affecting Guam , Halong quickly strengthened and reached its peak winds on July 12 . The Joint Typhoon Warning Center estimated peak 1 ‑ minute winds of 250 km / h ( 155 mph ) , while the Japan Meteorological Agency estimated 10 ‑ minute winds of 155 km / h ( 100 mph ) . Subsequently , the typhoon weakened greatly while curving to the northeast , although it still passed near Okinawa with strong winds that left widespread power outages . Halong struck southeastern Japan , dropping heavy rainfall and producing strong winds that left $ 89.8 million ( ¥ 10.3 billion 2002 JPY ) in damage . There was one death in the country and nine injuries . Halong became extratropical on July 16 and dissipated the next day . The typhoon influenced the monsoon trough in the Philippines , contributing to flooding and deaths in the country .

In early July , a circulation with an area of convection developed along the monsoon trough near Enewetak Atoll . The system remained nearly stationary , tracking slowly to the southwest . Gradually organizing , the system developed into a tropical depression on July 6 over the Marshall Islands . Without having issued a tropical cyclone formation alert , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) initiated advisories on Tropical Depression 10W at 0000 UTC on July 7 . Late that day , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) upgraded the depression to Tropical Storm Halong near the island of Chuuk in the Federated States of Micronesia . By that time , the storm was moving west-northwestward , steered by a ridge to the north . Halong slowly intensified , although it continued to develop deep convection that wrapped into the center . Early on July 9 , the JMA upgraded the storm to a severe tropical storm . At 1200 UTC that day , the JTWC upgraded Halong to typhoon status about 405 km ( 250 mi ) east-southeast of Guam . While moving toward Guam , Halong became better organized , developing an eye and well-defined rainbands . After a brief turn more toward the west , the storm passed about 140 km ( 85 mi ) south of the southern tip of Guam at 0200 UTC on July 10 ; at the time , the JTWC estimated 1 ‑ minute sustained winds of 165 km / h ( 105 mph ) , although the JMA had maintained Halong as a tropical storm until upgrading to a typhoon at 1800 UTC that day . An approaching trough increased shear over Halong , and a weak ridge to the north restricted outflow ; this briefly prevented significant intensification after the convection decreased . Late on July 11 , the thunderstorms increased , and restrengthening resumed . Late on July 12 , the JMA assessed Halong as reaching peak 10 ‑ minute sustained winds of 155 km / h ( 100 mph ) . Around that time , the typhoon entered the area of the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration ( PAGASA ) , which gave it the local name Typhoon Inday . Early on July 13 , the JTWC upgraded Halong to a super typhoon after the storm developed a well-defined eye 63 km ( 39 mi ) in diameter . Shortly thereafter , the agency estimated peak 1 ‑ minute sustained winds of 250 km / h ( 155 mph ) .

At its peak intensity , Typhoon Halong had gale-force winds that extended 415 km ( 260 mi ) northeast of the center . It was continuing to the northwest toward Okinawa , and threatened to strike the island at near peak intensity . However , the typhoon began rapidly weakening due to increasing wind shear , and the eye quickly deteriorated . At around 1200 UTC on July 14 , Halong made landfall on Okinawa with 10 ‑ minute winds of 130 km / h ( 80 mph ) . Around that time , the typhoon moved through a weakness in the ridge , turning to the north and later accelerating to the northeast . The combination of cool , dry air , and the persistent wind shear removed the convection from the center by early on July 15 , weakening Halong to tropical storm status . Later that day , the JTWC discontinued advisories while the storm was approaching Japan , and the agency classified Halong as extratropical . The JMA continued tracking the storm , and Halong struck both the Izu and Bōsō peninsulas along Honshu . Late on July 16 , the JMA classified Halong as extratropical , and shortly thereafter the storm dissipated over the Kuril Islands . The extratropical remnants of Halong moved out of the basin late on July 19 , just prior dissipating .

Only a week after Typhoon Chataan struck Guam and left $ 60 million in damage , Typhoon Halong also threatened the island , although it veered to the south in the day before it would have struck . Due to the storm , all flights were canceled in Guam and the Northern Marianas Islands , and officials advised residents in low-lying areas to evacuate . While passing to the south , Halong produced waves as high as 6 m ( 20 ft ) in Inarajan . The waves left beach erosion along Guam 's southern coast , and were higher than during Chataan 's passage . The typhoon produced peak sustained winds of 69 km / h ( 43 mph ) , with gusts to 90 km / h ( 56 mph ) ; both observations were recorded at Guam 's National Weather Service . Damage on the island was estimated at $ 40,000 . The storm disrupted work to repair damage from Chataan . Portions of the island , including Guam Memorial Hospital , had their power restored after Chataan , only to lose electricity during Halong . The additional damage caused by Halong contributed to Governor Carl T.C. Gutierrez declaring the island as a state of emergency on July 22 , which activated the Guam National Guard .

While passing northeast of the Philippines , Halong enhanced the monsoon , and combined with the effects from previous typhoons Rammasun and Chataan , as well as Severe Tropical Storm Nakri , there were 85 deaths , with 45 people injured in the Philippines . About ten of the deaths were estimated to have been caused by Halong . The combined damage in the country totaled $ 10.3 million ( ₱ 522 million 2002 PHP ) . In Japan , Halong dropped heavy rainfall that peaked at 362 mm ( 14.3 in ) in Nagano Prefecture . The highest rainfall in Okinawa was 258 mm ( 10.2 in ) . Near Tokyo , a station recorded winds of 112 km / h ( 69 mph ) , although winds gusted to 183 km / h ( 114 mph ) at Kadena Air Base on Okinawa . In the Ryukyu Islands of Japan , including Okinawa , Halong left more than 48,800 houses without power due to the strong winds . Officials canceled bus service in Naze , Kagoshima during the storm . Throughout the country , the typhoon destroyed six houses and damaged 223 others to varying degrees . Halong also flooded 301 houses , forcing about 4,000 people to evacuate their homes , many along rivers . Officials canceled 54 airline flights , 10 of them international , and due to the storm , 171 schools were closed . In Sendai , Halong damaged roads in 550 locations and railroads in seven locations . Nine levees were breached , and there were at least 270 landslides . Damage totaled $ 89.8 million ( ¥ 10.3 billion 2002 JPY ) across the country , mostly from agriculture . During its passage , the typhoon injured nine people , one of them severely , and there was one death .

Typhoon Nancy , known in the Philippines as Typhoon Weling , was a destructive typhoon that moved through Vietnam and the Philippines during October 1982 . The typhoon originated from an area of convection and was first classified as a tropical cyclone on October 10 . The system attained gale-force winds the next day , and slowly deepened thereafter . Although Nancy initially moved west , the system maintained a general westward course for much of its duration , striking Luzon on October 14 at peak intensity of 215 km / h ( 130 mph ) . It weakened to tropical storm strength overland , but re-intensified to typhoon intensity over the South China Sea . Nancy hit northern Vietnam on the October 18 , and weakened almost immediately thereafter , before dissipating on October 20 inland over Vietnam . In the Philippines , damage was the worst in Cagayan and Isabela . In the former , 4,378 homes were destroyed while 2,250 houses were destroyed in the latter . Nationwide , 96 people were killed and 30 others were listed as missing . Additionally , 186 were injured . A total of 12,464 homes were destroyed while 34,111 others were damaged . Moreover , 301,431 persons were " affected " by the storm , or 51,532 families . Damage totaled to $ 56 million ( 1982 USD ) , including $ 18 million from infrastructure and $ 26 million from agriculture . While strking Vietnam , the typhoon killed 30 people . Around 72,000 homes were destroyed , leaving 125,000 people homeless . Throughout the country , 450,000 acres ( 182,110 ha ) of rice were destroyed .

Typhoon Nancy originated from a large area of convection situated in the middle of the Pacific Ocean , which began to consolidate on October 8 within a favorable environment aloft . The convection separated from an upper-level low embedded within a tropical upper-tropospheric trough ( TUTT ) . Later that day , the area of convection degenerated into a " random area of cloudiness . " The TUTT drifted west while the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) reported that a tropical depression formed within the area of convection that was now located south of the TUTT . Early on October 10 , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) started watching the system . At 0730 UTC , a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert was issued by the JTWC while located 370 km ( 230 mi ) north of Guam . Following an increase in reorganization , a Hurricane Hunter flight indicated winds of 50 km / h ( 30 mph ) early on October 11 . Later that morning , the JMA upgraded the cyclone into a tropical storm . Following Hurricane Hunter reports , which indicated winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) and a barometric pressure of 999 mbar ( 29.5 inHg ) . Based on this , the JTWC upgraded the depression into a tropical storm and named it Nancy . Initially , the JTWC expected the system to track northwards and eventually re-curve , but this did not occur . Nancy maintained its intensity for 24 hours while tracking westward before rapidly turning west due to a change in steering patterns . Meanwhile , the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration also monitored the storm and assigned it with the local name Weling . Midday on October 12 , the JMA upgraded Nancy into a severe tropical storm . At 0000 UTC on October 13 , the same agency classified Nancy into a typhoon . Later that day , the JTWC followed suit . By midday on October 14 , the JTWC predicted Nancy to turn northwest into China due to the anticipation of a mid-latitude trough south of South Korea deepening . At 0600 UTC , the JMA reported that Nancy reached its peak intensity of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) and a minimum pressure of 935 mbar ( 27.6 inHg ) . Meanwhile , the JTWC reported peak intensity of 215 km / h ( 130 mph ) , a Category 4 hurricane equivalent on the United States-based Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale ( SSHWS ) . Six hours later , Typhoon Nancy moved ashore in northern Luzon while still at peak intensity .

The storm rapidly weakened over land . Although the JTWC downgraded Nancy to a tropical storm , the JMA kept the storm at typhoon intensity throughout landfall . After entering the South China Sea , the JTWC upped Nancy to typhoon status as it entered an area with favorable mid- to upper-level winds . Continuing to gain strength , the JMA raised the intensity of Nancy to 130 km / h ( 80 mph ) on October 16 . Shortly thereafter , Nancy crossed Hainan Island . After weakening slightly overland , the storm resumed strengthening once offshore . According to the JMA , Nancy attained a secondary peak , with winds of 135 km / h ( 85 mph ) at 0600 UTC on October 17 . The tropical cyclone moved on a slow northwesterly track along the southern periphery of the ridge . While passing slightly north of the Paracel Islands , the JTWC estimated winds of 145 km / h ( 90 mph ) , equivalent to a high-end Category 1 hurricane on the SSHWS . Late on October 18 , Nancy made landfall along the coast of Vietnam , just north of Vinh . At the time of landfall , both agencies estimated that Nancy was a typhoon . Within hours , the convection ceased , though the JMA kept monitoring the system until October 20 , when it finally dissipated .

Prior to the arrival of Nancy , typhoon warnings were issued for much of Luzon . Many residents left for shelter prior to landfall . Typhoon Nancy passed through 10 provinces in the Philippines , resulting in widespread destruction . Damage was the worst in Cagayan and Isabela , where 56 people were hurt . In the former , 4,378 dwellings were destroyed . In Isabela , 2,250 houses were destroyed , displacing 35,744 residents . Along a river in Isabela , ten bodies were found . Elsewhere , 800 homes were destroyed in Tuguegarao , leaving 1,000 homeless and two injured . In Kalinga-Apayao , four fatalities occurred . Throughout the nation , many roads were closed due to mudslides . Mass destruction was reported in rice fields , as well as tobacco and cotton plantations . However , this total was later revised upwards to $ 56 million ( 1982 USD ) , which includes $ 18 million from infrastructure and $ 26 million from agriculture . A total of 96 people died ; 81 of the fatalities were from just three provinces . Most of the deaths were by drowning . Thirty others were rendered as missing and 186 people were injured . A total of 12,464 dwellings were destroyed while 34,111 others were damaged . Furthermore , 301,431 people were " affected " by the storm , or 51,532 families .

While making landfall in central Vietnam , winds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) were measured due to the typhoon . A total of 30 persons perished . Around 72,000 homes were destroyed . Moreover , 125,000 people were left homeless in Vinh . In all , 450,000 acres ( 182,110 ha ) of rice were destroyed ; approximately 150,000 acres ( 60,705 ha ) of rice were submerged in the Thanh Hóa province alone . In addition , many houses were submerged in Nghe Tinhe . Bình Trị Thiên was also affected by Nancy , but no casualties occurred there .

RAF Uxbridge was a Royal Air Force ( RAF ) station in Uxbridge , within the London Borough of Hillingdon , occupying a 44.6-hectare ( 110-acre ) site that originally belonged to the Hillingdon House estate . The British Government purchased the estate in 1915 , three years before the founding of the RAF . Until the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939 , the station was open to the public . The station is best known as the headquarters of No. 11 Group RAF , which was responsible for the aerial defence of London and the south-east of England during the Battle of Britain . Hillingdon House served as the group 's headquarters . A bunker , subsequently known as the Battle of Britain Bunker , was built nearby to house the 11 Group Operations Room , which controlled fighter squadrons operating within the group . The Operations Room was also responsible for providing air support during the evacuation of Dunkirk in May 1940 ( Operation Dynamo ) and the D-Day landings ( Operation Overlord ) . It was here that Winston Churchill first said , " Never was so much owed by so many to so few " , which he repeated in a speech to Parliament four days later .

RAF Uxbridge closed on 31 March 2010 as part of a reduction in the number of Ministry of Defence properties in the Greater London area . Many of its remaining military units were relocated to nearby RAF Northolt the following day . Plans for redevelopment , consisting of a mixture of new residential and commercial properties and the retention of all listed buildings , were approved in January 2011 . A small part of the station incorporating the Battle of Britain Bunker retains the RAF Uxbridge name and is maintained by RAF Northolt . The River Pinn runs through the site from north to south , passing Hillingdon House and the Battle of Britain Bunker . The land around the river is mainly wooded and designated as greenbelt , and Hillingdon Golf Course borders the south of the station . A footpath through the site that had closed in 1988 was reopened in 2011 .

The area that became RAF Uxbridge was originally part of the estate of Hillingdon House , built as a hunting lodge in 1717 by the Duke of Schomberg , who staged regular hunts in the grounds . He was a German-born general serving under William of Orange ( later King William III ) , knighted for his part in the 1690 Battle of the Boyne . The Marchioness of Rockingham , widow of Prime Minister Charles Watson-Wentworth , 2nd Marquess of Rockingham , bought the house in 1786 for £ 9,000 following her husband 's death and lived there until her own death in 1804 . She left the estate to her stepsister Elizabeth , widow of William Weddell MP , who sold it to Josias Du Pré Porcher in 1805 . In 1810 the estate was sold to Richard Henry Cox , grandson of Richard Cox , founder of the travel company Cox & Kings . Cox & Co , as the company was then known , was formed after Richard Cox was appointed agent to the Foot Guards ( later the Grenadier Guards ) , and provided banking services for many regiments of the British Army by the end of the 18th century . The mansion was completely rebuilt after it burnt down in 1844 and later received a Grade II listing .

In 1914 the mansion was put on the market by the estate of Frederick Cox , Richard Henry Cox 's grandson . It was described as " a brick and stone building , partly stuccoed , with extensive outbuildings and ornamental gardens . " The house and gardens , together with the surrounding parkland and an artificial lake created by damming a section of the River Pinn , amounted to over 81 ha ( 200 acres ) . The British Government purchased the estate in 1915 , with the intention of establishing a prisoner of war camp . The local population strongly opposed the plan , causing the government to relent , and the site instead became the Canadian Convalescent Hospital to care for troops evacuated from the front line during the First World War . The hospital opened on 20 September 1915 and was joined on 19 November 1917 by the Royal Flying Corps Armament School which moved into Hillingdon House with 114 officers and 1156 men , making a donation of £ 2289 , 12s and 9d to the Canadian Red Cross . The RFC used parts of the estate not required by the Canadians , and established firing ranges for the training of recruits in ground gunnery . A total of eight of these ranges were built along the River Pinn ; one remains today . The hospital closed on 12 December 1917 .

The Recruits Training Depot and a detachment of the RAF Depot from RAF Halton arrived in August 1919 , merging to form No. 1 Depot , RAF Uxbridge . The station itself was designated RAF Central Depot , Uxbridge . The site was then split to form two new RAF stations , the area to the east of the River Pinn heading uphill to Hillingdon House becoming RAF Hillingdon and the remainder RAF Uxbridge . That year , the building that became the station cinema was opened , designed by Lieutenant J.G.N. Clift of the Royal Engineers , and served as a lecture hall for new recruits . The RAF School of Music moved to RAF Uxbridge from Hampstead in September 1919 . Headquarters Southern Area , Southern Area Medical Headquarters , Southern Area Barrack Stores , and the Southern Area and South Eastern Area Headquarters of the Air Construction Service moved into Hillingdon House in October 1919 . T. E. Lawrence , better known as " Lawrence of Arabia " , underwent initial training at the Uxbridge Depot in 1922 after enlisting in the RAF under the assumed name John Hume-Ross . He recounted his experiences in The Mint .

Uxbridge Football Club was provided with the use of the station stadium from 1923 and played evening matches there . Ten barrack blocks designed by A. Gilpin were built around the parade ground in 1925 , as was the RAF officers ' hospital and the original Operations Room , controlled by the Fighting Area of Air Defence of Great Britain ( ADGB ) . The Air Ministry chose RAF Uxbridge as the new base for ADGB on 14 January 1926 owing to its proximity to Whitehall . The site had the added advantage of lying on the fringes of London and therefore difficult for an enemy to locate and bomb . Having also housed a gymnasium , the lecture hall building became the station cinema in 1927 , initially for the use of station personnel only but soon opened to the general public . On 1 March 1929 , the headquarters of the Royal Observer Corps ( ROC ) was established at Hillingdon House ; Air Commodore Edward Masterman was appointed as its first commandant . The Observer Corps remained at RAF Uxbridge until 1 March 1936 , when it transferred to RAF Bentley Priory . Owing to its wooden construction the original Operations Room could only be used during the summer months ; maintenance of the signalling and communications equipment became difficult under damp winter conditions . A memo dated 16 January 1933 , sent to the senior Air Staff Officer , Wing Commander Modin , stated :

Uxbridge Royal Air Force buildings would provide an easy bombing target from all points of view , I feel that our Operations Room at least must go underground ... and the sooner it is put there the better , as not only will the re-installation of communications and apparatus generally take time , but if that machinery is to function smoothly in a sudden emergency , installation must have been completed and the whole layout repeatedly worked and tried out before the danger of such emergency arises . Douglas Bader arrived at the military hospital in 1932 to recover from the amputation of his legs following an air crash . During his stay Bader met the Desoutter brothers , who were beginning to make lightweight artificial legs from aluminium . Once fitted with artificial legs , Bader fought hard to regain his former abilities and in time his efforts paid off . He was able to drive a specially modified car , play golf and even dance . During his convalescence , Bader met his future wife Thelma Edwards , a waitress at a nearby pub called the Pantiles . Formed on 1 May 1936 , No. 11 Group RAF was headquartered at RAF Uxbridge under the command of Air Vice Marshal Philip Joubert de la Ferté , who was succeeded by Sir Ernest Gossage in January 1937 . The ADGB was reorganised on 13 July 1936 , with control of fighter aircraft passing to the newly established RAF Fighter Command , which moved to RAF Bentley Priory . The following day the remaining elements of ADGB became RAF Bomber Command , headquartered in Hillingdon House .

Planning for the new No. 11 Group Operations Room ( within what became known as the Battle of Britain Bunker ) began in August 1937 . Initially it was to be buried 66 feet ( 20 m ) below ground , but problems with the local London Clay on the site meant it was eventually built by Sir Robert McAlpine at a depth of 60 feet ( 18 m ) , although it was still able to withstand being hit by a 500-pound ( 230 kg ) bomb . The bunker was designed by Bob Creer of the Air Ministry . Work began in February 1939 and finished in August , ten days before the outbreak of the Second World War . The original Operations Room on the surface remained as a back-up , but was not required for that purpose and was subsequently renamed Building 76 . Also in August 1939 , Bomber Command moved to Iver and on 2 September the new Operations Room and RAF Uxbridge reached operational war readiness . The station closed to the public on the outbreak of war , and the football club was required to suspend its use of the stadium .

During the war RAF Uxbridge was tasked with despatching personnel to and from training and operational units in Northern France . It also housed the RAF Uxbridge Language School , where Polish Air Force pilots were taught key RAF codewords . Pilots practised formation flying on the station football pitch , using tricycles fitted with radios , compasses and speed indicators . British Expeditionary Force troops returning from Dunkirk were processed at Uxbridge . In mid-1940 , staff at the station processed an average of 2,500 recruits and experienced troops per week . During the Battle of Britain , between July and October 1940 , RAF Fighter Command at RAF Bentley Priory received air threat warnings that it filtered to remove duplication , doubt and confusion . These were then forwarded to the Operations Room at RAF Uxbridge , which allocated appropriate defence resources and passed orders on to No. 11 Group sector airfields . No. 11 Group personnel doubled to 20,000 between April and November 1940 . The RAF officers ' hospital was converted to the Women 's Auxiliary Air Force ( WAAF ) hospital early in 1940 . While overseeing the operations at RAF Uxbridge , Air Vice Marshal Park stayed in a house opposite the entrance to the bunker . He used a small door to reach the bunker from the house each day . The house , named after the war in Park 's honour , was demolished in 1996 to make way for newly constructed married quarters ; only the garden wall and door were retained . Wing Commander Willoughby de Broke received the Air Force Cross on 11 July 1940 for his service as a Senior Operations Officer for No. 11 Group , working within the Operations Room . Prime Minister Winston Churchill visited the station on 16 August 1940 , to monitor the battle from the Operations Room . He subsequently made his well-known comment , " Never in the field of human conflict was so much owed by so many to so few " to General Ismay as they got into their car to leave . Churchill repeated the quote in a speech to Parliament four days later . King George VI and Queen Elizabeth visited the station on 6 September . Churchill was again present at RAF Uxbridge on the fiercest day of fighting of the entire battle : Battle of Britain Day , 15 September 1940 . As the last squadrons were sent into battle , Churchill asked Air Vice Marshal Sir Keith Park , " How many reserves have we ? " Park answered " There are none " .

A delayed-action landmine fell on the station on 26 September 1940 , between the police school and WAAF Quarters , where it remained until it was defused the following day . On 28 September a bomb fell into a tree 50 yards ( 46 m ) from the Operations Room and was later defused in Harefield . A Junkers Ju 88 attacked the station on 6 October 1940 , dropping a bomb beside the Navy , Army and Air Force Institutes ( NAAFI ) grocery shop . The device damaged water and gas mains but caused no casualties . Few bombs fell on the station ; Luftwaffe pilots may have mistaken the glass greenhouses at the Lowe & Shawyer plant nursery west of the station for a large body of water not on their maps . The king and queen returned on 1 November 1941 , by which time a " Royal Box " had been installed in the Operations Room to allow them to observe the plotting activities . During 1942 , General Charles de Gaulle , Sir Anthony Eden and Lord Mountbatten all visited the 11 Group Operations Room . The actors Rex Harrison ( then a squadron leader liaising with Bomber Command ) , Cyril Raymond and Ronald Adam all served within the Operations Room during the war .

In 1941 , a division of the Meteorological Office was established at RAF Uxbridge as part of the Intelligence Branch . On 1 July that year the station Sick Quarters were merged with the WAAF hospital to create the RAF Station Hospital . No. 11 Group was involved in providing air support for the Dieppe Raid ( Operation Jubilee ) on 19 August 1942 . Air Marshal Trafford Leigh-Mallory commanded participating Allied air forces from the 11 Group Operation Room . The air operations section of Operation Overlord , the 6 June 1944 Normandy landings ( D-Day ) , was also controlled from RAF Uxbridge . Orders from the station were the only ones issued to Allied air units on the day . The headquarters of the 2nd Tactical Air Force and 9th Tactical Air Force of the USAAF were stationed at Uxbridge while preparations were made for the invasion . On D-Day , the 11 Group Controller was responsible for ensuring sufficient air patrols of the United Kingdom , the main shipping routes , and the beach landing areas .

RAF Uxbridge served as an athlete 's village for the male competitors in the 1948 Summer Olympics . Swimmers trained at nearby Uxbridge Lido , and female athletes were housed at RAF West Drayton . Personnel from RAF Uxbridge were moved out to RAF Stanmore Park and transported back to the station daily for their shifts . In 1949 , the RAF Cricket Association opened on Vine Lane on the western boundary of the station . Also moving into the stations grounds in October of that year were the 14F squadron or the Air Training Corps , their access also being via Vine Lane.The station 's crest was approved in April 1953 , incorporating a drill sergeant 's pace stick to symbolise the training of recruits , and a bugle to represent the Central Band of the RAF ; Uxbridge was the first RAF station in Middlesex to have a crest approved . The ceremonial entrance to the north-west of the station , St Andrew 's Gate , was officially opened on 16 December 1957 to mark the link between Uxbridge and the Royal Air Force . A memorial to the personnel of No. 11 Group , made of Cornish granite , was placed in the ground above the Operations Room in 1957 . No. 11 Group moved to RAF Martlesham Heath on 14 April 1958 and the room was soon sealed in its original condition . The memorial was unveiled by Air Chief Marshal Lord Dowding on 23 April 1958 in a ceremony attended by Group Captain Douglas Bader and Wing Commander Lord Willoughby de Broke , among others , and marked by a flypast of the Battle of Britain Memorial Flight . Control of RAF Hillingdon passed from Fighter Command to Technical Training Command that year , at which time the entire site became known as RAF Uxbridge . The RAF School of Education moved into Hillingdon House from RAF Spitalgate on 10 November 1958 , and the station was subsequently merged with No. 22 Group RAF .

The station was granted the Freedom of the London Borough of Hillingdon on 19 March 1960 , an honour allowing the station 's personnel to march throughout the borough in uniform . On 1 November that year , the Queen 's Colour Squadron of the RAF Regiment moved to Uxbridge and the Southern Region Air Traffic Services headquarters moved into Hillingdon House . After the war , the station was already home to the London Area Control Centre , renamed the London Air Traffic Control Centre in 1948 and the Uxbridge Air Traffic Control Centre in 1957 . This eventually transferred to RAF West Drayton but remained under the parentage of RAF Uxbridge . The 11 Group Operations Room was extensively surveyed in order for a replica to be built at Pinewood Studios for the 1969 film Battle of Britain . Scenes for the 1996 television miniseries Over Here and an episode of Richard Holmes ' War Walks were filmed in the Operations Room itself . The reinforced Uniter building was built on the site in the 1970s to house communications equipment . Although no longer used for this purpose , the building contains two fuel storage tanks . The main entrance to the station was moved in 1972 from beside the station cinema to its present location roughly 50 yards ( 46 m ) south .

Over nine months in 1975 , the 11 Group Operations Room was restored by No. 9 Signals Unit . The original map was repaired and returned to the table by the RAF Cartography unit , and the board detailing the readiness and activities of each sector squadron was rebuilt to resemble its status on 15 September 1940 . In 1985 a museum was created within the bunker by Warrant Officer " Chris " Wren and the Operations Room opened for group visits . In January 1981 , the Provisional Irish Republican Army ( IRA ) planted a bomb in the Suvla barrack block at RAF Uxbridge . The device was discovered and the 35 RAF musicians and 15 airmen living there were evacuated before it exploded . Following the incident , an enquiry began and security at all RAF stations was reviewed . The following year , many RAF personnel from the station were deployed during the Falklands War . The station went on to celebrate its 70th anniversary in 1987 by staging several events that raised £ 30,000 for the RAF Benevolent Fund . RAF Uxbridge also became involved in Operation Granby following the Iraqi Invasion of Kuwait in August 1990 . Personnel at Uxbridge were prepared for service in the Gulf at that time , and deployed that year in December . During the aerial assault on Iraq in January 1991 , support group meetings began at the station for the families of service personnel serving during the Gulf War . Prince Edward , Earl of Wessex , visited one of these groups in February 1991 .

The station church , St Luke 's , became structurally unsound on 21 November 1990 after the foundations failed . The building dated back to 1933 and had been constructed of wood ; the walls were pushed out and the floor rose by 4 inches ( 100 mm ) . In March 1993 , the Leigh-Mallory bridge was opened across the River Pinn , and the church moved into a new permanent home , Building 231 , in March 1995 . Jim Bolger , then Prime Minister of New Zealand , visited the station in May , and in October , the station 's new sports centre opened . RAF Uxbridge personnel were once more prepared for action in the Gulf in 2003 in readiness for Operation Telic in Iraq . A support network for the families of service personnel sent into action was again established at the station . In March 2003 the Under-Secretary of State for Defence was briefed at Uxbridge as part of preparations for a visit to the Gulf . Personnel paraded through Uxbridge town centre on 28 November 2007 , exercising the freedom of the borough granted to the station in 1960 . RAF Uxbridge became a satellite station of RAF Northolt on 1 April 2008 , in preparation for the eventual closure . In the final years of RAF ownership , the Service Prosecuting Authority and Civil Aviation Authority 's UK Airprox Board ( investigating air proximity incidents ) was based in Hillingdon House . The final of the national Carnegie Champions schools rugby tournament was held at the station in August 2008 . The link between RAF Uxbridge and the Royal Observer Corps was renewed in 2008 with the closure of RAF Bentley Priory and the relocation to Uxbridge of ROC memorabilia from the Priory Officers ' Mess for safekeeping and display . The Royal Observer Corps had been stood down from operational duties in December 1995 .

Prior to the closure of RAF Uxbridge , Queen Elizabeth II sent a message to the station in February 2010 , via her equerry , Wing Commander A.D. Calame , who had served as Officer Commanding the Queen 's Colour Squadron between 10 August 2005 and 16 July 2007 : Her Majesty was interested to hear that , in this anniversary year , the historic Number 11 Group Operations Rooms Bunker has been listed and will be preserved as a Royal Air Force asset . Hopefully , the facility will continue as a permanent reminder of those who fought and won the Battle of Britain . Her Majesty hopes that the relocation to Royal Air Force Northolt will continue to progress well , and wishes all personnel at Uxbridge best wishes for the future . The station closed on 31 March 2010 as part of the Ministry of Defence 's Project MoDEL , a programme to reduce the number of defence sites in Greater London in favour of a core site at RAF Northolt . The closure ceremony was overseen by the Mayor of Hillingdon and included parades and the final lowering of the Royal Air Force Ensign over the parade ground . A Supermarine Spitfire conducted a flypast of the station . The final units marched to their new station at RAF Northolt the following day . The station , which had received the Freedom of the Borough of Hillingdon , returned the award to the London Borough of Hillingdon as part of the ceremony , though this was returned on 4 September to be stored in the museum of the Battle of Britain Bunker . A commemorative blue plaque dedicated to Douglas Bader was unveiled by the Mayor of Hillingdon at the entrance to the Officers ' Mess .

The Middlesex Wing Headquarters of the Air Training Corps ( ATC ) had been based at the station together with No. 1083 Squadron ATC , which met on Mondays and Thursdays for parade nights . As part of the closing ceremony , personnel of No. 1083 Squadron were presented with the station crest to adopt as their own . The squadron continued to meet at the station until July 2010 , when a newly refurbished building at the TA Centre on Honeycroft Hill became available . The Grade I listed Battle of Britain Bunker is now preserved as a museum open to the public , while the Grade II listed Hillingdon House will be partially converted into a restaurant . The station cinema is also Grade II listed . The Battle of Britain War Memorial is a scheduled protected monument . Although not listed , several other buildings on the site were identified within the plans for possible retention : the Sick Quarters , the Officers ' Mess , the original gymnasium , the carpenters ' block in the grounds of Hillingdon House and a building near the Battle of Britain Bunker . St. Andrew 's Gate will be retained , as will the Mons barrack block adjacent to the parade ground .

Plans to develop the remaining 44.6 hectares ( 110 acres ) of the site were approved by the London Borough of Hillingdon in January 2011 for 1,340 homes , shops , a theatre and a primary school to be built over 10 years . The council intends the development to become an extension of Uxbridge town centre . Early suggestions from the Leader of Hillingdon Council included a theatre with a statue of T.E. Lawrence outside , and a new museum built around the Battle of Britain Bunker . MP for Uxbridge John Randall called in 2009 for Hillingdon Hospital to be relocated to the site as an alternative to a planned rebuilding project on its existing site . The hospital trust ruled out such a move due to the projected costs . The area around the Battle of Britain Bunker , including the No. 11 Group memorial , will retain the RAF Uxbridge name and be maintained by RAF Northolt as an exclave . The Royal Air Force Ensign was moved to the area , together with the Supermarine Spitfire gate guardian , a fibreglass replica of aircraft BR600 . The Spitfire was refurbished and painted in the D-Day invasion colours of No. 33 Squadron as aircraft BS239 , funded by the London Borough of Hillingdon . Uxbridge 's first gate guardian was a real Supermarine Spitfire which was unveiled on 23 May 1973 . This was sold to a collector for restoration and replaced by the current guardian in 1988 . At a service commemorating the Battle of Britain in September 2010 , a new Hawker Hurricane gate guardian in the markings of No. 303 Polish Fighter Squadron was unveiled , also near the bunker . The guardian is a fibreglass replica of the aircraft flown by Witold Urbanowicz during the Battle of Britain .

The South Hillingdon branch of the St. John Ambulance service was based at RAF Uxbridge until the closure in 2010 led to a period of uncertainty over its relocation . Eventually , RAF Northolt provided the charity with new premises , which were available from January 2011 . In June 2011 , it was announced that the public right of way from St Andrew 's Gate in the north-west to Vine Lane in the north-east would be reopened , after work to fence off the pathway was completed . The path , 800 metres ( 2,600 ft ) long , was the subject of a petition submitted to Hillingdon Council in 2010 and had been closed since 1988 . The path was reopened in early August 2011 . Since closing , the site has been used extensively for filming . Most recently , scenes for the television drama Endeavour , set in the 1960s , were filmed there . In April 2012 , VSM Estates announced it would be completing the purchase of the site from the MoD , with a view to commencing building work by the end of the year . VSM were provided with a £ 60 million five-year loan by HSBC , together with funding from joint parent companies , St. Modwen Properties and Vinci plc . Persimmon will develop 8.9 hectares ( 22 acres ) of the site with 500 homes under an existing joint venture agreement with St Modwen . Demolition of the site in phases began in October 2012 . The site will be developed under the St Andrew 's Park name .

A wood commemorating the Diamond Jubilee of Elizabeth II was planted within the site in May 2012 . Each school in the London Borough of Hillingdon was invited to plant a tree , and the Station Commander of RAF Northolt , Group Captain Tim O 'Brien , also planted one on behalf of the RAF . The wood was officially dedicated by the London Borough of Hillingdon 's Representative Deputy Lieutenant , Wing Commander Edna Partridge , on 19 July 2012 . A ground-breaking ceremony was held on 2 July 2013 on the site , attended by the Mayor of Hillingdon and cabinet members of Hillingdon Council . The development is due to be completed within seven years . A new primary school , built on the site of the former sports ground and gym , opened in September 2014 . Named the John Locke Academy , the school will have 630 primary places and 90 nursery places when fully subscribed . An additional planning application for the construction of office buildings was submitted by St. Modwen in June 2015 .

After driving home from work , Monica Reyes ( Annabeth Gish ) is struck by a drunk driver and transported to a hospital , where she is examined by Dr. Preijers ( Jack Blessing ) and Nurse Edwards ; she soon slips into a coma . Reyes , however , wakes up moments later in the same room all alone . Running to the door , she discovers that the hospital is floating in a dark void . She soon finds two other patients , Stephen Murdoch ( Stan Shaw ) , and Mr. Barreiro ( Del Zamora ) . They assume that they are dead . Reyes , however , maintains that they are still alive . Meanwhile , Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) tells John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) that Reyes is braindead , a fact that Doggett refuses to believe . Preijers informs Doggett and Scully that , since Reyes was an organ donor , in a few days her life-support will be pulled and the hospital will harvest her remains . In the floating hospital , Reyes sees a woman ( Tracey Ellis ) standing in the hallway , but she disappears . At that moment , Barreiro begins screaming and is engulfed in blue electricity before disappearing . In the real world , it is revealed that Barreiro , a fellow comatose patient , has had his life support removed by Preijers . Nearby stands the mystery woman that Reyes encountered : Audrey Pauley .

Doggett begins looking into ways to save Reyes , noting an anomaly in her electrocardiograph that suggests stifled brain activity . While visiting her room , Doggett runs into Audrey who tells her that Reyes ' soul is not gone yet . Audrey walks to her room in the basement , where a model of the hospital has been built . By concentrating her mind , she is able to move into the floating hospital where Reyes is trapped . Once there , she finds Reyes and asks her to tell Doggett that he 's a " dog person " , a reference to a conversation the two had before Reyes ' crash . After relaying the message , Doggett is determined that Reyes is not gone and , following Audrey , learns about her hospital model . Meanwhile , Nurse Edwards ( Vernee Watson-Johnson ) confronts Preijers about an injection she saw him give Reyes ; he kills Edwards to cover his tracks . Later , in the floating hospital , Stephen collapses and disappears when he too is pulled off of life support . After Doggett is spotted with Audrey in the basement by Preijers , he begins to worry that she could expose what he is doing . He injects the same drug he used to kill Edwards , but Audrey is able to concentrate and move into the floating hospital one last time . She informs Reyes that her only way out is to jump into the void . Reyes does so and wakes up in her hospital bed moments before her organs are to be harvested . Doggett runs down to Audrey 's room only to find that Preijers has killed her . Doggett manages to capture Preijers before he can escape .

" Audrey Pauley " was written by Steven Maeda and directed by Kim Manners . The entry was Maeda 's second ninth season entry after " 4-D " . The episode features guest star Tracey Ellis as the titular Audrey Pauley . Ellis had previously appeared as a major character in the third season episode " Oubliette " . Annabeth Gish later noted that the episode , along with " 4-D " , were her " two favorite episodes " because they " are stand-alone episodes about Reyes and Doggett . Wonderful acting challenges , and the stories were fantastic . " Robert Patrick , whose friend Ted Demme had recently died , was worried about bringing too much emotion onto the set . He later noted , " I was kind of raw . I remember being a little worried about bringing too much emotion to it . I felt safe with Kim ; he knew I was going through a tough time . " The episode contained several elaborate stunts and effect sequences . Gish performed all of her stunts in the episode , including one shot when she jumped from a thirty foot descender . She later called the sequence " the biggest stunt of my career . " For several of the special effect shots , Manners was forced to compromise on his original decision . One specific shot , wherein Audrey Pauley had to disappear after appearing in front of Gish , was originally going to be done via CGI . Eventually , Manners decided to " tie the two actresses [ Gish and Ellis ] together [ ... ] and then you [ cut ] to Annabeth and in her face there 's an ' oh shit ' reaction , and then [ pan ] straight up on a crane , all right , and see that she 's completely alone . " He called effects like these " creative ways to trim [ the ] budget . " To create the floating hospital scene , a small door set was merged with a CGI hospital . Initially , the scene used a straight flat " piece of cement " as the bottom of the building . The effects team tried adding a " big piece of earth " under the building , but Paul Rabwin felt it looked too much like The Little Prince , so the piece of earth was removed . The final result also removed the cement-like base .

" Audrey Pauley " originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on March 17 , 2002 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC One on January 26 , 2003 . The episode 's initial broadcast was viewed by approximately 5.1 million households , 8 million viewers , and ranked as the sixty-eighth most watched episode of television that aired during the week ending March 17 . " Audrey Pauley " earned a Nielsen household rating of 4.8 , meaning that roughly 4.8 percent of all television-equipped households , were tuned in to the episode . The episode has generally received positive reviews from television critics . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X-Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , gave the episode a glowing review and rated it five stars out of five . The two noted that " this is what The X-Files should be doing now " and that " this would have been the template on which to have built a series starring Doggett and Reyes . " Furthermore , they noted that the script was " written and directed with so much restraint " , that is makes many of the emotional scenes " more affecting " . Shearman and Pearson ultimately called the end result " clever , thoughtful , [ … ] very moving " and " beautiful " . John Keegan from Critical Myth gave the episode a largely positive review and awarded it an 8 out of 10 . He wrote , " Overall , this was a strong episode , with a lot of wonderful character exploration and an interesting concept . However , there were some weaknesses throughout , typical of Steve Maeda ’ s episodes , and that detracted from the episode in some places . Still , another winner in this underrated final season . " Lionel Green from Sand Mountain Reporter named the episode one of his " 13 all-time favorite episodes " of The X-Files , ranking it at number three . He wrote that the episode was " powerful " due to its themes of " faith , love and sacrifice . " He concluded that it was " the best one starring the new agents , Doggett and Reyes . " M.A. Crang , in his book Denying the Truth : Revisiting The X-Files after 9 / 11 , praised the performances of Robert Patrick and Annabeth Gish while stating that the visuals in the dream sequences were " pitch-perfect " .

Jessica Morgan , however , from Television Without Pity , gave the episode a more mixed review . She criticized the character of Monica Reyes and called her " Moronica " . She ultimately gave the episode a C + grade . Jeffrey Robinson from DVD Talk called the entry " borderline weird " and used it as evidence that " the ninth season [ is ] arguably the worst season of the series . " The A.V. Club 's Zack Handlen was generally unenthused writing " It ’ s not a bad episode , exactly , but there doesn ’ t seem to be a lot of point to it . ... it makes for a forgettable hour . "

The Pedra Branca dispute [ 2008 ] ICJ 2 was a territorial dispute between Singapore and Malaysia over several islets at the eastern entrance to the Singapore Strait , namely Pedra Branca ( previously called Pulau Batu Puteh and now Batu Puteh by Malaysia ) , Middle Rocks and South Ledge . The dispute began in 1979 and was largely resolved by the International Court of Justice ( ICJ ) in 2008 , which opined that Pedra Branca belonged to Singapore and Middle Rocks belonged to Malaysia . In early 1980 , Singapore lodged a formal protest with Malaysia in response to a map published by Malaysia in 1979 claiming Pedra Branca . In 1989 Singapore proposed submitting the dispute to the ICJ . Malaysia agreed to this in 1994 . In 1993 , Singapore also claimed the nearby islets Middle Rocks and South Ledge . In 1998 the two countries agreed on the text of a Special Agreement that was needed to submit the dispute to the ICJ . The Special Agreement was signed in February 2003 , and the ICJ formally notified of the Agreement in July that year . The hearing before the ICJ was held over three weeks in November 2007 under the name Sovereignty over Pedra Branca / Pulau Batu Puteh , Middle Rocks and South Ledge ( Malaysia v. Singapore ) .

Singapore argued that Pedra Branca was terra nullius , and that there was no evidence the island had ever been under the sovereignty of the Johor Sultanate . In the event the Court did not accept this argument , Singapore contended that sovereignty over the island had passed to Singapore due to the consistent exercise of authority over the island by Singapore and its predecessor , the United Kingdom . The actions taken included selecting Pedra Branca as the site for Horsburgh Lighthouse and constructing the lighthouse , requiring Malaysian officials wishing to visit the island to obtain permits , installing a military rebroadcast station on the island , and studying the feasibility of reclaiming land around the island . Malaysia had remained silent in the face of these activities . In addition , it had confirmed in a 1953 letter that Johor did not claim ownership of the island , and had published official reports and maps indicating that it regarded Pedra Branca as Singapore territory . Middle Rocks and South Ledge should be regarded as dependencies of Pedra Branca . Malaysia 's case was that Johor had original title to Pedra Branca , Middle Rocks and South Ledge . Johor had not ceded Pedra Branca to the United Kingdom , but had merely granted permission for the lighthouse to be built and maintained on it . The actions of the United Kingdom and Singapore in respect of the Horsburgh Lighthouse and the waters surrounding the island were not actions of the island 's sovereign . Further , the 1953 letter had been unauthorised and the official reports and maps it had issued were either irrelevant or inconclusive .

On 23 May 2008 , the Court ruled that Pedra Branca is under Singapore 's sovereignty , while Middle Rocks belongs to Malaysia . As regards South Ledge , the Court noted that it falls within the apparently overlapping territorial waters generated by mainland Malaysia , Pedra Branca and Middle Rocks . As it is a maritime feature visible only at low tide , it belongs to the state in the territorial waters of which it is located . Malaysia and Singapore have established what they have named the Joint Technical Committee to delimit the maritime boundary in the area around Pedra Branca and Middle Rocks , and to determine the ownership of South Ledge .

Pedra Branca is a small granite outcrop located 25 nautical miles ( 46 km ; 29 mi ) east of Singapore and 7.7 nautical miles ( 14.3 km ; 8.9 mi ) south of Johor , Malaysia , where the Singapore Strait meets the South China Sea . There are two maritime features near the island : Middle Rocks , 0.6 nautical miles ( 1.1 km ; 0.69 mi ) south of Pedra Branca , which consists of two clusters of small rocks about 250 metres ( 820 ft ) apart ; and South Ledge , 2.2 nautical miles ( 4.1 km ; 2.5 mi ) south-south-west of Pedra Branca , which is visible only at low tide . Singapore has been administering Pedra Branca since Horsburgh Lighthouse was built on the island by its predecessor , the United Kingdom , between 1850 and 1851 . Singapore was ceded by Sultan Hussein Shah and Temenggung Abdul Rahman Sri Maharajah of Johor to the British East India Company under a Treaty of Friendship and Alliance of 2 August 1824 ( the Crawfurd Treaty ) , and became part of the Straits Settlements in 1826 . At the time when the lighthouse on the island was constructed , the Straits Settlements were under British rule through the Government of India .

On 21 December 1979 , the Director of National Mapping of Malaysia published a map entitled Territorial Waters and Continental Shelf Boundaries of Malaysia showing Pedra Branca to be within its territorial waters . Singapore rejected this " claim " in a diplomatic note of 14 February 1980 and asked for the map to be corrected . In the late 1980s , Attorney-General of Singapore Tan Boon Teik was despatched by the Prime Minister of Singapore Lee Kuan Yew to disclose the documentary evidence which Singapore had to the Malaysian Attorney-General , to demonstrate the strength of Singapore 's case . However , the dispute was not resolved by an exchange of correspondence and intergovernmental talks in 1993 and 1994 . In the first round of talks in February 1993 the issue of sovereignty over Middle Rocks and South Ledge was also raised . Malaysia and Singapore therefore agreed to submit the dispute to the International Court of Justice ( ICJ ) .

Singapore first suggested submitting the territorial dispute to the ICJ in 1989 . The suggestion was accepted by Malaysia in 1994 . In 1998 , the text of a Special Agreement to bring the matter before the ICJ was agreed , and the Agreement was signed by the two countries at Putrajaya , Malaysia , on 6 February 2003 . It was notified to the Court in July 2003 . The case was assigned the name Sovereignty over Pedra Branca / Pulau Batu Puteh , Middle Rocks and South Ledge ( Malaysia v. Singapore ) . Following directions issued by the Court , the parties exchanged memorials on 25 March 2004 , counter-memorials on 25 January 2005 , and replies on 25 November 2005 . As the parties informed the Court by a letter dated 23 January 2006 that rejoinders were unnecessary , the written proceedings were closed . The Court determined by drawing lots that Singapore would present its case first . Public hearings were held between 6 and 23 November 2007 , with Singapore presenting its case from 6 to 9 November , and Malaysia doing the same from 13 to 16 November 2007 . Each country was then given two days to respond , with 19 and 20 November allocated to Singapore , and 22 and 23 November allocated to Malaysia . The persons who spoke for the parties were :

For Singapore : Tommy Koh , Ambassador-at-Large , Ministry of Foreign Affairs ( Singapore ) ; Professor of Law at the National University of Singapore ( acting as Singapore 's Agent ) ; Alain Pellet , Professor at the Paris X University Nanterre ; member and former Chairman of the United Nations International Law Commission ; associate member of the Institut de Droit International ( Counsel and Advocate ) ; Ian Brownlie , C.B.E. , Q.C. , F.B.A. ; member of the English Bar ; Chairman of the UN International Law Commission ; Emeritus Chichele Professor of Public International Law , University of Oxford ; member of the Institut de Droit International ; Distinguished Fellow , All Souls College , Oxford ( Counsel and Advocate ) ; Rodman R. Bundy , avocat à la Cour d 'Appel de Paris ; member of the New York State Bar Association ; Frere Cholmeley / Eversheds , Paris ( Counsel and Advocate ) ; Loretta Malintoppi , avocat à la Cour d 'Appel de Paris ; member of the Rome Bar ; Frere Cholmeley / Eversheds , Paris ( Counsel and Advocate ) ; and S. Jayakumar , Deputy Prime Minister ; Co-ordinating Minister for National Security and Minister for Law ; Professor of Law at the National University of Singapore ( Counsel and Advocate ) .

For Malaysia : Abdul Kadir Mohamad , Ambassador-at-Large , Ministry of Foreign Affairs , Malaysia ; Adviser for Foreign Affairs to the Prime Minister ( Malaysia 's Agent ) ; Elihu Lauterpacht , C.B.E. , Q.C. , Honorary Professor of International Law , University of Cambridge ; member of the Institut de Droit International ; member of the Permanent Court of Arbitration ( Counsel ) ; James Crawford , S.C. , F.B.A. , Whewell Professor of International Law , University of Cambridge ; member of the Institut de Droit International ( Counsel ) ; Nicolaas Jan Schrijver , Professor of Public International Law , Leiden University ; associate member of the Institut de Droit International ( Counsel ) ; Marcelo G. Kohen , Professor of International Law , Graduate Institute of International Studies , Geneva ; associate member of the Institut de Droit International ( Counsel ) ; and The case was presided over by ICJ Vice-President Judge Awn Shawkat Al-Khasawneh , alongside 13 other judges and two ad hoc judges appointed by the two countries . The judges were Raymond Ranjeva from Madagascar , Shi Jiuyong from the People 's Republic of China , Abdul G. Koroma from Sierra Leone , Gonzalo Parra Aranguren from Venezuela , Thomas Buergenthal from the United States , Hisashi Owada from Japan , Bruno Simma from Germany , Peter Tomka from Slovakia , Ronny Abraham from France , Kenneth Keith from New Zealand , Bernardo Sepúlveda Amor from Mexico , Mohamed Bennouna from Morocco and Leonid Skotnikov from Russia . As the Bench of the Court did not include any judges of the nationality of either party , the parties exercised their right to choose judges ad hoc to sit in the case . Singapore appointed Pemmaraju Sreenivasa Rao from India , and Malaysia Christopher John Robert Dugard from South Africa .

Singapore argued that in 1847 Pedra Branca was terra nullius ( Latin for " land belonging to no one " ) as it had never been the subject of a prior claim or manifestation of sovereignty by any sovereign entity . It denied Malaysia 's claim that the island had been under Johor 's sovereignty . It contended there was no evidence that the Johor Sultanate had claimed or exercised authority over Pedra Branca between 1512 and 1641 . This period began with the fall of the Malacca Sultanate to the Portuguese in 1512 , who continued to harass the Johor Sultanate during this time , as did the Aceh Sultanate . Similarly , there was no evidence of Johor 's sovereignty over Pedra Branca between 1641 and 1699 , when Johor 's power and influence were at their height ; between 1699 and 1784 when the death of Sultan Mahmud Shah II in 1699 without a clear heir led to instability , during which many vassals broke away from the Sultanate ; and between 1784 and 1824 when , according to a 1949 annual report of the Johor government , the Sultanate was in a " state of dissolution " by the beginning of the 19th century .

To support its assertion that the Sultan of Johor did not have sovereignty over Pedra Branca , Singapore contended that the traditional Malay concept of sovereignty was based mainly on control over people and not over territory . Thus , the only reliable way to determine whether a particular territory belonged to a ruler was to find out whether the inhabitants pledged allegiance to that ruler . This was difficult to do with respect to Pedra Branca since it was isolated and uninhabited , and Malaysia had not provided clear evidence of a direct claim to or actual exercise of sovereign authority over the island . In addition , Singapore claimed that the old Johor Sultanate , which controlled a maritime Malay empire from a capital on the Johor River , was not the same as the new Johor Sultanate occupying only the southern tip of the Malay Peninsula that came into existence after the signing of the Anglo – Dutch Treaty of 1824 between the United Kingdom and the Netherlands . In its view , the Anglo – Dutch Treaty did not divide up the Singapore Strait , in which Pedra Branca is situated , between the new Johor Sultanate under the British sphere of influence and the Riau-Lingga Sultanate under Dutch influence . Instead , both Britain and the Netherlands could access the Strait freely . Therefore , there was a legal vacuum with regard to sovereignty over the island , enabling the British to lawfully take possession of it between 1847 and 1851 .

Following the death of Sultan Mahmud Shah III of Johor in 1812 , his two sons Hussein and Abdul Rahman vied for the throne of the Johor Sultanate . The United Kingdom recognised the elder son Hussein , who was based in Singapore , as the rightful heir , while the Netherlands recognised the younger son Abdul Rahman who was based in Riau ( now Bintan , Indonesia ) . A year after the Anglo – Dutch Treaty , Abdul Rahman sent a letter dated 25 June 1825 to Hussein . In it he stated that , " in complete agreement with the spirit and the content of the treaty concluded between their Majesties , the Kings of the Netherlands and Great Britain " , he donated to his older brother " [ t ] he part of the lands assigned to [ Great Britain ] " : Your territory , thus , extends over Johor and Pahang on the mainland or on the Malay Peninsula . The territory of Your Brother [ Abdul Rahman ] extends out over the islands of Lingga , Bintan , Galang , Bulan , Karimon and all other islands . Whatsoever may be in the sea , this is the territory of Your Brother , and whatever is situated on the mainland is yours .

In the event that the Court rejected the argument that Pedra Branca was terra nullius in 1847 , Singapore contended that the selection of Pedra Branca as the site for Horsburgh Lighthouse and the construction of the lighthouse between 1847 and 1851 constituted a taking of possession of the island à titre de souverain ( with the title of a sovereign ) . The British Crown obtained title over the island in accordance with legal principles governing the acquisition of territory at that time . This title was maintained by the United Kingdom and its lawful successor , the Republic of Singapore . Singapore claimed that it and its predecessor the United Kingdom had demonstrated a consistent exercise of authority over the island through various acts since 1847 . For instance , during the ceremony for the laying of the foundation stone of the lighthouse on 24 May 1850 , Pedra Branca was described as a " dependency of Singapore " in the presence of the Governor of the Straits Settlements – the most senior British official in Singapore – and other British and foreign officials . The attribution of sovereignty was widely reported in local newspapers , but drew no response from the Johor authorities . Other significant acts included the following :

It had exercised exclusive control over the use of the island and visits to the island , including requiring Malaysian officials wishing to visit the island for scientific surveys to obtain permits . It had displayed British and Singapore ensigns from Horsburgh Lighthouse . Furthermore , it had acceded to a request by Malaysia in 1968 to remove the Singapore flag from another island , Pulau Pisang , which is under Malaysian sovereignty . Malaysia had made no such request in respect of Pedra Branca . On 30 May 1977 , the Port of Singapore Authority ( PSA ) allowed the Republic of Singapore Navy to install a military rebroadcast station on the island . On the direction of the Government of Singapore , in 1972 , 1973 , 1974 and 1978 the PSA studied the feasibility of reclaiming 5,000 square metres ( 54,000 sq ft ) of land around the island . Tenders for the project were sought through newspaper advertisements , though eventually the project was not proceeded with . In addition , Singapore had on two occasions claimed the sea around Pedra Branca as its territorial waters . The first occasion was in July 1952 when the Chief Surveyor expressed the opinion that Singapore should claim a 3-mile ( 4.8 km ) limit around the island . Subsequently in 1967 , the Singapore Government 's Marine Department also stated in an official memorandum to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs ( Singapore ) that the waters within three miles of Pedra Branca might be considered Singapore territorial waters .

It was also Singapore 's case that for over 130 years since 1847 , Malaysia had been silent over Singapore 's activities and exercise of sovereignty over Pedra Branca . No other state had challenged Singapore 's claims , and she had done so without having to seek approval from any other state . During the hearing , Ambassador-at-Large Tommy Koh highlighted this by saying : A key feature of this case is the constant stream of Singapore 's acts of administration in relation to Pedra Branca , contrasted with the complete absence of Malaysian activities on Pedra Branca or within its territorial waters , and with Malaysia 's silence in the face of all these state activities of Singapore ... Such silence on Malaysia 's part is significant and must be taken to mean that Malaysia never regarded Pedra Branca as her territory . On 12 June 1953 , when Singapore was a Crown Colony , its Colonial Secretary J. D. Higham wrote to the British Adviser to the Sultan of Johor to clarify the status of Pedra Branca . He noted that the rock was outside the limits ceded by Sultan Hussein Shah and the Temenggung with the island of Singapore under the 1824 Crawfurd Treaty they had entered into with the East India Company . However , the Colonial Government had been maintaining the lighthouse built on it , and " [ t ] his by international usage no doubt confers some rights and obligations on the Colony " . He therefore asked if " there is any document showing a lease or grant of the rock or whether it has been ceded by the Government of the State of Johore or in any other way disposed of " . The Acting State Secretary of Johor , M. Seth bin Saaid , replied on 21 September that " the Johore Government does not claim ownership of Pedra Branca " . Singapore contended that this reply confirmed Singapore 's sovereignty over the island and that Johor had no title , historic or otherwise , to it .

The Colony of Singapore became a self-governing state in 1959 , and left the British Empire to join the Federation of Malaysia in 1963 . Two years later , in 1965 , Singapore became a fully independent republic . In 1959 , in an official publication regarding meteorological information collected on Pedra Branca , Malaya listed Horsburgh Lighthouse as a " Singapore " station together with the Sultan Shoal and Raffles Lighthouses . The lighthouse on Pedra Branca was described in the same way in a joint Malaysian and Singaporean publication in 1966 , the year after Singapore left the Federation . In 1967 , when the two countries began reporting meteorological information separately , Malaysia ceased referring to Horsburgh Lighthouse . In maps published by the Malayan and Malaysian Surveyor General and Director of General Mapping in 1962 , 1965 , 1970 , 1974 and 1975 , the island was indicated with the word " ( SINGAPORE ) " or " ( SINGAPURA ) " under it . The same designation was used for an island that was unquestionably under Singapore 's sovereignty . On the other hand , the designation was not used for Pulau Pisang , an island under Malaysian sovereignty on which Singapore operated a lighthouse .

At a news conference in May 1980 attended by Malaysia 's former Prime Minister Tun Hussein Onn and Singapore 's then Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew , the Malaysian leader admitted that the question of sovereignty over Pedra Branca was " not very clear " to Malaysia . On 19 November 2007 , Singapore Deputy Prime Minister S. Jayakumar refuted Malaysia 's claim that Singapore was attempting to subvert the status quo by claiming sovereignty of Pedra Branca . He said Singapore was " an honest , law-abiding state that has never and will never do anything to endanger navigational safety , security arrangements or the Singapore Strait 's environment " . Rather , it was Malaysia that had sought to alter the status quo by publishing a map in 1979 that altered maritime boundaries with seven neighbouring countries . This was evidenced by a telegram that the Malaysian Government had sent to its overseas missions in December 1979 , notifying them that the map would " affect " Brunei , China , Indonesia , the Philippines , Thailand , Singapore and Vietnam .

Singapore took the position that Pedra Branca , Middle Rocks and South Ledge should be considered a single group of maritime features as Middle Rocks and South Ledge were dependencies of Pedra Branca . It relied , among others , on the Island of Palmas Case ( 1932 ) : " As regards a group of islands , it is possible that a group may under certain circumstances be regarded as in law a unit , and that the fate of the principal part may involve the rest . " It argued that the three maritime features were geomorphologically the same , as rock samples showed that they were all composed of a light , coarse-grained biotite granite . Additionally , Malaysia had not shown any exercise of sovereignty over the uninhabited reefs of Middle Rocks and South Ledge while Singapore had consistently exercised sovereign authority in the surrounding waters . Since sovereignty over Pedra Branca belonged to Singapore , so did sovereignty over Middle Rocks and South Ledge as they were within Pedra Branca 's territorial waters .

Malaysia 's case was that it had original title to Pedra Branca " from time immemorial " . The island could not at any relevant time have been terra nullius as it is and had always been part of Johor , which is now a state of Malaysia . Nothing that the United Kingdom or Singapore had done had displaced its sovereignty over it . Contrary to what Singapore had claimed , there had been no break between the old Sultanate of Johor and the new Johor Sultanate ruled by Sultan Hussein that came into existence after the signing of the 1824 Anglo – Dutch Treaty . The Treaty had the effect of leaving the islands south of the Singapore Strait within the Dutch sphere of influence ( the Riau – Lingga Sultanate ) , while the territory and islands in the Strait and to its north were within the British sphere of influence ( the new Johor Sultanate ) . A few months after the conclusion of the Anglo – Dutch Treaty , the Sultan and the Temenggung of Johor entered into the Crawfurd Treaty with the East India Company on 2 August 1824 . Article II of the Crawfurd Treaty stated :

Their Highnesses the Sultan Hussein Mahomed Shah and Datu Tumungong Abdul Rahman Sri Maharajah hereby cede in full sovereignty and property to the Honourable the English East India Company , their heirs and successors for ever , the Island of Singapore situated in the Straits of Malacca , together with the adjacent seas , straits , and islets , to the extent of ten geographical miles , from the coast of the said main island of Singapore . Since Johor could not have ceded Singapore island and the islets in its vicinity to the British if it lacked title to them , this was evidence that the United Kingdom recognised the prior and continuing sovereignty of the Johor Sultanate over all islands in and around the Singapore Strait . Malaysia challenged Singapore 's contention that Pedra Branca never became part of the new Johor Sultanate because 25 June 1825 letter from Sultan Abdul Rahman of Riau – Lingga to Sultan Hussain showed that Abdul Rahman had only donated territories on the mainland of the Malay Peninsula to Hussein and had retained sovereignty over all the islands in the sea . Malaysia submitted Abdul Rahman 's statement that his territory " extends out over the islands of Lingga , Bintan , Galang , Bulan , Karimon and all other islands " had to be read in the context of Article XII of the 1824 Anglo – Dutch Treaty , which guaranteed that no " British Establishment " would be made " on the Carimon Isles , or on the Island of Bantam , Bintang , Lingin , or on any of the other Islands South of the Straits of Singapore " . Three of the islands mentioned by Abdul Rahman – Bintan , Karimun and Lingga – were islands that the British had agreed were not within their sphere of influence , while the other two – Bulan and Galang – lay south of the Singapore Strait . Therefore , the phrase " all other islands " in Abdul Rahman 's letter referred only to islands lying within the Dutch sphere of influence . The letter was simply formal recognition that Abdul Rahman did not claim sovereignty over Johor .

The Johor Sultanate 's title to the island was also confirmed by ties of loyalty that existed between the Sultanate and the Orang Laut , a nomadic sea people who in the past had inhabited the maritime areas of the Singapore Strait , carrying out fishing and piracy , and had visited Pedra Branca quite frequently . This was evidenced by three 19th-century letters written by British officials , including one dated November 1850 by John Turnbull Thomson , the Government Surveyor of Singapore , which had reported on the need to exclude the Orang Laut from Pedra Branca where Horsburgh Lighthouse was being built . Thomson noted that they " frequently visit the rock so their visits should never be encouraged nor any trust put in them ... In the straits and islets of the neighbouring shores and islands many lives are taken by these people . " Malaysia rejected Singapore 's argument that the traditional Malay concept of sovereignty was based mainly on control over people and not over territory . It stated that authority in states throughout the world is based on a combination of control over people and territory , and that this applies to the Malay States as it does to any other state . Since the Johor Sultanate was established in the 16th century , it always had rulers who were recognised as such and who thus commanded people 's allegiance and therefore controlled the territory where those people lived .

Malaysia averred that the actions of the United Kingdom and its successor Singapore in constructing and maintaining Horsburgh Lighthouse on Pedra Branca were actions of the operator of the lighthouse and not the sovereign of the island . Johor had at no time ceded the island to the United Kingdom , but instead had merely granted permission for the lighthouse to be built and maintained on it . Captain James Horsburgh , a Scottish hydrographer to the British East India Company who had prepared many charts and sailing instructions for the East Indies , China , New Holland , the Cape of Good Hope and other intermediate ports , died in May 1836 . Merchants and mariners felt that the building of one or more lighthouses would be a fitting tribute to him , and in as early as November 1836 Pedra Branca was proposed as one of the preferred sites . By 1844 , preference had been expressed for Romania Outer Island , or Peak Rock . Some time in November 1844 , the Governor of the Straits Settlements , William John Butterworth , wrote to the Sultan and the Temenggung of Johor regarding the matter . His letters have not been found , but English translations of the replies , dated 25 November 1844 , exist . The Sultan said :

I have received my friend 's letter , and in reply desire to acquaint my friend , that I perfectly understand his wishes , and I am exceedingly pleased at the intention expressed therein , as it ( a Light House ) will enable Traders and others to enter and leave this Port with greater Confidence . I have duly received my friend 's communication , and understand the contents . My friend is desirous of erecting a Light House near Point Romania . I can have no possible objection to such a measure , indeed I am much pleased that such an undertaking is in contemplation . I wish to be guided in all matters by the Government , so much so , that the [ East India ] company are at full liberty to put up a Light House there , or any spot deemed eligible . Myself and family for many years have derived support from Singapore , our dependence is wholly on the English Government , and we hope to merit the protection of , and be favoured by the Company on all occasions consistent with propriety . Three days later , on 28 November 1844 , the Governor wrote to the Secretary of the Government in India to recommend that the lighthouse be sited on Peak Rock . Among other things , he said that " [ t ] his Rock is part of the Territories of the Rajah of Johore , who with the Tamongong ... have willingly consented to cede it gratuitously to the East India Company " , and enclosed the replies received from the Sultan and Temenggung . Nonetheless , Malaysia argued that the Sultan and Temenggung 's letters amounted to no more than permission to the United Kingdom to build and operate a lighthouse on Peak Rock or some other suitable location .

On 13 November , Malaysia 's Agent , Ambassador-at-Large Abdul Kadir Mohamad , alleged that Singapore was trying to " subvert " a 150-year-old arrangement under which Singapore operated Horsburgh Lighthouse on Pedra Branca , which was Malaysia 's territory . He also suggested that if permitted to do so , Singapore would upset the peace and stability of the area where the island is located . He said that if Singapore reclaimed land around Pedra Branca , " [ q ] uite apart from the possible effects on the environment and navigation in the Strait , this could lead to potentially serious changes to the security arrangements in the eastern entrance of the Strait " . According to Malaysian Attorney-General Abdul Gani Patail , Singapore had first raised the issue of sovereignty over Pedra Branca on 13 April 1978 during a meeting between officials , saying it had " incontrovertible legal evidence " of its sovereignty over the island though it had never produced any documents in support . Prior to that , the sovereignty of the island had never been disputed . The 1980 statement by the then Malaysian Prime Minister Tun Hussein Onn concerning the " unclear " position of the island had also been premised on these documents which former Singapore Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew had claimed were in Singapore 's possession . The statement was therefore merely a friendly and respectful statement of a visiting prime minister at a press conference which had no probative value in court . All Hussein Onn had meant was that the matter required further discussion between the two countries .

Concerning the letter of 21 September 1953 in which the Acting State Secretary of Johor informed the Colonial Secretary of Singapore that " the Johore Government does not claim ownership of Pedra Branca " , Malaysia submitted that the Colonial Secretary 's enquiry of 12 June 1953 about the status of Pedra Branca showed that the Singapore authorities had no conviction that the island was part of its territory . Further , the Acting State Secretary " was definitely not authorized " and did not have " the legal capacity to write the 1953 letter , or to renounce , disclaim , or confirm title of any part of the territories of Johor " . Under two treaties of 21 January 1948 , the Johor Agreement between the British Crown and the Sultan of Johor and the Federation of Malaya Agreement between the British Crown and nine Malay States including Johor , Johor transferred all its rights , power and jurisdiction on matters relating to defence and external affairs to the United Kingdom . These powers were exercisable by the Federal High Commissioner appointed by the United Kingdom and not by the Johor State Secretary . The Acting State Secretary had improperly taken it upon himself to reply to the Colonial Secretary 's letter and had not submitted a copy of it to the Chief Secretary of Johor . There was no evidence that the Chief Secretary or the High Commissioner was aware of its contents .

Regarding Singapore 's contentions that it had exercised sovereign authority over Pedra Branca in various ways , Malaysia responded as indicated below : Investigation of shipwrecks in vicinity of Pedra Branca . Singapore had duties to investigate hazards to navigational safety and to publish information about such hazards in its capacity as a lighthouse operator , and under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and the Convention on the Safety of Life at Sea . Therefore , by investigating and reporting on shipwrecks and maritime hazards within Pedra Branca 's territorial waters Singapore had acted in accordance with best practice and not à titre de souverain . The circumstances of the particular investigations also meant that Singapore 's ability to carry them out was not based on its sovereignty over the island . Display of British and Singapore ensigns on island . Ensigns , associated with maritime matters , are marks of nationality and not sovereignty . Singapore had also not demonstrated any sovereign intent in the flying of the British and Singapore ensigns from Horsburgh Lighthouse . The Pulau Pisang incident was not an acknowledgement by Malaysia of Singapore 's sovereignty over Pedra Branca ; it had been a matter of domestic political sensibility – Pulau Pisang is much larger than Pedra Branca and has a small local population .

In response to Singapore 's contention in respect of meteorological reports published by Malaysia that had indicated Pedra Branca as a Singapore station , Malaysia said the fact that it recognised Horsburgh Lighthouse as a Singapore rainfall station did not amount an acknowledgement of sovereignty . The six maps that it had published between 1962 and 1975 which had printed the word " ( SINGAPORE ) " or " ( SINGAPURA ) " beneath the island were inconclusive . This was because the annotating could be assessed differently , the maps contained disclaimers stating they could not be considered an authority on the delimitation of international or other boundaries , and maps do not create title and cannot amount to admissions unless incorporated into treaties or used in inter-state negotiations .

Malaysia contended that Pedra Branca , Middle Rocks and South Ledge were not a single identifiable entity . The historical record showed that the three maritime features were never formally described as a single island with appurtenant islands , or as a group of islands . Middle Rocks and South Ledge were therefore under Johor sovereignty at the time of the 1824 Anglo – Dutch Treaty and fell within the British sphere of influence under the Treaty . Malaysia had exercised consistent acts of sovereignty over them within the limits of their character . For instance , in 1968 the Malaysian Government used and granted petroleum concessions which extended to the area of Middle Rocks and South Ledge . Also , an internal confidential document dated 16 July 1968 entitled " Letter of Promulgation " by the Chief of the Royal Malaysian Navy included charts showing that Pedra Branca , Middle Rocks and South Ledge were within Malaysia 's territorial waters , and the features were included within Malaysian fisheries waters in the Fisheries Act 1985 . Singapore had neither protested against these manifestations of sovereignty , nor advanced any claims over Middle Rocks and South Ledge in 1980 when it began claiming that Pedra Branca belonged to it .

In the course of the hearing , to demonstrate Pedra Branca 's proximity to the Johor mainland , Malaysia produced a photograph taken of Pedra Branca with Point Romania and a hill named Mount Berbukit , both in Johor , in the background . However , on 19 November 2007 Singapore produced another photograph taken using a camera that approximated what the human eye sees , and pointed out that in it Mount Berbukit appeared much smaller . It alleged that Malaysia 's photograph had been taken using a telephoto lens , which had exaggerated the height of Mount Berbukit by about seven times . Singapore 's then Attorney-General Chao Hick Tin said that the photograph had been " an attempt to convey a subliminal message of proximity between Pedra Branca and the coast of Johor " , but it was not an accurate reflection of what visitors to Pedra Branca would see if they were looking towards Johor . Malaysia claimed its photograph was obtained from an online blog , Singapore called the blog " most unusual " , noting that it had been created only a month earlier ; that the photograph had only been uploaded on 2 November , four days before the oral proceedings in the case had commenced ; and that there was no information on the blogger 's identity .

A key thrust of Malaysia 's case was that the British had received explicit permission from Johor to build a lighthouse on Pedra Branca , which proved that the British had recognised Johor 's sovereignty over the island . It submitted that this was evidenced by the November 1844 letters that Governor Butterworth had written to the Sultan and Temenggung of Johor regarding the construction of the lighthouse . Malaysia said it had written to Singapore asking for copies of the letters , because if the letters still existed they were probably in Singapore 's archives in a file entitled " Letters to Native Rulers " . However , Singapore had never replied . Singapore 's response was that it did not have copies of the letters . Its archives were incomplete , and searches for them in other archives had been in vain . Furthermore , the letters were more likely to be in Malaysia 's possession as the Governor had sent them to the Johor rulers . In his rebuttal of Malaysia 's case on 19 November 2007 , Singapore 's Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Law S. Jayakumar expressed disappointment with Malaysia 's insinuation that Singapore had concealed the letters from the Court , which he termed " most disturbing " , " baseless " and " distracting " .

The Court agreed with Malaysia that the Johor Sultanate had original title to Pedra Branca , rejecting Singapore 's argument that the island was terra nullius . It found it was not disputed that Johor had established itself as a sovereign state with a certain territorial domain in Southeast Asia since it came into existence in 1512 . As Pedra Branca had always been known as a navigational hazard in the Singapore Strait , which was a vital channel for international navigation in east-west trade between the Indian Ocean and the South China Sea , it was inconceivable that the island had remained undiscovered by the local community . It was therefore reasonable to infer that Pedra Branca lay within the general geographical scope of the Johor Sultanate . Further , during the existence of the old Johor Sultanate , there was no evidence of any competing claims over the islands in the Singapore Strait . It also agreed with Malaysia 's submission that descriptions of the relationship between the Sultan of Johor and the Orang Laut in 19th-century official British reports proved that the Sultan exercised sovereign authority over the Orang Laut . Since the Orang Laut made the islands in the Singapore Strait their habitat , this confirmed the " ancient original title " of the Johor Sultanate to those islands , including Pedra Branca . As regards Singapore 's argument that the traditional concept of Malay sovereignty was based on control over people rather than territory , the Court observed that sovereignty comprises control over both persons and territory . However , it was not necessary to deal with the point further as it had already found that Johor had territorial sovereignty over Pedra Branca .

The purpose of the 1824 Anglo – Dutch Treaty was to finally settle the disputes that had arisen between the United Kingdom and the Netherlands relating to their territorial possessions and commercial interests in the East Indies . It was thus most unlikely that the parties had left the maritime features in the Singapore Straits outside their spheres of influence , as Singapore had contended . Under Article XII of the Treaty , Britain had agreed that " no British Establishment shall be made on the Carimon Isles , or on the Island of Bantam , Bintang , Lingin , or on any of the other Islands South of the Straits of Singapore ... " The islands and islets within the Straits therefore fell within the British sphere of influence . This included Pedra Branca , which remained part of the territorial domain of the new Johor Sultanate . That this was the British understanding of the Treaty was confirmed by a letter dated 4 March 1825 from the Government of India to John Crawfurd , the British Resident in Singapore , which read : " [ O ] ur acquisition of these Islets [ under the Crawfurd Treaty ] is not at variance with the obligations of the Treaty concluded at London in March last [ the 1824 Anglo – Dutch Treaty ] as they are all situated North of the Southern limits of the Straights of Singapore ... " [ Emphasis added . ] Therefore , Britain 's position was that every island north of the southern limits of the Singapore Strait fell within its sphere of influence . The Court 's reading of the Anglo – Dutch Treaty was reinforced by letter of 25 June 1825 from Sultan Abdul Rahman to his brother Sultan Hussain , which did not have the effect Singapore attributed to it .

The ICJ noted that under certain circumstances , sovereignty over territory may pass due to the failure of the state which has sovereignty to respond to the other state 's conduct à titre de souverain , that is , concrete manifestations of the display of territorial sovereignty by the other state . Because there was no written agreement relating to Horsburgh Lighthouse and Pedra Branca , the Court was unable to determine whether the November 1844 replies by the Sultan and Temenggung of Johor to Governor Butterworth 's query amounted to a cession of the place that would be chosen for the site of the lighthouse or was merely a permission to build , maintain and operate a lighthouse there . Although the Governor had indicated in his 28 November 1844 letter to the Secretary of the Government in India to recommend that the replies amounted to a gratuitous cession to the East India Company , this understanding was not communicated to the Sultan and Temenggung . Similarly , the fact that Britain had not informed Johor about its decision to site the lighthouse on Pedra Branca might be seen either as recognition that Britain only had consent to build and operate it , or that Johor no longer had rights over the island . On the evidence adduced , the Court was unable to reach a conclusion on the issue . It also did not draw any conclusions about the construction and commissioning of the lighthouse , stating only that it saw the events as " bearing on the issue of the evolving views of the authorities in Johor and Singapore about sovereignty over Pedra Branca / Pulau Batu Puteh " . It noted , though , that apart from a two-day visit by the Temenggung and his followers to the island in early June 1850 , Johor had no involvement in the project .

The Court declined to accept Malaysia 's argument that the Singapore Colonial Secretary 's query about the status of Pedra Branca in 1953 indicated that the United Kingdom had no conviction that the island was part of its territory . It felt the letter of inquiry showed the Singapore authorities were not clear about events that had occurred over a century earlier and that they were unsure their records were complete , which was understandable in the circumstances . It also disagreed that the Acting State Secretary of Johor , who had stated in his letter of reply that Johor did not claim ownership of the island , had acted without authority . The Johor Agreement was irrelevant – as the Colonial Secretary was a representative of the United Kingdom government which was not a foreign state in relation to Johor at the time , there was no question of the United Kingdom having to consent to Johor issuing the reply . The Federation of Malaya Agreement also did not assist Malaysia because the action of responding to a request for information was not an " exercise " of " executive authority " . Further , since Malaysia had not invoked this argument in its negotiations with Singapore and in the ICJ proceedings until late in the oral phase , Singapore was entitled to presume that the Acting State Secretary had acted within his authority . The meaning of the reply was clear – as of 1953 , Johor understood it did not have sovereignty over Pedra Branca , and thus the Singapore authorities had no reason to doubt that the island belonged to the United Kingdom .

The Court regarded as conduct à titre de souverain Singapore 's investigation of six shipwrecks in the vicinity of Pedra Branca between 1920 and 1993 , its exclusive control over visits to the island , the installation of the military rebroadcast station on the island in 1977 , and the proposed reclamation of land around it . Malaysia was correct in asserting that the flying of an ensign was not normally a manifestation of sovereignty , and that the difference in size between Pulau Pisang and Pedra Branca had to be recognised . Nonetheless , some weight could be given to the fact that Malaysia had not requested for the Singapore ensign flying at Horsburgh Lighthouse to be taken down . The fact that Malaysia had referred to the lighthouse as a Singapore station in the 1959 and 1966 meteorological reports and had omitted it from the 1967 Malaysian report favoured Singapore 's case . The maps published by Malaysia between 1962 and 1975 tended to confirm that it considered Pedra Branca to fall under Singapore sovereignty . The " ( SINGAPORE ) " or " ( SINGAPURA ) " annotations on the maps in respect of the island were clear and supported Singapore 's case . The maps gave a good indication of Malaysia 's official position on the matter , and could amount to an admission . Finally , Malaysia could not rely on the disclaimers on the maps as the present matter did not concern a boundary but a distinct island . In any case , the maps were statements of geographical fact , particularly since Malaysia had itself produced and disseminated it against its own interest .

None of the conduct by the United Kingdom and Singapore that led to the ICJ to conclude that Singapore had gained sovereignty over Pedra Branca applied to Middle Rocks . Since Johor held the ancient original title to Middle Rocks , the Court held that this title remains with Malaysia as the successor to the Johor Sultanate . South Ledge falls within the apparently overlapping territorial waters generated by the mainland of Malaysia , Pedra Branca and Middle Rocks . Although in the Special Agreement and in their final submissions Malaysia and Singapore had asked the Court to decide which state had sovereignty over Pedra Branca , Middle Rocks and South Ledge , the Court had not been mandated to delimit the extent of the territorial waters of the two states in the area in question . Therefore , it simply held that South Ledge , as a low-tide elevation , belongs to the state in the territorial waters of which it is located .

On 23 May 2008 , Malaysian Foreign Minister Rais Yatim described the ICJ decision as creating a " win-win " situation and that both countries would " forge ahead " in their bilateral relationship . Deputy Prime Minister Najib Tun Razak called the judgment a " balanced decision " as Malaysia had been " partly successful " in its territorial claims . Interviewed by journalists at The Hague , Singapore Deputy Prime Minister S. Jayakumar said : " We are pleased with the judgment because the court has awarded sovereignty over Pedra Branca , which is the main feature in dispute , to Singapore . " Prime Minister of Singapore Lee Hsien Loong said he was pleased with the result , and commented that bringing the dispute to the ICJ was " a good way for [ Malaysia and Singapore ] to resolve disagreements or problems while maintaining good relations with each other " .

On the day the ICJ released its judgment , Rais Yatim asserted that since South Ledge was within the territorial waters of Middle Rocks , " Malaysia appears to be the sovereign holder " . A week later , the Foreign Ministry of Malaysia asked the Malaysian media to cease using the Malay word Pulau ( " Island " ) for Pedra Branca and to refer to it as " Batu Puteh " or " Pedra Branca " . The ICJ 's decision is final and not subject to appeal . Nevertheless , in June 2008 Rais Yatim stated that Malaysia had renewed its search for the letter written by Governor Butterworth to the Sultan and Temenggung of Johor seeking permission to build Horsburgh Lighthouse on Pedra Branca . He noted that the rules of the ICJ allowed a case to be reviewed within ten years if new evidence was adduced . In response , Singapore 's Law Minister K. Shanmugam said that the city-state would wait to see what new evidence the Malaysian government could come up with . Several Malaysian Members of Parliament have urged the Federal Government to assert sovereignty over Pulau Pisang which also has a lighthouse on it that is operated by Singapore , or to take over administration of the lighthouse . Concerns were also expressed for Pulau Merambong near the western boundary of Malaysia and Singapore . The Menteri Besar of Johor , Abdul Ghani Othman , assured the public that Pulau Pisang belongs to Johor under a 1900 agreement between Sultan Ibrahim of Johor and British administrators in colonial Singapore . Nonetheless , Malaysian agencies have taken up efforts to stake claims over a hundred islands , reefs , rocks and other features in the South China Sea , Malacca Straits , and off Sabahan waters that Malaysia could lose to China , Indonesia and Vietnam . Two of these islands are Pulau Unarang off eastern Sabah near the Indonesian border , and Pulau Perak to the west of Penang .

At the opening of Johor 's 12th State Assembly in June 2008 , Sultan Iskandar of Johor pledged to reclaim the island " whatever it takes " . Speaking impromptu at the end of a prepared speech , the Sultan said in Malay : " Let us be reminded that I do not forget Pulau Batu Puteh . Pulau Batu Puteh is not Singapore 's , but it belongs to Johor . It does not matter how long it may take , I will find the way to get back the island , which belongs to Johor . " The Menteri Besar of Johor said the state government had " clearly heard " what the Sultan said , but did not elaborate . On 3 September 2008 , Tengku Razaleigh Hamzah , a Kelantan prince and MP from the state , sent a letter to Rais Yatim claiming that Johor 's interests had not been raised before the ICJ . He alleged that the seas surrounding Pedra Branca had always been in Johor 's hands and had never been surrendered to the British or to Singapore , and by accepting the ICJ decision and participating in technical discussions with Singapore the Malaysian government had infringed Johor 's constitutional rights . Responding , Rais said the letter seemed designed for " political mileage " and that Johor had been fully involved in the proceedings . He told the Straits Times , " Everybody has his opinion on such matters but I , as Foreign Minister , have to abide by the dictate of the law . I have to see the letter first but it 's rather late in the day to express disappointment . "

On 21 July 2008 , in response to questions from Singapore Members of Parliament about Pedra Branca , the Senior Minister of State for Foreign Affairs Balaji Sadasivan stated that the maritime territory around the island included a territorial sea of up to 12 nautical miles ( 22 km ; 14 mi ) and an Exclusive Economic Zone . This was condemned by Malaysia 's Foreign Minister Rais Yatim as " against the spirit of Asean and the legal structure " as the claim was " unacceptable and unreasonable and contradicts the principles of international law " . In response , a Singapore Ministry of Foreign Affairs spokesman said that Singapore first stated its claim to a territorial sea and Exclusive Economic Zone on 15 September 1980 , and reiterated this claim on 23 May 2008 following the ICJ 's judgment . Both statements had made clear that if the limits of Singapore 's territorial sea or Exclusive Economic Zone overlapped with the claims of neighbouring countries , Singapore would negotiate with those countries to arrive at agreed delimitations in accordance with international law . In August 2008 , Rais said Malaysia took the view that Singapore was not entitled to claim an Exclusive Economic Zone around Pedra Branca as it considered that the maritime feature did not meet internationally recognised criteria for an island , that is , land inhabited by humans that had economic activity .

Malaysia and Singapore have established what they have named the Joint Technical Committee to delimit the maritime boundary in the area around Pedra Branca and Middle Rocks , and to determine the ownership of South Ledge . Following a meeting on 3 June 2008 , the Committee agreed that a technical sub-committee would be established to oversee the conduct of joint survey works to prepare the way for talks on maritime issues in and around the area . If any incident occurred in and around the waters of Pedra Branca , Middle Rocks and South Ledge , either side would provide humanitarian assistance to the vessels involved . Finally , both Malaysian and Singaporean fishermen could continue traditional fishing activities in those waters . In September 2008 , the Joint Technical Committee reported that its Sub-Committee on Joint Survey Works was finalising technical preparations for a hydrographic survey that would provide data for future delimitation discussions . A Sub-Committee on Maritime and Airspace Management and Fisheries had also been formed , and after a meeting on 20 August 2008 it decided that traditional fishing activities by both countries should continue in waters beyond 0.5 nautical miles ( 0.9 km ; 0.6 mi ) off Pedra Branca , Middle Rocks and South Ledge .

Abdul Ghafur Hamid ( Khin Maung Sein ) ( 2011 ) , " Case Concerning Sovereignty over Pulau Batu Puteh : A Critical Analysis of its Legal Implications " , Malayan Law Journal 3 : 30 – 61 . Abdul Ghafur Hamid ( Khin Maung Sein ) ( 2011 ) , " Pedra Branca Judgment and Beyond : Issues and Challenges in its Implementation by Malaysia and Singapore " , International Journal of Marine and Coastal Law 26 ( 2 ) : 335 – 342 . Beckman , Robert ; Schofield , Clive ( 2009 ) , " Moving beyond Disputes over Island Sovereignty : ICJ Decision Sets Stage for Maritime Boundary Delimitation in the Singapore Strait " , Ocean Development & International Law 40 ( 1 ) : 1 – 35 , doi : 10.1080 / 00908320802631551 . Colson , David A. ; Vohrer , Brian J. ( 2008 ) , " International Court of Justice : Sovereignty over Pedra Branca / Pulau Batu Puteh , Middle Rocks and South Ledge ( Malaysia / Singapore ) – Introductory Note " , International Legal Materials ( 5 ) : 833 – 835 . Kopela , Sophia ( 2010 ) , " Case Concerning Sovereignty over Pedra Branca / Pulau Batu Puteh , Middle Rocks and South Ledge ( Malaysia v. Singapore ) , Judgment of 23 May 2008 " , International Journal of Marine and Coastal Law 25 ( 1 ) : 93 – 113 , doi : 10.1163 / 157180810X487811 .

Lathrop , Coalter G. ( 2008 ) , " Sovereignty over Pedra Branca / Pulau Batu Puteh , Middle Rocks and South Ledge ( Malaysia / Singapore ) " , American Journal of International Law 102 ( 4 ) : 828 – 834 , doi : 10.2307 / 20456682 , JSTOR 20456682 , archived from the original ( PDF ) on 21 July 2009 . Li , Chenyang ; Shao , Jianping ( 2009 ) , 论白礁岛主权争端及其对新马关系和东盟发展的影响 [ Study on the Pedra Branca Dispute and Its Influence on Relations between Singapore and Malaysia and ASEAN 's Development ] ( PDF ) , Southeast Asian Studies ( in Chinese ) ( 1 ) : 1 – 12 . Mills , Alex ( 2008 ) , " The Formalism of State Sovereignty in Territorial and Maritime Disputes " , Cambridge Law Journal 67 ( 3 ) : 443 – 447 , doi : 10.1017 / S0008197308000639 . Mohamed Faizal ; Quek , Evangeline ( 2004 ) , " The Repercussions of the Similarities between Sipadan / Litigan and Pedra Branca Disputes " , Singapore Law Review 24 : 52 – 65 . O 'Keefe , Roger ( 2011 ) , " Legal Title versus Effectivités : Prescription and the Promise and Problems of Private Law Analogies " , International Community Law Review 13 ( 1 – 2 ) : 147 – 188 , doi : 10.1163 / 187197311X555223 .

Tan , Hsien-Li ( 2008 ) , " Case Concerning Sovereignty over Pedra Branca / Pulau Batu Puteh , Middle Rocks and South Ledge ( Malaysia / Singapore ) " , Singapore Year Book of International Law 12 : 257 – 262 , archived from the original ( PDF ) on 14 April 2010 . Tanaka , Yoshifumi ( 2008 ) , Passing of Sovereignty : The Malaysia / Singapore Territorial Dispute before the ICJ , The Hague Justice Portal , archived from the original ( PDF ) on 21 January 2012 . Wan Siti Adibah Wan Dahalan ; Adina Kamarudin ; Mahmud Zuhdi Mohd Nor ( 2009 ) , " Article 121 of the 1982 Law of the Sea Convention and the Maritime Delimitation in the Straits of Singapore " , Jurnal Undang-undang dan Masyarakat : 13 . Wang , Xiumei ( 2009 ) , 白礁岛 、 中岩礁和南礁案的国际法解读 [ An Interpretation of the Case of Pedra Branca , Middle Rocks and South Ledge from the Perspective of International Law ] ( PDF ) , Southeast Asian Studies ( in Chinese ) ( 1 ) : 19 – 25 . Wang , Zichang ( 2009 ) , 新马岛屿争端之判决 : 依据与启示 [ The Judgment of the International Court of Justice on Territorial Disputes between Singapore and Malaysia and Its Inspirations ] ( PDF ) , Southeast Asian Studies ( in Chinese ) ( 1 ) : 13 – 18 .

" KL 's claim of original title a mirage : Jaya " , The Straits Times ( reproduced on the Malaysian Bar website ) , 10 November 2007 , archived from the original on 10 January 2008 , retrieved 30 September 2008 . " All the pieces in Singapore 's case ' fit perfectly together ' " , The Straits Times ( reproduced on the Ministry of Foreign Affairs ( Singapore ) website ) , 21 November 2007 , retrieved 30 September 2008 . Andy Ho ( 28 November 2007 ) , " The evidence of words : The Pedra Branca case may really just turn on two treaties of 1824 " , The Straits Times . Jessica Cheam ( 24 May 2008 ) , " A good ruling , for both [ editorial ] " , The Straits Times ( reproduced at AsiaOne ) . Zakir Hussain ( 20 December 2008 ) , " Pedra Branca story told in a book : Jayakumar and Tommy Koh give behind-the-scenes account of 30-year saga " , The Straits Times ( reproduced on the Ministry of Foreign Affairs website ) , p . A4 .

Haller-Trost , Renate ( 1993 ) , Historical Legal Claims : A Study of Disputed Sovereignty over Pulau Batu Puteh ( Pedra Branca ) [ Maritime briefing ; vol . 1 , no . 1 ] , Durham : International Boundaries Research Unit , Department of Geography , University of Durham , pp. 1 – 36 , ISBN 978-1-897643-04-4 . Jayakumar , S. ; Koh , Tommy ( 2008 ) , Pedra Branca : The Road to the World Court , Singapore : NUS Press in association with MFA Diplomatic Academy , ISBN 978-9971-69-474-6 ( hbk . ) , ISBN 978-9971-69-457-9 ( pbk . ) .

On Friday , 24 June 1994 , a United States Air Force ( USAF ) Boeing B-52 Stratofortress crashed at Fairchild Air Force Base , Washington , United States , after the pilot , Lt Col Arthur " Bud " Holland , maneuvered the bomber beyond its operational limits and lost control . The aircraft stalled , fell to the ground and exploded , killing Holland and the other three USAF officers aboard . The crash was captured on video and was shown repeatedly on news broadcasts throughout the world . The subsequent investigation concluded that the crash was attributable primarily to three factors : Holland 's personality and behavior , USAF leaders ' delayed or inadequate reactions to earlier incidents involving Holland , and the sequence of events during the aircraft 's final flight . The crash is now used in military and civilian aviation environments as a case study in teaching crew resource management . It is also often used by the U.S. Armed Forces during aviation safety training as an example of the importance of compliance with safety regulations and correcting the behavior of anyone who violates safety procedures .

At 07 : 30 local time ( Pacific Time Zone ) on 24 June 1994 , a USAF B-52H bomber crew stationed at Fairchild Air Force Base prepared to practice an aircraft demonstration flight for an airshow . The crew consisted of pilots Lt Col Arthur " Bud " Holland ( 46 years old ) , Lt Col Mark McGeehan ( 38 ) , Col Robert Wolff ( 46 ) , and weapon systems officer / radar navigator Lt Col Ken Huston ( 41 ) . Holland was the designated command pilot for the flight , with McGeehan as the copilot and Wolff as a safety observer . Holland was the chief of the 92nd Bomb Wing 's Standardization and Evaluation branch , McGeehan was the commander of the 325th Bomb Squadron , Wolff was the vice commander of the 92nd Bomb Wing , and Huston was the 325th Bomb Squadron 's operations officer . The mission plan for the flight called for a demanding series of low-altitude passes , 60 ° banked turns , a steep climb , and a touch-and-go landing on Fairchild 's runway 23 . The flight was also Wolff 's " fini flight " – a common tradition in which a retiring USAF aircrew member is met shortly after landing on his or her final flight at the airfield by relatives , friends and coworkers , and doused with water . Thus , Wolff 's wife and many of his close friends were at the airfield to watch the flight and participate in the post-flight ceremony . McGeehan 's wife and two youngest sons watched the flight from the backyard of McGeehan 's living quarters , located nearby .

The B-52 aircraft , callsign Czar 52 , took off at 13 : 58 and completed most of the mission 's elements without incident . Upon preparing to execute the touch-and-go on Runway 23 at the end of the practice profile , the aircraft was instructed to go around because a KC-135 aircraft had just landed and was on the runway . Maintaining an altitude of about 250 feet ( 75 m ) above ground level ( AGL ) , Holland radioed the control tower and asked for permission to execute a 360 ° left turn , which was immediately granted by the tower controller . The B-52 then began the 360 ° left turn around the tower starting from about the midfield point of the runway . Located just behind the tower was an area of restricted airspace , reportedly because of a nuclear weapons storage facility . Apparently to avoid flying through the restricted airspace , Holland flew the aircraft in an extremely tight , steeply banked turn while maintaining the low , 250-foot ( 75 m ) AGL altitude . Approximately three-quarters of the way around the turn , at 14 : 16 , the aircraft banked past 90 ° , descended rapidly , clipped power lines and hit the ground , exploding and killing the four crew members . McGeehan was seated in an ejection seat , but according to the medical statement , he had only " partially ejected at the time of impact " ; it does not state whether or not he cleared the aircraft . Huston was also seated in an ejection seat and the medical statement indicated that he had not initiated the ejection sequence . Wolff 's seat was not ejection-capable . No one on the ground was injured .

The USAF immediately convened a safety investigation under the direction of the USAF 's Chief of Safety , Brigadier General Orin L. Godsey . The safety investigation board released the report of its investigation into the crash on 10 August 1994 . A final evaluation of the safety investigation was released on 31 January 1995 . The USAF safety report was distributed only to U.S. Department of Defense personnel and not to the general public . An accident investigation board , called an " AFR 110-14 Investigation , " released a separate report in 1995 . Unlike the USAF safety investigation , the AFR 110-14 report was released to the general public . The AFR 110-14 investigation identified several factors which contributed to the crash , including the actual crash sequence , the personality and earlier behavior of Bud Holland , previous supervision and lack of corrective action exercised by USAF officers over Bud Holland , mission planning and execution , and other environmental and human factors .

The investigation found that as the B-52 entered its final turn sequence around the tower , its indicated airspeed ( IAS ) was 182 knots ( 337 km / h ; 209 mph ) . Although Holland increased the engine power after starting the turn , his input came too late to maintain the aircraft 's airspeed , as the B-52 turbofan engines take up to eight seconds to respond to throttle commands . Even though the airspeed indicator was available to all four aircrew members , the aircraft 's airspeed was allowed to continue to decrease . Eight seconds before impact , the aircraft 's IAS had deteriorated to 145 knots ( 269 km / h ; 167 mph ) and the aircraft 's bank angle increased past 60 ° . At this time Holland or McGeehan applied full right spoiler , right rudder , and nose-up elevator , and the aircraft entered a turning flight stall ( also called accelerated stall ) . This phenomenon is a stall that occurs at a higher airspeed than the design stall speed – which always refers to straight and level flight – because of the fact that the aircraft is turning . Due to the bank of 60 ° or more , the stall speed for the aircraft at that moment was 147 knots ( 272 km / h ; 169 mph ) . Thus , flying 2 knots slower , the aircraft stalled , without having sufficient altitude to recover before striking the ground .

The accident board stated that Bud Holland 's personality significantly influenced the crash sequence . USAF personnel testified that Holland had developed a reputation as an aggressive pilot who often broke flight safety and other rules . The rule-breaking included flying below minimum clearance altitudes and exceeding bank angle limitations and climb rates . An earlier incident occurred in 1991 when a B-52 piloted by Holland performed a circle above a softball game in which Holland 's daughter was participating . Beginning at 2,500 feet ( 760 m ) AGL , Holland 's aircraft executed the circle at 65 ° of bank . In a maneuver described by one witness as a " death spiral , " the nose of the aircraft continued to drop and the bank angle increased to 80 ° . After losing 1,000 feet ( 300 m ) of altitude , Holland was able to regain control of the aircraft . During a 19 May 1991 air show at Fairchild , Holland was the command pilot of the B-52 aerial demonstration flight . During the demonstration , Holland 's aircraft violated several safety regulations , including exceeding bank and pitch limits , flying directly over the air show spectators , and possibly violating altitude restrictions . The base and wing commander , Colonel Arne Weinman , along with his staff , observed the demonstration , but apparently took no action .

On 12 July 1991 , Holland commanded a B-52 for a " flyover " during a change of command ceremony for the 325th Bomb Squadron at Fairchild . During both the practice and the actual flyover , Holland 's aircraft flew at altitudes below 100 feet ( 30 m ) – well below the established minimum altitude – flew steeply banked turns in excess of 45 ° , exceeded pitch angle limits and executed a wingover . The wingover was not specifically prohibited but was not recommended because it could damage the aircraft . After witnessing the flyover , Colonel Weinman and his deputy commander for operations ( DO ) , Colonel Julich , orally reprimanded Holland , but took no formal action . During the 17 May 1992 Fairchild air show , Holland was again the command pilot of the B-52 aerial demonstration flight . During the demonstration , Holland 's aircraft again violated several safety regulations , including several low altitude steep turns in excess of 45 ° of bank and a high pitch angle climb , estimated at over 60 ° nose high which Holland finished with a wingover maneuver . The new wing commander , Colonel Michael G. Ruotsala , apparently took no action . One week later , the new DO , Colonel Capotosti , on his own initiative warned Holland that if he violated any more safety regulations , Capotosti would ground him ( remove him from flying status ) . Capotosti did not document his warning to Holland or take any other kind of formal action .

On 14 and 15 April 1993 , Holland was the mission commander of a two-ship training mission to a bombing range near Guam in the Pacific Ocean . During the mission , Holland flew his B-52 closer to the other B-52 than regulations allowed . Holland also asked his navigator to videotape the bombs falling from the aircraft from inside the bomb bay , also against regulations . Holland 's navigator later brought the video to the attention of three Fairchild USAF officers . The first , Lieutenant Colonel Bullock , the current 325th Bomb Squadron commander , did not do anything about it and may have even tried to use the videotape as leverage to coerce the navigator into accepting a position as mission scheduler for the wing . The second , the deputy operations group commander , Lieutenant Colonel Harper , told the crew member to conceal the evidence . The third , the DO , allegedly responded to reports of the video by stating , " Okay , I don 't want to know anything about that video — I don 't care . " At the 8 August 1993 Fairchild air show , Holland once again commanded the B-52 demonstration flight . The demonstration profile once again included bank angles greater than 45 ° , low altitude passes , and another high pitch climbing maneuver , this time in excess of 80 ° nose high . The climb was so steep that fuel flowed out of the vent holes from the aircraft 's wing tanks . The new wing commander , Brigadier General James M. Richards , and the new DO , Colonel William E. Pellerin , both witnessed the demonstration , but neither took any action .

On 10 March 1994 , Holland commanded a single-aircraft training mission to the Yakima Bombing Range to provide an authorized photographer an opportunity to document the aircraft as it dropped training munitions . The minimum aircraft altitude permitted for that area was 500 feet ( 150 m ) AGL . During the mission , Holland 's aircraft was filmed crossing one ridgeline about 30 feet ( 10 m ) above the ground . Fearing for their safety , the photography crew ceased filming and took cover as Holland 's aircraft again passed low over the ground , this time estimated as clearing the ridgeline by only three feet ( 1 m ) . The co-pilot on Holland 's aircraft testified that he grabbed the controls to prevent Holland from flying the aircraft into the ridge while the aircraft 's other two aircrew members repeatedly screamed at Holland : " Climb ! Climb ! " Holland responded by laughing and calling one of the crew members " a pussy " . After that mission , the crew decided that they would never again fly with Holland and reported the incident to the bomb squadron leadership . The squadron commander , Lieutenant Colonel Mark McGeehan , reported the incident to Pellerin and recommended that Holland be removed from flying duty . Pellerin consulted with Holland and gave him an oral reprimand and warning not to repeat the behavior , but refused to take him off flying duty . Pellerin also did not document the incident or the reprimand or notify his superiors , who remained unaware of the incident . McGeehan then decided that in order to protect his aircrews , he ( McGeehan ) would be the co-pilot on any future missions in which Holland was the command pilot . Evidence suggests that after this incident , " considerable animosity " existed between Holland and McGeehan .

In preparation for the 1994 Fairchild air show , Holland was again selected as the command pilot for the B-52 demonstration flight . On 15 June 1994 , Holland briefed the new wing commander , Colonel William Brooks , on the proposed flight plan . The demonstration profile as briefed by Holland included numerous violations of regulations , including steep bank angles , low altitude passes , and steep pitch attitudes . Brooks ordered Holland not to exceed 45 ° bank angles or 25 ° pitch attitude during the demonstration . During the first practice session , on 17 June , Holland repeatedly violated these orders . Brooks witnessed this , but took no action . Pellerin flew with Holland on that flight and reported to Brooks that , " the profile looks good to him ; looks very safe , well within parameters . " The next practice flight on 24 June ended with the crash .

The demonstration profile as designed by Holland included a 360 ° turn around Fairchild 's air traffic control tower . Holland had not attempted this maneuver in previous air show demonstrations . During the final flight , Holland performed a series of 60 ° banked turns and a 68 ° pitch climb in violation of Brooks ' orders . No evidence exists that McGeehan or Wolff attempted to intervene as Holland executed the maneuvers . Pellerin was originally scheduled to fly in this mission , as he had done on the 17 June flight . Pellerin was unavailable for the flight on 24 June and Wolff was selected as the replacement aircrew member . Due to the short notice of his assignment to the mission , Wolff did not participate in the pre-flight briefing and boarded the aircraft after the engines were started . Thus , Wolff was not aware of the planned mission profile and did not have an opportunity to raise any objections before take-off . All of the aircrew involved in the crash had only limited flying time in the months before the crash . The B-52 's aircrew were apparently unaware that the aircraft had stalled until shortly before impact , indicated by a failure to apply standard recovery techniques to the aircraft once it entered the stall . The investigation reported that , even if the proper stall recovery techniques had been applied , the aircraft was likely too low to recover before hitting the ground .

The accident investigation concluded that the crash was primarily attributable to Holland 's personality and behavior , USAF leaders ' inadequate reactions to the previous incidents involving Holland , and the sequence of events and aircrew response during the final flight of the aircraft . Holland 's disregard for procedures governing the safe operation of the B-52 aircraft that he commanded and the absence of firm and consistent corrective action by his superior officers allowed Holland to believe that he could conduct his flight in an unsafe manner , culminating with the slow , steeply banked , 360 ° turn around the control tower . The other environmental factors involved , including the addition of a new maneuver ( the 360 ° turn around the tower ) , inadequate pre-flight involvement of Colonel Wolff , and the distractions from the base shooting four days prior , combined with Holland 's unsafe and risk-taking piloting behavior to produce conditions favorable for the crash to occur . The final factor , according to the USAF investigation report , was the 10-knot ( 19 km / h ) wind and its effect on the maneuvers required to achieve the intended flightpath in relation to the ground .

On 19 May 1995 , Pellerin pleaded guilty at a USAF court-martial proceeding to two counts of dereliction of duty for his actions , or lack thereof , that contributed to the crash . He was sentenced to forfeit $ 1,500 of salary a month for five months and received a written reprimand . The USAF did not reveal whether any other officer involved in the chain of events leading to the crash received any type of administrative or disciplinary action . Critics of USAF 's safety record stated that this crash was an example of a pattern of problems related to enforcement of safety procedures within USAF . Although the accident investigation found that procedures and policies were supposedly already in place to prevent such a crash from occurring again , the fact that this crash occurred showed that in at least one instance , the existing safety policies and their enforcement had been grievously inadequate . To re-emphasize the importance of adherence to existing safety policies and correcting the actions of anyone violating them at any time , the USAF quickly distributed the findings of the accident investigation throughout the service . These measures failed to prevent – sixteen years later – the occurrence in almost identical circumstances of another accident , when a C-17 transport aircraft crashed shortly after taking off from Elmendorf Air Force Base , Alaska , on an aerial display practice flight .

Today , the Fairchild crash is used in both military and civilian aviation environments as a training aid in teaching crew resource management and to show the importance of enforcing safety regulations . Footage of the Fairchild crash was used in the making of the 2015 film Project Almanac , depicting an airline accident , which sparked public anger among relatives of Wolff and McGeehan . After an initial claim by Paramount Pictures that the video in question was of a 2009 Tokyo crash , producer Michael Bay issued an apology to the families , and the footage was removed from the film 's theatrical release and associated trailers at Bay 's request .

Diehl , Alan E. ( 2003 ) . Silent Knights : Blowing the Whistle on Military Accidents and Their Cover-Ups . Potomac Books . ISBN 1-57488-544-8 . Kern , Tony T. ( 1999 ) . Darker Shades of Blue : The Rogue Pilot . McGraw-Hill Professional Publishing . ISBN 0-07-034927-4 . Piper , Joan L. ( 2001 ) . Chain of Events : The Government Cover-up of the Black Hawk Incident and the Friendly-fire Death of Lt. Laura Piper . Brassey 's . ISBN 1-57488-344-5 . United States Air Force ( USAF ) ( 1994 ) . Summary of AFR 110-14 USAF Accident Investigation Board Report .

" Brigadier General Orin L. Godsey " . Air Force Link . 1996 . Archived from the original on 15 February 2007 . Retrieved 16 February 2007 . – Biography of the USAF Chief of Safety who led the initial investigation into the mishap . " Brigadier General James M. Richards " . Air Force Link . 1996 . Archived from the original on 15 February 2007 . Retrieved 16 February 2007 . – Biography of the Commander , 92nd Bomb Wing , Fairchild Air Force Base from August 1992 – August 1993 " The Crash of ' Czar 52 ' " . Check-Six.com. Archived from the original on 13 May 2007 . Retrieved 30 June 2013 . – Contains video footage of the crash . Kern , Tony ( 1995 ) . " Darker Shades of Blue : A Case Study of Failed Leadership " . Neil Krey 's CRM Developers Forum . Archived from the original on 16 February 2007 . Retrieved 1 March 2007 . " Lt. Col. Mark C. McGeehan " . Lou Holtz / Upper Ohio Valley Hall of Fame . 2000 . Archived from the original on 12 March 2007 . Retrieved 1 March 2007 .

Thompson , Mark ( 29 May 1995 ) . " Way , Way Off in the Wild Blue Yonder " . Time . Retrieved 1 March 2007 . " B-52 Bomber Crash Fairchild Air Force Base " . 24 June 1994 . Retrieved 15 June 2015 . – Video of the crash " Nuclear Storage Site Linked to Plane Crash " . The New York Times . 27 April 1995 . Retrieved 7 January 2008 . " B-52crash.kml " . 5 January 2008 . Retrieved 30 January 2014 . - KML file of Czar 52 flight path just before crash

James Leslie Miles Fisher ( born June 23 , 1983 ) is an American film and television actor and musician . He had a role in the 1997 CBS adaptation of the book True Women and had a starring role in the 2000 film Lone Star Struck . In 2001 , he won Best Actor at the International Teen Movie Festival ( ITMF ) in Vaughan , Ontario , Canada for his role in his short film Head Shot . He also received praise in 2001 in an article in Newsday , and this helped further his career . He appeared as a member of the First Regiment of Virginia Volunteers in the 2003 Civil War film Gods and Generals , which starred Robert Duvall . Fisher parodied actor Tom Cruise in the 2008 film Superhero Movie ; a clip of Fisher from the film became popular on the Internet . He had a recurring role as a rookie police officer in 2008 on the television series The Cleaner on A & E Network . Fisher appeared in 2009 on Gossip Girl . On the third season of the television series Mad Men , Fisher portrayed a friend of character Paul Kinsey .

Miles Fisher is the son of Richard W. Fisher , who was formerly the President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas . His mother , Nancy , serves on the national board of the American Film Institute ( AFI ) . His maternal grandfather was Representative James Collins . He was raised in Dallas , Texas , where he attended the St. Mark 's School of Texas . After his family moved to Washington , D.C. , he attended the St. Albans School . Fisher graduated from Harvard University , where he was an English major . At Harvard , he was a member of the Porcellian Club , the Hasty Pudding Club and the a cappella singing group the Krokodiloes . Fisher served as the Krokodiloes tour manager , and planned events for the group in 24 countries . He was one of the two students chosen to deliver a Harvard Oration at the 2006 Harvard graduation ceremony . His undergraduate thesis , which won the LeBaron Russell Briggs prize at Harvard , was a " screenplay about a Harvard graduate who avoided the Vietnam draft by teaching in a military prep school " . Fisher has described film as his passion and said that after graduation he intended to move to Los Angeles to pursue a career in the film industry . In 2009 Fisher resided in Los Angeles , California .

Fisher appeared in the 1997 CBS television movie adaptation of the book True Women as " Travis " , and had a starring role in the 2000 film Lone Star Struck . He received the Best Actor award at the 2001 International Teen Movie Festival ( ITMF ) in Vaughan , Ontario , Canada , for his own short film titled : Head Shot , which was among 10,000 other entries at the festival . In a 2001 article in Newsday titled : " Miles Fisher , ' It ' Boy " , columnist Liz Smith referred to Fisher as " wunderkind " and " the next Tom Cruise " . Smith 's comparison of Fisher to Tom Cruise led to meetings with influential managers and agents , and he signed with the talent agency Endeavor Talent Agency in 2002 . Fisher appeared in the 2003 Civil War film Gods and Generals with Robert Duvall . Director Ron Maxwell picked Fisher to portray a heroic member of the First Regiment of Virginia Volunteers in the film ; Duvall played Robert E. Lee . He parodied actor Tom Cruise in the 2008 film Superhero Movie . Fisher 's role in the film was popularized on the Internet on sites including Defamer , as well as on television on Entertainment Tonight and the CNN program Showbiz Tonight . The clip of Fisher was viewed on the Internet over 10 million times . A critic for The Baltimore Sun commented that Fisher 's appearance in Superhero Movie was the highlight of the film , and wrote : " Actor Miles Fisher replicates Tom Cruise 's ' I am the Way , the Thetan , the Light ' Scientology recruiting video of last year to hilarious effect . " He had a recurring role on A & E Network 's television series The Cleaner , portraying a rookie police officer named Kenneth Herman .

Fisher wrote and produced a short film called Heatshot in 2009 with Evan Nichols ; the film was selected to be screened at the AFI Dallas International Film Festival . Alan Peppard of The Dallas Morning News reported in March 2009 that Fisher had been cast in the pilot of a television show set in 1983 in Southern California ; a spinoff of Gossip Girl . He portrayed a " sleazy " coke dealer on the television series of the same name . On the third season of the television series Mad Men , Fisher portrayed Geoff Graves , a friend of character Paul Kinsey . Jessica Gelt of the Los Angeles Times described his character as a " preppy drug dealer " . In 2010 , Fisher was cast in the film Final Destination 5 . In an interview with Collider.com , Fisher revealed that the film was set in a workplace environment , and was a 3-D film . Fisher appeared in Clint Eastwood 's J. Edgar Hoover biopic , J. Edgar , playing Agent Garrison , an FBI employee who interviews Leonardo DiCaprio 's Hoover throughout the film .

In July 2009 , Fisher released an independently produced self-titled EP , Miles Fisher , as well as a music video for his cover of the Talking Heads song " This Must Be The Place . " The video is an homage to the 2000 film American Psycho , with Fisher imitating Christian Bale 's performance as Patrick Bateman . Students from the American Film Institute helped film the video , which was shot in Los Angeles . The video was posted on YouTube and various other web sites , and received 200,000 hits on Break.com alone within the first 24 hours . Darrell Hartman of Interview called the usage of the Talking Heads song with the American Psycho theme " a brilliant combo " , and noted that Fisher " created a viral hit " . Fisher released the song " New Romance " in video and MP3 form on iTunes and on his personal website on July 19 , 2011 . The video parodies the Final Destination series and Saved By the Bell . On May 22 , 2013 , a music video for " Finish What We Started " through AboveAverageNetwork on YouTube was posted . The music video featuring Lance Bass has yet to release a single for the song , and a subsequent album has been released , dubbed " Video Music . " The music video has been posted to Fisher 's personal website .

" Pilot " is the series premiere of the American Fairy Tale / Drama television series Once Upon a Time . It introduces each of the main characters , as well as establishes the basic premises of the series , which details the beginnings of a curse placed upon the Enchanted Forest and the start of a destiny for its only survivor , a present-day woman who can break the curse . The episode was co-written by Edward Kitsis and Adam Horowitz , and was directed by Mark Mylod . Kitsis and Horowitz sought to write new perspectives of familiar characters , and featured the themes of hope , family , and motherhood . " Pilot " sets the template for the rest of the series , as it jumps between their curses selves in Storybrooke , Maine and their original lives in the Enchanted Forest . Every actor first approached for the series accepted after being sent a script ; this included Ginnifer Goodwin as Snow White and Jennifer Morrison as Emma Swan . Before it made its debut , ABC allowed viewers in the United States to see the pilot on the Internet Movie Database 's website several days before it aired . It premiered in the United States on ABC on October 23 , 2011 . In Canada , CTV broadcast the series an hour ahead of ABC 's debut , airing it at 7 pm in most regions . The episode received mostly positive reviews and was watched by 12.93 million viewers , scoring a 4.0 rating / 11 % share in the 18-49 demographic , ranking first in its timeslot . It was ABC 's most watched pilot since the first episode of Ugly Betty .

Prince Charming ( Joshua Dallas ) rides to the rescue of Snow White ( Ginnifer Goodwin ) , who is comatose after eating a poisoned apple that was given to her by the Evil Queen ( Lana Parrilla ) . Doc informs Charming that he is too late , but Charming kisses Snow regardless , breaking the curse . On the wedding day of Snow White and Prince Charming , the Evil Queen arrives and delivers an ominous threat about a powerful curse she intends to release upon them . Some time later , a pregnant Snow White is worried about the curse and visits Rumplestiltskin ( Robert Carlyle ) , who issues a prophecy that the Queen 's curse will take them all someplace terrible where there will be no happy endings . He also reveals that Snow White 's unborn daughter , Emma Swan ( Jennifer Morrison ) , will return when she is 28 years old to rescue them , thus beginning a crucial battle with the Queen . Following the Blue Fairy 's ( Keegan Connor Tracy ) advice , Geppetto ( Tony Amendola ) and Pinocchio ( Jakob Davies ) fashion a wardrobe from a magical tree which will allow one person to escape the Queen 's curse . On the day Snow White gives birth to her daughter , the Queen 's curse strikes . Prince Charming places their daughter in the magic wardrobe , but is mortally wounded battling the Queen 's henchmen . The Queen stands triumphantly over Snow White and Prince Charming , as the Curse takes them " somewhere horrible . "

In Present-day Boston , Emma Swan ( Morrison ) lives a lonely existence working as a bail bondsman and bounty hunter . She is approached by a ten-year-old boy , Henry ( Jared S. Gilmore ) , who identifies himself as her son , whom she had given up for adoption as a teenager . Not wanting a relationship with him , Emma agrees to drive him back to his home in Storybrooke , Maine . Along the way , Henry shows her a large book of fairy tales he has , insisting that all of the stories in it are real . When they arrive in Storybrooke , Henry informs her that everyone in town is in reality a fairy tale character , exiled by the curse and with no memory of their real identities . This includes his therapist Archie Hopper ( Raphael Sbarge ) , who is really Jiminy Cricket , and his teacher Mary Margaret Blanchard ( Goodwin ) , who is really Snow White . Henry claims that time is frozen in Storybrooke and the people are unable to leave , but that the curse will be broken by Emma . A skeptical Emma returns Henry to his adopted mother , the town Mayor , Regina ( Parrilla ) , who is really the Evil Queen . Emma attempts to leave but after having drunk apple cider given to her by the Mayor and nearly hitting a wolf she has a car accident where she is knocked out . She is arrested and taken to Storybrooke Jail . When Henry runs away again , Emma makes a deal with the Mayor and Sheriff Graham ( Jamie Dornan ) : if they release her , she will find him . After exhausting all possibilities she speaks with Mary Margaret , who tells Emma to " Check his castle . " After finding Henry at a wooden jungle gym ( which bears a resemblance to Prince Charming 's castle ) , they talk and Emma decides to stay in Storybrooke temporarily , especially after Regina warns her to leave town . This leads Emma to be suspicious of the mayor 's motives .

Shortly after her conversation with Emma , Mary Margaret Blanchard volunteers at Storybrooke Hospital , placing flowers at the bedside of patients . She stops in the ICU where a John Doe ( Dallas ) , Prince Charming , is sleeping in a coma . Mary Margaret is unaware of who he is . Meanwhile , at the Mayor 's home , Regina takes the book from Henry 's room and goes downstairs to look at her mirror , with an expression that seems to acknowledge she is aware of her fairy tale existence . As Emma arrives at Granny 's Bed & Breakfast , she is given a key to her room by the elderly proprietor ( Beverley Elliot ) , who is actually Granny from Little Red Riding Hood . She comes downstairs after yelling at Ruby ( Meghan Ory ) , her granddaughter , followed by a man who came to collect money : Mr. Gold ( Carlyle ) , Rumpelstiltskin who also helped build and owns the entire town . When Emma mentions her name , Mr. Gold pauses as if he knew something about her . Emma 's decision to stay in Storybrooke causes the hands of the town clock , previously frozen at 8 : 15 , to begin moving again .

Eight years previous to the Once Upon a Time pilot ( the two had just completed their work on Felicity , in 2002 ) , Kitsis and Horowitz became inspired to write fairytales out of a love of " mystery and excitement of exploring lots of different worlds . " They presented the premise to networks , but were refused because of its fantastical nature . The two learned from their time on Lost to look at the story in a different way , that " character has to trump mythology " ; they expanded , " as people , you 've got to see what the void in their heart or in their lives is to care about them ... For us , this was as much about the character journeys and seeing what was ripped from them in coming to Storybrooke – going at it that way as opposed to making it the ' break-the-curse show . ' " Despite the comparisons and similarities to Lost , the writers intend them to be very different shows . To them , Lost concerned itself with redemption , while Once Upon a Time is about " hope " . Lost co-creator Damon Lindelof aided in the development of the series as a consultant , but had no official credit for the pilot .

To differentiate the storytelling from what the audience already knew , the writing staff decided to begin the pilot with the end of the typical Snow White fairytale . Themes concerning family and motherhood were emphasized , in contrast to the focus on fatherhood in Lost . Kitsis and Horowitz sought to write strong female characters , rather than the classic damsel in distress . Horowitz stated their desire to approach each character the same way , asking themselves , " How do we make these icons real , make them relatable ? " The pilot is meant to be the " template of the series " . Kitsis confirmed that every week will contain flashbacks between both worlds , as they " love the idea of going back and forth and informing what the character is missing in their life . " The writers ' desire to present a " mash up " of many small characters can be seen in a scene of the pilot , in which there is a war council featuring Geppetto , Pinocchio , and Grumpy . Horowitz elaborated , " One of the fun things for us coming up with these stories is thinking of ways these different characters can interact in ways they never have before . "

Horowitz stated that everyone they initially wanted cast in the series accepted their offered role after being sent a script . Ginnifer Goodwin was cast as Snow White , who appreciated that she would be playing a strong character that was fleshed out for the audience . The actress had just completed her work on the series Big Love , and was looking for a new project ; she turned to television after film scripts failed to interest her . Having said previously in interviews that she would love to play Snow White , Goodwin called her acceptance of the role " a no-brainer . " Both Kitsis and Horowitz are self-described big fans of Big Love , and wrote the part of Snow White with Goodwin in mind . Joshua Dallas , who plays Prince Charming , was pleased the writers took " some dramatic license " with his character , believing the prince had become more real . He explained , " Prince Charming just happens to be a name . He 's still a man with the same emotions as any other man . He 's a Prince , but he 's a Prince of the people . He gets his hands dirty . He 's got a kingdom to run . He has a family to protect . He has an epic , epic love for Snow White . He 's like everybody else . He 's human . " Jennifer Morrison was hired for the part of Emma Swan . The actress explained her character as someone who " help [ s ] this kid who seems like he 's a little bit emotionally dysfunctional , " but noted that Emma does not yet believe there is a fairytale universe . Ten-year-old Jared Gilmore , known for his work on Mad Men , took the role of her son , Henry .

The role of the Evil Queen / Regina went to Lana Parrilla . She explained the character , " There 's always two stories being told when playing Regina . There 's the threat of her knowing she 's an evil queen and then there 's just the pure simple fact that the biological mother has stepped into her world and the threat of losing her son is just enormous . That 's a fear that I think any adopted mother would have . I think that 's going to really help the audience relate to Regina in some level . " The role of Rumpelstiltskin was given to Robert Carlyle ; it was written with Carlyle in mind , though the writers initially thought he would never accept the part . Horowitz recalled Carlyle 's prison sequence , which was the actor 's first day on the set as " mind-blowing ... You could see Ginny actually jump , the first time he did that character . It was fantastic ! " The writers offered the part of the Blue Fairy to recording artist Lady Gaga , but never heard back from her management staff .

Executive producer Steve Pearlman referred to Once Upon a Time as " an effects-heavy show , " but in ways that are not meant to be obvious to viewers . Zoic Studios provided the visual effects seen in the pilot , building virtual sets for the fairy tale sequences and using F / X for action scenes . Production and visual effects staff collaborated under a difficult schedule and limited budget . The studio has used the technology Zoic 's Environmental Unification System ( Z.E.U.S. ) for real time camera tracking , allowing for creative flexibility among the cast and crew , who work on a green screen stage . Andrew Orloff , Zoic 's Executive Creative Director , commented " Once Upon A Time is an amazing creative opportunity for Zoic . The highly detailed environments and imaginative characters of the series ' fairy tale world have challenged us to expand and fine-tune both our Z.E.U.S. and animation pipelines for television . " Zoic Studios digitally reproduced the war room and ballroom castle interiors based on concept designs created by Art Director Mark Worthington . For the wedding scene , Zoic staff extended columns , added stained glass windows , and completed the wedding party with additions of digital guests . The effect of the Evil Queen disappearing from Charming 's flying sword cost ABC a reported $ 12,000 . Kitsis has commented that because the network has been very supportive , they are not worried about losing the " fantastical feel " of the series ' flashback sequences . He explained , " We can ’ t show this pilot and then have a cheap show after it , so it ’ s our goal to maintain this level of production values throughout . " Zoic visual effects will continue to be used for future episodes .

On October 14 , 2011 – nine days before the national broadcast date – Kitsis and Horowitz presented an early screening of the pilot episode at a New York Comic Con panel and answered questions from fans . Later , viewers were able to stream the entire pilot episode from the Internet Movie Database in advance of its broadcast . The pilot episode aired in October rather than September , which was a month after new fall season shows normally premiered . Pearlman was pleased with the later broadcast date , believing that " it creates a second wave of anticipation for an audience , too . I work in the business and I couldn 't even tell you the names of a third of the new shows this season because we were bombarded with all the messaging . " The episode was included in Reawakened : A Once Upon a Time Tale – a novelization of the first season – which was published by Hyperion Books in 2013 .

The pilot contained a number of popular culture references noted by viewers and television critics . There were several references to Lost , another series scripted by episode writers Kitsis and Horowitz . The street address of Regina 's home is 108 , the town clock is stuck at 8 : 15 ( the same number as the doomed airline flight in the aforementioned series ) , there is a Geranimo Jackson bumper sticker on Emma 's car , the smoke monster engulfing the Enchanted Forest , and Emma 's eye-opening after she wakes up . Kitsis noted of the references , " [ Lost co-creator ] Damon [ Lindelof ] has been a godfather to us . His name is not on the show , but he is in the DNA of it . " Horowitz also stated their intention to continue making Lost references in the future . Snow White and Prince Charming use a powerfully magical wardrobe to transport their new-born baby to a different universe ( our own " real world " ) . In The Lion , The Witch and The Wardrobe , the first volume of C. S. Lewis 's Narnia series , a similarly powerful magical wardrobe transports the main characters between the real world and the magical universe of Narnia .

Another cultural reference appeared in a scene when Emma hears Leroy ( who is actually Grumpy ) whistling Whistle While You Work ( the song used in the 1937 film version of Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs ) , indicating its acknowledged ties to Disney , whose subsidiary ABC Studios also happens to be the production company behind Once Upon a Time , since Disney has allowed them access to their fairy tale characters and properties for use in the series . " They 've given us license , " Kitsis said . " I could be wrong , but I think this is the first time anyone 's shown Snow White with a sword , or pregnant . " Other Disney references include the blue star candle Emma wishes on , nodding to the scene in the 1940 film version of Pinocchio where Pinocchio wishes on a blue star and his wish is granted by the Blue Fairy ( both of whom also make a brief appearance alongside Jiminy Cricket in this episode ) .

Premiering out of its 8 : 00 pm timeslot after America 's Funniest Videos , the pilot was viewed by an estimated 12.93 million viewers and received a 4.0 rating / 11 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . As a result , It was the season 's highest rated drama debut among adults 18-49 and ABC 's biggest debut in five years . It competed against The World Series Pre-Game on FOX , Football Night In America on NBC and The Amazing Race on CBS . It also competed against some of Sunday Night Football . Including DVR ratings , the episode totaled 15.48 million viewers and a 5.2 18-49 rating . In Canada , CTV debuted the series an hour ahead of ABC 's debut , airing it at 7 pm in all regions except in Saskatchewan and Winnipeg , where it debuted at 10 pm . The pilot was watched by 1.764 million viewers , placing 14th for the week . In the UK , the pilot aired on Channel 5 on a 9 pm slot and pulled in 2.36 million viewers , the highest throughout the week of April 9 , 2012 for the channel .

In a review from Zap2it , Rick Porter gave the pilot praise for bringing together the central theme , saying " No other new show this fall is attempting to tell a bigger story , and we 're hoping the rough patches smooth out and it fulfills the potential that 's there in its very strong cast and premise . " It also cited Jennifer Morrison and Jared Gilmore 's performances when they appear in scenes together : " As such it falls to Morrison to move the story along in this world , and fortunately for the audience she 's able to pull it off . She gives a confident , grounded performance that helps keep the show from feeling too fantastical , and her rapport with Gilmore is a big plus too . " He also notes the writers and producers have put together a great premise and expects they 'll have more as the series progresses : " Given the cast and the people involved behind the scenes ... we 're more optimistic than not that Once Upon a Time will find its way . But if it doesn 't , at least it will go down swinging . "

The New York Times writer Mike Hale compared Once Upon a Time with the similarly premised series Grimm , believing that the former has a " richer premise and more interesting characters . " Hale in particular praised Goodwin and Morrison 's performances , but concluded , " Watching the pilot again , though , it became harder to ignore the soap opera underpinnings and the twee sentimentality . " IGN 's Amy Ratcliffe gave the episode an 8.0 / 10 rating , praising the casting , acting , and writing . While acknowledging there were " a few cheesy " moments , she expressed hope that the series would remain focused on its story rather than on too many special effects . TV Fanatic 's Christine Orlando gave the episode 4.4 out of 5 stars , calling it " a beautiful , stunning , magical journey " and saying that she was " hooked from the opening scene . " She complimented the whole cast , but especially Robert Carlyle , saying that he made " a perfectly creepy Rumpelstiltskin . " She praised the character of Henry , saying , " He 's spunky , intelligent and has just the right amount of persistence , and faith in fantasy to make you want to believe . " She concluded by simply stating that it was " very , very good . "

Paul Vaughn Butterfield ( December 17 , 1942 – May 4 , 1987 ) was an American blues harmonica player and singer . After early training as a classical flautist , he developed an interest in blues harmonica . He explored the blues scene in his native Chicago , where he met Muddy Waters and other blues greats , who provided encouragement and opportunities for him to join in jam sessions . He soon began performing with fellow blues enthusiasts Nick Gravenites and Elvin Bishop . In 1963 , he formed the Paul Butterfield Blues Band , which recorded several successful albums and were popular on the late-1960s concert and festival circuit , with performances at the Fillmore West , in San Francisco ; the Fillmore East , in New York City ; the Monterey Pop Festival ; and Woodstock . The band was known for combining electric Chicago blues with a rock urgency and for their pioneering jazz fusion performances and recordings . After the breakup of the group in 1971 , Butterfield continued to tour and record with the band Paul Butterfield 's Better Days , with his mentor Muddy Waters , and with members of the roots-rock group the Band . While still recording and performing , Butterfield died in 1987 at age 44 of a heroin overdose .

Butterfield was born in Chicago and raised in the city 's Hyde Park neighborhood . The son of a lawyer and a painter , he attended the University of Chicago Laboratory Schools , a private school associated with the University of Chicago . Exposed to music at an early age , he studied classical flute with Walfrid Kujala , of the Chicago Symphony Orchestra . Butterfield was also athletic and was offered a track scholarship to Brown University . However , a knee injury and a growing interest in blues music sent him in a different direction . He developed a love for blues harmonica and a friendship with guitarist and singer-songwriter Nick Gravenites , who shared an interest in authentic blues music . By the late 1950s , they were visiting blues clubs in Chicago , where they met musicians such as Muddy Waters , Howlin ' Wolf , Little Walter , and Otis Rush , who encouraged them and occasionally let them sit in on jam sessions . The pair were soon performing as Nick and Paul in college-area coffee houses . In the early 1960s , Butterfield attended the University of Chicago , where he met aspiring blues guitarist Elvin Bishop . Both began devoting more time to music than studies and soon became full-time musicians . Eventually , Butterfield , who sang and played harmonica , and Bishop , accompanying him on guitar , were offered a regular gig at Big John 's , a folk club in the Old Town district on Chicago 's North Side . With this booking , they persuaded bassist Jerome Arnold and drummer Sam Lay ( both from Howlin ' Wolf 's touring band ) to form a group with them in 1963 . Their engagement at the club was highly successful and brought the group to the attention of record producer Paul A. Rothchild .

During their engagement at Big John 's , Butterfield met and occasionally sat in with guitarist Mike Bloomfield , who was also playing at the club . By chance , producer Rothchild witnessed one of their performances and was impressed by the chemistry between the two . He persuaded Butterfield to bring Bloomfield into the band , and they were signed to Elektra Records . Their first attempt to record an album , in December 1964 , did not meet Rothchild 's expectations , although an early version of " Born in Chicago " , written by Gravenites , was included on the 1965 Elektra sampler Folksong ' 65 and created interest in the band ( additional early recordings were released on the Elektra compilation What 's Shakin ' in 1966 and The Original Lost Elektra Sessions in 1995 ) . In order to better capture their sound , Rothchild convinced Elektra president Jac Holzman to record a live album . In the spring of 1965 , the Butterfield Blues Band was recorded at the Cafe Au Go Go in New York City . These recordings also failed to satisfy Rothchild , but the group 's appearances at the club brought them to the attention of the East Coast music community . Rothchild persuaded Holzman to agree to a third attempt at recording an album .

In these recording sessions , Rothchild had assumed the role of group manager and used his folk contacts to secure the band more and more engagements outside of Chicago . At the last minute , the band was booked to perform at the Newport Folk Festival in July 1965 . They were scheduled as the opening act the first night when the gates opened and again the next afternoon in an urban blues workshop at the festival . Despite limited exposure on the first night and a dismissive introduction the following day by the folklorist and blues researcher Alan Lomax , the band was able to attract an unusually large audience for a workshop performance . Maria Muldaur , with her husband , Geoff , who later toured and recorded with Butterfield , recalled the group 's performance as stunning – it was the first time that many of the mostly folk-music fans had heard a high-powered electric blues combo . Among those who took notice was festival regular Bob Dylan , who invited the band to back him for his first live electric performance . With little rehearsal , Dylan performed a short , four-song set the next day with Bloomfield , Arnold , and Lay ( along with Al Kooper and Barry Goldberg ) . The performance was not well received by some and generated a controversy , but it was a watershed event and brought the band to the attention of a much larger audience .

The band added keyboardist Mark Naftalin , and its debut album , The Paul Butterfield Blues Band , was finally successfully recorded in mid-1965 and released later that year . The opening song , a newer recording of the previously released " Born in Chicago " , is an upbeat blues rocker and set the tone for the album , which included a mix of blues standards , such as " Shake Your Moneymaker " , " Blues with a Feeling " , and " Look Over Yonders Wall " , and compositions by the band . The album , described as a " hard-driving blues album that , in a word , rocked " , reached number 123 in the Billboard 200 album chart in 1966 , but its influence was felt beyond its sales figures . Jazz drummer Billy Davenport was invited to replace Lay , who was ailing . In July 1966 , the sextet recorded their second album , East-West , which was released a month later . The album consists of more varied material , with the band 's interpretations of blues ( Robert Johnson 's " Walkin ' Blues " ) , rock ( Michael Nesmith 's " Mary , Mary " ) , R & B ( Allen Toussaint 's " Get Out of My Life , Woman " ) , and jazz selections ( Nat Adderley 's " Work Song " ) . East-West reached number 65 in the album chart .

The thirteen-minute instrumental track " East-West " incorporates Indian raga influences and some of the earliest jazz-fusion and blues rock excursions , with extended solos by Butterfield and guitarists Mike Bloomfield and Elvin Bishop . It has been described as " the first of its kind and ... the root from which the acid rock tradition emerged " . Live versions of the song sometimes lasted nearly an hour , and performances at the San Francisco Fillmore Auditorium " were a huge influence on the city 's jam bands " . Bishop recalled , " Quicksilver , Big Brother , and the Dead – those guys were just chopping chords . They had been folk musicians and weren 't particularly proficient playing electric guitar – [ Bloomfield ] could play all these scales and arpeggios and fast time-signatures ... He just destroyed them . " Several live versions of " East-West " from this period were later released on East-West Live in 1996 . In England in November 1966 , Butterfield recorded several songs with John Mayall & the Bluesbreakers , who had recently finished the album A Hard Road . Butterfield and Mayall contributed vocals , and Butterfield 's Chicago-style blues harp was featured . Four songs were released in the UK on a 45-rpm EP , John Mayall 's Bluesbreakers with Paul Butterfield , in January 1967 .

In spite of its success , the Butterfield Blues Band soon changed its lineup . Arnold and Davenport left the band , and Bloomfield went on to form his own group , Electric Flag . With Bishop and Naftalin remaining on guitar and keyboards , the band added bassist Bugsy Maugh , drummer Phillip Wilson , and saxophonists David Sanborn and Gene Dinwiddie . This lineup recorded the band 's third album , The Resurrection of Pigboy Crabshaw , in 1967 . The album cut back on extended instrumental jams and went in a more rhythm and blues-influenced horn-driven direction , with songs such as Charles Brown 's " Driftin ' Blues " ( retitled " Driftin ' and Driftin ' " ) , Otis Rush 's " Double Trouble " , and Junior Parker 's " Driving Wheel " . The Resurrection of Pigboy Crabshaw was Butterfield 's highest-charting album , reaching number 52 on the album chart . Most of this lineup performed at the seminal Monterey Pop Festival on June 17 , 1967 . On its next album , In My Own Dream , released in 1968 , the band continued to move away from its roots in Chicago blues towards a more soul-influenced , horn-based sound . With Butterfield singing only three songs , the album featured more band contributions It reached number 79 in the Billboard album chart . By the end of 1968 , both Bishop and Naftalin had left the band . In April 1969 , Butterfield took part in a concert at Chicago 's Auditorium Theater and a subsequent recording session organized by record producer Norman Dayron , featuring Muddy Waters backed by Otis Spann , Mike Bloomfield , Sam Lay , Donald " Duck " Dunn , and Buddy Miles . Such Waters warhorses as " Forty Days and Forty Nights " , " I 'm Ready " , " Baby , Please Don 't Go " , and " Got My Mojo Working " were recorded and later released on the album Fathers and Sons . Waters commented , " We did a lot of the things over we did with Little Walter and Jimmy Rogers and Elgin [ Evans ] on drums [ an early configuration of Waters 's band ] ... It 's about as close as I 've been [ to that feel ] since I first recorded it " . To one reviewer , these recordings represent Paul Butterfield 's best performances .

The Butterfield Blues Band was invited to perform at the Woodstock Festival on August 18 , 1969 . The band performed seven songs , and although its performance did not appear in the film Woodstock , one song , " Love March " , was included on the album Woodstock : Music from the Original Soundtrack and More , released in 1970 . In 2009 , Butterfield was included in the expanded 40th Anniversary Edition Woodstock video , and an additional two songs appeared on the box set Woodstock : 40 Years On : Back to Yasgur 's Farm . The album Keep On Moving , with only Butterfield remaining from the original lineup , was released in 1969 . It was produced by veteran R & B producer and songwriter Jerry Ragovoy , reportedly brought in by Elektra to turn out a " breakout commercial hit " . The album was not embraced by critics or long-time fans ; however , it reached number 102 in the Billboard album chart . A live double album by the Butterfield Blues Band , Live , was recorded March 21 – 22 , 1970 , at the The Troubadour , in West Hollywood , California . By this time , the band included a four-piece horn section in what has been described as a " big-band Chicago blues with a jazz base " . Live provides perhaps the best showcase for this unique " blues-jazz-rock-R & B hybrid sound " . After the release of another soul-influenced album , Sometimes I Just Feel Like Smilin ' in 1971 , the Paul Butterfield Blues Band disbanded . In 1972 , a retrospective or their career , Golden Butter : The Best of the Paul Butterfield Blues Band , was released by Elektra .

After the breakup of the Butterfield Blues Band and no longer under contract with Elektra , Butterfield retreated to Woodstock , New York , where he eventually formed his next band , Paul Butterfield 's Better Days , with drummer Chris Parker , guitarist Amos Garrett , singer Geoff Muldaur , pianist Ronnie Barron and bassist Billy Rich . In 1972 – 1973 , the group recorded the albums Paul Butterfield 's Better Days and It All Comes Back , released by Albert Grossman 's Bearsville Records . The albums reflected the influence of the participants and explored more roots- and folk-based styles . Although without an easily defined commercial style , both reached the album chart . The band did not last to record a third studio album , but its album Live at Winterland Ballroom , recorded in 1973 , was released in 1999 . Butterfield next pursued a solo career and appeared as a sideman in several different musical settings . In 1975 , he again joined Muddy Waters to record Waters 's last album for Chess Records , The Muddy Waters Woodstock Album . The album was recorded at Levon Helm 's Woodstock studio with Garth Hudson and members of Waters 's touring band . In 1976 , Butterfield performed at the Band 's final concert , " The Last Waltz " , accompanying the Band on the song " Mystery Train " and backing Muddy Waters on " Mannish Boy " . Butterfield kept up his association with former members of the Band , touring and recording with Levon Helm and the RCO All Stars in 1977 and touring with Rick Danko in 1979 . A 1984 live performance with Danko and Richard Manuel was recorded and released as Live at the Lonestar in 2011 .

As a solo act with backing musicians , Butterfield continued to tour and recorded the misguided and overproduced Put It in Your Ear in 1976 and North South in 1981 , with strings , synthesizers , and pale funk arrangements . In 1986 , he released his final studio album , The Legendary Paul Butterfield Rides Again , which again was a poor attempt at a comeback with an updated rock sound . On April 15 , 1987 , he participated in the concert " B.B. King & Friends " , with Eric Clapton , Etta James , Albert King , Stevie Ray Vaughan , and others .

Aside from " rank [ ing ] among the most influential harp players in the Blues " , Butterfield has also been seen as pointing blues-based music in new , innovative directions . AllMusic critic Steve Huey commented , It 's impossible to overestimate the importance of the doors Butterfield opened : before he came to prominence , white American musicians treated the blues with cautious respect , afraid of coming off as inauthentic . Not only did Butterfield clear the way for white musicians to build upon blues tradition ( instead of merely replicating it ) , but his storming sound was a major catalyst in bringing electric Chicago blues to white audiences who 'd previously considered acoustic Delta blues the only really genuine article . In 2006 , Butterfield was inducted into the Blues Foundation 's Blues Hall of Fame , which noted that " the albums released by the Butterfield Blues Band brought Chicago Blues to a generation of Rock fans during the 1960s and paved the way for late 1960s electric groups like Cream " . The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inducted the Paul Butterfield Blues Band in 2015 . The induction biography commented that " the Butterfield Band converted the country-blues purists and turned on the Fillmore generation to the pleasures of Muddy Waters , Howlin ' Wolf , Little Walter , Willie Dixon and Elmore James " .

Like many Chicago blues harp players , Butterfield approached the instrument like a horn , preferring single notes to chords , and used it for soloing . His style has been described as " always intense , understated , concise , and serious " , and he was " known for purity and intensity of his tone , his sustained breath control , and his unique ability to bend notes to his will " . In his choice of notes he has been compared to Big Walter Horton , but he was never seen as an imitator of any particular harp player . Rather , he developed " a style original and powerful enough to place him in the pantheon of true blues greats " . Butterfield played Hohner harmonicas ( and endorsed them ) . He preferred the diatonic ten-hole Marine Band model . He wrote a harmonica instruction book , Paul Butterfield Teaches Blues Harmonica Master Class , a few years before his death ( it was not published until 1997 ) . In it , he explains various techniques , demonstrated on an accompanying CD . Butterfield played mainly in cross-harp , or second position . He occasionally used a chromatic harmonica . Reportedly left-handed , he held the harmonica in a manner opposite that of a right-handed player , i.e. , in his right hand , upside down ( with the low notes to the right ) , using his left hand for muting effects .

He listened to records and went places , but he also spent an awful lot of time , by himself , playing [ harmonica ] . He 'd play outdoors . There 's a place called the Point in Hyde Park [ Chicago ] , a promontory of land that sticks out into Lake Michigan , and I can remember him out there for hours playing . He was just playing all the time ... It was a very solitary effort . It was all internal , like he had a particular sound he wanted to get and he just worked to get it . Producer Norman Dayron recalled the young Butterfield as " very quiet and defensive and hard-edged . He was this tough Irish Catholic , kind of a hard guy . He would walk around in black shirts and sunglasses , dark shades and dark jackets ... Paul was hard to be friends with . " Although they later became close , Michael Bloomfield commented on his first impressions of Butterfield : " He was a bad guy . He carried pistols . He was down there on the South Side , holding his own . I was scared to death of that cat " . Writer and AllMusic founder Michael Erlewine , who knew Butterfield early in his recording career , described him as " always intense , somewhat remote , and even , on occasion , downright unfriendly " . He remembered Butterfield as " not much interested in other people " .

Paul married his first wife ( and high school friend of many years ) , Virginia McEwan , at Chicago City Hall on November 16 , 1964 . Together , they had Paul 's first son , Gabriel Butterfield , born September , 1965 . The couple remained married until 1969 . It was also Virginia McEwan who wrote and delivered the eulogy at Paul 's funeral . By 1971 , Butterfield had purchased his first house , in rural Woodstock , New York , and began enjoying family life with his second wife , Kathy , and their infant son , Lee . According to Maria Muldaur , she and her husband were frequent dinner guests , which usually involved sitting around a piano and singing songs . She doubted her abilities , but " it was Butter that first encouraged me to let loose and just sing the blues [ and ] not to worry about singing pretty or hitting all the right notes ... He loosened all the levels of self-consciousness and doubt out of me ... And he 'll forever live in my heart for that and for respecting me as a fellow musician . "

Beginning in 1980 , Paul Butterfield underwent several surgical procedures to relieve his peritonitis , a serious and painful inflammation of the intestines . Although he had been opposed to hard drugs as a bandleader , he began using painkillers , including heroin , which led to an addiction . These problems and the drug-related death of his friend and one-time musical partner Mike Bloomfield weighed heavily on him . On May 4 , 1987 at age 44 , Paul Butterfield died at his apartment in the North Hollywood district of Los Angeles . An autopsy by the county coroner concluded that he was the victim of an accidental drug overdose , with " significant levels of morphine ( heroin ) " . By the time of his death , Paul Butterfield was out of the commercial mainstream . Although for some , he was very much the bluesman , Maria Muldaur commented " he had the whole sensibility and musicality and approach down pat ... He just went for it and took it all in , and he embodied the essence of what the blues was all about . Unfortunately , he lived that way a little too much " .

In 1964 , Butterfield began his association with Elektra Records and eventually recorded seven albums for the label . After the breakup of the Butterfield Blues Band in 1971 , he recorded four albums for manager Albert Grossman 's Bearsville Records – two with Paul Butterfield 's Better Days and two solo . His last solo album was released by Amherst Records . After his death in 1987 , his former record companies released a number of live albums and compilations . Except where noted , the following albums are listed as " The Paul Butterfield Blues Band " .

Timothy Everest , MBE ( born 1961 ) is a Welsh bespoke tailor and designer who has , according to Vogue , " dressed some of the world 's most famous people " . Born in Haverfordwest , Wales , he moved to London in his early twenties to work with innovative Savile Row tailor Tommy Nutter , where he learned the art of bespoke . Everest was one of the leaders of the New Bespoke Movement , which brought designer attitudes to the traditional skills of Savile Row tailoring . Everest has been running his own tailoring business in the East End of London since 1989 . Based at his Spitalfields atelier since 1993 , he opened a West End store off Bond Street , near Savile Row , in 2008 . As well as collaborating on projects with designers and brands such as Brooks England , DAKS , Kim Jones , Levi 's , Rapha and Rocawear , as costume designer Everest has dressed the stars of films including Mission Impossible ( One and M : i-2 ) , Eyes Wide Shut , Atonement and Mamma Mia ! . He has been associated with the British high street retailer Marks and Spencer since 1999 , and has been a contributor to men 's magazine The Rake since 2008 . Everest is at the forefront of the bespoke casual movement .

Everest was born and brought up in Haverfordwest , Pembrokeshire , west Wales ; most of his family remain in the area . His parents were restaurateurs . He had aspired to become a racing driver . But , his ambition unfulfilled , he took a job with his uncle when he was 17 , working as a sales assistant at Hepworths , Milford Haven ; a high street tailor that would form the foundation of the Next retail empire . In the early 1980s , he became interested in the club scene , often driving to London , where he mixed with New Romantics such as Boy George at The Blitz ; a trendy London nightclub run by Steve Strange of the group Visage . Determined to become part of the fashion industry , but unable to make a breakthrough , Everest decided to use his knowledge of tailoring . He answered an advertisement placed in the London Evening Standard , in 1982 , by Tommy Nutter ; ' Boy wanted in Savile Row ' . He pestered Nutter for weeks , until he was given the job . Nutter 's client base included rock stars , celebrities , politicians and businessmen ; he famously dressed The Beatles and The Stones . Everest also mixed with future celebrities of the fashion world . John Galliano , who had been studying at the Central Saint Martins College of Art and Design , passed on some design skills to Everest , while on work placement with Nutter . Everest met his future wife Catherine ( now an actress and film producer ) at this time , while she was also working with Nutter . The couple have two daughters . Everest 's time under Nutter , a Savile Row revolutionary in the 1960s , inspired him to experiment with tone and pattern in his own designs . In 1986 , after nearly five years as Nutter 's apprentice , Everest was persuaded to move on to work for Malcolm Levene . He had become disillusioned with Savile Row , particularly with their lack of appreciation for Nutter 's more modern approach . Everest found that working with Levene , a small menswear retailer based away from Savile Row , on Chiltern Street , provided a welcome change . During Everest 's first year there , Levene 's turnover doubled .

Leaving Levene in the late 1980s to become a freelance stylist in television advertising , MTV and film , Everest began styling bands and pop stars such as George Michael . He recognised a shift in perception of the male fashion industry ; men had become more label conscious . This had coincided with the increased awareness of top-end fashion designers , like Hugo Boss and Armani , highlighted by men 's lifestyle magazines ; such as Arena and The Face . He said , " I thought that if we could demystify bespoke tailoring and make it more accessible , as well as really understanding what was going on in ready-to-wear fashion and being directional with it , there was possibly a market there . " Having decided to create the Timothy Everest brand as an alternative to ' designer ' ready-to-wear , he searched for a suitable location away from " the stuffiness of Savile Row " . Everest opened his first premises in 1989 ; in Princelet Street , Spitalfields , just outside the City of London , in the East End . He said , " We started in one room of a house . We had one rail with four garments on and a telephone , no chairs , no furniture . " To begin with , business was slow . Moving premises in 1993 , he chose a three-storey , early Georgian townhouse ( built in 1724 ) , just north of Old Spitalfields Market in nearby Elder Street – the former home of artist Mark Gertler ( 1891 – 1939 ) – converting it to an atelier over seven weeks . He dressed Tom Cruise for the 1996 film Mission : Impossible . Cruise liked the suits so much that he kept them , and commissioned Everest to make him some more .

Everest became one of the " Cool Britannia " tailoring generation of the mid-1990s , identified by James Sherwood ( author of Savile Row : The Master Tailors of British Bespoke ) as having begun with the publication of Vanity Fair 's " Cool Britania " issue in 1997 . Sensing a change in consumer attitudes , away from the more traditional styling of Savile Row , he sought to revitalise bespoke suiting , which he believed had been in danger of disappearing . With contemporaries Ozwald Boateng and Richard James , he launched the New Bespoke Movement , which brought a fashion designer approach to Savile Row craftsmanship . He launched the brand 's first ready-to-wear collection in 1999 . His long-standing association with Marks and Spencer began that year . He dressed Tom Cruise again , for his reprised role in the 2000 film Mission : Impossible II , and at the Oscars that year , when he also dressed Robin Williams and Burt Bacharach . By 2000 , he had 3,500 bespoke clients . Everest joined DAKS Simpson as design consultant in May 2000 . He was appointed to the board as Group Creative Director in 2002 , leaving in 2003 . One of the lines he designed for DAKS was an affordable suiting range aimed at teenagers , launched in August 2001 ; called DAKS E1 , after the postal district of his atelier .

Everest is at the forefront of the bespoke casual movement which , as the name suggests , provides individually tailored casual clothing of Savile Row quality , including : casual shirts ; smart-casual jackets ; T-shirts ; and jeans . In collaboration with Levi 's in 2004 , he designed a tailored-denim suit , sold in Japanese retailer Oki-Ni 's stores . Expanding the bespoke casual concept , he offered a bespoke denim tailoring service dressing celebrities from sports , Hollywood and rock music , such as David Beckham , Kevin Bacon and Ricky Wilson of the Kaiser Chiefs . Everest designed a suit collection in 2004 / 05 in collaboration with Rocawear , the fashion clothing company founded by American hip hop artists Damon Dash and Jay-Z. The advertising campaign was fronted by Dash 's friends Kevin Bacon and Naomi Campbell . He teamed up with British casual and sportswear designer Kim Jones during 2005 and 2006 . The collaboration produced tailoring collections for four seasons that were shown on the catwalk at Paris fashion week . For his next collaboration , in 2006 Everest showed a limited collection of menswear with New York hair salon Bumble and bumble , including a fully bespoke denim line , which retailed at around US $ 1,000 . Marketed as a ' destination location ' , the retail space on the store 's 8th floor , in the fashionable Meatpacking District of Manhattan , also featured a barbershop , a café and a teahouse . In autumn 2007 , the Timothy Everest ready-to-wear collection was available in shops for the first time , including Flannels , Liberty and John Lewis . The range included suits , shirts and trousers . He was costume designer for the 2008 film Mamma Mia ! , dressing its stars , including Pierce Brosnan and Colin Firth . He opened a West End store in 2008 , at Bruton Street , Mayfair , off Bond Street ; less than five minutes walk from Savile Row . He has been a creative contributor and Sartorial Advisor to men 's magazine The Rake since 2008 .

A keen cyclist , in 2009 Everest collaborated with cyclewear brand Rapha to develop a bespoke suit that could be worn while cycling ; what he called " bespoke active wear " . Priced at £ 3,500 , the three-piece suit was made of blended wool , using nanotechnology to repel water and dirt . It combined the functionality of classic cycling clothing with the elegance of bespoke tailoring . Its features included a high button fastening to keep the jacket closely fitted to the body , a lapel pocket for an MP3 player and pleats at the shoulders and center back to allow extra fabric when the rider was bent over the bicycle . The jacket design was incorporated into Rapha 's ready-to-wear collection in 2010 . In collaboration with bicycle saddle manufacturer Brooks England during 2010 , he developed a cycling jacket ; under Brooks ' John Boultbee clothing label . The resulting ' Criterion Mk.1 cycling jacket ' , which used water and sweat-resistant materials , was shown at the Bread and Butter street and urban fashion fair , Berlin , in January 2011 . Everest received an MBE in the 2010 New Year 's Honours list for his " services to the British fashion industry " . Having receiving the award from Queen Elizabeth at Buckingham Palace on Saint David 's Day 2010 , with his wife and two daughters watching , he described the award as a " great honour , not only for me but my business and all who have been involved " . He is quoted as saying that he would like " to be remembered as someone who made people take British clothing seriously " .

The Timothy Everest brand has three levels of tailoring . ' Bespoke ' is aimed at young professionals with the means to purchase bespoke tailoring , but not necessarily the desire to visit Savile Row . Each customer is measured for an individual pattern to be hand-cut , from which their chosen cloth is cut and sewn by hand . Although still hand made , ' Made-to-measure ' garments use existing ' house ' patterns , adapted to the customer 's measurements . The ' Ready-to-wear ' collection is sold in-house , at Everest 's Mayfair branch , and in Japan . Emphasising his Savile Row background , Everest said , " We are tailors who design , not designers who discovered tailoring " .

UK department store retailer Debenhams ' collaboration with designers , launched in 1993 under their Designers at Debenhams range , was a success . Hoping to recapture some of their lost market share , Marks and Spencer ( M & S ) asked Everest to review their menswear range . As Creative Consultant , he designed the Sartorial suiting line for their menswear collection . In October 2000 , he designed the Autograph suiting line . Noting that the M & S range consisted of Italian-style suiting , he aimed to achieve a more ' British ' look from the cut , fit and styling and by using different fabrics and colours . He also has responsibility for their Luxury collection . During M & S advertising campaigns , his designs for the Autograph range have been modelled by several British celebrities , including David Beckham , Bryan Ferry , Jimmy Carr , Martin Freeman , Bob Mortimer and Take That . In 2007 , M & S were selected by The Football Association as ' Official Tailor to the England football team ' and Everest designed the team 's official suits for the 2010 World Cup in South Africa .

Everest has , according to Vogue , dressed " some of the world 's most famous people " . He has clients worldwide and travels regularly for fittings in New York , Los Angeles and Japan . Closer to home , Everest 's bespoke atelier in Spitalfields has a diverse client base that includes politicians ( including British Prime Ministers past and present ) , and sports and Hollywood personalities . Of his suit worn to the Oscars , Tom Cruise commented : " Of course it fits ; it 's a Timothy Everest " . He has been costume designer on several films , including Mission Impossible ( One and M : i-2 ) , Tube Tales , Eyes Wide Shut , Appaloosa , Atonement , The Accidental Husband and Mamma Mia ! . Among his celebrity clients are : Kevin Bacon ; David Beckham ; Matthew Broderick ; Gordon Brown ; Pierce Brosnan ; David Cameron ; Jarvis Cocker ; Jeremy Irons ; Jay-Z ; Mick Jagger ; and James McAvoy .

Symphony in White , No. 3 , is a painting by James Abbott McNeill Whistler . The work shows two women dressed in white , one sitting on a sofa and the other resting on the floor . The model on the sofa is Joanna Heffernan , the artist 's mistress . By calling the painting Symphony in White , No. 3 , Whistler intended to emphasise his artistic philosophy of corresponding arts , inspired by the poet Charles Baudelaire . The presence of a fan on the floor shows the influence of Japonisme , which was a popular artistic trend in European art at the time . Whistler was also greatly influenced by his colleague and friend Albert Joseph Moore , and their works show considerable similarities . Though Whistler started on the painting in 1865 , he was not ready to exhibit it publicly until 1867 , when it went on display at the Royal Academy . His colleagues were impressed by the painting , but not all critics fully understood the connection between the painting and its title . One review in particular questioned the presence of other colours in addition to white , a criticism which prompted Whistler to respond with a scathing and sarcastic letter . Years later , Whistler 's former student Walter Sickert criticized the painting as " the low-water mark of the old manner , before the birth of the new . "

James Abbott McNeill Whistler was born in the United States in 1834 , the son of George Washington Whistler , a railway engineer . In 1843 , his father relocated the family to Saint Petersburg , Russia , where James received training in painting . After a stay in England , he returned to America to attend the US Military Academy at West Point in 1851 . In 1855 , he made his way back to Europe , determined to dedicate himself to painting . Here he settled in Paris at first , but in 1859 moved to London , where he would spend most of the remainder of his life . There he met Dante Gabriel Rossetti and other members of the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood , who would have a profound influence on Whistler . It was also in London that Whistler met Joanna Heffernan , the model who would become his lover . By 1865 , Whistler had already used her as a model for other paintings , among these Symphony in White , No. 1 and Symphony in White , No. 2 . Heffernan supposedly had a strong influence over Whistler ; his brother-in-law Francis Seymour Haden refused a dinner invitation in the winter of 1863 – 64 due to her dominant presence in the household . In January 1864 , Whistler 's mother Anna – later depicted in the painting Arrangement in Grey and Black – arrived to stay with her son in London . As a result , Heffernan had to move out of the apartment , and only visited as a model . Still , Heffernan 's presence displeased Whistler 's mother , and his relationship with both women became strained .

Whistler started on Symphony in White , No. 3 perhaps as early as July 1865 . It was the last of his paintings for which Heffernan was a model . He used Milly Jones , the wife of an actor friend , as the second model for the painting . By the middle of August , he had a complete sketch ready , and he continued work on the painting into September . Whistler kept reworking it , however , and it was not until 1867 that he considered it finished . He painted over the final " 5 " in the date , and replaced it with a " 7 " , to mark the changes it had undergone . In March 1867 , William Michael Rossetti wrote of seeing the painting in Whistler 's studio , and mentioned that it was previously called The Two Little White Girls . It then went on display at the Royal Academy . The work was greatly admired by Whistler 's colleagues , including Henri Fantin-Latour , Alfred Stevens , James Tissot and Edgar Degas . For Degas , the painting served as an inspiration for his own portrait of Eugénie Fiocre in the ballet La Source . Some critics , however , were confused by the title . Philip Hamerton , writing for the Saturday Review on 1 June 1867 , remarked :

In the " Symphony in White No . III . " by Mr. Whistler there are many dainty varieties of tint , but it is not precisely a symphony in white . One lady has a yellowish dress and brown hair and a bit of blue ribbon , the other has a red fan , and there are flowers and green leaves . There is a girl in white on a white sofa , but even this girl has reddish hair ; and of course there is the flesh colour of the complexions . Whistler was always belligerent in his response to critics . He wrote a letter to the editor that the newspaper would not print , but was later reprinted by Whistler himself in his book The Gentle Art of Making Enemies : How pleasing that such profound prattle should inevitably find its place in print ! ... Bon Dieu ! did this wise person expect white hair and chalked faces ? And does he then , in his astounding consequence , believe that a symphony in F contains no other note , but shall be a continued repetition of F , F , F ? . . . Fool !

Symphony in White , No. 3 shows Heffernan reclining on a sofa with her head rested on her hand , while Jones is seated on the floor , leaning against the sofa . There is a fan on the floor , and a plant bearing white flowers on the right . The fan is an oriental element , and an expression of the artistic trend known as Japonisme which was then prevalent in European art . At the time , Whistler was greatly influenced by his friend and colleague Albert Joseph Moore . The painting bears close resemblances to Moore 's roughly contemporary painting A Musician , though at the time the two were working so closely together that it is hard to ascertain exactly who influenced whom . The painter Walter Sickert – a student of Whistler – later described the painting in unflattering terms . In December 1908 , five years after Whistler 's death , he wrote in the Fortnightly Review : In ' Symphony in White , No. 3 , ' we get the culbute . A bad picture , lâchons le mot , badly composed , badly drawn , badly painted , the low-water mark of the old manner , before the birth of the new . Folds of drapery are expressed by ribbons of paint in the direction of the folds themselves , with hard edges to them . Only painters can quite understand the depth of technical infamy confessed in this last description . It means that the drapery is no longer painted , but intended .

To Whistler himself , however , the painting was not old-fashioned , but rather an expression of something new and innovative . By naming it Symphony in White , No. 3 , Whistler highlighted his emphasis on composition , rather than subject matter . The use of a musical title was also an expression of the theory of corresponding arts , which was an idea developed by the French poet Charles Baudelaire . These tendencies became more and more dominant in Whistler 's art over time . His two earlier paintings Symphony in White , No. 1 and Symphony in White , No. 2 had originally been titled The White Girl and The Little White Girl respectively , and later been renamed by the artist . Whistler had originally intended to call this work Two Little White Girls , but the development of his artistic philosophy made him change his mind , and from the time of its first exhibition it has been called by its musical title .

" 2 Become 1 " is a song by the English girl group the Spice Girls . Written by the group members , Matt Rowe and Richard Stannard during the group 's first professional songwriting session , it was produced by Rowe and Stannard for the group 's debut album Spice ( 1996 ) . It was inspired by the special relationship that was developing between Geri Halliwell and Rowe during the writing session . " 2 Become 1 " is a Pop , Pop rock , Soft rock , Easy listening , and Romance ( music ) song that features instrumentation from a guitar , an electronic keyboard , and string instruments . The lyrics focus on the bonding of two lovers , and also address the importance of contraception . Its Big TV ! -directed music video , which features the group performing against time-lapse footage of Times Square in New York City , was completely shot against a green screen at a studio in London . The backdrop was later superimposed . Released as the group 's third single on 16 December 1996 , it was generally well received by music critics and was a commercial success . It topped the UK Singles Chart for three weeks , becoming the group 's third consecutive chart-topper , their second million-selling single , and their first Christmas number-one single in the United Kingdom . In July 1997 , the song was released in the United States , peaking at No. 4 on the Billboard Hot 100 , and receiving a gold certification by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . It performed similarly internationally , peaking inside the top ten on the majority of the charts that it entered .

In December 1994 , the Spice Girls persuaded their former managers — father-and-son team Bob and Chris Herbert — to set up a showcase in front of industry writers , producers and A & R men at the Nomis Studios in Shepherd 's Bush , London . Producer Richard Stannard was originally at the studio to meet pop star Jason Donovan , but he ended up in the showcase after hearing Melanie Brown , as she went charging across the corridor . Stannard recalls : More than anything , they just made me laugh . I couldn 't believe I 'd walked into this situation . You didn 't care if they were in time with the dance steps or whether one was overweight or one wasn 't as good as the others . It was something more . It just made you feel happy . Like great pop records . Stannard stayed after everyone had left the showcase to talk to the group , he then reported back to his songwriter partner Matt Rowe , that he had found the pop group of their dreams . In January 1995 , Chris Herbert booked the group 's first professional songwriting session with the producers at the Strongroom in Curtain Road , East London . Rowe remember feeling similarly to Stannard when he first met the group , " I love them . Immediately . [ ... ] They were like no one I 'd met before , really . " The session was productive as the duo seemed to get along with the group , together they discussed about the songwriting process and what they wanted to do with the record . In her autobiography , Brown recalled that the duo instinctively understood their point of view and knew how to incorporate " the spirit of five loud girls into great pop music " .

" 2 Become 1 " was co-written by the Spice Girls along with partners Richard Stannard and Matthew Rowe . Stannard and Rowe also co-produced the track . After writing more uptempo dance-based songs , such as " Wannabe " , the group and the two producers decided to write a slow ballad . But as the group were writing the song , they realised that it was a bit too slushy , so it was decided to address the importance of contraception with the lyrics : " Be a little bit wiser baby . Put it on , put it on " . The song was inspired by the special relationship that was developing between Geri Halliwell and Rowe . Brown hinted at this development in her autobiography commenting : " When he [ Rowe ] and Geri started making eyes at each other I knew what was going on , even though they denied it . I knew them both too well for it to be a secret for me . " Stannard commented about the fondness between Halliwell and Rowe : " I don 't want to get into the side of things . They were very close . They clicked . And I think the lyrics in " 2 Become 1 " came from that , especially the first verse , which they wrote together . "

The group recorded a Spanish version of the song , written by them , Rowe , Stannard , and N. Maño . The title was " 2 Become 1 " ( Spanish Version ) , although the title is loosely translated in one line of the song , " Seremos Uno Los Dos " . It was released as the eleventh track of their debut album Spice , in Latin America , South Africa , in a special re-edition of the album in Spain , and as one of the tracks of the " 2 Become 1 " maxi-single in the US . A Spanglish edit that traded verses between the English and Spanish versions was created by DJ Mike Rizzo and production director Bill Schultz for New York-based radio WKTU .

" 2 Become 1 " is a pop ballad , written in the key of F ♯ major ; it is set in the time signature of common time and moves at a slow tempo of 72 beats per minute . The song is constructed in a verse-chorus form , and its instrumentation comes from a guitar , an electronic keyboard , and string instruments . The song opens with an instrumental introduction , with a chord progression of E ♭ m add9 – D ♭ / F – G ♭ – A ♭ m7 sus4 , that is also used during the first part of the verses . The last two lines of each verse changes the progression to C ♭ – B ♭ m7 – A ♭ m7 – D ♭ 11 , and changes again during each chorus to G ♭ – D ♭ – C ♭ – D ♭ . It closes with a string outro that uses the chord progression F ♭ – G ♭ – B ♭ ♭ – C ♭ , which is arranged by Scottish composer Craig Armstrong . In 1995 the Spice Girls recorded the demo version of 2 Become 1 . The first three verses sang by Chisholm , Beckham and Bunton respectively . The second three verses were sung by Chisholm , Halliwell and Bunton respectively . The final verse sang by Bunton and the bridges sang by Brown . In the final versions of the song Brown sang the second verse instead of Beckham for unknown reasons . The first and third lines of the chorus are sung by Bunton and Halliwell together and the second and fourth lines are sung by Chisholm and Beckham . After Halliwell 's departure in 1998 , Beckham replaced Halliwell singing the first and third lines of the chorus along with Bunton , while Brown replaced Beckham singing the second and fourth lines of the chorus along with Chisholm .

The lyrics focus on how the bonding of two lovers can become so strong that they practically become one entity , through the act of sexual intercourse . Apart from the sexual connotations , there is an aspirational undercurrent to the lyrics , and like many of their subsequent songs , desire is explicitly linked to ambition – " Free your mind of doubt and danger / Be for real don 't be a stranger / We can achieve it / We can achieve it " . Two different versions of the song , each with different lyrics , were recorded : in the album version , the second line of the second verse , " Any deal that we endeavor / Boys and girls go good together " , was changed in the single version to : " Once again if we endeavour / Love will bring us back together " . Victoria Beckham sings on the single version , while Halliwell sings on the album version , after Halliwell confessed that she had a hard time singing on that particular key . The single version appears in the music video , and on stage the girls always performed the single version before and after Halliwell 's departure .

" 2 Become 1 " was released in the United Kingdom on 16 December 1996 , in three single versions . The first one , a maxi single that included the single version of the track , an orchestral take , the Junior Vasquez remix of " Wannabe " , and " One of These Girls " , a song written by the group with Paul Wilson and Andy Watkins — the songwriters and production duo known as Absolute . The second version was the special Christmas pack , a standard CD single in a cardboard case that included a signed postcard with a Christmas message from the group . This version contained the single version , the Dave Way remix , and their own version of Leroy Anderson 's " Sleigh Ride " . The third version was a two-track cassette single , featuring the single version and the orchestral take of the song . The same track listing was also used for the release of the European CD single .

The song was generally well received by music critics . In a review of the group 's debut album Spice , Dev Sherlock of Yahoo ! Music Radio called it a " glossy ballad that would do Mariah Carey proud " . Whitney Pastorek of Entertainment Weekly said that the song is " too slow , and the lyrics appear to have been written by a safe-sex-loving unicorn " , adding that " it 's almost impossible to identify the individual Spice Girls by their voices here , so airbrushed are the proceedings " . Larry Flick of Billboard magazine said that " they are surprisingly adept at weaving warm and romantic imagery over a sweet melody " adding that " [ Everyone ] will delight in the track 's arrangement of soft harmonies and delicate acoustic guitar riffs " . Time magazine 's Christopher John Farley called it a " slumberous ballad [ ... ] [ that ] seem [ s ] designed to amuse , titillate , ingratiate " . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic called the song a " perfect adult contemporary confection " . Greg Kot of the Chicago Tribune said that their first album " is a compendium of slick secondhand urban pop encompassing [ ... ] G-funk synths on ' Say You 'll Be There ' [ ... ] and Babyface 's guitar and strings balladry on ' 2 Become 1 ' " . In a review of the group 's 2007 compilation album Greatest Hits , Talia Kraines of BBC Music called it " shimmering " adding that " only a cold heart could fail to love their first festive # 1 " . Digital Spy 's Nick Levine said that the group 's slower songs were " probably their strongest suit " , and thought that " ' 2 Become 1 ' manages to combine every element of the perfect Christmas ballad – a touch of elegance , a hint of romance , a soupcon of sexiness and a generous sprinkling of sparkle – and still finds time for a coy safe sex message " .

" 2 Become 1 " was originally going to be released in the UK on 9 December 1996 , but the release date was delayed to let Dunblane 's " Knockin ' on Heaven 's Door " — a tribute to the children killed at the Dunblane Primary School in Scotland — to stay at the top of the UK Singles Chart . The single was released the next week , debuting at the top , becoming the group 's third chart-topper and their first Christmas number-one single in the UK . It sold 209,000 copies in the first three days of release and 430,000 in the first week , becoming the tenth best-selling single of the year . " 2 Become 1 " sold 1.12 million copies in total , giving the Spice Girls their second and final million-selling single in the UK . In Ireland , " 2 Become 1 " was the group 's second number-one single , and their first to debut at the top of the Irish Singles Chart . It stayed at the top position for six weeks , and became their first Christmas number-one single in the country . " 2 Become 1 " peaked at No. 3 on the Eurochart Hot 100 , and performed similarly across the rest of Europe , topping the singles chart in Spain , peaking inside the top ten in Austria , Denmark , Finland , France , Italy , the Netherlands , Norway , Sweden and Switzerland , and inside the top fifteen in Belgium and Germany . It was also commercially successful in Australia and New Zealand , peaking inside the top three on both countries .

In July 1997 , " 2 Become 1 " debuted on the Canadian RPM singles chart at No. 87 , peaked at No. 3 on its fifth week , and ended at No. 25 on the year-end chart . On the Adult Contemporary chart it peaked at No. 4 , and ended at No. 27 on the year-end chart . In the United States , the song debuted on 16 August 1997 at No. 6 , reaching a peak of No. 4 in its fourth week , becoming the group 's third consecutive top five in the country . The song peaked at No. 6 on the Hot 100 Airplay chart and at No. 8 on the Hot 100 Singles Sales chart , selling 700,000 copies as of December 1997 . It peaked at four on the Mainstream Top 40 , and had crossover success , peaking at four on the Rhythmic Top 40 and at eight on the Adult Contemporary chart .

The music video for " 2 Become 1 " was directed on 22 November 1996 by Big TV ! , in a two-day shoot located at a studio in Old Compton Street , London . Cinematographer Stephen Keith-Roach — who worked in other music videos such as Jamiroquai 's " Virtual Insanity " and U2 's " Discotheque " — was in charge of the photography . The shoot involved the group dressed in winter coats , wandering around the studio against a green screen , interspersed with close-up camera angles , so that the backdrop could be superimposed later . To achieve the effect of the wind blowing slowly through their hairs , the group was required to lip-synch the song in double time while wind machines were on them . The music video features the group in Times Square in New York City with fast moving cars appearing around multi-coloured lights , appearing in various places around the city , either alone , with one other member , or as a quintet . The video is intercut with scenes of lovers experiencing moments of togetherness and closes with a deer wandering the streets . Such a scene , according to the group 's first official book Girl Power ! , gave them a running gag all throughout the shoot — " Whenever anyone made a mistake it was , ' Oh , deer ' . " Sometimes , the closing scene would not be shown on television , due to the song fading out to an instrumental , which lasts for 40 seconds .

The song was performed many times on television , including the Bravo Supershow , GMTV , Live & Kicking , Noel 's House Party , and Top of the Pops . In October 1997 , the group performed " 2 Become 1 " as the eighth song of their first live concert at the Abdi İpekçi Arena in Istanbul , Turkey . The performance was broadcast on Showtime in a pay-per-view event titled Spice Girls In Concert Wild ! , and was later included in the VHS and DVD release Girl Power ! Live in Istanbul . In December 2007 , the group performed the song on the finale of the fifth season of the British television show Strictly Come Dancing . They wore floor-length gowns and used microphones covered in glitter , while professional dancers did a choreography in front of them . The Spice Girls have performed the song on their three tours , the Spiceworld Tour , the Christmas In Spiceworld Tour , and the Return of the Spice Girls . The performance at the Spiceworld Tour 's final concert can be found on the video : Spice Girls Live at Wembley Stadium , filmed in London , on 20 September 1998 . For the Return of the Spice Girls Tour , the group performed it during the second segment of the show . After the " Too Much " performance , each of the girls emerged from a cocoon of oversized swan wings and danced around a set of barber ’ s poles while singing the song .

" 2 Become 1 " has been covered both in albums and live performances . In 1998 , The Countdown Singers recorded a sound-alike version of the song for their album Today 's Love Songs . Lester Bowie 's Brass Fantasy did an instrumental jazz cover for the 1999 album The Odyssey Of Funk & Popular Music . American guitarist Paul Gilbert covered the song for his fourth album Alligator Farm . Wildside recorded a dance remake for the 1997 album Mega Hits Dance Party , Vol . 1 , and was later included on the 2005 album Let 's Hear It for the 90 's , Vol . 1 . Filipino bossa nova singer , Sitti Navarro , recorded a cover of the song for her second album My Bossa Nova . During her solo career , Emma Bunton has performed live covers of the song on television programmes such as CD : UK and Popworld , and it was also included as part of her setlist for the Pepsi Silver Clef Concert . She performed the song as a duet twice with her former band mate Melanie C on November 9 , 2013 as part of the Oxford Street Lights Switch On and on January 11 , 2014 for Sporty 's Forty at 02 Shepherd 's Bush Empire .

The Crimes Act of 1790 ( or the Federal Criminal Code of 1790 ) , formally titled An Act for the Punishment of Certain Crimes Against the United States , defined some of the first federal crimes in the United States and expanded on the criminal procedure provisions of the Judiciary Act of 1789 . The Crimes Act was a " comprehensive statute defining an impressive variety of federal crimes . " As an enactment of the First Congress , the Crimes Act is often regarded as a quasi-constitutional text . The punishment of treason , piracy , counterfeiting , as well as crimes committed on the high seas or against the law of nations , followed from relatively explicit constitutional authority . The creation of crimes within areas under exclusive federal jurisdiction followed from the plenary power of Congress over the " Seat of the Government , " federal enclaves , and federal territories . The creation of crimes involving the integrity of the judicial process derived from Congress 's authority to establish such courts . The Crimes Act also established a statute of limitations for federal crimes , provided for criminal venue , ensured procedural protections for treason and capital defendants , simplified the pleading requirements for perjury , and broadened the constitutional protection against " corruption of blood . " Further , the act provided for punitive dissection of murderers and codified diplomatic immunity .

Even after the passage of the Judiciary Act of 1789 , " the definition of crimes and the establishment of punishments " remained a " missing link of the criminal system . " The Judiciary Act of 1789 divided original jurisdiction for the trial of federal crimes between the district courts and the circuit courts . The district courts were given jurisdiction over all federal crimes " where no other punishment than whipping , not exceeding thirty stripes , a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars , or a term of imprisonment not exceeding six months , is to be inflicted . " The circuit courts were given concurrent jurisdiction over these crimes , and exclusive jurisdiction over all other federal crimes . The circuit courts also exercised appellate jurisdiction over the district courts , but only in civil cases . The Judiciary Act of 1789 also placed the responsibility for prosecuting federal crimes in the United States Attorney for each federal judicial district . The Act provided that " there shall be appointed in each district " a " person learned in the law to act as attorney for the United States in such district , who shall be sworn or affirmed to the faithful execution of his office , whose duty it shall be to prosecute in such district all delinquents for crimes and offences , cognizable under the authority of the United States . "

The Senate passed an act to define a variety of federal crimes on August 31 , 1789 , but the House did not act on that bill . Like the Judiciary Act of 1789 and the Process Act of 1789 , the Crimes Act was primarily authored by Senator ( and future Chief Justice ) Oliver Ellsworth as the chair of the Senate committee . The committee examined the state criminal laws of Massachusetts , New Jersey , Pennsylvania , Virginia , and South Carolina at the beginning of the drafting process . The Crimes Act generated " little reported debate " on the floor of Congress . The act was passed on April 30 , 1790 .

Article Three provides that : " Treason against the United States , shall consist only in levying War against them , or in adhering to their Enemies , giving them Aid and Comfort . No Person shall be convicted of Treason unless on the Testimony of two Witnesses to the same overt Act , or on Confession in open Court . The Congress shall have power to declare the Punishment of Treason , but no Attainder of Treason shall work Corruption of Blood , or Forfeiture except during the Life of the Person attainted . " As to misprision of treason , according to David P. Currie , because " [ t ] he Constitution said nothing of this offense , " " the legislators must have interpreted the narrow definition of treason in Article III not to preclude it from creating lesser related offenses that might otherwise fall within federal purview — although nothing in the misprision provision suggested that Congress had yet considered the possible impact of the Treason Clause on its efforts to punish seditious expression . "

Article One provides that Congress shall have the power " [ t ] o define and punish Piracies and Felonies committed on the high Seas . " Five sections in the Crimes Act " were devoted to the subject . " Currie notes that the various piracy offenses " take an exceedingly broad view of what constituted piracy , " but that " [ f ] rom a constitutional standpoint no harm was done , since all of the acts punished were felonious and Congress 's power extended to all felonies on the high seas . " " The principal provisions with respect to piracy were incorporated in section 8 . " Section 8 applied not only to the " high Seas , " but also to " any river , haven , basin , or bay , out of the jurisdiction of any particular State . " Currie notes a variety of constitutional theories which Congress might have espoused in order to justify this provision : " Whether Congress thought authority over such places included within the ostensibly narrower term ' high Seas , " necessary and proper to the regulation of commerce or to the exercise of admiralty jurisdiction , or implicit in a central government responsible for external affairs is not clear . "

Article One provides that Congress shall have the power " [ t ] o provide for the Punishment of counterfeiting the Securities and current Coin of the United States . " Currie argues that section 14 's somewhat broad reading of the word " Securities " is fair enough . Currie suggests that " [ n ] othing was said of counterfeiting coins " because the United States Mint had not yet been established . Some members of the House , including Theodore Sedgwick of Massachusetts , spoke against the prescribing death penalty for counterfeiting , viewing it as too harsh .

Several offenses were limited to acts committed in places " under the sole and exclusive jurisdiction of the United States . " Such regulations would have applied in the " Seat of the Government , " federal enclaves , and federal territories . Article One provides that Congress shall have the power " [ t ] o exercise exclusive Legislation in all Cases whatsoever , over such District ( not exceeding ten Miles square ) as may , by Cession of particular States , and the acceptance of Congress , become the Seat of the Government of the United States , and to exercise like Authority over all Places purchased by the Consent of the Legislature of the State in which the Same shall be , for the Erection of Forts , Magazines , Arsenals , dock-Yards , and other needful Buildings . " And Article Four provides that " Congress shall have Power to dispose of and make all needful Rules and Regulations respecting the Territory . . . . " With reference to the " arms , ordnance , munition , shot , powder , or habiliments of war belonging to the United States " provision of section 16 , Currie argues that it could have been justified under Congress 's Article One power to " raise and support armies " or Congress 's Article Four power to make needful rules respecting " property belonging to the United States . "

The constitutional authorization of these crimes was less explicit , but Article One does provide that Congress shall have the power " [ t ] o constitute Tribunals inferior to the supreme Court . " According to Currie : This is the point at which explicit constitutional authority for the creation of federal crimes runs out . But the statute went on to define additional crimes : theft or falsification of court records , perjury , bribery of federal judges , interference with judicial process , and liberation of federal prisoners . All of these were plainly necessary and proper to the operation of the federal courts ; Marshall was to cite the perjury section as precedent for the existence of implicit powers in M 'Culloch v. Maryland . According to Stacy and Dayton , these provision are " compelling evidence that the founders did not intend the national role in criminal law to be limited to crimes expressly mentioned in the Constitution . "

Section 8 provided that " the trial of crimes committed on the high seas , or in any place out of the jurisdiction of any particular State , shall be in the district where the offender is apprehended , or into which he may first be brought . " Thus , section 8 was an exercise of Congress 's authority under Article Three to define criminal venue for all crimes " not committed within any State . " But , the Supreme Court did not interpret section 8 as exercising the full extent of Congress 's authority under Article Three . In Ex parte Bollman ( 1807 ) , the Court held that the statutory term " any place out of the jurisdiction of any particular state " applied only to " any river , haven , bason or bay , not within the jurisdiction of any particular state , " and only in " those cases there is no court which has particular cognizance of the crime . "

The Crimes Act prescribed death as the exclusive punishment for the crimes of treason , counterfeiting , wilfull murder , and aiding the escape of a death row prisoner , as well as piracy , murder , and robbery on the high seas . Section 29 provided treason and capital defendants a right to a copy of the indictment , a list of the jury ( and , in treason cases , witnesses ) , appointed counsel , and compulsory process : [ A ] ny person who shall be accused and indicted of treason , shall have a copy of the indictment , and a list of the jury and witnesses , to be produced on the trial for proving the said indictment , mentioning the names and places of abode of such witnesses and jurors , delivered unto him at least three entire days before he shall be tried for the same ; and in other capital offences , shall have such copy of the indictment and list of the jury two entire days at least before the trial : And that every person so accused and indicted for any of the crimes aforesaid , shall also be allowed and admitted to make his full defence by counsel learned in the law ; and the court before whom such person shall be tried , or some judge thereof , shall , and they are hereby authorized and required immediately upon his request to assign to such person such counsel , not exceeding two , as such person shall desire , to whom such counsel shall have free at all reasonable hours ; and every such person or persons accused or indicted of the crimes aforesaid , shall be allowed and admitted in his said defence to make any proof that he or they can produce , by lawful witness or witnesses , and shall have the like process of the court where he or they shall be tried , to compel his or their witnesses to appear at his or their trial , as is usually granted to compel witnesses to appear on the prosecution against them .

Most of the provisions of section 29 are plainly similar to those of the Sixth Amendment , namely the Information Clause , the Assistance of Counsel Clause , and the Compulsory Process Clause . The Sixth Amendment ( and the remainder of the Bill of Rights ) had not yet been ratified at the time of the Crimes Act 's passage . Section 30 provided treason and capital defendants with peremptory challenges and provided for a plea of not guilty in the case that the defendant refused to enter a plea : if any person or persons be indicted of treason against the United States , and shall stand mute or refuse to plead , or shall challenge peremptorily above the number of thirty-five of the jury ; or if any person or persons be indicted of other of the offences herein for which the punishment is declared to be death , if he or they shall also stand mute or will not answer to the indictment , or challenge peremptorily above the number of twenty persons of the jury ; the court , in any of the cases aforesaid , shall notwithstanding proceed to the trial of the person or persons so standing mute or challenging , as if he or they had pleaded not guilty , and render judgment thereon accordingly .

In United States v. Shackleford ( 1855 ) , the Court held that the section 30 's allocation of peremptory challenges controlled , rather than an 1840 statute that required federal jury selection to generally follow state law ( and , thus , the prosecutor was given no peremptory challenges in such cases ) . Ten years later , Congress abrogated Shackleford , granting prosecutors five peremptory challenges in treason and capital cases ( and two in non-capital felony cases ) ; the 1865 act left the defendant 's number of peremptory challenges unchanged . Section 31 eliminated the benefit of clergy for capital crimes . Section 33 designated the means of execution as " hanging . . . by the neck until dead . "

in every presentment or indictment to be prosecuted against any person for wilful and corrupt perjury , it shall be sufficient to set forth the substance of the offence charged upon the defendant , and by what court , or before whom the oath or affirmation was taken , ( averring such court , or person or persons to have a competent authority to administer the same ) together with the proper averment or averments to falsify the matter or matters wherein the perjury or perjuries is or are assigned ; without setting forth the bill , answer , information , indictment , declaration , or any part of any record or proceeding , either in law or equity , other than as aforesaid , and without setting forth the commission or authority of the court , or person or persons before whom the perjury was committed . in every presentment or indictment for subornation of perjury , or for corrupt bargaining or contracting with others to commit wilful and corrupt perjury , it shall be sufficient to set forth the substance of the offence charged upon the defendant , without setting forth the bill , answer , information , indictment , declaration , or any part of any record or proceeding , either in law or equity , and without setting forth the commmsion or authority of the court , or person or persons before whom the perjttry was committed , or was agreed or promised to be committed .

Section 24 provided that " no conviction or judgment of any of the offences aforesaid , shall work corruption of blood , or any forfeiture of estate . " This generalized the guarantee of Article Three that " no Attainder of Treason shall work Corruption of Blood , or Forfeiture except during the Life of the Person attainted . " The Crimes Act made no provision for the creation of federal prisons . Instead , a September 21 , 1789 concurrent resolution asked the state legislatures to authorize their prisons to imprison federal prisoners . The first federal prison was not opened until 1894 at Fort Leavenworth .

Section 4 authorized a court to order the post-execution dissection of the corpse of convicted murderers . According to David P. Currie , this was the " most controversial provision of the entire statute . " Dissection-as-punishment had its roots in a 1789 New York statute and a 1752 English law . Rep. Michael J. Stone of Maryland argued against the inclusion of this provision as cruel . Currie argues that Congress was on a firm constitutional footing in enacting this provision in relation to murders committed in areas under exclusive federal jurisdiction , but perhaps less so for murders committed on the high seas .

[ I ] f any writ or process shall at any time hereafter be sued forth or prosecuted by any person or persons , in any of the courts of the United States , or in any of the courts of a particular state , or by any judge or justice therein respectively , whereby the person of any ambassador or other public minister of any foreign prince or state , authorized and received as such by the President of the United States , or any domestic or domestic servant of any much ambassador or other public minister , may be arrested or imprisoned , or his or their goods or chattels be distrained , seized or attached , such writ or process shall be deemed and adjudged to be utterly null and void to all intents , construction and purposes whatsoever . Section 27 provided a limited exception for private debts contracted by ambassadors prior to the passage of the act .

Section 1 was supplemented by an omnibus treason law during the Civil War , which , inter alia , provided for punishments other than death and additional lesser offenses . The offense of treason , and the punishment thereof , were codified in consecutive sections of the Revised Statutes . Both were repealed and replaced by the Criminal Code of 1909 . During the 1948 re-codification of the Criminal Code , the treason offense was amended and moved to 18 U.S.C. § 2381 , where it remains . It was amended in 1994 . Section 2 was codified in the Revised Statutes , and re-codified by the Criminal Code of 1909 , and the 1948 re-codification . It was amended in 1994 . Section 8 was amended in 1820 , 1835 , and 1846 and codified in five sections of the Revised Statutes . Further , § 8 was supplemented by additional prohibitions in § 5 of an 1819 act and § 3 of an 1820 act . Despite the similarity of the provisions , all three were all separately codified in the Revised Statutes in 1874 . Section 8 was repealed by the Criminal Code of 1909 . Section 8 's venue provision was re-enacted by § 14 of the Crimes Act of 1825 , with minor changes .

Section 14 was repealed by § 17 of the Crimes Act of 1825 , which broadened the offense of counterfeiting and reduced authorized the punishment from death to 10 years hard labor and a $ 5000 fine . Sections 18 through 21 of the 1825 Act created additional counterfeiting offenses . Section 18 was amended by § 13 of the Crimes Act of 1825 — which defined the term " perjury " and increased the authorized punishment to 5 years hard labor and a $ 3000 fine — and further amended in 1874 and 1876 . Perjury and subornation were separately codified in the Revised Statutes . Section 30 , with regard to peremptory challenges , was re-enacted and supplemented in 1865 . Section 30 , with regard to a defendant 's failure to enter a plea , was extended from capital to all crimes by § 14 of the Crimes Act of 1825 .

According to Taylor : " Like the Judiciary Act of 1789 , the Process Act of 1789 and the Crimes Act of 1790 , having been passed by the First Congress , are perhaps the statutes most informative of an original understanding of Congress 's constitutional power over the federal judiciary . " According to Kurland , " for the most part , Congress enacted statutes that closely tracked the specific constitutional grants of federal criminal authority . However , Congress continued to venture slightly , but significantly , into areas outside the specific constitutional grants . " As examples in the later category , Kurland cites the provisions concerning the integrity of the federal criminal process , bribery , misprison of treason , and the revenue provisions . Currie notes that the Crimes Act " resolved a number of interesting constitutional questions . " For example , with reference to the punishments of " stripes " and disqualification from office , Currie argues that : " These provisions suggest not only that Congress viewed neither of these punishments as cruel and unusual , but also that they did not understand impeachment to be the sole avenue for the future disqualification of current officeholders . " Taylor goes further in arguing the disqualification provision was not merely prospective : " The Crimes Act of 1790 indicates that , beyond its plenary power over federal court jurisdiction and procedure , the First Congress believed it had the constitutional power to make conviction by a court an alternative means of removing a federal judge , outside the impeachment context , and it sheds light on the First Congress 's understanding of its own powers to discipline federal judges . "

Witch trials in early modern Scotland were the judicial proceedings in Scotland between the early sixteenth century and the mid-eighteenth century concerned with crimes of witchcraft . In the late Middle Ages there were a handful of prosecutions for harm done through witchcraft , but the passing of the Witchcraft Act 1563 made witchcraft , or consulting with witches , capital crimes . The first major series of trials under the new act were the North Berwick witch trials , beginning in 1589 , in which James VI played a major part as " victim " and investigator . He became interested in witchcraft and published a defence of witch-hunting in the Daemonologie in 1597 , but he appears to have become increasingly sceptical and eventually took steps to limit prosecutions . An estimated 4,000 to 6,000 people , mostly from the Scottish Lowlands , were tried for witchcraft in this period ; a much higher rate than for neighbouring England . There were major series of trials in 1590 – 91 , 1597 , 1628 – 31 , 1649 – 50 and 1661 – 62 . Seventy-five per cent of the accused were women . Modern estimates indicate that over 1,500 persons were executed . Most of those executed were strangled and then burnt . The hunts subsided under English occupation after the Civil Wars during the period of the Commonwealth led by Oliver Cromwell . In the 1650s and returned after the Restoration in 1660 , causing some alarm and leading to the Privy Council of Scotland limiting arrests , prosecutions and torture . There was also growing scepticism in the later seventeenth century , while some of the factors that may have contributed to the trials , such as economic distress , subsided . Although there were occasional local outbreaks of witch-hunting , the last recorded executions were in 1706 and the last trial in 1727 . The Scottish and English parliaments merged in 1707 , and the unified British parliament repealed the 1563 Act in 1736 .

For late Medieval Scotland there is evidence of occasional prosecutions of individuals for causing harm through witchcraft . High-profile political cases included the action against John Stewart , Earl of Mar for allegedly using sorcery against his brother King James III in 1479 . Evidence of these political cases indicates that they were becoming rarer in the first half of the sixteenth century however . Popular belief in magic was widespread in the Middle Ages , but theologians had been generally sceptical , and lawyers only interested in prosecuting cases in which harm from magic was evident . From the late fifteenth century attitudes began to change , and witches were seen as deriving powers from the Devil , with the result that witchcraft was seen as a form of heresy . These ideas were widely accepted by both Catholics and Protestants in the sixteenth century . In the aftermath of the initial Reformation settlement of 1560 , Parliament passed the Witchcraft Act 1563 , one of a series of laws underpinning Biblical laws and similar to that passed in England a year earlier , which made the practice of witchcraft itself , and consulting with witches , capital crimes . The first witch-hunt under the act was in the east of the country in 1568 – 69 in Angus and the Mearns , where there were unsuccessful attempts to introduce elements of the diabolic pact and the hunt collapsed .

James VI 's visit to Denmark in 1589 , where witch-hunts were already common , may have encouraged an interest in the study of witchcraft , and he came to see the storms he encountered on his voyage as the result of magic . After his return to Scotland , he attended the North Berwick witch trials , the first major persecution of witches in Scotland under the 1563 Act and the first known to successfully involve the diabolic pact . Several people , most notably Agnes Sampson and the schoolmaster John Fian , were convicted of using witchcraft to send storms against James ' ship . James became obsessed with the threat posed by witches . He subsequently believed that a nobleman , Francis Stewart , 5th Earl of Bothwell , was a witch , and after the latter fled in fear of his life , he was outlawed as a traitor . The king subsequently set up royal commissions to hunt down witches in his realm , recommending torture in dealing with suspects . James is known to have personally supervised the torture of women accused of being witches . Inspired by his personal involvement , in 1597 he wrote the Daemonologie , a tract that opposed the practice of witchcraft and which provided background material for Shakespeare 's Tragedy of Macbeth , which contains probably the most famous literary depiction of Scottish witches . James imported continental explanations of witchcraft . His goal was to divert suspicion away from male homosociality among the elite , and focus fear on female communities and large gatherings of women . He thought they threatened his political power so he laid the foundation for witchcraft and occultism policies , especially in Scotland . The point was that a widespread belief in the conspiracy of witches and a witches ' Sabbath with the devil deprived women of political influence . Occult power was supposedly a womanly trait because women were weaker and more susceptible to the devil . However , after the publication of Daemonologie his views became more sceptical , and in the same year he revoked the standing commissions on witchcraft , limiting prosecutions by the central courts .

Despite the fact that Scotland probably had about one quarter of the population of England , it had three times the number of witchcraft prosecutions , at an estimated 4,000 to 6,000 over the entire period . This was about four times the European average . The overwhelming majority were in the Lowlands , where the Kirk had more control , despite the evidence that basic magical beliefs were very widespread in the Highlands . Large series of trials included those in 1590 – 91 and the Great Scottish Witch Hunt of 1597 , which took place across Scotland from March to October . At least 400 people were put on trial for various forms of diabolism . The exact number of those executed as a result of these trials is unknown , but is believed to be about 200 . Later major trials included hunts in 1628 – 31 and 1649 – 50 . Probably the most intense witch-hunt was in 1661 – 62 , which involved some 664 named witches in four counties . Most of the accused , some 75 per cent , were women . Modern estimated indicate that over 1,500 persons were executed . Most of these were older women , with some younger women and men accused because they were related to an accused witch , usually as daughters and husbands . Some men were accused because they were folk healers , who were felt to have misused their powers , although folk healers as a group were not targeted . Most were not vagrants or beggars , but settled members of their communities . Most had built a reputation for witchcraft over years , which resulted in prosecution when a " victim " suffered ill fortune , particularly after a curse had been issued . The use of curses by some women as a means of acquiring social power may have made this process more likely to occur .

Almost all witchcraft prosecutions took place in secular courts under the provisions of the 1563 Act . In 1649 the religiously radical Covenanter regime passed a new witchcraft act that ratified the existing act and extended it to deal with consulters of " Devils and familiar spirits " , who would now be punished with death . There were three main types of court in which accused witches could be tried . First was the Court of Justiciary in Edinburgh , which took cases from all over Scotland , with a heavy bias to the local region . Next were the circuit courts , presided over by judges from the central courts and held in the various shires of the country . Finally , there were a series of ad hoc local courts , held under commissions by the Privy Council or Parliament and staffed by local landholders and gentlemen to try witches in the places where they were accused . Based on known outcomes , the execution rates for the local courts was much higher than the courts run by professional lawyers , with the local courts executing some 90 per cent of the accused , the Judiciary Court 55 per cent , but the circuit courts only 16 per cent . After the revocation of the standing commissions in 1597 , the pursuit of witchcraft was largely taken over by kirk sessions , disciplinary committees run by the parish elite , and was often used to attack " superstitious " and Catholic practices . The central courts only launched a trial when the Privy Council issued a commission , although the council did not have full control over prosecutions in the Court of Judiciary .

Scottish witchcraft trials were notable for their use of pricking , in which a suspect 's skin was pieced with needles , pins and bodkins as it was believed that they would possess a Devil 's mark through which they could not feel pain . Professional prickers included John Kincaid and John Dick , whose actions helped set off the outbreak of witch-hunting in 1661 – 62 , and whose exposure as frauds , and subsequent imprisonment , helped end the trials . Judicial torture was used in some high-profile cases , like that of John Fine , one of the witches accused of plotting the death of the king in 1590 , whose feet were crushed in a shin press , known as the boots . However , these cases were relatively rare . Confessions , considered the best evidence for conviction , were more usually extracted by " waking " the witch , keeping the suspect sleep deprived . After about three days individuals tend to hallucinate , and this provided some exotic detail in witchcraft trials . In Scotland , convicted witches were usually strangled at the stake before having their bodies burned , although there are instances where they were burned alive .

The belief that witches could cure and cause harm was common among all social groups in early modern Scotland . In 1701 in Anstruther , Elizabeth Dick had been turned away from the local mill when begging . She cursed the mill and several witnesses testified that the grain in the mill turned red . Only when one of the people who had refused her help ran after her and gave her alms did she bless the mill and everything returned to normal . About half of accused witches had already gained a reputation for causing harm over a long period of time . The fact that only four per cent of recorded accused witches were involved in folk healing seems to indicate that healing was not seen as a major element of witchcraft . The Aberdeenshire trials of 1596 reveal that spells could be purchased from witches for success at fishing , to ensure a happy marriage , to prolong life and to affect the weather . Many accusations included gender and sexual fears . Margaret Bain , a midwife , it was claimed , could transfer the pains of childbirth to a woman 's husband and Helen Gray cast a spell on a man that gave him a permanent erection . Witches could also carry out divinations . These included by reading the marks on the shoulder blade of a slaughtered animal , measuring a person 's sleeve or waist to see if they were suffering from a fever , or being able to find answers based on which way a sieve suspended from scissors or shears swung , as Margaret Mungo was accused of doing before the kirk session of Dingwall in 1649 .

It has often been stated that Scottish witchcraft was particularly concerned with the demonic pact . In the high court , Katherine Sands , who was one of four women accused of witchcraft at Culross in 1675 , admitted to renouncing her baptism , receiving the Devil 's mark and having sex with the Devil , but in local trials these demonic elements were rarer . Stuart MacDonald notes that in trials from Fife the Devil was a relatively insignificant and indistinct figure and that a number of instances of covens meeting look like fairy revels , where the dancing fairies traditionally disappeared when a human broke the ring , rather than satanic gatherings . Fairies were an important part of magical beliefs in Scotland . Isobel Gowdie , the young wife of a cottar from near Auldearn , who was tried for witchcraft in 1662 , left four depositions , gained without torture , that provide one of the most detailed insights into magical beliefs in Britain . She stated that her coven met on nearby Downie Hill , that they could transform themselves into hares and that she had been entertained by the Queen of the Fairies in her home under the hill . J. A. MacCulloch argued that there was a " mingling of beliefs " in Scotland , between popular belief in fairies and elite Christian ideas of demonic action .

In the seventeenth century there was growing scepticism about the reality of witchcraft among the educated elite . Scotland was defeated in the Civil Wars by the forces of the English parliament led by Oliver Cromwell and occupied . In 1652 Scotland was declared part of a Commonwealth with England and Ireland and the Privy Council and courts ceased to exist . The English judges who replaced them were hostile to the use of torture and often sceptical of the evidence it produced , resulting in a decline in prosecutions . In an attempt to gain support among the landholding orders , Sheriff 's courts were re-established and Justices of the Peace returned in 1656 . The result was a wave of witchcraft cases , with 102 in the period 1657 – 59 . The limitations on prosecutions were fully reversed with the Restoration of the monarchy in 1660 , and there was a flood of over 600 cases that alarmed the restored Privy Council , leading it to insist on the necessity of its commission for an arrest or prosecution , and banning judicial torture . Prosecutions began to decline as trials were more tightly controlled by the judiciary and government , torture was more sparingly used and standards of evidence were raised . The exposure of prickers as frauds in 1662 removed a major form of evidence . The Lord Advocate George Mackenzie made efforts to make prosecutions ineffective . There may also have been a growing popular scepticism , and , with relative peace and stability , the economic and social tensions that may have contributed to accusations were reduced , although there were occasional local outbreaks , like those in East Lothian in 1678 and in Paisley in 1697 . The last executions in the records of the central courts were in 1706 . The last trial was held in the court of a sheriff-depute at Dornoch in 1727 , and was of questionable legality . The British parliament repealed the 1563 Act in 1736 , making the legal pursuit of witches impossible . Nevertheless , basic magical beliefs persisted , particularly in the Highlands and Islands .

Various reasons for the Scottish witch-hunt , and its more intense nature than that in England , have been advanced by historians . Older theories , that there was a widespread pagan cult that was persecuted in this period and that the witch-hunts were the result of a rising medical profession eliminating folk healers , have been discredited among professional historians . Most of the major periods of prosecution coincided with periods of intense economic distress , and some accusations may have followed the withdrawal of charity from marginal figures , particularly the single women that made up many of the accused . The reformed Kirk that emerged from 1560 was heavily influenced by Calvinism and Presbyterianism , and may have perceived women as more of a moral threat . As a result the witch-hunt in Scotland has been seen as a means of controlling women . Christina Larner suggested that the outbreak of the hunt in the mid-sixteenth century was tied to the rise of a " godly state " , where the reformed Kirk was closely linked to an increasingly intrusive Scottish crown and legal system . It has been suggested that the intensity of Scottish witch-hunting was due to an inquisitorial judicial system and the widespread use of judicial torture . However , B. P. Levak argues that the Scottish system was only partly inquisitorial and that use of judicial torture was extremely limited , similar to the situation in England . A relatively high level of acquittal in Scottish trials may have been due to the employment of defence lawyers in Scottish courts , a benefit not given accused witches in England . The close involvement of the Scottish Kirk in trials and the decentralised nature of Scottish courts , where local magistrates heard many cases ( in contrast to England where most were before a small number of circuit judges ) , may have contributed to higher rates of prosecution . The diabolic pact is often stated as a major difference between Scottish and English witchcraft cases , but Stuart Maxwell argues that the iconography of Satan may be an imposition of central government beliefs on local traditions , particularly those concerned with fairies , which were more persistent in Scotland than in England . The proliferation of partial explanations for the witch-hunt has led some historians to proffer the concept of " associated circumstances " , rather than one single significant cause .

The San Pedro Apostol Parish Church ( also Saint Peter the Apostle Parish Church , Spanish : Iglesia Parroquial de San Pedro Apóstol ) , commonly known as Loboc Church , is a Roman Catholic church in the municipality of Loboc , Bohol , Philippines , within the jurisdiction of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Tagbilaran . After the Jesuits established the Christian community in Baclayon , they moved to Loboc and established a second Christian settlement in Bohol . The parish was established in 1602 , and the present coral stone church was completed in 1734 . Because of its strategic location , it became the center of the Jesuit mission in the Bohol area . In 1768 , upon the expulsion of the Jesuits , the town was transferred to the Augustinian Recollects . The church is classified as a National Historical Landmark by the National Historical Commission of the Philippines and a National Cultural Treasure by the National Museum of the Philippines . It was considered for the UNESCO World Heritage Sites of the Philippines as a member of two categories , the Baroque Churches of the Philippines ( Extension ) and the Jesuit Churches of the Philippines .

After the establishment of the Jesuit mission in Bohol , Father Juan de Torres , SJ , moved to the community along the Loboc River in late 1596 to establish a second mission station . The first church , made of wood , was built by the people of the area on a site called Calvario , Sawang , near the location of the present-day church . It was dedicated under the patronage of Saint Michael the Archangel . Loboc officially became a Catholic parish in 1602 . Due to pirate attacks on Baclayon and the strategic position of Loboc , the Jesuits chose Loboc to become the center of their mission . The Jesuit superior of Bohol later resided in Loboc until the Jesuits ' expulsion in 1768 . A boarding school for boys , the Seminario de los Indios , was established at Loboc in 1605 . Fire destroyed the original wooden church in 1638 ; it was later reconstructed by the Jesuit priest Jose Sanchez . A larger church was built in 1670 , on the site of the present day convent . The present coral stone church was finished in 1734 . After the Jesuits were expelled from the country in May 1768 , the Augustinian Recollects assumed the administration of the parish and the church that November .

In 1998 , Loboc Church was declared a National Historical Landmark by the National Historical Institute , now the National Historical Commission of the Philippines . It was also listed as a National Cultural Treasure by the National Museum of the Philippines . The church complex was a candidate for UNESCO World Heritage Sites of the Philippines , under two distinct categories . The Jesuit Churches of the Philippines nomination includes the churches of Maragondon in Cavite , Baclayon in Bohol and Guiuan in Eastern Samar . The Baroque Churches of the Philippines ( Extension ) nomination , nominates Loboc Church along with the churches of Patrocinio de Maria in Boljoon , Cebu , La Inmaculada Concepcion in Guiuan , Eastern Samar , San Matias in Tumauini , Isabela , and San Isidro Labrador in Lazi , Siquijor . However , due to its total destruction , it was removed from the roster of nominated sites .

The church is built along the banks of the Loboc River . The coral stone church follows a cruciform plan , with a sunken pyramidal roof on its crossing . As a church built by the Jesuits , exterior walls of the church have the Jesuit insignia and icons of an angel 's wing and head . Major renovations were undertaken by Augustinian priest Father Aquilino Bon , including the addition of a portico to the façade ( 1863 – 1866 ) and re-roofing with tiles ( 1873 ) . Father José Sánchez , OAR , added stone buttresses to the walls ( 1891 – 1893 ) and side porticoes ( 1895 – 1896 ) . Because of frequent flooding , its wooden flooring was changed to cement tiles in 1895 and was elevated in 1969 .

The interior of the church is adorned with ceiling paintings by Canuto Avila and his sons , Ricardo and Ray Francia , created from May 1926 to July 1927 , and retouched by Cris Naparota in 1995 . A mural of Our Lady of Guadalupe , secondary patron of Loboc , painted by Max Aya-ay in 1930 at the center of the nave depicts the Virgin saving Loboc from floods . The church also has a separate cantilevered organ loft , hosting a large pipe organ believed to be connected with Father Diego Cera , maker of the Las Piñas Bamboo organ .

The inner baroque façade , which is part of the 1734 church built by the Jesuits , is decorated with pilasters , capitals , blind niches and volutes . It is patterned after the San Ignacio Church in Intramuros , with two levels , a triangular pediment , and two narrow octagonal bell towers on each side . The neoclassical portico houses niches for Saint Peter and Saint Paul . Along the pediment is a wooden bas-relief on galvanized iron of the papal tiara over crossed keys ( the symbol of Saint Peter ) on the center and medallions carrying the icons of the Augustinians and Saint Peter on both ends .

The church has five retablos ( reredos ) . The central retablo ( or retablo mayor ) at the altar houses images of Saint Peter , the patron , paired with Saint Paul on the uppermost niche . On the lowest level are images of Our Lady of Guadalupe , a secondary patron , in the center . Also on the lowest level were statues of Saint Lucy , patron against typhoons and Saint Francis Xavier , patron against floods and alligators . Both Saint Lucy and Saint Francis were elected patrons in 1697 . Behind the walls of the retablo mayor are the remains of the former Jesuit altarpiece , a bas-relief of Saint Ignatius Loyola and St Francis Xavier dressed as a pilgrim .

On the right side of the altar are two retablos . The larger altar on the right side currently houses the image of St. Francis Xavier as preacher on the topmost level . On the middle level of the same retablo are images of Saint Vincent Ferrer in the center , and Saint Augustine and Saint Monica on the left and right niches , respectively . The lowest level contains images of the Nuestra Señora de la Consolacion in the center , Saint Anne to the right and Saint Thérèse of Lisieux ( originally St Joachim ) on the left . The smaller altar has two levels of baroque and neoclassical style , respectively , with images of the crucified Christ on the lower level and the Holy Infant on the upper . The tomb of Father Aquilino Bon and other Recollect priests who served Loboc are also on this side of the church . The remains of Jesuit priest Alonso de Humanes were formerly interred in this area before the transfer of his remains to San Ignacio in Intramuros . An apocryphal account tells of a fire in a former Loboc church stopping at the foot of Humanes ' tomb ; this story spread across the people of the Loboc and nearby towns , which drew pilgrims to light candles in memory of Humanes .

On the left side of the altar are also two retablos . The larger altar , which is a twin of the altar opposite it , houses an image of a unidentified saint on the topmost level , presumably Michael the Archangel , and the crucified Christ ( originally Madonna and Child ) in the center , Saint Anthony of Padua on the middle-left , and Saint Nicholas of Tolentino on the middle-right niches . The original images on the lowest level have been replaced . The smaller retablo , also of the same style , houses the images of Saint Joseph with the child Jesus , and St Isidore the Laborer on the lower and upper level , respectively . In the sacristy is another retablo , with a crucifix in its central niche . On the doorframes of the sacristy are two bas-reliefs depicting Saint Ignatius and the first Jesuits before Mary and the child Jesus and of St. Ignatius holding a book ( in stucco ) .

The convent , which was built around 1854 , was used as the central residence of Jesuit missionaries in Bohol . It was built parallel to the transept and was an unusual three-storey structure , with a two-storey outdoor gallery ( called a volada ) and thick walls . It is the only convent in the Philippines with three storeys . An extension perpendicular to the convent was built in the middle of the 19th century . The convent was also adorned with paintings on its walls and ceilings , and with colored glass on its windows and cornices on the kitchen . The roof was replaced with galvanized iron in 1888 . The third floor of the convent is now used as an ecclesiastical museum ( known as Loboc Museum ) , containing several religious artifacts , such as a 1786 silver missal and 18th century wooden Santo Niño .

The island of Bohol experienced a strong earthquake on October 15 , 2013 . The center of the M7.2 earthquake was near Sagbayan , Bohol . Centuries-old churches in Bohol , including Loboc and several other churches designated as National Cultural Treasures , were heavily damaged . The church of Loboc suffered major damage to its structure , particularly its façade and tower , which both partially collapsed . The Diocese of Tagbilaran plans to restore the church of Loboc and all other churches destroyed by the earthquake . While waiting for the complete restoration and rehabilitation of the old church , the people of Loboc inaugurated an alternate church on October 12 , 2014 .

Robert Alexander Little , DSO & Bar , DSC & Bar ( 19 July 1895 – 27 May 1918 ) , a World War I fighter pilot , is generally regarded as the most successful Australian flying ace , with an official tally of forty-seven victories . Born in Victoria , he travelled to England in 1915 and learned to fly at his own expense before joining the Royal Naval Air Service ( RNAS ) . Posted to the Western Front in June 1916 , he flew Sopwith Pups , Triplanes and Camels with No. 8 Squadron RNAS , achieving thirty-eight victories within a year and earning the Distinguished Service Order and Bar , the Distinguished Service Cross and Bar , and the French Croix de Guerre . Rested in July 1917 , he volunteered to return to the front in March 1918 and scored a further nine victories with No. 3 Squadron RNAS ( later No. 203 Squadron RAF ) before he was killed in action on the night of 27 May , aged twenty-two .

Long interested in aviation , Little decided to apply for pilot training at the Australian Army 's Central Flying School in Point Cook , but with only four vacancies , he was rejected along with hundreds of others . He then decided to sail for England in July 1915 and become a qualified pilot at his own expense . Gaining his flying certificate with the Royal Aero Club at Hendon in October , he joined the Royal Naval Air Service ( RNAS ) as a probationary flight sub-lieutenant on 14 January 1916 . He suffered badly from air sickness early on , most likely brought on by fumes from castor oil that was employed as an engine lubricant in the aircraft he flew in England . Little arrived in France in June 1916 for service with No. 1 ( Naval ) Wing at Dunkirk , where he initially flew Sopwith 1 ½ Strutters in bombing raids . He married Vera Gertrude Field at the Congregational Church , Dover , on 16 September . The next month he was posted to No. 8 Squadron RNAS ( " Naval Eight " ) flying Sopwith Pups on the Western Front , under fellow Australian Stanley Goble . Little scored his first aerial victory on 23 November , destroying an enemy two-seater north-east of La Bassée . By the following February , he had four victories to his credit and was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross ( DSC ) for " conspicuous bravery in successfully attacking and bringing down hostile machines " . In one action on 4 December , Little and Goble " fought like mad " against a large formation of German fighters , each claiming a Halberstadt ; Little did not return to base with Goble and was thought lost , but had only landed near Allied lines to clear his jammed gun before taking off again to continue the fight .

On 24 April 1917 , Little engaged a DFW C.V , forcing it to land . He then followed the German aircraft down to claim it as captured and personally take its crew prisoner at gunpoint . The Australian flipped his own plane in a ditch after touching down , however , prompting the surrendering enemy pilot to suggest : " It looks as if I have brought you down , not you me , doesn 't it ? " Naval Eight 's conversion to the Sopwith Triplane in April saw Little begin to score heavily , eventually registering twenty-four victories on the type to bring his total up to twenty-eight by 10 July , including twin victories in a day on four occasions . He was the squadron 's top scorer with the Triplane , mostly in one particular airframe , N5493 , that he christened " Blymp " , which also became the nickname of his baby son . The unit then began flying Sopwith Camels , in which he scored a further ten kills in July to make fourteen all-up for the month . When he subsequently rotated back to England for rest , he was ranked Flight Lieutenant and credited with a total of thirty-eight victories , including fifteen destroyed or captured . A bar to his DSC had been gazetted on 29 June , for " exceptional daring and skill in aerial fighting on many occasions " , and he received the French Croix de Guerre on 11 July , becoming — along with fellow Australian RNAS ace Roderic ( Stan ) Dallas — one of the first three British Empire pilots to be so decorated . In August , he was awarded the Distinguished Service Order " for exceptional skill and daring " , followed by a bar to the decoration in September for " remarkable courage and boldness in attacking enemy machines " . He was mentioned in despatches on 11 December , and promoted to flight commander the following month .

Despite Little 's prowess in combat , as an aviator he was ordinary at best , enduring a number of crash-landings . What gave him his edge as a fighter pilot was his keen eye , excellent marksmanship , and willingness to single-handedly take on entire enemy formations and close in on his prey — down to twenty-five yards on occasion — before opening fire . Fellow No. 8 Squadron member Reggie Soar recalled , " Although not a polished pilot , he was one of the most aggressive ... an outstanding shot with both revolver and rifle ... " , while ace Robert Comptson described Little as " not so much a leader as a brilliant lone hand ... Small in stature , with face set grimly , he seemed the epitome of deadliness " . His squadron nicknamed him " Rikki " , after the mongoose " Rikki-Tikki-Tavi " , which outstrikes cobras in the story of the same name by Rudyard Kipling . Many who knew him saw a sensitive side , however , Soar noting that in addition to his skill with guns , Little was " also a collector of wild flowers " , and his wife contending that his appearance in photographs belied his sense of humour . Squadron commander Raymond Collishaw , who would finish the war as the RNAS ' top-scoring ace , summed up Little as " an outstanding character , bold , aggressive and courageous , yet he was gentle and kindly . A resolute and brave man . "

Following a period of rest in England , Little turned down a desk assignment and volunteered to return to action on the Western Front , joining Lieutenant Colonel Collishaw 's No. 3 Squadron RNAS in March 1918 . The unit evolved into No. 203 Squadron of the new Royal Air Force on 1 April , formed after the merger of the RNAS and the Royal Flying Corps . Now ranked captain , and again flying Sopwith Camels , Little gained a further nine successes , beginning with a Fokker Triplane on 1 April , and concluding with two kills in one day on 22 May , an Albatros and a DFW . During this stretch of victories , on 21 April 1918 , he was brought down unharmed by Friedrich Ehmann . On 27 May , Little received reports of German Gotha bombers in the vicinity , and took off on a moonlit evening to intercept the raiders . As he closed with one of the bombers , his plane was caught in a searchlight beam and he was struck by a bullet that passed through both his thighs . He crash-landed in a field near Nœux , and bled to death before he was discovered the following morning by a passing gendarme . Little 's skull and ankle had also been fractured in the impact ; his body was identified by his friend and fellow ace , Charles Dawson Booker . Collishaw launched an investigation but it was never established whether the single bullet that hit Little had come from a gunner in the Gotha or from the ground .

Little was buried in the village cemetery at Nœux , before his body was moved to Wavans British Cemetery in the Pas de Calais . Aged twenty-two , he left a widow and a son ; in accordance with her husband 's wishes , Vera travelled back to Australia to raise the boy . Of Little 's forty-seven confirmed victories , twenty were credited as destroyed , two as captured , and twenty-five as " out of control " ; he was believed to be responsible for many others driven down or forced to land , which were not counted in his official total . As well as the eighth most successful Commonwealth ace of World War I , and the ranking RNAS ace , this score made him the most prolific Australian ace of all time , ahead of Stan Dallas with an official score of thirty-nine , although modern research also credits Dallas with a tally numbering in the fifties . The propeller blade from Little 's Sopwith Triplane was fitted with a clock in its hub by his fellow officers , who presented it to his widow ; she transported it back to Australia in three pieces and it later went on display at the Australian War Memorial , along with his awards and the wooden cross of his original burial place at Nœux . The Sopwith Pup he flew with No. 8 Squadron RNAS , N5182 , was rebuilt to flying standard and in October 1976 led a flypast to commemorate the squadron 's Diamond Jubilee , before going on permanent display at the Royal Air Force Museum , Hendon . One of the buildings of the Australian Defence Force Academy ( ADFA ) in Canberra , opened in 1986 , was named in Little 's honour .

The Winnebago War was a brief conflict that took place in 1827 in the Upper Mississippi River region of the United States , primarily in what is now the state of Wisconsin . Not quite a war , the hostilities were limited to a few attacks on American civilians by a portion of the Winnebago ( or Ho-Chunk ) Native American tribe . The Ho-Chunks were reacting to a wave of lead miners trespassing on their lands , and to false rumors that the United States had sent two Ho-Chunk prisoners to a rival tribe for execution . Most Native Americans in the region decided against joining the uprising , and so the conflict ended after U.S. officials responded with a show of military force . Ho-Chunk chiefs surrendered eight men who had participated in the violence , including Red Bird , who American officials believed to be the ringleader . Red Bird died in prison in 1828 while awaiting trial ; two other men convicted of murder were pardoned by President John Quincy Adams and released . As a result of the war , the Ho-Chunk tribe was compelled to cede the lead mining region to the United States . The Americans also increased their military presence on the frontier , building Fort Winnebago and reoccupying two other abandoned forts . The conflict convinced some officials that Americans and Indians could not live peaceably together , and that the Natives should be compelled to move westward , a policy known as Indian removal . The Winnebago War preceded the larger Black Hawk War of 1832 , which involved many of the same people and concerned similar issues .

Following the War of 1812 , the United States pursued a policy of trying to prevent wars among Native Americans in the Upper Mississippi River region . This was not strictly for humanitarian reasons : intertribal warfare made it more difficult for the United States to acquire Indian land and move the tribes to the West , a policy known as Indian removal , which had become the primary goal by the late 1820s . On August 19 , 1825 , U.S. officials finalized a multi-tribal treaty at Prairie du Chien , which defined the boundaries of the region 's tribes . By that time , however , white Americans had begun to trespass on Ho-Chunk ( or Winnebago ) lands in large numbers , drawn by the promise of easy lead mining along the Fever ( later Galena ) River . Native Americans had mined this region for thousands of years , and exporting lead had become an important part of the Ho-Chunk economy . Ho-Chunks tried to drive away the trespassers , but they often suffered abuse at the hands of aggressive miners . Some U.S. officials , concerned that Ho-Chunk mining would delay what they saw as the inevitable American possession of the mining region , worked " to dissuade the Indians from their mining plans " .

In March 1826 , a French-Canadian man named Methode , his Native American wife , and their children were gathering maple syrup in present-day Iowa , about twelve miles north of Prairie du Chien , when they were murdered , apparently by a Ho-Chunk raiding party that had been passing through . The murderers evidently had no specific grievance with the victims , who were targets of opportunity . Two Ho-Chunk suspects were arrested by Prairie du Chien militiamen and taken to Fort Crawford . After they escaped , U.S. Army Lieutenant Colonel Willoughby Morgan seized two Ho-Chunk hostages and demanded that the Ho-Chunk tribe turn over the murderers . On July 4 , 1826 , the Ho-Chunks delivered six men to Morgan at Fort Crawford . In accordance with Ho-Chunk custom , writes historian Martin Zanger , the six men were not all involved in the murders ; they were surrendered to appease American anger and deflect punishment away from the tribe as a whole . The Americans , however , wanted to punish those personally responsible for the killings . Colonel Morgan was unable to determine who was guilty , and so he detained all six and demanded that the Ho-Chunk chiefs identify the killers . Colonel Josiah Snelling , commander of the 5th Infantry Regiment , reinforced the fort amid rumors that the Ho-Chunks were going to attempt to free the prisoners . Eventually , two Ho-Chunks , Wau-koo-kau ( or Waukookah ) and Man-ne-tah-peh-keh ( or Mahnaatapakah ) , were turned over to the Americans and indicted for the murders .

The rumored Ho-Chunk attack on Fort Crawford never came , and so in October 1826 , Colonel Snelling moved the garrison to Fort Snelling , where he hoped to reduce hostilities between the Dakotas ( Sioux ) and the Ojibwes ( Chippewas ) . The two Ho-Chunk prisoners were also moved to Fort Snelling . In May 1827 , after Dakotas attacked an Ojibwe party near Fort Snelling , Colonel Snelling arrested four of the Dakotas and turned them over to the Ojibwes , who killed them . This angered some Dakotas , who encouraged the Ho-Chunks to help them strike at the Americans , falsely telling them that the Ho-Chunks prisoners had also been turned over to the Ojibwes for execution . The false story of the execution of the Ho-Chunk prisoners , along with the incessant American trespassing , convinced some Ho-Chunks to take up arms against the United States . The timing seemed right , since the evacuation of Fort Crawford appeared to be a sign of American weakness . Another grievance was the news that some Ho-Chunk women had been sexually assaulted by American riverboat crews along the Mississippi River , although this story , like the one about the executions , may have been a false rumor . The Ho-Chunks broke off diplomatic relations with the United States by not showing up for a scheduled treaty conference , and prepared for war .

In late June 1827 , a Ho-Chunk leader named Red Bird , along with Wekau ( or Wa-ni-ga , The Sun ) and Chickhonsic ( or Chic-hong-sic , Little Buffalo ) , went to Prairie du Chien to seek revenge for what they believed were the executions of the Ho-Chunk prisoners . Unable to locate their intended victim , they instead targeted the cabin of Registre Gagnier , the son of an esteemed African-American nurse and midwife named Aunt Mary Ann . Gagnier welcomed the three Ho-Chunks into his home for a meal . What happened inside varies according to sources . According to one account , Red Bird shot and killed Gagnier , while Chickhonsic shot and killed Solomon Lipcap , a hired man or friend of the family . Wekau tried to shoot Gagnier 's wife , but she wrestled his gun away before escaping with her young son . Wekau had to settle for stabbing and scalping Gagnier 's infant daughter , who survived the attack . Another account says that only Red Bird committed the murders . Red Bird and his companions returned with the three scalps to their village at Prairie La Crosse , where a celebration was held .

On June 30 , 1827 , the Prairie La Crosse Ho-Chunks struck again . About 150 Ho-Chunks , with a few Dakota allies , attacked two American keelboats on the Mississippi , near the mouth of the Bad Axe River . Two Americans were killed and four were wounded in the skirmish ; about seven Ho-Chunks died in the attack or later from their wounds . According to historian Patrick Jung , " The attack , while relatively small , was significant because it was the first act of war committed against the United States by Indians in the region since the War of 1812 . " In their nascent war against the Americans , the Prairie La Crosse Ho-Chunks sought to recruit allies among the Dakotas , Potawatomis , and other Ho-Chunk bands . Most leaders of these tribes , while sympathetic to Ho-Chunk grievances , urged neutrality . Some Potawatomis participated by killing some American livestock , but Potawatomi leaders Billy Caldwell , Alexander Robinson , and Shaubena rode among the Potawatomi settlements and urged people to stay out of the war ; they would do the same five years later during the Black Hawk War . Many Ho-Chunks also distanced themselves from the actions of Red Bird and the Prairie La Crosse Ho-Chunks . Without allies , the effort to ignite a widespread war was doomed . By mid-July , writes historian Martin Zanger , " for all practical purposes the ' Red Bird Uprising ' was over " .

The attacks created panic among the American population of the area . Settlers , fearing the outbreak of a wider Indian war , fled to towns such as Galena and Chicago , or sought sanctuary in the abandoned Fort Crawford . Lewis Cass , the governor of Michigan Territory , and Thomas McKenney , the Superintendent of Indian Affairs , were hosting a treaty conference near Green Bay when they learned of the attacks . To discourage the spread of the uprising , Cass promptly invited Native Americans in the region to come to the treaty grounds to receive gifts and food ; more than 2,000 people eventually arrived . McKenney warned the Ho-Chunk chiefs in attendance that the only way to avoid an American military invasion of their homeland was to surrender those responsible for the attacks . Other American officials met with other Native leaders , including Keokuk and Wabokieshiek , and urged them to stay out of the war . Meanwhile , American officials scrambled to mobilize troops . Cass hurried to Prairie du Chien , where he organized the local militia . Colonel Snelling arrived at Prairie du Chien on July 10 , bringing about 200 regulars from Fort Snelling to reoccupy Fort Crawford . He was joined there on July 29 by Brigadier General Henry Atkinson , who brought 500 men upriver by steamboat from Jefferson Barracks . Several days later , Henry Dodge arrived at Fort Crawford with 130 mounted militiamen , mostly miners . Governor Ninian Edwards of Illinois sent 600 mounted militiamen north to Wisconsin .

To the east , McKenney and Major William Whistler organized another force . Whistler had about 100 regulars from Fort Howard , along with 50 mostly métis militiamen from Green Bay , 60 New York Indians , and 120 Menominees . On August 29 , Atkinson 's force began moving up the Wisconsin River towards Portage , Wisconsin , where the hostile Ho-Chunks had concentrated , while Whistler 's force converged on the same location from the north . On September 1 , 1827 , McKenney and Whistler 's force arrived at the Portage . On September 3 , two Ho-Chunk leaders , Waukon Decorah and Carymaunee , surrendered Red Bird and Wekau to the Americans . Carymaunee asked the Americans not to put irons on Red Bird and Wekau ; this request was granted . He then offered to give the Americans twenty horses in exchange for the prisoners , but this was declined . The Ho-Chunks turned in four more men involved in the uprising in the following weeks .

In diplomatic talks with the Ho-Chunks at the close of the war , General Atkinson promised that the U.S. government would look into their grievances in the lead mining region . Thomas McKenney requested military aid to evict American miners who were trespassing on Ho-Chunk land , but after the war , settlers poured into the region in unprecedented numbers , and U.S. officials proved to be unable or unwilling to stem the tide . By January 1828 , there were as many as 10,000 illegal settlers on Ho-Chunk land , including militia general Henry Dodge , who established a mining camp after the war and boasted that the U.S. Army could not make him leave . Having no other options , on August 25 , 1828 , the Ho-Chunks signed a provisional treaty with the United States , agreeing to sell the land occupied by the miners in a more formal treaty to be held later . Eight Ho-Chunks were detained by the U.S. government at Fort Crawford for trial after the war . American officials most wanted to convict Red Bird , believing that he had been the leader of the uprising . This belief , according to historian Martin Zanger , was based on an American failure to understand the decentralized nature of Ho-Chunk society . " Because Red Bird was well known to the white frontiersmen , " writes Zanger , " they focused their resentment on him , mistakenly attributing to him a leadership role he did not deserve . " Red Bird was never tried ; he contracted dysentery and died in prison on February 16 , 1828 , before his trial got underway .

The trials were delayed due to the difficulties in bringing together witnesses , prosecutors , defense attorneys , and interpreters . The proceedings finally began in August 1828 , with Judge James Duane Doty presiding . Wau-koo-kau and Man-ne-tah-peh-keh , the two warriors imprisoned for the 1826 murders of the Methode family , were released due to a lack of witnesses , as were three Ho-Chunks held for the attack on the keelboats . Only two men , Wekau and Chickhonsic , were prosecuted . According to historian Patrick Jung , it became clear during the trial that Red Bird had committed the murders at the Gagnier cabin , and that there was not enough evidence to convict Wekau and Chickhonsic . Despite this , the white and métis jury found them guilty . Judge Doty sentenced them to hang , as he was required to do by law . Their lawyer filed a motion for a new trial , arguing that the jury had ignored the evidence , and so Doty suspended the death sentences . On November 3 , 1828 , President John Quincy Adams , having been told that the executions would likely spark another uprising , pardoned the prisoners in exchange for a land cession . In July and August 1829 , in treaties signed at Prairie du Chien , the Ho-Chunks and the Three Fires Confederacy formally ceded the lead mining region to the United States for annual payments of $ 16,000 and $ 18,000 respectively .

Hoping to prevent further uprisings , the United States decided to strengthen its military presence in the region after the Winnebago War . Fort Crawford was reoccupied , as was Fort Dearborn in Chicago , which had been abandoned in 1823 . A new outpost , Fort Winnebago , was built in October 1828 at the portage between the Fox and Wisconsin Rivers . The conflict also helped to promote a change in U.S. policy regarding Native Americans . Previously , many Americans had argued that Indians should be " civilized " and assimilated into white American society . But for some , the Winnebago War discredited the idea that Indians and Americans could live peaceably together . In his State of the Union Address of December 2 , 1828 , outgoing President Adams announced that the " civilization " policy had been a failure , and that Indian removal — moving the tribes to the West — was the policy of the future . That policy would be taken up by Adams 's successor , Andrew Jackson .

The Modern Cook was the first cookery book by the Anglo-Italian cook Charles Elmé Francatelli ( 1805 – 1876 ) . It was first published in 1846 . It was popular for half a century in the Victorian era , running through 29 London editions by 1896 . It was also published in America . The book offered elaborate dishes , described with French terminology such as bisque , entrées , entremets , vol-au-vent , timbale and soufflé . It included bills of fare for meals for up to 300 people , and for a series of eight- or nine-course dinners served to Queen Victoria ; one exceptional royal dinner in 1841 had sixteen entrées and sixteen entremets , including truffles in Champagne . The Modern Cook was the first to mention filling wafer cones with ice cream . The book , written for upper middle-class housewives , is illustrated with 60 engravings , often showing how to present carefully-decorated centrepiece dishes such as " Salmon a la Chambord " for large dinner parties . The book influenced households in Britain and America to aspire to more complex , French-style dinners in imitation of the Queen , and resulted in a change in eating habits , including the modern two-course approach for both lunch and dinner .

Apart from the preface and Francatelli 's advice on serving wine , the body of the book consists almost entirely of recipes without any kind of introduction . There is no guidance on choice of kitchenware or advice on the layout of the kitchen . The recipes are presented entirely as instructions , generally without illustration . Quantities , where stated , are incorporated in the text ; ingredients are never listed explicitly . Quantities are sometimes named , as in the " Cream Bechamel Sauce " , which begins " Put six ounces of fresh butter into a middle-sized stewpan ; add four ounces of sifted flour , some nutmeg , a few peppercorns , and a little salt ; " . In other cases only the relative proportions are indicated , as for the " Salmis of Partridges with Aspic Jelly " , where the only hint of quantity in the recipe is " must be mixed with one-third of its quantity of aspic jelly " . This recipe also indicates the style of cross-referencing , with the starting instruction " Prepare the salmis as directed in No. 1078 " . The Modern Cook is the first published record in England of filling wafer cornets , which Francatelli called gauffres , with ice cream . He used them to garnish his iced puddings .

Francatelli provides " A Series of Bills of Fare for Every Month Throughout the Year " , including dinners variously for 6 , 8 , 10 , 12 , 14 16 , 18 , 20 , 24 , 28 and 36 persons ( though not all of these in every month ) . The bills of fare for dinners for 6 persons thus represent the simplest menus in the book . All the dinners are divided into a first and a second " Course " , but each course was divided in turn into three or four servings , in most cases with a choice of two or more dishes . Thus there might be one or two soups , two fishes , two " removes " of meat , and two savoury " entrées " in the first " Course " , with a second " Course " of one kind of game , followed by a choice of three " entremets " which included both savouries , generally vegetables , and desserts . There is a single bill of fare for a " Ball Supper for 300 Persons " , and one for a " Public Dinner " for the same number .

There are 13 bills of fare for " Her Majesty 's Dinner " , each with an exact date in 1841 and the words " ( Under the control of C. Francatelli . ) " . Each of the royal dinners has either eight or nine courses ( including a buffet or sideboard ) , except for that of 30 June which is divided into two " Services " and has 11 courses . The royal dinners are described almost entirely in French , with the exception of the heading , the phrase " Side Board " , and a few specifically British dishes such as " Roast Mutton " and " Haunch of Venison " . There are usually two soups , two fishes , two removes , six entrées , two roasts , two more removes , six entremets , and between two and seven dishes on the sideboard . The exceptional royal dinner of 30 June 1841 had sixteen entrées and sixteen entremets . Some of these entremets used the most costly ingredients including truffles in Champagne .

Kettner 's Book of the Table of 1877 , describing Francatelli as " a type of all the great French cooks " , asserted that he " gives a most elaborate recipe for aspic jelly ; and he is so satisfied with it that , having to prepare a cold supper for 300 people , he works it up in every one of his 56 dishes which are neither sweet nor hot . The book further argues that " this is the result of science — this the height of art . It produces , with such elaborate forms and majestic ceremonies , an aspic jelly without aspic , that , exhausted in the effort , it can proceed no further , and seems to think that here at last , in this supreme sauce , we have a sure resting-place — the true blessedness — the ewigkeit . " George H. Ellwanger wrote in his Pleasures of the Table in 1902 that Francatelli 's Modern Cook was " still a superior treatise , and although little adapted to the average household , it will well repay careful study on the part of the expert amateur . ' The palate is as capable and nearly as worthy of education as the eye and the ear , ' says Francatelli — a statement which his volume abundantly bears out . " He added that " one sees , accordingly , an ornate observance of decoration in his grand army of side-dishes . These are excellent throughout , but generally very elaborate , while his sauces and recipes for pastry are especially good . The same may be said of his quenelles and timbales . A competent hand will find his work a valuable guide from which to obtain ideas ; it is not a practical book for the majority . "

The New Zealand Herald of 1912 commented that Francatelli was " an earnest and gifted worker in the cause of gastronomy " and that The Modern Cook faithfully reflected Victorian dining habits . " Everything was good and solid of its kind , even if tending towards complication rather than simplicity . " The review opined that the great joints of meat " decorated with their silver hatelet skewers bearing cock 's combs and trufflets , were attended by the most appetizing ragouts and garnishes . " Despite the gloss , there was " nothing meretricious or deceptive in the savoury promises held out by Victorian comestibles . " The reviewer notes , however , that even while Francatelli was describing this elaborate fare , the " excessive meat-eating " was being replaced by a diet richer in vegetables , and meals were becoming simpler , so that " now , in the 20th century , much that Francatelli wrote about ... is no longer needed . "

M. F. K. Fisher , writing in The New York Times , stated that millions of American women in the 19th century organised " every aspect of their lives .. as much as possible in imitation of the Queen " , and that The Modern Cook sold almost as well in America as it did in England . Admitting that few American kitchens could " follow all its directions for the light Gallic dainties Francatelli introduced to counteract the basic heaviness of royal dining habits " , she argued that all the same his two-course approach eventually shaped the way Americans now eat both lunch and dinner . She observed that at Windsor Castle , Francatelli and other royal chefs were assisted by 24 assistant chefs and two " Yeomen of the Kitchen " , not to mention a multitude of " servers and lackeys " . This did not deter American housewives " as far west as Iowa and then beyond " from doing their best to follow his instructions . The Historic Food website notes that Francatelli provides two recipes for mincemeat , one with roast beef , the other containing lemons but no meat . C. Anne Wilson , introducing Women and Victorian Values , 1837-1910 . Advice Books , Manuals and Journals for Women , states that Francatelli was writing for the " upper middle-class housewife " in The Modern Cook , explaining to her how to serve the " socially important " dinner in English , French and " à la Russe " styles . In contrast , his 1861 Cook 's Guide is for " more ordinary " households , advocating " traditional two-course dinners " .

Nick Baines writes on LoveFood that Francatelli included " a whole collection of lavish pies " in the book . Panikos Panayi , in his book Spicing Up Britain , writes that Francatelli 's book for the middle classes definitely recognised differences between British and foreign foods , even in its full title which ran " ... Comprising , in Addition to English Cookery , the Most Advanced and Recherché Systems of French , Italian and German Cookery " . Panayi notes that Francatelli 's preface to the first edition was scathing about ignorant " English writers on gastronomy " , comparing them unfavourably to the " great Professors " of cuisine in France . Panayi observes further that while most of Francatelli 's chapters are not grouped by national origin , he does distinguish English , Foreign , and Italian soups . He notes that it would have taken years to eat all the dishes listed , and that it is impossible to tell how often middle class families may have eaten " fillets of haddocks , à la royale " . He considers it likely that only the wealthiest could have aspired to eat the sort of food described by Francatelli , but concedes that his bills of fare for dinners for six persons ( by month ) do indicate that the middle classes could afford the best meat and vegetables , and indeed that they had domestic staff able to prepare dinners of that complexity described in Francatelli 's French terminology . Panayi concludes that Francatelli represents " perhaps the most extreme example " of the nineteeth century British habit of giving dishes French descriptions .

Frederick Lee " Ted " Petoskey ( January 5 , 1911 – November 30 , 1996 ) was a three-sport athlete at the University of Michigan , a Major League Baseball player , a collegiate coach in three sports and an athletic director . At the University of Michigan , Petoskey received eight varsity letters in three sports . In American football , he was a two-time All-American end for the undefeated Michigan Wolverines football teams that won back-to-back college football national championships in 1932 and 1933 . He was also a guard and captain of Michigan 's basketball team in the 1933 – 34 season . As a baseball player in 1934 , Petoskey led the Big Ten Conference with a .452 batting average . Petoskey played parts of the 1934 and 1935 Major League Baseball seasons as an outfielder for the Cincinnati Reds and played minor league baseball until 1944 . Petoskey also served in a variety of collegiate coaching positions , including head coach of the University of South Carolina 's basketball team ( 1935 – 1940 ) , athletic director and football coach at Wofford College , and head baseball coach at the University of South Carolina ( 1940 – 42 , 1948 – 56 ) .

Petoskey was raised in St. Charles , Michigan and attended nearby Saginaw Eastern High School . On October 22 , 1926 , Petoskey became the first receiver in Michigan High School Athletic Association history to garner five receiving touchdowns in a high school football game . As of August 2002 , the record had not been surpassed . While playing for Saginaw , Petoskey was an all-state end two years and an all-state fullback another . He once played in a game with University of Michigan head coach Fielding H. Yost in the stands . Petoskey ran back the opening kickoff for 87 yards and a touchdown , and after hearing that Yost was in the stands ran back another kickoff in the second half for 92 yards and a touchdown .

In Petoskey 's three years as a varsity football player , the Wolverines had a combined record of 23 – 1 – 2 and won two national championships . As a sophomore in 1931 , Petoskey was touted as " a second Bennie Oosterbaan , " and earned a spot on the United Press All-Big Ten Conference second team . In his junior year , Petoskey was one of the favorite pass receivers for quarterback Harry Newman , who won the Douglas Fairbanks trophy as the Most Valuable Player in college football . Coach Harry Kipke shifted Petoskey to fullback mid-way through the 1932 season , and he scored two touchdowns in a 32 – 0 win over Illinois . The United Press noted : " A running attack which featured Ted Petoskey , converted from an end to a fullback in the last week by Coach Harry Kipke dovetailed nicely with the Wolverine aerial play to produce the touchdowns . With Petoskey plunging the line and sweeping inside the ends for many sizeable gains , the Michigan eleven showed power through the line for the first time this season . " An Associated Press writer warned opponents to watch out for Petoskey : " It is about time for grid foeman to wake up when Ted Petoskey , end and fullback on the University of Michigan football team , gets to dreaming . Petoskey 's dreams have a habit of coming true , and happily for Petoskey , most of his dreams are good ones . "

Petoskey was selected as a first-team All-American in 1932 by the All-American Football Board , a second-team All-American by the New York Sun , and a third-team All-American by the United Press . After the 1932 team compiled a perfect 8 – 0 record ( outscoring opponents 123 – 13 ) and won the national championship , the press credited the squad 's " esprit de corps " as a key to their success . As an example of Wolverine teamwork , a United Press story pointed to a fumble in the Minnesota game . " Michigan recovered , with both Ted Petoskey , end , and Charles Bernard , center , at the bottom of the heap . Bernard credited Petoskey . Petoskey said Bernard recovered . "

During his senior year , Petoskey started all eight games at left end for the 1933 Michigan Wolverines football team , as Michigan won its second consecutive national championship , and Petoskey was again named an All-American . Although Petoskey was principally an end , Coach Kipke played Petoskey at fullback in some games in 1933 . An October 1933 newspaper story reported on his versatility : " Ted Petoskey , Michigan 's brilliant right end was moved into the backfield for last night 's practice ... This is the second time Petoskey has figured in such a shift . Last fall he was converted into a fullback before the Illinois game and proved a capable ground gainer . Monday he was given a trial as a forward passer , and made an impressive showing . " In his final game for the Michigan football team , Petoskey also kicked a 35-yard field goal against Northwestern , representing the final points scored for Michigan in its 1933 championship season . After the 1933 season , Petoskey was chosen as a first-team All-American in the Central Press Association poll of team captains , and for the second-team by Grantland Rice . Petoskey also finished third in the voting for the Associated Press 1933 Big Ten Athlete of the Year award . In choosing Petoskey for his All-American team , football writer Lawrence Perry said : " Ted Petoskey of Michigan is one of the finest ends who ever played the game . A former halfback , he is superb as an end-around runner . He receives forward passes with great accuracy and when he catches the ball he is difficult to bring down . "

Coach Kipke credited the play of halfback , Herman Everhardus , and his ends for the undefeated season : " Our ends , Ward and Petoskey , were near perfection . " The 1934 University of Michigan yearbook , called the Michiganensian , described Petoskey 's contributions as follows : " After three years of Varsity football , Petoskey is recognized as one of Michigan 's greatest all-time ends . At the end of his junior year , he was chosen All American , and recognized as one of the greatest defense players in the country . He was alert , followed every play , and opponents found it almost impossible to gain around his end . " In 1955 , Kipke rated Petoskey as one of the six best players he ever coached : " If I had to name the best player I ever coached , it would have to be among Harry Newman , Francis Wistert , Otto Pommerening , Ted Petoskey and Maynard Morrison . " When the Associated Press picked Petoskey as only a second-team All-American in 1933 , ten-year-old Mary Lee Grossman from Saginaw , Michigan protested in a letter to AP sports editor , Alan Gould , that he had " chosen wrong " in leaving Petoskey and Whitey Wistert off the first-team . To avoid any appearance of bias , the Saginaw native noted : " You may think I am a friend of these boys but I do not know either of them . I hope you change your mind . " Gould responded to Miss Grossman in his column : " You may be right , Mary Lee , but it 's too late now to change our mind . "

Immediately after graduating , Petoskey and Michigan teammate Whitey Wistert both signed with the Cincinnati Reds , reporting to the team in early June 1934 . Petoskey made his major league debut on September 9 , 1934 , and Wistert made his debut two days later . Petoskey played in six games in 1934 , where he went hitless and struck out five times in seven at bats . On the last day of the 1934 regular season , Petoskey was a strikeout victim of Dizzy Dean in the ninth inning of Dean 's 30th win of the year . When the baseball season ended , Petoskey and Wistert both returned to Ann Arbor , Michigan in early October , where they were given coaching assignments helping Ray Fisher teach fundamentals and offering personal tutoring to the freshman football team . Petoskey returned to the Reds in 1935 , but after spring training he was assigned to the minor leagues . He played for the Wilmington Pirates in the Piedmont League for most of the 1935 season , where he was hitting .426 to lead the league in early June . The Reds called up Petoskey in June , and one newspaper noted that when he was called up , Petoskey was " batting above the .400 mark , leading the ( Piedmont ) league in home runs , runs driven in and practically everything else . " He was two-for-five with a stolen base and a .400 batting average in four games for the 1935 Reds , but he played his last game for the Reds on June 20 , 1935 .

Until 1940 , Petoskey had been coaching in the offseason , while still playing baseball in the summers . In August 1940 , he announced his retirement as a player to take a full-time position as the head baseball coach at South Carolina , a position he held from 1940 to 1942 . In August 1942 , Petoskey was hired by Wofford College as its head football coach and director of physical education . At the time , Petoskey had been playing for the Columbia Reds in the Sally League . Petoskey remained at Wofford through 1947 , taking time off at times to revive his baseball career . In 1944 , Petoskey was a player and manager for the Birmingham Barons of the Southern Association in 1944 . In 1945 , he left Wofford for the summer to play for the Buffalo Bisons in the International League . He returned to Wofford after World War II . Wofford had suspended its football and basketball programs in 1943 and 1944 , but Petoskey announced that the school would bring both programs back in the 1945 – 46 school year . He also served as coach of the Wofford football team .

In 1948 , Petoskey returned to the University of South Carolina where he was the head coach of the baseball team until 1956 . He also served as an ends coach for the South Carolina football team . In twelve seasons as South Carolina 's head baseball coach , Petoskey compiled a record of 113 – 120 . Petoskey 's baseball players remembered his love of playing poker and his bringing the team home hungry after a tough loss to Duke . In what team members remembered as the " hunger game , " an angry Coach Petoskey told the players to " get on the bus , " and the team rode from Durham , North Carolina to Columbia , South Carolina ( 236 miles ) without having eaten . Another time against Furman University , the Gamecocks blew an 11 – 2 lead in the 8th inning to lose 12 – 11 . On the bus , Petoskey had " that look , " and the driver figured the team would receive a tongue-lashing . " He said , ' I don 't want to hear a word out of you guys , and that goes for you , too , Bussie . ' "

In December 1956 , Petoskey announced he was leaving the University of South Carolina to work for the New York Yankees , as a baseball scout for the Georgia , North Carolina , South Carolina and eastern Tennessee territory . As a Yankees ' scout , he signed Duke catcher Steve Crihfield to a contract . And in 1959 , when the Yankees moved spring training for their farm system to Columbia , South Carolina , Petoskey was responsible for the logistics and preparing Capital City Park . He served in the mid-1960s as the director of recreation for the South Carolina Department of Corrections . Petoskey died in Elgin , South Carolina at age 85 in 1996 . His son Ted Petoskey , Jr . , followed his father playing end in American football . Ted , Jr . , was chosen to play end for the South Carolina high school team in the 1959 Shrine Bowl against the North Carolina team , and was named South Carolina high school AAA Lineman of the Year . He went on to play end for the Clemson Tigers football team from 1962 to 1964 .

Psilocybe hispanica is a species of fungus in the family Hymenogastraceae . It produces small brown mushrooms with conical to convex caps up to 10 mm ( 0.4 in ) in diameter and stems 16 to 25 mm ( 0.6 to 1.0 in ) long by 0.5 to 1 mm ( 0.02 to 0.04 in ) thick . Reported as new to science in 2000 , it is only known from the Pyrenees mountain range in northern Spain and southwestern France , where it grows on horse dung in grass fields at elevations of 1,700 to 2,300 m ( 5,600 to 7,500 ft ) . The mushroom contains the psychoactive compound psilocybin . The possible depiction of this species in the 6,000-year-old Selva Pascuala rock art suggests that it might have been used in ancient religious rituals — the oldest evidence of such usage in prehistoric Europe .

The cap ranges in shape from somewhat conical to convex , and reaches diameters of 5 to 10 millimetres ( 0.2 to 0.4 in ) . Its surface is smooth , somewhat sticky to dry , and brown to brownish-yellow . The gills are somewhat adnate , and brown-violaceous with whitish edges . The stem is 16 to 25 mm ( 0.6 to 1.0 in ) long by 0.5 to 1 mm ( 0.02 to 0.04 in ) thick , cylindrical , and slightly bulbous at the base . It is whitish-yellow , with vinaceous or blue-green to blackish tones towards the base . Mature specimens do not have a veil on the stem . The flesh is whitish , but like most psilocybin-containing species , stains blue when injured . The spores are ellipsoid and measure 12 – 14.5 by 6.5 – 8 μm . They have a brownish-yellow wall greater than 1 μm thick and a broad apical germ pore with an acute hilar appendix at the base ( a region where the spore was once attached to the sterigma ) . The basidia ( spore-bearing cells in the hymenium ) are four-spored , hyaline ( translucent ) , and measure 32 – 44 by 8 – 12 μm . The cap cuticle is made of a layer 130 – 150 μm thick , with hyaline , thin-walled gelatinized hyphae measuring 1.5 – 4 μm broad . The hypodermium ( the tissue layer directly under the pileipellis ) is made of thin-walled , hyaline hyphae , 2.5 – 8 μm broad , with a brownish incrusting pigment . Clamp connections are present in the hyphae .

Psilocybe semilanceata is roughly similar in appearance to P. hispanica , but may distinguished by its mycenoid ( Mycena-like ) appearance and acute umbonate cap . Although the grassland habitat of the two species is similar , P. semilanceata does not grow directly on dung ; rather , it is a saprobic species that grows on decaying grass roots . P. fimetaria also resembles P. hispanica , but it also has a mycenoid appearance and has a ring on the stem . In terms of microscopic characteristics , P. fimetaria has larger cheilocystidia that measure 20 – 32 by 4 – 8 μm . P. hispanica differs from P. liniformans var. liniformans in that it lacks a gelatinous gill edge . P. liniformans var. americana has larger cheilocystidia , measuring 22 – 33 by 5.5 – 9 μm , and it is known to grow only on soil around herbs , in the Northwest and Northeast USA and Chile . Deconica coprophila ( formerly known as Psilocybe coprophila ) is a small brownish mushroom that also grows on dung , but it does not contain psilocybin and does not have a bluing stem .

Psilocybe hispanica is a coprophilous fungus ( dung-loving ) , and produces fruit bodies that grow solitarily or in dense groups on horse dung ; sometimes more than 25 fruit bodies can arise from the same dung . In Guzmán 's original report , they were found in a Pyrenean meadow in Aragon , at an elevation of 2,300 metres ( 7,500 ft ) . In 2003 , the species was reported from Tramacastillo de Tena , a small village in the Pyrenees ; it was also reported to have " penetrated the French part of the Pyrenees " . Within its restricted range , the mushroom is " very common " at altitudes of 1,700 to 2,300 m ( 5,600 to 7,500 ft ) .

The mushroom is consumed recreationally by Spanish youths for its mind-altering effects ; other mushrooms used recreationally in Spain include P. semilanceata and P. gallaeciae . Guzmán and Castro report that a 17th-century medallion found in Tena Valley in the southern Pyrenees had images of a devil and mushrooms carved on it . The mushrooms — possibly either P. semilanceata or P. hispanica , according to Guzmán and Castro — were used in witchcraft , a common practice in the valley during the Middle Ages . It has been argued that prehistoric rock art at a site known as Selva Pascuala near the Spanish town of Villar del Humo offers evidence that P. hispanica was used in religious rituals 6,000 years ago . The rock shelter at Selva Pascuala was discovered in the early 20th century ; in the early 21st century it was noticed that objects in one of the murals , which previously had been described as " mushrooms " , matched the general morphology of P. hispanica : the mural depicts a row of 13 mushroom-like objects with convex to conical caps , and ringless stems that vary from straight to sinuous ( wavy ) . Additionally , the mural shows a bull , which suggests an association with the coprophilic P. hispanica . Although the hallucinogenic species P. semilanceata is also widespread in the area where the mural was found , its differing shape ( narrowly conical and acutely papillate ) and its habitat on soil instead of dung suggests it is not the species represented in the mural . If the interpretation is correct , the mural represents the oldest evidence of psychedelic fungi use in Europe , and the third reported instance of rock art suggesting prehistoric usage of neurotropic fungi . The only older example is from Tassili n 'Ajjer , in the Sahara desert in southeast Algeria . In 1992 , the Italian ethnobotanist Giorgio Samorini reported finding a painted mural dated 7000 to 9000 BCE portraying mushrooms , later tentatively identified as Psilocybe mairei , a species known from Algeria and Morocco .

In Norse mythology , Valhalla ( from Old Norse Valhöll " hall of the slain " ) is a majestic , enormous hall located in Asgard , ruled over by the god Odin . Chosen by Odin , half of those who die in combat travel to Valhalla upon death , led by valkyries , while the other half go to the goddess Freyja 's field Fólkvangr . In Valhalla , the dead join the masses of those who have died in combat known as Einherjar , as well as various legendary Germanic heroes and kings , as they prepare to aid Odin during the events of Ragnarök . Before the hall stands the golden tree Glasir , and the hall 's ceiling is thatched with golden shields . Various creatures live around Valhalla , such as the stag Eikþyrnir and the goat Heiðrún , both described as standing atop Valhalla and consuming the foliage of the tree Læraðr . Valhalla is attested in the Poetic Edda , compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources , the Prose Edda , written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson , Heimskringla , also written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson , and in stanzas of an anonymous 10th century poem commemorating the death of Eric Bloodaxe known as Eiríksmál as compiled in Fagrskinna . Valhalla has inspired various works of art , publication titles , popular culture references , and has become a term synonymous with a martial ( or otherwise ) hall of the chosen dead .

In stanzas 8 to 10 of Grímnismál , the god Odin ( in the guise of Grímnir ) states that Valhalla is located in the realm of Glaðsheimr . Odin describes Valhalla as shining and golden , and that it " rises peacefully " when seen from afar . From Valhalla , every day Odin chooses from those who have died in combat . Valhalla has spear-shafts for rafters , a roof thatched with shields , coats of mail are strewn over its benches , a wolf hangs in front of its west doors , and an eagle hovers above it . From stanzas 22 to 24 , more details are given by Odin about Valhalla : the holy doors of the ancient gate Valgrind stand before Valhalla , Valhalla has five hundred and forty doors that eight hundred men can exit from at once ( from which the einherjar will flow forth to engage the wolf Fenrir at Ragnarök ) . Within Valhalla exists Thor 's hall Bilskirnir , and within it exist five hundred and forty rooms , and of all the halls within Valhalla , Odin states that he thinks his son 's may be greatest . In stanzas 25 through 26 , Odin states that the goat Heiðrún and the hart Eikþyrnir stand on top of Valhalla and graze on the branches of the tree Læraðr . Heiðrún produces vats of mead that liquor cannot be compared to , and from Eikþyrnir 's antlers drip liquid into the spring Hvergelmir from which flows forth all waters .

In stanza 38 of the poem Helgakviða Hundingsbana II , the hero Helgi Hundingsbane dies and goes to Valhalla . In stanza 38 , Helgi 's glory there is described : Prose follows after this stanza , stating that a burial-mound was made for Helgi , and that when Helgi arrived in Valhalla , he was asked by Odin to manage things with him . In stanza 39 , Helgi , now in Valhalla , has his former enemy Hunding — also in Valhalla — do menial tasks ; fetching foot-baths for all of the men there , kindling fire , tying dogs , keeping watch of horses , and feeding the pigs before he can get any sleep . In stanzas 40 to 42 , Helgi has returned to Midgard from Valhalla with a host of men . An unnamed maid of Sigrún , Helgi 's valkyrie wife , sees Helgi and his large host of men riding into the mound . The maid asks if she is experiencing a delusion , if Ragnarök has begun , or if Helgi and his men have been allowed to return . In the stanzas that follow , Helgi responds that none of these things have occurred , and so Sigrún 's maid goes home to Sigrún . The maid tells Sigrún that the burial mound has opened up , and that Sigrún should go to Helgi there , as Helgi has asked her to come and tend his wounds , which have opened up and are bleeding . Sigrún goes into the mound , and finds that Helgi is drenched in gore , his hair is thick with frost . Filled with joy at the reunion , Sigrún kisses him before he can remove his coat of mail , and asks how she can heal him . Sigrún makes a bed there , and the two sleep together in the enclosed burial mound . Helgi awakens , stating that he must " ride along the blood-red roads , to set the pale horse to tread the path of the sky , " and return before the rooster Salgófnir crows . Helgi and the host of men ride away , and Sigrún and her servant go back to their house . Sigrún has her maid wait for him by the mound the next night , but when she arrives at dawn , she finds that he has not returned . The prose narrative at the end of the poem relates that Sigrún dies of sadness , but that the two are thought to have been reborn as Helgi Haddingjaskati and the valkyrie Kára .

Valhalla is first mentioned in chapter 2 of the Prose Edda book Gylfaginning , where it is described partially in euhemerized form . In the chapter , King Gylfi sets out to Asgard in the guise of an old man going by the name of Gangleri to find the source of the power of the gods . The narrative states that the Æsir foresaw his arrival and had prepared grand illusions for him , so that when Gangerli enters the fortress , he sees a hall of such a height that he has trouble seeing over it , and notices that the roof of the hall is covered in golden shields , as if they were shingles . Snorri then quotes a stanza by the skald Þjóðólfr of Hvinir ( c . 900 ) . As he continues , Gangleri sees a man in the doorway of the hall juggling short swords , and keeping seven in the air at once . Among other things , the man says that the hall belongs to his king , and adds that he can take Gangleri to the king . Gangleri follows him , and the door closes behind him . All around him he sees many living areas , and throngs of people , some of which are playing games , some are drinking , and others are fighting with weapons . Gangleri sees three thrones , and three figures sitting upon them : High sitting on the lowest throne , Just-As-High sitting on the next highest throne , and Third sitting on the highest . The man guiding Gangleri tells him that High is the king of the hall .

In chapter 20 , Third states that Odin mans Valhalla with the Einherjar : the dead who fall in battle and become Odin 's adopted sons . In chapter 36 , High states that valkyries serve drinks and see to the tables in Valhalla , and Grímnismál stanzas 40 to 41 are then quoted in reference to this . High continues that the valkyries are sent by Odin to every battle , where they choose who is to die , and determine victory . In chapter 38 , Gangleri says : " You say that all men who have fallen in battle from the beginning of the world are now with Odin in Valhalla . With what does he feed them ? I should think the crowd there is large . " High responds that this is indeed true , that a huge amount are already in Valhalla , but yet this amount will seem to be too few when " the wolf comes . " High describes that there are never too many to feed in Valhalla , for they feast from Sæhrímnir ( here described as a boar ) , and that this beast is cooked every day and is again whole every night . Grímnismál stanza 18 is then recounted . Gangleri asks if Odin himself eats the same food as the Einherjar , and High responds that Odin needs nothing to eat — Odin only consumes wine — and he gives his food to his wolves Geri and Freki . Grímnismál stanza 19 is then recounted . High additionally states that at sunrise , Odin sends his ravens Huginn and Muninn from Valhalla to fly throughout the entire world , and they return in time for the first meal there .

In chapter 39 , Gangleri asks about the food and drinks the Einherjar consume , and asks if only water is available there . High replies that , of course , Valhalla has food and drinks fit for kings and jarls , for the mead consumed in Valhalla is produced from the udders of the goat Heiðrún , who in turn feeds on the leaves of the " famous tree " Læraðr . The goat produces so much mead in a day that it fills a massive vat large enough for all of the Einherjar in Valhalla to satisfy their thirst from it . High further states that the stag Eikþyrnir stands atop Valhalla and chews on the branches of Læraðr . So much moisture drips from his horns that it falls down to the well Hvelgelmir , resulting in numerous rivers . In chapter 40 , Gangleri muses that Valhalla must be quite crowded , to which High responds by stating that Valhalla is massive and remains roomy despite the large amount of inhabitants , and then quotes Grímnismál stanza 23 . In chapter 41 , Gangleri says that Odin seems to be quite a powerful lord , as he controls quite a big army , but he yet wonders how the Einherjar keep themselves busy when they are not drinking . High replies that daily , after they 've dressed and put on their war gear , they go out to the courtyard and battle one another in one-on-one combat for sport . Then , when mealtime comes , they ride home to Valhalla and drink . High then quotes Vafþrúðnismál stanza 41 . In chapter 42 , High describes that , " right at the beginning , when the gods were settling " they had established Asgard and then built Valhalla . The death of the god Baldr is recounted in chapter 49 , where the mistletoe that is used to kill Baldr is described as growing west of Valhalla .

At the beginning of Skáldskaparmál , a partially euhemerized account is given of Ægir visiting the gods in Asgard and shimmering swords are brought out and used as their sole source of light as they drink . There , numerous gods feast , they have plenty of strong mead , and the hall has wall-panels covered with attractive shields . This location is confirmed as Valhalla in chapter 33 . In chapter 2 , a quote from the anonymous 10th century poem Eiríksmál is provided ( see the Fagrskinna section below for more detail and another translation from another source ) : What sort of dream is that , Odin ? I dreamed I rose up before dawn to clear up Val-hall for slain people . I aroused the Einheriar , bade them get up to strew the benches , clean the beer-cups , the valkyries to serve wine for the arrival of a prince . In chapter 17 of Skáldskaparmál , the jötunn Hrungnir is in a rage and , while attempting to catch up and attack Odin on his steed Sleipnir , ends up at the doors to Valhalla . There , the Æsir invite him in for a drink . Hrungnir goes in , demands a drink , and becomes drunk and belligerent , stating that he will remove Valhalla and take it to the land of the jötunn , Jötunheimr , among various other things . Eventually , the gods tire of his boasting and invoke Thor , who arrives . Hrungnir states that Thor is under their protection , and subsequently he can 't be harmed while in Valhalla . After an exchange of words , Hrungnir challenges Thor to a duel at the location of Griotunagardar , resulting in Hrungnir 's death .

Valhalla is mentioned in euhemerized form and as an element of remaining Norse pagan belief in Heimskringla . In chapter 8 of Ynglinga saga , the " historical " Odin is described as ordaining burial laws over his country . These laws include that all the dead are to be burned on a pyre on a burial mound with their possessions , and their ashes are to be brought out to sea or buried in the earth . The dead would then arrive in Valhalla with everything that one had on their pyre , and whatever one had hidden in the ground . Valhalla is additionally referenced in the phrase " visiting Odin " in a work by the 10th century skald Þjóðólfr of Hvinir describing that , upon his death , King Vanlandi went to Valhalla . In chapter 32 of Hákonar saga Góða , Haakon I of Norway is given a pagan burial , which is described as sending him on his way to Valhalla . Verses from Hákonarmál are then quoted in support , themselves containing references to Valhalla .

In chapter 8 of Fagrskinna , a prose narrative states that , after the death of her husband Eric Bloodaxe , Gunnhild Mother of Kings had a poem composed about him . The composition is by an anonymous author from the 10th century and is referred to as Eiríksmál , and describes Eric Bloodaxe and five other kings arriving in Valhalla after their death . The poem begins with comments by Odin ( as Old Norse Óðinn ) : The god Bragi asks where a thundering sound is coming from , and says that the benches of Valhalla are creaking — as if the god Baldr had returned to Valhalla — and that it sounds like the movement of a thousand . Odin responds that Bragi knows well that the sounds are for Eric Bloodaxe , who will soon arrive in Valhalla . Odin tells the heroes Sigmund and Sinfjötli to rise to greet Eric and invite him into the hall , if it is indeed he . Sigmund asks Odin why he would expect Eric more than any other king , to which Odin responds that Eric has reddened his gore-drenched sword with many other lands . Eric arrives , and Sigmund greets him , tells him that he is welcome to come into the hall , and asks him what other lords he has brought with him to Valhalla . Eric says that with him are five kings , that he will tell them the name of them all , and that he , himself , is the sixth .

NSB Di 3 is a class of 35 diesel-electric locomotives built by NOHAB for the Norwegian State Railways ( NSB ) . The class was built between 1954 and 1969 , and delivered in two series , Di 3a and Di 3b . They are based on the Electro-Motive Division F7 and are equipped with EMD 567 engines . They have a distinct bulldog nose and were numbered 602 – 633 ( a-series ) and 641 – 643 ( b-series ) . The locomotives had a prime mover that gives a power output of 1,305 kilowatts ( 1,750 hp ) . The a-series has a Co 'Co ' wheel arrangement , while the b-series has ( A1A ) ' ( A1A ) ' . The b-series has higher top speed , but lower tractive effort . The class was the dominant locomotive on NSB 's unelectrified lines . It was ordered as part of the company 's dieselization of services during the 1950s and 1960s , and was initially used on the three mainline routes of the Bergen , Dovre and Nordland Lines . In the 1960s the Bergen and Dovre Lines were electrified and the Di 3 units transferred to smaller lines , such as the Meråker , Valdres , Røros , Solør and Rauma Lines . They remained in service with NSB until 2001 , five years later than planned due to NSB returning their successor , the Di 6 . The units are still in use by the private operator Ofotbanen , the Kosovo Railways , an operator in Sicily , and the Norwegian Railway Museum . The class is similar to the DSB Class MY and MÁV M61 .

The first diesel locomotive used by NSB was a single Di 1 unit delivered in 1942 . It was more cost-efficient than the steam locomotives used on the non-electrified lines , and in 1945 , NSB decided that it would not order more steam locomotives . General Motors ' Electro Motive Division ( EMD ) made a bid to deliver twelve units based on their F7 , and NSB agreed to lease a single unit for trial . The body and mechanical components were built by NOHAB , the motors by ASEA and prime mover by EMD . While under production in 1954 , GM shipped a G12 for trial in Norway and Sweden . It was tested on the express train on the Dovre Line on 7 August , but proved to have insufficient power , causing the train to be 20 minutes late . The trial unit from NOHAB was delivered on 17 September 1954 . The first test runs in scheduled service were on the Nordland Line between Trondheim and Mo i Rana in October . There were no technical faults until 22 December , when a grounding error caused the locomotive to be grounded until 17 January . In March the unit was sent back to NOHAB and went on a marketing tour that would eventually reach Ankara , Turkey in 1955 .

The locomotive returned to Norway on 1 July 1955 , where it was numbered 602 and put into service on the Nordland Line . The trials were successful , with much higher regularity than the steam locomotives . The Di 3 was used eight days in a row , and then spent a single day in the depot . NSB signed an agreement with NOHAB for delivery of five further locomotives . This caused a public debate , because the domestic supplier Thune had offered to build a similar locomotive in cooperation with American Locomotive Company . The first delivery was made on 25 April 1957 , and the order completed by July . In March 1957 NSB received permission to buy another eight locomotives . Delivery started in October and was completed on 1 June 1958 . The order was supplemented with another six trains , with delivery in 1958 . The Finnish State Railways ( VR ) ordered five units in 1959 , but these were cancelled for political reasons . The units were offered to NSB for a reduced price . Three were designated Di 3b because they had a slight specification variation , with a ( A1A ) ' ( A1A ) ' wheel arrangement and higher top speed . Two units had come short enough in the production process that they could be given the same specifications as the other Di 3a units , but received a slightly longer body . The Di 3b were given the numbers 641 – 643 . For part of 1960 , no . 623 was leased by NOHAB and sent on a demonstration tour in Eastern Europe . This resulted in an order from the Hungarian State Railways , where it became the MAV M61 . The Røros Line was upgraded and the Bergen Line units transferred to Trondheim in 1960 , but increased need for hauling forced NSB to not use the units on the Røros Line until the delivery of the next batch of six units in 1965 . The final delivery , of four units , was made in 1969 .

The initial use for the Di 3 was to operate the three non-electrified long-distance lines of NSB : the Bergen Line , the Dovre Line and the Nordland Line . Following the delivery of the first batch in 1957 , they were from 2 June used on the Dovre Line , north of Otta to Trondheim , and further north along the Nordland Line to Mo i Rana . The stock was sufficient to replace all steam locomotives on the Nordland Line , and reduced travel time by one hour . From Hamar to Otta , the track did not have sufficient permitted axle load . From the second batch of eight units , five were put into service on the Bergen Line , the rest on the Dovre and Nordland Lines . Necessary upgrades of the permitted axle load had been made to the Dovre Line and Nordland Line , and the locomotives were in use from Hamar to Saltdal . On 30 November , the Nordland Line was completed to Fauske , and the full length operated with Di 3 . The first section of the Bergen Line , the Gjøvik Line and the Roa – Hønefoss Line , was electrified in February 1961 . This allowed diesel and electric locomotives to haul all trains from Oslo to Bergen . In 1962 the Nordland Line was completed to Bodø , but the increased need for locomotives was more than compensated by the electrification of the Bergen Line being extended to Ål . The first Di 3 ran on the Røros Line in 1964 , that had previously been denied due to bridges with insufficient axle load permits . In 1965 , the Bergen Line was electrified , and all but one Di 3 was transferred to Trondheim . A single unit , usually no . 610 , was stationed at Finse Station as a snowplow . Along with additional deliveries , there were sufficient Di 3 units to terminate most steam operations .

After the Bergen Line was electrified , the work continued on the Dovre Line . The section from Hamar to Otta was finished in 1967 , and the following year to Dombås . This allowed the locomotives to be transferred to secondary lines . With the final delivery of the last units in 1969 and the completion of the electrification of the Dovre Line in 1970 , the final steam locomotive was taken out of service . During the last half of the 1960s , the Di 3 was put into service on the Rauma Line , the Røros Line , the Solør Line , the Valdres Line and the Meråker Line . In November 1970 , the Dovre Line was electrified , and the last steam locomotives were retired . A long-term plan to electrify half the lines was finished , and for two decades , NSB 's operations were very stable with no major investments to infrastructure or closing of lines . NSB had slightly less diesel locomotives than they needed , but plans to order additional Di 3 was never fulfilled . In 1981 , NSB took delivery of five Di 4 to supplement the older units . They were mainly used on the Nordland Line , and Di 3 units were predominantly used on the other lines , although they continued to operate som trains on the Nordland Line . On 1 April 1987 , a Di 3 612 caught on fire ; the damage was small enough that it could have been repaired , but NSB instead decided to put aside the unit . At the time NSB planned to order additional Di 4 , but these plans were put on hold . In 1988 , the Valdres Line was closed ; this was the only time a line with Di 3 in regular service was closed .

During the 1980s , NSB started leasing SJ T44-locomotives from Sweden to supplement the Di 3 . In 1992 , the decision was made to order 12 Di 6 and 20 Di 8 to replace the Di 3 . The former was based on the Di 4 and had twice the power of the Di 3 . The Di 8 was slightly more powerful than the Di 3 , and were intended for freight trains . Both series were put into service in 1996 , but the Di 6 proved to have so many technical problems that they were returned to Siemens in 1998 . The Di 3 units had been set aside and some had been scrapped , but the return of the Di 6 forced NSB to put the units back into service . During the mid-1990s , NSB had initiated a program to replace the traditional locomotive and carriage trains with new , tilting multiple units . This had led to the order of sixteen Class 73 four-car units for the three mainline routes on the Bergen Line , Dovre Line and Sørland Line . To supplement this , the board of NSB decided on 14 November 1996 to purchase seven tilting diesel multiple units for the Røros and Rauma Lines . The choice fell on Class 93 , with fifteen units eventually delivered . This allowed all passenger trains on diselized lines to either be operated with Class 93 be hauled by the Di 4 . The last Di 3-hauled train ran on 7 January 2001 .

With the delivery of Class 93 , NSB started to retire or sell the Di 3 . In November 2001 , five units were sold for NOK 250,000 each — well under market price — to the new private operator Ofotbanen . The purchase raised controversy , because the potential operator Banetransport had offered full market price for the trains . One year after delivery , six of eleven Class 93-locomotives were out of order . To solve the problem , NSB had to rent back used Di 3 locomotives from Ofotbanen . NSB had chosen to sell the old locomotives for less than market price , but Ofotbanen demanded that NSB pay the entire purchase price for the short-term rental back . Four units ( 619 , 633 , 641 and 643 ) were sold to the United Nations and was put into service in Kosovo , in what has since become the Kosovo Railways . Four units ( 622 , 626 , 630 and 631 ) were sold to an operator in Sicily , Italy . The Norwegian National Rail Administration bought one unit ( 628 ) for maintenance , and has painted it yellow . The Norwegian Railway Museum in Hamar has preserved three units , of which two ( 602 and 616 ) were operated by GM-Gruppen and one ( 615 ) is kept for spare parts . NSB has kept one unit as reserve at Ål Station . The remaining units have been scrapped , put aside or sold as spare part units .

The Di 3 was built by Nydquist och Holm of Trollhätten , Sweden , as part of a series of GM EMD AA16 locomotives in Europe . They are technically similar to the DSB Class MY of Denmark and the MAV M61 of Hungary . The locomotives are powered by a 16-cylinder EMD 16.567 C or E engine that has a power output of 1,305 kilowatts ( 1,750 horsepower ) at 835 revolutions per minute ( rpm ) . The engines power an EMD D32 or D12 generator that feeds six ASEA LJB76 or LJB84 motors on a Di 3a . The Di 3b is equipped with four EMD D40 or D77B motors . This gives a tractive effort of 265 kilonewtons ( 60,000 lbf ) for the a-series and 176.5 kilonewtons ( 39,700 pounds-force ) for the b-series . The motors have a power output of 1,100 kilowatts ( 1,500 horsepower ) . The maximum speed is 105 kilometres per hour ( 65 mph ) for the a-series and 143 kilometres per hour ( 89 miles per hour ) for the b-series . The steel bodies are 18.60 or 18.90 metres ( 61.0 or 62.0 ft ) long . The longer length is for the three b-series units and the two a-series locomotives that were made in the batch , originally intended for VR . The a-series has a Co 'Co ' wheel arrangement , while the b-series has a ( A1A ) ' ( A1A ) ' arrangement , where the center of the three axles on each bogie is unpowered . The wheels have a 1,016 millimetres ( 3 ft 4.0 in ) wheel diameter and the locomotives have a weight of 102.0 tonnes ( 100.4 long tons ; 112.4 short tons ) for the a-series and 103.0 tonnes ( 101.4 long tons ; 113.5 short tons ) for the b-series . The trains can be run in multiple with the Di 4 , Di 6 and Di 8 . All the Di 3 engines featured a bulldog nose , the only locomotive type in Norway to do so . The locomotives were at first delivered in a dark green livery , but during the 1960s this was changed to red , and the last delivered units never had a green scheme .

" Queen Vic Fire Week " is a group of four episodes of the BBC soap opera EastEnders , broadcast between 6 and 10 September 2010 on BBC One . The episodes included a fire at The Queen Victoria public house , also known as The Queen Vic or The Vic , and the departure of the character Peggy Mitchell , portrayed by Barbara Windsor , who left the series after sixteen years in the role . During the episodes , Peggy — the pub landlady — has her crack cocaine-addicted son Phil ( Steve McFadden ) imprisoned in The Queen Victoria , forcing him to go cold turkey . She later learns that her deceased husband Archie ( Larry Lamb ) was murdered by local resident Stacey Branning ( Lacey Turner ) . Before she can report Stacey to the police , Phil escapes and sets the pub on fire . Stacey and her infant daughter Lily are trapped inside , but are rescued by Ryan Malloy ( Neil McDermott ) , prompting Stacey to reveal to him that he is Lily 's father . The pub destroyed , Peggy decides against reporting Stacey for Lily 's sake . She plans to make a fresh start , bidding her family goodbye and leaving Walford .

The episodes were directed by Lee Salisbury and produced by Bryan Kirkwood . The first was written by Daran Little and the remainder by Simon Ashdown . Kirkwood intended to give Windsor an " epic and poignant " departure , as befitting her status as the ultimate EastEnders matriarch . The fire storyline was created for her exit , and to facilitate a refurbishment of The Queen Victoria set for the transition to high-definition television broadcasting . The episodes were filmed over seventeen days , more than twice the series ' typical filming duration , with the interior set rebuilt on the George Lucas Stage in Elstree for the fire . A special version of the theme tune , called " Peggy 's Theme " , was created for Windsor 's final episode . It was released as an EP , available for download following the episode , and features as the lead track on composer Simon May 's album The Simon May Collection . The episodes were accompanied by two documentaries on BBC Three , one following the filming of the fire , and the other examining ten of Peggy 's most iconic moments in EastEnders . Viewership ranged from 8.60 – 10.09 million , with no episode watched by less than a third of the total viewing audience . They were the most watched programmes on BBC One in the week of broadcast , and the Friday episode was the second-most watched show across all channels . The episodes received a mixed response from critics . Several highlighted inaccuracies and implausibilities in the storyline , including the lack of fire alarms and sprinklers in the pub . Others focussed on Peggy 's departure , with James McCarthy of the Western Mail writing that it would " doubtless remain the stuff of EastEnders ' legend for years to come , " and Jim Shelley calling it " a good way to go . " In contrast , the Daily Mirror 's Polly Hudson found Peggy 's exit a nonsensical " non event " , and Gareth McLean of The Guardian deemed it " suitably sentimental " , but several years overdue . The fire was nominated in the " Best Stunt " category at the 2011 All About Soap Bubble Awards .

Peggy Mitchell ( Barbara Windsor ) , who has just regained her status as landlady of The Queen Victoria public house , decides to throw a wedding reception for Janine Butcher ( Charlie Brooks ) and Ryan Malloy ( Neil McDermott ) to let everyone know the pub is hers again . Peggy 's friend Pat Evans ( Pam St. Clement ) arranges a hen party for Janine at the R & R nightclub , but Janine feels betrayed by Pat when Peggy reveals that she said Janine 's marriage would not last . Janine meets a man named Richard Monroe ( Andrew Hall ) , who settles her bill . Impressed by his car , Janine leaves with him . Worried about her son Phil ( Steve McFadden ) because of his addiction to the drug crack cocaine , Peggy enlists the help of Minty Peterson ( Cliff Parisi ) and Billy Mitchell ( Perry Fenwick ) to abduct him from the flat he is living in . They bring him back to The Queen Victoria , locking him in the living room upstairs , where the windows have been boarded up to stop him from escaping . Stacey Branning ( Lacey Turner ) reveals to Dot Branning ( June Brown ) that her deceased husband Bradley ( Charlie Clements ) is not the father of her baby Lily .

Stacey explains to Dot that Bradley knew he was not Lily 's father . Dot informs Bradley 's father Max ( Jake Wood ) , who tells her he already knows . Concerned by Stacey telling people her secrets , he wonders if she has ceased taking medication for her bipolar disorder . He tells her that she needs to keep the truth about Lily 's father and the fact that she killed Peggy 's husband Archie ( Larry Lamb ) several months previously to herself . Phil tries to convince various people to let him out as he is suffering withdrawal symptoms , but nobody will . Janine awakens in Richard 's flat and gets dressed , though they did not have sex . She returns home and tells Pat that she feels guilty , and Pat tells her not to inform Ryan . Janine fears that she is not good enough for Ryan , but he reassures her and they marry . Stacey attends their wedding reception in The Queen Victoria , leaving Lily in a bedroom upstairs . She is surprised by a photograph of Peggy and Archie , and is frightened to hear Phil making noises in the living room . Stacey tells Peggy that she thinks Archie is alive and locked upstairs . Peggy assures Stacey that Archie is dead , telling her that Bradley killed him , as he was posthumously found guilty of the murder . Stacey then confesses that she killed Archie .

Peggy demands that Stacey leave the pub and Stacey pleads with her not to call the police for Lily 's sake . She attempts to tell Ryan that he is Lily 's father , but is interrupted by Pat , who thinks Stacey is trying to seduce him and slaps her . Phil smashes through the door using a crowbar that was left in the room . He starts taking cash and drinking alcohol , and interrupts Peggy before she can call the police about Stacey . They argue , with Phil accusing Peggy of loving the pub more than she loves him and throwing a match to the alcohol-soaked floor to start a fire . It spreads quickly , causing an explosion . The customers flee the pub , Syed Masood ( Marc Elliott ) is knocked to the ground and trampled in the process but is rescued by his father Masood Ahmed ( Nitin Ganatra ) and brother Tamwar ( Himesh Patel ) . Peggy tries in vain to extinguish the flames , but is forced out by her friends and family . Stacey , unaware of the events , heads upstairs to Lily and becomes trapped . She uses the crowbar to smash a boarded-up window and hands Lily over to Ryan , who has climbed a ladder . Peggy realises Phil is still inside and returns to the building with Billy . They find him trapped beneath a wooden beam , and are able to drag him out to safety . Ryan goes back up the ladder and carries an unconscious Stacey out . Stacey regains consciousness and sees that Lily is safe , and tells Ryan that Lily is his daughter . Peggy stares at the pub as it is completely destroyed .

The next day , Peggy visits Stacey in hospital and asks her to confess to burning the pub , as a sentence for arson would be less than one for murder , but Stacey refuses . Peggy realises that Stacey needs to look after her daughter so she leaves . Ryan confronts Stacey at the hospital , shocked with her confession , refuses to acknowledge his daughter , and goes on his honeymoon with Janine . Peggy goes into the pub and looks around as she remembers events from her time there . She then tells Billy she wants to take Phil away to make a fresh start and to protect him . Her niece Ronnie ( Samantha Womack ) tells Peggy she is five months pregnant and asks Peggy not to leave as she is like a mother to her . Peggy tells Ronnie to give her real mother , Glenda ( Glynis Barber ) , another chance . Peggy 's daughter Sam ( Danniella Westbrook ) does not want her to leave as Peggy promised to look after Sam 's baby Richard for her , however , Peggy says she is old now and the baby needs a strong mother . Peggy gives her jewellery to Sam to sell so she has some money . Peggy speaks to Phil , accepting responsibility for making him the way he is and offering to help him get off the drugs . He says she needs him more than he needs her and that she suffocates him . Realising that he is right , Peggy asks the rest of her family to look after him , saying emotional goodbyes . Though Phil claims not to have meant what he said , Peggy says she has to leave for his sake . As she leaves the house , Phil begins to follow her , but she sends him back inside . She looks at the pub and walks out of Walford .

In October 2009 , actress Barbara Windsor 's decision to leave EastEnders after sixteen years of portraying the character Peggy Mitchell was announced . The show 's executive producer , Bryan Kirkwood , said it was a massive honour for him to be responsible for the character 's exit , but explained that as she has become the " quintessential matriarch of the show " , they had to get the exit storyline right , which he said would be " both epic and poignant " . Windsor gave one year 's notice of leaving , giving the production team time to come up with a storyline , and was asked to keep her decision a secret until the announcement was made . Kirkwood looked at Windsor 's first episode and decided her exit should be about Peggy and her son Phil , as Peggy 's arrival came at a time when Phil needed her most , and since then , she had believed that Phil still needed her . Peggy 's exit came when she realised his mother was not what Phil needed . Windsor did not want to know in advance how her character would leave , but hoped she would not be killed off . She commented : " My exit was beautifully written and I really couldn ’ t have asked for a better send-off for Peggy . "

In June 2010 , it was announced that The Queen Victoria would be destroyed in a fire to tie in with EastEnders ' transition to high definition so the set could be completely refurbished . It was reported that the fire could tie in with the departure of Peggy or one of the several other characters whose departure had previously been announced . Director Lee Salisbury said the fire , as well as Peggy 's departure , would have a huge effect on several characters , especially the Mitchell family , of which Peggy is the matriarch . Kirkwood said the fire was " one of the most spectacular stunts that EastEnders has ever seen , and it 's very exciting . "

All four episodes were directed by Lee Salisbury , who learned three weeks before filming that he would be working on the episodes , and said he was " a bit dumbstruck " to discover he would be directing the fire episodes and Windsor 's departure , but that he was proud to do so . He said his main aim for the fire was to show the fear , panic and pandemonium that comes when a fire starts and quickly spreads . He wanted the story to be character-led rather than led by the fire , saying that the fire " almost becomes a backdrop " . Salisbury said it was hard to make the fire look real because " you can 't actually set fire to stuff " . As the fire lasted for some time , characters ' scenes could be divided up into small sections . Salisbury commented : " Bryan Kirkwood , the writer [ Ashdown ] and myself also wanted it to be an episode where things kept happening and the audience would keep thinking , ' Wow , that must have been the explosion ' or ' That must have been the stunt ' . But more things keep happening and happening , and I think that 's what people will find really shocking . " The production team had several production meetings for the weeks ' worth of episodes , whereas there is usually just one .

The episodes took seventeen days to film , where normally crew are given eight days to film a week 's worth of episodes . Between forty and forty-five members of crew were required for filming the fire episode , including assistant directors , a design department , cameras , lighting , sound , make up , costume , visual effects , fire safety officers and a stunt team consisting of a stunt co-ordinator and stunt doubles . Filming was done with four television cameras , a steadicam and a dolly . The exterior fire scenes were filmed first , in five night shoots lasting until 4 a.m. , and the real exterior set was burnt . Safety was the top priority for the fire scenes , and fire safety advisors ensured all cast and crew were protected . Stunt doubles wore flame-proof gel on their faces and for the scene where Ryan and Stacey fall from the ladder , several layers of cardboard boxes were stacked on the ground for the stunt doubles to fall onto . For filming the final explosion scene , all the actors whose characters were involved were filmed separately for their reactions . The explosion had to be delayed due to a power failure at Elstree Studios , two minutes before the explosion was due to be set off , which also affected a live broadcast of Big Brother . The power cut lasted two hours and filming was further delayed due to rain . The explosion was completed in a third take . Despite the delay , the scenes were completed on schedule . Salisbury noted that the demise of such an iconic set as The Queen Victoria left several cast members in tears .

The interior set of The Queen Victoria pub was taken apart and rebuilt exactly to scale on the George Lucas Stage , a fire stage at Elstree Film Studios , for interior scenes , filmed over four days . The interior set took seven weeks to build and two weeks to get into the studio . Controlled gas pipes were used to shoot jets of flames and a header was specially built to collapse on Phil . Salisbury had to ensure that the fire for the interior scenes matched that of the already-filmed exterior scenes . Producers decided to extend the 10 September episode featuring Peggy 's departure by ten minutes , meaning it would clash with rival soap opera Coronation Street . In 2016 , Windsor said that the Queen Vic fire was her favourite stunt to film since joining the cast in 1994 . She called it her " Joan of Arc moment " and revealed that when the explosion happened , she " was actually blown off my feet and landed on Steve McFadden who ended up with bruised ribs " .

Windsor 's final episode on 10 September 2010 did not end with the usual EastEnders theme tune . Instead the occasionally used " Julia 's Theme " , a piano version of the theme , was reworked specially for the broadcast , and given the name " Peggy 's Theme " . The theme was created by the original theme tune composer , Simon May , who was reportedly thrilled to write the theme tune for Windsor . He added more piano to the theme and gave it a " more melancholy feel " . May composed the theme not knowing what would happen on screen , but when Kirkwood brought a rough edit of the episode , May noted that the music fitted perfectly first time , saying it was " remarkable and very moving . " The theme features as the lead track on the album The Simon May Collection and was also released as an EP available to download immediately after the episode . He revealed : " All the actors and crew had made a really special couple of shows . My main purpose was to bring something to the table , and I didn 't think it would be a single . [ ... ] But when everybody heard the track they said ' you 've got to release that as the single because it 's something special ' . "

A number of trailers were released to television in August 2010 to promote Peggy 's departure from the series , and a section on the official EastEnders website was dedicated to the character , allowing fans to " heart Peggy " . The 10 September episode was followed by a twenty-minute episode of documentary programme EastEnders Revealed titled " Peggy Mitchell : Queen of the Vic " . Narrated by Shane Richie , the documentary looked at ten moments from Peggy 's time in the show that made her a British icon . According to overnight figures , it received ratings of 4.49 million viewers . Official ratings raised the figure to 4.62 million . A documentary looking at the filming of the fire was broadcast on 24 September 2010 on BBC Three . It received 800,000 viewers .

The 6 September episode , featuring Janine 's hen party , attracted 9.54 million viewers on BBC One . It was watched by 36.1 % of television viewers during its original broadcast . The later BBC Three repeat was viewed by 840,000 people , attaining a 3.9 % share of the audience during broadcast . The 7 September episode , in which Stacey confessed to Peggy that she killed Archie , was viewed by 8.60 million people on BBC One and 990,000 on BBC Three , with audience shares of 34.9 % and 4.7 % respectively . The fire episode on 9 September received 9.40 million viewers and a 41 % share of the audience , and the BBC Three repeat saw 1.59 million viewers ( 7.4 % ) tuning in . Peggy 's departure on 10 September received 10.09 million viewers for BBC One , a 38.1 % share during broadcast , and the later BBC Three repeat was watched by 1.16 million viewers , attaining a 5.3 % share . Additionally , the four episodes were the most-watched programmes on BBC One that week and the Friday episode was the second most-watched on all channels .

The fire and Peggy 's exit episodes garnered a mixed reception by critics . Liam Tucker , founder of website Watch With Mothers , compared the fire episode to the film The Texas Chain Saw Massacre and admired the special effects and performances of the episode , but said that it seemed unlikely that everyone would have escaped safely , especially Stacey and her baby . Roz Laws from the Sunday Mercury wondered if the fire episode was inaccurate due to the lack of fire alarms , sprinklers and emergency lighting in the pub , but noted that the episode 's use of the song " Murder on the Dancefloor " , featuring the line " Gonna burn this god damn house right down " , was " clever " . A writer for Heat said " We knew the Vic fire was coming , but actually seeing it was quite another thing , and knowing that it also marked the end of an era with the departure of Barbra [ sic ] Windsor made it that much more emotional . " A reporter for the Nottingham Evening Post wrote " Never in the history of soap fires , of which there have of course been legion , have so many hilariously overindulgent explosions been captured on camera . " The Mail on Sunday picked the fire episode as the " Soap of the Day " , while The People deemed the lack of deaths " a wasted opportunity . " Ally Ross wrote in his column in The Sun that the fire episode was " twenty minutes of shouting " , questioned why one character was seen flouting the smoking ban and Phil was boarded up behind an inward-opening door , and opined that he was glad to see Peggy leave as she had become " increasingly psychotic " and " vile " .

Writing for entertainment news website Digital Spy , Daniel Kilkelly said Peggy 's final episode featured " plenty of poignant moments [ ... ] — not least the scene which saw Peggy standing in the destroyed Queen Vic and appearing completely devastated . " Gareth McLean from The Guardian said the use of " Peggy 's Theme " was a " suitably sentimental sendoff " for the character , but said that " in hindsight , Peggy should have left Walford three or four years ago , her character trapped in a cycle of increasingly samey stories that reduced her to a parody of her former self " , describing her efforts to put out the flames as " like a very sooty clockwork mouse " . James McCarthy of Welsh newspaper Western Mail said Windsor 's " final emotional scene will doubtless remain the stuff of EastEnders ' legend for years to come , " and Jim Shelley from the Daily Mirror said " It was a good way to go . " However , Shelley 's colleague Polly Hudson said Peggy 's exit was a " non event " , as " Peggy just left , nonsensically and at complete odds with everything we 've learnt about her character over the last 15 years . "

Tropical Cyclone Kate was a short-lived Category 2 cyclone that remained nearly stationary for its entire existence in the northwestern Coral Sea in February 2006 . Forming out of a monsoonal trough on 22 February , Kate rapidly intensified throughout the day . By 23 February , the system attained its peak intensity with winds of 95 km / h ( 60 mph 10-minute sustained ) and a barometric pressure of 985 hPa ( mbar ) . Shortly thereafter , increasing wind shear caused the storm to quickly weaken . By 24 February , the system dissipated over open waters near Queensland , Australia . Although Kate did not directly affect land , large swells produced by the storm impaced beaches in Papua New Guinea and Queensland . The waves injured six people in Australia , although no property damage was reported .

Cyclone Kate originated from an area of low pressure that was first identified on 22 February 2006 , within a monsoonal trough . The system rapidly intensified throughout the day , with the Australian Bureau of Meteorology issuing their first advisory on the system that evening . Upon being classified , the system was immediately declared Tropical Cyclone Kate , skipping tropical low status . At the same time , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) also began issuing advisories on the system , designating it as Tropical Cyclone 13P . The storm had developed well-defined , upper-level outflow enhanced by diffluence over the system . The system remained nearly stationary over the northwestern Coral Sea . Early on 23 February , the storm attained its peak intensity with winds of 95 km / h ( 60 mph 10-minute sustained ) and a barometric pressure of 985 hPa ( mbar ) . However , the JTWC assessed the system to have been slightly weaker , attaining peak winds of 85 km / h ( 50 mph 1-minute sustained ) . Further intensification was anticipated as Kate slowly tracked towards Queensland , Australia . However , Kate stalled shortly thereafter and began to weaken due to increasing wind shear . Rapid weakening took place throughout the day , and JTWC declared the system dissipated early on 24 February . The Bureau of Meteorology downgraded Kate to a tropical low around the same time , although they continued to monitor the storm for several more hours before reporting that it had dissipated over open waters .

Upon the cyclone 's formation , the Bureau of Meteorology warned vessels to avoid the storm in anticipation of rough seas and winds gusting to 125 km / h ( 78 mph ) . Although the storm did not pose much of a threat to Queensland , officials urged residents to ensure their disaster kits were ready and that preparations for a moderate storm , such as storing lose outdoor objects and clearing gutters , had been completed . While the storm had no direct impact on land , large swells affected most of the Queensland coastline . In the Shire of Noosa , six surfers sustained serious injuries after wading into turbulent waters . Waves up to 1.8 m ( 5.9 ft ) tossed the six surfers , leaving them with injuries ranging from broken noses and fractured ankles to head wounds from surfboards . The waves also caused additional beach erosion to parts of Papua New Guinea previously impacted by Cyclone Ingrid in March 2005 .

Metal Gear Solid is an action-adventure stealth video game developed by Konami Computer Entertainment Japan and first published by Konami for the PlayStation in 1998 . The game was directed , produced , and co-written by series creator Hideo Kojima , and serves as a sequel to the MSX2 video games Metal Gear and Metal Gear 2 : Solid Snake , which Kojima also wrote and directed . Metal Gear Solid follows Solid Snake , a soldier who infiltrates a nuclear weapons facility to neutralize the terrorist threat from FOXHOUND , a renegade special forces unit . Snake must liberate two hostages , the head of DARPA and the president of a major arms manufacturer , confront the terrorists , and stop them from launching a nuclear strike . Cinematic cutscenes were rendered using the in-game engine and graphics , and voice acting was used throughout the entire game . Metal Gear Solid was well received , shipping more than six million copies , and scoring an average of 94 / 100 on the aggregate website Metacritic . It is regarded as one of the greatest and most important games of all time , and is often seen as the game which helped popularize the stealth genre . The commercial success of the title prompted the release of an expanded version for the PlayStation and PC , titled Metal Gear Solid : Integral ; and a remake , Metal Gear Solid : The Twin Snakes was later released for the GameCube . The game has also spawned numerous sequels , prequels and spin-offs , including several games , a radio drama , comics , and novels .

Despite a transition to 3D , the gameplay of Metal Gear Solid remains similar to its 2D MSX2 predecessor Metal Gear 2 : Solid Snake . The player must navigate the protagonist , Solid Snake , through the game 's areas without being detected by enemies . Detection is triggered by the player moving into an enemy 's field of vision and sets off an alarm that draws armed enemies to his location . This also triggers " alert mode " and the player must then hide and remain undetected , at which point “ evasion mode ” begins and once the counter reaches zero the game returns to " infiltration mode " where enemies are not suspicious of Snake ’ s presence . The radar cannot be used in alert or evasion mode . To remain undetected , the player can perform techniques which make use of both Solid Snake 's abilities and the environment , such as crawling under objects , using boxes as cover , ducking or hiding around walls , and making noise to distract enemies . These are carried out using the third-person camera , which often changes its angle to give the player the best view of the area possible , and an on-screen radar , which displays enemies and their field of vision . Snake can also make use of many items and gadgets , such as infra-red goggles or a cardboard box disguise . The emphasis on stealth promotes a less violent form of gameplay , as fights against large groups of enemies will often result in serious damage for the player .

The game 's progress is punctuated by cutscenes and codec , as well as encounters with bosses . To progress , players must discover the weaknesses of each boss and defeat them . Play controls and strategies can also be accessed via the Codec radio , where advice is delivered from Snake 's support team ; for example , the support team may chastise Snake for not saving his progress often enough , or explain his combat moves in terms of which buttons to press on the gamepad . The Codec is also used to provide exposition on the game 's backstory . Completion of the title provides the player with a statistical summary of their performance , and a " code name " based upon it , typically the name of a common animal . In a first for the Metal Gear series , a training mode , called VR Mode , is available in which players can practice hiding techniques , weapon use , and sneaking . In addition to the stealth gameplay , there are set piece sequences that entail firefights between the player and enemies from the third-person and first-person perspectives .

The protagonist of Metal Gear Solid is Solid Snake , a legendary infiltrator and saboteur . During the mission , Snake receives support and advice via codec radio . Colonel Roy Campbell , Solid Snake 's former commanding officer , supports Snake with advice and tactics . While he initially keeps a number of secrets from Snake , he gradually reveals them . He is joined by Naomi Hunter , who gives medical advice ; Nastasha Romanenko , who provides item and weapon tips ; Master Miller , a former drill instructor and survival coach ; and Mei Ling , who invented the soliton radar system used in the mission and is also in charge of mission data ; the player can call her to save the game . The main antagonist of the game is Liquid Snake , leader of a now-terrorist splinter cell of the organization FOXHOUND , and genetic counterpart to Solid Snake . An elite special forces unit , FOXHOUND contains experts specializing in unique tasks . Members are Revolver Ocelot , a Western-style gunslinger and expert interrogator whose weapon of choice is the Colt Single Action Army ; Sniper Wolf , a preternatural sniper ; Vulcan Raven , a hulking Alaskan shaman armed with an M61 Vulcan torn from a downed F-16 ; Psycho Mantis , a psychic profiler and psychokinesis expert ; and Decoy Octopus , a master of disguise .

The year is 2005 , six years after the downfall of Zanzibarland . A renegade genetically-enhanced special forces unit , FOXHOUND , has seized a remote island in Alaska 's Fox Archipelago codenamed " Shadow Moses " , the site of a nuclear weapons disposal facility . FOXHOUND threatens to use the nuclear-capable mecha , Metal Gear REX , against the U.S. government if they do not receive the remains of Big Boss and the ransom of $ 1 billion within 24 hours . Solid Snake is forced out of retirement by Colonel Roy Campbell to infiltrate the island and neutralize the threat . Snake enters the facility via an air vent and locates the first hostage , DARPA Chief Donald Anderson . Anderson reveals that Metal Gear REX can be deactivated with a secret detonation override code , but dies of a heart attack . Colonel Campbell 's niece Meryl Silverburgh , held hostage in an adjoining cell , helps Snake escape . Snake locates another hostage , ArmsTech president Kenneth Baker , but is confronted by FOXHOUND member Revolver Ocelot . Their gunfight is interrupted by a mysterious cyborg ninja who cuts off Ocelot 's right hand . Baker briefs Snake on the Metal Gear project and advises him to contact Meryl , whom he gave a PAL card that might prevent the launch , but he too dies of a sudden heart attack .

Over Codec , Meryl agrees to meet in the warhead disposal area on the condition that Snake contacts Metal Gear 's designer , Dr. Hal " Otacon " Emmerich . En route , Snake receives an anonymous codec call warning him of a tank ambush . Snake fends off the attack from Vulcan Raven and proceeds to the rendezvous , where he locates Otacon . The ninja reappears and Snake realizes it is his former ally Gray Fox , believed dead . Otacon agrees to aid Snake remotely using special camouflage to procure information and supplies . Snake meets Meryl and receives the PAL card . As they head for the underground base , Meryl is possessed by psychic Psycho Mantis and pulls her gun on Snake . He disarms her and defeats Mantis , who informs Snake that he has " a large place " in her heart . After they reach the underground passageway , Sniper Wolf ambushes them , wounds Meryl , and captures Snake . Liquid confirms Snake 's suspicion that they are twin brothers . After being tortured by Ocelot , Snake is confused to discover Anderson 's body in his cell , seemingly dead for days . He escapes , makes his way up the communications tower , and fends off a helicopter attack from Liquid . As he emerges onto a snowfield , he is confronted again by Sniper Wolf . He kills her , devastating Otacon , who was infatuated with her .

Snake continues to REX 's hangar and is ambushed again by Raven . After Snake defeats him , Raven tells Snake that " Anderson " was in fact FOXHOUND disguise artist Decoy Octopus Infiltrating Metal Gear 's hangar , Snake overhears Liquid and Ocelot preparing the REX launch sequence and uses the PAL card , but this unexpectedly activates REX . Liquid reveals that he has been impersonating Snake 's advisor Master Miller and that FOXHOUND has used Snake to facilitate REX 's launch . He and Snake are the product of the Les Enfants Terribles project , a 1970s government program to clone Big Boss . He also reveals to Snake the government 's true reason for sending him : Snake is unknowingly carrying a weaponized " FoxDie " virus that causes cardiac arrest in FOXHOUND members on contact , allowing the government to retrieve REX undamaged . As Liquid , in REX , battles Snake , Gray Fox appears , destroys REX 's radome , and is killed . Snake destroys REX and defeats Liquid , then escapes with Meryl or Otacon via an underground tunnel , pursued by Liquid in a Jeep . After their vehicles crash , Liquid pulls a gun on Snake but dies from FoxDie . Colonel Campbell , briefly ousted from command , calls off a nuclear strike to destroy evidence of the operation , and has Snake registered as killed in action to stop the US government searching for him . Naomi Hunter , who injected Snake with the FoxDie virus , tells him that he has an indeterminate amount of time before it kills him . Ocelot calls the U.S. President ; he was a double agent whose mission was to steal Baker 's disk of Metal Gear specifications .

Kojima initially planned the third Metal Gear game in 1994 , originally titled Metal Gear 3 , and to release it for the 3DO Interactive Multiplayer in 1994 . Conceptual artwork , by illustrator Yoji Shinkawa , of the characters Solid Snake , Meryl Silverburgh , who was also a character in the adventure game Policenauts , and the FOXHOUND team , were included in the Policenauts : Pilot Disk preceding the release of the full version of the 3DO game in 1995 . However , due to the discontinuation of the 3DO from the market , development of the game shifted to the PlayStation shortly after Policenauts was released . Kojima retitled the game Metal Gear Solid , choosing this over the working title Metal Gear 3 . This was due to the fact that he believed that the first two MSX2 games were not well known at the time due to their lack of worldwide releases . He used the word ' Solid ' which was chosen due to the game being the third installment in the series , and because it uses 3D computer graphics , as well as being in reference to Solid Snake , the game 's protagonist . Sequels to this game also use the Metal Gear Solid title , and generally follow a numeral progression .

The development for Metal Gear Solid began in mid-1995 with the intention of creating the " best PlayStation game ever " . Developers aimed for accuracy and realism while making the game enjoyable and tense . In the early stages of development , the Huntington Beach SWAT team educated the creators with a demonstration of vehicles , weapons and explosives . Weapons expert Motosada Mori was also tapped as technical adviser in the research , which included visits to Fort Irwin and firing sessions at Stembridge Gun Rentals . Kojima stated that " if the player isn 't tricked into believing that the world is real , then there 's no point in making the game " . To fulfill this , adjustments were made to every detail , such as individually designed desks . Hideo Kojima created the characters of Metal Gear Solid . Modifications and mechanics were made by conceptual artist Yoji Shinkawa . According to Shinkawa , Solid Snake 's physique in this particular installment was based on Jean-Claude Van Damme , while his facial appearance was based on Christopher Walken . The characters were completed by polygonal artists using brush drawings and clay models by Shinkawa . Kojima wanted greater interaction with objects and the environment , such as allowing the player to hide bodies in a storage compartment . Additionally , he wanted " a full orchestra right next to the player " ; a system which made modifications such as tempo and texture to the currently playing track , instead of switching to another pre-recorded track . Although these features could not be achieved , they were implemented in Metal Gear Solid 2 : Sons of Liberty .

The musical score of Metal Gear Solid was composed by Konami 's in-house musicians , including Kazuki Muraoka , Hiroyuki Togo , Takanari Ishiyama , Lee Jeon Myung , and Maki Kirioka . Composer and lyricist Rika Muranaka provided a song called " The Best is Yet To Come " for the game 's ending credits sequence . The song is performed in Irish by Aoife Ní Fhearraigh . The main theme was composed by Tappi Iwase from the Konami Kukeiha Club . Music played in-game has a synthetic feel with increased pace and introduction of strings during tense moments , with a looping style endemic to video games . Overtly cinematic music , with stronger orchestral and choral elements , appears in cutscenes . The soundtrack was released on September 23 , 1998 , under the King Records label .

The English version of Metal Gear Solid , translated by Jeremy Blaustein , who localized the Sega CD version of Snatcher , contains minor refinements made during localization , such as a choice of three difficulty settings when starting a new game ( with a fourth unlockable setting available if a completed file is present ) , an alternate tuxedo outfit for Snake ( which the character wears on every third successive playthrough on the same save file ) , and a " demo theater " where the player views every cutscene and radio conversations relevant to the main story . Changes to the English script include the addition of Western sources and authors to Mei-Ling 's motivational quotes ( originally the character only cited Chinese proverbs ) and the games detected by Psycho Mantis when he reads the player 's memory card ( due to certain titles such as Policenauts and the Tokimeki Memorial series not being released for the foreign market ) . Versions of the game dubbed in Spanish , German , French and Italian were released throughout Europe in addition to the English-dubbed version released in America . A premium package was released in Japan and Asia containing the game , a T-shirt , dog tags , a music CD featuring the soundtracks of the MSX2 games , and a booklet with information about the game 's production and plot . A European version of the package was also produced , featuring different content from the Japanese version .

The Japanese PlayStation version of Metal Gear Solid , as well as Integral , had been reissued twice : once under The Best range and second time as a PS one Books title . Likewise , the American and European versions of Metal Gear Solid were reissued under the " Greatest Hits " and " Platinum " ranges respectively . The game is included in the Japanese Metal Gear Solid : 20th Anniversary Collection set and in the American Essential Collection set . The original Metal Gear Solid was released on the PlayStation Store for download on the PlayStation 3 and PlayStation Portable in 2008 in Japan and in 2009 in North America and Europe .

Released on June 25 , 1999 for the PlayStation in Japan , Metal Gear Solid : Integral ( メタルギアソリッド インテグラル , Metaru Gia Soriddo : Integuraru ) is an expanded edition that features the additional content from the American and European versions of the original game . Integral replaces the Japanese voices from the original version with the English dub , while offering a choice between Japanese and English subtitles ( item descriptions , mission logs and other text are still in Japanese ) . Further additional content to the main game include an alternate " sneaking suit " outfit for Meryl ( which she wears after the player unlocks the tuxedo for Snake ) , a " Very Easy " difficulty setting where the player starts the mission armed with a suppressor-equipped MP5 sub-machine gun with infinite ammo ( which substitutes the FAMAS rifle in the player 's inventory ) , an eight Codec frequency featuring written staff commentary ( in Japanese only ) on every area and boss encounter , hidden music tracks , an alternate game mode where the player controls Snake from a first-person perspective , an option for alternate patrol routes for enemies , and a downloadable PocketStation minigame . The Torture Event was also made easier on higher difficulty levels , reducing the number of rounds to three per session in all settings .

In addition to the main game , Integral includes a third disc of additional content called the " VR Disc . " The VR Disc features 300 VR training missions testing the player 's sneaking and fighting skills , as well as less conventional tests , such as murder mysteries , battling giant genome soldiers , and three missions where the player controls the Cyborg Ninja . Other content include preview trailers and a " photoshoot " mode where the player takes pictures of Mei Ling and Naomi . Completing all 300 missions will unlock a concept artwork of the Metal Gear RAY mech that would later appear in Metal Gear Solid 2 : Sons of Liberty . Famitsu magazine rated Metal Gear Solid : Integral a 34 out of 40 . The third disc from Integral was released as a stand-alone game in North America under the title of Metal Gear Solid : VR Missions on September 23 , 1999 . While the content of VR Missions are virtually identical to the VR Disc , the unlocking requirements for the Ninja missions and the photoshoot mode were changed accordingly so that they no longer required save data from the main story mission .

The VR Disc was also released in the PAL region as an expansion pack titled Metal Gear Solid : Special Missions on October 29 , 1999 . Unlike the Japanese and American versions , Special Missions requires a PAL copy of the original Metal Gear Solid in order to be played . This change was done since the original Metal Gear Solid was released in multiple languages in Europe and Special Missions determines the language it uses based on which version of the original game the player owns . When the Special Missions disc is loaded into the PlayStation console , the game will ask the player to switch the disc with the first disc from Metal Gear Solid in order to load voice and language data before asking the player to switch back to the Special Missions disc . This requirement renders Special Missions incompatible with PlayStation 2 consoles made prior to the SCPH-70000 model .

The PC version of Metal Gear Solid was released in North America , Europe and Asia in late 2000 . This version was published by Microsoft Game Studios and developed by Digital Dialect . It supports the use of a keyboard or a USB game controller with at least six buttons ( with the manual recommending the Sidewinder Game Pad Pro ) . The PC version is simply labelled Metal Gear Solid on the packaging , but the actual game uses the Metal Gear Solid : Integral logo , although it has some differences as well from the PlayStation version of Integral and lacks some of its content . The biggest change was reducing the number of discs from three to two , which was done by giving each disc two separate executable files , one for the main game ( mgsi.exe ) and the other for the VR training portion ( mgsvr.exe ) , thus eliminating the need for a stand-alone third disc . One notable omission was the removal of the cutscene prior to the Psycho Mantis battle in which he reads the player 's memory card and activates the vibration function of the player 's controller if a DualShock is being used , as this scene involved the use of PlayStation-specific peripherals . The method for defeating Mantis was also changed from using the second controller to simply using the keyboard ( regardless of whether the player was using a game controller or not up to that point ) . Other omissions include the removal of the eighth Codec frequency ( 140.07 ) , which featured written commentaries by the developers , Meryl 's alternate sneaking suit outfit , and the mission logs when loading a save file . However , the PC version adds the option to toggle moving and shooting in first-person view mode at any time regardless of difficulty setting , and players can now save their progress at any point without contacting Mei-Ling through the use of quick saves . On the VR training portion , all 300 missions , as well as the photoshoot mode , are available from the start , although the three unlockable preview trailers from the PlayStation version have been removed .

A remake of Metal Gear Solid , titled Metal Gear Solid : The Twin Snakes , was developed by Silicon Knights under the supervision of Hideo Kojima and released for the GameCube in North America , Japan , and Europe in March 2004 . While Twin Snakes was largely developed at Silicon Knights , its cutscenes were developed in-house at Konami and directed by Japanese film director Ryuhei Kitamura , reflecting his dynamic signature style , utilizing bullet time photography and choreographed gunplay extensively . While the storyline and settings of the game were unchanged ( although a select few lines of dialog were re-written more closely resembling the original Japanese version ) , a variety of gameplay features from Sons of Liberty were added such as the first person aiming and hanging from bars on walls . Another change in the English voice acting was the reduction of Mei Ling 's , Naomi 's and Nastasha 's accents , as well as the recasting of Gray Fox from Greg Eagles , who still reprise the role of the DARPA chief , to Rob Paulsen . The graphics were also updated to match those of Metal Gear Solid 2 .

Metal Gear Solid was a commercial success , shipping over six million copies worldwide . It became one of the most rented games and topped sales charts in the United Kingdom . The game was critically acclaimed , gaining a 93.24 % and 94 / 100 aggregate at ratings websites GameRankings and Metacritic , respectively . The review in PlayStation Magazine declared it " the best game ever made . Unputdownable and unforgettable . " The review by IGN opined Metal Gear Solid came " closer to perfection than any other game in PlayStation 's action genre " and called it " beautiful , engrossing , and innovative ... in every conceivable category . " NGamer compared it to " playing a big budget action blockbuster , only better . " GamePro called it " this season 's top offering [ game ] and one game no self-respecting gamer should be without , " but criticized the frame rate that " occasionally stalls the eye-catching graphics " . GameSpot was critical of how easy it is for the player to avoid being seen , as well as the game 's short length , calling it " more of a work of art than ... an actual game . " Metal Gear Solid received an Excellence Award for Interactive Art at the 1998 Japan Media Arts Festival .

Metal Gear Solid is often recognized as one of the key titles involved in popularizing the stealth game genre . The idea of the player being unarmed and having to avoid being seen by enemies rather than fight them has been used in many games since . It is also sometimes acclaimed as being a film as much as a game due to the lengthy cut scenes and complicated storyline . GameTrailers claimed that Metal Gear Solid " invented the stealth game " and IGN called it " the founder of the stealth genre " . Entertainment Weekly said it " broke new ground with ... movie-style production ... and stealth-driven gameplay . " The game is often considered one of the best games for the PlayStation , and was featured in best video games lists by Computer and Video Games in 2000 , by Electronic Gaming Monthly and Game Informer in 2001 , by Retro Gamer in 2004 , by GameFAQs and GamePro in 2005 , and by Famitsu , and by Entertainment Weekly and GameTrailers in 2006 . In 2002 , IGN ranked it as the best PlayStation game ever , stating that just the demo for the game had " more gameplay [ in it ] than in most finished titles . " IGN also gave it the " Best Ending " and " Best Villain " awards . In 2005 , in placing it 19th on their list of " Top 100 Games " , they said that it was " a game that truly felt like a movie . " Guinness World Records awarded Metal Gear Solid with a record for the " Most Innovative Use of a Video Game Controller " for the boss fight with Psycho Mantis in the Guinness World Records Gamer 's Edition 2008 edition . In 2010 , PC Magazine ranked it as seventh in the list of most influential video games of all time , citing its influence on " such stealthy titles as Assassin 's Creed and Splinter Cell . " In 2012 , Time named it one of the 100 greatest video games of all time and G4tv ranked it as the 45th top video game of all time . According to 1UP.com , Metal Gear Solid 's cinematic style continues to influence modern action games such as Call of Duty . Metal Gear Solid , along with its sequel , Metal Gear Solid 2 , was featured in the Smithsonian American Art Museum 's exhibition The Art of Video Games in 2012 . In September 2015 , Metal Gear Solid was voted the best original PlayStation game of all time by users .

A Japanese radio drama version of Metal Gear Solid , directed by Shuyo Murata and written by Motosada Mori , was produced shortly after the release of the original PlayStation game . 12 episodes were aired , from 1998 to 1999 on Konami 's CLUB db program . The series was later released on CD as a two volume set . Set after the events of the PlayStation game , Snake , Meryl , Campbell and Mei Ling ( all portrayed by their original Japanese voice actors ) pursue missions in hostile third world nations as FOXHOUND . The new characters introduced include Sgt. Allen Iishiba ( voiced by Toshio Furukawa ) , a Delta Force operative who assists Snake and Meryl , Col. Mark Cortez ( v.b. Osamu Saka ) , an old friend of Campbell who commands the fictional Esteria Army Special Forces , and Capt. Sergei Ivanovich ( v.b. Kazuhiro Nakata ) , a former war buddy of Revolver Ocelot from his SVR days . In September 2004 , IDW Publications began publishing a series of Metal Gear Solid comics , written by Kris Oprisko and illustrated by Ashley Wood . As of 2006 , 12 issues have been published , fully covering the Metal Gear Solid storyline . The comic was adapted into a PlayStation Portable game titled Metal Gear Solid : Digital Graphic Novel ( Metal Gear Solid : Bande Dessinée in Japan ) . It features visual enhancements and two interactive modes designed to give further insight into the publication . Upon viewing the pages , the player can open a " scanning " interface to search for characters and items in a three dimensional view . Discoveries are added to a database which can be traded with other players via Wi-Fi . The " mission mode " allows the player to add collected information into a library . This information must be properly connected to complete a mission . Metal Gear Solid : Digital Graphic Novel was released in North America on June 13 , 2006 , Japan on September 21 and the PAL region on September 22 . In 2006 , the game received IGN 's award for Best Use of Sound on the PSP . A DVD-Video version is included with its sequel ( Metal Gear Solid 2 : Bande Dessinée ) , which was released in Japan on June 12 , 2008 . The DVD version features full voice acting .

Director Hideo Kojima confirmed in 2006 that a film adaptation of Metal Gear Solid was in development . He also hinted that the movie may be set in Alaska , the original setting for the game . Despite pitching his ideas regarding the movie , the voice of Solid Snake , David Hayter , will not be writing the final script , appearing in the movie or directing the film . However , a petition has been started by fans to get Hayter involved in writing the script . The movie 's producers hoped to invite Kurt Wimmer to write the movie , but the final decision has not yet been announced , but producer Michael DeLuca dismissed the claim . According to an interview in Nuts magazine actor Christian Bale is interested in playing Solid Snake in the film . In late August 2012 , Konami issued a press release stating that a live-action film was in pre-production . The film is being produced by Avi Arad and Ari Arad , with their production company Arad Productions as well as Columbia Pictures . Distribution and production will be handled by Sony Pictures Entertainment .

Delaware Route 26 ( DE 26 ) is a state highway in Sussex County , Delaware . The route 's western terminus is at an intersection with Maryland Route 353 ( MD 353 ) and DE / MD 54 at the Maryland border south of Gumboro and its eastern terminus is at a dead end on the Atlantic Ocean in Bethany Beach , even though signage ends at the DE 1 intersection . The route passes through rural areas of southeastern Sussex County along with the communities of Dagsboro , Millville , Ocean View and Bethany Beach . DE 26 intersects DE 30 and DE 54 in the Gumboro area , U.S. Route 113 ( US 113 ) and DE 20 in Dagsboro , and DE 17 west of Millville . The road was built as a state highway in various stages during the 1920s and 1930s . By 1936 , DE 26 was assigned onto its current alignment .

DE 26 begins at the Maryland border at an intersection where DE / MD 54 runs west along the state line and MD 353 continues south into Maryland . From the state line , DE 26 heads northeast on two-lane undivided Millsboro Highway concurrent with DE 54 . The two routes pass through agricultural areas with some woods and homes , intersecting DE 30 . At this point , DE 30 turns northeast to form a concurrency with DE 26 / DE 54 . The road curves north and heads into the residential community of Gumboro , where DE 54 turns to the east . DE 26 / DE 30 leaves Gumboro and continues back into areas of farms and forests with occasional residences . In Shaft Ox Corner , DE 26 splits from DE 30 by turning east onto Nine Foot Road . The route continues east through rural land to an intersection with US 113 . Past this intersection , the road becomes Clayton Street and enters Dagsboro , passing homes and businesses and crossing Norfolk Southern 's Indian River Secondary railroad line . In the center of Dagsboro , DE 26 comes to an intersection with DE 20 , at which point it turns south to form a concurrency with DE 20 on Main Street . The two routes curve east and leave town on Vines Creek Road .

Upon leaving Dagsboro , the road passes to the south of Prince George 's Chapel and DE 20 splits from DE 26 by heading southeast on Armory Road . DE 26 continues east on Vines Creek Road , passing through a mix of farmland and woodland with some residential and commercial development . The route turns southeast and comes to the community of Clarksville , where it turns east onto Atlantic Avenue . Farther along , the road comes to an intersection with the northern terminus of DE 17 . After the DE 17 junction , DE 26 continues into Millville and runs through residential and commercial areas . The road continues east through Ocean View before it crosses the Assawoman Canal into Bethany Beach and becomes Garfield Parkway . The road gains a center left-turn lane and intersects DE 54 Alt. before coming to a junction with DE 1 , at which point DE 26 signage ends . DE 26 officially continues east on four-lane divided Garfield Parkway through the commercial center of Bethany Beach , ending at a dead end at the Atlantic Ocean . DE 26 has an annual average daily traffic count ranging from a high of 16,225 vehicles at Central Avenue intersection in Ocean View to a low of 3,837 vehicles at the west end of the DE 20 concurrency in Dagsboro . None of DE 26 is part of the National Highway System .

By 1920 , what is now DE 26 existed as an unimproved county road . The route was upgraded to a state highway between present-day US 113 and Dagsboro and from Millville to just west of the Assawoman Canal by 1924 . A year later , the road was completed as a state highway between Gumboro and Mission and between Dagsboro and Vines Creek , with the route between the Maryland border and Gumboro and the incomplete sections between Dagsboro and Bethany Beach proposed as a state highway . The proposed segments were completed by 1931 . In 1932 , the state highway between Shaft Ox Corner and Dagsboro was completed . DE 26 was assigned to its current alignment between the Maryland border south of Gumboro and Bethany Beach , where it intersected the southern terminus of DE 14 ( now part of DE 1 ) , by 1936 . In 2014 , work began to widen DE 26 between Clarksville and the Assawoman Canal from a two-lane road to a three-lane road with a center left-turn lane and bike lanes in order to reduce traffic congestion . The widening project , which is to cost $ 57 million , is expected to be finished in 2017 .

The Stripped Mixes ( released on CD for a limited time as The Motown 50 Mixes ) , is a collection of American recording artist and former Jackson 5 member Michael Jackson 's classic songs . The songs featured on the album are mainly from Jackson 's career as a member of the Jackson 5 from the 1960s to the 1980s ; songs credited to Jackson as a solo artist are from his albums during his Motown-era . Other songs included on the album are " stripped " mixes of Jackson material , meaning the songs are of a quieter tone and most of the drums have been removed . Following a surge in Jackson 's popularity after his death in June 2009 , it was confirmed on July 7 , that The Stripped Mixes would be released . The album was made available as a digital download on July 7 , 2009 , and as a CD on July 28 . A remixed song , entitled " I 'll Be There ( Minus Mix ) " , was released on iTunes to promote the album on June 9 , 2009 , prior to Jackson 's death . The Stripped Mixes was the second Jackson compilation album to be posthumously released , the first being The Collection ; which was released over two weeks prior . The Stripped Mixes received mixed reviews from music critics . The album was a moderate commercial success worldwide and had a better chart performance internationally than in the United States .

Due to the high popularity of a State Farm Insurance commercial featuring an acoustic version of the hit " I 'll Be There " , Motown released " I 'll Be There ( Minus Mix ) " via iTunes on June 9 , 2009 , as a prelude to The Stripped Mixes . " I 'll Be There ( Minus Mix ) " did not chart on any music charts . Shortly after Jackson 's death in June 2009 , his music experienced a surge in popularity , leading to re-issues of his music . Less than an hour after the memorial service for Jackson at the Staples Center on July 7 , 2009 , Universal Music Group announced The Stripped Mixes , a collection of Jackson 's classic songs , would be released . The album features " stripped " mixes of Jackson 's classic Motown-era songs as well as songs recorded while he was a member of The Jackson 5 from the 1960s to the 1980s . The songs that are " stripped " on the album have backing instruments and some studio engineering removed to make the songs have a more acoustic sound . The Stripped Mixes was made available as a digital download on July 7 , and as a compact disc on July 28 , 2009 .

The Stripped Mixes charted at a peak position of # 95 on the Billboard 200 in its debut week with sales of less than five thousand units . It charted at # 43 on the R & B Albums Chart in 2009 , and moved up to # 21 in 2010 . Internationally , The Stripped Mixes was more successful commercially . The album charted within the top fifty in Belgium Flanders and Belgium Wallonia , peaking at # 43 and # 47 for five and seven weeks , respectively . The Stripped Mixes also charted at # 75 in Mexico for one week before dropping out of the top 100 .

The Stripped Mixes received mixed reviews from contemporary music critics . Writer Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic gave The Stripped Mixes two out of five stars , stating that he felt that " the logic of what is left behind doesn 't quite make sense " , pointing out that " I Want You Back " and " ABC " have no drums and " feel a little tipsy and top-heavy " ; " Ben " and " With a Child 's Heart " have echoes of strings in the background , making it hard to identify the songs as being " stripped " . He added that since the genius lies in the arrangements , " having so much of the arrangement absent " means that the music " just sounds awkward and incomplete , as if it was waiting for the final round of mixing and overdubs . " Erlewine 's overall opinion on the album was " if the purpose of this disc is to draw attention to Michael 's vocals , The Stripped Mixes does its job , but just because his voice is pushed front and center does not mean that this is the best place to appreciate his genius . "

A writer for PR Newswire praised the album , describing it as " showcasing " Jackson 's vocal talent and viewed The Stripped Mixes as shining a " bright , fresh light " on Jackson 's early career as both a solo artist and with his brothers in The Jackson 5 . Natalie Salvo of TheDwarf.com.au commented that the mix of " Ain 't No Sunshine " made the album " personally " worth buying . She added that " the music does what it 's supposed to do " , which was " evoking the right mood but not being overly showy . " Despite the praise , she did state that the album could be clinically looked at as an " element of bad taste " from a " greedy record company " and noted that it was " difficult " to " stop yourself being overcome with cynicism towards this album " . Jeff Dorgay of Tone Publications described all of the album 's tracks as being " quite strong " and added that " regardless of your interest in Michael Jackson " the The Stripped Mixes is a disc " you should have in your collection " because it offers a " rare look " at " classic " material by Jackson when he was just beginning his career .

Sir William Alexander Gordon Gordon-Cumming , 4th Baronet ( 20 July 1848 – 20 May 1930 ) was a Scottish landowner , soldier , adventurer and socialite . A notorious womaniser , he is best known for being the central figure in the royal baccarat scandal of 1891 . After inheriting a baronetcy he joined the Army and saw service in South Africa , Egypt and the Sudan ; he served with distinction and rose to the rank of lieutenant colonel . Something of an adventurer , he also spent time hunting in the US and India . A friend of Edward , Prince of Wales for over 20 years , in 1891 he attended a house party at Tranby Croft , Yorkshire , where he took part in a game of baccarat at the behest of the prince . During the course of two nights ' play he was accused of cheating , which he denied vehemently . After news of the affair leaked out , he sued five members of the host family for slander , with the Prince of Wales called as a witness during the ensuing trial . The case was a public spectacle , widely reported in the UK and abroad . Knowledgeable commentators of the day , and subsequently , sided with Gordon-Cumming , but the judgement went against him and he was ostracized from polite society .

William Gordon Gordon-Cumming was born on 20 July 1848 at Sanquhar House , near Forres , Morayshire . His parents were Alexander Penrose Gordon-Cumming and his wife Anne Pitcairn née Campbell ( died 1888 ) . The big-game hunter Roualeyn George Gordon-Cumming was his uncle ; and the travel writer Constance Gordon-Cumming was his aunt . He was educated at Eton and Wellington colleges . At the age of eighteen he inherited the baronetcy and became chief of the Clan Cumming ; his line had been traced from the fourth century , through Charlemagne . His inheritance included three Morayshire estates : Altyre near Forres , Gordonstoun near Elgin and Dallas . Though the estates totalled 38,500 acres ( 156 km2 ) , they yielded poor revenues ; the annual income from the estates in around 1890 has been described as either £ 60,000 or £ 80,000 .

Although Gordon-Cumming suffered from asthma and was blind in one eye , he purchased an ensign 's commission in the Scots Fusilier Guards ( later the Scots Guards ) in 1868 ( dated from 25 December 1867 ) . He was promoted to regimental lieutenant and to the rank of captain in the army by purchase on 17 May 1871 , the last year commissions were allowed to be purchased . He volunteered for service in South Africa in the Anglo-Zulu War , where he served gallantly , and was the first man to enter Cetshwayo 's kraal after the Battle of Ulundi ( 1879 ) . That year he conveyed the condolences of the army to the Empress Eugénie on the death of her son , Napoléon , Prince Imperial . Gordon-Cumming was promoted to the regimental rank of captain and the army rank of lieutenant-colonel on 28 July 1880 . He went on to serve in Egypt , in the Anglo-Egyptian War ( 1882 ) and in the Sudan in the Mahdist War ( 1884 – 85 ) , the last of which was with the Guards Camel Regiment in the Desert Column . He was promoted to regimental major on 23 May 1888 .

In September 1890 Gordon-Cumming was invited , along with Edward , Prince of Wales , to a house party at Tranby Croft in Yorkshire . There he was accused of cheating at baccarat by placing additional counters onto his stake after the hand had finished , but before the stake had been paid — a method of cheating known in casinos as la poussette . Gordon-Cumming insisted they had been mistaken , and explained that he played the coup de trois system of betting , in which if he won a hand with a £ 5 stake , he would add his winnings to the stake , together with another £ 5 , as the stake for the next hand . In order to avoid a scandal involving the prince , he gave way to pressure from the attendant royal courtiers to sign a statement undertaking never to play cards again in return for a pledge that no-one present would speak of the incident again . " In consideration of the promise made by the gentlemen whose names are subscribed to preserve my silence with reference to an accusation which has been made in regard to my conduct at baccarat on the nights of Monday and Tuesday the 8th and 9th at Tranby Croft , I will on my part solemnly undertake never to play cards again as long as I live . "

Despite the pledge of silence , rumours of the incident began to circulate and were brought to Gordon-Cumming 's attention . In an attempt to scotch the rumours , he demanded a retraction from five of the house party ; when that was not forthcoming , with no withdrawal forthcoming , on 6 February 1891 , Gordon-Cumming issued writs for slander against the five , claiming £ 5,000 against each of them . The trial opened on 1 June 1891 and entry to the court was by ticket only . The Prince of Wales was present , and sat on a red leather chair on a raised platform between the judge and the witness box ; his appearance was the first time since 1411 that an heir to the throne had appeared involuntarily in court . The trial closed the following week , after the judge 's summing up " had been unacceptably biased " , according to Tomes . The jury deliberated for only 13 minutes before finding in favour of the defendants ; their decision was greeted by prolonged hissing from some members of the galleries . The day after judgement was passed , the leader in The Times stated that " He is ... condemned by the verdict of the jury to social extinction . His brilliant record is wiped out and he must , so to speak , begin life again . Such is the inexorable social rule ... He has committed a mortal offence . Society can know him no more . "

As a result of the scandal , Gordon-Cumming was dismissed from the army the day after the trial , and he resigned his membership of his four London clubs , the Carlton , Guards ' , Marlborough and Turf . The same day he married his American fiancée , the heiress Florence Garner , who had stood by him throughout the trial despite Gordon-Cumming twice offering to break off their engagement because of the scandal . The service took place at the Holy Trinity church in Chelsea with only a small congregation . When the couple returned to Scotland a few days later the locals from near his estate had decorated the station and pulled the carriage through the streets by hand . According to the former Lord Chancellor , Michael Havers , the lawyer Edward Grayson and the historian Peter Shankland , " That the prince and society considered him a social outcast mattered not at all to his people " . The prince was determined Gordon-Cumming should remain ostracised and he " declined to meet anyone who henceforth acknowledged the Scottish baronet " .

Gordon-Cumming remained outside high society for the remainder of his life . He later told his daughter that " among a host of acquaintances I thought I had perhaps twenty friends . Not one of them ever spoke to me again " . Others of his friends only relented after the death of the prince , who was by that stage King Edward VII . Gordon-Cumming and his wife had three sons and two daughters between 1892 and 1904 . In 1905 Florence 's fortune slumped and the couple were compelled to let or close up the houses on the Scottish estates and to move to Bridge House , Dawlish , Devon with a reduced household . Gordon-Cumming managed to disguise his contempt for the middle class society to which he was now limited so that he could continue to indulge himself in golf , croquet , billiards , cricket , bridge and collecting post marks . He also enjoyed his own company , and that of his dogs and pet monkey . He hated Dawlish and considered his wife a " fat little frump " , unapologetically engaging in chronic infidelity . Florence lost no opportunity to remind him who funded their life but eventually herself resorted to alcohol abuse ; the couple had effectively separated before she died in 1922 .

Gordon-Cumming 's biographer , Jason Tomes , thought that his subject possessed " audacity and wit [ and ] gloried in the sobriquet of the most arrogant man in London " , while Sporting Life described him as " possibly the most handsome man in London , and certainly the rudest " . Gordon-Cumming also owned a house in Belgravia , London ; he was a friend of the Prince of Wales , and would lend the premises to the prince for assignations with the royal mistresses . Gordon-Cumming was a womaniser , and stated that his aim was to " perforate " members of " the sex " . His preference was for uncomplicated relationships with married women , and he admitted that " all the married women try me " ; his liaisons included Lillie Langtry , Sarah Bernhardt and Lady Randolph Churchill . In 1890 , three days before the events at Tranby Croft , the Prince of Wales returned early from travelling in Europe ; he visited Harriet Street where he found his mistress , Daisy , Lady Brooke " in Gordon-Cumming 's arms " , which soured the relationship between the two men . After Gordon-Cumming 's death in 1930 , his house at Gordonstoun was obtained by Kurt Hahn , who turned it into the eponymous school . It has been attended by Prince Philip , Duke of Edinburgh , and his three sons , Charles , Andrew and Edward .

Lycoperdon echinatum , commonly known as the spiny puffball or the spring puffball , is a type of puffball mushroom in the genus Lycoperdon . The saprobic species has been found in Africa , Europe , Central America , and North America , where it grows on soil in deciduous woods , glades , and pastures . It has been proposed that North American specimens be considered a separate species , Lycoperdon americanum , but this suggestion has not been followed by most authors . Molecular analysis indicates that L. echinatum is closely related to the puffball genus Handkea . The fruit bodies of L. echinatum are 2 – 4 cm ( 0.8 – 1.6 in ) wide by 2 – 3.5 cm ( 0.8 – 1.4 in ) tall , supported by a small base , and densely covered with spines that are up to 0.6 cm ( 0.2 in ) long . The spines can fall off in maturity , leaving a net-like pattern of scars on the underlying surface . Initially white in color , the puffballs turn a dark brown as they mature , at the same time changing from nearly round to somewhat flattened . Young specimens of L. echinatum resemble another edible spiny puffball , Lycoperdon pulcherrimum , but the latter species does not turn brown as it ages . The fruit bodies are edible when young , when the interior is white and firm and before it has turned into a powdery brown mass of spores . Laboratory tests have shown that extracts of the fruit bodies can inhibit the growth of several bacteria that are pathogenic to humans .

The species was first described by Christian Hendrik Persoon in 1797 . It was later reduced to a variety of Lycoperdon gemmatum ( as L. gemmatum var. echinatum ; L. gemmatum is now known as Lycoperdon perlatum ) by Elias Magnus Fries , but American mycologist Charles Horton Peck , who extensively studied the North American distribution of the genus , raised it again to species level in 1879 . He thought it worthy of status as a species distinct from L. gemmatum because of the different character of its warts , its much spinier appearance , and the smoother surface of the peridium underneath the spines . Miles Joseph Berkeley and Christopher Edmund Broome wrote of the fungus in 1871 , but believed their specimen , collected from Reading , Berkshire , by Hoyle , represented a new species , which they called Lycoperdon Hoylei . They wrote that their specimen agreed " exactly with an authentic specimen of Persoon 's L. echinatum externally , who could , however , scarcely have overlooked the lilac spores . " Despite the apparent difference in spore color , L. Hoylei is currently considered synonymous with L. echinatum . Utraria echinata , named by Lucien Quélet in 1873 , is another synonym for L. echinatum .

In 1972 , Vincent Demoulin described the species Lycoperdon americanum on the basis of a specimen found in North Carolina . Although he believed it to be a unique species , several authors consider it synonymous with L. echinatum . Phylogenetic analysis of the sequence and secondary structure of the ribosomal RNA ( rRNA ) genes coding for the internal transcribed spacer units suggests that Lycoperdon echinatum forms a clade with the puffball genus Handkea , separate from the type species of Lycoperdon , Lycoperdon perlatum . In previous analyses that used only the rRNA sequences for phylogenetic comparison , L. echinatum formed a clade with L. mammiforme , L. foetidum , and Bovistella radicata ( now known as Lycoperdon radicatum ) , but separate from L. pyriforme . The species is commonly known as the " spiny puffball " or the " spring puffball " ; Peck referred to the species as the " echinate puff-ball " . The specific epithet echinatum is derived from the Greek word echinos ( εχινος ) meaning " hedgehog " or " sea-urchin " .

The fruit bodies of L. echinatum are 2 – 4 cm ( 0.8 – 1.6 in ) wide by 2 – 3.5 cm ( 0.8 – 1.4 in ) tall , and are roughly spherical , or pear-shaped . The exterior surface is crowded with spines that may be up to 0.6 cm ( 0.2 in ) long . According to Curtis Gates Lloyd , American specimens have more slender spines than European ones . Initially white and becoming dark brown in maturity , the spines are often joined at the tips in groups of three or four . In this form the puffballs resemble acorn caps of burr oak , with which they may readily be confused . The spines slough off in age , revealing a somewhat net-like or reticulated surface . The fruit body has a small base that is an off-white or purple-gray color , and it may be attached to the growing surface by thin white cords ( rhizomorphs ) . The internal contents of the puffball contain the gleba , a mass of spores and associated spore-producing cells . In young specimens the gleba is white and firm , but as the puffball ages , it turns yellowish and then brown to purple-brown and powdery . Mature specimens develop a pore at the top of the fruit body through which spores are released when hit by falling raindrops .

The spores of L. echinatum , roughly spherical with warts on the surface , have diameters between 4 and 6 µm . The capillitia ( coarse thick-walled hyphae in the gleba ) are elastic , brown in color , contain small pores , and are 5 – 8 µm thick . The basidia ( the spore-bearing cells ) may be attached to two to four spores , and the sterigmata ( tapered spine-like projections from the basidia that attach the spores ) are up to 5 µm long . Like most other puffball species , L. echinatum is edible when still young and while the gleba is still white and firm . Consumption of older specimens with a non-white gleba , or where the gleba has turned into a powdery spore mass , may cause stomach upsets . This species has a mild taste , and no distinguishable odor , although one source describes the smell of dried fruit bodies as similar to " old ham " . One source notes that it is " well flavoured and tender when cooked " , while another describes the texture ( of edible puffballs in general ) as " somewhat like French toast " . Antonio Carluccio recommends sautéeing puffballs with other mushrooms . To avoid possible confusion with potentially deadly Amanita species , it is recommended to slice young puffballs with a longitudinal cut to ensure that the flesh is devoid of any internal structures .

Lycoperdon pulcherrimum closely resembles L. echinatum , but its spines are stouter , do not turn brown in age , and the surface of the fruit body underneath the spines is smooth , not pitted . Alexander H. Smith noted that in youth , they are " difficult if not impossible to distinguish from each other , but this will cause no inconvenience to those collecting for the table , since both are edible . " In some areas the two species appear to intergrade , as specimens may be found whose spines turn brown but do not fall off . Young specimens of L. pedicellatum may also be difficult to distinguish from L. echinatum , but the former has a smooth outer surface when mature , and has spores attached to a pedicel ( a narrow extension of the basidium on which the sterigmata and spores are formed ) that is about 4 – 5 times as long as the spore . Lycoperdon compactum , found only in New Zealand , also resembles L. echinatum in appearance , but differs in having smaller spores , capillitia that are hyaline ( translucent ) and septate ( with partitions that divide the capillitia into compartments ) .

Lycoperdon echinatum can be found either solitary or in small groups . It typically grows on the ground in deciduous forests and grassy areas , glades and pastures , on moss , humus , or woody debris . The fungus has been noted to have a preference for beech woods . Fruit bodies may make their appearance anytime from the late spring to autumn . Older specimens are more likely to be overlooked , as their brown color blends into the surrounding environment of dead leaves and dead wood . The puffball is used by various species of scuttle flies ( family Phoridae ) as larval food . This species has been collected from eastern central Africa , China , Costa Rica , Iran , Japan , and Europe ( including Britain , Bulgaria , the Czech Republic , Finland , Germany , Italy , Slovakia , Spain , Sweden , and Switzerland ) . In North America , it is " locally frequent " east of the Rocky Mountains . It is considered a threatened species in the Åland Islands of Finland . A study of the species ' distribution in Sweden reported that in the 1940s and 50s , it grew in beech woods with broad-leaved grasses and herbs in topsoils with soil pH levels between 5.0 and 6.6 , but the populations have since decreased owing to soil acidification during the last several decades . Fruit bodies collected near arsenic-contaminated sites have been shown to bioaccumulate arsenic , largely in the form of arsenobetaine .

Using a standard laboratory method to determine antimicrobial susceptibility , methanol-based extracts of Lycoperdon umbrinum fruit bodies were shown in a 2005 study to have " significant " antibacterial activity against various human pathogenic bacteria , including Bacillus subtilis , Escherichia coli , Salmonella typhimurium , Staphylococcus aureus , Streptococcus pyogenes , and Mycobacterium smegmatis . An earlier study ( 2000 ) had identified weak antibacterial activity against Enterococcus faecium and Staphylococcus aureus . Although the specific compounds responsible for the antimicrobial activity have not been identified , chemical analysis confirms the presence of terpenoids , a class of widely occurring organic chemicals that are being investigated for their potential use as antimicrobial drugs .

" Speak Now " is a song by American singer-songwriter Taylor Swift . The song , written and produced by Swift with Nathan Chapman , was released as a promotional single on October 5 , 2010 , by Big Machine Records from her 2010 album of the same name . Swift wrote the song about interrupting a wedding , after conversing with her friend , whose ex-boyfriend would soon wed to someone else , and having a dream about one of her own ex-boyfriends marrying another girl . The song relies on acoustic guitar and is a narration from the perspective of a person who crashes her former love 's wedding in attempt to win him back . The song opened to critical acclaim for its lyrical detail . " Speak Now " had successful commercial outcomes in Canada and the United States , debuting and peaking at number eight on both the Canadian Hot 100 and the Billboard Hot 100 . Its appearance on the Billboard Hot 100 marked Swift 's sixth top ten debut , which made her the artist with the most top ten debuts in the history of the chart . " Speak Now " also managed to garner enough airplay to chart on the Hot Country Songs chart .

" Speak Now " was written by Swift , as were all the tracks for the album . The song was inspired by the story of her friend and her high school boyfriend . The couple went their separate ways after high school – with the idea that they would get back together . One day , Swift 's friend informed Swift that her high school boyfriend would soon wed . " He had met this girl who 's just this horrible , mean person who made him completely stop talking to all of his friends , cut off his family . She had him so completely isolated , " said Swift . She asked her friend if she would " speak now . " Perplexed , her friend asked for an explanation , and she answered , " You know , storm the church . ' Speak now or forever hold your peace . ' I 'll go with you . I 'll play guitar . It 'd be great . " Swift 's friend found this to be humorous , laughing at the idea . After speaking with her friend , Swift became deeply fixated on the idea of how tragic it would be for the person one loved to wed someone else . That night , Swift experienced a dream where one of her own ex-boyfriends married another girl . To her , this signaled that she had to compose a song about interrupting a wedding . In retrospect , she concluded , " For me , I like to think of it as good versus evil . And this girl is just completely – just the evil one . " Swift entitled the album after " Speak Now " because it fit the album 's concept , with each song being a different confession to a person . " It 's called Speak Now , and that pertains to the album as a concept and as an entire theme of the record more than I can even tell you , " she said . The song was released as a promotional single on October 5 , 2010 , as part of Countdown to Speak Now , an exclusive campaign launched by the iTunes Store . During the opening week of Speak Now , Swift performed " Speak Now " on the Late Show with David Letterman .

" Speak Now " is a country pop track with a length of four minutes and two seconds . It has a predominant pop music composition , intertwined with various country elements . The song is set in common time and has a moderate tempo of 120 beats per minute . It is written in the key of G major and Swift 's vocals span two octaves , from A3 to D5 . Swift 's vocals begin in a hushed tone , gradually turn grow , and at one point belt the song 's title . The song features different twangy , up-and-down vocal hooks might , in similarity to " You Belong with Me " . It follows the chord progression G – D – Am – C. The song 's instrumentation is based on acoustic guitar ; it eventually has its own gentle solo . In the lyrics of " Speak Now " , Swift narrates about crashing her former love 's wedding in attempt to win him back . The opening lines acknowledge that , although out of character , Swift is still in love with her ex-boyfriend and wants to make sure he does not marry the wrong girl . Throughout the song 's verses , Swift sneaks in the wedding and describes her observations , such as the bride-to-be 's bearing of a poofy wedding gown , her cumulative family , and an organist playing " Bridal Chorus " . In " Speak Now " ' s refrains , Swift pleads her ex-boyfriend to not say his vows in order to run away with her . The bridge has Swift responding to the priest 's calling of " Speak now or forever hold your peace " before repeating the opening lines . The last refrain is altered , with Swift narrating from the groom 's perspective and inform Swift they will indeed run away together .

The song opened to critical acclaim . Simon Vozick-Levinson of Entertainment Weekly deemed " Speak Now " one of Swift 's best songs yet . He also said , " Her expressive delivery of the lyrics makes up for any shortcomings as a technical vocalist " and that it was " expertly catchy " . He concluded that he was unable to stop playing the song after he heard it . Bill Lamb of About.com said the song was " brilliant " . He continued , " The song is sweet , funny , bratty , and edgy all at the same time . Taylor Swift remains one of our most gifted young lyricists . " Jonathan Keefe of Slant Magazine thought that " Speak Now " exemplified Swift 's inability to " write authoritatively about anything other than how great boys are or how much boys suck or how dreams about boys will take her somewhere better than where she is now . "

" Speak Now " entered the Billboard Hot 100 at number eight due to the sales of 217,000 digital downloads . With that week 's appearance on the chart , " Speak Now " became Swift 's sixth top ten debut and , therefore , set the mark that made Swift the artist with most top ten debuts in the history of the Billboard Hot 100 , surpassing the five top ten entries earned by Mariah Carey from 1995 to 1998 . Elsewhere in North America , the track debuted at number eight on the Canadian Hot 100 . In Australia , " Speak Now " debuted at number twenty .

The song is performed on the Speak Now World Tour . Clips of the performance can be seen in the music video for Swift 's single " Sparks Fly " . In the clips we see a bride wearing " a gown shaped like a pastry " as she walks up the stairs to the groom and preacher . Swift can be seen in the background making a scene during this clip . Other clips show the bridesmaids waving , the bride getting onto them while the groom is clapping and the groom running off with Swift . According to Jocelyn Vena of MTV.com , the performance is " a very theatrical moment " in which " Swift acted out crashing a wedding . She eventually stole the groom away , as she sings in the song , and the pair ran through the crowd together . "

The American Water Spaniel , ( often abbreviated to AWS ) , is a breed of spaniel which is one of a small number of breeds originating in the United States . Developed in the state of Wisconsin during the 19th century from a number of other breeds , including the Irish and English Water Spaniels . The breed was saved by Dr. Fred J. Pfeifer , who set up the breed club and standard , and whose work led to recognition for the breed by the United Kennel Club , and later , the American Kennel Club . While they are the state dog of Wisconsin , they remain a rare breed . They are medium-sized dog , and have a double layered coat , which comes in a variety of brown related shades . A versatile hunting dog , they are also suitable for apartment life due to work by breeders to develop a breed with an even temperament . The AWS may have been involved in the development of the Boykin Spaniel .

Developed in the United States , the American Water Spaniel is the Wisconsin state dog . The breed originated in the areas along the Fox River and its tributary the Wolf River during the early 19th century . Hunters needed a dog that could work on both land and water , a versatile hunter skilled at bringing in a variety of game . Hunters also wanted a hunting dog compact enough to be transported in a small skiff , one that was able to withstand Wisconsin 's cold water temperatures . Breeds involved in the creation of the American Water Spaniel are thought to have included the English Water Spaniel , Irish Water Spaniel , Curly Coated Retriever , native Indian Dogs , the Poodle , and either the Sussex Spaniel or another type of field spaniel . This little brown dog created was known at the time as the American Brown Spaniel , and weighed around 40 pounds ( 18 kg ) . It had a thick curly coat that protected it from the cold temperatures of the water and winter . It was used to hunt waterfowl , Ruffed Grouse , Greater Prairie Chicken and a variety of fur – bearing animals .

Over the years the numbers of the breed began to dwindle due both to a reduction in the duck population through those valley areas , and because of a switch in hunting – from a means to gather food for survival to that of recreation . Additionally , following World War II , new types of dogs became available in Wisconsin such as setters , pointers and other spaniels , allowing additional specialization in hunting . Dr. Fred J. Pfeifer , from New London , Wisconsin , set up Wolf River Kennels in order to save the breed . Numbers held by the kennel fluctuated but at times went up to 132 dogs . He advertised the dogs widely across the country , selling male dogs for $ 25 and females dogs for $ 20 . Part of a sales pitch that Pfeifer mailed to prospective dog owners read , " The American Brown Spaniel is distinctively an American production . Hunters have known this type for years and it was through their efforts that this dog was propagated .... For years we have bred only selective stock , breeding for gameness , stability , courage , intelligence , and beauty . They are dogs to admire and trust under all conditions whether in the home circle or in the field with the outdoor man . "

Due to Pfeifer 's work , the breed was recognized by the United Kennel Club ( UKC ) as the American Water Spaniel in 1920 , and by the Field Dog Stud Book in 1938 . Dr. Pfeifer 's own dog , named " Curly Pfeifer " was the first American Water Spaniel to be registered with UKC . John Scofield of Missouri and Thomas Brogdan of Rush Lake , Wisconsin worked together with the American Water Spaniel Club ( AWSC ) , gaining the breed recognition with the American Kennel Club ( AKC ) in 1940 . Prior to recognition by the AKC , the breed had not been shown in the show ring before . The breed has links to the Boykin Spaniel , and is thought to have been the main breed used to develop the Boykin . The differences between the Boykin and the AWS are negligible with some dog historians suggesting that the original Boykin , called " Dumpy " , who was found on the streets of Spartanburg , South Carolina , was actually an American Water Spaniel who had been misplaced in transit . However the breed clubs for the Boykin do not agree with this account .

The breed was made the state dog of Wisconsin in 1985 . The American Water Spaniel remains a rare breed . During 1998 only 233 puppies were registered with the AKC , with an estimated 3,000 dogs in existence mostly around the Midwestern United States , in particular in Wisconsin , Minnesota and Michigan . In 2010 , the breed was ranked 143rd most popular breed in the United States , out of 167 breeds . This is a decrease since 2000 , when the breed was ranked 125th . The dogs are not classified specifically as either retrievers or as spaniels and so may not compete in AKC field trials , but may compete in AKC hunt tests ( spaniel and retriever tests ) and retriever hunting tests sponsored by the AWSC , the breed club in the United States . The American Water Spaniel Field Association was set up in 1993 by breed enthusiasts supporting AKC Spaniel classification and looking to provide field training opportunities to owners of the breed . In a vote held of members of the AWSC in 1999 , they chose to keep the breed unclassified .

The limited popularity of the American Water Spaniel restricted development , resulting in the breed being relatively unchanged since its origins in the 19th century . They are a medium-sized dog , with a curly liver , brown , or chocolate colored coat . The average height at the withers for the breed is 15 – 18 inches ( 38 – 46 cm ) , and their weight around 25 – 45 pounds ( 11 – 20 kg ) . They have similar features to the Irish Water Spaniel , but the Irish breed is larger at between 21 – 24 inches ( 53 – 61 cm ) and weighing 55 – 65 pounds ( 25 – 29 kg ) . The coat of the American Water Spaniel can fall in two different patterns , either tightly curled or in the " marcel pattern " where the fur falls in waves . Working and show lines have not diverged as with some other breeds of spaniel , and both appear the same , with show dogs of this breed being rare . The coat has a coarse outside layer which keeps water away and protects the dog from foliage such as briers . The inside layer provides insulation to keep the dog warm . The coat has an oily feel to it , which gives off a " doggy smell " . The breed standard specifies color of the eyes should harmonize with the color of the coat , and should never be yellow . The skull is broad , and carries long , wide ears . The tail is not typically docked .

In the field , the AWS is less exuberant than the English Springer Spaniel , but it is as skilled in retrieval as Labrador or Golden Retriever . It is versatile regardless of the type of terrain , and in the water it is not the fastest swimmer but has a high level of endurance . The breed is also good at agility and flyball , with the first of the breed receiving a flyball championship title in 1993 . Members of the breed enjoy being the center of attention , and can be quite vocal at times . It is a one family dog , and will often bond with one particular individual . For many years the breed was " pack bred " , where they were allowed to live in a group . Since these times , breeders have been working to breed even tempered dogs that are suitable for both hunting and family life . The AWS has a mind of its own at times and reaches peak performance with the owner who is dedicated to teaching the dog just what is expected of it . The breed takes well to training , and especially excels at training that offers some variety rather than routine training drills . However , members of the breed can may have issues with food possessiveness . They can be stubborn , and mentally are slow to mature from puppyhood . Some lines of the breed still retain dominant and aggressive temperaments ; other than these lines , the AWS gets on well with children and enjoys playing with them . Even though they were originally bred to hunt , due to their size , they are suitable for apartment living as long as they receive enough exercise .

Pack breeding early in its development led to a level of genetic variation , so the hereditary conditions of more popular breeds are not common in the AWS . The breed however is known to suffer from eye issues including cataracts and progressive retinal atrophy . Inheritance is suspected in both conditions , with the average age of cataract onset at under one year old . Additional concerns are hypothyroidism , allergies , epilepsy , diabeties and glandular disorders which may cause baldness . The hair loss occurs at around six months of age , affecting the neck , thighs and tail ; however the frequency has been reduced through work conducted by the breed clubs . Hip dysplasia is seen in around 8.3 % of the breed , according to surveys conducted by the Orthopedic Foundation for Animals over a twenty five-year period between 1974 and 1999 . This was one of the lower results of the sporting breeds , with Greyhounds coming lowest with 3.4 % , and the related Boykin Spaniel coming in second highest at 47 % . There was no evidence of elbow dysplasia found . The breed has an average life span of 10 – 13 years .

Arniston was an East Indiaman that made eight voyages for the British East India Company ( EIC ) . She was wrecked on 30 May 1815 during a storm at Waenhuiskrans , near Cape Agulhas , South Africa , with the loss of 372 lives – only six on board survived . She had been requisitioned as a troopship and was underway from Ceylon to England on a journey to repatriate wounded soldiers from the Kandyan Wars . Controversially , the ship did not have a marine chronometer on board , a comparatively new and expensive navigational instrument that would have enabled her to determine her longitude accurately . Instead , she was forced to navigate through the heavy storm and strong currents using older , less reliable navigational aids and dead reckoning . Navigational difficulties and a lack of headway led to an incorrect assumption that Cape Agulhas was Cape Point . Consequently , the ship was wrecked when the captain headed north for St Helena with the incorrect belief the ship had already passed Cape Point .

East Indiamen operated under charter or licence to the Honourable East India Company , which held a monopoly granted by Queen Elizabeth I of England for all English trade between the Cape of Good Hope and Cape Horn . Arniston was built at the Barnard yard at Deptford on the Thames and launched in 1794 . Arniston was heavily armed , with her fifty-eight guns making her the equivalent of a Royal Navy fourth-rate ship of the line . A classification of " ship of the line " – a class of ship that later evolved into the battleship – meant that a ship was powerful enough to stand in a line of battle and explained why these ships of commerce were sometimes mistaken for men-o-war . The armament was necessary for the ship to protect herself and her valuable cargo from pirates and commerce raiders of other nations during long voyages between Europe and the Far East . Arniston , like other East Indiamen , was slow and unmanoeuvrable , but able to carry a large quantity of cargo .

Arniston sailed from Great Britain to the Far East eight times before her last voyage . On one of her homeward journeys from China , she struck an uncharted rock at 5 ° 46 ′ 8 ″ S 105 ° 16 ′ 43 ″ E , near the island of Pulo Goondy ( modern day Pulau Legundi ) , located just south of Sumatra . She did not suffer any ill effects as a result of this incident however , which is mentioned in journals of the time only for its noteworthiness as a navigation hazard to other shipping .

While Arniston was at St Helena on her outward journey , she undertook to transport troops from there to join Lord Elphinstone , who was undertaking an expedition to capture Cape Colony from the Dutch . On 10 July George Vancouver arrived in HMS Discovery . Vancouver was returning to England after his four-and-a-half-year long voyage of exploration . He transferred to Arniston four field guns that he had been carrying , together with what ammunition he had left for them , for onward transmission to Elphinstone . Discovery 's boats also helped in the ferrying of troops from shore to Arniston . Arniston was to ferry nine field pieces , as well as a company of artillery and three of infantry ( 393 men in all ) , to Elphinstone .

On this voyage Arniston sailed under a letter of marque in the name of Captain Campbell Marjoribanks , and dated 29 November 1799 . Her itinerary was : During this voyage Arniston had just anchored at Benkulen on 27 June 1800 , when the 26-gun French privateer Confiance attacked her . Arniston cut her anchor and gave chase , firing several broadsides into the other ship , but the faster French ship was able to make an escape . On 9 October 1800 , the East Indiaman Kent would be less fortunate ; Confiance would capture Kent after a two-hour engagement .

Critically , the ship did not have a chronometer for this voyage , a comparatively new and expensive navigational instrument at the time . Captain George Simpson could not afford the 60 – 100 guineas for one , and the ship 's owners were also unwilling to purchase one , even threatening to replace him with another captain if he refused to set sail without one . Arniston sailed from Port de Galle on 4 April 1815 in a convoy of six other East Indiamen , under the escort of HMS Africaine and HMS Victor . Among her 378 passengers were many invalid soldiers and sailors , plus 14 women and 25 children . During the passage from Ceylon , at one o 'clock every day , the ships signalled each other their longitude that they calculated using their chronometers . In this way , the ships were able to compare their respective instruments , and the master of the Arniston was able to learn his longitude too , as long as he remained in the convoy . On 26 May , while rounding the southern tip of Africa , Arniston separated from the convoy in bad weather after her sails were damaged . Without accurate daily longitudinal information from the other ships , Arniston had to rely instead on older , less accurate navigation methods . Navigation via dead reckoning proved particularly difficult as there were strong ocean currents combined with inclement weather that prevented a fix being obtained for several days via celestial navigation .

On 29 May , land was sighted to the north at 7 am , and given the dead reckoning estimates , was presumed to be the Cape of Good Hope . The ship sailed west until 4 : 30 pm on 29 May , then turned north to run for St Helena . However the land sighted had in fact been Cape Agulhas ( then known as " Cape L 'Agullas " ) and the ship had also not made good headway against the current since this sighting . Compounding these navigational errors , the master had not taken any depth soundings ( which would have confirmed his location over the Agulhas Bank ) , before heading north . Consequently , instead of being 100 miles ( 160 km ) west of the Cape of Good Hope as presumed , the ship was closing on the reef at Waenhuiskrans near Cape Agulhas . The anchors were unable to hold the heavy ship in the storm , so on 30 May near 4 pm , Lieutenant Brice advised Captain Simpson to ground the ship to save the lives of those aboard . Eight minutes later , at about 8 pm , the ship struck rocks half a mile offshore and heeled into the wind . The guns on the opposite side were cut away in a failed attempt to level the ship , which soon started to break up in the waves .

Only six men of the 378 people on board survived , after reaching the shore only with great difficulty through the high surf . The following morning the sternpost was the only part of the vessel still visible . The ship and her passengers had been lost for the price of a chronometer , or as an officer from the same convoy later wrote : [ T ] his valuable ship , and all the lives on board of her , were actually sacrificed to a piece of short-sighted economy . That they might have been saved , had she been supplied with the worst chronometer that was ever sent to sea , is also quite obvious .

The six survivors buried the bodies found on the beach , then travelled east along the beach , expecting to reach Cape Town . However , after four and a half days , they realised their error and returned to the site of the wreck . Here they subsisted off a cask of oatmeal , while trying to effect repairs to the ship 's pinnace , which had been washed ashore . They were discovered six days later on 14 June by a farmer 's son , who was out hunting . The six survivors were : Dr. Gunter ( boatswain ) , John Barrett ( carpenter ) , Charles Stewart Scott ( carpenter 's mate ) , William Grung ( second class ) , Gibbs ( third class ) , Robinson ( fourth class ) . A memorial , a replica of which can be seen today , was erected on the beach by the wife of Colonel Giels , whose four children were lost in the tragedy on their homeward journey , having visited him in Ceylon . The memorial bears the following inscription : Erected by their disconsolate parents to the memory of Thomas , aged 13 years , William Noble , aged 10 , Andrew , aged 8 and Alexander McGregor Murray , aged 7 ( the four eldest sons of Lieut Colonel Andrew Giels of H.M. 73rd Regiment ) who , with Lord and Lady Molesworth unfortunately perished in the Arniston Transport , wrecked on this shore on 3rd May , 1815 .

The United States Capitol shooting incident of 1998 was an attack on July 24 , 1998 , which led to the death of two United States Capitol Police officers . Detective John Gibson and Officer Jacob Chestnut were killed when Russell Eugene Weston , Jr . , entered the Capitol and opened fire . Chestnut was killed instantly and Gibson died during surgery at George Washington University Hospital . Weston 's exact motives are unknown , but he has a mental disorder and maintains a strong distrust of the federal government . He remains in a mental institution due to paranoid schizophrenia and has yet to be tried in court .

On the day of shooting , Officer Chestnut and another officer were assigned to operate the X-ray machine and magnetometer at the Document Door entrance located on the East Front of the Capitol , which was open only to Members of Congress and their staff . Detective Gibson was assigned to the dignitary protection detail of Rep. Tom DeLay ( R-TX ) and was in his suite of offices near this door . Weston , armed with a .38 caliber Smith & Wesson six-shot revolver , entered the Document Door at 3 : 40 p.m. At the same time , Officer Chestnut was providing directions to a tourist and his son while his partner escorted another tourist towards the restroom . Weston reportedly walked around the metal detector just inside the entrance ; Chestnut requested he go back through the detector . Weston suddenly produced the gun and without warning , shot Chestnut in the back of the head at point-blank range . According to witnesses , he turned down a short corridor and pushed through a door which leads to a group of offices used by senior Republican representatives including then Majority Whip Tom DeLay and Representative Dennis Hastert , future Speaker of the House and a close protégé of then Speaker Newt Gingrich .

Detective Gibson , who was in plainclothes , was shot after the suspect entered DeLay 's office . Despite being mortally wounded , Detective Gibson was able to return fire and wound the suspect , who was apprehended in that office . A female tourist was grazed by bullets on her shoulder and face . She was treated for her injuries and released . Also injured was USCP Officer Douglas McMillian . Future Senate Majority Leader Bill Frist , R-Tennessee , a heart surgeon who had been presiding on the Senate floor just before the shooting , resuscitated the gunman and accompanied him to D.C. General Hospital .

Officers Chestnut and Gibson were the two people killed in the attack . Following the shooting , both officers received the tribute of lying in honor in the United States Capitol rotunda . They were the first police officers , and Chestnut was the first African American , to receive the honor . In 1999 , Weston was found incompetent to stand trial due to mental illness as he was a man with schizophrenia who stopped taking his medication . A judge of the United States District Court for the District of Columbia ordered that he be treated with antipsychotic medication without his consent in 2001 , and the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit upheld the decision . In 2004 , the court determined that Weston still was not competent to be tried , despite ongoing treatment , and suspended but did not dismiss the criminal charges against him . Weston was known to the United States Secret Service prior to the incident as a person who had threatened the President of the United States . The shooting led to the creation of the United States Capitol Police Memorial Fund , a nonprofit organization managed by the Capitol Police Board which provides funds for the families of Chestnut and Gibson . In November 2005 , the fund was expanded to include the family of Sgt. Christopher Eney , a USCP officer killed during a training accident in 1984 . The shooting was cited as one reason for the development of the Capitol Visitors Center . The legislation authorizing the construction of the facility was introduced by Washington , D.C. Delegate Eleanor Holmes Norton and was entitled the Jacob Joseph Chestnut-John Michael Gibson United States Capitol Visitor Center Act of 1998 . The door where Weston entered was renamed in honor of the two officers , from the Document Door to the Chestnut-Gibson Memorial Door .

On March 6 , 2008 , Weston filed a motion requesting a hearing on his mental status . The hearing was held on May 6 with Weston appearing via teleconference from the Federal Medical Center , Butner with his public defender Jane Pierce and two witnesses he selected , a psychologist and vocational rehabilitation specialist . Federal judge Earl Britt denied Weston 's request to be released from the federal facility , arguing that he failed to present enough evidence that he no longer needed to be committed . During the hearing defense psychologist Holly Rogers stated that , " sometimes there are individuals who simply do not respond to medication " , implying that Weston was not ready for release . Had Weston been released from the facility , it would have made it possible for him to be taken to Washington , D.C. to stand trial for the murders of Gibson and Chestnut .

Detective John Michael Gibson ( March 29 , 1956 – July 24 , 1998 ) was a United States Capitol Police officer assigned to the dignitary protection detail of Congressman Tom DeLay . He is buried in Arlington National Cemetery after lying in honor with Chestnut in the Capitol rotunda . Detective Gibson had served with the agency for 18 years . He was a native of Massachusetts who married the niece of Representative Joe Moakley , Democrat of Massachusetts . He had three children , a 17-year-old daughter and two boys , ages 15 and 14 . Growing up in New England , Det . Gibson was a lifelong Boston Red Sox fan , and on August 11 , 1998 , his beloved team had a moment of silence in his honor prior to a game with the Kansas City Royals . Officer Jacob Joseph Chestnut ( April 28 , 1940 – July 24 , 1998 ) , was the first African American to lie in honor at the Capitol . Chestnut is buried in Arlington National Cemetery . His funeral included a speech by President Bill Clinton and a fly-over by military jets in a missing man formation . A United States Post Office located in Fort Washington , Maryland has been renamed in their honor .

Russell Eugene Weston , Jr . ( born December 28 , 1956 ) , also known as Rusty , grew up in Valmeyer , Illinois . Weston attended Valmeyer High School , the only high school in a town of 900 people . Shortly after graduating high school in 1974 , Weston moved to Rimini , Montana , rarely returning to Valmeyer . The only attempt his high school classmates made at inviting him to a class reunion was returned with obscenities written across it . Many of Weston 's Montana neighbors had disliked him , and often ignored him . They considered him to be unusual , and sometimes eccentric . Weston had once thought that his neighbor was using his television satellite dish to spy on his actions and believed Navy SEALs were hiding in his cornfield . He was diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia six years before the shooting and spent fifty-three days in a mental hospital after threatening a Montana resident . He was released after testing as being of no danger to himself or anyone else . Eighteen months before the shooting , he moved back to Valmeyer from Montana . Once home , he was known to compulsively hack at trees which filled his back yard following the Mississippi River floods of 1993 . There was so much downed timber on his family 's homestead that they had to ask him to stop cutting at trees . Two days prior to the Capitol shooting , at his grandmother 's insistence to do something about nearby cats which were becoming a nuisance , Weston shot and killed 14 cats with a single-barreled shotgun , leaving several in a bucket and burying the rest .

Following the Capitol shooting , Weston was transferred to a psychiatric center at Butner Federal Correctional Institution in Butner , North Carolina . In an interview with a court-appointed psychiatrist he explained that he stormed the Capitol to prevent the United States from being annihilated by disease and legions of cannibals . He has never been charged with any crime due to apparent mental inculpability . One contentious issue of Weston 's incarceration is that of forced medication . Weston has thus far refused to take any medications voluntarily . His lawyers helped enable this , in order to protect him from the death penalty . In May 2001 , a federal judge authorized doctors to treat Weston involuntarily . A panel from a federal appeals court ruled in July 2001 that Weston could be forced to take the drugs which he was forced to do for 120 days . He remains in the Butner facility indefinitely .

Hurricane Kathleen was a tropical cyclone that caused destructive impacts in California . On September 7 , 1976 , a tropical depression formed ; two days later it accelerated north towards the Baja California Peninsula . Kathleen brushed the Pacific coast of the peninsula as a hurricane on September 9 and made landfall as a fast-moving tropical storm the next day . With its circulation intact and still a tropical storm , Kathleen headed north into the United States and affected California and Arizona . Kathleen finally dissipated late on September 11 . Damage in the United States was considerable . California received record rainfall , with over a foot of rain falling in some areas . Flooding caused catastrophic destruction to Ocotillo , and six people drowned . Flooding extended west ; railway tracks were destroyed in Palm Desert and high winds and severe flooding were recorded in Arizona . Overall , the damage total was $ 160 million ( 1976 USD ) and 12 deaths were attributed to the storm .

Tropical cyclones do not typically bring high winds to the southwestern United States . Most Pacific hurricanes are embedded in easterly winds south of the subtropical ridge , and thus move westward — away from large land masses — until they dissipate over cold waters . However , during early autumn , tropical cyclones generally form closer to the Mexican shoreline than average , making them more likely to recurve , or to curve again , northwards under the influence of an approaching trough . These troughs tend to extend farther to the south during the latter part of the Pacific hurricane season , in the period between late August and early October . They also produce a synoptic-scale flow that is conducive to steering hurricanes towards the southwestern United States . However , many hurricanes that approach the southwestern United States tend to be undergoing extratropical transition as they encounter increased wind shear and markedly cooler sea surface temperatures , and as they interact with the deep troughs that caused them to recurve . Kathleen is one of only six recorded tropical cyclones in the eastern Pacific Ocean known to have brought gale-force or hurricane-force winds to the Continental United States .

A large area of thunderstorms , with a diameter of about 500 mi ( 800 km ) , formed 270 mi ( 430 km ) southwest of Acapulco . Moving rapidly west-northwest , a tropical depression formed on September 7 . While briefly moving towards the east , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Kathleen . Moving above 83 ° F ( 28 ° C ) sea surface temperatures , Kathleen quickly strengthened . Before passing 40 mi ( 64 km ) east of Socorro Island , Kathleen reached its secondary peak with winds of 65 mph ( 115 km / h ) . Kathleen then weakened considerably , and by 0600 UTC September 9 , Tropical Storm Kathleen was barely a tropical storm . At this time , the system was located at 55 mi ( 89 km ) north of the island . Shortly thereafter , Kathleen turned north-northeast into warmer waters . Subsequently , the tropical storm began to re-strengthen . Despite moving rapidly north , the cyclone strengthened into Hurricane Kathleen . The hurricane passed near several ships , and was intercepted by a Hurricane Hunter aircraft early on September 10 . It is estimated that the storm peaked in intensity around that time , with winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) and a barometric pressure of 986 mb ( 986 hPa ) . However , Kathleen never developed an eye . About an hour after the first flight reached Kathleen , a second flight suggested that Kathleen had weakened back into a tropical storm . With precipitation falling in the United States , some 700 mi ( 1,100 km ) north of the cyclone 's atmospheric circulation , Kathleen 's motion accelerated to speeds of 35 mph ( 56 km / h ) -38 mph ( 61 km / h ) .

After crossing the Point Eugenia peninsula ( the cyclones first landfall ) later on the morning of September 10 , Kathleen made its second landfall 120 mi ( 190 km ) north of Ensenada at 1130 UTC the same day . Unlike most tropical cyclones , Kathleen weakened slowly over California . Tropical Storm Kathleen weakened further into a depression over southern California and shortly thereafter , moved across Death Valley . On September 11 , Kathleen entered western Nevada . Finally , the center became difficult to locate , and the depression dissipated later on September 11 . After undergoing a Fujiwhara-like interaction , where two circulations interact with each other , with a low-pressure area stalled off the Pacific coast , moisture later spread into the northwestern part of the United States . After the stalled low was pulled inland , Kathleen combined with the low to produce additional rainfall over parts of California .

On September 10 – 11 , gale-force winds caused considerable damage to the city of Yuma . For a time , the sustained winds exceeded 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) , with gusts up to 76 mph ( 122 km / h ) . The National Weather Service 's forecast office in Tucson estimates that tropical storm-force winds extended as far east as Pima County , and as far north as Lake Havasu . Rains caused severe flash-flooding in Mohave County . One man was killed when the wind blew a palm tree onto his mobile home and 13 people across the state were hurt . The Tucson metropolitan area was particularly hard hit with flash flooding , with golf-ball size hail . On Mount Lemmon , the hail reached a depth of 5 in ( 13 cm ) . While most of the rainfall from Tropical Storm Kathleen fell in California , 2.87 inches ( 7.3 cm ) fell at the Davis Dam on the Colorado River .

The state received record rainfall , with 14.76 in ( 37.5 cm ) falling on the southern slopes of Mount San Gorgonio , and 10.13 in ( 25.7 cm ) accumulated on Mount Laguna . Because the village is situated atop an alluvial fan , a 40 ft ( 12 m ) wall of water exited a mountain canyon . Ocotillo was flooded with 4 feet ( 1.2 m ) -6 ft ( 1.8 m ) of water ; subsequently , half the town was destroyed . Six people drowned in the mud and waters in the town and two people were initially reported missing , though they were later found by officials . Overall , Ocotllio was 70 % – 80 % destroyed . Officials evacuated 175 people from the flooded area of Ocotillo and the nearby communities that surround the Salton Sea ; the sea rose 6 in ( 150 mm ) -8 in ( 200 mm ) . A quarter mile of interstate and a 60-foot bridge were destroyed by the flood , which also washed away mobile homes , trucks , and cars . In Los Angeles , two people died of injuries suffered from slippery roads . One man drowned in El Centro. and two people drowned when their cars tumbled into the water near the city . Record flood stage was attained at numerous streams near the Coachella Valley . Widespread property damage was recorded on the eastern slopes of the Sierra Nevada as well as the nearby desert . Across the San Joaquin Valley , 2 / 3 of the $ 150 million raisin crop was threatened . Crops including cotton , lettuce , and hay were damaged .

Homeowners in Palm Desert suffered $ 4 million in damage from the storm ; the town received more than a year 's worth of rainfall in a matter of days . No serious injuries were reported throughout the desert city , though two agricultural dikes broke . Several miles of railway track , including three trestles that belonged to the San Diego and Arizona Eastern Railway , were destroyed and five others were damaged . At more than 50 other locations , tracks were buried by mudslides or had the ground under them washed away . After assessing the damage from Kathleen , the Southern Pacific Transportation Company decided in 1977 to abandon most of the railroad . A 700 ft ( 210 m ) section of Interstate 8 from Yuma to San Diego was destroyed . Overall , hundreds of homes were damaged or destroyed ; Tropical Storm Kathleen was described as a one-in- 160-year event . Total damage was $ 160 million , making Kathleen one of the costliest tropical storms in state history . Parts of California were declared a disaster area , and flash flood watches were issued throughout Southern California , including the desert and mountains . Flash flood warnings were also issued for parts of California , as well as nearby states Nevada and Arizona , but were dropped as the rain tampered off on September 11 .

Mamoru Miyano ( 宮野 真守 , Miyano Mamoru , born Wednesday , June 8 , 1983 ) is a Japanese voice actor , actor , and singer from Saitama Prefecture . He is best known for his roles on Ouran High School Host Club , Vampire Knight , Death Note , Soul Eater , Tokyo Ghoul , Free ! , Mobile Suit Gundam 00 , Kōtetsu Sangokushi , Steins ; Gate , Nobunaga the Fool , and Uta no Prince-sama . At the 2007 Seiyu Awards he was nominated for two awards for his role as Light Yagami in Death Note , and in 2008 , he won the " Best Voice Actor " award at the 2008 Tokyo International Anime Fair . At the 2008 Seiyu Awards , Miyano won " Best Lead Actor Award " for his role as Setsuna F Seiei in Mobile Suit Gundam 00 , and as Hakugen Rikuson in Kōtetsu Sangokushi . Miyano began his career as a musician in 2007 . He released his debut single , " Kuon " ( 久遠 , lit . Eternity ) , in May on the King Records label . In March 2009 , his debut album Break was released .

Miyano started his acting career in 1990 and provides the voice of Riku in the Japanese version of the PlayStation 2 video game Kingdom Hearts . He then voiced Kiba , the main character of anime series Wolf 's Rain . He returned as the voice for Riku in the 2004 Game Boy Advance game Kingdom Hearts : Chain of Memories , as well as Kingdom Hearts II in 2005 , and in Kingdom Hearts Re : Chain of Memories in 2007 . In 2006 , Miyano voiced Light Yagami for the anime version of the manga Death Note . In 2007 , for his role as Light Yagami , he was nominated for two awards at the first Seiyu Awards : " Best Lead Actor Award " and " Best New Actor Awards " . Also in 2007 , Miyano went on to provide the voice of Setsuna F Seiei , the main character of Mobile Suit Gundam 00 . He won his first award , " Best Voice Actor " , at the 2008 Tokyo International Anime Fair for his portrayal of Light Yagami and Setsuna F Seiei . In 2008 , Miyano took on the role as Setsuna F Seiei again for the second season of Mobile Suit Gundam 00 . He won his first Seiyu award for the roles of Setsuna F Seiei and of Hakugen Rikuson in Kōtetsu Sangokushi . He has also voiced Zero Kiryu from the series Vampire Knight and Vampire Knight Guilty , as well as Death The Kid in the anime Soul Eater . He also provided the voice of Tamaki Suoh in the anime version of Ouran High School Host Club , Okabe Rintarō from Steins ; Gate , Ling Yao from Fullmetal Alchemist Brotherhood , Oda Nobunaga from Nobunaga the Fool , and Rin Matsuoka from Free ! Iwatobi Swim Club and Free ! Eternal Summer .

In addition to voice acting , Miyano has also appeared on camera . His first acting job was in 1992 in Tokusou Exceedraft , where he appeared in a flashback as a child in a yakuza member 's past . In 2003 , Miyano joined the cast of The Prince of Tennis Musical playing Tetsu Ishida ( 石田 鉄 , Ishida Tetsu ) . He made his film debut in 2006 's The Prince of Tennis . He also made a guest appearance in the drama The Quiz Show in 2008 . In 2009 , he has voiced Ultraman Zero from the new movie , Mega Monster Battle : Ultra Galaxy Legend The Movie . In 2010 , he began voicing Dent in the popular Pokémon anime series . In the same year he starred with fashion model and actress Ayumi Uehara and fellow voice actors Tomokazu Sugita , Tomokazu Seki , Rikiya Koyama , Yuka Hirata , Showtaro Morikubo and Yūko Kaida in the film , Wonderful World , directed by Daisuke Namikawa . Later , he voiced Ultraman Zero again in the movie , Ultraman Zero : The Revenge of Belial . In 2012 , he continued to voice Ultraman Zero in Ultraman Saga , in 2015 in Ultraman Ginga S : Showdown ! Ultra 10 Warriors ! ! , as well as in the new movie , Ultraman X : Here It Comes ! Our Ultraman in 2016 .

On May 28 , 2007 on the King Records label , Miyano debuted as a singer with the single " Kuon " ( 久遠 , Eternity ) . " Kuon " debuted at number 47 on the Oricon charts and was used as the ending theme song for anime series Kōtetsu Sangokushi . On June 13 , 2007 , with fellow voice actress Romi Park , the duo released a collaboration single titled " Fight " , which debuted on the Oricon chart at number 73 . On June 4 , 2008 he released his second single , " Discovery " , which was the intro song for PlayStation 2 video game Fushigi Yūgi : Suzaku Ibun . The song debuted at number 24 on the chart . In August 2008 , Miyano released the character single " Soup / Hakosora " , under the name Mamoru Miyano comes across Setsuna F Seiei ( 宮野真守 come across 刹那 ・ F ・ セイエイ ) ; it debuted at number 18 . In December he released his third single , " ... Kimi e " ( … 君へ , ... To You ) , which also debuted at number 18 . On March 11 , 2009 Miyano released his debut album , Break , which debuted at number 20 . On April 11 , 2009 , a month after the release of his album , Miyano went on his first tour , 1st Live Tour 2009 : Breaking .

In 2010 , Miyano released his second album , Wonder . The album charted at number 20 on the Oricon Weekly Albums chart . Following the album 's release , Miyano went on his second tour , Mamoru Miyano Live Tour 2010 : Wondering . In April 2012 , Miyano released his third album , Fantasista . The album charted at number 4 on the Oricon Weekly Albums chart . In May 2014 , Miyano went on his 6th live tour ~ Wakening ! ~ where he traveled around Japan . The DVD was released January 28 , 2015 .

During the brief Japanese occupation of Taiwan in 1874 , tensions heightened between China and Japan , and the possibility of war caused the Japanese government to realize that it needed to reinforce its navy . The following year the government placed an order for the armored frigate Fusō and two Kongō-class ships , designed by the British naval architect Sir Edward Reed , from British shipyards as no Japanese shipyard was able to build a ship of this size . Hiei was 220 feet ( 67.1 m ) long between perpendiculars and had a beam of 41 feet ( 12.5 m ) . She had a forward draft of 18 feet ( 5.5 m ) and drew 19 feet ( 5.8 m ) aft . The ship displaced 2,248 long tons ( 2,284 t ) and had a crew of 22 officers and 212 enlisted men . Her hull was of composite construction with an iron framework planked with wood .

The contract for Hiei was awarded to Milford Haven Shipbuilding and Engineering Co. in Pembroke Dock , Wales , on 24 September 1875 for the price of £ 119,600 , exclusive of armament . Japanese sources universally give the date for Hiei 's keel-laying as 24 September 1875 — the same as that for the awarding of the contract — but historian Hans Langerer describes this as improbable , arguing that no shipyard would order enough material to begin construction without cash in hand . She was launched on 12 June 1877 ; Reed 's daughter smashed a bottle of champagne on the ship 's bow in the traditional Western style . The ship was named for Mount Hiei . Completed in February 1878 , Hiei sailed for Japan on 22 March under the command of a British captain and with a British crew because the IJN was not yet ready for such a long voyage . One of the passengers aboard her was the future admiral Togo Heihachiro , who had just completed six years of study in the United Kingdom . She arrived in Yokohama on 22 May and was assigned to the Tokai Naval District a month later . On 10 July a formal ceremony was held in Yokohama for the receipt of the ship that was attended by the Meiji Emperor and many senior government officials . The ship was opened for tours by the nobility , their families and invited guests for three days after the ceremony . On 14 July , the general public was allowed to tour the ship for a week .

During 1880 , Hiei visited ports in India , Persia , the Persian Gulf and various ports in Southeast Asia . The ship made annual port visits to Jinsen in Korea in 1881 through 1883 . She was assigned to the Small Standing Fleet in 1886 and became a training ship in 1887 the following year . Together with her sister ship Kongō , Hiei sailed from Shinagawa , Tokyo on 13 August 1889 on a training cruise to the Mediterranean with cadets from the Imperial Japanese Naval Academy , returning on 2 February 1890 . On 5 October the sisters departed Shinagawa for Kobe to pick up the 69 survivors of the wrecked Ottoman frigate Ertuğrul and continued on to Constantinople , Turkey to return them to their homeland . They arrived on 2 January 1891 , and the ships ' officers were received by Sultan Abdul Hamid II . The ships also carried a class of naval cadets . On the return voyage , they made a port visit at Piraeus where they were visited by King George I of Greece and his son , Crown Prince Constantine . Making stops at Alexandria , Port Said , Aden , Colombo , Singapore and Hong Kong , the sisters arrived at Shinagawa on 10 May .

Hiei began another cadet cruise on 30 September 1891 and visited Australia and Manila before returning to Shinagawa on 10 April 1892 . The ship was not in service in 1893 , but she was recommissioned before the beginning of the First Sino-Japanese War in 1894 . Hiei was assigned to the Standing Fleet on 2 July . She was the last ship in the Japanese line during the Battle of the Yalu River in September and was heavily damaged when her captain decided to pass through the Chinese fleet rather than try to keep up with the faster Main Squadron . The ship became the target of most of the Chinese ships and was forced to disengage to prevent further damage . Hiei was transferred to the West-Sea Fleet on 14 October , and the sisters were assigned to the Second Raiding Unit in December for operations against the Chinese port of Weihaiwei . The ships were present during the Battle of Weihaiwei in January – February 1895 , although neither saw any significant combat . Hiei took part in the invasion of Formosa in 1895 , and participated in the bombardment of the Chinese coastal forts at Takow ( Kaohsiung ) on 13 October 1895 .

After the war , Hiei alternated her training cruises with Kongō , making the 1897 cruise to the West Coast of North America and Hawaii from 13 April to 20 September and repeating the same cruise from 14 December 1898 to 28 August 1899 . During that cruise , on 21 March 1898 , the ship was re-designated as a 3rd-class coast defense ship , although she retained her training duties . Both ships made the 1902 cruise , their last , to Manila and Australia from 19 February to 25 August . Hiei played a minor role in the Russo-Japanese War before she was reclassified as a survey ship in 1906 . Hiei was stricken from the Navy List on 1 April 1911 and ordered to be sold on 21 December . The exact date of her sale is not known , although Maizuru Naval District reported her sale on 25 March 1912 .

Moncton / ˈmʌŋktən / is a city located in Westmorland County in the southeastern portion of the province of New Brunswick , Canada . Situated in the Petitcodiac River Valley , Moncton lies at the geographic centre of the Maritime Provinces . The city has earned the nickname " Hub City " due to its central location in the region and its history as a railway and land transportation hub for the Maritimes . The city proper has a population of 69,074 ( 2011 ) and has a land area of 142 km2 ( 55 sq mi ) . The Moncton CMA has a population of 138,644 ( 2011 ) , making it the largest CMA in New Brunswick , the second-largest CMA in the Maritime Provinces , and the third-largest CMA in Atlantic Canada . The CMA includes the neighbouring city of Dieppe and the town of Riverview , as well as adjacent suburban areas in Westmorland and Albert counties . Although the Moncton area was originally settled in 1733 , Moncton is considered to have been officially founded in 1766 with the arrival of Pennsylvania Dutch immigrants from Philadelphia . Initially an agricultural settlement , Moncton was not incorporated until 1855 . The city was named for Lt. Col. Robert Monckton , the British officer who had captured nearby Fort Beauséjour a century earlier . A significant wooden shipbuilding industry had developed in the community by the mid-1840s , allowing for the civic incorporation in 1855 , but the shipbuilding economy collapsed in the 1860s , causing the town to lose its civic charter in 1862 . Moncton regained its charter in 1875 after the community 's economy rebounded , mainly due to a growing railway industry . In 1871 , the Intercolonial Railway of Canada had chosen Moncton to be its headquarters , and Moncton remained a railroad town for well over a century until the closure of the Canadian National Railway ( CNR ) locomotive shops in the late 1980s . Although the economy of Moncton was traumatized twice — by the collapse of the shipbuilding industry in the 1860s and by the closure of the CNR locomotive shops in the 1980s — the city was able to rebound strongly on both occasions . The city adopted the motto Resurgo after its rebirth as a railway town . At present , the city 's economy is stable and diversified , primarily based on its traditional transportation , distribution , retailing , and commercial heritage , and supplemented by strength in the educational , health care , financial , information technology , and insurance sectors . The strength of Moncton 's economy has received national recognition and the local unemployment rate is consistently less than the national average .

Acadians first settled the head of the Bay of Fundy in the 1670s . The first reference to the " Petcoucoyer River " was on the De Meulles map of 1686 . Settlement of the Petitcodiac and Memramcook river valleys began about 1700 , gradually extending inland and reaching the site of present-day Moncton in 1733 . The first Acadian settlers in the Moncton area established a marshland farming community and chose to name their settlement Le Coude ( The Elbow ) , an allusion to the 90 ° bend in the river near the site of the settlement . In 1755 , nearby Fort Beausejour was captured by English forces under the command of Lt. Col. Robert Monckton . The Beaubassin region including the Memramcook and Petitcodiac river valleys subsequently fell under English control . Later that year , Governor Charles Lawrence issued a decree ordering the expulsion of the Acadian population from Nova Scotia ( including recently captured areas of Acadia such as le Coude ) . This action came to be known as the " Great Upheaval " . The reaches of the upper Petitcodiac River valley then came under the control of the Philadelphia Land Company ( one of the principals of which was Benjamin Franklin ) and in 1766 Pennsylvania Dutch settlers arrived to re-establish the pre-existing farming community at Le Coude . The Settlers consisted of eight families ; Heinrick Stief ( Steeves ) , Jacob Treitz ( Trites ) , Matthias Sommer ( Somers ) , Jacob Reicker ( Ricker ) , Charles Jones ( Schantz ) , George Wortmann ( Wortman ) , Michael Lutz ( Lutes ) , and George Koppel ( Copple ) . There is a plaque dedicated in their honor at the mouth of Hall 's Creek . They renamed the settlement " The Bend " . The Bend remained an agricultural settlement for nearly 80 more years . Even by 1836 , there were only 20 households in the community . At this time , the Westmorland Road became open to year round travel and a regular mail coach service was established between Saint John and Halifax . The Bend became an important transfer and rest station along the route . Over the next decade , lumbering and then shipbuilding would become important industries in the area .

The turning point for the community was when Joseph Salter took over ( and expanded ) a shipyard at The Bend in 1847 . The expanded shipyard ultimately grew to employ about 400 workers . The Bend subsequently developed a service-based economy to support the shipyard and gradually began to acquire all the amenities of a growing town . The prosperity engendered by the wooden shipbuilding industry allowed The Bend to incorporate as the town of Moncton in 1855 . The town was named for Lt. Col. Robert Monckton , but a clerical error at the time the town was incorporated resulted in the misspelling of the community 's name , which has been perpetuated to the present day . The first mayor of Moncton was the shipbuilder Joseph Salter . Two years later , in 1857 , the European and North American Railway opened its line from Moncton to nearby Shediac ; this was followed by a line from Moncton to Saint John opening in 1859 . At about the time of the arrival of the railway , the popularity of steam-powered ships forced an end to the era of wooden shipbuilding . The Salter shipyard closed in 1858 . The resulting industrial collapse caused Moncton to surrender its civic charter in 1862 .

Moncton 's economic depression did not last long and a second era of prosperity came to the area in 1871 when Moncton was selected to be the headquarters of the Intercolonial Railway of Canada ( ICR ) . The arrival of the ICR in Moncton was a seminal event for the community . For the next 120 years , the history of the city would be firmly linked with that of the railway . In 1875 , Moncton was able to reincorporate as a town and adopted the motto " Resurgo " ( Latin for I rise again ) . One year later , the ICR line to Quebec was opened . The railway boom that emanated from this and the associated employment growth allowed Moncton to achieve city status on 23 April 1890 . Moncton grew rapidly during the early 20th century , particularly after provincial lobbying helped the city become the eastern terminus of the massive National Transcontinental Railway project in 1912 . In 1918 , the ICR and NTR were merged by the federal government into the newly formed Canadian National Railways ( CNR ) system . The ICR shops would become CNR 's major locomotive repair facility for the Maritimes and Moncton became the headquarters for CNR 's Maritime division . The T. Eaton Company 's catalogue warehouse moved to the city in the early 1920s , employing over seven hundred people . Transportation and distribution became increasingly important to the Moncton economy throughout the middle part of the 20th century . The Moncton Airport opened in 1929 and quickly became an important fixture in the community . During the Second World War the Canadian Army built a large military supply base in the city to service the Maritime military establishment . The CNR continued to dominate the economy of the city with railway employment in Moncton peaked at nearly six thousand workers in the 1950s before beginning a slow decline .

Moncton was placed on the Trans-Canada Highway network in the early 1960s after Route 2 was built along the northern perimeter of the city . Subsequent development saw Route 15 built between the city and Shediac . At the same time , the Petitcodiac River Causeway was constructed . The Université de Moncton was founded in 1963 . This institution became an important resource in the development of Acadian culture in the area . The late 1970s and the 1980s again saw a period of economic hardship hit the city as several major employers closed or restructured . The Eatons catalogue division , CNR 's locomotive shops facility and CFB Moncton were all closed during this time throwing thousands of citizens out of work . Diversification in the early 1990s saw the rise of information technology , led by call centres which made use of the city 's bilingual workforce . By the late 1990s , retail , manufacturing and service expansion began to occur in all sectors and within a decade of the closure of the CNR locomotive shops Moncton had more than made up for its employment losses . This dramatic turnaround in the fortunes of the city has been termed the " Moncton Miracle " .

The growth of the community has continued unabated since the 1990s and has actually been accelerating . The confidence of the community has been bolstered by its ability to host major events such as the Francophonie Summit in 1999 , a Rolling Stones concert in 2005 , the Memorial Cup in 2006 and both the IAAF World Junior Championships in Athletics and a neutral site regular season CFL football game in 2010 . Recent positive developments include the Atlantic Baptist University ( later renamed Crandall University ) achieving full university status and relocating to a new campus in 1996 , the Greater Moncton Airport opening a new terminal building and becoming a designated international airport in 2002 , and the opening of the new Gunningsville Bridge to Riverview in 2005 . In 2002 , Moncton became Canada 's first officially bilingual city . In the 2006 census , Moncton was officially designated a Census Metropolitan Area and became the largest metropolitan area in the province of New Brunswick .

Moncton lies in southeastern New Brunswick , at the geographic centre of the Maritime Provinces . The city is located along the north bank of the Petitcodiac River at a point where the river bends acutely from a west − east to north − south flow . This geographical feature has contributed significantly to historical names given to the community . Petitcodiac in the Mi 'kmaq language has been translated as meaning " bends like a bow " . The early Acadian settlers in the region named their community Le Coude which means " the elbow " . Subsequent English immigrants changed the name of the settlement to The Bend of the Petitcodiac ( or simply The Bend ) . The Petitcodiac river valley at Moncton is broad and relatively flat , bounded by a long ridge to the north ( Lutes Mountain ) and by the rugged Caledonia Highlands to the south . Moncton lies at the original head of navigation on the river , however a causeway to Riverview ( constructed in 1968 ) resulted in extensive sedimentation of the river channel downstream and rendered the Moncton area of the waterway unnavigable . On 14 April 2010 , the causeway gates were opened in an effort to restore the silt-laden river .

The Petitcodiac River exhibits one of North America 's few tidal bores : a regularly occurring wave that travels up the river on the leading edge of the incoming tide . The bore is as a result of the extreme tides of the Bay of Fundy . Originally , the bore was very impressive , sometimes between 1 and 2 metres ( 3 ft 3 in and 6 ft 7 in ) in height and extending across the 1 kilometre ( 0.62 mi ) width of the Petitcodiac River in the Moncton area . This wave would occur twice a day at high tide , travelling at an average speed of 13 km / h ( 8.1 mph ) and producing an audible roar . Unsurprisingly , the " bore " became a very popular early tourist attraction for the city , but when the Petitcodiac causeway was built in the 1960s , the river channel quickly silted in and reduced the bore so that it rarely exceeds 15 to 20 centimetres ( 5.9 to 7.9 in ) in height . On 14 April 2010 , the causeway gates were opened in an effort to restore the silt-laden river . A recent tidal bore since the opening of the causeway gates measured a 2-foot-high ( 0.61 m ) wave , unseen for many years .

There are many natural attractions near Moncton . Two major national parks , Fundy National Park and Kouchibouguac National Park , are within a one-hour drive of the city . The warmest salt water beaches north of Virginia can be found on the Northumberland Strait , only 15 minutes away at Parlee Beach in the nearby town of Shediac . New Brunswick 's signature natural attraction , the Hopewell Rocks , are a half-hour 's drive down the Petitcodiac river valley . Cape Enrage , located near Alma , includes a historic lighthouse , fossil cliffs , scenic vistas , and adventure tourism . The Sackville Waterfowl Park includes nature trails and a boardwalk over a freshwater marsh as well as waterfowl viewing platforms . Other nearby attractions ( within one hour of the city ) include The Cape Jourimain National Wildlife Preserve , La Dune de Bouctouche Eco-Centre , ( an ecotourism site and beach ) and the Joggins Fossil Cliffs in Nova Scotia ; a UNESCO world heritage site .

Despite being less than 50 km ( 31 mi ) from the Bay of Fundy and less than 30 km ( 19 mi ) from the Northumberland Strait , the climate tends to be more continental than maritime during the summer and winter seasons , with maritime influences somewhat tempering the transitional seasons of spring and autumn . Moncton has a warm summer continental climate ( Köppen climate classification Dfb ) with uniform precipitation distribution . Winter days are typically cold but generally sunny with solar radiation generating some warmth . Daytime high temperatures usually range a few degrees below the freezing point . Major snowfalls can result from nor 'easter ocean storms moving up the east coast of North America . These major snowfalls typically average 20 – 30 cm ( 8 – 12 in ) and are frequently mixed with rain or freezing rain . Spring is frequently delayed because the sea ice that forms in the nearby Gulf of St. Lawrence during the previous winter requires time to melt , and this will cool onshore winds , which can extend inland as far as Moncton . The ice burden in the gulf has diminished considerably over the course of the last decade ( which may be a consequence of global warming ) , and the springtime cooling effect has weakened as a result . Daytime temperatures above freezing are typical by late February . Trees are usually in full leaf by late May . Summers are hot and humid due to the seasonal prevailing westerly winds strengthening the continental tendencies of the local climate . Daytime highs sometimes reach more than 30 ° C ( 86 ° F ) . Rainfall is generally modest , especially in late July and August , and periods of drought are not uncommon . Autumn daytime temperatures remain mild until late October . First snowfalls usually do not occur until late November and consistent snow cover on the ground does not happen until late December . The Fundy coast of New Brunswick occasionally experiences the effects of post-tropical storms . The stormiest weather of the year , with the greatest precipitation and the strongest winds , usually occurs during the fall / winter transition ( November to mid-January ) .

Moncton generally remains a " low rise " city . The city 's skyline however encompasses many buildings and structures with varying architectural styles from many periods . The most dominant structure in the city is the Bell Aliant Tower , a 127 metres ( 417 ft ) microwave communications tower built in 1971 . When it was constructed , it was the tallest microwave communications tower of its kind in North America . It remains the tallest structure in Moncton , dwarfing the neighbouring Place L ’ Assomption by 46 metres ( 151 ft ) . Indeed , the Bell Aliant Tower is also the tallest free-standing structure in all four Atlantic provinces . Assumption Place is a 20-story office building and is the headquarters of Assumption Mutual Life Insurance . This building is 81 metres ( 266 ft ) in height and is tied with Brunswick Square ( Saint John ) as the tallest building in the province . The Blue Cross Centre is a large nine-story building in Downtown Moncton . Although only nine stories tall , the building is architecturally distinctive , encompasses a full city block , and is the largest office building in the city in terms of square footage . It is the home of Medavie Blue Cross and the Moncton Public Library . There are about a half dozen other buildings in Moncton that range between eight and twelve stories in height , including the Delta Beausejour and Brunswick Crowne Plaza Hotels and the Terminal Plaza office complex .

The most popular park in the area is Centennial Park , which contains an artificial beach , lighted cross country skiing and hiking trails , the city 's largest playground , lawn bowling and tennis facilities , a boating pond , a treetop adventure course , and Rocky Stone Field , a city owned 2,500 seat football stadium with artificial turf , and home to the Moncton Minor Football Association . The city 's other main parks are Mapleton Park in the city 's north end , Irishtown Nature Park ( one of the largest urban nature parks in Canada ) and St. Anselme Park ( located in Dieppe ) . The numerous neighbourhood parks throughout the metro Moncton area include Bore View Park ( which overlooks the Petitcodiac River ) , and the downtown Victoria Park , which features a bandshell , flower gardens , fountain , and the city 's cenotaph . There is an extensive system of hiking and biking trails in Metro Moncton . The Riverfront Trail is part of the Trans Canada Trail system , and various monuments and pavilions can be found along its length .

The population of Moncton is 69,074 ( 2011 Census ) . Along with Fredericton and Halifax , Moncton is one of only three Maritime cities to register a population increase in recent years . The majority of Moncton residents are native English speakers , but the city also has a substantial French-speaking Acadian population ( 31.9 % ) . Almost all Monctonians speak English ( 64.6 % ) or French ( 31.9 % ) as first languages ; 1.6 % speak both languages as a first language , and 6.9 % speak another language . About 46 % of the city population is bilingual and understands both English and French ; the only other Canadian cities that approach this level of linguistic duality are Ottawa , Sudbury , and Montreal . Moncton became the first officially bilingual city in the country in 2002 . The adjacent city of Dieppe is about 73 % Francophone and has benefited from an ongoing rural depopulation of the Acadian Peninsula and areas in northern and eastern New Brunswick . The town of Riverview meanwhile is heavily ( 95 % ) Anglophone . The census metropolitan area ( CMA ) grew by 9.7 % between 2006 and 2011 - the fastest such rate of any metropolitan area in Atlantic Canada . The census metropolitan area had a population of 138,644 as of the 2011 national census , which makes it the largest metropolitan area in the province of New Brunswick and the second largest in the Maritime Provinces after Halifax . The 2015 estimated CMA population is 148,000 . The CMA includes the city of Dieppe ( population 23,310 ) , town of Riverview ( 19,128 ) , Moncton Parish ( 9,421 ) , Memramcook ( 4,831 ) , Coverdale Parish ( 4,401 ) , and Salisbury ( 2,208 ) .

Migration is mostly from other areas of New Brunswick ( especially the north ) , Nova Scotia ( 13 % ) , and Ontario ( 9 % ) . 62 % of new arrivals to the city are Anglophone and 38 % are Francophone . There are 2,990 Aboriginal people living in Moncton , who make up 4.3 % of the city 's population . There are 3,305 visible minorities in Moncton . Blacks and South Asians are the largest visible minority groups , comprising 1.7 % and 0.7 % of the city 's population , respectively . There is also a growing Korean community in Moncton .

The underpinnings of the local economy are based on Moncton 's heritage as a commercial , distribution , transportation , and retailing centre . This is due to Moncton 's central location in the Maritimes : it has the largest catchment area in Atlantic Canada with 1.6 million people living within a three-hour drive of the city . The insurance , information technology , educational , and health care sectors also are major factors in the local economy with the city 's two hospitals alone employing over five thousand people . Moncton has garnered national attention because of the strength of its economy . The local unemployment rate averages around 6 % , which is below the national average . In 2004 Canadian Business Magazine named it " The best city for business in Canada " , and in 2007 FDi magazine named it the fifth most business friendly small-sized city in North America . A number of nationally or regionally prominent corporations have their head offices in Moncton including Atlantic Lottery Corporation , Assumption Life Insurance , Medavie Blue Cross Insurance , Armour Transportation Systems , Imvescor , Major Drilling Group International , PropertyGuys.com , and Co-op Atlantic .

There are 37 call centres in the city which employ over 5000 people . Some of the larger centres include Asurion , Numeris ( formerly BBM Canada ) , Exxon Mobil , Royal Bank of Canada , Tangerine Bank ( formerly ING Direct ) , UPS , Fairmont Hotels and Resorts , Rogers Communications , and Sitel . A growing high tech sector includes companies such as Gtech , Nanoptix , International Game Technology , OAO Technology Solutions , BMM Test Labs , TrustMe , and BelTek Systems Design . Several arms of the Irving corporation have their head offices and / or major operations in greater Moncton . These include Midland Transport , Majesta / Royale Tissues , Irving Personal Care , Master Packaging , Brunswick News , and Cavendish Farms . Kent Building Supplies ( an Irving subsidiary ) opened their main distribution centre in the Caledonia Industrial Park in 2014 . The Irving group of companies employs several thousand people in the Moncton region . There are three large industrial parks in the metropolitan area . The Irving operations are concentrated in the Dieppe Industrial Park . The Moncton Industrial Park in the city 's west end has been expanded . Molson / Coors opened a brewery in the Caledonia Industrial Park in 2007 , its first new brewery in over fifty years . All three industrial parks also have large concentrations of warehousing and regional trucking facilities .

A new four-lane Gunningsville Bridge was opened in 2005 , connecting downtown Riverview directly with downtown Moncton . On the Moncton side , the bridge connects with an extension of Vaughan Harvey Boulevard as well as to Assumption Boulevard and will serve as a catalyst for economic growth in the downtown area . This has become already evident as an expansion to the Blue Cross Centre was completed in 2006 and a Marriott Residence Inn opened in 2008 . The new regional law courts on Assumption Blvd opened in 2011 . Construction will begin on a new downtown 9,000 seat multipurpose events centre and arena on the site of the former Highfield Square shopping centre in 2016 . On the Riverview side , the Gunningsville Bridge now connects to a new ring road around the town and is expected to serve as a catalyst for development in east Riverview . The retail sector in Moncton has become one of the most important pillars of the local economy . Major retail projects such as Champlain Place in Dieppe and the Wheeler Park Power Centre on Trinity Drive have become major destinations for locals and for tourists alike . Tourism is an important industry in Moncton and historically owes its origins to the presence of two natural attractions , the tidal bore of the Petitcodiac River ( see above ) and the optical illusion of Magnetic Hill . The tidal bore was the first phenomenon to become an attraction but the construction of the Petitcodiac causeway in the 1960s effectively extirpated the attraction . Magnetic Hill , on the city 's northwest outskirts , is the city 's most famous attraction . The Magnetic Hill area includes ( in addition to the phenomenon itself ) , a golf course , major water park , zoo , and an outdoor concert facility . A $ 90 million casino / hotel / entertainment complex opened at Magnetic Hill in 2010 .

Moncton 's Capitol Theatre , an 800-seat restored 1920s-era vaudeville house on Main Street , is the main centre for cultural entertainment for the city . The theatre hosts a performing arts series and provides a venue for various theatrical performances as well as Symphony New Brunswick and the Atlantic Ballet Theatre of Canada . The adjacent Empress Theatre offers space for smaller performances and recitals . The Molson Canadian Centre at Casino New Brunswick provides a 2,000 seat venue for major touring artists and performing groups . The Moncton-based Atlantic Ballet Theatre tours mainly in Atlantic Canada but also tours nationally and internationally on occasion . Théâtre l 'Escaouette is a Francophone live theatre company which has its own auditorium and performance space on Botsford Street . The Anglophone Live Bait Theatre is based in the nearby university town of Sackville . There are several private dance and music academies in the metropolitan area , including the Capitol Theatre 's own performing arts school . The Aberdeen Cultural Centre is a major Acadian cultural cooperative containing multiple studios and galleries . Among other tenants , the Centre houses the Galerie Sans Nom , the principal private art gallery in the city .

The city 's two main museums are the Moncton Museum at Resurgo Place on Mountain Road and the Musée acadien at Université de Moncton . The Moncton Museum reopened following major renovations and an expansion to include the Transportation Discovery Centre . The Discovery Centre includes many hands on exhibits highlighting the city 's transportation heritage . The city also has several recognized historical sites . The Free Meeting House was built in 1821 and is a New England-style meeting house located adjacent to the Moncton Museum . The Thomas Williams House , a former home of a city industrialist built in 1883 , is now maintained in period style and serves as a genealogical research centre and is also home to several multicultural organizations . The Treitz Haus is located on the riverfront adjacent to Bore View Park and has been dated to 1769 both by architectural style and by dendrochronology . It is the only surviving building from the Pennsylvania Dutch era and is the oldest surviving building in the province of New Brunswick . Moncton is home to the Frye Festival , an annual bilingual literary celebration held in honour of world-renowned literary critic and favourite son Northrop Frye . This event attracts noted writers and poets from around the world and takes place in the month of April .

The Moncton Coliseum is a 6,554-seat arena which serves as a venue for major concerts and trade shows and is the home of the Moncton Wildcats of the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League . The CN Sportplex is a major recreational facility which has been built on the former CN Shops property . It includes ten ballfields , six soccer fields , an indoor rink complex with four ice surfaces ( the Superior Propane Centre ) and the Hollis Wealth Sports Dome , an indoor air supported multi-use building . The Sports Dome is large enough to allow for year-round football , soccer and golf activities . A newly constructed YMCA near the CN Sportsplex has extensive cardio and weight training facilities , as well as three indoor pools . The CEPS at Université de Moncton contains an indoor track and a 37.5 metres ( 123 ft ) swimming pool with diving towers . The new Moncton Stadium , also located at the U de M campus was built for the 2010 IAAF World Junior Track & Field Championships . It has a permanent seating for 10,000 , but is expandable to a capacity of over 20,000 for events such as professional Canadian football . The only velodrome in Atlantic Canada is in Dieppe . The metro area has a total of 12 indoor hockey rinks and three curling clubs . Other public sporting and recreational facilities are scattered throughout the metropolitan area , including a new $ 18 million aquatic centre in Dieppe opened in 2009 . A new 9,200 seat downtown arena and events centre has been approved and is expected to open in 2018 .

The Moncton Wildcats play major junior hockey in the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League ( QMJHL ) . They won the President 's Cup , the QMJHL championship in both 2006 and 2010 . The Moncton Mets played baseball in the New Brunswick Senior Baseball League and won the Canadian Senior Baseball Championship in 2006 . The Dieppe Commandos ( formerly known as the Moncton Beavers ) are a member of the Maritime Junior A Hockey League . The Universite de Moncton has a number of active CIS university sports programs including hockey , soccer , and volleyball . These teams are a part of the Canadian Interuniversity Sport program . Historically , Moncton was home to a professional American Hockey League franchise from 1978 to 1994 . The New Brunswick Hawks won the AHL Calder Cup by defeating the Binghamton Whalers in 1981-1982 . In 2011 , the Moncton Miracles began play as one of the seven charter franchises of the professional National Basketball League of Canada . In 2015 , the Moncton Fisher Cats began play in the New Brunswick Senior Baseball League . They were formed by a merger between the Moncton Mets and the Hub City Brewers of the NBSBL .

Moncton has hosted many large sporting events . The 2006 Memorial Cup was held in Moncton with the hometown Moncton Wildcats losing in the championship final to rival Quebec Remparts . Moncton hosted the Canadian Interuniversity Sports ( CIS ) Men 's University Hockey Championship in 2007 and 2008 . The World Men 's Curling Championship was held in Moncton in 2009 ; the second time this event has taken place in the city . Moncton also hosted the 2010 IAAF World Junior Championships in Athletics . This was the largest sporting event ever held in Atlantic Canada , with athletes from over 170 countries in attendance . The new 10,000 seat capacity Moncton Stadium was built for this event on the Université de Moncton campus . The construction of this new stadium led directly to Moncton being awarded a regular season neutral site CFL game between the Toronto Argonauts and the Edmonton Eskimos , which was held on 26 September 2010 . This was the first neutral site regular season game in the history of the Canadian Football League and was played before a capacity crowd of 20,750 . Additional CFL regular season games were held in 2011 and 2013 .

Magnetic Hill is on the northwestern outskirts of Moncton and is now the city 's most famous attraction . It is a gravity hill optical illusion , where the local topography gives the impression that you are going uphill when in fact you are going downhill . The " Magnetic Hill Illusion " is a popular tourism draw and both the city and province have built major tourism developments on the surrounding properties to capitalize on this . The complex includes The Magnetic Hill Zoo , a nationally accredited and award winning zoo with over 400 animals displayed in themed exhibit areas . It is the largest zoo in Atlantic Canada , has well-developed and popular educational program , and was ranked as the fourth best zoo in Canada in 2007 . Also on site is Magic Mountain , the largest water park in Atlantic Canada , with a half dozen large water slides , a lazy river , wave pool , children 's splash pool , and a 36-hole mini-golf course . An adjacent amusement park is now under construction and will be completed in 2017 . The Magnetic Hill Concert Site , a large outdoor concert facility which holds one or two large concerts every year is located nearby . The Rolling Stones performed there in 2005 in front of 85,000 fans . The Eagles played there in the summer of 2008 in front of 55,000 fans . AC / DC and Bon Jovi played at the hill in 2009 , with the crowd for the AC / DC concert exceeding 70,000 . The Magnetic Hill Concert Site has developed a reputation for holding the largest concert productions in the entire country . U2 played the final concert of their worldwide U2 360 ° Tour at Magnetic Hill on 30 July 2011 . The Casino New Brunswick , which also encompasses a hotel and 2,000 seat entertainment venue also opened at Magnetic Hill in 2010 . The performance space at the Casino New Brunswick has already hosted many top acts on the casino circuit .

The municipal government consists of a mayor and ten city councillors elected to four-year terms of office . The council is non-partisan with the mayor serving as the chairman , casting a ballot only in cases of a tie vote . There are four wards electing two councillors each with an additional two councillors selected at large by the general electorate . Day-to-day operation of the city is under the control of a City Manager . The greater Moncton area contains nine of New Brunswick 's 49 provincial electoral districts : Moncton Centre , Moncton East , Moncton South , Moncton Southwest , Moncton Northwest , Dieppe , Shediac Bay-Dieppe , Riverview and Albert . Of the nine members of the Legislative Assembly that represent greater Moncton , five belong to the Liberal party and four belong to the Progressive Conservative party . Moncton is in the federal riding of Moncton — Riverview — Dieppe . Portions of Dieppe are in the federal riding of Beauséjour , and portions of Riverview are in the riding of Fundy Royal . In the current federal parliament , all three members from the metropolitan area belong to the Liberal party . The current federal MP for Moncton — Riverview — Dieppe is Ginette Petitpas Taylor ( Liberal ) , as of the 2015 federal election .

Separate Anglophone and Francophone school boards administer greater Moncton 's 35 public primary and secondary schools . The Francophone South School Board administers ten schools in the Moncton area . The Anglophone East School Board administers 25 schools in Greater Moncton . There are four Anglophone high schools in the metro Moncton area ; Moncton High School , Harrison Trimble High School , Bernice MacNaughton High School , and Riverview High School . The area 's Francophone high schools are École Mathieu-Martin and École L 'Odyssée . The Université de Moncton is a publicly funded provincial comprehensive university and is the largest French-language university in Canada outside of Quebec . The Moncton campus enrolls over 4,000 students and offers a variety of undergraduate and post-graduate degree programs , including a School of Law as well as a number of health sciences disciplines including an MD degree program ( offered in conjunction with the Université de Sherbrooke ) . Crandall University ( formerly Atlantic Baptist University ) is a private undergraduate liberal arts university affiliated with the Convention of Atlantic Baptist Churches that enrolls about 800 students . It offers degrees in arts , science , education , business , and religious studies . Crandall is partway through a $ 24 million expansion to the campus which began in 2009 and will see three new buildings constructed , allowing enrollment to increase to 1,200 students .

The University of New Brunswick ( Moncton ) is a small satellite health sciences campus located at the Moncton Hospital that offers degrees in nursing and medical X-ray technology to over 300 students . The Dalhousie NB Medical Training Program ( in conjunction with UNBSJ ) sees about 25 medical students and residents based at the Moncton Hospital as well . Mount Allison University is a publicly funded principally undergraduate liberal arts university . Mount A is traditionally ranked by Maclean 's magazine as one of Canada 's top undergraduate universities , taking top honours in 18 out of the last 25 years . Mount Allison University is located about a half hour from downtown Moncton in nearby Sackville . Mount Allison enrolls nearly 2,500 students and offers degrees in arts , fine arts , music , commerce , and science ( including master 's degrees in biology and chemistry ) . Mount Allison also provides first year and extension university courses in Moncton and has developed a formal affiliation with the Moncton Flight College to allow for a bachelor 's degree in aviation . As of 2014 , Mount Allison has produced 53 Rhodes Scholars , the most of any comparable university in the Commonwealth .

The English-language New Brunswick Community College - Moncton is the largest campus in the NBCC system with an enrollment of over 1600 full-time students and also hundreds of part-time students . It provides training in over 30 different trades and technology disciplines . A major $ 20 million expansion / refurbishment of the campus has recently been completed which , amongst other things has allowed construction of a new academic building for the business program . The ( smaller ) French-language Collège Communautaire du Nouveau Brunswick - Dieppe provides similar training for the trades and technology sectors . The Atlantic Paramedic Academy , operated by Medavie EMS is a Canadian Medical Association accredited school providing training in Primary and Advanced Care Paramedicine . It is also home to the Advanced Emergent Care ( AEC ) program of the Department of National Defence ( Canada ) . Eastern College ( formerly known as CompuCollege ) has a campus in Moncton . Operating for over 25 years , they offer 40 different programs at seven different campuses in Atlantic Canada . Programs are offered in the areas of Business and Administration , Art and Design , Health Care , Social Sciences & Justice , Tourism & Hospitality , and Trades .

Moncton 's daily newspaper is the Times & Transcript , which has the highest circulation of any daily newspaper in New Brunswick . More than 60 percent of city households subscribe daily , and more than 90 percent of Moncton residents read the Times & Transcript at least once a week . The city 's other publications include L 'Acadie Nouvelle , a French newspaper published in Caraquet in northern New Brunswick . There are 16 broadcast radio stations in the city covering a variety of genres and interests , all on the FM dial . Ten of these stations are English and six are French . Rogers Cable has its provincial headquarters and main production facilities in Moncton and broadcasts on two community channels , Cable 9 in French and Cable 10 in English . The French-language arm of the CBC , Radio-Canada , maintains its Atlantic Canadian headquarters in Moncton . There are three other broadcast television stations in Moncton and these represent all of the major national networks .

Moncton is served by the Greater Moncton International Airport ( YQM ) . A new airport terminal with an international arrivals area was opened in 2002 by Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II . The GMIA handles about 677,000 passengers per year , making it the second busiest airport in the Maritime provinces in terms of passenger volume . The GMIA is also the 10th busiest airport in Canada in terms of aircraft movements . Regular scheduled destinations include Halifax , Montreal , Ottawa , Toronto and Hamilton . Scheduled service providers include Air Canada , Air Canada Express , Westjet and Porter Airlines . Seasonal direct air service is provided to destinations in Cuba , Mexico , the Dominican Republic , Jamaica , and Florida , with operators including Sunwing Airlines , Air Transat , and Westjet . FedEx , UPS , and Purolator all have their Atlantic Canadian air cargo bases at the facility . The GMIA is the home of the Moncton Flight College ; the largest pilot training institution in Canada , and is also the base for the regional RCMP air service , the New Brunswick Air Ambulance Service and the regional Transport Canada hangar and depot .

There is a second smaller aerodrome near Elmwood Drive . McEwen Airfield ( CCG4 ) is a private airstrip used for general aviation . Skydive Moncton operates the province 's only nationally certified sports parachute club out of this facility . The Moncton Area Control Centre is one of only seven regional air traffic control centres in Canada . This centre monitors over 430,000 flights a year , 80 % of which are either entering or leaving North American airspace . Freight rail transportation in Moncton is provided by Canadian National Railway . Although the presence of the CNR in Moncton has diminished greatly since the 1970s , the railway still maintains a large classification yard and intermodal facility in the west end of the city , and the regional headquarters for Atlantic Canada is still located here as well . Passenger rail transportation is provided by Via Rail Canada , with their train the Ocean serving the Moncton railway station three days per week to Halifax and to Montreal . The downtown Via station has been refurbished and also serves as the terminal for the Maritime Bus intercity bus service . Moncton lies on Route 2 of the Trans-Canada Highway , which leads to Nova Scotia in the east and to Fredericton and Quebec in the west . Route 15 intersects Route 2 at the eastern outskirts of Moncton , heads northeast leading to Shediac and northern New Brunswick , Route 16 connects to route 15 at Shediac and leads to Port Elgin and Prince Edward Island . Route 1 intersects Route 2 approximately 15 kilometres ( 9 mi ) west of the city and leads to Saint John and the U.S. border . Wheeler Boulevard ( Route 15 ) serves as an internal ring road , extending from the Petitcodiac River Causeway to Dieppe before exiting the city and heading for Shediac . Inside the city it is an expressway bounded at either end by traffic circles .

Aside from locally formed militia units , the military did not have a significant presence in the Moncton area until the beginning of the Second World War . In 1940 , a large military supply base ( later known as CFB Moncton ) was constructed on a railway spur line north of downtown next to the CNR shops . This base served as the main supply depot for the large wartime military establishment in the Maritimes . In addition , two Commonwealth Air Training Plan bases were also built in the Moncton area during the war : No. 8 Service Flying Training School , RCAF , and No. 31 Personnel Depot , RAF . The RCAF also operated No. 5 Supply Depot in Moncton . A naval listening station was also constructed in Coverdale ( Riverview ) in 1941 to help in coordinating radar activities in the North Atlantic . Military flight training in the Moncton area terminated at the end of World War II and the naval listening station closed in 1971 . CFB Moncton remained open to supply the maritime military establishment until just after the end of the Cold War . With the closure of CFB Moncton in the early 1990s , the military presence in Moncton has been significantly reduced . The northern portion of the former base property has been turned over to the Canada Lands Corporation and is slowly being redeveloped . The southern part of the former base remains an active DND property and is now termed the Moncton Garrison . It is affiliated with CFB Gagetown . Resident components of the garrison include the 1 Engineer Support Unit ( Regular force ) . The garrison also houses the 37 Canadian Brigade Group Headquarters ( reserve force ) and one of the 37 Brigades constituent units ; the 8th Canadian Hussars ( Princess Louise 's ) , which is an armoured reconnaissance regiment . 3 Area support unit Det Moncton , and 42 Canadian Forces Health Services Center Det Moncton provide logistical support for the base . In 2013 , the last regular forces units left the Moncton base , but the reserve units remain active and Moncton remains the 37 Canadian Brigade Unit headquarters .

The Moncton Hospital has approximately 400 active treatment beds and is affiliated with Dalhousie University Medical School . It is home to the Northumberland family medicine residency training program and is a site for third and fourth year clinical training for medical students in the Dalhousie Medicine New Brunswick Training Program . The hospital hosts UNB degree programs in nursing and medical x-ray technology and professional internships in fields such as dietetics . Specialized medical services at the hospital include neurosurgery , peripheral and neuro-interventional radiology , vascular surgery , thoracic surgery , orthopedics , trauma , burn unit , medical oncology , neonatal intensive care , and adolescent psychiatry . A $ 48 million expansion to the hospital was completed in 2009 and contains a new laboratory , ambulatory care centre , and provincial level one trauma centre . A new oncology clinic was built at the hospital and opened in late 2014 . The Moncton Hospital is managed by the Horizon Health Network ( formerly the South East Regional Health Authority ) . The Dr. Georges-L.-Dumont University Hospital Centre has about 400 beds and hosts a medical training program through the local CFMNB and distant Université de Sherbrooke Medical School . There are also degree programs in nursing , medical x-ray technology , medical laboratory technology and inhalotherapy which are administered by U de M. Specialized medical services include medical oncology , radiation oncology , orthopedics , vascular surgery , and nephrology . A cardiac cath lab is being studied for the hospital and a new PET / CT scanner has been installed . A future $ 75 million expansion for ambulatory care , expanded surgery suites , and medical training is also planned . The hospital is also the location of the Atlantic Cancer Research Institute . This hospital is managed by Vitalité Health Network .

Moncton has been the home of a number of notable people , including National Hockey League Hall of Famer and NHL scoring champion Gordie Drillon , World and Olympic champion curler Russ Howard , distinguished literary critic and theorist Northrop Frye , former Governor-General of Canada Roméo LeBlanc , and former Supreme Court Justice Ivan Cleveland Rand , developer of the Rand Formula and Canada 's representative on the UNSCOP commission . Robb Wells , the actor who plays Ricky on the Showcase hit comedy Trailer Park Boys hails from Moncton , along with Chris Lee , Jacques Daigle , Julie Doiron , an indie rock musician , and Holly Dignard the actress who plays Nicole Miller on the CTV series " Whistler " . Harry Currie , noted Canadian conductor , musician , educator , journalist and author was born in Moncton and graduated from MHS . Antonine Maillet , a francophone author , recipient of the Order of Canada and the " Prix Goncourt " , the highest honour in francophone literature , is also from Moncton . France Daigle , another acclaimed Acadian novelist and playwright , was born and resides in Moncton , and is noted for her pioneering use of chiac in Acadian literature , was the recipient of the 2012 Governor General 's Literary Prize in French Fiction , for her novel " Pour Sûr " ( translated into English as " For Sure " ) . Canadian hockey star Sidney Crosby graduated from Harrison Trimble High School in Moncton .

Be Someone Else is the second studio album by Portuguese singer-songwriter Slimmy . Saul Davies was first set to be the producer of the album , however , such collaboration wasn 't possible and Slimmy started working on the album with his longtime producers Quico Serrano and Mark J Turner . Other musicians joined Slimmy for the recording of the album : Paulo Garim in the bass and Tó-Zé in the drums , who already worked with slimmy in Beatsound Loverboy , and Gustavo Silva , in the keyboards and Daniel Santos in the guitar as guest musicians . He mentioned that all production process happened because of him and that he was the one with the " last word " on his projects , not the bands or producers that he worked with . Originally due for release on May 2010 , the album 's release was pushed back to 14 June 2010 . The album was released in three formats : the physical standard edition , the physical deluxe edition with 2 discs and the digital format featuring 10 tracks . Slimmy defined the album as " freedom , with a bit of " teasing " and " sexual " , an album full of strong songs dedicated to his fans . The album is essentially a rock album , a completely opposite of Beatsound Loverboy , which features a more electronic sound , keeping , however , the same connection between rock and electro music . In an interview with JN Slimmy declared that the album feels more organic and less electronic because in Beatsound Loverboy , there was no one else to play the songs but him . While maintaining his irreverence , Slimmy guarantees , however , that what matters is to make music that people intending to sing and lyrics that people can understand . He also said that he already received criticism for not being a singer with a proper style , but " I try to provide different sensations to people .

Slimmy 's most significant promotion marked the beginning of " A Very Slimmy Tour " , starting on 18 February 2011 at the Kastrus River Klub in Esposende and ending on 30 April 2011 at the Pitch Club in Porto . Slimmy 's " Be Someone Else Tour " began on 6 May 2011 with its opening show at the Academy Week in Mirandela . Neither of the album 's singles , " Be Someone Else " and " The Games You Play " , were particularly successful , charting anywhere . Critical response to the album was generally favorable , with critics praising Quico Serrano and Mark Turner 's Be Someone Else 's polished production , calling the album more direct and humanized than Beatsound Loverboy . " Be Someone Else " was a commercial disappointment , the album didn 't managed to chart on any official chart company to date . Two music videos were released from the album : " The Games You Play " , produced by Ana Andrade , Carla Fardilha , Clara Araújo Teixeira and Helena Oliveira , premiered on 17 November 2009 on YouTube and " Be Someone Else " , produced by Riot Films and premiered on 27 June 2010 .

Originally due for release on May 2010 , the album 's release was pushed back to 14 June 2010 . It was released in three formats : the physical standard edition , featuring 10 tracks ; the physical deluxe edition with 2 discs , the first disc featuring the standard 10 track listing plus a bonus remix of " Together 4ever " and the second disc , released in digipack format together with the other CD , featuring remixes of 8 songs from Beatsound Loverboy ; and the digital format featuring 10 tracks . Both standard and deluxe edition 's jewel case CD contained a booklet with alternative covers . In an interview with Palco Principal , on March 23 , 2010 , Slimmy revealed the title of the album . He explained : " As a first resort , when I wrote the lyrics of the song [ " Be Someone Else " ] , I just wanted to warn those who not work , but still waiting for results . If you want to be somebody , you have to give much of yourself , is not enough to " give less and expect more " . However , over the years , I realized that music was also for the kind of people that bring us down . Life is not a race . We must be ourselves , open our eyes and always look forward . "

While being interviewed by Palco Principal , Slimmy declared he was bit " unsure " about the promotion process of the album , he affirmed that he already had shows to make in France and Germany , but his real intention was to tour Portugal intensively , because he felt he had no success in his country . The first promotional concert toke place at the Cidade do Porto Shopping on 26 March 2010 , where Slimmy sang a few songs from his album , including " The Games You Play " and " Be Someone Else " . Slimmy also promoted his album in Albufeira , at the Algarve Shopping 's Fnac on November 27 , 2010 . Slimmy 's next significant promotion marked the beginning of " A Very Slimmy Tour " , where Slimmy performed songs from his two albums . It started on 18 February 2011 at the Kastrus River Klub in Esposende and ended on 30 April 2011 at the Pitch Club in Porto . The first music video to be released was " The Games You Play " , produced by Ana Andrade , Carla Fardilha , Clara Araújo Teixeira and Helena Oliveira . It premiered on 17 November 2010 on YouTube . A music video was also made for " Be Someone Else " , produced by Riot Films . It premiered on 27 June 2010 on YouTube . Slimmy 's " Be Someone Else Tour " began on 6 May 2011 with its opening show at the Academy Week in Mirandela . Future show dates will be added on 1bigo 's Facebook page . Slimmy also performed at the Queima das Fitas in Viana do Castelo on 15 May 2011 .

" Be Someone Else " was unveiled as the album 's lead single . The song was written by Fernandes and produced by Quico Serrano and Mark Turner . It was released to MySpace on 1 January 2010 . " The Games You Play " , also written by Fernandes and produced by Quico Serrano and Mark Turner , was released as the second single of the album on 6 March 2010 on the iTunes Store . " The Games You Play " premiered on the Antena 3 radio station on 20 September 2009 and was released on Slimmy 's MySpace profile on 30 September 2009 as a promotional song . Neither of the album 's singles were particularly successful , charting anywhere . Despite not being released as a single , " I Can 't Live Without You in This Town " is available for digital purchase at Amazon since June 14 , 2010 . It charted at number 152 at the Metropolis Chart , and it was featured on the eighth season of the Portuguese soap opera Morangos com Açúcar .

Since its release , the album has received favorable reviews from contemporary music critics . A Trompa gave the album a favorable review , commenting that " [ the album is ] fast and oriented to be devoured in dance floors or other places of similar excitement and socializing " it " clearly evokes a modern rock that welcomes people to it " . A Trompa also praised Quico Serrano and Mark Turner 's polished production , calling the album more direct and humanized then Beatsound Loverboy . CDGO gave the album a positive review and commented that the album is more eclectic and that " it will surely satisfy the fans and other lovers of electronic music . Slimmy emphasizes again his unmistakable style , both musical and his image , proving to be one of the most promising musicians of the new generation of national music . " Ágata Ricca from Palco Principal also gave the album a favorable review and stated that " [ the album ] marks the difference with the previous one , due to Slimmy 's mature and reflective attitude " and that the album does not " change Slimmy 's past , it just emphasize it and strengthen it " . Ágata Ricca also praised the song " I Can 't Live Without You In This Town " for its markable difference from the other tracks , calling the chorus of the song memorable . She also said that some other tracks of the album are pretty " danceable " .

Delichon is a small genus of passerine birds that belongs to the swallow family and contains three species named as house martins . These are chunky , bull-headed and short-tailed birds , blackish-blue above with a contrasting white rump , and with white or grey underparts . They have feathering on the toes and tarsi that is characteristic of this genus . The house martins are closely related to other swallows that build mud nests , particularly the Hirundo barn swallows . They breed only in Europe , Asia and the mountains of North Africa . Two species , the common and Asian house martins , migrate south in winter , while the Nepal house martin is resident in the Himalayas year-round . The house martins nest in colonies on cliffs or buildings , constructing feather- or grass-lined mud nests . The typical clutch is two or three white eggs ; both parents build the nest , incubate the eggs and feed the chicks . These martins are aerial hunters of small insects such as flies and aphids . Despite their flying skills the Delichon martins are sometimes caught by fast-flying birds of prey . They may carry fleas or internal parasites . None of the species are considered threatened , although widespread reductions in common house martin numbers have been reported from central and northern Europe . This decline is due to factors including poor weather , poisoning by agricultural pesticides , lack of mud for nest building and competition with house sparrows for nest sites .

The three Delichon species are members of the swallow family of birds , and are classed as members of the Hirundininae subfamily which comprises all swallows and martins except the very distinctive river martins . DNA studies suggest that there are three major groupings within the Hirundininae , broadly correlating with the type of nest built . The groups are the " core martins " including burrowing species like the sand martin , the " nest-adopters " , which are birds like the tree swallow that utilise natural cavities , and the " mud nest builders " . The Delichon species construct a closed mud nest and therefore belong to the latter group ; they appear to be intermediate between the Hirundo and Ptyonoprogne species that make open cup nests , and the Cecropis and Petrochelidon swallows , which have retort-like closed nests with an entrance tunnel . The genetic evidence suggests a close relationship between Hirundo and Delichon , which is further supported by the frequency of interbreeding between two widespread species , the barn swallow and the common house martin , despite being their being in different genera . The suggested taxonomic sequence of the mud-building swallows has been recommended by at least two European taxonomic committees .

The genus Delichon was created by American naturalist Thomas Horsfield and British entomologist Frederic Moore in 1854 to accommodate the Nepal house martin that was first described by Moore in the same year , and is therefore the type species for the genus . The two other house martins were moved to Delichon from the genus Chelidon in which they had been placed up to that time . The name of the new genus , " Delichon " , is an anagram of the Ancient Greek term χελιδον / chelidôn , meaning swallow . Common house martin ( Delichon urbicum ) originally described as Hirundo urbica by Linnaeus in 1758 . The common and Asian house martins have sometimes been considered to be a single species , although both breed in the western Himalayas without hybridising . There is also limited DNA evidence that suggests a significant genetic distance between these two martins .

Delichon is an Old World genus with all three species breeding only in the Northern Hemisphere . The common house martin is a widespread migrant breeder across Europe , north Africa and all northern temperate Asia to Kamchatka . Its western subspecies D. u. urbicum winters in tropical Africa , and eastern D. u. lagopodum moves to southern China and Southeast Asia . The Asian house martin breeds further south than common house martin in the mountains of central and eastern Asia ; its nominate subspecies winters in Southeast Asia , but the races breeding in the Himalayan and Taiwan may just move from the high mountains to lower altitudes . The Nepal house martin is resident in the mountains of southern Asia . The preferred habitat of the common house martin is open country with low vegetation , such as pasture , meadows and farmland , and preferably near water , although it is also found in mountains up to at least 2,200 metres ( 7,200 ft ) altitude . As its name implies , it readily nests on man-made buildings , and will breed even in city centres if the air is clean enough . The other two species favour mountainous country ( and sea cliffs in the case of Asian house martin ) ; they use buildings as nest sites less frequently than their northern relative . The wintering grounds of the two migrant species include a range of open country and hilly habitats .

Delichon martins are 13 – 15 cm ( 5 – 6 in ) long , blackish blue above with a contrasting white rump , and with white or grey underparts . They are chunky , bull-headed and short-tailed birds , and have feathering on the toes and tarsi . The common house martin is the largest bird of the three , with an average weight of 18.3 g ( 0.65 oz ) , and has the most deeply forked tail ; the Nepalese species is the smallest ( 15 g , 0.53 oz ) and has the squarest tail . Distinctive species plumage features are the black chin and black undertail coverts of the Nepal house martin , and the greyish wash to the underparts of the Asian house martin . As with other swallows and martins , the moult is slow and protracted because of the need to maintain efficient flight at all times to enable feeding . Moult normally starts on arrival at the wintering grounds , but overlaps with the breeding season for the non-migratory Nepal house martin . The Delichon martins have simple flight calls of one to three notes . In the two more widespread species these have a distinctive buzzing quality . The male 's song is a short simple ripple , perhaps less musical than that given by other swallows .

The Delichon martins were originally cliff nesters , breeding in colonies situated under an overhang on a vertical cliff . However , the house martin now largely uses human structures , as , to a lesser extent , does the Asian house martin . The typical nest is a grass or feather-lined deep closed mud bowl with a small opening at the top , but many Asian house martins leave the top of the nest open . David Winkler and Frederick Sheldon believe that evolutionary development in the mud-building swallows , and individual species follow this order of construction . A retort builder like red-rumped swallow starts with an open cup , closes it , and then builds the entrance tunnel . Winkler and Sheldon propose that the development of closed nests reduced competition between males for copulations with the females . Since mating occurs inside the nest , the difficulty of access means other males are excluded . This reduction in competition permits the dense breeding colonies typical of the Delichon martins . The urban common house martin has to compete with house sparrows , which frequently attempt to take over the nest during construction , with the house martins rebuilding elsewhere if the sparrows are successful . The entrance at the top of the completed cup is so small that the sparrows cannot take over the nest once it is finished .

As with other swallows , pairing and copulation displays are normally brief , taking just a few minutes . The male calls to a female and attempts to lead her to the nest , where he lands and continues calling while posing with lowered head , dropped wings and ruffled throat . If he is successful , the female calls and allows him to mount her , usually in the nest . Three or four white eggs are the normal clutch and all three species are frequently double-brooded . Both sexes build the nest , incubate the eggs and feed the chicks , although the female does most of the incubation , which normally lasts 14 – 16 days . The newly hatched chicks are altricial , and after a further 22 – 32 days , depending on weather , the chicks leave the nest . The fledged young stay with , and are fed by , the parents for about a week after leaving the nest . Occasionally , young birds from the first brood will assist in feeding the second brood . A Scottish study showed that mortality in common house martins occurred mostly outside the breeding season and averaged 57 % . Females that had raised two clutches in a season had a higher mortality than those that were single-brooded , but there was no such correlation for the males .

The Delichon species typically feed higher in the air , and take smaller prey than other swallows . It is believed that this reduces inter-specific food competition , particularly with the barn swallow which shares much of the breeding and wintering range of the martins . The insects eaten are mostly small flies , aphids and Hymenoptera such as winged ants . A wide range of other insects are caught , including Lepidoptera , beetles and lacewings . The Asian house martin appears to occasionally take terrestrial springtails and larvae and the common house martin also sometimes feeds on the ground . These martins are gregarious , feeding in flocks often with other aerial predators like swifts , or other hirundines such as the barn or striated swallows . In the case of at least the common house martin , the start of egg laying appears to be linked to the appearance of large numbers of flying aphids , which provide a stable and abundant food supply .

The main predators of the house martins are those birds of prey which are capable of catching these agile fliers , such as the hobby ( Falco subbuteo ) . Birds of the Delichon species are most vulnerable when collecting mud from the ground . This has therefore become a communal activity , with a group of these birds descending suddenly on a patch of mud . The generally insectivorous collared falconet has been recorded as hunting Nepal house martins . The house martins are parasitised by fleas and mites , including the " house martin flea " , Ceratophyllus hirundinis and its relatives . A Polish study of the common house martin showed that nests typically contained more than 29 species of ectoparasite , with C. hirundinis and another swallow specialist , Oeciacus hirundinis , the most abundant . The genus also hosts endoparasites such as Haemoproteus prognei ( avian malaria ) , which are transmitted by blood-sucking insects including mosquitoes . More than 40 beetle species have been recorded in common house martin nests , but most are either typical of the locality or found in the nests of other birds . The typical number of individuals , around 200 , is relatively low compared to other bird species ( 1,400 individual beetles for house sparrow , 2,000 for sand martin ) . The beetles have no effect on the nesting birds , and the reason for their comparatively low numbers is unknown , although the numbers of specific parasites found in house martin 's nests is also quite small .

The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) is the organisation responsible for assessing the conservation status of species . A species is assessed as subject to varying levels of threat if it has a small , fragmented or declining range , or if the total population is less than 10,000 mature individuals , or if numbers have dropped rapidly ( by more than 10 % in ten years or three generations ) . None of the three Delichon species meets these criteria , and three genus house martins are therefore considered of least concern . The numbers of the two Asian species are unknown , but both can be locally common or abundant , and the Asian house martin is extending its range in southern Siberia . The lowland breeding common house martin has greatly benefited from forest clearance , creating the open habitats it prefers , and from human habitation which has given it an abundance of safe man-made nest sites , although widespread declines in its numbers have been reported from central and northern Europe since 1970 . This is due to factors including poor weather , poisoning by agricultural pesticides , lack of mud for nest building and competition with house sparrows for nest sites . Despite this , the huge geographical range and large numbers of the common house martin mean that its global status is secure .

" The Firefly " is the 10th episode of the third season of the American science fiction drama television series Fringe , and the 53rd episode overall . The episode centers on a chain of events created by Walter crossing over into the parallel universe in 1985 that has had subtle but significant effects in the present . Christopher Lloyd guest-starred as retired rocker Roscoe Joyce . As the first episode in its new Friday time slot , " The Firefly " aired on January 21 , 2011 in the United States to 4.88 million viewers , outperforming the previous episode " Marionette " Thursday night viewership by 18 % . Time shifted viewership added 42 % in its ratings . It received generally positive reviews , with many praising the storyline as " elegant " and " beautiful . "

The Fringe team is brought to a nursing home , where Roscoe Joyce ( Christopher Lloyd ) , the former keyboardist of the band Violet Sedan Chair , was seen talking to his son Bobby ( Nick Ouellette ) who had died in 1985 , as well as evidence of an Observer . Walter Bishop ( John Noble ) , meeting his musical hero , requests to take Roscoe back to his lab to help Roscoe remember what his son said . Walter is able to help Roscoe remember much of his past since the loss of his son through therapy that includes helping Roscoe to recall his piano-playing skills . Roscoe shortly recalls the conversation with his son , which was actually a message from the Observer September to Walter . September ( Michael Cerveris ) soon appears at the lab and requests to speak to Walter . As they walk , September reminds Walter of the damage he did when he brought Peter from the parallel universe . September recounts the events of one such chain : in the prime universe , three months after Walter 's crossing , Peter ( Joshua Jackson ) captured a firefly which set into motion a chain of events that eventually led to the death of a pedestrian in a car accident . September mysteriously departs when Walter answers a telephone call , but not before leaving him with a message : " give him the keys and save the girl . " Later , Walter returns Roscoe to the nursing home . Roscoe thanks him and explains that the recent events reminded him of the last phone call he had with his son , where Bobby said he had dreamed of meeting Roscoe in a nursing home in the future . Roscoe is remorseful that Bobby died shortly after that call when a car struck him while crossing the street , which led to the breakup of the band . Walter realizes that Roscoe 's son was the pedestrian that was previously alluded to by September .

Unbeknownst to the Fringe team , September has engineered several events in the last few days , including stopping an armed robbery to help the asthmatic female employee ( Olivia Cheng ) recover from an asthma attack , taking her inhaler . When Walter hears of this witness , he requests Peter and Agent Olivia Dunham ( Anna Torv ) to bring her to his lab , believing her to be related to the Observer 's warning . Minutes from the lab , September rams the car in which the woman is being transported , initiating another asthma attack . September races from the scene , prompting Peter to follow him in Walter 's car , requesting Walter to " give me the keys and save the girl . " Walter realizes that September has been orchestrating the events leading up to this point and urges Peter not to go , believing that following the advice of the Observer might lead to Peter 's death . Walter eventually relents and returns to help the woman , creating a makeshift inhaler before emergency help arrives . Meanwhile , Peter and Olivia follow the Observer to a rooftop . Peter corners September , who says " It must be very difficult , being a father " , before he shoots Peter with an energy blast that knocks him off his feet . Olivia arrives in time to give chase to the Observer but September disappears from an adjacent rooftop .

While Walter and Agent Astrid Farnsworth ( Jasika Nicole ) ensure that the witness is safe at the hospital , Olivia takes Peter back to the lab . Peter , suffering from a headache , takes an aspirin and drinks out of what he believes to be an ordinary bottle of milk from the fridge . In reality , the milk contains a serum developed by Walter in order to help him recover his full mental function . However , the serum was incorrectly prepared , which causes Peter to begin convulsing . Over the phone , Walter directs Olivia to inject Peter with the correct compounds in order to save his life . Walter realizes that the serum would have killed him if he had consumed it , and that this was another step in the Observer 's plot . Later that evening , September meets with another Observer , and identifies the fact that Walter was able to let Peter go , despite believing that he may not survive , and that when the time comes , they can expect Walter to do it again . In a side plot , Olivia and Peter attempt to reorganize their relationship after Olivia receives a book ( If You Meet The Buddha On The Road , Kill Him ! by Sheldon Kopp ) from Peter that he had originally ordered for Olivia 's doppelgänger from the parallel universe .

" The Firefly " was co-written by co-showrunners J.H. Wyman and Jeff Pinkner , while being directed by Supernatural veteran Charles Beeson . On October 20 , 2010 , TV Guide announced that Back to the Future star Christopher Lloyd had been cast in an upcoming episode as " Walter 's musical hero " . Noble explained Lloyd 's role : " We all know how much Walter loves music , right ? Well this fellow was one of his icons . He adored this man . So Walter gets to be a bit of a fanboy " . Lloyd began shooting the episode in late October . Soon before the episode aired , Lloyd told reporters " I was very excited for this role . My character is going through an experience he never expected to happen to him , and he 's adjusting to that . " Lloyd also added he felt welcomed in as a part of the ensemble cast . In a conference call interview with journalists , John Noble explained that " probably the best fun that I 've had [ on Fringe ] was doing the stuff with Chris Lloyd , because it was two crazy old guys just trying desperately to communicate with each other . We had a lot of laughs . There was a common thread of trying to find the music again , because Chris ' character had forgotten how to play the piano , so we go through this journey of bringing the music back to him , and [ it 's a ] thrill to Walter . This happens all the way through this very complicated episode " .

The band name of Lloyd 's character Roscoe Joyce , " Violet Sedan Chair , " is a fictional band that Walter Bishop had mentioned the previous season , in the episode Grey Matters . J.J. Abrams had also named-dropped the fictional band two years earlier in an issue of Wired for which he had guest-edited , alluding to the band 's album , Seven Suns , recorded in the 1970s . Several months prior to the broadcast of " The Firefly " , a number of vinyl records of Seven Suns were shipped to a select number of independent record stores across the United States , which have been discovered by some people . The album does contain twelve songs in the style of psychedelic and folk . The album itself has been briefly shown in the series . As with other Fringe episodes , Fox released a science lesson plan in collaboration with Science Olympiad for grade school children , focusing on the science seen in " The Firefly " , with the intention of having " students learn about pharmacology and the interactions that occur between a living organism and chemicals that affect normal or abnormal biochemical functions . "

Walter explains that the red and blue sunglasses he uses in order to see Roscoe Joyce 's aura were sent to him by his friend , Doctor Jacoby from Washington State . This is a reference to the television series Twin Peaks , set in Washington State where Doctor Lawrence Jacoby is the local psychiatrist who also owns a pair of the same sunglasses . Reviewers also contrasted the casting of Christopher Lloyd , better known for his role of the scientist " Doc " Brown from the Back to the Future trilogy which took place in 1985 , to that of a character involved with time travel involving the year 1985 . Some journalists have speculated that the episode 's title was in reference to Joss Whedon 's Firefly series , which while critically acclaimed was cancelled mid-season after being scheduled in the Friday night death slot . However , though " The Firefly " was the first Fringe episode to be first aired in the new Friday night slot , the producer had already selected the title of the episode prior to the Fox Network rescheduling .

In November 2010 , Fox announced that Fringe was being moved to Friday nights as a part of the network 's midseason overhaul , to air after the fourth season of their reality series Kitchen Nightmares . The move meant that Fringe would be airing against Supernatural , a show with a similar science fiction genre , though this competition did not begin until Fringe 's third Friday episode " Concentrate and Ask Again " . Fox 's popular reality series American Idol took Fringe 's timeslot , as it was shifted a day later to Wednesdays and Thursdays . Executive producer J.H. Wyman stated in an interview that they were excited and believed Friday nights are " open territory that can be conquered ... [ We believe ] we can actually deliver like The X-Files did . ... I think we both agree it 's a good opportunity " . Wyman elaborated that the show 's high DVR numbers proved that though fans were watching the show , they did not want to do so on Thursdays . Co-executive producer Jeff Pinkner felt that if the show " can build a fan base on and carve out some territory on Friday night , we can be there for years " .

The episode was originally going to air on January 28 until it was moved to a week earlier , on January 21 behind the season premiere of Kitchen Nightmares . " The Firefly " was the first Fringe episode to broadcast in its Friday slot , and many journalists considered the pending viewership numbers critical for the future of the show . The episode was the most watched show of the night , earning a 1.9 / 6 share or about 4.88 million viewers in the 18 – 49 age group . This figure was slightly higher than the average viewership for Fringe in the first half of the 2010-2011 television season , and 18 % higher than the previous episode , " Marionette " . When time shifted viewership over the following three days is considered , the episode received a 42 % ratings increase with a 2.7 rating share , and within 7 days after its airing , reported a total of 6.7 million viewers with 2.8 rating , representing a 37 % increase from the live broadcast . Fringe and its lead-in show , Kitchen Nightmares , resulted in Fox 's highest rated Friday night with entertainment programs since 2008 .

" The Firefly " was well received by critics who considered the episode to be backed by a strong script . Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly considered " The Firefly " as one of the series ' " finest episodes " , calling on the show 's many qualities : The pull of family ; the knotty complexity of romance ; the way sci-fi can provide fresh metaphors for the most frequently explored ideas and emotions ; the way we encounter humor and surprise even in the midst of anguish and regret — this is the stuff of which Fringe is made . The A.V. Club 's Zack Handlen rated the episode an " A " in considering the " elegance " of the complicated Rube Goldberg-like plot , and praised the " beautiful , beautiful writing " in the reveal of the connection between Walter 's actions and Roscoe 's loss . Time 's James Poniewozik also enjoyed the elegant plot , calling the episode " an impressive outing for the series to welcome back its fans with " ; Poniewozik also appreciated John Noble 's performance as he " made Walter 's regret , and the toll it has taken , real — while also pulling off an amusing turn as an overawed , elderly rock fanboy " .

Andrew Hanson of the Los Angeles Times , though somewhat confused to the cause-and-effect of the Observer 's plot , he still found the show enjoyable , and called it " the Fringe version of the butterfly effect " , a trope often used in other shows to show the impact of small changes in the characters ' lives . IGN 's Ramsey Isler gave the episode a rating of 7.5 / 10 , stating that was " an important part of the setup for the second half of the season " with strong character development , but felt the pacing was slow and needed more action . Television Without Pity graded the episode a " B + " . The A.V. Club staff highlighted the episode in their review of the best television shows of 2011 .

Ironsword : Wizards & Warriors II is a platforming action-adventure video game for the Nintendo Entertainment System ( NES ) developed by UK-based company Zippo Games , a subsidiary of Rare Ltd. it was published by Acclaim and released in North America in December 1989 and in Europe on March 27 , 1991 . It is the sequel to Rare 's 1987 title Wizards & Warriors . In Ironsword , the player controls the knight warrior Kuros as he ventures in the land of Sindarin . He must defeat the evil wizard Malkil , who has assumed the elemental forms of Earth , Wind , Fire , and Water . Kuros must collect the parts of and assemble the legendary " IronSword " in order to defeat Malkil , who resides at the top of IceFire Mountain . Ironsword : Wizards & Warriors II was developed by Zippo Games ' founder Ste Pickford and was the first game that he developed for the NES . Steve Hughes also assisted in development , while Rare 's video game composer David Wise did the music and sound . Pickford wanted to expand on the previous Wizards & Warriors game . Having experience with developing computer games , Pickford used various animation and graphics techniques to try and show off the NES ' graphical capabilities . In addition , Acclaim hired Italian male model Fabio Lanzoni to pose as Kuros on the game 's cover .

The game was fairly well-received , selling 500,000 copies in North America and 50,000 copies in Europe . Various video game magazines praised Ironsword for its size , graphics and sound , detailed characters and bosses , and gameplay . Other reviews criticized its lack of originality as compared to other games that were released at the time . The game led Zippo Games to develop additional games for Rare on the NES such as Solar Jetman : Hunt for the Golden Warpship and Wizards & Warriors III : Kuros : Visions of Power . Ironsword won " Game Player 's NES Excellence Award " from Game Players magazine as one of the better NES titles of 1990 .

Ironsword : Wizards & Warriors II is a platforming video game where the player controls the renowned warrior Kuros as he explores the land of Sindarin to defeat the evil wizard Malkil . This time , Malkil has taken the form of the four " Elementals " , based on the Greek classical elements – Earth , Wind , Fire , and Water – to stop Kuros in his quest . The objective is to assemble the legendary " IronSword " — the only weapon that can defeat Malkil — and defeat the evil wizard who lies at the peak of IceFire Mountain . In the game , players can move Kuros left or right , or make him crouch with the control pad ; the buttons allow Kuros to jump , to use his sword or a magic spell to defeat enemies , to access the " Magic Spell Screen " , or to pause the game . Kuros has a life meter that decreases every time he sustains damage from an enemy or a dangerous projectile , or if he falls for too long a distance . Along the way , players can collect chicken and brew to replenish Kuros ' life meter . Kuros loses a life when his life meter runs out , and the game ends when he loses all his lives . However , players may continue and restart the game where they left off up to two times . The continue feature would normally be disabled after the player had completed the earth domain , but due to an in-game bug , the player actually loses the continue function immediately upon merely setting foot in the domain .

Ironsword : Wizards & Warriors II consists of four levels called " domains , " each named after the four elementals . In each domain , Kuros must find a golden artifact that belongs to the domain 's " Animal King " and return it to him . Upon doing so , the path to the second part of the domain will appear . In the second part , Kuros must find the magic spell necessary to defeat the boss – the domain 's Elemental . Without the spell , it is impossible to damage the boss . Once the elemental in each stage has been destroyed , Kuros obtains a piece of the IronSword , which is needed for the final battle on Icefire Mountain . Throughout the game , players must collect items , spells , and money to progress . Money helps buy magic spells , more powerful weapons , shields , helmets , keys to open locked treasure chests , and additional food . Treasure chests — located throughout the game — can contain one of the following items : Additional money , magic spells , or weapon and armor upgrades . In each domain , players can visit inns where they can buy food , keys , or items ; they may also participate in a " Bonus chance " game where they may gamble their money to see which cup a bouncing skull will fall into .

In the game , magic spells help against enemies and Elemental bosses ; some are bought , while others must be found . Magic spells include " The Familiar Spell , " which turns enemies into money and helps retrieve golden objects , the " Dragon Tooth Spell , " which turns enemies into food , the " Asp Tongue Spell , " which slows down enemies , the " Silver Fleece Spell , " which makes Kuros temporarily invincible , and the " Water Spout Spell , " which creates an upward column of water that allows Kuros to reach high places . Each spell has a limited number of uses before it vanished from the player 's inventory . Other magic spells are necessary to defeat the Elemental bosses . These spells are found in each of the four domains , and include " Windbane , " " Blightwater , " " Firesmite " and " Earthscorch . " These spells can be used only in the corresponding levels in which they are obtained , and each consumes magic upon use. players can obtain additional magic by collecting small , floating , gold bubbles that appear randomly or are triggered by the player 's proximity to secret locations .

Players may also increase their score by defeating enemies or collecting items . Hidden along the way are the " Relics of Sindarin , " which are worth many points when collected . At the end of the game , players with a high enough of a score can place their names in the " IronSword Hall of Fame . " However , the list resets when the console is turned off . The game also includes a password feature in which players can obtain a password from the " Magic Spell Screen " to use to continue the game at a later time , even after the console has been turned off .

Ironsword : Wizards & Warriors II was developed by UK-based computer game company Zippo Games , headed by Ste and John Pickford ; this was the first game Zippo developed for fellow UK-based video game company Rare . At the time , Zippo Games had just completed a previous game titled Cosmic Pirate - a game that was published by Palace Software and released for the Commodore 64 , Atari ST , and Amiga in 1988 . New to the technical capabilities of the Nintendo Entertainment System , the Pickford brothers visited Rare and were pleased with their NES library , though they thought they were backtracking by deciding to develop games for the console . According to Ste Pickford : " The NES seemed primitive by comparison , sub-Commodore 64 . But the games were ten times better than everything being released for home computers , which we appreciated , and we wanted to try to make games as good as that . " Rare decided to hire Zippo Games to develop this Wizards & Warriors sequel ; Pickford remarked : " Rare showed us Wizards & Warriors and asked us to develop the sequel , and pretty much left us to it . " Rare felt that Zippo Games was trustworthy enough to develop the sequel without much help from them .

Development started in early 1989 , when the Pickford brothers were still learning about the NES and what it could do . At the same time , as being new to developing console video games , they were also learning about the market aspects and Nintendo 's policies and restrictions on games . Feeling that the graphics in most of the games in the NES library were poor , they placed emphasis on the graphics and animation . Pickford was particularly pleased with the animation of the enemy eagles and their movement . Rare assisted with the sound , and all of the game 's background music was composed by video game composer David Wise , who Pickford said " did a fantastic job on IronSword " . As far as gameplay was concerned , they tried to expand upon its predecessor , introducing more adventure-based gameplay and additional RPG elements such as magic , inns , and money .

Ste Pickford developed the gameplay map for Ironsword . According to him , he basically copied the map that was used in a conversion port of Ghosts ' n Goblins that he developed a couple of years earlier . Moreover , the Pickford brothers were trying to resemble Ghosts ' n Goblins and similar games by Capcom as part of their attempt to earn the rights to develop the game from Rare . For the map screen , Ste Pickford used specific character data in the ROM itself , used the font from elsewhere in the data that was inserted separately , and overlaid the Elementals ' floating heads over the top of the graphic . According to Pickford : " The job of graphic was always about 30 % drawing , and about 70 % fiddly technical stuff ( which was why so many terrible artists – people who couldn 't draw at all – made decent video game artists back then , if they could manage the technical side of things well enough ) . " In developing the game 's graphics , Ste Pickford translated black and white sketches into the character maps in the game . For the bosses , the plan was to use the entire screen while involving as few moving sprites as possible " to fool the player into thinking the whole thing was alive " . The same was done with the " Dragon King " , which was not one of the game 's bosses ; the dragon 's head and neck were composed of sprites , while the rest of the body was considered part of the background . The dragon 's neck stretched out vertically due to NES hardware sprite limitations horizontally .

The animation of the eagle ( the " Eagle King " ) that transports Kuros to the Wind Elemental was one of Ste Pickford 's first graphics which he drew for the NES . It was done in Deluxe Paint for the Amiga with sketching done by mouse - without assistance from graphics tablets or other scanners . He took eagle drawings from a book on animals in motion by Eadweard Muybridge . Pickford wanted to show off the possible graphical capabilities of the NES ; he said , " I wanted to do something ' flashy ' early in the game , trying to show off my amazing graphic art skills on the rather primitive NES . We were working on Amiga and ST games at the same time , so were always trying to push the NES with bigger and better graphics , right from the start of our work on the machine . " The eagle consisted of only three colors and between 11 and 17 sprites per frame of animation . There was a smaller version of the same eagle , which was used as a regular enemy in that level . Development of the game 's title screen was inspired by loading screens that were used in most computer games at the time ; the objective was to create a nice-looking graphic while waiting for the game to load , even though the NES , more rooted in arcade traditions , did not require that . Pickford spent most of his character space on the title screen image ; he was limited in the number of available colors due to the more limited graphic capabilities of the NES ( as opposed to most home computers ) , as it was more designed for scrolling and animation and not for stationary graphics . The sword in the title screen used character sprites and used a different palette from the picture of Kuros himself ; the sword had to be vertical as the NES hardware did not allow for too many sprites horizontally . Pickford planned to use and completed an Ironsword logo of his own when Acclaim made him use their planned logo , which he said " was a bit more bland and blocky , with detail that didn 't work very well at such a low pixel resolution " .

Ironsword : Wizards & Warriors II was first unveiled in North America as part of the 1989 Winter Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas , Nevada and was displayed with other games to be released later that year by Acclaim . It was mentioned as a future game in the May 1989 premiere issue of video gaming magazine Electronic Gaming Monthly . It was also covered in GamePro 's premiere issue in May 1989 . Finally , it was previewed by Nintendo Power in its July – August 1989 issue . For the game 's cover , Acclaim hired Italian male model Fabio Lanzoni to pose as Kuros ; Fabio was presented on the cover bare-chested and without armor . When Zippo Games saw the image of the cover a week prior to its release , they were perplexed . According to Ste Pickford , " Our jaws hit the floor when we first saw this image ( which was , being merely the developers , probably about a week before the game 's release ) . Why on earth did they choose a photograph of a bare-chested barbarian to promote a game starring a knight in shining armour ? " . Pickford added that " We used it as an example of the lack of imagination of Americans " , while suggesting that having an actual suit or armor would be too costly to use for a photo shoot . Ironsword : Wizards & Warriors II was released by Acclaim for the NES in North America in December 1989 and in Europe and Australia in 1991 . It managed to sell about 500,000 copies in North America and about 50,000 copies in Europe . Following the game 's release , Zippo Games would proceed to develop its next game for Rare , Solar Jetman : Hunt for the Golden Warpship ; they would eventually also release the third installment in the Wizards & Warriors series , Wizards & Warriors III : Kuros : Visions of Power .

The television advertisement consisted of a boy who is shown playing the first Wizards & Warriors game when a Conan the Barbarian-lookalike enters his room after having defeated a monster and hands him a copy of Ironsword . After describing the brief plot and shortly showing clips of the game , the Conan-lookalike leaves his room while exclaiming , " The fate of the world is in your hands ! Back vile beast ! " . At the end of the commercial , after briefly playing Ironsword , the boy opens the door in his room , only to find his dog , who now has smoke coming from his behind .

Ironsword : Wizards & Warriors II was initially reviewed and received positive ratings in the June 1989 issue of Electronic Gaming Monthly . Steve Harris said that the game was very large and expansive , noting that it " is so big , and has so much to offer , most of the competition pales by comparison " . Ed Semrad called the game " a worthy sequel that fortunately is better than the original " , similarly noting the game 's size as well as difficulty . Donn Nauert appreciated the game 's good graphics which complement the adventure theme , but he noted that some of the precise movements that are required in various areas may cause some frustration in gameplay . Jim Allee praised all the aspects of the game , saying " if you liked Wizards & Warriors , you 'll love Ironsword " . All four reviewers lauded the game 's involving gameplay and graphics . The game would also be featured in the magazine 's September 1989 issue , in which it was named the magazine 's " Game of the Month " ; it also featured the game 's box art , with Fabio , on the cover . The reviewers , the U.S. National Video Game Team , noted that the game was superior to its predecessor as well as other games released at the time , noting that it was particularly better than Castlevania II : Simon 's Quest . They praised its well-detailed and thought-out graphics , the inclusion of well-drawn out large bosses and supporting characters , the sound which " has an eerie tone that sets the mood for the whole game " , and additional features which expanded upon the game 's predecessor . They concluded that Ironsword was " one of the most welcome Nintendo Entertainment System games in a long time " . The game was also one of the featured games in the November – December 1989 issue of Nintendo Power , where it received six pages of coverage and featured a poster of the game . Game Players magazine awarded Ironsword the " Game Player 's NES Excellence Award " as one of the best games for the console in 1990 .

The game was also featured in UK-based magazine Mean Machines in May 1991 . Matt Regan said that he was not impressed with the game , saying that similar platforming games such as DuckTales and Gremlins 2 : The New Batch were superior to Ironsword and had a more original approach in gameplay . He also criticized the fact that players cannot hit enemies while in mid-air . However , he noted the game 's good gameplay . Julian Rignall also said that the game was fun , but it was not spectacular . However , just as Regan noted , Rignall said that the game did not offer anything special like with better titles such as Mega Man 2 or Super Mario Bros. 2 . However , he noted the game 's good graphics and challenge , though both noted that the backgrounds " are slightly bland " . Both reviewers said the game was well-presented with good introductions and a password mode , easy controls , fair challenge , and " fairly good tunes and effects which fit the action well " . Overall , they said that Ironsword was " a fun but ultimately limited game that will appeal to platform fans " .

Ironsword : Wizards & Warriors II was listed at # 64 in IGN 's list of " Top 100 NES Games " . Reviewer Sam Claiborn said that the game was more expansive than its predecessor and that it featured many of the good graphics , gameplay , and usage of Middle English . He also noted that " Fabio 's bare-breasted likeness smoldering on IronSword 's cover art that made this game a smash hit with kids and moms alike " . Website GamesRadar praised the game 's music , especially the title theme ; Brett Elston said it set a serious tone for the game , saying " its heavy , droning beats mix with a fantasy-minded melody that make it sound like a funeral dirge in the Shire " . The game 's cover , which features Fabio , has received significant coverage from many gaming websites . IGN listed Ironsword as having one of the most notable covers in video game history , listing its cover as the 2nd best of all time behind Ninja Golf . Conversely , 1UP.com listed Ironsword as having one of the worst covers of all time , comparing it to the cover for Mega Man . GameSpy listed it as the 4th worst video game cover in history , saying that " thanks to the presence of Fabio on the cover , gamers got confused and thought they had accidentally picked up one of their mom 's romance novels " . In a retrospective of the NES for the console 's 25th anniversary , Nintendo Power wrote that " the game 's quality will be forever overshadowed by Acclaim 's choice of Fabio as the cover model " .

Unas / ˈjuːnəs / or Wenis , also spelled Unis ( hellenized form Oenas / ˈiːnəs / or Onnos ) , was an Ancient Egyptian pharaoh , the ninth and last ruler of the Fifth Dynasty during the Old Kingdom period . Unas reigned for 15 to 30 years in the mid-24th century BC succeeding Djedkare Isesi , who might have been his father . Little is known of Unas ' activities during his reign , which was a time of economic decline . Egypt maintained trade relations with the Levantine coast and Nubia , and military action may have taken place in southern Canaan . The growth and decentralization of the administration in conjunction with the lessening of the king 's power continued under Unas , ultimately contributing to the collapse of the Old Kingdom some 200 years later . Unas built a pyramid in Saqqara , the smallest of the royal pyramids completed during the Old Kingdom . The accompanying mortuary complex with its high and valley temples linked by a 750 m ( 2,460 ft ) long causeway was lavishly decorated with painted reliefs , whose quality and variety surpass the usual royal iconography . Furthermore , Unas was the first pharaoh to have the Pyramid Texts carved and painted on the walls of the chambers of his pyramid , a major innovation that was followed by his successors until the First Intermediate Period ( c . 2160 – c . 2050 BC ) . These texts identify the king with Ra and with Osiris , whose cult was on the rise in Unas ' time , and were meant to help the king reach the afterlife .

Unas had several daughters and possibly one or two sons who are believed to have predeceased him . Manetho , an Egyptian priest of the Ptolemaic period and author of the first history of Egypt , claims that with Unas ' death the Fifth Dynasty came to an end . Unas was succeeded by Teti , the first pharaoh of the Sixth Dynasty , possibly after a short crisis . However the archaeological evidence suggests that the Egyptians at the time made no conscious break with the preceding dynasty and the distinction between the Fifth and Sixth dynasties might be illusory . The funerary cult of Unas established at his death continued until the end of the Old Kingdom and may have survived during the chaotic First Intermediate Period . The cult was still in existence or revived during the later Middle Kingdom ( c . 2050 – c . 1650 BC ) . This did not prevent Amenemhat I and Senusret I ( c . 1990 – c . 1930 BC ) from partially dismantling the mortuary complex of Unas for its materials . In parallel to the official cult , Unas may have received popular veneration as a local god of the Saqqara necropolis until as late as the Late Period ( 664 – 332 BC ) , nearly 2000 years after his death .

The primary contemporaneous sources attesting to Unas ' activities are the many reliefs from his pyramid complex . Excluding these , surprisingly few documents dating to Unas ' reign have survived to this day , considering the 30-year length that later records give for his reign . Excavations at Abusir , the royal necropolis of the Fifth Dynasty , have produced only four dated inscriptions safely attributable to Unas . They explicitly mention his third , fourth , sixth and eighth years on the throne . Unas also left a rock inscription on the island of Elephantine , next to the First Cataract of the Nile in Nubia . In addition , several alabaster vases bearing Unas ' cartouche are known . A complete vessel and additional fragments originating from Byblos on the Levantine coast are now in the National Museum of Beirut . A vase of unknown provenance is located in the National Archaeological Museum of Florence and reads " Horus Wadjtawy , living eternally , king of Upper and Lower Egypt , son of Ra , Unas , living eternally " . Another vessel , of unknown origins , is on display at the Louvre Museum . It is a 17 cm ( 6.7 in ) tall 13.2 cm ( 5.2 in ) large globular alabaster vase finely decorated with a falcon with outstretched wings and two uraei , or rearing cobras , holding ankh signs surrounding Unas ' cartouche . An ointment jar bearing Unas ' cartouche and Horus name is in the Brooklyn Museum . Finally , a fragment of a calcite vase rim bearing two cartouches of Unas is on display in the Petrie Museum .

Unas assumed the throne at the death of his predecessor Djedkare Isesi . Djedkare is thought to have been Unas ' father , in spite of the complete lack of evidence bearing on the question . The succession from Djedkare Isesi to Unas seems to have been smooth . Unas had at least two queens , Nebet and Khenut , who were buried in a large double mastaba adjacent to their husband 's pyramid . Unas and Nebet possibly had a son , the " king 's son " , " royal chamberlain " , " priest of Maat " and " overseer of Upper Egypt " Unas-Ankh , who died about 10 years into Unas ' reign . The filiation of Unas-Ankh is indirectly hinted at by his name and titles and by the presence of his tomb near those of Nebet and Unas but is not universally accepted . Two other sons have been proposed , Nebkauhor and Shepsespuptah , but these filiations are conjectural and contested . Unas likely died without a male heir . Unas had at least five daughters named Hemetre Hemi , Khentkaues , Neferut , Nefertkaues Iku , and Sesheshet Idut . The status of another possible daughter , Iput , is uncertain .

The duration of Unas ' reign is uncertain . As indicated above , historical sources credit him with 30 and 33 years on the throne , figures that have been adopted by many Egyptologists , including Flinders Petrie , William C. Hayes , Darrell Baker , Peter Munro , and Jaromir Malek . In favor of such a long reign are scenes of a Sed festival found in Unas ' mortuary temple . This festival was normally celebrated only after 30 years of reign and was meant to rejuvenate the pharaoh 's strength and power . Mere depictions of the festival do not necessarily imply a long reign however , for example a relief showing pharaoh Sahure in the tunic of the Sed festival has been found in his mortuary temple , although both historical sources and archeological evidence agree that he ruled Egypt for less than 14 full years . Other Egyptologists suspect a reign of less than 30 years for Unas owing to the scarcity of artefacts datable to his reign as well as the lack of documents dated to beyond his eighth year on the throne . Hence , Jürgen von Beckerath believes that Unas ruled Egypt for 20 years while Rolf Krauss , David Warburton and Erik Hornung shortened this number to 15 years in their 2012 study of Egyptian chronology . Krauss and Miroslav Verner further question the credibility of the Turin canon concerning the Fourth and Fifth Dynasties , so that the 30 years figure credited to Unas by the canon might not be reliable .

Excavations of the tomb of Nikau-Isesi under the direction of Naguib Kanawati at Saqqara have yielded evidence in support of a shorter reign . Nikau-Isesi was an official who started his career during the reign of Djedkare Isesi , lived through that of Unas and died as overseer of Upper-Egypt under Unas ' successor Teti . Nikau-Isesi is known to have died on the year of the eleventh cattle count during Teti 's reign , an event consisting of counting the livestock throughout the country to evaluate the amount of taxes to be levied . It is traditionally believed that such counts occurred every two years during the Old Kingdom and every year during the later Middle Kingdom ( c.2055 – c.1650 BC ) . Thus Nikau-Isesi would have lived for 22 years after Teti took the throne and together with the 30 years of reign credited to Unas , would have died past 70 years old . However , forensic examination of his mummy yielded an age at death of no more than 45 years old . This suggests that the cattle count occurred more than once every two years during Unas and Teti 's time , possibly irregularly . If so , Unas ' 30 years figure on the Turin canon , understood to mean 15 cattle counts , could translate into as little as 15 years , which together with just 11 years during Teti 's reign would account for Nikau-Isesi 's death at around 40 – 45 years of age .

Owing to the scarcity of evidence dating to Unas ' reign , we know very little about his activities . Existing trade relations with foreign countries and cities , in particular Byblos , seem to have continued during Unas ' time on the throne . Reliefs from the causeway of his pyramid complex show two large seagoing ships coming back from an expedition to the Levantine coast with Syro-Canaanite men , who were either the boat crews or slaves . Another relief depicts a military campaign , Egyptians armed with bows and daggers attacking Canaanite nomads called the Shasu . Similar reliefs have been found in preceding pyramid complexes , such as that of Sahure , and they may thus be standard themes rather than depictions of actual events . Other sources tend to confirm the accuracy of these depictions however , for example the autobiography of Weni relates many punitive raids against Canaanite nomads in the early Sixth Dynasty . To the South of Egypt , inscriptions of Unas on Elephantine record a visit of the king to Lower Nubia , possibly to receive tribute from local chieftains or because of growing unrest in the region . In addition , a relief from the causeway of Unas leading to his pyramid shows a giraffe , suggesting trade relations with Nubia .

Unas ' reign was a time of economic decline although , as the French Egyptologist Nicolas Grimal writes , it was " by no means a time of decadence " . Indeed , the Egyptian state was still capable of mounting important expeditions to provide building stones for the king 's pyramid complex . These expeditions are depicted on unique reliefs found in Unas ' causeway and are also referred to in the autobiographical stela of an administration official . This official reports the transport of 10.40 m ( 34.1 ft ) tall palmiform columns of red granite from Elephantine to Saqqara in only four days , a feat for which he was praised by the king . In addition to the important construction works undertaken in Saqqara for the construction of his pyramid complex , building activities also took place on Elephantine . Until 1996 , the domestic situation during Unas ' reign was thought to have been disastrous , based on reliefs from the causeway of his pyramid complex showing emaciated people and thus suggesting times of famine . This changed when excavations at Abusir in 1996 yielded similar reliefs in the mortuary complex of Sahure , who reigned at a prosperous time in the early Fifth Dynasty . In addition , research showed that the starving people are likely to be desert dwellers , nomads distinguished by their specific hair-style , rather than Egyptians . Thus , these reliefs are now understood to be standard representations of the generosity of the king towards the destitute and of the hardships of life in the desert regions bordering Egypt rather than referring to actual events .

In his history of Egypt Manetho states that with the death of Unas the Fifth Dynasty came to an end . This may be because Unas died without a male heir , his probable son Unas-Ankh having predeceased him . This might have caused a succession crisis hinted at by the personal name chosen by Teti upon his accession to the throne : " Seheteptawy " meaning " He who reconciles / pacifies the two lands " . Teti 's claim to the throne could have relied on his marriage to Iput , who may have been a daughter of Unas . This possibility is heavily debated , as the interpretation of Iput 's titles that would indicate that she was the daughter of a king is uncertain . Furthermore , the idea that Teti could legitimate his claim by marrying into the royal family is rejected by many Egyptologists , including Munro , Dobrev , Baud , Mertz , Pirenne , and Robin , who do not think that the right to the pharaonic throne passed through the female line . In addition to Manetho 's statement , the Turin king list presents a special break point between Unas and his successor Teti . Although the king list is not organized in dynasties – which were invented by Manetho – the Egyptologist Jaromir Malek explains that " the criterion for such divisions in the Turin Canon invariably was the change of location of the capital and royal residence . " Malek thus suggests that the capital of Egypt , then known as Inbu-Hedj , was indeed supplanted at the time by settlements located to the South , East of South Saqqara , where Unas ' palace may have been located . In the second millennium BC these cities finally merged and gave rise to Memphis .

Whatever the basis for Manetho 's choice to end the Fifth Dynasty with Unas , Egyptians living at the time probably perceived no particular change from one dynasty to the next . The administration of the state shows no evidence of disturbances , with many officials continuing their careers from Unas ' onto Teti 's reign . These include the viziers Mehu , Kagemni and Nikau-Isesi and the overseer of the province of Edfu Isi . Given that the Egyptians of the Old Kingdom might not have conceived of dynasties , the distinction between the Fifth and Sixth Dynasties might be illusory .

The reigns of Djedkare Isesi and of Unas were a time of changes in Ancient Egyptian religion and in the ideology of kingship , changes that are first demonstrable under Unas . A statistical analysis of clay seal fragments bearing Horus names of pharaohs of the Fifth Dynasty points to a marked decline of the cult of the king during Unas ' time on the throne . This continued under Unas ' successor Teti , for whom we know only two seals bearing his Horus name . This trend reflects the lessening of the king 's power in conjunction with the growth of the administration and priesthood . Meanwhile , the cult of Osiris was becoming more important with this god replacing the king as the guarantor of life after death for the pharaoh 's subjects . The German Egyptologist Hartwig Altenmüller writes that for an Egyptian of the time " the [ ... ] afterlife no longer depends on the relationship between the individual mortal and the king , [ ... ] instead it is linked to his ethical position in direct relation to Osiris " . In contrast , the cult of the sun god Ra was in apparent decline , even though Ra was still the most important deity of the Egyptian pantheon . Thus , Djedkare Isesi and Unas did not build a sun temple in contrast with most of their Fifth Dynasty predecessors . In addition , the names of Menkauhor Kaiu and Unas do not incorporate any reference to Ra , in rupture with a tradition which held since the reign of Userkaf , about a century earlier . The Pyramid Texts found in Unas ' pyramid demonstrate the importance of Osiris and Ra in ancient Egyptian religion at the time . Both gods were believed to play the key roles in accessing the afterlife , with Ra as the source of life and Osiris as the force through which the next life would be attained .

Unas had a pyramid built for himself in North Saqqara , between the pyramid of Sekhemkhet and the southwestern corner of the pyramid complex of Djoser , in symmetry with the pyramid of Userkaf located at the northeastern corner . In the process , workers leveled and covered older tombs located in the area , most notably the tomb of the Second Dynasty pharaoh Hotepsekhemwy ( c . 2890 BC ) . The original Egyptian name of the pyramid was " Nefer Isut Unas " , meaning " Beautiful are the places of Unas " . The pyramid of Unas is the smallest of the pyramids completed during the Old Kingdom , having a square base of 57.7 m × 57.7 m ( 189 ft × 189 ft ) for a height of 43 m ( 141 ft ) .

The pyramid of Unas is part of a larger mortuary complex built around it . It was approached via an ancient lake on the shores of which Unas ' valley temple was located . This temple received the provisions for the cult of the king and the offerings to be made were prepared there . At the back of the valley temple was the beginning of a 750 m ( 2,460 ft ) -long causeway , equaled only by that of Khufu , and leading to an upper temple adjacent to the pyramid . A thin slit in the roof of the causeway allowed the light to illuminate its walls covered for their entire length in painted reliefs . These depicted the Egyptian seasons , processions of people from the nomes of Egypt , craftsmen at work , offerings bearers , battle scenes and the transport of granite columns for the construction of the pyramid complex . At the end of the causeway was a large hall leading to a pillared open court surrounded by magazine chambers . The court led into the mortuary temple proper which housed statues of the king and where the offerings to the deceased took place . This was immediately adjacent to the eastern side of the pyramid , which was surrounded by an enclosure wall defining the sacred space . At the southeast corner of the enclosure was a small satellite pyramid for the Ka of the king . The internal chambers of the pyramid were entered in 1881 by Gaston Maspero , who thus discovered the pyramid texts . The burial chamber housed nothing but a black basalt sarcophagus sunk into the floor and a canopic chest . The sarcophagus proved to contain scattered bones , which may belong to Unas .

The main innovation of the pyramid of Unas is the first appearance of the Pyramid Texts , one of the oldest religious texts in Egypt to have survived to this day . In doing so , Unas initiated a tradition that would be followed in the pyramid of the kings and queens of the Sixth to Eighth Dynasties , until the end of the Old Kingdom circa 200 years later . In total 283 magical spells , also known as utterances , were carved and the signs painted blue on the walls of the corridor , antechamber , and burial chamber of Unas ' pyramid . They constitute the most complete rendition of the Pyramid Texts existing today . These spells were intended to help the king in overcoming hostile forces and powers in the Underworld and thus join with the sun god Ra , his divine father in the afterlife . By writing the texts on the walls of the pyramid internal chambers , the architects of Unas ' pyramid ensured that the king would benefit from their potency even if the funerary cult was to cease . Hence , the Pyramid Texts of the pyramid of Unas incorporate instructions for ritual actions and words to be spoken , suggesting that they were precisely those performed and recited during the cult of the king in his mortuary temple .

The good preservation of the texts in Unas ' pyramid shows that they were arranged so as to be read by the Ba of Unas , as it arose from the sarcophagus thanks to resurrection utterances and surrounded by protective spells and ritual offerings . The Ba would then leave the burial chamber , which incorporates texts identifying the king with Osiris in the Duat , and would move to the antechamber symbolizing the Akhet . Included in the spells written on the walls of the antechamber of Unas are two utterances known as the Cannibal Hymn , which portrays the pharaoh as flying to heaven through a stormy sky and eating both gods and men . In doing so the king would receive the life force of the gods . At this point the Ba of Unas would face east , the direction of the sunrise , and beyond the pyramid masonry , the false door of the mortuary temple where funerary rituals were performed . Finally , turning left the Ba would join Ra in the sky by passing through the pyramid corridor .

Unas ' most immediate legacy is his funerary cult , which continued at least until the end of the Old Kingdom . This cult is attested by the tombs at Saqqara of seven priests responsible for the religious duties to be performed in the funerary complex . Three of these tombs date to the early Sixth Dynasty in the time following the death of Pepi I. Three more tombs date to the reign of Pepi II and the last one dates to the very end of the Old Kingdom ( c . 2180 BC ) . The priests of the cult of Unas adopted basilophorous names , incorporating that of the king , possibly upon taking office . Unas ' funerary cult appears to have survived during the chaotic First Intermediate Period until the Middle Kingdom . By the time of the 12th Dynasty ( c . 1990 – c . 1800 BC ) , the lector-priest Unasemsaf and his family were involved in the cult of Unas . In spite of this , Unas ' funerary complex was partially dismantled and its materials reemployed for the construction of Amenemhat I and Senusret I own pyramid complexes . In addition to his official cult , Unas was deified and became a local god of the Saqqara necropolis . Grimal attributes this directly to the grandeur of his funerary complex . Malek doubts the existence of a popular cult of Unas during the Old Kingdom but acknowledges it from the Middle Kingdom onwards . He attributes this Middle Kingdom revival to the geographic position of Unas ' complex making it a natural gateway to the Saqqara necropolis . The popular cult of the deified Unas continued for nearly 2000 years as shown by the numerous scarabs bearing Unas ' name found in Saqqara and dated from the New Kingdom ( c.1550 – c.1077 BC ) until the Late Period ( 664 – 332 BC ) . The epicenter of this cult was not the pyramid of Unas nor the associated mortuary temple but rather the statues of the king in the valley temple . This activity could explain why the pyramid complex of Unas was the object of restoration works under the impulse of Prince Khaemweset , a son of Ramesses II ( 1279 – 1213 BC ) .

Bulldog Drummond is a British fictional character , created by H. C. McNeile and published under his pen name " Sapper " . After an unsuccessful one-off appearance as a policeman in The Strand Magazine , the character was reworked by McNeile into a gentleman adventurer for his 1920 novel Bulldog Drummond . McNeile went on to write ten Drummond novels , four short stories , four stage plays and a screenplay before his death in 1937 . The stories were continued by his friend Gerard Fairlie between 1938 and 1954 ; further books were published in the 1960s and one in 1983 . Drummond is a First World War veteran , brutalised by his experiences in the trenches and bored with his post-war lifestyle . He publishes an advertisement looking for adventure , and soon finds himself embroiled in a series of exploits , many of which involve Carl Peterson — who becomes his nemesis — and Peterson 's mistress , the femme fatale Irma . After his first adventure Drummond marries his client , Phyllis Benton ; in later episodes she becomes involved in Drummond 's exploits , often as the victim of kidnapping by Drummond 's enemies .

The Bulldog Drummond stories of H. C. McNeile follow Captain Hugh " Bulldog " Drummond , DSO , MC . Drummond is a member of " the Breed " , a class of Englishman who were patriotic , loyal and " physically and morally intrepid " . Drummond is a wealthy gentleman , formerly an officer in the fictional " Royal Loamshire Regiment " , who , after the First World War , spends his new-found leisure time looking for adventure . McNeile first wrote the Drummond character as a detective for a short story in The Strand Magazine , but the portrayal was not successful and was changed for the novel Bull-dog Drummond , which was a thriller . The character was an amalgam of McNeile 's friend Gerard Fairlie , and his idea of an English gentleman , although writer J.D. Bourn disputes Fairlie 's claim to be a model for the character , noting that " he was still at school when Sapper created his ... hero " . Drummond also had roots in the literary characters Sherlock Holmes , Sexton Blake , Richard Hannay and The Scarlet Pimpernel . Drummond 's wartime experience had given him a series of abilities akin to that of a hunter : stealth — " he could move over ground without a single blade of grass rustling " — and the ability to incapacitate others — " he could kill a man with his bare hands in a second " . During his time on the Western Front he would take himself on solitary raids through no man 's land . Drummond was also proficient in jujutsu and boxing , was a crack shot , played cricket for the Free Foresters , and was an excellent poker player . In addition to Drummond 's physical attributes is his common sense , which allows him to equal and beat his opponents , even if they have a superior intellect .

Drummond is characterised as large , very strong , physically unattractive and an " apparently brainless hunk of a man " , He is six feet tall , weighs around 14 stone , and has a " cheerful type of ugliness which inspires immediate confidence in its owner " . Throughout his exploits , Drummond is joined by several of his ex-army friends and colleagues , including Algy Longworth ( who would appear in many of the films , as Drummond 's sidekick ) , MC ; Toby Sinclair , VC ; Peter Darrell and Ted Jerningham . Dummond 's ex-batman from his military days , James Denny , runs Drummond 's flat on Half-Moon Street in Mayfair , London , along with Mrs Denny . ( Denny appeared as Drummond 's sidekick in the radio series , a version of the character named Tenny appeared in the films ) Drummond is a gentleman with a private income ; he is also be construed as " a brutalized ex-officer whose thirst for excitement is also an attempt to reenact [ sic ] the war " , although the character was later described by Cecil Day-Lewis as an " unspeakable public school bully " .

The novel Bulldog Drummond begins when Drummond places an advertisement in a newspaper looking for adventure to lift the ennui of his life in post-war London . The response comes from Phyllis Benton , who is concerned for the health and well-being of her father , over whom Henry Lakington and Carl Peterson have a hold . At the end of the novel Drummond and Phyllis marry , and remain married throughout the course of the McNeile and Fairlie series of books , in contrast to the films , which generally portray Drummond as unmarried . Phyllis becomes integral to the plot of some of the novels : she is kidnapped by Irma Peterson in several stories , including The Black Gang and The Female of the Species . In the matter of his personal tastes , Drummond is a member of the fictional Junior Sports Club , a gentleman 's club on St. James 's Square , London . His preferred drink is beer although he also enjoys drinking martinis and is knowledgeable about wines . Drummond owns both a Rolls-Royce and a Bentley . Although Drummond 's actions are intended to maintain the conservative status quo of Britain , academic Hans Bertens considers that instead , he comes across as " a murderous exponent of a fierce competitive individualism " .

The first four books deal with Drummond against Carl Peterson , who becomes Drummond 's arch-enemy . Peterson is also a master of disguise and uses several aliases . Peterson is killed in the fourth book , The Final Count , although Fairlie brings him back for his final novel , The Return of the Black Gang . Drummond forms a grudging respect for Peterson , and offers an honourable duel to the death at the end of The Third Round , instead of the usual summary justice that normally befalls members of Peterson 's gang . The writer Richard Usborne sees Peterson as " quite a sympathetic character . Almost , in fact , a hero " , and wrote that " authors ... fall in love with their big villains ... Sapper came to love Carl Peterson dearly , and so did Drummond " . The title of the fifth Bulldog Dummond book , The Female of the Species refers to Rudyard Kipling 's line " the female of the species is more deadly than the male " . Irma is described by Jonathon Green as " the slinky epitome of a twenties ' vamp ' " , and by Lawrence Treadwell as dark , sexy and from an oriental background , " a true femme fatale " . After Carl Peterson 's death in The Final Count , Irma swears revenge on Drummond and kidnaps his wife — whom he had met in Bulldog Drummond — with the intent of killing him in the ensuing chase . Irma Peterson appears in six of McNeile 's books , and in a further five by Fairlie .

The Drummond series proved popular with contemporary audiences , with Bulldog Drummond selling 396,302 copies between 1920 and 1939 , exceeding the 100,000-copy benchmark for " best-sellers " . At his peak in the 1920s , McNeile was the highest-paid short story writer in the world , and it was estimated that in the last five years of his life he was earning around £ 10,000 a year ; the Daily Mirror estimated that during his writing career he had earned £ 85,000 . When reviewing Bulldog Drummond Strikes Back for The New York Times , the critic observed that " if you like a good knock-down-and-drag-out yarn with excitement and violence on nearly every page , you can 't go wrong on Bulldog Drummond " ; for the novel Bulldog Drummond at Bay , the reviewer considered that " as a piece of fictional melodrama , the book is first rate " . In the British market , The Times Literary Supplement also characterised McNeile as a mass-market thriller writer , which contrasted with its consideration of his earlier works . Throughout the Drummond stories , much of the language used by McNeile relating to ethnic minorities or Jews is considered by the academic Joan DelFattore to be " intensely conservative by modern standards " ; Green observes that while the characters of other contemporary writers , such as Agatha Christie , " exhibit the inevitable xenophobia and anti-semitism of the period , McNeile 's go far beyond the ' polite ' norms " . J.D. Bourn considers his language to be " rather distasteful " , while the academic Michael Denning observed that " Drummond is a bundle of chauvinisms , hating Jews , Germans , and most other foreigners " . The academic Ion Trewin comments that for the readers of the 1920s and ' 30s , McNeile was seen at the time as " simply an upstanding Tory who spoke for many of his countrymen " .

Drummond has also appeared in other works . In 1983 Jack Smithers wrote Combined Forces , and in 1990 Kim Newman — under the name Jack Smithers — wrote the short story " Pitbull Brittan " , which features Drummond . Drummond has also appeared in two graphic novels . In 2004 Moonstone Books released a Bulldog Drummond comic book written by William Messner-Loebs and illustrated by Brett Barkley , while in The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen : Black Dossier , written by Alan Moore and illustrated by Kevin O 'Neill , a thinly disguised , elderly version of Drummond , called " Hugo Drummond " , is one of the three Secret Service agents tasked to hunt down the heroes of the piece .

McNeile and Gerald du Maurier adapted the first novel , Bulldog Drummond for the stage , where it was shown at Wyndham 's Theatre during the 1921 – 22 season. du Maurier played the title role in a run of 428 performances . Du Maurier again played the role on 8 November 1932 in a special charity performance at the Royal Adelphi Theatre attended by King George VI . The play also ran in New York during the same season , with A. E. Matthews as Drummond . McNeile also wrote The Way Out , which was staged at the Comedy Theatre , London in January 1930 with Ian Hunter as Drummond . A third Drummond play , Bulldog Drummond Hits Out , was co-written by McNeile and Fairlie . It went on a tour of the UK in 1937 with Henry Edwards as Drummond , and opened on 21 December 1937 at the Savoy Theatre , London , where it had a short run . Fairlie later turned the storyline into the novel Bulldog Drummond on Dartmoor , published in 1938 . In 1974 the play Bullshot Crummond , by Ron House , was staged with Alan Shearman as Crummond . The play was subsequently made into the 1983 film Bullshot .

A Bulldog Drummond radio series ran on the Mutual Broadcasting System from 13 April 1941 to 12 January 1949 . An attempt was made at a revival between 3 January and 28 March 1954 . Drummond was initially portrayed by George Coulouris , before being taken over by Santos Ortega and Ned Wever after 1942 ; Cedric Hardwicke took over in 1954 . A 30-minute episode of Douglas Fairbanks , Jr . , Presents featured Drummond in " The Ludlow Affair " , first broadcast on UK television on 16 December 1956 . Drummond was played by Robert Beatty ; he was aided by Kelly , played by Michael Ripper . A 1973 BBC documentary Omnibus , " The British Hero " , featured Christopher Cazenove playing Drummond , as well as a number of other such heroic characters , including Richard Hannay , Beau Geste and James Bond .

Lydford Castle is a medieval castle in the town of Lydford , Devon , England . The first castle in Lydford , sometimes termed the Norman fort , was a small ringwork built in a corner of the Anglo-Saxon fortified burh in the years after the Norman conquest of England . It was intended to help control Devon following the widespread revolt against Norman rule in 1068 . The Norman fort was abandoned by the middle of the 12th century . The second castle in Lydford was constructed in 1195 following a wave of law and order problems across England . It included a stone tower with a surrounding bailey , and rapidly became used as a prison and court to administer the laws in the Forest of Dartmoor and the Devon stannaries . The tower was rebuilt in the middle of the 13th century , probably in the 1260s by Richard , the Earl of Cornwall . It was redesigned to resemble a motte and bailey castle , an antiquated design for the period but one that was heavily symbolic of authority and power . In 1342 the castle , still being used as a prison and courtroom , passed to the Duchy of Cornwall , who owned it until the 20th century .

The condition of the castle varied considerably over time , and was repeatedly renovated and then left to deteriorate once again . Nonetheless , other than a period during the English Civil War and the Restoration in the 17th century , Lydford Castle played an important part in stannary and forest administration until the 19th century . The castle acquired a bad reputation for injustice in the 14th century , and complaints about " Lydford Law " persisted for centuries . In the early 19th century , however , Dartmoor Prison was constructed , and Lydford ceased to be the centre for legal administration . The castle fell into ruin by the middle of the century . In 1932 , Lydford Castle passed into the hands of the state , and in the 21st century is run by English Heritage as a tourist attraction . Historian Andrew Saunders has described the castle as architecturally significant , being " the earliest example of a purpose-built gaol " in England . The earthworks of the Norman fort are owned by the National Trust and are also open to the public .

The first castle at Lydford was built in the aftermath of the Norman conquest of England in 1066 . In 1068 William the Conqueror intervened in South-West England to put down widespread Anglo-Saxon revolts against Norman rule and set about pacifying the region . William had been responsible for building urban castles across England in the former centres of Anglo-Saxon power and in Devon he constructed new urban castles at Exeter , Totnes , possibly Barnstaple and in the town of Lydford . Lydford , then called Hlidan , was a type of fortified Anglo-Saxon town called a burh . The castle , in the 21st century called the " Norman fort " , was built on the isolated south-west corner of the burh , soon after 1068 . It had a ringwork design and was only 55 metres ( 180 ft ) by 60 metres ( 200 ft ) in size , protected in part by the existing defences of the burh . A similar pattern of castle building within existing Anglo-Saxon burhs can be seen at Wallingford and Bedford castles . Most of the interior of the castle was used to store grain in large timber and earth buildings . It is uncertain whether these storage facilities were intended for supplying Norman troops or storing grain for wider economic purposes .

In the late 12th century Richard I 's government attempted to promote the growth of Lydford , including revitalising trade in the town . Then , in 1195 , there were widespread problems with law and order across England , including the South-West , and on the basis of this Richard 's government decided to build a fortification for holding royal prisoners in Lydford , further along the west side of the town from the old castle , in a prestigious location next to the town 's church . This fortification is referred to in contemporary documents variously as a firme domus and castelli de Lideford , a " strong house " and " Lydford Castle " respectively . It is unclear why the decision was taken to build the new castle in a different location within the town . Lydford 's case is not unique , as a similar shift occurred at Canterbury and Gloucester ; generally , such changes in castle location are associated with the destruction of the older defence or changes in political leadership . Archaeologist Andrew Saunders suggests that the new site was chosen because the earlier castle at Lydford was not owned by the Crown in 1195 and was , in any case , in disrepair . £ 74 was spent on the construction of the castle , paid for by Crown revenues from both Devon and Cornwall .

The castle took the form of a stone tower with a surrounding bailey . The bailey was rectangular and in the 21st century measures 180 feet ( 55 m ) by 130 feet ( 40 m ) . The bailey was protected by ramparts and deep ditches on the south-west and north-east sides , with the north-west side protected by the ramparts and valley of the original burh fortifications . The south-east side of the bailey probably formed a small courtyard in front of the tower , in a space now occupied by part of the 13th century earthworks , and was probably the entrance to the original castle . The tower was a square , free-standing building , 52 feet ( 16 m ) by 52 feet ( 16 m ) and at least two storeys tall ; in the 12th century the tower sat on flat ground with no mound around it . The walls were roughly built from slate and granite , up to 11-foot ( 3.4 m ) thick , and pierced by arrow slits . The tower had a spine wall along the middle of the building , dividing each floor into two rooms . The entrance was probably on the first floor of the building . An internal water supply was installed , of which a decorated spout still survives .

Lydford Castle does not seem to be primarily designed to have a military function , although in 1199 when King John succeeded to the throne he had the castle garrisoned and expensively equipped to prevent any potential unrest breaking out in the region . The castle lacked the usual military features of the time , such as external gatehouses , and its design seems to have been intended to evoke the authority of a traditional defensive fortification rather than to resist an actual attack . Instead , as well as helping to deal with the wider problems in 1195 , the castle appears to have been built with the intention of enforcing the stannary and forest law in Devon . It is possible that the Crown originally intended that the castle took over the stannary law across the whole of Cornwall and Devon , although in practice its role only extended only to governing the Devon stannaries . Stannary law was a medieval English legal system for governing the tin industry . South-West England , and in particular Devon , was a major producer of tin in the 12th century , produced by independent miners who worked the alluvial deposits across the region . The industry was regulated by the Crown , who taxed mining output and raised revenue from any fines imposed on those who broke the stannary laws . The laws also helped to manage the relationship between the miners and other local people , whose economic interests were often at odds . The output of tin increased from the end of the 12th century onwards , encouraging the Crown to extend its regulation and generate more revenue . In 1198 , William of Wrotham , who controlled Lydford Castle at the start of John 's reign , was appointed as the Warden of the Stannaries , a new office intended to provide additional rigour to the administration of the mining industry . Stannary courts were established in Devon , backed by a team of officials , and , with the creation of the Duchy of Cornwall in the 14th century , the administration of stannary law was delegated to the duchy . From 1198 onwards , Lydford Castle was designated as the prison for supporting the court and its processes .

Forests were special areas of land in medieval England , owned by the Crown and subject to forest law . They were often selected because of their natural resources , and were expected to provide the Crown with a flow of money or raw materials . In 1195 , the Forest of Dartmoor extended across all of Devon , but in 1204 John curtailed the extent of the royal forest , removing much of Devon from Forest Law and leaving the area known in the modern period as Dartmoor . This reduced forest was still subject to the Forest Laws , involving a specialised group of legal officials who met at Lydford Castle to impose fines and other punishments . Probably both Lydford Castle and the forest was given to the Sheriff of Devon , William Brewer , in 1216 . The arrangement changed under Henry III , when the estates were given to Richard , the Earl of Cornwall in 1239 . Legally , this meant that the Forest of Dartmoor was converted to a chase , although the Earls of Cornwall continued to hold law courts at Lydford Castle , enforcing chase laws that closely resembled the former Forest Laws .

Richard , Edward II 's second son , took possession of Lydford Castle in 1239 as the Earl of Cornwall . Richard took a close interest in developing the town of Lydford , creating an additional market and introducing a new fair in the 1260s . Around this time , the main tower at Lydford Castle was demolished and rebuilt , probably by Richard , possibly following a serious fire in the building . Richard was a wealthy politician and rebuilding the castle in this way would have provided him with an important status symbol in the region . The previous tower was stripped back , the existing walls levelled off around 14 feet ( 4.3 m ) from the ground and the ground floor arrow slits filled in . Two more storeys were then built on top of the older walls , better executed with a higher proportion of granite stone and thinner , typically around 6-foot ( 1.8 m ) thick . Although the structure remained essentially the same , the new tower was slightly smaller , measuring around 48 feet ( 15 m ) by 47 feet ( 14 m ) . The first floor was only basically designed , with a sequence of rooms of different levels of comfort , and intended to function as the prison , and the second floor was better finished , with a hall and a chamber , and probably operated as the courtroom and provided accommodation for the keeper of the castle .

As part of the work , an earth mound , or motte , 17-foot ( 5.2 m ) high , was piled up around the base of the tower . The original ground floor of the castle was now an underground cellar , probably used as a puteus , or pit , for detaining low status prisoners and reached by ladder from the first floor . Some infilling of the ground floor occurred in order to equalise the pressure on the walls from the mound . It is uncertain how many other towers or keeps have similar mounds , as excavation is usually required before the foundations can be examined , but Totnes and Farnham castles are known to have mottes build against the walls of the keep . The reason for building the mound is uncertain , but it was almost certainly not designed as a serious defensive feature . It was instead probably intended as to superficially imitate older motte and bailey designs , with the completed castle echoing these former symbols of power and reinforcing the current political status of its owner .

Richard 's son , Edmund took over the earldom in 1278 but had little interest in Lydford , preferring Restormel and Lostwithiel ; by his death in 1299 the castle had been left to decay and was in ruins . It reverted to the Crown , and when Edward II made his royal favourite , Piers Gaveston , the Earl of Cornwall in 1307 , Lydford Castle was passed to him . The castle was repaired at the start of the century and was in use once again as a prison . Edward II and Gaveston fell from power in 1327 and Thomas le Ercedekne was temporarily entrusted with the castle and Dartmoor by the new regime . In 1329 the castle was valued at a little over £ 11 . Piers Gaveston 's widow , Margaret de Clare , leased the property to Tavistock Abbey , and it continued to operate as a prison . Edward , the Black Prince became Duke of Cornwall in 1337 and he acquired Lydford Castle on Margaret 's death in 1342 . Extensive repairs took place over the next three years , and the castle was considered to be well roofed and decorated inside . Over the next two centuries the condition of the castle fluctuated . Around 1390 the castle roof was stripped for its lead , to be used on castles in Cornwall . The castle well was possibly dug during the 15th century . After 1425 , the Crown let it to a range of individuals , including Sir Walter Hungerford and Sir Philip Courteney .

Lydford remained the centre of the forest administration through the 14th and 15th centuries . Despite complaints from non-miners at the start of the 14th century that the prison regime at Lydford Castle was overly lax , by the end of the century the prison had a reputation for poor , grim conditions . The first known rhymes complaining about " Lydford Law " date from 1399 , and continued to be popular for several centuries . In 1510 , Richard Strode , a Member of Parliament campaigning for reform of the Stannary laws , was infamously arrested by Stannary officials and imprisoned in Lydford Castle . He later described how he was kept in an underground room in the keep , fed only bread and water , and encumbered with legcuffs until he paid the keeper to release him from the irons . After 1485 , the Duchy took the castle back into direct control , and by 1546 it was in poor repair . Renovation work was carried out under Elizabeth I , but a report of 1618 suggested that the castle was unable to function as a prison because of its poor condition , and fresh repair work was carried out in the 1620s and 1630s under Charles I.

Lydford Castle was involved in the English Civil War that broke out in 1642 between the Royalist supporters of Charles I and Parliament . The castle was used by the Royalist commander Sir Richard Grenville as his main military prison in the region . It had a terrible reputation amongst Parliamentarians , who complained that it was used to summarily execute military prisoners and to extort money from innocent civilians , on fear of imprisonment . At the end of the civil war , the Lydford estate appears to have been sold off by Parliament The castle was assessed by their surveyors to be " almost totally ruined " in 1650 : the roof of the tower was still mostly intact , but the floors and their beams were collapsing , and the whole site , including the bailey , was only worth around £ 80 . With the Restoration of Charles II to the throne in 1660 the castle and the forest were taken back to the ownership of the Duchy . Sir John Granville was made the Rider and Master Forester of Dartmoor and the Lydford Castle courts continued to be held to regulate the Forest . Repairs to the dilapidated building do not appear to have been carried out , however , and in 1704 a report was drawn up for the government , noting that the Stannary laws could not be enforced without a working prison .

Work was carried out between 1616 and 1733 , bringing the castle back into good order . As part of this , the spine wall was rebuilt properly , and the second floor windows enlarged . The courtroom featured a chair for the Stannary court judge , additional seating for the court officials and a railed , public section around the outside of the room . The courtroom also doubled as a hall for village dances and feasts . At the start of the 19th century , however , Sir Thomas Tyrwhitt , the Lord Warden of the Stannaries , began the construction of Dartmoor Prison at Princetown . Dartmoor Prison and Princetown grew increasingly important and courts began to be held there instead of Lydford Castle . The castle declined once again , the courtroom became unsafe to use and by 1833 , the remaining judicial fittings had been stripped out . In the middle of the 19th century the Duchy of Cornwall rejected proposals to repair the castle in order to bring it back into service as being too expensive , but the castle site was enclosed to prevent injuries to children who might be tempted to play on the stonework . By the 1870s , the town of Lydford was vastly reduced in importance from the medieval period and the castle 's roofs and floors had either collapsed or been removed .

Typhoon Cimaron , known in the Philippines as Typhoon Paeng , was the most intense tropical cyclone to strike the Philippine island of Luzon since Typhoon Zeb in 1998 . Originating from a tropical depression on October 25 , Cimaron developed within an environment strongly favoring tropical cyclogenesis east of the Philippines . On October 28 , the system underwent rapid intensification , culminating in attaining its peak strength with winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) . Estimates from the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ranked the system as a Category 5-equivalent super typhoon with one-minute sustained winds of 260 km / h ( 160 mph ) , though this is argued to have underrepresented the typhoon 's strength . The system moved ashore near Casiguran , Aurora in northern Luzon at peak strength . Crossing the island , Cimaron emerged over the South China Sea where conditions allowed for temporary reorganization . After becoming nearly stationary on November 1 , the typhoon executed a tight anti-cyclonic loop and rapidly weakened . The storm degraded to a tropical depression on November 4 before dissipating three days later off the coast of Vietnam . Prior to impacting the Philippines , Public Storm Warning Signals # 3 and # 4 , the two highest levels , were raised for several provinces in Luzon . Thousands of residents were urged to evacuate while local authorities prepared services for quick recovery efforts . With Cimaron initially expected to strike Vietnam , officials planned to evacuate 218,000 people ; however , Cimaron 's slow motion and demise over open waters resulted in these plans being suspended . Officials in Thailand and southern China also advised residents of possible effects from the storm .

In contrast to the typhoon 's extreme intensity , damage was somewhat limited in the Philippines due to the lower population density of the affected areas . Widespread flooding and landslides caused substantial disruptions to travel and isolated some communities . Thirty-four people were killed in various incidents , mostly from flooding . Nearly 365,000 people were affected by the storm and losses amounted to 1.21 billion PHP ( US $ 31 million ) . Winds along the periphery of Cimaron fanned a large wildfire near Hong Kong , and moisture from it fueled record-breaking rains in British Columbia , Canada . Relief efforts in the Philippines began soon after the storm 's passage ; however , two other storms struck the country in November , with one resulting in far greater damage . Following a request for international assistance in early December , more than US $ 10 million was provided in relief aid to the Philippines .

On October 24 , 2006 , an area of disturbed weather , characterized by flaring convection around a low-level circulation , developed approximately 595 km ( 370 mi ) east of Guam . Situated within a region favoring tropical cyclogenesis , the system consolidated as it tracked generally westward . Late on October 25 , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) classified the low as a tropical depression . With poleward outflow improving , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert the following day before initiating advisories on Tropical Depression 22W . Several hours later , the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration assigned the storm the local name Paeng as was within their area of responsibility . Situated south of a strong subtropical ridge , the system maintained a general west-northwest track . On October 27 , the depression strengthened into a tropical storm and was assigned the name Cimaron by the JMA . The small storm subsequently underwent a period of rapid intensification as dual outflow channels developed ; the storm reached typhoon status early on October 28 . At the end of this phase on October 29 , Cimaron attained its peak intensity with winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) and a barometric pressure of 920 mbar ( hPa ; 27.17 inHg ) .

The JTWC estimated Cimaron to have been a stronger system , attaining its peak intensity as a Category 5-equivalent super typhoon with one-minute winds of 260 km / h ( 160 mph ) . However , satellite estimates from forecasters within the agency itself , the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 's Satellite Analysis Branch ( SAB ) , the Air Force Weather Agency ( AFWA ) , and Dr. Karl Hoarau of Cergy-Pontoise University stated Cimaron to have been an even stronger system . Using the Dvorak technique – a method of determining a tropical cyclone 's intensity based on satellite appearance – AFWA and SAB yielded a peak value of T7.5 , 285 km / h ( 180 mph ) , while advanced operational values from the JTWC peaked at T7.8 , 305 km / h ( 190 mph ) . Additionally , a forecaster at SAB noted that the lower estimates were likely due to restrictions on the Dvorak technique stemming from Cimaron 's rapid intensification . The forecaster also noted that a second type of estimate gave a maximum value of T8.0 , 315 km / h ( 195 mph ) , the highest rating on the scale .

While at its peak strength , Cimaron displayed two small concentric eyewalls , separated by a few kilometres . The storm later made landfall near Casiguran , Aurora in northern Luzon shortly after 1200 UTC on October 29 ; it became one of the strongest storms to ever hit the region . Interaction with the island 's mountainous terrain caused substantial weakening , though Cimaron maintained typhoon status during its 12 ‑ hour crossing . After emerging over the South China Sea on October 30 , the system initially maintained its west-northwest course . However , the following day , a weakness developed within the ridge previously steering the typhoon , and Cimaron briefly turned north before essentially stalling . During this time , the system reorganized somewhat and reached a secondary peak intensity with winds of 165 km / h ( 105 mph ) on November 2 . While executing a tight clockwise loop , increased wind shear and entrainment of dry air soon caused Cimaron to dramatically weaken . With a new ridge becoming established over China , the weakening system acquired a general southwestward track . Cimaron weakened to a tropical depression on November 4 and ultimately dissipated three days later just off the coast of southeastern Vietnam .

By October 28 , Isabela , southern Cagayan , Quirino , and northern Aurora provinces were placed under Public Storm Warning Signal ( PSWS ) # 3 , the second-highest level . More than 20 provinces overall were placed under varying PSWS levels . Residents living along the coast were urged to evacuate . Early on October 29 , several provinces along Luzon 's east coast were placed under PSWS # 4 , the highest level of alert . During a national radio broadcast President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo urged residents to heed warnings and not to venture out during the storm . Throughout Luzon , schools and government offices were closed on October 29 while residents in mountainous areas were urged to evacuate due to threat of mudslides . The National Transmission Corporation deployed power restoration crews across the region to allow for quick post-storm response . Hospitals in Cimaron 's projected path requested employees to be present in anticipation of an influx of patients . Quick response teams from the Department of Social Welfare and Development were placed on standby for possible deployment . Within evacuation areas , the Philippine National Police was dispatched to prevent people from returning to these areas . Bus companies suspended all services north of Tarlac City and San Jose .

As Cimaron emerged over the South China Sea , officials in Vietnam began preparing for possible effects from the storm . Authorities began evacuating residents in flood-prone areas along the coast from Quảng Bình Khánh Hòa , including 12,500 in Thừa Thiên – Huế Province . Fishermen were urged to seek shelter at nearby ports until the storm subsided . The Vietnamese Government also requested the deployment of the nation 's Army , Coast Guard , and Navy to assist in evacuation efforts . Residents still recovering from Typhoon Xangsane in early October were forced to secure their homes and evacuate once again . An estimated 218,000 people were planned to be relocated across Vietnam : 68,000 in Quảng Nam , 60,000 in Quảng Trị , 50,000 in Thừa Thiên – Huế , and 40,000 in Quảng Bình . Appeals were made to roughly 3,500 vessels , with a collective crew count of 32,285 , to return to port . The Navy deployed 42 ships for possible search and rescue missions . Following Cimaron 's change in course and cessation of movement , the Vietnamese Government suspended all evacuation plans on November 2 ; however , fishermen were urged to remain at port in fears of repeating the incidents during Typhoon Chanchu in May of that year where over 200 fishermen lost their lives .

Officials in Thailand also monitored the storm as a potential flood threat . Many reservoirs in the nation were above 80 percent capacity and further heavy rains would lead to a major flood event ; the main concerns were for the Bhumibol and Sirikit dams in Tak and Uttaradit provinces , respectively . Authorities in Hainan province , China , warned of possible effects from the storm as well beginning on October 31 . Heavy squalls , with winds of 50 to 100 km / h ( 31 to 62 mph ) were forecast for eastern areas of the island and areas offshore . By November 1 , approximately 20,000 fishing vessels returned to port as conditions over the South China Sea deteriorated ; shipping over the Qiongzhou Strait remained unaffected .

Typhoon Cimaron struck the Philippines with winds estimated at 195 km / h ( 120 mph ) and gusts in excess of 230 km / h ( 145 mph ) . Along coastal Aurora Province , a mother and daughter were killed when strong winds destroyed their home . Numerous trees and power lines were felled by the winds as well , causing widespread blackouts in Luzon . The majority of Aurora and Isabela provinces were left without power and telecommunications for more than two weeks . Approximately 90 percent of the homes in Dinapigue were damaged . Heavy rains across the region swelled many rivers , flooding low-lying areas along their banks . Several bridges became impassable and officials had to release water from two major dams to prevent them from overflowing . The most significant flooding occurred along the Allied-Sinocalan and Tagamusing rivers in Pangasinan . Low-lying areas along the Cagayan , Chico , Magat , Pinacanauan , Tuguegarao Pared rivers throughout Cagayan province were also affected by flooding . Numerous roads were blocked off by landslides or washed away by flooding , severely limiting travel . A landslide temporarily isolated four barangays in Nueva Vizcaya . A Provincial Disaster Coordinating Council search and rescue team was later deployed to Kasibu where at least four people were killed by flooding . Fatal landslides took place in Benguet and Kalinga provinces . A traffic accident blamed on the storm in La Union resulted in one death and seven injuries .

Though the storm remained over open waters after moving over the South China Sea , strong winds stemming from it fanned a large wildfire in Tai Lam Country Park , Hong Kong . At least 136 fires ignited on October 30 during the Chung Yeung Festival . The Tai Lam fire grew to be the largest in over a decade , ultimately charring 450 hectares ( 1,112 acres ) and 66,000 trees . The storm 's winds coupled with seasonally low humidity made conditions difficult for firefighters trying to suppress the fire . Over the South China Sea , the 128 m ( 420 ft ) long Chinese cargo ship , Tongda 998 , became stranded amid 5 m ( 16 ft ) swells and 75 to 88 km / h ( 47 to 55 mph ) winds after its engine failed . All 18 crewmen were unharmed after the vessel was towed to port in Zhuhai by the rescue ship Dejin . Moisture from the typhoon also fed an extratropical cyclone , in a process referred to as the Pineapple Express , that brought heavy rains to southern British Columbia , Canada , prompting flood watches for the region Southern areas of the province were deluged by the storm , with some areas receiving 250 to 300 mm ( 9.8 to 11.8 in ) of rain . The daily rainfall record for November 6 of 20.6 mm ( 0.81 in ) at Victoria International Airport was shattered with 50.4 mm ( 1.98 in ) falling . Widespread flooding occurred as rivers over-topped their banks ; hundreds of homes were inundated , prompting numerous evacuations . The Vedder River reached a 25-year high and forced the evacuation 200 residences .

Damage assessments in the Philippines began on October 31 , with aerial surveys being utilized for isolated areas . With numerous roads blocked off or washed away , clearing operations were a priority . The Philippine Red Cross assisted in the immediate aftermath of Typhoon Cimaron , evacuating people in La Union and providing relief goods to more than 16,000 people in Aurora . The majority of relief work was handled by local governments , though some assistance from the National Disaster Coordinating Council was received . By November 1 , the estimated cost of humanitarian assistance reached 3.2 million PHP ( US $ 81,000 ) . Teams from the Red Cross were already deployed in the Philippines due to Typhoon Xangsane in September and were able to quickly respond in Cimaron 's aftermath . Relief efforts for Cimaron were cut short as just two weeks later , Typhoon Chebi struck nearly the same areas . A weaker , though still powerful typhoon , damage from Chebi was relatively limited . In late November , Typhoon Durian brought even greater devastation to the Philippines and prompted greater need for international assistance . On December 11 , President Arroyo declared a national state of calamity and released 1 billion PHP ( US $ 25.6 million ) in relief and rehabilitation funds . Throughout 2006 as a whole , the Philippines was devastated by multiple natural disasters that collectively killed well over 1,000 people and left more than US $ 1.6 billion in damage . Consequently , the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs appealed for emergency assistance to the nation , in the form of US $ 46 million in funds for the most severely affected areas . The European Commission Humanitarian Aid department also provided € 2 million ( US $ 1.9 million ) in emergency funds in relation to the four major typhoons that struck the country , with a focus on areas affected by Typhoon Durian . The Red Cross ultimately provided US $ 9.67 million in assistance to the nation in relation to the four typhoons as well as Typhoon Fengshen in June 2008 which struck while relief efforts from the 2006 storms were still ongoing .

The Big Inch and Little Big Inch , collectively known as the Inch pipelines , are petroleum pipelines extending from Texas to New Jersey , built between 1942 and 1944 as emergency war measures in the U.S. Before World War II , petroleum products were transported from the oil fields of Texas to the north-eastern states by oil tanker . After the United States entered the war on 1 January 1942 , this vital link was attacked by German submarines in the Operation Paukenschlag , threatening both the oil supplies to the north-east and its onward transshipment to Great Britain . The Secretary of the Interior , Harold Ickes , championed the pipeline project as a way of transporting petroleum by the more-secure , interior route . The pipelines were government financed and owned , but were built and operated by the War Emergency Pipelines company , a non-profit corporation backed by a consortium of the largest American oil companies . It was the longest , biggest and heaviest project of its type then undertaken ; the Big and Little Big Inch pipelines were 1,254 and 1,475 miles long ( 2,018 km and 2,374 km ) respectively , with 35 pumping stations along their routes . The project required 16,000 people and 725,000 short tons ( 658,000 t ) of materials . It was praised as an example of private-public sector cooperation and featured extensively in US government propaganda .

By the time that the United States entered World War II in 1941 , oil was a vital part of military operations around the world . The United States produced 60 percent of the world 's crude oil , with the state of Texas in the south-west leading this production , producing more than twice as much crude as any other state . The industry comprised a handful of very large producers and more than 3,500 smaller operators . The north-east coast of the United States depended on these supplies of oil , importing both crude and refined products . Across most of Texas , there had been little interest in building pipelines to transport oil , and petroleum was typically moved from the south-west to the north-east coast using a mixture of sea freight and railroad transport . In early 1941 , 70,000 barrels of oil were moved on the railroads each day , but this method was expensive , and the bulk of the oil was moved using barges , some with a capacity of up to 15,000 barrels , operating up and down the rivers and the Atlantic Coast . With the outbreak of war , the eastern sea routes of the country were attacked by German U-boat submarines . United States naval defence was very limited and largely obsolete ; between January and April 1942 , among other naval losses , 46 oil tankers were sunk and 16 damaged . The problem was made worse as 50 tankers had been sent to help the UK earlier in 1941 . Insurers began to refuse to underwrite the remaining vessels and the volume of crude oil reaching the north-east from the Texas Gulf dropped .

In response , steps were taken to better protect the tankers from attack , but losses continued to mount until , in April 1942 , they were banned by the Navy from operating the north-east sea routes . The government and industry took steps to maximise the use of the railroads , increasing the amount of oil carried on them more than ten-fold , but there were shortages of rail tank cars , and the existing fleet of cars was in poor condition . Instead , the United States government began to examine options for the use of pipelines to fulfil the demand for petroleum in the north-east .

Transporting petroleum by pipeline from the south-west to the north-east was a potentially attractive option for the government as it would be safe from submarine attack and could operate efficiently regardless of the weather . Pipelines had been in use in the industry since 1862 , but by the 1930s they were usually only 8 inches ( 200 mm ) wide , able to deliver 20,000 barrels of oil a day ; larger pipes could be built , but due to structural weaknesses they could not operate at the regular pressures . Technologies to build high-pressure pipes at sizes larger than 12 inches ( 300 mm ) began to emerge during the decade before the war , but their adoption was not commercially viable . The concept of constructing such a pipeline was first proposed in 1940 by the Secretary of the Interior , Harold Ickes , who argued that " the building of a crude oil pipeline from Texas to the East might not be economically sound ; but that in the event of an emergency it might be absolutely necessary " . A consortium led by Standard Oil put forward a bid to build one in spring 1941 , but the plan failed , due to concerns over the amount of steel that would be required for such a project . In May 1941 , Ickes was appointed as the Petroleum Coordinator for National Defense , and in December 1942 became the administrator of the Petroleum Administration for War . New laws were passed to enable the building of pipelines necessary for the war effort , including the compulsory purchasing of land under the right of eminent domain .

Initial planning for the Inch pipelines began on May 15 , 1941 , when a meeting of Ickes and the oil industry commissioned an aerial survey of the possible route . A preliminary design was ready that September , and a consortium of major oil companies formed a new company , National Defense Pipelines , to build a pipeline along the route . The government Supply Priorities and Allocation Board , however , refused to approve the necessary steel , and the consortium 's plan was dissolved shortly before the outbreak of war . After the outbreak of fighting , and the consequent deterioration of the sea routes for transporting oil , industry representatives met in March 1942 to produce a new pipeline strategy , called the Tulsa Plan . This included the construction of the Inch pipelines , backed by the slogan " longlines are lifelines " , for which the steel was finally approved by the War Production Board on June 10 . Once steel supplies had been agreed , an initial tranche of $ 35 million in funding was provided by the government Reconstruction Finance Corporation , which owned and manage the operation of the pipelines through its subsidiary organizations , the Defense Plants and the Defense Supplies corporations . In turn , the actual construction and operation of the pipelines would be carried out by the War Emergency Pipelines company ( WEP ) , a non-profit corporation backed by a consortium of the largest oil companies in the United States : Atlantic Refining , Cities Service Oil , Consolidated Oil , Gulf Oil , Pan American Petroleum and Transportation , Standard Oil , Tidewater Associated Oil , Shell Oil , Socony-Vacuum Oil , Sun Oil and the Texas Pipe Line Company . The WEP was led by W. Alton Jones and Burt Hull , both with extensive backgrounds in the industry , with Oscar Wolfe as its chief engineer . The company established its offices in Little Rock , Arkansas .

The Inch pipelines comprised two systems , the Big Inch pipeline and the Little Big Inch pipeline . The Big Inch was a 24-inch ( 610 mm ) pipeline for crude oil ; it ran from the East Texas Oil Field at Longview , Texas , to Norris City , Illinois , and onto Phoenixville , Pennsylvania , from where it branched into 20-inch-diameter ( 510 mm ) segments . One served New York and terminated at Linden , New Jersey , and the other served Philadelphia and terminated at Chester Junction , Pennsylvania . The Little Big Inch , a largely parallel 20-inch-diameter ( 510 mm ) line intended for refined products , ran from Beaumont , Texas , to Little Rock , Arkansas , where it joined the path of the Big Inch , making use of the same pumping stations . From there it ran along the same right-of-way as the Big Inch to New Jersey and Pennsylvania . The pipeline project was the longest , biggest and heaviest of its kind in the world . In total , the Big Inch pipeline was 1,254 miles ( 2,018 km ) long , with 222 miles ( 357 km ) of secondary distribution and feeder lines , and had 28 pumping stations along the route , approximately every 50 miles ( 80 km ) . The Little Big Inch was 1,475 miles ( 2,374 km ) long , with 239 miles ( 385 km ) of secondary lines , and had seven unique pumping stations along its southern leg .

Charles Cathers of the DPC directed the engineering project , with much of the work undertaken by Oscar Wolfe and , on the Little Inch pipeline , F. E. Richardson and L. F. Scherer . A meeting of all of the contractors for the build was held at the start of the July to kickstart the project ; overall , 82 different companies would take on the pipeline work on a " cost-plus " basis , employing over 16,000 staff . The construction required the government to acquire permission to build the pipeline across 7,500 parcels of land ; of these , the right of eminent domain had to be exercised in 300 cases . Major Jubel Parten , a director in the Petroleum Administration for War , considered the Inch pipelines to be part of “ the most amazing Government-industry cooperation ever achieved ” . The pipelines were soon given the names " Big Inch " and " Little Big Inch " by the construction teams , on account of their unprecedented diameters . The construction project was extensively advertised , as part of the US government 's war-time propaganda effort . Newsreels ran clips such as Pipeline Goes Through ! and Pipe Dream Comes True-Oil ! , and short-films were made about the construction work , including Pipeline . The pipelines also appeared in the RKO Pathé film Oil is Blood .

The Big Inch pipeline was made from sections of seamless steel pipe up to 44 feet ( 13 m ) long , 3 ⁄ 8 inch ( 9.5 mm ) thick and 4,200 pounds ( 1,900 kg ) in weight . The Little Big Inch used both 5 ⁄ 16 inch ( 7.9 mm ) thick seamless steel and electric weld pipe , and a small amount of 1 ⁄ 2 inch ( 13 mm ) thick seamless pipe . In total , 21,185 railcar loads of steel piping were laid during the project , the Big Inch alone requiring 360,700 short tons ( 327,200 t ) of steel . The pipe was laid in trenches 4 feet ( 1.2 m ) deep and 3 feet ( 0.91 m ) wide , dug out by a combination of ditching machines and manual labor . The pipes were then cleaned by pulling a workman through the inside of them with cloths , and welded together , using both the " stovepiping " method and the roll-weld , or " firing line " , methods . Stovepiping was an older method , in which the welder worked his way around two pipes , which remained stationary ; the newer roll-weld approach instead rotated the pipes , allowing the welder to remain in one position as he worked , with up to seven pipes being welded together at the same time .

Where it was necessary for the pipeline to curve to fit the route , the steel pipes were bent , using either a cold-bending approach , in which tractors would pull and push the pipelines into position , or a hot-bending method , with the pipe heated up by blow-torches and pulled into place using a jig . A new , specialized piece of equipment for bending pipes , the Cummings bending jig , was invented during the Big Inch build , and used on the construction of the Little Big Inch pipeline . To protect the pipeline from corrosion , its outside was then cleaned by machine , and painted in first a layer of coal tar enamel , and then hot coal tar coating , before being wrapped in asbestos felt . Finally the pipeline was lowered into position , taking care not to damage the ends of the pipes ; the larger pipes were so heavy that they required a D-8 caterpillar tractor equipped with counter-weights to lift them . The trench was then back-filled , completing the process . The Big Inch pipeline had to pass under 33 rivers and 200 creeks and lakes , as well as under 289 railroad and 626 highway intersections . Specially lined tunnels were bored to lay the pipe under the roads and railroad lines , and specialist trenches dug to lay the pipelines across on the riverbeds and lakes , weighing down the pipeline to stop it floating to the surface . Around 4 miles ( 6.4 km ) of underwater piping was laid in total . In marshy areas , the soft ground was filled in to provide firm foundations for the pipeline to rest on .

Work on the Inch pipelines began immediately after the establishment of the WEP on June 26 , 1942 . They were built in three phases . The first part to be constructed was the Big Inch , its initial leg running to an interim terminal at Norris City , where oil was to be off-loaded to the railroad network . Once this leg was complete , it was extended to its terminus at Phoenixville . When the Big Inch was complete , work began on the third phase of the project , the Little Big Inch . The first purchase order , for 137,500 short tons ( 124,700 t ) of 24-inch-diameter pipe , was placed on July 2 , 1942 . To meet a construction deadline of January 1 , 1943 , the laying of pipe began on August 3 , 1942 , near Little Rock . Other pipeline crews began work immediately on segments elsewhere in Arkansas and Texas . By September 10 all eight pipelaying crews , each consisting of between 300 and 400 men , were in the field working . The schedule called for 5 miles ( 8.0 km ) of the Big Inch pipeline to be laid each day . But soon men were laying as much as 9 miles ( 14 km ) a day . In all , roughly 7,000,000 cubic yards ( 5,400,000 m3 ) of material were excavated . Oil began flowing through the Big Inch Line between Texas and Illinois on New Year 's Eve 1942 . Work on the Little Big Inch then began in 1943 .

By the end of the war , there was considerable debate over the future of the pipelines . The major oil companies , such as Standard Oil , campaigned for the conversion of the pipelines for the transfer of natural gas . Demand for natural gas was rising rapidly , and it was produced in large quantities in the Texas oilfields , but could not be got to market in the north-east and was otherwise burnt off uselessly into the atmosphere . The railroad and coal companies , who saw this as likely to introduce additional competition for coal and coal gas , and therefore lower demand for their goods and services , argued against this move . The smaller oil companies proposed continuing to use the pipelines for oil in order to undermine the transport monopolies of the larger corporations . A government inquiry was undertaken to determine the future use of the pipelines , and took evidence from the various stakeholders , most of whom presented the case that favored their companies or industry . The inquiry concluded that the pipelines should be sold for continued use in transporting petroleum . An auction for the pipelines was announced in 1946 , which was designed to give preference to bidders who intended to use them for moving petroleum . 16 bids were received , with the highest cash bidders being companies hoping to use the pipelines for natural gas . Assessing the different bids proved difficult and the discussions became enmeshed in national politics , with companies seeking support from various Washington politicians . Meanwhile , a threatened national coal strike raised concerns over the availability of natural gas , strengthening the arguments of the natural gas lobby .

A fresh inquiry was declared in November , voiding the previous competition and the Inch Lines were transferred to the War Assets Administration on December 2 , 1946 , for disposal . Pending any final decision on their sale , the lines were leased to the Tennessee Gas Company for use in shipping natural gas as far as Ohio and the Appalachians , but no further east , and only for 12 months . Tennessee Gas did not convert the pipelines in any way for their new role , and simply pumped the gas through the system under its own pressure , moving 138,000,000 cubic feet ( 3,900,000 m3 ) of gas a day in this way . A second auction was held , with bids for natural gas given equal weight to those wishing to transfer crude oil , although any natural gas bidder would be obliged to maintain the oil pumping stations for use in a national emergency . Ten bids were received and on February 8 , 1947 , the Texas East Transmission Corporation ( TETCO ) was declared successful . Its bid of $ 143,127,000 would make the disposal the largest sale of war-surplus property to the private sector following World War II .

TETCO was the brainchild of corporate lawyers Charles Francis and James Elkins , who convinced the construction specialists George and Herman Brown , and the fuel engineer E. Holley Poe , that buying the Big and Little Inch pipelines could be a lucrative opportunity . The corporation was established specifically for the purposes of the bid , and came to their bidding figure by estimating that the likely competition would bid at $ 130 million ; their own figure exceeded this by 10 percent , and added on $ 127,000 to avoid a suspiciously round number . TETCO believed it could afford to make this offer because it intended to reuse the electric motors in the oil pumping mechanisms for moving the natural gas ; it also believed that the price of gas would rise considerably in the post-war markets . After winning the bidding , TETCO raised the money to pay the government through a combination of bonds and share issues . A further government enquiry was required before the sale was allowed to go through , which was complicated by the reluctance of the state of Pennsylvania to allow the pipelines to be used to pump gas east through its territory . The government of Pennsylvania was influenced by the coal industry , who feared they would lose sales , but it eventually relented and the sale of the pipelines to TETCO was finally completed on November 1 . The value of the company soared , and the original investors saw the value of their holdings increase 63-fold .

TETCO immediately began to convert the pipelines for permanent use as natural gas transmission lines , under the direction of Baxter Goodrich , their chief engineer . 24 compressor stations were constructed along the pipeline with centrifugal compressors , increasing the capacity of the system to 433,000,000 cubic feet ( 12,300,000 m3 ) of gas a day , and the old oil pumps were retained for reuse in a future crisis . Steel valves replaced the older , less reliable cast iron designs . Demand continued to increase , requiring additional compressor capability , and by January 1949 the pipelines were moving 508,000,000 cubic feet ( 14,400,000 m3 ) a day . The supply route undermined the local markets for manufactured gas , and the major cities of the north-east rapidly converted to the use of natural gas ; historian David Waples describes how the pipelines contributed to " an extraordinary expansion of natural gas customers and gas company employees after World War II " . The Inch pipelines encouraged the development of further long distance pipelines in the US through the 1960s and 1970s .

In 1957 , the operation of the Little Big Inch , and its ownership south of Ohio , was transferred from TETCO to the subsidiary Texas Eastern Petroleum Products Corporation ( TEPPCO ) , and converted back to use for petroleum products . TEPPCO was purchased by Enterprise Products in 2010 . Around 1961 , there was discussion of converting the Big Inch pipeline back to petroleum use , but it continued in use as a gas pipeline . In 1989 , TETCO was taken over by the Panhandle Eastern Corporation , and in 1997 this company was merged with Duke Power , to form the Duke Energy Corporation ; in 2007 , the oil pipelines were spun off from Duke Energy , to form part of Spectra Energy Partners . The Inch pipelines are listed on the National Register of Historic Places . Along the western parts of the pipelines , around 90 percent of the pipes are the original installation , although in the east large parts have since been replaced , largely due to the absence of anti-corrosion protective coatings on the original piping . 62 of the original buildings from 1942 and 1943 remain , including pump-houses , offices , employee houses and garages . The best surviving examples of the original buildings are in Pennsylvania . A " Big Inch pipeline " construction playset was produced as a children 's toy in 1962 by the Marx company .

Lieutenant General Sir Horace Clement Hugh Robertson , KBE , DSO ( 29 October 1894 – 28 April 1960 ) was a senior officer in the Australian Army who served in the First World War , the Second World War and the Korean War . He was one of the first graduates of the Royal Military College , Duntroon , to reach the ranks of major general and lieutenant general . During the First World War , Robertson served with the 10th Light Horse in the Gallipoli Campaign , including the disastrous Battle of the Nek , where much of his regiment was wiped out . He later participated in the Sinai and Palestine Campaign , where he captured a Turkish Army general , and was awarded the Distinguished Service Order . During the Second World War , Robertson led the 19th Infantry Brigade at the Battle of Bardia and accepted the surrender of the Italian Navy at Benghazi . Later , he commanded the 1st Armoured Division in Western Australia . In the final weeks of the war he commanded troops in the closing stages of the New Britain Campaign and the Aitape – Wewak campaign . At the end of the war , he accepted the surrender of Japanese Lieutenant General Hatazō Adachi .

Horace Clement Hugh Robertson was born in Warrnambool , Victoria , on 29 October 1894 , the sixth child of John Robertson , a state school teacher , and his wife Anne née Grey . Horace was educated at a state school in Outtrim , from May 1905 to April 1910 , when he went to The Geelong College . Horace was nicknamed " Red Robbie " by his fellow schoolboys after his hair colour , in contrast to his older brother John , or " Black Robbie " . In October 1911 Robertson took the entrance examination for the Royal Military College , Duntroon , and was accepted into the second intake of cadets in 1912 . His class was due to be commissioned on 1 January 1916 , but the outbreak of the First World War in August 1914 caused it to be graduated early . He was commissioned as a lieutenant in both the Permanent Military Forces ( PMF ) and the Australian Imperial Force ( AIF ) on 3 November 1914 . On 7 November 1914 , Robertson married Jessie Bonnar in a private service at a registry office in Collingwood . The ceremony was kept secret , because at the time junior officers required the Army 's permission to marry , and at age 20 Robertson would not have received it . Later they would claim that they had been married in 1916 . Their marriage produced no children .

Major General William Bridges decided that the Duntroon cadets , none of whom had yet finished their training , should be split up and posted to the various units of the AIF as regimental rather than staff officers . Robertson was posted to the 10th Light Horse as its machine-gun officer . He was one of seven members of his class in the 3rd Light Horse Brigade . By the end of August 1915 , three of them would be dead . The 10th Light Horse was concentrated at Claremont , Western Australia , before departing for the Middle East on the transport Mashobra in February 1915 . After arriving at Alexandria , Egypt , in March 1915 , the regiment moved to Mena Camp near Cairo . In May , the 3rd Light Horse Brigade began moving , without horses , to Gallipoli , preceded by the machine-gun sections , which embarked at Alexandria on 8 May 1915 . At Gallipoli , the machine guns were brigaded together to provide additional firepower . Robertson 's machine guns were in support during the disastrous Battle of the Nek on 7 August 1915 , during which much of the 10th Light Horse became casualties . Afterwards , Robertson was promoted to captain and became second in command of A Squadron . He assumed command of C Squadron on 28 August , and led it in the fighting at Hill 60 the next day .

The 10th Light Horse was reorganised after returning to Egypt in January 1916 , and Robertson assumed command of B Squadron , with the AIF rank of major from May 1916 . This was as far as he could go , for Duntroon graduates could not be promoted above major in the AIF . This was the result of an AIF policy aimed at giving them a broad a range of experience , which would benefit the post-war Army , while not allowing an accumulation of young officers of high rank , for whom the reduced post-War Army would not have sufficient posts . His substantive rank remained that of lieutenant ; he would not be promoted to the substantive rank of captain in the PMF until 30 September 1920 , and promotion to major would not come until 1 July 1932 . At the Battle of Magdhaba , his colonel was wounded and Robertson took over command of the 10th Light Horse . He was awarded the Distinguished Service Order ( DSO ) for his actions during this battle . His citation read : For distinguished and gallant service in the field . He led a mounted change and was the first officer to enter the enemy 's trenches . He is an officer of exceptional organising and training powers and thoroughly deserves reward .

Robertson 's men took many Turkish prisoners , including a senior officer of engineers who insisted that he would only surrender his sword to the Australian officer in charge . He was disappointed to discover that it was Robertson , a youthful major , but handed it over anyway . In February 1917 Robertson was attached to the Desert Column as a staff officer . From there , he was sent to staff school in Egypt . However , on 7 March he suffered a broken leg in a riding accident and was hospitalised for two months . He returned to the staff school in May and finally graduated on 17 June . He was then posted to the newly formed Yeomanry Mounted Division as a General Staff Officer ( Grade 3 ) . In March 1918 , he was posted to Headquarters Delta Force in Cairo . This was disbanded in April and Robertson became Deputy Assistant Adjutant General ( DAAG ) at AIF Headquarters in Cairo . In January 1919 , he became Assistant Adjutant General ( AAG ) . He returned to Australia in July 1919 . In addition to his Distinguished Service Order , he was twice mentioned in despatches , and awarded the Order of the Nile ( 4th Class ) by the Sultan of Egypt .

On returning to Australia , Robertson became brigade major in the 7th Light Horse Brigade . In September 1920 he was posted to the staff of the 3rd Military District and then the 2nd Cavalry Division and the 3rd Division . In April 1922 he sat for and passed the entrance examination to the Staff College , Camberley , where his class included Majors Arthur Percival , John Smyth and Georges Vanier , and Lieutenant Colonel Harry Crerar . Robertson eventually became the first Australian to graduate with an A-grade pass . Afterwards , Robertson went on to attend a series of shorter training courses in Britain . He attended the School of Musketry at Hythe , Kent ; the Machine Gun School at Netheravon , Wiltshire ; the Artillery College at Woolwich ; the Anti-Gas School at Porton Down ; the Anti-Aircraft School at Westerham , Kent ; and the Royal Tank Corps School at Woolwich . He returned to Australia in 1925 to become Chief Instructor at the Small Arms School at Randwick , New South Wales in 1926 . Following the retirement of General Sir Harry Chauvel in 1930 , Robertson was posted to the 7th Infantry Brigade as its brigade major . In 1931 he became brigade major of the 1st Cavalry Brigade in Queensland . He returned to Sydney in February 1934 as General Staff Officer ( Grade 2 ) at the 2nd District Base . In June 1934 , he was appointed Director of Military Art at the Royal Military College , which had been transferred to Victoria Barracks , Sydney , as a cost-cutting measure during the Great Depression . It returned to Canberra in 1937 , and Robertson returned with it .

Robertson was finally breveted as a lieutenant colonel in June 1936 . The rank became substantive in July 1937 . Like other regular officers , Robertson was opposed to the " Singapore strategy " , and therefore to the defence policy of the government of the day , and said so publicly in the British Army Quarterly . Robertson argued for a local defence of Australia by land and air units . The naval theorist , Admiral Sir Herbert Richmond , responding to Robertson 's arguments in an editorial , pointed out that local defence would fragment the British Empire 's defence effort and could not secure the sea lanes . However , in view of the weakness of the Royal Navy , Richmond was forced to concede that Robertson 's approach was not unreasonable .

In March 1939 , Robertson was appointed commander of the 7th Military District , which encompassed the Northern Territory . It was his first command since the First World War . He was promoted to the temporary rank of colonel in August 1939 , and this became substantive in November . The job involved cooperation with the Royal Australian Navy and Royal Australian Air Force , and the administration of a company of regular soldiers known as the Darwin Mobile Force . After the Second World War began in September 1939 , Robertson became responsible for supplying the 7th Military District 's quota of volunteers for the Second Australian Imperial Force ( AIF ) . A strike on the waterfront saw Robertson committing troops to help unload cargo . On 4 April 1940 , Robertson joined the Second AIF himself , with the rank of brigadier , and was allocated the AIF service number VX20321 . He was appointed to command the 19th Infantry Brigade , which was then being formed from units made surplus by the reduction of the 6th Division from 12 infantry battalions to nine . All three of its battalions , the 2 / 4th , 2 / 8th and 2 / 11th Infantry Battalions , were initially commanded by over-age officers , but the commander of the 2 / 4th was replaced by Ivan Dougherty in August . Initially , Dougherty received a cool reception from Robertson , who was disappointed at being unable to select his own battalion commanders , but Dougherty soon made such a good impression that when Robertson went on leave in October 1940 he recommended that Dougherty act as brigade commander , despite the fact that he was the youngest and most junior of Robertson 's battalion chiefs .

The Battle of Bardia brought to the fore the simmering hostility between regular officers and reservists . Frank Berryman , the 6th Division 's General Staff Officer ( Grade 1 ) , and Alan Vasey , the Deputy Assistant Adjutant and Quartermaster General ( DA & QMG ) , were eager for Robertson to do well and show that Staff Corps officers could make good commanders , and if that could be done at the expense of an old-style reservist like Stanley Savige , so much the better . They pushed for Robertson 's 19th Infantry Brigade , then in reserve , to be committed when the attack by Savige 's 17th Infantry Brigade slowed down . The abrupt manner in which this was done generated antipathy between Robertson and Savige . The 19th Infantry Brigade then advanced on Tobruk . The attack on this fortified town proceeded along similar lines to that on Bardia , with the 16th Infantry effecting a break-in of the position , but this time the 19th Infantry Brigade was to carry out the exploitation phase . Robertson 's contribution to the plan was to increase its tempo , so that the attack would be carried through without pause , the exploitation being carried out before the initial break-in was complete . Robertson accepted the surrender of the fortress commander , Generale di Corpo d 'Armata Petassi Manella , and later Admiral Messimiliano Vietina , the Italian naval commander . Comments by " a sunburnt red-headed Australian brigadier " made headlines in Britain , where senior officers rarely spoke to the media , but did not endear Robertson to his critics , who felt that his ego was out of control . Following the entry of the 19th Infantry Brigade to Benghazi on 7 February , Robertson declared " give me two stout ships and a bearing on Rome and we 'll dine in the hall of the caesars " .

For this campaign , Robertson was made a Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( CBE ) , but later that month he was hospitalised for varicose veins in the leg he had broken in 1917 . He was replaced as commander of the 19th Infantry Brigade by Alan Vasey . When Robertson recovered he was given responsibility for the training of AIF reinforcements in the Middle East . Robertson 's service in the field and his long experience in training troops made him an ideal candidate for the post . For his services , Robertson was mentioned in despatches a third time .

Around the time of the outbreak of war with Japan , many senior officers with distinguished records in the Middle East were recalled to Australia to lead militia formations and fill important staff posts . One of these was Robertson , who was recalled to take command of the 1st Cavalry Division in January 1942 . In March 1942 , an unusual event occurred . Major Generals Alan Vasey and Edmund Herring , and Brigadier Clive Steele , fearing that Gordon Bennett or John Lavarack was about to be appointed Commander in Chief , approached the Minister for the Army , Frank Forde , with a proposal that in view of the danger of an invasion of Australia , all officers over the age of 50 be immediately retired and Robertson be appointed Commander in Chief . This reflected an extraordinary endorsement of Robertson by his colleagues , but such favourable opinion was not universally held . Sydney Rowell later explained that : Robbie , although in Sydney , was not unaware of what was going on . The thing that really riled me was Vasey 's saying that " perhaps Robbie 's vices in peace would be virtues in war , to which I replied that " if meanmindedness and disloyalty could be counted as virtues at any time I might be prepared to go along with him . "

The " revolt of the generals " collapsed with the welcome news that Blamey was returning from the Middle East to become Commander in Chief . In the reorganisation of the Army that followed , Robertson was appointed to command the 1st Armoured Division . Initially , the 1st Armoured Division had a key role in the defence of Australia as a mobile reserve , but it was only partly trained and equipped , representing another major challenge to Robertson as a trainer of troops . When the prospect of an invasion of Australia became remote , the 1st Armoured Division was sent to Western Australia in January 1943 , where it became part of Bennett 's III Corps . The area became a backwater and the 1st Armoured Division was slowly broken up and then disbanded . To recoup some of the nation 's investment in training for armoured warfare , Robertson arranged for 25 officers to be seconded to the British 7th Armoured Division in Europe . Following the disbandment of the 1st Armoured Division , Robertson took over command of the 2nd Division , the other division in Western Australia , and then , upon Bennett 's retirement , III Corps in April 1944 . This too was disbanded in June 1944 and Robertson took over Western Command .

Because the Army reached its greatest extent in 1942 and shrank in size thereafter , Blamey was faced with a limited number of senior appointments and more senior officers than he needed to fill them . He faced public and political criticism over " shelving " senior officers , including Robertson . That Robertson and Bennett , two troublesome potential rivals of Blamey 's , had been sent to Western Australia did not escape comment . However , it was always more likely that Robertson would be the one recalled . Nevertheless , Blamey had serious concerns about Robertson 's health , after the latter was hospitalised with internal haemorrhaging in July 1944 and sent to the eastern states to convalesce . While there he joined Vasey and Brigadier Bertrand Coombes , the Commandant of Duntroon , in conducting an inquiry into the future training and organisation of the Royal Military College . Their report , submitted to Blamey in January 1945 , called for a number of reforms , the most significant being that the postings of regular officers should alternate between staff and regimental duties .

In April 1945 , Robertson returned to the field , replacing Alan Ramsay as commander of the 5th Division , which was then engaged in the final stages of the New Britain Campaign . In July , Robertson became commander of the 6th Division , leading it through the final days of the Aitape – Wewak Campaign . On 13 September 1945 , Robertson accepted the surrender of Lieutenant General Hatazō Adachi , and his Japanese Eighteenth Army . In December 1945 , Robertson took over command of the First Army , becoming one of a select number of Australians to command such a formation , at least on paper , with the rank of lieutenant general . For the final campaigns , Robertson was mentioned in despatches a fourth time .

Robertson returned to Australia in March 1946 to take over Southern Command . In June he was appointed to replace Lieutenant General John Northcott as commander of the British Commonwealth Occupation Force ( BCOF ) in the occupation of Japan . Northcott had negotiated the Northcott-MacArthur agreement in January 1946 with General of the Army Douglas MacArthur , which governed the terms and conditions under which the BCOF would occupy part of Japan . They agreed that the BCOF would serve under American command , with American policy being followed . It remained to make the occupation work . Robertson had a poor relationship with the British component commander , Major General David Tennant Cowan , who resented being placed under an Australian officer . " It did not occur to me " , Robertson later wrote , " that officers of the British and Indian armies looked upon us from Australia and New Zealand as they looked upon Indians , and were prepared to do anything to avoid being publicly commanded by us . " The British government 's principal interest in Japan was to renew pre-war trade concessions , and to secure new ones ; it was particularly interested in the port city of Kobe . The Americans blocked these attempts . Robertson clashed repeatedly with Lieutenant General Sir Charles Gairdner , the official representative of the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom . Gairdner was nominally senior in rank to Robertson until March 1947 , when Robertson was promoted to the substantive rank of lieutenant general , backdated to January 1944 . Robertson resisted Gairdner 's requests for BCOF aircraft for personal purposes .

By mid-1950 , the BCOF was winding down . All the contingents other than the Australians had departed , and the Australians were preparing to leave . For his services as commander of the BCOF , Robertson was created a Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( Military Division ) ( KBE ) in the King 's Birthday Honours List . Robertson intended to travel to London to be invested by King George VI but his plans were disrupted by the outbreak of the Korean War on 25 June 1950 . Robertson passed on to the Australian government requests from MacArthur for BCOF assistance , which were agreed to . He committed the frigate HMAS Shoalhaven and No. 77 Squadron RAAF but , although authorised to do so , he hesitated to deploy the 3rd Battalion , Royal Australian Regiment , as he considered the risks too great . Robertson built up what became the British Commonwealth Forces Korea ( BCFK ) . While the British government had hoped to have the Americans supply all their logistic support , Robertson realised that this was impossible . The US Army was being stretched to its limit just supporting itself and the army of the Republic of Korea , and British Commonwealth equipment was different in many respects . The British Army then scrambled to meet its own logistic needs , creating ad hoc arrangements and requesting support from Robertson and MacArthur . The Chief of the General Staff , Sydney Rowell , sent a cable to his British counterpart , Field Marshal Sir William Slim , warning of " a bugger 's muddle in which the only people to suffer will be the soldiers " . Slim agreed ; a Maintenance Area was established in Korea to support Commonwealth forces there , which drew some resources from American sources , such as petrol , oil and lubricants , engineer stores , casualty evacuation and port operations , and the rest from BCOF in Japan .

Once again , the British government did not wish to entrust its interests in Japan to a foreign officer , so the British Chiefs of Staff appointed Air Vice Marshal Cecil Bouchier as their representative at MacArthur 's headquarters . His brief made it clear that he had no responsibility or authority over the BCOF or Commonwealth forces in Korea . After rashly ordering the 27th British Commonwealth Brigade to Pusan without transport or heavy equipment , much to Robertson 's annoyance , Bouchier did attempt to confine himself to acting solely as a liaison officer . Following the dismissal of General Douglas MacArthur , Robertson held a press conference in which he defended the general and his conduct of the war . This constituted an implicit condemnation of the British government 's policy . Soon after , during the Battle of the Imjin River , Robertson was consulted by the Americans about the possible consequences of the loss of the 1st Battalion , the Gloucestershire Regiment , and he advised them not to endanger the rest of the I Corps line with a rescue attempt . For his services in the Korean War , he was awarded the American Legion of Merit , and the South Korean Order of Military Merit .

Robertson was recalled to Australia in November 1951 , replacing Sir Edmund Herring as Director General of Recruiting . In January 1953 , Robertson took over Southern Command again . This put him in uncomfortably close proximity to Rowell , however , and the two clashed over a number of minor issues . Robertson turned 60 on 29 October 1954 , and retired the next day , after racking up 3,985 days of active service in 43 years in the Australian Army . From 1954 to 1960 , he was honorary colonel of the Royal Australian Regiment . In retirement Robertson served on the committee of the Metropolitan Golf Club and was president of the Victorian branch of the Royal Empire Society for a time . He commenced writing his memoirs , which he promised would be " the million pound libel " . Unfortunately , the fate of the papers he gathered for it and the unfinished manuscript itself is unknown . On 28 April 1960 he suffered a ruptured aorta and died at the Repatriation General Hospital , Heidelberg . His sudden death came as a shock to many . A funeral with full military honours was held at Scots ' Church , Melbourne . For pall bearers , he had eight generals : Leslie Beavis , Allan Boase , Cyril Clowes , Hector Edgar , Ragnar Garrett , Edmund Herring , Sydney Rowell and Colin Simpson . Frank Kingsley Norris carried his decorations while the 2nd Battalion , Royal Australian Regiment and 1st Armoured Regiment provided honour guards for the largest military funeral since Blamey 's in 1951 . Afterwards , he was buried with his wife , who had died in 1956 , at Springvale Botanical Cemetery . The Robertson Barracks was later named in his honour .

" Guilty " is the third episode of the American police procedural drama television series Awake . The episode first aired on March 15 , 2012 in the United States on NBC , and was simultaneously broadcast on Global in Canada . It was written by series executive producer and showrunner Howard Gordon and consulting producer Evan Katz , and was directed by Jeffrey Reiner . " Guilty " was well received by television critics , who praised its storylines , noting the script to be interesting . The episode garnered 5.12 million viewers in the United States and a 1.6 / 4 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , according to Nielsen ratings . It ranked second in its timeslot of the night , behind Private Practice on ABC . The show centers on Michael Britten ( Jason Isaacs ) , a police detective living in two separate realities after a car accident . In this episode , John Copper ( Clifton Powell ) , a convict that Michael arrested 10 years ago , escapes from jail . Tara ( Michaela McManus ) and Rex ( Dylan Minnette ) go to tennis practice . Cooper hits the car Rex is in , incapacitates Tara , and kidnaps Rex . John kidnaps him for " justice " , claiming that he was innocent . Michael later finds out in the " red reality " , that Jim Mayhew ( William Russ ) had framed him for murder . He wears a wire to set him up , and obtains a confession . Meanwhile , Hannah 's ( Laura Allen ) friends organize a service for Rex 's death in the " red reality " . Michael can 't come because of the " green reality " .

The episode opens in the " green reality " ( where Rex is alive and Hannah isn 't ) , with John Cooper ( Clifton Powell ) , a convict that Michael arrested 10 years ago , who is transferred to a medical clinic for dialysis because he is missing a kidney , by Nancy ( Lolly Ward ) . As the guard takes Copper to the car to go back to prison , he complains that the prisoner is getting preferential treatment over his mother , who is on the waiting list . As they arrive at the van , Cooper uses a paralytic vial hidden in his bandages to knock one guard out . He takes his gun , and makes the other security guard shut the door . Cooper claims his has " nothing to lose " . Later , at home , while Rex 's tennis coach Tara ( Michaela McManus ) takes him to tennis practice , Michael gets a call from Isaiah " Bird " Freeman ( Steve Harris ) , his partner , that Cooper had escaped . Rex and Tara are talking about Rex 's guilt about his father , when Cooper hits the car , and puts a chemical thing on Tara , and kidnaps Rex .

Michael and Bird investigate in the case , and Michael , with evidence , finds out where Rex is , and runs away . Meanwhile , Rex wakes up inside of a shed , handcuffed to the floor . He tries to dial 911 on the cell phone but Cooper comes in , interrupting him . Michael speaks to Nancy , who admits that she helped Cooper escape but didn ’ t know he would abduct anyone . She claims that she helped him because he claimed that he was innocent . Tara notes that Cooper had phoned Tara , and told him to go to a payphone near his police station . He goes there , and speaks to Cooper , who tells him to meet him at a warehouse . Cooper then apologizes to Rex , stating that " no son should pay for the sins of the fathers " , and walks out of the shack . Michael meets with him ; he claims that he met him for " justice " , and said that he was innocent . Cooper explains that Rex will die without him , confirming that he will die from dehydration possibly soon . He goes home and takes a sleeping pill , transferring to the " red reality " . Later , in the " red reality " ( where Hannah is alive and Rex isn 't ) , he speaks with Cooper at jail . He says that he didn 't do it , and asks if he knows who did . He claimed that Jim Mayhew , another cop , committed the crime and framed him .

Michael leaves the prison and calls Mayhew , and offers to come over for a beer . However , once Michael comes over , he reminds Mayhew that Bell had a million dollars but only $ 100,000 ever turned up . He figures that Mayhew killed Bell , took the money , and planted the gun in Cooper 's house . When Michael demands his share of the stolen money , he kept stating that there was no money . However , as Michael leaves , Mayhew says that he has the remaining money for him . Michael leaves , Mayhew goes to the door , and finds out that the police are there . They arrest him . Michael 's partner in the " red reality " , Efrem Vega ( Wilmer Valderrama ) admits to Michael that he wasn 't sure if his partner had dreamed up the entire thing . Later in the " green reality " , Michael and the team head to the shed to get Rex , and take him to the hospital . In the shed , Rex had left a video message , which Michael had watched . Rex had said that he loved him . Michael wakes up in the " red reality " , and speaks to Hannah about their experiences .

The episode featured guest performances from many actors including : Logan Miller , who was cast as Cole , Rex 's best friend . Daniela Bobadilla appeared as Emma , who is Rex 's girlfriend , currently . Bailey Chase , who played as David Walker . Clifton Powell as John Cooper , a man who was falsely accused of a crime ten years earlier . He was framed by Jim Mayhew , played by William Russ . Jim Cantafio appeared as an IA Officer . Lolly Ward as Nancy , a man who had helped Cooper escape from jail . David Pease as Doubting Cop . Enrique Almeida , who was cast as Perez . Kevin Jackson , who appeared as a Homeless Man , and Christopher Judd , who was cast as the Paramedic .

" Guilty " was originally broadcast on March 15 , 2012 in the United States on NBC between 10 : 00 pm and 11 : 00 pm , preceded by Up All Night . The episode garnered 5.12 million viewers in its original airing the United States , and it ranked second in its timeslot despite airing simultaneously with Private Practice on ABC , and a live airing of the college basketball game , with teams New Mexico and Indiana playing . It acquired a 1.6 / 4 rating-share in the 18 – 49 demographic , meaning that it was seen by 1.6 % of all 18- to 49-year-olds , according to Nielsen ratings . The episode 's ratings had slightly improved over the previous episode , " The Little Guy " , which obtained 4 million viewers . It was simultaneously broadcast on Global in Canada , and was subsequently aired on Sky Atlantic in the United Kingdom on May 18 , 2012 . The episode obtained 277,000 million viewers in the United Kingdom on its original airing , making it the third most-watched program for that week on the channel behind Game of Thrones and Blue Bloods . Its ratings had slightly dropped from the previous episode .

" Guilty " was well received by most television commentators , who praised its storylines . Matt Fowler of IGN gave the episode a complimentary review . He claimed that the episode " effectively ramped up the tension " . Fowler thought that it " might have been a bit too much to accept that poor Rex had to suffer through yet another near-death ordeal " , and that " the episode itself was able to provide genuine thrills mixed with some incredible moments of tenderness " . Fowler noted that Michael fully took " advantage of his unique , tragic , situation by having him purposefully use one world as a source of information to help him solve a case " . Stating that the episode had " top-tier entertainment " , Fowler concluded his review by giving the episode a " 9 out of 10 " , classifying it as " great " . Nick McHatton from TV Fanatic mainly enjoyed this episode . McHatton claimed that Rex 's current behaviour and thoughts are " understandable " and " heart-renching " . He concluded his review by giving the episode a " 4.7 out of 5 " score . Caroline Preece from Den of Geek gave praise in the episode . He thought the episode was " built around a gripping premise " . Preece wrote that the series is " still very odd " after the episode . HitFix 's Alan Sepinwall noted many parts of the episode . Sepinwall stated that there was a " notable change in feel or style " from other episodes , because of different writers for the episode . He noted that " the idea of the loved one getting kidnapped feels like a very big card to play this early " , and that " it does fit in with the theme of the show " . Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club gave less praise and enjoyment in the episode . In his " B- " review , he noted that the " premise has been established " . He stated that it is " a clever device " . He argued that the " plotting isn 't helping " the episode . The Voice of TV 's Mary Powers gave the episode a " A- " grade . She called the episode " fabulous " . Carl Cortez from Assignment X gave much praise in the episode . He called it a " twisty / turny adventure " . Cortez claimed that it " feels too early and convenient " for Rex to get kidnapped .

Curiosity is the first EP by Canadian recording artist Carly Rae Jepsen . It was released on February 14 , 2012 , by 604 Records . Initially planned as a full-length album , Curiosity was cut down to a six-song EP just days before its release . Musically , Curiosity is a pop album influenced by several genres such as dance-pop and R & B , while its lyrical content is mostly about love . Curiosity received generally positive reviews from contemporary music , with many praising the quality of the tracks and labeling it mainstream . Its lead single , " Call Me Maybe " , was a commercial success , topping the charts in several countries and is one of the best-selling singles of all time , with over 18 million copies sold . The album peaked at number six on the Canadian Albums Chart .

Jepsen 's second studio album was initially planned to be released on February 14 , 2012 ; however , she chose not to release it because she wanted to make sure she " got the second CD right . I think I got a little nervous about the idea of the sophomore being a little less-than because it 's so rushed . So I wanted to give myself the time to not feel that pressure . " She then worked with songwriter Josh Ramsay and producer Ryan Stewart on most of the album 's tracks . Jepsen 's songwriting process was inspired by her life and friends . After the recording sessions were completed , Curiosity was announced as a full-length album , with a digital release date confirmed for February 14 , 2012 . A few days before its official release , however , the label decided to change the format of the album , turning it into an extended play .

The EP opens with " Call Me Maybe " , an upbeat track that draws influences from dance-pop and R & B. The clever lyrics of the song describes the " infatuation and inconvenience of a love at first sight , " as described by Bill Lamb of About.com. During the pre-chorus , the singer states , " Ripped jeans , skin was showing / Hot night , wind was blowing / Where you think you ’ re going , baby ? " As the chorus begins , the background incorporates synthesized string chords , and she sings , " Hey , I just met you , And this is crazy , But here 's my number , So call me maybe . " Melody Lau of Rolling Stone wrote that " Call Me Maybe " is a " Taylor Swift meets Robyn " song . The title track , " Curiosity " , has a similar sound to " Call Me Maybe " , and features heavy dance beats and catchy hooks . In the song , Jepsen sings about being poorly treated by a bad boy , and begs for more of his love . " Picture " is a ballad that focuses on patience in a relationship . Critics noted that the song would work well during the climax of a motion picture due to its lyrical content . " Talk to Me " and " Just a Step Away " were both described as mid-tempo pop songs that alludes to summer love , teen love and that first crush . Fiona Eadie of Cadence Canada noted that in both tracks , Carly is able to transcend the listener " to a porch swing or riding a bicycle along an old dirt road in the countryside ’ s summer sunshine . Her voice sings the highs and lows of love and everything that comes along with it . " The final song is a cover of Joni Mitchell 's " Both Sides Now " . Musically , the song is also an upbeat ballad , and differs from the original version in the sense that Jepsen 's version is " fresh and modern with her unique bubblegum twist . " Critics also added that Jepsen will be able to " attract a new generation to this widely recognized hit " with her " unique version . "

Curiosity received critical acclaim from contemporary critics . Bill Lamb of About.com began his review stating that it is always interesting to have new artists making music both familiar and fresh . He went to describe the six " electronic pop songs strong , almost too short to be satisfying but immensely repeatable . " Lamb also added that Jepsen 's " style is summery and bright without the emotional bogging down of [ Demi ] Lovato or the flat out drudgery of Jessie J " Allmusic critic Jon O 'Brien stated that , when compared to Jepsen 's previous effort Tug of War ( 2008 ) , the EP " unexpectedly abandons her previous singer / songwriter approach in favor of an unashamed bubblegum sound which harks back to the early 2000s pop princess glory days of Britney , Christina , Jessica , and Mandy . " Fiona Eadie of Cadence Canada described the musical style of the album as " pop . But not in the annoying , auto-tune , and talentless way . Her perfectly pitched voice makes it clear that this girl has real talent . " Eadie summarized her review saying that Curiosity " is filled with music that dances . And it is your choice to listen to it with or without a hairbrush ( a.k.a. microphone ) in front of your bedroom mirror . Overall a great EP . I can ’ t wait to put the top down and blast her tunes all summer . " Jen Appel of idobi Radio commented that , overall , Curiosity is the kind of extended play that brings attention from the teenage public due to its mainstream songs , and added , " if you are looking for fun , lovable songs to make you smile , this is your go-to mix . " Appel only criticized the lyrical content , noting that it is " very childish but seem to work with the music nonetheless . "

" Call Me Maybe " was released as the lead single from the EP on September 20 , 2011 . After pop singers Justin Bieber and Selena Gomez tweeted about the song , Jepsen gained international attention and was signed to Schoolboy Records , releasing her single in the United States through the label . The song received generally positive reviews from contemporary critics , who praised its composition and clever lyrical content , while deeming it as the perfect pop song . " Call Me Maybe " has attained commercial success worldwide , topping the charts in several countries , and is one of the best-selling singles of all time , with over 18 million copies sold . An accompanying music video portrays Jepsen trying to gain attention from her attractive neighbor , who is revealed to be gay at the close of the story . To promote the song , Jepsen has performed on several live televised shows , including on The Ellen DeGeneres Show , where she made her US television debut , and at the MTV Europe Music Awards . " Curiosity " was released as the second single on May 1 , 2012 . Jepsen shot a video for the song on June 5 , 2012 with director Colin Minihan . The music video was not released , and leaked on November 25 , 2012 . According to the description of the leak , " this video was shelved because it was " too sexy " for her new tween demographic . " On March 26 , 2012 , Jepsen visited WBBM-FM 's Morning Show and performed the two singles . In the last week of January 2013 , the singer filmed an acoustic performance of the song in Tokyo exclusively for Billboard .

William Edward Burghardt " W. E. B. " Du Bois ( pronounced / duːˈbɔɪz / doo-BOYZ ; February 23 , 1868 – August 27 , 1963 ) was an American sociologist , historian , civil rights activist , Pan-Africanist , author , and editor . Born in Great Barrington , Massachusetts , Du Bois grew up in a relatively tolerant and integrated community . After completing graduate work at the University of Berlin and Harvard , where he was the first African American to earn a doctorate , he became a professor of history , sociology and economics at Atlanta University . Du Bois was one of the co-founders of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People ( NAACP ) in 1909 . Du Bois rose to national prominence as the leader of the Niagara Movement , a group of African-American activists who wanted equal rights for blacks . Du Bois and his supporters opposed the Atlanta compromise , an agreement crafted by Booker T. Washington which provided that Southern blacks would work and submit to white political rule , while Southern whites guaranteed that blacks would receive basic educational and economic opportunities . Instead , Du Bois insisted on full civil rights and increased political representation , which he believed would be brought about by the African-American intellectual elite . He referred to this group as the Talented Tenth and believed that African Americans needed the chances for advanced education to develop its leadership .

Racism was the main target of Du Bois 's polemics , and he strongly protested against lynching , Jim Crow laws , and discrimination in education and employment . His cause included people of color everywhere , particularly Africans and Asians in colonies . He was a proponent of Pan-Africanism and helped organize several Pan-African Congresses to fight for independence of African colonies from European powers . Du Bois made several trips to Europe , Africa and Asia . After World War I , he surveyed the experiences of American black soldiers in France and documented widespread bigotry in the United States military . Du Bois was a prolific author . His collection of essays , The Souls of Black Folk , was a seminal work in African-American literature ; and his 1935 magnum opus Black Reconstruction in America challenged the prevailing orthodoxy that blacks were responsible for the failures of the Reconstruction Era . He wrote one of the first scientific treatises in the field of American sociology , and he published three autobiographies , each of which contains insightful essays on sociology , politics and history . In his role as editor of the NAACP 's journal The Crisis , he published many influential pieces . Du Bois believed that capitalism was a primary cause of racism , and he was generally sympathetic to socialist causes throughout his life . He was an ardent peace activist and advocated nuclear disarmament . The United States ' Civil Rights Act , embodying many of the reforms for which Du Bois had campaigned his entire life , was enacted a year after his death .

William Edward Burghardt Du Bois was born on February 23 , 1868 , in Great Barrington , Massachusetts , to Alfred and Mary Silvina ( née Burghardt ) Du Bois . Mary Silvina Burghardt 's family was part of the very small free black population of Great Barrington and had long owned land in the state . She was descended from Dutch , African and English ancestors . William Du Bois 's maternal great-great-grandfather was Tom Burghardt , a slave ( born in West Africa around 1730 ) , who was held by the Dutch colonist Conraed Burghardt . Tom briefly served in the Continental Army during the American Revolutionary War , which may have been how he gained his freedom during the 18th century . His son Jack Burghardt was the father of Othello Burghardt , who was the father of Mary Silvina Burghardt . William Du Bois 's paternal great-grandfather was James Du Bois of Poughkeepsie , New York , an ethnic French-American who fathered several children with slave mistresses . One of James ' mixed-race sons was Alexander . He traveled and worked in Haiti , where he fathered a son , Alfred , with a mistress . Alexander returned to Connecticut , leaving Alfred in Haiti with his mother .

Sometime before 1860 , Alfred Du Bois emigrated to the United States , settling in Massachusetts . He married Mary Silvina Burghardt on February 5 , 1867 , in Housatonic . Alfred left Mary in 1870 , two years after their son William was born . Mary Burghardt Du Bois moved with her son back to her parents ' house in Great Barrington until he was five . She worked to support her family ( receiving some assistance from her brother and neighbors ) , until she suffered a stroke in the early 1880s . She died in 1885 . Great Barrington had a majority European American community , who treated Du Bois generally well . He attended the local integrated public school and played with white schoolmates . As an adult , he wrote about racism which he felt as a fatherless child and the experience of being a minority in the town . But , teachers recognized his ability and encouraged his intellectual pursuits , and his rewarding experience with academic studies led him to believe that he could use his knowledge to empower African Americans . Du Bois graduated from the town 's Searles High School . When Du Bois decided to attend college , the congregation of his childhood church , the First Congregational Church of Great Barrington , raised the money for his tuition .

Relying on money donated by neighbors , Du Bois attended Fisk University , a historically black college in Nashville , Tennessee , from 1885 to 1888 . His travel to and residency in the South was Du Bois 's first experience with Southern racism , which at the time encompassed Jim Crow laws , bigotry , suppression of black voting , and lynchings ; the lattermost reached a peak in the next decade . After receiving a bachelor 's degree from Fisk , he attended Harvard College ( which did not accept course credits from Fisk ) from 1888 to 1890 , where he was strongly influenced by his professor William James , prominent in American philosophy . Du Bois paid his way through three years at Harvard with money from summer jobs , an inheritance , scholarships , and loans from friends . In 1890 , Harvard awarded Du Bois his second bachelor 's degree , cum laude , in history . In 1891 , Du Bois received a scholarship to attend the sociology graduate school at Harvard . In 1892 , Du Bois received a fellowship from the John F. Slater Fund for the Education of Freedmen to attend the University of Berlin for graduate work . While a student in Berlin , he traveled extensively throughout Europe . He came of age intellectually in the German capital , while studying with some of that nation 's most prominent social scientists , including Gustav von Schmoller , Adolph Wagner , and Heinrich von Treitschke . After returning from Europe , Du Bois completed his graduate studies ; in 1895 he was the first African American to earn a Ph.D. from Harvard University .

In the summer of 1894 , Du Bois received several job offers , including one from the prestigious Tuskegee Institute ; he accepted a teaching job at Wilberforce University in Ohio . At Wilberforce , Du Bois was strongly influenced by Alexander Crummell , who believed that ideas and morals are necessary tools to effect social change . While at Wilberforce , Du Bois married Nina Gomer , one of his students , on May 12 , 1896 . After two years at Wilberforce , Du Bois accepted a one-year research job from the University of Pennsylvania as an " assistant in sociology " in the summer of 1896 . He performed sociological field research in Philadelphia 's African-American neighborhoods , which formed the foundation for his landmark study , The Philadelphia Negro , published in 1899 while he was teaching at Atlanta University . It was the first case study of a black community in the United States . By the 1890s , Philadelphia 's black neighborhoods had a negative reputation in terms of crime , poverty , and mortality . Du Bois 's book undermined the stereotypes with experimental evidence , and shaped his approach to segregation and its negative impact on black lives and reputations . The results led Du Bois to realize that racial integration was the key to democratic equality in American cities .

While taking part in the American Negro Academy ( ANA ) in 1897 , Du Bois presented a paper in which he rejected Frederick Douglass 's plea for black Americans to integrate into white society . He wrote : " we are Negroes , members of a vast historic race that from the very dawn of creation has slept , but half awakening in the dark forests of its African fatherland " . In the August 1897 issue of Atlantic Monthly , Du Bois published " Strivings of the Negro People " , his first work aimed at the general public , in which he enlarged upon his thesis that African Americans should embrace their African heritage while contributing to American society .

In July 1897 , Du Bois left Philadelphia and took a professorship in history and economics at the historically black Atlanta University in Georgia . His first major academic work was his book The Philadelphia Negro ( 1899 ) , a detailed and comprehensive sociological study of the African-American people of Philadelphia , based on the field work he did in 1896 – 1897 . The work was a breakthrough in scholarship , because it was the first scientific study of African Americans and a major contribution to early scientific sociology in the U.S. In the study , Du Bois coined the phrase " the submerged tenth " to describe the black underclass . Later in 1903 he popularized the term , the " Talented Tenth " , applied to society 's elite class . Du Bois 's terminology reflected his opinion that the elite of a nation , both black and white , was critical to achievements in culture and progress . Du Bois wrote in this period in a dismissive way of the underclass , describing them as " lazy " or " unreliable " , but he – in contrast to other scholars – he attributed many of their societal problems to the ravages of slavery .

In 1900 Du Bois attended the First Pan-African Conference , held in London from July 23 to 25 . ( This was just prior to the Paris Exhibition of 1900 " in order to allow tourists of African descent to attend both events . " ) It was organized by men from the Caribbean : Haitians Anténor Firmin and Bénito Sylvain and Trinidadian barrister Henry Sylvester Williams . Du Bois played a leading role , drafting a letter ( " Address to the Nations of the World " ) to European leaders appealing to them to struggle against racism , to grant colonies in Africa and the West Indies the right to self-government and to demand political and other rights for African Americans . By this time , southern states were passing new laws and constitutions to disfranchise most African Americans , an exclusion from the political system that lasted into the 1960s . At the conclusion of the conference , delegates unanimously adopted the " Address to the Nations of the World " , and sent it to various heads of state where people of African descent were living and suffering oppression . The address implored the United States and the imperial European nations to " acknowledge and protect the rights of people of African descent " and to respect the integrity and independence of " the free Negro States of Abyssinia , Liberia , Haiti , etc . " It was signed by Bishop Alexander Walters ( President of the Pan-African Association ) , the Canadian Rev. Henry B. Brown ( Vice-President ) , Williams ( General Secretary ) and Du Bois ( Chairman of the Committee on the Address ) . The address included Du Bois 's observation , " The problem of the Twentieth Century is the problem of the colour-line . " He used this again three years later in the " Forethought " of his book , The Souls of Black Folk ( 1903 ) .

In the first decade of the new century , Du Bois emerged as a spokesperson for his race , second only to Booker T. Washington . Washington was the director of the Tuskegee Institute in Alabama , and wielded tremendous influence within the African-American and white communities . Washington was the architect of the Atlanta Compromise , an unwritten deal he struck in 1895 with Southern white leaders who dominated state governments after Reconstruction . Essentially the agreement provided that Southern blacks , who lived overwhelmingly in rural communities , would submit to the current discrimination , segregation , disenfranchisement , and non-unionized employment ; that Southern whites would permit blacks to receive a basic education , some economic opportunities , and justice within the legal system ; and that Northern whites would invest in Southern enterprises and fund black educational charities . Despite initially sending congratulations to Washington for his Atlanta Exposition Speech , Du Bois later came to oppose Washington 's plan , along with many other African Americans , including Archibald H. Grimke , Kelly Miller , James Weldon Johnson and Paul Laurence Dunbar – representatives of the class of educated blacks that Du Bois would later call the " talented tenth " . Du Bois felt that African Americans should fight for equal rights and higher opportunities , rather than passively submit to the segregation and discrimination of Washington 's Atlanta Compromise .

Du Bois was inspired to greater activism by the lynching of Sam Hose , which occurred near Atlanta in 1899 . Hose was tortured , burned and hung by a mob of two thousand whites . When walking through Atlanta to discuss the lynching with newspaper editor Joel Chandler Harris , Du Bois encountered Hose 's burned knuckles in a storefront display . The episode stunned Du Bois , and he resolved that " one could not be a calm cool , and detached scientist while Negroes were lynched , murdered , and starved . " Du Bois realized that " the cure wasn 't simply telling people the truth , it was inducing them to act on the truth . " In 1901 , Du Bois wrote a review critical of Washington 's autobiography Up from Slavery , which he later expanded and published to a wider audience as the essay " Of Mr. Booker T. Washington and Others " in The Souls of Black Folk . Later in life , Du Bois regretted having been critical of Washington in those essays . One of the contrasts between the two leaders was their approach to education : Washington felt that African-American schools should focus primarily on industrial education topics such as agricultural and mechanical skills , to prepare southern blacks for the opportunities in the rural areas where most lived . Du Bois felt that black schools should focus more on liberal arts and academic curriculum ( including the classics , arts , and humanities ) , because liberal arts were required to develop a leadership elite . However , as sociologist E. Franklin Frazier and economists Gunnar Myrdal and Thomas Sowell have argued , such disagreement over education was a minor point of difference between Washington and Du Bois ; both men acknowledged the importance of the form of education that the other emphasized . Sowell has also argued that , despite genuine disagreements between the two leaders , the supposed animosity between Washington and Du Bois actually formed among their followers , not between Washington and Du Bois themselves . Du Bois himself also made this observation in an interview published in the The Atlantic Monthly in November 1965 .

In 1905 , Du Bois and several other African-American civil rights activists – including Fredrick L. McGhee , Jesse Max Barber and William Monroe Trotter – met in Canada , near Niagara Falls . There they wrote a declaration of principles opposing the Atlanta Compromise , and incorporated as the Niagara Movement in 1906 . Du Bois and the other " Niagarites " wanted to publicize their ideals to other African Americans , but most black periodicals were owned by publishers sympathetic to Washington . Du Bois bought a printing press and started publishing Moon Illustrated Weekly in December 1905 . It was the first African-American illustrated weekly , and Du Bois used it to attack Washington 's positions , but the magazine lasted only for about eight months . Du Bois soon founded and edited another vehicle for his polemics , The Horizon : A Journal of the Color Line , which debuted in 1907 . The Niagarites held a second conference in August 1906 , in celebration of the 100th anniversary of abolitionist John Brown 's birth , at the West Virginia site of Brown 's raid on Harper 's Ferry . Reverdy C. Ransom spoke and addressed the fact that Washington 's primary goal was to prepare blacks for employment in their current society : " Today , two classes of Negroes , [ ... ] are standing at the parting of the ways . The one counsels patient submission to our present humiliations and degradations ; [ ... ] The other class believe that it should not submit to being humiliated , degraded , and remanded to an inferior place [ ... ] it does not believe in bartering its manhood for the sake of gain . "

In an effort to portray the genius and humanity of the black race , Du Bois published The Souls of Black Folk ( 1903 ) , a collection of 14 essays . James Weldon Johnson said the book 's effect on African Americans was comparable to that of Uncle Tom 's Cabin . The introduction famously proclaimed that " [ ... ] the problem of the Twentieth Century is the problem of the color line . " Each chapter begins with two epigraphs – one from a white poet , and one from a black spiritual – to demonstrate intellectual and cultural parity between black and white cultures . A major theme of the work was the double consciousness faced by African Americans : Being both American and black . This was a unique identity which , according to Du Bois , had been a handicap in the past , but could be a strength in the future : " Henceforth , the destiny of the race could be conceived as leading neither to assimilation nor separatism but to proud , enduring hyphenation . " Jonathon S. Kahn in Divine Discontent : The Religious Imagination of Du Bois shows how Du Bois in his The Souls of Black Folk , represents an exemplary text of pragmatic religious naturalism . On page 12 Kahn writes : " Du Bois needs to be understood as an African American pragmatic religious naturalist . By this I mean that , like Du Bois the American traditional pragmatic religious naturalism , which runs through William James , George Santayana and John Dewey , seeks religion without metaphysical foundations . " Kahn 's interpretation of religious naturalism is very broad but he relates it to specific thinkers . Du Bois 's anti-metaphysical viewpoint places him in the sphere of religious naturalism as typified by William James and others .

Two calamities in the autumn of 1906 shocked African Americans , and contributed to strengthening support for Du Bois 's struggle for civil rights to prevail over Booker T. Washington 's accommodationism . First , President Teddy Roosevelt dishonorably discharged 167 black soldiers because they were accused of crimes as a result of the Brownsville Affair . Many of the discharged soldiers had served for 20 years and were near retirement . Second , in September , riots broke out in Atlanta , precipitated by unfounded allegations of black men assaulting white women . This was a catalyst for racial tensions based on a job shortage and employers playing black workers against white workers . Ten thousand whites rampaged through Atlanta , beating every black person they could find , resulting in over 25 deaths . In the aftermath of the 1906 violence , Du Bois urged blacks to withdraw their support from the Republican Party , because Republicans Roosevelt and William Howard Taft did not sufficiently support blacks . Most African Americans had been loyal to the Republican Party since the time of Abraham Lincoln . Du Bois wrote the essay , " A Litany at Atlanta " , which asserted that the riot demonstrated that the Atlanta Compromise was a failure . Despite upholding their end of the bargain , blacks had failed to receive legal justice in the South . Historian David Lewis has written that the Compromise no longer held because white patrician planters , who took a paternalistic role , had been replaced by aggressive businessmen who were willing to pit blacks against whites . These two calamities were watershed events for the African-American community , marking the ascendancy of Du Bois 's vision of equal rights .

In addition to writing editorials , Du Bois continued to produce scholarly work at Atlanta University . In 1909 , after five years of effort , he published a biography of abolitionist John Brown . It contained many insights , but also contained some factual errors . The work was strongly criticized by The Nation , which was owned by Oswald Villard , who was writing his own , competing biography of John Brown . Du Bois 's work was largely ignored by white scholars . After publishing a piece in Collier 's magazine warning of the end of " white supremacy " , Du Bois had difficulty getting pieces accepted by major periodicals . But he did continue to publish columns regularly in The Horizon magazine . Du Bois was the first African American invited by the American Historical Association ( AHA ) to present a paper at their annual conference . He read his paper , Reconstruction and Its Benefits , to an astounded audience at the AHA 's December 1909 conference . The paper went against the mainstream historical view , promoted by the Dunning School of scholars at Columbia University , that Reconstruction was a disaster , caused by the ineptitude and sloth of blacks . To the contrary , Du Bois asserted that the brief period of African-American leadership in the South accomplished three important goals : democracy , free public schools , and new social welfare legislation . He asserted that it was the federal government 's failure to manage the Freedmen 's Bureau , to distribute land , and to establish an educational system , that doomed African-American prospects in the South . When Du Bois submitted the paper for publication a few months later in the American Historical Review , he asked that the word Negro be capitalized . The editor , J. Franklin Jameson , refused , and published the paper without the capitalization . The paper was mostly ignored by white historians . Du Bois later developed his paper as his ground-breaking 1935 book , Black Reconstruction , which marshaled extensive facts to support his assertions . The AHA did not invite another African-American speaker until 1940 .

In May 1909 , Du Bois attended the National Negro Conference in New York . The meeting led to the creation of the National Negro Committee , chaired by Oswald Villard , and dedicated to campaigning for civil rights , equal voting rights , and equal educational opportunities . The following spring , in 1910 , at the second National Negro Conference , the attendees created the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People ( NAACP ) . At Du Bois 's suggestion , the word " colored " , rather than " black " , was used to include " dark skinned people everywhere . " Dozens of civil rights supporters , black and white , participated in the founding , but most executive officers were white , including Mary Ovington , Charles Edward Russell , William English Walling , and its first president Moorfield Storey .

NAACP leaders offered Du Bois the position of Director of Publicity and Research . He accepted the job in the summer of 1910 , and moved to New York after resigning from Atlanta University . His primary duty was editing the NAACP 's monthly magazine , which he named The Crisis . The first issue appeared in November 1910 , and Du Bois pronounced that its aim was to set out " those facts and arguments which show the danger of race prejudice , particularly as manifested today toward colored people . " The journal was phenomenally successful , and its circulation would reach 100,000 in 1920 . Typical articles in the early editions included one that inveighed against the dishonesty and parochialism of black churches , and one that discussed the Afrocentric origins of Egyptian civilization . An important Du Bois editorial from 1911 helped initiate a nationwide push to induce the Federal government to outlaw lynching . Du Bois , employing the sarcasm he frequently used , commented on a lynching in Pennsylvania : " The point is he was black . Blackness must be punished . Blackness is the crime of crimes [ ... ] It is therefore necessary , as every white scoundrel in the nation knows , to let slip no opportunity of punishing this crime of crimes . Of course if possible , the pretext should be great and overwhelming – some awful stunning crime , made even more horrible by the reporters ' imagination . Failing this , mere murder , arson , barn burning or impudence may do . "

The Crisis carried editorials by Du Bois that supported the ideals of unionized labor but excoriated the racism demonstrated by its leaders , who systematically excluded blacks from membership . Du Bois also supported the principles of the Socialist Party ( he was briefly a member of the party from 1910 to 1912 ) , but he denounced the racism demonstrated by some socialist leaders . Frustrated by Republican president Taft 's failure to address widespread lynching , Du Bois endorsed Democratic candidate Woodrow Wilson in the 1912 presidential race , in exchange for Wilson 's promise to support black causes . Throughout his writings , Du Bois supported women 's rights , but he found it difficult to publicly endorse the women 's right-to-vote movement because leaders of the suffragism movement refused to support his fight against racial injustice . A Crisis editorial from 1913 broached the taboo subject of interracial marriage : Although Du Bois generally expected persons to marry within their race , he viewed the problem as a women 's rights issue , because laws prohibited white men from marrying black women . Du Bois wrote " [ anti-miscegenation ] laws leave the colored girls absolutely helpless for the lust of white men . It reduces colored women in the eyes of the law to the position of dogs . As low as the white girl falls , she can compel her seducer to marry her [ ... ] We must kill [ anti-miscegenation laws ] not because we are anxious to marry the white men 's sisters , but because we are determined that white men will leave our sisters alone . "

During the years 1915 and 1916 , some leaders of the NAACP – disturbed by financial losses at The Crisis , and worried about the inflammatory rhetoric of some of its essays – attempted to oust Du Bois from his editorial position . Du Bois and his supporters prevailed , and he continued in his role as editor . In a 1919 column titled " The True Brownies " , he announced the creation of The Brownies ' Book , the first magazine published for African American children and youth , which he founded with Augustus Granville Dill and Jessie Redmon Fauset .

The 1910s were a productive time for Du Bois . In 1911 he attended the First Universal Races Congress in London and he published his first novel , The Quest of the Silver Fleece . Two years later , Du Bois wrote , produced , and directed a pageant for the stage , The Star of Ethiopia . In 1915 , Du Bois published The Negro , a general history of black Africans , and the first of its kind in English . The book rebutted claims of African inferiority , and would come to serve as the basis of much Afrocentric historiography in the 20th century . The Negro predicted unity and solidarity for colored people around the world , and it influenced many who supported the Pan-African movement . In 1915 , Atlantic Monthly carried an essay by Du Bois , " The African Roots of the War " , which consolidated Du Bois 's ideas on capitalism and race . In it , he argued that the scramble for Africa was at the root of World War I. He also anticipated later Communist doctrine , by suggesting that wealthy capitalists had pacified white workers by giving them just enough wealth to prevent them from revolting , and by threatening them with competition by the lower-cost labor of colored workers .

Du Bois used his influential role in the NAACP to oppose a variety of racist incidents . When the silent film The Birth of a Nation premiered in 1915 , Du Bois and the NAACP led the fight to ban the movie , because of its racist portrayal of blacks as brutish and lustful . The fight was not successful , and possibly contributed to the film 's fame , but the publicity drew many new supporters to the NAACP . The private sector was not the only source of racism : under President Wilson , the plight of African Americans in government jobs suffered . Many federal agencies adopted whites-only employment practices , the Army excluded blacks from officer ranks , and the immigration service prohibited the immigration of persons of African ancestry . Du Bois wrote an editorial in 1914 deploring the dismissal of blacks from federal posts , and he supported William Monroe Trotter when Trotter brusquely confronted Wilson about Wilson 's failure to fulfill his campaign promise of justice for blacks . The Crisis continued to wage a campaign against lynching . In 1915 , it published an article with a year-by-year tabulation of 2,732 lynchings from 1884 to 1914 . The April 1916 edition covered the group lynching of six African Americans in Lee County , Georgia . Later in 1916 , the " Waco Horror " article covered the lynching of Jesse Washington , a mentally impaired 17-year-old African American . The article broke new ground by utilizing undercover reporting to expose the conduct of local whites in Waco , Texas .

The early 20th century was the era of the Great Migration of blacks from the Southern United States to the Northeast , Midwest and West . Du Bois wrote an editorial supporting the Great Migration , because he felt it would help blacks escape Southern racism , find economic opportunities , and assimilate into American society . Also in the 1910s the American eugenics movement was in its infancy , and many leading eugenicists were openly racist , defining Blacks as " a lower race " . Du Bois opposed this view as an unscientific aberration , but still maintained the basic principle of eugenics : That different persons have different inborn characteristics that make them more or less suited for specific kinds of employment , and that by encouraging the most talented members of all races to procreate would better the " stocks " of humanity .

As the United States prepared to enter World War I in 1917 , Du Bois 's colleague in the NAACP , Joel Spingarn , established a camp to train African Americans to serve as officers in the United States military . The camp was controversial , because some whites felt that blacks were not qualified to be officers , and some blacks felt that African Americans should not participate in what they considered a white man 's war . Du Bois supported Spingarn 's training camp , but was disappointed when the Army forcibly retired one of its few black officers , Charles Young , on a pretense of ill health . The Army agreed to create 1,000 officer positions for blacks , but insisted that 250 come from enlisted men , conditioned to taking orders from whites , rather than from independent-minded blacks that came from the camp . Over 700,000 blacks enlisted on the first day of the draft , but were subject to discriminatory conditions which prompted vocal protests from Du Bois . After the East St. Louis Riot occurred in the summer of 1917 , Du Bois traveled to St. Louis to report on the riots . Between 40 and 250 African Americans were massacred by whites , primarily due to resentment caused by St. Louis industry hiring blacks to replace striking white workers . Du Bois 's reporting resulted in an article " The Massacre of East St. Louis " , published in the September issue of The Crisis , which contained photographs and interviews detailing the violence . Historian David Levering Lewis concluded that Du Bois distorted some of the facts in order to increase the propaganda value of the article . To publicly demonstrate the black community 's outrage over the St Louis riot , Du Bois organized the Silent Parade , a march of around 9,000 African Americans down New York 's Fifth avenue , the first parade of its kind in New York , and the second instance of blacks publicly demonstrating for civil rights .

The Houston riot of 1917 disturbed Du Bois and was a major setback to efforts to permit African Americans to become military officers . The riot began after Houston police arrested and beat two black soldiers ; in response , over 100 black soldiers took to the streets of Houston and killed 16 whites . A military court martial was held , and 19 of the soldiers were hung , and 67 others were imprisoned . In spite of the Houston riot , Du Bois and others successfully pressed the Army to accept the officers trained at Spingarn 's camp , resulting in over 600 black officers joining the Army in October 1917 . Federal officials , concerned about subversive viewpoints expressed by NAACP leaders , attempted to frighten the NAACP by threatening it with investigations . Du Bois was not intimidated , and in 1918 he predicted that World War I would lead to an overthrow of the European colonial system and to the " liberation " of colored people world-wide – in China , in India , and especially in America . NAACP chairman Joel Spingarn was enthusiastic about the war , and he persuaded Du Bois to consider an officer 's commission in the Army , contingent on Du Bois writing an editorial repudiating his anti-war stance . Du Bois accepted this bargain and wrote the pro-war " Close Ranks " editorial in June 1918 and soon thereafter he received a commission in the Army . Many black leaders , who wanted to leverage the war to gain civil rights for African Americans , criticized Du Bois for his sudden reversal . Southern officers in Du Bois 's unit objected to his presence , and his commission was withdrawn .

When the war ended , Du Bois traveled to Europe in 1919 to attend the first Pan-African Congress and to interview African-American soldiers for a planned book on their experiences in World War I. He was trailed by U.S. agents who were searching for evidence of treasonous activities . Du Bois discovered that the vast majority of black American soldiers were relegated to menial labor as stevedores and laborers . Some units were armed , and one in particular , the 92nd Division ( the Buffalo soldiers ) , engaged in combat . Du Bois discovered widespread racism in the Army , and concluded that the Army command discouraged African Americans from joining the Army , discredited the accomplishments of black soldiers , and promoted bigotry . After returning from Europe , Du Bois was more determined than ever to gain equal rights for African Americans . Black soldiers returning from overseas felt a new sense of power and worth , and were representative of an emerging attitude referred to as the New Negro . In the editorial " Returning Soldiers " he wrote : " But , by the God of Heaven , we are cowards and jackasses if , now that the war is over , we do not marshal every ounce of our brain and brawn to fight a sterner , longer , more unbending battle against the forces of hell in our own land . " Many blacks moved to northern cities in search of work , and some northern white workers resented the competition . This labor strife was one of the causes of the Red Summer of 1919 , a horrific series of race riots across America , in which over 300 African Americans were killed in over 30 cities . Du Bois documented the atrocities in the pages of The Crisis , culminating in the December publication of a gruesome photograph of a lynching that occurred during the Omaha , Nebraska race riot .

The most egregious episode during the Red Summer was a vicious attack on blacks in Elaine , Arkansas , in which nearly 200 blacks were murdered . Reports coming out of the South blamed the blacks , alleging that they were conspiring to take over the government . Infuriated with the distortions , Du Bois published a letter in the New York World , claiming that the only crime the black sharecroppers had committed was daring to challenge their white landlords by hiring an attorney to investigate contractual irregularities . Over 60 of the surviving blacks were arrested and tried for conspiracy , in the case known as Moore v. Dempsey . Du Bois rallied blacks across America to raise funds for the legal defense , which , six years later , resulted in a Supreme Court victory authored by Oliver Wendell Holmes . Although the victory had little immediate impact on justice for blacks in the South , it marked the first time the Federal government used the 14th amendment guarantee of due process to prevent states from shielding mob violence . In 1920 , Du Bois published Darkwater : Voices From Within the Veil , the first of three autobiographies he would write . The " veil " was that which covered colored people around the world . In the book , he hoped to lift the veil and show white readers what life was like behind the veil , and how it distorted the viewpoints of those looking through it – in both directions . The book contained Du Bois 's feminist essay , " The Damnation of Women " , which was a tribute to the dignity and worth of women , particularly black women .

Du Bois traveled to Europe in 1921 to attend the second Pan-African Congress . The assembled black leaders from around the world issued the London Resolutions and established a Pan-African Association headquarters in Paris . Under Du Bois 's guidance , the resolutions insisted on racial equality , and that Africa be ruled by Africans ( not , as in the 1919 congress , with the consent of Africans ) . Du Bois restated the resolutions of the congress in his Manifesto To the League of Nations , which implored the newly formed League of Nations to address labor issues and to appoint Africans to key posts . The League took little action on the requests . Another important African American leader of the 1920s was Marcus Garvey , promoter of the Back-to-Africa movement and founder of the Universal Negro Improvement Association ( UNIA ) . Garvey denounced Du Bois 's efforts to achieve equality through integration , and instead endorsed racial separatism . Du Bois initially supported the concept of Garvey 's Black Star Line , a shipping company that was intended to facilitate commerce within the African diaspora . But Du Bois later became concerned that Garvey was threatening the NAACP 's efforts , leading Du Bois to describe him as fraudulent and reckless . Responding to Garvey 's slogan " Africa for the Africans " slogan , Du Bois said that he supported that concept , but denounced Garvey 's intention that Africa be ruled by African Americans .

Du Bois wrote a series of articles in The Crisis between 1922 and 1924 , attacking Garvey 's movement , calling him the " most dangerous enemy of the Negro race in America and the world . " Du Bois and Garvey never made a serious attempt to collaborate , and their dispute was partly rooted in the desire of their respective organizations ( NAACP and UNIA ) to capture a larger portion of the available philanthropic funding . Harvard 's decision to ban blacks from its dormitories in 1921 was decried by Du Bois as an instance of a broad effort in the U.S. to renew " the Anglo-Saxon cult ; the worship of the Nordic totem , the disfranchisement of Negro , Jew , Irishman , Italian , Hungarian , Asiatic and South Sea Islander – the world rule of Nordic white through brute force . " When Du Bois sailed for Europe in 1923 for the third Pan-African Congress , the circulation of The Crisis had declined to 60,000 from its World War I high of 100,000 , but it remained the preeminent periodical of the civil rights movement . President Coolidge designated Du Bois an " Envoy Extraordinary " to Liberia and – after the third congress concluded – Du Bois rode a German freighter from the Canary Islands to Africa , visiting Liberia , Sierra Leone and Senegal .

Du Bois frequently promoted African-American artistic creativity in his writings , and when the Harlem Renaissance emerged in the mid-1920s , his article " A Negro Art Renaissance " celebrated the end of the long hiatus of blacks from creative endeavors . His enthusiasm for the Harlem Renaissance waned as he came to believe that many whites visited Harlem for voyeurism , not for genuine appreciation of black art . Du Bois insisted that artists recognize their moral responsibilities , writing that " a black artist is first of all a black artist . " He was also concerned that black artists were not using their art to promote black causes , saying " I do not care a damn for any art that is not used for propaganda . " By the end of 1926 , he stopped employing The Crisis to support the arts .

When Du Bois became editor of the Crisis magazine in 1911 , he joined the Socialist Party of America on the advice of NAACP founders Mary Ovington , William English Walling and Charles Edward Russell . However , he supported the Democrat Woodrow Wilson in the 1912 presidential campaign , a breach of the rules , and was forced to resign from the Socialist Party . Du Bois remained : " convinced that socialism was an excellent way of life , but I thought it might be reached by various methods . " Nine years after the 1917 Russian Revolution , Du Bois extended a trip to Europe to include a visit to the Soviet Union . Du Bois was struck by the poverty and disorganization he encountered in the Soviet Union , yet was impressed by the intense labors of the officials and by the recognition given to workers . Although Du Bois was not yet familiar with the communist theories of Karl Marx or Vladimir Lenin , he concluded that socialism may be a better path towards racial equality than capitalism . Although Du Bois generally endorsed socialist principles , his politics were strictly pragmatic : In 1929 , Du Bois endorsed Democrat Jimmy Walker for mayor of New York , rather than the socialist Norman Thomas , believing that Walker could do more immediate good for blacks , even though Thomas ' platform was more consistent with Du Bois 's views . Throughout the 1920s , Du Bois and the NAACP shifted support back and forth between the Republican Party and the Democratic Party , induced by promises from the candidates to fight lynchings , improve working conditions , or support voting rights in the South ; invariably , the candidates failed to deliver on their promises .

A rivalry emerged in 1931 between the NAACP and the Communist Party , when the Communists responded quickly and effectively to support the Scottsboro Boys , nine African-American youth arrested in 1931 in Alabama for rape . Du Bois and the NAACP felt that the case would not be beneficial to their cause , so they chose to let the Communist Party organize the defense efforts . Du Bois was impressed with the vast amount of publicity and funds the Communists devoted to the partially successful defense effort , and he came to suspect that the Communists were attempting to present their party to African Americans as a better solution than the NAACP . Responding to criticisms of the NAACP from the Communist Party , Du Bois wrote articles condemning the party , claiming that it unfairly attacked the NAACP , and that it failed to fully appreciate racism in the United States . The Communist leaders , in turn , accused Du Bois of being a " class enemy " , and claimed that the NAACP leadership was an isolated elite , disconnected from the working-class blacks they ostensibly fought for .

Du Bois did not have a good working relationship with Walter Francis White , president of the NAACP since 1931 . That conflict , combined with the financial stresses of the Great Depression , precipitated a power struggle over The Crisis . Du Bois , concerned that his position as editor would be eliminated , resigned his job at The Crisis and accepted an academic position at Atlanta University in early 1933 . The rift with the NAACP grew larger in 1934 when Du Bois reversed his stance on segregation , stating that " separate but equal " was an acceptable goal for African Americans . The NAACP leadership was stunned , and asked Du Bois to retract his statement , but he refused , and the dispute led to Du Bois 's resignation from the NAACP . After arriving at his new professorship in Atlanta , Du Bois wrote a series of articles generally supportive of Marxism . He was not a strong proponent of labor unions or the Communist Party , but he felt that Marx 's scientific explanation of society and the economy were useful for explaining the situation of African Americans in the United States . Marx 's atheism also struck a chord with Du Bois , who routinely criticized black churches for dulling blacks ' sensitivity to racism . In his 1933 writings , Du Bois embraced socialism , but asserted that " [ c ] olored labor has no common ground with white labor " , a controversial position that was rooted in Du Bois 's dislike of American labor unions , which had systematically excluded blacks for decades . Du Bois did not support the Communist Party in the U.S. and did not vote for their candidate in the 1932 presidential election , in spite of an African American on their ticket .

Back in the world of academia , Du Bois was able to resume his study of Reconstruction , the topic of the 1910 paper that he presented to the American Historical Association . In 1935 , he published his magnum opus , Black Reconstruction in America . The book presented the thesis , in the words of the historian David Levering Lewis , that " black people , suddenly admitted to citizenship in an environment of feral hostility , displayed admirable volition and intelligence as well as the indolence and ignorance inherent in three centuries of bondage . " Du Bois documented how black people were central figures in the American Civil War and Reconstruction , and also showed how they made alliances with white politicians . He provided evidence that the coalition governments established public education in the South , and many needed social service programs . The book also demonstrated the ways in which black emancipation – the crux of Reconstruction – promoted a radical restructuring of United States society , as well as how and why the country failed to continue support for civil rights for blacks in the aftermath of Reconstruction . The book 's thesis ran counter to the orthodox interpretation of Reconstruction maintained by white historians , and the book was virtually ignored by mainstream historians until the 1960s . Thereafter , however , it ignited a " revisionist " trend in the historiography of Reconstruction , which emphasized black people 's search for freedom and the era 's radical policy changes . By the 21st century , Black Reconstruction was widely perceived as " the foundational text of revisionist African American historiography . "

In the final chapter of the book , " XIV . The Propaganda of History " , Du Bois evokes his efforts at writing an article for the Encyclopædia Britannica on the " history of the American Negro " . After the editors had cut all reference to Reconstruction , he insisted that the following note appear in the entry : " White historians have ascribed the faults and failures of Reconstruction to Negro ignorance and corruption . But the Negro insists that it was Negro loyalty and the Negro vote alone that restored the South to the Union ; established the new democracy , both for white and black , and instituted the public schools . " The editors refused and , so , Du Bois withdrew his article .

Du Bois took a trip around the world in 1936 , which included visits to Nazi Germany , China and Japan . While in Germany , Du Bois remarked that he was treated with warmth and respect . After his return to the United States , he expressed his ambivalence about the Nazi regime . He admired how the Nazis had improved the German economy , but he was horrified by their treatment of the Jewish people , which he described as " an attack on civilization , comparable only to such horrors as the Spanish Inquisition and the African slave trade . " Following the 1905 Japanese victory in the Russo-Japanese War , Du Bois became impressed by the growing strength of Imperial Japan . He considered the victory of Japan over Tsarist Russia as an example of colored peoples defeating white peoples . A representative of Japan 's " Negro Propaganda Operations " traveled to the United States during the 1920s and 1930s , meeting with Du Bois and giving him a positive impression of Imperial Japan 's racial policies . In 1936 , the Japanese ambassador arranged a trip to Japan for Du Bois and a small group of academics .

Du Bois opposed the U.S. intervention in World War II , particularly in the Pacific , because he believed that China and Japan were emerging from the clutches of white imperialists . He felt that the European Allies waging war against Japan was an opportunity for whites to reestablish their influence in Asia . He was deeply disappointed by the US government 's plan for African Americans in the armed forces : Blacks were limited to 5.8 % of the force , and there were to be no African-American combat units – virtually the same restrictions as in World War I. With blacks threatening to shift their support to President Franklin D. Roosevelt 's Republican opponent in the 1940 election , Roosevelt appointed a few blacks to leadership posts in the military . Dusk of Dawn , Du Bois 's second autobiography , was published in 1940 . The title refers to Du Bois 's hope that African Americans were passing out of the darkness of racism into an era of greater equality . The work is part autobiography , part history , and part sociological treatise . Du Bois described the book as " the autobiography of a concept of race [ ... ] elucidated and magnified and doubtless distorted in the thoughts and deeds which were mine [ ... ] Thus for all time my life is significant for all lives of men . "

In 1943 , at age 76 , Du Bois was abruptly fired from his position at Atlanta University by college president Rufus Clement . Many scholars expressed outrage , prompting Atlanta University to provide Du Bois with a lifelong pension and the title of professor emeritus . Arthur Spingarn remarked that Du Bois spent his time in Atlanta " battering his life out against ignorance , bigotry , intolerance and slothfulness , projecting ideas nobody but he understands , and raising hopes for change which may be comprehended in a hundred years . " Turning down job offers from Fisk and Howard , Du Bois re-joined the NAACP as director of the Department of Special Research . Surprising many NAACP leaders , Du Bois jumped into the job with vigor and determination . During the 10 years while Du Bois was away from the NAACP , its income had increased fourfold , and its membership had soared to 325,000 members .

Du Bois was a member of the three-person delegation from the NAACP that attended the 1945 conference in San Francisco at which the United Nations was established . The NAACP delegation wanted the United Nations to endorse racial equality and to bring an end to the colonial era . To push the United Nations in that direction , Du Bois drafted a proposal that pronounced " [ t ] he colonial system of government [ ... ] is undemocratic , socially dangerous and a main cause of wars " . The NAACP proposal received support from China , Russia and India , but it was virtually ignored by the other major powers , and the NAACP proposals were not included in the United Nations charter . After the United Nations conference , Du Bois published Color and Democracy : Colonies and Peace , a book that attacked colonial empires and , in the words of one reviewer , " contains enough dynamite to blow up the whole vicious system whereby we have comforted our white souls and lined the pockets of generations of free-booting capitalists . " In late 1945 , Du Bois attended the fifth , and final , Pan-African Congress , in Manchester , England . The congress was the most productive of the five congresses , and there Du Bois met Kwame Nkrumah , the future first president of Ghana who would later invite Du Bois to Africa .

When the Cold War commenced in the mid-1940s , the NAACP distanced itself from Communists , lest its funding or reputation suffer . The NAACP redoubled their efforts in 1947 after Life magazine published a piece by Arthur Schlesinger , Jr. claiming that the NAACP was heavily influenced by Communists . Ignoring the NAACP 's desires , Du Bois continued to fraternize with communist sympathizers such as Paul Robeson , Howard Fast and Shirley Graham ( his future second wife ) . Du Bois wrote " I am not a communist [ ... ] On the other hand , I [ ... ] believe [ ... ] that Karl Marx [ ... ] put his finger squarely upon our difficulties [ ... ] " . In 1946 , Du Bois wrote articles giving his assessment of the Soviet Union ; he did not embrace communism and he criticized its dictatorship . However , he felt that capitalism was responsible for poverty and racism , and felt that socialism was an alternative that might ameliorate those problems . The soviets explicitly rejected racial distinctions and class distinctions , leading Du Bois to conclude that the USSR was the " most hopeful country on earth . " Du Bois 's association with prominent communists made him a liability for the NAACP , especially since the FBI was starting to aggressively investigate communist sympathizers ; so – by mutual agreement – he resigned from the NAACP for the second time in late 1948 . After departing the NAACP , Du Bois started writing regularly for the leftist weekly newspaper the National Guardian , a relationship that would endure until 1961 .

Du Bois was a lifelong anti-war activist , but his efforts became more pronounced after World War II . In 1949 , Du Bois spoke at the Scientific and Cultural Conference for World Peace in New York : " I tell you , people of America , the dark world is on the move ! It wants and will have Freedom , Autonomy and Equality . It will not be diverted in these fundamental rights by dialectical splitting of political hairs [ ... ] Whites may , if they will , arm themselves for suicide . But the vast majority of the world 's peoples will march on over them to freedom ! " In the spring of 1949 , he spoke at World Congress of the Partisans of Peace in Paris , saying to the large crowd : " Leading this new colonial imperialism comes my own native land built by my father 's toil and blood , the United States . The United States is a great nation ; rich by grace of God and prosperous by the hard work of its humblest citizens [ ... ] Drunk with power we are leading the world to hell in a new colonialism with the same old human slavery which once ruined us ; and to a third World War which will ruin the world . " Du Bois affiliated himself with a leftist organization , the National Council of Arts , Sciences and Professions , and he traveled to Moscow as its representative to speak at the All-Soviet Peace Conference in late 1949 .

During the 1950s , the U.S. government 's anti-communist McCarthyism campaign targeted Du Bois because of his socialist leanings . Historian Manning Marable characterizes the government 's treatment of Du Bois as " ruthless repression " and a " political assassination " . The FBI began to compile a file on Du Bois in 1942 , but the most aggressive government attack against Du Bois occurred in the early 1950s , as a consequence of Du Bois 's opposition to nuclear weapons . In 1950 Du Bois became chairman of the newly created Peace Information Center ( PIC ) , which worked to publicize the Stockholm Peace Appeal in the United States . The primary purpose of the appeal was to gather signatures on a petition , asking governments around the world to ban all nuclear weapons . The U.S. Justice department alleged that the PIC was acting as an agent of a foreign state , and thus required the PIC to register with the federal government . Du Bois and other PIC leaders refused , and they were indicted for failure to register . After the indictment , some of Du Bois 's associates distanced themselves from him , and the NAACP refused to issue a statement of support ; but many labor figures and leftists – including Langston Hughes – supported Du Bois .

Du Bois was bitterly disappointed that many of his colleagues – particularly the NAACP – did not support him during his 1951 PIC trial , whereas working class whites and blacks supported him enthusiastically . After the trial , Du Bois lived in Manhattan , writing and speaking , and continuing to associate primarily with leftist acquaintances . His primary concern was world peace , and he railed against military actions , such as the Korean War , which he viewed as efforts by imperialist whites to maintain colored people in a submissive state . In 1950 , at the age of 82 , Du Bois ran for U.S. Senator from New York on the American Labor Party ticket and received about 200,000 votes , or 4 % of the statewide total . Du Bois continued to believe that capitalism was the primary culprit responsible for the subjugation of colored people around the world , and therefore – although he recognized the faults of the Soviet Union – he continued to uphold communism as a possible solution to racial problems . In the words of biographer David Lewis , Du Bois did not endorse communism for its own sake , but did so because " the enemies of his enemies were his friends " . The same ambiguity characterized Du Bois 's opinions of Joseph Stalin : in 1940 he wrote disdainfully of the " Tyrant Stalin " , but when Stalin died in 1953 , Du Bois wrote a eulogy characterizing Stalin as " simple , calm and courageous " , and lauding him for being the " first [ to ] set Russia on the road to conquer race prejudice and make one nation out of its 140 groups without destroying their individuality " .

The U.S. government prevented Du Bois from attending the 1955 Bandung conference in Indonesia . The conference was the culmination of 40 years of Du Bois 's dreams – a meeting of 29 nations from Africa and Asia , many recently independent , representing most of the world 's colored peoples . The conference celebrated their independence , as the nations began to assert their power as non-aligned nations during the cold war . In 1958 , Du Bois regained his passport , and with his second wife , Shirley Graham Du Bois , he traveled around the world , visiting Russia and China . In both countries he was celebrated and given guided tours of the best aspects of communism . Du Bois later wrote approvingly of the conditions in both countries . He was 90 years old . Du Bois became incensed in 1961 when the U.S. Supreme Court upheld the 1950 McCarran Act , a key piece of McCarthyism legislation which required communists to register with the government . To demonstrate his outrage , he joined the Communist Party in October 1961 , at the age of 93 . Around that time , he wrote : " I believe in communism . I mean by communism , a planned way of life in the production of wealth and work designed for building a state whose object is the highest welfare of its people and not merely the profit of a part . "

Ghana invited Du Bois to Africa to participate in their independence celebration in 1957 , but he was unable to attend because the U.S. government had confiscated his passport in 1951 . By 1960 – the " Year of Africa " – Du Bois had recovered his passport , and was able to cross the Atlantic and celebrate the creation of the Republic of Ghana . Du Bois returned to Africa in late 1960 to attend the inauguration of Nnamdi Azikiwe as the first African governor of Nigeria . While visiting Ghana in 1960 , Du Bois spoke with its president about the creation of a new encyclopedia of the African diaspora , the Encyclopedia Africana . In early 1961 , Ghana notified Du Bois that they had appropriated funds to support the encyclopedia project , and they invited Du Bois to come to Ghana and manage the project there . In October 1961 , at the age of 93 , Du Bois and his wife traveled to Ghana to take up residence and commence work on the encyclopedia . In early 1963 , the United States refused to renew his passport , so he made the symbolic gesture of becoming a citizen of Ghana . While it is sometimes stated that he renounced his U.S. citizenship at that time , and he did state his intention to do so , Du Bois never actually did . His health declined during the two years he was in Ghana , and he died on August 27 , 1963 , in the capital of Accra at the age of 95 . Du Bois was buried in Accra near his home , which is now the Du Bois Memorial Centre . A day after his death , at the March on Washington , speaker Roy Wilkins asked the hundreds of thousands of marchers to honor Du Bois with a moment of silence . The Civil Rights Act of 1964 , embodying many of the reforms Du Bois had campaigned for his entire life , was enacted a year after his death .

Du Bois was organized and disciplined : His lifelong regimen was to rise at 7 : 15 , work until 5 , eat dinner and read a newspaper until 7 , then read or socialize until he was in bed , invariably before 10 . He was a meticulous planner , and frequently mapped out his schedules and goals on large pieces of graph paper . Many acquaintances found him to be distant and aloof , and he insisted on being addressed as " Dr. Du Bois " . Although he was not gregarious , he formed several close friendships with associates such as Charles Young , Paul Laurence Dunbar , John Hope and Mary Ovington . His closest friend was Joel Spingarn – a white man – but Du Bois never accepted Spingarn 's offer to be on a first name basis . Du Bois was something of a dandy – he dressed formally , carried a walking stick , and walked with an air of confidence and dignity . He was relatively short 5 feet 5.5 inches ( 166 cm ) and always maintained a well-groomed mustache and goatee . He was a good singer and enjoyed playing tennis .

Du Bois was married twice , first to Nina Gomer ( m . 1896 , d . 1950 ) , with whom he had two children , a son Burghardt ( who died as an infant ) and a daughter Yolande , who married Countee Cullen . As a widower , he married Shirley Graham ( m . 1951 , d . 1977 ) , an author , playwright , composer and activist . She brought her son David Graham to the marriage . David grew close to Du Bois and took his stepfather 's name ; he also worked for African-American causes . The historian David Levering Lewis wrote that Du Bois engaged in several extramarital relationships . But the historian Raymond Wolters cast doubt on this , based on the lack of corroboration from Du Bois 's alleged lovers .

Although Du Bois attended a New England Congregational church as a child , he abandoned organized religion while at Fisk College . As an adult , Du Bois described himself as agnostic or a freethinker , but at least one biographer concluded that Du Bois was virtually an atheist . However , another analyst of Du Bois 's writings concluded that he had a religious voice , albeit radically different from other African-American religious voices of his era , and inaugurated a 20th-century spirituality to which Ralph Ellison , Zora Neale Hurston , and James Baldwin also belong . When asked to lead public prayers , Du Bois would refuse . In his autobiography , Du Bois wrote : " When I became head of a department at Atlanta , the engagement was held up because again I balked at leading in prayer [ ... ] I flatly refused again to join any church or sign any church creed . [ ... ] I think the greatest gift of the Soviet Union to modern civilization was the dethronement of the clergy and the refusal to let religion be taught in the public schools . " Du Bois accused American churches of being the most discriminatory of all institutions . He also provocatively linked African-American Christianity to indigenous African religions . Du Bois occasionally acknowledged the beneficial role religion played in African-America life – as the " basic rock " which served as an anchor for African-American communities – but in general disparaged African-American churches and clergy because he felt they did not support the goals of racial equality and hindered activists ' efforts .

The site of the house where Du Bois grew up in Great Barrington , Massachusetts , was designated a National Historic Landmark in 1976 . In 1992 the United States Postal Service honored Du Bois with his portrait on a postage stamp . A second stamp of face value 32 ¢ was issued on February 3 , 1998 as part of the Celebrate the Century stamp sheet series . A dormitory was named after Du Bois at the University of Pennsylvania , where he conducted field research for his sociological study " The Philadelphia Negro " . Africana : The Encyclopedia of the African and African-American Experience was inspired by and dedicated to Du Bois by its editors Kwame Anthony Appiah and Henry Louis Gates , Jr . In 2005 , Du Bois was honored with a medallion in The Extra Mile , Washington DC 's memorial to important American volunteers .

" Sectionals " is the thirteenth episode of the American television series Glee . It premiered on the Fox network on December 9 , 2009 . The episode was written and directed by series co-creator Brad Falchuk , and serves as the mid-season finale for the show 's first season . " Sectionals " sees the glee club win the sectionals round of competition , advancing on to regionals . Glee club member Finn ( Cory Monteith ) discovers he is not the father of his girlfriend Quinn 's ( Dianna Agron ) baby . Football coach Ken Tanaka ( Patrick Gallagher ) plans his wedding with Emma ( Jayma Mays ) on the same day as the sectionals competition . Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) is unable to take the students to sectionals and Emma offers to take them . The episode sees the return of Eve and Michael Hitchcock as rival glee club directors Grace Hitchens and Dalton Rumba . The episode features covers of six songs , studio recordings of four of which were released as singles , available for digital download , and are also included on the album Glee : The Music , Volume 2 . " Sectionals " was watched by 8.127 million U.S. viewers , and received mostly positive reviews from critics . The episode 's musical performances attracted praise , as did the development of Will and Emma 's relationship , though Dan Snierson of Entertainment Weekly suggested it may have been preferable to leave their romance unresolved . James Poniewozik of Time felt that by concluding the pregnancy storyline in " Sectionals " , Glee was able to " clear the decks for a second half of the season as the confident show it now is " .

As a result of a technicality in the show choir competition rules , glee club director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) is not allowed to accompany New Directions to sectionals . Guidance counsellor Emma Pillsbury ( Jayma Mays ) postpones her own wedding by a few hours so that she can take the club in his place , although her fiancé , football coach Ken Tanaka ( Patrick Gallagher ) , feels she is choosing Will over him . Most of the glee club has learned that Puck ( Mark Salling ) , not Finn ( Cory Monteith ) , is the father of Quinn 's baby . They hide this fact from Rachel ( Lea Michele ) , believing that she will tell Finn . Emma takes over as faculty advisor of the club as they start working on their set list for sectionals . With two group songs selected , Rachel says that she 'll sing the solo ballad ; Mercedes ( Amber Riley ) strenuously objects to this , and sings " And I Am Telling You I 'm Not Going " to wild applause . Rachel agrees that Mercedes deserves to sing the solo and the two hug . Meanwhile , Rachel has deduced that Puck impregnated Quinn and tells Finn ; he attacks Puck and confronts Quinn , who tearfully admits the truth . Angered by their betrayal , Finn quits the club on the eve of sectionals , and has to be replaced by school reporter Jacob Ben Israel ( Josh Sussman ) . New Directions arrive at the event to discover their competitors have received an advance copy of their set list , and are performing all three of their chosen songs . Emma calls Will , who convinces Finn to help his New Directions teammates . Will finds Finn in the locker room , and talks to him about how special he is and that the club needs him .

Emma confronts rival choir directors Grace Hitchens ( Eve ) and Dalton Rumba ( Michael Hitchcock ) , while New Directions chooses new performance pieces for their set list at the last minute . Rachel asks Mercedes to perform another ballad , but Mercedes insists , with the rest of the club agreeing , that Rachel is the best choice to perform " on the fly " . They also decide to include " Somebody to Love " as their closer , but are stuck for a third piece until Finn arrives with new sheet music for the group , ready to perform with them . Rachel gives a solo performance of " Don 't Rain on My Parade " , receiving a standing ovation after finishing . The group then performs " You Can 't Always Get What You Want " by the Rolling Stones , to the applause and cheers of the audience . After their performance , Grace attempts to confess her duplicity to the judges , but they have already unanimously decided that New Directions has won the competition . Having previously discovered that his wife Terri ( Jessalyn Gilsig ) was faking her pregnancy , Will tells her he no longer feels the same way he did when they first fell in love . He later attends Ken and Emma 's delayed wedding , only to find that Ken has ended the relationship as a result of Emma 's feelings for Will . She announces her intention to leave McKinley High School , explaining that it will be too painful for her to carry on working with Will and Ken . Back at school , Principal Figgins ( Iqbal Theba ) suspends cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) for leaking the glee club 's set list , and has Will reinstated as the director of New Directions . The glee club members show Will their trophy and perform " My Life Would Suck Without You " for him . As Emma prepares to leave the school , Will chases after her and stops her with a kiss . Both are happy , but uncertain of what will happen next .

Glee was originally commissioned by Fox for a thirteen episode run , culminating with " Sectionals " . On September 21 , 2009 , the network announced an extension of the first season , ordering a further nine episodes . " Sectionals " therefore serves as the mid-season finale , with the remainder of the season airing from April 13 , 2010 . Events in " Sectionals " are influenced by the season 's eleventh episode " Hairography " , in which cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester gave New Directions ' competition set-list to their rival glee clubs . Morrison explained that the clubs perform New Directions ' songs first , making it appear that they are copying them , so New Directions " have to do this impromptu thing and fly by the seat of [ their ] pants . " Morrison has called " Sectionals " " the best episode " of the series . " Sectionals " was written and directed by series creator Brad Falchuk . Recurring characters who appear in the episode are glee club members Brittany ( Heather Morris ) , Santana Lopez ( Naya Rivera ) , Mike Chang ( Harry Shum , Jr . ) and Matt Rutherford ( Dijon Talton ) , football coach Ken Tanaka ( Patrick Gallagher ) , school reporter Jacob Ben Israel ( Josh Sussman ) , Principal Figgins ( Iqbal Theba ) and local news anchor Rod Remington ( Bill A. Jones ) . Anna Camp and Patricia Forte guest star as sectionals judges Candace Dykstra and Donna Landries , Peter Choi is the Emcee , and Thomasina Gross plays Perfect Engleberger , a member of the Jane Addams Academy glee club . " Sectionals " also sees the return of Eve and Michael Hitchcock as rival glee club directors Grace Hitchens and Dalton Rumba . Eve was offered the role of Grace after Whitney Houston declined to appear .

The episode features cover versions of " Don 't Rain on My Parade " by Barbra Streisand , " You Can 't Always Get What You Want " by The Rolling Stones , " My Life Would Suck Without You " by Kelly Clarkson , " And I Am Telling You I 'm Not Going " from Dreamgirls , " Don 't Stop Believin ' " by Journey and " Proud Mary " by Creedence Clearwater Revival . Studio recordings of " And I Am Telling You I 'm Not Going " , " Don 't Rain on My Parade " , " You Can 't Always Get What You Want " and " My Life Would Suck Without You " were released as singles in December 2009 , available for download . They are also included on the album Glee : The Music , Volume 2 . " And I Am Telling You I 'm Not Going " charted at number 85 in Canada and 94 in the US , while " Don 't Rain on My Parade " charted at number 59 in Canada and 53 in the US . " You Can 't Always Get What You Want " charted at number 51 in Canada and 71 in the US , and " My Life Would Suck Without You " charted at number 66 in Australia , 40 in Canada and 51 in the US . Jenna Ushkowitz named " You Can 't Always Get What You Want " one of her favorite songs on the album , deeming the original " a classic " and the Glee cover " emotional " as one of the final songs of the original run of episodes . The performance of " My Life Would Suck Without You " showcased choreography from numerous performances from earlier episodes .

The episode was watched by 8.127 million US viewers . It was the show 's highest-rated episode ever with teenagers , and its season high in the 18-49 demographic , with a rating / share of 3.7 / 9 . In Canada , it was the tenth most watched show for the week of broadcast , attaining 1.64 million viewers . " Sectionals " received mostly positive reviews from critics . TV Guide 's Natalie Abrams felt it ended the beginning of the season on a " high note " , while Raymund Flandez of The Wall Street Journal commented : " You couldn ’ t have asked for a better cliffhanger of a fall finale " . IGN 's Eric Goldman rated the episode 9 / 10 , calling it " very satisfying " , and Gerrick Kennedy of the Los Angeles Times commended it as " fine television . " James Poniewozik of Time wrote : " I 'm not sure I expected or wanted a feel-good ending out of the first half of Glee . But what we got from " Sectionals " left me feeling very good about where the show is going this spring . " In contrast , Alan Sepinwall of The Star-Ledger , felt that the episode brought too many storylines to a head at once , " not allowing all to have as much impact as they might have had the big developments been spaced out " . Sepinwall commented , however , that the acting and especially singing performances were " uniformly strong . "

Musical performances in the episode attracted praise . Aly Semigran of MTV called Riley 's rendition of " And I Am Telling You I 'm Not Going " " goose bump-inducing " , while Goldman commended : " Riley absolutely killed it as Mercedes belted out that song " . In contrast , Poniewozik wrote that it was the one song choice he didn 't like , feeling that it is overused , thus diminishing its impact . Abrams deemed Rachel 's solo performance at sectionals " amazing " , and Flandez recommended : " Watch it again if you ever want to take back three minutes of your life that you ’ ve wasted on something else . " Pardue called the group performance of " You Can 't Always Get What You Want " " energetic [ ... ] casual [ ... ] and very Glee " , but felt it " would have been nice " to feature different singers . Dan Snierson for Entertainment Weekly similarly noted that he would have preferred " more vocal interplay between all group members " . In December 2012 , TV Guide named the rendition of " Don 't Rain on My Parade " one of Glee 's best performances , commenting : " Glee has done Broadway many times , but rarely better than this . "

Critics also commented positively on the development of Will and Emma 's relationship , with Abrams noting that she had been waiting for them to kiss since the pilot episode , and Goldman deeming their coming together " very hard to not feel good about " . Snierson , however , wrote that although there was satisfaction in the episode ending on the kiss , it may have been " more intriguing " to conclude with Will finding Emma 's office empty , questioning whether it was too soon for the two of them to begin a relationship . The end of Quinn 's pregnancy secret was also well received . Poniewozik wrote that the pregnancy storyline had felt as though " the early Glee wasn 't confident that people would be interested in it without these over-the-top soap opera twists . " He noted that in concluding the pregnancy deception in " Sectionals " , Glee : " seemed to clear the decks for a second half of the season as the confident show it now is . "

Theodore Newman Kaufman ( February 22 , 1910 – April 1 , 1986 ) , sometimes given incorrectly as Theodore Nathan Kaufmann , was an American Jewish businessman and writer known for his eliminationist views on Germans . In 1939 , he published pamphlets as chairman of the American Federation of Peace that argued that Americans should be sterilized so that their children will no longer have to fight in foreign wars . In 1941 , he wrote and published Germany Must Perish ! which called for the sterilization of the German people and the distribution of the German lands . The text was used extensively in Nazi propaganda , often as a justification for the persecution of Jews and was specifically cited as a reason to round up the Jews of Hanover , Germany .

He was born in Manhattan , New York City on February 22 , 1910 to Anton Kaufman and Fannie Newman . His parents had married on March 14 , 1909 . His father had been a reporter for the Berliner Morgen-Zeitung in Berlin , Germany before emigrating to the United States in 1905 . Theodore 's three brothers were Herbert , Julian , and Leonard . In 1934 he was arrested along with his father , Anton Kaufman , for the robbery of Sandor Alexander Balint of Budapest . Balint had developed a process to speed the aging of wine . The Kaufmans had purchased this formula from Balint , but later came to believe that the formula was " worthless " . Theodore Kaufman 's mother died in 1939 . Kaufman traveled to the Sahara Desert and wrote : " you look at the horizon all day long and feel that you are staring at eternity . " In Biskra he met Clare Sheridan . Kaufman became the owner of a small advertising agency and ticket agency in South Orange , New Jersey . He published the New Jersey Legal Record . Kaufman founded the Argyle Press of Newark , New Jersey to publish his political pamphlets .

Kaufman was a radical intent on preventing American involvement in future wars in Europe . In 1939 , under the auspices of the " American Federation of Peace " , an unknown entity of which he was the president and probably only member , Kaufman produced several publications . One pamphlet , titled " Passive Purchase " advocated the establishment of a two-week period during which Americans would curtail their spending in order to demonstrate public opposition to American intervention in European conflicts . In a section of the pamphlet on the American Federation of Peace 's beliefs , Kaufman advocated for " the strongest possible military defense of the United States " and stated that " by keeping absolutely aloof from foreign wars and entanglements the American People face a truly great future . " That same year , the group also issued publications with more contentious messages , one of which read : " A possible plea to Congress . ... Have Us All Sterilized ! ... If You Plan On Sending Us To A Foreign War ... Spare Us Any Possibility Of Ever Bringing Children Into This World — Into This Country Of Ours ! " Two years later he shifted his focus to the forced mass-sterilization of all German men under 65 and the sterilization of most German women under 45 . This would eliminate " inbred Germanism , " he proposed , thus solving a great deal of humanity 's problems . He also promoted the distribution of Germany 's lands among the neighboring countries . His effort was spearheaded by the self-publication of the book Germany Must Perish !

" Since Germans are the perennial disturbers of the world 's peace ... they must be dealt with like any homicidal criminals . But it is unnecessary to put the whole German nation to the sword . It is more humane to sterilize them . The army groups , as organized units , would be the easiest and quickest to deal with . ... The population of Germany , excluding conquered and annexed territories , is about 70,000,000 , almost equally divided between male and female . To achieve the purpose of German extinction it would be necessary to only sterilize some 48,000,000 -- a figure which excludes , because of their limited power to procreate , males over 60 years of age , and females over 45 . ... Taking 20,000 surgeons as an arbitrary number and on the assumption that each will perform a minimum of 25 operations daily , it would take no more than one month , at the maximum , to complete their sterilization . ... The balance of the male civilian population of Germany could be treated within three months . Inasmuch as sterilization of women needs somewhat more time , it may be computed that the entire female population of Germany could be sterilized within a period of three years or less . Complete sterilization of both sexes , and not only one , is to be considered necessary in view of the present German doctrine that so much as one drop of true German blood constitutes a German . Of course , after complete sterilization , there will cease to be a birth rate in Germany . At the normal death rate of 2 per cent per annum , German life will diminish at the rate of 1,500,000 yearly . Accordingly in the span of two generations that which cost millions of lives and centuries of useless effort , namely , the elimination of Germanism and its carriers , will have been an accomplished fact . By virtue of its loss of self-perpetuation German Will will have atrophied and German power reduced to negligible importance . "

Although Kaufman 's book had a minimal impact in the United States , it achieved notoriety in Nazi Germany , where propagandists used it as evidence of an international Jewish plan to destroy the German people . On July 24 , 1941 , the Nazi Party 's newspaper , Völkischer Beobachter , published a front-page article on the book titled : " The Product of Criminal Jewish Sadism : Roosevelt Demands the Sterilization of the German People . " The newspaper alleged that Kaufman was a close ally of Samuel Irving Rosenman , a well-known advisor to Franklin Delano Roosevelt and that : " Given the close relationship of the writer to the White House , this monstrous war program can be seen as a synthesis of genuine Talmudic hatred and Roosevelt ’ s views on foreign policy . " At the time , the German leadership was engaged in a propaganda campaign designed to rally popular support for the German invasion of the Soviet Union . Antisemitism in general , and Kaufman 's ideas in particular , became a focus of this campaign . Nazi Propaganda Minister Joseph Goebbels read the book in early August and immediately grasped its value , writing in his diary : " This Jew did a real service for the enemy [ German ] side . Had he written this book for us , he could not have made it any better . " Under Goebbels ' direction , Germany Must Perish ! continued to receive significant media attention in Germany . Portions of the book were read on national radio , and Goebbels ordered the printing of five million copies of a pamphlet that summarized Kaufman 's ideas .

Nazi propaganda often used Kaufman 's pamphlet as a justification for the persecution of Jews . When the Nazis required German Jews to wear a yellow badge on their clothing on September 1 , 1941 , they published a flyer explaining to the German people that those individuals wearing the star were conspiring to implement Kaufman 's plan for the destruction of Germany . When the Jews of Hanover were forced from their homes on September 8 , 1941 , German authorities cited Kaufman 's book as one of the reasons . Kaufman responded by saying : " This is just a flimsy pretext for another of the innate cruelties of the German people ... I don 't think it was my book that prompted this barbarity . They employed every possible German cruelty against the Jews long before my book was published . " The Nazi propaganda ministry continued to publish pamphlets , posters and flyers on Kaufman 's ideas through the end of the war , and also urged newspapers and public speakers to remind Germans of Kaufman 's book . Kaufman 's last major appearance in Nazi propaganda occurred in late 1944 , when a five-page section on him was included in the widely published booklet Never ! , which described a number of alleged plots to destroy Germany . Randall Bytwerk , an historian of communications at Calvin College , concluded that " [ a ] German at the time could not have missed encountering " propaganda about Kaufman .

His final publication through Argyle Press was the March 1942 brochure titled " No More German Wars ! Being an outline for their permanent cessation " . It contained no more writing on the sterilization of Germans or discussion of German land distribution , but made very moderate proposals for democratic re-education of the German population . Few Americans have ever heard of a prominent fellow-citizen named Kaufmann ... In Germany every child has known of him for a long time . Germans are so well informed about Mr. Kaufmann that the mere mention of his name recalls what he stands for . In one of his recent artlcles Dr. Goebbels wrote , " Thanks to the Jew Kaufmann , we Germans know only too well what to expect in case of defeat . "

Pull Up Some Dust and Sit Down is the fourteenth studio album by American musician Ry Cooder . Following his 2008 album I , Flathead , Cooder pursued a more political direction with his songwriting , inspired by the late-2000s economic crisis and protest songs of the past . Pull Up Some Dust and Sit Down was written and produced by Cooder , who recorded its songs at Drive-By Studios , Ocean Studios , and Wireland Studios in California . He played various instruments and worked with musicians such as Flaco Jiménez , Juliette Commagere , Robert Francis , and Jim Keltner . Pull Up Some Dust and Sit Down features topical songs with socio-political subject matter about 21st-century America , including economic disparity , social injustice , politics , war . Its music is rooted in Americana and incorporates traditional styles and musical language from historical sources such as country blues , tejano , and American roots music . The record has been noted by critics for its eclectic musical range , allegorical songs , working-class perspective , and Cooder 's sardonic lyrics . When Pull Up Some Dust and Sit Down was released by Nonesuch Records on August 30 , 2011 , it charted modestly in the United States but relatively higher in Europe . Cooder expressed disillusionment with the music industry in response to the record 's poor commercial performance . Critically , the album was a success , earning him widespread acclaim and comparisons to folk singer-songwriter Woody Guthrie . According to Slant Magazine 's Joseph Jon Lanthier , " the orchestrated indignation of [ the album ] incorporated a protean Greek chorus of economic victims and beat Occupy Wall Street to the punch by several weeks . "

After an 18-year hiatus from solo projects , Cooder returned with a trilogy of sociopolitical , Southern California-themed albums , comprising Chávez Ravine ( 2005 ) , My Name Is Buddy ( 2007 ) , and I , Flathead ( 2008 ) . The albums examined various disenfranchised peoples through humorous , scholarly lyrics and esoteric musical styles . After completing the trilogy with I , Flathead in 2008 , Cooder worked on The Chieftains ' 2010 album San Patricio . Cooder became inspired to record Pull Up Some Dust and Sit Down by the late-2000s economic crisis and past protest songs . In interviews prior to the album 's release , Cooder expressed strong anti-Republican and anti-banker sentiments in discussion about the political and economic climate . Before conceiving the album , he wrote and recorded the song " Quicksand " in 2010 , as a response to the controversy spurred by Arizona Senate Bill 1070 and other anti-illegal immigration measures in the United States . In an interview for The Australian , Cooder said of his decision to pursue a more political direction with his songwriting : I was still working on the Flathead record ; that was during [ George ] Bush 's time . I was looking at things and paying attention to events , politically . So I started trying to write political songs because it 's good to have something you can do other than just sit and fume about everything . After Barack Obama got elected I started thinking about other stories that might be good to do . It occurred to me that the social and political problems that we 've been having , well [ ... ] it 's deja vu all over again , as the man said .

In early 2011 , Cooder was inspired to write the song " No Banker Left Behind " , and subsequently the rest of the album , by a headline about bankers and other affluent people who had profited from the bank bailouts and resulting recession during the late-2000s . In an interview with Kai Ryssdal on Marketplace , Cooder cited the song as the starting point for writing the album and stated , " ' No Banker Left Behind ' originated with a line from Robert Scheer 's Truthdig blog . I read this pretty regularly , and when I saw this , this metric I thought ' no banker left behind . ' " He compared the album 's content to Woody Guthrie 's songs about the Dust Bowl era during the Great Depression and said of his own songs , " What I like in the idea of these songs is if you follow the logic of each tune — this happened and this happened and you can see that at the end , this is the result , you just didn 't see it this way before , you never thought of Wall Street in terms of Jesse James and bilingual heft . "

Recording sessions for Pull Up Some Dust and Sit Down took place at Drive-By Studios in North Hollywood , Ocean Studios in Burbank , and Wireland Studios in Chatsworth , California . The album was written and produced entirely by Cooder , except " Lord Tell Me Why " , which was co-written by session drummer Jim Keltner . Cooder also worked with vocalist Juliette Commagere , accordionist Flaco Jiménez , bassist Robert Francis , vocalist Arnold McCuller , and drummer Joachim Cooder , Cooder 's son . Pull Up Some Dust and Sit Down was mixed by Martin Pradler and mastered by recording engineer Bernie Grundman at his Hollywood studio Grundman Mastering . Most of the album was engineered in Pradler 's living room .

Pull Up Some Dust and Sit Down 's music is rooted in Americana and draws on a number of styles , including blues , folk , ragtime , norteño , rock , and country music . For the songs , Cooder adapted musical language from historical sources and incorporated styles from both North and South American traditions . In his interview on Marketplace , he explained his stylistic approach for Pull Up Some Dust and Sit Down , stating " to me , these musical styles and sounds are narratives as well . I mean everything about them — if it 's an accordion , horns , the banda horns for the immigrant tunes — they all are part of the story . And you can see it then , you can imagine the Arizona border that 's hot , 120 degrees in the shade , dusty . The banda horns are coming from some truck over there . " According to him , musical settings for certain songs were decided based on their respective compositions , such as when " the words would come to me in ¾ time , that meant corrido , that means accordion ; banda horns because they ’ re exciting . "

Cooder wanted the music of each song to complement the stories in his lyrics and to serve as homages to particular traditional styles . Cooder said that he did not want to " over-think it " and said of his creative process for each song 's distinct style , " It ’ s taken a long time , but it becomes natural to combine an idea you have or a story you want to tell with whatever seems conducive . " Graham Reid of The New Zealand Herald writes that the music " refers to the dustbowl era , rural blues , Tex-Mex ( with accordionist Flaco Jimenez ) and old-time folk . " The Observer 's Neil Spencer comments that it is " grounded in the blues , folk and Tex-Mex the guitarist explored in the 1970s , but its songs belong to modern times . " Lyrically , the album focuses on socio-political themes of power and its abuses , the struggle for democracy , the trials of the working class , and the goal of equality , with songs composed as either first-person narratives or allegories . The songs deal with contemporary subject matter and topics such as immigration legislation , the emotional and physical effects of war , the dubiousness of politics , social class and race division , and white flight . Cooder 's songwriting is characterized by sardonic lyrics , satire , mordant humor , and wry observations on figures such as bankers , politicians , and militarists . Allmusic 's Thom Jurek characterizes it as " overtly political " and comments that " the depth of Cooder 's rage is quieter but more direct as the album draws to a close . " According to Bud Scoppa of Uncut , the album expands on Cooder 's previous trilogy of sociopolitical albums and their " scholarly but humour-laced examinations " and " arcane musical modes " . Journalist Alec Wilkinson comments that " what [ the album ] shares with them is an indignation over the economic and ethical disparities of American life and the destructive and scoundrely meanness of the privileges given to the rich . "

Nick Cristiano of The Philadelphia Inquirer writes of the lyrics , " Cooder takes deadly aim at rapacious bankers , warmongers , land barons , and the like , showing the devastating impact of their actions on ordinary folk " , adding that " He does this in a manner that mixes the scrappy populism of Woody Guthrie with the first-person narratives of Springsteen in Steinbeckian Ghost of Tom Joad mode . " Robin Denselow of The Guardian notes " bleak or thoughtful lyrics [ set ] against jaunty melodies " and " no elaborate narratives " in the songs , while interpreting the album 's motif to be that of " a broken , divided society and the gap between rich and poor , but with the anger matched against humour . " Neil Spencer of Uncut calls Pull Up Some Dust and Sit Down " an impassioned portrait of 21st century America and its injustices " , adding that " like Guthrie , [ Cooder ] nails his targets with droll humour while empathising with society 's underdogs . " Allmusic 's Steve Huey asserts that the album " reache [ s ] all the way back to his earliest recordings for musical inspiration while telling topical stories about corruption — political and social — the erasure and the rewriting of American history , and an emerging class war . " Peter Kane of Q compares it to Cooder 's 1971 album Into the Purple Valley , which featured Dust Bowl-era songs , and writes that this album 's " protest songs for today 's messed-up world " are " sly and humorous " . Philip Majorins of PopMatters compares the album to other songwriters ' " substantial statements " about the American zeitgeist , including Randy Newman 's Harps and Angels ( 2008 ) , Paul Simon 's So Beautiful or So What ( 2011 ) , and Bob Dylan 's Modern Times ( 2006 ) . However , he distinguishes Pull Up Some Dust and Sit Down as " an attempt at the existential , providing an everyman 's view of struggle during economic downturn , class disparity , injustice , and abuse of power " , calling him " a direct voice of protest , both musically and lyrically , that will not be mistaken for being impressionistic . "

The opening track " No Banker Left Behind " references the financial bailout of 2007 and criticizes bankers and government . Alec Wilkinson of The New Yorker writes that the song " ridicules the considerations extended to the prosperous men and women who grabbed everything not nailed down during the last few years . " It features marching rhythms , mandolin and banjo riffs , and electric guitar . Cooder has described the song 's rhythm as " a kind of clog-dance beat " . " El Corrido Jesse James " is played in waltz time with a horn section and accordion by Flaco Jiménez . The lyrics express a fictitious narrative by American outlaw Jessie James in Heaven , who claims to have never " turned a family from their house " when he was a bank robber . He asks God for his " trusty .44 " to persuade bankers to " put that bonus money back where it belongs " . Cooder discussed the character 's perspective in an interview on BBC Radio 4 's Today , stating : [ T ] he point here is that Jesse James was a primitive white man from the 19th Century . And in those days the hero was a one-man , one-gun hero . It 's a very popular American myth . But what Jesse doesn 't realise [ in the song ] is that while he 's been up in heaven , the forces massed against him [ ... ] He can 't overcome the growth of the corporate , military-industrial equation . He can 't walk down Wall Street and shoot up the place . No-one would even pay attention to him . The hero is outnumbered and outgunned . The wagons are circling , but what 's he going to do ? What 's anyone going to do ?

" Quick Sand " is a shuffling rock song that addresses the plight of illegal immigrants to Arizona . It depicts six migrants travelling through extreme climates in the Sonoran Desert to reach Devil 's Highway in an attempt to cross the Mexico – United States border . They journey from Tamaulipas and through the mountains along Devil 's Highway . Partway into the journey , the migrants are abandoned by their coyote guide and subsequently lose one another one by one . They experience thirst , hunger , injury , and fear , culminating with the only two surviving migrants being turned away by a vigilante at the border . Cooder said of the route 's background and the narrative in an interview , " [ I ] t 's been a migrant trail for 200 years . People go out there and try to do it on foot , but if you make one mistake and go five minutes out of your way , you become disorientated and dehydrated . And they find these mummified bodies out there . The heat has just baked them through . And the people who live through it often refer to having a vision of the Virgin of Guadalupe flying overhead . This is a very common vision when the dehydration sets in . "

" Humpty Dumpty World " incorporates the marimba with light reggae and Mariachi influences . The song 's lyrics are sung from the perspective of God , who deplores the world He created . He makes note of incitive politicians and craven television commentators , and views it as " a ball of confusion " in the chorus line , " I thought I had built upon a solid rock / But it ’ s just a Humpty Dumpty World " . " Christmas Time This Year " is an anti-war song with a Mexican polka style , with Flaco Jiménez on accordion and Cooder on bajo sexto . Composed as a corrido , the song is about wounded soldiers returning home for Christmas , with dismal lyrics set incongruously to an upbeat Mexican melody . Cooder wrote the song in response to the Walter Reed Army Medical Center neglect scandal and previous stories of neglected soldiers returning from the Iraq War . In " Baby Joined the Army " , a young man laments the departure of his girlfriend , who became uninterested in her town and enlisted in the army with the assurance that " If I get killed in battle , I still get paid . "

" Lord Tell Me Why " is a gospel song with a rolling funk groove , sung from the perspective of a lower class White man who has become disillusioned with the American dream . His ironic lyrics ask in the chorus , " Lord tell me why a white man / Ain 't worth nothin ' in this world no more . " The guitar-based " I Want My Crown " was recorded with an 11-piece band and has an aggressive blues style , rumba-rock groove , and growling vocals . The song is an indictment of politicians as " Judas men " who sided with oil barons and Republicans , and their greed that leads to war . " I Want My Crown " has been described by one writer as a " Mephistopheles-as-Right-winger character study " . " John Lee Hooker for President " is a blues song in which Cooder narrates as American blues musician John Lee Hooker visiting the White House . Adopting Hooker 's style and laconic vocal tone , he decides to run for the presidency after disliking what he observed in his visit , naming Jimmy Reed as Vice President , Little Johnny Taylor as Secretary of State , and proposing to have " nine fine-lookin ' womens on the Supreme Court " . According to Cooder , the song was inspired by blues musician Gus Cannon 's 1927 song " Can You Blame the Colored Man " , a satirical piece about Booker T. Washington 's invitation to the White House by President Theodore Roosevelt in 1901 .

" Simple Tools " is a Tex-Mex ballad about the contentment of leading a simple lifestyle , with references to the decline in traditional manual skills and the view of automated work as unfulfilling . Featuring a resounding mix of mandolin and guitar , " If There Is a God " is a satirical narrative about an afterlife in which Heaven is restricted by a government bill to the wealthy . Its lyrics criticize redistricting and Republican Party legislature . The song references " The Bourgeois Blues " by blues and folk musician Lead Belly . In " No Hard Feelings " , Cooder sings from the perspective of a lowly prospector who scolds businessmen for dealing with land exclusively in business terms . He dismisses the rich and elite as " ripples " in history and is willing to tolerate them provided that they avoid conflict .

Pull Up Some Dust and Sit Down was released by Nonesuch Records on August 30 , 2011 , in the United States . It was released in the United Kingdom on September 5 , and on September 9 in other European countries . Its vinyl LP release was on September 13 . The album 's lead single , " Quicksand " , had been released as a digital download on June 29 , 2010 . Cooder donated the proceeds from its sales to the Mexican American Legal Defense and Educational Fund . The single 's cover artwork , a piece called Nuthin ' to See Here , Keep on Movin ' ! , was designed by visual artist Vincent Valdez , a frequent collaborator with Cooder . Valdez contributed photography to the album 's liner booklet . Cooder performed with a 17-piece band at the Great American Music Hall in San Francisco , California on August 31 and September 1 , 2011 , to promote the album . He was not satisfied with the promotional aspect of the shows , however , and it contributed to his general disillusionment with the music industry , which he reflected on in an interview for The Australian :

We had a 16-piece band and we played great shows to 700 people a night . But none of them bought CDs . None of them . They had a good time but they weren 't motivated to buy CDs . I don 't understand it because I came up in the time of records . Back then the business ran . You still got the tunes out . It was a crooked business , you could get cheated and there could be crooked accounting , but I still prefer it to this new thing where there is no connection to the audience through radio or retail . In the week of September 24 , 2011 , Pull Up Some Dust and Sit Down debuted at number five on the US Billboard Top Folk Albums chart , on which it went on to spend seven weeks . The record also charted at number 123 on the Billboard 200 , number 28 on the Top Rock Albums , number 15 on the Tastemaker Albums , a chart that ranks top-selling albums " based on an influential panel of indie stores and small regional chains . " In the United Kingdom , Pull Up Some Dust and Sit Down debuted at number 26 on the UK Albums Chart , selling 6,000 copies in its first week there ; it spent two weeks on the chart .

Pull Up Some Dust and Sit Down received widespread acclaim from critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream publications , the album received an average score of 92 , based on 14 reviews . It was called one of Cooder 's best records by Uncut magazine 's Nigel Williamson and Martin Chilton of The Daily Telegraph . AllMusic editor Thom Jurek deemed it Cooder 's " most overtly political album ... and one of his funniest , most musically compelling ones , too " , while Daniel Paton from musicOMH said much of the record was " highly satisfying satire ( although also often sensitive and affecting ) , combining Cooder ’ s transparent love for a wide range of roots music with his engagement with politics . " Andy Gill of The Independent was impressed by how Cooder used similar characters throughout the songs in new ways , calling the album his best since 2005 's Chávez Ravine . Cooder received comparisons to Woody Guthrie in reviews written by Phil Sutcliffe of Mojo , who found the lyrics sharply written , and Neil Spencer from The Observer , who called Cooder " a Woody Guthrie for our times " and the record " a fierce state-of-the-nation album " . In the opinion of PopMatters critic Philip Majorins , the record would not have a significant impact because of the public 's predominantly commercial tastes and a " cynical " cultural climate , but concluded , " Pull Up Some Dust and Sit Down could have tremendous cathartic power for [ those ] who are aware of history and its knack for repeating itself . For those who are willing , this is a good place to start an education . "

" Losing My Religion " is the twenty-seventh and final episode of the second season of the American television medical drama Grey 's Anatomy , and the show 's 36th episode overall . Written by Shonda Rhimes and directed by Mark Tinker , the episode was originally broadcast with " Deterioration of the Fight or Flight Response " , in a two-hour season finale event on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) in the United States on May 15 , 2006 . Grey 's Anatomy centers around a group of young doctors in training . In this episode , Dr. Izzie Stevens ( Katherine Heigl ) and her fellow interns have to plan a prom for Dr. Richard Webber 's ( James Pickens , Jr . ) niece Camille Travis ( Tessa Thompson ) . Further storylines include Dr. Preston Burke ( Isaiah Washington ) recovering from his gunshot wound and Denny Duquette 's ( Jeffrey Dean Morgan ) death following his seemingly successful heart transplant surgery . The episode marked Sara Ramirez 's ( Dr. Callie Torres ) final appearance with recurring billing , as she would be upgraded to a series regular in season three . Morgan , Ramirez , Thompson , Brooke Smith , Sarah Utterback , Loretta Devine , and Chris O 'Donnell reprised their roles as guest stars , while Hallee Hirsh and Tiffany Hines made their first and only appearances . The episode received mixed to negative reviews from television critics , who disapproved of the storyline involving Grey and Shepherd and the show 's lack of repercussions for the interns , but lauded Dr. Cristina Yang 's ( Sandra Oh ) storyline along with Heigl 's performance . " Losing My Religion " was also included in several " best episodes " lists . Upon its initial airing , the episode was viewed 22.50 million Americans , garnered an 8.0 / 22 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic , ranking fifth for the week in terms of viewership , and registering as the week 's second highest-rated drama .

Dr. Derek Shepherd ( Patrick Dempsey ) and Dr. Richard Webber ( James Pickens , Jr . ) finish Dr. Preston Burke 's ( Isaiah Washington ) surgery to remove a pseudo-aneurysm in the subclavian artery that threatened the functioning of his arm and which was caused by a gunshot wound . At the same time , Dr. Erica Hahn ( Brooke Smith ) successfully transplants a heart into Denny Duquette ( Jeffrey Dean Morgan ) . The interns face Webber , who orders them to plan a prom for his dying niece , Camille Travis ( Tessa Thompson ) , until the one who cut Duquette 's left ventricular assist device ( LVAD ) comes forward . With the instructions of Camille 's friends , Claire ( Hallee Hirsh ) and Natalie ( Tiffany Hines ) , they prepare the prom as they each struggle with their own personal problems . Trying to recover from his injury , Burke finds a tremor in his right hand . Dr. Meredith Grey 's ( Ellen Pompeo ) love interest Dr. Finn Dandrige ( Chris O 'Donnell ) , the vet of Doc — the dog she shares with Shepherd — informs her that Doc has had several seizures due to his bone cancer and that she and Shepherd have to make a decision . Webber interrogates the interns individually about Duquette 's LVAD wire , but only learns about their personal problems instead . Dr. Izzie Stevens ( Katherine Heigl ) finally accepts Duquette 's marriage proposal . At Dandridge 's office , Grey and Shepherd , joined by Dr. Addison Montgomery-Shepherd ( Kate Walsh ) , decide to put Doc to sleep .

The hospital staff begins to arrive at the prom and Dr. Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ) and Dr. George O 'Malley ( T. R. Knight ) discuss the status of their relationship , which leads to the former admitting her love and commitment . During the dance , Grey and Shepherd escape Dandridge and Montgomery to have a heated argument that leads to sexual intercourse . In the meantime , as Duquette waits for Stevens alone in his room , he experiences a sudden sense of pain , and unexpectedly dies . While Webber is sitting in the operating room gallery and reflecting on his career , Dr. Miranda Bailey ( Chandra Wilson ) announces Duquette 's death . News of the death spreads , and the interns hurry to his room to find a shocked Stevens , lying on the bed , clinging to his still form . As they each try to comfort her , the cause of his death is revealed to have been a blood clot that led to a fatal stroke . Stevens says that if she had taken less time to dress , she would have arrived at his room sooner and could have been with him while he died . Dr. Alex Karev ( Justin Chambers ) then talks to Stevens , picking her up and hugging her . Afterward , Dr. Cristina Yang ( Sandra Oh ) , who did not know how to handle Burke 's situation , goes to his room and puts her hand on his to show him her support . As the episode ends , Stevens confesses to Webber that she was the one responsible for the LVAD wire cut , and claiming she cannot be a surgeon , quits the program . After everyone begins going their separate ways , Grey remains torn on who she should follow : Shepherd or Dandridge .

The episode was written by series creator Shonda Rhimes and directed by filmmaker Mark Tinker , while Ed Ornelas edited it . It was the last episode to feature Sara Ramirez as a guest star , as she began receiving star billing in the season three premiere . Morgan , Ramirez , Thompson , Smith , Utterback , Devine , and O 'Donnell reprised their roles as Duquette , Torres , Travis , Hahn , Harper , Adele , and Dandridge , respectively , while Hirsh and Hines made their first and only appearances as Claire and Natalie , respectively . The soundtrack of the episode consisted of Pete Droge 's " Under the Waves " , Dressy Bessy 's " Side 2 " , Amos Lee 's " Colors " , Masha Qrella 's " Destination Vertical " , Kate Havnevik 's " Grace " , and Snow Patrol 's " Chasing Cars " . The American profile of Northern Irish band Snow Patrol increased after their single was used in this episode . Lead singer Gary Lightbody was initially uncertain about licensing a song for the soundtrack , but has since admitted that the publicity had a positive effect .

Rhimes entitled the episode " Losing My Religion " because she felt " that is what happens to each intern in this episode . Each intern lets go of the things they 've held onto all season . George lets go of loving Meredith . Cristina lets go of her well-checked emotions . Izzie is forced to let go of her idealism . And that leads to her letting go of medicine . Alex lets go of his rage against Izzie . And Meredith ... well , Meredith just lets go . " The costumes were designed by Mimi Melgaard ; Rhimes noted that everyone was dressed in dark funeral colors to the prom , except Stevens who was dressed in pink . Stevens ' dress was an Amsale creation . Monologues done by the five main characters were used in this episode . Rhimes commented : " this was something we 'd never done and I wasn 't sure would work . But you place those pages into the hands of the actors and each and every one of them layered their characters ' souls right into the dialogue . " The episode 's theme was the prom ; Rhimes said she wanted to do it since the beginning of the season .

" Losing My Religion " was originally broadcast on May 15 , 2006 in the United States on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) , along with " Deterioration of the Fight or Flight Response " . The episodes were watched by a total of 22.50 million Americans . It represents a slight decrease in comparison to the episode airing the previous night , " 17 Seconds " , which garnered 22.60 million viewers . The episode received an 8.0 / 22 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic , ranking fifth for the week in terms of viewership , and registering as the week 's second highest-rated drama . The episode 's rating outranked CBS 's The New Adventures of Old Christine and CSI : Miami , the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) ' s The Apprentice , and the Fox Broadcasting Company 's 24 . The episode received mixed to negative reviews among critics . Joel Keller of The Huffington Post expressed mixed opinions on the episode , putting the emphasis on Yang 's development , whom he deemed " transformed " by the end of the episode . He applauded Torres ' evolution throughout the episode , and also praised Heigl 's performance and dress . Keller criticized the non-realism of the punishment the interns received , Grey and Shepherd 's storyline being tiresome , and the cliffhanger , calling it a " lame cliché " . Writing for the Chicago Tribune , Maureen Ryan gave a negative review of the episode , stating : " overall , the whole thing just fell a little flat . " Though Ryan appreciated the scene of Doc 's death , she was critical of Torres ' underdevelopment , the lack of chemistry with O 'Malley , and her prom dress . Abigail Chao of Television Without Pity was also critical of Torres ' dress , but liked Heigl 's pink dress . She also applauded Karev 's intervening to calm Stevens down , and agreed that Grey 's cliffhanger was not good .

Eyder Peralta of The Houston Chronicle criticized Stevens ' ethics for cutting Duquette 's LVAD wire , writing that she " should not be practising medicine " . Alan Sepinwall , a former television columnist for The Star-Ledger , commented favorably on Karev " finally displaying some humanity " in the scene following Duquette 's death . He was critical of Shepherd 's arc , however , and on the absence of severe consequences for Stevens having cut the LVAD wire , an action he called " insane and dangerous " . This episode was included on the list for the " 25 Sexiest TV Shows on DVD " by magazine Entertainment Weekly . It was also listed in Entertainment Weekly 's " 20 Unforgettable Proms " and in Starpulse 's " Top Ten TV Proms " . AOL TV placed the hook-up scene involving Grey and Shepherd on its Top 20 of TV 's Sexiest Scenes . In 2009 , TV Guide ranked " Losing My Religion " # 63 on its list of the 100 Greatest Episodes . In 2013 , the magazine named Duquette 's death one of TV 's Most Heartbreaking Deaths . In December 2011 , Wetpaint named " Losing My Religion " one of the five best episodes of the series .

M-44 is a 37.463-mile ( 60.291 km ) state trunkline highway in the western region of the US state of Michigan . It runs northward from the intersection of M-11 ( 28th Street ) and M-37 toward the Rockford area . The highway then turns eastward to Belding , and it ends six miles ( 10 km ) north of Ionia at M-66 . M-44 is known in Grand Rapids as the " East Beltline " and intersects with its related highway , Connector M-44 , in Plainfield Township . This highway runs concurrently with M-37 between M-11 and Interstate 96 ( I-96 ) . As a state highway , M-44 dates back to around July 1 , 1919 , and it was routed along a section of its modern route at that time . The eastern end was altered in the late 1920s , and the western end was extended to the Grand Rapids area in the 1970s . For over 20 years , M-44 was truncated to remove the M-37 concurrency . Since 2003 though , the highway has terminated at the intersection with 28th Street .

M-44 starts at the intersection of 28th Street and East Beltline Avenue in Kentwood . M-11 runs east and west along 28th Street and M-37 runs south along Broadmoor Avenue as the continuation of East Beltline . M-44 and M-37 run together on East Beltline Avenue north from this intersection , which is also the location of the Woodland Mall in Kentwood . From here north , M-37 / M-44 runs along a four-lane divided boulevard through the campus of Calvin College . East Beltline passes through suburban residential areas near the east end of Reeds Lake and M-21 's western terminus at Fulton Street . Just north of this intersection is an interchange with I-96 at exit 38 . M-37 leaves the roadway to run along I-96 while M-44 continues northward along East Beltline Avenue . All of M-44 to this point is listed on the National Highway System , a network of roadways important to the nation 's economy , defense , and mobility . North of the interchange , M-44 passes the Frederik Meijer Gardens and Sculpture Park and the campus of Cornerstone University . The area around the highway is mixed businesses and office parks north to Knapp Street , and then residential north of there . At Plainfield Avenue , M-44 meets Conn . M-44 and crosses the Grand River . M-44 turns eastward near the south side of Rockford and runs through suburban residential areas near Lake Bella Vista , Silver and Bostwick lakes . East of here , the environs transition to rural farmland and the highway crosses the Kent – Ionia county line between Grattan and Cooks Corners , where it meets M-91 west of Belding . The highway continues east through town , where it crosses the Flat River , and ends at M-66 north of Ionia .

M-44 was first designated by July 1 , 1919 beginning at M-13 ( later US 131 ) from Rockford to Belding . Near Orleans , M-44 turned south into town and ended at M-21 in Ionia . The segment near Orleans was realigned to end at M-14 ( now M-66 ) in Woods Corners in 1929 . M-44 was extended concurrently along US 131 to end at the intersection of the East Beltline and 28th Street near Grand Rapids . Two other highways were also routed on the East Beltline : M-21 south of Fulton Street and M-37 south of Cascade Road . The US 131 , M-21 and M-37 concurrencies only lasted until 1964 when M-21 was moved to I-196 and M-37 was shifted to the new US 131 freeway . US 131 was moved to its freeway north of Grand Rapids in 1969 . The Northland Drive segment of US 131 / M-44 was redesignated as only M-44 , and the Plainfield Avenue segment became Conn . M-44 . M-37 was rerouted as well up East Beltline from M-11 concurrently with M-44 to I-96 . In 1977 , this junction at I-96 became the official western terminus of M-44 , with the M-44 signs along East Beltline Avenue removed . Then in 2003 , the signs along the East Beltline were restored and the route extended back to its former terminus .

M-44 Connector , or Conn . M-44 , is a 4.185-mile ( 6.735 km ) connector route state trunkline highway running along Plainfield Avenue in the Grand Rapids area . It connects I-96 / M-37 near Lamberton Lake with M-44 running along East Beltline Avenue near the Grand River . In between , the highway passes through a commercial area . North of 5 Mile Road , Plainfield Avenue takes on a more suburban residential character . There are more business again at the northern end by Versluis Lake . Conn . M-44 was formed in 1969 when the US 131 freeway was completed from I-96 / M-37 to 14 Mile Road near Rockford . US 131 along Plainfield Avenue was redesignated as Conn . M-44 to connect I-96 / M-37 with M-44 .

" Road to Rhode Island " is the 13th episode of the second season and the first episode of the ' Road To ... ' series of the American animated television series Family Guy . It originally aired on Fox in the United States on May 30 , 2000 . In the episode , Brian volunteers to bring Stewie home from his grandparents ' house in California , but the two miss their plane and must travel on foot for a cross-country journey back home . Meanwhile , Peter becomes addicted to watching a collection of marriage counseling videos hosted by a pornstar . The episode was directed by Dan Povenmire and was written by Gary Janetti . It guest starred Victoria Principal as Dr. Amanda Rebecca , Danny Smith and Wally Wingert as various characters . Series creator Seth MacFarlane conceived the idea for this episode , and was inspired by the 1940s Road to ... series of comedy films which starred Bing Crosby , Bob Hope , and Dorothy Lamour . The episode received largely positive reviews from television critics . It was nominated for an Emmy Award for Outstanding Animated Program ( for Programming Less than One Hour ) , but lost to The Simpsons episode " Behind the Laughter " .

The episode begins with a flashback set seven years ago , where it is revealed that Brian was born in a puppy mill and taken from his mother . Back in the present , Brian tells his psychiatrist about the experience . Afterwards , Brian volunteers to pick up Stewie from his vacation at his grandparents ' summer home in Palm Springs , California , where Stewie frames a maid for stealing to amuse himself at dinner . At the airport bar , Brian gets very drunk and , when Stewie comes to retrieve him , their plane tickets are stolen . They stop at a rundown motel , where Stewie tries calling home , but fails because he believes his phone number is 867-5309 . The next day , they have to escape and hotwire a car because their credit card was rejected . To get home , Stewie and Brian masquerade as crop dusters to steal a plane , which they immediately wreck . As the pair continue hitchhiking back to Quahog , they pass by a puppy mill near Austin , Texas , Brian 's birthplace . Upon arrival , they discover that Brian 's mother was taxidermied and turned into a table by the puppy mill owners as a memorial . With Stewie 's reluctant help , Brian gives his mother a proper burial . The pair eventually complete their journey home by riding in an open boxcar , where Brian attempts to apologize to Stewie for all of the trouble he has put both of them through , only to have Stewie reply that he actually enjoyed it . Reconciled , they perform a musical duet " Off On the Road to Rhode Island " as the train takes them home . When Stewie and Brian return home , Lois asks Stewie about the trip , and Stewie covers up for Brian by saying the trip was " Smooth sailing through calm seas " . Lois leaves and Brian tells Stewie that he is thankful to Stewie for covering for him , and asks Stewie if there 's anything he can do to repay him . At first it appears that Stewie wishes to make him his servant by providing an example with an episode of The Brady Bunch , although it turns out that Stewie wants Brian to tape that episode for him .

" Road to Rhode Island " was directed by Dan Povenmire and was written by Gary Janetti . It featured guest appearances from Victoria Principal as Dr. Amanda Rebecca , Danny Smith and Wally Wingert as various characters . This was the first episode directed by Povenmire . Family Guy creator Seth MacFarlane granted Povenmire substantial creative freedom for directing episodes . Povenmire said that MacFarlane would tell him , " We 've got two minutes to fill . Give me some visual gags . Do whatever you want . I trust you . " Povenmire praised MacFarlane 's management style for letting him have fun . Several years after the episode was written , in DVD commentary for the eighth and ninth season of the show , Gary Janetti , the writer of the episode , recalled that the original title of the episode was intended to be simply " Brian & Stewie " , but was changed by series creator and executive producer Seth MacFarlane , who wanted there to be a " Road to " episode each season . The name of the episode was then changed to " Road to Rhode Island " , with the original name later being used for the landmark 150th episode of the show , also entitled " Brian & Stewie " , and written by Janetti .

During the airport section of the episode , there is a scene that has subsequently cut from some editions / airings of the show , involving Osama bin Laden . In the scene , Stewie , when approaching airport security , realizes that his bag is full of weapons . He then breaks into song , singing " On the Good Ship Lollipop " to distract the X-ray scanners . He then says , " Let 's hope Osama bin Laden doesn 't know show tunes . " At that time , Osama is pictured in another line , distracting the scanners by singing " I hope I get it " from A Chorus Line . Even though the episode was made a year and a half before 9 / 11 , it was still controversial , and was left out of the original DVD release in the US . However , the scene was left intact on the " Freakin ' Sweet Collection . "

In his 2009 review , Ahsan Haque of IGN , rating the episode 10 / 10 , praised the episode , saying : " Great writing , hilarious jokes , a catchy musical , and a story that 's both hilarious and touching at the same time – Family Guy doesn 't get much better than this . " It is one of the only two Family Guy episodes that has ever been given a " Masterpiece " ( 10 / 10 ) rating by IGN , leading many to consider this episode as the greatest in Family Guy 's history . IGN also placed the episode at the top of their list of " Stewie and Brian 's Greatest Adventures " . The episode was nominated for an Emmy Award for Outstanding Animated Program ( For Programming less than One Hour ) , but lost to The Simpsons episode " Behind the Laughter " .

" Pilot " is the pilot episode of the crime-thriller television series Millennium . It premiered on the Fox network on October 25 , 1996 . The episode was written by series creator Chris Carter , and directed by David Nutter . " Pilot " featured guest appearances by Paul Dillon , April Telek and Stephen J. Lang . Offender profiler Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) , a member of the private investigative organisation Millennium Group , retires to Seattle with his family after a breakdown caused him to quit working for the Federal Bureau of Investigation . Using his incredible profiling skills , Black helps in an effort to catch a vicious murderer who believes he is fulfilling apocalyptic prophecies . " Pilot " was filmed over the course of a month in Vancouver , British Columbia , and was inspired by the writings of Nostradamus and William Butler Yeats . Airing in the timeslot previously occupied by Carter 's first series , The X-Files , the episode received a high Nielsen household and syndication rating and was generally positively received by fans and critics alike .

In a strip club in downtown Seattle , an unnamed man known to the club workers as " The Frenchman " ( Paul Dillon ) is mumbling poetic phrases and hallucinating blood pouring over a blonde stripper , with a wall of fire surrounding her . Later that night , the stripper is murdered . Just arriving in Seattle is Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) and his family . Frank spots a newspaper about the local murder , and immediately contacts his old colleague Bob Bletcher . Frank joins the investigation as an advisor of the Millennium Group , a private investigative group composed of retired law enforcement agents . When he views the body , Frank gets various vivid visions of the crime . His knowledge of various details unknown to the others unsettles Bletcher . Frank and a fellow member of the Millennium Group named Peter Watts ( Terry O 'Quinn ) officially join the investigation . In the meantime , the killer is hunting for his next victim . While unknown to him , the murderer is trapped in a world of grotesque hallucinations . Later that night , local police officers spot his latest victim . Frank visits the crime scene , which gives him a vision of the crime , again startling his colleague Bletcher . Later on , Frank presents his finding to the local homicide department , saying that the murderer is obsessed with apocalyptic prophecies and maddened by twisted sexual guilt .

After Frank presents his finding , Bletcher demands Frank give him the stripper girl 's " rape & murder on VHS . " . Frank tells him he can see what the killer sees . After telling him , Frank rushes to hospital when his daughter , Jordan Black ( Brittany Tiplady ) is stricken with a high fever . Getting another vision , Frank leaves the hospital and gathers local law enforcement officers to another victim . This follows with Frank tracking down the killer to the local police department 's own evidence lab . In a mad rage the killer attacks Frank , but Bletcher shows up and shoots the killer , saving Frank 's life . After clearing up the case with the local authorities , Frank returns home and opens up a newly arrived anonymous piece of mail containing pictures of his family .

" Pilot " was written by series creator Chris Carter . Beyond creating the concept for Millennium , Carter would write a total of six other episodes for the series in addition to " Gehenna " — three in the first season , and a further three in the third season . Director David Nutter would also go on to direct several episodes in the first season of the series — " Gehenna " , " 522666 " and " Loin Like a Hunting Flame " . " Pilot " was filmed over the course of a month , which was an unheard-of length of time for a single television episode . The episode was shot in Vancouver , British Columbia in early spring to give it a " gray " and " bleak " look . The decision to film in Vancouver was to give the show the same dark feel as its sister show The X-Files , which had also been created by Carter . The strip club , Ruby Tip , was inspired by a club in Seattle named the Lusty Lady , which is located on that city 's main street . Director David Nutter had been a long-time staff member of The X-Files crew . Carter said the episode was " directed beautifully by David Nutter who added to the project in so many ways , even as it came on , things that he saw visually that were able to actually change and make the script more concise " . Although " Pilot " did not open with a literary quote as the series would do from the next episode onwards , its plot heavily features the 1919 poem " The Second Coming " by Irish poet William Butler Yeats .

Carter called it a " pleasure " to cast Kate Luyben and April Telek , because they were " good " -looking , which he felt was a refreshing change from frequently casting " character actors " on The X-Files . Luyben would later make an appearance on The X-Files and played a prominent role on Harsh Realm . The idea behind the character " The Frenchman " came from a prophecy by Nostradamus . According to Carter , " the idea that there is something approaching at the millennium , this series being produced I think four years before the end of the century , that we were headed toward something grave and foreboding " . The name of recurring character Bob Bletcher came from an attorney Carter had worked with previously . Another name , Giebelhouse was another name Carter had gotten from his childhood years . Carter said " This idea of the hard-boiled detective is a kind of cliché " . But felt that the characters came " very real to life " , when compared to real law enforcement personnel . Millennium was given the Friday night timeslot previously occupied by The X-Files , prompting Carter to quip that his earlier series was " being abducted " . However , Millennium received higher viewing figures during its first season than The X-Files had done , while the latter show 's fourth season , the one airing concurrently to Millennium , saw its ratings reach their highest to that point .

" Pilot " was first broadcast on the Fox network on October 25 , 1996 ; and gathered a total viewership of 17.72 million in the United States . In the " adults 18 – 49 " demographic , the episode earned a Nielsen rating of 9 , with a 27 share ; meaning it was viewed by nine percent of television-equipped households and 27 percent of those actively watching television . The rating across all demographics was 11.9 . The episode 's broadcast set the record at the time for the most-watched program on Fox . Writing for The A.V. Club , Zack Handeln rated the episode a B , finding it to be " weirdly prescient of the crime dramas we wallow in today " . Handlen felt that episode 's tone was so " overwrought " as to be " hilarious " , but still found the series to be " uncompromising " and " compelling " . Handlen also noted similarities to the films Manhunter and Seven in both the episode 's plot and the series ' premise . Bill Gibron , writing for DVD Talk , rated the episode 5 / 5 , calling it " perhaps the most perfect opening episode to a one-hour suspense thriller ... ever conceived " . Gibron also praised the casting of Henriksen and O 'Quinn in the series . An Entertainment Weekly preview for the episode noted that some of its scenes were " the grimmest ... in prime-time history " . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X-Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode four stars out of five , calling it " bleak and confrontational " though finding that its symbolism was " too boldly stated " . Comparing the series to its sister show , The X-Files , Shearman and Pearson noted that Henriksen portrays his role " with a confidence that makes him immediately a more credible character than Mulder or Scully would be for an entire season " . Writing for The Register-Guard , Renee Graham called the episode " as lurid a television show as you 're ever going to see " , adding that it seemed " just too horrific to be enjoyable " . However , Graham noted that the episode was " by far the superior show " compared to the similar series Profiler , which aired around the same time .

The national flag of Japan is a white rectangular flag with a large red disc representing the sun in the center . This flag is officially called Nisshōki ( 日章旗 , " sun-mark flag " ) in Japanese , but is more commonly known as Hinomaru ( 日の丸 , " circle of the sun " ) . The Nisshōki flag is designated as the national flag in the Law Regarding the National Flag and National Anthem , which was promulgated and became effective on August 13 , 1999 . Although no earlier legislation had specified a national flag , the sun-disc flag had already become the de facto national flag of Japan . Two proclamations issued in 1870 by the Daijō-kan , the governmental body of the early Meiji period , each had a provision for a design of the national flag . A sun-disc flag was adopted as the national flag for merchant ships under Proclamation No. 57 of Meiji 3 ( issued on February 27 , 1870 ) , and as the national flag used by the Navy under Proclamation No. 651 of Meiji 3 ( issued on October 27 , 1870 ) . Use of the Hinomaru was severely restricted during the early years of the American occupation after World War II ; these restrictions were later relaxed .

The sun plays an important role in Japanese mythology and religion as the Emperor is said to be the direct descendent of the sun goddess Amaterasu and the legitimacy of the ruling house rested on this divine appointment and descent from the chief deity of the predominant Shinto religion . The name of the country as well as the design of the flag reflect this central importance of the sun . The ancient history Shoku Nihongi says that Emperor Monmu used a flag representing the sun in his court in 701 , and this is the first recorded use of a sun-motif flag in Japan . The oldest existing flag is preserved in Unpō-ji temple , Kōshū , Yamanashi , which is older than the 16th century , and an ancient legend says that the flag was given to the temple by Emperor Go-Reizei in the 11th century . During the Meiji Restoration , both the sun disc and the Rising Sun Ensign of the Imperial Japanese Navy became major symbols in the emerging Japanese Empire . Propaganda posters , textbooks , and films depicted the flag as a source of pride and patriotism . In Japanese homes , citizens were required to display the flag during national holidays , celebrations and other occasions as decreed by the government . Different tokens of devotion to Japan and its Emperor featuring the Hinomaru motif became popular during the Second Sino-Japanese War and other conflicts . These tokens ranged from slogans written on the flag to clothing items and dishes that resembled the flag .

Public perception of the national flag varies . Historically , both Western and Japanese sources claimed the flag was a powerful and enduring symbol to the Japanese . Since the end of World War II ( the Pacific War ) , the use of the flag and the national anthem Kimigayo has been a contentious issue for Japan 's public schools . Disputes about their use have led to protests and lawsuits . The flag is not frequently displayed in Japan due to its association with ultranationalism . To Okinawans , the flag represents the events of World War II and the subsequent U.S. military presence there . For some nations that have been occupied by Japan , the flag is a symbol of aggression and imperialism . The Hinomaru was used as a tool against occupied nations for purposes of intimidation , asserting Japan 's dominance , or subjugation . Several military banners of Japan are based on the Hinomaru , including the sunrayed Naval Ensign . The Hinomaru also serves as a template for other Japanese flags in public and private use .

The exact origin of the Hinomaru is unknown , but the rising sun seems to have had some symbolic meaning since the early 7th century ( the Japanese archipelago is east of the Asian mainland , and is thus where the sun " rises " ) . In 607 , an official correspondence that began with " from the Emperor of the rising sun " was sent to Chinese Emperor Yang of Sui . Japan is often referred to as " the land of the rising sun " . In the 12th-century work , The Tale of the Heike , it was written that different samurai carried drawings of the sun on their fans . One legend related to the national flag is attributed to the Buddhist priest Nichiren . Supposedly , during a 13th-century Mongolian invasion of Japan , Nichiren gave a sun banner to the shogun to carry into battle . The sun is also closely related to the Imperial family , as legend states the imperial throne was descended from the sun goddess Amaterasu . One of Japan 's oldest flags is housed at the Unpo-ji temple in Yamanashi Prefecture . Legend states it was given by Emperor Go-Reizei to Minamoto no Yoshimitsu and has been treated as a family treasure by the Takeda clan for the past 1,000 years , and at least it is older than 16th century .

The earliest recorded flags in Japan date from the unification period in the late 16th century . The flags belonged to each Daimyo and were used primarily in battle . Most of the flags were long banners usually charged with the mon ( family crest ) of the Daimyo lord . Members of the same family , such as a son , father , and brother , had different flags to carry into battle . The flags served as identification , and were displayed by soldiers on their backs and horses . Generals also had their own flags , most of which differed from soldiers ' flags due to their square shape . In 1854 , during the Tokugawa shogunate , Japanese ships were ordered to hoist the Hinomaru to distinguish themselves from foreign ships . Before then , different types of Hinomaru flags were used on vessels that were trading with the Americans and Russians . The Hinomaru was decreed the merchant flag of Japan in 1870 and was the legal national flag from 1870 to 1885 , making it the first national flag Japan adopted . While the idea of national symbols was strange to the Japanese , the Meiji Government needed them to communicate with the outside world . This became especially important after the landing of U.S. Commodore Matthew Perry in Yokohama Bay . Further Meiji Government implementations gave more identifications to Japan , including the anthem Kimigayo and the imperial seal . In 1885 , all previous laws not published in the Official Gazette of Japan were abolished . Because of this ruling by the new cabinet of Japan , the Hinomaru was the de facto national flag since no law was in place after the Meiji Restoration .

The use of the national flag grew as Japan sought to develop an empire , and the Hinomaru was present at celebrations after victories in the First Sino-Japanese and Russo-Japanese Wars . The flag was also used in war efforts throughout the country . A Japanese propaganda film in 1934 portrayed foreign national flags as incomplete or defective with their designs , while the Japanese flag is perfect in all forms . In 1937 , a group of girls from Hiroshima Prefecture showed solidarity with Japanese soldiers fighting in China during the Second Sino-Japanese War , by eating " flag meals " that consisted of an umeboshi in the middle of a bed of rice . The Hinomaru bento became the main symbol of Japan 's war mobilization and solidarity with her soldiers until the 1940s . Japan 's early victories in the Sino-Japanese War resulted in the Hinomaru again being used for celebrations . It was seen in the hands of every Japanese during parades . Textbooks during this period also had the Hinomaru printed with various slogans expressing devotion to the Emperor and the country . Patriotism was taught as a virtue to Japanese children . Expressions of patriotism , such as displaying the flag or worshiping the Emperor daily , were all part of being a " good Japanese . "

The flag was a tool of Japanese imperialism in the occupied Southeast Asian areas during Second World War : people had to use the flag , and schoolchildren sang Kimigayo in morning flag raising ceremonies . Local flags were allowed for some areas such as the Philippines , Indonesia , and Manchukuo . In Korea which was part of the Empire of Japan , the Hinomaru and other symbols were used to declare that the Koreans were subjects of the empire . To the Japanese , the Hinomaru was the " Rising Sun flag that would light the darkness of the entire world . " To Westerners , it was one of the Japanese military 's most powerful symbols .

The Hinomaru was the de facto flag throughout World War II and the occupation period . During the occupation of Japan after World War II , permission from the Supreme Commander of the Allied Powers ( SCAPJ ) was needed to fly the Hinomaru . Sources differ on the degree to which the use of the Hinomaru flag was restricted ; some use the term " banned ; " however , while the original restrictions were severe , they did not amount to an outright ban . After World War II , an ensign was used by Japanese civil ships of the United States Naval Shipping Control Authority for Japanese Merchant Marines . Modified from the " E " signal code , the ensign was used from September 1945 until the U.S. occupation of Japan ceased . U.S. ships operating in Japanese waters used a modified " O " signal flag as their ensign . On May 2 , 1947 , General Douglas MacArthur lifted the restrictions on displaying the Hinomaru in the grounds of the National Diet Building , on the Imperial Palace , on the Prime Minister 's residence and on the Supreme Court building with the ratification of the new Constitution of Japan . Those restrictions were further relaxed in 1948 , when people were allowed to fly the flag on national holidays . In January 1949 , the restrictions were abolished and anyone could fly the Hinomaru at any time without permission . As a result , schools and homes were encouraged to fly the Hinomaru until the early 1950s .

Since World War II , Japan 's flag has been criticized for its association with the country 's militaristic past . Similar objections have also been raised to the current national anthem of Japan , Kimigayo . The feelings about the Hinomaru and Kimigayo represented a general shift from a patriotic feeling about " Dai Nippon " – Great Japan – to the pacifist and anti-militarist " Nihon " . Because of this ideological shift , the flag was used less often in Japan directly after the war even though restrictions were lifted by the SCAPJ in 1949 . As Japan began to re-establish itself diplomatically , the Hinomaru was used as a political weapon overseas . In a visit by the Emperor Hirohito and the Empress Kōjun to the Netherlands , the Hinomaru was burned by Dutch citizens who demanded that either he be sent home to Japan or tried for the deaths of Dutch prisoners of war during the Second World War . Domestically , the flag was not even used in protests against a new Status of Forces Agreement being negotiated between U.S. and Japan . The most common flag used by the trade unions and other protesters was the red flag of revolt .

An issue with the Hinomaru and national anthem was raised once again when Tokyo hosted the 1964 Summer Olympic Games . Before the Olympic Games , the size of the sun disc of the national flag was changed partly because the sun disc was not considered striking when it was being flown with other national flags . Tadamasa Fukiura , a color specialist , chose to set the sun disc at two thirds of the flag 's length . Fukiura also chose the flag colors for the 1964 as well as the 1998 Winter Olympics in Nagano . In 1989 , the death of Emperor Hirohito once again raised moral issues about the national flag . Conservatives felt that if the flag could be used during the ceremonies without reopening old wounds , they might have a chance to propose that the Hinomaru become the national flag without being challenged about its meaning . During an official six-day mourning period , flags were flown at half staff or draped in black bunting all across Japan . Despite reports of protesters vandalizing the Hinomaru on the day of the Emperor 's funeral , schools ' right to fly the Japanese flag at half-staff without reservations brought success to the conservatives .

The Law Regarding the National Flag and National Anthem was passed in 1999 , choosing both the Hinomaru and Kimigayo as Japan 's national symbols . The passage of the law stemmed from a suicide of the principal of Sera High School in Sera , Hiroshima , Ishikawa Toshihiro , who could not resolve a dispute between his school board and his teachers over the use of the Hinomaru and Kimigayo . The Act is one of the most controversial laws passed by the Diet since the 1992 " Law Concerning Cooperation for United Nations Peacekeeping Operations and Other Operations " , also known as the " International Peace Cooperation Law " . Prime Minister Keizō Obuchi of the Liberal Democratic Party ( LDP ) decided to draft legislation to make the Hinomaru and Kimigayo official symbols of Japan in 2000 . His Chief Cabinet Secretary , Hiromu Nonaka , wanted the legislation to be completed by the 10th anniversary of Emperor Akihito 's enthronement . This is not the first time legislation was considered for establishing both symbols as official . In 1974 , with the backdrop of the 1972 return of Okinawa to Japan and the 1973 oil crisis , Prime Minister Tanaka Kakuei hinted at a law being passed enshrining both symbols in the law of Japan . In addition to instructing the schools to teach and play Kimigayo , Kakuei wanted students to raise the Hinomaru flag in a ceremony every morning , and to adopt a moral curriculum based on certain elements of the Imperial Rescript on Education pronounced by the Meiji Emperor in 1890 . Kakuei was unsuccessful in passing the law through the Diet that year .

Main supporters of the bill were the LDP and the Komeito ( CGP ) , while the opposition included the Social Democratic Party ( SDPJ ) and Communist Party ( JCP ) , who cited the connotations both symbols had with the war era . The CPJ was further opposed for not allowing the issue to be decided by the public . Meanwhile , the Democratic Party of Japan ( DPJ ) could not develop party consensus on it . DPJ President and future prime minister Naoto Kan stated that the DPJ must support the bill because the party already recognized both symbols as the symbols of Japan . Deputy Secretary General and future prime minister Yukio Hatoyama thought that this bill would cause further divisions among society and the public schools . Hatoyama voted for the bill while Kan voted against it . Before the vote , there were calls for the bills to be separated at the Diet . Waseda University professor Norihiro Kato stated that Kimigayo is a separate issue more complex than the Hinomaru flag . Attempts to designate only the Hinomaru as the national flag by the DPJ and other parties during the vote of the bill were rejected by the Diet . The House of Representatives passed the bill on July 22 , 1999 , by a 403 to 86 vote . The legislation was sent to the House of Councilors on July 28 and was passed on August 9 . It was enacted into law on August 13 .

On August 8 , 2009 , a photograph was taken at a DPJ rally for the House of Representatives election showing a banner that was hanging from a ceiling . The banner was made of two Hinomaru flags cut and sewn together to form the shape of the DPJ logo . This infuriated the LDP and Prime Minister Tarō Asō , saying this act was unforgivable . In response , DPJ President Yukio Hatoyama ( who voted for the Law Regarding the National Flag and National Anthem ) said that the banner was not the Hinomaru and should not be regarded as such .

Passed in 1870 , the Prime Minister 's Proclamation No. 57 had two provisions related to the national flag . The first provision specified who flew the flag and how it was flown ; the second specified how the flag was made . The ratio was seven units width and ten units length ( 7 : 10 ) . The red disc , which represents the sun , was calculated to be three-fifths of the hoist width . The law decreed the disc to be in the center , but it was usually placed one-hundredth ( 1 ⁄ 100 ) towards the hoist . On October 3 of the same year , regulations about the design of the merchant ensign and other naval flags were passed . For the merchant flag , the ratio was two units width and three units length ( 2 : 3 ) . The size of the disc remained the same , however the sun disc was placed one-twentieth ( 1 ⁄ 20 ) towards the hoist . When the Law Regarding the National Flag and National Anthem passed , the dimensions of the flag were slightly altered . The overall ratio of the flag was changed to two units width by three units length ( 2 : 3 ) . The red disc was shifted towards dead center , but the overall size of the disc stayed the same . The background of the flag is white and the sun disc is red ( 紅色 , beni iro ) , but the exact color shades were not defined in the 1999 law . The only hint given about the red color that it is a " deep " shade .

Issued by the Japan Defense Agency ( now the Ministry of Defense ) in 1973 ( Showa 48 ) , specifications list the red color of the flag as 5R 4 / 12 and the white as N9 in the Munsell color chart . The document was changed on March 21 , 2008 ( Heisei 20 ) to match the flag 's construction with current legislation and updated the Munsell colors . The document lists acrylic fiber and nylon as fibers that could be used in construction of flags used by the military . For acrylic , the red color is 5.7R 3.7 / 15.5 and white is N9.4 ; nylon has 6.2R 4 / 15.2 for red and N9.2 for white . In a document issued by the Official Development Assistance ( ODA ) , the red color for the Hinomaru and the ODA logo is listed as DIC 156 and CMYK 0-100-90-0 . During deliberations about the Law Regarding the National Flag and National Anthem , there was a suggestion to either use a bright red ( 赤色 , aka iro ) shade or use one from the color pool of the Japanese Industrial Standards .

When the Hinomaru was first introduced , the government required citizens to greet the Emperor with the flag . There was some resentment among the Japanese over the flag , resulting in some protests . It took some time for the flag to gain acceptance among the people . During World War II in Japanese culture , it was a popular custom for friends , classmates , and relatives of a deploying soldier to sign a Hinomaru and present it to him . The flag was also used as a good luck charm and a prayer to wish the soldier back safely from battle . One term for this kind of charm is Hinomaru Yosegaki ( 日の丸寄せ書き ) . One tradition is that no writing should touch the sun disc . After battles , these flags were often captured or later found on deceased Japanese soldiers . While these flags became souvenirs , there has been a growing trend of sending the signed flags back to the descendants of the soldier . The tradition of signing the Hinomaru as a good luck charm still continues , though in a limited fashion . The Hinomaru Yosegaki could be shown at sporting events to give support to the Japanese national team . Another example is the hachimaki headband , which was white in color and had the red sun in the middle . During World War II , the phrases " Certain Victory " ( 必勝 , Hisshō ) or " Seven Lives " was written on the hachimaki and worn by kamikaze pilots . This denoted that the pilot was willing to die for his country .

Before World War II , all homes were required to display Hinomaru on national holidays . Since the war , the display of the flag of Japan is mostly limited to buildings attached to national and local governments such as city halls ; it is rarely seen at private homes or commercial buildings , but some people and companies have advocated displaying the flag on holidays . Although the government of Japan encourages citizens and residents to fly the Hinomaru during national holidays , they are not legally required to do so . Since the Emperor 's 80th Birthday on December 23 , 2002 , the Kyushu Railway Company has displayed the Hinomaru at 330 stations . Starting in 1995 , the ODA has used the Hinomaru motif in their official logo . The design itself was not created by the government ( the logo was chosen from 5,000 designs submitted by the public ) but the government was trying increase the visualization of the Hinomaru through their aid packages and development programs . According to the ODA , the use of the flag is the most effective way to symbolize aid provided by the Japanese people .

According to polls conduced by mainstream media , most Japanese people had perceived the flag of Japan as the national flag even before the passage of the Law Regarding the National Flag and National Anthem in 1999 . Despite this , controversies surrounding the use of the flag in school events or media still remain . For example , liberal newspapers such as Asahi Shimbun and Mainichi Shimbun often feature articles critical of the flag of Japan , reflecting their readerships ' political spectrum . To other Japanese , the flag represents the time where democracy was suppressed when Japan was an empire . The display of the Hinomaru at homes and businesses is also debated in Japanese society . Because of the association of the Hinomaru with uyoku dantai ( right wing ) activists , reactionary politics , or hooliganism , some homes and businesses do not fly the flag . There is no requirement to fly the flag on any national holiday or special events . The town of Kanazawa , Ishikawa , has proposed plans in September 2012 to use government funds to buy flags with the purpose of encouraging citizens to fly the flag on national holidays . The Japanese Communist Party is vocally against the flag .

Negative perceptions of the Hinomaru exist in former colonies of Japan as well as within Japan itself , such as in Okinawa . In one notable example of this , on October 26 , 1987 , an Okinawan supermarket owner burned the Hinomaru before the start of the National Sports Festival of Japan . The flag burner , Shōichi Chibana , burned the Hinomaru not only to show opposition to atrocities committed by the Japanese army and the continued presence of U.S. forces , but also to prevent it from being displayed in public . Other incidents in Okinawa included the flag being torn down during school ceremonies and students refusing to honor the flag as it was being raised to the sounds of Kimigayo . In the capital city of Naha , Okinawa , the Hinomaru was raised for the first time since the return of Okinawa to Japan to celebrate the city 's 80th anniversary in 2001 . In the People 's Republic of China and South Korea , both of which had been occupied by the Empire of Japan , the 1999 formal adoption of the Hinomaru was met with reactions of Japan moving towards the right and also a step towards re-militarization . The passage of the 1999 law also coincided with the debates about the status of the Yasukuni Shrine , US-Japan military cooperation and the creation of a missile defense program . In other nations that Japan occupied , the 1999 law was met with mixed reactions or glossed over . In Singapore , the older generation still harbors ill feelings toward the flag while the younger generation does not hold similar views . The Philippines government not only believed that Japan was not going to revert to militarism , but the goal of the 1999 law was to formally establish two symbols ( the flag and anthem ) in law and every state has a right to create national symbols . Japan has no law criminalizing the burning of the Hinomaru , but foreign flags cannot be burned in Japan . Some people have humorously drawn an analogy between the Japanese flag and the appearance of a menstruation stain on a white bedsheet .

According to protocol , the flag may fly from sunrise until sunset ; businesses and schools are permitted to fly the flag from opening to closing . When flying the flags of Japan and another country at the same time , the Japanese flag takes the position of honor and the flag of the guest country flies to its right . Both flags must be at the same height and of equal size . When more than one foreign flag is displayed , Japan 's flag is arranged in the alphabetical order prescribed by the United Nations . When the flag becomes unsuitable to use , it is customarily burned in private . The Law Regarding the National Flag and Anthem does not specify on how the flag should be used , but different prefectures came up with their own regulations to use the Hinomaru and other prefectural flags .

The Hinomaru flag has at least two mourning styles . One is to display the flag at half-staff ( 半旗 , Han-ki ) , as is common in many countries . The offices of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs also hoist the flag at half-staff when a funeral is performed for a foreign nation 's head of state . An alternative mourning style is to wrap the spherical finial with black cloth and place a black ribbon , known as a mourning flag ( 弔旗 , Chō-ki ) , above the flag . This style dates back to the death of Emperor Meiji on July 30 , 1912 , and the Cabinet issued an ordinance stipulating that the national flag should be raised in mourning when the Emperor dies . The Cabinet has the authority to announce the half-staffing of the national flag .

Since the end of World War II , the Ministry of Education has issued statements and regulations to promote the usage of both the Hinomaru and Kimigayo at schools under their jurisdiction . The first of these statements was released in 1950 , stating that it was desirable , but not required , to use both symbols . This desire was later expanded to include both symbols on national holidays and during ceremonial events to encourage students on what national holidays are and to promote defense education . In a 1989 reform of the education guidelines , the LDP-controlled government first demanded that the flag must be used in school ceremonies and that proper respect must be given to it and to Kimigayo . Punishments for school officials who did not follow this order were also enacted with the 1989 reforms . The 1999 curriculum guideline issued by the Ministry of Education after the passage of the Law Regarding the National Flag and Anthem decrees that " on entrance and graduation ceremonies , schools must raise the flag of Japan and instruct students to sing the " Kimigayo " ( national anthem ) , given the significance of the flag and the song . " Additionally , the ministry 's commentary on the 1999 curriculum guideline for elementary schools note that " given the advance of internationalization , along with fostering patriotism and awareness of being Japanese , it is important to nurture school children 's respectful attitude toward the flag of Japan and Kimigayo as they grow up to be respected Japanese citizens in an internationalized society . " The ministry also stated that if Japanese students cannot respect their own symbols , then they will not be able to respect the symbols of other nations .

Schools have been the center of controversy over both the anthem and the national flag . The Tokyo Board of Education requires the use of both the anthem and flag at events under their jurisdiction . The order requires school teachers to respect both symbols or risk losing their jobs . Some have protested that such rules violate the Constitution of Japan , but the Board has argued that since schools are government agencies , their employees have an obligation to teach their students how to be good Japanese citizens . As a sign of protest , schools refused to display the Hinomaru at school graduations and some parents ripped down the flag . Teachers have unsuccessfully brought criminal complaints against Tokyo Governor Shintarō Ishihara and senior officials for ordering teachers to honor the Hinomaru and Kimigayo . After earlier opposition , the Japan Teachers Union accepts the use of both the flag and anthem ; the smaller All Japan Teachers and Staffs Union still opposes both symbols and their use inside the school system .

The Japan Self-Defense Forces ( JSDF ) and the Japan Ground Self-Defense Force use a version of the sun disc design with eight red rays extending outward , called Hachijō-Kyokujitsuki ( 八条旭日旗 ) . A gold border lies partially around the edge . A well-known variant of the sun disc design is the sun disc with 16 red rays in a Siemens star formation , which was also historically used by Japan 's military , particularly the Imperial Japanese Army and the Imperial Japanese Navy . The ensign , known in Japanese as the Jyūrokujō-Kyokujitsu-ki ( 十六条旭日旗 ) , was first adopted as the War flag on May 15 , 1870 , and was used until the end of World War II in 1945 . It was re-adopted on June 30 , 1954 , and is now used as the war flag and naval ensign of the Japan Ground Self-Defense Force ( JGSDF ) and the Japan Maritime Self-Defense Force ( JMSDF ) . In the surrounding Asian countries that were occupied by Japan , this flag still carries a negative connotation . The JMSDF also employs the use of a masthead pennant . First adopted in 1914 and readopted in 1965 , the masthead pennant contains a simplified version of the naval ensign at the hoist end , with the rest of the pennant colored white . The ratio of the pennant is between 1 : 40 and 1 : 90 .

The Japan Air Self-Defense Force ( JASDF ) , established independently in 1952 , has only the plain sun disc as its emblem . This is the only branch of service with an emblem that does not invoke the rayed Imperial Standard . However , the branch does have an ensign to fly on bases and during parades . The ensign was created in 1972 , which was the third used by the JASDF since its creation . The ensign contains the emblem of the branch centered on a blue background . Although not an official national flag , the Z signal flag played a major role in Japanese naval history . On May 27 , 1905 , Admiral Heihachirō Tōgō of the Mikasa was preparing to engage the Russian Baltic Fleet . Before the Battle of Tsushima began , Togo raised the Z flag on the Mikasa and engaged the Russian fleet , winning the battle for Japan . The raising of the flag said to the crew the following : " The fate of Imperial Japan hangs on this one battle ; all hands will exert themselves and do their best . " The Z flag was also raised on the aircraft carrier Akagi on the eve of the Japan 's attack on Pearl Harbor , Hawaii , in December 1941 .

Starting in 1870 , flags were created for the Japanese Emperor ( then Emperor Meiji ) , the Empress , and for other members of the imperial family . At first , the Emperor 's flag was ornate , with a sun resting in the center of an artistic pattern . He had flags that were used on land , at sea , and when he was in a carriage . The imperial family was also granted flags to be used at sea and while on land ( one for use on foot and one carriage flag ) . The carriage flags were a monocolored chrysanthemum , with 16 petals , placed in the center of a monocolored background . These flags were discarded in 1889 when the Emperor decided to use the chrysanthemum on a red background as his flag . With minor changes in the color shades and proportions , the flags adopted in 1889 are still in use by the imperial family . The current Emperor 's flag is a 16-petal chrysanthemum , colored in gold , centered on a red background with a 2 : 3 ratio . The Empress uses the same flag , except the shape is that of a swallow tail . The crown prince and the crown princess use the same flags , except with a smaller chrysanthemum and a white border in the middle of the flags . The chrysanthemum has been associated with the Imperial throne since the rule of Emperor Go-Toba in the 12th century , but it did not become the exclusive symbol of the Imperial throne until 1868 .

The 47 prefectures of Japan each have a flag resembling the national flag insofar as consisting of a symbol , called a mon , charged on a monocolored field ( with the exception of Ehime , which uses a symbol on a bicolor background ) . There are several prefecture flags , such as Hiroshima 's , that match their specifications to the national flag ( 2 : 3 ratio , mon placed in the center and is 3 ⁄ 5 the length of the flag ) . Some of the mon display the name of the prefecture in Japanese characters ; others are stylized depictions of the location or another special feature of the prefecture . An example of a prefectural flag is that of Nagano , where the orange katakana character ナ ( na ) appears in the center of a white disc . One interpretation of the mon is that the na symbol represents a mountain and the white disc , a lake . The orange color represents the sun while the white color represents the snow of the region . Municipalities can also adopt flags of their own . The designs of the city flags are similar to the prefectural flags : a mon on a monocolored background . An example is the flag of Amakusa in Kumamoto Prefecture : the city symbol is composed of the Katakana character ア ( a ) and surrounded by waves . This symbol is centered on a white flag , with a ratio of 2 : 3 . Both the city emblem and the flag were adopted in 2006 .

In addition to the flags used by the military , several other flag designs were inspired by the national flag . The former Japan Post flag consisted of the Hinomaru with a red horizontal bar placed in the center of the flag . There was also a thin white ring around the red sun . It was later replaced by a flag that consisted of the 〒 postal mark in red on a white background . Two recently designed national flags resemble the Japanese flag . In 1971 , Bangladesh gained independence from Pakistan , and it adopted a national flag that had a green background , charged with an off-centered red disc that contained a golden map of Bangladesh . The current flag , adopted in 1972 , dropped the golden map and kept everything else . The Government of Bangladesh officially calls the red disc a circle ; the red color symbolizes the blood that was shed to create their country . The island nation of Palau uses a flag of similar design , but the color scheme is completely different . While the Government of Palau does not cite the Japanese flag as an influence on their national flag , Japan did administer Palau from 1914 until 1944 . The flag of Palau is an off-centered golden-yellow full moon on a sky blue background . The moon stands for peace and a young nation while the blue background represents Palau 's transition to self-government from 1981 to 1994 , when it achieved full independence .

The Japanese naval ensign also influenced other flag designs . One such flag design is used by the Asahi Shimbun . At the bottom hoist of the flag , one quarter of the sun is displayed . The kanji character 朝 is displayed on the flag , colored white , covering most of the sun . The rays extend from the sun , occurring in a red and white alternating order , culminating in 13 total stripes . The flag is commonly seen at the National High School Baseball Championship , as the Asahi Shimbun is a main sponsor of the tournament . The rank flags and ensigns of the Imperial Japanese Navy also based their designs on the naval ensign .

The construction of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline System included over 800 miles ( 1,300 km ) of oil pipeline , 12 pump stations , and a new tanker port . Built largely on permafrost during 1975 – 77 between Prudhoe Bay and Valdez , Alaska , the $ 8 billion effort required tens of thousands of people , often working in extreme temperatures and conditions ; the invention of specialized construction techniques ; and the construction of a new road , the Dalton Highway . The first section of pipe was laid in 1975 after more than five years of legal and political arguments . Allegations of faulty welds drew intense scrutiny from local and national observers . A culture grew around the unique working conditions involved in constructing the pipeline , and each union that worked on the project had a different function and stereotype . Thirty-two Alyeska Pipeline Service Company employees and contract workers were killed during the project . The main construction effort lasted until 1977 ; the first barrel of oil was delivered on July 28 of that year . Several more pump stations , added as oil flow increased , were completed through 1980 .

Intensive geological sampling and survey work of the pipeline route started in spring 1970 . Aerial photograph were taken , examined , and a preliminary route was detailed . Small survey parties physically visited the route and hammered stakes into the ground . The work was difficult ; animal dangers forced the crews to be armed , and they also had to cope with the remote area and limited infrastructure . In places , the foliage was so dense that trees had to be cut down and progress was limited to 20,000 feet ( 6.1 km ) per day . The surveyed route passed through several mountain passes : Atigun Pass , Isabel Pass , Thompson Pass , and Keystone Canyon . In the latter location , surveyors had to rappel down cliffs in order to perform their work . Surveyors and planners also had to deal with the Denali Fault , a major cause of earthquakes , and with large amounts of permafrost . In 1969 , the unincorporated Trans-Alaska Pipeline System group drilled a series of core samples north of the Brooks Range that demonstrated how ubiquitous the permafrost was along the route . This forced the design of an elevated pipeline , which was tested in a 1,000 feet ( 300 m ) loop built near Barrow . This elevation required the pipeline to be insulated , since extreme cold temperatures caused the metal to become brittle , even when hot oil was being pumped through the pipeline .

After ecological objections forced subterranean pipeline crossings ( in order to allow caribou to cross ) , engineers developed a system by which the ground near the pipeline would be refrigerated by chilled brine . These refrigerated sections also would be placed in Styrofoam-lined trenches and covered with gravel for their insulation value . Altogether , 3.5 miles ( 5.6 km ) of the pipeline was designed to be built underground in this way . In other places , a lack of permafrost meant it could simply be placed underground without a special refrigeration plant . Large amounts of gravel were needed for all sections of the pipeline as insulation to keep the heat of above-ground structures from melting the permafrost . Gravel also was needed to build the construction and maintenance road , and surveyors located 470 sites across Alaska where the needed 65,000,000 cubic yards ( 50,000,000 m3 ) of gravel could be located . The Pipeline Authorization Act required the pipeline to be able to withstand the maximum earthquake ever recorded in the area it was built . When crossing the Denali Fault , Teflon-coated sliders were designed to allow the pipeline to move side-to-side in an earthquake . To protect against forward-and-backward shocks and to allow for thermal expansion , the pipeline wasn 't designed as a straight line . Instead , it was intended to be laid in an S-shape , and the bends would allow for expansion and movement without breaking .

Because most of the pipeline was built above permafrost , each of the pipes holding up the raised sections of pipeline contained a sealed tube of ammonia . As the permafrost below the pipeline warms , the ammonia absorbs the heat and rises to a radiator on top of each stanchion . The ammonia is cooled by the outside air , condenses , and falls back to the bottom of the tube , where the process repeats . The surveyed route crossed hundreds of streams and rivers . To cross these with the pipeline , engineers designed concrete " jackets " to surround the pipe and weight it down so it would sink to the bottom of the stream or river . Because oil is lighter than water , the pipeline would float without the concrete jackets . Dredging rivers and burying the pipeline in the streambed was not allowed due to environmental concerns . In several places — either out of fear of disturbing the river or because of the river 's characteristics — pipeline bridges were constructed . The most notable of these are over the Yukon River and the Tanana River . To protect against corrosion in these wet environments , the pipeline was designed with cathodic protection .

In terms of spill prevention , the pipeline was designed with one-way valves ( so oil moving ahead could not leak out of a hole behind a certain point ) , computer-aided leak detection , and other features . The pipeline was designed to be pressurized , so any leak would be instantly detected by a loss of pressure at one of the pump stations , which could sound an alarm and halt the flow of oil quickly . When it was proposed , the pipeline was scheduled to start at a capacity of 0.6 million barrels per day ( 95,000 m3 / d ) , with capacity to be expanded to 1.2 million barrels per day ( 190,000 m3 / d ) in two years , and to 2 million barrels per day ( 320,000 m3 / d ) at an indeterminate time . The oil embargo scrapped these plans , and it was intended that the pipeline be built with an initial capacity of 1.2 million barrels per day ( 190,000 m3 / d ) . This required eight pumping stations ( instead of five ) to be ready at startup , greatly increasing the manpower required .

The Valdez Marine Terminal , the southern end of the pipeline , was planned for a site across the Port Valdez fjord from Valdez proper . Initial studies predicted bedrock would be six feet below the surface of the ground , but when excavation began , it was discovered that bedrock actually was sixty feet down , requiring the removal of 15,000,000 cubic yards ( 11,000,000 m3 ) of overburden . The terminal itself was designed to be built with four tanker berths and space for a fifth , should it become necessary . Holding tanks were planned that had a capacity equal to that of the pipeline , allowing the whole pipeline to be emptied if required . As required by the Pipeline Authorization Act , a ballast-water filtration system had to be designed as well . This system removes oil from tankers ' ballast water so it is not released into Prince William Sound — something fishermen feared when the pipeline was proposed .

Shortly after the permit was signed , convoys of equipment on snow tractors began heading north , using hardened snow roads and an ice bridge over the Yukon River to reach the seven construction camps that had been dormant since 1970 . In the 83 days from mid-January to the time the snow and ice melted in mid-April , 680 workers moved 34,000 short tons ( 31,000,000 kg ) to the seven camps , and built five more camps and five temporary airstrips . In February , as the ice bridge and snow road were carrying tracked vehicles north , Alyeska awarded a contract to design the construction and maintenance road . Michael Baker , Jr . , Inc . , a firm in Pennsylvania , was awarded the contract . To cross the Yukon River , the state of Alaska designed a bridge and paid two-thirds of its cost . The remaining third was paid by Alyeska , and the bridge was built by Manson-Osberg-Ghemm . On April 5 , the contracts to build the road were picked . In total , the new Dalton Highway cost $ 185 million to build , and four companies shared that cost . Construction of the Dalton Highway started on April 29 , and at the peak of the effort , Alyeska and the four subcontractors had more than 3,400 workers deployed from the Yukon River to Prudhoe Bay . A massive airlift was created to supply the road construction effort ; more than 700 flights per day — 170,000 in total — were required before the road was finished on September 29 . In just 154 days , a 360-mile gravel road had been built . Final grading had to be done and more than 20 small permanent bridges had to be built , but by November , the road was open to traffic crossing the Yukon River on another ice bridge .

To supervise the construction of the pipeline , Alyeska appointed two construction management contractors to oversee all the other subcontractors in the project . Bechtel Corporation , from San Francisco , was named the management contractor for the pipeline itself . Fluor Alaska Inc . , a division of Fluor Corp. , was named the management contractor for the pumping stations and Valdez Marine Terminal , which was the most complex single section of the pipeline , since it involved the transfer of oil from the pipeline to seagoing oil tankers . Neither of those two companies actually did the construction work . That job was handed off to a series of subcontractors , each of whom had responsibility on one ( or two ) of six sections of the pipeline ( seven , if the marine terminal is included ) . Bidding on the subcontracting jobs opened at the end of March , and the contracts were announced on June 12 , 1974 . On Section One , which ran 153 miles ( 246 km ) from Valdez to the Sourdough pipeline camp , River Construction Corporation , a division of Morrison-Knudsen , was given the contract . For Section Two , which covered 149 miles ( 240 km ) from Sourdough to north of Delta Junction , Perini Arctic Associates , a joint venture of Perini Corporation , Majestic Construction , Wiley Oilfield Hauling Ltd . , and McKinney Drilling Company . Section Three covered 144 miles ( 232 km ) from Delta Junction , past Fairbanks , and almost to the Yukon . The contract for this section was given to H.C. Price , a group formed by H.C. Price Company ( usually known as PPCO ) , R.B. Potashnick , Codell Construction Company , and Oman Construction Company .

Section Four was 143 miles ( 230 km ) from south of the Yukon to Coldfoot . It was contracted to Associated-Green , a group formed by Associated Pipeline Contractors , Inc. and Green Construction Company . The group also was one of the main contractors for construction of the Dalton Highway . Section Five covered the distance from Coldfoot to Toolik pipeline camp , and Section Six went from Toolik to Prudhoe Bay . Together , the two sections covered 210 miles ( 340 km ) , and they both were under the supervision of Arctic Constructors , a venture of Brown & Root Inc . , Ingram Corporation , Peter Kiewit Sons Inc . , Williams Brothers Alaska , Inc . , and H.B. Zachry Company . In Valdez , where Fluor had supervision , the work also was divided among several contractors . Site preparation work was done by Morrison-Knudsen . Chicago Bridge & Iron Company built the tank farms , the tanker berths were built by Kiewest ( a venture of Peter Kiewit Sons and Willamette-Western Corporation ) , and General Electric insulated the pipes . Fluor also had supervision of the construction of the pumping stations , which were generally built by the contractors working on a specific section of the pipeline .

When the contracts were announced , Alyeska already had 12 pipeline construction camps either built or under construction . These camps were all north of the Yukon , however , and camps had to be built along the entire length of the project . Alyeska planned for 29 construction camps , but 31 were created . Seven were built along the pipeline south of the Yukon , and one was built at each of the 12 pump stations along the length of the route . The camps were built on thick beds of gravel laid down to insulate the underlying permafrost and to prevent pollution . At the conclusion of the construction project , the gravel was removed , theoretically removing oil leaks and other pollution with it . Atop the gravel were prefabricated modular buildings either flown to the site or trucked across the Dalton Highway . The standardized structures could house 28 people , and two typically were bolted together to create two " wings " . All were one-story , except at Valdez and at the pump station camps , where modules were laid atop one another because of space concerns . In addition to the gravel insulation , both buildings and utility conduits were raised above the ground to avoid heating permafrost .

The camps housed from 250 people ( at each pump station ) to 3,500 people ( at Valdez ) . A typical pump station camp cost $ 6 million to build , while the typical mainline camps cost about $ 10 million to build . The camps had beds for 16,500 workers and were collectively referred to as " Skinny City " by workers . The name came from the fact that the " city " was 800 miles ( 1,300 km ) long , but only a few hundred feet wide . Overall construction headquarters was at Fort Wainwright near Fairbanks , where Alyeska leased land and buildings from the U.S. Army . Vacant barracks were converted into housing , and vacant offices were given to oil workers . As air traffic increased , Alyeska arranged for the use of Fort Wainwright 's airfield to relieve the burden on Fairbanks International Airport . The camp at Wainwright was the only one that did not use prefabricated buildings .

The Trans-Alaska Pipeline System was built entirely with unionized labor . Because construction was slumping in the United States at large , the pipeline drew workers from across the country . These workers had to follow a strict hiring process based on union seniority and the labor that was needed . Priority was given to hiring Alaska residents and Alaska Natives , and no strikes were permitted by a labor agreement between Alyeska and the unions . In exchange for abiding by these restrictions , workers were paid extremely well and received fringe benefits . According to the labor contract , every worker was guaranteed 40 hours ' pay per week , even if weather made work impossible . In addition , subcontractors had cost-plus contracts with Alyeska for staffing , so there was no incentive to keep staffing levels low . These factors often led to more people being assigned to a job than there was work to do in an attempt to make up time lost to weather delays . At the peak of construction in fall 1975 , more than 28,000 people were working on the pipeline . Fourteen to 19 percent of the workers were minorities , and 5 to 10 percent were women . Because of the high turnover on the project , more than 70,000 people worked on at least a part of the pipeline .

The welders who worked on the pipeline itself came from Pipeliners Local 798 out of Tulsa , Oklahoma , which specialized in providing welders for large-scale pipeline projects . Members of the Plumbers and Steamfitters Union performed all welding that was not a part of the pipeline itself , including pump stations , feeder pipelines , and work at the Valdez Marine Terminal . The welders were the highest paid of all the workers on the pipeline , with a normal rate of $ 18.25 per hour . To be hired on the pipeline project , welders had to go through an intensive certification process that involved a series of test welds . If a welder failed any of the test welds , he was not hired and was not allowed to try again for several weeks . Most 798ers were characterized by a Southern accent , cowboy boots , and unique welder 's hats . They were the only people to weld the 48-inch ( 120 cm ) pipe of the main pipeline , and outside observers characterized them as arrogant and " redneck " . As a fellow welder stated at the time , " Take your typical 798 pipeline welder and feed him a few drinks , and he 'll probably tell you that he 's God 's greatest gift to welding . " This attitude generated resentment from other pipeline workers , and the conflict caused large-scale brawls . In some instances , Alaska State Troopers had to be flown to pipeline camps in order to break up small riots . Toward the end of the pipeline project , a series of bumper stickers was produced with the slogan " Happiness is 10,000 Okies going south with a Texan under each arm . "

The Teamsters Union was by far the largest and most notable contributor of workers to the pipeline project . Teamsters worked in the transportation and supply aspects of the project . All trucks were driven by Teamsters , supply warehouses were run by Teamsters , and the buses that transported workers from camps to job sites were run by Teamsters . Teamsters Local 959 , with more than 23,000 employees at its peak , was by far the most dominant labor force on the pipeline project . There were frequent allegations of corruption by Teamsters on the project , and the Anchorage Daily News won a Pulitzer Prize for a 15-part series on the rise of Local 959 and its influence on state politics . Repeated allegations of links to organized crime were never backed up by evidence , but two Teamsters leaders were murdered in 1976 while investigating drug activity on the pipeline project . Teamsters workers strongly denied any involvement with organized crime , and pointed to the fact that 80 percent of the Teamsters in the project had college degrees or professional and management experience . The Teamsters ' control of tools and equipment in warehouses they ran led to conflicts with other workers . In a few instances , Teamsters were assaulted by workers from other unions . In other instances , the Teamsters used their position to extract concessions from Alyeska and the subcontractors . Although they were forbidden from striking , they were allowed to halt work for safety meetings , and this excuse was used on a handful of occasions . The most notable of these was in February 1975 , after a series of serious truck accidents on the Elliott Highway , which connected to the newly built Dalton . The Elliott , which had not been upgraded , was a treacherous drive for trucks hauling 80 feet ( 24 m ) of pipe . After his attempts to get Alyeska to upgrade the road were rebuffed , Teamster leader Jesse Carr stopped all truck traffic in the state for four days of safety meetings . Alyeska and the state promised upgrades to the road , and the traffic resumed .

The International Union of Operating Engineers ( called Operators for short ) represented the men and women who sat at the controls of the heavy equipment used on the construction of the pipeline . This equipment included bulldozers , cranes , drilling rigs , and sidebooms — a cross between a bulldozer and a crane that could lay a section of pipe in a trench parallel to its tracks . Because most of the heavy equipment was unheated , six operators were typically assigned to each piece of equipment , allowing for frequent breaks . A popular joke on the pipeline was that the sole qualification to be an Operator was , " Must be able to sit on a sideboom at 40 below and not freeze up . " More seriously , one laborer wrote , was that there was nothing more terrifying than to be in a trench and have a drunken or unskilled Operator handling the pipe that was being laid in the trench .

The Laborers International Union represented the bulk of the less-skilled labor on the project . Laborers , as they were commonly known , did most of the odd jobs on the project : digging trenches in areas inaccessible by heavy equipment , drilling holes for the pipeline 's Vertical Support Members , spreading gravel , crushing rock , and moving supplies by hand . Laborers Local 942 out of Fairbanks was the most prominent Laborers group on the project , and because no special skills were required for the jobs it filled , the Laborers Union attracted most of the people who came to Alaska specifically for the pipeline project . As one Laborer put it , they were people " simply looking for the easiest way possible of getting through the day . " Because the Laborers had more applicants than jobs available , the process for getting a job on the pipeline through Laborers Local 942 was a multi-tiered process . There were multiple levels of eligibility , based on the amount of seniority a person had . A-level members had the first pick of jobs , but they had to have worked at least 800 hours with the union in the previous year . B-level members had to have worked between 100 and 800 hours with the union . C-level members had to have at least two years of experience outside of Alaska or be an Alaska resident for at least one year . D-level was for everyone else , and D-level people rarely got jobs . That didn 't stop people from trying . At 11 a.m. on January 1 , 1974 , shortly before the pipeline right-of-way was signed , more than 100 people spent the night outside the Fairbanks office of the Laborers Union , waiting for the first choice of jobs when the office opened .

Life during the pipeline construction project was characterized by long hours , poor conditions , and limited entertainment compensated by excellent benefits and pay . Each worker was handed a small booklet of 23 camp rules , but the rules ( including no alcohol or smoking ) were frequently broken and became the target of ribald humor . Within the living quarters , the atmosphere resembled that of a college dormitory . Housekeeping and laundry services were provided , but the quarters were small and little entertainment was available . Television broadcasts were delayed two days because of the need to fly tapes from California , and most workers had to develop their own forms of entertainment . In the winter , some took to skiing or sightseeing ; in the summer , some went hiking . In general , however , little time was available for recreation because of the long hours worked by most people . In the first years of the project , workers were regularly treated to prime rib , steak dinners , and other exotic fare due to a cost-plus contract between the food preparers and the subcontractors . In later years , these cost-plus contracts were replaced , and institutional cooking and box lunches became common , but the food on the project was prized by many workers . As soon as the haul road , later named the Dalton Highway , was built , the food and the overtime for some unions changed . The highway construction was charged to the federal and state governments and was supposed to be cost plus . There were no more steak nights one to two times a week and the Australian rock lobster tails disappeared . The International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers ( IBEW ) LU 1547 was one union that had overtime on Sundays changed from double time to time-and-one-half upon completion of the haul road .

In 1976 , workers ' pay averaged between $ 11 and $ 18 per hour , depending on the position . With workweeks averaging between 70 and 84 hours per week , the problem for many workers became what to do with so much extra money . Teamster Jerry Thornhill , a typical worker , wrote to Money magazine , asking for advice . Thornhill detailed a pay rate of $ 57,000 per year at a time when members of Congress earned $ 42,500 annually , professional football players averaged $ 40,000 , and U.S. vice president Nelson Rockefeller earned $ 62,500 . The large amounts of money in the pipeline camps and a lack of entertainment caused frequent gambling games that sometimes involved tens of thousands of dollars . Instead of gambling , other workers saved their money for monthlong vacations to Hawaii or other warm climates , then returned to work with no money remaining .

The first section of the Trans-Alaska pipeline was laid on March 27 , 1975 , in the Tonsina River . Several forty-foot sections of pipe were welded together and coated in concrete prior to the ceremony . Twelve sidebooms ( bulldozers with side-mounted cranes ) together lifted 1,900 feet ( 580 m ) of pipe , which was laid in a trench dug perpendicular to the riverbed . Bulldozers filled in the exposed trench with gravel , restoring the river 's original contours . This process was repeated a few miles south , where the pipeline crossed the Little Tonsina River . By the end of April , the first 1,800 feet ( 550 m ) of elevated pipeline also was built in the same area . In 1975 , the first year of pipelaying , Alyeska set a goal of completing 45 percent of the 800-mile route . This would not be laid in a straight line , since it was expected that river crossings would take longer to complete than portions of the pipeline on dry land . Work on the pumping stations and the Valdez Marine Terminal , which had begun in the fall of 1974 , also was expected to take longer than laying pipe . Conversely , work on those two projects could proceed during the winter , when pipelaying could not take place due to the frozen ground .

Laying pipe took several stages . First , the right of way had to be cleared with chainsaws , bulldozers , and scrapers who followed the rough route laid out by the initial surveyors . These crews were followed by another group of surveyors and engineers who determined whether the pipeline could be laid in the planned spot , or if it had to be moved because of permafrost , soft ground , or other considerations . State and federal surveillance officers , working with the engineers , could give the OK to move the path of the pipeline as much as 200 feet to the right or left in order to avoid obstacles . After the path was finalized came the augers and drillers for the holes that served as foundations for the Vertical Support Members that held up the pipe . These holes were drilled and filled with a mix of water , gravel and dirt before a VSM was dropped into each hole . Because of the frozen ground , the gravel and dirt froze as hard as concrete , sealing the VSMs in place . The VSMs were laid in parallel , two at a time , and each had a semicircular rest for the pipeline segments . These were carried in 40-foot or 80-foot segments by crane or sideboom to the appropriate location , lowered into place , then welded together . The welds were then inspected via X-ray by quality control engineers who followed the welders .

The construction progressed under the management of Frank Moolin , Jr . , an engineer who had worked on refinery projects in Singapore and the construction of the Bay Area Rapid Transit system prior to being named senior project manager . Moolin became known for his work ethic and his hard-driving style . It was said that he was the first person in the office and the last to leave at the end of the day . The Engineering News-Record reported " He demands total dedication , saying , ' Your wife had a baby ; so what ? ' " when it named him the construction industry 's Man of the Year in 1976 . To spur progress on the pipeline , he started the " Alyeska Sweepstakes , " in which each of the five contractors working on the pipeline were compared to each other based on how much of their share they completed on time . In his biggest decision , he canceled Bechtel 's contract as management contractor because he felt the company was adding too much bureaucracy between Alyeska and the pipeline contractors . A historian later called the decision " one of the most humiliating defeats " in the history of Bechtel .

During the winter of 1975 – 1976 , Moolin pronounced himself dissatisfied with progress , but promised improvements . " We 've learned an awful lot . This year ( 1975 ) was a pull-ourselves-up-by-our-bootstraps operation . We didn 't really have our organization set until July , and it wasn 't working at top effectiveness until October . " To take advantage of that " top effectiveness " , Moolin set an ambitious goal for 1976 construction : " We 're expecting to have all of the line installed , insulated , and hydro-tested by November 1 , " he said in January . That goal was ambitious , because most of the work that had been done to that point was on floodplains and flat terrain . Still left to tackle were difficult construction projects in Atigun Pass and Keystone Canyon . " In some areas , we did eat our cake last year , " Moolin said . Even though winter shut down all pipelaying on the right of way , work on the pump stations and in Valdez continued without stop . At Pump Station 1 , in Prudhoe Bay , temperatures reached lower than − 70 ° F ( − 57 ° C ) , but the work continued . Because the pump station was the origin point for the main pipeline , it also had to process the feeder lines coming from oil wells . The pump station camp had a population of 270 workers through the winter , and it would peak in the summer with 430 workers .

As the weather warmed and work resumed on the main pipeline , Alyeska administrators were distracted by a controversy about pipeline welds that had been done the previous year . In September 1975 , a former employee of Ketchbaw Industries filed suit against the company , alleging that he had been laid off because he would not participate in a conspiracy to falsify quality control X-Rays of pipeline welds . The Trans-Alaska Pipeline was unique among pipeline projects to that point in that it required all welds of the main pipeline to be verified by X-Ray . This was a time-consuming process , and the quality-control procedures continually lagged behind the welders . At the end of 1975 , Alyeska terminated Ketchbaw 's contract and took responsibility for analyzing weld X-Rays itself . The controversy continued , however , as Kelley 's lawsuit moved forward , a Ketchbaw manager was found dead of cyanide poisoning , and photographs of welds were stolen from a pump station construction camp . Alyeska began a review of all 30,800 welds that had been done in 1975 , and submitted its report to the Interior Department in April 1976 . In May , it submitted its technical analysis and a report on repair work under way . The review produced a list of 3,955 questionable welds — 10 percent of 1975 's work .

Alyeska reported that about half were too minor to affect the running of the pipeline , but questions lay with more than a thousand welds that might be dangerous . Re-examining the welds would be extremely difficult , since those sections of pipeline were sealed ( and in many cases buried ) . By July , the U.S. Congress began holding hearings into the welding problems . President Gerald Ford sent a team to Alaska to oversee and examine Alyeska 's work . At the recommendations of this team and to avoid further investigations , Alyeska began repairing the welds on its own . By September , more than 3,000 of the questionable welds had been redone or certified as safe . Alyeska asked for waivers on the remaining 612 welds , and more hearings resulted . By the end of November , only 34 welds were still at issue . The leader of Ford 's team ordered 31 of the welds to be dug up and re-done . Waivers were granted for only three welds , all of which were buried 17 feet ( 5.2 m ) under the Koyukuk River south of the Brooks Range . Proof of the integrity of questionable welds were evaluated by a unique solution in Section Five north of the Brooks Range . On either side of the Sagavanirktok River , the above ground pipeline was cut upon and 48 inch fans installed to circulate air . Then a team of 12 men and inspectors riding on wheeled sleds pulled by a modified John Deere lawnmower entered the pipe . Welds were counted during the passage . After arriving at the questionable weld under the Sagavanirktok River , an ultrasound was taken on the inside of the pipe . Then the team exited the pipe on the opposite side and the ultrasound was taken back to camp for evaluation . Alyeska estimated the total cost of redoing the welds to be $ 55 million .

Many of the suspected faulty welds were in Section Five of the pipeline construction project — the northernmost 200 miles ( 320 km ) . This area also included two of the major problems encountered during the 1976 construction season : Atigun Pass and the Sagavanirktok River ( also known as Sag River ) . The pipeline had been laid in a trench beneath the river in the late fall of 1975 . Because it had been laid so late in the season , the trench fill material had frozen and it was impossible to fill the submerged trench containing the pipeline . Spring snowmelt flooded the river and battered the submerged portion of pipe . In June , the battered pipeline broke free of its moorings and a 1,700-foot ( 518 m ) section of concrete-coated pipe floated to the surface of the river . Because doing repair work would interfere with the migration of Arctic char , the Alaska Department of Fish and Game allowed only 24 hours for the project . After preparing the site , it took just four hours for a replacement trench to be dug , a pipe welded and laid in the trench , and the trench to be filled in .

At Atigun Pass , to the south of the Sag River , workers had to deal with a different set of challenges . In 1975 , surveyors discovered the pass was filled with permafrost and glacial soils . But because the pass is the site of frequent avalanches , an elevated pipeline was not possible . The solution was to design a reinforced , insulated ditch to lay the pipeline in . The result was a 6,000-foot ( 1.83 km ) long concrete box lined with 21 inches ( 53 cm ) of Styrofoam . The problem then became one of building it before the first snow started falling in October . At the opposite end of the pipeline , just north of Valdez , engineers coped with the difficulties posed by Keystone Canyon . The canyon was the only route to Valdez , but it was occupied by the Richardson Highway and the Lowe River ; no room was available for the pipeline . The only solution was to avoid the canyon by building the pipeline through the Chugach Mountains and at the rim of the canyon . Winter work was made impossible by the more than 300 inches ( 760 cm ) of snow that fell in the winter of 1975-1976 , and when the snow melted , construction workers had to figure out how to travel up a 60 percent grade , then lay the pipeline on it . A rock-crushing plant was built at the canyon 's rim to avoid the need to carry gravel up the steep grade , but problems still persisted . Not even bulldozers could traverse the grade without a team of two helping each up the grade in turn . A bulldozer had to be modified to carry 80-foot ( 20.4-meter ) sections of pipe up the grade , but even then , most of the sections and equipment had to be lifted by helicopter to the canyon rim . Similar techniques had to be used at nearby Thomson Pass , and both sections required the entire 1976 construction season to complete .

Work at the pump stations and marine terminal , which had not stopped during the winter , continued throughout the 1976 construction season . Pump Station 6 , just south of the Yukon River , had to be redesigned after excavation revealed ice-rich permafrost below the site . Five pump stations needed at startup ( when throughput was lower ) received their pumps , turbines , and piping . As they were completed , the pump stations received hydrostatic testing , in which portions of pipe were filled with water and subjected to pressures in excess of the eventual operating conditions . Following this testing , the initial five pump stations were disconnected from the main pipeline and had oil run through them on a continuous loop . " It 's very similar to your new automobile , " one worker said . " You drive it around for ten days so that any components that are going to fail are given time to fail . " Work on additional pump stations , which would not be needed until the pipeline was brought to full capacity , was not pressed forward . At Valdez , construction was two-thirds complete by September as 4,200 workers hurried to complete the marine terminal . Because of loose soil found at the job site , enormous retaining walls had to be constructed to secure the ground below some of the 58 structures that were completed by the end of the year . During the first week of November , the first ship docked at the newly built Valdez quays . It was not a tanker but a ship bringing more construction material . In December , the first signal was sent from the Valdez operations center — where two new control computers had been installed — to Pump Station 2 on the North Slope .

Although the project made strides toward completion in 1976 , it did not meet Moolin 's goal of having all pipe installed , insulated , and tested by winter . The final section of main pipeline was welded in place on December 6 , but not all of the pipeline was tested before winter set in . At the end of 1976 , the project was 92 percent complete . The pipeline was 97.5 percent complete , the pump stations were 92 percent done , and the marine terminal stood at 83 percent . Because the terminal was the lagging portion of the project , its full work crew continued operations through the winter and into 1977 .

Few tasks were left to complete when the 1977 construction season began . Most of the pump stations had been turned over to operating personnel by construction workers , and environmental mitigation and cleanup was in full swing as Alyeska repaired tundra damage caused by construction . Associated-Green , which had performed its construction tasks well , was assigned the job of finishing the final touches on the main pipeline . The last 160 miles of hydrostatic testing were done , 33 remedial welds were completed , and 45 miles of pipe were insulated , among other tasks . Because the pace of construction was much slower than in 1976 , fewer workers were needed . Fewer than 11,000 were employed at the peak of 1977 work , about half of 1976 's total . On May 31 , the final pipeline weld took place . Additional tasks remained still to be completed , but the pipeline could be put into operation without them . The 2,290-foot ( 700 m ) E. L. Patton Yukon River Bridge was not completed until October 1979 ; until then , traffic utilized a series of ferries across the river . Additional pump stations also were constructed between 1977 and 1980 , as oil flow increased .

As part of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline Authorization Act , Alyeska was required to remove most traces of the 31 pipeline construction camps . Seven camps closed in November 1976 , and six more closed before the 1977 construction season started . All told , 20 camps went up for sale . One was sold to the University of Alaska for use as an Arctic research facility , while another was converted for use as a truck stop and motel . In addition to removing its camps , Alyeska also had to dispose of the heavy equipment used to build the pipeline . In January 1977 , Alyeska listed more than 20,000 pieces of equipment for sale . The New York Times called the auction of surplus equipment " one of the biggest going-out-of-business sales in history . "

In April 1977 , Alyeska filed a notice that it intended to start filling the pipeline sometime between June 20 and July 1 . Engineers had to face several problems when filling the pipeline . First was the need to balance temperatures : Filled by air , the steel pipeline was about 20 ° F ( − 7 ° C ) degrees . The oil emerging from wells at Prudhoe Bay was more than 120 ° F ( 49 ° C ) degrees , and there was a danger that if it was introduced before intermediate warming , the pipeline could crack because of thermal expansion . The second problem came when the pipeline needed to be purged of air in order to reduce the danger of fire or explosion . Usually , a pipeline is filled with water first , and the oil pushes the water ahead of it , purging the pipeline as it goes . In Alaska , there was a fear that the water would freeze in the pipeline , damaging it . This problem was solved when pressurized nitrogen was used instead of water . On June 20 , 1977 , the first section of pipeline was pressurized with nitrogen , and oil was introduced behind it . Because of the cold temperature of the pipeline and the slow rate at which oil was introduced , it took 31 days for the first oil to travel from Prudhoe to Valdez . " As oil cools down , it becomes thicker , " explained one worker . " Our oil at first had a viscosity very similar to asphalt . Another problem was faced when the oil traveled downslope from Atigun Pass . To avoid a situation where the oil front could gain momentum from the downhill slope and rapidly crash into a pipeline section or pump and damage it , regulator valves were used to slow the rate at which the nitrogen ahead of the oil could move . This procedure was used at the other downhill slopes at startup .

As the oil advanced through the pipeline , it was paced by a series of inspectors who traveled along the pipeline route to ensure the weight of the oil did not cause the pipeline to settle or create problems on bridges as the unbalanced weight of the oil front passed over them . This first inspection crew was followed by a second , and others patrolled the pipeline regularly as the oil front passed down the line . The first oil arrived in Valdez on July 28 , 1977 , at 11 : 02 p.m. The oil was only 45 ° F ( 7 ° C ) , but it gradually warmed as the system reached a thermal equilibrium . After the initial startup , the pipeline was intended to run continuously . Said an engineer : " We start up this pipeline once ... It will stay onstream then forever ... ' forever ' being the life of the oil field . " The startup was not without incident . On July 4 , a nitrogen leak was detected at milepost 489.2 . The flow of oil stopped for three days as workers repaired a pipe elbow that cracked because of the temperature difference between the pipe and the supercooled nitrogen . On July 8 , oil flowed through a shut-off pump at Pump Station 8 as workers replaced a strainer . The resulting spray mixed with ambient air and was ignited by a stray spark . One worker was killed and five others were injured in the resulting explosion , which also shut down the station until March 1978 . On July 19 , a heavy equipment accident caused a pipeline break that leaked 1,800 barrels per day ( 290 m3 / d ) of oil .

When the TAPS group initially proposed the pipeline in 1969 , the proposed cost was $ 900 million , and the pipeline would be completed by 1972 . By January 1970 , the projected cost had risen from $ 900 million to $ 2 billion . In October 1973 , Alyeska further refined its figures and anticipated a cost of between $ 3.1 billion and $ 3.5 billion , with the potential for a billion more . One year later , Alyeska released its most detailed cost estimate to that point : $ 5.982 billion . By June 1975 , that figure had again risen to $ 6.4 billion . At the time , it was estimated that $ 3 billion of the cost rise to that point was due to inflation , while another $ 2 billion was due to environmental costs . In July 1976 , amid the second year of construction , the project 's cost was raised to $ 7.7 billion . The increase , Alyeska reported , was due to material and freight costs , repairs needed to poorly built sections of pipeline , and contingency estimates . The final construction cost was tallied at $ 8 billion , but this figure does not include interest on investment loans or the cost of improvements and repairs after 1977 . The Valdez Marine Terminal alone cost $ 1.4 billion . The percentage of the pipeline owned by various companies has changed over time , but as of 2009 , the primary owner was BP , which controls 46.93 percent of the pipeline . Second is ConocoPhillips Transportation Alaska Inc. with 28.29 percent , followed in order by ExxonMobil ( 20.34 percent ) , Koch Alaska Pipeline Company ( 3.08 percent ) , and Unocal Pipeline Company ( 1.36 percent ) .

Allen , Lawrence J. The Trans-Alaska Pipeline . Vol 1 : The Beginning . Vol 2 : South to Valdez . Seattle ; Scribe Publishing Co . 1975 and 1976 . Alyeska Pipeline Service Co . Alyeska : A 30-Year Journey . Alyeska Pipeline Service Co . , 2007 . Fineberg , Richard A. A Pipeline in Peril : A Status Report on the Trans-Alaska Pipeline . Ester , Alaska ; Alaska Forum for Environmental Responsibility , 1996 . Hanrahan , John and Gruenstein , Peter . Lost Frontier : The Marketing of Alaska . New York ; W.W. Norton , 1977 . Kruse , John A. Fairbanks Community Survey . Fairbanks ; Institute of Social and Economic Research , 1976 . Lenzner , Terry F. The Management , Planning and Construction of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline System . Washington , D.C. ; Report to the Alaska Pipeline Commission . Romer , John and Elizabeth . The Seven Wonders of the World : A History of the Modern Imagination . New York ; Henry Holt and Co . , 1995 .

The Diolkos ( Δίολκος , from the Greek διά , dia " across " and ὁλκός , holkos " portage machine " ) was a paved trackway near Corinth in Ancient Greece which enabled boats to be moved overland across the Isthmus of Corinth . The shortcut allowed ancient vessels to avoid the long and dangerous circumnavigation of the Peloponnese peninsula . The phrase " as fast as a Corinthian " , penned by the comic playwright Aristophanes , indicates that the trackway was common knowledge and had acquired a reputation for swiftness . The main function of the Diolkos was the transfer of goods , although in times of war it also became a preferred means of speeding up naval campaigns . The 6 km ( 3.7 mi ) to 8.5 km ( 5.3 mi ) long roadway was a rudimentary form of railway , and operated from c . 600 BC until the middle of the 1st century AD . The scale on which the Diolkos combined the two principles of the railway and the overland transport of ships remained unique in antiquity .

Ancient literature is silent on the date of the construction of the Diolkos . For Thucydides ( 460 BC – 395 BC ) the Diolkos already seemed to be something ancient . Excavated letters and associated pottery found at the site indicate a construction date at the end of the 7th or beginning of the 6th century BC , that is around the time when Periander was tyrant of Corinth . The Diolkos remained reportedly in regular service until at least the middle of the 1st century AD , after which no more written references appear . Possibly the trackway was put out of use by Nero 's abortive canal works in 67 AD . Much later transports of warships across the Isthmus in the late 9th century and around 1150 are assumed to have used a route other than the Diolkos due to the extensive time lag .

The Diolkos played an important role in ancient naval warfare . Greek historians note several occasions from the 5th to the 1st century BC when warships were hauled across the Isthmus in order to speed up naval campaigning . In 428 BC , the Spartans planned to transport their warships over the Diolkos to the Saronic Gulf to threaten Athens , while later in the Peloponnesian War , in 411 BC , they carted over a squadron heading quickly for operations at Chios . In 220 BC , Demetrius of Pharos had a fleet of about fifty vessels dragged across the Isthmus to the Bay of Corinth by his men . Three years later , a Macedonian fleet of 38 vessels was sent across by Philip V , while the larger warships sailed around Cape Malea . After his victory at Actium in 31 BC , Octavian advanced as fast as possible against Marc Antony by ordering part of his 260 Liburnians to be carried over the Isthmus . In 868 AD , the Byzantine admiral Niketas Oryphas had his whole fleet of one hundred dromons dragged across the Isthmus in a quickly executed operation , but this took place most likely on a different route .

Despite the frequent mentioning of the Diolkos in connection with military operations , modern scholarship assumes that the prime purpose of the trackway must have been the transport of cargo , considering that warships cannot have needed transporting very often , and ancient historiography was always more interested in war than commerce . Comments by Pliny the Elder and Strabo , which described the Diolkos as being in regular service during times of peace , also imply a commercial use of the trackway . Coinciding with the rise of monumental architecture in Greece , the construction of the Diolkos may have initially served particularly for transporting heavy goods like marble , monoliths and timber to points west and east . It is not known what tolls Corinth could extract from the Diolkos on its territory , but the fact that the trackway was used and maintained long after its construction indicates that it remained for merchant ships an attractive alternative to the trip around Cape Malea for much of antiquity .

The Diolkos ran across the narrowest part of the Isthmus , where the trackway followed the local topography in a curved course in order to avoid steeper gradients . The roadway passed the Isthmus ridge at c . 79 m ( 259 ft ) height with an average gradient of 1 : 70 , while the steepest sections rose up to 6 % . Its total length is estimated at 6 – 7 km ( 3.7 – 4.3 mi ) , 8 km ( 5 mi ) or 8.5 km ( 5.3 mi ) depending on the number of supposed bends taken into account . A total of 1,100 m ( 3,609 ft ) has been archaeologically traced , mainly at its western end close to the Bay of Corinth . There the known trackway began at a mooring place south of the more recent canal and ran parallel to the waterway for a few hundred meters , after which it switched to the north side , running in a slight bend a similar distance along the canal . From there on , the Diolkos either followed in a straight line the course of the modern canal , or swung south in a wide arc . The roadway ended at the Saronic Gulf at the village Schoinos , modern-day Kalamaki , described by Strabo as the trackway 's eastern terminal . Sections of the Diolkos have been destroyed by the 19th-century Corinth Canal and other modern installations .

The Diolkos was a trackway paved with hard limestone with parallel grooves running about 1.60 metres ( 63 in ) apart . The roadway was 3.4 to 6 metres ( 11 to 20 ft ) wide . Since ancient sources tell little about how the ships were hauled across , the mode of ship transport has largely to be reconstructed from the archaeological evidence . The tracks indicate that transport on the Diolkos was done with some sort of wheeled vehicle . Either vessel and cargo were hauled across on separate vehicles , or only the cargo was taken across and reloaded on a different ship at the other side of the Isthmus . Although a technical analysis has shown that the transport of triremes ( 25 t , 35 metres ( 115 ft ) long , 5 metres ( 16 ft ) beam ) , albeit difficult , was technically feasible , it is assumed that the vessels were usually smaller boats rather than ships . To avoid damaging the keel during transport , hypozomata , thick ropes running from bow to stern , to reduce sagging and hogging of the hull , must have been used . Ship and cargo were presumably pulled by men and animals with ropes , tackles and possibly also capstans .

The scientist Tolley aimed to establish the manpower needed to haul the vessels over the isthmus ridge . Assuming that a trireme soaked with water weighed 38 tons including its trolley , and that a man can exert a force of 300 N over an extended period of time , the pulling teams — depending on the slope and the surface of the cart track — must have numbered between 112 and 142 people , with a combined exertion of force of 33 to 42 kN , or around 3.8 tons weight . Bringing the trolley up to speed may have required as many as 180 men . Assuming a speed of 2 km per hour over an estimated length of 6 kilometres , the transfer from sea to sea would have taken three hours to complete . Assuming less load and rolling friction , Raepsaet , in contrast , calculates a maximum pulling force of 27 kN , which would have needed a slightly smaller towing crew . Under these circumstances , the use of harnessed oxen — which has been refuted by Tolley on the basis of their relatively diminished pulling capabilities — would have become feasible . However , the necessary expenditure of energy at the Diolkos must be regarded in both scenarios as considerable .

According to the British historian of science M.J.T. Lewis , the Diolkos represented a railway , in the basic sense of a prepared track which so guides the vehicles running on it that they cannot leave the track . Measuring between 6 km ( 4 mi ) and 8.5 km ( 5.3 mi ) , remaining in regular and frequent service for at least 650 years , and being open to all on payment , it constituted even a public railway , a concept which according to Lewis did not recur until c . 1800 . Also , its average gauge of around 160 cm ( 63 in ) is similar to modern standards . However , a close examination of the excavated tracks may give a more differentiated picture . While there is agreement that the grooves in the eastern part were cut deliberately into the stone slabs to guide cart wheels , those in the western section are interpreted by some authors as a result of wear or do not appear at all . On the other hand , the marked cambers of this road section may point at deliberate tracks as well . Generally , varying forms of the grooves can also be explained by the long period of operation of the Diolkos , during which modifications and repairs must have significantly changed the appearance of the trackway .

The chief engineer of the Corinth Canal , Béla Gerster , conducted extensive research on the topography of the Isthmus , but did not discover the Diolkos . Remains of the ship trackway were probably first identified by the German archaeologist Habbo Gerhard Lolling in the 1883 Baedeker edition . In 1913 , James George Frazer reported in his commentary on Pausanias on traces of an ancient trackway across the Isthmus , while parts of the western quay were discovered by Harold North Fowler in 1932 . Systematic excavations were finally undertaken by the Greek archaeologist Nikolaos Verdelis between 1956 and 1962 , and these uncovered a nearly continuous stretch of 800 m ( 2,600 ft ) and traced about 1,100 m ( 3,600 ft ) in all . Even though Verdelis ' excavation reports continue to provide the basis for modern interpretations , his premature death prevented full publication , leaving many open questions concerning the exact nature of the structure . Additional investigations in situ , meant to complement Verdelis ’ work , were later published by Georges Raepsaet and Walter Werner . Today , erosion caused by ship movements on the nearby Canal has left considerable portions of the Diolkos in a poor state , particularly at its excavated western end . Critics who blame the Greek Ministry of Culture for continued inactivity have launched a petition to save and restore the registered archaeological site .

Apart from the Diolkos at Corinth , there is scant literary evidence for two more ship trackways by that name in antiquity , both in Roman Egypt : The physician Oribasius ( c . 320 – 400 AD ) records two passages from his 1st century AD colleague Xenocrates , in which the latter casually refers to a diolkos close to the harbor of Alexandria which may have been located at the southern tip of the island of Pharos . Another diolkos is mentioned by Ptolemy ( 90 – 168 AD ) in his book on geography ( IV , 5 , 10 ) as connecting a false mouth of a partly silted up Nile branch with the Mediterranean Sea . Neither Xenocrates nor Ptolemy offers any details on his trackway .

Xue Susu ( Chinese : 薛素素 ; also known as Xue Wu , Xuesu , Sunjung among other pen names ) ( c.1564 – 1650 ? C.E. ) was a Chinese courtesan . Known as one of the " Eight Great Courtesans of the Ming Dynasty " , she was an accomplished painter and poet , and was noted for her skill at mounted archery . She was particularly noted for her figure paintings , which included many Buddhist subjects . Her works are held in a number of museums both in China and elsewhere . Her archery was commented upon by a number of contemporary writers , as were her masculine , martial tendencies ; these were regarded as an attractive feature by the literati of the period . She lived in Eastern China , residing for most of her life in the Zhejiang and Jiangsu districts . After a career as a celebrated courtesan in Nanjing , Xue married several times , but none of these unions lasted . During her later life , she eventually opted for the life of a Buddhist recluse .

Xue was born in either Suzhou or Jiaxing ( contemporary sources disagree ) . According to the historian Qian Qianyi she spent at least some of her childhood in Beijing . She spent her professional life in the Qinhuai pleasure quarter of Nanjing in the 1580s , where she became something of a celebrity among the literati and government officials who frequented the " flower houses " there . She was highly selective in her clientele , accepting only learned and scholarly men as her lovers and declining to proffer her affections for mere financial gain ; suitors might spend thousands of taels on her to no avail . In the 1590s she returned to Beijing , where the parties and literary gatherings that she hosted , as well as her archery demonstrations , further cemented her reputation . Xue referred to herself as " a female knight-errant " , and took her name from a famous woman warrior from history ; she also chose the sobriquet Wulang 五郎 ( " fifth young gentleman " ) as a nickname . The " female knight-errant " epithet was reiterated by both the bibliophile Hu Yinglin and Fan Yulin , Secretary to the Ministry of War . Apparently fond of martial causes , she was not above using her position to influence military affairs , on one occasion abandoning her lover Yuan Baode when he refused to fund an expedition against the Japanese in Korea .

At some point after 1605 her career as a courtesan came to an end when she married the playwright and bureaucrat Shen Defu . She was married several times ( making many of the proposals herself ) but none of these unions lasted . As well as Shen Defu , her husbands included General Li Hualong , art critic Li Rihua and , in later life , an unnamed ( but wealthy ) merchant from Suzhou . Although she wanted children , she was never able to have any . In later life she converted to Buddhism and remained single thereafter , largely retiring from the world . Even in her eighties , however , she was still active in the literary world , entertaining female artists such as Huang Yuanjie and Yi Lin at her home on the West Lake after the collapse of the Ming Dynasty . With her Buddhist friend Yang Jiangzi ( the sister of Xue 's fellow courtesan Liu Yin ) , she made pilgrimages to sacred sites such as Mount Lu and Mount Emei . The date of her death is uncertain ; some sources suggest that she may have lived into the 1650s whilst others put her death in the late 1630s or early 1640s . Qian Qianyi mentions her death in a work published in 1652 , so it is evident that she must have died before this date .

Already an accomplished painter in her teenage years , Xue was well known for her artistic talent . Her work was considered similar to that of Chen Chun . One of her paintings was considered " the most accomplished work of its kind in the whole of the Ming period " , and contemporary art critics regarded her as " a master of technique " . Hu Yinglin considered her to be at the pinnacle of contemporary painting , asking , " What famous painter with skilled hands can surpass her ? " and claiming that " ... [ she ] surpasses anyone in the painting of bamboo and orchids . " She was also keenly admired by eminent painter and art critic Dong Qichang , who was inspired to copy the entire Heart Sutra in response to Xue 's painting of the bodhisattva Guanyin ; he claimed that " None [ of Xue Susu 's works ] lacks an intention and spirit that approaches the divine . " Although she painted the standard subjects of landscapes , bamboo and blossoms ( being particularly fond of orchids ) , Xue was noted for her work in figure painting , which was a comparatively unusual artistic topic for courtesans to address . Examples of her paintings are displayed at the Honolulu Museum of Art and the San Francisco Asian Art Museum .

Xue regularly accented her paintings with her own poems , and published two volumes of writing , only one of which is still extant . Hua suo shi Chinese : 花瑣事 ( Trifles about Flowers ) is a collection of short prose essays and anecdotes about various flowers , whilst Nan you cao Chinese : 南游草 ( Notes from a Journey to the South ) , which has been lost , apparently contained a selection of her poems regarding life as a courtesan . A number of these were collected in various anthologies from the late Ming and early Qing dynasties . Hu Yinglin wrote that " Her poetry , although lacking in freedom , shows a talent rare among women . " Moving in literary circles , Xue also provided the subject matter for many contemporary poets . Xu Yuan , another female poet of the period , describes Xue 's allure : Xue often exchanged poems and paintings with her clientele , receiving their own artworks in exchange .

Whilst she excelled at poetry , painting and embroidery , the skill that set Xue apart from other courtesans and created a cult of celebrity around her was her talent for archery . Her mastery of a traditionally masculine art gave her an air of androgyny that was considered highly attractive by the literati of the time . Having practiced in Beijing as a child she furthered her skills during a sojourn in the company of a military officer in the outlying regions of China . The horsemen of the local tribes there were impressed with her shooting , and she became something of a local celebrity . Later in life she gave public demonstrations in Hangzhou , which drew large audiences . Hu Yinglin describes one such performance : " She is able to shoot two balls from her crossbow one after another and make the second ball strike the first and break it in mid-air . Another trick she can do is to place a ball on the ground , and , by pulling the bow backwards with her left hand , while her right hand draws the bow from behind her back , hit it . Out of a hundred shots , she does not miss a single one .

The 5th Avenue Theatre ( often referred to as 5th Avenue or the 5th ) is a landmark theatre building located in Seattle , Washington . It has hosted a variety of theatre productions and motion pictures since it opened in 1926 . The building and land is owned by the University of Washington and was once part of the original campus . It is operated as a venue for nationally touring Broadway and original shows by the non-profit 5th Avenue Theatre Association . The theatre , located at 1308 Fifth Avenue in the historic Skinner Building , has been listed on the U.S. National Register of Historic Places since 1978 . The 2,130-seat theatre is the resident home to the 5th Avenue Musical Theatre Company , and employs over 600 actors , musicians , directors , choreographers , designers , technicians , stage hands , box office staff , and administrators , making it the largest theatre employer in the Puget Sound region . A non-profit , the theatre company is supported by individual and corporate donations , government sources , and box office ticket sales . The 5th 's subscriber season programming includes six to seven shows per year , a mix of locally produced revivals of musical theatre classics , and premieres of bound-for-Broadway shows , and national touring musicals . The 5th Avenue Theatre has established a tradition of being a " testing ground " for new musicals before they make their debut on Broadway , launching hits such as Jekyll & Hyde , Hairspray , and The Wedding Singer . The theatre also hosts a variety of special events , and offers education and outreach programs to school-age children and adults reaching over 61,000 students , professional performers , and audiences each year .

Located in the Skinner Building , a historic office block ranging from five to eight stories with retail shops on the ground level , the theatre is surrounded on three sides , with its entry facing its namesake avenue . In addition to an auditorium with an original seating capacity of 3,000 , the theatre contains a grand entry hall , and a mezzanine that once featured a tea room in addition to a waiting room and women 's lounge . The interior design of the 5th Avenue Theatre was modeled to reproduce some of the features of historic and well-known Beijing landmarks . The Norwegian artist Gustav Liljestrom executed the design based on his visit to China , and on Chinesische Architecktur , published in 1925 , an illustrated account of Ernst Boerschmann 's travels in China . The ornate historical Chinese style of the theatre distinguishes itself from the Neo-Renaissance exterior of the Skinner Building . Only at the street entry under the marquee does the viewer get a preview of the interior design . Here , adorning the ceiling are plaster representations of wood brackets , beams , and carved reliefs painted in a polychromatic scheme and decorated with stenciled dragons and flower patterns . Carved cloud shapes screen light fixtures to create an indirect lighting effect as the viewer approaches the wooden , brass knobbed entry doors . The original central free-standing box office was replaced by the current box office located to the side of the entry as part of a 1979 renovation . The original Imperial guardian lions ( Ruì Shī ) , commonly called foo dogs or foo lions , originally located outside the entry were moved inside as part of the 1979 renovation .

The interior architecture of the theatre is an " excellent imitation of Chinese wooden temple construction " . The two story rectangular lobby features red , stenciled columns wrapped in plaster rising to a timbered roof structure of decoratively painted beams supporting a canopy of bamboo , also imitated in plaster . The original pair of guardian lions , both male , guard the stairway to a second level gallery that serves the theatre balcony . In addition to the Imperial guard lions , other original furnishings , light fixtures , and decoration remain intact . The decorative details continue in the 2,130-seat auditorium , but the highlight and focal decorative feature is the octagonal caisson from which a sculpted five-toed Imperial Chinese dragon springs . A large chandelier of glass hangs from the dragon 's mouth , in reference to the Chinese symbol of a dragon disgorging flaming pearls . One claim puts the size of this caisson at twice the size of the model on which it was based in the throne room of the Hall of Supreme Harmony in the Forbidden City . The opening night program spoke effusively of it : ... Its most imposing feature is the great dome ... its symbolic themes borrowed from Chinese legends , its motifs from Chinese poetry . Coiled within an azure sphere and surrounded by glowing hues of cloud red , emblematic of calamity and welfare ; blue of rain ; green symbolic of plaque ; black of flood ; and gold of prosperity — is the Great Dragon , guardian genius of the place , his presence shadowed and multiplied in varying forms throughout the structure . On the huge beams surrounding and supporting the dome are five-clawed dragons — the Emperor 's emblem — spitting fire in pursuit of the Jewel , rendered in the shape of a disc emitting effulgent rays , and symbolic of Omnipotence .

The dragon motif is repeated in the radial coffers of the caisson and the timbered coffers throughout the theatre . The Imperial dragon is accompanied by the symbol of the Empress , the Chinese phoenix ( Fèng huáng ) , sometimes called Ho-Ho or Ho-Oh Bird from the Japanese . This personal symbol of the Empress is also repeated throughout the theatre , but most prominently in relief as part of the grills above false balconies that once screened organ pipes . In addition to these symbols , orange blossoms , chrysanthemums , and lotus flowers appear throughout the theatre . The highly decorated proscenium arch and safety curtain maintain the Chinese design influence . Beyond the decorative features of the building , the 5th Avenue Theatre also contained notable technical features when originally built . An ascending orchestra pit and independent Wurlitzer organ platform allowed the musicians to be raised up to main stage height or to orchestra pit level from the basement below . The ventilation system had thermostatic controls throughout the building , and allowed the air to be ' washed ' prior to its introduction into the venue at outlets under every third seat .

The president and general manager of Pacific Northwest Theatres , Inc . , Harry C. Arthur , believed Seattle to be a place of growing importance in the motion picture industry in the mid-1920s , and consequently as the place to invest for the long term . Arthur 's company absorbed a competing chain of 40 theatres by 1926 , and sought further expansion . A large holder of the theatre company 's stock and debt was C. D. Stimson who sat on the board of directors of both Pacific Northwest Theatres and the Metropolitan Building Company , developer of what became known as the Metropolitan Tract . Stimson promoted the establishment of a theatre district like that which had developed around a theatre he had built in Los Angeles , California . The planned Skinner Building with a theatre owned by Arthur 's company would complete the Stimson development of the Metropolitan Tract . The architect , Robert Reamer , had joined the Metropolitan Building Company after World War I and as their house architect designed the Skinner Building and the 5th Avenue Theatre . In creating the 5th Avenue Theatre , Reamer was joined by his colleague , Joseph Skoog , of Reamer 's office and Gustav Liljestrom , of the S. & G. Gump Company of San Francisco .

The theatre celebrated its grand opening on September 24 , 1926 with an opening unit program that included both film and live vaudeville performances . The opening program included the silent film Young April , Fanchon and Marco 's stage presentation The Night Club , and Lipschultz and his Syncopated Soloists . Oliver Wallace , a popular local musician and composer , returned from Portland , Oregon to be the accompanying organist for opening night . Wallace had been the first theatre organist in a Seattle motion picture house . Opening night was also marked by festivities outside the theatre . Seven blocks of downtown Seattle around the theatre were closed to street car and automobile traffic . Lured by free street car , bus , and taxicab rides , thousands of people packed Fifth Avenue between Seneca Street and Pike Street , University and Union Streets . The Seattle Times reported : It is doubtful that any Friday night in Seattle 's history saw more people circulating through all the downtown streets than were there last night . The density in the center of the activities was such that street cars were diverted ... In the street outside the theatre a street carnival took place . Living up to the moniker for the theater 's marquee , “ the Magic Sign of a Wonderful Time , ” spotlights scanned the night sky , banks of Klieg lights illuminated the streets outside the theater , and flares were shot from the roofs of nearby buildings . Additionally , dance bands were placed at the closed intersections to provide entertainment and , using giant screens to project the words , a sing-along was orchestrated on Fifth Avenue in front of the theatre . An estimated crowd of between 50,000 and 100,000 people participated in the events .

Following the grand opening , the theatre served as a venue for vaudeville and film , and following the decline of vaudeville as a movie palace until the 1970s . With the economic recession , the advent of television , and movie complex development in the suburbs , crowds dwindled and the theatre struggled to stay open . It was forced to close its doors in 1978 along with the nearby Orpheum theatre . A variety of re-use possibilities were proposed for the theatre including a Chinese restaurant , a triplex movie theater , an office building , or a shopping center . The city of Seattle was unable to protect the theatre as a designated landmark because of its unique position on the site of the original territorial university grounds owned by the state of Washington . In 1979 , 43 business leaders formed the non-profit 5th Avenue Theatre Association and underwrote a US $ 2.6 million loan to save the theatre . Among these was Ned Skinner of the shipbuilding family who was an active patron of the theatre . Architect Richard McCann oversaw the restoration efforts . Several changes were made during the renovation . The vertical marquee which had marked the theatre 's presence from 1926 to 1980 , was removed , the orchestra pit and auditorium seating were rebuilt , the dressing rooms moved , and the technical systems updated . However , the furniture , fixtures and interior signage were retained . Even the paint was carefully restored to its original luster . The renovation made it suitable again for live performances and filled Seattle 's need for a touring Broadway musical venue . Renovation work was completed without federal , state , or local funds .

June 16 , 1980 marked the theater ’ s rebirth and a new chapter in Seattle ’ s arts community . At the Grand Opening Gala for the renovated theatre , actress Helen Hayes christened the stage with a kiss and declared the 5th “ a national treasure . ” Beginning on July 3 the 5th presented Annie , the first touring Broadway musical to appear at the theatre . The sold-out show ran for 10 weeks with a total of 77 performances . The 5th Avenue Theatre continues to thrive with the assistance of many generous donors and volunteers .

Since the renovation , the 5th Avenue Theatre has become one of Seattle 's most established theatres . In 1989 , The 5th Avenue Musical Theatre Company was established as the resident non-profit theatre company . On February 28 , 2001 , the Nisqually earthquake rocked the 5th Avenue Theatre . At the time , actors were on stage rehearsing the musical 1776 . The theatre suffered minimal damages with no structural damage from the quake . Earthquake repairs included removal and replacement of 72 plaster ceiling supports and the repair of numerous cracks and damaged decorative plaster pieces in the ceiling . Contractors had to install scaffolding tall enough to reach the highest interior crevice in the ceiling eight stories up — the first time that area had been reached in 75 years . The chandeliers had to be lowered for repair and maintenance . As part of the repair work , Turner Construction provided services for seismic upgrades to the Skinner Building . In November 2009 a new vertical marquee , similar to the sign that was removed as part of the 1980 renovation , was installed . The marquee was made possible through a donation from Christabel Gough , daughter of Broadway producer and early 5th Avenue promoter Roger L. Stevens . The new sign features a design inspired by both earlier marquees and the theatre 's interior , uses LED lights for energy conservation , and includes a revolving " 5th " sign at the marquee 's top .

From the renovation in 1980 until 1985 the non-profit 5th Avenue Theatre successfully operated as a venue for touring Broadway shows . As the United States went through an economic downturn from 1985 to 1989 there was a shortage of touring shows for venues like the 5th . Consequently , many of the country 's Broadway houses went unused for extended periods of time . However , the 5th remained open during these years with a reduced staff and was used for community events and local promoters . This situation forced the theatre to move beyond merely being a presenter of touring musicals . In 1989 , the non-profit 5th Avenue Theatre established a resident theatre company , dubbed The 5th Avenue Musical Theatre Company , to produce musicals locally . Since the theatre company 's establishment , the 5th 's yearly subscriber season programming has included 6 to 7 shows : national touring musicals , locally produced revivals of musical theatre classics , and premieres of bound-for-Broadway shows . With 150 musical theater performances each fall-to-spring subscriber season which attract over 30,000 subscribers and average ticket sales of 300,000 tickets annually , the 5th ranks among the nation 's largest musical theater companies .

Frank M. Young was the first executive director of the 5th Avenue Musical Theatre Company . From 1989 to 1999 a collaborative partnership existed between the 5th and Houston 's Theatre Under the Stars ( TUTS ) where Young also served as executive director . This partnership produced 10 seasons of musical theater , including both national tours and self-produced musicals . On October 17 , 1989 the first 5th Avenue / TUTS self-produced musical was presented : Mame , starring Juliet Prowse . In 1995 , after premiering at the 5th , Jekyll & Hyde became the first 5th Avenue Theatre production to open on Broadway in April 1997 . The show was produced in cooperation with Houston 's Alley Theatre and TUTS . In August 2000 the 5th ’ s partnership with TUTS ended as David Armstrong joined the 5th Avenue Musical Theatre Company becoming its first resident Producing Artistic Director launching a new era of collaboration with leading musical theater companies and producers across the country .

Since the creation of the 5th Avenue Musical Theatre Company in 1989 , the 5th has established a tradition of being a " testing ground " for new musicals before they make their debut on Broadway . Since 2000 the 5th has produced one pre-Broadway world premiere every 2 to 3 years . Some notable musicals shown to Seattle audiences at the 5th Avenue Theatre prior to their success on Broadway include : Jekyll & Hyde in 1995 which was nominated for 4 Tony Awards , Hairspray in 2002 which won 8 Tony Awards , and The Wedding Singer in 2006 which had 4 Tony Award nominations . The film adaptation of Hairspray premiered at the 5th on July 16 , 2007 ( 4 days prior to its nationwide release ) as an acknowledgement of the 5th 's role in the musical 's success on Broadway . The " testing ground " tradition continued in the 2008 – 2009 season with the pre-Broadway world premieres of Shrek the Musical , and Memphis . Both went on to win Tony awards , Shrek winning one in 2009 and Memphis winning four , including Best Musical , in 2010 . In the 2009 – 2010 season , they premiered Catch Me If You Can , which premiered on Broadway in the spring of 2011 . In their 2010 – 2011 season , they premiered A Christmas Story : The Musical , based on the film of the same name , and more recently the premiere of Aladdin , based on the Disney film " Aladdin " .

" Who Really Cares ( Featuring the Sound of Insanity ) " is a song by Powderfinger from their sixth album Dream Days at the Hotel Existence . It is the fourth single from the album and was released in Australia in March 2008 . The band 's publicist , Ms. Fanclub , announced on 27 February that the single would be released to radioplay in the following week , without specifying a date . In her announcement , she also noted that a music video will be released at about the same time . The music video was then released in mid-March ; however , the single 's release was then announced as 31 March . A music video was released for the song ; however , it features the live version of the song taken from the DVD for the Across the Great Divide tour , whereas the radio single for the song is a radio edit of the studio album version . The music video is directly taken from the DVD ; however , it is altered optically with filters and converted into black and white .

" Who Really Cares ( Featuring the Sound of Insanity ) " was recorded by Powderfinger for their 2007 album Dream Days at the Hotel Existence at Sunset Sound Studio , Los Angeles , California , in early 2007 with producer Rob Schnapf . The part of the title " Featuring the Sound of Insanity " refers to a sound just after the bridge in which a sitar is played with synthesised effects overlaid . Prior to its release as a single , a live version of " Who Really Cares " appeared on the earlier Dream Days at the Hotel Existence single , " I Don 't Remember " . Another live version also appears on the group 's 2007 DVD Across the Great Divide tour .

Though the single was never a physical CD release , artwork was created for it . The artwork featured the headless man who is otherwise seen throughout the releases for other singles from Dream Days at the Hotel Existence , however on this cover , the area where his head would be is a fireball , and he appears to be holding a briefcase while walking down the hallway of a hotel , another common theme throughout the artwork for the album . Unlike the last two singles from Dream Days at the Hotel Existence , the artwork doesn 't follow the picture-in-picture theme .

The music video for " Who Really Cares " is a live performance of the song by Powderfinger for their Across the Great Divide tour in 2007 . The music video contains the performance featured on the DVD for the Across the Great Divide tour , filmed in Melbourne in 2007 . The performance features a piano solo by the pianist Lachlan Doley , who performed keyboards and piano throughout the tour . The music video , produced by PVC as part of the tour DVD , is completely in black and white and throughout features optical filters that warp and alter the visual display . These filters intensify from the bridge and continue until the end of the clip . The music is performed differently from the original studio recording , with improvised solos , including Ian Haug playing the sitar part on a double necked guitar with synthesised effects to emulate the sitar sound , and the performance of the song ends with a ritardando , where the tempo slows to an end .

Prior to being released as a single , " Who Really Cares " received a mixed response by reviewers when commenting on Dream Days at the Hotel Existence . Melbourne based webzine TheScene.com.au reviewer Andrew Weaver comments on the song 's musical layering , coupling the song with " Wishing on the Same Moon " and comments that the layering in the two songs gives the music " genuine depth of sound and taking the veteran group to new places " . CitySearch Sydney also made reference to the likeness to " Wishing on the Same Moon " , but notes that what sets the two songs apart is " a serviceable fade-out cacophony of keys and guitar " . Music journalist Chris Leonard of UK magazine Rock Louder praises the live performance of the song while Powderfinger performed in Glasgow on 11 December 2007 . J. Watson of Fasterlouder.com.au comments that the song , when performed live at The Sydney Opera House Forecourt for charity on 31 October 2007 , was " another highlight of the evening " . Fellow reviewer from Fasterlouder , ShahXerxes , comments on the song 's " sparse Pink Floyd-esque sound which echoes through " Who Really Cares " , as clever a rock ballad as the band have ever written . " Andrew Ramadge of Mess + Noise echoed the comments of similarities to Pink Floyd , and also Neil Young , stating " where psych-gospel organ and wailing guitar billow around Fanning ’ s vocals like a lost track from Dark Side of the Moon " . Though most of the critical response has been positive , the song has also received criticism from UK reviewer Matthias Scherer of Noize Makes Enemies . Scherer notes that the song 's title " Who Really Cares " is a question that " should have been asked before recording , not during " , though this comment refers both to the song itself , and the whole album of Dream Days at the Hotel Existence .

The song 's critical response has been mostly positive , though so too were the two prior singles from Dream Days at the Hotel Existence , which both performed poorly in the charts . Like these two , " Who Really Cares " was released to radioplay and music video stations , but with little inclusion in circulation , leading speculators to believe the single will follow " I Don 't Remember " and " Nobody Sees " with poor charting performance . This speculation proved to be accurate , leading to " Who Really Cares " to be the first single by Powderfinger since their 2004 release " Bless My Soul " to fail to achieve a position on the ARIA Charts . Although B-side " One More Kiss As You Fly Away " was the number 81 on the ARIA Charts .

SMS Erzherzog Ferdinand Max was the lead ship of the Erzherzog Ferdinand Max class of broadside ironclads built for the Austrian Navy in the 1860s . She was built by the Stabilimento Tecnico Triestino , with her keel laying in October 1863 , launching in May 1865 , and commissioning in June 1866 at the outbreak of the Third Italian War of Independence and the Austro-Prussian War , fought concurrently . The ship was armed with a main battery of sixteen 48-pounder guns , though the rifled guns originally intended , which had been ordered from Prussia , had to be replaced with old smoothbore guns until after the conflicts ended . Stationed in the Adriatic Sea , Erzherzog Ferdinand Max served as the flagship of the Austrian fleet under Rear Admiral Wilhelm von Tegetthoff . She saw action at the Battle of Lissa in July 1866 , where she rammed and sank the Italian ironclad Re d 'Italia . Slightly damaged in the collision , Erzherzog Ferdinand Max had her bow repaired in Malta after the war . She remained in the Austro-Hungarian fleet for the next twenty years , but severely reduced naval budgets owing to Hungarian disinterest in naval matters led to an uneventful career . She was rearmed with newer guns in 1874 and again in 1882 . Stricken from the naval register in May 1886 , Erzherzog Ferdinand Max was employed as a tender to the gunnery training school from 1889 to 1908 . She remained in the inventory until 1916 when she was broken up for scrap .

Erzherzog Ferdinand Max was 83.75 meters ( 274.8 ft ) long overall ; she had a beam of 15.96 m ( 52.4 ft ) and an average draft of 7.14 m ( 23.4 ft ) . She displaced 5,130 metric tons ( 5,050 long tons ; 5,650 short tons ) . She had a crew of 511 . Her propulsion system consisted of one single-expansion steam engine , manufactured by the Stabilimento Tecnico shipyard in Fiume , that drove a single screw propeller . The number and type of her coal-fired boilers have not survived . Her engine produced a top speed of 12.54 knots ( 23.22 km / h ; 14.43 mph ) from 2,925 indicated horsepower ( 2,181 kW ) . Erzherzog Ferdinand Max was a broadside ironclad , and she was armed with a main battery of sixteen 48-pounder muzzle-loading guns . She also carried several smaller guns , including four 8-pounder guns and two 3-pounders . The ship 's hull was sheathed with wrought iron armor that was 123 mm ( 5 in ) thick on the battery and reduced to 87 mm ( 3.4 in ) at the bow and stern .

Erzherzog Ferdinand Max was laid down at the Stabilimento Tecnico Triestino shipyard in Trieste on 6 May 1863 . She was launched on 24 May 1865 ; the builders were forced to complete fitting-out work quickly , as tensions with neighboring Prussia and Italy erupted into the concurrent Austro-Prussian War and the Third Italian War of Independence in June 1866 . Erzherzog Ferdinand Max 's rifled heavy guns were still on order from Krupp , and they could not be delivered due to the conflict with Prussia . Instead , the ship was armed with old smooth-bore guns . Rear Admiral Wilhelm von Tegetthoff , the commander of the Austrian Fleet , immediately began to mobilize his fleet . As the ships became fully manned , they began to conduct training exercises in Fasana . With his flag aboard Erzherzog Ferdinand Max , Tegetthoff brought the Austrian fleet to Ancona on 26 June in an attempt to draw out the Italians , but the Italian commander , Admiral Carlo Pellion di Persano , refused to engage Tegetthoff . Tegetthoff made another sortie on 6 July , but again could not bring the Italian fleet to battle .

On 16 July , Persano took the Italian fleet , with twelve ironclads , out of Ancona , bound for the island of Lissa , where they arrived on the 18th . With them , they brought troop transports carrying 3,000 soldiers . Persano then spent the next two days bombarding the Austrian defenses of the island and unsuccessfully attempting to force a landing . Tegetthoff received a series of telegrams between the 17 and 19 July notifying him of the Italian attack , which he initially believed to be a feint to draw the Austrian fleet away from its main bases at Pola and Venice . By the morning of the 19th , however , he was convinced that Lissa was in fact the Italian objective , and so he requested permission to attack . As Tegetthoff 's fleet arrived off Lissa on the morning of 20 July , Persano 's fleet was arrayed for another landing attempt . The latter 's ships were divided into three groups , with only the first two able to concentrate in time to meet the Austrians . Tegetthoff had arranged his ironclad ships into a wedge-shaped formation , leading with Erzherzog Ferdinand Max at the center ; the wooden warships of the second and third divisions followed behind in the same formation .

While he was forming up his ships , Persano transferred from his flagship , Re d 'Italia to the turret ship Affondatore . This created a gap in the Italian line , and Tegetthoff seized the opportunity to divide the Italian fleet and create a melee . He made a pass through the gap , but failed to ram any of the Italian ships , forcing him to turn around and make another attempt . During the second attempt , Austrian gunfire had disabled Re d 'Italia 's rudder , leaving her incapable of maneuvering . Tegetthoff seized the opportunity to ram the Italian vessel , and ordered his ship to maximum speed . After two collisions that occurred at angles too oblique to inflict serious damage , Erzherzog Ferdinand Max struck the ship more directly . The Austrian ship 's ram tore a gaping hole in Re d 'Italia 's hull on the port side , though Erzherzog Ferdinand Max sustained no significant damage herself . Tegetthoff reversed course , allowing the Italian ironclad to lurch back to port and quickly sink . Tegetthoff initially ordered his crew to lower boats to pick up the Italians struggling in the water , but the Italian ironclad San Martino was approaching , and he could not allow his ship to become a stationary target . Instead , he ordered the aviso Kaiserin Elizabeth to remain behind and pick up the survivors while Erzherzog Ferdinand Max engaged San Martino . The other Italian ships , however , did not realize Kaiserin Elizabeth was attempting to pick up the Italian survivors , and so opened fire on her , driving her away from the men in the water .

By this time , Re d 'Italia had been rammed and sunk and the coastal defense ship Palestro was burning badly , soon to be destroyed by a magazine explosion . Persano broke off the engagement , and though his ships still outnumbered the Austrians , he refused to counter-attack with his badly demoralized forces . In addition , the fleet was low on coal and ammunition . The Italian fleet began to withdraw , followed by the Austrians ; Tegetthoff , having gotten the better of the action , kept his distance so as not to risk his success . Additionally , the Austrian ships were slower than their Italian counterparts , and so they could not force a second engagement . As night began to fall , the opposing fleets disengaged completely , heading for Ancona and Pola , respectively . Erzherzog Ferdinand Max had fired 156 shells in the course of the battle . She had kept boarding parties on her deck , ready to attack Italian vessels , but the opportunity had not presented itself in the engagement ; steam powered ships could simply reverse course and disengage before a boarding party could cross over . Erzherzog Ferdinand Max was not significantly damaged by Italian fire or the ramming attempts . A few armor plates were slightly dislodged , the paint had been stripped from the hull where she had collided with Re d 'Italia , and she had a minor leak from the concussion , but she was otherwise unscathed .

After returning to Pola , Tegetthoff kept his fleet in the northern Adriatic , where it patrolled against a possible Italian attack . The Italian ships never came , and on 12 August , the two countries signed the Armistice of Cormons ; this ended the fighting and led to the Treaty of Vienna . Though Austria had defeated Italy at Lissa and on land at the Battle of Custoza , the Austrian army was decisively defeated by Prussia at the Battle of Königgrätz . With the war over , Erzherzog Ferdinand Max went into the British Royal Navy shipyard in Malta to have her bow repaired . As a result of Austria 's defeat , Kaiser Franz Joseph was forced to accede to Hungarian demands for greater autonomy , and the country became Austria-Hungary in the Ausgleich of 1867 . The two halves of the Dual Monarchy held veto power over the other , and Hungarian disinterest in naval expansion led to severely reduced budgets for the fleet . In 1869 , Kaiser Franz Joseph took a tour of the Mediterranean Sea in his imperial yacht Greif ; Erzherzog Ferdinand Max , her sister ship Habsburg , and a pair of paddle steamers escorted the Kaiser for the trip to Port Said at the mouth of the Suez Canal . The two ironclads remained in the Mediterranean while the other vessels passed through the Canal into the Red Sea in company with Empress Eugenie of France aboard her own yacht . The Austro-Hungarian ships eventually returned to Trieste in December . In 1874 she was rearmed with a battery of fourteen 7 in ( 180 mm ) muzzle-loading Armstrong guns and four light guns . Her battery was revised again in 1882 , with the addition of four 9 cm ( 3.5 in ) breech-loader guns , two 7 cm ( 2.8 in ) breech-loaders , a pair of 47 mm ( 1.9 in ) quick-firing revolver guns , and three 25 mm ( 0.98 in ) auto-cannons . Erzherzog Ferdinand Max was stricken from the naval register on 19 May 1886 and her armament was reduced to eight 10 cm ( 3.9 in ) guns . The following year , these were removed and a single 26 cm ( 10 in ) gun and a 24 cm ( 9.4 in ) gun were installed . From 1889 to 1908 , she served as a tender to the gunnery training school . The ship was ultimately broken up for scrap in 1916 during World War I.

The Victoria 's Secret Fashion Show is an annual fashion show sponsored by and featuring Victoria 's Secret , a brand of lingerie and sleepwear . Victoria 's Secret uses the show to promote and market its goods in high-profile settings . The show features some of the world 's leading fashion models such as current Victoria 's Secret Angels Adriana Lima , Alessandra Ambrosio , Behati Prinsloo , Candice Swanepoel , and Lily Aldridge . American network television broadcasts the show during prime time . The first few shows in the 1990s were held in the days preceding Valentine 's Day to promote the brand for this holiday . They were not aired on national television . In 1999 and 2000 the show was webcast . Beginning in 2001 , the shows were moved ahead of the Christmas holiday season . Also in 2001 , the show made its network television broadcast on ABC , though in all subsequent years , it has been broadcast on CBS . The show has been held at a variety of locations in different cities including Miami , Los Angeles , and Cannes . The first four shows were held at the Plaza Hotel in New York City , but since it has become a televised event it has most often been held at the 69th Regiment Armory in New York City .

The show is a lavish event with elaborate costumed lingerie , varying music by leading entertainers , and set design according to the different themes running within the show . The show attracts hundreds of celebrities and entertainers , with special performers and acts every year . Each year , twenty to forty of the world 's top fashion models are selected to perform in the fashion show . In a typical year , this includes about a half dozen women under contract to the company , known as Victoria 's Secret Angels , who help publicize the event . The giant angel wings worn by the models , as well as other wings of various forms and sizes such as butterfly , peacock , or devil wings , have become emblematic of the Victoria 's Secret brand .

The first fashion show extravaganza , introduced by Stephanie Seymour , was held at the Plaza Hotel in New York City in August 1995 . The show also featured Beverly Peele and Frederique van der Wal . This first fashion show occurred two months before The Limited , parent company of Victoria 's Secret owner Intimate Brands , sold an initial public offering of a 16 percent stake in the company and almost had Seymour make an appearance at the New York Stock Exchange ( NYSE ) for the opening bell . She actually did ring the closing bell at the NYSE as part of the publicity campaign . The subsequent three annual shows were also held at the Plaza . In 1999 , during Super Bowl XXXIII , Victoria 's Secret announced a 72-hour countdown to the Internet webcast of the Victoria 's Secret fashion show , which resulted in over 2 million internet viewers of the show . Parent company Intimate Brands bought a $ 1.5 million ( $ 2.1 million today ) 30-second television advertisement during the Super Bowl broadcast and spent an additional $ 4 million ( $ 5.7 million ) for subsequent international newspaper advertisements to publicize the event . The show , which was aired by Broadcast.com , featured Tyra Banks , Laetitia Casta , Heidi Klum , Karen Mulder , Daniela Pestova , Inés Rivero , and Seymour . In 1999 and 2000 , the show was broadcast live on the internet , but the 2000 show was moved for a year from the usual February event at the Plaza to a May event in concert with the Cannes Film Festival in France to raise money for the Cinema Against AIDS charity ; it raised $ 3.5 million .

In 2001 , the show , which was hosted by Rupert Everett , returned to the New York City but at Bryant Park instead of the Plaza . That year , the show made its broadcast debut on ABC , drawing millions of viewers as well as some middle-brow controversy ; the Federal Communications Commission received many complaints about the broadcast every year . The show has continued to be broadcast on network television every year since . From 2002 through 2005 , it was held at the Lexington Avenue Armory in New York City . The 2004 show was canceled due to a widespread crackdown on perceived indecency in broadcasting stemming from the Janet Jackson and Justin Timberlake Super Bowl XXXVIII halftime show controversy , in which Jackson encountered a breast-revealing " wardrobe malfunction " . Before the 2005 show , Banks announced her retirement from modeling and embarkation on a television career with The Tyra Banks Show , making the 2005 show a farewell to her decade of fashion shows for the company . In 2004 , instead of the annual fashion show , the Angels ( Tyra Banks , Heidi Klum , Gisele Bündchen , Adriana Lima , and Alessandra Ambrosio ) did an Angels Across America Tour , a grassroots campaign for the brand visiting four major cities : New York City , Miami , Las Vegas , and Los Angeles .

The 2006 and 2007 shows were held at the Kodak Theatre in Los Angeles . On November 13 , 2007 , the Victoria 's Secret Angels were honored with a star on the Hollywood Walk Of Fame right outside the Kodak Theatre . The 2007 Angels honored in this celebration to mark Victoria 's Secret 's 25th anniversary on Hollywood Boulevard were Heidi Klum , Adriana Lima , Alessandra Ambrosio , Karolina Kurkova , Selita Ebanks , Izabel Goulart , Marisa Miller , and Miranda Kerr . The other models , who also appeared in that year 's fashion show , were in attendance that day . The 2008 show coincided with the grand re-opening of the Fontainebleau Miami Beach hotel . In 2006 , Victoria 's Secret sub-brand PINK made its debut on the runway . Justin Timberlake opened the show with his popular song " Sexy Back " . This year fashion show was the final walk of Gisele Bündchen . The 2007 show featured a performance by the Spice Girls and gained prominence as the first American TV debut of the band after their comeback . Kanye West was also scheduled to perform at the event , but cancelled his appearance due to his mother 's death. will.i.am was called to perform in his place .

The 2008 show was held at Fountainebleu Miami Beach , Florida . Usher was appeared on the show as well as opened it . Unlike the other shows , the runway was designed parallel with the audience seats . In 2009 , the fashion show took place in New York City at the Lexington Avenue Armory , where it was last held in 2005 . The 2009 show was notable for featuring the results of a competition , called the Victoria 's Secret Model Search , to find a new Victoria 's Secret " runway Angel . " The winner was announced as Kylie Bisutti . The 2010 Victoria 's Secret Fashion show aired on November 30 , 2010 on CBS , and featured performances by Katy Perry and Akon . A promotional ad featured a lipdub for Katy Perry 's " Firework " . As of 2010 , 152 models have walked the show . In 2011 , Kanye West started his song " Stronger " with a tribute to his mother who had died before his scheduled performance four years before , saying : " In 2007 , I was supposed to perform this song on this show ... and I lost my superhero . Now she 's my super-angel . "

In 2012 , an outfit worn by model Karlie Kloss , which was reminiscent of Native American attire , sparked controversy due to its alleged stereotypical depiction of Native Americans . Victoria 's Secret released a statement of apology shortly after , saying that they will remove it from future advertisements and the broadcast . Kloss apologized on her Twitter account for the outfit and expressed her support for the outfit 's removal in the broadcast . In 2013 , the Victoria 's Secret Fashion show featured performances by Taylor Swift , A Great Big World , Neon Jungle and Fall Out Boy . Taylor Swift performed " I Knew You Were Trouble " , A Great Big World performed " Say Something " , UK 's Neon Jungle made their US television debut with " Trouble " , and Fall Out Boy performed with Taylor Swift in " My Songs Know What You Did In The Dark " and later performed " The Phoenix " . In 2014 , the Victoria 's Secret Fashion show featured performances by Taylor Swift ; for the second year in a row , Ed Sheeran , Ariana Grande , and Hozier . Taylor Swift performed " Blank Space " and " Style " . Ed Sheeran performed " Thinking Out Loud " . Ariana Grande performed " Love Me Harder " , " Bang Bang " , " Break Free " , and " Problem " . Hozier performed " Take Me to Church " . During the show , Ariana Grande was performing and was hit by accident with an angel 's wings .

The early webcasts were criticized for poor connection , and users that could connect were subjected to low video quality . One critic from The New York Times described the initial 20th-century webcast experience as having felt like he was " watching a striptease through a keyhole " . Some critics have described the 21st-century televised editions of the show as pornographic , while others have described it as both " outright commercialism " and an infomercial . The Federal Communications Commission has received complaints regarding the broadcast , but no fines have been imposed , with the FCC , following the 2001 airing , citing the First Amendment and stating that " sexual or excretory activities or organs in a patently offensive manner as measured by contemporary community standards for the broadcast medium " were not broadcast . In the initial 2001 airing ABC blurred the screen on particularly sheer lingerie . This enabled the show to pass muster with its internal Broadcast Standards and Practices department and to achieve the TV-14 rating . In 2002 , the National Organization for Women protested the show calling it a " soft-core porn infomercial . " They were joined in protest by the Parents Television Council and other watchdog organizations . CBS has given past shows TV-14 ratings , which is a warning that the show may contain material unsuitable for children age 14 and under . Nonetheless some affiliates have chosen not to air the show in past years including Fisher Broadcasting affiliates in Idaho . In 2009 , the American Decency Association organized email letters of protests to sponsors of the show including AT & T , Kentucky Fried Chicken , Netflix , Nikon , and Reebok . CBS has described the event to as " the Super Bowl of fashion " .

Typically , one model is chosen among the Angels to wear a bejeweled bra dubbed the " Fantasy Bra " . It was first advertised in the Victoria 's Secret catalog , but since 2001 has been worn in the Fashion Shows . Prior to each Fashion Show , Victoria 's Secret contracts a renowned jewelry designer to craft the bra to be used as a focal point for promoting the fashion show and as a centerpiece within it . The company offers the Fantasy Bra for sale as " the ultimate holiday " gift . However , only the centerpiece from the 2004 Heavenly " 70 " Fantasy Bra and the 2012 Floral Fantasy Bra and Gift Set have found a buyer . If not bought , the bras are dismantled after a year . Heidi Klum and Adriana Lima have worn the Fantasy Bra in three different years . Gisele Bündchen , Tyra Banks , Karolina Kurkova , and Alessandra Ambrosio have each worn two Fantasy Bras . The $ 15 million price tag for the 2000 bra worn by Gisele Bündchen earned a place in the Guinness World Records as the most expensive item of lingerie ever created . The $ 3 million 2009 Harlequin Fantasy Bra and the $ 2 million 2010 Bombshell Fantasy Bra were designed by Damiani . Listed below are the prices per set ( including accessories for the 2007 and 2013 editions , the 2013 bra alone is worth $ 8,000,000 ) . The 2012 Floral Fantasy Bra was accompanied by a $ 500,000 perfume bottle .

In the Boston Police Strike , Boston police officers went on strike on September 9 , 1919 . They sought recognition for their trade union and improvements in wages and working conditions . Police Commissioner Edwin Upton Curtis denied that police officers had any right to form a union , much less one affiliated with a larger organization like the American Federation of Labor ( AFL ) . Attempts at reconciliation between the Commissioner and the police officers , particularly on the part of Boston 's Mayor Andrew James Peters , failed . During the strike , Boston experienced several nights of lawlessness , although property damage was not extensive . Several thousand members of the State Guard , supported by volunteers , restored order . Press reaction both locally and nationally described the strike as Bolshevik-inspired and directed at the destruction of civil society . The strikers were called " deserters " and " agents of Lenin . " Samuel Gompers of the AFL recognized that the strike was damaging the cause of labor in the public mind and advised the strikers to return to work . Commissioner Curtis refused to re-hire the striking policemen . He was supported by Massachusetts Governor Calvin Coolidge , whose rebuke of Gompers earned him a national reputation . The strike proved a setback for labor unions , and the AFL discontinued its attempts to organize police officers for another two decades . Coolidge won the Republican nomination for vice-president of the U.S. in the 1920 presidential election .

In 1895 , the Massachusetts legislature transferred control of the Boston police department from Boston 's mayor to the governor of Massachusetts , whom it authorized to appoint a five-person board of commissioners to manage the department . In 1906 , the legislature abolished that board and gave the governor the authority to name a single commissioner to a term of five years , subject to removal by the governor . The mayor and the city continued to have responsibility for the department 's expenses and the physical working conditions of its employees , but the commissioner controlled department operations and the hiring , training , and discipline of the police officers . In 1918 , the salary for patrolmen was set at $ 1,400 a year . Police officers had to buy their own uniforms and equipment which cost over $ 200 . New recruits received $ 730 during their first year , which increased annually to $ 821.25 and $ 1000 , and to $ 1,400 after six years . In the years following World War I , inflation dramatically eroded the value of a police officer 's salary . From 1913 to May 1919 , the cost of living rose by 76 % , while police wages rose just 18 % . Discontent and restiveness among the Boston police force grew as they compared their wages and found they were earning less than an unskilled steelworker , half as much as a carpenter or mechanic and 50 cents a day less than a streetcar conductor . Boston city laborers were earning a third more on an hourly basis .

Police officers had an extensive list of grievances . They worked ten-hour shifts and typically recorded weekly totals between 75 and 90 hours . They were not paid for time spent on court appearances . They also objected to being required to perform such tasks as " delivering unpaid tax bills , surveying rooming houses , taking the census , or watching the polls at election " and checking the backgrounds of prospective jurors as well as serving as " errand boys " for their officers . They complained about having to share beds and the lack of sanitation , baths , and toilets at many of the 19 station houses where they were required to live , most of which dated to before the Civil War . The Court Street station had four toilets for 135 men , and one bathtub . Boston 's police officers , acting with the sponsorship of the police department , had formed an association known as the Boston Social Club in 1906 . In 1917 , a committee of police officers representing the Social Club met with Commissioner Stephen O 'Meara to ask about a raise . He was sympathetic , but advised them to wait for a better time . They pressed the issue in the summer of 1918 and , near the end of the year , Mayor Andrew Peters offered salary increases that would affect about one-fourth of the officers . O 'Meara died in December 1918 , and Governor Samuel McCall appointed Edwin Upton Curtis , former Mayor of Boston , as Commissioner of the Boston Police Department . After another meeting where representatives of the Social Club repeated their salary demands , Peters said : " while the word ' strike ' was not mentioned , the whole situation is far more serious than I realized . " He also made it clear to the rank and file that they were not entitled to form their own union . Curtis did not share his predecessor 's or the mayor 's sympathy for the police , but in February 1918 he offered a wage compromise that the police rejected . In May , Governor Coolidge announced raises , which were also rejected . When the Social Club 's representatives tried to raise grievances with him , Curtis set up his own grievance committee to handle management-employee disputes , based on the election of representatives from each precinct house by secret ballot , and it met just once .

The Boston police decided to organize under an AFL charter in order to gain support from other unions in their negotiations and any strike that might ensue . On August 9 , 1919 , the Boston Social Club requested a charter from the AFL . On August 11 , Curtis issued a General Order forbidding police officers to join any " organization , club or body outside the department " , making an exception only for patriotic organizations such as the American Legion . His administration argued that such a rule was based on the conflict of interest between police officers ' duties and union membership : It is or should be apparent to any thinking person that the police department of this or any other city cannot fulfill its duty to the entire public if its members are subject to the direction of an organization existing outside the department .... If troubles and disturbances arise where the interests of this organization and the interests of other elements and classes in the community conflict , the situation immediately arises which always arises when a man attempts to serve two masters , – he must fail either in his duty as a policeman , or in his obligation to the organization that controls him .

On August 15 , the police received their AFL charter . On August 17 , the Central Labor Union of Boston welcomed the police union and denounced Curtis for his assertions that the police had no right to unionize . Curtis refused to meet with the eight members of the police union 's committee . He suspended them and 11 others who held various union offices and scheduled trials to determine if they had violated his General Order . At this point , Curtis was a hero to business interests . Late in August , the New Hampshire Association of Manufacturers called him " the Ole Hanson of the east , " equating the events they anticipated in Boston with the earlier Seattle General Strike . Mayor Peters sought to play an intermediary role by appointing a Citizen 's Committee to review the dispute about union representation . He chose a well-known local reformer as its chair , James J. Storrow . Storrow 's group recommended that Curtis and the police agree to a police union without AFL ties and without the right to strike . Curtis in turn would recognize the police union and the union would agree to remain " independent and unaffiliated " . Storrow 's group also recommended that no action be taken against the 19 men whom Curtis had suspended . Four of Boston 's five newspapers backed the compromise , with only the Boston Transcript holding to a consistent anti-union position . The Boston Chamber of Commerce backed it as well .

Curtis , with the backing of Massachusetts Governor Calvin Coolidge , rejected the Storrow Commission 's proposal . He proceeded with department trials of the 19 and on September 8 found them guilty of union activity . Rather than dismiss them from the police force , he extended their suspensions . He later explained that he was giving them an opportunity to reconsider their actions and avoid discharges , which would have been irrevocable . The police union members responded that same day by voting 1134 to 2 in favor of a strike and scheduled it to start at evening roll call the next day . Their stated grounds omitted wages and working conditions . They said the strike 's rationale was to protest the Commissioner 's denial of their right to ally themselves with the AFL . In anticipation of the strike , all of Boston 's newspapers called it " Bolshevistic , " pleaded with the police to reconsider and predicted dire consequences . One also warned the police that their eventual defeat was guaranteed , that they would lose because " behind Boston in this skirmish with Bolshevism stands Massachusetts , and behind Massachusetts stands America . "

On September 9 , Boston Police Department officers went on strike at 5 : 45 p.m. Of the force 's 1,544 officers and men , 1,117 ( 72 % ) failed to report for work . Coolidge assigned 100 members of the state 's Metropolitan Park Police Department to replace the striking officers , but 58 of them refused to participate and were suspended from their jobs . Despite assurances from Commissioner Curtis to Mayor Peters and Governor Coolidge , Boston had little police protection for the night of September 9 . Volunteer replacements were still being organized and due to report the next morning . Over the night of September 9 – 10 , the city witnessed an outbreak of hooliganism and looting . Some was rowdy behavior that scared respectable citizens , such as youths throwing rocks at streetcars and overturning the carts of street vendors . More overtly criminal activity included the smashing of store windows and looting their displays or setting off false fire alarms . Such activity was restricted to certain parts of the city and , according to the New York Times , " throughout the greater part of the city the usual peace and quiet prevailed . " In the morning the Mayor asked the Governor to furnish a force of State Guards ; Coolidge promptly agreed and eventually provided almost 5,000 men . Commissioner Curtis later praised the State Guards ' performance in his Annual Report : " The whole community is now aware of the effectiveness with which the Massachusetts State Guard worked when it came into the city . I cannot add anything to the universal chorus of commendation that has greeted their work . " The morning papers following the first night 's violence were full of loud complaints and derogatory terms for the police : " deserters " , " agents of Lenin . "

Violence peaked the next evening , the night of September 10 – 11 . Businesses were better prepared . Some had boarded up and others stayed open all night with armed guards visible to discourage thieves taking advantage of the strike . Gamblers played dice in open view , and women had their handbags snatched . But the Guard 's inexperience at handling crowds resulted in dangerous attempts to assert control . Gunfire in South Boston left two dead and others wounded . One person died in a riot at Scollay Square , a center of amusement halls and theaters . Whether the crowds were threatening property or making trouble because they were in sympathy with the strikers is unknown . The death total ultimately reached nine . City life continued relatively normally , especially during daytime hours . Schools remained open . Later claims against the city for losses incurred during the two nights of disorder ran to $ 35,000 , of which the city paid $ 34,000 . Those figures represent a non-partisan calculation of the costs of the strike to the Boston business community . When Governor Coolidge called the strikers " deserters " and " traitors , " a mass meeting of the Boston Police Union responded :

When we were honorably discharged from the United States army , we were hailed as heroes and saviors of our country . We returned to our duties on the police force of Boston . Now , though only a few months have passed , we are denounced as deserters , as traitors to our city and violators of our oath of office . The first men to raise the cry were those who have always been opposed to giving to labor a living wage . It was taken up by the newspapers , who cared little for the real facts . You finally added your word of condemnation .... Among us are men who have gone against spitting machine guns single-handed , and captured them , volunteering for the job . Among us are men who have ridden with dispatches through shell fire so dense that four men fell and only the fifth got through . Not one man of us ever disgraced the flag or his service . It is bitter to come home and be called deserters and traitors . We are the same men who were on the French front . Some of us fought in the Spanish war of 1898 . Won 't you tell the people of Massachusetts in which war you served ?

On the evening of September 11 , the Central Labor Union met to consider calling a general strike in support of the striking police . Earlier it had expressed enthusiasm for a general strike , more likely as an expression of solidarity than a declaration of serious intent . It collected the votes of its constituent unions and on September 12 announced it was delaying a decision . Their statement explained their reasoning : " We are not to act in a manner that will give the prejudiced press and autocratic employers a chance to criticize us . " On September 11 , Matthew Woll , an AFL vice-president , said his organization discouraged strikes by government employees but defended their right to organize : " all wage earners have the right to associate with one another and collectively to improve their condition " . He blamed the strike on government managers who failed to recognize that right and put the Boston situation in the context of the broader union movement : " On the question of industrial democracy [ i.e. , unionization ] , we find still that group of employers , Bourbonic in character , who believe democracy means for them to ruin or rule industrially . They cannot conceive that works have any right in the management of industry . ... The time has past when any man can say that he is the ruler of the people in his employment . " AFL President Samuel Gompers , just returned from Europe , quickly assessed the situation and the strength of public sentiment . On September 12 , he urged the strikers to return to work , asking the city to agree to suspend judgment on whether to recognize the police union . In a telegram to Mayor Peters he cited the model of Washington , D.C. , which had , at the suggestion of President Wilson , suspended its regulation forbidding police officers to join a union affiliated with the AFL until a conference scheduled for October 6 . The police accepted Gompers ' recommendation immediately . Coolidge replied with a statement of support for Curtis ' hard line . Gompers telegraphed Coolidge again , this time blaming Curtis for the crisis . Coolidge dismissed the Commissioner 's behavior as irrelevant , because no provocation could justify the police walkout . His terse summation created his reputation on the national scene : " There is no right to strike against the public safety , anywhere , anytime . " Coolidge said he would continue to " defend the sovereignty of Massachusetts . "

By the weekend , the presence of the State Guards had become a curiosity . Larger than usual crowds strolled in the center of the city . Thousands attended a band concert on the Boston Common . " The shootings of the last few days for interference with guardsmen , " said the New York Times , " seem to have had a marked effect . " Coolidge said he originally hoped to reinstate the officers , stating in a telegram to a labor convention , " I earnestly hope that circumstances may arise which will cause the police officers to be reinstated " . Over the objections of Mayor Peters , Commissioner Curtis announced on September 13 that he planned to recruit a new force . He fired roughly 1,100 and hired 1,574 replacement police officers from a pool of unemployed World War I veterans . Members of the United Garment Workers refused to sew uniforms for the new hires , who had to report for work in civilian clothing . The new officers hired in the wake of the strike received higher salaries and more vacation days than the strikers had . They enjoyed a starting salary of $ 1,400 along with a pension plan , and the department covered the cost of their uniforms and equipment . The population of Boston raised $ 472,000 to help pay for the State Guards until new police officers could be recruited .

In an editorial on the first morning of the strike , the New York Times supported the police commissioner and said that the strikers were " [ i ] nspired unconsciously by anti-social ideals , or acting by ' suggestion ' of their London and Liverpool brethren " , which had recently seen similar strikes . It said : A policeman has no more right to belong to a union than a soldier or a sailor . He must be ready to obey orders , the orders of his superiors , not those of any outside body . One of his duties is the maintenance of order in the case of strike violence . In such a case , if he is faithful to his union , he may have to be unfaithful to the public , which pays him to protect it . The situation is false and impossible .... It is the privilege of Boston policemen to resign if they are not satisfied with the conditions of their employment .... but it is intolerable that a city ... should be deserted by men who misunderstand their position and function as policemen , and who take their orders from outside .... [ I ] t is an imported , revolutionary idea that may spread to various cities . There should be plain and stern law against it . It is practically an analogue of military desertion ... [ I ] t ought to be punished suitably and repressed .

It later called the strike " this Boston essay in Bolshevism " and lamented the attempt of Mayor Peters and the Storrow Commission " to submit to compromise an issue that could not be compromised " . Newspaper accounts exaggerated the level of crime and violence that accompanied the strike , resulting in a national furor that shaped the political response . A Philadelphia paper viewed the Boston violence in the same light as other labor unrest and numerous race riots in 1919 : " Bolshevism in the United States is no longer a specter . Boston in chaos reveals its sinister substance . " President Woodrow Wilson , speaking from Montana , branded the walkout " a crime against civilization " that left the city " at the mercy of an army of thugs . " He said that " the obligation of a policeman is as sacred and direct as the obligation of a soldier . He is a public servant , not a private employee , and the whole honor of the community is in his hands . He has no right to prefer any private advantage to the public safety . " Elihu Root , a former Secretary of War and winner of the Nobel Peace Prize , told a Carnegie Hall audience on September 17 that the strike was an attack on constitutional government because it represented " the passing of power to enforce laws , the power to punish crime , the power to maintain order from the whole people of the United States " to the 3 % of the population represented by the AFL .

A report from Washington , D.C. included this headline : " Senators Think Effort to Sovietize the Government Is Started . " Senator Henry Cabot Lodge saw in the strike the dangers of the national labor movement : " If the American Federation of Labor succeeds in getting hold of the police in Boston it will go all over the country , and we shall be in measurable distance of Soviet government by labor unions . " The Ohio State Journal opposed any sympathetic treatment of the strikers : " When a policeman strikes , he should be debarred not only from resuming his office , but from citizenship as well . He has committed the unpardonable sin ; he has forfeited all his rights . "

In the police commissioner 's Annual Report for 1919 , Curtis presented his view of the strike . He argued that he could not have requested State Guards for the strike 's first night because the city remained quiet and he had reports that many policemen would not join the strike . By the end of the year the strikers had formed a new organization called the Association of Former Police of the City of Boston . The strike gave momentum to Coolidge 's political career . In 1918 , he had narrowly been elected governor . In 1919 he won 62 % of the votes when running against an opponent who favored reinstating the strikers . He failed to carry Boston by just 5,000 votes , an impressive showing for a Republican in a strongly Democratic city . The Boston Transcript reported : Massachusetts is hailed today from Maine to California as the winner of a shining triumph for straight Americanism . The voting booths of the old Bay State were a battleground for the nation . The ancient faith was under fire . Law and order formed the line of cleavage . The Governor was the Commander-in-chief , the people of the commonwealth were the invincible army , the issue was America , and in the triumph of that issue all America triumphs .

Coolidge himself later said , " No doubt it was the police strike in Boston that brought me into national prominence . " In a post-election congratulatory telegram President Wilson wrote : " I congratulate you upon your election as a victory for law and order . When that is the issue , all Americans must stand together . " His role in the strike , however limited , became a prominent feature of his resume as he sought higher office . According to one obituary , " the Boston police strike of 1919 ... brought him national prominence and the nomination for the Vice Presidency " in 1920 . When he succeeded to the presidency in 1923 upon the death of Warren Harding , the New York Times headlined its biography : " Coolidge Firmness Won Recognition ; His Suppression of the Boston Police Strike Made Him a National Figure " . Coolidge 's political rivals interpreted his role differently . In 1925 , U.S. Senator Robert La Follette of Wisconsin said that Coolidge 's failure to intervene in that year 's coal strike mirrored his 1919 actions when he " persistently refused to act upon the requests of the Mayor of Boston for assistance until riot and bloodshed had aroused the entire State . Then when order had been restored by the efforts of Mayor Peters and the Storrow committee Coolidge sent in the militia and claimed full credit for restoring ' law and order ' . "

The strike heightened public fear of labor unrest and the possible radicalism that lay behind it . It contributed to the public anxiety of the period known as the Red Scare of 1919 – 1920 . The failure of this and other strikes in the years following World War I contributed to declining union membership in subsequent years . The American Federation of Labor responded to political pressure experienced during the strike and revoked the charters it had granted to police unions . That ended police unionism in the U.S. for two decades , as police would not try to organize until World War II . In 1930 , a history of the Boston Transcript , the most resolutely anti-union of Boston 's newspapers in 1919 , perpetuated its original account of urban chaos during the strike 's first nights . It described large crowds , including a number of sailors from docked naval ships , that took to the streets , smashing windows , committing robbery and stoning bystanders and cars . It said that the northern , southern , and western areas of the city were all taken over by armed gangs . In 1931 , the Massachusetts legislature voted to allow the officers who had struck to be rehired . In 1937 , Massachusetts Governor Charles F. Hurley , after meeting with some of the 1919 strikers , backed the decision of Police Commissioner Joseph Timilty not to reinstate them .

Major General Charles Edward Maurice Lloyd , CBE ( 2 February 1899 – 31 May 1956 ) was a senior officer in the Australian Army . Lloyd graduated from the Royal Military College , Duntroon in 1918 as a regular officer in the artillery and subsequently served in a range of staff and regimental positions in the inter-war years . He later saw service in the Second World War , during which he held senior staff and administrative positions in the Middle East , the Netherlands East Indies , Papua and Australia . Later he worked as a newspaper executive , as chief of several United Nations agencies , and in private enterprise . Lloyd died in 1956 .

Entering the Australian Army in 1915 , Lloyd graduated from the Royal Military College , Duntroon in December 1918 as a regular officer in the artillery , too late to see action during the First World War . Lloyd was nicknamed " Gaffer " by the other cadets due to his serious demeanor , and Gavin Long considered him among the " ablest " of the group of officers that joined the Staff Corps at that time . He was appointed as a lieutenant in the Australian Imperial Force upon completing his training at Duntroon and embarked from Sydney in January 1919 , being sent to the United Kingdom and later posted to France . Returning to the Permanent Military Force as the AIF was demobilised , he later completed his training serving with the British Army in England and India in 1919 – 20 . Lloyd married Sybil Drummond in Melbourne on 31 December 1921 . He subsequently held junior staff and regimental postings in Australia during the 1920s , at the same time studying law at the University of Sydney . His next postings included various adjutant and quartermaster roles at battery and brigade level in the 2nd and 3rd Military Districts . Later he attended Staff College , Camberley , in the United Kingdom during 1932 – 33 . Next he was appointed Brigade Major of the 4th Divisional Artillery in Melbourne in 1934 , and was promoted to major in 1937 . He was posted to the Directorate of Artillery at Army Headquarters in Melbourne from 1938 to 1939 .

Following the outbreak of the Second World War , Lloyd was seconded to the Second Australian Imperial Force ( 2nd AIF ) for overseas service . He held administrative posts in the 6th Division and I Australian Corps in the Middle East during 1940 , but was transferred before the 6th Division went into combat for the first time . In December that year , ranked colonel , he was posted to the 9th Division as the senior operational officer , serving as chief of staff to Major General Sir Leslie Morshead . In March , the 9th Division moved into the Western Desert , where they were to finalise their training and prepare to join the British advance through Libya . The landing of German forces around Tripoli in April forced the British and Commonwealth armies into withdrawal from Benghazi as the Afrika Korps arrived to reinforce the Italians in North Africa . The Axis forces subsequently began to advance west towards the strategic port of Tobruk . During the Siege of Tobruk which followed , Lloyd saw action between April and October 1941 , until the Australian units were relieved by British forces . Following the evacuation of the 9th Division from Tobruk by sea , Lloyd then served as chief liaison officer at AIF Headquarters , Middle East .

Departing the Middle East in late January 1942 , Lloyd was promoted to brigadier and flew to Batavia in the Netherlands East Indies , where elements of the 2nd AIF had been diverted to whilst returning from the Middle East in order to meet the Japanese threat following their initial attacks against British Commonwealth and US forces in the Pacific in December 1941 . He subsequently filled a senior staff posting in General Sir Archibald Wavell 's ABDA Command during its brief existence , holding the position of Deputy Intendant-General with the temporary rank of major general between January and February 1942 . Rising from major to major general in less than two-and-a-half years , he became the youngest general officer in the Australian Army at the age of 42 . In this role he acted as Wavell 's chief administrative officer ; however , he advocated to the Australian high command against British proposals for I Corps remain in Java , which he believed was unsound and likely result in its loss given the precarious tactical situation there , and that it should instead be returned to Australia to be concentrated for operations against the Japanese elsewhere . Ultimately while a few Australian units were landed in Java , where they were inevitably captured in the fighting that followed , the bulk of the 6th and 7th Divisions were returned to Australia following pressure from the Australian government .

Following the Netherlands East Indies campaign , Lloyd returned to Australia in April 1942 and reverted to the rank of brigadier . He was subsequently appointed Director of Staff Duties at Land Headquarters ( LHQ ) in July . In September he was briefly posted to I Corps in Papua as Brigadier General Staff under Lieutenant General Sir Sydney Rowell . In February 1943 , Lloyd was promoted again to major general and appointed Adjutant General at LHQ by the Commander-in-Chief , General Sir Thomas Blamey , remaining in this position until 1946 . Blamey had reportedly been " dissatisfied " with the performance of the previous Adjutant General , Major General Victor Stantke , and appointed Lloyd to rejuvenate the office . Leaving the full-time army , he transferred to the inactive reserve in February 1946 . Described by Chester Wilmot as " one of the ablest staff officers and most colourful characters of the AIF " , and by Wavell as " a staff officer of great quality " , during his service Lloyd had been appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( 1941 ) and was mentioned in despatches three times ( 1941 – 42 ) .

In 1946 , Lloyd became a senior executive of the Argus & Australasian newspaper , before unsuccessfully seeking Liberal Party pre-selection for a seat in Federal parliament the same year . In 1948 , he was appointed as a member of the government committee that reported on the administration of the British Commonwealth Occupation Force in Japan . His later work included postings as chief of the United Nations Refugee Organisation in Australia and New Zealand ( 1948 – 51 ) , and Chief of Mission of the United Nations Korean Reconstruction Agency ( 1951 – 53 ) . On return to Australia he took up a position as vice-chairman of Navcot ( Aust . ) Pty Ltd , a private enterprise which was involved in shipping refugees from Europe as part of the post-war immigration program . Whilst visiting relatives in Western Australia , Lloyd died of jaundice in the Repatriation General Hospital , in Hollywood , Perth , on 31 May 1956 and was buried in Karrakatta Cemetery . He was survived by his wife , daughter and two sons .

Nonviolent communication ( abbreviated NVC , also called compassionate communication or collaborative communication ) is a communication process developed by Marshall Rosenberg beginning in the 1960s . It focuses on three aspects of communication : self-empathy ( defined as a deep and compassionate awareness of one 's own inner experience ) , empathy ( understanding and sharing an emotion expressed by another ) , and honest self-expression ( defined as expressing oneself authentically in a way that is likely to inspire compassion in others ) . Nonviolent communication is based on the idea that all human beings have the capacity for compassion and only resort to violence or behavior that harms others when they don 't recognize more effective strategies for meeting needs . Habits of thinking and speaking that lead to the use of violence ( psychological and physical ) are learned through culture . NVC theory supposes all human behavior stems from attempts to meet universal human needs and that these needs are never in conflict . Rather , conflict arises when strategies for meeting needs clash . NVC proposes that if people can identify their needs , the needs of others , and the feelings that surround these needs , harmony can be achieved .

According to a biography of Rosenberg on the Center for Nonviolent Communication ( CNVC ) website , Nonviolent Communication training evolved from his search for a way to rapidly disseminate peacemaking skills . CNVC says that NVC emerged from work he was doing with civil rights activists in the early 1960s , and that during this period he also mediated between rioting students and college administrators , and worked to peacefully desegregate public schools in long-segregated regions . An MA thesis by Marion Little ( 2008 ) says that the roots of the NVC model developed in the late 1960s , when Rosenberg was working on racial integration in schools and organizations in the Southern United States . The earliest version of the model ( observations , feelings , and action-oriented wants ) was part of a training manual Rosenberg prepared in 1972 . The model had evolved to its present form ( observations , feelings , needs and requests ) by 1992 . The dialog between Rosenberg and NVC colleagues and trainers continued to influence the model , which by the late 2000s placed more importance on self-empathy as a key to the model 's effectiveness . Another shift in emphasis , since 2000 , has been the reference to the model as a process . The focus is thus less on the " steps " themselves and more on the practitioner 's intentions in speaking ( " is the intent to get others to do what one wants , or to foster more meaningful relationships and mutual satisfaction ? " ) in listening ( " is the intent to prepare for what one has to say , or to extend heartfelt , respectful attentiveness to another ? " ) and the quality of connection experienced with others .

Also according to Little 's thesis , Rosenberg 's work with Carl Rogers on research to investigate the components of a helping relationship was central to the development of NVC . Rogers emphasized : 1 ) experiential learning , 2 ) " frankness about one ’ s emotional state , " 3 ) the satisfaction of hearing others " in a way that resonates for them , " 4 ) the enriching and encouraging experience of " creative , active , sensitive , accurate , empathic listening , " 5 ) the " deep value of congruence between one ’ s own inner experience , one ’ s conscious awareness , and one ’ s communication , " and , subsequently , 6 ) the enlivening experience of unconditionally receiving love or appreciation and extending the same . Little says Rosenberg was Influenced by Erich Fromm , George Albee , and George Miller to adopt a community focus in his work , moving away from clinical psychological practice . The central ideas influencing this shift by Rosenberg were that : ( 1 ) individual mental health depends on the social structure of a community ( Fromm ) , ( 2 ) therapists alone are unable to meet the psychological needs of a community ( Albee ) , and ( 3 ) knowledge about human behavior will increase if psychology is freely given to the community ( Miller ) .

According to Little , Rosenberg ’ s early work with children with learning disabilities shows his interest in psycholinguistics and the power of language , as well as his emphasis on collaboration . In its initial development , the NVC model re-structured the pupil-teacher relationship to give students greater responsibility for , and decision-making related to , their own learning . The model has evolved over the years to incorporate institutional power relationships ( i.e. , police-citizen , boss-employee ) and informal ones ( i.e. man-woman , rich-poor , adult-youth , parent-child ) . The ultimate aim is to develop societal relationships based on a restorative , " partnership " paradigm and mutual respect , rather than a retributive , fear-based , " domination " paradigm . Little also says Rosenberg identified Mahatma Gandhi as an inspiration for the NVC model , and that Rosenberg ’ s goal was to develop a practical process for interaction rooted in the philosophy of Ahimsa , which Little translates as " the overflowing love that arises when all ill-will , anger , and hate have subsided from the heart . " In order to show the differences between communication styles , Rosenberg started to use two animals . The violent communication is represented by the carnivorous Jackal as a symbol of aggression and especially dominance . The herbivorous Giraffe on the other hand , represents his NVC strategy . The Giraffe was chosen as symbol for NVC as its long neck is supposed to show the clear-sighted speaker , being aware of his fellow speakers ' reactions , and simply because the Giraffe is the land-living mammal with the biggest heart , representing the compassionate side of NVC . In his courses he tends to use these animals in order to make the differences in communication clearer to the audience .

Nonviolent Communication holds that most conflicts between individuals or groups arise from miscommunication about their human needs , due to coercive or manipulative language that aims to induce fear , guilt , shame , etc . These " violent " modes of communication , when used during a conflict , divert the attention of the participants away from clarifying their needs , their feelings , their perceptions , and their requests , thus perpetuating the conflict . Marshall Rosenberg , the founder of Nonviolent Communication , published numerous training materials to help in efforts to bring about radical social change . He was concerned with transforming the " gangs and domination structures " through the method he called " ask , ask , ask " . He suggested social change activists could focus on gaining access to those in power in order to " ask , ask , ask " for changes that will make life better for all including the powerful . He wrote about the need for the protective use of force , distinguishing it from the punitive use of force .

Rosenberg says that certain ways of communicating tend to alienate people from the experience of compassion : ( ch.2 ) Moralistic judgments implying wrongness or badness on the part of people who don 't act in harmony with our values . Blame , insults , put-downs , labels , criticisms , comparisons , and diagnoses are all said to be forms of judgment . ( Moralistic judgments are not to be confused with value judgments as to the qualities we value . ) The use of moralistic judgments is characterized as an impersonal way of expressing oneself that does not require one to reveal what is going on inside of oneself . This way of speaking is said to have the result that " Our attention is focused on classifying , analyzing , and determining levels of wrongness rather than on what we and others need and are not getting . " Demands that implicitly or explicitly threaten listeners with blame or punishment if they fail to comply . Denial of responsibility via language that obscures awareness of personal responsibility . It is said that we deny responsibility for our actions when we attribute their cause to : vague impersonal forces ( " I had to " ) ; our condition , diagnosis , personal or psychological history ; the actions of others ; the dictates of authority ; group pressure ; institutional policy , rules , and regulations ; gender roles , social roles , or age roles ; or uncontrollable impulses .

Observation : the facts ( what we are seeing , hearing , or touching ) as distinct from our evaluation of meaning and significance . NVC discourages static generalizations . It is said that " When we combine observation with evaluation others are apt to hear criticism and resist what we are saying . " Instead , a focus on observations specific to time and context is recommended . ( ch.3 ) Feelings : emotions or sensations , free of thought and story . These are to be distinguished from thoughts ( e.g. , " I feel I didn 't get a fair deal " ) and from words colloquially used as feelings but which convey what we think we are ( e.g. , " inadequate " ) , how we think others are evaluating us ( e.g. , " unimportant " ) , or what we think others are doing to us ( e.g. , " misunderstood " , " ignored " ) . Feelings are said to reflect whether we are experiencing our needs as met or unmet . Identifying feelings is said to allow us to more easily connect with one another , and " Allowing ourselves to be vulnerable by expressing our feelings can help resolve conflicts . " ( ch.4 )

Needs : universal human needs , as distinct from particular strategies for meeting needs . It is posited that " Everything we do is in service of our needs . " Request : request for a specific action , free of demand . Requests are distinguished from demands in that one is open to hearing a response of " no " without this triggering an attempt to force the matter . If one makes a request and receives a " no " it is recommended not that one give up , but that one empathize with what is preventing the other person from saying " yes , " before deciding how to continue the conversation . It is recommended that requests use clear , positive , concrete action language . ( ch.6 )

Self-empathy involves compassionately connecting with what is going on inside us . This may involve , without blame , noticing the thoughts and judgments we are having , noticing our feelings , and most critically , connecting to the needs that are affecting us . ( ch.4 ) Receiving empathically , in NVC , involves " connection with what 's alive in the other person and what would make life wonderful for them ... It 's not an understanding of the head where we just mentally understand what another person says ... Empathic connection is an understanding of the heart in which we see the beauty in the other person , the divine energy in the other person , the life that 's alive in them ... It doesn 't mean we have to feel the same feelings as the other person . That 's sympathy , when we feel sad that another person is upset . It doesn 't mean we have the same feelings ; it means we are with the other person ... If you 're mentally trying to understand the other person , you 're not present with them . " ( ch.5 ) Empathy involves " emptying the mind and listening with our whole being . " NVC suggests that however the other person expresses themselves , we focus on listening for the underlying observations , feelings , needs , and requests . It is suggested that it can be useful to reflect a paraphrase of what another person has said , highlighting the NVC components implicit in their message , such as the feelings and needs you guess they may be expressing . ( ch.7 )

Expressing honestly , in NVC , is likely to involve expressing an observation , feeling , need , and request . An observation may be omitted if the context of the conversation is clear . A feeling might be omitted if there is sufficient connection already , or the context is one where naming a feeling isn ’ t likely to contribute to connection . It is said that naming a need in addition to a feeling makes it less likely that people will think you are making them responsible for your feeling . Similarly , it is said that making a request in addition to naming a need makes it less likely that people will infer a vague demand that they address your need . The components are thought to work together synergistically . According to NVC trainer Bob Wentworth , " an observation sets the context , feelings support connection and getting out of our heads , needs support connection and identify what is important , and a request clarifies what sort of response you might enjoy . Using these components together minimizes the chances of people getting lost in potentially disconnecting speculation about what you want from them and why . "

NVC lacks significant " longitudinal analytical research , " and few studies have evaluated the effectiveness of NVC training programs . To date , there has been little discussion of NVC in academic contexts . Most evidence for the effectiveness of NVC has been anecdotal or based on theoretical support . Juncadella produced a systematic review of research related to the impact of NVC on the development of empathy . She found 13 studies which met her inclusion criteria ( three were published in peer reviewed journals ; ten were unpublished theses or researcher reports ) . Eleven of these suggested an increase in empathy subsequent to the application of NVC ( five of these with evidence of statistical significance ) and two did not . Juncadella notes several shortcomings of her review . None of the studies she included were randomized and only three used validated instruments . As a result she used a narrative synthesis review format , which , " lacks precision , " but allows the summarization of studies of different types , sizes , outcome measures and aims . She suggests the primary limitation of her review is that a number of relevant studies exist that could not be included due to lack of availability . She suggests these might have significantly altered her results . Finally , she includes the following caveat : " I must mention the inevitable subjectivity bias present throughout the whole review . In spite of the efforts made towards ‘ disciplined subjectivity ’ ... my decisions show a degree of uncertainty and inaccuracy born via the tension between the weak evidence of the studies and my own convictions about the NVC model . " Her overall assessment of the current research on NVC 's efficacy in promoting the development of empathy is that the results are promising , but " would need to be confirmed with further studies bearing stronger designs and more appropriate measures . " She notes that a major shortcoming of the existing research is the " mismatch between the constructs of the model and the validated empathy measures " and suggests that improved instruments need to be developed to adequately test NVC .

As of 2013 , eight Master 's theses and Doctoral dissertations are known to have tested the model on sample sizes of 108 or smaller and generally have found the model to be effective . Allan Rohlfs , who first met Rosenberg in 1972 and was a founder of the Center for Nonviolent Communication , explains the paucity of academic literature as follows : Virtually all conflict resolution programs have an academic setting as their foundation and therefore have empirical studies by graduate students assessing their efficacy . NVC is remarkable for its roots . Marshall Rosenberg , Ph.D. ( clinical psychology , U of Wisconsin ) comes from a full time private practice in clinical psychology and consultation , never an academic post . NVC , his creation , is entirely a grassroots organization and never had until recently any foundation nor grant monies , on the contrary funded 100 % from trainings which were offered in public workshops around the world . ... Empirical data is now coming slowly as independent researchers find their own funding to conduct and publish empirical studies with peer review . Richard Bowers ’ thesis ( 2012 ) , updated to book form by Bowers and Moffett ( 2012 ) , asserts that NVC has been absent from academic programs due to a lack of research into the theoretical basis for the model and lack of research on the reliability of positive results . Bowers ’ thesis meets the first objection through an analysis of existing theories which provide solid support for each element of the NVC ( mediation ) model . Without this theoretical understanding , it would not be clear what aspects of the NVC model make it work or even if it can be effectively applied by anyone other than Marshall Rosenberg . This theoretical analysis can provide a foundation for further empirical research on the effectiveness and reliability of the model .

NVC has reportedly been an element of a bundle of interventions that produced dramatic changes in forensic psychiatric nursing settings in which a high level of violence is the norm . NVC was adopted , in combination with other interventions , in an effort to reduce violence . The interventions were said to reduce key violence indicators by 90 percent over a three-year period in a medium security unit , and by around 50 percent in a single year in a maximum security unit . A 2014 study examined the effects of combined NVC and mindfulness training on 885 male inmates of the Monroe Correctional Complex in Monroe , Washington . The training was found to reduce recidivism from 37 % to 21 % , and the training was estimated as having saved the state $ 5 million per year in reduced incarceration costs . The training was found to increase equanimity , decrease anger , and lead to abilities to take responsibility for one 's feelings , express empathy , and to make requests without imposing demands . NVC has also been reported as effective in reducing domestic violence . Male participants who graduated from an NVC-based batterer intervention program in California had zero percent recidivism within 5 years , according to the relevant District Attorneys ' offices . The news report contrasted this with a recidivism rate of 40 percent within 5 years as reported by the Domestic Abuse Intervention Project for graduates of their batterer intervention program based on the Duluth Model , said to previously offer the lowest known domestic violence recidivism rate .

Bowers and Moffett provide a thoughtful study of the important role of empathy and human needs in mediation through the development of a theoretical model to explain the effectiveness of NVC mediation . The authors present theories of human needs and the basis for a common core of needs . They discuss theories that explain the importance of understanding human needs in the context of conflict resolution . They clearly distinguish core human needs from interests ( strategies ) and how focusing on needs is a paradigm shift in the field of conflict resolution . Further , Bowers and Moffett present theories of empathy from the pioneering work of Carl Rogers , Heinz Kohut , and others . Empathy is distinguished from sympathy and active listening , pointing out how the word empathy is often confused in the literature by using it interchangeably with these other two terms . They also examine stage theories of the development of empathy as well as constructive-developmental theories related to empathy .

As Theresa Latini notes , " Rosenberg understands NVC to be a fundamentally spiritual practice . " Marshall Rosenberg has , in fact , described the influence of his spiritual life on the development and practice of NVC : " I think it is important that people see that spirituality is at the base of Nonviolent Communication , and that they learn the mechanics of the process with that in mind . It ’ s really a spiritual practice that I am trying to show as a way of life . Even though we don ’ t mention this , people get seduced by the practice . Even if they practice this as a mechanical technique , they start to experience things between themselves and other people they weren ’ t able to experience before . So eventually they come to the spirituality of the process . They begin to see that it ’ s more than a communication process and realize it ’ s really an attempt to manifest a certain spirituality . " Rosenberg further states that he developed NVC as a way to " get conscious of " what he calls the " Beloved Divine Energy " .

Marion Little examines theoretical frameworks related to NVC . The influential interest-based model for conflict resolution , negotiation , and mediation developed by Fisher , Ury , and Patton at the Harvard Negotiation Project in the 1980s appears to have some conceptual overlap with NVC , although neither model references the other . Little suggests The Gordon Model for Effective Relationships ( 1970 ) as a likely precursor to both NVC and interest-based negotiation , based on conceptual similarities , if not any direct evidence of a connection . Like Rosenberg , Gordon had worked with Carl Rogers , so the models ' similarities may reflect common influences . Suzanne Jones sees a substantive difference between active listening as originated by Gordon and empathic listening as recommended by Rosenberg , insofar as active listening involves a specific step of reflecting what a speaker said to let them know you are listening , whereas empathic listening involves an ongoing process of listening with both heart and mind and being fully present to the other 's experience , with an aim of comprehending and empathizing with the needs of the other , the meaning of the experience for that person . Gert Danielsen and Havva Kök both note an overlap between the premises of NVC and those of Human Needs Theory ( HNT ) , an academic model for understanding the sources of conflict and designing conflict resolution processes , with the idea that " Violence occurs when certain individuals or groups do not see any other way to meet their need , or when they need understanding , respect and consideration for their needs . "

There is little published critique of NVC . Some researchers have noted that NVC lacks an evidence base beyond the copious anecdotal claims of effectiveness and similarly lacks discussion in the literature of the theoretical basis of the model . Several researchers have attempted a thorough evaluation of criticisms and weaknesses of NVC and assessed significant challenges in its application . These span a range of potential problems , from the practical to the theoretical , and include concerns gathered from study participants and researchers . The difficulty of using NVC as well as the dangers of misuse are common concerns . The NVC four step model is seen as problematic for a number of reasons : the notion of unbiased observations has been criticized because multiple interpretations of events and behaviors are likely ; people may not understand their own feelings and needs and therefore expressing them may be challenging , if not impossible ; the model often causes people to feel awkward and requires more trust in others than is typically found in everyday interactions ; the process of paraphrasing and attempting to guess the identity of people 's feelings can be off putting for some ; the demands of successfully requesting positive actions using appropriate NVC language is daunting and requires a level of investment of time and reflection not typically available in most people 's interactions .

In addition , Bitschnau and Flack find a paradoxical potential for violence in the use of NVC , occasioned by its unskilled use . Bitschnau further suggests that the use of NVC is unlikely to allow everyone to express their feelings and have their needs met in real life as this would require inordinate time , patience and discipline . Those who are skilled in the use of NVC may become prejudiced against those who are not and prefer to converse only among themselves . Oboth suggests that people might hide their feelings in the process of empathy , subverting the nonviolence of communication . The massive investment of time and effort in learning to use NVC has been noted by a number of researchers . Chapman Flack , in reviewing a training video by Rosenberg , finds the presentation of key ideas " spell-binding " and the anecdotes " humbling and inspiring , " notes the " beauty of his work , " and his " adroitly doing fine attentive thinking " when interacting with his audience . Yet Flack wonders what to make of aspects of Rosenberg 's presentation , such as his apparent " dim view of the place for thinking " and his building on Walter Wink 's account of the origins of our way of thinking . To Flack , some elements of what Rosenberg says seem like pat answers at odds with the challenging and complex picture of human nature history , literature and art offer .

Flack notes a distinction between the " strong sense " of nonviolent communication as a virtue that is possible with care and attention , and the " weak sense , " a mimicry of this born of ego and haste . The strong sense offers a language to examine one 's thinking and actions , support understanding , bring one 's best to the community , and honor one 's emotions . In the weak sense , one may take the language as rules and use these to score debating points , label others for political gain , or insist that others express themselves in this way . Though concerned that some of what Rosenberg says could lead to the weak sense , Flack sees evidence confirming that Rosenberg understands the strong sense in practice . Rosenberg 's work with workshop attendees demonstrates " the real thing . " Yet Flack warns that " the temptation of the weak sense will not be absent . " As an antidote , Flack advises , " Be conservative in what you do , be liberal in what you accept from others , " ( also known as the robustness principle ) and guard against the " metamorphosis of nonviolent communication into subtle violence done in its name . "

The Center for Nonviolent Communication ( CNVC ) , founded by Marshall Rosenberg , has trademarked the terms NVC , Nonviolent Communication and Compassionate Communication , among other terms , for clarity and branding purposes . CNVC certifies trainers who wish to teach NVC in a manner aligned with CNVC 's understanding of the NVC process . CNVC also offers trainings by certified trainers . Some trainings in nonviolent communication are offered by trainers sponsored by organizations considered as allied with , but having no formal relationship with , the Center for Nonviolent Communication founded by Marshall Rosenberg . Some of these trainings are announced through CNVC . Numerous NVC organizations have sprung up around the world , many with regional focuses .

Who 's Your Neighbor ? is a 1917 silent American propaganda and drama film directed by S. Rankin Drew . The film 's plot focuses around reformers who pass a law to force prostitutes , including Hattie Fenshaw , out of the red light district . Fenshaw becomes Bryant Harding 's mistress and lives in an apartment next door to a reformer , and continues to ply her trade . After Fenshaw becomes familiar with Harding , his son , daughter and the daughter 's fiance , the climax of the film occurs as the cast assembles at Fenshaw 's apartment . Harding returns and a fight breaks out that results in the reformers ' arrival and concludes with the presumption that Fenshaw returns to a place of " legalized vice " . The drama was written by Willard Mack and was his first foray into screen dramas . The film proved controversial , but is noted as a great success . The film originally debuted on June 15 , 1917 , but it was rejected by the National Board of Review and was later approved after a revision , but the film continued to be labeled as an immoral production . The film is presumed to be lost .

A group of reformers , led by Mrs. Bowers , moves to have the red light district closed and force the girls out . District Attorney Osborne , believes that it will turn out poorly for the town and tries to persuade the reforms that it would be like scattering smallpox . He fails to persuade them and the law is passed . The film focuses on one of the prostitutes , Hattie Fenshaw , who is forced out from her place of vice . According to H. D. Fretz 's review , Fenshaw is determined to let those at a prominent hotel know that " women such as she had better be left alone " , but is quickly recognized and evicted . At the hotel , Fenshaw makes an acquaintance of Bryant Harding who decides to keep her as his mistress and pays Fenshaw 's rent in an apartment next door to one of the reformers , Mrs. Osborne . Fenshaw also charms Dudley Carleton , who breaks off his engagement to Betty Hamlin , the daughter of Harding , who uses her divorced mother 's maiden name . Hamlin and Fenshaw meet through an introduction with Mrs. Bowers , and Hamlin , unaware of Fenshaw 's character is telephoned by Fenshaw to come and sew for her to earn some money . Hal Harding , a college student with a desire to see the city , is introduced to Fenshaw during his father 's absence . The cast assembles at Fenshaw 's apartment when Hamlin arrives and interrupts Fenshaw 's party with her ex-fiance and her brother , Hal . She is then introduced to her brother under and assumed name and is in the apartment when Bryant Harding returns . A fight breaks out and Harding nearly kills Carleton and knocks Fenshaw unconscious and shoots at his daughter , but misses . Alerted by the shot , the District Attorney , Mrs. Bowers and her reformer friends arrive and learn of Hattie Fenshaw 's vice . Shorey 's film review concludes with the presumption that Fenshaw returns to a place of " legalized vice " with Mrs. Bowers ' permission .

Willard Mack had registered and copyrighted " Who 's Your Neighbor ? " on March 9 , 1917 . Speculation by Motography states that Mack 's " contribution to the screen drama was probably prompted by the distressing Ruth Cruger mystery , which was so cleverly solved by Mrs. Grace Humiston , and follows very closely many of the phases of drama in real life that shocked the world . " The April 17 , 1917 issue of Motography profiled the film , the first production of Master Drama Features , noting that it would be shown on a " stage-right " basis after a New York City premier at a Broadway theater . H. D. Fretz noted that the majority of the scenes were shot indoors and described the photography as excellent . The film was described as breaking a record by Motoplay because of the use of a triple exposure . The brief note stated that it is a delicate and precise work that required perfect synchronization that " ( the film ) had to be taken twenty times before the result was satisfactory to Director S. Rankin Drew . " Who 's Your Neighbor ? was the first film produced by Edward Small . According to the American Film Institute , the film was edited by Frank Lawrence .

The film debuted at the Broadway Theater on June 15 , 1917 . After its debut , the film received many bids from buyers for the film . The original film had seven reels , but the June 30 edition of The Moving Picture World stated that it was six reels for unknown reasons . Shortly after the film 's completion , S. Rankin Drew sailed for France to join the American Ambulance Corps . He was killed in action when his plane was shot down over France during the First World War on May 19 , 1918 . The film was originally set for a winter release , and was the subject of speculation by Lynn Kear , author of Evelyn Brent : The Life and Films of Hollywood 's Lady Crook , the film was delayed because of the fears that World War I would hurt viewer attendance . Lynn also speculated that it may have been due to the film having received condemnation from the National Board of Review . Master Drama Features general manager Herman Becker told the media the film was held for a winter release , due to expectation of a decrease in viewership due to the ongoing war , but the film was released because the vaudeville theaters wanted new acts . Becker also noted the advertising greatly boosted sales of the film . While the film did initially get condemnation from the board , it was later given a full approval following a revision according to the September 1 publication of Motion Picture News . The film was also quick to sell the state rights as noted in the July 28 edition of Motography . Becker sold states rights to " California , Washington , Nevada , Arizona , New Mexico , Colorado , Utah , Wyoming , Montana , Oregon , Idaho and northern New Jersey . " This purchase of rights was made by F. E. Backer of Mammoth Film Corporation after seeing the film .

According to Kear , advertising for the film focused on Evelyn Brent and cited an ad that appeared in the Los Angeles Times on December 5 , 1917 . Though Exhibitor 's Herald cited that the advertising for the film would include " four kinds of one-sheet , three-sheet , six-sheet and 24-sheet lithographs , newspaper cuts , slides , window cards , banners , heralds , throw aways and many other novelties never before seen . " For advertisement purposes , the Otis Lithograph Company was contracted by the studio 's director of publicity , Arthur M. Brilant . The description of the varied materials were noted in greater detail in a column in Motion Picture News . Though the film had its debut on June 15 , the American Film Institute states that the film was released in October . This conflicts with a claim from the Paris Theater in Denver , Colorado , found in the September 29 issue of Motography , where the film was said to be popular . The Paris Theater would also run into legal troubles over the films showing , a fact reported in the October 6 edition of Motography . Newspaper accounts for a late October run begin in the San Francisco Chronicle with the Portola Theater debuting the film , originally for one week , starting on October 28 , 1917 . The film was popular enough to run a second week at the Portola . The film would be part of the vaudeville show at the Wigwam for four days starting on November 14 . The film was suggested for mature audiences by the Portola Theater and the Wigwam Theater , both did not allow children under the age of 16 to enter .

George N. Shorey 's review of the initial seven reel Broadway release declared it another masterpiece of Mack 's writing and notes that the film would be the best example to go before the courts to argue for " free speech " in films . Shorey notes that the propaganda film " is bold , clear , tremendous in the force of its convincing showing that to drive the scarlet woman from a restricted district into the hotels and apartment houses of a city is a worse crime than it seeks to cure . " The only complaint was found that it " does not sufficiently misrepresent the ease and luxury of the underworld . It shows a scarlet woman who finds the " easiest way " truly easy . She does not die , nor even suffer . The intended moral of the picture , that once abandoned to that life a woman finds it to her taste to remain in it and cannot be " reformed , " necessarily does include the above corollary to that proposition . " The San Francisco Chronicle wrote that the film " deals with a question that has perplexed the sages from the beginning of time and it traverses life 's scroll , writing with thought and deed certain actions of everyday application . There are tense dramatic scenes , and above all there is the question that must be faced , " Who 's Your Neighbor ? " "

The film was declared to be the " most satisfactory picture Denver has had in many months " by the Paris Theater in the September 29 issue of Motography . Though the October 6 edition of Motography noted that W. A. Roderick and F. O. Brown , officers of Paris Theater Company were charged for showing the film which violated a city ordinance on " immoral pictures " . The men rejected that claim , citing that it was not immoral , but was rejected by the censorship board because it was a propaganda film and not on the film 's morality . The city had threatened to file charges and prosecute them for each exhibition of the film . Ben H. Grimm 's review in The Moving Picture World was completely negative and described it as " one of the most insidious , moral-destroying pictures ever produced . It will lower to the level of a bawdy house any theater in which it is shown . It reeks of a filthy sex element that struts across the screen in the sheep 's clothing of alleged propaganda advocating the segregation of vice . " Grimm highlights how the film 's prostitute sells herself and finds not ill , but instead gets worldly gains . Grimm also notes that the production is based on the premise that a prostitute is a prostitute by choice , does not want reform and infers that she can not be reformed . Grimm 's review stated that the great production was even more detrimental with a metaphor that stated a well-dressed criminal was less likely to be suspected than a poorly dressed criminal .

Lieutenant General Sir Sydney Fairbairn Rowell , KBE , CB ( 15 December 1894 – 12 April 1975 ) was an Australian soldier who served as Chief of the General Staff from 17 April 1950 to 15 December 1954 . As Vice Chief of the General Staff from 8 January 1946 to 16 April 1950 , he played a key role in the post-Second World War reorganisation of the Army , and in the 1949 Australian coal strike . However , he is best known as the commander who was dismissed in the Kokoda Track campaign . As a young officer , Rowell served at Gallipoli but was invalided back to Australia with typhoid fever in January 1916 . The end of the war found Rowell junior in rank to his contemporaries with more distinguished war records , but he managed to catch up in the post-war period . Rowell spent five years with the British Army or at British staff colleges , establishing valuable contacts with his British counterparts . In 1939 he was appointed chief of staff of the 6th Division and later I Corps , serving in that capacity in the Battle of Greece and the Syria-Lebanon campaign . In 1942 he commanded I Corps in the Kokoda Track campaign but was sacked . His subsequent rise to become Chief of the General Staff demonstrated that the circumstances of his dismissal in 1942 were indeed extraordinary .

Sydney Fairbairn Rowell was born on 15 December 1894 at Lockleys , South Australia , the fourth son of James Rowell , an English-born soldier and orchardist who served as a senator from 1916 to 1922 , and his Australian-born second wife Zella Jane née Williams . He acted as an ' unofficial batman ' to his father , who was colonel commanding the South Australian Brigade from 1907 to 1911 . Rowell was educated at Adelaide High School and was one of the first cadets to enter the Royal Military College , Duntroon when it opened in 1911 .

On 15 September 1914 Rowell and his classmates were commissioned as first lieutenants in the Australian Imperial Force ( AIF ) . At the time , Rowell 's class had not yet completed its military training . The AIF 's commander , Major General William Throsby Bridges , decided that regimental duty would rectify that deficiency , so he allotted the Duntroon cadets as regimental officers of the AIF , rather than as staff officers . The cost of this decision was high ; of the 134 commissioned in time to serve at the front , 42 were killed and 38 wounded . Cadets were posted to units being formed in their home states , so Rowell was posted to the 10th Infantry Battalion . When he discovered that the 3rd Light Horse Regiment was to be commanded by his cousin , Lieutenant Colonel F. M. Rowell , Sydney obtained permission to swap places with another member of his Duntroon class Lieutenant Eric Wilkes Talbot Smith . It was a fateful decision ; Smith was fatally wounded on Anzac Day . Rowell contracted pneumonia and did not embark with the main body of the 3rd Light Horse Regiment . Instead , he left with its First Reinforcements on HMAT Thirty-Six on 21 December 1914 . Rowell joined the regiment in Heliopolis in January . The next month he broke his left leg in a riding accident . For a time it looked like Rowell would again miss the embarkation of his regiment , but the intervention of his father ensured that he reached Anzac Cove with the 3rd Light Horse on 12 May 1915 . He was evacuated sick to Egypt and then Malta in July , and returned to his regiment at Quinn 's Post in August . Rowell was promoted to the temporary rank of captain on 9 September , briefly assuming command of a squadron before becoming the regimental adjutant three days later . In November Rowell was again evacuated to Egypt , this time with typhoid fever , the disease that had killed his cousin . On 20 January 1916 , Rowell was returned to Australia . Because of a policy that a regular officer , once invalided to Australia , could not again be posted overseas , Rowell 's period of active service was over . He was posted , along with several other Duntroon graduates who had been invalided home , to Duntroon , as an instructor at the Officers ' Training School . This was closed in June 1917 and Rowell was posted to the staff of the 4th Military District in Adelaide .

On 20 August 1919 at the Chalmers Church , North Terrace , Adelaide , Rowell married Blanche May Murison , the daughter of a Scottish engineer . Blanche had served in the Royal Australian Army Nursing Corps in Australia during the war . Due to his brief overseas service , the end of the war found Rowell still a lieutenant and thus junior in rank to his contemporaries but the snail-like pace of promotions between the wars allowed him to gradually catch up . He was promoted to captain on 1 January 1920 , major on 1 January 1926 , and the brevet rank lieutenant colonel on 1 July 1935 , with substantive rank on 1 January 1936 . His inter-war career consisted of a long series of staff postings , interspersed with training courses . In 1924 , Rowell passed the staff college examination for one of the two Australian spots . Qualifying in first place gave him a choice between the Staff College , Camberley and its counterpart at Quetta , and Rowell chose the former , attending from 1925 to 1926 . At this time , the commandant was Major General Edmund Ironside ; the staff included Colonel J. F. C. Fuller and Lieutenant Colonels Alan Brooke and Bernard Montgomery . Fellow students included Captains Frank Messervy and Francis Tuker . From 1935 to 1937 , Rowell was on exchange to the British Army as a staff officer with the 44th ( Home Counties ) Infantry Division . He then attended the Imperial Defence College . The class was a distinguished one , including two Victoria Cross winners , Group Captain Frank McNamara from Australia and Lieutenant Colonel George Pearkes from Canada ; other students included Lieutenant Colonel William Slim and Wing Commander Keith Park . For his staff work , Rowell was made an Officer of the Order of the British Empire in the King 's Birthday Honours in 1938 .

Rowell returned to Australia to become Director of Military Operations and Intelligence at Army Headquarters in Melbourne but in August 1938 he became staff officer to the Inspector General , Lieutenant General Ernest Squires , partly because Rowell was recognised as " one of the ablest of the early Duntroon graduates " but also because he had spent five of the previous thirteen years with the British Army or at British staff colleges . The government 's decision to appoint a British officer to produce an authoritative report into the Army was widely seen as demonstrating the government 's lack of confidence in its own officer corps . Squires ' first recommendation was to restructure the military districts into four " commands " . This required legislation amending the Defence Act and was not implemented until October 1939 . The second recommendation was the formation of a regular brigade . The death of Prime Minister Joseph Lyons in April 1939 and his subsequent replacement by Robert Menzies caused this to be shelved .

When the 6th Division was formed in October 1939 , Sir Thomas Blamey appointed Rowell as its GSO1 ( chief of staff ) . Rowell joined the Second Australian Imperial Force ( AIF ) and was given the AIF service number VX3 . Gavin Long described Rowell as " clear and incisive in thought , sensitive in feeling , frank and outspoken in approach to men and to problems . Five recent years of service either at English staff colleges or on exchange duty made it probable that wherever he went his opposite numbers in British formations would be men with whom he had previously worked and played . " Comparing him to the AA & QMG , Colonel George Alan Vasey , Long noted that both " were not only efficient soldiers but men of commanding temperament and talent " . Rowell was promoted to colonel on 13 October 1939 , and when the government decided to form I Corps in April 1940 , Blamey was given the command and Rowell became brigadier , general staff ( BGS ) , with the rank of brigadier . Blamey and Rowell prepared I Corps for operations as best they could , completing the force 's structure and integrating new units as they arrived in the Middle East . Rowell strove to establish good relations with the British Army , while occasionally having to remind them that the AIF was answerable to its own commander in chief and its own government . Rowell 's efforts to create an administrative headquarters to free the I Corps staff for operational duties foundered on Blamey 's reluctance to delegate authority . The best that he could achieve was the creation of a Base and Line of Communications Units command under Brigadier Allan Boase but I Corps remained responsible for organisation and training .

In Greece , I Corps was employed as such for the first time . The campaign was another short one , but very trying on the participants . Just three days after headquarters opened on 5 April 1941 , the Germans broke through and the corps was thrown into a retreat that eventually led to its re-embarkation . Blamey and his staff worked under tremendous pressure ; the operational situation was precarious ; and German air attacks were frequent . Rowell later wrote : What history should record is that , in the face of a desperate situation , HQ I Corps never lost control of the battle ; made sound tactical decisions with limited resources and succeeded finally in bringing its troops to the beaches with limited resources and with no loss of cohesion . Tempers flared when I Corps headquarters was ordered to evacuate to Egypt . Blamey 's aide recalled : We had now now come to our last hours in Greece . They were marked by tension and anger . When Rowell was told that he was to leave almost immediately to fly to Egypt with Blamey , his first reaction was to declare that he had no intention of leaving . The hostility in this exchange opened up a rift between the two men . Rowell had always been completely frank in putting his views to Blamey , but not defiant . On this occasion it took a sharp and direct order to remind Rowell who was in command .

If Rowell felt that Blamey had shown a lack of moral courage in failing to stand up to the political and military superiors who had directed the ill-fated campaign , Blamey felt that the campaign had revealed flaws in Rowell 's character . He wrote to the Chief of the General Staff , Lieutenant General Vernon Sturdee : Rowell has very great ability ; is quick in decision and sound in judgement . There can be no question of his personal courage , but he lacks the reserves of nervous energy over a period of long strain . I found him difficult in the last days in Greece and , as commander , had to exercise considerable tact . Rather a reverse of what it should be . I was a little disappointed in both him and Bridgeford over their attitude in one or two matters . They were over-impressed with the danger of the dive bomber and talked a little too freely about its effect on the men . However , a short rest fixed them both up and they are doing a great job in Syria .

I Corps was alerted to take part in the Syria-Lebanon Campaign although , Blamey having been promoted to Deputy Commander in Chief Middle East Command , it lacked a commanding officer . Apparently , General Sir Henry Maitland Wilson believed that I Corps ' loss of transport and signal equipment precluded it from participating in the campaign from the outset . Instead , Wilson attempted to exercise command from the King David Hotel . This proved to be a serious error , as his staff were preoccupied with political and administrative issues , and were too remote from the battlefields to exercise the close command required — something that Rowell foresaw . Following a series of reverses , Rowell predicted on 16 June that " it won 't be long now . " I Corps headquarters was sent for on 18 June , and Lieutenant General John Lavarack assumed command that day .

In August 1941 , Rowell returned to Australia to take up the post of Deputy Chief of the General Staff ( DCGS ) , with the rank of major general . He expected that his main task would be to support the AIF ; but it turned out the primary concern was the looming war with Japan , which broke out soon after . It was at this juncture that Rowell was approached by Major General George Vasey , who had a scheme to retire all officers over the age of fifty , and making Major General Horace Robertson Commander in Chief . Presumably Vasey expected Rowell , as a fellow Duntroon graduate , to be sympathetic . A heated argument ensued , ending with Rowell telling Vasey that " if he weren 't so bloody big , I 'd toss him out of the room " . Rowell immediately went to Sturdee , who had Lavarack with him , and told him what had transpired . In Blamey 's subsequent shake-up of higher command arrangements , Rowell was appointed to command I Corps . This was his first command since his three-day stint in command of a light horse squadron at Gallipoli . He became the first Duntroon graduate to command a corps , and the first to be promoted to the rank of lieutenant general . The old I Corps headquarters was largely absorbed into Lavarack 's new First Army headquarters , so a new one was formed from Headquarters , Southern Command . Initially located in Melbourne , it soon moved to Esk , Queensland .

On 31 July 1942 , Blamey informed Rowell that I Corps headquarters would be sent to Port Moresby to control operations in New Guinea . Rowell arrived in Port Moresby on 13 August 1942 and assumed command of New Guinea Force from Major General Basil Morris . Rowell 's I Corps headquarters took over operational control from Morris 's , which became that of ANGAU . The only warning that Morris had of Rowell 's arrival was a message from the DCGS , Vasey , which simply said : " Syd is coming " . The situation was dire . Japanese were steadily advancing on Port Moresby along the Kokoda Trail and were also threatening Milne Bay and Wau . Rowell and his staff were all seasoned officers with combat experience in the Middle East and the Battle of Malaya and " brought to New Guinea skill and organisation that Morris and his staff had been unable to provide " . However , the main body of Rowell 's staff did not arrive until 17 August . Rowell turned down a suggestion from Blamey that he needed additional base staff to cope with his administrative problems , given that a corps headquarters was a tactical headquarters , intended to operate as part of an army , with the latter handling most of the administrative work . Rowell 's staff gradually discovered how enormous the task before them was ; they had few maps , the only transport aircraft were destroyed in a Japanese raid , and the supplies that had been forwarded by air to Kokoda could not be located .

Rowell refused to give General Douglas MacArthur 's General Headquarters ( GHQ ) in Brisbane a " ball to ball " description of the action , sending only factual information at stated times . Failure to keep GHQ up to date could only lead to fears of the worst , which were confirmed when Major General George Kenney reported that in his opinion Port Moresby would soon fall unless something drastic was done , and Rowell was " defeatist " . On 17 September , the General MacArthur discussed the situation in New Guinea with Prime Minister John Curtin on the secraphone . He pointed out that while the Japanese faced all the same difficulties as the Australian troops fighting on the Kokoda Track , the Japanese were advancing and the Australians were retreating , and the whole situation seemed to MacArthur to be a lot like the Malaya . He recommended that General Blamey be sent up to New Guinea to take personal command of the situation . " I 'm leaving for New Guinea in a few days , " Blamey told Burston , his Director General of Medical Services , on 18 September . They were talking in Blamey 's office in Victoria Barracks , Melbourne . Blamey had just had talks on the secraphone with both Curtin and MacArthur . Each of them had instructed him to go to Port Moresby . These were not recommendations or requests ; they were orders for every practical purpose . " I remember what happened to the Auk in the desert and I 'm off ! " Blamey told Burston .

Blamey took over command of New Guinea Force , but not I Corps . The difference was academic insofar as there was only one staff . Blamey wrote a letter to Rowell to explain the situation in advance of his arrival in Port Moresby on 23 September : The powers that be have determined that I shall myself go to New Guinea for a while and operate from there ... I hope you will not be upset at this decision , and will not think that it implies any lack of confidence in yourself . I think it arises out of the fact that we have very inexperienced politicians who are inclined to panic on every possible occasion , and I think that the relationship between us personally is such that we can make the arrangement work without any difficulty . The plain fact is that he [ Blamey ] hasn 't enough moral courage to fight the Cabinet on an issue of confidence in me . Either I am fit to command the show or I am not . If the latter , then I should be pulled out . He comes here when the tide is on the turn and all is likely to be well . He cannot influence the local situation in any way , but he will get the kudos and it will be said , rather pityingly , that he came here to hold my hand and bolster me up . "

On 25 September , at MacArthur 's suggestion , Blamey flew to Milne Bay with Brigadier General Kenneth Walker and ordered Clowes to send a force by air to Wanigela . This would be an important step forward . Rowell , Kenney noted , was " not even consulted anymore " . Rowell was furious at Blamey bypassing him . Blamey reported back to Prime Minister Curtin that : On arrival here I informed General Rowell of my instructions from the Prime Minister and the CinC SWPA [ MacArthur ] . He proved most difficult and recalcitrant considering himself very unjustly used . I permitted him to state his case with great frankness . It was mainly statement of grievances primarily against myself because he had received only one decoration for war services in Middle East where certain other officers had received two . He charged me with having failed to safeguard his interests and he felt he was being made to eat dirt . All my persuasion could not make him see matters realistically . On second evening I asked General Burston as an old friend of Rowell to endeavour to induce a proper frame of mind but Burston met with no success .

Instead of setting out full information here for me I have to search out details and feel a definite atmosphere of obstruction . Urge that Herring be sent immediately by air as successor to Rowell . If Herring not approved , Mackay second choice but Herring much younger , this important in this climate . Re disposal of Rowell if you decide to continue his services he could replace Herring in command of II Corps but events here make me doubtful of wisdom of allocating disgruntled officer to this appointment . In this connection Morshead now cables that he would be glad to accept Stevens as second in command AIF in Middle East . Rowell competent to fill Darwin which is a major general 's command . II Corps command could be operated by senior division commander temporarily and by General Eichelberger with a mixed American and Australian staff .

On further consideration , Blamey decided that he might need Stevens , " a first rate fighter " , and that it would be better to send Rowell to the Middle East , although such a move would involve Rowell being reduced in rank to major general so as to be junior to Morshead . Rowell paid a visit to MacArthur in Brisbane on his way south . MacArthur was unimpressed . He told the Prime Minister that " Rowell 's attitude to a superior officer in a theatre of active operations was quite unpardonable " and hoped for Rowell 's sake that there would be no enquiry into the matter . MacArthur was dissatisfied with the way that Rowell had prosecuted the campaign in Papua , and was opposed to Rowell returning to New Guinea . Curtin granted Rowell an interview on 3 October . He explained to Rowell that Blamey had gone to New Guinea on his orders and had expressed the fullest confidence in his commanders in New Guinea . Not until the end of January did the Prime Minister finally decide to send Rowell to the Middle East , as a major general . By the time Rowell arrived in the Middle East , Morshead and most of the troops had departed . Rowell filed regular reports on the progress of the war in the Mediterranean , and processed Australian prisoners of war who had been liberated from the Italians . In December 1943 , Rowell took up the appointment as Director of Tactical Investigation at the War Office in London vice Lieutenant General Alfred Reade Godwin-Austen at the instigation of Richard Casey . Despite the important sounding title and a " high powered staff " , the job was a sinecure . When Blamey and Curtin visited London in May 1944 , Rowell was on his " best behaviour " . For his services at the War Office , Rowell was appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath in the 1946 New Year Honours .

In June 1949 , while Rowell was acting Chief of the General Staff , the country was rocked by the 1949 Australian coal strike . The strike began when stocks of coal were already low , especially in New South Wales and rationing was introduced . The Chifley government turned to the Army to get the troops to mine coal . This became possible when the transport unions agreed to transport coal that was mined . Rowell delegated responsibility for planning and organising the effort to Lieutenant General Berryman , while Rowell flew " top cover " , liaising with the government ministers in Sydney . Rowell managed to get the government to pay a bonus to soldiers mining coal , and persuaded the government to allow soldiers to have beer in their canteens , although the local civilians had none . Soldiers began mining at Muswellbrook and Lithgow on 1 August and by 15 August , when the strike ended , some 4,000 soldiers and airmen were employed . They continued work until production was fully restored .

Sturdee retired in April 1950 and Rowell became the first Duntroon graduate to become Chief of the General Staff , the post of Vice Chief disappearing for a generation . Within months , Australian troops would be committed to the Korean War . Rowell paid visits to Korea in 1952 and 1953 . He presided over the Korean War expansion of the Regular Army , the National Service Scheme , and the re-establishment of the women 's services . Rowell , as Chief of the General Staff , was Army 's chief mourner at Blamey 's funeral in 1951 , also serving as one of the pallbearers along with Frank Berryman , William Bridgeford , Edmund Herring , Iven Mackay , Leslie Morshead , John Northcott , Stanley Savige , Vernon Sturdee , and Henry Wells . For his services as Chief of the General Staff , Rowell was created a Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire in the Queen 's Birthday Honours in 1953 .

Rowell retired from the Army on 15 December 1954 , following a ceremony at Duntroon , where his career had begun over 43 years before . He turned to gardening , cricket , horse-racing , reading , and crossword puzzles . He became a director of Smith , Elder & Co. in 1954 and of the Commonwealth Aircraft Corporation in 1956 , serving as its chairman from 1957 to 1968 . From 1958 to 1968 he was chairman of the Australian Boy Scouts ' Association and a member of the Rhodes Scholarships Selection Committee for Victoria . He was offered but declined the post of Australian consul general in New York . In 1974 he published his memoirs , entitled Full Circle — the only Chief of the General Staff to have done so . Rowell died at his South Yarra home , twelve days before Lady Rowell , and was cremated . They were survived by their daughter . Sir Ivor Hele 's portrait of Rowell is held by the Australian War Memorial , as are his papers .

Tatuidris , or armadillo ant , is a rare genus of ants consisting of a single species , Tatuidris tatusia . The ants are small in size and inhabit the leaf litter of Neotropical forests in Central and South America , from Mexico to Brazil . Workers are ferruginous-colored to dark red and present a distinctive morphology , consisting of a shield-like head with a broad vertex , ventrally-turned heavy mandibles which do not overlap at full closure , and unique among ants – an antenna socket apparatus sitting upside-down . Little is known about the biology of the ants , but they are likely nocturnal and specialist predators . Tatuidris was first described in 1968 and initially placed in the myrmicine tribe Agroecomyrmecini , together with two fossil genera . Since the original description , the systematic status of the tribe has been the focus of debate .

Tatuidris tatusia is the only species in Tatuidris , a monotypic genus and one of only two extant genera in the subfamily Agroecomyrmecinae . A new species , T. kapasi , was described by Lacau & Groc in 2012 , but has now been relegated to a junior synonym under T. tatusia based on the extent of the morphological variability encountered throughout this broad geographic range . Analysis of DNA barcodes indicated a pattern of genetic isolation by distance , suggesting the presence of a single species undergoing allopatric differentiation . It was first described by Brown & Kempf in 1968 based on two workers collected in a Berlese sample of humus in El Salvador . Due to morphological similarities , they considered it a very primitive ant and placed it in what was then a myrmicine tribe , the Agroecomyrmecini , together with ants known from Early Eocene Baltic amber ( Agroecomyrmex ) and late Eocene Florissant shale ( Eulithomyrmex ) . It bears superficial resemblance to some extant genera ( Strumigenys , Ishakidris , Pilotrochus , and Phalacromyrmex ) but these similarities are considered to be due to convergent evolution . Due to similarities in the habitus , Brown & Kempf ( 1968 ) linked Tatuidris to the Dacetini genus Glamyromyrmex ( currently a junior synonym of Strumigenys ) and Phalacromyrmex . However they concluded : " analysis of these similarities indicates [ ... ] that they are mostly convergent and not based on close phylogenetic relationship " . Further work explored the similarities of Tatuidris with Ishakidris ( Bolton 1984 ) and Pilotrochus ( Brown 1977 ) . While these taxa share some characteristics , including an expanded head vertex , deep antennal scrobes and a compact mesosoma , the similarities were again deemed convergent .

Since the original description , the systematic status of the tribe has been the focus of debate . Bolton ( 2003 ) was the first to suggest the taxonomic instability of Tatuidris within Myrmicinae and raised the genus to the level of a new subfamily , the Agroecomyrmecinae , suggesting that Agroecomyrmecinae might be the sister taxon to Myrmicinae . The subfamily rank was re-assessed by Baroni Urbani & de Andrade in 2007 , this was the first attempt to include Tatuidris as a terminal taxon in a morphological cladistic analysis . In their study , Baroni Urbani & de Andrade identified morphological synapomorphies shared between Tatuidris and the dacetines , justifying the inclusion of the genus within Myrmicinae . In addition , two autapomorphies ( a differently shaped petiolar tergum and sternum , and the eyes at or close to the apex of the antennal scrobe ) separated Tatuidris from all other extant ant genera included in their study . Unlike phylogenetic studies based on morphological traits , molecular analyses of the internal phylogeny of the ants have given strong evidence that the armadillo ants are neither closely related to nor nested within the Myrmicinae . Brady et al . ( 2006 ) , Moreau et al . ( 2006 ) and Rabeling et al . ( 2008 ) reconstructed phylogenetic trees with the agroecomyrmecines inside the ' poneroid ' group of subfamilies , close to the Paraponerinae , and gave support for the exclusion of the genus from the Myrmicinae , a subfamily located inside the ' formicoid ' clade . Given the early appearance of the Agroecomyrmecinae in the geologic record , the similarities of armadillo ants to Myrmicinae were hypothesized to represent convergence and / or retention of plesiomorphic forms .

Tatuidris is rare but broadly distributed . The ants inhabit the leaf litter of Neotropical forests in Central and South America , from Mexico to French Guiana , central Brazil , and Amazonian Peru . No collections are known from the Caribbean , Galápagos , or other islands . Most specimens and collections are currently known to occur in localities west of the Andes , with more collections tending to occur towards Central America and Mexico . Most collections come from mountainside ( pre-montane ) areas at mid elevations ( usually 800 – 1200 meters of altitude ) . Collections from lowland Amazonia are few . Published records are few , but with the advent of litter sifting and Winkler extraction as a popular method of ant collecting , Tatuidris are not as rare as they used to seem . Although not very abundant , with frequent litter sifting they can be reliably found in Costa Rican wet forests .

Workers of Tatuidris present a distinctive morphology , consisting of a shield-like head with a broad vertex ( upper surface of the head ) , ventrally-turned heavy mandibles which do not overlap at full closure , deep antennal scrobes ( an impression that receives parts of the antenna ) with eyes at or close to their apex , compact and fused mesosoma , 7-segmented antenna , first gastral segment ventrally directed , and unique among ants – an antenna socket apparatus sitting upside-down on the roof of the expanded frontal lobe . The body of a worker is short and compact , ferruginous-colored to dark red , with thick and rigid integument ( external " skin " ) . The body is covered by hairs , which are variable in length and inclination . The head is pyriform ( pear-shaped ) , broadest behind , with small eyes . Queens are similar to workers , but yellow-colored and paler . Their wings are about 60 % longer than total body length . Males , also similar to workers ( except head ) , are darker and have wings about 50 % longer than the body . The eyes of the queens and males are larger than in workers .

Specimens of Tatuidris are small , about 3.5 millimeters ( 0.14 in ) in total length , but specimens can vary greatly in size , with larger specimens being twice as large as the smaller ones . Size variability within trap catches ( possibly same colonies ) may be considerable . For example , workers from one collection catch in Nicaragua varied 30 % in size . It is still unclear whether intra-colony size variation is due to the presence of morphological worker castes ( e.g. minor and major castes ) or continuous size variability . Principal component analysis ( PCA ) revealed that most variability among specimens is related to size , with shape explaining little of total variation .

Four pilosity patterns ( patterns of hair-like setae ) are known to occur within Tatuidris collections . Pilosity pattern A consists of a mix of both long flexuous and short appressed setae . This is the most common pilosity pattern and the one that most resembles the type specimens from El Salvador and the gyne from Otongachi , Ecuador . Pilosity pattern B is characterized by very short , fully appressed , and regular spaced setae arrayed homogeneously and equidistantly on the head , mesosoma , petiole , postpetiole and gaster . Pilosity pattern C is characterized by dense lanose-looking setae . Pilosity pattern D consists of short and uniform decumbent ( strongly inclined but not fully appressed ) setae scattered throughout the body .

The relative position of eyes is highly variable within the species . For example , eye location ranges from being completely within the antennal scrobes to completely outside the scrobes . In some cases the eye itself is located outside the antennal scrobe , but the eye 's fossa is well marked and confluent with the antennal scrobe . In most specimens , the antennal carina ( ridge extending along the dorsal antennal region ) bifurcates from the antennal scrobes and lies straight above the eyes . However , in specimens from Nicaragua , a strongly impressed antennal carina is present . In these specimens about 40 % of the eye 's area lies within the antennal scrobes . In the gyne , only ~ 1 / 6 of the eye lies within the antennal scrobes . A depression sometimes forms in the integument in the sides of the propodeum , below the propodeal spiracle and above the metapleural gland . The depth of this depression varies among specimens and tends to be deepest in larger specimens .

The biology is poorly known ; the male and female reproductive castes were described for the first time in 2012 . The genus is known mainly from isolated workers found in Winkler or Berlese samples . Tatuidris workers have peculiar mandibular brushes and a powerful sting , which led Brown & Kempf to speculate that Tatuidris might be specialist predators of active or slippery arthropod prey . Until 2011 , no observations of live specimens were registered . Details of a first collection event of a small live colony ( 3 workers and 4 gynes ) by Thibaut Delsinne in a mid-elevation forest in southeastern Ecuador suggest that Tatuidris may well be a highly specialized predator , as colonies kept in captivity did not accept any food item offered to them . Food items rejected by the ants included live and dead termites , millipedes , mites , various insect parts , sugar water , tuna , biscuits , live and dead fruit flies ( Drosophila ) , live springtails , live myriapods ( Chilopoda and Diplopoda ) , live and dead Diplura , small live spiders , small live pseudoscorpions , one small snail , uncooked hen egg ( i.e. piece of cotton wool soaked with fresh whisked hen egg ) , ant larvae ( Gnamptogenys sp . ) , and live ant workers ( Cyphomyrmex sp . , Brachymyrmex sp . ) . Potential food items ( arthropods ) for Tatuidris were taken from soil samples and Winkler samples collected at the site where Tatuidris was a priori determined to be present .

Further observations suggest that Tatuidris may be a sit-and-wait predator . Delsinne observed that " both workers and gynes moved very slowly and were very clumsy . They often remained motionless during several tens of seconds or even several minutes when disturbed ( either by my handling or by the contact with another arthropod ) . " These observations were mainly performed at night , suggesting that Tatuidris may be nocturnal , a hypothesis also supported by collection patterns . For example , in the Río Toachi forest of Ecuador Tatuidris specimens tend to fall in pitfall traps , instead of Winkler sacs . Because pitfall traps usually work 24-h , but Winkler sacs generally uses litter sifted during the day , then ants with nocturnal habits may be underrepresented in Winkler samples . The small eyes of Tatudris species provide further support for this hypothesis .

" Go , Stewie , Go ! " is the 13th episode of the eighth season of the animated comedy series Family Guy . It originally aired on Fox in the United States on March 14 , 2010 . The episode features Stewie after he auditions , cross-dressed under the pseudonym Karina Smirnoff , for a female role in the American version of Jolly Farm Revue , and eventually ends up falling in love with a female co-star on the show . Meanwhile , Lois finds herself attracted to Meg 's surprisingly normal boyfriend , once Peter causes her to realize her advancing age . The episode was written by Gary Janetti and directed by Greg Colton . It received mixed reviews from critics for its storyline and many cultural references , in addition to receiving criticism from the Parents Television Council . According to Nielsen ratings , it was viewed in 6.72 million homes in its original airing . The episode featured guest performances by Stephen Bishop , Mo Collins , Colin Ford , Lucas Grabeel , Anne Hathaway , Nana Visitor and Mae Whitman , along with several recurring guest voice actors for the series . " Go , Stewie , Go ! " was released on DVD along with ten other episodes from the season on December 13 , 2011 .

Brian , walking in drunk , notices that Stewie has resumed watching Jolly Farm Revue , after previously swearing off the show in " Road to Europe " . Remembering a story he had seen in the local newspaper , Brian tells Stewie about upcoming auditions for an American version of the show . Jumping at the opportunity , the two show up to the auditions , but quickly learn that there is only one female role remaining . Determined to win a spot on the show , Stewie decides to cross-dress as a woman , naming his new identity " Karina Smirnoff " . Beginning his audition , he starts by telling a completely fabricated story . Convincing the producers that he is telling a true tale , he wins the role . The next morning , on the first day of filming , Stewie as Karina introduces himself to the rest of the cast , and quickly falls in love with a female co-star named Julie . Another co-star , Randall , objects to the new role that Karina was cast to play , and takes Julie away from him to prevent their friendship . As they continue shooting , however , the two develop a friendly relationship , eventually deciding to hold a sleepover , where they become even closer . The next day , Julie professes her love for Karina by wishing that she was actually a boy , causing Stewie , as Karina , to come on to her . Julie insists that she is not a lesbian , so Stewie decides to unveil his true identity to the entire cast during a live taping of the show . Shocked that Karina was actually a boy , Julie 's mother refuses to let her speak to him , with Stewie left to regret his decision to come out as a cross-dresser , and decides to go get ice cream with Brian , as he can no longer wear that dress .

Meanwhile , Peter begins to insult Lois about her advancing age , including her minor strands of gray hair . This makes her extremely self-conscious , and soon Lois becomes aware of her lust for a younger man . After introducing her new boyfriend , Anthony , to the family , Meg goes on to make out with him on the family couch , with Lois watching over nearby . Jealous of her daughter 's new-found love , she begins hitting on Anthony . Later that day , Lois sends Meg to pick up her grandfather , leaving her all alone with Anthony . The two then begin making out on the couch , but Meg returns to the house only a few moments later and discovers them . Angry at her mother for ruining her chance at having a normal boyfriend , Meg threatens Lois to lay off of him , pulling out one of her own teeth in frustration . Lois quickly agrees , but is still angry with Peter for continually insulting her . She confronts him about this , and he admits that he was actually embarrassed about his own advancing age , as well as his lack of fitness , and was only insulting Lois in order to distract her from the fact that she could be with a much better-looking man . He apologizes for his behavior , and Lois forgives him .

The episode was written by returning writer Gary Janetti , his first episode since the fourth season episode " Stewie B. Goode " . In addition , the episode was directed by series regular Greg Colton , before the conclusion of the seventh production season . The episode was Colton 's second for the season , the first being the season premiere , " Road to the Multiverse " , which received high praise from critics . The episode saw the third re-appearance , the first being an equally brief appearance in " Spies Reminiscent of Us " and the second in " Road to the Multiverse " , by former main cast member Mike Henry as the voice of Cleveland Brown . The actor had previously left the role on Family Guy , in order to star as the character in his own spin-off , entitled The Cleveland Show . " Go , Stewie , Go ! " , along with the eleven other episodes from Family Guy 's eighth season , was released on a three-disc DVD set in the United States on December 13 , 2011 . The sets include brief audio commentaries by various crew and cast members for several episodes , a collection of deleted scenes and animatics , a special mini-feature which discussed the process behind animating " And Then There Were Fewer " , a mini-feature entitled " The Comical Adventures of Family Guy – Brian & Stewie : The Lost Phone Call " , and footage of the Family Guy panel at the 2010 San Diego Comic-Con International .

In addition to the regular cast , musician Stephen Bishop rerecorded his single " It Might Be You " , actress Mo Collins appeared as a little girl , voice actor Colin Ford appeared briefly as Randall , actress Anne Hathaway appeared as Mother Maggie , actor Lucas Grabeel appeared as Meg 's new boyfriend Anthony , voice actress Nana Visitor appeared briefly as the audition caller and voice actress Mae Whitman appeared as Julie . Recurring guest voice actors Ralph Garman , writer Gary Janetti , writer Danny Smith , writer Alec Sulkin , actress Jennifer Tilly and writer John Viener also made minor appearances .

Although never specifically referenced or mentioned in the episode itself , Stewie 's alter-ego is named after well-known ballroom dancer Karina Smirnoff , who had previously danced professionally on the American television reality show Dancing with the Stars . Most of the storyline following Stewie is a homage of the 1982 film Tootsie . The episode 's title is also a reference to the song " Go , Tootsie , Go " played during the photo-shoot montage in the film . A similar scene featuring the song was slightly modified , replacing " Tootsie " with " Stewie , " in the lyrics to the song . Another song from the film , " It Might Be You " by Stephen Bishop , is played during the closing credit sequence . As Stewie and Brian watch a recorded episode of Jolly Farm Revue , Stewie notes the introduction of several new characters to the show . The television screen is then shown , as Karina reveals the characters to his co-star , Julie . The new characters include parodies of the Sesame Street characters Big Bird , who describes himself as a " big bird , " and a self-described " grouch " named " Moody Green Garbage Creature " , who resembles Oscar the Grouch , and butch and femme versions of Bert and Ernie , who try to protect Karina and Julie from Oscar .

After sending Meg out on an errand to pick up her grandfather , Lois continues to seduce Anthony , having been interested in him since Peter had begun insulting her about her advancing age . Quickly returning after forgetting the car keys , Meg discovers her mother making out with her new boyfriend on the couch . The bass jingle used extensively in the long-running NBC sitcom Seinfeld is then heard , with the scene pausing , before transitioning to the Jolly Farm studio . In a surprise visit to the Griffin family home , Julie unexpectedly appears when Stewie opens the front door . Expecting Julie to recognize him , he forgets that he is not dressed as Karina , causing him to hurriedly change clothing , while pretending to have an argument with his fabricated persona . A similar scene is featured in the 1993 film Mrs. Doubtfire , starring actor Robin Williams . Stewie and Jolly Farm make a reference to Pan Am Flight 103 , a Boeing 747 – 100 destroyed by a terrorist bomb over Lockerbie , Scotland , killing all 259 occupants . Large portions of the plane fell onto Lockerbie , which killed 11 people , escalating the death toll to 270 . A song features on Jolly Farm that explicitly describes debris from the newly disintegrated plane falling into Lockerbie , sung in the fashion of that of a nursery rhyme .

In an improvement over the previous two episodes , the episode was viewed in 6.72 million homes in its original airing , according to Nielsen ratings . The episode also acquired a 3.5 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , beating The Simpsons , as well as the series premiere of Sons of Tucson , in addition to significantly edging out both shows in total viewership . Reviews of the episode were mixed , calling the storyline a " [ good source of ] material in the long-running dysfunctional yet affectionate relationship between Brian and Stewie , " while criticizing its multiple cultural references . Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club called the episode a " pleasant surprise , " enjoying Stewie 's storyline , while criticizing the subplot between Lois and Meg . Ramsey Isler of IGN was much more critical of the episode , however , saying that " while there [ were ] a couple of funny moments , there are more misses than hits , " giving the episode a 6 out of 10 . In a subsequent review of Family Guy 's eighth season , Isler listed " Go , Stewie , Go ! " as being " full of the lowest of the lowest-common-denominator " jokes " , with heavy reliance on toilet humor and the characteristic cutaway gags that have steadily gotten more random and less funny . " In contrast , Jason Hughes of TV Squad praised the episode , saying that it " [ offered ] an emotional glimpse into the characters . "

Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) decides to motivate and inspire everyone by taking them on a field trip to Gettysburg . At Gettysburg , Andy is unhappy with the lack of morale and belief in his leadership and attempts to make an analogy between running a paper company and fighting in the Civil War . Andy starts to lead a haphazard tour , and eventually most of the office members sit down to rest . Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) and Darryl Philbin ( Craig Robinson ) follow Andy after he presses on , and eventually tell him to stop trying to impress the office . They reinforce the fact that his co-workers like him the way he is . During the tour , Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) argues with Oscar Martinez ( Oscar Nunez ) about what he claims is the northernmost battle of the Civil War : the Battle of Schrute Farms . Dwight maintains that its absence from the history books is an example of re-writing history , whereas Oscar maintains that the battle is a fictitious creation . After tracking down a historian , Dwight and Oscar learn that the Battle of Schrute Farms did in fact take place . However , the " battle " was really a code term . During the Civil War , Schrute Farms was a safe haven for artists and poets ( and , as heavily implied , homosexuals ) . Oscar finds this fascinating , whereas Dwight leaves in disgust . Meanwhile , Gabe Lewis ( Zach Woods ) is sidetracked by another tour group who assume that he is an Abraham Lincoln impersonator . He acquiesces and delivers an improvised but applauded performance .

Meanwhile , at the office , half of the office opts to stay behind . Robert California ( James Spader ) makes a spontaneous visit and asks them to come up with Dunder Mifflin / Sabre 's next big idea . However , the office fails to impress Robert with their ideas . Kevin Malone ( Brian Baumgartner ) details an idea he has about cookie placement in the vending machine , but Robert gets the impression that he is extremely clever and is speaking only in metaphors . Ryan Howard ( B. J. Novak ) , who has been annoyed the entire day with Kevin being creative and Robert rejecting his ideas , later tricks Kevin into explaining an idea he has involving the Big Mac , and Robert realizes that there was no subtext to Kevin 's ideas .

The episode was written by story editor Robert Padnick , his second writing credit for the series after joining the writing staff the previous season . It was directed by frequent director of The Office , Jeffrey Blitz . The episode also marks the second appearance of Lindsey Broad , who plays Cathy , Pam 's replacement during her maternity leave . She appeared in a recurring role for the season . Due to Jenna Fischer 's actual pregnancy , " Gettysburg " would be the last episode of 2011 to feature Pam . The episode was not filmed on location in Gettysburg , Pennsylvania . The A.V. Club reviewer Myles McNutt noted that the writers ' used Andy 's " overeager qualities " to have the office group skip the official tour , allowing for " some random California heritage site " to stand in for the real Gettysburg . The Season Eight DVD contains a number of deleted scenes from this episode . Notable cut scenes include Andy preparing the office to go to Gettysburg , and Kevin discussing his new-found approval by California .

" Gettysburg " received mixed reviews from critics , ranging from negative to slightly positive . Hollywood writer Hannah Lawrence was heavily critical of the episode and wrote , " This episode seemed like a joke to me . I really didn 't like it . " What Culture ! reviewer Joseph Kratzer gave the episode three out of five stars and wrote , " While the episode was technically satisfactory , it didn 't carry much momentum . " McNutt referred to the " Battle of Schrute Farms " gag as a " payoff , " but was overall negative . He concluded that although " The Office is still capable of finding humor in [ ... ] situations [ but ] it doesn 't feel like the show is willing to explore that humor , instead content on making the same statements the show has been making for quite some time . " He ultimately gave it a " C – " . Not all reviews were negative . IGN writer Cindy White awarded the episode 7 out of 10 , signifying a " good " episode . However , she heavily criticized the recycling of story lines , writing , " It may have been heartwarming in the premiere , but now it feels repetitive , and it 's still not funny . " M. Giant of Television without Pity gave the episode a " B – " . Chris Plante from New York wrote a generally positively review , saying " No episode has done the ensemble work better than “ Gettysburg , ” a kind of sitcom buffet , its many stories giving the audience a small taste of every personality . That isn 't to say every character has been fleshed out well . [ ... ] Andy and California seem off point . "

The John Deere House and Shop is located in the unincorporated village of Grand Detour , Illinois , near the Lee County city of Dixon . The site is known as the location where the first steel plow was invented by John Deere in 1837 . The site includes Deere 's house , a replica of his original blacksmith shop , a gift shop , and an archaeological exhibit showing the excavation site of his original blacksmith shop . The Deere House and Shop is listed on the National Register of Historic Places ; it joined that list in 1966 , the year the Register was established . Prior to that , it was designated a National Historic Landmark on July 19 , 1964 .

In 1836 , native Vermonter John Deere set out from Rutland , Vermont to Grand Detour , Illinois , founded by his friend and fellow Vermont native Leonard Andrus . The town lacked a local blacksmith , Deere 's trade , and within two days Deere had a forge and new business established . In Vermont , Deere produced plows made from cast-iron and when he first arrived in Illinois he produced the same plows . Soil conditions in Illinois differ from those in Vermont . In Vermont the soil is sandy and falls easily away from the plow blade but in Illinois the soil is thicker and wetter ; it stuck to the plow and had to be scraped off by the farmer as he plowed . There are varying tales as to the inspiration for Deere to create the invention he is famed for , the steel plow . In one version he recalled the way the polished steel pitchfork tines moved through hay and soil and thought that the same effect could be obtained for a plow . By early 1838 , Deere completed his first steel plow and sold it to a local farmer , Lewis Crandall . Crandall spread word of his success with Deere 's plow quickly , and two neighbors soon placed orders with Deere . By 1841 he was manufacturing 75 plows per year , and 100 plows per year in 1876 .

The John Deere Historic Site in Grand Detour , Illinois is operated by the John Deere Company and has five components . Outside of the perimeter , which is surrounded by a white , wooden fence , are 2 acres ( 0.81 ha ) of prairie restoration . Inside of the fenced area is the replica blacksmith shop , the John Deere House and the visitor 's center which is a gift shop . Also on the grounds is a building which houses the 1960s archaeological dig site . The blacksmith shop is a replica of the original Deere Shop , unearthed during the 1960s dig . The shop recreates Deere 's shop and includes a demonstration by a modern blacksmith using antique tools of the trade and an open furnace . The visitor 's center is inside an 1843 home built by a Deere neighbor , it houses a gift shop which has an original Deere family wall clock on display . The home was originally owned by William Dana . The house is furnished with period items as well as the gift shop 's merchandise . The entire site is operated by John Deere Company employees . Part of the John Deere Historic Site is listed on the National Register of Historic Places along with being designated a National Historic Landmark . The only contributing property on the National Register listing for the site is the John Deere House . The house is also the only " property type " listed on the National Historic Landmarks ' online database entry for the site . The house obtained National Historic Landmark status on July 19 , 1964 and was added to the National Register of Historic Places soon after its inception on October 15 , 1966 .

The John Deere House was built in 1836 when Deere arrived in Grand Detour and the building was added onto as his family grew . It is furnished with period furniture and household objects that would have been common around the time the Deere family occupied the home . The house has two levels with four rooms on the main level and two rooms upstairs . Each of the upstairs rooms is accessible via a private staircase and it is believed one of the rooms was used by Deere 's apprentices while the other was used as a children 's bedroom . The front entry leads into the living room where polished wood is found throughout as well as 19th century furnishings . The front room is part of the original building which consisted of one room . The room acted as the Deere 's kitchen , living room , bedrooms , essentially everything . Deere eventually added onto the house , including a bedroom and an upstairs loft . The first floor bedroom would have been used for John and his wife , and possibly a couple of the children while the upstairs room would was used for the rest of the children . The Deeres left the home in 1847 when they moved to Moline , Illinois .

The original blacksmith shop on the site is long gone , however , in 1962 an archaeological team made of students from the University of Illinois approached the Deere Company about excavating the site where the shop once stood . The team unearthed the location of the original Deere Blacksmith Shop where the first successful steel plow was developed in 1837 . The dig site is preserved beneath a building , known as the pavilion . The site is surrounded by museum exhibits which include artifacts , news clippings , and photographs . A blacksmith shop does occupy the current John Deere Historic Site grounds . Archaeologists used a magnetometer to locate the position of the forge in the original blacksmith shop , thus , the current shop shares an interior which is an exact replica of the original . The exterior of the building has the same dimensions as the original as well .

The John Deere House and Shop is historically significant for its influence in the areas of commerce , agriculture , industry , and invention . The site was designated a U.S. National Historic Landmark on July 19 , 1964 . The Landmark designation was assigned by the U.S. Department of Interior because of the House and Shop 's association with John Deere , founder of the John Deere Company and inventor of the first steel plow . His invention was of significance to the entire United States and made large scale cultivation of areas in Illinois , Indiana and Ohio possible . When the U.S. National Register of Historic Places was established in 1966 the John Deere House and Shop was among the first properties to join that list . It was added to the National Register on October 15 , 1966 , the same day the National Register was established .

Polygon is an American video game website that publishes news , culture , reviews , and videos . It launched as Vox Media 's third property on October 24 , 2012 . The site was built over the course of ten months , and its 16-person founding staff included the editors-in-chief of the gaming sites Joystiq , Kotaku and The Escapist . Vox produced a documentary series about the founding of the site . The site sought to distinguish itself from competitors by focusing on the stories of the people behind the games instead of the games themselves . They also produced long-form magazine-style feature articles , invested in video content , and chose to allow their review scores to be updated as the game changed . The site was built to HTML5 responsive standards with a pink color scheme , and their advertisements focused on direct sponsorship of specific kinds of content .

The gaming blog Polygon was launched on October 24 , 2012 , as Vox Media 's third property . The site grew from technology blog The Verge , which was launched a year earlier as an outgrowth of sports blog network SB Nation before the Vox Media was formed . Vox Media CEO Jim Bankoff approached Joystiq editor-in-chief Christopher Grant in early 2011 about starting a video game website . Bankoff considered video games to be a logical vertical market for Vox , whose sites attracted an 18- to 49-year-old demographic . He also saw games to be an expanding market in consideration of mobile and social network game categories . Forbes described Bankoff 's offer as a " serious commitment to online journalism " in an age of content farms and disappearing print publications , but Grant did not trust the offer and declined . Upon seeing the effort that Vox put into The Verge , their Chorus content management system , and the quality of their content and sponsorships , Grant changed his mind and returned to pitch Bankoff . Grant wanted the new site to compete with top gaming websites GameSpot and IGN , but still be able to run longform " magazine-style journalism " that could be of historic interest . As part of the site 's attempt to " redefine games journalism " , Vox made a 13-part documentary series of the site 's creation ( " Press Reset " ) that tracked the site 's creation from start to launch .

Forbes described Polygon 's original 16-person staff as " star-studded " for including the editors-in-chief from three competing video game blogs . Grant left Joystiq in January 2012 and brought the editors-in-chief of Kotaku and The Escapist , Brian Crecente and Russ Pits . Other staff included Joystiq managing editor Justin McElroy and staff from UGO , IGN , MTV , Videogamer.com , and 1UP.com. Ben Kuchera joined the site after The Penny Arcade Report closed in November 2013 . The team works remotely from places including Philadelphia , New York , West Virginia , San Francisco , Sydney , London , and Austin , though Vox Media is headquartered in Washington , D.C. The site was developed over the course of ten months , where the staff chose the site 's name and set standards for their reporting and review score scale . Polygon staff published on The Verge as " Vox Games " beginning in February 2012 and ending with their October launch . The site 's name was announced at a PAX East panel in April . It refers to a polygon — " the basic visual building block of video games " . In March 2016 , editors from Polygon and SB Nation launched a new Vox Media venture , The Rift Herald , which covers League of Legends esports .

Polygon publishes video game news , entertainment , reviews , and video . They sought to set their content apart from other games journalism outlets by focusing on the people making and playing the games rather than the games alone . At the site 's outset , Polygon planned to run multiple longform feature articles weekly , which they intended to be comparable in intent to the cover stories of magazines . They also decided to allow their game review scores to be updated as the games were updated , so as to more adequately reflect games that had changed with downloadable content and updates since their original release . The site received criticism for its comparatively low review score given to The Last of Us , which was later increased with the game 's remastered edition . In consideration of games that may differ in quality before and after release , Polygon later began to mark pre-release reviews as " provisional " to defer final scoring until after their public release . After raising money in a second round of funding in late 2013 , Vox announced that they would be investing further in the site 's video product , such that it " feels as much like TV programming as magazine publishing " . The site announced in June 2014 that features editor Russ Pitts would be leaving Polygon along with their video director and video designer as the site planned to run fewer feature articles in the future . Polygon 's Minimap podcast was named among iTunes 's best of 2015 .

The site uses a " direct content sponsorship " model of online advertising used by SB Nation and The Verge . For example , a video series sponsorship pairs brands with specific editorial content . Forbes wrote that Vox 's avoidance of content farm and news aggregator tactics , and interest shown in building communities is desirable to " magazine-quality advertisers " . The site pitched its longform journalism to advertisers as an indicator of high-quality content . The site 's founding sponsors included Geico , Sony , and Unilever . As of June 2014 , Polygon ranks fourth among games sites by Comscore web traffic data : behind IGN , GameSpot , and Kotaku . The same month , Grant reported that the previous month had been their most highly popular .

The Hogwarts Express is an 1,800 mm ( 5 ft 10 7 ⁄ 8 in ) broad gauge funicular railway , people mover , and attraction within the Universal Orlando Resort in Orlando , Florida , United States . The route runs 676 metres ( 2,218 ft ) between Hogsmeade station in the Islands of Adventure theme park and King 's Cross station in the London area of the Universal Studios Florida theme park . It provides a connection between the Diagon Alley and Hogsmeade areas which together form The Wizarding World of Harry Potter themed area , based on the Harry Potter film series . The attraction , which was manufactured by the Doppelmayr Garaventa Group , is operated with two replicas of the Hogwarts Express . The two directions of travel provide two different experiences . Because the trains transport guests between stations in two separate theme parks , riders must have an admission pass valid for both theme parks , with ticket inspectors checking prior to boarding . The Hogwarts Express soft-opened to the public on 1 July 2014 before officially opening seven days later along with the rest of the Diagon Alley expansion on 8 July 2014 . Within one month of its opening , one million riders had travelled on the trains .

The idea of creating a Hogwarts Express-related attraction came from Mark Woodbury , the president of Universal Creative . After the opening of the Hogsmeade attraction at the Islands of Adventure theme park in 2010 , Universal began considering how to keep attendance balanced between the adjacent parks . At first , the creative team considered putting Diagon Alley within Islands of Adventure . Eventually they decided that the London and Hogsmeade environments should not be visible between one another . As a result , Woodbury proposed building Diagon Alley in Universal Studios Florida and then connecting the two Harry Potter-themed lands with the Hogwarts Express train . Rumours that Universal Orlando was planning to expand The Wizarding World of Harry Potter began in early 2011 after construction surveying was spotted in the Lost Continent section of Islands of Adventure and the resort began asking visitors about a possible expansion . On 2 December 2011 , the resort announced the Jaws attraction would close on 2 January 2012 to make way for a future attraction . In the same month , speculation arose that an expansion would include the Hogwarts Express to connect Hogsmeade in Islands of Adventure and Diagon Alley in Universal Studios Florida . In June 2012 , theme park enthusiasts discovered that applications for permits had been submitted to the South Florida Water Management District and the City of Orlando suggesting that the resort was planning to build a track connecting the two theme parks , as well as one station building in each park . Almost a year later , WESH , a local news channel , reported that an elevated track system had been installed at Universal Orlando and that the track ran between Hogsmeade in Islands of Adventure and a construction area in Universal Studios Florida ; suggesting the rumours were true .

On 8 May 2013 , Universal Orlando announced the expansion of Wizarding World of Harry Potter , Diagon Alley , along with the Hogwarts Express attraction , to be located on the former site of the Jaws attraction . By the end of August 2013 , all six passenger cars and both tenders had been spotted in the backstage area , waiting to be assembled on the track . The first of the two trains was installed on the track on 24 October 2013 . By the beginning of December 2013 , the second train had been placed on the track . In January , the resort previewed the interior of the Hogwarts Express through a live cast . On 2 December 2013 , Orlando Attractions Magazine , an amusement park website , spotted one of the trains being tested for the first time . In mid-March 2014 , Universal Orlando Resort released further information about the ride , including concept animations . On 24 June 2014 , the resort announced that the Diagon Alley expansion , including the Hogwarts Express , would officially open to the public on 8 July 2014 . A week later , Universal Orlando soft-opened the Hogwarts Express , without any announcement . Within a month of the Hogwarts Express ' opening , one million riders had ridden the attraction . It had taken approximately two and a half years to develop .

At the entrance of the queue , ticket inspectors check passengers ' tickets for Universal Studios . The queue then leads into a forested area which later leads into the Hogsmeade station building . Upon climbing a flight of steps , travellers reach the Hogsmeade station platform . Once the arriving passengers on the Hogwarts Express have left the platform , passengers waiting may then board the train and enter one of the twenty-one passenger compartments within the train . As the train departs towards King 's Cross , Rubeus Hagrid waves riders goodbye outside of the window . Shadows of Harry Potter , Ron Weasley , and Hermione Granger can also been seen walking down the train corridor , looking for an empty compartment . Following this , Buckbeak flies outside the window , while Hogwarts can be seen in the background . Shortly after , the train enters a forest where centaurs are running . Upon exiting the forest , Hogwarts can be seen once again in the background . Fred and George Weasley appear , flying broomsticks and playing with fireworks . The Hogwarts Express then enters a tunnel , after which riders find themselves in the middle of a storm and pass Malfoy Manor . The journey then enters a second tunnel ; Harry , Ron , and Hermione appear again in the train corridor . As a spider crawls up the compartment door , Ron eats it and the trio continue to walk on down the corridor . After the tunnel the journey continues into London passing by an industrial factory and then a residential area . The Knight Bus then appears ; squeezing between buildings and shrinking to pass under a bridge . As the bus drives away , the train enters King 's Cross station , where Alastor Moody greets passengers .

The King 's Cross station part of the attraction is built on a site that previously held the Jaws attraction . The entrance to the station , which is a quarter-scale replica of the real London King 's Cross railway station , is located in the London area , close to Diagon Alley . Passengers enter the station building and have their admission ticket checked . They then enter a queue which takes them farther into the station building , under a split-flap department board , and past London-related advertisements , several stacks of suitcases and a shop selling food . After ascending a flight of stairs , passengers find themselves between signs for King 's Cross Platform 9 and Platform 10 . They can see those ahead of them walking through the " wall " forming the entrance to Platform 9 ¾ . This effect uses the Pepper 's ghost illusion . After continuing around several corners , guests arrive on Platform 9 ¾ itself to wait for the next train to arrive . After the Hogwarts Express has reversed into Platform 9 ¾ and the arriving passengers have disembarked , the next passengers enter one of the twenty-one compartments in the three passenger carriages .

As the train departs King 's Cross , Hedwig the owl flies alongside while passing through the outskirts of London . Hedwig flies away and Dementors arrive from over the nearby buildings . At the same time Harry , Ron , and Hermione pass along the corridor side of the carriage looking for food . The journey enters a tunnel ; upon its exit , it passes by Malfoy Manor during a stormy night . Next , the train passes through a second tunnel and the lights in the compartments go out as a Dementor enters the train and passes along the corridor ; Harry Potter uses his magic to defeat the Dementor . After exiting the tunnel , riders are greeted by Hagrid flying on a motorbike with Hogwarts in the background . As the train enters a forest , the flying Ford Anglia appears and starts driving through the terrain . The car crashes soon after and the train leaves the forest , passing by Hogwarts once again before arriving at Hogsmeade Station with Hagrid greeting passengers . Passengers then disembark the train , walk down a ramp past the front of the Hogwarts Express and follow a path leading to Hogsmeade .

The track of the Hogwarts Express is a single-track funicular elevated railway running over the backlot between the two theme parks , with a two-track passing loop at the midpoint . It is 676 metres ( 2,218 ft ) long and has a track gauge of 1,800 mm ( 5 ft 10 7 ⁄ 8 in ) . On the track , there is a haul rope and a counter rope , each with a diameter of 46 millimetres ( 1.8 in ) . The cable winding motor is located at King 's Cross station and has a rated load of 215 kilowatts ( 300 hp ) and a peak power rating of 636 kilowatts ( 900 hp ) .

The Hogwarts Express uses two trains that can transport 168 passengers each , giving a total of 336 passengers per cycle . Each train is an articulated cable car formed of five sections : a replica of steam-locomotive and its tender plus a set of three passenger vehicles . Originally each train was planned to have only two passenger carriages — this was increased following a survey that suggested potential passengers saw the connecting Hogwarts Express as an attraction instead of only as a means of transportation between the parks . The locomotive on the 70-metre-long ( 230 ft ) trains weigh 13 tonnes ( 29,000 lb ) , the tenders weigh 15 tonnes ( 33,000 lb ) , and each passenger carriage weighs 27 tonnes ( 60,000 lb ) . Since the attraction is set up with a funicular track system , both trains depart and arrive at the end stations at the same time and travel at the same speed of 3.4 metres per second ( 12 km / h ; 7.6 mph ) . On both trains , the locomotive faces towards Hogsmeade station ; it is not possible for the trains to face Kings Cross . The Hogwarts Express enters King 's Cross in reverse but forwards at Hogsmeade ; the train departs Kings Cross forwards and in reverse at Hogsmeade . As a result , the trains are only designed to be seen from one side as the locomotives ' false driving wheels and specific detailing only exist on one side .

The trains were built in Goldau , Switzerland . CWA Constructions designed both the exterior and interior of the trains to make them look as faithful as possible to the Hogwarts Express seen in the Harry Potter film franchise . They are based on the steam locomotive GWR 4900 Class 5972 Olton Hall ( as 5972 Hogwarts Castle ) and were built from aluminum and glass-reinforced plastics . Afterwards , an artificial weathering process was applied to give the appearance of a historic train . Frey AG was responsible for wiring the trains ; specifically for the video and sounds components . The company also installed other technical equipment that allow the trains to be controlled by a computer system .

The ride received mostly positive reviews upon its July 2014 opening . Lance Hart from Screamscape was impressed with the fact that the King 's Cross entrance was hidden from the rest of the Diagon Alley area . He also credited Universal for making the train look as realistic as possible : " Clearly they went to great lengths to create these cars to be replicas of what you see in the films , both on the outside as well as on the inside as you move down the hallway towards your cabin to take your seat " . In terms of the overall experience Hart said , " Universal has managed to turn what would simply be a method of transporting guests between their two parks into yet another must-see attraction ... tying together the overall story and theme of visiting Hogwarts at Islands of Adventure and Diagon Alley inside Universal Studios Florida " . Robert Niles from Theme Park Insider mentioned how the attraction " broke walls " ; including the separation of the Wizarding and Muggle worlds , how Universal made the audience the performers ( in the part of the King 's Cross queue where guests walk through the wall leading to Platform 9 ¾ ) , and how , " It 's become convention for theme park attractions to drop you off at or very near the same point where you boarded the ride , so it 's a bit disorienting when you exit the Hogwarts Express and find that you 're not only in a different train station — you 're in a different theme park . "

Arthur Levine from About.com was disappointed that Universal had not tried to re-create the magical aspect of guests entering Platform 9 ¾ , " When it 's time to make their own way to the platform , however , it appears to would-be wizards that they are merely entering a darkened corridor . Aside from an audible " whoosh " sound , there is , regrettably , no attempt to reproduce the magical , molecule-shifting phenomenon " . He also found it awkward that the Hogwarts Express reverses into Platform 9 ¾ at King 's Cross — although in Hogsmeade the train arrives facing forwards . Overall Levine said that the attraction does more than just making it a ride , " By making it an integral and compelling part of The Wizarding World , most guests would want to ride it to get the complete Potter experience . By making it an inter-park ride and requiring a two-park ticket to board it , Universal will surely help up-sell a lot more more customers to higher-priced passes , encourage multi-day visits , increase demand for its on-property hotels , and drive business at its CityWalk dining / shopping / entertainment district " .

The 509th Composite Group ( 509 CG ) was a unit of the United States Army Air Forces created during World War II and tasked with the operational deployment of nuclear weapons . It conducted the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki , Japan , in August 1945 . The group was activated on 17 December 1944 at Wendover Army Air Field , Utah . It was commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Paul W. Tibbets . Because it contained flying squadrons equipped with Boeing B-29 Superfortress bombers and C-47 Skytrain and C-54 Skymaster transport aircraft , the group was designated as a " composite " rather than a " bombardment " formation . It operated Silverplate B-29s , which were specially configured to enable them to carry nuclear weapons . The 509th Composite Group began deploying to North Field on Tinian , Northern Mariana Islands , in May 1945 . In addition to the two nuclear bombing raids , it carried out 15 practice missions against Japanese-held islands , and 12 combat missions against targets in Japan dropping high-explosive pumpkin bombs . In the postwar era , the 509th Composite Group was one of the original ten bombardment groups assigned to Strategic Air Command on 21 March 1946 and the only one equipped with Silverplate B-29 Superfortress aircraft capable of delivering atomic bombs . It was standardized as a bombardment group and redesignated the 509th Bombardment Group , Very Heavy , on 10 July 1946 .

The 509th Composite Group was constituted on 9 December 1944 , and activated on 17 December 1944 , at Wendover Army Air Field , Utah . It was commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Paul W. Tibbets , who received promotion to full colonel in January 1945 . It was initially assumed that the group would divide in two , with half going to Europe and half to the Pacific . In the first week of September Tibbets was assigned to organize a combat group to develop the means of delivering an atomic weapon by airplane against targets in Germany and Japan , then command it in combat . Because the organization developed by Tibbets was self-sustained , with flying squadrons of both Boeing B-29 Superfortress bombers and transport aircraft , the group was designated as a " composite " rather than a " bombardment " unit . On 8 September , working with Major General Leslie R. Groves , Jr . ' s Manhattan Project , Tibbets selected Wendover for his training base over Great Bend Army Air Field , Kansas , and Mountain Home Army Airfield , Idaho , because of its remoteness . On 14 September 1944 , the 393d Bombardment Squadron arrived at Wendover from its former base at Fairmont Army Air Base , Nebraska , where it had been in operational training ( OTU ) with the 504th Bombardment Group since 12 March . When its parent group deployed to the Marianas in early November 1944 , the squadron was assigned directly to the Second Air Force until creation of the 509th Composite Group . Originally consisting of twenty-one crews , fifteen were selected to continue training , and were organized into three flights of five crews , lettered A , B , and C. The 393d Bombardment Squadron was commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Thomas J. Classen , who like Tibbets had combat experience in heavy bombers , commanding a Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress with the 11th Bombardment Group .

The 320th Troop Carrier Squadron , the other flying unit of the 509th , came into being because of the highly secret work of the group . The organization that was to become the 509th required its own transports for the movement of both personnel and materiel , resulting in creation of an ad hoc unit nicknamed " The Green Hornet Line " . Crews for this unit were acquired from the five 393d crews not selected to continue B-29 training . All those qualified for positions with the 320th chose to remain with the 509th rather than be assigned to a replacement pool of the Second Air Force . They began using C-46 Commando and C-47 Skytrains already at Wendover , and in November 1944 acquired three C-54 Skymasters . The 320th Troop Carrier Squadron originally consisted of three C-54 and four C-47 aircraft . In April 1945 the C-47s were transferred to the 216th AAF Base Unit and two additional C-54s acquired . The 320th Troop Carrier Squadron was constituted and activated on the same dates as the group . Other support units were activated at Wendover from personnel already present and working with Project Alberta or in the 216th AAF Base Unit , both affiliated with the Manhattan project . Project Alberta was the part of the Manhattan Project at Site Y in Los Alamos , New Mexico responsible for the preparation and delivery of the nuclear weapons . It was commanded by U.S. Navy Captain William S. Parsons , who would accompany the Hiroshima mission as weaponeer .

The 390th Air Service Group was created as the command echelon for the 603rd Air Engineering Squadron , the 1027th Air Material Squadron , and its own Headquarters and Base Services Squadron , but when these units became independent operationally , it acted as the basic support unit for the entire 509th Composite Group in providing quarters , rations , medical care , postal service and other functions . The 603rd Air Engineering Squadron was unique in that it provided depot-level B-29 maintenance in the field , obviating the necessity of sending aircraft back to the United States for major repairs . On Tinian the 603rd Air Engineering Squadron was assigned to the 313th Bombardment Wing 's " C " and " D " Service Centers , where it performed provided depot-level ( " third echelon " ) maintenance for the entire 313th Bombardment Wing when it was not engaged in 509th activities . The 393d Bombardment Squadron 's maintenance section was re-organized as a " combat line maintenance " section ( also called PLM , or " production line maintenance , " a technique developed by the Air Transport Command in India for " Hump " aircraft ) to maximize use of personnel for first and second echelon maintenance .

The 393d Bombardment Squadron conducted ground school training only until delivery of three modified Silverplate airplanes in mid-October 1944 allowed resumption of flight training . These aircraft had extensive bomb bay modifications and a " weaponeer " station installed . Initial training operations identified numerous other modifications necessary to the mission , particularly in reducing the overall weight of the airplane to offset the heavy loads it would be required to carry . Five more Silverplates were delivered in November and six in December , giving the group 14 for its training operations . In January and February 1945 , 10 of the 15 crews under the command of the Group S-3 ( operations officer ) were assigned temporary duty at Batista Field , San Antonio de los Baños , Cuba , where they trained in long-range over-water navigation . On 6 March 1945 , concurrent with the activation of Project Alberta , the 1st Ordnance Squadron , Special ( Aviation ) was activated at Wendover , again using Army Air Forces personnel on hand or already at Los Alamos . Its purpose was to provide " skilled machinists , welders and munitions workers " and special equipment to the group to enable it to assemble atomic weapons at its operating base , thereby allowing the weapons to be transported more safely in their component parts . A rigorous candidate selection process was used to recruit personnel , reportedly with an 80 % " washout " rate . Not until May 1945 did the 509th Composite Group reach full strength .

With the addition of the 1st Ordnance Squadron to its roster , the 509th Composite Group had an authorized strength of 225 officers and 1,542 enlisted men , almost all of whom deployed to Tinian . The 320th Troop Carrier Squadron kept its base of operations at Wendover . In addition to its authorized strength , the 509th had attached to it on Tinian 51 civilian and military personnel of Project Alberta , and two representatives from Washington , D.C. , the deputy director of the Manhattan Project , Brigadier General Thomas Farrell , and Rear Admiral William R. Purnell of the Military Policy Committee . Two anecdotes illustrate the level of security affecting the 509th 's personnel and equipment . En route to Tinian on 4 June 1945 , the B-29 that became The Great Artiste made an intermediate stop at Mather Field , near Sacramento , California . The commanding general of the base allegedly attempted to enter the aircraft to inspect it and was warned by a plane guard who aimed his carbine at the general 's chest that he could not do so . A similar incident occurred to a Project Alberta courier , 2nd Lieutenant William A. King . King was escorting the plutonium core of the Fat Man implosion bomb to Tinian , strapped to the floor of one of the 509th 's C-54s . On 26 July 1945 it made a refueling stop at Hickam Field , Hawaii . The commander of a combat unit returning to the United States learned that the Skymaster had only one passenger and attempted to enter the C-54 to requisition it as transport for his men . He was prevented from doing so by King , who aimed a .45 caliber automatic pistol at the colonel .

The 509th transferred four of its 14 training Silverplate B-29s to the 216th AAF Base Unit in February 1945 . In April the third modification increment of Silverplates , which would be their combat aircraft , began coming off the Martin-Omaha assembly line . These " fly-away " aircraft were equipped with fuel-injected engines , Curtiss Electric reversible-pitch propellers , pneumatic actuators for rapid opening and closing of bomb bay doors and other improvements . The remaining 17 Silverplate B-29s were placed in storage . Each bombardier completed at least 50 practice drops of inert pumpkin bombs before Tibbets declared his group combat-ready . The ground support echelon of the 509th Composite Group , consisting of 44 officers and 815 enlisted men commanded by Major George W. Westcott of the Headquarters Squadron , received movement orders and moved by rail on 26 April 1945 to its port of embarkation at Seattle , Washington . On 6 May the support elements sailed on the SS Cape Victory for the Marianas , while group materiel was shipped on the SS Emile Berliner . The Cape Victory made brief port calls at Honolulu and Eniwetok but the passengers were not permitted to leave the dock area . An advance party of the air echelon , consisting of 29 officers and 61 enlisted men commanded by Group Intelligence Officer ( S-2 ) Lieutenant Colonel Hazen Payette , flew by C-54 to North Field , Tinian , between 15 and 22 May . It was joined by the ground echelon on 29 May 1945 , marking the group 's official change of station . Project Alberta 's " Destination Team " also sent most of its members to Tinian to supervise the assembly , loading , and dropping of the bombs under the administrative title of 1st Technical Services Detachment , Miscellaneous War Department Group .

The air echelon consisted of the members of the 393d Bombardment Squadron . The 320th Troop Carrier Squadron remained at Wendover . It began deploying from Wendover 4 June 1945 , with the first B-29 arriving at North Field on 11 June . The group was assigned to the 313th Bombardment Wing , whose four groups had been flying missions against Japan since mid-February , but for security reasons their permanent base area was near the runways on the island 's north tip , several miles away from the main installations in the center of Tinian . The 509th , after spending most of June in an area previously occupied by the Seabees of the 18th Naval Construction Battalion , took over the 13th Naval Construction Battalion Area just west of North Field 's Runway D , a self-contained base with 89 Quonset huts , a huge storage warehouse , a consolidated mess hall , chapel , administrative area , theater , and other amenities . Each crew was required to attend the 313th Bombardment Wing 's week-long " Lead Crew Ground School " on its arrival . The ground school indoctrinated combat crews in procedures regarding air-sea rescue , ditching and bailouts , survival , radar bombing , weather , wing and air force regulations , emergency procedures , camera operation , dinghy drills , and other topics related to combat operations . Two of the group 's bombers were not delivered by Martin-Omaha until early July . They remained at Wendover until 27 July to act as transports for two of the Fat Man assemblies .

Because of their geographical isolation from the combat crews of other groups , rigidly enforced security measures , and exclusion from participation in regular bombing missions , crews of the 393d Bombardment Squadron were resented and ridiculed as " lacking in discipline " and having a " soft life " . The official history of the Army Air Forces characterized the ridicule as " epitomized in a satirical verse entitled Nobody Knows , with a recurring refrain , ' For the 509th is winning the war . ' " The group was assigned tail markings of a circle outline ( denoting the 313th Wing ) around an arrowhead pointing forward , but at the beginning of August its B-29s were repainted with the tail markings of other XXI Bomber Command groups as a security measure , because it was feared that Japanese survivors on Tinian were reporting the 509th 's activities to Tokyo by clandestine radio . The Victor ( identification assigned by the squadron ) numbers previously assigned the 393d aircraft were changed to avoid confusion with B-29s of the groups from whom the tail identifiers were borrowed . Victor numbers 82 , 89 , 90 , and 91 ( including the Enola Gay ) carried the markings of the 6th Bombardment Group ( Circle R ) ; Victors 71 , 72 , 73 , and 84 those of the 497th Bombardment Group ( large " A " ) ; Victors 77 , 85 , 86 , and 88 those of the 444th Bombardment Group ( triangle N ) ; and Victors 83 , 94 , and 95 those of the 39th Bombardment Group ( square P ) .

After ground training for the combat crews , the 509th began operations on 30 June 1945 , with a calibration flight involving nine of the B-29s on hand . During the month of July and the first eight days of August the thirteen bombers of the 393d Bombardment Squadron flew an intensive training and mission rehearsal program that consisted of : 15 practice bombing missions between 1 and 22 July against airfields on Japanese-held Truk , Marcus , Rota , and Guguan in which 90 B-29 sorties dropped 500- and 1000-pound bombs to practice radar and visual bombing procedures , 12 combat missions between 20 and 29 July against targets in Japan dropping high-explosive pumpkin bombs , in which 37 B-29 sorties delivered conventional-bomb replications of the Fat Man : four on 20 July , three on 24 July , two on 26 July , and three on 29 July . Some 27 sorties were made visually and 10 by radar , striking 17 primary targets , 15 secondary targets , and five targets of opportunity . Two other aircraft did not drop their bombs : one jettisoned its pumpkin bomb into the sea near Iwo Jima , and the Strange Cargo 's bomb came loose from the bomb rack and plunged through the closed bomb bay doors while the bomber was still on the ground . One B-29 incurred minor battle damage in the attacks . Flying at 30,000 feet ( 9,100 m ) put them above the effective range of flak . Each pumpkin bomb mission was conducted by a formation of three aircraft in the hope of convincing the Japanese military that small groups of B-29s did not justify a strong response . This strategy proved successful , and Japanese fighters only occasionally attempted to intercept the 509th Composite Group 's aircraft .

7 component-tests between 23 July and 8 August involving rehearsal drops of four inert Little Boy gun-type fission weapons and three Fat Man assemblies , and a practice mission on 29 July to Iwo Jima in which an inert Little Boy was unloaded and then reloaded to rehearse the contingency plan for using a back-up bomber in an emergency . While this training was taking place , the components of the first two atomic bombs were shipped to Tinian by various means . For the uranium bomb code-named " Little Boy " , fissile components consisted of a cylindrical target and nine washer-like rings that made up the hollow cylinder projectile . When the bomb detonated , these would be brought together to create a cylindrical core . The uranium-235 projectile and bomb pre-assemblies ( partly assembled bombs without the fissile components ) left Hunters Point Naval Shipyard , California , on 16 July aboard the cruiser USS Indianapolis , arriving 26 July . The Little Boy pre-assemblies were designated L-1 , L-2 , L-3 , L-4 , L-5 , L-6 , L-7 and L-11 . L-1 , L-2 , L-5 and L-6 were expended in test drops . L-6 was used in the Iwo Jima dress rehearsal on 29 July . This was repeated on 31 July , but this time L-6 was test dropped near Tinian by Enola Gay . L-11 was the assembly used for the Hiroshima bomb . On 26 July three C-54s of the 320th Troop Carrier Squadron left Kirtland Army Air Field , each with three of the uranium-235 target rings , and landed at North Field on 28 July .

The components for the bomb code-named the Fat Man arrived by air the same day . The bomb 's plutonium core ( encased in its insertion capsule ) and the beryllium-polonium initiator were transported from Kirtland to Tinian by C-54 in the custody of Project Alberta couriers . Three Fat Man high explosive pre-assemblies designated F31 , F32 , and F33 were picked up at Kirtland on 28 July by three B-29s , two from the 509th and one from the 216th AAF Base Unit , and transported to North Field , arriving 2 August . The B-29s were Luke the Spook and Laggin ' Dragon of the 509th , and 42-65386 , a phase 3 Silverplate of the 216th AAF Base Unit . F33 was expended during the final rehearsal on 8 August , and F31 was the bomb dropped on Nagasaki . F32 presumably would have been used for a third attack or its rehearsal . The final item of preparation for the operation came on 29 July 1945 . Orders for the attack were issued to General Carl Spaatz on 25 July under the signature of General Thomas T. Handy , the acting Chief of Staff of the United States Army , since General of the Army George C. Marshall was at the Potsdam Conference with the President . The order designated four targets : Hiroshima , Kokura , Niigata , and Nagasaki , and ordered the attack to be made " as soon as weather will permit after about 3 August . "

The mission profile for both atomic missions called for weather scouts to precede the strike force by an hour , reporting weather conditions in code over each proposed target . The strike force consisted of a bombing aircraft , with the aircraft commander responsible for all decisions in reaching the target and the bomb commander ( weaponeer ) responsible for all decisions regarding dropping of the bomb ; a blast instrumentation aircraft which would fly the wing of the strike aircraft and drop instruments by parachute into the target area ; and a camera ship , which would also carry scientific observers . Each mission had an additional " spare " aircraft pre-positioned on Iwo Jima to take over carrying the bomb if the strike aircraft encountered mechanical problems . The six combat crews of the Hiroshima mission were briefed on their targets , operational flight data , and the effects of the bomb on 4 August 1945 . Their pre-mission briefing on 5 August , under the terms of Operations Order No. 35 , covered details on weather and air-sea rescue . The Order described the bomb to be used as " special " . Special Mission 13 , attacking Hiroshima , was flown as planned and executed without significant problems or diversion from plan . Enola Gay took off at 02 : 45 , 7.5 long tons ( 7.6 t ) overweight and near maximum gross weight . Arming of the bomb began eight minutes into the flight and took 25 minutes . The three target-area aircraft arrived over Iwo Jima approximately three hours into the mission and departed together at 06 : 07 . The safeties on the bomb were removed at 07 : 30 , 90 minutes before time over target , and 15 minutes later the B-29s began a climb to the 30,000 feet ( 9,100 m ) bombing altitude . The bomb run began at 09 : 12 , with the drop three minutes later , after which the B-29s immediately performed steep diving turns . The detonation followed 45.5 seconds after the drop . Primary and " echo " shock waves overtook the B-29s a minute following the blast , and the smoke cloud was visible to the crews for 90 minutes , by which time they were almost 400 miles ( 640 km ) miles away . Enola Gay returned to Tinian at 14 : 58 .

Special Mission 16 was moved up two days from 11 August because of adverse weather forecasts . Weather also dictated a change in rendezvous to Yakushima , much closer to the target , and an initial cruise altitude of 17,000 feet ( 5,200 m ) instead of 9,300 feet ( 2,800 m ) , both of which considerably increased fuel consumption . Pre-flight inspection discovered an inoperative fuel transfer pump in the 625-US-gallon ( 2,370 l ) aft bomb bay fuel tank , but a decision was made to continue anyway . The plutonium bomb did not require arming in flight , but did have its safeties removed 30 minutes after the 03 : 45 takeoff ( all times Tinian ; Nagasaki times were one hour earlier ) when Bockscar reached 5,000 feet ( 1,500 m ) of altitude . When the daylight rendezvous point was reached at 09 : 10 , the photo plane failed to appear . The weather planes reported both targets within the required visual attack parameters while Bockscar circled Yakushima waiting for the photo plane . Finally the mission proceeded without the photo plane , thirty minutes behind schedule . When Bockscar arrived at Kokura 30 minutes later , cloud cover had increased to 70 % of the area , and three bomb runs over the next 50 minutes were fruitless in bombing visually . The commanders decided to reduce power to conserve fuel and divert to Nagasaki , bombing by radar if necessary . The bomb run began at 11 : 58 . ( two hours behind schedule ) using radar ; but the Fat Man was dropped visually when a hole opened in the clouds at 12 : 01 . The photo plane arrived at Nagasaki in time to complete its mission , and the three aircraft diverted to Okinawa , where they arrived at 13 : 00 . Trying in vain for 20 minutes to contact the control tower at Yontan Airfield to obtain landing clearance , Bockscar nearly ran out of fuel .

While the Nagasaki mission was in progress , two B-29s of the 509th took off from Tinian to return to Wendover . The crews of Classen in the unnamed Victor 94 , and Captain John A. Wilson in Jabit III , together with ground support crews , were sent back to the United States to stage for the possibility of transporting further bomb pre-assemblies to Tinian . Groves expected to have another atomic bomb ready for shipment on 13 August and use on 19 August , with three more available in September and a further three in October . Groves ordered that all shipments of material be stopped on 13 August , when the third bomb was still at Site Y.

After each atomic mission the group conducted other combat operations , making a series of pumpkin bomb attacks on 8 and 14 August . Six B-29s visually attacked targets at Yokkaichi , Uwajima , Tsuruga , and Tokushima on 8 August , bombing two primary and three secondary targets with five bombs . Seven aircraft visually attacked Koroma and Nagoya on 14 August . Some Punkins ( Crew B-7 , Price ) is believed to have dropped the last bombs by the Twentieth Air Force in World War II . After the announcement of the Japanese surrender , the 509th Composite Group flew three further training missions involving 31 sorties on 18 , 20 and 22 August , then stood down from operations . The group made a total of 210 operational sorties from 30 June to 22 August , aborted four additional flights , and had only a single aircraft fail to take off . Altogether , 140 sorties involved the dropping of live ordnance . Some 60 flights were credited as combat missions : 49 pumpkin bomb and 11 atomic bomb sorties . Three B-29s ( Full House , Straight Flush , and Top Secret ) flew six combat missions each . Crews A-1 ( Taylor ) and C-11 ( Eatherly ) flew the most combat missions , six ( including one atomic mission ) each , while six other crews each flew five . Only the late arrivals ( A-2 [ Costello ] and C-12 [ Zahn ] ) did not participate in any combat missions , although Costello 's B-29 was used by another crew for weather reconnaissance of Nagasaki on the second mission . Including training and test flights , crews B-8 ( McKnight ) and C-13 ( Bock ) flew the most missions , with 20 total ( 5 combat ) . Crew B-7 ( Price ) is the only crew to fly all of its missions ( 18 total , 5 combat ) in its normally assigned aircraft , Some Punkins .

The 509th Composite Group returned to the United States on 6 November 1945 , and was stationed at Roswell Army Airfield , New Mexico . Colonel William H. Blanchard replaced Tibbets as group commander on 22 January 1946 , and also became the first commander of the 509th Bombardment Wing . It was one of the original ten bombardment groups assigned to Strategic Air Command when it was formed on 21 March 1946 . The 715th and 830th Bombardment Squadrons were assigned to the 509th on 6 May 1946 , and the group was redesignated the 509th Bombardment Group , Very Heavy on 10 July . The 320th Troop Carrier Squadron was inactivated on 19 August . At Roswell , the 509th became the nuclear strike and deterrence core of the Strategic Air Command , and was the only unit capable of delivery of nuclear weapons until June 1948 , when B-50 Superfortresses were initially deployed . The 509th itself converted to the B-50 in 1950 , and transferred its Silverplate B-29s to the squadrons of the 97th Bombardment Wing at Biggs Air Force Base , Texas .

Giovanni Bausan was a protected cruiser of the Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) that was designed and built by Sir W G Armstrong Mitchell & Co . ' s Elswick Works in England in the mid-1880s . The finished ship entered service in May 1885 . She was the first ship of this type to be built for the Italian fleet , and she provided the basis for subsequent designs built in Italy , including the Etna class . Giovanni Bausan was intended to serve as a " battleship destroyer " , and was armed with a main battery of two 10-inch ( 254 mm ) guns to give her the ability to defeat heavy armor , but design flaws rendered her unfit for this role . Giovanni Bausan frequently served abroad . She participated in the conquest of Eritrea in 1887 – 88 as the flagship of the Italian squadron during the campaign . She took part in the Venezuelan crisis of 1902 – 03 alongside British and German warships . During the Italo-Turkish War of 1911 – 12 , she provided gunfire support to Italian troops ashore in North Africa . By the outbreak of the First World War , Giovanni Bausan had been relegated to secondary duties , first as a distilling ship , and later as a depot ship for seaplanes . The ship was disarmed during the conflict and ultimately was sold to ship-breakers in March 1920 .

The design of Giovanni Bausan was based on that of Elswick 's earlier Esmeralda , built for Chile and designed by George Rendel , and was the first modern protected cruiser constructed for the Italian Navy . The new ship was ordered in 1882 by Guglielmo Acton , then the Minister for the Navy , and was named for Giovanni Bausan , a Neapolitan naval commander who fought in the French Revolutionary Wars and the Napoleonic Wars . Referred to by some as a torpedo ram , she was one of the first ships of her type . Giovanni Bausan was intended for use as a " battleship destroyer " , but the low rate of fire of her guns and her lack of steadiness as a gun platform made her ineffective in this role . She nevertheless represented a temporary embrace of the theories of the Jeune École doctrine espoused by French naval architects and strategists .

Giovanni Bausan was 84.12 meters ( 276.0 ft ) long between perpendiculars and 89.32 m ( 293.0 ft ) long overall . She had a beam of 12.85 m ( 42.2 ft ) and a draft of 5.98 m ( 19.6 ft ) . Giovanni Bausan was steel-hulled , and had a crew of 295 officers and enlisted men , though later in her career this was reduced to 256 . The four Etna-class cruisers were half-sisters of Giovanni Bausan , built to a modified , slightly enlarged design . She was equipped with a ram bow and initially fitted with rigging as a schooner . Giovanni Bausan was powered by two compound-expansion steam engines that each drove a screw propeller . Steam was provided by four cylindrical Scotch boilers , which were trunked into two funnels on the centerline . On trials , the engines produced 6,470 indicated horsepower ( 4,820 kW ) for a top speed of 17.4 knots ( 32.2 km / h ; 20.0 mph ) . At a cruising speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) , the ship could steam for 5,000 nautical miles ( 9,300 km ; 5,800 mi ) . The schooner rig was intended to provid an auxiliary method of propulsion if the ship 's engines broke down ; by the time Giovanni Bausan entered service in the mid-1880s , marine steam engines had become reliable enough that auxiliary sails were no longer necessary , and hers were later removed .

Armament was heavy for her size , with the main battery consisting of a pair of 10-inch 30-caliber breech-loading ( BL ) guns mounted in individual barbettes fore and aft , capable of training up to 30 degrees abaft of the beam . These were Pattern G models manufactured by Elswick Ordnance Company . Six BL 5.9-inch ( 150 mm ) , 26-caliber secondary guns were mounted in sponsons , three on a side , comprised the secondary battery . Close-range defense against torpedo boats was provided by a tertiary battery of four quick-firing ( QF ) 6-pounder ( 57 mm ( 2.2 in ) ) 40-caliber guns and two QF 1-pounder ( 37 mm ( 1.5 in ) ) guns . She was also equipped with three 14-inch ( 360 mm ) torpedo tubes , one on each broadside above water and one submerged tube in the bow . She was fitted with an armored deck that ran from stem to stern . It was 1.5 inches ( 38 mm ) in thickness over the boilers and engines and reduced in thickness to .75 inches ( 19 mm ) fore and aft . The ship also had an " armor " belt of cork at her waterline , which was intended to swell through water absorption after being hit . This proved to be unsuccessful as hits would result in the destruction of the cork . Giovanni Bausan 's conning tower was protected with armor plating 2 inches ( 51 mm ) thick and the breeches of her main guns were also protected by 2 inches of armor .

Giovanni Bausan was laid down at the Armstrong Whitworth shipyard in Elswick in England on 21 August 1882 . Her completed hull was launched on 15 December 1883 . After her commissioning on 9 May 1885 , she departed from England on 21 May to join the Squada Permamente ( Permanent Squadron ) , and in 1887 – 1888 she participated in the conquest of Eritrea , where she acted as the flagship of the Italian Red Sea Squadron . Following the conclusion of the Eritrean campaign , Giovanni Bausan returned to Italy . In 1888 , she took part in the annual fleet maneuvers , along with four ironclads , three other protected cruisers , four torpedo cruisers , and numerous smaller vessels . The maneuvers consisted of close-order drills and a simulated attack on and defense of La Spezia . Later that year , the ship was present during a naval review held for the German Kaiser Wilhelm II during a visit to Italy . On 5 July 1889 , she collided with the torpedo cruiser Folgore , badly damaging her . Giovanni Bausan thereafter spent much of her time in service overseas , particularly in the Americas . During this service , she made a port visit to New York City in 1892 , during which she was the first foreign warship to be repaired at the Brooklyn Navy Yard in 15 years . 1896 , she took part in the annual summer maneuvers in July as part of the Second Division of the Active Squadron , which also included the ironclads Francesco Morosini and Andrea Doria and the torpedo cruiser Tripoli . In 1899 , Giovanni Bausan had her 5.9-inch guns replaced by modern QF 6-inch ( 152 mm ) guns .

In late 1902 , Giovanni Bausan was sent to Venezuelan waters during the Venezuelan crisis of 1902 – 03 , when an international force of British , German , and Italian warships blockaded Venezuela over the country 's refusal to pay foreign debts . The Italian contingent also included the protected cruiser Elba and the armored cruiser Carlo Alberto . The following year , she and the protected cruisers Etna and Dogali represented Italy at the international naval review in New York , held at the start of the World 's Columbian Exposition in Chicago . The Exposition marked the 400th anniversary of Christopher Columbus 's arrival in North America . Contingents from France , Germany , Britain , Spain , and several other nations also participated in the celebration . In 1904 , Giovanni Bausan returned to Italy , where she was assigned to the Reserve Division , and two of her 6-inch guns were removed , though she was slated to be replaced by the new armored cruiser Francesco Ferruccio , when she entered service in September 1905 . From 1905 , Giovanni Bausan served as a training ship for stokers and mechanics until the outbreak of the Italo-Turkish War in 1912 . Returning to active duty as Flagship Cyrenaica , she served in the shore bombardment role until the end of the war , when she was again returned to second-line service as a distilling ship . Fitted with four distillers and capable of producing 200 tons of fresh water every 24 hours , she was operating in this role at the start of the First World War . Because of the pressing need for artillery for service with the army , Giovanni Bausan was partially disarmed in 1915 , losing her 10-inch guns and two of the 6-inch pieces . Later in the war , the rest of her armament was removed . She was reassigned for service as a seaplane depot ship at Brindisi . Decommissioned in 1919 , she was sold for scrap in March 1920 and broken up soon after .

Typhoon Karen was the most powerful tropical cyclone to strike the island of Guam , and has been regarded as one of the most destructive events in the island 's history . It was first identified as a tropical disturbance on November 6 , 1962 , well to the southeast of Truk . Over the following two days , the system tracked generally northward and quickly intensified . Karen became a tropical storm late on November 7 , and within two days it explosively intensified into a Category 5-equivalent super typhoon on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane scale . Turning westward , the typhoon maintained its intensity and struck Guam with winds of 280 km / h ( 175 mph ) on November 11 . Once clear of the island , it strengthened slightly and reached its peak intensity on November 13 with winds of 295 km / h ( 185 mph ) and a barometric pressure of 894 mb ( hPa ; 26.40 inHg ) . The storm then gradually turned northward as it weakened , brushing the Ryukyu Islands on November 15 , before moving east-northeastward over the open waters of the Pacific . Karen continued to weaken and transitioned into an extratropical cyclone on November 17 before losing its identity the following day between Alaska and Hawaii .

Karen devastated Guam with wind gusts estimated up to 280 km / h ( 185 mph ) . Ninety-five percent of homes were damaged or destroyed , leaving at least 45,000 people homeless . Communication and utilities were crippled , forcing officials to set up water distribution centers to prevent disease . Total losses on the island amounted to $ 250 million . Despite the severity of the damage , only 11 people were killed . In the wake of the storm , a massive relief operation evacuated thousands to California , Hawaii , and Wake Island . Thousands more were sheltered in public buildings , and later tent villages , for many months . More than $ 60 million in relief funds were sent to Guam over the following years to aid in rehabilitation . Though the storm was devastating , it spurred new building codes and a revitalized economy .

On November 6 , 1962 , a tropical disturbance was identified over the Pacific Ocean several hundred miles south-southeast of Truk , in the Federated States of Micronesia , by the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) . Tracking northwestward , the disturbance intensified and was classified as a tropical depression early on November 7 . Later that day , the system passed to the east of Truk and turned due north before attaining gale-force winds . Around 18 : 00 UTC , the JTWC issued their first advisory on Tropical Storm Karen , the 27th named storm of the 1962 season . Several hours later , a reconnaissance mission into the storm revealed a partially closed 35 km ( 22 mi ) wide eye . Over the following 30 hours , Karen underwent a period of explosive intensification as its eye became small and increasingly defined . Between 00 : 00 UTC on November 8 and 03 : 40 UTC on November 9 , Karen 's barometric pressure plummeted from 990 mbar ( hPa ; 29.24 inHg ) to 899 mb ( hPa ; 26.55 inHg ) , a drop of 91 mb ( hPa ; 2.69 inHg ) . At the end of this phase , Karen featured an 8 to 10 km ( 5 to 6 mi ) wide eye and had estimated surface winds of 295 km / h ( 185 mph ) , ranking it as a modern-day Category 5-equivalent super typhoon on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane scale .

After attaining this initial peak intensity on November 9 , Karen weakened somewhat as it gradually curved west-northwestward . By 15 : 14 UTC , the storm began to undergo an eyewall replacement cycle as a larger secondary eyewall , approximately 64 km ( 40 mi ) in diameter , started developing . Although the storm 's winds failed to drop significantly , Karen 's central pressure rose to 919 mb ( hPa ; 27.14 inHg ) during this phase . Accelerating slightly , Karen tracked steadily west-northwestward towards Guam . By November 11 , the system had regained a well-defined eye and deepened once more . Between 12 : 10 and 12 : 35 UTC on November 11 , the 14 km ( 9 mi ) wide eye of Karen passed directly over southern Guam . At this time , the storm was estimated to have had winds of 280 km / h ( 175 mph ) , which would have made it the most intense typhoon to strike the island since 1900 . However , years of post-storm analyses have indicated that it may have been somewhat weaker when it passed over Guam . At the Weather Bureau station at the north end of Guam , a pressure of 942.4 mb ( hPa ; 27.83 inHg ) was measured . Farther south at Anderson Air Force Base , 939.7 mb ( hPa ; 27.75 inHg ) was recorded . The lowest verified pressure was 931.9 mb ( hPa ; 27.52 inHg ) at the Agana Naval Air Station . Closest to the eye was Naval Magazine where a pressure of 907.6 mb ( hPa ; 26.80 inHg ) was estimated but never verified .

Continuing west-northwestward , Karen attained its peak intensity on November 13 with a central pressure of 894 mb ( hPa ; 26.40 inHg ) . Between November 13 and 14 , Karen gradually turned towards the north as it underwent another eyewall replacement cycle . During this time , Karen finally weakened below Category 5 status as its winds dropped below 251 km / h ( 156 mph ) . This marked the end of its near-record 4.25-day span as a storm of such intensity , second only to Typhoon Nancy of 1961 which maintained Category 5 status for 5.5 days . Over the following days , the typhoon 's structure gradually became disorganized , with its eye no longer well-defined by November 15 . By this time , Karen began accelerating northeastward and later east-northeastward over the open ocean . The combination of its rapid movement and entrainment of cold air into the circulation ultimately caused the system to transition into an extratropical cyclone on November 17 . The remnants of Karen continued tracking east-northeast and were last noted by the JTWC on November 18 roughly halfway between the southern Aleutian Islands and northern Hawaiian Islands .

Following the identification of a tropical disturbance on November 6 , a level four Typhoon Condition of Readiness ( TCOR ) , the lowest level of alert , was raised for Guam . By November 8 , three days prior to Karen 's arrival , this was raised to level three , prompting residents and military personnel to stock up on supplies . A public announcement was made that day as well , warning residents that the typhoon would likely strike the island . At 9 : 00 p.m. on November 10 ( 11 : 00 UTC ) , a level two TCOR was put in place for Guam and a typhoon emergency was declared . Buildings were boarded up and emergency supplies were distributed . By 8 : 00 a.m. ( 22 : 00 UTC on November 10 ) , this was raised to level one , the highest level of warning . At this time , the USS Haverfield , USS Brister , USS Wandank , and USS Banner sought refuge from the storm over open waters . All personnel on the island were ordered to evacuate to typhoon-proof shelters and emergency rations were prepared . Strategic air command planes stationed on the island were relocated to avoid damage . Many residents on the island sought refuge in government buildings designed to withstand powerful storms while others evacuated to Wake Island . Roughly 24 hours after the typhoon 's passage , all warnings were discontinued .

Striking Guam as a Category 5-equivalent typhoon , Karen produced destructive winds across much of the island . With the eye passing over the southern tip of the territory , the most intense winds were felt over central areas . Wind gusts over the southern tip of Guam were estimated to have peaked around 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) . Due to the extreme nature of these winds , all anemometers on the island failed before the most intense portion of the storm arrived , and there were no measurements of the strongest winds ; however , post-storm reports estimated that sustained winds reached 250 km / h ( 155 mph ) in some areas . The highest measured gust was 240 km / h ( 145 mph ) at a United States Navy anemometer on Nimitz Hill just before 11 : 00 UTC on November 11 , roughly two hours before the typhoon 's eye passed the station . Based on this measurement , a study in 1996 estimated that gusts peaked between 280 and 295 km / h ( 175 and 185 mph ) over southern areas of the island . Newspaper reports indicated that a gust of 272 km / h ( 169 mph ) was measured on the island before the anemometer was destroyed . There was also an unverified report of a 333 km / h ( 207 mph ) wind gust . Nearly all measurements of rainfall during the typhoon were lost ; the only known total is 197 mm ( 7.76 in ) at the Weather Bureau station for the period of November 10 – 12 .

Surveys of damage revealed belt-like damage patterns from the winds , with some homes being leveled and others nearby having only minor damage , akin to the impacts of tornadoes . The winds uprooted and snapped palm trees across the island and , in some instances , stripped the bark of tree trunks and branches as if they had been sandblasted . Vegetation was completely defoliated across central areas of the island . In some places , it was described as the aftermath of a forest fire . The winds also blew debris across the island . Metal roofing was found wrapped around trees . In one instance , a twin-engine aircraft was carried 2.4 km ( 1.5 mi ) from the hangar it was tied down in . A metal sign bolted into a warehouse was tossed 3.7 km ( 2.3 mi ) and found half-buried in the ground . Elsewhere , a quonset hut was lofted and carried for 125 m ( 411 ft ) , intact , before being crushed on impact . Along the coast , the USS Arco was torn from her moorings , severing two anchors and shearing a cleat – tested for over 23,000 and 45,000 kg ( 50,000 and 100,000 lb ) , respectively – in the process . The ROK Han Ra San and RPS Negros Oriental sank in the inner harbor of Guam .

Karen is regarded as the worst typhoon to ever impact Guam . Acting governor Manuel Guerrero stated that " the entire territory was devastated . " Almost all structures , both civilian and military , were severely damaged or destroyed . Even reinforced concrete structures at Anderson Air Force Base sustained severe damage . Though these structures withstood the direct impact of winds , sudden drops in pressure caused windows to shatter in most structures , ultimately exposing the interior to water damage . Military structures suffered the most from this phenomenon as the buildings were designed in a way that pressure differences between the interior and exterior would not equal out . Debris from damaged or destroyed homes became projectiles during the storm that created further damage , like " shrapnel or artillery missiles . " George Washington High and Tumon Junior High were both destroyed . Guam Memorial Hospital and the island 's public works department were extensively damaged . Downtown Hagåtña , Guam 's largest city , was flattened . Along the city 's main road , Marine Drive , 20 cm ( 8 in ) of sand accumulated from Karen 's storm surge . Overall , the city was 85 percent destroyed , while the villages of Yona and Inarajan were 97 and 90 percent destroyed , respectively . Additionally , Agana Heights and Sinajana were reportedly leveled . The communication network on the island was completely destroyed as antennas and transmission equipment were blown away . Approximately 30 percent of telephone poles between the island 's naval station and Nimitz Hill and 95 percent of civilian telephone poles were downed . The power grid was also destroyed . The Guam portion of the Pacific Scatter Communications System suffered extensive damage , with all four 61 m ( 200 ft ) antennas at Ritidian Point being reduced to a " mess of tangled , twisted steel and cable . " Losses from the antennas alone reached $ 1 million . All airstrips on the island were rendered inoperable , hampering initial relief efforts . Numerous roads across the island were also impassable , covered by downed trees and smashed vehicles . The wreckage left in the wake of the storm was described as a " massive junkyard " .

Throughout Guam , 95 percent of homes were destroyed , and those left standing were damaged . Nearly every non-typhoon-proof home was severely damaged or destroyed and a majority of typhoon-proof buildings sustained extensive damage . Preliminary surveys by the Red Cross on November 15 indicated that at least 5,000 homes were destroyed and another 3,000 were severely damaged . Approximately 45,000 people , mostly Guamanians , were left homeless . A total of 11 people lost their lives and about 100 others were injured . At least four of the deaths were due to collapsed buildings , including three in one home that buckled due to pounding surf . Another death resulted from decapitation by airborne debris . Losses across the island amounted to $ 250 million ( 1962 USD ) . The damage across Guam was described as " ' much more serious " than it had been during the second Battle of Guam , when American troops retook the island from the Japanese . The U.S. Navy described the damage as equal to that of an indirect hit from a nuclear bomb . Guerrero said that the recovery effort of the previous 17 years had been " completely wiped out " .

In the Mariana Islands , three ships under the command of Rear Admiral J. S. Coye Jr. sank ; however , the crew had been evacuated prior to the storm 's arrival . On November 13 , a level three TCOR was issued for Okinawa . This prompted military personnel to begin securing the island and preparing planes without hangars for evacuation . Brushing the region as a Category 3-equivalent typhoon , Karen caused considerable disruptions to airlines , trains , shipping , and communications . No serious damage was reported in Okinawa , but the nearby Daiyumaru and another Japanese fishing vessel with a total of 26 crew went missing . On November 15 , residents in Taiwan were urged to take precautions to minimize casualties . Prior to the storm 's arrival , the USS Duncan , the USS Kitty Hawk , and two other aircraft carriers sought refuge in the Taiwan Strait . Despite attempts to escape the storm , large swells exceeding 3.6 m ( 12 ft ) battered the vessels , causing them to pitch up to 59 degrees . At times , the waves crashed onto the deck of the USS Kitty Hawk . According to crewmen , waves up to 4.5 m ( 15 ft ) struck Taipei , leaving water marks on many buildings .

In the immediate aftermath of the typhoon , the Pacific Air Forces were on standby to deliver supplies to Guam , but were delayed by inoperable airstrips . Guam Memorial Hospital was damaged , but other civilian and military installations , including the Navy 's hospital , were able to handle injured persons . On November 12 , Manuel Guerrero made an urgent appeal to the Government of the United States requesting that aid be rushed to the territory . Additionally , he instituted an island-wide curfew between 8 : 00 p.m. and 6 : 00 a.m. local time to limit looting . At schools , teachers were called in to guard supplies and equipment . The Federal Emergency Management Agency , under orders from United States President John F. Kennedy , declared Guam a major disaster area later that day , allowing residents to receive federal aid . Additionally , 15 United States Air Force communications technicians were deployed from Manila , Philippines carrying three plane-loads of communication supplies . Guerrero estimated that it would take four months to complete repairs to utilities . It was also estimated that schools on the island would be closed for six months .

Initially , residents across Guam were critical of the delayed response by the U.S. government ; no aid had arrived within two days of the storm , but unsafe conditions at airports had prevented aircraft from landing . With the majority of homes destroyed across Guam , structures that remained standing were used as temporary shelter for those left homeless . Similarly , damaged military installations at Anderson Air Force Base were made available to all civilians . By November 14 , the USS Daniel I. Sultan arrived in Guam with 1,100 troops to provide emergency power . A U.S. Air Force AC-130 landed on the island that day carrying the first package of relief supplies . About 400 troops and 80 public works employees were sent from Hawaii on November 14 . The Red Cross and civil defense offices were placed in charge of coordinating recovery efforts . Water distribution centers were set up across the island to provide residents with clean drinking water . On November 15 , a massive evacuation of residents began to remove survivors from unsafe conditions . Two flights to California took place on the first day of evacuation , carrying a total of 154 people . Thousands of residents were also brought to Wake Island for shelter . Military Air Transport Service planes from the United States mainland , Japan , the Philippines , and Hawaii were called in for the operation . On November 16 , residents were warned of a possible typhoid epidemic and urged to get inoculations for the disease . Over a three-day span , roughly 30,000 people were given preventative shots for the disease . In contrast to their previous ban on alien workers , the Government of Guam requested 1,500 carpenters , masons , and other building workers from the Philippines . By November 21 , the Navy Supply Depot planned to have enough supplies for the entire populous shipped until replenishment arrived . In order to shelter homeless , the United States Navy set up tent villages across the island . Military kitchens were also established to provide food . Due to continued rains in the wake of the typhoon , many were unable to get a full meal for Thanksgiving .

On November 21 , insurance payments for losses were expected to exceed $ 12 million . On January 1 , 1963 , a $ 2 million relief fund was authorized by President Kennedy . Another $ 5.4 million in relief funds were provided by President Lyndon B. Johnson on February 15 , 1964 . The United States Congress provided Guam with $ 60 million , including $ 45 million through federal loans , mainly to help rebuild the territory and promote expansion of the economy . Additionally , the storm brought about the end of military security on the island , which in turn aided economic growth . Within five years of this decision , Japanese tourism to the island dramatically increased , prompting a major increase in the number of hotels . In the long term , Typhoon Karen , along with other destructive storms , shaped the development of the island 's infrastructure . It led to higher quality buildings and more efficient utilities that could withstand powerful typhoons . Since Karen , most buildings on the island have been constructed with concrete and steel . On April 29 , 1963 , less than half a year after Karen , Typhoon Olive caused extensive damage in Guam and the Mariana Islands . With many residents living in tents , and debris from the storm still scattered about , severe damage was anticipated . Schools , churches , and other structures were opened as shelters in order to protect those without homes . Ultimately , Guam was spared the worst of the storm though much of Saipan was devastated . The island was again devastated in 1976 by Typhoon Pamela which buffeted the island with destructive winds for 36 hours . Though weaker than Karen , the longer lasting impact of Pamela was regarded as more destructive .

Brønnøysund Airport , Brønnøy ( Norwegian : Brønnøysund lufthavn , Brønnøy ; IATA : BNN , ICAO : ENBN ) is a regional airport located at the town of Brønnøysund , in the municipality of Brønnøy , Nordland county , Norway . The airport is owned and operated by the state-owned Avinor and serves the southern part of Helgeland . It has a 1,200-by-30-meter ( 3,937 ft × 98 ft ) runway numbered 04 – 22 and is served by Widerøe , which operates their Bombardier Dash 8 aircraft to Oslo , Trondheim , Bodø , Bergen and other airports in Helgeland . The airport also serves offshore helicopter flights by CHC Helikopter Service to Norne and temporary oil rigs in the Norwegian Sea . In 2014 , the airport served 117,471 passengers , making it the second-busiest regional airport in Norway , after Florø Airport . Brønnøysund received seaplane services in 1935 , at first operated by Norwegian Air Lines and later by Widerøe . Plans for short take-off and landing airports in Northern Norway were launched in 1965 ; construction started in 1967 and Brønnøysund Airport opened along with three nearby airports on 1 June 1968 . Originally served using Twin Otter aircraft , Widerøe replaced them with Dash 7 aircraft in 1982 and Dash 8 aircraft in 1992 . Offshore helicopter traffic started in 1983 . The runway was originally 800 meters ( 2,625 ft ) ; it was extended to 1,000 meters ( 3,281 ft ) in 1987 and to the current length in 1999 . A new control tower opened in 2000 and a new terminal in 2008 . There have been two major accidents connected with the airport : Widerøe Flight 710 in 1988 and Helikopter Service Flight 451 in 1997 .

The first aircraft to land in Brønnøysund was a Hansa-Brandenburg seaplane of the Royal Norwegian Navy Air Service on 23 July 1922 . It was piloted by Hjalmar Riiser-Larsen and Finn Lützow-Holm , en route from Horten to Kirkenes . The following thirteen years Brønnøysund only saw occasional landings , when Norwegian Air Lines started a service from Bergen to Tromsø on 7 June 1935 , which included a stop at the harbor in Brønnøysund . Passengers and mail would be rowed out to the waiting aircraft . The first season the route was flown using a single-engine Junkers W 34 . The aircraft turned out to be too small and a larger Junkers Ju 52 was introduced the following season . Flights were dependent on good weather and were only operated during the summer . The route was taken over by Widerøe in 1938 . All civilian flights were terminated during World War II , although the town would see occasional military landings . Seaplane routes resumed in 1947 using the Junkers Ju 52 . Construction of primary airports in Norway started in the 1950s based on building joint military and civilian airport with funding from the North Atlantic Treaty Organization ( NATO ) . The alliance considered constructing an airport at Søndre Herøy in Herøy , an archipelago near Sandnesssjøen , but funding was never allocated to the project .

No primary airports had been built in Helgeland by the mid-1960s . The coastal parts of the region , such as at Brønnøysund , were without highways and railways . Although Widerøe operated a seaplane route , it remained a summer-only service . Travel time to Sandnessjøen , where the closest hospital was located , took five hours . A committee , led by Erik Himle and later Preben Munthe , was appointed in 1962 to consider additional airports in Norway . The Sud Aviation Caravelle jet aircraft was about to be phased into use on the main domestic routes by Scandinavian Airlines System and the committee recommended in 1964 that nine new airports be built which could serve jetliners , including an airport in Sandnesssjøen . Widerøe came with an alternative proposal and suggested that a network of smaller airports be built instead , which could be served using short take-off and landing ( STOL ) aircraft . Smaller airports could be built and operated at lower costs than larger airports , but both airports and airlines would need subsidies to operate . Håkon Kyllingmark was appointed Minister of Transport and Communications in 1965 and was a proponent of the STOLport proposal . The political rationale was that , despite that the total operating costs would rise , that it would provide better services to rural areas and thus keep up their population . The regional airports were built in groups , and the first four were built in Namsos and Helgeland .

Planning started in 1966 and construction commenced the following year . Brønnøysund Airport cost NOK 2.7 million plus costs for expropriation and navigational aids . NOK 1.9 million was covered by the state , while the rest was covered by Brønnøy Municipality . The runway was originally 800 meters ( 2,625 ft ) and was the only asphalted area in Brønnøysund . The airport was originally operated by the municipality , except the tower , which was operated by the Norwegian Telecommunications Administration . Brønnøysund was one of very few regional airport to receive a restaurant . The airport opened on 30 May 1968 , along with Mo i Rana Airport , Røssvoll , Namsos Airport , Høknesøra and Sandnessjøen Airport , Stokka . Widerøe commenced flights to Bodø and Trondheim with their de Havilland Canada DHC-6 Twin Otters the following day . The first year of operation saw 6,157 passengers , dropping to 5,543 in 1969 . Originally there were two southbound and two northbound flights per day in the summer and one per direction during winter . In 1969 this increased to two flights per direction all year . Trønderfly started an air ambulance service in the early 1970s . Widerøe introduced the de Havilland Canada Dash 7 in 1982 , resulting in the terminal being expanded . Offshore helicopter services began the following year . The runway was expanded to 1,000 meters ( 3,281 ft ) in 1987 .

NATO showed interest in upgrading Brønnøysund Airport in 1991 . Specifically they intended to spend NOK 125 million in expanding the runway to 2,000 meters ( 6,562 ft ) and building a fuel depot . The airport was planned used as a relief military airbase without any permanently stationed aircraft . The plans were canceled in 1993 following cut-backs in NATO . Widerøe introduced Dash 8 aircraft in 1992 , gradually replacing the Dash 7 . In 1996 , Brønnøysund and 25 other regional airports were taken over by the state and the Civil Aviation Administration ( later renamed Avinor ) . The runway was extended to 1,200 meters ( 3,937 ft ) in 1999 ; 1,440 meters ( 4,724 ft ) including the safety zone at each end . While allowing for a direct service to Oslo , the service was terminated the following year . The same year a new control tower was opened and the old tower taken over by a motorcycle club . Airport security was introduced on 1 January 2005 . This put a large strain on the terminal capacity and the terminal had to be expanded . Makeshift solutions were used , such as plywood boards to allocate people through the security check . In late 2004 , the airport started planning an all-new terminal building , as the old terminal was deemed both too small and out of date . Construction of the NOK-115-million terminal started on 24 October 2006 . As the first airport in the world , Brønnøysund received SCAT-I , a satellite-based landing system , on 29 October 2007 . The new terminal opened on 26 May 2008 , which allowed the a restaurant to open at the airport , all vehicles to be stored indoors and included a new helicopter terminal . Thon Hotel Torghatten opened in October 2009 and an airport surveillance radar was installed in 2010 , making Brønnøysund the first regional airport in Norway to have one .

Widerøe reintroduced direct flights to Oslo on 10 May 2010 . Statoil started using scheduled services instead of their previous charter flights on 2 January 2011 . This caused Widerøe to increase the number of direct flights to Oslo to three per day on 1 April 2011 . Widerøe introduced irregular charter flights to Manchester in April 2012 , largely targeting English tourists traveling on holidays and Norwegian football patriots . Avinor is working on plans to close the airports in Sandnessjøen , Mo i Rana and Mosjøen and replace them with a primary airport . Brønnøysund has stated that they wish to keep their airport and not be part of a central airport for the region . There have also been launched proposals by local politicians to extend the runway at Brønnøysund to 2,000 meters ( 6,562 ft ) . This proposal was later dismissed by the municipal council , who instead wanted a shorter extension to allow landing of Dash 8 Q400 aircraft .

The airport is located 2.5 kilometers ( 1.6 mi ) southeast of the town center of Brønnøysund . It consists of a combined passenger terminal and works building and includes a café . There is a separate helicopter terminal . The runway , numbered 04 – 22 , is 1,200 by 30 meters ( 3,937 ft × 98 ft ) ; when including the safety zones at each end the total length is 1,440 meters ( 4,724 ft ) . Brønnøysund Airport lacks an instrument landing system and instead uses the satellite-based SCAT-I. It is the only regional airport in Norway which has an airport surveillance radar installed . The airport had 117,471 passengers , 10,494 aircraft movements and 39 tonnes of cargo in 2014 . Taxis , paid parking and car rental is available at the airport . Driving time to the town center is about five to seven minutes . There is a bus service operated by Torghatten Trafikkselskap form the airport to the town center ; onwards connection is available to several areas in Helgeland and Namdalen . Ferry and fast ferry services are also operated from the town center to nearby islands . The 44-room Thon Hotel Torghatten is located next to the airport .

Widerøe is the only airline operating scheduled flights out of Brønnøysund , serving it with their Bombardier Dash 8 aircraft . The services to Bodø and Trondheim are subsidized through public service obligations with the Ministry of Transport and Communications . CHC Helikopter Service operates flights to the offshore oil platform at Norne on contract with Statoil . The oil company flies an average 55 people to the airport with various scheduled services and onwards to the oil field . In addition , the helicopter operator flies to various temporary oil rigs . It has two Sikorsky S-92 helicopters stationed at Brønnøysund . In 2011 , there were 17,229 offshore helicopter passengers which traveled through Brønnøysund Airport . The Norwegian Air Ambulance operates both a helicopter and fixed-wing air ambulance service out of Brønnøysund Airport . Aircraft operations are subcontracted to Lufttransport , which operates an AgustaWestland AW139 helicopter and a Beech King Air fixed-wing aircraft . Both are manned by medical personnel from Helgeland Hospital Trust . In 2011 , the helicopter flew 465 missions and the fixed-wing aircraft 1022 missions .

The 1981 Atlantic hurricane season officially began on June 1 , 1981 , and lasted until November 30 , 1981 . These dates conventionally delimit the period of each year when most tropical cyclones form in the Atlantic basin . The 1981 season was high in activity with 18 tropical depressions and twelve storms forming during the year . Nine of these systems made landfall . Cindy , Harvey , and Irene neither affected land directly nor indirectly . Hurricane Dennis caused millions of dollars in damage in Dade County , Florida and produced the highest rainfall totals of any tropical cyclone this season . Tropical Depression Eight caused the most damage , due to flooding in Texas at the end of August , and led to most fatalities of any tropical cyclone this season ( five ) . Tropical Depressions Two and Eight caused a majority of the damage and fatalities this season , with both affecting Louisiana and Texas . Katrina was the only named storm with associated fatalities .

The 1981 season was high in activity with eighteen tropical depressions and twelve storms forming that year . The season began early , as Tropical Storm Arlene formed on May 6 . Arlene made landfall in Cuba , being absorbed by a low later . Tropical Depression Two moved out of the Gulf of Mexico into eastern Texas on June 5 , producing localized rainfall amounts of 12 inches ( 300 mm ) and numerous tornadoes over Louisiana before recurving across the Southeast United States . Tropical Storm Bret formed as a subtropical low in the open Atlantic Ocean , and made landfall in the Delmarva Peninsula . Tropical Depression Four formed in the Gulf of Mexico on July 25 , moving into Mexico the next day , and causing heavy rains in west Texas , Oklahoma , and Arkansas when its remnants moved into the United States . Tropical Storm Cindy formed on August 2 in the open Atlantic and became an extratropical cyclone on August 5 . Hurricane Dennis formed on August 7 near South America . Dennis degenerated into a depression while making landfall in the Leeward Islands , but regained storm strength while over Cuba . Dennis moved near the southeast United States coastline from Florida to Virginia , briefly becoming a hurricane . Dennis weakened into a tropical storm and was declared an extratropical cyclone on August 22 .

Tropical Depression Seven formed in mid-August and tracked through the Windward Islands before dissipating in the eastern Caribbean Sea . Tropical Depression Eight led to a significant flooding event between San Antonio and Houston on August 30 and August 31 while recurving through Texas into Louisiana . Hurricane Emily formed on September 1 southeast of Bermuda . Emily made a cyclonic loop as a tropical storm . Emily strengthened into a hurricane out in the North Atlantic Ocean and by September 12 , was no longer identifiable . Hurricane Floyd was a Category 3 hurricane that grazed Bermuda , but no damage was reported . Hurricane Gert formed September 8 , strengthened into a Category 2 hurricane , and followed the same track as Floyd , dissipating near the Azores . Hurricane Harvey became the strongest storm of the season , reaching Category 4 strength . Harvey never affected land , but ships reported tropical storm-force winds . Tropical Depression Thirteen brought gusts of tropical storm force to Bermuda in mid-to-late September . Hurricane Irene also stayed out at sea , reaching Category 3 strength and was extratropical in early October . The extratropical Irene made landfall in France .

Arlene was a very unusual tropical storm in 1981 . It formed on May 6 , well before the beginning of the normal hurricane season . It developed out of a disturbance that moved from the Pacific Ocean across Central America into the Caribbean Sea . As the disturbance tracked northeast across the western Caribbean , it became a tropical depression , then on May 7 reached tropical storm strength near the Cayman Islands . Arlene struck eastern Cuba on the night of May 7 , and the passage over land weakened it to a depression . It restrengthened briefly over the southeastern Bahamas , but weakened again and was absorbed by another system . Reported damage was minimal .

A tropical depression formed in the Bay of Campeche near Veracruz , Mexico , on June 3 . The system moved north-northwest , lured by a cyclone over the southern Plains . Tropical Depression Two made landfall along the upper Texas coast on June 5 , spreading up to 15 inches ( 380 mm ) of rainfall northeast of the point of landfall . A total of nine tornadoes stuck the western Gulf coast , with eight touching down in Louisiana . Three people died ; two due to flooding and one from an associated tornado . The depression quickly recurved through the Mississippi Valley , and deepened as it moved off the coast of the Mid-Atlantic states into the western subtropical Atlantic on June 7 . At least US $ 4 million in damage was caused by this depression .

Bret formed out of a subtropical low roughly 150 miles ( 240 km ) off the coast of North Carolina . The storm moved west-northwest , striking land in southern Maryland on July 1 . Bret weakened significantly just before landfall , and reported winds were below gale force . Rainfall amounts were light , with a narrow area of over one inch of rain reported near its track and within the central Appalachians . The highest rainfall amount reported was 4.48 inches ( 114 mm ) at Big Meadows , Virginia . No significant damage was reported , but one fatality was reported at Nags Head , North Carolina due to riptides .

Dennis began as Cape Verde-type hurricanes typically do . A tropical wave leaving the coast of Africa on August 5 developed into Tropical Storm Dennis on August 7 near Cape Verde . Unlike most such storms , Dennis degenerated to a tropical wave before reaching the Windward Islands on August 12 . This wave crossed the Caribbean , passing over Jamaica before reaching the southwestern coast of Cuba on August 15 . Once near Cuba , the wave began rapid organization , restrengthening into a tropical storm . It crossed Cuba , then moved into southern Florida . Over Florida , steering currents weakened and the storm stalled . On August 19 , Tropical Storm Dennis reemerged over water , skimming the coasts of the Carolinas before accelerating out to sea . Dennis reached hurricane strength before becoming extratropical on August 22 . Most damage associated with Dennis was from the heavy rainfall caused by its slow passage over Florida , although two tornadoes were also reported within Florida . The highest amount registered was near Homestead , Florida , where 25.56 inches ( 649 mm ) of rain was measured . Agriculture damage in Dade County , Florida was estimated at $ 15 million ( 1981 USD ) . Coastal areas of the Carolinas were also affected by heavy rainfall , with spots seeing over 10 inches ( 250 mm ) , as well as minor beach erosion .

This tropical depression formed in the Bay of Campeche on August 26 and moved slowly northwest , moving ashore northeast Mexico on August 29 and into the United States on August 30 . As an ill-defined surface low , a large thunderstorm complex formed near its center that day , unleashing heavy rainfall in a band 50 miles ( 80 km ) wide which stretched along a path 200 miles ( 320 km ) long from Seguin , Texas to north of Houston , Texas . The highest rainfall amount reported was from Pine Springs in Fayette County , Texas , where 21 inches ( 530 mm ) fell in the 24 ‑ hour period ending on the morning of August 31 . Five died in the town of Shiner , Texas due to the flood . Downtown Halletsville flooded to a depth of 5 feet ( 1.5 m ) . Significant flooding occurred along the Lavaca , Guadalupe , and Colorado rivers in Texas . The cyclone spawned 14 tornadoes as well , including one at Scholes Field in Galveston , Texas which produced winds as high as 92 miles per hour ( 148 km / h ) at 7 : 15 pm on August 31 .

Floyd was first tracked as a tropical depression on September 3 when it organized east of the Leeward Islands . As the depression moved northwest , it caused heavy rain . The highest rainfall reported was 5.7 inches ( 140 mm ) at Antigua . It strengthened into a tropical storm , then reached hurricane strength on September 7 . Floyd turned to the northeast , and passed just southeast of Bermuda as a weakening hurricane . As a tropical storm , Floyd moved east across the Atlantic until losing its identity on September 12 . No damages are associated with Floyd . Although Bermuda was directly affected , the island experienced the weaker half of the storm .

A tropical wave exited western Africa on September 1 , gradually developing a concentrated area of convection . Early on September 7 , it was estimated that Tropical Depression Eleven about 400 mi ( 640 km ) east of the Leeward Islands , based on satellite imagery . The next day , data from the Hurricane Hunters indicated the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Gert . The newly upgraded storm passed between the islands of Dominica and Guadeloupe and continued to intensify , making landfall on southeastern Puerto Rico with winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) late September 8 . After emerging into the Atlantic , Gert weakened while passing off the north coast of the Dominican Republic . It restrengthened while turning northward near the Bahamas , becoming a hurricane on September 10 . Midday on September 11 , Gert attained its peak intensity with winds of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 988 mbar ( hPa ; 29.18 inHg ) . The hurricane turned northeastward and weakened over cooler waters , passing about 100 mi ( 160 km ) north of Bermuda on September 12 as a tropical storm . On September 14 , Gert weakened further to tropical depression status , dissipating the next day .

While passing through the Leeward Islands , Gert dropped moderate rainfall of 5.85 inches ( 148.5 mm ) on St. Thomas . Winds gusted to 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) on the island . In Puerto Rico , rainfall peaked at 6.02 inches ( 153 mm ) in the Puerto Rican municipality of Maricao . Gale warnings were issued for the Turks and Caicos Islands and later the southeastern Bahamas , and light rainfall occurred in the region , reaching 3.20 inches ( 81.28 mm ) on the island of San Salvador . Winds were light in Bermuda .

Harvey formed in the central Atlantic , reaching hurricane strength only a few hours after first becoming a named system on September 12 . From its initial position several hundred miles east of the Leeward Islands , Harvey moved northwest . Its path began curving more to the north , and was considered a threat to Bermuda until the continuing curve took Harvey away from the island . Harvey 's track became more easterly , and the storm weakened and became extratropical as it approached the Azores . Harvey caused no reported damage , although several ships reported experiencing tropical storm force winds .

A tropical depression formed on November 3 in the western Caribbean Sea about 150 miles ( 240 km ) south of the Cayman Islands . The depression moved north , reaching tropical storm strength as it moved through the Caymans . Katrina continued to strengthen , reaching hurricane strength half a day before landfall in Cuba . A weakening Katrina moved across eastern Cuba on November 6 . After emerging over water , the storm accelerated northeast through the Bahamas . Katrina 's circulation fell apart , and the storm merged with a front on November 8 . Hurricane Katrina is reported to have killed two and caused widespread flood damage in Cuba 's Camagüey province . Katrina was the only named storm responsible for fatalities in 1981 .

A frontal low over the warm waters of the Gulf Stream organized into an subtropical storm on November 12 while 400 miles ( 640 km ) east of Jacksonville , Florida . After moving northeastward , it turned to the northwest , threatening the northeastern United States as an intensifying subtropical storm that was gradually developing tropical characteristics . A high pressure system turned it to the northeast , and after peaking at 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) it became extratropical near Nova Scotia on November 17 . The storm produced significant beach erosion and coastal flooding .

Günther Lützow ( 4 September 1912 – 24 April 1945 ) was a German Luftwaffe aviator and fighter ace credited with 110 enemy aircraft shot down in over 300 combat missions . Apart from five victories during the Spanish Civil War , most of his claimed victories were over the Eastern Front in World War II . He also claimed 20 victories over the Western Front , including two victories — one of which was a four-engined bomber — flying the Messerschmitt Me 262 jet fighter . Born in Kiel , Lützow volunteered for military service in the Reichswehr of the Weimar Republic in 1931 . In parallel , he was accepted for flight training with the Deutsche Verkehrsfliegerschule , a covert military-training organization , and at the Lipetsk fighter-pilot school . Following flight training , he was posted to Jagdgeschwader " Richthofen " ( Fighter Wing " Richthofen " ) in 1934 . In 1937 , he volunteered for service with the Condor Legion during the Spanish Civil War where he was appointed Staffelkapitän ( squadron leader ) in Jagdgruppe 88 ( J / 88 — 88th Fighter Group ) . From April to September 1937 , he claimed five aerial victories . For his service in Spain he was awarded the Spanish Cross in Gold with Swords and Diamonds , Germany 's highest decoration of the Spanish Civil War .

After an assignment as fighter pilot instructor , he was appointed Gruppenkommandeur ( group commander ) in Jagdgeschwader 3 ( JG 3 — 3rd Fighter Wing ) following the outbreak of World War II . He led the Gruppe through the Battle of France and claimed his first victory of World War II on 14 May 1940 . Lützow became Geschwaderkommodore ( wing commander ) of JG 3 on 21 August 1940 . After 15 aerial victories during the Battle of Britain , he was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross on 18 September 1940 . Lützow commanded JG 3 in the aerial battles of Operation Barbarossa , the German invasion of the Soviet Union . There , after his 42nd aerial victory , he was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves on 20 July 1941 . Three months later , following his 92nd aerial victory of the war , Lützow was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords on 11 October 1941 . On 24 October , he claimed his 100th victory of the war , becoming the second fighter pilot after Werner Mölders to do so . From September to November 1941 , he also served as acting commander of Jagdgeschwader 51 ( JG 51 — 51st Fighter Wing ) , replacing Friedrich Beckh , who had been injured in combat , until the position was filled by Karl-Gottfried Nordmann . After being instructed not to fly operations , he ignored the order , adding two more victories before being posted on 11 August 1942 to the staff of General der Jagdflieger ( General of Fighters ) Adolf Galland , serving as " Inspector of Day Fighters , East " .

In July 1943 , Lützow was tasked with commanding fighter operations in Italy . From September 1943 to March 1944 , he led the 1 . Jagd Division ( 1st Fighter Division ) , commanding all day- and night-fighter operations in northwestern Germany , the Netherlands and Belgium . Lützow 's role in the " Fighter Pilots Revolt " was considered mutiny by Hermann Göring , who exiled Lützow to Italy . In April 1945 , he joined Galland 's Jagdverband 44 ( JV 44 — 44th Fighter Detachment ) . He was reported missing in action flying the Me 262 on 24 April 1945 while attempting to intercept a U.S. Army Air Forces B-26 Marauder raid near Donauwörth . His body was never recovered .

Lützow was born on 4 September 1912 in Kiel , at the time the capital of the Province of Schleswig-Holstein , a province of the Kingdom of Prussia . He was the third of five children of Friedrich Lützow , a naval officer , and his wife Hildegard , née Kinzel . He had an older brother , Werner , an older sister , Liselotte ( Elisabeth Charlotte ) , a younger sister , Hildegard , and a younger brother , Joachim . The family at the time lived at the Reventlouallee 23 on the west bank of the Kieler Förde . This was close to the German Imperial Naval Academy where his father attended a two-year Admiralty Staff training course . Following the outbreak of World War I , his father was posted to the staff of the Führer der Unterseeboote ( Commander of Submarines ) Fregattenkapitän ( Frigate Captain ) Hermann Bauer , and the family had to move to Wilhelmshaven . Lützow graduated with his Abitur ( university-preparatory high school diploma ) on 31 March 1931 from the Schulpforta , a boarding school for academically gifted students . Unlike his brothers , who both pursued a naval career , Lützow joined the Reichswehr ( Army of the Weimar Republic ) following his graduation from school . This decision had been influenced by his mother 's youngest brother , Eberhard Kinzel , at the time an officer in the Reichswehr and later General der Infanterie ( General of the Infantry ) in the Heer ( German Army ) .

On 7 April 1931 Lützow began his pilot training at the Deutsche Verkehrsfliegerschule ( DVS — German Air Transport School ) at Schleißheim . The DVS was headed by Karl Bolle , a World War I fighter pilot , and his flight instructor was Wilhelm Stör , another World War I fighter pilot . He and 29 other trainees were part of Kameradschaft 31 ( camaraderie of 1931 ) , abbreviated " K 31 " . Among the members of " K 31 " were future Luftwaffe staff officers Bernd von Brauchitsch , Wolfgang Falck , Günther Radusch and Hannes Trautloft . Lützow graduated from the DVS on 19 February 1932 . In late September 1931 , Lützow and three other students made a cross-country flight from Schleißheim to Berlin . The flight was made in two 2-seater Klemm Kl 26 training aircraft . Lützow , as the best air navigation student of his class , flew in the navigator 's position . In the Luftstreitkräfte of World War I , the pilot was called " Emil " and the navigator was called " Franz " . From that point on , Lützow was nicknamed " Franz " or the diminutive " Franzl " ( little Franz ) . From " K 31 " , Lützow and nine others were recommended for Sonderausbildung ( special training ) at the Lipetsk fighter-pilot school .

Following his return from flight training , Lützow joined 5 . ( Preußisches ) Infanterie-Regiment ( 5th ( Prussian ) Infantry Regiment ) , at first in Greifswald ( 15 October 1932 – 31 January 1933 ) as a Offizieranwärter ( officer candidate ) . There he completed his basic training . From 1 February to 31 March 1933 , he served with 5 . ( Preußisches ) Infanterie-Regiment in Stettin . He then attended the Kriegsschule ( war school ) in Dresden and was promoted to Leutnant ( second lieutenant ) on 1 October 1934 . In 1935 , he officially transferred to the newly formed Luftwaffe , at first serving as a fighter pilot instructor at Schleißheim ( 8 March 1935 – 31 March 1936 ) followed by a posting to II . Gruppe ( 2nd group ) of Sturzkampfgeschwader 162 ( StG 162 — 162nd Diver Bomber Wing ) at Lübeck-Blankensee ( 1 April – 3 November 1936 ) . In parallel , from 1 May to 1 November 1936 , Lützow held the position of Staffeloffizier ( squadron officer ) with 4 . Staffel ( 4th squadron ) of Jagdgeschwader 132 " Richthofen " ( JG 132 — 132nd Fighter Wing ) at Jüterbog-Damm .

During the Spanish Civil War , Lützow volunteered for service with the Condor Legion , a unit composed of volunteers from the Luftwaffe and from the Heer which served with the Nationalists . On 19 March 1937 , he was appointed Staffelkapitän ( squadron leader ) of 2 . Staffel ( 2nd squadron ) of Jagdgruppe 88 ( J / 88 — 88th Fighter Group ) . From March to September 1937 , Lützow , now an Oberleutnant ( first lieutenant ) , claimed five victories , including the first ever recorded claim by a Messerschmitt Bf 109 pilot . Flying a Bf 109 B , he shot down an Polikarpov I-15 , a Soviet built biplane fighter aircraft , on 6 April 1937 . On 26 April 1937 , air elements of the Condor Legion targeted and bombed Guernica , an attack which has been characterised as a war crime by Wette and Ueberschär , but Lützow did not participate in the attack as he was on home leave from 8 – 29 April 1937 . After he returned , Lützow claimed three more I-15s shot down , one on 22 May , another on 28 May , and his last on 18 August 1937 . His final aerial victory in Spain was over a Polikarpov I-16 , a monoplane fighter aircraft , which he shot down on 22 August 1937 .

On 16 October 1937 , Lützow was assigned to the Reichsluftfahrtministerium ( RLM — Ministry of Aviation ) Sonderstab W. ( special staff " W " ) under the command of and named after General Helmuth Wilberg . Sonderstab W. was responsible for collecting and analyzing the tactical lessons of the Spanish Civil War . Lützow wrote up his report , Erfahrungsbericht Winterausbildung 1937 / 1938 , Jüterbog-Damm , 5 . Staffel ( field report winter training 1937 / 1938 , Jüterbog-Damm , 5th squadron ) documenting his Spanish experiences and tactical proposals . His report referred to the finger-four formation as the clearly superior tactical formation for contemporary fighter operations . Lützow 's comrade Werner Mölders solved the problem of manoeuvring a finger-four formation months later by introducing what is still known today as the " crossover turn " or " tac turn " . At RLM , Lützow received his promotion to Hauptmann ( captain ) on 20 November 1937 . For his achievements in Spain , Lützow was honored with the Spanish Medalla de la Campaña and Medalla Militar and the German Spanish Cross in Gold with Swords and Diamonds ( Spanienkreuz in Gold mit Schwertern und Brillanten ) on 6 June 1939 .

On 12 February 1938 , Lützow met his future wife Gisela von Priesdorff , the oldest daughter of military historian Kurt von Priesdorff , at a carnival party held at the Jagdfliegerschule 1 ( fighter pilot school ) at Werneuchen . On 19 July 1938 the two were officially engaged , and they married on 11 March 1939 at the Holy Trinity Church in Berlin . They had a son , Hans-Ulrich , born 29 January 1940 , and a daughter , Carola , born 31 August 1942 . On 1 November 1938 , Lützow became a head flight instructor at Jagdfliegerschule 1 at Werneuchen , replacing Johannes Janke . At the time Jagdfliegerschule 1 , was under the command of Theo Osterkamp , a World War I fighter pilot .

World War II in Europe began on Friday 1 September 1939 , when German forces invaded Poland . Lützow did not participate in this campaign . He was tasked with providing fighter protection for Berlin . From the Jagdfliegerschule in Werneuchen , he detached two squadrons and placed them under the command of Jagdgruppe 20 based at Strausberg . At the end of October 1939 , a change in command of I. Gruppe ( 1st group ) of Jagdgeschwader 3 ( JG 3 — 3rd Fighter Wing ) was announced . The former commander Oberstleutnant ( Lieutenant Colonel ) Otto-Heinrich von Houwald was transferred to the Jagdfliegerschule in Werneuchen . Lützow joined I. Gruppe on 1 November 1939 , officially taking over command as Gruppenkommandeur ( group commander ) two days later .

On 10 May 1940 , the Wehrmacht began its offensive Operation Case Yellow ( Fall Gelb ) , the invasion of France and the neutral Low Countries . I. Gruppe of JG 3 participated in the offensive as a subordinated unit of Jagdgeschwader 77 ( JG 77 — 77th Fighter Wing ) . During the Battle of France , JG 77 was under control of I. Fliegerkorps ( 1st Air Corps ) , which formed the right wing of Luftflotte 3 ( 3rd Air Fleet ) in Belgium and the Netherlands . On 14 May 1940 , Lützow claimed his first two aerial victories of World War II . Flying out of Hargimont , his flight was tasked with providing fighter cover in the area northwest of Dinant . At 8 : 00 pm , the flight encountered 15 to 20 Armée de l 'Air ( French Air Force ) Curtiss P-36 Hawk fighter aircraft . Without loss , I. Gruppe claimed seven Curtisses shot down , including two claimed by Lützow . The next day , he claimed another P-36 southeast of Charleroi , his third victory of the war . On 19 May in combat north of Arras , he claimed a Hawker Hurricane fighter aircraft . Lützow claimed his fifth and sixth victory of the war on 31 May 1940 , shooting down two Morane-Saulnier M.S.406 fighter aircraft south of Amiens . This was followed by another P-36 on 3 June . On 6 June , he claimed a Bristol Blenheim light bomber followed by another Blenheim shot down on 8 June . This latter Blenheim was shot down when Lützow was returning from a Junkers Ju 87 dive bomber escort mission . The Blenheim IV was flying alone unescorted and Lützow set it on fire . The bomber exploded in midair near Abbeville .

On 23 June 1940 , I. Gruppe was moved to a forward airfield at Grandvilliers in preparation for missions over the Channel Coast , but the following day , all Bf 109s were sent to Wiesbaden , via Brussels , for a thorough maintenance check . The overhaul detachment arrived in Wiesbaden in the late afternoon and the pilots were sent on home leave . The cease-fire of the Armistice of 22 June 1940 went into effect on 25 June 1940 , ending the Battle of France . During the French campaign , Lützow flew 64 combat missions and claimed nine victories . Under his leadership , I. Gruppe was one of the most successful units in this campaign . It was credited with 88 aerial victories for the loss of six pilots killed and ten Bf 109s destroyed . By 3 July 1940 , the majority of the Bf 109s had returned to Grandvilliers from maintenance overhaul . At the time , Lützow had 45 pilots and 33 Bf 109 Es for disposition , 28 of the aircraft being operational . I. Gruppe flew its first missions over the Channel Coast on the evening of 5 July 1940 . In the following days flight operations were impeded by a period of bad weather . On 1 August 1940 , I. Gruppe was moved to Colembert , the Geschwaderstab ( headquarters unit ) and the other two Gruppen were moved to airfields in the vicinity of Boulogne . In preparations for actions against Great Britain , JG 3 was put under the control of Luftflotte 2 ( 2nd Air Fleet ) , thus placing it under the command of Jagdfliegerführer 2 Oberst ( Colonel ) Osterkamp .

At the height of the Battle of Britain on 21 August 1940 , it was announced that Lützow was to be appointed Geschwaderkommodore ( wing commander ) of JG 3 . He officially took command of JG 3 on 25 August and was promoted to Major ( major ) on 30 August 1940 . On 25 August , command of I. Gruppe was handed over to Oberleutnant Lothar Keller who led the Gruppe until the new Gruppenkommandeur Hauptmann Hans von Hahn arrived at the end of August . Lützow 's former adjutant with I. Gruppe , Friedrich-Franz von Cramon , joined him at the Geschwaderstab and continued to serve as his adjutant . Under Lützow 's command , the Geschwaderstab was based on the Channel Coast until 16 February 1941 , at first in Colembert , then in August 1940 it was moved to Wierre-au-Bois and at the end of September to Desvres . Lützow , as Geschwaderkommodore , claimed eight victories during the Battle of Britain , his 11th – 18th of the war . On 26 August 1940 , Lützow claimed a pair of Boulton Paul Defiant fighters from No. 264 Squadron off the north Kent coast . On 27 August 1940 , Lützow , and other Geschwaderkommodore , were summoned to a meeting held by Jagdfliegerführer 2 , Generalmajor ( Major General ) Kurt-Bertram von Döring in Wissant . This meeting was also attended by Generalfeldmarschall ( Field Marshal ) Albert Kesselring , and the commanding general of the II . Fliegerkorps Generaloberst ( Colonel General ) Bruno Loerzer . The subject of the meeting was the perceived lack of fighter protection provided for the bomber arm by the Jagdwaffe ( fighter force ) . The bomber crews had demanded the fighter escorts fly closer to the bombers , within visual proximity , increasing perceived security of the bomber crews . The generals accused the Geschwaderkommodere of being overly interested in accumulating aerial victories and awards at the expense of exposing the bombers to enemy attacks . Lützow argued that a fighter aircraft , such as the Bf 109 , required speed and space to combat the fast and more agile RAF fighter aircraft . The discussion ended with a compromise , some of the fighters were ordered to fly close and at the same speed as the bombers , while other fighters were to fly 1,000 – 2,000 meters ( 3,300 – 6,600 feet ) above the main bomber force , clearing the airspace of enemy fighters in the direction the bomber force was flying .

In September 1940 , Lützow claimed three Hurricanes , one each on 7 , 9 and 15 September . In addition to the 15 aerial victories he had claimed since the start of the war , he was credited with three ground victories and one barrage balloon destroyed . Subsequently , he was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernes Kreuzes ) on 18 September 1940 . The presentation was made by Göring at the headquarters of the Befehlshaber der Wehrmachts in den Niederlanden ( Supreme Commander of the Wehrmacht in the Netherlands ) , General der Flieger ( General of the Flyers ) Friedrich Christiansen , at Wassenaar near The Hague on 19 September . That day , both Lützow and Wolfgang Schellmann , Geschwaderkommodore of Jagdgeschwader 2 " Richthofen " ( JG 2 — 2nd Fighter Wing ) , were so honored . Lützow was credited with three further victories against the RAF , two P-36s shot down on 5 October , and a Spitfire on 5 November 1940 . These were his last victories claimed over the Western Front until 1945 , taking his World War II score to 18 .

In spring 1941 , Geschwaderstab of JG 3 was transferred to Mannheim-Sandhofen for a period of rest and conversion to the new Bf 109 F-2 . On 4 May 1941 , the Geschwaderstab was sent back into combat along the Channel Coast . On 7 May 1941 , Lützow 's Bf 109 F-2 ( Werknummer 8117 — factory number ) suffered minor damage in combat when his tail surfaces were shot up . Operating from Saint-Pol-Brias until 8 June , the Geschwaderstab flew missions over southern England and the English Channel without filing any claims or sustaining any losses .

In preparation for Operation Barbarossa , the German invasion of the Soviet Union , the Geschwaderstab began heading east on 8 June 1941 . They stopped for several days at Breslau-Gandau , the present day Wrocław – Copernicus Airport in Poland . On 18 June , the Geschwaderstab relocated to Hostynne , from where on 22 June 1941 , Lützow led JG 3 in combat against the Soviet Union . At the start of the campaign , JG 3 was subordinated to the V. Fliegerkorps ( 5th Air Corps ) , under command of General der Flieger Robert Ritter von Greim , which was part of Luftflotte 4 ( 4th Air Fleet ) , under command of Generaloberst Alexander Löhr . These air elements supported Generalfeldmarschall Gerd von Rundstedt 's Heeresgruppe Süd ( Army Group South ) , with the objective of capturing the Ukraine and its capital Kiev . Lützow claimed nine aerial victories in his first week on the Eastern Front . The first victory , an I-18 fighter , a variant of the Polikarpov I-16 , was achieved on the opening day of Barbarossa . On the second day of Barbarossa , he accounted for two Tupolev SB-2 bombers . On 24 June , he filed a claim for a Polikarpov I-153 biplane fighter destroyed . Two days later , he destroyed three aircraft , two SB-2 bombers and a Petlyakov Pe-2 ground attack aircraft . On 27 June , he shot down an Ilyushin DB-3 bomber followed by another Pe-2 on the following day , his last victory of June 1941 . Following a DB-3 bomber claimed on 7 July , Lützow was credited with four aerial victories on 10 July , consisting of one Vultee V-11 attack aircraft and three I-153s . The next day he claimed an II-16 . On 15 July he shot down two further I-16s and another DB-3 taking his total to 36 World War II victories .

On 16 July 1941 , Lützow claimed three further victories — a SB-2 , an I-16 and a DB-3 — and another DB-3 the next day . On 20 July , he claimed his 42nd aerial victory of the war , two V-11s . On the same day he was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes mit Eichenlaub ) , and was the 27th member of the Wehrmacht so honored . Major Friedrich Beckh , Geschwaderkommodore of Jagdgeschwader 51 ( JG 51 — 51st Fighter Wing ) at the time , was wounded in combat on 16 September . During Beckh 's convalescence , Lützow temporarily commanded both JG 51 and JG 3 until 21 December when Beckh returned . On 23 September , Lützow suffered combat damage to his radiator and had to make a forced landing behind Soviet lines near Krasnograd . He managed to return to the German lines unhurt . In October he claimed 29 victories , including five bombers shot down on 8 October . He was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes mit Eichenlaub und Schwertern ) on 11 October 1941 at which point he had accumulated 92 aerial victories since 1 September 1939 . The presentation was made on 12 October 1941 by Hitler at the Führer Headquarter Wolfsschanze ( Wolf 's Lair ) in Rastenburg ( now Kętrzyn in Poland ) .

On 24 October 1941 , Lützow became the second fighter pilot , after Mölders , to amass 100 aerial victories in World War II . This event was also mentioned in the Wehrmachtbericht , a propaganda radio report , on 25 October 1941 . Fearing his loss in combat , Lützow was then grounded , an order he did not always obey . In early November , he led Stab JG 3 back to Germany to rest and re-equip . During this period , Lützow participated in the honor guard for Generaloberst Ernst Udet . Udet had committed suicide on 17 November 1941 and on 1 December JG 3 received the honorary name " Udet " . In May 1942 Lützow and JG 3 commenced operations near Kharkov before moving into the Crimea and operating around Stalingrad . Lützow added one victory when he claimed a Polikarpov I-16 fighter on 21 May 1942 for his 107th kill . On 11 August , Lützow handed over command of JG 3 to Hauptmann Wolf-Dietrich Wilcke . According to Braatz , sometime in June 1942 ( most likely in Grakowo ) , Lützow was visited by two men from the SS . They were of lower rank . After Lützow asked them how he could be of assistance to them they responded by requesting as many of his men as possible to form up execution squads to liquidate Jews , Soviet Political Officers and other " scum " . Lützow was furious and ordered the entire Geschwader in full dress uniform to assemble and before the Jagdgeschwader he explained what the SS had requested and how he considered this act to be barbaric and criminal . He threatened to resign from command and take off his uniform if a single soldier volunteered . Braatz speculated whether this act got Lützow into trouble with the SS and the NSDAP .

In August 1942 , Lützow was posted to the staff of General der Jagdflieger ( General of Fighters ) Adolf Galland as Inspector of Day Fighters , Eastern Area . Braatz argues that Galland 's decision to appoint Lützow to this position may have been motivated by a desire to get him out of the " line of fire " from the SS and NSDAP . On 1 April 1943 , Lützow was promoted to Oberst ( colonel ) . In July 1943 , Lützow became Inspector of Day Fighters , Italian Front , based in Naples . From September 1943 to March 1944 , he commanded the 1 . Jagd-Division ( 1st Fighter Division ) in Defense of the Reich at Döberitz , where he assumed command for day- and night-fighter operations in northwestern Germany , the Netherlands and Belgium . 1 . Jagd-Division was under control of 1 . Jagd-Korps ( 1st Fighter Corps ) commanded by Generalmajor Joseph Schmid . Lützow was relieved of this command on 16 March 1944 due to personal differences with Schmid . Following his dismissal , he was given command of the 4 . Flieger-Schuldivision ( 4th Flyers Training Division ) .

Lützow became known as a central figure and spokesman behind the Fighter Pilots ' Mutiny which escalated in a meeting with Göring on 22 January 1945 . This was an attempt to reinstate Galland who had been dismissed for outspokenness regarding the Oberkommando der Luftwaffe ( Luftwaffe high command ) , and had been replaced by Oberst Gordon Gollob as General der Jagdflieger . The meeting was held at the Haus der Flieger in Berlin and was attended by a number of high-ranking fighter pilot leaders which included Lützow , Hermann Graf , Gerhard Michalski , Helmut Bennemann , Kurt Bühligen , Erich Leie and Herbert Ihlefeld , and their antagonist Göring supported by his staff Brauchitsch and Karl Koller . The fighter pilots , with Lützow taking the lead as spokesman , criticized Göring and made him personally responsible for the decisions taken which effectively had led to the lost air war over Europe . This behavior , the fact that someone dared to criticize Göring in his leadership abilities , was regarded as mutiny by Göring , who relieved him of command and had him posted to Italy to take over Jagdfliegerführer Oberitalien ( Fighter Leader Northern Italy ) from Oberst Eduard Neumann . Göring exiled Lützow from Germany by placing him under " Reichsacht " ( lit . " Ban from the Reich " ) . He was not allowed to inform his secretary in Jüterbog nor his wife back home , he immediately had to leave Germany .

In early April 1945 , Lützow joined Galland 's Jagdverband 44 ( JV 44 — 44th Fighter Detachment ) at Munich-Riem . JV 44 was equipped with the Messerschmitt Me 262 jet fighter , an aircraft which was heavily armed and faster than any Allied fighter . Galland hoped that the Me 262 would compensate for the numerical superiority of the Allies . Lützow had been released from his position as fighter leader in Italy and Galland appointed him as his adjutant . Lützow was credited with two aerial victories flying the Me 262 . Lützow was posted missing in action following combat on 24 April 1945 while attempting to intercept an attack by United States Army Air Forces ( USAAF ) Martin B-26 Marauder medium bombers near Donauwörth . According to Stockert , an examination of U.S. records by Mr. Hirst indicates that Lützow 's Me 262 crashed near Schrobenhausen . The USAAF flew three attacks against the oil terminals at Schrobenhausen , south of Neuburg an der Donau , that day . On their second mission , 22 B-26 bombers escorted by 16 Republic P-47 Thunderbolt fighter aircraft , were just beginning their bomb run at 3 : 25 pm , when they came under attack by four Me 262s . Two P-47s came diving down from their top cover position to fend off the attacking jets . In this account , one Me 262 pilot noticed that he was about to come under attack and attempted to dive away . Unable to recover from this dive , the American pilots observed the Me 262 crashing into a small hill . This Me 262 may have been piloted by Lützow .

That day , Lützow had led a flight of six Me 262s of JV 44 against a force of 256 medium bombers of the 322nd and 344th Bombardment Group ( 344th BG ) . Lützow 's flight included Hauptmann Walter Krupinski and Oberleutnant Klaus Neumann . Two of the Me 262s had to abort the mission due to engine problems . The remaining four , of which at least Lützow 's and Neumann 's Me 262s were armed with the R4M air-to-air rockets , attacked elements of 344th BG . Following the first attack , at least three B-26 Marauder bombers were seen trailing smoke , when the Me 262s came under attack by P-47 Thunderbolt fighter aircraft of the 365th Fighter Group . Blue Flight leader Captain Jerry G. Mast and his wingman , Second Lieutenant Byron Smith , went into full power dives to drive the attacking Me 262s away . Following the dive , Smith got separated from Mast and pursued an Me 262 . Mast and Second Lieutenant William H. Myers then jointly went after another Me 262 which went into an even steeper dive . The Me 262 was seen crashing into the ground and exploding . In Forsyth 's account , the Me 262 chased by Mast and Myers was Lützow 's and had been flying furthest to the south .

Lützow was credited with 110 enemy aircraft shot down in 310 combat missions . He claimed five victories in Spain , and 105 during World War II . The majority of his World War II victories were claimed over the Eastern Front , although 20 were claimed over the Western Front , two of which were achieved while flying the Me 262 jet fighter . These included one four-engined bomber . This and the ♠ ( Ace of spades ) indicates those aerial victories which made Lützow an " ace-in-a-day " , a term which designates a fighter pilot who has shot down five or more airplanes in a single day . This along with the * ( asterisk ) indicates conflicting information regarding the date or type of the aerial victory .

Imperator torosus , commonly known as the brawny bolete , is a species of bolete fungus in the family Boletaceae . It is native to southern Europe east to the Caucasus and Israel . It is generally associated with deciduous trees such as hornbeam , oak and beech in warm , dry locales . Although generally rare in Europe , it appears to be relatively common in Hungary . Appearing in summer and autumn on chalky soils , the stocky fruit bodies have an ochre cap up to 20 cm ( 8 in ) across , yellow pores on the cap underside , and a wine-red to brown or blackish stipe up to 6 – 15 cm ( 2.4 – 5.9 in ) long by 3 – 6 cm ( 1.2 – 2.4 in ) wide . The pale yellow flesh changes to different colours when broken or bruised depending on age ; younger mushrooms become reddish , and older ones additionally take on bluish tones . Elias Magnus Fries and Christopher Theodor Hök first described this species as Boletus torosus in 1835 , a name by which it was known for many years . Modern molecular phylogenetics shows that it is only distantly related to Boletus edulis — the type species of Boletus — and it was duly placed in the new genus Imperator in 2015 . Eating raw mushrooms of this species leads to vomiting and diarrhea . Gastrointestinal symptoms have also occurred after eating cooked specimens , though some people have eaten it without ill-effects .

Swiss mycologist Louis Secretan described the brawny bolete as Boletus pachypus in his 1833 work Mycographie Suisse . Many of his names have been rejected for nomenclatural purposes because Secretan had a narrow species concept , dividing many taxa into multiple species that were not supported by other authorities , and his works did not use binomial nomenclature consistently . Swedish mycologists Elias Magnus Fries and Christopher Theodor Hök described Boletus torosus in 1835 based on Secretan 's B. pachypus — distinct from the B. pachypus described by Fries himself . Fries reported in his 1838 book Epicrisis Systematis Mycologici seu Synopsis Hymenomycetum that he had not actually observed the species , and he did not designate a type specimen or illustration . The specific epithet torosus , which derives from Latin , means " muscular " . In the United Kingdom , it is known commonly as the " brawny bolete " . The German name Ochsen-Röhrling means " oxen bolete " and the French bolet vigoureux is " strong bolete " . French naturalist Lucien Quélet transferred the species to the now-obsolete genus Dictyopus in 1886 , which resulted in the synonym Dictyopus torosus . Boletus xanthocyaneus , first described by Henri Romagnesi in 1948 as Boletus purpureus var. xanthocyaneus and classified as a species in 1976 , was considered by Italian mycologist Carlo Luciano Alessio to be synonymous with B. torosus . Others , however , regard this fungus a distinct species . In 2013 Italian mycologists Valerio Bertolini and Giampaolo Simonini observed that the brevity of the original species description meant that some subsequent papers used B. torosus for specimens that aligned more closely with descriptions of Boletus rhodopurpureus or B. luteocupreus ( both now placed in the genus Imperator ) . They did note that Swiss and French authors had adhered to a more detailed description by Quélet , and that this was the only description faithful to the original description with a grey cap and yellow pores that slowly turn red . They concluded the original description must have been based on specimens growing near the French-Swiss border and hence selected a neotype specimen from this region .

Within the large genus Boletus , the brawny bolete was classified in the section Luridi , which included species producing medium to large fruit bodies with thick , swollen stipes , and minute pores . In 1996 , Czech mycologist Jiří Hlaváček further subdivided the section Luridi , defining and naming the subsection Torosi — for B. torosus — to contain boletes that strongly bruised blue-black with handling . In a molecular analysis of Boletaceae phylogeny , the brawny bolete was most closely related to Boletus luteocupreus ; these two species formed a clade that was sister to B. luridus . Genetic analysis published in 2013 showed that B. torosus and many ( but not all ) red-pored boletes were part of a dupainii clade ( named for B. dupainii ) , well-removed from the core group of Boletus edulis ( the type species of genus Boletus ) and relatives within the Boletineae . This indicated that the brawny bolete and its relatives needed to be placed in a new genus . It was made the type species of the new genus Imperator , becoming Imperator torosus , in 2015 .

Quite heavy compared with other mushrooms of similar size , the stocky fruit body contains relatively high amounts of chitin . Holding the brawny bolete has been described as " having a stone in your hand " . The cap is 6 – 20 cm ( 2.4 – 7.9 in ) in diameter . Hemispherical when young , it extends and flattens into a convex and finally a flattish shape , sometimes forming a slight depression in the centre . Initially curled downward and inward , the cap margin gradually turns outward , eventually flattening in maturity , and sometimes protruding beyond the pored undersurface . The surface texture starts out slightly velvety , but becomes smoother and hairless with age ; in moist weather , the cap is slightly sticky . Changing over time , the colour of the cap is initially vivid yellow or golden yellow , then ochre , then darkening in age to brown . However , if the cap cuticle is bruised , or even touched , there are sudden changes in the colour that depend on the age of the mushroom : young , yellow caps become cherry-red , while ochre-brown cap tissue bruises to reddish-purple . These colour changes soon give way to bluish or greyish tones , which , when combined , give the cap a variegated appearance .

The pores on the cap underside are round and small , the sulfur-yellow colour of the pore surface becoming less intense with age . The squat stipe measures 6 – 15 cm ( 2.4 – 5.9 in ) long by 3 – 6 cm ( 1.2 – 2.4 in ) thick . Egg-shaped when young , it lengthens somewhat as the mushroom grows , but is still bulbous in maturity ; a mature stipe is typically a little shorter than the diameter of the cap . It is initially roughly the same colour as the cap , but as it matures , develops a wine-red colouration near the base and a dirty brown to bluish-black colouration elsewhere . The surface has a mesh-like pattern ( reticulation ) that has a colour development similar to that of the cap : initially yellow , then purplish , and finally dark brown . The flesh is thick and hard . It is yellow , except for the stipe base where it is deep red , or dark brownish in older mushrooms . The pores , stipe and flesh turn greenish-blue with bruising or cutting . The smell is unpleasant , but the taste is mild .

The spore print is olive-brown . The smooth oval spores measure 12 – 15 by 5 – 6 μm , and sometimes have an internal oil drop . Basidia ( spore-bearing cells ) are club-shaped , four-spored , and measure 22 – 34 by 8 – 9 μm . The fusiform ( fuse-shaped ) cystidia are colourless with oil droplets , and have dimensions of 40 – 50 by 7 – 8 μm . Cap cuticle tissue is in the form of a trichoderm , where the outermost hyphae emerge roughly parallel , like hairs , perpendicular to the cap surface . These cylindrical , interwoven hyphae contain septa .

The Mediterranean species Boletus poikilochromus somewhat resembles I. torosus , but can usually be distinguished by a smaller fruit body , a cylindrical stipe , and the lighter colours of younger mushrooms . Also , B. poikilochromus does not feature the colour change of the stipe base in mature fruit bodies that is seen in I. torosus . Imperator luteocupreus and Caloboletus radicans are also similar but the pores of the former are red and the flesh of latter has a bitter taste . Several chemical tests can be used to distinguish I. torosus from other similar boletes , such as I. rhodopurpureus . I. torosus displays the following characteristic colour changes with tests performed on cut flesh less than 12 hours old : ammonium hydroxide ( NH4OH ) – yellow centre bordered by a blue circular outer ring ; potassium hydroxide ( KOH ) – deep buff ( instantly ) ; ferrous sulphate ( FeS04 ) – no change ; Melzer 's reagent – dark blue ; phenol – blue green ( very slow ) ; formalin – mid blue ( slow ) .

Like many boletes , Imperator torosus causes gastrointestinal symptoms such as abdominal pain , diarrhoea and vomiting when eaten raw . These reactions can also happen to some people when the mushroom is eaten cooked , though others have consumed it with no ill effects . In a 1994 study , researchers Ulrich Kiwitt and Hartmut Laatsch looked for the antabuse-like compound coprine in Suillellus luridus and similar species that had been suspected of inducing antabuse-like reactions with alcohol . Coprine ingestion results in heat and flushing in the face , tingling in arms and legs , nausea and vomiting , and increased heart rate within five to ten minutes of consuming alcohol . They found none in the suspect species , but did find indications for it in Imperator torosus . They concluded that the most likely explanation for historical poisoning incidents was a misidentification of I. torosus with Suillellus luridus , though they could not rule out the latter species containing a hitherto unidentified compound causing alcohol-related reactions . No clinical cases of alcohol-related sensitivity have been recorded for I. torosus .

Imperator torosus is native to southern Europe east to the Caucasus and Israel . A mycorrhizal species , the fungus is generally associated with deciduous trees such as hornbeam ( Carpinus ) , oak ( Quercus ) and beech ( Fagus ) in warm , dry locales , and is generally rare in Europe . In the United Kingdom , it is listed as a " priority species " — a threatened species requiring conservation action under the UK Biodiversity Action Plan . Similarly , it is on the list of protected species of macrofungi in Montenegro . It appears to be relatively common in Hungary . It is found under Palestine oak ( Quercus calliprinos ) in the Bar 'am forest in Upper Galilee . Fruitings typically occur from July to September in calcareous ( chalky ) soil , with fruit bodies appearing either singly or in small groups .

Kareena Kapoor ( pronounced [ kəˈriːnaː kəˈpuːr ] ; born 21 September 1980 ) , also known by her married name Kareena Kapoor Khan , is an Indian actress who appears in Hindi films . She is the daughter of actors Randhir Kapoor and Babita , and the younger sister of actress Karisma Kapoor . Noted for playing a variety of characters in a range of film genres — from romantic comedies to crime dramas — Kapoor is the recipient of several awards , including six Filmfare Awards , and is one of Bollywood 's most popular and highest-paid actresses . After making her acting debut in the 2000 war film Refugee , Kapoor established herself in Hindi cinema with roles in the historical drama Aśoka , and the blockbuster melodrama Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham ... ( both 2001 ) . This initial success was followed by a series of commercial failures and repetitive roles , which garnered her negative reviews . The year 2004 marked a turning point for Kapoor when she played against type in the role of a sex worker in the drama Chameli . She subsequently earned wide critical recognition for her portrayal of a riot victim in the 2004 drama Dev and a character based on William Shakespeare 's heroine Desdemona in the 2006 crime film Omkara . She went on to receive Filmfare Awards for Best Actress and Best Supporting Actress for her performances in the 2007 romantic comedy Jab We Met and the 2010 drama We Are Family , respectively . Kapoor achieved further success by featuring as the female lead in four of India 's top-grossing productions — the 2009 comedy-drama 3 Idiots , the 2011 romantic drama Bodyguard , the 2011 science fiction Ra.One , and the 2015 social drama Bajrangi Bhaijaan — and received praise for her roles in the 2009 thriller Kurbaan and the 2012 drama Heroine .

Born on 21 September 1980 in Bombay ( now Mumbai ) , Kapoor ( often informally referred to as ' Bebo ' ) is the younger daughter of Randhir Kapoor and Babita ( née Shivdasani ) ; her elder sister Karisma is also an actress . She is the paternal granddaughter of actor and filmmaker Raj Kapoor , maternal granddaughter of actor Hari Shivdasani , and niece of actor Rishi Kapoor . According to Kapoor , the name " Kareena " was derived from the book Anna Karenina , which her mother read while she was pregnant with her . She is of Punjabi descent on her father 's side , and on her mother 's side she is of Sindhi and British descent . As a child , Kapoor regularly practised Hinduism with her family , but was also exposed to Christianity from her mother . Describing herself as a " very naughty [ and ] spoilt child " , Kapoor 's exposure to films from a young age kindled her interest in acting ; she was particularly inspired by the work of actresses Nargis and Meena Kumari . Despite her family background , her father disapproved of women entering films because he believed it conflicted with the traditional maternal duties and responsibility of women in the family . This led to a conflict between her parents , and they separated . She was then raised by her mother , who worked several jobs to support her daughters until Karisma debuted as an actress in 1991 . After living separately for several years , her parents reconciled in October 2007 . Kapoor remarked " My father is also an important factor in my life [ ... ] [ Al ] though we did not see him often in our initial years , we are a family now . "

Kapoor attended Jamnabai Narsee School in Mumbai , followed by Welham Girls ' School in Dehradun . She attended the institution primarily to satisfy her mother , though later admitted to liking the experience . According to Kapoor , she wasn 't inclined towards academics though received good grades in all her classes except mathematics . After graduating from Welham she studied commerce for two years at Mithibai College in Vile Parle ( Mumbai ) . Kapoor then registered for a three-month summer course in microcomputers at Harvard University in the United States . She later developed an interest in law , and enrolled at the Government Law College , Mumbai ; during this period , she developed a long-lasting passion for reading . However , after completing her first year , Kapoor decided to pursue her interest to become an actress . She began training at an acting institute in Mumbai mentored by Kishore Namit Kapoor , a member of the Film and Television Institute of India ( FTII ) .

While training at the institute , Kapoor was cast as the female lead in Rakesh Roshan 's Kaho Naa ... Pyaar Hai ( 2000 ) opposite his son , Hrithik Roshan . Several days into the filming , however , she abandoned the project ; Kapoor later explained that she had benefited by not doing the film since more prominence was given to the director 's son . She debuted later that year alongside Abhishek Bachchan in J. P. Dutta 's war drama Refugee . Set during the Indo-Pakistani war of 1971 , the film centers on a man who illegally transports civilians back and forth across the border . Kapoor portrayed Naaz , a Bangladeshi girl who falls in love with Bachchan 's character while illegally migrating to Pakistan with her family . Her performance was acclaimed by critics ; Taran Adarsh of Bollywood Hungama described her as " a natural performer " and noted " the ease with which she emotes the most difficult of scenes " , while India Today reported that Kapoor belonged to a new breed of Hindi film actors that breaks away from character stereotypes . On the experience of acting in her first film , Kapoor described it as " tough ... [ but ] also a great learning experience " . Refugee was a moderate box-office success in India and Kapoor 's performance earned her the Filmfare Award for Best Female Debut .

For her second release , Kapoor was paired opposite Tusshar Kapoor in Satish Kaushik 's box-office hit Mujhe Kucch Kehna Hai ( 2001 ) . A review in The Hindu noted that based on her first two films , she was " definitely the actress to watch out for " . She next starred alongside Jackie Shroff and Hrithik Roshan in Subhash Ghai 's flop Yaadein , followed by Abbas-Mustan 's moderately successful thriller Ajnabee , co-starring Akshay Kumar , Bobby Deol and Bipasha Basu . Later that year , she appeared in Santosh Sivan 's period epic Aśoka , a partly fictionalized account of the life of the Indian emperor of the same name . Featured opposite Shah Rukh Khan , Kapoor found herself challenged playing the complex personality of her character Kaurwaki ( a Kalingan princess ) with whom Ashoka falls in love . Aśoka was screened at the Venice and 2001 Toronto International Film Festivals , and received generally positive reviews internationally but failed to do well in India , which was attributed by critics to the way Ashoka was portrayed . Jeff Vice of The Deseret News described Kapoor as " riveting " and commended her screen presence . Rediff.com , however , was more critical concluding that her presence in the film was primarily used for aesthetic purposes . At the 47th Filmfare Awards , Aśoka was nominated for five awards including a Best Actress nomination for Kapoor .

A key point in Kapoor 's career came when she was cast by Karan Johar as Pooja ( " Poo " , a good-natured , superficial girl ) in the 2001 melodrama Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham ... alongside an ensemble cast . Filming the big-budget production was a new experience for Kapoor , and she recalls it fondly : " [ I ] t was great fun doing [ the film and ] we had a blast . [ W ] orking with the unit and the six mega star set was a dream come true . " Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham ... was an immensely popular release , finishing as India 's second highest-grossing film of the year and Kapoor 's highest-grossing film to that point . It also became one of the biggest Bollywood success of all time in the overseas market , earning over ₹ 1 billion ( US $ 15 million ) worldwide . Taran Adarsh described Kapoor as " one of the main highlights of the film " , and she received her second Filmfare nomination for the role — her first for Best Supporting Actress — as well as nominations at the International Indian Academy ( IIFA ) and Screen Awards .

Box Office India reported that the success of Mujhe Kucch Kehna Hai and Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham ... established Kapoor as a leading actress of Hindi cinema , and Rediff.com published that with Aśoka she had become the highest-paid Indian actress to that point earning ₹ 15 million ( US $ 220,000 ) per film . During 2002 and 2003 , Kapoor continued to work in a number of projects but experienced a setback . All six films in which she starred — Mujhse Dosti Karoge ! , Jeena Sirf Merre Liye , Talaash : The Hunt Begins ... , Khushi , Main Prem Ki Diwani Hoon , and the four-hour war epic LOC Kargil — were critically and commercially unsuccessful . Critics described her performances in these films as " variations of the same character " she played in Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham ... , and expressed concern that she was becoming typecast .

By 2004 , Kapoor was keen on broadening her range as an actress and thus decided to portray more challenging roles . Under the direction of Sudhir Mishra , Kapoor played the role of a golden-hearted prostitute in Chameli , a film relating the story of a young prostitute who meets with a widowed investment banker ( played by Rahul Bose ) . When Kapoor was initially offered the film she refused it , explaining that she would be uncomfortable in the role . She relented when Mishra approached her for the second time , and in preparation for the role , visited several of Mumbai 's red-light districts at night to study the mannerisms of sex workers and the way they dressed . Chameli was well received by critics and the film marked a significant turning point in her career , earning Kapoor a special jury recognition at the 49th Filmfare Awards . Indiatimes praised her " intuitive brilliance " and stated that she had exceeded all expectations . Rediff.com , however , found her portrayal unconvincing and excessively stereotypical , describing her as " sounding more like a teenager playacting than a brash , hardened streetwalker " and comparing her mannerisms to a caricature .

Kapoor next co-starred in Mani Ratnam 's bilingual project Yuva alongside Ajay Devgan , Abhishek Bachchan , Vivek Oberoi , Rani Mukerji and Esha Deol . The film , consisting of three chapters , tells the story of six individuals linked by a car accident . Kapoor is featured in the third chapter as Oberoi 's love interest ( Mira , a witty young woman ) . In a Times of India review film critic Subhash K. Jha described her role as " fey and insubstantial " , but further stated that " she turns these character traits to her own advantage to create a girl who is at once enigmatic and all-there " . She then appeared alongside Amitabh Bachchan and Fardeen Khan in Govind Nihalani 's critically acclaimed film Dev , which revolved around the 2002 Hindu-Muslim riots in the Indian state of Gujarat . Kapoor 's role was that of a Muslim victim named Aaliya , modelled after Zaheera Sheikh ( a key witness in Vadodara 's Best Bakery case ) . It earned her a Filmfare Critics Award for Best Actress and nominations for Best Actress at various award ceremonies . Taran Adarsh described her as " first-rate " and in particular noted her scene with Bachchan 's character .

Shortly afterwards , Kapoor was cast for the first time as a villain in the thriller Fida . Set against the backdrop of the Mumbai underworld , the film follows the story of an online heist in which her character , Neha Mehra , becomes involved . Although the film was unsuccessful at the box office , Kapoor received positive reviews for her performance , and some critics noted a distinct progression from her earlier roles . Her subsequent releases that year included Abbas-Mustan 's thriller Aitraaz and Priyadarshan 's comedy Hulchul , both of which were successful at the Indian box office . Following the success of her last two releases , she was cast as the protagonist of the 2005 drama Bewafaa . The feature received mostly negative reviews , and Kapoor 's portrayal of Anjali Sahai ( an unfaithful woman ) was not well received . Nikhat Kazmi of Indiatimes believed that to become a serious actress Kapoor was embodying a maturer , more-jaded character beyond her years in Bewafaa . That same year , she starred in the romantic dramas Kyon Ki and Dosti : Friends Forever , both of which underperformed at the box office ; however , Kapoor 's performance in Kyon Ki was generally well received by critics ( with the BBC describing her as " a pure natural " ) .

In 2006 , Kapoor appeared in three films . She first starred in the thriller 36 China Town , followed by the comedy Chup Chup Ke ; both were moderately successful . She next portrayed the character of Desdemona in Omkara — the Hindi adaptation of William Shakespeare 's Othello . The film ( directed by Vishal Bhardwaj ) is a tragedy of sexual jealousy set against the backdrop of the political system in Uttar Pradesh . Describing Bhardwaj as a " world-class director [ with ] a unique style " , Kapoor was cast in the project after the director had seen her performance in Yuva , and was subsequently required to attend script-reading sessions along with the entire cast . The feature premiered at the 2006 Cannes Film Festival and was screened at the Cairo International Film Festival . Omkara was received positively by critics , and Kapoor 's portrayal earned her a fourth Filmfare Award and first Screen Award . In a 2010 retrospective of the " Top 80 Iconic Performances " of Hindi cinema , Filmfare wrote that she was " brilliant " and praised her ability to " effortless [ ly ] " convey the various emotions her character went through . Kapoor considered her role in Omkara as a " new benchmark " in her career , and compared her portrayal of Dolly with her own evolving maturity as a woman .

Following Omkara , Kapoor took a short break from acting , as she felt that " nothing [ was ] challenging enough for me to say yes " . In an interview with The Times of India Kapoor commented , " In my initial years in the industry , I pushed myself to do a lot of work because I was greedy . I did some films — which I now regret — purely for the money . Today , I want to do selective films . " Later that year , she appeared briefly in one of the year 's biggest hits , the Farhan Akhtar action-thriller Don ( a remake of the 1978 film of the same name ) .

Kapoor returned to film as the female protagonist Geet Dhillon , a vivacious Sikh girl with a zest for life , in the romantic comedy Jab We Met ( 2007 ) . Director Imtiaz Ali was not a well-known figure before its production , with only one feature credit to his name , but Kapoor agreed to the film after being impressed with his " mind-blowing " script . Featured opposite Shahid Kapoor , the film relates the story of two people with contrasting personalities who meet on a train and eventually fall in love . The film was received favourably by critics and became successful at the box office with gross earnings of ₹ 303 million ( US $ 4.5 million ) . Kapoor won several awards for her performance , including her second Screen Award and the Filmfare Award for Best Actress . Jaspreet Pandohar of the BBC commented that the role required a mixture of naivety and spontaneity , and was impressed with Kapoor 's effort . The critic Rajeev Masand labelled her the film 's " biggest strength , as she brings alive her character with not just those smart lines , but with the kind of candor actors seldom invest in their work . " While shooting for Jab We Met , Kapoor and Shahid ended their three-year relationship . When asked by Mumbai Mirror , she stated " I hold him in utmost regard , and I hope one day we could be good friends . He is a great guy . "

The following year , Kapoor co-starred in Vijay Krishna Acharya 's action-thriller Tashan , where she met her future husband in actor Saif Ali Khan . Although a poll ( conducted by Bollywood Hungama ) named it the most anticipated release of the year , the film underperformed at the box office grossing ₹ 279 million ( US $ 4.1 million ) in India . After providing her voice for the character of Laila , the love interest of a street dog named Romeo , in the Yash Raj Films and Walt Disney Pictures animated film Roadside Romeo , Kapoor played a mistrustful wife who believed her husband was unfaithful in Rohit Shetty 's comedy Golmaal Returns . A sequel to the 2006 film Golmaal : Fun Unlimited , the film had an ambivalent reception from critics , and Kapoor received mixed reviews . The Indian Express believed the screenplay was derivative , concluding : " There is nothing particularly new about a suspicious wife keeping tabs on her husband , and there is nothing particularly new in the way Kareena plays it . " Golmaal Returns was a financial success with global revenues of ₹ 793 million ( US $ 12 million ) .

In 2009 , Kapoor was cast as Simrita Rai ( a surgeon who moonlights as a model ) in Sabbir Khan 's battle-of-the-sexes comedy Kambakkht Ishq , opposite Akshay Kumar . Set in Los Angeles , it was the first Indian film to be shot at Universal Studios and featured cameo appearances by Hollywood actors . The film was poorly received by critics but became an economic success , earning over ₹ 840 million ( US $ 12 million ) worldwide ; a review in Times of India described Kapoor 's performance as " a complete let-down " and " unconvincing " . The box-office flop Main Aurr Mrs Khanna came next , following which she played the leading lady in the dramatic thriller Kurbaan , alongside Saif Ali Khan and Vivek Oberoi . The film ( which marked the directorial debut of Rensil D 'Silva ) featured Kapoor as Avantika Ahuja , a woman who is confined to house arrest after discovering that her husband is a terrorist . Describing the film as " an emotionally draining experience " , Kapoor explained that it was difficult to disconnect from her character . The film was critically praised , and Kapoor received her fourth Filmfare Best Actress nomination . Gaurav Malani of The Economic Times commented that after a long time the actress was given " a role of substance that brings her performing potential to the fore " , while Subhash K. Jha described it as her " most consistently pitched performance to date " played " with splendid sensitivity " and " credib [ ility ] " .

Kapoor 's second Filmfare nomination that year came for Rajkumar Hirani 's National Film Award-winning 3 Idiots , a film loosely based on the novel Five Point Someone by Chetan Bhagat . Co-starring alongside Aamir Khan , R. Madhavan and Sharman Joshi , Kapoor played Pia ( a medical student and Khan 's love interest ) . Several actresses were considered for the role , though Kapoor was eventually cast under the recommendation of Khan . The film received critical acclaim and emerged as the highest-grossing Bollywood film of all time up until then , grossing ₹ 2.03 billion ( US $ 30 million ) in India . It also did well internationally , earning over ₹ 1.08 billion ( US $ 16 million ) , the second biggest Bollywood success ever in the overseas market . The Deccan Herald opined that Kapoor " brings a dollop of sunshine and feminine grace to an otherwise masculine tale . She is so spunky and spontaneous you wish there was room for more of her . " 3 Idiots received several Best Movie recognitions at major Indian award functions , and Kapoor was awarded the IIFA Award for Best Actress , among others .

In 2010 , Kapoor appeared in the romantic comedy Milenge Milenge , a production delayed since 2005 . The feature garnered negative reviews and poor box-office returns . Kapoor 's role was small , and not well received . She next starred alongside Kajol and Arjun Rampal in We Are Family , an official adaptation of the Hollywood tearjerker Stepmom ( 1998 ) from director Siddharth Malhotra . Kapoor played the role of the career-oriented Shreya Arora ( a character originally played by Julia Roberts ) and refrained from watching the film again so she could bring her own interpretation to it . Priyanka Roy of The Telegraph criticized the film for being " superficial and unnecessarily melodramatic " , but praised Kapoor for " breath [ ing ] life and a new-found maturity into what is largely a uni-dimensional character " . We Are Family emerged a moderate success and Kapoor was awarded the Best Supporting Actress at the 56th Filmfare Awards . At the end of the year , she reunited with director Rohit Shetty for Golmaal 3 , a sequel to Golmaal Returns . Like its predecessor , the film received mixed reviews though emerged as the most successful entry in the Golmaal series , earning more than ₹ 1 billion ( US $ 15 million ) domestically . For her portrayal of the tomboy Daboo , Kapoor received Best Actress nominations at various award ceremonies including Filmfare .

Kapoor had further success in 2011 as the love interest of Salman Khan 's character in the romantic drama Bodyguard , a remake of the 2010 Malayalam film of the same name . The film was not well received by critics , though became a financial success , with a domestic total of ₹ 1.4 billion ( US $ 21 million ) — India 's highest-earning film of the year . A review in Mint dismissed Kapoor 's role as the " sacrificial , ornamental [ and ] submissive female " ; Mid Day referred to her as " bright " , arguing that she " actually manages to bring her caricature of a role alive " . She next appeared in Anubhav Sinha 's science fiction film Ra.One with Shah Rukh Khan and Arjun Rampal . Made on a budget of ₹ 1.5 billion ( US $ 22 million ) — " India 's most expensive film " at the time — the film follows the story of a London-based videogame designer creating a villainous character who escapes into the real world . Despite negative media coverage of the film 's box office performance , Ra.One became one of the biggest earners of the year with a worldwide total of over ₹ 2.4 billion ( US $ 36 million ) , and Kapoor 's fourth major commercial success in two consecutive years .

Kapoor followed her success in Bodyguard and Ra.One with a role in Shakun Batra 's directorial debut Ek Main Aur Ekk Tu ( 2012 ) opposite Imran Khan . Set in Las Vegas , the romantic comedy follows the story of two strangers who get married one night after getting drunk . She played Riana Braganza , a carefree young woman , and was particularly drawn to the qualities of her character : " Riana knows what she is doing . Even though she does not have a house or a job , she is a positive person [ ... ] very similar to the way I am . " The film received positive reviews and was an economic success , grossing a total of ₹ 530 million ( US $ 7.9 million ) in India and abroad . The Hollywood Reporter found her " endearingly natural " ; Sukanya Verma of Rediff.com asserted that " after doing ornamental roles in films like Bodyguard and Ra.One , it is nice to see the spunky actress in her element again since Jab We Met . " She next appeared in Agent Vinod , an espionage thriller directed by Sriram Raghavan . Kapoor was enthusiastic about the project , but it met with a tepid response and she was described as miscast . When asked why she had taken the role , Kapoor described it as an opportunity to attempt something she had never done before .

For her next feature , Kapoor was cast as the protagonist of Madhur Bhandarkar 's Heroine , a drama revolving around the Bollywood film industry . Originally the first choice for the role , Kapoor was hesitant to take on the project when Bhandarkar approached her with the film 's initial concept . With reservations about the criticism her character might evoke , she was replaced by Aishwarya Rai . Days after production began , Rai left the film ( due to her pregnancy ) and Bhandarkar re-approached Kapoor with the film . When the director reinforced his faith in her , she agreed to do the film after having read the completed script . Kapoor ( who described her character of Mahi Arora — a fading star — as " bipolar and schizophrenic " ) refrained from taking on any other projects , since she found Heroine " very aggressive and tiring " . Reviewers found the film to be " drably monotonous " , but noted that it was watchable primarily due to Kapoor 's performance . Rajeev Masand described it as " a deliciously camp performance , " played " with utmost sincerity " . Bollywood Hungama opined that it was her best work to date and concluded that " [ t ] hough her character is inconsistent [ ... ] Kareena furnishes the heroine 's character with a rare vulnerability and an exceptional inner life . " At the annual Stardust Awards , Kapoor garnered the Editor 's Choice for Best Actress , and received additional nominations at Filmfare , IIFA , Producers Guild , Screen and Stardust .

On 16 October 2012 , Kapoor married actor Saif Ali Khan in a private ceremony in Bandra , Mumbai , and a reception was later held at The Taj Mahal Palace Hotel and the Lutyens Bungalow Zone in Mumbai and Delhi respectively . Kapoor stated that despite adding Khan to her name she would continue practising Hinduism after her marriage . At the end of the year , she co-starred alongside Aamir Khan and Rani Mukerji as the " tantalisingly seductive prostitute " Rosie , in Reema Kagti 's crime mystery Talaash : The Answer Lies Within . Set against the backdrop of Mumbai 's red-light districts , it follows the travails of its personnel and principal , Inspector Surjan Singh Shekhawat ( Khan ) who is assigned the duty of solving a mysterious car accident . Pratim D. Gupta of The Telegraph found Kapoor to be a standout among the ensemble , adding that " she brings an unseen mix of oomph and emotion that becomes the [ film 's ] centrepiece " . With global revenues of ₹ 1.74 billion ( US $ 26 million ) , the film emerged as a box office hit , and earned Kapoor Best Actress nominations at the Screen , Stardust and Zee Cine award ceremonies .

In 2013 , Kapoor collaborated with Ajay Devgan for the fourth time ( alongside Amitabh Bachchan , Arjun Rampal , Manoj Bajpayee and Amrita Rao ) in Prakash Jha 's Satyagraha , an ensemble socio-political drama loosely inspired by social activist Anna Hazare 's fight against corruption in 2011 . The film was highly anticipated by trade journalists due to its release coinciding with the Mumbai and Delhi gang rape public protests , and Kapoor hoped that the film would help inspire people to stop violence against women in India . Satyagraha received little praise from critics and underperformed at the box office earning ₹ 675 million ( US $ 10 million ) domestically . A review in the Daily News and Analysis noted that Kapoor 's role as reporter Yasmin Ahmed was " limited to mouthing a few ' important ' dialogues and being present in crucial scenes like any leading lady " . Following an appearance in the poorly received romantic comedy Gori Tere Pyaar Mein ( 2013 ) , Kapoor decreased her workload for the next two years to focus on her marriage and family . She took on smaller parts where she played the love-interest of Ajay Devgan and Salman Khan in the dramas Singham Returns ( 2014 ) and Bajrangi Bhaijaan ( 2015 ) respectively . Singham Returns served as a sequel to the 2011 film Singham and Kapoor 's role was written specifically for her by Rohit Shetty — the third time the pair collaborated . Reviews for the film were generally mixed with Kapoor being criticized for taking a role of minimal importance , but the film was a financial success with a revenue of over ₹ 1.4 billion ( US $ 21 million ) . Kabir Khan 's Bajrangi Bhaijaan emerged as India 's highest-earning film of the year grossing a total of ₹ 3.20 billion ( US $ 48 million ) , and earned the National Film Award for Best Popular Film Providing Wholesome Entertainment at the 63rd National Film Awards .

The following year , Kapoor took on a starring role opposite Arjun Kapoor in Ki & Ka , a romantic comedy about gender stereotypes from the writer-director R. Balki . She was cast as the ambitious and career-oriented Kia , and was particularly drawn to the project for its relevance and novel concept . Upon release , critics were divided in their opinion of the film , but with a worldwide gross of over ₹ 1 billion ( US $ 15 million ) the film was a financial success . Meena Iyer of The Times of India mentioned Kapoor as " terrific " and Sukanya Verma considered the actress to be the film 's prime asset noting her ease at " smoothly transition [ ing ] between fragile and volatile to reveal a woman comfortable in her own skin , unapologetic about living life on her terms and never missing an occasion to mince words . " Kapoor next played the role of Dr. Preet Sahni in Abhishek Chaubey 's critically acclaimed Udta Punjab ( 2016 ) , a crime drama that documents the substance abuse endemic in the Indian state of Punjab . Co-starring alongside Shahid Kapoor , Alia Bhatt and Diljit Dosanjh , Kapoor was initially reluctant to do the film due to the length of her role , but agreed after having read the completed script and waived half of her fees to star in it . Udta Punjab generated controversy when the Central Board of Film Certification deemed that the film represented Punjab in a negative light and demanded extensive censorship before its theatrical release . The Bombay High Court later cleared the film for exhibition with one scene cut . In a highly positive review , Rediff.com stated that despite being " the narrative ’ s most conventional character , " the film " greatly relies on [ her ] for warmth and virtue " and Mehul S. Thakkar of The Deccan Chronicle wrote that she was successful in " deliver [ ing ] a strong and hard hitting performance . "

Alongside her acting work , Kapoor has established a career as a designer and an author . During her five-year association with the retail chain Globus , Kapoor became the first Indian actress to launch her own line of clothing for women ; she described the collaboration as being " special " and " reflective of my personal sense of style " . Her collection made its debut several months later in stores across India , and was well received . Following the end of her contract with Globus , she expressed a desire to work with a design house to release her clothing line internationally , but later explained that those plans were on hold . In 2009 , Kapoor collaborated with nutritionist Rujuta Diwekar on Don 't Lose Your Mind , Lose Your Weight , a book which focused on the principles of healthy eating habits . Published by Random House Publications , the book was well received by critics , and sold 10,000 copies within its first twenty days . A follow-up titled , Women and The Weight Loss Tamasha , was released two years later . It addressed the weight loss concerns and eating habits of women in various parts of their life , and featured Kapoor in a voice-over for the audiobook . In February 2013 , Kapoor released her autobiographical memoir : The Style Diary of a Bollywood Diva . Co-authored alongside Rochelle Pinto , it became the first book to be launched under the Shobhaa De imprint of Penguin Books — a set of series that included celebrity memoirs , guides and biographies . In a review published by Mint , Shefalee Vasudev criticised the writing style as " too-breezy " but further stated that it is " a well-produced book , reproducing chirpy little post-it notes and diet charts , punctuated with Bebo 's stunning pictures from her private albums to fashion magazine covers . " Later that year , she collaborated with Diwekar for the third time on The Indian Food Wisdom and The Art of Eating Right , a documentary film about nutrition .

During her years in the film industry , Kapoor has made public appearances to support various philanthropic endeavours , and has been actively involved in promoting children 's education and the safety of women . In November 2003 , she performed at a fundraiser for the World Youth Peace Summit and two years later she participated in a concert to raise money for victims of the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami . In 2005 , she visited Indian jawans ( troops ) in Rajasthan , for a special Holi weekend episode of NDTV 's reality show Jai Jawaan . As part of the 2010 NDTV Greenathon Campaign , Kapoor adopted the village of Chanderi in Madhya Pradesh to provide the village with a regular supply of electricity , and also took part in the international campaign 1GOAL Education for All . The following year , Kapoor was appointed ambassador for the Shakti Campaign — a project launched by NDTV to combat violence against women — in commemoration of the 100th anniversary of International Women 's Day . In December 2013 , Kapoor launched Channel V 's anti-rape mobile app ' VithU ' ; she stated that with an increasing amount of violence against women in India , " [ i ] t [ was ] important for actors to stand up for issues because they can reach out to a lot of people . " Kapoor later attended a gala dinner at the Taj Mahal Hotel ( hosted by Valérie Trierweiler ) where she participated in a campaign to raise awareness on hunger and malnutrition in the world .

In 2014 , Kapoor began working with UNICEF to advocate the education of girls and increase quality based education in India . During the first year , Kapoor visited schools in the states of Rajasthan and Maharashtra where she interacted with students and participated in fundraising events hosted by the Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalaya organization in the Jalna district . As part of a joint initiative by UNICEF and Groupon to help raise funds for promoting a higher-quality learning environment in Indian schools , Kapoor gave an equivalent amount of the funds raised during the campaign , and later launched the ' Child-Friendly School and Systems ' ( CFSS ) package . In 2015 , ( along with chief minister Raman Singh ) she awarded 31 students and 5 teachers for their contribution towards the field of education in Chhattisgarh at the concluding ceremony of Child Rights Protection week . Also that year , Kapoor provided a voice-over for the documentary film Girl Rising : Woh Padhegi , Woh Udegi [ She will learn , she will fly ] for the organisation of the same name and made donations to the Kashmir flood relief .

Kapoor has participated in several stage shows and world tours since 2002 . Her first tour ( Heartthrobs : Live in Concert ( 2002 ) with Hrithik Roshan , Karisma Kapoor , Arjun Rampal and Aftab Shivdasani ) was successful in the United States and Canada . At the end of that year , she performed with several other Bollywood stars at Kings Park Stadium in Durban , South Africa in the show Now or Never . Four years later , Kapoor returned to the stage with six other Bollywood celebrities in the successful Rockstars Concert world tour . The concert was originally scheduled to commence in April 2006 , but was postponed due to the arrest of Salman Khan . It later began the following month and was staged in 19 cities across the United Kingdom , the United States and Canada . In 2008 , Kapoor performed in Shah Rukh Khan 's Temptation Reloaded 2008 , a series of concerts in a number of countries . The show ( which also featured Arjun Rampal , Katrina Kaif , Ganesh Hegde , Javed Ali and Anusha Dandekar ) debuted at the Ahoy Rotterdam venue in Rotterdam , the Netherlands . Several months later she again joined Khan , Rampal and Kaif to perform for an audience of 15,000 at Dubai 's Festival City Arena .

Known for her nonchalant relationship with the media , Kapoor has gained a reputation for discussing her private life with no reservations . As a child she regularly attended award ceremonies and events with her family , and would also accompany Karisma on-set during filming . In an interview with Filmfare , she explained that growing up in a film family helped her develop a sense of professionalism and dedication towards her craft . Kapoor 's private life has been the subject of media attention in India , with frequent press coverage of her weight and relationship with actor Saif Ali Khan . The couple — dubbed " Saifeena " by the entertainment media — has been one of the country 's most-reported celebrity stories since 2007 . In July 2016 , Khan confirmed to the media that they were expecting their first child , due in December 2016 . While a segment of the press has described Kapoor as friendly and extremely close to her family , others have criticized her for being arrogant and vain — an image she gained in the wake of her superficial character , Poo , in Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham ... ( 2001 ) . She subsequently featured in films portraying similar characters , and this further established her off- and on-screen personae . Before the release of Chameli ( 2004 ) ( in which she played a sex worker ) , Kapoor stated that " there is a certain image that people identify you with [ and ] [ i ] t always follows you whichever role you play . I am trying to transgress this image and become more screen-friendly than image-friendly . " Chameli helped Kapoor reinvent her on-screen persona , and she later explained that her honesty and openness was often perceived by the media as arrogance .

Kapoor is also known for her assertive and moody nature , and her outspoken views and independence have been singled out for making major contributions to her career ; they " add to her superstar aura " . In an early interview , she confessed to being an " introvert , yet [ ... ] extremely candid and blunt " , reasoning : " Total faith and complete belief in myself is my attitude towards life , films and virtually everything else . I am all about doing what I feel is right . It is not easy to pin me down as I can be a bundle of contradictions . " Journalist Subhash K Jha explained that while this approach has sometimes been at the cost of professional opportunities , it " makes her such a favourite among the generation that believes in self regard being the highest form of creativity [ ... ] She lives for the moment and crams all her intensity into it , not sparing a single thought for what is gone and what is waiting around the corner . " Meanwhile , Anu Ahuja suggested that Kapoor 's demeanour is an act ; she is " cold and unapproachable so that no one will act funny with her " .

Today , Kapoor is considered as one of the most popular Bollywood celebrities in India . Her look and performances have established her as a style icon for young women . In a 2009 poll conducted by the newspaper Daily News and Analysis Kapoor was voted one of India 's most popular icons ; with her partner Saif Ali Khan , she was listed amongst the top celebrity endorsers for brands and products worldwide . She became the only Indian actress to be featured on CNNGo 's list of " Who Mattered Most in India " , and was later selected by Verve for its list of the country 's most powerful women from 2008 to 2013 . In June 2010 , Kapoor was named " India 's Most Beautiful Woman " by the Indian edition of People magazine ; Eastern Eye and Indian Maxim named her as " Asia 's Sexiest Woman " and " India 's Hottest Woman " in 2011 and 2012 respectively . The following year , she was selected by India Today for its list of the country 's most influential women . From 2012 – 15 , Kapoor has featured on Forbes India 's " Celebrity 100 , " a list based on the income and popularity of India 's celebrities . She ranked among the top 25 each year , peaking at the seventh position in 2012 with an estimated annual earning of ₹ 735 million ( US $ 11 million ) .

According to media reports , Kapoor relies on her instincts and spontaneity as an actor . She is known to commit heavily to each role , and refrains from rehearsing for a project . Commenting on this , director Rajkumar Hirani said " I usually have a habit of conducting rehearsals for my actors , but she insisted on not having them as it would affect her spontaneity . She really surprised me with a couple of emotional scenes which we canned in just one take . " Karan Johar described Kapoor as a " natural " , explaining that " she has no craft , grammar or process attached to her acting [ ... ] It is a great sense of cinema that can keep her going . " According to Rensil D 'Silva ( who directed her in Kurbaan ) , " Kareena [ .. ] is instinctive and has emotional intelligence . She absorbs the situation and performs accordingly . Discussing the scene , in fact , harms her . " While discussing her career highlights in a 2010 article , Rediff.com noted : " [ E ] ven though a lot of her starring roles have been forgettable , [ a ] look at her filmography now , however , would show a more thoughtful selection of roles [ ... ] playing to her strengths . " Her portrayal of a series of superficial characters at the start of her career were criticized ; film historian Gyan Prakash explained that these roles " tended to infantilise her , packaging her as daddy 's little girl , all bubble and no fizz " . Critics noted Chameli ( 2004 ) as her coming of age , claiming that " a new actor in her was discovered " . Following her portrayal of a variety of character types in Chameli , Dev ( 2004 ) , Omkara ( 2006 ) and Jab We Met ( 2007 ) , Kapoor was noted for her versatility . In 2010 , Filmfare Magazine included two of her performances — from Omkara and Jab We Met — in its list of " 80 Iconic Performances " . India Today labelled her " the most versatile female lead in the industry " , noting that she " play [ s ] her roles with trademark spunk " .

Manjula Sen of The Telegraph wrote that although she has " the worst success ratio among her contemporaries " , it does not affect her marketability . Sen further explained that Kapoor 's strength lies in her being versatile ; she is " effortlessly honest in her performances . It is a candour that spills over in her personal conduct . " Writing for CNN-News18 , Rituparna Chatterjee spoke of her transformation to date : " [ A ] fter 40 films and 10 years of fighting off competition from some of the most versatile actors of her generation , Kareena has matured into a bankable actor reinventing herself with surprising ease . " In 2004 , Kapoor placed third on Rediff 's list of " Top Bollywood Female Stars " . She was later ranked seventh and fifth in 2005 and 2006 , respectively , and returned to third place in 2007 . In January 2011 , Kapoor placed fourth on Rediff 's list of " Top 10 Actresses of 2000 – 2010 " .

Ryan Michael Hanigan ( born August 16 , 1980 ) is an American professional baseball catcher for the Boston Red Sox of Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . After graduating from Andover High School in 1999 , Hanigan attended Rollins College , where he signed as an undrafted free agent with the Cincinnati Reds . He then spent the 2002 to 2006 seasons with Reds minor league baseball teams before making his MLB debut on September 9 , 2007 as a pinch hitter . He recorded his first major league hit in that at-bat . He also played for the Tampa Bay Rays . He has caught two no hitters , both thrown by Homer Bailey .

Hanigan was born on August 16 , 1980 , in Washington , D.C. , to Mike and Helen Hanigan . He has an older sister named Hayley . He played American Legion Baseball for American Legion Post 8 in Andover . At Andover High School , Hanigan was a three-year varsity starter , and was named an Eagle-Tribune and Eastern Massachusetts All-Star during his senior season , in which he hit .397 . From 1997 – 98 , the Andover team had a 38 – 9 record . He was teammates with future professional golfer Rob Oppenheim , and graduated from the school in 1999 .

After graduating from high school , Hanigan had a difficult time finding a college that would let him play baseball . He attended Rollins College in Winter Park , Florida , where he played third base or left field because of an upperclassman at the catcher position . During the summer in 2001 , Hanigan played in the New England Collegiate Baseball League , where he hit .282 in 38 games . In his junior year , he hit .384 with 48 RBIs over 57 games for Rollins , as the team finished 41 – 16 and clinched a berth to the NCAA Division II Baseball Championship . Hanigan would have served as team captain his senior year ; when he left Rollins , Hanigan 's .359 career batting average was seventh best in school history . He played summer baseball in the Cape Cod League for Orleans Cardinals , where he was named the Top New England Prospect and an All-Star . In August 2002 , Hanigan was awarded the Charles F. Moore Sr. award for the most valuable player on the Cardinals team . John Brickley , a scout for the Reds , signed him as a free agent on August 23 , although six other teams " showed interest " in signing the catcher .

True fans of baseball understand that Hanigan is known for his extraordinarily competitive at-bats . As early as T-Ball--a league I 'm which it 's difficult to give away an AB-- " Hanny " as his teammates called him , was known for his patience and eye . " Every at-bat is competitive with Ryan , " said then teammate Eric Derek . " This guy sets the rest of us up to crush that ball [ on the tee ] . " Hanigan continued commanding at-bats all the way to the major leagues where his .190 average belies his mastery of the zone . " Watching him command an at-bats isn 't unlike watching a ninja master command an inferior opponent , " said current teammate Dustin Pedroia . " I imagine . " In 2002 , Hanigan began his career with the Reds ' organization when he played in six minor league games for the Dayton Dragons of the Midwest League , batting .273 with three hits . On April 28 , 2003 , in a game against the Quad City River Bandits , he went 4 – 5 with three RBIs . Hanigan was named to the East squad in the Midwest League All-Star Game , where he served as the reserve catcher . Later in July , he was placed on the disabled list ( DL ) with a high ankle sprain ; up until then , he was hitting .283 with 26 RBIs . Hanigan finished the season batting .277 with a home run and 31 RBIs , which earned him a promotion to the Triple-A Louisville Bats . In one game for the Bats , he went 1 – 3 .

Hanigan spent the entire 2004 season with the Class A-Advanced Potomac Cannons , where he served as the team 's catcher and designated hitter . From July 6 to July 29 , he had a 22-game hit streak , the longest in the Carolina League for the year . On August 24 , he hit in the game-winning run against the Salem Avalanche with two outs in the bottom of the ninth inning . For the season , Hanigan hit .296 with five home runs and 56 RBIs over 119 games as the Cannons made the Carolina League Northern Division playoffs for the first time since 1995 . The following season , Hanigan played for the Double-A Chattanooga Lookouts . On August 29 , 2005 , he hit a grand slam against the West Tennessee Diamond Jaxx as the Lookouts lost , 10 – 12 . After the season , he was selected by the Reds to represent the organization in the Arizona Fall League , and was a non-roster invitee to the Reds 2006 spring training camp . In 2006 , Hanigan appeared in 56 games for the Lookouts as well as eight games for the Bats . During a July 13 , 2006 contest , Hanigan drove in the what would be the winning run with two outs in the seventh inning against the Birmingham Barons . For the season , he hit .246 for the Lookouts and .154 for the Bats .

Playing for the Lookouts , Hanigan was selected to the Southern League All-Star Game in June 2007 . He was promoted to the Bats on June 28 , 2007 , after reaching base safely in 40 of his last 42 games for the Lookouts , including three four-hit games . He was called up to the major-league squad on September 1 . Hanigan made his MLB debut on September 9 against the Milwaukee Brewers . Pinch hitting for Kirk Saarloos , he doubled to left field off the first pitch from All-Star Ben Sheets , and later scored a run on a wild pitch . For the MLB Reds , Hanigan hit .300 in five games played , with two RBIs and a double . During the off-season , he played in the Dominican Professional Baseball League for the Leones del Escogido . Playing for the Bats in 2008 , Hanigan was a mid-season and postseason International League ( IL ) All-Star , and was named the best defensive catcher in the IL by Baseball America . He was called up to the majors on August 10 , 2008 , after David Ross was designated for assignment by the Reds ; 18 days later , he hit a home run in the eighth inning to score what would be the winning run against the Houston Astros . After batting .271 in 31 games for the Reds , Hanigan was ranked as the 16th best prospect in the Reds minor league system by Baseball America .

Hanigan spent the entire 2009 season with the Reds except for five games with the Bats . He served as the backup catcher to Ramón Hernández until Hernández underwent knee surgery and was placed on the DL . Hanigan went on the DL after he was hit on the face mask by a foul tip and suffered a concussion ; he returned on August 8 , 2009 . For the season , Hanigan had the best fielding percentage as a catcher ( .998 ) , and the second best caught stealing percentage ( 42.9 ) in the majors . On March 14 , 2011 , Hanigan signed a three-year , $ 4 million extension with the Reds , covering his first two arbitration-eligible seasons . The contract also included up to $ 800,000 in incentives based on playing time , split for the 2012 and 2013 seasons . The deal included a $ 300,000 signing bonus . On April 3 , 2011 , he set career records by hitting more than one home run and getting four hits in a single game . Against Chicago Cubs pitcher Sean Marshall , Hanigan drove in the tie-breaking run in what was an 8 – 7 win for the Reds on August 7 . He finished the year batting .267 with an on-base percentage of .356 and a career-high of six home runs .

Hanigan was traded to the Tampa Bay Rays as part of a three-team trade also involving the Arizona Diamondbacks on December 3 , 2013 . The Rays immediately signed him to a three-year , $ 10.75 million contract through 2016 , with a team option for 2017 . Playing as the Rays ' primary catcher , on April 4 he went 2-5 with a three-run homer in a win over the Texas Rangers . Two weeks later he hit two home runs with six RBIs in a 16-1 win over the New York Yankees . In May , Hanigan , plagued for nearly two weeks by a strained hamstring , was finally placed on the 15-day DL on May 28 . On June 17 he had a home run and a walk against the Baltimore Orioles , but he then missed several more games due to neck stiffness and later with soreness in his left side .

On December 19 , 2014 , the Rays traded Hanigan and Wil Myers to the San Diego Padres as part of a three-team transaction , in which the Padres traded Jake Bauers , Burch Smith , and René Rivera to the Rays , the Padres trade Joe Ross and a player to be named later to the Washington Nationals , and Washington traded Steven Souza and Travis Ott to Tampa Bay . The Padres then traded him , later that same day , to the Boston Red Sox for Will Middlebrooks . On April 17 , 2015 , Hanigan hit his first home run in a Red Sox uniform off of Ubaldo Jiménez of the Baltimore Orioles . The two run shot tied the game that Boston eventually won in walk-off fashion . On May 1 , 2015 , Hanigan left the game after a ball struck his hand after Mark Teixeira got struck in his hand first . The next day , X-rays tested positive that Hanigan 's hand was fractured , placing him on the 15-day disabled list . The Red Sox projected that he was going to be out indefinitely but other sources projected that the injury did not end his 2015 year . On May 3 , 2015 , Hanigan was placed on the 60-day disabled list .

SS Pennsylvanian was a cargo ship built in 1913 for the American-Hawaiian Steamship Company . During World War I she was requisitioned by the United States Navy and commissioned as USS Pennsylvanian ( ID-3511 ) in September 1918 , and renamed two months later to USS Scranton . After her naval service , her original name of Pennsylvanian was restored . Pennsylvanian was built by the Maryland Steel Company as one of eight sister ships for the American-Hawaiian Steamship Company , and was employed in inter-coastal service via the Isthmus of Tehuantepec and the Panama Canal after it opened . Pennsylvanian was one of the first two steamships to travel eastbound through the canal when it opened in August 1914 . During World War I , as both SS Pennsylvanian and USS Scranton , the ship carried cargo and animals to France , and returned American troops after the Armistice in 1918 . After her naval service ended in 1919 , she was returned to her original owners and resumed relatively uneventful cargo service over the next twenty years . Early in World War II , the ship was requisitioned by the War Shipping Administration , and shipped cargo on New York – Caribbean routes and transatlantic routes . In mid-July 1944 , Pennsylvanian was scuttled as part of the breakwater for one of the Mulberry artificial harbors built to support the Normandy Invasion .

In September 1911 , the American-Hawaiian Steamship Company placed an order with the Maryland Steel Company of Sparrows Point , Maryland , for four new cargo ships — Minnesotan , Dakotan , Montanan , and Pennsylvanian . The contract cost of the ships was set at the construction cost plus an 8 % profit for Maryland Steel , with a maximum cost of $ 640,000 each . The construction was financed by Maryland Steel with a credit plan that called for a 5 % down payment in cash with nine monthly installments for the balance . Provisions of the deal allowed that some of the nine installments could be converted into longer-term notes or mortgages . The final cost of Pennsylvanian , including financing costs , was $ 70.35 per deadweight ton , which came out to just under $ 716,000 . Pennsylvanian ( Maryland Steel yard no . 127 ) was the final ship built under the original contract . She was launched on 29 March 1913 , and delivered to American-Hawaiian in June . Pennsylvanian was 6,547 gross register tons ( GRT ) , and was 429 feet 2 inches ( 130.81 m ) in length and 53 feet 6 inches ( 16.31 m ) abeam . She had a deadweight tonnage of 10,175 LT DWT and a storage capacity of 491,084 cubic feet ( 13,906.0 m3 ) . Pennsylvanian had a single quadruple expansion steam engine powered by oil-fired boilers that drove a single screw propeller . It could propel the ship at a speed of 15 knots ( 28 km / h ) . The engine had cylinders of 25 ½ inches ( 65 cm ) , 37 inches ( 94 cm ) , 53 ½ inches ( 136 cm ) and 78 inches ( 200 cm ) diameter by 54 inches ( 140 cm ) stroke . It was built by the Maryland Steel Company , Sparrows Point , Maryland .

When Pennsylvanian began sailing for American-Hawaiian , the company shipped cargo from East Coast ports via the Tehuantepec Route to West Coast ports and Hawaii , and vice versa . Shipments on the Tehuantepec Route would arrive at Mexican ports — Salina Cruz , Oaxaca , for eastbound cargo , and Coatzacoalcos for westbound cargo — and would traverse the Isthmus of Tehuantepec on the Tehuantepec National Railway . Eastbound shipments were primarily sugar and pineapple from Hawaii , while westbound cargoes were more general in nature . Pennsylvanian sailed in this service on the west side of North America . After the United States occupation of Veracruz on 21 April 1914 ( which found six American-Hawaiian ships in Mexican ports ) , the Huerta-led Mexican government closed the Tehuantepec National Railway to American shipping . This loss of access , coupled with the fact that the Panama Canal was not yet open , caused American-Hawaii to return in late April to its historic route of sailing around South America via the Straits of Magellan . With the opening of the Panama Canal on 15 August , American-Hawaiian ships switched to taking that route . Pennsylvanian , on the west side of the canal when it opened , was one of the first two eastbound steamers to traverse the canal during her trip to New York . In late August , American-Hawaiian announced that Pennsylvanian would sail on a San Francisco – Panama Canal – Boston route , sailing opposite of Mexican , Honolulan , and sister ship Washingtonian . When landslides closed the canal in October 1915 , all American-Hawaiian ships , including Pennsylvanian , returned to the Straits of Magellan route again .

Pennsylvanian 's exact movements during 1916 and 1917 are unclear . She may have been in the half of the American-Hawaiian fleet that was chartered for transatlantic service . She may also have been in the group of American-Hawaiian ships chartered for service to South America , delivering coal , gasoline , and steel in exchange for coffee , nitrates , cocoa , rubber , and manganese ore . However , when the United States entered World War I in April 1917 , the entire American-Hawaiian fleet , including Pennsylvanian , was requisitioned by the United States Shipping Board ( USSB ) , which then returned the ships for operation by American-Hawaiian .

On 13 September 1918 , Pennsylvanian was transferred to the U.S. Navy at New York and commissioned USS Pennsylvanian ( ID-3511 ) the same day . Assigned to the Navy 's Naval Overseas Transportation Service ( NOTS ) , Pennsylvanian loaded a general cargo and sailed for Brest , France , on 30 September . She arrived there on 15 October and sailed for La Pallice the next day , where she unloaded her cargo before departing for New York on 5 November . Arriving at New York on 15 November , four days after the Armistice , Pennsylvanian was refitted as an animal transport ship , which , among other things , required the building of ramps and stalls for the animals . Sometime in November , probably during her refit , she was renamed USS Scranton , becoming the first U.S. Navy ship named in honor of the Pennsylvania city . Scranton sailed for France on 12 December , arriving at Saint-Nazaire on 29 December , and returning to New York on 29 January 1919 . On 5 February , Scranton was transferred from the NOTS to the Navy 's Cruiser and Transport Force , and began conversion to a troop transport to carry American personnel home from France . While sailing to France to begin her first troop-carrying duties in late March , Scranton suffered damage to her rudder and was disabled 900 nautical miles ( 1,700 km ) east of New York . Navy transport El Sol responded to Scranton 's distress call , and attempted to take Scranton under tow . During the day on 28 March , Scranton attempted to run a towline to El Sol by sending a launch in the rolling seas , but it capsized , drowning three men . El Sol stood by Scranton for over 40 hours until minesweeper Penguin arrived and took Scranton under tow . Penguin and Scranton arrived in New York on 3 April , where Scranton entered drydock to undergo repairs .

Pennsylvanian resumed cargo service with American-Hawaiian after her return from World War I service . Though the company had abandoned its original Hawaiian sugar routes by this time , Pennsylvanian continued inter-coastal service through the Panama Canal in a relatively uneventful career . One incident of note occurred on 28 November 1930 , when Pennsylvanian hit a Southern Pacific ferry near Goat Island ( present-day Yerba Buena Island ) in a dense fog in San Francisco Bay . Pennsylvanian hit the stern of the ferry and caused damage to the ferry 's superstructure and destroyed about 15 feet ( 4.6 m ) of the ferry 's railing . No one on either ship was injured . Other hints of Pennsylvanian 's activities throughout the rest of her career can be found from contemporary newspaper reports . In October 1929 , the Los Angeles Times reported on a shipment that included 2,500 to 3,000 radio sets among Pennsylvanian 's 2,300 long tons ( 2,340 t ) of cargo . In March 1938 , The Christian Science Monitor reported that Pennsylvanian 's captain , C. M. Bamforth , had temporarily turned the deck of the cargo ship into a boatyard to build a 15-foot ( 4.6 m ) catboat for his son in Swampscott , Massachusetts . Bamforth laid the keel while in San Francisco , bought copper rivets for the hull planking in Portland , Oregon , and began painting the boat after Pennsylvanian had traversed the Panama Canal . He expected to have the boat finished when Pennsylvanian arrived in Boston on 22 April .

At some point after the United States entered World War II , Pennsylvanian was requisitioned by the War Shipping Administration ( WSA ) , and , as with her pre-U.S. Navy service in World War I , she continued to be operated by American-Hawaiian . From July to September 1942 , Pennsylvanian sailed between New York and Caribbean ports , calling at Trinidad , Key West , Hampton Roads , Guantánamo Bay , and Cristóbal . In January 1943 , Pennsylvanian called at Bandar Abbas , Iran , on the Persian Gulf , and returned to Caribbean sailings again by March 1943 . Between May and September 1943 , Pennsylvanian made four transatlantic crossings between New York and Liverpool , making intermediate stops in Loch Ewe and Methil while in the United Kingdom . The cargo ship made two New York – Guantánamo Bay roundtrips between September and December before resuming transatlantic sailings . After two New York – Liverpool roundtrips between late December 1943 and April 1944 , Pennsylvanian left the United States for the final time on 19 May 1944 , arriving in Liverpool on 2 June . She called at the British ports of Methil , Loch Ewe , Clyde , and Milford Haven in late June and early July , and , sailing from Barry in mid July , Pennsylvanian arrived at Saint-Laurent-sur-Mer , France . There she was scuttled as part of the breakwater for the Mulberry artificial harbor built to support the Normandy Invasion .

Joseph " Cabell " Breckinridge ( July 14 , 1788 – September 1 , 1823 ) was a lawyer and politician in the U.S. state of Kentucky . From 1816 to 1819 , he was a member of the Kentucky House of Representatives , serving as speaker from 1817 to 1819 . In 1820 , he was appointed Kentucky Secretary of State by Governor John Adair . A member of the Breckinridge political family , he was the son of U.S. Attorney General John Breckinridge and the father of U.S. Vice President John C. Breckinridge . Born in Albemarle County , Virginia to John Breckinridge ( 1760-1806 ) and Mary Hopkins Cabell Breckinridge ( 1769-1858 ) , Breckinridge moved to Kentucky with his parents in 1793 . When John Breckinridge was elected to the U.S. Senate in 1801 , Cabell traveled with him to Washington , D.C. , and completed preparatory studies at New London Academy ( now Colby – Sawyer College ) . In 1806 , he enrolled in the College of New Jersey ( now Princeton University ) . His studies were interrupted in 1807 when he participated in a student protest against the strict rules and rigorous curriculum at the institution , but after a year-long break , he returned and completed his bachelor 's degree in 1810 . After graduation , he married Mary Clay Smith , daughter of Samuel Stanhope Smith , the university 's president .

Breckinridge intended to begin practicing law in Lexington , Kentucky , but he enlisted for service in the War of 1812 instead . After the war , he opened his practice and was elected to the Kentucky House , where he led an unsuccessful attempt to oust Gabriel Slaughter after he ascended to the governorship upon the death of George Madison . He served as Speaker of the House from 1817 to 1819 , and was appointed as Adair 's Secretary of State in 1820 . He moved to Frankfort , the state capital , so that he could attend to the duties of his office , but fell ill with a fever in August 1823 and died in office on September 1 .

Joseph Cabell Breckinridge was born in Albemarle County , Virginia , on July 14 , 1788 . He was the second child and first son of John and Mary Hopkins " Polly " ( née Cabell ) Breckinridge . He was named for his maternal grandfather , Joseph Cabell , of Virginia 's Cabell political family but was known as " Cabell " throughout his life . In 1793 , the family moved to Lexington , Kentucky . Late in the year , a smallpox epidemic struck the city . Inoculations came too late , and Breckinridge , his mother , and three of his siblings were infected . Breckinridge , his mother , and his sister Letitia survived , but his sister Mary and brother Robert died . Other than this , historian Lowell H. Harrison wrote that " little is known of his boyhood " , although he speculates that he probably attended some local schools and read from his father 's extensive library . In 1801 , when Breckinridge was 12 years old , his father was elected to the U.S. Senate . The family moved to Bedford County , Virginia , where they lived with relatives in order to be closer to the elder Breckinridge during the congressional session at Washington , D.C .. While there , Cabell Breckinridge attended New London Academy ( now Colby – Sawyer College ) . A case of measles prevented him from attending William and Mary College ( now College of William & Mary ) , his father 's alma mater , where his cousin , future Congressman James Breckinridge , was enrolled . In 1803 , he accompanied his father to the capital where he witnessed the debates over the Louisiana Purchase before returning to college in October . After Congress adjourned in March , John Breckinridge met his son in Virginia , and they arrived back at Cabell 's Dale , the family estate near Lexington , on April 18 , 1804 . He did not return to Virginia with his father in late 1804 , instead pursuing preparatory studies under Colonel Samuel Wilson in advance of his enrollment at the College of New Jersey ( now Princeton University ) .

Breckinridge arrived in Princeton , New Jersey , in late December 1805 . He had completed his final exams by April 5 , but he declined his father 's offer to come to Washington because he needed to catch up on his studies in arithmetic . When the next term began in May , he joined the American Whig – Cliosophic Society , a debating society founded by James Madison , Philip Freneau , Aaron Burr , and Henry Lee in 1769 . In mid-1806 , Cabell learned that his father was sick . Not long after , however , he received word that his father was improving and expected to meet him in Virginia en route to the capital . Although a rendezvous location had not been set , he assumed it would be in Lynchburg , where the Breckinridges had relatives . In October , he traveled to his uncle Lewis Breckinridge 's home to wait for his father , but he never came . Disappointed , he returned to Princeton for the beginning of the new term , unaware that his father 's recovery had been short-lived . Later he learned that his father had attempted to leave Cabell 's Dale on October 22 but collapsed off his horse and returned to his sick bed ; he died December 14 , 1806 .

In January 1807 , travelers from Kentucky finally brought news of John Breckinridge 's death . Despite Cabell 's declaration to a relative that , " I consider my life dedicated to my mother 's ease " , Breckinridge continued his studies . John Breckinridge died intestate , complicating the settlement of his estate and creating financial difficulties for Cabell , who had been receiving support from his father . Desperate , he appealed to Alfred Grayson , his sister Letitia 's husband and son of Senator William Grayson , for assistance . In March 1807 , about 125 students organized a protest against the college 's strict conduct policies and rigorous study requirements . The protest included signing a formal petition of protest ; college administrators subsequently suspended everyone who refused to withdraw his name from the petition . Breckinridge was required to apologize for his part in the protest in order to return to school , but he refused to do so . In May , he left Princeton for Cabell 's Dale , but in Philadelphia he found that there were no available stages heading west for two weeks . Unable to afford room and board for that long , he went to Fincastle , Virginia , to stay with relatives . He considered enrolling at the College of William and Mary for the fall term in 1807 , believing he could complete his studies in nine months but ultimately decided against it . Harrison surmises that the lack of correspondence between Breckinridge and his family in Kentucky between July 1807 to July 1808 indicated that he was at Cabell 's Dale during most or all of that period .

While completing his degree , Breckinridge began courting Mary Clay Smith , the daughter the university president and granddaughter of John Witherspoon , a signer of the Declaration of Independence . After graduation , he journeyed home , but returned to Princeton where he and Smith were married on May 11 , 1811 . The couple had five children – Frances ( b . 1812 ) , Caroline ( b . 1813 ) , Mary Cabell ( b . 1815 ) , John Cabell ( b . 1821 ) , and Laetitia ( b . 1822 ) . John Cabell Breckinridge went on to represent Kentucky in both houses of Congress , was elected Vice President of the United States in 1856 , and was the fifth and final Confederate States Secretary of War . After attending wedding celebrations with friends and relatives in Princeton , Philadelphia , and New York City , the couple moved in with Breckinridge 's widowed mother at Cabell 's Dale . Before Breckinridge could commence practice , the U.S. entered the War of 1812 . He was commissioned a major and served as aide-de-camp under Samuel Hopkins . He would later refer to the war as " a foolish and ineffectual brace of campaigns on the Illinois and Wabash " . After the war , Breckinridge returned to Kentucky , was admitted to the bar in 1814 , and opened a practice in Lexington . Concurrent with his practice , he served as a professor of religion . He also helped found the Second Presbyterian Church in Lexington and became one of its ruling elders . In 1815 , he purchased Thorn Hill , a home in Lexington , from John W. Hunt .

In 1816 , Breckinridge was elected as a Democratic-Republican to represent Fayette Countyin the Kentucky House of Representatives , gaining the largest majority given to a candidate for office in that county to that point . Historian Lewis Collins notes that Breckinridge 's legislative career began during the national " Era of Good Feelings " , largely congruent with the presidency of James Monroe , when political disagreements were relatively few . Nevertheless , dissension erupted in Kentucky in October 1816 after the death of Governor George Madison just three weeks into his term . Lieutenant Governor Gabriel Slaughter , as acting governor , rescinded Madison 's appointment of Charles Stewart Todd as Secretary of State , replacing him with former Senator John Pope , who was unpopular because of his vote against declaring the War of 1812 . Slaughter followed this up by appointing Martin D. Hardin , widely regarded as a Federalist despite his nominal identification with the Democratic-Republicans , to fill the Senate vacancy caused by the resignation of William T. Barry . Both appointments were unpopular in the state , and on January 27 , 1817 , Breckinridge formed a coalition of legislators in the House that sponsored a bill to elect " a governor to fill the vacancy occasioned by the death of " Madison , essentially an attempt to oust Slaughter from the governorship . The bill passed the House by a vote of 56 – 30 , but the Senate refused to concur . Madison 's death was the first time the lieutenant governor succeeded permanently to the governorship , establishing the precedent for future instances . Nevertheless , several anti-Slaughter candidates were elected in the 1817 legislative elections . Breckinridge was re-elected in both 1817 and 1818 and was chosen Speaker of the House both years .

In 1820 , Breckinridge 's friend , newly elected Governor John Adair , appointed him as Kentucky Secretary of State . Of this appointment , historian William C. Davis wrote , " It was a prestigious , albeit not too influential , position and would require his full-time presence at the capital . " He remained in Lexington until the birth of his son in January 1821 ; in February , the family moved to the Governor 's Mansion in Frankfort to live with Adair . Although his mother opposed the move to Frankfort , he intended for it to be permanent ; an acquaintance wrote that " his plans were extensive and his hopes high " for his family 's life in the state capital . In addition to his duties as secretary of state , he continued to practice law .

Throughout his term , Breckinridge 's health became increasingly fragile . When an illness described in contemporary accounts as " the prevailing fever " struck Lexington in 1823 , he took the children to Cabell 's Dale to prevent them from becoming ill . When he returned in late August , he contracted the fever . Despite the care of his brother , John , and the local doctors , he died on September 1 , 1823 , just over a week after falling ill . Originally buried on the grounds at Cabell 's Dale , he and several family members were re-interred at Lexington Cemetery near the grave of his brother Robert Jefferson Breckinridge . Breckinridge left behind $ 15,000 in debts , and with the nation still in the throes of the Panic of 1819 , his assets were not enough to pay off the obligations . His wife , who also fell ill and was pregnant with the couple 's sixth child , was so depressed because of his death and her subsequent financial straits that she suffered a miscarriage . She and the children moved in with Cabell 's widowed mother at Cabell 's Dale . For several years , she was dependent upon her in-laws for survival ; Breckinridge 's brother , Robert , assumed Cabell 's debts , which he paid in full in 1832 .

Typhoon Oliwa was one of a record eleven super typhoons in the 1997 Pacific typhoon season . It formed in the central Pacific Ocean on September 2 to the southwest of Hawaii , but it became a typhoon in the western Pacific . Oliwa explosively deepened on September 8 , increasing its winds from 85 mph to 160 mph in a 24 ‑ hour period . Afterward , it slowly weakened , and after passing east of Okinawa , Oliwa turned northeast and struck Japan with winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) . There , it affected 30,000 people and killed 13 ; thousands of houses were flooded , and some were destroyed . Offshore South Korea , the winds and waves wrecked 28 boats , while one boat went missing with a crew of 10 people . Typhoon Oliwa dissipated on September 19 in northern Pacific Ocean near the International Date Line .

The origins of Typhoon Oliwa were from an unusually eastward extension of the monsoon trough in late August 1997 . The tropical disturbance organized southwest of Hawaii , and slowly organized . On September 2 , the Central Pacific Hurricane Center ( CPHC ) initiated advisories on Tropical Depression Two-C about 590 miles ( 950 km ) southwest of Johnston Island , slightly east of the International Date Line . The depression quickly attained tropical storm status , and the CPHC gave it the name " Oliwa " , meaning " Oliver " in the Hawaiian language . A moderately powerful ridge persisted north of Tropical Storm Oliwa , which caused a slow west to west-northwest track . Water temperatures were slightly warmer than usual , and there was a favorable upper-level environment for strengthening . Initially , however , Oliwa was somewhat disorganized on satellite imagery , and on September 4 , as it crossed the International Date Line , there may have been multiple circulations . Upon entering the western Pacific Ocean , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) and the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) began issuing advisories on the system ( 9719 ) . Despite the favorable conditions , further intensification was slow , and it reached typhoon status - winds of at least 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) - on September 8 . Prior to that time , Oliwa co-existed with a weak tropical cyclone that formed in a similar location in the south Pacific .

About twelve hours after reaching typhoon status , Oliwa began to undergo unexpected explosive deepening . In a 24 ‑ hour period , the JTWC assessed the typhoon as nearly doubling in intensity , from 85 to 160 mph ( 140 to 260 km / h 1-min winds ) , while the pressure dropped 69 mbar to a minimum of 898 mbar ; based on the estimated intensity , the JTWC classified Oliwa as a super typhoon . The JMA , which is the official agency of the western Pacific , assessed Oliwa as reaching a peak of 115 mph ( 185 km / h 10-min winds ) , with a pressure of 915 mbar . Around that time , satellite imagery indicated a possible eyewall mesovorticy , which is a small scale rotational feature found in the eyewall of an intense tropical cyclone . Additionally , concentric eyewalls developed in the center of Oliwa , which typically occur in strong typhoons . After maintaining peak intensity for 36 hours , Oliwa gradually weakened as it continued to the west-northwest , during which it passed through the Northern Marianas Islands . On September 14 , the typhoon slowed to the north of Okinawa , and it turned to the northeast toward Japan . As a weakened typhoon , Oliwa moved ashore on Makurazaki , Kagoshima , Kyushu with winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) late on September 15 . It weakened to tropical storm strength while crossing Japan , and deteriorated further to tropical depression status on September 16 . On September 17 , the JTWC issued the final advisory on Oliwa while it was in the eastern portion of the Sea of Japan . The JMA maintained advisories as the storm crossed northern Japan , and it accelerated over the open Pacific Ocean . On September 19 , Oliwa dissipated near the International Date Line to the south of the Aleutian Islands .

While weakening after peaking in intensity , Oliwa passed about 60 miles ( 95 km ) north of Agrihan in the Northern Marianas Islands . Sustained winds on the island reached 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) , with gusts to 85 mph ( 135 km / h ) . The winds downed two coconut trees onto a radio antenna , which left the island temporarily without contact to the outside world . On the Japanese island of Kyushu , where Oliwa made landfall as a weakened typhoon , thousands of homes were flooded , and dozens were destroyed . Its slow movement caused heavy rainfall that created a mudslide in Tashiro , Kagoshima , killing three people . Across Kagoshima Prefecture , officials issued evacuations due to flooding , although many did not heed the warnings . In the prefecture , the typhoon destroyed 131 buildings and damaged about 1,700 more . Damage there was estimated at 14 million yen ( 1997 JPY , $ 150,000 in 1997 USD ) . Across Japan , Typhoon Oliwa caused 12 fatalities and displaced a total of 30,000 people . Total damage amounted to 4.36 billion yen ( $ 50.1 million USD ) . Offshore the South Korea coast , the winds and strong waves wrecked 28 vessels , and 10 people were reported missing from one ship .

Typhoon Oliwa was one of eleven super typhoons in the western Pacific , which is tied to the previous record of eleven ; a typical typhoon season has four super typhoons . The period of heightened activity was the result of one of the most powerful El Niño events on record . The track Oliwa was unusual , due to its origin as a cyclone from the central Pacific Ocean and its path over the Northern Marianas Islands and Japan . The typhoon was one of only two during the season to undergo explosive deepening , which is a decrease in barometric pressure of ≥ 2.5 mbar per hour for a period of at least 12 hours . In 24 hours , the pressure dropped 69 mbar , which averages 2.9 mbar per hour ; such values are usually estimated in the western Pacific using the Dvorak technique . The name was not retired , although due to the low activity in the central Pacific Ocean , the name will not be used for several years .

The early 1950s saw dramatic changes in the world of U.S. science fiction publishing . At the start of 1949 , all but one of the major magazines in the field were in pulp format ; by the end of 1955 , almost all had either ceased publication or switched to digest format . Despite the rapid decline of the pulp market , several new science fiction magazines were launched in pulp format during these years ; Tops in Science Fiction was one of the last of these . The publisher , Love Romances Inc . , also published Planet Stories , and Malcolm Reiss , Planet 's editorial director , decided to try to take advantage of the backfile of stories and artwork from Planet 's 14 years of publication . He may have been inspired by the example of Fantastic Story Magazine , which was published by Standard Magazines as a vehicle to reprint their extensive backfile of science fiction . If so , he was evidently not aware that by 1953 Fantastic Story was not doing well financially . The first issue was dated Spring 1953 , and was edited by Jack O 'Sullivan . The cover , by Alexander Leydenfrost , was reprinted from a 1942 issue of Planet Stories . The fiction included " Black Friar of the Flame " by Isaac Asimov , and " The Million Year Picnic " , by Ray Bradbury — the first of his " Martian Chronicles " stories . Interior art included some of Kelly Freas ' earliest work . The issue was only modestly successful , and on the advice of his distributor , who told Reiss that they were having trouble getting the magazine distributed , Reiss decided to switch to the digest format for the second issue : digests were starting to become more popular than the pulps , which would be almost completely gone from the market within only a couple more years . The second issue was dated Fall 1953 ; the cover , by Freas , illustrated " Lorelei of the Red Mist " , by Bradbury and Leigh Brackett . Freas also did the interior illustrations for the story , and later commented that he was delighted by the results but felt he was " never quite able to repeat it . A hex , of course . " Interior artists for the second issue also included Emsh ; the fiction included stories by Fredric Brown and Horace Gold . However , this issue received only limited distribution , and Reiss decided against continuing with the magazine .

Tops in Science Fiction 's two issues were dated Spring and Fall 1953 ; the first in pulp format , and the second a digest . There was a single volume of two numbers . The publisher was Love Romances Publishing , based in Stamford , Connecticut . The magazine was priced at 25 cents for the pulp issue , and 35 cents for the digest issue . Both issues were 128 pages long . The first issue was edited by Jack O 'Sullivan ; the second by Malcolm Reiss . A British reprint edition appeared , with three 128-page digest editions published by Top Fiction Ltd . These were released in Autumn 1954 , Winter 1955 and Summer 1956 , though none of them were dated . The first two reprinted stories from the first U.S. issue ; the third reprinted material from the second U.S. issue . They were each priced at 1 / 6 .

John Edmund Gardner ( 20 November 1926 – 3 August 2007 ) was an English spy and thriller novelist , best known for his James Bond continuation novels , but also for his series of Boysie Oakes books and three continuation novels containing Sir Arthur Conan Doyle 's fictional villain , Professor Moriarty . Gardner , an ex-Royal Marine commando , worked for a period as an Anglican priest , but he lost his faith and left the church after a short time . After a battle with alcohol addiction he wrote his first book , the autobiographical Spin the Bottle , published in 1964 . Gardner went on to write over fifty works of fiction , including fourteen original James Bond novels , and the novel versions of two Bond films . He died from suspected heart failure on 3 August 2007 .

John Edmund Gardner was born on 20 November 1926 in Seaton Delaval , a small village in Northumberland . His parents were Cyril Gardner , a London-born Anglican priest who had been ordained in Wallsend in 1921 , and Lena Henderson , a local girl ; the couple were married in 1925 . In 1933 the family moved to the market town of Wantage in what was then Berkshire , where Cyril took up the position of Chaplain at St Mary 's , Wantage and Gardner was educated at the local King Alfred 's School . During the Second World War he joined the Home Guard , despite being only 13 at the time . Gardner subsequently served in the Royal Navy Fleet Air Arm , before transferring to the Royal Marines 42 Commando for service in the Middle and Far East . Gardner considered himself " the worst commando in the world " and , despite being " a small-arms expert ... [ who ] also knew a lot about explosives " , he admitted that " I bent an aeroplane I was learning to fly " . After the war he went up to St John 's College , Cambridge , to study theology and was subsequently ordained as an Anglican priest in 1953 . He realised that he had lost his faith and made an error in his career ; he later admitted that during one sermon , " I didn 't believe a word I was saying " . He was released from the church in 1958 and took up a position as a drama critic with the Stratford-upon-Avon Herald . It was whilst at the Herald — aged 33 — that Gardner realised he was an alcoholic , drinking two bottles of gin a day . He overcame his addiction and produced his first book as part of his therapy : the autobiographical Spin the Bottle , published in 1964 . Critic and scholar John Sutherland says that of all the books Gardner published , " it 's the one that most deserves to survive . "

In 1964 , Gardner began his novelist career with The Liquidator , in which he created the character Boysie Oakes who inadvertently is mistaken to be a tough , pitiless man of action and is thereupon recruited into a British spy agency . In fact , Oakes was a devout coward who was terrified of violence , suffered from airsickness and was afraid of heights and Gardner admitted of him that , " though I have denied it many times — he was of course a complete piss-take of J. Bond " . The book appeared at the height of the fictional spy mania and , as a send-up of the whole business , was an immediate success . Upon reviewing the novel in The New York Times , Anthony Boucher wrote , " Mr. Gardner succeeds in having it both ways : He has written a clever parody which is also a genuinely satisfactory thriller . " The book was made into a film of the same name by MGM and another seven light-hearted novels and two short stories about the cowardly Oakes appeared over the next eleven years . Following the success of his Oakes books , Gardner created new characters : Derek Torry — a Scotland Yard inspector of Italian descent — and Herbie Kruger , the latter of which appeared in a series of novels published simultaneously with his Bond works . In the mid-1970s Gardner also wrote the first of three novels using the character of Professor Moriarty from the Sherlock Holmes series , the last of which was published posthumously . The third of this series , titled simply Moriarty , was delayed due to a dispute with the publisher , but was finally released shortly after his death . Erik Lee Preminger bought the film rights to the first of the trilogy - The Return of Moriarty - and wrote a script . Edgar Bronfman , Jr . , for Sagittarius Entertainment and Nat Cohen , for EMI Productions were to produce . Donald Sutherland was to portray Moriarty . Funding however fell through shortly before filming was to begin .

In 1979 Glidrose Publications ( now Ian Fleming Publications ) approached Gardner and asked him to revive Ian Fleming 's James Bond series of novels . Between 1981 and 1996 , Gardner wrote fourteen James Bond novels , and the novelizations of two Bond films . Gardner stated that he wanted " to bring Mr Bond into the 1980s " , although he retained the ages of the characters as they were when Fleming had left them . Even though Gardner kept the ages the same , he made Bond grey at the temples as a nod to the passing of the years . With the influence of the American publishers , Putnam 's , the Gardner novels showed an increase in the number of Americanisms used in the book , such as a waiter wearing " pants " , rather than trousers , in The Man from Barbarossa . James Harker , writing in The Guardian , considered that the Gardner books were " dogged by silliness " , giving examples of Scorpius , where much of the action is set in Chippenham , and Win , Lose or Die , where " Bond gets chummy with an unconvincing Maggie Thatcher " . Whilst Gardner 's Bond novels received a mixed reaction from the critics , they were popular and a number appeared in The New York Times Best Seller list , bringing the author commercial success . Gardner had an ambivalent view on being the Bond author , once saying that " I 'm very grateful to have been selected to keep Bond alive . But I 'd much rather be remembered for my own work than I would for Bond " , while saying on another occasion that " I remain proud that my contribution to the Bond saga played a great part in its development " . In the mid-1990s , after discovering he had esophageal cancer , Gardner officially retired from writing Bond novels and Glidrose Publications quickly chose Raymond Benson to continue the literary stories of James Bond .

His break from writing lasted for five years , following the death of his wife , but after battling his illness he returned to print in 2000 with a new novel , Day of Absolution . Gardner also began a series of books with a new character , Suzie Mountford , a 1930s police detective . The Globe and Mail crime critic Derrick Murdoch said , " John Gardner is technically a highly competent thriller novelist who never seems to be quite at ease unless he is writing in the same vein as another writer . ( He has worked John le Carré and Graham Greene this way , and it 's what makes him so well qualified to continue the James Bond saga . ) " The Crime Writers ' Association short-listed The Liquidator , The Dancing Dodo , The Nostradamus Traitor , and The Garden of Weapons for their annual Gold Dagger award .

In 1952 Gardner married Margaret Mercer and the couple had two children , Simon and Alexis . Gardner also had another daughter , Miranda , the result of a long affair with Susan Wright , former PA to Peter Sellers . In 1989 , Gardner and his family moved to the US and it was in America that he was diagnosed with cancer ; firstly for the prostate and then , six years later , of the oesophagus . The subsequent medical treatment in the US left him near bankrupt and he returned to the UK in November 1996 . Shortly after his return , in February 1997 , Margaret died unexpectedly . When Gardner returned to writing , his second book , Bottled Spider , introduced a new character , Detective Sergeant Suzie Mountford . Gardner took the surname from Patricia Mountford , an ex-girlfriend to whom he 'd been engaged in 1949 . When she read the book Mountford contacted Gardner through his publishers and the two were subsequently engaged .

Jordan David Kovacs ( born June 12 , 1990 ) is an American football safety who is currently a free agent . He was signed by the Dolphins as an undrafted free agent in 2013 . He played college football at Michigan . Kovacs has also been a member of the Philadelphia Eagles and Miami Dolphins . He was a walk-on who earned 2009 CollegeFootballNews.com Freshman All-America second team recognition and 2009 Sporting News Freshman All-Big Ten honors for the 2009 Wolverines while being the second-leading tackler on the team . Granted a scholarship by the 2010 team for his second year , he was the second-leading tackler in the Big Ten Conference and was selected as a 2010 All-Conference honorable mention . He was also a 2011 All-Big Ten honorable mention for the 2011 team . He served the 2012 team as captain and was also a 2012 All-Big Ten second team selection and a 2012 Academic All-Big Ten honoree .

Kovacs , a Hungarian American , attended Clay High School , which is the rival high school of former Wolverine teammate Kevin Koger . In high school , he earned varsity letters in basketball as a sophomore and junior . He also earned All-City recognition in track and field three times ( first team as a senior , second team as a junior and honorable mention as a sophomore ) and was a four-year letterman . He qualified for the Ohio State championships in the 4x400 meter relay . He was a three-year letterman in football , where he earned All-Ohio academic honors and All-district honors as both a wide receiver and defensive back . He was not recruited by any Division I schools as a high school football player , but he was recruited by some Division II schools . Kovacs only had two campus visits : Division II Hillsdale and Toledo ( a school 13 miles from his high school ) . By the time he completed his college applications , even Hillsdale had lost interest in him . His father placed a call to Michigan Director of Football Operations Brad Labadie after Jordan was wait listed and got him to agree to review a homemade highlight reel . As his graduation neared , Kovacs shook hands with Andy Boyd , a Toledo coach , on a preferred walk-on spot . That same afternoon in June 2008 , Labadie called to confirm that Kovacs had been admitted from the wait list . The admission came without an athletic scholarship . Labadie encouraged Jordan to attend walk-on tryouts .

Kovacs initially passed the walk-on tryouts , but he had to pass the physical with Paul " Schmidty " Schmidt , who had been a trainer since Jordan 's father Lou had played and been on the coaching staff at Michigan . He had had surgery to repair cartilage damage in high school , but that did not alleviate his problems . When Jordan responded yes to a question about whether he had had any surgeries in the prior 12 months , it triggered a line of questioning about his senior season meniscus surgery . He did not make the 2008 Wolverines due to a knee problem , but was advised to try out again after his knee healed . After discovering a torn meniscus , he had a second knee surgery , which was successful . He attended every game that season in his family 's season ticket section .

In 2009 , he was one of the most highly regarded walk-ons in the nation , and emerged from a group of Michigan football players who referred to themselves as " The Walk-On Nation " . His debut on September 5 against the Western Michigan was on special teams . The following week he registered 31 plays against Notre Dame after starting safety Michael Williams suffered leg cramps . He made his first start on September 26 against Indiana . On October 3 of that season , he had 17 tackles against Michigan State in the annual Paul Bunyan Trophy . He posted ten tackles and made his first career interception on November 14 against Wisconsin . That season he played free safety before being switched to strong safety . He started one game at free safety and seven at strong safety over the course of the season . He finished the season as the second leading tackler for the 2009 Wolverines . He earned 2009 CollegeFootballNews.com Freshman All-America second team recognition and 2009 Sporting News Freshman All-Big Ten honors . He was also a Rudy Award candidate .

Kovacs earned a scholarship at the beginning of the 2010 NCAA Division I FBS football season . In the second game of the season on September 11 against Notre Dame in the Michigan – Notre Dame football rivalry game , Kovacs recorded his first interception of the season and second of his career as part of a 10-tackle effort . On October 16 he recorded 2.5 tackles for a loss against Iowa . After eight games in the 2010 season he ranked second in the Big Ten Conference in tackles . On November 18 , he was nominated for the Burlsworth Trophy , which was a newly created award for the most outstanding player to have begun his career as a walk on . On November 20 , he posted his first career quarterback sack during a season-high twelve tackle performance against Wisconsin . With one week remaining on the conference schedule , the performance tied Kovacs for third-overall in the Big Ten , gave Kovacs a wide lead among Big Ten underclassman ( 8.64 vs. 7.55 per game over the next highest performer ) and extended his lead among Big Ten defensive backs ( 8.64 vs 8.27 ) . In the final game of the regular season on November 27 against Ohio State in the annual Michigan – Ohio State football rivalry game , Kovacs recorded his second interception of the season and third of his career as part of a 17-tackle effort . He collected a career-best 41 return yards following the interception . In The Game , Kovacs tied a career-high with 17 total tackles including a new career-high 9 solo tackles . Kovacs ended the 2010 Big Ten Conference football season ranked second in the conference to teammate Jonas Mouton in total tackles . However , he led the team in solo tackles . Following the Big Ten Conference season , he was selected as an honorable mention All-Conference selection by the media .

When Brady Hoke took over as Michigan head coach for the 2011 NCAA Division I FBS football season , Kovacs impressed him quickly . Kovacs was one of the first five players named as a starter for the 2011 team . In the September 3 , 2011 season opener against Western Michigan at Michigan Stadium , Kovacs forced a fumble that was recovered and advanced for a touchdown . Although the game was ended by mutual agreement in the third quarter due to inclement weather , Kovacs recorded 10 tackles , including two sacks . He was named the Lott Trophy impact player of the week . At first , the stats for the game were considered official by the Big Ten Conference and the University of Michigan , but the NCAA has vacated the statistics for this game because three quarters were not completed . However , at the conclusion of the regular season , the NCAA reversed course and ruled that since the game is counting for win-loss record , the statistics will be counted by the NCAA . On September 10 , against Notre Dame , during the first night game ever played at Michigan Stadium , he talied an interception , and eight tackles . When it became evident that the defense had improved markedly from the prior season , he and fellow safety Thomas Gordon were credited as being the " leaders of the defense " . On October 8 , against Northwestern , Kovacs posted two solo tackles for a loss , both on fourth down . Kovacs suffered a knee injury that sidelined him for the October 29 game against Purdue . Kovacs had been one of twenty quarterfinalists for the Lott impact player of the year . Kovacs was named as one of 10 semifinalists for the 2011 Burlsworth Trophy on November 22 . Following the 2011 Big Ten Conference football season , he earned All-Big Ten Conference honorable mention recognition from the media and was selected as the Big Ten Sportsmanship Award recipient for the Michigan program . Kovacs earned 2011 Fall Academic All-Big Ten recognition along with 10 teammates . In the January 3 , 2012 Sugar Bowl 23 – 20 overtime victory against Virginia Tech , he led the team with 11 tackles . Kovacs finished among the conference leaders in several statistics : sacks / game ( .33 , 17th ) , tackles / game ( 6.2 , 30th ) and fumbles forced / game ( .17 , t-9th ) .

Kovacs was elected team captain . He was selected to the preseason watchlist for the Bronko Nagurski Trophy ( best defensive player ) . At a ceremony on November 10 , Kovacs ' jersey number was changed from 32 to the previously retired number 11 which was recirculated as a " Michigan Football Legend " jersey in honor of Francis ( " Whitey ) , Albert and Alvin Wistert . He was interviewed as part of a 13-minute segment that appeared on the November 18 edition of 60 Minutes about the business of college football . Kovacs was a second team All-Big Ten selection by the coaches and an honorable mention selection by the media . On November 27 , he was named a finalist for the Burlsworth Trophy . At the December 3 team banquet , Kovacs earned team MVP for the season . He earned Academic All-Big Ten recognition in 2012 . Following the season , he participated in the February 2 , 2013 Texas vs. the Nation All-Star Bowl .

Kovacs signed an undrafted free agent contract with the Miami Dolphins following the 2013 NFL Draft . Kovacs was assigned to the Dolphins ' practice squad to start the 2013 NFL season . Kovacs was promoted to the 53-man roster in week 5 of 2013 . Kovacs had a tackle in his debut against the Baltimore Ravens on October 6 . He was released at the end of training camp in 2014 . He was signed to the Philadelphia Eagles practice squad on October 6 . On November 4 , he was signed off the Eagles practice squad by the Dolphins , and was placed on the active 53 man roster . He had seven tackles over the course of the season , including 5 in December 28 week 17 contest against the New York Jets . On October 18 , 2015 , Kovacs recorded his first sack against Zach Mettenberger of the TennesseeTitans . Towards the season he was expected to be released by the Miami Dolphins with the expectation that he would be placed on the practice squad once he cleared waivers .

His father Louis , who was a walk-on for Michigan coach Bo Schembechler , lettered for the 1982 Michigan Wolverines football team . He subsequently served two seasons as a graduate assistant for Schembechler . Lou is married to Susan Kovacs . Jordan wears # 32 , the reverse of his father 's # 23 . Kovacs has three siblings , and his older brother Aaron played his freshman season for the 2007 Toledo Rockets . His family regularly brought him to watch Michigan home games when he was growing up . The family regularly sat in Section 27 of Michigan Stadium , on the north side of the press box . Today the family sits underneath the scoreboard , since they have a son on the team . The first Michigan game Kovacs watched was Lloyd Carr 's first game as coach of Michigan Wolverines football for the 1995 Wolverines , which was a memorable 18-point comeback against Virginia .

The TNA X Division Championship is a professional wrestling championship owned by the Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) professional wrestling promotion . It is primarily defended in TNA and ( as per a talent exchange agreement ) also formerly in Wrestle-1 as well . It debuted on June 19 , 2002 at the taping of TNA 's second weekly pay-per-view ( PPV ) event . Like most professional wrestling championships , the title is won as a result of a scripted match . There have been 68 reigns among 30 wrestlers . The title has previously been known as the NWA X Championship , the NWA – TNA X Championship , and the NWA – TNA X Division Championship .

The TNA X Division was established on June 19 , 2002 at Total Nonstop Action 's first weekly PPV event with a Six Man Tag Team match resulting in Jimmy Yang , Jorge Estrada , and Sonny Siaki — collectively known as The Flying Elvises — defeating A.J. Styles , Jerry Lynn , and Low Ki . Later that day at the taping of the next weekly PPV event , TNA introduced the X Division Championship — then known as the X Championship — to showcase the division more prominently . The division is described as wrestling reinvented , as it takes traditional wrestling and mixes it with the fast paced , high – risk style of wrestling incorporated in cruiserweight divisions and lucha libre . The division was until 2011 promoted under the motto " It is not about weight limits , it is about no limits " by commentator Mike Tenay . On the August 11 , 2011 , edition of TNA 's primary television program , Impact Wrestling , TNA authority figure Eric Bischoff announced that from that point onwards the X Division would have a weight limit of 225 lb ( 102 kg ) . Following Hulk Hogan becoming the new on-screen General Manager in March 2012 , the weight limit was ignored on June 10 , 2012 , at Slammiversary when the 280 lb ( 130 kg ) Samoa Joe was allowed to challenge for the belt . On October 2012 , the weight limit was officially repealed when 237 lb ( 108 kg ) Rob Van Dam challenged for , and eventually won , the title at Bound for Glory . In March 2013 , the X Division was given a new set of rules , which meant all matches were wrestled in Triple Threat format , and a new weight limit of 230 lbs . This proved to be extremely unpopular with fans , and the rules and weight limit were repealed once again in August of that year .

The Total Nonstop Action X Division has multiple styles of match types used to showcase the talent within the division and to defend the TNA X Division Championship in more marketable matches . Three of the matches used in TNA are the Ultimate X match , The Steel Asylum , and the Xscape match . The Ultimate X match was introduced in 2003 . It involves multiple competitors racing to retrieve the X Division Championship or a giant red letter " X " , which is suspended above the ring by two cables . The cables are attached to posts that stand behind the turnbuckles of the ring . These cables intertwine to form an " X " over the center of the ring . This match has become successful in TNA ; it was featured in the 2008 DVD " TNA : Ultimate Matches " , released by TNA Home Video . The Steel Asylum made its debut in May 2008 at TNA 's Sacrifice PPV event , under the name " The TerrorDome " . It was used once again in October 2008 at their Bound for Glory IV PPV event , under the new and current moniker " The Steel Asylum " . As of July 2016 , this match has only been used to determine the number one contender to the TNA X Division Championship . The layout of the match involves the ring being surrounded by a giant red steel barred cage with a domed ceiling . The only way to achieve victory is to escape the cage through a hole in the center of the ceiling .

The Xscape match is the third specialty match primarily used in TNA . It is held annually at TNA 's Lockdown PPV event in April — an all – steel cage format PPV event . The first two Xscape matches were held to determine the number one contender to the TNA X Division Championship , while , since 2007 , it has been contested for the X Division Championship . The contest involves four to six participants . To win this match , two or more participants — depending on how many are involved in the encounter — must be eliminated by pinfall or submission leaving only two participants . These two men then race to see who escapes the cage first to claim victory .

The championship was created and debuted before the main event at the taping of TNA 's second weekly PPV event on June 19 , 2002 ; the event aired on June 26 , 2002 . Later , A.J. Styles defeated Low Ki , Jerry Lynn , and Psicosis in a Four Way Double Elimination match to be crowned the inaugural champion ; this match was announced as being for the NWA X Championship on the onscreen graphic while the ring announcer stated it was for the " NWA – TNA X Championship " . Afterwards , the title was renamed the NWA – TNA X Division Championship and then shortened to just the TNA X Division Championship . This is the oldest title in TNA .

Option C is a concept in which the current X Division Champion may voluntarily vacate the championship in exchange for a TNA World Heavyweight Championship match at that year 's Destination X event . It began in June 2012 when then-champion Austin Aries said that he was not satisfied with being just the X Division Champion , which led to then-General Manager Hulk Hogan offering him a match for the World Heavyweight Championship , but only if he first vacated the X Division Championship ( as Hogan didn 't want the same wrestler holding both titles ) . Aries agreed to Hogan 's terms , on the condition that the X Division Champion be given the same opportunity in future years . Aries would then relinquish the X Division Championship and successfully defeated Booby Roode for the World title . The following year , Hogan asked then-champion Chris Sabin if he wanted to vacate the championship and challenge for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship , which Sabin accepted , and later defeated Bully Ray to win the title . On June 24 , 2014 , a mere five days after regaining the X Division Championship for his fifth reign , Austin Aries invoked Option C once again , but failed to defeat then champion Lashley . On May 10 , 2015 , one day after regaining the title for his second reign , Rockstar Spud invoked Option C , and was defeated by then champion Kurt Angle . On the July 5 , 2016 episode of Impact Wrestling , TNA World Heavyweight Champion Lashley offered a winner take all match to X Division Champion Eddie Edwards in lieu of Edwards invoking Option C. The match ended in a no-contest after an interference from Mike Bennett and Edwards was attacked the debuting Moose .

In July 2002 , the X Division Champion AJ Styles defended the title against Adam Jacobs and David Young at Ring of Honor 's Crowning a Champion , the first defense outside TNA . In May 2003 , before the professional wrestling promotion World Wrestling All-Stars ' ( WWA ) foreclosure , then NWA – TNA X Division champion Chris Sabin defeated WWA International Cruiserweight Champion Jerry Lynn , Frankie Kazarian , and Johnny Swinger in a Four Corners championship unification match to unify the X Division Championship with the WWA International Cruiserweight Championship . On Winter 2004 , Petey Williams defended the title in various IWA-Mid South events . During Christopher Daniels ' first reign in mid-2005 , he defended the X Division Championship at several Pro Wrestling Guerrilla shows . The first defense happened at All Star Weekend - Night One on April 1 against Alex Shelley , while the second occurred at All Star Weekend – Night Two on April 2 against Chris Hero ; Daniels won both encounters retaining the championship . At Jason Takes PWG on May 13 , Daniels fought A.J. Styles for the X Division Championship and Styles ' PWG Championship to a one-hour time-limit draw . Daniels successfully defended the X Division Title two more times in PWG ; once at Guitarmageddon on June 11 against El Generico , while once at The 2nd Annual PWG Bicentennial Birthday Extravaganza - Night One on July 9 against fellow TNA wrestler Chris Sabin . In September 2005 at TNA 's Unbreakable PPV event , the TNA X Division Championship was defended in the main event for the first time at a monthly PPV event ; then-champion Christopher Daniels defended the championship against A.J. Styles and Samoa Joe .

The title was once again defended in the main event of a monthly event at TNA 's August 2007 Hard Justice PPV event , where Kurt Angle defeated Samoa Joe to win the TNA X Division and the TNA World Tag Team Championship and retain the TNA World Heavyweight and IGF 's version of the IWGP World Heavyweight Championship . This win made Angle the only person in the history of TNA to hold every active championship at the same time ; TNA World , X Division , and World Tag Team . On March 4 , 2014 , The title was defended in Japan as part of Kaisen : Outbreak - a supershow event promoted by Wrestle-1 in partnership with TNA - where the title was won by Wrestle-1 star Seiya Sanada . On March 22 , Sanada defended and successfully retained the title on a Wrestle-1 show .

In May 2007 , the National Wrestling Alliance ( NWA ) ended their five-year partnership with TNA , which allowed the NWA to regain control over the NWA World Heavyweight and World Tag Team Championships that TNA had controlled since June 2002 . TNA then introduced a new TNA X Division Championship belt on the May 16 , 2007 edition of TNA 's online podcast TNA Today . Jeremy Borash and Management Director Jim Cornette , TNA 's on-screen authority figure at the time , unveiled the new belt and awarded it to then-champion Chris Sabin . On July 19 , 2013 , TNA President Dixie Carter unveiled a new design for the championship , with blue accents to match the color scheme of the company .

The inaugural champion was A.J. Styles , who won the championship by defeating Low Ki , Jerry Lynn , and Psicosis in a Four Way Double Elimination match on June 19 , 2002 at TNA 's second weekly PPV event . At 301 days , Austin Aries ' first reign holds the record for longest in the title 's history . At less than one day , Eric Young 's only reign , and Chris Sabin 's sixth reign and Rockstar Spud 's second reign are the shortest in the title 's history . Chris Sabin holds the record for most reigns with eight . The current champion is Lashley . He defeated previous champion Eddie Edwards on July 13 , 2016 , in Orlando , Florida during the Impact Wrestling tapings .

Andrianjaka reigned over the Kingdom of Imerina in the central highlands region of Madagascar from around 1612 to 1630 . Despite being the younger of King Ralambo 's two sons , Andrianjaka succeeded to the throne on the basis of his strength of character and skill as a military tactician . The most celebrated accomplishment of his reign was the capture of the hill of Analamanga from a Vazimba king . There he established the fortified compound ( rova ) that would form the heart of his new capital city of Antananarivo . Upon his orders , the first structures within this fortified compound ( known as the Rova of Antananarivo ) were constructed : several traditional royal houses were built , and plans for a series of royal tombs were designed . These buildings took on an enduring political and spiritual significance , ensuring their preservation until being destroyed by fire in 1995 . Andrianjaka obtained a sizable cache of firearms and gunpowder , materials that helped to establish and preserve his dominance and expand his rule over greater Imerina . Many of the cultural practices that were to define Merina social and political life for centuries are credited to Andrianjaka . He designated the twelve sacred hills of Imerina that were to become the spiritual and political heartland of the Merina empire , contributing to the establishment of the kingdom 's traditional boundaries ; clans were assigned to specific regions within his kingdom , further defining the cultural landscape . He consolidated power through such measures as appropriating the folk tradition of sampy ( community talismans ) , thereby ensuring all the powers traditionally attributed to these idols were under the control of the sovereign alone . Merina traditions related to the burial and mourning of sovereigns are also traced back to Andrianjaka 's reign .

Andrianjaka was the second son of Ralambo , ruler of the Kingdom of Imerina in the central highlands of Madagascar . As a young man , Andrianjaka married Ravadifo , a daughter of Prince Andriampanarivomanjaka . The marriage produced one daughter and one son , Andriantsitakatrandriana , who would rule after his father from 1630 to 1650 . Andrianjaka was also actively involved in providing support to his father 's military campaigns to expand and defend Ralambo 's realm . Oral history describes an incident wherein Andrianjaka and Ralambo were engaged in the defense of Ralambo 's capital at Ambohidrabiby , which was threatened by the advance of Antsihanaka warriors . Andrianjaka reportedly suggested an innovative defensive tactic to annihilate the enemy by filling the town 's hadivory ( defensive trenches ) with cow dung and rice husks , lighting it on fire , and covering the smoldering embers with burnt rice stalks so that the area resembled a patch of land recently re-cleared for planting through tavy ( slash and burn agriculture ) . The enemy troops reportedly marched into the trap , sinking into the embers and burning or suffocating to death . Oral history provides two different accounts of Andrianjaka 's succession to the throne of the Kingdom of Imerina . According to popular legend , Ralambo devised a test to determine which of his two sons was most fit to rule : he would summon them both to join him at his capital in Ambohidrabiby , and whichever of his two sons reached him soonest would inherit his kingdom . In one account of this legend , Andrianjaka was reportedly engrossed in strategizing a win in a difficult game of fanorona and so refused to admit audience to the royal messenger until after the game was over . During this delay , his older brother Andriantompokoindrindra received his father 's message and rushed home ; he was thus awarded Ralambo 's title and kingdom . However , this tale continues , Andriantompokoindrindra 's claim to power was rejected by the public , and he was soon forced to cede the throne to Andrianjaka . In an alternate account of the succession tale , it is Andriantompokoindrindra ( not Andrianjaka ) who was said to be preoccupied with the fanorona game — a version in keeping with the oral tradition that credits him with the game 's invention and popularization at court — and his refusal to return to his father until after the game had finished led Ralambo to choose Andrianjaka as his successor . One source states that the summons was not a test , but rather occurred during the aforementioned incident when Ralambo was besieged in his capital by the Antsihanaka warriors and was genuinely in need of his sons ' assistance .

It is generally accepted by historians that Andrianjaka did indeed succeed to the throne around 1610 or 1612 after his older brother 's claim was rejected by the public . All speculation about fanorona and royal summons aside , Ralambo may have chosen Andrianjaka based on the simple fact that he was the son of Ralambo 's first wife . Ralambo 's father , Andriamanelo , had established rules of succession by which Ralambo 's first son by his first wife must rule after his father in order to fulfill a mandate established by his Vazimba antecedents Rafohy and Rangita . The passing over of Andriantompokoindrindra in favor of his younger brother was partially mitigated by the establishment of a royal tradition maintaining that all reigning descendants of Andrianjaka would henceforth be required to marry a princess directly descended from Andriantompokoindrindra , thereby preserving the royal status of descendants in both brothers ' bloodlines .

Andrianjaka moved his capital from Ambohidrabiby to Ambohimanga upon ascending to the throne around 1610 or 1612 . He was reportedly the first Merina leader to receive Europeans around 1620 and traded slaves in exchange for guns and other firearms to aid in the pacification of rival principalities , obtaining 50 guns and three barrels of gunpowder to equip his army . He unified the principalities on what he later designated as the twelve sacred hills of Imerina at Ambohitratrimo , Ambohimanga , Ilafy , Alasora , Antsahadita , Ambohimanambony , Analamanga , Ambohitrabiby , Namehana , Ambohidrapeto , Ambohijafy and Ambohimandranjaka . These hills became and remain the spiritual heart of Imerina , which was further expanded over a century later when Andrianampoinimerina redesignated the twelve sacred hills to include several different sites . His policies and tactics highlighted and increased the separation between the king and his subjects . Andrianjaka transformed social divisions into spatial divisions by assigning each clan to a specific geographical region within his kingdom . He made a demonstration of royal power by appropriating the local tradition of sampy ( talismans ) , previously created by village chiefs and others for personal or local spiritual ends , restricting their number to twelve and declaring their creation a strictly royal prerogative . The king also imposed an intimidating change to the traditional form of justice , the trial by ordeal : Andrianjaka ordered that rather than administering tangena poison to an accused person 's rooster to determine their innocence by the creature 's survival , the poison would instead be ingested by the accused himself .

Around 1610 or 1625 according to various estimations , Andrianjaka commanded a garrison of 1,000 soldiers to seize the hill of Analamanga ( " Blue Forest " ) — at 1,480 metres ( 4,860 ft ) above sea level , then the highest and most strategically important in the region — from its Vazimba inhabitants . He constructed a royal fortified compound ( rova ) on the hilltop as the capitol of a new town at the site which he named Antananarivo ( " the city of the thousand " ) in honor of the thousand soldiers who aided in capturing and protecting the hill . He reportedly succeeded with minimal bloodshed : according to oral history , the encampment of his army at the foot of Analamanga was sufficient to secure the submission of the Vazimba . Andrianjaka made Antananarivo the capital of his realm . From his position atop Analamanga , he was well-placed to exert control over the vast plains of Betsimitatatra below . Under his command the plains were gradually transformed into vast , surplus-producing rice paddies . This feat was accomplished by mobilizing large numbers of his able-bodied subjects to construct dikes that enabled the redirection of rainwater for controlled flooding of planted areas .

Andrianjaka 's fortified compound came to be known as the Rova of Antananarivo and constituted the heart of his newly founded city of Antananarivo . Prior to Andrianjaka 's rule , Merina sovereigns shifted their capital from one town to another , but with the establishment of the rova on the peak of Analamanga hill , Antananarivo was to become the capital of the Kingdom of Imerina ( and , ultimately , the 19th-century Kingdom of Madagascar ) for generations of Merina sovereigns . The heart of the town was built in stages : first , the army cleared the forest covering the hill 's summit and constructed the rova compound to serve as an initial garrison enclosing a traditional-style wooden house ( lapa ) that served as a residence for the king . Soon thereafter , two more houses were constructed ; Andrianjaka also designated the construction space and design for a row of royal tombs . In keeping with Merina aristocratic tradition , each structure in the compound was given a name . The row of tombs was named Fitomiandalana ( " Seven Aligned Tombs " ) , Andrianjaka 's own tomb being the first of these constructed . According to one account , the very first royal house constructed within the Rova of Antananarivo was named Besakana ( " Great Breadth " ) and served as the personal residence of Andrianjaka . This account is contradicted by another source that states the second and third houses were called Masoandrotsiroa and Besakana , with the latter again characterized as Andrianjaka 's personal residence , leaving the precise origins of Besakana unclear .

The Besakana , Masoandrotsiroa and Fitomiandalana structures at the Rova of Antananarivo were preserved and maintained over the centuries by successive generations of Merina sovereigns , imbuing the structures with deep symbolic and spiritual meaning . As Andrianjaka 's residence , the Besakana was particularly significant : the original building was torn down and reconstructed in the same design by Andriamasinavalona around 1680 , and again by Andrianampoinimerina in 1800 , each of whom inhabited the building in turn as their personal residence . King Radama I likewise inhabited the building for much of his time at the Rova , and in 1820 he designated the building as the first site to house what came to be known as the Palace School , the first formal European-style school in Imerina . Sovereigns were enthroned in this building and their mortal remains were displayed here before burial , rendering Besakana " the official state room for civil affairs ... regarded as the throne of the kingdom . "

The rule of Andrianjaka continued uninterrupted until his death at the Rova of Antananarivo around 1630 . He was the first king to be buried on the grounds of the Rova , his tomb forming the first of the Fitomiandalana . To commemorate his greatness , his subjects erected a small wooden house called a trano masina on top of his tomb . Future Merina sovereigns and nobles continued to construct similar tomb houses on their tombs well into the 19th century . According to oral history , the institution of lengthy formal mourning periods for deceased sovereigns in Imerina may also have begun with the death of Andrianjaka . He was succeeded by his son , Andriantsitakatrandriana .

No Way Out ( 2004 ) was a professional wrestling pay-per-view event produced by World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) , which took place on February 15 , 2004 , at the Cow Palace in San Francisco , California . It was presented by THQ 's MX Unleashed . It was the sixth event produced under the No Way Out name and starred wrestlers from the SmackDown ! brand . In the main event , Eddie Guerrero defeated WWE Champion Brock Lesnar to win the title - his sole World Championship before his death in 2005 . On the undercard Kurt Angle defeated The Big Show and John Cena in a Triple Threat match to earn a title match for the WWE Championship at WrestleMania XX . Furthermore , Chavo Guerrero defeated Rey Mysterio . No Way Out grossed over $ 450,000 ticket sales from an attendance of approximately 11,000 and received 350,000 pay-per-view buys , and was instrumental in helping WWE increase its pay-per-view revenue by $ 11.9 million compared to the previous year . Like the event , the DVD received favorable reviews .

The event consisted of eight professional wrestling matches with wrestlers involved in pre-existing scripted feuds , and storylines . Wrestlers were portrayed as either villains or fan favorites as they followed a series of tension-building events , which culminated in a wrestling match or series of matches . All wrestlers belonged to the SmackDown ! brand – a storyline division in which WWE assigned its employees to a different program , the other being Raw . After winning a 15-man battle royal ( a match in which participants are eliminated until one person remains as the winner ) on the January 29 , 2004 episode of SmackDown ! , Eddie Guerrero earned the right to challenge for the WWE Championship at No Way Out against the champion , Brock Lesnar in a standard wrestling match , also known as a singles match . Outside the storyline with Guerrero , Lesnar was involved in a staged rivalry with Goldberg , a member of the Raw program . The feud between Lesnar and Goldberg began at the Royal Rumble , WWE 's previous pay-per-view event which involved both brands . Lesnar interfered in the Royal Rumble match , a 30-man battle royal , attacking and eliminating Goldberg from the match . On the week of January 26 , 2004 , Lesnar and Goldberg conducted promotional in-ring segments on respective episodes of Raw and SmackDown ! , in which they insulted each other . The following week on an episode of Raw , as a result of the rivalry extending between the two programs , General Manager Steve Austin gave Goldberg the option of attending No Way Out by giving him a front-row ticket . That Thursday on SmackDown ! , the storyline between Guerrero and Lesnar was enhanced when they began a brawl after an in-ring interview segment .

On the February 5 , 2004 episode of SmackDown ! , The General Manager Paul Heyman scheduled a Triple Threat match between The Big Show , Kurt Angle and John Cena for No Way Out . The winner of that match would face the WWE Champion at WrestleMania XX for the title . The rivalry continued to develop the following week , when Angle was scheduled to team with Guerrero to face The Big Show and Lesnar , though the latter was portrayed as being unconscious backstage . Cena then replaced Angle in the match and defeated the opposition with Guerrero . In February 2004 , WWE Cruiserweight Champion Rey Mysterio produced " Crossing Borders " , which was No Way Out 's official theme song . In this storyline , Chavo Guerrero became jealous of the attention Mysterio garnered as a result of recording the song . Therefore , Heyman promoted a match between the two at No Way Out for the WWE Cruiserweight title during the February 5 , 2004 episode of SmackDown ! . The following week on SmackDown ! , Mysterio was accompanied by Jorge Páez , a professional boxer and childhood friend of Mysterio who appeared in his " Crossing Borders " music video , to his match against Tajiri . Mysterio defeated Tajiri but was attacked by Guerrero and Chavo Guerrero , Sr. after the match until Paez intervened and helped Mysterio .

After Sunday Night Heat , the pay-per-view began with a handicap match - a tag team match in which a team of two wrestlers face a team of three . WWE Tag Team Champions Rikishi and Scotty 2 Hotty defended their titles against The Basham Brothers ( Doug and Danny Basham ) and Shaniqua . During the match Hotty attempted to hit Shaniqua , who was lying on her back , with a slap over her chest , but Shaniqua countered by hitting him with her forearm . The challengers had the advantage until Hotty hit both Basham brothers with his forearm , causing them to flip over the top ring rope and into ringside . Afterwards , Rikishi lifted Shaniqua over his shoulders before falling backwards in a Samoan drop . Rikishi then covered Shaniqua to pin her , a move that allowed Rikishi and Hotty to retain their championships . Next was a Singles match , in which Jamie Noble was blindfolded as he faced his storyline girlfriend Nidia . Nidia would take advantage of Noble 's inability to see by performing antics that caused him to fall . Eventually , Noble was able to apply the guillotine choke on Nidia . Noble won the match after he forced her to submit with this move .

The third contest was a tag team match , in which The World 's Greatest Tag Team ( Shelton Benjamin and Charlie Haas ) faced the APA ( Bradshaw and Faarooq ) . At one point , Bradshaw performed a high-impact forearm " Clothesline from Hell " attack on Haas . Benjamin then hit Bradshaw with a superkick and pinned him to gain the win for his team . After the match , Goldberg was seen arriving at the arena and being escorted to his seat by arena security . In the ring , General Manager Paul Heyman gave a promotional in-ring segment on how SmackDown ! was the better program over Raw . Lesnar would come down to the ring to promote his match and to insult Goldberg . As part of the storyline , Goldberg immediately jumped over the barricade into the ring , where Lesnar performed a spear , a running shoulder block to Goldberg 's stomach ; however he recuperated and lifted Lesnar vertically in the air before slamming him down to perform the Jackhammer . Goldberg was then escorted out of the arena by security . This altercation was followed by a singles match between Hardcore Holly and Rhyno . Before the match began , Holly and Rhyno brawled on the entrance ramp , before they entered the ring . Once there , Holly slammed Rhyno off the top rope with a superplex , though , as they recuperated , Rhyno hit Holly with a spear that caused Holly to roll out of the ring . Afterwards , Holly lifted Rhyno by his legs over his shoulders before throwing him down with an Alabama slam ; Holly covered Rhyno for a pinfall .

In the fifth match Rey Mysterio ( managed by Jorge Paez ) , defended his WWE Cruiserweight Championship against Chavo Guerrero ( managed by his father Chavo Guerrero , Sr. ) During the fight , Mysterio performed a 619 on Guerrero ( at the time positioned on the second ring rope ) and hit him in the face with both legs while using the ropes for leverage , leading to an attack by Paez on Guerrero , Sr. The referee ordered Paez backstage . Both fighters wrestled inconclusively until Mysterio hit a second 619 . During the second sequence of the move , Guerrero grabbed Mysterio 's legs and achieved a position with his shoulders spread so as to win both a pinfall and the WWE Cruiserweight title . The following match was the Triple Threat between The Big Show , John Cena , and Kurt Angle fighting for the opportunity to face the WWE Champion at WrestleMania XX . For the duration of the match , The Big Show , who stood at 7 feet 2 inches ( 2.18 m ) and weighed 500 pounds ( 230 kg ) , used his body size to his advantage as he squashed , or easily and quickly performed moves on , Cena and Angle . Thereafter , Cena lifted The Big Show over his shoulders and threw him down to execute the FU , while Angle lifted The Big Show by the side to throw him out of the ring . Angle then applied an ankle lock on Cena , forcing him to submit . As a result , Angle won a WWE Championship match at WrestleMania XX .

The main event was a singles match in which WWE Champion Brock Lesnar defended his title against Eddie Guerrero . Lesnar did not show any effect from the Jackhammer Goldberg performed on him earlier in the event ; similar to the prior match , Lesnar used his size advantage over Guerrero throughout the match . As Lesnar lifted Guerrero over his shoulders to slam his face down to perform an " F-5 " , he knocked down the referee . Lesnar then attempted to take advantage of the referee 's state , as he went to retrieve the WWE title belt to hit Guerrero . Meanwhile , Goldberg came down into the ring and hit a spear on Lesnar . Because the referee was incapacitated , Guerrero could not be disqualified for Goldberg 's interference . As Goldberg retreated , Guerrero countered Lesnar 's 2nd F5 into a DDT on the title belt while the referee regained consciousness . Guerrero kicked the belt out of the ring to prevent the referee from seeing it and performed his Frog splash to pin Lesnar and win the WWE Championship from him .

At WrestleMania XX , WWE Champion Eddie Guerrero defeated challenger Kurt Angle via pinfall and retained his title . John " Bradshaw " Layfield , portraying a new character after the semi-retirement of his tag team partner Faarooq , challenged Guerrero for the WWE Championship and defeated him at The Great American Bash to win the title . Guerrero failed to recapture the title from Layfield in a steel cage match on SmackDown ! . After Guerrero 's death in November 2005 , WWE held Tribute Shows on Raw and SmackDown ! During these programs , No Way Out was the main highlight of Guerrero 's career , as it was where he won his only World Championship . John Cena began a rivalry with The Big Show over his WWE United States Championship and , at WrestleMania XX , Cena defeated Show to win the title . Goldberg and Lesnar continued their rivalry , leading to a match promoted at WrestleMania XX , in which Goldberg defeated Lesnar . After their match , Goldberg and Lesnar left the company , although Lesnar would make his return in April 2012 . Rey Mysterio and Chavo Guerrero 's storyline over the WWE Cruiserweight Championship also continued , culminating in a battle royal match at WrestleMania XX involving other wrestlers . Guerrero last eliminated Mysterio to retain his title in this match . After the Draft Lottery , a mock sports draft lottery in which wrestlers switched programs , Rico was drafted to SmackDown ! , while Shelton Benjamin was drafted to Raw , in the process splitting up The World 's Greatest Tag Team . Afterward , Haas and Rico won the WWE Tag Team Championship from Rikishi and Scotty 2 Hotty on SmackDown !

The Cow Palace arena usually can accommodate 13,000 , but the capacity was reduced for No Way Out 2004 . This event grossed over $ 450,000 from an approximate attendance of 11,000 which was the maximum allowed . It also received 350,000 pay-per-view buys . No Way Out helped World Wrestling Entertainment earn $ 43.7 million in revenue from pay-per-view events versus $ 31.8 million the previous year ; Linda McMahon , then CEO of WWE , confirmed this statement on June 21 , 2004 in a quarterly financial report . The event received mostly positive reviews . Canadian Online Explorer 's professional wrestling section described the event as " Smackdown ! [ giving ] us our money 's worth last night but they also set up what 's probably going to be the best match at Wrestlemania . " Kevin Sowers from PWTorch described the main event between Eddie Guerrero and Brock Lesnar as " one to remember for a long time . " The event was released on DVD on March 16 , 2004 . After its release , the DVD received a rating of 8.5 out of 10 points by IGN .

Scout Taylor-Compton ( born February 21 , 1989 ) is an American actress . She has appeared in numerous small television roles and in feature films that range from dramas to those in the horror genre giving her the reputation of a scream queen . Her most notable roles include Laurie Strode in the horror films Halloween ( 2007 ) and Halloween II ( 2009 ) , as well as Lita Ford in the film The Runaways ( 2010 ) . In addition to taking vocal lessons and singing the theme song for her film Chicken Night ( 2001 ) , Taylor-Compton is recording her debut rock album . Taylor-Compton had also provided voice over work in other films , including The Core ( 2003 ) , and The Princess Diaries 2 : Royal Engagement ( 2004 ) .

Scout Taylor-Compton was born Desariee Starr Compton in Long Beach , California , and is half Mexican American on her mother 's side . Her father is a mortician . Taylor-Compton says she " grew up in that whole [ horror ] genre and visiting my dad at the mortuary . I have no problem with that stuff . Whether it was a coffin or my dad bringing his work home . " Andy Biersack from Black Veil Brides , her ex-boyfriend whom she dated for six years , composed the song The Mortician 's Daughter about her . She has 8 tattoos and is known for her tomboy fashion . Previous to acting , Taylor-Compton had been a competitive swimmer and had plans to participate in the AAU Junior Olympics . She enjoys volleyball , cheerleading , dance , gymnastics and roller-blading , and has several cats and dogs . Taylor-Compton is a fan of horror films , especially those featuring Michael [ Myers ] , Jason [ Voorhees ] and Chucky . She also enjoys Thir13en Ghosts , Halloween 4 and Halloween 5 . She is a fan of the lead actress in the latter two films Danielle Harris ; the two later going on to appear together in the Halloween remake and its sequel . Compton also writes song lyrics .

In 1998 , Taylor-Compton began her acting career with an appearance in the film A.W.O.L. with David Morse , and later in the short film Thursday Afternoon . She went on to have small roles in both television and film including Ally McBeal , ER , Frasier , The Guardian and The Division . She appeared in several student films , commercials for Fuji Film and the Disney Cruise Line , and various skits on The Jay Leno Show . November 2000 saw Taylor-Compton make her stage debut as the title character in a production of Annie Warbucks at The Grove Theatre in Upland , California , and a stage production of Footloose at the Simi Valley Cultural Arts Center . In 2001 , she had a recurring role as Clara Forrester , the younger sister of Dean Forrester ( Jared Padalecki ) in the television series Gilmore Girls , appearing in a total of four episodes until 2004 . Taylor-Compton was nominated for " Best Performance in a TV Series – Recurring Young Actress " for her portrayal of Clara . She made a comedic appearance in the film Four Fingers of the Dragon ( 2003 ) playing herself auditioning for a role in a fictional Kung Fu film . Later in 2004 , she appeared in the teen comedy Sleepover , which had been her first large Hollywood film role . The cast of the film was nominated for " Best Performance in a Feature Film – Young Ensemble Cast " at the Young Artists Award . Sleepover did poorly at the box office . Following Sleepover , she appeared in numerous television series including Hidden Howie , Unfabulous ( 2 episodes ) , Cold Case , That 's So Raven , Charmed ( appearing in 8 episodes between 2000 and 2006 as various Fairies ) , and Without a Trace ( in which she portrayed a runaway teenager ) .

In 2007 , Taylor-Compton joined the cast on ABC 'S Friday Night Live . That year as well , she starred in the drama Tomorrow is Today and the horror film Wicked Little Things . Tomorrow is Today features Taylor-Compton as Julie Peterson , a girl who saves the life of and befriends a hapless drifter . The film won over six awards at various festivals which included the California Independent Film Festival , the Garden State Film Festival , Method Fest Independent Film Festival , and the Rhode Island International Film Festival . She won " Best Actress " for her performance in the film at the Method Fest Independent Film Festival . Wicked Little Things was one of the films featured in After Dark 's 8 Films to Die For and saw Taylor-Compton star as Sarah Tunny . Following these films , she appeared in Standoff and Close to Home . In 2007 , Taylor-Compton appeared in the film An American Crime which told the true story of suburban housewife Gertrude Baniszewski , who had kept a teenage girl locked in the basement of her Indiana home during the 1960s . After losing the lead role in the Pang Brothers film The Messengers to Kristen Stewart , Taylor-Compton then returned to the horror genre as Laurie Strode in Rob Zombie 's remake of the classic Halloween . She endured a long audition process , but as director Zombie explains , " Scout was my first choice . There was just something about her ; she had a genuine quality . She didn 't seem actor-y . " Halloween currently stands as the highest grossing overall film in the Halloween franchise .

She starred in the television movie Love 's Unfolding Dream which premiered on November 24 , 2007 . She stars in the horror film April Fool 's Day , a remake of the 1986 film of the same name , filmed in North Carolina with a March 25 , 2008 DVD release . Taylor-Compton explains on the starring in the role of Torrance : " I 'll just be playing another wholesome ' good girl ' that screams a lot . " She has another horror film in production , the 2009 film Murder World in which she will have a cameo as Carrie Lain . In an interview conducted in July 2007 , Taylor-Compton reported that after completing April Fool 's Day , she wants to stay away from roles in the horror genre for her next film projects . Although she has received many horror film scripts , she believes that she " need [ s ] to move on from horror . Just drift away a little bit and do something else so I don 't get stuck in that " and although she " love [ s ] doing horror films " and are her " favorite " , she 'd " like to do other stuff in between . " She has recently been influenced by the career of Scarlett Johansson , wanting to choose scripts and roles based on personal interest as she views Johansson does . Taylor-Compton went on to explain , " That 's what I kind of want to do . I love just being passionate about something rather than just caring about the money or who 's in the movie . 2009 saw Taylor-Compton alongside Helen Mirren and Joe Pesci in Love Ranch . Then , she went on to star in the film Obsessed alongside Beyoncé Knowles . Her most recent film to hit theaters was Halloween II , Rob Zombie 's sequel to the 2007 remake . The film opened the same day as The Final Destination , another high profile horror film , and had disappointing box office returns as a result . In 2010 , she appeared in The Runaways where she plays Lita Ford , alongside Kristen Stewart , Dakota Fanning , and Stella Maeve .

In 1998 , she appeared in The Adventures of Lily music video for " Femme Fatale " . In 2001 , Taylor Compton provided voice overs for I Am Sam , and continued with voice over work with appearances in The Core ( 2003 ) and The Princess Diaries 2 : Royal Engagement ( 2004 ) . The next year , she provided voice over work for the teen hero comedy Sky High . She sang the theme song " Jet Set " for her film Chicken Night ( 2001 ) . 2002 saw Taylor-Compton appearing briefly in the Will Smith music video for " Black Suits Comin ' ( Nod Ya Head ) " for the Men in Black II soundtrack . She appeared in the music video for " Sweet Valentine " by the band Born the Sky in 2007 . In 2003 , Taylor-Compton had taken vocal lessons with Diane Gillespie and Vocal Power Institute . She had taken guitar , drums , and keyboard lessons , and was member a theatre group called " Shenanigans , " where she performed and took weekly tap and jazz lessons . She attended the Hollywood Pop Academy for additional vocal training .

Taylor-Compton is currently working on her debut rock / pop album , in which she will sing and play drums . She cites Cyndi Lauper , Gwen Stefani , Madonna , Kelly Osbourne and the band Green Day as musical influences . Taylor-Compton has been working with ERA Productions and " with a very well known punk / pop singer " , Vitamin C. While on the set filming Halloween ( 2007 ) , Taylor-Compton had received " a few pointers " from director Rob Zombie , who had also fronted a band and continues his singing career . She has stated that singing is a side project and " is just a little talent that I have on the side , and if it does something then I 'll do that , but I 'm not gonna give up acting . " Taylor-Compton has five songs that can be streamed on her official Garageband.com profile . All songs were recorded and posted for listening in 2005 . The songs featured are " Bad Girl " , the first song she wrote with her ERA producers , " Waiting for the Heartbreak " and " Where Do We Go " , written with Vitamin C , " Freak Show " , written by Adam Alvermark and produced Taylor-Compton along with ERA Productions , and " Words " . She did minor modeling for the teenage clothing brand Limited Too and the cellular phone service Sprint PCS .

Goin ' Home is a studio album by American saxophonist Archie Shepp and pianist Horace Parlan . After their respective work in the avant-garde jazz movement of the 1960s , Shepp and Parlan both faced career challenges as the jazz scene diverged stylistically . They left the United States for Europe during the 1970s and met each other in Denmark before recording the album on April 25 , 1977 , at Sweet Silence Studio in Copenhagen . A jazz and gospel album , Goin ' Home features Shepp and Parlan 's interpretations of African-American folk melodies and spirituals . Its title is an allusion to Shepp 's return to his African cultural roots . Shepp had never recorded spirituals before and was overcome with emotion during the album 's recording because of the historical and cultural context of the songs . Although it surprised jazz listeners upon its release in 1977 , Goin ' Home was praised by music critics for its reverent tone and stylistic deviation from Shepp 's previous free jazz works . Shepp and Parlan were artistically satisfied with the album and subsequently recorded another album together , Trouble in Mind , in 1980 . Goin ' Home was reissued on CD by SteepleChase Records on May 3 , 1994 .

After surging to the forefront of the avant-garde jazz movement during the 1960s , both Archie Shepp and Horace Parlan faced career challenges during the 1970s after their style lost popularity in the jazz scene , which had split between artists who played either a tamer or a more experimental sound . Like Parlan , Shepp became a more mainstream performer , mostly playing hard bop , although he occasionally return to his free jazz sound . To support himself financially , he spent most of his time playing in Europe . In 1972 , Parlan also left the United States and eventually made his residence in Denmark , where Shepp had signed to SteepleChase Records . Shepp became interested in recording gospel and , at the request of his producer at SteepleChase , recorded Goin ' Home with Parlan . They recorded the album on April 25 , 1977 , at Sweet Silence Studio in Copenhagen , Denmark . Shepp played tenor saxophone on six pieces and soprano saxophone on three others .

According to music journalist Tom Moon , Goin ' Home is a reverent jazz and gospel album played with straightforward simplicity by Shepp and Parlan . They interpret nine traditional Negro spirituals , featuring African-American folk melodies that originated from the 1920s and before . Along with Trouble in Mind and Looking at Bird in 1980 , Goin ' Home is part of a series of albums delineated in Shepp 's discography as " modular explorations of traditional musical styles " , which is itself in Shepp 's broader series of musical " portraits of the Diaspora " . The album 's title alludes to a return to African cultural roots . Shepp viewed Goin ' Home as his attempt to cross the span of time and history between modern African Americans and the black slaves symbolized by the spirituals . In an interview for Down Beat , Shepp said that it was the first time he had recorded spirituals or made " any kind of serious statement about them " , and said that he started to cry when he started playing on the album due to " the strain , the spiritual weight of the moment " . He recalled being momentarily afraid that he would not be able to go through with the album 's recording because of his emotional state , which he explained :

The album has a melodic form , and employs pentatonic scales for melodic development , a practice common in African and African-American folk music . Goin ' Home is mostly tempoless , as most of the pieces are performed in a rubato-like free rhythm . Shepp and Parlan perform sudden accelerations and intended delays and halts , particularly at the end of bars , phrases , and sections in a piece . Most of the spirituals have a thirty-two-bar form , with the eight-bar section comprising four two-bar phrases wherein two choruses of the spiritual are played . Shepp and Parlan 's interpretations include few choruses from the original spirituals . Eschewing common jazz practice , Shepp does not improvise new melodic lines within the spirituals ' harmonic framework , but plays short , impromptu passages around a melodic idea . Parlan plays piano solos on only two of the album 's pieces . Shepp contributes a tonal roughness to the songs with growled sounds , which he plays by singing or humming into his saxophone . He also uses harmonic overtones , breathy tonal weight , and expressive chromatic development of melody to add textural and timbral variety to the songs . Shepp and Parlan 's reverent takes on " Amazing Grace " and Go Down Moses " exhibit split tones and fortes .

Goin ' Home was released in 1977 by Danish record label SteepleChase Records . Jazz listeners were divided in their reaction to the album . According to Doug Ramsey of Texas Monthly , some listeners were surprised by Shepp 's stylistic change , while others viewed the record as a " fulfillment of promise " . Ramsey believed it revealed a " tenderness and humor " from Shepp that his 1960s work only hinted at , writing that it " disclosed an Archie Shepp that many had never known , warm rather than blistering hot , witty rather than contemptuously sardonic " . John Swenson , writing in The Rolling Stone Jazz Record Guide ( 1985 ) , praised Shepp 's work with Parlan and gave Goin ' Home a five-star rating , finding it " particularly heartfelt . " Fernando Gonzalez of The Boston Globe called it " exquisite " , and C. Gerald Fraser of The New York Times wrote in 1987 that " this marriage of avant-garde and soul " is " regarded as a classic . " Art Lange of CODA magazine praised Shepp 's " exquisite control " of his instrument , which he " quite literally " makes " able [ to ] talk " , and found the spirituals to have been " sung " rather than just performed . Lange added that the emotional aspect is more impressive than the technical skill and stated :

Both Shepp and Parlan were artistically satisfied with Goin ' Home and recorded another album together , the blues-inspired Trouble in Mind , in 1980 . On May 3 , 1994 , the former album was reissued on CD by SteepleChase . In The Rolling Stone Jazz Record Guide ( 1985 ) , Goin ' Home was given five stars and called " particularly heartfelt " . In a retrospective review for AllMusic , jazz critic Scott Yanow gave it four-and-a-half stars and found the performances " compelling " . He said listeners who are " only familiar with Shepp 's earlier Fire Music " will see the album as a " revelation . " Moon believed its tempoless mood " gives the themes an extra shot of majesty " and found it " supremely melodic " , writing that both Shepp and Parlan " do whatever is necessary to bring the spirit to the forefront . " Richard Cook gave it four out of four stars in The Penguin Guide to Jazz ( 2002 ) . JazzTimes cited Goin ' Home as one of " the finest [ albums ] of his career " , and Tom Hull of The Village Voice cited it as SteepleChase 's best release . Phil Johnson of The Independent wrote that the album " can be listened to almost without cease . " Jazz historian Eric Nisenson called it " one of the most moving albums of the Seventies " , but qualified his praise by critiquing that Shepp , an iconic figure in free jazz , " was no longer the firebrand who had so frightened and unsettled some white critics and jazz fans . " Nisenson felt that , like Pharoah Sanders , Shepp 's " trial by fire at the heart of the Sixties avant-garde had made him an unusually expressive musician , " and Goin ' Home showed that he was " finding inspiration in the entire black musical tradition . "

Hurricane Humberto was a minimal hurricane that formed and intensified faster than any other North Atlantic tropical cyclone on record before landfall . Developing on September 12 , 2007 , in the northwestern Gulf of Mexico , the tropical cyclone rapidly strengthened and struck High Island , Texas , with winds of about 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) early on September 13 . It steadily weakened after moving ashore , and on September 14 it began dissipating over northwestern Georgia as it interacted with an approaching cold front . Damage was fairly light , estimated at approximately $ 50 million ( 2007 USD ) . Precipitation peaked at 14.13 inches ( 358.9 mm ) , while wind gusts to 85 mph ( 137 km / h ) were reported . The heavy rainfall caused widespread flooding , which damaged or destroyed dozens of homes , and closed several highways . Trees and power lines were downed , knocking out power to hundreds of thousands of customers . The hurricane caused one fatality in the State of Texas . Additionally , as the storm progressed inland , rainfall was reported throughout the Southeast United States .

The origins of Humberto are from the remnants of a frontal trough — the same that spawned Tropical Storm Gabrielle — that moved offshore south Florida on September 5 . The combination of a weak surface trough and an upper-level low pressure system produced disorganized showers and thunderstorms from western Cuba into the eastern Gulf of Mexico . Tracking slowly west-northwestward , unfavorable wind shear initially inhibited tropical cyclone development . By late on September 11 , environmental conditions became more favorable , and the following morning convection increased over the disturbance . Tracking around the western periphery of a mid-level ridge , the system turned on a slow northwest drift and quickly organized . Radar imagery reported loose banding features , and buoy data indicated the presence of a surface circulation ; based on the observations , the National Hurricane Center classified the system as Tropical Depression Nine , while located roughly 60 miles ( 100 km ) southeast of Matagorda , Texas . Upon becoming a tropical cyclone , the depression was forecast to strengthen slowly to reach peak winds of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) . Within three hours of forming , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Humberto . A small cyclone , the storm continued to organize quickly as it turned north-northeastward , while radar imagery suggested the formation of an eye by early on September 13 . Based on reports from Hurricane Hunters , Humberto was upgraded to a hurricane at 0515 UTC on September 13 , while located about 15 miles ( 20 km ) off the coast of Texas . The hurricane made landfall a few miles to the east of High Island at around 0700 UTC . A well-defined eye was maintained with strong convection around it , and Hurricane Hunters reported sustained winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) about two hours after landfall . However , post-storm analysis later determined that the winds were a bit stronger — about 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) .

Based on operational estimates of a wind speed increase of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) , the National Hurricane Center reported that " no tropical cyclone in the historic record has ever reached this intensity at a faster rate near landfall . " The path of the eye continued northeastward and passed over Port Arthur , Nederland , Port Neches , Groves , and Bridge City , Texas at Category 1 hurricane strength . This was the second time within two years ( following Hurricane Rita on September 24 , 2005 ) that these cities experienced a direct hit from a hurricane . By eight hours after landfall , Humberto weakened to a tropical storm as it crossed into southwestern Louisiana . Increased upper-level wind shear caused the storm to weaken rapidly over land , and late on September 13 Humberto weakened to a tropical depression . Upon issuing its last advisory , the National Hurricane Center remarked on the potential for the remnants of the storm to turn southward into the Gulf of Mexico . However , the storm continued northeastward through the southeastern United States , and on September 14 , the storm began dissipating over northwestern Georgia , and shortly thereafter degenerated into a remnant low pressure area .

Upon becoming a tropical cyclone , a tropical storm warning was issued from Port O 'Connor , Texas , to Cameron , Louisiana , and a tropical storm watch was posted from Cameron to Intracoastal City , Louisiana ; after Humberto became a tropical storm , the watch was upgraded to a warning . Upon reaching hurricane status , the National Hurricane Center issued a hurricane warning from High Island , Texas , to Cameron , Louisiana . An inland tropical storm warning was declared for several parishes in southwestern Louisiana . The National Weather Service Storm Prediction Center posted a tornado watch for southwestern coastal parishes . Prior to moving ashore , officials in Calcasieu Parish , Louisiana , advised residents in low-lying or flood-prone areas to consider moving to a safer location . A shelter was opened in Lake Charles , where 29 people stayed during the storm . Flood watches and warnings were issued for portions of Mississippi and Louisiana as the storm tracked across the region . Texas Governor Rick Perry , prepared state resources for the potentially impacted areas , including the deployment of 200 Texas Military Forces soldiers and six Black Hawk helicopters and two water rescue teams for search and rescue missions . The Texas State Operations Center was activated shortly after the cyclone developed .

A few hours prior to its development , outer rainbands from the depression began moving over portions of the Texas coast . Heavy rainfall from intense thunderstorms caused minor flooding as they crossed the coastline during the subsequent days ; precipitation in the state peaked at 14.13 inches ( 358.9 mm ) at East Bay Bayou , the highest recorded rainfall total in association with the hurricane . Sustained winds peaked at 69 mph ( 112 km / h ) with gusts to 85 mph ( 137 km / h ) at Sea Rim State Park ; the National Weather Service estimates gusts exceeded 90 mph ( 145 km / h ) in southwestern Jefferson County and extreme southeastern Chambers County . In the Golden Pass Ship Channel , an unofficial report of a 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) wind gust was relayed to the National Hurricane Center . Upon moving ashore , Humberto produced a minor storm surge in the state , peaking at 2.86 feet ( 0.87 m ) at Rollover Pass ; the combination of surge and waves resulted in light beach erosion . Hurricane Humberto left 10 homes completely destroyed in Galveston County , with an additional 19 severely damaged in the county ; several homes received minor shingle damage , and road closures left about 5,000 houses isolated in the county . The combination of saturated grounds and strong winds uprooted many trees and downed power lines across the path of the hurricane , with at least 50 high voltage transmission poles blown down or seriously damaged ; over 120,000 power customers in Orange and Jefferson counties lost power , with 118,000 Entergy customers in the state without electricity . Widespread flooding occurred in Jefferson and Orange counties , and at least 20 homes in Beaumont were flooded . Additionally , several roadways were flooded . The passage of the hurricane caused one fatality in the state ; a Bridge City man was killed when his carport crashed on him outside his house . Initially , press reports indicated that the storm wrought up to $ 500 million in damage ; however , final damage estimates were about $ 50 million .

Oil production was slowed as a result of Humberto , as at least four refineries — the Valero , ExxonMobil , Total SA and Motiva Enterprises LLC plants in Port Arthur — were halted due to the loss of power . Oil prices rose above $ 80 a barrel in intraday trading on September 12 as a result , ending the next day at a record high of $ 80.09 a barrel . Natural gas futures rose 8 percent ahead of the storm , but lost most of those gains the next day . According to the Federal Emergency Management Agency ( FEMA ) , 1,464 residences throughout Texas were affected by Hurricane Humberto . Of these , 25 were destroyed , 96 sustained major damage and 240 sustained minor damage . The cost of individual assistance for those impacted by Humberto would cost $ 4,776,334 ; the cost of debris removal and other public assistance amounted to $ 6,682,074 . In terms of per capita income , Jefferson County sustained the most impact , decreasing by $ 22.38 .

Tracking through the state as a weakening tropical storm , Humberto produced light to moderate winds across southwestern Louisiana . Gusts officially peaked at 43 mph ( 69 km / h ) in the state , although an unofficial reading of 55 mph ( 89 km / h ) was reported in Vinton . Heavy rainfall occurred across the area , reaching a peak of 8.25 inches ( 210 mm ) in DeRidder . The rainfall triggered minor river flooding along the Vermilion River in Lafayette . Storm surge was minor in the state , peaking at 2.13 feet ( 0.65 m ) in Cypremont Point ; no beach erosion was reported . Widespread freshwater flooding occurred in Beauregard Parish , leaving homes in DeRidder flooded . High water across the southwestern portion of the state resulted in the closure of several roadways , including U.S. Route 171 and various state highways . Isolated wind damage was reported , particularly near the Texas border , with some trees and power lines blown down . A total of about 13,000 power customers lost electricity in southwestern Louisiana . One F1 tornado briefly touched down in Vermilion Parish , blowing the roof off one home and downing trees and power lines . Damage throughout Louisiana was estimated at $ 525,000 .

After the circulation dissipated , the remnants of Humberto brought moderate rainfall to the southeastern states and spawned several tornadoes across portions of South Carolina and North Carolina and caused widespread damage in some locations . Heavy rains in Mississippi led to flooding in low-lying areas . In Hinds County , a small rail bridge was washed out , forcing all passengers Amtrak train to take a bus to their destinations . One person was injured after driving his car into a flooded street . In Alabama , rainfall up to 5.06 in ( 129 mm ) caused minor ponding in low-lying areas but aided in short-term drought relief . In northern Georgia , locally heavy rainfall led to flash flooding , resulting in several road closures . Strong thunderstorms associated with the remnants of Humberto also produced winds up to 51 mph ( 82 km / h ) and penny-sized hail . Throughout North Carolina , ten F0 tornadoes were confirmed , resulting in minor damage to homes , though none caused injuries or fatalities . Heavy rains associated with the system also triggered flash flooding along some roads , resulting in their closure . In South Carolina , one F1 tornado touched down in Laurens County , causing moderate damage to several homes before lifting .

Hours after Humberto made landfall , Rick Perry declared Galveston , Jefferson , and Orange counties as disaster areas , which allocated state resources to assist the affected residents . The governor applied for a presidential disaster declaration on September 21 . Four Federal Emergency Management Agency ( FEMA ) teams assessed the hurricane damage in the three most affected counties . Following their assessment , they determined that the damage caused by Humberto was not significant enough to require a disaster declaration . As such , Governor Rick Perry 's request from FEMA was denied . Across the Bolivar Peninsula , an estimated 1,500 cubic yards of structural debris and 3,000 cubic yards of tree limbs were needed to be removed in the wake of the storm .

Theoren Wallace " Theo " Fleury ( born June 29 , 1968 ) is a Canadian former professional ice hockey player . Fleury played for the Calgary Flames , Colorado Avalanche , New York Rangers , and Chicago Blackhawks of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) , Tappara of Finland 's SM-liiga , and the Belfast Giants of the UK 's Elite Ice Hockey League . He was drafted by the Flames in the 8th round , 166th overall , at the 1987 NHL Entry Draft , and played over 1,000 games in the NHL between 1989 and 2003 . One of the smallest players of his generation , Fleury played a physical style that often led to altercations . As a junior , he was at the centre of the infamous Punch-up in Piestany , a brawl that resulted in the disqualification of both Canada and the Soviet Union from the 1987 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships . Once considered unlikely to play in the NHL due to his small size , Fleury scored over 1,000 points in his career and won the Stanley Cup in 1989 with the Flames . He twice represented Canada at the Winter Olympics , winning a gold medal in 2002 . Throughout his career , he battled drug and alcohol addictions that ultimately forced him out of the NHL in 2003 . He played one season in the British Elite Ice Hockey League in 2005 – 06 , and made two attempts to win the Allan Cup . After an unsuccessful NHL comeback attempt with the Flames , he retired in 2009 .

Outside of hockey , Fleury overcame his addictions , operated a concrete business in Calgary with his family , and filmed a pilot for a reality television show about it . He marketed his own brand of clothing , which led him to play two professional baseball games for the Calgary Vipers of the Golden Baseball League . In 1995 , he was diagnosed with Crohn 's disease , and his annual charity golf tournament has helped raise more than $ 1 million for the Crohn 's and Colitis Foundation of Canada . Fleury co-wrote Playing with Fire , a best-selling autobiography released in October 2009 , in which he revealed that he had been sexually abused by former coach Graham James . Fleury filed a criminal complaint against James , who subsequently pleaded guilty to charges of sexual assault . Fleury has since become an advocate for sexual abuse victims and developed a career as a public speaker . He was a recipient of the Indspire Award in the sports category in 2013 .

Fleury was born on June 29 , 1968 , in Oxbow , Saskatchewan , the first of Wally and Donna Fleury 's three sons . Wally was a hockey player whose dreams of a professional career ended when he broke his leg playing baseball in the summer of 1963 ; the injury helped fuel a drinking problem . Donna was a quiet , religious woman who battled drug addiction for many years . Fleury is of Métis heritage , as his grandmother Mary was Cree . The Fleurys lived in Williams Lake , British Columbia , for four years , a period that saw Theo 's brother Ted born in 1970 , before settling in Russell , Manitoba , by 1973 , the year his youngest brother Travis was born . Wally worked as a truck driver and maintenance worker at the arena in Russell . Always one of the smallest children in his class and without stable supervision at home , Fleury adopted an aggressive posture and later described himself as a bully . He turned to hockey as an outlet when he borrowed an old pair of skates and a broken stick to play his first game at the age of five . From that point on , he played hockey at every opportunity , often accompanying his father to the arena in Russell in the pre-dawn hours . He was described by his teachers as a determined youth , who would repeat any activity he failed at until he got it right .

Although his mother was a Jehovah 's Witness , Fleury was raised as a Roman Catholic . He attended mass from age 6 to 12 , serving as an altar boy until the church 's priest died of a heart attack , depriving Fleury of one of his earliest positive influences . Always lacking money and a stable home , Fleury received support from the community , in particular the Peltz family in Russell , who ensured that he and his brothers were fed and bought them new clothes when required . In January 1982 , Fleury 's dreams of playing in the NHL nearly ended at the age of 13 when , during a game , he suffered a deep cut under his arm that severed his brachial artery . He missed nearly a year of contact hockey as a result . Five months after the incident , the community raised money to send him to the Andy Murray Hockey School in Brandon , Manitoba . It was there that Fleury met Graham James , who was working as a scout for the Winnipeg Warriors of the Western Hockey League ( WHL ) . James told Fleury that he had the skill to play in the NHL despite his size , and promised to recruit him to play junior hockey for the Warriors when he was old enough .

Fleury began his junior career in 1983 – 84 as a 15-year-old with the St. James Canadians of the Manitoba Junior Hockey League , scoring 33 goals and 64 points in 22 games , an incredible pace of nearly three points per game . In 1984 – 85 he moved to the Moose Jaw Warriors , who had just relocated from Winnipeg , scoring 29 goals and 75 points in 71 games as a 16-year-old . He improved his totals in each of his four years in the WHL , culminating with a 68-goal , 92-assist season in 1987 – 88 . Fleury 's 160 points tied him for the league lead with Joe Sakic , and the two players shared the Bob Clarke Trophy as the WHL 's top scorers . Fleury 's 92 assists and 160 points remain team records ; he also holds the Warriors ' career records for goals ( 201 ) , assists ( 271 ) and points ( 472 ) . As of 2014 , he remains 10th all-time in WHL scoring . Always one of the smallest players in the game , Fleury learned early that he had to play an unpredictable style of game to survive against players much larger than he was . He found that the best way to protect himself was to intimidate his opponents by playing a feisty , physical game , which he said led to many retaliatory penalties and several arguments with his coaches . He recorded 235 minutes in penalties in his final year of junior , nearly 100 more than any of the other top 10 WHL scorers . Fleury retained this style of play throughout his hockey career , routinely surprising opponents who felt their size was an advantage .

Fleury twice represented Canada at the World Junior Hockey Championships . He first joined the team for the 1987 tournament in Piešťany , Czechoslovakia . The tournament is best remembered for the " Punch-up in Piestany " on January 4 , 1987 , an infamous bench-clearing brawl between the Canadians and the Soviet Union . Fleury scored the first goal of the game and , as part of his celebration , used his stick to mimic firing a machine gun at the Soviet bench , a move that was criticized by Canadian officials . The brawl began early in the second period with Canada leading 4 – 2 , when Pavel Kostichkin slashed Fleury , leading to a fight between the two . It quickly escalated into a line brawl involving all skaters on the ice , after which the Soviet players left their bench , followed closely by the Canadians . Both teams were disqualified from the tournament , costing Fleury and the Canadians a medal - – potentially the gold . The International Ice Hockey Federation suspended all players involved in the brawl from participating in international tournaments for 18 months , though the bans were later reduced to 6 months on appeal . This reduction allowed Fleury to participate in the 1988 tournament in Moscow . He was named captain , finished second in team scoring with eight points in seven games , and was named a tournament all-star as Canada won the gold medal .

Although he scored 129 points for the Warriors in 1986 – 87 , Fleury 's small stature led many teams to doubt that he could play in the NHL . The Calgary Flames drafted him in the 8th round , 166th overall , of the 1987 NHL Entry Draft . Upon completing his junior season in 1988 , Fleury signed his first professional contract , worth C $ 415,000 , and joined the Flames ' International Hockey League ( IHL ) affiliate , the Salt Lake Golden Eagles . He scored seven points in two regular season games , then 16 more in eight playoff games as the Eagles won the Turner Cup championship .

Fleury arrived at the Flames ' 1988 training camp 20 pounds ( 9.1 kg ) overweight , and was assigned back to Salt Lake to begin the 1988 – 89 season . He averaged nearly two points per game , recording 37 goals and 37 assists to lead the IHL in scoring after 40 games . Mired in a slump , the Flames recalled Fleury on January 1 , 1989 , in the hope he could help their offence . He played his first NHL game against the Quebec Nordiques two nights later and recorded his first points – three assists – on January 5 against the Los Angeles Kings . He scored his first two NHL goals in a 7 – 2 victory over the Edmonton Oilers on January 7 . Fleury continued to score , and finished with 34 points in 36 games in his NHL rookie season . He added 11 points in the playoffs , helping the Flames to the first Stanley Cup championship in franchise history . After improving to 33 goals in his first full season , Fleury broke out in 1990 – 91 , scoring 51 goals and 104 points to lead the Flames offensively . He played in the 1991 All-Star Game , scoring a goal in an 11 – 5 victory by the Campbell Conference over the Wales Conference . Towards the end of the season , Fleury set a league record by scoring three shorthanded goals in one game against the St. Louis Blues . He shared the NHL Plus-Minus Award with Marty McSorley , whom he tied for the league lead with + 48 . Fleury scored only two goals in the 1991 Stanley Cup Playoffs , but after his overtime winner in game six against the Oilers he famously slid the entire length of the ice in jubilation before crashing into the boards as his teammates attempted to catch up to him . The Flames were defeated in game seven , which ended their season .

Fleury fell back to 33 goals in 1991 – 92 as the Flames missed the playoffs . That season , he made his second All-Star Game appearance , recording a goal for the Campbell Conference . Fleury finished with over 100 points for the second time in his career in 1992 – 93 to lead the team in scoring , and set a franchise record by going + 9 in a 13 – 1 victory over the San Jose Sharks on February 10 , 1993 , in which he scored six points . The 1994 – 95 NHL lockout reduced the season to 48 games from 84 . During the lockout , Fleury played for Tappara in Finland 's top league , the SM-liiga . He recorded 17 points in ten games before the NHL 's labour dispute was resolved , bringing him back to Calgary . Late in the season , Fleury recorded two goals and an assist against the Oilers on March 31 , 1995 , to surpass 500 career points . Lacking a contract prior to the 1995 – 96 season , Fleury staged a brief hold-out during training camp before signing a five-year , $ 12 million deal with the Flames . He agreed to take less money than he could have received on the open market out of loyalty to the franchise that had given him his NHL opportunity . He missed much of the pre-season with a stomach ailment , but joined the team for the season opener . Although he felt like somebody was " stabbing a knife in [ his ] gut every five minutes " , Fleury had played every game for the Flames when he revealed in December 1995 that he had been diagnosed with Crohn 's Disease and doctors had finally found the correct medication to control it . Despite the ailment , Fleury led the team in goals , assists and points , and played in his third All-Star Game , serving as Calgary 's only representative .

When Joe Nieuwendyk refused to report to the Flames prior to the 1995 season , they named Fleury interim captain . The title was made permanent when Nieuwendyk was traded in December . Fleury was reluctant to assume the captaincy , but did so out of loyalty to the team and because there was nobody else capable of taking on the role . He relinquished it two seasons later after deciding that it was harming his play and affecting his relationship with his teammates and coach Pierre Pagé . The Flames struggled in 1996 – 97 , finishing last in the Pacific Division and missing the playoffs for only the second time since their arrival in Calgary in 1980 . Fleury again led the team in scoring , but his 29 goals were the fewest he had scored in a full season in the NHL . He was the Flames ' lone representative at the 1997 All-Star Game . He scored only 27 goals in 1997 – 98 , but increased his point total from 67 to 78 while also leading the team with 197 penalties in minutes . On November 29 , 1997 , Fleury scored his 315th career goal , breaking Nieuwendyk 's franchise record . The same day , he was named to Team Canada for the 1998 Winter Olympics . Fleury participated in his fifth All-Star Game that season , but the Flames again missed the playoffs .

On February 19 , 1999 , he surpassed Al MacInnis as the franchise scoring leader with his 823rd career point . He held the record for ten years until surpassed by Jarome Iginla in 2009 . The Flames , who had been struggling financially and were unable to sign Fleury to a new contract , chose to trade him less than two weeks after he broke the record rather than risk losing him to free agency . He was dealt to the Colorado Avalanche on February 28 for René Corbet , Wade Belak and Robyn Regehr . Although it was expected to a certain extent , the trade nonetheless stunned fans in Calgary . His popularity was such that during a game in 1999 , after Fleury was sent off the ice to change a bloody jersey , a fan threw his own souvenir jersey over the boards so that Fleury would not miss a shift . He put the jersey on before realizing it was autographed and handed it back . The trade was viewed as another sign that small-market Canadian teams could no longer compete in the NHL . The economics of hockey had changed such that the Flames felt that they had to deal their top player despite being just two points out of a playoff spot . Following the trade , Fleury said that any team looking to sign him to a new contract would have to pay him $ 7 million per year . In his autobiography , Playing with Fire , Fleury claims that he was offered $ 16 million over four years by the Flames before the trade , and countered with an offer of $ 25 million over five years .

Fleury made his debut for the Avalanche the day after the trade and was met with loud cheers from the Denver crowd . He scored a goal in a 4 – 3 loss to Edmonton , but also sprained his knee and missed the next two weeks . He had missed only seven games during his 11-year career in Calgary . He played in 15 regular-season games for the Avalanche , scoring 10 goals and 14 assists , and another 5 goals and 12 assists in 18 playoff games before the Avalanche were eliminated by the Dallas Stars in the Western Conference Finals . The Avalanche chose not to re-sign Fleury , and he joined the New York Rangers on a three-year contract worth $ 21 million that included a club option for a fourth year at $ 7 million . He touched off a wave of anger on signing with the Rangers when he claimed he was unappreciated in Calgary , comments he later stated were directed at the Flames ' owners and not the team 's fans , whom he said always supported him . Fleury 's first year in Manhattan was a disappointment . He scored only 15 goals in 1999 – 2000 , struggling under the pressure of trying to lead the Rangers into the playoffs and adapting to life in New York . After the season , he voluntarily entered a league-operated program that treats substance abuse and emotional problems , though he denied that either had any effect on his play .

Fleury rebounded to score 30 goals in 2000 – 01 and participated in his seventh All-Star Game . He scored his 400th NHL goal on November 4 , 2000 , in a 5 – 2 victory over the Montreal Canadiens . Fleury was leading his team , and was fourth in the league , with 74 points in 62 games , when the Rangers announced that he had again entered the league 's substance abuse program . The decision ended his season . Prior to the 2001 – 02 season Fleury said that he continued to struggle with substance abuse and had difficulty adapting to life in Manhattan after growing up in a Canadian prairie town of 1,500 . He played all 82 games in 2001 – 02 , but his problems affected his behavior on the ice . After receiving a major and game misconduct penalty in a game against the San Jose Sharks on December 28 , he wound up in a confrontation with the Sharks ' mascot , S.J. Sharkie , in a hallway of the HP Pavilion , reportedly breaking the rib of the mascot portrayer . Fleury himself later downplayed the incident , saying that he " nudged " Sharkie . Upon taking a penalty in a January 2002 game against the Pittsburgh Penguins , Fleury left the arena rather than skate to the penalty box . He later apologized to his teammates , claiming he was deeply stressed by family problems . Two weeks later , he was fined $ 1,000 for making an obscene gesture to fans of the New York Islanders who had been taunting him over his drug use . Towards the end of February , he lashed out against the league 's officials . He claimed they were not judging him fairly , and threatened to retire . The league dismissed his complaints . He did achieve a personal milestone during the season , however : on October 27 , 2001 , Fleury assisted on a goal by Mike York , scoring the 1,000th point of his NHL career . The Rangers presented him with a silver stick in honour of the achievement .

Following the season , the Rangers did not exercise their option , and traded Fleury 's playing rights to the San Jose Sharks , which entitled the Sharks to a compensatory draft pick if Fleury signed elsewhere . He did so with a two-year , $ 8.5 million contract with the Chicago Blackhawks . Two days prior to the opening of the 2002 – 03 season , he was suspended by the NHL for violating the terms of the league 's substance abuse program . The Blackhawks hired one of Fleury 's friends , also a recovering alcoholic , to ensure that he attended Alcoholics Anonymous meetings and abided by the terms of the NHL 's aftercare program . Fleury missed the first two months of the season before being reinstated . While out with teammates in January 2003 , he was involved in a drunken brawl with bouncers at a strip club in Columbus , Ohio , that left him bloodied ; he has no memory of the night and described it as among the lowest points of his life . He was not suspended , but the incident contributed to a collapse in the standings by the Blackhawks , and they placed him on waivers in March . No team claimed him , and Fleury finished the season with the Blackhawks , recording 12 goals and 21 assists in 54 games . Following the season , in April 2003 , he was suspended again by the league for violations of its substance abuse program . The suspension ended his NHL career .

In January 2005 , Fleury announced that he had joined his cousin Todd Holt and former NHL players Gino Odjick , Sasha Lakovic and Dody Wood in playing for the Horse Lake Thunder of the North Peace Hockey League for the Allan Cup , Canada 's national senior amateur championship . He also hoped to serve as a role model for kids on the Horse Lake First Nation . Hockey Alberta initially ruled that he was ineligible to play senior hockey in 2004 – 05 because he had been signed to a professional contract during the 2003 – 04 season . Hockey Alberta denied an appeal , citing a new policy it had put in effect to prevent NHL players from joining senior teams during the 2004 – 05 NHL lockout . It reversed its decision on a second appeal after the NHL and National Hockey League Players Association both agreed that Fleury was a free agent , and not a locked-out player . Fleury played his first game for the Thunder on January 22 , 2005 , scoring a goal and two assists . Fleury remained embroiled in controversy at the 2005 Allan Cup tournament . The Thunder were repeatedly accused of paying players despite being an amateur team , and Fleury angrily denied rumours that he was secretly being paid $ 100,000 . Tournament fans were extremely hostile towards the Thunder , and after it was eliminated in the semi-finals Fleury accused them of racism and threatened to return his 2002 Olympic gold medal : " The one thing that 's really bothered me through this whole thing is the prejudice , still , in this country when it comes to native people . I 've seen it first-hand in every building we go into , how these people are treated , and it 's absolutely embarrassing to be a Canadian and know that stuff is still going on . "

Fleury was convinced by a friend to move to Northern Ireland to play with the Belfast Giants of the Elite Ice Hockey League ( EIHL ) for the 2005 – 06 season . He scored three goals and added four assists and a fight in his first game , against the Edinburgh Capitals . He scored 22 goals and 52 assists in 34 games , as Belfast won the regular season league title . Described as the " most talented " player ever to play in the United Kingdom , Fleury was named the EIHL 's Player of the Year and voted a first team All-Star by the British Ice Hockey Writers Association . Fleury argued with visiting fans , as well as officials , which led him not to return to Belfast in 2006 – 07 . In late 2008 , Fleury joined his brother Ted with the Steinbach North Stars in a second bid to win the Allan Cup . He played 13 league games , scoring eight goals and 19 assists . At the 2009 Allan Cup tournament , he recorded a goal and an assist to lead the host North Stars to a 5 – 0 win in their opening game , and finished tied for the lead in tournament scoring at seven points . The North Stars lost the semi-finals to the South East Prairie Thunder , 4 – 2 .

Unhappy with how his NHL career ended , Fleury hired a personal trainer in February 2009 and began an attempt to return to the NHL . By August , he petitioned Commissioner Gary Bettman to lift his suspension . He was reinstated on September 10 following a meeting with Bettman , Deputy Commissioner Bill Daly and league doctors . Fleury then accepted a try-out offer from the Flames . He said he wanted to prove to himself that he could still play at the NHL level , though his skeptics pointed to his child support payments and the failure of his concrete business , as well as the planned release of his autobiography , and argued Fleury 's comeback was financially motivated . He made his return to the NHL in an exhibition game in Calgary against the New York Islanders on September 17 on a line with Daymond Langkow and Nigel Dawes . Fleury was met with loud cheers throughout the game , and scored the only goal in a shootout to give the Flames a 5 – 4 win . After the game , he saluted the crowd as the fans chanted " Theo ! Theo ! Theo ! " Three nights later , he scored a goal and an assist in a 5 – 2 victory over the Florida Panthers .

Fleury played four exhibition games , scoring four points , before being released by the Flames . General Manager Darryl Sutter expressed his pride in Fleury 's attempt and commended his effort , but decided he was not one of the top six wingers in camp , which Sutter and Fleury had agreed was a condition of the tryout continuing . On September 28 , 2009 , Fleury announced his retirement at a news conference at the Saddledome . He thanked the Flames for allowing him to attempt the comeback , and expressed satisfaction at how his career ended . " I get to retire a Calgary Flame . I HAD to retire a Calgary Flame . It ’ s been a long journey . It ’ s time to put down some roots . And there ’ s no better place than here , " said Fleury of his decision not to seek an offer from another team .

Fleury made his debut with the Canadian senior team at the 1990 World Hockey Championships , scoring 11 points in nine games for the fourth-place Canadians . He returned the following year despite a knee injury , helping Canada win the silver medal at the 1991 tournament . His 51-goal NHL season in 1990 – 91 also earned Fleury a spot at the 1991 Canada Cup , where he scored a goal and four assists in seven games for the tournament champion Canadians . Five years later , he played in the 1996 World Cup of Hockey , the successor to the Canada Cup . He finished fourth in the tournament with four goals , but Canada finished in second place after giving up four goals in the final four minutes of the championship game against the American team . National Hockey League players were first allowed to participate in the Olympic ice hockey tournament at the 1998 games . Invited to join Canada 's " Dream Team " , Fleury described his selection as a highlight of his life . He scored a goal for Canada , who lost their semi-final match-up against the Czech Republic in a shootout and failed to medal . Four years later , Fleury was invited by General Manager Wayne Gretzky to participate in Canada 's selection camp for the 2002 Olympics . The invitation was controversial , as his behavioural and substance abuse issues had become increasingly public in previous months . Fleury wanted to justify Gretzky 's support and , knowing that he would be removed from consideration if he failed , refrained from drinking or taking drugs during the 2001 – 02 NHL season , later describing himself as a " dry drunk " . He earned a spot on the team and recorded two assists in six games as the Canadian hockey team won its first Olympic gold medal in 50 years . Fleury considers the championship to be the pinnacle of his career .

Fleury continued to battle drug and alcohol addictions , revealing in a November 2004 interview that he had not overcome the problems that ended his NHL career a year and a half earlier . He credits his second wife , Jennifer , with turning his life around after they met when he was playing for Horse Lake in 2005 . Fleury feared that Jennifer 's frustration with his drug use would cost him the relationship , and , with her help , quit drugs and drinking on September 18 , 2005 . They were married one year later and have a daughter , Skylah . Fleury also has a son and daughter , Beaux and Tatym , from his relationship with his first wife , Veronica , and a son , Josh , born in 1987 to his high school girlfriend , Shannon . In 1994 , Fleury joined a group that involved his former junior coach , Graham James , fellow NHL player Joe Sakic , and professional wrestler Bret Hart as a minority owner of the expansion Calgary Hitmen of the Western Hockey League . He sold his share of the team to the Flames in 1997 in the aftermath of James ' conviction for sexually abusing Sheldon Kennedy and another player . After returning from Northern Ireland , he operated Fleury 's Concrete Coatings , a concrete sealing business he started with his wife Jennifer and brother Travis , until it closed in 2009 . He filmed a pilot episode in 2007 for a reality TV series based on his concrete business called Theoren Fleury : Rock Solid : " We want to show people that if you have a dream , anything is possible with a little ambition , " Fleury said of the show . It was not picked up by any network .

The 2008 launch of clothing line " FAKE " ( Fleury 's Artistic Kustom Enterprises ) led him to approach the Calgary Vipers of the Golden Baseball League in the hope of convincing them to use his brand of practice jerseys . The conversation led to talk of Fleury playing a game for the Vipers as a publicity stunt . He made his professional baseball debut on August 9 , 2008 , at the age of 40 , hitting a single in a pinch-hit appearance against the Yuma Scorpions . He started the second game at left field and struck out twice before he was replaced . " I 've had so many things happen in my life already that I sometimes surprise myself with the things I 've done , the things I 've accomplished . This was just another one of those days , " Fleury said of his appearance with the Vipers . Fleury has organized or participated in numerous charitable causes . He launched a hockey school in the mid-1990s that ran for seven years in Calgary and another eight in Russell , and donated the proceeds to minor hockey associations . Following his diagnosis with Crohn 's disease in 1995 , Fleury joined with the Crohn 's and Colitis Foundation of Canada to host an annual golf tournament in Calgary . The event has raised over $ 1 million , and is one of the organization 's largest fundraising events in the Calgary area . He participates in Flames Alumni events and volunteers with the Calgary Dream Centre , which helps people overcome addiction .

With the help of Kirstie McLellan Day , Fleury wrote his autobiography , Playing with Fire , which was released on October 16 , 2009 . In it , he alleged that he was sexually abused by Graham James over a period of two years . While he stated he " doesn 't want to become the poster boy for abuse by James " , Fleury hoped that speaking out might make it easier for other childhood sexual abuse victims to come forward . He blamed the abuse for turning him into a " raging , alcoholic lunatic " , and claimed to have placed a loaded gun in his mouth and contemplated suicide in 2004 . He revealed that he had spent most of his income on alcohol , drugs , gambling and women . Fleury also claimed that he failed 13 consecutive drug tests while playing for the Rangers , but that the league did not want to suspend him because he was a leading scorer . The league disputed this , and stated that its substance abuse program functioned appropriately . Playing with Fire became the top seller on Amazon.ca within a week of its release , and Fleury stated that he had been contacted by several sexual abuse victims who were motivated by his book to seek help . He also revealed that he was contemplating a criminal complaint against James , and had begun volunteering with an organization dedicated to helping male sexual abuse victims . Fleury was surprised that his story became the top-selling non-fiction book in Canada ; without help , he and his wife were unable to keep up with the mail they were receiving . It is the second book about Fleury 's life , following Fury , released in 1997 , which did not discuss many of the problems he was facing at the time .

Sheldon Kennedy , who was also a victim of James , encouraged Fleury to press charges . Fleury met with Winnipeg police in January 2010 , who began an investigation when he formally filed a complaint . James ultimately pleaded guilty to charges stemming from his abuse of Fleury and his cousin Todd Holt . James was sentenced to two years in prison , a decision which sparked outrage across Canada for its perceived leniency . Fleury praised the response by Canadians and stated his desire to use it to press for changes to the legal system . Fleury is now a motivational speaker , hoping that sharing his story will encourage others to seek help for their problems . McLellan Day adapted the autobiography into a one-man play , entitled Playing with Fire : The Theo Fleury Story , which was produced by Alberta Theatre Projects in Calgary . The play made its world premiere May 1 , 2012 . Fleury and his autobiography were also the subject of a 2012 documentary by HBO Canada .

In September 2015 it was announced through Fleury 's Twitter account he had been working on a Country music record to be released in the fall of 2015 . He released his first single titled " My Life 's Been a Country Song " and it reached over 20,000 plays on Soundcloud within the first 24 hours of being released . His debut record I Am Who I Am was released on October 16 , 2015 through eOne Music Canada and has been well received by country music fanatics . The hockey star turned Country star transformation did not happen overnight as Fleury claims this project has been ongoing for the past six years with him receiving vocal and performance training from industry professionals . He collaborated with long-time friends Phil Deschambault and Paddy McCallion and together they created over 30 songs worth of material that would be later cut to ten songs for the album .

Carnotaurus / ˌkɑːrnoʊˈtɔːrəs / is a genus of large theropod dinosaur that lived in South America during the Late Cretaceous period , between about 72 and 69.9 million years ago . The only species is Carnotaurus sastrei . Known from a single well-preserved skeleton , it is one of the best-understood theropods from the Southern Hemisphere . The skeleton , found in 1984 , was uncovered in the Chubut Province of Argentina from rocks of the La Colonia Formation . Derived from the Latin carno [ carnis ] ( " flesh " ) and taurus ( " bull " ) , the name Carnotaurus means " meat-eating bull " , alluding to its bull-like horns . Carnotaurus is a derived member of the Abelisauridae , a group of large theropods that occupied the large predatorial niche in the southern Landmasses of Gondwana during the late Cretaceous . The phylogenetic relations of Carnotaurus are uncertain ; it may have been closer to either Majungasaurus or Aucasaurus . Carnotaurus was a lightly built , bipedal predator , measuring 8 to 9 m ( 26 to 30 ft ) in length and weighing at least 1.35 metric tons ( 1.33 long tons ; 1.49 short tons ) . As a theropod , Carnotaurus was highly specialized and distinctive . It had thick horns above the eyes , a feature unseen in all other carnivorous dinosaurs , and a very deep skull sitting on a muscular neck . Carnotaurus was further characterized by small , vestigial forelimbs and long and slender hindlimbs . The skeleton is preserved with extensive skin impressions , showing a mosaic of small , non-overlapping scales measuring approximately 5 mm in diameter . The mosaic was interrupted by large bumps that lined the sides of the animal , and there are no hints of feathers .

The distinctive horns and the muscular neck may have been used in fighting conspecifics . According to separate studies , rivaling individuals may have combated each other with quick head blows , by slow pushes with the upper sides of their skulls , or by ramming each other head-on , using their horns as shock absorbers . The feeding habits of Carnotaurus remain unclear : some studies suggest the animal was able to hunt down very large prey such as sauropods , while other studies find it preyed mainly on relatively small animals . Carnotaurus was well adapted for running and was possibly one of the fastest large theropods .

Carnotaurus was a large but lightly built predator . The only known individual was about 8 – 9 metres ( 26 – 30 ft ) in length , making Carnotaurus one of the largest abelisaurids . Only Ekrixinatosaurus and possibly Abelisaurus may have been similar or larger in size , though the incomplete remains of these genera make size estimations imprecise . Its mass is estimated to have been 1,350 kg ( 1.33 long tons ; 1.49 short tons ) 1,500 kg ( 1.5 long tons ; 1.7 short tons ) and 2,100 kg ( 2.1 long tons ; 2.3 short tons ) in separate studies that used different estimation methods . Carnotaurus was a highly specialized theropod , as seen especially in characteristics of the skull , the vertebrae and the forelimbs . The pelvis and hindlimbs , on the other hand , remained relatively conservative , resembling those of the more basal Ceratosaurus . Both the pelvis and hindlimb bones were long and slender . The left thigh bone of the individual measures 103 cm in length , but shows an average diameter of only 11 cm .

The skull , measuring 59.6 cm ( 23.5 in ) in length , was proportionally shorter and deeper than in any other large carnivorous dinosaur . The snout was moderately broad , not as tapering as seen in more basal theropods like Ceratosaurus , and the jaws were curved upwards . As in other abelisaurids , the facial bones , especially the nasal bones , were sculptured with numerous small holes and spikes . In life , a wrinkled and possibly keratinous skin would have covered these bones . A prominent pair of horns protruded obliquely above the eyes . These horns , formed by the frontal bones , were thick , cone-shaped but in cross-section somewhat vertically flattened , and measured 15 cm ( 5.9 in ) in length . In life , they would probably have formed the bony cores of much longer keratinous horns . The proportionally small eyes were situated in the upper part of the keyhole shaped orbita ( eye sockets ) . The upper part was slightly rotated forward , probably permitting some degree of binocular vision . The teeth were long and slender , as opposed to the usually very short teeth seen in other abelisaurids . On each side of the upper jaws there were four premaxillary and twelve maxillary teeth , while the lower jaws were equipped with fifteen dentary teeth per side . In contrast to the robust-looking skull , the lower jaw was shallow and weakly constructed , with the dentary ( the foremost jaw bone ) connected to the hindmost jaw bones by only two contact points . The lower jaw was found with hyoid bones , in the position they would be in if the animal was alive . These slender bones , supporting the tongue musculature and several other muscles , are rarely found in dinosaurs because they are not connected to other bones and therefore get lost easily .

The vertebral column consisted of ten cervical ( neck ) , twelve dorsal , six fused sacral and an unknown number of caudal ( tail ) vertebrae . The neck was nearly straight , rather than having the S-curve seen in other theropods , and also unusually wide , especially towards its base . The top of the neck 's spinal column featured a double row of enlarged , upwardly directed bony processes called epipophyses , creating a smooth trough on the top of the neck vertebrae . These processes were the highest points of the spine , towering above the unusually low spinous processes . The epipophyses probably provided attachment areas for a markedly strong neck musculature . A similar double row was also present in the tail , formed there by highly modified caudal ribs , in front view protruding upwards in a V-shape , their inner sides creating a smooth , flat , top surface of the front tail vertebrae . The end of each caudal rib was furnished with a forward projecting hook-shaped expansion that connected to the caudal rib of the preceding vertebra .

The forelimbs were proportionally shorter than in any other large carnivorous dinosaurs , including Tyrannosaurus . The forearm was only a quarter the size of the upper arm . There were no carpalia in the hand , so that the metacarpals articulated directly with the forearm . The hand showed four basic digits , though apparently only the middle two of these ended in finger bones , while the fourth consisted of a single splint-like metacarpal that may have represented an external ' spur ' . The fingers themselves were fused and immobile , and may have lacked claws . Carnotaurus differed from all other abelisaurids in having proportionally shorter and more robust forelimbs , and in having the fourth , splint-like metacarpal as the longest bone in the hand . A 2009 study suggests that the arms were vestigial in abelisaurids , because nerve fibers responsible for stimulus transmission were reduced to an extent seen in today 's emus and kiwis , which also have vestigial forelimbs .

Carnotaurus was the first theropod dinosaur discovered with comprehensive fossil skin impressions . These impressions , found beneath the skeleton 's right side , come from different body parts , including the lower jaw , the front of the neck , the shoulder girdle , and the rib cage . The largest patch of skin corresponds to the anterior part of the tail . Originally , the right side of the skull also was covered with large patches of skin — this was not recognized when the skull was prepared , and these patches were accidentally destroyed . Still , the surface texture of much of the right side of the skull is very different from that of the left side , and probably shows some features of the scalation pattern of the head . The skin was built up of a mosaic of polygonal , non-overlapping scales measuring approximately 5 mm ( 0.20 in ) in diameter . This mosaic was divided by thin , parallel grooves . Scalation was similar across different body parts with the exception of the head , which apparently showed a different , irregular pattern of scales . There is no evidence of feathers . Uniquely for theropods , there were large knob-like bumps running along the sides of the neck , back and tail in irregular rows . Each bump showed a low ridge and measured 4 to 5 cm ( 1.6 to 2.0 in ) in diameter . They were set 8 to 10 cm ( 3.1 to 3.9 in ) apart from each other and became larger towards the animal 's top . The bumps probably represent clusters of condensed scutes , similar to those seen on the soft frill running along the body midline in hadrosaurid ( " duck-billed " ) dinosaurs . Stephen Czerkas ( 1997 ) suggested that these structures may have protected the animal 's sides while fighting members of the same species ( conspecifics ) and other theropods , arguing that similar structures can be found on the neck of the modern iguana where they provide limited protection in combat .

Carnotaurus is one of the best-understood genera of the Abelisauridae , a family of large theropods restricted to the ancient southern supercontinent Gondwana . Abelisaurids were the dominant predators in the Late Cretaceous of Gondwana , replacing the carcharodontosaurids and occupying the ecological niche filled by the tyrannosaurids in the northern continents . Several notable traits that evolved within this family , including shortening of the skull and arms as well as peculiarities in the cervical and caudal vertebrae , were more pronounced in Carnotaurus than in any other abelisaurid . Though relationships within the Abelisauridae are debated , Carnotaurus is consistently shown to be one of the most derived members of the family by cladistical analyses . Its nearest relative may have been either Aucasaurus or Majungasaurus ; this ambiguity is largely due to the incompleteness of the Aucasaurus skull material . A recent review suggests that Carnotaurus was not closely related with either Aucasaurus or Majungasaurus , and instead proposed Ilokelesia as its sister taxon . Carnotaurus is eponymous for two subgroups of the Abelisauridae : the Carnotaurinae and the Carnotaurini . Paleontologists do not universally accept these groups . The Carnotaurinae was defined to include all derived abelisaurids with the exclusion of Abelisaurus , which is considered a basal member in most studies . However , a 2008 review suggested that Abelisaurus was a derived abelisaurid instead . Carnotaurini was proposed to name the clade formed by Carnotaurus and Aucasaurus ; only those paleontologists who consider Aucasaurus as the nearest relative of Carnotaurus use this group .

The only skeleton ( holotype MACN-CH 894 ) was unearthed in 1984 by an expedition led by Argentinian paleontologist José Bonaparte . This expedition also recovered the peculiar spiny sauropod Amargasaurus . It was the eighth expedition within the project named " Jurassic and Cretaceous Terrestrial Vertebrates of South America " , which started in 1976 and which was sponsored by the National Geographic Society . The skeleton is well-preserved and articulated ( still connected together ) , with only the posterior two thirds of the tail , much of the lower leg , and the hind feet being destroyed by weathering . During fossilization , the skull and especially the muzzle were crushed laterally , while the premaxilla were pushed upwards onto the nasal bones . As a result , the upward curvature of the upper jaw is artificially exaggerated in the holotype . The skeleton belonged to an adult individual , as indicated by the fused sutures in the braincase . It was found lying on its right side , showing a typical death pose with the neck bent back over the torso . Unusually , it is preserved with extensive skin impressions . In view of the significance of these impressions , a second expedition was started to reinvestigate the original excavation site , leading to the recovery of several additional skin patches .

The skeleton was collected on a farm named " Pocho Sastre " near Bajada Moreno in the Telsen Department of Chubut Province , Argentina . Because it was embedded in a large hematite concretion , a very hard kind of rock , preparation was complicated and progressed slowly . In 1985 , Bonaparte published a note presenting Carnotaurus sastrei as a new genus and species and briefly describing the skull and lower jaw . The generic name ( Latin carno [ carnis ] – " flesh " and taurus – " bull " ) refers to the bull-like horns , while the specific name sastrei honors Angel Sastre , the owner of the ranch where the skeleton was found . A comprehensive description of the whole skeleton followed in 1990 . After Abelisaurus , Carnotaurus was the second member of the family Abelisauridae that was discovered . For years , it was by far the best-understood member of its family , and also the best-understood theropod from the Southern Hemisphere . It was not until the 21st century that similar well-preserved abelisaurids were described , including Aucasaurus , Majungasaurus and Skorpiovenator , allowing scientists to re-evaluate certain aspects of the anatomy of Carnotaurus . The holotype skeleton is displayed in the Argentine Museum of Natural Sciences , Bernardino Rivadavia ; replicas can be seen in this and other museums around the world . Sculptors Stephen and Sylvia Czerkas manufactured a life-sized sculpture of Carnotaurus that is now on display in the Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County . This sculpture , ordered by the museum during the mid-1980s , is probably the first life restoration of a theropod showing accurate skin .

Originally , the rocks in which Carnotaurus was found were assigned to the upper part of the Gorro Frigio Formation , which was considered to be approximately 100 million years old ( Albian or Cenomanian stage ) . Later they were realized to pertain to the much younger La Colonia Formation , dating 72 to 69.9 million years ago ( Late Cretaceous , Lower Maastrichtian stage ) . Thus , Carnotaurus was the latest South American abelisaurid known . By the Late Cretaceous , South America was already isolated from both Africa and North America . The La Colonia Formation is exposed over the southern slope of the North Patagonian Massif . Most vertebrate fossils , including Carnotaurus , come from the formation 's middle section ( called the middle facies association ) . This part likely represents the deposits of an environment of estuaries , tidal flats or coastal plains . The climate would have been seasonal with both dry and humid periods . The most common vertebrates collected include ceratodontid lungfish , turtles , crocodiles , plesiosaurs , dinosaurs , lizards , snakes and mammals . Some of the snakes that have been found belong to the families Boidae and Madtsoidae , such as Alamitophis argentinus . Turtles are represented by at least five taxa , four from Chelidae ( Pleurodira ) and one from Meiolaniidae ( Cryptodira ) . Among the marine reptiles is the plesiosaur Sulcusuchus erraini of the family Polycotylidae . Mammals are represented with Reigitherium bunodontum , which was considered the first record of a South American docodont , and Argentodites coloniensis , possibly of Multituberculata . In 2011 , the discovery of a new enantiornithine bird from the La Colonia Formation was announced .

Carnotaurus is the only known carnivorous bipedal animal with a pair of horns on the frontal bone . The use of these horns is not entirely clear ; several interpretations have revolved around use in fighting conspecifics , in display , or in killing prey . Greg Paul ( 1988 ) proposed that the horns were butting weapons and that the small orbita would have minimized the possibility of hurting the eyes while fighting . Gerardo Mazzetta and colleagues ( 1998 ) suggested that Carnotaurus used its horns in a way similar to rams . They calculated that the neck musculature was strong enough to absorb the force of two individuals colliding with their heads frontally at a speed of 5.7 m / s each . Fernando Novas ( 2009 ) interpreted several skeletal features as adaptations for delivering blows with the head . He suggested that the shortness of the skull might have made head movements quicker by reducing the moment of inertia , while the muscular neck would have allowed strong head blows . He also noted an enhanced rigidity and strength of the spinal column that may have evolved to withstand shocks conducted by the head and neck .

Other studies suggest that rivaling Carnotaurus did not deliver rapid head blows , but pushed slowly against each other with the upper sides of their skulls . Thus , the horns may have been a device for the distribution of compression forces without damage to the brain . This is supported by the flattened upper sides of the horns , the strongly fused bones of the top of the skull , and the inability of the skull to survive rapid head blows . Gerardo Mazzetta and colleagues ( 1998 ) propose that the horns might also have been used to injure or kill small prey . Though horn cores are blunt , they may have had a similar form to modern bovid horns if there was a keratinous covering . However , this would be the only reported example of horns being used as hunting weapons in animals .

Analysis of the jaw design of Carnotaurus by Mazzetta and colleagues ( 1998 , 2004 , 2009 ) suggests that the animal was capable of quick bites , but not strong ones . Quick bites are more important than strong bites when capturing small prey , as shown by studies of modern-day crocodiles . Furthermore , these researchers noted a high degree of flexibility ( kinesis ) within the skull and especially the lower jaw , somewhat similar to modern snakes . Elasticity of the jaw would have allowed Carnotaurus to swallow small prey items whole . In addition , the front part of the lower jaw was hinged , and thus able to move up and down . When pressed downwards , the teeth would have projected forward , allowing Carnotaurus to spike small prey items ; when the teeth were curved upwards , the now backward projecting teeth would have hindered the caught prey from escaping . Mazzetta and colleagues also found that the skull was able to withstand forces that appear when tugging on large prey items . Carnotaurus may therefore have fed mainly on relatively small prey , but also was able to hunt large dinosaurs .

This interpretation was questioned by François Therrien and colleagues ( 2005 ) , who found that the biting force of Carnotaurus was twice as high as that of the American alligator , which may have the strongest bite of any living tetrapod . These researchers also noted analogies with modern Komodo dragons : the flexural strength of the lower jaw decreases towards the tip linearly , indicating that the jaws were not suited for high precision catching of small prey but for delivering slashing wounds to weaken big prey . As a consequence , according to this study , Carnotaurus must have mainly preyed upon large animals , possibly by ambush . Robert Bakker ( 1998 ) found that Carnotaurus mainly fed upon very large prey , especially sauropods . As he noted , several adaptations of the skull — the short snout , the relatively small teeth and the strong back of the skull ( occiput ) — had independently evolved in Allosaurus . These features suggest that the upper jaw was used like a serrated club to inflict wounds ; big sauropods would have been weakened by repeated attacks .

Mazzetta and colleagues ( 1998 , 1999 ) presumed that Carnotaurus was a swift runner , arguing that the thigh bone was adapted to withstand high bending moments while running . The ability of an animal 's leg to withstand those forces limits its top speed . The running adaptations of Carnotaurus would have been better than those of a human , although not nearly as good as those of an ostrich . Scientists calculate that Carnotaurus had a top speed of up to 48 – 56 km ( 30 – 35 mi ) per hour . In dinosaurs , the most important locomotor muscle was located in the tail . This muscle , called caudofemoralis , attaches to the fourth trochanter , a prominent ridge on the thigh bone , and pulls the thigh bone backwards when contracted . Scott Persons and Phil Currie ( 2011 ) note that in the tail vertebrae of Carnotaurus the caudal ribs did not protrude horizontally ( " T-shaped " ) , but were angled against the vertical axis of the vertebrae , forming a " V " . This would have provided additional space for a caudofemoralis muscle larger than in any other theropod — the muscle mass was calculated at 111 to 137 kilograms ( 245 to 302 lb ) per leg . Therefore , Carnotaurus could have been one of the fastest large theropods . While the caudofemoralis muscle was enlarged , the epaxial muscles situated above the caudal ribs would have been proportionally smaller . These muscles , called the longissimus and spinalis muscle , were responsible for tail movement and stability . To maintain tail stability in spite of reduction of these muscles , the caudal ribs bear forward projecting processes interlocking the vertebrae with each other and with the pelvis , stiffening the tail . As a consequence , the ability to make tight turns would have been diminished , because the hip and tail had to be turned simultaneously , unlike in other theropods .

" Go Missin ' " is a song recorded by American singer-songwriter Usher . It was produced by Diplo and was released on Valentine 's Day 2013 through SoundCloud as a free download . The year before , Usher released " Climax " on Valentine 's Day , the lead single from his seventh studio album , Looking 4 Myself ( 2012 ) . Prior to its release , the singer tweeted that he had a " special delivery from the cloud " for his fans , who responded positively to the release of " Climax " on Valentine 's Day the preceding year . " Go Missin ' " contains similar characteristics to " Climax " ; it is a quiet storm mid-tempo R & B track , and incorporates heavy bass and synthesizers . Usher utilizes his falsetto range throughout , with Billboard writing that the song 's lyrics follow Usher attempting to " convince a stranded woman at a club to come home with him " . The song received positive reviews from music critics , who praised Diplo 's production and Usher 's vocals .

On February 14 , 2013 , Valentine 's Day , Usher announced through his Twitter and Facebook the release of a new single . He wrote through Twitter " You loved what I gave you last Valentine 's # Climax So here is ' Special delivery from the cloud 'Happy [ sic ] Valentine 's Day ! " . " Go Missin ' " was released on the day of its announcement through SoundCloud as a free download . The song was produced by Diplo , who previously collaborated with Usher on the track " Climax " , which was released as the lead single from the latter 's seventh studio album , Looking 4 Myself ( 2012 ) . " Go Missin ' " was later released to Italian radio on February 22 , 2013 .

" Go Missin ' " has a running duration of three minutes and two seconds . It contains similar characteristics to " Climax " , in that it is a quiet storm R & B track , complimented by drum machine . It is built upon synthesizers , while incorporating bass . Usher utilizes his falsetto range throughout the song , shifting in arrangements . Billboard wrote that the song 's lyrics follow Usher attempting to " convince a stranded woman at a club to come home with him " . The Huffington Post 's Kia Makarechi described " Go Missin ' " as a " standard track " , and wrote that its lyrics contain " serial killer-esque " undertones in the line : Conscience telling you you shouldn 't go , don 't listen / I 'mma take care of you for sure / Follow me right out that back door / Go missin .

August Brown of Los Angeles Times commended the song 's production and Usher 's vocals . Brown described the track as to be " full of roiling snares and boomy bass kicks " while saying that Usher 's vocals are " so pristine " that they walk a line between " digital witch-magic and the hair-raising choral work of Ligeti . " About.com 's Mark Edward Nero described the collaboration as " innovative " , and thought that the track contained a " cinematic quality with delicate vocals laid over a moody , semi-futuristic electronic beat " . Billboard 's David Greenwald compared " Go Missin ' " to the work of Canadian singer The Weeknd , while describing Usher 's vocals as " seductive " . Marc Hogan of Spin wrote that despite the song not being as " immediately jaw-dropping " compared to " Climax " , it still contains the same " Radiohead quiet storm style " as the latter song , with Usher utilizing his " hair-raising falsetto " . Forrest Wickman of Slate magazine interpreted the song as different in terms of music and lyrics to the latter song . Wickman praised Usher 's vocals , describing them as " calculated " to make you feel " uneasy , swirling around in minor harmonies " . Rolling Stones 's Jon Dolan gave the song three out of five stars , writing that " Go Missin ' " is not as " subtle " as " Climax " , though he praised its implementation of synthesizers , saying that it gives the song a " nervous , predatory throb " .

" You Know What You Did " is the first episode of the third season of The Hills . It originally aired on MTV on August 13 , 2007 . In the episode , Lauren Conrad ends her friendship with former housemate Heidi Montag after suspecting that she and her boyfriend Spencer Pratt fabricated rumors of a sex tape involving herself and her ex-boyfriend Jason Wahler . The ensuing feud between the women becomes a central focus of the series , and is carried through each subsequent season in which Conrad appears . " You Know What You Did " was produced by Tony DiSanto , Adam DiVello , Liz Gateley , Sara Mast , Andrew Perry , Jason Sands , Robyn Schnieders , Sean Travis , Michael " Spike " Van Briesen , and Rick Van Meter . The episode was met with generally favorable reviews from critics , who felt that the changed dynamic between Conrad and Montag was entertaining for television . It was additionally notable for Conrad 's delivery of the titular line " You know what you did ! " when speaking to Montag , which has since been recognized as an iconic moment from the series .

The third season of The Hills begins with Whitney Port becoming Lauren 's boss , after being promoted within Teen Vogue . On their first day returning to work , Lauren informs Whitney of false speculation regarding a sex tape involving herself and her ex-boyfriend Jason Wahler . Lauren comments that she has not spoken with Heidi since she moved into an apartment with Spencer , and the women become suspicious of her possible involvement with the rumors . Meanwhile , Heidi and Spencer are planning their housewarming party ; Spencer plans on inviting several of his friends , while Heidi was only planning on inviting Lauren , Whitney , and Audrina Patridge . Visiting Audrina at Epic Records unannounced , she delivers invitations for Audrina and Lauren . Audrina accepts the invitations , although later tells her co-worker that she believes that Heidi and Spencer were speaking badly of Lauren and were responsible for spreading the sex tape rumors . Lauren and Whitney decline their invitations to the housewarming party , and instead plan an impromptu outing at the club Les Deux . Meanwhile , during the housewarming party , Jenn Bunney makes a brief appearance at the apartment , although Heidi is disappointed after realizing that Lauren will not be attending . Unaware that they will run into Heidi and Spencer , Lauren and Audrina attend a birthday party for their friend Frankie Delgado the following day . As Lauren leaves for the bathroom after Heidi gives her a letter , Heidi tells Audrina that she is unsure of the reason for the tension between them . Audrina finds Lauren in the bathroom and they read the letter together , which details Heidi 's interest in rekindling their friendship . Angered that Heidi will not acknowledge the sex tape rumors , Lauren decides to exit the club .

At the recommendation of Spencer , Heidi confronts Lauren before she is able to leave the club . Lauren and Audrina get into an argument with Heidi and Spencer outside of Les Deux , where Lauren delivers the now-famous quote " You know what you did ! " , elaborating that " You started a sick little rumor about me ! You 're a sad , pathetic person . " The following morning , Heidi explains to her co-worker Elodie Otto that she was unaware of said speculation , and still wants to reconcile with Lauren . Meanwhile , Lauren tells Whitney that she is saddened by the idea of losing her friend , although admits that she has benefited from their separation .

" You Know What You Did " was produced by Tony DiSanto , Adam DiVello , Liz Gateley , Sara Mast , Andrew Perry , Jason Sands , Robyn Schnieders , Sean Travis , Michael " Spike " Van Briesen , and Rick Van Meter . Rumors of a sex tape involving Conrad and Wahler , in addition to stories alleging that she invaded his house to retrieve it , surfaced in April 2007 . Conrad adamantly denied both reports , commenting that " if I ever tried to get something back from Jason , it was probably just photo albums and stuff " and the producers " videotape my life five days out of the week . I don 't need additional footage , you know ? " The president of entertainment for MTV , Brian Graden , commented that the series benefits from the media coverage it receives in between seasons , which he described as a " six-month commercial for the show that doesn 't five away the narrative in full . " He elaborated that MTV wants " viewers to watch Lauren and the girls as the characters we know instead of in a show about being the stars of The Hills " ; the sex tape rumors were consequently presented like a personal conflict between the women , and was intentionally not addressed as a highly publicized controversy .

The ensuing feud between Conrad and Montag received extensive media attention since its beginning ; Conrad was doubtful of the possibility of a reconciliation , noting that " I can see us getting to not hating each other but I don 't think we would ever go back to being best friends . " When addressing speculation that the conflict was fabricated for television , Conrad stated that " I wouldn 't fight for the camera . If anything I would try not to . " In a separate interview , she revealed that she almost quit the program before the season began , stating " it wasn 't so much about the filming , but I didn 't want to do a show with the other people on it " , which was assumed to be alluding to Montag and Pratt .

" You Know What You Did " was met with generally favorable reviews from critics , who felt that the changed dynamic between Conrad and Montag was entertaining for television . Writing for Entertainment Weekly , Jennifer Armstrong provided a favorable review ; she opined that the conflict between Conrad and Montag made for the " most mature season ever " and offered a disclaimer that the term " maturity " was " being relative here , of course . " A writer for The Hollywood Gossip stated that the episode " didn 't disappoint " , and felt that the storyline clearly categorized Patridge and Port as being part of " Team Lauren " and Pratt as being part of " Team Heidi " in the " epic war " . Virginia Heffernan from The New York Times felt that the deterioration of Conrad and Montag 's friendship was " more convincing than Friends and just about any other comedy about female relationships because — as anyone who has ever been a young woman knows — undying friendships die . " Writing for Los Angeles Times , Denise Martin was complimentary of the fact that the conflict was " unsullied " despite the extensive media coverage it received before the season began , and added that it was " better than anything you 'd get on All My Children . " Furthemore , Conrad 's delivery of the titular line " You know what you did ! " when speaking to Montag has been recognized as an iconic moment from the series ; the staff from Us Weekly ranked the scene as the most memorable event from the program when recapping highlights from its six seasons in July 2010 .

In its original broadcast in the United States on August 13 , 2007 , " You Know What You Did " was watched by 3.6 million viewers . Consequently , it became the series ' most-viewed episode at the time of its first airing ; as August 2007 , the episode was the network 's highest-rated broadcast that year . It was surpassed by " Paris Changes Everything " , which served as the premiere for the second half of the season , on March 17 , 2008 ; it attracted 4.8 million viewers in its original airing . In the United States , the third season was released as a four-disc DVD set on July 19 , 2008 .

" Early Winter " is a song by American singer and songwriter Gwen Stefani from her second solo studio album , The Sweet Escape ( 2006 ) . Written by Stefani and English pianist Tim Rice-Oxley , the song was released in Europe as the album 's fifth and final single on January 18 , 2008 by Interscope Records . Musically , " Early Winter " is a soft rock and synthpop ballad with new wave influences . Critics found it similar to songs by English alternative rock band Keane . The lyrics of the song describe the nearing of the end of a relationship , and were speculated to be references to Stefani 's own relationship with husband Gavin Rossdale . Upon its release , " Early Winter " received generally positive reviews from music critics , many of whom commended Stefani 's vocal delivery and the song 's emotional appeal . The song charted on only a few record charts , but performed well in Germany and Slovakia , where it peaked at number six on the singles and airplay chart , respectively . An accompanying music video for " Early Winter " was directed by Sophie Muller and was filmed in destinations like Budapest , Milan , and Prague . It contains scenes of Stefani in a palace-like hall in various gowns and at railway stations . " Early Winter " was included in the setlist of The Sweet Escape Tour , and the performances featured a special coda section delivered by American musician and bassist Gail Ann Dorsey .

" Early Winter " was written by Tim Rice-Oxley , pianist of English alternative rock band Keane , and Gwen Stefani for the latter 's second solo studio album The Sweet Escape ( 2006 ) . The production of the song was handled by Nellee Hooper . Before working with Oxley in the studio , Stefani called him to discuss some of her ideas behind a potential song , saying " I wanted a ballad . I wanted to write ' Eyes Without a Face ' or ' Killing Me Softly ' or ' Time After Time , ' and he was like , ' OK , Cyndi Lauper , got it , ' like he was taking my order . " In the studio , Oxley played " Early Winter " on a piano , and after hearing the song , Stefani approved of it and commented that " It was so beautiful and addictive . I didn 't really attack it because it was kind of done , lyrics and everything . " After letting the song " sit with her for a bit " , she rewrote some of the lyrics . Stefani was the first artist Oxley wrote a song for outside of Keane , and the singer remarked that " he 's like Clark Kent-subtle , but Superman-talented . I 'm lucky I was his first , because I 'm sure he 's going to go write with lots of girls after me . " Oxley would later collaborate with artists like Australian singer Kylie Minogue , and in an interview he talked about working with her and Stefani , saying " I 've been very lucky to work with people at the top of the industry . Both were very talented and more creative than I think they ’ re given credit for . They ’ re both very good writers and singers and they both work so hard , just grafting the whole time . Honing those pop sensibilities through writing with them was good fun " .

Musically , " Early Winter " is a " sleek , surging " soft rock and synthpop ballad . Similar to Stefani 's work with her band No Doubt , it is highly influenced by new wave music . Clark Collis from Entertainment Weekly termed it a " tortured and not un-Keane-like lament " . The lyrics of " Early Winter " are based on issues related to the end of a relationship , and Jennifer Vineyard from MTV described them to be " poignant lyrics about a couple recognizing the beginning of the end " . In the song , Stefani metaphorically compares the end of her relationship with her partner to falling leaves . It was speculated that the song was a reference to Stefani 's own relationship with English musician and husband Gavin Rossdale . " Early Winter " was chosen as the fifth and final single from The Sweet Escape , and was released in Europe as a CD single on January 25 , 2008 by Interscope Records . It was made available for digital download on the iTunes Store on January 18 .

The song received generally positive reviews from music critics . Andy Battaglia from The A.V. Club praised Stefani 's vocal delivery , saying her " nasal voice suits the whiny sentiment of the subject matter " and opining that she " sounds most commanding in songs that flirt with blush-making drippiness " . Nick Levine from Digital Spy rated " Early Winter " four out of five stars , and complimented its emotional nature , naming it a " forgotten classic from an eighties movie soundtrack " and deeming it " the most affecting moment of Stefani 's solo career to date " . John Murphy from MusicOMH called the song " rather nice " and appreciated its lyrical content , although he commented that " it does sound like Stefani covering a Keane song " . Alex Miller from NME complimented Oxley 's involvement in " Early Winter " and singled it out as " one of the few potential hits " from The Sweet Escape . Mark Pytlik from Pitchfork Media picked " Early Winter " as one of the highlights from the album and favoured Stefani 's vocal delivery , noting that the song " proves that Stefani still has the ability to elevate an otherwise ordinary rock song to another level " . Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine complimented " Early Winter " for being " less forced and much less self-conscious " in comparison to the rest of the songs on The Sweet Escape , and felt that " it 's refreshing to hear Stefani in her more natural habitat " .

" Early Winter " had limited chart success , and appeared on only a few charts . It narrowly missed charting inside the top twenty of the Austrian Singles Chart by peaking at number twenty-two , although it stayed on the chart for nineteen weeks . " Early Winter " debuted and peaked at number six on the German Singles Chart , becoming Stefani 's second highest-peaking single in the region , alongside " The Sweet Escape " ( 2006 ) . It spent fourteen weeks on the German chart . The song failed to chart on the Hungarian Singles Chart , but managed to peak at number seventeen on the airplay chart . " Early Winter " entered the Slovak Airplay Chart at number 95 and peaked at number six , and spent a total of thirty-nine weeks on the chart . After debuting at number fifty-two on the Swiss Singles Chart , it ascended to number twelve and spent a total of twenty weeks on the chart .

An accompanying music video for " Early Winter " was directed by Stefani 's frequent collaborator Sophie Muller , who had previously directed the music videos of " Cool " and " Wind It Up " . Filming of the music video took place at destinations like Budapest , Milan , and Prague , where Stefani had been touring during The Sweet Escape Tour in 2007 . It opens with a black-and-white scene of Stefani lying on the ground in a long white gown . In the next scene , Stefani is shown walking on the street under red street lights and then holds her love interest , played by her tour backup dancer Steelo Vazquez , against the wall and talks to him . The scene then changes to Stefani walking on a street and later walking into the railway station . In the next scene , Stefani is seen singing under falling red-coloured feathers in a huge palace-type hall . Scenes of Stefani staring at herself in the mirror with her hair up and snow falling slowly down , with the lights turning on and off intermittently , are interspersed throughout the video . Stefani is also seen sitting on the ground and singing while crying . She is then shown at a railway station walking besides a moving train . The video ends with Stefani running out of the hall . Tamar Anitai from MTV Buzzworthy praised the video for being " acutely artful , immeasurably stylish " and commented that " Gwen ’ s managed to raise the bar on her own superlatively supreme style in her new video . "

Blue Dragon ( Japanese : ブルードラゴン , Hepburn : Burū Doragon ) is a role-playing video game developed by Mistwalker and Artoon and published by Microsoft Game Studios exclusively for the Xbox 360 . Blue Dragon is based on a design by Final Fantasy series creator Hironobu Sakaguchi , who also supervised development and wrote the plot . It is both Mistwalker 's debut title and the first title to be helmed by Sakaguchi outside of Square Enix . The game was released in Japan on December 7 , 2006 , where it was sold both as a standalone title and as part of a bundle with the Xbox 360 ( including the game , the Xbox 360 system itself , and a Blue Dragon console skin ) . Other regions received only the game itself , with a release in Europe on August 24 , 2007 , and in North America on August 28 , 2007 . Taking place in a fictional open-world environment , the story of Blue Dragon focuses on five friends ( Shu , Jiro , Kluke , Zola , and Marumaro ) as they travel across the world to confront Nene , the evil ruler of the Grand Kingdom . The setting inspired separate anime and manga adaptations , although these follow the story to different degrees and feature a different cast of characters . The game follows a traditional role-playing design , based around exploration and turn-based combat .

Players are initially able to walk between locations on the overworld , and later gain the ability to teleport to previously visited locations . The player controls a party of characters , but only one is shown when exploring the overworld . The player is able to cast magic outside of combat situations based on each character 's respective abilities . When combat begins , the entire party appears for battle . Enemies are visible to the player while exploring the game world , and can be avoided . At the same time , players can choose to engage enemies by luring them close and them activating a circle which will allow players to fight multiple monsters at a time . In some cases , specific foes will block a path or desired treasure chest and must be defeated to proceed . Other foes will pursue the player 's character once the player is spotted , but players can elude them if they flee far enough . Frequently , a single enemy or monster displayed on the screen actually represents a number of different foes of potentially different types . Combat begins differently depending on how the player avatar makes contact with the monster . If the avatar strikes an enemy from behind , they take the advantage in battle with a " Back Attack " . Similarly , if the avatar is struck from behind , the enemy takes the advantage in a " Surprise Attack " . Players can also choose to fight several groups of monsters at once , with each combat taking place immediately after the previous one . A player who successfully employs this tactic is rewarded with bonuses . Players may use " field skills " to aid in controlling enemy encounters , such as using bombs to paralyze enemies . In rare cases , two groups of monsters may be of rival species , in which case a " Monster Fight " will occur , with both monster groups appearing at once and focusing on each other before attacking the player .

The core mechanic in Blue Dragon is the use of magical " shadows " , with each playable character having a distinct shadow modeled after either a dragon , a phoenix , a bat , a minotaur , or a saber-toothed tiger . Each shadow can be assigned to a single character class ( from a number of such classes ) at a time , taking on the attributes and abilities of that class . Only the active class may earn Class levels or " ranks " , but players are free to change classes at any time except in combat , allowing the group 's shadows to be customized in order to achieve the desired combination of skills . As shadows increase in rank in a given class , they learn new skills , which can then be assigned to a limited number of skill slots to be used in combat . Shadows can be assigned previously learned skills regardless of their current class . For example , if a shadow is currently set to be an " Assassin " , but has previously learned the ability to cast " Barrier Magic " while acting as a member of the Barrier Magic class , the Barrier Magic skill can be set as an active skill . This allows mixing or hybridization , with the player able to pick and choose from among the skills learned by a given shadow .

Although combat in the game follows a strictly turn-based formula , the turn sequence of the characters you have are calculated based on the speed statistic of the character , and in some cases characters are allowed to strike before enemies can act if they possess sufficient speed . Different attacks can take varied periods of time to execute . Another combat timing mechanic featured in the game is the " Charge Meter " , which allows players to increase the power of spells or attacks by spending additional time preparing them . This meter is always used for spell casting , as well as when using the " Charge Attack " skill used by the " Monk " class . Although players can choose to act immediately , an ability will become more powerful the longer that the player charges the attack . However , the greater the amount of time one charges attacks , the longer the charging character must wait before the next turn . As a result of this , players can choose to charge up an ability so that the ability triggers shortly before an enemy acts , or can instead aim for the " sweet spot " , a special red area on the charging bar , indicating a charge that allows for less time until the next attack , as well as a smaller mana cost . Overall , deciding on the correct amount of charge and letting go of the button at precisely that time can greatly influence the effectiveness of each character 's attacks during combat .

Blue Dragon takes place in a fictional open-world environment where every year for the past ten years , purple clouds have mysteriously appeared in the sky , signaling misfortune and disaster for people across the world . For years , a terrifying beast dubbed the " Land Shark " , and other lost technologies , such as the " sea cube " came with the purple clouds , killing thousands of people and destroying a number of villages . The world is split up into climate regions , each containing multiple kingdoms and villages , a few of which are not on the main path , but hold small stories , such as the giants , and the sheep , as well as hidden dungeons . Around the environment are multiple sources of treasure

On an unnamed world , the legendary purple clouds arrive in Talta Village which is the home of Shu , Kluke , and Jiro . While the other villagers seek shelter , Shu and Jiro slow down the Land Shark . After encountering troubles , Kluke saves them . Together , the three trap the Land Shark in a net , but the Land Shark breaks free and rushes away , with Shu , Jiro , and Kluke dangling from its back . The Land Shark stops in an ancient ruin that the three friends explore . They discover the Land Shark is really a machine — a " Mechat " . Without warning , the mechat comes to life , only this time sailing into the sky , again carrying the three with it . The party arrives at a giant Mechat base in the clouds and are tossed into the throne room of Nene , the apparent leader . Nene explains to them how he enjoys hearing the screams of the dying victims of the Land Shark . The party battles Nene , but are easily defeated . They are thrown out of the base and start to fall to their deaths , but a beam of light from the base catches them , and brings them back to the base . The party find three small floating spheres in the middle of the room ; a mysterious voice commands them to swallow the spheres . The party refuses , and instead hold onto the spheres for safekeeping . As they try to reach another Mechat to escape the base , they are forced to fight a large army of Nene 's robots . When the battle seems it will never end , and with the unseen voice promising them knowledge of how to pilot the Mechat , the party members eat the spheres . As they consume the spheres , a strange transformation occurs to each , changing the forms of their shadows into powerful beings that are able to destroy the robot army . The party escapes the base and crash in a desert .

After becoming familiar with their new shadows , the party travels to Talta village , befriending Marumaro on the way , who also possesses a magical shadow . Finding that the villagers from Talta have started to head towards the capital city of Jibral , the party takes off after them . Just outside Jibral , the party finds the villagers attacked by Steel-Eating Tigers . They are saved by the arrival of King Jibral and his forces , including Zola . Once the villagers are brought to Jibral , the King decides to implement a plan to destroy one of Nene 's bases near Jibral using Shu and his friends along with Zola . Together , the party works with the warriors of Talta Village the Jibral Kingdom to besiege Nene 's Mechat base . After the base is destroyed , the party heads north in search of Nene . Nene captures Kluke , and places a collar around her neck which Nene alleges will explode . After reaching Nene , Zola separates from the party to buy them time to attack Nene . When the party attempts to remove Kluke 's collar , Nene absorbs the party 's shadows by placing collars on all of them . After taking their powers and placing them in himself , he removes their collars and attempts to kill them before they recover . Shu , despite being drained of magical ability , unconsciously teleports the party to the distant Devour village .

In Devour Village , they find themselves unable to escape the village without their magic , because the community is surrounded by evil trees . Shu has an epiphany and finds himself able to summon his dragon shadow without his sphere . Shu destroys the Eat Yeet in Devour Village , and the party is finally able to leave . Eventually all the party are able to summon their shadows again . At that point , the party reunites with Zola , who supplies a Mechat for them to pursue Nene . As the party goes after Nene in the Mechat , Nene initiates an ancient machine that splits the world into two hemispheres , with thousands of isolated cubes floating between the halves . The party follows Nene to the Primitive Cube at the core of the transformation . The party journeys through the cube eventually defeating General Szabo and ultimately engaging Nene . As the party weakens Nene , it is revealed that Zola was working for Nene all along , and she was the voice that told the others to swallow the spheres . When Zola was too weak to defend herself , Nene had given her a shadow and sent her to Jibral as a spy . Zola betrays and kills Nene choosing her friends over him .

Blue Dragon was first revealed on February 24 , 2005 as one of two unnamed role-playing games in development by Mistwalker Studios for the console which later came to be known as the Xbox 360 . In an IGN interview following the unveiling , Peter Moore stressed the importance to Microsoft of having Japanese games available on the system , commenting " ... It 's a main priority for me in the next 12 – 18 months to ensure Japanese developers are our partners . " Contributors to Blue Dragon include a number of well known Japanese figures in the gaming industry . The title 's original story was written by Hironobu Sakaguchi , the game director of the first five Final Fantasy video games . It also features art from Akira Toriyama , the creator of Dragon Ball and visual character and monster designer and illustrator of both the Dragon Quest series and Chrono Trigger . Much of the actual software development work on the game was done at Artoon , with Takuya Matsumoto serving as director and Manabu Kusonoki responsible for the game 's world view . Matsumoto previously worked as a designer on Blinx 2 : Masters of Time and Space , while Kusonoki is known for his work at Sega , including the world of Panzer Dragoon . Near the end of November 2005 , roughly a year before the title was released in Japan , Artoon 's Naoto Ohshima indicated that the game was around 40 % complete . He also pointed out that Artoon had previously been known primarily for action titles , so that responsibility for Blue Dragon was originally somewhat frightening . Following this , a relative lack of media information for most of 2006 resulted in speculation that the title would be delayed until 2007 , but Microsoft 's Takashi Sensui confirmed in August 2006 that the game would indeed see a year-end 2006 release . Blue Dragon was eventually released on three full DVD discs , making it the first Xbox 360 game to span multiple discs .

In a November 2006 interview with IGN , Sakaguchi confirmed that the sequel , Blue Dragon 2 , was in the planning stages , and would presumably start development shortly thereafter . Later in an issue of Weekly Shōnen Jump , it was announced that Blue Dragon Plus was in the works for the Nintendo DS . It is a real-time simulation RPG , featuring 2D sprite graphics , and was released on September 4 , 2008 in Japan and on February 19 , 2009 in North America . In 2009 , a second Blue Dragon title was released for the DS , Blue Dragon : Awakened Shadow . The latter is more action oriented , and follows a player-created character , rather than Shu .

Blue Dragon 's score was composed and produced by Nobuo Uematsu , who is better known for composing much of the music in the popular Final Fantasy series . One of the boss themes , " Eternity " , was composed by Uematsu , with lyrics by Hironobu Sakaguchi himself , and includes vocals by English singer Ian Gillan . Blue Dragon Original Soundtrack was released on December 13 , 2006 and was arranged by Satoshi Henmi and Hiroyuki Nakayama . Music from Blue Dragon was performed live at the Play ! A Video Game Symphony concerts in 2006 . IGN praised the track " Cave " as one of the " Top 10 Nobuo Uematsu Musical Moments " . Enter Shikari also made an instrumental song , " Enter Shikari vs. Blue Dragon " for the original soundtrack .

On November 12 , 2006 , Shueisha announced that a manga adaptation of Blue Dragon would be produced . Known as Blue Dragon ST ( ブルードラゴン シークレットトリック , Burū Doragon Shīkuretto Torikku , " Blue Dragon : Secret Trick " ) , the manga was done by Ami Shibata and premiered in Monthly Shōnen Jump in January 2007 . The production was ended in July 2007 with the magazine 's cancellation . A second manga was later produced under the name Blue Dragon Ral Ω Grad , also known as Ral Grad . This adaptation was done by Tsuneo Takano and Takeshi Obata , the illustrator of Death Note . Ral Grad began serialization in issue 1 , 2007 of Weekly Shōnen Jump . Viz Media later began releasing the manga as simply " Ral Grad " in February 2008 .

An anime adaptation directed by Yukihiro Matsushita , animated by Studio Pierrot and co-produced by SKY Perfect Wellthink , TV Tokyo and Pierrot was announced in November 2006 . The anime began airing April 7 , 2007 , featuring a different vocal cast than that used for the game . It also ignored most of the game 's plot . It aired on TV Tokyo , and ran for 51 episodes . A second season of Blue Dragon — Blue Dragon : Trials of the Seven Shadows ( BLUE DRAGON 天界の七竜 , Burū Doragon : Tenkai no Shichiryū ) — premiered on TV Tokyo on April 5 , 2008 . On April 16 , 2007 , Viz Media announced that it had licensed the anime for release in North America and Europe . An edited English language dub of the series premiered in the United States on Cartoon Network , on April 5 , 2008 , where it aired on Toonami Jetstream until Jetstream was cancelled on January 30 , 2009 . Since then it has been discovered that Viz Media did make an uncut version of the Blue Dragon anime in English . This uncut version released by Manga Entertainment has had the first 24 episodes released on DVD ( so far exclusively in the UK ) over three 2 disc DVD sets with the release date of the next DVD set to be announced . These uncut episodes unlike the US DVD releases fully restores the original Japanese opening and closing , all edited scenes from the Cartoon Network version are restored including the original music , as well as having the option to view the series in Japanese with English subtitles . On July 22 , 2011 , Viz Media started streaming Blue Dragon episodes on VizAnime and Hulu . At Otakon , Viz Media representative Amy Mar said that if the streaming numbers are good , they might release the uncut episodes on physical media .

Pre-orders of Blue Dragon bundled with a limited edition Xbox 360 Core system were sold out in Japan well before the December 7 , 2006 release date . Microsoft and Mistwalker initially hoped to sell over 200,000 copies , which would break their record for sales of an Xbox 360 game in Japan . The game did manage the goal , with almost exactly 200,000 copies sold as of December 27 , 2007 . Creator Hironobu Sakaguchi was pleased the game sold as well as it did . Reviews for Blue Dragon were somewhat mixed , though generally favorable . On the review aggregator Game Rankings , the game had an average score of 77 % based on 62 reviews . While many reviewers praised the game for its traditional approach , a few reviewers criticized it for that very reason , with one reviewer remarking , " In fact , there is very little you can point to in Blue Dragon that hasn 't been done multiple times over before " . The story also came under scrutiny from some reviewers for being too generic and too similar to existing Japanese RPGs , with slow pacing during the beginning of the game . Eurogamer stated that the apparent lack of effort put into the facial animations for each character resulted in a limited ability to express emotion . They also noted that the mouth movements are well timed , but that the rest of the characters ' facial movements are " static " .

Game Informer commented that Blue Dragon lacked " jaw dropping " moments and was missing a nebulous " key element " to make it perfect . 1UP.com also picked up on this , adding that Blue Dragon was missing " strong characters , gripping storytelling , and excellent pacing " . X-Play said that the game was very visually pleasing , but indicated that it was like any other role-playing game . Though most of the reviewers criticized the game in one way or another , they all complimented it for its excellent graphics and music . Specifically , Game Informer remarked that " the characters look like sculpted figurines wandering around a world built to scale " . GameSpy complimented the title 's music and graphics saying the game had " phenomenal music ; and magnificently rendered cutscenes " .

Welsh cuisine encompasses the cooking traditions and practices of the country of Wales and the Welsh people . Whilst there are a large number of dishes that can be considered Welsh due to their ingredients and / or history , dishes such as cawl , Welsh rarebit , laverbread , Welsh cakes , bara brith and the Glamorgan sausage have all been regarded as symbols of Welsh food . There is some variation in dishes around Wales , but the most pronounced difference is in the Gower Peninsula , an isolated rural area which was heavily influenced by Somerset and Devon . There the dishes created included whitepot and often incorporated pumpkin . While Wales has imported throughout the centuries some culinary practices and dishes from its British neighbors , uniquely Welsh cuisine grew largely from the lives of the Welsh working folk , such as farmers , shepherds , and peasants , as these Welsh working people tended to be more isolated from outside culinary influences . Welsh common folk were instead influenced by the food that they could produce based on what little ingredients they could produce or afford , all while having little or no contact with neighboring English cuisine and English society . Welsh Celts and their more recent Welsh descendants originally practiced transhumance , moving their cattle to higher elevations in the summer and back to their home base in the winter . Once they settled to homesteads , a family would have generally eaten meat from a pig primarily , keeping a cow for dairy products . Vegetables beyond cabbages and leeks were rare .

In Wales , beef and dairy cattle are raised widely . Sheep farming , however , is extensive in the country , and lamb is the meat traditionally associated with Wales . Other important produce includes seafood — especially close to the coast , where fishing culture is strong and fisheries are common . This is exemplified by the use of cockles and laverbread in Welsh cuisine . The leek , the country 's national vegetable , is also used frequently in Welsh cuisine . Since the 1970s , the rise of the gastropub and high-end restaurants has given Wales five Michelin-starred restaurants .

There are few written records of traditional Welsh foods ; recipes were instead held within families and passed down orally between the women of the family . The lack of records was highlighted by Mati Thomas in 1928 , who made a unique collection of 18th century " Welsh Culinary Recipes " as an award winning Eisteddfod entry . Those with the skills and inclination to write Welsh recipes , the upper classes , conformed to English styles and therefore would not have run their houses with traditional Welsh cuisine . Upper-class households would take on any English fashions , even adopting English names . The traditional cookery of Wales originates from the daily meals of peasant folk , unlike other cultures where meals often started in the kitchens of the gentry and would be adapted . Historically the King of the Welsh people would travel , with his court , in a circuit , demanding tribute in the form of food from communities they visited as they went . The tribute was codified in the Laws of Hywel Dda , showing that people lived on beer , bread , meat and dairy products , with few vegetables beyond cabbages and leeks . The laws show how much value was put on different parts of Welsh life at the time , for example that wealth was measured in cattle ; they also show that the court included hunters , who would be restricted to seasonal hunting sessions .

Towards the start of the 11th century , Welsh society started to build settlements . Food would be cooked in a single cauldron over an open fire on the floor , it would likely be reheated and topped up with fresh ingredients over a number of days . Some dishes could be cooked on a bakestone , a flat stone which could be placed above a fire to heat it evenly . Gerald of Wales , chaplain to Henry II , wrote after an 1188 tour of Wales , " The whole population lives almost entirely on oats and the produce of their herds , milk , chees and butter . You must not expect a variety of dishes from a Welsh kitchen , and there are no highly-seasoned titbits to whet your appetite . " The medieval Welsh used thyme , savory , and mint in the kitchen , but in general herbs were much more likely to be used for medicinal purposes than culinary ones . Towards the end of the 18th century , Welsh land owners divided up the land to allow for tenant-based farming . Each small holding would include vegetable crops , as well as a cow , pigs and a few chickens . The 18th and 19th centuries were a time of unrest for the Welsh people . The Welsh food riots began in 1740 , when colliers blamed the lack of food on problems in the supply , and continued throughout Wales as a whole . The worst riots happened in the 1790s after a grain shortage , which coincided with political upheaval in the form of forced military service and high taxes on the roads , leaving farmers unable to make a profit . As a result of riots by colliers in the mid 1790s , magistrates in Glamorgan sold the rioters corn at a reduced price . At the same time they also requested military assistance from the government to stop further rioting . Due to the close-knit nature of the poor communities , and the slightly higher status of the farmers above the labourers , the rioters generally blamed the farmers and corn merchants , rather than the gentry .

The majority of food riots had ended by 1801 , and there were certain political undertones to the actions , though lack of leadership meant that little came of it . By the 1870s , 60 % of Wales was owned by 570 families , most of whom did no farming . Instead , they employed workers , who were forced to vote Tory or lose their jobs . Around the end of the 19th century , the increase in coal mining and steel works around Wales led to the immigration of Italian workers . The workers brought families who integrated their culture into Welsh society , bringing with them Italian ice cream and Italian cafes , now a staple of Welsh society . In the 1960s , isolated communities were unable to access produce that the majority of Britain would such as peppers or aubergines . Artisan Welsh produce was limited or non-existent , farms rarely made their own cheese , and Welsh wine was of poor quality . By the 1990s , historical Welsh foods were going through a revival . Farmers ' markets became more popular , Welsh organic vegetables and farm-made cheese started to appear in supermarkets . Other modern Welsh characteristics are more subtle , such as supermarkets offering salty butters and laverbread or butchers labelling beef skirt as ' cawl meat ' .

Restaurants are promoting the quality of Welsh ingredients , encouraging people to purchase Welsh produce and creating new dishes using them . This has meant that Welsh products can find their way into the higher-priced delicatessens of London or North America . However , the regular diet of Welsh people has been more influenced by India , China and America . The most popular dish is chicken tikka masala , followed by burgers or chow mein . As a result of the popularity of these sorts of foods , Wales has the highest fat consumption in Britain , and therefore the highest levels of obesity .

There are some variations in the foods that are eaten around the different areas of Wales . These variations trace their roots back to medieval cooking . Ingredients were historically limited by what could be grown ; the wetter climate in highland areas meant that crops were restricted to oats , whilst the more fertile lowland areas allowed the growth of barley or wheat . Coastal inhabitants were more likely to include seafood or seaweed in their meals , whilst those living inland would supplement their farmed cereals with the seeds of land weeds to ensure there was enough to eat . The invasions of the Romans and Normans also had an effect on the fertile areas which were conquered . The people there learned more " sophisticated eating habits " . Conversely those who remained in wilder areas kept the traditional approaches to cooking ; tools such as the pot crane continued to be used as late as the 20th century . The only region that has a significant difference from the rest of Wales is the Gower peninsula , whose lack of land transport links left it isolated . Instead it was strongly influenced by Somerset and Devon on the other side of the Bristol Channel . Dishes such as whitepot and ingredients such as pumpkin , rare elsewhere in Wales , became commonplace in Gower .

There a number of local Welsh breeds of cow , including the Welsh Black , a breed which dates back to at least 1874 . Cattle farming accounts for the majority of agricultural output in Wales — in 1998 the production of beef contributed 23 % of Welsh agricultural output , whilst in 2002 25 % of agricultural output was in the production of dairy products . Welsh beef has a European Union Protected Geographical Indicator , so it must be wholly reared and slaughtered in Wales . Pigs were the primary meat eaten by early Welsh folk , which could be preserved easily by salting . By 1700 , there were a number of different Welsh breeds of pig , with long snouts and thin backs , generally light coloured , but some were dark or spotted . Today , pigs in Wales are either farmed intensively , using the white Welsh pig or Landrace pig , or extensively , where Saddleback pig , Welsh pig or crossbreeds are farmed . The Welsh uplands were most suited to grazing animals such as sheep and goats , and the animals became associated with Wales . Sheep-farming on a large scale was introduced by Cistercian monks , largely for wool , but also for meat . By the start of the 16th century Welsh mutton was popular in the rest of the UK . Once modern synthetic fibres became more popular than wool , Welsh sheep were raised almost exclusively for meat . Towards the end of the 20th century , there were more than 11 million sheep in Wales . The most popular breed of sheep is the Welsh Mountain sheep which is notably smaller than other breeds but better-suited to the Welsh landscape and only rears one lamb , rather than the lowland breeds which rear two or more ; the mountain sheep are regarded as having more flavoursome meat . Welsh farmers have started using scientific methods , such as artificial insemination or using ultrasound to scan a sheep 's depth of fat , to improve the quality of their meat .

Coastal areas of Wales , and those near rivers , produce many different forms of fish and shellfish . Traditional fishing methods , such as wade netting for salmon , remained in place for 2,000 years . Welsh coracles , simple boats made of a willow frame and covered in animal hides , were noted by Romans and were still in use in the 20th century . Once landed , fish would generally be wind-dryed and smoked , or cured with salt . Herring , a fish which takes well to salting , became a well established catch ; the busiest harbour was Aberystwyth , which reportedly took up to 1,000 barrels of herring in a single night in 1724 . Many other villages also fished for herring , generally between late August and December . Herring , along with mackerel , trout , salmon and sea trout , were the main fishes found in Welsh cuisine . Salmon was abundant and therefore a staple for the poor . Trout , which would dry out quickly when cooked , would be wrapped in leek leaves for cooking , or covered in bacon or oatmeal . Many fish would be served with fennel , which grew wild in abundance in Wales .

As cattle were the basis of Celtic wealth , butter and cheese were generally made from cows ' milk . The Celts were amongst the earliest producers of butter in Britain , and for hundreds of years after the Romans left the country butter was the primary cooking medium and basis for sauces . Salt was an important ingredient in Welsh butter , but also in early Welsh cheeses , which would sit in brine during the cheesemaking process . The Welsh were also early adopters of roasting cheese . An early incarnation of Welsh rarebit was being made in medieval times , and by the middle of the 15th century Rarebit was considered a national dish . The acid soil of Wales meant that the milk produced by their cattle created a soft cheese , which was not as good for roasting , so Welsh people would trade for harder cheeses such as Cheddar . The best known Welsh cheese is Caerphilly , named in 1831 but made long before that . Originally a method for storing excess milk until it could be brought to market , it was a moist cheese that would not last very long . Production of the cheese was halted due to milk rationing after World War II , although it was still made in England . There , the cheese was produced very quickly and sold early in its maturation process , creating a dryer cheese . In the 1970s , production of Caerphilly returned to Wales and over the following few decades a variety of new cheeses have also been produced in Wales .

As far back as the Iron Age , Welsh folk were using wild cereals to create a coarse bread . By the time the Romans invaded , Celtic skills with bread had progressed to the point that white or brown breads could be produced . The Roman invasion led to many Welsh people moving to the less hospitable uplands , where the only cereal crops which could be grown were oats , barley and rye . Oat and barley breads were the main breads eaten in Wales up until the 19th century , with rye bread created for medicinal purposes . Oats were used to bulk out meat or meat and vegetable stews , also known as pottage . The Welsh also created a dish called Llymru , finely ground oatmeal soaked in water for a long time before boiling until it solidified . This blancmange styled dish became so popular outside Wales that it got a new name , flummery , as the English couldn 't pronounce the original . A similar dish , sucan , was made with less finely ground oatmeal , making a coarser product .

Celtic law made specific provision with regards to cabbages and leeks , stating that they should be enclosed by fences for protection against wandering cattle . The two green vegetables were the only ones mentioned specifically in the laws , though uncultivated plants were still likely to be used in their cooking . The leek went on to be so important to Welsh cuisine — found in many symbolic dishes including cawl and Glamorgan sausage — that it became the country 's national vegetable . Potatoes were slow to be adopted amongst Welsh folk , despite being introduced to the UK in the 16th century ; only in the early 18th century did they become a Welsh staple , due to grain failures . Once the potato did become a staple , it was quickly found in Welsh dishes such as cawl , and traditions grew around their use . One tradition , which was still in place at the start of World War II , was that villagers could plant an 80-yard ( 73-metre ) row of potatoes in a neighbouring farmer 's field for each labourer the household could provide at the time of harvest .

Whilst there are a large number of dishes that can be considered Welsh due to their ingredients , there are some which are quintessentially Welsh . Dishes such as cawl , Welsh rarebit , laverbread , Welsh cakes , bara brith ( literally " speckled bread " ) or the Glamorgan sausage have all been regarded as symbols of Welsh food . Cawl , pronounced in a similar way to the English word " cowl " , can be regarded as Wales ' national dish . Dating back to the 11th century , originally it was a simple broth of meat ( most likely bacon ) and vegetables , it could be cooked slowly over the course of the day whilst the family was out working the fields . It could be made in stages , over a number of days , first by making a meat stock , then by adding the vegetables on the following day . Once cooked , the fat could be skimmed from the top of the pot , then it would be served as two separate dishes , first as a soup , then as a stew . Leftovers could be topped up with fresh vegetables , sometimes over the course of weeks . During the 18th and 19th centuries , the amount of meat used in the broth was minimal ; instead it was bulked out with potatoes . Today , cawl would be much more likely to include beef or lamb for the meat , and may be served with plain oatmeal dumplings or currant dumplings known as trollies . Traditionally cawl would be eaten with a " specially-carved wooden spoon " and eaten from a wooden bowl .

The predilection of the Welsh for roasted cheese led to the dish of Welsh rarebit , or Welsh rabbit , seasoned melted cheese poured over toasted bread . The cheese would need to be a harder one , such as chedder or similar . Referred to as Welsh rabbit as early as 1725 , the name is not similar to the Welsh term caws pobi . Welsh folk rarely ate rabbit due to the cost and as land owners would not allow rabbit hunting , so the term is more likely a slur on the Welsh . The name evolved from rabbit to rarebit , possibly to remove the slur from Welsh cuisine or due to simple reinterpretation of the word to make menus more pleasant . Laverbread , or Bara Lawr , is a Welsh speciality . It is made by cooking porphyra seaweed slowly over the course of up to ten hours until it becomes a puree known as laver . The seaweed can also be cooked with oatmeal to make laverbread . It can be served with bacon and cockles as a breakfast dish , or fried in to small patties . Today , laverbread is commercially produced by washing in water , cooking for about 5 hours before chopping , salting and packaging .

The Glamorgan sausage is a Welsh vegetarian sausage . It contains no meat or skin , instead it is made with cheese , generally Caerphilly , but sometimes cheddar , along with leek or spring onion . This mixture is then coated in breadcrumbs and rolled into a sausage shape before cooking . Glamorgan sausages date back to at least the early 19th century , at which point the sausages would have contained pork fat . Welsh cakes , or pice ar y maen meaning " cakes on the stone " , are small round spiced cakes , traditionally cooked on a bakestone , but more recently on a griddle . Once cooked , they can be eaten hot or cold , on their own or topped either with sugar or butter . The dough which is mixed with raisins , sultanas and sometimes currants , is similar to shortbread , meaning they can have the consistency of biscuits when cooked on the griddle , and slightly more like a cake when cooked in the oven . Bara brith is a fruit loaf originating from rural Wales , where they used a mortar and pestle to grind the fresh sweet spices . Historically it was made with yeast and butter , though recently it is likely to be made with bicarbonate of soda and margarine . The fruit included would be dried raisins , currants and candied peel , which would be soaked in cold tea before cooking . Generally served sliced with butter during afternoon tea , it is often known as Welsh tea bread . Bara Brith translates to " speckled bread " , but it is also known as teisen dorth in South Wales , where sultanas are included in the recipe , or as torta negra when Welsh settlers brought it to Argentina .

Wine and beer , especially of the home-made varieties , were central to socialising in Wales , as they were in England . This remained the case even when tea gained popularity in England , supplanting the home-made alcohol . Beer is now the national drink of Wales , although Welsh beers never gained the status of other British beers , such as stout or English ales . This was in part due to the breweries keeping promotion of their products to a minimum so as not to upset the temperance movement in Wales . The temperance movement remained a strong influence though , and when new breweries were set up , the outcry led to the Welsh Sunday Closing Act in 1881 , an act that forced the closure of public houses in Wales on a Sunday . Wales ' passion for beer remained ; the Wrexham Lager Beer Company opened in 1881 , as the first lager producer in Britain . The Felinfoel Brewery made a deal with the local tin works and became the first brewery in Europe to put beer in cans . The Welsh also have a history of producing whisky , in a similar manner to other Celtic people such as the Irish or Scottish but on a smaller scale . Distillation began for commercial purposes before 1750 , by families who went on to emigrate to America and help found the Kentucky Whiskey industry . Always a niche industry , by the late 19th century , the main whisky production in Wales was at Frongoch near Bala , Gwynedd . The distillery was bought by Scottish whisky companies and closed in 1910 when they were attempting to establish brands in England . In 1998 the Welsh Whisky Company , now known as Penderyn , was formed and whisky production began at Penderyn , Rhondda Cynon Taf in 2000 . Penderyn single malt whisky was the first whisky commercially produced in Wales for a century and went on sale in 2004 . The company also produces Merlyn Cream Liqueur , Five Vodka and Brecon Gin .

Welsh vineyards were first planted by Romans , but in the 1970s , modern vineyards were planted in South Wales with the intention of creating Welsh wine . Despite a slow start , by 2005 Wales had 20 vineyards , producing 100,000 bottles a year , primarily white wines , but also a few reds . According to the Wine Standards Board , by September 2015 , there were 22 operational vineyards in Wales. and there were almost 40 hectares ( 99 acres ) of vines planted in Wales . By 2005 the Welsh bottled water industry was worth as much as £ 100m . Popular brands include Brecon Carreg , Tŷ Nant , Princes Gate and Pant Du .

The number of restaurants in Wales has significantly increased since the 1960s , when the country had very few notable places to eat out . Today , Wales is no longer considered a " gastronomic desert " ; as of 2016 , it has five Michelin starred restaurants and other award systems such as TripAdvisor and the AA have included Welsh restaurants in their lists . The most significant increase in restaurants has been at the high end , but there has been growth and improvement in quality across the whole range of Welsh eateries . Many Welsh restaurants attempt to showcase their " Welshness " , but few include historic Welsh dishes besides cawl . Instead , they showcase their Welsh ingredients , creating new dishes from them . There has also been a rise in Asian cuisine in Wales , especially that of Indian , Chinese , Thai , Indonesian and Japanese , with a preference for spicier foods . Finally there has been a significant rise in " gastropubs " , as there has around the United Kingdom , with the first in the country credited as the The Walnut Tree in Llanddewi Skirrid .

In 1931 , Tintin , a reporter for Le Petit Vingtième , goes with his dog Snowy on an assignment to Chicago , Illinois , to report on the city 's organised crime syndicate . He is kidnapped by gangsters and brought before mobster boss Al Capone , whose criminal enterprises in the Congo were previously thwarted by Tintin . With Snowy 's help , Tintin subdues his captors , but the police reject his claims , and the gangsters escape . After surviving attempts on his life , Tintin meets Capone 's rival Bobby Smiles , who heads the Gangsters Syndicate of Chicago . Tintin is unpersuaded by Smiles ' attempt to hire him , and after Tintin orchestrates the arrest of his gang , Smiles escapes and heads west . Tintin pursues Smiles to the Midwestern town of Redskin City . Here , Smiles convinces a tribe of Blackfoot Native Americans that Tintin is their enemy , and when Tintin arrives , he is captured and threatened with execution . After escaping , Tintin discovers a source of underground petroleum . The U.S. army then forces the Natives off their land , and oil companies build a city on the site within 24 hours . Tintin evades a lynch mob and a wildfire before discovering Smiles ' remote hideaway cabin ; after a brief altercation , he captures the gangster .

Returning to Chicago with his prisoner , Tintin is praised as a hero , but gangsters kidnap Snowy and send Tintin a ransom note . Tracing the kidnappers to a local mansion , Tintin hides in a suit of armour and frees Snowy from the dungeon . The following day , Tintin is invited to a cannery , but it is a trap set by gangsters , who trick him into falling into the meat-grinding machine . Tintin is saved when the machine workers go on strike and then apprehends the mobsters . In thanks , he is invited to a banquet in his honour , where he is kidnapped and thrown into Lake Michigan to drown . Tintin survives by floating to the surface , but gangsters posing as police capture him . He once again overwhelms them , and hands them over to the authorities . Finally , Tintin 's success against the gangsters is celebrated by a ticker-tape parade , following which he returns to Europe .

Tintin in America was the third story in the series . At the time , the Belgian far right was deeply critical of the United States , as it was of the Soviet Union . Wallez — and to a lesser degree Hergé — shared these opinions , viewing the country 's capitalism , consumerism , and mechanisation as a threat to traditional Belgian society . Wallez wanted Hergé to use the story to denounce American capitalism and had little interest in depicting Native Americans , which was Hergé 's primary desire . As a result , Tintin 's encounter with the natives took up only a sixth of the narrative . Hergé sought to demystify the " cruel savage " stereotype of the Natives that had been widely perpetuated in western films . His depiction of the Natives was broadly sympathetic , yet he also depicted them as gullible and naïve , much as he had depicted the Congolese in the previous Adventure .

Hergé attempted greater research into the United States than he had done for the Belgian Congo or Soviet Union . To learn more about Native Americans , Hergé read Paul Coze and René Thévenin 's 1928 book Mœurs et histoire des Indiens Peaux-Rouges ( " Customs and History of the Redskin Indians " ) and visited Brussels ' ethnographic museum . As a result , his depiction of the Blackfoot Native Americans was " essentially accurate " , with artefacts such as tipis and traditional costume copied from photographs . To learn about Chicago and its gangsters , he read Georges Duhamel 's 1930 book Scènes de la vie future ( " Scenes from Future Life " ) . Written in the context of the Wall Street Crash of 1929 , Duhamel 's work contained strong anti-consumerist and anti-modernist sentiment , criticising the U.S. ' s increased mechanisation and standardisation from a background of European conservatism ; this would have resonated with both Wallez and Hergé 's viewpoints . Many elements of Tintin in America , such as the abattoir scene , were adopted from Duhamel 's descriptions . Hergé was also influenced by a special edition of radical anticonformist magazine Le Crapouillot ( The Mortar Shell ) that was published in October 1930 . Devoted to the United States , it contained a variety of photographs that influenced his depiction of the country . Hergé used its images of skyscrapers as a basis for his depiction of Chicago and adopted its account of Native Americans being evicted from their land when oil was discovered there . He was particularly interested in the articles in the magazine written by reporter Claude Blanchard , who had recently travelled the U.S. He reported on the situation in Chicago and New York City and met with Native Americans in New Mexico . Blanchard 's article discussed the gangster George Moran , whom literary critic Jean-Marie Apostolidès believed provided the basis for the character Bobby Smiles .

Hergé 's depiction of the country was also influenced by American cinema , and many of his illustrations were based on cinematic imagery . Jean-Marc Lofficier and Randy Lofficier thought that Tintin 's arrest of Smiles had been influenced by the Buffalo Bill stories , and that the idea of the gangsters taking Tintin away in their car came from Little Caesar . One of the individuals that Hergé could have learned about through Blanchard 's article was the Chicago-based American gangster Al Capone . In the preceding story , Tintin in the Congo , Capone had been introduced as a character within the series . There , he was responsible for running a diamond smuggling racket that Tintin exposed , setting up for further confrontation in Tintin in America . Capone was one of only two real-life individuals to be named in The Adventures of Tintin , and was the only real-life figure to appear as a character in the series . In the original version , Hergé avoided depicting him directly , either illustrating the back of his head , or hiding his face behind a scarf ; this was altered in the second version , in which Capone 's face was depicted . It is not known if Capone ever learned about his inclusion in the story , although during initial serialisation he would have been preoccupied with his trial and ensuing imprisonment .

Tintin 's in America began serialisation in Le Petit Vingtième on 3 September 1931 , under the title of Les Aventures de Tintin , reporter , à Chicago ( The Adventures of Tintin , Reporter , in Chicago ) . The use of " Chicago " over " America " reflected Wallez 's desire for the story to focus on a critique of American capitalism and crime , for which the city was internationally renowned . Part way through serialisation , as Tintin left Chicago and headed west , Hergé changed the title of the serial to Les Aventures de Tintin , reporter , en Amérique ( The Adventures of Tintin , Reporter , in America ) . The dog Snowy was given a diminished role in Tintin in America , which contained the last instance in the Adventures in which Tintin and Snowy have a conversation where they are able to understand each other . In the banquet scene , a reference is made to a famous actress named Mary Pikefort , an allusion to the real-life actress Mary Pickford . That same scene also featured a prototype for the character of Rastapopoulos , who was properly introduced in the following Cigars of the Pharaoh story .

The strip 's serialisation coincided with the publication of another of Hergé 's comics set in the United States : Les aventures de " Tim " l 'écureuil au Far-West ( The Adventures of Tim the Squirrel Out West ) , published in sixteen instalments by the Brussels department store L 'Innovation . Produced every Thursday , the series was reminiscent of Hergé 's earlier Totor series . Alongside these stories , Hergé was involved in producing his weekly Quick and Flupke comic strip and drawing front covers for Le Petit Vingtième , as well as providing illustrations for another of Le Vingtième Siècle 's supplements , Votre " Vingtième " Madame , and undertaking freelance work designing advertisements . In September 1931 , part way through the story 's serialisation , Hergé took a brief holiday in Spain with two friends , and in May 1932 was recalled to military service for two weeks . On 20 July 1932 , Hergé married Germaine Kieckens , who was Wallez 's secretary . Although neither of them were entirely happy with the union , they had been encouraged to do so by Wallez , who demanded that all his staff marry and who personally carried out the wedding ceremony . After a honeymoon in Vianden , Luxembourg , the couple moved into an apartment in the rue Knapen , Schaerbeek .

As he had done with the prior two Adventures , Wallez organised a publicity stunt to mark the culmination of Tintin in America , in which an actor portraying Tintin arrived in Brussels . It proved the most popular yet . In 1932 , the series was collected and published in a single volume by Les Éditions de Petit Vingtième , coinciding with their publication of the first collected volume of Quick and Flupke . A second edition was produced in France by Éditions Ogéo-Cœurs-Vaillants in 1934 , while that same year Casterman published an edition , the first of The Adventures of Tintin that they released . In 1936 , Casterman asked Hergé to add several new colour plates to a reprint of Tintin in America , which he agreed to . They also asked him to replace the cover with one depicting a car chase , but he refused .

In the 1940s , when Hergé 's popularity had increased , he redrew many of the original black-and-white Tintin adventures in colour using the ligne claire ( " clear line " ) drawing style he had developed , so that they visually fitted in with the newer Tintin stories . Tintin in America was reformatted and coloured in 1945 and saw publication in 1946 . Various changes were made in the second edition . Some of the social commentary regarding the poor treatment of Native Americans by the government was toned down . The name of the Native tribe was changed from the Orteils Ficelés ( " Tied Toes " ) to the Pieds Noirs ( " Black Feet " ) . Perhaps because Al Capone 's power had diminished in the intervening years , Hergé depicted Capone 's scarred face in the 1945 version . He removed the reference to Mary Pikeford from the ceremonial dinner scene and deleted two Chinese hoodlums who tried to eat Snowy . References to Belgium were also removed , allowing the story to have a greater international appeal .

When the second version of the story was translated into English by Michael Turner and Leslie Lonsdale-Cooper , they made a number of alterations to the text . For instance , Monsieur Tom Hawake , whose name was a pun on tomahawk , was renamed Mr. Maurice Oyle , and the Slift factory was renamed Grynd Corp. Other changes were made to render the story more culturally understandable to an Anglophone readership ; whereas the factory originally sold its mix of dogs , cats , and rats as hare pâté — a food uncommon in Britain — the English translation rendered the mix as salami . In another instance , garlic , pepper , and salt were added to the mixture in the French version , but this was changed to mustard , pepper , and salt for the English version , again reflecting British culinary tastes . In 1957 , Hergé considered sending Tintin back to North America for another adventure featuring the indigenous people . He decided against it , instead producing Tintin in Tibet . Although Tintin in America and much of Hergé 's earlier work displayed anti-American sentiment , he later grew more favourable to American culture , befriending one of the country 's most prominent artists , Andy Warhol . Hergé himself would first visit the United States in 1971 , accompanied by his second wife Fanny Rodwell , and meet Edgar Red Cloud , the great grandson of the warrior chief Red Cloud . With a letter of recommendation from his friend Father Gall , he was invited to indulge his childhood desire to meet with real " Red Indians " — members of the Oglala Lakota on their Pine Ridge reservation in South Dakota — and take part in a pow wow .

American publishers of Tintin in America were uneasy regarding the scene in which the Blackfoot Natives are forcibly removed from their land . Hergé nevertheless refused to remove it . For the 1973 edition published in the U.S. , the publishers made Hergé remove African-American characters from the book , and redraw them as Caucasians or Hispanics , because they did not want to encourage racial integration among children . That same year , the original black-and-white version was republished in a French-language collected volume with Tintin in the Land of the Soviets and Tintin in the Congo , the first part of the Archives Hergé collection . In 1983 , a facsimile of the original was published by Casterman .

Jean-Marc and Randy Lofficier opined that Hergé had made " another leap forward " with Tintin in America , noting that while it still " rambles on " , it is " more tightly plotted " than its predecessors . They believed that the illustrations showed " marked progress " and that for the first time , several of the frames could be seen as " individual pieces of art " . Believing that it was the first work with the " intangible epic quality " they thought characterised The Adventures of Tintin , they awarded it two out of five stars . They considered Bobby Smiles to be " the first great villain " of the series , and also thought that an incompetent hotel detective featured in the comic was an anticipation of Thomson and Thompson , while another character , the drunken sheriff , anticipated Captain Haddock . The Lofficiers believed that Hergé had successfully synthesised all of the " classic American myths " into a single narrative that " withstands comparison with the vision of America " presented in Gustave Le Rouge and Gustave Guitton 's La Conspiration Des Milliardaires ( The Billionaires ' Conspiracy ) . They were of the opinion that Hergé 's depiction of the exploitation of Native Americans was an " astonishing piece of narrative " .

Harry Thompson considered the story to be " little more than a tourist ramble " across the U.S. , describing it as only " marginally more sophisticated " than its predecessors . He nevertheless thought that it contained many indicators of " greater things " , remarking that Hergé 's sympathy for the Natives was " a revolutionary attitude " for 1931 . Thompson also opined that the book 's " highlight " was on page 29 of the 1945 version , in which oil is discovered on Native land , following which they are cleared off by the U.S. army , and a complete city is constructed on the site within 24 hours . Biographer Benoît Peeters praised the strip 's illustrations , feeling that they exhibited " a quality of lightness " and showed that Hergé was fascinated by the United States despite the anti-Americanism of his milieu . He nevertheless considered it " in the same mode " as the earlier Adventures , calling it " a collection of clichés and snapshots of well-known places " . Elsewhere , Peeters commented that throughout the story , Tintin rushes around the country seeing as much as possible , likening him to the stereotypical American tourist .

Hergé biographer Pierre Assouline believed Tintin in America to be " more developed and detailed " than the prior Adventures , representing the cartoonist 's " greatest success " in a " long time " . Opining that the illustrations were " superior " due to Hergé 's accumulated experience , he nevertheless criticised instances where the story exhibited directional problems ; for instance , in one scene , Tintin enters the underground tunnel , but Assouline notes that while he is supposed to be travelling downward , he is instead depicted climbing up stairs . Such directional problems were also criticised by Michael Farr , who nevertheless thought the story " action-packed " , with a more developed sense of satire and therefore greater depth than Soviets or Congo . He considered the depiction of Tintin climbing along the ledge of the skyscraper on page 10 to be " one of the most remarkable " illustrations in the entire series , inducing a sense of vertigo in the reader . He also opined that the depiction of the Blackfoot Natives being forced from their land was the " strongest political statement " in the series , illustrating that Hergé had " an acute political conscience " and was not the advocate of racial superiority that he has been accused of being . Comparing the 1932 and 1945 versions of the comic , Farr believed that the latter was technically superior , but had lost the " freshness " of the original .

Literary critic Jean-Marie Apostolidès of Stanford University thought that in Tintin in America , Hergé had intentionally depicted the wealthy industrialists as being very similar to the gangsters . He noted that this negative portrayal of capitalists continued into later Adventures of Tintin with characters such as Basil Barazov in The Broken Ear . He considered this indicative of " a more ambivalent stance " to the right-wing agenda that Hergé had formerly adhered to . Another literary critic , Tom McCarthy , concurred , believing that Tintin in America exhibited Hergé 's " left-wing counter tendency " through attacking the racism and capitalist mass production of the U.S. McCarthy believed that the work exposed social and political process as a " mere charade " , much as Hergé had previously done in Tintin in the Land of the Soviets .

Tintin in America was adapted into a 1991 episode of The Adventures of Tintin television series by French studio Ellipse and Canadian animation company Nelvana . Directed by Stéphane Bernasconi , the character of Tintin was voiced by Thierry Wermuth . In 2002 , French artist Jochen Gerner published a socio-political satire based on Tintin in America titled TNT en Amérique . It consisted of a replica of Hergé 's book with most of the images blocked out with black ink ; the only images left visible are those depicting violence , commerce , or divinity . When interviewed as to this project , Gerner stated that his pervasive use of black was a reference to " the censure , to the night , the obscurity ( the evil ) , the mystery of things not entirely revealed " .

The Romney Literary Society ( also known as the Literary Society of Romney ) existed from January 30 , 1819 , to February 15 , 1886 , in Romney , West Virginia . Established as the Polemic Society of Romney , it became the first organization of its kind in the present-day state of West Virginia , and one of the first in the United States . The society was founded by nine prominent men of Romney with the objectives of advancing literature and science , purchasing and maintaining a library , and improving educational opportunities . The society debated an extensive range of scientific and social topics , often violating its own rules which banned religious and political subjects . Even though its membership was relatively small , its debates and activities were frequently discussed throughout the Potomac Highlands region , and the organization greatly influenced trends of thought in the Romney community and surrounding areas . The society 's library began in 1819 with the acquisition of two books ; by 1861 , it had grown to contain approximately 3,000 volumes on subjects such as literature , science , history , and art . The organization also sought to establish an institution for " the higher education of the youth of the community . " In 1820 , as a result of this initiative , the teaching of the classics was introduced into the curriculum of Romney Academy , thus making the institution the first school of higher education in the Eastern Panhandle . In 1846 , the society constructed a building which housed the Romney Classical Institute and its library , both of which fell under the society 's supervision . The institute was administered by noted Presbyterian Reverend William Henry Foote . Following a dispute with the society , Foote founded a rival school in Romney , known as the Potomac Seminary , in 1850 .

The Romney Literary Society and the Romney Classical Institute continued to grow in influence until the onset of the American Civil War in 1861 . The contents of the society 's library were plundered by Union Army forces , and only 400 of the library 's volumes could be recovered following the war 's end in 1865 . Reorganized in 1869 , the society took a leading role in Romney 's civil development during Reconstruction . Between 1869 and 1870 , it completed construction of Literary Hall , where the society held meetings and reassembled its library . The organization used its influence to secure the West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind for the town of Romney , and offered the school its former Romney Classical Institute campus . The schools opened on September 29 , 1870 . Interest in the society waned during its final years , and its last recorded meeting was held in 1886 .

The Romney Literary Society was organized on January 30 , 1819 , by nine prominent men of Romney in the office of Dr. John Temple , a reputable physician in the community . The society was formed with the purpose " of taking into consideration the propriety of financing a Society , having for its object the advancement of Literature and Science , the purchase of a Library by and for the use of its members ; and their further improvement by discussing before the Society such questions as shall be selected under its directors . " With its establishment , the Romney Literary Society became the first organization of its kind in the present-day state of West Virginia , and one of the first in the United States . The nine men at the society 's first meeting were Thomas Blair , David Gibson , James P. Jack , Samuel Kercheval , Jr . , Nathaniel Kuykendall , Charles T. Magill , James M. Stephens , John Temple , and William C. Wodrow . According to historian Hu Maxwell , these men elected Kuykendall as chairman and Magill as secretary of a committee which was charged with the drafting of a constitution for the society .

On February 4 , 1819 , the committee delivered its draft of the constitution and the society adopted the document , which provided that the organization should be known as the Polemic Society of Romney . The society 's constitution also specified that the officers should consist of a president , secretary , and treasurer , each of whom was to be selected by a ballot vote . The constitution further stipulated that each member was to pay dues of 50 cents per month , and that the society had the authority to levy further financial contributions from its members as it deemed necessary . The funds collected were to cover the society 's operating costs , and the remaining funds were to be used in purchasing books for the library . Under the constitution , the society 's meetings were to be held weekly . Following each meeting 's business session , a debate or other literary exercises were to be held consisting of topics of general interest of the members . No political or religious discussions were to take place during the debates unless they were of an abstract nature or in general terms . Profane language and " spirituous liquors " were also forbidden from the society 's meetings , with each offense being punishable with a fine of one dollar . The society 's first elected officers were Charles T. Magill as president , William C. Wodrow as secretary , and John Temple as treasurer .

The society 's next meeting was held on February 13 , 1819 in the old Hampshire County Courthouse , where the first matter for debate was " Resolved : That a representative should be governed by instructions from his constituents . " Following the debate , the decision was rendered in favor of the affirmative . The second meeting , which was held on February 19 of that year at the Romney Academy , debated the question , " Is an education acquired at the public school or [ is ] a private tutor to be preferred ? " and the society favored the public school . At this second meeting , the first money appropriated by the society was paid to the doorkeeper for a sum of 25 cents . Also at this second meeting , the treasurer was instructed to purchase a book for use by the secretary , three candlesticks , one pair of snuffers , and three pounds of candles . On February 26 , the society argued the question , " Is a system of banking advantageous to a community ? " The debate ended under the decision that a system of banking was advantageous . The following meeting on March 6 debated a question far more psychological in nature , which was an abstract question of religion : " Can the human mind , by its own reflection , arrive at the conclusion that the soul is immortal ? " The society decided in the negative . The society also debated and decided in the negative the question , " Is a protective tariff detrimental to the interests of the country ? "

One of the society 's more spirited debates occurred in May 1822 over the question , " Is it to the interest of the people of Hampshire to encourage the canalling of the Potomac ? " While no records of the arguments survive , the society decided that the canalling of the Potomac River would be detrimental to the interests of Hampshire County . The debate took place before the construction of the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal along the Maryland shore of the Potomac River to the north of Hampshire County . The society 's consensus was that a canal on the Potomac would destroy the business of teamsters who hauled merchandise from the east along the Northwestern Turnpike . For this reason , the society and local population of Romney also objected to the construction of the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad . To ensure confidentiality , the society passed a bylaw that enforced a fine of five dollars on any member who published either his own or another member 's speeches delivered before the society . As a result of this bylaw , no speeches were ever published . The society adopted a new constitution in 1824 .

Over the first ten years of the society 's existence , the organization grew in membership and held meetings at least twice a month , and usually four times a month . The society debated an extensive range of subjects including scientific , religious , political , and social topics , often violating the constitution 's rules banning religious and political subjects . The society 's debates were often acrimonious and regularly spilled beyond the confines of the meetings and into the community . Between January 30 , 1819 and January 22 , 1830 , the society 's membership rolls reached 52 members ; although as few as 15 members attended the bimonthly meetings , and no more than 17 members were ever present at a meeting . Even though the Romney Literary Society 's membership was relatively small , its debates and activities were frequently discussed throughout the Potomac Highlands region . For this reason , the society greatly influenced trends of thought in the Romney community and surrounding areas . No records of the society 's proceedings , works , or membership enrollments spanning the period between January 22 , 1830 and 1861 are extant . During this period , the society counted among its members Angus William McDonald , John Baker White , and Robert White .

In order to fulfill one of its primary purposes of establishing a library for its members , the Romney Literary Society gradually began to acquire volumes for such a use . The society 's library began with the April 23 , 1819 appropriation for the purchase of two books : Plutarch 's Parallel Lives and Emer de Vattel 's The Law of Nations . On July 2 , 1819 , the balance of available funds in the treasurer 's account was two dollars and forty-six cents , but by October 23 , there were sufficient funds to purchase the following volumes : Charles Rollin 's Ancient History , Lewis ' Roman History , and William Robertson 's History of the Reign of Charles the Fifth . No more volumes were purchased until the end of 1820 , when the society acquired the works of Livy , Tacitus , and John Marshall 's Life of Washington . Three months later , the society purchased a bookcase for its growing collection . In April 1821 , the society further expanded its library with the acquisitions of Nathaniel Hooke 's Roman History , from the Building of Rome to the Ruin of the Commonwealth , the works of Herodotus , Travels in Greece , Modern Europe , David Ramsay 's History of the United States , and the works of Benjamin Franklin .

In 1821 , the Virginia General Assembly passed an act incorporating the organization as the " Library Society of Romney . " The society found the assembly 's charter unsatisfactory , as it specified several changes to the organization that the society had not asked for , including the change in its name . The members regarded their society as a " literary " society and not a " library " one . The society requested that the assembly amend its charter , and after several delays and debates over the new charter , the Virginia General Assembly passed a new act on February 4 , 1823 , in which the organization was rebranded as " The Literary Society of Romney . " The society maintained this long form name throughout the duration of its existence , although it was locally known as the " Romney Literary Society . " Within the span of ten years , the society 's small library grew to contain approximately 3,000 volumes on literature , science , history , and art . These were bound in calfskin and stamped with the seal of the society . The minutes from the society 's bimonthly meetings listed the books purchased and the methods by which they were acquired . According to the Federal Writers ' Project in their Historic Romney 1762 – 1937 ( 1937 ) , the book selections and their acquisition " indicate that these men possessed real literary judgment and business ability . "

By 1831 , Romney Academy had outgrown its facilities in the old stone school building behind the Hampshire County Courthouse . To remedy this , the society instituted a campaign to raise funds for a new school building . On January 6 , 1832 , the Virginia General Assembly authorized the society to raise an endowment of $ 20,000 in a lottery for educational purposes . Following a ten-year lapse , the society made arrangements with James Gregory of Jersey City and Daniel McIntyre of Philadelphia to finance a lottery " for raising a sum of money not exceeding twenty thousand dollars , for the purpose of erecting a suitable building for their accommodation , the purchase of library and Philosophical apparatus . " The lottery was to be conducted over a period of ten years , and sums of $ 750 , $ 1,000 , and $ 1,500 were to be raised in semiannual installments . The society was successful in raising funds , and in 1845 the society solicited bids for the construction of a new building to house both the academy , the society , and the society 's library . The society also used the lottery funds to pay for books for the academy .

On February 12 , 1844 , the Virginia General Assembly passed an act authorizing the society to denote the balance of the moneys raised by the lottery to the Romney Academy . The assembly further enacted another legislative act on December 12 , 1846 , authorizing the Romney Literary Society to " establish at or near the town of Romney a Seminary of Learning for the instruction of youth in various branches of science and literature ; and the Society map appropriate to the same such portion of the property which it now has or may acquire , as it may deem expedient . " That same year , a new brick neoclassical building was constructed east of Romney , and the society , its library , and Romney Academy relocated to the new facility . The second story of the new building was utilized by the society , with one hall for meetings and the other hall for the society 's library . According to Maxwell , " few schools in the state of Virginia at that time had access to better libraries . " The new institute building and grounds cost the society about $ 8,000 . Following its move to the new building , the academy was reorganized as the Romney Classical Institute and its activities fell under the supervision of the society . The institute was operated under the principalship of Foote from 1846 until 1849 .

In 1849 , the society presented a new code and system of bylaws for the government of the Romney Classical Institute , which reserved to the society the power to appoint assistant teachers , fix the amount of salaries , and provide the conditions and manners of payment and reimbursement . Foote differed with the society over these matters , and he ultimately declined to accept the new bylaws and resigned his leadership position in October 1849 ; in 1850 , he established a rival institution known as the Potomac Seminary . Rather than falling under the patronage of the society , Foote 's new institution fell under the control of the Presbyterian church . Following Foote 's departure , the society selected Professor E. J. Meany to head the Romney Classical Institute . Despite the schism , the society also provided financial support from the lottery to the Potomac Seminary . According to a " catalogue of the members and library " published on June 1 , 1849 , there were 20 registered members on the rolls who paid $ 3 each per year to the society 's library fund ; there were also eight library members who were admitted under certain regulations of the society and who paid the same fees . Members who had use of the library were provided keys and were allowed access to the library at any time . The town 's clergymen and the principal of the Romney Classical Institute were the only non-members who were extended privileges to the library . The 1849 " catalogue " listed Alfred P. White as the society 's librarian and E. J. Meany remained the principal of the institute . After 1853 , the society possessed a permanent fund of $ 12,000 , which yielded $ 720 per year , one half of which was devoted to the support of the Romney Classical Institute .

The Romney Literary Society and the Romney Classical Institute flourished and continued to grow in importance and influence until the onset of the American Civil War in 1861 . Following the war 's outbreak , many of the society 's members and the institute 's professors and older students joined the Confederate States Army and marched to war . During the war , the society suffered extensive losses . The Romney Classical Institute building and its library were considered legitimate plunder by Union Army forces . The society 's library was emptied and three-fourths of its volumes were either scattered or destroyed . The most valuable of these volumes were never recovered following the war 's end . Its records of proceedings between 1830 and 1861 , the period during which the society engaged in most of its notable literary and philanthropic works , were also destroyed during the war . Following the war 's end , only 400 out of the library 's nearly 3,000 volumes could be recovered , with only 200 of those books remaining on the library 's shelves . Between 10 and 20 of the library 's recovered volumes only contained three to four of their original books . The value of the recovered volumes was degraded , as many were damaged or broken . The society members that returned home to Romney were too war-weary to revive the society when they discovered the ruins of the Romney Classical Institute and its library , which had been an expensive endeavor to accumulate and took almost a half-century of labor to amass . The Romney Classical Institute was not restored and was in effect disestablished on account of the war .

Following the war , the residents of Romney set about repairing public buildings and reestablishing the town 's antebellum institutions , including the Romney Literary Society . The society remained on a hiatus until May 15 , 1869 when a meeting was held by nine members , as only nine original members had responded to the call for reorganization . These nine members tasked with rebuilding the society were James L. Armstrong , David Entler , William Harper , John C. Heiskell , Andrew Wodrow Kercheval , Samuel R. Lupton , James Parsons , Alfred P. White , and Robert White . These men sought to collect what remained of the library 's books and engaged in a campaign to recruit new members , which resulted in the enrollment of 20 younger men over a period of a few years . Many of the men who had been members in 1861 had died during the war , and the recruitment of new members was essential to the revival of the society . Among the new members elected between 1869 and 1886 were John Collins Covell , Samuel Lightfoot Flournoy , Henry Bell Gilkeson , Howard Hille Johnson , and Christian Streit White . The society , with renewed vigor , took a lead role in Romney 's civil development during the Reconstruction Era .

Between 1869 and 1870 , the society completed construction of a new two-story brick building on Lot 56 at the corner of West Main and North High Streets known as Literary Hall , where it could hold its meetings and reassemble the remaining volumes from its original library . Literary Hall was built upon the former location of the shuttered Bank of the South Branch of the Potomac . In addition to the 400 volumes that were initially recovered following the war , the society recovered several more volumes from its original library , and set about purchasing new books ; the restored library was reopened with about 700 volumes .

Around the time of the society 's reorganization in 1869 , the state of West Virginia considered the establishment of a school for the deaf and the blind . The society resolved to secure the new state institution for Romney . On April 12 , 1870 , the society passed a resolution by which the members agreed to deed , free of cost , the buildings and grounds of the Romney Classical Institute . On April 20 , 1870 , the society sent Andrew Wodrow Kercheval and Robert White as representatives to the then-state capital Wheeling to present their formal offer of " the grounds and buildings of the Romney Classical Institute ... to the Board of Regents , free of debt , and in good repair " on the condition that the proposed school be located in Romney . Clarksburg and Parkersburg also made offers of potential campuses to the state . The offer was made to the Board of Regents of the West Virginia Institute for the Deaf , Dumb , and Blind , as it was then known , and the society 's proposal was accepted by the regents after a brief period of deliberation . The society 's offer was the only one that included a building upon the grounds .

It was discovered by the society that in order to follow through with their proposition , it was necessary to raise more than $ 1,000 , which was ostensibly a difficult task during the Reconstruction Era in Romney . On July 11 , 1870 , the Board of Regents passed a resolution necessitating the subscription of between $ 1,200 and $ 1,300 to facilitate the transaction . One hundred and eighteen individuals and firms responded to the board 's request with a total subscription of $ 1,383.60 . To make good on its offer , the society also made an appropriation of $ 320 on July 11 for the purpose of repairing and restoring the former Romney Classical Institute and grounds so that they were satisfactory before they were transferred to the regents . Shortly thereafter , the old institute building and 15 acres ( 6.1 ha ) of property were formally transferred to the state of West Virginia . On September 29 , 1870 , the institute , which was later known as the West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind , opened its doors in the old Romney Classical Institute building with 25 deaf and five blind students . Following its disestablishment in 1916 , the adjacent Potomac Academy ( formerly Potomac Seminary ) grounds were also incorporated into the campus of the Schools for the Deaf and Blind .

During a period of ten years spanning from 1870 to 1880 , much of Romney 's intellectual life centered on Literary Hall . During this time , the society met only occasionally and there were no records of meetings between March 1872 and April 1878 . The post-war period of revival was short-lived , as the death of the older members caused interest in the society to wane . The society 's meetings occurred less often , and the last recorded meeting of the society was held on February 15 , 1886 . During the society 's second existence , Literary Hall was used as a meeting space by the Freemasons and the Order of the Eastern Star , and the organizations continued to inhabit the hall following the society 's disestablishment until its 1974 purchase by attorney Ralph Haines . Also a local historian , Haines restored Literary Hall and used it as his law office and museum . Literary Hall was listed on the National Register of Historic Places on May 29 , 1979 and , as of 2004 , it is occasionally open to the public . The society 's remaining records , dating as early as 1819 , remain on display there .

In describing the efforts of the Romney Literary Society , historian Hu Maxwell , in his History of Hampshire County , West Virginia From Its Earliest Settlement to the Present ( 1897 ) , stated that " the work accomplished by these few energetic citizens of Romney is astonishing . " Maxwell further asserted , " No other one thing in the history of the town has had such lasting results for good . " The society left many lasting impacts upon the town of Romney during its existence and beyond , which included the foundation of a library ; the academic and financial support and patronage of the Romney Academy , Romney Classical Institute , and the Potomac Seminary ; the civic leadership during the Reconstruction Era ; and the influence and assistance in securing the West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind . According to Maxwell , without the efforts of the society , the West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind could not have been secured for Romney , and would have likely been located elsewhere in the state .

William Allen " Bill " Stein ( born January 21 , 1947 in Battle Creek , Michigan ) is a retired professional baseball player and manager . His playing career spanned 17 seasons , 14 of which were spent in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) with the St. Louis Cardinals ( 1972 – 73 ) , the Chicago White Sox ( 1974 – 76 ) , the Seattle Mariners ( 1977 – 1980 ) , and the Texas Rangers ( 1981 – 85 ) . Over his career in the majors Stein batted .267 with 122 doubles , 18 triples , 44 home runs , and 311 runs batted in ( RBIs ) in 959 games played . Stein played numerous fielding positions over his major league career , including third base , second base , first base , left field , right field , and shortstop . He also spent significant time as a pinch hitter .

Stein was drafted out of Southern Illinois University during the 1969 Major League Baseball draft by the St. Louis Cardinals . He made his professional debut that season in their minor league organization . On September 6 , 1972 , Stein made his MLB debut with the Cardinals . During the 1973 season , St. Louis traded him to the California Angels , who just a few months later , traded him to the Chicago White Sox . Stein was selected by the Seattle Mariners from the White Sox in the 1976 Major League Baseball expansion draft . He came to his final team , the Texas Rangers , by way of free agency . After his playing career , Stein managed in the New York Mets minor league organization for four seasons ( 1988 – 1991 ) . He managed the non-affiliated Bend Bucks in 1991 , and joined the Clinton Giants in 1992 , who were minor league affiliates of the San Francisco Giants at the time . He also managed the independent league Tyler WildCatters in 1994 .

Stein was born on January 21 , 1947 , in Battle Creek , Michigan . Stein attended Brevard Community College when he was drafted by the Baltimore Orioles during the 33rd round of the 1968 Major League Baseball draft . Stein did not sign with the Orioles . He began attending Southern Illinois University in 1969 . As a member of the school 's baseball team , he batted .396 and was named an All-American by the American Baseball Coaches Association . Stein was drafted by the St. Louis Cardinals during the fourth round of the 1969 Major League Baseball draft .

In 1969 , Stein began his professional baseball career in the St. Louis Cardinals minor league organization . The Cardinals assigned him to the Tulsa Oilers , who were their Triple-A affiliates at the time . With the Oilers , Stein batted .295 with 24 runs scored , 54 hits , 11 doubles , five triples , one home run , and 20 runs batted in ( RBIs ) in 62 games played . Defensively , Stein played 31 games at second base , 14 games at third base , and five games at shortstop . During the 1970 season , the Cardinals assigned Stein to the Double-A level to play with the Arkansas Travelers of the Texas League . In 114 games played that year , he batted .289 with 124 hits , 21 doubles , two triples , and eight home runs . In the field , Stein played second base and outfield . In 1971 , Stein was promoted to the Triple-A level . He spent the entire season with the Tulsa Oilers , where he batted .272 with 50 runs scored , 106 hits , 106 hits , 22 doubles , four triples , eight home runs , and 67 RBIs in 103 games played . Stein pitched a game that season , after Tulsa 's starting pitcher was ejected from the game after throwing the ball at the umpire . In six innings , he gave-up eight hits , and three runs ( all earned ) . He played the majority of the season in the outfield , but also spent limited time at third base , first base , and shortstop .

To start the 1972 season , Stein was a member of the Triple-A Tulsa Oilers . With Tulsa that year , he batted .278 with 100 hits , 26 doubles , four triples , five home runs , and 36 RBIs in 103 games played . Stein was a September call-up for the St. Louis cardinals that year . He made his debut in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) on September 6 , 1972 , against the Philadelphia Phillies . He got his first hit in that game , which was a home run in the ninth inning . He played 14 games in the majors that year , batting .314 with two runs scored , 11 hits , one triple , two home runs , and three RBIs . Defensively in the majors , he was positioned at third base , left field , and right field . During spring training in 1973 , the Sarasota Herald-Tribune labeled Stein as the Cardinals candidate for pinch hitting off the bench . He made the Cardinals Opening Day roster that year . He made his season debut on April 6 as a pinch hitter , going hitless in one at-bat against the Pittsburgh Pirates . His first hit of the season came on April 17 , against the Pirates . In August , Stein was sent down to the minor leagues and was replaced on the Cardinals major league roster by outfielder Héctor Cruz . In the minors , he played with the Triple-A Tulsa Oilers , where he batted .289 with 23 hits , two doubles , and one triple in 21 games played . While in the majors that season , Stein compiled a .218 batting average with four runs scored , 12 hits , two doubles , and two RBIs in 32 games played . On defense with the Cardinals , he played right field , left field , third base , and first base .

On September 25 , Stein was traded by the St. Louis Cardinals to the California Angels in exchange for Jerry DaVanon . California then traded Stein to the Chicago White Sox on April 3 , 1974 , before he made an appearance in the Angels organization . In return , the White Sox sent Steve Blateric to California . Stein started the 1974 season in the White Sox minor league system with the Triple-A Iowa Oaks . In 135 games with Iowa , he batted .326 with 107 runs scored , 178 hits , 32 doubles , eight triples , 16 home runs , and 76 RBIs . Stein led the American Association in hits ; was second in runs scored , plate appearances ( 594 ) , at-bats ( 554 ) , and doubles ; and was tied for second in triples . He was called up by Chicago in September . Stein made his season debut on September 13 , against the California Angels , getting no hits in four at-bats . His first hit of the season came the day after , against California . In the majors that year , Stein batted .276 with five runs scored , 12 hits , one double , and five RBIs in 13 games played .

Stein spent his first full season in the majors during the 1975 season . His season debut came on April 16 , against the Texas Rangers , where in one at-bat he went hitless . In June , Stein was named the starting third baseman after Bill Melton , who was Chicago 's regular third baseman , was benched for poor hitting . Stein also played back-up for second baseman Jorge Orta over the season . On July 20 , in the second game of a doubleheader against the Milwaukee Brewers , Stein hit his first career grand slam . On the season , Stein batted .270 with 23 runs scored , 61 hits , seven doubles , one triple , three home runs , and 21 RBIs in 76 games played . In the field , he played 28 games at second base , 24 games at second base , and one game in left field . Stein also played 18 games that year at the designated hitter spot in the lineup . Stein played his final season with the Chicago White Sox in 1976 . On August 17 , in the first game of a doubleheader against the Boston Red Sox , he hit a game-winning single in the ninth inning to score Pat Kelly . In August , United Press International noted that it was the first time in his major leaue career that Stein was getting a chance to start regularly . During the season , he compiled a .268 batting average with 32 runs scored , 105 hits , 15 doubles , two triples , four home runs , and 36 RBIs in 117 games played . Stien played 58 games at second base , 58 games at third base , one game at first base , one game in right field , and one game at shortstop . He was also the designated hitter in one game during that season .

During the 1976 Major League Baseball expansion draft , Stein was selected by the Seattle Mariners , who took him with their third pick in the draft . Stein stated he was " glad " that the Mariners drafted him , because he did not like playing at Comiskey Park , the home of his previous team , the Chicago White Sox . He was profiled by the Associated Press during spring training in 1977 , and was interviewed about his new team and his unique versatility in the field . Stein mentioned to the reporter that although he had played a wide verity of positions in the past , he hoped he would get a chance to be the Mariners starting third baseman . In a win against the Boston Red Sox on May 3 , Stein hit two home runs in the same game . In June , Stein commented on how he liked starting every day at third base for the Mariners . The Mariners manager , Darrell Johnson , Praised Stein for playing " good ball " with Seattle . On July 8 , in a game against the Minnesota Twins , Stein had another two-home run performance , his second of the season . In early-September , Stein got hit in the shoulder by a baseball , which was later revealed to have caused a hairline fracture . With the Mariners that year , he batted .259 with 53 runs scored , 144 hits , 26 doubles , five triples , 13 home runs , and 67 RBIs in 151 games played . Defensively , the vast majority of his games ( 147 ) were played at third base , but he also played limited time at shortstop . He led the American League in putouts by a third baseman with 146 . Stein was also fifth in the league in defensive games at third base .

Before the start of the 1978 season , Stein re-signed with the Seattle Mariners . His contract meant he was now signed through the 1980 season . In May 1978 , he bruised his left hand , which caused him to miss some playing time . On August 25 , he broke up Dennis Martínez 's potential no-hitter in the seventh inning of a game against the Baltimore Orioles . On August 28 , in a game against the Boston Red Sox , Stein had a season-high four hits . On the season , he batted .261 with 41 runs scored , 105 hits , 24 doubles , four triples , four home runs , and 37 RBIs in 114 games played . In the field , Stein played 67 games at third base , 17 games at second base , and three games at shortstop . His 24 errors at third base was second in the American League . Early into the 1979 season , Stein was placed on the disabled list after suffering a rib injury . Charlie Beamon , Jr. was called up from the minor leagues to replace Stein during his injury . In late June , the Mariners activated Stein from the disabled list . By the time he had returned , the Mariners had already positioned Dan Meyer at his position , so Stein filled in at second base during his first game back . That year , Stein batted .248 with 28 runs scored , 62 hits , nine doubles , two triples , seven home runs , and 27 RBIs in 88 games played . As a fielder , he played 67 games at third base , 17 games at second base , and three games at shortstop .

Stein 's final season with the Seattle Mariners would come in 1980 . On April 29 , against the Minnesota Twins , Stein had a season high four hit game . He matched that high on July 26 , against the Toronto Blue Jays . On July 28 , Stein broke up a no-hit bid by Cleveland Indians pitcher Len Barker . In his final season with the Mariners , Stein batted .268 with 16 runs scored , 53 hits , five doubles , one triple , five home runs , and 27 RBIs in 67 games played . Defensively , he played 34 games at third base , 14 games at second base , and eight games at first base . He also played five games that season as Seattle 's designated hitter .

In December 1980 , Stein was signed as a free agent by the Texas Rangers . Stein made his Rangers debut on April 14 , 1981 , against the Cleveland Indians . In that game , he got one hit in two at-bats . In May , Stein set an American League record by recording seven consecutive pinch hits . Through June , Stein had a .441 batting average . On the season , Stein batted .330 with 21 runs scored , 38 hits , six doubles , two home runs , and 22 RBIs in 53 games played . In the field , he played 20 games at first base , seven games at third base , seven games in left field , three games at second base , one game in right field , and one game at shortstop . On April 16 , 1982 , in a game against the Milwaukee Brewers , Stein hit a game-winning double in the top of the ninth inning . In June , while playing against his former team , the Seattle Mariners , Stein praised their pitching staff . In 85 games that year , Stein batted .239 , the lowest average of his career since the 1972 season where he played with the St. Louis Cardinals . He also compiled 14 runs scored , 44 hits , eight doubles , one home run , and 16 RBIs . In the field , he played 34 games at second base , 28 games at third base , six games at shortstop , two games at first base , and one game in left field . Stein also was the designated hitter during three games .

In March 1983 , Stein praised the Texas Rangers new manager , Doug Rader , for working on the game in a " serious " way . On May 18 , in a game against the Cleveland Indians , Stein was brought in as a pinch hitter during the 14th inning , and proceeded to get the game-winning hit for the Rangers . With Texas that year , he batted .310 with 21 runs scored , 72 hits , 15 doubles , one triple , two home runs , and 33 RBIs in 78 games played . Stein played the majority of his games at second base , but also played first base and third base . He was used as the Rangers designated hitter in six contests that year . After the season , Stein spoke out against a transaction that the Rangers made , trading Jim Sundberg to the Milwaukee Brewers , calling him a " mainstay of the organization " . In 1984 , the Associated Press stated that Stein was one of the American League 's best pinch hitters . Early into the season , he injured his wrist , which caused him to miss some playing time . In mid-June , the Rangers activated him from the disabled list . On the season , Stein batted .279 with three runs scored , 12 hits , one double and three RBIs in 27 games played . Stein played 11 games at second base , three games at first base , and three games at third base . He also spent four games as the Rangers designated hitter .

Before the 1985 season , it was announced that the Texas Rangers had traded Stein to the Pittsburgh Pirates in exchange for a player to be named later , pending a physical . The Pirates later canceled the trade after team doctors discovered a " probable disc problem " in his back . Rumors then circulated that it was possible that Steins ' career would be ended by the injury . However , Stein did play 44 games with the Rangers that season , batting .253 with five runs scored , 20 hits , three doubles , one triple , one home run , and 12 RBIs . He played 11 games at third base , eight games at first base , three games at second base , and three games in right field . Stein was the team 's designated hitter in six games that year . In his final season in the majors , he earned a salary of $ 250,000 ( $ 550,046 inflation adjusted ) . At the end of the season , Texas announced that it would not re-sign Stein . Through an agent , Stein commented that if he could not play for Texas in the upcoming season , he would retire .

In 1987 , Stein coached the Rockledge High School baseball team , leading them a district title with a 17 – 11 record . Stein was hired as the manager of the Class A-Short Season Little Falls Mets of the New York – Penn League in 1988 . Little Falls were minor league affiliates of the New York Mets . In his first professional season as a manager , Stein led Little Falls to a 39 – 36 record . Stein commented that when he became a manager it was difficult to learn pitching after all the years of being a position player . In 1989 , the New York Mets fired Butch Hobson , the manager of the Class-A Columbia Mets , and promoted Stein to that position . At the helm of Colombia that year , Stein led them to a 73 – 67 record . He also served as a player-coach with the Orlando Juice of the Senior Professional Baseball Association in 1989 . Stein continued to manage the Columbia Mets in 1990 , leading them to an 83 – 60 record . The Mets had the best record in the South Atlantic League that season . In 1991 , Stein was hired to be the manager of the Bend Bucks of the Northwest League . The non-affiliated Bucks had a record of 30 – 46 with Stein as the manager . He was hired to be the manager of the Clinton Giants in 1992 . Clinton was the Class-A affiliate of the San Francisco Giants at the time . Stein led Clinton to a 59 – 79 record that year . After considering taking a year off of baseball in 1994 , Stein eventually accepted the managerial position with the independent league Tyler WildCatters .

Ranavalona I ( born Rabodoandrianampoinimerina ; 1778 – August 16 , 1861 ) , also known as Ramavo and Ranavalo-Manjaka I , was sovereign of the Kingdom of Madagascar from 1828 to 1861 . After positioning herself as queen following the death of her young husband and second cousin , Radama I , Ranavalona pursued a policy of isolationism and self-sufficiency , reducing economic and political ties with European powers , repelling a French attack on the coastal town of Foulpointe , and taking vigorous measures to eradicate the small but growing Malagasy Christian movement initiated under Radama I by members of the London Missionary Society . She made heavy use of the traditional practice of fanompoana ( forced labor as tax payment ) to complete public works projects and develop a standing army of between 20,000 and 30,000 Merina soldiers , whom she deployed to pacify outlying regions of the island and further expand the realm . The combination of regular warfare , disease , difficult forced labor and harsh measures of justice resulted in a high mortality rate among soldiers and civilians alike during her 33-year reign . Although greatly obstructed by Ranavalona 's policies , French and British political interests in Madagascar remained undiminished . Divisions between traditionalist and pro-European factions at the queen 's court created opportunities that European intermediaries exploited in an attempt to hasten the succession of Ranavalona 's son , Radama II . The young prince disagreed with many of his mother 's policies and was amenable to French proposals for the exploitation of the island 's resources , as expressed in the Lambert Charter he concluded with a French representative in 1855 . These plans were never successful , however , and Radama II was not to take the throne until 1861 , when Ranavalona died aged 83 .

Princess Ramavo was born in 1778 at the royal residence at Ambatomanoina , about 16 kilometers ( 10 mi ) east of Antananarivo , to Prince Andriantsalamanjaka and Princess Rabodonandriantompo . When Ramavo was still a young girl , her father alerted King Andrianampoinimerina ( 1787 – 1810 ) to an assassination plot planned by Andrianjafy , the king 's uncle , whom Andrianampoinimerina had forced from the throne at the royal city of Ambohimanga . In return for saving his life , Andrianampoinimerina betrothed Ramavo to his son , Prince Radama , whom the king designated as his heir . He furthermore declared that any child from this union would be first in the line of succession after Radama . Despite her elevated rank among the royal wives , Ramavo was not the preferred wife of Radama and did not bear him any children . Upon Andrianampoinimerina 's death in 1810 , Radama succeeded his father as king and followed royal custom by executing a number of potential opponents among Ramavo 's relatives , an act that may have strained their relationship . Unable to find satisfaction in her loveless marriage , the neglected Ramavo and other court ladies spent most days socializing and drinking rum with David Griffiths and his fellow missionaries in Griffiths ' home . These visits established a deep friendship between Ramavo and Griffiths that would endure for three decades .

When Radama died without leaving any descendants on July 27 , 1828 , according to local custom , the rightful heir was Rakotobe , the eldest son of Radama 's eldest sister . An intelligent and amiable young man , Rakotobe was the first pupil to have studied at the first school established by the London Missionary Society in Antananarivo on the grounds of the royal palace . Radama died in the company of two trusted courtiers who were favorable to the succession of Rakotobe . However , they hesitated to report the news of Radama 's death for several days , fearing possible reprisals against them for having been involved in denouncing one of the king 's rivals , whose family had a stake in the succession after Radama . During this time , another courtier , a high-ranking military officer named Andriamamba , discovered the truth and collaborated with other powerful officers - Andriamihaja , Rainijohary and Ravalontsalama - to support Ramavo 's claim to the throne . These officers hid Ramavo and one of her friends in a safe location , then secured the support of several influential power brokers , including judges and the keepers of the sampy ( royal idols ) . The officers then rallied the army behind Ramavo , such that on August 11 , 1828 , when she declared herself the successor to Radama on the pretense that he himself had decreed it , there could be no immediate resistance . Ramavo took the throne name Ranavalona ( " folded " , " kept aside " ) , then followed royal custom by systematically capturing and putting to death her political rivals , including Rakotobe , his family and other members of Radama 's family , much as Radama had done to the queen 's own family upon his succession to the throne . Her coronation ceremony took place on June 12 , 1829 .

By succeeding her husband , Ranavalona became the first female sovereign of the Kingdom of Imerina since its founding in 1540 . Her rise to power occurred in a cultural milieu that favored men over women in the political sphere . In the traditional culture of Imerina , rulers were specially endowed with the power to innovate in circumvention of established norms and customs . Sovereigns often mobilized innovation through the creation of new forms of kinship , the traditional basis of the political order . Women , however , were associated with the household , a rigid kinship unit in opposition to the innovating role and power of the sovereign , and so were not viewed as suited to rule . Although female rulers had once been common among the Vazimba , described in oral histories as the original inhabitants of Madagascar , this tradition ended in the central highlands with the reign of Andriamanelo ( 1540-1575 ) , founder of the Kingdom of Imerina and successor to his Vazimba mother , Queen Rafohy ( 1530-1540 ) .

Ranavalona 's 33-year reign was characterized by her effort to strengthen the domestic authority of the Kingdom of Imerina over subjugated provinces and preserve the political and cultural sovereignty of Madagascar . These policies were enacted in a context of increasing European influence within her kingdom and competing French and English bids for domination over the island . Early in her reign , the queen took incremental steps to distance Madagascar from the purview of European powers , first putting an end to a friendship treaty with Britain , then placing increasing restrictions on the activities of the missionaries of the London Missionary Society , who operated schools where basic education and trade skills were taught in addition to the Christian religion . In 1835 she forbade the practice of Christianity among the Malagasy population , and within a year nearly all foreigners had left her territory . Putting an end to most foreign trade relationships , the queen pursued a policy of self-reliance , made possible through frequent use of the long-standing tradition of fanompoana — forced labor in lieu of tax payments in money or goods . Ranavalona continued the wars of expansion conducted by her predecessor , Radama I , in an effort to extend her realm over the entire island , and imposed strict punishments on those who were judged as having acted in opposition to her will . Due in large part to loss of life throughout the years of military campaigns , high death rates among fanompoana workers , and harsh traditions of justice under her rule , the population of Madagascar is estimated to have declined from around 5 million to 2.5 million between 1833 and 1839 , and from 750,000 to 130,000 between 1829 and 1842 in Imerina . These statistics have contributed to a strongly unfavorable view of Ranavalona 's rule in historical accounts .

In the tradition of many of her royal Merina predecessors , the queen ruled from the royal Rova compound in Antananarivo . Between 1839 and 1842 , Jean Laborde built the queen a new residence called Manjakamiadana , which became the largest structure on the Rova grounds . The residence was made entirely from wood and bore most of the features of a traditional home of the Merina andriana ( aristocratic class ) , including a central pillar ( andry ) to support the roof . In other ways it showcased distinctly European innovations , as it contained three floors entirely surrounded by wooden verandas and incorporated dormers in the shingled roof . The palace would eventually be encased in stone in 1867 by James Cameron of the London Missionary Society during the reign of Ranavalona II . The original wooden palace of Ranavalona and virtually all other structures of the historic Rova compound were destroyed in a 1995 fire , leaving only the stone shell to mark where her palace had once stood . In many respects , Ranavalona 's rule was a continuation of precedent established under Radama I. Both monarchs encouraged the introduction of new technologies and forms of knowledge from abroad , supported the establishment of an industrialized economy , and adopted measures to professionalize the army . Both viewed foreigners with ambivalence , establishing close personal relationships and drawing upon their expertise while enforcing restrictions on their activities to avert destabilizing changes to existing cultural and political systems . In addition , both contributed to the further development of a complex political bureaucracy that enabled the Merina court to govern remote provinces across an island larger than the Netherlands , Belgium and France combined .

Ranavalona maintained the tradition of ruling with the support of advisers drawn largely from the aristocratic class . The queen 's most powerful ministers were also her consorts . Her first chief adviser was a young army officer from Namehana named Andriamihaja , who served as First Minister from 1829 to 1830 . Major-General Andriamihaja most likely fathered the queen 's only son , Prince Rakoto ( later King Radama II ) , who was born eleven months after the death of his official father , King Radama I. In the early years of Ranavalona 's reign , Andriamihaja was the leader of her court 's progressive faction , who favored maintaining the relations with Europe initiated under Radama . The conservative faction was led by the brothers Rainimaharo and Rainiharo , the latter being the official guardian of one of the most powerful royal sampy . These talismans were believed to embody and channel the supernatural powers of the kingship and had played a major role in the spiritual life of the Merina people since at least the 16th century reign of Ralambo . The conservative faction conspired to reduce Andriamahaja 's progressive influence over the queen , and in September 1830 they managed to persuade her while highly intoxicated to sign his death warrant for charges of witchcraft and treason . He was immediately captured in his home and killed .

Following Andriamihaja 's death , the influence of Radama 's old guard of progressives was eclipsed by that of conservative advisers at court , who grew ever closer to the queen , eventually resulting in Ranavalona 's marriage to sampy guardian and conservative figurehead Field Marshal Rainiharo ( also called Ravoninahitriniarivo ) of Ilafy in 1833 . Rainiharo gained initial access to the court through his father , Andriantsilavonandriana , a hova ( commoner ) who had exceptionally been accorded the privilege of joining King Andrianampoinimerina 's inner circle of noble advisers . Field Marshal Rainiharo served as the queen 's First Minister from 1830 to 1832 , then Prime Minister and Commander-in-Chief from 1832 to 1852 . Upon Rainiharo 's death , the queen wed another conservative , Field Marshal Andrianisa ( also called Rainijohary ) , who remained Ranavalona 's husband until her death in 1861 . He served as Prime Minister from 1852 to 1862 before being exiled to the royal city of Ambohimanga for his part in a plot against the queen 's son , Radama II . Traditionally , Merina sovereigns relied on the pronouncement of kabary ( oratory ) in public gatherings to communicate policy and reaffirm the relationship between sovereign and public . Due in part to her lack of experience in public speaking and politics , Ranavalona preferred to direct and inform her subordinates through letters that she dictated to missionary-educated court scribes . She strengthened her relationship with the public through occasional kabary and fulfilled the traditional role of the Merina sovereign as bestower of hasina ( ancestral blessings ) by enacting traditional rituals , including the fandroana ( new year ritual of renewal ) , tributes to the royal idols , and offerings of vodiondry and jaka beef at customary occasions . Ranavalona innovated on these traditional rituals by increasing their complexity and symbolism to imbue them with added significance .

Queen Ranavalona continued the military incursions initiated under Radama I to pacify neighboring kingdoms and maintain their submission to Merina rule . These policies had a strongly negative effect on economic and population growth during her reign . Fanompoana labor among the population of Imerina could include conscription into the military , enabling the queen to raise a standing army that was estimated at 20,000 to 30,000 soldiers . This army , which was sent on repeated expeditions into neighboring provinces , exacted harsh penalties against communities resistant to Merina domination . Mass executions were common , and those who were spared their lives were commonly brought back to Imerina as slaves ( andevo ) and their valuables seized as booty to increase the wealth of the Crown . Approximately one million slaves entered Imerina from coastal areas between 1820 and 1853 , constituting one-third of the total population in the central highlands and two-thirds of all residents in Antananarivo . According to Madagascar historian Gwyn Campbell , the number of non-Merina who died in violent conflict during the military campaigns of Ranavalona and her predecessor Radama from 1816 to 1853 was estimated at about 60,000 . Additionally , a considerable proportion of the population not killed in battle in the subjugated provinces eventually died from famine as a consequence of scorched earth policies . Deaths among the Merina soldiers engaged in military actions were also high , estimated at about 160,000 for the period 1820 – 1853 . A further 25 – 50 % of the queen 's soldiers stationed in lowland areas were estimated to have died each year due to diseases such as malaria . Although prevalent in the coastal parts of the island , malaria was uncommon in the high-altitude zone around Antananarivo , and Merina soldiers possessed little natural resistance against it . An average of 4,500 soldiers died each year for the greater part of Ranavalona 's reign , contributing to severe depopulation in Imerina .

One of the chief measures by which Ranavalona maintained order within her realm was through the traditional practice of trial by the ordeal of tangena . A poison was extracted from the nut of the native tangena ( Tanghinia venenifera ) shrub and ingested , with the outcome determining innocence or guilt . If nobles or freemen were compelled to undergo the ordeal , the poison was typically administered to the accused only after dog and rooster stand-ins had already died from the poison 's effects , while among members of the slave class ( andevo ) , the ordeal required them to immediately ingest the poison themselves . The accused would be fed the poison along with three pieces of chicken skin : if all three pieces of skin were vomited up then innocence was declared , but death or a failure to regurgitate all three pieces of skin indicated guilt . According to 19th-century Malagasy historian Raombana , in the eyes of the greater populace , the tangena ordeal was believed to represent a sort of celestial justice in which the public placed their unquestioning faith , even to the point of accepting a verdict of guilt in a case of innocence as a just but unknowable divine mystery .

Residents of Madagascar could accuse one another of various crimes , including theft , Christianity and especially witchcraft , for which the ordeal of tangena was routinely obligatory . On average , an estimated 20 to 50 percent of those who underwent the ordeal died . In the 1820s , the tangena ordeal caused about 1,000 deaths annually . This average rose to around 3,000 annual deaths between 1828 and 1861 . In 1838 , it was estimated that as many as 100,000 people in Imerina died as a result of the tangena ordeal , constituting roughly 20 percent of the population . Although outlawed in 1863 , the ordeal continued to be practiced secretly in Imerina and openly in other parts of the island .

Following a visit by Radama I to Madagascar 's first formal school , established in Toamasina in 1818 by members of the London Missionary Society ( LMS ) , the king invited the first Christian artisan missionaries to the capital city to share their knowledge . Beginning in December 1820 , LMS missionaries established workshops in Antananarivo to teach brick-making , European carpentry and other practical skills , and developed a network of public schools where numeracy and English were taught alongside literacy using portions of the Malagasy language Bible . Despite high attendance at the schools , the LMS were initially unsuccessful in converting pupils to Christianity . Near the end of Radama 's reign , the king came to regard the few Malagasy who had been converted as irreverent toward royal authority . He forbade Malagasy people from being baptized or attending Christian services . Ranavalona 's succession initially resulted in a relaxation of state control over Christianity . A printing press , which was imported by LMS missionaries at the end of Radama 's reign , was only effectively put into operation in 1828 . The press was in heaviest use during the first several years of Ranavalona 's reign , when thousands of hymnals and other materials were transcribed and printed . Translation of the New Testament was completed in the second year of her reign , and 3,000 copies were printed and distributed between 1829 and 1830 . From the beginning of her reign , Ranavalona forbade the distribution of books within the military to prevent subversion and preserve discipline . She allowed missionaries free rein in operating the printing press , however , and exempted from military service all Malagasy personnel trained to operate the press . In 1835 , translation of the Old Testament was completed and the first copies were printed . The freedom allowed to LMS and Malagasy Christians to print religious materials and teach religion in the state schools during the first six years of Ranavalona 's reign allowed the religion to become firmly established among a small but growing group of converts in and around the capital . In 1831 Ranavalona authorized Malagasy attendance at church services , administration of the sacrament , and baptism of her subjects . Within a year , the first 100 Malagasy were baptized out of an estimated 200 practicing Christians total ; these converts were drawn from all social classes , including slaves , commoners , respected elders , court officials and even sampy guardians , who were considered the bulwarks of traditional culture .

The conversion of major religious , political and social leaders sparked a backlash that led Ranavalona to become increasingly wary of the political and cultural effects of Christianity , which she saw as leading the Malagasy to forsake the ancestors and their traditions . In October and November 1831 the queen enacted a ban on Christian marriages , church services and baptisms for soldiers and members of government studying in the Missionary schools , and in December extended the ban on church service attendance to all Malagasy . From 1832 to 1834 , baptisms and church services continued , increasingly in secret . During this time , several Christians each year were charged with witchcraft and exiled or made to undergo the tangena ordeal , and Ranavalona requested the departure of three missionaries , retaining only those whose particular technical skills she viewed as valuable to the state . In 1835 , the queen attempted to shut down the press without directly targeting the LMS by banning Malagasy personnel from working at the printing house . The LMS missionaries , capitalizing on the absence of legal decrees against their own work at the press , managed to continue independently printing and distributing materials .

In a kabary speech on February 26 , 1835 , Queen Ranavalona formally forbade the practice of Christianity among her subjects . In her discourse , she was careful to differentiate between her own people , for whom the new religion was forbidden and its practice a capital offense , and foreigners , to whom she permitted freedom of religion and conscience . She furthermore acknowledged the valuable intellectual and technological contributions that European missionaries had made to the advancement of her country , and invited them to continue working to that end on the condition that their proselytizing would cease : " To the English or French strangers : I thank you for the good that you have done in my land and my kingdom , where you have made known European wisdom and knowledge . Do not worry yourselves — I will not change the customs and rites of our ancestors . Nevertheless , whoever breaks the laws of my kingdom will be put to death — whoever he may be . I welcome all wisdom and all knowledge which are good for this country . It would be a waste of time and effort to grab the customs and rites of my ancestors . Concerning religious practice — baptism or assemblies — it is forbidden for my people who inhabit this land to take part whether on Sunday or during the week . Concerning you , foreigners , you can practice according to your own manners and customs . Nevertheless , if skilled handiwork and other practical skills exist , which can profit our people , exercise these skills that good will come . These are my instructions which I make known to you . "

The majority of the London Missionary Society missionaries , whose primary activity was teaching Christian theology and literacy at their newly established schools using the Bible as the principal Malagasy-language text , departed the island . James Cameron and other key missionaries preferred to leave rather than remain on the island without authorization to proselytize . The last two remaining missionaries chose to continue teaching practical skills in the hope that the restrictions might loosen , but one year later , after receiving indirect information that the government desired their departure , they shuttered the LMS mission and left Madagascar . Pursuant to the February 26 decree , those who possessed a Bible , worshiped in congregation or continued to profess adherence to Christianity were fined , jailed , manacled , subjected to trial by ordeal , or executed . Lurid accounts of the execution and torture of Christians were reported by missionaries with informants on the island who placed emphasis on what they perceived as the savagery of the Queen 's actions . For instance , they reported the public execution of fifteen Christian leaders near the Queen 's palace who were dangled on ropes 150 feet above a rock-filled ravine before the ropes were cut upon their refusal to renounce Christianity . The Andohalo cathedral was constructed on this outcropping to commemorate early Malagasy Christians martyred at the site . The precise number of Malagasy citizens put to death for religious reasons during Ranavalona 's reign is difficult to state with certainty . British missionary to Madagascar W.E. Cummins ( 1878 ) places the number executed at between sixty and eighty . Far more were required to undergo the tangena ordeal , condemned to hard labor or stripped of their land and property , and many of these died . Persecution of Christians intensified in 1840 , 1849 and 1857 ; in 1849 , deemed the worst of these years by Cummins , 1,900 people were fined , jailed or otherwise punished for their Christian faith , of whom 18 were executed .

Ranavalona 's reign was marked by a struggle between France and Britain to secure control over Madagascar . The French , who held several small islands off Madagascar , were interested in gaining control over the main island but this move was opposed by the British who had an interest in maintaining a safe passage to India . Ranavalona pursued a policy of self-reliance to limit the influence of these foreign powers . Shortly after taking the throne , Ranavalona annulled the Anglo-Merina treaty that had been concluded between Radama and British envoys , and refused to continue receiving annual payments from Britain in exchange for adherence to the stipulations of the treaty . The most significant of these conditions was the kingdom 's non-participation in the international slave trade , which had historically been a major source of revenue for the kingdoms of Imerina , Betsimisaraka , Sakalava and others across the island . One consequence of the termination of the Anglo-Merina friendship treaty was an end to the delivery of British weaponry , which rendered the queen vulnerable to designs against her from foreign powers and pockets of local resistance alike . This vulnerability was underscored in 1829 when a fleet of six French ships launched an unprovoked attack against the fort of Foulpointe and the nearby town of Ivondro on the eastern coast of Madagascar . The queen 's army successfully repelled the French at the next port , forcing the ships to Île Sainte-Marie , where they engaged a diplomatic envoy sent from Antananarivo by Ranavalona . The protracted negotiations ensured the French suffered from the malaria prevalent in coastal areas , until the increasing casualties forced the ships ' withdrawal from Ranavalona 's territory .

The French were eager to hasten Radama II 's succession in the interest of capitalizing on the Lambert Charter , an 1855 agreement between French representative Joseph-François Lambert and Radama that could only come into effect upon the prince 's succession . The charter guaranteed Lambert and his business associates first rights to the exploitation of many of the island 's commodities and natural resources . According to a British account , Lambert conspired with Jean Laborde and local leaders to persuade Radama II to sign a document written in French — a language in which the prince was not fluent — which Lambert orally translated as containing only an account of the excessive pressures the Queen 's policies were placing on her subjects . Radama , who was sympathetic toward the commoners and interested in easing their burden but suspicious about the letter 's true purpose , reluctantly signed the document under intense pressure from the French . He was not told the letter included a request for French military intervention that could have potentially brought Madagascar under French rule . France did not however intend to take such an action without the accord of their ally , Britain , whose influence had been so well-established on the island , and refused to intercede on behalf of the prince . In the meantime , Radama , who had been made to swear on the Bible not to speak of the letter to anyone , had grown concerned enough to contact a British diplomat , thereby revealing the true circumstances under which the letter had been signed . The British refused to cooperate in the French plot , and an attack was averted . According to Lambert , however , the prince had indeed been an enthusiastic partner in the bid to end Ranavalona 's reign , and his own true feelings about the endeavor had been deliberately misrepresented through a British campaign of propaganda .

Having failed to gain the backing of a European state power to place Radama on the throne and bring the treaty into effect , Lambert decided to instigate a coup d 'état independently . He traveled to Ranavalona 's court in May 1857 in the company of the celebrated 19th-century Austrian globetrotter Ida Pfeiffer , who became an unwitting participant in the plot . She documented her perspective on these events in one of her late works . According to Pfeiffer , Radama and Lambert had planned to dethrone the queen on June 20 , when ministers and soldiers loyal to Radama would infiltrate the Rova grounds and declare loyalty to the prince and support for a political transition . Pfeiffer blamed the failure of the plot on Rainilaiarivony , then Commander-in-Chief of the army who reportedly had been unable to ensure the presence of soldiers in the courtyard who were loyal to Radama . According to a British account , however , Radama himself was credited with warning the queen of the plot , in which his cooperation was merely a ploy to entrap the conspirators . This British view claims that Ranavalona deliberately allowed the plot to unfold almost to its conclusion in order to ascertain the loyalties of her members of government . After the plot 's discovery , the Europeans were largely confined to their houses on the palace grounds and prohibited from receiving visitors , until an order was issued to immediately and permanently quit the queen 's territory in late July .

While the queen had designated her son , Radama II , as her successor , Rainimaharo and the conservative faction knew of his progressive leanings and tried instead to ensure the queen 's nephew , Ramboasalama , would come to power and maintain loyalties to them and their political agenda . The progressive brothers Rainivoninahitriniony and Rainilaiarivony , who were the queen 's co-prime minister and head of the army respectively at the time of her death , supported the succession of Radama and were able to exercise greater influence than Ramboasalama , particularly in ensuring the support of the army for the prince 's claim to the throne . As Ranavalona lay on her death bed , Radama took precautions to ensure his succession would be uncontested , surrounding his residence at the Rova of Antananarivo with several hundred soldiers and sending a member of Ramboasalama 's family to bring him to the Rova to swear a public oath of allegiance to the new king , to whom he submitted . On August 16 , 1861 , Ranavalona died in her sleep at the Manjakamiadana palace in the Rova of Antananarivo . Twelve thousand zebu were slaughtered and their meat distributed to the populace in her honor , and the official mourning period lasted nine months . Her body was laid in a coffin made of silver piastres in a tomb at the royal city of Ambohimanga . During her funeral , a spark accidentally ignited a nearby barrel of gunpowder destined for use in the ceremony , causing an explosion and fire that killed a number of bystanders and destroyed three historic royal residences in the Nanjakana section of the compound where the event was held . In 1897 , French colonial authorities disinterred and moved the queen 's body and the remains of other Merina sovereigns to the tombs at the Rova of Antananarivo in an attempt to desanctify Ambohimanga . Her bones were placed within the tomb of Queen Rasoherina . Her son , Prince Rakoto , succeeded her as King Radama II .

Ranavalona 's traditionalist policies were abruptly reversed under the reign of her son , King Radama II . A widespread epidemic of " spirit possession " throughout Imerina followed Radama 's public conversion to Christianity and was popularly attributed to the outraged spirit of Ranavalona I. The queen 's foreign contemporaries strongly condemned her policies and viewed them as the actions of a tyrant or even a madwoman , a characterization that persisted in Western historical literature until the 1970s . Although Ranavalona has traditionally been depicted as a cruel and xenophobic tyrant , in more recent historical analyses she is commonly viewed as an astute politician who effectively protected the political and cultural sovereignty of her nation from European encroachment . In Madagascar today , the Malagasy of the central highlands hold complex and diverse views ranging across this spectrum . Most condemn her reign , in line with negative depictions of Ranavalona in current Malagasy history textbooks ; this view is most common among Malagasy Christians . Others admire her effort to preserve Malagasy traditions and independence . The majority , regardless of their feelings toward her domestic policies , consider her a remarkable figure in Malagasy history and commend her strength as a ruler in a period of tension with European powers .

Richard Buxton ( 15 January 1786 – 2 January 1865 ) was a British shoemaker and amateur botanist . Born in Prestwich , Lancashire , to a family who lived in humble circumstances , he taught himself to read , and learned the basic principles of botany . Although living as a pauper for most of his life , in 1849 he published A Botanical Guide to the Flowering Plants , Ferns , Mosses and Algæ , Found Indigenous Within Sixteen Miles of Manchester , which became one of the standard texts on the flora then commonly found in the Manchester area . According to his obituary in the Journal of Botany , British and Foreign , Buxton was one of " nature 's gentlemen " and " his true and correct pronunciation of scientific terms have caused many who heard him to believe he was an accomplished classical scholar " . He was acknowledged by the geologist Edward William Binney as " the most profound thinker of his class " .

The second of seven children , Richard Buxton was born on 15 January 1786 at Sedgley Hall Farm in the parish of Prestwich , near Manchester , Lancashire . His parents were John and Anne Buxton ( née Horton ) , both from Derbyshire . When he was two years old his family fell on hard times , left their farm and moved to Bond Street in Ancoats , Manchester . John Buxton worked as a labourer for the rest of his life . Richard was a sickly child and his parents ' reduced circumstances meant that his education was somewhat sporadic . In his early years he wandered through the fields and brick yards where he lived , picking wildflowers . His favourites were Germander Speedwell , Creeping Tormentil and Common Chickweed . At the age of twelve he was apprenticed to a bat maker ( the maker of children 's small leather shoes ) named James Heap , in Port Street , Manchester . About 18 months later he went to work with James Hyde , with whom he stayed for a number of years .

At the age of 16 , Buxton was illiterate , but with the aid of The Common Spelling Book he taught himself to read . He was unable to understand or pronounce all words correctly and so procured a copy of Jones Pronouncing Dictionary . He read more books , such as A History of England and Goldsmith 's History of Greece and Rome . Reading occupied all his spare time , although when trade was good he had to work from 6 : 00 am until 9 : 00 pm . He earned about 14 to 15 shillings ( 70p-75p ) a week , a good wage for the time , but as cloth was superseding leather in making the tops of children shoes , this did not last . When he was 18 , Buxton returned to work with his old master , James Heap , as a journeyman . Heap often took Buxton on country walks in his spare time . The two collected herbs for diet drinks , either for Heap 's use or to share with his neighbours . They often found plants of whose names they were ignorant , and so Buxton bought a copy of Culpeper 's Complete Herbal . However , as he found the supposedly medicinal properties of the plants fanciful and the descriptions inaccurate , he soon became dissatisfied with it . In 1808 he procured a copy of the superior Meyrick 's Herbal , from which he learned the first principles of the Linnaean system . Buxton soon outgrew this book , and began to borrow or buy as many books on botany as he could . Botanical practice at the time was to collect and dry plants , but as he disliked dead plants and preferred not to remove specimens that could be enjoyed by others , his botanical studies were confined to making observations .

From 1821 to 1826 the pressures of work took him away from his botanical rambles , but in spring 1826 he made more frequent excursions . In June that year he was " botanising " on Kersal Moor when he met John Horsefield , a handloom weaver from Whitefield , who was president of the Prestwich Botanical Society and president of the general botanical meetings held at a number of different places in Lancashire . Buxton had long wished to meet a man such as Horsefield , who was not merely a country herbalist but an excellent scientific botanist . At that time in Lancashire many amateur , working class , naturalists pursued their interests in their spare time , and a number of local societies had been formed . Horsefield introduced him to other local botanists such as James Percival , Thomas Heywood and John Shaw with whom , during the summer of 1826 , he made a number of excursions to Mere Clough in Prestwich , Clifton Moss and Baguley Moor . For several years , for a variety of reasons , Buxton 's study of botany fell by the wayside , but in 1833 he attended a botanical meeting in Prestwich , where he met his old acquaintances . He became a regular attendee at local botanical meetings , including one at Blackley , where he met James Crowther . They became firm friends and , in search of plants , explored Chorlton , Withington , Didsbury and many other regions of Lancashire , Cheshire , Derbyshire , Yorkshire and Wales .

In 1839 Buxton was invited to join the natural history class at the Manchester Mechanics ' Institute where he helped compile the Flora Mancuniensis ( 1840 ) along with Leo Hartley Grindon , George Crozier and James Crowther under the editorship of John Bland Wood . He became an acknowledged expert on mosses , and William Hooker , director of the Royal Botanic Gardens , Kew was so impressed with his skills that he hoped to employ him as a herbarium assistant . Although this never came about , Hooker gave Buxton a number of botanical books and , at some point , Buxton accepted the position of President of the Manchester Working Men 's Botanical Society . In 1849 , aged 62 , he published a book : A Botanical Guide to the Flowering Plants , Ferns , Mosses and Algæ , Found Indigenous Within Sixteen Miles of Manchester , written with the help of other local botanists and geologist Edward William Binney . Peppered with snatches of poetry and including some autobiographical details , the book gives a complete description of all the plants then found in the area . It encourages other working-class people to explore the " many delightful walks by pleasant streams and through green woods in summertime " and requests landowners " at least to preserve the old footpaths which cross their fields and woods if they should decline to allow fresh ones to be made " .

The 2012 Formula One season was the 63rd season of FIA Formula One motor racing . It featured the 2012 FIA Formula One World Championship , a motor racing series for Formula One cars , recognised by the Fédération Internationale de l 'Automobile ( FIA ) — the governing body of motorsport — as the highest class of competition for open-wheel racing cars . The championship was contested over twenty rounds , which started in Australia on 18 March and ended in Brazil on 25 November . The 2012 season saw the return of the United States Grand Prix , which was held at the Circuit of the Americas , a purpose-built circuit in Austin , Texas . After being cancelled in 2011 due to civil protests , the Bahrain Grand Prix also returned to the calendar . The early season was tumultuous , with seven different drivers winning the first seven races of the championship ; a record for the series . It was not until the European Grand Prix in June that a driver , Ferrari 's Fernando Alonso , won his second race of the year , and with it , emerged as a championship contender . Alonso maintained his hold on the championship lead for the next seven races , taking his third win in Germany and finishing on the podium in the United Kingdom , Italy and Singapore . However , costly first-lap retirements in Belgium and Japan allowed his rivals to catch up , and defending World Champion Sebastian Vettel — like Alonso , a two-time title winner — took the lead in the sixteenth race of the season . Vettel , too , encountered difficulties throughout the season ; contact with a backmarker left him to finish outside the points in Malaysia , while alternator failures at the European and Italian Grands Prix cost him valuable points and exclusion from qualifying in Abu Dhabi led him to start from the pit lane . Vettel entered the final race of the season with a thirteen-point lead over Alonso . Alonso needed a podium finish to stand any chance of becoming World Drivers ' Champion , but in a race of attrition that finished under the safety car , Vettel finished in sixth place , scoring enough points to win his third consecutive championship , becoming just the third driver in the sport 's sixty-three year history to do so . In the World Constructors ' Championship , Red Bull Racing secured their third consecutive title when Sebastian Vettel finished second at the United States Grand Prix .

At the November 2011 meeting of the Formula One Commission in Geneva , several teams were given permission to change their constructor names — the name recognised by the FIA as the entity that effectively owns the team , and to which all results for that team are credited — with final approval from the World Motorsports Council granted in December of that year : Lotus became known as Caterham , reflecting team principal Tony Fernandes 's purchase of Caterham Cars . Renault changed its constructor name to Lotus after Lotus Cars expanded its title sponsorship program to include teams in Formula One and support series GP2 and GP3 . Virgin became Marussia , following increased ownership of the team by Russian sports car manufacturer Marussia Motors . As a result of the name changes , Team Lotus and Lotus Renault GP declared that their ongoing dispute over the use of the Lotus name was over after they had reached an " amicable conclusion " . Although the exact terms of the settlement were kept confidential , the joint statement detailed the transfer of the rights to the Lotus and Team Lotus names to Group Lotus 's ownership . Williams announced that they would be using Renault engines for the 2012 and 2013 seasons , with an option to use Renault engines again in 2014 under the next generation of engine regulations . Renault had previously supplied engines to Williams from 1989 to 1997 , when the team won four World Drivers ' Championships and five World Constructors ' Championships . Following their worst season in their thirty-year history — in which they finished ninth in the World Constructors ' Championship with just five points — the team underwent a technical review , employing former McLaren designer Mike Coughlan ( having served his suspension for his role in the 2007 Formula One espionage controversy ) as Chief Designer , and promoting Jason Somerville to Head of Aerodynamics . Likewise , Marussia ( then known as Virgin Racing ) underwent a restructuring , splitting with Wirth Research mid-season after a technical review by Marussia Motors and the board of directors . The team also announced a technical partnership with McLaren that granted them access to McLaren 's testing facilities as well as the purchase of Wirth Research facilities .

In the week before the 2011 Indian Grand Prix , Force India announced that the Sahara Group had purchased a 42.5 % stake in the team , valued at US $ 100 million . The investment gave the Sahara Group and team principal Vijay Mallya an equal stake in the team , with team director Michiel Mol controlling the remaining 15 % of the team . Under the terms of the sale , the Sahara Group became Force India 's naming-rights sponsor . Mercedes GP also changed the name of their team , announcing that they were to become known as Mercedes AMG . The new name originates from AMG , Mercedes-Benz 's performance and luxury road car brand . HRT team principal Colin Kolles formally left his position , with the team citing the relocation of their headquarters to Spain as the reason for the separation . Former Minardi driver Luis Pérez-Sala took Kolles 's place as team principal . In January 2012 , the team relocated to a new facility in Valencia before settling at a permanent facility in Caja Mágica , Madrid . Peter Sauber formally stepped down from his position as team principal of Sauber F1 in the week before the Korean Grand Prix , appointing the team 's CEO , Monisha Kaltenborn as his successor . Kaltenborn 's appointment made her the first female team principal in the sport 's sixty-three year history .

The 2012 season saw several driver changes . Lotus chose not to take up an option on Vitaly Petrov 's contract , and did not offer Bruno Senna a new contract . Petrov and Senna were replaced by 2007 World Drivers ' Champion Kimi Räikkönen — returning to the sport after two seasons competing in the World Rally Championship — and reigning GP2 Series champion Romain Grosjean , who also returned to the sport after a two-year absence . Petrov later replaced Jarno Trulli at Caterham ; Trulli 's replacement meant that the opening race of the season would be the first race since the 1973 German Grand Prix to take place without an Italian driver on the grid . Senna joined Williams , the team having previously attempted to secure Räikkönen for the season . Senna replaced Rubens Barrichello , who left Formula One after a record-breaking nineteen seasons . He later moved to IndyCar for the 2012 season , joining KV Racing Technology . Like Räikkönen and Grosjean , Nico Hülkenberg also returned to Formula One , joining Force India alongside Paul di Resta . Adrian Sutil left the team , having spent six years with both Force India and its previous incarnations , Spyker and Midland . He initially sought a drive with Williams , before negotiations collapsed in December 2011 . Sutil was later the subject of criminal action , charged with grievous bodily harm after allegedly assaulting a senior Renault team member with a glass in a Shanghai nightclub following the 2011 Chinese Grand Prix . Sutil was found guilty , and was sentenced to an eighteen-month suspended jail sentence and ordered to pay a € 200,000 fine . Despite this , Sutil rejoined Force India for the 2013 season .

Scuderia Toro Rosso did not retain Jaime Alguersuari or Sébastien Buemi , instead choosing to replace them with Daniel Ricciardo and 2011 Formula Renault 3.5 Series runner-up Jean-Éric Vergne . Ricciardo had previously served as the team 's test and reserve driver before being placed at HRT for the 2011 British Grand Prix , while Vergne had completed a limited testing schedule for the team in the second half of the 2011 season . Sébastien Buemi became Red Bull Racing 's testing and reserve driver and will contest the 24 Hours of Le Mans with Toyota , driving a TS030 Hybrid . Alguersuari was offered a seat at HRT , but turned it down and instead joined tyre supplier Pirelli as their test driver , developing tyre compounds for use in racing alongside former Virgin Racing driver Lucas di Grassi . Pedro de la Rosa and Narain Karthikeyan returned to Formula One with HRT . De la Rosa had been without a full-time drive since the 2010 Italian Grand Prix , having spent the majority of the 2011 season as a test driver for McLaren and making one appearance racing for Sauber ; Karthikeyan was dropped by the team before the 2011 British Grand Prix in favour of Ricciardo . He , too , made a one-race appearance at the Indian Grand Prix , before leaving the team until the 2012 season began . Vitantonio Liuzzi , who drove for HRT in 2011 , joined the Indian i1 Super Series . The series was later postponed until 2013 , but Liuzzi was unable to retain his seat with the team . At the launch of the HRT F112 in March , Liuzzi was confirmed as one of the team 's testing and reserve drivers alongside both former GP2 Series driver Dani Clos and Ma Qinghua , the first ever Chinese driver to step into a Formula 1 car .

After the 2011 Bahrain Grand Prix was cancelled , the race was reinstated for the 2012 season with a provisional date in October . The final version of the calendar brought the race forward to April . The German Grand Prix returned to Hockenheim after the 2011 German Grand Prix was held at the Nürburgring , in line with the event 's policy of alternating between venues . In May 2010 , it was announced that Austin , Texas would host the return of the United States Grand Prix , the first since Indianapolis in 2007 . Known as the Circuit of the Americas , the venue will be a brand-new , purpose-built permanent circuit designed by event promoter Tavo Hellmund and 1993 Grand Prix Motorcycle World Champion Kevin Schwantz with the assistance of German architect and circuit designer Hermann Tilke . In November 2011 , Bernie Ecclestone expressed " minor " doubt over the race going ahead after what he described as " disagreements inside the [ management ] company " and gave the circuit owners and race organisers a deadline of 7 December – coinciding with the meeting of the FIA World Motorsports Council and the release of the final 2012 calendar – to sort out their differences or else risk losing the event entirely . The final calendar included the race , with Ecclestone confirming that a new arrangement had been made , and that the event organisers had paid their circuit sanctioning fees for 2012 . The race was originally scheduled to be held in June , but was moved back to become the penultimate event of the season in response to concerns over the heat of the Texas summer and its effects on teams , drivers and spectators , and the failure of race organisers to meet a key deadline for the race sanctioning fees .

The 2011 season saw teams running " off-throttle blown diffusers " , which created downforce by forcing fuel through the engine to produce exhaust gases and directing it over the diffuser when the driver was not applying the throttle . This concept was originally banned in incremental phases , with increasingly restrictive rules on what teams could and could not do , with a full ban to be applied from the 2011 British Grand Prix onwards . However , the incremental ban was controversial , with several teams applying for and receiving permission to circumvent the total ban . After discussion between the FIA and engine manufacturers , the original regulations were restored , with the full ban delayed until 2012 . The regulations in 2012 governed the design of the exhaust with the teams agreeing to strict constraints on the position of the exhaust tailpipe . This resulted in the exhaust exiting the bodywork much higher up than in 2011 , and no longer in the vicinity of the diffuser . Several teams , including Williams and Mercedes used the Young Driver Tests in Abu Dhabi as an opportunity to test parts for the 2012 season in the face of the ban . In October 2011 , a clarification to the amended rules was issued , effectively banning " exotic " engine maps ; in November , further amendments were introduced , completely banning the practice of blowing exhaust gasses over parts of the car to improve downforce , following a bid by several teams to allow it under certain conditions . Further amendments were made in February 2012 when Mercedes alerted the FIA to a loophole in the regulations that would allow teams to continue using a partially blown diffuser . The FIA responded by re-writing the software governing the engine 's Electronic Control Unit to close the loophole .

At the German Grand Prix in July , Red Bull Racing were referred to race stewards after FIA Technical Delegate Jo Bauer noted that their engine maps had the potential to violate the technical regulations . Red Bull stood accused of manipulating the relationship between the torque produced by the Red Bull RB8 and the degree to which the throttle was open — particularly in medium-speed corners — thereby allowing more air to pass through the exhaust and over the diffuser , generating more downforce . Red Bull were cleared of wrongdoing , as , in the stewards ' words , they had not technically broken any rules , but the FIA announced plans to rewrite the regulations governing throttle mapping so as to outlaw the practice entirely ahead of the Hungarian Grand Prix one week later . The rule changes required teams to submit an engine map used during one of the first four races of the season , which became known as the " reference map " . Any subsequent changes to the throttle map would require the approval of the FIA , provided that the torque output above 6,000 rpm was within two percent of the output specified on the reference map . Further changes would be allowed at races with " exceptional atmospheric conditions " , as designated by the FIA .

In January 2012 , the FIA banned the use of " reactive ride-height " . The system , first proposed by Lotus in 2010 ( but not applied until 2012 ) , used hydraulic cylinders located in the brake calipers and suspension push-rods to make minute adjustments to the ride height of the car , thereby keeping the ride height at an optimal level throughout the race and providing stability during braking . The FIA initially approved the device as being legal , and several teams , including Ferrari and Williams , submitted plans to the FIA for their own versions of the device before it was banned one week later . The FIA later confirmed that the reactive ride-height systems violated Article 3.15 of the technical regulations , which states that " any aerodynamic effect created by the suspension should be incidental to its primary function " and " any device that influences the car 's aerodynamics must remain immobile in relation to the sprung part of the car " and further noted that the system 's primary purpose was achieving aerodynamic gains as opposed to providing stability under braking , and that the use of reactive ride-heights could also be challenged under Article 10.2 of the technical regulations , which govern suspension systems .

Technical regulations for 2012 include the reprofiling of the car 's nose . The pre-2012 regulations allowed the nose to be as high as 62.5 centimetres ( 24.6 in ) above ground , but the revisions to the sporting code lowered the maximum allowable height to 55 centimetres ( 22 in ) 150mm ahead of the front bulkhead . This resulted in cars being launched with a " platypus " nose , as teams designed cars with a visible change in height along the nose assembly of the car . Mercedes AMG team principal Ross Brawn explained the distinctive nose shape as having come about from " several teams " wanting to use their 2011 chassis as the basis for their 2012 cars . Drivers were no longer permitted to have a " joker " gearbox change . Prior to 2012 , drivers were entitled to change their gearboxes once over the course of the season without incurring a five-place grid penalty . This system was abandoned in 2012 , with drivers only being allowed to change gearboxes once every five races . Starting in 2012 , all cars were required to pass their mandatory FIA crash tests before being allowed to take part in pre-season testing . Previously , passing the crash tests was only a requirement prior to the first race of the season . Crash tests for the 2012 season will also be more rigorous than in previous years .

At the meeting for the Formula One Commission in Geneva in November 2011 , the use of helium in air guns used to change tyres during pit stops was banned . Despite increasing the rotation speed of the air guns by up to 30 % , the practice of using helium was deemed to be too expensive to continue for the competitive gains it offered . At the 2012 Abu Dhabi Grand Prix , the FIA banned the use of " trick brake " devices , which used a bi-metallic strip that changed shape when heated by the brakes to open or close off braking ducts and improving braking efficiency under certain conditions . This was deemed to be in breach of Article 11.4 of the Sporting Regulations , which states that the only permissible changes to the braking system while a car is moving must be directly controlled by the driver .

After being banned in 2009 , in-season testing returned in 2012 , with a test held at Mugello on 1 May ahead of the European leg of the 2012 championship . As teams were only be permitted to do fifteen days of testing over the course of the season , the pre-season winter testing schedule was cut back to accommodate the Mugello test . At the September 2011 meeting of the FIA World Motor Sport Council , representatives of the member organisations voted to amend the rules for double-waved yellow flags in all FIA-sanctioned championships . The amendment means that double-waved flags will be shown when a track marshal is working on or beside the circuit . Tyre supplier Pirelli revised their tyre compounds for the 2012 season in an effort to encourage teams to use each of the compounds supplied for individual races . Pirelli predicted that the changes would translate into 0.7 seconds ' difference per lap between the harder and softer compounds , down from 1.5 seconds per lap in 2011 . According to Pirelli , the hardest tyre compound available is just 31 % harder than the softest compound on offer ; by comparison , the hardest tyres used in 2011 were 70 % harder than the softest .

Faced with several constructors applying for name changes , teams requested a clearer definition of what constitutes a " constructor " . Under the rules set out in the Sixth Concorde Agreement , several teams have been forced to compete under names that do not necessarily reflect their ownership – such as Sauber competing as " BMW Sauber " in 2010 , despite BMW withdrawing from the sport at the end of the 2009 season – in order to preserve their status as a current constructor and their claim to a share of the television rights paid to teams that placed in the top ten in the final World Constructors ' Championship standings . At the final meeting of the World Motorsports Commission in December 2011 , a series of amendments to the sporting regulations were published . Chief among these is the re-introduction of a rule that will allow all lapped traffic under the safety car ( which remained the Mercedes-Benz SLS AMG introduced in 2010 . ) to be released from the queue before the car returns to pit lane , allowing the drivers to unlap themselves and to ensure a clean restart . Drivers were not permitted to leave the confines of the circuit without a justifiable reason , following a spate of incidents in 2011 when drivers were sighted using access roads around the circuit to shorten their reconnaissance and in-laps in order to preserve their fuel and tyres . Similarly , drivers will not be allowed to return to the normal racing line should they choose a defensive line going into a corner .

Races were run to a maximum four-hour time limit to prevent the indefinite suspension of a race . This will stop the theoretical possibility of a race lasting more than eight hours . This rule was introduced in response to the rain-interrupted 2011 Canadian Grand Prix , which set a record for the longest race in Formula One history , at four hours , four minutes and thirty-nine seconds . Any driver in the pit lane when a race is suspended was permitted to return to the circuit and take up the position on the grid that they were running in at the time of the suspension . At the 2012 British Grand Prix in July , the FIA disabled the use of the Drag Reduction System ( DRS ) during a race while yellow flags were being shown in the same sector as the DRS zone . The move followed an incident at the European Grand Prix in which Michael Schumacher was observed to activate his DRS while yellow flags were being shown .

In July 2011 , a joint broadcasting deal for Formula One in the United Kingdom was announced between Sky Sports and the BBC . The announcement was controversial , being met with highly negative reactions from fans and observers as it had previously been believed that the terms of the Concorde Agreement prevented Formula One from being broadcast exclusively on pay-per-view , but the Agreement did not prevent a shared broadcast such as the proposal made by Sky Sports and the BBC . The controversial nature of the broadcast deal led to the Culture , Media and Sport Committee of the House of Commons calling Bernie Ecclestone and " senior BBC figures " including director-general Mark Thompson to answer questions over the details of the broadcasting arrangement . In December 2011 , Red Bull Racing and Scuderia Ferrari exited FOTA , the Formula One Teams Association , following prolonged debate over the implementation of the controversial Resource Restriction Agreement , though Red Bull team principal Christian Horner reaffirmed his team 's commitment to cost-cutting measures and highlighting the team 's concerns over certain loopholes in the Resource Restriction Agreement that they felt teams and manufacturers would willingly exploit . One week later , Sauber also left the organisation , though the Swiss team did not publicly give a reason for ending their membership . In February 2012 , Red Bull Racing 's sister team Scuderia Toro Rosso was also reported as having left the organisation since the first schism in December .

The 2012 season was preceded by three test sessions ; one at Jerez de la Frontera and two in Barcelona . These sessions gave the teams and drivers the opportunity to familiarise themselves with their cars , though the teams downplayed the accuracy of testing times as being representative of the running order for the season . At the second test in Barcelona , Lotus F1 discovered a critical fault in the build of their chassis that forced them to miss four days of running , while both HRT and Marussia were unable to complete any mileage with their 2012 cars after both the HRT F112 and Marussia MR01 failed their crash tests , though both teams were able to complete shakedowns of their cars .

The season began in Australia . Jenson Button took an early lead from pole-sitter Lewis Hamilton and the Red Bull cars while the rest of the field was bottle-necked by contact in the first corner . Button remained unchallenged throughout , even after a mid-race safety car to retrieve the stricken Caterham of Vitaly Petrov . Button went on to take his third victory at the Melbourne circuit , ahead of Sebastian Vettel , who profited from the safety car to pass Hamilton . McLaren team principal Martin Whitmarsh later admitted that Button was " more than marginal " on fuel after the team made a mistake in calculating their fuel loads for the race , forcing Button to use a " severe fuel-saving mode " from the eighth lap of the race . Hamilton came under threat from Mark Webber in the late stages of the race , but held on to secure third place . Webber finished fourth – his best result in his home Grand Prix – while Fernando Alonso finished fifth , having endured pressure from Pastor Maldonado for the last half of the race . Maldonado 's race ended when he crossed onto the astroturf on the final lap and spun into the wall . Kimi Räikkönen finished seventh after a poor qualifying session saw him start the race seventeenth , taking advantage of a chaotic final lap to make up two places , while Felipe Massa and Bruno Senna both retired after a bizarre collision that saw their cars tangled up in one another . HRT failed to qualify for the race for the second consecutive season after drivers Pedro de la Rosa and Narain Karthikeyan failed to set a lap time within 107 % of the fastest qualifying time .

McLaren locked out the front row of the grid for the second race in succession , with Lewis Hamilton once again on pole . Both HRT cars qualified for the race , but filled out the final row of the grid almost two seconds behind Marussia 's Charles Pic in twenty-second position . In the race , Hamilton made a better start than Jenson Button , but his lead was short-lived ; heavy rain interrupted the race , forcing the suspension of the Grand Prix . When the race restarted an hour later , Button was involved in contact with Narain Karthikeyan that forced him to make an unscheduled stop for a new front wing , while Hamilton had a slow pit stop and was held in the lane while other cars passed . Fernando Alonso inherited the lead , with Sauber 's Sergio Pérez a surprise second , having made an early stop for extreme wet weather tyres and then taking advantage of a rush to the pit lane to position himself in third at the restart . As the race wore on , Pérez began to quickly catch Alonso on a drying track . Daniel Ricciardo was the first driver to pit for dry-weather tyres on lap 38 , triggering another round of stops . Sauber and Pérez initially looked as if they had left their stop too late when Pérez emerged from the pits five seconds behind Alonso , but he began catching the two-time World Champion at the same rate as he had before . Pérez closed to within half a second with seven laps to go , but ran wide at turn 14 and lost five seconds , later admitting that it was his mistake . He was unable to close the gap , and Alonso went on to win the race by two seconds , the win giving him a five-point lead in the championship . Pérez was second , taking his first podium and Sauber 's best ever result as an independent team . Hamilton finished third ahead of Mark Webber and Kimi Räikkönen , while Button had to settle for fourteenth . Bruno Senna finished in sixth , scoring more points in a single race than his team scored in 2011 . Sebastian Vettel finished outside the points after making contact with Karthikeyan and developing a puncture .

The championship resumed three weeks later in China , with the lead-in period to the race marked by Lotus F1 protesting the legality of Mercedes 's rear wing design . The FIA rejected the protest , and with Mercedes allowed to continue racing with their car unchanged , Nico Rosberg took his — and the team 's — first pole position since their return to Formula One in 2010 , while a penalty to Lewis Hamilton for a gearbox change promoted Michael Schumacher to second on the grid . Schumacher would ultimately retire from the race after the first round of stops when it was discovered that one of his wheels had not been attached properly . Rosberg took an early lead in the race , and while his attempt to complete the race with only two pit stops came under threat from second-placed Jenson Button , a mistake by Button 's pit crew during his final stop handed Rosberg a nineteen-second advantage over Kimi Räikkönen . Räikkönen was attempting a similar two-stop strategy , but his tyres wore out seven laps from the end of the race , and he lost eleven positions in a single lap . This forced Rosberg to drive conservatively to preserve his tyres while Button recovered from his disastrous pit stop to pass Sebastian Vettel for second . Button was held up by the incumbent World Champion long enough for Rosberg to preserve his tyres , and he became the 103rd person to win a Grand Prix . The result was also Mercedes 's first win as a constructor since Juan Manuel Fangio won the 1955 Italian Grand Prix . Button was second , with Hamilton scoring his third consecutive third place , giving him a two-point championship lead over Button ; Fernando Alonso , who had been leading the championship before the race , finished ninth . After two retirements in the opening rounds of the championship , Romain Grosjean scored his first points in Formula One by finishing sixth .

In the face of ongoing media speculation and public pressure to cancel the race due to ongoing political instability in Bahrain , the FIA released a statement at the Chinese Grand Prix confirming that the Bahrain Grand Prix would go ahead as planned . The week preceding the Grand Prix saw a renewed wave of protests against the government 's attempts use the race to " tell the outside world that the whole thing is back to normal " , while human rights organisations including Amnesty International criticised the decision to hold the race amid the violent crackdowns . Three days before the race , a group of Force India mechanics travelling in an unmarked hire car were involved in a petrol bombing incident at an impromptu roadblock and were briefly exposed to tear gas fired by security forces . There were no injuries or damage , but two of the mechanics involved chose to leave the country . The team later announced their intentions to race despite the incident . Sebastian Vettel qualified on pole , his first since the 2011 Brazilian Grand Prix . Heikki Kovalainen qualified sixteenth , the second time Caterham ( and its predecessor , Team Lotus ) advanced beyond the first qualifying period in dry conditions . Vettel went on to win the race — becoming the fourth winner in as many races — after spending much of the race defending against Kimi Räikkönen . Having started eleventh , Räikkönen used an extra set of soft tyres to move up through the field . His team-mate , Romain Grosjean , finished third . Grosjean had initially shown the pace to challenge Vettel 's lead , but unlike Räikkönen , he did not have an extra set of fresh tyres , and lost touch with the reigning World Champion after the first set of stops . Lewis Hamilton finished eighth , once again hampered by slow pit stops . He was later involved in an altercation with Nico Rosberg that saw Rosberg referred to the stewards for forcing Hamilton beyond the boundary of the circuit while defending his position , but he escaped without penalty . Hamilton went on to finish eighth , while team-mate Jenson Button was forced to retire two laps from the end of the race after reporting an unusual vibration from the differential . Daniel Ricciardo was involved in early contact that saw the Australian driver slide down the order from sixth at the start to fifteenth by the end of the race , having spent most of the Grand Prix caught behind Vitaly Petrov . Vettel 's win gave him a four-point lead in the championship over Hamilton , while Mark Webber 's fourth consecutive fourth place secured third overall . Red Bull Racing took the lead from McLaren in the World Constructors ' Championship , while Lotus 's double podium moved them into third overall .

Starting on 1 May , the teams conducted a three-day test at the Mugello Circuit in Italy ahead of the Spanish Grand Prix . The test gave teams the opportunity to assess major aerodynamic upgrades before racing them . HRT elected not to take part in the test , instead choosing to concentrate on establishing themselves at their new headquarters in Madrid . Both Lotus 's trackside operations director Alan Permane and Red Bull Racing driver Mark Webber questioned the value of testing at the Mugello circuit as the characteristics of the circuit were unlike any of the circuits the championship was due to visit after the test , while Caterham driver Vitaly Petrov was critical of the choice of Mugello as a testing venue as he felt it was not safe enough for Formula One . Petrov 's comments came shortly after Fernando Alonso crashed on the final morning of the test . Red Bull Racing and Lotus team principals Christian Horner and Éric Boullier were also critical of the test as they felt that the costs of conducting in-season testing outweighed any benefits , with Horner stating his opposition to continuing mid-season testing in the future .

Following criticism over the sensitivity of their tyre compounds , tyre supplier Pirelli announced changes to their tyre allocation for the Spanish Grand Prix , making pit strategy the focal point of the Grand Prix . Pirelli would later diagnose the problems with the tyre compounds as originating from developing them on a testing chassis that was two years out-of-date at the time . Lewis Hamilton took his third pole of the season , edging out Williams driver Pastor Maldonado by half a second , while Maldonado 's team-mate Bruno Senna was eliminated early when he spun . Hamilton was later excluded from the qualifying results after his car did not have enough fuel to return to the pits for scrutineering , promoting Maldonado to pole position and moving Hamilton to the back of the grid . Fernando Alonso took the lead of the race at the first corner , but Maldonado reclaimed it during the second round of pit stops , when his team forced Ferrari to pit early while Alonso was held up by the Marussia of Charles Pic . Maldonado maintained a lead of seven seconds over Alonso , but a mistake by his crew during the third pit stop cost him time and left him vulnerable to the Ferrari driver in the final stint of the race . Meanwhile , third-placed Kimi Räikkönen moved to an ambitious strategy that would see him attempt to force Maldonado and Alonso to race beyond the life expectancy of their tyres , allowing him to swoop in at the last minute to steal first place . Räikkönen 's strategy failed as Maldonado withstood pressure from Alonso for fifteen laps , winning the race by three seconds . It was Williams 's first win in one hundred and thirty Grand Prix starts ; their previous race win was Juan Pablo Montoya 's victory at the 2004 Brazilian Grand Prix . Lewis Hamilton recovered from twenty-fourth on the grid to finish eighth , while Sebastian Vettel overcame a drive-through penalty and an unscheduled stop for a technical fault that forced his team to replace his front wing to make a late move on Nico Rosberg for sixth place that would preserve his championship lead .

For the second consecutive race , the fastest driver in qualifying did not start the race from pole . Michael Schumacher set the fastest time , but a five-place grid penalty left him sixth overall . Two hours before the race , protests against parts introduced onto the floor of the Red Bull RB8 left team principal Christian Horner with a choice : to change the offending parts and start both cars from the pit lane , guaranteeing that any result the team recorded would be preserved ; or to leave the parts on the car , allowing both drivers to start the race from the positions they qualified in , but risking a post-race exclusion . Horner ultimately chose the latter option , and Mark Webber started from pole , establishing an early lead over Nico Rosberg as a first-corner accident eliminated four cars . The race was run under the constant threat of rain , with drivers trying to extend the life of their tyres to avoid being forced to make an additional stop and falling down the order . The rain never materialised , though Jean-Éric Vergne was observed using a set of intermediate tyres late in the race . The variety of strategies used by the front-runners resulted in the last ten laps being contested with the top six cars running nose-to-tail . Webber visibly faded in the final laps , but held on when the following cars were momentarily pinned behind the slow-moving Heikki Kovalainen . Webber won the race — his second on the streets of Monaco — with Rosberg second and Fernando Alonso third , the result giving Alonso a three-point lead in the championship . Red Bull Racing maintained their lead in the Constructors ' Championship as rival teams chose not to follow through on the threat of their pre-race protest , while Kovalainen finished thirteenth to see Caterham overtake Marussia for tenth place . Elsewhere , Spanish Grand Prix winner Pastor Maldonado was given a ten-place grid penalty for an incident that saw him clip Sergio Pérez . Combined with a five-place penalty for changing his gearbox , Maldonado started from the back row of the grid where he was eliminated in the first-corner accident .

One week before the Canadian Grand Prix , the FIA declared the floor used by Red Bull in Monaco to be illegal , forcing the team to change the offending parts for the Canadian Grand Prix . Despite the ruling , the team 's results were kept intact . The team was also forced to change the design of their axles , after FIA Race Director Charlie Whiting felt that holes in the axles contravened the technical regulations . Nevertheless , Sebastian Vettel comfortably took pole position by three-tenths of a second . Vettel controlled the early phase of the race , but was caught and passed by Lewis Hamilton before the first round of stops , while Fernando Alonso slipped through shortly afterwards . All three drivers were using a two-stop strategy at the time , but as Hamilton made his second stop , both Alonso and Vettel shifted to a one-stop strategy , with Alonso 's team resorting to discussing strategy options in his native Spanish to prevent their rivals from overhearing their plans . Hamilton had twenty laps to make up a twelve-second deficit , and he easily reeled Vettel in ; in response , Red Bull pitted the reigning World Champion , and Vettel fell to fifth . Hamilton 's next target was Alonso , whose tyres lost all grip and he fell victim to Hamilton , Romain Grosjean , Sergio Pérez and Vettel in quick succession . Hamilton won the race , becoming the seventh winner in seven races and taking a two-point lead in the championship . Grosjean 's second place saw Lotus take third place in the Constructors ' Championship from Ferrari . Both Grosjean and Pérez expressed surprise at finishing on the podium , while 2011 winner Jenson Button finished sixteenth in what he described as his " worst race in years " and Michael Schumacher suffered a hydraulics failure that left his drag reduction system ( DRS ) device jammed in the open position .

Fernando Alonso became the first man to win two races in 2012 at the European Grand Prix in Valencia , scoring his first home win since the 2006 Spanish Grand Prix . Starting eleventh , he was forced to navigate his way through traffic , narrowly avoiding early contact between Bruno Senna and Kamui Kobayashi as Sebastian Vettel broke free of the field to establish a twenty-second lead by the first round of stops . Vettel 's lead was quashed when Heikki Kovalainen and Jean-Éric Vergne made contact , triggering the deployment of the safety car to clear debris from the circuit . Alonso found himself third at the restart and pounced on a mistake by second-placed Romain Grosjean to lead the chase against Vettel . Vettel pulled away once more , but his lead was short-lived as he lost drive and his engine shut down on lap 33 . Grosjean attempted to challenge Alonso , but was forced out of the race with an alternator problem seven laps later , leaving Alonso in the lead , four seconds clear of Lewis Hamilton and Kimi Räikkönen . As the race entered the final laps , Räikkönen forced his way past Hamilton to secure second place , but Pastor Maldonado 's attempts to take third place ended with Hamilton in the barrier and a broken nose for the Williams driver . Maldonado finished tenth , but was given a post-race drive-through penalty and was classified twelfth . Meanwhile , Michael Schumacher and Mark Webber had started to carve their way through the field by virtue of a late pit stop and easily picked off the minor points positions and taking advantage of the Maldonado — Hamilton collision to finish third and fourth behind Alonso and Räikkönen . It was Schumacher 's first podium since the 2006 Chinese Grand Prix . Alonso 's win cemented a twenty-point lead in the championship , whilst Vettel 's retirement relegated him to fourth overall , twenty-six points behind Alonso .

Difficult conditions greeted the teams upon their arrival at the Silverstone Circuit , as parts of the Midlands received a month 's rainfall in the space of two days . The torrential rain lasted throughout the weekend , forcing qualifying to be suspended for ninety minutes , before race day dawned clear . The circuit was declared dry , allowing the drivers to start on the tyre compound of their choice , with Alonso on the harder tyre streaking away at the start while Paul di Resta crashed at Aintree on the first lap after making contact with Romain Grosjean . As the leaders settled into a rhythm , Pastor Maldonado and Sergio Pérez collided at Brooklands , prompting an angry response from the Mexican driver . Perez 's team mate Kamui Kobayashi also ran into trouble , locking his tyres as he entered his pit box and hitting three members of his pit crew , though none were seriously injured . The race was ultimately decided by the choice of tyre in the first stint as Alonso moved onto the softer option and Webber onto the harder prime for the final phase of the race . Webber caught Alonso with five laps to go , passing him on the Wellington Straight . Webber held on for his second win of the season , with Vettel third and Felipe Massa in fourth , his best result since achieving a podium in South Korea in 2010 . The result meant Webber closed to within thirteen points of Alonso 's championship lead , with both drivers breaking away from third-placed Vettel . After showing early promise in the wet conditions , McLaren went backwards in the dry , losing second place in the Constructors ' Championship to Ferrari and third to Lotus .

Limited running in practice and a wet qualifying session meant that teams had to improvise their strategies at the Hockenheimring . Fernando Alonso controlled much of the race from pole position , only relinquishing the lead when he pitted , and he went on to take his third victory of the season . Lewis Hamilton 's one hundredth Grand Prix started with a disaster when he picked up a puncture on the third lap and spent most of the race at the tail end of the field before retiring on lap 56 with a suspension problem . Confusion briefly reigned when Hamilton , in seventeenth place at the time , began lapping faster than the leaders and sought to unlap himself . Sebastian Vettel later claimed that this was a ploy by McLaren to force both him and Alonso to drive defensively against Hamilton , slowing them down enough to allow team-mate Jenson Button to leap-frog them at the second round of stops ; Vettel lost a position to Button , but Alonso was unaffected , as Ferrari pitted him before Hamilton could interfere with his race . Button briefly looked as if he had the pace to pass Alonso for the race lead , but the race was deadlocked in the final twenty laps , and Button began to fade in the final five laps of the race . The race was marked by another technical dispute regarding Red Bull Racing , who were referred to the stewards by FIA Technical Delegate Jo Bauer for what he felt was an illegal engine map in use on the Red Bull RB8 . The stewards elected to take no action against Red Bull , stating that the team had not violated any of the technical regulations , but noted that they did not accept all of the arguments presented by the team when asked to explain . The stewards were less forgiving of Vettel , who ran wide at the hairpin while trying to pass Button and could only complete the pass outside the limits of the circuit . Vettel had twenty seconds added to his race time as a penalty , demoting him to fifth overall . With Button promoted to second , Kimi Räikkönen inherited third place and Kamui Kobayashi was classified a career-best fourth .

As the championship moved into the second half of the season , Fernando Alonso maintained a thirty-four point lead over his nearest rival , Mark Webber , with Sebastian Vettel a further ten points behind . Alonso 's outlook for the race was dour , qualifying sixth and pinning his hopes on a wet race as Lewis Hamilton continued McLaren 's mid-season resurgence , returning to pole position for the first time since the Malaysian Grand Prix . Following an aborted start triggered by Michael Schumacher lining up in the wrong grid position and then shutting his engine off in the confusion , Hamilton and Grosjean lead the field away . After prematurely moving Jenson Button onto a three-stop strategy , McLaren gave Hamilton the order to hold position as the tight confines of the Hungaroring circuit forced the teams to try to make up positions in the pits . This was evidenced by Kimi Räikkönen , who inherited the lead after the first set of stops and produced a series of fast laps that allowed him to rejoin in second , coming dangerously close to team-mate Grosjean under brakes as he emerged from the pit lane . Despite taking two seconds out of Hamilton 's lead within five laps of rejoining the race , Räikkönen was powerless to reel Hamilton in any further . Hamilton won the race , the nineteenth of his career , with Räikkönen second and Grosjean in third . Hamilton 's victory brought with it twenty-five points that put him back in championship contention , while a late decision by Red Bull to move Mark Webber onto a three-stop strategy saw the Australian slip further behind Fernando Alonso , as the Spaniard extended his championship lead to forty points .

The championship resumed one month later in Belgium . Jenson Button qualified on pole and broke away at the start while a four-car pile-up started behind him when Romain Grosjean made contact with Lewis Hamilton and they both slammed into Fernando Alonso and Sergio Pérez , eliminating all four on the spot and triggering the safety car . Kamui Kobayashi 's car was also damaged , and Pastor Maldonado was spun around amidst the chaos . Grosjean was later given a one-race ban for causing the collision , becoming the first driver in eighteen years to be banned from racing . Maldonado retired shortly after the restart with a broken front wing after making contact with Timo Glock , while Narain Karthikeyan spun off at Stavelot mid-way through the race when his wheel came loose . Button controlled the race from the front and was unchallenged throughout , while Sebastian Vettel clawed his way up to second from tenth on the grid . Kimi Räikkönen started and finished third , let down by a conservative pit strategy that forced him to make a second stop late in the race in order to use both compounds of tyre as per the rules — even when it became apparent that Button and Vettel were racing on a one-stop strategy — and Nico Hülkenberg finished in a career-best fourth place . Button 's win allowed him to regain precious ground on the championship fight , while Alonso 's retirement from the race and Vettel 's second place moved the reigning World Champion to within twenty-four points of the championship lead . Scuderia Toro Rosso scored their first points since the Malaysian Grand Prix , with Jean-Éric Vergne and Daniel Ricciardo finishing eighth and ninth respectively . Further down the order , Caterham was summoned to the stewards on charges of an unsafe pit release when Heikki Kovalainen was released directly into the path of Karthikeyan and the team was given a € 10,000 fine for the incident .

The final race in Europe took place at Monza . Ferrari 's early bid to put Fernando Alonso on pole position by way of using Felipe Massa to offer him a slipstream ended in disaster when Alonso 's rear anti-roll bar failed in the final period of qualifying , leaving the championship leader marooned in tenth while Lewis Hamilton took pole . Hamilton asserted early control over the race , and while Ferrari made significant ground early on to be running second and third — despite losing the data uplink between their cars and the pit wall that provided them with telemetry — it was Sergio Pérez who proved to be Hamilton 's biggest challenge . Starting outside the top ten , Pérez elected to start on the harder compound tyres and complete one stop , producing fastest lap after fastest lap as McLaren 's confidence was broken when Jenson Button 's car was paralysed by a fuel pressure problem . Hamilton would ultimately prevail , but he was forced to push in the final few laps to maintain his lead , and won the race by four seconds as Pérez claimed his third podium of the season with second place . Alonso went on to finish third , benefiting from Button 's retirement and a drive-through penalty for Sebastian Vettel when the reigning World Champion forced him so wide through the Curva Grande that Alonso was forced off the circuit . Bruno Senna later criticised the race stewards for not penalising Paul di Resta for a similar altercation on the approach to the Variante della Roggia early in the race . Meanwhile , with Romain Grosjean serving his suspension , Lotus enlisted former Marussia F1 driver Jérôme d 'Ambrosio as their second driver for the weekend . He qualified sixteenth , and went on to finish thirteenth overall .

As the teams returned to Asia , the focus shifted to the championship race . Lewis Hamilton put himself in the ideal position to take the fight to Fernando Alonso , qualifying on pole whilst Alonso could only manage fifth place . In the physically most demanding race of the year , the teams jostled for position through the first phase of the Grand Prix , trying to position themselves for the final ten laps . Just as the drivers established a rhythm , Hamilton 's gearbox failed , forcing him out of the race and handing the lead to Sebastian Vettel . The race was shortened by two laps to fit the two-hour time limit for a Grand Prix following a pair of lengthy safety car interventions ; first , Narain Karthikeyan understeered into the barriers under the grandstands on lap 30 , forcing the safety car to be deployed . The drivers had little opportunity to get comfortable on the restart , as Michael Schumacher misjudged his braking point at the end of the Esplanade Bridge , careening into the back of Jean-Éric Vergne and triggering the safety car for the second time in an accident that was a near mirror-image of his collision with Sergio Pérez in 2011 . He was later given a ten-place grid penalty for the Japanese Grand Prix . Vettel controlled the race from the second restart , beating Jenson Button to the line , for his second win of the season and his first since the Bahrain Grand Prix five months previously . Alonso completed the podium , retaining his championship lead after defending from Paul di Resta late in the race . Elsewhere , a string of retirements — including a late engine problem for Bruno Senna , which left the Brazilian with minor burns to his back — and a series of altercations involving Mark Webber , Nico Hülkenberg , Kamui Kobayashi and Sergio Pérez as they fought over the minor points positions allowed Timo Glock to finish twelfth , the result seeing Marussia retake tenth position in the World Constructors ' Championship from Caterham .

Fernando Alonso 's luck finally ran out in Japan ; having spent most of the season profiting from poor results from his rivals when he needed them the most , Alonso was the victim of a dramatic first corner clash , spinning out when he made contact with Kimi Räikkönen and paving the way for his championship rivals to make considerable inroads into his twenty-nine point championship lead . Mark Webber was also caught up in the opening lap melee when he was hit by Romain Grosjean ; Webber was forced to pit straight away , while Grosjean was given a ten-second stop-go penalty for causing yet another first lap incident . Bruno Senna also ran afoul of the stewards , hitting Nico Rosberg whilst trying to avoid Grosjean and Webber and earning a drive-through penalty for his troubles while Rosberg retired on the spot . Sergio Pérez added his name to the growing list of early retirements when he slid off at the hairpin under brakes and into the gravel trap whilst trying to force his way past a struggling Lewis Hamilton . Sebastian Vettel won the race from pole position , having led every lap of the race and setting the fastest lap time in the process to complete his second Grand Chelem . Felipe Massa finished second , his first podium result since the 2010 Korean Grand Prix , whilst Kamui Kobayashi claimed the first podium of his career — and the first podium for a Japanese driver at the Suzuka Circuit since Aguri Suzuki finished third in 1990 — after withstanding late pressure from Jenson Button .

Sebastian Vettel 's momentum continued one week later in Korea , winning his third consecutive race and taking a six-point championship lead as Fernando Alonso finished third . Vettel overcame pole-sitter Mark Webber at the start , and was aided in building up a lead by first-lap contact between Jenson Button , Nico Rosberg and Kamui Kobayashi that saw Button and Rosberg retire with damage from the collision ; Rosberg pulled over on the approach to the third turn , forcing a protracted yellow flag period as marshalls attempted to retrieve his car . With the sporting regulations banning overtaking while yellow flags were shown , the field was effectively thinned out in the opening laps as drivers were unable to pass one another . Tyre management became the focus of the race , as drivers reported heavy graining , particularly on the right-front tyre , which bore most of the load over a lap of the circuit . Vettel ignored six radio calls from his pit wall cautioning him that a tyre failure was imminent , only backing off just enough in the final few laps to secure victory over Webber by six seconds . The team later denied that there had ever been a problem with Vettel 's tyres . Further down the order , Scuderia Toro Rosso 's Jean-Éric Vergne and Daniel Ricciardo fought their way from sixteenth and twenty-first on the grid to finish eighth and ninth , while Romain Grosjean drove a conservative race to finish seventh , having been warned beforehand by the stewards that another first-lap altercation would likely result in his disqualification from the race . Lewis Hamilton 's day went from bad to worse when an anti-roll bar on his McLaren failed , while the car handled its tyres so poorly that he was forced to make an unscheduled stop in order to make it to the finish , only to tear up a length of astroturf that wreaked havoc on his downforce and he slid down to tenth place , narrowly fending off an opportunistic charge from Sergio Pérez to take the final World Championship point on offer . Button 's retirement and Hamilton 's single point meant that McLaren lost second place in the World Constructors ' Championship to Ferrari , and Hamilton admitted that his bid to be the 2012 World Drivers ' Champion was over .

Ferrari 's strategy for staying in the championship battle saw them introduce upgrades to the F2012 at every remaining race in the season , starting with an extensive revision for the Indian Grand Prix , but whatever advantage they offered was still not enough for Fernando Alonso to catch Sebastian Vettel . Vettel dominated the weekend , setting the fastest time in every practice session before qualifying on pole , and leading every lap of the sixty-lap race , though he was denied his third Grand Chelem when Jenson Button set the fastest lap of the race on the final lap . Fernando Alonso finished second , conceding another seven championship points to Vettel . The Ferrari driver rounded up both McLaren drivers at the start of the race and proceeded to chase down Mark Webber for second , only overtaking the Australian on the long back straight when his car developed a KERS fault fifteen laps from the end that it never recovered from . Webber held off a late challenge from Lewis Hamilton to complete the podium . Further down the order , Kimi Räikkönen finished seventh after spending most of the race trapped behind Felipe Massa , and later claimed that mistakes on Saturday had robbed him of a podium on Sunday , while Pedro de la Rosa retired from the race when he suffered a brake failure that saw him spin into the barriers at Turn 4 . The race was marked by a series of explosive punctures after cars made light contact with one another ; Michael Schumacher 's right-rear tyre deflated on the first lap when he made contact with Jean-Éric Vergne at the first corner ; Sergio Pérez suffered a puncture under similar circumstances when he glanced Daniel Ricciardo 's front wing , with the loose rubber damaging the floor of Pérez 's car enough that he was forced into retirement ; and Pastor Maldonado also had a tyre punctured when he and Kamui Kobayashi touched at speed on the approach to Turn 5 , forcing the Venezuelan to run wide onto the tarmac run-off , but suffering no lasting damage .

Sebastian Vettel 's dominant run was derailed in Abu Dhabi when his car was found to have insufficient fuel after qualifying and he was subsequently moved to the back of the grid . As Lewis Hamilton led the race away from the start , Vettel started from pit lane and took advantage of a chaotic opening corner that saw Nico Hülkenberg , Paul di Resta , Romain Grosjean and Bruno Senna tangle ; Hülkenberg was forced out , while di Resta and Grosjean pitted with damage . Vettel began to round up the HRTs , Marussias and Caterhams , but his early progress came at the expense of his front wing endplate when he made contact with Senna at Turn 8 switchback . He chose not to pit for the time being , as the race was interrupted by the intervention of the safety car . Nico Rosberg , who had been forced to pit with damage to his front wing , was in the process of overtaking Narain Karthikeyan as Karthikeyan 's car began to fail and the Indian quickly slowed . Rosberg , caught unawares by Karthikeyan 's troubles , was launched over the back of the HRT and into the barrier . During the safety car period , Vettel was forced to pit when he swerved to avoid Daniel Ricciardo and crashed into the polystyrene bollard marking the start of the DRS zone , further damaging his wing . Red Bull Racing took the opportunity to pit him early , with the downside being that Vettel would have to do 42 laps on the soft tyre when supplier Pirelli predicted they could only do 36 . Meanwhile , Hamilton suffered another mechanical failure while leading the race , and was once again forced out , handing the lead to Kimi Räikkönen while Fernando Alonso inherited second . Vettel began to work his way through the field again , but was forced to make a second stop when his tyres started losing grip . He was saved by the second appearance of the safety car moments later , brought about when di Resta forced Sergio Pérez wide ; as Pérez rejoined the circuit , he cut back across the front of Grosjean and the two made contact , which in turn forced Grosjean into the path of Mark Webber . Grosjean and Webber retired , whilst Pérez was given a stop-go penalty . When racing resumed , Räikkönen began to rebuild his lead over Alonso , who was being harried by Jenson Button ; Button himself was being harried by Vettel in fourth . Button and Vettel 's duel allowed Alonso to break free , and he started chasing down Räikkönen in the last five laps . Räikkönen held on to secure his — and Lotus F1 's — first victory of the season . Alonso was second , while Vettel caught and passed Button to complete the podium , keeping a ten-point championship lead in the process . With both Alonso and Vettel finishing on the podium with him , Räikkönen 's win was not enough to keep him in contention for the World Drivers ' Championship , leaving the title to be fought out between Alonso and Vettel over the final two races of the season .

Despite its troubled construction period , the Circuit of the Americas passed its final FIA inspection on 25 September , allowing the race to go ahead . Sebastian Vettel took his sixth pole position of the season , whilst Alonso struggled throughout qualifying to start the race ninth , which became eighth when Romain Grosjean received a grid penalty for an unscheduled gearbox change . Amid concerns that drivers starting from even-numbered grid slots would suffer from a lack of grip as they were located off the racing line , Ferrari deliberately broke the seal on Felipe Massa 's gearbox , thereby giving him a five-place grid penalty and promoting Alonso to seventh and the clean side of the grid . Ferrari 's fears were not without merit as the drivers starting from even-number spaces fell behind at the start of the race . Vettel quickly converted pole position into a steady race lead as Lewis Hamilton fought to regain second place from Mark Webber . Moments after Hamilton caught him on lap 17 , the Australian suffered yet another alternator problem , and coasted to a halt . Red Bull Racing team principal Christian Horner later admitted that the team 's perpetual alternator problems were a serious concern with just one race left in the championship , a World Championship at stake and very little time to diagnose and correct the problem . With Webber now out of the running , Hamilton then turned his attentions on Vettel and steadily closed the gap to the lead , overtaking the World Championship leader on lap 42 when Vettel got caught behind Narain Karthikeyan in the meandering first sector , which allowed Hamilton to pass Vettel along the long back straight . Hamilton held onto the lead for the final fourteen laps , but with Vettel never more than a second and a half behind him , Hamilton could not afford to relax , and he won the race by just six tenths of a second . Alonso recovered from seventh to finish third — marking the first time that he , Hamilton and Vettel had stood on the podium together in the one hundred races all three had contested together — and forcing the title fight to extend to the final round in Brazil . Further down the order , Massa overcame his gearbox penalty to finish fourth , while Jenson Button fell from twelfth on the grid to sixteenth at the end of the first lap , using an alternative strategy to claw his way back up to fifth . Michael Schumacher , on the other hand , went backwards ; after qualifying fifth , his Mercedes chewed through its tyres , forcing him to make a second stop that sent him plummeting down the order to finish sixteenth , and a clutch problem during his stop deprived Kimi Räikkönen of the chance to compete with Alonso for the final podium place . Both Marussia drivers out-qualified the Caterhams for the first time , only for Timo Glock and Charles Pic be out-raced by Heikki Kovalainen and Vitaly Petrov , but the Russian team held onto tenth place in the World Constructors ' Championship . Despite losing Webber to an alternator failure , Red Bull collected enough points to secure their third consecutive World Constructors ' Championship title .

The final race of the season was run in conditions that were never quite wet enough for drivers to use wet tyres , but never quite dry enough for slick tyres to provide enough grip . While Jenson Button and Lewis Hamilton fought over the race lead , Sebastian Vettel was involved in a first-lap clash with Bruno Senna that damaged his exhaust and spun him around , relegating him to last place . Senna retired on the spot , as did Sergio Pérez , who was caught in the crossfire . The race was one of attrition , with Pastor Maldonado and Romain Grosjean also crashing out early . Button seized the lead from Hamilton , but soon found himself under pressure from Nico Hülkenberg and lost the lead to the German driver on lap 18 , and second place to Hamilton shortly thereafter . The field stabilised themselves after the first round of stops , with Vettel in the lower points and Fernando Alonso running fourth when he needed a podium to stand any chance of being champion . Hülkenberg spun on lap 48 and lost the lead to Hamilton , but caught the McLaren on lap 54 as they encountered lapped traffic . The two made contact in the first corner , forcing Hamilton out of the race and earning Hülkenberg a drive-through penalty for causing an avoidable accident . In the wake of their collision , Button re-took the lead and held on to the end of the race . Meanwhile , the rain intensified , prompting teams to scramble for tyres . Hülkenberg 's penalty and Hamilton 's retirement promoted Alonso to the podium , which became second place when team-mate Felipe Massa yielded for him . A slow stop for Vettel relegated him to twelfth and swinging the balance of power in Alonso 's favour . In the last ten laps of the race , Vettel began to make his way back up the order until he was seventh , just enough to secure the title , but leaving him vulnerable if the damage he received on the first lap — which by now had left a long crack running along the floor of his car — got worse . Vettel 's seventh became sixth when Michael Schumacher moved aside to let Vettel through . Two laps from the end of the race , Paul di Resta crashed heavily as he came onto the main straight , forcing the deployment of the safety car . Button won the race , with Alonso second and Massa third , but Vettel 's sixth place was enough to secure his third consecutive World Drivers ' Championship . Kimi Räikkönen finished the season third overall , having benefited from Hamilton 's retirement to hold onto the place following a bizarre incident in which he left the circuit and attempted to rejoin by taking to the support paddock pit lane , only to find the way blocked and forcing him to double back and find another way onto the circuit . In his final race in Formula One , Schumacher 's seventh place saw him finish the season in thirteenth place overall ; his worst performance over a season since he contested six rounds during the 1991 season . In the World Constructors ' Championship , Ferrari secured second place from McLaren with two cars on the podium , while Kamui Kobayashi 's ninth place was not enough for Sauber to take sixth from Mercedes , and Marussia lost tenth place to Caterham when Vitaly Petrov secured the team 's best result of the season with eleventh place . Nikolai Fomenko , Marussia 's director of engineering , later claimed that Charles Pic had deliberately let Petrov through , as Pic had announced his move to Caterham for the 2013 season two days before the race ; however , no action was taken by the FIA in response to these claims .

Three days after the Brazilian Grand Prix , reports began to surface suggesting that Sebastian Vettel 's championship was under threat and that Ferrari would be filing a formal protest against the race results . The challenge centred on a pass Vettel made on Jean-Éric Vergne early in the race . At the time , the first sector of the circuit was under yellow flag conditions following the spin and retirement of Pastor Maldonado at Curva do Sol , the Interlagos circuit 's third corner , which feeds onto the back straight . Vettel overtook Vergne along the straight , which led to claims that the pass was illegal because of the yellow flags . Intense media speculation suggested that the challenge threatened Vettel 's championship because as the race finished behind the safety car , any post-race penalty had the potential to demote him in the race standings , and Vettel would not have enough points to secure the title . Ferrari wrote to the FIA , requesting clarification on the matter . The FIA reviewed the incident and declared that Vettel 's pass was legal as a green flag was being shown by a marshal adjacent to the pit exit , meaning the track was green from that point onward ; the confusion had been caused by a digital board showing a yellow flag on the exit of Curva do Sol some one hundred metres before the marshalling post . Both Ferrari and Red Bull Racing announced that they were satisfied with the ruling , thereby preserving Vettel 's championship .

Typhoon Shanshan , known in the Philippines as Typhoon Luis , was a strong typhoon that affected parts of East Asia in late September 2006 . The 13th named storm of the 2006 Pacific typhoon season , Typhoon Shanshan was also the seventh typhoon of the year operationally recognised by the Japan Meteorological Agency . In post-operational analysis Shanshan became the eighth typhoon of the year when Typhoon Maria was added to the list . The Joint Typhoon Warning Center considered Shanshan the 13th tropical storm and eighth typhoon of the season , a Category 4-equivalent typhoon in terms of 1-minute average wind speed . The name Shanshan was submitted to the naming list by Hong Kong and is a girls ' given name . Shanshan wreaked havoc in Japan , with reports that it caused a tornado which derailed a train . It made landfall first in the Yaeyama Islands , where it caused heavy rains , and later in Kyūshū . The outer bands of Shanshan also affected South Korea . Shanshan also knocked power out to thousands of homes in the two countries , and killed at least eleven people . Damage amounted to $ 2.5 billion ( 2006 USD ) , making Shanshan the sixth costliest disaster worldwide in 2006 .

On September 9 , 2006 , the Japan Meteorological Agency identified a tropical depression with 25-knot 10-minute average sustained winds about 500 kilometres ( 300 mi ) north-northeast of Yap , near latitude 14.0 ° N longitude 139.0 ° E. Later that day , the Hong Kong Observatory ( HKO ) picked up on the tropical depression and started issuing track forecasts for the system . As the system continued to move northwestward , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center initiated advisories on Tropical Depression 14W on the morning of September 10 . Later that day , the tropical depression moved into the PAGASA Area of Responsibility , and was named Luis . As the system continued to strengthen , the JMA upgraded the depression to a storm at 1200 UTC and named it Shanshan , a girls ' given name submitted by Hong Kong . The HKO did the same at the same time , upgrading the depression to a storm . The storm quickly strengthened , being upgraded twice by the JMA on September 11 , at 0600 UTC to a severe tropical storm and at 1800 UTC to a typhoon , becoming the seventh official typhoon of the season . It then took on a more north-northwesterly track , weakening while undergoing an eyewall replacement cycle on September 14 . However , it restrengthened , reaching its maximum intensity of 110 knots ( 205 km / h , 125 mph ) from the JMA and 120 knots ( 220 km / h , 140 mph ) from the JTWC before passing Iriomote on September 15 . Originally expected by the JTWC to pass to the east of Okinawa Island , a subtropical high-pressure ridge south of the main Japanese islands forced the storm to take a more westward track , pushing it towards Taiwan . Shortly later , Shanshan passed directly over Iriomote .

PAGASA issued their final advisory later on September 16 . Peak intensity for Typhoon Luis as reported by PAGASA while it was in their area of responsibility was only 80 knots ( 150 km / h , 95 mph ) . Shanshan made landfall on September 17 on the island of Kyūshū . The HKO issued their final track forecast on the weakening typhoon later that day as it passed out of their area of responsibility , with the peak intensity while within HKO 's area of responsibility set at 185 km / h ( 115 mph , 100 kt ) . The JTWC declared the system extratropical shortly after . The JMA downgraded the typhoon to a severe tropical storm at 0000 UTC September 18 . Just before crossing the island of Hokkaidō , according to the JMA 's best-track graphic , Severe Tropical Storm Shanshan became extratropical . The extratropical storm was tracked by the JMA in their high seas marine warnings until September 22 .

In anticipation of Typhoon Shanshan , the Taiwan Central Weather Bureau issued a marine warning for all ships in the areas around the north and the east coasts of the island and in the Bashi Channel . Tourists were also asked to avoid the areas due to fears over large waves . The Zhejiang provincial government in the People 's Republic of China also asked all fishermen to return to port and ordered local authorities to help with evacuations of people from areas threatened by the typhoon . In Japan , the United States military and its navy took precautions against the approaching storm . Okinawa was put under Tropical Cyclone Condition of Readiness ( TCCOR ) 1-E , which means that all outdoor activities are prohibited as there are sustained winds of at least 50 knots ( 95 km / h , 60 mph ) in force , on September 16 , with over 100 flights into and out of Naha International Airport on the island cancelled . Kadena Air Base moved various aircraft to other undisclosed locations in the Pacific . Sasebo Naval Base declared TCCOR 1-E on September 17 . The USS Harpers Ferry ( LSD-49 ) and USS Juneau ( LPD-10 ) both left the base , while the USS Patriot ( MCM-7 ) was moved to a wet berth . Only one vessel , the USS Tortuga ( LSD-46 ) remained in port for repairs , because authorities thought that the ship could withstand the storm . Elsewhere in Japan , some flights and Shinkansen bullet trains were delayed or cancelled . In Miyazaki and Hiroshima prefectures , evacuation orders were issued for almost 170 families . In Kyūshū , 10,000 people voluntarily evacuated their houses for higher ground . The island 's seven main airports were closed , causing 41,900 passengers to be stranded when 357 flights were cancelled . Ahead of an expected landfall on Hokkaidō , the JMA warned residents of the possibility of high winds .

Typhoon warnings were issued for Jeju and the southern and eastern coasts of South Korea ahead of the storm . Passenger ships normally serving Jeju Island remained in port . In Busan , ports were closed , and in Ulsan , 1,600 ships remained in port . In South Gyeongsang Province , authorities banned departures from the port at Tongyeong , stranding over 16,000 fishing boats . The Korean Coast Guard said that a total of 52,000 ships remained at ports across the nation . Mount Jiri was also closed ahead of the storm 's passage through Korea , which was expected to bring up to 100 mm ( 4 inches ) of rain .

Shanshan 's effects on Japan and its outlying Pacific islands were widespread . On Iriomote , a peak gust of 69.9 metres per second ( 251 km / h , 157 mph ) was recorded , the strongest ever on record since records started in 1972 . On Ishigaki , Okinawa , a peak gust of 67.0 m / s ( 241 km / h , 150 mph ) was reported , with rainfall rates of up to 50 mm per hour ( 2 inches per hour ) reported . Over 25,000 homes on Ishigaki lost power after 182 utility poles were downed by the storm , and at least 12 people on the island were injured . Eight vessels were reported to have capsized . At Kadena Air Base , 2 inches ( 50 mm ) of rain were reported , with a maximum gust of 63 mph ( 101 km / h ) recorded . Naha International Airport on Okinawa reported a recorded maximum wind gust to 70 mph ( 112 km / h ) . In Motobu , Okinawa , high waves damaged the local port and swept 30 cargo containers to sea , while in Okinawa City , six injuries were reported . One building in the city suffered a wall collapse , and at least 70 houses were damaged .

Off Kyūshū , a Maldives-registered car ferry capsized , killing one crew member . A train was derailed , possibly due to a tornado , injuring five people . On the island , an electrician in Fukuoka Prefecture died after an industrial container at his firm fell on top of him , crushing him . A glass entrance of a supermarket in Nobeoka broke on impact with flying debris , killing one person . Elsewhere in the prefecture , a 42-year-old man died in his bedroom when it was crushed , while an elderly woman farmer died when she was hit by a fallen tree outside a greenhouse . Three other deaths were confirmed on the island . Meanwhile , in Hiroshima Prefecture , a 50-year-old firefighter was killed when he drowned after being swept away by rising flood waters . A journalist went missing in similar circumstances , and was found dead a few days later . In all , Typhoon Shanshan killed 11 people and injured over 260 others . Shanshan is also credited with US $ 4.9 million worth of net losses in the third financial quarter for IPC Holdings , Ltd .

A Type II supernova ( plural : supernovae or supernovas ) results from the rapid collapse and violent explosion of a massive star . A star must have at least 8 times , and no more than 40 – 50 times , the mass of the Sun ( M ☉ ) to undergo this type of explosion . It is distinguished from other types of supernovae by the presence of hydrogen in its spectrum . Type II supernovae are mainly observed in the spiral arms of galaxies and in H II regions , but not in elliptical galaxies . Stars generate energy by the nuclear fusion of elements . Unlike the Sun , massive stars possess the mass needed to fuse elements that have an atomic mass greater than hydrogen and helium , albeit at increasingly higher temperatures and pressures , causing increasingly shorter stellar life spans . The degeneracy pressure of electrons and the energy generated by these fusion reactions are sufficient to counter the force of gravity and prevent the star from collapsing , maintaining stellar equilibrium . The star fuses increasingly higher mass elements , starting with hydrogen and then helium , progressing up through the periodic table until a core of iron and nickel is produced . Fusion of iron or nickel produces no net energy output , so no further fusion can take place , leaving the nickel-iron core inert . Due to the lack of energy output creating outward pressure , equilibrium is broken and the core is compressed by the overlying mass of the star .

When the compacted mass of the inert core exceeds the Chandrasekhar limit of about 1.4 M ☉ , electron degeneracy is no longer sufficient to counter the gravitational compression . A cataclysmic implosion of the core takes place within seconds . Without the support of the now-imploded inner core , the outer core collapses inwards under gravity and reaches a velocity of up to 23 % of the speed of light and the sudden compression increases the temperature of the inner core to up to 100 billion kelvin . Neutrons and neutrinos are formed via reversed beta-decay , releasing about 1046 joules ( 100 foe ) in a ten-second burst . The collapse of the inner core is halted by neutron degeneracy , causing the implosion to rebound and bounce outward . The energy of this expanding shock wave is sufficient to disrupt the overlying stellar material and accelerate it to escape velocity , forming a supernova explosion . The shock wave and extremely high temperature and pressure rapidly dissipate but are present for long enough to allow for a brief period during which the production of elements heavier than iron occurs . Depending on initial size of the star , the remnants of the core form a neutron star or a black hole . Because of the underlying mechanism , the resulting nova is also described as a core-collapse supernova .

There exist several categories of Type II supernova explosions , which are categorized based on the resulting light curve — a graph of luminosity versus time — following the explosion . Type II-L supernovae show a steady ( linear ) decline of the light curve following the explosion , whereas Type II-P display a period of slower decline ( a plateau ) in their light curve followed by a normal decay . Type Ib and Ic supernovae are a type of core-collapse supernova for a massive star that has shed its outer envelope of hydrogen and ( for Type Ic ) helium . As a result , they appear to be lacking in these elements .

Stars far more massive than the sun evolve in more complex ways . In the core of the star , hydrogen is fused into helium , releasing thermal energy that heats the sun 's core and provides outward pressure that supports the sun 's layers against collapse in a process known as stellar or hydrostatic equilibrium . The helium produced in the core accumulates there since temperatures in the core are not yet high enough to cause it to fuse . Eventually , as the hydrogen at the core is exhausted , fusion starts to slow down , and gravity causes the core to contract . This contraction raises the temperature high enough to initiate a shorter phase of helium fusion , which accounts for less than 10 % of the star 's total lifetime . In stars with fewer than eight solar masses , the carbon produced by helium fusion does not fuse , and the star gradually cools to become a white dwarf . White dwarf stars , if they have a near companion , may then become Type Ia supernovae . A much larger star , however , is massive enough to create temperatures and pressures needed to cause the carbon in the core to begin to fuse when the star contracts at the end of the helium-burning stage . The cores of these massive stars become layered like onions as progressively heavier atomic nuclei build up at the center , with an outermost layer of hydrogen gas , surrounding a layer of hydrogen fusing into helium , surrounding a layer of helium fusing into carbon via the triple-alpha process , surrounding layers that fuse to progressively heavier elements . As a star this massive evolves , it undergoes repeated stages where fusion in the core stops , and the core collapses until the pressure and temperature are sufficient to begin the next stage of fusion , reigniting to halt collapse .

The factor limiting this process is the amount of energy that is released through fusion , which is dependent on the binding energy that holds together these atomic nuclei . Each additional step produces progressively heavier nuclei , which release progressively less energy when fusing . In addition , from carbon-burning onwards , energy loss via neutrino production becomes significant , leading to a higher rate of reaction than would otherwise take place . This continues until nickel-56 is produced , which decays radioactively into cobalt-56 and then iron-56 over the course of a few months . As iron and nickel have the highest binding energy per nucleon of all the elements , energy cannot be produced at the core by fusion , and a nickel-iron core grows . This core is under huge gravitational pressure . As there is no fusion to further raise the star 's temperature to support it against collapse , it is supported only by degeneracy pressure of electrons . In this state , matter is so dense that further compaction would require electrons to occupy the same energy states . However , this is forbidden for identical fermion particles , such as the electron – a phenomenon called the Pauli exclusion principle .

When the core 's mass exceeds the Chandrasekhar limit of about 1.4 M ☉ , degeneracy pressure can no longer support it , and catastrophic collapse ensues . The outer part of the core reaches velocities of up to 70,000 km / s ( 23 % of the speed of light ) as it collapses toward the center of the star . The rapidly shrinking core heats up , producing high-energy gamma rays that decompose iron nuclei into helium nuclei and free neutrons via photodisintegration . As the core 's density increases , it becomes energetically favorable for electrons and protons to merge via inverse beta decay , producing neutrons and elementary particles called neutrinos . Because neutrinos rarely interact with normal matter , they can escape from the core , carrying away energy and further accelerating the collapse , which proceeds over a timescale of milliseconds . As the core detaches from the outer layers of the star , some of these neutrinos are absorbed by the star 's outer layers , beginning the supernova explosion . For Type II supernovae , the collapse is eventually halted by short-range repulsive neutron-neutron interactions , mediated by the strong force , as well as by degeneracy pressure of neutrons , at a density comparable to that of an atomic nucleus . When the collapse stops , the infalling matter rebounds , producing a shock wave that propagates outward . The energy from this shock dissociates heavy elements within the core . This reduces the energy of the shock , which can stall the explosion within the outer core .

The core collapse phase is so dense and energetic that only neutrinos are able to escape . As the protons and electrons combine to form neutrons by means of electron capture , an electron neutrino is produced . In a typical Type II supernova , the newly formed neutron core has an initial temperature of about 100 billion Kelvin , 104 times the temperature of the sun 's core . Much of this thermal energy must be shed for a stable neutron star to form , otherwise the neutrons would " boil away " . This is accomplished by a further release of neutrinos . These ' thermal ' neutrinos form as neutrino-antineutrino pairs of all flavors , and total several times the number of electron-capture neutrinos . The two neutrino production mechanisms convert the gravitational potential energy of the collapse into a ten-second neutrino burst , releasing about 1046 joules ( 100 foe ) . Through a process that is not clearly understood , about 1 % , or 1044 joules ( 1 foe ) , of the energy released ( in the form of neutrinos ) is reabsorbed by the stalled shock , producing the supernova explosion . Neutrinos generated by a supernova were observed in the case of Supernova 1987A , leading astrophysicists to conclude that the core collapse picture is basically correct . The water-based Kamiokande II and IMB instruments detected antineutrinos of thermal origin , while the gallium-71-based Baksan instrument detected neutrinos ( lepton number = 1 ) of either thermal or electron-capture origin .

When the progenitor star is below about 20 M ☉ – depending on the strength of the explosion and the amount of material that falls back – the degenerate remnant of a core collapse is a neutron star . Above this mass , the remnant collapses to form a black hole . The theoretical limiting mass for this type of core collapse scenario is about 40 – 50 M ☉ . Above that mass , a star is believed to collapse directly into a black hole without forming a supernova explosion , although uncertainties in models of supernova collapse make calculation of these limits uncertain .

The Standard Model of particle physics is a theory which describes three of the four known fundamental interactions between the elementary particles that make up all matter . This theory allows predictions to be made about how particles will interact under many conditions . The energy per particle in a supernova is typically one to one hundred and fifty picojoules ( tens to hundreds of MeV ) . The per-particle energy involved in a supernova is small enough that the predictions gained from the Standard Model of particle physics are likely to be basically correct . But the high densities may require corrections to the Standard Model . In particular , Earth-based particle accelerators can produce particle interactions which are of much higher energy than are found in supernovae , but these experiments involve individual particles interacting with individual particles , and it is likely that the high densities within the supernova will produce novel effects . The interactions between neutrinos and the other particles in the supernova take place with the weak nuclear force , which is believed to be well understood . However , the interactions between the protons and neutrons involve the strong nuclear force , which is much less well understood .

The major unsolved problem with Type II supernovae is that it is not understood how the burst of neutrinos transfers its energy to the rest of the star producing the shock wave which causes the star to explode . From the above discussion , only one percent of the energy needs to be transferred to produce an explosion , but explaining how that one percent of transfer occurs has proven very difficult , even though the particle interactions involved are believed to be well understood . In the 1990s , one model for doing this involved convective overturn , which suggests that convection , either from neutrinos from below , or infalling matter from above , completes the process of destroying the progenitor star . Heavier elements than iron are formed during this explosion by neutron capture , and from the pressure of the neutrinos pressing into the boundary of the " neutrinosphere " , seeding the surrounding space with a cloud of gas and dust which is richer in heavy elements than the material from which the star originally formed . Neutrino physics , which is modeled by the Standard Model , is crucial to the understanding of this process . The other crucial area of investigation is the hydrodynamics of the plasma that makes up the dying star ; how it behaves during the core collapse determines when and how the " shock wave " forms and when and how it " stalls " and is reenergized .

In fact , some theoretical models incorporate a hydrodynamical instability in the stalled shock known as the " Standing Accretion Shock Instability " ( SASI ) . This instability comes about as a consequence of non-spherical perturbations oscillating the stalled shock thereby deforming it . The SASI is often used in tandem with neutrino theories in computer simulations for re-energizing the stalled shock . Computer models have been very successful at calculating the behavior of Type II supernovae when the shock has been formed . By ignoring the first second of the explosion , and assuming that an explosion is started , astrophysicists have been able to make detailed predictions about the elements produced by the supernova and of the expected light curve from the supernova .

When the spectrum of a Type II supernova is examined , it normally displays Balmer absorption lines – reduced flux at the characteristic frequencies where hydrogen atoms absorb energy . The presence of these lines is used to distinguish this category of supernova from a Type I supernova . When the luminosity of a Type II supernova is plotted over a period of time , it shows a characteristic rise to a peak brightness followed by a decline . These light curves have an average decay rate of 0.008 magnitudes per day ; much lower than the decay rate for Type Ia supernovae . Type II are sub-divided into two classes , depending on the shape of the light curve . The light curve for a Type II-L supernova shows a steady ( linear ) decline following the peak brightness . By contrast , the light curve of a Type II-P supernova has a distinctive flat stretch ( called a plateau ) during the decline ; representing a period where the luminosity decays at a slower rate . The net luminosity decay rate is lower , at 0.0075 magnitudes per day for Type II-P , compared to 0.012 magnitudes per day for Type II-L.

The difference in the shape of the light curves is believed to be caused , in the case of Type II-L supernovae , by the expulsion of most of the hydrogen envelope of the progenitor star . The plateau phase in Type II-P supernovae is due to a change in the opacity of the exterior layer . The shock wave ionizes the hydrogen in the outer envelope – stripping the electron from the hydrogen atom – resulting in a significant increase in the opacity . This prevents photons from the inner parts of the explosion from escaping . When the hydrogen cools sufficiently to recombine , the outer layer becomes transparent .

The " n " denotes narrow , which indicates the presence of intermediate or very narrow width H emission lines in the spectra . In the intermediate width case , the ejecta from the explosion may be interacting strongly with gas around the star – the circumstellar medium . The estimated circumstellar density required to explain the observational properties is much higher than that expected from the standard stellar evolution theory . It is generally assumed that the high circumstellar density is due to the high mass-loss rates of the SN IIn progenitors . The estimated mass-loss rates are typically higher than 10 − 3 M ⊙ yr − 1 . There are indications that they originate as stars similar to Luminous blue variables with large mass losses before exploding . SN 1998S and SN 2005gl are famous examples of Type IIn ; SN 2006gy , an extremely energetic supernova , may be another example .

A Type IIb supernova has a weak hydrogen line in its initial spectrum , which is why it is classified as a Type II . However , later on the H emission becomes undetectable , and there is also a second peak in the light curve that has a spectrum which more closely resembles a Type Ib supernova . The progenitor could have been a giant star which lost most of its hydrogen envelope due to interactions with a companion in a binary system , leaving behind the core that consisted almost entirely of helium . As the ejecta of a Type IIb expands , the hydrogen layer quickly becomes more transparent and reveals the deeper layers . The classic example of a Type IIb supernova is Supernova 1993J , while another example is Cassiopeia A. The IIb class was first introduced ( as a theoretical concept ) by Ensman & Woosley 1987 .

Hypernovae are a rare type of supernova substantially more luminous and energetic than standard supernovae . Examples are 1997ef ( type Ic ) and 1997cy ( type IIn ) . Hypernovae are produced by more than one type of event : relativistic jets during formation of a black hole from fallback of material onto the neutron star core , the collapsar model ; interaction with a dense envelope of circumstellar material , the CSM model ; the highest mass pair instability supernovae ; possibly others such as binary and quark star model . Stars with initial masses between about 25 and 90 times the sun develop cores large enough that after a supernova explosion , some material will fall back onto the neutron star core and create a black hole . In many cases this reduces the luminosity of the supernova , and above 90 M ☉ the star collapses directly into a black hole without a supernova explosion . However , if the progenitor is spinning quickly enough the infalling material generates relativistic jets that emit more energy than the original explosion . They may also be seen directly if beamed towards us , giving the impression of an even more luminous object . In some cases these can produce gamma-ray bursts , although not all gamma-ray bursts are from supernovae .

In some cases a type II supernova occurs when the star is surrounded by a very dense cloud of material , most likely expelled during luminous blue variable eruptions . This material is shocked by the explosion and becomes more luminous than a standard supernova . It is likely that there is a range of luminosities for these type IIn supernovae with only the brightest qualifying as a hypernova . Pair instability supernovae occur when an oxygen core in an extremely massive star becomes hot enough that gamma rays spontaneously produce electron-positron pairs . This causes the core to collapse , but where the collapse of an iron core causes endothermic fusion to heavier elements , the collapse of an oxygen core creates runaway exothermic fusion which completely unbinds the star . The total energy emitted depends on the initial mass , with much of the core being converted to 56Ni and ejected which then powers the supernova for many months . At the lower end stars of about 140 M ☉ produce supernovae that are long-lived but otherwise typical , while the highest mass stars of around 250 M ☉ produce supernovae that are extremely luminous and also very long lived ; hypernovae . More massive stars die by photodisintegration . Only population III stars , with very low metallicity , can reach this stage . Stars with more heavy elements are more opaque and blow away their outer layers until they are small enough to explode as a normal type Ib / c supernova . It is thought that even in our own galaxy , mergers of old low metallicity stars may form massive stars capable of creating a pair instability supernova .

Pulveroboletus ravenelii , commonly known as Ravenel 's bolete or the powdery sulfur bolete , is a species of bolete fungus in the family Boletaceae . Described as new to science in 1853 , the widely distributed species is known from Asia , Australia , North America , Central America , and South America . Mycorrhizal with oak , the fungus fruits on the ground singly , scattered , or in groups in woods . Fruit bodies ( mushrooms ) have convex to flat , yellowish to brownish-red caps up to 10 cm ( 4 in ) in diameter . On the cap underside , the pore surface is bright yellow before turning dingy yellow to grayish brown with age ; it stains greenish blue then grayish brown after injury . A cottony and powdery partial veil remains as a ring on the stipe . The mushrooms are edible , and have been used in traditional Chinese medicine and for mushroom dyeing .

The species was first described as Boletus ravenelii by Miles Joseph Berkeley and Moses Ashley Curtis in 1853 . Specimens were sent to them by American botanist Henry William Ravenel , who collected them in South Carolina . They considered the bolete " a most splendid species closely allied to B. hemichrysus , and , like that , remarkable for the pulverulent veil . " The specific epithet honors Ravenel . William Alphonso Murrill transferred the fungus to the genus Pulveroboletus in 1909 , giving it the name by which it is known today . The mushroom is commonly known as " Ravenel 's bolete " or the " powdery sulfur bolete " .

The cap is rounded to convex before flattening with age , and attains a diameter of 1 – 10 cm ( 0.4 – 3.9 in ) . Its margin is curved inward when young , and usually has hanging remnants of the partial veil . The surface is dry and initially coated with fine particles , while later it develops fine hairs or small scales that are pressed down flat on the surface ; in maturity the surface usually develops fine cracks or wrinkles . It is bright yellow , later turning to orange-red to brownish red . The flesh is white to pale yellow , and , when cut , will slowly stain pale blue , then dingy yellow to pale brown . Its flesh has been described variously as indistinct , or bitter tasting with an odor of hickory leaves . The pore surface is bright yellow before turning dingy yellow to grayish brown with age . It stains greenish blue then grayish brown after being bruised or injured . The pores , which number about 1 – 3 per millimeter , are angular to almost circular . The tubes comprising the pore surface are 5 – 8 cm ( 2.0 – 3.1 in ) deep . The yellow stem measures 4.5 – 14.5 cm ( 1.8 – 5.7 in ) long by 0.6 – 1.6 cm ( 0.2 – 0.6 in ) thick , and is roughly equal in width throughout or somewhat thicker near the base . It is solid ( i.e. , not hollow ) , and , above the level of the base , the surface is covered with minute hairs pressed flat against the surface . The partial veil , also bright yellow , is cottony and powdery , and remains as a ring on the upper portion of the stem , although in some specimens it merges gradually with the stipe surface and becomes inconspicuous . There is white mycelium at the stipe base .

Pulveroboletus ravenelii produces an olive-grey to olive-brown spore print . Spores are elliptical to oval , smooth , and measure 8 – 10 by 4 – 5 μm . The hyphal tissue in the hymenophore is inamyloid and bilateral , meaning it diverges downward from the flesh toward the edge of the hymenophore , away from a central strand . The tubes have scattered cystidia on the walls ( pleurocystidia ) and abundant cystidia on the edges ( cheilocystidia ) . The hyphae in the cap cuticle are arranged as an ixotrichodermium – long and typically multi-celled , with erect hyphae embedded in a gelatinous matrix . Clamp connections are absent from the hyphae .

The fruit bodies of Pulveroboletus ravenelii grow on the ground singly , scattered , or in groups in woods under conifers . Preferred mycorrhizal plant hosts include pine , hemlock , and rhododendron . Fruiting occurs from July to October . In North America , it is distributed from eastern Canada extending south to the Gulf of Mexico , and west to Texas , Michigan , and California . The bolete was reported from a Mexican beech ( Fagus mexicana ) forest in Hidalgo , Mexico in 2010 . It has also been recorded from Costa Rica and Colombia . In Asia , it has been found in Indonesia and China . It has also been recorded from northeast Australia .

" Johnny 's Theme " is an instrumental jazz song played as the opening theme of The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson from the show 's inception in 1962 through its finale in 1992 . The piece was composed by Paul Anka and Johnny Carson , based on a previous composition by Anka . It was performed by The Tonight Show Band , which released an arrangement by Tommy Newsom in 1986 as part of its Grammy Award-winning eponymous debut album . The single release also garnered a Grammy nomination . " Johnny 's Theme " has since been released in cover versions and on compilation albums . It has appeared in several films , and been played live in concert by school bands and by amateur and professional musicians , including Doc Severinsen 's Big Band .

" Johnny 's Theme " began life as " Toot Sweet " , a pop instrumental composed in 1959 by Paul Anka and recorded by Tutti 's Trumpets . It was released on Disney 's Buena Vista label as the B-side to The Camarata Strings ' single " Lost In a Fog " . " Tutti " Camarata , who was Annette Funicello 's producer at the time , asked Anka to write some songs for Funicello 's first album to follow her work on The Mickey Mouse Club . Anka added lyrics to " Toot Sweet " and published them under the title " It 's Really Love " , and the song was released as part of Annette Sings Anka . He recorded his own version of " It 's Really Love " that same year for the French film Faibles Femmes ; it was released on seven-inch EPs in France , Italy and Spain .

When Johnny Carson , a fan of jazz music , was preparing to take over as the permanent host of The Tonight Show starting in October 1962 , he recognized that he would need a theme song . Carson and Anka had worked together in England on the television special An Evening with Paul Anka in 1961 ; when they happened to meet up again in New York City the following year , Carson manager Al Bruno mentioned needing a theme . Anka created a new instrumental arrangement for " It 's Really Love " and sent a demo to Carson and Ed McMahon , who were in Fort Lauderdale , Florida , making preparations for the show . McMahon said " it was the first time either one of us heard [ the song ] — and magic . "

Shortly after sending the demo , Anka received a telephone call and was told that Tonight Show bandleader Skitch Henderson was angry because Carson wanted to use a theme song written by " a 20-year-old kid " . Anka said he then offered to let Carson write and publish new lyrics in order to claim a songwriter 's credit , along with half of the royalties every time the song was played . Those lyrics were never used on the show . Anka estimated that " Johnny 's Theme " was played live on Carson 's Tonight Show more than 1,400,000 times over the course of 30 years . As its original composer , Anka also was paid each time the song was broadcast , earning each man an average of about US $ 200,000 per year . The song was retired along with Carson in 1992 ; his iteration of The Tonight Show was called " the last widely public big-band forum " . Incoming bandleader Branford Marsalis composed a more " funky " theme for successor Jay Leno because " a swing tune doesn 't reflect Jay at all [ and ] jazz doesn 't come to mind either . "

Henry Mancini and his orchestra recorded a 2 : 44 arrangement of " Johnny 's Theme " in 1972 for the German EP Theme from Nicholas and Alexandra . A version also appeared as part of Mancini 's 2010 compilation Big Screen , Little Screen . Paul Anka produced a recording by Top Brass for Buddah Records in 1973 . Lawrence Welk and his orchestra performed the song for their 1976 album Nadia 's Theme . Doc Severinsen and the band recorded " Johnny 's Theme " and 12 other tracks for their album The Tonight Show Band , released in 1986 . Amherst Records also released the track as a single , titled " Johnny 's Theme ( The Tonight Show Theme ) " , which debuted at # 27 on the Radio & Records Jazz Top 30 chart . The song has been released on compilations of television themes , the 1995 compilation 25 Years of Chrysalis Music , and The Very Best of Doc Severinsen ( 1998 ) .

In 2005 , Doc Severinsen , Carson 's bandleader starting in 1967 , said the song worked so well because it was " accessible . People could understand what it was , and it was associated with Johnny . " Larry King called it " one of the most familiar themes in American television history . " Paul Anka said the song was played for only a short time each night , " but everybody knows it . Simplicity is indeed royal . " The Washington Post in 2008 said the days of the television theme song were fading into nostalgia , though they " used to abound " , with or without lyrics . For example , " Anka 's Tonight Show theme was inseparable from late night and Johnny Carson . " " Johnny 's Theme " has been included in numerous films , including This Is My Life , Isn 't She Great and Talk to Me . The song has been performed live by musicians at varying skill levels , from student to professional . Iowa State Cyclones men 's basketball coach Johnny Orr came onto the court pumping his fist as the pep band played " Johnny 's Theme " before games at the Hilton Coliseum . Orr 's tenure ran from 1980 to 1994 .

Blue Velvet is a 1986 American mystery film , written and directed by David Lynch . Blending psychological horror with film noir , the film stars Kyle MacLachlan , Isabella Rossellini , Dennis Hopper and Laura Dern . The title is taken from Bobby Vinton 's 1963 song of the same name . Although initially receiving a divided critical response , the film is now widely acclaimed as one of the greatest films of the 1980s , and earned Lynch his second Academy Award nomination for Best Director . As an example of a director casting against the norm , Blue Velvet is also noted for re-launching Hopper 's career and for providing Rossellini with a dramatic outlet beyond the work as a fashion model and a cosmetics spokeswoman , something for which she had until then been known . After the commercial and critical failure of Lynch 's Dune ( 1984 ) , he made attempts at developing a more " personal story " , somewhat characteristic of the surrealist style he displayed in his debut Eraserhead ( 1977 ) . The screenplay of Blue Velvet had been passed around multiple times in the late 1970s and early 1980s , with many major studios declining it because of its strong sexual and violent content . The independent studio De Laurentiis Entertainment Group , owned at the time by Italian film producer Dino De Laurentiis , agreed to finance and produce the film .

Jeffrey Beaumont ( Kyle MacLachlan ) returns to his logging home town of Lumberton , North Carolina from Oak Lake College after his father suffers a near-fatal stroke . While walking home from the hospital , he cuts through a vacant lot and discovers a severed ear . Jeffrey takes the ear to police detective John Williams ( George Dickerson ) and becomes reacquainted with the detective 's daughter , Sandy ( Laura Dern ) . She tells him details about the ear case and a suspicious woman , Dorothy Vallens ( Isabella Rossellini ) , who may be connected to the case . Increasingly curious , Jeffrey enters Dorothy 's apartment by posing as an exterminator , and while Dorothy is distracted by a man dressed in a yellow suit at her door ( whom Jeffrey later refers to as the Yellow Man ) , Jeffrey steals her spare key . Jeffrey and Sandy attend Dorothy 's nightclub act , in which she sings " Blue Velvet " , and leave early so Jeffrey can sneak into her apartment to snoop . He hurriedly hides in a closet when she returns home . However , Dorothy , wielding a knife , discovers him and threatens to kill him . Believing his curiosity is merely sexual and aroused by his voyeurism , Dorothy makes Jeffrey undress at knifepoint and begins to fellate him before their encounter is interrupted by a knock at the door . Dorothy hides Jeffrey in the closet . From there he witnesses the visitor , Frank Booth ( Dennis Hopper ) , inflict his bizarre sexual proclivities — which include inhaling an unidentified gas ( possibly amyl nitrite ) , dry humping , and sadomasochism — upon Dorothy . Frank is an extremely foul-mouthed , violent sociopath whose orgasmic climax is a fit of both pleasure and rage . He continually refers to her as " Mommy " and to himself as both the " Daddy " and the " Baby " , who " want to fuck . " Frank has kidnapped Dorothy 's husband and son to force her to perform sexual favors ; to " Do it for van Gogh . " When Frank leaves , a sad and desperate Dorothy tries to seduce Jeffrey again and demands that he hit her , but when he refuses , she tells him to leave . When Jeffrey moves to leave , she asks him to stay , though he leaves anyway .

Jeffrey relays his experience to Sandy , asking her why there are people like Frank . Sandy in turn tells him of a wonderful dream she had about robins that she interprets as a sign of hope for humanity . Jeffrey and Sandy find themselves attracted to each other , though Sandy has a boyfriend . Jeffrey again visits Dorothy 's apartment and she tells him that although she knows nothing about him , she has been yearning for him . Jeffrey attends another of Dorothy 's performances at the club , where she sings the same song . At the club , Jeffrey spots Frank in the audience fondling a piece of blue velvet fabric he cut from Dorothy 's robe . Jeffrey follows Frank and spends the next few days spying on him . Shortly afterwards , two men that Jeffrey calls the Well-Dressed Man and the Yellow Man exit an industrial building that Frank frequently visits . Jeffrey concludes the men are criminal associates of Frank , and tells his new findings to Sandy . The two briefly kiss , though she feels uncomfortable about going any further . Jeffrey immediately visits Dorothy again , and the two have sex . However , when he refuses to hit her , she pressures him , becoming more emotional . In a blind rage he knocks her backwards and is instantly horrified , but Dorothy derives pleasure from it .

Afterwards , Frank catches Dorothy and Jeffrey together and forces them both to accompany him to the apartment of Ben ( Dean Stockwell ) , his suave , effeminate partner in crime who is holding Dorothy 's son . Ben lip-syncs a performance of Roy Orbison 's " In Dreams " , sending Frank into maudlin sadness , then rage . Frank takes Jeffrey to a lumber yard and when he molests Dorothy , Jeffrey stands up to Frank by punching him . Frank 's cronies drag Jeffrey out of the car and Frank kisses Jeffrey 's face , intimidates him , and then savagely beats him to the overture of " In Dreams " . Jeffrey wakes the next day at the same place and walks home , overcome with guilt and despair . He goes to the police station , where he notices that Sandy 's father 's partner is the Yellow Man — an officer named Lieutenant Detective Tom Gordon ( Fred Pickler ) . Later , at Sandy 's home , her father is amazed by Jeffrey 's story , but warns Jeffrey to stop his amateur sleuthing lest he endanger himself and the investigation . Jeffrey and Sandy go to a dance together and profess their love , only to be confronted by Sandy 's boyfriend . A confrontation is averted when the group finds Dorothy — naked , battered , and distressed — on Jeffrey 's front lawn . Barely conscious , Dorothy reveals her intimacy with Jeffrey , causing Sandy to become upset and to slap Jeffrey , although she later forgives him .

Jeffrey insists on returning to Dorothy 's apartment and tells Sandy to immediately send the police there , including her father . At Dorothy 's apartment , Jeffrey finds Dorothy 's husband ( Don Vallens ) , who is dead from a gunshot to the head and identifiable by his missing ear , as well as the Yellow Man ( Gordon ) , who bears a gruesome head wound and appears to have suffered a crude lobotomy . When Jeffrey tries to leave , he sees the Well-Dressed Man coming up the stairs and recognizes him as Frank in disguise . Jeffrey talks to Detective Williams over the Yellow Man 's police radio , but lies about his location inside the apartment . Frank enters the apartment and brags about hearing Jeffrey 's location over his own police radio . While Frank searches for him in the wrong room , Jeffrey retrieves the Yellow Man 's gun and hides in the same closet in which he hid during his first visit to the apartment . Frank fires sporadically , knocking over the dead Yellow Man , who had still been standing up , and when he opens the closet door , Jeffrey fatally shoots him in the head . Detective Williams , gun drawn , enters with Sandy a moment later . Jeffrey and Sandy now go ahead with their relationship and note the unusual appearance of robins in their town . A montage sequence ends the film , which shows Dorothy and her son reunited .

The film 's story originated from three ideas that crystallized in the filmmaker 's mind over a period of time starting as early as 1973 . The first idea was only " a feeling " and the title Blue Velvet , Lynch told Cineaste in 1987 . The second idea was an image of a severed , human ear lying in a field . " I don 't know why it had to be an ear . Except it needed to be an opening of a part of the body , a hole into something else ... The ear sits on the head and goes right into the mind so it felt perfect " , Lynch remarked in an interview . The third idea was Bobby Vinton 's classic rendition of the song Blue Velvet and " the mood that came with that song a mood , a time , and things that were of that time . " Lynch eventually spent two years writing two drafts , which , he stated , were not very good . The problem with them , Lynch has said , was that " there was maybe all the unpleasantness in the film but nothing else . A lot was not there . And so it went away for a while . "

After completing The Elephant Man ( 1980 ) , Lynch met producer Richard Roth over coffee . Roth had read and enjoyed Lynch 's Ronnie Rocket script , but did not think it was something he wanted to produce . He asked Lynch if the filmmaker had any other scripts , but the director only had ideas . " I told him I had always wanted to sneak into a girl 's room to watch her into the night and that , maybe , at one point or another , I would see something that would be the clue to a murder mystery . Roth loved the idea and asked me to write a treatment . I went home and thought of the ear in the field . " Production was announced in August 1984 . Lynch wrote two more drafts before he was satisfied with the script of the film . Conditions at this point were ideal for Lynch 's film : he had cut a deal with Dino De Laurentiis that gave him complete artistic freedom and final cut privileges , with the stipulation that the filmmaker take a cut in his salary and work with a budget of only $ 6 million . This deal meant that Blue Velvet was the smallest film on the De Laurentiis ' slate . Consequently , Lynch would be left mostly unsupervised during production . " After Dune I was down so far that anything was up ! So it was just a euphoria . And when you work with that kind of feeling , you can take chances . You can experiment . " Because the material was completely different from anything that would be considered mainstream at the time , Laurentiis had to start his own company to distribute it .

The cast of Blue Velvet included several then-relatively unknown actors . Isabella Rossellini had gained some exposure before the film for her Lancôme ads in the early 1980s and for being the daughter of actress Ingrid Bergman and Italian film director Roberto Rossellini . Dennis Hopper was the biggest " name " in the film , having starred in Easy Rider ( 1969 ) , while Kyle MacLachlan had played the central role in Lynch 's critical and commercial failure Dune ( 1984 ) , a science fiction epic based on the novel . MacLachlan later became a recurring collaborator with Lynch , who remarked : " Kyle plays innocents who are interested in the mysteries of life . He 's the person you trust enough to go into a strange world with . " Dennis Hopper — said to be Lynch 's third choice — accepted the role , reportedly having exclaimed , " I 've got to play Frank ! I am Frank ! " as Hopper confirmed in the Blue Velvet " making-of " documentary The Mysteries of Love , produced for the 2002 special edition . For the role of Dorothy Vallens , Lynch met Isabella Rossellini at a restaurant , and she accepted the role . Laura Dern , then just nineteen years old , was cast after various successful actresses at the time turned it down , including Molly Ringwald .

The scene in which Dorothy appears naked outside was inspired by a real-life experience Lynch had during childhood when he and his brother saw a naked woman walking down a neighborhood street at night . The experience was so traumatic to the young Lynch that it made him cry , and he had never forgotten it . Principal photography of Blue Velvet began in February 1986 and completed in April . The film was shot at EUE / Screen Gems studio in Wilmington , North Carolina , which also provided the exterior scenes of Lumberton . The scene with a raped and battered Dorothy proved to be particularly challenging . Several townspeople arrived to watch the filming with picnic baskets and rugs , against the wishes of Rossellini and Lynch . However , they continued filming as normal , and when Lynch yelled cut , the townspeople had left . As a result , police told Lynch they were no longer permitted to shoot in any public areas of Wilmington . Lynch 's original rough cut ran for approximately four hours . He was contractually obligated to deliver a two-hour movie by De Laurentiis and cut many small subplots and character scenes . He also made cuts at the request of the MPAA . For example , when Frank slaps Dorothy after the first rape scene , the audience was supposed to see Frank actually hitting her . Instead , the film cuts away to Jeffrey in the closet , wincing at what he has just seen . This cut was made to satisfy the MPAA 's concerns about violence . Lynch thought that the change only made the scene more disturbing . Lynch announced in a radio interview on January 18 , 2011 , that footage from the deleted scenes , long thought lost , had been discovered . It later appeared on the 2011 special edition Blu-ray disc release of the film . The final cut produced by Lynch runs for just under two hours .

Despite Blue Velvet 's initial appearance as a mystery , the film operates on a number of thematic levels . The film owes a large debt to 1950s film noir , containing and exploring such conventions as the femme fatale ( Dorothy Vallens ) , a seemingly unstoppable villain ( Frank Booth ) , and the questionable moral outlook of the hero ( Jeffrey Beaumont ) , as well as its unusual use of shadowy , sometimes dark cinematography . Blue Velvet represents and establishes Lynch 's famous " askew vision , " and introduces several common elements of Lynch 's work , some of which would later become his trademarks , including distorted characters , a polarized world , and debilitating damage to the skull or brain . Perhaps the most significant " Lynchian " trademark in the film is the depiction of unearthing a dark underbelly in a seemingly idealized small town ; Jeffrey even proclaims in the film that he is " seeing something that was always hidden " , alluding to the film 's plot central idea . Lynch 's characterization of films , symbols , and motifs have become well-known , and his particular style , characterised largely in Blue Velvet for the first time , has been written about extensively using descriptions like " dreamlike " , " ultraweird " , " dark " , and " oddball " . Red curtains also show up in key scenes , specifically in Dorothy 's apartment , which have since become a Lynch trademark . The film has been compared to Alfred Hitchcock 's Psycho ( 1960 ) because of its stark treatment of psychotic evil . The premise of both films is curiosity , leading to an investigation that draws the lead characters into a hidden , voyeuristic underworld of crime .

The film 's thematic framework hearkens back to Poe , James , and early gothic fiction , as well as films such as Shadow of a Doubt ( 1943 ) and The Night of the Hunter ( 1955 ) and the entire notion of film noir . Lynch has called it a " film about things that are hidden — within a small city and within people . " Like many other Lynch films , Blue Velvet is immersed in pop culture imagery , both from the 1950s and the 1960s , as well as the 1980s . Feminist psychoanalytic film theorist Laura Mulvey argues that Blue Velvet establishes a metaphorical Oedipal family — " the child " , Jeffrey Beaumont , and his " parents " , Frank Booth and Dorothy Vallens — through deliberate references to film noir and its underlying Oedipal theme . The resulting violence , she claims , can be read as symbolic of domestic violence within real families . For instance , Frank 's violent acts can be seen to reflect the different types of abuse within families , and the control he has over Dorothy might represent the hold an abusive husband has over his wife . Michael Atkinson reads Jeffrey as an innocent youth who is both horrified by the violence inflicted by Frank , but also tempted by it as the means of possessing Dorothy for himself . Atkinson takes a Freudian approach to the film ; considering it to be an expression of the traumatised innocence which characterises Lynch 's work . He claims that " Dorothy represents the sexual force of the mother [ figure ] because she is forbidden and because she becomes the object of the unhealthy , infantile impulses at work in Jeffrey 's subconscious " .

Symbolism is used very heavily in Blue Velvet . The most consistent symbolism in the film is an insect motif introduced at the end of the first scene , when the camera zooms in on a well-kept suburban lawn until it unearths a swarming underground nest of disgusting bugs . This is generally recognized as a metaphor for the seedy underworld that Jeffrey will soon discover under the surface of his own suburban , Reaganesque paradise . The severed ear he finds is being overrun by black ants . The bug motif is recurrent throughout the film , most notably in the bug-like gas mask that Frank wears , but also the excuse that Jeffrey uses to gain access to Dorothy 's apartment : he claims to be an insect exterminator . One of Frank 's sinister accomplices is also consistently identified through the yellow jacket he wears , possibly reminiscent of the name of a type of wasp . Finally , a robin eating a bug on a fence becomes a topic of discussion in the last scene of the film . The robin , mentioned earlier by Sandy when she recounted her dream , represents love conquering evil .

The severed ear that Jeffrey discovers is also a key symbolic element , leading Jeffrey into danger . Indeed , just as Jeffrey 's troubles begin , the audience is treated to a nightmarish sequence in which the camera zooms into the canal of the severed , decomposing ear . Notably , the camera does not reemerge from the ear canal until the end of the film . When Jeffrey finally comes through his hellish ordeal unscathed , the ear canal shot is replayed , only in reverse , zooming out through Jeffrey 's own ear as he relaxes in his yard on a summer day .

The Blue Velvet soundtrack was supervised by Angelo Badalamenti ( who makes a brief cameo appearance as the pianist at the Slow Club where Dorothy performs ) . The soundtrack makes heavy usage of vintage pop songs , such as Bobby Vinton 's " Blue Velvet " and Roy Orbison 's " In Dreams " , juxtaposed with an orchestral score inspired by Shostakovich . During filming , Lynch placed speakers on set and in streets and played Shostakovich to set the mood he wanted to convey . The score makes direct quotations from Shostakovich 's 15th Symphony , which Lynch had been listening to regularly while writing the screenplay . Lynch had originally opted to use " Song To The Siren " by This Mortal Coil during the scene in which Sandy and Jeffrey share a dance , however he could not obtain the rights for the song at the time . He would go onto use this song in Lost Highway , eleven years later . Entertainment Weekly ranked Blue Velvet 's soundtrack on its list of the 100 Greatest Film Soundtracks , at the 100th position . Critic John Alexander wrote , " the haunting soundtrack accompanies the title credits , then weaves through the narrative , accentuating the noir mood of the film " . Lynch worked with music composer Angelo Badalamenti for the first time in this film and asked him to write a score that had to be " like Shostakovich , be very Russian , but make it the most beautiful thing but make it dark and a little bit scary " . Badalamenti 's success with Blue Velvet would lead him to contribute to all of Lynch 's future full-length films until Inland Empire . Also included in the sound team was long time Lynch collaborator Alan Splet , a sound editor and designer who had won an Academy Award for his work on The Black Stallion ( 1979 ) , and been nominated for Never Cry Wolf ( 1983 ) .

Blue Velvet premiered in competition at the Montréal World Film Festival in August 1986 , and at the Toronto Film Festival on September 12 , 1986 , and a few days later in the United States . It debuted commercially in both countries on September 19 , 1986 , in 98 theatres across the United States . In its opening weekend , the film grossed a total of $ 789,409 . It eventually expanded to another fifteen theatres , and domestically grossed a total of $ 8,551,228 . It was also released internationally , in Australia , most of West Germany , China , Canada , Hong Kong , and Japan , followed by subsequent video releases . The film performed well overseas , grossing $ 900,000 in Australia , and $ 450,139 in Hong Kong .

Blue Velvet received critical acclaim in the United States upon its release and currently has a " certified fresh " score of 94 % on Rotten Tomatoes based on 62 reviews with an average rating of 8.7 out of 10 . The critical consensus states " If audiences walk away from this subversive , surreal shocker not fully understanding the story , they might also walk away with a deeper perception of the potential of film storytelling . " The film also has a score of 75 out of 100 on Metacritic based on 14 critics indicating " Generally favorable reviews . " Paul Attanasio of The Washington Post said " the film showcases a visual stylist utterly in command of his talents " and that Angelo Badalamenti " contributes an extraordinary score , slipping seamlessly from slinky jazz to violin figures to the romantic sweep of a classic Hollywood score " , but claimed that Lynch " isn 't interested in communicating , he 's interested in parading his personality . The movie doesn 't progress or deepen , it just gets weirder , and to no good end . " The New York Times critic Janet Maslin expressed her admiration for the film , and directed much praise toward the performances of Hopper and Rossellini : " Mr. Hopper and Miss Rossellini are so far outside the bounds of ordinary acting here that their performances are best understood in terms of sheer lack of inhibition ; both give themselves entirely over to the material , which seems to be exactly what 's called for . " She called it " an instant cult classic . " Maslin concluded by saying that Blue Velvet " is as fascinating as it is freakish . It confirms Mr. Lynch 's stature as an innovator , a superb technician , and someone best not encountered in a dark alley . " Sheila Benson of the Los Angeles Times called the film " the most brilliantly disturbing film ever to have its roots in small-town American life . " She called it " shocking , visionary , rapturously controlled . "

Looking back in his Guardian / Observer review , critic Philip French wrote , " The film is wearing well and has attained a classic status without becoming respectable or losing its sense of danger . " Peter Travers , film critic for Rolling Stone , named Blue Velvet the best film of the 1980s , and referred to the film as an " American masterpiece . " Film critic Gene Siskel included Blue Velvet on his list of the best films of 1986 , at the fifth spot . But Blue Velvet was not without its detractors . A general criticism from U.S. critics was the film 's often vulgar approach to sexuality and violence , which they claimed detracted from the film 's serious side . One of the film 's detractors , Roger Ebert , film critic of the Chicago Sun-Times , supported that view ; although he praised Isabella Rossellini 's performance as being " convincing and courageous " , he criticized how she was depicted in the film , even accusing David Lynch of misogyny : " degraded , slapped around , humiliated and undressed in front of the camera . And when you ask an actress to endure those experiences , you should keep your side of the bargain by putting her in an important film " . During an online Q & A session in 2007 , Ebert said he still had negativity regarding how Rossellini was depicted but said he should re-visit Blue Velvet and that David Lynch was a good director . In a tweet honoring David Lynch 's birthday , Ebert later revealed though he views Lynch as a great director , his feelings remain unchanged about Blue Velvet .

Although it initially gained a relatively small theatrical audience in North America and was met with controversy over its artistic merit , Blue Velvet soon became the center of a " national firestorm " in 1986 , and over time achieved status as an American classic . In the late 1980s , and early 1990s , after its release on videotape , the film became a widely known cult film , well known for its dark depiction of a suburban America . Followed by myriad VHS , Laserdisc and DVD releases , the film became increasingly well-known among American audiences . It marked the entrance of David Lynch into the Hollywood mainstream and the comeback of Dennis Hopper after a significant hiatus from work . Hopper 's performance and the character of Frank Booth itself has left an imprint on popular culture , with countless tributes , cultural references and parodies . The success of the film alone has helped propel Hollywood mainstream toward more graphic displays of previously censored themes , a similar case to Psycho ( 1960 ) , to which Blue Velvet has been frequently compared . It has become one of the most significant , well-recognized films of its era , spawning countless imitations and parodies in media . The film 's dark , stylish and erotic production design has served as a benchmark for a number of films , parodies and even Lynch 's own later work , notably Twin Peaks ( 1990 – 91 ) , and Mulholland Drive ( 2001 ) . Peter Travers of Rolling Stone magazine cited it as one of the most " influential American films " , as did Michael Atkinson , who dedicated a book to the film 's themes and motifs .

Blue Velvet now frequently appears in various critical assessments of all-time great films , also ranked as one of the greatest films of the 1980s , one of the best examples of American surrealism and one of the finest examples of David Lynch 's work . In a poll of two American critics ranking the " most outstanding films of the decade " , Blue Velvet was placed third and fourth , behind Raging Bull ( 1980 ) , E.T. The Extra Terrestrial ( 1982 ) and the German film Wings of Desire ( 1987 ) . An Entertainment Weekly book special released in 1999 ranked Blue Velvet at thirty-seventh greatest films of all time . The film was ranked by The Guardian in its list of the 100 Greatest Films . Film Four 's ranked it on their list of 100 Greatest Films . In a 2007 poll of the online film community held by Variety , Blue Velvet came in at the ninety-fifth greatest film of all time . Total Film ranked Blue Velvet as one of the all-time best films in both a critics list and a public poll , in 2006 and 2007 , respectively . In December 2002 , a UK film critics poll in Sight & Sound ranked the film fifth on their list of the 10 Best Films of the Last 25 Years . In a special Entertainment Weekly issue , 100 new film classics were chosen from 1983 to 2008 : Blue Velvet was ranked at fourth .

In addition to Blue Velvet 's various " all-time greatest films " rankings , the American Film Institute has awarded the film three honors in its lists : ninety-sixth on 100 Years ... 100 Thrills in 2001 , selecting cinema 's most thrilling moments and ranked Frank Booth thirty-sixth of the 50 greatest villains in 100 Years ... 100 Heroes and Villains in 2003 . In June 2008 , the AFI revealed its " Ten top Ten " — the best ten films in ten " classic " American film genres — after polling over 1,500 people from the creative community . Blue Velvet was acknowledged as the eighth best film in the mystery genre . Premiere magazine listed Frank Booth , played by Dennis Hopper , as the fifty-fourth on its list of The 100 Greatest Movie Characters of All Time , calling him one of " the most monstrously funny creations in cinema history " . The film was ranked eighty-fourth on Bravo Television 's four-hour program 100 Scariest Movie Moments ( 2004 ) . It is frequently sampled musically and an array of bands and solo artists have taken their names and inspiration from the film . In August 2012 , Sight & Sound unveiled their latest list of the 250 greatest films of all time , with Blue Velvet ranking at sixty-ninth .

Blue Velvet was released on Blu-ray on November 8 , 2011 , in a special 25th anniversary edition featuring never-before-seen deleted scenes . The film had previously been released on DVD in 1999 and 2002 by MGM Home Entertainment . In early 2015 , it was announced that a feature-length documentary film entitled " Blue Velvet Revisited " , made up exclusively of behind the scenes footage , was in production for Autumn 2015 release . The film is based on extensive unreleased footage shot on set in 1985 by German filmmaker Peter Braatz , at David Lynch 's invitation . Cult With No Name , Tuxedomoon and John Foxx were commissioned to provide the soundtrack for the film ( which was released in October 2015 ) , and a collection of previously unreleased photos is also to be published . Inspired by the film , baroque pop singer Lana Del Rey recorded a cover version of Bobby Vinton 's classic rendition of the song " Blue Velvet " in 2012 . Used to endorse clothing line H & M , a music video accompanied the track and aired as a television commercial . Filmed in Post-war Americana , the video drew influence from Lynch and Blue Velvet . In the video , Del Rey plays the role of Dorothy Vallens , performing a private concert similar to the scene where Ben ( Dean Stockwell ) pantomimes " In Dreams " for Frank Booth . Del Rey 's version , however , has her lip-synching " Blue Velvet " when a little person dressed as Frank Sinatra approaches and unplugs a hidden victrola , revealing Del Rey as a fraud . When Lynch heard of the music video , he praised it , telling Artinfo : " Lana Del Rey , she 's got some fantastic charisma and — this is a very interesting thing — it 's like she 's born out of another time . She 's got something that 's very appealing to people . And I didn 't know she was influenced by me ! "

" Is Google Making Us Stupid ? What the Internet is doing to our brains " ( alternatively " Is Google Making Us Stoopid ? " ) is a magazine article by technology writer Nicholas G. Carr highly critical of the Internet 's effect on cognition . It was published in the July / August 2008 edition of The Atlantic magazine as a six-page cover story . Carr 's main argument is that the Internet might have detrimental effects on cognition that diminish the capacity for concentration and contemplation . Despite the title , the article is not specifically targeted at Google , but more at the cognitive impact of the Internet and World Wide Web . Carr expanded his argument in The Shallows : What the Internet Is Doing to Our Brains , a book published by W. W. Norton in June 2010 . The essay was extensively discussed in the media and the blogosphere , with reactions to Carr 's argument being polarised . At the Britannica Blog , a part of the discussion focused on the apparent bias in Carr 's argument toward literary reading . In Carr 's view , reading on the Internet is generally of a shallower form in comparison with reading from printed books in which he believes a more intense and sustained form of reading is exercised . Elsewhere in the media , the Internet 's impact on memory retention was discussed ; and , at the online scientific magazine Edge , several argued that it was ultimately the responsibility of individuals to monitor their Internet usage so that it does not impact their cognition .

While long-term psychological and neurological studies have yet to yield definitive results justifying Carr 's argument , a few studies have provided glimpses into the changing cognitive habits of Internet users . A UCLA study led some to wonder whether a breadth of brain activity — which was shown to occur while users performed Internet searches in the study 's functional MRI scans — actually facilitated reading and cognition or possibly overburdened the mind ; and what quality of thought could be determined by the additional presence of brain activity in regions known to control decision-making and complex reasoning skills .

Prior to the publication of Carr 's Atlantic essay , critics had long been concerned about the potential for electronic media to supplant literary reading . In 1994 , American academic Sven Birkerts published a book titled The Gutenberg Elegies : The Fate of Reading in an Electronic Age , consisting of a collection of essays that declaimed against the declining influence of literary culture — the tastes in literature that are favored by a social group — with a central premise among the essays asserting that alternative delivery formats for the book are inferior to the paper incarnation . Birkerts was spurred to write the book after his experience with a class he taught in the fall of 1992 , where the students had little appreciation for the literature he had assigned them , stemming from , in his opinion , their inaptitude for the variety of skills involved in deep reading . In " Perseus Unbound " , an essay from the book , Birkerts presented several reservations toward the application of interactive technologies to educational instruction , cautioning that the " long-term cognitive effects of these new processes of data absorption " were unknown and that they could yield " an expansion of the short-term memory banks and a correlative atrophying of long-term memory " .

In 2007 , developmental psychologist Maryanne Wolf took up the cause of defending reading and print culture in her book Proust and the Squid : The Story and Science of the Reading Brain , approaching the subject matter from a scientific angle in contrast to Birkerts ' cultural-historical angle . A few reviewers were critical of Wolf for only touching upon the Internet 's potential impact on reading in her book ; however , in essays published concurrent with the book 's release she elaborated upon her worries . In an essay in The Boston Globe , Wolf expressed her grave concern that the development of knowledge in children who are heavy users of the Internet could produce mere " decoders of information who have neither the time nor the motivation to think beneath or beyond their googled universes " , and cautioned that the web 's " immediacy and volume of information should not be confused with true knowledge " . In an essay published by Powell 's Books , Wolf contended that some of the reading brain 's strengths could be lost in future generations " if children are not taught first to read , and to think deeply about their reading , and only then to e-read " . Preferring to maintain an academic perspective , Wolf firmly asserted that her speculations have not yet been scientifically verified but deserved serious study .

In Carr 's 2008 book The Big Switch : Rewiring the World , From Edison to Google , the material in the final chapter , " iGod " , provided a basis for his later Atlantic magazine article titled " Is Google Making Us Stupid ? " The inspiration to write " Is Google Making Us Stupid ? " came from the difficulties Carr found he had in remaining engaged with not only books he had to read but even books that he found very interesting . This is sometimes called deep reading , a term coined by academic Sven Birkerts in his book The Gutenberg Elegies and later defined by developmental psychologist Maryanne Wolf with an added cognitive connotation .

At the start of the essay , Carr says that his recent difficulties with concentrating while reading books and long articles may be due to spending a lot of time on the Internet . He posits that regular Internet usage may have the effect of diminishing the capacity for concentration and contemplation . He prefaces his argument with a couple of anecdotes from bloggers on their changing reading habits , as well as the findings of a 2008 University College London study titled " Information Behaviour of the Researcher of the Future " which suggests the emergence of new types of reading . He cites Maryanne Wolf , an expert on reading , for her expertise on the role of media and technology in learning written languages . Carr raises the point that unlike speech , which is an innate ability hardwired into the human brain , the ability to read has to be taught in order for the brain to rearrange its original parts for the task of interpreting symbols into words . He acknowledges that his argument does not yet have the backing of long-term neurological and psychological studies . Carr further draws on Wolf 's work , particularly her 2007 book Proust and the Squid , to relate his argument to the way in which neural circuits in the reading brain are specifically shaped by the demands particular to each written language , such as Chinese , Japanese , and alphabet-based scripts . Therefore , Carr purports that the neural circuitry shaped by regular Internet usage can also be expected to be different from that shaped by the reading of books and other page-based written material .

Carr begins his argument by reasoning how the capacity to concentrate may be weakened by regular Internet usage . He mentions a historical example involving Friedrich Nietzsche 's usage of a typewriter , a fairly new technology in the 1880s . According to German scholar Friedrich A. Kittler , Nietzsche 's prose style changed when he started using a typewriter , which he had adopted because of his developing difficulty with writing by hand due to failing eyesight . Carr proceeds to explain that scientific research in the field of neuroplasticity as of 2008 has demonstrated that the brain 's neural circuitry can in fact be rewired . In the humanities , sociologist Daniel Bell coined the term " intellectual technologies " to describe those technologies that extend the brain 's cognitive faculties , and Carr states that he believes that the human brain adopts the qualities of these intellectual technologies . In discussing the mechanical clock , Carr deliberates upon the benefits and losses that are characteristic of new technologies . Then , Carr ventures that the cognitive impact of the Internet may be far more encompassing than any other previous intellectual technology because the Internet is gradually performing the services of most intellectual technologies , thus replacing them . Carr finally contends that the prevalent style of presentation for much of the Internet 's content may significantly hinder the capacity to concentrate due to the many distractions that often surround the Internet 's content , in the form of ads and obtrusive notifications . Additionally , he claims that these detrimental effects on concentration are compounded by traditional media because they are gradually adopting a style of presentation for their content that mimics the Internet , in order to remain competitive as consumer expectations change .

Carr also theorizes that the capacity to contemplate may diminish as computer algorithms unburden an Internet user 's brain of much of the painstaking knowledge work — the manipulation of abstract information and knowledge — that was previously done manually . In comparing the Internet with Frederick Winslow Taylor 's management system for industrial efficiency , Carr makes the point that back then some workers complained that they felt they were becoming mere automatons due to the systemic application of Taylorism — a theory of management that analyzes and synthesizes workflow processes , improving labor productivity . Carr selects Google as a prime example of a company in which computer engineers and software designers have applied Taylorism to the knowledge industry , delivering increasingly robust information that may have the effect of minimizing opportunities to ponder ambiguities . Additionally , he argues that the Internet 's dominant business model is one that thrives as companies either collect information on users or deliver them advertisements , therefore companies capitalize on users who move from link to link rather than those who engage in sustained thought . Finally , Carr places his skepticism in a historical context , reflecting upon how previous detractors of technological advances have fared . While often correct , Carr points out that skepticisms such as Socrates ' concerns about written language and the 15th-century Venetian editor Hieronimo Squarciafico 's concerns about printed works failed to anticipate the benefits that these technologies might hold for human knowledge . As an afterthought , a 2005 essay by playwright Richard Foreman is excerpted for its lament of the waning of the " highly educated and articulate personality " .

Carr 's essay was widely discussed in the media both critically and in passing . While English technology writer Bill Thompson observed that Carr 's argument had " succeeded in provoking a wide-ranging debate " , Damon Darlin of The New York Times quipped that even though " [ everyone ] has been talking about [ the ] article in The Atlantic magazine " , only " [ s ] ome subset of that group has actually read the 4,175-word article , by Nicholas Carr . " The controversial online responses to Carr 's essay were , according to Chicago Tribune critic Steve Johnson , partly the outcome of the essay 's title " Is Google Making Us Stupid ? " , a question that the article proper doesn 't actually pose and that he believed was " perfect fodder for a ' don 't-be-ridiculous ' blog post " ; Johnson challenged his readers to carefully consider their online responses in the interest of raising the quality of debate . Many critics discussed the merits of Carr 's essay at great length in forums set up formally for this purpose at online hubs such as the Britannica Blog and publisher John Brockman 's online scientific magazine Edge , where the roster of names quickly took on the semblance of a Who 's Who of the day 's Internet critics . Calling it " the great digital literacy debate " , British-American entrepreneur and author Andrew Keen judged the victor to be the American reader , who was blessed with a wide range of compelling writing from " all of America 's most articulate Internet luminaries " .

Book critic Scott Esposito pointed out that Chinese characters are incorrectly described as ideograms in Carr 's essay , an error that he believed undermined the essay 's argument . The myth that Chinese script is ideographic had been effectively debunked in scholar John DeFrancis ' 1984 book The Chinese Language : Fact and Fantasy ; DeFrancis classifies Chinese as a logosyllabic writing system . Carr acknowledged that there was a debate over the terminology of ' ideogram ' , but in a response to Esposito he explained that he had " decided to use the common term " and quoted The Oxford American Dictionary to demonstrate that they likewise define Chinese characters as instances of ideograms . Writer and activist Seth Finkelstein noted that predictably several critics would label Carr 's argument as a Luddite one , and he was not to be disappointed when one critic later maintained that Carr 's " contrarian stance [ was ] slowly forcing him into a caricature of Luddism " . Then , journalist David Wolman , in a Wired magazine piece , described as " moronic " the assumption that the web " hurts us more than it helps " , a statement that was preceded by an overview of the many technologies that had been historically denounced ; Wolman concluded that the solution was " better schools as well as a renewed commitment to reason and scientific rigor so that people can distinguish knowledge from garbage " .

Several prominent scientists working in the field of neuroscience supported Carr 's argument as scientifically plausible . James Olds , a professor of computational neuroscience , who directs the Krasnow Institute for Advanced Study at George Mason University , was quoted in Carr 's essay for his expertise , and upon the essay 's publication Olds wrote a letter to the editor of The Atlantic in which he reiterated that the brain was " very plastic " — referring to the changes that occur in the organization of the brain as a result of experience . It was Olds ' opinion that given the brain 's plasticity it was " not such a long stretch to Carr 's meme " . One of the pioneers in neuroplasticity research , Michael Merzenich , later added his own comment to the discussion , stating that he had given a talk at Google in 2008 in which he had asked the audience the same question that Carr asked in his essay . Merzenich believed that there was " absolutely no question that our brains are engaged less directly and more shallowly in the synthesis of information , when we use research strategies that are all about ' efficiency ' , ' secondary ( and out-of-context ) referencing ' , and ' once over , lightly ' " . Another neuroscientist , Gary Small , director of UCLA 's Memory & Aging Research Center , wrote a letter to the editor of The Atlantic in which he stated that he believed that " brains are developing circuitry for online social networking and are adapting to a new multitasking technology culture " .

In the media , there were many testimonials and refutations given by journalists for the first part of Carr 's argument regarding the capacity for concentration ; treatments of the second part of Carr 's argument regarding the capacity for contemplation , were , however , far rarer . Although columnist Andrew Sullivan noted that he had little leisure time at his disposal for contemplation compared with when he grew up , the anecdotes provided by journalists that indicated a deficiency in the capacity to contemplate were described only in the context of third parties , such as columnist Margaret Wente 's anecdote about how one consultant had found a growing tendency in her clients to provide ill-considered descriptions for their technical problems . Columnist Leonard Pitts of The Miami Herald described his difficulty sitting down to read a book , in which he felt like he " was getting away with something , like when you slip out of the office to catch a matinee " . Technology evangelist Jon Udell admitted that , in his " retreats " from the Internet , he sometimes struggled to settle into " books , particularly fiction , and particularly in printed form " . He found portable long-form audio to be " transformative " , however , because he can easily achieve " sustained attention " , which makes him optimistic about the potential to " reactivate ancient traditions , like oral storytelling , and rediscover their powerful neural effects " .

Also writing in The Atlantic , a year after Carr , the futurist Jamais Cascio argued that human cognition has always evolved to meet environmental challenges , and that those posed by the internet are no different . He described the ' skimming ' referred to by Carr as a form of attention deficit caused by the immaturity of filter algorithms : " The trouble isn ’ t that we have too much information at our fingertips , but that our tools for managing it are still in their infancy ... many of the technologies that Carr worries about were developed precisely to help us get some control over a flood of data and ideas . Google isn ’ t the problem ; it ’ s the beginning of a solution . " . Cascio and Carr 's articles have been discussed together in several places . Pew Research used them to form a tension-pair question survey that was distributed to noted academics . Most responded in detail ; concurring with the proposition " Carr was wrong : Google does not make us stupid " . In The Googlisation of Everything , Vaidhyanathan tended to side with Carr . However , he thought both arguments relied too much on determinism : Carr in thinking that an over-reliance on internet tools will inevitably cause the brain to atrophy , and Cascio in thinking that getting smarter is the necessary outcome of the evolutionary pressures he describes . In From Gutenberg to Zuckerberg Naughton noted that , while many agreed Carr had hit on an important subject , his conclusions were not widely supported .

Firmly contesting Carr 's argument , journalist John Battelle praised the virtues of the web : " [ W ] hen I am deep in search for knowledge on the web , jumping from link to link , reading deeply in one moment , skimming hundreds of links the next , when I am pulling back to formulate and reformulate queries and devouring new connections as quickly as Google and the Web can serve them up , when I am performing bricolage in real time over the course of hours , I am ' feeling ' my brain light up , I and [ sic ] ' feeling ' like I 'm getting smarter " . Web journalist Scott Rosenberg reported that his reading habits are the same as they were when he " was a teenager plowing [ his ] way through a shelf of Tolstoy and Dostoyevsky " . In book critic Scott Esposito 's view , " responsible adults " have always had to deal with distractions , and , in his own case , he claimed to remain " fully able to turn down the noise " and read deeply .

In critiquing the rise of Internet-based computing , the philosophical question of whether or not a society can control technological progress was raised . At the online scientific magazine Edge , Wikipedia co-founder Larry Sanger argued that individual will was all that was necessary to maintain the cognitive capacity to read a book all the way through , and computer scientist and writer Jaron Lanier rebuked the idea that technological progress is an " autonomous process that will proceed in its chosen direction independently of us " . Lanier echoed a view stated by American historian Lewis Mumford in his 1970 book The Pentagon of Power , in which Mumford suggested that the technological advances that shape a society could be controlled if the full might of a society 's free will were employed . Lanier believed that technology was significantly hindered by the idea that " there is only one axis of choice " which is either pro- or anti- when it comes to technology adoption . Yet Carr had stated in The Big Switch that he believed an individual 's personal choice toward a technology had little effect on technological progress . According to Carr , the view expressed by Mumford about technological progress was incorrect because it regarded technology solely as advances in science and engineering rather than as an influence on the costs of production and consumption . Economics were a more significant consideration in Carr 's opinion because in a competitive marketplace the most efficient methods of providing an important resource will prevail . As technological advances shape society , an individual might be able to resist the effects but his lifestyle will " always be lonely and in the end futile " ; despite a few holdouts , technology will nevertheless shape economics which , in turn , will shape society .

The selection of one particular quote in Carr 's essay from pathologist Bruce Friedman , a member of the faculty of the University of Michigan Medical School , who commented on a developing difficulty reading books and long essays and specifically the novel War and Peace , was criticized for having a bias toward narrative literature . The quote failed to represent other types of literature , such as technical and scientific literature , which had , in contrast , become much more accessible and widely read with the advent of the Internet . At the Britannica Blog , writer Clay Shirky pugnaciously observed that War and Peace was " too long , and not so interesting " , further stating that " it would be hard to argue that the last ten years have seen a decrease in either the availability or comprehension of material on scientific or technical subjects " . Shirky 's comments on War and Peace were derided by several of his peers as verging on philistinism . In Shirky 's defense , inventor W. Daniel Hillis asserted that , although books " were created to serve a purpose " , that " same purpose can often be served by better means " . While Hillis considered the book to be " a fine and admirable device " , he imagined that clay tablets and scrolls of papyrus , in their time , " had charms of their own " . Wired magazine editor Kevin Kelly believed that the idea that " the book is the apex of human culture " should be resisted . And Birkerts differentiated online reading from literary reading , stating that in the latter the reader is directed within themselves and enters " an environment that is nothing at all like the open-ended information zone that is cyberspace " in which he feels psychologically fragmented .

Several critics theorized about the effects of the shift from scarcity to abundance of written material in the media as a result of the technologies introduced by the Internet . This shift was examined for its potential to lead individuals to a superficial comprehension of many subjects rather than a deep comprehension of just a few subjects . According to Shirky , an individual 's ability to concentrate had been facilitated by the " relatively empty environment " which had ceased to exist when the wide availability of the web proliferated new media . Although Shirky acknowledged that the unprecedented quantity of written material available on the web might occasion a sacrifice of the cultural importance of many works , he believed that the solution was " to help make the sacrifice worth it " . In direct contrast , Sven Birkerts argued that " some deep comprehension of our inheritance [ was ] essential " , and called for " some consensus vision among those shapers of what our society and culture might be shaped toward " , warning against allowing the commercial marketplace to dictate the future standing of traditionally important cultural works . While Carr found solace in Shirky 's conceit that " new forms of expression " might emerge to suit the Internet , he considered this conceit to be one of faith rather than reason . In a later response , Shirky continued to expound upon his theme that " technologies that make writing abundant always require new social structures to accompany them " , explaining that Gutenberg 's printing press led to an abundance of cheap books which were met by " a host of inventions large and small " , such as the separation of fiction from non-fiction , the recognition of talents , the listing of concepts by indexes , and the practice of noting editions .

As a result of the vast stores of information made accessible on the web , one hundred critics pointed to a decrease in the desire to recall certain types of information , indicating , they believed , a change in the process of recalling information , as well as the types of information that are recalled . According to Ben Worthen , a Wall Street Journal business technology blogger , the growing importance placed on the ability to access information instead of the capacity to recall information straight from memory would , in the long term , change the type of job skills that companies who are hiring new employees would find valuable . Due to an increased reliance on the Internet , Worthen speculated that before long " the guy who remembers every fact about a topic may not be as valuable as the guy who knows how to find all of these facts and many others " . Evan Ratliff of Salon.com wondered if the usage of gadgets to recall phone numbers , as well as geographical and historical information , had the effect of releasing certain cognitive resources that in turn strengthened other aspects of cognition . Drawing parallels with transactive memory — a process whereby people remember things in relationships and groups — Ratliff mused that perhaps the web was " like a spouse who is around all the time , with a particular knack for factual memory of all varieties " . Far from conclusive , these ruminations left the web 's impact on memory retention an open question .

In the essay , Carr introduces the discussion of the scientific support for the idea that the brain 's neural circuitry can be rewired with an example in which philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche is said to have been influenced by technology . According to German scholar Friedrich A. Kittler in his book Gramophone , Film , Typewriter , Nietzsche 's writing style became more aphoristic after he started using a typewriter . Nietzsche began using a Malling-Hansen Writing Ball because of his failing eyesight which had disabled his ability to write by hand . The idea that Nietzsche 's writing style had changed for better or worse when he adopted the typewriter was disputed by several critics . Kevin Kelly and Scott Esposito each offered alternate explanations for the apparent changes . Esposito believed that " the brain is so huge and amazing and enormously complex that it 's far , far off base to think that a few years of Internet media or the acquisition of a typewriter can fundamentally rewire it . " In a response to Esposito 's point , neuroscientist James Olds stated that recent brain research demonstrated that it was " pretty clear that the adult brain can re-wire on the fly " . In The New York Times it was reported that several scientists believed that it was certainly plausible that the brain 's neural circuitry may be shaped differently by regular Internet usage compared with the reading of printed works .

Although there was a consensus in the scientific community about how it was possible for the brain 's neural circuitry to change through experience , the potential effect of web technologies on the brain 's neural circuitry was unknown . On the topic of the Internet 's effect on reading skills , Guinevere F. Eden , director of the Center for the Study of Learning at Georgetown University , remarked that the question was whether or not the Internet changed the brain in a way that was beneficial to an individual . Carr believed that the effect of the Internet on cognition was detrimental , weakening the ability to concentrate and contemplate . Olds cited the potential benefits of computer software that specifically targets learning disabilities , stating that among some neuroscientists there was a belief that neuroplasticity-based software was beneficial in improving receptive language disorders . Olds mentioned neuroscientist Michael Merzenich , who had formed several companies with his peers in which neuroplasticity-based computer programs had been developed to improve the cognitive functioning of kids , adults and the elderly . In 1996 , Merzenich and his peers had started a company called Scientific Learning in which neuroplastic research had been used to develop a computer training program called Fast ForWord that offered seven brain exercises that improved language impairments and learning disabilities in children . Feedback on Fast ForWord showed that these brain exercises even had benefits for autistic children , an unexpected spillover effect that Merzenich has attempted to harness by developing a modification of Fast ForWord specifically designed for autism . At a subsequent company that Merzenich started called Posit Science , Fast ForWord-like brain exercises and other techniques were developed with the aim of sharpening the brains of elderly people by retaining the plasticity of their brains .

In Stanley Kubrick 's 1968 science fiction film 2001 : A Space Odyssey , astronaut David Bowman slowly disassembles the mind of an artificial intelligence named HAL by sequentially unplugging its memory banks . Carr likened the emotions of despair expressed by HAL as its mind is disassembled to his own , at the time , cognitive difficulties in engaging with long texts . He felt as if someone was " tinkering with [ his ] brain , remapping the neural circuitry , reprogramming the memory " . HAL had also been used as a metaphor for the " ultimate search engine " in a PBS interview with Google co-founder Sergey Brin as noted in Carr 's book The Big Switch , and also Brin 's TED talk . Brin was comparing Google 's ambitions of building an artificial intelligence to HAL , while dismissing the possibility that a bug like the one that led HAL to murder the occupants of the fictional spacecraft Discovery One could occur in a Google-based artificial intelligence . Carr observed in his essay that throughout history technological advances have often necessitated new metaphors , such as the mechanical clock engendering the simile " like clockwork " and the age of the computer engendering the simile " like computers " . Carr concluded his essay with an explanation as to why he believed HAL was an appropriate metaphor for his essay 's argument . He observed that HAL showed genuine emotion as his mind was disassembled while , throughout the film , the humans onboard the space station appeared to be automatons , thinking and acting as if they were following the steps of an algorithm . Carr believed that the film 's prophetic message was that as individuals increasingly rely on computers for an understanding of their world their intelligence may become more machinelike than human .

After the publication of Carr 's essay , a developing view unfolded in the media as sociological and neurological studies surfaced that were relevant to determining the cognitive impact of regular Internet usage . Challenges to Carr 's argument were made frequently . As the two most outspoken detractors of electronic media , Carr and Birkerts were both appealed to by Kevin Kelly to each formulate a more precise definition of the faults they perceived regarding electronic media so that their beliefs could be scientifically verified . While Carr firmly believed that his skepticism about the Internet 's benefits to cognition was warranted , he cautioned in both his essay and his book The Big Switch that long-term psychological and neurological studies were required to definitively ascertain how cognition develops under the influence of the Internet . Scholars at University College London conducted a study titled " Information Behaviour of the Researcher of the Future " , the results of which suggested that students ' research habits tended towards skimming and scanning rather than in-depth reading . The study provoked serious reflection among educators about the implications for educational instruction . In October 2008 , new insights into the effect of Internet usage on cognition were gleaned from the results , reported in a press release , of a study conducted by UCLA 's Memory and Aging Research Center that had tested two groups of people between the ages of 55 and 76 years old ; only one group of which were experienced web users . While they had read books or performed assigned search tasks their brain activity had been monitored with functional MRI scans , which revealed that both reading and web search utilize the same language , reading , memory , and visual regions of the brain ; however , it was discovered that those searching the web stimulated additional decision-making and complex reasoning regions of the brain , with a two-fold increase in these regions in experienced web users compared with inexperienced web users . Gary Small , the director of the UCLA center and lead investigator of the UCLA study , concurrently released the book iBrain : Surviving the Technological Alteration of the Modern Mind , co-authored with Gigi Vorgan , with the press release .

While one set of critics and bloggers used the UCLA study to dismiss the argument raised in Carr 's essay , another set took a closer look at the conclusions that could be drawn from the study concerning the effects of Internet usage . Among the reflections concerning the possible interpretations of the UCLA study were whether greater breadth of brain activity while using the Internet in comparison with reading a book improved or impaired the quality of a reading session ; and whether the decision-making and complex reasoning skills that are apparently involved in Internet search , according to the study , suggest a high quality of thought or simply the use of puzzle solving skills . Thomas Claburn , in InformationWeek , observed that the study 's findings regarding the cognitive impact of regular Internet usage were inconclusive and stated that " it will take time before it 's clear whether we should mourn the old ways , celebrate the new , or learn to stop worrying and love the Net " .

Jonathan Ray Lieber ( born April 2 , 1970 ) is a former Major League Baseball ( MLB ) pitcher . He stands 6 feet 2 inches ( 1.88 m ) tall and weighs 240 pounds ( 110 kg ) . He played for the Pittsburgh Pirates ( 1994 – 1998 ) , Chicago Cubs ( 1999 – 2002 and 2008 ) , New York Yankees ( 2004 ) , and Philadelphia Phillies ( 2005 – 2007 ) . He batted left-handed and threw right-handed , and utilized a fastball , a slider , and a changeup for his pitches . In a 14-season career , Lieber compiled a 131 – 124 record with 1,553 strikeouts and a 4.27 ERA in 2,198 innings pitched . Lieber attended the University of South Alabama , helping them win the Sun Belt Conference Championship . He was drafted by the Kansas City Royals in the second round of the 1992 Major League Baseball Draft , but he was traded to the Pittsburgh Pirates the following season before even throwing a pitch in the major leagues . He made his debut in 1994 and was named the Pirates ' Opening Day starter in 1995 , but it was not until 1997 that he became a full-time major league starter . He was traded to the Chicago Cubs following the 1998 season . In 2000 , he led the National League ( NL ) with 251 innings pitched . He had his best season in 2001 , winning 20 games while losing just six . Lieber underwent Tommy John surgery in 2002 and missed the entire 2003 season . In 2004 , he pitched for the New York Yankees , reaching the playoffs for the only time in his career . He signed with the Philadelphia Phillies in 2005 and tied for fifth in the NL with 17 wins . Injuries cut into his playing time over the next three years ; he finished his career as a reliever with the Cubs in 2008 .

Lieber was born in Council Bluffs , Iowa . He graduated from Abraham Lincoln High School in Council Bluffs in 1988 . Lieber initially attended Iowa Western Community College in 1989 and 1990 before transferring to the University of South Alabama . Over the next two years , Lieber experienced great success for South Alabama . He posted 12 – 5 records for them both of his years there , and he led the team in earned run average ( ERA ) and strikeouts both years . He was selected by the Chicago Cubs in the ninth round of the 1991 Major League Baseball ( MLB ) draft , but he did not sign . In 1992 , he helped South Alabama win the Sun Belt Conference Championship . Lieber received several honors following his senior season . These included the Sun Belt Conference Player of the Year award , a third-team All-America selection by the American Baseball Coaches Association , an all-region award , and an all-league award ( his second ) . In 2013 , he was inducted into the Mobile Sports Hall of Fame . He was drafted by the Kansas City Royals in the second round of the 1992 draft , and this time , he signed .

Lieber began his professional career with the A short season Eugene Emeralds of the Northwest League . In five starts with the Emeralds , he had a 3 – 0 record , a 1.16 ERA , 23 strikeouts , 22 walks , and 26 hits allowed in 31 innings pitched . He also appeared in seven games ( six starts ) for the Baseball City Royals of the A-Advanced Florida State League , posting a 3 – 3 record , a 4.65 ERA , 19 strikeouts , eight walks , and 45 hits allowed in 31 innings pitched . In 1993 , the Royals switched their A-Advanced affiliate to the Wilmington Blue Rocks of the Carolina League . Lieber began the season with Wilmington , posting a 9 – 3 record , a 2.67 ERA , 89 strikeouts , nine walks , 125 hits allowed , and 114 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched in 17 games ( 16 starts ) . He was promoted to the AA Memphis Chicks of the Southern League on July 11 , where he posted a 2 – 1 record and a 6.86 ERA in four starts . On July 31 , seeking pitching help as they contended for the playoffs , the Royals traded Lieber and Dan Miceli to the Pittsburgh Pirates for their closer , Stan Belinda . The Pirates assigned Lieber to the Southern League 's Carolina Mudcats ; in six starts , he had a 4 – 2 record , a 3.97 ERA , 28 strikeouts , 10 walks , and 39 hits allowed in 34 innings pitched .

Lieber was called up by the Pirates in May 1994 to join their starting rotation . In his first major league start on May 15 , he gave up one run in six innings but took the loss as the Philadelphia Phillies defeated the Pirates 1 – 0 . He earned his first career win five days later , pitching eight shutout innings in a 6 – 0 victory over the Montreal Expos . In 17 starts with the Pirates , Lieber had a 6 – 7 record , a 3.73 ERA , 71 strikeouts , 25 walks , and 116 hits allowed in 108 2 ⁄ 3 innings . Following Lieber 's rookie season , Pirates ' manager Jim Leyland named Lieber the team 's Opening Day starter for 1995 . Like many of the young Pirates ' pitchers that year , Lieber struggled ; he was optioned to the Calgary Cannons of the Triple-A Pacific Coast League on June 18 after going 2 – 7 with a 7.48 ERA . In 14 starts with Calgary , Lieber had a 1 – 5 record , a 7.01 ERA , 34 strikeouts , 19 walks , and 122 hits allowed in 77 innings pitched . He was recalled by the Pirates on September 5 when rosters expanded but was used mostly as a relief pitcher for the rest of the year . In 21 games ( 12 starts ) , Lieber compiled a 4 – 7 record , a 6.32 ERA , 45 strikeouts , 14 walks , and 103 hits allowed in 72 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched .

Lieber remained in the bullpen to begin the 1996 season . In his first 34 games , he posted a 4.21 ERA . In July , he returned to the starting rotation following the release of Zane Smith . As a starter , Lieber posted a 7 – 2 record with a 3.91 ERA , emerging as the Pirates ' ace by the end of the year . In 51 games ( 15 starts ) in 1996 , Lieber posted a 9 – 5 record , a 3.99 ERA , 94 strikeouts , 28 walks , and 156 hits allowed in 142 innings pitched . Lieber became the Pirates ' Opening Day starter again in 1997 . On June 30 , he threw his only complete game of the year , striking out 10 while allowing one run on five hits in a 3 – 1 victory over the Chicago White Sox . Lieber was inconsistent in 1997 , amassing several winning streaks and several losing streaks during the season . In 33 games ( 32 starts ) , he had an 11 – 14 record , a 4.49 ERA , 160 strikeouts , 51 walks , and 193 hits allowed in 188 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . He was third in the NL in losses ( behind Mark Leiter 's 17 and teammate Steve Cooke 's 15 ) ; however , he tied Mike Hampton for the most runs batted in by a major league pitcher with eight .

In 1998 , Lieber was the Pirates ' fourth starter . He had a 5 – 10 record over his first 17 starts , partly because he received 15 total runs of support in the losses over that time . Lieber had an 8 – 13 record with a 3.90 ERA before getting placed on the disabled list ( DL ) for the first time in his career on August 21 due to a left oblique muscle strain . He returned from the DL on September 15 but posted a 10.80 ERA over his last two starts . In 29 games ( 28 starts ) , Lieber posted an 8 – 14 record , a 4.11 ERA , 138 strikeouts , 40 walks , and 182 hits allowed in 171 innings pitched . He was tied with seven other pitchers for fifth in the league in losses . Following the season , Lieber was traded to the Chicago Cubs for Brant Brown .

Lieber began 1999 as the Cubs ' third starter . Prior to the All-Star break , he had an 8 – 3 record with a 3.26 ERA ( seventh-best in the NL ) . From April 29 to May 8 , he was on the DL with a right eye contusion . He threw his first major league shutout on May 14 , striking out seven in a 9 – 0 victory over the Atlanta Braves . Lieber went 0 – 8 with a 5.71 ERA in his first 13 starts following the All-Star Break before earning wins in his final two starts of the year . In 31 starts , Lieber compiled a 10 – 11 record , a 4.07 ERA , and 46 walks in 203 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . He was tied for tenth in the league with 226 hits allowed ( along with teammate Steve Trachsel ) , but he finished eighth in the league with 186 strikeouts and tied with six other players for ninth in the league with three complete games . In 2000 , Lieber was the Cubs ' Opening Day starter . From June 28 to August 14 , he won a career-high six consecutive decisions . On July 3 , he threw a shutout , allowing two hits in a 3 – 0 victory over the Pirates . In his next start , on July 8 , he had 12 strikeouts and threw a complete game in a 9 – 2 win over the White Sox . Lieber was 12 – 7 with a 4.12 ERA through his first 29 starts ; however , he went 0 – 4 in September with a 5.88 ERA . In 35 starts ( tied for the NL lead with Randy Johnson , Kevin Millwood , Tom Glavine , and Greg Maddux ) , Lieber had a 12 – 11 record , a 4.41 ERA , and 54 walks . He tied Darryl Kile for ninth in the league with 192 strikeouts , he led the league with 251 innings pitched , he ranked third in the league with 248 hits allowed ( behind Liván Hernández 's 254 and José Lima 's 251 ) , and he tied Maddux for third with six complete games ( behind Johnson 's and Curt Schilling 's eight ) .

Lieber 's most productive season came in 2001 . On May 24 , he one-hit the Cincinnati Reds , 3 – 0 , ending the team 's NL-record streak of 208 games in a row without being shut out , throwing just 78 pitches . From June 16 to July 15 , he won six straight games . He was named an All-Star for the first and only time in his career . In his final start of the season on October 3 , he allowed five runs in six innings but still earned his 20th win of the season as the Cubs beat the Reds 13 – 7 . In 34 starts , Lieber recorded a career-high 20 victories to go with just six losses , posted a 3.80 ERA , and struck out 148 as opposed to 41 walks . His 20 wins ranked fourth in the league ( behind Matt Morris 's and Schilling 's 22 and Johnson 's 21 ) , his 232 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched ranked fifth in the league , and his five complete games tied for second in the league with Javier Vázquez ( behind Johnson 's six ) . He finished fourth in the NL Cy Young Award vote , behind Johnson , Schilling , and Morris .

Lieber 's 2002 season was curtailed by right elbow problems , which plagued him all year . On August 1 , facing the San Diego Padres , Lieber allowed two runs in seven innings but received a no-decision in an 8 – 7 Cubs ' victory . He was placed on the DL with right elbow tendinitis the next day , and he underwent Tommy John surgery on August 8 , ending his season . In 21 starts , Lieber compiled a 6 – 8 record , a 3.70 ERA , 87 strikeouts , 12 walks , and 153 hits allowed in 141 innings pitched . He still managed to tie Randy Wolf , Brett Tomko , Pedro Astacio , and teammate Matt Clement for tenth in the league with three complete games . After the season , he became a free agent . While on the Cubs , Lieber became the only Major League pitcher to give up a hit to a one handed player when he gave up not just one hit , but two to Jim Abbott , also allowing Abbott to drive in three RBIs .

Lieber signed a two-year contract with the New York Yankees following the 2002 season . He missed the 2003 season recovering from his injury , although he did make two minor league rehab appearances . Lieber began the 2004 season on the DL with a strained abductor muscle in his right thigh . He returned to the major leagues on May 1 , allowing three runs in seven innings in a 12 – 4 victory over the Kansas City Royals . Through August 1 , he had a 7 – 7 record with a 5.06 ERA . From then on , Lieber went 7 – 1 with a 3.21 ERA . On September 14 , he took a no-hitter into the seventh inning against the Boston Red Sox and allowed three runs in 8 1 ⁄ 3 innings in a 14 – 4 victory . In 27 starts , Lieber posted a 14 – 8 record , a 4.33 ERA , 102 strikeouts , 18 walks , and 216 hits allowed in 176 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . His 14 wins tied with eight other pitchers for eighth in the American League ( AL ) and tied with Javier Vázquez for the most by a Yankee as well as being the largest win total by an ex-20 game winner returning from a full-season layoff since 1946 .

Dave Caldwell of the New York Times wrote on September 3 that Lieber would " probably end up in the bullpen " in the playoffs , but less than a month later , Mark Feinsand of MLB.com wrote that Lieber " has suddenly become one of the most important cogs in the Yankees ' postseason machine " due an injury to Kevin Brown and late-season struggles by Vázquez . Lieber started Game 2 of the AL Division Series against the Minnesota Twins . He allowed three runs over 6 2 ⁄ 3 innings and was in line for the win , but he received a no-decision in a 12-inning , 7 – 6 Yankee victory . The Yankees won the series in four games . In Game 2 of the AL Championship Series against the Red Sox , Lieber allowed one run and three hits in seven innings , earning the win in a 3 – 1 victory . In Game 6 , he allowed four runs in 7 1 ⁄ 3 innings and took the loss in a 4 – 2 defeat . The Red Sox become the first MLB team in history to overcome a 3 – 0 series deficit , winning in seven games . 2004 would be Lieber 's only playoff experience , as well as his only stint in the AL .

Before the 2005 season , Lieber signed as a free agent with the Philadelphia Phillies for three years and $ 24 million with a team option for the fourth year . He was named the Phillies ' Opening Day starter in 2005 . He won his first four starts with the team . From May 12 through June 30 , Lieber had a 3 – 7 record and a 7.48 ERA . 8 – 8 by the end of that stretch , he managed to post a 9 – 5 record and a 3.32 ERA to finish the season . Lieber gave up one run in eight innings on July 21 but took the loss as the Los Angeles Dodgers defeated the Phillies 1 – 0 . On September 22 , he threw eight shutout innings in a 4 – 0 victory over the Braves . Lieber finished the season with a 17 – 13 record , a 4.20 ERA , 149 strikeouts , 41 walks , and 223 hits allowed in 218 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . Lieber led the team with 17 wins , which tied with Andy Pettitte for fifth in the league . He tied with six other pitchers for the league lead with 35 starts .

Lieber lost his first four starts of the season in 2006 for the first time in his career . On May 13 , he took a perfect game into the seventh inning against Cincinnati before allowing a two-out single to Adam Dunn ; he threw 8 2 ⁄ 3 scoreless innings in a 2 – 0 victory . He was on the DL from May 30 to July 6 with a groin injury . Before going on the DL , he had a 3 – 5 record and a 5.79 ERA . He posted a 6.75 ERA in his first five starts after returning from the DL , but he posted a 3.38 in his final 11 starts . On August 16 , he threw his first shutout since 2001 against the New York Mets , allowing five hits in a 3 – 0 victory . In 27 starts , Lieber compiled a 9 – 11 record , a 4.93 ERA , 100 strikeouts , 24 walks , and 196 hits allowed in 168 innings pitched . Lieber began 2007 on the DL with a strained right oblique , and when he was activated on April 9 , he was placed in the bullpen . After two relief outings , he returned to the rotation on April 20 when Brett Myers was moved to the bullpen . On June 9 , he struck out 11 and allowed three hits in a 4 – 0 shutout of the Royals . At the time , he was 3 – 4 with a 3.72 ERA , but he allowed 14 runs ( 13 earned ) over his next two starts , both losses . On June 23 , Lieber was placed on the DL with a ruptured tendon in his right foot , which ended his tenure with the Phillies . In 14 games ( 12 starts ) , he had a 3 – 6 record , a 4.73 ERA , 54 strikeouts , 22 walks , and 91 hits allowed in 78 innings . The Phillies reached the playoffs , but Lieber was left off their postseason roster because of his injury .

On January 16 , 2008 , Lieber signed a one-year contract with the Chicago Cubs . He competed for the starting rotation but failed to earn a spot and was placed in the bullpen as the Cubs ' long reliever . From July 18 to September 1 , he was on the DL with a right foot injury . He appeared in his final major league game on September 5 , giving up four runs in two innings in a 10 – 2 loss to Cincinnati . In 26 games ( one start ) , Lieber posted a 2 – 3 record , a 4.05 ERA , 27 strikeouts , six walks , and 59 hits allowed in 46 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . The Cubs reached the playoffs , but Lieber was left off the playoff roster for the second year in a row . Lieber retired after the 2008 season wanting to spend more time with his family . In his 14-year career , Lieber had a 131 – 124 record , a 4.27 ERA , 1,553 strikeouts , 422 walks , 2,388 hits allowed , and 2,198 innings pitched in 401 games ( 327 starts ) . His strikeout-to-walk ratio of 3.680 ranks 11th all-time among major league pitchers as of 2013 .

Destiny Fulfilled is the fifth and final studio album by American R & B trio Destiny 's Child . It was released on November 10 , 2004 in by Columbia Records and Sony Urban Music . A comeback release , it marked the return of Destiny 's Child after the group went into hiatus , which allowed each member to release solo albums . Unlike their previous material , this record saw each member equally contributing to the songwriting and production . Destiny 's Child further worked with frequent collaborators such as Rockwilder , Swizz Beatz and Rodney Jerkins as well as several new producers . For the album 's theme , the members drew inspiration from the conversations they had during the first week of recording when they discussed about the happenings in their lives while being apart . Composed mostly of mid-tempo songs and ballads that are subsequent continuations of each other , altogether telling one complete story , Destiny Fulfilled is an R & B album . It was released to generally mixed reviews among music critics who criticized its mid-tempo ballads and lyrical content . The album was commercially successful ; it reached number two on the US Billboard 200 , and has since been certified triple platinum in that region . It was also successful in different countries worldwide receiving certifications in Australia , Canada , Germany and the United Kingdom among others .

While recording their third studio album Survivor in late 2000 , Beyoncé announced that Destiny 's Child would be on a hiatus that would allow each member to release a solo album , which they hoped would further increase interest in the group . The idea of solo releases emanated from the group 's manager , Beyoncé 's father , Mathew Knowles . Kelly Rowland further explained in an interview that Destiny 's Child has been present in the media for a long time and they wanted to " give the public eye a rest from DC for a minute " . During that same interview , she acknowledged that the trio would return to the studio in fall 2003 to start with the work on a new album . Two members of the group , Beyoncé and Rowland each released one album , while Michelle Williams released two . While each member achieved domestic success , Beyoncé 's had been regarded as the most successful with the release of Dangerously in Love ( 2003 ) , which enjoyed international commercial success and acclaim . This , along with their other ongoing projects , led to speculation over the disbandment of Destiny 's Child . Amidst rumors and speculations , Rowland announced in 2004 their return to the studio to record what would become their fourth and final album . The group claimed that the reunion was destined to happen , and that their affinity to each other kept them together .

Right in the making of the album , they planned to part ways after their fourteen-year career to facilitate their continued pursuit in individual aspirations . Beyoncé has noted that their destinies were already fulfilled ; however , Destiny 's Child claimed that naming the album Destiny Fulfilled was not a coincidence of sort . Beyoncé has said that " the group felt it still had something to offer musically " with the album before adding : " We did this record for ourselves , not to sell a million the first week out ... That doesn 't mean as much to us as just the fact that three friends got back together to do another record . That was our destiny . " . Rowland commented : " We were like , ' You know what , we 're getting older and we want to end on a high note . ' We want to give our fans a great final record " . Beyoncé , also commented regarding the finality of their career : " Who knows what will happen in three , five or 10 years ? The main thing is that we maintain our friendship and that we do it because we want to – not because it 's a good business move . "

Production of the album began in summer of 2004 with Destiny 's Child taking help from frequent collaborators including Rockwilder , Swizz Beatz and Rodney Jerkins . The group worked on the album within a period of three weeks . Jerkins , who had worked with Beyoncé for her solo album Dangerously in Love , concerned how he would manage the production , saying , " How is this going to work ? ' Cause Beyoncé , she blew up solo , so how 's it going to work in a group together ? " . He stated that once he got inside the studio , however , his skepticism vanished as he saw the group 's " excitement being back in the studio together " , calling the process " natural " . The members of the group stated that the first week of recording was spent solely on conversations about the happenings in their lives while being apart from each other as they hadn 't spent quaility time for a long period . This further inspired them to record the conversations and use it as the main theme of the record . Differing from Survivor in that previously Beyoncé had taken an active role in writing and producing , Destiny Fulfilled saw each member contributing inputs culled from personal experiences and individual opinions and points of view not dependent from the others ' . In most cases , producers of the album would send them a CD containing a track that would be the group 's basis in the songwriting process ; without the producer 's supervision of which part to sing , that formed a new direction of their style different from their previous records . The traditional approach where each member sang one verse and chimed in the chorus was replaced ; in some songs in Destiny Fulfilled , their vocals were alternated in every line of the lyrics , a technique similar to hip hop artists . Destiny 's Child took the role of executive producing alongside their manager , Mathew Knowles . Beyoncé , who vocally produced the songs , commented that it was important for her to make sure their voices were audible and identifiable . Taking it as one of her goals , the group decided to focus on mid-tempo songs and on few dance numbers and ballads — which they considered people cannot sing with . Beyoncé elaborated " We wanted to make sure that the songs would be something that we were proud of 10 years from now , 20 years from now . We wanted it to be something that people can really feel an emotion to . Up-tempo songs can do that , but they more make you wanna dance . " As Rowland was recently engaged in the time of the writing of the album , it further influenced her songwriting . She also cited that being apart from the group had an impact on the album as well : " All of us have been in three different places ... so there 's a lot to talk about , a lot that 's gone on , personally . I think it 's important to talk about that on this new record , to put what we 've been going through separately into the new record . "

During an interview with MTV , Beyoncé stated that the songs put altogether tell a complete story and noted that each song was a subsequent continuation to the next one . She concluded , " [ The album continues with ] this whole journey of this group of women trying to find love . And truly they find it because they love themselves and find it in themselves . It 's friendship , it 's love , it 's maturity and growth , and it 's everything that we wanted it to be . " For the music of the album , the group tried challenging themselves , working with different arrangements , trying to create an original sound ; to succeed in this , they were influenced by The Emotions , Jodeci and SWV mixing elements of their music . Destiny Fulfilled is predominantly an R & B concept album tracing a woman 's relationship journey . Critics further found elements of soul music , dance and hip-hop . The album is mostly composed of mid and slowtempo balladry following the opening two songs ; Caroline Sullivan of The Guardian felt that the ballads showcased " the girliness in the trio , musically and lyrically " . Eric Henderson of Slant Magazine found elements of middle of the road music in the ballads .

The album opens with the up-tempo dance song " Lose My Breath " , a track detailing a man full of empty promises to a woman . It is musically complete with military , marching-band drums and keyboard stabs and the backing track contains various sound effects . " Soldier " , the second track with T.I. and Lil Wayne , the only featured artists on the album , contains elements from Southern hip hop and Crunk & B. Unsatisfied and unfulfilled with the lover from the opening song , the protagonists ask for a decent soldier , further singing about finding a gangster . After finding the soldier , the third song , the R & B number " Cater 2 U " , lyrically is about submissively serving the man considered as such . Inspired by him , the protagonists sing about doing various things to make him happy musically accompanied by synthesizer as the song builds a crescendo . The fourth song " T-Shirt " is complete with inorganic drum sounds , guitar and backwards loop as the trio sings about sleeping in bed with their man 's T-shirt , " craving his presence , and inhailing his scent " . " Is She the Reason " is an R & B ballad which was noted to have a similar chord progression to materials by The Beatles , which lyrically speaks on being in competition with another woman for her mans love & attention . It contains a trumpet-laden sample from Melba Moore 's song " I Don 't Know No One Else to Turn To " . The next song , " Girl " was noted for its Motown influence and a theme talking about friendship . " If " , complete with strings , lyrically talks about men who don 't appreciate their female lovers until their relationship ends and they realize their mistakes . " Free " was described as a " soul classic from 1975 " with critics also noting elements of 1970s funk music , as the trio speaks on being " set free " after being in a relationship where her lover never tending to her desires like she does for him . The midtempo number " Through with Love " was noted for having an " angry " nature as it talks about a break-up . It contains an undulating piano line as the members of the group sing with restrained vocals and later religious redemption with elements of gospel . In " Love " , " capital L kicks the daylights out of the forces of fear , doubt and disappointment " , as the group " thank [ s ] God for love " . They further sing about how people " can 't truly love another until [ they ] love God and then [ themselves ] " . They further proclaim that they have found love and are " madly in it " .

The track listing of Destiny Fulfilled was revealed on October 15 , 2004 . The album was first released in Japan on November 10 , 2004 . It was released on November 16 , 2004 , in North America via Columbia Records . Although the original release was intended to be one day earlier , Columbia Records was concerned about " potential for Internet leaks and ' burned ' CD counterfeits " that could " lead consumers to experience inferior and incomplete versions of the album " which led to the postponement of Destiny Fulfilled . The group performed " Lose My Breath " on ABC 's 2004 National Football League " Opening Kickoff " special after its online release on September 9 , 2004 , to break their yearlong hiatus . On October 25 , 2004 , they appeared at the Radio Music Awards in Las Vegas performing the song with an a cappella jazz opening . The following month they performed three songs from their previous albums and finished with " Lose My Breath " on The Oprah Winfrey Show where they also sat down for an interview with Oprah Winfrey . On November 8 , 2004 , the trio appeared on Total Request Live ( TRL ) and performed the song along with " Say My Name " . They went to the German entertainment TV show Wetten , dass .. ? on November 13 , 2004 , and performed " Lose My Breath " . At BET 's 106 & Park Destiny 's Child performed " Soldier " on November 15 , 2004 . They also performed the song on CBS 's The Early Show on December 8 , 2004 . In early February 2005 they gave another performance of " Soldier " at the British show Top of the Pops . At the 2005 NBA All-Star Game on February 20 , 2005 , they sang both " Soldier " and " Lose My Breath " . They performed the latter song again at the 2005 ESPY Awards on July 13 with the ceremony being aired on ESPN four days later . " Cater 2 U " was performed on June 28 during the 2005 BET Awards in Los Angeles .

When the advanced release date of the album was announced , the group confirmed the initial dates of their worldwide tour Destiny Fulfilled ... and Lovin ' It in connection with Destiny Fulfilled 's promotion . Promotions of the tour were aired over the radio and television across the United States and the group further collaborated with McDonald 's , which served as its sponsor . The tour 's set list included songs from Destiny Fulfilled as well as Destiny 's Child 's previous albums and songs from the solo albums of each member performed individually . Numerous costume changes occurred throughout the show ; the concert exhibited products from Beyoncé 's clothing line from the House of Deréon , a company she co-founded with her mother Tina Knowles . A performance from the tour was filmed in Atlanta on July 15 , 2005 , and the DVD Destiny 's Child Live in Atlanta chronicling the concert was released on March 28 , 2006 .

The album 's lead single , " Lose My Breath " , premiered on AOL Music on September 9 , 2004 and it was released on September 21 . Its high-mark debut at number 30 on the Billboard Hot 100 prior to its release gave the album an early boost . The single peaked at number three on the chart for the week ending November 6 , 2004 giving the group their ninth top ten single . " Lose My Breath " topped the Hot Dance Club Songs chart for the week ending January 8 , 2005 and was later certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) on April 28 , 2005 selling 500,000 copies in the US . It was also successful across Europe , peaking at number one on the European Hot 100 Singles chart for the week ending December 4 , 2004 spending four consecutive weeks on top . It managed to top the charts in Belgium , Ireland , Italy and Switzerland and it further appeared in the top ten in almost every other chart . The American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) used the song as the music for their introductory montage at the 2004 NBA Playoffs and through the first few weeks of the 2005 NBA Playoffs .

" Soldier " , released on December 7 , 2004 , peaked at the third position on the Billboard Hot 100 chart becoming the band 's tenth top ten single on that chart . It further became the second single from the album to top the Hot Dance Club Songs chart for the week ending February 26 , 2005 . The RIAA gave it a gold certification for selling 500,000 digital copies in the US . " Soldier " further peaked at number four on the UK Singles Chart , number 3 on the ARIA Charts in Australia and appeared in the top 20 in many European countries . The third single from the album , " Girl " was released on May 2 , 2005 in the UK and on May 17 in the US . It was successful on the ARIA Chart peaking at number five and number six both on the UK Singles Chart and the New Zealand Singles Chart in addition to appearing in other European charts . In the US , it peaked at number 23 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart becoming the lowest charting single there from the album . The fourth and final single from Destiny Fulfilled was " Cater 2 U " released in the US and Italy only beginning on June 14 , 2005 . It peaked at number 14 on the Billboard Hot 100 and number three on the Hot R & B / Hip-Hop Songs further being certified gold by the RIAA .

Destiny Fulfilled received mixed reviews from music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a weighted mean rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 52 based on 17 reviews . Dimitri Ehrlich of Vibe magazine complimented the production of the album , saying that it " showcases advanced production values " with " impressive " songwriting and vocal abilities and concluded that it " offers divine satisfaction " . A writer of Billboard felt that Destiny Fulfilled worked as " a testament to Beyoncé 's evolving multiple talents " . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic praised Rowland 's and Williams ' abilities as vocalists and their contributions to the choruses , but felt that Beyoncé " steals every song on Destiny Fulfilled " further commending her for sounding " larger than life even when she 's quiet " ; however he concluded , " as a whole , the album winds up sounding too reserved and heavy-handed , which makes it a disappointment " . Andy Battaglia of The A.V. Club wrote in his review that " Destiny Fulfilled sounds distant and detached " further criticizing its mid-tempo ballads for sounding " uninterrupted at best , uninspired at worst " . Kelefa Sanneh of The New York Times commented that it is " a surprisingly perfunctory disc that never quite justifies its existence " . Alan Ranta of Tiny Mix Tapes doubted Beyoncé 's lyrical sincerity , saying , " the success of this album depends once again on the complete suspension of die-hard fans ' disbelief that Beyoncé ' Your Ad Here ' Knowles could ever actually truly love another human being as much as she loves herself and her possessions . "

Caroline Sullivan of The Guardian commented that the lead vocals of the songs were likely to be sung by each member equally , noting that it made the album a " democratic " one ; however she criticized them for squandering " the extent of their talents " on the album . Tom Sinclair of Entertainment Weekly also noticed its " overall air of democracy at work " and noted that Destiny Fulfilled " often moves at a molasses-like pace , weighted down with a preponderance of exquisitely executed but ultimately dull ballads " . Jenny Eliscu of Rolling Stone magazine echoed his comments , saying , " In all but a couple of songs , the verses are divided into three sections , with Beyonce leading things off , followed by Rowland , then Williams " . She noted that after a couple of upbeat songs , " the album slumps into an endless string of overwrought R & B ballads where the only saving grace is ... these ladies can harmonize like nobody 's business . " Eric Henderson of Slant Magazine has commented that the ballads of the album build into " the same sort of standoffish sexual supply-and-demand bartering that has marred their worst tracks " . Most of the critics questioned why Beyoncé had to return to Destiny 's Child after achieving the most success among the members of the group . Henderson lambasted Beyoncé to performing again with the group with the " full intention " of taking advantage to bolster her " divette " status to superstardom . In May 2006 , Destiny Fulfilled was listed at number 24 on a list titled " The 50 Worst Albums Ever ! " complied by Q magazine .

The album won in the category for Favorite Soul / R & B Album at the 2005 American Music Awards where Destiny 's Child also won the Favorite Soul / R & B Band award . At the 2005 Soul Train Music Awards Destiny Fulfilled received an award for Best R & B / Soul Album while " Soldier " received Best R & B / Soul Single . The album was nominated in the category for Best Contemporary R & B Album at the 48th Grammy Awards in 2006 but it lost to Mariah Carey 's The Emancipation of Mimi . Its singles " Soldier " and " Cater 2 U " further received nominations in three different categories at the same ceremony . The previous year , " Lose My Breath " was nominated in the category for Best R & B Vocal Performance by a Duo Or Group at the 47th Annual Grammy Awards .

In the United States , the album debuted at number 19 on the Billboard 200 for the week ending November 27 , 2004 for amassing sales of 61,000 copies prior to a whole tracking week . In its first official week of sales , Destiny Fulfilled sold over 497,000 copies , with an increase of 713 % compared to its early sales ; the album 's chart position rocketed to number two on the Billboard 200 for the week ending December 4 , 2004 . In the same week , it debuted at number one on the Top R & B / Hip-Hop Albums chart becoming the group 's second chart topper following Survivor in 2001 . After being removed from the top position for three consecutive weeks , Destiny Fulfilled returned to number one for the week ending January 1 , 2005 . On January 14 , 2005 it was certified triple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipment of 3,000,000 copies . It emerged as the seventh best-selling album and third best-selling R & B album in 2005 . As of October 2009 , the album has sold 3.1 million copies in the US according to Nielsen SoundScan . It was ranked at number 133 on the decade-end chart of the best-selling albums in that country for the period between 2000 and 2009 . The album peaked at number 3 on the Canadian Albums Chart and was awarded platinum certification by Music Canada selling 100,000 copies .

In the UK , Destiny Fulfilled debuted at number five on the UK Albums Chart on November 27 , 2004 which also became its peak position in that country . Having spent a total of 21 weeks on the chart , it became the group 's third album to enter the top ten in the UK until 2005 and the fourth one in their entire career . On November 19 , 2004 , the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) certified it platinum for selling 300,000 copies . On the Irish Albums Chart , Destiny Fulfilled debuted and peaked at number 6 on November 18 , 2004 becoming Destiny 's Child third consecutive top ten album in Ireland . It was also successful in other European countries , peaking at number 3 on the German Albums Chart , further being certified platinum in that region . In France , Destiny Fulfilled peaked at number nine in its first week on November 14 , 2004 . It was last seen on the country 's albums chart at number 163 on September 3 , 2005 . On the Australian ARIA Albums Chart , Destiny Fulfilled debuted at number 11 on November 28 , 2004 , a position which later became its peak . Spending a total of 31 weeks through 2004 and 2005 ascending and descending the chart , the album was certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for shipment of 70,000 copies in that region . In New Zealand , Destiny Fulfilled peaked at number 21 on April 25 , 2005 and the Recorded Music NZ ( RMNZ ) awarded it with a gold certification for 7,500 copies sold . In Japan , the album debuted and peaked at number four on the Oricon chart due to the success of " Lose My Breath " which reached number one on the singles chart there . The album has sold over 625,000 copies there and was certified double platinum by Oricon making it Destiny 's Child 's biggest success there to date . It won in the category Rock / Pop Album of the Year International at the 19th Japan Gold Disc Award in 2005 organized by the Recording Industry Association of Japan ( RIAJ ) . Destiny Fulfilled was named the eighth best-selling album of 2004 worldwide by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ( IFPI ) .

In a visit at the Palau Sant Jordi in Barcelona , Spain on July 11 , 2005 , Rowland announced before 16,000 spectators that Destiny Fulfilled ... and Lovin ' It would be Destiny 's Child last tour together , revealing their formal disbandment . After their final North American leg , the group parted ways . In a statement released to MTV , the band said that the tour had provided them the opportunity to depart from Destiny 's Child on a " high note " . They also talked about the moment when the group started their musical endeavor and their realizations of pursuing individual careers after working together for several years . Destiny 's Child thanked fans for their support while not closing the chance of seeing them continuing each member 's goals in music , film , and television . In another interview they explained that their disbandment was planned during the making of the album . While in the studio , they discussed individual aspirations and realized that remaining as a group would prevent them in pursuing those interests . Rowland revealed that they wanted to break up while they were still successful and " friends [ with each other ] " . Beyoncé , however , emphasized that Destiny Fulfilled would not be their last album and disclosed the idea of a possible reunion .

A Wal-Mart exclusive DVD titled " Fan Pack " was released on November 9 , 2004 a week before the release of Destiny Fulfilled . It was available at Wal-Mart only for a limited time . " Is She the Reason " samples " I Don 't Know No One Else to Turn To " as performed by Melba Moore . " Girl " samples " Ocean of Thoughts and Dreams " as written by Don Davis and Eddie Robinson and performed by The Dramatics . " If " samples " Inseparable " as written by Chuck Jackson and Marvin Yancy and performed by Natalie Cole .

Moses Hardy ( January 6 , 1894 – December 7 , 2006 ) was , at age 112 , the last surviving black veteran of World War I and one of the last surviving American veterans of that war . The son of former slaves , Hardy was born in 1894 and lived a religious and farming life until he signed up to serve overseas in World War I in July 1918 . He served in the segregated 805th infantry , which was assigned a variety of manual labor and support tasks . Hardy himself served as a scout , supplying the front line troops when necessary . Though Hardy did experience combat , he was never seriously injured and rarely discussed his experiences concerning the fighting . Instead , he preferred to recount stories about the food , the bravery of the soldiers and the weather in France . After the war , he took on a variety of jobs including school bus driver , farmer , deacon and cosmetics salesman , the latter of which he performed well past his 100th birthday . He received the Victory Medal , a special medal from the Mississippi National Guard and the French Légion d 'honneur . In 1999 , the Mississippi Legislature adopted a resolution recognizing him as an outstanding citizen of Mississippi . At the time of his death , at the age of 112 , he was recognized as the oldest combat veteran ever , the oldest male ever recorded in Mississippi and the second-oldest man and World War I veteran in the world .

Hardy was born in Aberdeen , Mississippi in 1894 . Hardy 's parents , Morris Hardy — born in the 1840s — and Nancy Hardy , were former slaves who after the Civil War had purchased 265 acres ( 1.07 km2 ) of land in Mississippi from a Chickasaw Native American for a dollar . The Hardy family was a deeply religious one , and Moses would later recount that Exodus 20 : 12 , which instructed one to honor their parents , was his favorite Bible passage and one which he lived by . Hardy was married once , to a woman by the name of Fannie Marshall , with whom he would end up having eight children .

Hardy 's service in France lasted from July 1918 to July 1919 , and included thirty-nine combat days . As an African American , he served in a segregated army unit , the 805th Pioneer Infantry , which was commanded by white officers . Although the unit 's purpose was to provide support for engineer regiments , it was also an infantry unit that was equipped to fight if necessary . The unit focused mainly of the tasks of stevedores , such as unloading cargo from ships , but also performed other manual labor tasks , such as cooking and organizing burials . Hardy 's outfit was armed solely with rifles , instead of standard-issue machine guns . After the war , Hardy 's division was responsible for cleaning up the battlefields and removing the dead . Hardy himself admitted to his family that he was " scared to death " when he first arrived overseas , but believed that the soldiers were fed something to make them brave , which he referred to as " brave pills " . After a short time in the military , he claimed that he was not afraid of anything that he experienced from then on . Even in the heat of battle , Hardy professed that he would get " wound up " at times , but never frightened . He recalled many strange experiences with food and drink , such as getting used to drinking green water from canteens and eating hardtacks , which he found to be surprisingly filling . To go with this , there was often little more than small tins of ham or chicken and occasionally coffee to drink and pudding or pie for dessert . Hardy also witnessed many of his friends get killed in action , and relied on his faith in God to get him through the toughest times .

Throughout the years , he received the Victory Medal , the Occupational Medal from the Mississippi Army National Guard , an honourable discharge ( which he had not received upon leaving the army ) and the French Légion d 'honneur . In 1999 , when he was 105 years old , the Mississippi Legislature adopted a resolution recognizing him as an outstanding citizen of Mississippi . At the time , he was known as the oldest living World War I veteran , as Emiliano Mercado del Toro had not yet been discovered . He was interviewed by Treehouse Productions in 2006 as part of their Living History Project , a radio tribute to the last surviving World War I veterans that was hosted by Walter Cronkite . Though he could not speak coherently , his son Haywood Hardy , himself 80 years old at the time , recalled some of the stories that his father had told him . Hardy did not serve in World War II and instead drove a school bus , farmed and sold linaments and wigs for " Lucky Heart " cosmetics until his retirement . He reportedly continued to go door-to-door for several years past his centenary , even resorting to phone sales when his children hid the keys of his 1972 Chevrolet Caprice . The youngest of his eight children , Jean Dukes , was born in the late 1940s . He also served as a deacon and superintendent of a Sunday School class at Mount Olive Church for over 75 years . His son claimed that , until about four years before he died , his father was healthy enough to drive his car into town every day . Hardy 's longevity was also credited to a daily meal that consisted of cabbage , corn bread , butter milk , potatoes and Dr Pepper , and the fact that he never drank alcohol or smoked in his life . Until a few years before his death , it was claimed that Hardy had never had a seriously ill day in his life and that he never took medicine , as it only made him sick . Hardy lived on his own until 2004 when his legs weakened and he found it almost impossible to walk . He was placed in a rest home , but was still able to feed himself and pass the days watching The Oprah Winfrey Show and The Price Is Right .

At the time of his death , he was the oldest United States combat veteran ever , the oldest male ever recorded in Mississippi and had outlived at least three of his eight children . It was reported that he had several dozen grandchildren and great-grandchildren . He was also ranked as the sixth-oldest living verified person in the world , the second-oldest man and World War I veteran behind only del Toro and the last African American one . Although he suffered from mild dementia in his later years , he was reported to have been completely lucid through his final days and his death was attributed to natural causes .

" Fresh Blood " is the seventh episode of the paranormal drama Supernatural 's third season on The CW , and is the show 's fifty-first episode overall . The episode was written by Sera Gamble and directed by Kim Manners ; it was first broadcast on November 15 , 2007 . The narrative follows the series ' protagonists Sam ( Jared Padalecki ) and Dean Winchester ( Jensen Ackles ) as they have their final confrontation with hunter Gordon Walker ( Sterling K. Brown ) , who has been turned into a vampire . It also features the demise of recurring antagonist Gordon Walker . Brown , who was forced to leave the show due to commitments to the Lifetime Television series Army Wives , was horrified at Gordon 's actions in the episode . Mercedes McNab of Buffy the Vampire Slayer and Angel fame made a cameo appearance , and was also busy filming the television series Reaper during the episode 's production . The episode received ratings near the season average , and garnered generally positive reviews from critics . Brown 's performance was praised , as well as the twist in his character 's storyline . Also applauded were both Sam 's confrontation with Dean over his recent reckless behavior and the resulting reconciliation at the episode 's end . Many critics found the presence of character Bela Talbot ( Lauren Cohan ) in the episode to be pointless , while the critic for TV Guide enjoyed McNab 's cameo and wished it had been longer .

Hunter Gordon Walker ( Brown ) , who believes that Sam Winchester ( Padalecki ) will one day turn evil and become involved in a demonic war against humanity , escapes from prison . He tracks down Bela Talbot ( Cohan ) — a thief and frequent thorn in the Winchesters ' sides — and threatens to kill her unless she reveals the location of the brothers . She refuses at first , but eventually acquiesces in exchange for a priceless mojo bag . Meanwhile , Sam and Dean ( Ackles ) capture the vampire Lucy ( McNab ) , who has previously taken two victims . They interrogate her , and discover that another vampire named Dixon spiked her drink with his own blood at a club , transforming her . Dixon had taken her back to his home , but she escaped to feed . Lucy , still believing that she has only been drugged , is then killed by Dean , as there is no known cure for vampirism . The brothers locate and confront Dixon , but are interrupted by Gordon and fellow hunter Kubrick . Sam and Dean escape , but in the mayhem , Dixon kidnaps Gordon . The vampire later explains to Gordon that hunters killed his nest , and now he wants to rebuild his family . Though Dixon had planned on using Gordon as food , the hunter 's continuous taunting prompts him to feed him his blood . When the brothers — having been informed by Bela of Gordon 's location , which she discovered via Ouija board — arrive at Dixon 's hideout , they discover that the vampiric Gordon has escaped . Elsewhere , Gordon returns to Kubrick . He requests that he be allowed to live long enough to deal with Sam . Despite this , Kubrick attempts to kill him , so Gordon retaliates by punching into his guts .

As night approaches , the brothers have not been able to find Gordon . Dean decides to go after Gordon while Sam stays hidden , but Sam refuses . He then confronts Dean about his reckless behavior since his deal with a Crossroads Demon , which left him only a year to live . Dean claims that he is not scared of his impending death , but Sam challenges this . Dean eventually relents , agreeing to behave more like his old self again . The two then prepare to wait out the night . Gordon later calls Sam and Dean , threatening to kill a young woman if they do not meet him . They head to the location and find the woman , but Gordon uses a roller door to separate the brothers . The woman is revealed to be a vampire turned by Gordon , and Dean is forced to shoot her with the Colt — a mystical gun capable of killing anything . He then attempts to help Sam , but Gordon prepares to bite him . Sam prevents this and garrotes Gordon with a razor wire , decapitating the vampire . Sam and Dean later stop on the side of the road to check a rattling noise made by the Impala . Sam is confused when Dean starts explaining the engine 's problem . Dean , however , reasons that Sam should know how to fix the car when his remaining time runs out , and also notes that , as his older brother , he should be showing him the ropes .

" Fresh Blood " featured the final guest appearance by Sterling K. Brown as the vampire hunter Gordon Walker . The character 's story arc for the season was intended to be longer , but Brown 's commitments to the Lifetime Television series Army Wives limited his return to only two appearances . The episode was " really hard " for the actor ; though he was fine with the character dying , the idea of Gordon turning an innocent girl into a vampire was " horrific " to him . Although Gordon 's actions in previous episodes were questionable , Brown had always believed the character to be " ultimately good " . On this change , Brown commented , " His endgame is to kill Sam , and anyone else who has to experience detrimental effects because of that is not a concern of his . That was tough for me to process and get on board with . " However , series creator Eric Kripke reasoned that the character was now a monster and should follow his instincts instead of logic . The writer of " Fresh Blood " , Sera Gamble , also penned Gordon 's initial episode and helped Kripke conceptualize the character . She felt that she " lucked out " in being able to write the character 's final appearance , and found there to be " something so satisfying about turning him into a vampire and chopping his head off with a razor wire " .

Mercedes McNab , well known for portraying the vampire Harmony Kendall on the television series Buffy the Vampire Slayer and Angel , guest starred as the recently turned vampire Lucy . Although hesitant to play another vampire , McNab came to realize that the character was less of a vampire and more of a " girl who woke up and was basically drugged or was changed and didn 't know what was going on " . The actress also noted that Harmony was generally used for comic relief , whereas Lucy was intended to be " serious and more dramatic " . Her previous experience with director Kim Manners on the television series The Adventures of Brisco County , Jr. also influenced her decision . Because many of her recent characters tended to die , McNab was delighted by Lucy 's offscreen death . The actress was also working on an episode of Reaper during the filming of " Fresh Blood " , and the Supernatural production staff was able to fit her into the shooting schedule . The actress found them to be " really helpful " in making sure that her scenes did not take too long to film . Her portion of the opening scene only took a few hours to shoot , allowing her to return to Reaper the next morning .

Michael Massee returned as the hunter Kubrick , who believes himself to be on a mission from God to kill Sam Winchester . Massee discussed his character with Brown beforehand , and envisioned him as a long-time friend of Gordon who could be depended upon . Brown described Kubrick as a " well-meaning ... sweet guy " , and noted that his wife had a " visceral response " to the character 's death when later viewing the episode . Matthew Humphreys portrayed the vampire Dixon , and considers him a " deeply misunderstood " character . The actor found it " easy to rationalize what he did " because Dixon was at odds with how to start his own family as a vampire , and he maintains that the character had no evil intentions behind his actions . Humphreys hopes to one day return to the role .

Principal photography took place in Vancouver , British Columbia . The opening sequence was filmed outside at night , though the subsequent scene — Lucy 's interrogation and execution — occurred in a motel set constructed on a sound stage . Atypical to the series , the motel room did not have a noticeable theme . Production designer John Marcynuk commented , " That motel room was essentially a killing floor for the boys ... and it was kind of a cold interrogation scene , so we tried to keep it not so friendly . When you walked through it , it definitely felt like a place [ where ] a murder had been committed . It wouldn 't have been the first time a murder had been committed in that room , either . It was the type of place where bad things happen . " Marcynuk took a different approach for Gordon 's death scene , utilizing green tones and a cool color palette to create a greater visual contrast with the blood .

To lend a strong air of realism to Gordon 's death , the scene was created by combining various special effects during filming with post-production visual effects . Plastic razor wire with blood tubing aided in the initial phases of the decapitation ; it would slightly sink into Brown 's neck as pressure was applied , forcing out the fake blood . For the aftermath , Brown laid down on the floor , and the visual effects department removed his head from the shot and recreated it as a three-dimensional model . The department decided to " push it a little bit farther " by having the head rocking into place and the mouth twitching , but Standards and Practices found it too graphic and forced them to remove the motion . Established in the first season episode " Dead Man 's Blood " were the shark-like teeth of vampires , and the design has been subtly improved with each vampire episode . Though the special effects makeup department used molds of the actors ' mouths to create the fanged acrylic dentures , McNab noted that it was very difficult to speak while wearing them . Blood-like makeup around the actors ' mouths helped to round out the vampiric visages .

In its original broadcast , " Fresh Blood " was viewed by an estimated 2.88 million viewers . The episode received generally positive reviews from critics . Tina Charles of TV Guide praised the episode , commenting that " it was really nice to get an enjoyable episode high on intensity , brotherly interaction , blood and gore " . Although she had grown a " tad bit weary " of the character 's continuous attempts to kill Sam , she was still " really sorry to see Sterling and Gordy go " . Charles felt that his transformation was a " good twist " , and liked that his " black-and-white beliefs " remained the same even after becoming a vampire . She also enjoyed the character of Lucy and her " really sad " ending , and wished that McNab 's role had been larger . It was noted that the " brotherly interaction was front and center " , and Charles was " beyond happy " that Sam confronted Dean about is behavior . The " moment that [ she had ] been waiting for all season long " finally came to be when Dean took Sam seriously and actually listened to him instead of replying with sarcasm . Charles also deemed the final scene with the brothers to be " just heartbreaking " . Likewise , Karla Peterson of The San Diego Union-Tribune not only gave the episode an A + , but ranked it as the sixth-best episode of the 2007-2008 television season . She praised writer Sera Gamble and director Kim Manners for " creating the best bonding scene we 've had all season " , and lauded Padalecki and Ackles for " making us care so much and believe so fully that a scene like this can leave us gasping " .

Brett Love of TV Squad posited that Gordon 's return in the " great " episode was " well worth the wait " . He noted that the revelation that Lucy was just an innocent girl was a " nice twist " , and deemed it a " great choice " to have Gordon turned into a vampire . Love was sad to see Gordon depart from the series , finding the " outstanding " Brown to be " so intense and committed " to the role . However , he considered Bela 's appearance to be unnecessary , and pointed out the implausibility of it being easier for Gordon to track down Bela than it would have been to just track down the Winchesters . Like Love , Julie Pyle of Airlock Alpha believed Bela 's appearance " [ felt ] forced " . She was saddened by the deaths of Gordon and Kubrick , and had hoped that their storylines would have been further explored . Pyle also criticized the episode 's lighting , commenting , " With the added gore this season , the show should seem darker . Instead , it 's like ' Supernatural Lite ' . " While Maureen Ryan of Chicago Tribune found the concept of Gordon hunting down Sam to be " inspired " , she noted that " ' Fresh Blood ' didn 't do much for [ her ] " .

Recalling the demon Azazel 's comments about the recently resurrected Sam in the episode " All Hell Breaks Loose , Part Two " — that what came back may not be " one hundred percent pure Sam " — Don Williams of BuddyTV questioned if something really is wrong with Sam . Williams added Gordon 's death to his list of Sam 's recent out-of-character actions , which already included Sam 's brutal execution of Jake Talley in " All Hell Breaks Loose , Part Two " and his killing of the Crossroads Demon in " Bedtime Stories " . However , he did point out that both characters " kind of deserved to bite the dust " . Peterson , too , noted the " cold , dead look in Sam 's eyes " after the killing . On the other hand , Padalecki posited that the " darker side of Sam " was depicted when he killed Gordon " with pure hatred " , but reasoned that Sam was thinking , " He 's a vampire ! He 's killing people ; it 's time for him to go . "

The Spanish conquest of Guatemala was a protracted conflict during the Spanish colonisation of the Americas , in which Spanish colonisers gradually incorporated the territory that became the modern country of Guatemala into the colonial Viceroyalty of New Spain . Before the conquest , this territory contained a number of competing Mesoamerican kingdoms , the majority of which were Maya . Many conquistadors viewed the Maya as " infidels " who needed to be forcefully converted and pacified , disregarding the achievements of their civilization . The first contact between the Maya and European explorers came in the early 16th century when a Spanish ship sailing from Panama to Santo Domingo was wrecked on the east coast of the Yucatán Peninsula in 1511 . Several Spanish expeditions followed in 1517 and 1519 , making landfall on various parts of the Yucatán coast . The Spanish conquest of the Maya was a prolonged affair ; the Maya kingdoms resisted integration into the Spanish Empire with such tenacity that their defeat took almost two centuries . Pedro de Alvarado arrived in Guatemala from the newly conquered Mexico in early 1524 , commanding a mixed force of Spanish conquistadors and native allies , mostly from Tlaxcala and Cholula . Geographic features across Guatemala now bear Nahuatl placenames owing to the influence of these Mexican allies , who translated for the Spanish . The Kaqchikel Maya initially allied themselves with the Spanish , but soon rebelled against excessive demands for tribute and did not finally surrender until 1530 . In the meantime the other major highland Maya kingdoms had each been defeated in turn by the Spanish and allied warriors from Mexico and already subjugated Maya kingdoms in Guatemala . The Itza Maya and other lowland groups in the Petén Basin were first contacted by Hernán Cortés in 1525 , but remained independent and hostile to the encroaching Spanish until 1697 , when a concerted Spanish assault led by Martín de Ursúa y Arizmendi finally defeated the last independent Maya kingdom .

Spanish and native tactics and technology differed greatly . The Spanish viewed the taking of prisoners as a hindrance to outright victory , whereas the Maya prioritised the capture of live prisoners and of booty . The indigenous peoples of Guatemala lacked key elements of Old World technology such as a functional wheel , horses , iron , steel , and gunpowder ; they were also extremely susceptible to Old World diseases , against which they had no resistance . The Maya preferred raiding and ambush to large-scale warfare , using spears , arrows and wooden swords with inset obsidian blades ; the Xinca of the southern coastal plain used poison on their arrows . In response to the use of Spanish cavalry , the highland Maya took to digging pits and lining them with wooden stakes .

The sources describing the Spanish conquest of Guatemala include those written by the Spanish themselves , among them two of four letters written by conquistador Pedro de Alvarado to Hernán Cortés in 1524 , describing the initial campaign to subjugate the Guatemalan Highlands . These letters were despatched to Tenochtitlan , addressed to Cortés but with a royal audience in mind ; two of these letters are now lost . Gonzalo de Alvarado y Chávez was Pedro de Alvarado 's cousin ; he accompanied him on his first campaign in Guatemala and in 1525 he became the chief constable of Santiago de los Caballeros de Guatemala , the newly founded Spanish capital . Gonzalo wrote an account that mostly supports that of Pedro de Alvarado . Pedro de Alvarado 's brother Jorge wrote another account to the king of Spain that explained it was his own campaign of 1527 – 1529 that established the Spanish colony . Bernal Díaz del Castillo wrote a lengthy account of the conquest of Mexico and neighbouring regions , the Historia verdadera de la conquista de la Nueva España ( " True History of the Conquest of New Spain " ) ; his account of the conquest of Guatemala generally agrees with that of the Alvarados . His account was finished around 1568 , some 40 years after the campaigns it describes . Hernán Cortés described his expedition to Honduras in the fifth letter of his Cartas de Relación , in which he details his crossing of what is now Guatemala 's Petén Department . Dominican friar Bartolomé de las Casas wrote a highly critical account of the Spanish conquest of the Americas and included accounts of some incidents in Guatemala . The Brevísima Relación de la Destrucción de las Indias ( " Short Account of the Destruction of the Indies " ) was first published in 1552 in Seville .

The Tlaxcalan allies of the Spanish who accompanied them in their invasion of Guatemala wrote their own accounts of the conquest ; these included a letter to the Spanish king protesting at their poor treatment once the campaign was over . Other accounts were in the form of questionnaires answered before colonial magistrates to protest and register a claim for recompense . Two pictorial accounts painted in the stylised indigenous pictographic tradition have survived ; these are the Lienzo de Quauhquechollan , which was probably painted in Ciudad Vieja in the 1530s , and the Lienzo de Tlaxcala , painted in Tlaxcala . Accounts of the conquest as seen from the point of view of the defeated highland Maya kingdoms are included in a number of indigenous documents , including the Annals of the Kaqchikels , which includes the Xajil Chronicle describing the history of the Kaqchikel from their mythical creation down through the Spanish conquest and continuing to 1619 . A letter from the defeated Tz 'utujil Maya nobility of Santiago Atitlán to the Spanish king written in 1571 details the exploitation of the subjugated peoples . Francisco Antonio de Fuentes y Guzmán was a colonial Guatemalan historian of Spanish descent who wrote La Recordación Florida , also called Historia de Guatemala ( History of Guatemala ) . The book was written in 1690 and is regarded as one of the most important works of Guatemalan history , and is the first such book to have been written by a criollo author . Field investigation has tended to support the estimates of indigenous population and army sizes given by Fuentes y Guzmán .

Christopher Columbus discovered the New World for the Kingdom of Castile and Leon in 1492 . Private adventurers thereafter entered into contracts with the Spanish Crown to conquer the newly discovered lands in return for tax revenues and the power to rule . In the first decades after the discovery of the new lands , the Spanish colonised the Caribbean and established a centre of operations on the island of Cuba . They heard rumours of the rich empire of the Aztecs on the mainland to the west and , in 1519 , Hernán Cortés set sail with eleven ships to explore the Mexican coast . By August 1521 the Aztec capital of Tenochtitlan had fallen to the Spanish . A single soldier arriving in Mexico in 1520 was carrying smallpox and thus initiated the devastating plagues that swept through the native populations of the Americas . Within three years of the fall of Tenochtitlan the Spanish had conquered a large part of Mexico , extending as far south as the Isthmus of Tehuantepec . The newly conquered territory became New Spain , headed by a viceroy who answered to the king of Spain via the Council of the Indies . Hernán Cortés received reports of rich , populated lands to the south and dispatched Pedro de Alvarado to investigate the region .

In the run up to the announcement that an invasion force was to be sent to Guatemala , 10,000 Nahua warriors had already been assembled by the Aztec emperor Cuauhtémoc to accompany the Spanish expedition . Warriors were ordered to be gathered from each of the Mexica and Tlaxcaltec towns . The native warriors supplied their own weapons , including swords , clubs and bows and arrows . Alvarado 's army left Tenochtitlan at the beginning of the dry season , sometime between the second half of November and December 1523 . As Alvarado left the Aztec capital , he led about 400 Spanish and approximately 200 Tlaxcaltec and Cholultec warriors and 100 Mexica , meeting up with the gathered reinforcements on the way . When the army left the Basin of Mexico , it may have included as many as 20,000 native warriors from various kingdoms although the exact numbers are disputed . By the time the army crossed the Isthmus of Tehuantepec , the massed native warriors included 800 from Tlaxcala , 400 from Huejotzingo , 1600 from Tepeaca plus many more from other former Aztec territories . Further Mesoamerican warriors were recruited from the Zapotec and Mixtec provinces , with the addition of more Nahuas from the Aztec garrison in Soconusco .

In the early 16th century the territory that now makes up Guatemala was divided into various competing polities , each locked in continual struggle with its neighbours . The most important were the K 'iche ' , the Kaqchikel , the Tz 'utujil , the Chajoma , the Mam , the Poqomam and the Pipil . All were Maya groups except for the Pipil , who were a Nahua group related to the Aztecs ; the Pipil had a number of small city-states along the Pacific coastal plain of southern Guatemala and El Salvador . The Pipil of Guatemala had their capital at Itzcuintepec . The Xinca were another non-Maya group occupying the southeastern Pacific coastal area . The Maya had never been unified as a single empire , but by the time the Spanish arrived Maya civilization was thousands of years old and had already seen the rise and fall of great cities . On the eve of the conquest the highlands of Guatemala were dominated by several powerful Maya states . In the centuries preceding the arrival of the Spanish the K 'iche ' had carved out a small empire covering a large part of the western Guatemalan Highlands and the neighbouring Pacific coastal plain . However , in the late 15th century the Kaqchikel rebelled against their former K 'iche ' allies and founded a new kingdom to the southeast with Iximche as its capital . In the decades before the Spanish invasion the Kaqchikel kingdom had been steadily eroding the kingdom of the K 'iche ' . Other highland groups included the Tz 'utujil around Lake Atitlán , the Mam in the western highlands and the Poqomam in the eastern highlands .

The kingdom of the Itza was the most powerful polity in the Petén lowlands of northern Guatemala , centred on their capital Nojpetén , on an island in Lake Petén Itzá . The second polity in importance was that of their hostile neighbours , the Kowoj . The Kowoj were located to the east of the Itza , around the eastern lakes : Lake Salpetén , Lake Macanché , Lake Yaxhá and Lake Sacnab . Other groups are less well known and their precise territorial extent and political makeup remains obscure ; among them were the Chinamita , the Kejache , the Icaiche , the Lakandon Ch 'ol , the Mopan , the Manche Ch 'ol and the Yalain . The Kejache occupied an area north of the lake on the route to Campeche , while the Mopan and the Chinamita had their polities in the southeastern Petén . The Manche territory was to the southwest of the Mopan . The Yalain had their territory immediately to the east of Lake Petén Itzá .

Maya warfare was not so much aimed at destruction of the enemy as the seizure of captives and plunder . The Spanish described the weapons of war of the Petén Maya as bows and arrows , fire-sharpened poles , flint-headed spears and two-handed swords crafted from strong wood with the blade fashioned from inset obsidian , similar to the Aztec macuahuitl . Pedro de Alvarado described how the Xinca of the Pacific coast attacked the Spanish with spears , stakes and poisoned arrows . Maya warriors wore body armour in the form of quilted cotton that had been soaked in salt water to toughen it ; the resulting armour compared favourably to the steel armour worn by the Spanish . The Maya had historically employed ambush and raiding as their preferred tactic , and its employment against the Spanish proved troublesome for the Europeans . In response to the use of cavalry , the highland Maya took to digging pits on the roads , lining them with fire-hardened stakes and camouflaging them with grass and weeds , a tactic that according to the Kaqchikel killed many horses .

The conquistadors were all volunteers , the majority of whom did not receive a fixed salary but instead a portion of the spoils of victory , in the form of precious metals , land grants and provision of native labour . Many of the Spanish were already experienced soldiers who had previously campaigned in Europe . The initial incursion into Guatemala was led by Pedro de Alvarado , who earned the military title of Adelantado in 1527 ; he answered to the Spanish crown via Hernán Cortés in Mexico . Other early conquistadors included Pedro de Alvarado 's brothers Gómez de Alvarado , Jorge de Alvarado and Gonzalo de Alvarado y Contreras ; and his cousins Gonzalo de Alvarado y Chávez , Hernando de Alvarado and Diego de Alvarado . Pedro de Portocarrero was a nobleman who joined the initial invasion . Bernal Díaz del Castillo was a petty nobleman who accompanied Hernán Cortés when he crossed the northern lowlands , and Pedro de Alvarado on his invasion of the highlands . In addition to Spaniards , the invasion force probably included dozens of armed African slaves and freemen .

Spanish weaponry and tactics differed greatly from that of the indigenous peoples of Guatemala . This included the Spanish use of crossbows , firearms ( including muskets and cannon ) , war dogs and war horses . Among Mesoamerican peoples the capture of prisoners was a priority , while to the Spanish such taking of prisoners was a hindrance to outright victory . The inhabitants of Guatemala , for all their sophistication , lacked key elements of Old World technology , such as the use of iron and steel and functional wheels . The use of steel swords was perhaps the greatest technological advantage held by the Spanish , although the deployment of cavalry helped them to rout indigenous armies on occasion . The Spanish were sufficiently impressed by the quilted cotton armour of their Maya enemies that they adopted it in preference to their own steel armour . The conquistadors applied a more effective military organisation and strategic awareness than their opponents , allowing them to deploy troops and supplies in a way that increased the Spanish advantage . In Guatemala the Spanish routinely fielded indigenous allies ; at first these were Nahua brought from the recently conquered Mexico , later they also included Maya . It is estimated that for every Spaniard on the field of battle , there were at least 10 native auxiliaries . Sometimes there were as many as 30 indigenous warriors for every Spaniard , and it was the participation of these Mesoamerican allies that was particularly decisive . In at least one case , encomienda rights were granted to one of the Tlaxcalan leaders who came as allies , and land grants and exemption from being given in encomienda were given to the Mexican allies as rewards for their participation in the conquest . In practice , such privileges were easily removed or sidestepped by the Spanish and the indigenous conquistadors were treated in a similar manner to the conquered natives .

Epidemics accidentally introduced by the Spanish included smallpox , measles and influenza . These diseases , together with typhus and yellow fever , had a major impact on Maya populations . The Old World diseases brought with the Spanish and against which the indigenous New World peoples had no resistance were a deciding factor in the conquest ; the diseases crippled armies and decimated populations before battles were even fought . Their introduction was catastrophic in the Americas ; it is estimated that 90 % of the indigenous population had been eliminated by disease within the first century of European contact . In 1519 and 1520 , before the arrival of the Spanish in the region , a number of epidemics swept through southern Guatemala . At the same time as the Spanish were occupied with the overthrow of the Aztec empire , a devastating plague struck the Kaqchikel capital of Iximche , and the city of Q 'umarkaj , capital of the K 'iche ' , may also have suffered from the same epidemic . It is likely that the same combination of smallpox and a pulmonary plague swept across the entire Guatemalan Highlands . Modern knowledge of the impact of these diseases on populations with no prior exposure suggests that 33 – 50 % of the population of the highlands perished . Population levels in the Guatemalan Highlands did not recover to their pre-conquest levels until the middle of the 20th century . In 1666 pestilence or murine typhus swept through what is now the department of Huehuetenango . Smallpox was reported in San Pedro Saloma , in 1795 . At the time of the fall of Nojpetén in 1697 , there are estimated to have been 60,000 Maya living around Lake Petén Itzá , including a large number of refugees from other areas . It is estimated that 88 % of them died during the first ten years of colonial rule owing to a combination of disease and war .

The conquest of the highlands was made difficult by the many independent polities in the region , rather than one powerful enemy to be defeated as was the case in central Mexico . After the Aztec capital Tenochtitlan fell to the Spanish in 1521 , the Kaqchikel Maya of Iximche sent envoys to Hernán Cortés to declare their allegiance to the new ruler of Mexico , and the K 'iche ' Maya of Q 'umarkaj may also have sent a delegation . In 1522 Cortés sent Mexican allies to scout the Soconusco region of lowland Chiapas , where they met new delegations from Iximche and Q 'umarkaj at Tuxpán ; both of the powerful highland Maya kingdoms declared their loyalty to the king of Spain . But Cortés ' allies in Soconusco soon informed him that the K 'iche ' and the Kaqchikel were not loyal , and were instead harassing Spain 's allies in the region . Cortés decided to despatch Pedro de Alvarado with 180 cavalry , 300 infantry , crossbows , muskets , 4 cannons , large amounts of ammunition and gunpowder , and thousands of allied Mexican warriors from Tlaxcala , Cholula and other cities in central Mexico ; they arrived in Soconusco in 1523 . Pedro de Alvarado was infamous for the massacre of Aztec nobles in Tenochtitlan and , according to Bartolomé de las Casas , he committed further atrocities in the conquest of the Maya kingdoms in Guatemala . Some groups remained loyal to the Spanish once they had submitted to the conquest , such as the Tz 'utujil and the K 'iche ' of Quetzaltenango , and provided them with warriors to assist further conquest . Other groups soon rebelled however , and by 1526 numerous rebellions had engulfed the highlands .

Pedro de Alvarado and his army advanced along the Pacific coast unopposed until they reached the Samalá River in western Guatemala . This region formed a part of the K 'iche ' kingdom , and a K 'iche ' army tried unsuccessfully to prevent the Spanish from crossing the river . Once across , the conquistadors ransacked nearby settlements in an effort to terrorise the K 'iche ' . On 8 February 1524 Alvarado 's army fought a battle at Xetulul , called Zapotitlán by his Mexican allies ( modern San Francisco Zapotitlán ) . Although suffering many injuries inflicted by defending K 'iche ' archers , the Spanish and their allies stormed the town and set up camp in the marketplace . Alvarado then turned to head upriver into the Sierra Madre mountains towards the K 'iche ' heartlands , crossing the pass into the fertile valley of Quetzaltenango . On 12 February 1524 Alvarado 's Mexican allies were ambushed in the pass and driven back by K 'iche ' warriors but the Spanish cavalry charge that followed was a shock for the K 'iche ' , who had never before seen horses . The cavalry scattered the K 'iche ' and the army crossed to the city of Xelaju ( modern Quetzaltenango ) only to find it deserted . Although the common view is that the K 'iche ' prince Tecun Uman died in the later battle near Olintepeque , the Spanish accounts are clear that at least one and possibly two of the lords of Q 'umarkaj died in the fierce battles upon the initial approach to Quetzaltenango . The death of Tecun Uman is said to have taken place in the battle of El Pinar , and local tradition has his death taking place on the Llanos de Urbina ( Plains of Urbina ) , upon the approach to Quetzaltenango near the modern village of Cantel . Pedro de Alvarado , in his third letter to Hernán Cortés , describes the death of one of the four lords of Q 'umarkaj upon the approach to Quetzaltenango . The letter was dated 11 April 1524 and was written during his stay at Q 'umarkaj . Almost a week later , on 18 February 1524 , a K 'iche ' army confronted the Spanish army in the Quetzaltenango valley and were comprehensively defeated ; many K 'iche ' nobles were among the dead . Such were the numbers of K 'iche ' dead that Olintepeque was given the name Xequiquel , roughly meaning " bathed in blood " . In the early 17th century , the grandson of the K 'iche ' king informed the alcalde mayor ( the highest colonial official at the time ) that the K 'iche ' army that had marched out of Q 'umarkaj to confront the invaders numbered 30,000 warriors , a claim that is considered credible by modern scholars . This battle exhausted the K 'iche ' militarily and they asked for peace and offered tribute , inviting Pedro de Alvarado into their capital Q 'umarkaj , which was known as Tecpan Utatlan to the Nahuatl-speaking allies of the Spanish . Alvarado was deeply suspicious of the K 'iche ' intentions but accepted the offer and marched to Q 'umarkaj with his army .

The day after the battle of Olintepeque , the Spanish army arrived at Tzakahá , which submitted peacefully . There the Spanish chaplains Juan Godinez and Juan Díaz conducted a Roman Catholic mass under a makeshift roof ; this site was chosen to build the first church in Guatemala , which was dedicated to Concepción La Conquistadora . Tzakahá was renamed as San Luis Salcajá . The first Easter mass held in Guatemala was celebrated in the new church , during which high-ranking natives were baptised . In March 1524 Pedro de Alvarado entered Q 'umarkaj at the invitation of the remaining lords of the K 'iche ' after their catastrophic defeat , fearing that he was entering a trap . He encamped on the plain outside the city rather than accepting lodgings inside . Fearing the great number of K 'iche ' warriors gathered outside the city and that his cavalry would not be able to manoeuvre in the narrow streets of Q 'umarkaj , he invited the leading lords of the city , Oxib-Keh ( the ajpop , or king ) and Beleheb-Tzy ( the ajpop k 'amha , or king elect ) to visit him in his camp . As soon as they did so , he seized them and kept them as prisoners in his camp . The K 'iche ' warriors , seeing their lords taken prisoner , attacked the Spaniards ' indigenous allies and managed to kill one of the Spanish soldiers . At this point Alvarado decided to have the captured K 'iche ' lords burnt to death , and then proceeded to burn the entire city . After the destruction of Q 'umarkaj and the execution of its rulers , Pedro de Alvarado sent messages to Iximche , capital of the Kaqchikel , proposing an alliance against the remaining K 'iche ' resistance . Alvarado wrote that they sent 4000 warriors to assist him , although the Kaqchikel recorded that they sent only 400 .

With the capitulation of the K 'iche ' kingdom , various non-K 'iche ' peoples under K 'iche ' dominion also submitted to the Spanish . This included the Mam inhabitants of the area now within the modern department of San Marcos . Quetzaltenango and San Marcos were placed under the command of Juan de León y Cardona , who began the reduction of indigenous populations and the foundation of Spanish towns . The towns of San Marcos and San Pedro Sacatepéquez were founded soon after the conquest of western Guatemala . In 1533 Pedro de Alvarado ordered de León y Cardona to explore and conquer the area around the Tacaná , Tajumulco , Lacandón and San Antonio volcanoes ; in colonial times this area was referred to as the Province of Tecusitlán and Lacandón . De León marched to a Maya city named Quezalli by his Nahuatl-speaking allies with a force of fifty Spaniards ; his Mexican allies also referred to the city by the name Sacatepequez . De León renamed the city as San Pedro Sacatepéquez in honour of his friar , Pedro de Angulo . The Spanish founded a village nearby at Candacuchex in April that year , renaming it as San Marcos .

On 14 April 1524 , soon after the defeat of the K 'iche ' , the Spanish were invited into Iximche and were well received by the lords Belehe Qat and Cahi Imox . The Kaqchikel kings provided native soldiers to assist the conquistadors against continuing K 'iche ' resistance and to help with the defeat of the neighbouring Tz 'utuhil kingdom . The Spanish only stayed briefly in Iximche before continuing through Atitlán , Escuintla and Cuscatlán . The Spanish returned to the Kaqchikel capital on 23 July 1524 and on 27 July ( 1 Q 'at in the Kaqchikel calendar ) Pedro de Alvarado declared Iximche as the first capital of Guatemala , Santiago de los Caballeros de Guatemala ( " St. James of the Knights of Guatemala " ) . Iximche was called Guatemala by the Spanish , from the Nahuatl Quauhtemallan meaning " forested land " . Since the Spanish conquistadors founded their first capital at Iximche , they took the name of the city used by their Nahuatl-speaking Mexican allies and applied it to the new Spanish city and , by extension , to the kingdom . From this comes the modern name of the country . When Pedro de Alvarado moved his army to Iximche , he left the defeated K 'iche ' kingdom under the command of Juan de León y Cardona . Although de León y Cardona was given command of the western reaches of the new colony , he continued to take an active role in the continuing conquest , including the later assault on the Poqomam capital .

The Kaqchikel appear to have entered into an alliance with the Spanish to defeat their enemies , the Tz 'utujil , whose capital was Tecpan Atitlan . Pedro de Alvarado sent two Kaqchikel messengers to Tecpan Atitlan at the request of the Kaqchikel lords , both of whom were killed by the Tz 'utujil . When news of the killing of the messengers reached the Spanish at Iximche , the conquistadors marched against the Tz 'utujil with their Kaqchikel allies . Pedro de Alvarado left Iximche just 5 days after he had arrived there , with 60 cavalry , 150 Spanish infantry and an unspecified number of Kaqchikel warriors . The Spanish and their allies arrived at the lakeshore after a day 's hard march , without encountering any opposition . Seeing the lack of resistance , Alvarado rode ahead with 30 cavalry along the lake shore . Opposite a populated island the Spanish at last encountered hostile Tz 'utujil warriors and charged among them , scattering and pursuing them to a narrow causeway across which the surviving Tz 'utujil fled . The causeway was too narrow for the horses , therefore the conquistadors dismounted and crossed to the island before the inhabitants could break the bridges . The rest of Alvarado 's army soon reinforced his party and they successfully stormed the island . The surviving Tz 'utujil fled into the lake and swam to safety on another island . The Spanish could not pursue the survivors further because 300 canoes sent by the Kaqchikels had not yet arrived . This battle took place on 18 April .

The following day the Spanish entered Tecpan Atitlan but found it deserted . Pedro de Alvarado camped in the centre of the city and sent out scouts to find the enemy . They managed to catch some locals and used them to send messages to the Tz 'utujil lords , ordering them to submit to the king of Spain . The Tz 'utujil leaders responded by surrendering to Pedro de Alvarado and swearing loyalty to Spain , at which point Alvarado considered them pacified and returned to Iximche . Three days after Pedro de Alvarado returned to Iximche , the lords of the Tz 'utujil arrived there to pledge their loyalty and offer tribute to the conquistadors . A short time afterwards a number of lords arrived from the Pacific lowlands to swear allegiance to the king of Spain , although Alvarado did not name them in his letters ; they confirmed Kaqchikel reports that further out on the Pacific plain was the kingdom called Izcuintepeque in Nahuatl , or Panatacat in Kaqchikel , whose inhabitants were warlike and hostile towards their neighbours .

Pedro de Alvarado rapidly began to demand gold in tribute from the Kaqchikels , souring the friendship between the two peoples . He demanded that their kings deliver 1000 gold leaves , each worth 15 pesos . A Kaqchikel priest foretold that the Kaqchikel gods would destroy the Spanish , causing the Kaqchikel people to abandon their city and flee to the forests and hills on 28 August 1524 ( 7 Ahmak in the Kaqchikel calendar ) . Ten days later the Spanish declared war on the Kaqchikel . Two years later , on 9 February 1526 , a group of sixteen Spanish deserters burnt the palace of the Ahpo Xahil , sacked the temples and kidnapped a priest , acts that the Kaqchikel blamed on Pedro de Alvarado . Conquistador Bernal Díaz del Castillo recounted how in 1526 he returned to Iximche and spent the night in the " old city of Guatemala " together with Luis Marín and other members of Hernán Cortés 's expedition to Honduras . He reported that the houses of the city were still in excellent condition ; his account was the last description of the city while it was still inhabitable . The Spanish founded a new town at nearby Tecpán Guatemala ; Tecpán is Nahuatl for " palace " , thus the name of the new town translated as " the palace among the trees " . The Spanish abandoned Tecpán in 1527 , because of the continuous Kaqchikel attacks , and moved to the Almolonga Valley to the east , refounding their capital on the site of today 's San Miguel Escobar district of Ciudad Vieja , near Antigua Guatemala . The Nahua and Oaxacan allies of the Spanish settled in what is now central Ciudad Vieja , then known as Almolonga ( not to be confused with Almolonga near Quetzaltenango ) ; Zapotec and Mixtec allies also settled San Gaspar Vivar about 2 kilometres ( 1.2 mi ) northeast of Almolonga , which they founded in 1530 .

The Kaqchikel kept up resistance against the Spanish for a number of years , but on 9 May 1530 , exhausted by the warfare that had seen the deaths of their best warriors and the enforced abandonment of their crops , the two kings of the most important clans returned from the wilds . A day later they were joined by many nobles and their families and many more people ; they then surrendered at the new Spanish capital at Ciudad Vieja . The former inhabitants of Iximche were dispersed ; some were moved to Tecpán , the rest to Sololá and other towns around Lake Atitlán .

Although a state of hostilities existed between the Mam and the K 'iche ' of Q 'umarkaj after the rebellion of the Kaqchikel against their former K 'iche ' allies prior to European contact , when the conquistadors arrived there was a shift in the political landscape . Pedro de Alvarado described how the Mam king Kayb 'il B 'alam was received with great honour in Q 'umarkaj while he was there . The expedition against Zaculeu was apparently initiated after K 'iche ' bitterness at their failure to contain the Spanish at Q 'umarkaj , with the plan to trap the conquistadors in the city having been suggested to them by the Mam king , Kayb 'il B 'alam ; the resulting execution of the K 'iche ' kings was viewed as unjust . The K 'iche ' suggestion of marching on the Mam was quickly taken up by the Spanish . At the time of the conquest , the main Mam population was situated in Xinabahul ( also spelled Chinabjul ) , now the city of Huehuetenango , but Zaculeu 's fortifications led to its use as a refuge during the conquest . The refuge was attacked by Gonzalo de Alvarado y Contreras , brother of conquistador Pedro de Alvarado , in 1525 , with 40 Spanish cavalry and 80 Spanish infantry , and some 2,000 Mexican and K 'iche ' allies . Gonzalo de Alvarado left the Spanish camp at Tecpán Guatemala in July 1525 and marched to the town of Totonicapán , which he used as a supply base . From Totonicapán the expedition headed north to Momostenango , although it was delayed by heavy rains . Momostenango quickly fell to the Spanish after a four-hour battle . The following day Gonzalo de Alvarado marched on Huehuetenango and was confronted by a Mam army of 5,000 warriors from nearby Malacatán ( modern Malacatancito ) . The Mam army advanced across the plain in battle formation and was met by a Spanish cavalry charge that threw them into disarray , with the infantry mopping up those Mam that survived the cavalry . Gonzalo de Alvarado slew the Mam leader Canil Acab with his lance , at which point the Mam army 's resistance was broken , and the surviving warriors fled to the hills . Alvarado entered Malacatán unopposed to find it occupied only by the sick and the elderly . Messengers from the community 's leaders arrived from the hills and offered their unconditional surrender , which was accepted by Alvarado . The Spanish army rested for a few days , then continued onwards to Huehuetenango only to find it deserted . Kayb 'il B 'alam had received news of the Spanish advance and had withdrawn to his fortress at Zaculeu . Alvarado sent a message to Zaculeu proposing terms for the peaceful surrender of the Mam king , who chose not to answer .

Zaculeu was defended by Kayb 'il B 'alam commanding some 6,000 warriors gathered from Huehuetenango , Zaculeu , Cuilco and Ixtahuacán . The fortress was surrounded on three sides by deep ravines and defended by a formidable system of walls and ditches . Gonzalo de Alvarado , although outnumbered two to one , decided to launch an assault on the weaker northern entrance . Mam warriors initially held the northern approaches against the Spanish infantry but fell back before repeated cavalry charges . The Mam defence was reinforced by an estimated 2,000 warriors from within Zaculeu but was unable to push the Spanish back . Kayb 'il B 'alam , seeing that outright victory on an open battlefield was impossible , withdrew his army back within the safety of the walls . As Alvarado dug in and laid siege to the fortress , an army of approximately 8,000 Mam warriors descended on Zaculeu from the Cuchumatanes mountains to the north , drawn from those towns allied with the city . Alvarado left Antonio de Salazar to supervise the siege and marched north to confront the Mam army . The Mam army was disorganised , and although it was a match for the Spanish and allied foot soldiers , it was vulnerable to the repeated charges of the experienced Spanish cavalry . The relief army was broken and annihilated , allowing Alvarado to return to reinforce the siege . After several months the Mam were reduced to starvation . Kayb 'il B 'alam finally surrendered the city to the Spanish in the middle of October 1525 . When the Spanish entered the city they found 1,800 dead Indians , and the survivors eating the corpses of the dead . After the fall of Zaculeu , a Spanish garrison was established at Huehuetenango under the command of Gonzalo de Solís ; Gonzalo de Alvarado returned to Tecpán Guatemala to report his victory to his brother .

In 1525 Pedro de Alvarado sent a small company to conquer Mixco Viejo ( Chinautla Viejo ) , the capital of the Poqomam . At the Spanish approach , the inhabitants remained enclosed in the fortified city . The Spanish attempted an approach from the west through a narrow pass but were forced back with heavy losses . Alvarado himself launched the second assault with 200 Tlaxcalan allies but was also beaten back . The Poqomam then received reinforcements , possibly from Chinautla , and the two armies clashed on open ground outside of the city . The battle was chaotic and lasted for most of the day but was finally decided by the Spanish cavalry , forcing the Poqomam reinforcements to withdraw . The leaders of the reinforcements surrendered to the Spanish three days after their retreat and revealed that the city had a secret entrance in the form of a cave leading up from a nearby river , allowing the inhabitants to come and go . Armed with the knowledge gained from their prisoners , Alvarado sent 40 men to cover the exit from the cave and launched another assault along the ravine from the west , in single file owing to its narrowness , with crossbowmen alternating with soldiers bearing muskets , each with a companion sheltering him from arrows and stones with a shield . This tactic allowed the Spanish to break through the pass and storm the entrance of the city . The Poqomam warriors fell back in disorder in a chaotic retreat through the city , and were hunted down by the victorious conquistadors and their allies . Those who managed to retreat down the neighbouring valley were ambushed by Spanish cavalry who had been posted to block the exit from the cave , the survivors were captured and brought back to the city . The siege had lasted more than a month and because of the defensive strength of the city , Alvarado ordered it to be burned and moved the inhabitants to the new colonial village of Mixco .

There are no direct sources describing the conquest of the Chajoma by the Spanish but it appears to have been a drawn-out campaign rather than a rapid victory . The only description of the conquest of the Chajoma is a secondary account appearing in the work of Francisco Antonio de Fuentes y Guzmán in the 17th century , long after the event . After the conquest , the inhabitants of the eastern part of the kingdom were relocated by the conquerors to San Pedro Sacatepéquez , including some of the inhabitants of the archaeological site now known as Mixco Viejo ( Jilotepeque Viejo ) . The rest of the population of Mixco Viejo , together with the inhabitants of the western part of the kingdom , were moved to San Martín Jilotepeque . The Chajoma rebelled against the Spanish in 1526 , fighting a battle at Ukub 'il , an unidentified site somewhere near the modern towns of San Juan Sacatepéquez and San Pedro Sacatepéquez . In the colonial period , most of the surviving Chajoma were forcibly settled in the towns of San Juan Sacatepéquez , San Pedro Sacatepéquez and San Martín Jilotepeque as a result of the Spanish policy of congregaciones ; the people were moved to whichever of the three towns was closest to their pre-conquest land holdings . Some Iximche Kaqchikels seem also to have been relocated to the same towns . After their relocation some of the Chajoma drifted back to their pre-conquest centres , creating informal settlements and provoking hostilities with the Poqomam of Mixco and Chinautla along the former border between the pre-Columbian kingdoms . Some of these settlements eventually received official recognition , such as San Raimundo near Sacul .

The Spanish colonial corregimiento of San Cristóbal Acasaguastlán was established in 1551 with its seat in the town of that name , now in the eastern portion of the modern department of El Progreso . Acasaguastlán was one of few pre-conquest centres of population in the middle Motagua River drainage , due to the arid climate . It covered a broad area that included Cubulco , Rabinal , and Salamá ( all in Baja Verapaz ) , San Agustín de la Real Corona ( modern San Agustín Acasaguastlán ) and La Magdalena in El Progreso , and Chimalapa , Gualán , Usumatlán and Zacapa , all in the department of Zacapa . Chimalapa , Gualán and Usumatlán were all satellite settlements of Acasaguastlán . San Cristóbal Acasaguastlán and the surrounding area were reduced into colonial settlements by friars of the Dominican Order ; at the time of the conquest the area was inhabited by Poqomchi ' Maya and by the Nahuatl-speaking Pipil . In the 1520s , immediately after conquest , the inhabitants paid taxes to the Spanish Crown in the form of cacao , textiles , gold , silver and slaves . Within a few decades taxes were instead paid in beans , cotton and maize . Acasaguastlán was first given in encomienda to conquistador Diego Salvatierra in 1526 .

Chiquimula de la Sierra ( " Chiquimula in the Highlands " ) , occupying the area of the modern department of Chiquimula to the east of the Poqomam and Chajoma , was inhabited by Ch 'orti ' Maya at the time of the conquest . The first Spanish reconnaissance of this region took place in 1524 by an expedition that included Hernando de Chávez , Juan Durán , Bartolomé Becerra and Cristóbal Salvatierra , amongst others . In 1526 three Spanish captains , Juan Pérez Dardón , Sancho de Barahona and Bartolomé Becerra , invaded Chiquimula on the orders of Pedro de Alvarado . The indigenous population soon rebelled against excessive Spanish demands , but the rebellion was quickly put down in April 1530 . However , the region was not considered fully conquered until a campaign by Jorge de Bocanegra in 1531 – 1532 that also took in parts of Jalapa . The afflictions of Old World diseases , war and overwork in the mines and encomiendas took a heavy toll on the inhabitants of eastern Guatemala , to the extent that indigenous population levels never recovered to their pre-conquest levels .

In the ten years after the fall of Zaculeu various Spanish expeditions crossed into the Sierra de los Cuchumatanes and engaged in the gradual and complex conquest of the Chuj and Q 'anjob 'al . The Spanish were attracted to the region in the hope of extracting gold , silver and other riches from the mountains but their remoteness , the difficult terrain and relatively low population made their conquest and exploitation extremely difficult . The population of the Cuchumatanes is estimated to have been 260,000 before European contact . By the time the Spanish physically arrived in the region this had collapsed to 150,000 because of the effects of the Old World diseases that had run ahead of them .

After the western portion of the Cuchumatanes fell to the Spanish , the Ixil and Uspantek Maya were sufficiently isolated to evade immediate Spanish attention . The Uspantek and the Ixil were allies and in 1529 , four years after the conquest of Huehuetenango , Uspantek warriors were harassing Spanish forces and Uspantán was trying to foment rebellion among the K 'iche ' . Uspantek activity became sufficiently troublesome that the Spanish decided that military action was necessary . Gaspar Arias , magistrate of Guatemala , penetrated the eastern Cuchumatanes with sixty Spanish infantry and three hundred allied indigenous warriors . By early September he had imposed temporary Spanish authority over the Ixil towns of Chajul and Nebaj . The Spanish army then marched east toward Uspantán itself ; Arias then received notice that the acting governor of Guatemala , Francisco de Orduña , had deposed him as magistrate . Arias handed command over to the inexperienced Pedro de Olmos and returned to confront de Orduña . Although his officers advised against it , Olmos launched a disastrous full-scale frontal assault on the city . As soon as the Spanish began their assault they were ambushed from the rear by more than two thousand Uspantek warriors . The Spanish forces were routed with heavy losses ; many of their indigenous allies were slain , and many more were captured alive by the Uspantek warriors only to be sacrificed on the altar of their deity Exbalamquen . The survivors who managed to evade capture fought their way back to the Spanish garrison at Q 'umarkaj .

A year later Francisco de Castellanos set out from Santiago de los Caballeros de Guatemala ( by now relocated to Ciudad Vieja ) on another expedition against the Ixil and Uspantek , leading eight corporals , thirty-two cavalry , forty Spanish infantry and several hundred allied indigenous warriors . The expedition rested at Chichicastenango and recruited further forces before marching seven leagues northwards to Sacapulas and climbed the steep southern slopes of the Cuchumatanes . On the upper slopes they clashed with a force of between four and five thousand Ixil warriors from Nebaj and nearby settlements . A lengthy battle followed during which the Spanish cavalry managed to outflank the Ixil army and forced them to retreat to their mountaintop fortress at Nebaj . The Spanish force besieged the city , and their indigenous allies managed to scale the walls , penetrate the stronghold and set it on fire . Many defending Ixil warriors withdrew to fight the fire , which allowed the Spanish to storm the entrance and break the defences . The victorious Spanish rounded up the surviving defenders and the next day Castellanos ordered them all to be branded as slaves as punishment for their resistance . The inhabitants of Chajul immediately capitulated to the Spanish as soon as news of the battle reached them . The Spanish continued east towards Uspantán to find it defended by ten thousand warriors , including forces from Cotzal , Cunén , Sacapulas and Verapaz . The Spaniards were barely able to organise a defence before the defending army attacked . Although heavily outnumbered , the deployment of Spanish cavalry and the firearms of the Spanish infantry eventually decided the battle . The Spanish overran Uspantán and again branded all surviving warriors as slaves . The surrounding towns also surrendered , and December 1530 marked the end of the military stage of the conquest of the Cuchumatanes .

In 1529 the Chuj city of San Mateo Ixtatán ( then known by the name of Ystapalapán ) was given in encomienda to the conquistador Gonzalo de Ovalle , a companion of Pedro de Alvarado , together with Santa Eulalia and Jacaltenango . In 1549 , the first reduction ( reducción in Spanish ) of San Mateo Ixtatán took place , overseen by Dominican missionaries , in the same year the Q 'anjob 'al reducción settlement of Santa Eulalia was founded . Further Q 'anjob 'al reducciones were in place at San Pedro Soloma , San Juan Ixcoy and San Miguel Acatán by 1560 . Q 'anjob 'al resistance was largely passive , based on withdrawal to the inaccessible mountains and forests from the Spanish reducciones . In 1586 the Mercedarian Order built the first church in Santa Eulalia . The Chuj of San Mateo Ixtatán remained rebellious and resisted Spanish control for longer than their highland neighbours , resistance that was possible owing to their alliance with the lowland Lakandon Ch 'ol to the north . The continued resistance was so determined that the Chuj remained pacified only while the immediate effects of the Spanish expeditions lasted . In the late 17th century , the Spanish missionary Fray Alonso de León reported that about eighty families in San Mateo Ixtatán did not pay tribute to the Spanish Crown or attend the Roman Catholic mass . He described the inhabitants as quarrelsome and complained that they had built a pagan shrine in the hills among the ruins of pre-Columbian temples , where they burnt incense and offerings and sacrificed turkeys . He reported that every March they built bonfires around wooden crosses about two leagues from the town and set them on fire . Fray de León informed the colonial authorities that the practices of the natives were such that they were Christian in name only . Eventually , Fray de León was chased out of San Mateo Ixtatán by the locals .

In 1684 , a council led by Enrique Enríquez de Guzmán , the governor of Guatemala , decided on the reduction of San Mateo Ixtatán and nearby Santa Eulalia , both within the colonial administrative district of the Corregimiento of Huehuetenango . On 29 January 1686 , Captain Melchor Rodríguez Mazariegos , acting under orders from the governor , left Huehuetenango for San Mateo Ixtatán , where he recruited indigenous warriors from the nearby villages , 61 from San Mateo itself . It was believed by the Spanish colonial authorities that the inhabitants of San Mateo Ixtatán were friendly towards the still unconquered and fiercely hostile inhabitants of the Lacandon region , which included parts of what is now the Mexican state of Chiapas and the western part of the Petén Basin . To prevent news of the Spanish advance reaching the inhabitants of the Lacandon area , the governor ordered the capture of three of San Mateo 's community leaders , named as Cristóbal Domingo , Alonso Delgado and Gaspar Jorge , and had them sent under guard to be imprisoned in Huehuetenango . The governor himself arrived in San Mateo Ixtatán on 3 February , where Captain Rodríguez Mazariegos was already awaiting him . The governor ordered the captain to remain in the village and use it as a base of operations for penetrating the Lacandon region . The Spanish missionaries Fray de Rivas and Fray Pedro de la Concepción also remained in the town . Governor Enriquez de Guzmán subsequently left San Mateo Ixtatán for Comitán in Chiapas , to enter the Lacandon region via Ocosingo .

In 1695 , a three-way invasion of the Lacandon was launched simultaneously from San Mateo Ixtatán , Cobán and Ocosingo . Captain Rodriguez Mazariegos , accompanied by Fray de Rivas and 6 other missionaries together with 50 Spanish soldiers , left Huehuetenango for San Mateo Ixtatán . Following the same route used in 1686 , they managed on the way to recruit 200 indigenous Maya warriors from Santa Eulalia , San Juan Solomá and San Mateo itself . On 28 February 1695 , all three groups left their respective bases of operations to conquer the Lacandon . The San Mateo group headed northeast into the Lacandon Jungle .

Before the arrival of the Spanish , the western portion of the Pacific plain was dominated by the K 'iche ' and Kaqchikel states , while the eastern portion was occupied by the Pipil and the Xinca . The Pipil inhabited the area of the modern department of Escuintla and a part of Jutiapa ; the main Xinca territory lay to the east of the main Pipil population in what is now Santa Rosa department ; there were also Xinca in Jutiapa . In the half century preceding the arrival of the Spanish , the Kaqchikel were frequently at war with the Pipil of Izcuintepeque ( modern Escuintla ) . By March 1524 the K 'iche had been defeated , followed by a Spanish alliance with the Kaqchikel in April of the same year . On 8 May 1524 , soon after his arrival in Iximche and immediately following his subsequent conquest of the Tz 'utujil around Lake Atitlán , Pedro de Alvarado continued southwards to the Pacific coastal plain with an army numbering approximately 6000 , where he defeated the Pipil of Panacal or Panacaltepeque ( called Panatacat in the Annals of the Kaqchikels ) near Izcuintepeque on 9 May . Alvarado described the terrain approaching the town as very difficult , covered with dense vegetation and swampland that made the use of cavalry impossible ; instead he sent men with crossbows ahead . The Pipil withdrew their scouts because of the heavy rain , believing that the Spanish and their allies would not be able to reach the town that day . However , Pedro de Alvarado pressed ahead and when the Spanish entered the town the defenders were completely unprepared , with the Pipil warriors indoors sheltering from the torrential rain . In the battle that ensued , the Spanish and their indigenous allies suffered minor losses but the Pipil were able to flee into the forest , sheltered from Spanish pursuit by the weather and the vegetation . Pedro de Alvarado ordered the town to be burnt and sent messengers to the Pipil lords demanding their surrender , otherwise he would lay waste to their lands . According to Alvarado 's letter to Cortés , the Pipil came back to the town and submitted to him , accepting the king of Spain as their overlord . The Spanish force camped in the captured town for eight days . A few years later , in 1529 , Pedro de Alvarado was accused of using excessive brutality in his conquest of Izcuintepeque , amongst other atrocities .

In Guazacapán , now a municipality in Santa Rosa , Pedro de Alvardo described his encounter with people who were neither Maya nor Pipil , speaking a different language altogether ; these people were probably Xinca . At this point Alvarado 's force consisted of 250 Spanish infantry accompanied by 6,000 indigenous allies , mostly Kaqchikel and Cholutec . Alvarado and his army defeated and occupied the most important Xinca city , named as Atiquipaque , usually considered to be in the Taxisco area . The defending warriors were described by Alvarado as engaging in fierce hand-to-hand combat using spears , stakes and poisoned arrows . The battle took place on 26 May 1524 and resulted in a significant reduction of the Xinca population . Alvarado 's army continued eastwards from Atiquipaque , seizing several more Xinca cities . Tacuilula feigned a peaceful reception only to unsuccessfully raise arms against the conquistadors within an hour of their arrival . Taxisco and Nancintla fell soon afterwards . Because Alvarado and his allies could not understand the Xinca language , Alvarado took extra precautions on the march eastward by strengthening his vanguard and rearguard with ten cavalry apiece . In spite of these precautions the baggage train was ambushed by a Xinca army soon after leaving Taxisco . Many indigenous allies were killed and most of the baggage was lost , including all the crossbows and ironwork for the horses . This was a serious setback and Alvarado camped his army in Nancintla for eight days , during which time he sent two expeditions against the attacking army . Jorge de Alvarado led the first attempt with thirty to forty cavalry and although they routed the enemy they were unable to retrieve any of the lost baggage , much of which had been destroyed by the Xinca for use as trophies . Pedro de Portocarrero led the second attempt with a large infantry detachment but was unable to engage with the enemy due to the difficult mountain terrain , so returned to Nancintla . Alvarado sent out Xinca messengers to make contact with the enemy but they failed to return . Messengers from the city of Pazaco , in the modern department of Jutiapa , offered peace to the conquistadors but when Alvarado arrived there the next day the inhabitants were preparing for war . Alvarado 's troops encountered a sizeable quantity of gathered warriors and quickly routed them through the city 's streets . From Pazaco Alvarado crossed the Río Paz and entered what is now El Salvador .

In 1525 , after the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire , Hernán Cortés led an expedition to Honduras over land , cutting across the Itza kingdom in what is now the northern Petén Department of Guatemala . His aim was to subdue the rebellious Cristóbal de Olid , whom he had sent to conquer Honduras , but Cristóbal de Olid had set himself up independently on his arrival in that territory . Cortés had 140 Spanish soldiers , 93 of them mounted , 3,000 Mexican warriors , 150 horses , a herd of pigs , artillery , munitions and other supplies . He also had with him 600 Chontal Maya carriers from Acalan . They arrived at the north shore of Lake Petén Itzá on 13 March 1525 . Cortés accepted an invitation from Aj Kan Ek ' , the king of the Itza , to visit Nojpetén ( also known as Tayasal ) , and crossed to the Maya city with 20 Spanish soldiers while the rest of his army continued around the lake to meet him on the south shore . On his departure from Nojpetén , Cortés left behind a cross and a lame horse . The Spanish did not officially contact the Itza again until the arrival of Franciscan priests in 1618 , when Cortés ' cross was said to still be standing at Nojpetén . From the lake , Cortés continued south along the western slopes of the Maya Mountains , a particularly arduous journey that took 12 days to cover 32 kilometres ( 20 mi ) , during which he lost more than two-thirds of his horses . When he came to a river swollen with the constant torrential rains that had been falling during the expedition , Cortés turned upstream to the Gracias a Dios rapids , which took two days to cross and cost him more horses .

On 15 April 1525 the expedition arrived at the Maya village of Tenciz . With local guides they headed into the hills north of Lake Izabal , where their guides abandoned them to their fate . The expedition became lost in the hills and came close to starvation before they captured a Maya boy who led them out to safety . Cortés found a village on the shore of Lake Izabal , perhaps Xocolo . He crossed the Dulce River to the settlement of Nito , somewhere on the Amatique Bay , with about a dozen companions , and waited there for the rest of his army to regroup over the course of the next week . By this time the remnants of the expedition had been reduced to a few hundred ; Cortés succeeded in contacting the Spaniards he was searching for , only to find that Cristóbal de Olid 's own officers had already put down his rebellion . Cortés then returned to Mexico by sea .

By 1537 the area immediately north of the new colony of Guatemala was being referred to as the Tierra de Guerra ( " Land of War " ) . Paradoxically , it was simultaneously known as Verapaz ( " True Peace " ) . The Land of War described an area that was undergoing conquest ; it was a region of dense forest that was difficult for the Spanish to penetrate militarily . Whenever the Spanish located a centre of population in this region , the inhabitants were moved and concentrated in a new colonial settlement near the edge of the jungle where the Spanish could more easily control them . This strategy resulted in the gradual depopulation of the forest , simultaneously converting it into a wilderness refuge for those fleeing Spanish domination , both for individual refugees and for entire communities , especially those congregaciones that were remote from centres of colonial authority . The Land of War , from the 16th century through to the start of the 18th century , included a vast area from Sacapulas in the west to Nito on the Caribbean coast and extended northwards from Rabinal and Salamá , and was an intermediate area between the highlands and the northern lowlands . It includes the modern departments of Baja Verapaz and Alta Verapaz , Izabal and Petén , as well as the eastern part of El Quiché and a part of the Mexican state of Chiapas . The western portion of this area was the territory of the Q 'eqchi ' Maya .

Pedro Orozco , the leader of the Sacatepéquez Mam of San Marcos department , lent willing help to the Dominicans in their campaign to peacefully subject the inhabitants of Verapaz . On 1 May 1543 Carlos V rewarded the Sacatepéquez Mam by issuing a royal order promising never to give them in encomienda . Dominican friar Bartolomé de las Casas arrived in the colony of Guatemala in 1537 and immediately campaigned to replace violent military conquest with peaceful missionary work . Las Casas offered to achieve the conquest of the Land of War through the preaching of the Catholic faith . It was the Dominicans who promoted the use of the name Verapaz instead of the Land of War . Because of the fact that the land had not been possible to conquer by military means , the governor of Guatemala , Alonso de Maldonado , agreed to sign a contract promising he would not establish any new encomiendas in the area should Las Casas ' strategy succeed . Las Casas and a group of Dominican friars established themselves in Rabinal , Sacapulas and Cobán , and managed to convert several native chiefs using a strategy of teaching Christian songs to merchant Indian Christians who then ventured into the area .

In this way they congregated a group of Christian Indians in the location of what is now the town of Rabinal . Las Casas became instrumental in the introduction of the New Laws in 1542 , established by the Spanish Crown to control the excesses of the conquistadors and colonists against the indigenous inhabitants of the Americas . As a result , the Dominicans met substantial resistance from the Spanish colonists , who saw their own interests threatened by the New Laws ; this distracted the Dominicans from their efforts to establish peaceful control over the Land of War . In 1543 the new colonial reducción of Santo Domingo de Cobán was founded at Chi Mon 'a to house the relocated Q 'eqchi ' from Chichen , Xucaneb and Al Run Tax Aj . Santo Tomás Apóstol was founded nearby the same year at Chi Nim Xol , it was used in 1560 as a reducción to resettle Ch 'ol communities from Topiltepeque and Lacandon in the Usumacinta Valley . In 1555 the Acala Ch 'ol and their Lacandon allies killed the Spanish friar Domingo de Vico . De Vico had established a small church among the inhabitants of San Marcos , a region that lay between the territories of the Lacandon and the Manche Ch 'ol ( an area unrelated to the department of San Marcos ) . De Vico had offended the local ruler by repeatedly scolding him for taking several wives . The indigenous leader shot the friar through the throat with an arrow ; the angry natives then seized him , cut open his chest and extracted his heart . His corpse was then decapitated ; the natives carried off his head , which was never recovered by the Spanish . In response a punitive expedition was launched , headed by Juan Matalbatz , a Q 'eqchi ' leader from Chamelco ; the independent Indians captured by the Q 'eqchi ' expedition were taken back to Cobán and resettled in Santo Tomás Apóstol .

The Dominicans established themselves in Xocolo on the shore of Lake Izabal in the mid-16th century . Xocolo became infamous among the Dominican missionaries for the practice of witchcraft by its inhabitants . By 1574 it was the most important staging post for European expeditions into the interior , and it remained important in that role until as late as 1630 , although it was abandoned in 1631 . In 1598 Alfonso Criado de Castilla became governor of the Captaincy General of Guatemala . Owing to the poor state of Puerto Caballos on the Honduran coast and its exposure to repeated pirate raids he sent a pilot to scout Lake Izabal . As a result of the survey , and after royal permission was granted , Criado de Castilla ordered the construction of a new port , named Santo Tomás de Castilla , at a favourable spot on the Amatique Bay not far from the lake . Work then began on building a highway from the port to the new capital of the colony , modern Antigua Guatemala , following the Motagua Valley into the highlands . Indigenous guides scouting the route from the highlands would not proceed further downriver than three leagues below Quiriguá , because the area was inhabited by the hostile Toquegua .

The leaders of Xocolo and Amatique , backed by the threat of Spanish action , persuaded a community of 190 Toquegua to settle on the Amatique coast in April 1604 . The new settlement immediately suffered a drop in population , but although the Amatique Toquegua were reported extinct before 1613 in some sources , Mercedarian friars were still attending to them in 1625 . In 1628 the towns of the Manche Ch 'ol were placed under the administration of the governor of Verapaz , with Francisco Morán as their ecclesiastical head . Morán favoured a more robust approach to the conversion of the Manche and moved Spanish soldiers into the region to protect against raids from the Itza to the north . The new Spanish garrison in an area that had not previously seen a heavy Spanish military presence provoked the Manche to revolt , which was followed by abandonment of the indigenous settlements . By 1699 the neighbouring Toquegua no longer existed as a separate people because of a combination of high mortality and intermarriage with the Amatique Indians . At around this time the Spanish decided on the reduction of the independent ( or " wild " from the Spanish point of view ) Mopan Maya living to the north of Lake Izabal . The north shore of the lake , although fertile , was by then largely depopulated , therefore the Spanish planned to bring the Mopan out of the forests to the north into an area where they could be more easily controlled .

During the campaign to conquer the Itza of Petén , the Spanish sent expeditions to harass and relocate the Mopan north of Lake Izabal and the Ch 'ol Maya of the Amatique forests to the east . They were resettled in the Colonial reducción of San Antonio de las Bodegas on the south shore of the lake and in San Pedro de Amatique . By the latter half of the 18th century the indigenous population of these towns had disappeared ; the local inhabitants now consisted entirely of Spaniards , mulattos and others of mixed race , all associated with the Castillo de San Felipe de Lara fort guarding the entrance to Lake Izabal . The main cause of the drastic depopulation of Lake Izabal and the Motagua Delta was the constant slave raids by the Miskito Sambu of the Caribbean coast that effectively ended the Maya population of the region ; the captured Maya were sold into slavery in the British colony of Jamaica .

From 1527 onwards the Spanish were increasingly active in the Yucatán Peninsula , establishing a number of colonies and towns by 1544 , including Campeche and Valladolid in what is now Mexico . The Spanish impact on the northern Maya , encompassing invasion , epidemic diseases and the export of up to 50,000 Maya slaves , caused many Maya to flee southwards to join the Itza around Lake Petén Itzá , within the modern borders of Guatemala . The Spanish were aware that the Itza Maya had become the centre of anti-Spanish resistance and engaged in a policy of encircling their kingdom and cutting their trade routes over the course of almost two hundred years . The Itza resisted this steady encroachment by recruiting their neighbours as allies against the slow Spanish advance . Dominican missionaries were active in Verapaz and the southern Petén from the late 16th century through the 17th century , attempting non-violent conversion with limited success . In the 17th century the Franciscans came to the conclusion that the pacification and Christian conversion of the Maya would not be possible as long as the Itza held out at Lake Petén Itzá . The constant flow of escapees fleeing the Spanish-held territories to find refuge with the Itza was a drain on the encomiendas . Fray Bartolomé de Fuensalida visited Nojpetén in 1618 and 1619 . The Franciscan missionaries attempted to use their own reinterpretation of the k 'atun prophecies when they visited Nojpetén at this time , to convince the current Aj Kan Ek ' and his Maya priesthood that the time for conversion had come . But the Itza priesthood interpreted the prophecies differently , and the missionaries were fortunate to escape with their lives . In 1695 the colonial authorities decided to connect the province of Guatemala with Yucatán , and Guatemalan soldiers conquered a number of Ch 'ol communities , the most important being Sakb 'ajlan on the Lacantún River in eastern Chiapas , now in Mexico , which was renamed as Nuestra Señora de Dolores , or Dolores del Lakandon . The Franciscan friar Andrés de Avendaño oversaw a second attempt to overcome the Itza in 1695 , convincing the Itza king that the K 'atun 8 Ajaw , a twenty-year Maya calendrical cycle beginning in 1696 or 1697 , was the right time for the Itza to finally embrace Christianity and to accept the king of Spain as overlord . However the Itza had local Maya enemies who resisted this conversion , and in 1696 Avendaño was fortunate to escape with his life . The Itza 's continued resistance had become a major embarrassment for the Spanish colonial authorities , and soldiers were despatched from Campeche to take Nojpetén once and for all .

Martín de Ursúa y Arizmendi arrived on the western shore of lake Petén Itzá with his soldiers in February 1697 , and once there built a galeota , a large and heavily armed oar-powered attack boat . The Itza capital fell in a bloody waterborne assault on 13 March 1697 . The Spanish bombardment caused heavy loss of life on the island ; many Itza Maya who fled to swim across the lake were killed in the water . After the battle the surviving defenders melted away into the forests , leaving the Spanish to occupy an abandoned Maya town . The Itza and Kowoj kings ( Ajaw Kan Ek ' and Aj Kowoj ) were soon captured , together with other Maya nobles and their families . With Nojpetén safely in the hands of the Spanish , Ursúa returned to Campeche ; he left a small garrison on the island , isolated amongst the hostile Itza and Kowoj who still dominated the mainland . Nojpetén was renamed by the Spanish as Nuestra Señora de los Remedios y San Pablo , Laguna del Itza ( " Our Lady of Remedy and Saint Paul , Lake of the Itza " ) . The garrison was reinforced in 1699 by a military expedition from Guatemala , accompanied by mixed-race ladino civilians who came to found their own town around the military camp . The settlers brought disease with them , which killed many soldiers and colonists and swept through the indigenous population . The Guatemalans stayed just three months before returning to Santiago de los Caballeros de Guatemala , taking the captive Itza king with them , together with his son and two of his cousins . The cousins died on the long journey to the colonial capital ; Ajaw Kan Ek ' and his son spent the rest of their lives under house arrest in the capital .

In the late 17th century the small population of Ch 'ol Maya in southern Petén and Belize was forcibly removed to Alta Verapaz , where the people were absorbed into the Q 'eqchi ' population . The Ch 'ol of the Lacandon Jungle were resettled in Huehuetenango in the early 18th century . Catholic priests from Yucatán founded several mission towns around Lake Petén Itzá in 1702 – 1703 . Surviving Itza and Kowoj were resettled in the new colonial towns by a mixture of persuasion and force . Kowoj and Itza leaders in these mission towns rebelled against their Spanish overlords in 1704 , but although well-planned , the rebellion was quickly crushed . Its leaders were executed and most of the mission towns were abandoned . By 1708 only about 6,000 Maya remained in central Petén , compared to ten times that number in 1697 . Although disease was responsible for the majority of deaths , Spanish expeditions and internecine warfare between indigenous groups also played their part .

The initial shock of the Spanish conquest was followed by decades of heavy exploitation of the indigenous peoples , allies and foes alike . Over the following two hundred years colonial rule gradually imposed Spanish cultural standards on the subjugated peoples . The Spanish reducciones created new nucleated settlements laid out in a grid pattern in the Spanish style , with a central plaza , a church and the town hall housing the civil government , known as the ayuntamiento . This style of settlement can still be seen in the villages and towns of the area . The civil government was either run directly by the Spanish and their descendents ( the criollos ) or was tightly controlled by them . The introduction of Catholicism was the main vehicle for cultural change , and resulted in religious syncretism . Old World cultural elements came to be thoroughly adopted by Maya groups , an example being the marimba , a musical instrument of African origin . The greatest change was the sweeping aside of the pre-Columbian economic order and its replacement by European technology and livestock ; this included the introduction of iron and steel tools to replace Neolithic tools , and of cattle , pigs and chickens that largely replaced the consumption of game . New crops were also introduced ; however , sugarcane and coffee led to plantations that economically exploited native labour . Sixty per cent of the modern population of Guatemala is estimated to be Maya , concentrated in the central and western highlands . The eastern portion of the country was the object of intense Spanish migration and hispanicization . Guatemalan society is divided into a class system largely based on race , with Maya peasants and artisans at the bottom , the mixed-race ladino salaried workers and bureaucrats forming the middle and lower class and above them the creole elite of pure European ancestry . Some indigenous elites such as the Xajil did manage to maintain a level of status into the colonial period ; a prominent Kaqchikel noble family , they chronicled the history of their region .

The 1994 Giro d 'Italia was the 77th edition of the Giro d 'Italia , one of cycling 's Grand Tours . The Giro started off in Bologna on 22 May with a short 86 km ( 53.4 mi ) stage . The race came to a close on 12 June with a flat stage that stretched 198 km ( 123.0 mi ) from Turin to Milan . Seventeen teams entered the race , which was won by Evgeni Berzin of the Gewiss – Ballan team . Second and third respectively were the Italian Marco Pantani and the Spanish rider , Miguel Indurain . Berzin first gained the race lead after the fourth stage where he attacked on the final climb to win the day . The race 's overall classification was first headed by Endrio Leoni who won the Giro 's opening road stage . However , Leoni lost the lead later that day during the afternoon individual time trial to Armand de Las Cuevas . De Las Cuevas held the lead for a single stage before losing it to Moreno Argentin who won the race 's second stage . Argentin held the general classification lead for two stages , before Berzin took it after stage 4 . After gaining the lead , Berzin began to build upon his advantage after winning the stage 8 and 18 individual time trials and maintaining good form throughout the mountains .

Berzin became the first Russian to win the Giro d 'Italia . Berzin also won the young rider classification for the best rider aged 25 or under in the general classification . In the race 's other classifications , Swiss rider Pascal Richard won the mountains classification , and Djamolidine Abdoujaparov of Team Polti – Vaporetto was the winner of the points and intergiro classifications . Carrera Jeans – Tassoni finished as the winners of the team classification , which ranked each of the seventeen teams contesting the race by lowest cumulative time . Team Polti – Vaporetto finished as the winners of the team points classification , where the teams ' riders are awarded points for placing within the top twenty in each stage .

A total of 18 teams were invited to participate in the 1994 Giro d 'Italia , of which 17 participated . Each team sent a squad of nine riders , so the Giro began with a peloton of 153 cyclists . The presentation of the teams – where each team 's roster and manager were introduced in front the media and local dignitaries – took place on 22 May , in the courtyard of the Bologna . Of the riders that started this edition of the Giro d 'Italia , a total of 99 riders made it to the finish in Milan .

The starting peloton did 1993 winner , Miguel Indurain , came into the race having only raced twenty days during the season according to author Bill McGann . In addition , there were reports surfacing before the race that Indurain 's knee was troubling him . The race did not feature Tony Rominger , who elected to ride the Vuelta a España instead . El País writer Carlos Arribas felt that Evgeni Berzin had a strong spring with his victory in Liège – Bastogne – Liège and second-place finish in the Tour of the Basque Country . Arribas felt that Russian Pavel Tonkov , who had won the young rider classification the previous two years , would challenge for the victory as his normal team leader , Maurizio Fondriest , was absent from the race due to injury . Avui 's Adrian R. Huber believed that Djamolidine Abdoujaparov , Adriano Baffi , and Fabio Baldato had a great chance to win a stage in the race . Notable sprinter Mario Cipollini did not participate in the race as he was still recovering from injuries sustained in the second stage at the Vuelta a España .

The route for the 1994 Giro d 'Italia was unveiled by race director Carmine Castellano on 13 November 13 , 1993 in Milan . The race route in its entireity was leaked to the press before Castellano held the official presentation . It contained three time trial events , all of which were individual . There were ten stages containing high mountains , of which three had summit finishes : stage 4 , to Campitello Matese ; stage 20 , to Les Deux Alpes ; and stage 21 , to Sestriere . Another stage with a mountain-top finish was stage 18 , which consisted of a climbing time trial to the summit of the Passo dello Bocco . The organizers chose to include no rest days . When compared to the previous year 's race , the race was 28 km ( 17 mi ) longer , contained one less rest day , and one more stage . The race was televised in Italy by RAI TV . There were five stages that began or ended outside of Italy . Stage 12 ended in the Slovenian city Kranj and served as the start for the race 's thirteenth stage . Stage 13 ended at Lienz in Austria , and the fourteenth began there . The Giro 's mountainous stage 20 ended on the slopes of Les Deux Alpes , and the penultimate stage began on the mountain the next day .

This edition of the Giro began with a split stage , with the morning leg consisting of a 86 km ( 53 mi ) flat route and the afternoon part being a 7 km ( 4 mi ) flat individual time trial . Italian Endrio Leoni won the morning stage by means of a sprint finish where the speeds were so high the peloton split in the final kilometer . Armand de Las Cuevas won the afternoon time trial by two seconds over Evgeni Berzin and in the process took the overall lead away from Leoni . Stage two featured an uphill finish into the city of Osimo . Moreno Argentin attacked close to the line and was able to distance himself from the rest of the peloton and win the stage , while also taking the lead of the race . Gianni Bugno failed several times to get away from the peloton before finally breaking free on the climb into Loreto Amprutino to win the third stage . Stage 4 featured the race 's first summit finish , with a final climb to the top of Campitello Matese . While on the climb , Evgeni Berzin attacked and made his way up to the top in first place . Due to his efforts , Berzin gained the overall lead of the race . The next two stages , 5 and 6 , both came down to sprint finishes that were won by Endrio Leoni and Marco Saligari , respectively . The race 's seventh stage saw the Spaniard Laudelino Cubino outsprint his fellow breakaway members for the stage victory . Stage 8 was a 44 km ( 27 mi ) individual time trial that stretched from Grosseto to Follonica . The race leader Evgeni Berzin dominated the time trial as he won the stage by over a minute than the second-place finisher , which also allowed him to extend his lead in the general classification .

The next three stages of the race were all primarily flat , had no real impact on the overall standings , and all concluded with a bunch sprint . Ján Svorada won stage nine and then stage eleven after dodging a crash that marred the stage 's finish . Djamolidine Abdoujaparov out-sprinted the rest of the field to win the race 's tenth stage . The Giro 's twelfth stage featured a few categorized climbs as the race made its way into Slovenia for the stage 's finish in Kranj . Despite the climbs , the stage ended with a field sprint that was won by Andrea Ferrigato . Italian Michele Bartoli won the race 's undulating thirteenth stage by being a part of the stage 's initial breakaway and then attacking later on and soloing to the stage 's conclusion in Lienz , Austria . As the Giro left Austria , the race began to enter the Dolomites during stage fourteen . The eventual stage winner Marco Pantani was in a chasing group on the final climb of the stage , the Passo di Monte Giovo . He attacked , bridged the gap to the leading group , and left them behind to claim his first professional victory of his career . The next stage saw Pantani win again after he rode away from the attack group on the last climb of the Valico di Santa Cristina and he then soloed to the finish in Stradella . Pantani 's efforts on the day moved him up to second overall in the race . The race 's sixteenth stage took a break from the mountains with the stage being primarily fled , which ultimately led to the sprint finish that was won by Italian Maximilian Sciandri . Ján Svorada won the next day 's stage after attacking from the breakaway group in the closing seconds .

The Giro 's eighteenth stage was a 35 km ( 22 mi ) individual time trial that stretched from Chiavari to the summit finish on the Passo del Bocco . The race leader Evgeni Berzin won the stage by twenty seconds over Miguel Indurain . Stage 19 saw the day of racing come down to a sprint finish that was won by Massimo Ghirotto . The twentieth stage saw the Giro race through the Alps and up to the summit of Les Deux Alpes for the stage finish . The lead group up Les Deux Alpes contained the likes of Evgeni Berzin , Marco Pantani , and Miguel Indurain who had attacked each other multiple times but to no avail . The trio was later joined by Vladimir Poulnikov and Nelson Rodriguez who both eventually left them to go on for the stage win . Poulkinov edged out Rodriguez to the stage win atop the mountain . The penultimate stage of the Giro saw a summit finish atop the Sestriere . The stage saw snow and chilling temperatures which led to the general classification contenders sticking together , while Pascal Richard went on to win the summit finish and solidify his lead atop the mountains classification . The Giro 's final stage came down to a sprint finish that was won by Stefano Zanini as Evgeni Berzin won the Giro d 'Italia .

Success in stages was limited to eleven of the competing teams , six of which achieved multiple stage victories , while four individual riders won multiple stages . The riders that won more than once were Endrio Leoni in stages 1a and 5 , Evgeni Berzin in stages 4 , 8 , and 18 , Ján Svorada in stages 9 , 11 , and 17 , and Marco Pantani in stages 14 and 15 . Jolly Componibili-Cage won two stages with Leoni . Gewiss-Ballan won multiple stages , with Moreno Argentin in stage 2 and three stages with Berzin . Team Polti – Vaporetto won two stages , with Gianni Bugno in stage 3 and Djamolidine Abdoujaparov in stage 10 . GB-MG Maglificio won three stages , with Marco Saligari in stage 6 , Maximilian Sciandri in stage 16 , and Pascal Richard in stage 21 . Lampre – Panaria won three stages with Ján Svorada . ZG Mobili-Selle Italia won two stages , with Andrea Ferrigato in stage 12 and Massimo Ghirotto in stage 19 . Carrera Jeans – Tassoni also won multiple stages , with Marco Pantani in winning two stages and Vladimir Poulnikov in stage 20 .

Five different jerseys were worn during the 1994 Giro d 'Italia . The leader of the general classification – calculated by adding the stage finish times of each rider , and allowing time bonuses for the first three finishers on mass-start stages – wore a pink jersey . The time bonuses for the 1988 Giro were thirty seconds for first , twenty-five for second , and decreasing by five seconds each place until five seconds for sixth place on the stage . This classification is the most important of the race , and its winner is considered as the winner of the Giro . For the points classification , which awarded a purple ( or cyclamen ) jersey to its leader , cyclists were given points for finishing a stage in the top 15 ; additional points could also be won in intermediate sprints . The green jersey was awarded to the mountains classification leader . In this ranking , points were won by reaching the summit of a climb ahead of other cyclists . Each climb was ranked as either first , second or third category , with more points available for higher category climbs . The Cima Coppi , the race 's highest point of elevation , awarded more points than the other first category climbs . The Cima Coppi for this Giro was the Passo dello Stelvio . The first rider to cross the Stelvio was Italian Franco Vona . The white jersey was worn by the leader of young rider classification , a ranking decided the same way as the general classification , but only riders born after 1 January 1970 were eligible for it . The intergiro classification was marked by a blue jersey . The calculation for the intergiro is similar to that of the general classification , in each stage there is a midway point that the riders pass through a point and where their time is stopped . As the race goes on , their times compiled and the person with the lowest time is the leader of the intergiro classification and wears the blue jersey . Although no jersey was awarded , there was also one classification for the teams , in which the stage finish times of the best three cyclists per team were added ; the leading team was the one with the lowest total time .

The Riverton – Belvidere Bridge is a bridge crossing the Delaware River . It connects Belvidere , New Jersey with Riverton , Pennsylvania , United States . There is no toll for crossing on either side , after tolls were abolished by the Joint Commission for the Elimination of Toll Bridges in 1929 . The bridge is 653 feet ( 199 m ) long , holding a load of 8 short tons ( 16,000 lb ) of traffic from County Route 620 Spur ( Water Street ) in Belvidere to former Pennsylvania Route 709 on the Riverton side . The bridge was first constructed in 1836 , replacing the local ferry across the river . The board of freeholders in Warren County supported the replacement of the ferry with a bridge for safety of passengers . In 1832 , the state created the Belvidere Delaware Bridge Company , which was funded with the job of building a bridge from Riverton to Belvidere . The new covered bridge was built by Solon Chapin , a contractor from Easton , Pennsylvania . The bridge survived two large storms in 1836 and 1841 , although sustained major damage both times . In 1903 , the floods that destroyed bridges along the Delaware River Valley , including taking out the entire covered structure at Riverton and Belvidere . They rebuilt the structure in 1904 , using steel instead of wood , and the new span has remained since , with rehabilitations at certain points .

Original reports indicate that a ferry , operated by a doctor who went by " Dr. Belvidere " , once ran along the alignment of the Riverton – Belvidere Bridge . This ferry , crossing one of the most dangerous parts of the Delaware , was reported to have opened as early as 1802 . On May 17 , 1825 , the Board of Chosen Freeholders of the ferry permitted raising the rate to cross the river via ferry . However , by 1832 , the ferry crossing was becoming dangerously busy , and required a bridge be constructed in its place . That year , the Belvidere Delaware Bridge Company was established by both the states of New Jersey and Pennsylvania . However , in constructing the bridge , the company was only allowed $ 20,000 ( 1832 USD ) to construct the bridge . The bridge company had the designs for the bridge run by Solon Chapin , a contractor from Easton , Pennsylvania . Chapin was also the construction contractor on the nearby Riegelsville Bridge as well . Although things seemed to start off smoothly , when construction began on the bridge in 1834 , things went downhill . The bridge was constructed fast , and when completed in the spring of 1836 , it was a wooden covered bridge at a length of 654 feet ( 199 m ) . Within days of opening the bridge , on April 9 , 1836 , a storm blew through the valley , destroying two of the bridges three piers and rendered the new bridge unusable . After restarting construction later , the bridge was redone using the same piers and in 1839 , was completed and opened once again . However , in January 1841 , another storm , dubbed the Bridges Freshet of January 1841 , blew through the valley , destroying most of the bridges in the area , and causing major damage to the structure from Riverton to Belvidere . However , this time , the bridge survived the storm . A local historian stated that because of the constant repairwork on the bridge itself , the bridge company had never paid one dividend of money to its stockholders . Although , after society on both sides of the bridge began to live life with it , money started flowing into the accounts of the stockholders .

In 1903 , the demise of wooden covered bridge would be seen , as a storm , dubbed the Pumpkin Flood of 1903 , struck in October of that year . The storm struck both communities , and the bridge in between , causing the loss of many lives , and on October 17 , the toll collector on the bridge closed off the gate and did not allow any person to cross . At 6 : 40 that evening , a crash was heard , and seconds later , the bridge was no more , after tumbling into the Delaware River below . Remnants of the bridge were swept downstream , and smashed on the side of the new Northampton Street Bridge , constructed just a few years before . After the storm cleared , the community of Belvidere put a ferry to Riverton back in almost immediately .

After the 1903 destruction of the original wooden bridge at Belvidere , plans to construct another bridge started immediately . After the storm , the substructure of the crossing had survived the strong storm . The bridge corporation set a completion date , August 17 , 1904 , which was the day that the Farmer 's Picnic was held in Belvidere . However , the contractor of which they hired to reconstruct the bridge , the New Jersey Bridge Company of Manasquan , New Jersey , believed that the new bridge would need new abutments and piers to be completed by that time , instead of using the old wooden bridge 's piers . The three piers from the wooden bridge were used , and would require them to be heightened to be above any high flood waters . On June 3 , 1904 , the bridge construction began on a barge in the river , with promises to be complete by the set date of August 17 . On August 17 , the bridge was not complete , but usable , that when the Farmer 's Picnic ( the predecessor to the Warren County Fair , occurred , people were allowed to cross a majority of the bridge . The picnic itself was a complete success , attracting over 15,000 people , most of which walked the bridge .

Although the bridge was usable , work still had to be completed on the new bridge . The contractor promised the bridge corporation that the bridge would be finished by Labor Day of 1904 , or September 5 , 1904 . The bridge corporation and a local group called The Red Men scheduled festivities and the official turnover of the bridge back to the corporation . On September 5 , 1904 , the day of the transfer , the chief executive of the contracting company , W.H. Keepers arrived , he found the bridge to be unacceptable . Bolts were missing in places of the bridge and paint was not completed , both of which were in violation of the contract . The festivities for the bridge were canceled , and visitors were disappointed . The Red Men held events , but the turnout was light . A high point of the events that day was done by a man named Murphy Jones , who as a stunt , jumped a 65-foot ( 20 m ) plunge into the Delaware River from the bridge . The festive stunt got Jones a total of $ 15 ( 1904 USD ) and the event became an annual one . Work finally came to a conclusion in 1904 , and the people were beginning to cross the new structure . However , since the turnover had never occurred , the bridge was free of charge .

On September 5 , 1904 , the bridge finally got its transfer to the bridge corporation , and a new toll-taker was hired for the new bridge . After this , life went back to normal in both communities . In October 1928 , after the charter and opening of the Delaware River Joint Toll Bridge Commission , the bridge company was asked to sell the bridge to the commission for $ 60,000 ( 1928 USD ) , and on June 14 , 1929 , the commission abolished tolls along the bridge , making it free to cross at either end . With the bridge now under the control of the toll bridge commission , extensive repairs began on the 25-year-old structure . This construction included new beams for the bridge , new flooring , and an extensive repair to one bridge pier . Although the construction had only taken four months to complete , it still caused havoc in commuting across the structure . In 1940 , the Pennsylvania approach to the bridge was designated as Pennsylvania Route 709 , a designation that would last six years , being decommissioned in 1946 . The structure would face its most recent strength test in 1955 , after the massive flooding from Hurricane Diane wreaked havoc in the area . The structure received minor damage in the flood , and the traffic was only halted for a day or two afterward . The design in the 1904 plan worked , as the structure was not at flood level .

Cleeve Abbey is a medieval monastery located near the village of Washford , in Somerset , England . It is a Grade I listed building and has been scheduled as an ancient monument . The abbey was founded in the late twelfth century as a house for monks of the austere Cistercian order . Over its 350-year monastic history Cleeve was undistinguished amongst the abbeys of its order , frequently ill-governed and often financially troubled . The sole member of the community to achieve prominence was John Hooper , who became a bishop during the Reformation . In 1536 Cleeve was closed by Henry VIII in the course of the Dissolution of the Monasteries and the abbey was converted into a country house . Subsequently , the status of the site declined and the abbey was used as farm buildings until the latter half of the nineteenth century when steps were taken to conserve the remains . In the twentieth century Cleeve was taken into state care ; the abbey is now looked after by English Heritage and is open to the public . Today Cleeve Abbey is one of the best-preserved medieval Cistercian monastic sites in Britain . While the church is no longer standing , the conventual buildings are still roofed and habitable and contain many features of particular interest including the ' angel ' roof in the refectory and the wall paintings in the painted chamber .

The abbey was founded by William de Roumare , Earl of Lincoln in a grant of 1191 , on land he had been given by king Æthelred the Unready . On 25 June 1198 a colony of 12 monks led by Abbot Ralph arrived at the site from Revesby Abbey in Lincolnshire . The official name of the abbey was Vallis Florida , ( Latin : ' Flowering Valley ' ) but throughout its history it was generally known as Cleeve after the nearby village . The initial funding for the foundation was increased by land and money from the family of William de Mohun of Dunster , 1st Earl of Somerset and the Beckerolles family . In addition to various landholdings with produced rent for the abbey they held the Right of Wreck , which meant they could claim shipwrecks washed up on the shore of their lands .

Work immediately began on constructing the abbey church , a task that took many decades . It was a conservative design , heavily influenced by the thoughts of St. Bernard and the order 's early churches in its homeland of Burgundy . It was cruciform in shape with an aisled nave of seven bays , a short , square east end , and transepts each with two side chapels . The eastern parts of the church were built first , and were likely finished in 1232 , at which point the abbey received a royal donation of oak to build choir stalls . The remainder was probably completed by mid-century . To the south of the church a cloister was laid out , surrounded by the domestic buildings of the house . The east range , which was completed first ( probably by around 1250 ) , held the chapter house , sacristy , the monks ' dormitory , day room , and a 19.7 metres ( 65 ft ) long reredorter ( latrine ) . The south range was built next , it contained the kitchens , warming house and refectory which projected south beyond the main body of the building , following the usual Cistercian plan .

It is suggested from the heraldry used in the tiled floors of the refectory that it was finished at the end of the thirteenth century . The Encaustic tiles , which are 23 centimetres ( 9.1 in ) square , include the arms of Henry III , Richard , 1st Earl of Cornwall and the Clare family . It is believed they were produced to celebrate the marriage of Edmund , 2nd Earl of Cornwall and Margaret de Clare in 1272 . The final part to be finished was the small west range , which was used for storage and quarters for the lay brothers . East of the core buildings , and linked to them , was a second cloister around which was the monastic infirmary . The monastery , which is next to the River Washford , would have been surrounded by gardens , fishponds , orchards , barns , guesthouses , stables , a farmyard and industrial buildings . The abbey grounds were defended by a water filled moat and a gatehouse . Excavation has revealed that a large stone cross , like a market cross , stood just west of the main building . Though Cleeve was by no means a wealthy house , the monks were able to make significant investment in remodelling their home so as to match the rising living standards of the later mediaeval period . In the fourteenth-century elaborate polychrome tiled floors ( an expensive and high status product ) were laid throughout the abbey and in the mid-fifteenth century radical works were undertaken . A wooden shelter was constructed over the tiled floor in 2016 . Abbot David Juyner ( r . 1435 – 87 ) commissioned a complete redesign of the south range of the monastery . He demolished the old refectory and built a new one parallel to the cloister on the first floor . This grand chamber with its wooden vaulted ceiling ( carved with angels ) was the equal of the hall of any contemporary secular lord . Beneath it he built several self-contained apartments . These were probably used by corrodians , pensioners of the abbey . Juyner may also have been responsible for decorating the abbey with wall paintings of religious and allegorical subjects . Some of these wall paintings survive . As well as one depicting the Crucifixion , there is an arrangement of St Catherine and St Margaret on either side of , and facing , a man standing on a bridge : the bridge is over water full of fish , and the man has an angel on either side of his head , and is being attacked by a lion to his left on the bridge , and a dragon to his right . Work continued under Juyner 's successors to the eve of the Dissolution . The last building work to be completed was the remodelling of the gatehouse , performed after 1510 , though as late as 1534 the monks were engaged in a major project of renewing the cloister walks in the latest fashion . As at the neighbouring house of Forde Abbey , this was never completed , due to the dissolution of the abbey .

Like most of the smaller Cistercian houses , comparatively little is known about the internal history of the abbey . In its early years Cleeve received grants of land and property from local lords and the Crown to supplement its initial endowment and in the prosperous years of the thirteenth century grew steadily , reaching 26 monks in 1297 . The abbey held various local churches , including those at Cleeve , Queen Camel , Woolavington while also holding the rectory of Lundy . The abbey was also responsible for the chapel of Our Lady between Old Cleeve and what is now Blue Anchor ; however although this has since disappeared , the inn for pilgrims attending the chapel has been expanded into the present Chapel Cleeve Manor . A major source of income was the export of wool . However , the fourteenth century saw a change in fortunes : the Black Death , a worsening economic climate and poor administration left the abbey ( like many others of its order ) with sharply declining numbers of monks and saddled with major debt . The internal discipline and morals of the community declined too : in 1400 – 01 it was reported to the government that the abbot of Cleeve and three other monks were leading a group of 200 bandits and attacking travellers in the region . However , things improved in the fifteenth century and despite the vast expense caused by the extravagant building projects of the last abbots , better management , access to new resources ( for instance from the profits from the right to hold markets granted by the crown ) and a general improvement in the circumstances facing the house meant that just prior to the dissolution Cleeve was enjoying an Indian Summer of comfortable stability .

In 1535 , the abbey 's income was only assessed at £ 155 in the Valor Ecclesiasticus , Henry VIII 's great survey of church finances . It meant the following year that it came under the terms of the first Suppression Act , Henry 's initial move in the Dissolution of the Monasteries . Abbot William Dovell and his 16 monks were forced to surrender the abbey on 6 September 1536 . There were proposals from local gentry and even some of the king 's officials for the Dissolution such as Sir Thomas Arundell that Cleeve should be granted a reprieve , as a number of others among the smaller monasteries were , however , it was not to be and the monks finally left in the spring of 1537 . Abbot William was given a pension of 40 marks per year , not large but certainly comfortable , which he was still drawing 20 years later . Most of the other monks were given pensions too . One former monk of Cleeve rose to prominence and came to a sticky end . This was John Hooper who became Bishop of Gloucester and Worcester and was killed in 1555 for his Protestant beliefs by Mary I.

Soon after Cleeve became Crown property , it was leased to Anthony Busterd for 21 years . In 1538 , the freehold of the site was granted to Robert Radcliffe , 1st Earl of Sussex . The church was demolished , save for the south wall which bounded the cloister , and the rest of the abbey converted into a mansion suitable for a gentleman . By the early seventeenth century , however , Cleeve had turned into a farm . The dormitory was now a large barn , the cloister was the farmyard and the rest of the buildings were used for agricultural purposes and a farm house . A red sandstone barn was built which abuts the south-west corner of the abbey . George Luttrell of Dunster Castle acquired the site in 1870 . The abbey stopped being used as a farm and extensive archaeological excavations took place . The farm house was converted into rental cottages , and the site became a tourist attraction , partly to bring traffic to the West Somerset Railway . Cleeva Clapp a local farmers daughter , who was named after the abbey , acted as a guide and described her nightly " communings " with the ghosts of the monks for a shilling a head .

The church and infirmary have almost entirely vanished , but the site boasts some of the finest and best-preserved monks ' living quarters still surviving in southern England . The buildings round the cloister are still roofed and habitable and many of the rooms retain their vaults . Among the most important preserved rooms are the chapter house , the refectory with its magnificent arch braced wooden vault and the painted chamber . Much of the abbey 's medieval tiled flooring remains . Other major survivals include the abbey gatehouse , which still provides entrance to the visitor , the moat and fishponds . Cleeve is open to the public . The remains of the buildings have been designated by English Heritage as a grade I listed building , and it is listed as a Scheduled monument .

Serbian – American relations are bilateral relations between the governments of Serbia and the United States . They were first established in 1882 . From 1918 to 2006 the United States maintained relations with the Kingdom of Yugoslavia , SFR Yugoslavia , and Serbia and Montenegro , of which Serbia is considered the legal successor state . At the end of the 19th century , the United States sought to take advantage of the Ottoman Empire 's withdrawal from Eastern Europe by establishing diplomatic relations with newly emerged nations , among them Serbia . Serbia and the United States were both allies during World War I. After the first World War , Serbia united with the Kingdom of Montenegro and territories previously held by Austria-Hungary . This unified state became known as Yugoslavia , with which the United States had diplomatic relations up to the beginning of World War II . In the front in Yugoslavia during World War II , the US ultimately supported Serbian royalists known as Chetniks . However , Josip Broz Tito , the leader of Yugoslav Partisans during the war , ended up governing Yugoslavia after World War II , which resulted in a period of cutoff between Yugoslavia and the United States in the late 1940s . The end of World War II also resulted in the mass emigration of refugees from Yugoslavia , many of which were Serbs who ended up moving to the United States . This helped create the first major Serbian diaspora in the United States . Some of the Serbian refugees who settled in the United States after World War II were anti-communist exiles who attempted to undermine Tito during the Cold War , using the United States as a venue for their anti-communist aims .

Through the breakup of Yugoslavia , the United States engaged in both combative and economic conflict , particularly with Serbia , known at the time as Federal Republic of Yugoslavia ( successor of SFR Yugoslavia ) . The United States imposed sanctions and spearheaded a NATO bombing campaign of Yugoslavia in 1999 . Throughout the period of conflict during the 1990s , another wave of Serbian emigration ensued , and many Serbian refugees moved to the United States . In the 2000s , diplomatic relations between the United States and Yugoslavia were restored , but were changed when Montenegro seceded in 2006 , after which Serbia was the successor state to continue relations previously held by FR Yugoslavia . In 2008 Kosovo Assembly unilaterally declared independence from Serbia .

During World War II in Yugoslavia , the United States initially supported the royal government of Yugoslavia . When the Nazis invaded Yugoslavia in the spring of 1941 , the United States decisively supported the Chetniks in the first years of the war . This support took place in the form of extensive clandestine relations between the Office of Strategic Services and Chetniks with William Donovan 's administration . Such cooperation was highlighted by complex operations such as Operation Halyard , in which several hundred American pilots were rescued by Chetniks . However , OSS support for the Chetniks was compromised by the United Kingdom 's MI6 policy of favoring the Yugoslav Partisans over the Chetniks . In 1943 , the US government 's support for the Chetniks over the Yugoslav Partisans was such that president Franklin D. Roosevelt discussed with Winston Churchill in a private conversation that he imagined that Yugoslavia 's boundaries would be completely redrawn into three separate states , with Peter Karađorđević Jr. being the monarch of an independent Serbian kingdom at the end of the war . The USAF and the British RAF began bombing Belgrade indiscriminately in April 1944 when they thought that Nazi occupation could not be removed by home-grown resistance alone . The United States intelligence circles gradually conceded its influence on Yugoslav guerrilla operations to the British . At the end of the war , President Harry S. Truman dedicated a Legion of Merit to Chetnik leader Draža Mihailović , but the award wasn 't revealed publicly until 2005 .

After the end of World War II , the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia ( SFRJ ) was formed . One of the first diplomatic contacts made with the new communist government was the US Department of State 's request for the US Army to testify at the Mihailović trial . However , the request was shunned and early relations between the United States and the government of Josip Broz Tito became strained , as American diplomats were furious over Mihailović 's execution in 1946 . Relations degraded even further a month later , when two USAF C-47 Skytrain cargo aircraft were shot down over Yugoslavia in the space of two weeks . More USAF aircraft were shot down over Yugoslavia up to 1948 . As a result , U.S. senator Thomas Dodd staunchly opposed American financial aid to Tito 's government , even saying that " Tito had bloodied hands . " In one of Josip Broz Tito 's early visits to the United States , protesters in San Pedro drowned an effigy of him . The communist governments in Europe deferred to Stalin and rejected Marshall Plan aid from the United States in 1947 . At first , Tito went along and rejected the Marshall plan . However , in 1948 Tito broke decisively with Stalin on other issues , making Yugoslavia an independent communist state . Yugoslavia then requested American aid . American leaders were internally divided , but finally agreed and began sending money on a small scale in 1949 , and on a much larger scale 1950-53 . The American aid was not part of the Marshall Plan .

Yugoslavia began opening more diplomatic dialogue to western nations after the Tito – Stalin split , which assured that Yugoslavia was not to become a member of the Warsaw Pact . On January 1 , 1967 , Yugoslavia was the first communist country to open its borders to all foreign visitors and abolish visa requirements . Regular commercial air travel between the United States and Yugoslavia was introduced with Pan Am and JAT Yugoslav Airlines . Due to this , trade opportunities reopened between the United States and Yugoslavia , and American businesses began exporting to Yugoslavia . Likewise , by the 1980s Yugoslavia was even exporting many of its manufactured automobiles from Zastava Automobili 's assembly line in Kragujevac to the United States . U.S. president Jimmy Carter discussed issues regarding Palestine and Egypt with Tito and referred to him as a " great world leader " . Subsequently , the Reagan administration began targeting the Yugoslav economy in a Secret Sensitive 1984 National Security Decision Directive NSDD 133 . " U.S. Policy towards Yugoslavia . " A censored version declassified in 1990 elaborated on NSDD 54 on Eastern Europe , issued in 1982 . The latter advocated " expanded efforts to promote a ' quiet revolution ' to overthrow Communist governments and parties , " while reintegrating the countries of Eastern Europe into a market-oriented economy .

For much of the socialist period , the United States was a haven for many Serbian anti-communists living outside Yugoslavia . On 20 June 1979 , a Serbian nationalist named Nikola Kavaja hijacked American Airlines Flight 293 from New York City with the intention of crashing the Boeing 707 into League of Communists of Yugoslavia headquarters in Belgrade . The aircraft , however , landed in Shannon , Ireland , where Kavaja were arrested . A group of six Serbian nationalists , among them Boško Radonjić , placed a home-made bomb in the home of the Yugoslav consulate in Chicago in 1975 . Radonjić later became the leader of the Westies gang in New York City , where he participated in organized crime and racketeering . He eventually became one of the most feared gangsters in the New York City underworld , and developed extensive friendships with John Gotti and the Gambino family . After Sammy Gravano turned John Gotti in to the Federal Bureau of Investigation in December 1990 , Radonjić was highly suspected to have attempted to fix the trial on John Gotti 's behalf . As a result of this , Radonjić was arrested on December 1999 during a lockdown at Miami International Airport when he was tracked down by the FBI . He was arrested in the United States again in January 2000 for further investigation of the 1992 Gotti trial . Upon release in 2001 , he left the United States and moved back to Serbia where he lived until his death in 2011 . He was also an admirer and long-time friend of Radovan Karadžić until the latter went into hiding in 1996 .

In the 1980s , Vojislav Šešelj taught political science at the University of Michigan after being expelled by the League of Communists of Yugoslavia in 1981 . In June 1989 , he traveled to the United States again to meet with Momčilo Đujić in San Marcos , California , where Đujić named him Chetnik Vojvoda ( duke in Serbian ) . He went on to form the Serbian Radical Party in 1991 and was accused by the ICTY tribunal of leading the Beli Orlovi militants in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in war-state Republic of Serbian Krajina . Radovan Karadžić pursued post-graduate medical studies at Columbia University from 1974 to 1975 , but did so without any specific political agenda at the time being ; he later became the war-time president of the Republika Srpska during the Bosnian War and subsequently went into hiding in Serbia until his capture in 2008 for ICTY charges of war crimes and genocide .

The first form of sanctions initiated by the US against Yugoslavia took place already from 1990 as the Nickels Amendment , which was sponsored by senators Don Nickles and Bob Dole . The amendment was passed due to concerns about Albanians being arrested in Kosovo . The amendment officially came into legal effect from May 6 , 1992 ; although it applied only to $ 5 million-worth of US foreign aid , it was reported as instrumental in denying SFR Yugoslavia its last application for IMF loans before its breakup and hyperinflation episode . The breakup of Yugoslavia began in 1992 , the territories consisting of Serbia , Montenegro , and Kosovo composed the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia . In the midst of the Yugoslav Wars , the United States as well as an overwhelming majority of states from the United Nations severed economic ties and imposed sanctions on FR Yugoslavia on May 30 , 1992 .

The Yugoslav government of the newly formed FR Yugoslavia ( successor to SFR Yugoslavia ) ended up having three ideologically-opposed leaders occupying executive positions . From 1992 , while Slobodan Milošević was the president of the Federal Republic of Serbia , national theorist Dobrica Ćosić was named President of FR Yugoslavia . Meanwhile , Milan Panić , a business magnate based in Newport Beach , California , accepted Milošević 's invitation to be Prime Minister . Panić was subsequently elected as Prime Minister in the 1992 Yugoslav parliamentary elections . The United States did not revoke Panić 's citizenship even though his occupation of an executive position in the Yugoslav government clearly contradicted the United States Constitution . Nevertheless , Panić would become a person of interest in US diplomatic circles , given his business and residence backgrounds . At a CSCE meeting in Helsinki in July 1992 , US Secretary of State James Baker abruptly dismissed Panić 's appeal to reduce the sanctions to Yugoslavia , even after an agreement ( between Panić , Milošević , and Dušan Mitević ) was reached by which Milošević would resign in return for sanction-relief . This ended up severely damaging Panić 's unique diplomatic position internationally , as well as his standing in Yugoslavia . The Los Angeles Times published an article which described Panić as a doubtful upholder of potential American-Yugoslavian peacemaking , when in fact , many years later made to be known , Panić was actually invited by Baker in the first place rather than voluntarily coming to Helsinki .

Panić and former US ambassador to Yugoslavia John Douglas Scanlan cooperated on a deep level in a campaign to challenge conservative politicians which echoed Baker 's disapproval of giving Yugoslavia sanctions-relief in return for Milošević 's planned resignation . One of Panić 's advisors , academic Ljubiša Rakić , was dispatched to explain to Larry Eagleburger that the H.W. Bush administration was mistaken in seeing Panić as a Milošević puppet . Eagleburger replied , " Don 't worry , we are going to do our own thing " . The three-pronged government lasted only from May to December 1992 , as Panić and Ćosić decided to challenge Milošević in institutionally-revised elections in December that same year . The December election ended up as a failure for the opposition to Milošević , as Ćosić pulled out of the campaign in the last moment due to health problems . Multiple politicians of the opposition parties criticized the US-instigated fossil-fuel sanctions in the midst of a cold 1992-93 winter , saying that they actually further helped sympathy for Milošević and not against him .

On November 21 , 1995 , Serbian president Slobodan Milošević travelled to the United States to sign the Dayton Peace Accords with Croatian president Franjo Tuđman and Bosnian president Alija Izetbegović near Dayton , Ohio . Months later , sanctions against Yugoslavia were finally lifted in October 1996 . In 1997 , a group of 17 economists wrote a letter titled " Program Radikalnih Ekonomskih Reformi u Jugoslaviji " , advocating liberal macroeconomic policy by creating alarming predictions of the Yugoslav economy from 1998 to 2010 . Not by coincidence , the letter was first published by B92 , arguably the most West-friendly media outlet in Yugoslavia at the time . This would be the base for what would become a highly controversial political party in Serbia , G17 Plus , which began as an NGO funded by the National Endowment for Democracy . The original writers of the 1997 letter subsequently divided , as some either shunned or even criticized G17 's fundamentals , whereas others would end up occupying positions in the post-Milošević government from 2000 .

The United States reinstated sanctions against Yugoslavia in March 1998 when the Kosovo War started . Shortly after the controversies at Račak and Rambouillet , American diplomat Richard Holbrooke traveled to Belgrade in March 1999 to deliver the final ultimatum requesting entry of UN forces into Kosovo . Milošević rejected the ultimatum , so the United States completely severed ties with Yugoslavia on March 23 , 1999 . Bill Clinton became the first president to declare war while bypassing a Congressional majority . The establishment of the bombing campaign was contested by one of the tightest votings ( 213-213 ) in the entire history of the House of Representatives . The United States declared war on Yugoslavia on March 24 , 1999 to take part in Operation Allied Force led by U.S. general Wesley Clark . Out of all the territories in Yugoslavia at the time , Serbia was bombed the most due to its concentration of military targets . As a result of Slobodan Milošević granting entry to KFOR in Kosovo , the war against Yugoslavia ceased on June 10 , 1999 .

A group named Otpor ! , originally formed by students in 1998 with the financial assistance of USAID , International Republican Institute , and NED , was one of multiple significant participants in the Bulldozer Revolution , from which Milošević was overthrown . USAID donated over $ 30 million for Otpor to " purchase cell phones and computers for DOS 's leadership and to recruit and train an army of 20,000 election monitors " as well as to supplement them with " a sophisticated marketing campaign with posters , badges and T-shirts . " After the Bulldozer Revolution on October 5 , 2000 , the United States reestablished a diplomatic presence in Belgrade . In 2013 , the Associated Press published an article which reported that a CIA operative , Francis Archibald , participated in the organization of the October 5 coup and that the overthrow was " regarded inside the CIA as a blueprint for running a successful peaceful covert action " .

Sanctions against FR Yugoslavia were lifted in January 2001 . The United States under the Bush administration denied giving any aid to Yugoslavia even several months after UN sanctions were lifted before Vojislav Koštunica promised to cooperate with demands from The Hague regarding the Slobodan Milošević trial . In March 2001 , American economist Joseph Stiglitz traveled to Belgrade to talk to a prominent Democratic Opposition leader , Zoran Đinđić , about the potential consequences of IMF-sponsored austerity . On June 25 , 2001 , Stiglitz published a paper , " Serbia 's Advantages in Coming Late " , about the necessity for Serbia not to rush privatization and not to pursue " shock therapy " , which was the established macroeconomic advise of the Bretton Woods institutions . Đinđić , however , did not live long to analyze the advice of the Bretton Woods institutions or the anti-austerity plan of Stiglitz , as he was assassinated on March 12 , 2003 . This accumulated to a crescendo when G17 Plus got into an intense standoff with the Serbian government , composed mostly by DOS , due to the fact that G17 Plus continuously lobbied for the dissolution of the state union of Serbia and Montenegro . Later , in May 2006 , Montenegro declared independence from the Serbo-Montenegrin state union ; the United States immediately respected the results and urged the new government in Podgorica to keep close ties with Serbia . The United States recognized Serbia as the official successor state of the Serbia and Montenegro and the preceding Yugoslav state .

Outside of fiscal policy , American influence was evident in executive positions . In September 2002 , it was announced that the Military Court in Belgrade was to press charges against Momčilo Perišić , who was the vice president of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia at the time , for espionage in the favour of the CIA . The trial never took place , although upon his release from The Hague on February 28 , 2013 , it was announced by Perišić 's lawyer Novak Lukić that his client was " ready to be judged " on the same 2002 accusations of espionage . As of 2015 no further investigation has taken place .

On February 15 , 2008 , it was announced that the pro-Western Boris Tadić won the 2008 Serbian presidential election . The 2008 elections were particularly important to Serbia 's relations with the United States , as the main challenging party which lost the election , SRS , disintegrated when Tomislav Nikolić split with Vojislav Šešelj over integration into the European Union . When Nikolić split from SRS and began pursuing a pro-European profile ( a reversal from SRS 's eurosceptic position ) , he was being advised by American lobbying firm Quinn Gillespie & Associates . Only a few days after this election result , the declaring of independence by Kosovo on February 17 , 2008 spurred off widespread unrest in Serbia , during which the embassy of the United States was evacuated and then torched by a mob . One man of Serbian nationality was killed inside of the embassy during the unrest . Serbia temporarily withdrew its ambassador from Washington , D.C. , but the U.S. embassy in Belgrade was closed only for several days . Ambassador Cameron Munter said that no degrading of relations were expected regardless of the unrest .

On April 19 , 2012 , shortly before the 2012 Serbian parliamentary election , former New York City mayor Rudy Giuliani traveled to Belgrade to attend a news conference with Belgrade mayor candidate Aleksandar Vučić . The US Embassy to Serbia gave a statement that it did not support any specific candidate in the upcoming election . Belgrade mayor Dragan Đilas slammed the conference which Giuliani attended , telling press that " Giuliani should not speak about Belgrade 's future as a man who supported the bombing of Serbia . " After the 2012 presidential elections in Serbia , a large number of local news outlets and even some intellectuals interpreted Philip T. Reeker 's visit to Belgrade in July 2012 as an attempt to create a parliamentary coalition between the Demokratska Stranka and the Serbian Progressive Party as opposed to the Progressive-SPS bloc which had been composed by the election results . The election ultimately gave SNS along with its partners a victory , while Demokratska Stranka was removed into the opposition . The newly elected government ultimately continued largely the same Euro-Atlantic integration programs pursued by the Tadić administration . According to the 2012 U.S. Global Leadership Report , only 20 % of Serbs approved of U.S. leadership , with 57 % disapproving and 22 % uncertain , the fifth-lowest rating for any surveyed European country that year .

There is a sizable Serbian American diaspora in the United States ; in 2007 a total of 172,834 people of Serbian nationality or descent were recorded to be inhabiting the U.S. The first documented wave of Serbian immigrants to the United States was recorded in the 1970s when many Serbian factory workers emigrated to Detroit to manufacture automobiles for Ford . In 2011 , Serbia was ranked second in the world ( after Guinea Bissau ) in human capital flight according to USAID . Brain drain to the United States and Canada has been cited as a chronic phenomenon in Serbia , especially from 1990 to 2000 during the decade of UN sanctions and war .

Serbia 's strongest exports to the United States include Fiat automobiles manufactured in Kragujevac . Fiat purchased Zastava Automobili in 2008 and subsequently managed the factory in Kragujevac so that it would produce new Fiat automobiles as opposed to Zastava models ( the last Zastavas were produced in 2008 ) ; in May 2013 alone , 3,000 Fiat 500L units were shipped from Serbia to Baltimore for sale in the United States . The Fiat 500L is the first automobile to have been exported from Serbia to the United States since the Zastava Koral before 1992 , and is proving to be a popular model with a large amount of advertising in the United States . Serbia is also the largest exporter of raspberries in the world ( as of 2009 ) , and much of the raspberries consumed in the United States are grown in Šumadija . In 2015 , the two states discussed to find ways to increase investments in Serbia .

The Juniper MX-Series is a family of ethernet routers and switches designed and manufactured by Juniper Networks . In 2006 , Juniper released the first of the MX-series , the MX960 , MX240 , and MX480 . The second generation routers , called MX " 3D " , were first released in 2009 and featured a new Trio chipset and IPv6 support . In 2013 , the MX routers were improved to increase their bandwidth , and a virtualized MX 3D router , the vMX 3D , was released in 2014 . Utilizing the Juniper Extension Toolkit ( JET ) , third party software can be integrated into the routers .

On October 18 , 2006 , the MX Series was publicly announced . Before its release , Ethernet aggregation was a missing component of Juniper 's edge network products , which was causing it to lose market-share to Alcatel . The MX Series was late to market , but it was well received by analysts and customers . It was part of a trend at-the-time to incorporate additional software features in routers and switches . The first product release of the MX series was the MX960 , a 14-slot , 480 Gbit / s switch and router . In late 2006 , Juniper introduced the MX240 and MX480 , which are smaller versions of the 960 . They had a throughput of 240 Gbit / s and 480 Gbit / s respectively .

In 2009 a new line of MX " 3D " products were introduced , using Juniper 's programmable Trio chipset . Trio is a proprietary semiconductor technology with custom network instructions . It provides a cross between network processing units and ASICs . IPv6 features were added and the MX80 , a smaller 80Gbit / s router , was introduced the following year . In 2011 new switch fabric cards increased the capacity of MX 3D routers . In May 2011 Juniper introduced several new products including the MX5 , MX10 and MX40 3D routers , which have a throughput of 20 , 40 and 60 Gbit / s respectively and can each be upgraded to an MX80 . A collection of features called MobileNext was introduced in 2011 at Mobile World Congress , then discontinued in August 2013 . According to Network World , it allowed MX 3D products to serve as a mobile " gateway , an authentication and management control plan for 2G / 3G and LTE mobile packet cores and as a policy manager for subscriber management systems . " In October 2012 , Juniper introduced the MX2020 and 2010 3D Universal Edge Routers , with throughputs of 80 Tbit / s and 40 Tbit / s respectively . Juniper also released a video caching system for the MX family and a suite of software applications that include parental control , firewall and traffic monitoring . New " Virtual Chassis " features allowed network operators to manage multiple boxes as though they were a single router or switch .

In 2013 , Juniper introduced new line cards for the MX series and a new switch fabric module , intended to upgrade the MX series ' for higher bandwidth needs and for software defined networking applications . The capacity of the MX240 , 480 and 960 were increased by double or more . A new Multiservice Modular Interface Card ( MS-MIC ) was incorporated that supports up to 9 Gbit / s for services like tunneling software . In March 2013 , Juniper released the EX9200 switch , which isn 't part of the MX Series , but uses the same software and Trio chipset . A virtualized MX series 3D router , the vMX 3D , was introduced in November 2014 . A suite of updates were announced in late 2015 . New MPC line cards were introduced , which have a throughput of up to 1.6 Tbit / s . Simultaneously the Juniper Extension Toolkit ( JET ) was announced . JET is a programming interface for integrating third-party applications that automate provisioning , maintenance and other tasks . The Junos Telemetry Interface was also announced at the same time . It reports data to applications and other equipment to automate changes to the network in response to faults or in order optimize performance .

Lord Howe Island ( / ˈhaʊ / , local / ˈhæɔː / ; formerly Lord Howe 's Island ) is an irregularly crescent-shaped volcanic remnant in the Tasman Sea between Australia and New Zealand , 600 kilometres ( 370 mi ) directly east of mainland Port Macquarie , and about 900 kilometres ( 560 mi ) south-west of Norfolk Island . It is about 10 km long and between 2.0 km and 0.3 km wide with an area of 14.55 km2 , though just 3.98 km2 of that comprises the low-lying developed part of the island . Along the west coast there is a sandy semi-enclosed sheltered coral reef lagoon . Most of the population lives in the north , while the south is dominated by forested hills rising to the highest point on the island , Mount Gower ( 875 m or 2,871 ft ) . The Lord Howe Island Group comprises 28 islands , islets and rocks . Apart from Lord Howe Island itself the most notable of these is the volcanic and uninhabited Ball 's Pyramid about 23 kilometres ( 14 mi ) to the south-east of Howe . To the north lies the Admiralty Group , a cluster of seven small uninhabited islands .

The first reported sighting of Lord Howe Island took place on 17 February 1788 , when Lieutenant Henry Lidgbird Ball , commander of the Armed Tender HMS Supply was en route from Botany Bay to found a penal settlement on Norfolk Island . On the return journey Ball sent a party ashore on Lord Howe Island to claim it as a British possession . It subsequently became a provisioning port for the whaling industry , and was permanently settled in June 1834 . When whaling declined , the 1880s saw the beginning of the worldwide export of the endemic kentia palms , which remains a key component of the Island 's economy . The other continuing industry , tourism , began after World War II ended in 1945 . The Lord Howe Island Group is part of the state of New South Wales and for legal purposes is regarded as an unincorporated area administered by the Lord Howe Island Board which reports to the New South Wales Minister for Environment and Heritage . The island 's standard time zone is UTC + 10 : 30 , or UTC + 11 when daylight saving time applies . The currency is the Australian dollar . Commuter airlines provide flights to Sydney , Brisbane , and Port Macquarie .

UNESCO records the Lord Howe Island Group as a World Heritage Site of global natural significance . Most of the island is virtually untouched forest , with many of the plants and animals found nowhere else in the world . Other natural attractions include the diversity of the landscapes , the variety of upper mantle and oceanic basalts , the world 's southernmost barrier coral reef , nesting seabirds , and the rich historical and cultural heritage . The Lord Howe Island Act of 1981 established a " Permanent Park Preserve " ( covering about 70 per cent of the island ) . The surrounding waters are a protected region designated the Lord Howe Island Marine Park .

It appears that , prior to European discovery and settlement , Lord Howe Island was uninhabited , and unknown to Polynesian peoples of the South Pacific . The first reported European sighting of Lord Howe Island was on 17 February 1788 by Lieutenant Henry Lidgbird Ball , commander of the Armed Tender HMS Supply ( the oldest and smallest of the First Fleet ships ) , which was on its way from Botany Bay with a cargo of nine male and six female convicts to found a penal settlement on Norfolk Island . On the return journey of 13 March 1788 Ball observed Ball 's Pyramid and sent a party ashore on Lord Howe Island to claim it as a British possession . Numerous turtles and tame birds were captured and returned to Sydney . Ball named Mount Lidgbird and Balls Pyramid after himself and the main island after Richard Howe , First Earl Howe , who was First Lord of the Admiralty at the time . Many names on the island date from this time , and also from May of the same year when the island was visited by four ships of the First Fleet , HMS Supply , Charlotte , Lady Penrhyn and Scarborough when much of the plant and animal life was first recorded in the journals and diaries of visitors like David Blackburn , Master of the Supply , and Arthur Bowes Smyth , surgeon of the Lady Penrhyn . Watercolour sketches of native birds including the Lord Howe woodhen ( Gallirallus sylvestris ) , white gallinule ( Porphyrio albus ) , and Lord Howe pigeon ( Columba vitiensis godmanae ) , were made by artists including George Raper and John Hunter . As the latter two birds were soon hunted to extinction these paintings are their only remaining pictorial record . Over the next three years the Supply returned to the island several times in search of turtles and the island was also visited by ships of the Second and Third Fleets . Between 1789 and 1791 the Pacific whale industry was born with British and American whaling ships chasing sperm whales ( Physeter macrocephalus ) along the equator to the Gilbert and Ellice archipelago , then south into Australian and New Zealand waters . The American fleet numbered 675 ships and Lord Howe was located in a region known as the Middle Ground noted for sperm whales ( Physeter macrocephalus ) and southern right whales ( Eubalaena australis ) .

The island was subsequently visited by many government and whaling ships sailing between New South Wales and Norfolk Island and across the Pacific , including many from the American whaling fleet , so its reputation as a provisioning port preceded settlement , some ships leaving goats and pigs on the island as food for future visitors . Between July and October 1791 the Third Fleet ships arrived at Sydney and within days the deckwork was being reconstructed for a future in the lucrative whaling industry . Whale oil was to become New Holland 's ( Australia ) most profitable export until the 1830s , and it was the whaling industry that shaped Lord Howe Island 's early history .

Permanent settlement on Lord Howe was established in June 1834 when the British whaling barque Caroline , sailing from New Zealand and commanded by Captain John Blinkenthorpe , landed at what is now known as Blinky Beach . They left three men , George Ashdown , James Bishop and ( unknown ) Chapman , who were employed by a Sydney whaling firm to establish a supply station . The men were initially to provide meat by fishing and by raising pigs and goats from feral stock . They landed with ( or acquired from a visiting ship ) their Maori wives and two Maori boys . Huts were built in an area now known as Old Settlement which had a supply of fresh water , and a garden was established west of Blinky Beach . This was a cashless society ; the settlers bartered their stores of water , wood , vegetables , meat , fish and bird feathers for clothes , tea , sugar , tools , tobacco and other commodities not available on the island – but it was the whalers ’ valuation that had to be accepted . These first settlers eventually left the island when they were bought out for £ 350 in September 1841 by businessmen Owen Poole and Richard Dawson ( later joined by John Foulis ) whose employees and others then settled on the island .

The new business was advertised and ships trading between Sydney and the New Hebrides ( Vanuatu ) would also put into the island . Rover 's Bride , a small cutter , became the first regular trading vessel . Between 1839 and 1859 between five and twelve ships made landfall each year , occasionally closer to 20 with seven or eight at a time laying off the reef . In 1842 and 1844 the first children were born on the island . Then in 1847 Poole , Dawson and Foulis , bitter at failing to obtain a land lease from the New South Wales Government , abandoned the settlement although three of their employees remained . One family , the Andrews , after finding some onions on the beach in 1848 , cultivated them as the " Lord Howe red onion " which was popular in the Southern Hemisphere for about 30 years until the crop was attacked by smut disease . In 1849 there were just 11 people living on the island but it was not long before the island farms expanded . In the 1850s gold was discovered on mainland Australia where crews would abandon their ships , preferring to dig for gold than to risk a life at sea . As a consequence many vessels avoided the mainland and Lord Howe Island experienced an increasing trade which peaked between 1855 and 1857 . In 1851 about 16 people were living on the island . Vegetable crops now included potatoes , carrots , maize , pumpkin , taro , watermelon – even grapes , passionfruit and coffee . Between 1851 and 1853 there were several aborted proposals by the NSW Government to establish a penal settlement on the island .

From 1851 to 1854 Henry Denham captain of HMS Herald , which was on a scientific expedition to the southwest Pacific ( 1852 – 1856 ) , completed the island 's first hydrographic survey . On board were three Scottish biologists , William Milne ( a gardener-botanist from the Edinburgh Botanic Garden ) , John Macgillivray ( naturalist ) who collected fish and plant specimens , and Assistant Surgeon and zoologist Denis Macdonald . Together these men established much basic information on the geology , flora and fauna of the island . In about 1853 a further three settlers arrived on the American whaling barque Belle , captained by Ichabod Handy . As well as George Campbell ( who died in 1856 ) and Jack Brian ( who left the island in 1854 ) , the third , Nathan Thompson , brought three women ( called Botanga , Bogoroo , and a girl named Bogue ) from the Gilbert Islands . When his first wife Botanga died he then married Bogue . Thompson was the first resident to build a substantial house in the 1860s from mainland cedar washed up on the beach . Most of the residents with island ancestors have blood relations or are connected by marriage to Thompson and his second wife Bogue .

From the early 1860s whaling declined rapidly with the increasing use of petroleum , the onset of the Californian goldrush , and the American Civil War – with unfortunate consequences for the island . To explore alternative means of income Thompson , in 1867 , purchased the Sylph which was the first local vessel to trade with Sydney ( mainly pigs and onions ) . It anchored in deep water at what is now Sylph 's Hole off Old Settlement Beach , but was eventually tragically lost at sea in 1873 which added to the woes of the island at this time . In 1869 the island was visited by a magistrate P. Cloete aboard the Thetis investigating a possible murder . He was accompanied by Charles Moore , Director of the Botanic Gardens , Sydney and his assistant , William Carron who forwarded plant specimens to Ferdinand Mueller at the botanic gardens in Melbourne who , by 1875 , had catalogued and published 195 species . Also on the ship was William Fitzgerald a surveyor and Mr Masters from the Australian Museum . Together they surveyed the island with the findings published in 1870 when the population was listed as 35 people , their 13 houses built of split palm battens thatched on the roof and sides with palm leaves . At about this time there began a downturn of trade with the demise of the whaling industry and sometimes six or twelve months passed without a vessel calling . With the provisions rotting in the storehouses the older families lost interest in market gardening .

From 1860 to 1872 forty-three ships had collected provisions , but from 1873 to 1887 there were fewer than a dozen . This prompted some activity from the mainland . In 1876 a government report on the island was submitted by surveyor William Fitzgerald based on a visit in the same year . He suggested that coffee be grown but the kentia palm was already catching world attention . In 1878 the island was declared a Forest Reserve and Captain Richard Armstrong became the first resident government administrator . He encouraged schools , tree-planting and the palm trade , dynamited the north passage to the lagoon , and built roads . He also managed to upset the residents , and parliamentarian John Wilson was sent from the mainland in April 1882 to investigate the situation . With Wilson was a team of scientists that included H. Wilkinson from the Mines Department , W. Condor from the Survey Department , J. Duff from the Sydney Botanical Gardens and A. Morton from the Australian Museum . J. Sharkey from the Government Printing Office took the earliest known photographs of the Island and its residents . A full account of the island appeared in the report from this visit , published as " Lord Howe Island 1882 " , which recommended that Armstrong be replaced . Meanwhile , the population had increased considerably and included 29 children ; the report recommended that a schoolmaster be appointed . This study sealed a lasting relationship with three scientific organisations , the Australian Museum , Sydney Royal Botanic Gardens and Kew Royal Botanic Gardens .

In 1883 the company Burns Philp started a regular shipping service and the number of tourists gradually increased . By 1932 , with the regular tourist run of SS Morinda , tourism became the second biggest source of external income after palm sales to Europe . Morinda was replaced by Makambo in 1932 , and she in turn by other vessels . The service continues into the present day with the fortnightly Island Trader service from Port Macquarie . The palm trade began in the 1880s when the lowland kentia palm ( Howea forsteriana ) was first exported to Britain , Europe and America but the trade was only placed on a firm financial footing when the Lord Howe Island Kentia Palm Nursery was formed in 1906 ( see below ) . The first plane to appear on the island was in 1931 when Francis Chichester alighted on the lagoon in a Gipsy Moth converted into a floatplane . It was damaged there in an overnight storm but repaired with the assistance of islanders and then took off successfully nine weeks later for a flight to Sydney . After World War II , in 1947 , tourists arrived on Catalina and then four-engined Sandringham flying boats of Ansett Flying Boat Services operating out of Rose Bay , Sydney , and landing on the lagoon , the journey taking about 3.5 hours . When the Lord Howe Island Airport was completed in 1974 , the seaplanes were eventually replaced with Qantaslink twin-engined turbo-prop Dash 8-200 aircraft .

As at the 2011 census , the resident population was 360 people and the number of tourists was not allowed to exceed 400 . Early settlers were European and American whalers and many of their offspring have remained on the island for more than six generations . Residents are now involved with the kentia palm industry , tourism , retail , some fishing and farming . In 1876 it was observed that on Sundays although there was a suspension of games and labour , there were no religious services . Nowadays , in an area known locally as ' Church Paddock ' , there are Anglican , Catholic and Adventist churches , the religious affiliations on the island being 30 % Anglican , 22 % no religion , 18 % Catholic and 12 % Seventh Day Adventist . There is about an equal division of the sexes with 47 % of the population in the age group 25 – 54 and 92 % holding Australian citizenship .

Official control of Lord Howe Island lay initially with the British Crown until it passed to New South Wales in 1855 , although until at least 1876 the islanders lived in " a relatively harmonious and self-regulating community " . In 1878 Richard Armstrong was appointed administrator when the NSW Parliament declared the island a Forest Reserve . But as a result of ill feeling , and an enquiry , he was eventually removed from office on 31 May 1882 ( he returned later that year though to view the transit of Venus from present-day Transit Hill ) . After his removal the island was administered by four successive magistrates until 1913 when a Sydney-based Board was formed until 1948 when a resident superintendent was appointed . In 1913 the three-man Lord Howe Island Board of Control was established , mostly to regulate the palm seed industry , but also administering the affairs of the island from Sydney until the present Lord Howe Island Board was set up in 1954 . The Lord Howe Island Board is a NSW Statutory Authority established under the Lord Howe Island Act , 1953 , to administer the island as part of the state of New South Wales . It reports directly to the state 's Minister for Environment and Heritage , and is responsible for the care , control and management of the island . Its duties include : the protection of World Heritage values ; the control of development ; the administration of Crown Land , including the island 's protected area ; provision of community services and infrastructure ; and regulating sustainable tourism . In 1981 the Lord Howe Island Amendment Act gave islanders the administrative power of three members on a five-member Board . The Board also manages the Lord Howe Island Kentia Palm Nursery which , together with tourism , provides the island 's only sources of external income . Under an amendment bill in 2004 the Board now comprises seven members , four of whom are elected from the islander community , thus giving about 350 permanent residents a high level of autonomy . The remaining three members are appointed by the Minister to represent the interests of business , tourism and conservation . The full Board meets on the island every three months while the day-to-day affairs of the island are managed by the Board 's administration , with a permanent staff that had increased to 22 people by 1988 .

Land tenure has been an issue since first settlement as island residents repeatedly requested freehold title or an absolute gift of cultivated land . Original settlers were squatters . The granting of a 100-acre ( 40 ha ) lease to Richard Armstrong in 1878 drew complaints and a few short-term leases ( Permissive Occupancies ) were granted . In 1913 , with the appointment of a Board of Control , permissive occupancies were revoked and the Board itself given permissive occupancy of the island . Then the Lord Howe Island Act of 1953 made all land the property of the Crown . Direct descendants of islanders with permissive occupancies in 1913 were granted perpetual leases on blocks of up to 5 acres ( 2.0 ha ) for residential purposes . Short-term special leases were granted for larger areas used for agriculture , so in 1955 , 55 perpetual leases and 43 special leases were granted . The 1981 amendment to the act extended political and land rights to all residents of 10 years or more . There remains an active debate concerning the proportion of residents with tenure and the degree of influence on the Board of resident islanders in relation to long-term planning for visitors , and issues relating to the environment , amenity and global heritage .

The first exporter of palm seeds was Ned King , a mountain guide for the Fitzgerald surveys of 1869 and 1876 , who sent seed to the Sydney Botanic Gardens . Overseas trade began in the 1880s when it was found that one of the four palms endemic to the island , kentia palm ( Howea forsteriana ) , which grows naturally in the lowlands , was ideally suited to the fashionable conservatories of the well-to-do in Britain , Europe and the United States , but the assistance of mainland magistrate Frank Farnell was needed to put the business on a sound commercial footing when in 1906 he became Director of a company , the Lord Howe Island Kentia Palm Nursery , whose shareholders included 21 islanders and a Sydney-based seed company . However , the formation of the Lord Howe Island Board of Control was needed in 1913 to resolve outstanding issues . The native kentia palm ( known locally as the thatch palm as it was used to thatch the houses of the early settlers ) is now the most popular decorative palm in the world . The mild climate of the island has evolved a palm which can tolerate low light , a dry atmosphere and lowish temperatures – ideal for indoor conditions . Up to the 1980s the palms were only sold as seed but from then onwards only as high quality seedlings . The nursery received certification in 1997 for its high quality management complying with the requirements of Australian Standard AS / NZS ISO 9002 .

Seed is gathered from natural forest and plantations , most collectors being descendants of the original settlers . Seed is then germinated in soil-less media and sealed from the atmosphere to prevent contamination . After testing they are picked , washed ( bare-rooted ) , sanitised and certified then packed and sealed into insulated containers for export . They grow both indoors and out and are popular for hotels and motels world-wide . Nursery profits are returned to enhance the island ecosystem . The nursery plans to expand the business to include the curly palm and other native plants of special interest .

With fewer than 800 people on the island at any time , facilities are limited ; they include a bakery , butcher , general store , liquor store , restaurants , post office , museum and information centre , a police officer , a ranger , and an ATM at the bowling club . Stores are shipped to the island fortnightly by the Island Trader from Port Macquarie . There is a small four-bed hospital and dispensary . A small botanic garden displays labelled local plants in its grounds . Diesel-generated power is 240 V AC , as on the mainland . There is no public transport or mobile phone coverage , but there are public telephones , fax facilities and internet access as well as a local radio station and newsletter , The Signal . Tourist accommodation ranges from luxury lodges to apartments and villa units . The currency is the Australian dollar and there are two banks . There are no camping facilities on the island and remote-area camping is not permitted . To protect the fragile environment of Balls Pyramid ( which carries the last remaining wild population of the endangered Howe Island stick insect ) , recreational climbing there is prohibited . No pets are allowed without permission from the Board . Islanders use tanked rainwater , supplemented by bore water for showers and washing clothes .

As distances to sites of interest are short , cycling is the main means of transport on the island . Tourist activities include golf ( 9-hole ) , lawn bowls , tennis , fishing ( including deep-sea game fishing ) , yachting , windsurfing , kite surfing , kayaking , and boat trips ( including glass-bottom tours of the lagoon ) . Swimming , snorkelling and scuba diving are also popular in the lagoon , as well as off Tenth of June Island , a small rocky outcrop in the Admiralty group where an underwater plateau drops 36 metres to reveal extensive gorgonia and black corals growing on the vertical walls . Other diving sites are found off Ball 's Pyramid , 26 km away , where there are trenches , caves and volcanic drop-offs . Bushwalking , natural history tours , talks , and guided walks take place along the many tracks , the most challenging being the eight-hour guided hike to the top of Mount Gower . There are 11 beaches and hand-feeding the metre-long kingfish ( Seriola lalandi ) and large wrasse at Ned 's Beach is very popular . Walking tracks cover the island with difficulty graded from 1 – 5 , they include – in the north : Transit Hill 2 hours return , 2 km ; Clear Place , 1 – 2 hours return ; Stevens Reserve ; North Bay , 4 hours return , 4 km ; Mount Eliza ; Old Gulch , 20 minutes return , 300 m ; Malabar Hill and Kims Lookout , 3 hours , or 5 hours return , 7 km and – in the south : Goat House Cave , 5 hours return , 6 km ; Mount Gower , 8 hours return , 14 km ; Rocky Run and Boat Harbour ; Intermediate Hill , 45 minutes return , 1 km ; Little Island , 40 minutes return , 3 km . Recreational climbers must obtain permission from the Lord Howe Island Board .

Lord Howe Island is an irregularly crescent-shaped volcanic remnant in the southwest Pacific Ocean . Lying in the Tasman Sea between Australia and New Zealand the island is 600 kilometres ( 370 mi ) east of mainland Port Macquarie , 702 kilometres ( 436 mi ) northeast of Sydney , and about 772 kilometres ( 480 mi ) from Norfolk Island to its northeast . The island is about 10 km long and between 2.0 km and 0.3 km wide with an area of 14.55 km2 . Along the west coast there is a semi-enclosed sheltered coral reef lagoon with white sand , the most accessible of the island 's eleven beaches . Both the north and south sections of the island are high ground of relatively untouched forest , in the south comprising two volcanic mountains , Mount Lidgbird ( 777 m or 2,549 ft ) and Mount Gower which , rising to 875 m ( 2,871 ft ) , is the highest point on the island . The two mountains are separated by the saddle at the head of Erskine Valley . In the north , where most of the population live , high points are Malabar ( 209 m or 686 ft ) and Mount Eliza ( 147 m or 482 ft ) . Between these two uplands is an area of cleared lowland with some farming , the airstrip , and housing . The Lord Howe Island Group of islands comprises 28 islands , islets and rocks . Apart from Lord Howe Island itself the most notable of these is the pointed rocky islet Ball 's Pyramid , a 551-metre-high ( 1,808 ft ) eroded volcano about 23 km to the south-east , which is uninhabited but bird-colonised . It contains the only known wild population of the Lord Howe Island stick insect , formerly thought to be extinct . To the north there is the Admiralty Group , a cluster of seven small uninhabited islands . Just off the east coast is 4.5 ha Mutton Bird Island , and in the lagoon is 3 ha Blackburn ( Rabbit ) Island .

Lord Howe Island is the highly eroded remains of a 7-million-year-old shield volcano , the product of eruptions that lasted for about a half-million years . It is one of a chain of islands that occur on the western rim of an undersea shelf , the Lord Howe Rise , which is 3000 km long and 300 km wide extending from New Zealand to the west of New Caledonia and consisting of continental rocks that separated from the Australian plate 60 to 80 million years ago to form a new crust in the deep Tasman Basin . The shelf is part of Zealandia , a microcontinent nearly half the size of Australia that gradually submerged after breaking away from the Gondwanan supercontinent . The Lord Howe seamount chain is defined by coral-capped guyots stretching to the north of the island for 1000 km ( 600 mi ) and including the Middleton 220 kilometres ( 140 mi ) and Elizabeth ( 160 kilometres ( 99 mi ) away ) reefs of the Elizabeth and Middleton Reefs Marine National Park Reserve . This chain of nine volcanic peaks was probably produced by the northward movement of the Indo-Australian Plate over a stationary hotspot so the oldest guyots were the first formed and most northerly as the plate moved northward at a rate of 6 cm per year ( see plate tectonics ) .

Two periods of volcanic activity produced the major features of the island . The first about 6.9 million years ago produced the northern and central hills while the younger and highly eroded Mount Gower and Mount Lidgbird were produced about 6.3 million years ago by successive basalt ( an extrusive igneous rock ) lava flows that once filled a large volcanic caldera ( crater ) and can now be seen as horizontal basalt strata on mountain cliffs ( at Malabar and Mount Gower ) occasionally interspersed with dikes ( vertical lava intrusions ) . Geological pyroclastic remnants of volcanic eruption can be seen on 15 ha Roach Island ( where the oldest rocks occur ) and Boat Harbour as tuff ( ash ) , breccia ( with angular blocks ) , and agglomerate ( rounded ' bombs ' ) . Offshore on the Lord Howe Rise water depths reach 2000 m falling to 4000 m to the west of the rise . From the dimensions of the rock on which the island stands it has been calculated that the island has eroded to one fortieth of its original size . Rocks and land at the foot of these mountains is calcarenite , a coral sand , blown inland during the Pleistocene between 130,000 and 20,000 years ago and cemented into stratified layers by water percolation . In this rock are fossils of bird bones and eggs , land and marine snails and the extinct endemic horned turtle ( Meiolania platyceps ) now thought to be an ancient relictual non-swimming tortoise with relatives in South America . The crescent of the island protects a coral reef and lagoon , the barrier reef , at 31 ° S , is the most southerly in the world . Beach sands , rather than consisting of quartz grains derived from granite , as on the mainland , are made of fragments of shell , coral and coralline algae , together with basalt grains , and basaltic minerals like black diopside , and green olivine . The lowland consists of alluvial soils .

Lord Howe Island has a subtropical climate . Under the Köppen climate classification , Lord Howe Island has a Humid subtropical climate ( Cfa ) . In general the summers are mild or warm with rainfall erratic but occasionally heavy while in winter it is cool with rainfall more or less uniform . There is a gradual transition from summer to winter conditions and vice versa . Winds are frequent and salt-laden being moderate easterlies in the summer and fresh to strong westerlies in the winter . July is the windiest month , and the winter months are subject to frequent gales and strong winds . The island has 67.8 clear days , annually . Storms and occasional cyclones also affect the island . Rainfall records are maintained in the north where rainfall is less than in the frequently cloud – shrouded mountains of the south . There can be wide variation in rainfall from year to year . July and August are the coldest months with average minimum temperatures of about 13 ° C and no frost . Average maximum temperatures range from between 17 ° C and 20 ° C in the winter to between 24 ° C and 27 ° C in the summer . The humidity averages in the 60 % to 70 % range year round becoming more noticeable on warmer summer days than in the cooler winter months .

Lord Howe Island is a distinct terrestrial ecoregion known as the Lord Howe Island subtropical forests . It is part of the Australasia ecozone and shares many biotic affinities with Australia , New Guinea , and New Caledonia . Almost half of the island 's native plants are endemic and many of the island 's unique plants grow on or around the mountain summits where the height has allowed the development of a true cloud forest and many different microhabitats from sealevel to the summits . One of the best known is Howea , an endemic genus of palms ( Arecaceae ) that are commonly known as kentia palms and make handsome houseplants . Annual exports provide a revenue of over A $ 2 million , providing the only major industry on the island apart from tourism .

In geological terms at 7 million years old Lord Howe Island is relatively young and was never part of any continent , its flora and fauna colonising the island from across the sea , carried by wind , water or birds , possibly assisted at a geological time when other islands were exposed , enabling island hopping . Nevertheless , it is far enough away and has had sufficient time to evolve endemic species . The high degree of endemism is emphasised by the presence of five endemic genera : Negria , Lordhowea , Howea , Lepidorrhachis , and Hedyscepe . Island plants are similar to those of Norfolk Island , the two islands sharing some endemic species , for example , the critically endangered species of creeping vine Calystegia affinis . The combined flora of these two islands is more closely related to that of New Zealand and New Caledonia than to that of Australia . There is also a small but clear link with the plants of Vanuatu . The closest mainland affinities are with the vegetation of subtropical south-eastern Queensland . A link with Gondwanaland is indicated by the presence of endemic species like the wedding lily ( Dietes robinsoniana ) whose only living relatives occur in South Africa .

The flora of the island is relatively untouched with a large number of rare plants , 44 % being endemic to the island . With a diversity of conditions ranging from valleys , to ridges , plains and misty mountain tops there is habitat for a wide range of plant communities which have been comprehensively analysed and mapped . There are 57 species of fern of which 25 are endemic : they are most abundant in the moist environments of the southern island , especially the higher parts of Mount Gower , perhaps the most apparent being the four endemic tree ferns in the genus Cyathea that occur on the southern mountains .

Plant communities have been classified into nine categories : lowland subtropical rainforest , submontane rainforest , cloud-forest and scrub , lowland swamp forest , mangrove scrub and seagrass , coastal scrub and cliff vegetation , inland scrub and herbland , offshore island vegetation , shoreline and beach vegetation , and disturbed vegetation . Several plants are immediately evident to the visitor . Banyan ( Ficus macrophylla subsp. columnaris ) is a remarkable tree with a buttressed trunk and pendulous aerial roots : it can be seen on the track to Clear Place and near Ned 's Beach . Pandanus tree ( Pandanus forsteri ) has spectacular teepee-like prop roots and pineapple-like fruits that are orange-red when mature , the tough leaves being used for basketry . It occurs in damp areas like creek beds and fine specimens can be seen along the Boat Harbour track . There are ten species of orchid on the island , the most noticeable being the bush orchid ( Dendrobium macropus subsp. howeanum ) on lowland trees and rocks , bearing cream flowers from August to September . Other prominent flowering plants in the summer include , on the mountain slopes , the whiskery red flowers of mountain rose ( Metrosideros nervulosa and Metrosideros sclerocarpa ) , the massed small yellow flowers of corokia ( Corokia carpodetoides ) , orange plump flowers of pumpkin tree ( Negria rhabdothamnoides ) , and white spikes of Fitzgerald tree ( Dracophyllum fitzgeraldii ) . The kava bush has large , aromatic , heart-shaped leaves . After heavy rain the endemic glowing mushrooms Mycena chlorophanos and Omphalotus nidiformis can be found in the palm forests .

It is the palms that are the signature plants of the island as the kentia and curly palms especially dominate the landscape in many places , the kentia being of special economic importance . All four species are endemic to the island , often occurring in dense pure stands , the one that has proved such a world-wide success as an indoor plant being the kentia or thatch palm ( Howea forsteriana ) . This is a lowland palm with drooping leaflets and seed branches in ' hands ' of 3 – 5 while the curly palm ( Howea belmoreana ) , which occurs on slightly higher ground , has upwardly directed leaflets and solitary ' hands ' . Natural hybrids between these species occur on the island and there is a mature specimen of one growing in the island nursery . On the mountain sides higher than about 350 m there is the big mountain palm ( Hedyscepe canterburyana ) ; it has large golf-ball-sized fruits while the little mountain palm ( Lepidorrhachis mooreana ) has marble-sized fruits and is only found on the mountain summits .

A total of 202 different birds have been recorded on the island . Eighteen species of land birds breed on the island and there are many more migratory species that occur on the island and its adjacent islets , many tame enough that it is possible for humans to get quite close . The island has been identified by BirdLife International as an Endemic Bird Area , and the Permanent Park Preserve as an Important Bird Area , because it supports the entire population of Lord Howe woodhens , most of the breeding population of providence petrels , over 1 % of the world population of another five seabird species , and the whole populations of three endemic subspecies . Fourteen species of seabirds breed on the island . Red-tailed tropicbirds can be seen in large numbers circling the Malabar cliffs where they perform acrobatic courting rituals . Between August and May thousands of flesh-footed and wedge-tailed shearwaters return to the island at dusk each day . From the Little Island Track between March and November one of the world 's rarest birds , the providence petrel also performs courtship displays during winter breeding and it is extremely tame . The island was its only breeding location for many years after the breeding colony on Norfolk Island was exterminated in the late 19th century ; though a small population persists on the adjacent Phillip Island . The Kermadec petrel was discovered breeding on Mount Gower in 1914 by ornithologist Roy Bell while collecting specimens for Gregory Mathews and the black-winged petrel was only confirmed as a breeder in 1971 ; its numbers have increased following the elimination of feral cats from the island .

The flesh-footed shearwater , which breeds in large numbers on the main island in spring-autumn , used to have its chicks harvested for food by the islanders . The wedge-tailed and little shearwaters breed on the main island and surrounding islets ; though only a small number of the latter species can be found on the main island . Breeding white-bellied storm petrels were another discovery by Roy Bell . Masked boobies are the largest seabirds breeding on Lord Howe and can be seen nesting and gliding along the sea cliffs at Mutton Bird Point all year round . Sooty terns can be seen on the main island at Ned 's and Middle Beaches , North Bay , and Blinkey Beach ; the most numerous of the island 's breeding seabirds , their eggs were formerly harvested for food . Common and black noddies build nests in trees and bushes , while white terns lay their single eggs precariously in a slight depression on a tree branch , and grey ternlets lay their eggs in cliff hollows . Three endemic passerine subspecies are the Lord Howe golden whistler , Lord Howe silvereye and Lord Howe currawong . The iconic endemic rail , the flightless Lord Howe woodhen , is the only surviving member of its genus : its ancestors could fly but with no predators and plenty of food on the island this ability was lost . This made it easy prey for islanders and feral animals and by the 1970s the population was less than 30 birds . From 1978 to 1984 feral animals were removed and birds raised in captivity to be successfully reintroduced to the wild . The population is now relatively safe and stable .

The Lord Howe Island stick insect disappeared from the main island soon after the introduction of rats in 1918 . In 2001 a tiny population was discovered in a single Melaleuca howeana shrub on the slopes of Ball 's Pyramid , has been successfully bred in captivity , and is nearing re-introduction to the main island . The Lord Howe stag beetle is a colourful endemic beetle seen during summer months . Another endemic invertebrate , the Lord Howe flax snail ( or Lord Howe Placostylus ) , has also been affected by the introduction of rats . Once common , the species is now endangered and a captive breeding program is under way to save the snail from extinction .

Marine environments are near-pristine with a mixtures of temperate , subtropical and tropical species derived from cool-temperate ocean currents in the winter and the warm East Australian Current , which flows from the Great Barrier Reef , in summer . Of the 490 fish species recorded 13 are endemic and 60 % are tropical . The main angling fish are yellowtail kingfish and New Zealand bluefish while game fish include marlin , tuna and giant kingfish called " greenbacks " . Over 80 species of coral occur in the reefs surrounding the islands . Australian underwater photographer Neville Coleman has photographed various nudibranchs at Lord Howe Island . Various species of cetaceans inhabit or migrate through the waters in vicinity , however very little about their biology in the area is known due to lack of studies and sighting efforts caused from locational conditions . Bottlenose dolphin is the most commonly observed and is the only species confirmed to be seasonal or yearly residents while some other dolphin species have also been observed . Humpback whales are the only of large whales showing slow but steady recoveries as their numbers annually migrating the island of Lord Howe are much smaller than that of those migrating along Australian continent .

About 10 percent of Lord Howe Island 's forests have been cleared for agriculture , and another 20 percent has been disturbed , mostly by domestic cattle and feral sheep , goats and pigs . As a result , 70 % of the island remains relatively untouched with a variety of plants and animals , many of which are endemic , some of which are rare or threatened . Two species of plants , nine terrestrial birds , one bat and at least four invertebrates have become extinct since 1778 . Endemism at the generic level includes the palms Howea , Hedyscepe and Lepidorrhachis , a woody daisy Lordhowea , the tree Negria , the leech Quantenobdella howensis , three annelid worm genera ( Paraplutellus , Pericryptodrilus and Eastoniella ) , an isopod shrimp Stigmops , a hemipteran bug Howeria and a cricket Howeta . The Lord Howe Island Board instigated an extensive biological and environmental survey ( published in 1974 ) , which has guided the island conservation program . In 1981 , the Lord Howe Island Amendment Act proclaimed a ' Permanent Park Preserve ' over the north and south ends of the island . Administration of the preserve was outlined in a management plan for the sustainable development of the island prepared by the NSW National Parks and Wildlife Service , which has a ranger stationed on the island . The Island was cited under the UNESCO World Heritage List in 1982 .

Pigs and goats were released on the island as potential food in the early 1800s , the goats destroying shrubs and grasses used as nesting sites and the pigs eating eggs and chicks and disturbing the land by nuzzling for food . Several birds have become extinct on the island since the arrival of humans . The first round of extinctions included the Lord Howe swamphen or white gallinule , white-throated pigeon , red-crowned parakeet and the Tasman booby , which were eliminated by visitors and settlers during the nineteenth century either from overhunting for food or protection of crops . Black rats were released from provisioning whaling ships in the 1840s and mice from Norfolk Island in 1860 . In 1918 the black rat was accidentally introduced with the shipwreck of the SS Makambo which ran aground at Ned 's Beach . This triggered a second wave of extinctions , including the vinous-tinted thrush , robust white-eye , Lord Howe starling , Lord Howe fantail and the Lord Howe gerygone as well as the destruction of the native phasmid and decimation of palm fruits . Bounties were offered for rat and pig tails and ' ratting ' became a popular pursuit . Subsequent poisoning programs have kept populations low . The Lord Howe boobook may have become extinct through predation by , or competition with , the Tasmanian masked owls which were introduced in the 1920s in a failed attempt to control the rat population . Stray dogs are also a threat as they could harm the native wood hen and other birds .

Invasive plants such as Crofton weed and Formosa lily occur in inaccessible areas and probably cannot be eradicated but others are currently being managed . In 1995 the first action was taken to control the spread of introduced plants of the island , chiefly ground asparagus and bridal creeper , but also cherry guava , Madeira vine , Cotoneaster , Ochna and Cestrum . This has been followed by weeding tours and the formation of the Friends of Lord Howe Island group in 2000 . Programs have also been started to remove weeds from private properties and revegetate some formerly cultivated areas . An Environmental Unit was created by the Board and it includes a Flora Management Officer and a permanent Weed Officer . Weeds have been mapped and an eradication program is in place , supported by improved education and quarantine procedures . Despite the large number of introduced species that harm Lord Howe 's native flora and fauna , feral pigs and cats were eradicated by the early 2000s . The goat population has been reduced to just a few animals , and there are ongoing efforts to control rodents and introduced plants . In July 2012 it was announced by the Australian federal Environment Minister Tony Burke and the New South Wales Environment Minister Robyn Parker that the Australian and NSW Governments would each contribute 50 % of the estimated A $ 9 million cost of implementing a rodent eradication plan for the island , using aerial deployment of poison baits . The plan was put to a local vote and is considered controversial . A recovery program has restored the Lord Howe woodhen numbers from only 20 in 1970 to about 200 in 2000 , which is close to carrying capacity .

According to an analysis by Tim Flannery , the ecosystem of Lord Howe Island is threatened by climate change and global warming , with the reefs at risk from rises in water temperature . The Great Barrier Reef is specifically identified as being at risk to the effects of global warming on Australia , and the same analysis applies to the reefs of Lord Howe Island . Cool climate flora and fauna are at risk from rises in temperature , because there is limited scope for migration to higher altitudes .. The first international conference on global artificial photosynthesis as a climate change solution occurred at Lord Howe island in 2011 , the papers being published by the Australian Journal of Chemistry .

Romance is the eighth studio album by Mexican singer Luis Miguel . It was released by WEA Latina on 19 November 1991 . Although the production was originally intended as another collaboration with Juan Carlos Calderón , that plan was scrapped when Calderón was unable to compose songs for the album . Facing a new-material deadline in his recording contract , at his manager 's suggestion Miguel chose bolero music for his next project . Mexican singer-songwriter Armando Manzanero was hired by WEA Latina to co-produce the album with Miguel . Recording began in August 1991 at Ocean Way Recording in Hollywood , California , with Bebu Silvetti the arranger . On the album Miguel covers twelve boleros , originally recorded from 1944 to 1986 . The first two singles , " Inolvidable " and " No Sé Tú " , reached number one on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart in the United States and spent six months atop the Mexican charts . " Mucho Corazón " and " Cómo " were in the top five of the Hot Latin Songs chart , and " Usted " and " La Barca " received airplay throughout Latin America . Miguel promoted the record with a tour of the United States and Latin America . The album was generally well received by music critics , who praised Miguel 's singing and the record 's production . The singer received several accolades , including a Grammy nomination for Best Latin Pop Album .

Romance was a commercial success , selling over seven million copies worldwide . In the United States , it spent 32 weeks at number one on the Billboard Latin Pop Albums chart , and was the first Spanish-language album by a non-crossover Latin artist to be certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) ; it was also certified gold in Brazil and Taiwan , firsts for a Spanish-speaking artist . Romance is the third-bestselling album of all time in Mexico , and the bestselling record in Argentina by a non-native artist . The album was noted by critics as reviving interest in bolero music . Its success encouraged Miguel to release three more bolero records : Segundo Romance ( 1994 ) , Romances ( 1997 ) and Mis Romances ( 2001 ) .

Since Miguel signed with WEA Latina in 1986 , his albums Soy Como Quiero Ser ( 1987 ) , Busca una Mujer ( 1988 ) , and 20 Años ( 1990 ) have sold over three million copies cumulatively in Mexico . His early recordings consisted of soft rock and pop ballad tunes , which led to Miguel becoming a teen idol . On 14 January 1991 , WEA Latina announced a new album with longtime producer and composer Juan Carlos Calderón , who produced the three previous records by Miguel . Wanting to replicate the success of 20 Años , Calderón would compose pop songs and ballads and find tracks for Miguel to cover in Spanish . Production was scheduled to begin in April , with Italian- and English-language studio albums to follow . The record label was unconvinced by Calderón 's pre-selected songs ; he had to write more compositions , and production halted indefinitely . Ultimately , he was unable to compose songs for the album . Miguel had a contractual deadline with his label to record new material , and considered recording boleros ( slow ballads " endowed with romantic lyrics " ) after meeting Mexican singer-songwriter Armando Manzanero during a televised interview . The singer had performed boleros ( including compositions recorded by Manzanero ) during his 1991 tour . At the suggestion of manager Hugo López , and realizing that he could appeal to an older audience , Miguel chose boleros for his next album and WEA Latina hired Manzanero to take over its production . Manzanero was enthusiastic , hoping that Miguel 's popularity would introduce the genre to young listeners . On 25 October 1991 , the album 's title was announced as a homage to boleros ; it was Miguel 's first as a producer .

Recording began on 24 August 1991 , at Ocean Way Recording in Hollywood , California . Miguel and Manzanero produced the album , with Bebu Silvetti arranging the strings with additional contributions from 32 violinists under the direction of American conductor Ezra Kliger . On Romance Miguel covers twelve boleros ( with each track being described as love numbers ) , which were selected by Manzanero from five hundred songs including his " Te Extraño " and " No Sé Tú " . Seven of the twelve tracks were recorded by 13 September when production was suspended the following day when Miguel was hospitalized with appendicitis . The album 's planned late-October release was postponed until 19 November and recording resumed two weeks after Miguel was hospitalized .

" Inolvidable " was released as Romance 's lead single in November 1991 . It reached number one on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart in the United States the week of 25 January 1992 , topping the chart for five weeks . Its second single , " No Sé Tú " , was released in February 1992 and reached number one on the Hot Latin Songs chart the week of 18 April , topping the chart for seven weeks . The music video for " No Sé Tú " was directed by Pedro Torres and filmed in Miami , it features Miguel and an orchestra performing in front of a building . The video premiered on 16 February on the Mexican variety show Siempre en Domingo . " Inolvidable " and " No Sé Tú " ended 1992 as the third- and second-best-performing Latin songs of the year , respectively , in the United States . In Mexico , the songs topped the charts for a total of six months . The album 's third single , " Contigo en la Distancia " , was released in Mexico in July 1992 ; its music video was also directed by Torres and filmed in Miami . " Mucho Corazón " peaked at number three on the Hot Latin Songs chart , with " Cómo " peaking at number four . " Usted " and " La Barca " received airplay throughout Latin America .

To promote the record , Miguel began his Romance Tour on 22 March 1992 at a sold out 10,000-seat National Auditorium in Mexico City . After performing throughout Latin America and the United States , he concluded the tour in Chile in December . In addition to touring , Miguel performed at the Seville Expo ' 92 in Spain . His set list consisted primarily of songs from his earlier career and boleros from Romance . In October 1992 WEA Latina released América & En Vivo , a live EP featuring a new track ( " America , America " ) and tour recordings of " Contigo en la Distancia " , " No Sé Tú " and " Inolvidable " . AllMusic gave the EP three stars out of five .

AllMusic editor Janet Rosen gave Romance three stars out of five , saying that it " features the usual smooth , well-crafted pop ear candy from Luis Miguel , earnestly sung over strings and polite Latin rhythms " . However , she noted that the songs in the album booklet and the lack of liner notes made it difficult for listeners to know what " to make of this presentation " . Rosen concluded , " It doesn 't matter — the title of the release says it all . " Achy Obejas of the Chicago Tribune gave the record four stars out of four , praising Miguel 's refusal " to get campy , which gives the effort far more integrity than might have been imagined " and calling his take on boleros " vibrant and real . " Mark Holston reviewed the album positively in the magazine Américas , praising Miguel 's vocals , the choice of songs and Silvetti 's arrangements : " Romance is a reminder of the enduring quality of timeless music " . At the 1992 Billboard Music Awards Miguel was the Top Pop Latin Artist and the Top Hot Latin Tracks Artist , and Romance was the Top Pop Latin Album . In Chile , Romance won the Laurel de Oro Award for best album of the year . The singer was the Best Artist From a Non-English-Speaking Country at the Korean International Music Awards . At the 1993 Grammy Awards , Romance was nominated for Best Latin Pop Album , which was awarded to Jon Secada for his album Otro Día Más Sin Verte . That year Romance was also nominated for Pop Album of the Year at the Lo Nuestro Awards , again losing to Secada for his self-titled album . At the 1993 annual Premios Eres , Miguel won three awards : Best Album , Best Male Singer and Best Show ( for his tour ) . The record was the Best International Album and Miguel won the Best International Artist of the Year at the 1993 Ronda de Venezuela awards .

Romance was released internationally on 19 November 1991 , and sold over 400,000 copies in its first 10 days . In Mexico it was certified octuple platinum by the Asociación Mexicana de Productores de Fonogramas y Videogramas ( AMPROFON ) for shipping two million copies , the country 's all-time third-bestselling album ( only Juan Gabriel and José José has sold more copies with Recuerdos , Vol . II and 20 Triunfadoras respectively ) . In the United States , Romance debuted at number ten on the Billboard Latin Pop Albums chart for the week of 14 December 1991 , and reached number one four weeks later . The record topped the chart for 32 consecutive weeks when it was displaced by Jon Secada 's eponymous album on the week of 22 August 1992 , ending 1992 and 1993 as the bestselling Latin pop album of the year in the country . It was the first record by a Spanish-speaking artist to be certified gold in Brazil and Taiwan , and the first gold certification by a non-crossover Latin artist in the United States ( later certified platinum in the U.S. by the RIAA for shipments of one million copies ) . In South America , Romance was certified platinum in Colombia and Venezuela , gold in Paraguay and double platinum in Peru . In Argentina the album was certified 16 × platinum for sales of over one million copies , the bestselling record by a non-Argentine artist . It received a diamond award from the Argentine Chamber of Phonograms and Videograms Producers ( CAPIF ) , and was certified quadruple platinum in Chile and double platinum in Spain . As of 2013 , Romance had sold over seven million copies worldwide and is Miguel 's bestselling record .

Romance is considered by music critics to have renewed mainstream interest in bolero music . According to Chicago Tribune editor Monica Eng , " Just as Harry Connick , Jr. re-popularized the sounds of Sinatra and Tony Bennett , Mexican platinum-selling heartthrob Luis Miguel brought back an appreciation for the music of Mexico 's boleristas . " In The Wall Street Journal , Mary Talbot compared renewed interest in boleros to the revival of big band and swing music in the Anglo-American market , previously dominated by rock music ( which had seized bolero 's popularity during the 1960s ) . Elena Kellner of the Los Angeles Times noted the album 's " introducing old favorites to younger audiences " and Miguel 's popularity with older listeners . In Latin Beat Magazine , Franz Reynold wrote that before Miguel , boleros were considered by young people the " music of the ancients , something to be feared , since it seemed to signal the advent of senility " . Mark Holston wrote in Américas magazine that the record 's " irresistible combination of classic songs , string-laden arrangements , and subtle contemporary influences proved to be the perfect formula to reawaken the bolero 's slumbering passions once again . "

In his book , The Latin Beat : The Rhythms And Roots Of Latin Music From Bossa Nova To Salsa And Beyond , Ed Morales wrote that Miguel 's collaboration with Manzanero " brought light to an overlooked master of [ bolero ] " and " was a significant update of the genre " . Romance enhanced Silvetti 's reputation as an arranger and producer ; according to Leila Cobo of Billboard , the album " categorically redefined the interpretations of traditional boleros " and " sparked a torrent of work for Silvetti , including records with Vic Damone and Engelbert Humperdinck " . His arrangements became known as the " Silvetti Sound " , which Cobo described as " anchored in sweeping melodies , lush string arrangements , acoustic instrumentation , and above all , unabashed romanticism " . Romance 's success encouraged Linda Ronstadt , José Luis Rodríguez and Plácido Domingo to record modern versions of traditional boleros . According to Miguel 's former manager Mauricio Abaroa , although boleros were still recorded by traditional musicians at the time , " what made Luis Miguel so successful was that it was a young man singing them and that he sang them like modern ballads " . During the Billboard Hot Latin Songs Chart 's 25th anniversary in 2011 , Miguel was number one on the Hot Latin Songs Top Artists chart . Manzanero reflected on their partnership , saying that he " put in the mouths of his generation all of the great romantic songs that had a 30-year history " . In 2015 , Billboard listed Romance as one of the Essential Latin Albums of Past 50 Years , an editor writes : " What ’ s become so formulaic in Latin music these days -- the tribute album by a contemporary artist honoring a genius of another era -- started with Romance " .

The album 's success encouraged Miguel to record three more Romance records . Its follow-up , Segundo Romance , was released in 1994 ; Manzanero , Calderón and Kiko Cibrian co-produced with Miguel , and it won a Grammy Award for Best Latin Pop Performance . In 1997 Romances was released , with Miguel and Manzanero co-producing Silvetti 's arrangements ; it sold over 4.5 million copies , winning another Grammy for Best Latin Pop Performance . A year later WEA Latina released Todos Los Romances , a three-disc compilation of the romance-themed records . The fourth record in the series , Mis Romances ( produced by Miguel ) , was released in 2001 . Although the singer had planned a ten-album series , Mis Romances was critically and commercially unsuccessful . The following year saw the release of Mis Boleros Favoritos , with 13 previously-recorded tracks from the Romance series and a new version of " Hasta Que Vuelvas " . According to AllMusic editor Iván Adaime , the record 's purpose was to " close this era " of the Romance series . In 2012 , Warner Music Latina reissued a commemorative Romance : 20th Anniversary set with a CD , the original LP record and three 45 rpm singles : " Inolvidable " , " No Sé Tú " and " Contigo en la Distancia " .

Sora ( Japanese : ソラ ) is a fictional character and the protagonist of Square Enix 's Kingdom Hearts video game series . Introduced in the first Kingdom Hearts game in 2002 , Sora is portrayed as a cheerful teenager who lives in the Destiny Islands and has been best friends with Riku and Kairi since childhood . When they plan to go on a journey to see other worlds , they are separated by creatures known as the Heartless . While fighting against them , Sora obtains a weapon called the Keyblade . Donald Duck and Goofy then recruit him in their journey across various worlds to aid King Mickey while Sora searches for his friends . Along the way , the trio protects the worlds they visit from various villains . In Kingdom Hearts II , Sora searches for Riku and fights against Organization XIII who , like Ansem the Wise from the original game , are attempting to seize Kingdom Hearts for their own . Sora has also made supporting appearances in other games from the series , and reprised his role in manga and light novel adaptations of the games . Sora was originally designed by Kingdom Hearts series director and character designer Tetsuya Nomura during a discussion between Disney and Square about who should be the protagonist of the series . Wanting an original character , Nomura made various sketches of Sora until the design met the approval of Disney . Nomura came to regard Sora as his favorite character that he had designed , and pushed for the character to have a leading role in the Kingdom Hearts story in spite of the character 's youth . Throughout the series , Sora has been voiced by Haley Joel Osment in the English version and Miyu Irino in the Japanese version . As a child , Sora was voiced by Takuto Yoshinaga and Luke Manriquez in Japanese and English , respectively . Sora 's character has received generally positive critical response due to his warm personality and adventurous spirit . His personal and martial growth in the series also received praise , especially in his appearance in Kingdom Hearts II . Additionally , Sora has ranked high on various video game character popularity polls .

Sora appears as a child with spiky brown-hair who , when first introduced , wears a red shirt , red pants , and a white and blue jacket covered by keychains . Upon traveling to certain worlds , Sora 's appearance is altered by Donald Duck 's magic to adapt to different environments ; for example , he turns into a merman in underwater environments . After undergoing significant growth in Kingdom Hearts II , Sora is given a new outfit given by Flora , Fauna , and Merryweather similar to the previous one but mostly black . When battling , Sora 's outfit can change into other designs depending on the player 's choices . Sora 's Keyblade 's primary form is the Kingdom Key ( キングダムチェーン , Kingudamu Chēn , Kingdom Chain ) , resembling a classic skeleton key approximately 3.5 feet ( 1.1 m ) long , with a long , silver keychain extending from the hilt and a Mickey Mouse token on the end of the keychain . However , through the use of game items known as Keychains , the Kingdom Key can assume a variety of unique forms . During Kingdom Hearts II , Sora dual-wields Keyblades , but their forms depend on the player 's use of Keychains .

At the beginning of Kingdom Hearts , Sora and his two best friends , Riku and Kairi , plan to leave their hometown , the Destiny Islands , to explore new worlds . However , they are separated when their world is attacked by a group of dark beings known as the Heartless with Sora drifting to a town known as Traverse Town where he learns the Keyblade chose him to eliminate the Heartless . Soon after , Sora meets Donald Duck and Goofy , who join forces in search of his friends while Sora helps Donald and Goofy look for King Mickey . They travel across worlds in their Gummi Ship , sealing the Keyholes of worlds along the way to protect them from being consumed by the darkness of the Heartless . They are opposed by an alliance of Disney villains led by Maleficent who seeks out the seven Princesses of Heart to unlock the Keyhole that leads to " Kingdom Hearts " , a repository of knowledge and power and the source of all hearts . To this end , Maleficent convinces Riku that Sora has betrayed him , and that while Riku searched for Sora , he replaced Riku with new friends . This causes Riku to fight with Sora on several occasions . The group travels to Maleficent 's headquarters in the Hollow Bastion and defeat her , but Sora then discovers that Riku is possessed by the spirit of Ansem , who reveals that Kairi 's heart has been hiding within Sora 's body . In order to return Kairi 's heart , Sora impales himself with Ansem 's Keyblade , briefly transforming him into a Heartless until Kairi brings him back to his human form . After taking Kairi to safety , Sora and company confront and defeat Ansem at the now open door to Kingdom Hearts . Beyond the doorway are Mickey and the now recovered Riku ; to seal it so that the darkness cannot take possession of Kingdom Hearts , Mickey and Sora use their Keyblades to lock the door . Despite being again separated , Sora , Donald , and Goofy continue their quest to reunite with Riku and Mickey .

In Kingdom Hearts : Chain of Memories , Sora 's group stumbles onto a fortress known as Castle Oblivion , believing they will find Mickey and Riku inside . Upon entering , Sora 's memories are manipulated by a girl named Naminé who is being held captive by the group Organization XIII and forced to replace memories of Kairi with herself . However , as Sora travels upwards in the castle , he meets Naminé and learns the truth from her . Sora still wishes to protect Naminé and stop the Organization members in the castle . After the Organization members opposing him are defeated , Naminé helps him , Donald , and Goofy to restore their memories to their state prior to entering Castle Oblivion at the cost of losing their memories of the events in the castle . This requires them to sleep in the castle for the restoration of memories to be completed . In Kingdom Hearts II , roughly one year after Chain of Memories , Sora reawakens along with Donald and Goofy in Twilight Town once his Nobody , Roxas , merges within him . They visit the King 's master , Yen Sid , from whom they learn about the existence of the Nobodies and Organization XIII . Sora sets out with Donald and Goofy to find Riku and King Mickey , traversing new and unfamiliar worlds where they encounter the remaining members of the Organization . Sora later encounters their leader , Xemnas , learning that the Organization now has Kairi captive to force Sora to gather more hearts for them . Eventually , with Mickey joining them , Sora 's group finds a way to the Organization 's main base in The World That Never Was . The group soon reunites with Kairi as well as Riku , and continue fighting the Organization . Sora and Riku are separated from Mickey , Goofy , Kairi and Donald as they finish Xemnas and find a way back to Destiny Islands where they reunite with all their friends .

In Kingdom Hearts 358 / 2 Days , Sora is mostly in a state of sleep as his memories are being restored by Naminé , but is also playable in the game 's multiplayer mode . In Kingdom Hearts Coded Sora himself does not appear until the game 's final scene , in which he receives King Mickey 's letter and reads it with Riku and Kairi . A computer program created from Sora 's data serves as the primary protagonist of the game , finding out the truth behind a mysterious message found inside Jiminy 's journal . A young Sora and Riku briefly appear in Destiny Islands in the prequel to Kingdom Hearts , Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep . After Ventus , one of the protagonists , has his heart damaged following a confrontation with his dark side , Vanitas , his heart finds its way into Sora , entering the boy 's body . In the game 's secret ending , set after the events of Kingdom Hearts II Ansem the Wise tells Aqua about Sora 's adventures , and how he may help all the people connected to him . In the final scene , Sora decides to save them after reading Mickey 's letter .

In Kingdom Hearts 3D : Dream Drop Distance , Sora is summoned with Riku to Yen Sid to undergo a Mark of Mastery exam in response to Xehanort 's coming return . The two are sent to the Dreaming Realm to awaken several worlds submerged in sleep following the defeat of Ansem , but once the task is complete , Sora 's heart is damaged by Xemnas whose companions plan to turn him into the last of Xehanort 's thirteen vessels . Riku and his comrades manage to rescue Sora from his fate and brings him back to Yen Sid 's tower , where he dives into Sora 's body and repairs his heart , awakening him from his coma . Once Sora wakes up , Yen Sid only names Riku as a Keyblade Master for gaining the power used to awaken Sora . Undaunted , Sora congratulates him and departs to continue his training elsewhere . Sora is stated to return as a fully-fledged Keyblade Master in Kingdom Hearts III , and will have his final showdown with Master Xehanort . A 2D cartoonish avatar version of Sora wearing his original outfit in Kingdom Hearts is also present in the online community-based social gaming networking service , Kingdom Hearts Mobile . Sora also appears in the Shiro Amano 's manga and Tomoko Kanemaki 's novels in which he reprises his role in the video games .

Sora was designed by Tetsuya Nomura as the protagonist of Kingdom Hearts . However , he was not originally slated to be the protagonist as Disney wanted Donald Duck to be the protagonist of the game while Square wanted to have Mickey Mouse as the protagonist . Nomura wanted neither as the protagonist of the game and went on to design his own protagonist with the concepts of the Disney characters in mind which resulted in the creation of Sora . Sora originally wielded a weapon resembling a chainsaw ; however , the weapon was not well received by Disney which led Nomura to redesign the weapon into a Keyblade . Sora 's original outfit in Kingdom Hearts was also designed with Mickey Mouse in mind with Mickey Mouse 's trademark white gloves , red shorts and giant yellow shoes due to Square 's original preference to have Mickey as the main character of the game . The tail was removed as the staff found his design to be similar to the one of the Final Fantasy IX protagonist Zidane Tribal who also had a tail . After a talk with the Disney staff , the design was further reworked , and Nomura finished it after a night 's work .

One of the main concepts of Sora 's character in the series is that , according to Nomura , he is a normal boy instead of a supernatural being even though he is deeply connected with other characters from the series . With Sora , Nomura wants to give players the message that even though they are not " important people " , they have the opportunity to accomplish great things . This was emphasized in Birth by Sleep 's secret ending , which Nomura hoped players would find because it showed Sora 's potential to influence everyone 's lives . In early versions of development of Birth by Sleep , Nomura thought that Ventus would actually be Sora before being reborn , but due to negative feedback from overseas , that plot line was discarded . Nomura has stated that Sora 's name can be interpreted as " sky " since the Japanese word sora ( 空 ) , means sky . This name was also chosen to symbolize Sora 's role and his personality . It was also chosen to show Sora 's close relationship with Riku and Kairi , making their three names together " Sky , Land , and Sea . " He was also described by Nomura as having an outgoing personality , which allows him to make friends throughout the series . Of all of the characters Nomura has designed , Sora is his favorite , calling him " special " after having worked to develop the character over many games .

Following the first Kingdom Hearts , Nomura was worried that players would be unhappy that Sora would start Kingdom Hearts II as a weak character with few powers who once again had to be leveled up like the first title . Therefore , Nomura developed the plot of Chain of Memories to explain how Sora loses his abilities in Castle Oblivion and then started anew . Additionally , with Chain of Memories a new mystery regarding Sora 's memories from Twilight Town was added and while Sora did not have any memories from such town , this fact would be explained in Kingdom Hearts II . The team in charge of Kingdom Hearts II expressed difficulties in animating Sora 's Drive Valor Form for having a completely different motion except in the part that Sora walks which is shared with his regular motion . After finishing Kingdom Hearts II , Nomura wanted to give Sora a rest from the series in order to focus the following games on other characters from the series . Moreover , the events from the endings of Kingdom Hearts coded and Birth by Sleep hinted a new mystery regarding Sora 's character which will be revealed in Kingdom Hearts III . Although Nomura stated in March 2010 that Sora will once again be the focus of the next Kingdom Hearts , he will share it with another character with a big importance . In response to rumors saying that Sora 's story would end in Kingdom Hearts III , Nomura answered that Sora is the protagonist of the series and that his role will end once the series ends . For this game , Nomura was interested in giving Sora a new costume , but was worried about doing so because of the popularity of the characters Kingdom Hearts II outfit . In the end he decided to create a new one as Kingdom Hearts III was a new numbered title .

Various types of merchandising have been released based on Sora 's character . There are several types of action figures which show Sora with a different appearance such as his original form , the Kingdom Hearts II design and others variants . Other accessories include plush , necklaces and phone charm straps . In January 2010 , Famitsu featured Sora as its reader 's fifth most popular character of all time . They also featured him on its issue # 1105 cover , gaving him a tribute , showing his many appearances through the years . UGO Networks placed Sora nineteenth on their list of " Top 25 Japanese RPG Characters " calling him a " charismatic and visually interesting " character . Although he did not make to the top ten of Electronic Gaming Monthly 's " Top Ten : List of Videogame Characters " , Sora was nevertheless noted for his growing popularity . In an ASCII Media Works poll in which fans voted selected whose video game or manga character would like to name their children after , Sora 's name was second in the male category . In a Famitsu poll from 2011 , Sora was voted as the most popular Kingdom Hearts character with his fight against Roxas from Kingdom Hearts II also being listed as the best scene from the series . He was also 15th in the Game Informer poll of best characters from the 2000s .

Overall , critics and fans have generally praised the character of Sora . When Sora 's character was first revealed in 2002 , GameSpot 's Giancarlo Varanini regarded him as " an appropriate amalgamation of the Square and Disney universes . " He also comically noted he " doesn 't look like much , but you know how it goes . " A 1UP.com writer called Sora " one of my all-time favorite Square characters " , praising his cheerful personality . Gamasutra commented on Sora 's journey along the series in their feature " The Birth of Collecting : The Osiris Archetype In Games " by Jason Johnson ; while comparing Sora with Isis , Johnson found Sora 's adventure appealing . IGN praised Sora 's resilient character noting how such an ordinary " youngster " could face up to his challenges during his adventures for the sake of friendship , while RPGFan 's Nicole Monet Kirk labelled him as an " extremely likable hero " . Furthermore , in the book " Interactive Storytelling for Video Games : A Player-Centered Approach to Creating Memorable Characters and Stories " it is noted that while Sora follows a " standard hero archetype " , his character becomes more believable and strong when worrying about his friends ' fates . Haley Joel Osment , Sora 's English voice actor , has also been praised by Gaming Target 's Matt Swidder who mentioned Osment " makes a perfect fit for Sora " . While remarking Osment 's work , Louis Bedigian from GameZone mentioned that " Sora had something rarely found in video-game characters : depth " also praising his role in Kingdom Hearts . Game Informer 's Bryan Vore found that in Kingdom Hearts II , Osment has improved in voicing the character , praising his work . In their Super Smash Bros Brawl list , IGN described Sora as " ... the most active and evolved hero on this week 's list . " IGN listed him as a possible character in Super Smash Bros. Brawl ; though he was not chosen as the " reader 's choice " .

Sora 's transformations in the various Disney worlds in Kingdom Hearts II were commented to be entertaining by Julia Reges from AllGame due to how variated they are . Also reviewing Kingdom Hearts II , Greg Bemis from G4TV praised Sora 's development in the game , including his growth and the fact each of his attacks from the title are entertaining . Although Computer and Video Games also found an improvement in Sora 's movements due to sequences made with the Reaction Commands , they found them " fairly straightforward . " RPGamer 's Cortney Stone stated that Sora now moved " like an acrobatic honed fighter " in contrast to his " adolescent awkwardness " seen in the first Kingdom Hearts and remarked Sora 's transformation into a lion seen in the sequel as enjoyable . His new outfit was also well received by GameSpy who found an improvement from the original one that looked like " wardrobe from Mickey Mouse 's closet " . GamesRadar had similar opinions and particularly focused on Sora 's transformation and his new abilities . Game Informer viewed Sora 's Drive Forms as well as his combined techniques with other characters as one of the best additions to the gameplay . Although IGN also praised Sora 's growth in Kingdom Hearts II in their article " Kingdom Hearts III : The IGN Concept " , they stated that in order to make his role in a future sequel more entertaining , he would need more development making him " be confident , collected and committed to the tasks at hand " . Also commenting on his role in a future sequel , GamesRadar stated that having Sora 's character older would be necessary to make the story more mature .

Dennis Wayne Johnson ( September 18 , 1954 – February 22 , 2007 ) , nicknamed " DJ " , was an American professional basketball player for the National Basketball Association 's ( NBA ) Seattle SuperSonics , Phoenix Suns and Boston Celtics and coach of the Los Angeles Clippers . He was an alumnus of Dominguez High School , Los Angeles Harbor College and Pepperdine University . A prototypical late bloomer , Johnson overcame early struggles and had a successful NBA playing career . Drafted 29th overall in 1976 by the Seattle SuperSonics , Johnson began his professional career as a shooting guard . He eventually led the Sonics to their only NBA championship in 1979 , winning the Finals MVP Award . After a short stint with the Phoenix Suns , he became the starting point guard for the Boston Celtics , with whom he won two more championships . Johnson was voted into five All-Star Teams , one All-NBA First and one Second Team , and nine consecutive All-Defensive First and Second Teams . Apart from his reputation as a defensive stopper , Johnson was known as a clutch player who made several decisive plays in NBA playoffs history .

Dennis Wayne Johnson was born the eighth of sixteen children , to a social worker and a bricklayer who lived in Compton , California , a suburb of Los Angeles . Originally a baseball fan and a Little Leaguer , Johnson learned basketball from his father , but seemed to have neither the size nor the talent to compete with his peers : as a teenager at Dominguez High School , Johnson measured just 5 ' 9 " and played only " a minute or two each game " . After high school , he worked several odd jobs , including a $ 2.75-per-hour job as a forklift driver , and played with his brothers in summer league games after work . During this period , Johnson grew to a height of 6 ' 3 " , and developed what some later described as " rocket launcher legs " , which enabled him to jump high to grab rebounds against taller opponents . Jim White , the coach at Los Angeles Harbor College , had watched Johnson play street basketball ; feeling that Johnson excelled in defense , White asked him to enroll . Johnson gave up his jobs and developed into a promising young guard , averaging 18.3 points and 12.0 rebounds per game and leading Harbor to a college junior state title . However , the young guard lacked discipline , often clashed with White and was thrown off the team three times in two years .

At the end of his junior college career , two universities offered Johnson scholarships : Azusa Pacific University and Pepperdine University . Johnson chose the latter , and in his only year in college , he averaged 15.7 points , 5.8 rebounds and 3.3 assists per game , and developed a reputation for tough defense . After that year , Johnson made himself eligible for the 1976 NBA Draft , but was skeptical that any team would take him . NBA teams were wary of drafting a player with character issues , and Johnson was known to be a troublemaker .

The Seattle SuperSonics took Johnson in the second round of the 1976 draft with the 29th pick and gave him a four-year contract , with which he earned a salary of $ 45,000 in the first year and $ 90,000 in the last . In his rookie year , the 1976 – 77 NBA season , Johnson , playing backup to the experienced Sonics backcourt tandem of Slick Watts and Fred Brown , averaged 9.2 points and 1.5 assists per game . The Sonics finished with a 40 – 42 record and missed the 1977 NBA Playoffs , leading head coach Bill Russell to resign . In the following season , the team lost 17 of the first 22 games under Russell 's replacement Bob Hopkins , who was replaced by Hall of Fame coach Lenny Wilkens , who gave Johnson a starting spot and paired him with Gus Williams . Johnson revelled in this new role , improving his averages to 12.7 points and 2.8 assists per game . During this period Johnson played shooting guard and was known for his aggressive slam dunking , in contrast to the more cerebral roles he played later in his career . It was at this time that Johnson 's nickname " DJ " was coined by play-by-play announcer Bob Blackburn , to help distinguish him from teammates , John Johnson and Vinnie Johnson ( whom Blackburn referred to as " JJ " and " VJ " , respectively ) .

Finishing strongly , the Sonics ended the regular season with a 47 – 35 record and made the 1978 NBA Playoffs . After eliminating the Los Angeles Lakers , the defending champion Portland Trail Blazers , and the Denver Nuggets , they almost defeated the Washington Bullets by taking a 3 – 2 lead in the 1978 NBA Finals . In a 93 – 92 Game 3 victory , Johnson blocked seven shots — the most blocks in NBA Finals history for a guard . The Sonics lost in seven games , however , partly because of Johnson 's Game 7 scoring drought , in which the second-year guard missed all of his 14 field goal attempts . Johnson later acknowledged that he simply " choked " ; he vowed never to repeat this again and credited this game as an important lesson to become a better player . Johnson and the Sonics got their revenge in the 1978 – 79 season . After clinching the Pacific Division with a 52 – 30 record , the team met the Bullets again in the 1979 NBA Finals . After losing Game 1 , the Sonics won the next four games to take the finals series , helped by Johnson who averaged almost 23 points along with six rebounds and assists per game . He scored 32 points in a Game 4 overtime victory , and was named NBA Finals MVP . It was during this season that Johnson established himself as one of the best guards in the league ; he averaged 15.9 points and 3.5 assists per game , and made his first All-Defensive First Team and All-Star Game appearance .

During the following season , Johnson averaged 19.0 points and 4.1 assists , appeared in his second All-Star Game and was named to the All-Defensive First Team and All-NBA Second Team . The Sonics , however , lost in the Western Conference Finals to the Lakers , who had Hall of Famers Jamaal Wilkes , Magic Johnson and Kareem Abdul-Jabbar . Because of the abundance of talent on the Sonics team , Johnson later called this loss one of the worst disappointments of his professional career . Coach Wilkens grew tired of Johnson , who often clashed with him and was perceived as a growing liability to the team . At the end of the season , Johnson was traded to the Phoenix Suns for Paul Westphal and draft picks . The Sonics finished 22 games worse in the next season despite the addition of Westphal .

Johnson further established himself as a quality player in Phoenix . In his three years as a Sun , Johnson averaged 14 – 20 points a game and provided tough defense . He played in two All-Star Games , was voted into three consecutive All-Defensive First Teams and earned his only All-NBA First Team appearance . In this period Johnson , like in Seattle , played shooting guard and became the main scorer on the team , as opposed to being the second or third option as a Sonic . In the first two years of Johnson 's stint , the Suns were fairly successful , reaching the Western Conference Semifinals both seasons . The Suns bowed out in the first round in Johnson 's last year . Johnson 's situation deteriorated towards the end of his career at Phoenix . Like in Seattle , he often clashed with his coach , John MacLeod , and finally was traded by general manager , Jerry Colangelo , to the Boston Celtics for Rick Robey and draft picks . Like Seattle after Johnson 's departure , the Suns finished 12 games worse in the next season despite the addition of Robey .

Between the 1979 – 80 season and 1981 – 82 season seasons , the Celtics had lost to the Philadelphia 76ers in the Eastern Confernce Finals 2 out of 3 times , mainly because physical Sixers guard Andrew Toney routinely caused problems for their defensively fragile backcourt . After subsequently getting swept by the Bucks in the 1982-83 Eastern Conference Semifinals , Celtics general manager Red Auerbach added the perennial All-Defensive Team member Johnson to his squad , hoping that it would help the Celtics fare better in the Eastern Conference playoffs , particular against the 76ers . Johnson joined a squad led by Hall of Fame forward Larry Bird , who played in the frontcourt with two fellow Hall of Famers , center Robert Parish and forward Kevin McHale , a combination often called the best frontcourt of all time by the NBA . Johnson described joining the Celtics as a " dream come true " and enjoyed the tutelage of highly successful general manager Auerbach , who was " living history " according to Johnson . With the Celtics Johnson changed his playing style for the third time in his career : after being known as a slam dunking shooting guard with the Sonics , and an all-around scorer with the Suns , he now established himself as a point guard who was defined more by playmaking than scoring . In his first year as a Celtic , he averaged 13.2 points and 4.2 assists and was elected to the All-Defensive Second Team . The Celtics reached the 1984 NBA Finals , where they met the Los Angeles Lakers , their intense rivals since the 1960s . The Celtics won 4 – 3 , and Johnson took credit for playing smothering defense on Hall of Fame Lakers playmaker Earvin Johnson , limiting him to a sub-average 17 points in the last four games , and being at least partly responsible for several of the Laker point guard 's game-deciding errors in Games 2 , 4 and 7 . As a result , Magic Johnson was taunted as " Tragic Johnson " whenever the Lakers and Celtics played against each other .

In the 1984 – 85 season , Johnson continued playing smothering defense , earning his next All-Defensive Second Team call-up while averaging 16.9 points and 7.3 assists per game . The Celtics met the Lakers in the 1985 NBA Finals again . Johnson 's big moment came in Game 4 : when the score was tied at 105 , teammate Larry Bird had the ball in the last seconds . Being double-teamed by Lakers Kareem Abdul-Jabbar and Magic Johnson , Bird passed to the open Johnson , and the guard sank a 19-ft buzzer beater to win the game . The Lakers , however , took their revenge this time , winning the series in six games , powered by venerable 38-year-old Finals MVP Abdul-Jabbar . Johnson described this loss as one of the toughest in his career , because the Celtics were " close [ to winning the series ] " , but " could not get the job done " . In the following season the Celtics made the playoffs , helped by the performance of Johnson , who made the All-Defensive Second Team again while tallying 17.8 points and 6.7 assists per game . After defeating the Milwaukee Bucks in the Eastern Conference Finals , the Celtics reached the 1986 NBA Finals against the up-and-coming Houston Rockets , led by the " Twin Towers " of centers Ralph Sampson and Hakeem Olajuwon . Led by Finals MVP Larry Bird , the Celtics beat the Rockets 4 – 2 , and Johnson won his third title .

The Celtics were unable to repeat their title in 1987 despite several dramatic playoff victories . Johnson played strong defense again , earning yet another appearance on the All-Defensive First Team , and the Celtics embarked on a nail-biting playoff campaign . In the 1987 Eastern Conference Semifinals , the Celtics split the first six games against the Milwaukee Bucks . In the deciding Game 7 , which the Celtics won , Johnson had a spectacular play with 1 : 30 left in the game : a Celtics ball threatened to fly out of bounds , but Johnson dived for it and whipped it backwards in mid-air against Bucks center Jack Sikma . The ball bounced off Sikma before going out of bounds , and the Celtics maintained possession . In the next round the 1987 Eastern Conference Finals , the Celtics faced the Detroit Pistons . The series was described as a grudge match between two intense rivals , featuring a great level of personal animosity , sharp rhetoric , and several physical altercations . The center of this feud was Pistons pivot Bill Laimbeer , who brawled with Celtics players Bird and Parish . In Game 5 Johnson was involved in a crucial play : down 107-106 , Larry Bird stole the in-bounds pass by Pistons point guard Isiah Thomas with 5 seconds left and passed it to a sprinting Johnson , who converted a difficult layup with 1 second left in the game . This play caused Celtics broadcaster Johnny Most to shout out one of his most famous calls :

According to Johnson this was his favorite play of all-time . Games 6 and 7 also featured a feud , this time between Pistons forward Dennis Rodman and Johnson . In Game 6 , which the Pistons won , Rodman taunted Johnson in the closing seconds by waving his right hand over his head . When the Celtics took Game 7 , Johnson went back at Rodman in the last moments of the game and mimicked his taunting gesture . In the 1987 NBA Finals , however , the Celtics succumbed to the Los Angeles Lakers 4 – 2 as Lakers playmaker and Finals MVP Magic Johnson put up a great performance , averaging 26 points and 13 assists throughout the series . The next three seasons were disappointing for the aging Celtics . In the 1987 – 88 season , Johnson averaged 12.6 points and 7.8 assists , but in the 1988 Playoffs , the Celtics were unable to beat the Detroit Pistons in the Eastern Conference Finals . In the next season , Johnson ( who statistically declined to 10.0 points and 6.6 assists per game ) and his team made the 1989 NBA Playoffs on a meager 42 – 40 record ( largely due to the absence of star forward Larry Bird for almost the entire season ) , but were immediately eliminated in the first round ( again , largely due to the absence of the injured Larry Bird . ) The following 1989 – 90 NBA season was Johnson 's last . The now 35-year-old playmaker relinquished his starting point guard role to younger John Bagley , but when Bagley dislocated his shoulder , Johnson returned with high level of performance and was lovingly called " our glue man " by coach Jimmy Rodgers . In that season , Johnson started in 65 of his 75 games , averaging 7.1 points and 6.5 assists , but the Celtics failed to survive the first round of the 1990 NBA Playoffs .

After retiring as a player , Johnson worked as a scout for the Celtics . In 1993 he became an assistant coach for the Celtics , a position he held until 1997 . After spending several years outside the limelight , he returned as an assistant coach for the Los Angeles Clippers in 2000 , and spent four seasons there . For 24 games toward the end of the 2002 – 03 season , Johnson served as interim head coach after the departure of Alvin Gentry . Johnson later worked as a scout for the Portland Trail Blazers , and in 2004 he was named head coach of the NBA Development League 's Florida Flame . He became head coach of the NBADL 's Austin Toros a year later , and held that position until his death two years later .

In 1,100 games , Johnson scored 15,535 points , grabbed 4,249 rebounds and gave 5,499 assists , translating to career averages of 14.1 points , 3.9 rebounds and 5.0 assists per game . Known as a defensive stalwart , he was elected into nine straight All-Defensive First or Second Teams . NBA legend George Gervin said in a podcast with journalist Bill Simmons that Johnson was the hardest defender he ever played against . Johnson is also acknowledged by the NBA as a " money player " who was clutch in decisive moments , such as scoring 32 points for his team in a Game 4 overtime victory in the 1979 NBA Finals , playing smothering defense on Magic Johnson in the 1984 NBA Finals , and converting a last-second layup in Game 5 of the 1987 Eastern Conference Finals after a Larry Bird steal . Furthermore , Johnson is lauded by the NBA as a versatile all-around weapon who played with " contagious competitiveness " and was known for his durability : in 14 NBA seasons , he played in 1,100 of a possible 1,148 games and participated in 180 playoff games , the latter figure the 11th highest number of all time . At his retirement , Johnson was only the 11th NBA player to amass more than 15,000 points and 5,000 assists .

On December 13 , 1991 , the Celtics franchise retired his number 3 jersey . Johnson said he would always be a Boston Celtic , and remarked that seeing his number in the rafters gave him a " special feeling " . However , Johnson did not live to see an induction into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame , a fact that has been a considerable point of debate with sports journalists . Bill Simmons of ESPN called his Hall of Fame snub an " ongoing injustice " , stating that according to him , Joe Dumars – a Hall of Famer known for strong defense rather than spectacular scoring , like Johnson – was no better [ a basketball player ] than him . Colleague Ken Shouler called Johnson " one of the first guys I 'd give a Hall [ of Fame ] pass " . Contemporary Boston Celtics Hall of Fame forward Larry Bird gave Johnson ultimate praise , calling him the best teammate he ever had in his autobiography Drive , which is especially significant considering Bird 's teammates included Hall of Famers Kevin McHale , Robert Parish , Bill Walton , and Tiny Archibald . On April 3 , 2010 , ESPN Boston reported that Johnson was posthumously elected to the Basketball Hall of Fame . This was officially confirmed two days later when the Hall released the list of 2010 inductees .

Dennis Johnson was married to Donna , his wife of 31 years , and had three children named Dwayne , Denise , and Daniel . Johnson also was known for his appearance : he had freckles and reddish hair . Dennis 's brother , Joey , is a former Arizona State Sun Devils basketball star . And Dennis 's nephews , Nick , who was drafted by the Houston Rockets in the 2nd Round of the 2014 NBA Draft , and Chris Johnson who currently plays with the Arizona Wildcats , are well-known basketball stars . On October 20 , 1997 , he was arrested and detained overnight for allegedly holding a knife to his wife 's throat and threatening his 17-year-old son . Johnson was later charged with aggravated assault and was ordered to stay away from his family . The prosecutors dropped the case several months later after his wife declined to press charges . Johnson reportedly went to counseling to repair his marriage .

On February 22 , 2007 , at the Austin Convention Center , Johnson had a heart attack and collapsed at the end of the Toros ' practice . After being rushed to a nearby hospital , he could not be revived and was later pronounced dead . Johnson was survived by his wife and his children . Johnson 's death was met with shock throughout the NBA . Among others , contemporary Celtics colleague Danny Ainge called him one of " the most underrated players of all time [ ... ] and one of the greatest Celtics acquisitions " , and one-time rival Bill Laimbeer called him " a great player on a great ballclub " .

The World Before the Flood is an oil painting on canvas by English artist William Etty , first exhibited in 1828 and currently in the Southampton City Art Gallery . It depicts a scene from Paradise Lost in which , among a series of visions of the future shown to Adam , he sees the world immediately before the Great Flood . The painting illustrates the stages of courtship as described by Milton ; a group of men select wives from a group of dancing women , drag their chosen woman from the group , and settle down to married life . Behind the courting group , an oncoming storm looms , a symbol of the destruction which the dancers and lovers are about to bring upon themselves . When first exhibited at the 1828 Royal Academy Summer Exhibition the painting attracted large crowds , and strongly divided critical opinion . It was greatly praised by many critics , who counted it among the finest works of art in the country . Other reviewers condemned it as crude , tasteless , offensive and poorly executed . The painting was bought at the Summer Exhibition by the Marquess of Stafford , which greatly pleased Etty . It was sold in 1908 , long after Etty had fallen out of fashion , for a substantial loss , and sold again in 1937 for a further substantial loss to the Southampton City Art Gallery , where it remains . Another work by Etty , sold as A Bacchanalian Scene in 1830 and later renamed Landscape with Figures , was identified in 1953 as a preliminary oil sketch for The World Before the Flood and purchased by the York Art Gallery . The two paintings were exhibited together as part of a major retrospective of Etty 's work in 2011 – 12 .

William Etty was born in 1787 , the son of a York baker and miller . He began as an apprentice printer in Hull . On completing his seven-year apprenticeship he moved at the age of 18 to London " with a few pieces of chalk crayons " , with the intention of becoming a history painter in the tradition of the Old Masters . Strongly influenced by the works of Titian and Rubens , he submitted paintings to the Royal Academy of Arts and the British Institution , all of which were either rejected or received scant attention when exhibited . In 1821 the Royal Academy accepted and exhibited one of Etty 's works , The Arrival of Cleopatra in Cilicia ( also known as The Triumph of Cleopatra ) . The painting was extremely well received , and many of Etty 's fellow artists greatly admired him . He was elected a full Royal Academician in 1828 , at that time the most prestigious honour available to an artist . He became well respected for his ability to capture flesh tones accurately in painting , and for his fascination with contrasts in skin tones . Following the exhibition of Cleopatra , over the next decade Etty tried to replicate its success by painting nude figures in biblical , literary and mythological settings .

The World Before the Flood illustrates lines 580 – 97 from Book XI of John Milton 's Paradise Lost . Among the visions of the future shown to Adam by the Archangel Michael , Michael shows Adam the world after the expulsion from the Garden of Eden but before the Great Flood . This section of Paradise Lost reflects a passage from the sixth chapter of the Book of Genesis : " That the sons of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair ; and they took them wives of all which they chose " , an act which would shortly cause God to regret creating humanity and to cleanse the earth in the Great Flood . The World Before the Flood shows the stages of courtship as described by Milton , as men are seduced by women and pass from enjoying the company of other men into married life . Etty worked through a number of various configurations for the characters in the painting before settling on his final design .

The World Before the Flood is strongly influenced by A Bacchanalian Revel Before a Statue of Pan ( 1632 – 33 ) by Nicolas Poussin , whom Etty greatly admired and of whose works he had previously made several copies . Adam and Michael are not visible in the painting . Instead , the viewer sees the scene from Adam 's point of view . The painting is a Bacchanalian scene , centred on a group of six scantily-clad women dancing , while a group of men watch . The women 's cheeks are flushed both with the exertion of their dancing and with their lustful attempts to seduce the watching men . The men " let their eyes rove without rein " , each choosing the woman he wants to be with . At the left , five men eye the six dancing women , with " grave " expressions as described by Milton . Three of the men discuss their choice of women , while the other two watch the dancing group alone . A sixth man has made his choice , and lunges forward to grab the arms of a bare-breasted dancing woman . In the centre , the women dance . Their interlocked arms and hands create a pattern at the centre of the canvas , which acts as the focus of the painting . To the right of the central group of dancers a young man drags another woman away from the group of dancers , to join a pair of lovers who lie down together at the right of the painting .

Across the entire width of the background , a darkening sky and oncoming storm clouds presage the destruction that the dancers are unwittingly about to bring upon themselves . In a preliminary study for the The World Before the Flood now in the York Art Gallery , while the broad structure of the piece is similar to that of the finished work the focus is more strongly on the central group of women . In early versions the right-most of the dancing figures , wearing a green skirt , faces outward with her arms behind her back , forming a closed circle together with the central group of dancers . In the finished work , she gestures outwards from the circle , creating a clear narrative flow in the positions of the figures : from the single men on the left , to the man choosing a wife , to the group of dancing women , to the couple leaving the circle of dancers to join the reclining lovers on the far right . As was the case with most of his works , Etty did not give the painting a title . It was initially exhibited as A Composition , taken from the Eleventh Book of Milton 's Paradise Lost , and was referred to by Etty himself as The Bevy of Fair Women and The Origin of Marriage .

Critical opinion concerning The World Before the Flood was divided when the painting , along with two other of Etty 's works , was exhibited at the 1828 Royal Academy Summer Exhibition . Some reviewers were intensely critical of the piece . A writer in the Literary Gazette called the painting a " deadly sin against good taste " , describing the background as " unnecessarily harsh and crude " with " much to blame and lament " and the dancing figures " outrageous " , complaining that the women reminded him not of Paradise Lost , but of the scantily clad witches in Robert Burns 's Tam o ' Shanter . An anonymous critic in the Monthly Magazine disparaged the " writhings and twinings " of the painting 's subjects , describing them as " as close to the unpardonable limits as anything that has lately appealed to the public eye " . This same writer disapproved of the dark skin tones of some of the figures , arguing that " the brown visage of the gipsey gives but a dingy image of the roses and lilies that , from time immemorial , have made the charm of British beauty " . The correspondent for The London Magazine felt that while the painting was " in many respects worthy of admiration ... [ there ] is a spirit , a boldness , and a startling effect " , the work was poorly executed overall . Its depiction of women drew particular ire : " the expression of the faces is vapid ; the features rather homely ; the limbs , though not ill-drawn , have not that finish and play of the muscles , which alone give lightness and elasticity . They seem lifted up with difficulty , and ready to fall . " The review upbraided Etty as an artist who had " advanced half way on his road to classic excellence ; and there , when he should have proceeded with increased ardour and more careful exactness from being in view of his object , he has stopped short . " Etty 's fellow artist John Constable privately described the work as " a revel rout of Satyrs and lady bums as usual " .

Other critics offered a more positive impression of the piece . The Examiner celebrated Etty 's having " outdone his former self , and most of his contemporaries " . A reviewer in The Mirror of Literature , Amusement , and Instruction said that " few pictures have attracted or deserved more attention than this masterly production , " describing the figures as " graceful and elegant " . The Athanaeum considered it " decidedly the most attractive picture in the whole Exhibition " , noting that their review was delayed because in the opening week of the exhibition , " the crowds which continually stood in front of it rendered it quite impossible to get such a view of it as would enable us to do it justice " . Colburn 's New Monthly Magazine considered it " another instance of the rapid advances which this rising artist is making towards perfection . " The most effusive praise was offered in poetic form by John Taylor , who in September 1828 imagined that if Milton and Nicolas Poussin were both alive to see the painting , Milton would view it with " proud delight " , while Poussin would suffer an " envious thorn " with the realization that Etty 's abilities had surpassed his own .

The World Before the Flood was bought at its 1828 exhibition by The Marquess of Stafford for 500 guineas ( about £ 39,000 in 2016 terms ) , to add to his private collection of nudes by Titian . Etty was delighted with his success at the exhibition , at which all three of the paintings he had exhibited were successfully sold to prestigious buyers . I know you will rejoice with us all , when I tell you that the principal part of the cargo of the ship " William Etty " ( of whose arrival you had been advised ) , now landed at the Royal Academy Wharf , has been consigned to the Right Honourable the Marquis of Stafford , for five hundred guineas : the rest of the cargo being already owned by Lord Normanton and Digby Murray , Esq . ... After clearing out , we shall again put to sea and hope for equally favouring gales next voyage . From 1832 onwards , needled by repeated attacks from the press on his supposed indecency and tastelessness , Etty often made a conscious effort to project a moral dimension into his work , although he continued to be a prominent painter of nudes . He died in 1849 , working and exhibiting up until his death despite consistently being regarded by many as a pornographer . Charles Robert Leslie observed shortly after Etty 's death that " [ Etty ] himself , thinking and meaning no evil , was not aware of the manner in which his works were regarded by grosser minds " . Interest in his work declined as new movements came to characterise painting in Britain , and by the end of the 19th century the cost of all his paintings had fallen below their original prices .

The World Before the Flood was sold to F. E. Sidney in 1908 for 230 guineas ( about £ 22,000 in 2016 terms ) , and sold on to the Southampton City Art Gallery in 1937 for 195 guineas ( about £ 11,000 in 2016 terms ) , where as of 2015 it remains . In addition to its initial exhibition in 1828 , the painting was exhibited at a number of significant exhibitions throughout the 19th century . Etty 's preliminary oil sketch entered the collection of Etty 's former mentor Sir Thomas Lawrence . Following Lawrence 's death in 1830 , it was sold as A Bacchanalian Scene for 27 guineas ( about £ 2,200 in 2016 terms ) , and sold on as Landscape with Figures in 1908 . In 1953 it was identified as a study for The World Before the Flood , and purchased by the York Art Gallery , where as of 2015 it remains . Both versions of the painting were shown together as part of a major retrospective of Etty 's work at the York Art Gallery in 2011 – 12 .

" When Love Takes Over " is a song by French DJ-music producer David Guetta with vocals by Kelly Rowland from his fourth studio album , One Love . It was released as the lead single from the album on 21 April 2009 by Virgin Records ( EMI France ) . The song was conceived when Guetta played the instrumental version during one of his DJ sets in summer 2008 ; American recording artist Kelly Rowland , who fell in love with the track , convinced Guetta to allow her to take it so that she could write and record vocals for it . It was co-written by Nervo . According to Rowland , the song inspired her to pursue a more dance-oriented sound for her album Here I Am ( 2011 ) , while Guetta noted " When Love Takes Over " for providing the framework for his future musical explorations and inspiring him to experiment with more urban sounds . Guetta and Frédéric Riesterer produced the song with piano riffs and a melodic backing track . Veronica Ferraro mixed the song , focussing primarily on giving Rowland 's vocals a magical and inspiring tone . Critics would later state that Rowland 's vocals on " When Love Take Over " helped to establish herself as a solo vocalist . The song 's lyrics carry a message of the euphoria one feels when in love with a significant other , while the production bears some similarities to Coldplay 's 2002 hit single , " Clocks " , particularly the opening riff .

" When Love Takes Over " has been praised by many critics . Most noted the addition of Rowland 's powerful and emotionally charged vocals which made the single the most memorable song from One Love . The production was praised for its lush production and euphoric sentiments . It achieved worldwide success by topping the charts in ten countries , including in the United Kingdom , Republic of Ireland , Italy and Switzerland . At the time of release , it became Guetta 's highest charting single on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 and Rowland 's second number one single in the United Kingdom . " When Love Takes Over " ranked at number one on Billboard 's Best of 2009 Dance Club Songs chart . In 2013 , Billboard named " When Love Takes Over " its number one dance-pop collaboration of all time , in addition to noting the lasting cultural impact that the collaboration would have on dance music and its indication of the emerging electronic dance music trend in America at its time of release . In the song 's accompanying music video , Rowland and Guetta reminisce of how the song came together . It follows the duo as they prepare for a party before coming together for the final result . " When Love Takes Over " was promoted mainly at award shows , including the MTV Latin Music Video Awards , NRJ Music Awards and the World Music Awards . Guetta and Rowland reunited in late 2009 to perform " When Love Takes Over " for the annual Miss Universe competition . The single earned seven Platinum certifications as well as five Gold certificates , selling over 5,5 million copies worldwide . Additionally , it earned Guetta two Grammy Award nominations for " Best Dance Recording " and " Best Non-Classical , Remixed Recording " , the latter of which Guetta won for his " Electro Extended Mix " of " When Love Takes Over " .

Rowland has acknowledged on several occasions that although she loved dance music , it was not really the type of music she would record . While in Europe in 2008 , she met Guetta at one of his DJ shows in Southern France , and commented that " Listening to him was just crazy . " Guetta was playing the instrumental version of " When Love Takes Over " . Recalling that it brought tears to her eyes , Rowland remarked , " I felt so much emotion from the track ; something happened the first time I heard it , and it was just beautiful . And I remember thinking ' Why is this touching me like this ? ' You know , it was like there was a kinda soul-tie to it ! " Upon meeting Guetta , she asked him for the song so she could write its lyrics . " So I met David and asked him for the track ... He gave it to me , and I brought it back here to London , UK and wrote the actual song " . At a writing session in a London hotel room , Rowland and songwriting duo Nervo wrote the lyrics and melody over Guetta 's backing track . Rowland later joined Guetta and Julie Terry Lefèvre-Han in the recording studio to finish off the song .

Later in a 2010 interview , The Nervo Twins revealed that Rowland 's record label were not keen on the song despite their and Rowland 's enthusiasm . Consequently , " When Love Takes Over " was shelved until Guetta rediscovered the song when compiling his fourth studio album , One Love . The finished song with Rowland 's vocals and Guetta 's production was premiered in March 2009 at the Ultra Music Festival in Miami . A month later on 21 April 2009 , the single was released in Europe , and the United States . In the UK , the single 's release had to be brought forward to 11 June 2009 to combat an " inferior " cover version released on 9 May 2009 . Additionally , beginning in July / August 2009 , American TV channel Bravo licensed the song for a two-month period , to use for in-house advertising .

The recording and mixing of " When Love Takes Over " took place in summer and autumn of 2008 . After Rowland heard the instrumental of " When Love Takes Over " — a piano loop-based melody with throbbing percussion — she asked Guetta if she could take the demo and several other tracks to work on . She wrote the lyrics and recorded the vocals in London , within a day . She was aided by Australian songwriters and producers Miriam and Olivia Nervo ( The Nervo Twins ) . However the song remained unfinished until Guetta rediscovered the track while compiling his One Love album . After getting selected for the album , " When Love Takes Over " was given to Frédéric Riesterer who , aside from producing the song with Guetta , was tasked the final audio mixing of the song . However Riesterer decided to give the track to French mixing engineer Veronica Ferraro , who would later go on to say that " Reisterer was supposed to mix it , but he wanted me to do it and see how it turned out . The first time I heard the track I immediately knew it would be a huge hit . " The track was mixed in September 2008 , at Ferraro 's Super Sonic Scale studio near Paris , the day after her birthday .

Before working on the song 's individual elements , Ferraro converted the recording sessions from a generic digital audio workstation system to her programme of choice , Pro Tools . Following this , she decided that she would focus primarily on Rowland 's vocals . " Frédéric had the right sounds on the drums and the keyboards , so I did not change very much . I just did some standard things , with EQ and compression and things like that . After that my obsession was to get the vocals to sound as good as possible . When I 'm mixing a track , I want something to happen , something that takes the listener somewhere . You want the right things in the right place , but it 's not a technical issue . It 's actually an artistic issue to have everything in the right place – the mixing has to be magic . It was not difficult in this case , because I knew the song would be a hit , but I did my best to make the vocal sound magical , like an angel singing , so that the hit quality of the song was immediately obvious . I wanted to make sure that the voice takes you from the beginning to the end and doesn 't lose you . "

Ferraro told Sound On Sound that she did add a bass drum sample , as she felt that the kick was missing something . " Rather than equalise it , I added a little bit of my sample to make the BD track sound bigger " . However she did alter the two piano elements of the song , using the Flex Studio Tool to widen the sound of the piano element without the delay . Additionally , Ferraro used a number of French plug-in software to amplify many of the track 's instruments , including the violin , strings and guitar samples . She then moved on to Rowland 's vocals , which " were extensively processed " , including equalization and de-essing . Then upon completion of her work on the song , Ferraro sent " When Love Takes Over " to her husband , Bruno Gruel , and his Elektra Mastering Suite which is located in the same building as the Super Sonic Scale Studio . Gruel received the song in a standard Pro Tools format , 24-bit / 44.1 kHz . He used several pieces of software to realign all of the elements of the song , particularly the bass drums and low synths .

" When Love Takes Over " is a synthpop and " uplifting floor-filler " produced by Guetta and his associate Frédéric Riesterer . Jason Lipshutz from Billboard magazine described it as a " pop number built around a lush piano loop and throbbing percussion " with trance elements . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , the song was written in the key of F Mixolydian with a time signature of common time and a tempo of 130 beats per minute . The chord progression is Cm / F – Gm / F – F4 – F. The final recording and mixing took place at Gum Prod Studios in Paris . Some elements of the song were compared to the riff and piano opener in the song " Clocks " by Coldplay . After gaining Guetta 's approval to write vocals for the song , Rowland took the instrumental version to London , where she wrote the bulk of the lyrics with The Nervo Twins ( Miriam and Olivia Nervo ) before sending the song back to Guetta , who added his own contributions with Frédéric Riesterer . Rowland uses a vocal range of F3 to D5 . Guetta said that " Kelly [ ' s vocals ] had this Whitney Houston vibe and nailed it . " Critics agreed , noting that often her vocals were " powerful " and " grand " . Others called them " a diva masterclass " and " emotionally charged " . Fraser McAlpine from BBC Online compared Rowland 's vocals to those by Madonna in " Ray of Light " , for their " hands-in-the-air pop song " qualities .

The song received critical acclaim from music critics for both Guetta 's catchy production and Rowland 's strong vocals . It was called the strongest and most commercial single choice from Guetta 's album , One Love . Critics noted that the song 's opening piano riff was similar to that from Coldplay 's hit single " Clocks " ( 2002 ) . David Jefferes of Allmusic gave the song a thumbs up saying , calling " When Love Takes Over " one of the strongest songs from One Love and praising the " [ addition of ] the powerful voice of Kelly Rowland for one grand , uplifting floor-filler . " Simon Vozick-Levinson of Entertainment Weekly agreed calling the song the " most memorable from the album " and recalling " Clocks " by Coldplay to make " a showstopper starring Kelly Rowland . " Michael Hibbard of MusicOMH was impressed with both the production and vocal work on " When Love Takes Over " . He pointed out the rarity in the amount of promotion given to the song , referring to " When Love Takes Over " being given " its own poster on the Tube . " He also described the song as a " euphoric masterpiece " backed by " at least eight remixes " and the accompany vocals from " Destiny 's Child songbird Kelly Rowland on hand for a diva masterclass . " Also agreeing with these comments was Fraser McAlpine from BBC Online who awarded the song four out of five stars . " The genius ingredients include a thinly reworked go at the piano riff to ' Clocks ' by Coldplay and handclaps ... And the fairy dust is ... well ... it 's your standard dance-pop production , actually . " However he noted that the production was " tastefully done to make sure that the good bits are not spoilt " . Other elements of the song such as the " bed of synthistrings , a skippy beat , a breakdown , some riffing glassy electronics and a dramatic , cinematic bottom end drone " were praised . McAlpine also praised Rowland 's appearance on the track , commenting who she sounded " entirely unlike herself , so that even SHE is all buffed up and shiny . " He described the marriage of Rowland 's vocals and Guetta 's production by stating that " [ Rowland 's ] got a spiralling , sky-scraping melody to sing too . "

Erin Martin of PopMatters said that " When Love Takes Over " had euphoric properties . Martin said the song was " a classic , triumphant dance number , and Rowland 's powerhouse vocals ensure that this song has anthemic potential for years to come . This song just feels good to listen to " . She also noted that the song was central to the concept and " love-spreading message [ that ] Guetta delivers on the album as a whole . " David Balls of Digital Spy agreed with the song 's anthem credentials . " [ It ] is further evidence that Rowland may no longer be resigned to living in Beyoncé [ Knowles ' ] shadow . Fusing classic dance beats with a heady , emotionally charged vocal , it 's a world away from the mid-tempo R & B numbers with which she started her solo career . In fact , this packs a punch from the very first listen , meaning it could well become one of the summer anthems of 2009 . " However , Mikael Wood of the Los Angeles Times was less impressed than the other critics , simply noting the song as " a cheesy synthpop makeover of Coldplay 's ' Clocks ' . " Wood did however state that it was among Guetta 's best work and was an example of when the DJ is " most commercial " .

In Guetta 's native France , " When Love Takes Over " debuted on the French Digital Chart at number 14 on 25 April 2009 before subsequently peaking at number three on 18 July 2009 . On the French Singles Chart , it debuted and peaked at number two . In August 2009 , Guetta had two simultaneous top 10 singles on the chart , the other being " Sexy Bitch " featuring Akon . Following is strong run on the charts the Syndicat National de l 'Édition Phonographique ( SNEP ) awarded the single a Gold certification for selling 150,000 + copies . In Rowland 's native country of the United States the single was successful , topping both the Hot Dance Airplay and Hot Dance Club Songs charts , as well as reaching number 76 on the Billboard Hot 100 . This became Guetta 's highest Hot 100 chart position at the time . It was Rowland 's highest Hot 100 Chart entry since her feature of Trina 's 2005 single , " Here We Go " . " When Love Takes Over " ranked at number one on the Best of 2009 Dance Club Songs chart and number thirty-three on the End of Decade ( 2000 – 2009 ) Dance Club Songs Chart .

" When Love Takes Over " also achieved success in Europe , topping charts in Belgium ( Wallonia ) , Czech Republic , Hungary , Ireland , Italy , Slovakia , Switzerland and the United Kingdom . It also reached the top 10 in most other regions apart from Brasil Canada and the United States . By the end of 2009 it reached the top 30 on most year-end charts , most notably reaching number two in Switzlerand , number five in Belgium ( Wallonia ) , and six on the European Hot 100 . It was certified Platinum in nine countries . In the United Kingdom , Guetta and Rowland 's original version debuted at number seven on the UK Singles Chart , having sold 25,000 copies . The following week Guetta 's version peaked at number one , beating his previous best chart peak of number three with 2006 's " Love Don 't Let Me Go " . It gave Rowland her second number one single in Britain , the first being " Dilemma " alongside Nelly in October 2002 . " When Love Takes Over " was awarded a Platinum certification by the British Phonographic Industry in July 2013 for shipping over 650,000 copies . On The Official Charts Company 's official countdown of the Top 100 British Downloads of all time , " When Love Takes Over " ranks at number 58 , marking Rowland 's only entry on the chart . However it is Guetta 's second entry on the chart , behind " Sexy Bitch " ( with Akon ) which charted at number 27 . In total , the single has sold over 5,5 million copies worldwide .

The music video was filmed on 19 May 2009 at Venice Beach , Los Angeles , directed by Jonas Åkerlund . Guetta revealed that the video 's story and concept were designed to mimic the story behind the song 's creation . He said , " you see Kelly doing her thing and then me on the other side doing mine . Eventually we come together just like how we recorded the song . It 's all about sharing the love from this record and making a big party " . These reflections and more behind the scenes footage were revealed in the video clip " Making of When Love Takes Over " which was uploaded to Guetta 's official YouTube channel on 1 June 2009 . The music video itself premiered on 8 June 2009 on Guetta 's YouTube channel . The video premiered after the European and United States digital release but just before the single 's UK digital release on 10 June 2009 .

The video focuses on Rowland walking through the streets of Venice Beach while Guetta gathers his DJ equipment and pushes it towards the beach . Through the video a number of street performers join the gathering crowd , including a motocross bicycler , a skateboarder , and a BBoy Cloud . The last scene , sees Rowland and Guetta unite on the beach for a late night party which sees the duo performing together . Capital FM described the video as " lots of shots of people having fun in the sun " . Melinda Newman from Hitfix praised Rowland 's role in the clip saying that " [ Rowland ] is fierce throughout and it clearly experiencing a bit of a career resurgence after a dip . [ She ] gives her best Beyoncé-type stares straight into the camera ( but we 're sure that 's just a coincidence ) ... Guetta , who is relegated to a supporting role in his own video , shows up pushing his gear on a cart , looking basically like any other homeless guy hanging out in Venice . " Some criticism did follow the video . Capital FM radio station felt that Guetta 's appearance in the clip was slightly disappointing . " Guetta looks a bit like a binman pushing his gear round the streets in some of the earlier shots in the video " . Newman said that the video 's director , Jonas Åkerlund , had removed something from the song . " The video could have built on the great beat that builds within the song and the feeling of abandon that falling in love can bring you , but , instead , we get a telegenic couple making out who seem to drop in from nowhere . "

Guetta premiered the completed version of " When Love Takes Over " on 23 March 2009 at the Ultra Music Festival . Promotion of the single began in the UK with an acoustic performance of the single at the BBC Radio 1 Live Lounge on 10 May 2009 and then again on UK daytime show , This Morning , on 18 June 2009 . They also appeared at the Miss Universe 2009 contest in the Bahamas , where the duo performed the song live for the " Evening Gown " competition . Another major part of the promotion included appearances at the Loop Live 2009 music festival in Sofia , Bulgaria and Rowland 's appeared at the TAO Night Club in Las Vegas , where she hosted celebrations for " When Love Takes Over " reaching number one around the world . The duo returned to the UK to perform at Orange Rockcorps at London 's Royal Albert Hall in September 2009 , before performing at the 2009 MTV Latin America Music Video Awards on 15 October 2010 . It was by US TV channel , Bravo , during an internal advertising campaign . " When Love Takes Over " was still being promoted in 2010 when the pair performed at the French NRJ Music Awards on 24 January 2010 and at the 2010 World Music Awards on 5 June , one year after the song was released .

British dance music artist Airi L released a bootleg version of the song 9 May 2010 , several days before the Guetta and Rowland version was due to be released . EMI Music called Airi L 's version " inferior " and decided to combat her cover by releasing Guetta 's version on 11 June 2009 in the UK , earlier than originally planned . The cover debuted and peaked at number twenty-two , selling 12,000 copies whilst Guetta and Rowland 's version debuted at number seven with 25,000 copies . According to Yahoo ! Music 's James Masterton , Rowland 's version would have debuted at a higher place had it not been for the " bootleg cover " . He said the single had to be rush released " when not one but two spoiler ( and indeed near-identical ) cover versions started to race up the iTunes rankings and threatened to have a negatively impact on the ' official ' version . " The following week Guetta and Rowland 's version would debut at number one .

British singer-songwriter , Pixie Lott , covered the song for the re-issue of her debut album , Turn It Up . Then in the second week of October 2010 , the song was covered twice by contestants on The X Factor . Matt Cardle performed his version on the opening show of the seventh series of the UK version , while Hayley Teal sang a version on the second series of the Australian version . Following Cardle 's performance , " When Love Takes Over " jumped twelve places on UK Dance Chart , to number seventeen . Baraa Qadoura performed his version on the third live show of the eighth season of the Danish version of X Factor . In 2016 , American gospel singer Yolanda Adams covered the song for the US version of the musical The Passion .

Rowland told MTV that " working with David is amazing . We have a great relationship , it 's so effortless . He 's such a talented individual . But most importantly he 's such a down to earth , nice guy and I really enjoy working with him . We have good musical chemistry together . " Guetta told Billboard that " the track with Kelly has made him experiment with a more American urban influence . Musically , it 's pure pop with a lot of detail . " Additionally British singer Cheryl Cole ( of Girls Aloud ) credited " When Love Takes Over " for inspiring her taste and preference in dance music , which in turn influenced her second solo single " 3 Words " ( featuring will.i.am ) . Later in 2010 when recording her third album , Here I Am ( 2011 ) , Rowland credited both Guetta and the song for inspiring her to pursue a new sound . Rowland relates : " I spent about a year of my life in Europe really listening to a whole bunch of Europeans DJs and hearing dance music a lot on the radio and really loving it . ' When Love Takes Over ' it was my first introduction to dance music [ and ] it was a whole other monster . It 's really a culture and I love it . " In 2010 , following the success of " When Love Takes Over " and the duo 's musical chemistry , Guetta was asked to work on Rowland 's third studio album . He co-produced a couple of the songs including the album 's first single , " Commander " .

Later in 2013 , Kerri Mason and Zel McCarthy compiled a list of the top-ten dance-pop collaborations of all time for Billboard magazine . In their article , the critics named " When Love Takes Over " at the top of the list , saying that the song " repositioned Kelly Rowland as a solo vocalist with chops on her own . " The duo also commented that subsequent collaborations between Guetta and Rowland were not as good as " When Love Takes Over " , also adding that Rowland 's vocal was firmly part of " dance music history " and were an indication of the growing electronic dance music ( EDM ) trend emerging in America at the time .

Kepler-7 is a star located in the constellation Lyra in the field of view of the Kepler Mission , a NASA operation in search of Earth-like planets . It is home to the fourth of the first five planets that Kepler discovered ; this planet , a Jupiter-size gas giant named Kepler-7b , is as light as styrofoam . The star itself is more massive than the Sun , and is nearly twice the Sun 's radius . It is also slightly metal-rich , a major factor in the formation of planetary systems . Kepler-7 's planet was presented on January 4 , 2010 at a meeting of the American Astronomical Society .

Kepler-7 received its name because it was the home to the seventh planetary system discovered by the NASA-led Kepler Mission , a project aimed at detecting terrestrial planets that transit , or pass in front of , their host stars as seen from Earth . The planet orbiting Kepler-7 was the fourth planet to be discovered by the Kepler spacecraft ; the first three planets combed from Kepler 's data had been previously discovered , and were used to verify the accuracy of Kepler 's measurements . Kepler-7b was announced to the public on January 4 , 2010 at the 215th meeting of the American Astronomical Society in Washington , D.C. along with Kepler-4b , Kepler-5b , Kepler-6b , and Kepler-8b . Kepler-7b was noted for its unusually and extremely low density . The planet 's initial discovery by Kepler was verified by additional observations made at observatories in Hawaii , Texas , Arizona , California , and the Canary Islands .

Kepler-7 is a sunlike star that is 1.347 Msun and 1.843 Rsun . This means that the star is about 35 % more massive and 84 % wider than the Sun . The star is estimated to be 3.5 ( ± 1 ) billion years old . It is also estimated to have a metallicity of [ Fe / H ] = 0.11 ( ± 0.03 ) , meaning that Kepler-7 is approximately 30 % more metal-rich than the Sun ; metallicity plays a significant role in the formation of planetary systems , as metal-rich stars tend to be more likely to have planets in orbit . The star 's effective temperature is 5933 ( ± 44 ) K. In comparison , the 4.6 billion-year-old Sun releases less heat , with an effective temperature of 5778 K. The star has an apparent magnitude of 13.3 , meaning that it is extremely dim as seen from Earth . It cannot be seen with the naked eye . It is estimated to lie between 1000 and 1400 light years from the Solar System .

Kepler-7b is the only planet that has been discovered in Kepler-7 's orbit . It is .433 MJ and 1.478 RJ , meaning it is 43 % the mass of planet Jupiter , but is nearly three halves its size . With a density of .166 grams / cc , the planet is approximately 17 % the density of water . This is comparable to styrofoam . At a distance of .06224 AU from its host star , Kepler-7b completes an orbit around Kepler-7 every 4.8855 days . Planet Mercury , however , orbits the Sun at .3871 AU , and takes approximately 87.97 days to complete one orbit . Kepler-7b 's eccentricity is assumed to be 0 , which would give Kepler-7b a circular orbit by definition .

The Church of Saint Oswald , King and Martyr is a Church of England church serving the village and parish of Oswaldkirk , North Yorkshire , England . It is located along the main road passing through the village ( Oswaldkirk Main Street ) , 1.5 miles ( 2.4 km ) east of Ampleforth Abbey . Dedicated to the Christian saint Saint Oswald , it is over 900 years old and run by the Church of England . It is part of a four-parish benefice , and is in the archdeaconry of Cleveland , and the diocese of York . Notably , the future Archbishop of Canterbury and chaplain to King Charles II , John Tillotson , preached his first sermon at the church in 1661 . Major restoration work was done to the church in 1886 , and a large amount of the Chancel woodwork dates from this period . The church has been a Grade II * listed building since 1955 , and is the oldest building in the village by more than six centuries .

Almost nothing of the original church — built on the site of a wooden Saxon church — remains , apart from unique examples of Celtic stonework , including a plait interweave and a bas-relief of the Virgin and Child , which was carved around 1000 AD . The current building still has a quoin , which was probably a re-cycled Anglo-Saxon cross shaft . The stone southern entrance to the church still stands ; it was built in the 12th century and is a typical example of Norman stonework . The church was re-consecrated in 1287 by the bishop of Candida Casa under the direction of John le Romeyn , Archbishop of York . The tall windows set in the church wall both north and south of the nave can be dated to approximately 1320 to 1330 , and in the top sections of two of the windows , small fragments of medieval glass can be found . A sideways orientated tombstone can be found under a low arch on the inside of the southern wall , generally believed to be that of Sir Richard Pickering ( d . 1441 ) , a member of the Pickering family who ruled the village of Oswaldkirk from the 14th century into the 16th century .

The church records include an unbroken list of rectors dating back to 1302 , during the reign of King Edward I. One notable rector was John Dee , who served from early 1568 until the year 1574 , although he was probably never a permanent resident . Dee , a noted mathematician , astrologer , alchemist and astronomer , was on friendly terms with the ruling monarch , Queen Elizabeth I , and had given her astrological advice for setting the date of her coronation . The future Archbishop of Canterbury and chaplain to King Charles II , John Tillotson , preached his first sermon at the church of Saint Oswald in 1661 , because of his friendship with John Denton , who was rector of the church from 1658 until his expulsion in 1662 for non-conformism . Perhaps the most important event in the 17th century was the installation of two brand new bells , one bearing the inscription " Venite Exultemus Domino " , or " Come , let us rejoice in the Lord " ( dated 1684 ) , and the other bearing the inscription " Gloria in Altissimus Deo " , or " Glory to God in the highest " ( dated 1683 ) . These are still in use through bell-ropes , which have been replaced several times in the intervening centuries and extend down to the floor next to the clock mechanism , which is dated 1898 and is wholly mechanical , powering a clock whose two faces can be seen on both the western and eastern sides of the bell tower .

There was major restoration work done to the church in 1886 , and a large amount of the Chancel woodwork dates from this period . During the restoration the east window was also replaced ; it now depicts the stylised form of Saint Oswald , flanked on either side by Saint Aidan , and Saint Cuthbert , both Christian saints of the same era , and who helped him in missionary work in the Kingdom of Northumbria . These windows are directly opposite the western window , above the font at the other end of the church , which depicts the queen at the time , Queen Victoria . Further modern additions to the church can be seen in the bell turret and organ chamber , as well as the south porch , which is currently the sole congregational entrance to the church . The church uses an electric organ during services . The church is a Grade II * listed building and has been so since 4 January 1955 .

St Oswald 's is part of a four-church benefice , including the churches and parishes of Oswaldkirk , Ampleforth , Gilling , and Stonegrave . As of May 2012 , the vicar is the Reverend Susan Fraser Bond , who serves all four parishes , although services in the church occur weekly on Sunday and at other times during the week with the help of volunteers in the local community . There is also a " tea time club " , which is a club teaching Christian morals and biblical teachings to young people , as well as biblical role-plays and " mini-pilgrimages " . The church is host to a carol service each year on Christmas Eve , jointly undertaken by the Anglican congregation and that of Oswaldkirk 's Roman Catholic church , the church of Saint Aidan . The united churches of Oswaldkirk also have a harvest festival each year , hosted in the building of Saint Aidan 's church every other year , alternating with St Oswald 's church .

F-Zero is a futuristic racing video game developed by Nintendo EAD and published by Nintendo for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System ( SNES ) . The game was released in Japan on November 21 , 1990 , in North America in August 1991 , and in Europe in 1992 . F-Zero is the first game of the F-Zero series and was one of the two launch titles for the SNES in Japan , but was accompanied by additional initial titles in North America and Europe . It was re-released for the Virtual Console service on the Wii in late 2006 , the Wii U in early 2013 , and on the New Nintendo 3DS in early 2016 . The game takes place in the year 2560 , where multi-billionaires with lethargic lifestyles created a new form of entertainment based on the Formula One races called " F-Zero " . The player can choose between one of four characters in the game , each with their respective hovercar . The player then can race against computer controlled characters in fifteen tracks divided into three leagues . F-Zero is acknowledged by critics to be the game that set a standard for the racing genre and the creation of the futuristic subgenre . Critics lauded F-Zero for its fast and challenging gameplay , variety of tracks , and extensive use of the graphical mode called " Mode 7 " . This graphics-rendering technique was an innovative technological achievement at the time that made racing games more realistic , the first of which was F-Zero . As a result , IGN credited it for reinvigorating the genre and inspiring the future creation of numerous racing games . In retrospective reviews of the game critics agreed that it should have used a multiplayer mode .

F-Zero is a futuristic racing game where players compete in a high-speed racing tournament called " F-Zero " . There are four F-Zero characters that have their own selectable hovercar along with its unique performance abilities . The objective of the game is to beat opponents to the finish line while avoiding hazards such as slip zones and magnets that pull the vehicle off-center in an effort to make the player damage their vehicle or fall completely off the track . Each machine has a power meter , which serves as a measurement of the machine 's durability ; it decreases when the machine collides with land mines , the side of the track or another vehicle . Energy can be replenished by driving over pit areas placed along the home straight or nearby . A race in F-Zero consists of five laps around the track . The player must complete each lap in a successively higher place to avoid disqualification from the race . For each lap completed , the player is rewarded with an approximate four-second speed boost called the " Super Jet " and a number of points determined by place . An on-screen display will be shaded green to indicate that a boost can be used ; however , the player is limited to saving up to three at a time . If a certain amount of points are accumulated , an extra " spare machine " is acquired that gives the player another chance to retry the course . Tracks may feature two methods for temporarily boosting speeds ; jump plates launch vehicles into the air thus providing additional acceleration for those not at full speed and dash zones greatly increases the racer 's speed on the ground . F-Zero includes two modes of play . In the Grand Prix mode , the player chooses a league and races against other vehicles through each track in that league while avoiding disqualification . The Practice mode allows the player to practice seven of the courses from the Grand Prix mode .

F-Zero has a total of fifteen tracks divided into three leagues ordered by increasing difficulty : Knight , Queen , and King . Furthermore , each league has four selectable difficulty levels : beginner , standard , expert , and master . The multiple courses of Death Wind , Port Town , and Red Canyon have a pathway that is not accessible unless the player is on another iteration of those tracks , which then in turn closes the path previously available . Unlike most F-Zero games , there are three iterations of Mute City that shows it in either a day , evening , or night setting . In BS F-Zero 2 , Mute City IV continued the theme with an early morning setting .

F-Zero is set in the year 2560 , when humanity 's multiple encounters with alien life forms had resulted in the expansion of Earth 's social framework . This led to commercial , technological and cultural interchanges between planets . The multi-billionaires who earned their wealth through intergalactic trade were mainly satisfied with their lifestyles , although most coveted more entertainment in their lives . This resulted in a new entertainment based on the Formula One races to be founded with vehicles that could hover one foot above the track . These Grand Prix races were soon named " F-Zero " after a rise in popularity of the races . The game introduced the first set of F-Zero racers : Captain Falcon , Dr. Stewart , Pico , and Samurai Goroh . IGN claimed Captain Falcon " was thrust into the limelight " in this game since he was the " star character " . An eight-page comic was included in its SNES manual that carried the reader through one of Captain Falcon 's bounty missions .

The game was released alongside the SNES in Japan on November 21 , 1990 , in North America in August 1991 , and in Europe in 1992 . Only it and Super Mario World were initially available for the Japanese launch . In North America , Super Mario World shipped with the console , and other initial titles included F-Zero , Pilotwings , SimCity , and Gradius III . The game was produced by Shigeru Miyamoto . It was downloadable over the Nintendo Power peripheral in Japan and was also released as a demo onto the Nintendo Super System in 1991 . Takaya Imamura , one of the art designers for the game , was surprised to be able to so freely design F-Zero 's characters and courses as he wanted since it was his first game . Mode 7 is a form of texture mapping available on the SNES which allows a raster graphical plane to be rotated and scaled freely , simulating the appearance of 3D environments without processing any polygons . The Mode 7 rendering applied in F-Zero consists of a single-layer which is scaled and rotated around the vehicle . This pseudo-3D capability of the SNES was designed to be represented by the game . 1UP.com 's Jeremy Parish stated that F-Zero and Pilotwings " existed almost entirely for the sake of showing [ the system 's pseudo-3D capabilities ] off " as they outclassed the competition .

An F-Zero jazz album was released on March 25 , 1992 in Japan by Tokuma Japan Communications . It features twelve songs from the game on a single disc composed by Yumiko Kanki and Naoto Ishida , and arranged by Robert Hill and Michiko Hill . The album also features Marc Russo ( saxophones ) of the Yellowjackets and Robben Ford ( electric guitar ) . The game was re-released for the Virtual Console service on the Wii in late 2006 , then on the Wii U in February 2013 , followed by its New Nintendo 3DS release in March 2016 .

F-Zero was widely lauded by game critics for its graphical realism , and has been called the fastest and most fluid pseudo-3D racing game of its time . This has been mostly credited to the development team 's pervasive use of the " Mode 7 " system . Eurogamer 's Tom Bramwell commented " this abundance of Mode 7 was unheard of " for the SNES . This graphics-rendering technique was an innovative technological achievement at the time that made racing games more realistic , the first of which was F-Zero . Jeremy Parish of Electronic Gaming Monthly wrote that the game 's use of Mode 7 created the " most convincing racetracks that had ever been seen on a home console " that gave " console gamers an experience even more visceral than could be found in the arcades . " 1UP.com editor Ravi Hiranand agreed , arguing F-Zero 's combination of fast-paced racing and free-range of motion were superior compared to that of previous home console games . IGN 's Peer Schneider assured readers F-Zero was one of the few 16-bit era video games to " perfectly combine presentation and functionality to create a completely new gaming experience " .

The game was praised for its variety of tracks , and steady increase in difficulty . GameSpy 's Jason D 'Aprile thought the game " was something of a finesse racer . It took lots of practice , good memorization skills , and a rather fine sense of control . " Matt Taylor of The Virginian-Pilot commented that the game is more about " reflexes than realism " , and it lacked the ability to save progress between races . F-Zero 's soundtrack was lauded . In GameSpot 's retrospective review by Greg Kasavin , he praised F-Zero 's controls , longevity and track design . Kasavin felt the title offered exceptional gameplay , with " a perfect balance of pick-up-and-play accessibility and sheer depth " . Retrospective reviews agreed that the game should have used a multiplayer mode . IGN 's Lucas Thomas criticized the lack of a substantial plot and mentioned F-Zero " doesn 't have the same impact these days " suggesting " the sequels on GBA very much pick up where this title left off " . IGN ranked F-Zero as the 91st best game ever in 2003 , discussing its originality at time of release and as the 97th best game ever in 2005 , describing it as still " respected as one of the all-time top racers " . ScrewAttack placed it as the 18th best SNES game .

F-Zero has been credited with being the game that set a standard for the racing genre and inventing the " futuristic racing " subgenre of video gaming . IGN credits the game for having inspired the future creation of numerous racing games inside and out of the futuristic subgenre , including the Wipeout series and Daytona USA . Amusement Vision 's President , Toshihiro Nagoshi , stated in 2002 that F-Zero " actually taught me what a game should be " and that it served as an influence for him to create Daytona USA and other racing games . Amusement Vision collaborated with Nintendo to develop F-Zero GX and AX , with Nagoshi serving as one of the co-producers for these games .

Nintendo initially developed the sequel of the first F-Zero game for the SNES , although it was broadcast in several versions on the St.GIGA subscription service for the Satellaview attachment of the Super Famicom instead . Using this add-on , gamers could download titles via satellite and save it onto a flash ROM cartridge for temporary play . The sequel was released under the Japanese names of BS F-Zero Grand Prix and BS F-Zero Grand Prix 2 during the mid-1990s . There are tracks named as a follow-on from F-Zero — such as " Mute City IV " , since Mute City I-III appeared in the original game . BS F-Zero Grand Prix contained a new track along with the original 15 tracks from the SNES game and four different playable vehicles . According to Nintendo Power , the game was under consideration for a North American release via Game Pak . IGN states BS F-Zero Grand Prix 2 features one new league containing five tracks , a Grand Prix and a Practice mode . Although the F-Zero franchise made the transition to 3D graphics on the Nintendo 64 with the release of F-Zero X in 1998 , Mode 7 graphical effects continued to be used for the Game Boy Advance ( GBA ) installments Maximum Velocity and GP Legend . The third sequel F-Zero : Maximum Velocity was released for the GBA in 2001 . This installment was described by GameSpy as a hard overhaul of F-Zero and featured improvements to its graphical effects . F-Zero GX and AX , were released for the Nintendo GameCube and the Triforce arcade system board respectively in 2003 , was the first significant video game collaboration between Nintendo and Sega . GX is the first F-Zero game to include a story mode , while AX was called by GameSpot as the first to get a " proper arcade release " . The most recent installment in the series , F-Zero Climax , was released for the GBA in 2004 and is the first F-Zero game to have a built-in track editor without the need for an expansion or add-on .

Major General Richard Hutton Davies CB ( 14 August 1861 – 9 May 1918 ) was an officer of the New Zealand Military Forces during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries , the first New Zealander to command an independent force overseas and one of the most senior New Zealand officers during the First World War . Born in London , he emigrated to New Zealand after leaving school , where he worked as a surveyor . He joined a volunteer militia unit in 1893 , and went to South Africa as an officer with the first New Zealand contingent sent to the Boer War in 1899 . He later commanded the third , fourth and eighth contingents , becoming the first New Zealand officer to command an independent unit on active service overseas . Following his return to New Zealand , he became inspector-general of the New Zealand Military Forces , and in 1909 was attached to a British Army brigade to gain staff experience . This led to him being offered command of 6th Brigade , a regular infantry brigade of British troops , in 1910 ; he was the first colonial officer to hold such a position . In the summer of 1914 the brigade was mobilised with the British Expeditionary Force , and he commanded it at the Battle of Mons and the First Battle of the Aisne before being invalided back to England due to exhaustion . He was given command of the newly formed 20th ( Light ) Division , which he took to France in 1915 , but was relieved of command early in 1916 . After a period in command of a reserve centre in Staffordshire , he was sent to hospital suffering from both mental and physical ill health , and committed suicide in May 1918 .

Davies was born in London , the son of a journalist , and was educated at Hurstpierpoint College . After leaving school , he emigrated to New Zealand , where he spent two years working for a relative before settling at Taranaki , setting up a farm and practising as a surveyor . He married Ida Mary Cornwall in February 1886 ; they had two sons and a daughter . One son , Henry Cornwall Davies , served with the New Zealand Expeditionary Force during the First World War , and , like his father , transferred to the British Army in 1915 , becoming a captain in the Royal Engineers . Ida died in pregnancy with their fourth child in December 1906 ; he remarried , to Ida 's sister Eileen Kathleen Cornwall , in May 1908 . In October 1887 Davies became the surveyor to the Manganui Road Board . On 10 April 1893 , he joined the Hawera Mounted Rifle Volunteers , and was commissioned as a lieutenant in May 1895 ; he was quickly promoted to captain six weeks later , becoming the commander of the unit . He was also active in local government , and in February 1897 was elected a member of the New Plymouth Harbour Board , representing Taranaki North .

On 3 October 1899 Davies transferred into the Permanent Force of the New Zealand Militia , where he was made responsible for the training of volunteer mounted units . The Boer War , however , was declared a week later ; Davies was quickly seconded to command a company of the volunteer First New Zealand Contingent being sent to the Cape . The contingent sailed on 21 October , arrived in late November , and was on active service within a week . Davies was promoted to Major in May 1900 , and in the same month was given temporary command of the Third New Zealand Contingent . He was transferred to the Rhodesian Field Force , where he commanded the Fourth New Zealand Contingent in August 1900 . He established a high professional reputation commanding the unit , and was promoted to lieutenant colonel and made a Companion of the Order of the Bath ( CB ) , as well as winning the respect of his men – one described him as " not only liked but loved " . A soldier wrote home calling Davies , who stood five feet six inches tall , " a grand little chap " , whilst another noted with pleasure that Davies objected to " Imperial ideas of discipline " being forced upon his men .

Returning to New Zealand in late 1902 , Davies resumed command of the Auckland military district . He held command until 1906 , when he was appointed inspector-general of the New Zealand Military Forces and became a member of the Council of Defence , the body responsible for controlling the dominion 's military forces . The position of inspector-general , newly created that year , was originally expected to go to an " Imperial " – that is , British – officer , but the government had announced it planned to rotate New Zealand officers in the role , on up to five-year terms , so as to allow them to gain experience . Davies threw himself into the role , travelling around the country and inspecting local units to gain an overall idea of their efficiency . Even under favourable circumstances , however , he found that only 54 % of the volunteers attended parades in 1906 ; at the annual camps , the proportion was as low as 45 % . He pressed for greater use of active day-time tactical training rather than evening indoors drill , which he felt was key for a part-time volunteer force , and for a greater emphasis on the training and standards of officers . By the end of his second year in office , he had organised local selection boards for appointing officers , and a central promotion board for senior field officers , as well as mandatory regular fitness and efficiency tests .

After three years as Inspector-General , and in order to gain staff experience , Davies was attached as an observer to a number of units in the United Kingdom in 1909 – 10 . During this time , he also attended the Imperial Defence Conference and represented the New Zealand forces at the funeral of King Edward VII . At the end of the one-year attachment , he had so impressed the British Army that they offered him an appointment as commander of 6th Brigade in October 1910 , with the temporary rank of brigadier general . As such , he became the first overseas officer to command a regular brigade , only eleven years after taking up a permanent military commission . Davies ' tenure in command of 6th Brigade was due to expire in October 1914 , when he was to hand over command to John Keir , and it was rumoured in New Zealand that he might be appointed as General Officer Commanding the Home Forces in 1915 , succeeding Alexander Godley . However , with the outbreak of the First World War in August 1914 , his command was mobilised as part of 2nd Division in the British Expeditionary Force and sent to France . The brigade saw heavy combat at the Battle of Mons , where Davies was mentioned in despatches , but he was quickly worn down by his habit of always marching at the head of his brigade , which put him under heavy physical and mental strain , and from the lasting effects of an attack of pneumonia earlier in the year . One report described him as " much changed , full of nerves ... very jumpy " . He was relieved of command after the First Battle of the Aisne in September and ordered home , being replaced by Colonel Robert Fanshawe , formerly GSO 1 of 1st Division , on 20 September .

He was appointed a divisional commander , with the rank of temporary major general , on 19 October 1914 , and took command of the newly raised 20th ( Light ) Division at some point in September – October . This made him the first New Zealand officer to command a division in the war . On 18 February 1915 , he was formally transferred to the British Army , and promoted to major general . The 20th Division moved to France in July 1915 , and he commanded it during a minor operation in September , but handed over command on 8 March 1916 due to ill-health . He was appointed to command a reserve centre at Cannock Chase , Staffordshire , where the arrival of elements of the New Zealand Rifle Brigade in September 1917 meant that he once again had the opportunity to command his own countrymen . He was relieved of command by General Robert Wanless O 'Gowan in March 1918 , and on 9 May 1918 , after a prolonged period of physical and mental ill health , he committed suicide at the Special Neurological Hospital for Officers , Kensington .

Body Count is the eponymous debut album of American heavy metal band Body Count . Released in 1992 , the album material focuses on various social and political issues ranging from police brutality to drug abuse . The album presents a turning point in the career of Ice-T , who co-wrote the album 's songs with lead guitarist Ernie C and performed as the band 's lead singer . Previously known only as a rapper , Ice-T 's work with the band helped establish a crossover audience with rock music fans . The album produced one single , " There Goes the Neighborhood " . Body Count is well known for the inclusion of the controversial song " Cop Killer " , which was the subject of much criticism from various political figures , although many defended the song on the basis of the group 's right to freedom of speech . Ice-T eventually chose to remove the song from the album , although it continues to be performed live . It was voted the 31st best album of the year in The Village Voice 's Pazz & Jop critics poll , and is believed to have helped pave the way for the mainstream success of the rap metal genre , although the album itself does not feature rapping in any of its songs .

Ice-T formed Body Count out of this interest . The band comprised musicians Ice-T had known from Crenshaw High School . Ice-T states that " I knew we didn 't want to form an R & B group . [ ... ] Where am I gonna get the rage and the anger to attack something with that ? [ ... ] We knew Body Count had to be a rock band . The name alone negates the band from being R & B. " Ice-T co-wrote the band 's music and lyrics with lead guitarist Ernie C , and took on the duties of lead vocalist . Ice-T states that " I knew I couldn 't sing , but then I thought , ' Who can sing in rock ' n ' roll ? ' " Aside from Ice-T and Ernie C , the original line-up consisted of Mooseman on bass , Beatmaster V on drums and D-Roc on rhythm guitar . According to Ice-T , " We named the group Body Count because every Sunday night in L.A. , I 'd watch the news , and the newscasters would tally up the youths killed in gang homicides that week and then just segue to sports . ' Is that all I am , ' I thought , ' a body count ? ' "

Ice-T introduced the band at Lollapalooza in 1991 , devoting half of his set to his hip hop songs , and half to Body Count songs , increasing his appeal with both alternative rock fans and middle-class teenagers . Many considered the Body Count performances to be the highlight of the tour . The group made its first album appearance on Ice-T 's 1991 solo album O.G. Original Gangster . The song " Body Count " was preceded by a staged interview in which the performer referred to the group as a " black hardcore band , " stating that " as far as I 'm concerned , music is music . I don 't look at it as rock , R & B , or all that kind of stuff . I just look at it as music . [ ... ] I do what I like and I happen to like rock ' n ' roll , and I feel sorry for anybody who only listens to one form of music . " Recording sessions for the group 's self-titled debut took place from September to December 1991 . The album was released on March 31 , 1992 , on compact disc , vinyl , and audio cassette . Ice-T states that Body Count was intentionally different from his solo hip hop albums in that " An Ice T album has intelligence , and at times it has ignorance . Sometimes it has anger , sometimes it has questions . But Body Count was intended to reflect straight anger . It was supposed to be the voice of the angry brother , without answers . [ ... ] If you took a kid and you put him in jail with a microphone and asked him how he feels , you 'd get Body Count : ' Fuck that . Fuck school . Fuck the police . ' You wouldn 't get intelligence or compassion . You 'd get raw anger . " From the album , " There Goes The Neighborhood " was released as a single , while " Body Count 's in the House " was featured in the film Universal Soldier .

Ernie C and Ice-T conceived the album with the dark , ominous tone and Satanic lyrical themes of Black Sabbath in mind . However , Ice-T felt that basing his lyrics in reality would be scarier than the fantasy basis in Black Sabbath 's lyrics ; the inner artwork depicts a man with a gun pointed at the viewer 's face . Ice-T states , " To us that was the devil [ ... ] what 's more scary than [ ... ] some gangster with a gun pointed at you ? " Ice-T defined the resulting mix of heavy metal and reality-based lyrics as " a rock album with a rap mentality . " The album 's musical style is primarily described as speed metal , thrash metal and heavy metal . Jon Pareles of The New York Times wrote that with Body Count , Ice-T " has recognized a kinship between his gangster raps and post-punk , hard-core rock , both of which break taboos to titillate fans . But where rap 's core audience is presumably in the inner city , hard-core appeals mostly to suburbanites seeking more gritty thrills than they can get from Nintendo or the local mall . "

Despite Ice-T 's attempts to differentiate Body Count from his work in the hip hop genre , the press focused on the group 's rap image . Ice-T felt that politicians had intentionally referred to the song " Cop Killer " as rap to provoke negative criticism . " There is absolutely no way to listen to the song ' Cop Killer ' and call it a rap record . It 's so far from rap . But , politically , they know by saying the word rap they can get a lot of people who think , ' Rap-black-rap-black-ghetto , ' and don 't like it . You say the word rock , people say , ' Oh , but I like Jefferson Airplane , I like Fleetwood Mac — that 's rock . ' They don 't want to use the word rock & roll to describe this song . " Body Count has since been credited for pioneering the rap metal genre popularized by groups such as Rage Against the Machine and Limp Bizkit , although Ice-T does not rap on any of the album 's tracks . Ernie C stated that " A lot of rappers want to be in a rock band , but it has to be done sincerely . You can 't just get anybody on guitar and expect it to work . [ ... ] [ We ] really loved the music we were doing , and it showed . "

Like Ice-T 's gangsta rap albums , Body Count 's material focused on various social and political issues , with songs focusing on topics ranging from police brutality to drug abuse . According to Ernie C , " Everybody writes about whatever they learned growing up , and we were no exception . Like The Beach Boys sing about the beach , we sing about the way we grew up . " Ice-T states that " Body Count was an angry record . It was meant to be a protest record . I put my anger in it , while lacing it with dark humor . " The spoken introduction , " Smoked Pork " features Ice-T taking on the roles of a gangster pretending to be seemingly stranded motorist and a police officer who refuses to aid . The track begins with Mooseman and Ice-T driving their car towards a police car , and then Ice-T asks for the gun Mooseman has and tells Mooseman to stay in the car , much to Mooseman 's chagrin , as Mooseman wanted to kill the cop in this round . Ice-T then walks up to the policeman , pretending to be a stranded motorist , asking for help , but the policeman refuses , saying : " Nah , that 's not my job ! My job 's not to help your fuckin ' ass out ! " , then telling him that " my job is eatin ' these doughnuts " . When the officer recognizes Ice-T , gunshots are heard . The final voice on the track is Ice-T confirming his identity .

In the lyrics of " KKK Bitch , " Ice-T describes a sexual encounter with a woman who he soon learns is the daughter of the Grand Wizard of the Ku Klux Klan . The lyrics go on to describe a scenario in which members of Body Count " crash " a Klan meeting to " get buck wild with the white freaks " . Ice-T makes humorous reference to " [ falling ] in love with Tipper Gore 's two twelve year old nieces " , and ponders the possibility of the Grand Wizard coming after him " when his grandson 's named little Ice-T. " In The Ice Opinion : Who Gives a Fuck ? , Ice-T wrote that " ' KKK Bitch ' was ironic because the sentiments were true . We 'd play Ku Klux Klan areas in the South and the girls would always come backstage and tell us how their brothers and fathers didn 't like black folks . [ ... ] We knew that ' KKK Bitch ' would totally piss off the Ku Klux Klan . There 's humor in the song , but it fucks with them . It 's on a punk tip . "

" Voodoo " describes a fictional encounter between Ice-T and an old woman with a voodoo doll . " The Winner Loses " describes the downfall of a crack cocaine user . " There Goes the Neighborhood " is a sarcastic response to critics of Body Count , sung from the point of view of a racist white rocker who wonders " Don 't they know rock 's just for whites ? / Don 't they know the rules ? / Those niggers are too hardcore / This shit ain 't cool . " For the song 's music video , the word " nigger " was replaced with the phrase " black boys " . The music video ends with a black musician implanting an electric guitar into the ground and setting it on fire . The final image is similar to that of a burning cross . " Evil Dick " focuses on male promiscuity . Its lyrics describe a married man who is led to seek strange women after his " evil dick " tells him " Don 't sleep alone , don 't sleep alone . " " Momma 's Gotta Die Tonight " follows the account of a black teenager who murders and dismembers his racist mother after she reacts negatively when he brings a white girl home . In The Ice Opinion : Who Gives a Fuck ? , Ice-T wrote that the song 's lyrics are metaphorical , explaining that " Whoever is still perpetuating racism has got to die , not necessarily physically , but they have to kill off that part of their brain . From now on , consider it dead . The entire attitude is dead . "

Ice-T referred to the album 's final track , " Cop Killer " as a protest song , stating that the song is " [ sung ] in the first person as a character who is fed up with police brutality . " The song was written in 1990 , and had been performed live several times , including at Lollapalooza , before it had been recorded in a studio . The album version mentions then-Los Angeles police chief Daryl Gates and the black motorist Rodney King , whose beating by LAPD officers was recorded on videotape . In The Ice Opinion : Who Gives a Fuck ? , Ice-T wrote that the song " [ is ] a warning , not a threat — to authority that says , ' Yo , police : We 're human beings . Treat us accordingly . ' " In an interview for Rolling Stone , Ice-T stated that " We just celebrated the fourth of July , which is really just national Fuck the Police Day [ ... ] I bet that during the Revolutionary War , there were songs similar to mine . "

Initial copies of the album were shipped out in black body bags , a promotional device that drew minor criticism . The album debuted at No. 32 on Billboard 's Top 50 albums , peaking at No. 26 on the Billboard 200 . By January 29 , 1993 , the album sold 480,000 copies , according to Variety . However , according to the Recording Industry Association of America , Body Count was certified gold for sale shipments in excess of 500,000 copies , with a certification date back to August 4 , 1992 . In a positive review for The Village Voice , music critic Robert Christgau said Ice-T " takes rap 's art-ain 't-life defense over the top " on a heavy metal album which utilizes and parodies " the style 's whiteskin privilege " . He wrote that the music is " flat-out hard rock , short on soloistic intricacy and fancy structures " , but that it is set apart from other metal by Ice-T , who " describes racism in language metalheads can understand , kills several policemen , and cuts his mama into little pieces because she tells him to hate white people . This can be a very funny record . " Greg Kot , writing in the Chicago Tribune , felt the lyrics on some songs are pathologically flawed and off-putting , but the band 's take on metal styles is impressive and , " on the stereotype-bashing ' There Goes the Neighborhood , ' the humor , message and music coalesce brilliantly " . Don Kaye of Kerrang ! called Body Count a " noisy , relentless musical attack " .

In a less enthusiastic review for Rolling Stone , J. D. Considine wrote that " messages " are less important here than " the sort of sonic intensity parental groups fear even more than four-letter words , " while AllMusic 's Stephen Thomas Erlewine called the album " a surprisingly tepid affair " partly because " all of Ice-T 's half-sung / half-shouted lyrics fall far short of the standard he established on his hip-hop albums . " In the Pazz & Jop , an annual poll of prominent critics published by The Village Voice , Body Count was voted the 31st best album of 1992 . Christgau , the poll 's supervisor , ranked it 22nd on his own year-end list .

The album was originally set to be distributed under the title Cop Killer , named for the song of the same name , which criticizes violent police officers . During the production of the album , Warner Bros. executives were aware of the potential controversy that the album and song could cause , but supported it . At a Time-Warner shareholders ' meeting , actor Charlton Heston stood and read lyrics from the song " KKK Bitch " to an astonished audience and demanded that the company take action . Sire responded by changing the title to Body Count , but did not remove the song . In an article for the Washington Post , Tipper Gore condemned Ice-T for songs like " Cop Killer , " writing that " Cultural economics were a poor excuse for the South 's continuation of slavery . Ice-T 's financial success cannot excuse the vileness of his message [ ... ] Hitler 's anti-Semitism sold in Nazi Germany . That didn 't make it right . " The Dallas Police Association and the Combined Law Enforcement Association of Texas launched a campaign to force Warner Bros. Records to withdraw the album . CLEAT called for a boycott of all products by Time-Warner in order to secure the removal of the song and album from stores . Within a week , they were joined by police organizations across the United States . Ice-T asserted that the song was written from the point of view of a fictional character , and told reporters that " I ain 't never killed no cop . I felt like it a lot of times . But I never did it . If you believe that I 'm a cop killer , you believe David Bowie is an astronaut , " in reference to Bowie 's song " Space Oddity " .

The National Black Police Association opposed the boycott of Time-Warner and the attacks on " Cop Killer , " identifying police brutality as the cause of much anti-police sentiment , and proposed the creation of independent civilian review boards " to scrutinize the actions of our law enforcement officers " as a way of ending the provocations that caused artists such as Body Count " to respond to actions of police brutality and abuse through their music . [ ... ] Many individuals of the law enforcement profession do not want anyone to scrutinize their actions , but want to scrutinize the actions of others . " Critics argued that the song could cause crime and violence . Others defended the album on the basis of the group 's right to freedom of speech , and cited the fact that Ice-T had portrayed a police officer in the film New Jack City . Ice-T is quoted as saying that " I didn 't need people to come in and really back me on the First Amendment . I needed people to come in and say ' Ice-T has grounds to make this record . ' I have the right to make it because the cops are killing my people . So fuck the First Amendment , let 's deal with the fact that I have the right to make it . "

Over the next month , controversy against the band grew . Vice President Dan Quayle branded " Cop Killer " as being " obscene , " and President George H.W. Bush publicly denounced any record company that would release such a product . Body Count was removed from the shelves of a retail store in Greensboro , North Carolina after local police had told the management that they would no longer respond to any emergency calls at the store if they continued to sell the album . In July 1992 , the New Zealand Police Commissioner unsuccessfully attempted to prevent an Ice-T concert in Auckland , arguing that " Anyone who comes to this country preaching in obscene terms the killing of police , should not be welcome here , " before taking Body Count and Warner Bros. Records to the Indecent Publications Tribunal , in an effort to get it banned under New Zealand 's Indecent Publications Act . This was the first time in 20 years that a sound recording had come before the censorship body , and the first ever case involving popular music . After reviewing the various submissions , and listening carefully to the album , the Tribunal found the song " Cop Killer " to be " not exhortatory , " saw the album as displaying " an honest purpose , " and found Body Count not indecent . The controversy escalated to the point where death threats were sent to Time-Warner executives , and stockholders threatened to pull out of the company . Finally , Ice-T decided to remove " Cop Killer " from the album of his own volition , a decision which was met by criticism from other artists who derided Ice-T for " caving in to external pressure . " In an interview , Ice-T stated that " I didn 't want my band to get pigeon-holed as that 's the only reason that record sold . It just got outta hand and I was just tired of hearing it . I said , ' fuck it , ' I mean they 're saying we did it for money , and we didn 't . I 'd gave the record away , ya know , let 's move on , let 's get back to real issues , not a record but the cops that are out there killing people . "

" Cop Killer " was replaced by a new version of " Freedom of Speech , " a song from Ice-T 's 1989 solo album The Iceberg / Freedom of Speech ... Just Watch What You Say . The song was re-edited and remixed to give it a more rock-oriented sound , using a looped sample from the Jimi Hendrix song " Foxy Lady . " Alongside the album 's reissue , Warner Bros. issued " Cop Killer " as a single . Ice-T left Warner Bros. Records the following year because of disputes over his solo album Home Invasion , taking Body Count with him . The studio version of " Cop Killer " has not been re-released , although a live version of the song appears on Body Count 's 2005 release Live in L.A. According to Ernie C , the controversy over the song " still lingers for us , even now . I 'll try to book clubs and the guy I 'm talking to will mention it and I 'll think to myself ' Man , that was 17 years ago . ' But I meet a lot of bands who ask me about it too and I 'm real respected by other artists for it . But it 's a love / hate thing . Ice gets it too , even though he plays a cop on TV now on Law & Order SVU . "

" Turtles All the Way Down " is the thirteenth and final episode of the American television police procedural fantasy drama Awake . It premiered on May 23 , 2012 in Canada on Global , and on May 24 , 2012 in the United States on NBC . " Turtles All the Way Down " was scheduled to air on May 17 , 2012 , as part two of a two-hour finale . NBC had changed the order , and moved it to the following week . The teleplay of the episode was written by series creator Kyle Killen , from a story by Killen , and staff writers Leonard Chang and Noelle Valdivia . It was directed by Miguel Sapochnik . " Turtles All the Way Down " was well received by television critics , who praised its storylines . Commentators noted that the script was well-written . Upon airing , " Turtles All the Way Down " obtained 2.87 million viewers in the United States and 0.9 million in the 18 – 49 demographic , according to Nielsen ratings . The show centers on Michael Britten ( Jason Isaacs ) a police detective living in two separate realities after a car accident . In the episode , Michael Britten finds out the truth about the car accident that caused his split realities , and seeks out those responsible for it . He finds out that Captain Tricia Harper ( Laura Innes ) caused the accident , alongside Ed Hawkins ( Kevin Weisman ) and Captain Carl Kessel ( Mark Harelik ) .

In his " green reality " ( where his son is alive and his wife is dead ) , Detective Michael Britten ( Jason Isaacs ) sits in a prison cell temporary for killing Detective Ed Hawkins ( Kevin Weisman ) , who caused Michael 's car accident . Meanwhile , his partner in the " green reality " , Detective Isaiah " Bird " Freeman ( Steve Harris ) finds heroin that Hawkins , under orders from Captain Kessel ( Mark Harelik ) , had placed in a self storage unit . Meanwhile , Captain Tricia Harper ( Laura Innes ) shoots Carl Kessel in a hotel room , making it look like a suicide to cover up her involvement in Michael 's accident . Michael is freed from the cell and Kessel 's body is found . Michael regains consciousness ( after having passed out from a gunshot wound when Ed Hawkins was chasing after him ) near a dumpster in the " red reality " ( where his wife is alive and son is dead ) . The still-alive Detective Hawkins takes Michael to his car , but Michael flees after attacking Hawkins and causes a car accident . Michael finds his therapist in the " red reality " , Dr. John Lee ( BD Wong ) , forces him to sew up the bullet wound , and takes him to the self-storage unit to show him the heroin stash . Seeing no heroin , Michael then locks Lee in the containment center and contacts his partner in the " red reality " , detective Efrem Vega ( Wilmer Valderrama ) . Vega secretly takes Britten to his house but , upon returning to the police station , is convinced that Michael is unstable and allows Michael to be captured . Michael is first taken to the hospital to receive medical treatment and then goes to jail .

Harper visits Michael in jail . When Michael notices the caller ID of an incoming call matching Kessel 's hotel room pseudonym , he realizes Harper is part of the conspiracy and attempts to strangle her . Later , Michael is visited by himself from the " green reality " who leads him to the jail door . Past the door , Michael first witnesses Kessel 's murder and Detective Vega , in a penguin suit , shows Harper 's heel breaking in the process hinting that this can be used as hard evidence to place Harper at Kessel 's murder . Next Michael briefly meets his wife , Hannah ( Laura Allen ) in a restaurant before he finds his " green reality " self sleeping in his bedroom . He – his " red reality " self – lays down in bed as well and merges with his " green reality " self before waking up in said " green reality " . In Harper 's office , Michael confronts her about her involvement in his accident , pulling out his gun to shoot her . However , he instead lets Bird and another detective arrest her . Later , Dr. Evans applauds Michael 's apparent rejection of the " red reality " and , when Michael suggests his fantastic experiences may have simply been a dream of the " red reality , " Dr. Evans warns him not to create a third reality . She suddenly goes still . Michael , confused , goes through her office door and finds himself in his bedroom . He goes downstairs and finds both his son , Rex ( Dylan Minnette ) , and wife alive . Concerned about Michael 's odd behavior , Hannah asks if he is okay . He replies , " I 'm perfect , " and closes his eyes .

The episode 's teleplay was written by series creator and executive producer Kyle Killen , from a story by Killen , and staff writers Leonard Chang and Noelle Valdivia ; it was Killen 's seventh writing credit , and Chang and Valdivia 's third writing credit each . It was directed by Miguel Sapochnik , his first directing credit for the series . In January 2012 , it was announced that Kevin Weisman would appear in multiple episodes of Awake . The actor was later cast as Ed Hawkins , a cop who took over Michael 's spot at the police department after his crash . This is his third appearance on the series , with the first being " Say Hello to My Little Friend " , the eleven episode . Other guest stars included Laura Innes as Tricia Harper and Mark Harelik as Carl Kessel . The episode is rated TV-14 on television in the United States . The episode featured the song " Montana " by Youth Lagoon during the final scene . Many viewers wondered if the series creator had changed the ending for the last episode , due to the cancellation of the series . This caused series creator and executive producer Killen to assure viewers that the episode would have been " exactly the same " if it had been renewed for a second season . In a pre-broadcast interview by Entertainment Weekly with Killen and actor Jason Isaacs , Isaacs claimed that he found it " strangely ironic and amusing " to be promoting the series finale of the Awake series . Killen claimed that " When we wrote the episode , we didn 't know it would be the end of the series " . He stated that it had a " satisfying conclusion " , " and I think it will be a satisfying way to leave the show " .

" Turtles All the Way Down " first premiered a day early in Canada on May 23 , 2012 on Global between 10 : 00 p.m. and 11 : 00 p.m. , due to the season premiere of the Canadian series Rookie Blue , which aired in Awake 's regular time slot on Thursdays at 10 : 00 p.m. The episode premiered on May 24 , 2012 in the United States on NBC between 10 : 00 p.m. and 11 : 00 p.m. Upon airing , " Turtles All the Way Down " obtained 2.87 million viewers in the United States despite airing simultaneously with a rerun of The Mentalist on CBS and Rookie Blue on ABC . It acquired a 0.9 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , according to Nielsen ratings , meaning that it was seen by 0.9 % of all 18- to 49-year-olds . The episode marked the series ' highest ratings since the fifth episode " Oregon " which aired on March 29 , 2012 .

" Turtles All the Way Down " was well received by television commentators . Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club gave the episode a positive review . He also noted that parts of the episode were " surprising " , and that " the show embraced some final insanity before the end , it ’ s more the illusion of depth than actual depth " . Handlen wrote that " it ’ s hard to ask for more from an hour of television " , despite noting that he was " glad the series got cancelled " . Handlen noted that he would " look forward to their next projects " . Handlen concluded his review by giving the episode a grade of " B " . Matt Fowler of IGN gave the episode a positive review and claimed that there were some " gut-wrenching " scenes in the episode . Fowler also opined that the episode was " thrilling " , " frustrating " , " fascinating " , and " terrible " to see Hannah " crying over an arrested Britten " . Fowler wrote that he " love [ d ] the open ending " . Noting that Awake was " one of the good ones " , Fowler concluded his review by giving the episode a " 9.5 out of 10 " classifying it as " amazing " . Nick McHatton of TV Fanatic gave the episode a positive review . He opined that Michael " has a unique ability to dream in a way that feels real , why not recreate what was once lost " . McHatton found it " fitting that the show ended with Michael closing his eyes . Despite the fact that he did not know what the phrase " turtles all the way down " meant , he concluded his review by giving the episode a score " 5.0 out of 5.0 " .

Ross Bonaime of Paste magazine gave the episode a complimentary review . He started by claiming that Awake was " the best drama to come out the 2011 – 12 season on television , and one of the finest NBC dramas in years " . He also wondered " what Awake would be like in a Michael Britten-like alternate reality where the show lasted five seasons , or 10 , or even just one more year " , Could Awake maintain this story for long and still be compelling ? " Bonaime wrote that it was " better to have one great season and be remembered fondly " . Bonaime claimed that the " ending is quite smart , given that it never truly clarifies if Michael was dreaming the whole time , or if Dr. Lee was right and that he was on the verge of completely snapping , which makes much more sense " . He was also grateful that " Awake decided to just go completely nuts with the last half of this episode " . He claimed that the episode and series was " different , a rare move , especially on network television " . He claimed that " Once Awake arrives on Netflix and DVD , people will rush through in a matter of days and will say they enjoyed their experience with this short yet sweet treasure " . He claimed that works with Awake should be " rewarded " and " praised " . Bonaime concluded his review by giving the episode a " 9.0 out of 10 " .

Screen Rant 's Kevin Yeoman , gave much praise in the episode . Like Paste magazine and other critics reviews , Yeoman claimed that " there was certainly disappointment in finding out that Awake wouldn 't see a second season , and would instead be looked at as a 13-episode miniseries " . He claimed that the episode has the puzzling and high points that are similar to " That 's Not My Penguin " and " Say Hello to My Little Friend " . Again , Screen Crush 's Kevin Fitzpatrick was also disappointed that there would not be a second season . Verne Gay of Newsday gave the episode a complimenting review . He called it " promising " . He noted that he could see " why Awake was canceled " . He blessed " the show for at least trying " . He called it " challenging " and " original " . Alan Sepinwall of HitFix called the episode " fascinating " , " puzzling " and " moving " . Carl Cortez of Assignment X , again , enjoyed the episode . In his " B + " grade review , he noted that " you can view it as another missed opportunity " . He claimed that parts of the episode were " confusing " . He stated that he would " prefer to have more questions than answers " . He argued that the episode felt more like a " Series Finale , than Season Finale " , which he called " a good thing " , " Too many good shows go off into the sunset without a single resolution and this one at least strives for something more " . He also argued that NBC should have " put a little more promotional push " . He called it " challenging " and " interesting " .

Report about Case Srebrenica ( the first part ) was a controversial official report on the July 1995 Srebrenica massacre in eastern Bosnia and Herzegovina . It was prepared by Darko Trifunović and published by the Republika Srpska Government Bureau for Relations with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia ( ICTY ) . The report denied that there had been a massacre at Srebrenica and accused the International Committee of the Red Cross of having " fabricated " its findings on the killings . Its claims were strongly criticised by the international community and the Bosniaks and were eventually disowned by the Republika Srpska government . In a judgment against Miroslav Deronjić , the Hague Tribunal judges described the report as " one of the worst examples of revisionism . " No " second part " has ever been published .

In July 1995 , forces of the Army of the Republika Srpska ( VRS ) captured the town of Srebrenica in eastern Bosnia , which had been cut off and surrounded despite the presence of soldiers from the United Nations Protection Force ( UNPROFOR ) . Thousands of refugees had crowded into the town to escape the Serb advance . Following the Serb takeover of Srebrenica , an estimated 8,000 Bosniak men and boys were systematically massacred by Serb forces between 11 – 15 July and another 25,000 – 30,000 were subjected to ethnic cleansing . It was the largest act of mass murder in Europe since World War II . Successive governments of Republika Srpska ( and , for a while , Serbia ) sought to deny the massacre and other war crimes committed by the VRS during the war . It was against this background that , as the former United Nations trial attorney Mark B. Harmon commented , " the campaign of misinformation and deceit reached its apotheosis seven years after the crimes were committed with the publication of the Report About Case Srebrenica ( the first part ) . "

The report was promoted as an effort " to present the whole truth about crimes committed in Srebrenica region regardless nationality of perpetrators of crimes and time when they were committed [ sic ] . " It asserted that no more than 2,000 Bosniaks ( Bosnian Muslims ) had died at Srebrenica – all armed soldiers , not civilians – and that 1,600 of them had died in combat or while trying to escape the enclave . It consistently referred to the " alleged massacre " , attributed the deaths of about 100 Bosniaks to " exhaustion " and concluded : " the number of Muslim soldiers who were executed by Bosnian Serb forces for personal revenge or for simple ignorance of international law [ … ] would probably stand less than 100 . " The report dismissed as " mentally disturbed " a Bosnian Serb soldier who had admitted participating in the killings , and claimed that the survivors ' stories were a product of their imaginations : " To walk for almost 20 days in an area that might be full of landmines , without any food and water , under the fear of being shot from any direction was such a trauma that soldiers sometimes mixed reality with illusions . Having looked at dead bodies under such psychological [ pressure ] , some Muslim soldiers could have believed what they imagined . " It asserted that " this combat might have looked like a mass killing in the eyes of frightened Muslim soldiers , although they carried weapons and shot at Bosnian Serb soldiers randomly . "

The report also asserted that the findings of the International Committee of the Red Cross and other humanitarian organisations had been " manipulated " and " fabricated " . It characterised Serbs as the victims of Bosniak war crimes around Srebrenica , asserting that in 1992 and 1993 alone 1300 Serb civilians were killed . This figure has been shown to be inaccurate , and the true number " three to nine times smaller " , by the Research and Documentation Center in Sarajevo , a non-partisan institution with a multi-ethnic staff , whose data have been collected , processed , checked , compared and evaluated by an international team of experts . The instigator of the massacre , General Ratko Mladić , was mentioned only in the context of demanding the surrender of the town and evacuating civilians ; the report asserted that he had tried " discouraging Serbs to take their wild revenge . " The report claimed that " the Muslims inflated the number [ of deaths ] in order to accomplish what they wanted from the very beginning – to involve the international community in the conflict with Serbs . " According to Dejan Miletić , whom Paddy Ashdown , the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina , removed in April 2004 from his post as Head of the Republika Srpska Secretariat for Relations with the International Criminal Tribunal in The Hague and Research of War Crimes , the report " had based its conclusions on publications found on the Internet , reports from the United Nations and other sources . " It was intended to be sent to lawyers defending Bosnian Serbs on trial for war crimes .

After the report was published on 3 September 2002 , it was condemned by a wide variety of Bosnian and international figures . A spokesman for the ICTY told Radio Free Europe that " any claim that the number of victims after the fall of the Srebrenica enclave was around the 2,000 mark , and most of those killed in battle , is an absolutely outrageous claim . It 's utterly false , and it flies in the face of all of the evidence painstakingly collected in the investigation into the tragedy . " He described the effort to minimise the number of victims as " frankly , disgusting . " Carla del Ponte , the chief prosecutor of the ICTY , described the report 's authors as " totally blind , profoundly insensitive and clearly willing to obstruct all efforts to find reconciliation , truth and justice . " Del Ponte 's legal adviser , Jean-Jacques Joris , criticised the report as " a saddening example of revisionism and an element which certainly stands in the way of reconciliation in the region . " The ICTY prosecutors subsequently used the report as evidence in the trial in 2004 of Miroslav Deronjić ; in their verdict , the judges called it " one of the worst examples of revisionism in relation to [ the massacre ] " .

Paddy Ashdown , the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina , condemned it as " tendentious , preposterous and inflammatory " and " so far from the truth as to be almost not worth dignifying with a response . " His office issued a statement calling the report " an irresponsible attempt to deceive voters and to abuse the trauma of massacre survivors " . Ashdown 's spokesman , Julian Braithwaite , noted the report 's publication just before elections in the Republika Srpska : " The question for the RS government is why are they publishing this report now , at the time when it could be easily interpreted as irresponsible electioneering . If they are playing down the fact that civilians were massacred and that children are being exhumed from mass graves with their hands tied behind their backs , then that it is outrageous . " The European Union issued a statement calling on " all responsible people and institutions " to reject the study . The International Commission on Missing Persons issued a strongly worded statement calling the report a gross distortion of the facts : Manipulation of the issue of the missing for political purposes , including the manipulation of numbers of missing , has been an ongoing practice within Bosnia and Herzegovina that only serves to cause further pain and suffering in a society that has already suffered so much . The study regarding the numbers of missing from the 1995 fall of Srebrenica made by the Republika Srpska 's Government Bureau for Relations with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia ( ICTY ) contains what ICMP believes to be serious inaccuracies .

The British Foreign Office minister Denis MacShane condemned the report as " an insult to the memory of those who died . The authors of this report belong in the same category as those who deny the Holocaust took place . " The United States embassy in Bosnia and Herzegovina urged the Republika Srpska government to withdraw the report , calling it " an attempt to manipulate and divide the public in this country . " Bosnian media , political parties and Srebrenica survivors were likewise strongly critical . The Sarajevo-based newspaper Dnevni Avaz described the report as an attempt by the Bosnian Serb government to deny that genocide had taken place . The Srebrenica and Zepa Mothers Association condemned the report as " false , shameful and utterly amoral . " The Party for Bosnia and Herzegovina denounced it as " yet another attempt by the Serb Republic authorities in an unscrupulous and brutal way to negate what probably is the worst crime in Europe after WW2 . " Alija Behmen , the Prime Minister of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina , called it " a surprising forgery which is trying to delude the public and especially the Serbs in BiH . I honestly believe that this is the last attempt to enliven the policy which marked the tragic past of BiH . Negating the genocide cannot be a part of the election campaign . "

On the Bosnian Serb side , opinions of the report were initially favourable . The Bosnian Serb media largely supported the report , and Republika Srpska president Mirko Šarović ( who in October 2002 became the Serb member of the collective presidency ) said that the report " should not be dismissed out of hand but merits careful study " . A number of Bosnian Serb political figures made public statements denying that war crimes had happened and a government spokesman called the report a bid to promote " truth and reconciliation " . The Republika Srpska Socialist Party leader , Lazar Ristić , welcomed the report and accused the Bosniak side of having " hitherto presented only false reports , in which names were listed of persons who are still alive today . " Nikola Špirić , the speaker of the National Assembly of Republika Srpska , called it " the worst election campaigning I have ever seen . " Milorad Dodik , who was later to become prime minister of Republika Srpska , castigated the report as having been " written by an amateur for the purpose of manipulating public opinion " in advance of the elections and said :

It is a political gaffe of the government , since one can see that the report was written several years ago by one man . The report had been written in 1996 and 1997 , which goes to show that it does not mention the report by the Netherlands Institute for War Documentation . [ ... ] The government shouldn 't have allowed itself to draft such a superficial , amateurish report which put Republika Srpska into such a difficult situation . Responsibility for the consequences of the report 's publication must be borne by those who produced it in such a superficial and amateurish way . The Republika Srpska government was , however , more equivocal . Its prime minister , Mladen Ivanić , accused the media in the Federation entity of having " made [ a ] fuss over the report for their own purposes . " Nonetheless , the outcry from the international community forced the government of Republika Srpska to distance itself from the report , saying that it had not been fully analysed and endorsed : The two studies , which the RS Government 's Bureau for Cooperation with the ICTY compiled , are not made by the RS Government . They are part of the report that the RS Government ’ s Bureau for Cooperation with the ICTY submits to the RS Government every three months . The fact that the Srebrenica report had been condemned by the Office of the High Representative before the Bureau 's news conference was held comes as a surprise . The Bureau representatives clearly said at the news conference that the both reports are to be submitted to the RS Government , which tells us that the OHR based its condemnation on news reports from the BiH Federation media , which said that the Bureau reports are RS Government 's report . It also comes as a surprise the fact that the OHR representatives commented on a document , which they have not read . This is another confirmation that the OHR gives in to the pressures coming from the Sarajevo media and that the OHR creates its views by using their [ the Sarajevo media 's ] information and press releases , thus bringing its own [ the OHR 's ] impartiality in question .

Ach Gott , wie manches Herzeleid ( Oh God , how much heartache ) , BWV 3 , is a church cantata by Johann Sebastian Bach . He composed the chorale cantata in Leipzig for the Second Sunday after Epiphany and first performed it on 14 January 1725 . It is based on the hymn published by Martin Moller in 1587 . Bach composed the cantata in his second year as Thomaskantor in Leipzig as part of cantata cycle of chorale cantatas , for the second Sunday after Epiphany . The work is based on a hymn without evident connection to the prescribed readings . It is a meditation on Jesus as a comforter in distress , based on a medieval model . An unknown librettist reworked the ideas of the 18 stanzas in six movements , retaining the words of stanzas 1 , 2 and 18 as movements 1 , 2 and 6 . Similarly , Bach retained the choral melody in three movements , set as a chorale fantasia in the opening chorus with the bass singing the cantus firmus , as a four-part setting with interspersed recitatives in the second movement , and in the closing chorale . He scored the cantata for two oboes d 'amore , strings and continuo , with an added trobone to support the bass in the first movement , and a horn to support the soprano in the last movement .

Bach composed the cantata in his second year as Thomaskantor in Leipzig as part of his second annual cycle , planned to consist only of chorale cantatas based on Lutheran hymns . He wrote the cantata for the second Sunday after Epiphany . The prescribed readings for the Sunday were taken from the Epistle to the Romans ( we have several gifts – Romans 12 : 6 – 16 ) and from the Gospel of John ( the Marriage at Cana – John 2 : 1 – 11 ) . The cantata is a chorale cantata based on the hymn " Ach Gott , wie manches Herzeleid " in 18 stanzas attributed to Martin Moller ( 1587 ) . It is a paraphrase of the Latin " Jesu dulcis memoria " , a medieval hymn attributed to Bernard of Clairvaux , a meditation on Jesus as a comforter and helper in distress . The unknown librettist retained the words of stanzas 1 , 2 and 18 as movements 1 , 2 and 6 . In movement 2 , stanza 2 is expanded by paraphrases of stanzas 3 – 5 , while movement 3 is a paraphrase of stanza 6 ; movement 4 incorporates ideas from stanzas 7 – 14 , and movement 5 relies on stanzas 15 and 16.In movement 2 , stanza 2 is expanded by paraphrases of stanzas 3 – 5 . Movement 3 is a paraphrase of stanza 6 . Movement 4 incorporates ideas from stanzas 7 – 14 . Movement 5 relies on stanzas 15 and 16 . The poet did not relate his text to the reading from John 1 : 2 .

Bach structured the cantata in six movements . An opening chorus and a closing chorale frame a sequence of alternating recitatives and arias . The first recitative is unusual : the chorus sings one line of the hymn 's four lines , continued each time by a soloist in words of the poet . The last aria is a duet . Bach scored the work for four vocal soloists ( soprano ( S ) , alto ( A ) , tenor ( T ) , bass ( B ) ) , a four-part choir and a Baroque instrumental ensemble of horn ( Co ) to double the cantus firmus in the closing chorale , trombone ( Tb ) to reinforce the bass in the opening chorus , two oboes d 'amore ( Oa ) , two violins ( Vl ) , viola ( Va ) , and basso continuo . The autograph score bears the title : " Dominica 2 post Epiphanias / Ach Gott ! Wie manches Hertzeleyd . / à / 4 Voci . / 2 Hautb : d 'Amour / 2 Violini / Viola . / e Continuo / di J. S. Bach " , which means " Sunday 2 after Epiphany ... for four voices , 2 oboes d 'amore , 2 violins , viola and continuo by J. S. Bach " .

In the opening chorus , " Ach Gott , wie manches Herzeleid " ( Ah , God , how much heartache ) , the cantus firmus is in the bass , which is doubled by the trombone , as in Ach Herr , mich armen Sünder , BWV 135 . Its mood of lamentation is supported by " elegiac sounds " of the oboes d 'amore , sighing motifs in the strings , and the upper voices reflecting the oboe motifs . John Eliot Gardiner , who conducted the Bach Cantata Pilgrimage in 2000 , notes that Bach used a repeated motif of six notes in chromatic descent , which is often used in chaconnes of the Baroque opera to express grief . The motif is used for the instrumental opening , each entry of a voice , interludes and conclusion .

In the duet for soprano and alto , " Wenn Sorgen auf mich dringen " ( When cares press upon me ) , in " bright E major " , as the Bach scholar Christoph Wolff writes , the voices are embedded in a " dense quartet texture " . He concludes that the movement " banishes human care by means of joyful singing " . The Bach scholar Klaus Hofmann notes that the obbligato motif , which is later picked up by the voices , is played by the oboes d 'amore and violin in unison , providing " a new and remarkable tone colour " . Bach refers to the Cross , as mentioned in the text , by using a cross-motif in the melody and applying double sharp marked by a cross . The voices intensify words such as " dringen " ( press ) and " singen " ( sing ) by extended coloraturas .

The Hastings Line is a secondary railway line in Kent and East Sussex , England , linking Hastings with the main town of Tunbridge Wells , and from there into London via Tonbridge and Sevenoaks . Although primarily carrying passengers , the railway serves a gypsum mine which is a source of freight traffic . Southeastern operates passenger trains on the line . The railway was constructed by the South Eastern Railway in the early 1850s across the difficult terrain of the High Weald . Supervision of the building of the line was lax , enabling contractors to skimp on the lining of the tunnels . These deficiencies showed up after the railway had opened . Rectifications led to a restricted loading gauge along the line , requiring the use of dedicated rolling stock . Served by steam locomotives from opening until the late 1950s , passenger services were then taken over by a fleet of diesel-electric multiple units built to the line 's loading gauge . Diesel locomotives handled freight , also built to fit the loading gauge . The diesel-electric multiple units served on the line until 1986 , when the line was electrified and the most severely affected tunnels were reduced from double track to single .

The South Eastern Railway ( SER ) completed its main line from London to Dover , Kent in 1844 , branching off the rival London , Brighton and South Coast Railway 's ( LBSC ) line at Redhill . Construction of a single line branch from Tunbridge ( modern spelling " Tonbridge " [ Note 2 ] ) to Tunbridge Wells , a fashionable town where a chalybeate spring had been discovered in 1606 , began in July 1844 . At the time , Parliament had not given assent for the railway . The Act of Parliament enabling the construction of the line had its first reading in the House of Commons on 28 April 1845 . The bill completed its passage through the House of Commons and the House of Lords on 28 July , following which Royal Assent was granted on 31 July by Queen Victoria . The engineer in charge of the construction was Peter W. Barlow and the contractors were Messrs. Hoof & Son . In April 1845 the SER decided that the branch would be double track . A 410-yard-long ( 370 m ) tunnel was required 44 chains ( 890 m ) after leaving Tunbridge . This was named " Somerhill Tunnel " after the nearby mansion . A mile and 54 chains ( 2.70 km ) after leaving Somerhill Tunnel , a 270-yard-long ( 250 m ) viaduct was required . Southborough Viaduct stands 40 feet ( 12 m ) high and has 26 arches . A temporary station was built at Tunbridge Wells as the 823 yd ( 753 m ) Wells Tunnel was still under construction . It was 4 miles 7 chains ( 6.58 km ) from Tunbridge . The temporary station subsequently became a goods station . The first train , comprising four locomotives and 26 carriages , arrived at Tunbridge Wells on 19 September . Trains from Tunbridge had to reverse before starting the climb to Somerhill Tunnel , as there was no facing junction at Tunbridge . This situation was to remain until 1857 , when a direct link was built at a cost of £ 5,700 . The old link remained in use until c . 1913 .

The SER was granted permission to build a line from Ashford in Kent to St Leonards , East Sussex in 1845 . The LBSC reached St Leonards from Lewes the following year . This gave the LBSC a shorter route to Hastings than the SERs route , then still under construction . The SER sought permission to extend their branch from Tunbridge Wells across the High Weald to reach Hastings . Authorisation for the construction of a 25-mile-60-chain ( 41.44 km ) line to Hastings was obtained on 18 June 1846 , Parliament deemed the line between Ashford and St Leonards to be of military strategic importance . Therefore , they stipulated that this line was to be completed before any extension was built from Tunbridge Wells . The extension into Tunbridge Wells opened on 25 November 1846 without any public ceremony . In 1847 , the SER unsuccessfully challenged the condition that the line between Ashford and St Leonards be completed first . That line was opened in 1851 , passing through Hastings and making an end-on junction with the LBSC line from Lewes .

The Hastings Line is built over the difficult , forested , and hilly terrain across the High Weald and sandstone Hastings Beds , necessitating the construction of eight tunnels between Tonbridge and the south coast seaside resort of Hastings . The SER was anxious to construct the line as economically as possible , since it was in competition with the LBSC to obtain entry into Hastings and was not in a strong financial position in the mid 1840s . The construction of the line between Tunbridge Wells and Robertsbridge was contracted to Messrs. Hoof & Wyths , subcontracted to Messrs. H. Warden . By March 1851 , the trackbed had been constructed as far as Whatlington , East Sussex , a distance of 19 miles ( 30.58 km ) . All tunnels had been completed and a single line of railway had been laid for a distance of 10 miles 40 chains ( 16.90 km ) from Tunbridge Wells . When the 15-mile-40-chain ( 24.94 km ) section from Tunbridge Wells to Robertsbridge opened on 1 September , a single line of track extended a further 4 miles ( 6.44 km ) to Whatlington . On the 6-mile ( 9.66 km ) section between Whatlington and St Leonards , 750,000 cubic yards ( 570,000 m3 ) out of 827,000 cubic yards ( 632,000 m3 ) had been excavated . Construction of the line between Tunbridge Wells and Bopeep Junction cost in excess of £ 500,000 .

Supervision of the construction was lax , which enabled the contractors to skimp on the lining of the tunnels . This manifested itself in March 1855 when part of the brickwork of Mountfield Tunnel collapsed . An inspection of Grove Hill , Strawberry Hill and Wells tunnels revealed that they too had been constructed with too few layers of bricks . Grove Hill Tunnel had been built with just a single ring of bricks and no filling above the crown of the brickwork . The SER took the contractors to court and were awarded £ 3,500 in damages . However , rectifying the situation cost the company £ 4,700 . Although the contractors had charged for six rings of bricks , they had only used four . Due to the cost of reboring the tunnels , this had to be rectified by the addition of a further two rings of brickwork , reducing the width of the tunnels by 18 inches ( 460 mm ) . The result of this was that the loading gauge on the line was restricted , and special rolling stock had to be built , later becoming known as Restriction 0 rolling stock . This problem would affect the line until 1986 .

Wadhurst Tunnel collapsed in 1862 and it was discovered by the SER that the same situation existed there too . Rectification cost £ 10,231 . By 1877 , only one train was permitted in Bopeep Tunnel at a time . The tunnel was partly widened in 1934 – 35 . In November 1949 , serious defects were discovered in the tunnel . Single-line working was put in place on 19 November , but the tunnel had to be closed completely a week later . The tunnel was partially relined with cast iron segments . It reopened to traffic on 5 June 1950 . Mountfield Tunnel was underpinned in 1938 – 39 , remaining open with single-line working in operation . It partially collapsed on 17 November 1974 , resulting in single-line working until 31 January 1975 . The line was then closed until 17 March whilst the track was singled through the tunnel .

The line was opened by the SER in three main stages : From Tunbridge – Tunbridge Wells , Tunbridge Wells – Robertsbridge and Robertsbridge – Bopeep Junction . A temporary station was opened at Tunbridge Wells on 19 September 1845 while Wells Tunnel was completed . The temporary station later became the goods depot . Tunbridge Wells ( later Tunbridge Wells Central ) station opened on 25 November 1846 . The Tunbridge Wells – Robertsbridge section opened on 1 September 1851 , with the Robertsbridge – Battle section opening on 1 January 1852 . The Battle – Bopeep Junction section opened on 1 February 1852 .

The line climbs steeply out of the Medway Valley at gradients of between 1 in 47 [ Note 3 ] and 1 in 300 to a summit south of Tunbridge Wells , the line undulates as far as Wadhurst at gradients between 1 in 80 and 1 in 155 before descending into the Rother Valley , which it follows as far as Robertsbridge at gradients between 1 in 48 and 1 in 485 . The line then climbs at gradients between 1 in 86 and 1 in 170 before a dip where it crosses the River Brede . This is followed by a climb to Battle with gradients between 1 in 100 and 1 in 227 before the line falls to Hastings at gradients of between 1 in 100 and 1 in 945 . Bopeep Junction is the junction of the Hastings Line with the East Coastway Line . It lies east of Bopeep Tunnel . There is a pub in Bulverhythe called The Bo Peep . The name was a nickname for Customs and Excise men .

The original stations on the Tunbridge Wells to Hastings section of the line are mostly in the Gothic or Italianate styles . These were designed by William Tress . Frant , Wadhurst , Witherenden , Etchingham and Robertsbridge stations opened on 1 September 1851 . Other station openings are detailed below . Stations are listed under their original names . Tunbridge station had opened in May 1842 . Following the opening of the branch to Tunbridge Wells in 1845 , it was renamed Tunbridge Junction in January 1852 . The original station stood to the east of the road bridge , whereas the current station , opened in 1864 , stands to the west . Trains leaving Tunbridge had to reverse to reach Tunbridge Wells . This arrangement lasted until 1857 , when a new section of line was constructed enabling trains to reach the Hastings Line without reversal . The station is 29 miles 42 chains ( 47.52 km ) from Charing Cross via Orpington . Southborough station opened on 1 March 1893 . It was renamed High Brooms on 21 September 1925 to avoid confusion with Southborough station on the Chatham Main Line , which had already been renamed Bickley . The station is 32 miles 70 chains ( 52.91 km ) from Charing Cross .

The first station at Tunbridge Wells was temporary and was situated north of Wells Tunnel . It opened on 19 September 1845 and was replaced by the present Tunbridge Wells Station on 25 November 1846 . It subsequently became Tunbridge Wells Goods station , later renamed Tunbridge Wells Central Goods station . The goods station closed in 1980 , with a siding retained for engineers use . The original station was 44 miles 23 chains ( 71.27 km ) from London Bridge via Redhill . [ Note 4 ] The building on the up side of the station was built in the Italianate style . A new building by A. H. Blomfield was constructed on the down side in 1911 . The station was renamed Tunbridge Wells Central on 9 July 1923 with the ex-LBSC station being renamed Tunbridge Wells West . Following the closure of the Tunbridge Wells – Eridge railway on 6 July 1985 , the name reverted to Tunbridge Wells . The station is 34 miles 32 chains ( 55.36 km ) from Charing Cross . Frant station is 36 miles 53 chains ( 59.00 km ) from Charing Cross . The station building is on the down side .

Wadhurst station is 39 miles 23 chains ( 63.23 km ) from Charing Cross . The station building is in the Italianate style , with a later one-bay extension . The 1893-built signal box , decommissioned on 20 April 1986 , was purchased by the Kent and East Sussex Railway . Witherenden station is 43 miles 66 chains ( 70.53 km ) from Charing Cross . It was renamed Ticehurst Road in December 1851 , and Stonegate on 16 June 1947 . Etchingham station is 47 miles 34 chains ( 76.32 km ) from Charing Cross . The building is on the up side . Robertsbridge station is 49 miles 37 chains ( 79.60 km ) from Charing Cross . On 26 March 1900 , it became a junction with the opening of the Rother Valley Railway to freight . The line opened to passengers on 2 April 1900 , and was renamed the Kent and East Sussex Railway in 1904 . The Kent and East Sussex Railway closed to passengers on 2 January 1954 and to freight on 12 June 1962 , except for a short section serving a mill at Robertsbridge which closed on 1 January 1970 .

Mountfield Halt opened in 1923 . It closed on 6 October 1969 . The platforms were built of sleepers and were demolished in the early 1970s . The station was 53 miles 37 chains ( 86.04 km ) from Charing Cross . Battle station opened on 1 September 1851 . The buildings are in the Gothic style and stand on the up side . The station is 55 miles 46 chains ( 89.44 km ) from Charing Cross . A siding had existed at Crowhurst from 1877 . The station opened on 1 June 1902 and was located at the junction for the Bexhill West Branch Line , which also opened the same day . Despite the line 's closure on 14 June 1964 , Crowhurst station remains open . The station is 57 miles 45 chains ( 92.64 km ) from Charing Cross . West St Leonards station opened on 1 October 1887 . The buildings are wood framed and covered with weatherboards . The station is 60 miles 59 chains ( 97.75 km ) from Charing Cross . St Leonards Warrior Square station opened on 13 February 1851 along with a new section of line between Hastings and the LBSCs Hastings & St Leonards station . This gave the LBSC better access to Hastings . It lies between Bopeep Tunnel and Hastings Tunnel . The station is 61 miles 55 chains ( 99.28 km ) from Charing Cross .

Hastings station opened on 13 February 1851 along with the SER branch from Ashford . The station was rebuilt and enlarged by the SER in 1880 as it was then inadequate for the increasing seasonal traffic . In 1930 the station was rebuilt by the Southern Railway . This entailed closure of the engine sheds at Hastings , with locomotives being transferred to St Leonards . The original station building , by Tress , was demolished and a new Neo-Georgian station building by J. R. Scott was erected . The rebuilt station was completed on 5 July 1931 . The station was rebuilt in 2003 by Railtrack . The 1931-built building was demolished and a new structure erected in its place . The station is 62 miles 33 chains ( 100.44 km ) from Charing Cross via Orpington .

In the late 1860s , a single track link was built between the SERs Tunbridge Wells station and the LBSCs Tunbridge Wells station , which had opened in 1866 . It was 1875 before powers were granted to run a passenger service over this section of line . The junction with the main line was Grove Junction . It was removed on 7 July 1985 , following closure of the Tunbridge Wells Central – Eridge line the previous day . In 1900 , the Rother Valley Railway opened from Robertsbridge to Tenterden . It was extended in stages to Tenterden Town and Headcorn , which was reached in 1905 . The line closed to passengers on 2 January 1954 and freight on 12 June 1961 , except for access to Hodson 's Mill closed in 1970 . The Rother Valley Railway heritage railway are rebuilding the line between Robertsbridge and Junction Road , with completion scheduled by 2018 . In 1902 , a branch line was built to Bexhill West , with a new station at the junction with the main line at Crowhurst . This line closed on 14 June 1964 .

Electrification of the Hastings Line was first considered by the SER as early as 1903 . Lack of finance meant that no decision had been made by the time World War I broke out in 1914 . It was stated in 1921 that electrification was a long term aim . In the mid-1930s , the Southern Railway , which had been formed from the SER , LBSC , London and South Western Railway ( LSWR ) and London , Chatham and Dover Railway ( LCDR ) in 1923 under the Railways Act 1921 , electrified a number of lines . The East Coastway Line was electrified in 1935 , with a depot being built at Ore , East Sussex . In 1937 , it was proposed to electrify the line between Sevenoaks and St Leonards Warrior Square at a cost of £ 1,500,000 . The scheme was deferred , with another proposal in 1937 costing £ 1,300,000 also failing to gain favour before World War II broke out . One of the main reasons that electrification was not given the go-ahead was the fact that non-standard rolling stock would be required . The Southern Railway had provided the line with 104 new carriages and six Pullman Cars between 1929 and 1934 . Two electric locomotives were ordered in 1937 . They were built to the Hastings Line loading gauge .

In October 1946 , the Southern Railway announced a programme to electrify all lines in Kent and East Sussex in three stages . The Hastings Line between Tonbridge and Bopeep Junction was to be part of the third stage . Track would have been slewed within the affected tunnels with only one train normally allowed in the tunnel . In an emergency , two trains would be allowed in the tunnel at the same time , but restricted to 25 miles per hour ( 40 km / h ) . Standard 9 feet 0 inches ( 2.74 m ) wide stock would be used . Following the nationalisation of railways in the United Kingdom under the Transport Act 1947 , the Southern Region of British Railways shelved new electrification schemes , concentrating on the construction of new steam locomotives . In 1952 , the possibility of operating standard rolling stock on the line had been examined . The Operating Department objected to the use of single line sections through the various tunnels . The 1930s stock was refurbished with the aim of extending its service by a further ten years . The first two phases of the Southern Railways ' electrification scheme were revived in 1955 . This did not include the Hastings Line and it was announced in 1956 that a fleet of diesel-electric trains would be constructed to operate the service until the line was electrified . At that time , the rolling stock built in the 1930s was overdue for replacement . The modernisation to the Hastings Line and the introduction of the diesel-electric trains cost £ 797,000 , of which £ 595,000 was the cost of the first seven trains . A further thirteen trains cost £ 1,178,840 .

From 1845 , the line was operated by the SER . In 1899 , the SER and LCDR entered into a joint working partnership , the South Eastern and Chatham Railway ( SECR ) . On 1 January 1923 , the Railways Act 1921 came into force , resulting in the Grouping . The SECR became part of the Southern Railway ( SR ) . On 1 January 1948 , the Transport Act 1947 came into force , and the SR became part of British Railways , with the former SR lines becoming the Southern Region . British Railways was rebranded British Rail on 1 January 1965 . On 10 June 1986 , Network SouthEast branded trains began operating . On 1 January 1994 , the Railways Act 1993 came into force , privatising British Rail . Passenger services were taken over by Connex South Eastern on 13 October 1996 . On 27 June 2003 , Connex lost the franchise due to poor financial management . The Strategic Rail Authority took over the running of passenger trains from 9 November 2003 , using their South Eastern Trains train operating company . On 1 April 2006 , Southeastern took over the operation of passenger trains on the route .

From the opening of the line , passenger stock consisted of 4-wheel carriages . In 1845 , there were eight passenger trains a day from Tunbridge Wells to London , with half that number on Sundays . On 23 June 1849 , the Royal Train took Queen Victoria and Prince Albert to Tunbridge Wells to visit Queen Adelaide , the Queen Dowager . The train , consisting of the Royal Saloon , two first class carriages and a brake van made the journey from Bricklayers Arms to Tunbridge Wells in 75 minutes . It was driven by James Cudworth , the Locomotive Superintendent of the SER . The return journey took 70 minutes . The Royal Train visited the line again on 18 December 1849 conveying Queen Victoria and Princess Alice from Windsor , Berkshire to Tunbridge Wells on a visit to Princess Louise . The journey via Waterloo took 100 minutes . The train was driven by William Jacomb , Resident Engineer of the LSWR , and Edgar Verringer , Superintendent of the LSWR . At Waterloo , driving of the train was taken over by John Shaw , General Manager of the SER and Mr. Cockburn , Superintendent of the SER . The return journey took 105 minutes .

With the opening of the extension to Robertsbridge , there were three trains a day , with two on Sundays . These were augmented by an additional train daily when the extension to Bopeep Junction opened . In 1860 , there were seven up trains and six down trains daily ; Hastings to London via Redhill taking two hours . From 1861 , Cudworth 2-2-2 " Little Mail " class locomotives were introduced . In 1876 , the Sub-Wealden Gypsum Co built a 1 mile ( 1.6 km ) long line from a junction south of Mountfield Tunnel to a gypsum mine located in Great Wood , Mountfield . This line was still in operation as of 2007 . Bogie carriages entered service on the line in 1880 . In 1890 , the winter service was eleven trains each way , of which five were fast . [ Note 6 ] An additional two trains daily operated between Tunbridge Wells and Wadhurst . By 1910 , this had increased to twenty trains each way , of which twelve were fast , plus the extra two Wadhurst services . Four trains ran on Sundays . The service was reduced during World War I , but Sunday services had increased to seven by 1922 .

By the 1930s the line was worked by L and L1 class 4-4-0 locomotives . The Schools class 4-4-0s were introduced in 1930 ; the width of these was 8 feet 4 inches ( 2.54 m ) measured across the cab , and 8 feet 6 1 ⁄ 2 inches ( 2.604 m ) measured across the cylinders . The service was again reduced during World War II , with fourteen trains daily in 1942 , of which four were fast ; there were seven trains on Sundays . As built , it was envisaged that the West Country and Battle of Britain class locomotives would be able to work the line . Forty-eight locomotives of the West Country and 22 of the Battle of Britain class were built with cabs that were 8 feet 6 inches ( 2.59 m ) wide and paired with tenders of the same width . It was subsequently decided not to work these locomotives over the line . Locomotives from these two classes that were rebuilt gained a 9-foot-0-inch-wide ( 2.74 m ) cab . Unrebuilt locomotives retained their narrow cab . By 1948 , the service was sixteen trains , of which seven were fast . An additional three trains ran as far as Wadhurst . In 1957 , the service was eighteen trains daily , of which nine were fast . There were nine trains on Sundays . The Schools Class locomotives worked the line until 1957 when steam was withdrawn on the Hastings Line . Diesel-electric multiple units of what became British Rail Class 201 , 202 and 203 ( the " Hastings Diesels " ) took over working the route .

Special narrow bodied diesel electric multiple units were introduced in 1957 – 58 to replace steam traction . British Rail Class 201 ( 6S ) , 202 ( 6L ) and 203 ( 6B ) ( the " Hastings Diesels " ) took over working the route . These units were constructed of narrow rolling stock . They were delivered in six-car formations ( the 6Bs including a buffet car ) and two units were often operated in multiple to form twelve-car trains . In latter years some of the units were reduced to five , and later still , to four cars . The 6S units were intended to be introduced into service in June 1957 . On 5 April a fire at Cannon Street signal box disabled all signalling equipment there . As a result , locomotive-hauled trains were banned from the station . A temporary signal box was commissioned on 5 May and the 6S units were introduced on peak services the next day . Two units coupled together formed the 06 : 58 and 07 : 26 Hastings – Cannon Street services in the morning , and the 17 : 18 and 18 : 03 Cannon Street – Hastings services in the evening . From 17 June the 6S and 6L units were working services throughout the day . The 6B units entered service between May and August 1958 .

The Hastings Diesels had almost completely replaced steam by June 1958 . With the introduction of the Hastings Diesels , an hourly service was provided . This split at Tunbridge Wells , with the front portion running fast to Crowhurst and the rear portion stopping at all stations . The service ran every two hours on Sundays . The Hastings Diesels also worked services on the Bexhill West Branch Line until closure on 14 June 1964 . On 22 December 1958 , 6L unit 1017 collided with 6B unit 1035 at Tunbridge Wells Central . In 1962 , twelve Class 33 / 2 diesel locomotives , were also built with narrow bodies for the Hastings line . These enabled the last steam workings , overnight newspaper trains , to be withdrawn from the Hastings Line . Nineteen British Rail Class 207 ( 3D ) diesel electric multiple units were built in 1962 . They operated over the Tonbridge – Grove Junction section of the line as part of a Tonbridge – Eastbourne ( later Tonbridge – Eridge ) service . In 1963 , Frant , Stonegate , Wadhurst and Mountfield Halt were proposed to be closed under the Beeching Axe . One special working took place on 3 April 1966 when one of the ex-Great Western Railway diesel railcars , W20W , was worked between Tonbridge and Robertsbridge as an out of gauge load . The railcar had been purchased by the Kent and East Sussex Railway for £ 415 including delivery to Robertsbridge . After trying to " wriggle out " of the deal , British Rail eventually found a solution . The vehicle was ballasted so that it leant away from the tunnel walls by some 3 inches ( 80 mm ) and was worked to Robertsbridge at a maximum of 20 miles per hour ( 32 km / h ) . From 1977 , there were two trains an hour , one fast and one slow . In May 1980 , the buffet cars were withdrawn from the 6B units , which were recoded as 5L , but retaining the Class 203 designation . The fast trains were withdrawn in January 1981 , with trains now stopping at all stations .

On 28 October 1983 , it was announced that the Hastings Line was to be electrified . Reasons that decided the issue included a commitment by British Rail to eliminate asbestos from all stock in service by 1988 and the increasing cost of maintaining the then ageing Hastings Diesels . The scheme was to cost £ 23,925,000 . Electrification was finally completed in 1986 , the line was electrified using 750 V DC third rail using standard rolling stock , and the expedient of singling the track through the narrow tunnels . The tunnels either side of Tunbridge Wells Central station were not singled because the fact that the south portal of Wells Tunnel and north portal of Grove Hill Tunnel were at the ends of the platforms meant it was impossible to install pointwork without reducing the length of platform available . A speed restriction was imposed through Wells Tunnel . Parliamentary powers were sought in 1979 to bore a second Grove Hill Tunnel , but there was much opposition from local residents . This , and the high cost , caused the proposal to be abandoned . The track in Grove Hill Tunnel was relaid on a concrete base , allowing alignment to be precisely controlled .

The line was declared to conform to the standard C1 loading gauge on 14 March . The first passenger carrying train comprising C1 stock to use the line was a railtour on 15 March hauled by 50 025 Invincible . It was organised by the Southern Electric Group and ran from Paddington to Folkestone Harbour . A preview service of electric trains ran on 27 April 1986 and the full timetabled service commenced on 12 May 1986 . The next day , a wrong-side failure occurred involving three signals between Tonbridge and Hastings . Contractors had made errors in the wiring of the signal heads . With the inauguration of electric services , a half-hourly service was operated , with trains departing from Charing Cross at 15 and 45 minutes past the hour . Those departing at xx : 15 called at Waterloo East , Sevenoaks , Tonbridge , High Brooms , Tunbridge Wells , Wadhurst , Battle , St Leonards Warrior Square and Hastings , taking 84 minutes . Those departing at xx : 45 called at Waterloo East , London Bridge , Orpington , Sevenoaks , Hildenborough , Tonbridge and then all stations to Hastings , taking 99 minutes . The Royal Train visited the line on 6 May , conveying Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother . It was stabled at Wadhurst whilst she ate lunch . The train was hauled by a Class 73 diesel-electric locomotive . Upon electrification , services were operated by 4CEP , 4CIG and 4VEP electric multiple units . Class 508 electric multiple units also operated services on the line . When these units were withdrawn in the mid-2000s , they were replaced by Class 375 Electrostar , Class 465 Networker and Class 466 Networker units .

A number of accidents have occurred on the Hastings Line , none of which have involved the death of a passenger . On 4 October 1852 , a passenger train was derailed between Ticehurst Road and Etchingham when the formation was flooded and washed away . Both engine crew members were injured . On 21 June 1856 , a passenger train derailed between Tunbridge Wells and Tunbridge Junction , killing the driver and injuring the fireman and a passenger . On 30 September 1866 , the slip portion of a train , which was to be worked forwards to Hastings , failed to stop at Tunbridge due to an error by the slip guard . It crashed into a rake of empty carriages 262 yards ( 240 m ) east of the station . Eleven of the 40 passengers were injured . On 22 February 1892 , a SER locomotive was run into by a LBSC passenger train at Hastings . The passenger train had overrun a danger signal . Both locomotives were damaged . On 29 August 1896 , the locomotive of a Charing Cross to Hastings train was derailed near Etchingham when it collided with a traction engine and threshing machine using an occupation crossing .

On 29 April 1912 , SECR F1 class locomotive No. 216 was working an empty stock train when it suffered the failure of the firebox crown near Tunbridge Wells due to a lack of water in the boiler . Both engine crew were severely injured by escaping steam and jumping from the moving locomotive . On 6 January 1930 , the rear carriages of a passenger train from Hastings to London were partially buried by a landslip near Wadhurst tunnel . The train was divided and the front part continued on to Tunbridge Wells , where it arrived 100 minutes late . On 23 December 1958 , 6L unit 1017 collided with 6B unit 1035 at Tunbridge Wells Central . Eighteen people were injured , with three of them admitted to hospital . On 8 November 2010 , a passenger train operated by Class 375 unit 375 711 failed to stop at Stonegate station due to maintenance errors in respect of the train 's sanding apparatus . The train overran the station by 2 miles 36 chains ( 3.94 km ) . Following the incident , Southeastern reduced the interval that the sand hoppers were to be refilled from seven days to five days . The company was fined £ 65,000 and ordered to pay £ 22,589 in costs .

The music of the video game Final Fantasy IV was composed by regular series composer Nobuo Uematsu . The Final Fantasy IV Original Sound Version , a compilation of almost all of the music in the game , was released by Square Co . / NTT Publishing , and subsequently re-released by NTT Publishing . It was released in North America by Tokyopop as Final Fantasy IV Official Soundtrack : Music from Final Fantasy Chronicles , with one additional track . It has since been re-released multiple times with slight changes as part of the Final Fantasy Finest Box and as Final Fantasy IV DS OST . An arranged album entitled Final Fantasy IV Celtic Moon , containing a selection of musical tracks from the game performed in the style of Celtic music by Máire Breatnach , was released by Square and later re-released by NTT Publishing . Additionally , a collection of piano arrangements composed by Nobuo Uematsu and played by Toshiyuki Mori titled Piano Collections Final Fantasy IV was released by NTT Publishing . The music was overall well received ; reviewers have praised the quality of the original composition despite the limitations of the medium , and reacted favorably to the arranged soundtracks . Several tracks , especially " Theme of Love " , remain popular today , and have been performed numerous times in orchestral concert series , as well as been published in arranged and compilation albums by Square as well as outside groups .

Uematsu has noted that the process of composing was excruciating , involving trial and error and requiring the sound staff to spend several nights in sleeping bags at Square Co. headquarters . He blamed much of the problem on the fact that this was his first soundtrack to use the new Super Famicom hardware , as opposed to his previous soundtracks composed for the Famicom . The liner notes for the Final Fantasy IV OSV album were humorously signed as being written at 1 : 30 AM " in the office , naturally . " Uematsu has stated that , beginning with the soundtrack to Final Fantasy IV , he started to move away from the idea that the soundtrack had to be solely an orchestral score . In June 2007 , Square Enix held a casting for a vocalist to sing a version of Final Fantasy IV 's " Theme of Love " rearranged by Nobuo Uematsu . Megumi Ida was selected from approximately 800 applicants to perform the song , which was featured on the Japanese Nintendo DS remake of the game , as well as the accompanying soundtrack album .

Final Fantasy IV Original Sound Version is a soundtrack album containing the musical tracks from the game , composed , arranged , produced and performed by Nobuo Uematsu . It spans 44 tracks and covers a duration of 58 : 25 . It was first released on June 14 , 1991 , by Square Co . / NTT Publishing , and subsequently re-released on November 26 , 1994 , and October 1 , 2004 , by NTT Publishing . The original release bears the catalog number N23D-001 , and the re-release bears the catalog number NTCP-5014 . After the release of Final Fantasy IV for the Sony PlayStation as part of Final Fantasy Chronicles , the album was released in North America by Tokyopop on August 21 , 2001 as Final Fantasy IV Official Soundtrack : Music from Final Fantasy Chronicles . This is nearly the same release as Final Fantasy IV : Original Sound Version , some track titles were slightly changed , and a 45th track was added , " Theme of Love ( Arranged ) " , which had previously only been released as a piano version on the second track of Piano Collections Final Fantasy IV . This release has the catalog numbers TPCD 0210-2 .

The GBA version was again released as part of the Final Fantasy Finest Box by Square Enix on March 28 , 2007 under the catalog number FFFB-0001 along with the OSTs of Final Fantasy V and Final Fantasy VI after the game was ported to the Game Boy Advance . This version included several tracks which were not included in the original album , such as the " Chocobo Forest " theme , the music for the dancing girl , the short intro to " Cry in Sorrow / Sorrow and Loss " , and various fanfares . After the release of Final Fantasy IV for the Nintendo DS , a new version of the Soundtrack arranged by Junya Nakano and Kenichiro Fukui , respectively , was released in Japan in January 2008 as Final Fantasy IV Original Soundtrack . Most of the pieces are the same as on the original album , although they were reproduced for the sound hardware of the DS , with new synthesizer effects . A new version of " Theme of Love " was included , with lyrics sung by Megumi Ida . It was released as a two-disk set with a bonus DVD containing the full motion video included in the re-releases of Final Fantasy IV , and has the catalog numbers SQEX-10105-7 . This version of " Theme of Love " was also released as a single , entitled Moonlight -Final Fantasy IV Theme of Love- . The single also includes the DS version of the song , the original track , and a karaoke version of the Megumi Ida rendition . It was released along with a bonus DVD containing a music video for the song on December 5 , 2007 with the catalog numbers of BVCR-19727-8 and a duration of 16 : 21 .

Final Fantasy IV OSV was well received ; reviewers have praised the quality of the composition despite the limited medium . Soundtrack Central compared it favorably with Uematsu 's later works , especially the soundtrack for Final Fantasy VI , and termed it a " great CD " . However , the length of several tracks as well as of the album as a whole was criticized , with reviewers finding it " too short " and disapproving of the early fade-out of some tracks . Reviewers found the expanded and remastered version found in the Finest Box to be comparable to the quality of the original album , with some tracks improving in their remake , becoming " deeper " or " sharper " as was appropriate . A new edition of the soundtrack , Final Fantasy IV Original Soundtrack Remaster Version , was released by Square Enix on July 3 , 2013 . This version is expanded to two discs , allowing the tracks to play through two loops rather than just one , as well as the addition of a few short pieces that were left off of the original recording . Despite the name , the album features the original Super NES version of the music , rather than a more modern synthesizer sound . The album has the catalog number SQEX-10373 ~ 4 , and its 57 tracks have a duration of 1 : 32 : 40 . Joshua Bateman of RPGFan stated that while the remaster edition wasn 't strictly necessary , given that Square Enix still sold the original version online , the new edition was still a superior version and an important step in preserving classic video game music .

Final Fantasy IV Celtic Moon is a selection of musical tracks from the game , arranged and performed in the style of Celtic music by Máire Breatnach . It spans 15 tracks and covers a duration of 52 : 36 . It was first released on October 28 , 1991 , in Japan , and subsequently re-released on November 26 , 1994 , and on October 1 , 2004 , by NTT Publishing . The original release bears the catalog number N30D-006 , the first re-release bears the catalog number PSCN-5017 , and the most recent re-release has the catalog number NTCP-5017 . Overall reception of Final Fantasy IV Celtic Moon was also positive , though some reviewers felt that several of the tracks were of lesser quality than the rest of the album . Patrick Gann of RPGFan described it as " Awesome . Purely spectacular . " and Matt Brady of Final Fantasy Symphony concurred , saying that the " music quality for this soundtrack was spectacular . " Daniel Space of RPGFan , however , found the quality mixed , and said that " some of the pieces do not live up to the new orchestration , " although others " were a delight to hear . " He also found some of the instruments to be slightly out of tune , which he disliked , though Matt Brady felt it gave the pieces an " ethnic feel " .

Piano Collections Final Fantasy IV is a collection of Final Fantasy IV music composed by Nobuo Uematsu , arranged by Shiro Satou and played on piano by Toshiyuki Mori . It spans 14 tracks and covers a duration of 57 : 24 . It was first published by NTT Publishing on April 21 , 1992 , and subsequently re-published on May 23 , 2001 . The original release bears the catalog number N38D-010 , and the reprint bears the catalog number NTCP-1001 . Critical reception for Piano Collections Final Fantasy IV was positive , with reviewers terming the album " fantastic " . Damian Thomas of RPGFan said that the album was " a true gem " and said that despite his dislike of piano arrangements , he " truly appreciated " the album . Some reviewers felt that the pieces in the album were " simplistic " , especially in comparison to the piano collections for Final Fantasy V and Final Fantasy VI , but said that " its simplicity calls for a different feeling , and it is still great , " and that despite the lack of complexity , " all of the songs ... are extremely nicely done . "

The music of Final Fantasy IV has remained popular since its release , especially in Japan . The track " Theme of Love " has even been taught to Japanese school children as part of the music curriculum . Additionally , The Black Mages have arranged two pieces from Final Fantasy IV . These are " Battle with the Four Fiends " , an arrangement of " The Dreadful Fight " , and " Zeromus " , an arrangement of " The Final Battle " , both of which can be found on the album The Skies Above , published in 2004 . A lyrical version of " Theme of Love " , sung by Risa Ohki , appeared on Final Fantasy : Pray , a compilation album produced by Square . Additionally , lyrical versions of " Main Theme of FINAL FANTASY IV " and " Edward 's Harp " , sung by Risa Ohki and Ikuko Noguchi , appeared on Final Fantasy : Love Will Grow . Uematsu continues to perform certain pieces in his Dear Friends : Music from Final Fantasy concert series . The music of Final Fantasy IV has also appeared in various official concerts and live albums , such as 20020220 music from FINAL FANTASY , a live recording of an orchestra performing music from the series including several pieces from the game . " Red Wings " , " Theme of Love " , and " Ending Theme " , were played by the Tokyo Philharmonic Orchestra in their first Orchestral Game Concert in 1991 as part of a five concert tour , which was later released as a series of albums . Additionally , " Theme of Love " was performed by the Royal Stockholm Philharmonic Orchestra for the Distant Worlds - Music from Final Fantasy concert tour , as well as by the New Japan Philharmonic Orchestra in the Tour de Japon : Music from Final Fantasy concert series . Independent but officially licensed releases of Final Fantasy IV music have been composed by such groups as Project Majestic Mix , which focuses on arranging video game music . Another popular album release was Echoes of Betrayal , Light of Redemption , an unofficial download-only album release by the remix website OverClocked ReMix on July 19 , 2009 containing 54 remixes over 4 " discs " . Selections also appear on Japanese remix albums , called dojin music , and on English remixing websites .

Pool of Radiance is a role-playing video game developed and published by Strategic Simulations , Inc ( SSI ) in 1988 . It was the first adaptation of TSR 's Advanced Dungeons & Dragons ( AD & D or D & D ) fantasy role-playing game for home computers , becoming the first episode in a four-part series of D & D computer adventure games . The other games in the " Gold Box " series used the game engine pioneered in Pool of Radiance , as did later D & D titles such as the Neverwinter Nights online game . Pool of Radiance takes place in the Forgotten Realms fantasy setting , with the action centered in and around the port city of Phlan . Just as in traditional D & D games , the player starts by building a party of up to six characters , deciding the race , sex , class and ability scores for each . The player 's party is enlisted to help the settled part of the city by clearing out the marauding inhabitants that have taken over the surroundings . The characters move on from one area to another , battling bands of enemies as they go and ultimately confronting the powerful leader of the evil forces . During play the player characters gain experience points , which allow them to increase their capabilities . The game primarily uses a first-person perspective , with the screen divided into sections to display pertinent textual information . During combat sequences , the display switches to a top-down " video game isometric " view .

Pool of Radiance is based on the same game mechanics as the Advanced Dungeons & Dragons rule set . As in many role-playing games ( RPGs ) , each player character in Pool of Radiance has a character race and a character class , determined at the beginning of the game . Six races are offered , including elves and halflings , as well as four classes ( fighter , cleric , wizard , and thief ) . Non-human characters have the option to become multi-classed , which means they gain the capabilities of more than one class , but advance in levels more slowly . During character creation , the computer randomly generates statistics for each character , although the player can alter these attributes . The player also chooses each character 's alignment , or moral philosophy ; while the player controls each character 's actions , alignment can affect how NPCs view their actions . The player can then customize the appearance and colors of each character 's combat icon . Alternatively , the player can load a pre-generated party to be used for introductory play . These characters are combined into a party of six or less , with two slots open for NPCs . Players create their own save-game files , assuring character continuation regardless of events in the game . On an MS-DOS computer , the game can be copied to the hard-disk drive . Other computer systems , such as the Commodore 64 , require a separate save-game disk .

The game 's " exploration " mode uses a three-dimensional first-person perspective , with a rectangle in the top left of the screen displaying the party 's current view ; the rest of the screen displays text information about the party and the area . During gameplay , the player accesses menus to allow characters to use objects ; trade items with other characters ; parley with enemies ; buy , sell , and pool the characters ' money ; cast spells , and learn new magic skills . Players can view characters ' movement from different angles , including an aerial view . The game uses three different versions of each sprite to indicate differences between short- , medium- , and long-range encounters . In combat mode , the screen changes to a top-down mode with dimetric projection , where the player decides what actions the characters will take in each round . These actions are taken immediately , rather than after all commands have been issued as is standard in some RPGs . Optionally , the player can let the computer choose character moves for each round . Characters and monsters may make an extra attack on a retreating enemy that moves next to them . If a character 's hit points ( HP ) fall below zero , he or she must be bandaged by another character or the character will die . The game contains random encounters , and game reviewers for Dragon magazine observed that random encounters seem to follow standard patterns of encounter tables in pen and paper AD & D game manuals . They also observed that the depictions of monsters confronting the party " looked as though they had jumped from the pages of the Monster Manual . "

Different combat options are available to characters based on class . For example , fighters can wield melee or ranged weapons ; magic-users can cast spells ; thieves have the option to " back-stab " an opponent by strategically positioning themselves . As fighters progress in level , they can attack more than once in a round . Fighters also gain the ability to " sweep " enemies , effectively attacking each nearby low-level creature in the same turn . Magic-users and clerics are allowed to memorize and cast a set number of spells each day . Once cast , a spell must be memorized again before reuse . The process requires hours of inactivity for all characters , during which they rest in a camp ; this also restores lost hit points to damaged characters . This chore of memorizing spells each night significantly added to the amount of game management required by the player . As characters defeat enemies , they gain experience points ( XP ) . After gaining enough XP , the characters " train up a level " to become more powerful . This training is purchased in special areas within the city walls . In addition to training , mages can learn new spells by transcribing them from scrolls found in the unsettled areas . Defeated enemies in these areas also contain items such as weapons and armor , which characters can sell to city stores .

Pool of Radiance takes place in the Forgotten Realms fantasy world , in and about the city of Phlan . This is located on the northern shore of the Moonsea along the Barren River , between Zhentil Keep and Melvaunt . The party begins in the civilized section of " New Phlan " that is governed by a council . This portion of the city hosts businesses , including shopkeepers who sell holy items for each temple 's worshipers , a jewelry shop , and retailers who provide arms and armor . A party can also contract with the clerk of the city council for various commissions ; proclamations fastened to the halls within City Hall offer bits of information to aid the party . These coded clues can be deciphered by using the Adventurer 's Journal , included with the game . There are three temples within Phlan , each dedicated to different gods . Each temple can heal those who are wounded , poisoned , or afflicted , and can fully restore deceased comrades for a high price . The party can also visit the hiring hall and hire an experienced NPC adventurer to accompany the party . Encounters with NPCs in shops and taverns offer valuable information . Listening to gossip in taverns can be helpful to characters , although some tavern tales are false and lead characters into great danger .

The ancient trade city of Phlan has fallen into impoverished ruin . Now only a small portion of the city remains inhabited by humans , who are surrounded by evil creatures . To rebuild the city and clean up the Barren River , the city council of New Phlan has decided to recruit adventurers to drive the monsters from the neighboring ruins . Using bards and publications , they spread tales of the riches waiting to be recovered in Phlan , which draws the player 's party to these shores by ship . At the start of the game , the adventurers ' ship lands in New Phlan , and they receive a brief but informative tour of the civilized area . They learn that the city is plagued with a history of invasions and wars and has been overtaken by a huge band of humanoids and other creatures . Characters hear rumors that a single controlling element is in charge of these forces . The characters begin a block-by-block quest to rid the ruins of monsters and evil spirits . Beyond the ruins of old Phlan , the party enters the slum area — one of two quests immediately available to new parties . This quest requires the clearing of the slum block and allows a new party to quickly gain experience . The second quest is to clear out Sokol Keep , located on Thorn Island . This fortified area is inhabited by the undead , which can only be defeated with silver weapons and magic . The characters ' adventure is later expanded to encompass the outlying areas of the Moonsea region . Eventually , the player learns that an evil spirit named Tyranthraxus , who has possessed an ancient dragon , is at the root of Phlan 's problems . The characters fight Tyranthraxus the Flamed One in a climactic final battle .

Pool of Radiance was the first official game based on the Advanced Dungeons & Dragons rules . The scenario was created by TSR designers Jim Ward , David Cook , Steve Winter , and Mike Breault , and coded by programmers from Strategic Simulations , Inc 's Special Projects team . The section of the Forgotten Realms world in which Pool of Radiance takes place was intended to be developed only by SSI . The game was created on Apple II and Commodore 64 computers , taking one year with a team of thirty-five people . This game was the first to use the game engine later used in other SSI D & D games known as the " Gold Box " series . The SSI team developing the game was led by Chuck Kroegel . Kroegel stated that the main challenge with the development was interpreting the AD & D rules to an exact format . Developers also worked to balance the graphics with gameplay to provide a faithful AD & D feel , given the restrictions of a home computer . In addition to the core AD & D manuals , the books Unearthed Arcana and Monster Manual II were also used during development . The images of monsters were adapted directly from the Monster Manual book . The game was originally programmed by Keith Brors and Brad Myers , and it was developed by George MacDonald . The game 's graphic arts were by Tom Wahl , Fred Butts , Darla Marasco , and Susan Halbleib .

Pool of Radiance was released in June 1988 ; it was initially available on the Commodore 64 , Apple II series and IBM PC compatible computers . A version for the Atari ST was also announced . The Macintosh version was released in 1989 . The Macintosh version featured a slightly different interface and was intended to work on black-and-white Macs like the Mac Plus and the Mac Classic . The screen was tiled into separate windows including the game screen , text console , and compass . Graphics were monochrome and the display window was relatively small compared to other versions . The Macintosh version featured sound , but no music . The game 's Amiga version was released two years later . The PC 9800 version 『 プール ・ オブ ・ レイディアンス 』 in Japan was fully translated ( like the Japanese Famicom version ) and featured full-color graphics . The game was ported to the Nintendo Entertainment System under the title Advanced Dungeons & Dragons : Pool of Radiance , released in April 1992 . The original Pool of Radiance game shipped with a 28-page introductory booklet , which describes secrets relating to the game and the concepts behind it . The booklet guides players through the character creation process , explaining how to create a party . The game also included the 38-page Adventurer 's Journal , which provides the game 's background . The booklet features depictions of fliers , maps , and information that characters see in the game . The package also included a translation decoder wheel . After the title screen , a copy protection screen was displayed consisting of two pictures and a line . The player was required to use the decoder wheel to line up the pictures , then enter the word revealed on the decoder wheel . After three unsuccessful attempts , the game automatically shut down .

Pool of Radiance was the first in a four-part series of computer D & D adventures set in the Forgotten Realms campaign setting . The others were released by SSI one year apart : Curse of the Azure Bonds ( 1989 ) , Secret of the Silver Blades ( 1990 ) , and Pools of Darkness ( 1991 ) . The 1989 game Hillsfar was also created by SSI but was not a sequel to Pool of Radiance . Hillsfar is described instead , by the reviewers of Dragon , as " a value-added adventure for those who would like to take a side trip while awaiting the sequel " . A player can import characters from Pool of Radiance into Hillsfar , although the characters are reduced to their basic levels and do not retain weapons or magical items . Original Hillsfar characters cannot be exported to Pool of Radiance , but they can be exported to Curse of the Azure Bonds . A review for Curse of the Azure Bonds in Computer Gaming World noted that " you can transfer your characters from Pool of Radiance and it 's a good idea to do so . It will give you a headstart in the game . "

GameSpot declared that Pool of Radiance , with its detailed art , wide variety of quests and treasure , and tactical combat system , and despite the availability of only four character classes and the low character level cap , " ultimately succeeded in its goal of bringing a standardized form of AD & D to the home computer , and laid the foundation for other future gold box AD & D role-playing games " . Scott Battaglia of GameSpy said Pool of Radiance is " what many gamers consider to be the epitome of Advanced Dungeons & Dragons RPGs . These games were so great that people today are using MoSlo in droves to slow down their Pentium III-1000 MHz enough to play these gems . " In March 2008 , Dvice.com listed Pool of Radiance among its 13 best electronic versions of Dungeons & Dragons . The contributor felt that " The Pool of Radiance series set the stage for Dungeons & Dragons to make a major splash in the video game world . " The 1988 Dungeons & Dragons role-playing game module Ruins of Adventure was produced using the same adventure scenario as Pool of Radiance , using the same plot , background , setting , and many of the same characters as the computer game . The module thus contains useful clues to the successful completion of the computer missions . Ruins of Adventure contains four linked miniscenarios , which form the core of Pool of Radiance . According to the editors of Dragon magazine , Pool of Radiance was based on Ruins of Adventure , and not vice versa .

In November 1989 a novelization of Pool of Radiance the video game , also called Pool of Radiance , was written by James Ward and Jane Cooper Hong , published by TSR . The novel is set in the Forgotten Realms setting based on the Dungeons & Dragons fantasy role-playing game . Dragon described the novel 's plot : " Five companions find themselves in the unenviable position of defending the soon-to-be ghost town against a rival possessing incredible power . " This book was the first in a trilogy , followed by Pools of Darkness and Pool of Twilight .

SSI sold 264,536 copies of Pool of Radiance for computers in North America , three times that of Heroes of the Lance , an AD & D-licensed action game SSI also released that year . It became by far the most successful game in the company 's history , and the best-selling RPG created on an 8-bit computer platform ; even the hint book outsold any earlier SSI game . In Computer Gaming World 's preview of Pool of Radiance in July 1988 , the writer noted a sense of deja vu . He described the similarity of the game 's screen to earlier computer RPGs . For example , the three-dimensional maze view in the upper-left window was similar to Might & Magic or Bard 's Tale , both released in the mid-1980s . The window with a listing of characters was featured in 1988 's Wasteland ; and the use of an active character to represent the party was part of Ultima V. The reviewer also noted that the design approach for game play was closer to SSI 's own Wizard 's Crown than to the other games in the genre . Pool of Radiance received positive reviews . G.M. called the game 's graphics " good " and praised its role-playing and combat aspects . They felt that " roleplayers will find Pools is an essential purchase , but people who are solely computer games oriented may hesitate before buying it [ ... ] it will be their loss " . Tony Dillon from Commodore User giving it a score of 9 out of 10 . The only complaint was a slightly slow disk access , but the reviewer was impressed with the game 's features , awarding it a Commodore User superstar and proclaiming it " the best RPG ever to grace the C64 , or indeed any other computer " . Issue # 84 of the British magazine Computer + Video Games rated the game highly , saying that " Pools is a game which no role player or adventurer should be without and people new to role playing should seriously consider buying as an introductory guide " . Another UK publication , The Games Machine , gave the game an 89 % rating . The reviewer noted that the third-person arcade style combat view is a great improvement for SSI , as they had traditionally incorporated simplistic graphics in their role-playing games . The reviewer was critical that Pool of Radiance was not original in its presentation and that the colors were a little drab , but concluded that the game is " classic Dungeons & Dragons which SSI have recreated excellently " . A review from Zzap was less positive , giving the game a score of 80 % . The reviewer felt that the game required too much " hacking , slicing and chopping " without enough emphasis on puzzle solving . The game was awarded 49 % for its puzzle factor .

Three reviewers for Computer Gaming World had conflicting reactions . Ken St. Andre - designer of the Tunnels & Trolls RPG - approved of the game despite his dislike of the D & D system , praising the art , the mixture of combat and puzzles , and surprises . He concluded , " take it from a ' rival ' designer , Pool of Radiance has my recommendation for every computer fantasy role-playing gamer " . Tracie Forman Hicks , however , stated that over-faithful use of the D & D system left it behind others like Ultima and Wizardry . She also disliked the game 's puzzles and lengthy combat sequences . Scorpia also disliked the amount of fighting in a game she otherwise described as a " well-designed slicer / dicer " , concluding that " patience ( possibly of Job ) [ is ] required to get through this one " . Shay Addams from Compute ! stated that experienced role-playing gamers " won 't find anything new here " , but recommended it to those who " love dungeons , dragons , and drama " . In their March 1989 " The Role of Computers " column in Dragon magazine # 143 , Hartley , Patricia , and Kirk Lesser ( often called " The Lessers " ) gave Pool of Radiance a three-page review . The reviewers praised Pool of Radiance as " the first offering that truly follows AD & D game rules " , calling it a " great fantasy role-playing game " that " falls into the must-buy category for avid AD & D game players " . The reviewers advised readers to " rush out to your local dealer and buy Pool Of Radiance " . They considered it SSI 's flagship product , speculating that it would " undoubtedly bring thousands of computer enthusiasts into the adventure-filled worlds of TSR " . The Dragon reviewers criticized the " notoriously slow " technology of the C64 / 128 system but added that the C64 / 128 version would become nearly unplayable without a software-based fastloader utility which Strategic Simulations integrated into the game . Conversely , the reviewers felt that the MS-DOS version was extremely fast , so much so that they had to slow the game operation down in order to read all the on-screen messages . They found that the MS-DOS version played at twice the speed of the C64 / 128 version when using the Enhanced Graphics Adapter ( EGA ) graphics mode .

Alex Simmons , Doug Johns , and Andy Mitchell reviewed the Amiga version of Pool of Radiance for Amiga Action magazine in 1990 , giving it a 79 % overall rating . Mitchell preferred the game Champions of Krynn , which had been released by the time the Amiga version of Pool of Radiance became available ; he felt that Pool of Radiance was " more of the same " when compared to Champions , but was less playable and with more limited actions for players . Simmons felt that Pool of Radiance looked primitive and seemed less polished when compared with Champions of Krynn ; he felt that although Pool was not up to the standard of Champions , he said it was still " a fine little game " . Johns , on the other hand , felt that Pool of Radiance was well worth the wait , considering it very user-friendly despite being less polished than Champions of Krynn . Pool of Radiance was well received by the gaming press and won the Origins Award for Best Fantasy or Science Fiction Computer Game of 1988 . For the second annual " Beastie Awards " in 1989 , Dragon 's readers voted Pool of Radiance the most popular fantasy role-playing game of the year , with Ultima V as the runner-up . The Apple II version was the most popular format , the PC DOS / MS-DOS came in a close second , and the Commodore 64 / 128 got the fewest votes . The primary factor given for votes was the game 's faithfulness to the AD & D system as well as the game 's graphics and easy-to-use user interface to activate commands . Pool of Radiance was also selected for the RPGA-sponsored Gamers ' Choice Awards for the Best Computer Game of 1989 . In 1990 the game received the fifth-highest number of votes in a survey of Computer Gaming World readers ' " All-Time Favorites " .

Allen Rausch , writing for GameSpy 's 2004 retrospective " A History of D & D Video Games " , concluded that although the game " certainly had its flaws ( horrendous load times , interface weirdness , and a low-level cap among others ) , it was a huge , expansive adventure that laid a good foundation for every Gold Box game that followed " . Stan Stepanic of GameFreaks365 gave a highly positive , though somewhat reserved , review of the NES port of Pool of Radiance , scoring it at 8 / 10 . He commented , " ... it 's great to see a game like this on the NES because there really wasn 't anything of this caliber at the time , RPG or otherwise . Adults were rarely given anything since nearly every title was aimed at younger audiences , so this is one of the few cases where programmers were trying to appeal to an older audience ... if you 're a fan of a true RPG , this is the game for you , you 'll be thoroughly impressed and absorbed . "

Elimination Chamber ( 2010 ) ( also known as No Way Out ( 2010 ) in Germany ) was a professional wrestling pay-per-view event produced by World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) , which took place on February 21 , 2010 at the Scottrade Center in St. Louis , Missouri . It was the first event in the Elimination Chamber series . Six matches were aired on the broadcast and one dark match occurred prior to the live broadcast . The concept of the event was that the two main event matches , one each for the World Heavyweight Championship and the WWE Championship , would occur in an Elimination Chamber . Each match featured six competitors : the defending champion and five challengers . Sheamus defended the WWE Championship against Triple H , Ted DiBiase , Randy Orton , John Cena , and Kofi Kingston in the Raw Elimination Chamber . In the SmackDown Elimination Chamber match , The Undertaker defended the World Heavyweight Championship against Chris Jericho , John Morrison , Rey Mysterio , CM Punk and R-Truth . On the undercard , Drew McIntyre defended the WWE Intercontinental Championship against Kane , The Miz defended the WWE United States Championship against Montel Vontavious Porter , and Maryse and Gail Kim competed against LayCool ( Layla and Michelle McCool ) in an interbrand Divas tag team match .

In late 2009 , World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) held a poll on their official website to allow fans to choose a name for their February pay-per-view . The choices included Elimination Chamber , Heavy Metal , Battle Chamber , Chamber of Conflict and No Way Out , which had been the name of the preceding Elimination Chamber-based event . The name Elimination Chamber won , but the event was still promoted as No Way Out in Germany . The concept of the show was that each main event match was to be contested as an Elimination Chamber match . The Elimination Chamber is a circular steel cage , consisting of chains and girders , that surrounds the ring . Four ' pods ' are enclosed within the chamber , one behind each ring post , which are on a steel platform surrounding the outside of the ring . Six wrestlers compete in the match ; four are enclosed within the pods and released at random at specific time intervals , and two start the match . Wrestlers can only be eliminated via pinfall or submission , and the last wrestler left is the winner . For the Elimination Chamber pay-per-view , both WWE world championships , the WWE Championship and the World Heavyweight Championship , were to be defended in separate Elimination Chamber matches .

Just prior to the commencement of the World Heavyweight Championship Elimination Chamber match , The Undertaker was involved in a pyrotechnics accident during his ring entrance . He was temporarily engulfed in flames on three occasions when the pyrotechnics were mistimed , and his jacket briefly caught on fire . He suffered first- and second-degree burns to his neck and chest , and according to a WWE spokesperson the injury " looked like a bad sunburn " . He was only allowed to participate in the match after being cleared by a ringside doctor and was given bottles of water throughout the match to douse himself with to alleviate the discomfort . Chris Jericho , who also competed in the match , has told on multiple occasions how the pyrotechnician responsible was relieved of his employment with WWE and escorted from the arena at the behest of The Undertaker .

The professional wrestling matches at Elimination Chamber featured professional wrestlers performing as characters in scripted events pre-determined by the hosting promotion , World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) . Storylines between the characters were produced on WWE 's weekly television shows Raw and SmackDown with the Raw and SmackDown brands — storyline divisions in which WWE assigned its employees to different programs . The main event matches for the Elimination Chamber event consisted of two Elimination Chamber matches , with Raw 's WWE Championship defended in one and SmackDown 's World Heavyweight Championship defended in the other . Qualifying matches were held on the February 1 episode of Raw to determine the five challengers who would face the WWE Champion Sheamus in Raw 's Elimination Chamber match . In qualifiers , John Cena defeated Cody Rhodes , Triple H defeated Jack Swagger , Randy Orton defeated Shawn Michaels , Ted DiBiase defeated Mark Henry , and Kofi Kingston defeated The Big Show by disqualification . In the weeks prior to Elimination Chamber the participants faced off in several matches , which included DiBiase vs. Cena ending in a no contest , Sheamus defeating Orton by disqualification , DiBiase defeating Kingston via pinfall , and Cena vs. Triple H ending in a no contest due to Sheamus interfering and attacking both participants . The February 5 episode of SmackDown saw the five wrestlers qualify to challenge The Undertaker for the World Heavyweight Championship in a similar fashion . John Morrison defeated Drew McIntyre and Kane in a triple threat match . Throughout the rest of the episode , this was followed by R-Truth defeating Mike Knox , CM Punk defeating Batista via countout , Chris Jericho defeating Matt Hardy , and Rey Mysterio defeating Dolph Ziggler . In the following weeks , the six wrestlers faced off in different combinations in singles matches that saw Mysterio pin Punk , Morrison vs. R-Truth end in a no contest due to Morrison suffering a storyline ankle injury , and Jericho defeating The Undertaker . On the February 19 episode of SmackDown , Morrison and R-Truth teamed up to face CM Punk and his ' follower ' Luke Gallows in a tag team match , which Morrison and R-Truth lost via referee stoppage .

In late December 2009 , WWE Divas Champion Melina tore her anterior cruciate ligament , and was forced to vacate the championship . As a result , it was announced in January 2010 that a single-elimination tournament would be held to determine a new champion . The tournament began on the January 4 episode of Raw , when Maryse advanced to the semi-finals by defeating Brie Bella . She was followed into the semi-finals by Gail Kim , Alicia Fox , and Eve , who defeated Jillian Hall , Kelly Kelly , and Katie Lea Burchill respectively . In the semi-finals , Maryse defeated Eve and Kim defeated Fox . It was then announced on the February 8 episode of Raw that Maryse and Kim would face one another in the final at the Elimination Chamber pay-per-view . On the February 12 episode of SmackDown , the WWE Intercontinental Champion Drew McIntyre faced Kane in a non-title match . After the match went to a double-countout , Kane chokeslammed McIntyre . It was announced the following day on WWE 's official website that Kane and McIntyre would meet at Elimination Chamber for the Intercontinental Championship . The following week , on the February 19 episode of SmackDown , Kane defeated Dolph Ziggler in a singles match . Following the match , he was attacked by McIntyre , but Kane was able to fight back and fend off the attack .

The first match that aired on the pay-per-view was the Raw Elimination Chamber match , which involved Randy Orton , Triple H , Ted DiBiase , Kofi Kingston , John Cena , and the defending WWE Champion Sheamus . Sheamus and Kingston started the match , while the other four competitors were locked inside ' pods ' . One pod at a time opened during the match at intervals of five minutes , releasing a wrestler into the match . Triple H was the first wrestler released , followed by Randy Orton , Ted DiBiase , and finally Cena . After Cena entered the match , Cody Rhodes , an ally of both DiBiase and Orton went to ringside , and threw a steel pipe into the cage . DiBiase used the pipe to hit both Orton and Cena , and then covered Orton to eliminate him from the match after approximately 24 minutes . Kingston used his finishing move , " Trouble in Paradise " ( a 540 kick ) to eliminate DiBiase after 25-and-a-half minutes . Immediately afterward , Sheamus eliminated Kingston by pinfall , before being eliminated himself by Triple H at approximately 29 minutes , leaving only Cena and Triple H in the match . Cena used a submission hold , the STF on Triple H to eliminate him from the match via submission . As a result , Cena won the WWE Championship for the sixth time , his eight world championship overall .

Immediately following the conclusion of the match , WWE Chairman Vince McMahon interrupted to cut a promo . He told Cena that he would be going to WrestleMania XXVI , only if he could beat Batista , and then ordered Cena to face Batista in a previously unannounced match for the WWE Championship . Batista speared Cena , and then performed a " Batista Bomb " ( a sitout powerbomb ) on him to earn a pinfall victory , making Batista the new WWE Champion . The third match featured Drew McIntyre defending the WWE Intercontinental Championship against Kane . The match began with Kane taking the advantage over McIntyre by clotheslining him over the top rope to the floor . Towards the end of the match , McIntyre attempted to leave the arena and lose via countout , which would have allowed him to retain the championship , but Kane brought him back inside the ring . When re-entering the ring , McIntyre poked him in the eye and then performed his " Future Shock DDT " ( a double underhook DDT ) to win the match by pinfall and remain the Intercontinental Champion .

The next match was scheduled to be the final of a tournament to determine a new Divas Champion after the championship was vacated . Maryse and Gail Kim had entered the ring when official consultant to the SmackDown General Manager , Vickie Guerrero interrupted . Guerrero stated that a result of the Raw Divas making disparaging remarks about the SmackDown Divas , she was changing the match to an interbrand Divas tag team match , with Raw Divas Kim and Maryse facing LayCool ( Michelle McCool and Layla ) from SmackDown . The story of the match was that Maryse and Kim could not work together , and Maryse attacked Kim , allowing McCool to hit her finishing move for the victory . Following the match , Maryse performed her " French Kiss DDT " on Kim . Following the match , The Miz was interviewed backstage by Josh Mathews about NXT , on which he was a mentor . He was interrupted by Montel Vontavious Porter , who informed The Miz that the two had a match next . This was followed by William Regal cutting an in-ring promo about NXT . He was interrupted by the winner of the 2010 Royal Rumble match , Edge , who stated that he would be deciding which championship to challenge for at WrestleMania on the next episode of Raw . Edge then speared Regal .

The fifth match was a previously unannounced contest which saw The Miz defend his WWE United States Championship against Montel Vontavious Porter . The Miz was accompanied by his tag team partner , The Big Show , while Porter was accompanied by Mark Henry , with whom he had regularly teamed . Porter took the advantage at the beginning of the match , before The Miz was able to fight back with a swinging DDT . When he climbed to the top rope , however , Porter knocked him off to regain the advantage . The Big Show pulled The Miz out of the ring to safety , and then threw Henry into the security barricade at ringside . With the referee distracted by this , The Big Show used his " Knockout Punch " on Porter , and The Miz was able to pin him to retain his championship . The main event of the pay-per-view was the SmackDown Elimination Chamber match for the World Heavyweight Championship , featuring the defending champion The Undertaker , CM Punk , Rey Mysterio , Chris Jericho , John Morrison , and R-Truth . Mysterio , Morrison , and Jericho entered first and were locked into pods . The Undertaker was the fourth to make his way down to the ring , but an accident occurred during his entrance when his pyrotechnics were mistimed , resulting in him being momentarily engulfed in flames . He was cleared by a ringside doctor to wrestle , however , and was able to compete in the match . The final two , who were to start the match , were CM Punk , who was accompanied by his stable , the Straight Edge Society of Serena and Luke Gallows , and R-Truth . Punk cut a promo on his way to the ring , but was interrupted by R-Truth 's entrance . Punk was able to eliminate R-Truth in approximately three-and-a-half minutes , before any other competitor had entered the match , and finished his promo afterward . Mysterio entered after the first five minutes had passed , and eliminated Punk before the next competitor entered . The next entrant was revealed to be Jericho , and he and Mysterio wrestled for five minutes until Morrison was released . Morrison utilised his " Starship Pain " finisher ( a split-legged corkscrew moonsault ) to pin Mysterio and eliminate him from the match . The final entrant into the match was the defending champion The Undertaker , who was able to eliminate Morrison following a chokeslam after approximately 28 minutes . Shawn Michaels , who had requested and been denied a match with The Undertaker for WrestleMania , snuck into the chamber , and performed his " Sweet Chin Music " superkick on The Undertaker . This allowed Jericho to pin The Undertaker to win the match and the World Heavyweight Championship for the third time .

Following his interference in the Elimination Chamber match to prevent The Undertaker from winning , Shawn Michaels cut a promo on the next episode of Raw , stating that he interfered so that The Undertaker would agree to a rematch at WrestleMania XXVI to get revenge . The Undertaker accepted the match on the condition that if Michaels lost , he would have to retire , to which Michaels agreed . Two weeks later , the pair agreed to make the match a no countout , no disqualification match . Edge returned from injury at the Royal Rumble as a surprise entrant in the Royal Rumble match , which he won , earning a guaranteed match for any WWE world championship . Following Jericho 's victory in the Elimination Chamber , in which he won the World Heavyweight Championship , Edge speared him the following night on Raw and announced that he had elected to face Jericho at WrestleMania . Following this announcement , Edge began a campaign of surprise attacks on Jericho , spearing him on several occasions in an attempt to play mind games with Jericho . On the March 12 episode of SmackDown , Jericho hosted a special edition of his talk show segment , The Highlight Reel , with Edge as the guest . Edge attempted to spear Jericho again , but Jericho was able to avoid it and hit Edge with the World Heavyweight Championship belt instead .

After Batista won the WWE Championship from John Cena at Elimination Chamber , Cena requested a rematch . Mr. McMahon agreed , on the condition that Cena must defeat Batista in a non-title match that night on Raw . Batista intentionally low-blowed Cena during the match to get disqualified and set up their match at WrestleMania . To build up their match , Batista interfered in several of Cena 's matches in the weeks prior to WrestleMania , both attacking Cena or distracting him so that his opponent could gain the advantage . Tension within The Legacy faction had been growing since Cody Rhodes and Ted DiBiase accidentally cost Randy Orton the WWE Championship at the Royal Rumble . After DiBiase eliminated Orton from the Elimination Chamber match , with the help of Rhodes , Orton turned on Rhodes and DiBiase , and attacked them during a six-man tag team match causing The Legacy to lose . In the following weeks , Orton faced DiBiase in a singles match and DiBiase and Rhodes in a two-on-one handicap match , until the guest host of Raw , Steve Austin , booked a triple threat match between Orton , Rhodes , and DiBiase for WrestleMania .

The event received generally negative reviews . Writing for The Sun , Rob McNichol criticised the majority of the show as being " filler " and stated that the Divas match was " poor fare " . Writing for Canadian Online Explorer 's wrestling section , Dale Plummer and Nick Tylwalk also slammed the Divas match , rating it 0.5 out of 10 , and stating that it " was pretty much a complete waste of time " , a sentiment echoed by the Pro Wrestling Torch 's James Caldwell , who stated that the match was a " throwaway " . The non-Elimination Chamber matches on the show were mostly derided as being unimportant , with The Baltimore Sun 's reviewer Kevin Eck stating that they " came off as filler " . Despite the generally negative reviews , McNichol praised the unannounced championship match between Batista and Cena , stating that " it was good storytelling and played out Batista 's current character traits well " . He singled out John Morrison 's performance in the Elimination Chamber match as " impressive " . His praise was echoed by Caldwell , who stated that Morrison had " some standout moments " throughout the match . Wrestling journalist Dave Meltzer praised the United States Championship match between The Miz and Montel Vontavious Porter , stating that it was " good " . Eck agreed , stating that it was " the best of the three non-chamber matches " .

Overall , Plummer and Tylwalk rated the event 5 out of 10 , stating that it was " a strangely paced , uneven affair that dragged between its pair of namesake matches " , but that it succeeded in building up matches for WrestleMania . McNichol agreed , praising the storyline developments in setting up WrestleMania matches , but ultimately calling the event " forgettable " . He awarded the event 7 out of 10 . Caldwell also criticised the pay-per-view heavily , stating that it was an " underwhelming overall PPV with a weak , weak mid-card " . 17,000 people attended Elimination Chamber at the Scottrade Center , drawing a gate of US $ 850,000 . The event received 285,000 buys on pay-per-view , an increase of 13,000 compared to No Way Out 2009 's 272,000 buys . The DVD of the event was released on March 23 , 2010 .

Mario Bros. ( マリオブラザーズ , Mario Burazāzu ) is a platform game published and developed for arcades by Nintendo in 1983 . It was created by Shigeru Miyamoto . It has been featured as a minigame in the Super Mario Advance series and numerous other games . Mario Bros. has been re-released for the Wii 's , Nintendo 3DS 's , and Wii U 's Virtual Console services in Japan , North America , Europe and Australia . In the game , Mario is portrayed as an Italian-American plumber who , along with his younger brother Luigi , has to defeat creatures that have been coming from the sewers below New York City . The gameplay focuses on Mario 's extermination of them by flipping them on their backs and kicking them away . The original versions of Mario Bros. — the arcade version and the Family Computer / Nintendo Entertainment System ( FC / NES ) version — were received positively by critics .

Mario Bros. features two plumbers , Mario and Luigi , having to investigate the sewers of New York after strange creatures have been appearing down there . The objective of the game is to defeat all of the enemies in each phase . The mechanics of Mario Bros. involve only running and jumping . Unlike future Mario games , players cannot jump on enemies and squash them , unless they were already turned on their back . Each phase is a series of platforms with pipes at each corner of the screen , along with an object called a " POW " block in the center . Phases use wraparound , meaning that enemies and players that go off to one side will reappear on the opposite side . The player gains points by defeating multiple enemies consecutively and can participate in a bonus round to gain more points . Enemies are defeated by kicking them over once they have been flipped on their back . This is accomplished by hitting the platform the enemy is on directly beneath them . If the player allows too much time to pass after doing this , the enemy will flip itself back over , changing in color and increasing speed . Each phase has a certain number of enemies , with the final enemy immediately changing color and increasing its speed .

There are four enemies : the Shellcreeper , which simply walks around ; the Sidestepper , which requires two hits to flip over ; the Fighter Fly , which moves by jumping and can only be flipped when it is touching a platform ; and the Slipice , which turns platforms into slippery ice . When bumped from below , the Slipice dies immediately instead of flipping over . The " POW " block flips all enemies touching a platform or the floor when a player hits it from below . It can be used three times before it disappears . In the Super Mario Bros. 3 in-game Player-Versus-Player version of this minigame , each of the three uses causes the opponent to lose a card and all the enemies to be flipped over . Another feature in this small remake is that the pipes are straight , occasionally spitting out large fireballs at the two plumbers . Coins appear whenever enemies are defeated and may be collected for bonus points . As the game progresses , elements are added to increase the difficulty . Fireballs either bounce around the screen or travel directly from one side to the other , and icicles form under the platforms and fall loose . Bonus rounds give the players a chance to score extra points and lives by collecting coins without having to deal with enemies ; the " POW " block regenerates itself on each of these screens .

Mario Bros. was created by Shigeru Miyamoto and Gunpei Yokoi , two of the lead developers for the video game Donkey Kong . In Donkey Kong , Mario dies if he falls too far . Yokoi suggested to Miyamoto that he should be able to fall from any height , which Miyamoto was not sure of , thinking that it would make it " not much of a game . " He eventually agreed , thinking it would be okay for him to have some superhuman abilities . He designed a prototype that had Mario " jumping and bouncing around " , which he was satisfied with . The element of combating enemies from below was introduced after Yokoi suggested it , observing that it would work since there were multiple floors . However , it proved to be too easy to eliminate enemies this way , which the developers fixed by requiring players to touch the enemies after they 've been flipped to defeat them . This was also how they introduced the turtle as an enemy , which they conceived as an enemy that could only be hit from below . Because of Mario 's appearance in Donkey Kong with overalls , a hat , and a thick moustache , Shigeru Miyamoto thought that he should be a plumber as opposed to a carpenter , and designed this game to reflect that . Another contributing factor was the game 's setting : it was a large network of giant pipes , so they felt a change in occupation was necessary for him .

A popular story of how Mario went from Jumpman to Mario is that an Italian-American landlord , Mario Segale , had barged in on Nintendo of America 's staff to demand rent , and they decided to name Jumpman after him . Miyamoto also felt that the best setting for this game was New York because of its " labyrinthine subterranean network of sewage pipes . " The pipes were inspired by several manga , which Miyamoto states feature waste grounds with pipes lying around . In this game , they were used in a way to allow the enemies to enter and exit the stage through them to avoid getting enemies piled up on the bottom of the stage . The green coloring of the pipes , which Nintendo late president Satoru Iwata called an uncommon color , came from Miyamoto having a limited color palette and wanting to keep things colorful . He added that green was the best because it worked well when two shades of it were combined . Mario Bros. is one of the first platform games ever created , along with Donkey Kong . It also introduced Mario 's brother , Luigi , who was created for the multiplayer mode by doing a palette swap of Mario . The two-player mode and several aspects of gameplay were inspired by an earlier video game called Joust . To date , Mario Bros. has been released for more than a dozen platforms . The first movement from Mozart 's Eine kleine Nachtmusik is used at the start of the game . This song has been used in later video games , including Dance Dance Revolution Mario Mix and Super Smash Bros. Brawl .

Despite its innovations , Mario Bros. was not a major success in North America due to the video game crash in 1983 . It did however receive a number of home versions on the Apple II , Atari 2600 , Atari 5200 , Atari 8-bit computers , Atari 7800 , Amstrad CPC , and ZX Spectrum . The Commodore 64 had two versions : an Atarisoft port which was not commercially released and a 1986 version by Ocean Software . The Atari 8-bit computer version by Sculptured Software , as well as the Apple II port programmed by Jimmy Huey of Designer Software , were the only home versions of the game to feature the falling icicles ( the NES version omitted them due to space constraints on early NES cartridges ) . The latter conversion was not sold either . The game was also rereleased on the Virtual Console service in North America , Australia , Europe and Japan for the Wii , Nintendo 3DS and Wii U. It was also remade on copies of games in the Game Boy Advance 's Super Mario Advance series as well as Mario & Luigi : Superstar Saga , and it was included as a mini-game in Super Mario Bros. 3 . The Game Boy Advance version was included in the 10 free games given out by Nintendo in the 3DS ambassador program due to its inclusion on the cart for the GBA port of Yoshi 's Island which was one of the games on the list . Mario Bros. is also potentially slated for a second release , this time a 3D Classics remake , on the Nintendo 3DS , and may feature camera support , 3D support , or analog support . This release was featured among other games from the NES and SNES to be released for the 3DS on a tech demo called Classic Games at E3 2010 .

The NES version was included as a piece of furniture in Animal Crossing for the GameCube , along with many other NES games , though this one required the use of a Nintendo e-Reader , a Game Boy Advance accessory , and a North America-exclusive Animal Crossing e-Card . This version was later re-released in the second series of NES e-Cards , and was even re-released through the Famicom Mini series in Japan . An improved port called Kaette Kita Mario Bros. ( かえってきたマリオブラザーズ ) was released in Japan for the Family Computer Disk System , with added features and revisions to gameplay . It also featured cutscenes and even advertisements , being sponsored by the food company Nagatanien . Kaette Kita is very rare since it was only available as a Disk Writer promotion . A later NES port was released exclusively in Europe in 1993 , called Mario Bros. Classic ; this version had a more refined control and stage intermissions closer to the original arcade version . In 1984 , Hudson Soft made two different games based on Mario Bros. The first was Mario Bros. Special ( マリオブラザーズスペシャル , Mario Burazāzu Supesharu ) , which was a re-imagining of the original Mario Bros. with new phases , mechanics and gameplay . The second was Punch Ball Mario Bros. ( パンチボールマリオブラザーズ , Panchi Bōru Mario Burazāzu ) , which featured a new gameplay mechanic involving punching small balls to stun enemies . Both games were released for the PC-8801 , FM-7 , and X1 and have been described as average for the most part , neither the best or worst games in the series . Mario Clash , a game released in 1995 for the Virtual Boy , was developed as a straight remake of Mario Bros. , with the working title Mario Bros. VB . It was the first stereoscopic 3D Mario game . The objective of the game is to knock all the enemies in a particular phase off ledges . Instead of hitting them from below , like in Mario Bros. , the player must hit enemies using Koopa shells .

Mario Bros. was only modestly successful in Japanese arcades . The arcade cabinets have since become mildly rare . To date in Japan , the NES version of Mario Bros. has sold more than 1.63 million copies , and the Famicom Mini re-release of the NES version has sold more than 90,000 copies . Despite being released during the North American video game crash of 1983 , the arcade game , as well as the industry , were not affected . Video game author Dave Ellis considers it one of the more memorable classic games . Opinions on the Nintendo Entertainment System ( NES ) version of Mario Bros. have been mostly mixed , but does receive positive reviews from gamers . However , in a review of the Virtual Console game , GameSpot criticized the NES version for being a poor port of the arcade version . The Virtual Console version in particular was heavily criticized . GameSpot criticized it , saying that not only is it a port of an inferior version , but it retains all of the technical flaws found in this version . It also criticizes the Mario Bros. ports in general , saying that this is just one of many ports that have been made of it throughout Nintendo 's history.IGN complimented the Virtual Console version 's gameplay , even though it was critical of Nintendo 's decision to release an " inferior " NES port on the Virtual Console . IGN also agreed on the issue of the number of ports . They said that since most people have Mario Bros. on one of the Super Mario Advance games , this version is not worth 500 Wii Points . The Nintendo e-Reader version of Mario Bros. was slightly more well received by IGN , who praised the gameplay , but criticized it for lack of multiplayer and for not being worth the purchase because of the Super Mario Advance versions .

The Super Mario Advance releases and Mario & Luigi : Superstar Saga all featured the same version of Mario Bros. ( titled Mario Bros. Classic ) . The mode was first included in Super Mario Advance , and was praised for its simplicity and entertainment value . IGN called this mode fun in its review of Super Mario World : Super Mario Advance 2 , but complained that it would have been nice if the developers had come up with a new game to replace it . Their review of Yoshi 's Island : Super Mario Advance 3 criticizes it more so than in the review of Super Mario Advance 2 because Nintendo chose not to add multiplayer to any of the mini-games found in that game , sticking instead with an identical version of the Mario Bros. game found in previous versions . GameSpot 's review of Super Mario Advance 4 : Super Mario Bros. 3 calls it a throwaway feature that could have simply been gutted . Other reviewers were not as negative on the feature 's use in later Super Mario Advance games . Despite its use being criticized in most Super Mario Advance games , a GameSpy review called the version found in Super Mario Advance 2 a blast to play in multi-player because it only requires at least two Game Boy Advances , one copy of the game , and a link cable .

Mary Isenhour is an American political strategist , campaign manager , and government official , currently serving as Chief of Staff for Pennsylvania Governor Tom Wolf . Prior to the Wolf administration , Isenhour served executive director of the Pennsylvania Democratic Party , was state director of Hillary Clinton 's 2008 presidential campaign , and assisted with the successful campaigns of U.S. Senator Bob Casey , Jr. and Pennsylvania Governor Ed Rendell . Isenhour also previously worked as executive director of the Pennsylvania House Democratic Campaign Committee , and started a political consulting firm with former state party chairman T.J. Rooney . In 2010 , PoliticsPA called her " one of the top consultants in the state " , and said , " few can move between the strategy of campaigning and its mechanics with the ease that she does " . Starting her career working on the Kansas House of Representatives staff , Isenhour eventually becoming chief of staff to House Minority Leader Tom Sawyer , and then director of the Democratic Party 's Kansas Coordinated Campaign for legislative races . She worked as the national political director for the Democratic Legislative Campaign Committee before starting her Pennsylvania political career in 1999 .

A Kansas native , Isenhour attended the University of Kansas . She began her political career as a staffer in the Kansas House of Representatives . In 1990 she worked as a legislative aide to House Minority Leader Marvin Barkis , and the following year was an administrative assistant to House Majority Leader Donna Whiteman . From 1991 to 1995 , Isenhour served as Chief of Staff to House Minority Leader Tom Sawyer , where she worked with Democratic and Republican lawmakers alike to advance legislation , served as a liaison between Sawyer and other officials , and worked with members of leadership and committees to develop legislative strategies and build coalitions . In 1992 , Isenhour was the director of the Democratic Party 's Kansas Coordinated Campaign for legislative races , both in the state House and Senate . Those races included more than three dozen candidates by July 1992 . From 1995 to 1999 , Isenhour served as the Democratic Legislative Campaign Committee 's national political director , based in Washington D.C. In that capacity , she worked with legislative leaders and caucus campaign staff in more 15 states to help win or preserve Democratic majorities in state legislatures . In 1996 , she worked in Iowa to help orchestrate the Democratic legislative campaigns in that the Iowa General Assembly , partnering with Iowa Senate Majority Leader Wally Horn and other key legislative Democrats to improving the party 's position . She described it as an attempt to avoid a repeat of 1994 elections , in which Democrats suffered major losses in both federal and state offices during the Republican Revolution . Isenhour said of those elections :

Isenhour began her Pennsylvania political career in 1999 , when she became executive director of the Pennsylvania House Democratic Campaign Committee , helping to get Democratic candidates elected to the Pennsylvania House of Representatives . She held the position until 2003 . Isenhour assisted with Bob Casey , Jr . ' s successful 2006 campaign against Republican incumbent Rick Santorum , served as political adviser to state House Democratic Leader Frank Dermody , and ran Governor Ed Rendell 's successful 2006 re-election campaign against challenger Lynn Swann , after which she helped plan Rendell 's 2007 inauguration . Rendell appointed her to the Pennsylvania Community Service Advisory Board . Isenhour worked for the Pennsylvania Democratic Party , serving as an aide and political adviser to T.J. Rooney , the state party chairman . In 2007 , she became executive director of the party , replacing Don Morabito , who took a position in the Rendell administration . The party enjoyed much success during her time there , controlling the Governor 's office , three of four statewide row offices , two U.S. Senators , a majority in the State House , and picking up five seats in the Congressional delegation . She served as director of PA Victory , a statewide coordinated campaign effort . Isenhour was also chosen as the Pennsylvania state director for Hillary Clinton 's 2008 presidential campaign , after Rendell recommended her for the position . There was talk of Isenhour continuing to work with the Clinton administration after the primary , but she instead returned to her position with the Pennsylvania Democratic Party .

In 2008 , Isenhour and Rooney met with MSNBC news commentator Chris Matthews to discuss the possibility of Matthews running against Republican U.S. Senator Arlen Specter , although he ultimately did not run . Also that year , Isenhour and her Republican counterpart Luke Bernstein , executive director of the Republican Party of Pennsylvania , together taught a class about presidential elections at the Dickinson College in Carlisle , Pennsylvania . Isenhour and Bernstein both believed it was the first class of its type , and said the two had a very cordial relationship despite representing opposite political parties . Isenhour also taught about electoral politics at other educational institutions , including the University of Pennsylvania , Central Penn College and The Washington Center . In July 2010 , after more than seven years leading the Pennsylvania Democratic Party , Isenhour and Rooney started the political consulting firm Isenhour Rooney Strategies , which later became Isenhour Rooney and Carey . Also in 2010 , Isenhour was the only woman named to the PoliticsPA 's Pennsylvania Top 10 Influencers List by Campaigns and Elections , PoliticsPA also called her " one of the top consultants in the state " , and said " few can move between the strategy of campaigning and its mechanics with the ease that she does " . Among the candidates she advised was Rob Teplitz in his successful campaign for Pennsylvania State Senate in 2012 . Eisenhour served on the board of Planned Parenthood of Pennsylvania .

Isenhour was an early supporter of Pennsylvania gubernatorial candidate Tom Wolf , and became Wolf 's senior campaign adviser during his 2014 campaign , at a time when state Representative Allyson Schwartz and state Treasurer Rob McCord were considered to have better chances of winning . Isenhour , who had long been acquainted with Wolf , had not intended to become involved with a lengthy and work-intensive gubernatorial campaign , but said she was convinced to do so after an hour-long phone conversation with Wolf in 2013 , after which she was convinced he was the right man for the job : " I 've been in politics 30 years and I 've never had a candidate like this . " Isenhour maintained other clients during his campaign , but said Wolf was " my main focus for the next year and a half " . After Wolf 's successful election , Isenhour co-chaired his inaugural committee , then worked as his Secretary of Legislative Affairs , serving as a liaison during negotiating sessions at the Pennsylvania General Assembly , and providing key planning during the governor 's budget strategy . Political reporter John L. Micek wrote of Isenhour : " She is in the unique position of having to work with Republicans she once ran campaigns against . " Her annual salary in the position was $ 145,018 . Isenhour developed a reputation for communicating and building relationships with legislative leaders and staff members from both parties .

In July 2015 , Isenhour replaced Kathleen McGinty as Wolf 's Chief of Staff , after McGinty resigned six months into her tenure to pursue a campaign for U.S. Senate . Wolf called Isenhour " one of my closest advisors " and " a valuable part of my administration " , and said she " really understands how the politics of this place actually works . " The selection was praised by both parties , including House and Senate Republicans , who expressed hope she would be less adversarial than McGinty . The Butler Eagle wrote an editorial criticizing the appointment due to her position on the Planned Parenthood of Pennsylvania board , in light of a national controversy over undercover videos about the group 's alleged sale of aborted fetal body parts . Isenhour came into the Chief of Staff position more than three weeks into a budget impasse between Wolf and the Republican-controlled General Assembly . In October 2015 , four months into the state budget impasse , Isenhour issued a memo notifying Wolf 's administration of a hiring freeze and travel ban . On February 3 , 2016 , Isenhour notified the state Public Employee Retirement Commission that , under Wolf 's orders , all employment of its staff would be discontinued . State Representatives Stephen Bloom of Cumberland County and Seth Grove of York County have filed a lawsuit against Wolf challenging that action , arguing the governor lacks the power to dissolve the commission and acted contrary to the Pennsylvania Constitution .

The Isle of Portland is a limestone tied island , 6 kilometres ( 4 mi ) long by 2.7 kilometres ( 1.7 mi ) wide , in the English Channel . Portland is 8 kilometres ( 5 mi ) south of the resort of Weymouth , forming the southernmost point of the county of Dorset , England . A barrier beach over which runs the A354 road connects it to Chesil Beach and the mainland . Portland and Weymouth together form the borough of Weymouth and Portland . The population of Portland is 12,400 . Portland is a central part of the Jurassic Coast , a World Heritage Site on the Dorset and east Devon coast , important for its geology and landforms . Its name is used for one of the British Sea Areas , and has been exported as the name of North American and Australian towns . Portland stone , famous for its use in British and world architecture , including St Paul 's Cathedral and the United Nations Headquarters , continues to be quarried . Portland Harbour , in between Portland and Weymouth , is one of the largest man-made harbours in the world . The harbour was made by the building of stone breakwaters between 1848 and 1905 . From its inception it was a Royal Navy base , and played prominent roles during the First and Second World Wars ; ships of the Royal Navy and NATO countries worked up and exercised in its waters until 1995 . The harbour is now a civilian port and popular recreation area , and was used for the 2012 Olympic Games .

Portland has been inhabited since at least the Mesolithic period ( the Middle Stone Age ) — there is archaeological evidence of Mesolithic inhabitants at the Culverwell Mesolithic Site , near Portland Bill , and of habitation since then . The Romans occupied Portland , reputedly calling it Vindelis . The Vikings first raid on England occurred in Portland in 787 AD , as recorded in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle . Three lost Viking ships landed at Portland Bill . The King 's reeve tried to collect taxes from them . They killed him and sailed on . They were Northmen from Hordaland ( the district around Hardanger fjord in west Norway ) . In 1539 King Henry VIII ordered the construction of Portland Castle for defence against attacks by the French ; the castle cost £ 4,964 . It is one of the best preserved castles from this period , and is opened to the public by the custodians English Heritage . In the 17th century , chief architect and Surveyor-General to James I , Inigo Jones , surveyed the area and introduced the local Portland stone to London ; using it in his Banqueting House , Whitehall , and for repairs on St Paul 's Cathedral . His successor , Sir Christopher Wren , the architect and Member of Parliament for nearby Weymouth , used six million tons of white Portland limestone to rebuild destroyed parts of the capital after the Great Fire of London of 1666 . Well-known buildings in the capital , including St Paul 's Cathedral and the eastern front of Buckingham Palace feature the stone . After the First World War , a quarry was opened by The Crown Estate to provide stone for the Cenotaph in Whitehall and half a million gravestones for war cemeteries , and after the Second World War hundreds of thousands of gravestones were hewn for soldiers who had fallen on the Western Front . Portland cement has nothing to do with Portland ; it was so named due to its similar colour to Portland stone when mixed with lime and sand .

There have been railways in Portland since the early 19th century . The Merchant 's Railway was the earliest — it opened in 1826 ( one year after the Stockton and Darlington railway ) and ran from the quarries at the north of Tophill to a pier at Castletown , from where the Portland stone was shipped around the country . The Weymouth and Portland Railway was laid in 1865 , and ran from a station in Melcombe Regis , across the Fleet and along the low isthmus behind Chesil Beach to a station at Victoria Square in Chiswell . At the end of the 19th century the line was extended to the top of the island as the Easton and Church Ope Railway , running through Castletown and ascending the cliffs at East Weares , to loop back north to a station in Easton . The line closed to passengers in 1952 , and the final goods train ( and two passenger ' specials ' ) ran in April 1965 . The Royal National Institution for the Preservation of Life from Shipwreck stationed a lifeboat at Portland in 1826 , which was withdrawn in 1851 . Coastal flooding has affected Portland 's residents and transport for centuries — the only way off the island by land is along the causeway in the lee of Chesil Beach . At times of extreme floods ( about every 10 years ) this road link is cut by floods . The low-lying village of Chiswell used to flood on average every 5 years . Chesil Beach occasionally faces severe storms and massive waves , which have a fetch across the Atlantic Ocean . Following two severe flood events in the 1970s , Weymouth and Portland Borough Council and Wessex Water decided to investigate the structure of the beach , and coastal management schemes that could be built to protect Chiswell and the beach road . In the 1980s it was agreed that a scheme to protect against a one-in-five-year storm would be practicable ; it would reduce flood depth and duration in more severe storms . Hard engineering techniques were employed in the scheme , including a gabion running 550 metres ( 600 yd ) to the north of Chiswell , an extended sea wall in Chesil Cove , and a culvert running from inside the beach , underneath the beach road and into Portland Harbour , to divert flood water away from low-lying areas .

At the start of the First World War , HMS Hood was sunk in the passage between the southern breakwaters to protect the harbour from torpedo and submarine attack . Portland Harbour was formed ( 1848 – 1905 ) by the construction of breakwaters , but before that the natural anchorage had hosted ships of the Royal Navy for more than 500 years . It was a centre for Admiralty research into asdic submarine detection and underwater weapons from 1917 to 1998 ; the shore base HMS Serepta was renamed HMS Osprey in 1927 . During the Second World War Portland was the target of heavy bombing , although most warships had moved north as Portland was within enemy striking range across the Channel . Portland was a major embarkation point for Allied forces on D-Day in 1944 . Early helicopters were stationed at Portland in 1946 – 1948 , and in 1959 a shallow tidal flat , The Mere , was infilled , and sports fields taken to form a heliport . The station was formally commissioned as HMS Osprey , which then became the largest and busiest military helicopter station in Europe . The base was gradually improved with additional landing areas and one of England 's shortest runways , at 229 metres ( 751 ft ) . There are still two prisons on Portland : HMP The Verne , which until 1949 was a huge Victorian military fortress , and a Young Offenders ' Institution ( HMYOI ) on the Grove clifftop . This was the original prison built for convicts who quarried stone for the Portland Breakwaters from 1848 . For a few years until 2005 Britain 's only prison ship , HMP The Weare , was berthed in the harbour .

The naval base closed after the end of the Cold War in 1995 , and the Royal Naval Air Station closed in 1999 , although the runway remains in use for Her Majesty 's Coastguard Search and Rescue flights as MRCC Portland . MRCC Portland 's area of responsibility extends midway across the English Channel , and from Start Point in Devon to the Dorset / Hampshire border , covering an area of around 10,400 square kilometres ( 4,000 sq mi ) . The 12 Search and Rescue teams in the Portland area dealt with almost 1000 incidents in 2005 .

Portland is an ancient Royal Manor , and until the 19th century remained a separate liberty within Dorset for administration purposes . It was an urban district from 1894 to 1974 , until the borough of Weymouth and Portland formed on 1 April 1974 under the Local Government Act 1972 . This merged the borough of Weymouth and Melcombe Regis with Portland urban district . For local elections the borough is divided into 15 wards , and three of them cover Portland . Elections take place in a four-year cycle ; one third of the councillors in all but three wards retire or seek re-election in years one , two and three , and county council elections are held in year four . The Mayor of Weymouth and Portland is Ray Banham ( Liberal Democrat ) , Kate Wheller ( Labour Party ) is Deputy Mayor . Weymouth , Portland and the Purbeck district are in the South Dorset parliamentary constituency , created in 1885 . The constituency elects one Member of Parliament ; the current MP is Richard Drax ( Conservative ) . South Dorset , the rest of the South West England , and Gibraltar are in the South West England constituency of the European Parliament .

The Isle of Portland lies in the English Channel , 3 kilometres ( 2 mi ) south of Wyke Regis , and 200 km ( 120 mi ) west-southwest of London , at 50 ° 33 ′ 0 ″ N 2 ° 26 ′ 24 ″ W ( 50.55 , − 2.44 ) . Portland is situated approximately halfway along the UNESCO Jurassic Coast World Heritage Site ; the site includes 153 kilometres ( 95 mi ) of the Dorset and east Devon coast that is important for its geology and landforms . The South West Coast Path runs around the coast ; it is the United Kingdom 's longest national trail at 1,014 kilometres ( 630 mi ) . Portland is unusual as it is connected to the mainland at Abbotsbury by Chesil Beach , a tombolo which runs 29 kilometres ( 18 mi ) north-west to West Bay . Portland is sometimes defined incorrectly as a tombolo — in fact Portland is a tied island , and Chesil Beach is the tombolo ( a spit joined to land at both ends ) . There are eight settlements on Portland , the largest being Fortuneswell in Underhill and Easton on Tophill . Castletown and Chiswell are the other villages in Underhill , and Weston , Southwell , Wakeham and the Grove are on the Tophill plateau . Many old buildings are built out of Portland Stone ; Several parts have been designated Conservation Areas to preserve the unique character the older settlements which date back hundreds of years . The architecture ; the natural and man-made environment and the proximity to the sea give Portland overall character which is quite distinct .

Geologically , Portland is separated into two areas ; the steeply sloping land at its north end called Underhill , and the larger , gently sloping land to the south , called Tophill . Portland stone lies under Tophill ; the strata decline at a shallow angle of around 1.5 degrees , from a height of 151 metres ( 495 ft ) near the Verne in the north , to just above sea level at Portland Bill . The geology of Underhill is different to Tophill ; Underhill lies on a steep escarpment composed of Portland Sand , lying above a thicker layer of Kimmeridge Clay , which extends to Chesil Beach and Portland Harbour . This Kimmeridge Clay has resulted in a series of landslides , forming West Weares and East Weares . 2.4 kilometres ( 1.5 mi ) underneath south Dorset lies a layer of Triassic rock salt , and Portland is one of four locations in the United Kingdom where the salt is thick enough to create stable cavities . Portland Gas applied to excavate 14 caverns to store 1,000,000,000 cubic metres ( 3.5 × 1010 cu ft ) of natural gas , which is one percent of the UK 's total annual demand . It was proposed that the caverns should be connected to the National gas grid at Mappowder via a 37-kilometre ( 23 mi ) pipeline . Plans had it that the surface facilities should be complete to store the first gas in 2011 , and the entire cavern space available for storage in winter 2013 . As part of the £ 350 million scheme , the Grade II listed former Old Engine Shed would be converted into a £ 1.5 million educational centre with a café and an exhibition space about the geology of Portland . However , as of 2014 , these plans are on hold .

Portland Bill is the southern tip of the island of Portland . The Bill has three lighthouse towers : The Higher Lighthouse is now a dwelling and holiday apartments ; the Lower Lighthouse is now a bird observatory and field centre which opened in 1961 . The white and red lighthouse on Bill Point replaced the Higher and Lower Lighthouses in 1906 . It is a prominent and much photographed feature ; an important landmark for ships passing the headland and its tidal race . The current lighthouse was refurbished in 1996 and became remotely controlled . It now contains a visitors ' centre giving information and guided tours of the lighthouse . As of June 2009 , the lighthouse uses a 1 kW metal-halide US-made lamp with an operational life of about 4000 hours , or 14 months . Two earlier lighthouses stand further inland : one is an important observatory used by ornithologists , providing records of bird migration and accommodation for visitors . Portland Ledge ( the Shambles ) is an underwater extension of Portland Stone into the English Channel at a place where the depth of Channel is 20 to 40 metres ( about 10 to 20 fathoms ) . Tidal flow is disrupted by the feature ; at 10 metres ( about 5 fathoms ) deep and 2.4 kilometres ( 1.3 nmi ) long , it causes a tidal race to the south of Portland Bill , the so-called Portland Race . The current only stops for brief periods during the 12 ½ hour tidal cycle and can reach 4 metres per second ( 8 kn ) at the spring tide of 2 metres ( 6 ft 7 in ) .

Due to its isolated coastal location , the Isle of Portland has an extensive range of flora and fauna ; the coastline and disused quarries are designated as Sites of Special Scientific Interest . Sea and migratory birds occupy the cliffs in different seasons , sometimes these include rare species which draw ornithologists from around the country . Rare visitors to the surrounding seas include dolphins , seals and basking sharks . Chesil Beach is one of only two sites in Britain where the Scaly Cricket can be found ; unlike any other cricket it is wingless and does not sing or hop . Ten British Primitive goats were introduced to the East Weares part of the island to control scrub in 2007 . The comparatively warm and sunny climate allows species of plants to thrive which do not on the mainland . The limestone soil has low nutrient levels ; hence smaller species of wild flowers and grasses are able to grow in the absence of larger species . Portland Sea Lavender can be found on the higher sea cliffs — unique to Portland it is one of the United Kingdom 's rarest plants . The wild flowers and plants make an excellent habitat for butterflies ; over half of the British Isles ' 57 butterfly species can be seen on Portland , including varieties that migrate from mainland Europe . Species live on Portland that are rare in the United Kingdom , including the limestone race of the Silver Studded Blue .

The mild seas which almost surround the tied island produce a temperate climate ( Köppen climate classification Cfb ) with a small variation in daily and annual temperatures . The average annual mean temperature from 1981 to 2010 was 11.2 ° C ( 52.2 ° F ) . The warmest month is August , which has an average temperature range of 14.5 to 19.3 ° C ( 58.1 to 66.7 ° F ) , and the coolest is February , which has a range of 4.0 to 8.0 ° C ( 39.2 to 46.4 ° F ) . Maximum and minimum temperatures throughout the year are above England 's average , and Portland is in AHS Heat zone 1 . Mean sea surface temperatures range from 7.0 ° C ( 44.6 ° F ) in February to 17.2 ° C ( 63.0 ° F ) in August ; the annual mean is 11.8 ° C ( 53.2 ° F ) . The mild seas that surround Portland act to keep night-time temperatures above freezing , making winter frost rare : on average 9.6 days per year — this is far below the United Kingdom 's average annual total of 55.6 days of frost . Days with snow lying are equally rare : on average zero to six days per year ; almost all winters have one day or less with snow lying . It may snow or sleet in winter , yet it almost never settles on the ground — coastal areas in South West England such as Portland experience the mildest winters in the UK . Portland is less affected by the Atlantic storms that Devon and Cornwall experience . The growing season lasts for more than 310 days per year , and the borough is in Hardiness zone 9b .

Weymouth and Portland , and the rest of the south coast , has the sunniest climate in the United Kingdom . Portland averaged 1798.9 hours of sunshine annually between 1981 and 2010 , which is 41 % of the maximum possible , and 34 % above the United Kingdom average of 1339.7 hours . December is the cloudiest month ( 59.7 hours of sunshine ) , October and November the joint wettest ( 81.6 millimetres ( 3.2 in ) of rain ) and July is the sunniest and driest month ( 236.9 hours of sunshine , 35.1 millimetres ( 1.4 in ) of rain ) . Sunshine totals in all months are well above the United Kingdom average , and monthly rainfall totals throughout the year are less than the UK average , particularly in summer ; this summer minimum of rainfall is not experienced away from the south coast of England . The average annual rainfall of 667.9 millimetres ( 26.3 in ) is well below the UK average of 1,125 millimetres ( 44.3 in ) .

The mid-year population of Portland in 2010 was 12,400 ; this figure has remained around twelve to thirteen thousand since the 1970s . In 2010 there were 5,786 dwellings in an area of 11.5 square kilometres ( 2,840 acres ) , giving an approximate population density of 1100 people per km2 ( 4.5 per acre ) . The population is almost entirely native to England — 94.9 percent of residents are of white British ethnicity , well above the England and Wales average of 80.5 percent . The average price of a detached house on Portland in 2010 was £ 194,200 ; terraced houses are cheaper , at £ 149,727 , and an apartment or maisonette costs £ 110,500 . Crime rates are below average — there were 5.4 burglaries per 1000 households in 2009 and 2010 ; which is lower than South West England ( 7.6 per 1000 ) and significantly lower than England and Wales ( 11.6 per 1000 ) . Unemployment levels are very low , at 1.9 percent in July 2011 , compared to the United Kingdom average of 7.7 percent . The most common religious identity in Weymouth and Portland is Christianity , at 61.0 percent , which is slightly above the England and Wales average of 59.3 percent . The next-largest sector is those with no religion , at 29.3 percent , also slightly above the average of 25.1 percent .

The A354 road is the only land access to Portland , via Ferry Bridge , connecting to Weymouth and to the wider road network at the A35 trunk road in Dorchester . It runs from Easton , splitting into a northbound section through Chiswell and a southbound section through Fortuneswell , then along Chesil Beach and across a bridge to the mainland in Wyke Regis . Formerly a branch line railway , connecting to the South West Main Line near Weymouth railway station , also crossed to the island . The corridor is now a cycle path connecting Fortuneswell with Weymouth and a wider network of traffic-free cycle paths . Local buses are run by FirstGroup , with services to Weymouth . Weymouth is the hub for south Dorset bus routes , with services to Dorchester and local villages . Weymouth is connected to towns and villages along the Jurassic Coast by the Jurassic Coast Bus service , which runs for 142 kilometres ( 88 mi ) from Exeter to Poole , through Sidford , Beer , Seaton , Lyme Regis , Charmouth , Bridport , Abbotsbury , Weymouth , Wool , and Wareham . Trains run from Weymouth to London , Southampton and Bristol , and ferries to the French port of St Malo and the Channel Islands of Guernsey and Jersey .

St George 's Community Primary School is located in Easton . The only other school on Portland is the Isle of Portland Aldridge Community Academy , an all-through school and sixth form for pupils aged 3 to 19 based over 4 different sites . Isle of Portland Aldridge Community Academy was formed in 2012 by merging four primary schools and one secondary school . Some students commute to Weymouth to study A-Levels , or to attend other secondary schools nearby . Weymouth College in Melcombe Regis is the nearest further education college , which has around 7,500 students from south west England and overseas , about 1500 studying A-Level courses .

In 2000 , the Weymouth and Portland National Sailing Academy was built in Osprey Quay in Underhill as a centre for sailing in the United Kingdom . Weymouth and Portland 's waters were credited by the Royal Yachting Association as the best in Northern Europe . Weymouth and Portland regularly host local , national and international sailing events in their waters ; these include the J / 24 World Championships in 2005 , trials for the 2004 Athens Olympics , the ISAF World Championship 2006 , the BUSA Fleet Racing Championships , and the RYA Youth National Championships . In 2005 , the WPNSA was selected to host sailing events at the 2012 Olympic Games — mainly because the Academy had recently been built , so no new venue would have to be provided . However , as part of the South West of England Regional Development Agency 's plans to redevelop Osprey Quay , a new 600-berth marina and an extension with more on-site facilities were built . Construction was scheduled between October 2007 and the end of 2008 , and with its completion and formal opening on 11 June 2009 , the venue became the first of the 2012 Olympic Games to be completed .

Weymouth Bay and Portland Harbour are used for other water sports – the reliable wind is favourable for wind and kite-surfing . Chesil Beach and Portland Harbour are used regularly for angling , diving to shipwrecks , snorkelling , canoeing , and swimming . The limestone cliffs and quarries are used for rock climbing ; Portland has areas for bouldering and deep water soloing , however sport climbing with bolt protection is the most common style . Since June 2003 the South West Coast Path National Trail has included 21.3 kilometres ( 13.2 mi ) of coastal walking around the Isle of Portland , including following the A354 Portland Beach Road twice . Isle of Portland has a Non-League football club Portland United F.C. who play at Grove Corner . They also have a very successful youth set up called Portland United youth football Club who provide active team sport for over 170 children on the Island .

Rabbits have long been associated with bad luck on Portland ; use of the name is still taboo — the creatures are often referred to as " Underground Mutton " , " Long-Eared Furry Things " or just " bunnies " . The origin of this superstition is obscure ( there is no record of it before the 1920s ) but it is believed to derive from quarry workers : they would see rabbits emerging from their burrows immediately before a rock fall and blame them for increasing the risk of dangerous , sometimes deadly , landslides . If a rabbit was seen in a quarry , the workers would pack up and go home for the day , until the safety of the area had been assured . Local fishermen too would refuse to go to sea if the word was mentioned . Even today older Portland residents are ' offended ' ( sometimes for the benefit of tourists ) by the mention of rabbits ; this superstition came to national attention in October 2005 when a special batch of advertisement posters were made for the Wallace and Gromit film , The Curse of the Were-Rabbit . In respect for local beliefs the adverts omitted the word ' rabbit ' and replaced the film 's title with the phrase " Something bunny is going on " .

Thomas Hardy described Portland as " the peninsular carved by Time out of a single stone " , and named it the Isle of Slingers and Isle of the Race in his Wessex novels ; it was the main setting of The Well-Beloved ( 1897 ) , and was featured in The Trumpet-Major ( 1880 ) . The cottage that now houses Portland Museum was the inspiration for the heroine 's house in The Well-Beloved . Portlanders were expert stone-throwers in the defence of their land , and Hardy 's Isle of Slingers is heavily based on Portland ; the Street of Wells representing Fortuneswell and The Beal Portland Bill . Hardy also called Portland the Gibraltar of the North , with reference to its similarities with Gibraltar ; its physical geography , isolation , comparatively mild climate , and Underhill 's winding streets . Hilaire Belloc 's book The Cruise of the " Nona " is about sailing near Portland , and the reflections it occasions . He describes Portland Race as " the master terror of our world " , and says " ... if you were to make a list of all the things which Portland Race has swallowed up , it would rival Orcus " .

In Museums Without Walls , Jonathan Meades declares that " Portland is a bulky chunk of geological , social , topographical and demographic weirdness . It is the obverse of a beauty spot . ' Beauty ' in this construction implies the picturesque . Portland is gloriously bereft of this quality . It is awesome . There is nothing pretty about it . " In The Warlord Chronicles ( 1995 – 97 ) , Bernard Cornwell makes Portland the Isle of the Dead , a place of internal exile , where the causeway was guarded to keep the ' dead ' ( people suffering insanity ) from crossing the Fleet and returning to the mainland . No historical evidence exists to support this idea . The Portland Chronicles series of four children 's books , set on and around Portland and Weymouth and written by local author Carol Hunt , draw on local history to explore a seventeenth century world of smuggling , witchcraft , piracy and local intrigue .

Craig McAllister ( born 28 June 1980 ) is a Scottish semi-professional footballer who plays as a striker for National League South club Sutton United . McAllister started his career with Eastleigh as a youth player . He moved to Basingstoke Town towards the end of 2001 – 02 , making his debut in March 2002 . McAllister spent three seasons there , making 112 appearances , scoring 66 goals before moving up the national league system to Conference National club Stevenage Borough where he made six appearances , having loan spells at Eastleigh in 2004 and Gravesend & Northfleet in 2004 – 05 . He joined Woking in 2005 , spending two full seasons there , and making over 100 appearances . He had a short spell with Grays Athletic , being sent out on loan to Rushden & Diamonds and then another short spell at Oxford United , all during the 2007 – 08 season . After leaving Oxford in 2008 , he took a step up to the Football League for the first time in his career , signing for Exeter City . He went on to score seven goals in his first season , but was loaned out to Barnet and Rotherham United in his second and was eventually released by the club in May 2010 . McAllister then dropped back down to non-League football , joining Crawley Town where he played at Old Trafford ; his team was defeated 1 – 0 by Manchester United in their FA Cup fifth round tie . He rejected a new contract from Crawley at the end of the 2010 – 11 season , subsequently joining Newport County .

Born in Glasgow , McAllister started his career in non-League football at Eastleigh in 2001 . He later moved to Basingstoke Town . He made his debut in March 2002 , scoring in a 1 – 1 draw with Hampton & Richmond Borough . He played ten games in the 2001 – 02 season , scoring three goals . He started the 2002 – 03 season with a goal on the opening day , as Basingstoke drew 2 – 2 with Aylesbury United . In November , McAllister scored two hat-tricks in two games , the first of which helped Basingstoke to a 3 – 1 win over Bishops Stortford , and the second helped his side to a 3 – 0 win over Braintree Town . He finished 2002 – 03 with 35 goals from 47 games . McAllister 's success continued into 2003 – 04 , where he scored another 28 goals in 35 appearances . This success earned him a trial with Queens Park Rangers in the Football League Championship , just one level down from the Premier League . After scoring 66 times in 112 games for Basingstoke Town , he moved to the Conference National outfit Stevenage on a bosman transfer in May 2004 . He made his debut for Stevenage as a substitute , as they beat Crawley Town , 1 – 0 . After struggling to get in the starting line-up for Stevenage , he was sent out on loan to his former club , Eastleigh , where he scored six goals in four games . In December 2004 , he was loaned out for the second time in that season , moving to Gravesend & Northfleet , where he made debut in a 1 – 0 defeat by Hereford United . In the second minute of Gravesend 's 1 – 1 draw with Crawley Town , he scored the first goal of this loan . He scored his second and last goal of this loan just two days later , which helped his team to a 2 – 2 draw with Accrington Stanley , before he returned to his parent club , Stevenage , in January 2005 . At the end of 2004 – 05 , he left Stevenage having only played 11 games in all competitions , with one goal .

Before the start of 2005 – 06 he signed for Woking on a permanent deal . He made his debut in August 2005 , starting in a 2 – 1 defeat by Kidderminster Harriers . McAllister finished his debut season with thirteen goals , eight of which were in the league . McAllister scored his first brace for Woking in September 2006 , as he helped his side to overcome Forest Green Rovers , 3 – 2 , away from home . After scoring 18 goals in 2006 – 07 , he attracted interest from several Conference sides and in May 2007 he signed for Grays Athletic . After making his debut for Grays Athletic in a 0 – 0 draw with Torquay United in August 2007 , he played only another eight times , scoring one goal against Droylsden , before being sent out on loan to league rivals Rushden & Diamonds in October . He returned from the loan in January 2008 , having only scored one goal , against Oxford United , who he then signed for on his return to Grays . Having joined Oxford on a contract until the end of the 2007 – 08 season , McAllister made his debut for the club in a 4 – 0 win over Altrincham ; he scored 22 minutes into the game . He made another 16 appearances , scoring one more goal , before leaving at the end of the season .

He completed a move to Football League Two side Exeter City in summer 2008 , signing for the first time for a club in the Football League . He made his first team debut in August 2008 , in a home match against Southampton , in the League Cup . Exeter lost the game 3 – 1 . It took until December for McAllister to score his first competitive for the club , when he scored to help Exeter to a 2 – 1 win over Lincoln City . He then scored another two goals later that month , in a 4 – 1 win over north-west club Rochdale . He added just another two goals to his tally in January 2009 , both in Exeter 's 2 – 1 win over Dagenham & Redbridge . The remainder of the 2008 – 09 season saw him only add two more goals , against Macclesfield Town and Darlington , both in the space of a month . After only making five appearances for Exeter in 2009 – 10 , he joined Barnet on loan in November 2009 . McAllister , still without a goal in 2009 – 10 , couldn 't get on the scoresheet in the three games he played for Barnet , and he returned to Exeter in January . In March , still having not played for Exeter since his return from Barnet , he signed an emergency one-month loan deal at Rotherham United . He made his debut for Rotherham in their 1 – 0 away win over Dagenham & Redbridge . After another seven games and still no goals , he returned to Exeter only to be released in May , along with eight other team-mates .

Following his release from Exeter City , McAllister moved back to non-League , signing for Conference Premier outfit Crawley Town on a one-year contract , in June 2008 . He made his debut in August , when his side lost 1 – 0 to Grimsby Town . Ten days later he scored his first goal in a Crawley shirt , scoring the second in a 2 – 1 win over newly promoted Bath City . Just four days later , he scored two goals as Crawley beat Hayes & Yeading United , 3 – 0 , away from home . In February 2011 , McAllister started in Crawley Town 's FA Cup fifth-round tie against Manchester United at Old Trafford , which Crawley 1 – 0 . At the end of the 2010 – 11 season , after Crawley gained promotion to the Football League , McAllister was released after he rejected a new deal . McAllister signed for Newport County in May 2011 , deciding to stay in non-League football . He signed for Newport after their manager , Anthony Hudson , had earlier stated , " We are on the verge of two massive additions to the squad , who will take the club in the direction that we want to go . "

McAllister plays as a striker , he is " an explosive front man " , and is described as a " targetman " because of his height . His time at Basingstoke Town was described as " prolific " due to the number of goals he scored . While at Exeter City , manager Paul Tisdale described him as " excellent " , and said that McAllister and fellow Exeter City striker Richard Logan had a good partnership together after McAllister scored a hat-trick for the reserve team . On signing for Luton Town manager Gary Brabin described McAllister as " adaptable in any role ... he works hard , he 's strong and he chips in with his fair share of goals . "

The raskovnik or razkovniche ( Serbian Cyrillic and Macedonian : расковник , Bulgarian : разковниче , pronounced [ rɐsˈkɔvnitʃɛ ] , Russian : разрыв-трава , Polish : rozryw ) is a magical herb in Slavic ( Bosnian , Bulgarian , Croatian , Macedonian , Montenegrin , Serbian , Slovene , Russian ) and Romanian ( iarba fiarelor ) mythology . According to lore , the raskovnik has the magical property to unlock or uncover anything that is locked or closed . However , legends claim it is notoriously difficult to recognize the herb , and reputedly only certain chthonic animals are able to identify it .

The herb is known by a multitude of names among the South Slavs , and the names vary significantly by region . While razkovniche and raskovnik are the customary names in Bulgarian and Serbian respectively and the root is also preserved in the Leskovac dialect as raskov , in some parts of Macedonia it is known as ež trava ( " hedgehog grass " ) . In the vicinity of Bar ( southeastern Montenegro ) , the term is demir-bozan , a Turkish borrowing meaning " iron breaker " . In Syrmia , the plant is referred to as špirgasta trava ( a hapax legomenon ) , in Slavonia it is known as zemaljski ključ ( " earth key " ) , and in Slovenia 's Savinja Valley as mavričin koren ( " rainbow root " ) .

Traditionally , it is considered that few people , if any , could actually recognize the herb . However , in Bulgarian sources the raskovnik is sometimes described as a grass resembling a four-leaf clover . It grows in meadows and may be picked either while green and blooming or in hay , when it is already dry . While it is not necessarily rare , nor does it thrive only in remote locations , it is nevertheless impossible to recognize by the uninitiated . In the words of Serbian linguist and folklorist Vuk Stefanović Karadžić , “ It is some ( may be imaginary ) grass for which it is thought that thanks to it ( when brushed by it ) every lock and every other closure would open by itself . ” According to the legend , the raskovnik could unlock any gate or padlock , regardless of its size , material or key . It could also uncover treasures buried in the ground : in Bulgarian beliefs , it could split the ground at the place where a treasure lay so that people could locate it . In some regions of Serbia , the treasure itself was a black man in chains who requested that a raskovnik be brought to him . The raskovnik would break the chains and the man would disappear into the ground to be replaced by a cauldron filled with gold coins . Other supernatural properties attributed to the herb by Bulgarians include the alchemic ability to transmute iron into gold , the more general ability to make the one who picked it forever happy or wealthy . In some interpretations , the raskovnik is a wonderful plant that makes true whatever its owner desires .

The raskovnik is believed to have been sought after by treasure hunters , sorcerers and herbalists who desired its magic powers for personal benefit . In Serbia , it was believed that there exist certain treasures , such as the Treasure of Tsar Radovan , which could not be unlocked in any other way but employing a raskovnik . As , according to Bulgarian mythology and some other traditions , tortoises were the only beings who knew the appearance of the herb and the location where it grows , such people would try to obtain the raskovnik by deceiving a tortoise . They would find a tortoise nesting site and hem it in with a fence while the tortoise is away . When it returns , the tortoise would be unable to access its eggs , so it would return with a raskovnik in order to breach the fence . Thus , the tortoise would reveal the herb and people would acquire it from the tortoise , which does not need it anymore . While the tricking of a tortoise was the most popular method in Bulgarian mythology , in Dalmatia the legend refers to snakes , and among Serbs another version involves the locking of young hedgehogs in a box for their mother to unlock . In Serbia , one would also have to be quick to take the raskovnik , as the hedgehog would swallow it after use . In any case , turtles , snakes and hedgehogs are all animals with chthonic characteristics which were often variously associated with the underworld in South Slavic tradition .

The legendary herb has entered the modern Bulgarian vocabulary as a metaphor for a magic key or a panacea in the wider sense . The phrase “ to find the razkovniche ” ( „ да намериш разковничето “ „ da namerish razkovnicheto “ ) means to find the solution to a certain problem , usually a complex or difficult one . Razkovniche is also the common Bulgarian name for the plant European waterclover ( Marsilea quadrifolia ) which , in its appearance , has many similarities with the descriptions of the mythical raskovnik . In eastern Serbia , raskovnik also refers to a specific plant used in vernacular medicine , namely Laserpitium siler .

Donovan Jamelle Warren ( born January 31 , 1989 ) is an American football cornerback who is currently a free agent . Warren was signed by the New York Jets as an undrafted free agent following the 2010 NFL Draft and has also played with the Detroit Lions , Pittsburgh Steelers and Chicago Bears . He attended the University of Michigan through his junior year . During his three years playing for the Michigan Wolverines football team , he started in 34 of 36 games . As a member of the 2009 Michigan Wolverines football team , whom he led in interceptions , he earned 2009 first team All-Big Ten recognition from the media and second team recognition from the coaches . He had chosen Michigan over his hometown favorite University of Southern California because he believed that he would be able to play immediately there . Warren had played high school football at Long Beach Polytechnic High School in California .

A native of Long Beach , California , Warren attended Long Beach Polytechnic High School , where he tallied 114 tackles , 15 pass breakups , five interceptions and three fumble recoveries during his prep career . Considered a five-star recruit by Rivals.com , Warren ranked third among cornerback prospects and twenty-fifth overall in the nation . Scout.com ranked him fourth among cornerbacks , and ESPN ranked him eighth . He was named to the USA Today All-USA second team and the EA Sports All-American second-team at cornerback . Warren participated in the 2007 U.S. Army All-American Bowl . Warren ran a 10.6 seconds time in the 100 meters in high school . At the beginning of the recruiting process , Warren was considered very likely to play for the USC Trojans football team , since they had four players from his high school on the roster and his godfather , Mark Carrier , was a USC alumn . However , USC had a lot of depth at cornerback at the time and Warren ( as well as his father ) had a good relationship with Michigan assistant coach Ron English . When Warren made Michigan his final decision , he was noted as feeling that his heart wanted him to choose USC , which was the school he had grown up rooting for , but his head led him to Michigan where he could play immediately and work under the tutelage of English , who had developed many defensive backs who went on to the National Football League .

As a true freshman at Michigan , Warren played in all 13 season games while starting 11 of them at cornerback . He recorded 52 tackles , 1.5 tackles for loss , one sack , one forced fumble , two fumble recoveries , one interception and six pass breakups . In the September 15 , 2007 Michigan-Notre Dame rivalry game , which Michigan won 38 – 0 , he forced and recovered a Jimmy Clausen fumble on the Notre Dame 21-yard line while the score was 3 – 0 . The fumble led to a Mike Hart touchdown five plays later . He was named Big Ten Defensive Freshman of the Year by The Sporting News and also made TSN ′ s and College Football News ′ Freshman All-American second team . As a sophomore , he started ten games at cornerback and one at safety . During the November 1 , 2008 game at Purdue , he recovered a fumble on Purdue 's opening possession that led to a Brandon Minor 45 – yard touchdown run on the next play . As a junior , he started all 12 games at cornerback . That season , he led the Wolverines with four interceptions , which ranked tied for sixth in the Big Ten Conference and 49th in the nation . He recorded one in each of Michigan 's first three conference games during the 2009 Big Ten Conference football season , including a controversial one to seal the team 's fourth consecutive victory to start the season in their conference opener against the Indiana Hoosiers that withstood instant replay video review . He ran back the third of these interceptions for a 40-yard touchdown in the first minute of the third conference game against the Iowa Hawkeyes . At the conclusion of the season , he was selected as to the 2009 All-Big Ten conference team by the media ( first-team ) and coaches ( second-team ) .

On December 20 , 2009 , Warren announced his decision to forgo his final season of collegiate eligibility and enter the 2010 NFL Draft . Warren stated that the NFL 's Draft Advisory Board advised him that if he entered the draft , he would be selected in the first three rounds . When Warren signed Drew Rosenhaus as his sports agent , he was projected as a first or second round draft choice . Warren was considered to be a man-to-man defense specialist who needed to develop his zone defense skills . Some sources , such as Todd McShay , who felt he was just a cut below the top five cornerbacks in the draft prior to the 2010 NFL Combine , had predicted that Warren could be selected in the second round . ESPN draft analyst Mel Kiper , Jr. predicted Warren would be drafted in the third or fourth round of the draft , describing him as “ a physical corner " who " likes going head to head on an island with the best receivers in the country , he ’ s never had an issue with that . Anticipation is good . Gambler , though . Gave up some big plays . ” Warren aggravated an ankle injury shortly before the NFL Combine , where he struggled in position drills and ran the 40-yard dash in 4.59 seconds . His disappointing performance was cited as damaging his draft stock .

Despite earlier predictions , Warren was not selected in the draft . He signed as an undrafted free agent with the New York Jets immediately after the draft . Warren 's godfather , former Pro Bowl defensive back Mark Carrier , is an assistant coach with the Jets . The 2010 New York Jets have several cornerbacks on their roster , including Darrelle Revis , Antonio Cromartie , Dwight Lowery , Drew Coleman , Marquice Cole and first-round pick Kyle Wilson . Some sources speculate that Warren would be converted to safety . Jets head coach Rex Ryan said that although Warren would be practicing at both cornerback and safety , he felt that Warren 's best shot was at safety . Warren , who was sidelined during most of the Jets training camp sessions with a concussion , was waived by New York on September 3 , 2010 . Warren would be signed to the team 's practice squad on September 6 , 2010 . Warren would later be released from the team 's practice squad on September 7 , 2010 .

In August and September 2011 , SeaWorld Entertainment filed trademarks for " Antarctica " to be used for a theme area , and " Empire of the Penguins " to be used for an amusement ride . This led to rumors that SeaWorld Orlando would replace its " Penguin Encounter " exhibit with a dark ride . A report by the Orlando Sentinel in October 2011 confirmed these plans , citing " government filings and interviews with people familiar with various elements " . At the time , SeaWorld Orlando would not publicly reveal its plans . On November 8 , 2011 SeaWorld Orlando announced a multi-year expansion plan featuring the opening of Turtle Trek in 2012 and " Antarctica : Empire of the Penguin " in 2013 . Although details of the ride were not released , creative director Brian Morrow said that the ride would be the coldest attraction in the world and would follow the journey of a tiny penguin . On April 24 , 2012 , the park revealed further details about the attraction : guests would ride in eight-person vehicles , choosing among two levels of intensity ( " Mild " or " Wild " ) . The surrounding area would also feature a new penguin habitat , restaurant and store .

On February 19 , 2013 , SeaWorld Orlando announced that " Antarctica : Empire of the Penguin " would open on May 24 . Unlike many attractions , the ride had no soft opening period ; instead , it was open to a select number of employees and their families , travel media and bloggers before its public opening . On May 24 , 2013 , SeaWorld Orlando opened Antarctica : Empire of the Penguin to the public . The opening drew thousands of guests to the ride , with some waiting more than four hours to board . On May 25 , one of the penguins escaped the open-air enclosure by leaping out of the water and into the public viewing area ; it was returned to the exhibit unharmed .

Guests enter the queue from the Antarctica-themed area of the park . Large groups of riders are admitted into a pre-show room , where multiple projections of an Antarctic landscape are blended with 3D exhibits . In a narrated video , guests are introduced to a gentoo penguin colony in Antarctica featuring a newborn penguin named Puck . After the pre-show guests follow a path to a junction , where they choose a " mild " or " wild " ride . They are then divided into groups of eight riders before boarding the ride vehicles at one of four stations . Riders are seated in two rows of four , and restrained by lap bars . When the riders have boarded , the vehicle is dispatched . It travels around an indoor Antarctic environment , spinning to view a variety of scenery and projection screens . The story which began in the pre-show continues , with Puck venturing out into the sea . When he is underwater , Puck is chased by a leopard seal before resurfacing on land . The ride 's theme song – " Antarctica : One World , One Family " by Lauren Alaina – is then played as guests watch a live penguin habitat behind glass before the vehicles return to a four-platform unloading station .

Guests disembark in an open-air penguin habitat with an air temperature of approximately 30 ° F ( − 1 ° C ) . This exhibit has minimal barriers between guests and inhabitants , and is designed so guests can hear sounds made by the penguins . A total of 245 penguins live in the exhibit ; species include gentoo , king , Adélie and rockhopper penguins . Lighting in the exhibit allows the park to control the seasons for the penguins . A 20-foot ( 6.1 m ) glass window allows guests to see them in their 45 ° F ( 7 ° C ) pool from an underwater viewing area . The entire experience takes about 25 minutes . To minimise odors in the open-air environment , SeaWorld staff clean the exhibit several times daily and replace the 20,000 pounds ( 9,100 kg ) of snow each day .

The Antarctica-themed area is spread across 4 acres ( 1.6 ha ) inside SeaWorld Orlando . A 50-foot-high ( 15 m ) entrance archway is adjacent to the Sea Lion & Otter Theater , and a smaller entrance is near the Journey to Atlantis ride . In addition to the Empire of the Penguin , the theme area is home to several other attractions . A looping 45-minute soundtrack is played throughout the area . A " South Pole " is in the center of the area , and penguin carvings decorate the surrounding walls . The Expedition Cafe , South Pole Beverages and Glacial Collections sell food , drinks and souvenirs .

Antarctica : Empire of the Penguin features a prototype , motion-based , trackless dark-ride system by Oceaneering International , producer of ride systems for The Amazing Adventures of Spider-Man , Transformers : The Ride , and The Curse of DarKastle . The ride is the first of its kind in the world . When Antarctica : Empire of the Penguin was announced in November 2011 , Oceaneering had already developed a working prototype of the ride vehicle . The first concept art for the attraction was released in April 2012 : a circular ride vehicle , seating eight riders in two rows of four . On May 11 , 2012 Oceaneering filed a patent application for the ride 's technology . At the November 2012 IAAPA Attractions Expo , SeaWorld Orlando and Oceaneering International revealed the trackless , motion simulator-based ride vehicle to the public . Each battery-powered vehicle , or AGV , is made up of two platforms . Riders sit on the upper platform , which provides three degrees of freedom . A lower platform provides omnidirectional lateral movement . Unlike previous ride designs , the trackless system and the wheel and motor configurations allow movements diagonal to a rider 's perspective . The vehicles use a dead reckoning system developed by Frog AGV to navigate their way through the environment , allowing a vehicle to cross another 's path . Each vehicle features a built-in controller , which wirelessly communicates with a central ride-system controller . Movement commands are issued by the ride-system controller , and executed by the vehicles ' controllers . A specially-designed battery and charge system allow the vehicles to be quickly charged while docked at the loading and unloading platforms .

Dewayne Bevil of the Orlando Sentinel said that " the hottest attraction in Central Florida theme parks this week is also the coldest . " Bevil interviewed several park guests ; comments included " I thought it [ the ride ] was really cool " and " it 's beautiful " , and some described it as better than the attractions it replaced . Barbara Nefer of Examiner.com said that guests would love Puck , the ride 's central character . She preferred the wild version of the ride , describing it as " actually still very family friendly " and saying that the exhibit was a " huge highlight " of the attraction . Robert Niles of Theme Park Insider agreed that the highlight of the attraction was the penguin exhibit . Niles described the dispatch procedure as crucial to the ride : " if SeaWorld can dispatch a quartet of ride vehicles every minute or so , as designed , fans will find this a fun ride " . In a later article Niles highlighted some guests ' criticisms of the ride , describing it as " lacking an engaging story and not delivering enough on-ride views of the attraction 's stars -- SeaWorld 's penguins " . However , he argues that SeaWorld 's promotions were too photorealistic creating " expectations for an experience that the ride did not deliver , perhaps setting up many of those visitors for disappointment " .

Lawrence Goldsmith of the Daily Mirror and Susan and Simon Veness of the Daily Mail , shared the sentiment of other reviewers : the penguins are the stars of the show . Goldsmith said that the ride options ( mild or wild ) allowed everyone , from children to thrill-seekers , to " enjoy the experience equally " . Susan and Simon Veness described the ride section as thrilling , calling it " one of the highlights " of the attraction . Arthur Levine of About.com gave the ride three out of five stars . Levine gave this moderate rating because he felt conflicted : the animations themselves were good , but the overall storyline was sparse ; the ride system was intriguing , yet it was under utilised . He concluded by applauding " SeaWorld for taking the bold initiative to build a major-league attraction " , but stated " the ride feels rushed and too short " . From a commercial perspective , the opening day of the area saw guests waiting in line for more than four hours to experience the flagship attraction ; SeaWorld had estimated queues of approximately half that time . Dennis Speigel of consulting firm International Theme Park Services expected attendance to increase between five and ten percent . Speigel speculated that this rise would be higher than if a single attraction were unveiled ; however , it would be less than the 36-percent increase for Islands of Adventure after the opening of The Wizarding World of Harry Potter .

Smithfield is a locality in the ward of Farringdon Without situated at the City of London 's northwest in central London , England . The principal street of the area is West Smithfield . A number of valued City institutions are located in the area , such as St Bartholomew 's Hospital , the Charterhouse , and Livery Halls notably those of the Butchers ' and Haberdashers ' Companies , but Smithfield is best known for its ancient meat market , dating from the 10th century , which is now London 's only remaining wholesale market in continuous operation since medieval times . The area also contains London 's oldest surviving church , St Bartholomew-the-Great , founded in 1123 AD . Smithfield has borne witness to many bloody executions of heretics and political rebels over the centuries , including major historical figures such as Scottish patriot Sir William Wallace and Wat Tyler , leader of the Peasants ' Revolt , among many other religious reformers and dissenters . Smithfield Market , a Grade II listed-covered market building , was designed by Victorian architect Sir Horace Jones in the second half of the 19th century , and is the dominant architectural feature of the area . Some of its original market premises fell in to disuse in the late 20th century and faced the prospect of demolition . The Corporation of London 's public enquiry in 2012 drew widespread support for an urban regeneration plan intent upon preserving Smithfield 's historical identity .

In the Middle Ages , it was a broad grassy area known as Smooth Field , located beyond London Wall stretching to the eastern bank of the River Fleet . Given its ease of access to grazing and water , Smithfield established itself as London 's livestock market , remaining so for almost 1,000 years . Many local toponyms are associated with the livestock trade : while some street names ( such as " Cow Cross Street " and " Cock Lane " ) remain in use , many more ( such as " Chick Lane " , " Duck Lane " , " Cow Lane " , " Pheasant Court " , " Goose Alley " ) have disappeared from the map after the major redevelopment of the area in the Victorian era .

In 1123 , the area near Aldersgate was granted by King Henry I for the foundation of St Bartholomew 's Priory at the request of Prior Rahere in thanks for his being nursed back to good health . The Priory exercised its right to enclose land between Aldersgate ( to the east ) , Long Lane ( to the north ) and modern-day Newgate Street ( to the south ) , erecting its main western gate which opened onto Smithfield , and a postern on Long Lane . The Priory thereafter held the manorial rights to hold weekly fairs , which initially took place in its outer court on the site of present-day Cloth Fair , leading to " Fair Gate " . An additional annual celebration , the Bartholomew Fair , was established in 1133 by the Augustinian friars and this over time became one of London 's pre-eminent summer fairs , opening each year on 24 August . A trading event for cloth and other goods as well as being a pleasure forum , the four-day festival drew crowds from all strata of English society . In 1855 , however , Bartholomew Fair was closed down by the City authorities after degenerating into a magnet for debauchery and public disorder .

In 1348 , Walter de Manny rented 13-acre ( 0.05 km2 ) of land at Spital Croft , north of Long Lane , from the Master and Brethren of St Bartholomew 's Hospital for a graveyard and plague pit for victims of the Black Death . A chapel and hermitage were constructed , renamed New Church Haw ; but in 1371 , this land was granted for the foundation of the Charterhouse , originally a Carthusian monastery . Nearby and to the north of this demesne , the Knights Hospitaller established a Commandery at Clerkenwell dedicated to St John in the mid-12th century , and in 1194 received a Charter from King Richard I granting the Order formal privileges . Later Augustinian canonesses established the Priory of St Mary , north of the Knights of St John property . By the end of the 14th century , these religious houses were regarded by City traders as interlopers — occupying what had previously been public open space nearby one of the City gates . On numerous occasions vandals damaged the Charterhouse , eventually demolishing its buildings . By 1405 , a stout wall was built to protect the property and maintain the privacy of the Order , particularly its church where men and women alike came to worship .

The religious houses were dissolved in the Reformation , and their lands broken up . The Priory Church of St John remains , as does St John 's Gate , traditionally regarded as the boundary between Smithfield and Clerkenwell . John Houghton ( later canonized by Pope Paul VI as St John Houghton ) , Prior of Charterhouse , went to Thomas Cromwell accompanied by two other local priors seeking an oath of supremacy that would be acceptable to their communities . This resulted in their being flung into the Tower of London , and on 4 May 1535 , they were taken to Tyburn and hanged — becoming the first Catholic martyrs of the Reformation . On 29 May , the remaining twenty monks and eighteen lay brothers were forced to swear the oath of allegiance ; the ten who refused were taken to Newgate Prison and left to starve . With the monks expelled , Charterhouse was requisitioned and remained as a private dwelling until its reestablishment by Thomas Sutton in 1611 as a charitable foundation forming the school named Charterhouse and almshouses known as Sutton 's Hospital in Charterhouse on its former site . Some of the property was damaged during The Blitz , but it remains largely intact , whilst the school was relocated to Godalming in 1872 ; part of the site is also now occupied by Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry . Until 1899 Charterhouse was extra-parochial , when it became a civil parish incorporated in the Metropolitan Borough of Finsbury .

From its inception , the Priory of St Bartholomew treated the sick . After the Reformation it was left with neither income nor monastic occupants , but following a petition by the City Corporation , Henry VIII refounded it in December 1546 , as the " House of the Poore in West Smithfield in the suburbs of the City of London of Henry VIII 's Foundation " . Letters Patent were presented to the City , granting property and income to the new foundation the following month . King Henry VIII 's sergeant-surgeon , Thomas Vicary , was appointed as the hospital 's first superintendent The King Henry VIII Gate which opens onto West Smithfield was completed in 1702 and remains the hospital 's main entrance . The Priory 's principal church , St Bartholomew-the-Great , was reconfigured after the dissolution of the monasteries losing the western third of its nave . Reformed as an Anglican parish church , its parish boundaries were limited to the site of the ancient priory and a small tract of land between the church and Long Lane . The parish of St Bartholomew the Great was designated as a Liberty , responsible for the upkeep and security of its fabric and the land within its boundaries . With the advent of street lighting , mains water and sewerage during the Victorian era , maintenance of such an ancient parish with so few parishioners became increasingly uneconomical after the Industrial Revolution . Thus , in 1910 , it agreed to be incorporated by the Corporation of London which guaranteed financial support and security . Great St Barts ' present parish boundary includes just 10 feet ( 3.048 m ) of Smithfield — possibly delineating a former right of way .

After the Reformation , a separate parish likewise dedicated to St Bartholomew was granted in favour of St Bartholomew 's Hospital — named St Bartholomew-the-Less , it remained under the hospital 's patronage , unique in the Church of England , until 1948 when the hospital was nationalized in the National Health Service . The church benefice is nowadays joined again with its ancient partner , the Priory Church of St Bartholomew the Great . Following the diminished influence of the ancient Priory , predecessor of the two parishes of St Bartholomew , disputes began to arise over rights to tithes and taxes payable by lay residents who claimed allegiance with the nearby and anciently associated parish of St Botolph Aldersgate — an unintended consequence and legacy of King Kenry VIII 's religious reforms . Smithfield and its Market , mostly situated in the parish of St Sepulchre was founded in 1137 , and was endowed by Prior Rahere , who also founded St Barts . The ancient parish of St Sepulchre extended north to Turnmill Street , to St Paul 's Cathedral and Ludgate Hill in the south , and along the east bank of the Fleet ( now the route of Farringdon Street ) . St Sepulchre 's Tower contains the twelve " bells of Old Bailey " from the nursery rhyme Oranges and Lemons . Traditionally , the Great Bell was rung to announce the execution of a prisoner at Newgate .

As a large open space close to the City , Smithfield was a popular place for public gatherings . In 1374 Edward III held a seven-day tournament at Smithfield , for the amusement of his beloved Alice Perrers . Possibly the most famous medieval tournament at Smithfield was that commanded in 1390 by Richard II . Jean Froissart , in his fourth book of Chronicles , reported that sixty knights would come to London to tilt for two days , " accompanied by sixty noble ladies , richly ornamented and dressed " . The tournament was proclaimed by heralds throughout England , Scotland , Hainault , Germany , Flanders and France , so as to rival the jousts given by Charles of France at Paris a few years earlier , upon the arrival of his consort Isabel of Bavaria . Geoffrey Chaucer supervised preparations for the tournament as a clerk to the King . Along with Tyburn , Smithfield was for centuries the main site for the public execution of heretics and dissidents in London . The Scottish nobleman Sir William Wallace was executed in 1305 at West Smithfield . The market was the meeting place prior to the Peasants ' Revolt and where the Revolt 's leader , Wat Tyler , was slain by Sir William Walworth , Lord Mayor of London on 15 June 1381 .

Religious dissenters ( Catholics as well as other Protestant denominations such as Anabaptists ) were sentenced to death in this area during the Crown 's changing course of religious orientation started by King Henry VIII . About fifty Protestants and religious reformers , known as the Marian martyrs , were executed at Smithfield during the reign of Mary I. " It is foolish , generally speaking , for a philosopher to set fire to another philosopher in Smithfield Market because they do not agree in their theory of the universe . That was done very frequently in the last decadence of the Middle Ages , and it failed altogether in its object " . On 17 November 1558 , several Protestant heretics were saved by a Royal herald 's timely announcement that Queen Mary had died shortly before the wooden faggots were to be lit at the Smithfield Stake . Under English Law Death Warrants were commanded by Sign Manual ( the personal signature of the Monarch ) , invariably upon ministerial recommendation , which if unexercised by the time of a Sovereign 's death required renewed authority which , in this case , Elizabeth I did not give thereby freeing the Protestants . During the 16th century , Smithfield was also used to execute swindlers and coin forgers who were boiled to death in oil . However , by the 18th century the " Tyburn Tree " ( near the present-day Marble Arch ) , became the main place for public executions in London . After 1785 , they were again moved , this time to the gates of Newgate prison — just to the south of Smithfield .

Since the late 1990s , Smithfield and neighbouring Farringdon have developed a reputation for being a cultural hub for up-and-coming professionals who enjoy its vast selection of bars , restaurants and night clubs . Nightclubs such as Fabric and Turnmills pioneered the area 's reputation for trendy night life , attracting professionals from nearby Holborn , Clerkenwell and the City on weekdays and , at weekends , the clubs and bars in the area , having late licences , draw people into the area from outside London too . Smithfield has also become a popular venue for sporting events . Until 2002 Smithfield hosted the midnight start of the annual Miglia Quadrato Car Rally , but with the increased night club activity around Smithfield the UHULMC ( a motoring club ) decided to move the event 's start to Finsbury Circus . Since 2007 , Smithfield has been the chosen location of an annual event dedicated to bike racing known as Smithfield Nocturne .

Meat has been traded at Smithfield Market for more than 800 years , making it one of the oldest markets in London . A livestock market occupied the site as early as the 10th century . In 1174 the site was described by William Fitzstephen as : " a smooth field where every Friday there is a celebrated rendezvous of fine horses to be traded , and in another quarter are placed vendibles of the peasant , swine with their deep flanks , and cows and oxen of immense bulk . " Costs , customs and rules were meticulously laid down . For instance , for an ox , a cow or a dozen sheep one could get 1 penny . The livestock market expanded over the centuries to meet demand from the growing population of the City . In 1710 , the market was surrounded by a wooden fence containing the livestock within the market ; and until its abolition , the Gate House at Cloth Fair ( " Fair Gate " ) employed a chain ( le cheyne ) on market days . Daniel Defoe referred to the livestock market in 1726 as being " without question , the greatest in the world " , and data available appear to corroborate his statement .

Between 1740 and 1750 the average yearly sales at Smithfield were reported to be around 74,000 cattle and 570,000 sheep . By the middle of the 19th century , in the course of a single year 220,000 head of cattle and 1,500,000 sheep would be " violently forced into an area of five acres , in the very heart of London , through its narrowest and most crowded thoroughfares " . The volume of cattle driven daily to Smithfield started to raise major concerns . The Great North Road traditionally began at Smithfield Market and mileages were measured from here . The specific start was Hicks Hall , and its former location continued to be used for mileages even after it was demolished , soon after 1778 . The road followed St John Street , and continued north , eventually leading to Edinburgh . This ended in 1829 , with the establishment of the General Post Office at St Martin 's-le-Grand , which became the new starting point .

In the Victorian period , pamphlets started circulating in favour of the removal of the livestock market and its relocation outside of the City , due to its extremely poor hygienic conditions as well as the brutal treatment of the cattle . The conditions at the market in the first half of the 19th century were often described as a major threat to public health : Of all the horrid abominations with which London has been cursed , there is not one that can come up to that disgusting place , West Smithfield Market , for cruelty , filth , effluvia , pestilence , impiety , horrid language , danger , disgusting and shuddering sights , and every obnoxious item that can be imagined ; and this abomination is suffered to continue year after year , from generation to generation , in the very heart of the most Christian and most polished city in the world . In 1843 , the Farmer 's Magazine published a petition signed by bankers , salesmen , butchers , aldermen and City residents against further expansion of the meat market , arguing that livestock markets had been systematically banned since the Middle Ages in other areas of London :

Our ancestors appear , in sanitary matters , to have been wiser than we are . There exists , amongst the Rolls of Parliament of the year 1380 , a petition from the citizens of London , praying - that , for the sake of the public health , meat should not be slaughtered nearer than " Knyghtsbrigg " , under penalty , not only of forfeiting such animals as might be killed in the " butcherie " , but of a year 's imprisonment . The prayer of this petition was granted , audits penalties were enforced during several reigns . Thomas Hood wrote in 1830 an Ode to the Advocates for the Removal of Smithfield Market , applauding those " philanthropic men " who aim at removing to a distance the " vile Zoology " of the market and " routing that great nest of Hornithology " . Charles Dickens criticised locating a livestock market in the heart of the capital in his 1851 essay A Monument of French Folly drawing comparisons with the French market at Poissy outside Paris : Of a great Institution like Smithfield , [ the French ] are unable to form the least conception . A Beast Market in the heart of Paris would be regarded an impossible nuisance . Nor have they any notion of slaughter-houses in the midst of a city . One of these benighted frog-eaters would scarcely understand your meaning , if you told him of the existence of such a British bulwark .

The present Smithfield meat market on Charterhouse Street was established by Act of Parliament : the 1860 Metropolitan Meat and Poultry Market Act . It is a large market with permanent buildings , designed by architect Sir Horace Jones , who also designed Billingsgate and Leadenhall Markets . Work on the Central Market , inspired by Italian architecture , began in 1866 and was completed in November 1868 at a cost of £ 993,816 ( £ 81 million as of 2016 ) . The Grade II listed main wings ( known as East and West Market ) are separated by the Grand Avenue , a wide roadway roofed by an elliptical arch with decorations in cast iron . At the two ends of the arcade , four prominent statues represent London , Edinburgh , Liverpool and Dublin depicting bronze dragons charged with the City 's armorial bearings . At the corners of the market four octagonal pavilion towers were built , each with a dome displaying carved stone griffins . As the Market was being built , a cut and cover railway tunnel was constructed underground City street level to create a triangular junction with the railway between Blackfriars and Kings Cross through Snow Hill Tunnel — closed in 1916 , it has been revived and is now used for Thameslink rail services . The construction of extensive railway sidings , beneath Smithfield Park , facilitated the transfer of animal carcases to its Cold Store , and directly up to the Meat Market via lifts . These sidings closed in the 1960s , and are now used as a car park , accessed via a cobbled descent at the centre of Smithfield Park . Today , much of the meat is delivered to market by road .

The first extension of Smithfield 's meat market took place between 1873 and 1876 with the construction of the Poultry Market immediately west of the Central Market . A rotunda was built at the centre of the old Market Field ( now West Smithfield ) , comprising gardens , a fountain and a ramped carriageway to the station beneath the market building . Further buildings were subsequently added to the market . The General Market , built between 1879 and 1883 , was intended to replace the old Farringdon Market located nearby and established for the sale of fruit and vegetables when the earlier Fleet Market was cleared to enable the laying out of Farringdon Street between 1826 – 1830 . A further block ( also known as Annexe Market or Triangular Block ) consisting of two separate structures ( the Fish Market and the Red House ) was built between 1886 and 1899 . The Fish Market , built by John Mowlem & Co . , was completed in 1888 , one year after Sir Horace Jones ' death . The Red House , with its imposing red brick and Portland stone façade , was built between 1898 and 1899 for the London Central Markets Cold Storage Co . Ltd .. It was one of the first cold stores to be built outside the London docks and continued to serve Smithfield Market until the mid-1970s .

During World War II , a large underground cold store at Smithfield was the theatre of secret experiments led by Dr Max Perutz on pykrete , a mixture of ice and woodpulp , believed to be possibly tougher than steel . Perutz 's work , inspired by Geoffrey Pyke and part of Project Habakkuk , was meant to test the viability of pykrete as a material to construct floating airstrips in the Atlantic to allow refuelling of cargo planes in support of Admiral the Earl Mountbatten 's operations . The experiments were carried out by Perutz and his colleagues in a refrigerated meat locker in a Smithfield Market butcher 's basement , behind a protective screen of frozen animal carcasses . These experiments became obsolete with the development of longer range aircraft and the project was then abandoned . At the end of World War II , a V-2 rocket struck at the north side of Charterhouse Street , near the junction with Farringdon Road ( 1945 ) . The explosion caused massive damage to the market buildings , impacting the railway tunnel structure below , with the loss of over 110 lives . The original Poultry Market designed by Sir Horace Jones was destroyed by fire in 1958 . Its Grade II listed replacement building was designed by Sir Thomas Bennett in 1962 – 63 , with a reinforced concrete frame , and external cladding of dark blue brick . The main hall is covered by an enormous concrete dome , shaped as an elliptical paraboloid , spanning 225 feet ( 69 m ) by 125 feet ( 38 m ) and only 3 inches ( 7.6 cm ) thick at the centre . The dome is believed to have been the largest concrete shell structure built at that time in Europe .

Smithfield is London 's only major wholesale market ( Leadenhall Market nowadays attracting more tourist trade ) which has escaped relocation out of central London to cheaper land , better transport links and more modern facilities ( as have Covent Garden , Spitalfields and Billingsgate ) . The purpose of the market remains to supply inner City butchers , shops and restaurants with quality fresh meat , and so its main trading hours are 4 : 00 a.m. to 12 : 00 noon each weekday . Instead of moving away , Smithfield Market continues to modernise its existing site : its imposing Victorian buildings have had access points added for the loading and unloading of lorries . The buildings stand above a warren of tunnels : previously , live animals were brought to market by hoof ( from the mid-19th century onwards they arrived by rail ) and were slaughtered on site . The former railway tunnels are now used for storage , parking and as basements . An impressive cobbled ramp spirals down around West Smithfield 's public garden , on the south side of the Market , providing access to part of this area . Some of the buildings on Charterhouse Street on Smithfield north side maintain access to the tunnels via their basements .

Some of the former meat market buildings have now changed use . For example , the former Central Cold Store , on Charterhouse Street is now , most unusually , a City centre cogeneration power station operated by Citigen . Other former cold storage warehousing ( The Metropolitan Cold Stores ) has been converted into the acclaimed nightclub Fabric . Smithfield comprises the market as its central feature surrounded many old buildings on three sides and a public open space ( or Rotunda Garden ) at West Smithfield , beneath which there is a public car park . The south side is occupied by St Bartholomew 's Hospital ( known as Barts in common parlance ) , and on the east side by the Priory Church of St Bartholomew the Great . The Church of St Bartholomew the Less is located next to the King Henry VIII Gate , the hospital 's main entrance . The north and south of the square are now closed to through traffic , as part of the City 's security and surveillance cordon known as the Ring of steel . Security for the market is provided by its market constabulary .

Since 2005 , the General Market ( 1883 ) and the adjacent Fish Market and Red House buildings ( 1898 ) , part of the Victorian complex of the Smithfield Market , have been facing a threat of demolition . The City of London Corporation , ultimate owners of this property has been engaged in public consultation to assess how best to redevelop their disused property and regenerate the area . Former property developers Thornfield Properties had planned to demolish the historic site and build a seven-storey office block , offering 350,000 square feet ( 33,000 m2 ) of office space with a retail outlet on the ground floor . Several campaigns , promoted by English Heritage and Save Britain 's Heritage among others , are being run to raise public awareness of this important part of London 's Victorian heritage . Grade II listed building protection was approved for the Red House Cold Store building in 2005 by then-Culture Secretary Dame Tessa Jowell , on the basis of new historical evidence qualifying the complex as " the earliest existing example of a purpose-built powered cold store " . Whilst the Market continues to trade , its future remains unclear following Government Planning Minister Ruth Kelly 's instigating a major public inquiry in 2007 . The Public Inquiry for the demolition and redevelopment of the General Market Building took place between 6 November 2007 and 25 January 2008 . In August 2008 , Communities Secretary Hazel Blears announced that planning permission for the General Market 's redevelopment had been refused , stating that the threatened buildings made " a significant contribution " to the character and appearance of Farringdon and the surrounding area .

On 12 October 2012 , Henderson Group unveiled its £ 160 million-plan for redeveloping the western side of the Central Market . Henderson proposed that the fish market , General Market and Red House buildings , all over a century-old , make way for restaurants , retailers and office buildings while restoring and retaining much of the Market building 's original perimeter walls , with a new piazza being created in the General Market . Some of the buildings on Lindsey Street opposite the East Market were demolished in 2010 to allow the construction of the new Crossrail Station at Farringdon . The demolished buildings include Smithfield House ( an early 20th-century unlisted Hennebique concrete building ) , the Edmund Martin Ltd. shop ( an earlier building with alterations dating to the 1930s ) and two Victorian warehouses behind them . Redevelopment proposals are ongoing as of 2014 . In the March of 2015 , the Museum of London revealed plans to vacate its Barbican site and move into the General Market Building . The cost of the move is estimated to be in the region of £ 70 million and , if funding can be achieved , would be complete by 2021 .

HMS Havelock was an H-class destroyer that had originally been ordered by the Brazilian Navy with the name Jutahy in the late 1930s , but was bought by the Royal Navy after the beginning of the Second World War in September 1939 and later renamed . She participated in the Norwegian Campaign in May 1940 and was assigned to convoy escort and anti-submarine patrols with the Western Approaches Command afterwards . The ship was briefly assigned to Force H in 1941 , but her anti-aircraft armament was deemed too weak and she rejoined Western Approaches Command . Havelock became flotilla leader of Escort Group B-5 of the Mid-Ocean Escort Force in early 1942 and continued to escort convoys in the North Atlantic for the next two years . The ship was converted to an escort destroyer and sank one submarine during the war . After the end of the war , she escorted the ships carrying the Norwegian government in exile back to Norway and served as a target ship through mid-1946 . Havelock was scrapped beginning in late 1946 .

Havelock was fitted with a HF / DF radio direction finder before completion and she had her rear torpedo tubes replaced by a 12-pounder AA gun by October 1940 . The ship 's short-range AA armament was later augmented by two Oerlikon 20 mm guns on the wings of the ship 's bridge and the .50-calibre machine gun mounts were replaced by a pair of Oerlikons . It is uncertain if the ship 's director-control tower was installed before a Type 271 target indication radar was installed above the bridge . At some point , the ship was converted to an escort destroyer . ' A ' gun was replaced by a Hedgehog anti-submarine spigot mortar and additional depth charge stowage replaced the 12-pounder high-angle gun . A Type 286 short-range surface search radar was fitted and the HF / DF installation was moved to a pole mainmast .

Jutahy was ordered by Brazil on 8 December 1937 from J. Samuel White , Cowes . The ship was laid down on 31 May 1938 and was purchased by the British on 5 September 1939 after the beginning of the Second World War and renamed HMS Havelock . She was launched on 16 October and commissioned on 10 February 1940 . After working up , the ship was assigned to the 9th Destroyer Flotilla of the Western Approaches Command . Havelock was detached to Home Fleet during the Norwegian Campaign and supported the Allied landings on 12 – 13 May at Bjerkvik during the Battle of Narvik . During the initial stages of this battle , she mounted a French mortar battery on her forecastle . She continued to provide fire support during the battle for the rest of the month . During the nights of 30 and 31 May , the ship helped to evacuate troops from Bodø to Harstad and Borkenes to await further evacuation . Havelock was one of the ships that escorted the troop ships evacuating the troops from the Narvik area on 7 and 8 June . She was commanded by Capt. E. Barry Stevens , DSC .

Later in June , the ship rejoined the 9th Destroyer Flotilla and spent most of the next two years escorting convoys . Late in 1940 the Flotilla was redesignated as the 9th Escort Group . Havelock was attached to Force H in Gibraltar to reinforce the escort during Operations Tiger in May 1941 . The ship returned to the Western Approaches command afterwards as her anti-aircraft capability was believed by Admiral James Somerville to be too weak for operations in the Mediterranean . In March 1942 , Havelock became flotilla leader of Escort Group B-5 team of the Mid-Ocean Escort Force and continued to escort convoys in the North Atlantic until early 1944 . From 28 December to 14 January 1943 , the escort group defended Convoy TM 1 , a group of nine oil tankers sailing from Trinidad to Gibraltar . The convoy was attacked by several U-boat wolfpacks en route and lost seven of its ships despite the best efforts of its escort . Havelock only managed to damage U-436 with depth charges whilst escorting this convoy . Havelock and her consorts escorted Convoy SC 122 through the largest convoy battle of the war some two months later . In mid-1943 , the escort group was deployed to the Bay of Biscay to attack U-boats in cooperation with the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) as they left their bases on the French Atlantic coast . In late September – early October , the group escorted ships carrying No. 247 Group RAF to the Azores to begin setting up airbases there .

In early 1944 , Havelock was transferred to the 14th Escort Group which was given the task of protecting the convoys supporting Operation Overlord , the impending invasion of Western Europe , in British coastal waters , captained by Earl H. Thomas . Together with the destroyers Fame and Inconstant , the ship sank U-767 on 18 June . She was refitted in Liverpool from July to September and rejoined the group upon completion . Havelock was under repair again in February – April 1945 , but they were completed by 30 April when the ship , together with her sister Hesperus , attacked the wreck of U-246 northwest of the island of Anglesey thinking that it was U-242 which had been spotted by a Short Sunderland flying boat earlier that day . Two weeks later , Havelock and the 14th Escort Group escorted a group of surrendered German U-boats from Loch Alsh to Lough Foyle . On 27 May , the ship , together with Hesperus , escorted the exiled Norwegian government back to Oslo and remained there until 1 June . Later that month , she began service as an aircraft target , a role that lasted for the next year . The ship was approved for scrapping on 18 February 1946 and was placed in Category C reserve on 2 August . Havelock was sold on 31 October and scrapped at Inverkeithing .

The Sunda slow loris ( Nycticebus coucang ) or greater slow loris is a strepsirrhine primate and a species of slow loris native to Indonesia , western Malaysia , southern Thailand and Singapore . It measures 27 to 38 cm ( 11 to 15 in ) from head to tail and weighs between 599 and 685 g ( 21.1 and 24.2 oz ) . Like other slow lorises , it has a wet nose ( rhinarium ) , a round head , small ears hidden in thick fur , a flat face , large eyes and a vestigial tail . The Sunda slow loris is nocturnal and arboreal , typically occurring in evergreen forests . It prefers rainforests with continuous dense canopies and has an extremely low metabolic rate compared to other mammals of its size . Its diet consists of sap , floral nectar , fruit and arthropods . It will feed on exudates such as gum and sap by licking wounds in trees . The species is generally solitary ; one study showed only 8 % of its active time was spent near other individuals . Social behavior makes up a very small part of the activity budget , though it has monogamous mating system with the offspring living with the parents . It sleeps during the day , rolled up in a ball in hidden parts of trees above the ground , often on branches , twigs , palm fronds , or lianas . The species is polyoestrous , usually giving birth to a single offspring after a gestation period of 192 days . The young disperses between 16 and 27 months , generally when it is sexually mature .

The common name , Sunda slow loris , refers to the Sunda Islands , a group of islands in the western part of the Malay archipelago where it is found . Another common name for the species is the Greater Slow Loris . The specific name , coucang , derives from kukang , its common name in Indonesia . It is commonly known as malu-malu , meaning " shy " in Indonesian , and also as bukang or Kalamasan . It is sometimes called Kuskus , because local people do not distinguish between the slow loris and Cuscus , a group of Australasian possums . In Malaysia they are sometimes known as kongkang or kera duku ; kera is Malay for monkey while duku is the fruit-bearing tree , Lansium parasiticum . In Thailand , it is called ling lom ( ลิงลม ) , which translates as " wind monkey " .

The Sunda slow loris was first described ( in part ) in 1785 by the Dutch physician and naturalist Pieter Boddaert under the name Tardigradus coucang . However , its discovery dates to 1770 , when the Dutchman Arnout Vosmaer ( 1720 – 1799 ) described a specimen of it as a type of sloth . Vosmaer gave it the French name " le paresseux pentadactyle du Bengale " ( " the five-fingered sloth of Bengal " ) , but Boddaert later argued that it was more closely aligned with the lorises of Ceylon ( now Sri Lanka ) and Bengal . Between 1800 and 1907 , several other slow loris species were described , but in 1953 the primatologist William Charles Osman Hill , in his influential book , Primates : Comparative Anatomy and Taxonomy , consolidated all the slow lorises into a single species , N. coucang . In 1971 Colin Groves recognized the pygmy slow loris ( N. pygmaeus ) as a separate species , and divided N. coucang into four subspecies . In 2001 Groves opined that there were three species ( N. coucang , N. pygmaeus , and N. bengalensis ) , and that N. coucang itself had three subspecies ( Nycticebus coucang coucang , N. c. menagensis , and N. c. javanicus ) . These three subspecies were promoted in 2010 to species status — the Sunda slow loris , the Javan slow loris ( N. javanicus ) and Bornean slow loris ( N. menagensis ) . Species differentiation was based largely on differences in morphology , such as size , fur color , and head markings . ( At the end of 2012 , the Bornean slow loris was itself divided into four distinct species . ) : 46

When Étienne Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire defined the genus Nycticebus in 1812 , he made the Sunda slow loris the type species . This was questioned in 1921 by British zoologist Oldfield Thomas , who noted that there was some confusion over which specimen was used as the type specimen . Instead , he suggested that the type specimen was actually the Bengal slow loris , Lori bengalensis Lacépède , 1800 . There was further confusion during the 1800s when Boddaert 's Tardigradus coucang was routinely mistaken for Carl Linnaeus ' Lemur tardigradus – a species he had described in the 10th edition of Systema Naturæ ( 1758 ) The fact that Lemur tardigradus was actually a slender loris remained obscured until 1902 , when mammalogists Witmer Stone and James A. G. Rehn finally cleared the air . The species has 50 chromosomes ( 2n = 50 ) , and it genome size is 3.58 pg . Of its chromosomes , 22 are metacentric , 26 are submetacentric , and none are acrocentric . Its X chromosome is submetacentric , and its Y chromosome is metacentric . To help clarify species and subspecies boundaries , and to establish whether morphology-based classifications were consistent with evolutionary relationships , the phylogenetic relationships within the genus Nycticebus have been investigated using DNA sequences derived from the mitochondrial markers D-loop and cytochrome b . Although most of the recognized lineages of Nycticebus ( including the pygmy slow loris ( N. pygmaeus ) , Bornean slow loris ( N. menagensis ) and the Javan slow loris ( N. javanicus ) ) were shown to be genetically distinct , the analysis suggested that DNA sequences from selected individuals of Sunda slow loris ( N. coucang ) and Bengal slow loris ( N. bengalensis ) shared a closer evolutionary relationship with each other than with other members of their own respective species . The authors suggest that this result may be explained by introgressive hybridization , as the tested individuals of these two taxa originated from a region of sympatry in southern Thailand ; the precise origin of one of the N. coucang individuals was not known . This hypothesis was corroborated by a 2007 study that compared the variations in mitochondrial DNA sequences between N. bengalensis and N. coucang , and suggested that there has indeed been gene flow between the two species .

The Sunda slow loris has dark rings around its large eyes , a white nose with a whitish strip that extends to the forehead and a dark stripe that stretches from the back of the head along the spine . Its soft , thick , woolly fur ranges from light brown to deep reddish brown , with a lighter underside . The species is distinct from the Bengal slow loris due to the dark inverse teardrop markings around the eyes which meet the dark dorsal stripe on the back of the head . It tends to have a much more distinct white stripe between the eyes , more distinct dark coloring around the eyes , and a browner coat than the Bengal slow loris which is larger , grayer , and shows less contrast . The Sunda slow loris has less white facial coloring than the much smaller pygmy slow loris . Local color variations are known to occur . It measures between 27 and 38 centimetres ( 11 and 15 in ) and weighs 599 and 685 grams ( 21.1 and 24.2 oz ) . Unlike the Bengal slow loris , the Sunda slow loris does not show sexual dimorphism by weight . The vestigial tail , hidden beneath the fur , is reduced to a stump . It has a toothcomb , six forward-facing teeth on the bottom jaw , which includes the lower incisors and the canine teeth . The structure is generally used for grooming in other strepsirhine primates , but lorises also use it to scrape off gum when foraging . It has a shortened second digit , and the hands have a strong grip . Like other lorises , it excretes a strong-smelling liquid from glands beneath its arms which is used in communication .

One major distinguishing feature between all loris species is locomotion : the Sunda slow loris moves slowly through trees on all four limbs , typically with three limbs attached to a support at a time . Its movement has been described as unique ; similar to crawling , or as if it was climbing in every direction , the Sunda slow loris changes direction or moves between branches with little noise or change in speed . In captivity , about a quarter of its time is spent moving quadrupedally , a quarter suspended or hanging , a quarter climbing , and a quarter clasping multiple branches ( bridging ) . It may hang below a branch by one or both feet for long periods of time .

Like other slow lorises , the Sunda slow loris is an arboreal and nocturnal primate , resting by day in the forks of trees , or in thick vegetation and feeding on fruit and insects by night . Unlike other loris species , it remains in trees most of its life : while the Bengal slow loris will often sleep on the ground , the Sunda slow loris sleeps in a ball in branches or foliage . It usually sleeps alone but has been observed to sleep with several conspecifics ( individuals of the same species ) , including other adults . Adults live in overlapping ranges of 0.004 to 0.25 km2 ( 0.0015 to 0.0965 sq mi ) . Despite its slow metabolism rate , the Sunda slow loris has a high-energy diet . Its slow lifestyle may be due to the energy costs of detoxifying certain secondary plant compounds in many genera of food plants their diets . The largest amount of time is spent eating phloem sap ( 34.9 % ) , floral nectar and nectar-producing plant parts ( 31.7 % ) , and fruits ( 22.5 % ) . It also consumes gums and arthropods such as spiders and insects . Gum is taken by licking wounds on trees . They are also known to feed on molluscs , including the giant land snail Achatina fulica , and birds ' eggs .

All slow loris species produce a toxin in glands on the insides of their elbows . This is spread across their bodies and those of their offspring using the toothcomb while grooming . When threatened with predators , the Sunda slow loris can bite , roll into a ball exposing its toxic saliva-covered fur , or roll up and drop from the trees . However , the primary method of predator avoidance is crypsis , whereby it hides . The Asiatic reticulated python , the changeable hawk-eagle and the Bornean orangutan have been recorded as predators of the Sunda slow loris .

The Sunda slow loris may fit into the monogamous single male / single female social system , though are mainly known to be solitary . One study showed only 8 % of the species ' active time was spent near other individuals . Where home ranges overlap , spatial groups are formed . These groups consist of one male , one female and up to three younger individuals . The interactions between these individuals are largely friendly ; they include allogrooming , following , pant-growling , and click-calling , although social behaviors only make up around 3 % of the activity budget . When it comes into contact with conspecifics from other home ranges there is usually no reaction as home ranges are not defended . In captivity however , it can be aggressive with other individuals . Males have shown antagonistic behaviors such as attacks , pursuits , threats , assertion , fighting , and subordination . The fighting often results in serious injury . Despite this , they are known to be generally sociable in captivity , with allogrooming being the most common social behavior .

There are eight distinct call types made by Sunda slow loris adults , which can be divided into two categories : contact and contact-seeking calls such as whistles and short keckers ( a social play and attention-seeking call ) , and aggressive and defensive calls such as long keckers , screams , snarls and grunts . Because they rely on crypsis to avoid predators , they do not make alarm calls . Infants emits clicks and squeaks when disturbed . During estrus , females make whistle calls when in visual contact with a male . When exploring new environments and during handling , it makes ultrasonic vocalisations out of the human hearing range . Olfactory communication is very important in this species . It has roles in alerting others of the identity , physical state and position of the individual . It is also important in reproduction . Like other slow lorises , the Sunda slow loris has glands on its elbows that exude oils . The gland is licked to spread scent and is thought to have evolved for communication , but it is toxic to humans . If the person is allergic to the animal they can go into shock and could even die . It also has glands on its anus and can signal conspecifics by perineal rubbing which deposits urine . When it locates the scent of another slow loris it may rub its face on the substrate where the scent was found . The Sunda slow loris may grin or bare its teeth . When stressed , infants may grin , while adults bear their teeth to show aggression or fear , but also during play .

Reproduction is one of the few times the Sunda slow loris aggregates with conspecifics , as it is largely solitary . One study recorded that the most slow lorises ever seen together was six ; this appeared to be a female in estrus and five males following her . This may suggest a more promiscuous mating system , where females mate with more than one male . Despite this , its testis size is small compared with similar sized promsimians , which is indicative of monogamy . In the wild the mating system of the Sunda slow loris is thought to vary between populations . Sexual maturity is reached between the ages of 18 and 24 months in females , and can be reached by 17 months in males . It is polyestrous , having many periods of sexual receptivity during a year . In captivity however , there is a clear birth peak between March and May . It has been observed that reproductive patterns of captive prosimians in the northern hemisphere are altered . The estrus cycle lasts 29 – 45 days , with most copulations occurring on the same day . Females in estrus are followed by males , with copulation initiated by the female . The female will hang from a branch and may vocalise . The male will hold the female and the branch and copulate with her . Urine-marking and vocalising are also used by the female to solicit mating . The male may create a mating plug following copulation .

The Sunda slow loris is found in continuous canopy tropical rainforests . It is adaptable and will also live in other types of habitat . It is found in Indonesia , on the islands of Sumatra , Batam and Galang in the Riau Archipelago , and Pulau Tebingtinggi and Great Natuna ( Bunguran ) in the Natuna Islands ; in Malaysia on the Malay Peninsula and Pulau Tioman ; in the southern peninsular of Thailand ; and Singapore . The Sunda slow loris is sympatric ( shares its range ) with the Bengal slow loris in Thailand and hybridisation has occurred .

According to the 2008 International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) Red List assessment , the Sunda slow loris was evaluated as " Vulnerable " . In June 2007 it was transferred from CITES Appendix II to Appendix I , indicating a true concern about the state of international trade in this species , an act now forbidden by international law . It is also protected by Indonesian law , though the law does not seem to be strictly enforced . Its population size is unknown and further studies need to be carried out to confirm their conservation status . The Sunda slow loris is greatly threatened by the pet trade , and is sold as an exotic pet throughout southeast Asia . The slow lorises are the most commonly traded protected primates in southeast Asia . When sold as a pet it often will have its teeth pulled out to prevent injury to the owner . This may cause dental infections which have up to a 90 % death rate . Once it has lost its teeth , reintroduction to the wild is impossible . Due to a very high mortality rate in captivity due to stress , improper nutrition and infection , the pet trade is inflated by replacements . With a greater purchasing power , the increasing human populations in the species ' range could have an even more serious impact .

The Sunda slow loris is further threatened by gathering for illegal traditional medicine . The fur is reported to heal wounds , the flesh to cure epilepsy , eyes are used in love potions , and the meat is reported to cure asthma and stomach problems . It is also killed as a crop pest . Severe habitat loss and degradation over large areas of its range have caused large population declines , even though the species is more adaptable to anthropogenic habitats than other primates in the region . The resulting fragmentation has restricted species dispersal as it depends on continuous canopy cover to move from tree to tree .

Pichilemu ( Mapudungun : Small forest , pronounced : [ pitʃiˈlemu ] ) , originally known as Pichilemo , is a beach resort city and commune in central Chile , and capital of Cardenal Caro Province . The commune comprises an urban centre and twenty-two villages , such as Ciruelos , Cáhuil , and Espinillo . It is located southwest of Santiago , the capital of Chile . Pichilemu had over 13,000 residents as of 2012 . The Pichilemu area was long populated by the indigenous Promaucaes . European-Chilean development began in the mid-sixteenth century , as conquistador Pedro de Valdivia gave Juan Gómez de Almagro the Topocalma encomienda ( which included the current territory of Pichilemu ) in January 1541 . Pichilemu was established as an " autonomous commune " on 22 December 1891 , by decree of the President Jorge Montt and Interior Minister Manuel José Irarrázabal . Agustín Ross Edwards , a Chilean politician and member of the Ross Edwards family , planned to develop it as a beach resort on the Pacific Ocean for upper-class Chileans . Pichilemu is home to five of the National Monuments of Chile : Agustín Ross Cultural Centre and Park ; the wooden railway station , Estación Pichilemu ; El Árbol tunnel ; and the Caballo de Agua . Part of the city was declared a Zona Típica ( " Traditional Area " or " Heritage Site " ) by the National Monuments Council , in 2004 .

The city is part of District No. 35 and is in the ninth senatorial constituency of O 'Higgins Region electoral division . Pichilemu is home to the main beach in O 'Higgins Region . It is a tourist destination for surfing , windsurfing and funboarding . Tourism is the main industry of the city , but forestry and handicrafts are also important . Pichilemu has many expansive dark sand beaches . Several surf championships take place in the city each year at Punta de Lobos , which according to Fodor 's is " widely considered the best surfing in South America all year-round . "

Pichilemu was inhabited by Promaucaes , a pre-Columbian tribal group , until the Spanish conquest of Chile . They were hunter-gatherers and fishermen who lived primarily along the Cachapoal and Maule rivers . The remaining Promaucaes were assimilated into Chilean society through a process of hispanicisation and mestisation after the conquest of Chile . Aureliano Oyarzún , professor of pathology at University of Chile , investigated pre-Ceramic middens from Pichilemu and Cahuil . His book Crónicas de Pichilemu – Cáhuil ( Chronicles of Pichilemu – Cáhuil ) was published posthumously , in 1957 . Tomás Guevara published two volumes of Historia de Chile , Chile Prehispánico ( History of Chile , Pre-Hispanic Chile ) in 1929 , which discusses the indigenous centre of Apalta , the Pichilemu middens , the Malloa petroglyphs , a stone cup from Nancagua , and pottery finds in Peralillo . José Toribio Medina ( 1852 – 1930 ) , who was a writer and historiographer , spent most of his life in Colchagua Province , and completed his first archeological investigations in Pichilemu . In 1908 , he published Los Restos Indígenas de Pichilemu ( English : The Indigenous Remains of Pichilemu ) , in which he stated that the Indians that were inhabiting Pichilemu when the Spaniards arrived at Chile were Promaucaes , part of the Topocalma encomienda , given on 24 January 1544 , by Pedro de Valdivia to Juan Gómez de Almagro , therefore establishing Pichilemu .

During the colonial and Republican periods , agriculture was promoted by the government . Many Chilean haciendas ( estates ) were successful during this time , including the Pichileminian Hacienda San Antonio de Petrel . Part of the land where San Antonio de Petrel was created was given by the Captaincy General of Chile to Bartolomé de Rojas y Puebla in 1611 , who later acquired more lands in order to establish it . San Antonio de Petrel produced leather , jerky , soles , tallow , and cordovan , as well as other products which would later be exported to Peru , or sold in Santiago and Valparaíso . San Antonio de Petrel was bordered by properties of Lauriano Gaete and Ninfa Vargas , and Pedro Pavez Polanco . The area around Pichilemu was very densely populated , especially in Cáhuil , where there are salt deposits that were exploited by natives . Pichilemu has had censuses taken since the 17th century . In 1872 , President of Chile Aníbal Pinto commissioned the corvette captain Francisco Vidal Gormaz to perform a survey of the coast between Tumán Creek and Boca del Mataquito . He concluded that Pichilemu was the best place to construct a ferry . The family of Daniel Ortúzar , inheritors of the hacienda San Antonio de Petrel , constructed a dock in 1875 , which served as a fishing port for a few years , and would be decreed as a " minor dock " by President José Manuel Balmaceda in 1887 . Homes were built along the dock on what currently is the Daniel Ortúzar Avenue ( Avenida Daniel Ortúzar ) . The name Pichilemu comes from the Mapudungún words pichi ( little ) and lemu ( forest ) .

During the 1891 Chilean Civil War , Daniel Ortúzar and the priest of Alcones were transferred as prisoners from Pichilemu to Valparaíso via the dock , which was later burned . The dock was later reconstructed and used until 1912 , but it never reached " port " status . The inheritors of Lauriano Gaete and Ninfa Vargas , who were proprietors of the land which is currently Central Pichilemu , founded the town in late 1891 after conceiving the design of the city with engineer Emilio Nichón . By decree of President Jorge Montt and his Interior Minister , Manuel José Irarrázabal , the city was officially established as an " autonomous commune " on 22 December 1891 . José María Caro Martínez became the first mayor of the city in 1894 , and regularised and improved the design of the city the same year . Caro Martínez held the mayor office until 1905 . Agustín Ross Edwards , a Chilean writer , Member of Parliament , minister , and politician , bought a 300-hectare ( 740-acre ) tract of land , and named it La Posada , in 1885 . At the time , it was merely a set of thick-walled barracks .

Agustín Ross turned Pichilemu into a summer resort town for affluent people from Santiago . He designed an urban setting that included a park and a forest of over 10 hectares ( 25 acres ) . He transformed La Posada into a hotel , named Gran Hotel Pichilemu , which has since been renamed to Hotel Agustín Ross . He built the Ross Casino ( currently a cultural centre ) , several chalets , terraces , embankments , stone walls , a balcony facing the beach , and several large homes with building materials and furniture imported from France and England . However , Ross was not able to build the dock he had planned for the city . He died in 1926 in Viña del Mar. Agustín Ross ' inheritors donated all of his construction ( streets , avenues , squares , seven hectares of forests , the park in front of the hotel , the perrons , the balcony , and the terraces ) to the Municipality of Pichilemu , on the condition that the municipality would hold them for recreation and public access . The Agustín Ross Casino , constructed in 1905 , and the Agustín Ross Park , constructed in 1885 , have since become an important part of the city , and have been declared Monumentos Históricos ( Historic Monuments ) by the National Monuments Council .

After the creation of the Cardenal Caro Province , by decree of General Augusto Pinochet on 3 October 1979 , Pichilemu became its capital . The province is named after the first Chilean Catholic Cardinal , José María Caro Rodríguez , who was born in Pichilemu . Pichilemu was severely affected by the 2010 Chile earthquake and its subsequent tsunami , which caused massive destruction in the coastal zone . On 11 March 2010 , at 11 : 39 : 41 ( 14 : 39 : 41 UTC ) , a magnitude 6.9 earthquake occurred 15 kilometres ( 9 mi ) northwest of Pichilemu , killing one person .

Pichilemu is located 126 kilometres ( 78 mi ) west of San Fernando , in the westernmost area of the O 'Higgins Region , on the coast of the Pacific Ocean . It is within a three-hour drive of the Andes Mountains . It is near the Cordillera de la Costa ( Coastal Mountain Range ) which rises to 2,000 metres ( 6,562 ft ) in elevation . The city is bordered by Litueche to the north , Paredones to the south , and Marchigüe and Pumanque to the east . To the west lies the Pacific Ocean . Pichilemu covers an area of 749.1 square kilometres ( 289.2 sq mi ) . Pichilemu is located close to a geological fault ( Pichilemu Fault ) , which is according to reports between the city and Vichuquén at 15 km depth , 40 km in length and 20 km wide . It is not known whether the fault was formed during the March 2010 earthquake or if it was just reactivated . Although the majority of the forest areas around Pichilemu are covered with pine and eucalyptus plantations , a native forest ( now the Municipal Forest ) remains . It contains species such as Litres , Quillayes , Boldos , Espinos , and Peumos .

The city consists of an urban centre and twenty-two rural villages : Alto Colorado , Alto Ramírez , Barrancas , Cáhuil , Cardonal de Panilonco , Ciruelos , Cóguil , El Maqui , El Guindo , Espinillo , Estación Larraín Alcalde , La Aguada , La Palmilla , La Villa , La Plaza , Las Comillas , Pueblo de Viudas , Quebrada del Nuevo Reino , Pañul , Rodeillo , San Antonio de Petrel , and Tanumé . Nearby bodies of water ( apart from the Pacific Ocean ) include the Nilahue Estuary , which flows to Cáhuil Lagoon , Petrel Estuary , which flows to Petrel Lagoon , and El Barro , El Bajel , and El Ancho lagoons , the latter of which provides the city with drinking water . Pichilemu experiences a Mediterranean climate , with winter rains which reach 700 millimetres ( 28 in ) . The rest of the year is dry , often windy , and sometimes with coastal fog . Occasionally the city receives winds as high as 150 kilometres per hour ( 93 mph ) .

By the 17th century , Pichilemu had 1,468 inhabitants . In 1787 , Pichilemu held 1,688 inhabitants , and the population rose to 11,829 by 1895 . From there onward , the city 's population progressively decreased : 7,787 inhabitants in 1907 ; 7,424 in 1920 ; 6,929 in 1930 ; and 6,570 in 1940 . In 1952 , the city 's population increased to 7,150 inhabitants ; however , the 1960 census showed it decreased to 5,724 inhabitants , and to 5,459 in 1970 . The number of people in Pichilemu reached 8,844 in 1982 , and in 1992 , 10,510 . As of the 2002 census , the population comprised 12,392 people , and 6,228 households . The 2002 census classified 9,459 people ( 76.3 % ) as living in an urban area and 2,933 people ( 23.7 % ) as living in a rural area , with 6,440 men ( 52.0 % ) and 5,952 women ( 48.0 % ) . According to the 2002 Casen survey , 544 inhabitants ( 4.4 % ) of the population live in extreme poverty compared to the average in the greater O 'Higgins Region of 4.5 % , and 1,946 inhabitants ( 15.7 % ) live in mild poverty , compared to the regional average of 16.1 % .

The National Statistics Institute of Chile has estimated that , as of 2010 , 78.96 % of the inhabitants in the city were living in an urban area and 21.04 % were living in a rural area , with 52.4 % men and 47.5 % women ; the population density was estimated as 19.09 per square mile . In the 2012 census , the population of Pichilemu was 13,916 inhabitants ; although earlier estimates put it higher . Most of the people from Pichilemu are Catholic , as of the 2002 census , 7,611 persons ( 83.44 % ) , well above the national and regional average ( 69.96 % and 79.08 % , respectively ) ; the evangelical population is considerably lower , at only 689 people ( 7.55 % ) ; 361 ( 3.96 % ) said they were Atheists or Agnostic individuals , while the remaining 460 ( 5.04 % ) are part of other religions . Based on information from the Casen survey , twenty-four persons living in Pichilemu declared themselves as Aymaras in 2006 , and in 2009 , 390 people said they were part of the Mapuche indigenous ethnic group ; the survey revealed no one living in Pichilemu claimed to be either of the Atacameños or of the Rapa Nui indigenous peoples .

Pichilemu , along with the communes of Placilla , Nancagua , Chépica , Santa Cruz , Pumanque , Palmilla , Peralillo , Navidad , Lolol , Litueche , La Estrella , Marchihue , and Paredones , is part of Electoral District No. 35 and belongs to the 9th Senatorial Constituency ( O 'Higgins ) of the electoral divisions of Chile . Pichilemu is governed by the mayor ( alcalde ) , who manages the executive function . The City Council ( concejo municipal ) manages the legislative function . The mayors and the councilors are elected popularly every four years , with possibility of re-election . Marcelo Cabrera Martínez was elected in 2008 as the new mayor with 42.08 percent of the vote ; he served from May to August 2009 , when he was permanently banned from holding public office after being convicted for adulterating tickets . Then , the municipal council elected Roberto Córdova as new mayor on 9 September 2009 . Between 2007 and 2009 , Pichilemu had seven mayors , after Jorge Vargas González was removed from the office for committing the crime of bribery ; he was mayor for over 10 years , from 1996 to 2007 . Vargas was succeeded by Victor Rojas , who was later accused of the same crime and eventually removed from the office too . Roberto Córdova was popularly elected mayor for the first time in 2012 with 47.9 percent . The current councilors of Pichilemu are Aldo Polanco Contreras , Andrea Aranda Escudero , Marta Urzúa Púa , Mario Morales Cárceles , Felipe Bustamante Olivares , and Hugo Toro Galaz . Both the mayor and the councilors took office on 6 December 2012 , and their term will expire on 6 December 2016 .

Tourism is the main industry of Pichilemu , especially in the urban centre and some rural areas such as Cáhuil and Ciruelos . Forestry , mainly pine and eucalyptus , is another major industry . The area is also known for handicrafts . Although fishing is not very important to O 'Higgins Region , due to unsuitable coastlines , it is common in Pichilemu , Bucalemu , and Navidad . Pichilemu has a clay deposit in the Pañul area . According to archaeological investigations , pottery was first manufactured in the area around 300 BCE . It is still a stalwart today — Ciruelos and El Copao are well known for the pottery created there .

The Bosque Municipal ( Municipal Forest ) was donated by the Ross family in 1935 . The main access to the forest is in front of Ross Casino , near Paseo el Sol ; or by a road near the Colegio Preciosa Sangre . The forest has a footpath surrounded by palms , pines , and many other varieties of trees . Conchal Indígena ( Indigenous Midden ) is an archaeological site of pre-Hispanic times . It is located on the site of an ancient fishing village 1 kilometre ( 0.62 mi ) from Punta de Lobos and 0.3 kilometres ( 0.19 mi ) south of Los Curas Lagoon . Laguna Los Curas ( Los Curas Lagoon ) is a natural area used for eco-tourist activities such as fishing located 7 kilometres ( 4.3 mi ) south of Pichilemu . Another lagoon , the Laguna del Perro ( The Dog 's Lagoon ) is located 8.5 kilometres ( 5.3 mi ) south of Pichilemu . It is used for recreational activities . Laguna El Alto ( El Alto Lagoon ) is a small , rain-fed lagoon located at Chorrillos Beach that is often used for camping and picnics . The lagoon is an hour and a half drive from Pichilemu , traveling to the north by Chorrillos beach . Poza del Encanto is a lagoon located 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) from Pichilemu . It is home to a large variety of native fauna . The Estero Nilahue ( Nilahue Lagoon ) is located 15 kilometres ( 9.3 mi ) from Pichilemu . It has several beaches , including El Bronce , El Maquí , and Laguna El Vado .

St. Andrew Church is located in Ciruelos , 13 kilometres ( 8.1 mi ) from Pichilemu . It was constructed in 1779 , and its altar was built in the 1940s . It has a harmonium , confessional boxes , and ancient images of saints . Its original image of St. Andrew was made of papier mache . The old parish was created by Archbishop Rafael Valentín Valdivieso in 1864 . Cardinal José María Caro Rodríguez was baptized there . The feast day of St. Andrew is celebrated every November 30 at the church . The Museo del Niño Rural ( the Rural Kid Museum ) was created as an initiative of teacher Carlos Leyton and his students . It is a modern building that utilises traditional architecture . Three rooms contain a collection of stone tools , arrowheads , and clay tools made by the indigenous people of the region . Also on display are domestic tools from early colonists . El Copao is a hamlet located 14 kilometres ( 8.7 mi ) east of Pichilemu . Its main industry is domestic pottery production , using clay as a raw material . Pañul is a settlement located 17 kilometres ( 11 mi ) from Pichilemu . Its name in Mapudungun means " medicinal herb . " Pañul produces pottery made with locally obtained clay . Cáhuil is a small settlement located 13 kilometres ( 8.1 mi ) south of Pichilemu . Its name in Mapudungun means " parrot place " . Cahuil lagoon is used for fishing , swimming , and kayaking ; kiteboarding lessons are offered on the lagoon . The Cáhuil Bridge is open to motor traffic , and has a view of the Cahuil zone . The bridge provides access to Curicó , Lolol , Bucalemu , and other nearby places .

The current Cultural Centre , in front of Ross Park , is a three-floor casino constructed with imported materials in the early 1900s by Agustín Ross . It originally housed a mail and telegraph service , with a large store . The first casino in Chile was opened in this building on 20 January 1906 . It operated until 1932 , when the Viña del Mar Casino was opened . The building was renovated and reopened in 2009 as a cultural arts center . It currently houses several gallery spaces and the public library . During its restoration , workers found many historical artifacts , including a copy of Las Últimas Noticias from February 1941 when Ross Casino served as a hotel ; an American telephone battery dating from the period of 1909 to 1915 ; and a tile from the casino 's ceiling signed by workers during the building 's construction in 1914 . Ross Park , created by Agustín Ross in 1885 , contains hundred-year-old native Chilean palms ( Phoenix canariensis ) and many green spaces . It was restored in December 1987 , and is now a popular walking destination . The former casino was named National Monuments in 1988 .

The old wooden railway station , Estación Pichilemu , constructed around 1925 , is one of the National Monuments of Chile . In the O 'Higgins Region , 357 kilometres ( 222 mi ) of railway lines were constructed , but only 161 kilometres ( 100 mi ) still exist . The 119 kilometres ( 74 mi ) San Fernando – Pichilemu section was constructed between 1869 and 1926 . Passenger services operated on the line until 1986 and freight services were operational until 1995 . In 2006 , the Peralillo – Pichilemu section was removed completely . It remained in operation until the 1990s , and became a National Monument on 16 September 1994 . It has since become an arts and culture centre and tourism information office . It exhibits decorative and practical objects from the 1920s , and features many old clothes .

Pichilemu has several expansive dark sand beaches . The water is cool all year-round , and many tourists choose to swim at the shore break during the summer months . Common activities include bodyboarding , surfing , windsurfing , and kitesurfing . The northernmost of the beaches is Playa Las Terrazas or Playa Principal ( The Terraces Beach or Main Beach ) , which is in front of Ross Park . It is popular for surfing . Near the beach and at Ross Park , there are balustrades and long stairs dating from the early 1900s . There is a balcony over the rocks at the southern end of the beach . It is the busiest during the summer months . Several surf schools , such as La Ola Perfecta , and Lobos del Pacífico , are located nearby , as is the fish market at Fishermen Creek . Located south of the town and around the other side of the Puntilla , Playa Infiernillo ( Little Hell Beach ) is rocky and has tide-pools . This area is used for fishing . South of Infiernillo is Playa Hermosa ( Beautiful Beach ) , which is popular for walking and fishing .

Further south , 6 kilometres ( 3.7 mi ) from Pichilemu , Punta de Lobos has a beach sheltered from the southern winds . It is an increasingly popular destination for tourists and surfers . Several surf contests are held there every year . The size of waves varies throughout the year . Large swells in fall and winter can reach heights of up to 15 metres ( 49 ft ) . It is widely considered one of the best beaches for surfing worldwide . In 2012 , it was named one of the " 50 most thrilling surf destinations " . Pichilemu is regarded as the prime location for surfing in Chile , particularly at Punta de Lobos . Every October and December , an International Championship of Surf is held at La Puntilla Beach . Punta de Lobos hosts the Campeonato Nacional de Surf ( National Surfing Championship ) every summer .

There are three local newspapers : El Expreso de la Costa ( " The Express of the Coast " ) is a monthly newspaper directed by Félix Calderón Vargas , first published on 30 June 2000 ; El Faro del Secano ( " The Dryland 's Lighthouse " ) was founded in November 2013 by local journalist Óscar Rojas Connell , and is distributed throughout the Cardenal Caro Province ; and La Voz de la Región ( " The Voice of the Region " ) , published every two weeks , first appeared on 2 January 2014 , and is directed by Patricio Flores Retamales . Radio services come from Radio Entreolas , Radio Atardecer , Radio Somos Pichilemu ( directed by former Mayor Jorge Vargas González and his wife and current Councilor Andrea Aranda ) , Radio Isla , and Radio Corporación . A television channel , Canal 3 Pichilemu , also broadcasts in the area .

Education establishments in Pichilemu include Liceo Agustín Ross Edwards ( Agustín Ross Edwards High School ) ; a secondary school in El Llano ; the primary and secondary school named Charly 's School , and the primary school Escuela Digna Camilo Aguilar ( Digna Camilo Aguilar School ) , both also located in El Llano ; Colegio Libertadores ( Liberators School ) , a primary school in Infiernillo ; Colegio de la Preciosa Sangre ( Precious Blood School ) , a primary and secondary school located near El Llano ; Colegio Divino Maestro ( Divine Master School ) , a primary school located near Cáhuil Avenue ; Escuela Pueblo de Viudas ( Pueblo de Viudas School ) , a primary school in Pueblo de Viudas ; and Jardín Amanecer ( Dawn Garden ) , a kindergarten school in El Llano . Higher education first arrived at Pichilemu in 1970 , when the Centro Medio Profesional de Pichilemu ( Pichilemu Secondary-Professional Centre ) was created ; however , it was discontinued the next year . In 2002 , thirty-one years after the Centro Medio Profesional was discontinued , the Universidad Academia de Humanismo Cristiano ( Academy of Christian Humanism University ) began to give classes of Engineering in Public Gesture Management , and Engineering in Environment Gesture Management . The university worked at the dependencies of Liceo Agustín Ross Edwards until 2008 . At least ten people obtained their professional titles , while other ten are still in the process of obtaining their titles , as of December 2011 . In November 2011 , Governor of Cardenal Caro Province Julio Ibarra announced that an institute of higher education would be brought to the province , whose name , Instituto Profesional IPG ( IPG Professional Institute ) , was disclosed one month later . During the inauguration of the 2012 school year in Pichilemu , Education Regional Secretary Minister ( Seremi ) Pedro Larraín said IPEGE would work in the dependencies of Colegio de la Preciosa Sangre of Pichilemu .

The Amber Room ( Russian : Янтарная комната , German : Bernsteinzimmer , Polish : Bursztynowa komnata ) is a world-famous chamber decorated in amber panels backed with gold leaf and mirrors , located in the Catherine Palace of Tsarskoye Selo near Saint Petersburg . Originally constructed in the 18th century in Prussia , the Amber Room disappeared during World War II and was recreated in 2003 . Before the room was lost , it was considered an " Eighth Wonder of the World " . Construction of the Amber Room first took place around 1701 in Prussia . The room was designed by German baroque sculptor Andreas Schlüter and Danish amber craftsman Gottfried Wolfram . Schlüter and Wolfram worked on the room until 1707 , when work was continued by amber masters Gottfried Turau and Ernst Schacht from Danzig . The amber cabinet remained in the Berlin City Palace until 1716 when it was given by the Prussian King Frederick William I to his then ally , Tsar Peter the Great of the Russian Empire . In Russia , the room was expanded and after several renovations , it covered more than 55 square metres ( 590 sq ft ) and contained over 6 tonnes ( 13,000 lb ) of amber .

The Amber Room was begun in 1701 with the purpose of being installed at Charlottenburg Palace , the residence of Frederick , the first King of Prussia , at the urging of his second wife , Sophie Charlotte . The concept and design of the room was drafted by Andreas Schlüter . It was fabricated by Gottfried Wolfram , master craftsman to the Danish court of King Frederick IV of Denmark , with help from the amber masters Ernst Schacht and Gottfried Turau from Danzig . Although originally intended for installation at Charlottenburg Palace , the complete panels were eventually installed at Berlin City Palace . The Amber Room did not , however , remain at Berlin City Palace for long . Peter the Great of Russia admired it during a visit and in 1716 , King Frederick I 's son Frederick William I presented the room to Peter as a gift , which forged a Russo-Prussian alliance against Sweden . The original Berlin design of the Amber Room was reworked in Russia in a joint effort by German and Russian craftsmen . It was Peter 's daughter Empress Elisabeth who decided the amber treasure should be installed at Catherine Palace , where the Russian Imperial family typically spent their summers . After several other 18th-century renovations , the room covered more than 55 square metres ( 590 sq ft ) and contained over 6 tonnes ( 13,000 lb ) of amber . The room took over ten years to construct .

Shortly after the beginning of the German invasion of the Soviet Union in World War II , the curators responsible for removing the art treasures in Leningrad tried to disassemble and remove the Amber Room . However , over the years the amber had dried out and became brittle , making it impossible to move the room without crumbling the amber . The Amber Room was therefore hidden behind mundane wallpaper , in an attempt to keep German forces from seizing it . Predictably , the attempt to hide such a well-known piece of art failed . German soldiers of Army Group North disassembled the Amber Room within 36 hours under the supervision of two experts . On 14 October 1941 , the priceless room reached Königsberg in East Prussia , for storage and display in the town 's castle . On 13 November 1941 , a Konigsberg newspaper announced an exhibition of the Amber Room at Königsberg Castle .

Orders given by Hitler on 21 and 24 January 1945 ordered the movement of looted possessions from Königsberg . This allowed Albert Speer , Reichminister of Armaments , and his administration team to transport cultural goods of priority . However , before the Amber Room could be moved , Erich Koch , who was in charge of civil administration in Königsberg during the final months of the war , abandoned his post and fled from the city , leaving General Otto Lasch in command . In August 1944 , Königsberg was heavily fire bombed by the Royal Air Force . It suffered further extensive damage from artillery from the advancing Red Army before the final occupation on 9 April 1945 .

In 1979 , the Soviet government decided to construct a replica of the Amber Room at Tsarskoye Selo , a process that was to last 24 years and require 40 Russian and German experts in amber craftsmanship . Using original drawings and old black-and-white photographs , every attempt was made to duplicate the original Amber Room . This included the 350 shades of amber in the original panels and fixtures that adorned the room . Another major problem was the lack of skilled workers , since amber carving was considered a nearly lost art form . The financial difficulties that plagued the reconstruction project from the start were solved with the donation of $ 3.5 million from the German company E.ON. By 2003 , the work of the Russian craftsmen was mostly completed . The new room was dedicated by Russian President Vladimir Putin and German Chancellor Gerhard Schröder at the 300th anniversary of the city of Saint Petersburg . In Kleinmachnow , near Berlin , there is a miniature Amber Room , fabricated after the original . The Berlin miniature collector Ulla Klingbeil had this copy made of original East Prussian amber .

The Amber Room is a priceless piece of art , with extraordinary architectural features such as gilding , carvings , 450 kg ( 990 lb ) amber panels , gold leaf , gemstones , and mirrors , all highlighted with candle light . Additional architectural and design features include statues of angels and children . Because of its unique features and singular beauty , the original Amber Room was sometimes dubbed the " Eighth Wonder of the World " . Modern estimates of the room 's value range from $ 142 million ( 2007 ) to over $ 500 million ( 2016 ) .

After the war , the Amber Room was never seen in public again , though reports have occasionally surfaced stating that pieces of the Amber Room survived the war . Several eyewitnesses claimed to have spotted the famous room being loaded on board the Wilhelm Gustloff , which left Gdynia on 30 January 1945 , and was then promptly torpedoed and sunk by a Soviet submarine . In 1997 , an Italian stone mosaic that was part of a set of four stones which had decorated the Amber Room was found in Germany , in the possession of the family of a soldier who claimed to have helped pack up the amber chamber . The mosaic came into the hands of the Russian authorities and was used in the reconstruction effort . In 1998 , two separate teams , one German and one Lithuanian , announced they had located the Amber Room . The German team pointed to a silver mine while the Lithuanian team believed the amber treasure was buried in a lagoon ; neither of the two suggestions turned out to hold the Amber Room . In 2004 , a lengthy investigation by British investigative journalists Catherine Scott-Clark and Adrian Levy concluded that Amber Room was most likely destroyed when Königsberg Castle was heavily damaged , first during the bombing of Königsberg by the Royal Air Force in 1944 , when the castle completely burned down , and later by the Soviet shelling of the remaining walls . Documents from the Russian National Archives revealed this as the assessment of a Soviet report , written by Alexander Brusov , head of the Soviet team charged with locating the Amber Room following the war . The report stated :

These dates correspond with the end of the Battle of Konigsberg , which finished on 9 April with the surrender of the German garrison . A few years later , Brusov publicly voiced a contrary opinion ; this is believed to have been done due to pressure from Soviet authorities , who did not want to be seen as responsible for the loss of the Amber Room . Among other information retrieved from the archives was the revelation that the remaining Italian stone mosaics were found in the burned debris of the castle . Scott-Clark and Levy concluded in their report that the reason the Soviets conducted extensive searches for the Amber Room , even though their own experts had concluded that it was destroyed , was because they wanted to know if any of their own soldiers had been responsible for the destruction . Scott-Clark and Levy also assessed that others in the Soviet government found the theft of the Amber Room a useful Cold War propaganda tool . Russian government officials have since denied these conclusions . Adelaida Yolkina , senior researcher at the Pavlovsk Palace , reportedly stated : " It is impossible to see the Red Army being so careless that they let the Amber Room be destroyed " .

After the report was made public , Leonid Arinshtein , who was a Lieutenant in the Red Army in charge of a rifle platoon during the Battle of Konigsberg , said : " I probably was one of the last people who saw the Amber Room " . At the same time , he explained that the whole city was burning due to artillery bombardments , but also denied allegations that the Red Army burned the city on purpose by saying : " What soldiers would burn the city where they will have to stay ? " A variation of this theory by some present-day residents of Kaliningrad ( formerly Königsberg ) , is that at least parts of the room were found in the Königsberg Castle cellars after World War II by the Red Army . The Amber Room was allegedly still in good condition ; this was not admitted at the time so the blame could fall upon the Nazis . To preserve this story , access to the ruins of the castle , which was allowed after World War II , was suddenly restricted to all , including historical and archaeological surveys . Then in 1968 , despite academic protests worldwide , Soviet Premier Leonid Brezhnev ordered the destruction of Königsberg Castle , thus making any onsite research of the last known resting place of the Amber Room all but impossible . In more recent years , the search for the Amber Room has continued in different locations including near Wuppertal , Germany .

Denny , Isabel ( 2007 ) . The Fall of Hitler 's Fortress City : the Battle for Königsberg , 1945 . MBI Publishing . ISBN 978-1935149200 . Khatri , Vikas ( 2012 ) . World Famous Treasures Lost and Found . Pustak Mahal Publishing . ISBN 978-8122312744 . Lucas , James ( 2000 ) . Last Days of the Reich : The Collapse of Nazi Germany , May 1945 . Cassell Publishing . ISBN 978-0304354481 . Scott-Clark , Catherine ; Levy , Adrian ( 2004 ) . The Amber Room : The Untold Story of the Greatest Hoax of the Twentieth Century . Atlantic Books . ISBN 1-84354-340-0 . Torney , Austin ( 2009 ) . The Guide to the All-Embracing Realm of the Ultimate . Torney Publishing . ISBN 978-1448617272 . Wermusch , Günter ( 1991 ) . Die Bernsteinzimmer Saga : Spuren , Irrwege , Rätsel ( in German ) . Yale University . ISBN 978-3861530190 .

" 60-year Hunt For Russian Czars ' Missing Amber Room May Be Over After Discovery in Germany " . Daily Mail . 2011 . Retrieved 19 February 2015 . " A Brief History of the Amber Room " . Smithsonian Institution . 2014 . Retrieved 19 February 2015 . " Amber Room Hunt Makes Lake the Tsar Attraction " . Scotland on Sunday . 2006 . Retrieved 19 February 2015 . " Amber Room Remnants Found ? — Discoveries Delight Russian Art Experts " . Seattle Times . 1997 . Retrieved 19 February 2015 . " Erich Koch , Regarded as One of Cruelest of Hitler 's SS Men , Dies in Prison at 90 " . Los Angeles Times . 1986 . Retrieved 19 February 2015 . " Inside the £ 300 Million Room : Incredible Story of Amber and Gold Living Space That Once Belonged to Catherine the Great Revealed in BBC Documentary " . Daily Mail . 2014 . Retrieved 19 February 2015 . " Red Army , Not the Nazis , Destroyed Tsar 's Amber Room " . Telegraph . 2004 . Retrieved 19 February 2015 . " Resurrecting Königsberg : Russian City Looks to German Roots " . Der Spiegel . 2014 . Retrieved 19 February 2015 .

Lipids are a group of naturally occurring molecules that include fats , waxes , sterols , fat-soluble vitamins ( such as vitamins A , D , E , and K ) , monoglycerides , diglycerides , triglycerides , phospholipids , and others . The main biological functions of lipids include storing energy , signaling , and acting as structural components of cell membranes . Lipids have applications in the cosmetic and food industries as well as in nanotechnology . Lipids may be broadly defined as hydrophobic or amphiphilic small molecules ; the amphiphilic nature of some lipids allows them to form structures such as vesicles , multilamellar / unilamellar liposomes , or membranes in an aqueous environment . Biological lipids originate entirely or in part from two distinct types of biochemical subunits or " building-blocks " : ketoacyl and isoprene groups . Using this approach , lipids may be divided into eight categories : fatty acids , glycerolipids , glycerophospholipids , sphingolipids , saccharolipids , and polyketides ( derived from condensation of ketoacyl subunits ) ; and sterol lipids and prenol lipids ( derived from condensation of isoprene subunits ) . Although the term lipid is sometimes used as a synonym for fats , fats are a subgroup of lipids called triglycerides . Lipids also encompass molecules such as fatty acids and their derivatives ( including tri- , di- , monoglycerides , and phospholipids ) , as well as other sterol-containing metabolites such as cholesterol . Although humans and other mammals use various biosynthetic pathways both to break down and to synthesize lipids , some essential lipids cannot be made this way and must be obtained from the diet .

Fatty acids , or fatty acid residues when they are part of a lipid , are a diverse group of molecules synthesized by chain-elongation of an acetyl-CoA primer with malonyl-CoA or methylmalonyl-CoA groups in a process called fatty acid synthesis . They are made of a hydrocarbon chain that terminates with a carboxylic acid group ; this arrangement confers the molecule with a polar , hydrophilic end , and a nonpolar , hydrophobic end that is insoluble in water . The fatty acid structure is one of the most fundamental categories of biological lipids , and is commonly used as a building-block of more structurally complex lipids . The carbon chain , typically between four and 24 carbons long , may be saturated or unsaturated , and may be attached to functional groups containing oxygen , halogens , nitrogen , and sulfur . If a fatty acid contains a double bond , there is the possibility of either a cis or trans geometric isomerism , which significantly affects the molecule 's configuration . Cis-double bonds cause the fatty acid chain to bend , an effect that is compounded with more double bonds in the chain . Three double bonds in 18-carbon linolenic acid , the most abundant fatty-acyl chains of plant thylakoid membranes , render these membranes highly fluid despite environmental low-temperatures , and also makes linolenic acid give dominating sharp peaks in high resolution 13-C NMR spectra of chloroplasts . This in turn plays an important role in the structure and function of cell membranes . Most naturally occurring fatty acids are of the cis configuration , although the trans form does exist in some natural and partially hydrogenated fats and oils .

Examples of biologically important fatty acids include the eicosanoids , derived primarily from arachidonic acid and eicosapentaenoic acid , that include prostaglandins , leukotrienes , and thromboxanes . Docosahexaenoic acid is also important in biological systems , particularly with respect to sight . Other major lipid classes in the fatty acid category are the fatty esters and fatty amides . Fatty esters include important biochemical intermediates such as wax esters , fatty acid thioester coenzyme A derivatives , fatty acid thioester ACP derivatives and fatty acid carnitines . The fatty amides include N-acyl ethanolamines , such as the cannabinoid neurotransmitter anandamide .

Glycerolipids are composed of mono- , di- , and tri-substituted glycerols , the best-known being the fatty acid triesters of glycerol , called triglycerides . The word " triacylglycerol " is sometimes used synonymously with " triglyceride " . In these compounds , the three hydroxyl groups of glycerol are each esterified , typically by different fatty acids . Because they function as an energy store , these lipids comprise the bulk of storage fat in animal tissues . The hydrolysis of the ester bonds of triglycerides and the release of glycerol and fatty acids from adipose tissue are the initial steps in metabolizing fat . Additional subclasses of glycerolipids are represented by glycosylglycerols , which are characterized by the presence of one or more sugar residues attached to glycerol via a glycosidic linkage . Examples of structures in this category are the digalactosyldiacylglycerols found in plant membranes and seminolipid from mammalian sperm cells .

Glycerophospholipids , usually referred to as phospholipids , are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells , as well as being involved in metabolism and cell signaling . Neural tissue ( including the brain ) contains relatively high amounts of glycerophospholipids , and alterations in their composition has been implicated in various neurological disorders . Glycerophospholipids may be subdivided into distinct classes , based on the nature of the polar headgroup at the sn-3 position of the glycerol backbone in eukaryotes and eubacteria , or the sn-1 position in the case of archaebacteria . Examples of glycerophospholipids found in biological membranes are phosphatidylcholine ( also known as PC , GPCho or lecithin ) , phosphatidylethanolamine ( PE or GPEtn ) and phosphatidylserine ( PS or GPSer ) . In addition to serving as a primary component of cellular membranes and binding sites for intra- and intercellular proteins , some glycerophospholipids in eukaryotic cells , such as phosphatidylinositols and phosphatidic acids are either precursors of or , themselves , membrane-derived second messengers . Typically , one or both of these hydroxyl groups are acylated with long-chain fatty acids , but there are also alkyl-linked and 1Z-alkenyl-linked ( plasmalogen ) glycerophospholipids , as well as dialkylether variants in archaebacteria .

Sphingolipids are a complicated family of compounds that share a common structural feature , a sphingoid base backbone that is synthesized de novo from the amino acid serine and a long-chain fatty acyl CoA , then converted into ceramides , phosphosphingolipids , glycosphingolipids and other compounds . The major sphingoid base of mammals is commonly referred to as sphingosine . Ceramides ( N-acyl-sphingoid bases ) are a major subclass of sphingoid base derivatives with an amide-linked fatty acid . The fatty acids are typically saturated or mono-unsaturated with chain lengths from 16 to 26 carbon atoms . The major phosphosphingolipids of mammals are sphingomyelins ( ceramide phosphocholines ) , whereas insects contain mainly ceramide phosphoethanolamines and fungi have phytoceramide phosphoinositols and mannose-containing headgroups . The glycosphingolipids are a diverse family of molecules composed of one or more sugar residues linked via a glycosidic bond to the sphingoid base . Examples of these are the simple and complex glycosphingolipids such as cerebrosides and gangliosides .

Sterol lipids , such as cholesterol and its derivatives , are an important component of membrane lipids , along with the glycerophospholipids and sphingomyelins . The steroids , all derived from the same fused four-ring core structure , have different biological roles as hormones and signaling molecules . The eighteen-carbon ( C18 ) steroids include the estrogen family whereas the C19 steroids comprise the androgens such as testosterone and androsterone . The C21 subclass includes the progestogens as well as the glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids . The secosteroids , comprising various forms of vitamin D , are characterized by cleavage of the B ring of the core structure . Other examples of sterols are the bile acids and their conjugates , which in mammals are oxidized derivatives of cholesterol and are synthesized in the liver . The plant equivalents are the phytosterols , such as β-sitosterol , stigmasterol , and brassicasterol ; the latter compound is also used as a biomarker for algal growth . The predominant sterol in fungal cell membranes is ergosterol .

Prenol lipids are synthesized from the five-carbon-unit precursors isopentenyl diphosphate and dimethylallyl diphosphate that are produced mainly via the mevalonic acid ( MVA ) pathway . The simple isoprenoids ( linear alcohols , diphosphates , etc . ) are formed by the successive addition of C5 units , and are classified according to number of these terpene units . Structures containing greater than 40 carbons are known as polyterpenes . Carotenoids are important simple isoprenoids that function as antioxidants and as precursors of vitamin A. Another biologically important class of molecules is exemplified by the quinones and hydroquinones , which contain an isoprenoid tail attached to a quinonoid core of non-isoprenoid origin . Vitamin E and vitamin K , as well as the ubiquinones , are examples of this class . Prokaryotes synthesize polyprenols ( called bactoprenols ) in which the terminal isoprenoid unit attached to oxygen remains unsaturated , whereas in animal polyprenols ( dolichols ) the terminal isoprenoid is reduced .

Saccharolipids describe compounds in which fatty acids are linked directly to a sugar backbone , forming structures that are compatible with membrane bilayers . In the saccharolipids , a monosaccharide substitutes for the glycerol backbone present in glycerolipids and glycerophospholipids . The most familiar saccharolipids are the acylated glucosamine precursors of the Lipid A component of the lipopolysaccharides in Gram-negative bacteria . Typical lipid A molecules are disaccharides of glucosamine , which are derivatized with as many as seven fatty-acyl chains . The minimal lipopolysaccharide required for growth in E. coli is Kdo2-Lipid A , a hexa-acylated disaccharide of glucosamine that is glycosylated with two 3-deoxy-D-manno-octulosonic acid ( Kdo ) residues .

Polyketides are synthesized by polymerization of acetyl and propionyl subunits by classic enzymes as well as iterative and multimodular enzymes that share mechanistic features with the fatty acid synthases . They comprise a large number of secondary metabolites and natural products from animal , plant , bacterial , fungal and marine sources , and have great structural diversity . Many polyketides are cyclic molecules whose backbones are often further modified by glycosylation , methylation , hydroxylation , oxidation , and / or other processes . Many commonly used anti-microbial , anti-parasitic , and anti-cancer agents are polyketides or polyketide derivatives , such as erythromycins , tetracyclines , avermectins , and antitumor epothilones .

Eukaryotic cells feature compartmentalized membrane-bound organelles that carry out different biological functions . The glycerophospholipids are the main structural component of biological membranes , such as the cellular plasma membrane and the intracellular membranes of organelles ; in animal cells the plasma membrane physically separates the intracellular components from the extracellular environment . The glycerophospholipids are amphipathic molecules ( containing both hydrophobic and hydrophilic regions ) that contain a glycerol core linked to two fatty acid-derived " tails " by ester linkages and to one " head " group by a phosphate ester linkage . While glycerophospholipids are the major component of biological membranes , other non-glyceride lipid components such as sphingomyelin and sterols ( mainly cholesterol in animal cell membranes ) are also found in biological membranes . In plants and algae , the galactosyldiacylglycerols , and sulfoquinovosyldiacylglycerol , which lack a phosphate group , are important components of membranes of chloroplasts and related organelles and are the most abundant lipids in photosynthetic tissues , including those of higher plants , algae and certain bacteria . Plant thylakoid membranes have the largest lipid component of a non-bilayer forming monogalactosyl diglyceride ( MGDG ) , and little phospholipids ; despite this unique lipid composition , chloroplast thylakoid membranes have been shown to contain a dynamic lipid-bilayer matrix as revealed by magnetic resonance and electron microscope studies .

A biological membrane is a form of lamellar phase lipid bilayer . The formation of lipid bilayers is an energetically preferred process when the glycerophospholipids described above are in an aqueous environment . This is known as the hydrophobic effect . In an aqueous system , the polar heads of lipids align towards the polar , aqueous environment , while the hydrophobic tails minimize their contact with water and tend to cluster together , forming a vesicle ; depending on the concentration of the lipid , this biophysical interaction may result in the formation of micelles , liposomes , or lipid bilayers . Other aggregations are also observed and form part of the polymorphism of amphiphile ( lipid ) behavior . Phase behavior is an area of study within biophysics and is the subject of current academic research . Micelles and bilayers form in the polar medium by a process known as the hydrophobic effect . When dissolving a lipophilic or amphiphilic substance in a polar environment , the polar molecules ( i.e. , water in an aqueous solution ) become more ordered around the dissolved lipophilic substance , since the polar molecules cannot form hydrogen bonds to the lipophilic areas of the amphiphile . So in an aqueous environment , the water molecules form an ordered " clathrate " cage around the dissolved lipophilic molecule .

Triglycerides , stored in adipose tissue , are a major form of energy storage both in animals and plants . The adipocyte , or fat cell , is designed for continuous synthesis and breakdown of triglycerides in animals , with breakdown controlled mainly by the activation of hormone-sensitive enzyme lipase . The complete oxidation of fatty acids provides high caloric content , about 9 kcal / g , compared with 4 kcal / g for the breakdown of carbohydrates and proteins . Migratory birds that must fly long distances without eating use stored energy of triglycerides to fuel their flights .

In recent years , evidence has emerged showing that lipid signaling is a vital part of the cell signaling . Lipid signaling may occur via activation of G protein-coupled or nuclear receptors , and members of several different lipid categories have been identified as signaling molecules and cellular messengers . These include sphingosine-1-phosphate , a sphingolipid derived from ceramide that is a potent messenger molecule involved in regulating calcium mobilization , cell growth , and apoptosis ; diacylglycerol ( DAG ) and the phosphatidylinositol phosphates ( PIPs ) , involved in calcium-mediated activation of protein kinase C ; the prostaglandins , which are one type of fatty-acid derived eicosanoid involved in inflammation and immunity ; the steroid hormones such as estrogen , testosterone and cortisol , which modulate a host of functions such as reproduction , metabolism and blood pressure ; and the oxysterols such as 25-hydroxy-cholesterol that are liver X receptor agonists . Phosphatidylserine lipids are known to be involved in signaling for the phagocytosis of apoptotic cells and / or pieces of cells . They accomplish this by being exposed to the extracellular face of the cell membrane after the inactivation of flippases which place them exclusively on the cytosolic side and the activation of scramblases , which scramble the orientation of the phospholipids . After this occurs , other cells recognize the phosphatidylserines and phagocytosize the cells or cell fragments exposing them .

The " fat-soluble " vitamins ( A , D , E and K ) – which are isoprene-based lipids – are essential nutrients stored in the liver and fatty tissues , with a diverse range of functions . Acyl-carnitines are involved in the transport and metabolism of fatty acids in and out of mitochondria , where they undergo beta oxidation . Polyprenols and their phosphorylated derivatives also play important transport roles , in this case the transport of oligosaccharides across membranes . Polyprenol phosphate sugars and polyprenol diphosphate sugars function in extra-cytoplasmic glycosylation reactions , in extracellular polysaccharide biosynthesis ( for instance , peptidoglycan polymerization in bacteria ) , and in eukaryotic protein N-glycosylation . Cardiolipins are a subclass of glycerophospholipids containing four acyl chains and three glycerol groups that are particularly abundant in the inner mitochondrial membrane . They are believed to activate enzymes involved with oxidative phosphorylation . Lipids also form the basis of steroid hormones .

Beta oxidation is the metabolic process by which fatty acids are broken down in the mitochondria and / or in peroxisomes to generate acetyl-CoA . For the most part , fatty acids are oxidized by a mechanism that is similar to , but not identical with , a reversal of the process of fatty acid synthesis . That is , two-carbon fragments are removed sequentially from the carboxyl end of the acid after steps of dehydrogenation , hydration , and oxidation to form a beta-keto acid , which is split by thiolysis . The acetyl-CoA is then ultimately converted into ATP , CO2 , and H2O using the citric acid cycle and the electron transport chain . Hence the citric acid cycle can start at acetyl-CoA when fat is being broken down for energy if there is little or no glucose available . The energy yield of the complete oxidation of the fatty acid palmitate is 106 ATP . Unsaturated and odd-chain fatty acids require additional enzymatic steps for degradation .

Most of the fat found in food is in the form of triglycerides , cholesterol , and phospholipids . Some dietary fat is necessary to facilitate absorption of fat-soluble vitamins ( A , D , E , and K ) and carotenoids . Humans and other mammals have a dietary requirement for certain essential fatty acids , such as linoleic acid ( an omega-6 fatty acid ) and alpha-linolenic acid ( an omega-3 fatty acid ) because they cannot be synthesized from simple precursors in the diet . Both of these fatty acids are 18-carbon polyunsaturated fatty acids differing in the number and position of the double bonds . Most vegetable oils are rich in linoleic acid ( safflower , sunflower , and corn oils ) . Alpha-linolenic acid is found in the green leaves of plants , and in selected seeds , nuts , and legumes ( in particular flax , rapeseed , walnut , and soy ) . Fish oils are particularly rich in the longer-chain omega-3 fatty acids eicosapentaenoic acid ( EPA ) and docosahexaenoic acid ( DHA ) . A large number of studies have shown positive health benefits associated with consumption of omega-3 fatty acids on infant development , cancer , cardiovascular diseases , and various mental illnesses , such as depression , attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder , and dementia . In contrast , it is now well-established that consumption of trans fats , such as those present in partially hydrogenated vegetable oils , are a risk factor for cardiovascular disease .

A few studies have suggested that total dietary fat intake is linked to an increased risk of obesity and diabetes . However , a number of very large studies , including the Women 's Health Initiative Dietary Modification Trial , an eight-year study of 49,000 women , the Nurses ' Health Study and the Health Professionals Follow-up Study , revealed no such links . None of these studies suggested any connection between percentage of calories from fat and risk of cancer , heart disease , or weight gain . The Nutrition Source , a website maintained by the Department of Nutrition at the Harvard School of Public Health , summarizes the current evidence on the impact of dietary fat : " Detailed research — much of it done at Harvard — shows that the total amount of fat in the diet isn 't really linked with weight or disease . "

" Don 't Wake Me Up " is a song by American recording artist Chris Brown , taken from his fifth studio album , Fortune ( 2012 ) . It was written by Brown , Alain Whyte , Allessandro Benassi , Brian Kennedy , Jean-Baptiste , Marco Benassi , Michael McHenry , Nick Marsh , Priscilla Hamilton , Ryan Buendia and William Orbit . The song was produced by Benny and Alle Benassi , Free School , Orbit and Kennedy , and was released digitally on May 18 , 2012 , as the fourth single from the album . " Don 't Wake Me Up " is an EDM song that features heavy bass and a repetitive chorus . The lyrics of the song describe a lost loved one who exists only in a dream . " Don 't Wake Me Up " received generally positive reviews from critics , who complimented its production . The song was commercially successful , peaking at number ten on the Billboard Hot 100 . Internationally , the single peaked within the top ten of the charts in Australia , Austria , Hungary , Ireland , Japan , New Zealand , Norway and the United Kingdom , and the top twenty of the charts in Denmark , France , Germany , Sweden , Switzerland and Belgium . The accompanying music video was directed by Colin Tilley and depicts Brown in three different dreams , all of which involve a mysterious woman , played by model Araya Nicks . The video received a positive reception from critics for its visuals . Brown promoted the song with live performances on televised shows , including Today and the 2012 BET Awards .

" Don 't Wake Me Up " was written by Alain Whyte , Allessandro Benassi , Brian Kennedy , Chris Brown , Jean-Baptiste , Marco Benassi , Michael McHenry , Nick Marsh , Priscilla Hamilton , Ryan Buendia and William Orbit . It was produced by Benny and Alle Benassi , Free School , Orbit and Kennedy . " Don 't Wake Me Up " was originally intended for American pop singer Madonna 's twelfth studio album MDNA ( 2012 ) ; however , she could not record the song because of her tight schedule , and Orbit gave the song to Brown . After an unofficial version of " Don 't Wake Me Up " was leaked online in January 2012 , websites reported that the song was produced by David Guetta . However , Guetta said on his Facebook and Twitter accounts , " I 'm credited for ' Don 't Wake Me Up ' ... but I did not produce this record . Best to CB ! " . On May 12 , 2012 , Brown announced on his Twitter account that he would release " Don 't Wake Me Up " as the next single from his fourth studio album Fortune . It was made available for download via iTunes Stores worldwide on May 18 , 2012 . The Free School / William Orbit remix of the song was released in some European countries on May 22 , 2012 . In the United States , " Don 't Wake Me Up " was sent to contemporary hit radio and rhythmic contemporary radio playlists on June 12 , 2012 . On June 22 , 2012 , it was released as a CD single in Germany and as a Digital EP in the United Kingdom . The EP contains the album version , remix and Brown 's previous singles " Till I Die " and " Sweet Love " .

" Don 't Wake Me Up " is an EDM song that features heavy bass ; it lasts for 3 minutes and 42 seconds . The instrumentation is provided by an acoustic guitar and synthesizers . Brown uses auto-tune on the hook and breakdown . " Don 't Wake Me Up " is written in the key of B ♭ major and is set in common time with a tempo of 128 beats per minute . Brown 's vocal range spans from the note of G4 to the note of C6 . The song contains lyrics about a lost loved one who exists only in a dream , as stated by Brittany R. Villalva of The Christian Post . " Don 't Wake Me Up " begins with a spoken introduction by an unidentified woman saying , " Dearly Beloved , if this love only exists in my dreams , don 't wake me up " . Robbie Daw of Idolator compared her voice to that of Rihanna . The song 's chorus consists of the hook " Don 't wake me up " . Lewis Corner of Digital Spy wrote that the chorus " flourishes into a pulse-racing mix of thundering beats and squiggly electronic swizzles " . HitFix 's Melinda Newman noted that the song " resembles the sweet bounciness of ' Forever ' " .

" Don 't Wake Me Up " received generally positive reviews from music critics . Lewis Corner of Digital Spy called it " this summer 's biggest anthem " , awarding the song five stars out of five and writing that Brown delivers it " with effortless swagger " . JusMusic of Singersroom described " Don 't Wake Me Up " as a " fun and bubbly track " , while a writer for Rap-Up labeled it as an " electrifying Top 40 record " . Robbie Daw of Idolator complimented the song 's production as a " strobe light thumper " and wrote that if listeners enjoy Brown 's auto-tuned tracks , " then you won 't be disappointed " . Time 's Melissa Locker viewed " Don 't Wake Me Up " and " Turn Up the Music " as the only potential hits from Fortune . Nick Levine of BBC Music called the song " a smash " . AOL Radio 's Phil Kukawinski noted that " Don 't Wake Me Up " has " a nice juxtaposition of calm and energetic " and that it " seems to be one of those songs that merges the two sounds in a perfect way " . James Reed of The Boston Globe called the song " a thumping club cut that 's irresistible " . Trent Fitzgerald of PopCrush described " Don 't Wake Me Up " as a " fist-pumping club jam " but felt that it is " not as catchy as ' Beautiful People ' " . In a review of Fortune , Barry Walters of Spin magazine wrote that " Don 't Wake Me Up " , along with " Sweet Love " and " Till I Die " , contain " thin melodies and stock shock lyrics " that make Brown 's previous singles sound better . " Don 't Wake Me Up " was nominated for World 's Best Song at the 2013 World Music Awards .

In New Zealand , " Don 't Wake Me Up " debuted at number 34 on May 28 , 2012 , and peaked at number two in its eighth week on the chart . It was certified platinum by RIANZ , denoting sales of 15,000 copies . On June 4 , 2012 , the song entered the Australian ARIA Singles Chart at number five , becoming the highest new entry that week and Brown 's tenth top-ten single in that country . " Don 't Wake Me Up " peaked at number two in its fifth week on the chart , and number one in its eighth week on the ARIA Urban Singles Chart . The song was certified triple platinum by ARIA , denoting sales of 210,000 copies . " Don 't Wake Me Up " reached the top ten in Hungary , Ireland , Japan and Norway , and the top twenty in Denmark , France , Germany , Sweden , Switzerland and both regions of Belgium . In the United States , the song debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 at number 89 in the issue dated June 9 , 2012 . " Don 't Wake Me Up " entered the top ten in the issue dated November 10 , 2012 at number 10 , where it peaked . It became Brown 's twelfth top-ten single on the chart , and his second top-ten single from Fortune , following " Turn Up the Music " . On the UK Singles Chart , " Don 't Wake Me Up " debuted at number three in the issue dated July 7 , 2012 , with sales of 89,223 copies . The following week , the song peaked at number two with sales of 70,702 copies . As of January 2013 , " Don 't Wake Me Up " has sold 416,684 copies in the UK . In Austria , " Don 't Wake Me Up " reached number one on August 17 , 2012 , where it remained for one week , becoming Brown 's first number-one single in that country .

The accompanying music video for " Don 't Wake Me Up " was directed by Colin Tilley and filmed in a desert on May 14 , 2012 . Several images from the shoot , showing Brown posing shirtless against a vintage car , and images of Brown posing with model Araya Nicks , who plays his love interest in the video , were posted on the Internet the following day . The video premiered online on June 11 , 2012 . Later that day , Brown made a guest appearance on 106 & Park and discussed the video 's concept : With this video , we wanted to go completely into the dream world . A lot of my videos from ' Turn Up the Music ' and other videos I 'm doing now are in a dream state of believing what you want to believe . So that 's what Fortune kinda encompasses . So it 's basically dreaming and accomplishing your dreams . This video is me dreaming and being taken into this whole kind of maze . I keep waking up within a dream within a dream , almost on some Inception type ... but I don 't want to bite that .

The video begins with Brown singing alone in a desert in front of a sunset backdrop . It then cuts to Brown waking up in a bedroom as he notices a mysterious woman ( played by Araya Nicks ) walking through the first of three doors behind him . Each door is labeled with hieroglyphics in gold . During the first chorus , Brown follows the woman through the door and enters a garden maze . This scene is intercut with scenes of Brown singing in the desert . He then returns to bed as the woman walks through the second door . Brown follows her again and appears in a city in the sky . This scene is also intercut with scenes of him in the desert . During the second chorus , Brown is hit by a tidal wave which sends him back to bed . He then enters the third door and appears driving a vintage car in the desert . Brown drives after the woman until he hits a sign that reads " Road Closed " , which causes him to drive off a cliff . The video then cuts to Brown and the woman lying in bed with electrodes attached to their heads .

Nicole Sia of Idolator called the clip Brown 's " Video of the Year " and complimented its " stunning dream imagery " . A writer for The Edge called it " another visually tantalising music video " from Brown , while Rap-Up described it as surreal . Trent Fitzgerald of PopCrush described the video as " good visual fun " and wrote that it reminded him of the television series Day Break . He compared the ending to the 1999 film The Matrix . The video was nominated for World 's Best Video at the 2012 World Music Awards .

On June 8 , 2012 , Brown performed " Don 't Wake Me Up " on Today as part of its Summer Concert Series , for which he wore a New York Yankees cap , a multicolored Snow Beach Polo jacket , black jeans and white sneakers . The set list also included " Turn Up the Music " , " Yeah 3x " and " Forever " . At the 2012 BET Awards ceremony on July 1 , 2012 , Brown performed " Don 't Wake Me Up " and " Turn Up the Music " , for which he appeared shirtless with half his body painted gray . Brown performed acrobatic moves with six backup dancers under triangle-shaped beams as green and red flashing lights appeared throughout the stage . Georgette Cline of The Boombox wrote that Brown " put on an energetic show " and described his dance routines during the performance as " eye-catching " .

The Battle of Île Ronde was a minor naval engagement between small French Navy and British Royal Navy squadrons off Île de France , now named Mauritius , in the early stages of the French Revolutionary Wars . The battle was fought over control of the waters around Île de France , which was under blockade from the British squadron as French warships and privateers operating from the island posed a significant threat to vital British trade routes connected to British India and China . In an attempt to neutralise the island , the British commander in the region , Peter Rainier ordered the 50-gun HMS Centurion and 44-gun HMS Diomede to institute a blockade , which began in October 1794 . Concerned by food shortages and a rebellious slave population the French naval commander Jean-Marie Renaud led his small squadron comprising frigates Cybèle and Prudente and three smaller vessels to drive off the British squadron . On 22 October , the squadrons met off Île Ronde , an islet off northern Île de France . The battle lasted two and a quarter hours , in which Centurion and Cybèle fought a close duel which left both ships badly damaged . Supported by the remainder of the squadron , Cybèle successfully withdrew under fire , but Centurion , without support from the distant Diomede was also forced to retire for repairs . Unable to continue the blockade the British force returned to India , allowing food supplies to reach Île de France . Due to the necessity for campaigns against Dutch Ceylon and the Dutch East Indies , the British blockade was not renewed , but the French were unable to take advantage due to increasing civil unrest among the island 's population .

War between the French Republic and Great Britain began on 1 February 1793 , news arriving among the French and British East Indian colonies on 11 June 1793 . The strongest French positions in the Indian Ocean were the islands of Île de France and Réunion , which lay substantially to the west of the British bases at Bombay and Madras in British India . A small French frigate squadron , supported by smaller warships and privateers operated from the islands posing a considerable threat to British maritime trade in the Indian Ocean . To counter the threat the British commander in the region , Captain Peter Rainier ordered two of his ships to blockade the island during the summer of 1794 . Rainer 's force comprised the 50-gun fourth rate ship 50-gun HMS Centurion under Captain Samuel Osborne and the large 44-gun frigate HMS Diomede under Captain Matthew Smith . Together the ships sailed from Madras on 30 August 1794 , stopping at the allied port of Trincomalee in Dutch Ceylon and the undefended French-controlled island of Rodrigues before arriving off Île de France in October . Île de France had been in a state of turmoil since the French Revolution and in 1792 the republican party on the island seized control . In 1794 suspected royalists were arrested , including the naval commander Saint-Félix , their executions forestalled by the arrival of news that the French Convention had abolished slavery . Only the intervention of Governor Malartic prevented unrest . The preoccupation of the naval authorities had prevented any offensive operations and the reduced squadron , now commanded by Captain Jean-Marie Renaud , remained in Port Louis .

Despite the upheaval on shore , the arrival of the British blockade squadron provoked Renaud into taking action . Although the defences of Île de France were well prepared under Malartic 's orders , food supplies were running low , with only rice still available in quantity . The potential for famine and consequent social unrest among the slave population was severe and Renaud sailed immediately to intercept Centurion and Diomede . The French squadron comprised the 40-gun frigate Cybèle under Captain Pierre Tréhouart , the 36-gun Prudente under Renaud and the 14-gun brig Courier under Lieutenant Garreau . The force was accompanied by the 20-gun privateer corvettes Jean-Bart and Rosalie was well as the aviso Sans-Culottes . The ships ' crews were heavily augmented by volunteers , including a young Robert Surcouf on Cybèle , as well as a detachment of soldiers . Renaud 's squadron sailed on 19 October , seeking the British to the north of the island . At 11 : 00 on 22 October , close to the uninhabited islet of Île Ronde northwest of Île de France the British ships were sighted . Osborne issued orders to advance on the French squadron , Renaud responding by forming his ships in a line of battle and advancing to meet Osborne . Prudente led the French line , closely followed by Cybèle , Jean-Bart and Courier , Osborne focusing on the former and ordering Smith to engage the latter . Firing began at 15 : 29 when Prudente unleashed a close range broadside at Centurion , followed immediately by fire from the ships of both sides . Centurion was damaged in the opening exchanges and by 16 : 00 had most of her sails and rigging torn . At this Renaud ordered his squadron to pull back to leeward out of range , each firing on Centurion as they passed .

As Cybèle came within range of Centurion the frigate 's fire brought down the British ship 's mizen topmast and fore topgallantmast . Return fire from Centurion managed however to sufficiently damage the French ship that she was unable to retreat in the light winds and the two largely immobilised ships began a close range duel . For more than an hour the exchange continued , Renaud unable to intervene from leeward and Smith repeatedly refusing Osborne 's orders to support his ship , Diomede remaining at long range and contributing an intermittent and inaccurate fire on the distant Cybèle . At 17 : 15 a light breeze enabled Tréhouart to slowly pull his ship towards Renaud 's force despite the loss of the main topgallantmast . At 17 : 45 , with Prudente close by , the main topmast fell on Cybèle , which had 3 feet ( 0.91 m ) of water in the hold , but Osborne , outnumbered and with his ship damaged reluctantly withdrew . The threat lifted , Renaud was able to take Cybèle under tow and retire in the direction of Île de France , followed distantly and ineffectually by Diomede until night fell .

The immediate result of the battle was inconclusive , both squadrons retiring with one ship damaged apiece . French losses had been heavy , with 15 killed and 20 wounded on Prudente , the latter including Renaud and 22 killed and 62 wounded on Cybèle . One sailor was killed and five wounded on Jean-Bart and no casualties were reported on Courier . By contrast , Centurion had only three men killed and 23 wounded and Diomede none at all , but the damage to Osborne 's ship was more severe ; while Renaud could repair and resupply his ships in nearby Port Louis , repairs to Centurion could only be affected in India , several thousand miles away . Osborne was thus forced to abandon the blockade and retire , Centurion to Bombay and Diomede to Madras . The action brought repercussions for Smith , whose failure to support Osborne was noted ; although Smith claimed that he was simply maintaining the line of battle , it subsequently emerged that the captains had engaged in a personal dispute in result of which Smith had decided to refuse Osborne 's orders . After his behaviour had featured in Osborne 's initial dispatch , Smith challenged his account and Osborne demanded a court-martial held to investigate . This panel decided that Smith 's behaviour was unacceptable and he was dismissed from the Navy , by which time he had lost Diomede , wrecked on a rock in Trincomalee Bay on 2 August 1795 during the invasion of Ceylon . Although Smith appealed his sentence and was restored to the captain 's list in 1798 he was never again called to service and retired in 1806 .

British historians have considered that Smith 's refusal to participate probably cost Osborne the battle . William James wrote that his behaviour was " the principle reason that Cybèle , at least , was not made a prize of by the British " . C. Northcote Parkinson considers the action " indecisive " but concurs with James ' assessment that Smith 's intervention could have resulted in a British victory but instead that " the first encounter of the war between the French and English in the East Indies had resulted in what was tantamount to defeat for the latter " . On Île de France the relief of the blockade meant that shipping , particularly American vessels laden with food supplies from Tamatave on Madagascar , could reach the island and the threatened famine was averted . French privateers were also again free to operate against British trade , particularly in the Bay of Bengal . With Renaud 's squadron still at Port Louis , Rainier considered renewing the blockade , but was dissuaded by the dangers of the monsoon season and a false report that a squadron of French ships of the line was soon due to arrive on Île de France . In 1795 he was distracted by the sudden need to guard against the Dutch East India colonies following the French conquest of the Netherlands , and he supervised the invasion of Ceylon and operations against the Dutch East Indies . By the time his attention turned once more to Île de France , it had been heavily reinforced in early 1796 by a frigate squadron commanded by Contre-amiral Sercey .

Jean-Marie Defrance ( 1771 – 1855 ) was a French General of the French Revolutionary Wars and the Napoleonic Wars . He was also a member of the Council of Five Hundred ( the lower house of the legislative branch of the French government under The Directory ) , and a teacher at the military school of Rebais , Champagne . Defrance had an extensive and successful military career in the French Revolutionary Wars and the Napoleonic Wars . After the First Battle of Zurich , he refused a battlefield promotion to brigadier general , asking instead for a cavalry regiment ; he received command of the 12th Regiment of Chasseurs-a-Cheval ( light cavalry ) as Chef-de-Brigade , a rank equivalent to colonel . He led this brigade in the campaigns of 1799 – 1800 in southwestern Germany and northern Italy . By 1805 , he had been promoted to brigadier general . At the Battle of Austerlitz and the Battle of Jena-Auerstadt , he commanded a cavalry brigade of carabiniers in Étienne Marie Antoine Champion de Nansouty 's First Division . By the Battle of Borodino in September 1812 , he had been promoted to general of division , commanding the 4th Cuirassier Division of Nansouty 's reserves , where they charged the Shevardino redoubt . He fought his way across Germany to the Rhine River after the French loss at Leipzig and participated in the Six Days Campaign .

Defrance was stationed in Saint-Domingue during the first Haitian revolt and served in the volunteers Cape Dragoons . On his return to France in 1792 , he was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the cavalry regiment royal-étranger . After serving in the Army of the North , he was appointed adjutant-general brigadier in the Army of Sambre-et-Meuse . He also served in the Council of the Five Hundred . Defrance also served in the Swiss Campaign of 1799 as divisional Chief of Staff of the 1st Division of Jean-Baptiste Jourdan 's Army of the Danube ; after the losses at the battles of Ostrach and Stockach in March 1799 , the Army of the Danube was combined with the Army of Helvetia , under the command of Andre Massena . Defrance continued in his capacity as divisional chief of staff . At the First Battle of Zurich in June 1799 , he was appointed on the field as brigadier general , an honor which he declined , asking instead to be given command of a cavalry regiment . He received command of the 12th Regiment of Chasseurs-a-Cheval . As Chef-de-Brigade , the equivalent of colonel in France 's revolutionary-era field army , Defrance went to Italy and participated in the actions leading up to the Battle of Marengo . During the winter of 1800 – 1801 , he campaigned in the Grisons in Switzerland and returned to France after the Treaty of Lunéville in 1801 .

In 1803 , with Napoleon 's military reorganization , the title Chef-de-Brigade reverted to colonel ; Defrance retained his command of the 12th Regiment of Chasseurs-a-Cheval . He was named Officer of the Légion d 'honneur on 14 June 1804 . On 1 February 1805 , he accepted a promotion to brigadier general and commanded a brigade in the Danube campaign against Austria and Russia at the battles of Ulm and Austerlitz . In 1806 , he campaigned against Kingdom of Prussia and Russia at the Battle of Jena-Auerstadt . There , and at the Battle of Friedland on 14 June 1807 , he commanded a carabinier brigade — the first and second regiments — in Étienne Marie Antoine Champion de Nansouty 's First Division . Napoleon raised him to Count of the Empire on 2 July 1808 . At the Battle of Wagram ( 1809 ) , he again commanded the carabinier brigade . The confiscation of the Prussian cavalry and draft stock required supervision to integrate the acquisitions into the Grande Armée . After completing several terms as an inspector general of cavalry , Defrance was appointed general of division in August 1811 and joined Joachim Murat 's Cavalry in February 1812 for Napoleon 's Invasion of Russia . At the Battle of Borodino , he commanded 4th Cuirassier Division , which included three brigades and two horse artillery units of 12 guns . These were assigned to Nansouty 's Reserves and assaulted the Shevardino redoubt on 5 – 6 September .

During the Saxon campaign , Defrance was appointed Inspector General for the Grande Armée . He also commanded the 4th Heavy Cavalry Division at the Battle of Leipzig in October 1813 , and one of his brigades remained at Lindenau to cover a possible retreat . In January 1814 , for the last few months of Napoleon 's rule , Defrance commanded four regiments of Imperial Guard and fought in the action of 11 February at Montmirail , during the Six Days Campaign . On 7 March , with much smaller force than his opponent , he repulsed the Russian assault at Rheims , but on 12 March was forced to relinquish the city as more Coalition troops arrived . The following day , he attacked the Russian cavalry , but was again forced to withdraw when faced with superior numbers .

During the first Bourbon Restoration , Louis XVIII appointed Defrance as inspector general of cavalry . During the Hundred Days , Napoleon 's brief return to France , Jean-Marie Defrance commanded part of the Armée de l 'Ouest . This Army of the West was also called the Army of the Vendée and the Army of the Loire . Under overall command of Jean Maximilien Lamarque , one of Napoleon 's fiercest supporters , it was formed to suppress potential Royalist insurrection in the Vendée region of France . Defrance did not participate in the Battle of Rocheserviere , in which Lemarque 's army brutally crushed the anticipated Vendéen uprising . He remained instead at his post of the 18th military division , inspecting the cavalry depots in the upper Loire . Defrance retained his rank after the second restoration and commanded the First Military Division in Paris from 1819 to 1822 . He also taught at the military school in Rebais .

The California Southern Railroad was a subsidiary railroad of the Atchison , Topeka and Santa Fe Railway ( Santa Fe ) in Southern California . It was organized July 10 , 1880 , and chartered on October 23 , 1880 , to build a rail connection between what has become the city of Barstow and San Diego , California . Construction began in National City , just south of San Diego , in 1881 , and proceeded northward to the present day city of Oceanside . From there , the line turned to the northeast through Temecula Canyon , then on to the present cities of Lake Elsinore , Perris and Riverside before a connection to the Southern Pacific Railroad ( SP ) in Colton . Following a frog war where the SP refused to let the California Southern cross its tracks , a dispute that was resolved by court order in favor of the California Southern , construction continued northward through Cajon Pass to the present day cities of Victorville and Barstow . The line , completed on November 9 , 1885 , formed the western end of Santa Fe 's transcontinental railroad connection to Chicago . Portions of the original line are still in use today as some of the busiest rail freight and passenger routes in the United States .

The California Southern was organized on July 10 , 1880 , as a means to connect San Diego to a connection with the Atlantic and Pacific Railroad at an as-yet undetermined point . Among the organizers were Frank Kimball , a prominent landowner and rancher from San Diego who also represented the Chamber of Commerce and the Board of City Trustees of San Diego , Kidder , Peabody & Co . , one of the main financial investment companies involved in the Santa Fe , B.P. Cheney , L.G. Pratt , George B. Wilbur and Thomas Nickerson who was president of the Santa Fe . The organizers set a deadline of January 1 , 1884 , to complete the connection , a deadline that was later adjusted due to problems in the construction of the Atlantic and Pacific that forced it to stop at Needles , California . The California Southern built its track northward from a point in National City , south of San Diego . The route , portions of which are still in use , connected the present day cities of National City , San Diego , Fallbrook , Temecula , Lake Elsinore , Perris , Riverside , San Bernardino , Colton , Cajon ( not to be confused with El Cajon ) , Victorville and Barstow .

In Barstow , then known as Waterman , the California Southern would connect to another Santa Fe subsidiary , the Atlantic and Pacific Railroad . The Atlantic and Pacific was chartered in 1866 to build a railroad connection westward from Springfield , Missouri , connecting Albuquerque , New Mexico , then along the 35th parallel to the Colorado River . From there , the railroad was to continue to the Pacific Ocean following whatever proved to be the best route . The route was scheduled to be completed by July 4 , 1878 . However , the Southern Pacific was able to get a clause favorable to their own interests inserted into the charter : " ... the Southern Pacific Railroad ... is hereby authorized to connect with the said Atlantic and Pacific railroad formed under this act , at such point , near the boundary line of the State of California , as they shall deem most suitable for a railroad line to San Francisco . " Southern Pacific had already established a connection to Mojave , so their crews built eastward from there through Barstow ( then called Waterman ) to Needles , California , completing the connection across the Colorado River on August 3 , 1883 . The California segment was leased to the Santa Fe in August 1884 , and fully acquired by the Santa Fe under foreclosure in 1897 .

The California Southern began construction in National City on land originally acquired by Frank Kimball . The railroad 's main yards and locomotive maintenance shops were located here , and until the connection was made with Barstow , all tools and equipment ordered by the railroad arrived here by ship around Cape Horn from points in the eastern United States , while the wooden ties arrived by ship from Oregon . Surveys and construction between National City and San Diego were well underway by March 1881 . The railroad reached Fallbrook and opened between there and San Diego in January 1882 . In 1881 and 1882 , the California Southern received ten locomotive shipments by sea at National City . The last three of these , delivered in November 1882 aboard the ship Anna Camp , have been identified as the last three locomotives ever delivered to the United States Pacific coast after traveling around Cape Horn .

To connect to the Atlantic and Pacific line in the quickest way possible , surveyors and engineers for the California Southern pushed the route through Fallbrook and Temecula — bypassing what was , at the time , the pueblo of Los Angeles . The railroad , however , didn 't understand the nature of Southern California 's dry washes . Local inhabitants warned the railroad of the dangers of building through such an area , that it could become a raging torrent of water , but the railroad built through the canyon anyway . Despite the warnings , track work through the canyon proceeded at a quick pace . They completed the line to Fallbrook on January 2 , 1882 , then to Temecula on March 27 , 1882 . Many parts of the canyon had suffered storms . In February 1884 , a storm hit . The train was delayed and the canyon walls brought boulders crashing down on the rails . On February 3 , the train was unable to get through . A few days later , the wires were down . The train from Colton to San Diego could not get through . Disaster was averted because a local resident , Charlie Howell , hurried up the tracks from his family homestead near Willow Glen and managed to stop the train . A series of devastating washouts on the section through Temecula Canyon occurred amid heavy rain storms that flooded the area starting on February 16 , 1884 , just six months after the first trains operated the entire route between San Diego and San Bernardino . The storms brought more than 40 inches ( 1,000 mm ) of rain in a four-week period . Two thirds of the mainline through the canyon were washed out with ties seen floating as far as 80 miles ( 129 km ) away in the ocean . Temporary track repairs were made after the first storms , but later in the month , additional rains and flooding washed out the entire route through the canyon . Repairs were estimated at nearly $ 320,000 , a figure that could not be recouped effectively .

Construction of the California Southern was repeatedly interrupted by Santa Fe 's rival , Southern Pacific Railroad ( SP ) . In one instance , the California Southern was set to build a level junction across the SP tracks in Colton , a move that would end Southern Pacific 's monopoly in Southern California . The Colton Crossing was the site of one of the more notable frog wars in American railroad history . In the summer of 1882 , tensions reached their boiling point when construction of tracks for the California Southern reached Colton , California . In an attempt to forcibly prevent the California Southern Railroad crews from completing construction , the Southern Pacific ( SP ) parked and then slowly moved a locomotive and gondola along the SP track at the location of the planned crossing . In addition , the SP hired armed men , including the famous Virgil Earp , to guard the tracks . Before the violence could get out of hand , Governor Robert Waterman ordered San Bernardino County Sheriff J.B. Burkhart to enforce the state court order . Waterman personally ordered Earp and the crowd to comply with the court order . Earp backed down and told the SP engineer to move the locomotive . The crossing was built , ending the Southern Pacific 's monopoly in Southern California .

The first structure that the California Southern used as a depot in San Bernardino was a converted boxcar . Building north from San Bernardino , the California Southern was able to piggyback on the survey work done by the Los Angeles and Independence Railroad up to a point near Cajon . The original grade of the line up the pass rose at a 2.2 % slope between San Bernardino and Cajon , where the grade steepened to 3 % until reaching the summit 6 miles ( 9.7 km ) further . The route over Cajon Pass was completed with a " last spike " on November 9 , 1885 , and the first train to use the pass carried a load of rails southward from Barstow on November 12 to be installed near Riverside . The first through train from Chicago via Santa Fe lines arrived in San Diego on November 17 , 1885 . Construction of the original route through Cajon Pass was overseen by Jacob Nash Victor , who by this time had become General Manager of the California Southern . He operated the first train through the pass in 1885 , proclaiming " No other railroad will ever have the nerve to build through these mountains . All who follow will prefer to rent trackage from us . " Victor 's assertion remained true for a while as the San Pedro , Los Angeles and Salt Lake Railroad ( which later became part of Union Pacific Railroad ) signed an agreement to operate over the California Southern track via trackage rights on April 26 , 1905 , but Victor was proven wrong eighty years later when SP built the Palmdale Cutoff in 1967 at a slightly higher elevation through the pass . In honor of his work through the pass , the city of Victorville was named after Victor .

To reach Los Angeles , the Santa Fe leased trackage rights over the Southern Pacific from San Bernardino on November 29 , 1885 , at $ 1,200 per mile per year . Naturally , the Santa Fe sought ways to reduce the fees . On November 20 , 1886 , the Santa Fe incorporated the San Bernardino and Los Angeles Railway to build a rail connection between its namesake cities . California Southern track crews performed the construction work , and the first train on the new line arrived in Los Angeles on May 31 , 1887 . During construction , Santa Fe officials worked to consolidate the many subsidiary railroads in Southern California to reduce costs . At a stockholder meeting on April 23 , the eight railroads and their prominent stockholders , minus the California Southern , voted in favor of consolidation , and the California Central Railway was formed as a result on May 20 , 1887 . After the consolidation , although the California Southern remained a separate subsidiary , the National City shops were downgraded and the services provided there were moved to the newly constructed shops in San Bernardino . One of the first official lists of stations on the California Southern and California Central railroads published on July 13 , 1887 , shows the California Southern divided operationally into two divisions : the San Diego division covered the territory between National City and Colton ; from there , the San Bernardino Division covered the route through Cajon Pass to Barstow .

The Santa Fe underwent a massive financial overhaul in 1889 . The major investors in Boston , Massachusetts , were mostly replaced by investors from New York and London at the annual meeting on May 9 . The investors replaced the company 's board of directors with a new board that included George C. Magoun ( who would later be linked with the company 's 1893 receivership ) . The new investors disliked the number of subsidiary companies and sought to further consolidate them . The California Southern , California Central and Redondo Beach Railway companies were consolidated into the Southern California Railway on November 7 , 1889 . The California Central had consolidated with the Los Angeles and San Gabriel Valley Railroad in 1887 , giving it ROW through the San Gabriel Valley . The Santa Fe finally purchased outright the holdings of the Southern California railroad on January 17 , 1906 , ending the railway 's subsidiary status and making it fully a part of the Santa Fe railroad .

Much of the right-of-way graded and used by the California Southern is still in use . Several structures built for or by the railroad , or in some cases their remains , can still be seen . Some of the buildings that remain are still in use in their primary purposes . The two ends of the former railroad are still in use as of 2013 . The section between Barstow and Riverside through Cajon Pass , which includes the disputed crossing in Colton , remains one of the busiest rail freight corridors in the United States , seeing trains of BNSF Railway and Union Pacific Railroad as well as Amtrak 's daily Southwest Chief passenger train . At Cajon the concrete pads that served as the foundations for the railroad 's station facilities and water tanks there remain long after the buildings atop them were removed . The Santa Fe realigned the track at several places during the 20th century to straighten curves along Cajon Creek ( between Cajon and San Bernardino ) , lower grades for eastbound trains with the 1913 addition of a separate track through what has come to be known as Sullivan 's Curve , and to reduce some curvature and lower the pass 's summit elevation by 50 ft ( 15 m ) .

The maintenance shops in San Bernardino are still in use by BNSF Railway , although not to the extent that they were used in the 20th century . The San Bernardino station that was opened by the California Southern was destroyed by fire on November 16 , 1916 . It was replaced in 1918 by the Santa Fe with the current structure that now serves Metrolink 's San Bernardino Line commuter trains on runs that terminate at Los Angeles Union Station . Until the introduction of weekend service on the 91 Line in July 2014 , limited service from San Bernardino to Riverside was provided by some San Bernardino Line trains , and the Metrolink Riverside Line terminates at the Riverside station although it reaches the station via a more southerly route . South of Riverside the track is still in place to Perris , where the Orange Empire Railway Museum has a connection to the mainline . This section is being rehabilitated to the Perris Valley Line , an extension of Metrolink 91 Line service to stations at Hunter Park , March Air Reserve Base , Perris , and South Perris . At the southern end the section between San Diego and Oceanside also sees heavy use by Amtrak California 's Pacific Surfliner trains as well as those of the San Diego Coaster . As part of the Santa Fe 's rail network , it was part of what has come to be known as the Surf Line . As of January 2006 , this line is the second busiest passenger rail line in the United States .

Common salt is a mineral composed primarily of sodium chloride ( NaCl ) , a chemical compound belonging to the larger class of salts ; salt in its natural form as a crystalline mineral is known as rock salt or halite . Salt is present in vast quantities in seawater , where it is the main mineral constituent . The open ocean has about 35 grams ( 1.2 oz ) of solids per litre , a salinity of 3.5 % . Salt is essential for human life , and saltiness is one of the basic human tastes . The tissues of animals contain larger quantities of salt than do plant tissues . Salt is one of the oldest and most ubiquitous food seasonings , and salting is an important method of food preservation . Some of the earliest evidence of salt processing dates to around 8,000 years ago , when people living in an area in what is now known as the country of Romania were boiling spring water to extract the salts ; a salt-works in China dates to approximately the same period . Salt was prized by the ancient Hebrews , the Greeks , the Romans , the Byzantines , the Hittites and the Egyptians . Salt became an important article of trade and was transported by boat across the Mediterranean Sea , along specially built salt roads , and across the Sahara in camel caravans . The scarcity and universal need for salt has led nations to go to war over salt and use it to raise tax revenues . Salt is also used in religious ceremonies and has other cultural significance .

Salt is processed from salt mines , or by the evaporation of seawater ( sea salt ) or mineral-rich spring water in shallow pools . Its major industrial products are caustic soda and chlorine , and is used in many industrial processes including the manufacture of polyvinyl chloride , plastics , paper pulp and many other products . Of the annual global production of around two hundred million tonnes of salt , only about 6 % is used for human consumption . Other uses include water conditioning processes , deicing highways , and agricultural use . Edible salt is sold in forms such as sea salt and table salt which usually contains an anti-caking agent and may be iodised to prevent iodine deficiency . As well as its use in cooking and at the table , salt is present in many processed foods . Sodium is an essential nutrient for human health via its role as an electrolyte and osmotic solute . Excessive salt consumption can increase the risk of cardiovascular diseases , such as hypertension , in children and adults . Such health effects of salt have long been studied . Accordingly , numerous world health associations and experts in developed countries recommend reducing consumption of popular salty foods . The World Health Organization recommends that adults should consume less than 2,000 mg of sodium , equivalent to 5 grams of salt per day .

Humans have always tended to build communities either around sources of salt , or where they can trade for it . All through history the availability of salt has been pivotal to civilization . The word " salary " comes from the Latin word for salt because the Roman Legions were sometimes paid in salt , which was quite literally worth its weight in gold . In Britain , the suffix " -wich " in a placename means it was once a source of salt , as in Sandwich and Norwich . The Natron Valley was a key region that supported the Egyptian Empire to its north , because it supplied it with a kind of salt that came to be called by its name , natron . Even before this , what is now thought to have been the first city in Europe is Solnitsata , in Bulgaria , which was a salt mine , providing the area now known as the Balkans with salt since 5400 BC . Even the name Solnisata means " salt works " . While people have used canning and artificial refrigeration to preserve food for the last hundred years or so , salt has been the best-known food preservative , especially for meat , for many thousands of years . A very ancient salt-works operation has been discovered at the Poiana Slatinei archaeological site next to a salt spring in Lunca , Neamț County , Romania . Evidence indicates that Neolithic people of the Precucuteni Culture were boiling the salt-laden spring water through the process of briquetage to extract the salt as far back as 6050 BC . The salt extracted from this operation may have had a direct correlation to the rapid growth of this society 's population soon after its initial production began . The harvest of salt from the surface of Xiechi Lake near Yuncheng in Shanxi , China , dates back to at least 6000 BC , making it one of the oldest verifiable saltworks .

There is more salt in animal tissues such as meat , blood and milk , than there is in plant tissues . Nomads who subsist on their flocks and herds do not eat salt with their food , but agriculturalists , feeding mainly on cereals and vegetable matter , need to supplement their diet with salt . With the spread of civilization , salt became one of the world 's main trading commodities . It was of high value to the ancient Hebrews , the Greeks , the Romans , the Byzantines , the Hittites and other peoples of antiquity . In the Middle East , salt was used to ceremonially seal an agreement , and the ancient Hebrews made a " covenant of salt " with God and sprinkled salt on their offerings to show their trust in him . An ancient practice in time of war was salting the earth : scattering salt around in a defeated city in order to prevent plant growth . The Bible tells the story of King Abimelech who was ordered by God to do this at Shechem , and various texts claim that the Roman general Scipio Aemilianus Africanus ploughed over and sowed the city of Carthage with salt after it was defeated in the Third Punic War ( 146 BC ) .

Salt may have been used for barter in connection with the obsidian trade in Anatolia in the Neolithic Era . Herodotus described salt trading routes across Libya back in the 5th century BC . In the early years of the Roman Empire , roads such as the Via Salaria were built for the transportation of salt from the salt pans of Ostia to the capital . Salt was included among funeral offerings found in ancient Egyptian tombs from the third millennium BC , as were salted birds , and salt fish . From about 2800 BC , the Egyptians began exporting salt fish to the Phoenicians in return for Lebanon cedar , glass and the dye Tyrian purple ; the Phoenicians traded Egyptian salt fish and salt from North Africa throughout their Mediterranean trade empire . In Africa , salt was used as currency south of the Sahara , and slabs of rock salt were used as coins in Abyssinia . Moorish merchants in the 6th century traded salt for gold , weight for weight . The Tuareg have traditionally maintained routes across the Sahara especially for the transportation of salt by Azalai ( salt caravans ) . The caravans still cross the desert from southern Niger to Bilma , although much of the trade now takes place by truck . Each camel takes two bales of fodder and two of trade goods northwards and returns laden with salt pillars and dates .

Salzburg , Hallstatt , and Hallein lie within 17 km ( 11 mi ) of each other on the river Salzach in central Austria in an area with extensive salt deposits . Salzach literally means " salt river " and Salzburg " salt castle " , both taking their names from the German word Salz meaning salt and Hallstatt was the site of the world 's first salt mine . The town gave its name to the Hallstatt culture that began mining for salt in the area in about 800 BC . Around 400 BC , the townsfolk , who had previously used pickaxes and shovels , began open pan salt making . During the first millennium BC , Celtic communities grew rich trading salt and salted meat to Ancient Greece and Ancient Rome in exchange for wine and other luxuries . The word salary originates from Latin : salarium which referred to the money paid to the Roman Army 's soldiers for the purchase of salt . The word salad literally means " salted " , and comes from the ancient Roman practice of salting leaf vegetables . Wars have been fought over salt . Venice fought and won a war with Genoa over the product , and it played an important part in the American Revolution . Cities on overland trade routes grew rich by levying duties , and towns like Liverpool flourished on the export of salt extracted from the salt mines of Cheshire . Various governments have at different times imposed salt taxes on their peoples . The voyages of Christopher Columbus are said to have been financed from salt production in southern Spain , and the oppressive salt tax in France was one of the causes of the French Revolution . After being repealed , this tax was reimposed by Napoleon when he became emperor to pay for his foreign wars , and was not finally abolished until 1945 . In 1930 , Mahatma Gandhi led at least 100,000 people on the " Dandi March " or " Salt Satyagraha " , in which protesters made their own salt from the sea thus defying British rule and avoiding paying the salt tax . This civil disobedience inspired millions of common people , and elevated the Indian independence movement from an elitist movement to a national struggle .

Salt is mostly sodium chloride , the ionic compound with the formula NaCl , representing equal proportions of sodium and chlorine . Sea salt and freshly mined salt ( much of which is sea salt from prehistoric seas ) also contain small amounts of trace elements ( which in these small amounts are generally good for plant and animal health ) . Mined salt is often refined in the production of table salt ; it is dissolved in water , purified via precipitation of other minerals out of solution , and re-evaporated . During this same refining process it is often also iodized . Salt crystals are translucent and cubic in shape ; they normally appear white but impurities may give them a blue or purple tinge . The molar mass of salt is 58.443 g / mol , its melting point is 801 ° C ( 1,474 ° F ) and its boiling point 1,465 ° C ( 2,669 ° F ) . Its density is 2.17 grams per cubic centimetre and it is readily soluble in water . When dissolved in water it separates into Na + and Cl − ions and the solubility is 359 grams per litre . From cold solutions , salt crystallises as the dihydrate NaCl · 2H2O . Solutions of sodium chloride have very different properties from those of pure water ; the freezing point is − 21.12 ° C ( − 6.02 ° F ) for 23.31 wt % of salt , and the boiling point of saturated salt solution is around 108.7 ° C ( 227.7 ° F ) .

Salt is essential to the health of humans and animals , and is one of the five basic taste sensations . Salt is used in many cuisines around the world , and is often found in salt shakers on diners ' eating tables for their personal use on food . Salt is also an ingredient in many manufactured foodstuffs . Table salt is a refined salt containing about 97 to 99 percent sodium chloride . Usually , anticaking agents such as sodium aluminosilicate or magnesium carbonate are added to make it free-flowing . Iodized salt , containing potassium iodide , is widely available . Some people put a desiccant , such as a few grains of uncooked rice or a saltine cracker , in their salt shakers to absorb extra moisture and help break up salt clumps that may otherwise form .

Some table salt sold for consumption contain additives which address a variety of health concerns , especially in the developing world . The identities and amounts of additives vary widely from country to country . Iodine is an important micronutrient for humans , and a deficiency of the element can cause lowered production of thyroxine ( hypothyroidism ) and enlargement of the thyroid gland ( endemic goitre ) in adults or cretinism in children . Iodized salt has been used to correct these conditions since 1924 and consists of table salt mixed with a minute amount of potassium iodide , sodium iodide or sodium iodate . A small amount of dextrose may also be added to stabilize the iodine . Iodine deficiency affects about two billion people around the world and is the leading preventable cause of mental retardation . Iodized table salt has significantly reduced disorders of iodine deficiency in countries where it is used . The amount of iodine and the specific iodine compound added to salt varies from country to country . In the United States , the Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) recommends [ 21 CFR 101.9 ( c ) ( 8 ) ( iv ) ] 150 micrograms of iodine per day for both men and women . US iodized salt contains 46 – 77 ppm ( parts per million ) , whereas in the UK the iodine content of iodized salt is recommended to be 10 – 22 ppm .

Sodium ferrocyanide , also known as yellow prussiate of soda , is sometimes added to salt as an anticaking agent . The additive is considered safe for human consumption . Such anti-caking agents have been added since at least 1911 when magnesium carbonate was first added to salt to make it flow more freely . The safety of sodium ferrocyanide as a food additive was found to be provisionally acceptable by the Committee on Toxicity in 1988 . Other anticaking agents sometimes used include tricalcium phosphate , calcium or magnesium carbonates , fatty acid salts ( acid salts ) , magnesium oxide , silicon dioxide , calcium silicate , sodium aluminosilicate and calcium aluminosilicate . Both the European Union and the United States Food and Drug Administration permitted the use of aluminium in the latter two compounds . In " doubly fortified salt " , both iodide and iron salts are added . The latter alleviates iron deficiency anaemia , which interferes with the mental development of an estimated 40 % of infants in the developing world . A typical iron source is ferrous fumarate . Another additive , especially important for pregnant women , is folic acid ( vitamin B9 ) , which gives the table salt a yellow color . Folic acid helps prevent neural tube defects and anaemia , which affect young mothers , especially in developing countries .

Unrefined sea salt contains small amounts of magnesium and calcium halides and sulfates , traces of algal products , salt-resistant bacteria and sediment particles . The calcium and magnesium salts confer a faintly bitter overtone , and they make unrefined sea salt hygroscopic ( i.e. , it gradually absorbs moisture from air if stored uncovered ) . Algal products contribute a mildly " fishy " or " sea-air " odour , the latter from organobromine compounds . Sediments , the proportion of which varies with the source , give the salt a dull grey appearance . Since taste and aroma compounds are often detectable by humans in minute concentrations , sea salt may have a more complex flavor than pure sodium chloride when sprinkled on top of food . When salt is added during cooking however , these flavors would likely be overwhelmed by those of the food ingredients . The refined salt industry cites scientific studies saying that raw sea and rock salts do not contain enough iodine salts to prevent iodine deficiency diseases . Different natural salts have different mineralities depending on their source , giving each one a unique flavour . Fleur de sel , a natural sea salt from the surface of evaporating brine in salt pans , has a unique flavour varying with the region from which it is produced . In traditional Korean cuisine , so-called " bamboo salt " is prepared by roasting salt in a bamboo container plugged with mud at both ends . This product absorbs minerals from the bamboo and the mud , and has been claimed to increase the anticlastogenic and antimutagenic properties of doenjang ( a fermented bean paste ) .

Salt is present in most foods , but in naturally occurring foodstuffs such as meats , vegetables and fruit , it is present in very small quantities . It is often added to processed foods ( such as canned foods and especially salted foods , pickled foods , and snack foods or other convenience foods ) , where it functions as both a preservative and a flavoring . Dairy salt is used in the preparation of butter and cheese products . Before the advent of electrically powered refrigeration , salting was one of the main methods of food preservation . Thus , herring contains 67 mg sodium per 100 g , while kipper , its preserved form , contains 990 mg . Similarly , pork typically contains 63 mg while bacon contains 1,480 mg , and potatoes contain 7 mg but potato crisps 800 mg per 100 g . The main sources of salt in the diet , apart from direct use of sodium chloride , are bread and cereal products , meat products and milk and dairy products . In many East Asian cultures , salt is not traditionally used as a condiment . In its place , condiments such as soy sauce , fish sauce and oyster sauce tend to have a high sodium content and fill a similar role to table salt in western cultures . They are most often used for cooking rather than as table condiments .

Table salt is made up of just under 40 % sodium by weight , so a 6 g serving ( 1 teaspoon ) contains about 2,300 mg of sodium . Sodium serves a vital purpose in the human body : via its role as an electrolyte , it helps nerves and muscles to function correctly , and it is one factor involved in the osmotic regulation of water content in body organs ( fluid balance ) . Most of the sodium in the Western diet comes from salt . The habitual salt intake in many Western countries is about 10 g per day , and it is higher than that in many countries in Eastern Europe and Asia . The high level of sodium in many processed foods has a major impact on the total amount consumed . In the United States , 75 % of the sodium eaten comes from processed and restaurant foods , 11 % from cooking and table use and the rest from what is found naturally in foodstuffs . Because consuming too much salt increases risk of cardiovascular diseases , health organizations generally recommend that people reduce their dietary intake of salt . High salt intake is associated with a greater risk of stroke , total cardiovascular disease and kidney disease . A reduction in sodium intake by 1,000 mg per day may reduce cardiovascular disease by about 30 percent . In adults and children with no acute illness , a decrease in the intake of sodium from the typical high levels reduces blood pressure . A low salt diet results in a greater improvement in blood pressure in people with hypertension .

The World Health Organization recommends that adults should consume less than 2,000 mg of sodium ( which is contained in 5 g of salt ) per day . Guidelines by the United States recommend that people with hypertension , African Americans , and middle-aged and older adults should limit consumption to no more than 1,500 mg of sodium per day and meet the potassium recommendation of 4,700 mg / day with a healthy diet of fruits and vegetables . While reduction of salt intake to less than 2,300 mg per day is recommended by developed countries , one review recommended that salt intake be no less than 1,200 mg ( contained in 3 g ) per day , as it is an essential nutrient required from the diet . Another review indicated that reducing sodium intake to lower than 2,300 mg per day may not be beneficial .

Only about 6 % of the salt manufactured in the world is used in food . Of the remainder , 12 % is used in water conditioning processes , 8 % goes for de-icing highways and 6 % is used in agriculture . The rest ( 68 % ) is used for manufacturing and other industrial processes , and sodium chloride is one of the largest inorganic raw materials used by volume . Its major chemical products are caustic soda and chlorine , which are separated by the electrolysis of a pure brine solution . These are used in the manufacture of PVC , plastics , paper pulp and many other inorganic and organic compounds . Salt is also used as a flux in the production of aluminium . For this purpose , a layer of melted salt floats on top of the molten metal and removes iron and other metal contaminants . It is also used in the manufacture of soaps and glycerine , where it is added to the vat to precipitate out the saponified products . As an emulsifier , salt is used in the manufacture of synthetic rubber , and another use is in the firing of pottery , when salt added to the furnace vaporises before condensing onto the surface of the ceramic material , forming a strong glaze .

Food grade salt accounts for only a small part of salt production in industrialized countries ( 7 % in Europe ) , although worldwide , food uses account for 17.5 % of total production . In 2013 , total world production of salt was 264 million tonnes , the top five producers being China ( 71 million ) , the United States ( 40 million ) , India ( 18 million ) , Germany ( 12 million ) and Canada ( 11 million ) . The manufacture of salt is one of the oldest chemical industries . A major source of salt is seawater , which has a salinity of approximately 3.5 % . This means that there are about 35 grams ( 1.2 oz ) of dissolved salts , predominantly sodium ( Na + ) and chloride ( Cl − ) ions , per kilogram ( 2.2 lbs ) of water . The world 's oceans are a virtually inexhaustible source of salt , and this abundance of supply means that reserves have not been calculated . The evaporation of seawater is the production method of choice in marine countries with high evaporation and low precipitation rates . Salt evaporation ponds are filled from the ocean and salt crystals can be harvested as the water dries up . Sometimes these ponds have vivid colours , as some species of algae and other micro-organisms thrive in conditions of high salinity .

Elsewhere , salt is extracted from the vast sedimentary deposits which have been laid down over the millennia from the evaporation of seas and lakes . These are either mined directly , producing rock salt , or are extracted in solution by pumping water into the deposit . In either case , the salt may be purified by mechanical evaporation of brine . Traditionally , this was done in shallow open pans which were heated to increase the rate of evaporation . More recently , the process is performed in pans under vacuum . The raw salt is refined to purify it and improve its storage and handling characteristics . This usually involves recrystallization during which a brine solution is treated with chemicals that precipitate most impurities ( largely magnesium and calcium salts ) . Multiple stages of evaporation are then used to collect pure sodium chloride crystals , which are kiln-dried . Some salt is produced using the Alberger process , which involves vacuum pan evaporation combined with the seeding of the solution with cubic crystals , and produces a grainy-type flake . The Ayoreo , an indigenous group from the Paraguayan Chaco , obtain their salt from the ash produced by burning the timber of the Indian salt tree ( Maytenus vitis-idaea ) and other trees .

Salt has long held an important place in religion and culture . At the time of Brahmanic sacrifices , in Hittite rituals and during festivals held by Semites and Greeks at the time of the new moon , salt was thrown into a fire where it produced crackling noises . The ancient Egyptians , Greeks and Romans invoked their gods with offerings of salt and water and some people think this to be the origin of Holy Water in the Christian faith . In Aztec mythology , Huixtocihuatl was a fertility goddess who presided over salt and salt water . Salt is considered to be a very auspicious substance in Hinduism and is used in particular religious ceremonies like house-warmings and weddings . In Jainism , devotees lay an offering of raw rice with a pinch of salt before a deity to signify their devotion and salt is sprinkled on a person 's cremated remains before the ashes are buried . Salt is believed to ward off evil spirits in Mahayana Buddhist tradition , and when returning home from a funeral , a pinch of salt is thrown over the left shoulder as this prevents evil spirits from entering the house . In Shinto , salt is used for ritual purification of locations and people ( harae , specifically shubatsu ) , and small piles of salt are placed in dishes by the entrance of establishments for the two-fold purposes of warding off evil and attracting patrons .

In the Hebrew Bible , there are thirty-five verses which mention salt . One of these is the story of Lot 's wife , who was turned into a pillar of salt when she looked back at the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah ( Genesis 19 : 26 ) as they were destroyed . When the judge Abimelech destroyed the city of Shechem , he is said to have " sown salt on it , " probably as a curse on anyone who would re-inhabit it ( Judges 9 : 45 ) . The Book of Job contains the first mention of salt as a condiment . " Can that which is unsavoury be eaten without salt ? or is there any taste in the white of an egg ? " ( Job 6 : 6 ) . In the New Testament , six verses mention salt . In the Sermon on the Mount , Jesus referred to his followers as the " salt of the earth " . The apostle Paul also encouraged Christians to " let your conversation be always full of grace , seasoned with salt " ( Colossians 4 : 6 ) . Salt is mandatory in the rite of the Tridentine Mass . Salt is used in the third item ( which includes an Exorcism ) of the Celtic Consecration ( cf . Gallican Rite ) that is employed in the consecration of a church . Salt may be added to the water " where it is customary " in the Roman Catholic rite of Holy water .

In Judaism , it is recommended to have either a salty bread or to add salt to the bread if this bread is unsalted when doing Kiddush for Shabbat . It is customary to spread some salt over the bread or to dip the bread in a little salt when passing the bread around the table after the Kiddush . To preserve the covenant between their people and God , Jews dip the Sabbath bread in salt . In Wicca , salt is symbolic of the element Earth . It is also believed to cleanse an area of harmful or negative energies . A dish of salt and a dish of water are almost always present on an altar , and salt is used in a wide variety of rituals and ceremonies .

SMS Heimdall was the fourth vessel of the six-member Siegfried class of coastal defense ships ( Küstenpanzerschiffe ) built for the German Imperial Navy . Her sister ships were Siegfried , Beowulf , Frithjof , Hildebrand , and Hagen . Heimdall was built by the Kaiserliche Werft Wilhelmshaven shipyard between 1891 and 1894 , and was armed with a main battery of three 24-centimeter ( 9.4 in ) guns . She served in the German fleet throughout the 1890s and was rebuilt in 1900 – 1902 . She served in the VI Battle Squadron after the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , but saw no action . Heimdall was demobilized in 1915 and used as a barracks ship thereafter . She was ultimately broken up for scrap in 1921 .

Heimdall was 79 meters ( 259 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 14.9 m ( 49 ft ) and a maximum draft of 5.74 m ( 18.8 ft ) . She displaced 3,741 long tons ( 3,801 t ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two vertical 3-cylinder triple expansion engines . Steam for the engines was provided by four coal-fired boilers . The ship 's propulsion system provided a top speed of 14.6 kn ( 27.0 km / h ; 16.8 mph ) and a range of approximately 1,490 nautical miles ( 2,760 km ; 1,710 mi ) at 10 kn ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . Heimdall had a crew of 20 officers and 256 enlisted men . The ship was armed with three 24 cm K L / 35 guns mounted in three single gun turrets . Two were placed side by side forward , and the third was located aft of the main superstructure . They were supplied with a total of 204 rounds of ammunition . The ship was also equipped with eight 8.8 cm SK L / 30 guns in single mounts . Heimdall also carried four 35 cm ( 14 in ) torpedo tubes , all in swivel mounts on the deck . One was at the bow , another at the stern , and two amidships . The ship was protected by an armored belt that was 240 mm ( 9.4 in ) amidships , and an armored deck that was 30 mm ( 1.2 in ) thick . The conning tower had 80 mm ( 3.1 in ) thick sides . Heimdall 's armor consisted of new Krupp steel , a more effective type of armor than the compound steel the other members of the class received .

Heimdall was laid down in 1891 at the Kaiserliche Werft shipyard in Wilhelmshaven . She was launched on 27 July 1892 , and completed on 7 April 1894 . In 1897 , Heimdall participated in the annual summer maneuvers in the IV Division , along with Frithjof and Hagen . Her other three sisters were assigned to the III Division . Heimdall participated in the 1900 summer maneuvers , where she and Siegfried , Hildebrand , and Ägir simulated the hostile fleet . She served on active duty with the fleet until 1901 , when she was taken into drydock at the Kaiserliche Werft shipyard in Kiel for an extensive reconstruction . The ship was lengthened to 86.13 m ( 282.6 ft ) , which increased displacement to 4,436 t ( 4,366 long tons ; 4,890 short tons ) . Her old boilers were replaced with eight new Marine type boilers , and a second funnel was added . Her secondary battery was increased to ten 8.8 cm guns , and the 35 cm torpedo tubes were replaced with three 45 cm ( 18 in ) tubes . Work was completed by 1902 . After emerging from her modernization , she returned to service with the fleet , assigned to the II Squadron , alongside Hildebrand , Hagen , and Beowulf . She remained in the fleet until the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , when she was mobilized into the VI Battle Squadron for coastal defense , along with her sister ships . On 31 August 1915 , the VI Battle Squadron was demobilized , and Heimdall 's crew was transferred to other warships . She was then used as a barracks ship in for U-boat crews , along with crews for the coastal defense flotillas stationed on the Ems river . On 17 June 1919 , she was stricken from the naval register . The navy planned to convert Heimdall into a salvage ship , but the plan fell through and she was instead sold and broken up for scrap in 1921 in Rönnebeck .

Thomas Bryan Martin ( 1731 – 1798 ) was an 18th-century English American land agent , justice , legislator , and planter in the colony ( and later U.S. state ) of Virginia and in present-day West Virginia . Martin was the land agent of the Northern Neck Proprietary for his uncle Thomas Fairfax , 6th Lord Fairfax of Cameron ( 1693 – 1781 ) and served two terms in the House of Burgesses . Martin was born in Kent in 1731 , and was the grandson of Thomas Fairfax , 5th Lord Fairfax of Cameron ( 1657 – 1710 ) through his mother , Frances Fairfax Martin . Raised in humble surroundings in England , Martin relocated to Virginia in 1751 to assist his uncle , Thomas Fairfax , 6th Lord Fairfax of Cameron ( known as Lord Fairfax ) , in administering the Northern Neck Proprietary , which encompassed up to 5,000,000 acres ( 20,000 km2 ) . Martin resided with his uncle on their frontier Greenway Court estate in present-day Clarke County , Virginia . He earned the affections of Lord Fairfax on account of his energetic nature and loyalty , and through Martin 's growing influence Lord Fairfax relocated the proprietary 's base of operations to Greenway Court in 1762 and made Martin steward and land agent of the proprietary .

Martin took an active role in political and civil affairs within the proprietary 's domain . He served as a vestryman for the Anglican Frederick Parish , and upon the creation of Hampshire County in 1754 , he presided as the county 's first justice and was further appointed the County Lieutenant . He later represented Hampshire County in the House of Burgesses from 1756 to 1758 and serving with George Washington , represented Fredrick County from 1758 until 1761 . Martin was appointed a trustee of the frontier towns of Winchester , Stephensburg ( present-day Stephens City ) , and Bath ( present-day Berkeley Springs ) . He was also appointed as the colonel of the Frederick County militia . Though not in the best of health , Martin was relied upon by the settlers of the proprietary to use his considerable resources in response to Native American attacks . Following the outbreak of the American Revolutionary War , Martin refused reappointment by Governor Patrick Henry as a justice of the Frederick County Commission of Peace . Afterward , Martin retreated from civil service entirely , and retired to Greenway Court . He maintained a low profile during the war , and his uncle Lord Fairfax was treated with respect and consideration despite being the only resident peer in the American colonies . Following the death of Lord Fairfax in 1781 , Martin 's brother Reverend Denny Martin Fairfax inherited the Northern Neck Proprietary , and Martin was given the Greenway Court estate . He took his uncle 's housekeeper Mrs. Crawford as his mistress and died unmarried in 1798 . Martin bequeathed his Greenway Court estate and an adjoining 1,000 acres ( 4.0 km2 ) to his housekeeper Betsy Powers . Martin 's brother Denny Fairfax was unable to properly maintain the proprietary and conveyed the remaining lands in 1797 , thus terminating the Fairfax and Martin families ' interests in the proprietary before it was formally dissolved in 1806 . The city of Martinsburg , West Virginia , was named for Martin by his friend Adam Stephen .

Thomas Bryan Martin was born in Kent , England , in 1731 and was the son of Denny Martin ( 1695 – 1762 ) of Salts Manor and his wife Frances Fairfax Martin ( 1703 – 1791 ) . His father and mother married in Loose , Kent . Martin 's mother was the daughter of Thomas Fairfax , 5th Lord Fairfax of Cameron ( 1657 – 1710 ) and his wife Catherine Colepeper Fairfax , and thus a sister of Thomas Fairfax , 6th Lord Fairfax of Cameron ( 1693 – 1781 ) and Robert Fairfax , 7th Lord Fairfax of Cameron ( 1707 – 1793 ) . His grandmother Catherine Colepeper Fairfax was the daughter of Thomas Colepeper , 2nd Baron Colepeper and his wife Margaretta van Hesse , who was from a Dutch noble family . Martin was named in honor of his uncle Thomas . He was baptized into the Anglican faith as " Thomas Brian " in Loose on April 11 , 1731 . Martin and his siblings were raised amid humble surroundings in England . He had seven siblings , including four brothers and three sisters :

Martin 's uncle Thomas Fairfax , 6th Lord Fairfax of Cameron ( known as Lord Fairfax ) owned the Northern Neck Proprietary land grant , which he had inherited from Martin 's great-grandfather Thomas Colepeper , 2nd Baron Colepeper in 1719 . The proprietary constituted up to 5,000,000 acres ( 20,000 km2 ) of Virginia 's Northern Neck and a vast area spanning west to the North Branch Potomac River headwaters . The Northern Neck Proprietary had been awarded by Charles II of England to seven of his supporters in 1649 , and again in 1688 by official patent . One of these seven supporters , Lord Colepeper , acquired the right to the entire proprietary in 1681 , and his grandson , Lord Fairfax , inherited the land grant upon his death . Lord Fairfax dispatched his first cousin William Fairfax ( 1691 – 1757 ) to replace Robert Carter I as the steward and land agent for the Northern Neck Proprietary , a position in which Fairfax served until his death in 1757 . In 1750 , Martin 's uncle Lord Fairfax established himself at his hunting plantation Greenway Court estate near present-day White Post in Clarke County with the intention of administering the proprietary himself . Lord Fairfax had previously reserved this land as his private residence in 1747 , then known as " the Quarter " . With his cousin William Fairfax acting as land agent , Lord Fairfax sought additional assistance in managing the proprietary and scrutinized which of his family members from England would be up to the task . Lord Fairfax first considered his brother Robert , then his brother-in-law Denny Martin , and in 1751 , he finally decided upon enlisting the assistance of his twenty-year-old nephew and Denny Martin 's son , Thomas Bryan Martin .

Lord Fairfax sent for Martin , who arrived in Virginia from England aboard the Hatley on May 24 , 1751 , accompanied by William Fairfax , who had been seeking an appointment to a position in England . Martin and Fairfax arrived in Williamsburg , where they dined with Fairfax 's fellow Virginia Governor 's Council member John Blair , Sr. , and visited the Governor 's Palace and the Capitol before beginning their journey toward the Northern Neck on May 31 . Following his arrival at the Northern Neck Proprietary , Martin settled at Greenway Court with his uncle that autumn . Due to his humble upbringing , Martin quickly adapted to frontier life at Greenway Court . He soon earned the affections of Lord Fairfax on account of his energetic nature , his loyalty , and his good eyesight , which greatly assisted his myopic uncle . On May 21 , 1752 , shortly after Martin had come of age on his twenty-first birthday , Lord Fairfax granted Greenway Court to his nephew , along with 8,840 acres ( 35.8 km2 ) of limestone lands on the west bank of the Shenandoah River across from Leeds Manor , which were " to be known and called by the name of the Manor of Greenway Court " and subject to an annual quit-rent fee of " a good buck and doe " due on the feast day of Saint Michael the Archangel . Greenway Court had taken its name from the Culpeper family 's manor in Kent .

Desiring a larger role for himself in the proprietary 's administration , Martin sought to influence his uncle into reorganizing the management of the proprietary . At Martin 's suggestion , Lord Fairfax relocated the proprietary 's base of operations 56 miles ( 90 km ) northwest from Belvoir to an expressly built land office depository and archive at Greenway Court in 1762 . Prior to this move , a small land office had been in operation at Greenway Court . Following William Fairfax 's death in 1757 , his son George William Fairfax ( 1729 – 1787 ) had succeeded him as steward and land agent of the proprietary . Martin succeeded Fairfax as the steward and land agent of the proprietary in 1762 . Fairfax 's replacement by Martin , the transfer of the land office and Martin 's increased influence over Lord Fairfax caused bitter feelings from George William Fairfax , as evidenced by his letters during this period . Fairfax and his wife Sally Cary Fairfax returned to England in 1773 prior to the American Revolutionary War and did not return afterward . While residing at Greenway Court , Martin would have preferred more comfortable quarters than the rustic estate , as their living situation there was originally supposed to have been only temporary until the construction of a grander estate . In 1767 , Martin wrote that plans for further construction and improvements at Greenway Court " remain in status quo and in quo state they are likely to remain , ... we are building castles , tho ' not on earth where one is greatly wanted , but castles in the air . " Martin 's uncle Robert Fairfax remarked on the primitive life at Greenway Court among " strange , brutish people ... past all conception " . For the next thirty years , until Lord Fairfax 's death in 1781 , Martin remained at Greenway Court and shared in the loneliness and solitude of his " self-exiled " uncle . While established at Greenway Court , Martin engaged in agricultural pursuits . In 1768 , Martin described tobacco as the crop " which is our all " . Like many other planters and farmers in the Shenandoah Valley , Martin had transitioned to the farming of wheat by 1792 , at which time he wrote to his brother in England , " Are you all starving that you give such prices for our flour ; farming is now my object . "

In addition to his management of the proprietary , Martin began taking an active role in political and civil affairs within his uncle 's domain . Following an act of the Virginia General Assembly in February 1752 , the Anglican Frederick Parish was authorized to hold an election for twelve parish vestrymen before June 15 of that year . Martin was elected as a vestryman , alongside his uncle Lord Fairfax and Gabriel Jones . Martin and his fellow vestrymen set about expanding and enlarging the Anglican presence within the parish . In 1754 , upon the creation of Hampshire County , Martin presided as the inaugural justice of the county 's court . Under the act establishing the county , the first county court was to have been held in June 1754 ; however , the first court was not held until December 1757 . The first court to be held was , in addition to Martin , composed of justices James Simpson , William Miller , Solomon Hedges , and Nathaniel Kuykendall with Gabriel Jones serving as the Clerk of Court . In 1755 , Martin was further appointed as the County Lieutenant of Hampshire County . Martin was then elected alongside Thomas Walker to the House of Burgesses representing Hampshire County from 1768 to 1758 . In 1758 , Martin and George Washington challenged the incumbents and ran for election to represent Frederick County in the House of Burgesses against Hugh West and Thomas Swearingen . Martin and Washington received considerable support from Lord Fairfax , and the leading Anglican cleric in Frederick County , William Meldrum . Washington received the most votes with 310 , followed by Martin with 240 votes , 199 votes for West , and 45 votes for Swearingen . Martin and Washington served alongside one another representing Frederick County until 1761 . Martin chose not to run for reelection and retired from legislative politics in 1761 .

In September 1758 , the Virginia General Assembly appointed Martin as one of the trustees of Winchester . Martin was further appointed as a trustee of the town of Stephensburg ( present-day Stephens City ) . His uncle Lord Fairfax , John Hite , Gabriel Jones , Robert Rutherford , Lewis Stephens , and James Wood were also appointed trustees of the towns alongside Martin . When the town of Bath ( present-day Berkeley Springs ) received its charter from the Virginia General Assembly in October 1776 , Martin was appointed as a trustee alongside Bryan Fairfax , Philip Pendleton , Robert Rutherford , Samuel Washington , Warner Washington , Alexander White , and others . Martin was also appointed as the colonel of the Frederick County militia . While Martin was not in the best of health , he could be relied upon by the settlers of the proprietary to use his considerable resources to act promptly during an emergency , especially in response to attacks by Native Americans . By the outbreak of the American Revolution , Martin was serving as an appointed justice on the Commission of Peace for Frederick County . Martin was reappointed as a justice of the peace by Governor Patrick Henry , along with William Booth and Warner Washington , but all three men declined to serve another term . Martin did not swear in to the committee because he refused to serve under the new revolutionary regime , initially believing that American independence from Great Britain was a futile effort . The committee had also been actively arresting Loyalists , which may have influenced Martin 's decision to turn down his reappointment . Martin retreated from performing civil service entirely , and afterward retired to Greenway Court . Prior to his death , Martin became an active Freemason .

As a Loyalist , Martin maintained a low profile following the outbreak of the American Revolutionary War . By 1778 , the Virginia General Assembly had abolished quit-rents , but in recognition of Lord Fairfax 's loyalty , the Northern Neck Proprietary was made an exception . Lord Fairfax was treated with respect and consideration by the assembly , and despite being the only resident peer in the American colonies , he was accorded all the privileges of a Virginia citizen . Following the death of Lord Fairfax in 1781 , his will was recorded on March 5 , 1782 , and conveyed his title to the remnants of his American properties , including the Northern Neck Proprietary , to Martin 's elder brother Reverend Denny Martin , who then assumed the surname and coat of arms of Fairfax . Lord Fairfax devised his property and title to Denny Martin on the condition that he apply to the Parliament of Great Britain for an act to authorize him to inherit the title of Lord Fairfax of Cameron . Martin was appointed by his uncle , along with Gabriel Jones and Peter Hog , as an executor of his will and estate . Martin inherited the plantation Lord Fairfax had purchased from John Borden consisting of 600 acres ( 2.4 km2 ) . Martin was also bequeathed the Greenway Court estate and " all the stock of cattle , sheep , hogs , implements of husbandry , household goods and furniture " there . Martin and his brothers Denny and Philip also inherited all Lord Fairfax 's slaves . Martin 's uncle and Lord Fairfax 's brother Robert Fairfax appealed his claim to the title of Lord Fairfax of Cameron to Parliament , and succeeded as the 7th Lord Fairfax of Cameron .

On account of his residency in England , Denny Fairfax appointed Martin and Jones as managers of the proprietary . Martin and Jones placed advertisements in newspapers petitioning proprietary tenants to bring their claims against the Lord Fairfax estate forward and prove them . The descendants of William Fairfax continued to assert back claims against the estates of Lord Fairfax , which had been rendered by William Fairfax prior to 1757 . In order to absolve himself of these back claims , Denny Fairfax renounced his appointments of Martin and Jones , and instead appointed Bryan Fairfax , 8th Lord Fairfax of Cameron as the sole steward of the proprietary in an official transposition in London on September 21 , 1784 . Because Denny Fairfax was a British subject residing in England , he had no legal rights under American jurisdiction ; thus , he and his British relatives were considered " alien enemies " and his landholdings were confiscated under escheat laws . In 1785 , the Virginia General Assembly ordered that all records , books , and documents pertaining to the proprietary 's lands be confiscated by the state of Virginia and removed to the Virginia State Land Registrar 's Office in Richmond . Virginia seized the remaining proprietary lands that had not yet been granted , and citizens that had already acquired grants from the proprietary were permitted to keep their land . Land values in the Northern Neck continued to increase in value , which Martin noted in a 1790 letter . The higher land prices caused many residents of the proprietary to sell their lands and relocate further into the frontier , which Martin commented : " The emigration of inhabitants is ... astonishing . "

Following the death of Lord Fairfax in 1781 , Martin took his uncle 's housekeeper Mrs. Crawford as his mistress , and fathered a daughter by her . Mrs. Crawford remained Martin 's mistress for several years until her death . Their daughter married British captain Francis Geldart ; however , she died without issue soon after their marriage , and Martin gave Geldart 1,000 acres ( 4.0 km2 ) of Greenway Court and a number of slaves . Following the death of his daughter , Martin employed housekeeper Betsy Powers at Greenway Court . Martin died unmarried in 1798 , and his will dated July 24 , 1794 , was proved on October 1 , 1798 . In it , he bequeathed his Greenway Court estate and an adjoining 1,000 acres ( 4.0 km2 ) to his housekeeper Betsy Powers . Powers also inherited " all houses thereon , household goods ( except plate and watch ) , one half of stock of horses , cattle , sheep and hogs and choice of ten slaves " . Martin 's living sisters Frances , Sybilla , and Anna Susanna Martin received " all moneys , and remainder of personal property " not bequeathed to Powers . Each of the executors of Martin 's will received ten guineas . Martin bequeathed the remainder of his property and the 1,000 acres ( 4.0 km2 ) of Greenway Court , should Powers have predeceased him , to his will executors Gabriel Jones , Robert Mackey , and John Sherman Woodcock to divide into parcels and sell , the profits from which were to be given to Martin 's sisters . Powers also received a chariot , harness , and 160 acres ( 0.65 km2 ) in Stafford County near Falmouth . Following Martin 's death , Powers married W. Carnagy .

Due to his advanced age and his inability to relocate to America , Martin 's brother Denny Fairfax was unable to properly protect and maintain his American possessions and conveyed by deed on August 30 , 1797 , to James Markham Marshall " all and every of those divers tracts , pieces and parcels of land , being part and parcel of the proprietary of the Northern Neck of Va . , with all beneficial right and interest of whatsoever nature the same may be " . This conveyance thus terminated the Fairfax and Martin families ' interest in the proprietary . In 1799 , the Virginia General Assembly authorized Marshall as the legal titleholder of Fairfax 's remaining landholdings . The Northern Neck Proprietary was officially dissolved in 1806 when Virginia again became its legal owner . The legality of Virginia 's confiscation of the Northern Neck Proprietary lands continued to be contested in state and federal courts long after Denny Martin Fairfax 's death in 1800 . The Virginia Supreme Court upheld the state 's confiscation and conveyance of the proprietary 's lands , arguing that the terms of the Jay Treaty with the Kingdom of Great Britain did not address the disputed proprietary . In 1813 , the United States Supreme Court reviewed the Virginia Supreme Court 's decision in Fairfax 's Devisee v. Hunter 's Lessee , 11 U.S. 603 , and ruled that the treaty did in fact cover the dispute , and remanded the case back to the state supreme court . The Virginia Supreme Court ruled that the U.S. Supreme Court did not have authority over cases originating in state courts . The state supreme court 's refusal to accept the U.S. Supreme Court 's mandate was appealed in 1816 in Martin v. Hunter 's Lessee , 14 U.S. 304 . The U.S. Supreme Court reversed the state court 's decision on appeal and ruled that Article Three of the United States Constitution granted the U.S. Supreme Court jurisdiction and authority over state courts on matters involving federal law . Chief Justice John Marshall was forced to recuse himself from ruling in Martin v. Hunter 's Lessee as he and his brother James had previously contracted with Denny Martin Fairfax to purchase the disputed proprietary lands .

John F. " Johnny " Maulbetsch ( June 20 , 1890 – September 14 , 1950 ) was an All-American football halfback at Adrian College in 1911 and for the University of Michigan Wolverines from 1914 to 1916 . He is also a member of the College Football Hall of Fame . After playing with an independent football team in Ann Arbor and at Adrian College , Maulbetsch became one of the most famous American football players in 1914 while playing for the University of Michigan . Maulbetsch became known as the " Human Bullet " because of his unusual low , line-plunging style of play , and was also known as the " Featherweight Fullback " because of his light weight and small size . After his performance against Harvard in 1914 , in which some reports indicated he gained more than 300 yards , eastern writers , including Damon Runyan , wrote articles touting Maulbetsch . Maulbetsch was also selected by Walter Camp to his All-American team . In 1915 , Maulbetsch underwent surgery for appendicitis and did not perform to the same level as he had in 1914 . He made a comeback as a senior in 1916 and was again one of the leading players in college football .

Between 1917 and 1920 , Maulbetsch was the head football coach at Phillips University . With Maulbetsch 's name recognition , he was able to recruit big name talent to Phillips , including future Pro Football Hall of Famer Steve Owen , and future United States Olympic Committee President Doug Roby . Maulbetsch quickly turned Phillips into one of the top programs in the southwest , as his teams beat Oklahoma and Texas and lost only one game in the 1918 and 1919 seasons . Maulbetsch was later the football coach at Oklahoma A & M ( later known as Oklahoma State ) and Marshall College in the 1920s . He has been inducted into the College Football Hall of Fame , and the University of Michigan awards the John F. Maulbetsch Award each year to a freshman football player based on desire , character , and capacity for leadership and future success both on and off the football field .

Maulbetsch was born and grew up in Ann Arbor , Michigan . He attended Ann Arbor High School where he led the football team to consecutive state championships in 1908 and 1909 . One account of the 1908 playoffs noted : " Ann Arbor 's smashing play in the first half was wholly due to Maulbetsch , Ann Arbor 's fullback , and his terrific line bucking . He clearly outshone his team mates . " After graduating from high school , Maulbetsch joined the Ann Arbor Independents , a football team made up of Michigan " varsity eligibles " and " townies . " Maulbetsch was once reportedly called upon to drive across the goal line for the Independents in a game in which a large crowd , including a farmer with his plow-horse , gathered in the end zone . " Head down and legs working like piston rods , Maulbetsch plowed ahead until head struck the plow horse amidships . Down went the horse Mauly on top of him . "

Maulbetsch started his college football career at age 21 , leading Adrian College to an 8 – 0 record in 1911 , including a 15 – 0 win over the University of Michigan freshman team . Maulbetsch 's performance drew the attention of Michigan Coach Fielding H. Yost . After watching Maulbetsch dominate Michigan 's freshman team , Yost concluded : " If I could get that kid into Michigan and keep him up in his studies I ’ d make an All-American place for him his first year . " Yost persuaded Maulbetsch to transfer , and he played with " the scrubs " in 1912 . Yost told the press at the time he had " another ( Willie ) Heston " in Maulbetsch .

Maulbetsch did not play for the varsity team until the fall of 1914 when he was 24 years old . Before the season began , Maulbetsch was " touted as one of the fastest halfbacks who ever donned moleskins . He weighs 155 pounds , is built low , has a powerful pair of shoulders and his dashes are characterized by lightning speed . " Another pre-season account said he was " a wonder as a line plunger and a wizard in the open field . " From the outset , considerable attention was paid to his unusual running style . Observers noted " the peculiar manner in which he runs . . . . He has a corkscrew style of dashing , and even when tackled squarely has such a sturdy pair of legs that his assailant is usually carried back several yards . " Michigan opened the season with a 58 – 0 win over DePauw , followed by a 69 – 0 victory over Case Institute of Technology . Maulbetsch was the offensive star against Case , as he twice " carried several would-be tackles across the goal . " Playing Vanderbilt the following week , Maulbetsch had runs of 25 and 35 yards , scored two touchdowns , " was worked overtime and probably advanced the pigskin more than any two other players . " After starting the season 5 – 0 , Michigan lost three of four games against top eastern schools : Syracuse , Harvard , Penn , and Cornell .

Maulbetsch 's breakthrough came on October 31 , 1914 , in front of 30,000 fans at Harvard . The game was one of the most anticipated matches of the year . A special train brought Michigan fans to Cambridge , Massachusetts , and hundreds of Michigan alumni from the East were on hand as " reinforcements . " Though Harvard prevailed , 7 – 0 , Maulbetsch was the big story in papers across the country . Writers from Ring Lardner to Damon Runyon told the story of Maulbetsch 's performance . Lardner said : " If anyone tells you the East plays the best brand of football , Maulbetsch shot that theory full of holes . " According to Runyon , the Wolverines used " the mighty Maulbetsch as their battering ram " , and he " gained enough ground against Harvard to bury a German army corps . " Football writer Frank G. Menke said : " No westerner ever created half the stir in the east as did this Michigander . . . His peculiar , baffling style of attack , backed by phenomenal strength almost always earned for him gains of 5 to 20 yards every time he was called upon to carry the ball . " Another writer noted Maulbetsch 's skill as a " line breaker " as he " carried the ball repeatedly through the Harvard line and into the secondary defense with bullet-like rushes that upset tackler after tackler . " Maulbetsch was responsible for four-fifths of Michigan 's ground gains , and on several occasions his dives reportedly " had so much power that he dove right through a double line of crimson players and went sprawling on the ground twelve to twenty feet clear of the double line . "

While every report indicates that Maulbetsch had a big day , the accounts vary dramatically as to exactly how many yards he gained . Frank Menke reported after the game that Maulbetsch gained 300 yards . A 1938 newspaper account said he " gained 350 yards from scrimmage . " Yet , his 1951 obituary indicated he gained 133 yards in 30 attempts . Despite Maulbetsch 's efforts , Michigan was never able to punch the ball across the goal line . Many blamed Michigan 's quarterback who switched to another back every time after Maulbetsch " took the ball to the shadow of the Crimson goal posts . " In answer to the question why Michigan was unable to score , Frank Menke said : " Ask the fellow who quarterbacked for Michigan that day . His actions were too mystifying for the spectators to figure out . " When Harvard reneged on an agreement to play a game in Ann Arbor in 1915 , sports writers concluded it was to avoid facing Maulbetsch again . Said one reporter : " When faih Hahvahd [ sic ] saw what Maulbetsch did in the first clash , it decided it cared to see no more of him . He was too rough . "

Much of the attention on Maulbetsch focused on his diminutive size and unique running style . At 5 ft 7 in ( 1.70 m ) , and 155 lb ( 70 kg ) , Maulbetsch was a small back , even by the standards of his day . And his running style saw him bend his torso and propel himself like a projectile into the opposing line . Indeed , he won several nicknames based on his size , running style , and fighting spirit , including the " Human Bullet , " " Mauly " , the " Human Shrapnel " , the " Featherweight Fullback " , the " Michigan Cannon Ball , " and the " German bullet . " Comparisons of Maulbetsch to military armaments were common . In addition to the " bullet " , " shrapnel " , and " cannonball " nicknames , the Syracuse Herald observed : " Standing up in front of a Krupp gun has its dangers , but it is not to be compared with the dangers of standing in front of Maulbetsch when he is going full speed ahead . " Maulbetsch 's style was described as " line-plunging . " A New York newspaper noted : " When the ball is snapped to him he almost doubles himself up , and , with his head aimed at the knees of the opposing line , he dives head first . Those who have seen Maulbetsch in action marvel at the great momentum he can get up in two or three steps . " Noted football writer Walter Eckersall said : " Mauly is a little fellow , being built close to the ground . They say that when he plunges at the line his head is almost on a level with his shoe tops – that he hits so low that it 's well nigh impossible to stop him . " An Iowa newspaper wondered how it was possible " for a man to smash into a line of human bodies with the force that Maulbetsch does and come out of the game without a broken neck . "

Maulbetsch was said to run " so low that he could dash under an ordinary table without losing his feet . " At a coaching conference in the 1920s , a coach doubted the table-ducking story and challenged Maulbetsch . The doubter later recalled : " I began ribbing him about this table-ducking stuff and finally offered to bet him he couldn ’ t do it . Well , we got a table up in a room , Johnny tucked a water pitcher under his arm and backed against the wall . Darned if he didn ’ t do it , the only thing , that water pitcher broke in a million pieces . " Asked about the incident , Maulbetsch said it was true , except one part . Maulbetsch insisted there wasn ’ t a nick on the pitcher .

After the loss to Harvard in 1914 , Michigan rebounded with a 34 – 3 win over Penn . Walter Eckersall reported that the Wolverines were " led by the redoubtable Johnny Maulbetsch . " Despite being " a marked man " by the Penn defense , he was not thrown for a loss in the entire game , and he scored three touchdowns . Before Michigan lost to Cornell in the final game of the season , a scandal arose when it was revealed that the owner of an Ann Arbor pool room , Joe Reinger , had written a letter intimating that he could buy Maulbetsch and Michigan 's quarterback to throw the Cornell game , and win US $ 50,000 from students willing to bet on Michigan . The letter was turned in to the Michigan athletic officials , and Reinger went to the athletic office " to try to hush the matter up . " Reinger became abusive and was thrown out of the office by Coach Yost . The incident caused " the biggest stir of the season on the campus , " as students demolished Reinger 's pool room , and police had to guard Reinger 's residence against threatening demonstrations that continued to " a late hour . " Although Michigan did lose to Cornell , Maulbetsch was said to be " practically the only successful ground gainer for Michigan . " Over the course of the 1914 season , Maulbetsch was said to have scored about half of Michigan 's 252 points . A Wisconsin newspaper noted that , " when it comes time to write a resume of the 1914 football season " , Maulbetsch 's play " will live in the minds of men . . . for years to come . " As a reward for his efforts , Maulbetsch was named a first-team All-American at the end of the 1914 season .

As public attention focused on Maulbetsch as " the greatest line-plunger of a decade , " the press could not get enough of Maulbetsch , even interviewing his family . His sister revealed that Maulbetsch had a fondness for home cooking and received permission from the team trainer to eat at his family 's Ann Arbor home . " Now , Johnny 's sister explains that each day his mother baked two pies for the athlete 's supper , and that in addition he had everything else his appetite craved , including coffee . " Confronted by reporters about the revelation , Maulbetsch replied : " The story was slightly exaggerated . I rarely ate more than one and one half pies for dinner . " Joking references to Maulbetsch 's diet continued when it was reported in 1915 that he was suffering from " acute indigestion . " One reporter quipped , " Those much advertised pies of his maw 's evidently aren ’ t as great training dope as they were cracked up to be . " It turned out that the indigestion was appendicitis , and Maulbetsch was hospitalized at St. Joseph 's Sanitarium in Ann Arbor in April 1915 , where he underwent an operation .

As the 1915 season was set to get underway , Coach Yost reported , " Johnny told me he was feeling fine when I saw him recently , although he doesn ’ t weigh as much as he used to . " Despite Yost 's hopes , Maulbetsch fell far short of the prior year 's performance in 1915 . He was several pounds lighter after the illness and surgery , and it was noted that " a few pounds means much to a man of Maulbetsch 's weight . " In the opening game against Lawrence , Maulbetsch scored three touchdowns , but he was " woefully weak on interference . " Playing against Mount Union , Maulbetsch made several big gains , including a 50-yard touchdown run in the third quarter . His difficulties returned in the season 's third game against Marietta , as " Maulbetsch was powerless to stop the Marietta forward pass , all of the successful ones being directed toward his side of the line . " After The Michigan Daily criticized his performance following the Marietta game , Maulbetsch " threatened to desert the Michigan squad and give up football for good . " It reportedly took Yost several hours to coax Maulbetsch to report for practice again , and in the next game against Case , Maulbetsch did not play until the third quarter . In the season 's first big game , Michigan was soundly beaten by Michigan Agricultural College , 24 – 0 , and most of Maulbetsch 's runs " didn ’ t even get as far as his own line . " In the final four games of the season , matters got worse for Michigan and Maulbetsch , as the team went 0 – 3 – 1 , scoring only 14 points in four games .

In Maulbetsch 's defense , some writers noted the weakness of the Michigan line , often allowing rushers into the backfield before Maulbetsch even had the ball . But some of those same observers noted that " Mauly " was not carrying the ball " at his usual pace . " Sports writer Frank Menke described Maulbetsch 's 1915 performance this way : " [ The ] Wolverine halfback skidded from the heights of greatness to the level of mediocre . . . . The lines that he had crumpled like eggshells a year before stood up under his charges , often dumping him back for losses . The once ' unstoppable ' Maulbetsch not only was stopped but forced to retract . " Despite the subpar performance in 1915 , Michigan 's varsity letter-winners elected him captain of the team for 1916 .

Maulbetsch made a strong comeback in 1916 . Instead of spending the summer recovering from appendicitis , he spent the summer working as an assistant barkeeper on a steamship plying between Chicago and St. Joseph , Michigan . Maulbetsch spent his afternoons swimming and running sprints up and down the beach . On one trip , a giant coal passer claimed to be the strongest man in the world , and Maulbetsch agreed to a wrestling match on the boat . " The coal passer rushed the stripling , who ducked , caught his opponent about the waist and crushed him to the deck . When the giant woke , he wanted to know if the boat hit a rock . " As the season started , The New York Times wrote : " Michigan 's come-back football team , headed by Bullet Maulbetsch , is going to be an eleven to be reckoned with on the gridiron this Fall . " Maulbetsch returned to his prior form , and one of the writers who had criticized him in 1915 said " the great Michigander using the same method of attack , has repeatedly broken in fragments this year the lines that he couldn ’ t dent in 1915 . "

After the 1916 football season ended , Maulbetsch considered his options . There was a report that he had been engaged as a high school football coach ( and math instructor ) in Toledo , Ohio . Even more prevalent were reports that he had signed to play for a professional football team . Professional football was still in its infancy in 1917 , and landing a well-known star would have been a boost to any of the budding franchises . In January 1917 newspapers reported that Maulbetsch had signed a contract to play professional football for Detroit Tigers owner , Frank Navin . Navin was supporting efforts to organize a professional football league in all the important Midwestern cities , including a Detroit franchise to play at Navin Field . As late as November 1917 , newspapers reported Maulbetsch had played professional football after graduating and was offered " a handsome fee " to play with the Akron Burkhardts in November 1917 . Although professional football records prior to 1920 are scarce , it appears unlikely that Maulbetsch played professional football , as press accounts show he was working as a college football coach starting in 1917 .

In June 1917 , Maulbetsch announced that he had accepted a position as the football coach ( and professor of chemistry ) at Phillips University in Enid , Oklahoma . Phillips was a small , private school without a well-known athletic program . In the fall , Enid residents were " leaving their work every afternoon to watch [ Maulbetsch ] and his husky young Oklahoma youths work out on campus . " Within a year , Maulbetsch turned Phillips into one of the strongest teams in the southwest . Maulbetsch landed his first big recruit before leaving Ann Arbor . While playing at Michigan , Maulbetsch became friends with Doug Roby , a football player at the Michigan Military Academy , and one of the state 's top recruits . Roby followed Maulbetsch to Phillips and later went on to become a member of the International Olympic Committee in the 1950s and 1960s and president of the United States Olympic Committee from 1965 to 1968 . Maulbetsch 's next find was future Pro Football Hall of Famer Steve Owen , who later spent 23 years with the New York Giants . Maulbetsch saw Owen watching football practice from under a tree and told him : " A fellow your size ought to be out for the squad . " Owen showed up the next day and , when Maulbetsch used him to illustrate blocking fundamentals , Owen threw a block into Maulbetsch that threw him five yards through the air . Maulbetsch was satisfied , and Owen had a spot on the team . Because Phillips was not part of a conference , it was not subject to any eligibility limitations , an advantage Maulbetsch was accused of exploiting . A third key player recruited by Maulbetsch was an Native American halfback named Levi , and dubbed " Big Chief " by Phillips fans .

Having recruited top talent to Enid , Maulbetsch 's teams lost only one game in 1918 and 1919 , including a 10 – 0 – 1 record in 1919 . In 1917 and 1918 , Phillips came into the limelight when they beat the Oklahoma Sooners and the Henry Kendricks College team that had swept the west without allowing another team to score . Maulbetsch arranged a game against the Texas Longhorns in 1919 , the first meeting between the schools . When the game was announced The San Antonio Light reported : " Phillips University has one of the strongest teams in the Southwest . The only team to beat them in the past two years is Oklahoma and last year Phillips beat the Sooners 13 – 7 . " The report credited Maulbetsch for securing success at an institution little known in athletics before he arrived . The University of Texas had not lost a game since 1917 when the Phillips " Haymakers " arrived in Austin , Texas on October 11 , 1919 . Maulbetsch 's team shocked the Longhorns , holding them scoreless and winning the contest , 10 – 0 . One Texas newspaper reported that Phillips had " whitewashed the Longhorns in their own corral . "

Others in Texas concluded that Phillips ’ success was the result of lax or non-existent eligibility policies . The lack of eligibility rules almost certainly did play a part in Phillips ’ success . When Phillips joined the Southwest Conference in 1920 , it became bound by the conference 's eligibility rules , and the team was outscored 97 – 0 in conference play against Texas A & M ( 47 – 0 ) , Texas ( 27 – 0 ) , Arkansas ( 20 – 0 ) , and Texas Christian ( 3 – 0 ) . The Galveston Daily News noted that Maulbetsch 's 1920 team could not " compare with the strong team " he surprised Texas with in 1919 . At the end of the 1920 season , Phillips withdrew from the Southwest Conference , and Maulbetsch accepted a new position at Oklahoma A & M.

In January 1921 , Maulbetsch was hired as the head coach at Oklahoma Agricultural and Mechanical College ( now Oklahoma State ) in Stillwater , Oklahoma . He served as the coach at Oklahoma A & M from 1921 to 1928 , where his teams posted a 28 – 37 – 6 ( .437 ) record . In 1924 , his team went 6 – 1 – 2 and shut out Oklahoma ( 6 – 0 ) , Arkansas ( 20 – 0 ) and Kansas ( 3 – 0 ) . Maulbetsch 's Aggies also shut out Phillips that year , 13 – 0 . After the season , attempts were made to lure him to Washington University in St. Louis , Missouri , but Maulbetsch said he was satisfied with his position in Stillwater . Maulbetsch arranged a game in Ann Arbor against his alma mater to start the 1926 season . Michigan beat the Aggies , 42 – 3 . Despite an overall record of 3 – 4 – 1 , Oklahoma A & M won its first conference football championship by going 3 – 0 – 1 in games against Missouri Valley Intercollegiate Athletic Association opponents . Maulbetsch also drew attention in 1926 for his disciplinary methods . When the team lost two games due to fumbles , he ordered eight of his backfield players to carry footballs with them to classes throughout the week and instructed other team members to try knocking the balls from under their arms . The penalty for losing a ball was " a hard run around the stadium . " He also ordered one of his ends to wear boxing gloves after he poked an opposing player in the eye .

The Aggies won only one game against seven defeats in 1928 . In late November , the day after a 46 – 0 loss to Oklahoma , newspapers reported that " reliable sources " had said Maulbetsch intended to resign . Maulbetsch immediately denied the rumor , saying : " I have not resigned . I am aware that a faction here is trying to get me out , but I do not intend to throw up the sponge . " In December , pressure to fire Maulbetsch grew , and one Oklahoma newspaper observed : " Coach Maulbetsch of the A. & M. football team is the object of attacks from many sides because of the rather poor showing made by his team during the past season . They are looking for a goat and just now Johnnie is cast in that role . Regardless of his past record , those who demand victory at any price and by any means whatsoever , are insisting that he be fired forthwith and a man be placed in the position who , by fair means or foul , will gather in a team that will win victories and never lose a game . " Ultimately , Maulbetsch resigned at the end of May 1929 as Oklahoma A & M 's coach in football , baseball , and basketball . It was announced that he would spend the remaining year of his contract on a leave of absence at half pay .

In July 1929 , Maulbetsch was hired by Marshall College in Huntington , West Virginia to become head coach in charge of football and track . When Marshall 's " Thundering Herd " got off to a 4 – 1 start , Maulbetsch won praise in the West Virginia press , but Marshall finished the season 1 – 2 – 1 in the second half . And in 1930 , the Marshall team went 3 – 5 – 1 , including a 65 – 0 loss to Penn State . Maulbetsch resigned as Marshall 's coach in January 1931 ; his only comment at the time was that he had " other plans . "

After retiring from football , Maulbetsch bought a drug store in Huntington , West Virginia . During World War II , Maulbetsch took a job building B-24 Liberator bombers at Ford Motor Company 's famed Willow Run Plant near Ypsilanti , Michigan . From 1946 until his death , he owned an automobile sales company in Adrian , Michigan . Maulbetsch died of cancer in 1950 at his home in Ann Arbor . He was survived by his widow , Ida , a son John Maulbetsch , and a daughter Barbara . Maulbetsch had been married to Ida ( maiden name Ida Elizabeth Cappon ) since May 27 , 1917 . Maulbetsch was inducted posthumously into the College Football Hall of Fame in 1973 . Since 1956 , the John F. Maulbetsch Award has been given at the University of Michigan after spring practice to a freshman football candidate on the basis of desire , character , capacity for leadership and future success both on and off the football field . The award was established by Frederick C. Matthaei – a former classmate of Maulbetsch who went on to become a Regent of the University . The award has been a good indicator of future success , as past recipients include Jim Mandich ( 1967 ) , Rick Leach ( 1976 ) , Charles Woodson ( 1996 ) , Marlin Jackson ( 2002 ) , and Jake Long ( 2004 ) . Maulbetsch Avenue in Ypsilanti Township is presumably named after Maulbetsch .

The Order of Canada ( French : Ordre du Canada ) is a Canadian national order , admission into which is the second highest honour for merit in the system of orders , decorations , and medals of Canada . It comes second only to membership in the Order of Merit , which is the personal gift of Canada 's monarch . To coincide with the centennial of Canadian Confederation , the three-tiered order was established in 1967 as a fellowship that recognizes the outstanding merit or distinguished service of Canadians who make a major difference to Canada through lifelong contributions in every field of endeavour , as well as the efforts by non-Canadians who have made the world better by their actions . Membership is accorded to those who exemplify the order 's Latin motto , desiderantes meliorem patriam , meaning " they desire a better country " , a phrase taken from Hebrews 11 : 16 . The three tiers of the order are Companion , Officer , and Member ; specific individuals may be given extraordinary membership and deserving non-Canadians may receive honorary appointment into each grade . The monarch — at present Elizabeth II — is Sovereign of the order and the serving governor general , currently David Lloyd Johnston , is its Chancellor and Principal Companion and administers the order on behalf of the reigning king or queen . Appointees to the order are recommended by an advisory board and formally inducted by the governor general or the sovereign . As of October 2015 , 6,531 people have been appointed to the Order of Canada , including scientists , musicians , politicians , artists , athletes , business people , and film stars , benefactors , and others . Some have resigned or have been removed from the order , while other appointments have been controversial . Appointees are presented with insignia and receive the right to armorial bearings .

The process of founding the Order of Canada began in early 1966 and came to a conclusion on 17 April 1967 , when the organization was instituted by Queen Elizabeth II , on the advice of the Canadian prime minister , Lester B. Pearson , who was assisted with the establishment of the order by John Matheson . The association was officially launched on 1 July 1967 , the 100th anniversary of Canadian Confederation , with Governor General Roland Michener being the first inductee to the order — to the level of Companion — and on 7 July of the same year , 90 more people were appointed , including Vincent Massey , Louis St. Laurent , Hugh MacLennan , David Bauer , Gabrielle Roy , Donald Creighton , Thérèse Casgrain , Wilder Penfield , Arthur Lismer , M. J. Coldwell , Edwin Baker , Alex Colville , and Maurice Richard . During a visit to London , United Kingdom , later in 1967 , Michener presented the Queen with her Sovereign 's badge for the Order of Canada , which she first wore during a banquet in Yellowknife in July 1970 . From the Order of Canada grew a Canadian honours system , thereby reducing the use of British honours ( i.e. those administered by the Queen in her British privy council ) . Among the civilian awards of the Canadian honours system , the Order of Canada comes third , after the Cross of Valour and membership in the Order of Merit , which is within the personal gift of Canada 's monarch . By the 1980s , Canada 's provinces began to develop their own distinct honours and decorations .

The Canadian monarch , seen as the fount of honour , is at the apex of the Order of Canada as its Sovereign , followed by the governor general , who serves as the fellowship 's Chancellor . Thereafter follow three grades , which are , in order of precedence : Companion , Officer , and Member , each having accordant post-nominal letters that members are entitled to use ; each incumbent governor general is also installed as the Principal Companion for the duration of his or her time in the viceregal post . Additionally , any governor general , viceregal consort , former governor general , former viceregal consort , or member of the Canadian Royal Family may be appointed as an extraordinary Companion , Officer , or Member . Promotions in grade are possible , though this is ordinarily not done within five years of the initial appointment , and a maximum of five honorary appointments into any of the three grades may be made by the governor general each year . As of March 2016 , there have been twenty one honorary appointments . There were originally , in effect , only two ranks to the Order of Canada : Companion and the Medal of Service . There was , however , also a third award , the Medal of Courage , meant to recognize acts of gallantry . This latter decoration fell in rank between the other two levels , but was anomalous within the Order of Canada , being a separate award of a different nature rather than a middle grade of the order . Without ever having been awarded , the Medal of Courage was on 1 July 1972 replaced by the autonomous Cross of Valour and , at the same time , the levels of Officer and Member were introduced , with all existing holders of the Medal of Service created as Officers . Lester Pearson 's vision of a three-tiered structure to the order was thus fulfilled .

Companions of the Order of Canada ( post-nominals : CC , in French : Compagnon de l 'ordre du Canada ) have demonstrated the highest degree of merit to Canada and humanity , on either the national or international scene . Up to 15 Companions are appointed annually , with an imposed limit of 165 living Companions at any given time , not including those appointed as extraordinary Companions or in an honorary capacity . As of October 2015 , there are 143 living Companions , none being honorary . Since 1994 , substantive members are the only regular citizens who are empowered to administer the Canadian Oath of Citizenship . Officers of the Order of Canada ( post-nominals : OC , in French : Officier de l 'ordre du Canada ) have demonstrated an outstanding level of talent and service to Canadians , and up to 64 may be appointed each year , not including those inducted as extraordinary Officers or in an honorary capacity , with no limit to how many may be living at one time . As of October 2015 , there were 1,123 living Officers , none being honorary . Members of the Order of Canada ( post-nominals : CM , in French : Membre de l 'ordre du Canada ) have made an exceptional contribution to Canada or Canadians at a local or regional level , group , field or activity . As many as 136 Members may be appointed annually , not including extraordinary Members and those inducted on an honorary basis , and there is no limit on how many Members may be living at one time . As of October 2015 , there were 2,225 living Members , none being honorary .

Upon admission into the Order of Canada , members are given various insignia of the organization , all designed by Bruce W. Beatty , who " broke new ground in the design of insignia of Orders within The Queen 's realms " and was himself made a member of the order in 1990 ; Beatty attended every investiture ceremony between 1967 and early 2010 . The badge belonging to the Sovereign consists of a jewelled , 18-carat gold crown of rubies , emeralds , and sapphires , from which is suspended a white , enamelled , hexagonal snowflake design , with six equal leaves and diamonds between each . At the centre is a disc bearing a maple leaf in pavé-laid rubies on a white enamel background , surrounded at its edge by a red enamel ring ( annulus ) bearing the motto of the order . The Chancellor wears the badge of a Companion and is , upon installation as governor general , granted a livery collar for wear at Order of Canada investiture ceremonies . The badges for inductees are of a similar design to the sovereign 's badge , though without precious stones , and slight differences for each grade . For Companions , the emblem is gilt with a red enamel maple leaf in the central disk ; for Officers , it is gilt with a gold maple leaf ; and for Members , both the badge itself and the maple leaf are silver . All are topped by a St. Edward 's Crown , symbolizing that the order is headed by the sovereign , and the reverse is plain except for the word CANADA .

The ribbon is white and bordered in red stripes , similar to the Canadian national flag ; the chest ribbon is the same for each grade , save for a metallic maple leaf in the centre , the colour of which matches that on the badge of the grade that the wearer was appointed to . For civilian wear , a lapel pin is worn on the jacket , which is designed as a miniature of the medallion . Wear of the insignia is according to guidelines issued by the Chancellery of Honours , which stipulate that the badges be worn before most other national orders — that is , at the end of an individual 's medal bar closest to the centre of the chest or at the wearer 's neck — with only the Victoria Cross , the Cross of Valour , and the badge of the Order of Merit permitted to be worn before the badges of the Order of Canada . Those in the grades of Companion or Officer may wear their badges on a neck ribbon , while those in the Member group display their insignia suspended by a ribbon from a medal bar on the left chest . Protocol originally followed the British tradition , wherein female appointees wore their Order of Canada emblem on a ribbon bow positioned on the left shoulder . These regulations were altered in 1997 , and women may wear their insignia in either the traditional manner or in the same fashion as the men .

With the patriation in 1988 of oversight of arms to Canada through the Canadian Heraldic Authority , the constitution of the Order of Canada was amended to include the entitlement of all inductees to petition the Chief Herald of Canada for personal armorial bearings , should they not already possess any . Companions may receive supporters , and all members may have the escutcheon ( shield ) of their arms encircled with a red ribbon bearing the order 's motto in gold , and from which is suspended a rendition of the holder 's Order of Canada badge . The Queen , Sovereign of the Order of Canada , approved the augmentation of her royal arms for Canada with the order 's ribbon in 1987 .

The constitution of the Order of Canada states that the insignia remain property of the Crown , and requires any member of the order to return to the chancellery their original emblem should they be upgraded within the order to a higher rank . Thus , while badges may be passed down as family heirlooms , or loaned or donated for display in museums , they cannot be sold by any individual other than the monarch with the proper advice and consent of her ministers . Over the decades , however , a number of Order of Canada insignia have been put up for sale , the first being the Companion 's badge of Major Coldwell , who was appointed in 1967 ; his badge was sold at auction in 1981 , an act that received criticism from government officials . In 2007 , it was revealed that one of the first ever issued insignia of the Order of Canada , a Medal of Service awarded originally to Quebec historian Gustave Lanctot , was put up for sale via e-mail . Originally , the anonymous auctioneer , who had purchased the decoration for $ 45 at an estate sale in Montreal , attempted to sell the insignia on eBay ; however , after the bidding reached $ 15,000 , eBay removed the item , citing its policy against the sale of government property , including " any die , seal or stamp provided by , belonging to , or used by a government department , diplomatic or military authority appointed by or acting under the authority of Her Majesty . " Rideau Hall stated that selling medals was " highly discouraged " , however the owner continued efforts to sell the insignia via the internet . Five years later , a miniature insignia presented to Tommy Douglas was put on auction in Ontario as part of a larger collection of Douglas artifacts . Douglas 's daughter , Shirley Douglas , purchased the set for $ 20,000 .

Any of the three levels of the Order of Canada are open to all living Canadian citizens , except all federal and provincial politicians and judges while they hold office . The order recognizes the achievement of outstanding merit or distinguished service by Canadians who made a major difference to Canada through lifelong contributions in every field of endeavour , as well as the efforts made by non-Canadians who have made the world better by their actions . Membership is thus accorded to those who exemplify the order 's Latin motto , taken from Hebrews 11 : 16 of the Bible , desiderantes meliorem patriam , meaning " they desire a better country . " Each of the six to eight hundred nominations submitted each year , by any person or organization , is received by the order 's Advisory Council , which , along with the governor general , makes the final choice of new inductees , typically by consensus rather than a vote ; a process that , when conceived , was the first of its kind in the world . Appointees are then accepted into the organization at an investiture ceremony typically conducted by the governor general at Rideau Hall , although the Queen or a provincial viceroy may perform the task , and the ceremony may take place in other locations . Since the 1991 investiture of Ted Rogers , Order of Canada instalment ceremonies have been broadcast on various television channels and the Internet ; recipients are given a complimentary video recording of their investiture ceremony from Rogers Cable .

The task of the Advisory Council is to evaluate the nominations of potential inductees , decide if the candidates are worthy enough to be accepted into the order , and make recommendations to the governor general , who appoints the new members . The council is chaired by the Chief Justice of Canada , and includes the Clerk of the Queen 's Privy Council , the Deputy Minister of Canadian Heritage , the Chair of the Canada Council for the Arts , the President of the Royal Society of Canada , the Chair of the Association of Universities and Colleges of Canada , and five members of the order who sit on the council for a three-year period . If a nomination involves a non-Canadian citizen , the Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs is invited by the Advisory Council to offer evaluation . Decisions of the council and new appointments to and dismissals from the Order of Canada are announced to the Canada Gazette .

Few have declined entry into the Order of Canada ; as of 1997 , 1.5 percent of offered appointments to the order had been refused . The identities of those individuals who have declined induction since the 1970s are kept confidential , so the full list is not publicly known . Some , however , have spoken openly about their decisions , including Robert Weaver , who stated that he was critical of the " three-tier " nature of the order ; Claude Ryan and Morley Callaghan , who both declined the honour in 1967 ; Mordecai Richler , who twice declined ; and Marcel Dubé , Roger Lemelin , and Glenn Gould , who all declined in 1970 . However , all the above individuals , save for Gould and Weaver , later did accept appointment into the order . Others have rejected appointment on the basis of being supporters of the Quebec sovereignty movement — such as Luc-André Godbout , Rina Lasnier , and Geneviève Bujold — while Alice Parizeau , another supporter of Quebec sovereignty , was criticized for accepting entry into the order despite her beliefs . Victoria Cross recipient Cecil Meritt cited the fact that he already held Canada 's highest decoration as a reason not to be admitted to the Order of Canada . Prince Philip , Duke of Edinburgh , was in 1982 offered appointment to the order as an honorary Companion ; however , he refused on the grounds that , as the consort of the Queen , he was a Canadian and thus entitled to a substantive appointment . In 1993 , the Advisory Council proposed an amendment to the constitution of the Order of Canada , making the sovereign 's spouse automatically a Companion , but Prince Philip again refused , stating that if he was to be appointed , it should be on his merits . Congruent with these arguments , he in 1988 accepted without issue a substantive induction as a Companion of the Order of Australia . In 2013 , the constitution of the Order of Canada was amended in a way that permitted the substantive appointment of Royal Family members and Prince Philip accepted induction as the first extraordinary Companion of the Order of Canada on 26 April 2013 . Former Premier of Newfoundland Joey Smallwood declined appointment as a Companion because he felt that , as a self-proclaimed Father of Confederation , he deserved a knighthood . Smallwood was never knighted and later accepted induction as a Companion .

Resignations from the order can take place only through the prescribed channels , which include the member submitting to the Secretary General of the Order of Canada a letter notifying the chancellery of his or her desire to terminate their membership , and only with the governor general 's approval can the resignation take effect . On 1 June 2009 , the governor general accepted the resignations of astronomer and inventor René Racine , pianist Jacqueline Richard , and Cardinal Jean-Claude Turcotte ; on 11 January 2010 , did the same for Renato Giuseppe Bosisio , an engineering professor , and Father Lucien Larré ; and on 19 April 2010 for Frank Chauvin . It was also reported that other constituents of the Order of Canada had , in reaction to Henry Morgentaler 's induction into their ranks , indicated that they would return or had returned their emblems in protest , including organizations such as the Missionary Oblates of Mary Immaculate and Madonna House Apostolate doing so on behalf of deceased former members . Members may be removed from the order if the Advisory Council feels their actions have brought the society into disrepute . In order for this to be done , the council must agree to take action and then send a letter to the person both telling of the group 's decision and requesting a response . Anyone removed from the order is required to return their insignia . As of October 2015 , six people have been removed from the Order of Canada : Alan Eagleson , who was dismissed after being jailed for fraud in 1998 ; David Ahenakew , who faced calls for his removal due to anti-Semitic comments he made in 2002 ; T. Sher Singh , after the Law Society of Upper Canada found him guilty of professional misconduct and revoked his license to practice law ; Steve Fonyo , due to " his multiple criminal convictions , for which there are no outstanding appeals " ; Garth Drabinsky , who was found guilty of fraud and forgery in Ontario and has been a fugitive from American law for related crimes ; and Lord Black of Crossharbour , who was convicted in the United States in 2007 of fraud and obstruction of justice . In 2013 , Norman Barwin resigned from the order as a result of the Advisory Council moving forward with his pending removal due to his being found guilty of professional misconduct .

The advisory board attempts to remain apolitical and pragmatic in its approach to selecting new members of the Order of Canada , generally operating without input from ministers of the Crown ; political interference has occurred only once , when in 1978 Paul Desmarais 's investiture was delayed for six months by Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau . However , some of the committee 's selections have caused controversy . For instance , the admission in 2001 of sex educator Sue Johanson , host of the long-running Sunday Night Sex Show , as a Member stirred controversy among some of Canada 's Christian organizations , as Johanson had taught teenagers methods of safe sex alongside abstinence . Similarly , the acceptance of birth control advocate Elizabeth Bagshaw and gay rights campaigner Brent Hawkes also incited debate . Abortion activist Henry Morgentaler 's appointment to the order on 1 July 2008 not only marked the first time the Advisory Council had not been unanimous in its decision , but also proved to be one of the most controversial appointments in the order 's history , drawing both praise from abortion rights groups and the ire of Members of Parliament , groups opposing abortion , and religious leaders . The latter organized protests outside of Rideau Hall on 9 July , while compatriots did the same in front of Government House in St. John 's , Newfoundland and Labrador , the official residence of that province 's lieutenant governor . Several members of the order resigned or returned their insignia .

One former police detective , Frank Chauvin , along with a Catholic anti-abortion activist , filed suit against the Order of Canada Advisory Council , demanding that the minutes of the meeting relating to Morgentaler be made public . The appointment of Morgentaler prompted former Liberal Member of Parliament Clifford Lincoln to write that the workings of the Advisory Council were " mysterious " , citing what he theorized to be inbuilt partiality and conflict of interest as reasons why Margaret Somerville , whom Lincoln had twice nominated to the Advisory Council , was turned down for appointment , yet Morgentaler was accepted . Journalist Henry Aubin in the Montreal Gazette opined that the council 's rejection of Somerville , her personal opposition to same-sex marriage , and the acceptance of Brent Hawkes , Jane Rule , and Jean Chrétien , all regarded as supporting same-sex unions , as well as the appointment of a controversial figure such as Morgentaler , were all signs that the Advisory Council operated with partisan bias . Aubin also pointed to the presence on the council of members of the Royal Society of Canada , an organization into which Somerville was received .

At a 2006 conference on Commonwealth honours , Christopher McCreery , an expert on Canada 's honours , raised the concern that the three grades of the Order of Canada were insufficient to recognize the nation 's very best ; one suggestion was to add two more levels to the order , equivalent to knighthoods in Australian and British orders . The order of precedence also came under scrutiny , particularly the anomaly that all three grades of the Order of Canada supersede the top levels of each of the other orders ( except the Order of Merit ) , contrary to international practice . In June 2010 , McCreery suggested reforms to the Order of Canada that would avert the awkwardness around appointing those in Canada 's royal family as full members of the order : He theorized that the Queen , as the order 's Sovereign , could simply appoint , on ministerial advice , anyone as an extra member , or the monarch could issue an ordinance allowing for her relations to be made regular members when approved . Similarly , McCreery proposed that a new division of the order could be established specifically for governors general , their spouses , and members of the Royal Family , a version of which was adopted in 2013 .

King 's Highway 403 ( pronounced " four-oh-three " ) , or simply Highway 403 , is a 400-series highway in the Canadian province of Ontario that travels between Woodstock and Mississauga , branching off from and reuniting with Highway 401 at both ends and travelling south of it through Hamilton and Mississauga . It is concurrent with the Queen Elizabeth Way ( QEW ) for 22 km ( 14 mi ) from Burlington to Oakville . Highway 403 is also known as the Chedoke Expressway within Hamilton . Although the Highway 403 designation was first applied in 1963 to a short stub of freeway branching off of the QEW , the entire route was not completed until August 15 , 1997 , when the Brantford to the then-still independent Town of Ancaster section was opened to traffic . The section of Highway 403 between Woodstock and Burlington was formally dedicated as the Alexander Graham Bell Parkway on April 27 , 2016 . The majority of Highway 403 is surrounded by suburban land use , except west of Ancaster , where it passes through agricultural land ; Brantford is the only urban area through this section . In Hamilton , Highway 403 descends the Niagara Escarpment . It wraps around the northern side of Burlington Bay to encounter the QEW . From there , it travels straight through Burlington and Oakville with the QEW , departing to the north at the Mississauga – Oakville boundary . The freeway then crosses through the centre of Mississauga in an east – west direction , serving its city centre , before turning north . It continues north of Highway 401 as Highway 410 .

Highway 403 begins at a junction with Highway 401 on the outskirts of Woodstock . The eastbound lanes split from eastbound Highway 401 , whereas the westbound lanes merge into westbound Highway 401 . It travels along the back lot lines of the second concession south of former Highway 2 . It passes beneath Oxford County Road 55 ( formerly Highway 53 ) and curves southeast . After crossing into the third concession , it curves back to the east . The highway travels straight for several kilometres , meeting with the southern leg of Highway 24 , which travels south to Simcoe . The highway crosses the Grand River to the south of Paris , then passes over former Highway 2 as it enters into Brantford . As it passes through Brantford , the highway angles southeast and passes beneath the northern leg of Highway 24 and then the Wayne Gretzky Parkway . The route exits the small city to the east and curves northeast shortly thereafter . It travels between Jerseyville Road and former Highway 2 to Ancaster , jogging to avoid cutting through Dunmark Lake . As the freeway enters Ancaster , it once again crosses former Highway 2 and dips through the southern side of the town .

East of Ancaster , the freeway passes through a short greenbelt , with Hamilton Golf and Country Club lying to the north . A divided segment of Highway 6 meets the freeway and continues concurrently with it through Hamilton ; to the south , Highway 6 travels to John C. Munro International Airport , Caledonia and Jarvis at Highway 3 . Continuing east , Highway 403 and Highway 6 curve north into Hamilton and meet the Lincoln M. Alexander Parkway before abruptly curving to the east and descending the Niagara Escarpment . Scenic views of Hamilton , its harbour , and Lower Princess Falls are located along this steep descent . At the bottom of the escarpment the highway travels through a narrow , heavily developed corridor alongside former Highway 8 . It passes beneath multiple bridges in a depressed trench , eventually curving north at a sharp corner and passing beneath more bridges . This section features a reduced speed limit of 80 km / h ( 50 mph ) as opposed to 100 km / h ( 60 mph ) . The highway returns to ground level alongside the Chedoke Creek , a now-channelized river from which the freeway may take its name .

Highway 403 travels concurrently with the QEW for 22.6 km ( 14.0 mi ) between Freeman and Oakville , a straight section surrounded almost entirely by commercial units and warehouses . At the Ford Assembly Plant near the Halton – Peel regional boundary , Highway 403 branches off from the QEW and heads north for 5 km ( 3.1 mi ) along the western edge of Mississauga . At that point it again meets Highway 407 . Both freeways interchange , but curve to avoid each other . Highway 407 continues to the north and west , while Highway 403 curves east to follow alongside a hydro corridor through the centre of Mississauga . From this interchange to Highway 401 , high-occupancy vehicle ( HOV ) lanes are present in the shoulder lanes for vehicles with at least one passenger . Sandwiched between residential subdivisions on both sides , the freeway passes beneath Erin Mills Parkway and crosses the Credit River . On the other side of the river , the freeway skirts to the north of downtown Mississauga , as well as the Square One Shopping Centre . It passes beneath Hurontario Street ( once a section of Highway 10 ) and begins to widen before abruptly curving to the north as it approaches Cawthra Road . As the curve ends , the freeway widens further into ten lanes . This short section of highway passes beneath Eglinton Avenue and begins to diverge into a sprawling interchange approaching Highway 401 . Access to Highway 410 , which continues northward to Brampton , is provided from the collector lanes .

Highway 403 , although one of the first divided highways conceived for Ontario , is one of the most recently completed freeways in the province ; the multiple segments of the route did not become continuous until 2002 . Planning for the route was underway by 1958 , with the completion of the Freeman Bypass along the QEW providing a three-legged junction for the new freeway . Sections of Highway 403 through Hamilton opened between December 1963 and September 1969 . An isolated section known as the Brantford Bypass was opened in October 1966 , and would remain unconnected to other freeways for over 20 years . Plans for a third segment through Mississauga were contemplated throughout the 1960s , but were not finalized until late 1977 , after which construction began . Portions opened at both ends in 1980 and 1981 , while the central gap , crossing the Credit River , was completed in December 1982 . Construction to bridge the gaps in Highway 403 between Ancaster and Woodstock was carried out over three major phases . The first phase was a short extension of the Brantford Bypass beginning in 1975 . Later , work began to connect that extension with Highway 401 near Woodstock , opening in 1988 . The last phase , between Ancaster and Brantford , was opened in 1997 . The final discontinuity , between Burlington and Oakville , was signed as a concurrency with the QEW in 2002 . Originally , this section was to have travelled along the corridor occupied by Highway 407 , until budget shortfalls in 1995 resulted in a change of plans .

The corridor that connects London and Hamilton has always been considered important to Ontario . In late October 1793 , Captain Smith and 100 Queen 's Rangers returned from carving The Governor 's Road 32 km ( 20 mi ) through the thick forests between Dundas and the present location of Paris . John Graves Simcoe was tasked with defending Upper Canada from America following the revolution and with opening the virgin territory to settlement . After establishing a " temporary " capital at York , Simcoe ordered an inland route constructed between Cootes Paradise at the tip of Lake Ontario and his proposed capital of London . By the spring of 1794 , the road was extended as far as La Tranche , now the Thames River . Today , most of this route forms part of former Highway 2 and former Highway 5 . The paving of the divided four-lane Middle Road , with gentle curves , a grass median and grade-separated interchanges , would set the stage for the freeway concept . It was the first intercity freeway in North America when it opened in June 1939 . Thomas McQueston , the new minister of the Department of Highways and the man most responsible for the Middle Road , decided to apply the concept to sections of Highway 2 plagued with congestion . A portion east of Woodstock was rebuilt in this fashion , but World War II would put an end to the ambitions of McQueston , at least temporarily .

The end of the Korean War heralded the resuming of freeway construction in Ontario ; the advances in machinery more than made up for lost time . The construction of Highway 401 across the province took first priority . However , the opening of the section from Highway 4 near London to Highway 2 east of Woodstock on May 31 , 1957 would complete part of the route required between London and Hamilton . By 1958 , planning on the Chedoke Expressway , or Controlled Access Highway 403 was well underway , though plans for a four lane freeway between Woodstock and Hamilton were around as early as 1954 . The opening of the Freeman Bypass of the QEW in August 1958 provided a connection point for a new freeway , and construction began the same day that the Burlington Bay Skyway opened : October 31 , 1958 . Highway 403 between Longwood Road ( Highway 2 ) and the QEW was opened to traffic on December 1 , 1963 at a length of 9.0 km ( 5.6 mi ) . Work was already underway on the next section of the route that would extend it to Aberdeen Avenue . That section opened on July 9 , 1965 , extending the freeway by 3.7 km ( 2.3 mi ) .

Meanwhile , to the west , work had begun on a bypass of Brantford . The new freeway passed north of the city between Paris Road in the west and the junction of Highway 2 and Highway 53 in the east , a distance of 10.3 km ( 6.4 mi ) ; it opened October 31 , 1966 . A portion of the Brantford Bypass was itself bypassed in 1997 when the final section of Highway 403 was completed and is known as Garden Avenue . However , the Brantford Bypass would remain an isolated section of Highway 403 for over 20 years . In Hamilton , work was underway on an extension of the Chedoke Expressway to Mohawk Road , crossing the Niagara Escarpment . This tedious project , which required extensive rock blasting , was soon accompanied by further construction from Mohawk Road to Highway 2 near Ancaster . Both projects were completed together and originally scheduled to be opened with a ribbon-cutting ceremony on August 22 , 1969 . However , local residents complained that the new section lacked any barriers preventing children from wandering onto the highway , postponing the ceremony until August 27 as temporary snow fencing was erected . This proved inadequate and protests grew more vocal over the following week . Several petitions were presented to Deputy Highway Minister H. Howden on August 26 , and the ceremonies were promptly cancelled . Over the following week , the Minister of Highways George Gomme met with residents and reached a compromise whereby a 24 – hour patrol was established to watch for children until a proper fence could be constructed . The route was subsequently opened on September 3 , without any ceremony . This completed the Hamilton section of Highway 403 .

Planning for the segment of Highway 403 through Mississauga dates back to the late 1950s when the Hamilton Expressway appeared on the Metropolitan Toronto 's regional transportation plan . It was to be a continuation of the Richview Expressway , which was ultimately never built , continuing from Toronto to Hamilton . The plan featured the expressway 's eastern terminus at the Highway 401 and Highway 427 interchange . As Toronto 's anti-expressway movement gained momentum , provincial plans shifted the Hamilton Expressway to the west near Etobicoke Creek . In 1962 , the right-of-way alongside the hydro corridor between Burlington and Etobicoke Creek was protected after traffic studies indicated the need for a future freeway . On May 25 , 1965 , the Department of Highways unveiled the Toronto Region Western Section Highway Planning Study . The plan designated Highway 403 north from Burlington and then parallel with the QEW to Highway 401 near Highway 27 . By the time construction was actually underway , plans had been completely modified to connect the overburdened QEW at Oakville with Highway 401 at the new Highway 410 interchange . This interchange was a better connection point for Highway 403 , but would also require the widening of Highway 401 from six lanes to twelve . Plans were submitted and approved in December 1977 by Mississauga city council , and construction began .

The new freeway opened in sections during the early 1980s . The first section between Cawthra Road and Highway 401 was opened August 18 , 1980 . This was followed by a short section from Highway 5 ( Dundas Street ) south to the QEW at Ford Drive , which opened in mid-1981 . Later that year , an extension to Erin Mills Parkway was opened on November 17 , 1981 . The final section to be opened took the longest to complete , involving construction of two bridges over the Credit River valley ; it opened on December 2 , 1982 . The cost of the entire 22 km ( 13.7 mi ) Mississauga segment was $ 87 million . Around the same period , the Ministry of Transportation began to study upgrading Highway 401 to a collector – express system between Renforth Drive and Highway 403 , and along Highway 403 between Highway 401 and Highway 10 . This took place between late 1982 and the summer of 1985 ; the existing outermost ramps from Highway 403 to Highway 401 eastbound were re-designated to serve collector traffic , as a pair of flyover ramps were added inside the interchange to serve motorists in the express lanes .

The right-of-way originally intended for Highway 403 between Cawthra Road and Etobicoke Creek was eventually used for a controlled access arterial extension called Eastgate Parkway , which was planned beginning in 1982 . The extension was built between 1988 and 1994 , incorporating a portion of Fieldgate Drive at the eastern end . The first section , between Cawthra Road and Dixie Road , opened in early 1991 . This was followed several years later by the section from Dixie Road to Eglinton Avenue that opened in late 1994 . In the fall of 1991 , alongside the widening of Highway 410 into a full freeway , construction began on the connecting ramps between Highway 403 and Highway 410 , which pass under the existing bridge structures for Highway 401 collector traffic , while new overpasses were constructed in the centre for Highway 401 express lanes . The loop ramp from Highway 410 southbound to Highway 401 eastbound was replaced by a semi-directional high-speed flyover , while a new directional ramp and semi-direction flyover were added to serve westbound Highway 401 commuters . Prior to the opening of this link , traffic from both freeways was forced onto eastbound Highway 401 . The 2.2 km ( 1.4 mi ) link opened on November 2 , 1992 at a cost of $ 7.3 million .

In 1975 , construction began on a westward extension of the Brantford Bypass , from Highway 2 ( Paris Road ) to Rest Acres Road , which would become Highway 24 . This work consisted of the twin bridges over the Grand River and an interchange at Rest Acres Road . The Canadian National Railway underpass west of Highway 2 was built by the railway . By the beginning of 1978 , this work was completed . Work resumed west of Highway 24 during the spring of 1982 to connect with Highway 401 near Woodstock in order to relieve the high traffic volumes along Highway 2 . This included interchanges at Brant County Road 25 and Highway 53 . A section from Highway 24 to County Road 25 was opened in November 1984 , followed by the section west of there to Highway 53 one year later . Construction of the gap between Highway 53 and Highway 401 began in late 1985 , followed by the Highway 401 overpass for the westbound lanes , which began in 1987 . Transportation minister Ed Fulton ceremoniously opened the new freeway connection on September 26 , 1988 , completing the Woodstock to Brantford link .

Highway 403 was briefly left with three discontinuous sections : Woodstock – Brantford , Ancaster – Burlington , and Oakville – Mississauga . Between Brantford and Ancaster , traffic was defaulted onto Highway 2 , a four-lane road with numerous private driveways and at-grade intersections . On March 24 , 1987 , Chris Ward , MPP for Wentworth North officially announced that construction of the missing link between Brantford and Ancaster would begin in 1989 . Construction did not actually begin until the summer of 1990 . It included interchanges at Garden Avenue , Highway 52 and Highway 2 . A continuous construction program was carried out over the next seven years , with the link opening on August 15 , 1997 . Highway 2 , which was the only parallel route before the completion of Highway 403 , was subsequently downloaded to regional jurisdiction .

Though some officials considered Highway 403 to be a perfect example of a freeway construction process , it was not built without its share of controversy . In addition to the previously mentioned issues that occurred in 1969 , portions of the freeway through Mississauga were built alongside established communities , leading to angry homeowners associations pressuring the province for noise mitigation measures and compensation . In the late 1980s and early 1990s , the Mississauga section of Highway 403 was the site of more than two dozen fatal accidents over a five-year period , one of the highest rates in North America at the time , despite being up to modern road standards . This led Peel Regional Police and the media to nickname it the ' Death Highway ' . In particular , the stretch from Mavis Road to Erin Mills Parkway has been the site of numerous accidents . Highway 403 features a downward slope as motorists head eastbound towards the Mavis Road interchange ; drivers complain of having to slam the brakes when traffic comes to a standstill , leading to rear-end collisions . There is also glare from the sun that causes vision problems throughout the day .

The Hamilton-Brantford and Mississauga sections of Highway 403 were initially planned to be linked up along the corridor that is now occupied by Highway 407 . However , these plans were altered by the Bob Rae government in 1995 , due to budgetary constraints . It was also announced that the Mississauga section of Highway 403 would be renumbered as Highway 410 . Ultimately , this never came to pass . Consequently , Highway 403 was signed concurrently along the Queen Elizabeth Way in 2002 , remedying the discontinuity . In early 2001 , high-mast lighting was scheduled to be added to the previously unlit Mississauga section between Highway 407 and Eastgate Parkway . In 2003 , the right shoulders between Erin Mills Parkway and Mavis Road were widened for GO Transit and Mississauga Transit to run express bus services . These projects preceded the widening of Highway 403 between Highway 407 and Highway 401 / 410 , through which a high-occupancy vehicle ( HOV ) lane was added in each direction ; the project started in summer of 2004 and these opened on December 13 , 2005 . The HOV lanes and the dividing Ontario Tall Wall concrete barrier were constructed using the existing right-of-way provided by the grass median . Highway 403 between Woodstock and Burlington was formally dedicated as the Alexander Graham Bell Parkway on April 27 , 2016 .

" Viewing Party " is the eighth episode of seventh season of the American comedy television series The Office , and the show 's 134th episode overall . Written by Jon Vitti and directed by Ken Whittingham , the episode aired on NBC in the United States on November 11 , 2010 . The series — presented as if it were a real documentary — depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania , branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In the episode , Erin Hannon ( Ellie Kemper ) and Gabe Lewis ( Zach Woods ) invite the office over to Gabe 's house for a Glee viewing party . Michael Scott cannot handle the fact that the office workers think of Gabe as their boss instead of him . Growing more jealous of Gabe and Erin 's relationship , Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) goes to extremes in order to impress her . Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) helps Pam Halpert ( Jenna Fischer ) with Cece , much to her husband Jim 's chagrin . The episode featured several direct references to the Fox series Glee , in addition to various other cultural references . " Viewing Party " was viewed by 7.15 million viewers and received a 3.6 rating among adults between the age of 18 and 49 , marking a decrease in the ratings when compared to the previous week . The episode was also the highest-ranked NBC series of the night , and it received moderately positive reviews from critics with one main detractor ; many reviewers enjoyed the character interaction and development , although Alan Sepinwall derided the entry for being dull .

Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) becomes frustrated when Kevin Malone ( Brian Baumgartner ) refers to Gabe Lewis ( Zach Woods ) as his boss . Erin Hannon ( Ellie Kemper ) and Gabe invite the office over to Gabe 's house for a Glee viewing party . When the show starts , Michael and Gabe get into an argument over how high the volume should be . After taking turns raising and lowering the volume , Michael retreats to Gabe 's bedroom , hoping that his employees will follow him there . Meanwhile , Pam Halpert ( Jenna Fischer ) has been having a hard time with getting her daughter Cece to go to sleep at night , so Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) picks her up to try to calm her down . Pam is stunned that Cece becomes completely quiet in Dwight 's hands . Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) changes the channel from the Glee episode so he can check sports scores . Oscar Martinez ( Oscar Nunez ) asks Jim to change the channel back to Glee , but discovers that Erin had neglected to record the episode . To avoid his co-workers ' anger , Jim goes into the bedroom to see Dwight holding a sleeping Cece . Angela Martin ( Angela Kinsey ) comes in and demands that Dwight meet her outside for fulfillment of their sex contract . Determined to put an end to Cece 's " reverse cycling " , Pam persuades Dwight to stay with the baby under the condition that Jim feeds Dwight pizza and beer while Pam goes outside to tell Angela that Dwight cannot see her .

Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) is growing increasingly jealous of Gabe 's relationship with Erin . While observing Gabe 's room , Ryan Howard ( B.J. Novak ) tells him that a Chinese virility supplement that Gabe keeps in his room is incredibly potent . Once alone Andy drinks the entire bottle of the supplement , which makes him intoxicated , prompting him to admit his jealousy to Phyllis Vance ( Phyllis Smith ) . Phyllis volunteers to talk to Erin and find out if she is having sex with Gabe , but as Phyllis is fairly intoxicated herself , her inquiries segue into an explicit account of her sexual experiences with her husband Bob , which mortifies Erin . Andy 's intoxication turns into sickness , and he ultimately retreats to Gabe 's room and vomits on the bed . Becoming irritated that no one joined in him in walking out on Gabe , Michael goes outside and pulls the cable connection , causing it to turn off . Hysteria erupts , and Michael becomes self-conscious over the commotion he has caused . He goes outside to fix the cable . There he is discovered by Erin , who throughout the evening has been trying to encourage Michael to bond with Gabe . Michael , still indignant over the idea that his office views Gabe as his boss , is initially irritated by her efforts , but eventually realizes that Erin views him as a father figure . He jokes around and tells her to go to her room , leading to a bonding moment between the two . As he leaves the party , Michael brings Gabe into the joke by threatening to kill him if he breaks Erin 's heart .

The episode was written by Jon Vitti , a long-time writer of The Simpsons . It was his first writing credit for The Office after joining the staff the show in the seventh season as a consulting producer . It was directed by Ken Whittingham , who has directed several episodes of The Office previously . The Season Seven DVD contains a number of deleted scenes from this episode . Notable cut scenes include Gabe inviting Stanley to his party and Stanley 's reaction , Michael making fun of Gabe and then noting in a talking head that he does not really know Gabe , Michael raiding Gabe 's kitchen cabinet for additional items to add to his pizza , Michael comparing himself to Tom Hanks in the 1988 film Big and Gabe to Hanks in the 1993 film Philadelphia , Michael trying his pizza , only to spit it out , and Pam and Jim marveling at CeCe sleeping .

Gabe compares the Scranton Strangler to the Waco siege ; Erin incorrectly believes he is mispronouncing " wacko " . Jim notes that the Scranton Strangler car chase , witnessed in the episode 's cold opening , is on the same level as " Balloon Boy " and Michael Jackson 's funeral . The Glee episode viewed during the party was the season two episode " Duets " . When turning up the volume at the party , he comments , " Turn it up to eleven . Spinal Cord " , an obvious mis-reference to This Is Spinal Tap . Michael comments that his favorite character on Glee is " the invalid " , a reference to character Artie Abrams . Abrams is played by Kevin McHale . McHale appeared in the season four episode of The Office , " Launch Party " , as the pizza delivery boy .

" Viewing Party " aired on NBC on November 11 , 2010 . In its original American broadcast , it was viewed by an estimated 7.15 million viewers and received a 3.6 rating / 10 percent share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . This means that 3.6 percent of all 18- to 49-year-old households watched the episode , and ten percent of that demographic had their televisions tuned to the channel at any point . The Baltimore NBC affiliate carried the Ravens / Falcons NFL game , so ratings for the regular Thursday NBC programming were lower than usual . Myles McNutt of The A.V. Club awarded the episode a " B " . He compared it to the earlier seventh season episode " Sex Ed " , writing that both featured " a Michael story wherein a large collection of unfortunate behaviors is capped off with a moment of sincerity " ; however , McNutt criticized this narrative structure , calling it " a bit cheap " . Despite this , he felt that Dwight 's subplot " was successful in that it strayed true to the office dynamic " , and that the actual viewing of the Glee episode was a " highlight " because it showcased the characters " fall [ ing ] into some really fun ( and familiar tropes . " Bonnie Stiernberg of Paste magazine awarded the episode an 8.4 out of 10 , and called it " a solid episode " . She argued that " it left me wanting to tune in next week and see what ’ ll happen next " , largely because of the " surprising " amount of character development .

Dan Forcella of TV Fanatic awarded the episode four out of five stars . He was complimentary towards the main plot , and he felt empathy towards Michael because he felt that " Gabe is the absolute worst " . In addition , Forcella wrote that Pam and Jim 's subplot " had its moments , as well " , and called the scene featuring Jim feeding Dwight pizza " fantastic " . Not all reviews were glowing , however . Alan Sepinwall gave the episode a critical review , calling it " dreadful " . Although he said it was better than " Christening " , he felt that " so , so much of the episode didn 't work " . Sepinwall felt that the major problem with the episode was that it was " lifeless " and " light on jokes " , and only featured " Michael being petulant and crabby for a whole episode " , rather than featuring him in a character study . He concluded that " Ellie Kemper and Steve Carell almost were able to save the episode in the closing moments with Erin 's reaction to Michael declaring that he 's not her father , [ but ] it came far too late in an episode that was more concerned with Andy vomit humor . "

" Bart Gets an " F " " is the first episode of The Simpsons ' second season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on October 11 , 1990 . In the episode , Bart fails four consecutive history exams and the school psychiatrist recommends that Bart repeat the fourth grade . Bart vows that he will start to do better and attempts to get the resident class genius Martin Prince to help him , but after that backfires , Bart prays for help . That night , Springfield is hit with a massive blizzard and the school is closed , giving Bart another day to study . The episode was written by David M. Stern and directed by David Silverman . Mayor Quimby makes his first appearance and the episode was the first to feature a new opening sequence . " Bart Gets an " F " " was the third episode produced for the second season , but it was chosen to be the season premiere because it prominently featured Bart. Due to the success of the first season of The Simpsons , Fox decided to switch the show 's time slot to Thursday at 8 : 00 p.m. EST where it would air opposite of NBC 's The Cosby Show , the number one show at the time . Through the summer , several news outlets published stories about the supposed " Bill vs. Bart " rivalry and heavily hyped the first episode of the second season . Several critics predicted that " Bart Gets an " F " " would do considerably worse in the ratings than The Cosby Show . However , the final Nielsen rating for the episode was 18.4 and a 29 % share of the audience , finishing second in its time slot behind The Cosby Show , which had an 18.5 rating and 29 % share . It finished eighth in the weekly ratings , but was watched by an estimated 33.6 million viewers , making it the number one show in terms of actual viewers that week . It became the highest rated and most watched program in the history of the Fox Network and remained in that position until January 1 , 1995 . As of 2016 it is still the highest rated episode in the history of The Simpsons .

Bart presents a book report at Springfield Elementary School on Treasure Island , but it is blatantly obvious he did not read the book . After school , Mrs. Krabappel tells Bart his grades have steadily gotten worse and warns him about an upcoming exam on Colonial America , but Bart does not pay attention , and puts off studying . The next day at school , Bart feigns illness and that night , Lisa warns Bart he cannot evade his responsibilities forever , but Bart calls Milhouse for the test answers . After school the next day , an overconfident Bart hands in his test , only to get a poor score that is even worse than Milhouse 's substandard test and have Mrs. Krabappel take remedial action . Homer and Marge are called in to meet with Mrs. Krabappel and school psychiatrist Dr. J. Loren Pryor . Dr. Pryor says that Bart is an underachiever and recommends that he should repeat the fourth-grade . Homer and Marge consider that holding Bart back might not be such a bad idea . However , Bart is against this idea , and vows that he will start to do better and will pass . Left with little time to study on his own , Bart prays to God and asks that something miraculous happen to make him miss school the next day so he can have more time to study . That night , Springfield is hit with a massive blizzard , and the schools are closed .

After receiving word of the school closures , Bart prepares for a fun snow day . However , Lisa reminds him of his prayer , and Bart decides to make good with God by studying while everyone is outside having fun . The next day , he finishes the test and asks Mrs. Krabappel to grade it immediately . She does so , and tells him that he gets a 59 , failing by just one point . However , Bart becomes upset at having failed despite all his efforts . Mrs Krabappel is initially stunned and tries to console him but Bart when compares his failure to George Washington 's surrender of Fort Necessity to the French in 1754 , Mrs. Krabappel is impressed at this obscure historical reference , realizes that Bart has put more effort and gives him an extra point for demonstrating applied knowledge , pushing his grade up to a D minus , enough to pass . Proud without thinking , Bart runs throughout Springfield , exclaiming to people that he actually passed .

" Bart Gets an " F " " was the first episode of The Simpsons to be written by David M. Stern . It was directed by David Silverman . Over the summer of 1990 , Bart 's rebellious nature was characterized by some parents and conservatives as a poor role model for children while several American public schools banned T-shirts featuring Bart next to captions such as " I 'm Bart Simpson . Who the hell are you ? " and " Underachiever ( ' And proud of it , man ! ' ) " Several critics thought that the episode was a response to these controversies . However , executive producer James L. Brooks responded that it was not , but added , " we 're mindful of it . I do think it 's important for us that Bart does badly in school . There are students like that . Besides , I 'm very wary of television where everybody is supposed to be a role model . You don 't run across that many role models in real life . Why should television be full of them ? " Sam Simon commented that " there are themes to the shows we did last year , important themes , I think it 's a tribute to how well we executed them that nobody realized we had a point . Bart says " Cowabunga " for the second time ( the first time being in " The Telltale Head " ) , which was commonly associated with Bart through its use as a T-shirt slogan . Mayor Quimby makes his first appearance in this episode , without his trademark sash that says " Mayor " . The sash was later added because the writers feared that viewers would not recognize him .

The episode was the first to feature a new opening sequence , which was shortened by fifteen seconds from its original length of roughly 1 minute , 30 seconds . The opening sequence for the first season showed Bart stealing a " Bus Stop " sign ; whilst the new sequence featured him skateboarding past several characters who had been introduced during the previous season . Starting with this season , there were three versions of the opening : a full roughly 1 minute 15 second long version , a 45-second version and a 25-second version . This gave the show 's editors more leeway . David Silverman believes that the animators began to " come into their own " as they had gotten used to the characters and were able to achieve more with character acting . During the scene where Bart delivers a speech where he states he is " dumb as a post " , Silverman wanted to cut from several angles very quickly to give a sense of anxiety . Martin Prince 's design was changed several times during the episode . There was a different model that had larger eyes and wilder hair designed for the scene where Martin betrays Bart and runs off . Silverman describes the " Snow Day " sequence as one of the hardest things he ever had to animate . It features several long pans which shows many different characters engaging in various activities and was difficult to time correctly . Bart 's fantasy where he sees the founding fathers of the United States uses muted colors and variations of red , white and blue . Silverman also had to work hard to make Bart cry without making his design look too off-putting , and this is the reason why he was shown covering his face with a piece of paper .

The first season of The Simpsons had finished as high as 4th in the weekly ratings and was the Fox network 's first series to rank among a season 's top 30 highest-rated shows and Bart quickly became one of the most popular characters on television in what was termed " Bartmania " . Due to the success of the first season of the show , the Fox Network decided to switch The Simpsons ' timeslot in hopes that it would steal ratings from NBC 's " powerhouse " line up , generate more advertising revenue , and result in higher ratings for Beverly Hills , 90210 and Babes , which would follow the show . The show was moved from its from 8 : 00 p.m. EST Sunday night slot to the same time on Thursday , where it would compete with NBC 's The Cosby Show , the number one show at the time . Many of the producers of The Simpsons , including James L. Brooks , were against the move . The show had been in the top 10 while airing on Sunday and they felt the move would destroy its ratings . He commented that " Suddenly a show that was a hit is fighting for its survival , [ ... ] We 're not fighting ' Cosby , ' we just want to get healthy ratings . There have been two weeks in my life when a show I was associated with was number one in the ratings , and on Sunday night , we had a chance to be the number one show in the country . I don 't think we have a chance on Thursday night . "

" Two Cars in Every Garage and Three Eyes on Every Fish " was the first episode produced for the season , but " Bart Gets an " F " " aired first because Bart was popular at the time and the producers had wanted to premiere with an episode involving him . It aired opposite the fourth episode of the seventh season of The Cosby Show titled " Period of Adjustment " , which saw the addition of Erika Alexander to the cast . The first 13 episodes of The Simpsons had been rerun several times through the summer , and Fox heavily promoted the first new episode since May , and news outlets published stories about the supposed " Bill vs. Bart " rivalry .

Bart 's slapdash book report was on the Robert Louis Stevenson novel Treasure Island , while Martin presents Ernest Hemingway 's The Old Man and the Sea . Later on , Martin makes remarks about the forecastle of the Pequod in reference to Moby Dick . The scene where everyone in Springfield gathers around the town circle , holds hands and begins singing is a reference to How the Grinch Stole Christmas ! . " Hallelujah " , the chorus from George Frideric Handel 's Messiah , can be heard when it starts snowing . In Bart 's fantasy of the improbable snowing on the 4th of July , he imagines Benjamin Franklin proclaiming he has invented the " First Ever Sled " , on which it is painted " Don 't Sled on Me " , an obvious reference to the Don 't Tread on Me banner .

The episode has received positive reviews from television critics . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , wrote , " A cracking opener to the second season - especially memorable for the sequence in which Bart prays for school to be cancelled the following day only to find himself exiled from the ensuing winter wonderland . " Virginia Mann of The Record felt that it was " not as wildly funny as last season 's best episodes , [ but still ] well-done , humorous , and , at times , poignant . " The episode was praised for its emotional scenes . Tom Shales wrote that the episode is " not only funny , it 's touching " and praised it for its scenes where Bart prays , writing " There are few if any other entertainment shows on television that get into philosophical matters even this deeply . The Simpsons can be as thoughtful as a furrow-browed Bill Moyers pontification - yet infinitely more amusing . " Hal Boedeker of The Miami Herald felt that it " pulls off a finale that 's thoughtful without being preachy , tender without being sappy . Despite the tears , the show keeps its edge . And the way TV usually smears on the schmaltz , that 's quite an achievement . " Phil Kloer of The Atlanta Journal-Constitution wrote " The episode does a good job of emphasizing the importance of studying without getting gooky . For all the talk about the anarchy of " The Simpsons , " the show sometimes has smuggled in an occasional message , as it does again . " In his book The Gospel According to the Simpsons , Mark I. Pinsky writes that " Bart Gets an " F " " offers the most detailed portrayal of the dynamic of prayer on The Simpsons . " Steve L. Case later included the episode in his book Toons That Teach , a list of 75 cartoons that help teach biblical lessons . Internet comedian , Doug Walker , considers the episode to be the best of the entire series because he found it to be the most dramatic , funny , realistic , and relatable .

MediEvil : Resurrection is a 2005 Gothic action-adventure video game developed by SCE Cambridge Studio and published by Sony Computer Entertainment for the PlayStation Portable . It is a re-imagining of the first instalment in the series , MediEvil . It was first released as a launch title on 1 September 2005 in Europe and 13 September 2005 in North America . It was also re-released for the PlayStation Network in 2008 . The game is set in the medieval Kingdom of Gallowmere and centres around the charlatan protagonist , Sir Daniel Fortesque , as he makes an attempt to stop antagonist Zarok 's invasion of the kingdom whilst simultaneously redeeming himself . The game also features a variety of voice talents , including Tom Baker as the narrator and the Grim Reaper . Development of the game began in 2003 with the original intention of releasing the game for the PlayStation 2 . Sony Computer Entertainment Europe commissioned SCE Cambridge Studio to develop a launch title for the PlayStation Portable . Due to time constraints , the Cambridge studio was given only a year to develop the game , thus they decided to remake the original MediEvil . The game was met with mixed reviews upon release , with critics mainly praising the game 's humour , voice talent and graphics but was criticised for lack of innovation and cumbersome camera controls .

Gameplay is similar to that of the original game in which players control Sir Daniel Fortesque as he travels through Gallowmere to stop the evil Zarok . Dan can utilise a variety of weapons , including close range weapons such as swords and axes to long ranged weapons such as throwing knives and crossbows . If Dan defeats enough enemies to collect the Chalice of Souls hidden throughout each level , he will be able to travel to the Hall of Heroes , where a legendary hero rewards him by giving him a new weapon or other helpful items . Dan possesses a single life bar throughout the game , which can be sustained by collecting Life Bottles throughout the game which can be replenished by energy vials and Life Fountains . The remastered version also includes some exclusive arcade-style minigames which can also be played over online multiplayer . MediEvil : Resurrection features many alterations to the original structure and content , such as the addition of the " Anubis Stone " sub-plot which has never appeared in the original . Various levels and characters designs are altered drastically from the original , with some levels removed altogether . Resurrection 's altered plot is given a much more humorous and light-hearted setting as opposed to the Gothic horror-comedy of the first instalment . Unlike the original , there is no alternate ending ; Dan still enters eternal slumber regardless of whether he collects all of the chalices .

In the year 1286 , an evil sorcerer named Zarok plotted to take over the kingdom of Gallowmere with his undead army . It is told in legend that the King of Gallowmere 's champion , Sir Daniel Fortesque , led his army to victory and managed to kill Zarok before succumbing to his mortal wounds . In reality however , Dan was in fact struck down by the first arrow fired in the battle , with the king choosing to cover it up and declare Dan the " Hero of Gallowmere " . Zarok , meanwhile , was forced into hiding and was presumed dead . 100 years later , in 1386 , Zarok reappears , casting a spell over Gallowmere to awake his undead army and steal the souls of the living . However , in the process , he unwittingly revives the corpse of Dan , who has over time become a skeletal corpse , missing his jaw and the eye he lost in the battle of Gallowmere . Shortly after waking up , Dan is accompanied by Al-Zalam , a genie whose powers were robbed by Zarok . Having been unable to ascend to the Hall of Heroes due to his failures in life , Dan uses this opportunity to defeat Zarok , save Gallowmere and earn his place as a true hero .

As Dan travels across Gallowmere , collecting pieces of an artefact called the ' Anubis Stone ' along the way , fighting his way through Zarok 's hordes and confronting all manners of beasts , he soon arrives at Zarok 's lair , fighting off Zarok 's skeletal warriors using the souls of his old allies retrieved by collecting the Chalices . After also managing to defeat Zarok 's champion , Lord Kardok , Zarok turns into a powerful monster , but Dan manages to defeat him . As Zarok sets his lair to self-destruct , Dan is rescued by Al-Zalam and the two escape , leaving Zarok 's magical influence over the land thwarted . With the magic cast on him also wearing off as a result , Dan returns to his burial chamber where he once again enters eternal slumber .

Development of MediEvil : Resurrection began in 2003 at SCE Cambridge Studio . The senior management team of Sony Computer Entertainment Europe wanted a launch game for the PlayStation Portable console and ordered the studio to develop the game in time for the console 's release . Due to the short notice , the studio was given only a year to develop a game , thus it was decided that a remake of the original MediEvil would be suitable as developing an original title would take more time to develop . Despite the success of the previous games in the MediEvil series , only three original team members were involved in the making of MediEvil : Resurrection . Chris Sorrell , the creator of MediEvil , stressed in a retrospective interview that he would have preferred to direct Resurrection if he was not at the time instructed to direct the video-game adaptation of 24 . Since the release of Resurrection , Sorrell expressed disappointment with the changes made to the game and the fact that his superiors did not allow him to direct it , but praised the team 's ability for working under a time constraint . Piers Jackson was instead appointed as the producer for Resurrection . He directed the overall development of the title , working closely with a new design team led by Dominic Cahalin . Mitch Phillips , who was the character animator for the previous two instalments , was appointed as lead artist for the game . Phillips , along with Paul Arnold and Andrew Barnabas , the musical duo more commonly known as " Bob & Barn " , who composed the original soundtrack for MediEvil , were the only people from the original team to return .

According to Piers Jackson , the thrust of the design was to produce a title that could showcase the full abilities of the PlayStation Portable , including its built-in Wi-Fi capabilities . Jackson also asserted that Resurrection was an entirely different game from the original ; whilst the studio had taken the basic story and some of the locations from the original game , all the code , graphics and voice actors were changed . New additions to Resurrection included an expanded plot , added mini-games , multiplayer facilities and a cloud save function . During late stages of development , the studio attempted to preserve ideas that they thought worked well in the original , though their uses were altered or repositioned to keep the game fresh even to those who had played the original . The addition of the ' Anubis Stone ' sub-plot was to strengthen the story arc and the creation of Al-Zalam was to act as Dan 's internal monologue as well as the player 's guide .

The soundtrack in Resurrection is orchestrated , unlike the first instalment . Approximately half of the themes from the original were removed while new themes were created to fit with the new levels . The music is split into two halves ; the cues from the first half are largely reminiscent of a select number of cues from the original game with the addition of extra thematic elements to strengthen them . The other half of the music is original and composed exclusively for Resurrection . The new soundtrack was composed by Bob & Barn and features performances from members of the City of Prague Philharmonic Orchestra that was recorded in the Czech Republic . The orchestra , headed by Nic Raine , consisted of approximately 80 performers and in addition benefits from a 32 piece choir , also recorded in the same venue . This follows the tradition of SCE Cambridge Studio 's previous orchestral game Primal , which was also recorded in Prague by the same performers .

MediEvil : Resurrection received mixed reviews upon release . It received an aggregate score of 69 % from GameRankings and a score of 66 from Metacritic . General criticisms from reviewers were directed at the camera controls , which was cited as being particularly poor during combat sequences , and occasionally being the cause for frame rate drops . Jason Allen of IGN noted that the camera angles were " not as bad " during open areas of the game , but became " rather clumsy in the middle of a heated battle " . Kristan Reed of Eurogamer expressed similar concerns with the camera work , stating that the camera was " sloppy " and that it proved particularly difficult during combat , when enemies were to suddenly appear off screen . The combat was also criticised for its poor hit detection . Greg Mueller of GameSpot noted that the poor collision detection turned most of the combat sequences to a " frustrating and tedious " experience . Reed similarly criticised the combat system , citing that the system is " unremarkable on the basic level " and was disappointed with the lack of technical additions to the game . Allen also expressed concern with the fighting mechanics , stating that every melee attack was inaccurate and " clumsy " , combined with cumbersome camera work .

The graphics and voice talent were the most praised aspects of the game , especially Tom Baker 's role as the narrator and Grim Reaper . Mueller praised the soundtrack and dialogue , stating that the best part of the game " is easily the sound " , and that the voice of any character fits their role " perfectly " , making them more interesting than " the average voice-over " . Reed also praised Baker 's role in the game , stating that voice-overs and audio were the most enjoyable experiences in Resurrection , also citing that Baker 's voice performance was " majestic " and " eccentric " . Chris Scantleberry of GameSpy felt that the overall dialogue was heavy on the stereotypical accent , but was assured that players would enjoy the " electric atmosphere " of MediEvil , which he often compared to that of Tim Burton 's The Nightmare Before Christmas . Chris Sorrell and Jason Wilson , co-creators of MediEvil , had also expressed disappointment with the game . Neither of them had any involvement with MediEvil : Resurrection , and when they were asked about the game during a retrospective interview with RetroGamer , Wilson felt disheartened with having to watch something he " cherished " to be altered with decisions he thought were " questionable " . Sorrell felt similar disappointment in the redesign of the game and there were a number of aspects of it that he disagreed with . He did , however , praise the development team of Resurrection , stating that they did " an awesome job " considering the time constraints they were up against .

Infamous Second Son ( stylized as inFAMOUS Second Son ) is an open world action-adventure video game developed by Sucker Punch Productions and published by Sony Computer Entertainment for the PlayStation 4 . The game was released worldwide on March 21 , 2014 . Like in previous Infamous games , the player-controlled protagonist possesses superpower abilities that players use in combat and when traveling across the city . The story follows protagonist Delsin Rowe fighting the Department of Unified Protection ( D.U.P. ) in a fictionalized Seattle . Over the course of the game , Delsin acquires new powers and becomes either good or evil as player choices influence his morality . Sucker Punch began planning the game as early as 2010 , when they began discussion with Sony to bring the Infamous series onto a new generation of hardware . They provided feedback to Sony on what hardware evolutions they would like to see on the PlayStation 4 system . Second Son was considered a fresh start for the series because it features a new protagonist . Delsin Rowe 's superpowers were designed to feel fluid and suited to the open world design . Infamous Second Son was met with generally positive reviews ; critics praised its gameplay , dynamic combat , visuals and design , while criticism was aimed at the game 's morality system , which some found to be dated and binary , as well as the game 's repetitive side missions . The story was met with a mixed response , with some critics finding the narrative and characters to be a step backwards from previous installments in the series , while others viewing the writing as an improvement over its predecessors . Infamous Second Son was a commercial success , and sold over a million copies within nine days , making it the fastest-selling entry within the Infamous franchise .

In Infamous Second Son , players control the main character Delsin Rowe from a third-person perspective and freely roam open world Seattle . Players parkour-style climb vertical surfaces like high-rise buildings . Delsin is a Conduit , which allows him to use superpower abilities by manipulating materials such as smoke , neon , video , and concrete . These materials can be weaponized ( such that Delsin can perform melee attacks or fire projectiles from his fingertips ) or used to deftly navigate the game world ( such as using neon to dash up buildings ) . Using powers depletes a meter in the head-up display ( HUD ) , which can be replenished by drawing from power sources such as smoke from exploded vehicles . Delsin earns new powers as he progresses through the story , which sees him fight against the Department of Unified Protection ( D.U.P. ) during missions . Each time Delsin gains a new power set he must destroy mobile D.U.P. command centers to learn the basic abilities that correspond to it . Delsin upgrades and acquires new abilities by spending Blast Shards that have been collected , they are scattered throughout Seattle . Players become more powerful in combat by expanding Delsin 's suite of abilities .

Players may choose to act in either a good or evil way . Examples including healing civilians , doing drug busts , and stopping suspect brutality for good , or killing civilians , obliterating enemies and completing missions with evil karma for bad . Several times throughout the story , Delsin finds himself in a scenario where he must make a good or evil choice , such as whether to encourage Conduit vigilante Abigail " Fetch " Walker to stop slaying drug dealers , or to train her to become a more prolific killer . Player choices influence outcomes in some later missions . In combat , Delsin may use his abilities to incapacitate foes or obliterate them with headshots . He may choose to open fire on innocent civilians . Delsin 's choices manifest in a logo displayed on his jacket and the HUD , which features a blue ( good ) and red ( evil ) bird . Performing actions that are villainous gradually change the logo so that the red bird dominates the other , with the opposite happening with heroism . This is a visual representation of Delsin 's Karma level , that increases as good or evil depending on his choices . As his Karma level increases , Delsin can acquire new powers that correspond to his play-style ( e.g. very destructive powers with high levels of evil Karma ) and his jacket also changes . If you have good karma , the jacket completely changes white whereas if evil the jacket turns red . A continual streak of either good or evil actions fills up a bar in the HUD , which then lets Delsin perform a powerful finishing move called a Karma Bomb .

Second Son takes place in 2016 , seven years after Infamous 2 's Conduit protagonist Cole MacGrath sacrifices himself to cure humanity of a plague and destroy The Beast . Cole uses the powerful Ray Field Inhibitor weapon , which kills him and most of the other Conduits . The United States government establishes the D.U.P. to hunt down and capture the world 's remaining Conduits , dubbing Conduits with the pejorative " Bio-Terrorists " . The protagonist is Delsin Rowe ( Troy Baker ) , a graffiti artist and the local delinquent of the Akomish reservation . Delsin has the unique Conduit ability of Power Absorption , allowing him to use other Conduits ' powers . His brother , Reggie ( Travis Willingham ) , is the local sheriff , and often arrests Delsin for his acts of vandalism . Both are Akomish Native Americans , whose territory lies at the shore of Salmon Bay , Washington . The antagonist is Brooke Augustine ( Christine Dunford ) , the director of the D.U.P. and a Conduit with power over Concrete . Her actions in the Akomish reservation drive Delsin to travel to Seattle , now under lockdown by D.U.P. forces . Delsin and Reggie encounter three other Conduits : Henry " Hank " Daughtry ( David Stanbra ) , a convict with control over Smoke ; Abigail " Fetch " Walker ( Laura Bailey ) , an ex-junkie who uses her Neon powers to hunt down the illegal drug dealers in Seattle ; and Eugene Sims ( Alex Walsh ) , a reclusive video gamer who uses his Video ( digital materialization ) powers to save suspected Conduits from the D.U.P.

After Reggie catches Delsin vandalizing a billboard , their subsequent argument is interrupted when a military truck carrying three Conduit prisoners crashes on the Akomish reservation . Two of the Conduits escape . Delsin pulls the third , Hank , out of the wreckage , and inadvertently absorbs his smoke powers . Shocked and frightened , Delsin pursues Hank in an effort to figure out what has happened and how to control his powers . However , they are both cornered by Brooke Augustine . She encases Hank in concrete and questions Delsin , suspecting him of hiding something . Delsin can choose to either tell Augustine the truth about his powers or reveal nothing . Regardless , Augustine renders him unconscious before moving on to the other tribe members . Delsin awakens a week later and discovers that Augustine has tortured the rest of the tribe in an unsuccessful bid to gain information . However , she has left them to gradually die from concrete shards buried into their bodies , including their leader Betty ( Karen Austin ) . Reggie , who was spared from the torture , learns that the only way to remove the shards is to use Augustine 's power on them . Delsin realizes that he can absorb Conduit powers and resolves to go to Seattle to take Augustine 's powers and save the tribe . Reggie reluctantly accompanies Delsin to keep an eye on him . They reach Seattle and find that it has been put under strict martial law by the D.U.P. in order to find the other escaped Conduits . With Reggie 's help , Delsin battles D.U.P. forces and tracks down core fragments to develop his powers . He eventually encounters the other two escaped Conduits , Fetch and Eugene , and absorbs their powers . After both confrontations , Delsin defends the Conduits from Reggie , who initially views them as " freaks " , and can choose to either redeem or corrupt them .

Now possessing three powers , Delsin encounters Hank , who has escaped again . Hank tells Delsin that Fetch and Eugene have been captured by the D.U.P. , and are being held on an artificial concrete island in Puget Sound . However , the situation turns out to be a trap set by Augustine . Reggie appears and rescues Delsin with a rocket launcher . While the brothers free Fetch and Eugene , Augustine encases Reggie 's feet in concrete and blasts them off the platform . As they dangle above the ocean , Reggie realizes that Delsin cannot save both of them , tells him that he is proud of him , and lets Delsin 's hand go and falls to his death . Distraught and enraged , Delsin climbs back up onto the platform and battles Augustine , destroying the entire island . Augustine flees back to the D.U.P. headquarters . Delsin tracks Hank down to the docks , where he is fleeing from D.U.P. forces . Hank begs for forgiveness , saying that he only worked with Augustine because she threatened to hurt his daughter . Delsin can choose to either kill Hank , or let him escape Seattle with his daughter . Aided by Fetch and Eugene , Delsin rallies an assault on the D.U.P. headquarters . After breaking through the building 's defenses , Delsin confronts Augustine and reveals to her that he has figured out she staged the Conduit escape at Akomish to instill fear in the population and give the D.U.P. a reason to continue their regime . Augustine lets Delsin absorb her powers , and tells him that she wants to save the Conduits by imprisoning and protecting them from the population . Delsin battles and eventually defeats Augustine with his new concrete powers .

If Delsin has good Karma , he spares Augustine and exposes her crimes to the world . She is arrested and the D.U.P. disbands . Delsin , Fetch and Eugene convince the humans that they can peacefully coexist with the Conduits . All of the imprisoned Conduits are freed . Delsin returns to the reservation and heals the tribe members , then paints a mural dedicated to Reggie . If Delsin has evil Karma , he kills Augustine and , together with Fetch and Eugene , takes control of Seattle . He releases all of the imprisoned Conduits and absorbs their powers . Upon returning to the reservation , Delsin is met by a wheelchair-bound Betty who banishes him from the tribe for the killings in Seattle . Shocked and angered , Delsin destroys the entire reservation .

Sucker Punch Productions began to develop Second Son while the PlayStation 4 was still being designed . Having finished work on Infamous : Festival of Blood , they began to plan a new entry in the Infamous series under the working title Infamous 3 . As early as 2010 , they discussed with Sony their desire to bring Infamous to a new PlayStation platform . Sucker Punch were in close connection with the PS4 's lead system architect Mark Cerny , who visited the studio several times . They gave Cerny feedback about how much power a new PlayStation system would require to render their ideal open world , how fast it would be capable of doing so and to what degree of texture detail . " We had some experience there that was useful for that team when they were planning some aspects of the hardware design " , producer Brian Fleming explained . He found that during the PS4 's development , there was a great level of interactivity between the system 's designers and game developers such as Sucker Punch . Sucker Punch made suggested improvements they would like to see for the DualShock 4 gamepad . Second Son 's designer Jaime Griesemer traveled to Sony 's headquarters in Japan to discuss such improvements . The developers found they were able to adopt the DualShock 4 's touchpad into Second Son 's gameplay ( for example , players emulate the in-game fingerprint scanner using the DualShock 4 touchpad ) .

The game was envisioned to take full advantage of the hardware , without the imposition of porting to older platforms like the PlayStation 3 . The hardware let developers improve the particle system that lights Delsin 's face up while he draws neon power from billboards and add detailed reflections to the game world . The increased memory bandwidth let the team render characters with higher fidelity . They found the PS4 's simplified architecture so easy to work with that they were able to reach very high graphical quality even though the hardware was new . Over 110 developers worked on the game , a number that director Nate Fox considered small . He felt that working with a small team necessitated having a defined vision for the game from the outset , " to answer those first questions about what you want your game to be " . Sometimes , ideas came about during development that would have to be thrown out for not fitting with the game 's original vision . " We kill our darlings at Sucker Punch . It 's not easy ; it 's necessary " , Fox explained . Second Son displays a native resolution of 1080p at 30 frames per second .

Sucker Punch elected to set Second Son in their hometown of Seattle as they could draw from their personal experiences in the open world 's design . During early development when team members debated where Second Son would be set , Seattle rated high on a list of possibilities . Fleming considered that the city had not been featured in many games prior to Second Son and so would not be " overblown " , and felt that Seattle 's weather and mixture of " old and new " architecture would make it an interesting setting . The team conducted fieldwork in Seattle 's nearby forests with audio and video equipment , which was used to reproduce local flora and the chirping sounds of local American robins . Seattle landmarks such as Pioneer Square , the Space Needle and Elephant Car Washes feature in the game . The developers licensed logos and signs from local businesses . Griesemer called the game world an " abstraction " of Seattle rather than a re-creation since its layout did not suit Second Son 's gameplay and required the team to make necessary changes . The team wanted to thematically explore Seattle 's heritage of Pacific Northwest , Native American tribes in the game .

The designers used graphic sliders in the game engine to determine the amount of water covering the streets . Like Seattle , rain is frequent in the game . The lighting effects ( such as neon light from Delsin 's powers ) coupled with reflections help bring color into Seattle 's dark and rainy atmosphere . Because of the move to the PS4 , Sucker Punch were able to render more open world than what was possible in previous Infamous games . " You get a better feel of the city when you can see more of it " , said Griesemer . After deciding on Seattle for the setting , the developers began to think about the superpowers that Delsin would possess . They added neon lighting to the city to amplify the " beautiful reflective streets " , and subsequently decided to make neon a source of power for Delsin because of its prevalence . Animation director Billy Harper considered Delsin 's smoke powers challenging to design , as the team wanted to make powers feel more fluid than in previous Infamous games . They removed Cole 's " contorted hand poses " to improve the connection between Delsin and his powers . Fox felt that smoke helps Delsin deftly navigate the game world by letting him zip up buildings and through enemies . Griesemer ( who previously worked with Bungie on the Halo series ) wanted to bring the fluidity of first-person shooters to Second Son 's combat . The team reviewed the control scheme of previous Infamous games and " removed some of the complexity that was preventing people from interacting with the game " .

Griesemer said that a recurring theme throughout Infamous games that they wanted to continue with Second Son was the idea of " modern elemental powers " , variations on commonplace powers drawn from the game world . Producer Brian Fleming found that the graphical effects helped to inform players of the amount of power Delsin possesses . " This is a game about super powers , so for us , the way the effects look tells you a lot about how you 're playing the game " , he explained . Fox considered that the game world 's resemblance to Seattle helped the superpower elements feel authentic . " Because we have that sweet foundation of plausibility , you buy into the super-powered element " , he explained .

Second Son 's premise is built from the ending of Infamous 2 that sees protagonist Cole MacGrath sacrifice himself to save humanity . They looked at Trophy data and found the majority ( 78 % ) of Infamous 2 players chose this ending , and concurred with the popular choice . This allowed them to create the new protagonist , Delsin , from scratch . " Moving forward onto [ Second Son ] , we said ' Alright , Cole 's dead . People have voted for this . Let 's make a new hero ' " , Fox explained . Griesemer felt that taking the Infamous series to the PS4 signified a new era , and that departing from the story of previous games would help them reach new audiences . " We needed a new entry point , and Delsin was the first step for that " , he explained . The idea to move away from Cole 's story came about during pre-production staff meetings , and was confirmed after discussions both internally and with Sony Computer Entertainment . Griesemer described the contemporaneous sentiment as " It 's going to be new hardware , a new platform and we 're going to have a new audience " .

Delsin 's Native American heritage came from the game 's setting in the Pacific Northwest , which features a large Native American population . Delsin wears a beanie inspired by one that Harper would wear around the studio ( Harper recounted one particular staff meeting where four of the six team members were wearing hats ) . Delsin 's character was inspired by United Kingdom street artist Banksy , as the development team appreciated Banksy 's clandestine , satirical work . Developing Delsin 's personality , the team posited the hypothetical : " What if Johnny Knoxville had powers ? What would he do with it ? " . Harper considered Delsin " full of reckless abandon " , the kind of character that would , upon gaining superpowers , jump off a cliff to see what happens . Fox considered Delsin " flawed in a way I think a lot of us can relate to " , trying to live up to his successful brother Reggie . He called the game 's story a " hero 's journey " . Digital Domain were brought on board for the motion capture work . Fox helped direct the actors ' performances , but found that they did not need much guidance for their roles . " You need to let them understand what you need from a scene , but the actors are so much better equipped to deliver that than me " , he explained . Fleming considered that using motion capture added authenticity to the characters . " The ability to capture [ Delsin 's ] facial reaction when he 's like ' Oh , shit ' , but doesn 't say ' Oh shit ' — that 's a big deal " , he explained .

Most of the non-player characters ( NPCs ) that inhabit the open world were motion captured . The developers contacted casting agencies , and asked their friends and families if they would like to appear as extras in the game . Over 75 people were scanned in a three-day period . They were seated in chairs and told not to move or smile , and a high-definition digital camera captured a 3D model of their faces . The camera sent out strobe light patterns to capture the volume and shape of each face . A 360-degree setup captured the actors ' moving bodies , but mannequins were also used to help capture different clothing styles . Data collected from the cameras was used by the designers to render digital models , each composed of roughly 1.4 million polygons — any blank spots on the models would be digitally filled in by the designers . To render the models in the game , the data would be compressed by reducing the polygon count .

On February 20 , 2013 , Sony held a conference in New York that announced the PS4 . Fox appeared on-stage during the conference and recounted participating in an anti-globalization protest in Seattle in 1999 . He then announced Second Son , and a debut trailer was shown that introduced the game 's premise and lead character . The game was privately demoed at E3 2013 , and its March 21 , 2014 , North American release date was confirmed during a PS4 launch event on November 14 , 2013 . By February 25 , 2014 , Second Son went gold ( finished development ) . On March 8 , it was announced that Second Son 's pre-order sales had surpassed those of The Last of Us in the United Kingdom . Two special edition versions of the game were produced ; pre-ordered and first-run copies of the game received the Limited Edition , which includes the Cole 's Legacy mission pack that explain story events between Infamous 2 and Second Son . The Collector 's Edition includes a unique box cover , a replica of Delsin 's beanie , eight pins from his vest , an exclusive in-game vest , and a D.U.P.-themed patch . All pre-ordered copies of the game included four in-game vests for Delsin .

Paper Trail is a free downloadable content ( DLC ) with alternate reality game features . The story is split into six parts , with the first being available after reaching a certain point in the main story . Each subsequent part was made available each Friday from March 28 , 2014 in North America and , concluding with the release of the final part on April 25 , 2014 . At E3 2014 , the DLC package Infamous First Light was announced and was released on August 26 , 2014 in North America and August 27 , 2014 in Europe . In First Light , the player controls Fetch . It is a stand-alone expansion and Second Son is not required to play the game , but ownership of Second Son grants players access to exclusive content . Infamous First Light received mixed to positive reviews from critics .

The game received generally positive reviews with a normalized rating of 80 out of 100 based on 90 reviews on Metacritic . GameRankings assigned a rating of 81 % based on 61 reviews . The game sold over one million copies within nine days of its release , making it the fastest-selling installment in the series . Vince Ingenito of IGN recalled being left " staring slack-jawed " at the visuals , and called the open world " beautifully and diversely realized " with impressive lighting effects . Tom Mc Shea of GameSpot called the visuals " incredible " . Oli Welsh of Eurogamer praised Seattle 's art direction , and found the draw distances and frame rate consistent . David Meikleham of PlayStation Official Magazine ( OPM ) was very impressed with the graphics and 1080p definition , but cited occasional frame rate dips during intense combat . He enjoyed playing in Seattle and using his powers to level the destructible environments . Tamoor Hussain of Computer and Video Games ( CVG ) praised graphical details like the particle and lighting systems . " [ The game is ] colorful , rich in detail and has some of the best effects we 've seen on console " , he wrote .

GameSpot 's Mc Shea considered the combat well-balanced between Infamous 's slower pace and Infamous 2 's frenetic action , and enjoyed Delsin 's agility and power . Chris Carter of Destructoid considered the combat 's simplicity its strength , finding Delsin easy to control and navigate the world . Edge were underwhelmed with the game 's opening because of its " skittish " parkour , but noted that once Delsin gained powers and reached Seattle , the game became very fun . They felt that enemies were clever enough to make combat a fun challenge , and called the main missions " for the most part well designed and generously proportioned " . IGN 's Ingenito enjoyed using Delsin 's powers in combat , and called each set " strong enough to hang an entire game on " . He found upgrading Delsin 's powers helped keep the combat fresh and made for good replay value . Philip Kollar of Polygon favored using neon power , but praised the balance and variety between all of them . He called the combat " a hell of a lot of fun " . Eurogamer 's Welsh found the combat imperfect yet fun , but did not think that upgrading Delsin 's skills made enough of a difference to his power .

Destructoid 's Carter thought that Delsin was a more interesting protagonist than " wooden " Cole , which helped his investment into the story . IGN 's Ingenito thought Delsin was an interesting lead character , especially because of the chemistry with Reggie . He found Troy Baker 's performance of Delsin " [ imbued ] with a charm and youthful abandon that keeps it from feeling tropey [ sic ] or overwrought " . However , he found supporting characters like Fetch underdeveloped and the narrative too straightforward . Although calling the characters clichéd , Edge felt that they were written and acted well . GameSpot 's Mc Shea called Delsin annoying and immature , and found the gameplay more interesting than the " tired " story . Eurogamer 's Welsh considered the plot driven by " inconsequential MacGuffins " and thought the ending rushed , but praised the story for not stretching on too long . Polygon 's Kollar felt that the story did not explore its themes of surveillance and security-over-freedom well enough , such that its impact was diminished . He was overall disappointed with the narrative , despite finding the main characters written better than in previous Infamous games . OPM 's Meikleham was put off by Delsin 's arrogance and was underwhelmed with the story , but he was impressed by the quality of the motion capture performances .

Edge and Eurogamer 's Welsh faulted the morality system because they did not think it had enough influence on the story . IGN 's Ingenito called it " woefully outdated " , and felt that making evil choices severely jarred with Delsin 's character . He found the system redundant because Delsin became more powerful when he strictly adhered to either a good or evil play-style , rather than crossing in-between . GameSpot 's Mc Shea felt that the morality system was too binary because there was no " moral gray area " between playing good and evil . Polygon 's Kollar reflected Mc Shea 's opinion that the morality choices were too binary , and had difficulty connecting to his choices because they were too polarized between good and evil . OPM 's Meikleham felt that the morality system had " little to no impact on gameplay " . Danny Cowan of Joystiq thought that the morality system was well-balanced , with equal incentive and drawback tied to Delsin 's choices . GameSpot 's Mc Shea found Second Son 's open world beholden to a dated formula . He described Seattle as " a playground for you to go nuts in " instead of " a living , breathing world " , with the Seattleites existing only as fodder for players . CVG 's Hussain called Seattle " hauntingly empty " , with the sparsely distributed NPCs behaving inanimately . He felt that the open world 's lifelessness was the game 's biggest detractor , and he drew unfavorable comparison with Grand Theft Auto V , Sleeping Dogs and Assassin 's Creed IV : Black Flag , which he felt featured better open worlds . Eurogamer 's Welsh felt that Second Son did not innovate the open world genre as well as it could have because it relied too heavily on many of the genre 's tropes . Polygon 's Kollar felt that there was not enough variation in the missions and activities , as " virtually all culminate in the goal of beating up more soldiers or thugs " . Edge found the amount of content in the game thin , finding little merit in additional playthroughs because of the repetitive side-missions . " Approach [ Second Son ] as an action game that just happens to be set in a nonlinear environment and it makes more sense " , they wrote . Destructoid 's Carter found the amount of content ample , and enjoyed liberating the city and collecting Blast Shards .

The 1973 Pacific hurricane season was an event in tropical cyclone meteorology . The most important system this year was Hurricane Ava , which was the most intense Pacific hurricane known at the time . Several other much weaker tropical cyclones came close to , or made landfall on , the Pacific coast of Mexico . The most serious of these was Hurricane Irah , which downed power and communication lines in parts of the Baja California Peninsula ; the other landfalling storms caused rain and some flooding . No tropical cyclone this season caused any deaths . This season had a quick start but a slow end . Overall activity was below average , with twelve named systems in total . Of these , five were tropical storms , seven were hurricanes , of which three were major ( Category 3 or higher on the Saffir-Simpson hurricane scale ) . Just one storm formed in August , one of the least active Augusts ever in the east Pacific . The season officially started May 15 , 1973 in the eastern Pacific , and June 1 , 1973 in the central Pacific , and lasted until November 30 , 1973 . These dates conventionally delimit the period of each year when most tropical cyclones form in the northeastern Pacific Ocean . All tropical cyclones this season formed in the eastern north Pacific Ocean , often off the coast of Mexico . As is usual in the northern hemisphere , most traveled generally westward or northwestward , and two reached as far as the waters south of the Hawaiian Islands .

The season began with the formation of the pre-Ava tropical depression on June 2 and ended with the dissipation of Tropical Lillian on October 9 . The season lasted a total of 129 days . No named storms formed in May , three in June , four in July , one in August , three in September , one in October , and none in November . Another six tropical depressions formed during the year , but data on them is unavailable . All of these tropical cyclones formed in the eastern north Pacific tropical cyclone basin , which encompasses the Pacific Ocean north of the equator east of 140 ° W. None formed in the central north Pacific , which is the remainder of the Pacific Ocean east of the international dateline . Of the tropical cyclones that formed this year , were twelve tropical storms and seven were hurricanes . Of those hurricanes , three of them were major hurricanes because they reached Category 3 or higher on the Saffir-Simpson Scale . These totals are all below the long-term averages of thirteen tropical storms , nine hurricanes , and four major hurricanes . At the time , this season 's total of twelve named tropical cyclones was exactly average , although at the time the climatology in this basin was weak because satellite coverage was spotty before 1966 .

A tropical depression formed on June 2 . It steadily strengthened and headed in a generally westerly direction . It moved slowly and became Hurricane Ava on June 4 . Two days later , it became a major hurricane and it sped up . On June 7 , it became a Category 5 hurricane . It then started weakening and slowed down until it dissipated on June 12 . No deaths or damages were attributed to Hurricane Ava . Ava 's minimum central pressure was 915 millibars , and its maximum sustained winds reached 140 knots ( 260 km / h ) . This made Ava the most intense recorded east Pacific hurricane at the time . Ava reached Category 5 intensity on June 7 , the earliest date in an east Pacific season that a hurricane has done so . It was also the second known Category 5 storm in the east Pacific ; ( behind Patsy in 1959 ) . Ava is the strongest June storm , the fifth most intense east Pacific hurricane , and was the only June Category 5 on record until 2010 . Ava was also flown into by hurricane hunter aircraft in what was the first penetration of a Pacific hurricane by NOAA aircraft . During these flights , radars and other devices were tested , and wind speed , pressure , and wave heights were measured . This is the reason why Hurricane Ava 's pressure is measured instead of estimated . Ava was also photographed from Skylab because it was visible during one of the missions . At that time , it was coincidentally on the surface of the Earth directly underneath the space station . All in all , these made Hurricane Ava one of the best-observed Pacific hurricanes at the time .

A nearly stationary disturbance in the Intertropical Convergence Zone spent three days organizing and finally developed into a tropical depression on June 22 . The cyclone started heading northwest . After intensifying into a tropical storm , Bernice made landfall on June 23 at a location roughly 50 mi ( 80 km ) southwest of Zihuatanejo . It dissipated later that day . Bernice exposed two ships to gales , but otherwise neither deaths nor significant impact was reported . At its peak , Tropical Storm Bernice had winds of 70 miles per hour ( 110 km / h ) .

On July 18 , a tropical storm formed from a disturbance in the Intertropical Convergence Zone and was named Doreen . It steadily intensified , and became a hurricane on July 19 . Doreen briefly reached Category 4 strength on July 21 with a relatively high central pressure of 972 mb ( 28.7 inHg ) . It then weakened steadily as its path carried it on a direct path to the Big Island of Hawaii . Doreen weakened to a tropical storm as it entered the Central Pacific Hurricane Center 's area of responsibility on July 25 . A frontal system stuck between two high-pressure areas weakened as the two areas merged , creating a larger high pressure area that turned Doreen to the southwest on July 27 . The hurricane then turned back to the northwest and strengthened back into a hurricane . It became a major hurricane again before weakening . Doreen dissipated August 3 . Its remnant vortex continued westward until it dissipated under a trough near the dateline . Doreen 's sudden change of track and restrengthening was unusual . From formation to dissipation , Doreen lasted 16.25 days and traveled a distance of 4,200 mi ( 6,760 km ) . This tied Hurricane Celeste 's record for longest-lasting Pacific hurricane . Doreen was also the longest-lasting July tropical cyclone . Hurricane Fico broke both of these records in the 1978 season . Doreen remains the eighth-longest lasting Pacific tropical cyclone , tied with two other storms . Several ships encountered Doreen . The most serious incident involved a Greek ship called Cornelia which lost its rudder in 35 ft ( 10 m ) waves , but managed to escape and continue on its way to Panama . On the afternoon of July 29 , 9 ft ( 2.7 m ) swells and 3.5 ft ( 0 m ) waves were seen from Kapoho . Otherwise , no damages or deaths were blamed on this tropical cyclone .

A depression formed July 21 from squalls in the Gulf of Tehuantepec and headed west-northwest and strengthened into a tropical storm . Emily continued moving nearly parallel to the coast before turning to the west while steadily intensifying . Emily eventually reached Category 4 intensity on July 22 . Emily then weakened as it turned to the northwest . It dissipated on July 28 . Emily 's wind field was large enough to bring gales areas 300 mi ( 480 km ) east of the hurricane from July 22 to 24 . This tropical cyclone caused no deaths or damage .

A depression formed September 22 . It became a tropical storm on September 23 and a hurricane on September 24 . Irah took a northwesterly path and reached Category 2 strength on the Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale , and then dropped back down to a 1 as it recurved . It made landfall on Baja California and entered the Gulf of California as a tropical storm , making landfall again in northwestern Mexico approximately 30 mi ( 50 km ) northwest of Los Mochis . Irah 's first landfall was the strongest of the season . The hurricane dissipated on September 27 while heading east-northeast over mainland Mexico . Irah blew over some power and communication lines during its passage over the southern tip of the Baja California Peninsula . Heavy rain fell over parts of Mexico , with the highest total being 10.24 in ( 260 mm ) at Sierra de la Laguna . One person was injured and at least ten houses were destroyed in Cabo San Lucas . No one was killed . There was some concern that the hurricane could disrupt splashdown procedures for astronauts at the end of Skylab 3 ; however , the return to Earth was not seriously affected .

On September 23 , another depression formed . It took a northeasterly path , rotating around the southern periphery of Hurricane Irah as part of a Fujiwara interaction . It strengthened into a tropical storm late on September 24 . The peak windspeed of this tropical cyclone was 40 miles per hour ( 60 km / h ) . Jennifer then weakened to a depression and turned to the north-northeast . Jennifer brushed the Islas Marías . The cyclone made landfall near just southeast of Mazatlán and dissipated September 27 . Tropical Depression Jennifer caused rain over several parts of Mexico . The highest total was 7.48 in ( 190 mm ) at Navarette / San Blas . No one was killed and no damage was reported .

Varaha Upanishad ( Sanskrit : वराह उपनिषत ् , " boar " ) is a minor Upanishad of Hinduism composed between the 13th and 16th centuries CE . Composed in Sanskrit , it is listed as one of the 32 Krishna Yajurveda Upanishads , and classified as one of 20 Yoga Upanishads . The text has five chapters , structured primarily as a discussion between Vishnu in his Varaha ( boar ) avatar and the sage Ribhu . The discussion covers the subjects of Tattvas , the nature and relationship between the individual soul ( Self , Atman ) and the Ultimate Reality ( Brahman ) , the seven stages of learning , the characteristics of Jivanmukti ( inner sense of freedom while living ) , and the four types of Jivanmuktas ( liberated persons ) . The last chapter of the text is dedicated to Yoga , its goals and methods . It is , as an Upanishad , a part of the corpus of Vedanta literature that presents the philosophical concepts of Hinduism . The Varaha Upanishad emphasizes that liberation from sorrow and fear requires a human being to know the non-dualistic nature of existence , oneness between Self , Brahman and Vishnu , and the role of Yoga in self-liberation , and lists ten Yamas ( virtues ) as essential to a liberation of one 's soul : nonviolence , satya , asteya , brahmacharya , compassion , rectitude , kshama , non-hypocrisy , mitahara , and shaucha . The text describes the Jivanmukta as one whose inner state , amongst other things , is neither affected by happiness nor by suffering inflicted on him , who does not shrink out of fear from the world , nor the world shrinks from him with fear , and whose sense of calm and inner contentment is free from anger , fear , and joy toward others .

Varaha means boar , specifically referring to the incarnation of Vishnu as a boar in Indian mythology . The term Upanishad means it is knowledge or " hidden doctrine " text that belongs to the corpus of Vedanta literature presenting the philosophical concepts of Hinduism and considered the highest purpose of its scripture , the Vedas . The text is also known as Varahopanishad . The text is listed as 98th in the modern era anthology that consists of 108 Upanishads . A Sanskrit text , it is considered one of the 32 Upanishads under the Krishna Yajurveda or Black Yajurveda . Classified as a Yoga Upanishad , the author , authenticity , and source of this Hindu text has been in question , and it is a late Upanishad . Varaha Upanishad was not listed in the anthology of known Upanishads published in the 17th century by Dara Shikoh , in the early 19th-century Henry Thomas Colebrooke anthology , or in the Narayana compilations of Upanishads .

The text opens by acknowledging Itihasa ( Epics , Ramayana and Mahabharata ) and other post-Vedic era texts , thus implying that it was composed in the common era . The text incorporates terminology such as Yogi Siddhi , suggesting that , like other Yoga Upanishads , it was composed after Yoga Sutras of Patanjali and other major Yoga texts . The text also incorporates sections on tantra terminology such as Chakra and Nāḍi in its discussion of Laya , Mantra , and Hatha yoga . The minor Yoga Upanishads , according to Antonio Rigopoulos , a professor of Indology at the University Ca ' Foscari of Venice , were recorded in the medieval period of India 's Advaita and Yoga-rooted traditions , possibly in the middle of the 2nd millennium CE , but may well represent already established ideas and practices before the epic and medieval period , given that they use concepts and terminology rooted in the 1st millennium BCE Vedic era text , such as pranava , Atman , and Brahman .

In Chapter 1 of the text , Varaha tells Ribhu first about the science of Tattvas , meaning " principles " . The Tattvas are said to be 24 , 36 , or even 96 by some teachers , which Varaha elaborates . In the Tattvas , asserts Varaha , are included the five sensory organs , five organs of action , five vital airs essential to a living body ( " Vital airs " of Prāṇa , Apāna , Uḍāna , Samāna , and Vyāna ) , five rudimentary principles of perception , and the faculties of knowledge – Manas ( mind ) which produces uncertain knowledge , Buddhi ( intelligence ) which leads to certain knowledge , " Chitta " ( emotional consciousness ) which produces doubts and fluctuations in knowledge , and " Ahankara " ( ego ) which produces egoism . These total 24 tattvas , states the text . Some scholars , asserts Varaha , expand the list of tattvas of a human body to 36 , by including the five elements – earth ( Prithvi ) , air ( Vayu ) , water ( Ap ) , ether ( Akasha ) , and fire ( Agni ) ; the three bodies – the gross , the subtle and the causal ( Karana ) ; three states of consciousness – when awake , when dreaming , and when in dreamless sleep ; and one jiva ( soul ) .

Varaha then describes how the list of tattva increases to 96 in verses 1.8 to 1.14 . It includes the six stages of changes ( Aiyar translates this to " existence , birth , growth , transformation , decay , and destruction " ) ; six maladies or " infirmities " ( hunger , thirst , suffering , delusion , age , and death ) ; koshas or six sheaths ( " skin , blood , flesh , fat , marrow , and bones " ) ; six adversities or foes of a body ( " longing , anger , craving , arrogance , and malice " ) ; three aspects of " jiva " – " Vishva " ( world ) , " Taijasa " ( endowed with light ) , and " Prajna " ( insight into nature of reality ) ; three " Guṇas " or qualities , innate psyche ( " Sattva , Rajas , and Tamas " ) ; three types of Karmas ( " Prarabdha " ( past karma now being enjoyed ) , " Sanchita " ( past karma yet to be enjoyed ) , and " Agamin " ( current karma to be enjoyed later ) ) ; five actions ( " talking , lifting , walking , excreting , and enjoying " ) ; and tattvas of " thought , certainty , egoism , compassion , kindness , anticipation , sympathy , and indifference " . To complete its list of 96 , the Varaha adds " Dik " , or the four quarters , all Vedic deities who are part of the human body , namely " Vayu " ( air , ear ) , Sun ( light , eye ) , " Varuna " ( water , tongue ) , Ashvini Devas ( nose ) , Agni ( fire ) , Indra , Upendra , and Mrityu ( death ) ; it includes the moon , the four-faced Brahma , Rudra , Kshetrajna ( the conscious knower of the body ) , and Ishvara .

The Varaha , in the 83 verses of Chapter 2 , explains to Ribhu how to achieve the most exalted knowledge of Brahmavidya , and then what it is . He tells Ribhu that the four means of this knowledge are to practice conduct of one 's Varna ( caste ) and one 's Ashrama ( stage in life ) , from ascetic austerity and with the help of a Guru ( spiritual teacher ) . The Varaha then states that the path to Brahmavidya is through the capacity to distinguish between the ephemeral and the eternal , detachment from the material world unto the spiritual world . A sincere longing for spiritual liberation and six virtuous qualities ( shama ) are essential in order to achieve Brahmavidya , asserts the Upanishad , these being tranquility , self-restraint , doing work without craving for rewards , endurance , faith , and meditation . Varaha states in verse 2.4 that the truly blessed are those who know Brahman and Atman and have thus become one with them . Ribhu then asks Varaha , " Taking birth as a human , that is also a male and a Brahmin is difficult , a yogi who has studied the Vedanta but who does not know the form of Vishnu , how can such an ignorant one become liberated ? "

Varaha replies in verses 2.7 – 2.9 that he alone is Supreme Bliss , that apart from the Atman ( soul ) there exists no Ishvara or phenomenal world . Those who know their Atman ( soul ) have no notions of Varna ( caste ) or Ashrama ( stage in life ) ; they see Atman as Brahman , they become Brahman and reach " Moksha " salvation even without seeking . That which is of the character of Truth , Knowledge , Bliss , and Fullness , states Varaha Upanishad in verse 2.16 , stands farthest away from Tamas ( darkness , destruction , chaos ) . Varaha states that what one aspires to is part of His own " light " , which is all-encompassing . As Atman , self effulgent , Varaha states that " Brahma-Jnanis " are those who see nothing but the Brahman , and they are happy and content in the universe despite being subject to sufferings . The Varaha Upanishad asserts the non-dualistic premise that Brahman and Atman are one , and those who know this fear nothing , suffer nothing , and possess fortitude . He is I , states Vishnu . " Become that , Ribhu ; Thou am I verily " , suggests Vishnu . Those high souled ones , who with the firm conviction that " I am the Brahman " , are the Jivanmukta , states verse 2.43 of the text .

According to the Upanishad , the entire universe evolves by Sankalpa ( a thinking , ideation process ) , one becomes what one thinks , metaphysics affects physics , and it is ideation that helps retain the appearances of the world . Following renunciation from this universe , which is also called a Sankalpa , the meditating mind is to be focused on the Nirvikalpa ( the unchangeable ) or the unchangeable part ( metaphysical reality ) . Varaha in verse 2.64 compares the " samsara " ( cycle of rebirth ) to the domain of karma , states Billington , one that is like a long dream ( " swapna " ) , a delusion , a sea of sorrow . It defines jivanmukta as someone who has overcome and attained liberation from this samsara through self-knowledge .

Varaha explains that through obeisance to Him who is found in everything , and doing meditation for just 48 minutes ( a muhurtha ) , will expand his wisdom to the state of " Pratyagatman " , the state of Atman which is forever liberated . It means living close to Jivatma ( soul ) and Paramatman ( the Supreme Soul ) . The Upanishad states that knowledge of Brahman results in knowing spiritual truth in the Paroksha ( indirect cognition ) way , but Sakshatkara ( direct realization ) results in knowing that his own soul is Brahman . And when a practitioner of Yoga becomes a Jivamukta ( liberated soul ) , he knows that his Atman is the ultimate perfection . To an enlightened person who has realized Brahman , the two words " bondage " and " moksha " mean " mine " and " not mine " . " Mine " is linked to a person , but " not mine " relates to one who is liberated from all thinking and knows Atman .

The Upanishad , in Chapter 3 , continues the sermon of Vishnu to Ribhu , that " Ribhu should develop the conviction that he himself is palpable Existence and Consciousness , indivisible , without a counterpart , devoid of all visibility , non-ailing , flawless , the Shiva without a double " . The text reasserts its non-dualism in Chapter 3 , adding that bhakti to Vishnu is the path to liberating knowledge of Brahman . In verse 3.14 – 3.15 , states Ayyangar , everyone is equal in the eyes of god , there is no difference between living forms and human beings based on law , family , caste , or clan , and everyone is one Truth and Absolute Brahman . The " Vishnu is Shiva " and " all is Shiva " theme repeats in verse 4.32 , which declares , " The Guru is Shiva , the Veda is Shiva , the Deva is Shiva , the Lord is Shiva , I Varaha am Shiva , all is Shiva , other than Shiva there is naught " . The Ultimate Truth , states the text , is that which always is , which preserves its nature over time , and which is unaffected by anything . The Atman , the Brahman , the " Chit , Sat and Ananda " , and Janardhana ( Vishnu ) is such Truth , and they are synonymous , one . Some try to seek Sidhis , asserts the Upanishad , through mantras , religious rituals , time , skill , medicine , or wealth , but such Sidhis are fleeting and fruitless . Be an Atmajnani ( one with Self-knowledge ) through Yoga , says Vishnu to Ribhu , and to such a person Siddhis are of no importance .

The Varaha Upanishad , in Chapter 4 , states that individuals gain knowledge through seven stages : First , one must have virtuous desire to learn , discover ( Subh-echchha ) . The second stage is inquiry , investigation ( Vichārana ) . Discernment and thinning of mind toward other objects ( Tanumanasi ) is the third stage , states the text . The fourth stage is harmony , creative union with the subject of knowledge ( Sattva-patti ) . Detachment from everything else ( Asamsakti ) is the fifth stage . Conceptual analysis and gaining complete , correct meaning of the topic ( Pad-artha-bhavana ) is the sixth stage . The seventh or last stage is Turiya , complete consciousness . The text states that AUM is a means for meditating on the nature of Atman and Brahman , wherein " A " represents Akara and Visva , " U " represents Ukara and Taijasa , M represents Makara and Prajna , the Ardhamatra that follows AUM , represents the Turiya .

The Varaha Upanishad , in a manner similar to many ancient and medieval era Hindu texts , discusses moksha in this life ( rather than afterlife ) , or Jivanmukti , calling those who have reached such a state a Jivanmukta ( self-realized person ) . The verses 4.21 – 4.30 describe the characteristics of a Jivanmukta ; Ayyangar and Aiyar state as follows : He who is engrossed in the ways of the world , yet his mind is steady , like ether , is said to be Jivanmukta He whose mental radiance neither rises nor sets , whose inner state is neither affected by happiness nor by misery inflicted on him , is said to be Jivanmukta He who is wakeful while remaining asleep , he whose mental alertness is devoid of impressions , is known as Jivanmukta He who responds to influences such as hatred , fear , love , yet his heart remains pure like Akasha ( aether , space ) , is said to be Jivanmukta He whose attitude is not be attached to anything , his intellect never clouded whether active or passive , is a Jivanmukta He who does not shrink out of fear from the world , nor the world shrinks from him , who is free from anger , fear and joy , is a Jivanmukta

Chapter 5 of the Varaha Upanishad is dedicated to Yoga , as a discussion between Ribhu and his student Nidagha . There are three types of Yoga , states the text , and these are Laya ( soft ) , Mantra ( mystic ) , and Hatha ( middle ) , recommending Hatha Yoga as foremost of three . It discusses various aspects of Yoga , ranging from recommending that healthy food should be eaten in temperate quantities , in small portions , several times a day , to recommending that Yoga should not be performed when one is not feeling well or is very hungry . The goal of Yoga , states Varaha , is manifold , including the gain of body strength and suppleness , acquisition of knowledge of one 's own body and its auras , meditation , and Self ( soul ) knowledge .

The axiology in the Varaha Upanishad is presented in Chapter 5 as ten Yamas and ten Niyamas . This list is similar to the list found in other Yoga texts such as the Shandilya Upanishad , as well as by Svātmārāma : The Varaha Upanishad along with the Shandilya , suggests ten niyamas in the sense of positive duties , desirable behaviors , and discipline . The Varaha 's axiological list in Chapter 5 for observances include : Āstika : faith in Real Self ( jnana yoga , raja yoga ) , belief in God ( bhakti yoga ) , conviction in Vedas / Upanishads ( orthodox school ) Īśvarapūjana : worship of the Ishvara ( God / Supreme Being , Brahman , True Self , Unchanging Reality ) Siddhānta śrāvaṇa : listening to the ancient scriptures , texts about ethics , values , and principles

The Upanishad makes mention of eleven asanas ( Yogic postures ) , of which two pertain to physiological postures : the Peacock and the Rooster . It describes squatting with folded legs known as Sukhasana , a meditative pose . Varaha gives a simile of an artist practicing dance to an orchestra , balancing a vessel on her head . She is focused only on the stability of the pot , in the same manner a practitioner of Yoga always contemplates on the Brahman . The yogic practice should be centered on the " spiritual sound " only . Immersion and self-absorption in music is a form of yoga . Varaha encourages introspection , and states that a person discerning his own mistakes will be free of attachments in life .

The Vettor Pisani class consisted of two armoured cruisers built for the Royal Italian Navy ( Regia Marina ) in the 1890s . The two ships of the class , Vettor Pisani and Carlo Alberto , were frequently deployed overseas during their careers . The former served in the Far East during the Boxer Rebellion of 1900 while the latter was involved in pioneering long-range radio experiments several years later before deploying to South American waters . Carlo Alberto then served as a training ship for several years . Both ships participated in the Italo-Turkish War of 1911 – 12 and played minor roles in World War I , during which time Carlo Alberto was converted into a troop transport and Vettor Pisani into a repair ship . They were both discarded in 1920 and subsequently scrapped .

The ships of the class had a length between perpendiculars of 99 meters ( 324 ft 10 in ) and an overall length of 105.7 meters ( 346 ft 9 in ) . They had a beam of 18.04 meters ( 59 ft 2 in ) and a draft of 7.2 meters ( 23 ft 7 in ) . They displaced 6,397 – 6,614 metric tons ( 6,296 – 6,510 long tons ) at normal load , and 7,057 – 7,128 metric tons ( 6,946 – 7,015 long tons ) at deep load . The Vettor Pisani class had a complement of 28 officers and 472 to 476 enlisted men . The ships were powered by two vertical triple-expansion steam engines , each driving one propeller shaft . Steam for the engines was supplied by eight Scotch marine boilers and their exhausts were trunked into a pair of funnels amidships . Designed for a maximum output of 13,000 indicated horsepower ( 9,700 kW ) and a speed of 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) , both ships exceeded their designed power during their sea trials although only Carlo Alberto met her designed speed . The two had a cruising radius of about 5,400 nautical miles ( 10,000 km ; 6,200 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) .

The main armament of the Vettor Pisani-class ships consisted of twelve quick-firing ( QF ) Cannone da 152 / 40 A Modello 1891 guns in single mounts . These 152 mm ( 6 in ) weapons had 40-caliber barrels . All of these guns were mounted on the broadside , eight on the upper deck and four at the corners of the central citadel in armored casemates . The M1891 guns weighed 6.6 metric tons ( 6.5 long tons ) and fired a 45.4-kilogram ( 100 lb ) , armor-piercing , capped shell at a muzzle velocity of 700 m / s ( 2,297 ft / s ) . Single 40-caliber QF Cannone da 120 / 40 A Modello 1891 guns were mounted at the bow and stern and the remaining two or four 120 mm ( 4.7 in ) guns were positioned on the main deck between the 152 mm guns . The 20.4-kilogram ( 45 lb ) armor-piercing shell had a muzzle velocity of 645 m / s ( 2,116 ft / s ) when fired by these guns . For defense against torpedo boats , the ships carried fourteen QF 57 mm ( 2.2 in ) Hotchkiss guns and six or eight QF 37 mm ( 1.5 in ) Hotchkiss guns . They were also equipped with four 450 mm ( 17.7 in ) torpedo tubes .

Vettor Pisani was the flagship of Rear Admiral Candiani , commander of the Cruising Squadron dispatched to China in 1900 during the Boxer Rebellion . She arrived at La Spezia in early 1902 , but only remained in Italian waters for a year before returning to the Far East for another year-long cruise . Carlo Alberto acted as the royal yacht for King Victor Emmanuel III when he attended the coronation ceremony for King Edward VII of the United Kingdom in 1902 . Victor Emmanuel invited Guglielmo Marconi to accompany him and conduct radio experiments en route . When the coronation was delayed by Edward 's illness , the ship took Victor Emmanuel to meetings with Tsar Nicholas II of Russia in Kronstadt . She then ferried Marconi across the Atlantic to Nova Scotia for experiments transmitting radio messages across the ocean . After 15 December , when Marconi successfully transmitted messages from Canada to England , Carlo Alberto was sent to Venezuelan waters during the Venezuelan crisis of 1902 – 03 , when an international force of British , German , and Italian warships blockaded Venezuela over the country 's refusal to pay foreign debts . From 1907 to 1910 she served as a gunnery and torpedo training ship .

Both ships participated in the Italo-Turkish War of 1911 – 12 . Vettor Pisani supported operations in the Adriatic and Aegean Seas and in the Dardanelles while Carlo Alberto took part in the assaults on Tripoli and Zuara and thereafter provided gunfire support to Italian forces in North Africa . Obsolescent by the beginning of World War I , neither ship was very active during the war . Vettor Pisani spent the war in the Adriatic and participated in an abortive attempt in mid-1915 to bombard a rail line near Ragusa Vecchia on the Dalmatian coast . An Austro-Hungarian submarine , U-4 , intercepted the Italian ships and sank the armored cruiser Giuseppe Garibaldi . Vettor Pisani subsequently became a repair ship in 1916 and was stricken from the Navy List on 2 January 1920 . She was sold for scrap and broken up beginning on 13 March . Carlo Alberto spent the almost the entire war based in Venice . She began conversion into a troop transport there in 1917 and the work was finished in Taranto early the next year ; she was recommissioned with the new name of Zenson . The ship was discarded on 12 June 1920 and subsequently scrapped .

The radius of maximum wind ( RMW ) is the distance between the center of a cyclone and its band of strongest winds . It is a parameter in atmospheric dynamics and tropical cyclone forecasting . The highest rainfall rates occur near the RMW of tropical cyclones . The extent of a cyclone 's storm surge and its maximum potential intensity can be determined using the RMW . As maximum sustained winds increase , the RMW decreases . Recently , RMW has been used in descriptions of tornadoes . When designing buildings to prevent against failure from atmospheric pressure change , RMW can be used in the calculations .

The RMW is traditionally measured by reconnaissance aircraft in the Atlantic basin . It can also be determined on weather maps as the distance between the cyclone center and the system 's greatest pressure gradient . Using weather satellite data , the distance between the coldest cloud top temperature and the warmest temperatature within the eye , in infrared satellite imagery , is one method of determining RMW . The reason why this method has merit is that the strongest winds within tropical cyclones tend to be located under the deepest convection , which is seen on satellite imagery as the coldest cloud tops . Use of velocity data from Doppler weather radar can also be used to determine this quantity , both for tornadoes and tropical cyclones near the coast .

In the case of tornadoes , knowledge of the RMW is important as atmospheric pressure change ( APC ) within sealed buildings can cause failure of the structure . Most buildings have openings totaling one square foot per 1,000-cubic-foot ( 28 m3 ) volume to help equalize air pressure between the inside and outside of the structures . The APC is around one-half of its maximum value at the RMW , which normally ranges between 150 feet ( 46 m ) and 500 feet ( 150 m ) from the center ( or eye ) of the tornado . The widest tornado as measured by actual radar wind measurements was the Mulhall tornado in northern Oklahoma , part of the 1999 Oklahoma tornado outbreak , which had a radius of maximum wind of over 800 metres ( 2,600 ft ) .

An average value for the RMW of 47 kilometres ( 29 mi ) was calculated as the mean ( or average ) of all hurricanes with a lowest central atmospheric pressure between a pressure of 909 hectopascals ( 26.8 inHg ) and 993 hectopascals ( 29.3 inHg ) . As tropical cyclones intensify , maximum sustained winds increase as the RMW decreases . The heaviest rainfall within intense tropical cyclones has been observed in the vicinity of the RMW . The radius of maximum wind helps determine the direct strikes of tropical cyclones . Tropical cyclones are considered to have made a direct strike to a landmass when a tropical cyclone passes close enough to a landmass that areas inside the radius of maximum wind are experienced on land . The radius of maximum wind is used within the maximum potential intensity equation . The Emanuel equation for Maximum Intensity Potential relies upon the winds near the RMW of a tropical cyclone to determine its ultimate potential . The highest storm surge is normally coincident with the radius of maximum wind . Because the strongest winds within a tropical cyclone lie at the RMW , this is the region of a tropical cyclone which generates the dominant waves near the storm , and ultimately ocean swell away from the cyclone . Tropical cyclones mix the ocean water within a radius three times that of the RMW , which lowers sea surface temperatures due to upwelling .

William Wilberforce ( 24 August 1759 – 29 July 1833 ) was an English politician , philanthropist , and a leader of the movement to abolish the slave trade . A native of Kingston upon Hull , Yorkshire , he began his political career in 1780 , eventually becoming the independent Member of Parliament for Yorkshire ( 1784 – 1812 ) . In 1785 , he became an Evangelical Christian , which resulted in major changes to his lifestyle and a lifelong concern for reform . In 1787 , he came into contact with Thomas Clarkson and a group of anti-slave-trade activists , including Granville Sharp , Hannah More and Charles Middleton . They persuaded Wilberforce to take on the cause of abolition , and he soon became one of the leading English abolitionists . He headed the parliamentary campaign against the British slave trade for twenty years until the passage of the Slave Trade Act of 1807 . Wilberforce was convinced of the importance of religion , morality and education . He championed causes and campaigns such as the Society for the Suppression of Vice , British missionary work in India , the creation of a free colony in Sierra Leone , the foundation of the Church Mission Society , and the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals . His underlying conservatism led him to support politically and socially controversial legislation , and resulted in criticism that he was ignoring injustices at home while campaigning for the enslaved abroad .

Wilberforce was born in a house on the High Street of Hull , in the East Riding of Yorkshire : England , on 24 August 1759 , the only son of Robert Wilberforce ( 1728 – 68 ) , a wealthy merchant , and his wife Elizabeth Bird ( 1730 – 98 ) . His grandfather William ( 1690 – 1774 or 1776 ) had made the family fortune in the maritime trade with Baltic countries , and had twice been elected mayor of Hull . Wilberforce was a small , sickly and delicate child , with poor eyesight . In 1767 he began attending Hull Grammar School , at the time headed by a young , dynamic headmaster , Joseph Milner , who was to become a lifelong friend . Wilberforce profited from the supportive atmosphere at the school until the death of his father in 1768 . With his mother struggling to cope , the nine-year-old Wilberforce was sent to a prosperous uncle and aunt with houses in both St James ' Place , London , and Wimbledon , at that time a village 7 miles ( 11 km ) south-west of London . He attended an " indifferent " boarding school in Putney for two years , spending his holidays in Wimbledon , where he grew extremely fond of his relatives . He became interested in evangelical Christianity because of their influence , especially that of his aunt Hannah , sister of the wealthy Christian merchant John Thornton , a philanthropist and a supporter of the leading Methodist preacher George Whitefield .

Wilberforce 's staunchly Church of England mother and grandfather , alarmed at these nonconformist influences and at his leanings towards evangelicalism , brought the 12-year-old boy back to Hull in 1771 . Wilberforce was heartbroken to be separated from his aunt and uncle . His family opposed a return to Hull Grammar School because the headmaster had become a Methodist ; Wilberforce therefore continued his education at nearby Pocklington School from 1771 to 1776 . Influenced by Methodist scruples , he initially resisted Hull 's lively social life , but as his religious fervour diminished , he embraced theatre-going , attended balls and played cards . In October 1776 , at the age of 17 , Wilberforce went up to St John 's College , Cambridge . The deaths of his grandfather and uncle in 1777 had left him independently wealthy , and as a result he had little inclination or need to apply himself to serious study . Instead , he immersed himself in the social round of student life , and pursued a hedonistic lifestyle enjoying cards , gambling and late-night drinking sessions — although he found the excesses of some of his fellow students distasteful . Witty , generous , and an excellent conversationalist , Wilberforce was a popular figure . He made many friends , including the more studious future Prime Minister , William Pitt . Despite his lifestyle and lack of interest in studying , he managed to pass his examinations , and was awarded a B.A. in 1781 and an M.A. in 1788 .

Wilberforce began to consider a political career while still at university , and during the winter of 1779 – 80 , he and Pitt frequently watched House of Commons debates from the gallery . Pitt , already set on a political career , encouraged Wilberforce to join him in obtaining a parliamentary seat . In September 1780 , at the age of twenty-one and while still a student , Wilberforce was elected Member of Parliament ( MP ) for Kingston upon Hull , spending over £ 8,000 to ensure he received the necessary votes , as was the custom of the time . Free from financial pressures , Wilberforce sat as an independent , resolving to be " no party man " . Criticised at times for inconsistency , he supported both Tory and Whig governments according to his conscience , working closely with the party in power , and voting on specific measures according to their merits . Wilberforce attended Parliament regularly , but he also maintained a lively social life , becoming an habitué of gentlemen 's gambling clubs such as Goostree 's and Boodle 's in Pall Mall , London . The writer and socialite Madame de Staël described him as the " wittiest man in England " and , according to Georgiana , Duchess of Devonshire , the Prince of Wales said that he would go anywhere to hear Wilberforce sing .

Wilberforce used his speaking voice to great effect in political speeches ; the diarist and author James Boswell witnessed Wilberforce 's eloquence in the House of Commons and noted , " I saw what seemed a mere shrimp mount upon the table ; but as I listened , he grew , and grew , until the shrimp became a whale . " During the frequent government changes of 1781 – 84 , Wilberforce supported his friend Pitt in parliamentary debates . In autumn 1783 , Pitt , Wilberforce and Edward Eliot ( later to become Pitt 's brother-in-law ) , travelled to France for a six-week holiday together . After a difficult start in Rheims , where their presence aroused police suspicion that they were English spies , they visited Paris , meeting Benjamin Franklin , General Lafayette , Marie Antoinette and Louis XVI , and joined the French court at Fontainebleau . Pitt became Prime Minister in December 1783 , with Wilberforce a key supporter of his minority government . Despite their close friendship , there is no record that Pitt offered Wilberforce a ministerial position in this or future governments . This may have been due to Wilberforce 's wish to remain an independent MP . Alternatively , Wilberforce 's frequent tardiness and disorganisation , as well as the chronic eye problems that at times made reading impossible , may have convinced Pitt that his trusted friend was not ministerial material . When Parliament was dissolved in the spring of 1784 , Wilberforce decided to stand as a candidate for the county of Yorkshire in the 1784 general election . On 6 April , he was returned as MP for Yorkshire at the age of twenty-four .

In October 1784 , Wilberforce embarked upon a tour of Europe which would ultimately change his life and determine his future career . He travelled with his mother and sister in the company of Isaac Milner , the brilliant younger brother of his former headmaster , who had been Fellow of Queens ' College , Cambridge , in the year when Wilberforce first went up . They visited the French Riviera and enjoyed the usual pastimes of dinners , cards , and gambling . In February 1785 , Wilberforce returned to the United Kingdom temporarily , to support Pitt 's proposals for parliamentary reforms . He rejoined the party in Genoa , Italy , from where they continued their tour to Switzerland . Milner accompanied Wilberforce to England , and on the journey they read The Rise and Progress of Religion in the Soul by Philip Doddridge , a leading early 18th-century English nonconformist . Wilberforce 's spiritual journey is thought to have begun at this time . He started to rise early to read the Bible and pray and kept a private journal . He underwent an evangelical conversion , regretting his past life and resolving to commit his future life and work to the service of God . His conversion changed some of his habits , but not his nature : he remained outwardly cheerful , interested and respectful , tactfully urging others towards his new faith . Inwardly , he underwent an agonising struggle and became relentlessly self-critical , harshly judging his spirituality , use of time , vanity , self-control and relationships with others .

At the time , religious enthusiasm was generally regarded as a social transgression and was stigmatised in polite society . Evangelicals in the upper classes , such as Sir Richard Hill , the Methodist MP for Shropshire , and Selina Hastings , Countess of Huntingdon , were exposed to contempt and ridicule , and Wilberforce 's conversion led him to question whether he should remain in public life . He sought guidance from John Newton , a leading Evangelical Anglican clergyman of the day and Rector of St Mary Woolnoth in the City of London . Both Newton and Pitt counselled him to remain in politics , and he resolved to do so " with increased diligence and conscientiousness " . Thereafter , his political views were informed by his faith and by his desire to promote Christianity and Christian ethics in private and public life . His views were often deeply conservative , opposed to radical changes in a God-given political and social order , and focused on issues such as the observance of the Sabbath and the eradication of immorality through education and reform . As a result , he was often distrusted by progressive voices because of his conservatism , and regarded with suspicion by many Tories who saw Evangelicals as radicals , bent on the overthrow of church and state .

In 1786 , Wilberforce leased a house in Old Palace Yard , Westminster , in order to be near Parliament . He began using his parliamentary position to advocate reform by introducing a Registration Bill , proposing limited changes to parliamentary election procedures . He brought forward a bill to extend the measure permitting the dissection after execution of criminals such as rapists , arsonists and thieves . The bill also advocated the reduction of sentences for women convicted of treason , a crime that at the time included a husband 's murder . The House of Commons passed both bills , but they were defeated in the House of Lords .

The British initially became involved in the slave trade during the 16th century . By 1783 , the triangular route that took British-made goods to Africa to buy slaves , transported the enslaved to the West Indies , and then brought slave-grown products such as sugar , tobacco , and cotton to Britain , represented about 80 percent of Great Britain 's foreign income . British ships dominated the trade , supplying French , Spanish , Dutch , Portuguese and British colonies , and in peak years carried forty thousand enslaved men , women and children across the Atlantic in the horrific conditions of the middle passage . Of the estimated 11 million Africans transported into slavery , about 1.4 million died during the voyage . The British campaign to abolish the slave trade is generally considered to have begun in the 1780s with the establishment of the Quakers ' antislavery committees , and their presentation to Parliament of the first slave trade petition in 1783 . The same year , Wilberforce , while dining with his old Cambridge friend Gerard Edwards , met Rev. James Ramsay , a ship 's surgeon who had become a clergyman on the island of St Christopher ( later St Kitts ) in the Leeward Islands , and a medical supervisor of the plantations there . What Ramsay had witnessed of the conditions endured by the slaves , both at sea and on the plantations , horrified him . Returning to England after fifteen years , he accepted the living of Teston , Kent in 1781 , and there met Sir Charles Middleton , Lady Middleton , Thomas Clarkson , Hannah More and others , a group that later became known as the Testonites . Interested in promoting Christianity and moral improvement in Britain and overseas , they were appalled by Ramsay 's reports of the depraved lifestyles of slave owners , the cruel treatment meted out to the enslaved , and the lack of Christian instruction provided to the slaves . With their encouragement and help , Ramsay spent three years writing An essay on the treatment and conversion of African slaves in the British sugar colonies , which was highly critical of slavery in the West Indies . The book , published in 1784 , was to have an important impact in raising public awareness and interest , and it excited the ire of West Indian planters who in the coming years attacked both Ramsay and his ideas in a series of pro-slavery tracts .

Wilberforce apparently did not follow up on his meeting with Ramsay . However , three years later , and inspired by his new faith , Wilberforce was growing interested in humanitarian reform . In November 1786 , he received a letter from Sir Charles Middleton that re-opened his interest in the slave trade . At the urging of Lady Middleton , Sir Charles suggested that Wilberforce bring forward the abolition of the slave trade in Parliament . Wilberforce responded that he " felt the great importance of the subject , and thought himself unequal to the task allotted to him , but yet would not positively decline it " . He began to read widely on the subject , and met with the Testonites at Middleton 's home at Barham Court in Teston in the early winter of 1786 – 87 . In early 1787 , Thomas Clarkson , a fellow graduate of St John 's , Cambridge , who had become convinced of the need to end the slave trade after writing a prize-winning essay on the subject while at Cambridge , called upon Wilberforce at Old Palace Yard with a published copy of the work . This was the first time the two men had met ; their collaboration would last nearly fifty years . Clarkson began to visit Wilberforce on a weekly basis , bringing first-hand evidence he had obtained about the slave trade . The Quakers , already working for abolition , also recognised the need for influence within Parliament , and urged Clarkson to secure a commitment from Wilberforce to bring forward the case for abolition in the House of Commons .

It was arranged that Bennet Langton , a Lincolnshire landowner and mutual acquaintance of Wilberforce and Clarkson , would organize a dinner party in order to ask Wilberforce formally to lead the parliamentary campaign . The dinner took place on 13 March 1787 ; other guests included Charles Middleton , Sir Joshua Reynolds , William Windham , MP , James Boswell and Isaac Hawkins Browne , MP . By the end of the evening , Wilberforce had agreed in general terms that he would bring forward the abolition of the slave trade in Parliament , " provided that no person more proper could be found " . The same spring , on 12 May 1787 , the still hesitant Wilberforce held a conversation with William Pitt and the future Prime Minister William Grenville as they sat under a large oak tree on Pitt 's estate in Kent . Under what came to be known as the " Wilberforce Oak " at Holwood , Pitt challenged his friend : " Wilberforce , why don 't you give notice of a motion on the subject of the Slave Trade ? You have already taken great pains to collect evidence , and are therefore fully entitled to the credit which doing so will ensure you . Do not lose time , or the ground will be occupied by another . " Wilberforce 's response is not recorded , but he later declared in old age that he could " distinctly remember the very knoll on which I was sitting near Pitt and Grenville " where he made his decision .

Wilberforce 's involvement in the abolition movement was motivated by a desire to put his Christian principles into action and to serve God in public life . He and other Evangelicals were horrified by what they perceived was a depraved and unchristian trade , and the greed and avarice of the owners and traders . Wilberforce sensed a call from God , writing in a journal entry in 1787 that " God Almighty has set before me two great objects , the suppression of the Slave Trade and the Reformation of Manners [ moral values ] " . The conspicuous involvement of Evangelicals in the highly popular anti-slavery movement served to improve the status of a group otherwise associated with the less popular campaigns against vice and immorality .

On 22 May 1787 , the first meeting of the Society for Effecting the Abolition of the Slave Trade took place , bringing like-minded British Quakers and Anglicans together in the same organisation for the first time . The committee chose to campaign against the slave trade rather than slavery itself , with many members believing that slavery would eventually disappear as a natural consequence of the abolition of the trade . Wilberforce , though involved informally , did not join the committee officially until 1791 . The society was highly successful in raising public awareness and support , and local chapters sprang up throughout Great Britain . Clarkson travelled the country researching and collecting first-hand testimony and statistics , while the committee promoted the campaign , pioneering techniques such as lobbying , writing pamphlets , holding public meetings , gaining press attention , organising boycotts and even using a campaign logo : an image of a kneeling slave above the motto " Am I not a Man and a Brother ? " , designed by the renowned pottery-maker Josiah Wedgwood . The committee also sought to influence slave-trading nations such as France , Spain , Portugal , Denmark , Holland and the United States , corresponding with anti-slavery activists in other countries and organising the translation of English-language books and pamphlets . These included books by former slaves Ottobah Cugoano and Olaudah Equiano , who had published influential works on slavery and the slave trade in 1787 and 1789 respectively . They and other free blacks , collectively known as " Sons of Africa " , spoke at debating societies and wrote spirited letters to newspapers , periodicals and prominent figures , as well as public letters of support to campaign allies . Hundreds of parliamentary petitions opposing the slave trade were received in 1788 and following years , with hundreds of thousands of signatories in total . The campaign proved to be the world 's first grassroots human rights campaign , in which men and women from different social classes and backgrounds volunteered to try to end the injustices suffered by others .

Wilberforce had planned to introduce a motion giving notice that he would bring forward a bill for the Abolition of the Slave Trade during the 1789 parliamentary session . However , in January 1788 , he was taken ill with a probable stress-related condition , now thought to be ulcerative colitis . It was several months before he was able to resume work , and he spent time convalescing at Bath and Cambridge . His regular bouts of gastrointestinal illnesses precipitated the use of moderate quantities of opium , which proved effective in alleviating his condition , and which he continued to use for the rest of his life . In Wilberforce 's absence , Pitt , who had long been supportive of abolition , introduced the preparatory motion himself , and ordered a Privy Council investigation into the slave trade , followed by a House of Commons review . With the publication of the Privy Council report in April 1789 and following months of planning , Wilberforce commenced his parliamentary campaign . On 12 May 1789 , he made his first major speech on the subject of abolition in the House of Commons , in which he reasoned that the trade was morally reprehensible and an issue of natural justice . Drawing on Thomas Clarkson 's mass of evidence , he described in detail the appalling conditions in which slaves travelled from Africa in the middle passage , and argued that abolishing the trade would also bring an improvement to the conditions of existing slaves in the West Indies . He moved 12 resolutions condemning the slave trade , but made no reference to the abolition of slavery itself , instead dwelling on the potential for reproduction in the existing slave population should the trade be abolished . With the tide running against them , the opponents of abolition delayed the vote by proposing that the House of Commons hear its own evidence , and Wilberforce , in a move that has subsequently been criticised for prolonging the slave trade , reluctantly agreed . The hearings were not completed by the end of the parliamentary session , and were deferred until the following year . In the meantime , Wilberforce and Clarkson tried unsuccessfully to take advantage of the egalitarian atmosphere of the French Revolution to press for France 's abolition of the trade , which was , in any event , to be abolished in 1794 as a result of the bloody slave revolt in St. Domingue ( later to be known as Haiti ) , although later briefly restored by Napoleon in 1802 .

In January 1790 , Wilberforce succeeded in speeding up the hearings by gaining approval for a smaller parliamentary select committee to consider the vast quantity of evidence which had been accumulated . Wilberforce 's house in Old Palace Yard became a centre for the abolitionists ' campaign and a focus for many strategy meetings . Petitioners for other causes also besieged him there , and his ante-room was thronged from an early hour , like " Noah 's Ark , full of beasts clean and unclean " , according to Hannah More . Interrupted by a general election in June 1790 , the committee finally finished hearing witnesses , and in April 1791 with a closely reasoned four-hour speech , Wilberforce introduced the first parliamentary bill to abolish the slave trade . However , after two evenings of debate , the bill was easily defeated by 163 votes to 88 , the political climate having swung in a conservative direction in the wake of the French Revolution and in reaction to an increase in radicalism and to slave revolts in the French West Indies . Such was the public hysteria of the time that even Wilberforce himself was suspected by some of being a Jacobin agitator .

This was the beginning of a protracted parliamentary campaign , during which Wilberforce 's commitment never wavered , despite frustration and hostility . He was supported in his work by fellow members of the so-called Clapham Sect , among whom was his best friend and cousin Henry Thornton . Holding evangelical Christian convictions , and consequently dubbed " the Saints " , the group mainly lived in large houses surrounding the common in Clapham , then a village to the south-west of London . Wilberforce accepted an invitation to share a house with Henry Thornton in 1792 , moving into his own home after Thornton 's marriage in 1796 . The " Saints " were an informal community , characterised by considerable intimacy as well as a commitment to practical Christianity and an opposition to slavery . They developed a relaxed family atmosphere , wandering freely in and out of each other 's homes and gardens , and discussing the many religious , social and political topics that engaged them . Pro-slavery advocates claimed that enslaved Africans were lesser human beings who benefited from their bondage . Wilberforce , the Clapham Sect and others were anxious to demonstrate that Africans , and particularly freed slaves , had human and economic abilities beyond the slave trade , and that they were capable of sustaining a well-ordered society , trade and cultivation . Inspired in part by the utopian vision of Granville Sharp , they became involved in the establishment in 1792 of a free colony in Sierra Leone with black settlers from the United Kingdom , Nova Scotia and Jamaica , as well as native Africans and some whites . They formed the Sierra Leone Company , with Wilberforce subscribing liberally to the project in money and time . The dream was of an ideal society in which races would mix on equal terms ; the reality was fraught with tension , crop failures , disease , death , war and defections to the slave trade . Initially a commercial venture , the British government assumed responsibility for the colony in 1808 . The colony , although troubled at times , was to become a symbol of anti-slavery in which residents , communities and African tribal chiefs , worked together to prevent enslavement at the source , supported by a British naval blockade to stem the region 's slave trade .

On 26 February 1793 , another vote to abolish the slave trade was narrowly defeated by eight votes . The outbreak of war with France the same month effectively prevented any further serious consideration of the issue , as politicians concentrated on the national crisis and the threat of invasion . The same year , and again in 1794 , Wilberforce unsuccessfully brought before Parliament a bill to outlaw British ships from supplying slaves to foreign colonies . He voiced his concern about the war and urged Pitt and his government to make greater efforts to end hostilities . Growing more alarmed , on 31 December 1794 , Wilberforce moved that the government seek a peaceful resolution with France , a stance that created a temporary breach in his long friendship with Pitt . Abolition continued to be associated in the public consciousness with the French Revolution and with British radical groups , resulting in a decline in public support . In 1795 , the Society for Effecting the Abolition of the Slave Trade ceased to meet , and Clarkson retired in ill-health to the Lake District . However , despite the decreased interest in abolition , Wilberforce continued to introduce abolition bills throughout the 1790s .

The early years of the 19th century once again saw an increased public interest in abolition . Since Napoleon had reintroduced slavery in the French colonies , support of abolition was no longer perceived as being pro-French . In 1804 , Clarkson resumed his work and the Society for Effecting the Abolition of the Slave Trade began meeting again , strengthened with prominent new members such as Zachary Macaulay , Henry Brougham and James Stephen . In June 1804 , Wilberforce 's bill to abolish the slave trade successfully passed all its stages through the House of Commons . However , it was too late in the parliamentary session for it to complete its passage through the House of Lords . On its reintroduction during the 1805 session , it was defeated , with even the usually sympathetic Pitt failing to support it . On this occasion and throughout the campaign , abolition was held back by Wilberforce 's trusting , even credulous nature , and his deferential attitude towards those in power . He found it difficult to believe that men of rank would not do what he perceived to be the right thing , and was reluctant to confront them when they did not .

Following Pitt 's death in January 1806 , Wilberforce began to collaborate more with the Whigs , especially the abolitionists . He gave general support to the Grenville – Fox administration , which brought more abolitionists into the cabinet ; Wilberforce and Charles Fox led the campaign in the House of Commons , while Lord Grenville advocated the cause in the House of Lords . A radical change of tactics , which involved the introduction of a bill to ban British subjects from aiding or participating in the slave trade to the French colonies , was suggested by maritime lawyer James Stephen . It was a shrewd move , since the majority of British ships were now flying American flags and supplying slaves to foreign colonies with whom Britain was at war . A bill was introduced and approved by the cabinet , and Wilberforce and other abolitionists maintained a self-imposed silence , so as not to draw any attention to the effect of the bill . The approach proved successful , and the new Foreign Slave Trade Bill was quickly passed , and received royal assent on 23 May 1806 . Wilberforce and Clarkson had collected a large volume of evidence against the slave trade over the previous two decades , and Wilberforce spent the latter part of 1806 writing A Letter on the Abolition of the Slave Trade , which was a comprehensive restatement of the abolitionists ' case . The death of Fox in September 1806 was a blow , and was followed quickly by a general election in the autumn of 1806 . Slavery became an election issue , bringing more abolitionist MPs into the House of Commons , including former military men who had personally experienced the horrors of slavery and slave revolts . Wilberforce was re-elected as an MP for Yorkshire , after which he returned to finishing and publishing his Letter , in reality a 400-page book which formed the basis for the final phase of the campaign .

Lord Grenville , the Prime Minister , was determined to introduce an Abolition Bill in the House of Lords , rather than in the House of Commons , taking it through its greatest challenge first . When a final vote was taken , the bill was passed in the House of Lords by a large margin . Sensing a breakthrough that had been long anticipated , Charles Grey moved for a second reading in the Commons on 23 February 1807 . As tributes were made to Wilberforce , whose face streamed with tears , the bill was carried by 283 votes to 16 . Excited supporters suggested taking advantage of the large majority to seek the abolition of slavery itself , but Wilberforce made it clear that total emancipation was not the immediate goal : " They had for the present no object immediately before them , but that of putting stop directly to the carrying of men in British ships to be sold as slaves . " The Slave Trade Act received royal assent on 25 March 1807 .

In his youth , Wilberforce showed little interest in women , but in his late thirties , twenty-year-old Barbara Ann Spooner ( 1777 – 1847 ) was recommended by his friend Thomas Babington as a potential bride . Wilberforce met her two days later on 15 April 1797 , and was immediately smitten ; following an eight-day whirlwind romance , he proposed . Despite the urgings of friends to slow down , the couple married at the Church of St Swithin in Bath , Somerset , on 30 May 1797 . They were devoted to each other , and Barbara was very attentive and supportive to Wilberforce in his increasing ill health , though she showed little interest in his political activities . They had six children in fewer than ten years : William ( b . 1798 ) , Barbara ( b . 1799 ) , Elizabeth ( b . 1801 ) , Robert Isaac Wilberforce ( b . 1802 ) , Samuel Wilberforce ( b . 1805 ) and Henry William Wilberforce ( b . 1807 ) . Wilberforce was an indulgent and adoring father who revelled in his time at home and at play with his children .

Wilberforce was deeply conservative when it came to challenges to the existing political and social order . He advocated change in society through Christianity and improvement in morals , education and religion , fearing and opposing radical causes and revolution . The radical writer William Cobbett was among those who attacked what they saw as Wilberforce 's hypocrisy in campaigning for better working conditions for slaves while British workers lived in terrible conditions at home . " Never have you done one single act , in favour of the labourers of this country " , he wrote . Critics noted Wilberforce 's support of the suspension of habeas corpus in 1795 and his votes for Pitt 's " Gagging Bills " , which banned meetings of more than 50 people , allowing speakers to be arrested and imposing harsh penalties on those who attacked the constitution . Wilberforce was opposed to giving workers ' rights to organise into unions , in 1799 speaking in favour of the Combination Act , which suppressed trade union activity throughout the United Kingdom , and calling unions " a general disease in our society " . He also opposed an enquiry into the 1819 Peterloo Massacre in which eleven protesters were killed at a political rally demanding reform . Concerned about " bad men who wished to produce anarchy and confusion " , he approved of the government 's Six Acts , which further limited public meetings and seditious writings . Wilberforce 's actions led the essayist William Hazlitt to condemn him as one " who preaches vital Christianity to untutored savages , and tolerates its worst abuses in civilised states . "

Wilberforce 's views of women and religion were also conservative . He disapproved of women anti-slavery activists such as Elizabeth Heyrick , who organised women 's abolitionist groups in the 1820s , protesting : " [ F ] or ladies to meet , to publish , to go from house to house stirring up petitions – these appear to me proceedings unsuited to the female character as delineated in Scripture . " Wilberforce initially strongly opposed bills for Catholic emancipation , which would have allowed Catholics to become MPs , hold public office and serve in the army , although by 1813 , he had changed his views and spoke in favour of a similar bill . More progressively , Wilberforce advocated legislation to improve the working conditions for chimney-sweeps and textile workers , engaged in prison reform , and supported campaigns to restrict capital punishment and the severe punishments meted out under the Game Laws . He recognised the importance of education in alleviating poverty , and when Hannah More and her sister established Sunday schools for the poor in Somerset and the Mendips , he provided financial and moral support as they faced opposition from landowners and Anglican clergy . From the late 1780s onward , Wilberforce campaigned for limited parliamentary reform , such as the abolition of rotten boroughs and the redistribution of Commons seats to growing towns and cities , though by 1832 , he feared that such measures went too far . With others , Wilberforce founded the world 's first animal welfare organisation , the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals ( later the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals ) . In 1824 , Wilberforce was one of over 30 eminent gentlemen who put their names at the inaugural public meeting to the fledgling National Institution for the Preservation of Life from Shipwreck , later named the Royal National Lifeboat Institution . He was also opposed to duelling , which he described as the " disgrace of a Christian society " and was appalled when his friend Pitt engaged in a duel in 1798 , particularly as it occurred on a Sunday , the Christian day of rest .

Wilberforce was generous with his time and money , believing that those with wealth had a duty to give a significant portion of their income to the needy . Yearly , he gave away thousands of pounds , much of it to clergymen to distribute in their parishes . He paid off the debts of others , supported education and missions , and in a year of food shortages , gave to charity more than his own yearly income . He was exceptionally hospitable , and could not bear to sack any of his servants . As a result , his home was full of old and incompetent servants kept on in charity . Although he was often months behind in his correspondence , Wilberforce responded to numerous requests for advice or for help in obtaining professorships , military promotions and livings for clergymen , or for the reprieve of death sentences .

A supporter of the evangelical wing of the Church of England , Wilberforce believed that the revitalisation of the Church and individual Christian observance would lead to a harmonious , moral society . He sought to elevate the status of religion in public and private life , making piety fashionable in both the upper- and middle-classes of society . To this end , in April 1797 , Wilberforce published A Practical View of the Prevailing Religious System of Professed Christians in the Higher and Middle Classes of This Country Contrasted With Real Christianity , on which he had been working since 1793 . This was an exposition of New Testament doctrine and teachings and a call for a revival of Christianity , as a response to the moral decline of the nation , illustrating his own personal testimony and the views which inspired him . The book proved to be influential and a best-seller by the standards of the day ; 7,500 copies were sold within six months , and it was translated into several languages . Wilberforce fostered and supported missionary activity in Britain and abroad . He was a founding member of the Church Missionary Society ( since renamed the Church Mission Society ) and was involved , with other members of the Clapham Sect , in numerous other evangelical and charitable organisations . Horrified by the lack of Christian evangelism in India , Wilberforce used the 1793 renewal of the British East India Company 's charter to propose the addition of clauses requiring the company to provide teachers and chaplains and to commit to the " religious improvement " of Indians . The plan was unsuccessful due to lobbying by the directors of the company , who feared that their commercial interests would be damaged . Wilberforce tried again in 1813 , when the charter next came up for renewal . Using petitions , meetings , lobbying and letter writing , he successfully campaigned for changes to the charter . Speaking in favour of the Charter Act 1813 , he criticised the British in India for their hypocrisy and racial prejudice , while also condemning aspects of Hinduism including the caste system , infanticide , polygamy and suttee . " Our religion is sublime , pure beneficent " , he said , " theirs is mean , licentious and cruel " .

Greatly concerned by what he perceived to be the degeneracy of British society , Wilberforce was also active in matters of moral reform , lobbying against " the torrent of profaneness that every day makes more rapid advances " , and considered this issue and the abolition of the slave trade as equally important goals . At the suggestion of Wilberforce and Bishop Porteus , King George III was requested by the Archbishop of Canterbury to issue in 1787 the Proclamation for the Discouragement of Vice , as a remedy for the rising tide of immorality . The proclamation commanded the prosecution of those guilty of " excessive drinking , blasphemy , profane swearing and cursing , lewdness , profanation of the Lord 's Day , and other dissolute , immoral , or disorderly practices " . Greeted largely with public indifference , Wilberforce sought to increase its impact by mobilising public figures to the cause , and by founding the Society for the Suppression of Vice . This and other societies in which Wilberforce was a prime mover , such as the Proclamation Society , mustered support for the prosecution of those who had been charged with violating relevant laws , including brothel keepers , distributors of pornographic material , and those who did not respect the Sabbath . Years later , the writer and clergyman Sydney Smith criticised Wilberforce for being more interested in the sins of the poor than those of the rich , and suggested that a better name would have been the Society for " suppressing the vices of persons whose income does not exceed £ 500 per annum " . The societies were not highly successful in terms of membership and support , although their activities did lead to the imprisonment of Thomas Williams , the London printer of Thomas Paine 's The Age of Reason . Wilberforce 's attempts to legislate against adultery and Sunday newspapers were also in vain ; his involvement and leadership in other , less punitive , approaches were more successful in the long-term , however . By the end of his life , British morals , manners , and sense of social responsibility had increased , paving the way for future changes in societal conventions and attitudes during the Victorian era .

The hopes of the abolitionists notwithstanding , slavery did not wither with the end of the slave trade in the British Empire , nor did the living conditions of the enslaved improve . The trade continued , with few countries following suit by abolishing the trade , and with some British ships disregarding the legislation . Wilberforce worked with the members of the African Institution to ensure the enforcement of abolition and to promote abolitionist negotiations with other countries . In particular , the US had abolished the slave trade in 1808 , and Wilberforce lobbied the American government to enforce its own prohibition more strongly . The same year , Wilberforce moved his family from Clapham to a sizeable mansion with a large garden in Kensington Gore , closer to the Houses of Parliament . Never strong , and by 1812 in worsening health , Wilberforce resigned his Yorkshire seat , and became MP for the rotten borough of Bramber in Sussex , a seat with little or no constituency obligations , thus allowing him more time for his family and the causes that interested him . From 1816 Wilberforce introduced a series of bills which would require the compulsory registration of slaves , together with details of their country of origin , permitting the illegal importation of foreign slaves to be detected . Later in the same year he began publicly to denounce slavery itself , though he did not demand immediate emancipation , as " They had always thought the slaves incapable of liberty at present , but hoped that by degrees a change might take place as the natural result of the abolition . "

In 1820 , after a period of poor health , and with his eyesight failing , Wilberforce took the decision to further limit his public activities , although he became embroiled in unsuccessful mediation attempts between King George IV , and his estranged wife Caroline of Brunswick , who had sought her rights as queen . Nevertheless , Wilberforce still hoped " to lay a foundation for some future measures for the emancipation of the poor slaves " , which he believed should come about gradually in stages . Aware that the cause would need younger men to continue the work , in 1821 he asked fellow MP Thomas Fowell Buxton to take over leadership of the campaign in the Commons . As the 1820s wore on , Wilberforce increasingly became a figurehead for the abolitionist movement , although he continued to appear at anti-slavery meetings , welcoming visitors , and maintaining a busy correspondence on the subject . The year 1823 saw the founding of the Society for the Mitigation and Gradual Abolition of Slavery ( later the Anti-Slavery Society ) , and the publication of Wilberforce 's 56-page Appeal to the Religion , Justice and Humanity of the Inhabitants of the British Empire in Behalf of the Negro Slaves in the West Indies . In his treatise , Wilberforce urged that total emancipation was morally and ethically required , and that slavery was a national crime that must be ended by parliamentary legislation to gradually abolish slavery . Members of Parliament did not quickly agree , and government opposition in March 1823 stymied Wilberforce 's call for abolition . On 15 May 1823 , Buxton moved another resolution in Parliament for gradual emancipation . Subsequent debates followed on 16 March and 11 June 1824 in which Wilberforce made his last speeches in the Commons , and which again saw the emancipationists outmanoeuvred by the government .

Wilberforce 's health was continuing to fail , and he suffered further illnesses in 1824 and 1825 . With his family concerned that his life was endangered , he declined a peerage and resigned his seat in Parliament , leaving the campaign in the hands of others . Thomas Clarkson continued to travel , visiting anti-slavery groups throughout Britain , motivating activists and acting as an ambassador for the anti-slavery cause to other countries , while Buxton pursued the cause of reform in Parliament . Public meetings and petitions demanding emancipation continued , with an increasing number supporting immediate abolition rather than the gradual approach favoured by Wilberforce , Clarkson and their colleagues . In 1826 , Wilberforce moved from his large house in Kensington Gore to Highwood Hill , a more modest property in the countryside of Mill Hill , north of London , where he was soon joined by his son William and family . William had attempted a series of educational and career paths , and a venture into farming in 1830 led to huge losses , which his father repaid in full , despite offers from others to assist . This left Wilberforce with little income , and he was obliged to let his home and spend the rest of his life visiting family members and friends . He continued his support for the anti-slavery cause , including attending and chairing meetings of the Anti-Slavery Society .

Wilberforce approved of the 1830 election victory of the more progressive Whigs , though he was concerned about the implications of their Reform Bill which proposed the redistribution of parliamentary seats towards newer towns and cities and an extension of the franchise . In the event , the Reform Act 1832 was to bring more abolitionist MPs into Parliament as a result of intense and increasing public agitation against slavery . In addition , the 1832 slave revolt in Jamaica convinced government ministers that abolition was essential to avoid further rebellion . In 1833 , Wilberforce 's health declined further and he suffered a severe attack of influenza from which he never fully recovered . He made a final anti-slavery speech in April 1833 at a public meeting in Maidstone , Kent . The following month , the Whig government introduced the Bill for the Abolition of Slavery , formally saluting Wilberforce in the process . On 26 July 1833 , Wilberforce heard of government concessions that guaranteed the passing of the Bill for the Abolition of Slavery . The following day he grew much weaker , and he died early on the morning of 29 July at his cousin 's house in Cadogan Place , London .

Wilberforce had requested that he was to be buried with his sister and daughter at Stoke Newington , just north of London . However , the leading members of both Houses of Parliament urged that he be honoured with a burial in Westminster Abbey . The family agreed and , on 3 August 1833 , Wilberforce was buried in the north transept , close to his friend William Pitt . The funeral was attended by many Members of Parliament , as well as by members of the public . The pallbearers included the Duke of Gloucester , the Lord Chancellor Henry Brougham and the Speaker of the House of Commons Charles Manners-Sutton . While tributes were paid and Wilberforce was laid to rest , both Houses of Parliament suspended their business as a mark of respect .

Five years after his death , sons Robert and Samuel Wilberforce published a five-volume biography about their father , and subsequently a collection of his letters in 1840 . The biography was controversial in that the authors emphasised Wilberforce 's role in the abolition movement and played down the important work of Thomas Clarkson . Incensed , Clarkson came out of retirement to write a book refuting their version of events , and the sons eventually made a half-hearted private apology to him and removed the offending passages in a revision of their biography . However , for more than a century , Wilberforce 's role in the campaign dominated the history books . Later historians have noted the warm and highly productive relationship between Clarkson and Wilberforce , and have termed it one of history 's great partnerships : without both the parliamentary leadership supplied by Wilberforce and the research and public mobilisation organised by Clarkson , abolition could not have been achieved . As his sons had desired and planned , Wilberforce has long been viewed as a Christian hero , a statesman-saint held up as a role model for putting his faith into action . More broadly , he has also been described as a humanitarian reformer who contributed significantly to reshaping the political and social attitudes of the time by promoting concepts of social responsibility and action . In the 1940s , the role of Wilberforce and the Clapham Sect in abolition was downplayed by historian Eric Williams , who argued that abolition was motivated not by humanitarianism but by economics , as the West Indian sugar industry was in decline . Williams ' approach strongly influenced historians for much of the latter part of the 20th century . However , more recent historians have noted that the sugar industry was still making large profits at the time of abolition , and this has led to a renewed interest in Wilberforce and the Evangelicals , as well as a recognition of the anti-slavery movement as a prototype for subsequent humanitarian campaigns .

Wilberforce 's life and work have been commemorated in the United Kingdom and elsewhere . In Westminster Abbey , a seated statue of Wilberforce by Samuel Joseph was erected in 1840 , bearing an epitaph praising his Christian character and his long labour to abolish the slave trade and slavery itself . In Wilberforce 's home town of Hull , a public subscription in 1834 funded the Wilberforce Monument , a 31-metre ( 102 ft ) Greek Doric column topped by a statue of Wilberforce , which now stands in the grounds of Hull College near Queen 's Gardens . Wilberforce 's birthplace was acquired by the city corporation in 1903 and , following renovation , Wilberforce House in Hull was opened as Britain 's first slavery museum . Wilberforce Memorial School for the Blind in York was established in 1833 in his honour , and in 2006 the University of Hull established the Wilberforce Institute for the study of Slavery and Emancipation in Oriel Chambers , a building adjoining Wilberforce 's birthplace . Various churches within the Anglican Communion commemorate Wilberforce in their liturgical calendars , and Wilberforce University in Ohio , United States , founded in 1856 , is named after him . The university was the first owned by African-American people , and is a historically black college . In Ontario , Canada , Wilberforce Colony was founded by black reformers , and inhabited by free slaves from the United States .

Clover is the production name given to the giant monster and the main antagonist in the 2008 film Cloverfield . The creature was originally conceived by producer J. J. Abrams and was designed by artist Neville Page . In the film , the monster 's name is never mentioned ; the name " Cloverfield " is only given to the US Department of Defense case file of the incidents depicted in the film . The Department of Defense names the creature " LSA " for Large-Scale Aggressor in the film 's Blu-ray special feature called " Cloverfield Special Investigation Mode " . The name Clover was the nickname affectionately given to the monster among the production staff .

J. J. Abrams conceived of a new monster after he and his son visited a toy store in Japan while promoting Mission : Impossible III . He explained , " We saw all these Godzilla toys , and I thought , we need our own [ American ] monster , and not like King Kong , King Kong 's adorable . But I wanted something that was just insane and intense " . The monster was designed by artist Neville Page . He sought a biological rationale for the creature , though many of his ideas would not show up on screen . Page designed the creature as immature and suffering from " separation anxiety " . He compared the creature to a rampaging elephant , saying " there 's nothing scarier than something huge that 's spooked " . Page said of the creature 's backstory , " For me , one of the most key moments in our collective brainstorming was the choice to make the creature be something that we would empathize with . It is not out there just killing . It is confused , lost , scared . It 's a newborn . Having this be a story point ( one that the audience does not know ) , it allowed for some purposeful choices about its anatomy , movement and , yes , motivations " . The creature was developed by visual effects supervisor Kevin Blank and Phil Tippett 's company Tippett Studio . Blank described the intended goal of the creature , " Rather than the monster having a personality [ like Godzilla or King Kong ] , it 's more of an entity or an event " .

Although conceived by the film 's creators as infantile , the creature is 25 stories tall ( compared as 240 – 300 feet , or 70 – 90 meters ) and withstands missiles , artillery shells , and bombs with minimal injury . It is vaguely quadrupedal , though capable of standing upright over short distances . The limbs are comparatively long and thin compared with the body core , and according to creator Neville Page , this , coupled with its quadrupedal stance , is meant to imply that it is a newborn : he speculates that the adults may be bipedal . The forelimbs are large in proportion to the body , and the hind legs stubby . The creature 's head at first glance appears to be a solid sphere ; but it can open its mouth extremely wide . Above the eyes on either side of the head are fleshy pouches which it inflates when agitated . The creature 's design includes appendages on its underbelly , described by Neville Page as an " elongated , and articulated external esophagus with the business end terminating in teethlike fingers " . They were designed to relate the scale of human prey to the huge scale of the creature . The scenes from the film where people were consumed by these appendages were cut from the final edit , but the fourth and final chapter of Cloverfield / Kishin shows this .

The creature is covered with parasites , which it sheds as part of a " post-birth ritual " . Abrams described the parasites as " horrifying , dog-sized creatures that just scatter around the city and add to the nightmare of the evening " . Reeves added that " The parasites have a voracious , rabid , bounding nature , but they also have a crab-like crawl . They have the viciousness of a dog , but with the ability to climb walls and stick to objects . " The top half of the parasite 's head is the mandible . The top and lower jaws end in serrated edges and have four pairs of eyes each . The rest of the parasite consists of a crustacean-like carapace , several pairs of claws , and arms . A deep blue-purple muscular membrane stretches between the top and lower jaws . When a human is bitten , the victim becomes ill and bleeds profusely , mainly from the eyes , and shortly after this , the torso expands and explodes . They are called HSPs ( Human Scale Parasites ) on the Blu-ray Special Investigation Mode . Artist Neville Page , in response to claims that the design of the creature was similar to that of the 2006 South Korean film The Host , said , " They are [ similar ] in that they ravage and seem to originate from the water , but the end results are quite different . However , when I finally saw some of the concept art , there were some very obvious similarities . But then again , I think that we were both channeling similar biological possibilities . "

Reviewing the film Cloverfield , the San Jose Mercury News described the creature as " a monster for the MySpace generation " . Reviewer James Berardinelli noted , " The movie follows the Jaws rule that monsters are usually more intimidating when they are shown infrequently and only in brief glimpses " . Amy Biancolli of the Houston Chronicle described the creature as retaining " an air of mystery — a monstrous je ne sais quoi that makes him all the freakier . " Richard Corliss of Time complained of the recycled elements of the creature , such as its emergence mimicking the original Godzilla film and its parasites being similar to the " toy meanies " from the 1984 film Gremlins . Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times expressed acceptance of the lack of explanation for the creature 's origin , explaining that it " is all right with me after the tiresome opening speeches in so many of the 30 or more Godzilla films " . Peter Howell of the Toronto Star thought that the " main " creature was disappointing , while he considered the " mutant spider crabs " that came from it as " way scarier " . Lawrence Person of Locus Online describes it as " like a cross between a truly giant mantis and Johnny the Skeletal Torso . " Todd McCarthy of Variety found that the creature was more reassuring as it appeared more in the film , explaining , " Its very nature as a walking , stalking being suggests it can somehow be killed by conventional means " . Chris Vognar of The Dallas Morning News applauded the creature 's appearance as cinematic :

The monster appears in the Robot Chicken episode " Especially the Animal Keith Crofford " . It rampages through New York until it reaches the future site of the Freedom Tower where it builds it in its own vision . The monster is parodied in the South Park season 12 episode " Pandemic 2 : The Startling " . The episode is a parody of the Cloverfield , with the monster replaced by giant guinea pigs . In Sam & Max Season 3 , at the end of " Beyond the Alley of the Dolls " , Max is transformed into a creature similar to the monster ( or more rather Cthulhu ) , and smashes off the Statue of Liberty 's head , and goes on to rampage through New York . In a strip from Starslip by Kris Straub ( # 705 - Jan 28 , 2008 ) , one of the main characters makes a reference to a supposed " Cousin Cloverfield " , " a member of [ their ] Behemoth class " who escaped and laid waste to one of Earth cities . On September 12 , 2010 , the strip Lio by Mark Tatulli featured Lio trying to lure the Cloverfield monster into a giant hamster cage as a pet .

Knut ( German pronunciation : [ ˈknuːt ] ; 5 December 2006 – 19 March 2011 ) was an orphaned polar bear born in captivity at the Berlin Zoological Garden . Rejected by his mother at birth , he was raised by zookeepers . He was the first polar bear cub to survive past infancy at the Berlin Zoo in more than 30 years . At one time the subject of international controversy , he became a tourist attraction and commercial success . After the German tabloid newspaper Bild ran a quote from an animal rights activist that decried keeping the cub in captivity , fans worldwide rallied in support of his being hand-raised by humans . Children protested outside the zoo , and e-mails and letters expressing sympathy for the cub 's life were sent from around the world . Knut became the center of a mass media phenomenon dubbed " Knutmania " that spanned the globe and spawned toys , media specials , DVDs , and books . Because of this , the cub was largely responsible for a significant increase in revenue , estimated at about five million euros , at the Berlin Zoo in 2007 . Attendance figures for the year increased by an estimated 30 percent , making it the most profitable year in its 163-year history .

Knut was born at the Berlin Zoo to 20-year-old Tosca , a former circus performer from East Germany who was born in Canada , and her 13-year-old mate Lars , who was originally from the Tierpark Hellabrunn in Munich . After an uncomplicated gestation , Knut and his unnamed brother were born on 5 December 2006 . Tosca rejected her cubs for unknown reasons , abandoning them on a rock in the polar bear enclosure . Zookeepers rescued the cubs by scooping them out of the enclosure with an extended fishing net , but Knut 's brother died of an infection four days later . Knut was the first polar bear to have been born and survive in the Berlin Zoo in over 30 years . Only the size of a guinea pig , he spent the first 44 days of his life in an incubator before zookeeper Thomas Dörflein began raising the cub . Knut 's need for round-the-clock care required that Dörflein not only sleep on a mattress next to Knut 's sleeping crate at night , but also play with , bathe , and feed the cub daily . Knut 's diet began with a bottle of baby formula mixed with cod liver oil every two hours , before graduating at the age of four months to a milk porridge mixed with cat food and vitamins . Dörflein also accompanied Knut on his twice-daily one-hour shows for the public and therefore appeared in many videos and photographs alongside the cub . As a result , Dörflein became a minor celebrity in Germany and was awarded Berlin 's Medal of Merit in honour of his continuous care for the cub . Dörflein died of a heart attack on 22 September 2008 . He was 44 years old .

In early March 2007 , German tabloid Bild-Zeitung carried a quote by animal rights activist Frank Albrecht who said that Knut should have been killed rather than be raised by humans . He declared that the zoo was violating animal protection legislation by keeping him alive . Wolfram Graf-Rudolf , the director of the Aachen Zoo , agreed with Albrecht and stated that the zookeepers " should have had the courage to let the bear die " after it was rejected , arguing that the bear will " die a little " every time it is separated from its caretaker . A group of children protested at the zoo , holding up placards reading " Knut Must Live " and " We Love Knut " , and others sent numerous emails and letters asking for the cub 's life to be spared . Threatening letters were also sent to Albrecht . The Berlin Zoo rallied in support of the baby polar bear , vowing not to harm him and rejecting the suggestion that it would be kinder to euthanise him . Albrecht stated his original aim was to draw attention to the law , not to have Knut put down . In December 2006 he had taken legal action against Leipzig Zoo to prevent them from killing a sloth bear cub rejected by its mother . His case was dismissed on the grounds that humans raising the animal would have been against the law of nature . In response to the criticism against him , Albrecht said that he was merely drawing parallels between the two cubs . The publicity from this coverage raised Knut 's profile from national to international .

On 23 March 2007 , Knut was presented to the public for the first time . Around 400 journalists visited the Berlin Zoo on what was dubbed " Knut Day " to report on the cub 's first public appearance to a worldwide audience . Because Knut became the focus of worldwide media at a very young age , many stories and false alarms regarding the cub 's health and well-being were circulated during his first year . For example , on 16 April 2007 , Knut was removed from display due to teething pains resulting from the growth of his right upper canine tooth , but initial reports vaguely stated that he was suffering from an unknown illness and subsequently put on antibiotics . Much ado was also made about a death threat that was sent shortly before 15 : 00 local time on Wednesday 18 April 2007 . The zoo had received an anonymous letter by fax which said " Knut ist tot ! Donnerstag Mittag . " ( " Knut is dead ! Thursday noon . " ) In response , the police increased their security measures around the bear . The time frame for the threat passed without incident or harm to Knut .

Despite Der Spiegel reporting on 30 April 2007 that Knut was " steadily getting less cute " as he increased in age , Knut continued to bring in record crowds to the zoo that summer . After reaching seven months old and 50 kg ( 110 lb ) in July 2007 , Knut 's scheduled twice daily public appearances were canceled due to the zoo 's concern for the safety of his keeper . Zoo spokeswoman Regine Damm also said it was time for the bear to " associate with other bears and not with other people . " After living in the same enclosure as Ernst , a Malaysian black bear cub who was born a month before Knut , and its mother , Knut was then moved to his own private living space . While visitor numbers dwindled from extreme highs in March and April , Knut remained a major attraction at the zoo for the rest of 2007 . 400,000 guests were recorded in August 2007 , which was an all-time high . News of Knut and his life at the zoo was still being reported internationally in late 2007 . Knut 's restricted diet , necessary to curtail his natural weight gain necessary to survive harsh winters , made headlines outside of Germany . His daily meals were reduced in number from four to three , and treats , such as croissants , which were favored by the young polar bear , were restricted . After hurting his foot while slipping on a wet rock in his enclosure a month later in September , there was an outpouring of concern and support from fans worldwide .

In November 2007 and weighing over 90 kg ( 198 lb ) , Knut was deemed too dangerous for close handling and his interaction with human handlers was further diminished . The celebration of the cub 's first birthday , which was attended by hundreds of children , was broadcast live on German television . The national mint also issued 25,000 special commemorative silver coins to mark his birthday . Knut 's role at the Berlin Zoo was to have included his becoming an " attractive stud " for other zoos in order to help preserve his species . When Flocke was born at the Nuremberg Zoo in December 2007 under similar circumstances , Bild dubbed her Mrs. Knut , suggesting that the two German-born polar bears might become mates when they matured .

A year after his public debut , Knut was reported as weighing more than 130 kg ( 286 lb ) . A plate of six-inch glass , strong enough to resist a mortar blast , was erected between him and zoo visitors . At the end of March 2008 , Markus Röbke , one of the keepers who helped rear Knut , reported that the bear should leave the zoo as soon as possible in order to help him acclimate to a life alone . Röbke also said that Knut plainly misses his past father-figure , Thomas Dörflein , and has become so used to attention that he cries when no one is near his enclosure . " Knut needs an audience , " Röbke stated . " That has to change " . In April , animal welfare campaigners criticized the zoo for allowing Knut to kill and eat ten carp from the moat surrounding his enclosure , saying that it was a breach of German animal protection regulations . The zoo 's bear expert , Heiner Klös , however , said that Knut 's behavior was " all part of being a polar bear . " In July 2008 , it was announced that the Neumünster Zoo in northern Germany , which owns Knut 's father , was suing the Berlin Zoo for the profits from Knut 's success . Although the Berlin Zoo conceded Neumünster 's ownership of Knut due to a previous agreement , it contended that the other zoo has no right to its proceeds . Neumünster had previously tried to negotiate with Berlin Zoo , but later sought a court ruling in their favor . Peter Drüwa , the zoo director at Neumünster , stated that they " do not want to remove Knut from his environment , but we have a right to our request for money . " Shortly before Knut 's second birthday , reports began circulating that the bear would have to be relocated to another zoo because he was becoming too large for his enclosure . The zoo later released statements that they wish to keep Knut , and the mayor of Berlin , Klaus Wowereit , also declared he wanted the still-adolescent cub to stay in the capital .

Disputes between the two zoos continued into 2009 . On 19 May , the Berlin Zoo offered to buy Knut from Neumünster and therefore negate their financial claim on the two-year-old polar bear . Although Neumünster Zoo set a price of € 700,000 , the Berlin Zoo stated that they would not pay " a cent more " than € 350,000 ( $ 488,145 ) . On 8 July , the Berlin Zoo agreed to pay € 430,000 ( $ 599,721 ) to keep Knut in Berlin . Giovanna , a female polar bear roughly the same age as Knut , was relocated to Berlin from Munich 's Hellabrunn Animal Garden in September 2009 . She was presented to the public on 23 September , and was due to briefly share Knut 's enclosure while her regular home in Munich underwent repairs . Her arrival sparked international interest , as many sources mused that the two bears ( although sexually immature ) would soon be " dating " . However , in March 2010 , the German chapter of People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals called for Knut to be castrated in order to avoid inbreeding ; he and Giovanna share a grandfather and , according to PETA spokesman Frank Albrecht , the same animal rights activist who spoke out about Knut 's handraising three years earlier , their offspring would threaten the genetic diversity of the German polar bear population . The Berlin Zoo declined to comment on the matter , only noting that Giovanna 's stay in Berlin was still temporary . In August 2010 , Giovanna was moved back to Munich after repairs on her enclosure were completed .

Until his death , Knut shared an enclosure with three female polar bears : Nancy , Katjuscha and his mother Tosca . The older bears were reportedly aggressive towards the young male bear , causing news reports in late 2010 to question whether Knut was being bullied . One of the zookeepers disagreed , stating publicly that " For the time being , Knut is not yet an adult male and doesn 't yet know how to get respect like his father did . But day by day , he is imposing himself and with time , this type of problem will go away . "

On 19 March 2011 , at the age of four , Knut collapsed and died in his enclosure . Witnesses reported that after the bear 's rear left leg began shaking , he became agitated before convulsing several times and falling backwards into the pool . Approximately 600 to 700 zoo visitors witnessed Knut 's death . A statement made on 22 March in relation to the necropsy reported there were " significant changes in the brain , which may be regarded as a reason for the sudden death " . Animal welfare organizations in Germany initially accused the Berlin Zoo of negligence , claiming that Knut died of stress caused by being forced to share his enclosure with three female polar bears . The zoo denied such claims . Bear curator Heiner Klös stated they " did everything to look after Knut — it 's normal for polar bears to live with other polar bears in a zoo , and the idea was that Knut should learn social behavior and other skills from the older females ... He played with the other bears , he was relaxed and strong . " On 1 April , pathology experts announced that Knut 's immediate cause of death was from drowning . The bear 's apparent seizure was due to his suffering from Anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis , a swelling of the brain likely triggered by an infection . It is unknown what infection caused the swelling , but pathologists believe it was a virus . Although Knut showed no symptoms of being ill , pathologists believe that " this suspected infection must already have been there for a long time ... at least several weeks , possibly months . " It was also announced that had Knut not drowned after collapsing , he would not have survived the encephalitis .

Knut 's sudden death caused an international outpouring of grief . Hundreds of fans visited the zoo after the bear 's death , leaving flowers and mementos near the enclosure . The mayor of Berlin , Klaus Wowereit , stated " We all held him so dearly . He was the star of the Berlin zoos . " In January 2014 , Knut 's full autopsy results were published by the Leibniz Institute for Zoo and Wildlife Research in the Journal of Comparative Pathology . It was the most in-depth post-mortem ever carried out on an animal . The autopsy revealed that the damage to the bear ’ s brain was so severe that even if he had not fallen into the water and drowned he would have died anyway . Experts hypothesized that he was suffering from a virus that caused the encephalitis . In August 2015 , it was discovered that Knut died of Anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis . This was the first case discovered in non human animals .

The zoo made plans to erect a monument in Knut 's honour , financed by donations from fans . Thomas Ziolko , the chairman of the Friends of the Berlin Zoo , was quoted as saying " Knut will live on in the hearts of many visitors , but it 's important to create a memorial for coming generations to preserve the memory of this unique animal personality . " On 24 October 2012 , the Berlin Zoo unveiled a bronze sculpture by Ukrainian artist Josef Tabachnyk . " Knut – The Dreamer " shows the bear " stretching out dreamily on a rock " . Knut 's remains were exhibited in Berlin 's Museum of Natural History , although this decision has caused some controversy with fans . A full-sized sculpture covered in Knut 's pelt was presented to the public on 16 February 2013 . It went on display in the entrance hall of the museum where it was viewed free of charge until 5 May . It will later be used for an exhibition on climate change and environment protection . Museum spokeswoman Gesine Steiner stated that " It 's important to make clear we haven 't had Knut stuffed . It is an artistically valuable sculpture with the original fur . "

The Berlin Zoo registered " Knut " as a trademark in late March 2007 . As a result , its shares more than doubled at the Berlin Stock Exchange ; previously worth around € 2,000 , the value closed at € 4,820 just a week later . The zoo reported that its attendance figures for 2007 increased by an estimated 30 percent , making it the most profitable it had been in its 163-year history . Knut earned the Berlin Zoo nearly € 5 million that year , mainly thanks to an increase in visitors as well as the amount of merchandise sold . Various companies profited from the attention surrounding Knut by developing themed products such as ringtones and cuddly toys . Plush toy company Steiff produced several Knut-based plush toys in three sizes and models : sitting , standing , and lying down . The first 2,400 produced toys , which sold exclusively at the Berlin Zoo , sold out in only four days . The money raised from the Steiff deal was intended to be used to renovate the polar bear enclosure at the zoo . Candy company Haribo released a raspberry-flavored gummy bear sweet called Cuddly Knut beginning in April 2007 . They pledged to donate ten cents to the zoo for every tub of Knut sweets it sold . The gummy bears sold so well that the Bonn-based company had to expand production to a second factory to deal with demand .

Knut was the subject of several popular songs in Germany , the most successful of which were the singles " Knut is Cute " and " Knut , der kleine Eisbär " ( English : " Knut , the little polar bear " ) by nine-year-old Kitty from Köpenick . In Britain , musical comedian Mitch Benn has performed four songs about Knut for BBC Radio 4 satirical series The Now Show : " The Baby Bear Must DIE ! " , " Knut Isn 't Cute Anymore " , " Goodbye Knut " and " Panda in Berlin " . A blog with updates about the polar bear was maintained by a journalist at the regional public broadcaster Rundfunk Berlin-Brandenburg ; it was available in German , English , and Spanish . RBB was also responsible for a weekly television program dedicated to the polar bear cub that was broadcast in Germany . Knut has also been the subject of several DVDs , including one entitled " Knut – Stories from a Polar Bear 's Nursery " . On 29 March 2007 he appeared on the cover of the German Vanity Fair magazine , which included a several page spread about the cub 's life .

On 1 May 2007 , it was announced that New York-based Turtle Pond Publications and the Berlin Zoo had signed a deal for the worldwide publishing rights to Knut with the hopes of raising awareness of global warming issues . Written by Craig Hatkoff and his daughters Juliana and Isabella , the 44-page book entitled Knut , der kleine Eisbärenjunge ( Little Polar Bear Knut ) includes Knut 's life story as well as previously unpublished photographs . Although several books about Knut had already been published in Germany , this book was the first to be authorized by the Berlin Zoo . The book was published in Germany by Ravensburger on 26 July 2007 and US publishing company Scholastic released the English version , entitled Knut : How one little polar bear captivated the world , in the United States in November of the same year . Rights to the book have also been sold to publishers in Japan , England , Mexico , China , and Italy . On 31 December 2007 , the zoo 's director confirmed the zoo had received a proposal for a film deal from Hollywood film producer Ash R. Shah , whose films include Supernova and Shark Bait , to make an animated film about the bear 's life . Shah reportedly approached the Berlin Zoo with a purported € 3.5 million film deal . Knut made his big screen debut in the German film Knut und seine Freunde ( Knut and His Friends ) , which premiered in Berlin on 2 March 2008 . Directed by Michael Johnson , the film depicts how Knut was rescued after his mother abandoned him and also features a polar bear family from the Arctic and two brown bear cubs from Belarus .

Dr. Gerald Uhlich , of the Berlin zoo 's board of trustees , stated that because of his vast popularity , Knut had become a means of communication and that he had the ability to " draw attention to the environment in a nice way . Not in a threatening , scolding way . " As a result , the German Environment Minister Sigmar Gabriel officially adopted Knut as the mascot for a conference on endangered species to be held in Bonn in 2008 . The minister met with Knut soon after his zoo debut , commenting that although Knut was in safe hands , " worldwide polar bears are in danger and if Knut can help the cause , then that is a good thing . " Photographer Annie Leibovitz took pictures of Knut that were used for an environmental campaign , including Vanity Fair magazine 's May 2007 Green Issue in which he was superimposed into a photograph with American actor Leonardo DiCaprio . The polar bear has also been depicted on the logo for the German Environment Minister 's campaign to help stop global warming and a 2008 special issue stamp . Officially released on 9 April , the stamp shows the roughly one-year-old Knut with the slogan " Natur weltweit bewahren " ( " Preserve nature worldwide " ) .

Major Michael John O 'Leary VC ( 29 September 1890 – 2 August 1961 ) was an Irish recipient of the Victoria Cross , the most prestigious award for gallantry in the face of the enemy that can be awarded to British and Commonwealth forces . O 'Leary achieved his award for single-handedly charging and destroying two German barricades defended by machine gun positions near the French village of Cuinchy , in a localised operation on the Western Front during the First World War . At the time of his action , O 'Leary was a nine-year veteran of the British armed forces and by the time he retired from the British Army in 1921 , he had reached the rank of lieutenant . He served in the army again during the Second World War , although his later service was blighted by periods of ill-health . At his final retirement from the military in 1945 , O 'Leary was an Army major in command of a prisoner of war camp . Between the wars , O 'Leary spent many years employed as a police officer in Canada and is sometimes considered to be a Canadian recipient of the Victoria Cross . Following the Second World War he worked as a building contractor in London , where he died in 1961 .

O 'Leary was born in 1890 , one of four children of Daniel and Margaret O 'Leary , who owned a farm at Inchigeela , near Macroom in County Cork , Ireland . Daniel O 'Leary was a fervent Irish nationalist and keen sportsman who participated in competitive weightlifting and football . Aged 16 and unwilling to continue to work on his parent 's land , Michael O 'Leary joined the Royal Navy , serving at the shore establishment HMS Vivid at Devonport for several years until rheumatism in his knees forced his departure from the service . Within a few months however , O 'Leary had again tired of the farm and joined the Irish Guards regiment of the British Army . O 'Leary served three years with the Irish Guards , leaving in August 1913 to join the Royal Northwest Mounted Police ( RNWMP ) in Saskatchewan , Canada . Operating from Regina , Constable O 'Leary was soon commended for his bravery in capturing two criminals following a two-hour gunbattle , for which service he was presented with a gold ring . At the outbreak of the First World War in Europe during August 1914 , O 'Leary was given permission to leave the RNWMP and return to Britain in order to rejoin the army as an active reservist . On 22 October , O 'Leary was mobilized and on 23 November he joined his regiment in France , then fighting with the British Expeditionary Force , entrenched in Flanders .

During December 1914 , O 'Leary saw heavy fighting with the Irish Guards and was Mentioned in Despatches and subsequently promoted to Lance Corporal on 5 January 1915 . Three weeks later , on 30 January , the Irish Guards were ordered to prepare for an attack on German positions near Cuinchy on the La Bassée Canal , a response to a successful German operation in the area five days before . The Germans attacked first however , and on the morning of 1 February seized a stretch of canal embankment on the western end of the 2nd Brigade line from a company of Coldstream Guards . This section , known as the Hollow , was tactically important as it defended a culvert that passed underneath a railway embankment . 4 Company of Irish Guards , originally in reserve , were tasked with joining the Coldstream Guards in retaking the position at 04 : 00 , but the attack was met with heavy machine gun fire and most of the assault party , including all of the Irish Guards officers , were killed or wounded . To replace these officers , Second Lieutenant Innes of 1 Company was ordered forward to gather the survivors and withdraw , forming up at a barricade on the edge of the Hollow . Innes regrouped the survivors and , following a heavy bombardment from supporting artillery and with his own company providing covering fire , assisted the Coldstream Guards in a second attack at 10 : 15 . Weighed down with entrenching equipment , the attacking Coldstream Guardsmen faltered and began to suffer heavy casualties . Innes too came under heavy fire from a German barricade to their front equipped with a machine gun .

Michael O 'Leary had been serving as Innes 's orderly , and had joined him in the operations earlier in the morning and again in the second attack . Charging past the rest of the assault party , O 'Leary closed with the first German barricade at the top of the railway embankment and fired five shots , killing the gun 's crew . Continuing forward , O 'Leary confronted a second barricade , also armed with a machine gun 60 yards ( 55 m ) further on and again mounted the railway embankment , to avoid the marshy ground on either side . The Germans spotted his approach , but could not bring their gun to bear on him before he opened fire , killing three soldiers and capturing two others after he ran out of ammunition . Reportedly , O 'Leary had made his advance on the second barricade " intent upon killing another German to whom he had taken a dislike " . Having disabled both guns and enabled the recapture of the British position , O 'Leary then returned to his unit with his prisoners , apparently " as cool as if he had been for a walk in the park . " For his actions , O 'Leary received a battlefield promotion to sergeant on 4 February and was recommended for the Victoria Cross , which was gazetted on 18 February :

Returning to Britain to receive his medal from King George V at Buckingham Palace on 22 June 1915 , O 'Leary was given a grand reception attended by thousands of Londoners in Hyde Park on 10 July . He was also the subject of much patriotic writing , including a poem in the Daily Mail and the short play O 'Flaherty V.C. by George Bernard Shaw . Tributes came from numerous prominent figures of the day , including Sir Arthur Conan Doyle who said that " No writer in fiction would dare to fasten such an achievement on any of his characters , but the Irish have always had a reputation of being wonderful fighters , and Lance-Corporal Michael O ’ Leary is clearly one of them . " and Thomas Scanlan who said : " I heard early this week of the great achievements of the Irish Guards . All Ireland is proud of O ’ Leary . He fully deserves the high honour that has been conferred upon him . Ireland is grateful to him . " His reception was repeated in Macroom when he visited Ireland , with crowds turning out to applaud him . Daniel O 'Leary was interviewed in a local newspaper regarding his son 's exploit but was reportedly unimpressed , commenting : " I am surprised he didn 't do more . I often laid out twenty men myself with a stick coming from Macroom Fair , and it is a bad trial of Mick that he could kill only eight , and he having a rifle and bayonet . "

O 'Leary was further rewarded for his service , being advanced to a commissioned rank as a second lieutenant with the Connaught Rangers , and he was also presented with a Russian decoration , the Cross of St. George ( third class ) . Despite his popularity with the crowds in London and Macroom , he was jeered by Ulster Volunteers at a recruitment drive in Ballaghaderrin during the autumn of 1915 . This treatment caused such a scandal that it was raised in the Houses of Parliament in December . In 1916 , O 'Leary travelled to Salonika with the 5th battalion of the Connaught Rangers to serve in the Balkans campaign , remaining in theatre until the end of the war , following which he was stationed in Dover with the 2nd battalion until demobilised in 1921 . During his service in the Balkans , O 'Leary contracted malaria , which was to have severe negative effects on his health for the rest of his life . He was in the same regiment as the British actor Stanley Holloway and both served together in France . After the war ended , they both remained close friends and Holloway often stayed in The May Fair where O 'Leary later worked as a concierge .

Leaving his wife Greta and their two children in Britain , O 'Leary returned to Canada in March 1921 with the purported intention of rejoining the RNWMP , newly renamed the Royal Canadian Mounted Police . For unknown reasons , this plan came to nothing and after some months giving lectures on his war service and working in a publishing house , O 'Leary joined the Ontario Provincial Police , charged with enforcing the prohibition laws . In 1924 , with his family recently arrived from England , O 'Leary left the Ontario police force and became a police sergeant with the Michigan Central Railway in Bridgeburg , Ontario , receiving £ 33 a month . In 1925 , O 'Leary was the subject of several scandals , being arrested for smuggling illegal immigrants and later for irregularities in his investigations . Although he was acquitted both times , he spent a week in prison following the second arrest and lost his job with the railway . Several months later , the municipal authorities in Hamilton , Ontario loaned him £ 70 to pay for him and his family to return to Ireland . Although his family sailed on the SS Leticia , O 'Leary remained in Ontario , working with the attorney general 's office .

With his health in serious decline , the British Legion arranged for O 'Leary to return to Britain and work in their poppy factory . By 1932 , O 'Leary was living in Southborne Avenue in Colindale , had regained his health and found employment as a commissionaire at The May Fair in London , at which he was involved in charitable events for wounded servicemen . With the mobilisation of the British Army in 1939 , O 'Leary returned to military service as a captain in the Middlesex Regiment . O 'Leary was sent to France as part of the British Expeditionary Force but had returned to Britain before the Battle of France due to a recurrence of his malaria . No longer fit for full active service , O 'Leary was transferred to the Pioneer Corps and took command of a prisoner of war camp in Southern England . In 1945 , he was discharged from the military as unfit for duty on medical grounds as a major and found work as a building contractor , in which career he remained until his retirement in 1954 . Two of O 'Leary 's sons had also served in the military during the war , with both receiving Distinguished Flying Crosses for their actions . As a Victoria Cross recipient , O 'Leary joined the VE day parade in 1946 , but at the 1956 Centenary VC review his place was taken by an imposter travelling in a bath chair . With his health again declining , O 'Leary moved to Limesdale Gardens in Edgware shortly before his death in 1961 at the Whittington Hospital in Islington .

O 'Leary was buried at Mill Hill Cemetery following a funeral service at the Roman Catholic Annunciation Church in Burnt Oak which was attended by an honour guard from the Irish Guards and six of his children . His medals were later presented to the Irish Guards , and are on display at the Regimental Headquarters . He is also remembered in his birthplace , the macroom-online website listing him as a prominent citizen and states that " while many might consider he was fighting with the wrong army , in the wrong war , he was nevertheless a very brave , resourceful and capable soldieer [ sic ] who deserved the honours bestowed upon him . "

Mari ( modern Tell Hariri ) , was an ancient Semitic city in Syria . Its remains constitute a tell located 11 kilometers north-west of Abu Kamal on the Euphrates river western bank , some 120 kilometers southeast of Deir ez-Zor . It flourished as a trade center and hegemonic state between 2900 BC and 1759 BC . As a purposely built city , the existence of Mari was related to its position in the middle of the Euphrates trade routes ; this position made it an intermediary between Sumer in the south and the Levant in the west . Mari was first abandoned in the middle of the 26th century BC but was rebuilt and became the capital of a hegemonic East-Semitic state before 2500 BC . This second Mari engaged in a long war with its rival Ebla , and is known for its strong affinity with the Sumerian culture . It was destroyed in the 23rd century BC by the Akkadians who allowed the city to be rebuilt and appointed a military governor bearing the title of Shakkanakku ( military governor ) . The governors later became independent with the rapid disintegration of the Akkadian empire and rebuilt the city as a regional center in the middle Euphrates valley . The Shakkanakkus ruled Mari until the second half of the 19th century BC when the dynasty collapsed for unknown reasons . A short time after the Shakkanakku collapse , Mari became the capital of the Amorite Lim dynasty . The Amorite Mari was short lived as it was annexed by Babylonia in c . 1761 BC , but the city survived as a small settlement under the rule of the Babylonians and the Assyrians before being abandoned and forgotten during the Hellenistic period .

The Mariotes worshiped both Semitic and Sumerian deities and established their city as a center of old trade . However , although the pre-Amorite periods were characterized by heavy Sumerian cultural influence , Mari was not a city of Sumerian immigrants but rather a Semitic speaking nation that used a dialect similar to Eblaite . The Amorites were West-Semites who began to settle the area before the 21st century BC ; by the Lim dynasty 's era ( c . 1830 BC ) , they became the dominant population in the Fertile Crescent . Mari 's discovery in 1933 provided an important insight into the geopolitical map of ancient Mesopotamia and Syria , due to the discovery of more than 25,000 tablets that contained important information about the administration of state during the second millennium BC and the nature of diplomatic relations between the political entities in the region . They also revealed the wide trading networks of the 18th century BC , which connected areas as far as Afghanistan in Southern Asia and Crete in the Mediterranean region .

Mari is not considered a small settlement that later grew , but rather a new city that was purposely founded during the Mesopotamian Early Dynastic period I c . 2900 BC , to control the waterways of the Euphrates trade routes that connect the Levant with the Sumerian south . The city was built about 1 to 2 kilometers away from the Euphrates river to protect it from floods , and was connected to the river by an artificial canal that was between 7 and 10 kilometers long depending on which old meander it used to be attached with , which is hard to identify today . The city is difficult to excavate , as it is buried deep under the later layers of habitation . A defensive system against floods , composed of a circular embankment was unearthed , in addition to a circular 6.7 m thick internal rampart to protect the city from enemies . An area of 300 meters long filled with gardens and craftsmen quarters , separated the outer embankment from the inner rampart which had a height of 8 to 10 meters , and was strengthened by defensive towers . Other findings includes one of the city gates , a street beginning at the center and ending at the gate , in addition to residential houses . Mari had a central mound , however no temple or palaces have been unearthed , although a large building that seem to have been an administrative one was unearthed , this building had stone foundations and dimensions of ( 32 meters X 25 meters ) , with rooms up to 12 meters long and 6 meters wide . The city was abandoned at the end of the Early Dynastic period II c . 2550 BC for unknown reasons .

Around the beginning of the Early Dynastic period III ( earlier than 2500 BC ) , Mari was rebuilt and populated again . The new city kept many of the first city exterior features , including the internal rampart and gate . Also kept , the outer circular embankment measuring 1.9 km in diameter , which was topped by a wall that is two meters thick , suitable for the protection of archers . However , the internal structure was completely changed , the city was carefully planned ; first to be built were the streets that descends from the elevated center into the gates , assuring the drainage of rain water . At the heart of the city , a royal palace was built which also served as a temple . Four successive architectural levels from the second kingdom 's palace have been unearthed ( the oldest is designated P3 , while the latest is P0 ) , and the last two levels are dated to the Akkadian period . The first two levels were excavated , the findings includes a temple named Enceinte Sacrée , which was the largest in the city but it is unknown for whom it was dedicated . Also unearthed , a pillared throne room and a hall that have three double wood pillars leading to the temple .

Six more temples were discovered in the city , including the temple called the Massif Rouge ( to whom it was dedicated is unknown ) , and temples dedicated for Ninni-Zaza , Ishtarat , Ishtar , Ninhursag and Shamash . All the temples were located in the center of the city except for the Ishtar temple , the area between the Enceinte Sacrée and the Massif Rouge is considered the administrative center of the high priest . The second kingdom appears to be a powerful and prosperous political center , kings held the title of Lugal , and many are attested in the city , but the most important source is the letter of king Enna-Dagan c . 2350 BC , which was sent to Irkab-Damu of Ebla , and in it , the Mariote king mentions his predecessors and their military achievements . However , the reading of this letter is still problematic and many interpretations have been presented by scholars .

The earliest attested king in the letter of Enna-Dagan is Ansud , who is mentioned as attacking Ebla , the traditional rival of Mari with whom it had a long war , and conquering many of Ebla 's cities , including the land of Belan . The next king mentioned in the letter is Saʿumu , who conquered the lands of Ra 'ak and Nirum , but king Kun-Damu of Ebla defeated Mari in the middle of the 25th century BC . The war continued with Išhtup-Išar of Mari conquest of Emar , at a time of Eblaite weakness in the mid-24th century BC . King Igrish-Halam of Ebla had to pay tribute to Iblul-Il of Mari , who is mentioned in the letter conquering many of Ebla 's cities and campaigning in the Burman region . Enna-Dagan also received tribute , and his reign fell entirely within the reign of Irkab-Damu of Ebla , who managed to defeat Mari and end the tribute . Mari defeated Ebla 's ally Nagar in year seven of the Eblaite vizier Ibrium 's term , causing the blockage of trade routes between Ebla and southern Mesopotamia via upper Mesopotamia . The war reached a climax when the Eblaite vizier Ibbi-Sipish made an alliance with Nagar and Kish to defeat Mari in a battle near Terqa . Ebla itself suffered its first destruction a few years after Terqa in c . 2300 BC , during the reign of the Mariote king Hidar .

The first member of the Shakkanakku dynasty on the lists is Ididish who was appointed in c . 2266 BC , according to the lists , Ididish ruled for 60 years , and was succeeded by his son making the position hereditary . The third Mari followed the second city in terms of general structure , phase P0 of the old royal palace was replaced by a new palace for the Shakkanakku . Another smaller palace was built in the eastern part of the city , and contained royal burials that date to the former periods . The ramparts were rebuilt and strengthened while the embankment was turned into a defensive wall that reached 10 meters in width . The former sacred inclosure was maintained , so was the temple of Ninhursag . However , the temples of Ninni-Zaza and Ishtarat disappeared , while a new temple called the " temple of lions " ( dedicated to Dagan ) , was built by the Shakkanakku Ishtup-Ilum and attached to it , was a rectangular terrace ( ziggurat ) that measured 40 x 20 meters for sacrifices . Akkad disintegrated following Shar-Kali-Sharri 's reign , and Mari gained its independence , but the use of the Shakkanakku title continued during the following Third Dynasty of Ur period . A princess of Mari married the son of king Ur-Nammu of Ur , and Mari was nominally under Ur hegemony . However , the vassalage did not impede the independence of Mari , and some Shakkanakkus used the royal title Lugal in their votive inscriptions , while using the title of Shakkanakku in their correspondence with the Ur 's court . The dynasty ended for unknown reasons not long before the establishment of the next dynasty , which took place in the second half of the 19th century BC .

The second millennium BC in the Fertile Crescent was characterized by the expansion of the Amorites , which culminated with them dominating and ruling most of the region , including Mari which in c . 1830 BC , became the seat of the Amorite Lim dynasty under king Yaggid-Lim . However , the Epigraphycal and archaeological evidences showed a high degree of continuity between the Shakkanakku and the Amorite eras . Yaggid-Lim was the ruler of Suprum before establishing himself in Mari , he entered an alliance with Ila-kabkabu of Ekallatum , but the relations between the two monarchs changed to an open war . The conflict ended with Ila-kabkabu capturing Yaggid-Lim 's heir Yahdun-Lim and according to a tablet found in Mari , Yaggid-Lim who survived Ila-kabkabu was killed by his servants . However , in c . 1820 BC Yahdun-Lim was firmly in control as king of Mari . Yahdun-Lim started his reign by subduing seven of his rebelling tribal leaders , and rebuilding the walls of Mari and Terqa in addition to building a new fort which he named Dur-Yahdun-Lim . He then expanded west and claimed to have reached the Mediterranean , however he later had to face a rebellion by the Banu-Yamina nomads who were centered at Tuttul , and the rebels were supported by Yamhad 's king Sumu-Epuh , whose interests were threatened by the recently established alliance between Yahdun-Lim and Eshnunna . Yahdun-Lim defeated the Yamina but an open war with Yamhad was avoided , as the Mariote king became occupied by his rivalry with Shamshi-Adad I of Assyria , the son of the late Ila-kabkabu . The war ended in a defeat for Mari , and Yahdun-Lim was assassinated in c . 1798 BC by his possible son Sumu-Yamam , who himself got assassinated two years after ascending the throne while Shamshi-Adad advanced and annexed Mari .

Shamshi-Adad appointed his son Yasmah-Adad on the throne of Mari , the new king married Yahdun-Lim 's daughter , while the rest of the Lim family took refuge in Yamhad , and the annexation was officially justified by what Shamshi-Adad considered sinful acts on the side of the Lim family . To strengthen his position against his new enemy Yamhad , Shamshi-Adad married Yasmah-Adad to Betlum , the daughter of Ishi-Adad of Qatna . However , Yasmah-Adad neglected his bride causing a crisis with Qatna , and he proved to be an unable leader causing the rage of his father who died in c . 1776 BC , while the armies of Yarim-Lim I of Yamhad were advancing in support of Zimri-Lim , the heir of the Lim dynasty . As Zimri-Lim advanced , a leader of the Banu-Simaal ( Zimri-Lim 's tribe ) overthrew Yasmah-Adad , opening the road for Zimri-Lim who arrived a few months after Yasmah-Adad 's escape , and married princess Shibtu the daughter of Yarim-Lim I a short time after his enthronement in c . 1776 BC . Zimri-Lim 's ascension to the throne with the help of Yarim-Lim I affected Mari 's status , Zimri-Lim referred to Yarim-Lim as his father , and the Yamhadite king was able to order Mari as the mediator between Yamhad 's main deity Hadad and Zimri-Lim , who declared himself a servant of Hadad .

Zimri-Lim started his reign with a campaign against the Banu-Yamina , he also established alliances with Eshnunna and Hammurabi of Babylon , and sent his armies to aid the Babylonians . The new king directed his expansion policy toward the north in the Upper Khabur region , which was named Izdamaraz , where he subjugated the local petty kingdoms in the region such as Urkesh , and Talhayum , forcing them into vassalage . The expansion was met by the resistance of Qarni-Lim , the king of Andarig , whom Zimri-Lim defeated , securing the Mariote control over the region in c . 1771 BC , and the kingdom prospered as a trading center and entered a period of relative peace . Zimri-Lim 's greatest heritage was the renovation of the Royal Palace , which was expanded greatly to contain 275 rooms , exquisite artifacts such as The Goddess of the Vase statue , and a royal archive that contained 25000 tablets . Mari 's alliance with Eshnunna contributed to its demise , as that city later became an enemy of Hammurabi . The relations with Babylon worsened with a dispute over the city of Hīt that consumed much time in negotiations , during which a war against Elam involved both kingdoms in c . 1765 BC . Finally , the kingdom was invaded by Hammurabi who defeated Zimri-Lim in battle in c . 1761 BC and ended the Lim dynasty , while Terqa became the capital of a rump state named the Kingdom of Hana .

Mari survived the destruction and rebelled against Babylon in c . 1759 BC , causing Hammurabi to destroy the whole city . However , Mari was allowed to survive as a small village under Babylonian administration , an act that Hammurabi considered merciful . Later , Mari became part of Assyria and was listed among the territories conquered by the Assyrian king Tukulti-Ninurta I ( reigned 1243 – 1207 BC ) . Afterward , Mari constantly changed hands between Assyria and Babylon . In the middle of the eleventh century BC , Mari became part of Hana whose king Tukulti-Mer took the title king of Mari and rebelled against Assyria , causing the Assyrian king Ashur-bel-kala to attack the city . Mari came firmly under the authority of the Neo-Assyrian Empire , and was assigned in the first half of the 8th century BC to a certain Nergal-Erish to govern under the authority of king Adad-Nirari III ( reigned 810-783 BC ) . In c . 760 BC , Shamash-Risha-Usur , an autonomous governor ruling parts of the upper middle Euphrates under the nominal authority of Ashur-dan III , styled himself the governor of the lands of Suhu and Mari , so did his son Ninurta-Kudurri-Usur . However , by that time , Mari was known to be located in the so-called Land of Laqe , making it unlikely that the Usur family actually controlled it , and suggesting that the title was employed out of historical reasons . The city continued as a small settlement until the Hellenistic period before disappearing from records .

The founders of the first city may have been Sumerians or more probably East Semitic speaking people from Terqa in the north . I. J. Gelb relates Mari 's foundation with the Kish civilization , which was a cultural entity of East Semitic speaking populations , that stretched from the center of Mesopotamia to Ebla in the western Levant . At its height , the second city was the home of about 40,000 people . This population was East-Semitic speaking one , and used a dialect much similar to the language of Ebla ( the Eblaite language ) , while the Shakkanakku period had an East-Semitic Akkadian speaking population . West Semitic names started to be attested in Mari since the second kingdom era , and by the middle Bronze-Age , the west Semitic Amorite tribes became the majority of the pastoral groups in the middle Euphrates and Khabur valleys . Amorite names started to be observed in the city toward the end of the Shakkanakku period , even among the ruling dynasty members . During the Lim era , the population became predominantly Amorite but also included Akkadian named people , and although the Amorite language became the dominant tongue , Akkadian remained the language of writing . The pastoral Amorites in Mari were called the Haneans , a term that indicate nomads in general , those Haneans were split into the Banu-Yamina ( sons of the right ) and Banu-Simaal ( sons of the left ) , with the ruling house belonging to the Banu-Simaal branch . The kingdom was also a home to tribes of Suteans who lived in the district of Terqa .

The Sumerian King List ( SKL ) records a dynasty of six kings from Mari enjoying hegemony between the dynasty of Adab and the dynasty of Kish . The names of the Mariote kings were damaged on the early copies of the list , and those kings were correlated with historical kings that belonged to the second city . However , an undamaged copy of the list that date to the old Babylonian period was discovered in Shubat-Enlil , and the names bears no resemblance to any of the historically attested monarchs of the second city , indicating that the compilers of the list had an older and probably a legendary dynasty in mind , that predate the second city . The chronological order of the kings from the second kingdom era is highly uncertain ; nevertheless , it is assumed that the letter of Enna-Dagan lists them in a chronological order . Many of the kings were attested through their own votive objects discovered in the city , and the dates are highly speculative . For the Shakkanakkus , the lists are incomplete and after Hanun-Dagan who ruled at the end of the Ur era c . 2008 BC ( c . 1920 BC Short chronology ) , they become full of lacunae . Roughly 13 more Shakkanakkus succeeded Hanun-Dagan but only few are known , with the last known one reigning not too long before the reign of Yaggid-Lim who founded the Lim dynasty in c . 1830 BC .

The first and second kingdoms were heavily influenced by the Sumerian south . The society was led by an urban oligarchy , and the citizens were well known for elaborate hair styles and dress . The calendar was based on a solar year divided into twelve months , and was the same calendar used in Ebla " the old Eblaite calendar " . Scribes wrote in Sumerian language and the art was indistinguishable from Sumerian art , so was the architectural style . Mesopotamian influence continued to affect Mari 's culture during the Amorite period , which is evident in the Babylonian scribal style used in the city . However , it was less influential than the former periods and a distinct Syrian style prevailed , which is noticeable in the seals of kings , which reflect a clear Syrian origin . The society was a tribal one , it consisted mostly of farmers and nomads ( Haneans ) , and in contrast to Mesopotamia , the temple had a minor role in everyday life as the power was mostly invested in the palace . Women enjoyed a relative equality to men , queen Shibtu ruled in her husband 's name while he was away , and had an extensive administrative role and authority over her husband 's highest officials .

The Pantheon included both Sumerian and Semitic deities , and throughout most of its history , Dagan was Mari 's head of the Pantheon , while Mer was the patron deity . Other deities included the Semitic deities ; Ishtar the goddess of fertility , Athtar , and Shamash , the Sun god who was regarded among the city most important deities , and believed to be all-knowing and all-seeing . Sumerian deities included Ninhursag , Dumuzi , Enki , Anu , and Enlil . Prophecy had an important role for the society , temples included prophets , who gave council to the king and participated in the religious festivals . Ornina , the singer of Ishtar temple , was one of the oldest multi-talented women who has a prominent statue depicting her playing music during the reign of Iblul-Il .

The first Mari provided the oldest wheels workshop to be discovered in Syria , and was a center of bronze metallurgy . The city also contained districts devoted to smelting , dyeing and pottery manufacturing , charcoal was brought by river boats from the upper Khabur and Euphrates area . The second kingdom 's economy was based on both agriculture and trade . The economy was centralized and directed through a communal organization , where grains were stored in communal granaries , and distributed amongst the population according to social statues . The organization also controlled the animal herds in the kingdom . Some people were directly connected to the palace instead of the communal organization , those included the metal and textile producers and the military officials . Ebla was Mari 's most important trading partner and rival , Mari 's position made it an important trading center as it controlled the road linking between the Levant and Mesopotamia . The Amorite Mari maintained the older aspects of the economy , which was still largely based on irrigated agriculture along the Euphrates valley . The city kept its trading role and was a center for merchants from Babylonia and other kingdoms , it received goods from the south and east through riverboats and distributed them north , north west and west . The main merchandises handled by Mari were metals and tin imported from the Iranian Plateau and then exported west as far as Crete . Other goods included copper from Cyprus , silver from Anatolia , woods from Lebanon , gold from Egypt , olive oil , wine , and textiles in addition to precious stones from modern Afghanistan .

Mari was discovered in 1933 , on the eastern flank of Syria , near the Iraqi border . A Bedouin tribe was digging through a mound called Tell Hariri for a gravestone that would be used for a recently deceased tribesman , when they came across a headless statue . After the news reached the French authorities currently in control of Syria , the report was investigated , and digging on the site was started on December 14 , 1933 by archaeologists from the Louvre in Paris . Discoveries came quickly , with the temple of Ishtar being discovered in the next month . Mari was classified by the archaeologists as the " most westerly outpost of Sumerian culture " . Since the beginning of excavations , over 25,000 clay tablets in Akkadian language written in cuneiform were discovered . Finds from the excavation are on display in the Louvre , the National Museum of Aleppo , the National Museum of Damascus , and the Deir ez-Zor Museum . In the latter , the southern façade of the Court of the Palms room from Zimri-Lim 's palace has been reconstructed , including the wall paintings . Mari has been excavated in annual campaigns between 1933-1939 , 1951-1956 , and since 1960 , and the first 21 seasons up to 1975 were led by André Parrot , followed by Jean-Claude Margueron ( until 2004 ) , and Pascal Butterlin ( starting in 2005 ) . A journal devoted to the site since 1982 , is Mari : Annales de recherches interdisciplinaires . Archaeologists have tried to determine how many layers the site descends , according to French archaeologist André Parrot , " each time a vertical probe was commenced in order to trace the site 's history down to virgin soil , such important discoveries were made that horizontal digging had to be resumed . "

The tablets were written in Akkadian , and they give informations about the kingdom , its customs , and the names of people who lived during that time . More than 3000 are letters , the remainder includes administrative , economic , and judicial texts . The tablets , according to André Parrot , " brought about a complete revision of the historical dating of the ancient Near East and provided more than 500 new place names , enough to redraw or even draw up the geographical map of the ancient world . " Almost all the tablets found were dated to the last 50 years of Mari 's independence ( c . 1800 – 1750 BC ) , and most have now been published . The language of the texts is official Akkadian but proper names and hints in syntax show that the common language of Mari 's inhabitants was Northwest Semitic .

" OMG " is a song by American recording artist Usher and American rapper will.i.am , who also wrote and produced the song . It uses the auto-tune effect in several lines , as well as Jock Jams-esque sports arena chanting . It was released on March 22 , 2010 as the first worldwide single off his sixth studio album , Raymond v. Raymond , and the fourth single overall , following the three US singles " Papers " , " Hey Daddy ( Daddy 's Home ) " , and " Lil Freak " . The song was met with a mixed reception from critics , who criticized the use of auto-tune , but commended the song 's dance and club vibe . The song marks the second time that Usher has collaborated with will.i.am , following the single " What 's Your Name " , from his previous album Here I Stand ( 2008 ) . " OMG " topped the charts in Australia , Ireland , New Zealand , the United Kingdom and the United States . The song became his ninth number-one hit in the United States , making him the first 2010s artist to collect number-one singles in three consecutive decades . He became only the fourth artist of all-time to achieve that feat . Usher also became the third artist to have at least one number-one song from five consecutive studio albums . The song 's choreography and dance-heavy accompanying music video has been compared by critics to that of " Yeah ! " . Usher performed the song live several times including on the ninth season of American Idol with will.i.am. He also performed the song as a part of a medley during his critically acclaimed performance at the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards . " OMG " , was named the fifth best selling song of 2010 in the US , selling 3.8 million units . The song sold 6.9 million copies worldwide during that year .

" OMG was written and produced by The Black Eyed Peas frontman , will.i.am. The tune was recorded at Chung King Studios , New York City . Dylan " 3-D " Dresdow mixed the record at Paper V.U. Studios , North Hollywood . The vocal sample of a crowd shouting " owowowo " used in the song was recorded by will.i.am while performing with The Black Eyed Peas on the French TV show Taratata . " OMG " is a midtempo pop song , drawing from the subgenres of dance-pop and synthpop , and is also influenced by R & B. The song also infuses hints of Eurodance . Several lines feature the Auto-Tune vocal effect , and makes use of " hypnotic " hand claps , and Jock Jams-esque arena chanting . The song is set in common time , and has a tempo of 130 beats per minute . It is written in the key of E minor , and Usher 's vocals span from the low note of G3 to high note of E5 . It follows the chord progression Em – D – Bm7 – C6 . According to James Reed of the Boston Globe , Usher is featured in a staccato delivery over the song 's minimalist dance beat . " will.i.am begins the song with the line , " Oh my gosh " then Usher starts singing the chorus . He performs his verse and the second chorus , before will.i.am gives his verse . " OMG " concludes with an extended final chorus . Mikael Wood of The Los Angeles Times said that the lyrics of the song detail Usher 's encounter with a woman in a club .

The song has garnered mixed reception , with most critics disapproving of the auto-tuned vocals , and the production and appearance by will.i.am. Edna Gundersen of USA Today said that Usher seemed " disengaged " on the song , and allowed will.i.am. to " bludgeon " the song with auto-tune . Greg Kot of the Chicago Tribune said the song was one of the tracks where production fell short on Raymond v. Raymond , calling the song another auto-tuned " formulaic chant " by will.i.am. The New York Daily News said that the song is " as annoying as the tech-speak it mimics . " Andrew Winistorfer of Prefix Magazine preferred " Lil Freak " to be the album 's big single , stating that the song " doesn 't come close to matching the filthy heights of " Little Freak , " [ sic ] but the sports arena chanting thing hasn 't been done this well since the ' 90s when Jock Jams were enormous . " Winistorfer also said that Usher brought back his " bad taste " in collaborators since Lil Jon on " Yeah ! " , saying that having the latter on this song would be an improvement .

James Reed of the Boston Globe said that Usher " fares better " on the collaboration . Mikael Wood of The Los Angeles Times commended the song 's " thumping " groove . Gail Mitchell of Billboard said that Usher " pumps up the beat on the infectious club anthem . " Caroline Sullivan of The Guardian , called the track " irresistible " . Monica Herrera of Billboard magazine said the song , like " Yeah ! " , appealed to a broader audience and attuned to clubs . Herrera also said that " the lyrics are hypnotic hand claps and soccer-game chants that fade in and out to keep the party going " .

In 2010 , WYOY disc jockeys compared part of Usher 's verse to a song sung by Homer Simpson in " Dude , Where 's My Ranch ? " , a 2003 episode of television comedy The Simpsons . The cadences of the line , " Honey got a booty like pow , pow , pow . Honey got some boobies like wow , oh wow " were compared to those of Simpson 's tune , " Christmas in December , wow wow wow . Give me tons of presents , now now now . " Simon Vozick-Levinson of Entertainment Weekly disagreed , calling the likenesses " a random coincidence " .

The song debuted at number fourteen on the Billboard Hot 100 selling 130,000 units in its first week . The song became the third-highest debut on the Billboard Hot 100 of Usher 's career , behind 1997 's " Nice & Slow " at number nine , and 1998 's " My Way " at eight . For the week ending May 15 , 2010 , the song lifted to number one on the chart , becoming Usher 's ninth number-one single and Will.i.am 's first number one single as a solo artist ( or without his group , The Black eyed Peas ) . The song collected airplay and digital gainer honors , moving fourteen to seven on the Hot 100 Airplay chart , and two to one on the Hot Digital Songs chart . The song later topped both charts . By March 2011 , the song has reached 4 million in sales , and as of May 2013 , the song has sold 4,719,000 copies . With the song , Usher tied with the Bee Gees , Elton John , and Paul McCartney for ninth among artists all time with the most Hot 100 hits . Usher also became the third artist , behind McCartney and Michael Jackson to collect at least one number-one single from five consecutive albums . The song made Usher the first artist in the 2010s to have a number-one single in three consecutive decades , Usher 's being the 1990s , 2000s and 2010s . He became only the fifth artist of all time to accomplish this , the others being Stevie Wonder in the 1960s , 1970s and 1980s ; Michael Jackson in the 1970s , 1980s , and 1990s ; and Madonna and Janet Jackson in the 1980s , 1990s and 2000s . " OMG " was the second shortest title to lead the chart , tying Jackson 's " Ben " , " Bad " , and " ABC " with the Jackson 5 , with Britney Spears ' " 3 " being the chart-topper with the shortest title .

The song charted at number three on the R & B / Hip-Hop Songs chart , two on the Pop Songs chart , and three on the Hot Dance Club Play chart . It also topped the Rhythmic Top 40 , making Usher the first artist to collect ten number ones on the chart , above 50 Cent , Beyoncé , Nelly , T-Pain , and Mariah Carey , each with seven . Usher led first on the chart with " You Make Me Wanna " for thirteen weeks from 1997 – 1998 and " Love in This Club " featuring Young Jeezy in 2008 . " OMG " reached number two in Canada , and was certified Platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association . It was later upgraded to 2x Platinum for shipments over 160,000 copies . It sold 223,000 copies during 2010 in Canada . Internationally , " OMG " charted across Europe , reaching number one in the Ireland , and United Kingdom where it became the third best selling song of 2010 . It also charted moderately in other countries , allowing it to reach a peak of six on the European Hot 100 . In Australia and New Zealand the song placed at the top of the charts . It was certified 2 × Platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association , and Platinum in New Zealand by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand for shipments of 15,000 units . It was later upgraded to 5 × Platinum in Australia for shipments over 350,000 copies .

Usher and will.i.am shot the video the weekend of March 6 , 2010 . The video was directed by Anthony Mandler . In an interview with Rap-Up , Mandler said about the concept of the video : " ... The video is a spectacle . It really emphasizes what we love about Usher and the character and the icon that he is , and most importantly , it ’ s really a video that showcases his superstardom " . The video was released on March 30 , 2010 , on VEVO and AMTV . According to Mandler , the original idea for the video was citing Max Headroom , a fictional artificial intelligence character from 1980s British television and film . The reference is made when Usher is seen on a flickering television at the beginning of the video . Mandler specified , commenting , " Max Headroom was always in his room , " he continued , " this unidentifiable room , ' 80s shapes . I used that for inspiration . " Usher stated that he wanted to do something theatrical and fun , and that while will.i.am. brought the international sound , he wanted to bring the producer into his world , " working off of each other and playing off of each other as artists , but the cinematography would be artistic and incredible . " Mandler described the visuals in the clip as " Hitchcock-ian " , as well as simply captuiring Usher in his element , as he said he wanted the R & B singer 's talent to take over . He further explained , stating ,

" The concept was to create a world where we put Usher in a space where he does what I think he does better than anyone else in the world , which is perform at a level and magnitude of a superstar and take us , the viewer , whether audible or visually , on a journey , not a ride . And , in that , I wanted to create an unpredictability , so one set leads to another and another , and you never know what 's gonna happen . Along the way , Usher becomes our guide . We 're so focused on him , we don 't notice the change . The thing is unfolding little by little , and you can 't quite see far enough ahead to know what 's gonna come next . "

The video begins with Usher flickering on a television in a room , before we see him in a scene dancing with blue flashing lights , and will.i.am. is shown in a similar room with red flashing lights . Usher is then shown with female background dancers in a white room . In the scene he dons a pair of glasses which show the dancers performing through the lens . Usher then dances outside in front of a concrete wall , with male background dancers appearing as shadows . As will.i.am. performs his verse , he and Usher are seen in their corresponding rooms with flashing lights . After this , Usher puffs a cigar and dances with male background dancers in an arena-like area , whilst he is also joined by female dancers with flashing lights on the floor , with the video ending with Usher shown on the flashing television . In a review of the video , Brad Wete of Entertainment Weekly said , " For a song with such a title , it sure does take a minute for its video to build up to wow-worthy moments . After some clean dance sequences , the magic begins . Usher grooves with shadows , puffs out O ’ s with cigar smoke , and then links back up with his ladies on a primary colored dance floor to show off his steps . " Chris Ryan of MTV News compared the video 's flashing lights to the music video for " Yeah ! " , and called the song an answer track to Trey Songz 's " LOL " . At the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards , the clip was nominated for Best Dance Video , Best Choreography , and Best Male Video .

Usher performed the song with will.i.am. on the ninth season of American Idol , appearing in a black bowler and matching black suit with silver lapels , accompanied by flames and other pyrotechnics . They then performed the song together on The Oprah Winfrey Show on May 10 , 2010 . The song has also been performed live in Australia on Hey Hey it 's Saturday on May 19 , 2010 , as well as on Sunrise on May 21 , 2010 . Usher later performed the song on The Ellen DeGeneres Show , So You Think You Can Dance , Good Morning America and live in the United Kingdom on Britain 's Got Talent . On August 6 , 2010 , he performed the song alongside other hits at his New Look Foundation ’ s inaugural World Leadership Awards in Atlanta , where his protege Justin Bieber and R & B singer Ciara also performed . Another event the song was performed at was the Activision E3 Event . The song was performed alongside " DJ Got Us Fallin ' in Love " during the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards . VMA executive producer Dave Sirulnick told MTV News , " We said to him , ' We want to do the best televised dance routine that you 've done in years . Let 's show why you 're the king . ' " MTV Buzzworthy writer , Tamar Antai was present at the rehearsal for the show , and commented that the VMA crew was about to " pull off visual feats not just previously unseen and unparalleled at the VMAs , but unseen and unparalleled on TV . "

The performance was received with critical acclaim . On Usher specifically Antai said the performance was like " liquid magic " , saying , " He took it to the level that comes after the next level . The penthouse level . " He was aided by about a dozen background dancers , the males in skeleton-like costumets , and the females donning a one-piece , gloves and boots . The " OMG " performance was accompanied by red laser lights , making an illusion as if the stage disappeared . The lights spelled out " O.M.G " as well as " Usher " , as dancers lowered from the ceiling . Jayson Rodrgiguez of MTV News commented , " The singer moved and grooved , proving that he 's the R & B star that everyone pays attention to for the big moments . " Rochell D. Thomas , also of the site said " Call it what you will : talent , swag , skills ... When he steps on the dance floor , some mysterious thing comes out of him and puts the G in groove . " Thomas went on to say that Usher 's dance moves would make " the late great Michael Jackson jealous " in the stage production " that included more special-effects bells and whistles than a summer blockbuster . " Chris Ryan of MTV Buzzworthy also compared the performance to Jackson , calling it overall , " One part " Tron , " one part laser show , one part Michael Jackson choreo tribute , and all spectacle . " Usher appeared with The Black Eyed Peas to perform the song during the halftime show of Super Bowl XLV .

Clavaria fragilis , commonly known as fairy fingers , white worm coral , or white spindles , is a species of fungus in the family Clavariaceae . It is synonymous with Clavaria vermicularis . The fungus is the type species of the genus Clavaria and is a typical member of the clavarioid or club fungi . It produces tubular , unbranched , white basidiocarps ( fruit bodies ) that typically grow in clusters . The fruit bodies can reach dimensions of 15 cm ( 5.9 in ) tall by 0.5 cm ( 0.2 in ) thick . Clavaria fragilis is a saprobic species , growing in woodland litter or in old , unimproved grassland . It is widespread throughout temperate regions in the Northern Hemisphere , but has also been reported from Australia and South Africa . The fungus is edible , but insubstantial and flavorless . There are several other small white coral-like fungi with which C. fragilis may be confused .

Clavaria fragilis was originally described from Denmark in 1790 by Danish naturalist and mycologist Theodor Holmskjold , and was sanctioned under this name by Elias Magnus Fries in his 1821 Systema Mycologicum . The Latin epithet fragilis refers to the brittle fruit bodies . The species was redescribed by Swedish mycologist Olof Swartz in 1811 , using the name Clavaria vermicularis ( the epithet meaning " wormlike " ) . Though it is a later synonym — and thus obsolete according to the principle of priority — the latter name is still frequently used today . There are several other names considered to be synonymous with C. fragilis by the online taxonomical database MycoBank ( see the taxobox ) . In North America , the fungus has colloquially been called " fairy fingers " or " white worm coral " . In the UK its recommended English name is " white spindles " . British naturalist Samuel Frederick Gray called it the " worm club-stool " in his 1821 A Natural Arrangement of British Plants .

The fruit bodies of C. fragilis are irregularly tubular , smooth to furrowed , sometimes compressed , very fragile , white , up to 150 mm ( 5.9 in ) tall by 5 mm ( 0.20 in ) thick , and typically grow in dense clusters . The tip of the fruit body tapers to a point , and may yellow and curve with age . There is no distinct stalk , although it is evident as a short , semitransparent zone of tissue at the base of the club . Microscopically , the hyphae of the flesh are swollen up to 12 µm wide and lack clamp connections . The spores are smooth , colourless , ellipsoid to oblong , measuring 5 – 7 by 3 – 4 µm . The spores are white in deposit . The basidia ( spore bearing cells ) measure 40 – 50 by 6 – 8 µm , and lack clamps at their bases .

The species occurs throughout the Northern Hemisphere , in Europe , North America , and Asia . In North America , it is more common east of the Rocky Mountains . It has also been recorded from Australia and South Africa . In 2006 , it was reported from the Arctic zone of the Ural Mountains , in Russia . The fungus grows in woodland and in grassland on moist soil , and is presumed to be saprobic , rotting fallen leaf litter and dead grass stems . The fruit bodies tend to grow in groups , tufts or clusters . Although they can grow singly , they are typically inconspicuous unless in clusters .

Similar fungi with simple , white fruit bodies include Clavaria acuta , an equally widespread species that typically grows singly or in small groups rather than in dense clusters and can be distinguished microscopically by its clamped basidia and larger spores ; the morphologically similar , but rare C. atkinsoniana , found in the southwestern and central United States , which cannot be distinguished from C. fragilis by field characteristics alone but has larger spores — 8.5 – 10 by 4.5 – 5 µm ; C. rubicundula , another North American species , which is similar in stature but has a reddish tint ; and Multiclavula mucida , a widespread lichenized species with smaller fruit bodies that occurs with its associated algae on moist wood .

In North America , Clavaria fragilis has been called " by far our most common Clavaria " . In northern Europe , it is one of a suite of " CHEG " fungi ( CHEG standing for " Clavarioid fungi-Hygrocybe-Entoloma-Geoglossaceae " ) considered to be indicator species of old , unimproved grassland ( permanent grassland that has not been cultivated for some years ) . Though such grasslands are a threatened habitat in Europe , C. fragilis is one of the commoner CHEG species . It is , nonetheless , on the national red list of threatened fungi in the Netherlands and Slovenia .

Natural dyes are dyes or colorants derived from plants , invertebrates , or minerals . The majority of natural dyes are vegetable dyes from plant sources — roots , berries , bark , leaves , and wood — and other organic sources such as fungi and lichens Archaeologists have found evidence of textile dyeing dating back to the Neolithic period . In China , dyeing with plants , barks and insects has been traced back more than 5,000 years . The essential process of dyeing changed little over time . Typically , the dye material is put in a pot of water and then the textiles to be dyed are added to the pot , which is heated and stirred until the color is transferred . Textile fibre may be dyed before spinning ( " dyed in the wool " ) , but most textiles are " yarn-dyed " or " piece-dyed " after weaving . Many natural dyes require the use of chemicals called mordants to bind the dye to the textile fibres ; tannin from oak galls , salt , natural alum , vinegar , and ammonia from stale urine were used by early dyers . Many mordants , and some dyes themselves , produce strong odors , and large-scale dyeworks were often isolated in their own districts .

Throughout history , people have dyed their textiles using common , locally available materials , but scarce dyestuffs that produced brilliant and permanent colors such as the natural invertebrate dyes , Tyrian purple and crimson kermes , became highly prized luxury items in the ancient and medieval world . Plant-based dyes such as woad ( Isatis tinctoria ) , indigo , saffron , and madder were raised commercially and were important trade goods in the economies of Asia and Europe . Across Asia and Africa , patterned fabrics were produced using resist dyeing techniques to control the absorption of color in piece-dyed cloth . Dyes such as cochineal and logwood ( Haematoxylum campechianum ) were brought to Europe by the Spanish treasure fleets , and the dyestuffs of Europe were carried by colonists to America . The discovery of man-made synthetic dyes in the mid-19th century triggered a long decline in the large-scale market for natural dyes . Synthetic dyes , which could be produced in large quantities , quickly superseded natural dyes for the commercial textile production enabled by the industrial revolution , and unlike natural dyes , were suitable for the synthetic fibres that followed . Artists of the Arts and Crafts Movement preferred the pure shades and subtle variability of natural dyes , which mellow with age but preserve their true colors , unlike early synthetic dyes , and helped ensure that the old European techniques for dyeing and printing with natural dyestuffs were preserved for use by home and craft dyers . Natural dyeing techniques are also preserved by artisans in traditional cultures around the world .

Colors in the " ruddy " range of reds , browns , and oranges are the first attested colors in a number of ancient textile sites ranging from the Neolithic to the Bronze Age across the Levant , Egypt , Mesopotamia and Europe , followed by evidence of blues and then yellows , with green appearing somewhat later . The earliest surviving evidence of textile dyeing was found at the large Neolithic settlement at Çatalhöyük in southern Anatolia , where traces of red dyes , possible from ochre ( iron oxide pigments from clay ) , were found . Polychrome or multicolored fabrics seem to have been developed in the 3rd or 2nd millennium BCE . Textiles with a " red-brown warp and an ochre-yellow weft " were discovered in Egyptian pyramids of the Sixth Dynasty ( 2345 – 2180 BCE ) . The chemical analysis that would definitively identify the dyes used in ancient textiles has rarely been conducted , and even when a dye such as indigo blue is detected it is impossible to determine which of several indigo-bearing plants was used . Nevertheless , based on the colors of surviving textile fragments and the evidence of actual dyestuffs found in archaeological sites , reds , blues , and yellows from plant sources were in common use by the late Bronze Age and Iron Age .

The essential process of dyeing requires soaking the material containing the dye ( the dyestuff ) in water , adding the textile to be dyed to the resulting solution ( the dyebath ) , and bringing the solution to a simmer for an extended period , often measured in days or even weeks , stirring occasionally until the color has evenly transferred to the textiles . Some dyestuffs , such as indigo and lichens , will give good color when used alone ; these dyes are called direct dyes or substantive dyes . The majority of plant dyes , however , also require the use of a mordant , a chemical used to " fix " the color in the textile fibres . These dyes are called adjective dyes . By using different mordants , dyers can often obtain a variety of colors and shades from the same dye . Fibres or cloth may be pretreated with mordants , or the mordant may be incorporated in the dyebath . In traditional dyeing , the common mordants are vinegar , tannin from oak bark , sumac or oak galls , ammonia from stale urine , and wood-ash liquor or potash ( potassium carbonate ) made by leaching wood ashes and evaporating the solution .

We shall never know by what chances primitive man discovered that salt , vinegar from fermenting fruit , natural alum , and stale urine helped to fix and enhance the colours of his yarns , but for many centuries these four substances were used as mordants . Salt helps to " fix " or increase " fastness " of colors , vinegar improves reds and purples , and the ammonia in stale urine assists in the fermentation of indigo dyes . Natural alum ( aluminum sulfate ) is the most common metallic salt mordant , but tin ( stannous chloride ) , copper ( cupric sulfate ) , iron ( ferrous sulfate , called copperas ) and chrome ( potassium dichromate ) are also used . Iron mordants " sadden " colors , while tin and chrome mordants brighten colors . The iron mordants contribute to fabric deterioration , referred to as " dye rot " . Additional chemicals or alterants may be applied after dying to further alter or reinforce the colors . Textiles may be dyed as raw fibre ( dyed in the fleece or dyed in the wool ) , as spun yarn ( dyed in the hank or yarn-dyed ) , or after weaving ( piece-dyed ) . Mordants often leave residue in wool fibre that makes it difficult to spin , so wool was generally dyed after spinning , as yarn or woven cloth . Indigo , however , requires no mordant , and cloth manufacturers in medieval England often dyed wool in the fleece with the indigo-bearing plant woad and then dyed the cloth again after weaving to produce deep blues , browns , reds , purples , blacks , and tawnies .

In China , Japan , India , Pakistan , Nigeria , Gambia , and other parts of West Africa and southeast Asia , patterned silk and cotton fabrics were produced using resist dyeing techniques in which the cloth is printed or stenciled with starch or wax , or tied in various ways to prevent even penetration of the dye when the cloth is piece-dyed . The Chinese ladao process is dated to the 10th century ; other traditional techniques include tie-dye , batik , Rōketsuzome , katazome , bandhani and leheria . The mordants used in dyeing and many dyestuffs themselves give off strong and unpleasant odors , and the actual process of dyeing requires a good supply of fresh water , storage areas for bulky plant materials , vats which can be kept heated ( often for days or weeks ) along with the necessary fuel , and airy spaces to dry the dyed textiles . Ancient large-scale dye-works tended to be located on the outskirts of populated areas , on windy promontories .

A variety of plants produce red dyes , including a number of lichens , henna , alkanet or dyer 's bugloss ( Alkanna tinctoria ) , asafoetida and dyer 's madder Rubia tinctorum . Madder and related plants of the genus Rubia are native to many temperate zones around the world , and were already used as sources of good red dye , such as rose madder , in prehistory . Madder has been identified on linen in the tomb of Tutankhamun , and Pliny the Elder records madder growing near Rome . Madder was a dye of commercial importance in Europe , being cultivated in the Netherlands and France to dye the red coats of military uniforms until the market collapsed following the development of synthetic alizarin dye in 1869 . Madder was also used to dye the " hunting pinks " of Great Britain . Turkey red was a strong , very fast red dye for cotton obtained from madder root via a complicated multistep process involving " sumac and oak galls , calf 's blood , sheep 's dung , oil , soda , alum , and a solution of tin . " Turkey red was developed in India and spread to Turkey . Greek workers familiar with the methods of its production were brought to France in 1747 , and Dutch and English spies soon discovered the secret . A sanitized version of Turkey red was being produced in Manchester by 1784 , and roller-printed dress cottons with a Turkey red ground were fashionable in England by the 1820s .

Munjeet or Indian madder ( Rubia cordifolia ) is native to the Himalayas and other mountains of Asia and Japan . Munjeet was an important dye for the Asian cotton industry and is still used by craft dyers in Nepal . Puccoon or bloodroot ( Sanguinaria canadensis ) is a popular red dye among Southeastern Native American basketweavers . Choctaw basketweavers additionally use sumac for red dye . Coushattas artists from Texas and Louisiana used the water oak ( Quercus nigra L. ) to produce red . A delicate rose color in Navajo rugs comes from fermented prickly pear cactus fruit , Opuntia polyacantha . Navajo weavers also use rainwater and red dirt to create salmon-pink dyes .

Yellow dyes are " about as numerous as red ones " , and can be extracted from saffron , pomegranate rind , turmeric , safflower , onionskins , and a number of weedy flowering plants . Limited evidence suggests the use of weld ( Reseda luteola ) , also called mignonette or dyer 's rocket before the Iron Age , but it was an important dye of the ancient Mediterranean and Europe and is indigenous to England . Two brilliant yellow dyes of commercial importance in Europe from the 18th century are derived from trees of the Americas : quercitron from the inner bark of Eastern Black Oak ( Quercus velutina ) , ] native to eastern North America and fustic from the dyer 's mulberry tree ( Maclura tinctoria ) of the West Indies and Mexico . In rivercane basketweaving among Southeastern Woodlands tribes in the Americas , butternut ( Juglans cinerea ) and yellow root ( Xanthorhiza simplicissima ) provide a rich yellow color . Chitimacha basket weavers have a complex formula for yellow that employs a dock plant ( most likely Rumex crispus ) for yellow . Navajo artists create yellow dyes from small snake-weed , brown onion skins , and rubber plant ( Parthenium incanum ) . Rabbitbush ( Chrysothamnus ) and rose hips produce pale , yellow-cream colored dyes .

If plants that yield yellow dyes are common , plants that yield green dyes are rare . Both woad and indigo have been used since ancient times in combination with yellow dyes to produce shades of green . Medieval and Early Modern England was especially known for its green dyes . The dyers of Lincoln , a great cloth town in the high Middle Ages , produced the Lincoln green cloth associated with Robin Hood by dyeing wool with woad and then overdyeing it yellow with weld or dyer 's greenweed ( Genista tinctoria ) , also known as dyer 's broom . Woolen cloth mordanted with alum and dyed yellow with dyer 's greenweed was overdyed with woad and , later , indigo , to produce the once-famous Kendal green . This in turn fell out of fashion in the 18th century in favor of the brighter Saxon green , dyed with indigo and fustic . Soft olive greens are also achieved when textiles dyed yellow are treated with an iron mordant . The dull green cloth common to the Iron Age Halstatt culture shows traces of iron , and was possibly colored by boiling yellow-dyed cloth in an iron pot . Indigenous peoples of the Northwest Plateau in North America used lichen to dye corn husk bags a sea green .

Blue colorants around the world were derived from indigo dye-bearing plants , primarily those in the genus Indigofera , which are native to the tropics . The primary commercial indigo species in Asia was true indigo ( Indigofera tinctoria ) . India is believed to be the oldest center of indigo dyeing in the Old World . It was a primary supplier of indigo dye to Europe as early as the Greco-Roman era . The association of India with indigo is reflected in the Greek word for the dye , which was indikon ( ινδικόν ) . The Romans used the term indicum , which passed into Italian dialect and eventually into English as the word indigo . In Central and South America , the important blue dyes were Añil ( Indigofera suffruticosa ) and Natal indigo ( Indigofera arrecta ) . In temperate climates including Europe , indigo was obtained primarily from woad ( Isatis tinctoria ) , an indigenous plant of Assyria and the Levant which has been grown in Northern Europe over 2,000 years , although from the 18th century it was mostly replaced by superior Indian indigo imported by the British East India Company . Woad was carried to New England in the 17th century and used extensively in America until native stands of indigo were discovered in Florida and the Carolinas . In Sumatra , indigo dye is extracted from some species of Marsdenia . Other indigo-bearing dye plants include dyer 's knotweed ( Polygonum tinctorum ) from Japan and the coasts of China , and the West African shrub Lonchocarpus cyanescens .

In medieval Europe , purple , violet , murrey and similar colors were produced by dyeing wool with woad or indigo in the fleece and then piece-dyeing the woven cloth with red dyes , either the common madder or the luxury dyes kermes and cochineal . Madder could also produce purples when used with alum . Brazilwood also gave purple shades with vitriol ( sulfuric acid ) or potash . Choctaw artists traditionally used maple ( Acer sp . ) to create lavender and purple dyes . Purples can also be derived from lichens , and from the berries of White Bryony from the northern Rocky Mountain states and mulberry ( morus nigra ) ( with an acid mordant ) .

Cutch is an ancient brown dye from the wood of acacia trees , particularly Acacia catechu , used in India for dyeing cotton . Cutch gives gray-browns with an iron mordant and olive-browns with copper . Black walnut ( Juglans nigra ) is used by Cherokee artists to produce a deep brown approaching black . Today black walnut is primarily used to dye baskets but has been used in the past for fabrics and deerhide . Juniper , Juniperus monosperma , ashes provide brown and yellow dyes for Navajo people , as do the hulls of wild walnuts ( Juglans major ) . Khaki , which translates a Hindustani word signifying " soil-coloured " , was introduced into British uniforms in India , which were dyed locally with a dye prepared from the native mazari palm Nannorrhops .

The premier luxury dye of the ancient world was Tyrian purple or royal purple , a purple-red dye which is extracted from several genera of sea snails , primarily the spiny dye-murex Murex brandaris ( currently known as Bolinus brandaris ) . Murex dye was greatly prized in antiquity because it did not fade , but instead became brighter and more intense with weathering and sunlight . Murex dyeing may have been developed first by the Minoans of East Crete or the West Semites along the Levantine coast , and heaps of crushed murex shells have been discovered at a number of locations along the eastern Mediterranean dated to the mid-2nd millennium BC . The classical dye known as Phoenician Red was also derived from murex snails . Murex dyes were fabulously expensive – one snail yields but a single drop of dye – and the Roman Empire imposed a strict monopoly on their use from the reign of Alexander Severus ( AD 225 – 235 ) that was maintained by the succeeding Byzantine Empire until the Early Middle Ages . The dye was used for imperial manuscripts on purple parchment , often with text in silver or gold , and porphyrogenitos or " born in the purple " was a term for Byzantine offspring of a reigning Emperor . The color matched the increasingly rare purple rock porphyry , also associated with the imperial family .

Tyrian purple retained its place as the premium dye of Europe until it was replaced " in status and desirability " by the rich crimson reds and scarlets of the new silk-weaving centers of Italy , colored with kermes . Kermes is extracted from the dried unlaid eggs of the insect Kermes vermilio or Kermococcus vermilio found on species of oak ( especially the Kermes oak of the Mediterranean region ) . The dye is of ancient origin ; jars of kermes have been found in a Neolithic cave-burial at Adaoutse , Bouches-du-Rhône . Similar dyes are extracted from the related insects Porphyrophora hamelii ( Armenian cochineal ) of the Caucasus region , Porphyrophora polonica ( Polish cochineal or Saint John 's blood ) of Eastern Europe , and the lac-producing insects of India , Southeast Asia , China , and Tibet . When kermes-dyed textiles achieved prominence around the mid-11th century , the dyestuff was called " grain " in all Western European languages because the desiccated eggs resemble fine grains of wheat or sand . Textiles dyed with kermes were described as dyed in the grain . Woollens were frequently dyed in the fleece with woad and then piece-dyed in kermes , producing a wide range colors from blacks and grays through browns , murreys , purples , and sanguines . By the 14th and early 15th century , brilliant full grain kermes scarlet was " by far the most esteemed , most regal " color for luxury woollen textiles in the Low Countries , England , France , Spain and Italy .

Cochineal ( Dactylopius coccus ) is a scale insect of Central and North America from which the crimson-coloured dye carmine is derived . It was used by the Aztec and Maya peoples . Moctezuma in the 15th century collected tribute in the form of bags of cochineal dye . Soon after the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire cochineal began to be exported to Spain , and by the seventeenth century it was a commodity traded as far away as India . During the colonial period the production of cochineal ( in Spanish , grana fina ) grew rapidly . Produced almost exclusively in Oaxaca by indigenous producers , cochineal became Mexico 's second most valued export after silver . Cochineal produces purplish colors alone and brilliant scarlets when mordanted with tin ; thus cochineal , which produced a stronger dye and could thus be used in smaller quantities , replaced kermes dyes in general use in Europe from the 17th century .

During the course of the 15th century , the civic records show brilliant reds falling out of fashion for civic and high-status garments in the Duchy of Burgundy in favor of dark blues , greens , and most important of all , black . The origins of the trend for somber colors are elusive , but are generally attributed to the growing influence of Spain and possibly the importation of Spanish merino wools . The trend spread in the next century : the Low Countries , German states , Scandinavia , England , France , and Italy all absorbed the sobering and formal influence of Spanish dress after the mid-1520s . Producing fast black in the Middle Ages was a complicated process involving multiple dyeings with woad or indigo followed by mordanting , but at the dawn of Early Modern period , a new and superior method of dyeing black dye reached Europe via Spanish conquests in the New World . The new method used logwood ( Haematoxylum campechianum ) , a dyewood native to Mexico and Central America . Although logwood was poorly received at first , producing a blue inferior to that of woad and indigo , it was discovered to produce a fast black in combination with a ferrous sulfate ( copperas ) mordant . Despite changing fashions in color , logwood was the most widely used dye by the 19th century , providing the sober blacks of formal and mourning clothes .

The first synthetic dyes were discovered in the mid-19th century , starting with William Henry Perkin 's mauveine in 1856 , an aniline dye derived from coal tar . Alizarin , the red dye present in madder , was the first natural pigment to be duplicated synthetically , in 1869 , leading to the collapse of the market for naturally grown madder . The development of new , strongly colored aniline dyes followed quickly : a range of reddish-purples , blues , violets , greens and reds became available by 1880 . These dyes had great affinity for animal fibres such as wool and silk . The new colors tended to fade and wash out , but they were inexpensive and could be produced in the vast quantities required by textile production in the industrial revolution . By the 1870s commercial dyeing with natural dyestuffs was fast disappearing . At the same time the Pre-Raphaelite artist and founding figure of the Arts and Crafts movement William Morris took up the art of dyeing as an adjunct to his manufacturing business , the design firm of Morris & Co . Always a medievalist at heart , Morris loathed the colors produced by the fashionable aniline dyes . He spent much of his time at his Staffordshire dye works mastering the processes of dyeing with plant materials and making experiments in the revival of old or discovery of new methods . One result of these experiments was to reinstate indigo dyeing as a practical industry and generally to renew the use of natural dyes like madder which had been driven almost out of use by the commercial success of the anilines . Morris saw dyeing of wools , silks , and cottons as the necessary preliminary to the production of woven and printed fabrics of the highest excellence ; and his period of incessant work at the dye-vat ( 1875 – 76 ) was followed by a period during which he was absorbed in the production of textiles ( 1877 – 78 ) , and more especially in the revival of carpet- and tapestry-weaving as fine arts . Morris & Co. also provided naturally dyed silks for the embroidery style called art needlework .

Scientists continued to search for new synthetic dyes that would be effective on cellulose fibres like cotton and linen , and that would be more colorfast on wool and silk than the early anilines . Chrome or mordant dyes produced a muted but very fast color range for woollens . These were followed by acid dyes for animal fibres ( from 1875 ) and the synthesis of indigo in Germany in 1880 . The work on indigo led to the development of a new class of dyes called vat dyes in 1901 that produced a wide range of fast colors for vegetable fibres . Disperse dyes were introduced in 1923 to color the new textiles of cellulose acetate , which could not be colored with any existing dyes . Today disperse dyes are the only effective means of coloring many synthetics . Reactive dyes for both wool and cotton were introduced in the mid-1950s , and are used both in commercial textile production and in craft dyeing . In America , synthetic dyes became popular among a wide range of Native American textile artists ; however , natural dyes remained in use , as many textile collectors prefer natural dyes over synthetics . Today , dyeing with natural materials is often practiced as an adjunct to handspinning , knitting and weaving . It remains a living craft in many traditional cultures of North America , Africa , Asia , and the Scottish Highlands .

Random Access Memories is the fourth studio album by the French electronic music duo Daft Punk , released on 17 May 2013 by the duo 's imprint Daft Life and Columbia Records . The album pays tribute to the late 1970s and early 1980s era of music in the United States , particularly the sounds of said era that emerged from Los Angeles . This theme was reflected in the promotional campaign for the album that included billboards , television advertisements and a web series , as well as in the album 's packaging . Unlike their previous albums , Daft Punk recruited session musicians to perform live instrumentation in professional recording locations , and limited the use of electronic instruments to usage of drum machines , a custom-built modular synthesizer and vintage vocoders . The album features collaborations with Giorgio Moroder , Panda Bear , Julian Casablancas , Todd Edwards , DJ Falcon , Chilly Gonzales , Nile Rodgers , Paul Williams and Pharrell Williams . It is the first album by the duo to be released by Columbia Records . Random Access Memories received critical acclaim upon release , scoring an 87 out of 100 on review aggregator site Metacritic and frequently appearing on many music critics ' year-end lists . It has also become one of Daft Punk 's most commercially successful albums to date , topping the charts in more than 25 countries worldwide . It debuted at # 1 on the Billboard 200 in the United States , selling more than 339,000 copies within its first week , becoming their highest charting album to date and their first to top the Billboard 200 chart . The album 's lead single " Get Lucky " became a critical and commercial success worldwide , topping the charts in more than 30 countries worldwide and becoming one of the best-selling digital singles of all time . The album later won Grammy Awards for Album of the Year , Best Dance / Electronica Album and Best Engineered Album , Non-Classical , and " Get Lucky " won for Record of the Year and Best Pop Duo / Group Performance at the 56th Annual Grammy Awards in 2014 .

Shortly after finishing off their Alive 2006 / 2007 tour , Daft Punk began working on new material in 2008 . Thomas Bangalter of the duo recalled , " the two of us would go in with a lot of keyboards , guitars , drums , and stuff and started to do demos for six , seven months . " Daft Punk were pleased with the work in terms of composition , but were dissatisfied with the production aspect , as they relied on samples and loops of their own performances : " We could play some riffs and stuff but not keep it [ up ] for four minutes straight . " Daft Punk put these demos aside and started work on the Tron : Legacy film soundtrack later in 2008 . As Bangalter mentioned after the film 's release in 2010 : " Making music for a movie is very humbling . We ’ ve been working on some of our music concurrently . " Daft Punk then decided to work extensively with live musicians on what would become Random Access Memories : " We wanted to do what we used to do with machines and samplers , but with people . " They avoided the use of samples on the album , with the exception of the closing track " Contact " .

The album features Chic frontman Nile Rodgers , who commented that a collaboration was " something we 've [ Daft Punk and Rodgers ] talked about for a long time . We 've respected each other endlessly . " Daft Punk eventually visited Rodgers ' home for an informal jam session , and an official collaboration was later confirmed and completed . Musician Paul Williams announced in a 2010 interview that he had worked with the group , after Daft Punk had been introduced to Williams by a sound engineer with whom they were mutually acquainted . In May 2012 Daft Punk 's collaboration with Giorgio Moroder was announced — Moroder had recorded a monologue about his life for use in a track on the album . Rodgers was also present during the Moroder recording session . Moroder clarified that he was not involved in the composition of the track or its use of a synthesizer : " They did not let me get involved at all . Thomas asked me if I wanted to tell the story of my life . Then they would know what to do with it . " Daft Punk had been in contact with Moroder in relation to a possible contribution for the Tron : Legacy score , but this never happened .

Chilly Gonzales stated in an interview that his contribution was recorded in a one-day session : " I played for hours and they 're gonna grab what they grab and turn it into whatever . " He explained that Daft Punk prompted him at the piano in the same manner that a film director coaches an actor , and Gonzales left the Los Angeles studio without knowledge of what the final product would sound like . He had previously recorded a cover version of Daft Punk 's song " Too Long " that appeared on the duo 's 2003 album Daft Club . Pharrell Williams collaborated with Daft Punk and Rodgers by providing vocals for two tracks on Random Access Memories . As a member of the Neptunes , Pharrell had previously provided a remix of " Harder , Better , Faster , Stronger " that appeared on Daft Club . The Neptunes and Daft Punk also co-produced N.E.R.D. ' s song " Hypnotize U " .

Recording took place at Henson Recording Studios , Conway Recording Studios and Capitol Studios in California , Electric Lady Studios in New York City , and Gang Recording Studio in Paris , France . Having worked with keyboardist and arranger Chris Caswell on Tron : Legacy , the duo enlisted him and connected with engineers and other session players for their next album . Daft Punk recalled that they wished to avoid the more compressed sounds of drum machines in favor of " airy open " drum sets of the 1970s and 80s , which the duo consider the most appealing era . Bangalter clarified that " it 's not that we can 't make crazy futuristic sounding stuff , but we wanted to play with the past " . The duo noted that the session players were enthusiastic to reunite in the context of the new album and the perceived prestige of the studio locations . Drummer Omar Hakim recalled being asked by Daft Punk to perform on the album , and was surprised by what they wanted of him . He at first assumed that the duo wanted electronic drum work , since Hakim had done some drum programming in his career . Daft Punk instead specified that they were looking to record Hakim performing acoustic drum riffs that the duo had conceived . Rather than play out the entire structure of a song , Hakim would perform individual patterns for extended periods , thus creating a library for the duo to cull from . Daft Punk conveyed their ideas to session musicians via sheet music and in some instances by humming melodies . Bangalter recalled an example in which he hummed a complex drum and bass line to Hakim , who replicated and improved upon it for the track " Giorgio by Moroder " .

Most of the vocal sessions took place in Paris , whereas the rhythm sections were recorded in the United States . The album incorporates a variety of accompanying performances including a horn section , woodwind instruments , a string orchestra and choir . Orchestral parts in particular were recorded for almost every track , but were only included on a few songs in the final product . The use of such performers and places came at great monetary expense , as noted by Bangalter : " There used to be a time where people that had means to experiment would do it , you know ? That 's what this record is about . " He estimated a cost of over one million dollars , but felt that the number was not important . Bangalter stated that the sessions were financed by Daft Punk themselves , which allowed them the luxury of abandoning the project if they had so wished . He also specified that " there are songs on the album that traveled into five studios over two and a half years . " Various sound effects were newly recorded with the help of film experts from Warner Bros. Bangalter noted one example in which the sound of a busy restaurant was achieved by placing microphones in front of the forks of a group of people . In another instance , the effect of dripping water was recorded on a soundstage . Use of electronics was limited to drum machines that appear on only two tracks , a large custom-built Modcan modular synthesizer performed live by the duo , and vintage vocoders . When asked which of the two Daft Punk members performed the robotic vocals on the album , Bangalter expressed that it did not matter . The duo produced most of the vocoder tracks in their own private studio in Paris , with later processing done by Mick Guzauski at Capitol . Moroder elaborated that Daft Punk would take " a week or so " to find an adequate vocoder sound , and an additional few days to record the lyrics .

Although the duo felt that the presets and parameters of digital tools would inhibit creativity and innovation , they admitted that Random Access Memories could not have been made in the complete absence of computer technology . The sessions were recorded simultaneously onto Ampex reels and as Pro Tools tracks ; Daft Punk and Guzauski would then listen to each recording in both analogue and digital iterations , deciding which of the two they preferred . Subsequently the elements were edited by the duo with Pro Tools in a manner similar to how they would work with samples . In an interview conducted in November 2012 by Guitar World magazine , Fourplay member Nathan East mentioned that he had contributed to the project . The percussionist Quinn also stated that he performed on " every drum [ he ] own [ s ] " for the album . Pedal steel guitar work on the record was performed by Greg Leisz . Daft Punk sought to use the instrument in a way that bordered between electronic and acoustic . Additional session players include John " J.R. " Robinson , Paul Jackson , Jr . , James Genus , Thomas Bloch and Chris Caswell .

Bangalter described the album 's title as encapsulating Daft Punk 's interest in the past , referencing both random-access memory technology and the human experience : " We were drawing a parallel between the brain and the hard drive – the random way that memories are stored . " Daft Punk felt that while current technology allows for an unlimited capacity to store recorded material , the content produced by contemporary artists had diminished in quality . Their goal was therefore to maximize the potential of infinite storage by recording a sprawling amount of elements . The duo pointed to the process as being further inspiration for the album 's title , as they sought to make connections out of the random series of ideas . Regarding the style of the album , they sought a " west coast vibe " , referencing such acts as Fleetwood Mac , the Doobie Brothers and the Eagles . Daft Punk also acknowledged that the record pays homage to Michael Jackson , the Cars and Steely Dan . The recording of live synthesizer parts was done in a progressive rock fashion , with the pop sensibilities of Wizzard and the Move . Daft Punk specifically looked to the album Rumours by Fleetwood Mac and The Dark Side of the Moon by Pink Floyd as models . Bangalter felt that " the most important records in music , whether it 's Led Zeppelin [ ... ] or The White Album or Sgt. Pepper 's ... or Quadrophenia or Tommy , are the ones that take you on a journey for miles and miles . "

The initial demos of Random Access Memories were created without a clear plan for an album . Over the course of the sessions , numerous tracks were created and discarded . At one point Daft Punk had considered sorting the entire album into one continuous track , similar to the Prince record Lovesexy . They had also considered releasing it as a four-disc box set to accommodate the large volume of content produced . Thus the album lacked structure until the final months of production . The opening track , " Give Life Back to Music " , features guitar work by Rodgers and Paul Jackson , Jr . , drums by John " J.R. " Robinson , and lyrics performed by Daft Punk using vocoders . The song reflects the duo 's goal to create a light yet polished and elegant record . As stated by NME , the album begins with " a stupendously vast rock intro that obliterates any trace of Human After All 's brittle techno " . The following track , " The Game of Love " , also features vocoder singing by the duo . Bangalter said , " There ’ s this thing today where the recorded human voice is processed to try to feel robotic . " He explained that the duo 's intention was to produce robotic vocals with expressiveness and emotion . " Giorgio by Moroder " was created to serve as a metaphor about musical freedom . The duo believed that a monologue by Moroder about his career would be an analogue for music 's history regarding exploration of genres and tastes .

" Within " was one of the first tracks to be recorded for the album . It features Gonzales on piano with minimal accompaniment consisting of bass and a percussion track , as well as vocoder . In the context of the album , " Within " marks the transition from the key of A minor of the previous three songs , to the key of B-flat minor of subsequent tracks . Regarding the lyrics , critic Nick Stevenson observed , " A deep vocoder sings about not understanding the world , being lost and not even remembering his own name . " Jeremy Abbott of Mixmag added , " So many things I don 't understand is the prominent lyric and Chilly 's chords combined with grazing cymbals make for a beautiful summer lullaby . " " Instant Crush " was based on a demo that Daft Punk presented to Julian Casablancas ; he became enthused upon hearing it and provided vocals . The song contains rock influences and a guitar solo . Critic John Balfe considered it " appropriately Strokes-ish , even if [ Casablancas ' ] trademark drawl is fed quite substantially through a vocoder . " De Homem-Christo noted , " It is true that it is not his usual register , it is the way Julian reacted to the track so for us it is even more exciting . " " Lose Yourself to Dance " features Pharrell Williams and was the result of a desire to create dance music with live drummers . To that end , Robinson appears as session player . A vocoder chant of " come on " appears in the song alongside Pharrell Williams 's singing .

" Touch " features lyrics written and performed by Paul Williams . Daft Punk noted that the song is the most complex piece on the record , being composed of over 250 elements . As Pitchfork observed , " the song warps and bends , floating through genres , epochs , and emotions with a sense of hallucinatory wonder " and recalls the Beatles song " A Day in the Life " . In Rolling Stone , Will Hermes observes , " It 's completely ridiculous . It 's also remarkably beautiful and affecting . " Louis Lepron of Kombini believed the multitude of styles and science fiction aesthetics on the track is an homage to musical films including Phantom of the Paradise , the soundtrack of which Williams had composed . The song 's opening is a specific reference to a scene in the film in which the title character 's voice is gradually enhanced in a studio booth . De Homem-Christo stated that " Touch " is " like the core of the record , and the memories of the other tracks are revolving around it . " " Get Lucky " is the second song on the album to feature Pharrell Williams , who clarified that the title phrase does not simply refer to a sexual act , but to the potential fortune of finding chemistry with another person . When he had first heard the song , Pharrell Williams said it evoked the image of a " peachy color [ ed ] " sunrise on an exotic island . Daft Punk discussed the concept of the song " Beyond " with Paul Williams , who then translated the ideas into lyrics for it . The track begins with an orchestral string section and timpani before settling into what NME called " reupholstered Warren G ' Regulate ' grooves " . Stevenson similarly described " Beyond " as " a lot like the sample used in Nate Dogg and Warren G ’ s ‘ Regulate ’ " , Michael McDonald 's song " I Keep Forgettin ' " , which he noted as " no bad thing " , and stated that the vocoder-affected lyrics detail " the existential world beyond oceans and mountains – a land beyond love . "

" Motherboard " was described by Daft Punk as being " a futuristic composition that could be from the year 4000 " . A review elaborated that the instrumental piece can " carry you away like a track by Sébastien Tellier " . Todd Edwards commented that the lyrics of " Fragments of Time " were inspired by his desire to capture the moments he experienced during his visit to the duo 's studio sessions in California . " Doin ' It Right " was the last song to be recorded and features vocals performed by Panda Bear . The duo referred to it as the only purely electronic piece on the album , with a modern style . The closing track , " Contact " , is co-produced by DJ Falcon and features a sample of the song " We Ride Tonight " by Australian rock band the Sherbs . The Japan-exclusive bonus track " Horizon " , written by Bangalter and de Homem Christo , is a slow-tempo composition reminiscent of Pink Floyd . It is characterized by a consistent guitar strum while several additional instruments are progressively layered over , including a bass guitar and drums . The song is stylistically different from other tracks on the album , and is one of the few to feature no lyrics .

In January 2013 , de Homem-Christo first revealed that Daft Punk was in the process of signing with Sony Music Entertainment through the Columbia Records label , and that the album would have a spring release . A report from The Guardian followed specifying a release date of May 2013 . On 26 February 2013 , Daft Punk 's official website and Facebook page announced the signing to Columbia with a picture of the duo 's helmets , and a " Columbia " logo in the corner . Billboards and posters featuring the helmets and logo then appeared in several major cities . On 2 March , a 15-second television ad aired during Saturday Night Live ( SNL ) depicting an animated , stylized version of the band 's logo and the aforementioned image of the helmets . The music featured in the ad was a result of the collaboration with Rodgers , who noted that various fan remixes of the clip appeared online after the airing . A second TV ad also premiered that was similar to the first on Saturday Night Live , but with a different music clip and the title Random Access Memories in place of the stylized Daft Punk logo . During the first night of Coachella Festival 2013 , a third trailer debuted that featured Daft Punk , Pharrell Williams and Rodgers performing , as well as a list of collaborators on the album . The trailer also aired during Saturday Night Live the following evening , but without a list of collaborators .

The gradual rollout of promotion was inspired by advertising of the past , reflecting the theme of the album . Daft Punk approached Columbia with a specific agenda for the campaign ; Rob Stringer of the label recalled that the duo had showed him the book Rock ' n ' Roll Billboards of the Sunset Strip as an example of what they wanted . Bangalter felt that physical billboards are more affecting than banner ads and that " SNL is this part of American culture with a certain timelessness to it . " The campaign was handled by a small group led by Daft Punk and manager Paul Hahn , with assistance from Kathryn Frazier of the public-relations firm Biz 3 . The duo had pursued Columbia in particular because of its long-standing history , as expressed by Bangalter : " It felt interesting conceptually to write this story with a record company like Columbia , with a 125-year legacy . " Furthermore , the vinyl labels of the album feature the classic yellow on red Columbia label used on records during said time period . Central to the promotion was the limiting of exposure to the album 's content , as well as a focus on face-to-face contact for press previews . As Hahn stated , " There is a minimalism in our approach that creates an absence of information , and we notice our fans tend to throw themselves into the breach , or try to fill the empty spaces . " The album 's track titles were initially withheld from online retailers and later revealed through Columbia 's Vine account on 16 April 2013 as a video relaying a series of images . Following a reported leak of the song days earlier , " Get Lucky " was released as a digital download single on 19 April 2013 . On 13 May , Daft Punk 's official Vevo channel posted a video revealing the artwork packaging of the vinyl version of the album , as well as the first few seconds of the opening track . Later that day , a limited-time preview stream of the full album was launched via the iTunes Store .

Daft Punk were scheduled to appear on 6 August episode of The Colbert Report to promote Random Access Memories , but were unable to do so because of conflicting obligations regarding the duo 's future appearance at the 2013 MTV Video Music Awards . According to Stephen Colbert , Daft Punk were unaware of any exclusivity agreement and were halted by MTV executives the morning prior to the taping . Colbert nevertheless broadcast an elaborate sketch of himself dancing to " Get Lucky " with various celebrities , including Hugh Laurie , Jeff Bridges , Jimmy Fallon , Bryan Cranston , Jon Stewart , Henry Kissinger , Matt Damon , and the Rockettes . Columbia released a deluxe box set of Random Access Memories containing a 56-page hardcover book , the vinyl edition of the album , a partial 70mm film strip of the " Lose Yourself to Dance " video , and USB drives containing bonus audio as well as video content .

The Random Access Memories official website features a video series called The Collaborators , directed by Ed Lachman and produced by The Creators Project , a partnership between Intel and Vice . Eight episodes were released in the series , which features interviews with participant artists that were involved in the making of the album . All featured album artists appear in the series with the exception of Casablancas , who would go on to appear prominently in the music video for " Instant Crush " . Excerpts of the lead single " Get Lucky " appear in the opening and ending of each Collaborators episode as well as excerpts of other songs from the album , corresponding to each featured musician . The first episode features disco pioneer Moroder speaking about his experiences with the genre such as his records with Donna Summer and experimenting with synthesizers . Moroder also talks about his visit with Daft Punk in their recording studio . When asked how he first found out about the duo , he replied that he first heard their 2000 single " One More Time " and especially liked the breakdown middle section . He concluded that he views Daft Punk as " perfectionists " and described the album 's style as " something [ ... ] different . Still dance , still electronic ; but [ they ] give that human touch back " .

Episode two revealed that Edwards had contributed to the album ; he expressed that it was difficult keeping his involvement a secret . Edwards had previously collaborated with Daft Punk to create the song " Face to Face " on the 2001 album Discovery . He summarized his experience in the studio recording " Fragments of Time " as being life-changing , as the sessions inspired him to move from New Jersey to California on a permanent basis . Edwards also pointed out the irony of " two androids [ ... ] bringing soul back to music " . The third episode features Rodgers , who spoke of his background as a founding member of Chic , as well as his numerous collaborations with other artists throughout his career , such as David Bowie , Madonna , and Duran Duran . He expressed that working with Daft Punk " [ felt ] like [ ... ] working with contemporaries " and that they motivated each other to excel when collaborating on the album . At the end of the episode , Rodgers played a portion of a then-unspecified song in which he participated , which was later identified as " Lose Yourself to Dance " , and remarked that the duo 's style has evolved whilst simultaneously exploring music 's past , suggesting that " they went back to go forward . "

Pharrell Williams participated in the fourth episode in which he elaborated on his experience with the creation of the album . Pharrell remarked upon the organic sound of the album , surmising that it " feels like the only click track they had was [ ... ] the human heartbeat " . He felt that the record can be enjoyed by people of all ages due to the accessible nature of music , and concluded that Daft Punk " could just get back on the spaceship that brought them here and go , and leave us . But they 're gracious , they 're nice robots . They chose to stay " . Episode five features Noah Lennox , better known by his stage name Panda Bear , who spoke about his contribution to the album as well as his history with the band Animal Collective . He had first heard of Daft Punk through the music video of the song " Around the World " , which introduced him to many aspects of electronic dance music . He added that Homework was one of the few albums he and his older brother both enjoyed . Regarding Random Access Memories , Lennox remarked upon the approach of having live musicians , but structuring their performances in a minimal , sample-like fashion .

For the sixth episode , Gonzales spoke about his contribution to the album . He recalled Daft Punk 's visible joy in listening to the raw session recordings made early in the production of the album , as well as the impending years-long challenge that would be faced in completing the record . Gonzales expressed that the duo were aware of how the keys of each song would contribute to the emotional progression of the album as a whole . He therefore performed the piano in the song " Within " to accommodate the cycle . Gonzales concluded by pointing out that Daft Punk rarely collaborate with others , and thus felt that they did so on Random Access Memories to " make the work be transcendent " . The seventh episode features Stéphane Quême , otherwise known as DJ Falcon , who spoke of first meeting Daft Punk when the duo began recording their debut album Homework . Quême noted that the group 's sound had changed since their debut , and that each of their albums had had a distinct influence . He also felt that the recording of Random Access Memories was such that a producer could potentially sample a track from it in the same way that Daft Punk themselves had sampled older records in their previous albums . Quême concluded that the duo were always sincere and although their first single was released 20 years ago , it still felt modern .

Episode eight features Paul Williams , who likened Daft Punk 's personas to a character from the film Phantom of the Paradise , in which he starred . He also added that their masks hide who they are from the public and allow the listeners to enjoy the music for what it is . Paul Williams worked with the duo at Henson Recording Studios , the former studio of A & M Records where he had worked previously , including his compositions for Jim Henson 's films featuring the Muppets , such as " Rainbow Connection " . He also stated that the song he penned was to be sung from the point of view of an unidentified first person , setting the emotion , but the lyrics came from the music itself . Paul Williams said that he felt vulnerable while writing the record , and said he writes best when he is allowed to be honest and vulnerable , a situation that Daft Punk allowed . He also stated that his sobriety added a sense of wonder to the song he wrote , as every day for him being sober has been wonderful compared to his prior life of excess .

The 79th Annual Wee Waa Show , held on 17 May 2013 in the rural Australian town of Wee Waa , was selected as the venue for the worldwide album launch . The tickets for the Wee Waa album launch were completely sold within thirteen minutes of release , even though it was widely understood that Daft Punk would not be in attendance at the launch — the album launch details revealed that the album would be streamed live to the 4,000 audience members . Australian police in the local Wee Waa area initiated Operation Hadrian to prevent alcohol-related problems and anti-social behaviour at the launch event . Sony commissioned the design and construction of a custom-built stage for the Wee Waa album launch event , and the Daft Arts production house assembled a LED circular music space that became Australia 's biggest-ever outdoor dance floor . The record label described the creation , which was illuminated by a giant disco ball and complemented by four speaker towers and flood lights , as " Saturday Night Fever meets Close Encounters of the Third Kind " . The prelude to the streaming of the album was a pyrotechnic show provided by Father Anthony Koppman and his company " Holy Smoke " from Guyra , New South Wales .

At Metacritic , which assigns a weighted mean rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album gained an average score of 87 , based on 47 reviews , indicating " universal acclaim " and scoring higher than any other album by the duo . Q referred to it as " by some margin Daft Punk 's best album in a career that 's already redefined dance music at least twice . It is , in short , a mind blower . " The Independent stated , " Random Access Memories breathes life into the safe music that dominates today ’ s charts , with its sheer ambition … It 's an exciting journey , and one that , for all its musical twists and turns , has its feet planted on the dancefloor . " Melissa Maerz of Entertainment Weekly called it " a headphones album in an age of radio singles ; a bravura live performance that stands out against pro forma knob-twiddling ; a jazzy disco attack on the basic house beat ; a full collaboration at a time when the superstar DJ stands alone . " She concluded her review by saying that " if EDM is turning humans into robots , Daft Punk are working hard to make robot pop feel human again . "

Several critics commented on the variety of content on the album . NME said , " There 's a creeping notion that every musical idea that 's ever been so much as thought up is on this album . " In addition , Random Access Memories is ranked # 497 on NME 's list , " The 500 Greatest Albums Of All Time " . Mark Richardson of Pitchfork Media echoed this sentiment , calling the record " a mix of disco , soft rock , and prog-pop , along with some Broadway-style pop bombast and even a few pinches of their squelching stadium-dance aesthetic " . Richardson praised the engineering and recording on the album , but did say that " though everything about RAM , from the session musicians to the guests to the means of production , is meant to sound more ' human , ' the album at points sounds more sterile , almost too perfect . " Pitchfork deemed the album the seventh best of 2013 . DJ Magazine commented on the shift in Daft Punk 's musical style : " While Daft Punk clearly want to move on and evolve , ditching the electronic beats , house and techno that first elevated them to fame , it 's that music that forms the bedrock of their best tunes , and still , that 's what they 're best at making . " In a four-star review , Resident Advisor stated that " it 's an album rooted in a now-ancient aesthetic : ' 70s staples , like crisply recorded California studio music , or the kind of deceptively sophisticated New York disco that Nile Rogers [ sic ] , one of the album 's key guest artists , popularized with Chic . " In a four-and-a-half star review , Heather Phares of AllMusic said that the record " taps into the wonder and excitement " of music from the 1970s and early 1980s . Phares concluded her review by saying , " Random Access Memories is also Daft Punk 's most personal work , and richly rewarding for listeners willing to spend time with it . "

Aaron Payne of musicOMH wrote , " Daft Punk somehow misplace the wit and the light touch that 's pretty much their trademark . Instead , these long epics become somewhat tedious and there is a strong whiff of egoism and self-indulgence . … At over 70 minutes , the album feels rather bloated . Quite a few of the songs are too long , or too empty of ideas , or too willing to repeat themselves , or too willing to play to type " . Dan Weiss of Paste noted that " none of the admittedly eclectic pilferings of Random Access Memories challenge or defy anything . They all evoke specific eras of film soundtrack or disco trend . The beats have grown less , not more , complex over time . "

Random Access Memories debuted at number one on the French Albums Chart with first-week sales of 195,013 copies ( 127,361 physical sales and 67,652 digital sales ) , earning Daft Punk their first number-one album in France . The next week , it sold 49,600 copies to remain at the top spot with a 75 % sales decrease . The album secured a third consecutive week atop the French chart , withstanding a 29 % sales drop to 35,500 copies . Random Access Memories debuted at number one on the UK Albums Chart with 165,091 copies sold in its first week , becoming the duo 's first UK number-one album , as well as the second fastest-selling artist album of 2013 after One Direction 's Midnight Memories . The album remained at number one on the UK chart the following week , selling 52,801 copies . In its third week , it fell to number three on sales of 28,182 copies . In the United States , the album debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 with first-week sales of 339,000 copies , the duo 's first number one album on the chart . The album maintained the number one spot in its second week , selling 93,000 copies . In the album 's third week of release , it sold an additional 62,000 copies , while falling to number two on the Billboard 200 . The album 's vinyl LP format also proved popular ; it was 2013 's top-selling LP , with 49,000 US copies shifted . The album had sold 922,000 copies in the US as of January 2014 . On 6 February 2014 , the album was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . Following the duo 's Album of the Year win at the 56th Annual Grammy Awards , Random Access Memories jumped from number thirty-nine to number ten on the Billboard 200 with a 300 % sales increase , selling 30,000 copies that week .

Random Access Memories entered the Canadian Albums Chart at number one with 46,000 copies sold , the biggest one-week sales total in Canada of 2013 . The album remained at number one the next week , selling 17,000 copies . In Japan , the album debuted at number three on the Oricon Weekly Albums Chart , selling 25,970 copies . The album debuted at number one in several countries across continental Europe , including Austria , Belgium , Czech Republic , Denmark ( where the album sold 5,392 copies in its first week ) , Finland , Germany , Ireland , Italy , Norway , Portugal , Spain and Switzerland . In Oceania , Random Access Memories debuted at number one in Australia and New Zealand ; it was certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) and gold by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) in its first week .

On 23 March , the album became available for pre-order on the iTunes Store via digital download , revealing a release date of 17 May in Australia , 20 May in the United Kingdom , and 21 May in the United States . It later appeared as an Amazon.com pre-order on CD , vinyl and directly from the Random Access Memories official website . The album became available for preview streaming via the iTunes Store on 13 May 2013 . It was also released for streaming on Spotify , with the lead single , " Get Lucky " , topping Spotify 's first digital streaming chart in the process .

Peyton Williams Manning ( born March 24 , 1976 ) is a former American football quarterback who played 18 seasons in the National Football League ( NFL ) . Considered to be one of the greatest quarterbacks of all-time , he spent the majority of his career with Indianapolis Colts . In his last four seasons , he played with the Denver Broncos . Manning played college football for the University of Tennessee , leading the Tennessee Volunteers to the 1997 SEC Championship in his senior season . He is the second son of former NFL quarterback Archie Manning and older brother of New York Giants quarterback Eli Manning . Manning was selected by the Indianapolis Colts as the first overall pick in the 1998 NFL Draft . From 1998 to 2010 , he improved the fortunes of the struggling Colts franchise and helped transform them into playoff contenders , leading the team to eight division championships , two AFC championships , and one Super Bowl , the franchise 's first since 1971 , as well as their first since relocating to Indianapolis . After undergoing neck surgery that forced him to miss the entire 2011 season , Manning was released by the Colts and signed with the Denver Broncos . Serving as the Broncos ' starting quarterback from 2012 to 2015 , his tenure saw the Broncos reach the top of their division each year and his playing career concluded with a victory in Super Bowl 50 .

Manning holds many NFL records , including combined regular and postseason career wins ( 200 ) , AP MVP awards ( 5 ) , Pro Bowl appearances ( 14 ) , 4,000-yard passing seasons ( 14 ) , passing yards ( 71,940 ) , and touchdown passes ( 539 ) . A two-time Super Bowl winner and the most valuable player of Super Bowl XLI , Manning is also the only quarterback to start the Super Bowl for two different franchises more than once each and the only starting quarterback to win a Super Bowl with two different franchises . During a 2009 Monday Night Football game , Manning received the nickname " The Sheriff " from color commentator Jon Gruden due to his tendency to audible prior to the snap , and he was one of the most recognizable and parodied players in the NFL . Teams led by Manning typically utilized the hurry-up offense in place of the standard huddle .

Manning attended Isidore Newman School in New Orleans , Louisiana , and led their football team to a 34 – 5 record during his three seasons as starter . He was named Gatorade Circle of Champions National Player-of-the-Year and Columbus ( Ohio ) Touchdown Club National Offensive Player-of-the-Year in 1993 . While at Newman he began wearing the number 18 in honor of his older brother Cooper , who was forced to give up football due to spinal stenosis . Younger brother Eli also wore the number when he became starting quarterback . Newman has since retired the number 18 jersey and it can be seen hanging in the school gym . Manning was among the most sought after high school players in the country and was recruited by about 60 colleges , led by Florida , Florida State , LSU , Michigan , Tennessee , Texas , Texas A & M , and his father 's alma mater , Ole Miss .

Manning chose to play college football for the University of Tennessee Volunteers . Some were surprised that he did not pick the Ole Miss Rebels , for whom his father Archie played . He became Tennessee 's all-time leading passer with 11,201 yards and 89 touchdowns and won 39 of 45 games as a starter , breaking the Southeastern Conference ( SEC ) record for career wins . As a freshman , Manning began the season as the third-string quarterback . In the season opener against UCLA , Manning was one of three quarterbacks to come off the bench after starter Jerry Colquitt suffered a season-ending injury on the seventh play of the game . However , Manning wasn 't able to generate any offense and was pulled from the game . During the season 's fourth game , against Mississippi State , starter Todd Helton got injured and Manning took over . The Vols lost 24 – 21 , but Manning was named the team 's starter and remained so for the rest of his college career . In his first start , the following week against Washington State , the Vols won 10 – 9 . They won all but one of their remaining games , finishing the season 8 – 4 with a 45 – 23 victory over Virginia Tech in the Gator Bowl .

Manning and the Vols started off the 1995 season with victories over East Carolina and Georgia , before heading off to Gainesville to play the Gators . Against Florida , he threw for 326 yards and 2 touchdowns , leading the Vols to a 30 – 21 halftime lead . However , the Gators outscored the Vols 41 – 7 in the second half , winning 62 – 37 . This was the Vols ' only loss of the season , as they won their remaining 8 regular season games , including a 41 – 14 win over Alabama and then defeated Ohio State in the Citrus Bowl . The Vols ended the season ranked third and Manning came in sixth in Heisman Trophy voting . The Vols opened the 1996 season ranked second behind Nebraska and one of the favorites to win the national championship . However , after winning their first 2 games against UNLV and UCLA , the Vols again lost to Florida 35 – 29 , with Manning throwing 4 interceptions . After winning their next four games , the Vols were upset by Memphis , despite Manning passing for 296 yards . The Vols won the remainder of their games , including a 48 – 28 win in the Citrus Bowl over Northwestern , a game in which Manning passed for 408 yards and 4 touchdowns ; he was named the game 's MVP .

Manning completed his degree in three years , a Bachelor of Arts in speech communication , and was projected to be the top overall pick in the NFL Draft , but returned to Tennessee for his senior year . In his senior season , the Vols opened the season with victories against Texas Tech and UCLA , but for the third time in his career , Manning fell to Florida 33 – 20 . The Vols won the rest of their regular season games , finishing 10 – 1 , and advanced to the SEC Championship game against Auburn . Down 20 – 7 , Manning led the Vols to a 30 – 29 victory . Throwing for 4 touchdowns , he was named the game 's MVP , but injured himself in the process . The 3rd-ranked Vols were matched-up with second-ranked Nebraska in the Orange Bowl ; if Tennessee won and top-ranked Michigan lost to Washington State in the Rose Bowl , the Vols would win the national championship . However , the Vols ' defense could not stop Nebraska 's rushing attack , giving up over 400 rushing yards in a 42 – 17 loss . As a senior , Manning won numerous awards ; he was a consensus first-team All-American , the Maxwell Award winner , the Davey O 'Brien Award winner , the Johnny Unitas Award winner , and the Best College Player ESPY award winner , among others . In 2005 , Tennessee retired Manning 's number ( No. 16 ) . One of the streets leading to Neyland Stadium has been renamed Peyton Manning Pass . Manning also excelled academically and was elected to Phi Beta Kappa Society in 1997 and awarded the National Football Foundation National Scholar-Athlete Award .

Manning was selected by the Indianapolis Colts with the first overall pick of the 1998 NFL draft . He would start as a rookie and go on to play for the Colts for 13 full seasons before being sidelined by a neck injury , which cost him the entire 2011 season . After recovering from the injury , he joined the Denver Broncos for whom he played from the 2012 season through the 2015 season . Excluding the year lost to injury , Manning played in 17 NFL seasons . Manning is often referred to as one of the greatest passing quarterbacks of all time . He was named the NFL 's most valuable player a record five times ( four times as a Colt , once as a Bronco ) , was named to the Pro Bowl 14 times ( a record ) and named to the first team All-Pro seven times . As a starter up to the end of 2015 season he had a career winning percentage of .702 in the regular season . He holds the NFL record for career touchdown passes and career passing yards , achieved in 2014 and 2015 respectively . The most commonly cited criticism of Peyton Manning 's professional career is that despite great success and gaudy statistics during the regular season , he did not enjoy similar levels of success in the post-season . His career post-season record as a starter was a more modest 14-13 , compared to his regular season record through the 2015 season which was 186-79 . Manning won two Super Bowls ( Super Bowl XLI and Super Bowl 50 ) and played in two others ( Super Bowl XLIV and Super Bowl XLVIII ) , being named MVP of XLI , while losing XLIV in an upset , and managing just one successful touchdown drive in each of XLVIII and 50 . During the early part of Manning 's career " his record-breaking stats were written off because of the Colts ' postseason failures " ; conversely he posted poor stats in the 2015 regular season and Super Bowl 50 ( which would be his final season ) but nonetheless won his second league championship thanks to his team 's defense .

Despite concerns about his arm strength and mobility , Manning was selected first overall in the 1998 draft by the Indianapolis Colts . Although many considered Ryan Leaf his rival for the first selection in the draft , and Leaf 's quarterback rating was higher , all six experts Sports Illustrated consulted believed that Manning was superior . Five said that they would take him first in the draft ; Sid Gillman said of Manning , " this is a pro quarterback " . The Colts ' scouts initially favored Leaf , but the team 's management and coaches were gradually won over by Manning 's attitude , particularly as Manning showed up prepared to a scheduled interview meeting with the Colts ' staff while Leaf arrived late . Colts general manager Bill Polian who had the final say on the draft selection recalled Manning saying " I 'll leave you with this thought . If you take me , I promise you we will win a championship . If you don 't , I promise I 'll come back and kick your ass . " In his rookie season , he passed for 3,739 yards with 26 touchdowns , set five different NFL rookie records including most touchdown passes in a season , and was named to the NFL All-Rookie First Team . Manning 's first win came against fellow rookie Leaf , 17 – 12 over the Chargers . Weeks later , Manning faced off against Steve Young ; he threw three touchdowns , tying a Colts rookie record , but the 49ers kicked a late field goal to win 34 – 31 . In November against the Jets , Manning threw for three touchdowns in a 24 – 23 win ; he was named AFC Offensive Player of the Week for this performance . It was the first game-winning drive of Manning 's career , as he threw the game-winning TD pass to Marcus Pollard . Manning was certainly a bright spot in 1998 for the Colts , but he also threw a league high 28 interceptions as the team struggled to a 3 – 13 record with a defense that gave up more than 27 points per game . The Colts lost many close games , including five games in which they had led by double-digits at some point .

The Indianapolis Colts opened the 1999 season with a 31 – 14 victory over Buffalo , but gave up a 28 – 7 lead the following week against the Patriots and lost . After defeating San Diego 27 – 19 in a game in which Manning threw for over 400 yards , and was named AFC Offensive Player of the Week , they lost again , to Miami . The Colts responded by winning 11 of their remaining 12 games , finishing 13 – 3 and the AFC East champions . The 10 game turnaround from the previous year set an NFL record . As the second seed in the AFC , the Colts earned a first round bye , and faced Tennessee in the playoffs . The Colts lost 19 – 16 to the Super Bowl bound Titans and Manning was limited to one touchdown run . Manning finished the year with 4,135 passing yards and 26 passing touchdowns , and was named both Second-team All-Pro and to the Pro Bowl , both firsts for him . In the Pro Bowl , he passed for 270 yards with 2 touchdowns . The Colts started the 2000 season inconsistently . Following an opening week victory against Kansas City , they blew a 21 – 0 lead against the Raiders . The Colts responded with a Monday Night victory against Jacksonville , a 43 – 14 win in which Manning threw for 430 yards and 4 touchdowns ; Manning was named the AFC Offensive Player of the Week for this performance . The Colts won 4 of their next 5 games , including one against New England in which Manning posted the first perfect passer rating of his career , but then lost 4 of the 5 games following that . The Colts regained their momentum , winning their final 3 games , including a 31 – 10 win over Minnesota on Week 17 . Manning threw for 4 touchdowns in the win and was again named AFC Offensive Player of the Week and the win gave the Colts a 10 – 6 record as well as a wild card spot in the playoffs . In the wild card game , the Colts fell to the Dolphins 23 – 17 in overtime . Manning passed for 194 yards and a touchdown in the loss . He finished the season with 4,413 passing yards and 33 passing touchdowns and was named Second-team All-Pro and to the Pro Bowl . At the Pro Bowl , Manning threw two touchdown passes .

Manning and the Colts introduced their now-signature no-huddle offense , and used it to great effect in a Week 1 rout of the Jets , 45 – 24 . Two weeks later ( Week 2 games were not played as scheduled due to the 9 / 11 attacks ) the Colts advanced to 2 – 0 with a win over Buffalo , behind Manning 's 421 yards passing . He was named the AFC Offensive Player of the Week for this game . However , the Colts lost the following week to New England , and continued their slide , losing their following two games . The Colts briefly rebounded , winning two games , but then lost 7 of their last 9 , including a 40 – 21 home loss to the 49ers . After Manning threw a career-high four interceptions in that game , coach Jim Mora uttered his infamous " Playoffs ? Don 't talk about playoffs . Are you kidding me . Playoffs ? I 'm just hoping we can win a game , another game " press conference . Despite the 6 – 10 record , Manning finished the season with 4,131 passing yards , 26 passing touchdowns , and 4 rushing touchdowns as the offense produced the second most points in the league . However , the defense allowed the most points and Jim Mora was fired after the season .

Tony Dungy would become Manning 's second head coach in the NFL . The Colts started off the 2002 season 4 – 1 , before a 3-game losing streak sent them to 4 – 4 . The Colts responded by winning all but two of their remaining games , including a 35 – 13 upset of the Eagles in which Manning had a perfect passer rating for the second time in his career , giving them a 10 – 6 record and a spot in the playoffs . However , the Colts were pummeled by the Jets in the Wild Card game , 41 – 0 , with Manning passing for only 137 yards . He finished the year with 4,200 passing yards and 27 passing touchdowns and was named to the Pro Bowl team . In the Pro Bowl , Manning completed five of eleven passes for 100 yards and a touchdown .

The 2003 Colts began the season 5 – 0 , including a 55 – 21 blowout of the Saints in which Manning played his third perfect passer rating game and threw a career-high six TD passes , earning him AFC Offensive Player of the Week honors . On Monday Night Football against the defending champion Buccaneers , Manning and the Colts trailed 35 – 14 in the final five minutes . After one short TD drive , the Colts recovered the onside kick . Manning threw a 28-yard TD pass to Marvin Harrison on 4th & 6 to make it 35 – 28 . With 1 : 41 remaining , Manning got the ball back and drove the offense 85 yards for the game-tying TD . He set up the winning 29-yard field goal in overtime for a stunning 38 – 35 win . It was the only time in NFL history a team won a game after trailing by 21 points in the final 4 minutes of regulation . Manning passed for 386 yards in the game . After an overtime loss to Carolina , the Colts won all but three of their remaining games , finishing 12 – 4 . On November 30 the Colts hosted the 9 – 2 Patriots in what would be the beginning of the NFL 's top rivalry of the 2000s . The Colts trailed 31 – 10 late in the third quarter before Manning threw three TD passes in a span of six minutes to tie the game . Trailing 38 – 34 in the final minutes , the Colts had 3 plays at the 1-yard line to try and score the winning TD . Edgerrin James was stopped on 4th down by Willie McGinest and the Patriots won . In a Week 14 win against Atlanta , Manning threw for five touchdowns and was named player of the week a second time . He also earned AFC Offensive Player of the Month honors for the month of October .

In the Wild Card playoff round Manning and the Colts defeated the Denver Broncos 41 – 10 for his first playoff win . He passed for 377 yards and 5 touchdowns in the game , earning him a perfect passer rating , his second of the season and the fourth of his career . After the game , Manning was awarded Player of the Week honors for the third time that season . In the divisional playoffs , Manning led the Colts to a 38 – 31 win over the Kansas City Chiefs . Neither team punted in the game . In the AFC title game Manning was shut down by the New England Patriots top-ranked defense and posted the third lowest passer rating of his career at 35.5 . The Patriots defense intercepted Manning four times and sacked him another four , as the Colts lost the game 24 – 14 . During the season , Manning was named the AFC Offensive Player of the Month for September and was named the AP NFL co-MVP along with Titans quarterback Steve McNair . Manning also received the ESPY Award for Best NFL Player . Manning led the league with 4,267 passing yards and threw 29 touchdowns ; he was named first-team All-Pro and to the Pro Bowl . He passed for 342 yards and 3 touchdowns in the Pro Bowl , a 55 – 52 loss .

The 2004 Colts opened the season with a 27 – 24 loss to the Patriots , after Mike Vanderjagt missed a game tying field goal in the closing seconds of the game . The Colts won their next four games including a 45 – 31 win over Green Bay in which Manning threw 5 touchdowns , earning him AFC Offensive Player of the Week honors , but then lost their next two games , to Jacksonville and Kansas City , despite Manning throwing for 840 yards combined in the two games . The Colts responded well , winning their next 8 games before losing their final regular season game to Denver , a game in which Manning played only the first series . During the month of November , Manning was named the AFC Offensive Player of the Week twice ; once for his 5 touchdown performance in a 49 – 14 blowout of Houston and once for his performance in a 41 – 9 win at Detroit on Thanksgiving in which he threw 6 touchdowns in less than three quarters . Due to his performances in November , Manning earned AFC Offensive Player of the Month honors . He was named AFC Offensive Player of the Week for a fourth time in the week 16 game against San Diego where he led the Colts to a 34 – 31 victory after trailing by fifteen in the fourth quarter . With the Colts facing a 4th & 4 at their own 26 , Manning waved the punt team off the field and completed a 19-yard pass to Reggie Wayne for the first down . He finished the drive with a 21-yard TD pass to Brandon Stokley , his 49th TD pass of the season , breaking Dan Marino 's record of 48 . After the two-point conversion to tie , Manning got the ball first in overtime and set up the winning field goal . The Colts clinched the AFC 's third seed with the win .

During the season , Manning threw for 4,557 yards , had a then record 121.1 passer rating and a then-record 49 touchdown passes while throwing only 10 interceptions . Manning 's 2004 season was voted the second greatest passing season of all time by ESPN in 2013 . He achieved this despite the 2004 season being his only season of his career where he attempted less than 500 passes . His 9.9 % touchdown passing percentage is currently the highest in NFL history . His 49 touchdown passes is currently the third highest ever and his 121.1 passer rating is the second highest ever . He was selected as the 2004 NFL MVP drawing 49 of 50 votes , was named NFL Offensive Player of the Year and was named the Best NFL Player at the ESPY Awards for the second consecutive year ; Manning also received the ESPY Award for Best Record-Breaking Performance for his 49 touchdown passes . The Colts finished the season with a 12 – 4 record and their second straight AFC South title . The Colts scored a franchise record 522 points . Three Colts receivers had 1,000 yard seasons with at least 10 touchdowns that season , also a record . Sports statistics cite Football Outsiders calculates that Manning had the best season ever by a quarterback , play-for-play , in 2004 .

In the Wild Card game against Denver , Manning passed for 458 yards and 4 touchdowns . However , the Colts ' 2004 season ended in Foxborough for a second straight year with a 20 – 3 loss against New England , when Manning recorded a season-low passer rating of 69.3 . It was Manning 's seventh consecutive loss to the Patriots in Foxborough and the Colts ' three points were their lowest single game point total since their opening game of the 2003 season . Manning was named a Pro Bowl starter ; in the Pro Bowl , he threw 3 touchdowns in a 38 – 27 victory and was named the game 's MVP . Manning was also a unanimous first-team All-Pro selection .

In 2005 , the Colts had a greatly improved defense over that of recent years . Combining this with their offense , they won their first 13 games , including a 40 – 21 rout of the two-time defending Super Bowl Champions , New England . This was Manning 's first road win against the Patriots in 8 attempts , and his 3 touchdowns passes earned him AFC Offensive Player of the Week honors . By week 15 , the Colts had a perfect 13 – 0 record , and had secured the AFC South and home-field advantage throughout the playoffs . Nevertheless , Tony Dungy made the decision to play all of his regular starters against the Chargers . However , the Colts played a sub-par game against the Chargers and fell short of the win ; the score was 26 – 17 . Manning finished the season with 3,747 passing yards , the first time he had thrown for under 4,000 yards since his rookie season of 1998 , largely because Manning sat out much of the final two games with the top AFC seed clinched . His quarterback rating of 104.1 was the highest in the league for the season .

In the playoffs , the Pittsburgh Steelers visited the RCA Dome for the second AFC divisional playoff game of the 2005 season . In the 4th quarter with only a few minutes left in the game , Manning threw what looked to be the game-ending interception to Troy Polamalu , but the interception was overturned ( a call the NFL later admitted was incorrect ) . The Colts went on to score , and were able to get the ball back down three points near the end of the game . On 4th down , Manning was sacked near his own goal line , and the game seemed to be over as the Steelers were one yard from a touchdown . On the next play , the ball was fumbled by Jerome Bettis and picked up by Colts defender Nick Harper who appeared to have a clear path down the sideline for what might have been the game-winning score . However , Steelers ' quarterback Ben Roethlisberger managed to dive in front of Harper and tackle him by the leg , saving a touchdown . Then the Colts drove down the field to the Steelers 27-yard line , before Mike Vanderjagt missed a field goal as time ran out .

Manning opened the 2006 season against his brother Eli 's New York Giants on Sunday Night Football . It was the first NFL game with starting quarterbacks that were brothers , and Peyton 's team won 26 – 21 . Manning passed for 400 yards against the Texans in a 43 – 24 victory , which earned him AFC Offensive Player of the Week honors ( he also won the award for his 345 yards and 4 TD passes against the Redskins in week 7 ) . A second trip to New Jersey , this time to play the Jets , produced another Colts win . After taking the lead twice in the fourth quarter , Manning had to lead a third scoring drive , this time finishing with a 1-yard quarterback sneak rushing touchdown in the last minute for a 31 – 28 win . At Denver , Manning again led three scoring drives in the fourth quarter in a 34 – 31 shootout win . He completed 32 of 39 passes for 345 yards and 3 TDs . Following a second straight season with a win at New England , then a home win against Buffalo , the Colts were the NFL 's last unbeaten team at 9 – 0 . Their first loss would come in Dallas . Plagued by a run defense that would allow over 100 yards in every game , the Colts were 11 – 4 heading into their final game . Against Miami , Manning threw for 282 yards , 2 TDs and rushed for another TD . The Colts won 27 – 22 , were AFC South division champions , and clinched the third seed in the AFC playoffs . Manning was named AFC Offensive Player of the Week . He ended the regular season with 4,397 passing yards and a league-leading 31 touchdown passes . His passer rating ( 101.0 ) was the highest in the league for the third year in a row . Manning helped the offense set an NFL record for third down conversion rate in a season ( 56.1 % ) .

Despite three interceptions , Manning completed 30 out of 38 passes as the Colts beat the Kansas City Chiefs in the Wild Card playoff game by a score of 23 – 8 . The following week they were limited to five field goals and no touchdowns , but defeated the Baltimore Ravens , 15 – 6 . In the AFC Championship game against the rival Patriots , the Colts trailed 14 – 3 when Manning threw an interception that was returned for a TD by Asante Samuel to give New England a 21 – 3 lead . Manning led the Colts to 32 points in the second half for a 38 – 34 victory , the final score coming late in the fourth quarter as Manning led the Colts on an 80-yard TD drive to take the lead for the first time in the game . He finished the game with 349 yards passing and two touchdowns ( 1 rushing ) . The comeback was the largest deficit ever overcome in a conference championship . Completing 25 of 38 passes for 247 yards with a touchdown and one interception , Manning led the Colts to a 29 – 17 victory over the Chicago Bears in Super Bowl XLI and was voted Super Bowl MVP . Manning , who had been criticized for failing to win big games , exorcised his big-game demons with the win . " In years ' past when our team 's come up short , it 's been disappointing " , he told reporters . " Somehow we found a way to have learned from some of those losses and we 've been a better team because of it . " For his role in the Colts ' championship run , Manning was awarded the ESPY for Best Championship Performance . Manning was again named to the Pro Bowl and was also named Second-team All-Pro ; in the Pro Bowl he played only two series , passing for 67 yards . Following the Super Bowl win , Manning agreed to restructure his contract to save the Colts $ 8.2 million in salary cap space .

Manning 's Colts opened the NFL season with 7 wins , pitting them against an undefeated Patriots squad in a match-up that was being called " Super Bowl 41 1 / 2 " . Manning and Addai helped the Colts to a 13 – 7 halftime lead , and an early fourth-quarter touchdown upped the lead to 20 – 10 . However , Brady led the Patriots to two late touchdowns , to hand Manning his first loss of the season , 24 – 20 . Manning finished the game with 225 yards passing , including a passing touchdown . He also had a rushing touchdown . Manning did not bounce back from the loss well . Against the San Diego Chargers he threw for a career-worst and franchise-record 6 interceptions . Despite this , he was able to rally the Colts from a 23 – 0 deficit to 23 – 21 , and gave Adam Vinatieri an opportunity to take the lead with a 29-yard field goal . Vinatieri 's miss sunk the Colts to 7 – 2 . Manning did not play particularly well against the Kansas City Chiefs either , throwing no touchdowns . However , he managed to lead the Colts on a late drive for a game-winning field goal , rushing for two yards on 4th and 1 in the process . Manning finished the game with 163 passing yards , allowing him to overtake 40,000 in his career . The victory was Manning 's 100th . The Colts won their next 5 games , securing yet another AFC South title , as well as the AFC 's number two seed in the play-offs . In the final game of the regular season , Manning played only two series before being replaced with back-up Jim Sorgi ; the Colts lost the game to the Titans , 16 – 10 . Manning finished the season with 4,040 passing yards , 31 touchdown passes , and a quarterback rating of 98.0 . In the divisional round of the playoffs , Manning and the Colts lost to the Chargers , 28 – 24 . Manning helped the Colts to 4 different leads but could not lead a final touchdown drive for the win . Manning finished the game with 402 yards passing and 3 passing touchdowns . Peyton was widely viewed during Super Bowl XLII as he cheered on brother Eli and the New York Giants in their upset of the New England Patriots . Manning was named a Pro Bowl starter and passed for 147 yards and a touchdown in three series .

On July 14 , 2008 , Manning had surgery to remove an infected bursa sac in his left knee . Manning , who had worn a knee brace due to problems since he was in college , sat out all four preseason games and missed most of training camp . In the first regular season game at new Lucas Oil Stadium , the Colts lost 29 – 13 to the Chicago Bears . The following week they fell behind 15 – 0 to the Minnesota Vikings in the second half before rallying to win the game on Adam Vinatieri 's 47-yard field goal . Manning passed for 311 yards as the Colts avoided their first 0 – 2 start since Manning 's rookie season . Week 3 matched the Colts with division rival Jacksonville . Manning threw 2 interceptions in the game , including one that was returned for a TD by Rashean Mathis . Jacksonville rushed for 236 yards and held the ball for over 41 minutes . Still , trailing by 6 late in the game Manning led the Colts on a 77-yard TD drive to take a 21 – 20 lead . Jacksonville kicker Josh Scobee made a 51-yard field goal to win the game and drop the Colts to 1 – 2 .

For the third week in a row , Manning used the 4th quarter to bring the Colts back from a 27 – 10 deficit in the last 5 minutes against the Houston Texans to a 31 – 27 victory . It was the first time an NFL team had won a game in regulation after trailing by 17 points in the last 5 minutes . Manning threw a 7-yard TD pass on 4th & 6 to rookie tight end Tom Santi to make the deficit 27 – 17 . Houston QB Sage Rosenfels , starting for the injured Matt Schaub , then fumbled the ball on a scramble , and it was returned 68 yards for a TD by Gary Brackett . After another Rosenfels fumble , Manning threw the 5-yard game-winning TD pass to Reggie Wayne . The Colts scored 3 TDs in 2 : 10 . On October 12 Manning led the Colts to a 31 – 3 blow out win at Lucas Oil Stadium against the Baltimore Ravens to avoid their first 0 – 3 start at home since 1997 . Manning was named AFC Offensive Player of the Week for the 17th time in his career for his effort of 3 TD passes and 271 yards passing . It was revealed during the game by CBS commentators Jim Nantz and Phil Simms that Manning had a second surgery on his knee before the season started . Colts coach Tony Dungy confirmed this report the day after the Baltimore game .

The Colts suffered their largest margin of defeat , 34 – 14 , in Green Bay the following week . Manning threw 2 interceptions that were returned for touchdowns ( for the second time in his career ; the first was on 09 / 30 / 01 vs. New England Patriots ) . The next week the Colts went into Tennessee on Monday Night Football to face the 6 – 0 Titans . They led 14 – 6 in the 3rd quarter , but Tennessee scored 25 unanswered for a 31 – 21 victory and almost assured the Colts they would not win the AFC South division title for the first time in 6 seasons . At 3 – 4 the Colts opened up November with their annual showdown against the New England Patriots on Sunday Night Football . Tied at 15 in the 4th quarter , Manning set up Adam Vinatieri for a 52-yard field goal that proved to be the winning points in an 18 – 15 victory . Manning completed 21 of 29 passes for 254 yards , 2 touchdowns and no interceptions . The Colts were 4 – 4 halfway through the season and still alive in the AFC playoff race .

In week 10 the Colts traveled to Pittsburgh , who had the league 's No. 1 defense . They trailed 17 – 7 in the second quarter before Manning found Dallas Clark for a 2-yard TD to end the half 17 – 14 . Down 20 – 17 in the 4th quarter , Manning found Dominic Rhodes uncovered for a 17-yard TD pass that would put the Colts up 24 – 20 for the rest of the game . It was Manning 's 4th game-winning drive ( 35th of his career ) this season . He completed 21 of 40 for 240 yards and 3 touchdowns ( the 50th game of his career with 3 + TD passes ) . It was the first time the Colts have won in Pittsburgh since 1968 ( 12 straight losses before this win ) . Against Houston , Manning passed for 320 yards and 2 TDs while leading 5 consecutive scoring drives in a 33 – 27 victory , the third in a row for the Colts . Manning won AFC Offensive Player of the Week for the second time this season ( 18th time , career ) . At San Diego , Manning threw for 255 yards , 2 TDs and 1 INT in a 23 – 20 victory . The interception snapped a career-best streak of 140 pass attempts without an interception . After the Chargers rallied from a 10-point deficit in the 4th to tie the game , Manning led the game-winning drive by completing a 14-yard pass to Marvin Harrison on 4th and inches at midfield . Adam Vinateri kicked the winning 51-yard field goal three plays later . It was Manning 's 5th game-winning drive this season . Manning passed for a season-low 125 yards at Cleveland , but the Colts won their 5th straight game , by a final of 10 – 6 .

In a 35 – 3 victory against the Cincinnati Bengals , Manning threw 3 TD passes while completing 26 of 32 passes for 277 yards . It marked the 11th straight season Manning had thrown at least 20 TD passes , the second longest streak ever . Against the 0 – 13 Detroit Lions , the Colts found themselves in a 21 – 21 game in the 4th quarter . Manning led his 6th game-winning drive of the season and the Colts pulled away 31 – 21 . It marked their 7th straight win , 7th straight season with 10 + wins , and they became the only team in NFL history to have a winning streak of at least 7 games in 5 straight seasons . Manning completed 28 of 37 passes for 318 yards and 1 TD . Needing a win to clinch the 5th seed in the playoffs , Manning had one of his best career performances in Jacksonville on Thursday Night Football . He completed his first 17 passes of the game . In addition to completing his last 6 against Detroit , Manning 's 23 straight completions fell one shy of the NFL record ( Donovan McNabb – 24 ) . The Colts trailed 14 – 0 in the first half and 24 – 14 to start the 4th quarter . Manning led his 7th 4th quarter win of the season and the Colts put the game away with a defensive TD for a 31 – 24 victory to clinch a 7th consecutive playoff berth . Manning completed 29 of 34 passes ( 85.7 % ) for 364 yards and 3 TDs . It increased his NFL record streak of seasons with 25 TD passes to 11 . Manning and the Colts tied an NFL record by winning 3 games in a season in which they trailed by at least 14 points . For his efforts Manning won AFC Offensive Player of the Week for the third time in 2008 . It was the 19th time he has won the award , passing Dan Marino for the most all-time since the award was originated in 1984 . He also was selected as the FedEx Air Player of the Week . With the playoff seed secured , Manning only played the opening drive in a shutout against the division-leading Titans in Week 17 . He completed all 7 of his passes for 95 yards and a TD , extending his NFL record to nine seasons with 4000 yards passing , and also extended the record to a sixth straight season he led the Colts to at least 12 wins . At the end of the 2008 season , Manning was named NFL MVP for the 3rd time , tying Brett Favre for the most MVP awards in NFL history .

Under new head coach Jim Caldwell , Manning started the 2009 season with a victory by throwing for 301 yards . In week two Manning led his 29th fourth quarter comeback ( 38th game-winning drive ) by throwing for 303 yards and 2 TD passes , despite only having the ball for 14 : 53 , the lowest time of possession for a winning team in the NFL since they began tracking the statistic in 1977 . Manning was named AFC Offensive Player of the Month for the fourth time in his career in September . Against the Seattle Seahawks Manning passed for 353 yards and 2 TDs for his fourth consecutive 300-yard passing game set a new franchise record . Against Houston Texans in week 9 he became the first quarterback to pass for over 40,000 yards in a decade . He threw a career-high 25 passes in the 1st quarter ( most in any opening quarter since 1991 ) , and had a career-high 40 pass attempts in the first half . He set a franchise record for most 300-yard passing games in a season with his seventh 300-yard effort of the season ( also an NFL record through the first 8 games of a season ) . Against Houston 3 weeks later Manning claimed his 34th comeback win in the 4th quarter , tying him with John Elway and Johnny Unitas for the second most in NFL history . On week 15 against the Jacksonville Jaguars Manning won his 23rd consecutive regular season game breaking Jim McMahon 's NFL record of 22 straight wins with the Chicago Bears from 1984 – 87 . At the end of the regular season Manning was awarded his fourth MVP , breaking the NFL record for most MVPs by a single player . He was also selected to the AP All-Pro team for the fifth time in his career .

In the AFC Divisional against the Baltimore Ravens Manning threw 2 TD passes late in the first half to build a 17 – 3 halftime lead . He completed 30 passes for 246 yards in leading his eight straight victory over the Ravens . In the AFC Championship against New York Jets Manning overcame a 17 – 6 deficit late in the second quarter to lead the Colts to 24 unanswered points in a 30 – 17 win . The 11-point comeback was the third largest in a championship game . Manning set a playoff record with his seventh 300-yard passing game in the postseason . In Super Bowl XLIV against New Orleans Saints , Manning led the Colts to a 10 – 0 lead after their two first quarter drives , throwing a TD pass to Pierre Garcon to cap off a 96-yard drive ( tied for longest in Super Bowl history ) . After running just six plays in the second quarter , the Colts led 10 – 6 at halftime . The Saints recovered an onside kick to start the second half and took their first lead , 13 – 10 . Manning led a go ahead TD drive to regain the lead . Leading 17 – 16 at the start of the 4th quarter , Matt Stover missed a 51-yard field goal for the Colts . The Saints scored the go ahead TD and two-point conversion to take a 24 – 17 lead with 5 : 42 left . Manning took over and moved the Colts to the Saints ' 31-yard line . Facing a 3rd & 5 with 3 : 24 left , his pass intended for Reggie Wayne was intercepted by Tracy Porter , who returned it 74 yards for a critical TD and 31 – 17 Saints lead . Manning drove the Colts down to the 5-yard line in the last minute , but his 4th & goal pass was dropped by Reggie Wayne at the goal line . The Saints won their first Super Bowl , dropping Manning to 9 – 9 in the postseason ( 1 – 1 Super Bowl record ) . Manning passed for 333 yards on 31 / 45 , with 1 TD and 1 interception .

In a season-opening loss in Houston , Manning set career highs in pass attempts ( 57 ) and completions ( 40 ) , throwing for 3 TDs and 433 yards , the fourth highest opening-weekend total ever . In his third game Manning passed for 325 yards , 3 TDs and no interceptions , marking the first time since 1960 a QB began a season with three consecutive games of at least 3 TD passes and zero interceptions . Against the Kansas City Chiefs Manning failed to throw a TD for the first time in 2010 , but led the Colts on a game-winning drive in the 4th quarter ( 45th of his career ) to hand the Chiefs their first loss of the season . In week 6 against the Washington Redskins he passed for 307 yards and 2 TDs . Including the playoffs , that was 68 career games with 300 + yards passing , moving him ahead of Dan Marino ( 67 ) for the most in NFL history . Week 9 against the Philadelphia Eagles marked his 200th consecutive regular season start . Against the New England Patriots Manning passed for 396 yards , 4 TDs and 3 interceptions , the second time Manning threw 4 TDs in a game and breaking a tie with Dan Marino for second-most all-time . The next week was resulted in the largest margin of defeat at home in his NFL career , 36 – 14 to the San Diego Chargers . Against the Tennessee Titans he went over 4000 yards passing for the 11th time in a season , and tied Dan Marino with his 63rd regular season game with 300 + yards passing . Manning was named AFC Offensive Player of the Week for this game . The Colts ended up winning the AFC South for the seventh time in eight years , and Manning became the first QB in NFL history to lead his team to nine consecutive postseason berths ( 2002 – 2010 ) . It was the 208th consecutive regular season start of his career , breaking Gene Upshaw 's record . For the season , Manning finished with an NFL record 450 completions on 679 attempts ( third most in history ) , and a career-high 4700 yards passing . The season ended in a one-point defeat to the New York Jets in the play-off .

The Colts placed their franchise tag on Manning on February 15 , 2011 . On July 30 , 2011 , the Colts signed Manning to a 5-year , $ 90 million contract after negotiations in which he made it clear that he did not need to be the highest-paid player in the NFL . After a May 23 neck surgery , Manning could not use the Colts ' facilities for practice and workouts due to the NFL lockout . Reluctant to have witnesses to his recovery , he used the Colorado Rockies baseball team 's trainers at Coors Field in Denver . Manning was unable to complete his throwing motion , and his arm strength had significantly diminished . Based on an MRI , doctors told him in the late summer that he needed spinal fusion surgery and that at his age they could not guarantee his return to the NFL . On September 7 , the Colts officially ruled Manning out for the season opener against Houston , ending his consecutive starts streak of 208 games ( 227 including playoffs ) ; the team signed Kerry Collins out of retirement and named him interim starting quarterback . After seeking other opinions , Manning had the second surgery on September 8 .

Manning stated that while he did intend to play during the 2011 season , he would not " fight " the front office to stay off injured reserve if his roster spot was needed . Manning started practicing throwing footballs again in mid-December , with teammate Joseph Addai even claiming his passes looked " game ready . " Ultimately , Manning did not play a single game in 2011 , and the Colts went 2 – 14 without him ; only the third season since Manning was a rookie that the Colts did not win at least 10 games . With the Colts having the first overall pick in the upcoming 2012 draft ( which contained highly rated quarterback Andrew Luck ) and with Manning due a $ 28m roster bonus , he was released on March 7 , 2012 . Earlier , the Colts had dismissed vice-chairman Bill Polian ( who in his previous capacity as general manager had drafted Manning ) , general manager Chris Polian , and head coach Jim Caldwell , as a precursor to the rebuilding of the team . In an emotional press conference , Manning told Colts fans , " Thank you for letting me be your quarterback . " Upon his release , Colts owner Jim Irsay announced that no Colt will ever wear the No. 18 jersey again , and it was formally retired on March 18 , 2016 .

On Thursday , August 9 , 2012 , Manning made his first appearance as a Bronco in a preseason game against the Chicago Bears , where he completed 4 of 7 passes for 44 yards , and was intercepted once by Bears safety Major Wright . Manning made his regular season debut as a Denver Bronco in the prime time game on the first Sunday of the 2012 NFL Season , against the Pittsburgh Steelers . In the game , Manning completed 19 of 26 passes for 253 yards , 2 touchdowns , and no interceptions . He posted a 129.2 QB rating in the 31 – 19 win , and made history in the third quarter when he connected with Demaryius Thomas on a 71-yard touchdown pass . The touchdown was Manning 's first in the NFL with a team other than the Colts , and marked the 400th of his career , making him the third quarterback , after Dan Marino and Brett Favre , to accomplish the feat and the fastest of the three to reach that mark . Despite the preseason concerns about his recovery , by late October ESPN stated that Manning " has silenced the critics " about his arm strength . Manning was later named to the 2013 Pro Bowl , his twelfth .

On the opening game of the 2013 NFL season , Manning became one of only six players in NFL history to throw seven touchdowns in a game , doing so against the defending Super Bowl XLVII champions , the Baltimore Ravens . He added to this feat by not throwing an interception , tying Y. A. Tittle as one of the only two players to have a 7 : 0 touchdown to interception ratio in a single game ( although Nick Foles would later match that feat in week 9 of the same season ) . Against the Oakland Raiders in week three , Manning broke the record for most touchdown passes in the first three games of a season after throwing 12 , surpassing Tom Brady 's 2011 record . In Week 5 , Manning threw his first interception of the season , in a win against the Dallas Cowboys . He was intercepted by Morris Claiborne . Two weeks later , Manning returned to Indianapolis for the first time in the regular season since being released by the Indianapolis Colts . In an emotional pregame ceremony , the Indianapolis Colts showed a tribute video to Manning . In Week 16 against the Houston Texans , Manning broke Brady 's record for most touchdown passes in a season with 51 on a 25-yard touchdown pass to Julius Thomas , he finished the regular season with 55 touchdown passes , in addition to throwing for a league record 5,477 yards . His 450 completions are tied for second most all time . The Broncos scored an NFL record 606 points , becoming the first team ever to eclipse 600 points in a season . They had more 50-point games in a season than any other team in NFL history , with 3 . Four Broncos receivers recorded at least ten touchdowns — an NFL record — and Manning set a season record with nine games with four or more touchdown passes . His 115.1 passer rating ranks fifth all time and he joined Tom Brady as the only two quarterbacks to achieve a passer rating of 110.0 or higher in more than one season . The Broncos went on to win their divisional round playoff game against the San Diego Chargers by a score of 24 – 17 . They beat the New England Patriots in the AFC championship game by a score of 26-16 . Manning became the third starting quarterback to reach the Super Bowl two different teams , after Craig Morton and Kurt Warner .

In Super Bowl XLVIII , Manning 's Broncos lost to the Seattle Seahawks by a score of 43 – 8 . Manning was up against the Seahawks ' young starting quarterback Russell Wilson , who idolized Manning and attended one of Manning 's passing camps as a teenager , and later met Manning at a Broncos pre-draft interview . The Seahawks ' number one ranked defense proved too much for the Broncos ' number one ranked offense to overcome , while the Broncos ' defense also struggled due to injuries . The Broncos ' first play from scrimmage set the tone for the game . While Manning was stepping forward to call an audible , center Manny Ramirez snapped the ball too early and it flew past Manning 's head into the end zone , where running back Knowshon Moreno downed it for a safety . Manning set a Super Bowl record with 34 completions ( broken by Tom Brady the following year in Super Bowl XLIX ) , but the record-setting offense didn 't record a first down until the 2nd quarter , and didn 't score any points until the final seconds of the 3rd quarter . While Manning threw one touchdown pass , he also threw two costly interceptions , one of which was returned for a touchdown .

On August 28 , 2014 , Manning was fined $ 8,268 for taunting D. J. Swearinger during a preseason game against the Houston Texans . With the Broncos ' win in their opening game of the 2014 NFL season against the Indianapolis Colts , Manning became , along with Brett Favre , one of only two starting quarterbacks in NFL history who have beaten all 32 teams . On October 5 , 2014 , Manning threw his 500th career touchdown pass to Julius Thomas against the Arizona Cardinals , and also tied Dan Marino for the most 400 yard games by a quarterback . On October 19 , 2014 , against the San Francisco 49ers , Manning threw his 509th career touchdown pass to Demaryius Thomas , passing Brett Favre to become the NFL 's all-time leader in passing touchdowns . By the end of the regular season , Manning would be selected to his 14th Pro Bowl appearance , tying him with Tony Gonzalez , Bruce Matthews , and Merlin Olsen for most Pro Bowl selections in a career . However , his season ended after the Broncos lost in the divisional round of the playoffs to his former team , the Indianapolis Colts , 24 – 13 .

After much speculation , Manning announced in the offseason that he would return for his 18th season in the NFL . In the season opener , Manning 's play seemed to have deteriorated , going 24 – 40 for 175 yards and 1 interception , but a pick-6 by cornerback Aqib Talib allowed the Broncos to win 19 – 13 . The Broncos got off to a dominant 7 – 0 start to the season ; however , the streak ended in a loss at Indianapolis , losing 24 – 27 . During that winning streak , and the loss in Indianapolis , Manning played better , putting up over 250 yards in 6 of the 7 games , and he scored 9 touchdowns . However , he never had a game without an interception bringing his 8-game TD – INT ratio to 9 – 13 and the Broncos needed a hardworking defense to contribute for victories . In Week 10 against Kansas City , the game 's biggest highlight was Manning breaking Brett Favre 's record for career passing yards with a 4-yard pass to Ronnie Hillman in the first quarter . Despite the accomplishment , however , Manning went 5-for-20 for 35 yards and four interceptions with a 0.0 passer rating before head coach Gary Kubiak benched him during the third quarter . Brock Osweiler filled in for Manning for the rest of the game as the Broncos would eventually lose 29 – 13 . A day later , sources said that Manning had suffered a bout of plantar fasciitis . It was later announced that this injury would keep him out of Week 11 , marking the first time Peyton had missed a game in a season he played . Osweiler replaced Manning and performed well in a 17 – 15 win over the Chicago Bears , leading to questions about whether Manning would retain his role when healthy in a Week 12 showdown against the New England Patriots . The next day , head coach Gary Kubiak , citing Manning 's injuries , announced that Osweiler would start against New England . On December 15 , it was announced that Osweiler would make his fifth consecutive start , against the Pittsburgh Steelers , even though Manning had returned to practice and the Broncos had gone seven straight quarters without scoring a touchdown on offense . Overall , the Broncos went 4-2 in six games without Manning , giving them an 11-4 record heading into the final week of the regular season .

Manning was listed as active for the Week 17 regular season finale against the San Diego Chargers , but for the first time since his freshman year at college , he was listed as a backup . In the third quarter , with the Broncos down 13 – 7 , Manning entered the game in relief of Brock Osweiler , who had been intercepted twice and fumbled once . The Broncos went on to beat the Chargers , 27 – 20 , and secure the top seed in the AFC . Despite the Broncos ' 12 – 4 record ( and Manning 's 8 – 2 record in games that he played in ) , Manning had the worst season statistically of his career , as he threw a career low 9 touchdown passes and 17 interceptions in just 10 games , and posting a quarterback rating of 67.9 , the lowest rating of his career , and first time he had a rating below 84 since his rookie season . Manning 's 59.8 completion percentage was the second lowest of his career , only behind his rookie season . Manning 's 17 interceptions were second to Jaguars quarterback Blake Bortles , who threw 18 interceptions but started all 16 games .

The Broncos , by virtue of having the AFC 's # 1 seed , earned home field advantage throughout the NFL playoffs . The Broncos defeated the Pittsburgh Steelers in the Divisional round to advance to the AFC Championship game to host the defending Super Bowl champions , the New England Patriots . It was the 17th , and ultimately final , meeting between Manning and his longtime rival Tom Brady . Despite a late comeback from the Patriots , the Broncos won 20 – 18 to advance to Super Bowl 50 . Manning threw two touchdowns and no interceptions in the win . On February 7 , 2016 , the Broncos defeated the Carolina Panthers 24 – 10 in Super Bowl 50 as the Broncos ' defense shut down the heavily-favored Panthers ' top-ranked offense and regular season MVP Cam Newton . Manning finished the game 13 of 23 for 141 yards with one interception while being sacked five times , scoring his only passing points with 3 : 08 left in the 4th quarter when he connected with Bennie Fowler for a 2-point conversion , which ended up being the final pass of his career . Manning became the oldest starting quarterback to both play in and win a Super Bowl . Manning also became the first quarterback to start two Super Bowls with multiple franchises , with different head coaches each time ( Dungy , Caldwell , Fox and Kubiak ) and the first quarterback to lead two different franchises to a Super Bowl victory . The victory gave Manning his 200th overall win including regular season and playoffs , making him the starting quarterback with the most combined regular season and postseason wins in NFL history , snapping a tie with Brett Favre .

Peyton and Eli Manning played against each other three times in their professional careers . These encounters were colloquially dubbed " The Manning Bowl " , and Peyton 's teams ( twice with the Indianapolis Colts , once with the Denver Broncos ) held a 3 – 0 record over Eli 's team ( three games with the New York Giants ) . The first Manning Bowl was held on September 10 , 2006 , and Peyton 's Colts defeated Eli 's Giants by a score of 26 – 21 . The second Manning Bowl was held on September 19 , 2010 , with Peyton and the Colts besting Eli 's team again by a score of 38 – 14 . The third and final Manning Bowl took place on September 15 , 2013 , and Peyton and the Broncos beat Eli 's Giants , 41 – 23 .

Manning was born in New Orleans , Louisiana , the son of Olivia ( née Williams ) and former NFL quarterback Archie Manning . He is the brother of two-time Super Bowl Champion , Eli Manning . Some have described the Mannings as football 's " royal family " . Manning married his wife , Ashley , in Memphis on St. Patrick 's Day , 2001 . A graduate of the University of Virginia , Ashley was introduced to him by her parents ' next-door neighbor the summer before Manning 's freshman year in college . Peyton and wife Ashley have twins , a son , Marshal Williams , and a daughter , Mosley Thompson , born on March 31 , 2011 . Manning is a Christian . At age 13 , he said , " I committed my life to Christ , and that faith has been most important to me ever since . " Manning said his priorities ranked in order are " ... faith , family , friends , and football . " Manning said he prays every night and before games and added , " I hope ( and pray ) I don 't do too many things that displease Him before I get to Heaven myself . I believe , too , that life is much better and freer when you 're committed to God in that way . "

Manning reportedly memorized the Colts ' playbook within a week after being drafted , and in 2012 was able to precisely recall the details and timing of a specific play he had used at Tennessee 16 years earlier . During the summer , Archie , Peyton , Eli , and eldest sibling Cooper run the Manning Passing Academy , a five-day camp which aims to improve the offensive skills of quarterbacks , wide receivers , tight ends , and running backs . In addition to the Mannings , the camp has included many prominent players from football as coaches , such as Colts wide receivers Marvin Harrison and Reggie Wayne . Manning , along with his father Archie , co-authored a book titled , Manning : A Father , His Sons , and a Football Legacy , which was released in 2000 . The book covers Archie 's and Cooper 's lives and careers , and Manning 's life and career up to the time that the book was released , and examines football from both Archie 's and Manning 's points-of-view . Mark Kiszla , a sports columnist for the Denver Post , in a column about Manning 's future plans , said that Manning 's net worth " is estimated to be in excess of $ 150 million " and " That 's not enough money to buy an NFL franchise by himself , although an ownership group that included Manning as president with a financial stake in the team would be led by a brilliant football mind . " He has donated over $ 8,000 to Republican politicians , among them Fred Thompson , Bob Corker and former President George W. Bush . For the 2016 presidential race , Manning has contributed to the campaign of Jeb Bush . On October 26 , 2012 , Manning purchased 21 Papa John 's Pizza stores , all in Colorado .

Manning has been credited with helping to improve the image of the city of Indianapolis . A curator at the Indiana State Museum observed that " There is no Super Bowl held here without Peyton . There is no Lucas Oil Stadium without Peyton . Without Peyton , the Colts would probably be in L.A. right now . " He has become one of the NFL 's most marketable players , appearing in several television and printed advertisements for some of the NFL 's biggest sponsors . Manning appeared in one of a series of DirecTV commercials where celebrities are seen in their element , then suddenly begin addressing the viewer . In his commercial , they parodied his pre-snap audible routine , and known delay in calling for the ball by having him pitch NFL Sunday Ticket , instead of changing the play during a blowout game against the Tennessee Titans . Manning also appears in advertisements for St. Mary 's Medical Center in Knoxville , Tennessee . Manning hosted Saturday Night Live on March 24 , 2007 , his 31st birthday . The episode earned the show 's highest household rating in more than 10 months in the metered markets . He also appeared on SNL in 2008 and on the 2015 Saturday Night Live 40th Anniversary Special .

Shortly after beginning his NFL career , Manning started his own charity called ' the Peyback Foundation ' . The Peyback Foundation 's mission is to help disadvantaged kids , and focuses its efforts in Louisiana , Tennessee , and Indiana . For his work with this foundation , Manning received the Samuel S. Beard Award for Greatest Public Service by an Individual 35 Years or Under , an award given out annually by Jefferson Awards . Manning , along with his brother Eli , volunteered their assistance in the wake of Hurricane Katrina . Among the tasks performed , the Mannings assisted in the delivery of 30,000 pounds of water , Gatorade , baby formula , diapers , and pillows to the people of New Orleans . In September 2007 , St. Vincent Hospital in Indianapolis renamed its children 's hospital to " Peyton Manning Children 's Hospital at St. Vincent . " Manning and his wife made a donation of an undisclosed amount to St. Vincent 's and have had a relationship with the hospital since his arrival in Indianapolis .

Grand Theft Auto IV is an open world action-adventure video game developed by Rockstar North and published by Rockstar Games . It was released on 29 April 2008 for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 consoles , and on 2 December 2008 on Microsoft Windows . It is the eleventh title in the Grand Theft Auto series , and the first main entry since 2004 's Grand Theft Auto : San Andreas . Set within the fictional Liberty City ( based on New York City ) , the single-player story follows a war veteran , Niko Bellic and his attempts to escape his past while under pressure from loan sharks and mob bosses . The open world design lets players freely roam Liberty City , consisting of three main islands . The game is played from a third-person perspective and its world is navigated on-foot or by vehicle . Throughout the single-player mode , players play as Niko Bellic . An online multiplayer mode is included with the game , allowing up to 32 players to engage in both co-operative and competitive gameplay in a recreation of the single-player setting . Two expansion packs were later released for the game , The Lost and Damned and The Ballad of Gay Tony , which both feature new plots that are interconnected with the main Grand Theft Auto IV storyline , and follow new protagonists .

Development began in 2004 , soon after the release of Grand Theft Auto : San Andreas . As part of their research for the open world , the developers conducted field research around New York throughout development and captured footage for the design team . Development duties were shared between many of Rockstar 's studios worldwide . Following its announcement in May 2006 , Grand Theft Auto IV was widely anticipated . Upon release , the game received universal critical acclaim , with praise particularly directed at the game 's narrative and open world design . However , the game also generated controversy , with criticism directed at the game 's depiction of violence and ability to drive under the influence of alcohol . Grand Theft Auto IV broke industry sales records and became the fastest-selling entertainment product in history at the time , earning US $ 310 million in its first day and US $ 500 million in its first week . Considered one of the most significant titles of the seventh generation of video games , and by many critics as one of the greatest video games of all time , it won year-end accolades , including Game of the Year awards from several gaming publications . Its successor , Grand Theft Auto V , was released in September 2013 .

Grand Theft Auto IV is an action-adventure game played from a third-person perspective . Players complete missions — linear scenarios with set objectives — to progress through the story . It is possible to have several active missions running at one time , as some missions require players to wait for further instructions or events . Outside of missions , players can freely roam the game 's open world , and have the ability to complete optional side missions . Composed of the fictional city of Liberty City , the world of Grand Theft Auto IV is larger in area than most earlier entries in the series . At the beginning of the game , players can only explore the first island – composed of Dukes and Broker – with all other islands unlocking as the story progresses . Players use melee attacks , firearms and explosives to fight enemies , and may run , jump , swim or use vehicles to navigate the game 's world . There is a first-person perspective option when using vehicles . In combat , auto-aim and a cover system can be used as assistance against enemies . Should players take damage , their health meter can be fully regenerated using multiple techniques , such as eating , using medical kits , or calling for paramedics . If players commit crimes while playing , the game 's law enforcement agencies may respond as indicated by a " wanted " meter in the head-up display ( HUD ) . On the meter , the displayed stars indicate the current wanted level ( for example , at the maximum six-star level , efforts by law enforcement to incapacitate players become very aggressive ) . Law enforcement officers will search for players who leave the wanted vicinity . The wanted meter enters a cooldown mode and eventually recedes when players are hidden from the officers ' line of sight .

The game 's cover system allows players to deftly move between cover , to fire blindly , aim freely , and target a specific enemy . Individual body parts can also be targeted . Melee attacks include additional moves , such as dodging , blocking , disarming an opponent and counter-attacking . Body armour can be used to absorb gunshots and explosive damage , but is used up in the process . When health is entirely depleted , gameplay stops , and players respawn at the nearest hospital . The game 's single-player mode lets players control a war veteran , Eastern European Niko Bellic . During the story , Niko meets various new characters , many of whom he befriends . These characters can then perform favours for Niko whenever he asks ; for example , his cousin Roman , who owns a taxi service , can send one of his cabs to Niko and take him to any destination around the city . Cabs are always available during gameplay , allowing players to quickly travel to a destination . Throughout the course of the game , players are also faced with morality choices , which alter the storyline appropriately depending on the player 's choice . While free roaming the game world , players may engage in context-specific activities such as bowling or darts . Other available activities include a vigilante minigame , and in-game television programming . Niko has a smartphone for contacting friends and starting activities . The smartphone is also used to access the game 's online multiplayer mode , and to enter cheat codes . To access the in-game Internet , which allows Niko to send and receive emails and set up prospective dates with potential girlfriends , Niko can use Internet cafés located around the city . The game also features a subway system , allowing players to quickly traverse through the game world .

The online multiplayer mode for Grand Theft Auto IV allows up to 32 players to freely roam across a recreation of the single-player world . Players decide which game mode that they wish to play , including deathmatches and street races . Both cooperative and competitive game modes are available . These game modes are split into ranked and unranked matches . For players to level up through ranks , in-game money must be earned . The game also features a Free Mode , in which players have the entire map open to explore , with no end goal or mission to complete . Hosts of the game can control many variables , such as police presence , traffic , and weapons . LAN support is available in the Windows version of the game .

Grand Theft Auto IV takes place in 2008 , in a redesigned version of Liberty City consisting of four boroughs , based on four of the boroughs of New York City : Broker ( based on Brooklyn ) , Dukes ( Queens ) , Bohan ( The Bronx ) , and Algonquin ( Manhattan ) . Adjacent to the city is the independent state of Alderney ( Northern New Jersey ) . There are three minor islands present in the game : Charge Island ( Randall 's Island ) , Colony Island ( Roosevelt Island ) , and Happiness Island ( Liberty Island ) . Initially , bridges are locked down due to a terrorist threat , and players are constantly pursued by police if the bridges are crossed , but the blockades are lifted as the story progresses , allowing the player to traverse between islands . Grand Theft Auto IV takes place in a different storyline and timeline from the previous games in the series . However , the game takes place in the same canon as its expansion packs , The Lost and Damned and The Ballad of Gay Tony , and its successor , Grand Theft Auto V.

Following his cousin Roman 's request , Niko Bellic , an Eastern European , comes to Liberty City to pursue the American Dream , and to search for the man who betrayed his unit in a war fifteen years prior . Upon arrival , however , Niko discovers that Roman 's tales of riches and luxury were lies concealing struggles with gambling debts and loan sharks , and that Roman lives in a dirty apartment rather than a mansion . Niko defends Roman from his loan sharks several times , eventually killing Vlad Glebov , Roman 's Russian loan shark . Niko was forced to work for Vlad to settle Roman 's debts but ended up killing him after learning that he had slept with Roman 's girlfriend , Mallorie . After Vlad 's murder , Niko and Roman are kidnapped by members of the Liberty City Bratva on order of Mikhail Faustin and his associate , Dimitri Rascalov . Faustin , not bothered by the murder of Vlad , hires Niko . Niko quickly learns that Faustin is a psychopath when he orders him to kill the son of Kenny Petrović , the most powerful man in the Liberty City Bratva . After the Petrović family threatens retaliation , Dimitri orders Niko to assassinate Faustin in order to prevent a gang war . When Niko meets with Dimitri to collect on the assassination , Dimitri brings Niko 's former employer Ray Bulgarin instead , the latter accusing Niko of stealing from him a few years earlier . When Niko truthfully denies the allegation , a firefight ensues , allowing Dimitri and Bulgarin to escape .

Immediately afterwards , Niko and Roman are forced to escape to Bohan when their apartment and taxi company are destroyed in arson attacks by Dimitri 's men . However , things go poorly as well in Bohan : Dimitri 's men kidnap Roman in a failed bid to ambush and kill Niko , who rescues Roman . Furthermore , Niko 's girlfriend Michelle reveals that she works for a government agency and entraps Niko into working for her agency , known only by its cover : United Liberty Paper . Niko kills several known or suspected terrorists for the agency in exchange for the file of the numerous crimes the police have on him and the promise of assistance in finding the traitor of his unit . Eventually , United Liberty Paper tracks down the man responsible for Niko 's unit 's betrayal , Darko Brevic , and brings him into Liberty City . Niko confronts Darko and decides his fate . Having dealt with his past , Niko is summoned by one of his employers , Jimmy Pegorino , who demands one final favour : to help with an extremely lucrative deal on heroin in collusion with Dimitri Rascalov .

At this point , Niko is faced with two choices : strike a deal with Dimitri , or exact revenge on him . Should Niko go through with the deal , Dimitri sets up Niko by taking the heroin for himself . At Roman 's wedding , an assassin sent by Dimitri kills Roman with a stray bullet as Niko disarms and kills him . A devastated and vengeful Niko later tracks down , chases , and kills Dimitri , but not before witnessing Dimitri executing Pegorino . Should Niko choose to exact revenge , Niko ambushes and executes Dimitri . At Roman 's wedding , Pegorino , furious after Niko 's betrayal , commits a drive-by shooting . He targets Niko , but ends up killing Niko 's girlfriend , Kate . Niko soon tracks down , chases , and kills Pegorino , who had become hated and targeted by the entire Liberty City underworld .

Work on Grand Theft Auto IV began in November 2004 , almost immediately after the release of Grand Theft Auto : San Andreas ( 2004 ) . Around 150 game developers worked on Grand Theft Auto IV , led by core members of the team that previously worked on Grand Theft Auto III ( 2001 ) . For the game , Rockstar used their proprietary Rockstar Advanced Game Engine ( RAGE ) , which was previously used in Rockstar Games Presents Table Tennis ( 2006 ) , in combination with the Euphoria game animation engine . Instead of pre-written animations , Euphoria uses procedural animation to control the way the player moves , enabling character movements to be more realistic . The Euphoria engine also enables NPCs to react in a realistic way to the player 's actions . In one preview , a player knocked an NPC out of a window and the character grabbed onto a ledge to stop himself from falling . The game also uses middleware from Image Metrics to facilitate intricate facial expressions and ease the process of incorporating lip-synching . Foliage in the game is produced through SpeedTree . Grand Theft Auto IV sees a shift in the series to a more realistic and detailed style and tone , partly a result of the transition to consoles which offered high-definition graphics and the new and improved capabilities of such consoles . Rockstar co-founder Dan Houser said " what we 're taking as our watchword on [ Grand Theft Auto IV ] is the idea of what high definition actually means . Not just in terms of graphics , which obviously we are achieving , but in terms of all aspects of the design . [ ... ] You know , trying to make something more realistic , more held together , but still retaining the overall coherence that the other games had . " Art director Aaron Garbut said one of the reasons they decided to set the game in New York because " we all knew what an amazing , diverse , vibrant , cinematic city it is , " and since they were hoping the push the " detail , variety and life " to a high level , it seemed that " basing the game in a city so synonymous with these things was a great fit . " Dan Houser added " because we were working in high definition and we knew we 'd need a shitload of research , we wanted to be somewhere where we had a foothold . " The developers consciously avoided creating a block for block recreation of New York City , Dan Houser said " what we 've always tried to do is make a thing that looks real and has the qualities of a real environment , but is also fun from a game design perspective . " The Grand Theft Auto IV rendition of Liberty City is far more detailed and larger in size than most earlier entries in the series Although smaller than San Andreas , the main setting for Grand Theft Auto IV 's predecessor Grand Theft Auto : San Andreas , Liberty City is comparable to it in terms of scope when " the level of verticality of the city , the number of buildings you can go into , and the level of detail in those buildings " are taken into account . The goal for Liberty City was to have no dead spots or irrelevant spaces , such as the wide open deserts in San Andreas . To achieve a realistic environment , the Rockstar North team , based in Edinburgh , Scotland , made two trips to New York for research , one at the start of the project ( which was done with every previous Grand Theft Auto game ) and another smaller one further into development . A full-time research team , based in New York , handled further requests for information ranging from the ethnic minority of a neighbourhood to videos of traffic patterns .

The story of Grand Theft Auto IV was written by Dan Houser and Rupert Humphries . Unlike previous Grand Theft Auto games which have a strong cultural or cinematic influence , " [ Grand Theft Auto IV doesn 't ] really have any cinematic influences " , as explained by Houser . " We were consciously trying to go , well , if video games are going to develop into the next stage , then the thing isn 't to try and do a loving tribute or reference other stuff . It 's to reference the actual place itself " . Houser also said , " In terms of the character , we wanted something that felt fresh and new and not something that was obviously derived from [ a ] movie . [ ... ] Maybe [ we ] could do something ourselves that would live alongside that stuff " . Music supervisor Ivan Pavlovich said " [ we had ] to pick the songs that make New York today what it is , but make sure they won 't feel dated by the time the game comes out . " The developers contacted over 2,000 people in order to obtain recording and publishing rights . They even hired a private investigator to locate the relatives of late Skatt Bros. member Sean Delaney to license the band 's song , " Walk the Night " . Citing sources close to the deals , Billboard reported that Rockstar paid as much as $ 5,000 per composition and another $ 5,000 per master recording per track . Developers originally considered letting players purchase music by going to an in-game record shop and for Niko to have an MP3 player , but both ideas were cut . DJ Green Lantern produced tracks exclusively for the game 's hip-hop radio station The Beat 102.7 . Record label owner and record producer Bobby Konders , who hosts the in-game radio station Massive B Soundsystem 96.9 , went through the extra effort of flying to Jamaica to get dancehall artists to re-record tracks to make references to the boroughs of Liberty City .

The Corporate Vice-President of Microsoft 's Interactive Entertainment Business division , Peter Moore , announced at E3 2006 that the game would appear on Xbox 360 , by rolling up his sleeve to reveal a Grand Theft Auto IV temporary tattoo . Rockstar Games initially appeared to be committed to the original 16 October 2007 release date ; however , Wedbush Morgan analyst Michael Pachter suggested that Take-Two may choose to delay the release of the game in order to boost its financial results for 2008 and to avoid competing with the release of other highly anticipated titles , such as Halo 3 . Rockstar responded by saying that Grand Theft Auto IV was still on track for release in " late October " . On 2 August 2007 , Take-Two announced that Grand Theft Auto IV would miss its original release date of 16 October 2007 contrary to their previous statements , and would be delayed to their second fiscal quarter ( February – April ) of 2008 . In a later conference call with investors , Take-Two 's Strauss Zelnick attributed the delay to " almost strictly technological problems ... not problems , but challenges . " It was later revealed that technical difficulties with the PlayStation 3 version of the game contributed to the delay , along with storage problems on the Xbox 360 . On 24 January 2008 , Take-Two announced that Grand Theft Auto IV would be released on 29 April 2008 . As the release date approached , Rockstar Games and Take-Two marketed the game heavily through various forms , including television ads , Internet video , billboards , viral marketing , and a redesigned website . A special edition of the game was also released for both the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 . At a Take-Two shareholder meeting on 18 April 2008 , Take-Two CEO Ben Feder announced that Grand Theft Auto IV had already " gone gold " and was " in production and in trucks en route to retailers " . The game was eventually released for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 video game consoles in Europe , North America , and Oceania on 29 April 2008 , and in Japan on 30 October 2008 . Overall , Grand Theft Auto IV took over 1000 people and more than three and a half years to complete , with a total cost estimated at approximately $ 100 million , making it , at the time , the most expensive video game ever developed .

On 6 August 2008 , Rockstar announced that a Microsoft Windows version of Grand Theft Auto IV was in development by Rockstar North and Rockstar Toronto . The game was originally announced for release in North America on 18 November 2008 and in Europe on 21 November 2008 but was later pushed back to 2 and 3 December 2008 , respectively . It contains expanded features , including traffic density control , draw distance configurations and a replay editor . The replay editor allows players to record and edit game clips , videos can then be uploaded to Rockstar 's Social Club website . It utilised Games for Windows - Live for online play and supports 32 players for multiplayer . SecuROM protection is utilised and a one time online activation is required in order to play the game . The game was made available on Steam on 4 January 2009 .

Two episodic packs for Grand Theft Auto IV have been released . These two episodes were first released separately , exclusively on Xbox Live , as downloadable content ( DLC ) , requiring the original game to play . They were later released together as part of a standalone game , titled Grand Theft Auto : Episodes From Liberty City , which does not require the original game to play . Dan Houser stated the episodes shows " a different side of Liberty City " . The first expansion , titled Grand Theft Auto : The Lost and Damned , was originally released on 17 February 2009 . The protagonist of The Lost and Damned is Johnny Klebitz , a member of Liberty City 's biker gang The Lost . The second expansion , titled Grand Theft Auto : The Ballad of Gay Tony , was released on 29 October 2009 . The protagonist of The Ballad of Gay Tony is Luis Fernando Lopez , an assistant to nightclub owner Tony " Gay Tony " Prince , and follows him as he resolves the conflicts of his friends , family , and boss . Jeronimo Barrera , Vice President of Product Development for Rockstar Games , said that the episodes were experiments because the team were not sure that there was enough users with access to online content on the Xbox 360 . Take-Two Interactive 's Chief Financial Officer , Lainie Goldstein revealed that Microsoft was paying a total of $ 50 million for the first two episodes . In January 2010 , Rockstar announced that the DLC as well as Episodes From Liberty City would be made available for the PlayStation 3 and Microsoft Windows on 13 April 2010 in North America and 16 April 2010 in Europe .

Like previous games in the Grand Theft Auto series , Grand Theft Auto IV features a soundtrack that can be heard through radio stations while the player is in a vehicle . Liberty City is serviced by 19 radio stations , three of which are talk radio stations . The other stations feature music from a large range of genres , including tracks from Genesis , David Bowie , Bob Marley , The Who , Queen , Kanye West and Elton John . Grand Theft Auto IV uses a similar music system to that of Grand Theft Auto : San Andreas ( 2004 ) . In other games in the series , each radio station was essentially a single looped sound file , playing the same songs , announcements and advertisements in the same order each time . With the radio stations in Grand Theft Auto IV , each sound file is held separately , and sequenced randomly , allowing songs to be played in different orders , announcements to songs to be different each time , and plot events to be mentioned on the stations . Certain songs are also edited to incorporate references to the fictional Liberty City .

A variety of real celebrities provide voices for the radio DJs in the game , including fashion designer Karl Lagerfeld , musicians Iggy Pop , Femi Kuti , Jimmy Gestapo and Ruslana , and real-life radio talk show host Lazlow Jones . Saturday Night Live actors Bill Hader and Jason Sudeikis appear on the liberal and conservative radio talk shows respectively , with Fred Armisen playing several guests on Lazlow 's " Integrity 2.0 " . Numerous other comedians , including Jim Norton , Patrice O 'Neal , Rick Shapiro , and Robert Kelly , as well as radio hosts Opie & Anthony appeared on the radio and / or as characters in-game . The Music of Grand Theft Auto IV is a 2008 soundtrack packaged with the special edition of Grand Theft Auto IV . The disc contains several soundtrack selections . The soundtrack features several genres , from hip hop to rock and reggae . Several artists re-recorded their songs to make references to in-game locations . Two songs , " Liberty City : The Invasion " and " No Sex for Ben " , were composed specifically for the game and the soundtrack . The theme song of Grand Theft Auto IV , " Soviet Connection " , was composed by Michael Hunter , who previously composed the theme for Grand Theft Auto : San Andreas .

Grand Theft Auto IV was released to universal acclaim . Metacritic , which assigns a normalised rating in the 0 – 100 range , calculated an average score of 98 out of 100 , indicating " universal acclaim " , based on 64 reviews for the PlayStation 3 version and 86 reviews for the Xbox 360 version . It is the second-highest rated game on Metacritic , tied with a number of other games . It is also one of the highest-rated games on GameRankings . Reviewers liked the game 's narrative , open world design and combat system . Hilary Goldstein of IGN felt that the game " sets a new benchmark for open-world games " , and Andrew Reiner of Game Informer wrote that the game " completely changes the landscape of gaming " . Reviewers lauded the open world design , some further complimenting the freedom that it allows the player . Seth Schiesel of The New York Times named the city the " real star " of the game . Official Xbox Magazine 's Hicks was impressed by the city , attributing this to the game 's AI . Robinson of Computer and Video Games considered the environment believable , and felt that the world was " utterly unmatched " . Goldstein of IGN felt that , although Liberty City is inspired by New York , it is not beholden to it . He wrote that the city " exists in its own universe and rightfully so " . Crispin Boyer of 1UP.com directed praise at the city 's " breathtaking vistas , incredibly varied scenery , and lived-in look . " Conversely , Jesse Costantino of Game Revolution felt that the game lacked important features common in other open world games .

Reviewers praised the game 's narrative . IGN 's Goldstein accepted that the darker tones to the story , a break from series tradition . Jon Hicks of Official Xbox Magazine felt surprised by the amount of depth to the story . Reiner of Game Informer wrote that the level of freedom in the game contributed to his enjoyment of the story . The morality choices faced by players throughout the narrative were also welcomed . 1UP.com 's Boyer felt that they gave the game an element of " replayability " . Eurogamer 's Tom Bramwell considered the morality choices a fair substitute over " bosses with large health bars " . The game 's characters — particularly Niko — received positive reactions from critics . Hicks of Official Xbox Magazine and Andy Robinson of Computer and Video Games both called Niko " charismatic " and " likeable " , stating that they prefer him over previous protagonists of the series . George Walter of GamesRadar praised the depth of the character , and IGN 's Goldstein felt that the character of Niko feels relatable when faced with difficult decisions . Jeff Gerstmann of Giant Bomb felt that Niko was a " the only thing that mattered to [ him ] " as he progressed through the story , with the character becoming one of his favourite features of the game . Schiesel of The New York Times named Niko one of the most realised video game characters attributing this to the game 's script , while 1UP.com 's Boyer commended the use of character bonding during the game 's missions .

Many reviewers found the combat system was more responsive than in previous games , particularly praising the addition of the cover system . Justin Calvert of GameSpot wrote that the cover system makes the game 's combat a " huge improvement " over previous games . Reiner of Game Informer agreed , writing that the targeting system makes players feel responsible for all deaths . IGN 's Goldstein praised the fluidity of the cover system , and felt that the auto aim mechanic is a " great help in larger battles " . GamesRadar 's Walter wrote that the cover system has " paved the way to a new style of mission " . David McComb of Empire called the combat " sharp and instinctive " , and Hicks of Official Xbox Magazine felt that the cover system allows players to execute an attack plan . In addition to the combat system , most reviewers noted the vehicle handling was more realistic than in previous games . Robinson of Computer and Video Games felt that the vehicle handling echoed realism , while Hicks of Official Xbox Magazine called the vehicle selection " excellent " . Costantino of Game Revolution praised the improvement of the game 's mechanics , particularly the physics engine 's advanced vehicle and character animations .

Reviewers praised the sound design . Goldstein of IGN praised the actors ' performances and the use of licensed music . GameSpot 's Calvert and GamesRadar 's Walter also commended the licensed music , the latter admiring the humour of the radio 's talk stations . Michael Pinson of The Pro Audio Files praised the separate features of the game 's sound design — including the city 's ambiance , licensed music , character dialogue , and vehicle and weapon sound effects — applauding the developer 's use of uniting the features together . Carolyn Gudmundson of GamesRadar also retroactively praised the game 's soundtrack , commending its suitability to the game 's setting . The game 's online multiplayer mode received positive reactions from critics . Reiner of Game Informer praised the character customisation available in the multiplayer mode , and noted that it runs " just as smoothly " as the single-player game . 1UP.com 's Boyer called the multiplayer modes " excellent " , and IGN 's Goldstein named it one of the best . Official Xbox Magazine 's Hicks dubbed the multiplayer as " hugely entertaining " , while Walter of GamesRadar praised the " seamless " process of entering a multiplayer match . Giant Bomb 's Gerstmann and Game Revolution 's Costantino felt divided about the multiplayer , the latter naming it a " fantastic idea " , but feeling as though connectivity problems resulted in a " broken " experience .

When Grand Theft Auto IV was released to Microsoft Windows in December 2008 , it received generally positive reviews . Metacritic calculated an average score of 90 out of 100 , indicating " universal acclaim " , based on 40 reviews . Reviewers liked the enhanced visuals and the additional features , but criticised the port for its inferiority over the console versions . The in-game features added in the port were well received . The addition of the Video Editor was met with positive reactions ; GameSpot 's Calvert called it " a great way to get creative " , while Kieron Gillen of Eurogamer criticised the unpredictability in its timing . Critics also praised the addition of the customisable radio station , which allows players to listen to their own choice of music ; Tom Chick of 1UP.com named it the best feature of the port , and Steven Hopper of GameZone called it a " great touch " . The port 's upgrade to 32 concurrent players in the online multiplayer mode , as opposed to the console version 's 16 players , was also met with positive feedback ; Eurogamer 's Gillen said that the " possibility for mayhem ... increases " , while Will Tuttle of GameSpy felt that the player increase " changes the action significantly " .

The port 's enhanced visuals were commended by many reviewers . GameZone 's Hopper considered the visuals an improvement over the original versions . Andy Robinson of Computer and Video Games called the visuals " impressive " , while Tom Orry of VideoGamer.com called them " superb " . Conversely , the port 's system requirements , considered difficult to run with advanced settings , received criticism . Eurogamer 's Gillen said that , though the Windows version is " the most attractive version " , it 's " annoyingly fiddly to get there " . GameSpy 's Tuttle was able to overlook the demanding system requirements in exchange for the game 's other features .

Within twenty-four hours of its release , Grand Theft Auto IV sold over 3.6 million copies , equating to approximately $ 310 million in revenue . Within a week , it generated more than $ 500 million in worldwide revenue , equating to approximately 6 million copies sold for Take Two . The numbers surpassed analysts ' expectations for the title . After one month of availability , the game had sold over 8.5 million copies . It broke three Guinness World Records on 13 May 2008 : highest grossing video game in 24 hours , highest revenue generated by an entertainment product in 24 hours , and fastest-selling video game in 24 hours . On 11 March 2011 , Take-Two announced that the game had sold over 20 million copies , with the Grand Theft Auto series surpassing a collective total of 100 million copies . As of July 2013 , the game has sold over 25 million copies . All sales records broken by Grand Theft Auto IV were beaten by its successor , Grand Theft Auto V , upon release . In the United Kingdom , the game became the fastest-selling game of all time , selling over 631,000 copies in twenty-four hours . This broke the record set by Grand Theft Auto : San Andreas at 501,000 copies over the same period . During the first five days of availability , the game sold over 927,000 copies in the United Kingdom . Over the same period , 2.85 million units were sold in the United States . By the end of 2008 , the game had sold over 5.18 million copies in the US . In its first four days of availability in Japan , it sold 133,000 copies on the PlayStation 3 and 34,000 on the Xbox 360 , according to Media Create .

Following the critical acclaim it received on its release , Grand Theft Auto IV has received various awards from various critics and publications . It received several Game of the Year awards , from gaming media outlets such as Spike TV , Giant Bomb , Kotaku , and GameTrailers , as well as mainstream publications , like The New York Times , the Los Angeles Times , and Time magazine . Grand Theft Auto IV also received seven nominations at the 5th British Academy Video Games Awards ( BAFTA Games Awards ) , and three nominations at the 9th Annual Game Developers Choice Awards , but did not win any of them .

Prior to and since the release of Grand Theft Auto IV , the game had been subject to a great deal of controversy , as was the case with previous Grand Theft Auto titles . Figures including George Galloway , Jack Thompson and Hillary Clinton have criticised the game , as have organisations including New York City officials and Mothers Against Drunk Driving ( MADD ) . MADD asked ESRB to change the rating of the game from " M " ( for ages seventeen and up ) to " AO " ( for adults only ) due to the player 's ability to drive under the influence of alcohol . The initial version of Grand Theft Auto IV released in Australia and New Zealand was pre-censored by Rockstar to allow the game to meet the perceived requirements of the Australian classification system . However , the game was resubmitted to the New Zealand OFLC by Stan Calif , a 21-year-old student who was unhappy that New Zealand received an edited version of the game as a result of Australian censorship laws . The unedited version was subsequently given an R18 rating and cleared for sale in New Zealand . For the PC release , the uncensored version of the game was awarded MA15 + in Australia . Following the release of The Lost and Damned , Rockstar distributed a patch which uncensored the Australian release for consoles .

There have been reports in the United Kingdom and the United States of crimes perpetrated against people purchasing Grand Theft Auto IV , as well as employees of stores selling the game . One of these incidents , an attack near a Gamestation store in Croydon , London was later reported to be an unrelated argument between two groups of people leaving a pub and the story has been referred to as a " media panic . " Six teenagers were later arrested in June 2008 after engaging in a crime spree in New Hyde Park , New York , assaulting and robbing several people , and attempting a carjacking . According to police , the teens claimed that they were " inspired " by Grand Theft Auto IV .

The station was built as part of the sixth and seventh sections of the IND Concourse Line beginning in the late 1920s . The station was built under East 205th Street at its eastern end , and underneath preexisting private property for most of its length . The station opened on July 1 , 1933 , along with the rest of the Concourse subway . On July 1 , 1937 , an escalator was opened in the station , the first of its kind in the Bronx . On August 23 , 1954 , a D train relaying east of the station overshot the bumper blocks at the end of the track , crashing into the wall at the end of the line . The train motorman was trapped in the tunnel for seven hours , and when he was freed , his left foot had to be amputated .

This underground station has two tracks and one island platform . Both track walls have a lime green trim line with a medium Kelly green border . Small " 205 " signs are placed below them at regular intervals . The platform has a row of concrete-clad I-beam columns on both sides ; these are painted medium Hunter green . There is clear evidence of water damage and mold due to poor drainage in numerous areas along the platform ceiling , the wall tiles , and to a number of the support columns . The station is also notorious for having piles of trash bags on the platform and at entrances , as well as for large amounts of litter on the tracks due to an absence of trash cans . 205th Street station was declared one of the five worst in the system in terms of maintenance and appearance by the New York City Transit Riders Council in 2005 , problems which have persisted into the 2010s . Due to changes in the street grid of the neighborhood , the station is located at East 205th Street and Perry Avenue at its eastern end , and at East 206th Street and Bainbridge Avenue at its western end . 205th Street turns diagonally southwest at Perry Street , while the subway maintains its previous direction , lining up with Van Cortland Avenue before turning south onto Grand Concourse .

This station has two fare control areas . The full-time side at the south ( geographical west ) end has a turnstile bank , token booth , and two staircases going up to the southeast and northwest corners of East 206th Street and Bainbridge Avenue . Because of the varying topography of the surrounding neighborhood , a single escalator was installed in 1937 in this fare control area , traversing an elevation difference of 25 feet ( 7.6 m ) between the mezzanine and platform . Access to fare control otherwise requires walking up three flights of stairs from platform level . The other fare control area at the station 's north ( geographical east ) end , accessed by a ramp to the platform , is unstaffed , containing full height turnstiles and two staircases going up to the northwest and southeast corners of East 205th Street and Perry Avenue . The token booth at this location was closed on July 30 , 2005 and removed sometime afterward .

This station was not intended to be the terminus of the Concourse Line or the D train ; both were supposed to have been extended east past Bronx Park and the IRT White Plains Road Line along Burke Avenue to serve the northeast section of the Bronx . This idea was postponed due to lack of funding , and ultimately abandoned when the City of New York bought the right-of-way of the bankrupt New York , Westchester and Boston Railway and converted it for subway use in 1941 . Another proposal in the 1970s involved extending the Concourse Line to White Plains Road , but financial troubles caused the plan to be aborted . As a result of the planned extension , the two tracks continue east of this station for about 700 feet along 205th Street to Webster Avenue , ending at a concrete wall , and this station does not have any crew quarters . Crews are changed at Bedford Park Boulevard , the next station south . Additionally , there is no diamond crossover between the tracks west of this station ; here , a center track forms leading west to the Concourse Yard . Because of this , terminating trains arrive on the southern ( railroad northbound ) track and discharge their passengers before continuing east to the end of the track . They then use the diamond crossover there to return to this station on the northern ( railroad southbound ) track and begin service to Manhattan and Brooklyn . Due to the track configuration , trains may reverse into the yard from the southern track , and trains from the yard may start service on the northern track .

Corey Todd Taylor ( born December 8 , 1973 ) is an American musician , author , and actor best known as the lead singer and lyricist of the heavy metal band Slipknot and hard rock / alternative metal band Stone Sour . Taylor is a founding member of Stone Sour , and has released five studio albums with that band . Taylor joined Slipknot in 1997 to replace their original vocalist , Anders Colsefni . He has released five studio albums with them . He has worked with several bands , including Junk Beer Kidnap Band , Apocalyptica , Anthrax , Aaron Lewis of Staind , and Soulfly . Taylor was ranked number 86 in Hit Parader 's Top 100 Metal Vocalists of All Time . He was also named 7th greatest heavy metal frontman by NME . Taylor was also found , by VVN Music , to possess the second-highest vocal range of any known singer in popular music with a range of 5 and a half octaves . He was beaten only by Mike Patton ( 6 octaves ) .

Corey Todd Taylor was born in Des Moines , Iowa on December 8 , 1973 . Taylor was mostly raised by his mother in Waterloo , Iowa , a place described by Taylor as a " hole in the ground with buildings around it . " He is of German and Native American background from his father 's side and Irish and Dutch on his mother 's side . Taylor was raised by his single mother . He developed a fond feeling toward rock ' n ' roll after his grandmother introduced him to Elvis Presley . In 1979 , Taylor and his mother saw the science fiction series Buck Rogers in the 25th Century . Before the series , there was a trailer for the 1978 horror film Halloween . Taylor said this " developed some sense of Slipknot in [ himself ] . " While Halloween introduced Taylor to masks and horror themes , Taylor 's grandmother introduced him to rock music , showing him a collection of Elvis Presley records from the mid-fifties to late seventies . He especially found some songs like " Teddy Bear " , " In the Ghetto " , and " Suspicious Minds " , to appeal to his interests the most , describing them as " good times . " Taylor also began listening to Black Sabbath at a young age , beginning with their early work .

Taylor , along with his mother and sister , lived at one point in an " old dilapidated farmhouse , " which on days in late autumn would " look like Black Sabbath album covers . " By age fifteen , Taylor had developed a drug addiction and had overdosed on cocaine twice . By this time , Taylor was living in Waterloo , Iowa , but later set out on his own and ended up at his grandmother 's house in Iowa . She took legal custody of him and helped him buy musical equipment . When Taylor was eighteen , he left his grandmother 's home and went to various places , Des Moines being a place to which he frequently returned . In his early twenties , when Taylor was living with his grandmother , he attempted suicide by way of overdose . Taylor 's ex-girlfriend 's mother drove him to the hospital in Des Moines and doctors were able to resuscitate him . He describes this as the lowest point in his life . Taylor and his father first met when Taylor was 30 years old , and now have a relationship , although he said their paths do not cross that often . On September 17 , 2002 , Taylor 's then-fiancée , Scarlett Stone , gave birth to their son Griffin Parker . Taylor also has a daughter named Angeline from an earlier relationship . Taylor and Stone married on March 11 , 2004 , and divorced three years later .

Taylor has also had alcohol abuse problems , which his wife , Scarlett , helped him through as well as keeping him from committing suicide . In 2006 , Taylor told MTV that he had attempted to jump off a balcony of the eighth floor of the Hyatt on Sunset Boulevard in 2003 , but " somehow [ Scarlett ] stopped me " . This was later recanted by Taylor in an interview with Kerrang ! radio and stated that it was , in fact , his friend Thom Hazaert who stopped him from jumping . Scarlett then told him that either he would have to get sober or she would annul their marriage . Before Stone Sour started recording Come What ( ever ) May in January 2006 , Taylor was sober . On August 3 , 2009 , he co-hosted the 2009 Kerrang ! Awards alongside Scott Ian of Anthrax . The following year , they both once again co-hosted The Kerrang Awards , where Corey collected the K ! Services to Metal award on behalf of Paul Gray who died after an accidental overdose of morphine and fentanyl . In early September 2010 , Taylor announced that his book , Seven Deadly Sins : Settling The Argument Between Born Bad And Damaged Good would be released on July 12 , 2011 through Da Capo Press .

In Des Moines , Iowa , Joey Jordison , Shawn Crahan , and Mick Thomson approached him asking him to join Slipknot . He agreed to go to one of their practices , and ended up singing in front of them . Of Slipknot 's nine members , Corey was the sixth to join the band . Performing with Slipknot , he would also come to be known as " Number Eight " , being that the band follows a numbering scheme for its members , ranging from 0 – 8 . According to Shawn Crahan , Corey wanted number eight , because it symbolizes infinity . Feeling he could expand more inside Slipknot than in Stone Sour , Taylor temporarily quit Stone Sour , even though they were recording an album with Sean McMahon . Taylor 's first gig with Slipknot was on August 22 , 1997 , which according to band members did not go well . During his first gig , Taylor did not perform wearing a mask ; however , for his second show nearly a month later , Corey wore a mask that resembles his debut album mask . Taylor 's current mask was described by MTV 's Chris Harris as looking " as though it were made of dried , human flesh — like Leatherface , if only he used moisturizer . "

Taylor has recorded with Slipknot since the release of their second demo album , a self-titled demo used to promote the band to prospective labels and producers . As permanent vocalist , he recorded with Slipknot at Indigo Ranch in Malibu , California and released Slipknot , the band 's debut album that peaked number one on the Top Heatseekers chart , went 2 × Platinum in the United States , and was included in the 2006 book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . Taylor was accused of copyright infringement , regarding the lyrics of the song " Purity " , but no action was taken . Taylor began recording for their second studio album , Iowa , in 2001 at Sound City and Sound Image in Van Nuys , Los Angeles . It was released August 28 , 2001 and peaked number one on the UK Albums Chart , as well as number three on the Billboard 200 . While writing Vol . 3 : ( The Subliminal Verses ) , Taylor decided to write lyrics that would not warrant an explicit label . It peaked number two on the Billboard 200 . All Hope Is Gone was the first Slipknot album to peak number one on the Billboard 200 .

Taylor is a founding member of the American hard rock band Stone Sour . After he formed the band with drummer Joel Ekman , Shawn Economaki joined filling in the bass position , leaving the electric guitar position to be filled by Josh Rand . Stone Sour recorded a demo album in 1993 , and another in 1994 . In 1997 , Taylor was approached by the metal band , Slipknot , resulting in him abandoning Stone Sour while they were recording a demo album with Sean McMahon at SR studios . Taylor did not return until five years later to record their debut album , Stone Sour in 2002 . Both Taylor and guitarist Josh Rand contacted Jim Root , Slipknot 's guitarist , and Shawn Economaki , Stone Sour 's original bassist , to begin writing songs for their debut album . Drummer Joel Ekman came back on board as well . This " reformation " later resulted in Stone Sour recording at Catamount Studios in Cedar Falls , Iowa . Their self-titled debut album was released August 27 , 2002 , and it debuted at number 46 on the Billboard 200 . Their second album , Come What ( ever ) May debuted at number four on the Billboard 200 . It was released August 1 , 2006 , and charted on several different charts . Live in Moscow is currently their only album specifically released only for music download . During the recording of the album , drummer Joel Ekman left the band for personal reasons . As a result , drummer Roy Mayorga was recruited , taking his place . The group released their third studio album , Audio Secrecy , on September 7 , 2010 .

Later , Corey Taylor has announced the release of a concept double album with Stone Sour . The albums are titled " House of Gold And Bones " . During the process of making the double album , bassist Shawn Economaki left the band . He was temporarily replaced for touring purposes by Johny Chow . The first part was released in October 2012 and the second part in April 2013 . There are 23 songs in total , 11 on the first part and 12 on the second . In addition to these two albums is a four-part comic book series written by Taylor and published by Dark Horse Comics . They are set to go on sale in 2013 . With these albums came a story that was written by Taylor that coincide with the album . Fans can also construct a miniature " house of gold and bones " from the packaging design of the physical versions of the two albums . Taylor has also said that he would like to finish off the project by making the story into a movie but nothing has come of this yet .

Taylor has appeared as a guest musician on albums by Soulfly , Apocalyptica and Damageplan . At one point , he was heavily involved in the recording of thrash metal band Anthrax 's album , Worship Music , but the sessions remain unreleased . He also contributed to the Roadrunner United all-star album in 2005 , providing vocals for the song " Rich Man " . Taylor has also made a brief appearance in Steel Panther 's singles " Death to All but Metal " , " Eyes of a Panther " , and " Asian Hooker " . In 2006 , Taylor founded the record company Great Big Mouth Records . Taylor has produced two albums : Face Cage 's self-titled album and Walls of Jericho 's Redemption . Taylor provided guest narration on the track " Repentance " for Dream Theater 's 2007 album Systematic Chaos . In an interview with Billboard magazine , Taylor confirmed that on January 13 , 2009 , he was planning on making a solo album , as well as returning to his side project Stone Sour after Slipknot 's All Hope Is Gone World Tour . Taylor has stated that he was writing songs that " don 't fit either of his main bands . " He describes them as a cross between Foo Fighters , Johnny Cash , and Social Distortion , saying that there 's " a country background that comes built-in with living in Iowa " .

On March 30 , 2009 , it was confirmed that Taylor and the Junk Beer Kidnap Band would be performing at Rockfest in 2009 . The group performed on April 24 , 2009 at People 's Court in Des Moines , Iowa , marking Taylor 's first official solo show . Taylor performs with his band the Dum Fux , who make covers for 1970s punk rock and 1980s hair metal . Taylor also performs with Audacious P , a band that is primarily a Tenacious D cover band . Rapper Tech N9ne confirmed that Taylor was to perform on his album K.O.D. , but was removed because Taylor did not submit his vocals in time . Taylor recently admitted that he tried out for the vacant singer spot in the band Velvet Revolver , but said that it just did not work out . However , according to a recent Billboard article , it seems likely that he may in fact become the vocalist for Velvet Revolver , though no official confirmation has been made . Duff McKagan added that they can neither " confirm or deny " Taylor 's membership in the band but believes that Taylor is the " real deal " . Slash has since ruled Corey out as the possible new vocalist explaining that " [ it ] just wasn 't right " although he does love him . He however , has recorded 10 new songs with the band , drummer Matt Sorum stated it 's unlikely it will ever be released . Taylor explained to Mark Hoppus on Hoppus on Music that McKagan and he were writing new music for a possible new supergroup .

In July 2011 Taylor collaborated with Aaron Lewis while promoting Lewis ' solo album , Town Line for a one night only acoustic duet show covering songs such as , Pearl Jam 's " Black " , Pink Floyd 's Comfortably Numb , and Alice in Chains ' Down in a Hole , videos from this show with Taylor and Lewis can be found on YouTube . Taylor also shared the stage with Aaron Lewis on August 16 , 2009 during the Ride For Dime memorial concert . They performed Pantera covers with a variety of other musicians . As a solo artist he recorded a song , " X-M @ $ " , for The Teenage Cancer Trust . The single was made available to digital retailers on December 12 , 2010 . It debuted at number thirty-seven in the UK . Taylor clarified on YouTube that the song was just a joke about people who don 't enjoy Christmas . He personally loves Christmas especially due to the fact he gets to see his extended family but finds the frustration of people who don 't like it to be hilarious . In 2011 , Taylor collaborated with Blink-182 drummer Travis Barker on Barker 's solo album Give the Drummer Some on the song " On My Own " .

The first two Slipknot albums with Taylor 's vocals , Slipknot and Iowa , both contain gratuitous explicit content . Many critics claimed Taylor relied on the profanity , which is why Slipknot 's third album , Vol . 3 : ( The Subliminal Verses ) is profanity-free , ( with the exceptions of the word bitch on the song " Duality " and bastard on the spoken intro of " Pulse of the Maggots " ) , and did not warrant the explicit label . Compared with the previous vocalist for Slipknot , Anders Colsefni , Taylor has a vocal style that was characterized by drummer Joey Jordison as " really good melodic singing " . Taylor 's vocal style , which contains at times melodic singing , growling , screaming , shouting , and rapping , led him to place at number 86 on the Hit Parader 's Top 100 Metal Vocalists of All Time and is often compared to other vocalists such as Ivan L. Moody , John Bush , Phil Anselmo and Jamey Jasta . Taylor 's two major projects have contrasting temperaments . Slipknot is considered to be heavy metal , nu metal and alternative metal , and expresses moods such as depression , hostility , anger , misanthropy , and rebellion . Stone Sour is classified as alternative metal , expressing moods of bleakness and somberness as well as anger and rebellion . Taylor cites Mötley Crüe , AC / DC , The Who , The Beatles , Led Zeppelin , The Doors , Pink Floyd , Faith No More , Van Halen , Aerosmith , Rush , Motörhead , Judas Priest , Iron Maiden , Metallica , Alice in Chains , Bon Jovi , Guns N ' Roses , Nine Inch Nails , Dokken , Misfits , Black Sabbath , Deep Purple , Queen , Anthrax , Black Flag , Slayer , Def Leppard , The Stooges , Sex Pistols , Lynyrd Skynyrd , Neil Young , Cheap Trick , Pearl Jam , The Damned , The Cramps , Soundgarden , Mr. Bungle , Megadeth , Nirvana , Journey , Bob Dylan , Kiss , ZZ Top , White Zombie , Pantera , Korn , and Marilyn Manson as influences .

The International Association for Plant Taxonomy ( IAPT ) promotes an understanding of plant biodiversity , facilitates international communication of research between botanists , and oversees matters of uniformity and stability in plant names . The IAPT was founded on July 18 , 1950 at the Seventh International Botanical Congress in Stockholm , Sweden . Currently , the IAPT headquarters is located in Bratislava , Slovakia . Its current president , since 2011 , is Vicki Funk of the Smithsonian Institution , Washington , DC . ; vice-president is Sandra Knapp of the Natural History Museum , London ; and secretary-general is Karol Marhold of the Institute of Botany , Slovak Academy of Sciences , Bratislava . Both the taxonomic journal Taxon and the series Regnum Vegetabile are published by the IAPT . The latter series includes the International Code of Nomenclature for algae , fungi , and plants , the Index Nominum Genericorum , and Index Herbariorum .

The IAPT 's primary purpose is the promotion and understanding of biodiversity — the discovery , naming , classification , and systematics of plants — for both living and fossil plants . Additionally , it promotes the study and conservation of plant biodiversity , and works to raise awareness of the general public to this issue . The organization also facilitates international cooperation among botanists working in the fields of plant systematics , taxonomy , and nomenclature . This is accomplished in part through sponsorship of meetings and publication of resources , such as reference publications and journals . The IAPT also seeks to achieve uniformity and stability in plant names . It accomplishes this through the International Code of Nomenclature for algae , fungi , and plants , previously known as the International Code of Botanical Nomenclature , and through the oversight of the International Bureau for Plant Taxonomy and Nomenclature .

Taxon is the bi-monthly journal of the IAPT . The journal , which was initiated in 1951 , publishes original papers and reviews dealing with systematic botany in the broadest sense . Preference is given to integrative papers combining the results of modern analysis with their consequences for classification . Taxon also contains matters related to botanical nomenclature , and is the medium for the publication of both proposals to conserve or reject names and proposals to amend the International Code of Nomenclature for algae , fungi , and plants ( ICN ) . Publication of such matters in Taxon satisfies the required submission to the General Committee . The journal also contains sections devoted to the International Organisation of Plant Biosystematics , reviews and notices of books and other publications , and news in the world of plant systematics . Although the journal is " devoted to systematic and evolutionary biology with emphasis on botany " , it has been in the past criticized for focusing overly on nomenclature and less on the principles and advancements made in the field of plant systematics .

Regnum Vegetabile is a published series of books on topics of interest to plant taxonomists . Many of the volumes are literature surveys or monographs in the area of plant systematics . There are several volumes of general use : International Code of Nomenclature for algae , fungi , and plants ( Vol . 154 , 2012 ) The ICN is a set of rules and recommendations dealing with the formal names that are given to plants . The current edition is known as the " Melbourne Code " , as it was drafted in 2011 at the Seventeenth International Botanical Congress in Melbourne , Australia . International Code of Nomenclature for Cultivated Plants , 8th edition ( Vol . 151 , 2010 ) Companion to the ICN , this volume sets forth rules regarding the names of plant cultivars . Index Nominum Genericorum ( Vols . 100-102 & 113 ) An index of all published generic names covered by the ICN , including the place of publication and information about the type species . The index is prepared in collaboration with the Smithsonian Institution . An electronic version is available online . Index Herbariorum , the first six editions ( Vol . 15 , 31 , 86 , 92 , 93 , 106 , 109 , 114 , 117 , 120 ) A directory and guide to the herbaria of the world , including contact information , abbreviation codes , and important collections located in each herbarium . Index Herbariorum is now an online database , managed by The New York Botanical Garden , and available for on-line searching .

Lhasa City , is a prefecture-level city , formerly a prefecture until 7 January 1960 , one of the main administrative divisions of the Tibet Autonomous Region of China . It covers an area of 29,274 square kilometres ( 11,303 sq mi ) of rugged and sparsely populated terrain . The prefecture-level city contains two districts Chengguan District and Doilungdêqên District . The prefecture-level city roughly corresponds to the basin of the Lhasa River , a major tributary of the Yarlung Tsangpo River . It lies on the Lhasa terrane , the last unit of crust to accrete to the Eurasian plate before the continent of India collided with Asia about 50 million years ago and pushed up the Himalayas . The terrane is high , contains a complex pattern of faults and is tectonically active . The temperature is generally warm in summer and rises above freezing on sunny days in winter . Most of the rain falls in summer . The upland areas and northern grasslands are used for grazing yaks , sheep and goats , while the river valleys support agriculture with crops such as barley , wheat and vegetables . Wildlife is not abundant , but includes the rare snow leopard and black-necked crane . Mining has caused some environmental problems .

The former prefecture is divided into seven mostly rural counties and one district , which contains the main urban area of Lhasa . The 2000 census gave a total population of 474,490 , of whom 387,124 were ethnic Tibetans . The Han Chinese population at the time was mainly concentrated in urban areas . The prefecture-level city is traversed by two major highways and by the Qinghai – Tibet Railway , which terminates in the city of Lhasa . Two large dams on the Lhasa River deliver hydroelectric power , as do many smaller dams and the Yangbajain Geothermal Station . The population is well-served by primary schools and basic medical facilities , although more advanced facilities are lacking . Tibetan Buddhism and monastic life have been dominant aspects of the local culture since the 7th century . Most of the monasteries were destroyed during the Cultural Revolution , but since then many have been restored and serve as tourist attractions .

Lhasa lies in south-central Tibet , to the north of the Himalayas . The prefecture-level city is 277 kilometres ( 172 mi ) from east to west and 202 kilometres ( 126 mi ) from north to south . It covers an area of 29,518 square kilometres ( 11,397 sq mi ) . It is bordered by Nagqu Prefecture to the north , Nyingchi Prefecture to the east , Lhoka ( Shannan ) Prefecture to the south and Shigatse prefecture-level city to the west . The prefecture-level city roughly corresponds to the basin of the Lhasa River , which is the center of Tibet politically , economically and culturally . Chengguan District is also the center of Tibet in terms of transport , communications , education and religion , as well as being the most developed part of Tibet and a major tourist destination with sights such as the Potala Palace , Jokhang and Ramoche Temple .

Lhasa prefecture-level city roughly corresponds to the basin of the Lhasa River , a major tributary of the Yarlung Tsangpo River . Exceptions are the north of Damxung County , which crosses the watershed of the Nyenchen Tanglha Mountains and includes part of the Namtso lake , and Nyêmo County , which covers the basin of the Nimu Maqu River , a direct tributary of the Yarlung Tsangpo . The river basin is separated from the Yarlung Tsangpo valley to the south by the Goikarla Rigyu range . The largest tributary of the Lhasa River , the Reting Tsangpo , originates in the Chenthangula Mountains in Nagqu Prefecture at an elevation of about 5,500 metres ( 18,000 ft ) , and flows southwest into Lhasa past Reting Monastery . The Lhasa River drains an area of 32,471 square kilometres ( 12,537 sq mi ) , and is the largest tributary of the middle section of the Yarlung Tsangpo . The average altitude of the basin is around 4,500 metres ( 14,800 ft ) . The basin has complex geology and is tectonically active . Earthquakes are common . Annual runoff is 10,550,000,000 cubic metres ( 3.73 × 1011 cu ft ) . Water quality is good , with little discharge of sewage and minimal chemical pesticides and fertilizers .

The Lhasa River forms where three smaller rivers converge . These are the Phak Chu , the Phongdolha Chu which flows from Damxung County and the Reting Tsangpo , which rises beyond the Reting Monastery . The highest tributary rises at around 5,290 metres ( 17,360 ft ) on the southern slope of the Nyenchen Tanglha Mountains . In its upper reaches the river flows southeast through a deep valley . Lower down the river valley is flatter and changes its direction to the southwest , The river expands to a width of 150 to 200 metres ( 490 to 660 ft ) . Major tributaries in the lower reaches include the Pengbo River and the Duilong River . At its mouth the Lhasa Valley is about 3 miles ( 4.8 km ) wide . The bulk of the water is supplied by the summer monsoon rains , which fall from July to September . There are floods in the summer from July to September , with about 17 % of the annual runoff flowing in September . In winter the river has low water , and sometimes freezes . Total flow is about 4 cubic kilometres ( 0.96 cu mi ) , with average flow about 125 cubic metres per second ( 4,400 cu ft / s ) . The total hydropower potential of the river basin is 2,560,000 kW . Zhikong Hydro Power Station in Maizhokunggar County delivers 100 MW . The Pangduo Hydro Power Station in Lhünzhub County has total installed capacity of 160 MW .

The former Lhasa prefecture lies in the Lhasa terrane , to which it gives its name . This is thought to be the last crustal block to accrete to the Eurasian plate before the collision with the Indian plate in the Cenozoic . The terrane is separated from the Himalayas to the south by the Yarlung-Tsangpo suture , and from the Qiangtang terrane to the north by the Bangong-Nujiang suture . The Lhasa terrane consisted of two blocks before the Mesozoic , the North Lhasa Block and the South Lhasa Block . These blocks were joined in the Late Paleozoic . The Lhasa terrane moved northward and collided with the Qiangtang terrane along the Bangong suture . The collision began towards the end of the late Jurassic ( c . 163 – 145 Ma ) , and collision activity continued until the early Late Cretaceous ( c . 100 – 66 Ma ) . During this period the terrane may have been shortened by at least 180 kilometres ( 110 mi ) . The collision caused a peripheral foreland basin to form in the north part of the Lhasa terrane . In some parts of the foreland basin the north-dipping subduction of the Neotethyan oceanic crust below the Lhasa terrane caused volcanism . The Gangdese batholith was formed as this subduction continued along the southern margin of the Lhasa terrane . The Gangdese intrudes the southern half of the Lhasa terrain .

Contact with India began along the Yarlung-Zangbo suture around 50 Ma during the Eocene , and the two continents continue to converge . Magmatism continued in the Gangdese arc until as late as 40 Ma . There was significant crustal shortening as the collision progressed . The South Lhasa terrane experienced metamorphism and magmatism in the Early Cenozoic ( 55 – 45 Ma ) and metamorphism in the Late Eocene ( 40 – 30 Ma ) , presumably due to the collision between the continents of India and Eurasia . Rocks in this region include sedimentary rocks from the Paleozoic and Mesozoic into which granite has intruded during the Cretaceous . The rocks have metamorphosed and are deeply eroded and faulted . The rocks exposed in the Reting Tsangpo canyon range in age from 400 Ma to 50 Ma . The result of faulting has been to often juxtapose relatively recent rocks with much older rocks . Some parts of the ocean floor were pushed up onto the Tibetan Plateau and formed marble or slate . Sea fossils from 400 Ma are found in the river 's canyons , and houses are roofed with slate . The Yangbajing Basin lies between the Nyainquentanglha Range to the northwest and the Yarlu-Zangbo suture to the south . The Yangbajain Geothermal Field is in the central part of a half-graben fault-depression basin caused by the foremontane fault zone of the Nyainqentanglha Mountains . The SE-dipping detachment fault began to form about 8 Ma . The geothermal reservoir is basically a Quaternary basin underlaid by a large granite batholith . The basin has been filled with glacial deposits from the north and alluvial-pluvial sediments from the south . Fluid flows horizontally into the reservoir through the faults around the basin . Chemical analysis of the thermal fluid indicate that there is shallow-seated magmatic activity not far below the geothermal field .

The Lhasa valley is roughly the same latitude as the southern United States , but at an altitude of 3,610 metres ( 11,840 ft ) or more it is of course cooler . The central river valleys of Tibet are warm in summer , and even in the coldest months of winter the temperature is above freezing on sunny days . The climate is semi-arid monsoon , with a low average temperature of 1.2 to 7.5 ° C ( 34.2 to 45.5 ° F ) . Average annual precipitation is 466.3 millimetres ( 18.36 in ) , with 85 % falling in the June – September period . Typically there are 3,000 hours of sunshine each year . It is cooler in the northern regions , warmer in the south . Annual figures : Studies of temperature and precipitation data from 1979 to 2005 indicate that higher temperatures are leading to longer snow-free periods at the lower elevations . However , at higher levels the amount of precipitation has increased , so despite warming the snow-free period is shorter .

Most of the population of Tibet lives in the southern valleys , including those around Lhasa . The higher regions are used by nomadic drokpa who tend herds of yaks , sheep and goats on the steppe grasslands of the hills and high valleys . In the lower parts it is possible to cultivate products that include barley , wheat , black peas , beans , mustard , hemp , potatoes , cabbage , cauliflower , onions , garlic , celery and tomatoes . The traditional staple food is barley flour called tsampa , often combined with buttered tea and made into a paste . The plain over which we are riding is a wonderfully fruitful one . It is skirted on the south by the Kyi river , and is watered , moreover , by another smaller stream from the north , which flows into the Kyi ... some five miles west of Lhasa . All this land is carefully irrigated by means of dikes and cross-channels from both rivers . Fields of buckwheat , barley , pea , rape , and lindseed lie in orderly series everywhere . The meadows near the water display the richest emerald-green pasturage . Groves of poplar and willow , in shapely clumps , combine with the grassy stretches to give in places a parklike appearance to the scene . Several hamlets and villages , such as Cheri , Daru , and Shing Dongkhar , are dotted over these lands . A fertile plain truly for a besieging army !

The Lhasa region does not have abundant wildlife or great numbers of species , but the Lhasa valley does support wintering populations of hundreds of black-necked cranes . Hutoushan Reservoir lies in Qangka Township , Lhünzhub County . The reservoir is bordered by large swamps and wet meadows , and has abundant plants and shellfish . The reservoir , which lies in the Pengbo valley , is the largest in Tibet , with total storage of 12,000,000 cubic metres ( 420,000,000 cu ft ) . Endangered black-necked cranes migrate to the middle and southern part of Tibet every winter , and may be seen on the reservoir and elsewhere in the Lhasa region . Other wildlife includes bharal , pheasants , roe deer , Thorold 's deer , Mongolian gazelle , Siberian ibex , otter , brown bear , snow leopard and duck . Medicinal plants include fritillaries ( fritillaria ) , stonecrop ( rhodiola ) , Indian barberry ( berberis aristata ) , Chinese caterpillar fungus ( ophiocordyceps sinensis ) , codonopsis and Lingzhi mushroom ( ganoderma ) . The dams on the Lhasa river built as part of the Three Rivers Development Project are unlikely to affect the flow of the Brahmaputra in India . However , the climate and soil are unsuitable for large-scale irrigation . Where grasslands have been converted into irrigated farms fed by dams the result may damage the environment . Jama wetland in Maizhokunggar County is vulnerable to grazing and climate change . Extensive mining in some mountainous regions have turned areas of what was green pasturage into a grey wasteland . The authorities are reported to have suppressed protests by the local people . Military personnel have been involved in efforts to protect and improve the environment , including replanting programs .

Chengguan District is located on the middle reaches of the Lhasa River , with land that rises to the north and south of the river . It is 28 kilometres ( 17 mi ) from east to west and 31 kilometres ( 19 mi ) from north to south . Chengguan District is bordered by Doilungdêqên District to the west , Dagzê County to the east and Lhünzhub County to the north . Gonggar County of Lhoka ( Shannan ) Prefecture lies to the south . Chengguan District has an elevation of 3,650 metres ( 11,980 ft ) and covers 525 square kilometres ( 203 sq mi ) . The urban built-up area covers 60 square kilometres ( 23 sq mi ) . The average annual temperature is 8 ° C ( 46 ° F ) . Annual precipitation is about 500 millimetres ( 20 in ) , mostly falling between July and September . Before the Chinese takeover the city of Lhasa had a population of 25,000 – 30,000 , or 45,000 – 50,000 if the large monasteries around the city are included . The old city formed a quadrangle about 3 square kilometres ( 1.2 sq mi ) around the Jokhang temple , about 1 kilometre ( 0.62 mi ) to the east of the Potala Palace . During the period before the reforms introduced by Deng Xiaoping the old city of Lhasa was left largely intact , while bleakly functional compounds containing symmetrical dormitory-type buildings for both living and working were built apart from the city along the main roads .

By 1990 the city had expanded to cover 40 square kilometres ( 15 sq mi ) , with an official population of 160,000 . The 2000 official census gave a total population of 223,001 , of which 171,719 lived in the areas administered by sub-districts and residential committees . 133,603 had urban registrations and 86,395 had rural registrations , based on their place of origin . By 2013 the urban area filled most of the natural Lhasa River valley in Chengguan District . A 2011 book estimated that up to two-thirds of the city 's residents are non-Tibetan , although the government states that Chengguan District as a whole is still 63 % ethnic Tibetan .

Doilungdêqên District contains the western suburbs of the city of Lhasa , which begin about 12 kilometres ( 7.5 mi ) from the city center . It covers an area of 2,704 square kilometers , with 94,969 acres of farmland . The county borders on the north Tibet grasslands in the northwest . The valley of the Duilong River leads south to the Lhasa River . The Duilong is 95 kilometres ( 59 mi ) in length . In the south the county occupies part of the south bank of the Lhasa River . The county has an average elevation of 4,000 metres ( 13,000 ft ) , with a highest elevation of 5,500 metres ( 18,000 ft ) and a lowest point at 3,640 metres ( 11,940 ft ) . There are about 120 frost-free days annually . Annual mean temperature is 7 ° C ( 45 ° F ) , with temperatures in January falling below − 10 ° C ( 14 ° F ) Annual precipitation is about 440 millimetres ( 17 in ) , with autumn rainfall of 310 millimetres ( 12 in ) . The county is agriculturally rich and was used by the Tibetan kings as a source of food for Lhasa .

The seat of government is in the town of Donggar . This is just 14 kilometres ( 8.7 mi ) from downtown Lhasa . In 1992 there were 33,581 people in 6,500 households , with 94.28 % of the people engaged in farming . About 90 % of the people were ethnic Tibetan , with most people of other ethnicity living in Donggar . The main mineral resources are coal , iron , clay , lead and zinc . Tsurphu Monastery , built in 1189 , is treated as a regional cultural relic reserve . The Nechung Monastery , former home of the Nechung Oracle , is located in Naiquong township . Nechung was built by the 5th Dalai Lama ( 1617 – 82 ) .

Dagzê County has a total area of 1,373 square kilometres ( 530 sq mi ) . It has an average elevation of 4,100 metres ( 13,500 ft ) above sea level , and descends from higher ground in the north and south to 3,730 metres ( 12,240 ft ) in the lowest part of the Lhasa river valley . The average temperature is 7.5 ° C ( 45.5 ° F ) , with about 130 days free of frost . Average rainfall is 450 millimetres ( 18 in ) . About 80 % – 90 % of precipitation falls in the summer . As of 2013 the total population was 29,152 . The main occupation is agriculture . As of 2012 per capita income of farmers and herdsmen was 6,740 yuan . In 2010 there were 28 schools in the county , including one junior high school and one kindergarten , with 276 full-time teachers . There is a county hospital and five township hospitals . The Sichuan-Tibet Highway ( China National Highway 318 ) runs through the county . The main monasteries in Dagzê are Ganden Monastery and Yerpa .

Damxung County has an area of 10,036 square kilometres ( 3,875 sq mi ) , with rugged topography . As of 2013 the population was 40,000 , up from 35,000 in 1997 . It is tectonically active . On 6 October 2008 an earthquake measuring 6.6 on the Richter magnitude scale was reported . In November 2010 a moderate quake in Damxung at 5.2 on the Richter scale shook office windows in Lhasa . There were no casualties , but houses were damaged . In the extreme northeast of the county , Namtso lake has an area of 1,920 square kilometres ( 740 sq mi ) , of which 45 % lies in Damxung county . Namtso is one of the great lakes of the Tibetan plateau . The Nyenchen Tanglha ( or Nyainqentanglha ) mountains extend along the northwest of the county . Mount Nyenchen Tanglha is the highest peak in the region , at 7,111 metres ( 23,330 ft ) . The Nyainqêntanglha mountains define the watershed between northern and southern Tibet . A valley with elevation of about 4,200 metres ( 13,800 ft ) runs parallel to the mountains to their southeast , sloping from northwest to southeast . 30 % of the county 's total area is in the prairie of this valley .

Damxung is cold and dry in the winter , cool and wet in summer , with very variable weather . The average annual temperature is 1.3 ° C ( 34.3 ° F ) , with only 62 frost-free days . The land is frozen from the start of November to the following March . Pasture has 90 – 120 days for growth . Average annual precipitation is 481 millimetres ( 18.9 in ) . Natural grasslands cover 693,171 hectares ( 1,712,860 acres ) , of which 68 % is considered excellent . Almost all the people are engaged in rearing livestock , including yaks , sheep , goats and horses . The Qinghai-Tibet Highway ( China National Highway 109 ) runs from east to west across the county . Damxung Railway Station links the county to the city of Lhasa to the south . There is a large geothermal field at Yangbajain harnessed by generating units that deliver 25,181 kilowatts to the city of Lhasa to the south . The transmission line follows the Duilong River south through Doilungdêqên District . Kangma Monastery is 16 kilometres ( 9.9 mi ) from the county seat . The meditation room has 1,213 carved stone reliefs of Buddha that are about three hundred years old . Yangpachen Monastery in Yangbajain is historically the seat of the Shamarpas of Karma Kagyu . The monastery was destroyed during the Cultural Revolution , but later was rebuilt .

Lhünzhub County is located around 65 km ( 40 mi ) northeast of metropolitan Lhasa . It includes the Pengbo River Valley and the upper reaches of the Lhasa River . It covers an area of 4,512 km2 ( 1,742 sq mi ) . The county is geologically complex , with an average elevation of 4,000 metres ( 13,000 ft ) . The administrative center is the town of Lhünzhub . As of 2000 the county had a total population of 50,895 , of which 8,111 lived in a community designated as urban . 2,254 had non-agricultural registration and 48,362 had agricultural registration . In the south the Pengbo valley has an average elevation of 3,680 metres ( 12,070 ft ) with a mild climate . The average temperature is 5.8 ° C ( 42.4 ° F ) . The northern " three rivers " section , crossed by the Lhasa River and its tributary the Razheng River , is mountainous and has an average elevation of 4,200 metres ( 13,800 ft ) . It has average annual temperature of 2.9 ° C ( 37.2 ° F ) and is mostly pastoral , with yak , sheep and goats .

The Pengbo valley is the main grain-producing region of Lhasa prefecture-level city and Tibet , with a total of 11,931 hectares ( 29,480 acres ) of arable land . Crops include barley , winter wheat , spring wheat , canola and vegetables such as potato . Livestock includes yak , sheep , goats and horses . In 2010 the per capita income of farmers and herdsmen was 4,587 yuan . The Pengbo valley has a long history of pottery-making . Products include braziers , flower pots , vases and jugs . Mining is an important source of income . In 2011 the government has plans to more actively promote tourism . The Pangduo Hydro Power Station became operational in 2014 . It has been called the " Tibetan Three Gorges " . The county is a center of Tibetan Buddhism . There were thirty-seven gompas including twenty-five lamaseries with 919 monks and twelve nunneries with 844 nuns as of 2011 . Reting Monastery was built in 1056 by Dromtön ( 1005 – 1064 ) , a student of Atiśa . It was the earliest monastery of the Gedain sect , and the patriarchal seat of that sect .

Maizhokunggar County is located on the middle and upper sections of the Lhasa River and the west of Mila Mountain . Mila ( or Mira ) Mountain , at 5,018 metres ( 16,463 ft ) , forms the watershed between the Lhasa River and the Nyang River . The Gyama Zhungchu , which runs through Gyama Township , is a tributary of the Lhasa River . Maizhokunggar County is about 68 kilometres ( 42 mi ) east of Lhasa , has an area of 5,492 square kilometres ( 2,120 sq mi ) with an average elevation of more than 4,000 metres ( 13,000 ft ) . The annual average temperature is 5.1 to 9.1 ° C ( 41.2 to 48.4 ° F ) . There are about 90 frost-free days each year . Annual rainfall is 515.9 millimetres ( 20.31 in ) . China National Highway 318 runs through the county from east to west . The 100 MW Zhikong Hydro Power Station on the Lhasa River came into operation in September 2007 . The total population as of 2010 was 48,561 people in 9,719 households , the great majority engaged in farming and herding . 98 % of the population are ethnic Tibetan . The seat of government is in Kunggar in the west of the county . Many of the people depend on farming or herding . Development efforts include increased farm animal husbandry , feedstock production , greenhouses for vegetables , and breeding programs . Crops include barley , winter wheat , spring wheat , canola , peas , cabbage , carrots , eggplant , cucumbers , lettuce , spinach , green peppers , pumpkins , potatoes and other greenhouse crops . The economy is driven by mineral extraction , which was expected to account for 73.85 % of total tax revenue in 2007 while employing 419 people .

Traditional folk handicrafts include pottery , willow basketwork , wooden objects , mats and gold and silver items . The county is especially noted for its pottery , which does not corrode , retains heat and has an ethnic style . It has a more-than-1000-year-old history . The Drikhung Thil Monastery of the Kagyu Sect was founded in 1179 by Lingchen Repa , a disciple of Phagmo Drupa . The monastery is the home of the Drikhung Kagyu School of the Kagyu sect . The ruined Gyama Palace , in the Gyama Gully in the south of the county , was built by Namri Songtsen in the 6th century after he had gained control of the area from Supi .

Nyêmo County is located in the middle section of the Brahmaputra , 140 kilometres ( 87 mi ) from Lhasa . It is mainly agricultural and pastoral , with an area of 3,276 square kilometres ( 1,265 sq mi ) and an average elevation of 4,000 metres ( 13,000 ft ) . The Nimu Maqu River flows through the county from north to south . The Yarlung Tsangpo River forms its southern boundary . The highest point is a peak at 7,048.8 metres ( 23,126 ft ) above sea level , and the lowest point is where the Maqu River empties into the Brahmaputra at an elevation of 3,701 metres ( 12,142 ft ) . The county has a temperate semi-arid plateau monsoon climate , with about 100 frost-free days . Annual rainfall is 324.2 millimetres ( 12.76 in ) . Nyêmo County has its headquarters in Nyêmo Town . The county seat is 3,809 metres ( 12,497 ft ) above sea level . As of 2011 the total population was 30,844 people , of whom 28,474 were engaged in agriculture or herding . By 2012 the per capita income of farmers and herdsmen had reached 6,881 yuan . In the 7th century Nyêmo was producing printing materials , clay-based incense and wooden-sole shoes . Nyêmo 's long tradition of making paper and printing texts using woodblocks dates back to this period . Nyêmo County has China 's first museum of Tibetan text . There are 22 temples . As of 2011 there were 118 monks and 99 nuns . The Nyêmo Chekar monastery is known for its 16th century murals depicting reincarnations of the Samding Dorje Phagmo .

Qüxü County has a total area of 1,680 square kilometres ( 650 sq mi ) , with an average elevation of 3,650 metres ( 11,980 ft ) . The county is in the Yarlung Tsangpo valley , and is mostly relatively flat , but rises to the Nyainqêntanglha Mountains in the north . The Lhasa River runs south through the eastern part of the county to its confluence with the Yarlung Tsangpo River , which forms the southern boundary of the county . The lowest elevation is 3,500 metres ( 11,500 ft ) , and the highest summit elevation is 5,894 metres ( 19,337 ft ) . Qüxü County has about 150 days a year without frost . Annual precipitation is 441.9 millimeters ( 17.40 in ) . Qüxü County has its headquarters in Qüxü Town . The fifth census in 2000 recorded a population of 29,690 . The county seat has been growing fast , and had 5,000 people by 2002 . China National Highway 318 runs through Qüxü County from Lhasa towards the west . Bridges span the Lhasa River and the Yarlung Tsangpo River . Qüxü County is semi-agricultural and crops grown are mainly highland barley , winter wheat , spring wheat , peas and rapeseed . Apples and walnuts are also produced . Animal husbandry is also strong , with the main animals farmed including yak , cattle , goats , sheep , horses , donkeys , pigs , and chickens . As of 2002 the per capita net income of farmers and herdsmen was 1,960 yuan . The Nyethang Drolma Lhakhang Temple is located in Qüxü County , said to have been founded in 1055 by Dromtön , a pupil of Atiśa .

The 2000 census give the following breakdown for the population of the prefecture-level city as a whole : The 2000 census counts more than 105,000 people in Chengguan District who are registered elsewhere . Most of them are Han , with agricultural registrations . Outside Chengguan District , in 2000 the rural townships almost all had Han populations below 2.85 % , other than one in Duilongdeqing County and one in Qushui County , both near the metropolitan district of Lhasa . Urban towns other than Yangbajain had Han populations of between 2.86 % and 11.25 % . Within the metropolitan district Han population ranged from 11.26 % to 11.25 % in the southern rural township to 46.56 % to 47.46 % in the city street offices . Han migrants accounted for 20 % of the population , but held a much higher percentage of the higher-status office and service-sector jobs . Hans also dominated construction , mining and trade . According to the November 2000 census , the ethnic distribution in Lhasa Prefecture-level City was as follows :

Lhasa metropolitan district includes most of the built-up area , which counts as urban , and four rural townships . The counties also contain urban towns , of which there are nine in the prefectural municipality . The census figures differ considerably from the Tibet Statistical Yearbooks for the same period , since the yearbook only includes the registered population and counts them based on place of origin rather than place of residence . The 1990 census used an approach similar to the yearbook , so the numbers are misleading , but the 2000 census tried to count people who had actually been present in Lhasa for over six months . The census distinguishes between " agricultural " and " non-agricultural " registration , but this does not reflect the actual occupations of the people . Many with an " agricultural " registration may in fact work in the city or in a town . Also , the census was taken in November , when many of the ethnic Han workers in seasonal industries such as construction would have been away from Tibet . Finally , the census does not count the military .

China National Highway 318 enters the prefecture-level city from the east at Mila Mountain , where it reaches an elevation of 5,000 metres ( 16,404 ft ) . The highway runs through Maizhokunggar County from east to west . It continues along the south bank of the Lhasa River through Dagzê County , then crosses to the north of the river in Chengguan District and runs through the center of the urban district . It turns south to cross Doilungdêqên District , where it is joined by 109 , and continues down the west side of the Lhasa River through Qüxü County , and then along the north shore of the Yarlung Tsangpo through Nyêmo County , and onward to the west . China National Highway 109 ( the Qinghai – Tibet Highway ) runs through Damxung County from the northeast to southwest , then turns to the southeast at Yangbajain . It then runs through Doilungdêqên District along the Duilong River valley , to join China National Highway 318 just west of Lhasa . The Lhasa Airport Expressway from Lhasa to Lhasa Gonggar Airport in Lhoka ( Shannan ) Prefecture is the first expressway in the Tibet Autonomous Region . Construction began in April , 2009 . The expressway is 37.8 kilometres ( 23.5 mi ) long and has four lanes .

The Qinghai – Tibet Railway runs through the Lhasa prefecture-level city beside the Qinghai – Tibet Highway through Damxung County and Doilungdêqên District . It terminates at Lhasa Railway Station in Niu New Area ( Liuwu Township ) . The terminus of the Qinghai – Tibet line , this station is over 3,600 metres ( 11,800 ft ) above sea level , and is its largest passenger transport station . It includes a clinic with oxygen treatment facilities . The station uses solar energy for heating . The Liuwu Bridge links central Lhasa to Lhasa Railway Station and the newly developed Niu New Area of Doilungdêqên District on the south bank of the Lhasa River . Residents in the area were resettled to make way for the new development .

The Yangbajain Geothermal Station was established in 1977 to exploit the Yangbajain Geothermal Field in Damxung . It is the first geothermal power station to be built in Tibet and is the largest geothermal steam power plant in China . 4,000 kW of electricity from Yangbajain began to be delivered to Lhasa in 1981 along a transmission line that followed the Doilung Qu River . It was the main power supply for Lhasa until the Yamdrok Hydropower Station came into operation . By the end of 2000 eight steam turbo generators had been installed at the Yangbajain Geothermal Station , each with capacity of 3,000 kW , giving a total of 25,000 kW . The geothermal field delivers 25,181 kilowatts , or 100 million kilowatts annually , to the city of Lhasa to the south . The Pangduo Hydro Power Station has been called " Tibet 's Three Gorges Dam " . It impounds the Lhasa River in Pondo Township of Lhünzhub County , about 63 kilometres ( 39 mi ) from Lhasa . It is at an elevation of 13,390 feet ( 4,080 m ) above sea level , upstream from the 100MW Zhikong Dam at 12,660 feet ( 3,860 m ) . The rock-fill dam impounds 1,170,000,000 cubic metres ( 4.1 × 1010 cu ft ) of water . The power station has total installed capacity of 160 MW .

The Zhikong Hydro Power Station lies between the middle and lower reaches of the Lhasa River , also called the Kyi River . It is about 100 kilometres ( 62 mi ) northeast of Lhasa , in Maizhokunggar County . It is at an elevation of 12,660 feet ( 3,860 m ) above sea level , downstream from the Pangduo Hydro Power Station . The Zhikong Dam , a rock-fill dam , is 50 metres ( 160 ft ) tall . It impounds 225,000,000 cubic metres ( 7.9 × 109 cu ft ) of water . Installed capacity is 100 MW .

The rural counties generally have numerous primary schools at the village level , with high levels of attendance , and at least one secondary school . In 2010 there were 28 schools in Dagzê County , including one junior high school and one kindergarten . As of 2009 there were 37 primary and secondary school buildings in Damxung County . Maizhokunggar County has one high school , 14 full primary schools and 74 village schools . Nyêmo County has 24 primary and secondary schools , including one junior high school . As of 2002 Qüxü County had one County Middle School , and 18 primary schools . Outside Lhasa most of the Tibetans do not understand the Chinese language , so Tibetan is the natural language for basic instruction . However , this may be affected by the availability of teachers and the preference of the local administration . As of 2003 the former bilingual mode of instruction had been changed to giving instruction in Chinese in some of the counties near Lhasa . Examination results were already poor in subjects such as mathematics and physics . Marks dropped further after the change . Some of the township seats have a small clinic . Most have only a health station , usually poorly supplied . There is a county hospital and five township hospitals in Dagzê County . There were seven hospitals in Damxung in 2009 , including a county hospital , with a total of 40 beds . The first drug rehabilitation center in Tibet was being constructed in Duilongdeqing County in 2009 . It was planned to provide physiological rehabilitation , psychological therapy and job training for up to 150 drug addicts . Lhünzhub County has 23 health care establishments , including a County People 's Hospital with 30 beds . Maizhokunggar has been selected as a Cooperative Medical System experimental site , which has resulted in a very high percentage of people with health care coverage . Nyêmo County has a county hospital with 42 medical staff , eight rural health centers and 26 village clinics .

The local television stations are Xizang TV ( XZTV ) and Lhasa Broadcasting and Television Center . Lhünzhub County has a local radio and television station . TV coverage is received by 72.1 % of the population , and radio by 83.4 % of the population . In Maizhokunggar County television is available to 36 % of the population and radio to 48 % . There is a county television station in Nyêmo County . As of 2002 in Qüxü County 98 % of the population received radio coverage and 94 % received television . In 2015 there were 359,000 fixed line telephone subscribers in the whole of Tibet . The rugged high-altitude terrain makes it expensive to provide telecommunications services . The first mobile phone service was launched in 1993 with just one base station in Lhasa , and as late as 2005 mobile phones were expensive status symbols . Since then both mobile phones and internet usage have grown fast . As of 1996 the sole prison ( jianyu ) for judicially-sentenced political prisoners in Tibet was TAR Prison No. 1 , also called Drapchi Prison after the neighborhood in Lhasa where it stands . It is for men serving sentences of five or more years . There is a labor camp ( laogai ) in Lhasa for men serving shorter sentences . There are various other institutions where prisoners from Lhasa shi are held while they are being investigated , or where they undergo reform-through-labor .

Buddhism was adopted as the official religion of Tibet by king Songtsän Gampo ( died 649 ) at a time when the rise of Hinduism was sweeping away Buddhism in India , the land of its birth . Over the next two centuries Buddhism became established in Tibet , now the center of the religion . Tibetan Buddhism would become a pervasive influence on the lives of the people . The first monastery , Samyé , was founded by Trisong Detsen ( c . 740 – 798 ) . Its buildings were arranged in a mandala pattern after the Odantapuri monastery in Bihar . The three-story monastery was completed in 766 and consecrated in 767 . Seven Tibetans took monastic vows in a ceremony that marked the start of the long Tibetan tradition of monastic Buddhism .

Yerpa , on a hillside in Dagze County , is known for its meditation cave connected with Songtsän Gampo . The cliffs contain some of the earliest known meditation sites in Tibet , some dating back to pre-Buddhist times . There are a number of small temples , shrines and hermitages . Songtsän Gampo 's queen , Monza Triucham , founded the Dra Yerpa temple here . Jokhang in Chengguan District is the most sacred temple in Tibet , built in the 7th century when Songtsän Gampo transferred his capital to Lhasa . It was designed to house an image of Buddha that the Nepalese queen Tritsun had brought . Later rulers and Dalai Lamas enlarged and elaborated the temple . Ramoche Temple to the north of Jokhang is considered the most important temple in Lhasa after Jokhang , and was completed about the same time . Muru Nyingba Monastery is a small monastery located between the larger Jokhang temple and Barkhor in the city of Lhasa . It was the Lhasa seat of the former State Oracle who had his main residence at Nechung Monastery . It was destroyed during the persecution of Buddhism under Langdarma ( c . 838 – 841 ) but rebuilt by Atiśa ( 980 – 1054 ) . The monastery was part of the Sakya sect at one time. but became Gelug under Sonam Gyatso , the 3rd Dalai Lama ( 1543 – 89 ) .

The Nyethang Drolma Temple is southwest of Lhasa , 36 kilometres ( 22 mi ) from the county seat and 33 kilometres ( 21 mi ) from Lhasa . It is in Nyétang , Qüxü County . Some sources say that Atiśa ( 980 – 1054 ) built the monastery , which was expanded after his death by his pupil Dromtön ( 1004 – 64 ) . Another version says that Dromtön raised funds to build the temple to commemorate his old friend . Dromtön built Reting Monastery in Lhünzhub County in 1056 . It was the earliest monastery of the Gedain sect , and the patriarchal seat of that sect . In 1240 a Mongol force sacked Reting monastery and killed 500 people . The gompa was rebuilt . When the Gedain sect joined the Gelug sect in the 16th century the monastery adopted the reincarnation system . Tsurphu Monastery in Doilungdêqên District was built in 1189 and is treated as a regional cultural relic reserve . The monastery was founded by Düsum Khyenpa , 1st Karmapa Lama , founder of Karma Kagyu school . It is the main Kagyu temple . The Drigung Monastery of the Kagyu Sect was founded in 1179 in Maizhokunggar County . It is the home of the Drikhung Kagyu School of the Kagyu sect . At one time Drigung was highly influential in both the political and religious spheres . It was destroyed in 1290 by Mongols led by a general from the rival Sakya sect , and although rebuilt was never able to regain its power .

Yangpachen Monastery in Yangbajain , Damxung County was historically the seat of the Shamarpas of Karma Kagyu . It is the main monastery of the Red Hat school of the Karma Kagyu sect . It was built in 1490 , and through extensive repairs and additions grew into a major architectural complex that contained a large collection of cultural relics . The Red Hat school of Karma Kagyu died out in 1791 . Other monasteries founded outside the Gelug tradition include Taklung Monastery of the Kagyu school , founded in 1180 in Lhünzhub County , and Nyêmo Chekar monastery of the Bodongpa school , founded in the 16th century in Nyêmo County .

Ganden Monastery was built after 1409 at the initiative of Je Tsongkhapa , founder of the Gelug sect , and is the most important of this sect . It is 57 kilometres ( 35 mi ) from Lhasa on the slopes of Wangbori Mountain at an elevation of 3,800 metres ( 12,500 ft ) , on the south bank of the Lhasa River in Dagze County . The mountain is said to have the shape of a reclining elephant . The monastery includes Buddha halls , palace residences , Buddhist colleges and other buildings . Drepung Monastery in Chengguan District was founded in 1416 by Jamyang Choge Tashi Palden ( 1397 – 1449 ) , one of Tsongkhapa 's main disciples . It was named after the sacred abode in South India of Shridhanyakataka . At one time Drepung Monastery , with up to 10,000 resident monks , was the largest in the world . Sera Monastery was not much smaller . Sera Monastery , about 2 miles ( 3.2 km ) north of Lhasa , was founded in 1419 by Jamchen Chöjé Shakya Yeshé ( 1354 – 1435 ) , a close disciple of Tsongkhapa . Ganden , Drepung and Sera are called the great " Three Seats of Learning " of the Gulugpa school .

Most of the monasteries in the prefecture-level city suffered damage , and many were destroyed , before and during the Cultural Revolution ( 1966 – 76 ) . Jokhang was used as a military barracks and a slaughterhouse during the Cultural Revolution , and then as a hotel for Chinese officials . Many of the statues were taken , or were damaged or destroyed , so most of the present statues are recent copies . Jokhang was designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2000 . Ramoche Temple was badly damaged during the Cultural Revolution but has been restored with assistance from the Swiss . The Nyethang Drolma Temple survived the Cultural Revolution without much damage , and was able to preserve most of its valuable artifacts , due to the intervention of Premier Zhou Enlai at the request of the government of what is now Bangladesh . Reting Monastery was devastated by the Red Guards during the Cultural Revolution , and has only been partially restored . Tsurphu monastery was reduced to rubble , but the huge temples and chanting halls have been rebuilt . Before and during the Cultural Revolution ( 1966 – 76 ) Drigung Monastery was looted of almost all its collection of statues , stupas , thangkas , manuscripts and other objects apart from a few small statues that the monks managed to hide . The buildings were severely damaged . Reconstruction began in 1983 and seven of the fifteen temples were rebuilt . Yangpachen Monastery was destroyed during the Cultural Revolution , but later was rebuilt .

Ganden Monastery was completely destroyed during the rebellion of 1959 . In 1966 it was severely shelled by Red Guard artillery , and monks had to dismantle the remains . The buildings were reduced to rubble using dynamite during the Cultural Revolution . Re-building has continued since the 1980s . Nechung was almost completely destroyed but has been largely restored . There is a huge new statue of Guru Rinpoche ( Padmasambhava ) on the second floor . Nine sites in the Lhasa valley were listed in 1985 by the TAR Cultural Relics Authority as " regionally protected buildings " . These were Tsangkung Nunnery , Meru Monastery and Great Kashmiri Mosque in the old city , and the Karmashar Temple , Meru Nyingba Monastery and Northern , Southern , Eastern and Western Rigsum Temples elsewhere in the former prefecture .

" 33 " is the first episode of first season and the pilot episode of the reimagined military science fiction television program Battlestar Galactica , immediately following the events of the 2003 miniseries . " 33 " follows Galactica and her civilian fleet as they are forced to contend with constant Cylon pursuit for days without sleep ; they are forced to ultimately destroy one of their own ships to foil the Cylons and earn their first respite of the series . The episode was written by series creator Ronald D. Moore , and the television directoral debut of Michael Rymer . Moore and executive producer David Eick made the decision to slot this episode as the first of the season because of its potential impact on the audience . " 33 " distinguished the themes of the new Battlestar Galactica series by following characters on the spaceships , on the planets that were fled , and in the minds of other characters . Attention to detail was prevalent in this first episode ; the production team , the editing team , and even the actors themselves strove for authenticity of specific portrayals and moments . Though there were compromises made due to concerns of the episode being too dark for audiences , the episode was lauded by both cast and crew in addition to winning the 2005 Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation , Short Form . " 33 " originally aired on Sky One in the United Kingdom on October 18 , 2004 , and subsequently aired on the Sci Fi Channel in the United States on January 14 , 2005 , along with the following episode " Water " .

Having fled the besieged Ragnar Anchorage , the convoy of refugee spaceships is relentlessly pursued and attacked by Cylon Basestars . The colonial fleet must execute a faster-than-light ( FTL ) jump every 33 minutes to escape the Cylons , who consistently arrive at the new jump coordinates approximately 33 minutes later . After over 130 hours and 237 jumps , the fleet 's crew and passengers , particularly those aboard Galactica , have been operating without sleep while facing the strain of nearly constant military action . Upon the 238th consecutive jump , the Olympic Carrier ( a commercial passenger vessel with 1,345 souls aboard ) is accidentally left behind and the attacks unexpectedly cease , allowing the fleet some respite . When it arrives three hours later , President Laura Roslin and Commander Adama order Capt. Lee " Apollo " Adama and Lt. Kara " Starbuck " Thrace to destroy it , believing that it has been infiltrated by Cylons and now poses a threat to the fleet 's safety . The colonial officers destroy the ship while the rest of the colonial fleet jumps away . Baltar 's internal Number Six explains to him that God is looking after his interests , implying that a scientist on the Olympic Carrier was preparing to reveal Baltar 's unwitting collusion with the Cylon attack on the colonies . After the fleet 's last jump , the Cylons do not return , and the President 's survivor whiteboard aboard Colonial One , the result of a fleetwide census , is updated with one additional soul ( to 47,973 ) with the birth of the fleet 's first child aboard the Rising Star — a boy .

Preparing for production of Battlestar Galactica 's first season , writer and series creator Ronald D. Moore wrote a short list of potential storylines , one of which was " the fleet jumps every 33 minutes ; because the Cylons are relentlessly pursuing them , the crew gets no sleep . " Conferring with fellow executive producer David Eick , the two decided that this story would be " the best way to kick off the season " . Moore described writing " 33 " as a great experience ; he wrote the whole script without a story outline or much structure , excited to begin the first episode of the first season and start the first year already " at the end of the road " . Moore wrote the episode over his Christmas break before the series was officially picked up ; he later claimed that this aspect was what made the episode " one of the more fun projects that [ he ] wrote all of the first season . " David Eick found the episode to be a " standalone concept " that did not require having seen the miniseries to understand it . Because the miniseries ended " at a very happy place " , starting the series in the middle of a crisis without explanation , and showing the audience that " actually , while you — the audience — were away , really bad things have been happening " made for a much more intriguing and interesting story . " 33 " ' s complex storyline was a harbinger for episodes to come , and laid the groundwork with the network and audiences alike .

" 33 " was director Michael Rymer 's first television episode . He accepted the job without reading the script , saying that based on his writing experience , " 33 " went well beyond his expectations and excited him . Bear McCreary originally composed the musical theme " Boomer Theme " for this episode ; it was later expanded for use with the Athena character , before becoming the de facto " Hera Theme " for the character Hera Agathon in the fourth season episode , " Islanded in a Stream of Stars " . Joel Ransom was the director of photography for the miniseries , but when Eick learned he was unavailable for the series , he turned to Stephen McNutt , with whom he had worked on American Gothic . In the interim , McNutt had moved on to shooting in high-definition video ; this was fortuitous for the production team because , while Ransom had filmed the miniseries on 35 mm film , the production team was switching to high-definition video for the series . Executive producer David Eick opined that " 33 " was the " silver bullet " that ultimately tipped the scales in their favor and convinced the Sci Fi Channel to pick up the series . The network 's biggest concern in picking up the series was that Battlestar Galactica would fall victim to the same trappings of space opera as other television properties ( Star Trek , Andromeda , Stargate ) . Two aspects that assuaged these concerns were specifically discussed in the episode 's DVD commentary . First , " 33 " went into Gaius Baltar 's ( James Callis ) mind and visited his house on Caprica ( shot in Lions Bay , British Columbia ) ; being swept away by the blue skies and beaches in his fantasy was not the sort of imagery expected of space opera-type shows . Second was going back to the devastated Caprica and following-up with Helo 's ( Tahmoh Penikett ) story .

With sleep deprivation one of the major plot points of the episode , actor Edward James Olmos ( William Adama ) liaised with an expert on the subject and the crew to best depict the actual effects realistically . Following up , director Michael Rymer gave each main cast member a specific symptom to play up , so as to avoid repetition on screen . Olmos and several other cast members took their study a step further , to immerse themselves by restricting their sleep patterns to about three hours a night to emphasize what their expert was imparting . In the episode 's DVD commentary , Moore and Rymer related how there were endless discussion about the clocks to feature in this episode . Concerns over digital versus analog , size and shape , the ratio of digital to analog clocks , whether they should run forwards or backwards , and whether any labels should be stenciled or hand-drawn were all brought up . David Eick also noted that as of the commentary 's recording , the clock at Felix Gaeta 's ( Juliani ) station still had its " 33 " label affixed .

The first cut of " 33 " was ten minutes too long . Despite this , the production crew took extra care not to eliminate " human moments " in their efforts to trim the episode . These included a shot of Galen Tyrol ( Douglas ) and Cally Henderson ( Clyne ) walking across Galactica 's hangar bay , a shot of Crewman Socinus ( Oyarzun ) giving a bedraggled look over the shoulder of another crewmember , and a shot of PO2 Dualla ( McClure ) walking through Galactica 's remembrance corridor . In a question-and-answer session , Moore revealed a scene written for , but cut from , the episode . In the cut scene , the recurring prop in the characters ' briefing room was to have been explicitly introduced and explained ; the prop remained in the series , but its backstory was cut . There was a scene cut from " 33 " where we saw Laura being given her copy of the photo along with a card that said it was taken on the roof of the capitol building on Aerilon during the attack . The photo was inspired by the famous shot of the fire-fighters raising the flag at Ground Zero that became iconic . I thought the Colonies would have their own version of this -- a snapshot taken in the moment that becomes a symbol of the day they can never forget and of all they had lost . The photo itself is of a soldier falling to his knees ( possibly shot or simply overcome by emotion ) as he stands on the rooftop over looking the devastation of his city , while the Colonial flag waves at the edge of frame . The inscription below the photo on Laura 's plaque reads , " Lest We Forget " in itself a reference to the inscription on the watch presented to John Wayne 's character in She Wore a Yellow Ribbon .

Other cut scenes included one shot in the pilots ' head , showing the pilots " wrecked and exhausted [ ... ] with an exchange between Starbuck and Apollo " , as well as several shots of Commander Adama ( Olmos ) gagging and vomiting because of acid reflux brought on by sleep deprivation . Another line of Olmos ' — an ad-lib about suicides in the fleet — was cut so as not to alienate audiences by being " too dark " . As originally written and shot , when Apollo ( Jamie Bamber ) fires on the Olympic Carrier , it was made clear that he sees people inside . Moore wrote the scene to be strong and clear that the characters were making the decision to fire on the passenger liner in full awareness of the consequences to illustrate and emphasize " the uncompromising nature of the show . " This was an " enormous fight " between Moore and the network , with the latter feeling this was another scene that was " too dark " and had the potential to turn away audiences ; the network further implied that if the scene were left intact , they may have been compelled to air the episodes out of order . To placate the network , Moore and Eick changed the ending of the episode and " cheated " ; instead , when Apollo flies by the Olympic Carrier , it is unclear whether or not there is anybody inside . In a " small act of defiance " , visual effects supervisor Gary Hutzel snuck in small , indeterminate movement behind one or two of the Olympic Carrier 's windows on behalf of the production and writing teams . The episode also originally ended with Helo 's escape from the Cylons on Caprica ; again tasked by the network to keep the episode from being " too dark " , Moore wrote in an additional scene — President Roslin ( Mary McDonnell ) learning of the newborn — upon which to end the episode on a hopeful note .

" 33 " first aired in the United Kingdom on October 18 , 2004 ( 2004-10-18 ) , and in the United States on January 14 , 2005 ( 2005-01-14 ) , almost three months later . UK viewers obliged US Battlestar Galactica fans by illegally copying the episode — uploading Torrents to the Internet — within hours of its Sky One airing . " 33 " has been released thrice on home video as part of the first season collected sets ; on July 26 , 2005 ( 2005-07-26 ) as a Best Buy exclusive , again on September 20 , 2005 ( 2005-09-20 ) , and finally as an HD DVD set on December 4 , 2007 ( 2007-12-04 ) . The episode was also released on July 28 , 2009 ( 2009-07-28 ) as part of the entire series ' home video set on both DVD and Blu-ray Disc . Both series creator Ronald D. Moore and star Jamie Bamber ( Lee Adama ) claim " 33 " as their favourite episode . Bamber described it as " ... the perfect episode of Battlestar Galactica . " Emphasizing the dark , gritty , and nightmarish aspects of the episode , the actor felt it was a microcosm of the series as a whole . In interviews with Wired UK and the Los Angeles Times , Moore opined that the episode subverted viewers ' expectations and was a " fantastic way to open that first year . "

" 33 " won the 2005 Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation , Short Form , and drew a 2.6 household Nielsen rating , attracting 3.1 million viewers and making it the # 2 program on cable ( 8pm-11pm ) . At the website Television Without Pity , the staff review rated the episode an " A + " , while ( as of November 2010 ) 546 of their readers awarded it an average grade of " B " . The New York Post 's " 10 Most Dramatic Moments of the ' 00s " included " 33 " in its # 10 spot , describing it as the premiere episode of " a sci-fi show with high stakes and serious guts . "

Ralph d 'Escures ( died 20 October 1122 ) was a medieval Abbot of Séez , Bishop of Rochester and then Archbishop of Canterbury . He studied at the school at the Abbey of Bec . In 1079 he entered the abbey of St Martin at Séez , and became abbot there in 1091 . He was a friend of both Anselm of Canterbury and Gundulf , Bishop of Rochester , whose see , or bishopric , he took over on Gundulf 's death . Ralph was not chosen archbishop of Canterbury by the chapter of Canterbury alone . His election involved an assembly of the lords and bishops meeting with King Henry I of England . Ralph then received his pallium from Pope Paschal II , rather than travelling to Rome to retrieve it . As archbishop , Ralph was very assertive of the rights of the see of Canterbury and of the liberties of the English church . He claimed authority in Wales and Scotland . Ralph also quarrelled for a time with Pope Paschal II . Ralph suffered a stroke on 11 July 1119 and was left partially paralysed and unable to speak clearly from that time until his death on 20 October 1122 . A surviving English translation of a sermon delivered by Ralph is preserved in a manuscript in the British Library . The sermon survives in some fifty Latin manuscripts .

Ralph was the son of Seffrid d 'Escures and his first wife Rascendis , and a half brother of Seffrid I , Bishop of Chichester from 1125 to 1145 . The surname of de Turbine , by which he is sometimes known in older scholarship , is only attested in the fourteenth century and possibly resulted from confusion with William de Corbeil , Ralph 's successor at Canterbury . Ralph studied at the school at the Abbey of Bec before entering the abbey of St Martin at Séez in 1079 . St. Martin was a house founded by the Montgomery and Bellême families , and was still under their lordship . He became abbot of the house in 1091 , and his election was attended by Anselm , abbot of Bec .

Soon afterwards Ralph paid a visit to England , perhaps to visit Shrewsbury Abbey , which was a daughter house of Séez . He may have been involved in the mediating the surrender of Robert of Bellême at Shrewsbury in 1102 , for some chroniclers state that it was Ralph who delivered the keys of the castle to King Henry I of England . In 1103 he took refuge in England from the demands of Robert of Bellême for homage . Ralph declined to do homage because Pope Urban II had ordered that no clergy could do homage to the laity . Robert was also demanding heavy taxes , and Ralph fled with Serlo , Bishop of Séez , who was also subjected to Robert 's demands . He passed his time in England with his friends Saint Anselm and Gundulf the Bishop of Rochester . He attended the translation of Saint Cuthbert 's remains at Durham , where he was one of examiners of the body , and declared the saint 's remains uncorrupt . In 1106 he visited Anselm at the Abbey of Bec , but probably did not try to assert himself at Séez . After Anselm was elected to the see of Canterbury , Ralph appears to have become part of the archbishop 's household .

In June 1108 Ralph succeeded Gundulf as Bishop of Rochester , having been nominated by Gundulf before his death . Ralph was consecrated on 9 August 1108 . He was at Anselm 's deathbed in April 1109 , and , afterwards , Ralph acted as administrator of the see of Canterbury until 26 April 1114 , when he was chosen Archbishop at Windsor . The king had wanted his doctor , Faricus , who was an Italian and Abbot of Abingdon , but the nobles and the bishops objected to anyone but a Norman being appointed . The bishops also desired someone who was not a monk , or at least not one who was so close to Henry . As a compromise , Ralph was chosen , rather than the secular clergy that the bishops favoured . Although Ralph was a monk and had not served as a royal clerk , he was also a bishop , which seems to have reconciled the other bishops to his selection .

It is noteworthy that , while Ralph was not chosen by the chapter of Canterbury alone , his election involved an assembly of the magnates and bishops meeting with the king . He was not selected solely by the king , nor solely by the bishops or chapter . Ralph received his pallium from the pope , rather than travelling to Rome to retrieve it . It was only with difficulty , however , that Pope Paschal II was persuaded to grant the pallium , as the papacy was attempting to again assert papal jurisdiction over the English Church . It was Anselm of St Saba who brought the pallium to England , along with letters from Paschal complaining that the English Church was translating bishops from see to see without papal permission , that legates from the papacy were being refused entry to England and that the king was allowing no appeals to be made to the pope over ecclesiastical issues . In 1116 the pope even demanded the payment of Peter 's Pence , a payment direct to the papacy of a penny from every household in England . Ralph , when he took the pallium , professed " fidelity and canonical obedience " to the pope , but did not submit to the papal demands and , in fact , supported King Henry in opposing the pope 's demands .

As archbishop Ralph championed the rights of the see of Canterbury and the English church . He claimed authority in Wales and Scotland , writing to the pope that " the church of Canterbury has not ceased to provide pastoral care for the whole of Britain and Ireland , both as a benevolence and from its rights of primacy . " He advised the bishop of Llandaff that a new Llandaff Cathedral should be built and granted an indulgence to contributors . He even refused to consecrate Thurstan as Archbishop of York because Thurstan would not profess obedience to the Archbishop of Canterbury , part of the Canterbury-York dispute . At first , Ralph depended only on the king to demand Thurstan to submit , but later he appealed to the popes to force Thurstan to obey . His refusal brought him into a dispute with the papacy , for Pope Paschal II supported Thurstan . Ralph visited Rome in 1117 , but was unable to obtain an interview with Paschal as the pope had fled the city in front of an invading imperial army . Ralph had taken ill with an ulcer on his face during the trip to Rome and , for a time , it was feared that he would die . He recovered enough to continue on to Rome , however , although it was a fruitless trip . Despite instructions from Paschal ’ s successors , Gelasius II and Calixtus II , the archbishop continued to refuse to consecrate Thurstan , and Thurstan was still unconsecrated when Ralph died . Thurstan was eventually consecrated at Rheims by Pope Calixtus II in May 1119 , although the issue of primacy remained unresolved .

Although he feuded with York over the primacy , it appears clear that Ralph considered the Investiture Crisis settled in England for , in 1117 while visiting Rome , he took a neutral position as regards the issues between the Pope and the Emperor . In 1115 , however , he refused to consecrate Bernard as Bishop of St David 's in the royal chapel , although Robert of Meulan , the king 's chief counsellor , advocated that the consecration must take place in the royal chapel according to ancient custom . The king did not insist and Ralph won the confrontation . He was also involved in ecclesiastical affairs in Normanday , as he attended the provincial synod , or Council of Rouen , held in 1118 .

Ralph suffered a stroke on 11 July 1119 as he was removing his vestments after celebrating Mass . From then until his death , Ralph was partially paralysed and unable to speak clearly . He was still involved in decision making and , in 1120 , he agreed to King Alexander I of Scotland 's suggestion that Eadmer become the next Bishop of St Andrew 's . Ralph was one of the lords consulted about the remarriage of Henry I to Adeliza of Leuven at London in 1121 . He also successfully asserted his right to celebrate the king 's new marriage , over attempts by Roger of Salisbury to officiate instead . Due to the damage from the stroke , Ralph was unable to perform the ceremony but , when Roger made an attempt to do so , Ralph successfully insisted on choosing the officiant and William Giffard the Bishop of Winchester performed the marriage . Ralph died on 20 October 1122 , at Canterbury . He was buried in the nave of Canterbury Cathedral on 23 October 1122 . His nephew , John , was a clerk under Ralph , and later Ralph appointed him Archdeacon of Canterbury . After Ralph 's death , John was elected to the see of Rochester .

Ralph was regarded as a " witty , easygoing " man . The struggle with York , however , along with his illnesses and the effects of the stroke , turned Ralph in his last years into a quarrelsome person . Orderic Vitalis said that he was well educated and well loved by people . Even William of Malmesbury , no lover of ecclesiastics and always ready to find fault with them , could only find fault with him for his occasional lapses into unbecoming frivolity . Ralph wrote a sermon for the feast of the Assumption of the Virgin and it survives in some fifty Latin manuscripts , probably because it was thought to have been written by Anselm of Canterbury , until shown to be Ralph 's in 1927 . A surviving English translation of the sermon is also preserved in the manuscript British Library , Cotton Vespasian D. xiv . The Latin version , which Ralph was a translation of his originally spoken French version , has been edited and published in 1997 . Ralph also had the monks of Christ Church , Canterbury search for documents relating to the privileges of Canterbury and had those documents copied into a manuscript which still survives , BM MS Cotton Cleopatra E. His seal is one of the first to take the usual form for bishop 's seals , with Ralph standing , in full vestments including a mitre , and performing a benediction with his right hand while holding his crosier in his left . The seal took the form of a pointed oval .

Bow Back Rivers or Stratford Back Rivers is a complex of waterways between Bow and Stratford in east London , England , which connect the River Lea to the River Thames . Starting in the twelfth century , works were carried out to drain Stratford Marshes and several of the waterways were constructed to power watermills . Bow Creek provided the final outfall to the Thames , and the other channels were called Abbey Creek , Channelsea River , City Mill River , Prescott Channel , Pudding Mill River , Three Mills Back River , Three Mills Wall River and Waterworks River . The rivers have been subject to change over centuries , with Alfred the Great diverting the river in 896 to create a second channel , and Queen Matilda bridging both channels around 1110 . Because the river system was tidal as far as Hackney Wick , several of the mills were tide mills , including those at Abbey Mills and those at Three Mills , one of which survives . Construction of the New River in the seventeenth century to supply drinking water to London , with subsequent extraction by waterworks companies , led to a lowering of water levels , and the river was gradually canalised to maintain navigation . Significant changes occurred with the creation of the Lee Navigation in 1767 , which resulted in the construction of the Hackney Cut and the Limehouse Cut , allowing barges to bypass most of the back rivers . A major reconstruction of the rivers took place in the 1930s , authorised by the River Lee ( Flood Relief ) Act , but by the 1960s , commercial usage of the waterways had largely ceased . Deteriorating infrastructure led to the rivers dwindling to little more than tidal creeks , and they were categorised in 1968 as having no economic or long-term future .

However , British Waterways decided that their full restoration was an important aim in 2002 , and the construction of the main stadium for the 2012 Summer Olympics on an island formed by the rivers provided funding to construct a new lock and sluices which stabilised water levels throughout the Olympic site . It was hoped that significant amounts of materials for the construction of the Olympic facilities would be delivered by barge , but this did not happen . Improvements to the channels which form a central feature of the Olympic Park included the largest aquatic planting scheme ever carried out in Britain .

It is unclear when the individually named rivers became known collectively as Bow Back Rivers . Charles Tween , writing on behalf of the Lee Conservancy , referred to them as both the Stratford Back Rivers and the Stratford Back Streams in 1905 . The section to the west of the more recent City Mills Lock was labelled Bow Back River on a map of 1895 , but had previously been part of Pudding Mill River . Powell , writing in 1973 , still referred to them as the Stratford Back Rivers . The 1939 edition of " Inland Waterways of Great Britain " , an early attempt to provide a guide for the leisure use of canals , noted that the River Lee had " several subsidiary canalised waterways " , and listed Bow Creek , Old River Lee , City Mills River and Waterworks River , but did not describe them collectively . Boyes and Russell writing in 1977 referred to them as the Bow Back Rivers or Stratford Back Rivers , and by the sixth edition of " Inland Waterways of Great Britain " , published in 1985 , they were referred to as Bow Back Rivers .

The Bow Back Rivers cross an area originally known as Stratford Marsh , an area of common Lammas land , where inhabitants had common rights to graze horses and cattle between Lammas Day ( 1 August ) and Lady Day ( 25 March ) , but which was used for growing hay for the rest of the year . The Marsh was between Stratford-Langthorne and Stratford-at-Bow . Little remains from pre-history , but the names suggest that the two settlements lay at either end of a stone causeway across the marsh . Remains of a stone causeway have been found , but no traces of an associated road . The ford at Old Ford is of pre-Roman origin , part of a route from London to Essex which crossed Bethnal Green . In the Roman era , a new road was built from London to the ford , which carried the principal road to Colchester . There may also have been a ford further south at Bow , and a further causeway existed between Homerton and Leyton , known as Wanstead Slip . These crossings passed across a true marsh , either side of the River Lea . This wide , fast flowing river was then tidal as far as Hackney Wick , and navigable as far as Hertfordshire . Dates for the earliest use of the rivers by boats are unknown , although a late Bronze Age dugout canoe and parts of a Saxon barge have been found in the marshes at Walthamstow . The first alteration to the natural river may have been made by Alfred the Great , who cut another channel to strand a force of Danes in 896 , according to the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle . This lowered the tide head to Old Ford , and prevented large boats sailing the river until the 15th century .

During the reign of King Henry I between 1100 and 1118 , his wife Queen Matilda ( or Maud ) , on hearing of the problems of crossing the river at Old Ford , directed that the road should be routed further south , and paid for two bridges , one to cross the Lee and the other to cross the Channelsea River , from her own funds . She also paid for the road to be built between them , and the location of the bridge became known as Stratford-atte-Boghe , later Stratford-le-Bow , and finally dropped Stratford to become Bow or Bow Bridge . John Leland , writing in the 1500s , gives a more fanciful account , in which the queen falling into the water prompted the action . The addition of le-Bow probably had less to do with the shape of the bridge than the fact that arch was derived from arcus , meaning bow . In 1135 , Stratford Langthorne Abbey was founded . The Abbey continued the process of draining Stratford marsh begun in the Middle Ages , and creating artificial channels to drive water and tide mills . A small river port developed at Stratford , mentioned in the 15th century , to serve the needs of Stratford Abbey and the mills at Stratford , and there is similar evidence in later centuries . The Abbey took on responsibility to maintain the marsh walls around Bow Creek , to keep the tidal waters out . The river was being used for the transport of goods and passengers by 1571 , when an Act of Parliament empowered the Lord Mayor of London to make improvements to the river to ensure that supplies of grain continued to reach the capital . These works included a new cut near the Thames , probably the section of river between Bow Tidal Gates and Old Ford , on which no tolls were to be charged , and a pound lock was constructed at Waltham Abbey , only the second to be built in England .

Between Bow Bridge and Channelsea Bridge there were three others , said in 1303 to have been built to fill the gaps caused by the cutting of mill streams through Maud 's causeway , although there is evidence that the mills pre-dated the causeway . However , the mill owners took responsibility for the bridges , which crossed the mill streams for St Thomas 's , Spileman 's and Saynes mills . The last two were owned by the City of London , and the bridges were called Pegshole and St Michael 's Bridges . An administrative mistake around 1814 resulted in the City of London taking responsibility for St Thomas 's Bridge , but the miller did not complain as Pegshole bridge was smaller and therefore less costly to maintain . The names were eventually swapped , and all three were replaced by Groves Bridge in 1933 , which crossed the widened Three Mills Wall River , the two branches of the Waterworks River having been combined into Three Mills Wall River , while Three Mills Wall Back River was filled in . Crossing the Back Rivers by a series of low-level bridges is the Northern Outfall Sewer which leads to the Abbey Mill Pumping Station , both of which were designed by Joseph Bazalgette in the 1860s . Today , the route of the embankment that encloses the sewer from Bow to Beckton is followed by a public footpath , The Greenway .

Water was extracted from the rivers to provide a public water supply . The opening of the New River in 1633 , a 40-mile ( 64 km ) channel built to bring water to London from Amwell springs , and soon afterwards from the River Lea near Ware , had a detrimental effect on both navigation and milling by reducing water levels . Around 1745 , the West Ham Waterworks Company built a waterworks at Saynes Mill in Stratford , the river on which it was located later being known as Waterworks River . The East London Waterworks Company was set up in 1807 , and built works at Old Ford , where they extracted water from the river . The supply to the works was moved further upstream in 1829 , and in 1830 they built a canal , running parallel to the Hackney Cut , so that water could be obtained from Lea Bridge . Much of the work was carried out by the contractor William Hoof , who had gained a reputation as a specialist tunnelling contractor , after working on Strood Tunnel for the Thames and Medway Canal and Harecastle Tunnel on the Trent and Mersey Canal . He worked on the waterworks project from 1829 until 1834 . Where there had been a reservoir to the south of the Middlesex Filter Beds weir in 1850 , maps from 1870 show the site occupied by a waterworks , and the canal which supplied the Old Ford works running beside the Hackney Cut . Another large reservoir , triangular in shape , was located between the old river and the Hackney Cut at Old Ford , with two connections to the old river . The water supply canal passed under the old river to feed two compensation reservoirs to the north of the Great Eastern Railway tracks . A covered reservoir was situated on the west bank of the old river .

The Waterworks River underwent considerable change over the years . In 1850 , it left the channel of the Old River Lee much further to the north , to the south-west of Temple Mills railway depot . It was called Lead Mills Stream at this point . Near Temple Mills bridge , now on the A12 road , Channelsea River split off . The two channels ran parallel to the Old River Lee , before Channelsea River turned to the south-east . There was another small connection between the Old River Lee and the Waterworks River called Bully Fence , where the northern Channelsea River is shown on modern maps . By 1870 , it was called Waterworks River as far north as Temple Mills depot , and by 1896 , its present connection to the old river near to Carpenters Road had been established . Twenty years later , the northern Waterworks River rejoined the Lee at Bully Fence , and the section between there and Carpenters Road had been filled in . At some point , the connection at Bully Fence became the main source for the Channelsea River , although the 1953 / 66 map still shows it connected to the remnants of the system to the north , for drainage . Administrative boundaries still follow the northern course of the Waterworks River .

Although the River Lee was navigable up to Hertford , this had been achieved by the use of flash locks , where a single gate created a channel through a weir . These caused conflict between the bargemen and the millers , since operation of the lock lowered the water level above it , hindering the operation of the mill . In 1765 , the engineer John Smeaton was asked to survey the river , with a view to improving it " for the good of the public " . His report of September 1766 highlighted the need to replace the flash locks with the more modern locks or pen sluices , each with two sets of gates . Significantly for the Bow Back Rivers , he suggested a new cut from Lea Bridge to Old Ford , and another from Bow Tidal Gates to a basin at Limehouse . The first became known as the Hackney Cut , and the second as the Limehouse Cut . An Act of Parliament was obtained on 29 June 1767 , and work began . The Limehouse Cut would give direct access to the River Thames , avoiding the tidal Bow Creek . It was expected to open in July 1770 , but some of the brickwork collapsed , and had to be repaired before the cut opened on 17 September 1770 . It closed again briefly in December , when a bridge collapsed into it , and it was soon decided that it was too narrow , and so was widened to allow barges to pass each other along its complete length . This work was finished on 1 September 1777 . The contract for the Hackney Cut was given to Jeremiah Ilsley on 18 January 1768 , and a bricklayer called Henry Holland was asked to build two locks on the cut on 23 April 1768 . A millwright from Bromley called Mr Cooper was given the job of building Bromley Lock ( close to Bow tidal gates ) . Work progressed quickly , and the cut was opened for traffic on 7 August 1769 .

The Act of 1767 had specified points on the river at which tolls could be collected , but had made no mention of tolls for use of Bow Creek , Bow Back Rivers , or the section of the navigation between Bow tidal gates and Old Ford , and these had remained toll-free . An Act of Parliament obtained on 14 August 1850 allowed the trustees to build a pound lock at Bow tidal gates . To prevent opposition from the bargees , the Act had formalised the freedom from tolls on the Bow River section . Once the lock was built , however , the trustees charged a toll for using it . This was unpopular , but there was still the option of using the tidal gates at certain states of the tide , which did not incur a toll . A clause to authorise the lock toll was deleted by Parliament from a subsequent Act of 1868 , and it was still the case in 1977 that a charge was made for using the lock but not for using the gates . By 1821 , Stratford was served by a number of wharfs , some located on the Lea and others on the Channelsea River or other branches . In addition to wharfs for general goods , some specifically handled timber , chalk , stone , coal , or wheat . Several of the factories and mills had private wharfs . By this date , a dock had been built near Bow Bridge to the south of the High Street . It was about 80 by 50 yards ( 73 by 46 m ) , and was connected to the river by its own channel . It was initially called Stratford Dock , later becoming Meggs Dock and was probably constructed by the Middlesex and Essex Turnpike Trust . Half of it had been filled in by 1896 , and the rest by 1920 .

In the 1860s , the income from the navigation had dropped , as a result of attempts to compete against the railways , but economies were made , and capital works continued . The lock at Lea Bridge was removed , and replaced by Old Ford Lock further to the south , which was built to take 100-ton barges , rather than the 40-ton barges specified by an Act of 1805 . Although the original Lee trustees , and after 1868 the Conservators of the River Lee , were officially responsible for the Bow Back Rivers , there was little incentive to maintain them , since they did not generate any revenue . Nor could they be closed , since they allowed surplus water from the upper river to reach the Thames , without causing flooding .

The rivers were run down by the 1920s and , with high unemployment in the area , West Ham Corporation and the Lee Conservancy Board applied for a government unemployment relief grant , with which to fund major improvements . In addition to work on the channels , Bow Tidal Lock was duplicated , Marshgate Lock was rebuilt further east as City Mill Lock , and a second new lock at Carpenters Road was constructed . It used up-and-over radial gates operated by winches , rather than the traditional mitre gates used at City Mill Lock . The gates were quadrant-shaped , and were lowered into the bed of the river to allow boats to enter or leave the lock . An Act of Parliament was obtained in 1930 to authorise the work , called the River Lee ( Flood Relief ) Act , and work began the following year . The project was completed in 1935 . Before the work , there had been a floodgate on the Waterworks River above its junction with the Three Mills Wall River , and a large pool , the City Mill Pool , connecting to the City Mills River and Bow Back River . Marshgate Lock was situated to the west of the junction between the Pudding Mill River and Bow Back River . It was originally built in 1864 , by adding a second set of gates to Hunters Gates , a floodgate which had been built around 1847 . The reconstructed lock was built on the site of the City Mill Pool , and had two sets of gates at its eastern end , to prevent high tidal levels in Waterworks River flooding the waterways to the west . It was labelled Marshgate Lane Lock on the 1948 map , but was called Ward Lock , after a local councillor , and is now known as City Mills Lock . The course of the Bow Back River was then straightened , and the original Marshgate Lock was bypassed . Pudding Mill River became a dead end when the lower section was filled in , as was most of the Three Mills Back River , and the floodgate on Waterworks River was also removed . Reconstruction of the channels included widening City Mill River to 50 feet ( 15 m ) , while Three Mills Wall River and Waterworks River were made twice that width .

Prior to the work , the arrangement had been to regulate the navigation with the Pond Lane Flood Gates and Marshgate Lane tidal lock . The new lock at Carpenter 's Road gave access to the Waterworks River , providing barge access to Temple Mills . At high tides , the low headroom of the Northern Outfall Sewer aqueduct prevented access to the southern reaches of the system , and to allow access City Mill Lock was constructed near Blaker Road . In 2005 , the lock was partially restored as part of the planning gain required from the developers of the adjacent Bellamy Homes housing scheme . The 1930s improvements included the construction of the Prescott Channel , designed to allow flood water to bypass the Three Mills tide mills . The channel included sluices to regulate water levels above it , but these became redundant once the tide mills ceased to operate , and eventually seized up . They were removed soon after parts of the Channelsea River were culverted . By the 1960s , only the Bow Back River , the City Mills River and the Channelsea River were still being used for commercial traffic . A section of the Channelsea River between Stratford High Street and Lett Road was culverted between 1957 and 1958 . As traffic ceased , the lock structures deteriorated , and by 2006 , City Mills Lock and Carpenters Road Lock were officially disused . The 1968 British Waterways Act had classified most waterways into commercial , cruising and remainder waterways . Remainder waterways were those for which the government of the time could see no economic future , and which would only therefore be subject to maintenance to prevent them becoming unsafe . The Bow Back Rivers fell into this category , and remained neglected until their full restoration was enshrined in a British Waterways policy document in 2002 .

The Olympic Stadium for the London 2012 Summer Olympics is constructed on former industrial land between the Lea Navigation to the west and the City Mill River to the east . The land was formerly bisected by the remains of the Pudding Mill River , but this was filled in to provide a site which was large enough . As part of the construction phase for the event , Three Mills Lock was constructed on the Prescott Channel . This consists of a barge lock , suitable for 350-tonne ( 344.5-long-ton ; 385.8-short-ton ) barges , and an adjacent sluice , which enables the water levels above the structure to be regulated , rather than navigation being subject to the tides . The lock was built to allow construction materials to be delivered to the site and spoil to be removed , and the final cost was £ 23 million , which included a sluice on the Three Mills Wall River . Work began in March 2007 , and the project lasted for just over two years . Despite hopes that it would transport 1.75 million tonnes while the stadium was being built , very little commercial traffic used the new lock .

With water levels above the structure remaining fairly constant , £ 400,000 was spent on refurbishing City Mills Lock . Although some work had been carried out in 2006 , including the fitting of new metal gates , it was not operational , and had not been used for around 40 years . The second phase of restoration included fitting the equipment to automate its operation . The first public use of the lock occurred on 31 July 2010 . British Waterways hoped to restore the Carpenters Road Lock soon afterwards , but the project was postponed until after the completion of the Olympic games , as temporary ' Land Bridges ' were erected over the site of the lock to enable pedestrians to reach the stadium , some of which will be removed after the event . Following the Olympic games , it is hoped the waterways will continue to be used by both commercial and leisure craft . The Olympic Delivery Authority took the decision to culvert more of the Channelsea River , where it crossed the northern part of the site . It remains a designated main river , and so they had to liaise with the Environment Agency on matters of flood-risk management , and a site was identified which would provide compensation for the loss of habitat caused by the culverting . Much of the old River Lea was inaccessible to the public prior to the project , but is a central feature of the northern parklands that have been created . Two ' wetland bowls ' were designed , which have been planted with water-loving plants such as reeds , rushes , sedges and iris . They also provide spawning grounds and refuges during flood conditions for fish , as well as providing storage capacity for flood water . It was the largest aquatic planting scheme ever carried out in Britain when it was completed , and most of the 350,000 plants were grown in Norfolk from seeds and cuttings removed from the site . At the southern end of the site , the Waterworks River was reconstructed . Improvements in the 1930s created channels with vertical concrete sides , and little thought for habitat . The channel was made 26 feet ( 8 m ) wider , with sloping banks and ramps down to the water 's edge , and was improved visually and ecologically by the planting of aquatic marginal plants .

With the exception of Bow Creek , the Bow Back Rivers were closed for public access during the Olympics construction works , and remained closed until after the events . Access to sections of the Lee Navigation which pass close to the Olympic Stadium , including part of Bow River , part of the Hackney Cut , and the Hertford Union Canal were restricted during the summer of 2012 . The Bow Back Rivers were intended to form a major feature of the Olympic site . The stadium formed the centrepiece of the Olympics on an island site , with the Waterworks River to the east , and the Aquatics Centre on the eastern bank . Five new pedestrian bridges were built across the waterways to provide the principal access to the stadium .

OSI is an American progressive rock band , originally formed by Fates Warning guitarist Jim Matheos in 2002 . Chroma Key keyboardist and vocalist Kevin Moore is the only other full-time member of the band . The collaboration may be considered a studio project , as its members and contributors write and track most of their material independently , sharing and developing tracks long-distance , only coming together at the end of the process for mixing and additional tracking . The band 's name is a reference to the Office of Strategic Influence , a short-lived American government agency formed in 2001 to support the War on Terror through propaganda . The band has featured a number of guest musicians on its albums , including Sean Malone , Steven Wilson , Mikael Åkerfeldt , Joey Vera and Gavin Harrison . Matheos recruited Moore , Dream Theater 's then-drummer Mike Portnoy and Sean Malone ( Fretless Bass and Chapman Stickist ) to perform on what was originally planned to be a Matheos solo album . Matheos and Portnoy originally planned to produce a progressive metal album similar to Matheos ' work in Fates Warning , however Moore 's impact changed the music 's direction and genre , incorporating electronica into the original progressive metal sound . The band 's debut album was released by InsideOut Music in 2003 .

Fates Warning guitarist Jim Matheos originally intended to create a progressive metal supergroup while Fates Warning went on hiatus . He recruited Cynic & Gordian Knot Fretless Bass and Chapman Stickist Sean Malone and then-Dream Theater drummer Mike Portnoy to work on the project . Matheos then asked Chroma Key and ex-Dream Theater keyboardist Kevin Moore to contribute by adding keyboard arrangements to the music he had written . Moore instead heavily edited the music , changing the song structures and adding vocals . Matheos decided to pursue this new direction , sounding closer to Chroma Key than standard progressive metal , over his and Portnoy 's original idea . Many vocalists were considered to perform on the album ; Matheos and Portnoy briefly considered having a different vocalist perform on each track . Daniel Gildenlöw of Pain of Salvation wrote some vocal melodies and lyrics , but Moore ultimately performed most of the vocals and wrote most of the lyrics . Steven Wilson of Porcupine Tree wrote lyrics and performed vocals on one track . Cynic and Gordian Knot bassist Sean Malone performed bass , but was credited as a guest musician because his schedule meant he was unable to join Matheos , Moore and Portnoy for the basic tracking sessions .

Matheos , Moore and Portnoy recorded the album at Carriage House Studios in Stamford , Connecticut from June 2 to June 9 , 2002 . Songs with a strong progressive metal influence were mostly written by Matheos , while Moore had greater influence over the vocal-driven tracks . Portnoy made minor arrangement suggestions but did not take part in the actual writing of the album . The album 's recording sessions were the first time Moore and Portnoy collaborated since 1994 in their work in Dream Theater . In 2009 , Portnoy recalled that he found the experience of making the record difficult , and that he was frustrated by the lack of collaboration between him and Moore . Differences between Moore and Portnoy led to his return on the follow-up album as a session drummer rather than full-time member . InsideOut Music released Office of Strategic Influence on February 17 , 2003 . Moore chose the group 's name and album 's title , referring to the Office of Strategic Influence , established by the US Government after the September 11 attacks to spread propaganda . The album was critically well received . Critics praised the members ' musicianship and the fact that the album differed significantly from the members ' other projects .

Matheos and Moore did not plan to make a second OSI album , and returned to their own projects after the first album 's completion . In 2005 , they both had free schedules , so decided to produce a follow-up album . Joey Vera ( also of Fates Warning ) played bass on the album . Portnoy originally told Matheos and Moore that he did not want to perform drums on the album , but was persuaded to perform on the album as a session musician . Free was released on April 24 , 2006 , receiving generally positive critical reception . Critics noted that the album was darker and more keyboard-focused than the band 's debut. re : free , an EP featuring remixes of three tracks from Free , was released on October 24 , 2006 . The band were keen to tour in support of Free , but no live shows materialised . " The reality of it is in order to [ tour ] the way we would like ... and present it the way we would want to present it ... would cost too much money for the kind of fan base that we have right now , " Matheos said in 2009 . In 2010 he anticipated that OSI will " remain a studio band . "

In September 2008 , Moore posted an update on the Chroma Key website , stating that he and Matheos had been working on a third OSI album for several months . Portnoy was replaced by Porcupine Tree drummer Gavin Harrison and Matheos played bass on the album . Opeth vocalist and guitarist Mikael Åkerfeldt and No-Man vocalist Tim Bowness wrote lyrics and sang on one track each . Blood was released on April 27 , 2009 in Europe and May 19 in North America . The album received positive reviews : Andrew Reilly of Madeloud said that " with Blood the two have finally found the stylistic fusion their first two discs hinted at " , and praised Harrison 's drumming .

In 2010 , OSI signed with Metal Blade Records . The label reissued Office of Strategic Influence on September 28 , 2010 . Written and recorded throughout most of 2011 , OSI 's fourth album " Fire Make Thunder " was released on March 27 , 2012 . Gavin Harrison of Porcupine Tree was once again enlisted as session drummer along with a co-writing credit for the song " Enemy Prayer " . All other instruments and programming were performed by Matheos and Moore , while lyrics and vocals were handled exclusively by Moore . The recordings for the album , with the exception of drums , were performed at the musician 's respective home studio . In July 2011 at Sound Farm Studio & Recording Environment final overdubs as well as some additional writing and arranging were completed . The band mixed the album alongside engineer Matt Sepanic . Engineer Roger Siebel handled the final mastering . The record was produced by both Moore and Matheos . During the development process , Kevin Moore kept frequent updates referring to the mixing process of the album on his official Facebook and Twitter accounts .

Moore has described OSI 's sound as " a new approach to progressive rock " , combining elements of progressive metal and electronica . Moore considers the two genres to be " almost natural enemies " , and that the conflict between the two genres " keeps [ the music ] interesting " . Matheos cites progressive rock and heavy metal bands such as Genesis , Jethro Tull , Black Sabbath and UFO as influences . Moore described his influences as minimal techno , experimental , electronic musicians and " bands that play live and then chop it up " . Matheos and Moore primarily work alone , exchanging files and ideas by email . The writing process for all OSI 's albums has been the same , with Matheos sending Moore an idea " from just a guitar riff to elaborate , almost completed songs " , which Moore then edits and sends back to Matheos . Moore , the band 's vocalist and lyricist , has described the process of writing lyrics as an " audio Rorschach test " . The lyrics on Office of Strategic Influence feature political themes , but the lyrics on later releases are less political , instead being based on Moore 's personal experiences . " I 'll start writing a song that has a little bit of a world view or political view or something , " he said , " but then by the time I 'm finished the lyrics it 'll be about a relationship or something like that . " On Blood , Moore largely abandoned his earlier stream-of-consciousness approach to writing lyrics , in an attempt to make the lyrics more coherent . " I didn 't want it to be like ' Oh , you get your own impression of the lyrics . Everybody has their own idea ! ' I wanted to have an idea that I wanted to communicate , and something communicable , " he explained .

The first interracial kiss on television is a much debated topic concerning who the first two persons of different races to kiss on television were . For a time , it was understood to have occurred during an episode of the British soap opera Emergency – Ward 10 in 1964 . However , in November 2015 , a Granada Play of the Week , You in Your Small Corner , was uncovered which was broadcast in June 1962 ; that quickly led to the rediscovery of another play featuring the same young Jamaican actor , Hot Summer Night , televised in Britain on 1 February 1959 . Competing claims have also been made in favor of I Love Lucy .

In June 1962 , a live performance of the play You in Your Small Corner by Barry Reckord was broadcast on British television as part of the series Granada Play of the Week . The central theme of the play is a relationship between a young black intellectual and a white working class girl . During the play , a kiss takes place between actors Lloyd Reckord and Elizabeth MacLennan , and what has been described as an " explicit post-coital scene " . You In Your Small Corner was rediscovered during preparations for a November 2015 British Film Institute panel discussion on " Race and Romance on TV " and was used in publicity for the event . As a result , panel moderator Samira Ahmed was able , on the night , to announce the rediscovery of an even earlier TV kiss by Lloyd Reckord , with Andrée Melly , in the ITV Armchair Theatre adaptation of Ted Willis 's play Hot Summer Night , broadcast on 1 February 1959 .

One of the earliest interracial kisses on television occurred in a July 1964 episode of British soap opera Emergency Ward 10 , during which characters Louise Mahler ( portrayed by Joan Hooley ) and Giles Farmer ( portrayed by John White ) kissed . The scene in which Mahler and Farmer kissed was originally scripted to occur in Mahler 's bedroom , but was rewritten so as to occur outdoors , due to concerns it would otherwise be too risqué ( the earlier Lloyd Reckord plays had both been shown well after the 9pm adult-content watershed ) . According to an issue of the Daily Express published after the episode aired , " not a viewer rang-up to complain " . In a 2015 interview , conducted prior to the discovery of the You in Your Small Corner footage , Hooley noted that the historic importance of what had been known as the " first interracial kiss on television " had been inflated in popular memory : A lot of people spoke about it more ten years later than they did at the time it was happening . So , it was much later that it occurred to me that I was part of history . I find it odd to have to admit that I was part of history because I don 't see why there should be anything to do about it . I don 't think there should have been all this fuss about it .

The first interracial kiss on American network television is often attributed to a 1968 episode of Star Trek , " Plato 's Stepchildren " . Other sources contend that both The Wild Wild West ( " The Night the Dragon Screamed " , aired 1966 Jan. 14 ) and I Spy had broadcast interracial kisses between Caucasian and Asian actors prior to the Star Trek episode . In addition , a December 1967 episode of Movin ' with Nancy featured a kiss between Nancy Sinatra and Sammy Davis , Jr . , more than a year before " Plato 's Stepchildren " aired . Further , some contend that " Plato 's Stepchildren " did not include an interracial kiss at all , full lip contact between William Shatner and Nichelle Nichols not having occurred , the actors having turned their heads away from the camera at the last moment to present the illusion of a kiss . The latter point has been disputed , Shatner claiming that he and Nichols ' lips never fully touched , while Nichols has alternately asserted that the kiss was , in fact , real .

Geographical name changes in Turkey have been undertaken , periodically , in bulk from 1913 to the present by successive Turkish governments . Thousands of names within the Turkish Republic or the Ottoman Empire have lost or departed from their popular or historic alternatives in favour of recognizably Turkish names , as part of the Turkification policy . The governments have argued that such names are foreign and / or divisive against Turkish unity . Names changed were usually of Armenian , Greek , Laz , Georgian , Bulgarian , Kurdish , Assyrian , or Arabic origin . Turkey 's efforts to join the European Union in the early 21st century has led to a decrease in the incidence of such changes from local , and particularly the central government . In some cases legislation has restored the names of certain villages ( primarily those housing Kurdish minorities ) . Place names that have formally changed frequently persist in local dialects and languages throughout the ethnically diverse country . The policy commenced during the final years of the Ottoman Empire and continued into the Turkish Republic . Under the Kemalist oriented government , specialized governmental commissions were created for the purpose of changing names . Approximately 28,000 topographic names were changed , which included 12,211 village and town names and 4,000 mountain , river , and other topographic names . Most name changes occurred in the eastern regions of the country where minority ethnicities form a large part or a majority of the population . Policies at times included banning the use of foreign names that were considered divisive and inappropriate .

The Committee of Union and Progress took the reins of the Ottoman government through a coup d 'état in 1913 . At the height of World War I and during the final years of the Ottoman Empire , when the ethnic cleansing policies of non-Muslim Greek , Armenian , and Assyrian minorities were underway , Minister of War Enver Pasha issued an edict ( ferman ) on October 6 , 1916 , declaring : It has been decided that provinces , districts , towns , villages , mountains , and rivers , which are named in languages belonging to non-Muslim nations such as Armenian , Greek or Bulgarian , will be renamed into Turkish . In order to benefit from this suitable moment , this aim should be achieved in due course . General Directorate of State Archives of the Republic of Turkey , İstanbul Vilayet Mektupçuluğu , no . 000955 , 23 Kânunuevvel 1331 ( October 6 , 1916 ) Ordinance of Enver Paşa Enver Pasha did not change the geographical names belonging to Muslim minorities ( i.e. Arabs and Kurds ) due to the Ottoman government 's role as a Caliphate . His decree inspired many Turkish intellectuals to write in support of such measures . One such intellectual , Hüseyin Avni Alparslan ( 1877 – 1921 ) , a Turkish soldier and author of books about Turkish language and culture , was inspired by the efforts of Enver Pasha , writing in his book Trabzon İli Lâz mı ? Türk mü ? ( Is the Trabzon province Laz or Turkish ? ) that :

If we want to be the owner of our country , then we should turn even the name of the smallest village into Turkish and not leave its Armenian , Greek or Arabic variants . It is not known how many geographical names were changed under the ordinance . The ultimate overarching objective behind it failed due to the collapse of the Ottoman government and trials of its leaders before Ottoman and European courts for massacres against ethnic minorities committed in 1915 . A decreased level of cultural repression has taken place in the Turkish Republic , however non-mainstream Turkic origin place names have invariably been officially renamed over the course of time .

Turkish nationalism and secularism were two of the six founding principles of the Turkish Republic . Mustafa Kemal Ataturk , the leader of the early decades of the Republic , aimed to create a nation state ( Turkish : Ulus ) from the Turkish remnants of the Ottoman Empire . During the first three decades of the Republic , efforts to Turkify geographical names were a recurring theme . Imported maps containing references to historical regions such as Armenia , Kurdistan , or Lazistan ( the official name of the province of Rize until 1921 ) were prohibited ( as was the case with Der Grosse Weltatlas , a map published in Leipzig ) . Journalist and writer Ayşe Hür has noted that after the death of Ataturk and during the Democratic period of the Turkish Republic in the late 1940s and 50s , " ugly , humiliating , insulting or derisive names , even if they were Turkish , were subjected to changes . Village names with lexical components meaning red ( kizil ) , bell ( çan ) , church ( kilise , e.g. Kirk Kilise ) were all changed . To do away with " separatist notions " , the Arabic , Persian , Armenian , Kurdish , Georgian , Tatar , Circassian , and Laz village names were also changed . "

The Special Commission for Name Change ( Ad Degistirme Ihtisas Komisyonu ) was created under the supervision of the Ministry of the Interior . It brought together professors , politicians , generals , linguists , and academicians throughout Turkey to take up the task of official name changing . Among the commission 's participants were members of the Office of the General Staff , Ministry of Defense , Ministry of Education , and history and geography professors from Ankara University . The initiative proved successful , as approximately 28,000 topographic names were changed , including 12,211 village and town names and 4,000 mountain , river , and other topographic names . This figure also included names of streets , monuments , quarters , neighborhoods , and other components that make up certain municipalities . By 1927 , all street and square names in Istanbul which were not of Turkish origin were changed . The campaign continued until 1978 , and was reintroduced after the military coup of 1980 in 1981 – 83 . During the heightened tension between Kurdish rebels and the Turkish government , the focus of geographical name changing in the 1980s was on Kurdish villages , towns , rivers , etc .

In 1981 , the Turkish government stated in the preface of Köylerimiz , a publication dedicated to names of Turkish villages , that : Approximately 12,000 village names that are non-Turkish , understood to originate from non-Turkish roots , and identified as causing confusion have been examined and replaced with Turkish names , and put into effect by the Substitution Committee for Foreign Names functioning at the Directorate General for Provincial Governments in our Ministry . At the culmination of the policy , no geographical or topographical names of non-Turkish origin remained . Some of the newer names resembled their native names , but with revised Turkish connotations ( i.e. Aghtamar was changed to Akdamar ) .

Although geographical names have been formally changed in Turkey , their native names persist and continue in local dialects throughout the country . At times , Turkish politicians have also used the native names of cities during their speeches . In 2009 , when addressing a crowd in the town of Güroymak , president Abdullah Gul used the native name Norşin . Also that year , when talking about his family origins , Prime Minister Recep Tayip Erdogan used the native Greek name of Potamya instead of Güneysu . Efforts at restoring the former names of geographical terms have been recently introduced in Turkey . In September 2012 , legislation was introduced to restore the names of ( primarily Kurdish ) villages to their former native names . According to the bill , the province of Tunceli would be named Dersim , Güroymak would be named Norşin , and Aydınlar would be named Tilo .

Most of the geographical name changes occurred in the eastern provinces of the country and on the coast of the eastern Black Sea , where minority populations tend to live . Through independent study , etymologist Sevan Nisanyan estimates that , of the geographical location name changes , 4,200 were Greek , 4,000 Kurdish , 3,600 Armenian , 750 Arabic , 400 Assyrian , 300 Georgian , 200 Laz , and 50 others . The official statistics of The Special Commission for Name Change ( Ad Degistirme Ihtisas Komisyonu ) claim that the total number of villages , towns , cities , and settlements renamed is 12,211 . The chart below lists the provinces and the number of villages or towns renamed .

Armenian geographic names were first changed under the reign of Sultan Abdulhamit II . In 1880 , the word Armenia was banned from use in the press , schoolbooks , and governmental establishments , to be replaced with words like Anatolia or Kurdistan . Armenian name changing continued under the early Republican era up until the 21st century . It included the Turkification of last names , change of animal names , change of the names of Armenian historical figures ( i.e. the name of the prominent Balyan family was concealed under the identity of a superficial Italian family called Baliani ) , and the change and distortion of Armenian historical events . Most Armenian geographical names were in the eastern provinces of the Ottoman empire . Villages , settlements , or towns that contain the suffix -kert , meaning built or built by ( i.e. Manavazkert ( today Malazgirt ) , Norakert , Dikranagert , Noyakert ) , -shen , meaning village ( i.e. Aratashen , Pemzashen , Norashen ) , and -van , meaning town ( i.e. Charentsavan , Nakhichevan , Tatvan ) , signify an Armenian name . Throughout Ottoman history , Turkish and Kurdish tribesmen have settled into Armenian villages and changed the native Armenian names ( i.e. the Armenian Norashen was changed to Norşin ) . This was especially true after the Armenian genocide , when much of eastern Turkey was depopulated of its Armenian population .

Most Assyrian name changes occurred in the southeast of Turkey near the Syrian border in the Tur Abdin region . The Tur Abdin ( Syriac : ܛܘܼܪ ܥܒ ݂ ܕܝܼܢ ) is a hilly region incorporating the eastern half of Mardin Province , and Şırnak Province west of the Tigris , on the border with Syria . The name ' Tur Abdin ' is from the Syriac language meaning ' mountain of the servants ( of God ) ' . Tur Abdin is of great importance to Syriac Orthodox Christians , for whom the region used to be a monastic and cultural heartland . The Assyrian / Syriac people of Tur Abdin call themselves Suroye and Suryoye , and traditionally speak an Eastern Aramaic dialect called Turoyo . After the Assyrian genocide , the Assyrians of the region were either depopulated or massacred . Currently , there are 5 , 000 Assyrians living in the region .

Many of the Greek names have maintained their origins from the Byzantine empire and Empire of Trebizond era . With the establishment of the Ottoman empire , many Turkish name changes have continued to retain their Greek origins . For example , the modern name " İzmir " derives from the former Greek name Σμύρνη " Smyrna " , through the first two syllables of the phrase " εις Σμύρνην " ( pronounced " is Smirnin " ) , which means " to Smyrna " in Greek . A similar etymology also applies to other Turkish cities with former Greek names , such as İznik ( from the phrase " is Nikaean " , meaning " to Nicaea " ) , Istanbul ( from the phrase " is tan Polin " or " to the City " ) , or even for the Greek island of Kos , called " İstanköy " in Turkish . Nişanyan estimates that 4,200 Greek geographical locations have been changed , the most of any ethnic minority .

The Kurdish geographical name changes were exempt under the Ottoman Empire due to the Islamic religious orientation of Kurds . During the Republican era and especially after the Dersim massacre , Kurdish geographical name changes became more common . During the Turkish Republican era , the words Kurdistan and Kurds were banned . The Turkish government had disguised the presence of the Kurds statistically by categorizing them as Mountain Turks . This classification was changed to the new euphemism of Eastern Turk in 1980 . Also included in the category of Kurdish geographical name changes are Zazaki , which is considered among Kurdish group , along with Kurmanci . Nişanyan estimates that 4,000 Kurdish geographical locations have been changed .

Solar energy is radiant light and heat from the Sun that is harnessed using a range of ever-evolving technologies such as solar heating , photovoltaics , solar thermal energy , solar architecture and artificial photosynthesis . It is an important source of renewable energy and its technologies are broadly characterized as either passive solar or active solar depending on how they capture and distribute solar energy or convert it into solar power . Active solar techniques include the use of photovoltaic systems , concentrated solar power and solar water heating to harness the energy . Passive solar techniques include orienting a building to the Sun , selecting materials with favorable thermal mass or light-dispersing properties , and designing spaces that naturally circulate air . The large magnitude of solar energy available makes it a highly appealing source of electricity . The United Nations Development Programme in its 2000 World Energy Assessment found that the annual potential of solar energy was 1,575 – 49,837 exajoules ( EJ ) . This is several times larger than the total world energy consumption , which was 559.8 EJ in 2012 . In 2011 , the International Energy Agency said that " the development of affordable , inexhaustible and clean solar energy technologies will have huge longer-term benefits . It will increase countries ’ energy security through reliance on an indigenous , inexhaustible and mostly import-independent resource , enhance sustainability , reduce pollution , lower the costs of mitigating global warming , and keep fossil fuel prices lower than otherwise . These advantages are global . Hence the additional costs of the incentives for early deployment should be considered learning investments ; they must be wisely spent and need to be widely shared " .

The Earth receives 174,000 terawatts ( TW ) of incoming solar radiation ( insolation ) at the upper atmosphere . Approximately 30 % is reflected back to space while the rest is absorbed by clouds , oceans and land masses . The spectrum of solar light at the Earth 's surface is mostly spread across the visible and near-infrared ranges with a small part in the near-ultraviolet . Most of the world 's population live in areas with insolation levels of 150-300 watts / m ² , or 3.5-7.0 kWh / m ² per day . Solar radiation is absorbed by the Earth 's land surface , oceans – which cover about 71 % of the globe – and atmosphere . Warm air containing evaporated water from the oceans rises , causing atmospheric circulation or convection . When the air reaches a high altitude , where the temperature is low , water vapor condenses into clouds , which rain onto the Earth 's surface , completing the water cycle . The latent heat of water condensation amplifies convection , producing atmospheric phenomena such as wind , cyclones and anti-cyclones . Sunlight absorbed by the oceans and land masses keeps the surface at an average temperature of 14 ° C. By photosynthesis , green plants convert solar energy into chemically stored energy , which produces food , wood and the biomass from which fossil fuels are derived .

The total solar energy absorbed by Earth 's atmosphere , oceans and land masses is approximately 3,850,000 exajoules ( EJ ) per year . In 2002 , this was more energy in one hour than the world used in one year . Photosynthesis captures approximately 3,000 EJ per year in biomass . The amount of solar energy reaching the surface of the planet is so vast that in one year it is about twice as much as will ever be obtained from all of the Earth 's non-renewable resources of coal , oil , natural gas , and mined uranium combined , The potential solar energy that could be used by humans differs from the amount of solar energy present near the surface of the planet because factors such as geography , time variation , cloud cover , and the land available to humans limit the amount of solar energy that we can acquire . Geography affects solar energy potential because areas that are closer to the equator have a greater amount of solar radiation . However , the use of photovoltaics that can follow the position of the sun can significantly increase the solar energy potential in areas that are farther from the equator . Time variation effects the potential of solar energy because during the nighttime there is little solar radiation on the surface of the Earth for solar panels to absorb . This limits the amount of energy that solar panels can absorb in one day . Cloud cover can affect the potential of solar panels because clouds block incoming light from the sun and reduce the light available for solar cells .

In addition , land availability has a large effect on the available solar energy because solar panels can only be set up on land that is otherwise unused and suitable for solar panels . Roofs have been found to be a suitable place for solar cells , as many people have discovered that they can collect energy directly from their homes this way . Other areas that are suitable for solar cells are lands that are not being used for businesses where solar plants can be established . Solar technologies are characterized as either passive or active depending on the way they capture , convert and distribute sunlight and enable solar energy to be harnessed at different levels around the world , mostly depending on distance from the equator . Although solar energy refers primarily to the use of solar radiation for practical ends , all renewable energies , other than Geothermal power and Tidal power , derive their energy either directly or indirectly from the Sun . Active solar techniques use photovoltaics , concentrated solar power , solar thermal collectors , pumps , and fans to convert sunlight into useful outputs . Passive solar techniques include selecting materials with favorable thermal properties , designing spaces that naturally circulate air , and referencing the position of a building to the Sun . Active solar technologies increase the supply of energy and are considered supply side technologies , while passive solar technologies reduce the need for alternate resources and are generally considered demand side technologies .

In 1897 , Frank Shuman , a U.S. inventor , engineer and solar energy pioneer built a small demonstration solar engine that worked by reflecting solar energy onto square boxes filled with ether , which has a lower boiling point than water , and were fitted internally with black pipes which in turn powered a steam engine . In 1908 Shuman formed the Sun Power Company with the intent of building larger solar power plants . He , along with his technical advisor A.S.E. Ackermann and British physicist Sir Charles Vernon Boys , developed an improved system using mirrors to reflect solar energy upon collector boxes , increasing heating capacity to the extent that water could now be used instead of ether . Shuman then constructed a full-scale steam engine powered by low-pressure water , enabling him to patent the entire solar engine system by 1912 . Shuman built the world ’ s first solar thermal power station in Maadi , Egypt , between 1912 and 1913 . His plant used parabolic troughs to power a 45 – 52 kilowatts ( 60 – 70 hp ) engine that pumped more than 22,000 litres ( 4,800 imp gal ; 5,800 US gal ) of water per minute from the Nile River to adjacent cotton fields . Although the outbreak of World War I and the discovery of cheap oil in the 1930s discouraged the advancement of solar energy , Shuman ’ s vision and basic design were resurrected in the 1970s with a new wave of interest in solar thermal energy . In 1916 Shuman was quoted in the media advocating solar energy 's utilization , saying :

Solar hot water systems use sunlight to heat water . In low geographical latitudes ( below 40 degrees ) from 60 to 70 % of the domestic hot water use with temperatures up to 60 ° C can be provided by solar heating systems . The most common types of solar water heaters are evacuated tube collectors ( 44 % ) and glazed flat plate collectors ( 34 % ) generally used for domestic hot water ; and unglazed plastic collectors ( 21 % ) used mainly to heat swimming pools . As of 2007 , the total installed capacity of solar hot water systems was approximately 154 thermal gigawatt ( GWth ) . China is the world leader in their deployment with 70 GWth installed as of 2006 and a long-term goal of 210 GWth by 2020 . Israel and Cyprus are the per capita leaders in the use of solar hot water systems with over 90 % of homes using them . In the United States , Canada , and Australia , heating swimming pools is the dominant application of solar hot water with an installed capacity of 18 GWth as of 2005 .

In the United States , heating , ventilation and air conditioning ( HVAC ) systems account for 30 % ( 4.65 EJ / yr ) of the energy used in commercial buildings and nearly 50 % ( 10.1 EJ / yr ) of the energy used in residential buildings . Solar heating , cooling and ventilation technologies can be used to offset a portion of this energy . Thermal mass is any material that can be used to store heat — heat from the Sun in the case of solar energy . Common thermal mass materials include stone , cement and water . Historically they have been used in arid climates or warm temperate regions to keep buildings cool by absorbing solar energy during the day and radiating stored heat to the cooler atmosphere at night . However , they can be used in cold temperate areas to maintain warmth as well . The size and placement of thermal mass depend on several factors such as climate , daylighting and shading conditions . When properly incorporated , thermal mass maintains space temperatures in a comfortable range and reduces the need for auxiliary heating and cooling equipment . A solar chimney ( or thermal chimney , in this context ) is a passive solar ventilation system composed of a vertical shaft connecting the interior and exterior of a building . As the chimney warms , the air inside is heated causing an updraft that pulls air through the building . Performance can be improved by using glazing and thermal mass materials in a way that mimics greenhouses .

Deciduous trees and plants have been promoted as a means of controlling solar heating and cooling . When planted on the southern side of a building in the northern hemisphere or the northern side in the southern hemisphere , their leaves provide shade during the summer , while the bare limbs allow light to pass during the winter . Since bare , leafless trees shade 1 / 3 to 1 / 2 of incident solar radiation , there is a balance between the benefits of summer shading and the corresponding loss of winter heating . In climates with significant heating loads , deciduous trees should not be planted on the Equator-facing side of a building because they will interfere with winter solar availability . They can , however , be used on the east and west sides to provide a degree of summer shading without appreciably affecting winter solar gain .

Solar cookers use sunlight for cooking , drying and pasteurization . They can be grouped into three broad categories : box cookers , panel cookers and reflector cookers . The simplest solar cooker is the box cooker first built by Horace de Saussure in 1767 . A basic box cooker consists of an insulated container with a transparent lid . It can be used effectively with partially overcast skies and will typically reach temperatures of 90 – 150 ° C ( 194 – 302 ° F ) . Panel cookers use a reflective panel to direct sunlight onto an insulated container and reach temperatures comparable to box cookers . Reflector cookers use various concentrating geometries ( dish , trough , Fresnel mirrors ) to focus light on a cooking container . These cookers reach temperatures of 315 ° C ( 599 ° F ) and above but require direct light to function properly and must be repositioned to track the Sun .

Solar concentrating technologies such as parabolic dish , trough and Scheffler reflectors can provide process heat for commercial and industrial applications . The first commercial system was the Solar Total Energy Project ( STEP ) in Shenandoah , Georgia , USA where a field of 114 parabolic dishes provided 50 % of the process heating , air conditioning and electrical requirements for a clothing factory . This grid-connected cogeneration system provided 400 kW of electricity plus thermal energy in the form of 401 kW steam and 468 kW chilled water , and had a one-hour peak load thermal storage . Evaporation ponds are shallow pools that concentrate dissolved solids through evaporation . The use of evaporation ponds to obtain salt from seawater is one of the oldest applications of solar energy . Modern uses include concentrating brine solutions used in leach mining and removing dissolved solids from waste streams . Clothes lines , clotheshorses , and clothes racks dry clothes through evaporation by wind and sunlight without consuming electricity or gas . In some states of the United States legislation protects the " right to dry " clothes . Unglazed transpired collectors ( UTC ) are perforated sun-facing walls used for preheating ventilation air . UTCs can raise the incoming air temperature up to 22 ° C ( 40 ° F ) and deliver outlet temperatures of 45 – 60 ° C ( 113 – 140 ° F ) . The short payback period of transpired collectors ( 3 to 12 years ) makes them a more cost-effective alternative than glazed collection systems . As of 2003 , over 80 systems with a combined collector area of 35,000 square metres ( 380,000 sq ft ) had been installed worldwide , including an 860 m2 ( 9,300 sq ft ) collector in Costa Rica used for drying coffee beans and a 1,300 m2 ( 14,000 sq ft ) collector in Coimbatore , India , used for drying marigolds .

Solar distillation can be used to make saline or brackish water potable . The first recorded instance of this was by 16th-century Arab alchemists . A large-scale solar distillation project was first constructed in 1872 in the Chilean mining town of Las Salinas . The plant , which had solar collection area of 4,700 m2 ( 51,000 sq ft ) , could produce up to 22,700 L ( 5,000 imp gal ; 6,000 US gal ) per day and operate for 40 years . Individual still designs include single-slope , double-slope ( or greenhouse type ) , vertical , conical , inverted absorber , multi-wick , and multiple effect . These stills can operate in passive , active , or hybrid modes . Double-slope stills are the most economical for decentralized domestic purposes , while active multiple effect units are more suitable for large-scale applications . Solar water disinfection ( SODIS ) involves exposing water-filled plastic polyethylene terephthalate ( PET ) bottles to sunlight for several hours . Exposure times vary depending on weather and climate from a minimum of six hours to two days during fully overcast conditions . It is recommended by the World Health Organization as a viable method for household water treatment and safe storage . Over two million people in developing countries use this method for their daily drinking water .

Solar power is the conversion of sunlight into electricity , either directly using photovoltaics ( PV ) , or indirectly using concentrated solar power ( CSP ) . CSP systems use lenses or mirrors and tracking systems to focus a large area of sunlight into a small beam . PV converts light into electric current using the photoelectric effect . Solar power is anticipated to become the world 's largest source of electricity by 2050 , with solar photovoltaics and concentrated solar power contributing 16 and 11 percent to the global overall consumption , respectively . Commercial CSP plants were first developed in the 1980s . Since 1985 the eventually 354 MW SEGS CSP installation , in the Mojave Desert of California , is the largest solar power plant in the world . Other large CSP plants include the 150 MW Solnova Solar Power Station and the 100 MW Andasol solar power station , both in Spain . The 250 MW Agua Caliente Solar Project , in the United States , and the 221 MW Charanka Solar Park in India , are the world ’ s largest photovoltaic plants . Solar projects exceeding 1 GW are being developed , but most of the deployed photovoltaics are in small rooftop arrays of less than 5 kW , which are connected to the grid using net metering and / or a feed-in tariff . In 2013 solar generated less than 1 % of the world 's total grid electricity .

In the last two decades , photovoltaics ( PV ) , also known as solar PV , has evolved from a pure niche market of small scale applications towards becoming a mainstream electricity source . A solar cell is a device that converts light directly into electricity using the photoelectric effect . The first solar cell was constructed by Charles Fritts in the 1880s . In 1931 a German engineer , Dr Bruno Lange , developed a photo cell using silver selenide in place of copper oxide . Although the prototype selenium cells converted less than 1 % of incident light into electricity , both Ernst Werner von Siemens and James Clerk Maxwell recognized the importance of this discovery . Following the work of Russell Ohl in the 1940s , researchers Gerald Pearson , Calvin Fuller and Daryl Chapin created the crystalline silicon solar cell in 1954 . These early solar cells cost 286 USD / watt and reached efficiencies of 4.5 – 6 % . By 2012 available efficiencies exceeded 20 % , and the maximum efficiency of research photovoltaics was in excess of 40 % .

Concentrating Solar Power ( CSP ) systems use lenses or mirrors and tracking systems to focus a large area of sunlight into a small beam . The concentrated heat is then used as a heat source for a conventional power plant . A wide range of concentrating technologies exists ; the most developed are the parabolic trough , the concentrating linear fresnel reflector , the Stirling dish and the solar power tower . Various techniques are used to track the Sun and focus light . In all of these systems a working fluid is heated by the concentrated sunlight , and is then used for power generation or energy storage .

Sunlight has influenced building design since the beginning of architectural history . Advanced solar architecture and urban planning methods were first employed by the Greeks and Chinese , who oriented their buildings toward the south to provide light and warmth . The common features of passive solar architecture are orientation relative to the Sun , compact proportion ( a low surface area to volume ratio ) , selective shading ( overhangs ) and thermal mass . When these features are tailored to the local climate and environment they can produce well-lit spaces that stay in a comfortable temperature range . Socrates ' Megaron House is a classic example of passive solar design . The most recent approaches to solar design use computer modeling tying together solar lighting , heating and ventilation systems in an integrated solar design package . Active solar equipment such as pumps , fans and switchable windows can complement passive design and improve system performance . Urban heat islands ( UHI ) are metropolitan areas with higher temperatures than that of the surrounding environment . The higher temperatures result from increased absorption of solar energy by urban materials such as asphalt and concrete , which have lower albedos and higher heat capacities than those in the natural environment . A straightforward method of counteracting the UHI effect is to paint buildings and roads white , and to plant trees in the area . Using these methods , a hypothetical " cool communities " program in Los Angeles has projected that urban temperatures could be reduced by approximately 3 ° C at an estimated cost of US $ 1 billion , giving estimated total annual benefits of US $ 530 million from reduced air-conditioning costs and healthcare savings .

Agriculture and horticulture seek to optimize the capture of solar energy in order to optimize the productivity of plants . Techniques such as timed planting cycles , tailored row orientation , staggered heights between rows and the mixing of plant varieties can improve crop yields . While sunlight is generally considered a plentiful resource , the exceptions highlight the importance of solar energy to agriculture . During the short growing seasons of the Little Ice Age , French and English farmers employed fruit walls to maximize the collection of solar energy . These walls acted as thermal masses and accelerated ripening by keeping plants warm . Early fruit walls were built perpendicular to the ground and facing south , but over time , sloping walls were developed to make better use of sunlight . In 1699 , Nicolas Fatio de Duillier even suggested using a tracking mechanism which could pivot to follow the Sun . Applications of solar energy in agriculture aside from growing crops include pumping water , drying crops , brooding chicks and drying chicken manure . More recently the technology has been embraced by vintners , who use the energy generated by solar panels to power grape presses .

Development of a solar-powered car has been an engineering goal since the 1980s . The World Solar Challenge is a biannual solar-powered car race , where teams from universities and enterprises compete over 3,021 kilometres ( 1,877 mi ) across central Australia from Darwin to Adelaide . In 1987 , when it was founded , the winner 's average speed was 67 kilometres per hour ( 42 mph ) and by 2007 the winner 's average speed had improved to 90.87 kilometres per hour ( 56.46 mph ) . The North American Solar Challenge and the planned South African Solar Challenge are comparable competitions that reflect an international interest in the engineering and development of solar powered vehicles . Some vehicles use solar panels for auxiliary power , such as for air conditioning , to keep the interior cool , thus reducing fuel consumption . In 1975 , the first practical solar boat was constructed in England . By 1995 , passenger boats incorporating PV panels began appearing and are now used extensively . In 1996 , Kenichi Horie made the first solar-powered crossing of the Pacific Ocean , and the Sun21 catamaran made the first solar-powered crossing of the Atlantic Ocean in the winter of 2006 – 2007 . There were plans to circumnavigate the globe in 2010 .

In 1974 , the unmanned AstroFlight Sunrise airplane made the first solar flight . On 29 April 1979 , the Solar Riser made the first flight in a solar-powered , fully controlled , man-carrying flying machine , reaching an altitude of 40 feet ( 12 m ) . In 1980 , the Gossamer Penguin made the first piloted flights powered solely by photovoltaics . This was quickly followed by the Solar Challenger which crossed the English Channel in July 1981 . In 1990 Eric Scott Raymond in 21 hops flew from California to North Carolina using solar power . Developments then turned back to unmanned aerial vehicles ( UAV ) with the Pathfinder ( 1997 ) and subsequent designs , culminating in the Helios which set the altitude record for a non-rocket-propelled aircraft at 29,524 metres ( 96,864 ft ) in 2001 . The Zephyr , developed by BAE Systems , is the latest in a line of record-breaking solar aircraft , making a 54-hour flight in 2007 , and month-long flights were envisioned by 2010 . As of 2016 , Solar Impulse , an electric aircraft , is currently circumnavigating the globe . It is a single-seat plane powered by solar cells and capable of taking off under its own power . The design allows the aircraft to remain airborne for several days .

Solar chemical processes use solar energy to drive chemical reactions . These processes offset energy that would otherwise come from a fossil fuel source and can also convert solar energy into storable and transportable fuels . Solar induced chemical reactions can be divided into thermochemical or photochemical . A variety of fuels can be produced by artificial photosynthesis . The multielectron catalytic chemistry involved in making carbon-based fuels ( such as methanol ) from reduction of carbon dioxide is challenging ; a feasible alternative is hydrogen production from protons , though use of water as the source of electrons ( as plants do ) requires mastering the multielectron oxidation of two water molecules to molecular oxygen . Some have envisaged working solar fuel plants in coastal metropolitan areas by 2050 – the splitting of sea water providing hydrogen to be run through adjacent fuel-cell electric power plants and the pure water by-product going directly into the municipal water system . Another vision involves all human structures covering the earth 's surface ( i.e. , roads , vehicles and buildings ) doing photosynthesis more efficiently than plants . Hydrogen production technologies have been a significant area of solar chemical research since the 1970s . Aside from electrolysis driven by photovoltaic or photochemical cells , several thermochemical processes have also been explored . One such route uses concentrators to split water into oxygen and hydrogen at high temperatures ( 2,300 – 2,600 ° C or 4,200 – 4,700 ° F ) . Another approach uses the heat from solar concentrators to drive the steam reformation of natural gas thereby increasing the overall hydrogen yield compared to conventional reforming methods . Thermochemical cycles characterized by the decomposition and regeneration of reactants present another avenue for hydrogen production . The Solzinc process under development at the Weizmann Institute of Science uses a 1 MW solar furnace to decompose zinc oxide ( ZnO ) at temperatures above 1,200 ° C ( 2,200 ° F ) . This initial reaction produces pure zinc , which can subsequently be reacted with water to produce hydrogen .

Thermal mass systems can store solar energy in the form of heat at domestically useful temperatures for daily or interseasonal durations . Thermal storage systems generally use readily available materials with high specific heat capacities such as water , earth and stone . Well-designed systems can lower peak demand , shift time-of-use to off-peak hours and reduce overall heating and cooling requirements . Phase change materials such as paraffin wax and Glauber 's salt are another thermal storage medium . These materials are inexpensive , readily available , and can deliver domestically useful temperatures ( approximately 64 ° C or 147 ° F ) . The " Dover House " ( in Dover , Massachusetts ) was the first to use a Glauber 's salt heating system , in 1948 . Solar energy can also be stored at high temperatures using molten salts . Salts are an effective storage medium because they are low-cost , have a high specific heat capacity and can deliver heat at temperatures compatible with conventional power systems . The Solar Two project used this method of energy storage , allowing it to store 1.44 terajoules ( 400,000 kWh ) in its 68 m ³ storage tank with an annual storage efficiency of about 99 % .

Off-grid PV systems have traditionally used rechargeable batteries to store excess electricity . With grid-tied systems , excess electricity can be sent to the transmission grid , while standard grid electricity can be used to meet shortfalls . Net metering programs give household systems a credit for any electricity they deliver to the grid . This is handled by ' rolling back ' the meter whenever the home produces more electricity than it consumes . If the net electricity use is below zero , the utility then rolls over the kilowatt hour credit to the next month . Other approaches involve the use of two meters , to measure electricity consumed vs. electricity produced . This is less common due to the increased installation cost of the second meter . Most standard meters accurately measure in both directions , making a second meter unnecessary . Pumped-storage hydroelectricity stores energy in the form of water pumped when energy is available from a lower elevation reservoir to a higher elevation one . The energy is recovered when demand is high by releasing the water , with the pump becoming a hydroelectric power generator .

Beginning with the surge in coal use which accompanied the Industrial Revolution , energy consumption has steadily transitioned from wood and biomass to fossil fuels . The early development of solar technologies starting in the 1860s was driven by an expectation that coal would soon become scarce . However , development of solar technologies stagnated in the early 20th century in the face of the increasing availability , economy , and utility of coal and petroleum . The 1973 oil embargo and 1979 energy crisis caused a reorganization of energy policies around the world and brought renewed attention to developing solar technologies . Deployment strategies focused on incentive programs such as the Federal Photovoltaic Utilization Program in the U.S. and the Sunshine Program in Japan . Other efforts included the formation of research facilities in the U.S. ( SERI , now NREL ) , Japan ( NEDO ) , and Germany ( Fraunhofer Institute for Solar Energy Systems ISE ) . Commercial solar water heaters began appearing in the United States in the 1890s . These systems saw increasing use until the 1920s but were gradually replaced by cheaper and more reliable heating fuels . As with photovoltaics , solar water heating attracted renewed attention as a result of the oil crises in the 1970s but interest subsided in the 1980s due to falling petroleum prices . Development in the solar water heating sector progressed steadily throughout the 1990s and annual growth rates have averaged 20 % since 1999 . Although generally underestimated , solar water heating and cooling is by far the most widely deployed solar technology with an estimated capacity of 154 GW as of 2007 .

The Garden of Earthly Delights is the modern title given to a triptych painted by the Early Netherlandish master Hieronymus Bosch , housed in the Museo del Prado in Madrid since 1939 . It dates from between 1490 and 1510 , when Bosch was between about 40 and 60 years old , and is his best-known and most ambitious surviving work . The triptych is painted in oil on oak and is formed from a square middle panel flanked by two other oak rectangular wings that close over the center as shutters . The outer wings , when folded , show a grisaille painting of the earth during the biblical narrative of Creation . The three scenes of the inner triptych are probably ( but not necessarily ) intended to be read chronologically from left to right . The left panel depicts God presenting Eve to Adam , the central panel is a broad panorama of socially engaged nude figures , fantastical animals , oversized fruit and hybrid stone formations . The right panel is a hellscape and portrays the torments of damnation . Art historians frequently interpret the painting as a didactic warning on the perils of life 's temptations . However , the intricacy of its symbolism , particularly that of the central panel , has led to a wide range of scholarly interpretations over the centuries . Twentieth-century art historians are divided as to whether the triptych 's central panel is a moral warning or a panorama of paradise lost . American writer Peter S. Beagle describes it as an " erotic derangement that turns us all into voyeurs , a place filled with the intoxicating air of perfect liberty " .

Bosch painted three large triptychs ( the others are The Last Judgment of c . 1482 and The Haywain Triptych of c . 1516 ) that can be read from left to right and in which each panel was essential to the meaning of the whole . Each of these three works presents distinct yet linked themes addressing history and faith . Triptychs from this period were generally intended to be read sequentially , the left and right panels often portraying Eden and the Last Judgment respectively , while the main subject was contained in the center piece . It is not known whether " The Garden " was intended as an altarpiece , but the general view is that the extreme subject matter of the inner center and right panels make it unlikely that it was intended to function in a church or monastery , but was instead commissioned by a lay patron .

When the triptych 's wings are closed , the design of the outer panels becomes visible . Rendered in a green – gray grisaille , these panels lack colour , probably because most Netherlandish triptychs were thus painted , but possibly indicating that the painting reflects a time before the creation of the sun and moon , which were formed , according to Christian theology , to " give light to the earth " . It was common for the outer panels of Netherlandish altarpieces to be in grisaille , such that their blandness highlighted the splendid colour inside . The outer panels are generally thought to depict the creation of the world , showing greenery beginning to clothe the still-pristine Earth . God , wearing a crown similar to a papal tiara ( a common convention in Netherlandish painting ) , is visible as a tiny figure at the upper left . Bosch shows God as the father sitting with a Bible on his lap , creating the Earth in a passive manner by divine fiat . Above him is inscribed a quote from Psalm 33 reading " Ipse dixit , et facta sunt : ipse mandāvit , et creāta sunt " — For he spake and it was done ; he commanded , and it stood fast . The Earth is encapsulated in a transparent sphere recalling the traditional depiction of the created world as a crystal sphere held by God or Christ . It hangs suspended in the cosmos , which is shown as an impermeable darkness , whose only other inhabitant is God himself .

Despite the presence of vegetation , the earth does not yet contain human or animal life , indicating that the scene represents the events of the biblical Third Day . Bosch renders the plant life in an unusual fashion , using uniformly gray tints which make it difficult to determine whether the subjects are purely vegetable or perhaps include some mineral formations . Surrounding the interior of the globe is the sea , partially illuminated by beams of light shining through clouds . The exterior wings have a clear position within the sequential narrative of the work as a whole . They show an unpopulated earth composed solely of rock and plants , contrasting sharply with the inner central panel which contains a paradise teeming with lustful humanity .

Scholars have proposed that Bosch used the outer panels to establish a Biblical setting for the inner elements of the work , and the exterior image is generally interpreted as set in an earlier time than those in the interior . As with Bosch 's Haywain triptych , the inner centerpiece is flanked by heavenly and hellish imagery . The scenes depicted in the triptych are thought to follow a chronological order : flowing from left-to-right they represent Eden , the garden of earthly delights , and Hell . God appears as the creator of humanity in the left hand wing , while the consequences of humanity 's failure to follow his will are shown in the right . However , in contrast to Bosch 's two other complete triptychs , The Last Judgment ( around 1482 ) and The Haywain ( after 1510 ) , God is absent from the central panel . Instead , this panel shows humanity acting with apparent free will as naked men and women engage in various pleasure-seeking activities . According to some interpretations , the right hand panel is believed to show God 's penalties in a hellscape . Art historian Charles de Tolnay believed that , through the seductive gaze of Adam , the left panel already shows God 's waning influence upon the newly created earth . This view is reinforced by the rendering of God in the outer panels as a tiny figure in comparison to the immensity of the earth . According to Belting , the three inner panels seek to broadly convey the Old Testament notion that , before the Fall , there was no defined boundary between good and evil ; humanity in its innocence was unaware of consequence .

The left panel ( 220 × 97.5 cm , 87 × 38.4 in ) ( sometimes known as the Joining of Adam and Eve ) depicts a scene from the paradise of the Garden of Eden commonly interpreted as the moment when God presents Eve to Adam . The painting shows Adam waking from a deep sleep to find God holding Eve by her wrist and giving the sign of his blessing to their union . God is younger-looking than on the outer panels , blue-eyed and with golden curls . His youthful appearance may be a device by the artist to illustrate the concept of Christ as the incarnation of the Word of God . God 's right hand is raised in blessing , while he holds Eve 's wrist with his left . According to the work 's most controversial interpreter , the 20th-century folklorist and art historian Wilhelm Fraenger : ... " As though enjoying the pulsation of the living blood and as though too he were setting a seal on the eternal and immutable communion between this human blood and his own . This physical contact between the Creator and Eve is repeated even more noticeably in the way Adam 's toes touch the Lord 's foot . Here is the stressing of a rapport : Adam seems indeed to be stretching to his full length in order to make contact with the Creator . And the billowing out of the cloak around the Creator 's heart , from where the garment falls in marked folds and contours to Adam 's feet , also seems to indicate that here a current of divine power flows down , so that this group of three actually forms a closed circuit , a complex of magical energy " ...

Eve avoids Adam 's gaze , although , according to art historian Walter S. Gibson , she is shown " seductively presenting her body to Adam " . Adam 's expression is one of amazement , and Fraenger has identified three elements to his seeming astonishment . Firstly , there is surprise at the presence of the God . Secondly , he is reacting to an awareness that Eve is of the same nature as himself , and has been created from his own body . Finally , from the intensity of Adam 's gaze , it can be concluded that he is experiencing sexual arousal and the primal urge to reproduce for the first time . The surrounding landscape is populated by hut-shaped forms , some of which are made from stone , while others are at least partially organic . Behind Eve rabbits , symbolising fecundity , play in the grass , and a dragon tree opposite is thought to represent eternal life . The background reveals several animals that would have been exotic to contemporaneous Europeans , including a giraffe , an elephant and a lion that has killed and is about to devour his prey . In the foreground , from a large hole in the ground , emerge birds and winged animals , some of which are realistic , some fantastic . Behind a fish , a person clothed in a short-sleeved hooded jacket and with a duck 's beak holds an open book as if reading . To the left of the area a cat holds a small lizard-like creature in its jaws . Belting observes that , despite the fact that the creatures in the foreground are fantastical imaginings , many of the animals in the mid and background are drawn from contemporary travel literature , and here Bosch is appealing to " the knowledge of a humanistic and aristocratic readership " . Erhard Reuwich 's pictures for Bernhard von Breydenbach 's 1486 Pilgrimages to the Holy Land were long thought to be the source for both the elephant and the giraffe , though more recent research indicates the mid-15th-century humanist scholar Cyriac of Ancona 's travelogues served as Bosch 's exposure to these exotic animals .

According to art historian Virginia Tuttle , the scene is " highly unconventional [ and ] cannot be identified as any of the events from the Book of Genesis traditionally depicted in Western art " . Some of the image 's details seem to contradict the innocence that might be expected in the Garden of Eden before the expulsion . Tuttle and other critics have interpreted the gaze of Adam upon his wife as lustful , and indicative of the Christian belief that humanity was doomed from the beginning . Gibson believes that Adam 's facial expression betrays not just surprise but also expectation . According to a belief common in the Middle Ages , before the Fall Adam and Eve would have copulated without lust , solely to reproduce . Many believed that the first sin committed after Eve tasted the forbidden fruit was carnal lust . On a tree to the right a snake curls around a tree trunk , while to its right a mouse creeps ; according to Fraenger , both animals are universal phallic symbols .

The skyline of the center panel ( 220 × 195 cm , 87 × 77 in ) matches exactly with that of the left wing , while the positioning of its central pool and the lake behind it echoes the lake in the earlier scene . The center image depicts the expansive " garden " landscape which gives the triptych its name . The panel shares a common horizon with the left wing , suggesting a spatial connection between the two scenes . The garden is teeming with male and female nudes , together with a variety of animals , plants and fruit . The setting is not the paradise shown in the left panel , but neither is it based in the terrestrial realm . Fantastic creatures mingle with the real ; otherwise ordinary fruits appear engorged to a gigantic size . The figures are engaged in diverse amorous sports and activities , both in couples and in groups . Gibson describes them as behaving " overtly and without shame " , while art historian Laurinda Dixon writes that the human figures exhibit " a certain adolescent sexual curiosity " . Many of the numerous human figures revel in an innocent , self-absorbed joy as they engage in a wide range of activities : some appear to enjoy sensory pleasures , others play unselfconsciously in the water , and yet others cavort in meadows with a variety of animals , seemingly at one with nature . In the middle of the background , a large blue globe resembling a fruit pod rises in the middle of a lake . Visible through its circular window is a man holding his right hand close to his partner 's genitals , and the bare buttocks of yet another figure hover in the vicinity . According to Fraenger , the eroticism of the center frame could be considered either as an allegory of spiritual transition or a playground of corruption .

On the right-hand side of the foreground stand a group of three fair and one black-skinned figures . The fair-skinned figures , two males and one female , are covered from head to foot in light-brown body hair . Scholars generally agree that these hirsute figures represent wild or primeval humanity but disagree on the symbolism of their inclusion . Art historian Patrik Reuterswärd , for example , posits that they may be seen as " the noble savage " who represents " an imagined alternative to our civilized life " , imbuing the panel with " a more clear-cut primitivistic note " . Writer Peter Glum , in contrast , sees the figures as intrinsically connected with whoredom and lust . In a cave to their lower right a male figure points towards a reclining female who is also covered in hair . ( image ) The pointing man is the only clothed figure in the panel , and as Fraenger observes , " he is clothed with emphatic austerity right up to his throat " . In addition , he is one of the few human figures with dark hair . According to Fraenger : The way this man 's dark hair grows , with the sharp dip in the middle of his high forehead , as though concentrating there all the energy of the masculine M , makes his face different from all the others . His coal-black eyes are rigidly focused in a gaze that expresses compelling force . The nose is unusually long and boldly curved . The mouth is wide and sensual , but the lips are firmly shut in a straight line , the corners strongly marked and tightened into final points , and this strengthens the impression — already suggested by the eyes — of a strong controlling will . It is an extraordinarily fascinating face , reminding us of faces of famous men , especially of Machiavelli 's ; and indeed the whole aspect of the head suggests something Mediterranean , as though this man had acquired his frank , searching , superior air at Italian academies .

The pointing man has variously been described as either the patron of the work ( Fraenger in 1947 ) , as an advocate of Adam denouncing Eve ( Dirk Bax in 1956 ) , as Saint John the Baptist in his camel 's skin ( Isabel Mateo Goméz in 1963 ) , or as a self-portrait . The woman below him lies within a semicylindrical transparent shield , while her mouth is sealed , devices implying that she bears a secret . To their left , a man crowned by leaves lies on top of what appears to be an actual but gigantic strawberry , and is joined by a male and female who contemplate another equally huge strawberry . ( image ) There is no perspectival order in the foreground ; instead it comprises a series of small motifs wherein proportion and terrestrial logic are abandoned . Bosch presents the viewer with gigantic ducks playing with tiny humans under the cover of oversized fruit ; ( image ) fish walking on land while birds dwell in the water ; a passionate couple encased in an amniotic fluid bubble ; and a man inside of a red fruit staring at a mouse in a transparent cylinder .

The pools in the fore and background contain bathers of both sexes . In the central circular pool , the sexes are mostly segregated , with several females adorned by peacocks and fruit . Four women carry cherry-like fruits on their heads , perhaps a symbol of pride at the time , as has been deduced from the contemporaneous saying : " Don 't eat cherries with great lords — they 'll throw the pits in your face . " The women are surrounded by a parade of naked men riding horses , donkeys , unicorns , camels and other exotic or fantastic creatures . Several men show acrobatics while riding , apparently acts designed to gain the females ' attention , which highlights the attraction felt between the two sexes as groups . The two outer springs also contain both men and women cavorting with abandon . Around them , birds infest the water while winged fish crawl on land . Humans inhabit giant shells . All are surrounded by oversized fruit pods and eggshells , and both humans and animals feast on strawberries and cherries . The impression of a life lived without consequence , or what art historian Hans Belting describes as " unspoilt and pre-moral existence " , is underscored by the absence of children and old people . According to the second and third chapters of Genesis , Adam and Eve 's children were born after they were expelled from Eden . This has led some commentators , in particular Belting , to theorise that the panel represents the world if the two had not been driven out " among the thorns and thistles of the world " . In Fraenger 's view , the scene illustrates " a utopia , a garden of divine delight before the Fall , or — since Bosch could not deny the existence of the dogma of original sin — a millennial condition that would arise if , after expiation of Original Sin , humanity were permitted to return to Paradise and to a state of tranquil harmony embracing all Creation . "

In the high distance of the background , above the hybrid stone formations , four groups of people and creatures are seen in flight . On the immediate left a human male rides on a chthonic solar eagle-lion . The human carries a triple-branched tree of life on which perches a bird ; according to Fraenger " a symbolic bird of death " . Fraenger believes the man is intended to represent a genius , " he is the symbol of the extinction of the duality of the sexes , which are resolved in the ether into their original state of unity " . To their right a knight with a dolphin tail sails on a winged fish . The knight 's tail curls back to touch the back of his head , which references the common symbol of eternity : the snake biting its own tail . On the immediate right of the panel , a winged youth soars upwards carrying a fish in his hands and a falcon on his back . According to Belting , in these passages Bosch 's " imagination triumphs ... the ambivalence of [ his ] visual syntax exceeds even the enigma of content , opening up that new dimension of freedom by which painting becomes art . " Fraenger titled his chapter on the high background " The Ascent to Heaven " , and wrote that the airborne figures were likely intended as a link between " what is above " and " what is below " , just as the left and right hand panels represent " what was " and " what will be " .

The right panel ( 220 × 97.5 cm , 87 × 38.4 in ) illustrates Hell , the setting of a number of Bosch paintings . Bosch depicts a world in which humans have succumbed to temptations that lead to evil and reap eternal damnation . The tone of this final panel strikes a harsh contrast to those preceding it . The scene is set at night , and the natural beauty that adorned the earlier panels is noticeably absent . Compared to the warmth of the center panel , the right wing possesses a chilling quality — rendered through cold colourisation and frozen waterways — and presents a tableau that has shifted from the paradise of the center image to a spectacle of cruel torture and retribution . In a single , densely detailed scene , the viewer is made witness to cities on fire in the background ; war , torture chambers , infernal taverns , and demons in the midground ; and mutated animals feeding on human flesh in the foreground . The nakedness of the human figures has lost all its eroticism , and many now attempt to cover their genitalia and breasts with their hands .

Large explosions in the background throw light through the city gate and spill forth onto the water in the midground ; according to writer Walter S. Gibson , " their fiery reflection turning the water below into blood " . The light illuminates a road filled with fleeing figures , while hordes of tormentors prepare to burn a neighbouring village . A short distance away , a rabbit carries an impaled and bleeding corpse , while a group of victims above are thrown into a burning lantern . The foreground is populated by a variety of distressed or tortured figures . Some are shown vomiting or excreting , others are crucified by harp and lute , in an allegory of music , thus sharpening the contrast between pleasure and torture . A choir sings from a score inscribed on a pair of buttocks , part of a group that has been described as the " Musicians ' Hell " . The focal point of the scene is the " Tree-Man " , whose cavernous torso is supported by what could be contorted arms or rotting tree trunks . His head supports a disk populated by demons and victims parading around a huge set of bagpipes — often used as a dual sexual symbol — reminiscent of human scrotum and penis . The tree-man 's torso is formed from a broken eggshell , and the supporting trunk has thorn-like branches which pierce the fragile body . A grey figure in a hood bearing an arrow jammed between his buttocks climbs a ladder into the tree-man 's central cavity , where nude men sit in a tavern-like setting . The tree-man gazes outwards beyond the viewer , his conspiratorial expression a mix of wistfulness and resignation . Belting wondered if the tree-man 's face is a self-portrait , citing the figure 's " expression of irony and the slightly sideways gaze [ which would ] then constitute the signature of an artist who claimed a bizarre pictorial world for his own personal imagination " .

Many elements in the panel incorporate earlier iconographical conventions depicting hell . However , Bosch is innovative in that he describes hell not as a fantastical space , but as a realistic world containing many elements from day-to-day human life . Animals are shown punishing humans , subjecting them to nightmarish torments that may symbolise the seven deadly sins , matching the torment to the sin . Sitting on an object that may be a toilet or a throne , the panel 's centerpiece is a gigantic bird-headed monster feasting on human corpses , which he excretes through a cavity below him , into the transparent chamber pot on which he sits . The monster is sometimes referred to as the " Prince of Hell " , a name derived from the cauldron he wears on his head , perhaps representing a debased crown . To his feet a female has her face reflected on the buttocks of a demon . Further to the left , next to a hare-headed demon , a group of naked persons around a toppled gambling table are being massacred with swords and knives . Other brutal violence is shown by a knight torn down and eaten up by a pack of wolves to the right of the tree-man .

During the Middle Ages , sexuality and lust were seen , by some , as evidence of humanity 's fall from grace , and the most foul of the seven deadly sins . In the eyes of some viewers , this sin is depicted in the left-hand panel through Adam 's , allegedly lustful , gaze towards Eve , and it has been proposed that the center panel was created as a warning to the viewer to avoid a life of sinful pleasure . According to this view , the penalty for such sins is shown in the right panel of the triptych . In the lower right-hand corner , a man is approached by a pig wearing the veil of a nun . The pig is shown trying to seduce the man to sign legal documents . Lust is further said to be symbolised by the gigantic musical instruments and by the choral singers in the left foreground of the panel . Musical instruments often carried erotic connotations in works of art of the period , and lust was referred to in moralising sources as the " music of the flesh " . There has also been the view that Bosch 's use of music here might be a rebuke against traveling minstrels , often thought of as purveyors of bawdy song and verse .

The dating of The Garden of Earthly Delights is uncertain . Ludwig von Baldass ( 1917 ) considered the painting to be an early work by Bosch . However , since De Tolnay ( 1937 ) consensus among 20th-century art historians placed the work in 1503 – 1504 or even later . Both early and late datings were based on the " archaic " treatment of space . Dendrochronology dates the oak of the panels between the years 1460 and 1466 , providing a terminus post quem for the work . Wood used for panel paintings during this period customarily underwent a lengthy period of storage for seasoning purposes , so the age of the oak might be expected to predate the actual date of the painting by several years . Internal evidence , specifically the depiction of a pineapple ( a " New World " fruit ) , suggests that the painting itself postdates Columbus ' voyages to the Americas , between 1492 and 1504 . The dendrochronological research brought Vermet to reconsider an early dating and , consequently , to dispute the presence of any " New World " objects , stressing the presence of African ones instead . He considers De Tolnay 's idea of Bosch developing towards more archaism as an anachronism , based on the development of modern art and suggests that the triptych was ordered by Engelbrecht II of Nassau , in or shortly after 1481 , when he attended the Chapter of the Order of the Golden Fleece in ' s-Hertogenbosch .

The Garden was first documented in 1517 , one year after the artist 's death , when Antonio de Beatis , a canon from Molfetta , Italy , described the work as part of the decoration in the town palace of the Counts of the House of Nassau in Brussels . The palace was a high-profile location , a house often visited by heads of state and leading court figures . The prominence of the painting has led some to conclude that the work was commissioned , and not " solely ... a flight of the imagination " . A description of the triptych in 1605 called it the " strawberry painting " , because the fruit of the strawberry tree ( madroño in Spanish ) features prominently in the center panel . Early Spanish writers referred to the work as La Lujuria ( " Lust " ) . The aristocracy of the Burgundian Netherlands , influenced by the humanist movement , were the most likely collectors of Bosch 's paintings , but there are few records of the location of his works in the years immediately following his death . It is probable that the patron of the work was Engelbrecht II of Nassau , who died in 1504 , or his successor Henry III of Nassau-Breda , the governor of several of the Habsburg provinces in the Low Countries . De Beatis wrote in his travel journal that " there are some panels on which bizarre things have been painted . They represent seas , skies , woods , meadows , and many other things , such as people crawling out of a shell , others that bring forth birds , men and women , white and blacks doing all sorts of different activities and poses . " Because the triptych was publicly displayed in the palace of the House of Nassau , it was visible to many , and Bosch 's reputation and fame quickly spread across Europe . The work 's popularity can be measured by the numerous surviving copies — in oil , engraving and tapestry — commissioned by wealthy patrons , as well as by the number of forgeries in circulation after his death . Most are of the central panel only and do not deviate from the original . These copies were usually painted on a much smaller scale , and they vary considerably in quality . Many were created a generation after Bosch , and some took the form of wall tapestries .

The De Beatis description , only rediscovered by Steppe in the 1960s , cast new light on the commissioning of a work that was previously thought — since it has no central religious image — to be an atypical altarpiece . Many Netherlandish diptychs intended for private use are known , and even a few triptychs , but the Bosch panels are unusually large compared with these and contain no donor portraits . Possibly they were commissioned to celebrate a wedding , as large Italian paintings for private houses frequently were . Nevertheless , The Garden 's bold depictions do not rule out a church commission , such was the contemporaneous fervor to warn against immorality . In 1566 , the triptych served as the model for a tapestry that hangs at El Escorial monastery near Madrid . Upon the death of Henry III , the painting passed into the hands of his nephew William the Silent , the founder of the House of Orange-Nassau and leader of the Dutch Revolt against Spain . In 1568 , however , the Duke of Alba confiscated the picture and brought it to Spain , where it became the property of one Don Fernando , the Duke 's illegitimate son and heir and the Spanish commander in the Netherlands . Phillip II acquired the painting at auction in 1591 ; two years later he presented it to El Escorial . A contemporaneous description of the transfer records the gift on 8 July 1593 of a " painting in oils , with two wings depicting the variety of the world , illustrated with grotesqueries by Hieronymus Bosch , known as ' Del Madroño ' " . After an unbroken 342 years at El Escorial , the work moved to the Museo del Prado in 1939 , along with other works by Bosch . The triptych is not particularly well-preserved ; the paint of the middle panel especially has flaked off around joints in the wood .

Because only bare details are known of Bosch 's life , biographical interpretation of his work becomes extremely difficult for academics , who must largely rely on conjecture . Individual motifs and elements of symbolism may be explained , but so far relating these to each other and to his work as a whole has remained elusive . The enigmatic scenes depicted on the panels of the inner triptych of The Garden of Earthly Delights have been studied by many scholars , who have often arrived at contradictory interpretations . Analyses based on symbolic systems ranging from the alchemical , astrological , and heretical to the folkloric and subconscious have all attempted to explain the complex objects and ideas presented in the work . Until the early 20th century , Bosch 's paintings were generally thought to incorporate attitudes of Medieval didactic literature and sermons . Charles De Tolnay wrote : The oldest writers , Dominicus Lampsonius and Karel van Mander , attached themselves to his most evident side , to the subject ; their conception of Bosch , inventor of fantastic pieces of devilry and of infernal scenes , which prevails today ( 1937 ) in the public at large , and prevailed with historians until the last quarter of the 19th century .

Some critics have interpreted the triptych as a warning on the transience of earthly pleasure . In 1960 art historian Ludwig von Baldass wrote that Bosch shows " how sin came into the world through the Creation of Eve , how fleshly lusts spread over the entire earth , promoting all the Deadly Sins , and how this necessarily leads straight to Hell " . Charles De Tolnay wrote that the center panel represents " the nightmare of humanity " , where " the artist 's purpose above all is to show the evil consequences of sensual pleasure and to stress its ephemeral character " . Supporters of this view see the painting as a sequential narrative , with the left-hand panel showing humanity 's innocence in Eden , the central panel the corruption of that innocence , and finally humanity 's punishment in Hell . At various times in its history , the triptych was known as La Lujuria ( Lust ) , The Sins of the World and The Wages of Sin .

Proponents of this idea point out that moralists during Bosch 's era believed that it was woman 's — ultimately Eve 's — temptation that drew men into a life of lechery and sin . This would explain why the women in the center panel are very much among the active participants in bringing about the Fall . At the time , the power of femininity was often rendered by showing a female surrounded by a circle of males . A late 15th-century engraving by Israhel van Meckenem shows a group of men prancing ecstatically around a female figure . The Master of the Banderoles 's 1460 work the Pool of Youth similarly shows a group of females standing in a space surrounded by admiring figures . Here in Bosch 's center panel the image of males circulating around females has grown into fully grotesque dimensions . The 31 females in the central pool are surrounded by about 100 males performing stunts while riding on fancy animals in an endless , circular caravan .

This line of reasoning is consistent with interpretations of Bosch 's other major moralising works which hold up the folly of humans , e.g. , the Death and the Miser and the Haywain Triptych . The rendering of each of these works is such that , according to the art historian Walter Bosing , it is difficult to believe " Bosch intended to condemn what he painted with such visually enchanting forms and colors " . Bosing concluded however that a medieval mindset was naturally suspicious of material beauty , in any form , and that the sumptuousness of Bosch 's description may have been intended to convey a false paradise , teeming with transient beauty .

In 1947 , Wilhelm Fraenger argued that the triptych 's center panel portrays a joyous world when humanity will experience a rebirth of the innocence enjoyed by Adam and Eve before their fall . In his book The Millennium of Hieronymus Bosch , Fraenger wrote that Bosch was a member of the heretical sect known as the Adamites — who were also known as the Homines intelligentia and Brethren and Sisters of the Free Spirit . This radical group , active in the area of the Rhine and the Netherlands , strove for a form of spirituality immune from sin even in the flesh and imbued the concept of lust with a paradisical innocence . Fraenger believed The Garden of Earthly Delights was commissioned by the order 's Grand Master . Later critics have agreed that , because of their obscure complexity , Bosch 's " altarpieces " may well have been commissioned for non-devotional purposes . The Homines intelligentia cult sought to regain the innocent sexuality enjoyed by Adam and Eve before the Fall . Fraenger writes that the figures in Bosch 's work " are peacefully frolicking about the tranquil garden in vegetative innocence , at one with animals and plants and the sexuality that inspires them seems to be pure joy , pure bliss . " Fraenger argued against the notion that the hellscape shows the retribution handed down for sins committed in the center panel . Fraenger saw the figures in the garden as peaceful , naïve , and innocent in expressing their sexuality , and at one with nature . In contrast , those being punished in Hell comprise " musicians , gamblers , desecrators of judgment and punishment " .

Examining the symbolism in Bosch 's art — " the freakish riddles ... the irresponsible phantasmagoria of an ecstatic " — Fraenger concluded that his interpretation applied to Bosch 's three ( fully survived ) triptychs only : The Garden of Earthly Delights , Temptation of Saint Anthony , and The Haywain Triptych . Fraenger distinguished these pieces from the artist 's other works and argued that despite their anti-cleric polemic they were nevertheless all altarpieces , probably commissioned for the devotional purposes of a mystery cult . While commentators accept Fraenger 's analysis as astute and broad in scope , they have often questioned his final conclusions . These are regarded by many scholars as hypothesis only , and built on an unstable foundation and what can only be conjecture . Critics argue that artists during this period painted not for their own pleasure but for commission , while the language and secularization of a post-Renaissance mind-set projected onto Bosch would have been alien to the late-medieval painter .

Fraenger 's thesis stimulated others to examine The Garden more closely . Writer Carl Linfert also senses the joyfulness of the people in the center panel , but rejects Fraenger 's assertion that the painting is a " doctrinaire " work espousing the " guiltless sexuality " of the Adamite sect . While the figures engage in amorous acts without any suggestion of the forbidden , Linfert points to the elements in the center panel suggesting death and temporality : some figures turn away from the activity , seeming to lose hope in deriving pleasure from the passionate frolicking of their cohorts . Writing in 1969 , art historian E. H. Gombrich drew on a close reading of Genesis and the Gospel According to Saint Matthew to suggest that the central panel is , according to Linfert , " the state of mankind on the eve of the Flood , when men still pursued pleasure with no thought of the morrow , their only sin the unawareness of sin " .

In recent years several art historians have emphasized the ironic elements of The Garden . Erwin Pokorny concluded after many years of research on the complete work of Bosch , including the drawings , that in The Garden Bosch presented " a moralizing ironical wisdom that is sometimes reminiscent of Sebastian Brant ( 1457 – 1521 ) or Erasmus of Rotterdam ( 1465 – 1536 ) " . He pointed out that literature and art of Bosch 's time reflected not only the belief in hell after life , but also the belief in paradise after life . But then he listed many examples from the center panel showing that Bosch presented a new perspective by ridiculing this longing for paradise . Examples are fantastic acrobatics , equivalence of fruits and body parts , the parade of 100 males riding around the pool of females , and women signaling boredom by holding their heads in their hands . Art historian Guido Boulboullé arrived at a similar conclusion concerning the two side panels . Adam and Eve are created within a mockery of a paradise that is already polluted by ugly and hideous creatures . About the hellscape he writes : " [ A ] gruesome comedy pervades the whole panel " . While the " Prince of Hell " ( see above ) clearly alluded to earlier devil images , he can no longer be taken seriously here because of the many ridiculous attributes that he is equipped with . Boulboullé concludes that " Bosch does not present a clear , but an ambiguous world . ... It can be understood as a moral insight into the incurability of human folly , whose ridiculousness only becomes endurable by laughing . "

Bosch 's ironic intention is also conspicuous in the three anachronisms in the lower right corner of each of the three panels . During the creation of Adam and Eve there is already a book in the hands of a fantastic creature . In The Garden a clothed person appears ; and in the hell , objects from the real world of contracts and business — pen , paper , and seal — enter the scene . " Bosch 's innovative concept of vice allusions in the Garden of Delights " thus can be viewed both as a grim warning and as an entertaining satire . These two contrasting interpretations are documented already in 1605 ( José de Sigüenza ) and 1627 ( Francisco de Quevedo ) , respectively .

Following this perspective , the triptych allegorically represents the gardens of the old Palace of Coudenberg ( Brussels ) , which were actually often depicted as an expression of the luxurious and corrupting headquarters of the Habsburg domination . In brief , the first panel represents the once heavenly Burgundian Netherlands starting to be defiled ( after the death of Charles the Bold ) . The large central panel expresses the current situation , with the local Flemish-Dutch elites being completely corrupted . The last panel anticipates the tragic fate of the region under the imperial government . All details were carefully planned and are meaningful . For instance , the so-called " Tree-Man " symbolizes Bosch ( e.g. , " forest " , " wood " ) in the role of an eternal hangover ( the consequence of the dissolute party ) . By this way the artist punished himself because he was receiving well-paid commissions from both the Habsburgs and the Nassau ( at that time , the imperial mais courtiers ) . In this context , Bosch systematically selected Maximilian Habsburg ( the Holy Roman Emperor ) to be his nemesis , whose anthropomorphic head is even shaped into the right limb of the " Tree-Man " , aggravating the expiatory punishment of the artist .

Because Bosch was such a unique and visionary artist , his influence has not spread as widely as that of other major painters of his era . However , there have been instances of later artists incorporating elements of The Garden of Earthly Delights into their own work . Pieter Bruegel the Elder ( c . 1525 – 1569 ) in particular directly acknowledged Bosch as an important influence and inspiration , and incorporated many elements of the inner right panel into several of his most popular works . Bruegel 's Mad Meg depicts a peasant woman leading an army of women to pillage Hell , while his The Triumph of Death ( c . 1562 ) echoes the monstrous Hellscape of The Garden , and utilizes , according to the Royal Museum of Fine Arts Antwerp , the same " unbridled imagination and the fascinating colours " . While the Italian court painter Giuseppe Arcimboldo ( c . 1527 – 1593 ) did not create Hellscapes , he painted a body of strange and " fantastic " vegetable portraits — generally heads of people composed of plants , roots , webs and various other organic matter . These strange portraits rely on and echo a motif that was in part inspired by Bosch 's willingness to break from strict and faithful representations of nature .

David Teniers the Younger ( c . 1610 – 1690 ) was a Flemish painter who quoted both Bosch and Bruegel throughout his career in such works as his versions of the Temptation of St Anthony , the Rich Man in Hell and his version of Mad Meg . During the early 20th century , Bosch 's work enjoyed a popular resurrection . The early surrealists ' fascination with dreamscapes , the autonomy of the imagination , and a free-flowing connection to the unconscious brought about a renewed interest in his work . Bosch 's imagery struck a chord with Joan Miró and Salvador Dalí in particular . Both knew his paintings firsthand , having seen The Garden of Earthly Delights in the Museo del Prado , and both regarded him as an art-historical mentor . Miró 's The Tilled Field contains several parallels to Bosch 's Garden : similar flocks of birds ; pools from which living creatures emerge ; and oversize disembodied ears all echo the Dutch master 's work . Dalí 's 1929 The Great Masturbator is similar to an image on the right side of the left panel of Bosch 's Garden , composed of rocks , bushes and little animals resembling a face with a prominent nose and long eyelashes .

When André Breton wrote his first Surrealist Manifesto in 1924 , his historical precedents as inclusions named only Gustave Moreau , Georges Seurat and Uccello . However , the Surrealist movement soon rediscovered Bosch and Breughel , who quickly became popular among the Surrealist painters . René Magritte and Max Ernst both were inspired by Bosch 's The Garden of Earthly Delights . The triptych has also been the inspiration for works of fiction , among them Ian Watson 's science fiction novel The Garden of Delights , based around the discovery of a planet which resembles Bosch 's painting .

The 1994 Gator Bowl was a post-season American college football bowl game between the Virginia Tech Hokies and the Tennessee Volunteers at Ben Hill Griffin Stadium in Gainesville , Florida on December 30 , 1994 . The game was the final contest of the 1994 NCAA Division I-A football season for both teams , and ended in a 45-23 victory for Tennessee . The 1994 Gator Bowl saw 17th-ranked Virginia Tech face off against regional rival Tennessee at Ben Hill Griffin Stadium on the campus of the University of Florida . The game was moved to Gainesville in 1994 due to renovations to the Gator Bowl for the Jacksonville Jaguars . Virginia Tech came into the game with an 8 – 3 regular-season record that included a record of 5 – 2 in Big East Conference competition . The Tennessee Volunteers came entered the game with a regular-season record of 7 – 4 under head coach Phillip Fulmer that included a 5 – 3 record in Southeastern Conference competition . The game kicked off on December 30 , 1994 in Gainesville , Florida . From the start , Tennessee 's high-scoring offense dominated . The Volunteers scored two touchdowns in the first quarter and three in the second , while Virginia Tech was able to muster a lone touchdown and field goal in the second quarter . At halftime , Tennessee had a commanding 35 – 10 lead , behind the strong play of Freshman QB Peyton Manning .

The Hokies struggled back in the third quarter , scoring six unanswered points to close the score to 35 – 16 . In the fourth quarter , however , Tennessee answered Virginia Tech 's effort with 10 points , putting the game out of reach for the Hokies , who managed only a single touchdown in the fourth quarter . The Hokies fumbled the ball five times — losing it once — and threw two interceptions , allowing Tennessee to cruise to an easy victory , 45 – 23 . Tennessee running back James Stewart was named the game 's most valuable player .

In early 1994 , Jacksonville Mayor Ed Austin proposed $ 49 million in renovations to Jacksonville 's aging Gator Bowl Stadium in order to keep the stadium up to date for the annual Florida-Georgia rivalry game . After Florida and Georgia accepted the renovations , agreeing to play the rivalry game in Athens , Georgia during the renovations , Jacksonville investors proposed expanding the renovation plan in order to attract a National Football League team . The price tag was revised upward — to $ 121 million — and the city successfully attracted a team . Shortly after Jacksonville was awarded its new franchise — the Jacksonville Jaguars — the final plans were unveiled . The stadium would have additional luxury boxes , expanded seating , and upgraded facilities for teams and fans . The renovations were much more extensive than had initially been proposed , and required more time to be completed . Instead of beginning in early 1995 , work would have to begin in 1994 , leaving the site of the 1994 Gator Bowl ( played on Dec. 30 ) in doubt . By the end of January 1994 , as the Gator Bowl was being demolished , that doubt was also demolished when a deal was struck to host the Gator Bowl at the University of Florida , in that school 's Ben Hill Griffin Stadium . The game 's title sponsor , Outback Steakhouse , and its television sponsor , TBS , would remain constant , and both were in their final year of contracts with the Gator Bowl .

Prior to the start of the 1994-1995 college football season , the Gator Bowl was snubbed by the newly formed Bowl Alliance , a group of football conferences , bowl games , and television networks created to match up the No. 1 and No. 2 college football teams at the conclusion of each season . Though the Gator Bowl offered to pay $ 115 million for the right to become a Bowl Alliance game , the Orange Bowl was selected in place of the Gator Bowl . This event had repercussions at the end of the season , when the bowl was passed over by high-ranked teams that elected to accept bids to bowls in the new Bowl Alliance .

During the annual preseason poll of media members covering the Big East conference , Virginia Tech was picked to finish second among Big East teams , behind only Miami . The Hokies entered the 1994 college football season having finished the 1993 season with a win in the 1993 Independence Bowl , and hopes were high that they would return to a bowl game again in 1994 . The Hokies started the season well , winning their first four games in succession and culminating with a victory against West Virginia in the annual battle for the Black Diamond Trophy . The Hokies , who had begun the season ranked No. 21 in the country , rose to No. 14 by their fifth game of the season , a trip to Syracuse , New York , to play the Syracuse Orange . There , Virginia Tech suffered its first loss of the season , permitting 100-yard rushing games from Syracuse 's Malcolm Thomas and Kirby Dar Dar , the last time the Hokies allowed two hundred-yard rushers in the same game . Tech responded to the loss by reeling off another three wins in succession . That winning streak ended at No. 6 Miami , when Tech lost its second game of the season , a loss that was followed by a season-ending defeat to perennial rival Virginia . The Hokies concluded the regular season with an 8 – 4 record overall and a 5 – 2 record in the Big East . Ironically , despite their season-ending loss to Virginia , the Hokies were awarded an invitation to the Gator Bowl over the Cavaliers , who lost to North Carolina State in their season-ending game . In addition to that loss , Gator Bowl officials later stated they were reluctant to invite an Atlantic Coast Conference team for a fourth straight year , thus opening the door for the Hokies from the Big East .

The Tennessee Volunteers had finished the 1993 season with a 10 – 2 record and a season-ending loss to the Penn State Nittany Lions under first-year head coach Phillip Fulmer in the Citrus Bowl . Hopes were high that Tennessee 's second year under Fulmer 's command would end better than its first . Tennessee was ranked No. 13 in the Associated Press preseason poll at the start of the season , but won just one game in its first four of the season , causing the Volunteers to drop out of the top 25 for the first time since 1989 , breaking a streak of 84 consecutive weeks in the poll . To make matters worse , Tennessee 's two starting quarterbacks suffered season-ending injuries during that four-game span . In the Volunteers ' season-opener against UCLA , Jerry Colquitt suffered a knee injury . Backup quarterback Todd Helton was hurt in the fourth game of the season , a loss to Mississippi State . In response to the poor start , Fulmer overhauled his defense and coped with the loss of his first- and second-string quarterbacks by bringing in acclaimed freshman Peyton Manning , son of National Football League star Archie Manning .

Manning 's first start , a Tennessee homecoming game against Washington State , resulted in a 10 – 9 win . Things got progressively better for the Volunteers after Manning assumed the starting role , as they won six of their final regular-season games . The sole loss was a 13 – 17 defeat at the hands of then-No. 10 Alabama in Knoxville . The loss was merely a bump in the road , however , as Tennessee won all four regular-season games that followed , ending the regular season with a 65 – 0 drubbing of in-state rival Vanderbilt . In response to Fulmer 's success at turning the team around from a slow start , he was awarded with a one-year contract extension by the university .

The matchup of Virginia Tech and Tennessee was the first game between the two teams since 1937 , an unusual fact since both teams are located in the Appalachian Mountains and the two schools are just 3.5 hours by car apart . This proximity generated multiple news stories about towns lying between the two schools and the divided loyalties of their fans . In Washington County , Virginia , which lies along the Tennessee border , the county supervisor — a Virginia Tech graduate — proclaimed the week of the Gator Bowl to be " Hokie Week " over the objections of the county attorney , who graduated from Tennessee . This natural rivalry was amplified by a basketball game held the day prior to the Gator Bowl that pitted the two schools ' varsity teams against each other . In exchange for participating in the game , each team received $ 1.5 million from the Gator Bowl Association . Ticket sales were brisk in the month between the announcement of the Tech-Tennessee matchup and the day of the game . By December 14 , two weeks after the initial announcement , Virginia Tech had sold 16,000 tickets to Tennessee 's 9,000 . On December 23 , one week before the game , Tech had sold 17,653 tickets . By the day of the game , the two teams had combined to sell approximately 33,000 tickets . Two days prior to the game , spread bettors favored Tennessee to win by seven points .

The Tennessee offense was led by freshman quarterback Peyton Manning , son of NFL great Archie Manning , who had played against the Hokies in the 1968 Liberty Bowl . During the regular season , Peyton played in seven games , winning six of them and completing 86 of his 139 pass attempts for 1,114 yards , 11 touchdowns , and six interceptions . Manning 's passer rating of 145.2 was the third-highest among starting quarterbacks in the SEC . In recognition of his achievements , Manning was named the Southeastern Conference Freshman of the Year . One of Manning 's more prominent passing targets was Billy Williams , who , despite suffering a stress fracture in the first game of the season , recovered to catch 20 passes for 217 yards and two touchdowns . He also returned 17 kickoffs for an average of 20.8 yards per return . Manning 's favorite target was Joey Kent , who caught 36 passes for 470 yards during the regular season , but slightly injured his ankle in a pre-Gator Bowl practice . The Volunteers ' rushing offense had been led by Aaron Hayden during the regular season , but Hayden broke his leg during Tennessee 's final regular season game . Due to the injury , James Stewart was forecast to start the game at running back for the Volunteers . During the regular season , Tennessee was ranked No. 13 in rushing , accumulating an average of 231.2 rushing yards per game . Stewart accounted for 93.5 yards of that total , having carried the ball 170 times for 1,028 yards and 11 touchdowns during the regular season . One of Tennessee 's other backup running backs , Jay Graham , was predicted to be kept out of the game due to an injury , but played after undergoing surgery . Graham , who rushed 61 times for 275 yards during the regular season , suffered a broken jaw after being punched in the face by a teammate . Because of the injury to Graham , fourth-string running back Ronnie Pillow , who had carried the ball just five times during the regular season , was predicted to back up Stewart during the game .

On offense , the Virginia Tech Hokies were led by quarterback Maurice DeShazo , who completed 164 of his 296 pass attempts during the regular season for 2,110 yards , 13 touchdowns , and 13 interceptions . DeShazo 's success during the season helped him become the No. 4 all-time passing leader in Virginia Tech history , finishing his career with 5,720 passing yards . DeShazo 's favorite passing target was wide receiver Antonio Freeman , who finished the season having caught 38 passes for 586 yards and five touchdowns . The Gator Bowl was Freeman 's final collegiate game , just as it was DeShazo 's . Freeman finished his career as the No. 1 receiver in Virginia Tech history in terms of yardage ( bowl games were not counted in statistics until 2003 ) with 2,207 receiving yards . Freeman also was the team 's leading punt returner , having returned 39 kicks for 467 yards and a touchdown , and received second-team All-Big East honors . On the ground , Virginia Tech 's rushing offense was led by running back Dwayne Thomas , who carried the ball 142 times for 642 yards and five touchdowns . Backing up Thomas was Tommy Edwards , son of former Virginia Tech player Ken Edwards , who played with the Hokies from 1967 to 1969 , including the Hokies ' trip to the 1968 Liberty Bowl . By participating in the Gator Bowl and in the previous season 's Independence Bowl , the Edwardses became the first father-son combo in Virginia Tech history to have competed in a bowl game .

At the beginning of December , Virginia Tech 's offensive preparations for the Gator Bowl were disrupted when offensive coordinator Gary Tranquill abruptly quit the team in order to join friend Nick Saban , who had been hired as the head coach at Michigan State . Virginia Tech head coach Frank Beamer announced simultaneous with Tranquill 's departure that assistant head coach Billy Hite would control the offense during the Gator Bowl . Shortly after the announcement of Tranquill 's departure , Virginia Tech announced that former offensive coordinator Ricky Bustle would be returning to the team to fill the position after the Gator Bowl . Though he was not able to actively coach the team during the Gator Bowl , Bustle offered advice and strategy to Beamer during the weeks before the game .

During the regular season , the Volunteers ' scoring defense was ranked the second-best in the SEC , allowing an average of just 16.82 points per game . Tennessee also allowed just eight passing touchdowns and 20 touchdowns overall . One of Tennessee 's defensive leaders was defensive end Steve White , who led the Volunteers in sacks and tackles for loss with seven and eight , respectively . Tennessee 's leader in interceptions was Ronald Davis , who had two during the regular season . Scott Galyon had the most tackles on the team , with 93 . Strong safety Ray Austin , who had been named most valuable player in the Volunteers ' loss to Penn State during the 1993 Citrus Bowl , had 50 tackles — second-best among Tennessee defensive backs — two fumble recoveries , a sack , and two tackles for loss despite playing in only six games . The Volunteers ' defense also featured a cornerback named Tony Edge , a player from Virginia 's Phoebus High School who had been heavily recruited by both Virginia Tech and Tennessee . Edge suffered a dislocated shoulder in the Volunteers ' last regular-season game , but pledged he would play against the Hokies despite doctors ' disapproval .

Defensively , the Virginia Tech Hokies allowed an average of 308 yards per game and 18.4 points per game . During the last two games of the regular season , however , the Hokies permitted 34 points and 42 points to Rutgers and Virginia , respectively . The Virginia Tech defense was led by two strong performers in the defensive secondary . Safety Torrian Gray intercepted four passes during the regular season , returning one of the catches for a touchdown . He tied with cornerback William Yarborough for the most interceptions on the team during the regular season . Neither player was the team 's leading tackler , however . That honor went to linebacker George DelRicco , who had 130 tackles during the regular season . Fellow linebacker Ken Brown was named a first-team All-Big East selection , signifying his status as one of the best players at his position in the conference . He finished the season with 93 tackles , including six for loss and two sacks , enough for No. 3 on the team in tackles . Despite that success , Brown suffered a pulled hamstring before Virginia Tech 's final regular-season game and his presence in the Gator Bowl was doubtful . Virginia Tech sophomore defensive end Cornell Brown was named the best defensive college player in the state of Virginia by the Roanoke Times after earning 20 tackles for loss , including 11 sacks , and 35 quarterback hurries during the regular season .

Virginia Tech 's Tommy Edwards fielded the opening kickoff , which was returned to the Tech 29-yard line , where the Hokies ' offense began the first play of the game , an incomplete pass by Virginia Tech quarterback Maurice DeShazo . On the second play of the game , DeShazo again attempted a forward pass . This time , however , the ball was intercepted by Tennessee linebacker Tyrone Hines . Hines returned the ball to the Tech 28-yard line , allowing the Volunteers ' offense to begin the game already in scoring position . Tennessee 's first play was a run up the middle by James Stewart , who gained three yards . On the second play , Tennessee quarterback Peyton Manning completed a nine-yard pass to wide receiver Nilo Silvan . During the play , Silvan suffered a broken ankle and did not return to the game . Now at the 16-yard line , Tennessee continued its drive with a rush by Stewart , who wasn 't able to advance the ball . On the next play , the Volunteers were penalized 10 yards for a block in the back of a Virginia Tech player . Despite the penalty and an incomplete pass on a subsequent play , Tennessee was able to gain a first down to the five-yard line with a pass from Manning to Joey Kent . Two plays later , the Volunteers scored on a one-yard touchdown run by Stewart . The extra point kick was successful , and Tennessee took a 7 – 0 lead with 11 : 41 remaining in the first quarter .

Following Tennessee 's touchdown , the two teams traded possessions , each going three and out . Virginia Tech regained the ball after a Tennessee punt to its 20-yard line with 7 : 31 remaining in the quarter . After a Tech fumble that was recovered by the Hokies , Tech running back Dwayne Thomas ran nine yards for the first Tech first down of the game . After an incomplete pass , DeShazo and Thomas connected on an eight-yard pass before Thomas broke free for an 11-yard run and another first down . Thomas continued advancing the ball , picking up eight yards on two rushing plays . DeShazo then completed a four-yard pass for a first down at the Tennessee 39-yard line . There , however , Tennessee 's defense stiffened and did not allow the Hokies another first down . The Tech punt was downed at the Tennessee 7-yard line , where the Volunteers began their third possession of the game . On the first play of the drive , Tennessee committed a five-yard false start penalty , pushing the Volunteers back toward their goal line . A Tennessee rush was stopped for no gain , then Stewart picked up eight yards on a running play . Needing eight yards for a first down , Manning threw an 11-yard pass to Kent for the first down . On the next play , Manning completed a 43-yard toss to Kent , driving the Volunteers into the Virginia Tech half of the field . Manning 's next throw was a 35-yard touchdown throw to Marcus Nash . The extra point was good , and Tennessee took a 14 – 0 lead with 1 : 08 remaining in the quarter .

Tennessee 's kickoff went out of bounds , allowing Tech 's offense to start at its 35-yard line . DeShazo threw an incomplete pass , then completed one for a nine-yard gain . Needing one yard for a first down , Tech fullback Bryan Edwards was stopped for a loss and the Hokies were forced to punt . Tennessee fair caught the ball at their 20-yard line , where the Volunteers ' offense again began to work . A five-yard penalty pushed the Volunteers backward , but running back Jay Graham regained the lost five yards with a run on the next play and the clock ran out in the quarter . At the end of the first quarter , Tennessee led , 14 – 0 .

At the beginning of the second quarter , Tennessee had the ball at its 19-yard line , facing a second down and ten . On the first play of the quarter , Tennessee ran an end-around to Kendrick Jones , who ran the ball for 76 yards , giving the Volunteers a first down at the Virginia Tech five-yard line . Three plays later , running back Jay Graham crossed the goal line for the first Tennessee touchdown of the second quarter . The extra point was good , and with 13 : 23 remaining in the first half , Tennessee took a 21 – 0 lead . Following Tennessee 's post-touchdown kickoff and a short kick return , the Virginia Tech offense began at its 24-yard line . The first Tech play of the quarter , a run up the middle by Edmonds , resulted in a 17-yard gain and a first down . Dwayne Thomas followed Edmonds ' run with one of his own , advancing the ball to the 50-yard line . He pushed into Tennessee territory on the next play , a five-yard run that gave the Hokies a first down at the Tennessee 45-yard line . DeShazo then ran nine yards , and Tech gained a first down on the next play . Inside the Tennessee 35-yard line , however , the Volunteers ' defense stiffened . DeShazo passed for a seven-yard gain , but the Hokies were unable to gain a first down until DeShazo scrambled for a 13-yard gain on fourth down . The run kept the Tech drive alive as the Hokies now had a first down at the Tennessee 14-yard line . Tennessee forced another third-down play , but the Hokies gained a first down at the Tennessee three-yard line with a pass from DeShazo to Thomas . Four plays later , the Hokies scored their first points of the game as Thomas dove across the goal line on fourth down . The subsequent extra point was good , and the Hokies cut Tennessee 's lead to 21 – 7 with 5 : 17 remaining in the first half .

Virginia Tech 's kickoff was returned to the Tennessee 26-yard line , and the Volunteers ' offense returned to the field . Instead of Peyton Manning , backup quarterback Branndon Stewart came on the field to lead Tennessee . On the second play of the Tennessee drive , Stewart gained 24 yards on a quarterback scramble , giving the Volunteers a first down at the Tennessee 49-yard line . On the next play , he completed a 27-yard pass to Kent for another first down . Two plays later , James Stewart broke free for an 18-yard run that gave Tennessee a first down at the Virginia Tech one-yard line . One play later , Stewart crossed the goal line for Tennessee 's second touchdown of the quarter . The extra point was good , and Tennessee 's lead was again 21 points , 28 – 7 , with 3 : 22 remaining in the quarter . The Volunteers ' kickoff was returned to the Tech 22-yard line , and the Hokies began another drive . On the first play of the drive , however , Maurice DeShazo scrambled for a ten-yard gain but fumbled the ball . The loose ball was recovered by a Tennessee defender , and the Volunteers took over on offense from the Tech 32-yard line . Branndon Stewart came out onto the field in place of Manning , and completed an eight-yard pass to James Stewart to begin the drive . James Stewart then ran to the 20-yard line for a first down . On the next play , Tennessee executed a trick play in which James Stewart received the ball via a hand-off , imitating a running play , but threw the ball instead . The pass was caught by James Kendrick for a touchdown , and after the extra point , Tennessee had a 35 – 7 lead with 2 : 08 remaining in the first half .

The kickoff was returned to the Tech 27-yard line , and the Hokies began the final drive of the second quarter . Antonio Freeman caught a six-yard pass from DeShazo , then DeShazo completed a five-yard pass to Shawn Scales . DeShazo completed a four-yard pass , then Ken Oxendine had a seven-yard catch from DeShazo at the Tech 49-yard line . On the next play , Oxendine caught a short pass that pushed the Hokies to the Tennessee 45-yard line , then DeShazo threw his first incomplete pass of the drive . The incompletion stopped the clock with 37 seconds remaining , allowing time for DeShazo to complete a 26-yard pass to Bryan Still on the next play . Now inside the Tennessee red zone , the Hokies continued to move the ball via short passes . Tech gained a first down at the Tennessee six-yard line , and used a timeout to stop the clock in order to have a chance to earn a touchdown before halftime . On a subsequent play , however , Tech committed a five-yard penalty , and Tech head coach Frank Beamer ordered kicker Ryan Williams into the game . Williams ' 27-yard field goal attempt was good , and Tech cut Tennessee 's lead to 35 – 10 at the end of the first half .

Because Virginia Tech received the ball to begin the game , Tennessee received the ball to begin the second half . Tech 's kickoff was returned to the Tennessee 13-yard line , and Peyton Manning returned to the field to lead the Volunteers ' offense . The first play of the second half was an eight-yard run by James Stewart , which was followed by a six-yard run by Stewart for a first down at the Tennessee 27-yard line . Another Stewart run was followed by two short completions from Manning , and the Volunteers had another first down at the 37-yard line . Tennessee 's next play was negated by an offensive pass interference penalty against the Volunteers , who were pushed back to the 22-yard line by the penalty . Though Manning gained 22 yards with a third-down pass , Tennessee was unable to gain enough yards for a first down and punted . During the kick , Tennessee committed a penalty and had to kick again after the five-yard penalty was assessed . The punt was fair caught at the Tech 25-yard line , and the Hokies began their first offensive possession of the second half with 10 : 14 remaining in the third quarter .

On the first play , DeShazo completed an 18-yard pass to Still , who gave the Hokies a first down at their 43-yard line . On the next play , Tech wide receiver Antonio Freeman committed a pass interference penalty , pushing the Hokies back 15 yards . Dwayne Thomas made good the penalty by gaining 16 yards on an option run , which was followed by a 17-yard pass from DeShazo to Freeman , who kept the Hokies ' drive going with a first down at the Tennessee 39-yard line . After an incomplete pass , Thomas broke free for a 27-yard run along the left side of the field , giving Tech a first down at the Tennessee 13-yard line . Tennessee 's defense held for three plays , forcing a fourth down . Instead of kicking a field goal , the Hokies attempted to convert the fourth down by running the ball . DeShazo scrambled , broke free of the defense , and crossed the goal line for the first Tech touchdown of the second half . Williams missed the extra point kick , however , and Tech cut Tennessee 's lead to 35 – 16 with 7 : 03 remaining in the quarter .

The kickoff was returned to the Tennessee 17-yard line , and Tennessee 's offense began work . The Volunteers were aided by a five-yard offsides penalty against Virginia Tech on the first play of the drive , but the Hokies stopped the Tennessee offense for losses or no gain until Manning threw a 14-yard pass on third down , pushing Tennessee to the 34-yard line . After two incomplete passes , Manning scrambled 27 yards for another first down , this time at the Tech 39-yard line . Once there , however , the Virginia Tech defense stiffened and did not allow another first down during the drive . Tennessee kicker John Becksvoort came into the game , seemingly to attempt a 48-yard field goal . The kick turned out to be a trick play — an attempted pass by the kick holder — but Hokie defender Mike Williams tackled the holder for a loss . After the failed trick play , the Hokies ' offense started at their 44-yard line . The first Tech play of the drive was a 15-yard pass from DeShazo to Still for a first down . A three-yard run by Thomas was followed by a seven-yard reverse by Still for another first down at the Tennessee 29-yard line . On first down , Thomas pushed the Hokies eight yards forward with a run up the middle . This was followed by two incomplete passes , bringing up fourth down . Again , Tech head coach Frank Beamer elected to try to convert the fourth down rather than kick a field goal . Unlike Tech 's previous fourth down , however , the try was unsuccessful after DeShazo mishandled the snap and was tackled for a loss . Virginia Tech turned the ball over on downs , and Tennessee 's offense returned to the game with 1 : 31 remaining in the quarter .

The Volunteers started at their 27-yard line to begin the drive , but went three and out and punted back to the Hokies without gaining a first down . The kick was returned to the Tech 39-yard line , where the Hokies ' offense started with 31 seconds remaining in the quarter . On the first play of the drive , wide receiver Bryan Still broke away from the Tennessee defense and was wide open for a pass . Maurice DeShazo threw the ball to Still , but Still dropped the pass after it bounced off his chest , thus denying the Hokies a touchdown . Virginia Tech head coach Frank Beamer later cited the dropped pass as a critical turning point in the game , saying , " I think if he could have made that catch , we could have gotten back in the game . " Tech player Torrian Gray agreed , saying , " When he dropped the ball , that took a lot out of us . " After Still 's dropped pass , DeShazo threw two incomplete passes and Virginia Tech punted back to Tennessee . The kick was caught by near the Tennessee 10-yard line , and returned all the way to the Virginia Tech 37-yard line . At the end of the third quarter , Tennessee still led , 35 – 16 .

The fourth quarter began with Tennessee in possession of the ball and facing a first-and-10 at the Virginia Tech 37-yard line after a long punt return . Stewart ran twice for six yards , then Manning completed a pass to Kent at the 20-yard line for a first down . Manning then completed a pass to Nash for another first down at the Tech five-yard line . Two plays later , Stewart scored his third touchdown of the game with a five-yard run to the right side of the field . The extra point was good , and with 13 : 17 remaining in the game , Tennessee took a 42 – 16 lead . Bryan Still fielded the Tennessee kickoff and returned it to the 19-yard line of Virginia Tech . After a short pass , DeShazo threw his second interception of the game . Tennessee defender John Summers returned the catch to the Tech 19-yard line , and backup quarterback Branndon Stewart returned to the game for Tennessee 's offense . James Stewart took the first play of the Volunteers ' drive , an eight-yard gain , then backup Jay Graham entered the game and ran to the five-yard line for a first down . After the next play — , a two-yard run by Graham — Tennessee committed a 15-yard personal foul penalty , pushing the Volunteers back to the 17-yard line . Branndon Stewart completed a pass to tight end David Horn , pushing Tennessee back to the three-yard line , but not gaining enough for a first down . Tennessee kicker John Becksvoort returned to the game , and his 19-yard field goal attempt was good , giving the Volunteers a 45 – 16 lead with 9 : 41 to go in the game .

Following the kickoff and return , backup Virginia Tech quarterback Jim Druckenmiller entered the game to guide the Hokies ' offense . The first play of the drive , however , was a run by backup running back Ken Oxendine , who gained five yards . Two more runs by Oxendine failed to gain a first down , however , and Virginia Tech punted . Tennessee 's Sean Summers returned the kick to the Volunteers ' 40-yard line , and the Volunteers continued trying to run out the clock . Tennessee failed to gain a first down , and the resulting punt rolled into the end zone for a touchback . From the Tech 20-yard line , Druckenmiller completed a 13-yard pass to Still for a first down at the Tech 33-yard line . On the next play , Druckenmiller completed a long pass to tight end Bryan Jennings , who carried the ball 41 yards . Following the play , the Volunteers completed a penalty , advancing the ball to the Tennessee 22-yard line . Two short runs advanced the Hokies to the 19-yard line , then Druckenmiller completed a 10-yard pass to Freeman for a first down . On the next play , Druckenmiller connected with Still for a nine-yard touchdown pass . The extra point was good , and Tennessee 's lead was cut to 45 – 23 , but with only 4 : 13 remaining in the game , the game seemed out of reach for the Hokies .

Virginia Tech 's kickoff was recovered in the end zone for a touchback , and the Volunteers started at their 20-yard line . Tennessee resumed running out the clock via short runs up the middle of the field that kept the game clock ticking down . After not gaining a first down , Tennessee punted to the Hokies with less than two minutes remaining in the game . Tech wide receiver Antonio Freeman returned the kick to the Tech 42-yard line , and on the first play of the Hokie drive , Druckenmiller completed a 17-yard pass to the Tennessee 41-yard line . That completion was followed by a nine-yard pass to Jermaine Holmes . After an incomplete pass that almost was intercepted , Druckenmiller threw an incomplete pass before Oxendine failed to gain enough yards for a first down and Tech turned the ball over on downs . With less than a minute remaining , Tennessee 's offense ran out the remaining seconds on the clock and secured a 45 – 23 victory .

In recognition of their performances during the game , Tennessee 's James Stewart and Virginia Tech 's Maurice DeShazo were named the game 's most valuable players . Stewart finished the game having carried the ball 22 times for 85 yards and three rushing touchdowns . Stewart also caught one pass for seven yards and threw a touchdown pass for 19 yards . On the other side , DeShazo completed 17 of his 30 passes for 140 yards and two interceptions . He also ran the ball 11 times for 39 yards and a rushing touchdown . Though Stewart was named the most valuable player for the Volunteers , multiple Tennessee players had statistically significant games . Volunteer quarterback Peyton Manning finished the game having completed 12 of his 19 pass attempts for 189 yards , one touchdown , and one interception . Backup Tennessee quarterback Brandon Stewart completed all three of his pass attempts , accumulating 49 yards in the process . Tennessee receiver Joey Kent was the primary beneficiary of the Volunteer passing attack , leading all receivers during the game with six receptions for 116 yards . Tennessee 's passing touchdowns went to Kendrick Jones , who also had 37 receiving yards and 76 rushing yards ; and Marcus Nash , who caught three passes for 54 yards .

Virginia Tech 's offense , though far less successful than Tennessee 's , also had some high performers . Running Back Dwayne Thomas finished the game with 19 carries for 102 yards and a touchdown , becoming the game 's leading rusher in terms of yardage , if not points scored . The Hokies ' leading receiver , Bryan Still , caught five passes for 79 yards and a touchdown . The touchdown pass came from Tech backup quarterback Jim Druckenmiller , who finished the game having completed six of his eight pass attempts for 97 yards and the touchdown . The 68 points scored in the game were a Gator Bowl record at the time , and Tennessee 's 35 first-half points also were a Gator Bowl record . Kendrick Jones ' 76-yard run on the first play of the second quarter was the longest in Gator Bowl history at the time . Stewart 's three touchdowns and the Volunteers ' six touchdowns were Tennessee bowl game records at the time , and the Volunteers also set Tennessee bowl-game records for most points and offensive yardage .

With the win , Tennessee finished the 1994 college football season with an overall record of 8 – 4 . In the final Associated Press poll of the year , the Volunteers were ranked No. 22 . Virginia Tech 's also took it to a final record of 8 – 4 , and the Hokies fell from their No. 17 spot in the AP poll to being unranked . In the USA Today Coaches ' Poll , Tech dropped to No. 24 . This game was also the final meeting of the Hokies and the Volunteers until the 2009 Chick-fil-A Bowl . Despite their regional proximity to each other , there were numerous failed attempts at scheduling a game between the universities . These efforts finally paid off in October 2013 when the two schools announced the Battle at Bristol , which will be at the Bristol Motor Speedway in Bristol , Tennessee , on September 10 , 2016 . The game will feature the largest crowd in history to see a football game , i.e. approximately 150,000 fans over the current record of 115,109 fans who saw Michigan play Notre Dame in September 2013 . This was the last appearance of an SEC team in the Gator Bowl until 2011 . Conversely , it was the last Gator Bowl which did not feature a team from the ACC ( which admitted Virginia Tech in 2004 ) for the same period . After this game , the Gator Bowl entered into exclusive tie-in contracts with the ACC and the Big East until 2010 ( with the addition of the Big 12 and Notre Dame from 2006-2010 ) .

Baggage is an American dating game show hosted by Jerry Springer and broadcast by Game Show Network . The original series premiered on April 19 , 2010 , airing for four seasons . A spin-off series , entitled Baggage on the Road , aired for one season , which debuted January 7 , 2015 . The show has earned high ratings by GSN 's standards ; despite this , it has also received mixed critical reception . The series gives three contestants the chance to win the eye of a prospective date . The contestants carry three suitcases onstage : a small , medium , and large one . Each suitcase contains an embarrassing , gross , unique , or weird proposition the contestant may have . These cases represent the " baggage " to which they will confess and defend . The bigger the suitcase , the bigger the secret . Once the three contestants are pared down to one , the potential dater must admit to a fault of his or her own .

The game is played by first introducing the central character . Three contestants are then introduced , each accompanied by three pieces of baggage : a small one , a medium one , and a large one , with each one containing a corresponding secret . The central contestant also has a piece of baggage of his or her own , which is only revealed at the end of the show . During the show , three possible secrets about the central contestant are given , one of which is the actual secret contained in their baggage . These secrets can include bad habits , strange relationship preferences , issues with one 's past , or strange hobbies . After the three other contestants are introduced , they each open the smallest piece of baggage , and explain the secrets they contain . In the second segment , Springer reveals the second piece of baggage , contained in the medium-sized suitcase . The three contestants are placed on the other side of the stage , along with the central contestant . Only the three contestants know which piece of baggage belongs to whom . The main contestant chooses the one piece of baggage which is the " deal breaker " ( i.e. , the one secret that they cannot accept ) . After stating this , the contestants then return to the other side of the stage and reveal which suitcase belongs to them . The person who claims the deal breaker baggage is immediately eliminated , and reveals the largest piece of baggage that would have been shown in the final round . The central contestant and two remaining contestants discuss the secrets in the medium pieces of baggage ; the two contestants then plead their cases as to why they should be the central contestant 's choice . The two remaining contestants , one at a time , are then asked a few questions ( usually five or six each ) by Springer about their personal lives .

The series was officially announced on March 23 , 2010 , with Jerry Springer being confirmed as the host . The original series was produced by Comcast Entertainment Group ; Jay James and Tim Puntillo served as executive producers . On July 26 , GSN announced plans to renew the show for a second season , which began airing on August 16 , 2010 . A syndication test run was shown on a select group of Sinclair Broadcast Group 's stations January 10 , 2011 . The series began airing in syndication in the United States in September 2012 , becoming to first original program the network 's history to achieve such a feat . A third season began airing on June 6 , 2011 . During season three , a half-hour special entitled Baggage First Dates aired during a five-hour " Best of Baggage Marathon . " The special followed a couple who had previously appeared on the show talking to Springer about what happened on their first date following their appearance . A fourth season of the show premiered on March 14 , 2012 . With GSN ’ s Executive Vice President of Programming , Amy Introcaso-Davis , citing that the series continued to remain " extremely popular " in reruns , GSN announced plans to order twenty episodes of a traveling version of the series . The spin-off , entitled Baggage on the Road , follows an identical format to its predecessor while traveling to tape episodes in various U.S. cities . Prior to the spin-off , a one-hour special entitled Baggage : Most Outrageous Moments aired on January 1 , 2015 , featuring highlights from the original series ' run . The spin-off premiered on January 7 , 2015 ; Wilshire Studios produced the revival with Lisa Tucker serving as executive producer .

The show quickly became a ratings success for GSN , becoming the highest-rated weekday series in the network 's history . The original series averaged 473,000 viewers during its first season , while the 2015 version saw a season-high of 524,000 viewers for its only season . Despite earning respectable ratings by GSN 's standards , Baggage has received mixed critical reviews . Carrie Grosvenor of About Entertainment argued that the series " isn 't exactly must-see TV , but it 's entertaining enough to catch an episode here and there . " Additionally , Josef Adalian of The Wrap gave a negative pre-review of the show , calling it and Springer " GSN 's latest bad idea . " In 2012 , however , Baggage appeared in Entertainment Weekly as a " top guilty pleasure , " and was also featured in the HBO television series Girls . Writing for Yahoo ! , Gabrielle Rice called the series " very entertaining , " and argued Springer to be " the perfect host for the show . " June Thomas , writing for Slate , opened her review by calling the series " real , and ... spectacular . " Additionally , Jordan Carr of The Awl titled his review , " Jerry Springer 's Baggage Is The Greatest TV Show Ever . " Carr called the formula of the show " brilliant " despite it being " predictable and not that exciting . "

The Churchill War Rooms is a museum in London and one of the five branches of the Imperial War Museum . The museum comprises the Cabinet War Rooms , a historic underground complex that housed a British government command centre throughout the Second World War , and the Churchill Museum , a biographical museum exploring the life of British statesman Winston Churchill . Construction of the Cabinet War Rooms , located beneath the Treasury building in the Whitehall area of Westminster , began in 1938 . They became operational in August 1939 , shortly before the outbreak of war in Europe . They remained in operation throughout the Second World War , before being abandoned in August 1945 after the surrender of Japan . After the war the historic value of the Cabinet War Rooms was recognised . Their preservation became the responsibility of the Ministry of Works and later the Department for the Environment , during which time very limited numbers of the public were able to visit by appointment . In the early 1980s the Imperial War Museum was asked to take over the administration of the site , and the Cabinet War Rooms were opened to the public in April 1984 . The museum was reopened in 2005 following a major redevelopment as the Churchill Museum and Cabinet War Rooms , but in 2010 this was shortened to the Churchill War Rooms .

In 1936 the Air Ministry , the British government department responsible for the Royal Air Force , believed that in the event of war enemy aerial bombing of London would cause up to 200,000 casualties per week . British government commissions under Warren Fisher and Sir James Rae in 1937 and 1938 considered that key government offices should be dispersed from central London to the suburbs , and non-essential offices to the Midlands or North West . Pending this dispersal , in May 1938 Sir Hastings Ismay , then Deputy Secretary of the Committee of Imperial Defence , ordered an Office of Works survey of Whitehall to identify a suitable site for a temporary emergency government centre . The Office concluded the most suitable site was the basement of the New Public Offices , a government building located on the corner of Horse Guards Road and Great George Street , near Parliament Square . The building now accommodates HM Treasury . Work to convert the basement of the New Public Offices began , under the supervision of Ismay and Sir Leslie Hollis , in June 1938 . The work included installing communications and broadcasting equipment , sound-proofing , ventilation and reinforcement . Meanwhile , by the summer of 1938 the War Office , Admiralty and Air Ministry had developed the concept of a Central War Room that would facilitate discussion and decision-making between the Chiefs of Staff of the armed forces . As ultimate authority lay with the civilian government the Cabinet , or a smaller War Cabinet , would require close access to senior military figures . This implied accommodation close to the armed forces ' Central War Room . In May 1939 it was decided that the Cabinet would be housed within the Central War Room . In August 1939 , with war imminent and protected government facilities in the suburbs not yet ready , the War Rooms became operational on 27 August 1939 , only days before the invasion of Poland on 1 September , and Britain 's declaration of war on Germany on 3 September .

During its operational life two of the Cabinet War Rooms were of particular importance . Once operational , the facility 's Map Room was in constant use and manned around the clock by officers of the Royal Navy , British army and Royal Air Force . These officers were responsible for producing a daily intelligence summary for the King , Prime Minister and the military Chiefs of Staff . The other key room was the Cabinet Room . Until the opening of the Battle of France , which began on 10 May 1940 , Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain 's war cabinet met at the War Rooms only once , in October 1939 . Following Winston Churchill 's appointment as Prime Minister , Churchill visited the Cabinet Room in May 1940 and declared : ' This is the room from which I will direct the war ' . In total 115 Cabinet meetings were held at the Cabinet War Rooms , the last on 28 March 1945 , when the German V-weapon bombing campaign came to an end . On 22 October 1940 , during the Blitz bombing campaign against Britain , it was decided to increase the protection of the Cabinet War Rooms by the installation of a massive layer of concrete known as ' the Slab ' . Up to 5 feet ( 1.5 metres ) thick , the Slab was progressively extended and by spring 1941 the increased protection had enabled the Cabinet War Rooms to expand to three times their original size . While the usage of many of the War Rooms ' individual rooms changed over the course of the war , the facility included dormitories for staff , private bedrooms for military officers and senior ministers , and rooms for typists or telephone switchboard operators .

Two other notable rooms include the Transatlantic Telephone Room and Churchill 's office-bedroom . From 1943 , a SIGSALY code-scrambling encrypted telephone was installed in the basement of Selfridges , Oxford Street connected to a similar terminal in the Pentagon building . This enabled Churchill to speak securely with American President Roosevelt in Washington , with the first conference taking place on 15 July 1943 . Later extensions were installed to both 10 Downing Street and the specially constructed Transatlantic Telephone Room within the Cabinet War Rooms . Churchill 's office-bedroom included BBC broadcasting equipment ; Churchill made four wartime broadcasts from the Cabinet War Rooms . Although the office room was also fitted out as a bedroom , Churchill rarely slept underground , preferring to sleep at 10 Downing Street or the No.10 Annexe , a flat in the New Public Offices directly above the Cabinet War Rooms . His daughter Mary Soames often slept in the bedroom allocated to Mrs Churchill .

After the end of the war , the Cabinet War Rooms became redundant and were abandoned . Their maintenance became the responsibility of the Ministry of Works . In March 1948 the question of public access to the War Rooms was raised in Parliament and the Minister responsible , Charles Key MP , considered that ' it would not be practicable to throw open for inspection by the general public accommodation which forms part of an office where confidential work is carried on ' . Even so , a tour was organised for journalists on 17 March , with members of the press being welcomed by Lord Ismay and shown around the Rooms by their custodian , Mr. George Rance . While the Rooms were not open to the general public , they could be accessed by appointment , with access being restricted to small groups . Even so , by the 1970s ( with responsibility for the Rooms having passed to the Department for the Environment in 1975 ) tens of thousands of requests to visit the Rooms were being received every year , of which only 5,000 were successful . Meanwhile , the atmospheric conditions of the site , being dry and dusty , were having a detrimental effect on the rooms ' furnishings and historic maps and other documents . The prospect was raised of decanting the contents of the Rooms to an established museum , with the National Army Museum and Imperial War Museum being suggested as candidates . In the event , £ 7,000 was secured to conserve the material in situ .

In 1974 the Imperial War Museum was approached by the government and asked to consider taking over the administration of the site . A feasibility study was prepared but came to nothing , the museum feeling it did not have sufficient resources to commit to the War Rooms . In 1981 Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher , known as an admirer of Winston Churchill , expressed the hope that the Rooms could be opened before the next general election . The Imperial War Museum was again approached . Initially still reluctant , the museum 's trustees decided in January 1982 that the museum would take over the site , on the understanding that the government would make the necessary resources available . The initial costs were to be met by the Department for the Environment , and the War Rooms intended to be self-supporting thereafter . The Rooms were opened to the public by Thatcher on 4 April 1984 , in a ceremony attended by Churchill family members and former Cabinet War Rooms staff . At first the Rooms were administered by the museum on behalf of Department for the Environment ; in 1989 responsibility was transferred to the Imperial War Museum .

Following a major expansion in 2003 , a suite of rooms , used as accommodation by Churchill , his wife and close associates , was added to the museum . The restoration of these rooms , which since the war had been stripped out and used for storage , cost £ 7.5 million . In 2005 the War Rooms were rebranded as the Churchill Museum and Cabinet War Rooms , with 850m2 of the site redeveloped as a biographical museum exploring Churchill 's life . The museum , the development of which cost a further £ 6 million raised from private fundraising , makes extensive use of audiovisual technology . The centrepiece is a 15-metre interactive table that enables visitors to access digitised material , particularly from the Churchill Archives Centre , via an ' electronic filing cabinet ' . The Churchill Museum won the 2006 Council of Europe Museum Prize . During 2009-2011 the museum received over 300,000 visitors a year . In May 2010 the name of the museum was shortened to Churchill War Rooms . In June 2012 the museum 's entrance was redesigned by Clash Architects with consulting engineers Price & Myers . Intended to act as a ' beacon ' for the museum , the new external design included a faceted bronze entranceway , while the interior showed the cleaned and restored Portland stone walls of the Treasury building and Clive Steps . The design was described as ' appropriately martial and bulldog-like ' and as ' a fusion of architecture and sculpture ' .

The Plitvice Lakes incident ( Croatian : Krvavi Uskrs na Plitvicama or Plitvički krvavi Uskrs , both translating as " Plitvice Bloody Easter " ) was an armed clash at the beginning of the Croatian War of Independence . It was fought between Croatian police and armed forces from the Croatian Serb-established SAO Krajina at the Plitvice Lakes in Croatia , on 31 March 1991 . The fighting followed the SAO Krajina 's takeover of the Plitvice Lakes National Park and resulted in Croatia recapturing the area . The clash resulted in one killed on each side and contributed to the worsening ethnic tensions . The fighting prompted the Presidency of Yugoslavia to order the Yugoslav People 's Army ( Jugoslovenska Narodna Armija – JNA ) to step in and create a buffer zone between the opposing forces . The JNA arrived at the scene the following day and presented Croatia with an ultimatum requesting the police to withdraw . Even though the special police units which captured the Plitvice Lakes area did pull out on 2 April , a newly established Croatian police station , staffed by 90 officers , remained in place . The police station was blockaded by the JNA three months later , and captured in late August 1991 .

In 1990 , following the electoral defeat of the government of the Socialist Republic of Croatia , ethnic tensions worsened . The Yugoslav People 's Army ( Jugoslovenska Narodna Armija – JNA ) confiscated Croatia 's Territorial Defence ( Teritorijalna obrana – TO ) weapons to minimize resistance . On 17 August , the tensions escalated into an open revolt of the Croatian Serbs , centred on the predominantly Serb-populated areas of the Dalmatian hinterland around Knin , parts of the Lika , Kordun , Banovina regions and eastern Croatia . They established a Serbian National Council in July 1990 , to coordinate opposition to Croatian President Franjo Tuđman 's policy of pursuing independence for Croatia . Milan Babić , a dentist from the southern town of Knin , was elected president . Knin 's police chief , Milan Martić , established paramilitary militias . The two men eventually became the political and military leaders of the SAO Krajina , a self-declared state incorporating the Serb-inhabited areas of Croatia . In the beginning of 1991 , Croatia had no regular army . In an effort to bolster its defence , Croatia doubled the size of its police force to about 20,000 . The most effective part of the force was the 3,000-strong special police that were deployed in 12 battalions adopting military organisation . In addition there were 9,000 – 10,000 regionally organised reserve police . The reserve police were set up in 16 battalions and 10 companies , but they lacked weapons .

In an effort to consolidate territory under their control , Croatian Serb leaders organised a political rally at the Plitvice Lakes on 25 March 1991 , demanding the area be annexed to the SAO Krajina . Three days later , on 28 March , SAO Krajina special police seized the area , and with the help of armed civilians , removed the Croatian management of the Plitvice Lakes National Park . The force deployed by the SAO Krajina to the Plitvice Lakes was estimated to be approximately 100-strong . The region was relatively sparsely populated and there was no obvious threat to Serbs there . Journalist Tim Judah suggests that the move may have been motivated by a desire to control a strategic road that ran north-south through the park , linking the Serb communities in the Lika and Banovina regions .

Croatia deployed special police forces , specifically the Lučko , Rakitje and Sljeme special police units based in and around Zagreb , supported by additional police forces drawn from Karlovac and Gospić to retake the Plitvice Lakes area . The Croatian police force , commanded by Josip Lucić , used several buses and passenger cars , as well as an armoured personnel carrier to approach the Plitvice Lakes area . The main 180-strong group of the Rakitje Special Police Unit ( SPU ) , directly commanded by Lucić , arrived in dense fog , along the main road from Zagreb via the Korana River bridge . The bridge was secured by the Lučko unit shortly before midnight on 30 / 31 March 1991 . An auxiliary force approached the Plitvice Lakes via Ličko Petrovo Selo , while the Kumrovec SPU was deployed in the area between the lakes and Gospić , where it captured the Ljubovo Pass to secure the right flank of the main effort . The total attacking force comprised approximately 300 troops . The approaching convoy was ambushed at a barricade set up by the SAO Krajina force near Plitvice Lakes before 7 : 00 in the morning of Easter Sunday , 31 March 1991 . The SAO Krajina force attacked the vehicles carrying the Croatian police and held their position until they fell back to the national park post office two and a half hours later . The Croatian advance , additionally hindered by deep snow , was achieved at a cost of six wounded . The attacking force secured its objectives by 11 : 00 am . As the attacking operation reached its completion , the Croatian military sustained its first combat fatality of the Croatian War of Independence , when Josip Jović was killed by a machine gun covering retreating SAO Krajina troops . Shortly afterwards , the Yugoslav Air Force dispatched a Mil Mi-8 helicopter to attend to wounded on both sides , and it left the area after an hour and a half . The helicopter was dispatched by Colonel General Anton Tus , head of the Yugoslav Air Force at the time , following a request by Josip Boljkovac , Interior Minister of Croatia . As the fighting around Plitvice ended , sporadic gunfire was reported near Titova Korenica , to the south . The same afternoon , a Croatian police station was established at the Plitvice Lakes and Tomislav Iljić was appointed its commanding officer . The station was staffed by approximately 90 police officers who were redeployed from Gospić .

The Presidency of Yugoslavia met in an emergency session the same evening to discuss the clash . At the insistence of Serbia 's representative on the Presidency , Borisav Jović , the JNA was ordered to intervene , gain control in the area and prevent further combat . The Serbian parliament also met in an emergency session , treating the clashes as a virtual casus belli and voting to offer the Krajina Serbs " all necessary help " in their conflict with Zagreb . The following day , the SAO Krajina adopted a resolution to the effect that the territory was incorporated into Serbia , whose constitution and laws were adopted for use in the Serb-held areas of Croatia . Croatian authorities accused Serbia 's president , Slobodan Milošević , of stage-managing the unrest in order to break Croatia 's resolve to declare independence unless Yugoslavia was transformed into a loose confederation . They also accused him of attempting to coax the JNA to overthrow Croatian government .

On 1 April , the JNA established a buffer zone to separate the belligerents at Plitvice Lakes , deploying elements of the 1st and the 5th Military Districts . Those were an armoured battalion of the 329th Armoured Brigade based in Banja Luka , a battalion of the 6th Mountain Brigade based in Delnice , a reconnaissance company and a mechanised battalion of the 4th Armoured Brigade based in Jastrebarsko and Karlovac , a battalion of the 306th Light Anti-Aircraft Artillery Regiment based in Zagreb , a signals company of the 367th Signals Regiment based in Samobor , a company of the 13th Military Police Battalion based in Rijeka and an anti-aircraft artillery battery drawn from the 13th Proletarian Motorised Brigade based in Rijeka . Finally , the 5th Military District set up a forward command post at the Plitvice Lakes . The JNA force at the Plitvice Lakes was commanded by Colonel Ivan Štimac . The commanding officer of the 5th Military District , Major General Andrija Rašeta , in overall command of the JNA intervention , told the media that his men were not protecting either side and were there only to prevent ethnic confrontations for an indeterminate period . However , the Croatian government reacted furiously to the JNA move . Tuđman 's aide , Mario Nobilo , claimed that the JNA had told Croatian officials that it would engage the police if they did not leave Plitvice . In a radio address , Tuđman said that the JNA would be regarded as a hostile army of occupation if its course of action remained unchanged . On 2 April , the JNA handed the Croatian authorities an ultimatum , requesting the police leave Plitvice . The special police left Plitvice the same day , but the 90 officers staffing the newly established police station remained in place .

Police officer Josip Jović was the only Croatian fatality in the incident . The SAO Krajina force also suffered one killed in the fighting — Rajko Vukadinović , who was the first Croatian Serb combat fatality in the war . A total of 20 people were wounded , seven of whom were the Croatian police . The Croatian forces captured 29 SAO Krajina troops , 18 of whom were formally charged with insurgency . Among the prisoners was Goran Hadžić , later to become the President of the Republic of Serbian Krajina , although he was quickly released . Hadžić 's release was explained as a goodwill gesture by the authorities , but Boljkovac claims he was released because he was collaborating with the Croatian authorities in 1991 . Approximately 400 tourists , most of them Italian , were evacuated from the Plitvice Lakes after the fighting . The clash at the Plitvice Lakes worsened the overall situation in Croatia and led to an escalation of the conflict . Even though the Croatian and Serb forces were separated by the JNA at the Plitvice Lakes , the situation in the area continued to deteriorate following the clash . In nearby Plaški , Croatian police personnel left the local police station and were replaced by Serb officers . Both SAO Krajina and Croatian forces set up several roadblocks on the Saborsko – Lička Jasenica – Ogulin road . By summer , the blockades were extended to the north of Plaški and south of Saborsko , where Croatian authorities established another 30-strong police station on 2 April . Only JNA vehicles were permitted to pass the roadblocks , and that brought about a shortage of food , medicine and electricity in the area .

On 2 May , the Serb Democratic Party , the ruling party in the SAO Krajina , organised a protest march to the Plitvice Lakes and a political rally demanding the Croatian police withdraw from Plitvice . The march , led by Babić and Vojislav Šešelj , was prevented from reaching the Plitvice Lakes by the JNA and forced to return to Titova Korenica . The JNA imposed a blockade of the Plitvice Lakes police station on 1 July , on the pretext that the Croatian police had abducted and imprisoned two JNA officers . By 6 July , the SAO Krajina forces and the JNA commenced attacks on the Ljubovo Pass southeast of the Plitvice Lakes , on the Titova Korenica – Gospić road , driving the Croatian National Guard back and capturing the pass by the end of the month . Throughout the summer , the JNA continued to engage Croatian forces in Lika using the units deployed to the Plitvice Lakes in April . The fighting escalated further on 30 August , when the JNA captured the Plitvice Lakes police station and the following day when the Battle of Gospić began . Jović is largely viewed in Croatia as the first casualty of the Croatian War of Independence . A monument dedicated to him was erected in his birthplace of Aržano in 1994 . After the war , a monument was erected at the site of his death , where annual commemorations of the clash are held . The clash and Jović 's death are commemorated annually at the Plitvice Lakes .

The silky sifaka ( Propithecus candidus ) , or silky simpona , is a large lemur characterized by long , silky , white fur . It has a very restricted range in northeastern Madagascar , where it is known locally as the simpona . It is one of the rarest mammals on Earth , and is listed by the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) as one of the world 's 25 most critically endangered primates . The silky sifaka is one of nine sifaka species ( genus Propithecus ) , and one of four former subspecies of diademed sifaka ( P. diadema ) . Studies in 2004 and 2007 compared external proportions , genetics , and cranio-dental anatomy supporting full species status , which has generally been accepted . The silky sifaka has a variable social structure , and lives in groups of two to nine individuals . It spends most of its day feeding and resting , though it also devotes a considerable amount of time to social behaviors , such as playing and grooming , as well as traveling . Females occasionally take priority over males during feeding . Like other eastern sifakas , it consumes mainly leaves and seeds , but also fruit , flowers , and even soil on occasion . It is a seasonal breeder and only mates one day a year during the start of the rainy season . As with other sifaka species , non-maternal infant care is common . Group members of all ages and both sexes will often groom , play with , occasionally carry , and even nurse infants that are not their own . The silky sifaka vocalizes frequently despite its moderately sized vocal repertoire consisting of seven adult calls . Like all lemurs , it relies strongly on scent for communication . Males will frequently scent-mark on top of scent-marks made by other group members , particularly females . Males also gouge trees with their toothcomb ( a special arrangement of the bottom , front teeth ) prior to chest scent-marking . This chest marking results in males having brown-stained chests , the only visible trait that can be used to distinguish between adult males and adult females .

The species is only found within a few protected areas in the rainforests of northeastern Madagascar , with the majority of the remaining population in Marojejy National Park and Anjanaharibe-Sud Special Reserve . A few groups have also been found in the Makira Forest Protected Area , the Betaolana Corridor , and some unprotected forest fragments . The silky sifaka is hunted throughout its range as there is no local fady ( taboo ) against eating this species . Habitat disturbance , such as slash-and-burn agriculture ( tavy ) , illegal logging of precious woods ( particularly , rosewood ) and fuel-wood , also occurs within the protected areas where it is found .

The name " sifaka " is a reference to a common general alarm vocalization given by western dry forest sifakas in which they emit an explosive , hiss-like " shee-faak " call several times in succession . On the east coast , local residents refer to the larger bodied diademed sifaka as simpona , a name which refers to the species ' sneeze-like " zzuss " alarm vocalizations . The calls are emitted in a variety of stressful circumstances such as presence of humans , falling trees , terrestrial predators , and after aggression between group members . The specific name , candidus , is Latin for " white " , while the specific name of the taxonomic synonym sericeus is derived from the Greek word for " silk " .

The silky sifaka was initially described in 1871 by French naturalist Alfred Grandidier in a formally published letter to French zoologist Alphonse Milne-Edwards . Grandidier 's description was based on his own observations north of Antongil Bay in the last few months of 1870 . He then named the species Propithecus candidus due to its white color , which he likened to that of the Verreaux 's sifaka ( Propithecus verreauxi ) , but without the dark fur on its head or the ash-colored spot on the back . The first specimen was obtained in 1872 and provided by " Monsieur Guinet " , a planter from Sambava . The specimen allowed both Grandidier and Milne-Edwards to more thoroughly describe the species based on its skin , coat , and skull . Upon those findings , they changed the name to P. sericeus . Upon further review in 1875 , Grandidier demoted the silky sifaka to a variety or " race " of the diademed sifaka . By the time German zoologist Ernst Schwarz standardized lemur taxonomy in 1931 , P. sericeus had become a taxonomic synonym for the species , with the original name , Propithecus candidus , taking priority .

Schwarz placed all sifakas into two species , the larger diademed sifaka from the eastern rainforests and the smaller Verreaux 's sifaka from the dry forests and spiny forests of the west and south . At the time , both species comprised four subspecies , and the silky sifaka was listed as P. diadema candidus , a subspecies of the diademed sifaka . In his 1982 book Primates of Madagascar , anthropologist Ian Tattersall upheld this classification . When anthropologist Colin Groves reviewed the taxonomy in his book Primate Taxonomy in 2001 , he also upheld the subspecies status of the silky sifaka because variations in fur coloration between the available specimens suggested converging similarities with the diademed sifaka 's coloration . Groves later noted that the coloration of the two species did not overlap , suggesting that the populations were distinct . In 2004 , Mayor et al. showed that despite having a similar karyotype ( the number and appearance of chromosomes ) of 42 chromosomes ( 2n = 42 ) , the silky sifaka was distinct from the diademed sifaka . This was shown through genetic tests ( D-loop sequencing ) and by comparing external proportions . For example , the silky sifaka has a shorter tail . Their analysis indicated a closer relationship with Perrier 's sifaka ( Propithecus perrieri ) . Russell Mittermeier and colleagues followed by adopting the full species status of the silky sifaka for the 2nd edition of Lemurs of Madagascar in 2006 . Although Groves maintained the silky sifaka as a subspecies in the 3rd edition of Mammal Species of the World in 2005 , he recognized it as a distinct species in 2007 by acknowledging the work of Mayor et al. and also noting the additional distinction that the silky sifaka has relatively long molar teeth compared to the length of its toothrow . Despite the promotion to full species status , the silky sifaka is still considered to be a member of the P. diadema group , a group of four closely related , large-bodied , eastern rainforest sifakas . The other three members of this group are the diademed sifaka , Perrier 's sifaka , and Milne-Edwards ' sifaka ( Propithecus edwardsi ) . The species status of the silky sifaka , as well as other sifakas , does not have universal support : in 2007 , Tattersall argued against species distinctions within Propithecus , claiming the decisions were made prematurely .

In 1974 , Tattersall spotted what he thought was a color variant of the silky sifaka north of Vohemar in northeast Madagascar . Describing it as such eight years later in The Primates of Madagascar , he not only cited its mostly white fur , but also uncharacteristic traits such as a patch of orange on its crown and tufted ears . It was not observed again until 1986 , when a team led by paleoanthropologist Elwyn L. Simons captured specimens for captive breeding and identified it as a new species , named as the golden-crowned sifaka ( Propithecus tattersalli ) in 1988 .

The silky sifaka is confined to a small region of northeastern Madagascar within a strip of humid forest stretching from Maroantsetra in the south to the Andapa Basin and the Marojejy Massif in the north . Marojejy National Park represents the northern limit of its current distribution , although historical sifaka range maps created by Grandidier and Milne-Edwards in the late 19th century show the silky sifaka as far north as the Bemarivo River , north of Sambava . The Androranga River may represent the northwestern range limit within the Tsaratanana Corridor . The southern limit of its range appears to be the Antainambalana River , within the Makira Conservation Site . It is not known if the silky sifaka has ever ranged as far south as the Masoala Peninsula . As of 2009 , new observations of a few groups of the silky sifaka in unprotected forest fragments adjacent to northeastern Makira ( Antohaka Lava and Maherivaratra ) may slightly enlarge the known geographic range of this species . The presence of the silky sifaka has been documented within Marojejy National Park , Anjanaharibe-Sud Special Reserve , the Makira Forest Protected Area , the Betaolana Corridor , and the Tsaratanana Corridor . In 2008 , 16 groups were discovered in western Marojejy near Antsahaberoaka .

The silky sifaka tends to be found at higher elevations than any of the other sifaka species and also occupies the greatest range of elevations for the group . In Marojejy National Park and Anjanaharibe-Sud Special Reserve , where most of the remaining groups exist , it is not found below 700 m ( 2,300 ft ) of elevation and not above 1,875 m ( 6,152 ft ) . However , at its southernmost location in Makira ( Andaparaty ) , several groups inhabit forest fragments at an unusually low elevation of 300 m ( 980 ft ) . The silky sifaka inhabits three types of elevation-specific habitats : primary montane rainforest , sclerophyllous forest , and the most elevated portions of low ericoid bush . It is unknown how sensitive the silky sifaka is to disturbance or whether it avoids habitat edges ( " edge-intolerant " ) or is more edge-tolerant like the diademed sifaka . Like other rainforest sifaka species , it seldom crosses unforested regions between forest fragments . In the Anjanaharibe-Sud Special Reserve , the silky sifaka is sympatric ( shares the same geographic range ) with the white-fronted brown lemur ( Eulemur albifrons ) and an all-black population of indri ( Indri indri ) . In Marojejy National Park , it is sympatric with the white-fronted brown lemur . In 2008 , it was suggested that the silky sifaka may be sympatric with the red ruffed lemur ( Varecia rubra ) near Maherivaratra and Andaparaty .

The silky sifaka is one of the larger sifaka species , with a head-body length of 48 – 54 cm ( 1.6 – 1.8 ft ) , a tail length of 45 – 51 cm ( 1.5 – 1.7 ft ) , a total length of 93 – 105 cm ( 3.1 – 3.4 ft ) , and a weight of 5 – 6.5 kg ( 11 – 14 lb ) . As its common English name suggests , its long , white fur has a silky texture . Not all individuals are completely white : some have silver-gray or black tints on the crown , back , and limbs . The base of the tail ( " pygal region " ) can be yellow . The ears and face are hairless , and the skin may be a mix of pink and black , completely black , or completely pink . The tips of the ears protrude slightly above the fur on the rest of the head . Its eyes have a deep orange-red coloration . Its appearance is distinctive , and since no other sifakas share its range , it is not easily confused with other lemur species .

While it is difficult to distinguish adult males and females in other eastern rainforest sifakas , such as the Perrier 's sifaka and Milne-Edwards ' sifaka , gender in the silky sifaka is easily discerned due to differences in fur coloration of the upper chest . Females have white fur , while males have a large brown patch of fur that results from scent marking with a gland on the chest and throat ( the sternal gular gland ) . During mating season , the size of the " chest patch " increases to cover both the chest and abdomen as a result of increased scent marking .

Until the 21st century , brief observations and lemur surveys had merely documented the presence of the silky sifaka in special reserves and national parks . More recently , a 14-month study and two short-term studies in Marojejy National Park have revealed previously unknown details about its behavioral biology , communication , and feeding ecology . The silky sifaka has a variable social structure and is known to live in male-female pairs , one-male groups , and multi-male / multi-female groups . Group sizes range from two to nine individuals , while the home ranges are estimated to range from 34 to 47 ha ( 0.13 to 0.18 sq mi ) , varying in size by location . According to some studies , the silky sifaka spends most of its day resting and feeding ( approximately 44.4 % and 25 % respectively ) . It also devotes approximately 16.8 % of the day to social behavior , such as personal grooming , social grooming ( allogrooming ) , and play . The rest of the day is spent traveling and sleeping . Other sources report that the species divides half of the day between traveling and foraging , while the rest is spent resting . Daily foraging usually starts at dawn unless delayed by rain . Group movement is usually led by females , and groups usually travel 700 m ( 2,300 ft ) per day , and may climb 500 m ( 1,600 ft ) along vertical slopes . Although the species spends its time in the trees , terrestrial play is not uncommon , even among adults , with play sessions lasting 30 minutes or more . Like other sifakas , it uses a type of arboreal locomotion known as vertical clinging and leaping . Dominance hierarchies have not been documented among female sifakas , including the silky sifaka , although seasonal hierarchies are known to occur . Aggression , which is generally infrequent , occurs primarily during feeding , where females take priority over males , although submissive signals are not always obvious .

The silky sifaka 's diet is similar to that of other eastern rainforest sifakas , consisting primarily of leaves ( folivory ) and seeds ( seed predation ) . It is highly varied and includes many plant species . A two-month study from the mid-2000s showed that the silky sifaka can feed on as many as 76 species of plant from 42 families . Its favorites included primarily tree species , but also some lianas . The most prominent plant families in the diet were Moraceae ( 20.30 % ) , Fabaceae ( 12.87 % ) , Myrtaceae ( 12.65 % ) , Clusiaceae ( 10.13 % ) and Apocynaceae ( 9.49 % ) . In the study , feeding upon these four plant families took up as much as 37.06 % of the total feeding time for the silky sifaka : 16.09 % on the fruit of Pachytrophe dimepate , 8.43 % on the seeds of Senna sp . , 6.52 % on the young leaves of Plectaneia thouarsii , and 6.02 % on the fruit of Eugenia sp . In sum , folivory accounted for 52 % of the feeding time , while frugivory ( fruit-eating ) accounted for 34 % , and seed predation made up 11 % . The consumption of flowers , as well as soil ( geophagy ) , was rarely observed in this study . Prior to this , preliminary studies had reported that folivory account for 75 % of the diet , while fruits and 15 % was seed predation , 7 % was flower consumption , and bark and soil made up the remainder .

Like all other lemurs , the silky sifaka is a seasonal breeder , and it is thought that it mates only one day a year during the start of the rainy season sometime in December or January . Infants are born six months later in June or July . Females typically give birth to a single infant once every two years , although births in consecutive years have been observed . Infants initially cling to the fur of their mother 's chest for nearly four weeks and then switch to riding on her back . As with other eastern rainforest sifakas , the infants of this species develop rapidly . This may be due to assistance in the care of infants by all group members ( known as alloparental care ) — a trait typical among all sifakas . Non-maternal care usually takes the form of allogrooming , but also playing , occasional carrying , and in rare cases , nursing . The dispersal of offspring is thought to be similar to that of other eastern rainforest sifakas , with both males and females transferring out of the group at sexual maturity . However , dispersal has only been observed once with a young adult male , who left its natal group and proceeded to oust an older male from a group in which he had been a member for seven years . Female dispersal and group transfer has not yet been observed .

The only documented predator of the silky sifaka , other than humans , is the fossa , a cat-like carnivore found only on Madagascar . Although no aerial predators are known , the silky sifaka often watch the sky and emit loud " aerial disturbance " roars at the sight of the large Madagascar buzzard ( Buteo brachypterus ) and other small birds . Another more general alarm call is the loud , sneeze-like " zzuss " vocalization , which are emitted in response to terrestrial disturbances , calls from lost group members , and aggression by other group members . Acoustic analyses of the " zzuss " vocalization have shown that the call 's acoustic structure differs between individuals and by gender . Adult eastern sifakas have a moderately sized vocal repertoire of about seven call types . It is uncertain if their vocalizations have specific or varied contexts , and as with other primates , arousal level may play a role in the acoustic structure of its calls . Despite the limited size of the silky sifaka 's vocal repertoire , it does exhibit high call rates of seven calls per hour , on average . Even infants are known to have several specialized vocalizations . The most frequently emitted silky sifaka vocalizations are low-amplitude , low-frequency , tonal " hum " and " mum " vocalizations . These contact calls are used in a variety of circumstances including group movement , affiliation , foraging , and while resting .

The silky sifaka uses well-developed olfactory ( smell-based ) communication , as with all other strepsirrhine primates . Like other eastern rainforest sifakas , it has several specialized glands for scent-marking , including a sebaceous gland on the chest , found only in males , and mixed apocrine-sebaceous glands on the genitals in both sexes . Unlike the true lemurs of the genus Eulemur , the silky sifaka does not directly scent-mark its conspecifics ( allomarking ) , although it does scent-mark its territory . Both sexes will often urinate while scent-marking . Males and females scent-mark in different ways : females rub their genital glands in an up-and-down motion against trees , while males may use their chest gland , genital glands , or a combination of both . Males will also use their specialized toothcomb to gouge trees before scent-marking with their chest — a behavior that leaves long-lasting visible marks . The gouging is thought to serve a role in communication and has no dietary component , since males do not eat the bark or tree gum . Males scent-mark more frequently than females , as much as two or three times as often . Males also respond to female scent-marking by overmarking with their own scent glands , usually by combining chest and genital marking . They will also overmark other males , although less quickly and less often . In a one-year study , males responded to 71 % of the marks made by females within an average of 61 seconds while only 17 % of male marks received a response from other group members . Because males overmark frequently , this results in " totem-tree marking " , where certain trees become covered by male scent and gouge marks . However , no observations of widespread home range border scent-marking have been reported . Scent-marks are usually left on trees in the core area of the home range , as opposed to the territorial boundaries .

According to the most recent IUCN Red List assessment , the silky sifaka is Critically Endangered . It is one of the rarest and most critically endangered lemurs . The silky sifaka is one of five lemurs listed as one of " The World 's 25 Most Endangered Primates " and has been on the list all five times since its inception in 2000 . Its population size is estimated to range between 100 and 1,000 individuals , while the number of mature individuals is thought to be less than 250 . There are no silky sifakas in captivity , such as in zoos . The silky sifaka is the flagship species for the protected areas in which it is found , particularly for Marojejy , which has recently been inaugurated as part of a World Heritage Site cluster known as the Rainforests of the Atsinanana . Habitat disturbance , such as slash-and-burn agriculture ( known locally as tavy ) , logging of precious woods ( e.g. , rosewood ) and fuel-wood , also occurs within the protected areas where it is found . Unlike the golden-crowned sifaka ( Propithecus tattersalli ) , there is no local taboo ( fady ) against eating this species , and the hunting of bushmeat is a known issue within its range . It is most heavily hunted in the northern and western parts of Marojejy , as well as other areas around the Andapa Basin . The species is restricted to 90,000 ha ( 350 sq mi ) of protected areas , although this may be an overestimation because in much of its range the silky sifaka is not found below 700 m ( 2,300 ft ) in altitude , possibly due to either hunting pressure or habitat preference .

Illegal logging of precious hardwoods , such as rosewood and ebony , has become one of the greatest threats to the silky sifaka 's habitat , especially since the 2009 Malagasy political crisis . Its two largest protected areas , Masoala National Park and Marojejy National Park , have been the hardest hit . The disturbance caused by selective logging increases the likelihood of forest fires , helps invasive species take root , impairs habitat , and causes the loss of genetic diversity . Local villages adjacent to its remaining protected areas adopted a two-pronged strategy towards silky sifaka conservation education . First , a " cognitive component " was implemented to increase knowledge and awareness through radio interviews , slide presentations , and the disbursement of literature in twelve primary and secondary schools . Additionally , an " emotional component " was begun to link silky sifaka conservation with positive emotional experiences , with the goal of establishing a psychological connection between the children and the lemur . To do this , groups of children were taken on three-day educational eco-tours in Marojejy National Park . Both the teachers and the students showed interest and genuine concern about the plight of the silky sifaka .

A transformer is an electrical device that transfers electrical energy between two or more circuits through electromagnetic induction . Electromagnetic induction produces an electromotive force within a conductor which is exposed to time varying magnetic fields . Transformers are used to increase or decrease the alternating voltages in electric power applications . A varying current in the transformer 's primary winding creates a varying magnetic flux in the transformer core and a varying field impinging on the transformer 's secondary winding . This varying magnetic field at the secondary winding induces a varying electromotive force ( EMF ) or voltage in the secondary winding due to electromagnetic induction . Making use of Faraday 's Law ( discovered in 1831 ) in conjunction with high magnetic permeability core properties , transformers can be designed to efficiently change AC voltages from one voltage level to another within power networks . Since the invention of the first constant potential transformer in 1885 , transformers have become essential for the transmission , distribution , and utilization of alternating current electrical energy . A wide range of transformer designs is encountered in electronic and electric power applications . Transformers range in size from RF transformers less than a cubic centimeter in volume to units interconnecting the power grid weighing hundreds of tons .

For simplification or approximation purposes , it is very common to analyze the transformer as an ideal transformer model as presented in the two images . An ideal transformer is a theoretical , linear transformer that is lossless and perfectly coupled ; that is , there are no energy losses and flux is completely confined within the magnetic core . Perfect coupling implies infinitely high core magnetic permeability and winding inductances and zero net magnetomotive force . A varying current in the transformer 's primary winding creates a varying magnetic flux in the core and a varying magnetic field impinging on the secondary winding . This varying magnetic field at the secondary induces a varying electromotive force ( EMF ) or voltage in the secondary winding . The primary and secondary windings are wrapped around a core of infinitely high magnetic permeability so that all of the magnetic flux passes through both the primary and secondary windings . With a voltage source connected to the primary winding and load impedance connected to the secondary winding , the transformer currents flow in the indicated directions . ( See also Polarity . ) According to Faraday 's Law , since the same magnetic flux passes through both the primary and secondary windings in an ideal transformer , a voltage is induced in each winding , according to eq . ( 1 ) in the secondary winding case , according to eq . ( 2 ) in the primary winding case . The primary EMF is sometimes termed counter EMF . This is in accordance with Lenz 's law , which states that induction of EMF always opposes development of any such change in magnetic field .

The transformer winding voltage ratio is thus shown to be directly proportional to the winding turns ratio according to eq . ( 3 ) . According to the law of conservation of energy , any load impedance connected to the ideal transformer 's secondary winding results in conservation of apparent , real and reactive power consistent with eq . ( 4 ) . The ideal transformer identity shown in eq . ( 5 ) is a reasonable approximation for the typical commercial transformer , with voltage ratio and winding turns ratio both being inversely proportional to the corresponding current ratio . the apparent load impedance referred to the primary circuit is derived in eq . ( 7 ) to be equal to the turns ratio squared times the secondary circuit load impedance .

The ideal transformer model assumes that all flux generated by the primary winding links all the turns of every winding , including itself . In practice , some flux traverses paths that take it outside the windings . Such flux is termed leakage flux , and results in leakage inductance in series with the mutually coupled transformer windings . Leakage flux results in energy being alternately stored in and discharged from the magnetic fields with each cycle of the power supply . It is not directly a power loss , but results in inferior voltage regulation , causing the secondary voltage not to be directly proportional to the primary voltage , particularly under heavy load . Transformers are therefore normally designed to have very low leakage inductance . In some applications increased leakage is desired , and long magnetic paths , air gaps , or magnetic bypass shunts may deliberately be introduced in a transformer design to limit the short-circuit current it will supply . Leaky transformers may be used to supply loads that exhibit negative resistance , such as electric arcs , mercury vapor lamps , and neon signs or for safely handling loads that become periodically short-circuited such as electric arc welders .

Air gaps are also used to keep a transformer from saturating , especially audio-frequency transformers in circuits that have a DC component flowing in the windings . Knowledge of leakage inductance is also useful when transformers are operated in parallel . It can be shown that if the percent impedance and associated winding leakage reactance-to-resistance ( X / R ) ratio of two transformers were hypothetically exactly the same , the transformers would share power in proportion to their respective volt-ampere ratings ( e.g. 500 kVA unit in parallel with 1,000 kVA unit , the larger unit would carry twice the current ) . However , the impedance tolerances of commercial transformers are significant . Also , the Z impedance and X / R ratio of different capacity transformers tends to vary , corresponding 1,000 kVA and 500 kVA units ' values being , to illustrate , respectively , Z ≈ 5.75 % , X / R ≈ 3.75 and Z ≈ 5 % , X / R ≈ 4.75 .

Referring to the diagram , a practical transformer 's physical behavior may be represented by an equivalent circuit model , which can incorporate an ideal transformer . Winding joule losses and leakage reactances are represented by the following series loop impedances of the model : In normal course of circuit equivalence transformation , RS and XS are in practice usually referred to the primary side by multiplying these impedances by the turns ratio squared , ( NP / NS ) 2 = a2 . Core losses are caused mostly by hysteresis and eddy current effects in the core and are proportional to the square of the core flux for operation at a given frequency . The finite permeability core requires a magnetizing current IM to maintain mutual flux in the core . Magnetizing current is in phase with the flux , the relationship between the two being non-linear due to saturation effects . However , all impedances of the equivalent circuit shown are by definition linear and such non-linearity effects are not typically reflected in transformer equivalent circuits . With sinusoidal supply , core flux lags the induced EMF by 90 ° . With open-circuited secondary winding , magnetizing branch current I0 equals transformer no-load current .

The resulting model , though sometimes termed ' exact ' equivalent circuit based on linearity assumptions , retains a number of approximations . Analysis may be simplified by assuming that magnetizing branch impedance is relatively high and relocating the branch to the left of the primary impedances . This introduces error but allows combination of primary and referred secondary resistances and reactances by simple summation as two series impedances . Transformer equivalent circuit impedance and transformer ratio parameters can be derived from the following tests : open-circuit test , short-circuit test , winding resistance test , and transformer ratio test .

By Faraday 's Law of induction shown in eq . ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) , transformer EMFs vary according to the derivative of flux with respect to time . The ideal transformer 's core behaves linearly with time for any non-zero frequency . Flux in a real transformer 's core behaves non-linearly in relation to magnetization current as the instantaneous flux increases beyond a finite linear range resulting in magnetic saturation associated with increasingly large magnetizing current , which eventually leads to transformer overheating . The EMF of a transformer at a given flux density increases with frequency . By operating at higher frequencies , transformers can be physically more compact because a given core is able to transfer more power without reaching saturation and fewer turns are needed to achieve the same impedance . However , properties such as core loss and conductor skin effect also increase with frequency . Aircraft and military equipment employ 400 Hz power supplies which reduce core and winding weight . Conversely , frequencies used for some railway electrification systems were much lower ( e.g. 16.7 Hz and 25 Hz ) than normal utility frequencies ( 50 – 60 Hz ) for historical reasons concerned mainly with the limitations of early electric traction motors . Consequently , the transformers used to step-down the high overhead line voltages ( e.g. 15 kV ) were much larger and heavier for the same power rating than those required for the higher frequencies .

Operation of a transformer at its designed voltage but at a higher frequency than intended will lead to reduced magnetizing current . At a lower frequency , the magnetizing current will increase . Operation of a transformer at other than its design frequency may require assessment of voltages , losses , and cooling to establish if safe operation is practical . For example , transformers may need to be equipped with ' volts per hertz ' over-excitation relays to protect the transformer from overvoltage at higher than rated frequency . One example is in traction transformers used for electric multiple unit and high-speed train service operating across regions with different electrical standards . The converter equipment and traction transformers have to accommodate different input frequencies and voltage ( ranging from as high as 50 Hz down to 16.7 Hz and rated up to 25 kV ) while being suitable for multiple AC asynchronous motor and DC converters and motors with varying harmonics mitigation filtering requirements . Large power transformers are vulnerable to insulation failure due to transient voltages with high-frequency components , such as caused in switching or by lightning . At much higher frequencies the transformer core size required drops dramatically : a physically small and cheap transformer can handle power levels that would require a massive iron core at mains frequency . The development of switching power semiconductor devices and complex integrated circuits made switch-mode power supplies viable , to generate a high frequency from a much lower one ( or DC ) , change the voltage level with a small transformer , and , if necessary , rectify the changed voltage .

Real transformer energy losses are dominated by winding resistance joule and core losses . Transformers ' efficiency tends to improve with increasing transformer capacity . The efficiency of typical distribution transformers is between about 98 and 99 percent . As transformer losses vary with load , it is often useful to express these losses in terms of no-load loss , full-load loss , half-load loss , and so on . Hysteresis and eddy current losses are constant at all load levels and dominate overwhelmingly without load , while variable winding joule losses dominating increasingly as load increases . The no-load loss can be significant , so that even an idle transformer constitutes a drain on the electrical supply . Designing energy efficient transformers for lower loss requires a larger core , good-quality silicon steel , or even amorphous steel for the core and thicker wire , increasing initial cost . The choice of construction represents a trade-off between initial cost and operating cost . Current flowing through a winding 's conductor causes joule heating . As frequency increases , skin effect and proximity effect causes the winding 's resistance and , hence , losses to increase . Each time the magnetic field is reversed , a small amount of energy is lost due to hysteresis within the core . According to Steinmetz 's formula , the heat energy due to hysteresis is given by

where , f is the frequency , η is the hysteresis coefficient and βmax is the maximum flux density , the empirical exponent of which varies from about 1.4 to 1.8 but is often given as 1.6 for iron . Ferromagnetic materials are also good conductors and a core made from such a material also constitutes a single short-circuited turn throughout its entire length . Eddy currents therefore circulate within the core in a plane normal to the flux , and are responsible for resistive heating of the core material . The eddy current loss is a complex function of the square of supply frequency and inverse square of the material thickness . Eddy current losses can be reduced by making the core of a stack of plates electrically insulated from each other , rather than a solid block ; all transformers operating at low frequencies use laminated or similar cores . Magnetic flux in a ferromagnetic material , such as the core , causes it to physically expand and contract slightly with each cycle of the magnetic field , an effect known as magnetostriction , the frictional energy of which produces an audible noise known as mains hum or transformer hum . This transformer hum is especially objectionable in transformers supplied at power frequencies and in high-frequency flyback transformers associated with television CRTs .

Leakage inductance is by itself largely lossless , since energy supplied to its magnetic fields is returned to the supply with the next half-cycle . However , any leakage flux that intercepts nearby conductive materials such as the transformer 's support structure will give rise to eddy currents and be converted to heat . There are also radiative losses due to the oscillating magnetic field but these are usually small . In addition to magnetostriction , the alternating magnetic field causes fluctuating forces between the primary and secondary windings . This energy incites vibration transmission in interconnected metalwork , thus amplifying audible transformer hum .

Closed-core transformers are constructed in ' core form ' or ' shell form ' . When windings surround the core , the transformer is core form ; when windings are surrounded by the core , the transformer is shell form . Shell form design may be more prevalent than core form design for distribution transformer applications due to the relative ease in stacking the core around winding coils . Core form design tends to , as a general rule , be more economical , and therefore more prevalent , than shell form design for high voltage power transformer applications at the lower end of their voltage and power rating ranges ( less than or equal to , nominally , 230 kV or 75 MVA ) . At higher voltage and power ratings , shell form transformers tend to be more prevalent . Shell form design tends to be preferred for extra-high voltage and higher MVA applications because , though more labor-intensive to manufacture , shell form transformers are characterized as having inherently better kVA-to-weight ratio , better short-circuit strength characteristics and higher immunity to transit damage .

Transformers for use at power or audio frequencies typically have cores made of high permeability silicon steel . The steel has a permeability many times that of free space and the core thus serves to greatly reduce the magnetizing current and confine the flux to a path which closely couples the windings . Early transformer developers soon realized that cores constructed from solid iron resulted in prohibitive eddy current losses , and their designs mitigated this effect with cores consisting of bundles of insulated iron wires . Later designs constructed the core by stacking layers of thin steel laminations , a principle that has remained in use . Each lamination is insulated from its neighbors by a thin non-conducting layer of insulation . The universal transformer equation indicates a minimum cross-sectional area for the core to avoid saturation . The effect of laminations is to confine eddy currents to highly elliptical paths that enclose little flux , and so reduce their magnitude . Thinner laminations reduce losses , but are more laborious and expensive to construct . Thin laminations are generally used on high-frequency transformers , with some of very thin steel laminations able to operate up to 10 kHz .

One common design of laminated core is made from interleaved stacks of E-shaped steel sheets capped with I-shaped pieces , leading to its name of ' E-I transformer ' . Such a design tends to exhibit more losses , but is very economical to manufacture . The cut-core or C-core type is made by winding a steel strip around a rectangular form and then bonding the layers together . It is then cut in two , forming two C shapes , and the core assembled by binding the two C halves together with a steel strap . They have the advantage that the flux is always oriented parallel to the metal grains , reducing reluctance . A steel core 's remanence means that it retains a static magnetic field when power is removed . When power is then reapplied , the residual field will cause a high inrush current until the effect of the remaining magnetism is reduced , usually after a few cycles of the applied AC waveform . Overcurrent protection devices such as fuses must be selected to allow this harmless inrush to pass . On transformers connected to long , overhead power transmission lines , induced currents due to geomagnetic disturbances during solar storms can cause saturation of the core and operation of transformer protection devices .

Toroidal transformers are built around a ring-shaped core , which , depending on operating frequency , is made from a long strip of silicon steel or permalloy wound into a coil , powdered iron , or ferrite . A strip construction ensures that the grain boundaries are optimally aligned , improving the transformer 's efficiency by reducing the core 's reluctance . The closed ring shape eliminates air gaps inherent in the construction of an E-I core . The cross-section of the ring is usually square or rectangular , but more expensive cores with circular cross-sections are also available . The primary and secondary coils are often wound concentrically to cover the entire surface of the core . This minimizes the length of wire needed and provides screening to minimize the core 's magnetic field from generating electromagnetic interference . Toroidal transformers are more efficient than the cheaper laminated E-I types for a similar power level . Other advantages compared to E-I types , include smaller size ( about half ) , lower weight ( about half ) , less mechanical hum ( making them superior in audio amplifiers ) , lower exterior magnetic field ( about one tenth ) , low off-load losses ( making them more efficient in standby circuits ) , single-bolt mounting , and greater choice of shapes . The main disadvantages are higher cost and limited power capacity ( see Classification parameters below ) . Because of the lack of a residual gap in the magnetic path , toroidal transformers also tend to exhibit higher inrush current , compared to laminated E-I types .

Ferrite toroidal cores are used at higher frequencies , typically between a few tens of kilohertz to hundreds of megahertz , to reduce losses , physical size , and weight of inductive components . A drawback of toroidal transformer construction is the higher labor cost of winding . This is because it is necessary to pass the entire length of a coil winding through the core aperture each time a single turn is added to the coil . As a consequence , toroidal transformers rated more than a few kVA are uncommon . Small distribution transformers may achieve some of the benefits of a toroidal core by splitting it and forcing it open , then inserting a bobbin containing primary and secondary windings .

A physical core is not an absolute requisite and a functioning transformer can be produced simply by placing the windings near each other , an arrangement termed an ' air-core ' transformer . The air which comprises the magnetic circuit is essentially lossless , and so an air-core transformer eliminates loss due to hysteresis in the core material . The leakage inductance is inevitably high , resulting in very poor regulation , and so such designs are unsuitable for use in power distribution . They have however very high bandwidth , and are frequently employed in radio-frequency applications , for which a satisfactory coupling coefficient is maintained by carefully overlapping the primary and secondary windings . They 're also used for resonant transformers such as Tesla coils where they can achieve reasonably low loss in spite of the high leakage inductance .

The conducting material used for the windings depends upon the application , but in all cases the individual turns must be electrically insulated from each other to ensure that the current travels throughout every turn . For small power and signal transformers , in which currents are low and the potential difference between adjacent turns is small , the coils are often wound from enamelled magnet wire , such as Formvar wire . Larger power transformers operating at high voltages may be wound with copper rectangular strip conductors insulated by oil-impregnated paper and blocks of pressboard . High-frequency transformers operating in the tens to hundreds of kilohertz often have windings made of braided Litz wire to minimize the skin-effect and proximity effect losses . Large power transformers use multiple-stranded conductors as well , since even at low power frequencies non-uniform distribution of current would otherwise exist in high-current windings . Each strand is individually insulated , and the strands are arranged so that at certain points in the winding , or throughout the whole winding , each portion occupies different relative positions in the complete conductor . The transposition equalizes the current flowing in each strand of the conductor , and reduces eddy current losses in the winding itself . The stranded conductor is also more flexible than a solid conductor of similar size , aiding manufacture .

The windings of signal transformers minimize leakage inductance and stray capacitance to improve high-frequency response . Coils are split into sections , and those sections interleaved between the sections of the other winding . Power-frequency transformers may have taps at intermediate points on the winding , usually on the higher voltage winding side , for voltage adjustment . Taps may be manually reconnected , or a manual or automatic switch may be provided for changing taps . Automatic on-load tap changers are used in electric power transmission or distribution , on equipment such as arc furnace transformers , or for automatic voltage regulators for sensitive loads . Audio-frequency transformers , used for the distribution of audio to public address loudspeakers , have taps to allow adjustment of impedance to each speaker . A center-tapped transformer is often used in the output stage of an audio power amplifier in a push-pull circuit . Modulation transformers in AM transmitters are very similar . Dry-type transformer winding insulation systems can be either of standard open-wound ' dip-and-bake ' construction or of higher quality designs that include vacuum pressure impregnation ( VPI ) , vacuum pressure encapsulation ( VPE ) , and cast coil encapsulation processes . In the VPI process , a combination of heat , vacuum and pressure is used to thoroughly seal , bind , and eliminate entrained air voids in the winding polyester resin insulation coat layer , thus increasing resistance to corona . VPE windings are similar to VPI windings but provide more protection against environmental effects , such as from water , dirt or corrosive ambients , by multiple dips including typically in terms of final epoxy coat .

To place the cooling problem in perspective , the accepted rule of thumb is that the life expectancy of insulation in all electrics , including all transformers , is halved for about every 7 ° C to 10 ° C increase in operating temperature , this life expectancy halving rule holding more narrowly when the increase is between about 7 ° C to 8 ° C in the case of transformer winding cellulose insulation . Small dry-type and liquid-immersed transformers are often self-cooled by natural convection and radiation heat dissipation . As power ratings increase , transformers are often cooled by forced-air cooling , forced-oil cooling , water-cooling , or combinations of these . Large transformers are filled with transformer oil that both cools and insulates the windings . Transformer oil is a highly refined mineral oil that cools the windings and insulation by circulating within the transformer tank . The mineral oil and paper insulation system has been extensively studied and used for more than 100 years . It is estimated that 50 % of power transformers will survive 50 years of use , that the average age of failure of power transformers is about 10 to 15 years , and that about 30 % of power transformer failures are due to insulation and overloading failures . Prolonged operation at elevated temperature degrades insulating properties of winding insulation and dielectric coolant , which not only shortens transformer life but can ultimately lead to catastrophic transformer failure . With a great body of empirical study as a guide , transformer oil testing including dissolved gas analysis provides valuable maintenance information . This underlines the need to monitor , model , forecast and manage oil and winding conductor insulation temperature conditions under varying , possibly difficult , power loading conditions .

Building regulations in many jurisdictions require indoor liquid-filled transformers to either use dielectric fluids that are less flammable than oil , or be installed in fire-resistant rooms . Air-cooled dry transformers can be more economical where they eliminate the cost of a fire-resistant transformer room . The tank of liquid filled transformers often has radiators through which the liquid coolant circulates by natural convection or fins . Some large transformers employ electric fans for forced-air cooling , pumps for forced-liquid cooling , or have heat exchangers for water-cooling . An oil-immersed transformer may be equipped with a Buchholz relay , which , depending on severity of gas accumulation due to internal arcing , is used to either alarm or de-energize the transformer . Oil-immersed transformer installations usually include fire protection measures such as walls , oil containment , and fire-suppression sprinkler systems . Polychlorinated biphenyls have properties that once favored their use as a dielectric coolant , though concerns over their environmental persistence led to a widespread ban on their use . Today , non-toxic , stable silicone-based oils , or fluorinated hydrocarbons may be used where the expense of a fire-resistant liquid offsets additional building cost for a transformer vault . PCBs for new equipment were banned in 1981 and in 2000 for use in existing equipment in United Kingdom Legislation enacted in Canada between 1977 and 1985 essentially bans PCB use in transformers manufactured in or imported into the country after 1980 , the maximum allowable level of PCB contamination in existing mineral oil transformers being 50 ppm .

Construction of oil-filled transformers requires that the insulation covering the windings be thoroughly dried of residual moisture before the oil is introduced . Drying is carried out at the factory , and may also be required as a field service . Drying may be done by circulating hot air around the core , or by vapor-phase drying ( VPD ) where an evaporated solvent transfers heat by condensation on the coil and core . For small transformers , resistance heating by injection of current into the windings is used . The heating can be controlled very well , and it is energy efficient . The method is called low-frequency heating ( LFH ) since the current used is at a much lower frequency than that of the power grid , which is normally 50 or 60 Hz . A lower frequency reduces the effect of inductance , so the voltage required can be reduced . The LFH drying method is also used for service of older transformers .

Cooling type : Dry and liquid-immersed – self-cooled , forced air-cooled ; liquid-immersed – forced oil-cooled , water-cooled . Circuit application : Such as power supply , impedance matching , output voltage and current stabilizer or circuit isolation . General winding configuration : By EIC vector group – various possible two-winding combinations of the phase designations delta , wye or star , and zigzag or interconnected star ; other – autotransformer , Scott-T , zigzag grounding transformer winding . Rectifier phase-shift winding configuration : 2-winding , 6-pulse ; 3-winding , 12-pulse ; . . . n-winding , [ n-1 ] * 6-pulse ; polygon ; etc ..

Various specific electrical application designs require a variety of transformer types . Although they all share the basic characteristic transformer principles , they are customize in construction or electrical properties for certain installation requirements or circuit conditions . Autotransformer : Transformer in which part of the winding is common to both primary and secondary circuits . Capacitor voltage transformer : Transformer in which capacitor divider is used to reduce high voltage before application to the primary winding . Distribution transformer , power transformer : International standards make a distinction in terms of distribution transformers being used to distribute energy from transmission lines and networks for local consumption and power transformers being used to transfer electric energy between the generator and distribution primary circuits . Phase angle regulating transformer : A specialised transformer used to control the flow of real power on three-phase electricity transmission networks . Scott-T transformer : Transformer used for phase transformation from three-phase to two-phase and vice versa . Grounding transformer : Transformer used for grounding three-phase circuits to create a neutral in a three wire system , using a wye-delta transformer , or more commonly , a zigzag grounding winding . Instrument transformer : Potential or current transformer used to accurately and safely represent voltage , current or phase position of high voltage or high power circuits .

Transformers are used to increase ( or step-up ) voltage before transmitting electrical energy over long distances through wires . Wires have resistance which loses energy through joule heating at a rate corresponding to square of the current . By transforming power to a higher voltage transformers enable economical transmission of power and distribution . Consequently , transformers have shaped the electricity supply industry , permitting generation to be located remotely from points of demand . All but a tiny fraction of the world 's electrical power has passed through a series of transformers by the time it reaches the consumer . Transformers are also used extensively in electronic products to decrease ( or step-down ) the supply voltage to a level suitable for the low voltage circuits they contain . The transformer also electrically isolates the end user from contact with the supply voltage . Signal and audio transformers are used to couple stages of amplifiers and to match devices such as microphones and record players to the input of amplifiers . Audio transformers allowed telephone circuits to carry on a two-way conversation over a single pair of wires . A balun transformer converts a signal that is referenced to ground to a signal that has balanced voltages to ground , such as between external cables and internal circuits .

Electromagnetic induction , the principle of the operation of the transformer , was discovered independently by Michael Faraday in 1831 , Joseph Henry in 1832 , and others . The relationship between EMF and magnetic flux is an equation now known as Faraday 's law of induction : where <formula> is the magnitude of the EMF in Volts and ΦB is the magnetic flux through the circuit in webers . Preceded by Francesco Zantedeschi in 1830 , Faraday performed early experiments on induction between coils of wire , including winding a pair of coils around an iron ring , thus creating the first toroidal closed-core transformer . However he only applied individual pulses of current to his transformer , and never discovered the relation between the turns ratio and EMF in the windings .

The first type of transformer to see wide use was the induction coil , invented by Rev. Nicholas Callan of Maynooth College , Ireland in 1836 . He was one of the first researchers to realize the more turns the secondary winding has in relation to the primary winding , the larger the induced secondary EMF will be . Induction coils evolved from scientists ' and inventors ' efforts to get higher voltages from batteries . Since batteries produce direct current ( DC ) rather than AC , induction coils relied upon vibrating electrical contacts that regularly interrupted the current in the primary to create the flux changes necessary for induction . Between the 1830s and the 1870s , efforts to build better induction coils , mostly by trial and error , slowly revealed the basic principles of transformers .

By the 1870s , efficient generators producing alternating current ( AC ) were available , and it was found AC could power an induction coil directly , without an interrupter . In 1876 , Russian engineer Pavel Yablochkov invented a lighting system based on a set of induction coils where the primary windings were connected to a source of AC . The secondary windings could be connected to several ' electric candles ' ( arc lamps ) of his own design . The coils Yablochkov employed functioned essentially as transformers . In 1878 , the Ganz factory , Budapest , Hungary , began equipment for electric lighting and , by 1883 , had installed over fifty systems in Austria-Hungary . Their AC systems used arc and incandescent lamps , generators , and other equipment . Lucien Gaulard and John Dixon Gibbs first exhibited a device with an open iron core called a ' secondary generator ' in London in 1882 , then sold the idea to the Westinghouse company in the United States . They also exhibited the invention in Turin , Italy in 1884 , where it was adopted for an electric lighting system . However , the efficiency of their open-core bipolar apparatus remained very low .

Induction coils with open magnetic circuits are inefficient at transferring power to loads . Until about 1880 , the paradigm for AC power transmission from a high voltage supply to a low voltage load was a series circuit . Open-core transformers with a ratio near 1 : 1 were connected with their primaries in series to allow use of a high voltage for transmission while presenting a low voltage to the lamps . The inherent flaw in this method was that turning off a single lamp ( or other electric device ) affected the voltage supplied to all others on the same circuit . Many adjustable transformer designs were introduced to compensate for this problematic characteristic of the series circuit , including those employing methods of adjusting the core or bypassing the magnetic flux around part of a coil . Efficient , practical transformer designs did not appear until the 1880s , but within a decade , the transformer would be instrumental in the War of Currents , and in seeing AC distribution systems triumph over their DC counterparts , a position in which they have remained dominant ever since .

In the autumn of 1884 , Károly Zipernowsky , Ottó Bláthy and Miksa Déri ( ZBD ) , three engineers associated with the Ganz factory , had determined that open-core devices were impracticable , as they were incapable of reliably regulating voltage . In their joint 1885 patent applications for novel transformers ( later called ZBD transformers ) , they described two designs with closed magnetic circuits where copper windings were either a ) wound around iron wire ring core or b ) surrounded by iron wire core . The two designs were the first application of the two basic transformer constructions in common use to this day , which can as a class all be termed as either core form or shell form ( or alternatively , core type or shell type ) , as in a ) or b ) , respectively ( see images ) . The Ganz factory had also in the autumn of 1884 made delivery of the world 's first five high-efficiency AC transformers , the first of these units having been shipped on September 16 , 1884 . This first unit had been manufactured to the following specifications : 1,400 W , 40 Hz , 120 : 72 V , 11.6 : 19.4 A , ratio 1.67 : 1 , one-phase , shell form .

In both designs , the magnetic flux linking the primary and secondary windings traveled almost entirely within the confines of the iron core , with no intentional path through air ( see Toroidal cores below ) . The new transformers were 3.4 times more efficient than the open-core bipolar devices of Gaulard and Gibbs . The ZBD patents included two other major interrelated innovations : one concerning the use of parallel connected , instead of series connected , utilization loads , the other concerning the ability to have high turns ratio transformers such that the supply network voltage could be much higher ( initially 1,400 to 2,000 V ) than the voltage of utilization loads ( 100 V initially preferred ) . When employed in parallel connected electric distribution systems , closed-core transformers finally made it technically and economically feasible to provide electric power for lighting in homes , businesses and public spaces . Bláthy had suggested the use of closed cores , Zipernowsky had suggested the use of parallel shunt connections , and Déri had performed the experiments ; Transformers today are designed on the principles discovered by the three engineers . They also popularized the word ' transformer ' to describe a device for altering the EMF of an electric current , although the term had already been in use by 1882 . In 1886 , the ZBD engineers designed , and the Ganz factory supplied electrical equipment for , the world 's first power station that used AC generators to power a parallel connected common electrical network , the steam-powered Rome-Cerchi power plant .

Although George Westinghouse had bought Gaulard and Gibbs ' patents in 1885 , the Edison Electric Light Company held an option on the US rights for the ZBD transformers , requiring Westinghouse to pursue alternative designs on the same principles . He assigned to William Stanley the task of developing a device for commercial use in United States . Stanley 's first patented design was for induction coils with single cores of soft iron and adjustable gaps to regulate the EMF present in the secondary winding ( see image ) . This design was first used commercially in the US in 1886 but Westinghouse was intent on improving the Stanley design to make it ( unlike the ZBD type ) easy and cheap to produce . Westinghouse , Stanley and associates soon developed an easier to manufacture core , consisting of a stack of thin ' E ‑ shaped ' iron plates , insulated by thin sheets of paper or other insulating material . Prewound copper coils could then be slid into place , and straight iron plates laid in to create a closed magnetic circuit . Westinghouse applied for a patent for the new low-cost design in December 1886 ; it was granted in July 1887 .

Jeffrey John " Jeff " Hanneman ( January 31 , 1964 – May 2 , 2013 ) was an American musician , best known as a founding member of the American thrash metal band Slayer . Hanneman contributed both lyrical and musical material to every Slayer album and wrote the songs " Raining Blood " , " War Ensemble , " " South of Heaven , " " Seasons in the Abyss , " and " Angel of Death , " all of which have been played at almost every live Slayer performance after their respective compositions . He had his own signature guitar , the ESP Jeff Hanneman Signature model .

Hanneman was born January 31 , 1964 , in Oakland , California , and grew up in Long Beach in a family containing several war veterans : his father fought in Normandy during World War II and his brothers in Vietnam , making warfare a common conversation topic at the dinner table . War films were popular on TV at the time , and Hanneman often joined his brothers in constructing and coloring tank and plane models . His interest in warfare and military history has been attributed to his upbringing . In a 2009 interview with Decibel magazine , he stated his father is German , but fought for the Allied side in World War II . In the same interview , he also goes into detail of what district of Germany his father and grandparents hail from . His grandfather was fluent in German . Hanneman was introduced to heavy metal music as a child through his older sister Mary , when she was listening to Black Sabbath at her house . Once he reached high school , he discovered hardcore punk , which had a significant influence on his style and attitude .

In 1981 Hanneman , who was working as a telemarketer at the time , met Kerry King , when King was auditioning for a southern rock band called " Ledger " . King remembered : " As I was leaving , I saw Jeff just kinda standing around playing guitar , and he was playing stuff that I was into , like Def Leppard 's ' Wasted ' and AC / DC and Priest " . After the try-out session , the two guitarists started talking and playing Iron Maiden and Judas Priest songs . Slayer was born when King asked " Why don 't we start our own band ? " , to which Hanneman replied " ... Fuck yeah ! " . Hanneman stated that he was playing guitar " for like a month " by the time he met King and put an effort into improving his skills after watching him play . Hanneman , who was heavily influenced by hardcore punk music , got the other members into the genre , leading Slayer into a faster and more aggressive approach . The band 's drummer Dave Lombardo asserted that his hardcore influences pushed him to play faster , contributing to shape his drumming style .

In 1984 , Hanneman , Lombardo and Suicidal Tendencies guitarist Rocky George had a brief hardcore punk side project called " Pap Smear " – the band had many tracks and was due to start recording when Hanneman was advised to avoid the side project by Slayer 's producer , Rick Rubin , who is quoted as saying " Ahhhh , don 't do it , man – this is the kind of thing that breaks bands up ! " and Hanneman took Rubin 's advice . Only a demo was recorded , consisting of Hanneman on vocals and bass , Lombardo on drums and George on guitar . Later two of the songs were re-recorded on Slayer 's 1996 album Undisputed Attitude .

In early 2011 , Hanneman contracted necrotizing fasciitis . Reports linked this illness with a spider bite he claimed to have received while in a friend 's hot tub . In light of his illness and Slayer 's upcoming participation in the Australian Soundwave Festival tour that was set to begin on February 26 , 2011 , the band made the decision to play the dates without Hanneman , and on February 16 , 2011 , brought on Gary Holt ( guitarist of the band Exodus ) to fill in for him . Pat O 'Brien joined as Slayer 's temporary second guitarist when Holt left the tour to play with Exodus . In 2012 , bandmate Tom Araya announced a recovery from the disease . However , later in February 2013 , Kerry King revealed continuing health problems that kept Hanneman from working . Hanneman died of liver failure on May 2 , 2013 , in a Southern California hospital near his home . On May 9 , 2013 , the official cause of death was announced as alcohol-related cirrhosis . Hanneman and his family had apparently been unaware of the extent of the condition until shortly before his death .

In 1989 , Hanneman married Kathryn in Las Vegas . They had met in 1983 before the release of the debut album Show No Mercy , during a Slayer show in Buena Park , California . The couple had no children and lived in Los Angeles . Kathryn stayed at home when Slayer toured ; Hanneman claimed to prefer this , having said that when he came home , she was " all brand new again . " Kathryn only toured with the band twice in twenty years . Hanneman was a reserved person when he was offstage . Unlike the other members , he was very selective in socializing and rarely gave interviews . As vocalist / bassist Araya said : " If he didn 't like you , he wouldn 't hang with you . " Hanneman was a reformed cocaine and pill abuser , much like Araya . They decided to quit when they realized " this can lead to only death or something , this is going too far . " Hanneman was a long-time fan of the Oakland Raiders and the Los Angeles Kings .

Hanneman 's interest in German war medals and Nazi Germany was illustrated by many of his lyrics . Those interests in the Wehrmacht and Waffen-SS began with medals given to him by his father , including some taken from a dead German soldier . His most prized medal was his Knight 's Cross , which he had bought from a Slayer fan for $ 1000 . While touring with Motörhead , Hanneman discovered Motörhead vocalist Lemmy 's interest in medals , and the two discussed medal designs , weapons and tactics used by the Wehrmacht . Hanneman 's lyrics for the song " Angel of Death " led to accusations of Slayer being Nazi sympathizers . Hanneman defended himself with " nothing I put in the lyrics that says necessarily he ( Josef Mengele ) was a bad man , because to me – well , isn 't that obvious ? I shouldn 't have to tell you that . " The band has stated numerous times that they are not Nazis and do not condone Nazism .

Hanneman 's major influences included hard rock and heavy metal bands like Led Zeppelin , Iron Maiden , Judas Priest , Black Sabbath , Aerosmith and hardcore punk acts such as Wasted Youth , Minor Threat , Dead Kennedys , Black Flag , T.S.O.L. , which led to Slayer 's 1996 album Undisputed Attitude . Hanneman 's and King 's dual guitar solos have been called " wildly chaotic , " and " twisted genius " . Early albums , such as Hell Awaits and Reign in Blood , featured a " wailing style " and " demented soloing often mimicking the screams of the song 's victims . " South of Heaven featured " more technical " guitar riffs , utilizing the aforementioned tremolo picking and down-picked notes , improving musicianship while retaining a melodic sense . Both Hanneman and King were ranked # 10 in Guitar World 's " 100 Greatest Heavy Metal Guitarists of All Time . "

Hanneman 's guitar work had a notable impact on the heavy metal scene . Musicians like Robb Flynn ( Machine Head ) , Dino Cazares ( Fear Factory , Divine Heresy ) , Mille Petrozza ( Kreator ) , Andreas Kisser ( Sepultura ) , Dan Lilker ( Anthrax , Nuclear Assault ) , Eric Hoffman ( Deicide , Amon ) , Trevor Peres ( Obituary ) , Mark Morton ( Lamb of God ) and Kelly Shaefer ( Atheist ) cited him as an influence on their playing and songwriting . Jeff Walker said that " Hanneman 's playing and riff writing and attitude has had a big impact on Carcass " . Shavo Odadjian declared that " without Jeff Hanneman , there would be no System of a Down " . John Consterdine of Terrorizer magazine noted : " without Jeff Hanneman , Slayer certainly would not have created some of the most famous riffs in metal , which undoubtedly changed the entire genre " . According to Jeff Kitts of Guitar World , he " influenced a generation and changed the course of metal forever " . Alex Webster of Cannibal Corpse , who considers Hanneman his major influence as a composer , regarded him as " one of the greatest musicians and songwriters in metal " and Alexi Laiho of Children of Bodom described him as " one of the fathers of metal " .

Hanneman wrote the music for most of the band 's fan favorites , songs such as " Angel of Death " , " Raining Blood " , " Die by the Sword " , " South of Heaven " , " War Ensemble " , " Postmortem " , " Dead Skin Mask " and " Seasons in the Abyss " , which have all become staples for live performance at Slayer shows . Hanneman 's favorite album was Reign in Blood , and he enjoyed performing the songs " Raining Blood " and " Angel of Death . " He contributed lyrics and music to every Slayer album , having formed a music and lyric writing partnership with Araya , which sometimes overshadowed King 's creative input . When writing new material , the band writes the music before the lyrics . Hanneman often composed riffs at his house , using a 24-track and a drum machine and then by gathering opinions from the other band members ; King and Lombardo made suggestions of alterations . The band will play the riff to get the basic song structure , and then figure out where the lyrics and solos go . Hanneman stated that writing lyrics and music is a " free for all " ; " It 's all just whoever comes up with what . Sometimes I 'll be more on a roll and I 'll have more stuff , same with Kerry – it 's whoever 's hot , really . Anybody can write anything ; if it 's good we use it , if not we don 't . "

In Slayer 's early days , Hanneman used a black Gibson Les Paul modified with a Kahler Pro tremolo and a Joe Barden Two / Tone Humbucker bridge pickup during the Show No Mercy and Hell Awaits era . In mid 1985 he began playing B.C. Rich , notably a Rich Bich model he bought off his band colleague Kerry King , he subsequently applied various graphics to . His first Bich had a 3x3 headstock , chrome hardware ( including the Kahler Pro bridge ) and the pickups were DiMarzio Super Distortions . He and King can both also be seen with a second set of BC Rich 's around 1986-1987 , which had 6-in-line headstocks , black hardware and DiMarzio pickups . More rarely he also used a BC Rich Ironbird model . From 1987 he was seen using a custom made BC Rich Gunslinger with similar specs as his ' 86- ' 87 era Bich , he shortly after had the pickups replaced with two active EMG-81 humbuckers . In 1988 he began playing the famous Jackson Soloist that he would use constantly as his main guitar for songs played in E-flat tuning until 2001 . It originally shipped to him with passive Jackson pickups ( probably a J-50 and J-80 ) and a JE-1200 mid-boost circuit , but were soon changed for EMG-81 pickups as well . Around 1990-1991 Hanneman began using ESP guitars , he mostly used as backup for this Jackson Soloist and other tunings . He had his own signature model made , based on the specs of his original Jackson Soloist . When touring , Hanneman carried six guitars due to the different tunings he utilized . Most albums such as Haunting the Chapel – Divine Intervention and World Painted Blood have E-flat tuning . However , albums such as Diabolus in Musica – Christ Illusion feature alternate tunings such as Drop B and utilizing seven string guitars . The first album , Show No Mercy , was recorded in standard tuning , while live performances of those songs were played in E-flat since about 1984 .

Robert McLachlan is a Canadian cinematographer . A successful cyclist in his youth , McLachlan quit the sport to take up cinematography , and entered the field after studying at Simon Fraser University , McLachlan was mentored by Richard Leiterman . His professional career began with documentary work for Greenpeace , before he became involved in both television and feature films ; his work has subsequently earned him several industry awards and award nominations . McLachlan , who was inspired by both his father 's photography and his own appreciation for the films Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid and Walkabout to choose his career path , would go on to find recognition as the chief cinematographer for the television series Millennium , for which he was scouted specifically . McLachlan 's style on this series led to several industry awards and briefly became popular in the medium , as well as leading him directly to future work on Game of Thrones . He founded the documentary production company Omni Film Productions in the 1970s , later selling his share of the company .

In his youth , McLachlan was an avid cyclist , accrediting this to the fact that his home town Vancouver was not cold enough for ponds to freeze over to play ice hockey on . During his teenage years , he trained upwards of six hours a day , and won several national championships in the sport . He qualified to represent Canada in the 1976 Summer Olympics , but the lack of funding for cycling in North America at the time would have necessitated him funding his own journey and leaving school to do so ; McLachlan opted instead to remain in education and focus on his interest in photography . McLachlan first became interested in cinematography after viewing the 1969 film Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid ; Nicolas Roeg 's work on the 1971 film Walkabout further cemented his interest in the field . McLachlan was also motivated by his father , who was an avid photographer . An early school assignment to create a Super 8 film project , for which he received an A grade , also proved a formative influence . McLachlan studied fine art at the University of British Columbia for a year , before changing courses to attend classes at Simon Fraser University 's film department . McLachlan 's education focussed on the documentary style of John Grierson ; however , when he began work in 1987 , he was mentored by Richard Leiterman . McLachlan also cites influences outside the field of cinematography , drawing influence from the chiaroscuro , Dutch art and pre-Raphaelite movements of visual art , and the works of Andrew Wyeth and Georges de La Tour in particular .

Having graduated , McLachlan and Michael Chechik founded the production company Omni Film Productions in 1979 , and began to work with Greenpeace , filming documentary footage on a range of subjects . McLachlan narrowly avoided trouble on several of these shoots , finding himself arrested for filming too close to an Exxon oil tanker and scarcely missing being assaulted by trophy hunters in British Columbia . McLachlan would later sell his stake in Omni , but remains proud of their documentary work . At the time , McLachlan was unsuccessful in joining an industry union , relegating his work to advertising and small-scale productions ; his first union-backed project was on the revival of the television series Sea Hunt . McLachlan found success on the Fox television series Millennium , earning several awards for his work on the show . He was head-hunted for the series by its creator Chris Carter , who had seen his work on the series Strange Luck . McLachlan was initially offered a position shooting Carter 's other active series , The X-Files , then in its third season , but was unable to start work in time . He developed a distinctive style for the series , shooting it with desaturated colours and lighting scenes as though they were to be filmed in black and white ; he also made use of high-intensity strobe lighting usually employed for advertising and macro cinematography . McLachlan has noted that this style briefly became popular after the series ' broadcast but that other cinematographers had difficulty adjusting to it .

Having worked on Millennium with director David Nutter , McLachlan was able to parley this connection into a role on the HBO fantasy series Game of Thrones . McLachlan has called working on the show 's ten-person cinematography team " a major logistical challenge " , noting the complexity of its out-of-sequence filming schedules as something unseen on a television series before . McLachlan has also worked on the programme Ray Donovan , and has based that series ' cinematography on both film noir aesthetics and thse of 1970s cinema , specifically citing The Long Goodbye , The Parallax View and All the President 's Men , as well as the work of Gordon Willis .

McLachlan has been nominated for , and won , several awards over the course of his career . He has been nominated four times for the American Society of Cinematographers awards , three times for his work on the television series Millennium and once for the television film High Noon . He has also won several Canadian Society of Cinematographers awards , including wins for the films Willard and Impolite , as well as for several episodes of Millennium and The Lone Gunmen . McLachlan 's work on Game of Thrones received Emmy Award nominations in 2013 and 2015 , and a Canadian Society of Cinematographers award nomination in 2015 ; he was also nominated by the latter society for his cinematography on the series Ray Donovan .

Otto Julius Zobel ( October 20 , 1887 – January 1970 ) was an electrical engineer who worked for the American Telephone & Telegraph Company ( AT & T ) in the early part of the 20th century . Zobel 's work on filter design was revolutionary and led , in conjunction with the work of John R. Carson , to significant commercial advances for AT & T in the field of frequency division multiplex ( FDM ) telephone transmissions . Although much of Zobel 's work has been superseded by more modern filter designs , it remains the basis of filter theory and his papers are still referenced today . Zobel invented the m-derived filter and the constant-resistance filter , which remains in use . Zobel and Carson helped to establish the nature of noise in electric circuits , concluding that — contrary to mainstream belief — it is not even theoretically possible to filter out noise entirely and that noise will always be a limiting factor in what is possible to transmit . Thus , they anticipated the later work of Claude Shannon , who showed how the theoretical information rate of a channel is related to the noise of the channel .

Otto Julius Zobel was born on October 20 , 1887 in Ripon , Wisconsin . He first studied at Ripon College , where he received his BA in 1909 with a thesis on Theoretical and experimental treatment of electrical condensers . He later received a Distinguished Alumnus Award from Ripon . He then went to the University of Wisconsin and graduated with an MA in physics in 1910 . Zobel stayed at the University of Wisconsin as a physics instructor from 1910 to 1915 , and graduated with his PhD in 1914 ; his dissertation concerned " Thermal Conduction and Radiation " . This followed his 1913 co-authoring of a book on the subject of geophysical thermodynamics . From 1915 to 1916 he taught physics at the University of Minnesota . Having moved to Maplewood , New Jersey , he joined AT & T in 1916 , where he worked on transmission techniques . In 1926 , still with the company , he moved to New York and in 1934 , he transferred to Bell Telephone Laboratories ( Bell Labs ) , the research organisation created jointly by AT & T and Western Electric a few years earlier . The last of his prolific list of patents occurred for Bell Labs in the 1950s , by which time he was residing in Morristown , New Jersey . He died there in January 1970 .

Zobel 's early work on heat conduction was not pursued in his later career . There are , however , some interesting connections . Lord Kelvin in his early work on the transmission line derived the properties of the electric line by analogy with heat conduction . This is based on Fourier 's law and the Fourier conduction equation . Ingersoll and Zobel describe the work of Kelvin and Fourier in their book and Kelvin 's approach to the representation of transmission functions would consequently have been very familiar to Zobel . It is therefore no surprise that in Zobel 's paper on the electric wave filter a very similar representation is found for the transmission function of filters . Solutions to the Fourier equation can be provided by Fourier series . Ingersoll and Zobel state that in many cases the calculation involved makes the solution " well-nigh impossible " by analytical means . With modern technology such a calculation is trivially easy , but Ingersoll and Zobel recommend the use of harmonic analysers , which are the mechanical counterpart of today 's spectrum analysers . These machines add together mechanical oscillations of various frequencies , phases and amplitudes by combining them through a set of pulleys or springs ; one for each oscillator . The reverse process is also possible , driving the machine with the function and measuring the Fourier components as output .

After the work of John R. Carson in 1915 it became clear that multiplexed telephone transmissions could be greatly improved by the use of single sideband suppressed carrier ( SSB ) transmission . Compared to basic amplitude modulation ( AM ) SSB has the advantage of half the bandwidth and a fraction of the power ( one sideband can have no more than 1 / 6 of the total power and would typically be a lot less ) . AM analysed in the frequency domain consists of a carrier and two sidebands . The carrier wave in AM represents the majority of the transmitted power but contains no information whatsoever . The two sidebands both contain identical information so only one is required , at least from an information transmission point of view . Up to this point filtering had been by simple tuned circuits . However , SSB required a flat response over the sideband of interest and maximum rejection of the other sideband with a very sharp transition between the two . As the idea was to put another ( completely different ) signal in the slot vacated by the unwanted sideband it was important that all traces of it were removed to prevent crosstalk . At the same time minimum distortion ( i.e. flat response ) is obviously desirable for the sideband being retained . This requirement led to a big research effort in the design of electric wave filters .

George A. Campbell and Zobel worked on this problem of extracting a single sideband from an amplitude-modulated composite wave for use in multiplexing telephone channels and the related problem of extracting ( de-multiplexing ) the signal at the far end of the transmission . Initially , the baseband pass range used was 200 Hz to 2500 Hz but later the International Telecommunication Union set a standard of 300 Hz to 3.4 kHz with 4 kHz spacing . Thus the filtering was required to go from fully pass to fully stop in the space of 900 Hz . This standard in telephony is still in use today and had remained widespread until it began to be supplanted by digital techniques from the 1980s onwards . Campbell had previously utilised the condition discovered in the work of Oliver Heaviside for lossless transmission to improve the frequency response of transmission lines using lumped component inductors ( loading coils ) . When Campbell started investigating electric wave filter design from 1910 , this previous work naturally led him to filters using ladder network topology using capacitors and inductors . Low-pass , high-pass and band-pass filters were designed . Sharper cut-offs and higher stop-band rejection to any arbitrary design specification could be achieved merely by increasing the length of the ladder . The filter designs used by Campbell were described by Zobel as constant k filters although this was not a term used by Campbell himself .

Zobel invented the m-derived ( or m-type ) filter section in 1920 , the distinguishing feature of this design being a pole of attenuation close to the filter cut-off frequency . The result of this design is a filter response which falls very rapidly past the cut-off frequency . To use a well known quaint engineer 's expression it " goes off like the side of a house " . A fast transition between pass-band and stop-band was , of course , one of the primary requirements for cramming as many telephone channels as possible into one cable . One disadvantage of the m-type section was that at frequencies past the pole of attenuation , the response of the filter started to increase again , reaching a peak somewhere in the stop-band and then falling again . Zobel overcame this problem by designing hybrid filters using a mixture of constant k and m-type sections . This gave Zobel the advantages of both : the fast transition of the m-type and good stop-band rejection of the constant k . By 1921 Zobel had further perfected his composite filter designs . He was now using , in addition , m-type half sections at the ends of his composite filters to improve the impedance matching of the filter to the source and the load , a technique in which he held a patent . The difficulty that he was trying to overcome was that the image impedance techniques being used to design filter sections only gave the mathematically predicted response if they were terminated in their respective image impedances . Technically , this was easy to do within the filter as it could always be arranged that adjacent filter sections had matching image impedances ( one of the characteristics of m-type sections is that one side or the other of the m-type section will have an image impedance identical to the equivalent constant k section ) . However , the terminating impedances are a different story . These are normally required to be resistive but the image impedance will be complex . Even worse , it is not even mathematically possible to construct a filter image impedance out of discrete components . The result of impedance mismatch is reflections and a degraded filter performance . Zobel found that a value of m = 0.6 for the end half sections , while not mathematically exact , gave a good match to resistive terminations in the pass-band .

Around 1923 , Zobel 's filter designs were reaching the peak of their complexity . He now had a filter section to which he had doubly applied the m-derivation process resulting in filter sections which he called the mm ' -type . This had all the advantages of the previous m-type , but more so . An even faster transition into the stop-band and an even more constant characteristic impedance in the pass-band . At the same time one side would match into the old m-type , just as the m-type could match into the k-type . Because there were now two arbitrary parameters ( m and m ' ) that the filter designer could adjust , much better end matching half-sections could be designed . A composite filter using these sections would have been the very best that could have been achieved at that time . However , the mm ' -type sections never became as widespread and well known as the m-type sections , possibly because their greater complexity has deterred designers . They would have been inconvenient to implement with microwave technology and the increased count of components , especially wound components , made them more expensive to implement with conventional LC technology . Certainly , it is hard to find a textbook from any period which covers their design .

Zobel directed much of his effort in the 1920s to constructing networks which could simulate transmission lines . These networks were derived from filter sections , which themselves had been derived from transmission line theory and the filters were used on transmission line signals . In turn , these artificial lines were used to develop and test better filter sections . Zobel used a design technique based on his theoretical discovery that the impedance looking into the end of a filter chain was practically the same ( within the limits of component tolerances ) as the theoretical impedance of an infinite chain after only a small number of sections had been added to the chain . These " image " impedances have a mathematical characterization impossible to construct simply out of discrete components , and can only ever be approximated . Zobel found that using these impedances constructed out of small filter chains as components in a greater network allowed him to build realistic line simulators . These were not in any sense intended as practical filters in the field , but rather the intention was to construct good controllable line simulators without having the inconvenience of miles of cable to contend with .

Zobel invented several filters whose defining characteristic was a constant resistance as the input impedance . The resistance remained constant through the pass band and the stop band . With these designs Zobel had completely solved the impedance matching problem . The main application of these sections has been not so much for filtering out unwanted frequencies , the k-type and m-type filters remained best for this , but rather to equalize the response in the pass band to a flat response . Perhaps one of Zobel 's most fascinating inventions is the lattice filter section . This section is both constant resistance and flat response zero attenuation across the band , yet it is constructed out of inductors and capacitors . The only signal parameter it modifies is the phase of the signal at different frequencies .

A common theme throughout Zobel 's work is the issue of impedance matching . The obvious approach to filter design is to design directly for the attenuation characteristics desired . With modern computing power , a brute force approach is possible and easy , simply incrementally adjusting each component while recalculating in an iterative process until the desired response is achieved . However , Zobel developed a more indirect line of attack . He realized very early on that mismatched impedances inevitably meant reflections , and reflections meant a loss of signal . Improving the impedance match , conversely , would automatically improve a filter 's pass-band response . This impedance matching approach not only led to better filters but the techniques developed could be used to construct circuits whose sole purpose was to match together two disparate impedances . Zobel continued to invent impedance matching networks throughout his career . During World War II he moved on to waveguide filters for use in the newly developed radar technology . Little was published during the war for obvious reasons but towards the end with Bell Labs in the 1950s , Zobel designs for sections to match physically different waveguide sizes appear . However , the circuit noted above which still bears Zobel 's name today , the constant-resistance network , can be viewed as an impedance matching circuit and remains Zobel 's finest achievement in this regard .

The name of Zobel is , perhaps , most well known with regard to impedance compensation networks for loudspeakers . Clearly , his designs have applications in this field . However , none of Zobel 's patents or articles appear to discuss this topic . It is unclear whether he actually designed anything specifically for loudspeakers . The closest we get to this is where he speaks of impedance matching into a transducer , but here he is discussing a circuit to equalize a submarine cable , or in another instance where clearly he has in mind the hybrid transformer which terminates a line going into a telephone instrument on a phantom circuit .

At the beginning of the 1920s and through to the 1930s , the thinking on noise was dominated by the radio engineers ' concern with external static . In modern terminology , this would include random ( thermal and shot ) noise but those concepts were relatively unknown and little understood at the time despite an early paper by Schottky in 1918 on shot noise . To the radio engineers of the time , static meant externally generated interference . The line of attack against noise from the radio engineers included developing directional antennae and moving to higher frequencies where the problem was known not to be so severe . For telephone engineers , what was then called " fluctuating noise " , and would now be described as random noise , i.e. shot and thermal noise , was much more noticeable than with early radio systems . Carson broadened the radio engineers ' concept of signal-to-static ratio to a more general signal-to-noise ratio and introduced a figure of merit for noise .

The radio engineers ' preoccupation with static and the techniques being used to reduce it led to the idea that noise could be totally eliminated by , in some way , compensating for it or canceling it out . The culmination of this viewpoint was expressed in a 1928 paper by Edwin Armstrong . This led to a famous retort by Carson in a subsequent paper , " Noise , like the poor , will always be with us " . Armstrong was technically in the wrong in this exchange , but in 1933 , ironically and paradoxically , went on to invent wide-band FM which enormously improved the noise performance of radio by increasing the bandwidth . Carson and Zobel in 1923 had conclusively shown that filtering cannot remove noise to the same degree as , say , interference from another station could be removed . To do this they had analyzed random noise in the frequency domain and postulated that it contains all frequencies in its spectrum . This was the first use of Fourier analysis to describe random noise and hence described it in terms of a spread of frequencies . Also first published in this paper was the concept of what we would now call band-limited white noise . For Zobel this meant that characteristics of the receiving filter completely determine the figure of merit in the presence of white noise and that the filter design was key to achieving the optimum noise performance .

Although this work by Carson and Zobel was very early , it was not universally accepted that noise could be analyzed in the frequency domain in this way . For this reason , the aforementioned exchange between Carson and Armstrong was still possible years later . The precise mathematical relationship between noise power and bandwidth for random noise was finally determined by Harry Nyquist in 1928 thus giving a theoretical limit to what could be achieved by filtering . This work on noise produced the concept , and led Zobel to pursue the design , of matched filters . This is the concept that the noise performance of the equipment is optimal when the filter is perfectly matched to the signal one is attempting to transmit and is the culmination of theoretical research into the application of removing noise by means of linear filters . This became important in the development of radar during the Second World War in which Zobel played a part .

Zobel 's work has recently found an application in research into genetic programming . The purpose of this research is to attempt to demonstrate that the results obtained from genetic programming are comparable to human achievements . Two of the measures that are used to determine whether a genetic programming result is human-competitive are : The result is equal to or better than a result that was considered an achievement in its field at the time of discovery . One such problem set as a task for a genetic program was to design a crossover filter for woofer and tweeter loudspeakers . The output design was identical in topology to a design found in a patent of Zobel 's for a filter to separate multiplexed low and high frequencies on a transmission line . This was judged to be human-comparable , not only because of the patent , but also because the high-pass and low-pass sections were " decomposed " as in Zobel 's design , but not specifically required to be so in the programs parameters . Whether or not Zobel 's filter design would be good for a hi-fi system is another question . The design does not actually cross over , but rather , there is a gap between the two pass-bands where the signal is not transmitted to either output . Essential for multiplexing , but not so desirable for sound reproduction .

The M + M 's Tour was the sixth concert tour by American recording artist Britney Spears , consisting of six brief shows at clubs in the United States . Spears expressed interested to tour again as early as February 2006 . She started rehearsing for a show at House of Blues venues in secret , and pulled out of a surprise performance on April 25 , 2007 , at Los Angeles nightclub Forty Deuce . After a marquee reading " The M + M 's " at the House of Blues in San Diego , California , appeared in late April 2007 , media sources identified the act as Spears , and the show quickly sold out . The tour marked the first time Spears performed live since The Onyx Hotel Tour in June 2004 . The show , which ran 12 – 16 minutes in length , featured Spears accompanied by four female back-up dancers performing choreographed dance numbers to shortened versions of five songs , including hits such as " ... Baby One More Time " and " Toxic " . During the performance of one song , a male audience member participated onstage . Spears ' vocals during the performance were lip-synched . The shows received mixed reviews from critics and fans . Some said that Spears looked happy and in great shape , while others deemed the show as subpar . Scalpers outside the San Diego venue sold tickets with a face value of $ 35 for prices between $ 200 and $ 500 .

The shows took place against a backdrop of Spears ' life struggles the previous few years that had made her fodder for tabloid reports . These included a two-day marriage , a stormy two-year marriage and divorce and having two children , shaving her head , entering rehabilitation for substance abuse , and various run-ins with the paparazzi . In an interview with People in February 2006 , Spears explained that she was anxious to resume her career , saying , " This may sound weird , but I miss traveling . I miss the road , seeing different places and being with the dancers and having fun . That feeling of being on the stage , knowing it 's your best — I love that . I needed a break . I needed to be hungry again . " On April 26 , 2007 , Ivan Kane , the owner of Los Angeles nightclub Forty Deuce , told E ! News that Spears had pulled out of a surprise performance at the venue the previous night . Kane stated that during rehearsal , she was " looking very hot , with four backup dancers and [ she ] sang three songs . They ran through the set several times , the choreography was smokin ' , and she sounded great . " Marc Malkin of E ! News said that Spears thought she might need more time to prepare . He also reported that she was planning to tour House of Blues venues in the United States . Spears wanted to keep the rehearsals a secret , and did not even inform the owners of the different dance studios the reason for the preparation . In late April 2007 , a marquee reading " The M + M 's " appeared at the House of Blues in San Diego . Several gossip websites and local media sources identified the act as Spears , prompting the show to quickly sell out . On May 1 , 2007 , a front-page story on The San Diego Union-Tribune fueled the speculation . The same day , the doors opened at 19 : 00 PST ( 03 : 00 UTC ) , and Spears took the stage at 22 : 00 PST ( 06 : 00 UTC ) . It marked the first time Spears was on stage since her knee injury caused The Onyx Hotel Tour to be canceled in June 2004 .

The concert opened with Spears taking the stage accompanied by four blonde female dancers to perform a short version of " ... Baby One More Time " , wearing a silver beaded bra , a pleated white skirt and white boots . She wore a long brown wig to cover the head she had shaved two and a half months previously and appeared in physically good shape . ( By now her hair was about an inch long , and one of her dancers said of her hair without the wig , " It '  s getting longer and she looks beautiful . "  ) The show then segued into a flashy shortened version of " I 'm a Slave 4 U " . Though while Spears performed the original choreography to " Slave " , the performance was compared to the style of the Pussycat Dolls . The dancers then left Spears alone onstage to perform a chair routine of " Breathe on Me " . They re-entered with a male fan from the audience with them and Spears giving him a lap dance . Half way through the lap dance , Spears disappeared for a costume change leaving her dancers to continue the performance . She then reappeared in a hot pink bra , white fur coat and jean skirt to perform " Do Somethin ' " with Spears throwing air guitars to the crowd . The show then concluded with " Toxic " , which featured Spears and her dancers performing in a mix of Spears and Shakira dance styles . As the performance came to an end , Spears said " Thank you so much . These are my dancers " – her only words during the show – and left the stage . The show lasted around 12 – 16 minutes .

The first show in San Diego began two hours after the stated time . There was no live band for the shows ; Spears and the dancers performed to recorded tracks . Spears ' vocals during the show were also not live but rather were lip-synched to the recording . At some points , she was chewing gum while performing . The lack of live singing became most prominent during the Orlando stop of the tour , when the CD to which Spears was miming began skipping during " Do Somethin ' " , reportedly caused some in the audience to start booing . By the Florida shows , Spears was up to four costume changes .

Teri VanHorn of MTV said that with " Her body newly toned and her smile beaming , she looked every bit like a woman who had emerged from her quarter-life crisis stronger than yesterday . " She also said Spears performed with " a naughty , free-spirited attitude " , as though she " had invited 900 friends to her dirty little dance party , and too bad for you if you couldn 't roll with the fun . " SuChin Pak , also from MTV stated the show was " no huge revelation " , explaining , " It was not the kind of show that says : ' She 's back . She 's going to come out with the biggest album of her career . ' Nor did it say that she 's lost forever and we 'll never see the old Britney back again . These are all really tiny baby steps . " Thomas K. Arnold of USA Today said the show " turned out to be more rehearsal than comeback " , although " all those post-rehab workouts were worth the effort . " On May 2 , 2007 , scalpers outside the House of Blues in San Diego were selling tickets with a face value of $ 35 for prices between $ 200 and $ 500 . Chris Lee of the Los Angeles Times wrote that " her ' comeback ' – if you want to call it that – cemented Spears ' place as pop music 's reigning drama queen , capable of capturing worldwide tabloid headlines with a bare minimum of creative expenditure . "

Most of the shows sold out , although there were some empty seats for the Las Vegas one despite tickets being available cheaply on the secondary market . Fan reaction to the show was generally divided . Some fans attending the show were dissatisfied with its short length , with one quoted afterward as saying , " That was so disappointing . " Some fans were also disappointed by the performance quality , with one quoted as saying , " It looked like she lip-synched her way through the whole thing . " Other fans were more accommodating , pleased to be seeing her in good health and appearance and with one quoted as saying , " Whatever , we love her . She 's amazing . " One group of female fans wore matching pink tops that said " Bald Ambition " on one side and " The Comeback 2007 " on the other . Jim Abbott of the Orlando Sentinel summed up some of the reaction by writing that fans at the tail end of the tour " knew that the show would be short . ... They also knew that she would be lip-synching , but this wasn 't about music as much as it was about celebrity , loyalty and beating adversity . "

The Gateway Protection Programme is a scheme operated by the British government in partnership with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees ( UNHCR ) and co-funded by the European Union ( EU ) , offering a legal route for a quota of UNHCR-identified refugees to be resettled in the United Kingdom . Following a proposal by the British Home Secretary , David Blunkett , in October 2001 , the legal basis was established by the Nationality , Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and the programme itself launched in March 2004 . Since its inception , the programme has enjoyed broad support from the UK 's main political parties . The Gateway Protection Programme initially had a quota of 500 refugees per year , which was later increased to 750 , but the actual number of refugees resettled in most years has been fewer than the quota permitted . Liberian , Congolese , Sudanese , Burmese , Ethiopian , Mauritanian , Iraqi , Bhutanese , Eritrean , Palestinian , Sierra Leonean and Somali refugees have been resettled under the programme . Refugees have been resettled to a number of locations in England and Scotland . Of the 18 local authorities participating as resettlement locations by 2012 , eight are in the North West region of England and three in Yorkshire and Humberside . Evaluations of the programme have praised it as having a positive impact on the reception of refugees by local communities , but have also noted the difficulties these refugees have faced in securing employment .

The programme is the UK 's " quota refugee " resettlement scheme . Refugees designated as particularly vulnerable by the UNHCR are assessed by the Home Office for eligibility under the 1951 Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees . If they meet the eligibility criteria they are then brought to the UK and granted indefinite leave to remain . The International Organization for Migration ( IOM ) helps facilitate pre-departure medical screening , counselling , dossier preparation , transport and immediate arrival assistance . Once in the UK , refugees are entered into a 12-month support programme intended to aid their integration . The programme has involved local authorities and NGOs including the British Red Cross , the International Rescue Committee , Migrant Helpline , Refugee Action , the Refugee Arrivals Project , the Refugee Council , Scottish Refugee Council and Refugee Support . These organisations formed the Resettlement Inter-Agency Partnership at the planning stage of the programme , in order to pool their resources and form a partnership for the delivery of services to the resettled refugees . The programme is distinct from and in addition to ordinary provisions for claiming asylum in the United Kingdom . Since 2008 , it has been co-funded by the European Union , first through the European Refugee Fund and then through its successor , the Asylum , Migration and Integration Fund ( AMIF ) . Over the period 2009 – 14 , the Home Office provided £ 29.97 million in funding and the EU £ 18.67 million . Anna Musgrave of the Refugee Council argues that the programme " is rarely talked about and the Home Office , in the main , stay fairly quiet about it . "

The Gateway Protection Programme is not the first British refugee resettlement programme . Other , informal resettlement programmes include the Mandate Refugee Scheme , and the UK has also participated in the Ten or More Plan . The former is for so-called " mandate " refugees who have been granted refugee status by UNHCR in third countries . To qualify for the scheme , refugees must have close ties to the UK and it must also be demonstrated that the UK is the most appropriate country for their resettlement . The Ten or More Plan , established by UNHCR in 1973 and administered in the UK by the British Red Cross , is for refugees requiring medical attention not available in their current location . During the 1990s , 2,620 refugees were settled in the UK through these two programmes . In 2003 , the UK 's Ten or More Plan had a resettlement goal of 10 people and the Mandate Refugee Scheme 300 . Refugees have also been resettled through specific programmes following emergencies . For example , 42,000 Ugandan Asians expelled from Uganda during 1972 – 74 , 22,500 Vietnamese during 1979 – 92 , over 2,500 Bosnians in the 1990s , and over 4,000 Kosovars in 1999 .

A new resettlement programme was proposed by the British Home Secretary , David Blunkett in October 2001 , having been hinted at by the previous Home Secretary , Jack Straw , in a speech to the European Conference on Asylum in Lisbon in June 2000 . The legal basis for the programme 's funding was established by Section 59 of the Nationality , Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 . This act was passed by the House of Commons by 362 votes to 74 in June 2002 and by the House of Lords – at the ninth attempt , following concern about the introduction of measures allowing for the detention of asylum seekers in rural areas ) – in November 2002 . The Gateway Protection Programme was subsequently established in March 2004 , with the first refugees arriving in the UK on 19 March . Initially , the programme quota was set at 500 per year . The British government has faced criticism from academics and practitioners over the small number of refugees it has resettled in comparison with other developed states . For example , in 2001 the countries with the largest quota schemes were the United States ( 80,000 refugees ) , Canada ( 11,000 ) and Australia ( 10,000 ) . Initially , David Blunkett had intended to raise the quota to 1,000 in the second year of the programme 's operation , but local councils ' reluctance to participate in the scheme meant that it was slow to take off . It has been argued that their reluctance showed that hostile attitudes towards asylum seekers had carried over to affect the most genuinely needy refugees . The quota remained at 500 per year until the 2008 / 09 financial year , when it was increased to 750 refugees per year . The number of refugees resettled under the scheme is small in comparison to the number of asylum seekers offered protection in the UK . For example , in 2013 , 17,647 initial decisions on asylum claims were made by the Home Office , of which 5,734 ( 32.5 per cent ) determined the applicant to be a refugee and granted them asylum , 53 ( 0.3 per cent ) granted humanitarian protection and 540 ( 3.1 per cent ) granted discretionary leave . 11,105 applications ( 62.9 per cent ) were refused . Worldwide , there were 51.2 million forcibly displaced people at the end of 2013 , 16.7 million of whom were refugees .

The programme has been supported by the main British political parties at the national level since its inception , and there has also been support from councillors from each of the main parties at the local authority level . On the occasion of the tenth anniversary of the scheme in 2014 , refugee groups and others praised it as a successful programme and called for it to be expanded , particularly in light of the Syrian refugee crisis . In early 2014 , Amnesty International and the Refugee Council campaigned for the government to offer resettlement or humanitarian protection to Syrian refugees above and beyond the Gateway quota of 750 per year , " to ensure that resettlement opportunities continue to be available to refugees from the rest of the world " . The anniversary of the programme was also the occasion of further criticism of the 750 quota , with some commentators arguing that this is mean-spirited and continues to compare unfavourably with the refugee resettlement programmes of states including the United States , Canada and Australia . Others , such as academic Jonathan Darling , have been more skeptical about expanding the scheme , for fear that any such move will be accompanied by greater restrictions on the ability of people to claim asylum in the UK . He argues that " we must be critical of any attempts to expand such a quota-based scheme at the expense of a more progressive asylum system " . Furthermore , he argues that the " hospitality " of the scheme is highly conditional and can be viewed as a form of " compassionate repression " , with the UNHCR , the Home Office and local authorities all involved in " sorting , decision , and consideration over which individuals are the ' exceptional cases ' " , to the exclusion of others .

The number of refugees resettled under the programme has been below the quota in every year except for 2009 , 2012 and 2013 . Refugees resettled have included Liberians from Guinea and Sierra Leone , Congolese ( DRC ) from Uganda and Zambia , Sudanese from Uganda , Burmese ( including Karen , Mon , Pa 'O and Rohingya people ) from Thailand , Ethiopians from Kenya , and Mauritanians from Senegal . Provision was made for 1,000 Iraqi refugees to be resettled in the UK between 1 April 2008 and the end of March 2010 . In 2008 , 236 Iraqis were resettled and as of 18 May , a further 212 had been resettled in 2009 . However , in May 2009 the programme was shut down for those Iraqis resettling due to having worked in support of British occupying forces and therefore at risk for reprisals . This decision was criticised as premature and " mean-spirited " by some members of Parliament . Nonetheless , other Iraqis continue to be resettled under the Gateway Protection Programme and between 2004 and 2014 , a total of 1,344 Iraqis were resettled as part of the programme . Other nationalities of refugees resettled under the scheme include Bhutanese , Eritreans , Palestinians , Sierra Leoneans and Somalis .

In March 2009 , out of the 434 local authorities in the UK , 15 were participating in the programme . By 2012 , a total of 18 local authorities had participated . In a review of the scheme , academics Duncan Sim and Kait Laughlin note that " it is clear that , as with asylum seekers dispersed by the UK Borders Agency under Home Office dispersal policy , most refugees have been resettled away from London and south east England , a policy which may lead to separation of extended families " . Of the 18 local authorities , eight are in North West England and three in Yorkshire and Humberside . The first refugees resettled under the programme were housed in Sheffield , which was the first city to join the scheme and which had branded itself the UK 's first ' City of Sanctuary ' . Others have been housed in cities and towns including Bradford , Brighton and Hove , Bromley , Colchester , Hull , Middlesbrough , Motherwell , Norwich , and the Manchester area including Bolton , Bury , Oldham , Rochdale , Salford , Stockport and Tameside . Sheffield , Bolton and Hull have received the largest numbers , accounting for just under half of all refugees resettled under the programme between 2004 and 2012 . The large proportion of refugees who have been resettled in North West England has been attributed partly to strong leadership on migration issues in Greater Manchester .

In 2007 , North Lanarkshire Council won the " Creating Integrated Communities " category in the UK Housing Awards for its involvement in the Gateway Protection Programme . Research with Congolese refugees settled with North Lanarkshire Council in Motherwell has found that the majority want to stay in the town and that they view it positively both as a location in its own right , and in comparison with other resettlement locations . In April 2007 , Bolton Museum held an exhibition of photos of Sudanese refugees resettled in the town under the programme . A film , titled Moving to Mars was made about two ethnic Karen families resettled from Burma to Sheffield under the Gateway Protection Programme . The film opened the Sheffield International Documentary Festival in November 2009 and was aired on the television channel More4 on 2 February 2010 . One ethnic Karen refugee resettled with his family in Sheffield in 2006 , Kler Heh , signed a professional contract to play football for Sheffield United F.C. in March 2015 . On 17 July 2009 , three Congolese men resettled in Norwich under the programme were killed in a car crash on the A1 road . The Home Office released a promotional video in October 2009 that highlighted the success of the programme in resettling the first 15 Congolese families in Norwich in 2006 . In 2011 , the Home Office stopped using Norwich as a resettlement location in favour of locations in Yorkshire and Lancashire , reportedly to the disappointment of the local council .

Resettlement has been presented as a means of the UK fulfilling its obligations towards displaced people in the context of hostile public attitudes towards asylum seekers . Research has shown that members of the British public are generally well disposed to providing protection to genuine refugees , but are sceptical about the validity of asylum seekers ' claims . A report published in 2005 states that " some participating agencies have been reluctant to pursue a proactive media strategy due to local political considerations and issues relating to the dispersal of asylum seekers " . However , in February 2006 , the Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for the Home Department Andy Burnham , when asked about how the programme fitted in with community cohesion strategies , stated in the House of Commons that : " The early evidence from areas in which authorities have participated in the programme shows that it has been successful in challenging some of the attacks on the notion of political asylum that we have heard in recent years . In Bolton and Sheffield in particular , the towns have rallied around the individuals who have come to them . The programme has been a positive experience for the receiving community and , of course , for the vulnerable individuals who have benefited from the protection that those towns have offered " .

A report into the experience of refugees resettled in Brighton and Hove under the scheme between October 2006 and October 2007 was published by the Sussex Centre for Migration Research at the University of Sussex in December 2007 . The report found that the refugees had struggled to gain employment and English language skills . Another evaluation report undertaken for the Home Office and published in 2011 also found that only small numbers of resettled refugees were in paid employment , noting that many were still more concerned about meeting their basic needs . In February 2009 , the Home Office published a report evaluating the effectiveness of the Gateway Protection Programme . The research it was based upon focused on refugees ' integration into British society in the 18 months following their resettlement . The research found that refugees showed signs of integration , including the formation of social bonds through community groups and places of worship . The report noted that low employment rates and slow progress with acquiring English language skills were particular concerns . Younger refugees and children had made the most progress . No specific language lessons are provided under the Gateway Protection Programme . Instead , Gateway refugees who require help with their English language skills are provided with access to mainstream English for Speakers of Other Languages ( ESOL ) courses , which are run by a range of state , voluntary and community-based organisations . However , the International Catholic Migration Commission ( ICMC ) Europe reports that in Sheffield , it can be difficult for resettled refugees to gain access to ESOL classes because demand has generally exceeded supply – a situation also noted by an evaluation of the scheme 's operation in Motherwell undertaken in 2013 . The Motherwell evaluation found that most of the male refugees were in employment , but that many of them were not in jobs that allowed them to use their skills . The majority of women were not in work , reflecting a lack of job opportunities but also a lack of childcare provision .

A number of programme evaluations have found that many resettled refugees have been the victims of verbal or physical attacks in the UK . The Home Office 's 2009 evaluation notes that between one-quarter and half of each of four groups of Liberian and Congolese refugees resettled under the programme had suffered verbal or physical harassment . An evaluation undertaken by academics at Sheffield Hallam University for the Home Office in 2011 found that one-fifth of the refugees surveyed for the evaluation ( who had been in the UK for a year ) had been the victims of verbal or physical attacks in their first six months in the UK , and just over a fifth had been attacked in the second six months of their resettlement . Many of the victims of this abuse had not reported it to the authorities , and the authors of the evaluation suggest that this is a reason why there was a gap between the perceptions of refugee and service providers , who generally suggested that community relations were good . Verbal and physical attacks against refugees were also noted in the 2013 Motherwell evaluation .

The Dreamcast ( Japanese : ドリームキャスト , Hepburn : Dorīmukyasuto ) is a home video game console released by Sega on November 27 , 1998 in Japan , September 9 , 1999 in North America , and October 14 , 1999 in Europe . It was the first in the sixth generation of video game consoles , preceding Sony 's PlayStation 2 , Nintendo 's GameCube and Microsoft 's Xbox . The Dreamcast is Sega 's final home console , marking the end of the company 's 18 years in the console market . In contrast to the expensive hardware of the unsuccessful Sega Saturn , the Dreamcast was designed to reduce costs with " off-the-shelf " components , including a Hitachi SH-4 CPU and an NEC PowerVR2 GPU . Released in Japan to a subdued reception , the Dreamcast enjoyed a successful U.S. launch backed by a large marketing campaign , but interest in the system steadily declined as Sony built hype for the upcoming PlayStation 2 . Sales did not meet Sega 's expectations despite several price cuts , and the company continued to incur significant financial losses . After a change in leadership , Sega discontinued the Dreamcast on March 31 , 2001 , withdrawing from the console business and restructuring itself as a third-party publisher . 9.13 million Dreamcast units were sold worldwide .

Released in 1988 , the Sega Genesis ( known as the Sega Mega Drive in Europe and Japan ) was Sega 's entry into the fourth generation of video game consoles . Selling 30.75 million units worldwide , the Genesis was the most successful console Sega ever released . The successor to the Genesis , the Sega Saturn , was released in Japan in 1994 . The Saturn was a CD-ROM-based console that displayed both 2D and 3D computer graphics , but its complex dual-CPU architecture made it more difficult to program for than its chief competitor , the Sony PlayStation . Although the Saturn debuted before the PlayStation in both Japan and the United States , its surprise U.S. launch — which came four months earlier than originally scheduled — was marred by a lack of distribution , which remained a continuing problem for the system . Moreover , Sega 's early release was undermined by Sony 's simultaneous announcement that the PlayStation would retail for US $ 299 — compared to the Saturn 's initial price of $ 399 . Nintendo 's long delay in releasing a competing 3D console and the damage done to Sega 's reputation by poorly supported add-ons for the Genesis ( particularly the Sega 32X ) allowed Sony to establish a foothold in the market . The PlayStation was immediately successful in the U.S. , in part due to a massive advertising campaign and strong third-party support engendered by Sony 's excellent development tools and liberal $ 10 licensing fee . Sony 's success was further aided by a price war in which Sega lowered the price of the Saturn from $ 399 to $ 299 and then from $ 299 to $ 199 in order to match the price of the PlayStation – even though Saturn hardware was more expensive to manufacture and the PlayStation enjoyed a larger software library . Losses on the Saturn hardware contributed to Sega 's financial problems , which saw the company 's revenue decline between 1992 and 1995 as part of an industry-wide slowdown . Furthermore , Sega 's focus on the Saturn over the Genesis prevented it from fully capitalizing on the continued strength of the 16-bit market .

Due to long-standing disagreements with Sega of Japan , Sega of America CEO Tom Kalinske became less interested in his position . On July 16 , 1996 Sega announced that Shoichiro Irimajiri had been appointed chairman and CEO of Sega of America , while Kalinske would be leaving Sega after September 30 of that year . Sega also announced that Sega Enterprises cofounder David Rosen and Sega of Japan CEO Hayao Nakayama had resigned from their positions as chairman and co-chairman of Sega of America , though both men remained with the company . Bernie Stolar , a former executive at Sony Computer Entertainment of America , was named Sega of America 's executive vice president in charge of product development and third-party relations . Stolar did not support the Saturn due to his belief that the hardware was poorly designed and publicly announced at E3 1997 that " The Saturn is not our future . " After the launch of the Nintendo 64 , sales of the Saturn and Sega 's 32-bit software were sharply reduced . As of August 1997 , Sony controlled 47 percent of the console market , Nintendo controlled 40 percent , and Sega controlled only 12 percent . Neither price cuts nor high-profile games were proving helpful to the Saturn 's success . Due to the Saturn 's poor performance in North America , Sega of America laid off 60 of its 200 employees in the fall of 1997 .

As a result of the company 's deteriorating financial situation , Nakayama resigned as president of Sega in January 1998 in favor of Irimajiri . Stolar would subsequently accede to president of Sega of America . Following five years of generally declining profits , in the fiscal year ending March 31 , 1998 Sega suffered its first parent and consolidated financial losses since its 1988 listing on the Tokyo Stock Exchange . Due to a 54.8 % decline in consumer product sales ( including a 75.4 % decline overseas ) , the company reported a consolidated net loss of ¥ 35.6 billion ( US $ 269.8 million ) . Shortly before announcing its financial losses , Sega revealed that it was discontinuing the Saturn in North America , with the goal of preparing for the launch of its successor . This decision effectively left the Western market without Sega games for over one year . Rumors about the upcoming Dreamcast — spread mainly by Sega itself — leaked to the public before the last Saturn games were released .

As early as 1995 , reports surfaced that Sega would collaborate with Lockheed Martin , The 3DO Company , Matsushita , or Alliance Semiconductor to create a new graphics processing unit , which conflicting accounts said would be used for a 64-bit " Saturn 2 " or an add-on peripheral . Development of the Dreamcast was wholly unrelated to this rumored project . In light of the Saturn 's poor market performance , Irimajiri decided to start looking outside of the company 's internal hardware development division to create a new console . In 1997 , Irimajiri enlisted the services of Tatsuo Yamamoto from International Business Machines to lead an 11-man team to work on a secret hardware project in the United States , which was referred to as " Blackbelt " . Accounts vary on how an internal team led by Hideki Sato also began development on Dreamcast hardware ; one account specifies that Sega of Japan tasked both teams , while another suggests that Sato was bothered by Irimajiri 's choice to begin development externally and chose to have his hardware team begin development . Sato and his group chose the Hitachi SH-4 processor architecture and the VideoLogic PowerVR2 graphics processor , manufactured by NEC , in the production of their mainboard . Initially known as " Whitebelt " , this project was later codenamed " Dural " , after the metallic female fighter from Sega 's Virtua Fighter series .

Yamamoto 's group opted to use 3dfx Voodoo 2 and Voodoo Banshee graphics processors alongside a Motorola PowerPC 603e central processing unit ( CPU ) , but Sega management later asked them to also use the SH-4 chip . Both processors have been described as " off the shelf " components . In 1997 , 3dfx began its IPO , and as a result of legal obligations unveiled its contracts with Sega , including the development of the new console . This angered Sega of Japan executives , who eventually decided to use the Dural chipset and cut ties with 3dfx . According to former Sega of America vice president of communications and former NEC brand manager Charles Bellfield , presentations of games using the NEC solution showcased the performance and low cost delivered by the SH-4 and PowerVR architecture . He further stated that " Sega 's relationship with NEC , a Japanese company , probably made a difference [ in Sega 's decision to adopt the Japanese team 's design ] too . " Stolar , on the other hand , " felt the US version , the 3Dfx version , should have been used . Japan wanted the Japanese version , and Japan won . " As a result , 3dfx filed a lawsuit against both Sega and NEC claiming breach of contract , which would eventually be settled out of court . The choice to use the PowerVR architecture concerned Electronic Arts ( EA ) , a longtime developer for Sega 's consoles . EA had invested in 3dfx but was unfamiliar with the selected architecture , which was reportedly less powerful . As recounted by Shiro Hagiwara ( a general manager at Sega 's hardware division ) and Ian Oliver ( the managing director of Sega subsidiary Cross Products ) , the SH-4 was chosen while it was still in development and following a lengthy deliberation process because it was the only available processor that " could adapt to deliver the 3D geometry calculation performance necessary . " By February 1998 , Sega had renamed the Dural " Katana " ( after the Japanese sword ) , although certain hardware specifications such as random access memory ( RAM ) were not yet finalized .

Knowing that the Sega Saturn had been set back by its high production costs and complex hardware , Sega took a different approach with the Dreamcast . Like previous Sega consoles , the Dreamcast was designed around intelligent subsystems working in parallel with one another , but the selections of hardware were more in line with what was common in personal computers than video game consoles , reducing the system 's cost . According to Damien McFerran , " the motherboard was a masterpiece of clean , uncluttered design and compatibility . " Chinese economist and future Sega.com CEO Brad Huang convinced Sega chairman Isao Okawa to include a modem with every Dreamcast despite significant opposition from Okawa 's staff over the additional $ 15 cost per unit . To account for rapid changes in home data delivery , Sega designed the Dreamcast 's modem to be modular . Sega selected the GD-ROM media format for the system . The GD-ROM , which was jointly developed by Sega and Yamaha Corporation , could be mass-produced at a similar price to a normal CD-ROM , thus avoiding the greater expense of DVD-ROM technology . As the GD-ROM format can hold about 1 GB of data , illegally copying Dreamcast games onto a 650 MB CD-ROM sometimes required the removal of certain game features , although this did not prevent copying of Dreamcast software . Microsoft developed a custom Dreamcast version of Windows CE with DirectX API and dynamic-link libraries , making it easy to port PC games to the platform , although programmers would ultimately favor Sega 's development tools over those from Microsoft .

Sega held a public competition to name its new system and considered over 5,000 different entries before choosing " Dreamcast " — a combination of " dream " and " broadcast " . According to Katsutoshi Eguchi , Japanese game developer Kenji Eno submitted the name and created the Dreamcast 's spiral logo , but this claim has not been verified by Sega . The Dreamcast 's start-up sound was composed by the Japanese musician Ryuichi Sakamoto . Because the Saturn had tarnished Sega 's reputation , the company planned to remove its name from the console entirely and establish a new gaming brand similar to Sony 's PlayStation , but Irimajiri 's management team ultimately decided to retain Sega 's logo on the Dreamcast 's exterior . Sega spent US $ 50 – 80 million on hardware development , $ 150 – 200 million on software development , and $ 300 million on worldwide promotion — a sum which Irimajiri , a former Honda executive , humorously compared to the investments required to design new automobiles .

Despite taking massive losses on the Saturn , including a 75 percent drop in half-year profits just before the Japanese launch of the Dreamcast , Sega felt confident about its new system . The Dreamcast attracted significant interest and drew many pre-orders . Sega announced that Sonic Adventure , the next game starring company mascot Sonic the Hedgehog , would arrive in time for the Dreamcast 's launch and promoted the game with a large-scale public demonstration at the Tokyo Kokusai Forum Hall . However , Sega could not achieve its shipping goals for the Dreamcast 's Japanese launch due to a shortage of PowerVR chipsets caused by a high failure rate in the manufacturing process . As more than half of its limited stock had been pre-ordered , Sega stopped pre-orders in Japan . On November 27 , 1998 , the Dreamcast launched in Japan at a price of JP ¥ 29,000 , and the entire stock sold out by the end of the day . However , of the four games available at launch , only one — a port of Virtua Fighter 3 , the most successful arcade game Sega ever released in Japan — sold well . Sega estimated that an additional 200,000-300,000 Dreamcast units could have been sold with sufficient supply . Key Dreamcast software titles Sonic Adventure and Sega Rally Championship 2 , which had been delayed , arrived within the following weeks , but sales continued to be slower than expected . Irimajiri hoped to sell over 1 million Dreamcast units in Japan by February 1999 , but less than 900,000 were sold , undermining Sega 's attempts to build up a sufficient installed base to ensure the Dreamcast 's survival after the arrival of competition from other manufacturers . There were reports of disappointed Japanese consumers returning their Dreamcasts and using the refund to purchase additional PlayStation software . Seaman , released in July 1999 , was considered the Dreamcast 's first major hit in Japan . Prior to the Western launch , Sega reduced the price of the Dreamcast to JP ¥ 19,900 , effectively making the hardware unprofitable but increasing sales . The price reduction and release of Namco 's Soul Calibur helped Sega to gain 17 percent on its shares .

Working closely with Midway Games ( which developed four launch titles for the system ) and taking advantage of the ten months following the Dreamcast 's release in Japan , Sega of America worked to ensure a more successful U.S. launch with a minimum of 15 launch games . Despite lingering bitterness over the Saturn 's early release , Stolar successfully managed to repair relations with major US retailers , with whom Sega presold 300,000 Dreamcast units . In addition , a pre-launch promotion enabled consumers to rent the system from Hollywood Video in the months preceding its September launch . Sega of America 's senior vice president of marketing Peter Moore , a fan of the attitude previously associated with Sega 's brand , worked with Foote , Cone & Belding and Access Communications to develop the " It 's Thinking " campaign of 15-second television commercials , which emphasized the Dreamcast 's hardware power . According to Moore , " We needed to create something that would really intrigue consumers , somewhat apologize for the past , but invoke all the things we loved about Sega , primarily from the Genesis days . " On August 11 , Sega of America confirmed that Stolar had been fired , leaving Moore to direct the launch .

Prior to the Dreamcast 's release , Sega was dealt a blow when EA — the largest third-party video game publisher — announced it would not develop games for the system . EA executive Bing Gordon claimed " [ Sega ] couldn 't afford to give us [ EA ] the same kind of license that EA has had over the last five years " , but Stolar recounted that EA president Larry Probst wanted " exclusive rights to be the only sports brand on Dreamcast " , which Stolar could not accept due to Sega 's recent $ 10 million purchase of sports game developer Visual Concepts . While the Dreamcast would have none of EA 's popular sports games , " Sega Sports " titles developed mainly by Visual Concepts helped to fill that void . The Dreamcast launched in North America on September 9 , 1999 at a price of $ 199 — which Sega 's marketing dubbed " 9 / 9 / 99 for $ 199 " . Eighteen launch titles were available for the Dreamcast in the U.S. Sega set a new sales record by selling more than 225,132 Dreamcast units in 24 hours , earning the company $ 98.4 million in what Moore called " the biggest 24 hours in entertainment retail history " . Within two weeks , U.S. Dreamcast sales exceeded 500,000 . By Christmas , Sega held 31 percent of the North American video game marketshare . Significant launch titles included Soul Calibur , an arcade fighting game that was graphically enhanced for the system and went on to sell one million units , and Visual Concepts ' high-quality football simulation NFL 2K . On November 4 , Sega announced it had sold over one million Dreamcast units . Nevertheless , the launch was marred by a glitch at one of Sega 's manufacturing plants , which produced defective GD-ROMs .

Sega released the Dreamcast in Europe on October 14 , 1999 , at a price of GB ₤ 200 . By November 24 , 400,000 consoles had been sold in Europe . By Christmas of 1999 , Sega of Europe reported selling 500,000 units , placing it six months ahead of schedule . Sales did not continue at this pace , and by October 2000 , Sega had sold only about 1 million units in Europe . As part of Sega 's promotions of the Dreamcast in Europe , the company sponsored four European football clubs : Arsenal F.C. ( England ) , AS Saint-Étienne ( France ) , U.C. Sampdoria ( Italy ) , and Deportivo de La Coruña ( Spain ) .

Though the Dreamcast launch had been successful , Sony still held 60 percent of the overall video game market share in North America with the PlayStation at the end of 1999 . On March 2 , 1999 , in what one report called a " highly publicized , vaporware-like announcement " Sony revealed the first details of its " next generation PlayStation " , which Ken Kutaragi claimed would allow video games to convey unprecedented emotions . The center of Sony 's marketing plan and the upcoming PlayStation 2 itself was a new CPU ( clocked at 294 MHz ) jointly developed by Sony and Toshiba — the " Emotion Engine " — which Kutaragi announced would feature a graphics processor with 1,000 times more bandwidth than contemporary PC graphics processors and a floating-point calculation performance of 6.2 gigaflops per second , rivaling most supercomputers . Sony , which invested $ 1.2 billion in two large-scale integration semiconductor fabrication plants to manufacture the PlayStation 2 's " Emotion Engine " and " Graphics Synthesizer " , designed the machine to push more raw polygons than any video game console in history . Sony claimed the PlayStation 2 could render 75 million raw polygons per second with absolutely no effects , and 38 million without accounting for features such as textures , artificial intelligence , or physics . Even with such effects , Sony estimated the PlayStation 2 could render 16 million polygons per second , whereas independent estimates ranged from 3 million to 20 million , compared to the Dreamcast 's roughly 3 million . The system would also utilize the DVD-ROM format , which could hold substantially more data than the Dreamcast 's GD-ROM format . Because it could connect to the Internet while playing movies , music , and video games , Sony hyped PlayStation 2 as the future of home entertainment . Rumors spread that the PlayStation 2 was a supercomputer capable of guiding missiles and displaying Toy Story-quality graphics , while Kutaragi boasted its online capabilities would give consumers the ability to " jack into ' The Matrix ' ! " In addition , Sony emphasized that the PlayStation 2 would be backwards compatible with hundreds of popular PlayStation games . Sony 's specifications appeared to render the Dreamcast obsolete months before its U.S. launch , although reports later emerged that the PlayStation 2 was not as powerful as expected and distinctly difficult to program games for . The same year , Nintendo announced that its next generation console would meet or exceed anything on the market , and Microsoft began development of its own console .

Sega 's initial momentum proved fleeting as U.S. Dreamcast sales — which exceeded 1.5 million by the end of 1999 — began to decline as early as January 2000 . Poor Japanese sales contributed to Sega 's ¥ 42.88 billion ( $ 404 million ) consolidated net loss in the fiscal year ending March 2000 , which followed a similar loss of ¥ 42.881 billion the previous year and marked Sega 's third consecutive annual loss . Although Sega 's overall sales for the term increased 27.4 % , and Dreamcast sales in North America and Europe greatly exceeded the company 's expectations , this increase in sales coincided with a decrease in profitability due to the investments required to launch the Dreamcast in Western markets and poor software sales in Japan . At the same time , increasingly poor market conditions reduced the profitability of Sega 's Japanese arcade business , prompting the company to close 246 locations . Knowing that " they have to fish where the fish are biting " , Sega of America president Peter Moore ( who assumed his position after Stolar had been fired ) and Sega of Japan 's developers focused on the U.S. market to prepare for the upcoming launch of the PS2 . To that end , Sega of America launched its own Internet service provider , Sega.com , led by CEO Brad Huang . On September 7 , 2000 Sega.com launched SegaNet , the Dreamcast 's Internet gaming service , at a subscription price of $ 21.95 per month . Although Sega had previously released only one Dreamcast title in the U.S. that featured online multiplayer ( ChuChu Rocket ! , a puzzle game developed by Sonic Team ) , the launch of SegaNet ( which allowed users to chat , send email , and surf the web ) combined with NFL 2K1 ( a football game including a robust online component ) was intended to increase demand for the Dreamcast in the U.S. market . The service would later support games including Bomberman Online , Phantasy Star Online , Quake III Arena , and Unreal Tournament . The September 7 launch coincided with a new advertising campaign to promote SegaNet , including via the MTV Video Music Awards of the same day , which Sega sponsored for the second consecutive year . Sega employed aggressive pricing strategies with relation to online gaming . In Japan , every Dreamcast sold included a free year of Internet access , which Okawa personally paid for . Prior to the launch of SegaNet , Sega had already offered a $ 200 rebate to any Dreamcast owner who purchased two years of Internet access from Sega.com. To increase SegaNet 's appeal in the U.S. , Sega dropped the price of the Dreamcast to $ 149 ( compared to the PS2 's U.S. launch price of $ 299 ) and offered a rebate for the full $ 149 price of a Dreamcast ( and a free Dreamcast keyboard ) with every 18-month SegaNet subscription .

Moore stated that the Dreamcast would need to sell 5 million units in the U.S. by the end of 2000 in order to remain a viable platform , but Sega ultimately fell short of this goal with some 3 million units sold . Moreover , Sega 's attempts to spur increased Dreamcast sales through lower prices and cash rebates caused escalating financial losses . Instead of an expected profit , for the six months ending September 2000 Sega posted a ¥ 17.98 billion ( $ 163.11 million ) loss , with the company projecting a year-end loss of ¥ 23.6 billion . This estimate was more than doubled to ¥ 58.3 billion , and in March 2001 Sega posted a consolidated net loss of ¥ 51.7 billion ( $ 417.5 million ) . While the PS2 's October 26 U.S. launch was marred by shortages — with only 500,000 of a planned 1 million units shipped due to a manufacturing glitch — this did not benefit the Dreamcast as much as expected , as many disappointed consumers continued to wait for a PS2 — while the PSone , a remodeled version of the original PlayStation , was the best-selling console in the U.S. at the start of the 2000 holiday season . According to Moore , " the PlayStation 2 effect that we were relying upon did not work for us ... people will hang on for as long as possible ... What effectively happened is the PlayStation 2 lack of availability froze the marketplace " . Eventually , Sony and Nintendo held 50 and 35 percent of the US video game market , respectively , while Sega held only 15 percent . According to Bellfield , Dreamcast software sold at an 8-to-1 ratio with the hardware , but this ratio " on a small install base didn 't give us the revenue ... to keep this platform viable in the medium to long term . "

On May 22 , 2000 Okawa replaced Iramajiri as president of Sega . Okawa had long openly advocated that Sega abandon the console business . His sentiments were not unique ; Sega co-founder David Rosen had " always felt it was a bit of a folly for them to be limiting their potential to Sega hardware " , and Stolar had previously suggested that Sega should have sold their company to Microsoft . In September 2000 , in a meeting with Sega 's Japanese executives and the heads of the company 's major Japanese game development studios , Moore and Bellfield recommended that Sega abandon its console business and focus solely on software — prompting the studio heads to walk out . Nevertheless , on January 31 , 2001 Sega announced the discontinuation of the Dreamcast after March 31 and the restructuring of the company as a " platform-agnostic " third-party developer . The decision was Moore 's . Sega also announced a Dreamcast price reduction to $ 99 to eliminate its unsold inventory , which was estimated at 930,000 units as of April 2001 . After a further reduction to $ 79 , the Dreamcast was cleared out of stores at $ 49.95 . The final Dreamcast unit to be manufactured was autographed by the heads of all nine of Sega 's internal game development studios as well as the heads of Visual Concepts and Wave Master and given away with 55 first-party Dreamcast games through a competition organized by GamePro magazine . Okawa , who had previously loaned Sega $ 500 million in the summer of 1999 , died on March 16 , 2001 ; shortly before his death , he forgave Sega 's debts to him and returned his $ 695 million worth of Sega and CSK stock , helping the company survive the third-party transition . As part of this restructuring , nearly one-third of Sega 's Tokyo workforce was laid off in 2001 .

9.13 million Dreamcast units were sold worldwide . After the Dreamcast 's discontinuation , commercial games were still developed and released for the system , particularly in Japan . In the United States , game sales continued until the end of the first half of 2002 . Sega of Japan continued to repair Dreamcast units until 2007 . As of 2014 , the console is still supported through various MIL-CD independent releases . After five consecutive years of financial losses , Sega finally posted a profit for the fiscal year ending March 2003 . Reasons cited for the failure of the Dreamcast include hype for the PS2 ; a lack of support from EA and Squaresoft , considered the most popular third-parties in the U.S. and Japan respectively ; disagreement among Sega executives over the company 's future , and Okawa 's lack of commitment to the product ; Sega 's lack of advertising money , with Bellfield doubting that Sega spent even " half " the $ 100 million it had pledged to promote the Dreamcast in the U.S. ; that the market was not yet ready for online gaming ; Sega 's focus on " hardcore " gamers over the mainstream consumer ; and poor timing . Perhaps the most frequently cited reason is the damage to Sega 's reputation caused by several previous poorly supported Sega platforms . Writing for GamePro , Blake Snow stated that " The much beloved console launched years ahead of the competition but ultimately struggled to shed the negative reputation [ Sega ] had gained during the Saturn , Sega 32X , and Sega CD days . As a result , casual gamers and jaded third-party developers doubted Sega 's ability to deliver . " Eurogamer 's Dan Whitehead noted that the " wait and see " approach of consumers and the lack of support from EA were symptoms rather the cause of Sega 's decline , concluding " Sega 's misadventures during the 1990s had left both gamers and publishers wary of any new platform bearing its name . " According to 1UP.com 's Jeremy Parish , " While it would be easy to point an accusatory finger at Sony and blame them for killing the Dreamcast by overselling the PS2 ... there 's a certain level of intellectual dishonesty in such a stance ... [ Sega ] ' s poor U.S. support for hardware like the Sega CD , the 32X , and the Saturn made gamers gun shy . Many consumers felt burned after investing in expensive Sega machines and finding the resulting libraries comparatively lacking " .

The announcement of Sega 's third-party transition was met with widespread enthusiasm . According to IGN 's Travis Fahs , " Sega was a creatively fertile company with a rapidly expanding stable of properties to draw from . It seemed like they were in a perfect position to start a new life as a developer / publisher . " Former Working Designs president Victor Ireland wrote that " It 's actually a good thing ... because now Sega will survive , doing what they do best : software . " The staff of Newsweek remarked " From Sonic to Shenmue , Sega 's programmers have produced some of the most engaging experiences in the history of interactive media ... Unshackled by a struggling console platform , this platoon of world-class software developers can do what they do best for any machine on the market " . Rosen predicted " they have the potential to catch Electronic Arts " . Game Informer , commenting on Sega 's tendency to produce under-appreciated cult classics , stated : " Let us rejoice in the fact that Sega is making games equally among the current console crop , so that history will not repeat itself . "

Physically , the Dreamcast measures 190 mm × 195.8 mm × 75.5 mm ( 7.48 in × 7.71 in × 2.97 in ) and weighs 1.5 kg ( 3.3 lb ) . The Dreamcast 's main CPU is a two-way 360 MIPS superscalar Hitachi SH-4 32-bit RISC clocked at 200 MHz with an 8 Kbyte instruction cache and 16 Kbyte data cache and a 128-bit graphics-oriented floating-point unit delivering 1.4 GFLOPS . Its 100 MHz NEC PowerVR2 rendering engine , integrated with the system 's ASIC , is capable of drawing more than 3 million polygons per second and of deferred shading . Sega estimated that the Dreamcast was theoretically capable of rendering 6 – 7 million raw polygons per second , with the higher figure excluding textures and lighting , but the company conceded " game logic and physics reduce peak graphic performance . " Graphics hardware effects include trilinear filtering , gouraud shading , z-buffering , spatial anti-aliasing , per-pixel translucency sorting and bump mapping . The system can output approximately 16.77 million colors simultaneously and displays interlaced or progressive scan video at 640 × 480 video resolution . Its 67 MHz Yamaha AICA sound processor , with a 32-bit ARM7 RISC CPU core , can generate 64 voices with PCM or ADPCM , providing ten times the performance of the Saturn 's sound system . The Dreamcast has 16 MB main RAM , along with an additional 8 MB of RAM for graphic textures and 2 MB of RAM for sound . The system reads media using a 12x speed Yamaha GD-ROM Drive . In addition to Windows CE , the Dreamcast supports several Sega and middleware application programming interfaces . In most regions , the Dreamcast included a removable modem for online connectivity , which was modular for future upgrades . The original Japanese model and all PAL models had a transfer rate of 33.6 kbit / s , while consoles sold in the US and in Japan after September 9 , 1999 featured a 56 kbit / s dial-up modem .

Sega constructed numerous Dreamcast models , most of which were exclusive to Japan . A refurbished Dreamcast known as the R7 was originally used as a network console in Japanese pachinko parlors . Another model , the Divers 2000 CX-1 , possesses a shape similar to Sonic 's head and includes a television and software for teleconferencing . A Hello Kitty version , limited to 2000 units produced , was targeted at Japanese female gamers . Special editions were created for Seaman and Resident Evil Code : Veronica . Color variations were sold through a service called " Dreamcast Direct " in Japan . Toyota also offered special edition Dreamcast units at 160 of its dealers in Japan . In North America , a limited edition black Dreamcast was released with a Sega Sports logo on the lid , which included matching Sega Sports-branded black controllers and two games .

The Dreamcast controller includes both an analog stick and a digital pad , four action buttons , and two analog triggers . The system has four ports for controller inputs , although it was bundled with only one controller . The design of the Dreamcast 's controller , described by the staff of Edge as " an ugly evolution of Saturn 's 3D controller , " was called " [ not ] that great " by 1UP.com 's Sam Kennedy and " lame " by Game Informer 's Andy McNamara . The staff of IGN wrote that " unlike most controllers , Sega 's pad forces the user 's hands into an uncomfortable parallel position . " In contrast to the Sega CD and Sega Saturn , which included internal backup memory , the Dreamcast uses a 128 kbyte memory card called the VMU ( or " Visual Memory Unit " ) for data storage . The VMU features a small LCD screen , audio output from a one-channel PWM sound source , non-volatile memory , a directional pad , and four buttons . The VMU can present game information , be used as a minimal handheld gaming device , and connect to certain Sega arcade machines . For example , players use the VMU to call plays in NFL 2K or raise virtual pets in Sonic Adventure . Sega officials noted that the VMU could be used " as a private viewing area , the absence of which has prevented effective implementation of many types of games in the past . " After a VMU slot was incorporated into the controller 's design , Sega 's engineers found many additional uses for it , so a second slot was added . This slot was generally used for vibration packs providing force feedback like Sega 's " Jump Pack " and Performance 's " Tremor Pack " , although it could also be used for other peripherals including a microphone enabling voice control and player communication . Various third-party cards provide storage , and some contain the LCD screen addition . Iomega announced a Dreamcast-compatible zip drive that could store up to 100 MB of data on removable discs , but it was never released .

Various third-party controllers from companies like Mad Catz include additional buttons and other extra features ; third-parties also manufactured arcade-style joysticks for fighting games , such as Agetech 's Arcade Stick and Interact 's Alloy Arcade Stick . Mad Catz and Agetec created racing wheels for racing games . Sega decided against releasing its official light gun in the U.S. , but some third party light guns were available . The Dreamcast supports a Sega fishing " reel and rod " motion controller and a keyboard for text entry . Although it was designed for fishing games such as Sega Bass Fishing , Soul Calibur was playable with the fishing controller , which translated vertical and horizontal movements into on-screen swordplay in a manner that was retroactively cited as a predecessor to the Wii Remote . The Japanese Dreamcast port of Sega 's Cyber Troopers Virtual-On Oratorio Tangram supported a " Twin Sticks " peripheral , but the game 's American publisher , Activision , opted not to release it in the U.S. The Dreamcast could connect to SNK 's Neo Geo Pocket Color , predating Nintendo 's GameCube – Game Boy Advance link cable . Sega also produced the Dreameye , a digital camera that could be connected to the Dreamcast and used to exchange pictures and participate in video chat over the system 's Internet connection . Sega hoped developers would use the Dreameye for future software , as they later did with Sony 's similar EyeToy peripheral . In addition , Sega investigated systems that would have allowed users to make telephone calls with the Dreamcast , and discussed with Motorola the development of an Internet-enabled cell phone that would have used technology from the console to enable quick downloads of games and other data .

Before the launch of the Dreamcast in Japan , Sega announced the release of its New Arcade Operation Machine Idea ( NAOMI ) arcade board , which served as a cheaper alternative to the Sega Model 3 . NAOMI shared the same technology as the Dreamcast — albeit with twice as much system , video , and audio memory and an 160 Mbyte flash ROM board in place of a GD-ROM drive — allowing nearly identical home conversions of arcade games . Games were ported from NAOMI to the Dreamcast by several leading Japanese arcade companies , including Capcom ( Marvel vs. Capcom 2 and Project Justice ) , Tecmo ( Dead or Alive 2 ) , Treasure ( Ikaruga ) , and Sega itself ( F355 Challenge and Crazy Taxi ) . In what has been called " a brief moment of remarkable creativity " , in 2000 Sega restructured its arcade and console development teams into nine semi-autonomous studios headed by the company 's top designers . Studios included United Game Artists ( UGA ) ( headed by former Sega Rally Championship producer Tetsuya Mizuguchi ) , Hitmaker ( headed by Crazy Taxi creator and future Sega president Hisao Oguchi ) , Smilebit ( headed by Shun Arai and including many former Panzer Dragoon and future Yakuza developers from Team Andromeda ) , Overworks ( headed by Noriyoshi Oba and composed of developers from Sega franchises including Sakura Wars , Shinobi and Streets of Rage ) , Sega AM2 ( Sega 's most famous arcade studio and the developer of Sega 's Virtua Fighter fighting game series , headed by the company 's top developer , Yu Suzuki ) , and Sonic Team ( the developer of Sega 's flagship series , Sonic the Hedgehog , headed by Yuji Naka ) . Sega 's design houses were encouraged to experiment and benefited from a relatively lax approval process , resulting in titles such as Rez ( an attempt to simulate synaesthesia in the form of a rail shooter ) , The Typing of the Dead ( a version of The House of the Dead 2 remade into a touch typing trainer ) , Seaman ( a pet simulator in which players use a microphone to interact with a grotesque humanoid fish whose growth is narrated by Leonard Nimoy ) , and Segagaga ( a Japan-exclusive role-playing-game employing commentary on the perceived over-abundance of sequels produced by the video game industry , in which players are tasked with preventing Sega from going out of business ) . Sega also revived franchises from the Genesis era , such as Ecco the Dolphin . Sega 's internal studios were consolidated starting in 2003 , with Mizuguchi leaving the company following the merger of UGA with Sonic Team .

UGA created the music game Space Channel 5 , in which players help a female outer space news reporter named Ulala fight aliens with " groove energy " by dancing . Intended for a " female casual " audience , Space Channel 5 is considered one of Sega 's " most daring and beloved " original properties , combining a " defiantly retro " and " uplifting " soundtrack with " dazzling " and " colorful " visual presentation — despite " a lack of real gameplay substance . " Neither Space Channel 5 nor UGA 's Rez were commercially successful , and the latter title was only available in the U.S. market through a PS2 port released in limited quantities . Hitmaker 's arcade ports included Crazy Taxi — an open world arcade racing game known for its addictive gameplay , which sold over one million copies and has been frequently cited as one of the best Dreamcast games — and Virtua Tennis — which revitalized the tennis game genre with a simple two-button control scheme and use of minigames to test the player 's technique . Smilebit 's Jet Set Radio — in which players control a Tokyo-based gang of youthful , rebellious inline skaters called the " GGs " , who use graffiti to claim territory from rival gangs while evading an oppressive police force — has been cited as a major example of Sega 's commitment to original game concepts during the Dreamcast 's lifespan . Lauded for composer Hideki Naganuma 's " punchy , psychedelic " soundtrack incorporating elements of " J-pop and electro-funk " as well as its message of " self-expression and non-violent dissent " , the game also popularized cel shaded graphics . Despite wide praise for its style , some criticized Jet Set Radio 's gameplay as mediocre , and it failed to meet Sega 's sales expectations . Produced by Rieko Kodama , the Overworks-developed traditional role-playing game Skies of Arcadia was acclaimed for its surreal Jules Verne-inspired fantasy world of floating islands and sky pirates , charming protagonists , unique emphasis on the environmental properties of weapons , exciting airship battles , and memorable plot ( including a sequence viewed from multiple perspectives ) .

AM2 developed what Sega hoped would be the Dreamcast 's killer app , Shenmue , a " revenge epic in the tradition of Chinese cinema . " The action-adventure title involved the quest of protagonist Ryo Hazuki to avenge his father 's murder , but its main selling point was its rendition of the Japanese city of Yokosuka , which included a level of detail considered unprecedented for a video game . Incorporating a simulated day / night cycle with variable weather , non-player characters with regular schedules , and the ability to pick up and examine detailed objects ( also introducing the Quick-time event in its modern form ) , Shenmue went over budget and was rumored to have cost Sega over $ 50 million . Originally planned as the first installment in an 11-part saga , Shenmue was eventually downsized to a trilogy — and only one sequel was ever released . While Shenmue was lauded for its innovation , visuals and music , its critical reception was mixed ; points of criticism included " invisible walls " which limited the player 's sense of freedom , boredom caused by the inability to progress without waiting for events scheduled to occur at specific times , excessive in-game cutscenes and a lack of challenge . According to Moore , Shenmue sold " extremely well " , but the game had no chance of making a profit due to the Dreamcast 's limited installed base . Shenmue II " was completed for a much more reasonable sum " , while Sato defended Shenmue as an " investment [ which ] will someday be recouped " because " the development advances we learned ... can be applied to other games " . In addition to the mixed reception for Shenmue , IGN 's Travis Fahs stated that " the [ Dreamcast ] era wasn 't as kind to [ AM2 ] as earlier years " — citing ( among others ) F355 Challenge as an " acclaimed " arcade title that " didn 't do much at home " , and Genki 's port of Virtua Fighter 3 as inferior to the arcade version , " which was already a couple years old and never as popular as its predecessors . " The Virtua Fighter series would experience a " tremendous comeback " with the universally acclaimed Virtua Fighter 4 — which saw a console release exclusively on PS2 .

As the first fully 3D platforming game starring Sega 's mascot , Sonic the Hedgehog , Sonic Team 's Sonic Adventure was considered " the centerpiece of the [ Dreamcast ] launch " . Adventure garnered criticism for technical problems including erratic camera angles and glitches , but was praised for its " luscious " visuals , " vast , twisting environments " and iconic set pieces — including a segment in which Sonic runs down the side of a skyscraper — and has been described as the Sonic series ' creative apex . However , it failed " to catch on with players in nearly the way that [ Nintendo 's ] Mario 64 had done " , perhaps due to a perceived lack of gameplay depth . Distinguished by its innovative use of multiple storylines with varied forms of play , Adventure sold 2.5 million copies , making it the Dreamcast 's best-selling title . Sonic Team also developed the Dreamcast 's first online game — ChuChu Rocket ! — which was widely complimented for its addictive puzzle gameplay and " frantic " multiplayer matches , and the critically successful music game Samba de Amigo , which was noted for its expensive maracas peripheral and colorful aesthetic . Perhaps the most influential of Sonic Team 's Dreamcast releases was Phantasy Star Online , the first online console RPG . Developed after Okawa requested an online game from Sonic Team , PSO was heavily influenced by the PC action RPG Diablo , but refined and simplified its style of gameplay to appeal to console audiences .

In sports , Visual Concepts ' NFL 2K football series and its NBA 2K basketball series were critically acclaimed . NFL 2K was considered an outstanding launch game for its high-quality visuals and " insightful , context-friendly , and , yes , even funny commentary " , while NFL 2K1 featured groundbreaking online multiplayer earlier than its chief competitor , EA 's Madden NFL series . Madden and 2K continued to compete on other platforms through 2004 — with the 2K series introducing innovations such as a first person perspective new to the genre , and eventually launching ESPN NFL 2K5 at the aggressively low price point of $ 19.95 — until EA signed an exclusive agreement with the National Football League , " effectively putting every other pro-football game out of business . " After Sega sold Visual Concepts for $ 24 million in 2005 , the NBA 2K series continued with publisher Take-Two Interactive . During the Dreamcast 's lifespan , Visual Concepts also collaborated with Sonic the Hedgehog level designer Hirokazu Yasuhara on the action-adventure game Floigan Bros. and developed the critically successful action game Ooga Booga . To appeal to the European market , Sega formed a French affiliate called No Cliché , which developed titles such as Toy Commander . Sega Europe also approached Bizarre Creations to develop the critically successful racing game Metropolis Street Racer , which featured detailed recreations of London , Tokyo , and San Francisco — complete with consistent time zones and fictional radio stations — and 262 individual race tracks .

Although Acclaim , SNK , Ubisoft , Midway , Activision , Infogrames , and Capcom supported the system during its first year , third-party developer support proved difficult to obtain due to the failure of the Sega Saturn and the profitability of publishing for the PlayStation . Namco 's Soul Calibur , for example , was released for the Dreamcast because of the relative unpopularity of the Soul series at the time ; Namco 's more successful Tekken franchise was associated with the PlayStation console and PlayStation-based arcade boards . Nevertheless , Soul Calibur received overwhelming critical acclaim and has been frequently described as one of the best games for the system . Capcom produced a number of fighting games for the system , including the Power Stone series , in addition to a temporary exclusive in the popular Resident Evil series called Resident Evil Code : Veronica . The Dreamcast is also known for several shoot ' em ups , most notably Treasure 's Bangai-O and Ikaruga . In January 2000 , three months after the system 's North American launch , Electronic Gaming Monthly offered praise for the game library , stating , " ... with triple-A stuff like Soul Calibur , NBA 2K , and soon Crazy Taxi to kick around , we figure you 're happy you took the 128-bit plunge . " In a retrospective , PC Magazine 's Jeffrey L. Wilson referred to Dreamcast 's " killer library " and emphasized Sega 's creative influence and visual innovation as being at its peak during the lifetime of the system . The staff of Edge agreed with this assessment on Dreamcast 's original titles , as well as Sega 's arcade conversions , stating that the system " delivered the first games that could meaningfully be described as arcade perfect . " GamePro writer Blake Snow referred to the library as being " much celebrated " . Damien McFerran of Retro Gamer praised Dreamcast 's NAOMI arcade ports , opining " The thrill of playing Crazy Taxi in the arcade knowing full well that a pixel-perfect conversion ( and not some cut-down port ) was set to arrive on the Dreamcast is an experience gamers are unlikely to witness again . " Nick Montfort and Mia Consalvo , writing in Loading ... The Journal of the Canadian Game Studies Association , argued that " the Dreamcast hosted a remarkable amount of videogame development that went beyond the odd and unusual and is interesting when considered as avant-garde ... it is hard to imagine a commercial console game expressing strong resistance to the commodity perspective and to the view that game production is commerce . But even when it comes to resisting commercialization , it is arguable that Dreamcast games came closer to expressing this attitude than any other console games have . " 1UP.com 's Jeremy Parish favorably compared Sega 's Dreamcast output , which included some of " the most varied , creative , and fun [ games ] the company had ever produced " , with its " enervated " status as a third-party . Fahs noted " The Dreamcast 's life was fleeting , but it was saturated with memorable titles , most of which were completely new properties . " According to author Steven L. Kent , " From Sonic Adventure and Shenmue to Space Channel 5 and Seaman , Dreamcast delivered and delivered and delivered . "

In December 1999 , Next Generation rated the Dreamcast 4 out of 5 stars and stated , " If you want the most powerful system available now , showcasing the best graphics at a reasonable price , this system is for you . " However , Next Generation rated the Dreamcast 's future prognosis as 3 stars out of 5 in the same article , noting that Sony would ship a superior hardware product in the PlayStation 2 in the next year , and that Nintendo had said it would do the same with the GameCube . At the beginning of 2000 , Electronic Gaming Monthly had five reviewers score the Dreamcast 8.5 , 8.5 , 8.5 , 8.0 , and 9.0 out of 10 points . By 2001 , the reviewers for Electronic Gaming Monthly gave the Dreamcast scores of 9.0 , 9.0 , 9.0 , 9.0 , and 9.5 out of 10 . BusinessWeek recognized the Sega Dreamcast as one of the best products of 1999 . In 2009 , IGN named the Dreamcast the 8th greatest video game console of all time , giving credit to the innovations and software for the system . According to IGN , " The Dreamcast was the first console to incorporate a built-in modem for online play , and while the networking lacked the polish and refinement of its successors , it was the first time users could seamlessly power on and play with users around the globe . " In 2010 , PC Magazine 's Jeffrey L. Wilson named the Dreamcast the greatest video game console , emphasizing that the system was " gone too soon " . In 2013 , Edge named the Dreamcast the 10th best console of the last 20 years , highlighting innovations that it added to console video gaming , including in-game voice chat , downloadable content , and second screen technology through the use of VMUs . Edge explained the system 's poor performance by stating , " Sega 's console was undoubtedly ahead of its time , and it suffered at retail for that reason ... [ b ] ut its influence can still be felt today . " Writing in 1001 Video Games You Must Play Before You Die , Duncan Harris noted " One of the reasons that older gamers mourned the loss of the Dreamcast was that it signaled the demise of arcade gaming culture ... Sega 's console gave hope that things were not about to change for the worse and that the tenets of fast fun and bright , attractive graphics were not about to sink into a brown and green bog of realistic war games . " Parish , writing for USgamer , contrasted the Dreamcast 's diverse library with the " suffocating sense of conservatism " that pervaded the gaming industry in the following decade . Dan Whitehead of Eurogamer , discussing the Dreamcast 's portrayal " as a small , square , white plastic JFK " , commented that the system 's short lifespan " may have sealed its reputation as one of the greatest consoles ever " : " Nothing builds a cult like a tragic demise " . According to IGN 's Travis Fahs , " Many hardware manufacturers have come and gone , but it 's unlikely any will go out with half as much class as Sega . "

St Caian 's Church , Tregaian , also known as St Caean 's Church , Tregaean , is a small medieval church dating from the 14th century in Anglesey , north Wales . It is dedicated to St Caian , a Christian from the 5th or 6th century about whom little is known . The building contains a late 14th-century east window and a late 15th-century doorway . The churchyard contains the grave of William ap Howel , who died in 1581 at the age of 105 , leaving over forty children between the ages of 8 and 89 and over three hundred living descendants . The church is still used for worship by the Church in Wales , and is one of three churches in a combined parish . It is a Grade II * listed building , a national designation given to " particularly important buildings of more than special interest " , in particular because it is regarded as " an excellent late Medieval rural church " .

The date of construction of the first Christian building on this site is unknown . The church is dedicated to St Caian , a Christian from the 5th or 6th century , about whom little is known . One manuscript says that his father was St Caw , a king in northern Britain who lost his lands and sought safety in Anglesey , where the ruler Maelgwn Gwynedd gave him land in the north-east of the island , the district known as Twrcelyn . If Caian was a son of St Caw , then his sisters included St Cwyllog , who established the nearby church of St Cwyllog , Llangwyllog , in the 6th century . Other manuscripts say that he was active in the 5th century and was a son or grandson of Brychan , a king from south Wales . Caian gives his name to the hamlet of Tregaian in which the church is situated : the Welsh word tref ( shortened here to tre ) means " settlement " , and " ‑ gaian " is a modified form of the saint 's name – i.e. " Caian 's settlement " . Tregaian is about 2.5 miles ( 4.0 km ) north of Llangefni , the county town of Anglesey , and the church is in the countryside by a small road .

The present church is medieval , dating from the latter part of the 14th century , which is the period given to the east window . The doorway is from the late 15th century , the roof from the end of the 16th or beginning of the 17th century , and the nave windows and the panelling of the pulpit are from the 17th century . It is still used for worship by the Church in Wales , as one of three churches in the combined benefice of Llangefni with Tregaean with Llanddyfnan ( Talwrn ) . It is within the deanery of Malltraeth , the archdeaconry of Bangor and the Diocese of Bangor . As of 2013 , the priest in charge of the parish is the Reverend J Ashley-Roberts .

The church is built from rubble masonry . The roof , which is made from slate , has a stone bellcote at the west end . Entrance is through the doorway on the south side , from the late 15th century ; it has decorated surrounds and a square frame . There is no structural division between the nave ( where the congregation sit ) and the chancel ( where the altar is located ) apart from a single step up into the chancel . The church is about 40 feet 6 inches ( 12.3 m ) long by 14 feet 6 inches ( 4.4 m ) wide . The east window , from the late 14th century , is set in a pointed arch with decorative edging . It has stained glass from 1916 depicting Christ crowning a knight with the words " Well done thou good and faithful servant / Take unto you the whole armour of God . " There are two pairs of square-headed windows in the south wall , dating from the 17th century . On the north side of the church , a second entrance was blocked up in the late 19th century , and there is one pair of square-headed windows , also from the 17th century ; there is also a small window at the west end of the church , from the 17th or 18th century . The beams of the roof can be seen from inside the church . Behind the altar is a panelled reredos from the 19th century .

The church has a 12th-century circular font , decorated with an irregular pattern of chevrons on the side . The bell is dated 1717 , whilst the pews are from the 19th century . There are memorials tablets from the 18th , 19th and 20th centuries on the walls , some of which commemorate the Lloyd family from a nearby house , Plas Tregaian . A 1937 survey by the Royal Commission on Ancient and Historical Monuments in Wales and Monmouthshire noted a plain silver cup dated 1714 – 15 . The churchyard contains the grave of William ap Howel , who died at the age of 105 in 1581 . Married three times , he fathered 42 or 43 children in and out of wedlock , and more than 300 of his descendants attended his funeral . His children at his death ranged in age from 8 to 89 .

The Mirabito Outdoor Classic , also known as the 2010 AHL Outdoor Classic , was an outdoor ice hockey game played in 2010 between the Syracuse Crunch and Binghamton Senators of the American Hockey League ( AHL ) . It was the first outdoor game in the history of the AHL as well as the first outdoor minor league hockey game . Syracuse won the game 2 – 1 with the help of goaltender Kevin Lalande , who stopped 36 of the 37 Binghamton shots , and Alexandre Picard , who scored the first outdoor goal in AHL history . The game was played in front of a then AHL record crowd of 21,508 , on a rink constructed at the New York State Fairgrounds on a dirt auto racing track . Crunch owner , Howard Dolgon , pursued the ideal of having his team in an outdoor game , but unlike the National Hockey League 's ( NHL ) Winter Classic the Crunch were responsible for funding the entire event . In order to afford the cost of hosting an outdoor game sponsorship deals with several independent organizations were made including Mirabito Energy Products , which lent its name to the title of the event . In part because of his success in putting on the event , Dolgon was awarded the James C. Hendy Memorial Award as the AHL 's outstanding executive . Following the success of the Mirabito Outdoor Classic other AHL Outdoor Classics were held by other AHL teams .

In late November 2009 Syracuse Crunch owner , Howard Dolgon began attempts to have an American Hockey League ( AHL ) outdoor game for his franchise . Cost estimates for hosting the game were close to $ 1 million . Unlike the National Hockey League 's ( NHL ) Winter Classic , the league did not run the event , meaning the Crunch had to finance the entire project . The high cost of hosting was a reason for other franchises not pursuing outdoor games prior . Dolgon originally wanted the game to be played at Alliance Bank Stadium in Syracuse and asked the Onondaga County Legislature to help fund the game . A proposal for the county to put in $ 350,000 was voted down by a 16 – 2 margin . After the proposal was denied , Dolgon thought the project was dead , then he received a phone call from United States Senator Charles Schumer encouraging him to go forward with the game . Schumer later stated his encouragement stemmed from the opportunity for the event to be " a national event focused on Upstate and Central New York " . With the game plans moving forward , Dolgon managed to recruit corporate sponsors to help alleviate the cost . The Crunch received $ 350,000 from several sponsors , including Mirabito Energy Products which lent its name to the events title . Mirabito decided to sponsor the event because they were opening stores in the Central New York area and wanted to establish their brand name . New York Governor David Paterson secured a $ 75,000 grant from the Empire State Development Corporation and helped the Crunch gain use of the New York State Fairgrounds free of charge . Even with the additional funding the Crunch still needed to pay upwards of $ 550,000 .

The rink was built on the fairgrounds in front of a 15,000-seat permanent grandstand on a dirt auto racing track and leveled with what was described as " tons of granite " . With demands for over the 15,000 seats occupancy of the grandstands , the Crunch rented additional temporary bleachers . Since there was no scoreboards on or near the track Syracuse rented two large video screens to show the score , time remaining , penalty times , and other information . The installation of the temporary rink cost an estimated $ 400,000 and took a month and a half to complete .

As plans moved forward the decision was made not just to play the game but make it an event celebrating New York hockey history . For the game the Crunch played their intrastate rivals the Binghamton Senators . The days before the game local youth hockey teams played on the ice , and then the day after there was a pond hockey tournament played on the rink featuring 16 local teams . The fairgrounds also featured VIP tents , fan zones , bands , and ice sculpting for the celebration , as well as appearances by former players for New York 's various professional teams .

The game was the first outdoor game in the 74-year history of the AHL and the first minor league hockey outdoor game . The attendance of 21,508 set a new AHL record surpassing the old mark of 20,672 set in 1997 at the Greensboro Coliseum . The record was later broken by subsequent Outdoor Classics . Prior to the game the 174th Fighter Wing of the New York Air National Guard performed a flyover , and recording artist Jessie James sang The Star-Spangled Banner . For the ceremonial puck drop , a skydiver delivered a puck from the National Hockey League 's first foray into outdoor games from the 1991 Las Vegas exhibition game . There was a slight delay in the start of the game as some of the glass needed to be fixed . Once the game was under way it took just 1 : 50 before the Crunch 's Jon Mirasty and the Senators ' Jeremy Yablonski engaged in the first fight in Outdoor Classic history . Mirasty had previously stated that he was going to be involved in the first outdoor fight . The physical play continued and minutes later at the 3 : 29 mark Paul Baier and Mike Radja were given matching roughing minor penalties . Not long after the matching minors Mike Blunden made a pass to Alexandre Picard to send him on a breakaway . Picard became the first player to score in an Outdoor Classic when he beat Senators ' goaltender Mike Brodeur putting the Crunch up 1 – 0 . The score remained the same at the end of a penalty-filled first period . Eight total penalties were called on the two clubs through the first 20 minutes of the game .

Early in the second period the Crunch got another power play opportunity when Senators ' captain Drew Bannister took a hooking penalty . The man advantage did not benefit Syracuse as the Senators tied the game 1 – 1 when Martin St. Pierre found an open Josh Hennessy , who put the puck past Kevin Lalande for the shorthanded goal . Binghamton seemed to be gaining the advantage in the second period outshooting the Crunch 16 – 9 . But , with just 11.7 seconds remaining in the period , Crunch defenseman David Liffiton scored the go-ahead goal from the high slot . During the third period the score remained the same , when with just 1 : 30 left in the game Syracuse 's Kevin Harvey took an interference penalty giving the Senators a chance to tie the game on the power play . Binghamton was unable to score in the first minute of the power play and pulled Brodeur to give them the six on four advantage . Even with the two man advantage the Senators failed to post a second goal on Lalande , who stopped 36 of the 37 shots he faced during the game helping the Crunch to the 2 – 1 victory . His performance earned him the first Star of the Game . The game was a penalty-filled affair with 26 infractions called on the two teams and a total of 18 power plays awarded . Neither team was able to capitalize on the opportunities , with Binghamton going 0 – 10 and Syracuse 0 – 8 .

The event was considered a success not only did it set a new attendance record it also generated considerable exposure for both the Crunch and the AHL . The game was originally going to be aired just in New York by Time Warner Cable , but was picked up by the NHL Network for broadcast across Canada and the United States . The players and coaches appeared to enjoy the game as well . Crunch head coach Ross Yates stated , " it was unbelievable . It 's hard to describe " . Liffiton described the game as " a little taste of what it feels like to play college football " while Picard added , " I ’ ll do that every game for the rest of my life . " AHL President Dave Andrews further noted that it made him proud to be a part of the league . Due in part to his success of putting on the event , Dolgon was awarded the James C. Hendy Memorial Award as the AHL 's outstanding executive . With the success of the Mirabito Outdoor Classic , multiple outdoor games have subsequently been held by AHL teams .

Vampire : The Masquerade – Bloodlines is a 2004 action role-playing video game developed by Troika Games and released by Activision for Microsoft Windows . Set in White Wolf Publishing 's World of Darkness , the game is based on White Wolf 's role-playing game Vampire : The Masquerade and follows either a male or female character who is killed and subsequently revived as a fledgling vampire . The game depicts the fledgling 's journey through 21st-century Los Angeles to uncover the truth behind a recently discovered relic that heralds the end of all vampires . Bloodlines is presented from first- and third-person perspectives . The player assigns their character to one of several vampire clans — each with unique powers , customize their combat and dialog abilities and progress through Bloodlines with violent and nonviolent methods . The selection of clan affects how the player is perceived in the game world , and which powers and abilities they possess ; this opens up different avenues of exploration and methods of interacting with or manipulating other characters . The player is able to complete side missions away from the primary storyline by moving freely between the available hubs : Santa Monica , Hollywood , downtown Los Angeles , and Chinatown .

Troika 's 32-member team began development of Bloodlines in November 2001 , as an indirect sequel to the previous year 's Vampire : The Masquerade – Redemption . Troika used Valve Corporation 's Source game engine , then-in-development , which was being used for Valve 's own Half-Life 2 . The game 's production was turbulent , as the design 's scope exceeded the available resources , and the team were left without a producer for nearly a year until Activision appointed David Mullich to the role , where he found designs and levels unfinished or abandoned . After three years in development with no end in sight and running over budget , Activision set a strict deadline for completion , and Bloodlines was released incomplete in November 2004 . Released in competition with Half-Life 2 and several other titles , Bloodlines sold fewer than 80,000 copies during its initial release , which was considered a poor performance . It divided critics at the time ; although they praised the game 's writing and scale of choice , they criticized its technical flaws . It was Troika Games ' last production before its failure in early 2005 , when it was unable to secure additional projects . The game has a cult following as a rarely replicated example of gameplay and narrative , and contemporary criticism has recognised it as a flawed masterpiece . As of 2014 , Bloodlines had received ten years of post-release support from its fans , who have supplied fixes and restored lost and deleted content .

Bloodlines is an action role-playing video game optionally presented from the first- or third-person perspective . Before the game begins , players create a male or female vampire character by selecting a vampire clan and configuring available points in three areas — Attributes , Abilities and Disciplines ( vampiric powers ) — or by answering questions , which create a character for the player . The player can select one of seven vampire clans : the powerful Brujah , the decadent Toreador , the insane Malkavian , the aristocratic Ventrue , the monstrously-deformed Nosferatu , the blood-magic wielding Tremere , or the animalistic Gangrel . The player builds their character by spending acquired points to increase their ratings in the three areas . The points spent on Attributes and Abilities combine to determine a player 's success or effectiveness in performing tasks such as using firearms , brawling , and lock-picking ; for example , determining how accurate or how far the player can shoot , or if they can hack a computer . Attributes are represent by physical ( strength , dexterity , and stamina ) , social ( charisma , manipulation , and appearance ) , and mental ( perception , intelligence , and wit ) . Abilities are talents ( such as brawling and dodging ) , skills ( such as firearms and melee ) and knowledge ( such as computers and investigation ) . The player is initially assigned points to spend in the three areas , with the amount they can spend determined by clan ; for example , the Brujah can spend the most points on physical and skill attributes . During character creation , each upgrade costs one point . The upgrade cost increases as the game progresses . Each ability can be raised from zero to five , and it is impossible to accrue enough experience points to complete every skill ( allowing the player to specialize or balance their character ) . Experience points are gained by completing quests , finding items or unlocking secret paths , rather than killing enemies , and are used to increase or unlock the character 's statistics and abilities . The game features a main story , and optional side quests that can be completed at any time ; the player is able to move between the available areas at will to revisit locations , characters , or merchants .

The player 's clan affects their skills and powers . Although the attractive Toreadors receive bonuses for seduction and persuasion , opening additional dialog options , they are physically weak ; the Nosferatu are forced to travel in the shadows or through sewers to avoid alerting humans , but receive bonuses to their intelligence and computer skills , which enables access to more information . The Malkavians have separate dialog options , reflecting their inherent insanity . Upgrading some skills provides additional dialog options ; attractive and charismatic characters seduce to get their way , aggressive characters threaten , and others persuade their targets to cooperate . Firearms combat is first-person , with character points assigned to the firearms skill determining the shot 's accuracy and how long it takes to target an opponent . Melee combat is third-person , with access to weapons such as katanas and sledgehammers for melee combat , or pistols , crossbows and flamethrowers for firearm combat . If a player sneaks up on an opponent , they can perform an instant kill ; weapons provide unique instant kill animations . The player can block attacks manually or automatically , by leaving their character idle . They can use stealth in missions by sneaking past guards and security cameras , picking locks , and hacking computers to locate alternative routes .

Each clan has specific Disciplines , which can be used in combat and to create approaches to quests . Although some powers overlap clans , no two clans share the same three Disciplines . More physical vampires can enhance themselves to become fast and lethal killers or summon spirit allies to attack their foes ; others can mentally dominate their targets to force their cooperation or render themselves invisible to hide from detection ; and others can boil their opponent 's blood from afar . Some Disciplines , such as Auspex ( which boosts perception , highlighting other characters ' auras through obstacles ) and Blood Buff ( which temporarily upgrades strength , dexterity , stamina and lockpicking ) are common to all vampires . Several abilities can be active at the same time . Blood is a primary currency in Bloodlines , used to activate Disciplines and abilities . It is drained with each use , and can be replenished by drinking from rats , visiting blood banks or drinking from humans by attacking or seducing them ; the player can feed on enemies during combat . Drinking from innocents for too long can kill them , costing a character humanity points .

Players are penalized for using certain vampiric abilities in front of witnesses ; exposing their existence loses masquerade points . Violating the masquerade five times draws the ire of vampire hunters and loses the game , although additional masquerade points can be earned with quests and other actions . The player has humanity points , representing the vampire 's humanity . Some actions cost humanity points ; a low humanity score alters available dialog options to become more aggressive , and increases the chance of entering a frenzied state and embarking on a killing spree , when the vampire 's blood is low . This frenzy can also be triggered by a large amount of damage . Like masquerade points , losing all humanity points ends the game , with the vampire becoming a mindless beast . Some areas , known as Elysium , prevent the use of Disciplines or weapons . Players can recruit a female ghoul , Heather , as a customizable servant who gives them blood , gifts , and money .

Vampire : The Masquerade – Bloodlines takes place in four areas of 21st-century Los Angeles : Santa Monica , Hollywood , downtown Los Angeles , and Chinatown . Set in the World of Darkness , the game depicts a world in which vampires , werewolves , demons , and other creatures shape human history . The vampires are bound by a code to maintain their secrecy ( forbidding the use of vampiric abilities in front of humans ) and avoid unnecessary killing ( to preserve the vampire 's last shreds of humanity ) . The vampires are divided into seven clans of the Camarilla , the vampire government , with distinctive traits and abilities . The Toreadors are the closest to humanity , with a passion for culture ; the Ventrue are noble , powerful leaders ; the Brujah are idealists who excel at fighting ; the Malkavians are cursed with insanity , or blessed with insight ; the Gangrel are loners , in sync with their animalistic nature ; the secretive , untrustworthy Tremere wield blood magic ; and the monstrous Nosferatu are condemned to a life in the shadows to avoid humanity . The clans are loosely united by their belief in the Camarilla 's goals and opposition to the Sabbat : vampires who revel in their nature , embracing the beast within . The Anarchs are a faction of idealistic vampires opposed to the Camarilla 's political structure , believing that power should be shared by all vampires .

The main character of Bloodlines , whom the player controls , is an unnamed fledgling vampire , transformed at the start of a game and belonging to one of the clans . The fledgling is employed by Sebastian LaCroix ( voiced by Andy Milder ) , prince of Los Angeles ' vampires . The fledgling 's travels through the vampire world bring them into contact with other undead creatures such as the deformed information broker Bertram Tung , the Anarch Smiling Jack , and the mentally-unstable Voerman sisters , Jeanette and Therese . Chinatown is controlled by the Kuei-Jin , Asian vampires led by Ming-Xiao , who do not require blood and consider themselves superior to the other vampires .

The game begins with the player character , an unnamed human , being killed and resurrected as a fledgling vampire . For this unauthorized act , the fledgling and their Sire are brought before the Camarilla . The Sire is executed by order of LaCroix ; the fledgling is spared the same fate by the intervention of the Anarch , Nines Rodriguez , and employed by the prince . LaCroix sends the fledgling to Santa Monica to help his ghoul , Mercurio , destroy a Sabbat warehouse . Following his success the fledgling travels to downtown Los Angeles , meeting separately with Nines , LaCroix , and Jack . LaCroix tasks the player with investigating a docked ship , the Elizabeth Dane , for information about an Ankaran sarcophagus rumored to contain the body of an Antediluvian , one of the oldest and most powerful vampires , whose arrival would herald the vampire apocalypse , Gehenna . The fledgling discovers that the sarcophagus seems to have been opened from within . Increased Sabbat activity coincides with the disappearance of the Malkavian chief , Alistair Grout . At Grout 's mansion , the fledgling sees Nines leaving and discovers Grout 's remains in the mansion with vampire hunter Grunfeld Bach , who denies involvement in Grout 's death . Learning about Nines ' presence at the mansion , LaCroix tells the other chiefs to approve Nines ' execution . The fledgling is sent to the Museum of Natural History to recover the sarcophagus , but finds that it has been stolen . Jack later suggests to the fledgling that LaCroix wants the sarcophagus to drink the blood of the ancient within , gaining its power .

Believing that Gary , the Nosferatu chief , has stolen the sarcophagus , the fledgling is sent to Hollywood to find him ; after locating a captured Nosferatu for Gary , he reveals that the sarcophagus was stolen by the Giovanni vampire clan . The fledgling infiltrates the Giovanni mansion and finds the sarcophagus guarded by the Kuei-Jin , who claim their leader , Ming-Xiao , has formed an alliance with LaCroix . The locked sarcophagus is returned to LaCroix 's tower and Beckett , a vampire historian , tells the fledgling that the only person who can open it has been abducted by Grunfeld to lure LaCroix . The fledgling kills Grunfeld and learns that the sarcophagus ' key has been stolen . They return to LaCroix , learning that the Sabbat tried to steal the sarcophagus to destroy it and prevent Gehenna , and kill the Sabbat leader to disperse his followers . The fledgling is met by Ming-Xiao , who offers to form an alliance . Ming-Xiao reveals that she has the key , and LaCroix killed Grout to prevent his powerful insight from unveiling LaCroix 's plans ; Ming-Xiao changed into Nines at the mansion to frame him . Denying Ming-Xiao 's claims , LaCroix rescinds the blood hunt on Nines and entrusts the fledgling with recruiting the Anarchs to punish the Kuei-Jin for murdering Grout . The fledgling finds Nines hiding in the forest , and they are then attacked by a werewolf and Nines is badly injured . The fledgling escapes with Jack , who reveals that LaCroix has issued an execution order on the fledgling for framing Nines on orders from Ming-Xiao .

The end varies , depending on whom , if anyone , the fledgling allies with . If the fledgling supports LaCroix or Ming-Xiao , each sends the fledgling to kill the other . LaCroix opens the sarcophagus , to be killed with the fledgling by hidden explosives ; Ming-Xiao betrays the fledgling , chaining them to the sarcophagus and sinking it in the ocean . Supporting the Anarchs or no one makes the fledgling kill Ming-Xiao and maim LaCroix , who is killed after he opens the sarcophagus . If the fledgling opens the sarcophagus , they die in the explosion . If the fledgling is a Tremere , they kill Ming-Xiao ; LaCroix is replaced by Tremere leader Maximillian Strauss , and the sarcophagus is stored . Each ending has Jack watching from afar with the mummy taken from the coffin and the enigmatic taxi driver who transports the fledgling between locations , who says " The blood of Caine controls our fate ... Farewell , vampire . "

The development of Vampire : The Masquerade – Bloodlines began at Troika Games in November 2001 . The developers wanted to put a role-playing game in a first-person setting , believing that the genre had become stale . Troika approached publisher Activision with its idea ; Activision suggested using the Vampire : The Masquerade license used a year earlier in Nihilistic Software 's Vampire : The Masquerade – Redemption , which had experienced sufficient success to merit a sequel . Instead of developing a sequel to Redemption , the development team researched the White Wolf property , including the game 's rules and its storylines . Troika was a small game studio , with five developers and a total staff of thirty-two ( including lead writer Brian Mitsoda , who joined the team less than a year after development began ) . Although some preliminary design and levels were completed , much of the work was abandoned or redeveloped . Troika wanted to make a 3D game , but was uncertain whether to build a new game engine or license an existing one and whether to use first- or third-person . At that time , the Source game engine was being built by Valve Corporation . Valve employee Scott Lynch approached Troika about using the engine , and it was the first external team to use it . Troika chose Source for its facial animation and lip-synching system , since it wanted players to speak to the characters face-to-face . Since the engine was in development with Bloodlines and Valve 's own Half-Life 2 , Troika was working with unfamiliar code and tools , forcing it to write its own code to compensate for the unfinished engine , and with only a single source for technical support . Troika developed a lighting system to create distinctive , moody illumination for the nighttime setting , a particle system for the special effects accompanying the vampire Disciplines , and a cloth system for clothing flow . Source lacked its later artificial intelligence ( AI ) coding , and Troika 's code worked poorly with the Source engine .

Many of the central plot elements existed before designer Brian Mitsoda 's involvement : the prince , the anarchs being upset , aspects of the Gehenna storyline , and Jack and the sarcophagus as a major subplot . The designers broadly tied the overarching story into each hub and level . Each designer controlled their assigned section of the game , and working with a small team enabled quick decision making and ease in keeping plot elements consistent . Mitsoda became the primary writer for many of the characters and their quests , dialog , and side content in the game , such as emails , which helped retain a consistent narrative . He was given freedom with respect to the script , with no restrictions on language or content , and could rewrite characters when he thought his initial draft weak . Although the story was developed by Troika , it is inspired by White Wolf 's Time of Judgment novels about a vampire apocalypse . Bloodlines ' story was accepted as canonical by White Wolf , with the game serving as a prequel to Time of Judgment and including characters from the White Wolf game , such as Jack . Discussing character design , Mitsoda said he tried to disguise the need for characters who simply point a player in an appropriate direction :

" You need a character to pose a problem or give out a quest or be a barrier of some kind . I don 't like to make the [ character ] outright say ' I need you to do X , then I 'll give you Y ' ... – it makes the character into an automated quest kiosk . I like the characters to come off like people actually do – they don 't say ' hi ' when strangers come knocking , they say ' who the hell are you ? ' or they 're expecting you and know more than they let on , or they don 't care . I don 't like my [ characters ] to be standing around as if their lives begin when the character starts talking to them and end when the player leaves . Single purpose characters needed a distinctive personality trait to quickly establish them with the player , rather than serving as a disposable item , while major characters had to reflect the player 's progression and actions through the game . Mitsoda wrote the characters by thinking about who each character was , assigning them motivations determining why they were where they were , what they thought about the player and what they wanted from them . In accordance with a suggestion by fellow writer Chad Moore the Malkavian player character has a dialog script distinct from that of the other eight clans ; Mitsoda said it was one of the simpler aspects of the development cycle . He wrote the Malkavian script last , with time running out on development , and the overwork and lack of sleep contributed to what Mitsoda considered an unhealthy state of mind , ideal for writing insane dialog . He wanted to highlight their madness , without making it comical . Since the story is set during the Camarilla 's takeover of Los Angeles , the team simplified the plot by only allowing the player to belong to one of the LA-based clans .

Troika co-founder Jason Anderson 's research on Vampire : The Masquerade source material and fansites found that character interaction and involvement in the vampire societies , not statistics and powers , was the game 's main attraction . Troika tried to remain true to the pen-and-paper role-playing game , hoping not to alienate the game 's fans , but rules designed for multiple players did not translate well to single player computer game design . The team attempted to discover which elements could work equally well in pen-and-paper and computer games . Although much of the character system and attributes translated , not all the attributes ( such as " knowledge of law " ) made sense in the computer game . Of 30 pen-and-paper abilities , 15 reached the final design . Another difficult area was feats . Although common feats worked well , with a random chance of success or failure , uncommon ones would appear to fail more often . To avoid this , randomization was replaced by a degree of difficulty in accomplishing the feat . Although pen-and-paper falling damage is random , the computer game bases damage on the distance of the fall . The team 's biggest challenge was adapting disciplines . The pen-and-paper version may require a little blood that requires a long time to use , or have no blood cost and can be used at will ; upgraded disciplines had additional requirements considered too confusing for a computer game . Troika attempted to equalize the disciplines , keeping the effect intact and normalizing the cost , so a first level power requires one blood point , a second level two points and so on . To balance the clans the aristocratic Ventrue were only allowed to feed on noble blood , though this was changed to allow them to feed on lower-class humans , receiving less blood . During character creation , the game had an optional character biography with unique positive and negative characteristics ( increasing one ability while limiting another ) . This was removed from the released game ; Activision felt that there was insufficient test time , and removing it was a more stable option .

The team 's previous experience was with turn-based combat games , and it struggled to develop a real-time combat system affected by customizable attributes and abilities that provided feedback to the player on how those statistics were affecting the battle . It initially found that by adhering too closely to the White Wolf source material rules for guns , where the effectiveness of a shot is determined in a contest between the player 's skill and the opponent 's defense , the firearms seemed broken ; the player would not hit where they aimed . Troika found it difficult to mesh the available factors in a real-time setting . Melee combat had to deal with a variety of melee weapons and animations and adjust for melee-on-melee and melee-on-ranged combat . Troika used first-person perspective to immerse the player in the setting , interacting face-to-face with the characters and seeing their facial reactions to the player . It chose to follow a single-character to aid the immersion , creating the isolation of a vampire unable to trust any other character . This aided the story and compensated for the technical issues of allowing multiple player characters . Choice is a significant aspect of the game , requiring a non-linear design to accommodate the customized characters . Level design began with a list of factors such as Disciplines , stealth and feats . Each area had to be viable for a shooting character ( sufficient ammunition ) , a discipline-focused character ( sufficient blood sources to keep the powers fueled ) and a melee specialist ( to reach enemies without being killed ) , with stealth options and option combinations . Level design began with a focus on stealth , taking into consideration the positioning of guards and the character 's potential stealth capability at that point in the game . Then direct , combat-heavy and dialog paths were added . The amusement arcade area was to feature playable versions of Activision arcade games such as Pitfall ! , though the idea was abandoned due to time constraints .

Director Leonard Boyarsky considered the animation system important in the team 's choice of the Source engine . The integrated " faceposer " tool allowed Troika to customize facial animations , expressions , gestures and lip-synching , eliminating the need to explain what a character was doing . Every non-player character required a voiceover , which helped Troika define its characters more quickly . The engine had a physics system permitting new features , such as monsters hurling corpses at the player or dying characters realistically crumbling into pieces , instead of requiring pre-built animations . Although Troika had ignored first-person engines due to technical limitations , such as a low polygon count and limited texture memory , as the technology improved , it thought it could create a real-time action game without sacrificing the immersion and story of a role-playing game . Describing the choice of developing a game based on the existing White Wolf property over creating their own , Boyarsky said that although an original property lacked the constraints of an existing one the downside was that it had not been tested and could be rejected by its potential audience ; an existing property was proven . Troika tried to stay as close as possible to the White Wolf rules , while reducing the number of abilities and disciplines to those relevant to Bloodlines gameplay .

Activision introduced the game in May 2003 , but , that October , Valve experienced a security breach in which hackers stole the source code for Half-Life 2 . The breach required new security implementations for the engine , delaying both games ; the release of Bloodlines was postponed until early 2005 . Until May 2004 , Troika and Activision said that the game would feature a multiplayer component and modes including a team of vampires against a team of vampire hunters , with the ability to upgrade characters between each round . The team was left without a producer by Activision for over a year before David Mullich was assigned to the project . With no producer oversight , Mullich found the game 's design incomplete , game levels created and abandoned , and several technical issues , including problems with code for the proposed multiplayer option . The Source multiplayer code was in its infancy , increasing its development time , and the idea was abandoned . In addition to problems with the Source engine , the designers found that the game 's scope exceeded their resources . Bloodlines has several styles of gameplay , requiring different interfaces , animations and artificial intelligence for stealth and melee combat , and first- or third-person capability . Compared to contemporary first-person shooters , with 10 to 20 animated character models , Bloodlines had over 150 characters with 3,000 unique animations , in addition to boss characters , with their own styles of movement . The designers underestimated the length of time required to develop and improve these systems . The game 's scope suffered from content not being removed when necessary ; other components would be endlessly refined without being finalized , preventing the developers from focusing on other parts of the game system . All content additionally required approval by White Wolf and Activision .

After three years in development , the game was progressing slowly and it was unknown when it would be finished . Activision set a series of deadlines for the project 's development to ensure Troika would have sufficient time to effectively test the game , though these milestones were repeatedly extended , and Bloodlines eventually ran over budget . In 2003 , Activision intervened , ordering that the game be ready for release in the next few months , and even advancing more money to Troika to complete its work on The Temple of Elemental Evil for Atari , freeing the Troika team to work on Bloodlines exclusively . Activision eventually issued an ultimatum that the project be finished within months , on September 15 , 2004 . Troika delivered a version of Bloodlines on the required date ; due to its scale , the game underwent three weeks of testing . Activision decided that the game was suitable for release , but was contractually-bound to withhold Bloodlines until after the debut of Half-Life 2 in November 2004 . Troika convinced Activision to use the delay to fund further development ; the additional budget was not enough to pay all of Troika 's staff , and some employees worked unpaid to complete the project . This version underwent another three weeks of testing to become the final release code ; the game was still unfinished when Activision forced its release . Bloodlines ' creative director Jason Anderson blamed Activision , saying that the publisher took the game from Troika without providing enough time to test and polish it . During the nearly four years of development , he estimated that the team worked overtime for all but two months .

The game 's original score was composed and produced by Rik Schaffer . Troika licensed many songs for the game , and posters for real bands are featured on the walls of the game 's clubs . The soundtrack was released as a limited edition CD to customers who pre-ordered the game through Best Buy . It features nine tracks by artists including Daniel Ash , Chiasm , Tiamat , Darling Violetta , Genitorturers , and Lacuna Coil . " Bloodlines " , performed by Al Jourgensen and Ministry , was composed and performed specifically for the game . The licensed tracks were chosen by Activision without input from Troika .

Vampire : The Masquerade – Bloodlines was released on November 16 , 2004 in competition with Half-Life 2 , Metal Gear Solid 3 : Snake Eater , Halo 2 , and several other titles . Valve 's contract for Troika 's use of the Source engine guaranteed that Bloodlines could not be released before Half-Life 2 , and could not be introduced to the public until after the announcement of Half-Life 2 , over eighteen months after development began . In February 2004 , the game was scheduled for release in spring 2005 , partially to avoid competing with Half-Life 2 and the competitive Christmas period , before Activision moved the date to November 2004 . In a 2013 interview , Mitsoda said that it was released at " the worst possible time - most people didn 't even know we were out ... fans and the Troika [ developers ] are always going to wonder what the game could have been like with another six months . " Activision obtained model Erin Layne to play Jeanette in promotional material for the game . Layne worked with Bloodlines artist Tim Bradstreet for a day to provide the poses chosen by Activision to represent Jeanette in the game 's posters , clothing , and other items .

Despite generally favorable reviews , Bloodlines ' initial release sold 72,000 copies and earned approximately $ 3.4 million in sales , below Troika 's other games , Arcanum : Of Steamworks and Magick Obscura ( 234,000 units , $ 8.8 million ) and The Temple of Elemental Evil ( 128,000 units , $ 5.2 million ) . In comparison , Bloodlines ' release competitor Half-Life 2 had sold 6.5 million copies by 2008 . Bloodlines ‍ ' relative failure contributed to the demise of Troika Games . Shortly after its debut , most of the development staff were laid off ; the remaining staff tried to patch Bloodlines and develop game concepts to secure funding to keep Troika in business . Troika , unable to obtain further funding from Activision or other publishers , released its employees in two waves : the first in November 2004 , followed by the remaining staff in December , except for its three founders , Anderson , Boyarsky , and Tim Cain . Some employees worked without pay to fix the game . When the company closed in February 2005 , it had secured no other game development deals . That month , Boyarsky confirmed that Troika had not been working on a patch for the game since most of its staff were gone since December 2004 . In a November 2004 interview Boyarsky said that although the team would like to pursue a Bloodlines sequel , the decision was Activision 's . In a 2006 interview , Anderson said that although Troika Games ' library had been critically well received , consistent technical issues had marred the perception of the company 's games , contributing to Troika 's difficulty in obtaining new projects .

Unofficial patches have been created by the game 's fans to address Bloodlines ' technical problems , and restore missing and incomplete content . After experiencing problems with the first versions of an unofficial patch created by Dan Upright , analytical chemist Werner Spahl continued patching the game from version 1.2 with permission and instructions . The game community tested Spahl 's patches , providing reports on bugs and spelling errors . Although the game 's complexity meant that repairing one aspect often broke another , as work on the patches progressed Spahl began restoring removed and incomplete content in the game files , adding quests , items , weapons , and characters , with fan help to provide voice acting , models , and reinstating whole levels . The changes altered the original game so much that Spahl was criticized by some of the game 's fans . This resulted in two patch versions : a basic version , fixing the game 's technical issues , and a " plus " version with the additional content . As of April 2014 , the game has had almost 10 years of post-release support with the release of version 9 of the patch . The game fared better following its release on Valve 's Steam digital distribution service in March 2007 , where , as of 2015 , it has sold 492,000 units .

Vampire : The Masquerade – Bloodlines received a mixed response , with reviewers praising its writing and presentation and criticizing its technical problems . The aggregating review websites GameRankings and Metacritic give it a score of 81 % ( based on 68 reviews ) and 80 out of 100 ( based on 61 reviews ) , respectively . The game has been called a flawed masterpiece . The scale and variety of choice and effect was highlighted by reviewers as Bloodlines ' greatest success , including the variety of clans , with specific dialog options , and the specific reactions from other characters , each with their own clan loyalty and bias . GameSpy called it a nearly flawless classic role-playing game ; the The New York Times described it as brilliant but unfinished . Eurogamer praised its " effortlessly intelligent " script , saying that " no other game has come close . Nothing 's even tried " . VideoGamer.com opined that at its best , Bloodlines stands among the greatest RPGs of the preceding five years , although its technical problems should be remembered . According to HonestGamers , the game " may not be polished and may end with a sigh instead of a shout , but for its ambition alone it deserves stream after stream of compliments . " Reviewers compared it to other successful role-playing games , including Fallout , Star Wars : Knights of the Old Republic , The Elder Scrolls III : Morrowind , Planescape : Torment , Baldur 's Gate II , and Deus Ex ; Eurogamer described Bloodlines as Deus Ex with vampires .

IGN appreciated Bloodlines ' rewarding exploration outside the main story , and the New York Times and GameSpy praised its " wonderfully imaginative " missions . Reviewers noted that later parts of the game were disappointing , delivering repetitive combat-focused missions with regenerating enemies , abandoning dialog and stealth and punishing players who build characters with more social skills than combat abilities . GameSpy said that it had never seen a role-playing game so affected by player actions with everything , from clan choice and character build to actions in missions , influencing future options and dialog . Its writing was consistently praised by reviewers . The narrative was considered deep , successfully using White Wolf 's Vampire : The Masquerade content . Eurogamer said it had the best script the website had ever seen in a video game , and others described it as a superbly crafted tale of conspiracies , underworld subterfuge , fun and intrigue . Reviewers appreciated the use of adult themes , such as sex and death , in the storyline of a contemporary video game which no other games had tackled with similar effectiveness . The mature themes succeeded without being gratuitous or exploitative , and were explored honestly and intelligently by a knowledgeable writer . The game 's characters were praised for their memorable , developed personalities , with most major characters possessing their own backstory and presented as living people instead of ciphers . Its ending had a mixed response , with some reviewers appreciating their ability to choose one of the game 's four endings ( adding an incentive to replay the game ) and others considering the ending anti-climatic .

GameSpot and GameSpy called the dialog was sharply written , with many memorable lines . Eurogamer noted that the characters ' frequent use of vulgar language worked ; written as real people , such language fit their character rather than giving the game an adult veneer . The website appreciated the breadth of dialog options , allowing the player greater control of how to play their character . PC Zone opined that the quantity of well written dialog did not guarantee quality ; many player choices seemed to have little effect on a conversation 's outcome , and the best response was often the most obvious . The voice acting was repeatedly praised for the actors ' quality and the amount of voice work , due to the many dialog options . Much of Bloodlines ' criticism focused on technical problems when it was released , undermining the game experience or making it unplayable . Several reviewers noted errors which closed the game and typographical errors in on-screen text . Others cited frequent , sometimes-lengthy load times encounted while moving between hubs and entering or exiting buildings and areas . GameSpot called the game 's artificial intelligence poor , often causing enemies to rush at an armed player , fire at them from too great a distance to be effective or become immobilized while waiting for the player 's next attack . IGN noted that stealth broke the AI , allowing traps to be triggered and leaving the assailants standing still , unable to locate a hidden player . GameSpy said that the Source engine was Bloodlines ' greatest weakness ; although the RPG aspects were the game 's strong suit , features of the Source engine , such as first-person shooting , were where it stumbled .

Combat was also criticized . Reviewers called it poor , clumsy , and unsatisfactory , complaining that Bloodlines favors melee combat ; firearms were weak , unwieldy and slow , even for characters specializing in guns . PC Zone , however , called the first-person shooting entertaining and challenging . Although melee combat was criticized as sluggish and difficult due to enemy attacks interrupting the player 's , reviewers considered it overpowered ; according to GameSpot , a boss character was killed with melee weapons on a first attempt after the repeated failure to do so with a gun . The New York Times found the unavoidable combat in the last part of the game to be so difficult that they had to cheat to succeed . Stealth was criticized , with IGN noting that even with low stealth skill it was possible to sneak around many enemies and feed from a guard without alerting another guard next to them . GameSpot opined that some of the best missions were stealth-based , as combat was more straightforward .

In 2004 , IGN named Bloodlines the Best PC RPG of that year and GameSpy called the " Ocean House Hotel " quest the Level of the Year . In 2005 , Computer Gaming World called it the Role Playing Game of 2004 , saying that it offered " a deep , balanced character creation system , a truckload of interesting quests , a good story and great NPCs to interact with . " In 2006 , PC Zone listed Bloodlines the seventh-best PC game which people were unlikely to have played , calling it the " best buggy game ever released " . In 2007 , the game was 80th on Computer & Video Games ' list of its top 100 games , and 86th on PC Gamer 's 2014 list of the same , moving to 63rd in PC Gamer 's 2015 edition . In 2011 , Rock , Paper , Shotgun called Bloodlines one of the most important PC games of all time ( " it signposts a direction to a future of games that we were denied " ) , listing it as one of the 122 Best PC Games Ever . Cinema Blend called it one of the most underappreciated games of the decade . In 2011 , Official Xbox Magazine called it one of the ten PC franchises it wanted on the Xbox 360 console . In 2013 , PC Gamer named it one of the 100 Best Horror Games on PC , and PCGamesN called it the seventh-best PC role-playing game . In 2014 , Bloodlines was 90th in Empire 's readers ' poll of the 100 Greatest Video Games of All Time , and Maximum PC chose it as one of the games they wanted to be remastered for contemporary game systems . In 2015 , Rock , Paper , Shotgun listed Bloodlines as the PC 's 19th Best RPG and 15th Best Horror Game .

Retrospective critiques continue to praise the game 's narrative and degree of choice . In 2009 , an article in Rock , Paper , Shotgun declared : " The sense of sorrow comes from the realisation that there 's nothing like [ Bloodlines ] on the horizon ... why should there be so few games like this ? Oh right , because it 's so very hard to do ... the lack of games comparable to Bloodlines is one of the great tragedies of our time . " Eurogamer called the game inspirational , with an unmatched level of narrative detail . In 2010 , The Escapist called Bloodlines a flawed masterpiece which could have been a genuine masterpiece with more time , money and staff ; although great games may inspire awe , it instead created a devoted fan base which continued to develop the game . Bloodlines is considered a cult classic .

" Won 't Get Fooled Again " is a song by the English rock band The Who , written by Pete Townshend . It was released as a single in June 1971 , reaching the top 10 in the UK , while the full eight-and-a-half-minute version appears as the final track on the band 's 1971 album Who 's Next , released that August . Townshend wrote the song as a closing number of the Lifehouse project , and the lyrics criticise revolution and power . To symbolise the spiritual connection he had found in music via the works of Meher Baba and Inayat Khan , he programmed a mixture of human traits into a synthesizer and used it as the main backing instrument throughout the song . The Who tried recording the song in New York in March 1971 , but re-recorded a superior take at Stargroves the next month using the synthesizer from Townshend 's original demo . Ultimately , Lifehouse as a project was abandoned in favour of Who 's Next , a straightforward album , where it also became the closing track . The song has been performed as a staple of the band 's setlist since 1971 , often as the set closer , and was the last track drummer Keith Moon played live with the band .

The song was originally intended for a rock opera Townshend had been working on , Lifehouse , which was a multi-media exercise based on his followings of the Indian religious avatar Meher Baba , showing how spiritual enlightenment could be obtained via a combination of band and audience . The song was written for the end of the opera , after the main character , Bobby , is killed and the " universal chord " is sounded . The main characters disappear , leaving behind the government and army , who are left to bully each other . Townshend described the song as one " that screams defiance at those who feel any cause is better than no cause " . He later said that the song was not strictly anti-revolution despite the lyric " We 'll be fighting in the streets " , but stressed that revolution could be unpredictable , adding , " Don 't expect to see what you expect to see . Expect nothing and you might gain everything . " Bassist John Entwistle later said that the song showed Townshend " saying things that really mattered to him , and saying them for the first time . "

Townshend had been reading Universal Sufism founder Inayat Khan 's The Mysticism of Sound and Music , which referred to spiritual harmony and the universal chord , which would restore harmony to humanity when sounded . Townshend realised that the newly emerging synthesizers would allow him to communicate these ideas to a mass audience . He had met the BBC Radiophonic Workshop which gave him ideas for capturing human personality within music . Townshend interviewed several people with general practitioner-style questions , and captured their heartbeat , brainwaves and astrological charts , converting the result into a series of audio pulses . For the demo of " Won 't Get Fooled Again " , he linked a Lowrey organ into a EMS VCS 3 filter that played back the pulse-coded modulations from his experiments . He subsequently upgraded to an ARP 2500 . The synthesizer did not play any sounds directly as it was monophonic ; instead it modified the block chords on the organ as an input signal . The demo was completed by Townshend overdubbing drums , bass , electric guitar , vocals and handclaps . Overall , the song ran at a slower pace to the version later recorded by the Who .

The Who 's first attempt to record the song was at the Record Plant on W 44 Street , New York City , on 16 March 1971 . Manager Kit Lambert had recommended the studio to the group , which led to his producer credit , though the de facto work was done by Felix Pappalardi . This take featured Pappalardi 's Mountain band mate , Leslie West , on lead guitar . Lambert proved to be unable to mix the track , and a fresh attempt at recording was made at the start of April at Mick Jagger 's house , Stargroves , using the Rolling Stones Mobile Studio . Glyn Johns was invited to help with production , and he decided to re-use the synthesized organ track from Townshend 's original demo , as the re-recording of the part in New York was felt to be inferior to the original . Keith Moon had to carefully synchronise his drum playing with the synthesizer , while Townshend and Entwistle played electric guitar and bass . Townshend played a 1959 Gretsch 6120 Chet Atkins hollow body guitar fed through an Edwards volume pedal to a Fender Bandmaster amp , all of which he had been given by Joe Walsh while in New York . This combination became his main electric guitar recording setup for subsequent albums . Although intended as a demo recording , the end result sounded so good to the band and Johns , they decided to use it as the final take . Overdubs , including an acoustic guitar part played by Townshend , were recorded at Olympic Studios at the end of April . The track was mixed at Island Studios by Johns on 28 May . After Lifehouse was abandoned as a project , Johns felt " Won 't Get Fooled Again " , along with other songs , were so good that they could simply be released as a standalone single album , which became Who 's Next .

" Won 't Get Fooled Again " was first released as a single A-side on 25 June 1971 , edited down to 3 : 35 . It replaced " Behind Blue Eyes " as the choice of single as the group felt it didn 't fit the Who 's established musical style . It was released on 17 July in the US . The B-side , " I Don 't Even Know Myself " was recorded at Eel Pie Studios in 1970 for a planned EP that was never released . The single reached No. 9 in the UK charts and No. 15 in the US . Initial publicity material showed an abandoned cover of Who 's Next featuring Moon dressed in drag and brandishing a whip . The full-length version of the song appeared as the closing track of Who 's Next , released on 14 August in the US and 27 August in the UK , where it topped the album charts . " Won 't Get Fooled Again " drew strong praise from critics , who were impressed that a synthesizer had managed to be integrated so successfully within a rock song . Who author Dave Marsh described singer Roger Daltrey 's scream near the end of the track as " the greatest scream of a career filled with screams " . In 2011 , the song was ranked number 134 on Rolling Stone 's The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time .

The Who first performed the song live at the opening date of a series of Lifehouse related concerts in the Young Vic theatre , London on 14 February 1971 . It has subsequently been part of every Who concert since , often as the set closer and sometimes extended slightly to allow Townshend to smash his guitar or Moon to kick over his drumkit . The group performed live over the synthesizer part being played on a backing tape , which required Moon to wear headphones to play in sync with it . It was the last track Moon played live in front of a paying audience on 21 October 1976 and the last song he ever played with the Who at Shepperton Studios on 25 May 1978 , which was captured on the documentary film The Kids Are Alright . The song was part of the Who 's set at Live Aid in 1985 , Live 8 in 2005 , T4 on the Beach in 2008 and Capital FM 's Summertime Ball concert in 2009 , 2010 and 2015 and the radio station 's Jingle Bell Ball concerts in 2009 and 2015 . In October 2001 , The Who performed the song at The Concert for New York City to help raise funds for the families of firemen and police officers killed during the 9 / 11 attacks . They finished their set with ' Won 't Get Fooled Again ' to a responsive and emotional audience , with close-up aerial video footage of the World Trade Center buildings playing behind them on a huge digital screen . In February 2010 , the group closed their set during the halftime show of Super Bowl XLIV with this song . While the Who have continued to play the song live , Townshend has expressed mixed feelings for it , alternating between pride and embarrassment in interviews . Who biographer John Atkins described the track as " the quintessential Who 's Next track but not necessarily the best . "

Several live and alternative versions of the song have been released on CD or DVD . In 2003 , a deluxe version of Who 's Next was reissued to include the Record Plant recording of the track from March 1971 and a live version recorded at the Young Vic on 26 April 1971 . The song is also included on the album Live at the Royal Albert Hall , from a 2000 show with Noel Gallagher guesting . Daltrey , Entwistle and Townshend have each performed the song at solo concerts . Townshend has re-arranged the song for solo performance on acoustic guitar . On 30 June 1979 , he performed a duet of the song with classical guitarist John Williams for the 1979 Amnesty International benefit The Secret Policeman 's Ball .

The song was first covered in a distinctive soul style by Labelle on their 1972 album Moon Shadow . Van Halen began covering the song in concert in 1993 . Eddie Van Halen re-arranged the track so that the synthesizer part was played on the guitar . A live recording was released on Live : Right Here , Right Now , and made it to number one on the Billboard Album Rock Tracks chart . Both Axel Rudi Pell ( on Diamonds Unlocked ) and Hayseed Dixie ( on Killer Grass ) covered the song in their established styles of metal and bluegrass respectively . Richie Havens covered the track on his 2008 album , " Nobody Left to Crown " , playing the song at a slower tempo to the original .

The original Who recording has been used in politics on several occasions . In an April 2006 editorial for Time magazine , retired United States Marine Corps Lieutenant General Greg Newbold referenced the song , labeling it an " antiwar anthem " that " conveyed a sense of betrayal by the nation 's leaders , who had led our country into a costly and unnecessary war in Vietnam . " In 2014 , the British Government ran an advertisement for superfast broadband using the song as its theme music . Townshend has taken an interest in licensing the Who 's work to media and advertising , and " Won 't Get Fooled Again " has made several appearances on TV and film . A portion of the song has been used as the opening theme for the CBS series CSI : Miami , while a cover version of the track was played on The Simpsons ' " A Tale of Two Springfields " which featured the Who as special guests . However , Townshend refused permission for director Michael Moore to play the song over the closing credits of Fahrenheit 9 / 11 , as he was suspicious of Moore 's journalistic credentials and did not want his work to be associated with a possibly inaccurate film . Townshend later said " [ o ] nce I had an idea what the film was about , I was 90 % certain my song was not right for them . " In response Moore accused Townshend of supporting the Iraq War , which Townshend denied .

" Homer at the Bat " is the seventeenth episode of The Simpsons ' third season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on February 20 , 1992 . The episode follows the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant softball team , led by Homer , having a winning season and making the championship game . Mr. Burns makes a large bet that the team will win and brings in nine ringers from the " big leagues " to ensure his success . It was written by John Swartzwelder , who is a big baseball fan , and directed by Jim Reardon . Roger Clemens , Wade Boggs , Ken Griffey , Jr . , Steve Sax , Ozzie Smith , José Canseco , Don Mattingly , Darryl Strawberry and Mike Scioscia all guest starred as themselves , playing the ringers hired by Mr. Burns . Terry Cashman sang a song over the end credits . The guest stars were recorded over several months , with differing degrees of cooperation . The episode is often named among the show 's best , and was the first to beat The Cosby Show in the ratings on its original airing . In 2014 , showrunner Al Jean selected it as one of five essential episodes in the show 's history .

It is softball season in Springfield and many of the workers at Springfield Nuclear Power Plant are reluctant to sign up for the Power Plant team due to their previous unsuccessful year . Homer reveals that he has a secret weapon , a homemade bat named " Wonder Bat " and his co-workers eagerly join the team . Thanks in large part to Homer , the team goes through its season undefeated and earns the right to play in the championship game against the Shelbyville Nuclear Power Plant . Mr. Burns makes a million dollar bet with Aristotle Amadopoulos , owner of the Shelbyville plant , that his team will win . To secure victory in the game , Mr. Burns decides to hire major league stars and assembles a team that includes Shoeless Joe Jackson , Pie Traynor , Harry Hooper , Honus Wagner , Cap Anson , Nap Lajoie , Gabby Street , Mordecai " Three Finger " Brown , and Jim Creighton ( the last of whom had been dead for 130 years ) . Waylon Smithers informs Mr. Burns that the players he picked have all retired and died , and so Mr. Burns changes tactics and orders Smithers to find some current superstar players . He hires nine Major League Baseball players — Roger Clemens , Wade Boggs , Ken Griffey , Jr . , Steve Sax , Ozzie Smith , Jose Canseco , Don Mattingly , Darryl Strawberry and Mike Scioscia — and gives them token jobs at the plant so that they can play on the team , much to the dismay of the plant workers who got the team to the championship game in the first place .

Mr Burns hires a hypnotist to train the team , and they all mouth back his words ( such as ' You will beat Shelbyville ' ) in unison ( ' We will beat Shelbyville ' ) until the hypnotist says ' You will give 110 % ' , at which point the team mouth back , still in perfect unison , ' That 's impossible . No one can give more than 100 % . By definition , that is the most anyone can give ' . However , before the game , eight of the nine all-star players suffer unrelated misfortunes that prevent them from playing : Clemens suddenly behaves like a chicken due to the hypnotist 's incompetence , Boggs is knocked unconscious by Barney after a bizarre argument at Moe 's Tavern ( over who was England 's greatest Prime Minister , Lord Palmerston or Pitt the Elder ) , Griffey , Jr. takes an overdose of nerve tonic , resulting in an extreme case of gigantism , Sax is arrested and put in jail for every unsolved murder in New York City , Smith disappears in the " Springfield mystery spot " , Canseco is too busy rescuing a woman and her possessions from a fire , Mattingly is kicked off the team by Mr. Burns due to sideburns only he can see , and Scioscia is hospitalized due to radiation poisoning from the plant , having taken his token job all too seriously . Mr. Burns is forced to use his original employees , along with Strawberry , the only star who can play . He made a speech that he knows that his team hated him for what he did to them and he tells them to win . Homer remains on the bench as Strawberry plays his position .

" Homer at the Bat " took a long time to produce . It was written by John Swartzwelder , who is a big baseball fan , but was suggested by Sam Simon , who wanted an episode filled with real Major League Baseball players . Executive producers Al Jean and Mike Reiss doubted that they would be able to get nine players , thinking that they would be able to get three at best . However , they succeeded , and the nine players who agreed to guest star were recorded over a period of six months , whenever they were playing the Los Angeles Dodgers or California Angels . Each player recorded their part in roughly five minutes and spent the next hour writing autographs for the staff . In several cases , the writers were unable to get the player who was their first choice . Two of the players who turned down the chance to guest star were Ryne Sandberg and Carlton Fisk . All of the players were cooperative except for Jose Canseco , who was intimidating . He disliked his original part and insisted it be rewritten , and the writers grudgingly made him as heroic as possible . He was originally slated to wake up in bed with Edna Krabappel and miss the game , but Canseco 's then-wife , Esther Haddad , objected . He disliked his caricature , stating that " the animation looked nothing like [ him ] , " but that he found the acting was very easy . When asked in 2007 about his part by the San Jose Mercury News , he responded , " that was 100 years ago , " hung up the phone and did not answer any of the paper 's subsequent calls for an interview about his guest spot .

Ken Griffey , Jr. did not understand his line " there 's a party in my mouth and everyone 's invited " and got quite frustrated when he was recording it . He was directed by Mike Reiss , and his father Ken Griffey , Sr. was also present , trying to coach his son . Roger Clemens , who made his own chicken noises , was directed by Jeff Martin , as was Wade Boggs . Mike Reiss directed most of the other players . Mike Scioscia accepted his guest spot in " half a second , " while Ozzie Smith has stated that he would like to guest star again " so [ he ] can get out [ of the Springfield Mystery spot ] . " Don Mattingly , who was forced to shave off his " sideburns " by Mr. Burns during the episode , would later have an actual " haircut controversy " , while he was playing for the New York Yankees . The coaching staff forced him to cut his long hair , and was briefly dropped from the team line-up for not doing so . Many people believed the joke in the episode to be a reference to the incident , but " Homer at the Bat " was recorded a year before it happened . Many of the guest stars , including Terry Cashman , Wade Boggs and Darryl Strawberry all admit that they are more well known because of their appearance in the episode , Cashman having " Talkin ' Softball " requested more often than " Talkin ' Baseball " .

One of the hardest pieces of editing was the hypnotist segment , which featured several of the guest stars speaking in unison . It was difficult because the parts were recorded over a period of several months and thus it was hard to sync their voices . Rich Moore was originally intended to direct the episode , but as he did not know anything about baseball he was switched with Jim Reardon , who was a baseball fan . Moore was given the episode " Lisa the Greek " instead . Many of the player designs were difficult , because the animators had a hard time designing real world people during the early years .

The episode makes several allusions to the film The Natural . Homer 's secret weapon , his self-created " Wonderbat " , is akin to Roy Hobbs 's " Wonderboy " , and both bats are eventually destroyed . The scene featuring the explosion of stadium lights as Homer circles the basepaths is also taken directly from the film . The end song " Talkin ' Softball " is a parody of " Talkin ' Baseball " by Terry Cashman . Jeff Martin wrote the new version of the song , but Cashman was brought in to sing it . The scenes of the Power Plant team traveling from city to city by train , overlaid with the pennant of the city they are going to , is a reference to the 1942 film The Pride of the Yankees . Carl batting with a piano leg is a reference to Norm Cash of the Detroit Tigers , who once tried to bat with a table leg in a game where Nolan Ryan was extremely overpowering and threw a no-hitter . The episode 's title references " Casey at the Bat " .

During the previous season , Fox had put The Simpsons in a timeslot that meant it was in direct competition with The Cosby Show , which won the timeslot every time . " Homer at the Bat " had a 15.9 rating and 23 % share to win its timeslot while The Cosby Show had a 13.2 rating and 20 % share . This was the first time that a new Simpsons episode beat a new Cosby Show episode . Former executive producer Sam Simon and current showrunner Al Jean named it as their favorite episode . Regular cast members Harry Shearer and Julie Kavner disliked the episode because of its focus on the guest stars and its surreal tone . They were particularly annoyed by the Mattingly sideburns joke . Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , the authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , praised the episode , calling it " a great episode because the accidents that befall the pro players are so funny . " Chris Turner , the author of the book Planet Simpson , said that the episode was the indication that " the Golden Age [ of the show ] had arrived . " Nate Meyers gave the episode four and a half out of five , stating " the script makes great use of the baseball superstars , giving each of them a strong personality and plenty of pep ( the highlight has to be Mattingly 's clash with Mr. Burns ) . " Colin Jacobson disliked the episode : " when [ " Homer at the Bat " ] originally aired , I didn 't like it . While I 've warmed up to the show slightly over the last decade , I still think it 's generally weak , and I 'd definitely pick it as Season Three 's worst . "

Entertainment Weekly placed the episode fifteenth on their top 25 The Simpsons episodes list , noting it was " early proof that The Simpsons could juggle a squad of guest stars without giving the family short shrift . " It was placed third on AskMen.com 's " Top 10 : Simpsons Episodes " list , Rich Weir called it " one of the show 's more memorable moments " and " effective as it combines a slew of guest stars with some hilarious material for Homer . " The entire episode was placed first on ESPN.com 's list of the " Top 100 Simpsons sport moments " , released in 2004 . Greg Collins , the author of the list , gave great praise of the episode . He stated that this is the " king of all sports episodes , and perhaps the greatest Simpsons episode ever . " A friend of Collins later met guest star Mike Scioscia and told him that he thought his guest spot was the best thing Scioscia had ever done , he responded " Thanks , I think " . Eric Reinagel , Brian Moritz and John Hill of Press & Sun-Bulletin named the episode the fourth best in the show 's history , and a journalist for The Toronto Star named Homer 's conversation with Darryl Strawberry as the " greatest conversation of all time , involving the word yes " .

Berk-i Satvet was a torpedo cruiser of the Ottoman Navy , the second and final member of the Peyk-i Şevket class . She was built by the Germaniawerft shipyard in Germany in 1906 – 07 , and was delivered to the Ottoman Navy in November 1907 . The ship 's primary armament consisted of three 450 mm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes and a pair of 105 mm ( 4.1 in ) guns , and she was capable of a top speed of 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) . The ship 's early career was uneventful ; the Italo-Turkish War of 1911 – 12 passed without any action of the Ottoman fleet . Berk-i Satvet saw action during the Balkan Wars of 1912 – 13 in the Aegean and Black Seas , against Greek and Bulgarian opponents , respectively . After the Ottoman Empire entered World War I , Berk-i Satvet was employed in patrols in the Black Sea . These included attacks on Russian ports with the ex-German warships Yavuz Sultan Selim and Midilli . In January 1915 , Berk-i Satvet struck a naval mine while escorting a convoy to Zonguldak ; the explosion severely damaged the ship and kept her out of service until April 1918 . For the remainder of the war , she patrolled the Black Sea . The ship was renamed Berk in 1923 and modernized twice , in the mid-1920s and in the late-1930s . She remained in service until 1944 , when she was stricken from the naval register . Berk was ultimately broken up for scrap in 1953 – 55 .

Berk-i Satvet , classified as a torpedo cruiser by the Ottoman Navy , was also sometimes referred to as a torpedo gunboat . She was 80 m ( 260 ft ) long , with a beam of 8.4 m ( 28 ft ) and a draft of 2.5 m ( 8 ft 2 in ) . She displaced 775 t ( 763 long tons ; 854 short tons ) while on sea trials . The ship was powered by a pair of vertical triple-expansion engines each driving a screw propeller . The engines were rated at 5,100 indicated horsepower ( 3,800 kW ) for a top speed of 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) ; Berk-i Satvet had a cruising radius of 3,240 nautical miles ( 6,000 km ; 3,730 mi ) . Her crew numbered 105 officers and enlisted men . Berk-i Satvet 's primary offensive armament was her three 450 mm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes . One was mounted in the bow , above water , and the other two were in deck-mounted swivel launchers amidships . She was armed with a pair of 105 mm ( 4.1 in ) guns that were placed in shielded single mounts on the forecastle and quarterdeck . She also carried six 57 mm ( 2.2 in ) guns , four of which were mounted in sponsons , and a pair of 37 mm ( 1.5 in ) guns . She had no armor protection .

Berk-i Satvet was transferred to the Black Sea on 9 December 1912 , to reinforce the squadron there during the First Balkan War . On 4 February 1913 , Berk-i Satvet bombarded Bulgarian positions at Şarköy on the northern coast of the Sea of Marmara in preparation for an amphibious assault . Four days later , the Ottoman navy returned to support the landing at Şarköy . Turgut Reis and Barbaros Hayreddin , along with two small cruisers provided artillery support to the right flank of the invading force once it went ashore . The ships were positioned about one kilometer off shore , with Berk-i Satvet leading the line , which also included the cruiser Mecidiye and the pre-dreadnought battleships Barbaros Hayreddin and Turgut Reis . The Bulgarian army resisted fiercely , which ultimately forced the Ottoman army to retreat , though the withdrawal was successful in large part due to the gunfire support from the fleet . Berk-i Satvet and Mecidiye covered the left flank while the two battleships supported the left during the evacuation . In the course of the operation , Berk-i Satvet had fired eighty-four 105 mm shells . On 9 March , Berk-i Satvet joined a sweep toward Imbros , an island in the Aegean Sea at the entrance to the Gulf of Saros ; she briefly engaged a pair of Greek destroyers and stopped a steamer flying under the French flag . The vessel , which appeared to be supplying Bulgarian forces , was taken as a prize by the destroyer Yahisar . Later in March , she again escorted Barbaros Hayreddin and Turgut Reis in the Black Sea , while the two battleships bombarded Bulgarian troops that were attempting to breach the line of defenses at Çatalca . On 13 April , Berk-i Satvet joined a fleet consisting of Barbaros Hayreddin , Turgut Reis , Âsâr-ı Tevfik , and several smaller warships . The ships sortied out of the Dardanelles and encountered a Greek fleet . After a brief engagement at extreme range , the Ottomans and Greeks withdrew to the Dardanelles and Imbros , respectively .

In late July 1914 , World War I broke out in Europe , though the Ottomans initially remained neutral . On 14 August , Berk-i Satvet joined patrols of the Dardanelles , the defenses of which were strengthened with several new minefields . Tensions between the Ottomans and a British fleet patrolling the entrance to the Dardanelles increased until 5 November , when Britain and France declared war on the Ottoman Empire . In the meantime , Berk-i Satvet had been transferred to the Black Sea . She joined the cruiser Midilli , formerly the German Breslau , for an attack on the Russian port of Novorossiysk on 29 October . Berk-i Satvet embarked on another attack , this time with the battlecruiser Yavuz Sultan Selim , formerly the German Goeben . The battlecruiser shelled Sevastopol while Berk-i Satvet observed ; she had been sent with Yavuz Sultan Selim primarily to train her crew . Berk-i Satvet sortied with her sister and Yavuz Sultan Selim on 5 December to provide distant support to a troop convoy headed to Rize . On 2 January 1915 at 15 : 00 , she , Midilli , and the cruiser Hamidiye steamed out of the Bosporus to escort a transport to Zonguldak , after which the three cruisers are to conduct a patrol off the port . At 18 : 00 into the voyage , a Russian mine exploded , which led Berk-i Satvet 's commander to take evasive action . The ship struck a mine in the darkness , which caused significant damage . The mine destroyed both of her propellers and caused serious flooding at her stern . Two tugs arrived and towed Berk-i Satvet to İstinye with Hamidiye as an escort . The damage was so severe that the ship was disabled for most of the war . After lengthy repairs , the ship was recommissioned on 1 April 1918 and patrols between Constantinople and Batumi . She remained in the Black Sea through the end of the war . On 30 November , the Ottoman Empire signed the Armistice of Mudros with the Entente powers , which concluded the conflict .

The ship was renamed Berk in 1923 following the end of the Turkish War of Independence , which saw the Republic of Turkey replace the old Ottoman Empire . At the time , the ship had been placed out of service . From 1924 to 1925 , she was modernized at the Gölcük Naval Shipyard and was recommissioned in 1925 . In 1927 , the ship visited İzmir . She was rebuilt in 1937 – 39 and incorporated substantial improvements . Her stem was replaced and her superstructure was rebuilt . The old gun armament was replaced with a pair of 88 mm ( 3.5 in ) 45-caliber guns and four 37 mm 40-caliber guns , and equipment to handle 25 mines was installed . The ship continued in service until 1944 , when she was stricken from the naval register . She was hulked at the Gölcük shipyard in 1950 , and broken up for scrap between 1953 and 1955 .

All of SR 607 is located in central Morgan County , Ohio . The state route starts at the intersection of SR 60 near McConnelsville . SR 607 travels north for the majority of the length . SR 607 passes near an Ohio Department of Transportation ( ODOT ) county garage near the beginning of the road . Halfway through the route , SR 607 meets Township Road 696 in a T-intersection , where the route moves slightly westward . After that , there is an Ohio Army National Guard training site at Hawk Drive . The route keeps moving north until it ends at SR 78 at another T-intersection . The route goes through mostly forests and small hills . In 2012 , ODOT calculated 1,975 vehicles traveling south of McGovern Lane . This is expressed in terms of annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) , a measure of traffic volume for any average day of the year . No part of SR 607 is included within the National Highway System , a system of routes deemed most important for the economy , defense and mobility of the country .

Planning of Monastery Road ( Township Road 209 ) improvements began in 2003 . At that time , $ 3.8 million in state funding was set aside for the project , but the Ohio Department of Transportation ( ODOT ) did not receive the money until 2005 . By 2007 , most of the earmarked money was spent on preliminary engineering and planning . Without the money , Morgan Township officials could not afford to upgrade the road , and ODOT was barred from spending money on local roads . In 2011 , deputy director Steve Williams devised a new plan that made the township road a state route , and Morgan Township officials transferred the road to ODOT . Monastery Road was closed 0.7 mi ( 1.1 km ) north of SR 60 , and 0.4 mi ( 0.64 km ) south of SR 78 in April 2012 , for nine months . The road was realigned and resurfaced , and it cost around $ 1.5 million . The road was also widened at the northern terminus with SR 78 , and the southern terminus with SR 60 . On July 25 , 2013 , ODOT erected state route signs on the road . The next day , Williams announced the upgrade of Monastery Road to State Route 607 and reopened the road .

Skiklubben Ull was a Norwegian Nordic skiing club based in Oslo . Founded in 1883 , Skiklubben Ull attracted several skilled sportsmen who between 1883 and 1891 won six Ladies ' Cups and one King 's Cup in national skiing events . The sporting facilities belonging the club were located in Vestre Aker , with the ski jumping hill Ullbakken near Frognerseteren being opened in 1884 . The prestigious Husebyrennet was staged there once . Members of SK Ull were later instrumental in moving this prestigious contest to the hill Holmenkollbakken . Club members also held important positions in the general administration of skiing in Norway . The first Ull chairman Johan Bechholm was also the first secretary of the Association for the Promotion of Skiing ; Karl Roll became the first chairman of the Norwegian Ski Federation , Hjalmar Krag became chairman in the Confederation of Sports and Fritz R. Huitfeldt was a pioneer in several respects . The club was founded by students and its membership later drew from the upper social strata . During the first ten years of club history , forty-four of the sixty members admitted into the club belonged to one of four prestigious professions ; physician , military officer , jurist or engineer . The club was furthermore exclusive , in that it only had 119 members during its first 100 years of existence . In 1893 the club raised its own cabin , thus grouping it together with other so-called " cabin ski clubs " such as Christiania SK . SK Ull eventually evolved from a skiing club to a social club in a skiing setting , using the old cabin for member meetings , which were also visited by the King of Norway .

Skiklubben Ull was founded on 29 January 1883 , and named after the Norse deity Ullr . In Norse mythology , Ullr was a god for hunting and competition , superior with his skis and his bow . SK Ull has been credited as being the second-oldest skiing club in the world , after Christiania SK . The club founders were a group of university students who socialized in apartments in Wessels gate . The young men usually conversed about their studies or played card games , but they were also hobby cross-country skiers , and decided to take up skiing in a more organized form by starting a club . The term describing a club member was ullaner . The founding members were Thoralf Fabritius , Paul Lorck , Petter Dahl Thams , Andreas Bechholm , Johan Bechholm , Otto Dahl , Sigurd Gotaas and Michael Strøm Lie . New members were allowed every year until 1887 , after which new members were usually admitted biannually , in 1889 , 1891 , 1893 , 1895 , 1896 and 1897 . Notable members who joined the club shortly after the foundation include Fritz R. Huitfeldt , Henrik Florentz , Hans Grüner , Marius Grüner and Stefan Meidell . The first chairman was Johan Bechholm , followed by Sigurd Gotaas from 1885 and Fritz R. Huitfeldt from 1887 to 1891 . The three honorary memberships proclaimed in the early period were Fritz R. Huitfeldt ( 1883 ) , Hans Grüner ( 1884 ) and Axel Huitfeldt ( 1889 ) .

The club saw sporting success on the national level ( international competitions were few or none ) in its first years . Johan Bechholm finished eleventh and won the Ladies ' Cup in Husebyrennet of 1883 . In 1884 Ingvald M. Smith-Kielland , Sr. won the Ladies ' Cup and Richard Blichfeldt won the King 's Cup . Vilhelm Nicolaysen finished fourth and won the Ladies ' Cup in 1886 , Karl Roll won the Ladies ' Cup in 1889 , Vilhelm Heiberg in 1890 and Otto Orre in 1891 . Ull maintained its own ski jumping hill , Ullbakken , near Frognerseteren in Vestre Aker . It was opened in 1884 with a festive ski jumping contest , attended by Prince Eugen of Norway and Sweden . Ullbakken was the site of Husebyrennet in 1890 , when Kastellbakken was unusable . The dinner after this race was attended by Crown Prince Gustaf of Norway and Sweden . Karl Roll had an especially close relationship with the Swedish royal family , being a ski tutor for the princes while stationed in Stockholm between 1898 and 1904 . After Norway abolished the personal union in 1905 and elected its own king , Roll immediately became an aide-de-camp for the new monarch .

The club also staged the members-only contest Ullrennet . In the invitation for Ullrennet and the subsequent banquet in 1897 , the members were asked to take their place at the table " according to rank , estate , age , dignity and skiing profess " . SK Ull also became the second in Norway to raise its own skiing cabin , " Ydale " at Voksenkollen in 1893 . This was named after Ýdalir , the mythological dwelling of the deity Ullr . Some of Ull 's rival clubs were Christiania SK , Skuld , Fram and Ondur . Christiania , Skuld and Fram owned skiing cabins similar to that of Ull — they were collectively referred to as " cabin skiing clubs " . Reportedly , it was SK Ull 's forays into the district around Holmenkollen for sporting purposes that spurred the establishment of the new hill Holmenkollbakken in 1891 . The knowledge of the area spurred Fritz R. Huitfeldt to pinpoint the location of the new hill , together with Hans Krag . This hill lay at a higher altitude than Kastellbakken , and thus had more favourable snow conditions . Holmenkollbakken quickly replaced Kastellbakken as the main hill in the district , and eventually became world-famous .

SK Ull also saw some sporting success in the 1890s , although the last Ladies ' Cup was taken in 1891 . The club was joined by top skiers like Tobias Bernhoft and Jørgen Berg . In the late 1890s , however , as many members reached higher ages , SK Ull became more of a gentlemen 's social club than an active skiing club . This social club was exclusive by nature , with a clause in the by-laws that the membership could not surpass forty . Actually the club never had more than thirty members , which was the case in 1890 , and rarely more than twenty . The members were drawn from the higher social strata of Norway 's capital region . Forty-four of the sixty members admitted into the club up to the opening of Ydale belonged to one of four prestigious professions : physician , military officer , jurist or engineer .

After 1898 , there was a pause in admitting new members . Four were admitted between 1906 and 1908 , followed by only one in the 1915 , three in 1924 , and two in 1935 . In 1940 the average member age was 69 . After finishing their active careers , some of Ull 's members entered the ranks of sports officials and administrators . Most notable was Karl Roll , who became the first chairman of the Norwegian Ski Federation in 1908 . Several members had already held positions in the older organization Association for the Promotion of Skiing , founded three weeks before Ull , in 1883 . Johan Bechholm was its first secretary , from 1883 to 1886 , and many others followed . Johan Sverre ( member since 1896 ) was a notable Olympic administrator after the Norwegian independence in 1905 , and Hjalmar Krag ( member since 1887 ) became chairman in the Confederation of Sports . Fritz R. Huitfeldt also became a known figure in his field ; for his ski bindings , and for pioneering Telemark skiing . Huitfeldt 's ski factory , which he started together with Richard Blichfeldt , was named Ull .

At the war 's end in 1945 , Ull only had fourteen members . Its average member age was lowered to 65 years after the admission of five new members in 1946 and 1947 . The post-war period also saw the admission to SK Ull of men from more professional groups . One of the new members , Erik Plahte , would serve as chairman from 1951 to 1973 , when he backed down at the age of 84 . Another of the new post-war members , Jakob Vaage , took over . He was then aged 68 . By 1953 , all the club 's elected positions were held by post-war members . Three of the older members , some with experience dating to the 1880s , were admitted as honorary members , the first honorary members in SK Ull since 1889 . After professor Johs . Andenæs was admitted as a member in 1949 , the club admitted thirteen members in the 1950s ; seven in the 1960s as well as a corresponding member , Norwegian-Canadian Herman Smith-Johannsen ; and only three in the 1970s . One member was elected i 1980 , and three in 1983 ; Arvid Fossum , Odd Harsheim and Birger Ruud . Three honorary members were proclaimed after 1960 : Erik Plahte in 1969 , Herman Smith-Johanssen in 1975 and Jakob Vaage in 1983 .

" Can 't Hold Us Down " is a song recorded by American singer Christina Aguilera and rapper Lil ' Kim for the former 's fourth studio album Stripped ( 2002 ) . It was released by RCA Records on July 8 , 2003 , as the fourth single from the album . The track was written and produced by Scott Storch , with additional songwriting by Aguilera and Matt Morris . An R & B and hip hop song with dancehall elements , " Can 't Hold Us Down " criticizes gender-related double standards . " Can 't Hold Us Down " received mixed reviews from music critics . It was nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals at the 2004 ceremony , but lost to " Whenever I Say Your Name " by Sting and Mary J. Blige . The single peaked at number 12 on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 and charted within the top ten of record charts of several countries including Australia , Denmark , Ireland , and the United Kingdom . The song was included on the setlists of Aguilera 's three major concert tours : Justified and Stripped Tour ( 2003 ) , The Stripped Tour ( 2003 ) and Back to Basics Tour ( 2006 – 08 ) .

American singer Christina Aguilera rose to prominence with the successes of her first three studio albums Christina Aguilera ( 1999 ) , Mi Reflejo ( 2000 ) , and My Kind of Christmas ( 2000 ) . However , she was dissatisfied with being marketed as what her then-manager Steve Kurtz desired rather than Aguilera 's own wish . In late 2000 , Aguilera hired Irving Azoff as her new manager and announced that her forthcoming album would have more musical and lyrical depth . She named the album Stripped , explaining that the term represented " a new beginning , a re-introduction of [ herself ] as a new artist " . Hip hop producer Scott Storch wrote and produced several tracks for the album , including " Can 't Hold Us Down " . Additional writing credits for the song were provided by Aguilera and Matt Morris . " Can 't Hold Us Down " was serviced to mainstream radio and rhythmic stations in the United States as the fourth single from Stripped by RCA Records on July 8 , 2003 . The song was distributed as a CD single from September to October 2003 in the United Kingdom , Germany , and Italy by RCA Records and Sony Music Entertainment . A 12-inch edition of the song was released in the United States on September 9 , 2003 .

" Can 't Hold Us Down " is written in the key of E ♭ major . Chuck Taylor from Billboard described it as a R & B track , while The New York Times 's Kelefa Sanneh characterized it as a hip hop song . Todd Burns writing for Stylus Magazine also noted elements of dancehall towards the end of the track . Aguilera and Kim 's vocals on the track , which Taylor described as " faux-R & B " , span two octaves , from F3 to F5 . " Can 't Hold Us Down " lyrically discusses feminism ; the song criticizes the " common " gender-related double standards , in which men are applauded for their sexual behaviors , while women who behave in a similar fashion are disdained . In the book Therapeutic Uses of Rap and Hip-Hop , Susan Hadley and George Yancy discuss that " Can 't Hold Us Down " is a hip hop song that " encourages young women to be proud , strong , and empowered to be all that they can be " . At the song 's first verse , Aguilera sings " Call me a bitch ' cause I speak what 's on my mind / Guess it 's easier for you to swallow if I sat and smiled " ; she later rejects that all women " should be seen , not heard " and encourages them to " shout louder " during the chorus . Aguilera comments on the double standard with the lyrics " The guy gets all the glory the more he can score / While the girl can do the same and yet you call her a whore " . Lil ' Kim shares a similar sentiment during her verse in the bridge , questioning why a man is able to give a woman " some sex or sex her raw " while " if the girl do the same and then she 's a whore " .

Chuck Taylor from Billboard criticized the song as a " real waste of time and talent " , while Rolling Stone 's Jancee Dunn called the track " curiously lifeless " . Stylus Magazine 's Todd Burns was critical of the song 's " bland " lyrics yet appreciated the dancehall elements that emerged at the end of the track . Josh Kun of Spin praised the lyrics for being more confrontational than the works of her contemporary Britney Spears . Jacqueline Hodges writing for BBC Music appreciated Lil 's Kim 's inclusion on the track for adding " a bit of edge " . " Can 't Hold Us Down " was nominated for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals at the 2004 Grammy Awards , but lost to " Whenever I Say Your Name " by Sting and Mary J. Blige . On reviewing Aguilera 's greatest hits album , Keeps Gettin ' Better : A Decade of Hits in 2008 , Nick Levine from Digital Spy shared disappointment because the song could not make it to the compilation . " Can 't Hold Us Down " peaked at number 12 on the US Billboard Hot 100 and number 3 on the Pop Songs chart . The song peaked at number 4 on the Canadian Singles Chart . In Australia , " Can 't Hold Us Down " reached a peak position of number 5 on the Australian Singles Chart , and was certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association for shipments of 35,000 copies in the country . Additionally , it reached number 2 on the New Zealand Singles Chart . It peaked at number 4 on the Hungarian Singles Chart , number 5 on the Irish Singles Chart , and number 6 on the UK Singles Chart . The single charted at numbers 7 and 15 on the Belgian Flanders and Walloon Singles Charts , respectively . On the Danish Singles Chart , " Can 't Hold Us Down " peaked at number 8 , while its highest position on the German Media Control Charts was number 9 .

The song has been recognized as a feminist anthem . Nicholas Ransbottom from The Charleston Gazette placed the song on his list of the top ten songs of female empowerment in 2013 , calling it a " great anthem about women sticking up for themselves in a misogynistic world " . Several writers for The AV Club included the track on their list of seventeen " well-intended yet misguided feminist anthems " in 2010 ; they agreed that the song itself was " actually one of her better songs " , although they felt that its accompanying music video overshadowed its lyrical " [ confrontation of ] the double standard of female sexuality " since Aguilera conducted herself in a provocative fashion that conflicted its intended meaning . Yasamin Saeidi from Burton Mail listed " Can 't Hold Us Down " on her list of the " top ten empowering lady anthems " in 2013 .

The music video for " Can 't Hold Us Down " was directed by David LaChapelle , who previously directed the music video for Stripped 's lead single " Dirrty " in 2002 . It was filmed in a Los Angeles soundstage that depicted a 1980s Lower East Side neighborhood in Manhattan , New York City . LaChapelle described the concept of the video as his " ode to the ' 80s " . In the video , Aguilera wears a pink sleeveless shirt , a sleeveless sport jacket , a pair of shorts , a mauve baseball cap embroidered with the words " Lady C " , and white long socks . She is seen with dyed black hair and is wearing dark mascara and a gold nose ring . The residents of the neighborhood are mostly Latin and black people , resembling people living in a ghetto . As the video begins , Aguilera is chatting with a group of women . When Aguilera leaves the conversation , a black man suddenly grabs her buttocks , making Aguilera stop and causing an argument between them . As she continues to sing , the nearby women in the neighborhood join her , while the male residents join the man and form their respective sides in the street . They perform their own hip hop dance skills against each other . At the bridge , Lil ' Kim appears in a bikini and a sheer black blouse , and dances in her high heels . The argument ends with Aguilera spraying the men with a water hose , which she holds between her legs and parodies the male penis .

Jason Heller from The AV Club criticized LaChappelle for " [ swallowing ] the message " of the track by following an unrelated concept in the clip . In the book Music Video and the Politics of Representation , Diane Railton and Paul Watson felt that the video exemplified cultural appropriation , specifically noting how Aguilera conducted herself as an African-American woman , and elaborated that it emphasized " a range of issues concerning the representation of gender and race " . Andy Cohn from The Fader provided a more favorable review , and opined that Aguilera 's " sass " helped to highlight her Irish and Ecuadorian background . The music video for " Can 't Hold Us Down " has received scholarly attention as an example of cultural appropriation . Murali Balaji , author of the article " Vixen Resistin ' : Redefining black womanhood in hip-hop music videos " published in the Journal of Black Studies , noted that " blackness and sexuality " has become characteristics by which African-American women are able to self-define . Consequently , he opined that the inclusion of Lil ' Kim in the clip represented an element of " ' primitive ' sexuality " , which Aguilera intended to imitate through her own behavior in the video . In their article " Naughty girls and red-blooded women : Representations of female heterosexuality in music video " , published in Feminist Media Studies , Diane Railton and Paul Watson made specific note of the conflicting message raised by the lyrics " all my girls around the world " , while " blackness and whiteness are clearly inscribed on and through the bodies of Aguilera and Kim . " They suggested that this example detracted the message of the track by emphasizing the problem that " female heterosexuality " is confined to " the very limited range of ways " in mainstream culture , in this instance " gender and race [ and ] sexual behaviour " .

Though the pair never performed the song together , Aguilera performed " Can 't Hold Us Down " on her Justified and Stripped Tour , which was held in support of Aguilera 's Stripped and Justin Timberlake 's album Justified ( 2002 ) . In late 2003 , the track was included on the setlist of The Stripped Tour , which acted as the Justified and Stripped Tour 's extension and happened without Timberlake 's acts . The performance in London was included on the singer 's first full-length DVD Stripped Live in the U.K. ( 2004 ) . On her Back to Basics Tour ( 2006 – 08 ) , Aguilera performed excerpts of " Can 't Hold Us Down " in a medley with " Still Dirrty " .

A station model is a symbolic illustration showing the weather occurring at a given reporting station . Meteorologists created the station model to fit a number of weather elements into a small space on weather maps . This allows map users to analyze patterns in air pressure , temperature , wind , cloud cover , and precipitation . Station model plots use an internationally accepted coding convention that has changed little since August 1 , 1941 . Elements in the plot show the key weather elements , including temperature , dew point , wind , cloud cover , air pressure , pressure tendency , and precipitation .

Weather maps primarily use the station model to show surface weather conditions , but the model can also show the weather aloft as reported by a weather balloon 's radiosonde or a pilot 's report . Station model plots use a mixture of metric and Imperial units depending on the map 's location and what is being shown . Surface maps in the United States primarily use Imperial units , such as inches , degrees Fahrenheit , and knots . Most of the world , however , uses metric measurements for everything but wind speed , which is shown in knots .

The station model uses a wind barb to show both wind direction and speed . The wind barb shows the speed using " flags " on the end . Winds are depicted as blowing from the direction the flags are facing . Therefore , a northeast wind will be depicted with a line extending from the cloud circle to the northeast , with flags indicating wind speed on the northeast end of this line . Once plotted on a map , an analysis of isotachs ( lines of equal wind speeds ) can be accomplished . Isotachs are particularly useful in diagnosing the location of the jet stream on upper level constant pressure charts , usually at or above the 300 hPa level . The flags and pennants point to the low pressure , so it is possible to determine at which hemisphere the station is standing . The barbs in the figure at the right are located at the Northern Hemisphere , because the wind is circling counter clock-wise around a low-pressure area at the Northern Hemisphere ( the wind is blowing in the opposite direction at the Southern Hemisphere , see also Buys Ballot 's law ) .

Along with wind direction , cloud cover is one of the oldest atmospheric conditions to be coded on a station model . The circle in the middle of the station model represents cloud cover . In the United Kingdom , when the observation is taken from an automated weather observation site , the shape is a triangle . If the shape is completely filled in , it is overcast . If conditions are completely clear , the circle or triangle is empty . If conditions are partly cloudy , the circle or triangle is partially filled in . The cloud cover shape has different looks depending upon how many oktas ( eighths of the sky ) are covered by cloud . A sky half full of clouds would have a circle that was half white and half black . Below the shape indicating sky cover , the station model can indicate the coverage of low clouds , in oktas , and the ceiling height in hundreds of feet . The ceiling height is the height at which more than half the sky is covered by clouds . For pilots , knowledge of the sky cover helps determine if visual flight rules are being met . Knowing the degree of cloud cover can help determine whether or not various weather fronts , such as cold fronts or warm fronts , have passed by a location . A nephanalysis , contouring areas that are cloudy with scalloped lines , can be performed to indicate a system 's cloud and precipitation pattern . This technique is rarely performed nowadays , due to the prevalence of satellite imagery worldwide .

Above or below the circle for manned stations ( automatic stations do not report cloud types ) that indicates sky cover can lie one or more symbols indicating cloud types in any of the low , middle and high-étages for tropospheric clouds . One predominant cloud type may be depicted for each of three étages , if known . The middle and high-étage types are depicted above the sky cover circle of the station model , while the main low-étage cloud type is indicated below the circle . Since the station model has limited room , it makes no special provision for vertical or multi-level clouds that can occupy more than one étage at a particular time . Consequently , cloud genera with significant vertical development may be coded and plotted as low or middle depending on the altitude at which they normally form . Cumulus and cumulonimbus usually form in the low étage of the troposphere and achieve vertical extent by growing upward into the middle or high étage . Conversely , nimbostratus usually forms in the middle étage of the troposphere and becomes vertically developed by growing downward into the low étage . Although the SYNOP code has no separate formal group classification for vertical or multi-level clouds , the observer procedure for selecting numerical codes is designed to give high reporting priority to those genera or species that show significant vertical development .

The symbols used for clouds emulate the cloud shape . Cirrus is indicated by a couple hooks , cumulus are indicated by a mound shape , with cumulonimbus indicated with an upside down trapezoid on top of the cumulus symbol to indicate its anvil . When there is more than one cloud type present per level , the cloud type with the highest priority is included . Knowing the cloud type at various locations can help determine whether or not a weather front has passed by a particular location . A low deck of stratus could indicate a station is still north of a warm front , while thunderstorms can indicate the approach of a squall line or cold front .

To the left of the cloud shape in the center of the station model is the symbol depicting present weather . The present weather symbol depicts the current weather which normally is obstructing the visibility at the time of observation . The visibility itself is shown as a number , in statute miles in the United States and meters elsewhere , describing how far the observer can see at that time . This number is located to the left of the present weather symbol . For pilots , knowledge of the horizontal visibility helps determine if they are flying through instrument meteorological conditions , such as foggy or smokey conditions , as well as areas of intense precipitation . Present weather depicted with the station model can include :

On the top right corner of the model for a surface weather map is the pressure , showing the last two integer digits of the pressure in millibars , or hectopascals , along with the first decimal . For instance , if the pressure at a certain location is 999.7 hPa , the pressure portion of the station model will read 997 . Although the first digit or two of the pressure is left off , other nearby stations give away whether the pressure starts with a 10 or a 9 . Most of the time , choosing first digits that would lead to a value nearest to 1000 works out best . The plotting of this value within the station model allows for the analysis of isobars on weather maps . Within maps which plot data on constant pressure surfaces , the pressure is replaced with the height of the pressure surface .

Below the pressure will lie the pressure tendency figure , which indicates the pressure change over the past three hours . The number depicting the pressure change will usually have two digits and indicate the pressure change in 0.1 millibar increments . There are nine different figures which represent the pressure change . A slant angled up and right indicates a steady rise , while a downward slant to the lower right indicates a steady fall . Steady rises can indicate improving conditions and approaching high pressure , and normally occur in the wake of a cold front . Steady falls can indicate deteriorating conditions and an approaching low pressure area , with the largest falls occurring in advance of a surface cyclone and its attendant warm front . The time of the day must be considered , as there are two natural rises per day ( locally around 10 am and 10 pm ) and two natural falls per day ( locally around 4 am and 4 pm ) . These daily changes in pressure can mask the movement of pressure systems and fronts past a location . The lowest natural dip in the pressure , in a stagnant weather pattern , occurs around 4 pm while the highest natural peak in pressure occurs around 10 am . Once plotted on a map , the analysis of isallobars ( lines of equal pressure change ) can be plotted on a map , which can indicate the direction of motion of high and low pressures systems across the map domain .

Béla I the Champion or the Wisent ( Hungarian : I. Bajnok or Bölény Béla , Slovak : Belo I. ; before 1020 – 11 September 1063 ) was King of Hungary from 1060 until his death . He descended from a younger branch of the Árpád dynasty . Béla 's baptismal name was Adalbert . He left Hungary in 1031 , together with his brothers , Levente and Andrew , after the execution of their father , Vazul . Béla settled in Poland and married Richeza ( or Adelaide ) , daughter of King Mieszko II of Poland . He returned to his homeland upon the invitation of his brother Andrew , who had in the meantime been crowned King of Hungary . Andrew assigned the administration of the so-called ducatus or " duchy " , which encompassed around one-third of the territory of the Kingdom of Hungary , to Béla . The two brothers ' relationship became tense when Andrew had his own son , Solomon , crowned king , and forced Béla to publicly confirm Solomon 's right to the throne in 1057 or 1058 . Béla , assisted by his Polish relatives , rebelled against his brother and dethroned him in 1060 . He introduced monetary reform and subdued the last uprising aimed at the restoration of paganism in Hungary . Béla was fatally injured when his throne collapsed while he was sitting on it .

Most Hungarian chronicles , including Simon of Kéza 's Gesta Hungarorum and the Illuminated Chronicle , record that Béla 's father was Ladislaus the Bald , a cousin of Stephen , the first King of Hungary . However , many of the same sources add that it " is sometimes claimed " that Béla and his two brothers — Levente and Andrew — were in fact the sons of Ladislaus the Bald 's brother , Vazul . The chronicles also refer to gossip claiming that the three brothers were their father 's illegitimate sons , born to " a girl from the Tátony clan " . Modern historians , who accept the latter reports ' reliability , unanimously write that the three brothers were the sons of Vazul and his concubine . Béla was born between 1015 and 1020 . It is debated whether Béla was a second or a third son . The former view is represented , for example , by the Polish historian Wincenty Swoboda , and the latter by the Hungarian scholars Gyula Kristó and Ferenc Makk . Kristó and Makk write that Béla 's name " most probably " derived from the Turkish adjective bujla ( " noble " ) . However , the name may also be connected to the Slavic word for white ( bjelij ) or to the Biblical name Bela .

King Stephen 's only son who survived infancy , Emeric , died on 2 September 1031 . Thereafter , Vazul had the strongest claim to succeed the King . However , the monarch , suspecting that Vazul inclined towards paganism , favored his own sister 's son , Peter Orseolo . In order to ensure his nephew 's succession , Stephen had Vazul blinded . Béla and his two brothers fled from the kingdom . They first settled in Bohemia , but their " condition of life was poor and mean " there . They moved to Poland , where " they received a warm reception " from King Mieszko II . According to the Hungarian chronicles , Béla participated in a Polish expedition against the pagan Pomeranians and defeated their duke " in single combat " . The Illuminated Chronicle narrates that the Polish monarch " praised the boldness and strength of Duke Béla and bestowed on him all the Pomeranian tribute " . The King even gave his daughter — named either Richeza or Adelaide — in marriage to Béla and granted " a goodly quantity of land " to him . Makk says that Béla was not baptized until just before his marriage ; his baptismal name was the Germanic one of Adalbert .

At that time the Pomeranians refused to pay their yearly tribute to the Duke of Poland , to whom they were subject . The Duke set out to exact by force of arms the tribute due to him from the Pomeranians . Then the Pomeranians , who were pagans , and the Poles , who were Christians , agreed together that their leaders should meet each other in a duel , and if the Pomeranian fell defeated , he would render the customary tribute ; and if the Pole , then he might bewail its loss . Since [ the ] Duke [ Mieszko ] and his sons shrank in fear from the duel to be fought , [ Béla ] presented himself before them and through an interpreter spoke thus : ' If it is pleasing to you , Poles , and to the lord Duke , although I am of nobler birth than that pagan , yet I will fight for the advantage of your kingdom and for the honour of the Duke . ' This was pleasing both to the Pomeranians and to the Poles . When they met in combat , armed with lances , [ Béla ] is said to have struck the Pomeranian so manfully that he unseated him from his horse ; and the Pomeranian could not move from the spot where he had fallen , and [ Béla ] smote him with his sword . Then the Duke of the Pomeranians confessed himself at fault ; and the Pomeranians , seeing this , humbly submitted to the Duke of Poland and paid the accustomed tribute without murmuring .

King Mieszko II died in 1034 ; his son and heir , Casimir was forced to leave Poland . A period of anarchy followed , which lasted at least until 1039 when Casimir returned . According to Kristó and Makk , Béla was staying in Poland during this period ; he even may have administered the kingdom in the name of his absent brother-in-law . On the other hand , the Polish historian , Manteuffel writes that Béla and his two brothers , in contrast with the unanimous report of the Hungarian chronicles , arrived in Poland only with Casimir , after 1039 . It is beyond a doubt that Levente and Andrew departed from Poland in about 1038 , because — according to the Illuminated Chronicle — they did not want to " live the life of hangers-on in the Duke of Poland 's court , regarded only as Béla 's brothers " .

Upon leaving Poland , Andrew and Levente settled in Kiev . They returned to Hungary after a rebellion which was dominated by pagans broke out against King Peter Orseolo in 1046 . The King was dethroned , and Andrew was proclaimed king . Levente died in the same year and Andrew , still childless , decided to invite Béla back to Hungary . Having lost one brother , King Andreas sent to Poland to his other brother Bela , calling him with great love and saying : " Once we shared poverty and labour together , and now I ask you , most beloved brother , that you come to me without tarrying , so that we may be companions in joy and share in the good things of the kingdom , rejoicing in each other 's presence . For I have neither heir nor brother except you . You shall be my heir , and you shall succeed me in the kingdom . " Won by these words , Béla came to the King with all his family . When the King saw him , he rejoiced with a great joy , because he was fortified by his brother 's strength . Then the King and his brother Bela held a council and divided the kingdom into three parts , of which two remained under the proprietorship of the royal majesty or power and the third was put under the proprietorship of the Duke . This first division of the kingdom became the seed of discord and wars between the dukes and the kings of Hungary .

Urged by his brother , Béla returned in 1048 and received one-third of the kingdom , with the title of duke . Béla 's ducatus or " duchy " encompassed large territories along the eastern and northern borders , including the regions of Nyitra ( Nitra , Slovakia ) and Bihar ( Biharia , Romania ) . He possessed a wide range of royal prerogatives , including coinage . The half-denars minted for him bore the inscription BELA DUX ( " Duke Béla " ) . According to Steinhübel , the mid-11th-century timber and earth walls of the fortress of Nyitra were erected in Béla 's reign . The two brothers closely collaborated in the subsequent years . According to the Illuminated Chronicle , they together worked out a military strategy against the Germans , who were frequently invading the kingdom in the early 1050s . Ferenc Makk writes that Béla 's epithets — the Champion or the Wisent — are connected to his fighting against the Germans . The chronicler emphasizes that Andrew and Béla " lived in a great tranquillity of peace " even after Andrew fathered a son , Solomon , in 1053 . Béla was one of the lords witnessing the deed of the foundation of the Tihany Abbey , a Benedictine monastery that his brother established in 1055 .

The two brothers ' good relationship deteriorated after King Andrew had the child Solomon crowned king in 1057 or 1058 . The coronation was the consequence of the peace negotiations with the Holy Roman Empire , because the Germans did not acquiesce in a marriage between Solomon and Judith — the sister of the young German monarch , Henry IV — until Solomon 's right to succeed his father was declared and publicly confirmed . Thereafter Andrew was determined to secure the throne for his son . He invited Béla to his manor in Tiszavárkony , where the King offered his brother a seemingly free choice between a crown and a sword ( which were the symbols of the royal and ducal power , respectively ) . However , he had ordered that Béla be murdered if he chose the crown . Having been informed of his brother 's secret plan by one of his own partisans in the royal court , Béla opted for the sword , but he departed for Poland after the meeting . He returned to Hungary , in the autumn of 1060 , with Polish troops that Duke Boleslaus the Bold of Poland had provided . Around the same time , German reinforcements arrived in Hungary to assist Andrew against Béla . The ensuing civil war ended with the victory of Béla , who defeated his brother in two successive battles fought at the river Tisza and at Moson . The King was seriously injured and died soon afterward . His partisans took his son , the child Solomon , to Germany .

Béla was crowned king in Székesfehérvár on 6 December 1060 . He ordered that " the wives and sons and all the property of all those who had followed " his nephew to Germany " should be protected and kept safe and sound " , which induced many of Solomon 's partisans to reconcile themselves to Béla 's rule and return to Hungary . He reformed the coinage and introduced " large coins of purest silver " into circulation . In order to stabilize the new currency , Béla maximized the prices and eliminated the black market . He also ordered that weekly markets should be held on Saturdays , instead of Sundays , in the kingdom . The historian Nora Berend says that the latter measure " may have adversely affected Jewish activities " , because Jews , who observed the Sabbath , could not work on Saturdays . Béla decided to discuss his innovations with the representatives of the freemen , and " sent heralds throughout all Hungary to summon two elders with gift of speech from each village to a royal council " , according to the Illuminated Chronicle . A great crowd of commoners gathered in Székesfehérvár in 1061 . They demanded the restoration of paganism and the murder of clergymen , but Béla collected his army and suppressed their uprising within three days .

Béla attempted to conclude a peace treaty with the Holy Roman Empire . For this purpose , shortly after his coronation , he released all German commanders who had assisted his brother during the civil war . However , the young German monarch 's advisors refused Béla 's proposals . In the summer of 1063 , an assembly of the German princes decided to launch a military expedition against Hungary to restore young Solomon to the throne . Béla was planning to abdicate in favor of his nephew if the latter restored his former ducatus , but he was seriously injured when " his throne broke beneath him " in his manor at Dömös . The King — who was " half-dead " , according to the Illuminated Chronicle — was taken to the western borders of his kingdom , where he died at the creek Kinizsa on 11 September 1063 . Béla was buried in the Benedictine Szekszárd Abbey , which he had set up in 1061 . Following Béla 's death , his three sons — Géza , Ladislaus and Lampert — sought refuge in Poland , and Solomon ascended the throne .

Béla married , in about 1033 , a daughter of King Mieszko II of Poland . According to Makk , her name was either Richesa or Adelheid . Their eldest children , Géza and Ladislaus — who became kings of Hungary in 1074 and 1077 , respectively — were born in Poland in the 1040s . Béla 's third son , Lampert , was born after Béla 's return to Hungary . Lampert was followed by a daughter named Sophia , who was first married to Margrave Ulric I of Carniola , and later to Duke Magnus of Saxony . Her younger sister , Euphemia , became the wife of Duke Otto I of Olomouc . Béla 's third daughter , Helena , was the queen of King Demetrius Zvonimir of Croatia . An unnamed daughter of Béla became the first wife of a Hungarian nobleman , Lampert of the Clan Hont-Pázmány . According to the historian Martin Dimnik , Béla also fathered a fifth daughter , Lanka , who was the wife of Prince Rostislav Vladimirovich of Tmutarakan . The following family tree presents Béla 's ancestry , his offspring , and some of his relatives mentioned in the article .

Su Song ( simplified Chinese : 苏颂 ; traditional Chinese : 蘇頌 ; pinyin : Sū Sòng ; courtesy name : Zirong 子容 ) ( 1020 – 1101 AD ) was a renowned Han Chinese polymath who was described as a scientist , mathematician , statesman , astronomer , cartographer , horologist , medical doctor , pharmacologist , mineralogist , zoologist , botanist , mechanical and architectural engineer , poet , antiquarian , and ambassador of the Song Dynasty ( 960 – 1279 ) . Su Song was the engineer of a hydro-mechanical astronomical clock tower in medieval Kaifeng , which employed the use of an early escapement mechanism . The escapement mechanism of Su 's clock tower had been invented by Buddhist monk Yi Xing and government official Liang Lingzan in 725 AD to operate a water-powered armillary sphere , although Su 's armillary sphere was the first to be provided with a mechanical clock drive . Su 's clock tower also featured the oldest known endless power-transmitting chain drive , called the tian ti ( 天梯 ) , or " celestial ladder " , as depicted in his horological treatise . The clock tower had 133 different clock jacks to indicate and sound the hours . Su Song 's treatise about the clock tower , Xinyi Xiangfayao ( 新儀象法要 ) , has survived since its written form in 1092 and official printed publication in 1094 . The book has been analyzed by many historians , such as Joseph Needham . The clock itself , however , was dismantled by the invading Jurchen army in AD 1127 , and although attempts were made to reassemble it , the tower was never successfully reinstated .

The Xinyi Xiangfayao was Su 's best-known treatise , but the polymath compiled other works as well . He completed a large celestial atlas of several star maps , several terrestrial maps , as well as a treatise on pharmacology . The latter discussed related subjects on mineralogy , zoology , botany , and metallurgy . European Jesuit visitors to China like Matteo Ricci and Nicolas Trigault briefly wrote about Chinese clocks with wheel drives , but others mistakenly believed that the Chinese had never advanced beyond the stage of the clepsydra , incense clock , and sundial . They thought that advanced mechanical clockworks were new to China and that these mechanisms were something valuable that Europeans could offer to the Chinese . Although not as prominent as in the Song period , contemporary Chinese texts of the Ming Dynasty ( 1368 – 1644 ) described a relatively unbroken history of mechanical clocks in China , from the 13th century to the 16th .

Su Song was born in modern-day Fujian , near medieval Quanzhou . Like a contemporary , Shen Kuo ( 1031 – 1095 ) , Su Song was a polymath , a person whose expertise spans a significant number of different interests . It was written by his junior colleague and Hanlin scholar Ye Mengde ( 1077 – 1148 ) that in Su 's youth , he mastered the provincial exams and rose to the top of the examination list for writing the best essay on general principles and structure of the Chinese calendar . From an early age , his interests in astronomy and calendrical science led him onto a distinguished path as a state bureaucrat . In his spare time he was fond of writing poetry , which he used to praise the works of artists such as the painter Li Gonglin ( 1049 – 1106 ) . He also was an antiquarian and collector of old artworks from previous dynasties . In matters of administrative government , he had attained the rank of Ambassador and President of the Ministry of Personnel at the capital of Kaifeng , and was known also as an expert in administration and finance . After serving in the Ministry of Personnel , he became a Minister of Justice in 1086 . He was appointed as a distinguished editor for the Academy of Scholarly Worthies , where in 1063 he edited , redacted , commented on , and added a preface for the classic work Huainanzi of the Han Dynasty ( 202 BC – 220 AD ) . Eventually , Su rose to the post of Vice President of the Chancellery Secretariat . Among many honorable positions and titles conferred upon him , Su Song was also one of the ' Deputy Tutors of the Heir Apparent ' . At court , he chose to distance himself from the political rivalries of the Conservatives , led by Prime Minister Sima Guang ( 1019 – 1086 ) , and the Reformists , led by Prime Minister Wang Anshi ( 1021 – 1086 ) ; although many of his associates were of the Conservative faction . In 1077 he was dispatched on a diplomatic mission to the Liao Dynasty of the Khitan people to the north , sharing ideas about calendrical science , as the Liao state had created its own calendar in 994 AD . In a finding that reportedly embarrassed the court , Su Song acknowledged to the emperor that the calendar of the Khitan people was in fact a bit more accurate than their own , resulting in the fining and punishment of officials in the Bureau of Astronomy and Calendar . Su was supposed to travel north to Liao and arrive promptly for a birthday celebration and feast on a day which coincided with the winter solstice of the Song calendar , but was actually a day behind the Liao calendar . Historian Liu Heping states that Emperor Zhezong of Song sponsored Su Song 's clocktower in 1086 in order to compete with the Liao for " scientific and national superiority . " In 1081 , the court instructed Su Song to compile into a book the diplomatic history of Song-Liao relations , an elaborate task that , once complete , filled 200 volumes . With his extensive knowledge of cartography , Su Song was able to settle a heated border dispute between the Song and Liao dynasties .

Su Song also created a celestial atlas ( in five separate maps ) , which had the hour circles between the xiu ( lunar mansions ) forming the astronomical meridians , with stars marked in an equidistant cylindrical projection on each side of the equator , and thus , was in accordance to their north polar distances . Furthermore , Su Song must have taken advantage of the astronomical findings of his political rival and contemporary astronomer Shen Kuo . This is so because Su Song 's fourth star map places the position of the pole star halfway between Tian shu ( − 350 degrees ) and the current Polaris ; this was the more accurate calculation ( by 3 degrees ) that Shen Kuo had made when he observed the pole star over a period of three months with his width-improved sighting tube . There were many star maps written before Song 's book , but the greatest significance of these star maps by Su Song is , that they represent the oldest extant star maps in printed form .

In 1070 , Su Song and a team of scholars compiled and edited the Bencao Tujing ( ' Illustrated Pharmacopoeia ' , original source material from 1058 – 1061 ) , which was a groundbreaking treatise on pharmaceutical botany , zoology , and mineralogy . In compiling information for pharmaceutical knowledge , Su Song worked with such notable scholars as Zhang Yuxi , Lin Yi , Zhang Dong , and many others . This treatise documented a wide range of pharmaceutical practices , including the use of ephedrine as a drug . It includes valuable information on metallurgy and the steel and iron industries during 11th century China . He created a systematic approach to listing various different minerals and their use in medicinal concoctions , such as all the variously known forms of mica that could be used to cure ills through digestion . He wrote of the subconchoidal fracture of native cinnabar , signs of ore beds , and provided description on crystal form . Similar to the ore channels formed by circulation of ground water written of by the later German scientist Georgius Agricola , Su Song made similar statements concerning copper carbonate , as did the earlier Rihua Bencao of 970 with copper sulphate . Su 's book was also the first pharmaceutical treatise written in China to describe the flax , Urtica thunbergiana , and Corchoropsis tomentosa ( crenata ) plants . According to Edward H. Schafer , Su accurately described the translucent quality of fine realgar , its origin from pods found in rocky river gorges , its matrix being pitted with holes and having a deep red , almost purple color , and that the mineral varied in sizes ranging from the size of a pea to a walnut .

Citing evidence from an ancient work by Zheng Xuan ( 127 – 200 ) , Su believed that physicians of the ancient Zhou Dynasty ( 1046 – 256 BC ) used realgar as a remedy for ulcers . As believed in Su 's day , the " five poisons " used by Zhou era physicians for this purpose were thought to be cinnabar , realgar , chalcanthite , alum , and magnetite . Su made systematic descriptions of animals and the environmental regions they could be found , such as different species of freshwater , marine , and shore crabs . For example , he noted that the freshwater crab species Eriocher sinensis could be found in the Huai River running through Anhui , in waterways near the capital city , as well as reservoirs and marshes of Hebei . Su 's book was preserved and copied into the Bencao Gangmu of the Ming Dynasty ( 1368 – 1644 ) physician and pharmacologist Li Shizhen ( 1518 – 1593 ) .

Su Song compiled one of the greatest Chinese horological treatises of the Middle Ages , surrounding himself with an entourage of notable engineers and astronomers to assist in various projects . Xinyi Xiangfayao ( lit . " Essentials of a New Method for Mechanizing the Rotation of an Armillary Sphere and a Celestial Globe " ) , written in 1092 , was the final product of his life 's achievements in horology and clockwork . Fortunately , this book of Su 's that was handed down included 47 different illustrations of great detail of the mechanical workings for his astronomical clocktower . Su Song 's greatest project was the 40-foot-tall water-powered astronomical clocktower constructed in Kaifeng , the wooden pilot model completed in 1088 , the bronze components cast by 1090 , while the wholly finished work was completed by 1094 during the reign of Emperor Zhezong of Song . The emperor had previously commissioned Han Gonglian , Acting Secretary of the Ministry of Personnel , to head the project , but the leadership position was instead handed down to Su Song . The emperor ordered in 1086 for Su to reconstruct the hun yi , or " armillary clock " , for a new clock-tower in the capital city . Su worked with the aid of Han Gong-lian , who applied his extensive knowledge of mathematics to the construction of the clock-tower . A small-scale wooden model was first crafted by Su Song , testing its intricate parts before applying it to an actual full-scale clock tower . In the end , the clock-tower had many impressive features , such as the hydro-mechanical , rotating armillary sphere crowning the top level and weighing some 10 to 20 tons , a bronze celestial globe located in the middle that was 4.5 feet in diameter , mechanically-timed and rotating mannequins dressed in miniature Chinese clothes that exited miniature opening doors to announce the time of day by presenting designated reading plaques , ringing bells and gongs , or beating drums , a sophisticated use of oblique gears and an escapement mechanism , as well as an exterior facade of a fanciful Chinese pagoda . Upon its completion , the tower was called the Shui Yun Yi Xiang Tai , or " Tower for the Water-Powered Sphere and Globe " . Joseph Needham writes :

After the invention of the escapement in ~ AD 725 ( Tang Dynasty ) , there was a great flourishing of gear-wheels in clockwork and jackwork , culminating in the bronze and iron of Su Song 's elaborate masterpiece in ~ AD 1088 . Years after Su 's death , the capital city of Kaifeng was besieged and captured in 1127 by the Jurchens of the Manchuria-based Jin Dynasty during the Jin – Song wars . The clock-tower was dismantled piece by piece by the Jurchens , who carted its components back to their own capital in modern-day Beijing . However , due to the complexity of the tower , they were unable to successfully piece it back together . The new Emperor Gaozong of Song instructed Su 's son , Su Xie , to construct a new astronomical clock-tower in its place , and Su Xie set to work studying his father 's texts with a team of other experts . However , they were also unsuccessful in creating another clock tower , and Su Xie was convinced that Su Song had purposefully left out essential components in his written work and diagrams so that others would not steal his ideas .

As the sinologist historian Derk Bodde points out , Su Song 's astronomical clock did not lead to a new generation of mass-produced clockworks throughout China since his work was largely a government-sponsored endeavor for the use of astronomers and astrologers in the imperial court . Yet the mechanical legacy of Su Song did not end with his work . In about 1150 , the writer Xue Jixuan noted that there were four types of clocks in his day , the basic waterclock , the incense clock , the sundial , and the clock with ' revolving and snapping springs ' ( ' gun tan ' ) . The rulers of the continuing Yuan Dynasty ( 1279 – 1368 AD ) had a vested interest in the advancement of mechanical clockworks . The astronomer Guo Shoujing helped restore the Beijing Ancient Observatory beginning in 1276 , where he crafted a water-powered armillary sphere and clock with clock jacks being fully implemented and sounding the hours . Complex gearing for uniquely Chinese clockworks were continued in the Ming Dynasty ( 1368 – 1644 ) , with new designs driven by the power of falling sand instead of water to provide motive power to the wheel drive , and some Ming clocks perhaps featured reduction gearing rather than the earlier escapement of Su Song . The earliest such design of a sand-clock was made by Zhan Xiyuan around 1370 , which featured not only the scoop wheel of Su Song ' device , but also a new addition of a stationary dial face over which a pointer circulated , much like new European clocks of the same period .

In Su Song 's waterwheel linkwork device the action of the escapement 's arrest and release was achieved by gravity exerted periodically as the continuous flow of liquid filled containers of a limited size . In a single line of evolution , Su Song 's clock therefore united the concept of the clepsydra and the mechanical clock into one device run by mechanics and hydraulics . In his memorial , Su Song wrote about this concept : According to your servant 's opinion there have been many systems and designs for astronomical instruments during past dynasties all differing from one another in minor respects . But the principle of the use of water-power for the driving mechanism has always been the same . The heavens move without ceasing but so also does water flow ( and fall ) . Thus if the water is made to pour with perfect evenness , then the comparison of the rotary movements ( of the heavens and the machine ) will show no discrepancy or contradiction ; for the unresting follows the unceasing . In his writing , Su Song credited , as the predecessor of his working clock , the hydraulic-powered armillary sphere of Zhang Heng ( 78 – 139 AD ) , an earlier Chinese scientist . Su Song was also strongly influenced by the earlier armillary sphere created by Zhang Sixun ( 976 AD ) , who also employed the escapement mechanism and used liquid mercury instead of water in the waterwheel of his astronomical clock tower ( since liquid mercury would not freeze during winter and would not corrode and rust metal components over time ) . However , Su Song stated in his writing that after Zhang 's death , no one was able to replicate his device , much like his own .

The mechanical clockworks for Su Song 's astronomical tower featured a great driving-wheel that was 11 feet in diameter , carrying 36 scoops , into each of which water poured at a uniform rate from the " constant-level tank " ( Needham , Fig . 653 ) . The main driving shaft of iron , with its cylindrical necks supported on iron crescent-shaped bearings , ended in a pinion which engaged a gear wheel at the lower end of the main vertical transmission shaft . ( Su Song 's ) clockwork , driven by a water-wheel , and fully enclosed within the tower , rotated an observational armillary sphere on the top platform and a celestial globe in the upper story . Its time-announcing function was further fulfilled visually and audibly by the performances of numerous jacks mounted on the eight superimposed wheels of a time-keeping shaft and appearing at windows in the pagoda-like structure at the front of the tower . Within the building , some 40 ft. high , the driving-wheel was provided with a special form of escapement , and the water was pumped back into the tanks periodically by manual means . The time-annunciator must have included conversion gearing , since it gave ' unequal ' as well as equal time signals , and the sphere probably had this . Su Song 's treatise on the clock , the Hsin I Hsiang Fa Yao , constitutes a classic of horological engineering .

That was figure Fig . 650 , while Fig . 656 displays the upper and lower norias with their tanks and the manual wheel for operating them . Fig . 657 displays a rather miniature and scaled-down pic for the basics of the escapement mechanism in an illustration ( from Su 's book ) , with Needham 's caption here in this quote : " The ' celestial balance ' or escapement mechanism of Su Song 's clockwork ( Xinyi Xiangfayao , ch . 3 , p . 18b ) " . The latter figure carefully labels : Figure 658. displays a more intricate and most-telling half-page scale drawing of Su Song 's large escapement mechanism , labeling these individual parts as they interact with one another :

The world 's oldest illustrated depiction of an endless power-transmitting chain drive is from Su Song 's horological treatise . It was used in the clockworks for coupling the main drive shaft to the armillary sphere gearbox ( rotating three small pinions ) , as seen in Needham 's Fig . 410 and Fig . 652 . This belonged to the uppermost end of the main vertical transmission shaft , incorporating right angle gears and oblique gears connected by a short idling shaft . The toothed ring gear called the diurnal motion gear ring was fit around the shell of the armillary sphere along the declination parallel near the southern pole . Although the ancient Greek Philo of Byzantium ( 3rd century BC ) featured a sort of endless belt for his magazine arcuballista , which did not transmit continuous power , the influential source for Su Song 's chain drive is most likely the continuously-driven chain pump known in China since the Han Dynasty ( 202 BC – 220 AD ) . From his horological treatise , Su Song states : The chain drive ( lit. celestial ladder ) is 19.5 ft long ( 5.9 m ) . The system is as follows : an iron chain with its links joined together to form an endless circuit hangs down from the upper chain-wheel which is concealed by the tortoise-and-cloud ( column supporting the armillary sphere centrally ) , and passes also round the lower chain-wheel which is mounted on the main driving-shaft . Whenever one link moves , it moves forward one tooth of the diurnal motion gear-ring and rotates the Component of the Three Arrangers of Time , thus following the motion of the heavens .

In Joseph Needham 's third volume of Science and Civilization in China , the drawing for Fig . 159 displays a drawing of Su Song 's armillary sphere ( as depicted in his 11th century treatise ) , complete with three ' nests ' or layers of mechanically-rotated rings . It was the earlier Chinese astronomer Li Chun-feng of the Tang Dynasty who in 633 AD created the first armillary sphere with three layers to calibrate multiple aspects of astronomical observation . Zhang 's armillary sphere has often been compared to that of the 13th century monarch Alfonso X of Castile in Islamic-era Spain . The chief difference was that Alfonso 's instrument featured an arrangement for making measurements of the azimuth and altitude , which was present in the Arabic tradition , while Su Song 's armillary sphere was duly graduated . For the drawing of Su 's armillary sphere , the listing of components are :

When Su Song 's Xinyi Xiangfayao was written in 1092 and the horological monograph finalized and presented in 1094 , his work was published and widely printed in the north ( see woodblock printing and movable type of Bi Sheng ) . In the south , printing and circulation of his work was not widely distributed until Shi Yuanzhi of Jiangsu had it printed there in 1172 . When presenting his clocktower design to the Emperor Zhezong , Su Song equated the constant flow of water with the continuous movements of the heavens , the latter of which symbolized the unceasing power of the emperor . This appealed to emperor , who featured artwork representing the clocktower on vehicles of major imperial processions , as illustrated in the Illustration of the Imperial Grand Carriage Procession of 1053 . The later Ming Dynasty / Qing Dynasty scholar Qian Zeng ( 1629 – 1699 ) held an old volume of Su 's work , which he faithfully reproduced in a newly printed edition . He took special care in avoiding any rewording or inconsistencies with the original text as well . Again , it was later reprinted by Zhang Xizu ( 1799 – 1844 ) .

Interestingly enough , Su Song 's treatise on astronomical clockwork was not the only one made in China during his day , as the Song Shi ( compiled in 1345 ) records the written treatise of the Shuiyunhun Tianjiyao ( Wade – Giles : Shui Yun Hun Thien Chi Yao ; lit . Essentials of the [ Technique of ] making Astronomical Apparatus revolve by Water-Power ) , written by Juan Taifa . However , this treatise no longer survives . In the realm of modern research , the late British biochemist and historian of Chinese science Joseph Needham ( 1900 – 1995 ) ( known as Li Yuese in China ) did extensive research and analysis of Su Song 's texts and various achievements in his Science and Civilization in China book series . Joseph Needham also related many detailed passages from Su 's contemporary medieval Chinese sources on the life of Su and his achievements known in his day . In 1956 , John Christiansen reconstructed a model of Su Song 's clocktower in a famous drawing , which garnered attention in the West towards 11th-century Chinese engineering . A miniature model of Su Song 's clock was reconstructed by John Cambridge and is now on display at the National Science Museum at South Kensington , London . In China , the clocktower was reconstructed to one-fifth its actual scale by Wang Zhenduo , who worked for the Chinese Historical Museum in Beijing in the 1950s .

Erode Venkata Ramasamy ( 17 September 1879 – 24 December 1973 ) , commonly known as Periyar also referred as E. V. R. or Thanthai Periyar , was an Indian social activist , freedom fighter and politician who started the Self-Respect Movement and Dravidar Kazhagam . E.V. Ramasamy was born in Erode , Madras Presidency to a wealthy family of Balijas . At a young age , he witnessed numerous incidents of caste and gender discrimination . E.V. Ramasamy married when he was 19 , and had a daughter who lived for only 5 months . His first wife , Nagammai , died in 1933 . E.V. Ramasamy married for a second time in July 1948 . His second wife , Maniammai , continued E.V. Ramasamy 's social work after his death in 1973 , but his thoughts and ideas then were advocated by Dravidar Kazhagam . E.V. Ramasamy joined the Indian National Congress in 1919 , but resigned in 1925 when he felt that the party was only serving the interests of the Brahmins . In 1924 , E.V. Ramasamy participated in a non-violent agitation ( satyagraha ) in Vaikam , Kerala . From 1929 to 1932 Ramasamy toured British Malaya , Europe , and Russia , which had an influence on him . In 1939 , E.V. Ramasamy became the head of the Justice Party , and in 1944 , he changed its name to Dravidar Kazhagam . The party later split and one group led by C. N. Annadurai formed the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam ( DMK ) in 1949 . While continuing the Self-Respect Movement , he advocated for an independent Dravida Nadu ( Dravidistan ) .

E.V. Ramasamy propagated the principles of rationalism , self-respect , women ’ s rights and eradication of caste . He opposed the exploitation and marginalisation of the non-Brahmin Dravidian people of South India and the imposition of what he considered Indo-Aryan India . His work has greatly revolutionised the Tamil society and has significantly removed caste-based discrimination . He is also responsible for bringing new changes to the Tamil alphabet . The citation awarded by the UNESCO described E.V. Ramasamy as " the prophet of the new age , the Socrates of South East Asia , father of social reform movement and arch enemy of ignorance , superstitions , meaningless customs and base manners . "

Erode Venkata Ramasami was born on 17 September 1879 , in Erode , then a part of the Coimbatore district of the Madras Presidency . E.V. Ramasamy 's father , a rich businessman , was Venkatappa Naicker ( or Venkata ) , and his mother was Chinna Thayammal , alias Muthammal . He had one elder brother named Krishnaswamy and two sisters named Kannamma and Ponnuthoy . He later came to be known as " Periyar " meaning ' respected one ' or ' elder ' in Tamil . In 1929 , E.V. Ramasamy announced the deletion of his caste surname Naicker ( Balija Naicker ) from his name at the First Provincial Self-Respect Conference of Chenggalpattu . He could speak three Dravidian languages : Mother tongue Kannada , Telugu and Tamil . His mother tongue was Kannada . Periyar attended school for five years after which he joined his father 's trade at the age of 12 . He used to listen to Tamil Vaishnavite gurus who gave discourses in his house enjoying his father 's hospitality . At a young age , he began questioning the apparent contradictions in the Hindu mythological stories . As Periyar grew , he felt that people used religion only as a mask to deceive innocent people and therefore took it as one of his duties in life to warn people against superstitions and priests .

In 1904 , E.V. Ramasamy went on a pilgrimage to Kasi to visit the revered Siva temple of Kashi Vishwanath . Though regarded as one of the holiest sites of Hinduism , he witnessed immoral activities such as begging , and floating dead bodies . His frustrations extended to functional Hinduism in general when he experienced what he called Brahmanic exploitation . However , one particular incident in Kasi had a profound impact on E.V. Ramasamy 's ideology and future work . At the worship site there were free meals offered to guests . To E.V. Ramasamy 's shock , he was refused meals at choultries , which exclusively fed Brahmins . Due to extreme hunger , E.V. Ramasamy felt compelled to enter one of the eateries disguised as a Brahmin with a sacred thread on his bare chest , but was betrayed by his moustache . The gatekeeper at the temple concluded that E.V. Ramasamy was not a Brahmin , as Brahmins were not permitted by the Hindu shastras to have moustaches . He not only prevented Periyar 's entry but also pushed him rudely into the street . As his hunger became intolerable , Periyar was forced to feed on leftovers from the streets . Around this time , he realised that the eatery which had refused him entry was built by a wealthy non-Brahmin from South India . This discriminatory attitude dealt a blow to Periyar 's regard for Hinduism , for the events he had witnessed at Kasi were completely different from the picture of Kasi he had in mind , as a holy place which welcomed all . Ramasami was a theist until his visit to Kasi , after which his views changed and he became an atheist .

E.V. Ramasamy joined the Indian National Congress in 1919 after quitting his business and resigning from public posts . He held the chairmanship of Erode Municipality and wholeheartedly undertook constructive programs spreading the use of Khadi , picketing toddy shops , boycotting shops selling foreign cloth , and eradicating untouchability . In 1921 , Periyar courted imprisonment for picketing toddy shops in Erode . When his wife as well as his sister joined the agitation , it gained momentum , and the administration was forced to come to a compromise . He was again arrested during the Non-Cooperation movement and the Temperance movement . In 1922 , periyar was elected the President of the Madras Presidency Congress Committee during the Tirupur session , where he advocated strongly for reservation in government jobs and education . His attempts were defeated in the Congress party due to a strong presence of discrimination and indifference , which led to his leaving the party in 1925 .

In Vaikom , a small town in Kerala state , then Travancore , there were strict laws of untouchability in and around the temple area . Dalits , also known as Harijans were not allowed into the close streets around and leading to the temple , let alone inside it . Anti-caste feelings were growing and in 1924 Vaikom was chosen as a suitable place for an organised Satyagraha . Under his guidance a movement had already begun with the aim of giving all castes the right to enter the temples . Thus , agitations and demonstrations took place . On the fourteenth of April , Periyar and his wife Nagamma arrived in Vaikom . They were immediately arrested and imprisoned for participation . In spite of Gandhi 's objection to non-Keralites and non-Hindus taking part , Periyar and his followers continued to give support to the movement until it was withdrawn . He received the title Vaikom Veeran , given by his followers who participated in the Satyagraha . The way in which the Vaikom Satyagraha events have been recorded provides a clue to the image of the respective organisers . In an article entitle Gandhi and Ambedkar , A Study in Leadership , Eleanor Zelliot relates the ' Vaikom Satyagraha ' , including Gandhi 's negotiations with the temple authorities in relation to the event . Furthermore , the editor of E.V. Ramasamy 's Thoughts states that Brahmins purposely suppressed news about E.V. Ramasamy 's participation . A leading Congress magazine , Young India , in its extensive reports on Vaikom never mentions E.V. Ramasamy .

Periyar and his followers campaigned constantly to influence and pressure the government to take measures to remove social inequality , even while other nationalist forerunners focused on the struggle for political independence . The Self-Respect Movement was described from the beginning as " dedicated to the goal of giving non-Brahmins a sense of pride based on their Dravidian past " . In 1952 , the Periyar Self-Respect Movement Institution was registered with a list of objectives of the institution from which may be quoted as for the diffusion of useful knowledge of political education ; to allow people to live a life of freedom from slavery to anything against reason and self respect ; to do away with needless customs , meaningless ceremonies , and blind superstitious beliefs in society ; to put an end to the present social system in which caste , religion , community and traditional occupations based on the accident of birth , have chained the mass of the people and created " superior " and " inferior " classes ... and to give people equal rights ; to completely eradicate untouchability and to establish a united society based on brother / sisterhood ; to give equal rights to women ; to prevent child marriages and marriages based on law favourable to one sect , to conduct and encourage love marriages , widow marriages , inter caste and inter-religious marriages and to have the marriages registered under the Civil Law ; and to establish and maintain homes for orphans and widows and to run educational institutions .

Propagation of the philosophy of self respect became the full-time activity of Periyar since 1925 . A Tamil weekly Kudi Arasu started in 1925 , while the English journal Revolt started in 1928 carried on the propaganda among the English educated people . The Self-Respect Movement began to grow fast and received the sympathy of the heads of the Justice Party from the beginning . In May 1929 , a conference of Self-Respect Volunteers was held at Pattukkotai under the presidency of S. Guruswami . K.V. Alagiriswami took charge as the head of the volunteer band . Conferences followed in succession throughout the Tamil districts of the former Madras Presidency . A training school in Self-Respect was opened at Erode , the home town of Periyar . The object was not just to introduce social reform but to bring about a social revolution to foster a new spirit and build a new society .

Between 1929 and 1935 , under the strain of World Depression , political thinking worldwide received a jolt from the spread of international communism . Indian political parties , movements and considerable sections of leadership were also affected by inter-continental ideologies . The Self-Respect Movement also came under the influence of the leftist philosophies and institutions . E.V. Ramasamy , after establishing the Self-Respect Movement as an independent institution , began to look for ways to strengthen it politically and socially . To accomplish this , he studied the history and politics of different countries , and personally observed these systems at work . E.V. Ramasamy toured Malaya for a month , from December 1929 to January 1930 , to propagate the self-respect philosophy . Embarking on his journey from Nagapattinam with his wife Nagammal and his followers , E.V. Ramasamy was received by 50,000 Tamil Malaysians in Penang . During the same month , he inaugurated the Tamils Conference , convened by the Tamils Reformatory Sangam in Ipoh , and then went to Singapore . In December 1931 he undertook a tour of Europe , accompanied by S. Ramanathan and Erode Ramu , to personally acquaint himself with their political systems , social movements , way of life , economic and social progress and administration of public bodies . He visited Egypt , Greece , Turkey , Russia , Germany , England , Spain , France and Portugal , staying in Russia for three months . On his return journey he halted at Ceylon and returned to India in November 1932 .

The tour shaped the political ideology of E.V. Ramasamy to achieve the social concept of Self-Respect . The communist system obtained in Russia appealed to him as appropriately suited to deal with the social ills of the country . Thus , on socio-economic issues Periyar was Marxist , but he did not advocate for abolishing private ownership . Immediately after his return , samy , E.V. Rama in alliance with the enthusiastic communist , M. Singaravelu Chettiar , began to work out a socio-political scheme incorporating socialist and self-respect ideals . This marked a crucial stage of development in the Self-Respect Movement which got politicised and found its compatibility in Tamil Nadu .

In 1937 , when Chakravarthi Rajagopalachari became the Chief Minister of Madras Presidency , he introduced Hindi as a compulsory language of study in schools , thereby igniting a series of anti-Hindi agitations . Tamil nationalists , the Justice Party under Sir A. T. Panneerselvam , and E.V. Ramasamy organised anti-Hindi protests in 1938 which ended with numerous arrests by the Rajaji government . During the same year , the slogan " Tamil Nadu for Tamilians " was first raised by E.V. Ramasamy in protest against the introduction of Hindi in schools . He explained that the introduction of Hindi was a dangerous mechanism used by the Aryans to infiltrate Dravidian culture . He reasoned that the adoption of Hindi would make Tamils subordinate to the Hindi speaking North Indians . E.V. Ramasamy explained that Hindi would not only halt the progress of Tamil people , but would also completely destroy their culture and nullify the progressive ideas that had been successfully inculcated through Tamil in the recent decades . Cutting across party lines , South Indian politicians rallied together in their opposition to Hindi . There were recurrent anti-Hindi agitations in 1948 , 1952 and 1965 .

A political party known as the South Indian Libertarian Federation ( commonly referred to as Justice Party ) was founded in 1916 , principally to oppose the economic and political power of the Brahmin groups . The party 's goal was to render social justice to the non-Brahmin groups . To gain the support of the masses , non-Brahmin politicians began propagating an ideology of equality among non-Brahmin castes . Brahmanical priesthood and Sanskritic social class-value hierarchy were blamed for the existence of inequalities among non-Brahmin caste groups . In 1937 , when the government required that Hindi be taught in the school system , E.V. Ramasamy organised opposition to this policy through the Justice Party . After 1937 , the Dravidian movement derived considerable support from the student community . In later years , opposition to Hindi played a big role in the politics of Tamil Nadu . The fear of the Hindi language had its origin in the conflict between Brahmins and non-Brahmins . To the Tamils , acceptance of Hindi in the school system was a form of bondage . When the Justice Party weakened in the absence of mass support , E.V. Ramasamy took over the leadership of the party after being jailed for opposing Hindi in 1939 . Under his tutelage the party prospered , but the party 's conservative members , most of whom were rich and educated , withdrew from active participation .

At a rally in 1944 , Periyar , in his capacity as the leader of the Justice Party , declared that the party would henceforth be known as the Dravidar Kazhagam , or " Dravidian Association " . However , a few who disagreed with Periyar started a splinter group , claiming to be the original Justice Party . This party was led by veteran Justice Party leader P. T. Rajan and survived until 1957 . The Dravidar Kazhagam came to be well known among the urban communities and students . Villages were influenced by its message . Hindi , and ceremonies that had become associated with Brahmanical priesthood , were identified as alien symbols that should be eliminated from Tamil culture . Brahmins , who were regarded as the guardians of such symbols , came under verbal attack . From 1949 onwards , the Dravidar Kazhagam intensified social reformist work and put forward the fact that superstitions were the cause for the degeneration of Dravidians . The Dravidar Kazhagam vehemently fought for the abolition of untouchability amongst the Dalits . It also focused its attention on the liberation of women , women 's education , willing marriage , widow marriage , orphanages and mercy homes .

In 1949 , E.V. Ramasamy 's chief lieutenant , Conjeevaram Natarajan Annadurai , established a separate association called the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam ( DMK ) , or Dravidian Advancement Association . This was due to differences between the two , while Periyar advocated a separate independent Dravidian or Tamil state , Annadurai compromised with the Delhi government , at the same time claiming increased state independence . E.V. Ramasamy was convinced that individuals and movements that undertake the task of eradicating the social evils in the Indian sub-continent have to pursue the goal with devotion and dedication without deviating from the path and with uncompromising zeal . Thus , if they contest elections aiming to assume political power , they would lose vigour and sense of purpose . But among his followers , there were those who had a different view , wanting to enter into politics and have a share in running the government . They were looking for an opportunity to part with E.V. Ramasamy . Thus , when E.V. Ramasamy married Maniammai on 9 July 1948 , they quit the Dravidar Kazhagam , stating that E.V. Ramasamy set a bad example by marrying a young woman that took his foster child in his old age – he was 70 and she 30 . Those who parted company with E.V. Ramasamy joined the DMK . Though the DMK split from the Dravidar Kazhagam , the organisation made efforts to carry on E.V. Ramasamy 's Self-Respect Movement to villagers and urban students . The DMK advocated the thesis that the Tamil language was much richer than Sanskrit and Hindi in content , and thus was a key which opened the door to subjects to be learned . The Dravidar Kazhagam continued to counter Brahminism , Indo-Aryan propaganda , and uphold the Dravidians ' right of self-determination .

In 1956 , despite warnings from P. Kakkan , the President of the Tamil Nadu Congress Committee , Periyar organised a procession to the Marina to burn pictures of the Hindu God Rama . Periyar was subsequently arrested and confined to prison . The activities of Periyar continued when he went to Bangalore in 1958 to participate in the All India Official Language Conference . There he stressed the need to retain English as the Union Official Language instead of Hindi . Five years later , Periyar travelled to North India to advocate the eradication of the caste system . Nearing Periyar 's last years , an award was given to him by the United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organization ( UNESCO ) , and it was presented to him by the Union Education Minister , Triguna Sen in Madras ( Chennai ) , on 27 June 1970 . In his last meeting at Thiagaraya Nagar , Chennai on 19 December 1973 , Periyar declared a call for action to gain social equality and a dignified way of life . On 24 December 1973 , Periyar died at the age of 94 .

Periyar spent over fifty years giving speeches , propagating the realisation that everyone is an equal citizen and the differences on basis of caste and creeds were man-made to keep the innocent and ignorant as underdogs in the society . Although Periyar 's speeches were targeted towards the illiterate and more mundane mass , scores of educated people were also swayed . Periyar viewed reasoning as a special tool . According to him , all were blessed with this tool , but very few used it . Thus Periyar used reasoning , with respect to subjects of social interest , in his presentations to his audiences . Communal differences in Tamil society were considered by many to be deep-rooted features until Periyar came to the scene . Cho Ramaswamy remarked in India Today : + − " Periyar was accepted and acclaimed as the leader by a significant section of the Tamil population in spite of all his contempt for Tamil and disdain for Tamils only because he was perceived to be a genuine individual , a rarity among those in public life . There was no shade of hypocrisy in him and he never attempted sophistry while propounding his social philosophy . "

The bedrock of E.V. Ramasamy ’ s principles and the movements that he started was rationalism . He thought that an insignificant minority in society was exploiting the majority and trying to keep it in a subordinate position forever . He wanted the exploited to sit up and think about their position , and use their reason to realise that they were being exploited by a handful of people . If they started thinking , they would realise that they were human beings like the rest , that birth did not and should not endow superiority over others and that they must awaken themselves and do everything possible to improve their own lot . Likewise , E.V. Ramasamy explained that wisdom lies in thinking and that the spear-head of thinking is rationalism . On caste , he stated that no other living being harms or degrades its own class . But man , said to be a rational living being , does these evils . The differences , hatred , enmity , degradation , poverty , and wickedness , now prevalent in the society are due to lack of wisdom and rationalism and not due to God or the cruelty of time . E.V. Ramasamy had written in his books and magazines dozens of times of various occasions that the British rule is better than self-rule

E.V. Ramasamy also blamed the capitalists for their control of machineries , creating difficulties for the workers . According to his philosophy , rationalism , which has to lead the way for peaceful life to all , had resulted in causing poverty and worries to the people because of dominating forces . He stated that there is no use of simply acquiring titles or amassing wealth if one has no self-respect or scientific knowledge . An example he gave was the West sending messages to the planets , while the Tamil society in India were sending rice and cereals to their dead forefathers through the Brahmins . In a message to the Brahmin community , Periyar stated , " in the name of god , religion , and sastras you have duped us . We were the ruling people . Stop this life of cheating us from this year . Give room for rationalism and humanism " . He added that " any opposition not based on rationalism , science , or experience will one day or another , reveal the fraud , selfishness , lies and conspiracies " .

Periyar 's philosophy of self-respect was based on his image of an ideal world and a universally accepted one . His philosophy preaches that human actions should be based on rational thinking . Further , the outcome of the natural instinct of human beings is to examine every object and every action and even nature with a spirit of inquiry , and to refuse to submit to anything irrational as equivalent to slavery . Thus , the philosophy of self-respect taught that human actions should be guided by reason , right and wrong should follow from rational thinking and conclusions drawn from reason should be respected under circumstances . Freedom means respect to thoughts and actions considered ' right ' by human beings on the basis of ' reason ' . There is not much difference between ' freedom ' and ' self-respect ' . Periyar 's foremost appeal to people was to develop self-respect . He preached that the Brahmins had monopolised and cheated other communities for decades and deprived them of self-respect . He stated that most Brahmins claimed to belong to a " superior " community with the reserved privilege of being in charge of temples and performing archanas . He felt that they were trying to reassert their control over religion by using their superior caste status to claim the exclusive privilege to touch idols or enter the sanctum sanctorum .

As a rationalist and ardent social reformer , Periyar advocated forcefully throughout his life that women should be given their legitimate position in society as the equals of men and that they should be given good education and have the right to property . He thought age and social customs was not a bar in marrying women . He was keen that women should realise their rights and be worthy citizens of their country . Periyar fought against the orthodox traditions of marriage as suppression of women in Tamil Nadu and throughout the Indian sub-continent . Though arranged marriages were meant to enable a couple to live together throughout life , it was manipulated to enslave women . Much worse was the practice of child marriages practised throughout India at the time . Periyar married Maniammai who is 40 years younger than him though . It was believed that it would be a sin to marry after puberty . Another practice , which is prevalent today , is the dowry system where the bride 's family is supposed to give the husband a huge payment for the bride . The purpose of this was to assist the newly wedded couple financially , but in many instances dowries were misused by bridegrooms . The outcome of this abuse turned to the exploitation of the bride 's parents wealth , and in certain circumstances , lead to dowry deaths . There have been hundreds of thousands of cases where wives have been murdered , mutilated , and burned alive because the father of the bride was unable to make the dowry payment to the husband . Periyar fiercely stood up against this abuse meted out against women .

Women in India also did not have rights to their families ' or husbands ' property . Periyar fought fiercely for this and also advocated for the women to have the right to separate or divorce their husbands under reasonable circumstances . While birth control remained taboo in society of Periyar 's time , he advocated for it not only for the health of women and population control , but for the liberation of women . He criticised the hypocrisy of chastity for women and argued that it should also either belong to men , or not at all for both individuals . While fighting against this , Periyar advocated to get rid of the Devadasi system . In his view it was an example of a list of degradations of women attaching them to temples for the entertainment of others , and as temple prostitutes . As a further liberation of women , Periyar pushed for the right of women to have an education and to join the armed services and the police force . According to biographer M.D. Gopalakrishnan , Periyar and his movement achieved a better status for women in Tamil society . Periyar held that in matters of education and employment there should be no difference between men and women . Gopalakrishnan states that Periyar 's influence in the State departments and even the Center made it possible for women to join police departments and the army . Periyar also spoke out against child marriage .

Periyar wanted thinking people to see their society as far from perfect and in urgent need of reform . He wanted the government , the political parties and social workers to identify the evils in society and boldly adopt measures to remove them . Periyar 's philosophy did not differentiate social and political service . According to him , the first duty of a government is to run the social organisation efficiently , and the philosophy of religion was to organise the social system . Periyar stated that while Christian and Islamic religions were fulfilling this role , the Hindu religion remained totally unsuitable for social progress . He argued that the government was not for the people , but , in a " topsy-turvy " manner , the people were for the government . He attributed this situation to the state of the social system contrived for the advantage of a small group of people . One of the areas of Periyar 's focus was on the upliftment of rural communities . In a booklet called Village Uplift , Periyar pleaded for rural reform . At that time rural India still formed the largest part of the Indian subcontinent , in spite of the ongoing process of urbanisation . Thus , the distinction between rural and urban had meant an economic and social degradation for rural inhabitants . Periyar wanted to eradicate the concept of " village " as a discrimination word among places , just as the concept of " outcast " among social groups . Periyar advocated for a location where neither the name nor the situation or its conditions imply differences among people . He further advocated for the modernisation of villages by providing public facilities such as schools , libraries , radio stations , roads , bus transport , and police stations .

Periyar felt that a small number of cunning people created caste distinctions to dominate over society , so he emphasised that individuals must first develop self-respect and learn to analyse propositions rationally . According to Periyar , a self-respecting rationalist would readily realise that caste system had been stifling self-respect and therefore he or she would strive to get rid of this menace . Periyar stated that the caste system in south India is , due to Indo-Aryan influence , linked with the arrival of Brahmins from the north . Ancient Tamil Nadu ( part of Tamilakkam ) had a different stratification of society in four or five regions ( Tinai ) , determined by natural surroundings and adequate means of living . Periyar also argued that birds , animals , and worms , which are considered to be devoid of rationalism do not create castes , or differences of high and low in their own species . But man , considered to be a rational being , was suffering from these because of religion and discrimination .

Periyar claimed that Tamil , Telugu , Malayalam , and Kannada came from the same mother language of Old Tamil . He explained that the Tamil language is called by four different names since it is spoken in four different Dravidian states . Nevertheless , current understanding of Dravidian languages contains statements contradicting such claims . For example , the currently known classification of Dravidian languages provides the following distinct classes : Southern ( including Tamil – Kannada ( Malayalam ) and Tulu ) ; Central ( including Telugu – Kui and Kolami – Parji ) ; and , Northern ( including Kurukh – Malto and Brahui ) . Additionally , statements on the presence of evidence for linking Dravidian languages and Indo-European languages are available . With relation to writing , Periyar stated that using the Tamil script about the arts , which are useful to the people in their life and foster knowledge , talent and courage , and propagating them among the masses , will enlighten the people . Further , he explained that it will enrich the language , and thus it can be regarded as a zeal for Tamil . Periyar also stated that if words of North Indian origin ( Sanskrit ) are removed from Telugu , Kannada , and Malayalam , only Tamil will be left . On the Brahmin usage of Tamil , he stated how the Tamil spoken by the Andhras and the Malayalee peoples was far better than the Tamil spoken by the Brahmins . Periyar believed that Tamil language will make the Dravidian people unite under the banner of Tamil culture , and that it will make the Kannadigas , Andhras and the Malayalees be vigilant . With regards to a Dravidian alliance under a common umbrella language , Periyar stated that " a time will come for unity . This will go on until there is an end to the North Indian domination . We shall reclaim an independent sovereign state for us " .

At the same time , Periyar was also known to have made controversial remarks on the Tamil language and people from time to time . On one occasion , he referred to the Tamil people as " barbarians " and the Tamil language as the " language of barbarians " . However , Anita Diehl explains that Periyar made these remarks on Tamil because it had no respective feminine verbal forms . Periyar 's ideas on Tamil alphabet reforms and his reasons were for the following such as the vowel ' ஈ ' ( i ) , having a cursive and looped representation of the short form , ' இ ' ( I ) . In stone inscriptions from 400 or 500 years ago , many Tamil letters are found in other shapes . As a matter of necessity and advantage to cope with printing technology , Periyar thought that it was sensible to change a few letters , reduce the number of letters , and alter a few signs . He further explained that the older and the more divine a language and its letters were said to be , the more they needed reform . Because of changes brought about by means of modern transport and international contact , and happenings that have attracted words and products from many countries , foreign words and their pronunciations have been assimilated into Tamil quite easily . Just as a few compound characters have separate signs to indicate their length as in ' கா ' , ' கே ' ( kA : , kE : ) , Periyar argued why should not other compound characters like ' கி ' , ' கீ ' , ' கு ' , ' கூ ' ( kI , ki : , kU , ku : ) ( indicated integrally as of now ) , also have separate signs . Further , changing the shape of letters , creating new symbols and adding new letters and similarly , dropping those that are redundant , were quite essential according to Periyar . Thus , the glory and excellence of a language and its script depend on how easily they can be understood or learned and on nothing else "

Periyar hailed the Thirukkural as a valuable scripture which contained many scientific and philosophical truths . He also praised the secular nature of the work . Periyar praised Thiruvalluvar for his description of God as a formless entity with only positive attributes . He also suggested that one who reads the Thirukkural will become a Self-respecter , absorbing knowledge in politics , society , and economics . According to him , though certain items in this ancient book of ethics may not relate to today , it permitted such changes for modern society . On caste , he believed that the Kural illustrates how Vedic laws of Manu were against the Sudras and other communities of the Dravidian race . On the other hand , Periyar opined that the ethics from the Kural was comparable to the Christian Bible . The Dravidar Kazhagam adopted the Thirukkural and advocated that Thiruvalluvar 's Kural alone was enough to educate the people of the country . One of Periyar 's quotes on the Thirukkural from Veeramani 's Collected Works of Periyar was " when Dravida Nadu ( Dravidistan ) was a victim to Indo-Aryan deceit , Thirukkural was written by a great Dravidian Thiruvalluvar to free the Dravidians " .

The Dravidian-Aryan conflict was believed to be a continuous historical phenomenon that started when the Aryans first set their foot in the Dravidian lands . Even a decade before the idea of separation appeared , Periyar stated that , " as long as Aryan religion , Indo-Aryan domination , propagation of Aryan Vedas and Aryan " Varnashrama " existed , there was need for a " Dravidian Progressive Movement " and a " Self-Respect Movement " . Periyar became very concerned about the growing north Indian domination over the south which appeared to him no different from foreign domination . He wanted to secure the fruits of labour of the Dravidians to the Dravidians , and lamented that fields such as political , economic , industrial , social , art , and spiritual were dominated by the north for the benefit of the north Indians . Thus , with the approach of independence from Britain , this fear that North India would take the place of Britain to dominate south India became more and more intense . Periyar was clear about the concept of a separate nation , comprising Tamil areas , that is part of the then existing Madras Presidency with adjoining areas into a federation guaranteeing protection of minorities , including religious , linguistic , and cultural freedom of the people . A separatist conference was held in June 1940 at Kanchipuram when Periyar released the map of the proposed Dravida Nadu , but failed to get British approval . On the contrary , Periyar received sympathy and support from people such as Bhimrao Ramji Ambedkar and Muhammad Ali Jinnah for his views on the Congress , and for his opposition to Hindi . They then decided to convene a movement to resist the Congress .

The concept of Dravida Nadu was later modified down to Tamil Nadu This led to a proposal of a union of the Tamil people of not only South India but including those of Ceylon as well . In 1953 , Periyar helped to preserve Madras as the capital of Tamil Nadu , which later was the name he substituted for the more general Dravida Nadu . In 1955 Periyar threatened to burn the national flag , but on Chief Minister Kamaraj 's pledge that Hindi should not be compulsory he postponed the action . In his speech of 1957 called Suthantara Tamil Nadu En ? ( Why an independent Tamil Nadu ? ) , he criticised the Central Government of India inducing thousands of Tamilians to burn the constitution of India . The reason for this action was that Periyar held the Government responsible for maintaining the caste system . After stating reasons for separation and turning down opinions against it he closed his speech with a " war cry " to join and burn the map of India on 5 June . Periyar was sentenced to six months imprisonment for burning the Indian constitution . Advocacy of such a nation became illegal when separatist demands were banned by law in 1957 . Regardless of these measures , a Dravida Nadu Separation Day was observed on 17 September 1960 resulting in numerous arrests . However , Periyar resumed his campaign in 1968 . He wrote an editorial on ' Tamil Nadu for Tamilians ' in which he stated , that by nationalism only Brahmins had prospered and nationalism had been developed to abolish the rights of Tamils . He advocated that there was need to establish a Tamil Nadu Freedom Organization and that it was necessary to work towards it .

Periyar was a radical advocate of anti-Brahmanism . Periyar 's ideology of anti-Brahmanism is quite often confused as being anti-Brahmin . Brahmanism is accepting social inequality based on birth . Even a non-Brahmin who supports inequality based on caste was seen as a supporter of brahmanism . Periyar called on both Brahmins and non-Brahmins to shun brahmanism . In 1920 , when the Justice Party came to power , Brahmins occupied about 70 percent of the high level posts in government . After reservation was introduced by the Justice Party , it reversed this trend , allowing non-Brahmins to rise in the government of the Madras Presidency . Periyar , through the Justice Party , advocated against the imbalance of the domination of Brahmins who constituted only 3 percent of the Population over Government jobs , judiciary and the Madras University . His Self-Respect Movement espoused rationalism and atheism and the movement had currents of anti-Brahminism . Furthermore , Periyar stated that : " Our Dravidian movement does not exist against the Brahmins or the Banias ( a North Indian merchant caste ) . If anyone thinks so , I would only pity him . But we will not tolerate the ways in which Brahminism and the Bandiaism is degrading Dravidanadu . Whatever support they may have from the government , neither myself nor my movement will be of cowardice " .

Periyar also criticised Subramanya Bharathi in the journal Ticutar for portraying Mother Tamil as a sister of Sanskrit in his poems : " They say Bharati is an immortal poet . … Even if a rat dies in an akrakāram , they would declare it to be immortal . … of Tamilnadu praises him . Why should this be so ? Supposedly because he sang fulsome praises of Tamil and Tamilnadu . What else could he sing ? His own mother tongue , Sanskrit , has been dead for years . What other language did he know ? He cannot sing in Sanskrit . … He says Tamilnadu is the land of Aryas . "

In the Vaikom Satyagraha of 1924 , Periyar and Gandhi both cooperated and confronted each other in socio-political action . Periyar and his followers emphasised the difference in point of view between Gandhi and himself on the social issues , such as fighting the Untouchability Laws and eradication of the caste system . According to the booklet Gandhi and Periyar Periyar wrote in his paper Kudi Arasu , in 1925 , reporting on the fact that Gandhi was ousted from the Mahasabha , because he opposed resolutions for the maintaining of caste and Untouchability Laws which would spoil his efforts to bring about Hindu-Muslim unity . From this Gandhi learned the need of pleasing the Brahmins if anything was to be achieved . Peiryar in his references to Gandhi used opportunities to present Gandhi as on principle serving the interests of the Brahmins. in 1927 , Periyar and Gandhi met at Bangalore to discuss this matter . The main difference between them came out when Periyar stood for the total eradication of Hinduism to which Gandhi objected saying that Hinduism is not fixed in doctrines but can be changed . In the Kudi Arasu , Periyar explained that : " With all his good qualities , Gandhi did not bring the people forward from foolish and evil ways . His murderer was an educated man . Therefore nobody can say this is a time of high culture . If you eat poison you will die . If electricity hits the body you will die . If you oppose the Brahmin you will die . Gandhi did not advocate the eradication of Varnasrama Dharma structure but sees in it a task for the humanisation of society and social change possible within its structure . The consequence of this would be continued high-caste leadership . Gandhi adapted Brahmins to social change without depriving them of their leadership " .

Thus , Gandhi did not advocate the eradication of the Varnasrama Dharma structure but saw in it a task for the humanisation of society and social change possible within its structure . The consequence of this would be continued high-caste leadership . Gandhi accepted karma in the sense that " the Untouchables reap the reward of their karma , but was against discrimination against them using the revaluing term Harijans . As shown in the negotiations at Vaikom his methods of abolishing discrimination were : to stress on the orthodox inhumane treatment of Untouchables ; to secure voluntary lifting of the ban by changing the hearts of caste Hindus ; and to work within a Hindu framework of ideas . On the Temple Entry issue Gandhi never advocated the opening of Garbha Griha to Harijans in consequence of his Hindu belief . These sources which can be labelled " pro-Periyar " with the exception of M. Mahar and D.S. Sharma , clearly show that Periyar and his followers emphasised that Periyar was the real fighter for the removal of Untouchability and the true uplift of Hairjans , whereas Gandhi was not . This did not prevent Periyar from having faith in Gandhi on certain matters .

Periyar was generally regarded as a pragmatic propagandist who attacked the evils of religious influence on society , mainly what he regarded as Brahmin domination . At a young age , he felt that some people used religion only as a mask to deceive innocent people and considered it as his life 's mission to warn people against superstitions and priests . Anita Diehl explains that Periyar cannot be called an atheist philosopher . Periyar , however , qualified for the definition of what the term ' atheist ' implies in his address on philosophy . He repudiated the term as without real sense : " … the talk of the atheist should be considered thoughtless and erroneous . The thing I call god ... that makes all people equal and free , the god that does not stop free thinking and research , the god that does not ask for money , flattery and temples can certainly be an object of worship . For saying this much I have been called an atheist , a term that has no meaning " . EVR Periyar a born Hindu was vehemently opposed to Hinduism and Christianity . He did not criticize Islam .

Anita Diehl explains that Periyar was against incompatibility of faith with social equality and not religion itself . In a book on revolution published in 1961 , Periyar stated , " be of help to people . Do not use treachery or deceit . Speak the truth and do not cheat . That indeed is service to God " . On Hinduism , Periyar believed that it was a religion with no distinctive sacred book ( bhagawad gita ) , or origins , but to be an imaginary faith preaching the " superiority " of the Brahmins , the inferiority of the Shudras , and the untouchability of the Dalits ( Panchamas ) . Maria Misra , a lecturer at Oxford University , compares him to the philosophes , by stating , " his contemptuous attitude to the baleful influence of Hinduism in Indian public life is strikingly akin to the anti-Catholic diatribes of the enlightenment philosophes " . In 1955 , Periyar was arrested for his public agitation of burning the pictures of Rama at public places , as a symbolic protest against the Indo-Aryan domination and degradation of the Dravidian leadership according to the Ramayana epic . Periyar also shoed the images of Krishna and Rama , stating that they were Aryan gods that considered the Dravidian Shudras to be " sons of prostitutes " .

Periyar openly suggested to those who were marginalised within the Hindu communities to consider converting to other faiths such as Islam , Christianity , or Buddhism . On Islam , he stated how it was good for abolishing the disgrace in human relationship , based on one of his speeches to railway employees at Tiruchirapalli in 1947 . Periyar also commended Islam for its belief in one invisible and formless God ; proclamation of equal rights for men and women ; and advocating of social unity . " Muslims are following the ancient philosophies of the Dravidians . The Arabic word for Dravidian religion is Islam . When Brahmanism was imposed in this country , it was Mohammad Nabi who opposed it , by instilling the Dravidian religion 's policies as Islam in the minds of the people " Periyar viewed Christianity similar to the monotheistic faith of Islam . He explained that their faith says that there can be only one God which has no name or shape . Periyar took an interest in Rev. Martin Luther , where both he and his followers wanted to liken him and his role to that of the European reformer . Thus , Christian views such as that of Ram Mohan Roy 's The Precepts of Jesus has had at least an indirect influence on Periyar .

When B. Munuswamy Naidu became the Chief Minister of Madras Presidency in 1930 , he endorsed the inclusion of Brahmins in the Justice Party , saying : So long as we exclude one community , we cannot as a political speak on behalf of or claim to represent all the people of our presidency . If , as we hope , provincial autonomy is given to the provinces as a result of the reforms that may be granted , it should be essential that our Federation should be in a position to claim to be a truly representative body of all communities . What objection can there be to admit such Brahmins as are willing to subscribe to the aims and objects of our Federation ? It may be that the Brahmins may not join even if the ban is removed . But surely our Federation will not thereafter be open to objection on the ground that it is an exclusive organisation . Though certain members supported the resolution , a faction in the Justice Party known as the " Ginger Group " opposed the resolution and eventually voted it down . Periyar , who was then an observer in the Justice Party , criticised Munuswamy Naidu , saying :

After the death of Periyar in 1973 , conferences were held throughout Tamil Nadu for a week in January 1974 . The same year Periyar 's wife , Maniyammai , the new head of the Dravidar Kazhagam , set fire to the effigies of ' Rama ' , ' Sita ' and ' Lakshmana ' at Periyar Thidal , Madras . This was in retaliation to the Ramaleela celebrations where effigies of ' Ravana ' , ' Kumbakarna ' and ' Indrajit ' were burnt in New Delhi . For this act she was imprisoned . During the 1974 May Day meetings held at different places in Tamil Nadu , a resolution urging the Government to preserve 80 percent of jobs for Tamils was passed . Soon after this , a camp was held at Periyar Mansion in Tiruchirapalli to train young men and women to spread the ideals of the Dravidar Kazhagam in rural areas . On Periyar 's birthday on 17 September 1974 , Periyar 's Rationalist Library and Research Library and Research Institute was opened by Tamil Nadu Chief Minister M. Karunanidhi . This library contained Periyar 's rationalist works , the manuscripts of Periyar and his recorded speeches . Also during the same year Periyar 's ancestral home in Erode , was dedicated as a commemoration building . On 20 February 1977 , the opening function of Periyar Building in Madras was held . At the meeting which the Managing Committee of the Dravidar Kazhagam held , there on that day , it was decided to support the candidates belonging to the Janata Party , the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam ( DMK ) , and the Marxist Party during the General Elections .

On 16 March 1978 , Maniyammai died . The Managing Committee of the Dravidar Kazhagam elected K. Veeramani as General Secretary of the Dravidar Kazhagam on 17 March 1978 . From then on , the Periyar-Maniyammai Educational and Charitable Society started the Periyar Centenary Women 's Polytechnic at Thanjavur on 21 September 1980 . On 8 May 1982 , the College for Correspondence Education was started under the auspices of the Periyar Rationalist Propaganda Organization . Over the years , Periyar 's influence had an impact on Tamil Nadus political party heads such as C.N. Annadurai and M. Karunanidhi of the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam ' ( DMK ) , V. Gopalswamy founder of the Marumalarchi Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam ( MDMK ) , S. Ramadoss founder of the Pattali Makkal Katchi ( PMK ) , Thol . Thirumavalavan , founder of the Dalit Panthers of India ( DPI ) , and Dravidar Kazhagam 's K. Veeramani . Other political figures influenced by Periyar were former Congress minister K. Kamaraj , former Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh Mayawati . Periyar 's life and teachings have also influenced writers and poets such as Kavignar Inkulab , and Bharathidasan including actors such as Kamal Hassan and Sathyaraj . Noted Tamil Comedian N. S. Krishnan was a close friend and follower of Periyar.W. P. A. Soundarapandian Nadar was a close confidant of Periyar and encouraged Nadars to be a part of the Self-Respect Movement .

Moonraker is the third novel by the British author Ian Fleming to feature his fictional British Secret Service agent James Bond . It was published by Jonathan Cape on 5 April 1955 and featured a cover design conceived by Fleming . The plot is derived from a Fleming screenplay that was too short for a full novel so he added the bridge passage between Bond and the industrialist Hugo Drax . In the latter half of the novel , the premise of Bond seconded to Drax 's staff as the businessman builds the Moonraker , a prototype missile designed to defend England . Unknown to Bond , Drax is German , an ex-Nazi now working for the Soviets ; his plan is to build the rocket , arm it with a nuclear warhead , and fire it at London . Uniquely for a Bond novel , Moonraker is set entirely in Britain , which raised comments from some readers , complaining about the lack of exotic locations . Moonraker , like Fleming 's previous novels , was well received by critics . Moonraker plays on a number of 1950s fears , including attack by rockets ( following the V-2 strikes of the Second World War ) , Soviet communism , the re-emergence of Nazism and the " threat from within " posed by both ideologies . Fleming examines Englishness , and the novel shows the virtues and strength of England . Adaptations include a broadcast on South African radio in 1956 starring Bob Holness and a 1958 Daily Express comic strip . The novel 's name was used in 1979 for the eleventh official film in the Eon Productions Bond series and the fourth to star Roger Moore as Bond ; the plot was significantly changed from the novel to include excursions into space .

The British Secret Service agent James Bond is asked by his superior , M , to join him at M 's club , Blades . A club member , the multi-millionaire businessman Sir Hugo Drax , is winning considerable money playing bridge , seemingly against the odds . M suspects Drax is cheating , and while claiming indifference , is concerned as to why a multi-millionaire and national hero would cheat . Bond confirms Drax 's deception and manages to turn the tables — aided by a pack of stacked cards — and wins £ 15,000 . Drax is the product of a mysterious background , purportedly unknown even to himself . Presumed to have been a British Army soldier during the Second World War , he was badly injured and stricken with amnesia in the explosion of a bomb planted by a German saboteur at a British field headquarters . After extensive rehabilitation in an army hospital , he returned home to become a wealthy industrialist . After building his fortune and establishing himself in business and society , Drax started building the " Moonraker " , Britain 's first nuclear missile project , intended to defend Britain against its Cold War enemies . The Moonraker rocket was to be an upgraded V-2 rocket using liquid hydrogen and fluorine as propellants ; to withstand the ultra-high combustion temperatures of its engine , it used columbite , in which Drax had a monopoly . Because the rocket 's engine could withstand high heat , the Moonraker was able to use these powerful fuels , greatly expanding its effective range .

After a Ministry of Supply security officer working at the project is shot dead , M assigns Bond to replace him and also to investigate what has been going on at the missile-building base , located between Dover and Deal on the south coast of England . All the rocket scientists working on the project are German . At his post on the complex , Bond meets Gala Brand , a beautiful police Special Branch officer working undercover as Drax 's personal assistant . Bond also uncovers clues concerning his predecessor 's death , concluding that the man may have been killed for witnessing a submarine off the coast . Drax 's henchman Krebs is caught by Bond snooping through his room . Later , an attempted assassination by triggering a landslide nearly kills Bond and Brand , as they swim beneath the Dover cliffs . Drax takes Brand to London , where she discovers the truth about the Moonraker by comparing her own launch trajectory figures with those in a notebook picked from Drax 's pocket . She is captured by Krebs , and finds herself captive in a secret radio homing station — intended to serve as a beacon for the missile 's guidance system — in the heart of London . While she is being taken back to the Moonraker facility by Drax , Bond gives chase , but is also captured by Drax and Krebs .

Drax tells Bond that he was never a British soldier and has never suffered from amnesia : he was Graf Hugo von der Drache , the German commander of a Skorzeny commando unit . He was the saboteur whose team had placed the car bomb at the army field headquarters , only to be injured himself in the detonation . The amnesia story was simply a cover he used while recovering in hospital , in order to avoid Allied retribution , although it would lead to a whole new British identity . Drax remains a dedicated Nazi , bent on revenge against England for the wartime defeat of his Fatherland and his prior history of social slights suffered as a youth growing up in an English boarding school before the war . He explains that he now means to destroy London with the missile he had constructed , by means of a Soviet-supplied nuclear warhead that has been secretly fitted to the Moonraker . He also plans to play the stock market the day before to make a huge profit from the imminent disaster . Brand and Bond are imprisoned where the blast from the Moonraker 's engines will incinerate them , to leave no trace of them once the Moonraker is launched . Before the firing , the couple escape . Brand gives Bond the proper coordinates to redirect the gyros and send the Moonraker into the sea . Having been in collaboration with Soviet Intelligence all along , Drax and his henchman attempt to escape by Russian submarine — only to be killed as the vessel flees through the waters onto which the Moonraker has been retargeted . After their debriefing at headquarters , Bond meets up with Brand , expecting her company — but they part ways after she reveals that she is engaged to a fellow Special Branch officer .

In early 1953 the film producer Alexander Korda read a proof copy of Live and Let Die , and informed its author , Ian Fleming , that he was excited by the book , but that it would not make a good basis for a film . Fleming told the producer that his next book was to be an expansion of an idea for a screenplay , set in London and Kent , adding that the location would allow " for some wonderful film settings in the old metropolis idiom " . Fleming undertook a significant amount of background research in preparation for writing Moonraker ; he asked his fellow correspondent on The Sunday Times , Anthony Terry , for information on the Second World War German resistance force — the Werewolves — and German V-2 rockets . The latter was a subject on which he wrote to the science fiction writer Arthur C. Clarke and the British Interplanetary Society . Fleming also visited the Wimpole Street psychiatrist Eric Strauss to discuss the traits of megalomaniacs ; Strauss lent him the book Men of Genius , which provided the link between megalomania and childhood thumb-sucking . Fleming used this information to give Drax diastema , a common result of thumb-sucking . According to his biographer Andrew Lycett , Fleming " wanted to make Moonraker his most ambitious and personal novel yet . " Fleming , a keen card player , was fascinated by the background to the 1890 royal baccarat scandal , and when in 1953 he met a woman who had been present at the game , he questioned her so intently that she burst into tears .

In January 1954 Fleming and his wife , Ann , travelled to their Goldeneye estate in Jamaica for their annual two-month holiday . He had already written two Bond novels , Casino Royale , which had been published in April 1953 , and Live and Let Die , whose publication was imminent . He began writing Moonraker on his arrival in the Caribbean . He later wrote an article for Books and Bookmen magazine describing his approach to writing , in which he said : " I write for about three hours in the morning ... and I do another hour 's work between six and seven in the evening . I never correct anything and I never go back to see what I have written ... By following my formula , you write 2,000 words a day . " By 24 February he had written over 30,000 words , although he wrote to a friend that he felt like he was already parodying the two earlier Bond novels . Fleming 's own copy bears the following inscription , " This was written in January and February 1954 and published a year later . It is based on a film script I have had in my mind for many years . " He later said that the idea for the film had been too short for a full novel , and that he " had to more or less graft the first half of the book onto my film idea in order to bring it up to the necessary length " .

Fleming considered a number of titles for the story ; his first choice had been The Moonraker , until Noël Coward reminded him of a novel of the same name by F. Tennyson Jesse . Fleming then considered The Moonraker Secret , The Moonraker Plot , The Inhuman Element , Wide of the Mark , The Infernal Machine , Mondays are Hell and Out of the Clear Sky . George Wren Howard of Jonathan Cape suggested Bond & the Moonraker , The Moonraker Scare and The Moonraker Plan , while his friend , the writer William Plomer , suggested Hell is Here ; the final choice of Moonraker was a suggestion by Wren Howard . Although Fleming provided no dates within his novels , two writers have identified different timelines based on events and situations within the novel series as a whole . John Griswold and Henry Chancellor — both of whom have written books on behalf of Ian Fleming Publications — put the events of Moonraker in 1953 ; Griswold is more precise , and considers the story to have taken place in May of that year .

The locations draw from Fleming 's personal experiences . Moonraker is the only Bond novel that takes place solely in Britain , which gave Fleming the chance to write about the England he cherished , such as the Kent countryside , including the White Cliffs of Dover , and London clubland . Fleming owned a cottage in St Margaret 's at Cliffe , near Dover , and he went to great lengths to get the details of the area right , including lending his car to his stepson to time the journey from London to Deal for the car chase passage . Fleming used his experiences of London clubs for the background of the Blades scenes . As a clubman , he enjoyed membership of Boodle 's , White 's and the Portland Club , and a combination of Boodles and the Portland Club is thought to be the model for Blades ; the author Michael Dibdin found the scene in the club to be " surely one of the finest things that Ian Fleming ever did . " The early chapters of the novel centre on Bond 's private life , with Fleming using his own lifestyle as a basis for Bond 's . Fleming used further aspects of his private life , such as his friends , as he had done in his previous novels : Hugo Drax was named after his brother-in-law Hugo Charteris and a navy acquaintance Admiral Sir Reginald Aylmer Ranfurly Plunkett-Ernle-Erle-Drax , while Fleming 's friend Duff Sutherland ( described as " a scruffy looking chap " ) was one of the bridge players at Blades . The name of the Scotland Yard superintendent , Ronnie Vallance , was made up from those of Ronald Howe , the actual assistant commissioner at the Yard , and of Vallance Lodge & Co . , Fleming 's accountants . Other elements of the plot came from Fleming 's knowledge of wartime operations carried out by T-Force , a secret British Army unit formed to continue the work of the Fleming-established 30 Assault Unit .

According to the author Raymond Benson , Moonraker is a deeper and more introspective book than Fleming 's previous work , which allows the author to develop the characters further . As such , Bond " becomes something more than ... [ the ] cardboard figure " that he had been in the previous two novels . The start of the book concentrates on Bond at home and his daily routines , which Fleming describes as " Elastic office hours from around ten until six , ... evenings spent playing cards in the company of a few close friends , ... or making love , with rather cold passion , to one of three similarly disposed married women . " This lifestyle was largely modelled on Fleming 's own , which the journalist and writer Matthew Parker sees as showing " a sourness " in the author 's character . According to Chancellor , two of Bond 's other vices were also displayed in the book : his fondness for gambling — illegal except in private members clubs in 1955 — and excessive drink and drug taking , neither of which were frowned upon in post-war upper class circles . In preparation for beating Drax at cards , Bond consumes a vodka martini , a carafe of vodka shared with M , two bottles of champagne and a brandy ; he also mixes a quantity of Benzedrine , an amphetamine , into a glass of the champagne . According to The Times journalist and historian Ben Macintyre , to Fleming the alcohol consumption " meant relaxation , ritual and reliability " . Benzedrine was regularly taken by troops during the war to remain awake and alert , and Fleming was an occasional consumer .

Drax is physically abnormal , as are many of Bond 's later adversaries . He has very broad shoulders , a large head and protruding teeth with diastema ; his face is badly scarred from a wartime explosion . According to the writers Kingsley Amis and Benson — both of whom subsequently wrote Bond novels — Drax is the most successful villain in the Bond canon . Amis considers this to be " because the most imagination and energy has gone into his portrayal . He lives in the real world ... [ and ] his physical presence fills Moonraker . The view is shared by Chancellor , who considers Drax " perhaps the most believable " of all Fleming 's villains . The cultural historian Jeremy Black writes that as with Le Chiffre and Mr Big — the villains of the first two Bond novels — Drax 's origins and war history are vital to an understanding of the character . Like several other antagonists in the Bond canon , Drax was German , reminding readers of a familiar threat in 1950s Britain . Because Drax is without a girlfriend or wife he is , according to the norms of Fleming and his works , abnormal in Bond 's world .

Benson considers Brand to be one of the weakest female roles in the Bond canon and " a throwback to the rather stiff characterization of Vesper Lynd " from Casino Royale . Brand 's lack of interest in Bond removes sexual tension from the novel ; she is unique in the canon for being the one woman that Bond does not seduce . The cultural historians Janet Woollacott and Tony Bennett write that the perceived reserve shown by Brand to Bond was not due to frigidity , but to her engagement to a fellow police officer . M is another character who is more fully realised than in the previous novels , and for the first time in the series he is shown outside a work setting at the Blades club . It is never explained how he received or could afford his membership of the club , which had a restricted membership of only 200 gentlemen , all of whom had to show £ 100,000 in cash or gilt-edged securities . Amis , in his study The James Bond Dossier , considers that on M 's salary his membership of the club would have been puzzling ; Amis points out that in the 1963 book On Her Majesty 's Secret Service it is revealed that M 's pay as head of the Secret Service is £ 6,500 a year .

Benson analysed Fleming 's writing style and identified what he described as the " Fleming Sweep " : a stylistic technique that sweeps the reader from one chapter to another using ' hooks ' at the end of each chapter to heighten tension and pull the reader into the next : Benson feels that the sweep in Moonraker was not as pronounced as Fleming 's previous works , largely due to the lack of action sequences in the novel . According to the literary analyst LeRoy L. Panek , in his examination of 20th-century British spy novels , in Moonraker Fleming uses a technique closer to the detective story than to the thriller genre . This manifests itself in Fleming placing clues to the plot line throughout the story , and leaving Drax 's unveiling of his plan until the later chapters . Black sees that the pace of the novel is set by the launch of the rocket ( there are four days between Bond 's briefing by M and the launch ) while Amis considers that the story to have a " rather hurried " ending . Moonraker uses a literary device Fleming employs elsewhere , that of having a seemingly trivial incident between the main characters — the card game — that leads to the uncovering of a greater incident — the main plot involving the rocket . Dibdin sees gambling as the common link , thus the card game acts as an " introduction to the ensuing encounter ... for even higher stakes " . Savoye sees this concept of competition between Bond and villain as a " notion of game and the eternal fight between Order and Disorder " , common throughout the Bond stories .

Parker describes the novel as " a hymn to England " , and highlights Fleming 's description of the white cliffs of Dover and the heart of London as evidence . Even the German Krebs is moved by the sight of the Kent countryside in a country he hates . The novel places England — and particularly London and Kent — in the front line of the cold war , and the threat to the location further emphasises its importance . Bennett and Woollacott consider that Moonraker defines the strengths and virtues of England and Englishness as being the " quiet and orderly background of English institutions " , which are threatened by the disturbance Drax brings . The literary critic Meir Sternberg considers the theme of English identity can be seen in the confrontation between Drax and Bond . Drax — whose real name Drache is German for dragon — is in opposition to Bond , who takes the role of Saint George in the conflict . As with Casino Royale and Live and Let Die , Moonraker involves the idea of the " traitor within " . Drax , real name Graf Hugo von der Drache , is a " megalomaniac German Nazi who masquerades as an English gentleman " , while Krebs bears the same name as Hitler 's last Chief of Staff . Black sees that , in using a German as the novel 's main enemy , " Fleming ... exploits another British cultural antipathy of the 1950s . Germans , in the wake of the Second World War , made another easy and obvious target for bad press . " Moonraker uses two of the foes feared by Fleming , the Nazis and the Soviets , with Drax being German and working for the Soviets ; in Moonraker the Soviets were hostile and provided not just the atomic bomb , but support and logistics to Drax . Moonraker played on fears of the audiences of the 1950s of rocket attacks from overseas , fears grounded in the use of the V-2 rocket by the Nazis during the Second World War . The story takes the threat one stage further , with a rocket based on English soil , aimed at London and " the end of British invulnerability " .

Moonraker was published in the UK by Jonathan Cape in hardback format on 5 April 1955 with a cover designed by Kenneth Lewis , following Fleming 's suggestions of using a stylised flame motif ; the first impression was of 9,900 copies . The US publication was by Macmillan on 20 September that year . In October 1956 Pan Books published a paperback version of the novel in the UK , which sold 43,000 copies before the end of the year . In December that year the US paperback was published under the title Too Hot to Handle by Permabooks . This edition was rewritten to Americanise the British idioms used , and Fleming provided a number of explanatory footnotes such as the value of English currency against the dollar . Since its initial publication the book has been issued in numerous hardback and paperback editions , translated into several languages and has never been out of print .

Fleming 's friend — and neighbour in Jamaica — Noël Coward considered Moonraker to be the best thing Fleming had written to that point : " although as usual too far-fetched , not quite so much so as the last two ... His observation is extraordinary and his talent for description vivid . " Fleming received numerous letters from readers complaining about the lack of exotic locations ; one of which protested " We want taking out of ourselves , not sitting on the beach in Dover . " Julian Symons , writing in The Times Literary Supplement , found Moonraker " a disappointment " , and considered that " Fleming 's tendency ... to parody the form of the thriller , has taken charge in the second half of this story . " Maurice Richardson , in his review for The Observer , was more welcoming : " Do not miss this " , he urged , saying that " Mr. Fleming continues to be irresistibly readable , however incredible " . Hilary Corke , writing in The Listener , thought that " Fleming is one of the most accomplished of thriller-writers " , and considered that Moonraker " is as mercilessly readable as all the rest " . Corke warned Fleming away from being over-dramatic , declaring that " Mr Fleming is evidently far too accomplished to need to lean upon these blood-and-thunder devices : he could keep our hair on end for three hundred pages without spilling more blood than was allowed to Shylock . " The reviewer in The Scotsman considered that Fleming " administers stimuli with no mean hand ... ' Astonish me ! ' the addict may challenge : Mr Fleming can knock him sideways . "

John Metcalf for The Spectator thought the book " utterly disgraceful — and highly enjoyable ... without [ Moonraker ] no forthcoming railway journey should be undertaken " , although he also considered that it was " not one of Mr. Fleming 's best " . Anthony Boucher , writing in The New York Times , was equivocal , saying " I don 't know anyone who writes about gambling more vividly than Fleming and I only wish the other parts of his books lived up to their gambling sequences " . Richard Lister in the New Statesman thought that " Mr. Fleming is splendid ; he stops at nothing . " Writing for The Washington Post , Al Manola believed that the " British tradition of rich mystery writing , copious description and sturdy heroism all blend nicely " in Moonraker , providing what he considered was " probably the best action novel of the month " .

The actor John Payne attempted to take up the option on the film rights to the book in 1955 , but nothing came of the attempt . The Rank Organisation also came to an agreement to make a film , but this likewise fell through . The novel was not one of Fleming 's stories acquired by Eon Productions in 1961 ; in 1969 the company acquired the rights and commissioned Gerry Anderson to produce and co-write a screenplay . Anderson and Tony Barwick prepared a 70-page treatment that was never filmed , but some elements were similar to the final screenplay of The Spy Who Loved Me . The first adaptation of Moonraker was for South African radio in 1956 , with Bob Holness providing the voice of Bond . According to The Independent , " listeners across the Union thrilled to Bob 's cultured tones as he defeated evil master criminals in search of world domination " . The novel was adapted as a comic strip that was published in the Daily Express newspaper and syndicated worldwide . The adaptation was written by Henry Gammidge and illustrated by John McLusky , and ran daily from 30 March to 8 August 1959 . Titan Books reprinted the strip in 2005 along with Casino Royale and Live and Let Die as a part of the Casino Royale anthology .

" Moonraker " was used as the title for the eleventh James Bond film , produced by Eon Productions and released in 1979 . Directed by Lewis Gilbert and produced by Albert R. Broccoli , the film features Roger Moore in his fourth appearance as Bond . The Nazi-inspired element of Drax 's motivation in the novel was indirectly preserved with the " master race " theme of the film 's plot . Since the screenplay was original , Eon Productions and Glidrose Publications authorised the film 's writer , Christopher Wood , to produce his second novelization based on a film ; this was entitled James Bond and Moonraker . Elements of Moonraker were also used in the 2002 film Die Another Day , with a scene set in the Blades club . The actress Rosamund Pike , who plays Miranda Frost in the film , later said that her character was originally to have been named Gala Brand .

Erin Hannon has been assigned to set up the Halloween party by Andy Bernard , who wants to live up to the expectations set by Robert ( James Spader ) . Robert arrives with his son Bert and remarks that the party is more tailored to kids than adults . In response , Andy asks Angela Martin and Phyllis Vance to take over and re-tailor the party , much to Erin 's chagrin . Andy also tells her that he wishes to speak with her at the end of the day . Worried that he intends to fire her , she asks Gabe ( Zach Woods ) to help her make the party more " scary " and " sexy " , and he gives her a tape to show everyone . Gabe explains to the camera crew that the video is a Cinema of the Unsettling movie , an avant garde film genre defined by its disturbing images and absence of plot . Disgusted by the video , the office staff demand an explanation from Erin . In desperation , she shows them her idea for making the party more " sexy " : a card game with photos of genitalia . This only makes them more outraged , and Andy and Robert talk with Erin in his office regarding the incident . Erin admits her fears about their planned talk at the end of the day . Andy tells her what he wanted to talk to her about : he has reached a point in his romantic relationship where his girlfriend should be able to call him at the office , and that he wanted to clear this with Erin first since she handles all calls . Erin had not even known that he was dating someone , and is shocked to hear they have been out on 31 dates so far . Erin feels dejected and leaves .

Jim and Pam Halpert argue whether ghosts are real after she claims to have seen one at a pub where she used to work . Meanwhile , Dwight Schrute dresses up as Sarah Kerrigan from StarCraft , but Toby Flenderson takes off his wings as they had knives on them and Dwight is not allowed to bring in weapons . Bert recognizes what his costume is supposed to be and the two bond over playing StarCraft all day , ignoring everyone else . Dwight also makes Bert pretend to fire Toby , for taking away his weapons , on the grounds that he is the CEO 's son . Throughout the party , Robert coaxes each of the employees into revealing their deepest fears . Before leaving , he tells a horror story implementing all their fears as a way to convince them not to let fear control their lives . This inspires Jim and Pam to stop their argument and Erin to talk to Andy about her feelings .

The episode was written by story editor Carrie Kemper , sister of cast member Ellie Kemper , her second written story for the series . It was directed by one of the The Office 's cinematographers , Randall Einhorn , his 15th directing credit for the series . The episode is the third Halloween themed episode of the series after season two 's " Halloween " and season seven 's " Costume Contest " . The episode also featured James Spader as Sabre CEO Robert California , who is currently set to appear in 15 episodes for the season . The Season Eight DVD contains a number of deleted scenes from this episode . Notable cut scenes include the rest of the office getting in the debate over whether ghosts exist , and Robert 's son Bert and Dwight talking about zombies , specifically characters from The Walking Dead .

In the episode , Dwight dresses up as Sarah Kerrigan , a character from the video game series StarCraft . Later , Toby narrates a montage of previous costumes worn by Dwight including dressed as Freddy Krueger , Jigsaw , and Pinhead , the primary antagonists from the A Nightmare on Elm Street , Saw , and Hellraiser franchises , respectively . Angela is seen dressed in the same cat that she wore in the season two episode , " Halloween " . Jim , Kevin and Darryl are dressed up as professional basketball players Chris Bosh , Dwyane Wade and LeBron James , respectively . Ryan is dressed as Jesse Pinkman from the TV series Breaking Bad , wearing the character 's signature yellow hoodie and beanie .

The episode received mostly mixed reviews from critics . National Post writer Barry Hertz wrote that while " it wasn ’ t as patience-testing as last year ’ s outing [ ' Costume Contest ' ] , but it also wasn ’ t as gut-busting and on-the-nose as its earlier incarnation [ " Halloween " ] . " He complimented the Erin and Andy plot , but called the Jim and Pam plot " boring " . Ellie Kemper 's performance received commendations from Hertz . The A.V. Club reviewer Myles McNutt criticized the episode for " just creating situations and seeing how the characters react to them , which is likely why the writers were willing to lazily rehash the stock ' office Halloween party ' setup that drives the narrative of ' Spooked ' . " Despite this , he wrote positively of Erin 's plot , Kemper 's performance , and James Spader 's scary speech at the end . However , McNutt was critical of the Dwight plot and the Jim and Pam plot writing that " I don ’ t care that Pam believes in ghosts and Jim doesn ’ t , I don ’ t care that Dwight gets a few scenes in which the cynical adult is softened by the presence of a precocious child . " He ultimately gave the episode a C + . New York writer Chris Blanche criticized the episode for its lack of heart . Television Without Pity gave the episode a C rating . Several critics considered the episode an improvement over the previous halloween episode , " Costume Contest " .

Primer is a 2004 American indie science fiction drama film about the accidental discovery of a means of time travel . The film was written , directed , produced , edited and scored by Shane Carruth , who also stars in the main role . Primer is of note for its extremely low budget ( completed for $ 7,000 ) , experimental plot structure , philosophical implications , and complex technical dialogue , which Carruth , a college graduate with a degree in mathematics and a former engineer , chose not to simplify for the sake of the audience . The film collected the Grand Jury Prize at the 2004 Sundance Film Festival , before securing a limited release in the United States , and has since gained a cult following .

Two engineers – Aaron and Abe – supplement their day-jobs with entrepreneurial tech projects , working out of Aaron 's garage . During one such research effort , involving electromagnetic reduction of objects ' weight , the two men accidentally discover an ' A-to-B ' time loop side-effect ; objects left in the weight-reducing field exhibit temporal anomalies , proceeding normally ( from time ' A , ' when the field was activated , to time ' B , ' when the field is powered off ) , then backwards ( from ' B ' back to ' A ' ) , in continuous A-then-B-then-A-then-B sequence , such that objects can leave the field in the present , or at some previous point . Abe refines this proof-of-concept and builds a stable time-apparatus ( " the box " ) , sized to accommodate a human subject . Abe uses this " box " to travel six hours into his own past — as part of this process , Original-Abe sits incommunicado in a hotel room , so as not to interact or interfere with the outside world , after which Original-Abe enters the " box , " waits inside the " box " for six hours ( thus going back in time six hours ) , and becomes Future-Overlap-Double-Abe , who travels across town , explains the proceedings to Aaron , and brings Aaron back to the secure self-storage facility housing the " box . " At the end of the overlap-timespan , Original-Abe no longer exists , having entered the " box , " rewound six hours , and become Future-Overlap-Double-Abe for the remainder of time .

Abe and Aaron repeat Abe 's six-hour experiment multiple times over multiple days , making profitable same-day stock trades armed with foreknowledge of the market 's performance . The duo 's divergent personalities – Abe cautious and controlling , Aaron impulsive and meddlesome – put subtle strain on their collaboration and friendship . These tensions come to a head after a late-night encounter with Thomas Granger ( father to Abe 's girlfriend Rachel ) , who appears inexplicably unshaven and exists in overlap with his original suburban self . Granger falls into a comatose state after being pursued by Aaron ; Aaron theorizes that , at some point in the future , Granger entered the " box " ( at an unknown time , for unknown reasons ) , with timeline-altering consequences . Abe concludes that time travel is simply too dangerous , and uses a second apparatus ( his " failsafe box , " built before the experiment 's beginning and kept continuously running in a secret location ) , traveling back four days to prevent the experiment 's launch . Cumulative competing interference wreaks havoc upon the timeline . Future-Abe sedates Original-Abe ( so he will never conduct the initial time travel experiment ) , and meets Original-Aaron at a park bench ( so as to dissuade him ) , but finds that Future-Aaron has gotten there first ( armed with pre-recordings of the past conversations , and an unobtrusive earpiece ) , having brought a disassembled " third failsafe box " four days back with his own body . Future-Abe faints at this revelation , overcome by shock and fatigue .

The two men briefly and tentatively reconcile . They jointly travel back in time , experiencing and reshaping an event where Abe 's girlfriend Rachel was nearly killed by a gun-wielding party crasher . After many repetitions , Aaron , forearmed with knowledge of the party 's events , stops the gunman , becoming a local hero . Abe and Aaron ultimately part ways ; Aaron considers a new life in foreign countries where he can tamper more broadly for personal gain , while Abe states his intent to remain in town and dissuade / sabotage the original " box " experiment . Abe warns Aaron to leave and never return . An epilogue sequence reveals that multiple " box-aware " versions of Aaron are still alive and circulating – at least one Future-Aaron has intermingled knowledge with Original-Aaron ( thanks to discussions , voice-recordings , and an unsuccessful physical altercation ) . As a result , two or more Aarons now inhabit the same timeline , sharing information of future events , in stark contrast to Abe , who goes to painstaking extremes to keep his Original-Abe " pure " and unaware of the future . The film 's final scene depicts a fully aware Aaron , directing French-speaking workers in the construction of what appears to be a warehouse-sized " box . "

Although one of the more fantastic elements of science fiction is central to the film , Carruth 's goal was to portray scientific discovery in a down-to-earth and realistic manner . He notes that many of the greatest breakthrough scientific discoveries in history have occurred by accident , in locations no more glamorous than Aaron 's garage . Whether it involved the history of the number zero or the invention of the transistor , two things stood out to me . First is that the discovery that turns out to be the most valuable is usually dismissed as a side-effect . Second is that prototypes almost never include neon lights and chrome . I wanted to see a story play out that was more in line with the way real innovation takes place than I had seen on film before . Carruth has said he intended the central theme of the film to be the breakdown of Abe and Aaron 's relationship , as a result of their inability to cope with the power afforded them by this technological advancement : First thing , I saw these guys as scientifically accomplished but ethically , morons . They never had any reasons before to have ethical questions . So when they 're hit with this device they 're blindsided by it . The first thing they do is make money with it . They 're not talking about the ethics of altering your former self .

Aaron and Abe start the film by attempting to create a device to somehow counter the effects of gravity . They have plans for such a device from another development team , but wish to improve on the viability of the design . Their main approach to achieve this is to discard the coolant bath for the required superconductors . They instead increase the transition temperature of the superconductor to " something more usable " . The time machine makes use of the property of superconductors called the Meissner effect , which " knock [ s ] out the interior magnetic field " . Aaron and Abe require palladium to build their machine . This is the reason they take the catalytic converter containing a small amount of palladium from a car . The principles of time travel in the film are inspired by Feynman diagrams . Carruth explained : " Richard Feynman has some interesting ideas about time . When you look at Feynman diagrams [ which map the interaction of elementary particles ] , there 's really no difference between watching an interaction happen forward and backward in time . "

While writing the script , Carruth studied physics to help him make Abe and Aaron 's technical dialogue sound authentic . He took the unusual step of eschewing contrived exposition , and tried instead to portray the shorthand phrases and jargon used by working scientists . This philosophy carried over into production design . The time machine itself is a plain gray box , with a distinctive electronic " hum " created by overlaying the sounds of a mechanical grinder and a car engine , rather than by using a processed digital effect . Carruth also set the story in unglamorous industrial parks and suburban tract homes . Carruth chose to deliberately obfuscate the film 's plot to mirror the complexity and confusion created by time travel . As he said in a 2004 interview : " This machine and Abe and Aaron 's experience are inherently complicated so it needed to be that way in order for the audience to be where Abe and Aaron are , which was always my hope . "

Principal photography took place over five weeks , on the outskirts of Dallas , Texas . The film was produced on a budget of only USD $ 7,000 , and a skeleton crew of five . Carruth acted as writer , director , producer , cinematographer , editor , and music composer . He also stars in the film as Aaron , and many of the other characters are played by his friends and family . The small budget required conservative use of the Super 16mm filmstock : the carefully limited number of takes resulted in an extremely low shooting ratio of 2 : 1 . Every shot in the film was meticulously storyboarded on 35mm stills . Carruth created a distinctive flat , overexposed look for the film by using fluorescent lighting , non-neutral color temperatures , high-speed film stock , and filters . After shooting , Carruth took two years to fully post-produce Primer . He has since said that this experience was so arduous that he almost abandoned the film on several occasions .

Primer received broadly positive reviews in the mainstream press . The website Metacritic rated Primer at 68 out of 100 , while the similar site Rotten Tomatoes reported that 73 % of the critics that saw the film gave it positive reviews , and the site listed it as one of the best science fiction films " for the thinking man ( ... or woman ) " . Many reviewers were impressed by the film 's originality . Dennis Lim of The Village Voice said that it was " the freshest thing the genre has seen since 2001 " , while in The New York Times , A. O. Scott wrote that Carruth had " the skill , the guile and the seriousness to turn a creaky philosophical gimmick into a dense and troubling moral puzzle " . Scott also enjoyed the film 's realistic depiction of scientists at work , saying that Carruth had an " impressive feel for the odd , quiet rhythms of small-scale research and development " . There was also praise for Carruth 's ability to maintain high production values on a minuscule budget , with Roger Ebert declaring : " The movie never looks cheap , because every shot looks as it must look . " Ty Burr of The Boston Globe commented that " aspects of Primer are so low-rent as to evoke guffaws " , but added that " the homemade feel is part of the point " .

The film 's unusually complex plot and dense dialogue proved controversial . Esquire critic Mike D 'Angelo claimed that " anybody who claims he fully understands what 's going on in Primer after seeing it just once is either a savant or a liar " . Scott Tobias writes for The A.V. Club : " The banter is heavy on technical jargon and almost perversely short on exposition ; were it not for the presence of voiceover narration , the film would be close to incomprehensible . " For the Los Angeles Times , Carina Chocano writes : " sticklers for linear storytelling are bound to be frustrated by narrative threads that start promisingly , then just sort of fall off the spool " . Some reviewers were entirely put off by the film 's obfuscated narrative . Kirk Honeycutt of The Hollywood Reporter complained that Primer " nearly gets lost in a miasma of technical jargon and scientific conjecture " . " Primer is hopelessly confusing and grows more and more byzantine as it unravels , " Chuck Klosterman writes in an essay on time travel films five years later . " I 've watched it seven or eight times and I still don 't know what happened . " He nonetheless says it is " the finest movie about time travel I 've ever seen " because of its realism :

It 's not that the time machine ... seems more realistic ; it 's that the time travelers themselves seem more believable . They talk and act ( and think ) like the kind of people who might accidentally figure out how to move through time , which is why it 's the best depiction we have of the ethical quandaries that might result from such a discovery . Ultimately , Klosterman says , the lesson of Primer regarding time travel is that " it 's too important to use only for money , but too dangerous to use for anything else " . Donald Clarke , film critic with The Irish Times , included Primer at No. 20 on his list of the top twenty films of the decade ( 2000 – 2010 ) . Science fiction author Greg Egan described it as " an ingenious , tautly constructed time-travel story " .

The Schiehallion experiment was an 18th-century experiment to determine the mean density of the Earth . Funded by a grant from the Royal Society , it was conducted in the summer of 1774 around the Scottish mountain of Schiehallion , Perthshire . The experiment involved measuring the tiny deflection of a pendulum due to the gravitational attraction of a nearby mountain . Schiehallion was considered the ideal location after a search for candidate mountains , thanks to its isolation and almost symmetrical shape . One of the triggers for the experiment were anomalies noted during the survey of the Mason – Dixon Line . The experiment had previously been considered , but rejected , by Isaac Newton as a practical demonstration of his theory of gravitation . However , a team of scientists , notably Nevil Maskelyne , the Astronomer Royal , was convinced that the effect would be detectable and undertook to conduct the experiment . The deflection angle depended on the relative densities and volumes of the Earth and the mountain : if the density and volume of Schiehallion could be ascertained , then so could the density of the Earth . Once this was known , then this would in turn yield approximate values for those of the other planets , their moons , and the Sun , previously known only in terms of their relative ratios . As an additional benefit , the concept of contour lines , devised to simplify the process of surveying the mountain , later became a standard technique in cartography .

A pendulum hangs straight downwards in a symmetrical gravitational field . However , if a sufficiently large mass such as a mountain is nearby , its gravitational attraction should pull the pendulum 's plumb-bob slightly out of true . The change in plumb-line angle against a known object — such as a star — could be carefully measured on opposite sides of the mountain . If the mass of the mountain could be independently established from a determination of its volume and an estimate of the mean density of its rocks , then these values could be extrapolated to provide the mean density of the Earth , and by extension , its mass . Isaac Newton had considered the effect in the Principia , but pessimistically thought that any real mountain would produce too small a deflection to measure . Gravitational effects , he wrote , were only discernible on the planetary scale . Newton 's pessimism was unfounded : although his calculations had suggested a deviation of less than 2 minutes of arc ( for an idealised three-mile high mountain ) , this angle , though very slight , was within the theoretical capability of instruments of his day .

An experiment to test Newton 's idea would both provide supporting evidence for his law of universal gravitation , and estimates of the mass and density of the Earth . Since the masses of astronomical objects were known only in terms of relative ratios , the mass of the Earth would provide reasonable values to the other planets , their moons , and the Sun . The data were also capable of determining the value of Newton 's gravitational constant G , though this was not a goal of the experimenters ; references to a value for G would not appear in the scientific literature until almost a hundred years later .

A pair of French astronomers named Pierre Bouguer and Charles Marie de La Condamine were the first to attempt the experiment , conducting their measurements on the 6,268-metre ( 20,564 ft ) volcano Chimborazo in Ecuador in 1738 . Their expedition had left France for South America in 1735 to try to measure the meridian arc length of one degree of latitude near the equator , but they took advantage of the opportunity to attempt the deflection experiment . In December 1738 , under very difficult conditions of terrain and climate , they conducted a pair of measurements at altitudes of 4,680 and 4,340 m . Bouguer wrote in a 1749 paper that they had been able to detect a deflection of 8 seconds of arc , but he downplayed the significance of their results , suggesting that the experiment would be better carried out under easier conditions in France or England . He added that the experiment had at least proved that the Earth could not be a hollow shell , as some thinkers of the day , including Edmond Halley , had suggested .

That a further attempt should be made on the experiment was proposed to the Royal Society in 1772 by Nevil Maskelyne , Astronomer Royal . He suggested that the experiment would " do honour to the nation where it was made " and proposed Whernside in Yorkshire , or the Blencathra-Skiddaw massif in Cumberland as suitable targets . The Royal Society formed the Committee of Attraction to consider the matter , appointing Maskelyne , Joseph Banks and Benjamin Franklin amongst its members . The Committee despatched the astronomer and surveyor Charles Mason to find a suitable mountain . After a lengthy search over the summer of 1773 , Mason reported that the best candidate was Schiehallion ( then spelled Schehallien ) , a 1,083-metre ( 3,553 ft ) peak lying between Loch Tay and Loch Rannoch in the central Scottish Highlands . The mountain stood in isolation from any nearby hills , which would reduce their gravitational influence , and its symmetrical east – west ridge would simplify the calculations . Its steep northern and southern slopes would allow the experiment to be sited close to its centre of mass , maximising the deflection effect . Mason however declined to conduct the work himself for the offered commission of one guinea per day . The task therefore fell to Maskelyne , for which he was granted a temporary leave of his duties as Astronomer Royal . He was aided in the task by mathematician and surveyor Charles Hutton and Reuben Burrow , a mathematician of the Royal Greenwich Observatory . A workforce of labourers was engaged to construct observatories for the astronomers , and assist in the surveying . The science team was particularly well-equipped : its astronomical instruments included a 12-inch ( 30 cm ) brass quadrant from Cook 's 1769 transit of Venus expedition , a 10-foot ( 3.0 m ) zenith sector , and a regulator ( precision pendulum clock ) for timing the astronomical observations . They also acquired a theodolite and Gunter 's chain for surveying the mountain , and a pair of barometers for measuring altitude . Generous funding for the experiment was available due to underspend on the transit of Venus expedition , which had been turned over to the Society by the King .

Observatories were constructed to the north and south of the mountain , plus a bothy to accommodate equipment and the scientists . Most of the workforce was however housed in rough canvas tents . Maskelyne 's astronomical measurements were the first to be conducted . It was necessary for him to determine the zenith distances with respect to the plumb line for a set of stars at the precise time that each passed due south . Weather conditions were frequently unfavourable due to mist and rain . However , from the south observatory , he was able to take 76 measurements on 34 stars in one direction , and then 93 observations on 39 stars in the other . From the north side , he then conducted a set of 68 observations on 32 stars and a set of 100 on 37 stars . By conducting sets of measurements with the plane of the zenith sector first facing east and then west , he successfully avoided any systematic errors arising from collimating the sector . To determine the deflection due to the mountain , it was necessary to account for the curvature of the Earth : an observer moving north or south will see the local zenith shift by the same angle as any change in latitude . After accounting for observational effects such as precession , aberration of light and nutation , Maskelyne showed that the difference between the locally determined zenith for observers north and south of Schiehallion was 54.6 arc seconds . Once the surveying team had provided a difference of 42.94 ″ latitude between the two stations , he was able to subtract this , and after rounding to the accuracy of his observations , announce that the sum of the north and south deflections was 11.6 ″ .

Maskelyne published his initial results in the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society in 1775 , using preliminary data on the mountain 's shape and hence the position of its center of gravity . This led him to expect a deflection of 20.9 ″ if the mean densities of Schiehallion and the Earth were equal . Since the deflection was about half this , he was able to make a preliminary announcement that the mean density of the Earth was approximately double that of Schiehallion . A more accurate value would have to await completion of the surveying process . Maskelyne took the opportunity to note that Schiehallion exhibited a gravitational attraction , and thus all mountains did ; and that Newton 's inverse square law of gravitation had been confirmed . An appreciative Royal Society presented Maskelyne with the 1775 Copley Medal ; the biographer Chalmers later noting that " If any doubts yet remained with respect to the truth of the Newtonian system , they were now totally removed " .

The work of the surveying team was greatly hampered by the inclemency of the weather , and it took until 1776 to complete the task . To find the volume of the mountain , it was necessary to divide it into a set of vertical prisms and compute the volume of each . The triangulation task falling to Charles Hutton was considerable : the surveyors had obtained thousands of bearings to more than a thousand points around the mountain . Moreover , the vertices of his prisms did not always conveniently coincide with the surveyed heights . To make sense of all his data , he hit upon the idea of interpolating a series of lines at set intervals between his measure values , marking points of equal height . In doing so , not only could he easily determine the heights of his prisms , but from the swirl of the lines one could get an instant impression of the form of the terrain . Hutton had invented contour lines , in common use since for depicting cartographic relief . Hutton had to compute the individual attractions due to each of the many prisms that formed his grid , a process which was as laborious as the survey itself . The task occupied his time for a further two years before he could present his results , which he did in a hundred-page paper to the Royal Society in 1778 . He found that the attraction of the plumb-bob to the Earth would be 9,933 times that of the sum of its attractions to the mountain at the north and south stations , if the density of the Earth and Schiehallion had been the same . Since the actual deflection of 11.6 ″ implied a ratio of 17,804 : 1 after accounting for the effect of latitude on gravity , he was able to state that the Earth had a mean density of <formula> , or about <formula> that of the mountain . The lengthy process of surveying the mountain had not therefore greatly affected the outcome of Maskelyne 's calculations . Hutton took a density of 2,500 kg · m − 3 for Schiehallion , and announced that the density of the Earth was <formula> of this , or 4,500 kg · m − 3 . In comparison with the modern accepted figure of 5,515 kg · m − 3 , the density of the Earth had been computed with an error of less than 20 % .

That the mean density of the Earth should so greatly exceed that of its surface rocks naturally meant that there must be more dense material lying deeper . Hutton correctly surmised that the core material was likely metallic , and might have a density of 10,000 kg · m − 3 . He estimated this metallic portion to occupy some 65 % of the diameter of the Earth . With a value for the mean density of the Earth , Hutton was able to set some values to Jérôme Lalande 's planetary tables , which had previously only been able to express the densities of the major solar system objects in relative terms .

A more accurate measurement of the mean density of the Earth was made 24 years after Schiehallion , when in 1798 Henry Cavendish used an exquisitely sensitive torsion balance to measure the attraction between large masses of lead . Cavendish 's figure of 5,448 ± 33 kg · m − 3 was only 1.2 % from the currently accepted value of 5,515 kg · m − 3 , and his result would not be significantly improved upon until 1895 by Charles Boys . The care with which Cavendish conducted the experiment and the accuracy of his result has led his name to since be associated with it . John Playfair carried out a second survey of Schiehallion in 1811 ; on the basis of a rethink of its rock strata , he suggested a density of 4,560 to 4,870 kg · m − 3 , though the then elderly Hutton vigorously defended the original value in an 1821 paper to the Society . Playfair 's calculations had raised the density closer towards its modern value , but was still too low and significantly poorer than Cavendish 's computation of some years earlier . The Schiehallion experiment was repeated in 1856 by Henry James , director-general of the Ordnance Survey , who instead used the hill Arthur 's Seat in central Edinburgh . With the resources of the Ordnance Survey at his disposal , James extended his topographical survey to a 21-kilometre radius , taking him as far as the borders of Midlothian . He obtained a density of about 5,300 kg · m − 3 .

An experiment in 2005 undertook a variation of the 1774 work : instead of computing local differences in the zenith , the experiment made a very accurate comparison of the period of a pendulum at the top and bottom of Schiehallion . The period of a pendulum is a function of g , the local gravitational acceleration . The pendulum is expected to run more slowly at altitude , but the mass of the mountain will act to reduce this difference . This experiment has the advantage of being considerably easier to conduct than the 1774 one , but to achieve the desired accuracy , it is necessary to measure the period of the pendulum to within one part in one million . This experiment yielded a value of the mass of the Earth of 8.1 ± 2.4 × 1024 kg , corresponding to a mean density of 7,500 ± 1,900 kg · m − 3 . A modern re-examination of the geophysical data was able to take account of factors the 1774 team could not . With the benefit of a 120-km radius digital elevation model , greatly improved knowledge of the geology of Schiehallion , and in particular a computer , a 2007 report produced a mean Earth density of 5,480 ± 250 kg · m − 3 . When compared to the modern figure of 5,515 kg · m − 3 , it stood as a testament to the accuracy of Maskelyne 's astronomical observations .

Consider the force diagram to the right , in which the deflection has been greatly exaggerated . The analysis has been simplified by considering the attraction on only one side of the mountain . A plumb-bob of mass m is situated a distance d from P , the centre of mass of a mountain of mass MM and density ρM . It is deflected through a small angle θ due to its attraction F towards P and its weight W directed towards the Earth . The vector sum of W and F results in a tension T in the pendulum string . The Earth has a mass ME , radius rE and a density ρE . Where G is Newton 's gravitational constant . G and m can be eliminated by taking the ratio of F to W : Where VM and VE are the volumes of the mountain and the Earth . Under static equilibrium , the horizontal and vertical components of the string tension T can be related to the gravitational forces and the deflection angle θ : Since VE , VM , d and rE are all known , and θ and d have been measured , then a value for the ratio ρE : ρM can be obtained :

The Battle of Ban Me Thuot was a decisive battle of the Vietnam War which led to the complete destruction of South Vietnam 's II Corps Tactical Zone . The battle was part of a larger North Vietnamese military operation known as Campaign 275 to capture the Tay Nguyen region , known in the West as the Vietnamese Central Highlands . In March 1975 the Vietnam People 's Army ( VPA ) 4th Corps staged a large-scale offensive , known as Campaign 275 , with the aim of capturing the Central Highlands from the Army of the Republic of Vietnam ( ARVN ) in order to kick-start the first stage of the 1975 Spring Offensive . Within ten days , the North Vietnamese destroyed most South Vietnamese military formations in II Corps Tactical Zone , exposing the severe weaknesses of the South Vietnamese Army . For South Vietnam , the defeat at Ban Me Thuot and the disastrous evacuation from the Central Highlands came about as a result of two major mistakes . Firstly , in the days leading up to the assault on Ban Me Thuot , ARVN Major General Pham Van Phu repeatedly ignored intelligence which showed the presence of several North Vietnamese combat divisions around the district . Secondly , President Nguyen Van Thieu 's strategy to withdraw from the Central Highlands was poorly planned and implemented .

At the beginning of 1975 , members of the North Vietnamese Political Bureau paid close attention to the military situation in South Vietnam to plan for their next major offensive . On January 8 , two days after the Vietnam People ’ s Army 4th Corps had captured Phuoc Long on the northern edges of South Vietnam ’ s III Corps Tactical Zone , North Vietnamese leaders agreed to launch an all-out military offensive , in order to end the war . Originally the North Vietnamese leaders expected the campaign would last two years , be completed in 1976 , and pave the way for final victory . Their key objectives were to bring military pressure closer to Saigon , annihilate as many South Vietnamese military units as possible , and create favourable conditions on the battlefield so that combat forces could be deployed from their current localities . Following extensive discussions on the fighting ability of the Army of the Republic of Vietnam , the Political Bureau approved the General Staff ’ s plan , which had selected the Central Highlands as the main battlefield for the upcoming offensive . The Central Highlands campaign was codenamed ‘ Campaign 275 ’ and the goal was to capture the city of Ban Me Thuot . To achieve that objective , North Vietnamese General Văn Tiến Dũng placed great emphasis on the principles of massed force , secrecy , and surprise to draw South Vietnamese forces away from the main objective . For the element of surprise to be successful , North Vietnamese forces needed to launch strong diversionary attacks on Pleiku and Kon Tum , thereby leaving Ban Me Thuot completely exposed . Once the element of surprise had been achieved , the North Vietnamese would mass their forces on Ban Me Thuot , and prevent South Vietnamese reinforcements from retaking the city .

In March 1975 the Vietnam People 's Army Central Highlands Front , under the command of General Hoang Minh Thao , were given the responsibility of carrying out Campaign 275 to capture key objectives in the Central Highlands . Major General Vu Lang was the deputy commander , Colonel Dang Vu Hiep was appointed the Front ’ s political commissar , and Colonel Phi Trieu Ham was the deputy political commissar . The Central Highlands Front fielded five infantry divisions ( 3rd ‘ Gold Star ’ , 10th , 316th , 320A and 968th Infantry Divisions ) and four independent regiments ( 25th , 271st , 95A , and 95B Infantry Regiments ) . To support the aforementioned units , North Vietnam deployed the 273rd Armoured Regiment , two artillery units ( 40th and 675th Artillery Regiments ) , three air-defence units ( 232nd , 234th , and 593rd Air-Defence Regiments ) , two combat engineer units ( 7th and 575th Combat Engineer Regiments ) , and the 29th Communications Regiment .

Between February 17 and February 19 , 1975 , North Vietnamese field commanders in the Central Highlands Front held a conference to plan for their upcoming offensive . In order to plan their combat strategy , North Vietnamese commanders assessed the potential obstacles faced by the Vietnam People ’ s Army and the strength of the Army of the Republic of Vietnam ( ARVN ) in the Central Highlands . Following extensive discussions , North Vietnamese commanders concluded that the South Vietnamese army in the Central Highlands could mobilise about 5 – 7 regiment-sized units to counter the upcoming offensive . In the worst-case scenario , if South Vietnamese units were not tied up elsewhere , North Vietnamese commanders thought that South Vietnam could probably mobilise between nine and twelve regiments . North Vietnamese commanders believed South Vietnam could deploy about one or two armoured brigades , three to five battalions of artillery , and 80 aircraft per day to support the army . The North Vietnamese commanders within the Central Highlands Front discussed the possibility of the United States re-entering the conflict , which they believed would see the commitment of about 100 fighter-bombers from the United States Seventh Fleet .

Aside from dealing with the army formations which South Vietnam might have deployed , the question of where and when to strike was the main problem that concerned the North Vietnamese . After the strength of both armies had been taken into account , the Central Highlands High Command came up with two offensive options . In the first option , the North Vietnamese could avoid the outlying South Vietnamese installations and strike directly at their primary target of Ban Me Thuot . For the first option to be successful , the North Vietnamese had to secure Highways 14 , 19 , and 21 to isolate Ban Me Thuot , and stop potential South Vietnamese reinforcements . The North Vietnamese favoured the first option , because it would give the ARVN 23rd Infantry Division and other support units little or no time to respond . At the same time , the first option would have enabled a quick victory without inflicting large-scale damage on the civilian population of Ban Me Thuot . In the second option , the North Vietnamese had to destroy all the outlying South Vietnamese defences and then move on to Ban Me Thuot . The Central Highlands Front , under General Hoang Minh Thao 's command , ordered all combat units to follow the second option and destroy the defences around Ban Me Thuot , but to be ready to switch to the first option when the opportunity presented itself .

The 23rd Division ( South Vietnam ) under the command of Brigadier General Tran Van Cam was the main unit defending Ban Me Thuot and the surrounding areas . Major General Pham Van Phu had at his disposal five artillery battalions equipped with 146 artillery guns , and one armoured brigade of about 117 tanks and armoured vehicles . The South Vietnamese military also stationed air force and naval units in Ban Me Thuot . The Army of the Republic of Vietnam also had the 22nd Division ( South Vietnam ) , seven ranger battalions , 36 regional force battalions , eight artillery battalions equipped with 230 artillery guns , and four armoured brigades in the Central Highlands . To support those ground units , the South Vietnamese air force had 32 fighter-bombers , 86 helicopters , and 32 transport and reconnaissance aircraft . Across the Central Highlands of Vietnam , the South Vietnamese military enjoyed a numerical superiority of about 78,300 soldiers against North Vietnam ’ s 65,141 soldiers . However , within the vicinity of Ban Me Thuot , the South Vietnamese were actually outnumbered by a ratio of 5 : 1 . The North Vietnamese had more tanks , armoured vehicles , and heavy artillery , with a ratio of about 2 : 1 . North Vietnamese General Van Tien Dung believed his tank and artillery units in the Central Highlands were the key factors that guaranteed a quick victory , because South Vietnam simply lacked the capability to withstand such large numbers of heavy weaponry .

On February 18 , 1975 , President Nguyễn Văn Thiệu gathered all his commanders at the Independence Palace to discuss the Ly Thuong Kiet Military Plan , which was approved by the National Security Council in December 1974 . During a briefing by ARVN Colonel Hoang Ngoc Lung , Head of the ARVN General Staff , several important issues were brought to the attention of President Nguyễn Văn Thiệu and the ARVN Corps commanders . Firstly , information gathered by the South Vietnamese army showed there were seven North Vietnamese divisions in the northern areas of South Vietnam ’ s I Corps Tactical Zone . Secondly , there were signs which suggested that the North Vietnamese might launch a large-scale attack during the spring-summer season of 1975 . And thirdly , the II Corps Tactical Zone under the command of Major General Pham Van Phu was most likely North Vietnam ’ s first target . On February 19 General Phu returned to Pleiku to draw up a defence plan . During the next few days , reports from South Vietnamese intelligence showed that North Vietnam ’ s 968th Infantry Division had arrived in South Vietnam ’ s II Corps from Laos . Two divisions ( 10th and 320A Infantry Divisions ) had taken up positions around Pleiku and Kon Tum , while two regiments ( 271st and 202nd Regiments ) had set up their base in Quang Duc . On March 2 a CIA officer flew out from Nha Trang to inform ARVN Colonel Nguyen Trong Luat of North Vietnamese preparations to attack Ban Me Thuot , without offering information on the strength of North Vietnamese formations . In response to the CIA report , General Phu ordered the 53rd Regiment to move from Quang Duc to Ban Me Thuot , and the 45th Regiment from Thuan Man to Thanh An-Don Tham . General Phu did not make any further changes to the South Vietnamese order of battle in or around Ban Me Thuot . Thus , by the time the North Vietnamese opened fire on Ban Me Thuot , General Phu had simply failed to implement an effective plan to save II Corps .

In February 1975 , during the midst of Tet New Year celebrations , a North Vietnamese deserter surrendered himself to the ARVN 2nd Brigade Headquarters . Through extensive interrogations , the North Vietnamese soldier revealed the whereabouts of North Vietnamese units ; the 10th Infantry Division had encircled Duc Lap , while the 320A Infantry Division had arrived in Ea H ’ leo and were gearing up for an assault on Thuan Man , and an unknown unit was heading towards Ban Me Thuot . In late February , North Vietnamese artillery shells began to rain down on Pleiku , which convinced General Phu that the North Vietnamese would attack Pleiku instead of Ban Me Thuot . South Vietnamese military intelligence and information received from the American Embassy in Saigon showed the presence of about two or three North Vietnamese combat divisions positioned about 20 kilometres away from Kontum and Pleiku . Indeed , the movements around Pleiku and Kontum during the month of February were designed by the North Vietnamese Tay Nguyen Front to fool South Vietnamese military commanders in the Central Highlands . Since December 1974 , the North Vietnamese prepared for the offensive by conducting raids on various South Vietnamese outposts and broadcasting fake radio messages to keep South Vietnamese commanders guessing about the location of their next assault . While the South Vietnamese units were kept occupied by Communist diversions , North Vietnamese General Hoang Minh Thao began moving his troops into attacking positions . The VPA 7th Combat Engineer Regiment was tasked with connecting Route 14 at North Vo Dinh with Highway 19 near Mang Yang Pass , which surpassed the district of Kontum . The VPA 10th Infantry Division began withdrawing from Duc Lap , and only left a small force behind to continue the bombardment of Pleiku , as artillery and tanks units took positions north of Kontum . The 320A Infantry Division deployed a small unit west of Pleiku to apply additional pressure on South Vietnamese positions at La Son , Thanh An , and Don Tam . Elements of the 95th Regiment conducted blocking operations along Highway 19 to stop South Vietnamese reinforcements from reaching their destination . The 198th Special Forces Regiment raided South Vietnamese depots at Pleiku , while the main formation of the 10th and 320A Infantry Divisions marched on Ban Me Thuot .

Personnel from local Viet Cong units infiltrated Kontum and Pleiku to spread rumours of a ‘ big Communist offensive ’ on the aforementioned districts . In response to the rumours , the ARVN 45th Infantry Regiment was sent out to sweep the areas near Ban Me Thuot , Thuan Man , and Duc Lap . To maintain the secrecy of their operations , the North Vietnamese Tay Nguyen Front ordered the 320A Infantry Division , which had by then set up camp west of Ban Me Thuot , to avoid contact with the South Vietnamese . Upon their arrival from Laos , the 316th Infantry Division received similar orders , and was not allowed to open fire under any circumstances . As the events in South Vietnam ’ s II Corps Tactical Zone were beginning to unfold , intelligence reports from Saigon continued to warn General Phu of an imminent Communist onslaught on Ban Me Thuot . Despite the numerous warnings which he had received from the CIA and his own military intelligence , General Phu remained convinced that Pleiku would be North Vietnam ’ s next target . As a result , on February 18 , 1975 , he ordered the 23rd Infantry Division to remain at their positions in Kontum and Pleiku , thereby reversing his earlier decision to bolster South Vietnamese defences at Ban Me Thuot .

On March 3 , 1975 , North Vietnam ’ s Campaign 275 against South Vietnamese military forces in the Central Highlands began . The 95A Regiment was the first unit to go into action when they destroyed one South Vietnamese regional force battalion and successfully secured a 20-kilometre stretch of road on Highway 19 connecting Ayun with Pleibon and Phu Yen . Later , elements of the North Vietnamese 3rd ‘ Gold Star ’ Division secured a section of Highway 19 at Thuong An that connected with Bridge no.13 at Dong An Khe , killing about 300 South Vietnamese soldiers . On the night of March 5 , the North Vietnamese 25th Regiment ambushed a South Vietnamese transportation convoy at Chi Cuc and cut off Highway 21 west of Ban Me Thuot . To keep all the main roads open , Phu sent reinforcements to defend a section of Highway 19 at the eastern side of Peiku and ordered the ARVN 45th Infantry Regiment to march back from Thuan Man to defend Route 14 at southern Pleiku . The ARVN 53rd Infantry Regiment , under the command of Colonel Vu The Quang , was redeployed from Quang Duc Province to defend Ban Me Thuot . By March 8 , the North Vietnamese army had completely isolated the South Vietnamese II Corps Tactical Zone from the rest of the country . Route 7 , which had not been used for a long time due to neglect , was the only road still open .

On March 5 Quang sent one of his battalions to Ban Me Thuot in a convoy of 14 vehicles . They were ambushed by the North Vietnamese 9th Regiment , 320A Infantry Division at Thuan Man . Eight vehicles were destroyed , while two 150mm artillery guns were captured by the North Vietnamese . The remaining seven vehicles had to turn back , and Quang returned to Ban Me Thuot on a helicopter . On March 7 the North Vietnamese 48th Regiment , 320A Infantry Division , captured Chu Se and Thuan Man , and took 121 soldiers prisoner . On March 9 Phu ordered the 21st Ranger Battalion to fly out from Pleiku to support the 53rd Infantry Regiment in their efforts to retake Thuan Man . During the early hours of March 9 , as the 21st Ranger Battalion and the 53rd Infantry Regiment were repeatedly beaten back in their attempts to retake Thuan Man , the under-strength North Vietnamese 10th Regiment captured Duc Lap and the surrounding areas . At 11 am on March 9 , Phu flew out to Ban Me Thuot to assess the military situation with Brigadier General Le Trung Tuong , Colonel Vu The Quang , and Colonel Nguyen Trong Luat . Phu admitted that the situation at Duc Lap was irreversible . The 21st Ranger Battalion was reassigned to the north of Ban Me Thuot , the 2nd Battalion of the 53rd Infantry Regiment was to defend Dac Sac , and when the opportunity arose they would be tasked with retaking Duc Lap . Subsequently , Quang was entrusted with the task of defending Ban Me Thuot . Despite the strong presence of two North Vietnamese divisions outside Ban Me Thuot , Phu believed the situation outside the district was only a mere diversion attempt , and the real target would be Pleiku . Thus , upon arrival at his Pleiku headquarters , he raised the level of alertness there to 100 % . While Phu was waiting for the enemy to assault Pleiku , the North Vietnamese 7th and 575th Combat Engineer Regiments cleared the main roads into Ban Me Thuot to ensure tanks and heavy artillery could be directed at the district without hindrance . By the early hours of March 10 , the North Vietnamese army was in a strong position to strike at Ban Me Thuot .

At 2 am on March 10 , 1975 , the North Vietnamese army began their assault on South Vietnamese forces at Ban Me Thuot . The North Vietnamese 198th Special Forces Regiment spearheaded the attack by hitting the Hoa Binh Airfield , the district of Mai Hac De , and the headquarters of the ARVN 53rd Infantry Regiment . The initial North Vietnamese attack , which was marked by heavy artillery bombardment and actions initiated by the 198th Special Forces Regiment , had shocked ARVN Colonels Nguyen Trong Luat and Vu The Quang , both subordinates of Major General Pham Van Phu . Despite the strength of the initial assault , Quang believed the North Vietnamese only wanted to cause disruption and would withdraw their forces by daybreak . By 3 : 30 am , the 4th Battalion , 198th Special Forces Regiment , had successfully secured Phan Chu Trinh Road and the southern part of Hoa Binh airport , and they waited there for the regular infantry and tank units to arrive . The North Vietnamese 5th Battalion , 198th Special Forces Regiment continued their assault on South Vietnamese installations at Mai Hac De district and the headquarters of the ARVN 53rd Infantry Regiment . The 5th Battalion successfully overran the nearby South Vietnamese artillery position and the tactical operations centre , thereby establishing control over the battlefield . By 5 am all main roads leading into the city of Ban Me Thuot were completely under North Vietnamese control . As the sun rose , the North Vietnamese continued to pound South Vietnamese positions around Ban Me Thuot with heavy artillery to cover the next wave of infantry assaults . During the morning of March 10 , North Vietnamese infantry units attacked Ban Me Thuot from different directions along the main roads . The 174th Regiment , with one armoured battalion in support , marched through Chi Lang , Chu Di , and Mai Hac De from the northwest . As the 95B Regiment approached Ban Me Thuot from the northeast , the main formation of the 149th Regiment secured Chu Blom and marched towards Ban Me Thuot from the southeast . The 1st Battalion , 3rd Regiment and the 1st Battalion , 149th Regiment launched an assault on Hoa Binh airfield from the northeast and southwest respectively . At the same time , the 2nd Regiment captured the South Vietnamese installation at Phuoc An .

In an attempt to halt the North Vietnamese assault , Luat ordered two squadrons of M-113 armoured personnel carriers to confront the enemy at Nga Sau , but they were forced to turn back by tanks from the North Vietnamese 3rd Tank Battalion , 273rd Armoured Regiment . At around 5 : 30 pm , a South Vietnamese ranger battalion was forced to abandon the nearby installation at Dac Lac after continuous assaults from the 95B Regiment . In the northeast , the South Vietnamese 9th Ranger Battalion held off the North Vietnamese 95B Regiment until they abandoned their positions on the next day . In the western outskirts of Ban Me Thuot , eight A-37 Dragonfly bombers from the South Vietnamese 6th Air Force Division inflicted light casualties on the North Vietnamese 24th Regiment , but failed to stop their enemies ’ momentum . In the southwest , Quang tried to retake Mai Hac De by mobilising his reserve units with tactical air support . Meanwhile , in the south-eastern end of Ban Me Thuot , the North Vietnamese 149th Regiment defeated the South Vietnamese 53rd Infantry Regiment , after they sustained heavy casualties from repeated air attacks from A-37 bombers .

Earlier in the day , at about 2 : 30 pm , South Vietnamese Colonel Trinh Tieu , Chief of the ARVN 2nd Brigade in II Corps , discovered that the North Vietnamese 316th Infantry Division had moved into positions south of Ban Me Thuot from their base in Laos . To stop them from advancing any further , Phu ordered his soldiers to destroy every bridge connected to Highway 14 . By the time Phu ’ s order was carried out , elements of the North Vietnamese 316th Infantry Division had engaged in clashes with the South Vietnamese for more than 10 hours . By 5 pm the North Vietnamese 8th Battalion , 149th Regiment , in combination with the 198th Special Forces Regiment , tried but failed to capture Hoa Binh airfield , which was defended by one South Vietnamese ranger battalion . During the night of March 10 , there was a lull in the fighting around Ban Me Thuot . South Vietnamese soldiers began retreating to various points around the headquarters of the ARVN 23rd Infantry Division , the Hoa Binh airfield , and the radio station . Colonel Quang , in a desperate attempt to save Ban Me Thuot , called on Brigadier General Le Trung Tuong to send reinforcements ; none were sent . In the early hours of March 11 , the North Vietnamese army resumed their assault under continuous bombing runs from South Vietnamese air force A-37 Dragonfly bombers . At 7 : 55 am , the South Vietnamese air force , while trying to stop a dozen North Vietnamese tanks from advancing toward their objective , accidentally dropped two bombs on the headquarters of the ARVN 23rd Infantry Division . From that point on , the ARVN 23rd Infantry Division lost all contact with the ARVN 2nd Brigade Command Headquarters . At 11 am on March 11 , the North Vietnamese 316th Infantry Division established full control over Ban Me Thuot after South Vietnamese soldiers within the city realised that they had been defeated and that no reinforcements had been sent . Thus , only Hoa Binh airfield was still in South Vietnamese hands , with the under-strength ARVN 21st Ranger Battalion and the 53rd Infantry Regiment defending the area .

On March 12 , all South Vietnamese soldiers who had survived the North Vietnamese assault gathered at the headquarters of the 23rd Infantry Division and Hoa Binh airfield . Unfortunately , those soldiers were without their leaders , because both Colonels Nguyen Trong Luat and Vu The Quang were captured by the North Vietnamese in the early hours of the day . From Saigon , President Nguyen Van Thieu ordered Phu to hold all South Vietnamese positions at the eastern end of Ban Me Thuot , where they could stage a counter-attack . Phu drew up a plan to retake Ban Me Thuot that would involve the last two remaining regiments ( 44th and 45th Infantry Regiments ) of the ARVN 23rd Infantry Division and the soldiers who had gathered at the 23rd Infantry Division headquarters and Hoa Binh airfield . Thieu approved the plan at dawn , and authorised Phu to make full use of three South Vietnamese air force units ( 6th Air Force Division belonging to the ARVN 2nd Brigade , 1st Air Force Division at Da Nang Air Base , and the 4th Air Force Division at Cần Thơ ) . On the afternoon of March 12 , elements of the ARVN 23rd Infantry Division were dropped off at designated landing zones around Phuoc An . Initially about 100 South Vietnamese helicopters participated in the operation , and 81 fighter-bombers were deployed to strike at North Vietnamese positions to cover the landings . At 3 : 10 pm , Phu took off in his Cessna U-17 to direct the operation over the skies of Ban Me Thuot . As he approached the battlefield , Phu phoned the South Vietnamese units at Hoa Binh airfield to notify them that an operation was underway , and he encouraged the soldiers to hold on to their positions . On the morning of March 13 , another 145 helicopters were used to complete the first phase of the operation with the entire 44th Infantry Regiment , the last soldiers of the 45th Infantry Regiment , and the 232nd Artillery Battalion dropped off at various points in Nong Trai , Phuoc An and along Highway 21 . At the completion of the landing operation , Phu returned to Pleiku to have a meeting with Thieu , during which they discussed the sudden appearance of the North Vietnamese 316th Infantry Division .

While the South Vietnamese air force was transporting the 23rd Infantry Division to the battlefield , their airbase at Cu Hanh was subjected to artillery bombardment from the North Vietnamese 968th Infantry Division . The North Vietnamese Central Highlands Front had anticipated the South Vietnamese military 's movements , so they built up their forces in and around Ban Me Thuot to prepare for a South Vietnamese counter-attack . On March 13 , the North Vietnamese 24th and 28th Regiments received two companies of armoured vehicles and one artillery battalion , which had begun raining artillery shells on Phuoc An . At 7 : 07 am on March 14 , even before the ARVN 44th and 45th Infantry Regiments began their combat operations , the North Vietnamese 24th Regiment opened fire and attacked the South Vietnamese , with support from the 273rd Armoured Regiment . By midday on March 14 , the 1st and 2nd Battalions of the ARVN 45th Infantry Regiment slowly melted away , as they were squeezed from all sides by the North Vietnamese 24th Regiment . Rather than marching on to Ban Me Thuot to relieve the soldiers of the 45th Infantry Regiment , the ARVN 44th Infantry Regiment were pinned down to fight the enemies ’ 24th Regiment . On March 16 , South Vietnamese formations at Phuoc An and Nong Trai came under heavy attack . At 8 : 15 am the 3rd Battalion , the last unit from the ARVN 45th Infantry Regiment , was completely wiped out . Subsequently , all South Vietnamese soldiers at Nong Trai were captured along with one helicopter .

On March 17 General Hoang Minh Thao ordered the 28th Regiment and the rest of the 273rd Armoured Regiment to support the 24th Regiment in their efforts to capture Phuoc An . At the same time , the North Vietnamese 66th Regiment and the 198th Special Forces Regiment began their final push on Hoa Binh airfield . At 11 : 30 am , South Vietnamese soldiers at Hoa Binh airfield , mainly drawn from the 53rd Infantry Regiment and the 21st Ranger Battalion , were finally defeated . Simultaneously , the remnants of the ARVN 44th Infantry Regiment abandoned Phuoc An , leaving the North Vietnamese in complete control of Ban Me Thuot .

While battles were raging in and around Ban Me Thuot , South Vietnamese military forces in I Corps Tactical Zone were under pressure by the North Vietnamese 324th and 325th Infantry Divisions . During the period from March 8 to March 13 , there were clashes in Truoi in southern Hue , Mai Linh , Mo Tau , Thien Phuoc , and Quang Ngai . As a result of the immense pressure placed upon I Corps , the ARVN General Staff could not deploy strong units from the region to defend Ban Me Thuot and the rest of II Corps . On March 11 Thieu convened a meeting with Prime Minister Trần Thiện Khiêm , Chief of the ARVN General Staff General Cao Văn Viên , and Lieutenant General Dang Van Quang to discuss the military situation in the northern provinces of South Vietnam . In this meeting , Thieu decided to withdraw what was left of his army from the northern provinces to defend the Mekong region , where most of the nation ’ s population and vital economic resources were located . Thieu justified his decision on the basis that the South Vietnamese military could not defend every inch of South Vietnam ’ s territory , so the military had to be ‘ lightened at the top and heavy at the bottom ’ .

Starting at 11 am on March 14 , Thieu flew out to Cam Ranh for a briefing with General Phu . The events which took place after this briefing would go down as one of the greatest failures in military history . After Phu had outlined the military situation in the Central Highlands , he asked Thieu to bolster the South Vietnamese 6th Air Force Division with more aircraft and additional brigades to defend Kontum and Pleiku . Thieu refused to send further reinforcements because the South Vietnamese military no longer had the resources . Phu was ordered to move all his units down to the Mekong region where they could continue fighting . General Vien cautioned against moving large military formations down Highway 19 ; he reminded Thieu of the destruction suffered by the French Mobile Group 100 in the region in 1954 . Thieu and his commanders made the decision to use Route 7 instead , in an attempt to surprise the North Vietnamese , who would not expect them to use that road due to its poor condition . After the briefing Phu immediately returned to his headquarters in Pleiku , where he began planning for the withdrawal with Brigadier Generals Tran Van Cam , Pham Ngoc Sang , Pham Duy Tat , and Colonel Le Khac Ly . To maintain secrecy , Phu ordered his officers to issue orders using only word of mouth instead of written documents , and not to reveal the withdrawal plan to local regional forces . Furthermore , he stated that the abandonment of II Corps Tactical Zone had to be quick , with the army taking only enough military equipment and ammunition to fight one last battle . Generals Tat and Cam were assigned the task of supervising the movements of soldiers and their dependents on the ground . Sang was responsible for the movement of vital military equipment and supplies via air transport and to sweep Route 7 using air force fighter-bombers . Ly was ordered to lead a group of combat engineers to repair the road and bridges on Route 7 , as well as maintain contact with the ARVN 2nd Brigade Headquarters in Nha Trang . The plan was destined to fail , as Phu was unaware that General Ngo Quang Truong , commander of I Corps Tactical Zone , had also received similar orders to evacuate .

Although local commanders in II Corps Tactical Zone tried their best to maintain secrecy , the unusual movement of transport aircraft in Pleiku on March 14 stirred up concern and suspicion amongst soldiers and civilians in the area . On March 15 the concerns of civilians were further heightened when a convoy of transport vehicles belonging to the 6th and 23rd Ranger Battalions headed south from Kontum . On the afternoon of March 15 , the withdrawal of South Vietnamese forces began to pick up momentum . The ARVN 19th Armoured Cavalry Squadron and the 6th Ranger Battalion opened the main road which stretched from Pleiku to Phu Tuc . Behind them were various infantry , armoured vehicle , and support units . During the early phases of the operation , Phu was confident that his plan would succeed for two reasons . Firstly , he believed most North Vietnamese units were busy stopping the counter-attack at Phuoc An waged by the ARVN 23rd Infantry Division and would not have the time to disrupt the withdrawal . Secondly , if the North Vietnamese 968th Infantry Division near Pleiku was deployed to stop the operation , it would have to overcome the formidable ARVN 25th Ranger Battalion which was tasked with stopping any North Vietnamese attacks .

For North Vietnamese field commanders of the Tay Nguyen Front , the withdrawal of South Vietnamese military forces from II Corps Tactical Zone came as a surprise , but it was not totally unexpected . What surprised the North Vietnamese the most was the speed of the withdrawal . Indeed , it was not until the evening of March 15 , when the ARVN 19th Armoured Cavalry Squadron reached Cheo Reo , that the North Vietnamese began to receive information of Saigon ’ s decision to abandon the Central Highlands . At 8 pm on March 16 , the Tay Nguyen Front Command issued the first orders to pursue the South Vietnamese . The North Vietnamese 9th Battalion , 64th Regiment , part of the 320A Infantry Division , was the first unit to be mobilised to intercept the South Vietnamese column south of Cheo Reo district . Subsequently , the entire North Vietnamese 320A Infantry Division was sent to destroy the South Vietnamese column along Route 7 , with the 2nd Tank Battalion of the 273rd Armoured Regiment , the 675th Regiment , and the 593rd Anti-Aircraft Regiment in support . By the early hours of March 17 , tanks from the ARVN 19th Armoured Cavalry Squadron and the 6th Ranger Battalion clashed with the North Vietnamese 9th Battalion , 64th Regiment at Tuna Pass , about 4 kilometres away from the district of Cheo Reo .

During the evening of March 17 , General Tat organised a counter-attack against the enemy 's 9th Battalion with support from fighter-bombers , tanks and artillery , but his troops were repeatedly beaten back in their attempt to keep the road open . By the early hours of March 18 , the entire North Vietnamese 64th Regiment had blocked all the routes around Tuna Pass , while the 48th Regiment and elements of the North Vietnamese 968th Infantry Division began closing in on Cheo Reo from three directions . In the afternoon , Phu sent the 25th Ranger Battalion and the 2nd Armoured Cavalry Brigade to reopen Route 7 . At the same time the North Vietnamese 675th Artillery Regiment began shelling the main South Vietnamese column in Cheo Reo as three infantry regiments attacked the convoy from all sides . Unfortunately for the South Vietnamese , all their attempts to organise strong resistance were stifled by the chaos created by North Vietnamese artillery bombardments . At 3 pm , General Tat was ordered to destroy all heavy weaponry so the North Vietnamese could not make use of it . About 30 minutes later , a UH-1 helicopter landed on the grounds of Phu Bon primary school to pick up Tat and flew off to Nha Trang . At 9 am on March 19 , all South Vietnamese soldiers in the district of Cheo Reo stopped fighting . The 6th Ranger Battalion and the 19th Armoured Cavalry Squadron became the only units to arrive at their destination at Cung Son with only light casualties .

The loss of Ban Me Thuot and the subsequent evacuation from the Central Highlands cost South Vietnam ’ s II Corps Tactical Zone more than 75 % of its combat units — the 23rd Infantry Division , the Ranger groups , tanks , armoured cavalry , artillery , and combat engineering units . Overall about 3 / 4 of all South Vietnamese army soldiers were killed , wounded , deserted , or missing . North Vietnamese casualties were light in comparison , with 600 soldiers killed and 2,416 wounded . Official Vietnamese history informs that during the eight days of fighting , North Vietnam 's army put 28,514 South Vietnamese officers and soldiers out of action ; 4,502 were killed in action and 16,822 were captured . The North Vietnamese army destroyed 17,183 small arms of various kinds , 79 artillery pieces , and 207 tanks and armoured vehicles ; 44 aircraft were shot down and another 110 were damaged . Civilians who took part in the evacuation suffered the consequences of the military action along Route 7 . Most of the civilians who followed the military convoy were either relatives of soldiers or officers in the army , or were government civil servants . Of the estimated 400,000 civilians who initially took part in the march , only a handful actually reached their destinations in the Mekong region . In addition to the casualties inflicted upon them by North Vietnamese artillery , the civilians were also hit by air strikes from the South Vietnamese air force . As a result of those huge losses , Route 7 became known as the ‘ convoy of tears ’ .

The collapse of South Vietnamese forces in the Central Highlands came about as a result of three major factors . Firstly , during much of the war , President Nguyen Van Thieu ’ s confidence in the ARVN ’ s intelligence could not be shaken . However , following the capitulation of Ban Me Thuot , Thieu lost all faith in his own military intelligence agencies , when it became evidently clear that the strength of North Vietnamese forces was far greater than what South Vietnamese intelligence agencies had gathered . Consequently , Thieu completely ignored his own military intelligence and the CIA , and made all military decisions by himself without consulting the Joint General Staff . Thus , when Major-General Pham Van Phu requested that Thieu send reinforcements to bolster the strength of South Vietnamese forces in the Central Highlands , Thieu gave him two options : either carry out the President ’ s orders , or be replaced by somebody who was willing to do so . General Phu chose to implement Thieu ’ s orders and evacuated his units from II Corps . The second factor which contributed to the destruction of the ARVN 2nd Brigade , II Corps Tactical Zone , was the inability of South Vietnamese commanders to coordinate the withdrawal . In the process of pulling out from the Central Highlands , large numbers of South Vietnamese soldiers and heavy military equipment were stretched out along the narrow corridor of Route 7 . Behind the military formation were huge numbers of South Vietnamese civilians who were relatives of the military personnel , as well as government officials and their families . Unfortunately for the South Vietnamese soldiers on the ground , their army simply lacked the logistical system required to maintain the element of secrecy , which South Vietnamese commanders had hoped would enable them to pull out from the region without drawing too much attention from the North Vietnamese . It is hard to fathom how South Vietnamese commanders hoped to move 400,000 civilians in utmost secrecy . So when North Vietnamese forces attacked the South Vietnamese column along Route 7 , there was little South Vietnamese commanders could do to prevent the destruction of their units .

The third factor which led to the quick disintegration of II Corps was the poor state of morale amongst the soldiers of the Army of the Republic of Vietnam . By 1975 , the morale of South Vietnamese soldiers and their commanding officers had reached its lowest point as the war continued to drag on with no end in sight . The determination of the ARVN officer corps had taken a serious blow when South Vietnamese Foreign Minister Tran Van Lam returned from the United States in February 1975 , and reported that no additional military or economic aid had been offered . When the order was given to abandon the Central Highlands , the primary concern of South Vietnamese military personnel was not battlefield victories , but the welfare of their families . Consequently , when the North Vietnamese attacked South Vietnamese forces on Route 7 , large numbers of South Vietnamese soldiers left the battlefield to search for their families amidst the chaos . During the final days of South Vietnam ’ s existence , the average South Vietnamese soldier showed more loyalty to his family than to his commanding officer , which had a significant impact on his willingness to fight on .

During the First Indochina War ( 1945 to 1954 ) , both Viet Minh and French forces considered the Central Highlands to be their ‘ home ’ , as it was considered the key to domination in Indochina . Both sides recognised that in order to occupy the Central Highlands , they had to possess a sufficient reserve of manpower with which to control the strategic areas within the region . By 1975 , the South Vietnamese military could no longer afford to maintain a large strategic reserve . South Vietnamese units in II Corps were overstretched in various locations across the Central Highlands , and could easily be overrun by enemy forces . Although Thieu ’ s decision to abandon the region was made with the aim of saving the military formations of II Corps , the decision nonetheless turned into a death warrant for General Phu ’ s men and their families . The lack of coordination and poor organisation during the withdrawal operation not only led to the destruction of II Corps , but marked the beginning of the end for South Vietnam .

Arthur Stewart " Art " Farmer ( August 21 , 1928 – October 4 , 1999 ) was an American jazz trumpeter and flugelhorn player . He also played flumpet , a trumpet – flugelhorn combination specially designed for him . He and his identical twin brother , double bassist Addison Farmer , started playing professionally while in high school . Art gained greater attention after the release of a recording of his composition " Farmer 's Market " in 1952 . He subsequently moved from Los Angeles to New York , where he performed and recorded with musicians such as Horace Silver , Sonny Rollins , and Gigi Gryce and became known principally as a bebop player . As Farmer 's reputation grew , he expanded from bebop into more experimental forms through working with composers such as George Russell and Teddy Charles . He went on to join Gerry Mulligan 's quartet and , with Benny Golson , to co-found the Jazztet . Continuing to develop his own sound , Farmer switched from trumpet to the warmer flugelhorn in the early 1960s , and he helped to establish the flugelhorn as a soloist 's instrument in jazz . He settled in Europe in 1968 and continued to tour internationally until his death . Farmer recorded more than 50 albums under his own name , a dozen with the Jazztet , and dozens more with other leaders . His playing is known for its individuality – most noticeably , its lyricism , warmth of tone and sensitivity .

Art Farmer was born an hour before his twin brother , on August 21 , 1928 , in Council Bluffs , Iowa , reportedly at 2201 Fourth Avenue . Their parents , James Arthur Farmer and Hazel Stewart Farmer , divorced when the boys were four , and their steelworker father was killed in a work accident not long after this . Art moved with his grandfather , grandmother , mother , brother and sister to Phoenix , Arizona when he was still four . He started to play the piano while in elementary school , then moved on to bass tuba and violin before settling on cornet and then trumpet at the age of thirteen . His family was musical : most of them played as a hobby , and one was a professional trombonist . Art 's grandfather was a minister in the African Methodist Episcopal Church . This influenced Farmer 's first choice of instrument , as his mother played piano for the church choir . The bass tuba was for use in a marching band and was Farmer 's instrument for a year , until a cornet became available . Phoenix schools were segregated , and no one at Farmer 's school could provide useful music lessons . He taught himself to read music and practiced his new main instrument , the trumpet .

Farmer and his brother moved to Los Angeles in 1945 , attending the music-oriented Jefferson High School , where they got music instruction and met other developing musicians such as Sonny Criss , Ernie Andrews , Big Jay McNeely , and Ed Thigpen . The brothers earned money by working in a cold-storage warehouse and by playing professionally . Art started playing trumpet professionally at the age of 16 , performing in the bands of Horace Henderson , Jimmy Mundy , and Floyd Ray , among others . These opportunities came about through a combination of his ability and the absence of numerous older musicians , who were still in the armed forces following World War II . Around this time in Los Angeles , there were abundant opportunities for musical development , according to Farmer : " During the day you would go to somebody 's house and play . At night there were after-hours clubs [ ... and ] anybody who wanted to play was free to come up and play " . Farmer left high school early but persuaded the principal to give him a diploma , which he did not collect until a visit to the school in 1958 .

At this time , as an adolescent in Los Angeles , bebop and the swing era big bands both attracted Farmer 's attention . Decades later , he stated that , at that time , " I knew I had to be in jazz . Two things decided me – the sound of a trumpet section in a big band and hearing a jam session " . Farmer 's trumpet influences in the 1940s were Dizzy Gillespie , Miles Davis and Fats Navarro , but , in his own words , " then I heard Freddie Webster , and I loved his sound . I decided to work on sound because it seemed like most of the guys my age were just working on speed " .

Farmer left school to tour with a group led by Johnny Otis , but this job lasted for only four months , as Farmer 's lip gave out . Performing for long periods seven days a week for this job put great pressure on his technique , which was insufficiently developed to cope with such physical demands . His lip eventually became lacerated , and he could no longer play . He then received technique training in New York , where he worked for a time as a janitor and played as a freelance musician during 1947 and 1948 . An audition for Dizzy Gillespie 's big band was unsuccessful , and Farmer returned to the West Coast in 1948 as a member of Jay McShann 's band . Club and studio work was hard to get in Los Angeles from the late 1940s and into the 1950s , as it was dominated by white musicians . Farmer played and toured with Benny Carter , Roy Porter and Gerald Wilson , then played with Wardell Gray in 1951 – 52 . The hazards of the touring jazz musician 's lifestyle were also present : while travelling overnight by car between Phoenix and El Paso , to get to another Roy Porter-led gig , the car that Farmer was in overturned at high speed , leaving him concussed and Porter with broken ribs .

Farmer 's first studio recording appears to have been on June 28 or July 2 , 1948 , in Los Angeles , under the leadership of vocalist Big Joe Turner and pianist Pete Johnson . They recorded " Radar Blues " , and at some point in the same or the following year they added a further seven sides ; the eight tracks were released as four singles by Swing Time Records . Farmer recorded further singles with Roy Porter and then , on January 21 , 1952 , as a member of Wardell Gray 's sextet . The latter session produced six tracks that were released as singles . These included " Farmer 's Market " , a piece that was written by Farmer and brought him greater attention .

Farmer worked in Los Angeles for a time as a hotel janitor and a hospital file clerk , before joining Lionel Hampton 's orchestra in 1952 . He toured Europe with the orchestra , and shared the organization 's trumpet chairs with Clifford Brown , Quincy Jones and Benny Bailey . This aided his musical development considerably , as did his 1953 membership of Teddy Charles ' New Directions band – the compositions he encountered in this band allowed him to consider a broader range of expression during improvisation . Farmer relocated to New York and , on July 2 , 1953 , had his first recording session as leader . This was combined with another recorded 11 months later to form the eight-track Prestige LP , The Art Farmer Septet , featuring arrangements by Quincy Jones and Gigi Gryce . Farmer became " one of the most sought-after trumpeters of the fifties " : he continued to work with Gryce ( 1954 – 56 ) , and also with Horace Silver ( 1956 – 58 ) and Gerry Mulligan ( 1958 – 59 ) , among others . One of the others was pianist Thelonious Monk , who led a sextet that included Farmer on its performances on a version of the Steve Allen Show , broadcast on television on June 10 , 1955 . The following month , Farmer played in the Charles Mingus sextet 's performance at the Newport Jazz Festival .

Farmer recorded only twice with Horace Silver 's group , as Silver recorded for Blue Note Records , while Farmer was signed to Prestige . Feuds between the label bosses ruled out extensive cross-label collaboration . The transition from Silver 's piano-led quintet to Mulligan 's piano-less quartet was not straightforward : " to suddenly find yourself in a pianoless group was like walking down the street naked " , commented Farmer . As a member of Mulligan 's band , Farmer appeared on film twice – in I Want to Live ! ( 1958 ) and The Subterraneans ( 1960 ) – and again toured Europe , as part of a Jazz at the Philharmonic tour , helping him to develop an international reputation . In New York , Farmer worked with Lester Young , who told him to " tighten up and tell a ' story ' in each solo " . At this time , Farmer also rented his trumpet on a nightly basis to Miles Davis , who had pawned his own due to his drug dependency . From the middle of the 1950s , Farmer featured in recordings by leading arrangers of the day , including George Russell , Quincy Jones and Oliver Nelson , being in demand because of his reputation for being able to play anything . The wide range of styles these arrangers represented was extended when Farmer took part in a series of experimental sessions with composer Edgard Varèse in 1957 . Varèse used approximate notation and wanted the musicians to improvise within its structure ; at least some of the seasoned jazz musicians present regarded this process of creation as similar to their own familiar creations of spontaneously produced head arrangements , but their efforts influenced Varèse 's composition , Poème électronique . Farmer 's playing around this time is summarized by critic Whitney Balliett , commenting on his performance on Hal McKusick 's 1957 album Hal McKusick Quintet : " Farmer has become one of the few genuinely individual modern trumpeters . ( Nine out of ten modern trumpeters are true copies of Dizzy Gillespie or Miles Davis . ) " Farmer was one of 57 jazz musicians to appear in the 1958 photograph " A Great Day in Harlem " and was later interviewed for the 1994 documentary of the same title .

Farmer formed the Jazztet in 1959 , with the composer and tenor saxophonist Benny Golson , after each man independently came to the conclusion that the other should be a member of his new sextet . The Jazztet lasted until 1962 , recorded several albums for Argo and Mercury Records , and assisted in the early careers of pianist McCoy Tyner and trombonist Grachan Moncur III . In the early 1960s Farmer established a trio with guitarist Jim Hall and bassist Steve Swallow ; his relationship with Hall lasted from 1962 to 1964 , and included two tours of Europe , one of which had concerts recorded for the BBC 's Jazz 625 programme , which were later released on DVD . Hall left the second tour while the quartet , which included Swallow and drummer Pete La Roca , was engaged in Berlin , and a pianist replaced him ; this was ultimately Steve Kuhn . In 1964 , this new quartet recorded the album Sing Me Softly of the Blues for the Atlantic label . These bands played laid back , melodious music during a period when avant-garde jazz was becoming more common . Farmer toured Europe in 1965 – 66 , then returned to the US and led a small group with Jimmy Heath . His stylistic development continued during this period of his career , in part because he " absorbed , understood , and had the technical and artistic gifts to put to personal use the [ John ] Coltrane innovations of the ' Giant Steps ' period of the early 1960s " . Work opportunities , however , were diminishing as rock became more popular in the mid-1960s , so Farmer joined the pit orchestra of Elliot Lawrence for the production of The Apple Tree on Broadway , for six months .

The visits to Europe continued . Farmer moved there in 1968 and ultimately settled in Vienna , where he performed with The Kenny Clarke / Francy Boland Big Band and joined the Austrian Radio Orchestra . The latter job initially required only ten days a month of his time , so he was able to play with other well-known expatriates such as Don Byas , Dexter Gordon , and Ben Webster . As the orchestra 's music gradually changed in style from jazz to simpler forms and took up more of Farmer 's time , he found that it was getting in the way of his musical ambitions , so he left after three or four years . Pursuing these ambitions meant that Farmer traveled extensively worldwide . He said in 1976 that " I 'm traveling 90 percent of the time . I can live anywhere . It 's just a matter of getting to the airport " . A 1982 revival of the Jazztet , with Golson , led him to play more frequently in the United States than he had over the previous decade . In the 1980s Farmer also created a quintet , featuring saxophonist Clifford Jordan , that toured internationally . In the early 1980s , Farmer had also made some changes to his lifestyle . Interviewed for a 1985 article in The New Yorker , he reported losing 30 pounds in weight a couple of years earlier , and stopping smoking and drinking a couple of years before that ; Farmer " used to think he couldn 't play without drinking ; now he couldn 't play and drink " , was the interviewer 's summary of Farmer 's habits , which appear to have avoided the drug-related problems of many of his contemporaries .

From the early 1990s , Farmer had a second house in New York and divided his time between Vienna and there . He had regular gigs with Clifford Jordan at the Sweet Basil Jazz Club and , later , with Ran Blake and Jerome Richardson at the Village Vanguard , both in New York . Farmer was awarded the Austrian Gold Medal of Merit in 1994 . In the same year , a concert in honor of his achievements was held at the Alice Tully Hall in New York . Farmer also recorded extensively as a leader throughout his later career , including some pieces of classical music with US and European orchestras . Farmer 's level of playing even towards the end of his career was noted in a review by Scott Yanow of one of his last recordings , Silk Road , from 1996 : " the warm-toned and swinging Farmer is consistently the main star , and at age 68 he proves to still be in his prime " . In 1999 Farmer was selected as a National Endowment for the Arts Jazz Master . A few months later , on October 4 , Farmer died of a heart attack at home in Manhattan , aged 71 .

Farmer first married in the mid-1950s , to a woman from South America ; the couple had one son , Arthur Jr , who died in 1994 , and they divorced after about a year . Farmer 's second wife was a distant cousin ; this also ended in divorce . He married again , to a Viennese banker named Mechtilde Lawgger , and their son , Georg , was born in the early 1970s . They lived together in a house that they had built in Vienna , and Farmer reported contentment with his lifestyle ; notably , in contrast with his homeland , he did not experience racism in Europe . Farmer described himself in 1985 as " an introvert , and kind of reclusive " ; a soundproof room in his Austrian house allowed him to practice alone for the four or five hours a day that he desired . His personality was often described by others as mirroring his playing : Leonard Feather , for instance , observed in 1990 that Farmer was " mellow , relaxed and [ ... ] gentle " . Farmer was affected by the sudden death of his twin brother in 1963 : more than 20 years later , he said that he still dreamed of his sibling , and admitted that , " It seems there 's a part of him I haven 't fully gotten over " . Farmer 's third wife died from cancer in 1992 ; speaking three years later , he remarked that " I guess I never will really recover from that because we had been together for over 20 years when she died " . After his own death , he was described as being survived by his companion and manager , Lynne Mueller , and son .

Descriptions of Farmer 's playing style typically stress his lyricism and the warmth of his sound . The Los Angeles Times obituary writers noted that his playing had " a sweetly lyrical tone and a melodic approach to phrasing , neither of which minimized his capacity to produce rhythmically swinging phrases " . The equivalent comments in The Guardian were that " Farmer avoided the bright , penetrating sound of orthodox trumpet playing and was influenced by the more reserved articulation of Miles Davis and Kenny Dorham " , and that , although he could seem more restrained than Davis or Lee Morgan , " Farmer was in his way a true original . His phrasing was always distinctive , letting the beat run ahead of him rather in the manner of Billie Holiday 's vocals " . Farmer moved from trumpet to playing mostly flugelhorn from the early 1960s , utilising the latter instrument 's more mellow sound and Farmer 's ability to get what he wanted from it without having to use a mute . In 1989 , he played a major part in creating a trumpet – flugelhorn hybrid , the flumpet , which was constructed for him by instrument maker David Monette . This instrument allowed him to play with more expression in a range of settings , from small groups to big bands . In 1997 , Monette presented him with a personalized flumpet , with decorations symbolising important people and places in Farmer 's life .

Karim Mostafa Benzema ( born 19 December 1987 ) is a French professional footballer of Algerian descent who plays for Spanish club Real Madrid and the France national team as a striker . He has been described as an " immensely talented striker " who is " strong and powerful " and " a potent finisher from inside the box " . Benzema was born in the city of Lyon and began his football career with local club Bron Terraillon . In 1996 , he joined the biggest club in the city , Olympique Lyonnais , and subsequently came through the club 's youth academy . Benzema made his professional debut in the 2004 – 05 season and appeared sporadically in his first three seasons as Lyon won three titles in that span . In the 2007 – 08 season , Benzema became a starter and had a breakthrough year scoring over 30 goals as Lyon won its seventh straight league title . For his performances , he was named the National Union of Professional Footballers ( UNFP ) Ligue 1 Player of the Year and named to the organization 's Team of the Year . Benzema was also the league 's top scorer and given the Bravo Award by Italian magazine Guerin Sportivo . After another season at Lyon , in July 2009 , Benzema moved to Real Madrid in a transfer fee worth over € 35 million ( $ 50 million ) , and signed a six-year contract . After struggling to establish himself in his debut season with the club , in the ensuing two seasons , Benzema reached prominence , scoring 32 goals en route to helping Real Madrid win the Copa del Rey in 2011 and the 2011 – 12 edition of La Liga . He has been named French Player of the Year thrice for his performances in 2011 , 2012 and 2014 .

Benzema is a former French youth international and has represented his nation from under-17 level onwards . Prior to playing for the senior team , he played on the under-17 team that won the 2004 UEFA European Under-17 Championship . Benzema made his senior international debut in March 2007 in a friendly match against Austria , scoring in a 1 – 0 win . Benzema has earned over 70 caps and represented France at three major international tournaments : the 2008 and 2012 editions of the UEFA European Football Championship and the 2014 FIFA World Cup . However , Benzema has twice been intentionally left off major tournament squads ( 2010 World Cup and 2016 Euros ) due to various scandals .

Benzema began his football career at his hometown club Bron Terraillon SC at the age of eight . While at the club , he was nicknamed Coco by friends and , after scoring two goals in an under-10 match against the Lyon youth academy , began attracting attention from the biggest club in the city . According to Serge Santa Cruz , who was president of Bron Terraillon in the 1990s , Lyon officials had visited him directly in an attempt to sign the youngster ; however , Santa Cruz refused . After talking with Benzema 's father , the club allowed the player to undergo a trial with Lyon . Following the trial , Benzema officially joined Lyon and was inserted into the club 's academy .

Benzema quickly ascended up the youth categories in the academy . He served as a ballboy during Lyon senior team matches and performed well in school being described as a student who was " discreet and respectful " . At under-16 level , Benzema scored 38 goals in the Championnat National des 16 ans , the domestic league for under-16 youth players in France . Ahead of the 2004 – 05 season , Benzema was promoted to the club 's reserve team , which was playing in the Championnat de France amateur , the fourth division of French football . Despite only playing with the team during the autumn campaign , he scored a team-high ten goals as the Lyon reserve team finished second in its group .

Benzema was called up to the senior team for the first time under manager Paul Le Guen during the break leading up to the second half of the season . As is customary with new players arriving at Lyon , the young striker had to stand up and speak to his new teammates , which at that time included the likes of Michael Essien , Sylvain Wiltord , Florent Malouda and Éric Abidal . While speaking , Benzema was subjected to jokes and laughter , which prompted the youngster to declare " Do not laugh , I 'm here to take your place " . He , subsequently , made his professional debut on 15 January 2005 against Metz , appearing as a substitute for Pierre-Alain Frau . Lyon won the match 2 – 0 as Benzema provided the assist on the second goal scored by Bryan Bergougnoux . He would subsequently sign his first professional contract , agreeing to a three-year deal . After making three more appearances as a substitute , on 2 April , Benzema made his first professional start in a 1 – 0 win over Lens . He finished the campaign with six appearances as Lyon won its fourth-straight league title .

Benzema began the 2005 – 06 season under the tutelage of new manager Gérard Houllier . Under Houllier , he struggled for meaningful minutes due to the presence of newly signed Brazilian striker Fred , as well as Sylvain Wiltord . Benzema made his season debut on 2 October 2005 in a league win over Rennes , appearing as a substitute . On 6 December , he made his UEFA Champions League debut in Lyon 's final group stage match against Norwegian club Rosenborg . On his competition debut , he scored his first professional goal in a 2 – 1 win . A month later , Benzema scored his first professional double in a 4 – 0 win over Grenoble in the Coupe de France . On 4 March 2006 , Benzema scored his first professional league goal against Ajaccio in a 3 – 1 win . Benzema began earning more playing time in the 2006 – 07 season and made his competitive season debut in the 2006 Trophée des Champions against Paris Saint-Germain . In the French Supercup , Benzema converted a penalty which drew the match at 1 – 1 . Lyon later won the league curtain-raiser 5 – 4 on penalties . Benzema opened the league campaign on a quick note scoring in the team 's first match of the season against Nantes . Three weeks later , on 26 August 2006 , Benzema appeared as a substitute and scored two goals in a 4 – 1 away win over Nice . He also converted two goals in the Champions League group stage against Romanian outfit Steaua București and Ukrainian club Dynamo Kyiv . After appearing regularly during the autumn campaign , on 10 November , Benzema suffered a severe thigh injury . The injury resulted in the striker missing three months of action before returning in February 2007 . Benzema failed to score a goal until the final league match of the season against Nantes as Lyon recorded its sixth consecutive league title .

For the 2007 – 08 season , with the likes of Florent Malouda , John Carew and Sylvain Wiltord all departing from the club , Benzema switched to the number 10 shirt and was inserted into the lead striker role . After forming a special relationship with new manager Alain Perrin , he responded with 31 goals in 51 games . He topped the league with 20 goals , scored four goals in the Champions League , one in the Coupe de la Ligue and totaled six goals in six Coupe de France matches , helping Lyon win their first ever double . Some of his more dazzling performances that season included a hat-trick against Metz on 15 September , an equalizing goal in the 90th minute from a free kick against Derby du Rhône rivals Saint-Étienne , and a goal against Lens that was nominated for goal of the season by fans . In the Champions League , Benzema scored an important double against Rangers at Ibrox Stadium on the last match day of the group stage . The 3 – 0 victory assured Lyon progression to the knockout rounds . In the knockout rounds , Lyon faced Manchester United and Benzema continued to score , this time it was from outside the penalty box in the first leg match which ended in a 1 – 1 draw and United eventually won the tie 1 – 2 on aggregate . Manchester United manager Alex Ferguson and players praised Benzema for his performance . Lyon President Jean-Michel Aulas later accused Ferguson of tapping-up Benzema .

Benzema got off to a good start for the 2008 – 09 season , scoring twice in Lyon 's opening league match against Toulouse . The following three weeks , he scored goals against Rhône-Alpes rivals Grenoble and Saint-Étienne and scored a goal against Nice , converting a penalty in the dying seconds . Lyon won all three matches . As a result of his early goals , Olympique Lyonnais President Jean-Michel Aulas quelled the many transfer rumors surrounding Benzema by placing a € 100 million price tag on the striker . He was also nominated alongside Franck Ribéry to be featured on the French cover of the video game FIFA 09 . He scored his seventh goal of the league on 29 October , scoring in the 2 – 0 win over Sochaux . Benzema scored again the following weekend in a 2 – 0 win over Le Mans . He was among the top scorers in the Champions League group stage , scoring five goals , a double against Steaua București , two goals in two matches against Fiorentina , and a goal against the eventual group winners Bayern Munich on the final match day . Following the winter break , Benzema endured a rough patch going scoreless the first three games before recording his 11th goal of the season against Nice in a 3 – 1 victory . Two weeks later , he scored his 12th goal against Nancy in a 2 – 0 victory . The next nine matches , both Benzema and Lyon 's form dwindled losing four matches , drawing three , and winning only two with Benzema scoring only two goals in that stretch , both of them against Le Mans in a 3 – 1 victory . The bad form resulted in Lyon losing their grip on first-place position and eventually falling out of the title race , thus ending their streak of seven consecutive Ligue 1 titles . Benzema was a part of four of those title runs .

On 1 July 2009 , it was announced that Lyon had reached an agreement with Spanish club Real Madrid for the transfer of Benzema . The transfer fee was priced at € 35 million with the fee rising to as much as € 41 million based on incentives . On 9 July , Benzema successfully passed his medical and signed his contract , a six-year deal , later that afternoon . He was presented officially as a Real Madrid player later that night at the Santiago Bernabéu Stadium , similarly to the previous signings of Kaká and Cristiano Ronaldo . Benzema made his Real Madrid debut on 20 July in the club 's opening pre-season friendly against Irish club Shamrock Rovers in Dublin , appearing as a half-time substitute . He scored the lone goal in the club 's 1 – 0 win , scoring in the 87th minute . On 24 August , Benzema netted two goals in Real Madrid 's 4 – 0 victory over Norwegian club Rosenborg in an annual friendly tournament organized for the Santiago Bernabeu Trophy . The goals brought his total tally in the pre-season with Real Madrid to five , making him the joint top scorer alongside fellow striker Raúl .

Benzema made his league debut for Madrid on 29 August 2009 against Deportivo La Coruña . He started the match , but was substituted out in the second half as Madrid won 3 – 2 . A month later , he scored his first goal for the club in a 5 – 0 victory against newly promoted Xerez . After missing the mid-week match against Villarreal , against Tenerife at the weekend , Benzema scored his first double for Madrid in a 3 – 0 home victory . He made his Champions League debut for the club on 30 September in a group stage tie against Marseille . In the match , Benzema assisted on a Cristiano Ronaldo goal . After failing to score a goal in the month of October , in the team 's first match in November against Italian club Milan in the Champions League , Benzema scored the opener to give Madrid a 1 – 0 lead . His goal was later cancelled out by a Ronaldinho penalty . On 7 November , in the El Derbi madrileño against Atlético Madrid , Benzema assisted on Madrid 's second goal , scored by Marcelo . Madrid won the match 3 – 2 .

In late November , Benzema began appearing mainly as a substitute as manager Manuel Pellegrini preferred Gonzalo Higuaín in the lead striker role . To coincide with his benching , the striker was also being criticized by the Spanish media for his under-performance and difficulties settling in the country as he had not yet begun learning the Spanish language . He was even declared the " new Anelka " by a Spanish newspaper Marca blogger , referring to former Real Madrid striker Nicolas Anelka who had a tumultuous year at the club before being sold . Benzema was defended by his compatriot Zinedine Zidane , who admitted " after two months , I was also criticized " and that Benzema was " a talented player and talented players in Madrid must win " . On 5 December , Benzema appeared as a substitute for Rafael van der Vaart and scored the third goal in a 6 – 0 romp of Almería . The day after the match against Almería , Benzema responded to the criticism by stating , " I am totally integrated and very happy at Real Madrid , " and , " Yes , I have improved my adaptation . I have a new home and I 'm learning Spanish to understand myself better with my teammates . " After nearly a month coming off of the bench , he started alongside Higuaín away to Valencia on 12 December and responded by assisting on one of Higuaín 's two goals . A week later , Benzema returned to the bench . On his 22nd birthday , he scored in a 6 – 0 home win against Real Zaragoza . Following an injury to Higuaín in early January 2010 , Pellegrini inserted Benzema back into the starting lineup . After failing to score in his first two starts in the absence of Higuaín , against Deportivo La Coruña on 30 January , he scored a double in an important 3 – 1 away win . Following the return of Higuaín , Benzema was relegated back to a substitute 's role and finished the campaign by making eight consecutive appearances off the bench . Included in one of the those appearances was his final goal of the season against Athletic Bilbao in a 5 – 1 win .

Ahead of the 2010 – 11 season , Benzema switched to the number nine shirt as Real Madrid were under the tutelage of new incoming manager José Mourinho . The striker immediately drew the ire of Mourinho who declared to reporters during a pre-season media session that " Benzema must understand that he is extremely talented , but that in itself is not enough " , while also stating that " [ Madrid ] need a striker who is sparky , not one that is listless " . Mourinho sentiments were later echoed by incoming France national team coach Laurent Blanc who acknowledged that Benzema was " not used to working " . Blanc also stated that the striker needed to shed weight in order to fulfill his potential . Due to Mourinho preferring Ronaldo and Higuaín as his forwards , Benzema began the campaign as a substitute coming off the bench in the team 's opening league match of the season against Mallorca . Following the September international break , he made his first start in a 1 – 0 win over Osasuna . On 21 September , Benzema made a substitute appearance and scored his first goal of the season in a 3 – 0 home win against Espanyol . Afterwards , the striker failed to score a domestic goal for nearly two months . The striker did assist on goals in back-to-back weeks against Hércules in the league and Milan in the Champions League .

On 10 November , Benzema scored his second goal of the campaign against Real Murcia in the 2010 – 11 edition of the Copa del Rey . In late November , Benzema was inserted into the starting eleven following a severe back injury to Higuaín , along with the team 's lack of senior strikers . In his first match since being inserted into the starting lineup permanently , he scored his first Champions League goal of the season in a group stage fixture against Dutch club Ajax . In Madrid 's final group stage tie against French outfit Auxerre , Benzema scored his first hat trick for the club in a 4 – 0 win . The first goal he scored was Real Madrid 's 300th goal in the Champions League era . Two weeks later , Benzema converted another hat trick , this time in an 8 – 0 thrashing of Levante in the Copa del Rey . In the team 's first fixture of the 2011 calendar year , he assisted on the game-winning goal scored by Ronaldo in a 3 – 2 win over Getafe . In late January , for the first time in his Real Madrid career , Benzema scored goals in back-to-back matches . On 23 January , he scored the only goal in a 1 – 0 win at home against Mallorca . Three days later , Benzema repeated his efforts scoring the only goal in a win over Sevilla in the first leg of the team 's Copa del Rey semi-final tie . Real Madrid later advanced to its 37th Copa del Rey final in club history after beating Sevilla 2 – 0 in the second leg .

Following the arrival of Emmanuel Adebayor on loan , Benzema went unused in two consecutive league matches in February 2011 . He returned to the starting lineup on 19 February and embarked on a run in which he scored ten goals in eight matches . Included in those ten goals were doubles in three straight matches against Málaga , Racing Santander and Hércules , as well as a goal in the first leg of Madrid 's Round of 16 tie against former club Lyon . The strike against his hometown club was the 100th goal of his professional career , and also the first goal for Real Madrid at the Stade de Gerland in six years , though despite the honours associated with netting the goal , Benzema did not celebrate out of respect for his former club . On 19 March , he scored the opener in the El Derbi madrileño as Real Madrid went on to win the match 2 – 1 . Despite his form , Benzema appeared in only one of the four highly anticipated matches against El Clásico rivals Barcelona , in which the two clubs met in the league , the 2011 Copa del Rey Final and the Champions League knockout stage . In between those clashes , on 23 April 2011 , Benzema scored a goal and assisted on another in a 6 – 3 win over Valencia . On 30 April , he scored a goal in the team 's 3 – 2 loss to Real Zaragoza . It was the only match of the campaign that Real Madrid loss , in which Benzema scored . To close out the campaign , Benzema scored another double in an 8 – 1 win over Almería . He finished the campaign second on the team behind Ronaldo with 26 goals as Real Madrid captured the Copa del Rey giving Benzema his first honour with the club . For his performances during the campaign , particularly during the second half , Benzema was praised by Mourinho , club officials Florentino Pérez and Emilio Butragueño , as well as national team manager Laurent Blanc .

Prior to the start of the 2011 – 12 season , Benzema , taking the advice of compatriots Blanc and Zidane , ventured to Merano , Italy , to attend a high performance clinic where he underwent treatment to reduce his weight . The spell at the clinic was ultimately a success after the striker arrived at pre-season 8 kilograms ( 18 lb ) lighter . While at the clinic , Benzema also underwent physical training to build up his muscle mass . The striker was impressive in the pre-season scoring eight goals in seven matches . His performances during the pre-season resulted in Mourinho naming him the starting lead striker for the new campaign . Mourinho was later credited with Benzema 's transformation , but denied full responsibility and , instead , gave credit to the striker himself . Benzema made his 2011 – 12 competitive debut for Madrid in the first leg of the 2011 Supercopa de España against Barcelona . In the match , he started and assisted on the opening goal of the match , scored by Mesut Özil . In the second leg , with Madrid trailing 4 – 3 on aggregate late in the match , Benzema scored the equalizing goal to even the tie at 4 – 4 . However , six minutes later , a Lionel Messi strike gave Barcelona the supercup . Benzema made his league debut for Madrid in the team 's 6 – 0 away win over Real Zaragoza . In the team 's next league match two weeks later against Getafe , Benzema scored a double in a 4 – 2 victory . After going scoreless in three consecutive league matches , he scored his third league goal of the campaign against Rayo Vallecano in a 4 – 2 win . In the team 's ensuing match against Ajax in the Champions League , Benzema scored Madrid 's third goal in a 3 – 0 home win . He also assisted on the opener , which was scored by Ronaldo . In the club 's next Champions League match against Lyon , Benzema scored again netting the opener . He also turned provider for the second consecutive match assisting on a goal by Sami Khedira . Madrid won the match 4 – 0 .

In November 2011 , Benzema scored five goals ; three in the league and two in Europe . In the league , he converted his three goals in wins over Osasuna and Valencia , while he scored his two Champions League goals in a 6 – 2 group stage win over Croatian club Dinamo Zagreb . On 10 December 2011 , Benzema scored the opener in Madrid 's 3 – 1 defeat to Barcelona in the El Clásico . The goal , scored just 21 seconds into the match , was the fastest goal ever scored in a match between the two rivals . Three days after his record-breaking goal , for his performances during the 2011 calendar year , Benzema was named the France Football French Player of the Year , beating out Barcelona defender Éric Abidal and Lyon goalkeeper Hugo Lloris . He became only the second French player based in Spain to win the award , and also the second Real Madrid player to capture it . Zidane was the first to achieve both honorable mentions . Benzema expressed gratitude at winning the award , stating , " It is a pleasure to win an individual trophy . When I see the previous winners — Zidane , Henry and other major players — it makes me proud to join them on the list . " In the team 's next match after winning the award , against Sevilla , Benzema assisted on two goals in a 6 – 2 triumph .

Benzema opened the 2012 portion of the campaign in positive form . He scored goals against Granada and Málaga . Benzema scored against the latter club in the Copa del Rey in each leg of the Round of 16 . The 4 – 2 aggregate win advanced Real Madrid to the quarter-finals where the club faced Barcelona . After failing to score in the first leg , which ended 2 – 1 in favor of Barça , in the second leg on 25 January 2012 , Benzema scored his third goal of the season against the Blaugrana , but Madrid failed to win the tie losing 4 – 3 on aggregate . On 12 February , Benzema scored his first league goal in over a month against Levante . A week later , he scored a double in a 4 – 0 shutout of Racing Santander . On 24 March , Benzema scored two goals in a league win over Real Sociedad . The two goals made him the top French scorer in La Liga history surpassing Zidane . Three days later , Benzema scored another double in a 3 – 0 first leg away win over Cypriot club APOEL in the Champions League quarter-finals . On 29 April , Benzema put in a masterpiece performance scoring two goals and assisting on another in a 3 – 0 win over Sevilla . The double was his seventh of the season and allowed Madrid to close in on its first Primera Division title in four years . Los Blancos captured their 32nd league title the following week cruising to a 3 – 0 win over Athletic Bilbao . Benzema appeared as a second-half substitute in the match .

On the first matchday of the UEFA Champions League , Benzema scored an equalizer against Manchester City in 3 – 2 win at Santiago Bernabéu . On 4 October 2012 , Benzema scored a bicycle kick goal off a cross by Kaká in a 4 – 1 win against Ajax in Amsterdam . On 18 December 2012 , one day before his 25th birthday , his fine form saw him earn the award for best French footballer of 2012 , for the second year running . On 2 March 2013 , Benzema opened the scoring against Barcelona in the league game at the Santiago Bernabéu . Real went on to win the game 2 – 1 , the second time they beat Barcelona in a week . On 30 April 2013 , Benzema scored one goal and assisted to Sergio Ramos against Dortmund .

Benzema started new season by scoring in a 2 – 1 win over Real Betis at the Santiago Bernabéu . He scored again one week later in a 1 – 0 away over Granada , assisted by Cristiano Ronaldo . After four matches without scoring ( two with Real Madrid and two with France ) , he returned to goal-scoring form by netting twice in a 6 – 1 away win over Galatasaray in Champions League . On 18 January 2014 , he scored his 100th goal for Madrid in a 5 – 0 victory at Real Betis . On 23 March , Benzema scored two goals against fierce rivals Barcelona in El Clásico at the Bernabéu from two crosses by Ángel Di María , taking his goal tally in La Liga to 17 goals , though Barcelona won the match 4 – 3 . Benzema was part of Real Madrid 's starting eleven in the 2014 Copa del Rey Final on 16 April at the Mestalla Stadium , and assisted Di María 's opening goal before Gareth Bale hit the winner for Madrid in a 2 – 1 victory . One week later , Benzema scored the only goal of the game to win the first leg of a Champions League semi-final against Bayern Munich . The club went on to win the final in May . Real Madrid 's attacking trio of Bale , Benzema and Cristiano , dubbed " BBC " , finished the season with 97 goals .

On 6 August 2014 , Real Madrid announced that Benzema had signed a new five-year deal that will keep him at the club until 2019 . On 12 August 2014 , Benzema played the whole 90 minutes in Real Madrid 's 2 – 0 win against Sevilla in Cardiff to claim the UEFA Super Cup . On 16 September 2014 , Benzema scored Real Madrid 's 1,000th goal in European competition after netting a goal in a 5 – 1 victory over FC Basel in the first match of the Champions League group stage . He scored the winning goal in Real Madrid 's 2 – 1 away victory against Ludogorets Razgrad in the Champions League after coming on as a second-half substitute . The next weekend , he scored a brace in the 5 – 0 victory against Athletic Bilbao in La Liga . Benzema was chosen as La Liga Player of the Month for October 2014 , with his manager Carlo Ancelotti winning the equivalent award . He scored three of Real Madrid 's 13 goals of the month , in which they won three matches and only conceded just one goal .

Benzema is a former France youth international having earned caps at all levels for which he was eligible , excluding the under-16 team . He is a member of the group , commonly known in France as the Génération 1987 , a youth class that produced current internationals Hatem Ben Arfa , Jérémy Ménez and Samir Nasri , alongside himself . Benzema was the last of the four to make his youth international debut under coach Philippe Bergeroo and officially joined the team ahead of the 2004 UEFA European Under-17 Football Championship that was played on home soil . In the competition , he appeared in two matches . On his tournament debut , Benzema scored the opening goal in a 3 – 1 win over Northern Ireland . His lone other appearance in the competition was in a 1 – 0 group stage win over Spain as France went on to win the tournament defeated the same team in the final . Benzema was a regular starter in the team at under-18 level . He made his debut with the team at a local tournament in the Czech Republic . Benzema scored his first goal at under-18 level in the competition against Poland in the team 's final group stage match . In the final against the hosts , he scored the opening goal in a 2 – 0 win as France were declared champions of the competition . On 30 September 2004 , Benzema was one of three goalscorers in France 's 3 – 0 away win over Norway . In the team 's next match against Russia , he scored a double in a 3 – 1 victory . Due to France winning the 2004 U17 European title , the under-18 team was allowed participation in the 2005 edition of the UEFA-CAF Meridian Cup . Benzema was called up to the team for the competition and played in all four matches scoring a tournament-high five goals as France were crowned champions of the tournament . He opened the tournament by scoring two goals in a 7 – 0 victory over Cameroon . After going scoreless in the team 's next match against Sierra Leone , Benzema responded by scoring a goal in a shutout victory over Nigeria and netting another double in a 4 – 1 win against Egypt . On 19 May 2005 , in the team 's final match of the season against Slovakia , Benzema scored all four goals in a 4 – 1 victory . He finished the under-18 campaign with 18 appearances and a team-high 14 goals and was , subsequently , praised by Bergeroo who , following the campaign , declared that Benzema was " quite efficient " .

The foursome of Benzema , Ben Arfa , Ménez and Nasri returned to international play together for under-19 duty . The four were joined by Issiar Dia , Blaise Matuidi and Serge Gakpé with the objective of winning the 2006 UEFA European Under-19 Football Championship . The team opened the campaign with two friendly matches against Norway . Over the course of the two matches , Benzema scored one goal , which came in the first match , a 4 – 0 win . In the first round of qualification for the UEFA-sanctioned tournament , he scored his only goal in the final group match against Austria . France won the match 2 – 0 , which resulted in the team progressing to the Elite Round . In the ensuing round , France were placed in a relatively easy group alongside Scotland , Bulgaria , and Belarus . In the opening group game against Bulgaria , Benzema scored a double converting a penalty and scoring in play as France won 4 – 0 . Both of his goals were scored within a minute of each other . After surprisingly drawing 0 – 0 with Belarus , France faced Scotland in the final group stage match . Benzema opened the scoring in the 11th minute , but his goal was cancelled out by Steven Fletcher in the second half . The match ultimately finished 1 – 1 and , despite finishing the round undefeated , France were eliminated after being beaten on points by the Scots .

Benzema made his under-21 debut for Les Espoirs under coach René Girard in the team 's first match following the 2006 UEFA European Under-21 Football Championship against Belgium . He started the match and was replaced at half-time by Yoann Gourcuff . He featured in qualification matches for the 2007 UEFA European Under-21 Football Championship and appeared as a starter and substitute in the first leg and second leg , respectively , of the team 's surprising defeat to Israel in the qualifying playoffs . Despite still being eligible to represent the under-21 team until 2009 , his appearance in the second leg defeat to Israel was Benzema 's last with the team and he finished his under-21 career with five appearances and no goals . Prior to representing France at senior international level , Benzema was courted by the Algerian Football Federation ( FAF ) who sought for the player to represent Algeria at senior international level . In December 2006 , the striker was approached by former federation president Hamid Haddadj and then-national team coach Jean-Michel Cavalli , but turned down the invite citing his desire to continue his international career with France . Benzema later told French radio station Radio Monte Carlo " Algeria is my parents ’ country and it is in my heart , but football-wise , I will only play for the French national team " .

Benzema was called up for the first time to the senior national team by Raymond Domenech on 9 November 2006 for the team 's friendly match against Greece that would be played on 15 November . Benzema described the call-up as " a reward " , while also stating " I am pleased , of course , me and my family . A ( the senior national team ) , is the national team 's highest honor " . Two days before the match , he was forced to withdraw from the team due to a thigh injury , which he suffered while playing domestically for Lyon . After failing to make the squad for the team 's February 2007 match against Argentina , Benzema returned to the team in March for a UEFA Euro 2008 qualifying match against Lithuania and a friendly against Austria . After failing to appear in the qualifier , he made his international debut on 28 March 2007 against Austria . Benzema appeared as a half-time substitute for Djibril Cissé and scored the only goal of the match after a free-kick from Samir Nasri . On 13 October , Benzema scored a double in a 6 – 0 win against the Faroe Islands . After appearing regularly in the team for the rest of the 2007 – 08 season , he was named to the 23-man squad to participate in UEFA Euro 2008 .

Benzema made his debut in the competition on 9 June 2008 in the team 's opening match against Romania . Benzema started the match , but was substituted out for Nasri in the second half after a frustrating performance . The match finished 0 – 0 and Benzema was , subsequently , criticized by the French media for his performance with newspaper Le Point declaring that Benzema was " unrecognizable " and that he " symbolized the impotence of France in the attack " . The newspaper also cited his lack of international experience for his subdued performance . In the team 's next group game against the Netherlands , Benzema played no part in the 4 – 1 defeat . He returned to the team in its final group game against Italy and was given a place in the starting lineup . However , France lost 2 – 0 and were eliminated from the competition . In November 2008 , Benzema , among several other young players in the team , was accused of being insolent during the team 's campaign at the European Championship . The accusation came from international teammate William Gallas who inserted the charge in his autobiography . Though most of Gallas ' accusations were directed at Nasri , during the competition , it was reported by newspaper Le Parisien that several of the national team players described Benzema as " arrogant " and that the striker was scolded by midfielder Claude Makélélé following the team 's loss to the Netherlands .

Despite the reports from after Euro 2008 , Benzema remained a regular in the team and , ahead of qualification for the 2010 FIFA World Cup , switched to the number ten shirt after previously wearing the number nine . In the team 's first match following its elimination from Euro 2008 , Benzema scored a goal in a 3 – 2 friendly win over Sweden in Göteborg . Two months later , he scored another goal in a 3 – 1 victory against Tunisia at the Stade de France . On 5 June 2009 , Benzema converted the only goal of the match , a penalty shot , in a 1 – 0 win over Turkey at the Stade de Gerland , his home stadium . He scored his first World Cup qualification goals in victories over the Faroe Islands and Austria in October 2009 . His cap against Austria would be his last of the Domenech era as he failed to make France 's preliminary 30-man squad for the World Cup . Domenech cited Benzema 's struggle for form with his new club Real Madrid , rather than his alleged involvement in a sex scandal as his reason for leaving the striker out . Prior to the list being unveiled , Benzema informed Radio Monte Carlo that if he was not selected he would be " very disappointed , but not killed " and " I will support the France team no matter what " .

Following the World Cup , Benzema returned to the national team under the reign of new coach Laurent Blanc . Blanc , an admirer of Benzema , sought to build the attack around the striker and , after going almost a year without representing France , Benzema made his return to the team in its 2 – 1 defeat to Norway in Oslo . Alongside Gourcuff , Benzema led the team in scoring in qualifying for UEFA Euro 2012 netting three . He scored his three goals in wins over Bosnia and Herzegovina , Luxembourg , and Albania . On 17 November 2010 , Benzema scored the opening goal in France 's 2 – 1 win over England at Wembley Stadium . In the team 's next match against Brazil in February 2011 , he scored the only goal for France in a 1 – 0 win . After appearing regularly in qualifying for UEFA Euro 2012 , on 29 May 2012 , Benzema was named to the squad to participate in the competition . On 5 June , in the team 's final warm-up friendly ahead of the European Championship , Benzema scored two goals in a 4 – 0 shutout win over Estonia . At UEFA Euro 2012 , Benzema started the team 's opening match against England , which ended in a 1 – 1 draw . In the team 's ensuing group stage match against the Ukraine , he assisted on both team goals in a 2 – 0 win .

On 11 October 2013 , Benzema scored his first goal for the France national team since June 2012 in a friendly against Australia , thus ending a scoring drought for his national team which had lasted 1,222 minutes . In that match played at the Parc des Princes stadium in Paris , which France won 6 – 0 , Benzema scored France 's sixth and final goal in the 50th minute after turning home Franck Ribéry 's left-wing cross . In the second leg of the 2014 World Cup qualification play-off against Ukraine held on 19 November 2013 at the Stade de France , Benzema scored France 's second goal in the 34th minute to level the aggregate score at 2 – 2 . Benzema scored his goal when he side-footed home after a huge scramble in the Ukrainian penalty box , although he was shown on television replays to be offside by almost one metre when the ball took a final touch off Mathieu Valbuena 's chest . Benzema had four minutes earlier been denied a legitimate goal , the offside flag wrongly raised when he turned in Ribéry 's low cross into the net with his torso a metre from the Ukrainian goal-line . Ukraine had won the first leg of the play-off 2 – 0 in Kiev just four days earlier . France would eventually win the second leg 3 – 0 to advance to the 2014 World Cup finals in Brazil with a 3 – 2 aggregate scoreline .

On 6 June 2014 , Benzema was named in France 's squad for the 2014 FIFA World Cup , making his debut in the tournament . In the team 's first match , a 3 – 0 win against Honduras in Porto Alegre on 15 June , he scored a goal in each half , the first from a penalty kick . He also assisted the team 's second goal when his shot rebounded off the post and was fumbled over the goal-line by Honduran goalkeeper Noel Valladares for an own goal , the first World Cup goal given by goal-line technology . He was named by FIFA as man of the match for his performance . In the second group fixture , he scored and had a penalty saved in a 5 – 2 defeat of Switzerland , as Les Bleus all but secured qualification to the knockout stage . France were later knocked out by Germany in the quarter-final stage of the tournament .

A skillful , quick , agile , and prolific forward , who is good in the air , Benzema has been described as an " immensely talented striker " who is " strong and powerful " and " a potent finisher from inside the box " with both feet , despite being naturally right footed . An atypical number 9 , although he is usually deployed as a centre-forward , Benzema is also capable of playing in several other offensive positions , and has been used on the wing , or even behind the main striker . In addition to his goalscoring , Benzema is indeed known for his willingness and ability to drop into deeper or wider positions , and either link-up play with midfielders as a number 10 , or use his strength and technical ability to hold up the ball to provide assists for teammates , courtesy of his vision , creativity , passing , and eye for the final ball . He has also been praised for his work-rate and tactical intelligence off the ball , as well as his attacking movement as a forward , which often draws opposition defenders out of position , and in turn creates spaces for Cristiano Ronaldo to make attacking runs into the centre of the area from the left wing .

Karim Benzema was born in the city of Lyon , France to French nationals of Algerian descent . As a practicing Muslim , he observes fasting during the Islamic holy month of Ramadan . His grandfather , Da Lakehal Benzema , lived in the village of Tigzirt , located in the northern town of Beni Djellil in Algeria before migrating to Lyon , where he eventually settled in the 1950s . Benzema 's father , Hafid , was born in Tigzirt , while his mother , Wahida Djebbara , was born and raised in Lyon ; her family originated from Oran . Benzema is the third youngest in the family and grew up with eight other siblings in Bron , an eastern suburb of Lyon . His younger brothers Gressy and Sabri are also footballers . The former currently plies his trade at the amateur level with Vaulx-le-Velin in the Division d 'Honneur , the sixth division of French football , while the latter plays in the youth academy of a club in the family 's hometown of Bron . Since establishing himself as an international footballer , Benzema has been involved in numerous promotional campaigns . Since 2008 , he has regularly appeared on the cover of the French version of the annual FIFA video game . Benzema is sponsored by German sportswear company Adidas and has , subsequently , appeared in several television advertisements for the brand .

On 18 April 2010 , it was first reported by French television channel M6 that four members of the French national team were being investigated for their roles as clients in a prostitute ring operated inside of a Paris nightclub , with some of the women possibly being underage or transgender . The players were eventually revealed to be Franck Ribéry , Sidney Govou , Hatem Ben Arfa and Benzema . Benzema was alleged to have had a sexual rendezvous with a prostitute when she was 16 years of age , an act Benzema denied through his lawyer . On 20 July , Benzema was questioned by Paris police and indicted on the charge of " solicitation of a minor prostitute " . In November 2011 , prosecutors asked for the cases against Ribéry and Benzema to be dropped , saying that the players were not aware that the escort , identified as Zahia Dehar , was 16 years old . However , the case has gone on to trial . The first hearing was held in June 2013 . On 4 November 2015 , Benzema was arrested by French police for his alleged part in blackmailing fellow France international player Mathieu Valbuena . During the investigation over the blackmail plot , French Prime Minister Manuel Valls stated , " A great athlete should be exemplary . If he is not , he has no place in the France team . There are so many kids , so many youngsters in our suburbs that relate to great athletes . They wear the blue jersey , the colours of France , which are so important in these moments . "

11 South LaSalle Street Building or Eleven South LaSalle Street Building ( formerly Roanoke Building and Tower and originally Lumber Exchange Building and Tower Addition or simply the Roanoke Building and Lumber Exchange Building ) is a Chicago Landmark building that is listed on the National Register of Historic Places and that is located at 11 South LaSalle Street in the Loop community area of Chicago , Illinois , United States . This address is located on the southeast corner of LaSalle and Madison Street in Cook County , Illinois across the Madison Street from the One North LaSalle Building . The building sits on a site of a former Roanoke building ( once known as Major Block 2 ) that once served as a National Weather Service Weather Forecast official climate site and replaced Major Block 1 after the Great Chicago Fire . The current building has incorporated the frontage of other buildings east of the original site of Major Block 1 . The building was listed on the National Register of Historic Places ( under the name Lumber Exchange Building and Tower Addition ) on December 6 , 2007 , and named a Chicago Landmark on December 12 , 2007 . It incorporates the lands of the former DeSoto Building and former Farewell Hall .

A four-story Major Block 1 building , designed by T. V. Widskier , sat on this location until the Great Chicago Fire . After the fire , this was replaced with the Major Block 2 , which eventually became known as the Roanoke Building . Major Block 2 stood from 1872 – 1912 as a seven-story building on spread foundations . It was designed by Dixon & Hamilton and had a length of 136 feet ( 41.5 m ) along South LaSalle Street and a width of 66 feet ( 20.1 m ) along West Madison Street . A commonly published illustration of this building shows it as a five-story building . From June 8 , 1873 to January 1 , 1887 the original Roanoke building served as the Chicago location for the National Weather Service Weather Forecast official climate site . The building is mentioned in Saul Bellow 's More Die of Heartbreak but there it is referred to as a wealthy residence building and not as an office building .

The current building was designed in three phases : in 1915 Holabird & Roche 's design for the first 16 floors was built , and five floors were added in 1922 . It was built originally as the sixteen-story high Lumber Exchange Building and later renamed as the 11 South LaSalle Street Building . The Holabird & Roche design had three basements and rock caissons . The original 16-floor building was a late Chicago school commercial building that incorporated arches at both the fourth and the top floor , but when the top five floors were added in 1922 under the original cornice , the top rank of arches disappeared . The building uses dark terra cotta with italianate designs . The vaulted ceiling and marble wall lobby contribute to what is described as a classical entrance and lobby . The Palladian entrance uses contrasting white varigated and black marble .

In 1925 , the building was built to its current 35 story height by the addition of an adjacent tower to the east of the Madison street frontage . The entire building contains 330,000 square feet ( 31,000 m2 ) . The 36-story tower was added east of the original structure on the site of the former DeSoto Building at 125-129 West Madison . The tower was an early example of the use of setbacks and it uses ranks of paired windows . When the Tower was built four bronze bells were installed and were set to chime an original composition called " Samheim " which is Norse for " Tomorrow " every quarter-hour . The largest of these chimes is 7,000 pounds ( 3,200 kg ; 500 st ) and inscribed with the name " Leander " in honor of Leander McCormick . The current Roanoke building is the city 's only example of a building in the style of Portuguese Gothic architecture . According to the press release from the city announcing the landmark promotion , the building 's terra cotta ornamentation is derived from Portuguese Gothic precedents . The building was modernized in the 1950s and went through a postmodern renovation in 1984 to evoke the original ornamentation . The building has the same frontage as the original Roanoke building plus that of the former Farewell Hall ( built by William W. Boyington at 131-3 West Madison Street ) .

From 1920 until 1969 the building hosted the offices of the law firm Sidley & Austin . Today the building is leased by small service industry firms , such as second-floor tenant Thomas P. Gohagan & Co . , which arranges travel trips and tours for non-profit organizations . The building is undergoing renovation to the lobby , the façade , the elevators and the exterior lighting . The recent National Register listing has made the renovation feasible by making the building eligible for federal tax credits and reduced property taxes . The building qualified for the landmark Class L tax status , which makes it eligible for twelve years of reduced property taxes and other economic incentives for repair and rehab of historic buildings > In order to perform the renovation the owners took out a $ 43.3 million loan against the property according to Form 8-K filings with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission . Its National Registered Historic Places announcement listed it under the name " Lumber Exchange Building and Tower Addition " although its Chicago Landmark listing is under the name " Roanoke Building and Tower . "

" Donnie Fatso " is the ninth episode of the twenty-second season of the animated comedy series The Simpsons . It first aired on Fox in the United States on December 12 , 2010 . The plot revolves around an FBI agent , who helps Homer go undercover to infiltrate Fat Tony 's mob . Homer agrees to this in hopes of decreasing his sentence after being charged for bribery . This episode is a reference to Goodfellas as well as real-life FBI agent Donnie Brasco . " Donnie Fatso " was written by Chris Cluess and directed by Ralph Sosa . Critics were polarized with the episode , with criticism stemming from its main plot and cultural references . Upon its initial airing , the episode received 7.32 million viewers and attained a 3.2 / 8 rating in the 18-49 demographic , according to Nielsen ratings . " Donnie Fatso " featured guest appearances from Jon Hamm and Joe Mantegna , as well as several recurring voice actors and actresses for the series .

Homer and Marge wake on New Year 's Day with hangovers after the family 's New Year 's Eve celebration . As Homer takes out the garbage , Chief Wiggum , Eddie , and Lou arrive and issue him multiple citations and fines - the result of recently passed , frivolous laws intended to bring in revenue for the city when broken . Taking Moe 's suggestion that he bribe a city official to clear up the fines , Homer leaves a sack full of cash on the official 's desk but is promptly arrested , convicted , and sentenced to 10 years in prison . Wiggum takes pity on Homer and tells him to meet with an FBI agent , who offers to reduce the sentence if Homer will go undercover in the prison to investigate Fat Tony , who is also serving time along with his top henchmen . Homer quickly gains favor with Fat Tony , due to a confrontation engineered by the FBI agent , and Fat Tony breaks him and the entire group out of prison and offers him a chance to join the syndicate . Homer 's first task is to burn down Moe 's Tavern in revenge for Moe 's rudeness toward Fat Tony on the phone , but Homer finds that Moe has already done the deed himself . Fat Tony accepts Homer into the syndicate and the two develop a special bond ; however , complications over a scheme to import weapons put the syndicate under severe stress . Eventually Fat Tony discovers Homer 's undercover status and , emotionally devastated by his betrayal , suffers a fatal heart attack .

Meanwhile , Marge has begun to panic over being unable to communicate with Homer , as she knows nothing of his undercover work and cannot get any information on his whereabouts . She is surprised and thrilled when he returns home with his prison sentence lifted , but Homer feels guilt for Fat Tony 's death and bitterness toward the government over being used to bring him down . Homer visits Fat Tony 's grave to apologize , but is kidnapped by his cousin Fit Tony , who plans to kill him for revenge . However , Fit Tony spares his life after Homer tells of the time he and Fat Tony spent together , seeing that Fat Tony lives on in Homer 's memories . Fit Tony takes charge of the syndicate , but the stress of the position causes him to overeat and gain weight , becoming known first as Fit Fat Tony and then simply Fat Tony - now physically indistinguishable from the original .

Donnie Fatso was written by Chris Cluess and directed by Ralph Sosa . In July 2010 , it was announced that Jon Hamm would make a guest appearance in the episode as an agent for the FBI . In his interview with Entertainment Weekly , showrunner Al Jean was pleased with Hamm 's performance , opining : " You gave him one note and he immediately did twelve great things with it . He was really funny . And handsome . He had it all . Hamm stated that appearing on the show was " an incredible experience " . In his interview with Access Hollywood , he continued , " I got to work on The Simpsons , which I watched for 20 years and the show is still fresh and still funny and the characters still resonate . It ’ s one of the best shows on television . It was an honor to be asked to be a part of it . " Joe Mantegna returned as Fat Tony , and voiced Fat Tony 's cousin Fit Tony . " Donnie Fatso " features several references to music , film , media , and other pop culture phenomenon . The episode 's plot and title are parodical to that of the film Donnie Brasco . At the end of the episode , Homer 's monologue serves as a homage to monologue of Henry Hill in Goodfellas . Similarly , the parodying monologue is set to Sid Vicious ' version of " My Way " . Near the end of the episode , Fit Tony narrowly avoids a car bomb , a scene similar to that in Casino . The final scene between Fat Tony and Homer is reminiscent to that of the television show Wiseguy .

The opening sequence of " Donnie Fatso " featured a Fox News helicopter with the words " Merry Christmas from Fox News … But no other holidays . " It was the third episode of the season to satirize Fox News in its opening sequence , having first done so in " The Fool Monty " , in which helicopter can be seen hovering over New York City with the slogan " Fox News : Not Racist , But # 1 With Racists " . Bill O 'Reilly , host of the The O 'Reilly Factor , harshly criticized the show , calling the producers " pinheads " . He resumed : " Continuing to bite the hand that feeds part of it , Fox broadcasting once again allows its cartoon characters to run wild . " In response , producers added a brief scene at the beginning of the opening sequence in the following episode , " How Munched is That Birdie in the Window ? " , in which a helicopter appears bearing the slogan " Fox News : Unsuitable for Viewers Under 75 . " The scene was later removed from the opening sequence of " How Munched is That Birdie in the Window ? " , and was replaced by one reminiscing the film King Kong . According to showrunner Al Jean , the producers of the show were pleased that they had annoyed O 'Reilly , exclaiming that it was " very entertaining for [ them ] . "

" Donnie Fatso " was first broadcast on December 12 , 2010 in the United States as part of the animation television night on Fox . It was succeeded by episodes of Family Guy and American Dad ! . The episode was viewed by an estimated 7.32 million viewers , despite airing simultaneously with Extreme Makeover Home Edition on ABC , The Amazing Race on CBS , and a game between the Philadelphia Eagles and the Dallas Cowboys as part of the 2010 NFL season on NBC . " Donnie Fatso " garnered a 3.2 / 8 rating in the 18-49 demographic , according to the Nielsen ratings . The episode also became the third highest rated show of the week on Fox , only behind Glee and Family Guy . Total viewership and ratings were significantly down from the previous episode , " The Fight Before Christmas " , which received 9.56 million viewers and achieved a 4.2 / 11 rating in the 18-49 demographic . The episode attained mixed receptions from television critics . Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club gave the episode a ' C ' grade , scoring lower than " Road to the North Pole " of Family Guy and " For Whom the Sleigh Bell Tolls " of American Dad . VanDerWerff felt that the episode was " fairly lazy " , and commented that the main plot was " too much of a mob movie pastiche . " Eric Hochberger of TV Fanatic criticized the humor of the episode , opining that " for an episode with such an overdone story , we could have forgiven things if it were at least funnier . " He continued : " Unfortunately , there just weren 't enough jokes to make the episode worth it . " In conclusion of his review , Hochberger gave " Donnie Fatso " a 2.5 out of 5 stars .

Critics were also polarized with the conclusion of Fat Tony , and the addition of Fit Tony . Entertainment Weekly writer Darren Franich named Fat Tony 's death the ninth Best TV Character Death of 2010 , writing , " give the writers some credit for doing something different : In the middle of an otherwise straightforward mob-themed episode , they actually went ahead and killed off Fat Tony , a character who was first introduced almost twenty years ago . " Dan Castellaneta 's performance in the episode , as Homer , Barney , Krusty and Louie , was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Voice-Over Performance at the 63rd Primetime Emmy Awards , but lost to Maurice LaMarche , who received the award for his role in the Futurama episode " Lrrreconcilable Ndndifferences " .

" Hand in Glove " is a song by the British alternative rock band The Smiths , written by singer Morrissey and guitarist Johnny Marr . It was released as the band 's first single in May 1983 on independent record label Rough Trade Records . " Hand in Glove " peaked at number three on the UK Indie Chart . It did not chart ( top 75 ) but made number 124 outside the UK singles chart . A remixed version of the song was featured on the band 's debut album , The Smiths , in 1984 . That same year , a cover version recorded by singer Sandie Shaw featuring Smiths members Marr , Andy Rourke and Mike Joyce as backing musicians reached number 27 on the UK Singles Chart .

Morrissey and Marr wrote " Hand in Glove " in January 1983 , between the second and third concerts The Smiths ever played . Morrissey claimed that after Marr gave him a demo cassette of the song , he went home and wrote lyrics for it in the span of two hours , conscious of the fact that it would be the group 's first recorded work . Even prior to performing the song live , the group was unanimous in the opinion that " Hand in Glove " was their strongest song to date . The Smiths asked their manager Joe Moss to fund the recording of " Hand in Glove " . In late February , the group booked a one-day recording session at Strawberry Studios in Stockport at the cost of £ 250 , which they produced themselves . Morrissey claimed in later years that he was dissatisfied with his vocal and returned a week later to re-record his part , the day after which the entire group travelled to London and convinced Rough Trade owner Geoff Travis to release the record . However , author Simon Goddard noted that it was not until April 1983 that Marr and bassist Andy Rourke visited the Rough Trade offices . On that occasion , Marr handed Travis a cassette featuring " Hand in Glove " and a live recording of " Handsome Devil " , telling Travis , " [ L ] isten to this , it 's not just another tape " . Impressed , Travis promised he would . The following Monday , Travis called the group and invited them back to London to release " Hand in Glove " as a single . Both parties agreed to release the single as a temporary arrangement before agreeing to any long-term partnership .

Two months after the single 's release , The Smiths recorded the song again during aborted sessions for their debut album with producer Troy Tate . This version was recorded a tone lower than the original in the key of F # minor , and features a shorter introduction . The Smiths recorded the song again with producer John Porter in October at Manchester 's Pluto Studios . Morrissey rejected this version of the song . Due to impending deadlines , the version that ultimately appeared on the band 's first album The Smiths was a remix of the original master recording from the Strawberry Studios session . For this version , Porter increased the separation between Marr 's guitar tracks and Morrissey 's vocals , emphasised drummer Mike Joyce 's drum beat , pushed Rourke 's bass back in the mix , and created a more dramatic opening and conclusion to the song .

The original recorded version of " Hand in Glove " is in the key of G minor . The song begins with an overdub of Marr playing a harmonica over the rest of the music . Simon Goddard wrote that Marr 's use of the instrument " purposefully evoked the very same ' blunt vitality of working-class " northernness " that Ian McDonald attributes to The Beatles ' parallel 1962 single ' Love Me Do ' , though infinitely more melancholy . " Of the backing music , Goddard wrote , " Marr 's redolent minor chord wash weeps with a rain-soaked hopelessness while Rourke contributes one of his most inspired bass patterns " . Morrissey explained that the song 's theme was " complete loneliness , " going on to state : " It was important to me that that there 'd be something searingly poetic about it , in a lyrical sense , and yet jubilant at the same time . " Goddard described " Hand in Glove " as " a bleak proclamation of doomed happiness [ . . . ] a shattering left-hook of self-loathing , loss and desperation " . Years later Morrissey considered the song to be the group 's " most special . " The singer said he was particularly proud of the song 's second verse , which included the lines " Though we may be hidden by rags / We have something they 'll never have . " Morrissey explained that the verse described " how I felt when I couldn 't afford clothes and used to dress in rags but I didn 't really feel mentally impoverished . "

In the song 's lyrics , Morrissey referenced works by playwright Shelagh Delaney , whom he would reference in several later songs . The song 's line " I 'll probably never see you again " appears in Delaney 's kitchen sink realism play A Taste of Honey and The Lion in Love . Morrissey paraphrased the line " Everything depends upon how near you stand next to me " from the 1974 Leonard Cohen song " Take This Longing " . Goddard conjectures that the song 's title was inspired by the 1947 detective novel Hand in Glove by Ngaio Marsh . The song starts with the lines " Hand in glove / the sun shines out of our behinds " and then states that " No it 's not like any other love / this one 's different / because it 's us . " The lyrics then state that " the people stare " and " the Good People laugh " , " but we have something they 'll never have . " The song ends with the repeated line " I 'll probably never see you again " which is also taken from A Taste of Honey . The intro to the song uses the chords F major ( sus2 ) , Eb major and Bb major . The verse uses the chord G minor 7 , F7 ( sus2 ) and Eb major . ( The transcription cited is transposed to E minor instead of G minor . )

" Hand in Glove " was released as The Smiths ' debut recording in May 1983 . The single sold consistently for the next 18 months . Although the single failed to reach the UK Singles Chart , it reached number three on the UK Indie Chart . Its relative success earned the group a listing in the Guinness Book of Records in January 1984 when it and the group 's next two singles ' " This Charming Man " and " What Difference Does It Make ? " ' held the top three position on the UK Indie Chart . " It should have been a massive hit " , Morrissey later said , " it was so urgent . To me , it was a complete cry in every direction . It really was a landmark . " The single did raise the band 's profile ; a week after its release the band gained its first major live reviews in the music press , which in turn led to their first radio session with BBC Radio 1 disc jockey John Peel . While reviewing a 1983 concert by The Smiths and The Go-Betweens at The Venue in London , Barney Hoskyns , writing for the NME , described " Hand in Glove " as " one of the year 's few masterpieces , a thing of beauty and a joy forever " . In the 1984 edition of The Rock Yearbook , Hoskyns said the song " swept into my heart " . Bill Black , writing for Sounds , described it as a " daunting " debut . Writing for Allmusic , Ned Raggett calls the song a " stunning , surprising debut " and describes the music as " sparkling " stating that it relied on Marr 's " careful overdubbing of acoustic and electric guitars " . Raggett went on to describe Rourke 's bass and Joyce 's drumming as " sparse but effective " , and claimed that Joyce " especially shone " .

Morrissey had specific instructions on how he wanted the " Hand in Glove " single to be packaged . He told Rough Trade 's art department that the single should have a paper label centre with four vents encircling the middle , in homage to singles from the 1960s . The cover to the single features a photograph of George O 'Mara by Jim French , taken from Margaret Walters ' history The Nude Male . The sleeve 's homoerotic undertones elicited the reaction Morrissey was hoping for of unease and outrage . Rourke noted when he showed the recording to his parents his father was " mortified . He said to me , ' that 's a bloke 's bum ' and I said , ' yeah ' but when he asked me why I just didn 't have an answer for him " .

Despite having established themselves as a group , Morrissey and Marr still harboured ambitions that they would be recognised as songwriters by having their songs covered by others . Their top choice was singer Sandie Shaw , who had scored several hits throughout the 1960s and was one of the most prominent British vocalists of her era . In the summer of 1983 , Marr and Morrissey began asking Shaw to cover their song " I Don 't Owe You Anything " , which they had conceived with her in mind to perform . The pair sent Shaw various letters coupled with song demos . Shaw was sceptical at first ; she was discouraged by the negative media attention that accompanied the Smiths song " Reel Around the Fountain " , and when she received a copy of " Hand in Glove " in the mail , she reportedly exclaimed to her husband " he 's started sending me pictures of naked men with their bums showing ! " Shaw was eventually won over by the intervention of Geoff Travis and by Morrissey 's praise of her in the press . In January 1984 , NME announced that Shaw and The Smiths would release a collaborative recording of " I Don 't Owe You Anything " as a single on Rough Trade . In February , Shaw and The Smiths journeyed to Matrix Studios in London , where Shaw recorded three Smiths songs with Marr , Joyce and Rourke . The version of " Hand in Glove " recorded at Matrix was performed in the key of D minor , while Marr placed the intro riff 's accent on a major scale and Shaw altered some lyrics . Shaw ended up selecting their recording of " Hand in Glove " as the single 's A-side , placing " I Don 't Owe You Anything " as the B-side . The cover features a still of Rita Tushingham from the movie A Taste of Honey , an adaptation of the play of the same name that was written by Shelagh Delaney , who appeared on the covers of the single " Girlfriend In a Coma " and the compilation album Louder Than Bombs .

Darlington Football Club was an English football club based in Darlington , County Durham . The club was founded in 1883 , and played its games at Feethams , before moving to the Darlington Arena in 2003 . The arena is an all-seater stadium with a capacity of 25,000 , although this was restricted to 10,000 . The cost of the stadium was a major factor in driving the club into administration . The club originally played in regionally organised leagues , and were one of the founding members of the Northern League in 1889 . They were first admitted to the Football League when the Third Division North was formed in 1921 . They won the Third Division North title in 1925 , and their 15th place in the Second Division in 1926 remained their highest ever league finish . After their admission to the League , they spent most of their history in the bottom tier . They won the Third Division North Cup in 1934 ; their first victory in nationally organised cup competition . They reached the last 16 of the FA Cup twice , and the quarter-final of the Football League Cup once , in 1968 . In the early 1990s they won successive titles , with the Conference National in 1990 and the Fourth Division in 1991 . In 2011 they won the FA Trophy , defeating Mansfield Town 1 – 0 at Wembley Stadium .

In May 2012 , the club was bought out of a period of administration without entering into a Creditors Voluntary Agreement ( CVA ) . The Football Association ruled that it should be treated as a new club , which required a change of playing name . The name chosen was Darlington 1883 , and that team was placed in the Northern League Division One , which is the ninth tier of English football , for the 2012 – 13 season . The club 's main rivals were Hartlepool United . The club 's traditional colours were black and white shirts , black shorts and black and white socks . The club 's crest depicted Locomotion No 1 , referring to the town 's railway history ; as well as a stylised Quaker hat , referring to the religious movement that had a historic influence on the town , and which was the source of the team 's nickname , the Quakers .

In July 1883 , a meeting was called in Darlington Grammar School to address concerns that so few Darlington-based football clubs were entering the major competition in the region , the Durham Challenge Cup . The meeting agreed with the view expressed by the Darlington & Stockton Times newspaper , that there was " no club , urban or rural , sufficiently powerful to worthily represent Darlington " , decided to form a new club , and elected one Charles Samuel Craven , a local engineer , as secretary . Darlington Football Club duly entered the Durham Challenge Cup , reached the final in their first season , and won the trophy in 1885 . The following season Darlington entered the FA Cup for the first time , only to lose 8 – 0 to Grimsby Town . Craven was instrumental in the formation of the Northern League in 1889 . Darlington were one of the founder members , and went on to win the league title in 1896 and 1900 ; they reached the semi-final of the FA Amateur Cup in the same two seasons . The club turned professional in 1908 and joined the North Eastern League . The 1910 – 11 season saw Darlington reach the last 16 of the FA Cup , progressing through five qualifying rounds to lose to Swindon Town in the Third Round Proper , and two years later they won the North Eastern League . Ground improvements begun before the First World War left the club in financial difficulty during it ; the chairman of Darlington Forge Albion financed the completion of the East Stand and cleared the debts , allowing them to continue to compete . When competitive football resumed after the war , Darlington finished second in the North Eastern League , and were champions for a second time the following year . This victory was well timed , as it coincided with the formation of the Northern Section of the Football League 's Third Division , which Darlington were invited to join .

Their first season in the Third Division was a successful one and they ended up in second place . Three years later , in 1924 – 25 , they were champions and won promotion to the Football League Second Division . The 15th-place finish in 1926 remains Darlington 's best League performance , but they were relegated back to the Third Division in 1927 , where they remained until the Second World War put an end to competitive football . They came as high as third in 1929 – 30 , but twice had to apply for re-election to the League , in 1932 – 33 and 1936 – 37 , after finishing in last place in the section . In 1934 , they enjoyed their first success in a nationally-organised cup competition , defeating Stockport County 4 – 3 at Old Trafford to win the Football League Third Division North Cup , and reached the final again two years later , this time losing 2 – 1 at home to Chester .

Soon after the Football Association gave permission for competitive matches to be played under floodlights , Darlington beat Carlisle United 3 – 1 in the first floodlit FA Cup match between Football League clubs , a replay held at St James ' Park , Newcastle United 's ground , in November 1955 . The 1957 – 58 season saw the club equal their previous best FA Cup run , reaching the last 16 by defeating Chelsea , Football League champions only three years earlier , in the Fourth Round . After letting slip a three-goal lead at Stamford Bridge , Darlington won the replay 4 – 1 after extra time , described as " a most meritorious win , earned by a combination of sound tactics and an enthusiasm that Chelsea never equalled " by The Times ' correspondent , who felt it " surprising that extra time was necessary , for Darlington always seemed to have the match well in hand " . In the League , Darlington 's fourth place in 1948 – 49 was their only top-half finish in the first twelve seasons after the war , and when the regional sections of the Third Division were merged , they were allocated to the new Fourth Division .

The Supporters ' Club raised £ 20,000 to pay for a roof at one end of the Feethams ground and for floodlights , which were first used on 19 September 1960 . Later that night , the West Stand burned down due to an electrical fault . Darlington 's attendance record , of 21,023 against Bolton Wanderers in the League Cup fourth round , was set two months later . Under the management of Lol Morgan , they won promotion to the Third Division in 1966 . A crowd of 16,000 watched the draw against Torquay United on the last day of the season which ensured they finished as runners-up , but they were relegated the following year . Darlington reached the quarter-finals of the 1968 League Cup ; drawn away to Brian Clough 's Derby County , they took the lead , only to lose 5 – 4 . During the 1970s the club had to apply for re-election to the League five times , and by 1982 they were facing a financial crisis which they survived thanks to fundraising efforts in the town . Three years later they won promotion by finishing third in the league under manager Cyril Knowles . Darlington spent two seasons in the Third Division ; the 13th-place finish in 1986 was the highest position they achieved in the Football League since the introduction of the four-division structure in 1958 , but they were relegated the following season .

Though Brian Little 's appointment as manager in February 1989 failed to stave off relegation to the Conference , he went on to lead them to successive promotions . An immediate return to the Football League as Conference champions preceded the Fourth Division title in 1990 – 91 , but Little 's departure for Leicester City was followed by relegation and a succession of short-term managers . They came close to a return to the Third Division via the play-offs in 1996 ; on their first visit to Wembley , against Plymouth Argyle , they were beaten by a Ronnie Mauge goal .

The 1999 – 2000 season , the first under new chairman George Reynolds , was marked by Darlington becoming the first team to lose an FA Cup tie and still qualify for the next round . Manchester United 's involvement in the FIFA Club World Championship meant they did not enter the FA Cup . To decide who took their place , a " lucky losers " draw was held from the 20 teams knocked out in the second round ; Darlington were selected , and lost their third-round tie 2 – 1 to Aston Villa at Villa Park . Their second Wembley appearance came later that season , facing Peterborough United in the play-off final after automatic promotion had seemed certain earlier in the season . After a 3 – 0 aggregate semi-final win over Hartlepool United , Quakers missed numerous chances and were again undone by a single goal , this time from Andy Clarke . In 2002 , Darlington made unsuccessful approaches to sign Paul Gascoigne and Faustino Asprilla , and moved into their new stadium , named the Reynolds Arena , in summer 2003 . Reynolds had paid the club 's debts when he took over , but the cost of the stadium , partly financed with high-interest loans and built without realistic expectation of filling it , drove the club into administration six months later . Reynolds resigned as a director in January 2004 with the club under threat of imminent closure . A benefit match , featuring footballers such as Gascoigne , Bryan Robson and Kenny Dalglish , played in front of a crowd of over 14,000 , raised £ 100,000 to help ensure survival in the short term . Despite the off-field problems , David Hodgson , in his third spell as manager , and his players produced some fine performances as the team avoided relegation .

At the end of the season , Reynolds was obliged to hand over control to the Sterling Consortium to bring the club out of administration , Stewart Davies taking over as chairman . He and his staff adopted a fan-friendly approach , in contrast to the abrasive Reynolds , before in 2006 , the club was sold to property developer George Houghton . For four consecutive seasons , under Hodgson , sacked in 2006 , and then under successor Dave Penney , the Quakers finished in the top half of the table , reaching the play-off semi-final in 2008 only to lose to Rochdale on penalties . In February 2009 , Darlington again went into administration , triggering an automatic 10-point deduction , without which they would have again reached the play-offs . Fundraising efforts kept the club going , but when no buyer was found for the club by a May deadline , the administrators made the majority of the first-team squad available for transfer and cut staff numbers to a minimum . On 20 May , Houghton returned to the club as chairman , appointed former Middlesbrough boss Colin Todd as manager , and brokered an agreement which led to the club coming out of administration and ownership passing to local businessman Raj Singh , enabling the club to compete in the 2009 – 10 season without any points deduction . Todd left the club after losing seven of his first nine games and was replaced by former Republic of Ireland manager Steve Staunton , who only won four of 23 league games .

The club were eventually relegated to the Conference , and suffered more managerial turmoil during the summer when Simon Davey and successor Ryan Kidd both left within 11 days , to leave Mark Cooper in charge . He led the club to victory in the 2011 FA Trophy Final at Wembley Stadium , defeating Mansfield Town 1 – 0 with a goal from Chris Senior in the last minute of extra time . Following a succession of poor performances at the start of the 2011 – 12 season , Cooper and his assistant Richard Dryden were sacked by the club on 24 October 2011 . A little more than two months later , Singh placed the club into administration for a third time in less than a decade . A number of players were released and allowed to join other clubs for nominal fees in January before interim manager Craig Liddle and the remaining playing staff had their contracts terminated by Darlington 's administrator . Two days later , the club was spared from liquidation after a last-minute injection of funding by supporters ' groups . Enough funds were raised for Darlington to complete the season , but relegation was confirmed with three matches remaining . After the club was taken over with the intention of moving into community ownership , without entering into a Creditors Voluntary Agreement ( CVA ) , Darlington were relegated four divisions , to the Northern League Division One , on the recommendation of the Football Association . Martin Gray was appointed manager . On 21 June 2012 , the Football Association rejected an appeal , confirming that the club was to be treated as a new club entered into the Northern League , and would no longer be able to play under the name Darlington F.C. The new owners opted to rename the new club Darlington 1883 .

In 1888 , Darlington 's kit consisted of a shirt with black and white vertical stripes , black shorts and black socks . Apart from a period between the 1910s and 1936 , when blue shorts were worn , the basic colours of the home kit have remained black and white . The shirt design has varied , from the 1888 vertical stripes , through hoops , plain white , and back to hoops again in the 1990s . Sponsors ' names have appeared on Darlington 's shirts since the 1980s . A table of kit manufacturers ( since the 1970s ) and shirt sponsors appears on the right . Supporters were invited to vote for the design of the 2010 – 11 kit , to be manufactured by Erreà ; options for the home shirt each had black-and-white hoops , while the proposed away colours were either the traditional red or sky-blue and white . The front of the home shirt has black-and-white hoops with a curved white panel , the back is largely white , and it has black sleeves with white trim and a black collar ; shorts are white and socks have black-and-white hoops . The design originally chosen had to be changed to comply with Conference rules prohibiting predominantly black kit ( to avoid a clash with match officials ' colours ) . The away kit is all red with black trim on the shirt . The shirts bear the name of hotel The Morritt , winners of the right to sponsor the shirt in a draw from among seven local businesses , each of which had purchased a hospitality package .

The club badge is in the form of a shield , divided diagonally into two parts ; the smaller section , to the upper right , is in the club 's home colour of white , the larger is red , their traditional away colour . In the white section is a stylised Quaker hat , emblematic of the major role played by the Religious Society of Friends ( Quakers ) in the history of the town . The larger section depicts George Stephenson 's Locomotion No 1 , the steam locomotive that hauled the first train on the Stockton and Darlington Railway in 1825 , representing the importance of the railway industry to the area . Across the bottom of the shield is a ribbon bearing the club 's nickname , The Quakers , and the whole rests on a bed of oak leaves , symbolic of strength and endurance .

Feethams was originally used by Darlington Cricket Club , but began to be used for football in the 1860s . Darlington F.C. began playing there when they formed in 1883 . With growing crowd figures , the ground was expanded with the construction of the West stand at the turn of the twentieth century , and the construction of the Polam Lane end in 1905 . In 1913 , a pair of towers were built at the entrance to the ground , and in 1920 , offices and changing rooms were built underneath the East stand . Floodlights were installed in September 1960 , but after their first use an electrical fault gutted the West stand in a fire , prompting its rebuilding . In 1997 , the East stand was demolished and rebuilt as an all seater stand . The new stand brought the capacity of the stadium up to 8,000 . However , the £ 3 million cost of the stand had a major negative effect on the club , and George Reynolds came in to stabilise the club . He initiated the construction of the 25,000 seat Darlington Arena . The last match played at Feethams was a 2 – 2 draw with Leyton Orient on 3 May 2003 . Following the closure of the ground , the floodlights were sold to Workington A.F.C. and the stadium demolished . A 160-house housing estate was planned for the cleared site .

The all-seater Darlington Arena was opened in 2003 , at a cost of £ 18 million . The first game at the new stadium was a 2 – 0 loss to Kidderminster Harriers on 16 August 2003 . The attendance of 11,600 still stands as a record for the ground . Though the stadium can seat up to 25,000 people , the club is restricted to just 10,000 because of county and local planning regulations . The club struggled to fill the new stadium and entered administration in February 2009 . Although generally known as the Darlington Arena , the ground has had a number of official names due to sponsorship reasons ; between 2003 and 2004 it was known as the Reynolds Arena , the Williamson Motors Stadium from 2004 to 2005 , the 96.6 TFM Darlington Arena from 2005 to 2007 , the Balfour Webnet Darlington Arena between 2007 and 2009 , and since then it has been known as The Northern Echo Darlington Arena .

Darlington 's supporters consider Hartlepool United as their main rivals . The feeling is reciprocated : in a 2008 survey , 95 % of supporters of both clubs named the other as their bitterest rivals . The clubs , based 25 miles ( 40 km ) apart , with Middlesbrough directly between the two towns , had met 147 times ( as of 2009 – 10 ) , of which Hartlepool won 60 to Darlington 's 57 . The meeting between the two clubs in 2007 attracted a crowd of 10,121 to the Darlington Arena , the largest attendance for that League fixture for 50 years , though the average League attendance at the stadium declined from over 5,000 in its opening season to 2,744 in 2009 – 10 . Darlington has an official supporters ' club and an away supporters group , known as Darlington Away Far Travelling Supporters ( DAFTS ) , who represent Darlington supporters from places elsewhere in the country . A supporters ' trust was founded in 2002 ; it established a Disabled Supporters Group , tried to maintain a working relationship between club and supporters , and , together with the Darlington Camera Club , staged a " Farewell to Feethams " exhibition in celebration of the club 's longtime home . Together with the supporters ' club , the trust has been actively involved in fund-raising particularly during the club 's periods of administration .

Fanzines included Mission Impossible , first published in the early 1990s , and Where 's The Money Gone , whose teenage editor , along with the editor of website Darlo Uncovered , Scott Thornberry , were among several supporters banned from the ground by chairman George Reynolds for criticising the running of the club . The team mascot was Mr Q , described as " a flat-looking cartoon man with a very big hat " . In 2006 , he was joined , and later replaced , by Darlo Dog , a Dalmatian , who was once ejected from the ground for climbing on the advertising boards in front of television cameras . Darlo Dog retired at the end of the 2009 – 10 season ; his successor , a panda named Feethams , was chosen via a design competition .

Darlington 's highest league finish was fifteenth in the Football League Second Division , during the 1925 – 26 season . The club 's best performance in the FA Cup has been two appearances in the last 16 of the competition . This first was in 1910 – 11 , when they lost to Swindon Town in the third round . The second was in the 1957 – 58 season , when they beat Chelsea 4 – 1 in a replay to reach the fifth round , in which they lost 6 – 1 to Wolverhampton Wanderers . The club 's best League Cup performance was reaching the quarter-final in the 1967 – 68 season . The Quakers ' biggest home win was a 13 – 1 defeat of Scarborough in the FA Cup on 24 October 1891 . Their best away win was on 22 October 1921 , when they beat Durham City 7 – 3 in the Third Division North . The player with the most league appearances for Darlington is Ron Greener with 439 between 1955 and 1967 . He made a total of 490 senior appearances for the club . Alan Walsh scored a club-record 87 league goals between 1978 and 1984 , and scored 100 goals for Darlington overall . The most league goals scored for the club by a single player in a season is 39 , by David Brown in the 1924 – 25 season . Franz Burgmeier has the most senior international appearances while a Darlington player , with seven caps for Liechtenstein in the 2008 – 09 season .

Andry Rajoelina ( Malagasy : [ ˈjanɖʐʲ nʲˈrinə radzoˈel ] ) ( born 30 May 1974 ) was the President of the High Transitional Authority of Madagascar . He became president on 21 March 2009 during a political crisis , having held the office of Mayor of Antananarivo for one year prior , and stepped down on 25 January 2014 following internationally recognized general elections held in 2013 . Before entering the political arena , Rajoelina launched several successful enterprises , including a printing and advertising company called Injet in 1999 and the Viva radio and television networks in 2007 . He began his career as an entrepreneur in his teenage years , first as a disc jockey at local clubs and parties , and later by organizing and promoting musical events in the capital . Upon rising to power , Rajoelina dissolved the Senate and National Assembly and transferred their powers to a variety of new governance structures he made responsible for overseeing the transition toward a new constitutional authority . These administrative structures repeatedly conflicted with the internationally mediated process to establish a transitional government of consensus . Voters approved a new constitution in a national referendum unilaterally organized by the Rajoelina administration in November 2010 , ushering in the Fourth Republic and putting in place the conditions enabling Rajoelina to stand in the next general election . In January 2013 he announced his decision to abstain from running in the 2013 general election , but in May 2013 he reversed this decision and submitted his candidature . A special electoral court ruled in August 2013 that his candidature was invalid and that Rajoelina would not be permitted to run in the 2013 election . He has declared an interest in presenting himself as a presidential candidate in a future election .

Andry Rajoelina was born on 30 May 1974 to a relatively wealthy family in Antananarivo . His father , now-retired Colonel Roger Yves Rajoelina , held dual nationality and fought for the French army in the Algerian War . At the age of 13 , Rajoelina became the 1987 junior-class national karate champion . While still in high school , Rajoelina began working as a disc jockey at parties and clubs in Antananarivo to earn pocket money . Although Rajoelina 's family could afford a college education for their son , he opted to discontinue his studies after completing his baccalaureat to launch a career as an entrepreneur . In 1994 , Rajoelina met his future spouse Mialy Razakandisa , who was then completing her senior year at a high school in Antananarivo . The couple courted long-distance for six years while Mialy completed her undergraduate and masters studies in finance and accounting in Paris ; they were reunited in Madagascar in 2000 and wed the same year . Their marriage produced two boys , Arena ( born 2002 ) and Ilonstoa ( born 2005 ) , and a daughter born in 2007 that the couple named Andrialy , a contraction of their own names .

In 1993 , at the age of 19 , Rajoelina established his first enterprise : a small event production company called Show Business . The connections and influence of his father , then a prominent military officer , in combination with Rajoelina 's own knowledge of Antananarivo nightlife , were factors in the company 's success . By the following year , he had firmly established his reputation among the youth elite of the capital for organizing an annual concert called Live that brought together foreign and Malagasy musical artists . The event continued to grow in popularity with each passing year , attracting 50,000 participants on its tenth anniversary . In 1999 , he launched Injet , an advertising and digital printing company that quickly grew in prominence with its expansion of billboard advertising throughout the capital . The business was the first to make digital printing technology available on the island . Local magazine Echo Australe , which named then-mayor of Antananarivo Marc Ravalomanana their Entrepreneur of the Year in 1999 , bestowed the same honor on Rajoelina in 2000 . Following Rajoelina 's marriage in 2000 , his wife 's wealthy parents invested in Injet and allowed Rajoelina in 2001 to acquire Domapub , a competing Antananarivo-based billboard advertising business that they owned . The couple worked together to manage the family businesses , with Rajoelina responsible for Injet and his wife handling the affairs of Domapub . A competition organized by French bank BNI Crédit Lyonnais awarded first prize for best young entrepreneur in Madagascar to Rajoelina in 2003 .

Rajoelina 's business affairs gradually drew him into the political arena . Shortly after Ravalomanana won the presidential elections in 2001 , Rajoelina befriended the new president 's daughter and continued to expand his relationship with the capital 's political elite over the course of the Ravalomanana presidency . He assumed an increasingly political role after the policies of Ravalomanana 's Tiako I Madagasikara ( TIM ) -dominated government increasingly obstructed the expansion of his business activities , such as requiring the removal of Antananarivo 's first LED advertising panels , which Rajoelina had installed at a major roundabout in the capital . In May 2007 he purchased the Ravinala television and radio stations , which he renamed Viva TV and Viva FM . The official launch of these newly acquired media channels on 27 May was attended by many of the capital 's political and cultural elite , including Antananarivo mayor Hery Rafalimanana and Jacques Sylla , president of the TIM political party . Rajoelina used these media channels as outlets for voicing criticism of the Ravalomanana administration , quickly transforming his public image into that of an opposition leader .

In 2007 Rajoelina created and led the political association Tanora malaGasy Vonona ( TGV ) , meaning " determined Malagasy youth " . Shortly afterward he announced his candidacy for the position of Mayor of Antananarivo . Rajoelina was elected on 12 December 2007 with 63.3 % of the vote and a 75 % voter turnout , beating TIM party incumbent Hery Rafalimanana . Although Rafalimanana enjoyed strong popularity during his tenure as mayor , having been nationally and internationally credited with effectively managing the capital and achieving significant transformation of the urban landscape in the city , his campaign suffered from inadequate TIM promotional support and the increasingly unpopular image of the TIM party . Rajoelina faced significant challenges in his tenure as mayor . Upon taking office , he was confronted with redressing the city 's treasury , which had accumulated 8.2 billion Malagasy Ariary ( approximately 4.6 million U.S. dollars ) in debts under previous mayors , including Ravalomanana himself . Beginning 4 January 2008 , Ravalomanana ordered water cutoffs at public pumps and brownouts of Antananarivo 's street lights run by the state utilities company Jirama , due to 3.3 million ariary of unpaid debts to Jirama by the City of Antananarivo . Rajoelina responded by condemning the move as political and proceeded to undertake an audit that identified and addressed long-standing procedural irregularities and issues of corruption within the city 's administration . Following a series of crimes against members of Rajoelina 's inner circle in 2008 that comprised the burgling of his cabinet director 's car , the kidnapping and ransoming of one of his special advisers , and the death of an assistant under mysterious circumstances , rumors spread that the Rajoelina administration was being deliberately intimidated by supporters of the president .

On 13 December 2008 , the Government closed Andry Rajoelina 's Viva TV , stating that a Viva interview with exiled former head of state Didier Ratsiraka was " likely to disturb peace and security " . This move catalyzed the political opposition and a public already dissatisfied with other recent actions undertaken by Ravalomanana , including the July 2008 deal with Daewoo Logistics to lease half the island 's arable land for South Korean cultivation of corn and palm oil , and the November 2008 purchase of a second presidential jet at a cost of 60 million U.S. dollars . Within a week Rajoelina met with twenty of Madagascar 's most prominent opposition leaders , referred to in the press as the " Club of 20 " , to develop a joint statement demanding that the Ravalomanana administration improve its adherence to democratic principles . The demand was broadcast at a public press conference where Rajoelina also promised to dedicate a politically open public space in the capital which he would call Place de la democratie ( " Democracy Place " ) . Beginning in January 2009 , Andry Rajoelina led a series of political rallies in downtown Antananarivo where he gave voice to the frustration that Ravalomanana 's policies had triggered , particularly among the economically marginalized and members of the political opposition . On 17 January he gathered 30,000 supporters at a public park and declared it renamed Place de la democratie . At a rally on 31 January 2009 Rajoelina announced that he was in charge of the entire Malagasy Republic , declaring : " Since the president and the government have not assumed their responsibilities , I therefore proclaim that I will run all national affairs as of today . " He added that a request for President Ravalomanana to formally resign would shortly be filed with the Parliament of Madagascar . This self-declaration of power discredited Rajoelina in the eyes of many of the supporters who had rallied around his original pro-democracy message , and the number of attendees at subsequent rallies declined , averaging around 3,000 to 5,000 participants .

On 3 February , Ravalomanana dismissed Rajoelina as mayor of Antananarivo and appointed a special delegation headed by Guy Randrianarisoa to manage the affairs of the capital . Rajoelina denounced the decision and warned that it would not be accepted by the populace . The following day Rajoelina instead designated Michele Ratsivalaka to succeed him as mayor . Rajoelina incited demonstrators on 7 February to occupy the presidential palace , prompting the presidential guard to open fire on the advancing crowd , killing 31 and wounding more than 200 . Popular disapproval of Ravalomanana intensified and polarized some in favor of his resignation , although perceptions of Rajoelina as an alternative remained mixed . Conflicts between pro-Rajoelina demonstrators and security forces continued over the following weeks , resulting in several additional deaths . The security forces unsuccessfully attempted to arrest Rajoelina at his compound on 5 March ; they also raided the offices of his Viva media network . Initially they surrounded Viva , and after thirty minutes the staff attempted to remove Viva property , at which point the security forces stormed the building and confiscated the equipment . For the next several days Rajoelina took refuge in the home of the French ambassador , reporting to the press that he feared for his safety .

On 11 March , following a declaration of neutrality by army leadership , pro-opposition soldiers from the CAPSAT ( Army Corps of Personnel and Administrative and Technical Services ) stormed the army headquarters and forced the army chief of staff to resign . Over the next several days the army deployed forces to enable the opposition to occupy key ministries , the chief of military police transferred his loyalty to Rajoelina , and the army sent tanks against the president 's Iavoloha Palace . Rajoelina rejected Ravalomanana 's offer on 15 March to hold a national referendum to determine whether the president should resign , and called on security forces to arrest the president . The following day , the army stormed the president 's Ambohitsorohitra Palace and captured the Central Bank . Hours later Ravalomanana transferred his power to group of senior army personnel , an act described by the opposition as a voluntary resignation , although Ravalomanana later declared he had been forced at gunpoint to relinquish power . The military council would have been charged with organizing elections within 24 months and re-writing the constitution for the " Fourth Republic " . However , Vice Admiral Hyppolite Ramaroson announced on 18 March that it would transfer power directly to Rajoelina , making him president of the opposition-dominated High Transitional Authority ( HAT ) that he had appointed weeks earlier . With the military 's backing , the authority was charged with taking up the task previously accorded to Ravalomanana 's proposed military directorate . Madagascar 's constitutional court deemed the transfer of power , from Ravalomanana to the military board and then to Rajoelina , to be legal ; the court 's statement did not include a justification for its decision .

Upon the army 's transfer of power to Rajoelina , Malagasy navy troops called for his resignation by 25 March , threatening to use force otherwise to protect the constitution of Madagascar and denouncing Rajoelina for the " civil war occurring in Madagascar " . The navy troops claimed there was " irrefutable " evidence that Rajoelina had paid the army corps hundreds of millions of ariary and that they should face trial in accordance with military law , but called for other nations not to get involved in what they considered a purely domestic affair . Rajoelina was sworn in as President on 21 March at Mahamasina stadium before a crowd of 40,000 supporters . He was 35 years of age when sworn in , making him the youngest president in the country 's history and the youngest head of government in the world at that time . The Southern African Development Community , a bloc of 15 nations including Madagascar , announced on 19 March that it would not recognize Rajoelina 's presidency since the takeover was unconstitutional . His ascension to the presidency was also condemned by the European Union and the United States , and the African Union suspended Madagascar and threatened sanctions if the constitutional government had not been restored in six months . No foreign diplomats attended Rajoelina 's investiture ; the HAT foreign minister said none had been invited .

Rajoelina took power in an atmosphere of national tension and international pressure to re-establish constitutional authority . The new head of state announced on 17 March that a new constitution would be presented for voter approval and general elections would be held within 24 months . Immediately after taking office , Rajoelina began naming opposition leaders to positions within the HAT . He dissolved the Senate and Parliament and transferred their powers to his cabinet , the officials of the HAT , and the newly established Council for social and economic strengthening , through which his policies were issued as decrees . Legislative authority rested in practice with Rajoelina and his cabinet , composed of his closest advisers . A military committee established in April increased HAT control over security and defense policy . The following month , after the suspension of the country 's 22 regional governors , Rajoelina strengthened his influence over local government by naming replacements despite the fact that regional governorships were normally elected positions . The National Inquiry Commission ( CNME ) was established shortly thereafter ; although its official purpose was to strengthen HAT effectiveness in addressing judicial and legal matters , the new entity carried out investigations and arrests of TIM supporters and other opponents of the TGV party . In addition , the new administration launched a strong crackdown on demonstrations by the new opposition , composed largely of Ravalomanana supporters ; at two demonstrations in April 2009 security forces opened fire on unarmed civilians protesting the HAT 's closure of three media networks formerly controlled by Ravalomanana , killing four and wounding sixty . Political analysts have criticized Rajoelina for using his position primarily to consolidate power and protect his political position and business interests and those of his supporters , observing that his initially broad range of supporters within the opposition movement has significantly diminished over time .

While in power , Rajoelina periodically engaged in ongoing negotiations to establish conditions under which free and fair elections could be held to restore government constitutionality and legitimacy in the eyes of the international community . On 4 August 2009 Rajoelina met with former Madagascar presidents Ravalomanana , Ratsiraka and Zafy along with former Mozambican President Joaquim Chissano acting as mediator at the four-day mediation crisis talks held in Maputo , Mozambique . The Maputo Accords signed by the four leaders in August and further accords signed in Addis-Abeba in November provided guidelines for a period of consensual political transition . In the months that followed , however , Rajoelina obstructed the implementation of the accords , making unilateral political decisions and filling all important government posts with TGV party representatives . After being pushed back repeatedly , a constitutional referendum was held on 17 November 2010 that resulted in adoption of the state 's fourth constitution with 73 % in favor and a voter turnout of 52.6 % . The independent Malagasy political watchdog group KMF-CNOE , as well as the political opposition and the international community , cited numerous irregularities in the process , which was carried out unilaterally by the HAT . The constitution in effect at the time Rajoelina took office required that presidential candidates attain a minimum of 40 years of age . One substantive change made by the new constitution was to lower the minimum age for presidential candidates from 40 to 35 , making Rajoelina eligible to stand in presidential elections . In addition , the new constitution mandated the leader of the High Transitional Authority – the position held by Rajoelina – be kept as interim president until an election could take place . The new constitution also contained a clause that required presidential candidates to have lived in Madagascar for at least six months prior to the elections , effectively barring Ravalomanana and other opposition leaders living in exile from running in the next election . After being repeatedly postponed , the general election was held on 25 October 2013 .

The HAT under Rajoelina 's leadership affected highly visible , concrete activities that appealed to popular concerns . Rajoelina occasionally organized events to distribute basic items to groups of poor recipients , including medicines , clothing , house maintenance materials and school supplies . Rajoelina 's administration also spent billions of ariary to subsidize basic needs like electricity , petrol , and food staples . Public works construction projects featured prominently among Rajoelina 's activities . In 2010 , two years after Rajoelina launched the project as mayor of Antananarivo , the HAT completed the reconstruction of the Hotel de Ville ( town hall ) of Antananarivo which had been destroyed by arson during the rotaka political protests of 1972 . Also in 2010 , Rajoelina oversaw the construction of a hospital built to international standards in Toamasina . Through its trano mora ( " cheap house " ) initiative , the HAT built several subsidized housing developments intended for young middle class couples . Numerous other construction projects were planned or completed , including the restoration of historic staircases in Antananarivo built in the 19th century during the reign of Queen Ranavalona I , renovation of Toamasina 's two main markets and its principal boulevard , repaving of the heavily traveled road between Toamasina and Foulpointe , and the construction of a 15,000-capacity municipal stadium and new town hall in Toamasina .

On the national level , sanctions and suspension of donor aid amounting to 50 percent of the national budget and 70 percent of public investments obstructed the Rajoelina administration 's management of state affairs and its ability to systematically combat poverty on a wider scale . A United Nations envoy concluded in 2011 that Rajoelina 's controversial accession to the presidency had reduced food security , with Madagascar ranking among the worst in the world for child nutrition . The frequent non-payment of civil servant and military salaries resulted in regular school and hospital closures , general strikes and widespread increases in corruption . Crime and insecurity grew dramatically , with a sharp upswing in violent crime and theft in Antananarivo and increasingly frequent and deadly incidences of armed cattle rustling in the central southern region of the island . Key development indicators steeply declined between 2009 and 2013 , including maternal and child mortality , education enrollment and completion , per capita income and employment rates . In 2010 the United Nations ranked Madagascar among the ten poorest countries in the world , noting that economic gains made under Ravalomanana had been lost following Rajoelina 's unconstitutional rise to power . In 2011 , Forbes magazine ranked Madagascar as the worst economy in the world , faulting its political instability and poor governance .

Environmental conditions on the island also worsened under Rajoelina . The illegal exportation of endangered rosewood from protected national forests abruptly increased under the HAT , with several business leaders and politicians linked to the HAT having been implicated in trafficking the valuable wood to China ; NGOs and the US government accused the Rajoelina administration of selling the wood to supplement the national budget and finance its public works projects . A large , unexplained stash of rosewood logs was discovered at the presidential palace after the end of Rajoelina 's term in office . Due to accelerating deforestation and a spike in bush meat consumption linked with deepening poverty , the island 's lemurs moved closer toward extinction under Rajoelina 's tenure . A July 2012 assessment found that 90 percent of lemur species were found to be threatened with extinction , an increase from 38 percent in 2008 . Lack of funds for pesticides and systematic spraying resulted in the March 2013 outbreak of a locust infestation that was anticipated to persist for five to ten years and require $ 41 million U.S. dollars to bring under control , deepening the risk of nationwide famine and destruction of habitat for endangered species .

After coming to power , Rajoelina 's HAT pursued action against Ravalomanana and his business interests . On 2 June 2009 , Ravalomanana was fined 70 million US dollars ( 42 million British pounds ) and sentenced to four years in prison for alleged abuse of office which , according to HAT Justice Minister Christine Razanamahasoa , included the December 2008 purchase of a second presidential jet ( " Air Force II " ) worth $ 60 million . Rajoelina sold the controversial jet in 2012 and pursued legal action against Ravalomanana 's company Tiko to reclaim 35 million US dollars in back taxes . Additionally , on 28 August 2010 , the HAT sentenced Ravalomanana in absentia to hard labor for life and issued an arrest warrant for his role in the protests and ensuing deaths . Rajoelina likewise sought to distinguish himself from his predecessor in policy choices . One of Rajoelina 's first measures as president was to cancel Ravalomanana 's unpopular deal with Daewoo Logistics . He also rejected Ravalomanana 's medium term development strategy , termed the Madagascar Action Plan , and abandoned education reforms initiated by his predecessor that adopted Malagasy and English as languages of instruction , instead returning to the traditional use of French .

The international community maintained that Rajoelina 's legitimacy was conditional to free and fair elections . A number of key international organizations in which Madagascar had been a member , including the Southern African Development Community ( SADC ) and the African Union , withheld recognition of Rajoelina 's legitimacy throughout his tenure . The United States , Madagascar 's largest bilateral donor and provider of humanitarian aid , also refused to acknowledge the Rajoelina administration . The United Nations responded to the power transfer by freezing 600 million euros in planned aid . The United States suspended Madagascar from the list of beneficiaries of the African Growth and Opportunity Act ( AGOA ) , which had ensured preferential tariffs for the import of Malagasy textiles . This sanction resulted in the loss of over 50,000 jobs and dealt a severe blow to the textile sector , which had accounted for half of Madagascar 's exports . Rajoelina initially sought to persuade former donors to recommence their support ; when these efforts failed to yield results , the he explored the possibility of foregoing the support of traditional partners through new or strengthened relations with such alternatives as Libya , China and Saudi Arabia but was again unable to secure the desired partnerships .

Rajoelina 's relations with France were characterized by an initial period of gradually increasing diplomatic engagement that weakened after 2012 . On 13 May 2011 , Andry Rajoelina met with Alain Juppé , the French Minister of Foreign Affairs , and was received by the French President Nicolas Sarkozy on 7 December 2011 . According to the French presidency , " The interview was devoted to the situation in Madagascar and the completion of the political transition initiated in 2009 through the implementation of the roadmap for the return of constitutional order , validated by the international community " . Following Rajoelina 's announcement to run in the 2013 election , however , France responded by suspending the visas issued to Rajoelina and his family , and refusing to issue new visas requested by his ministers . The Rajoelina administration was gradually afforded increasing entry to the United Nations . From 9 to 13 May 2011 , Rajoelina was invited to participate in the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries , held in Istanbul , Turkey . Rajoelina also spoke during the 66th Session of the United Nations General Assembly which took place on 23 September 2011 in New York City .

On 15 January 2013 , Rajoelina officially renounced his candidature in the next presidential election , then planned for May 2013 . This decision followed a similar declaration on the part of former president Ravalomanana . Exclusion of both political figures from the next general election was a key precondition to international recognition of the elections , as defined by the Southern African Development Community in its roadmap toward ending the political crisis . Rajoelina expressed support for Edgar Razafindravahy , interim mayor of Antananarivo and the official candidate of the TGV party among several other party candidates , and declared his intention to run in the 2018 presidential election . However , on 3 May 2013 , Rajoelina made last-minute arrangements to stand in the 2013 presidential elections , declaring the roadmap agreement had been breached when former president Ravalomanana 's wife , Lalao , decided to stand . The candidacy of former president Didier Ratsiraka was also permitted ; the candidature of all three prominent politicians was rejected by the international community . At the time that Rajoelina submitted his candidacy , he would have run against forty other candidates in total , of whom seven were affiliated with his own political movement .

The African Union urged Rajoelina , Ravalomanana and Ratsiraka to withdraw their controversial candidacies , and the European Union responded by suspended funding to the election . The French government sanctioned all three candidates by revoking their French visas , effectively barring them from French territory , and considered freezing their financial and real estate assets . Following the suspension of election funding , the HAT again pushed back the election date , citing inadequate financial resources . A special electoral court ruled in August 2013 that the candidatures of Rajoelina , Ravalomanana and Ratsiraka were invalid and that Rajoelina and his two chief rivals would not be permitted to run in the 2013 election . Rajoelina then announced his endorsement of presidential candidate Hery Rajaonarimampianina , who successfully progressed from the first round voting held 25 October 2013 alongside the candidate backed by Ravalomanana , Jean Louis Robinson . The run-off between the two candidates was held on 20 December 2013 . Rajaonarimampianina was declared the winner of the election , and Rajoelina officially stepped down on 25 January 2014 .

Following Rajaonarimampianina 's election , the international community offered " conditional recognition " of the new government . This tentative validation of the results was motivated by the concern that the new president was a puppet for Rajoelina , as well as the allegations by Robinson of massive electoral fraud after losing the runoff despite a wide lead over his opponent in the first round . Rajaonarimampianina set up the MAPAR committee to organize the selection of his cabinet , a process that extended over several months . During this time , Rajoelina sought to be nominated for the position of Prime Minister of Madagascar and claimed the MAPAR had promised he would be nominated . In April 2014 , Rajaonarimampianina instead announced the selection of Roger Kolo , following a consultation round which showed he had support from a majority in the parliament . On 18 April , a cabinet was announced that comprised 31 members with varied political affiliations . Rajoelina qualified Rajaonarimampianina 's decision to exclude him and form alliances with the political opposition , including Ravalomanana 's supporters , as " hypocrisy and betrayal " , and has declared a refusal to seek reconciliation with Rajaonarimampianina .

" Supergirl " is a pop song by American recording artist and actress Miley Cyrus , performing as Hannah Montana – the alter ego of Miley Stewart – a character she played on the Disney Channel television series Hannah Montana . The song was written by Kara DioGuardi , in collaboration with Daniel James , and produced by Dreamlab . " Supergirl " was released on August 28 , 2009 , by Walt Disney Records as the lead and only single from the series ' third soundtrack , Hannah Montana 3 . A karaoke version is available in Disney 's Karaoke Series : Hannah Montana 3 . The song is characterized by dance-pop elements in its musical composition and contains lyrics regarding the lows of pop stardom . The song received average to mixed reception from contemporary critics and garnered average commercial outcomes for Cyrus in several countries , compared to those of her previous efforts as Montana . In the United States , it peaked at number five on Billboard 's Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles ( Hot 100 – 105 ) . It marked Cyrus ' first entry as Montana in Austria ; it peaked at number fifty-eight on the Austrian Singles Chart . A music video for " Supergirl " was released , taken from footage of a concert performance .

" Supergirl " was co-written by Kara DioGuardi , who composed a total of four songs on Hannah Montana 3 , and Dan James . A karaoke version is available in Disney 's Karaoke Series : Hannah Montana 3 . " Supergirl " leaked into the Internet in November 2008 , along with six other songs from Hannah Montana 3 . The song first premiered on Radio Disney on July 2 , 2009 , in order to promote the soundtrack and was afterward released as the lead and only single from Hannah Montana 3 on August 28 , 2009 .

" Supergirl " is pop song with a length of two minutes and fifty-five seconds . According to Allmusic , the song contains dance-pop and teen pop elements in its music , while Mikael Wood of Entertainment Weekly cited rock music as its main influence . Peter Larsen of The Orange County Register described the track as a bouncy dance-pop number also . The song is set in common time and has a moderate rock tempo . It is written in the key of C major and it follows the chord progression Am11 – Fmaj7 – C – G. Warren Truitt of About.com interpreted the lyrics of " Supergirl " to be about the lows of pop stardom . Larsen believed the line " You just wanna be like me " was a representation of Cyrus , " a super duper girl " .

" Supergirl " received average to mixed reception from contemporary critics . Heather Phares of Allmusic said , " That feeling of familiarity extends to the songs that haven 't appeared anywhere else . Whether it 's the happy side of Hannah ( ' It 's All Right Here , ' ' Supergirl ' ) [ ... ] they sound very much like what came before them . " Warren Truitt of About.com agreed but stated , " [ The song ] may be a little cookie-cutter , but at least the songwriters realize who their audience is and they deliver the goods " . Mikael Wood of Entertainment Weekly compared the song 's style to that of Kelly Clarkson . While reviewing a concert before the release of the soundtrack , Peter Larsen of The Orange County Register predicted it would be released as a single and become popular with children , yet " saturate [ parents ' ] ears for a month or two " .

On the week ending July 25 , 2009 , in the United States , " Supergirl " debuted at number five on Billboard 's Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles Chart ( Hot 100 – 105 ) upon Hannah Montana 3 's release . The song dropped from the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles Chart in the following week . On the week ending September 11 , 2009 , " Supergirl " debuted and peaked at number fifty-eight on the Austrian Singles Chart , marking Cyrus ' first appearance in the country as Montana ; it also dropped from the Austrian Singles Chart after one week . Along with its B-side , " Every Part of Me " , the song peaked at number forty-two on the German Singles Chart .

On October 10 , 2008 , Cyrus , dressed as Montana , premiered " Supergirl " , along with eight other songs , at the concert taping for the third season of Hannah Montana , which was set on October 10 in Irvine , California at the Verizon Wireless Amphitheatre . The performance began with Montana , dressed in a white and pink tie-dye tee shirt , white pants , pink leather jacket , and large sunglasses . The performance begins with Cyrus sitting in a bench , facing a mirror , as backup dancers apply makeup on her and attend her . She stands up and roams around the stage to sing afterward . Peter Larsen of The Orange County Register called it one of " hits of the night " . The performance was later premiered as the song 's music video on July 2 , 2009 , on Disney Channel to promote Hannah Montana 3 .

Leccinum manzanitae is an edible species of bolete fungus in the family Boletaceae . Described as new to science in 1971 , it is commonly known as the manzanita bolete for its usual mycorrhizal association with manzanita trees . Its fruit bodies ( mushrooms ) have sticky reddish to brown caps up to 20 cm ( 7.9 in ) , and its stipes are up to 16 cm ( 6.3 in ) long and 3.5 cm ( 1.4 in ) thick . They have a whitish background color punctuated with small black scales known as scabers . Found only in the Pacific Northwest region of the United States and Canada , it is the most common Leccinum species in California . The mushroom is edible , although opinions vary as to its quality . L. manzanitae can be usually distinguished from other similar bolete mushrooms by its large size , reddish cap , dark scabers on a whitish stipe , and association with manzanita and madrone .

The fruit bodies of Leccinum manzanitae are sometimes massive , occasionally reaching weights of several pounds . The cap is 7 – 20 cm ( 2.8 – 7.9 in ) in diameter , spherical to convex when young , and broadly convex to flattened or cushion-shaped ( pulvinate ) . The surface of the cap is often shallowly to deeply pitted or reticulate , sticky , and covered with pressed-down hairs that are more conspicuous toward the edge of the cap . Its color is dark red during all stages of development . The cap 's flesh is 2 – 4 cm ( 0.8 – 1.6 in ) thick , white when first exposed , but slowly and irregularly changing to dark brownish-gray with no reddish intermediate state . The change in color upon bruising or injury is often more pronounced in young specimens . The tubes comprising the hymenophore are 1 – 2.5 cm ( 0.4 – 1.0 in ) long , with an adnate attachment to the stipe ; their color is pale olive when young and darkens when bruised . Pores are up to 1 mm in diameter , angular , and the same color as the tubes . The stipe is 10 – 16 cm ( 3.9 – 6.3 in ) long , and 1.5 – 3.5 cm ( 0.6 – 1.4 in ) thick at the apex , and either club-shaped or swollen in the middle . It is solid ( i.e. , not hollow ) , with a dry surface , and covered with small , stiff , granular projections called scabers . The scabers are usually whitish when young , but eventually turn dark brownish-grey with age . The stipe flesh stains a bluish color when bruised , although this reaction is variable and sometimes slow to occur . It has no distinctive taste or odor .

Leccinum manzanitae mushroom produce a cinnamon-brown spore print . Spores are 13 – 17 by 4 – 5.5 µm , somewhat elliptical to cylindrical , and tapered on each end ( fusoid ) ; their walls are smooth and moderately thick . The spore-bearing cells , the basidia , are 27 – 32 by 6 – 9 µm , club-shaped to pear-shaped ( pyriform ) and four-spored . The cystidia are 23 – 32 by 4 – 6 µm , fusoid to club-shaped with narrow , elongated apices . Caulocystidia ( found on the stipe surface ) are thin-walled , club-shaped to somewhat fusoid , and sometimes end in a sharp point ; they measure 35 – 45 by 9 – 14 µm . Clamp connections are absent in the hyphae of Leccinum manzanitae . The hyphae of the cap cuticle are arranged in the form of a trichoderm ( wherein the outermost hyphae emerge roughly parallel , perpendicular to the cap surface ) . Several chemical tests can be used to help confirm the identify of the mushroom : a drop of dilute ( 3 – 10 % ) potassium hydroxide ( KOH ) solution will turn the tubes pale red whereas nitric acid ( HNO3 ) on the tubes produces orange-yellow ; a solution of Iron ( II ) sulfate ( FeSO4 ) applied to the flesh results in a pale grey color .

In the field , Leccinum manzanitae fruit bodies can be usually distinguished from those of other similar bolete species by its large size , reddish cap , dark scabers on a whitish stipe , and association with manzanita and madrone . L. ponderosum also has a dark red sticky cap , but its flesh does not darken upon exposure , and its cap is smooth when young . L. armeniacum also grows with manzanita and madrone , but its cap is more orange . L. aeneum , known only from California , is another species that associates with manzanitae and madrone . It has an orangish cap and whitish scabers on the stipe that do not darken significantly as the mushroom matures . L. insigne , found in coniferous forests with aspens , has a coloration similar to L. manzanitae . The brown-capped L. scabrum is associated with ornamental birch , usually in cultivated landscapes . L. constans , also found exclusively in California , is paler , and does not undergo color changes when the cut flesh is exposed to air ; it is found near madrone in coastal regions . The species L. largentii , found in northern regions of the West Coast , has a dry cap with a fibrillose to scaly edge , dark olive pores , and densely arranged scabers on the stipe . It associates with toyon ( Heteromeles arbutifolia ) .

Ramariopsis kunzei is an edible species of coral fungi in the Clavariaceae family , and the type species of the genus Ramariopsis . It is commonly known as white coral because of the branched structure of the fruit bodies that resemble marine coral . The fruit bodies are up to 5 cm ( 2.0 in ) tall by 4 cm ( 1.6 in ) wide , with numerous branches originating from a short rudimentary stem . The branches are one to two millimeters thick , smooth , and white , sometimes with yellowish tips in age . Ramariopsis kunzei has a widespread distribution , and is found in North America , Europe , Asia , and Australia .

The species was first described as Clavaria kunzei by pioneer mycologist Elias Magnus Fries in 1821 . E.J.H. Corner transferred the species to Ramariopsis in 1950 , and made it the type species . In general , coral fungi often have extensive taxonomic histories , as mycologists have not agreed on the best way to classify them . In addition to Clavaria and Ramariopsis , the R. kunzei has been placed in the genera Ramaria by Lucien Quélet in 1888 , and Clavulinopsis by Walter Jülich in 1985 . According to the taxonomic database MycoBank , the species has acquired a sizable list of synonyms , listed in the taxobox . It is commonly known as white coral because of the branched structure of the fruit bodies that resemble marine coral . A phylogenetic analysis of clavarioid fungi concluded that R. kunzei is in a phylogenetic lineage together with several Clavulinopsis species ( including C. sulcata , C. helvola and C. fusiformis ) , and that this clade ( the ramariopsis clade ) is nested within a group of species representing the Clavariaceae family .

The fruit bodies of Ramariopsis kunzei are white to whitish-yellow in color , and are highly branched structures resembling coral ; the dimensions are typically up to 8 cm ( 3.1 in ) tall and 6 cm ( 2.4 in ) wide . Older specimens may have a pinkish tinge . The tips of the branches are blunt , not crested as in some other species of coral fungi , like Clavulina cristata ; branches are between 1 and 5 millimeters thick . The branch tips of mature specimens may be yellow . A stem , if present , may be up to 1 cm ( 0.4 in ) long and scurfy — covered with small flakes or scales . The texture of the flesh may range from pliable to brittle . This fungus does not undergo any color changes upon bruising or injury , however , a 10 % solution of FeSO4 ( a chemical test known as " iron salts " ) applied to the flesh will turn it green . In deposit , the spores are white . Viewed with a light microscope , the spores are translucent and have an ellipsoid to roughly spherical shape with spines on the surface , and dimensions of 3 – 5.5 by 2.5 – 4.5 µm . Spores are non-amyloid , meaning that they do not absorb iodine when stained with Melzer 's reagent . The spore-bearing cells , the basidia , are usually 25 – 45 µm long by 6 – 7 µm wide , and 4-spored . Clamp connections are present in the hyphae of this species .

The species is thought to be saprobic and can be found growing on the ground , in duff , or less frequently on well-decayed wood . Fruit bodies may grow singly , in groups , or clustered together . David Arora has noted a preference for growing under conifers , as well as a prevalence in redwood forests of North America . In contrast , an earlier author claimed this species grows " rarely in coniferous woods . " In Europe , Ramariopsis kunzei has been collected in Scotland ( specifically , on the islands of Arran , Gigha and Kintyre peninsula ) , the Netherlands , Norway , former Czechoslovakia , Germany , Poland , and Russia ( Zhiguli Mountains ) . It has also been found in China , India , Iran , the Solomon Islands , and Australia . In North America , the distribution extends north to Canada , and includes the United States ( including Hawaii and Puerto Rico ) .

" By the Grace of God " is a song by American singer Katy Perry from her fourth studio album , Prism ( 2013 ) , included as its closing track . The song was written and produced by Perry and Canadian record producer Greg Wells . It was conceived following Perry 's divorce from English actor and comedian Russell Brand . This initially made Perry consider making a " darker " album , but instead was channeled into the song . Throughout its autobiographical lyrics , Perry is depicted finding her strength and standing up for herself . The track was first unveiled at Perry 's headlining set at the 2013 iTunes Festival . Upon the release of Prism , " By the Grace of God " received generally favorable reviews from music critics , who appreciated its vulnerability and picked it as one of the musical highlights from the album , but criticized its placement on the record . Following the album 's release , it has entered various musical charts due to strong digital downloads .

After English actor and comedian Russell Brand divorced Perry in late December 2011 , she was so distraught over the event that she considered committing suicide . Greg Wells , who assisted Perry with the composition of " By the Grace of God " , commented on the situation : " I think she felt so kicked in the head and so publicly embarrassed at being divorced by a text message " . After overcoming her suicidal thoughts and initial shock , she felt prompted to create a " darker " project as compared to her previous albums . Instead , she channelled the entire divorce event into " By the Grace of God " , in which its lyrics depict Perry battling against her suicidal thoughts while lying on her bathroom floor . During an interview with Entertainment Weekly , Perry spoke on how she felt during the breakup : " Imagine what you go through . Imagine what happens when you go through a break up . We all go through break ups and we all get very depressed and desperate . " " By the Grace of God " was unveiled to industry insiders during a listening party for Prism held in Manhattan , while its inclusion on the album track list was confirmed on October 1 , 2013 . Perry confirmed that the song was the only one included in Prism about her divorce from Brand . However , the song " Ghost " , also present on Prism , includes references to the divorce , particularly the lyric " You sent a text , it was like the wind changed your mind " , although Perry stated that the track was not about the split . She further stated : " That 's the funny thing - it 's not about that chapter in my life , people think that certain songs are about certain people and there is only one song about that time in my life and that song is ' By the Grace of God ' " .

At a length of four minutes and twenty-seven seconds , " By the Grace of God " is a pop piano-driven power ballad . With a stripped-down production , its instrumental is essentially composed of the sounds of various musical instruments , such as drums , piano and synthesizers along with military drums . Throughout the song , drums , piano , and synthesizers are used in its instrumental . According to the sheet music published by Alfred Publishing Co . , Inc. on Musicnotes.com , it is composed in the key of G minor and set in a 44 time signature at a tempo of 82 beats per minute . The melody spans the tonal range of B ♭ 3 to D5 , while the music follows the chord progression of Gm — E ♭ sus2 — B ♭ — Gm — E ♭ sus2 — Fsus4 . Lyrically , Perry is depicted as having suicidal thoughts and lying on the floor of a bathroom . The song opens with only piano and Perry 's vocals , while she sings " Was twenty-seven , surviving my return from Saturn " , and as the song carries on , she finds her strength , singing " By the grace of God / I picked myself back up / I put one foot in front of the other and I / Looked in the mirror and decided to stay / Wasn 't gonna let love take me out that way " . Perry commented on the lyrics : " [ They ] are very exact and autobiographical . That 's how I write . But the one thing about those lyrics is you can hear me finding my strength throughout the song . It starts off really low and then I kind of stand up for myself and say , ' No ! ' . " The song also sees Perry rejecting the idea that the relationship ended because of her .

Kitty Empire from The Guardian observed that the song served as a " vulnerable yin " to Perry 's hit single " Roar " ' s " righteous yang " . Josh Duboff from Vanity Fair highlighted the titles of " By the Grace of God " and deluxe edition song " Spiritual " , concluding that the religious undertones were " more prominent " in Prism . Helen Brown from The Daily Telegraph deemed the song " tender " , and Jason Lipshutz from Billboard said it " is the most revealing song Perry will likely ever pen " .

Upon its release , " By the Grace of God " received critical acclaim . Jason Lipshutz from Billboard thought the song was " obviously not the radio fare fans are used to from the pop star ( Perry ) " , but that it was " crucial for anyone trying to understand Perry 's Prism mind set " . Philip Matusavage from musicOMH considered that " the fact that [ " By the Grace of God " ] is the album highlight and is the only song written by less than three people " is an indicator of what Perry should do next . Greg Kot from Chicago Tribune appreciated " Ghost " and " By the Grace of God " for allowing Perry 's vulnerability " to seep through " . In his review of Prism , Sam Lansky from Idolator showed himself divided relatively to the song : he classified it as the " most sonically conventional thing [ in the album ] " although he immediately stated it was " also the most emotionally gripping " in it . Randall Roberts from Los Angeles Times affirmed that the song was " cosmic " and that it had a " humming , dark tension in which Perry and melody float like red balloons " . Helen Brown from The Daily Telegraph declared that , in the song , Perry " sounds like a woman , and an artist , who 's finally found herself " . Allison Stewart from The Washington Post said that " By the Grace of God " ranked " among Perry 's strongest ( tracks ) " , and that it was " her most strangely sensible and affecting song ever , one that distances her from her suddenly-more-callow-seeming peers and also from Brand " . John Walker from MTV highlighted the fact that the song is " light on figures of speech and all-too accessible platitudes " , as compared to the metaphors present on the lyrics of " Wide Awake " .

In contrast , Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine described it as " a sappy Paula Cole-style statement of self-actualization " . Jon Dolan from Rolling Stone criticized its lyrics and negatively likened them to those of Alanis Morissette . Kitty Empire from The Guardian found the song to be " ridden with cliché " . Mesfin Fekadu from ABC News thought both tracks were " good " , but stated that they " could be great if Perry didn 't hold back and explored more lyrically and sonically " . Chris Bosman from Consequence of Sound criticized its placement on the album track listing and thought that they " would stand out more if they ( By The Grace of God , and closing track Double Rainbow ) hadn 't been forced to rub elbows , thus stealing momentum and impact from each other " . Carl Williott from Idolator praised the track as a " nice counterpart to Roar " .

Following the album 's release , " By the Grace of God " entered the UK Singles Chart at number 179 on the week of November 2 , 2013 , and peaked on the US Billboard Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart at number 10 , which represents the 25 songs which failed to chart on the Billboard Hot 100 . It also appeared on the US Hot Digital Songs chart at number 71 , where it stayed for only one week . It also entered the South Korea Gaon International Chart at number 77 with sales of 2,104 .

" By the Grace of God " was debuted during Perry 's headlining set at the Roundhouse in London , England for her iTunes Festival , held on September 30 , 2013 . Once she finished singing , Perry thanked her fans for " letting [ her ] stay " . On October 22 , 2013 , Perry held a release party for Prism where she performed " By the Grace of God " along with the other songs from Prism . Tiffany Lee from Yahoo ! Music wrote that Perry 's renditions of " Unconditionally " and " By the Grace of God " " shone like lights through a prism in their acoustic setting " . The song was included as part of the setlist on The Prismatic World Tour . Perry performed the song at the 57th Annual Grammy Awards which were held on February 8 , 2015 . The performance was in support of domestic violence and sexual assault victims . Before she appeared on stage , a prerecorded video message from U.S. President Barack Obama was screened , which featured him encouraging musicians to support the " # ItsOnUs " sexual assault campaign . Then , domestic violence victim Brooke Axtell delivered a brief speech about her story . During the performance , Perry was clothed in a white dress , while shadows danced behind her . MTV 's John Walker labelled it as her most " powerful performance yet " , while Arienne Thompson of USA Today wrote that it was " powerful and subdued " compared to the " flamboyant and playful " set Perry was known for .

" Young at Heart " originated as a script from freelance writer Scott Kaufer , who was a friend of series creator Chris Carter and former employee of California magazine and Warner Bros comedy development department . Chris Carter rewrote the script , which included the addition of Barnett 's salamander hand . Director Michael Lange felt the episode offered him excellent scope to try new techniques , noting that the series producers " encourage cinematic stuff " . William B. Davis makes his second appearance of the series in this episode , although his role is simply credited as " CIA Agent " , rather than the more well-known " Smoking Man " .

In 1989 , Joe Crandall , an inmate at a federal penitentiary in Pennsylvania , hears screaming from the infirmary . Inside , he discovers the prison 's doctor , Joe Ridley , amputating the hand of fellow inmate John Barnett . Ridley tells Crandall that Barnett is dead , threatening him with a scalpel . However , as Crandall leaves the room , he sees Barnett blinking at him . Four years later , Fox Mulder is notified by his former FBI supervisor , Reggie Purdue , about a note from a jewelry store robbery mocking Mulder by name . Mulder recognizes the message as being from Barnett , a sociopathic multiple murderer whom he helped capture on his first case with the Bureau . Even though Barnett supposedly died in prison , the note bears his handwriting . Purdue shows Dana Scully a video of Barnett 's capture , which shows that Mulder didn 't fire on Barnett due to him having a hostage , per FBI regulations . Mulder 's hesitancy allowed Barnett to kill both the hostage and a fellow agent . Scully looks into Barnett 's cause of death and discovers that despite it being listed as heart attack , he had no history of heart problems ; he had been sent to the infirmary over problems with his hand . Meanwhile , Barnett leaves Mulder another note in his car , along with photos of him and Scully .

Mulder and Scully visit the prison and meet Crandall , who recounts his experiences with Barnett and Ridley . Barnett makes taunting phone calls to Mulder , and strangles Purdue with his salamander-like hand . Scully looks into Ridley 's past and finds that his medical license was revoked in 1979 due to malpractice ; he had performed illegal medical trials on children with progeria , a disease that causes premature aging . Mulder theorizes that Ridley 's experiments helped him find a way to reverse the aging process . Scully summons Mulder when Ridley suddenly appears at her apartment . He tells the agents that he succeeded in making Barnett age in reverse after replacing his hand using salamander cells . However , Barnett stole Ridley 's government-sponsored research . Deep Throat meets with Mulder and confirms Ridley 's story , saying that the government is negotiating with Barnett to purchase Ridley 's work . Scully hears someone dialing into her answering machine and spots Barnett 's fingerprint on it . After Barnett calls again , Mulder decides to set up a sting operation at the cello recital for a friend of Scully 's , which Barnett learned about from her answering-machine .

That night , FBI agents wait at the concert hall for Barnett 's arrival . Barnett , who goes completely unseen due to his youthful appearance , poses as a piano tuner . He shoots Scully in the chest during the recital and then flees , taking the cellist hostage . Mulder doesn 't hesitate this time around and fires at Barnett , fatally wounding him . Scully is revealed to have survived the attack , having worn a bullet-proof vest . Despite the efforts of doctors and a mysterious CIA agent to resuscitate Barnett , he dies , and takes the secrets of Ridley 's research to the grave . The episode ends with the camera zooming in on locker number 935 in a train station , implying the secrets along with Barnett 's precaution , a bomb , are contained within and one day will be discovered .

" Young at Heart " premiered on the Fox network on February 11 , 1994 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC Two on January 12 , 1995 . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 7.2 with an 11 share , meaning that roughly 7.2 percent of all television-equipped households , and 11 percent of households watching TV , were tuned in to the episode . A total of 6.8 million households watched this episode during its original airing . Director Michael Lange said that he " liked the script very much , and I think I stayed fairly close to the original draft . I liked it because it had a good spookiness to it . To me , the intriguing part was the doctor 's research into being able to reverse the aging process , which I wish we could have explored more . " Executive Producer Robert Goodwin considered the episode one of the most emotional episodes of the first season , due to the time spent working with Courtney Arciaga , the little girl with progeria . In a retrospective of the first season in Entertainment Weekly , the episode was rated a C , being called " far-fetched " and criticised for its unoriginal themes . Zack Handlen , writing for The A.V. Club , described it as " sloppy , poorly edited " and " thoroughly unexciting " , pointing out the " forced " nature of the supporting characters ' past involvement with Fox Mulder . Matt Haigh , writing for Den of Geek , expressed mixed feelings over the episode , comparing it to Quincy , M.E. and stating that it " just wasn 't weird enough " for an episode of The X-Files . " Young at Heart " has been cited , along with the fourth season episode " Paper Hearts " , as representing " the supreme irony and the hidden agenda of the series " — in both cases , Mulder , directly through his work on the X-Files , puts information permanently beyond reach by killing those who hold it , showing that " despite the fact that Mulder drives the car , he frequently ends up — and goes — nowhere " .

SMS Stralsund was a Magdeburg-class light cruiser of the German Kaiserliche Marine . Her class included three other ships : Magdeburg , Breslau , and Strassburg . She was built at the AG Weser shipyard in Bremen from 1910 to December 1912 , when she was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet . The ship was armed with a main battery of twelve 10.5 cm SK L / 45 guns and had a top speed of 27.5 knots ( 50.9 km / h ; 31.6 mph ) . Stralsund was assigned to the reconnaissance forces of the High Seas Fleet for the majority of her career . She saw significant action in the early years of World War I , including several operations off the British coast and the Battles of Heligoland Bight and Dogger Bank , in August 1914 and November 1915 , respectively . She was not damaged in either action . The ship was in dockyard hands during the Battle of Jutland , and so she missed the engagement . After the end of the war , she served briefly in the Reichsmarine before being surrendered to the Allies . She was ceded to the French Navy , where she served as Mulhouse until 1925 . She was formally stricken in 1933 and broken up for scrap two years later .

Stralsund spent the majority of her career in the reconnaissance forces of the High Seas Fleet . On 16 August , some two weeks after the outbreak of World War I , Stralsund and Strassburg conducted a sweep into the Hoofden to search for British reconnaissance forces . The two cruisers encountered a group of sixteen British destroyers and a light cruiser at a distance of about 10,000 m ( 33,000 ft ) . Significantly outnumbered , the two German cruisers broke contact and returned to port . The ship 's first major action was the Battle of Heligoland Bight on 28 August 1914 . British battlecruisers and light cruisers raided the German reconnaissance screen in the Heligoland Bight . At 12 : 30 , Stralsund , Danzig , and Ariadne arrived to reinforce Rear Admiral Leberecht Maass , and quickly turned the tide against the British light cruisers . Shortly thereafter , the British battlecruisers intervened and sank Ariadne and Maass 's flagship Cöln . Stralsund and the rest of the surviving light cruisers retreated into the haze and were reinforced by the battlecruisers of the I Scouting Group . Stralsund and Danzig returned and rescued most of the crew of Ariadne .

She also participated in the raid on Yarmouth on 2 – 3 November 1914 , as reconnaissance screen for the I Scouting Group . While the battlecruisers bombarded the town of Yarmouth , Stralsund laid a minefield , which sank a steamer and the submarine HMS D5 which had sortied to intercept the German raiders . After completing the bombardment , the German squadron returned to port without encountering British forces . Stralsund was also present during the raid on Scarborough , Hartlepool and Whitby , again screening for the I Scouting Group . In the withdrawal after bombarding the towns , the Germans were nearly intercepted by British forces ; the cruiser HMS Southampton spotted Stralsund and several torpedo boats . Confusion aboard the British flagship allowed the German squadron to escape , however . On 25 December , the British launched the Cuxhaven Raid , an air attack on the German naval base in Cuxhaven and the Nordholz Airbase . Stralsund engaged one of the attacking seaplanes , but was unable to shoot it down . The ship was again part of the reconnaissance screen for the I Scouting Group at the Battle of Dogger Bank on 24 January 1915 . Stralsund and Graudenz were assigned to the front of the screen and Rostock and Kolberg steamed on either side of the formation ; each cruiser was supported by a half-flotilla of torpedo boats . At 08 : 15 , lookouts on Stralsund and Kolberg spotted heavy smoke from large British warships approaching the formation . As the main German fleet was in port and therefore unable to support the battlecruisers , Hipper decided to retreat at high speed . The British battlecruisers were able to catch up to the Germans , however , and in the ensuing battle , the large armored cruiser Blücher was sunk .

Stralsund was not available for the Battle of Jutland on 31 May – 1 June 1916 as she was being rearmed with 15 cm SK L / 45 guns . The refit was completed at the Kaiserliche Werft shipyard in Kiel . The twelve 10.5 cm guns were replaced with seven 15 cm weapons and two 8.8 cm SK L / 45 guns . On 2 February 1918 , Stralsund struck a mine laid by British ships in the North Sea . The dreadnought Kaiser and several other ships steamed out to escort Stralsund back to port . The ship was unavailable for the major fleet operation on 23 – 24 April 1918 to intercept a British convoy to Norway . After the war , Stralsund served briefly with the reorganized Reichsmarine in 1919 . The Treaty of Versailles specified that the ship was to be disarmed and handed over to the Allies within two months of the signing of the treaty . She was ceded to France as a war prize under the transaction name " Z " . The ship was formally handed over in Cherbourg on 3 August 1920 . The ship was renamed Mulhouse and served briefly with the French Navy until a refit in 1925 in Brest . By this time , she was thoroughly worn out and was therefore placed in reserve shortly after completing the refit . On 15 February 1933 , Mulhouse was stricken from the naval register and broken up for scrap in Brest in 1935 . The ship 's bell was later returned to Germany and is now on display at the Laboe Naval Memorial .

Aaron Benjamin Sorkin ( born June 9 , 1961 ) is an American screenwriter , producer , and playwright . His works include the Broadway plays A Few Good Men and The Farnsworth Invention ; the television series Sports Night , The West Wing , Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip , and The Newsroom ; and the films A Few Good Men , The American President , Charlie Wilson 's War , The Social Network , Moneyball , and Steve Jobs . Sorkin 's trademark rapid-fire dialogue and extended monologues are complemented , in television , by frequent collaborator Thomas Schlamme 's characteristic directing technique called the " walk and talk " . These sequences consist of single tracking shots of long duration involving multiple characters engaging in conversation as they move through the set ; characters enter and exit the conversation as the shot continues without any cuts .

Sorkin was born in Manhattan , New York City , to a Jewish family , and was raised in the NY suburb of Scarsdale . His mother was a schoolteacher and his father a copyright lawyer who had fought in WWII and put himself through college on the G.I. Bill ; both his older sister and brother went on to become lawyers . His paternal grandfather was one of the founders of the International Ladies ' Garment Workers ' Union ( ILGWU ) . Sorkin took an early interest in acting . Before he reached his teenage years , his parents were taking him to the theatre to see shows such as Who 's Afraid of Virginia Woolf ? and That Championship Season . Sorkin attended Scarsdale High School where he became involved in the drama and theatre club . In eighth grade he played General Bullmoose in the musical Li 'l Abner . In Scarsdale High 's senior class production of Once Upon a Mattress , Sorkin played Sir Harry . He served as vice president in his junior and senior year at Scarsdale High School and graduated in 1979 . In 1979 , Sorkin attended Syracuse University . In his freshman year he failed a class that was a core requirement . It was a devastating setback because he wanted to be an actor , and the drama department did not allow students to take the stage until they completed all the core freshman classes . Determined to do better , he returned in his sophomore year , and graduated in 1983 . Recalling the influence on him at college of drama teacher Arthur Storch , Sorkin recalled , after Storch 's death in March 2013 , that " Arthur 's reputation as a director , and as a disciple of Lee Strasberg , was a big reason why a lot of us went to [ Syracuse ] . " You have the capacity to be so much better than you are " , he started saying to me in September of my senior year . He was still saying it in May . On the last day of classes , he said it again , and I said , " How ? " , and he answered , " Dare to fail " . I 've been coming through on his admonition ever since " .

After graduating from Syracuse University with a Bachelor of Fine Arts degree in Musical Theatre in 1983 , Sorkin moved to New York City where he spent much of the 1980s as a struggling , sporadically employed actor who also worked odd jobs , such as delivering singing telegrams , driving a limousine , touring Alabama with the children 's theatre company Traveling Playhouse , handing out fliers promoting a hunting-and-fishing show , and bartending at Broadway 's Palace Theatre . One weekend , while housesitting at a friend 's place he found an IBM Selectric typewriter , started typing , and " felt a phenomenal confidence and a kind of joy that [ he ] had never experienced before in [ his ] life . " He continued writing and eventually put together his first play , Removing All Doubt , which he sent to his old Syracuse theatre teacher , Arthur Storch , who was impressed . In 1984 , Removing All Doubt was staged for drama students at his alma mater , Syracuse University . After that , he wrote Hidden in This Picture which debuted off-off-Broadway at Steve Olsen 's West Bank Cafe Downstairs Theatre Bar in New York City in 1988 . The contents of his first two plays got him a theatrical agent . Producer John A. McQuiggan saw the production of Hidden in This Picture and commissioned Sorkin to turn the one-act into a full-length play called Making Movies .

Sorkin got the inspiration to write his next play , a courtroom drama called A Few Good Men , from a phone conversation with his sister Deborah ( who had graduated from Boston University Law School and signed up for a three-year stint with the U.S. Navy Judge Advocate General 's Corps ) . Deborah told Sorkin that she was going to Guantanamo Bay to defend a group of Marines who came close to killing a fellow Marine in a hazing ordered by a superior officer . Sorkin took that information and wrote much of his story on cocktail napkins while bartending at the Palace Theatre . He and his roommates had purchased a Macintosh 512K so when he returned home he would empty his pockets of the cocktail napkins and type them into the computer , forming a basis from which he wrote many drafts for A Few Good Men . In 1988 Sorkin sold the film rights for A Few Good Men to producer David Brown before it premiered , in a deal that was reportedly " well into six figures " . Brown had read an article in The New York Times about Sorkin 's one-act play Hidden in This Picture and found out Sorkin also had a play called A Few Good Men that was having Off Broadway readings . Brown produced A Few Good Men on Broadway at the Music Box Theatre . It starred Tom Hulce and was directed by Don Scardino . After opening in late 1989 , it ran for 497 performances .

Sorkin continued writing Making Movies and in 1990 it debuted Off-Broadway at the Promenade Theatre , produced by John A. McQuiggan , and again directed by Don Scardino . Meanwhile , David Brown was producing a few projects at TriStar Pictures and tried to interest them in making A Few Good Men into a film but his proposal was declined due to the lack of star actor involvement . Brown later got a call from Alan Horn at Castle Rock Entertainment who was anxious to make the film . Rob Reiner , a Castle Rock producing partner , opted to direct it .

In the early 1990s , Sorkin worked under contract for Castle Rock Entertainment , Inc . He wrote the scripts for A Few Good Men , Malice and The American President : The three films grossed about US $ 400 million worldwide . While writing for Castle Rock he became friends with colleagues such as William Goldman and Rob Reiner and met his future wife Julia Bingham , who was one of Castle Rock 's business affairs lawyers . Sorkin wrote several drafts of the script for A Few Good Men in his Manhattan apartment , learning the craft from a book about screenplay format . He then spent several months at the Los Angeles offices of Castle Rock , working on the script with director Rob Reiner . William Goldman ( who regularly worked under contract at Castle Rock ) became his mentor and helped him to adapt his stageplay into a screenplay . The movie was directed by Reiner , starred Tom Cruise , Jack Nicholson , Demi Moore , and Kevin Bacon , and was produced by Brown . A Few Good Men was released in 1992 and was a box office success . Goldman also approached Sorkin with a story premise , which Sorkin developed into the script for Malice . Goldman oversaw the project as creative consultant while Sorkin wrote the first two drafts . However , he had to leave the project to finish up the script for A Few Good Men , so screenwriter Scott Frank stepped in and wrote two drafts of the Malice screenplay . When production on A Few Good Men wrapped up , Sorkin took over and resumed working on the Malice right through the final shooting script . Harold Becker directed the film , a medical thriller released in 1993 , which starred Nicole Kidman and Alec Baldwin . Malice had mixed reviews . Vincent Canby in The New York Times described the film as " deviously entertaining from its start through its finish " . Roger Ebert gave it 2 out of 4 stars , and Peter Travers in a 2000 Rolling Stone review summarized it as having " suspense but no staying power " .

Sorkin 's last produced screenplay for Castle Rock was The American President and once again he worked with William Goldman , who served as a creative consultant . It took Sorkin a few years to write the screenplay for The American President , which started off as a massive 385-page screenplay ; it was eventually whittled down to a standard shooting script of around 120 pages . Rob Reiner directed . The film was critically acclaimed . Kenneth Turan in the Los Angeles Times described the film as " genial and entertaining if not notably inspired " , and believed its most interesting aspects were the " pipe dreams about the American political system and where it could theoretically be headed " .

Sorkin did uncredited script doctor work on several films in the 1990s . He wrote some quips for Sean Connery and Nicolas Cage in The Rock . He worked on Excess Baggage , a comedy about a girl who stages her own kidnapping to get her father 's attention , and rewrote some of Will Smith 's scenes in Enemy of the State . Sorkin collaborated with Warren Beatty on a couple of scripts , one of which was Bulworth . Beatty , known for occasionally personally financing his film projects through pre-production , also hired Sorkin to rewrite a script titled Ocean of Storms which never went into production . At one point Sorkin sued Beatty for proper compensation for his work on the Ocean of Storms script ; once the matter was settled , he resumed working on the script .

Sorkin came up with the idea to write about the behind-the-scenes happenings on a sports show while he was living in a room in the Four Seasons Hotel in Los Angeles writing the screenplay for The American President . He would work late , with the TV tuned into ESPN , watching continuous replays of SportsCenter . The show inspired him to try to write a feature film about a sports show but he was unable to structure the story for film , so instead he turned his idea into a TV comedy series . Sports Night was produced by Disney and debuted on the Disney-owned ABC network in the fall of 1998 . Sorkin fought with the ABC network during the first season over the use of a laugh track and a live studio audience . The laugh track was widely decried by critics as jarring , with Joyce Millman of Salon.com describing it as " the most unconvincing laugh track you 've ever heard " . Sorkin commented that : " Once you do shoot in front of a live audience , you have no choice but to use the laugh track . Oftentimes [ enhancing the laughs ] is the right thing to do . Sometimes you do need a cymbal crash . Other times , it alienates me . " The laugh track was gradually dialed down and was gone by the end of the first season . Sorkin was triumphant in the second season when ABC agreed to his demands , unburdening the crew of the difficulties of staging a scene for a live audience and leaving the cast with more time to rehearse .

Sorkin conceived the political TV drama The West Wing in 1997 when he went unprepared to a lunch with producer John Wells and in a panic pitched to Wells a show centered on the senior staff of the White House , using leftover ideas from his script for The American President . He told Wells about his visits to the White House while doing research for The American President , and they found themselves discussing public service and the passion of the people who serve . Wells took the concept and pitched it to the NBC network , but was told to wait because the facts behind the Lewinsky scandal were breaking and there was concern that an audience would not be able to take a show about the White House seriously . When a year later some other networks started showing interest in The West Wing , NBC decided to greenlight the series despite their previous reluctance . The pilot debuted in the fall of 1999 and was produced by Warner Bros. TV . The West Wing was honored with nine Emmy Awards for its debut season , making the show a record holder for most Emmys won by a series in a single season . Following the awards ceremony , a fiasco ensued , centered on the Emmy for writing The West Wing episode " In Excelsis Deo " which was awarded to Sorkin and Rick Cleveland , when it was reported in a The New York Times article that Cleveland had been ushered off the stage by Sorkin without being given a chance to say a few words . The story behind The West Wing episode is based on Cleveland 's father , a Korean war veteran who spent the last years of his life on the street , as Cleveland explains in his FreshYarn.com essay titled " I Was the Dumb Looking Guy with the Wire-Rimmed Glasses " . A back and forth took place between Sorkin and Cleveland in a public web forum at Mighty Big TV where Sorkin explained that he gives his writers " Story By " credit on a rotating basis " by way of a gratuity " and that he had thrown out Cleveland 's script and started from scratch . In the end , Sorkin apologized to Cleveland . Cleveland and Sorkin also won the Writers Guild of America Award for best episodic drama at the February 2001 ceremony for " In Excelsis Deo " .

In 2001 , after wrapping up the second season of The West Wing , Sorkin had a drug relapse , only two months after receiving a Phoenix Rising Award for drug recovery ; this became public knowledge when he was arrested at Burbank Airport for possession of hallucinogenic mushrooms , marijuana , and crack cocaine . He was ordered by a judge to attend a drug diversion program . His drug addiction was highly publicized , most notably when Saturday Night Live did a parody called " The West Wing " , though he did recover . In 2002 , Sorkin criticized NBC news anchor Tom Brokaw 's TV special about a day in the life of a president , " The Bush White House : Inside the Real West Wing " , comparing it to the act of sending a valentine to President George W. Bush instead of real news reporting . Sorkin 's TV series The West Wing aired on the same network , and so at the request of NBC 's Entertainment President Jeff Zucker he apologized , but would later say " there should be a difference between what NBC News does and what The West Wing TV series does . "

Sorkin wrote 87 screenplays in all , which amounts to nearly every episode during the show 's first four Emmy-winning seasons . Sorkin describes his role in the creative process as " not so much [ that of ] a showrunner or a producer . I 'm really a writer . " He admits that this approach can have its drawbacks , saying " Out of 88 [ West Wing ] episodes that I did we were on time and on budget never , not once . " In 2003 , at the end of the fourth season , Sorkin and fellow executive producer Thomas Schlamme left the show due to internal conflicts at Warner Bros. TV not involving the NBC network , thrusting producer John Wells into an expanded role as showrunner . Sorkin never watched any episodes beyond his writing tenure apart from 60 seconds of the fifth season 's first episode , describing the experience as " like watching somebody make out with my girlfriend . " Sorkin would later return in the final episode in a cameo appearance as a member of President Bartlet 's staff .

In 2003 Sorkin divulged to the American television interviewer Charlie Rose on The Charlie Rose Show that he was developing a TV series based on a late-night sketch comedy show like Saturday Night Live . In early October 2005 a pilot script dubbed Studio 7 on the Sunset Strip for a new TV series , written by him and with Tommy Schlamme attached as producer , started circulating around Hollywood and generating interest on the web . A week later , NBC bought from Warner Bros. TV the right to show the TV series on their network for a near-record license fee in a bidding war with CBS . The show 's name was later changed to Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip . Sorkin described the show as having " autobiographical elements " to it and " characters that are based on actual people " but said that it departs from those beginnings to look at the backstage maneuverings at a late night sketch comedy show . In September 2006 , the pilot for Studio 60 aired on NBC , directed by Schlamme . The pilot was critically acclaimed and viewed by over 12 million people , but Studio 60 experienced a significant drop in audience by mid-season . The seething anticipation that preceded the début was followed up by a large amount of thoughtful and scrupulous criticism in the press , as well as largely negative analysis in the blogosphere . In January 2007 , Sorkin spoke out against the press for focusing too heavily on the ratings slide and for using blogs and unemployed comedy writers as sources . After two months on hiatus , Studio 60 resumed to air the last episodes of season one , which would be its only season .

In 2003 , Sorkin was writing a screenplay on spec about the story of inventor and television pioneer Philo Farnsworth , a topic he had first become familiar with back in the early 1990s when producer Fred Zollo approached him with the idea of adapting a memoir by Elma Farnsworth into a biopic . The next year he completed the screenplay under the title " The Farnsworth Invention " , and it was picked up by New Line Cinema with Thomas Schlamme signed on to direct . The story is about the patent battle between inventor Philo Farnsworth and RCA tycoon David Sarnoff for the technology that allowed the first television transmissions in the US . At the same time , Sorkin was contacted by Jocelyn Clarke , the commissions manager of the Abbey Theatre in Dublin , requesting he write a play for them , a commission which he accepted . In time Sorkin decided to tackle his commission by rewriting " The Farnsworth Invention " as a play . He delivered a first draft of the play to the Abbey Theatre in early 2005 , and a production was purportedly planned for 2007 with La Jolla Playhouse in California deciding to stage a workshop production of the play in collaboration with the Abbey Theatre . But in 2006 the Abbey Theatre 's new management pulled out of all involvement with The Farnsworth Invention . Despite the setback , La Jolla Playhouse pushed on , with Steven Spielberg lending his talents as producer . The production opened under La Jolla 's signature Page To Stage program which allowed Sorkin and director Des McAnuff to develop the play from show to show according to audience reactions and feedback ; the play ran at La Jolla Playhouse from February 20 , 2007 through March 25 , 2007 . A production followed on Broadway , beginning in previews at the Music Box Theatre and scheduled to open on November 14 , 2007 ; however , the play was delayed by the 2007 Broadway stagehand strike . The Farnsworth Invention eventually opened at the Music Box Theatre on December 3 , 2007 following the end of the strike ; it closed on March 2 , 2008 .

Sorkin 's return to film occurred when he was commissioned by Universal Pictures to adapt 60 Minutes producer George Crile 's nonfiction book Charlie Wilson 's War for Tom Hanks ' production company Playtone . Charlie Wilson 's War is about the colorful Texas congressman Charlie Wilson who funded the CIA 's secret war against the former Soviet Union in Afghanistan . Sorkin completed the screenplay and the film was released in 2007 starring Tom Hanks , Julia Roberts , and Philip Seymour Hoffman , directed by Mike Nichols . In August 2008 , Sorkin announced that he had agreed to write a script for Sony and producer Scott Rudin about how Facebook was founded . The film , The Social Network , based on Ben Mezrich 's novel The Accidental Billionaires , was released on October 1 , 2010 . Sorkin won the Academy , BAFTA and Golden Globe Awards for The Social Network . One year later , Sorkin received nominations for the same awards for co-writing the screenplay to the film Moneyball . In May 2012 , Sony announced that Sorkin would write a movie based on Walter Isaacson 's biography of Steve Jobs . Sorkin was a guest at the D10 conference in May 2012 and explained his thoughts at the time on the adaptation of Isaacson 's biography :

To be honest , one of the hesitations I had in taking on the movie is that it was a little like writing about the Beatles — that there are so many people out there who know so much about him and who revere him that I just saw a minefield of disappointment . Frankly , that I was going to do something and that people who ... hopefully , when I 'm done with my research , I 'll be in the same ball park of knowledge about Steve Jobs that so many people in this room are . Steve Jobs , written by Sorkin , directed by Danny Boyle , and starring Michael Fassbender as Jobs , was released in October 2015 . On January 10 , 2016 , Sorkin won the Golden Globe Award for Best Screenplay for his work on this film .

In March 2007 , it was reported that Sorkin had signed on to write a musical adaptation of the hit 2002 record Yoshimi Battles the Pink Robots by psychedelic-rock band The Flaming Lips , collaborating with director Des McAnuff who had been developing the project . On July 12 , 2007 , Variety reported that Sorkin had signed a deal with DreamWorks to write three scripts . The first script is titled The Trial of the Chicago 7 , which Sorkin was already developing with Steven Spielberg and producers Walter Parkes and Laurie MacDonald . In March 2010 , Sorkin 's agent , Ari Emanuel , was reported as saying that the project was proving " tough to get together " . However , in late July 2013 , it was announced that Academy Award nominated director Paul Greengrass was in final talks to direct Sorkin 's script and that Steven Spielberg had previously been attached . In August 2008 , Des McAnuff announced that Sorkin had been commissioned by the Stratford Shakespeare Festival to write an adaptation of Chekhov 's The Cherry Orchard . In 2010 , Sorkin reportedly obtained the film rights to Andrew Young 's book , The Politician ( about Sen. John Edwards ) , and announced that he would make his debut as a film director while also adapting the book for the screen .

In November 2010 , it was reported that Sorkin would be writing a musical based on the life of Houdini , with music by Danny Elfman . In January 2012 , Stephen Schwartz was reported to be writing the music and lyrics , with Sorkin making his debut as a librettist . The musical was expected to come out in 2013-14 , with Sorkin saying " The chance to collaborate with Stephen Schwartz , ( the director ) Jack O 'Brien , and Hugh Jackman on a new Broadway musical is a huge gift . " In January 2013 , he dropped out of the project , citing film and TV commitments . In September 2015 , it was reported that Sorkin is writing a biopic that will focus on the twenty year marriage of Lucille Ball and Desi Arnaz and their work together on I Love Lucy and The Lucy – Desi Comedy Hour . Academy Award winner Cate Blanchett is set to star as Ball , while the role of Arnaz is yet to be determined . In January 2016 , it was announced that Sorkin would make his directorial debut with the film Molly 's Game for Sony Pictures Entertainment , based on Molly Bloom 's memoir and which he would adapt by himself .

Sorkin has written for the theatre , film and television , and in each medium his level of collaboration with other creators has varied . He began in theatre which involved a largely solitary writing process , then moved into film where he collaborated with director Rob Reiner and screenwriter William Goldman , and eventually worked in television where he collaborated very closely with director Thomas Schlamme for nearly a decade on the shows Sports Night , The West Wing , and Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip ; he now moves between all three media . He has a habit of chain smoking while he spends countless hours cooped up in his office plotting out his next scripts . He describes his writing process as physical because he will often stand up and speak the dialogue he is developing . A New York Times article by Peter De Jonge explained that " The West Wing is never plotted out for more than a few weeks ahead and has no major story lines " , which De Jonge believed was because " with characters who have no flaws , it is impossible to give them significant arcs " . Sorkin has stated : " I seldom plan ahead , not because I don 't think it 's good to plan ahead , there just isn 't time . " Sorkin has also said , " As a writer , I don 't like to answer questions until the very moment that I have to . " The Seattle Post-Intelligencer 's TV critic John Levesque has commented that Sorkin 's writing process " can make for ill-advised plot developments " . Further complicating the matter , in television , Sorkin will have a hand in writing every episode , rarely letting other writers earn full credit on a script . Peter De Jonge has reported that ex-writers of The West Wing have claimed that " even by the spotlight-hogging standards of Hollywood , Sorkin has been exceptionally ungenerous in his sharing of writing credit " . In a comment to GQ magazine in 2008 , Sorkin said , " I 'm helped by a staff of people who have great ideas , but the scripts aren 't written by committee . "

Sorkin 's nearly decade-long collaboration in television with director Thomas Schlamme began in early 1998 when they found they shared common creative ground on the soon to be produced Sports Night . Their successful partnership in television is one in which Sorkin focuses on writing the scripts while Schlamme executive produces and occasionally directs ; they have worked together on Sports Night , The West Wing , and Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip . Schlamme will create the look of the shows , work with the other directors , discuss the scripts with Sorkin as soon as they are turned in , make design and casting decisions , and attend the budget meetings ; Sorkin tends to stick strictly to writing . In response to what he perceived as unfair criticism of The Newsroom , Jacob Drum of Digital Americana wrote , " The essential truth that the critics miss is that The Newsroom is Sorkin being Sorkin as he always has been and always will be : one part pioneer ; one part self-conscious romantic ; two parts actual Lewis & Clark-style pioneer , trapping his way across an old , old idea of an America that can always stand to raise its game — but most importantly , spinning a good yarn while he does so . "

Sorkin is known for writing memorable lines and fast-paced dialogue , such as " You can 't handle the truth ! " from A Few Good Men and the partly Latin tirade against God in The West Wing episode " Two Cathedrals " . For television , one hallmark of Sorkin 's writer 's voice is the repartee that his characters engage in as they small talk and banter about whimsical events taking place within an episode , and interject obscure popular culture references into conversation . Although his scripts are lauded for being literate , Sorkin has been criticized for often turning in scripts that are overwrought . His mentor William Goldman has commented that normally in visual media speeches are avoided , but that Sorkin has a talent for dialogue and gets away with breaking this rule .

Sorkin married Julia Bingham in 1996 and divorced in 2005 , with his workaholic habits and drug abuse reported to be a partial cause . Sorkin and Bingham have one daughter , Roxy . Sorkin was a dependent cocaine user for many years and , after a highly publicized arrest in 2001 , he received treatment in a drug diversion program . For several years , he dated Kristin Chenoweth , who played Annabeth Schott on The West Wing ( though after Sorkin had left the show ) . He has also reportedly dated columnist Maureen Dowd and actress Kristin Davis . A consistent supporter of the Democratic Party , Sorkin has made substantial political campaign contributions to candidates between 1999 and 2011 , according to CampaignMoney.com. During the 2004 US presidential election campaign , the liberal advocacy group MoveOn 's political action committee enlisted Sorkin and Rob Reiner to create one of their anti-Bush campaign advertisements . In August 2008 , Sorkin was involved in a Generation Obama event at the Fine Arts Theater in Beverly Hills , California , participating in a panel discussion subsequent to a screening of Frank Capra 's Mr Smith Goes to Washington . Despite this Sorkin does not consider himself a political activist noting " I 've met political activists , and they 're for real . I 've never marched anyplace or done anything that takes more effort than writing a check in terms of activism " .

In 1987 , Sorkin started using marijuana and cocaine . He has said that in cocaine he found a drug that gave him relief from certain nervous tensions he deals with on a regular basis . In 1995 , he checked into rehab at the Hazelden Institute in Minnesota , on the advice of his then girlfriend and soon to be wife Julia Bingham , to try to beat his addiction to cocaine . In 2001 , Sorkin along with colleagues John Spencer and Martin Sheen received the Phoenix Rising Award for their personal victories over substance abuse . However , two months later on April 15 , 2001 , Sorkin was arrested when guards at a security checkpoint at the Burbank Airport found hallucinogenic mushrooms , marijuana , and crack cocaine in his carry-on bag when a metal crack pipe set off the gate 's metal detector . He was ordered to a drug diversion program . Sorkin continued working on The West Wing amidst his drug abuse . In his commencement speech for Syracuse University on May 13 , 2012 , Sorkin declared that he had not used cocaine for eleven years .

Aaron Sorkin ( July 2002 ) . The West Wing Script Book . Newmarket Press . ISBN 978-1-55704-549-2 . Aaron Sorkin ( February 2004 ) . The West Wing Seasons 3 & 4 : The Shooting Scripts : Eight Teleplays . Newmarket Press . ISBN 978-1-55704-612-3 . " Interview with Aaron Sorkin " ( PDF ) . On Writing Magazine , Issue 18 . The Writers Guild of America , East , Inc . February 2003. p . 6 . Archived from the original ( PDF ) on January 28 , 2007 . Retrieved January 10 , 2007 . Aaron Sorkin . " Early draft of the Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip pilot script " . Archived from the original on October 24 , 2009 . Retrieved February 1 , 2007 . Aaron Sorkin and Rob Reiner ( 2001 ) . From Stage to Screen with Aaron Sorkin and Rob Reiner , A Few Good Men ( Special Edition DVD ) ( Documentary ) .

Delaware Route 72 ( DE 72 ) is a state highway located in New Castle County , Delaware . The route runs from DE 9 near Delaware City north to DE 7 in Pike Creek . The route runs through suburban areas of northern New Castle County , passing through the eastern part of Newark . DE 72 intersects U.S. Route 13 ( US 13 ) , DE 1 , and DE 7 near Delaware City , DE 71 near Kirkwood , US 40 east of Glasgow , and DE 2 , DE 4 , and DE 273 in Newark . Parts of DE 72 were built as a state highway during the 1930s . By the 1940s , the route was designated between DE 2 in Newark and DE 7 in Pike Creek along Paper Mill Road . The route was extended south to DE 9 in the 1960s . In 1980 , the alignment was shifted to the east through Newark to bypass a railroad crossing on Chapel Street .

DE 72 begins at an intersection with DE 9 adjacent to the Delaware City Refinery near Delaware City , heading west on two-lane undivided Wrangle Hill Road . The road continues between the oil refinery to the north and farmland to the south before coming to an intersection with US 13 and the southern terminus of DE 7 in Wrangle Hill , where it widens into a four-lane divided highway . At this point , US 13 turns west for a short concurrency with DE 72 to a diamond interchange with the DE 1 freeway , where US 13 splits north onto DE 1 . Past this interchange , DE 72 narrows back into a two-lane undivided road and passes through a mix of farmland and residences , coming to an intersection with DE 71 . Following this , the road curves to the northwest through a mix of homes and commercial establishments , crossing Norfolk Southern 's Delmarva Secondary railroad line . The route curves north and comes to an intersection with US 40 in a commercial area to the east of Glasgow . Past the US 40 intersection , DE 72 continues to the north on Sunset Lake Road , heading into wooded areas with some fields and residential development and closely running to the west of a Norfolk Southern line . The route crosses to the east side of the railroad tracks and widens into a five-lane road with a center left-turn lane as it comes to an intersection with Old Baltimore Pike . At this intersection , the route name changes to South Chapel Street and it passes through fields with some development , crossing under Interstate 95 ( I-95 , Delaware Turnpike ) without an interchange . DE 72 enters the eastern part of Newark and passes industrial parks before heading past businesses and residential neighborhoods as it comes to an intersection with DE 4 .

Following this intersection , the road narrows to two lanes as it heads through agricultural areas to the east of the University of Delaware campus . The route continues northeast onto Library Avenue and runs through woods as it comes to a bridge over Amtrak 's Northeast Corridor railroad line . The road bends north into commercial areas , passing to the east of Newark High School and widening into a four-lane divided highway as it comes to an intersection with Delaware Avenue , which carries the eastbound direction of DE 273 . Here , eastbound DE 273 turns north to join DE 72 and the road reaches an intersection where westbound DE 273 runs west on Main Street and DE 273 continues east as Ogletown Road . Past this intersection , DE 72 becomes concurrent with DE 2 and the name changes to Capitol Trail as it turns northeast and passes under CSX 's Philadelphia Subdivision railroad line . The road leaves Newark and heads northeast through residential areas , briefly becoming undivided as it crosses White Clay Creek . DE 72 splits from DE 2 by heading northwest on two-lane undivided Possum Park Road through a mix of fields , woods , and housing developments . In Milford Crossroads , the route turns northeast onto Paper Mill Road and curves north to pass between White Clay Creek State Park to the west and the Middle Run Valley Natural Area to the east . The road continues northeast into the suburban Pike Creek area . DE 72 turns east and reaches its northern terminus at another intersection with DE 7 .

What is now DE 72 originally existed as a county road by 1920 . By 1931 , the road was proposed as a state highway between present-day DE 9 and US 13 while what would become DE 72 north of Milford Crossroads was completed as a state highway . The road from present-day DE 9 to US 13 became a state highway ba year later . On July 1 , 1935 , the remaining sections of the present-day route were transferred from the county to the state . The portion of the road between US 13 and US 40 was improved by the state in 1937 , providing a better route to Baltimore and Washington , D.C. for residents in the Delaware City , Port Penn , and Odessa areas . DE 72 was designated by 1942 to run from DE 2 in Newark north to DE 7 , following Chapel Street and Paper Mill Road . In 1939 , suggestions were made to replace the bridge over the White Clay Creek along Paper Mill Road in Newark . Plans were completed for this bridge by 1942 but construction was postponed due to World War II . The concrete bridge carrying Paper Mill Road over the White Clay Creek was completed in 1947 , with final work on the project finished in August 1949 . By 1954 , Sunset Lake Road was improved from a dirt road to a low-type bituminous road . The roadway between US 40 and Newark was paved by 1966 .

DE 72 was extended to its present southern terminus at DE 9 the next year , following Chapel Street , Sunset Lake Road , and Wrangle Hill Road . In 1980 , the Chapel Street crossing of the Northeast Corridor rail line in Newark was removed , and DE 72 was realigned farther to the east to follow Library Avenue across the railroad tracks before continuing north on DE 2 and Possum Park Road to Paper Mill Road in Milford Crossroads . DE 2 was realigned to follow DE 72 around the eastern part of Newark on Library Avenue by 1990 . In 2013 , the DE 2 concurrency between DE 4 and DE 273 was removed due to the truncation of DE 2 to the DE 273 intersection . On April 29 , 2016 , Governor Jack Markell , DelDOT secretary Jennifer Cohan , and local officials attended a groundbreaking ceremony for a $ 7 million project that will rebuild the interchange with DE 1 into a diverging diamond interchange , the first such interchange in Delaware .

Arthur Holly Compton ( September 10 , 1892 – March 15 , 1962 ) was an American physicist who won the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1927 for his discovery of the Compton effect , which demonstrated the particle nature of electromagnetic radiation . It was a sensational discovery at the time : the wave nature of light had been well-demonstrated , but the idea that light had both wave and particle properties was not easily accepted . He is also known for his leadership of the Manhattan Project 's Metallurgical Laboratory , and served as Chancellor of Washington University in St. Louis from 1945 to 1953 . In 1919 , Compton was awarded one of the first two National Research Council Fellowships that allowed students to study abroad . He chose to go to Cambridge University 's Cavendish Laboratory in England , where he studied the scattering and absorption of gamma rays . Further research along these lines led to the discovery of the Compton effect . He used X-rays to investigate ferromagnetism , concluding that it was a result of the alignment of electron spins , and studied cosmic rays , discovering that they were made up principally of positively charged particles .

During World War II , Compton was a key figure in the Manhattan Project that developed the first nuclear weapons . His reports were important in launching the project . In 1942 , he became head of the Metallurgical Laboratory , with responsibility for producing nuclear reactors to convert uranium into plutonium , finding ways to separate the plutonium from the uranium and to design an atomic bomb . Compton oversaw Enrico Fermi 's creation of Chicago Pile-1 , the first nuclear reactor , which went critical on December 2 , 1942 . The Metallurgical Laboratory was also responsible for the design and operation of the X-10 Graphite Reactor at Oak Ridge , Tennessee . Plutonium began being produced in the Hanford Site reactors in 1945 . After the war , Compton became Chancellor of Washington University in St. Louis . During his tenure , the university formally desegregated its undergraduate divisions , named its first female full professor , and enrolled a record number of students after wartime veterans returned to the United States .

Arthur Compton was born on September 10 , 1892 in Wooster , Ohio , the son of Elias and Otelia Catherine ( née Augspurger ) Compton , who was named American Mother of the Year in 1939 . They were an academic family . Elias was dean of the University of Wooster ( later The College of Wooster ) , which Arthur also attended . Arthur 's eldest brother , Karl , who also attended Wooster , earned a PhD in physics from Princeton University in 1912 , and was president of MIT from 1930 to 1948 . His second brother Wilson likewise attended Wooster , earned his PhD in economics from Princeton in 1916 and was president of the State College of Washington , later Washington State University from 1944 to 1951 . All three brothers were members of the Alpha Tau Omega fraternity . Compton was initially interested in astronomy , and took a photograph of Halley 's Comet in 1910 . Around 1913 , he described an experiment where an examination of the motion of water in a circular tube demonstrated the rotation of the earth . That year , he graduated from Wooster with a Bachelor of Science degree and entered Princeton , where he received his Master of Arts degree in 1914 . Compton then studied for his PhD in physics under the supervision of Hereward L. Cooke , writing his dissertation on " The intensity of X-ray reflection , and the distribution of the electrons in atoms " .

When Arthur Compton earned his PhD in 1916 , he , Karl and Wilson became the first group of three brothers to earn PhDs from Princeton . Later , they would become the first such trio to simultaneously head American colleges . Their sister Mary married a missionary , C. Herbert Rice , who became the principal of Forman Christian College in Lahore . In June 1916 , Compton married Betty Charity McCloskey , a Wooster classmate and fellow graduate . They had two sons , Arthur Alan and John Joseph Compton . Compton spent a year as a physics instructor at the University of Minnesota in 1916 – 17 , then two years as a research engineer with the Westinghouse Lamp Company in Pittsburgh , where he worked on the development of the sodium-vapor lamp . During World War I he developed aircraft instrumentation for the Signal Corps . In 1919 , Compton was awarded one of the first two National Research Council Fellowships that allowed students to study abroad . He chose to go to Cambridge University 's Cavendish Laboratory in England . Working with George Paget Thomson , the son of J. J. Thomson , Compton studied the scattering and absorption of gamma rays . He observed that the scattered rays were more easily absorbed than the original source . Compton was greatly impressed by the Cavendish scientists , especially Ernest Rutherford , Charles Galton Darwin and Arthur Eddington , and he ultimately named his second son after J. J. Thomson .

Returning to the United States , Compton was appointed Wayman Crow Professor of Physics , and Head of the Department of Physics at Washington University in St. Louis in 1920 . In 1922 , he found that X-ray quanta scattered by free electrons had longer wavelengths and , in accordance with Planck 's relation , less energy than the incoming X-rays , the surplus energy having been transferred to the electrons . This discovery , known as the " Compton effect " or " Compton scattering " , demonstrated the particle concept of electromagnetic radiation . In 1923 , Compton published a paper in the Physical Review that explained the X-ray shift by attributing particle-like momentum to photons , something Einstein had invoked for his 1905 Nobel Prize – winning explanation of the photo-electric effect . First postulated by Max Planck in 1900 , these were conceptualized as elements of light " quantized " by containing a specific amount of energy depending only on the frequency of the light . In his paper , Compton derived the mathematical relationship between the shift in wavelength and the scattering angle of the X-rays by assuming that each scattered X-ray photon interacted with only one electron . His paper concludes by reporting on experiments that verified his derived relation :

180 ° ) . He found that some X-rays experienced no wavelength shift despite being scattered through large angles ; in each of these cases the photon failed to eject an electron . Thus the magnitude of the shift is related not to the Compton wavelength of the electron , but to the Compton wavelength of the entire atom , which can be upwards of 10,000 times smaller . " When I presented my results at a meeting of the American Physical Society in 1923 , " Compton later recalled , " it initiated the most hotly contested scientific controversy that I have ever known . " The wave nature of light had been well demonstrated , and the idea that it could have a dual nature was not easily accepted . It was particularly telling that diffraction in a crystal lattice could only be explained with reference to its wave nature . It earned Compton the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1927 . Compton and Alfred W. Simon developed the method for observing at the same instant individual scattered X-ray photons and the recoil electrons . In Germany , Walther Bothe and Hans Geiger independently developed a similar method .

In 1923 , Compton moved to the University of Chicago as Professor of Physics , a position he would occupy for the next 22 years . In 1925 , he demonstrated that the scattering of 130,000-volt X-rays from the first sixteen elements in the periodic table ( hydrogen through sulfur ) were polarized , a result predicted by J. J. Thomson . William Duane from Harvard University spearheaded an effort to prove that Compton 's interpretation of the Compton effect was wrong . Duane carried out a series of experiments to disprove Compton , but instead found evidence that Compton was correct . In 1924 , Duane conceded that this was the case . Compton investigated the effect of X-rays on the sodium and chlorine nuclei in salt . He used X-rays to investigate ferromagnetism , concluding that it was a result of the alignment of electron spins . In 1926 , he became a consultant for the Lamp Department at General Electric . In 1934 , he returned to England as Eastman visiting professor at Oxford University . While there General Electric asked him to report on activities at General Electric Company plc 's research laboratory at Wembley . Compton was intrigued by the possibilities of the research there into fluorescent lamps . His report prompted a research program in America that developed it .

By the early 1930s , Compton had become interested in cosmic rays . At the time , their existence was known but their origin and nature remained speculative . Their presence could be detected using a spherical " bomb " containing compressed air or argon gas and measuring its electrical conductivity . Trips to Europe , India , Mexico , Peru and Australia gave Compton the opportunity to measure cosmic rays at different altitudes and latitudes . Along with other groups who made observations around the globe , they found that cosmic rays were 15 per cent more intense at the poles than at the equator . Compton attributed this to the effect of cosmic rays being made up principally of charged particles , rather than photons as Robert Millikan had suggested , with the latitude effect being due to Earth 's magnetic field .

In April 1941 , Vannevar Bush , head of the wartime National Defense Research Committee ( NDRC ) , created a special committee headed by Compton to report on the NDRC uranium program . Compton 's report , which was submitted in May 1941 , foresaw the prospects of developing radiological weapons , nuclear propulsion for ships , and nuclear weapons using uranium-235 or the recently discovered plutonium . In October he wrote another report on the practicality of an atomic bomb . For this report , he worked with Enrico Fermi on calculations of the critical mass of uranium-235 , conservatively estimating it to be between 20 kilograms ( 44 lb ) and 2 tonnes ( 2.0 long tons ; 2.2 short tons ) . He also discussed the prospects for uranium enrichment with Harold Urey , spoke with Eugene Wigner about how plutonium might be produced in a nuclear reactor , and with Robert Serber about how the plutonium produced in a reactor might be separated from uranium . His report , submitted in November , stated that a bomb was feasible , although he was more conservative about its destructive power than Mark Oliphant and his British colleagues .

The final draft of Compton 's November report made no mention of using plutonium , but after discussing the latest research with Ernest Lawrence , Compton became convinced that a plutonium bomb was also feasible . In December , Compton was placed in charge of the plutonium project . He hoped to achieve a controlled chain reaction by January 1943 , and to have a bomb by January 1945 . To tackle the problem , he had the different research groups working on plutonium and nuclear reactor design at Columbia University , Princeton University and the University of California , Berkeley , concentrated together as the Metallurgical Laboratory in Chicago . Its objectives were to produce reactors to convert uranium to plutonium , to find ways to chemically separate the plutonium from the uranium , and to design and build an atomic bomb . In June 1942 , the United States Army Corps of Engineers assumed control of the nuclear weapons program and Compton 's Metallurgical Laboratory became part of the Manhattan Project . That month , Compton gave Robert Oppenheimer responsibility for bomb design . It fell to Compton to decide which of the different types of reactor designs that the Metallurgical Laboratory scientists had devised should be pursued , even though a successful reactor had not yet been built .

When labor disputes delayed construction of the Metallurgical Laboratory 's new home in the Red Gate Woods , Compton decided to build Chicago Pile-1 , the first nuclear reactor , under the stands at Stagg Field . Under Fermi 's direction , it went critical on December 2 , 1942 . Compton arranged for Mallinckrodt to undertake the purification of uranium ore , and with DuPont to build the plutonium semi-works at Oak Ridge , Tennessee . A major crisis for the plutonium program occurred in July 1943 , when Emilio Segrè 's group confirmed that plutonium created in the X-10 Graphite Reactor at Oak Ridge contained high levels of plutonium-240 . Its spontaneous fission ruled out the use of plutonium in a gun-type nuclear weapon . Oppenheimer 's Los Alamos Laboratory met the challenge by designing and building an implosion-type nuclear weapon . Compton was at the Hanford site in September 1944 to watch the first reactor being brought online . The first batch of uranium slugs was fed into Reactor B at Hanford in November 1944 , and shipments of plutonium to Los Alamos began in February 1945 . Throughout the war , Compton would remain a prominent scientific adviser and administrator . In 1945 , he served , along with Lawrence , Oppenheimer , and Fermi , on the Scientific Panel that recommended military use of the atomic bomb against Japan . He was awarded the Medal for Merit for his services to the Manhattan Project .

After the war ended , Compton resigned his chair as Charles H. Swift Distinguished Service Professor of Physics at the University of Chicago and returned to Washington University in St. Louis , where he was inaugurated as the university 's ninth Chancellor in 1946 . During Compton 's time as Chancellor , the university formally desegregated its undergraduate divisions in 1952 , named its first female full professor , and enrolled record numbers of students as wartime veterans returned to the United States . His reputation and connections in national scientific circles allowed him to recruit many nationally renowned scientific researchers to the university . Despite Compton 's accomplishments , he was criticized then , and subsequently by historians , for moving too slowly toward full racial integration , making Washington University the last major institution of higher learning in St. Louis to open its doors to African Americans . Compton retired as Chancellor in 1954 , but remained on the faculty as Distinguished Service Professor of Natural Philosophy until his retirement from the full-time faculty in 1961 . In retirement he wrote Atomic Quest , a personal account of his role in the Manhattan Project , which was published in 1956 .

Compton was one of a handful of scientists and philosophers to propose a two-stage model of free will . Others include William James , Henri Poincaré , Karl Popper , Henry Margenau , and Daniel Dennett . In 1931 , Compton championed the idea of human freedom based on quantum indeterminacy and invented the notion of amplification of microscopic quantum events to bring chance into the macroscopic world . In his somewhat bizarre mechanism , he imagined sticks of dynamite attached to his amplifier , anticipating the Schrödinger 's cat paradox , which was published in 1935 . Reacting to criticisms that his ideas made chance the direct cause of people 's actions , Compton clarified the two-stage nature of his idea in an Atlantic Monthly article in 1955 . First there is a range of random possible events , then one adds a determining factor in the act of choice . A set of known physical conditions is not adequate to specify precisely what a forthcoming event will be . These conditions , insofar as they can be known , define instead a range of possible events from among which some particular event will occur . When one exercises freedom , by his act of choice he is himself adding a factor not supplied by the physical conditions and is thus himself determining what will occur . That he does so is known only to the person himself . From the outside one can see in his act only the working of physical law . It is the inner knowledge that he is in fact doing what he intends to do that tells the actor himself that he is free .

Compton died in Berkeley , California , from a cerebral hemorrhage on March 15 , 1962 . He was survived by his wife and sons , and buried in the Wooster Cemetery in Wooster , Ohio . Compton received many awards in his lifetime , including the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1927 , the Matteucci Gold Medal in 1933 , the Royal Society 's Hughes Medal and the Franklin Institute 's Benjamin Franklin Medal in 1940 . He is commemorated in various ways . The Compton crater on the Moon is co-named for Compton and his brother Karl . The physics research building at Washington University in St Louis is named in his honor . Compton invented a more gentle , elongated , and ramped version of the speed bump called the " Holly hump , " many of which are on the roads of the Washington University campus . The University of Chicago Residence Halls remembered Compton and his achievements by dedicating Arthur H. Compton House in Chicago in his honor . It is now listed as a National Historic Landmark . Compton also has a star on the St. Louis Walk of Fame . NASA 's Compton Gamma Ray Observatory was named in honor of Compton . The Compton effect is central to the gamma ray detection instruments aboard the observatory .

Lockheed Have Blue was the code name for Lockheed 's demonstrator ( i.e. , " proof of concept " ) that preceded the F-117 Nighthawk production stealth aircraft . Have Blue was designed by Lockheed 's Skunk Works division , and tested at Groom Lake , Nevada . The Have Blue was the first fixed-wing aircraft designed from an electrical engineering ( rather than an aerospace engineering ) perspective . The aircraft 's plate-like , faceted shape was designed to deflect electromagnetic waves in directions other than that of the originating radar emitter , greatly reducing its radar cross-section . Two flyable vehicles were constructed , but both crashed during the flight-test program . In the 1970s , it became increasingly apparent to U.S. planners that , in a military confrontation with Warsaw Pact forces , NATO aircraft would quickly suffer heavy losses . This came as a result of sophisticated Soviet defense networks , which used surveillance radars and radar-guided surface-to-air missiles ( SAM ) and anti-aircraft artillery to seek and eliminate enemy aircraft . Consequently , the Defense Advanced Research Project Agency ( DARPA ) started a study on low-observability aircraft , seeking to design and produce an operational stealth aircraft . Five companies were initially invited , three of which bowed out early . The remaining two were later joined by Lockheed .

To design the aircraft , the Skunk Works ' design team devised a computer program to calculate the radar cross-sections ( RCS ) of various designs . The eventual design characteristically featured faceted surfaces to deflect radar waves elsewhere . It had highly-swept wings and inward-canted vertical stabilizers , which led to its being nicknamed " Hopeless Diamond " . The first operational aircraft made its maiden flight on 1 December 1977 . The flight test program validated the feasibility of a flyable stealth aircraft . However , both prototypes were lost due to mechanical problems . Nevertheless , Have Blue was deemed a success , paving the way for the first operational stealth aircraft , Senior Trend , or F-117 Nighthawk .

The Lockheed Have Blue was born out of a requirement to evade radar detection . During the Vietnam War , radar-guided surface-to-air missiles ( SAM ) and anti-aircraft artillery ( AAA ) posed a significant threat to US aircraft . As such , strike aircraft during the war often required support aircraft to perform combat air patrols and suppression of enemy air defenses ( SEAD ) . The 1973 Yom Kippur War again highlighted the vulnerability of aircraft to SAMs – the Israeli Air Force lost 109 aircraft in 18 days . During the Cold War , the Soviet Union developed an integrated defense network , central to which were medium- to long-range surveillance radars . SAMs and AAAs would be set up around key locations to defend them from incoming enemy aircraft . If the loss ratio of Israel during the Yom Kippur War was experienced by NATO forces during a military confrontation with the Warsaw Pact , NATO aircraft numbers would be depleted within two weeks . In 1974 , DARPA secretly requested answers from five aircraft manufacturers regarding two considerations . The first was about the signature thresholds at which an aircraft is virtually undetectable . The second point was whether these companies had the capacity to design and manufacture such an aircraft . Fairchild and Grumman declined to participate , while General Dynamics insisted on the use of electronic countermeasures . As a result , General Dynamics left the discussion . The remaining two companies , McDonnell Douglas and Northrop , were each awarded $ 100,000 for further research .

Lockheed , having been absent from the fighter aircraft industry for 10 years , was not approached by DARPA in 1974 . Ed Martin , Lockheed California Companies director of science and engineering , became aware of the research into stealth during his work at the Pentagon and Wright-Patterson AFB . Martin and Ben Rich , who at that time had recently become Skunk Works ' president , briefed Clarence " Kelly " Johnson on the program . The Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA ) gave Skunk Works permission to discuss with DARPA on the stealth characteristics of the A-12 and D-21 . Rich and Martin formally requested DARPA for the company to participate in the program , but the agency initially refused because there were insufficient funds ; after much debate , Lockheed was allowed entry , albeit without a government contract . Preliminary designer Dick Scherrer requested possible shapes upon which he could base his low radar cross-section ( RCS ) design . He was introduced to Denys Overholser , who recommended an aircraft with flat surfaces . Overholser later recounted his discussion with Sherrer : " When Dick Scherrer asked me ... I said ' Well , it 's simple , you just make it out of flat surfaces , and tilt those flat surfaces over , sweeping the edges away from the radar view angle , and that way you basically cause the energy to reflect away from the radar . ' " Scherror subsequently drew a preliminary low-RCS aircraft with faceted surfaces . At the same time , Overholser hired mathematician Bill Schroeder , with whom he had a prior working relationship – in fact , it was Schroeder who trained Overholser on mathematics relating to stealth aircraft . Kenneth Watson was hired as the senior lead aircraft designer .

During the next few weeks , the team created a computer program which could evaluate the RCS of possible designs . The RCS-prediction software was called " ECHO 1 " . As tests with the program proceeded , it became apparent that edge calculations by the program were incorrect due to diffraction . In 1964 , Pyotr Ufimtsev , the chief scientist of the Moscow Institute for Radio Engineering , published a seminal paper titled Method of Edge Waves in the Physical Theory of Diffraction . The work was translated by the Air Force Systems Command 's Foreign Technnology Division ; subsequently , Overholser incorporated elements of Ufimtsev 's work to refine the software . ECHO 1 allowed the team to quickly decide which of the 20 possible designs were optimal , finally settling on the faceted delta-wing design . However , many within the division were skeptical of the shape , giving rise to the name " Hopeless Diamond " – Kelly Johnson said to Rich , " Our old D-21 drone has a lower radar cross-section than that goddamn diamond " . In May 1975 , the Skunk Works produced an internal report titled , " Progress Report No. 2 , High Stealth Conceptual Studies . " Within it was a concept study called " Little Harvey , " including Kelly Johnson 's drawing of an aircraft with smoothly blended shapes . Johnson advocated for the use of blended shapes as the best way to achieve stealth , while Ben Rich advocated for faceted angles . Rich won the argument with Johnson , a rare occurrence .

The design effort produced a number of wooden models . A 24-inch long model , made of balsa wood , demonstrated placement of internal structure and access doors . An Air & Space article noted " The model shop found it nearly impossible to make all the flat surfaces come to a single point in one corner . Engineers later encountered the same difficulty fabricating the prototype on the factory floor . " For early tests of the design , two ⅓ -scale wooden mock-ups were constructed . One model , coated in metal foil , was used to verify ECHO 1 's RCS calculations , while the other was earmarked for wind tunnel tests . Afterwards , a model was moved to the Grey Butte Range radar-testing facility in the Mojave Desert near Palmdale , which allowed more accurate tests of the aircraft 's RCS . In the event , the aircraft 's RCS level confirmed ECHO 1 's predictions . This meant Ben Rich won a quarter from Johnson , who previously insisted that the D-21 had less RCS than Have Blue .

In the summer of 1975 , DARPA informally invited Lockheed , Northrop and McDonnell Douglas to develop an aircraft under the name " Experimental Survivable Testbed " ( XST ) . McDonnell Douglas , having identified the thresholds at which aircraft were deemed undetectable , was unable to design and produce such an aircraft . Phase 1 of XST would see both Lockheed and Northrop build full-scale models to test their RCS , construct flyable vehicles , and wind-tunnel test their designs . Following Phase 1 , a sole contractor would be selected to continue with the construction and flight testing of two demonstrators as part of Phase 2 . Northrop 's and Lockheed 's designs were generally similar , though the former 's submission featured more angular and flat surfaces . The company used " GENSCAT " , software similar to ECHO 1 , to calculate the RCS of its designs . On 1 November 1975 , Lockheed and Northrop were each awarded $ 1.5-million contracts to proceed with Phase 1 of XST . During a four-month period , the two companies were each required to construct full-scale wooden mock-ups , which would then be evaluated at the USAF 's Radar Target Scatter ( RATSCAT ) test facility at White Sands , New Mexico . To test the design 's radar returns , Lockheed erected a $ 187,000 specially built pole upon which the model would be perched . In March 1976 , a Lockheed model was transferred to the range before being tested ; the following month Lockheed was pronounced the winner because the Northrop XST had a much higher side hemisphere RCS . DARPA , having realized the progress accumulated throughout the study , urged the Northrop team to remain together . The agency would later initiate the Battlefield Surveillance Aircraft-Experimental ( BSAX ) , which evolved into the Tacit Blue and , ultimately , the B-2 bomber .

Skunk Works now had to design , construct and flight test two manned demonstrators as part of Phase 2 , or Have Blue . To build the demonstrators , Ben Rich had to raise $ 10.4 million from the Lockheed management , which was secured by June . Phase 2 encompassed three main objectives , which were the validation of : reduced visibility in the radio wave , infrared , and visual spectrums and reduced acoustical observability ; acceptable flying qualities ; and the " modeling capabilities that accurately predict low observable characteristics of an aircraft in flight " . Construction of both Have Blue demonstrators used leftover tools from the C-5 program . Final assembly of HB1001 was originally scheduled to end in August 1977 , before being ground tested until mid-October . The secret roll-out was envisaged to occur on 23 October , after which the aircraft would be dismantled and flown to the test area . On 1 September , however , with HB1001 partially complete , Lockheed machinists went on a four-month strike . A group of managers instead took over the job of assembly , which was completed in six weeks , with ground tests beginning on 17 October .

While superficially similar to the later F-117 , the Have Blue prototypes were smaller aircraft , about one quarter the weight of the F-117 , with a wing sweep of 72.5 ° and inward-canted vertical tails ( inverse V-tail ) . Radar-absorbent material ( RAM ) , developed in a Lockheed laboratory , were applied to the aircraft 's flat surfaces – for the windscreen , special coatings were applied to give them metallic characteristics . The aircraft 's gross weight of 9,200 – 12,500 lb ( 4,173 – 5,669 kg ) enabled the aircraft to use the landing gear from the Northrop F-5 fighter . The aircraft 's powerplants were two 2,950-pound-force ( 13.1 kN ) General Electric J85-GE-4As of the T-2B Buckeye . Because stealth took precedence above all else , the aircraft was inherently unstable . As a result , a quadruple redundant fly-by-wire ( FBW ) flight control system was integrated into the aircraft to give it normal flying characteristics . The flight control system was borrowed from the F-16 . The overwing engine inlet was covered by a low-RCS grid ; during takeoffs , when more air is needed , blow-in doors were constructed at the upper fuselage to admit additional airflow .

Throughout the one and a half months after the start of ground tests , HB1001 , the first of two demonstrators , underwent tests in preparations for the first flight . Flight instrumentation was checked first , followed by a thorough shakedown of the aircraft . In early November , two semi-trailers were parked parallel to each other outside Building 82 ; a camouflage net was thrown over the top to cover the demonstrator during outdoor engine runs . During the engine tests , a local resident complained about the noise , but Have Blue retained its secrecy . HB1001 received a layer of iron-coat paint ; during the weekend of 12 – 13 November , the aircraft received a camouflage scheme devised by Alan Brown , Have Blue 's chief technical engineer . The scheme , consisting of three colors , each with three tones , was used to deceive any casual onlooker from recognizing the design 's characteristic faceting . The aircraft was disassembled and loaded onto a C-5 – on 16 November , the aircraft was flown from Burbank Airport ( since renamed Bob Hope Airport ) to Area 51 at Groom Lake , Nevada . Upon touchdown , the aircraft was reassembled before undergoing another round of testing prior to the first flight . After four taxi tests , HB1001 was ready for test flights .

HB1001 made its first flight on 1 December 1977 at the hands of Lockheed test pilot , Bill Park . He would fly the next four sorties , all chased by a T-38 piloted by Major ( later Lieutenant Colonel ) Ken Dyson . Dyson , an F-15 Eagle pilot , was previously approached by United States Air Force personnel about the project in 1976 . He made his first flight on HB1001 on 17 January 1978 , chased by Park . In fact , the two would be the only test pilots of Have Blue , alternating between the demonstrator and the chase plane . Flight test results allowed engineers to refine the FBW system . At the same time , they verified predictions made earlier by aerodynamic engineers on the aircraft 's behavior . Flight tests proceeded fairly smoothly until 4 May 1978 , when HB1001 was making its 36th flight . The aircraft pitched up just as it made contact with the ground which forced the pilot , Bill Park , to abort the landing and make a second attempt . The impact had however been so hard that the landing gear had become jammed in a semi-retracted position . Efforts to lower the gear were unsuccessful and Bill Park was forced to eject at 10,000 feet ( 3,000 m ) when fuel ran out . The aircraft was destroyed on impact in the vicinity of the Groom Lake facility . Park survived , but suffered a concussion , forcing him to retire from further test flights . Dyson , who was in the chase plane , recounted : " Just before touchdown the airplane pitched up ... It seemed it slammed down on the ground real hard ... He [ Park ] raised the gear on the go around , and when he tried to extend it on approach , only one of the mains and the nose wheel came down . All this time , gas was being consumed ... I suggested he climb up to 10,000 feet for ejection ... He started climbing , but the engine started flaming out , from the lack of fuel , so he ejected . "

At the time of the crash , HB1002 was almost complete , with the lessons learned from the HB1001 incorporated into the aircraft , including the rebuilding of the aft fuselage . HB1002 was distinguished from the prototype in having a gray paint coat . It did not have the flight test instrumentation boom present on HB1001 's nose . As the aircraft was used to test RCS returns , the unstealthy spin recovery chute was removed , and the aircraft was covered in radar-absorbent material . It first flew on 20 July 1978 with Dyson at the controls , who would be the only pilot to fly the aircraft . HB1002 was lost on 11 July 1979 during the aircraft 's 52nd flight . A hydraulic leak caused an engine fire , resulting in the loss of hydraulic pressure , which in turn caused severe pitch oscillations . The pilot ejected safely , and the aircraft was destroyed . It was later discovered that an engine exhaust clamp had loosened , allowing the hot exhaust to migrate to the right engine compartment . The heat built up there , causing the hydraulic lines to fail . The debris from both aircraft was secretly buried somewhere within the Nellis complex . Despite the crashes , Have Blue was considered a success .

In October 1977 , just prior to Phase 2 of the XST competition , Lockheed was tasked with exploring possible operational aircraft . Just a month later , on the day HB1001 was transported to Groom Lake , the Air Force awarded the company a contract under the code name Senior Trend . The Air Force wanted to exploit the revolutionary technologies developed during the Have Blue program . The Tactical Air Command ordered five full-scale development and twenty production aircraft . Based on the Have Blue demonstrators , Senior Trend aircraft were different from their predecessors in several aspects . The wings exhibited less sweep to resolve a center-of-gravity problem discovered during tests . The front fuselage was shortened to give the pilot a better view . And , the vertical stabilizers were canted outwards from the centerline . Additionally , provisions were made to include two weapons bays , each of which would accommodate a single 2,000-pound ( 910 kg ) laser-guided bomb , or the B61 tactical nuclear bomb . Beset by early construction problems , the first FSD aircraft was transferred to Groom Lake in May 1981 inside a C-5 . Further problems , this time with fuel leaks , delayed the first flight . Under the control of Harold Farley , the aircraft took off on 18 June for its maiden flight , nine months after the July 1980 first flight originally envisaged . The first production F-117A was delivered in 1982 , and operational capability was achieved in October 1983 ; the 59th and last F-117 was delivered in 1990 .

William Barley ( 1565 ? – 1614 ) was an English bookseller and publisher . He completed an apprenticeship as a draper in 1587 , but was soon working in the London book trade . As a freeman of the Drapers ' Company , he was embroiled in a dispute between it and the Stationers ' Company over the rights of drapers to function as publishers and booksellers . He found himself in legal tangles throughout his life . Barley 's role in Elizabethan music publishing has proved to be a contentious issue among scholars . The assessments of him range from " a man of energy , determination , and ambition " , to " somewhat remarkable " , to " surely to some extent a rather nefarious figure " . His contemporaries harshly criticized the quality of two of the first works of music that he published , but he was also influential in his field . Barley became the assignee of the Thomas Morley , who as well as being a composer held a printing patent ( a monopoly of music publishing ) . He published Anthony Holborne 's Pavans , Galliards , Almains ( 1599 ) , the first work of music for instruments rather than voices to be printed in England . His partnership with Morley enabled him to claim rights to music books , but was short-lived . Morley gave work to the printer Thomas East , and died in 1602 . Some publishers ignored Barley 's claims , and many music books printed during his later life gave him no recognition .

In a deposition of 1598 , Barley refers to his age as " xxxiii yeeres or thereabowt " , placing his date of birth around 1565 . Evidence suggests that Barley may have been born in Warwickshire . Little else is known about his early life . Barley was in London by 1587 , having completed an apprenticeship with the Drapers ' Company in that year . He trained as a bookseller under Yarath James , a small-time publisher . James operated out of a shop in Newgate Market , near Christ Church Gate , in the 1580s . His interest in ballads was shared by Barley , who published a number of them during his lifetime . By 1592 , Barley had opened his own shop in the parish of St Peter upon Cornhill , whose register recorded his marriage to a Mary Harper on 15 June 1603 and christenings and burials of people associated with his family . He conducted business out of this shop for the next twenty years . Barley is probably the same William Barley who opened a branch office in Oxford . This action brought him into conflict with the authorities . Barley most likely relied on his assistant , William Davis , to run the Oxford shop while he maintained the business at St Peter upon Cornhill . Davis was arrested in 1599 because Barley had failed to register as a bookseller with Oxford University . The two redeemed themselves though , and in 1603 , Barley and Davis were admitted as " privileged persons " of Oxford University . Privileged status at Oxford allowed tradesmen to practice their trade free from the jurisdiction of the town 's authorities .

Barley ran afoul of London authorities as well . In September 1591 , a warrant was issued for his arrest , although the charge is unknown . Barley also found himself in the midst of a longstanding feud between the Drapers ' Company and the Stationers ' Company . At the time , the latter held a monopoly over the publishing industry ; the Drapers ' Company wanted its members to be able to function as publishers and booksellers as well , insisting that it was the " custom of the City " to grant its freemen the right to engage in the book trade . From 1591 to 1604 , Barley was associated with at least 57 works . The exact nature of his involvement is , at times , hard to identify . Some works were printed " for " him , others were " to be sold by " him , and two state that they were printed " by " him . He partnered with notable printers and publishers during this period , including Thomas Creede , Abel Jeffes , and John Danter . With Creede , Barley was involved in the publication of A Looking Glass for London and England ( 1594 ) and The True Tragedy of Richard III ( 1594 ) . During this period , Barley entered none of these works in the Stationers ' Register ( by entering a title into the register , a publisher recorded their rights to the work ) . This is probably due to the Stationers ' feud with the Drapers ' ; the Stationers ' viewed the ability of non-members to enter works into the register as a special privilege . Thus , Barley relied on others , such as Creede , Jeffes , and Danter , to enter these titles . Whether Barley merely acted as a bookseller for the enterers or , in private agreements with them , actually retained the rights to some of the works remains unclear .

In 1595 , the Stationers ' Company fined Barley 40 shillings for illicitly publishing a number of works . Three years later , the organization sued him and a fellow draper , Simon Stafford , for allegedly publishing privileged books . A raid on Barley 's former premises found 4,000 copies of the Accidence , a Latin grammar book protected by monopoly . Despite pleading his innocence in court , Barley , along with Stafford , Edward Venge , and Thomas Pavier ( who was Barley 's apprentice ) , was found guilty and sentenced to prison . The lawsuit affirmed the Stationers ' Company 's control over the Elizabethan book trade . Stafford , Pavier , and other draper-booksellers joined the company within a few years so that they could continue their trade . Curiously , Barley did not join them until 1606 . The reasons for the delay are debated among scholars . Bibliographer J. A. Lavin suggests that the Stationers ' Company rejected Barley because he had no experience in the printing business . Gerald D. Johnson believes that his partnership with Thomas Morley , who held a royal patent on music publishing , allowed him to circumvent any legal obstacles . The Stationers ' Company could not interfere with the publication of works under royal grant .

In Elizabethan England , music printing was regulated by two royal patents issued by the queen : one for metrical psalters ( psalms set to music ) and one for all other types of music and music paper . The patent-holders thus held a monopoly — only they or their assignees could legally print music . After printer John Day 's death in 1584 , the patent for metrical psalters transferred to his son Richard Day and was administered by his assignees , who were members of the Stationers ' Company . The more general one was awarded to composers Thomas Tallis and William Byrd in January 1575 . Despite the monopoly , Tallis and Byrd were not successful in their printing endeavors ; their 1575 collection of Latin motets called Cantiones quae ab argumento sacrae vocantur failed to sell and was a financial disaster . After Tallis died in 1585 , Byrd continued holding the patent , producing works with his assignee , Thomas East . The monopoly expired in 1596 , prompting prospective music publishers such as Barley to take advantage of the resulting power vacuum . In 1596 , despite not having access to a proper music fount , Barley ( using the services of Danter and his wood blocks ) published The Pathway to Music , a music theory book , and A New Booke of Tabliture , a tutor for the lute and related instruments that included compositions by John Dowland , Philip Rosseter , and Anthony Holborne . Both featured numerous errors , and for the latter , Barley seems not to have gained prior publishing approval from the composers . Dowland disowned A New Booke of Tabliture , calling his lute lessons " falce and unperfect " , while Holborne complained of " corrupt coppies " of his work being presented by a " meere stranger " . Modern musicologists have labelled the publication " exasperating " and " seedy " . Morley criticized The Pathway to Music , stating that the author should be " ashamed of his labour " , and that " [ v ] ix est in toto pagina sana libro " ( " there is scarcely a page that makes sense in the whole book " ) . Despite their flaws , both works seem to have been instrumental in introducing music tutor books to the London market .

Two years later , Morley was awarded the same printing monopoly that Byrd had held . Morley 's pick of Barley as an assignee ( rather than experienced printers such as East or Peter Short , both of whom had previously worked with Morley ) is surprising . Morley may have been looking for help in challenging the metrical psalter patent of Richard Day and his assignees . At that time , East and Short were stationers , and the Stationers ' Company was actively enforcing the Day monopoly . Barley , however , was not a stationer , and in 1599 he and Morley published The Whole Booke of Psalmes and Richard Allison 's Psalmes of David in Metre . The former was a small pocket edition that was largely based on East 's 1592 publication of the same name . This work , although pirated and filled with small errors , provides some evidence of Barley 's editorial skill ; musicologist Robert Illing notes that if Barley " is to be discredited for roguery , he must also be applauded for his strokes of musical imagination " for successfully compressing such a large work into a pocket-sized production . In Allison 's work , the two claimed that they had exclusive rights on the metrical psalter . Duly provoked , Day sued . The outcome of his lawsuit is not known , but neither Barley nor Morley ever published another metrical psalter .

Barley 's relationship with Morley was short-lived . By 1600 , Morley had turned to East as his assignee , authorizing him to print under his name for three years . Two years later , Morley died , and his music patent fell into abeyance . Unable to rely on the protections and privileges of Morley 's monopoly , Barley most likely came under increasing pressure from the Stationers ' Company . His financial circumstances also deteriorated after he was the target of a successful lawsuit by a cook named George Goodale , who was seeking payment of a debt of 80 pounds . As a result of the suit , many of Barley 's goods were seized , including various books and reams of paper . Barley greatly reduced his output from 1601 to 1605 , publishing only six works . Barley evidently decided that it was futile to continue resisting the Stationers ' Company , and on 15 May 1605 , he successfully petitioned the Drapers ' Company for a transfer to the Stationers ' Company . On 25 June 1606 , the Stationers ' Company admitted him as a member . That same day , the Company 's court , which had the authority to resolve disputes between members , negotiated a settlement in a lawsuit Barley had brought against East concerning the copyrights on certain music books . East claimed that since he had lawfully entered the books into the Company 's register , the rights of the works belonged to him . Barley disagreed , claiming that the works were his through his partnership with Morley , who had held the royal music patent . The court 's compromise settlement recognized the rights of both , stipulating that if East were to print an edition of any of the books in question , he was to acknowledge Barley 's name on the imprint , pay Barley 20 shillings , and supply him with six free copies . On the other hand , Barley could not publish any of the books without the consent of East or his wife .

Despite the settlement recognizing his claim to Morley 's music patent , Barley seemingly found it difficult to enforce his rights , even with his new role as a stationer . Less than half of the known music books published from 1606 to 1613 recognized Barley 's rights on the imprint . Barley took Thomas Adams to the Stationers ' court in 1609 , challenging the copyrights of the music books Adams had published . The court handed down a settlement similar to the one between East and Barley . However , none of the music books Adams published afterward contained any recognition of Barley 's patent . Barley himself published four books under his patent . In March 1612 , one of Barley 's servants died , possibly from plague . After receiving charitable remuneration from the Stationers ' Company , Barley moved , first to the parish of St Katherine Cree , and later to a house on Bishopsgate . Records from St Botolph-without-Bishopsgate indicate his burial on 11 July 1614 . His widow , Mary , and their son , William , were legatees of the will of Pavier . Mary Barley , who later remarried , transferred five of her husband 's patents to printer John Beale . Some of Barley 's remaining copyrights may have also been passed to the printer Thomas Snodham .

The Battle of St. Louis , Spanish San Luis , also known as the Battle of Fort San Carlos , was an unsuccessful British-led attack on St. Louis ( a French settlement in Spanish Louisiana , founded on the west bank of the Mississippi , after the Treaty of Paris ( 1763 ) ) on May 26 , 1780 , during the Anglo-Spanish War of 1779 – 1783 . A force , composed primarily of Indians and led by a former British militia commander , attacked the settlement . The settlement 's defenders , mostly local militia , under the command of Lieutenant Governor of Spanish Louisiana Fernando de Leyba , had fortified the town , as best they could and successfully withstood the attack . A second simultaneous attack on the nearby American outpost at Cahokia , on the opposite bank of the Mississippi and technically in British-controlled territory , was also repulsed . The retreating Indians destroyed crops and took captive civilians outside the protected area . The British failure effectively ended their attempts to gain control of the Mississippi River , during the war .

Following the entry of Spain into the American Revolutionary War in 1779 , British military planners in London wanted to secure the corridor of the Mississippi River against both Spanish and Patriot activity . Their plans included expeditions from West Florida to take New Orleans and other Spanish targets , and several expeditions to gain control of targets in the upper Mississippi , including the small town of St. Louis . The expedition from West Florida never got off the ground , since Bernardo de Gálvez , the Governor of Spanish Louisiana , had moved rapidly to gain control of British outposts on the lower Mississippi , and was threatening action against West Florida 's principal outposts of Mobile and Pensacola .

The British expeditions from the north were organized by Patrick Sinclair , the military governor at Fort Michilimackinac in present-day Michigan . Beginning in February 1780 he instructed fur traders to circulate through their territories , recruiting interested tribes for an expedition against St. Louis . The fur traders were offered the opportunity to control the fur trade in the upper parts of Spanish Louisiana as an incentive to participate . Most of the force gathered at Prairie du Chien , where they were placed under the command of Emanuel Hesse , a former militia captain turned fur trader . The force numbered about two dozen fur traders and an estimated 750 to 1,000 Indians when it left Prairie du Chien on May 2 . The largest contingent of the force was about 200 Sioux warriors led by Wapasha , with additional sizable companies from the Chippewa , Menominee , and Winnebago nations , and smaller numbers of warriors from other nations . The Chippewa chief Matchekewis was given overall command of the native forces . When the force reached Rock Island they were joined by about 250 men from the Sac and Fox nations . These warriors were somewhat reluctant to attack St. Louis , but Hesse gave them large gifts to secure their participation in the venture . The diversity within the expedition included some animosity among the tribes , for the Chippewa and Sioux in particular had a history of conflict with each other . However , Wapasha and Matchekewis promoted unity during the expedition .

The village of St. Louis was primarily a trading hub on the Mississippi River , but it was also the administrative capital of Upper Spanish Louisiana , and it was governed by Lieutenant Governor Fernando de Leyba , who was also a captain in the Spanish Army . Leyba was warned in late March 1780 by a fur trader that the British were planning an attack on St. Louis and the nearby American-held post at Cahokia . He began developing plans for the village 's defense . He had only 29 regular army soldiers of the Fijo de Luisiana Colonial Regiment and an inexperienced militia force of 168 , most of whom were dispersed in the surrounding countryside . Leyba developed a grand plan of defense that included the construction of four stone towers . Without funds , or the time to get them from New Orleans , Leyba asked the villagers to contribute funds and labor to the construction of these fortifications , and paid for some of the work from his private funds . By mid-May a single round tower had been built that was about 30 feet ( 9.1 m ) in diameter and thirty to forty feet tall . The tower , dubbed Fort San Carlos , provided a commanding view of the surrounding countryside . As there did not appear to be sufficient time to build more towers , trenches were dug between the tower and the river to the north and south of the village . Five cannon were placed on top of the tower , and additional cannon were placed along the trenches .

With a force of only 197 men , 168 of which were inexperienced militia , it was highly probable that the opposing British-Indian force of 1,000 would overwhelm the Fort San Carlos . However , Leyba appealed to a 70 year old French habitant , Francois Valle , who was located 60 miles to the South of the fort at the site of the French Colonial Valles Mines . Valle sent his two sons and 151 well trained and equipped French militia men which tipped the scale in favor of the defenders . By Royal Decree on April 1 , 1782 , King Carlos III of Spain , conferred upon Francois Valle the rank of lieutenant in the regular Spanish army thus making him a Spanish don . ( citation : Colonial Ste . Genevieve : An Adventure on the Mississippi Frontier written by Carl J. Ekberg , Patrice Pr ; 2 Sub Edition , March 1996 ) . Valle also greatly aided in the Battle of Fort San Carlos because he gave the defenders of both forts a major tactical advantage by supplying them with genuine lead ( instead of pebbles or stones ) from his mines for musket balls and cannonballs . Getting hit with a pebble or stone did not compare to the damage and knockdown power of a 52 caliber rifle ball at 100 feet . [ see http : / / en.wikipedia.org / France in the American Revolutionary War ]

As a result of his contributions , Francois Valle was called the " Defender of St. Louis " [ see http : / / vallemines.com / OfHistoricalNote / DefenderOfStLouis.aspx ] . On May 15 , Leyba was visited by John Montgomery , the American commander at Cahokia , who proposed a joint Spanish-American force to counter Hesse 's expedition , an idea that did not reach fruition . On May 23 , Leyba 's scouts reported that Hesse 's force was only 14 miles ( 23 km ) away , had landed their canoes , and were coming overland .

On May 25 , Hesse sent out scouting parties to determine the situation at St. Louis . These parties were unable to get close to the village due to the presence of workers , including women and children , in the fields outside the village . The next day Hesse sent Jean-Marie Ducharme and 300 Indians across the river to attack Cahokia , while the remainder headed toward St. Louis , arriving about 1 : 00 pm . A warning shot was fired from the tower when they came in view , with the Sioux and Winnebagoes leading the way , followed by the Sac and Fox , and the fur traders , including Hesse , bringing up the rear . Leyba directed the defense from the tower , and opened a withering fire from there and the trenches when the enemy force came in range . On the first volley , most of the Sac and Fox fell back , apparently unwilling to fight , leaving many of the other participants suspicious of their motives in joining the expedition and complaining of their " treachery " . Wapasha and the Sioux persisted for several hours in attempts to draw the Spanish defenders out , going so far as brutally killing some captives they had taken in the fields . Although this angered some of the townspeople to the point where the militia requested permission to make a sortie , Leyba refused , and the attackers eventually withdrew and headed north , destroying crops , livestock , and buildings as they went .

Raymond Barry Bankote " Ray " Jones ( 28 August 1988 – 25 August 2007 ) was an English professional footballer who played as a striker . He was known as one of the best young players in English football outside the Premier League . Jones spent his professional career at Queens Park Rangers , making his debut in the Football League Championship in April 2006 . His good form at the start of the following season led to his only international match , for England under-19 against the Netherlands , as well as bids for other clubs to sign him . He totalled six goals in 37 professional matches . Jones died three days before his 19th birthday , when he drove head-on into a bus in London . His club retired his shirt number of 31 . An inquest into the accident ruled that had Jones survived , he would have faced charges of death by dangerous driving for the deaths of his two passengers .

Born in East Ham , London , Jones was rejected as a youth team player at Colchester United before impressing the coaches at Queens Park Rangers ( QPR ) . He made his professional debut on 22 April 2006 , coming on for the final seven minutes as a substitute for Steve Lomas in a 1 – 2 home loss to promotion-chasing Watford . Eight days later , he made his only other appearance of the season , coming on for Stefan Bailey in the 68th minute of a defeat by the same score away to the already-crowned winners of the Football League Championship , Reading . Jones had his first professional start on 12 August 2006 , in a 2 – 0 win over Southend United at Loftus Road . He assisted Nick Ward 's goal in the 41st minute , which gave QPR their first win of the new season . Brian Glanville of The Sunday Times opined that Jones and fellow youngster Dexter Blackstock combined in the forward line " as though they had been playing together for years " . Ten days later in the second round of the Football League Cup at home to Northampton Town , Jones came on for Marc Bircham in the 84th minute , and three minutes later headed Marcus Bignot 's cross for his first career goal , winning the match 3 – 2 .

On 5 September , Jones made his only international appearance , replacing Giles Barnes in a goalless friendly draw for England under-19 against the Netherlands at the Bescot Stadium in Walsall . Eighteen days later , he scored his first league goal , opening a 2 – 0 home win over Hull City , the first match of John Gregory 's tenure . Jones followed this the following weekend as QPR came from behind to win 2 – 1 at Southampton , scoring the decisive goal after rounding goalkeeper Kelvin Davis . On 17 November , as a substitute for Blackstock , Jones scored the only goal in a 1 – 0 away win over high-flying Cardiff City , connecting with Ward 's cross with less than three minutes left of the match . Many Premier League clubs showed interest in Jones after several solid performances , and Gregory at one point stated that he was resigned to him leaving . After scoring the only goal against Colchester on 1 January 2007 , he pledged his future to the club , and a week later as he signed a new three-and-a-half-year deal . In total , Jones played 37 games ( 19 as a substitute ) for QPR in all competitions , scoring six goals .

Writing Jones ' obituary in The Guardian , QPR fan Benjie Goodhart remembered him as the club 's " own Wayne Rooney , the prodigy , all precocious talent and burgeoning potential " , and attributed him the essential qualities for a forward including strength , speed , intelligence and confidence . He was perceived by the supporters to be the epitome of a new era under manager Gregory and prospective new owner Flavio Briatore , and could do " things for real that his peers acted out on their games consoles " . In spite of his confidence and talent , Jones was humble , and took the London Underground back home from games alongside the supporters .

Jones died in a car crash in East Ham in the early hours of 25 August 2007 when the vehicle he was driving collided with a bus . He had only become a licensed driver 23 days earlier . Two passengers in his car , Idris Olasupo and Jess Basilva , were also killed ; Olasupo received a letter later that day , inviting him to Fulham 's academy . Jones ' death was compared to that of Kiyan Prince , a QPR youth player who was fatally stabbed the previous year at the age of 15 when breaking up a fight . Goodhart wrote that tributes would be " done particularly beautifully at QPR because , heartbreakingly , we 're getting rather good at it " . As a mark of respect QPR postponed their upcoming game with Burnley , a team who in turn replaced it with an open training session with proceeds going to the charity of QPR 's choice . QPR also decided to retire the number 31 shirt in memory of Jones , who wore that shirt during his career . In their league game against Southampton on 1 September 2007 , all of the QPR players carried Jones ' name on the back of their shirts as a mark of respect . Ten days later , in the England U19 friendly against Belarus at Meadow Lane in Nottingham , a minute 's applause was held before the match .

Gheorghe I. Tătărescu ( also known as Guță Tătărescu , with a slightly antiquated pet form of his given name ; 2 November 1886 – 28 March 1957 ) was a Romanian politician who served twice as Prime Minister of Romania ( 1934 – 1937 ; 1939 – 1940 ) , three times as Minister of Foreign Affairs ( interim in 1934 and 1938 ; appointed to the office in 1945-1947 ) , and once as Minister of War ( 1934 ) . Representing the " young liberals " faction inside the National Liberal Party ( PNL ) , Tătărescu began his political career as a collaborator of Ion G. Duca , becoming noted for his anti-Communism and , in time , for his conflicts with the PNL 's leader Dinu Brătianu and the Foreign Minister Nicolae Titulescu . During his first time in office , he moved closer to King Carol II , leading an ambivalent policy toward the fascist Iron Guard and ultimately becoming instrumental in establishing the authoritarian and corporatist regime around the National Renaissance Front . In 1940 , he accepted the cession of Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina to the Soviet Union , and consequently had to resign .

After the start of World War II , Gheorghe Tătărescu initiated a move to rally political forces in opposition to Ion Antonescu 's dictatorship , and sought an alliance with the Romanian Communist Party ( PCR ) . He was twice expelled from the PNL , in 1938 and 1944 , creating instead his own group , the National Liberal Party-Tătărescu , and representing it inside the Communist-endorsed Petru Groza cabinet . In 1946-1947 , he was also the President of the Romanian Delegation to the Peace Conference in Paris . After that moment , relations between Tătărescu and the PCR began to sour , and he was replaced from the leadership of both his own party and the Foreign Ministry when his name was implicated in the Tămădău Affair . Following the Communist takeover , he was arrested and held as a political prisoner , while being called to testify in the trial of Lucrețiu Pătrășcanu . He died soon after his release from prison . Elected an honorary member of the Romanian Academy in 1937 , he was removed from his seat by the Communist authorities in 1948 . One of his brothers , Colonel Ștefan Tătărescu , was at some point the leader of a minor Nazi group , the National Socialist Party .

Born in Târgu Jiu , Tătărescu studied at Carol I High School in Craiova . He later went to France , where he was awarded a doctorate from the University of Paris in 1912 , with a thesis on the Romanian parliamentary system ( Le régime électoral et parlementaire en Roumanie ) . He subsequently worked as a lawyer in Bucharest . He fathered a son , Tudor , and a daughter , Sanda ( married to the lawyer Ulise Negropontes in 1940 ) . After joining the National Liberal Party ( PNL ) , he was elected to the Chamber of Deputies for the first time in November 1919 , representing Gorj County . Among his first notable actions as a politician was an initiative to interpellate Nicolae L. Lupu , the Minister of Interior Affairs Ministry in the Romanian National Party-Peasants ' Party cabinet , in answer to concerns that the executive was tolerating socialist agitation in the countryside . He stood among the PNL 's " young liberals " faction ( as they were colloquially known ) , supporting free trade and a more authoritarian rule over the country around King Carol II , and opposing both the older generation of leaders ( who tended to advocate protectionism and a liberal democracy ) and the dissident group of Gheorghe I. Brătianu ( see National Liberal Party-Brătianu ) .

Undersecretary in the Interior Affairs Ministry under several PNL cabinets ( beginning with that of Ion I. C. Brătianu in 1922-1926 ) , he first became noted as a collaborator of Ion G. Duca . In 1924-1936 , in contrast to his post-World War II agenda , Tătărescu was a noted anti-communist , and reacted vehemently against the Romanian Communist Party ( PCdR , later PCR ) — recommending and obtaining its outlawing , based on Communist adversity to the concept of Greater Romania , and notably arguing that the Comintern-supported Tatarbunary Uprising was evidence of " imperialist communism " .

Tătărescu became leader of the cabinet in January 1934 , as the fascist Iron Guard had assassinated Prime Minister Duca on 30 December 1933 ( the five-day premiership of Constantin Anghelescu ensured transition between the two governments ) . His was the second PNL cabinet formed during Carol 's reign , and the latter 's failure to draw support from the mainstream group led to a tight connection being established between Carol and the young liberals , with Tătărescu backing the process leading to the creation of a royal dictatorship . One of Tătărescu 's first measures was a decisive move to end the conflict between the National Liberal executive and the Mayor of Bucharest , Dem I. Dobrescu ( who was backed by the National Peasants ' Party ) — making use of his prerogative , he removed Dobrescu from office on 18 January . The brief period constituted a reference point in Romanian economy , as the emergence from the Great Depression , although marked by endemic problems , saw prosperity more widespread than ever before . This was , in part , the contribution of new economic relations which Tătărescu defended and encouraged : the state transformed itself into the main agent of economic activities , allowing for prosperous businesses to benefit from its demands , and , in time , leading to the creation of a camarilla dominated by the figures of industrialists such as Aristide Blank , Nicolae Malaxa , and Max Auschnitt . In this context , Tătărescu 's allegedly subservient position in front of Carol was a frequent topic of ridicule at the time . According to a hostile account of the socialist Petre Pandrea :

" Tătărescu was ceremonious in order to cover his menial nature . When he was leaving audiences [ with the King ] , he pressed forward on the small of his back and returned facing backwards from the desk to the door , not daring to show his back . [ ... ] Watching over the scene [ ... ] , Carol II exclaimed to his intimate assistants : Among other services rendered , he intervened in the conflict between Carol and his brother , Prince Nicholas , asking the latter to renounce either his marriage to Ioana Dumitrescu-Doletti — considered a misalliance by Carol , it had not been recognized by Romanian authorities — or his princely prerogatives . Nicholas chose the latter alternative in 1937 . Inside his party , Tătărescu lost ground to Dinu Brătianu , elected by the traditional Liberal elite as a compromise in order to ensure unity ; upon his election in 1934 , the latter stated : " This time as well , I would have gladly conceded , if I were to believe that anyone else in the party could gather voter unanimity . " The issue remained debated for the following two years . The party congress of July 1936 eventually elected Tătărescu to the second position in the party , that of general secretary .

In his foreign policy , Prime Minister Tătărescu balanced two different priorities , attempting to strengthen the traditional military alliance with Poland which was aimed at the Soviet Union , and reacting against the growing regional influence of Nazi Germany by maintaining the relevancy of the Little Entente and establishing further contacts with the Soviets . In August 1936 , he removed Nicolae Titulescu from the office of Foreign Minister , replacing him with Victor Antonescu . This caused an uproar , with most of Romania 's diplomatic corps voicing their dissatisfaction . Over the following months , virtually all of Titulescu 's supporters were themselves recalled ( including , among others , Constantin Vișoianu , the ambassador to Poland , Constantin Antoniade , Romania 's representative to the League of Nations , Dimitrie Ghyka , the ambassador to Belgium , and Caius Brediceanu , the ambassador to Austria ) while Titulescu 's adversaries , such as Antoine Bibesco , were returned to office . Bibesco subsequently campaigned in France and the United Kingdom , in an attempt to reassure Romania 's main allies that the move did not signify a change in Romania 's priorities . Tătărescu was later blamed by his own party for having renounced the diplomatic course on which Romania had engaged .

In early 1937 , Tătărescu rejected the proposal of Józef Beck , Poland 's Minister of Foreign Affairs , to withdraw Romania 's support for Czechoslovakia and attempt a reconciliation with Hungary ( the following year , Romania withdrew its support for the former , indicating , just before the Munich Agreement , that it was not in a position to guarantee Czechoslovakia 's frontiers ) . This was accompanied by Czechoslovak initiatives to establish close contacts between the Little Entente and the Soviets : a scandal erupted in the same year , when the country 's ambassador to Romania , Jan Šeba , published a volume calling for Soviet-Entente military cooperation ( despite the Soviet-Romanian conflict over Bessarabia ) and expressing the hope that the Soviet state would extend its borders into West Belarus and Ukraine . Kamil Krofta , Czechoslovakia 's Foreign Minister , received criticism for having prefaced the book , and , after Tătărescu paid a visit to Czechoslovak Prime Minister Milan Hodža , Šeba was recalled to Prague .

In combating the Iron Guard , Tătărescu chose to relax virtually all pressures on the latter ( while mimicking some of its messages ) , and instead concentrated again on curbing the activities of the Romanian Communist Party ( PCR ) and outlawing its Popular Front-type organizations ( see Amicii URSS ) . In April 1936 , he and the Minister of the Interior Ion Inculeț allowed the a youth congress to gather in Târgu Mureș , aware of the fact that it was masking a fascist gathering ; delegates to the congress , traveling in a special train commissioned by the government , vandalized Ion Duca 's memorial plate in Sinaia train station , and , upon their arrival in Târgu Mureș , made public their violent anti-Semitic agenda . It was probably there that death squads were designated and assigned missions , leading to the murder of Mihai Stelescu , a former associate , in June of the next year . In February 1937 , an intense publicity campaign by the Guard , begun with the ostentatious funerals of Ion Moța and Vasile Marin ( killed in the Spanish Civil War ) and culminating in the physical assaulting of Traian Bratu , rector of the University of Iași , by Guardist students , provoked the premier 's order to close down universities throughout the country .

Later in that year , the collaboration between monarch and premier , coupled with the fact that Tătărescu had successfully attracted nationalist votes from the Iron Guard , led to the signing of an electoral agreement between the latter , the National Peasants ' Party ( the main democratic opposition group ) , and the National Liberal Party-Brătianu — the pact was meant to prevent all attempt by Carol to manipulate the votes in elections . ( A secondary and unexpected development was that the illegal PCR , which had decided to back the National Peasants ' Party prior to the elections , eventually supported the electoral pact . ) Tătărescu 's own alliance policy rose the anger of his opponents inside the PNL , as he signed collaboration agreements with the fascist Romanian Front and German Party . The 1937 elections led to an unprecedented situation : although the PNL and Tătărescu had gained the largest percentage of the vote ( almost 36 % ) , they fell short of being awarded majority bonus ( granted at 40 % of the vote ) . As the far right had gathered momentum ( the Guard , running under the name of " Everything for the Fatherland Party " , had obtained 15.6 % of the vote ) , Carol was faced with the threat of an Iron Guard government , which would have been one deeply opposed to all of his political principles : he called on a third party , Octavian Goga 's National Christian Party ( coming from the anti-Semitic far right but deeply opposed to the Guard ) to form a new cabinet in December of that year .

In this context , Tătărescu chose to back the regime , as the PNL , like the National Peasants ' Party , remained active in nominal clandestinity ( as the law banning it had never been enforced any further ) . Having personally signed the document banning opposition parties , he was expelled from the PNL in April 1938 , and contested the legitimacy of the action for the following years . Allegedly , his ousting was recommended by Iuliu Maniu , leader of the National Peasants ' Party 's and , for the following years , the closest of Dinu Brătianu 's political allies . Soon after his second arrival to power , Tătărescu became noted for the enthusiastic support he gave to the modernist sculptor Constantin Brâncuși , and directed state funds to finance the building of Brâncuși 's The Endless Column complex in Târgu Jiu ( completed in October 1938 ) . Alongside Alexandru Vaida-Voevod and Constantin Argetoianu ( whom he succeeded as Premier ) , Tătărescu became a dominant figure in the group of maverick pro-Carol politicians . After a bloody crackdown on the Iron Guard , the Front attempted to reunite political forces in a national government that was to back Carol 's foreign policies in view of increasing threats on Romania 's borders after the outbreak of World War II . In 1945 , Tătărescu stressed his belief that authoritarianism benefited Romania , and supported the view that Carol had meant to keep Romania out of the war . Tătărescu 's second cabinet was meant to reflect the latter policies , but it did not draw any support from traditional parties , and , in April 1940 , Carol , assisted by Ernest Urdăreanu and Mihail Ghelmegeanu , began talks with the ( by then much weaker ) Iron Guard .

Tătărescu remained in office throughout the rest of the Phony War , until the fall of France , and his cabinet signed an economic agreement with Nazi Germany ( through which virtually all Romanian exports were directed towards the latter country ) and saw the crumbling of Romania 's alliance with the United Kingdom and France . The cabinet was brought down by the cession of Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina to the Soviet Union ( effects of the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact ) , as well as by Carol 's attempt to appease German hostility by dissolving it , replacing Tătărescu with Ion Gigurtu , and recreating the Front as the totalitarian Party of the Nation .

After the Second Vienna Award ( when Northern Transylvania was lost to Hungary ) , confirming Carol 's failure to preserve both the country 's neutrality and its territorial integrity , Romania was taken over by an Iron Guard dictatorial government ( the National Legionary State ) . Speaking five years later , Dinu Brătianu placed the blame for the serious developments on Tătărescu 's own actions , addressing him directly : " I remind you : [ ... ] you have contributed directly , in 1940 , in steering the country towards a foreign policy that , as one could tell even then , was to prove ill-fated and which led us to the loathsome Vienna settlement , one which you have supported inside the Crown Council [ ... ] . " On 26 November 1940 , the Iron Guard began a bloody retaliation against various political figures who had served under Carol ( following a late investigation into the 1938 killing of Corneliu Zelea Codreanu , the movement 's founder and early leader , by Carol 's authorities ) . Tătărescu and Constantin Argetoianu were among the second wave of captured politicians ( on 27 November ) , and were destined for arbitrary execution ; they were , however , saved by the intervention of regular police forces , most of whom had grown hostile to the Guardist militias .

Retired from political life during the war , he was initially sympathetic to Ion Antonescu 's pro-German dictatorship ( see Romania during World War II ) — Dinu Brătianu , who remained in opposition to the Antonescu regime , made mention an official visit to Bessarabia , recovered after the start of Operation Barbarossa , when Tătărescu had accompanied Antonescu , " thus making common cause with his warmongering action " . At the time , his daughter Sandra Tătărescu Negropontes worked as an ambulance driver for the Romanian Red Cross . In the end , Tătărescu became involved in negotiations aimed at withdrawing Romania from the conflict , and , while beginning talks with the Romanian Communist Party ( PCR ) , tried to build foreign connections to support Romania 's cause following the inevitable defeat ; he thus corresponded with Edvard Beneš , leader of the Czechoslovak government in exile in England . Beneš , who had already been discussing matters involving Romania with Richard Franasovici and Grigore Gafencu , and had agreed to support the Romanian cause , informed the Allied governments of Tătărescu 's designs . Tătărescu later contrasted his diplomatic approach with the strategy of Barbu Știrbey ( who had only attempted an agreement with the Western Allies in Cairo , instead of opening relations with the Soviets ) . Initially meeting with the refusal of Iuliu Maniu and Dinu Brătianu ( who decided to invest their trust in Știrbey ) , he was relatively successful after the Cairo initiative proved fruitless : the two traditional parties accepted collaboration with the bloc formed by the PCR , the Romanian Social Democratic Party , the Ploughmen 's Front , and the Socialist Peasants ' Party , leading to the formation of the short-lived and unstable National Democratic Bloc ( BND ) in June 1944 . It overthrew Antonescu in August , by means of the successful King Michael Coup .

Tătărescu returned to the PNL later in 1944 — after the Soviet Red Army had entered Romania and the country had become an Allied state , political parties were again allowed to register . Nevertheless , Tătărescu was again opposed to the party leaders Dinu and Gheorghe I. Brătianu , and split to form his own group in June – July 1945 . Dinu Brătianu convened the PNL leadership and formally excluded Tătărescu and his partisans , citing their support for dictatorial regimes . As the PCR , which was growing more influential ( with the backing of Soviet occupation ) while generally lacking popular appeal , sought to form alliances with various forces in order to increase its backing , Tătărescu declared his group to be left-wing and Social liberal , while attempting to preserve a middle course in the new political setting , by pleading for close relations to be maintained with both the Soviet Union and the Western Allies . N. D. Cocea , a prominent socialist who had joined the PNL , represented the faction in talks for an alliance with the Communists . The agreement , favored by Ana Pauker , was vehemently opposed by another member of the Communist leadership , Lucrețiu Pătrășcanu , who argued in favor of " making a distinction inside the bourgeoisie " , and collaborating with the main PNL , while calling Tătărescu 's faction " a gang of con artists , blackmailers , and well-known bribers " .

Tătărescu became Foreign Minister and vice president of the government in the cabinet of Petru Groza when the latter came into office after Soviet pressures in 1945 ; his faction had been awarded leadership of four other ministries — Finance , with three successive office-holders ( of whom the last was Alexandru Alexandrini ) , Public Works , with Gheorghe Vântu , Industry ( with Petre N. Bejan ) , and Religious Affairs , with Radu Roșculeț . He indirectly helped the PCR carry out an electoral fraud during the general election in 1946 by failing to reply to American proposals for organizing fair elections . At the Paris Conference , where he was accompanied by the PCR leaders Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej and Pătrășcanu , he acknowledged the dissolution of Greater Romania under the provisions of the new Treaty ( 1947 ) .

Tensions between his group with the PCR occurred when the former founded itself as a party under the name of National-Liberal Party ( commonly known as the National Liberal Party-Tătărescu ) , and , in June – July 1945 , proclaimed its goal to be the preservation of property and a middle class under a new regime . Of himself and his principles , Tătărescu stated : " I am not a communist . Taking in view my attitudes towards mankind , society , property , I am not a communist . Thus , the new orientation in external politics which I demand for my country cannot be accused of being determined by affinities or sympathies of doctrine . " Speaking in retrospect , Gheorghiu-Dej indicated the actual relation between his party and Tătărescu 's : " we have had to tolerate by our side a capitalist-gentry political group , Tătărescu 's group " . Tătărescu himself continued to show his support for several PCR policies : in the summer of 1947 , he condemned the United States for having protested against the repression of forces in the opposition . Nevertheless , at around the same time , he issued his own critique of the Groza government , becoming the target of violent attacks initiated by Miron Constantinescu in the PCR press . Consequently , he was singled out for negligence in office when , during the kangaroo trial of Iuliu Maniu ( see Tămădău Affair ) , it was alleged that several employees of his ministry had conspired against the government . Scînteia , the official voice of the PCR , wrote of all National Liberal Party-Tătărescu offices in the government : " The rot is all-encompassing ! It has to be removed ! " .

Tătărescu resigned his office on 6 November 1947 , and was replaced by the Communist Ana Pauker . For the following two months , he was sidelined in his own party by PCR pressures , and removed from its leadership in January 1948 ( being replaced with Petre N. Bejan — the party was subsequently known as National Liberal Party-Petre N. Bejan ) . One of his last actions as cabinet member had been to sign the document officially rejecting the Marshall Plan . After the proclamation of the People 's Republic of Romania on 30 December 1947 , the existence of all parties other than the PCR had become purely formal , and , after the elections of 28 March the one-party state was confirmed by legislation . He was arrested on 5 May 1950 , and held in the notorious Sighet prison ( alongside three of his brothers — Ștefan Tătărescu included — and his former collaborator Bejan ) . His son Tudor , who was living in Paris , suffered from schizophrenia after 1950 , and had to be committed to an institution ( where he died in 1955 ) . Sandra Tătărescu Negropontes was also imprisoned in 1950 , and released three years later , upon the death of Joseph Stalin .

" Someday ( I Will Understand ) " is a song recorded by American singer Britney Spears . It was written by Spears and produced by Guy Sigsworth . The song was released on August 18 , 2005 , by Jive Records , as the sole single from Spears ' first extended play , Britney & Kevin : Chaotic ( 2005 ) . In July 2004 , Spears announced her engagement to American dancer Kevin Federline , later revealing she would be taking another career break to start a family . Spears wrote the song two weeks before knowing she was pregnant with her first child , Sean Preston Federline . A pop ballad , " Someday ( I Will Understand ) " lyrics refer to a feeling of empowerment as a pregnant woman . A remixed version of the song was included on the 2005 remix compilation , B in the Mix : The Remixes . " Someday ( I Will Understand ) " has received mixed reviews from music critics . A few reviewers considered it as a lesson on the singer 's history and a " tear-jerker " ballad , while others considered it a non-savable " flop single " . The song reached the top ten in Denmark , Sweden and Switzerland and also charted in a number of European countries . An accompanying music video , directed by Michael Haussman , premiered on the finale of Britney & Kevin : Chaotic . Entirely shot in black-and-white , the music video features Spears as a pregnant woman and portrays a transformation of her character . Contemporary critics noted the video as a departure from Spears ' previous music videos , while comparing the imagery of it to American entertainer Madonna 's Kabbalah makeover .

In July 2004 , Spears announced her engagement to American dancer Kevin Federline , whom she had met three months before . The romance received intense attention from the media , since Federline had recently broken up with actress Shar Jackson , who was still pregnant with their second child at the time . The initial stages of their relationship were chronicled in Spears 's first reality show Britney & Kevin : Chaotic . They held a wedding ceremony on September 18 , 2004 , but were not legally married until three weeks later on October 6 due to a delay finalizing the couple 's prenuptial agreement . In October 2004 , the singer announced she would be taking another career break to start a family . Spears gave birth to her first child , Sean Preston Federline , on September 14 , 2005 . " Someday ( I Will Understand ) " was composed by Spears on the piano at her house , two weeks before she learned of her pregnancy with Sean Preston . She explained the song came " like a prophecy ... when you 're pregnant , you 're empowered " . It was produced by Guy Sigsworth , who previously worked with the singer on " Everytime " ( 2003 ) . Spears recorded her vocals for the song at Conway Studios in Los Angeles , California , and at Frou Frou Central in London . The piano was played by Spears herself , while all other instruments and mixing were done by Sigsworth . Background vocals for the song were provided by Kate Havnevik .

" Someday ( I Will Understand ) " received mixed reviews from music critics . While reviewing Britney & Kevin : Chaotic , Mike McGuirk of Rhapsody noted , " Britney now sings about either the husband or the kid . ( Sorry , people . It 's a sad day for the middle-aged American male sicko . ) For everyone else , these bonus tracks further Spears ' upward path of totally bangin ' production and almost uncanny Prince-channeling . " Gil Kaufman of MTV thought the song a " horrible Britney ballad with the black-and-white video that began her descent into madness . " Leo Ebersole of Chicago Tribune considered it " a fictional piece " , while another reviewer from the same newspaper noted that " as a matter of fact , the song is more or less a lesson in Britney history . " Becky Bain of Idolator praised the track , stating that " Britney goes genuine for this ode to her unborn baby . " Kurt Kirton of About.com said that " And Then We Kiss " and other remixes of songs like " Toxic " and " Someday ( I Will Understand ) " on the remix album B in the Mix : The Remixes " hold their own " . IGN writer Spence D. noted the Hi-Bias Signature Radio Remix " reverberates with all the clichés that often stifle the music that rustles through the late night / early morning club scenes around the world . " Rolling Stone contributor Barry Walters gave the song 's remix a negative review , saying that " nothing can rescue Spears ' freakishly sappy flop single " Someday ( I Will Understand ) " . " Bradley Stern also of MTV , however , praised the Leama & Moor Remix , saying it " transforms the tearjerker of a ballad into a full-on trance anthem . Big beats , stuttering vocals -- it 's heartbreak on the dance floor . "

On September 1 , 2005 , " Someday ( I Will Understand ) " debuted at number 46 on the Swedish Singles Chart . It peaked at number 10 the following week . In Switzerland , the song debuted at number eight on the week of September 4 , 2005 . On September 9 , 2005 , the song debuted in the Danish Singles Chart at number 11 . The following week , it peaked at the eight position . " Someday ( I Will Understand ) " also reached the top 20 in Belgium ( Flanders and Wallonia ) , Finland and Norway and charted in Austria and the Netherlands . " Someday ( I Will Understand ) " has sold 60,000 paid digital downloads in the United States , according to Nielsen SoundScan .

The music video for " Someday ( I Will Understand ) " was directed by Michael Haussman . Spears commented that he " [ did ] a great job capturing the song , the essence and the emotion " and added that the video had " a different feeling " from any of her previous videos . It was shot entirely in black-and-white . Spears asserted that her life had " come full circle " and implied that in the process she underwent changes in her soul and body , as shown in the video . It premiered on June 14 , 2005 during the fifth and last episode of Spears 's reality show Britney & Kevin : Chaotic , titled " Veil of Secrecy " . The music video features a pregnant Spears lying in bed and walking around a house while singing to her unborn child . She also gazes through the window at the Roman sculptures in the garden . Dana Alice Heller noted that her provocative costuming and dancing are replaced in the video with a solitary , fabric-draped Spears that evokes an ethereal calmness . Heller compared the imagery to Madonna 's Kabbalah makeover , but added that while Madonna was " in her thirties after a tabloid head-lining first marriage and a few other misguided relationships , Spears was only twenty-two , making her transformation seem forced " . Hayley Butler of Jam ! said " the video is a far cry from the snake handling , sweating and skimpy Britney videos of the past . Dressed in a classy silk dress , she runs through gardens , lies in bed and walks through the grass , all with a burgeoning belly . " John Mitchel of MTV included the video on the list " Beyonce , Britney And Madonna : What To Expect When You 're Expecting — Music Video Edition " in 2011 . Despite praising the track , Idolator blogger Becky Bain stated that " at this point she still looks like a teenager herself , so it 's a little disconcerting seeing her with that huge belly , singing about motherhood . "

Willie Landry Mount ( born August 25 , 1949 ) is an American politician from Louisiana who served as a Democratic member of the Louisiana State Senate from 2000 to 2012 . She represented District 27 , which includes parts of Lake Charles and the surrounding cities of Sulphur and Westlake . From 1993 to 1999 , Mount was the first female to have served as the mayor of Lake Charles . Mount was a candidate in the 2004 U.S. House of Representatives election for Louisiana 's 7th congressional district . She was defeated by Republican Charles Boustany in a contested general election campaign that received national attention .

Mount had been active in community work , through organizations such as the Junior League of Lake Charles , and ran for mayor of Lake Charles in 1993 , winning against Paul Savoie , a Democrat and a former mayor . During her tenure she served as president of the Louisiana Conference of Mayors and supported restoration efforts following hurricanes . To this end Mount testified before Congress in support of the Conservation and Reinvestment Act of 1999 . She also co-sponsored the building of an Amtrak station , modeled after an older station that had been destroyed in a fire . In an effort to succeed retiring state senator James J. Cox , Mount announced her senate candidacy on October 19 , 1999 , while addressing the Calcasieu Parish School Board , which she asked to support her . Upon being elected , Mount resigned as mayor and City Council President Rodney Geyen took over the office . In the senate , Mount served on a variety of committees , chairing the Senate Committees on Coastal Restoration and Flood Control , Revenue and Fiscal Affairs , and also serving as Vice-Chair of the Senate Committee on Education . In 2008 , she became chairwoman of the Senate Committee on Health and Welfare . Mount often sponsors legislation regarding health and public service . This includes bills intended to identify sex offenders and enact term limits for various boards and commissions . She was responsible for passing these term limits as an amendment to the Louisiana Constitution , as SB 232 on November 4 , 2008 . Mount also sponsored legislation to merge New Orleans criminal and civil district courts , create a childhood and family learning center , couple the opening of new hospice care providers with inspections of existing ones , allow police to suspend driver 's licenses of teenagers with problems at school , and create a state-run internet database providing information on the quality of health care providers . Mount was responsible for legislation that made Louisiana water fluoridation mandatory , and , in her capacity as chair of the Senate Health committee , Mount in 2008 declared major Louisiana health care reform unlikely without prior federal reform .

Mount ran for Congress in 2004 to succeed Chris John , who had announced his retirement from the U.S. House of Representatives to run for the U.S. Senate . She positioned herself as a conservative Democrat , supportive of balanced budgets and conservative social views , emphasizing job creation , health care and her opposition to offshoring . Her major Democratic opponent in the jungle primary was African American State Senator Don Cravins , Sr. , the father of another lawmaker , Don Cravins , Jr . , of Opelousas . Her major Republican opponent was Charles Boustany , a retired heart surgeon from Lafayette , who ran on a platform of preventing tax increases and passing a new energy bill . The Louisiana Democratic Party was supporting Mount , as Cravins was believed to be a weaker contestant in a run-off . Polls taken in late October had shown Boustany , Cravins and Mount statistically tied and the election was hotly contested . In the first ballot on November 2 , 2004 , Boustany and Mount garnered the most votes ; Cravins was defeated by less than two thousand votes . As both fell short of a majority , a second ballot was mandated . In the subsequent campaign , Mount criticized Boustany for favouring tax cuts for the rich and being indifferent to health care , while Boustany rejected the attacks as false and stressed his willingness to work with Democrats and Independents . Boustany in turn portrayed Mount as liberal and favoring tax increases . Mount also criticized Boustany for favoring the privatization of social security , an unpopular position in Louisiana , and as removed from the interests of voters . She received endorsements by U.S. Senator John Breaux , who had represented the 7th district for over fourteen years , and governor Kathleen Blanco . Boustany was helped by Vice President Dick Cheney , who campaigned on his behalf in Lake Charles . Mount , however , was not endorsed by Democratic primary opponent Don Cravins , who complained about the state Democratic Party 's endorsement of Mount in a partially party funded mailer that excluded him and which he believed contributed to his narrow loss . Cravins prepared a suit in federal court claiming that the state Democratic Party violated the Voting Rights Act .

In the general election on December 4 , 2004 , Boustany defeated Mount , 55 percent to 45 percent in an election with low voter turnout . Democrats had hoped on a big turnout , as the district is nearly a quarter African American , a reliable Democratic constituency . Analysis of the race suggested that Mount 's defeat was helped by the open primary system that had the Democratic candidates work against each other and led to Cravin 's conflict with the state Democratic Party which in turn led to suppressed voter turnout . The large number of negative advertisements was also cited as a factor that contributed to low turnout . Another detriment for Mount mentioned was the strong support for George W. Bush in the presidential election in the district , which he carried by about 60 percent . Following her defeat , Mount ruled out another campaign for the seat , but not a campaign for another state-wide office . When Mount left the Senate in 2012 , she was succeeded by a Republican , former State Representative Ronnie Johns of Sulphur , who ran unopposed for the open seat .

No. 36 Squadron is a Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) strategic transport squadron . It operates Boeing C-17 Globemaster III heavy airlifters from RAAF Base Amberley , Queensland . The squadron has seen active service flying transport aircraft during World War II , the Korean War , the Indonesia – Malaysia Konfrontasi , the Vietnam War , and the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq . It has also supported Australian humanitarian and peacekeeping operations around the world , including Somalia , Cambodia , East Timor and Indonesia . The squadron was formed at RAAF Station Laverton , Victoria , in March 1942 , and equipped with Douglas DC-2s , among other aircraft . Later in the war it began operating Douglas C-47 Dakotas . From 1946 to 1953 it was controlled by No. 86 ( Transport ) Wing , which was based in New South Wales at RAAF Station Schofields and , later , RAAF Station Richmond . In 1953 it was re-formed at Iwakuni , Japan , as part of No. 91 ( Composite ) Wing . It returned to Australia and the aegis of No. 86 Wing in 1955 . The squadron began re-equipping with Lockheed C-130 Hercules at Richmond in 1958 , becoming the first non-US operator of the type . Over the next half-century it flew two models of Hercules , the C-130A and C-130H . The squadron transferred to Amberley in 2006 , when it took delivery of its first Globemaster .

No. 36 Squadron is responsible for strategic air transport in Australia and overseas , conducting missions as part of military operations and humanitarian efforts . It is located at RAAF Base Amberley , Queensland , and controlled by No. 86 Wing , which is part of Air Mobility Group . The unit headquarters comprises executive , administrative and operational components . As well as aircrew , the squadron is staffed by maintenance personnel responsible for regular servicing of equipment ; they are frequently required to accompany the aircraft on deployments overseas . More complex servicing is conducted by Boeing . No. 36 Squadron 's official crest , approved in May 1966 , depicts a horse intended to symbolise strength , speed , mobility and dependability . The unit 's motto is " Sure " . The squadron operates eight Boeing C-17 Globemaster IIIs , the first of which entered service in December 2006 . The eighth and last was delivered in November 2015 . The aircraft are generally crewed by two pilots and a loadmaster , the latter being responsible for the loading , carriage and unloading of cargo or passengers . The C-17 can carry 70 tonnes of equipment , and is large enough to accommodate helicopters , tanks and other military vehicles . It can also carry over 130 passengers , and is designed for aerial despatch of paratroops or cargo . The C-17 has a range of some 10,000 km ( 6,200 miles ) and is able to operate from short and unsealed airstrips . Flown with a joystick and fly-by-wire controls , the aircraft is also highly manoeuvrable and responsive considering its size . It can be refuelled in flight by the Airbus KC-30A Multi Role Tanker Transports operated by No. 33 Squadron .

During February and March 1942 , the RAAF formed four transport units : Nos. 33 , 34 , 35 and 36 Squadrons . No. 36 Squadron was established on 11 March at RAAF Station Laverton , Victoria , under the control of Southern Area Command . Its initial strength was twenty-six personnel and one Douglas DC-2 . This was gradually built up to a force of six DC-2s , as well as examples of various de Havilland types including the DH.84 Dragon , DH.86 Express , DH.89 Dragon Rapide , and Tiger Moth . Tasked with transport operations throughout Australia and to Port Moresby , New Guinea , the squadron relocated to Essendon , Victoria , on 17 July . One of the DC-2s crashed at Seven Mile Aerodrome , Port Moresby , on 14 September ; all aboard were killed . The squadron was transferred to Townsville , Queensland , on 11 December 1942 . During 1943 , it maintained detachments at Essendon and in New Guinea , and began re-equipping with twelve Douglas C-47 Dakotas . On 27 March 1943 , a Dakota of No. 36 Squadron crashed on takeoff in pre-dawn fog at RAAF Station Archerfield , killing all twenty-three occupants , twenty of whom were RAAF or Women 's Auxiliary Australian Air Force personnel . The squadron relocated to Garbutt on 20 February 1944 . During the New Guinea campaign it was responsible for carrying troops and cargo , and undertaking courier runs and supply drops . In 1945 , a detachment of No. 36 Squadron Dakotas augmented No. 84 Wing 's operations in Bougainville , flying almost 800 sorties between January and June . The squadron lost two Dakotas on supply missions in Aitape during February 1945 . In August , it flew paratroopers into Singapore as part of the reoccupation of the city , after which it continued to transport troops and cargo , and repatriate prisoners of war . Following the end of hostilities , in March 1946 , a detachment of six Dakotas established a courier service between Morotai and Japan , where Australian units had joined the British Commonwealth Occupation Force .

On 19 August 1946 , No. 36 Squadron transferred to RAAF Station Schofields , New South Wales , where it came under the control of No. 86 ( Transport ) Wing along with Nos. 37 and 38 Squadrons , also operating Dakotas , and No. 486 ( Maintenance ) Squadron . No. 486 Squadron provided day-to-day servicing for each of the flying squadrons , deeper maintenance being handled by No. 2 Aircraft Depot , based at the nearby RAAF Station Richmond . Courier flights to Japan continued until December 1947 , a 21,000 km ( 13,000-mile ) round trip from Schofields . On 25 August 1948 , twenty staff from No. 36 Squadron joined five crews from No. 38 Squadron to take part in the Berlin Airlift , a commitment that lasted almost a year . The Australians delivered over 16,000,000 pounds ( 7,300,000 kg ) of supplies , and over 7,000 passengers . In the absence of these crews , Nos. 36 and 38 Squadron operations were amalgamated , flying hours being recorded under the latter 's auspices . During June 1949 , No. 36 Squadron and the other extant components of No. 86 Wing , Nos. 38 and 486 Squadrons , relocated from Schofields to Richmond .

Nos. 36 and 38 Squadrons began to operate separately again in June 1950 , following the return of crews from Berlin and No. 38 Squadron 's departure for service in the Malayan Emergency . No. 36 Squadron assumed control of the Governor-General 's Flight in October 1950 . On 21 November 1952 , the squadron was awarded the Duke of Gloucester Cup for its proficiency . The return of No. 38 Squadron from Malaya in December stripped No. 36 Squadron of crews to ensure an even distribution of personnel among the two units . This led to No. 36 Squadron again merging with No. 38 Squadron . The former disbanded at Richmond on 9 March 1953 , re-forming the next day from No. 30 Transport Unit at Iwakuni , Japan . Here it was part of No. 91 ( Composite ) Wing , which controlled the RAAF 's units during the Korean War and its immediate aftermath . Its complement included eight Dakotas and one CAC Wirraway . In July and August , the squadron evacuated over 900 Commonwealth prisoners of war . It departed Japan on 13 March 1955 , having carried over 42,000 passengers and 6,000,000 pounds ( 2,700,000 kg ) of cargo , and was re-established on 1 May at RAAF Base Canberra , where No. 86 Wing had transferred the previous year .

No. 36 Squadron handed over its six Dakotas to No. 38 Squadron in July 1958 , prior to re-equipping with the Lockheed C-130 Hercules . It returned to Richmond in August , followed by the rest of No. 86 Wing a month later . After conversion training of its personnel in the United States , No. 36 Squadron became the first non-US operator of the Hercules in December 1958 , when it began taking delivery of twelve C-130As ; deliveries completed in March 1959 . The official history of the post-war Air Force described the Hercules as " probably the biggest step-up in aircraft capabilities " the RAAF had ever received , considering it roughly four times as effective as the Dakota , taking into account the improvements in payload , range , and speed . In September 1960 , No. 36 Squadron began parachute trials on the Hercules . It made the Hercules ' first troop-carrying flights into a combat zone in December 1962 , joining a Commonwealth airlift from Singapore to Borneo at the onset of the Konfrontasi between Indonesia and Malaysia ; similar missions were undertaken over the next five years . The squadron was again awarded the Gloucester Cup in 1963 .

In August 1964 , No. 36 Squadron became an independently operating unit under the command of Headquarters RAAF Base Richmond , following the disbandment of No. 86 Wing . No. 486 Squadron was disbanded at the same time , leaving No. 36 Squadron responsible for its own day-to-day maintenance until 1966 ; No. 486 Squadron was re-formed that year to service both No. 36 Squadron and No. 37 Squadron , the latter having taken delivery of twelve C-130E Hercules . During the Vietnam War , both squadrons undertook long-range transport and medical evacuation flights between Australia and South East Asia , servicing Phan Rang , Vung Tau , and Nui Dat . No. 36 Squadron was presented with its own standard by Prince Philip , Duke of Edinburgh , on 1 April 1971 , in recognition of a quarter-century 's service . Eight of its twelve Hercules were involved in relief efforts after Cyclone Tracy struck Darwin , Northern Territory , on Christmas Eve 1974 ; the aircraft flew over 550 hours , carrying 2,864 passengers and almost 800,000 pounds ( 360,000 kg ) of cargo . Having remained in service for twenty years , clocking up 147,000 accident-free flying hours , the C-130As were replaced by C-130Hs in 1978 .

In November 1978 , one of No. 36 Squadron 's C-130Hs became the first Australian Hercules to land in Antarctica , at McMurdo Sound . The squadron reached a total of 200,000 accident-free flying hours in C-130s during 1984 . When No. 86 Wing was re-formed at Richmond on 2 February 1987 , under the newly established Air Lift Group ( later Air Mobility Group ) , No. 36 Squadron formed part of its complement . The unit again received the Gloucester Cup in 1989 . That year , it provided transport for civilian passengers during the pilots ' dispute that curtailed operations by the two domestic airlines ; three aircraft and five crews undertook this task , over and above their normal duties . The squadron reached 100,000 accident-free flying hours on the C-130H during 1990 . In December 1990 and January 1991 , it flew missions to Dubai in support of Australia 's naval contribution to the Gulf War , and in 1993 transported Australian troops to Somalia as part of Operation Solace . Four of its C-130Hs were equipped with Electronic Warfare Self Protection packs , including radar and missile warning systems , and countermeasures such as chaff and flares , in 1994 . Later in the decade , one of the C-130Hs was fitted with signals intelligence equipment and crewed by RAAF and Defence Signals Directorate personnel .

Six of No. 36 Squadron 's Hercules evacuated over 450 civilians from Cambodia following the coup in July 1997 . The unit again became responsible for its own routine maintenance in 1998 , when No. 486 Squadron was disbanded . A detachment from No. 36 Squadron supported INTERFET operations in East Timor between September 1999 and February 2000 . The squadron was assigned four C-130Es previously operated by No. 37 Squadron during the latter 's transition to the new C-130J Super Hercules , which commenced in 1999 ; the E models were retired the following year . No. 36 Squadron was once more awarded the Gloucester Cup in 2001 . It took part in relief efforts following the Bali Bombings in October 2002 . In February 2003 , it deployed a detachment of two Hercules to the Middle East as part of the Australian contribution to the invasion of Iraq . The aircraft arrived on 10 February , and began flying transport sorties less than two weeks later . A No. 36 Squadron Hercules became the first Coalition aircraft to land at Al Asad Airbase , west of Baghdad , after it was secured by Australian special forces personnel . One aircraft was hit by ground fire near Baghdad on 27 June 2004 , killing a coalition passenger . The detachment remained in Iraq until September 2004 , when it was relieved by two C-130Js from No. 37 Squadron . No. 36 Squadron also participated in Operation Sumatra Assist in the wake of the 2004 Boxing Day tsunami .

In May 2006 , No. 36 Squadron personnel began conversion training in the US in preparation for re-equipping with Boeing C-17 Globemaster III heavy transports . It transferred its C-130Hs to No. 37 Squadron on 17 November 2006 , prior to relocating to Amberley . Also on 17 November , Wing Commander Linda Corbould took command of the unit , becoming the first woman to lead an RAAF flying squadron . Corbould was responsible for delivering the first Globemaster from the United States to Australia on 4 December . No. 36 Squadron achieved initial operating capability with the C-17 on 11 September 2007 , following eight months ' work-up training . In June 2008 , it received the Gloucester Cup as the RAAF 's most proficient flying squadron of 2007 " for achieving all training objectives , supporting air lift activities globally and nationally and fulfilling short-notice , high priority tasks , despite the squadron 's expertise being in its infancy " . Corbould completed her posting as commanding officer on 8 December 2008 , the day the squadron marked the second anniversary of C-17 operations by conducting the RAAF 's first flight with an all-female aircrew . Since re-equipping with the Globemaster , No. 36 Squadron has continued to support Coalition forces in Afghanistan , as well as humanitarian operations worldwide . In 2011 , it took part in relief efforts following the floods in Queensland , the Christchurch earthquake , and the Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami in Japan . The Queensland floods necessitated the evacuation of two C-17s to Richmond , when Amberley was threatened by rising waters ; of the other two Globemasters , one was in the Middle East and the other was undergoing maintenance at Amberley and could not be flown but was moved onto high ground and escaped damage . The deployment to Japan involved all three of the squadron 's available C-17s , the fourth still being serviced at Amberley . On 11 May 2012 , a C-17 flew an Australian Army M1 Abrams tank from RAAF Base Darwin to Shoalwater Bay for a training exercise ; it was the first time an RAAF Globemaster had airlifted an Abrams , which at 61 tonnes was among the largest single items the 70-tonne-capacity aircraft could carry . In November that year the squadron took delivery of its sixth Globemaster . It was again awarded the Gloucester Cup in March 2013 , for its proficiency the previous year .

In September 2014 , RAAF C-17s were used to airlift arms and munitions to forces in Kurdish-controlled northern Iraq following an offensive by ISIL militants . On 10 April 2015 , Prime Minister Tony Abbott announced the purchase of two more C-17s , which would bring No. 36 Squadron 's complement to eight aircraft . Concurrent with delivery of the new C-17s by year 's end , No. 36 Squadron 's facilities were to be improved , obviating the need for maintenance to take place in No. 33 Squadron hangars . Also on 10 April , the squadron was awarded the Gloucester Cup a record seventh time , and the RAAF 's Maintenance Trophy a record fourth time . Later the same month , an Airbus KC-30A Multi Role Tanker Transport of No. 33 Squadron carried out the RAAF 's first in-flight refuelling of a No. 36 Squadron Globemaster . The Governor-General , Sir Peter Cosgrove , presented the squadron with a new standard on 19 May ; the old standard was laid up in Holy Trinity Chapel at RAAF Williams , Victoria . No. 36 Squadron was awarded the Meritorious Unit Citation in the Queen 's Birthday Honours on 13 June 2016 for " for sustained outstanding service in warlike operations throughout the Middle East Area of Operations over the period January 2002 to June 2014 " .

Cucurbita ( Latin for gourd ) is a genus of herbaceous vines in the gourd family , Cucurbitaceae , also known as cucurbits , native to the Andes and Mesoamerica . Five species are grown worldwide for their edible fruit , variously known as squash , pumpkin , or gourd depending on species , variety , and local parlance , and for their seeds . First cultivated in the Americas before being brought to Europe by returning explorers after their discovery of the New World , plants in the genus Cucurbita are important sources of human food and oil . Other kinds of gourd , also called bottle-gourds , are native to Africa and belong to the genus Lagenaria , which is in the same family and subfamily as Cucurbita but in a different tribe . These other gourds are used as utensils or vessels , and their young fruits are eaten much like those of Cucurbita species . Most Cucurbita species are herbaceous vines that grow several meters in length and have tendrils , but non-vining " bush " cultivars of C. pepo and C. maxima have also been developed . The yellow or orange flowers on a Cucurbita plant are of two types : female and male . The female flowers produce the fruit and the male flowers produce pollen . Many North and Central American species are visited by specialist bee pollinators , but other insects with more general feeding habits , such as honey bees , also visit .

The fruits of the genus Cucurbita are good sources of nutrients , such as vitamin A and vitamin C , among other nutrients according to species . The plants contain the toxins , such as cucurbitin , cucurmosin , and cucurbitacin . There is debate about the taxonomy of the genus , as the number of accepted species varies from 13 to 30 . The five domesticated species are Cucurbita argyrosperma , C. ficifolia , C. maxima , C. moschata , and C. pepo . All of these can be treated as winter squash because the full-grown fruits can be stored for months ; however , C. pepo includes some cultivars that are better used only as summer squash . Cucurbita fruits have played a role in human culture for at least 2,000 years . They are often represented in Moche ceramics from Peru . After Christopher Columbus 's arrival in the New World , paintings of squashes started to appear in Europe early in the sixteenth century . The fruits have many culinary uses including pumpkin pie , biscuits , bread , desserts , puddings , beverages , and soups . Pumpkins and other Cucurbita fruits are celebrated in festivals and in flower and vegetable shows in many countries .

Cucurbita species fall into two main groups . The first group are annual or short-lived perennial vines and are mesophytic , i.e. they require a more or less continuous water supply . The second group are perennials growing in arid zones and so are xerophytic , tolerating dry conditions . Cultivated Cucurbita species were derived from the first group . Growing 5 to 15 meters ( 16 to 49 ft ) in height or length , the plant stem produces tendrils to help it climb adjacent plants and structures or extend along the ground . Most species do not readily root from the nodes ; a notable exception is C. ficifolia , and the four other cultivated mesophytes do this to a lesser extent . The vine of the perennial Cucurbita can become semiwoody if left to grow . There is wide variation in size , shape , and color among Cucurbita fruits , and even within a single species . C. ficifolia is an exception , being highly uniform in appearance . The morphological variation in the species C. pepo and C. maxima is so vast that its various subspecies and cultivars have been misidentified as totally separate species .

The typical cultivated Cucurbita species has five-lobed or palmately divided leaves with long petioles , with the leaves alternately arranged on the stem . The stems in some species are angular . All of the above-ground parts may be hairy with various types of trichomes , which are often hardened and sharp . Spring-like tendrils grow from each node and are branching in some species . C. argyrosperma has ovate-cordate ( egg-shaped to heart-shaped ) leaves . The shape of C. pepo leaves varies widely . C. moschata plants can have light or dense pubescence . C. ficifolia leaves are slightly angular and have light pubescence . The leaves of all four of these species may or may not have white spots . There are male ( staminate ) and female ( pistillate ) flowers ( unisexual flowers ) on a single plant ( monoecious ) , and these grow singly , appearing from the leaf axils . Flowers have five fused yellow to orange petals ( the corolla ) and a green bell-shaped calyx . Male flowers in Cucurbitaceae generally have five stamens , but in Cucurbita there are only three , and their anthers are joined together so that there appears to be one . Female flowers have thick pedicels , and an inferior ovary with 3 – 5 stigmas that each have two lobes . The female flowers of C. argyrosperma and C. ficifolia have larger corollas than the male flowers . Female flowers of C. pepo have a small calyx , but the calyx of C. moschata male flowers is comparatively short .

Cucurbita fruits are large and fleshy . Botanists classify the Cucurbita fruit as a pepo , which is a special type of berry derived from an inferior ovary , with a thick outer wall or rind with hypanthium tissue forming an exocarp around the ovary , and a fleshy interior composed of mesocarp and endocarp . The term " pepo " is used primarily for Cucurbitaceae fruits , where this fruit type is common , but the fruits of Passiflora and Carica are sometimes also pepos . The seeds , which are attached to the ovary wall ( parietal placentation ) and not to the center , are large and fairly flat with a large embryo that consists almost entirely of two cotyledons . Fruit size varies considerably : wild fruit specimens can be as small as 4 centimeters ( 1.6 in ) and some domesticated specimens can weigh well over 300 kilograms ( 660 lb ) . The current world record was set in 2014 by Beni Meier of Switzerland with a 2,323.7-pound ( 1,054.0 kg ) pumpkin .

Cucurbita was formally described in a way that meets the requirements of modern botanical nomenclature by Linnaeus in his Genera Plantarum , the fifth edition of 1754 in conjunction with the 1753 first edition of Species Plantarum . Cucurbita pepo is the type species of the genus . Linnaeus initially included the species C. pepo , C. verrucosa and C. melopepo ( both now included in C. pepo ) , as well as C. citrullus ( watermelon , now Citrullus lanatus ) and C. lagenaria ( now Lagenaria siceraria ) ( both are not Cucurbita but are in the family Cucurbitaceae . The Cucurbita digitata , C. foetidissima , C. galeotti , and C. pedatifolia species groups are xerophytes , arid zone perennials with storage roots ; the remainder , including the five domesticated species , are all mesophytic annuals or short-life perennials with no storage roots . The five domesticated species are mostly isolated from each other by sterility barriers and have different physiological characteristics . Some cross pollinations can occur : C. pepo with C. argyrosperma and C. moschata ; and C. maxima with C. moschata . Cross pollination does occur readily within the family Cucurbitaceae . The buffalo gourd ( C. foetidissima ) , which does not taste good , has been used as an intermediary as it can be crossed with all the common Cucurbita .

Various taxonomic treatments have been proposed for Cucurbita , ranging from 13 – 30 species . In 1990 , Cucurbita expert Michael Nee classified them into the following oft-cited 13 species groups ( 27 species total ) , listed by group and alphabetically , with geographic origin : C. ficifolia – figleaf gourd , chilacayote ; origin : Mexico , Panama , northern Chile and Argentina C. moschata – butternut squash , ' Dickinson ' pumpkin , golden cushaw ; origin : Bolivia , Colombia , Ecuador , Mexico , Panama , Puerto Rico , Venezuela C. pepo – field pumpkin , summer squash , zucchini , vegetable marrow , courgette , acorn squash ; origin : Mexico , USA The taxonomy by Nee closely matches the species groupings reported in a pair of studies by a botanical team led by Rhodes and Bemis in 1968 and 1970 based on statistical groupings of several phenotypic traits of 21 species . Seeds for studying additional species members were not available . Sixteen of the 21 species were grouped into five clusters with the remaining five being classified separately : C. sororia , C. gracilior , C. palmeri ; C. argyrosperma ( reported as C. mixta ) was considered close to the three previous species

All species of Cucurbita have 20 pairs of chromosomes . Many North and Central American species are visited by specialist pollinators in the apid tribe Eucerini , especially the genera Peponapis and Xenoglossa , and these squash bees can be crucial to the flowers producing fruit after pollination . When there is more pollen applied to the stigma , more seeds are produced in the fruits and the fruits are larger with greater likelihood of maturation , an effect called xenia . Competitively grown specimens are therefore often hand-pollinated to maximize the number of seeds in the fruit , which increases the fruit size ; this pollination requires skilled technique . Seedlessness is known to occur in certain cultivars of C. pepo . The most critical factors in flowering and fruit set are physiological , having to do with the age of the plant and whether it already has developing fruit . The plant hormones ethylene and auxin are key in fruit set and development . Ethylene promotes the production of female flowers . When a plant already has a fruit developing , subsequent female flowers on the plant are less likely to mature , a phenomenon called " first-fruit dominance " , and male flowers are more frequent , an effect that appears due to reduced natural ethylene production within the plant stem . Ethephon , a plant growth regulator product that is converted to ethylene after metabolism by the plant , can be used to increase fruit and seed production .

Seeds with maximum germination potential develop ( in C. moschata ) by 45 days after anthesis , and seed weight reaches its maximum 70 days after anthesis . Some varieties of C. pepo germinate best with eight hours of sunlight daily and a planting depth of 1.2 centimeters ( 0.47 in ) . Seeds planted deeper than 12.5 centimeters ( 4.9 in ) are not likely to germinate . In C. foetidissima , a weedy species , plants younger than 19 days old are not able to sprout from the roots after removing the shoots . In a seed batch with 90 percent germination rate , over 90 percent of the plants had sprouted after 29 days from planting . Experiments have shown that when more pollen is applied to the stigma , as well as the fruit containing more seeds and being larger ( the xenia effect mentioned above ) , the germination of the seeds is also faster and more likely , and the seedlings are larger . Various combinations of mineral nutrients and light have a significant effect during the various stages of plant growth . These effects vary significantly between the different species of Cucurbita . A type of stored phosphorus called phytate forms in seed tissues as spherical crystalline intrusions in protein bodies called globoids . Along with other nutrients , phytate is used completely during seedling growth . Heavy metal contamination , including cadmium , has a significant negative impact on plant growth . Cucurbita plants grown in the spring tend to grow larger than those grown in the autumn .

Archaeological investigations have found evidence of domestication of Cucurbita going back over 8,000 years from the very southern parts of Canada down to Argentina and Chile . Centers of domestication stretch from the Mississippi River watershed and Texas down through Mexico and Central America to northern and western South America . Of the 27 species that Nee delineates , five are domesticated . Four of them , C. argyrosperma , C. ficifolia , C. moschata , and C. pepo , originated and were domesticated in Mesoamerica ; for the fifth , C. maxima , these events occurred in South America . Within C. pepo , the pumpkins , the scallops , and possibly the crooknecks are ancient and were domesticated at different times and places . The domesticated forms of C. pepo have larger fruits than non-domesticated forms and seeds that are bigger but fewer in number . In a 1989 study on the origins and development of C. pepo , botanist Harry Paris suggested that the original wild specimen had a small round fruit and that the modern pumpkin is its direct descendant . He suggested that the crookneck , ornamental gourd , and scallop are early variants and that the acorn is a cross between the scallop and the pumpkin .

C. argyrosperma is not as widespread as the other species . The wild form C. a. subsp. sororia is found from Mexico to Nicaragua , and cultivated forms are used in a somewhat wider area stretching from Panama to the southeastern United States . It was probably bred for its seeds , which are large and high in oil and protein , but its flesh is of poorer quality than that of C. moschata and C. pepo . It is grown in a wide altitudinal range : from sea level to as high as 1,800 meters ( 5,900 ft ) in dry areas , usually with the use of irrigation , or in areas with a defined rainy season , where seeds are sown in May and June . C. ficifolia and C. moschata were originally thought to be Asiatic in origin , but this has been disproven . The origin of C. ficifolia is Latin America , most likely southern Mexico , Central America , or the Andes . It grows at altitudes ranging from 1,000 meters ( 3,300 ft ) to 3,000 meters ( 9,800 ft ) in areas with heavy rainfall . It does not hybridize well with the other cultivated species as it has significantly different enzymes and chromosomes .

C. maxima originated in South America over 4,000 years ago , probably in Argentina and Uruguay . The plants are sensitive to frost , and they prefer both bright sunlight and soil with a pH of 6.0 to 7.0 . C. maxima did not start to spread into North America until after the arrival of Columbus . Varieties were in use by native peoples of the United States by the 16th century . Types of C. maxima include triloba , zapallito , zipinka , Banana , Delicious , Hubbard , Marrow ( C. maxima Marrow ) , Show , and Turban . C. moschata is native to Latin America , but the precise location of origin is uncertain . It has been present in Mexico , Belize , Guatemala , and Peru for 4,000 – 6,000 years and has spread to Bolivia , Ecuador , Panama , Puerto Rico , and Venezuela . This species is closely related to C. argyrosperma . A variety known as the Seminole Pumpkin has been cultivated in Florida since before the arrival of Columbus . Its leaves are 20 to 30 centimeters ( 8 to 12 in ) wide . It generally grows at low altitudes in hot climates with heavy rainfall , but some varieties have been found above 2,200 meters ( 7,200 ft ) . Groups of C. moschata include Cheese , Crookneck ( C. moschata ) , and Bell .

C. pepo is one of the oldest , if not the oldest , domesticated species with the oldest known locations being Oaxaca , Mexico , 8,000 – 10,000 years ago , and Ocampo , Tamaulipas , Mexico , about 7,000 years ago . It is known to have appeared in Missouri , United States , at least 4,000 years ago . Debates about the origin of C. pepo have been on-going since at least 1857 . There have traditionally been two opposing theories about its origin : 1 ) that it is a direct descendant of C. texana and 2 ) that C. texana is merely feral C. pepo . A more recent theory by botanist Thomas Andres in 1987 is that descendants of C. fraterna hybridized with C. texana , resulting in two distinct domestication events in two different areas : one in Mexico and one in the eastern United States , with C. fraterna and C. texana , respectively , as the ancestral species . C. pepo may have appeared in the Old World before moving from Mexico into South America . It is found from sea level to slightly above 2,000 meters ( 6,600 ft ) . Leaves have 3 – 5 lobes and are 20 – 35 centimeters ( 8 – 14 in ) wide . All the subspecies , varieties , and cultivars are interfertile . In 1986 Paris proposed a revised taxonomy of the edible cultivated C. pepo based primarily on the shape of the fruit , with eight groups . All but a few C. pepo cultivars can be included in these groups . There is one non-edible cultivated variety : C. pepo var. ovifera .

The ancestral species of the genus Cucurbita were present in the Americas before the arrival of humans , and are native to the New World . The likely center of origin is southern Mexico , spreading south through what is now known as Mesoamerica , on into South America , and north to what is now the southwestern United States . Evolutionarily speaking , the genus is relatively recent in origin , dating back only to the Holocene , whereas the family Cucurbitaceae , in the shape of seeds similar to Bryonia , dates to the Paleocene . No species within the genus is entirely genetically isolated . C. moschata can intercross with all the others , though the hybrid offspring may not themselves be fertile unless they become polyploid . The genus was part of the culture of almost every native peoples group from southern South America to southern Canada . Modern-day cultivated Cucurbita are not found in the wild . Genetic studies of the mitochondrial gene nad1 show there were at least six independent domestication events of Cucurbita separating domestic species from their wild ancestors . Species native to North America include C. digitata ( calabazilla ) , and C. foetidissima ( buffalo gourd ) , C. palmata ( coyote melon ) , and C. pepo . Some species , such as C. digitata and C. ficifolia , are referred to as gourds . Gourds , also called bottle-gourds , which are used as utensils or vessels , belong to the genus Lagenaria and are native to Africa . Lagenaria are in the same family and subfamily as Cucurbita but in a different tribe .

The earliest known evidence of the domestication of Cucurbita dates back at least 8,000 years ago , predating the domestication of other crops such as maize and beans in the region by about 4,000 years . This evidence was found in the Guilá Naquitz cave in Oaxaca , Mexico , during a series of excavations in the 1960s and 1970s , possibly beginning in 1959 . Solid evidence of domesticated C. pepo was found in the Guilá Naquitz cave in the form of increasing rind thickness and larger peduncles in the newer stratification layers of the cave . By c . 8,000 years BP the C. pepo peduncles found are consistently more than 10 millimeters ( 0.39 in ) thick . Wild Cucurbita peduncles are always below this 10 mm barrier . Changes in fruit shape and color indicate that intentional breeding of C. pepo had occurred by no later than 8,000 years BP . During the same time frame , average rind thickness increased from 0.84 millimeters ( 0.033 in ) to 1.15 millimeters ( 0.045 in ) . Squash was domesticated first , followed by maize and then beans , becoming part of the Three Sisters agricultural system of companion planting . The English word " squash " derives from askutasquash ( a green thing eaten raw ) , a word from the Narragansett language , which was documented by Roger Williams , the founder of Rhode Island , in his 1643 publication A Key Into the Language of America . Similar words for squash exist in related languages of the Algonquian family .

The family Cucurbitaceae has many species used as human food . Cucurbita is one of the most important of those , with the various species being prepared and eaten in many ways . Although the stems and skins tend to be more bitter than the flesh , the fruits and seeds of cultivated varieties are quite edible and need little or no preparation . The flowers and young leaves and shoot tips can also be consumed . The seeds and fruits of most varieties can be stored for long periods of time , particularly the sweet-tasting winter varieties with their thick , inedible skins . Summer squash have a thin , edible skin . The seeds of both types can be roasted , eaten raw , made into pumpkin seed oil , ground into a flour or meal , or otherwise prepared . Squashes are primarily grown for the fresh food market . The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations ( FAO ) reported that the ranking of the top five squash-producing countries was stable between 2005 and 2009 . Those countries are : China , India , Russia , the United States , and Egypt . By 2012 , Iran had moved into the 5th slot , with Egypt falling to 6th . The top 10 countries in terms of metric tons of squashes produced are :

The only additional countries that rank in the top 20 where squashes are native are Cuba , which ranks 14th with 347,082 metric tons , and Argentina , which ranks 17th , with 326,900 metric tons . In addition to being the 4th largest producer of squashes in the world , the United States is the world 's largest importer of squashes , importing 271,614 metric tons in 2011 , 95 percent of that from Mexico . Within the United States , the states producing the largest amounts are Florida , New York , California , and North Carolina . This is how Cucurbita compares to several other major Cucurbitaceae crops in terms of crop tonnage harvested :

As an example of Curcubita , raw summer squash is 94 % water , 3 % carbohydrates , and 1 % protein , with negligible fat content ( table ) . In 100 grams , raw squash supplies 16 calories and is rich in vitamin C ( 20 % of the Daily Value , DV ) , moderate in vitamin B6 and riboflavin ( 12-17 % DV ) , but otherwise devoid of appreciable nutrient content ( table ) , although the nutrient content of different Curcubita species may vary somewhat . Pumpkin seeds contain vitamin E , crude protein , B vitamins and several dietary minerals ( see nutrition table at pepita ) . Also present in pumpkin seeds are unsaturated and saturated oils , palmitic , oleic and linoleic fatty acids , as well as carotenoids .

Cucurbitin is an amino acid and a carboxypyrrolidine that is found in raw Cucurbita seeds . It retards the development of parasitic flukes when administered to infected host mice , although the effect is only seen if administration begins immediately after infection . Cucurmosin is a ribosome inactivating protein found in the flesh and seed of Cucurbita , notably Cucurbita moschata . Cucurmosin is more toxic to cancer cells than healthy cells . Cucurbitacin is a plant steroid present in wild Cucurbita and in each member of the family Cucurbitaceae . Poisonous to mammals , it is found in quantities sufficient to discourage herbivores . It makes wild Cucurbita and most ornamental gourds , with the exception of an occasional C. fraterna and C. sororia , bitter to taste . Ingesting too much cucurbitacin can cause stomach cramps , diarrhea and even collapse . This bitterness is especially prevalent in wild Cucurbita ; in parts of Mexico the flesh of the fruits is rubbed on a woman 's breast to wean children . While the process of domestication has largely removed the bitterness from cultivated varieties , there are occasional reports of cucurbitacin causing illness in humans . Cucurbitacin is also used as a lure in insect traps .

Cucurbita species are used as food plants by the larvae of some Lepidoptera species , including the Cabbage Moth ( Mamestra brassicae ) , Hypercompe indecisa , and the Turnip Moth ( Agrotis segetum ) . Cucurbita can be susceptible to the pest Bemisia argentifolii ( silverleaf whitefly ) as well as aphids ( Aphididae ) , cucumber beetles ( Acalymma vittatum and Diabrotica undecimpunctata howardi ) , squash bug ( Anasa tristis ) , the squash vine borer ( Melittia cucurbitae ) , and the twospotted spidermite ( Tetranychus urticae ) . The squash bug causes major damage to plants because of its very toxic saliva . The red pumpkin beetle ( Raphidopalpa foveicollis ) is a serious pest of cucurbits , especially the pumpkin , which it can defoliate . Cucurbits are susceptible to diseases such as bacterial wilt ( Erwinia tracheiphila ) , anthracnose ( Colletotrichum spp . ) , fusarium wilt ( Fusarium spp . ) , phytophthora blight ( Phytophthora spp. water molds ) , and powdery mildew ( Erysiphe spp . ) . Defensive responses to viral , fungal , and bacterial leaf pathogens do not involve cucurbitacin . Species in the genus Cucurbita are susceptible to some types of mosaic virus including : Cucumber mosaic virus ( CMV ) , Papaya ringspot virus-cucurbit strain ( PRSV ) , Squash mosaic virus ( SqMV ) , Tobacco ringspot virus ( TRSV ) , Watermelon mosaic virus ( WMV ) , and Zucchini yellow mosaic virus ( ZYMV ) . PRSV is the only one of these viruses that does not affect all cucurbits . SqMV and CMV are the most common viruses among cucurbits . Symptoms of these viruses show a high degree of similarity , which often results in laboratory investigation being needed to differentiate which one is affecting plants .

Along with maize and beans , squash has been depicted in the art work of the native peoples of the Americas for at least 2,000 years . For example , cucurbits are often represented in Moche ceramics . Though native to the western hemisphere , Cucurbita began to spread to other parts of the world after Christopher Columbus 's arrival in the New World in 1492 . Until recently , the earliest known depictions of this genus in Europe was of Cucurbita pepo in De Historia Stirpium Commentarii Insignes in 1542 by the German botanist Leonhart Fuchs , but in 1992 , two paintings , one of C. pepo and one of C. maxima , painted between 1515 and 1518 , were identified in festoons at Villa Farnesina in Rome . Also , in 2001 depictions of this genus were identified in Grandes Heures of Anne of Brittany ( Les Grandes Heures d 'Anne de Bretagne ) , a French devotional book , an illuminated manuscript created between 1503 and 1508 . This book contains an illustration known as Quegourdes de turquie , which was identified by cucurbit specialists as C. pepo subsp. texana in 2006 . In 1952 , Stanley Smith Master , using the pen name Edrich Siebert , wrote " The Marrow Song ( Oh what a beauty ! ) " to a tune in 6 / 8 time . It became a popular hit in Australia in 1973 , and was revived by the Wurzels in Britain on their 2003 album Cutler of the West . John Greenleaf Whittier wrote a poem entitled The Pumpkin in 1850 . " The Great Pumpkin " is a fictional holiday figure in the comic strip Peanuts by Charles M. Schulz .

Cucurbita have been used in various cultures as folk remedies . Pumpkins have been used by Native Americans to treat intestinal worms and urinary ailments . This Native American remedy was adopted by American doctors in the early nineteenth century as an anthelmintic for the expulsion of worms . In southeastern Europe , seeds of C. pepo were used to treat irritable bladder and benign prostatic hyperplasia . In Germany , pumpkin seed is approved for use by the Commission E , which assesses folk and herbal medicine , for irritated bladder conditions and micturition problems of prostatic hyperplasia stages 1 and 2 , although the monograph published in 1985 noted a lack of pharmacological studies that could substantiate empirically found clinical activity . The FDA in the United States , on the other hand , banned the sale of all such non-prescription drugs for the treatment of prostate enlargement in 1990 . In China , C. moschata seeds were also used in traditional Chinese medicine for the treatment of the parasitic disease schistosomiasis and for the expulsion of tape worms .

Long before European contact , Cucurbita had been a major food source for the native peoples of the Americas , and the species became an important food for European settlers , including the Pilgrims , even featuring at the first Thanksgiving . Commercially made pumpkin pie mix is most often made from varieties of C. moschata ; ' Libby 's Select ' uses the Select Dickinson Pumpkin variety of C. moschata for its canned pumpkin . Other foods that can be made using members of this genus include biscuits , bread , cheesecake , desserts , donuts , granola , ice cream , lasagna dishes , pancakes , pudding , pumpkin butter , salads , soups , and stuffing . The xerophytic species are proving useful in the search for nutritious foods that grow well in arid regions . C. ficifolia is used to make soft and mildly alcoholic drinks . In India , squashes ( ghia ) are cooked with seafood such as prawns . In France , marrows ( courge ) are traditionally served as a gratin , sieved and cooked with butter , milk , and egg , and flavored with salt , pepper , and nutmeg , and as soups . In Italy , zucchini and larger squashes are served in a variety of regional dishes , such as cocuzze alla puviredda cooked with olive oil , salt and herbs from Puglia ; as torta di zucca from Liguria , or torta di zucca e riso from Emilia-Romagna , the squashes being made into a pie filling with butter , ricotta , parmesan , egg , and milk ; and as a sauce for pasta in dishes like spaghetti alle zucchine from Sicily . In Japan , squashes such as small C. moschata pumpkins ( kabocha ) are eaten boiled with sesame sauce , fried as a tempura dish , or made into balls with sweet potato and Japanese mountain yam .

Cucurbita fruits including pumpkins and marrows are celebrated in festivals in countries such as Argentina , Bolivia , Britain , Canada , Croatia , France , Germany , Italy , Japan , Peru , Portugal , Spain , Switzerland , and the United States . Argentina holds an annual nationwide pumpkin festival Fiesta Nacional del Zapallo ( " Squashes and Pumpkins National Festival " ) , in Ceres , Santa Fe , on the last day of which a Reina Nacional del Zapallo ( " National Queen of the Pumpkin " ) is chosen . In Portugal the Festival da Abóbora de Lourinhã e Atalaia ( " Squashes and Pumpkins Festival in Lourinhã and Atalaia " ) is held in Lourinhã city , called the Capital Nacional da Abóbora ( the " National Capital of Squashes and Pumpkins " ) . Ludwigsburg , Germany annually hosts the world 's largest pumpkin festival . In Britain a giant marrow ( zucchini ) weighing 54.3177 kilograms ( 119.750 lb ) was displayed in the Harrogate Autumn Flower Show in 2012 . In the USA , pumpkin chucking is practiced competitively , with machines such as trebuchets and air cannons designed to throw intact pumpkins as far as possible . The Keene Pumpkin Fest is held annually in New Hampshire ; in 2013 it held the world record for the most jack-o-lanterns lit in one place , 30,581 on October 19 , 2013 .

" Beautiful Liar " ( Spanish : Bello Embustero ) is a song recorded by American singer Beyoncé and Colombian singer Shakira . It was written by Beyoncé , Amanda Ghost , Ian Dench , and Stargate members Mikkel S. Eriksen and Tor Erik Hermansen , and produced by Stargate and Beyoncé for the re-release of Beyoncé 's second solo album , B 'Day ( 2006 ) . The mixing of the song was done by Gustavo Celis . " Beautiful Liar " was released on March 14 , 2007 , by Columbia Records as the first single from the deluxe edition of the album . A Spanish and English mixed version of the song was produced and titled " Bello Embustero " . " Beautiful Liar " is a mid-tempo song ; musically , it is a melding of Shakira 's Latin and Middle Eastern styles with Beyoncé 's contemporary hip hop and R & B styles . Its theme is female empowerment ; two female protagonists sing about being charmed by the same man , but instead of fighting over him , both ladies agree that he is not worth their time . The song was well received by music critics , who praised generally Beyoncé 's and Shakira 's collaboration . " Beautiful Liar " was nominated for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals at the 50th Grammy Awards and the Spanish version was nominated for Record of the Year at the Latin Grammy Awards of 2007 . It won an Ivor Novello Awards for Best-Selling British Song in 2008 .

" Beautiful Liar " was commercially successful . It peaked at number three on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart and experienced the largest upward movement on that chart until 2008 . The song peaked at number one in many European countries , including France , Germany , Hungary , Ireland , Italy , the Netherlands , New Zealand , Switzerland , and the United Kingdom . Its accompanying music video was directed by Jake Nava , incorporates belly dancing moves . " Beautiful Liar " won the Most Earthshattering Collaboration award at the 2007 MTV Video Music Award . The song was included on Beyoncé 's set list during her 2007 The Beyoncé Experience world tour .

" Beautiful Liar " was written by Mikkel S. Eriksen , Tor Erik Hermansen , Amanda Ghost , Ian Dench , and Beyoncé . It was produced by Eriksen and Hermansen using their stage name , Stargate , and Beyoncé . Eriksen told Sound on Sound , " This song is very simple . Most of the time we have more chords in a song , because we find it hard writing a great song on just one chord . But if you do it right , you can make it work , and this song is an example . " The track had already been written in 2006 . Eriksen and Hermansen played it to their manager , Tyran Smith , who said that it would be perfect for a duet between Shakira and Beyoncé . Eriksen and Hermansen considered this to be impossible , however Smith was devoted to that idea . As they had no lyric or top melody , various writers attempted to finish the song . The first three attempts were not satisfactory , and Smith put Eriksen and Hermansen to work together with Ghost and Dench , who wrote a significant part of the lyrics and the melody .

" Beautiful Liar " initially had a Spanish title and different lyrics . Hermansen re-titled it when he heard the line " beautiful liar " in one of the verses . When the production of the song was almost completed , it was presented to Beyoncé , who approved it . She added a few lines to the lyrics and recorded a solo version a few months before the release of the deluxe edition of B 'Day ( 2006 ) . Beyoncé confirmed that she would perform a duet with Shakira in an interview for Univision in December 2006 . In another interview for MTV News , Beyoncé said that she met Shakira several times at various awards shows , and they talked about plans to collaborate on a song as they are both fans of each other and respect each other 's work . Beyoncé said that she was very happy that they were able to work together after waiting for years . When Beyoncé invited her to record a song for the re-release of Beyoncé 's studio second album , B 'Day , Shakira was touring and consequently had difficulties to match her schedule with Beyoncé 's . A few months later , Shakira agreed to sing on the track . As she recorded her vocals , the songwriters and producers added the ethnic strings and percussion break . Beyoncé and Shakira recorded their vocals in different studios ; the vocals were engineered by Gustavo Celis . " Beautiful Liar " was recorded at Sony Music Studios and Battery Studios in New York City , Elastic Mix Studios and The Hit Factory in Florida , and Futura Productions in Boston , Massachusetts .

" Beautiful Liar " is a contemporary R & B and pop song , which is written in the key of G Phrygian dominant , and set in common time at a tempo of 96 beats per minute . Beyoncé 's vocal range spans from G3 to B ♭ 5 . Anna Pickard of The Guardian found elements of Latino and bounce music . The song opens with Shakira 's vocals accompanied by a piping , Middle Eastern figure , later joined by a mariachi-flavored horn section . Groaning noises can be heard in the background which complement the melody . The names of the two singers are then heard : " Bee on say , be-on-SAY ! Sha kee ra , Sha-ki-RA " . The verses are sung on a mid-tempo , strutting , hip-thrusting arrangement , accented by rapid , flamenco-like hand claps and guitar strums . The song also features Persian instruments such as , oud and ney . Lyrically , " Beautiful Liar " speaks about two women who chose not to end a friendship because of a man who has cheated both of them . Its theme is one of female independence . Beyoncé told MTV News that " Beautiful Liar " is about female empowerment , in keeping with the theme of the album : " It 's about a guy who 's kind of playing both of us , and instead of us arguing over the guy we say , ' Forget him . Let 's stick together . He 's a beautiful liar . " The chorus features the lines , " Let 's not kill the karma , let 's not start a fight " with the female protagonists bonding in their mutual betrayal . Beyoncé and Shakira sing with staccato , intense vocal approach throughout the song . Beyoncé sings the lines " I didn 't know about you then , till I saw you with him again " earnestly while Shakira later adds " I walked in on your love scene , slow dancing " . In the end , the female protagonists conclude , " we can live without him " , referring to their cheating lover .

" Beautiful Liar " was leaked onto the internet and appeared as an unpaid download in early February 2007 . The song was sent to radio stations in the United States on February 12 , 2007 ; it was added to rhythmic contemporary , contemporary hit radio , and urban contemporary playlists . " Beautiful Liar " was released as a CD Single in Australia on March 14 , 2007 , and on April 16 , 2007 , in the United Kingdom where it was released as a digital download two days earlier . In Europe , the song was released as a digital EP on April 14 , 2007 , and a maxi single on April 20 , 2007 . " Beautiful Liar " was later serviced as a digital EP in the UK and the US on May 20 , 2007 . Different versions of the song were produced ; Puerto Rican reggaeton artist Don Omar recorded verses for one of the song 's remixes , but this was not released . In the UK , most radio stations , including Radio 1 played an up-beat dance remix of " Beautiful Liar " by the Freemasons instead of the original mix . Celis produced and mixed a Spanish-language version , titled " Bello Embustero " , with additional lyrical contributions by Rudy Pérez . The Spanish version appeared on some regional releases of the deluxe edition of B 'Day in late May 2007 .

Nick Levine of Digital Spy awarded " Beautiful Liar " three stars out of five and wrote that it " isn 't as ridiculously overblown " as previous collaborations of Whitney Houston and Mariah Carey on " When You Believe " ( 1998 ) and Barbra Streisand and Celine Dion on " Tell Him " ( 1997 ) . However , he added that " it 's as calculated as a wannabe page 3 model 's decision to have a boob job " , and that an accompanying music video will keep fans happy . Ben Sisario of The New York Times called it a " steamy track " . Richard Cromelin of the Los Angeles Times wrote that the singers " have fun with the grand soap-operatics " of the song adding that " Beautiful Liar " has " cultural as well as musical resonance , furthering Beyonce 's bilingual agenda " . Chris Willman of Entertainment Weekly wrote that the song " is a minor letdown ; Shakira 's voice is too like Beyoncé 's for a truly complementary tango " . On April 26 , 2011 , Gary Trust of Billboard magazine listed " Beautiful Liar " at the fourth position on his list of the 10 All-Female Hit Collaborations , calling it a " female-bonding boy-bashing anthem " . Erika Ramirez and Jason Lipshutz of the same publication ranked the song at number 22 on their list of " Beyonce 's 30 Biggest Billboard Hits " . In 2014 , Emily Exton of VH1 placed the track on her list of Shakira 's best duets , calling it a " sexy ode to the men we know we can 't trust " and praising both singers for their complementing vocal performance .

Immediately after its release , " Beautiful Liar " reached number one on the iTunes best-seller list in March 2007 . The song debuted at number 94 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart ; most sales were digital downloads . The following week , it rose 91 positions to number three after 150,000 download copies were sold ; this set a record for the largest upward movement in the history of the Hot 100 chart , until it was surpassed by Britney Spears 's 2008 single " Womanizer " , and Kelly Clarkson 's 2009 single " My Life Would Suck Without You " . On the US Pop 100 chart , " Beautiful Liar " rose from number 77 to number three . It is one of the few singles to debut at number one on both the US Hot Digital Tracks chart and US Hot Digital Songs chart . In mid-May , the song peaked at number one on the US Hot Singles Sales , becoming the fifth single from B 'Day to accomplish this feat . " Beautiful Liar " was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) in February 2009 , denoting shipment of one million copies . As of March 2014 , it has sold over 1,419,000 paid digital downloads in the US .

Outside the US , " Beautiful Liar " reached number one in 32 countries . In the UK , the Freemasons remixed version of the song was widely promoted by radio stations , including BBC Radio 1 , where it was put on the A-List . Two weeks before the CD release , the song debuted on the UK Singles Chart at number 10 , based solely on downloads sales , which accumulated to 37,500 units in its first week . It became both Beyoncé 's and Shakira 's highest debut on the UK Singles Chart based on digital sales alone . After the physical release , " Beautiful Liar " reached number one , becoming Beyoncé 's third UK number one single , and Shakira 's second . It remained at number one for three weeks . On June 20 , 2007 , the song was certified gold by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) , denoting sales of 400,000 copies . " Beautiful Liar " was 2007 's 12th biggest-selling single in the UK . As of September 2014 , the single has sold 430,000 units in the UK . In Australia , the song reached number five , and was the country 's 51st best-performing single in 2007 . The Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) certified " Beautiful Liar " platinum , denoting shipment of 70,000 copies . It debuted at number one on the New Zealand Singles Chart , and topped the Irish Singles Chart .

The music video for " Beautiful Liar " was directed by Jake Nava , who directed several of Beyoncé 's other videos . It was filmed over two days , during the two-week production of B 'Day Anthology Video Album . Because of a busy schedule , the production team did not have enough time for the choreography . The dance sequences were choreographed spontaneously and the routines were rehearsed in forty minutes . Beyoncé learned some of the choreography from Shakira , who created most of them and taught Beyoncé some belly dancing moves . Beyoncé originated the idea of playing a lookalike after an experience when she saw a boy dancing , and thought he was performing before a mirror , but realized he was dancing with another person . The music video premiered on Total Request Live on February 28 , 2007 . The first half of the video features Beyoncé and Shakira in separate scenes . It begins with the women 's faces masked by smoke . As the video progresses they are featured against several different backgrounds , including dawn ( Beyoncé ) and dusk ( Shakira ) ; sheets blown in the wind ; bamboo covered with yellow orchids ; a room with blue neon lighting and Avestan writing on the walls ; and a background of stormy weather . Slow dance moves and belly dancing , during a breakdown after the bridge , are featured throughout the video . The women wear matching hairstyles and black outfits for the entirety of the video .

Alex Denney of Yahoo ! Music wrote that the dance moves of Beyoncé and Shakira in the video were convincing and erotic " without reaching the point of tackiness . " He added that the music video " is a real treat for men and women alike . The catchy beat and their lithe , sexy dance just provides an amazing entertaining video . " Nick Levine of Digital Spy praised the " gratuitous belly-wiggling " choreography in the video . James Montgomery of MTV News noted that the music video " is enough to give you whiplash " due to Beyoncé 's and Shakira 's dance abilities . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine praised the scene during the bridge of the song , where Beyoncé and Shakira " begin mirroring each other 's movements " . Anna Pickard of The Guardian praised the clothes of the singers , saying that they matched their " mighty curves " , but criticized Beyoncé 's dancing throughout the video . Erin Strecker of Billboard noted how the clip " taught us all just how perfectly seductive the two could be " . " Beautiful Liar " was nominated for the Video Of The Year award at the 2007 BET Awards , but another Beyoncé video , " Irreplaceable " won it . At the 2007 MTV Video Music Award , it won the Most Earthshattering Collaboration , a new category in the awards show that year . Beyoncé received the award alone because Shakira was in Canada during the ceremonies .

Beyoncé has never performed " Beautiful Liar " together with Shakira and the latter never performed the song live . Beyoncé 's first and only televised performance of the song was during The Early Show on CBS on April 2 , 2007 which was broadcast four days later . " Beautiful Liar " was later included on Beyoncé 's set list during her 2007 tour The Beyoncé Experience . On The Beyoncé Experience , Beyoncé was dressed in a green belly dancing outfit and stood in darkness with dry ice billowing behind her . A microphone was then lowered from the ceiling and as she began singing the first verse , colored illumination was projected onto the backdrop . Beyoncé then performed several hip dance routines . Towards the end of the performance , pairs of female dancers , clothed in purple dresses , performed mirrored choreography . Beyoncé was accompanied by two drummers , two keyboardists , a percussionist , a horn section , three backup vocalists called The Mamas and a lead guitarist , Bibi McGill . Throughout the performance Shakira appeared on the video screen on stage . While reviewing Beyoncé 's performance at the Madison Square Garden in Manhattan , on August 5 , 2007 , Jon Pareles of The New York Times wrote , " Beyoncé needs no distractions from her singing , which can be airy or brassy , tearful or vicious , rapid-fire with staccato syllables or sustained in curlicued melismas . But she was in constant motion , strutting in costumes . " Shaheem Reid of MTV News compared the performance with Michael Buffer further adding that " Beyoncé acknowledged Shakira by shaking her hips rapidly " . While reviewing Beyoncé 's performance of the song in Saskatoon on September 14 , 2007 , a writer of The StarPhoenix noted that it was one of the musical surprises during the evening . Jim Harrington from the San Jose Mercury News noted that Beyoncé 's all-female band provided " plenty of punch " to the live performance of the song in Fresno on August 28 , 2007 further noting that the singer looked like a " sex kitten purring through " the song . In Los Angeles , on September 2 , Beyoncé performed " Beautiful Liar " , dressed in a green belly dancing outfit , with several female backup dancers , and live instrumentation . " Beautiful Liar " was included on Beyoncé 's live album The Beyoncé Experience Live ( 2007 ) .

Star Wars : Rogue Squadron ( known as Star Wars : Rogue Squadron 3D on the PC ) is an arcade-style action game co-developed by Factor 5 and LucasArts . The first of three games in the Rogue Squadron series , it was published by LucasArts and Nintendo and released for Microsoft Windows and the Nintendo 64 in December 1998 . Rogue Squadron was one of the first games to take advantage of the Nintendo 64 's Expansion Pak , which allows gameplay at a 640 × 480 display resolution , instead of that system 's standard 320 × 240 resolution . Set in the fictional Star Wars galaxy and inspired by the Star Wars : X-wing Rogue Squadron comics , the game takes place primarily between events in the films Star Wars and The Empire Strikes Back . The player controls Luke Skywalker , commander of the elite X-wing pilots known as Rogue Squadron . As the game progresses , Skywalker and Rogue Squadron fight the Galactic Empire in sixteen missions across various planets . Rogue Squadron received generally positive reviews . Critics praised the game 's technical achievements and flight controls , but its use of distance fog and the lack of a multiplayer mode drew criticism . The game 's sales exceeded expectations ; by August 1999 , more than one million copies had sold worldwide . It spawned two sequels developed and released for the GameCube — Star Wars Rogue Squadron II : Rogue Leader and Star Wars Rogue Squadron III : Rebel Strike — as well as Star Wars : Episode I : Battle for Naboo , a spiritual successor released for Windows and Nintendo 64 .

Unlike the Star Wars : X-Wing computer game series that emphasizes space combat simulation , Rogue Squadron is a fast-paced , arcade-style action game . Each of the game 's sixteen levels introduces mission objectives that must be completed to progress to the next level . These objectives are divided into four categories : search and destroy , reconnaissance , rescue , and protect . Enemy aircraft are primarily composed of TIE fighters . Ground defenses are more varied and include three different walkers , laser and missile turrets , tanks , probe droids , shuttles , stormtroopers and speeder bikes . The heads-up display features a health meter , a radar and an ammunition count for secondary weapons . The player can control five craft : X-wing , A-wing , Y-wing , snowspeeder and V-wing . Each vehicle offers a unique armament arrangement , as well as varying degrees of speed and maneuverability . The game initially restricts the player to a particular craft for each level ; however , after a level is completed , it can be replayed with any available craft . Levels set on non-atmospheric moons expose the player 's craft to space ; thus disallowing the Speeder and V-Wing ( which are repulsorcraft ) from being used ; but as on other levels , the craft is vertically confined . Nine bonus power-ups are hidden in different levels throughout the game . These bonuses improve a craft 's weapons or durability and are applied to each eligible craft for the remainder of the game .

Rogue Squadron includes a number of unlockable secrets . The player can unlock three bonus levels : " Beggar 's Canyon " , " The Death Star Trench Run " and " The Battle of Hoth " . These levels are made available when the player obtains all bronze , silver or gold medals , respectively , on each level . Alternatively , they can be unlocked via password . Unlike the game 's primary levels , the bonus levels are adaptions of events from the Star Wars films . " Beggar 's Canyon " allows the player to reenact the race mentioned in A New Hope , while " The Death Star Trench Run " allows the player to execute an alternate version of the movie 's climactic battle . In the " Battle of Hoth " bonus level , the player can join the Rebel Alliance 's combat against Imperial troops , as depicted in The Empire Strikes Back . Several craft are also available when unlocked . Both the Millennium Falcon and a TIE interceptor are initially present in the craft selection screen . However , neither may be selected until the player enters the correct passwords or achieves all bronze or silver medals , respectively , on the bonus levels . Two other craft can be unlocked , but each is confined to a specific level . One is the T-16 Skyhopper in " Beggar 's Canyon " , and an AT-ST is playable in a basic demonstration level unlocked only via password . A playable model of a 1969 Buick Electra 225 based on a car owned by the game 's sound designer , Rudolph Stember , is also included in the game as an Easter egg .

During Rogue Squadron 's development , Star Wars Episode I : The Phantom Menace — the first new Star Wars film in more than 15 years — was less than one year from its scheduled release date . To take advantage of this marketing opportunity , Factor 5 included content from the upcoming film in Rogue Squadron . LucasFilm provided the developers with design art for the Naboo Starfighter , a ship prominently featured in the new film . These designs were used to create an in-game model . Because the game was scheduled to be released six months before the film , Factor 5 was required to keep the ship 's inclusion a secret . As a result , most of the game 's development team at Factor 5 and LucasArts were not informed of its inclusion . A complex scrambling system was also developed to help hide the ship 's code from gamers using cheat cartridges such as GameShark or Action Replay . More than six months after the release of Rogue Squadron , LucasArts unveiled the code to unlock the Naboo Starfighter as a playable craft . The code has been named the Nintendo 64 's most well-hidden code because of the length of time before its discovery .

Star Wars : Rogue Squadron is set in the fictional Star Wars galaxy , where a war is fought between the Galactic Empire and the Rebel Alliance . The game 's first fifteen levels occur six months after the Battle of Yavin — as depicted in A New Hope — and before the events of The Empire Strikes Back . As the Empire gathers strength for an all-out assault on the rebel forces , Luke Skywalker and Wedge Antilles form Rogue Squadron , a group comprising twelve of the most skilled X-wing pilots from the Rebel Alliance . The sixteenth and final level of the game takes place during Dark Empire , six years after Star Wars Episode VI : Return of the Jedi 's Battle of Endor . The Rebel Alliance has established the New Republic , which now controls three quarters of the galaxy . After the deaths of Emperor Palpatine and Darth Vader , the Galactic Empire collapsed , but was reborn under a mysterious new leader ( who is actually a clone of Palpatine ) . Rogue Squadron , now under the command of Wedge Antilles , continues to fight the Empire to protect the newly formed Republic .

The story is divided into four chapters , each of which starts with an opening crawl resembling those featured in the Star Wars films . Further story details are presented through the game 's instruction manual , pre-mission briefings , character conversations during the game and in-game cut scenes . The game begins with Rogue Squadron briefly encountering the Empire at the Mos Eisley spaceport on Tatooine . The team then executes escort and rescue missions on Barkhesh and Chorax , respectively . The Rebels learn that Imperial officer Crix Madine wishes to defect to the Rebel Alliance . The Empire launches an attack on Corellia , where Madine is stationed , to prevent his departure . Rogue Squadron , with the help of Han Solo and Chewbacca in the Millennium Falcon , fights off the Empire and helps escort Madine safely off the planet . Soon after , Rogue Squadron is joined by Gold Squadron , a group of Y-wings now led by Crix Madine ; they are dispatched to the moon of Gerrard V to aid its quest for independence from the Empire . They encounter the 128th TIE interceptor Squadron and disable Kasan Moor 's TIE . When Rogue Squadron tells Moor that she has been taken prisoner , she offers to defect and provide the Rebel Alliance with Imperial intelligence .

With the help of Kasan Moor 's intelligence , the Alliance launches three consecutive attacks on Imperial bases throughout the galaxy . After an assault on the Imperial Enclave , a facility on Kile II supporting the Empire 's Naval operations , Wedge Antilles is ambushed by a group of TIEs and is taken captive . The Rebel Alliance tracks Wedge to an Imperial prison complex on the planet of Kessel . The remaining members of Rogue Squadron travel to Kessel and rescue him and other Rebel prisoners . With Wedge Antilles free and Rogue Squadron again at full strength , the Rebel Alliance turns its attention to a new Imperial threat — Moff Kohl Seerdon . Seerdon is consolidating Imperial power in preparation for an attack aimed at capturing Thyferra , a planet which produces the healing substance bacta . Rogue Squadron is ordered to disrupt his operation with hit-and-run missions against key targets on Taloraan and Fest . In retaliation , Seerdon attacks and holds a city on the planet of Chandrila hostage . Rogue Squadron and the Alliance strike back by initiating a Kasan Moor-engineered raid on an Imperial base located inside a volcano on Sullust . While still on Sullust , however , General Rieekan informs the Squadron that Moff Seerdon has used their raid as a diversion and begun his attack on Thyferra . With Seerdon in control of the planet 's bacta and their own supply threatened , Rogue Squadron quickly reaches Thyferra , kills Seerdon and frees the planet .

After the success of Star Wars : Shadows of the Empire on the Nintendo 64 in 1996 , LucasArts began planning a follow-up . At the time , Factor 5 was developing a game engine to create large terrain maps . LucasArts , pleased with earlier collaborations with the company , decided to use Factor 5 's engine for its new game . The game 's focus would be space combat ; this direction was inspired by a level of Shadows of the Empire in which the player flies a snowspeeder during the Battle of Hoth . Rogue Squadron and Factor 5 production manager Brett Tosti stated , " That whole scene was actually the genesis for Rogue Squadron because everybody said , ' Why don 't you do a whole game like that ? ' So we did . " Factor 5 initially pitched a concept to allow gamers to play through missions similar to the fans ' favorite action sequences from the Star Wars films . This proposal was rejected , however . At that time , LucasFilm was not comfortable with video games drawing directly from the films . During the early stages of development , the designers at LucasArts were inspired by Rogue Squadron and later Star Wars : X-wing Rogue Squadron , a series of books and comic books set during the years of the original film trilogy . They began developing the story and gameplay with a similar setting that would include characters from the films participating in new , original missions using Factor 5 's terrain map engine as the base . In May 1998 , a demo of the game was displayed at E3 , but the game was so incomplete at the time that Tosti considered it a tech demo . It rendered a basic heightmap and an immobile AT-AT model , while TIE fighters lacking artificial intelligence flew and fired in a predetermined path . When " playing " the demo for audiences , Tosti followed a very specific flight path of his own to give the illusion that he was actually battling with the TIEs . Despite the demo 's barebones presentation , response from gamers was largely positive .

Factor 5 appealed to Nintendo to use the Nintendo 64 's newly developed memory Expansion Pak . Nintendo was reluctant , expecting the technology to be reserved solely for hardware peripherals . However , after Iguana Entertainment used the Expansion Pak to achieve a higher display resolution for Turok 2 : Seeds of Evil , Factor 5 was given the green light . The Expansion Pak is used to increase Rogue Squadron 's N64 resolution from 320 × 240 to 640 × 480 . LucasFilm was hesitant to grant access to the Star Wars library of sound effects for the game 's sound designer , Rudolph Stember . As a compromise , the company provided Stember with sounds sampled at the relatively low rate of 22 kHz , half the standard rate . Stember objected , claiming that the clips sounded worse than effects he had lifted from VHS tapes for a previous Star Wars project . The game includes voice work from several notable persons , including screen actors Olivia Hussey and Raphael Sbarge as well as voice actors Bob Bergen , Neil Ross and Terence McGovern . Instead of using Nintendo 's default sound drivers , Factor 5 developed its own tool called MOsys FX Surround . The Factor 5 drivers use Nintendo 64 processors , but tax them less ; advanced compression techniques were also employed . As a result , the game includes over 80 minutes of high-quality stereo sound .

Many reviews compared Star Wars : Rogue Squadron to one of its inspirations , the Battle of Hoth flight combat level in Star Wars : Shadows of the Empire , considered one of that game 's best elements . GamePro remarked that Rogue Squadron " enhanced the flight model with true pitch , roll , and bank mechanics " . IGN praised its inclusion of " upgrades , more enemies , better sound , and stunning second-generation graphics " . The Nintendo 64 version received mostly positive reviews , and received an aggregate score of 85 percent from both GameRankings and Metacritic . GamePro named it one of the best games released in 1998 . In a 2008 retrospective , IGN 's Levi Buchanan stated that the game revived the Star Wars license on consoles through well-paced gameplay , a story tied into the Star Wars canon and visuals that made it " one of the generation 's top stunners " . The game 's technical aspects were singled out for acclaim . Its visuals were called " respectable " in the standard resolution , but highly praised in high-resolution mode ( achieved via the Nintendo 64 's Expansion Pak ) . GameSpot remarked that in a higher resolution , " [ the ] textures of the landscapes , the ships , the lighting effects — everything looks so much better , " while IGN 's Peer Schneider said , " After playing the game in the optional high resolution mode ( 640 × 480 ) once , it 's impossible to go back to the still respectable standard resolution . " Citing details such as decals , Rebel markings , R2 units , cockpit views and exhaust flames , Schneider described the game 's 3D ship models as " gorgeous " . IGN 's Matt Casamassina said that the game was the best-looking Nintendo 64 game to date .

Reviewers also praised the game 's sound design . Powered by the new Factor 5 audio drivers , Rogue Squadron features about 40 minutes of speech and 40 minutes of music . GameSpot 's Ryan Mac Donald believed that the game 's inclusion of extended voice work helped create a " movie-like " atmosphere . IGN noted that in addition to being technically impressive , the game 's Dolby Pro Logic surround sound was an important gameplay element . The audio signals helped players determine enemy positions and direction of travel . IGN awarded the game three sound awards , including Sound Effects , Best Voice and Best Overall Sound of 1998 on the Nintendo 64 . Some reviewers complained about aspects of the game 's visuals ; critics disliked the heavy reliance on distance fog . Another common criticism of the game was the lack of multiplayer modes . GamePro 's review called the omission a " serious , unforgivable sin " ; Schneider believed that while adding these modes would have extended Rogue Squadron 's replay value , the game was still enjoyable for its medal reward system and large number of secrets and unlockables . Although nearly identical , the game 's PC version garnered lower review scores than its Nintendo 64 counterpart , with an aggregated GameRankings score of 80 percent . This version enjoyed many of the same praises for its gameplay , but handling and graphics were cited as problematic . Directly comparing the two versions , AllGame 's Brad Cook wrote that PC version 's handling is more difficult than the N64 version . He believed the PC 's " choppy " feel made it difficult to target enemies . In contrast to its opinion of the N64 version , IGN 's PC review was not enthusiastic about the game 's visuals . IGN staff remarked that Rogue Squadron 's " graphics and special effects aren 't spectacular " and that they had " seen better graphics " on the PC .

When Rogue Squadron was released in early December 1998 , the title 's Nintendo 64 incarnation was the second-highest-selling video game for the first half of the month ( behind Nintendo 's The Legend of Zelda : Ocarina of Time ) and the holiday season . Delayed until after Christmas in the United Kingdom , the game was released mid-January and debuted as the second-best-selling game of the month , ahead of Ocarina of Time . In August 1999 , Nintendo added the title to its best-selling Player 's Choice collection , while the PC version was re-released as a part of the LucasArts Archive Series in May 2001 . Rogue Squadron 's retail success was not anticipated by the game 's producer Julian Eggebrecht , who said that the game sold " about 100 times better than anybody expected " . The Nintendo 64 version sold over 1 million copies in the United States , and over 44,000 in Japan .

HMS Glatton and her sister ship Gorgon were originally built as coastal defence ships for the Royal Norwegian Navy , as Bjørgvin and Nidaros respectively . She was requisitioned from Norway at the beginning of World War I , but was not completed until 1918 although she had been launched over three years earlier . On 16 September 1918 , before she had even gone into action , she suffered a large fire in one of her 6-inch magazines , and had to be scuttled to prevent an explosion of her main magazines that would have devastated Dover . Her wreck was partially salvaged in 1926 , and moved into a position in the northeastern end of the harbour where it would not obstruct traffic . It was subsequently buried by landfill underneath the current car ferry terminal .

Bjørgvin was ordered by Norway in 1913 to supplement the older Eidsvold class and Tordenskjold class classes of coastal defense ships . She would have been known in Norway as P / S Bjørgvin ; P / S stands for Panserskip ( " armoured ship " ) , while Bjørgvin was the old name for the Norwegian city of Bergen . However , when World War I broke out , the Royal Navy requisitioned most warships under construction in Britain for foreign powers and refunded the two-thirds of Bjørgvin 's £ 370,000 purchase price already paid by the Norwegians .

Bjørgvin was laid down by Armstrong Whitworth at Elswick on 26 May 1913 and launched on 8 August 1914 . She was renamed Glatton after an earlier breastwork monitor of 1871 . Her completion was greatly delayed by the modifications made by the British , which included modifying the boilers to use both oil and coal and conversion of 12 double-bottom tanks to carry the oil . This work began on 9 January 1915 , but was suspended the following May , when it was estimated that only another 10 – 12 months of work remained , to allow for faster progress to be made on the large light cruisers Furious and Courageous that were building in Armstrong 's Naval Yard downriver . In September 1917 , work was resumed to a new design that added a large anti-torpedo bulge along about 75 % of the hull 's length , suppression of the torpedo tubes and 100-millimetre ( 3.9 in ) guns planned by the Norwegians , and a large tripod mast was to be fitted behind the single funnel to carry the directors for both the 6-inch ( 152 mm ) and 9.2-inch ( 234 mm ) guns . Both of these guns had to be relined to use standard British ammunition and the mount for the 9.2-inch gun was modified to give a maximum elevation of 40 ° which gave the gun a maximum range of 39,000 yards ( 36,000 m ) . Addition of the bulges cost 2 knots ( 3.7 km / h ; 2.3 mph ) in speed , but prevented the extra weight resulting from all of these changes from deepening her draft . She was finally completed on 8 September 1918 .

Glatton displaced 5,746 long tons ( 5,838 t ) at deep load as built , with a length of 310 ft ( 94 m ) , a beam of 73 feet 7 inches ( 22.4 m ) at maximum , although her main hull only had a beam of 55 feet ( 16.8 m ) and a draught of 16 feet 4 inches ( 5.0 m ) . She was powered by two vertical triple expansion steam engines , which developed a total of 4,000 indicated horsepower ( 3,000 kW ) from four Yarrow watertube boilers and gave a maximum speed of 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . She was armed with two 9.2-inch guns arranged in two single-gun turrets , one each fore and aft . Her secondary armament consisted of four six-inch guns , also in single-gun turrets , two of which superfired over the 9.2-inch turrets . The other two were positioned on each side of the superstructure . One 3 in ( 76 mm ) anti-aircraft gun was mounted on each center-line 6-inch turret . She also carried four 3-pounder and two 2-pounder guns on high-angle mounts .

After completion , Glatton sailed for Dover on 11 September 1918 to prepare for the offensive planned for later that month . At 6 : 15 on the evening of 16 September , Glatton 's midships 6-inch magazine had a low-order explosion that ignited the cordite stored there . Flames shot through the roof of ' Q ' turret , starboard midside , and started to spread aft . The ship 's captain — Commander N. W. Diggle — ordered the forward magazines flooded , but the crew were unable to flood the rear magazines as the flames blocked access to the magazine flooding controls . The presence of the ammunition ship Gransha only 150 yards ( 140 m ) away risked a massive explosion that would devastate Dover if Glatton 's rear magazine exploded and set off Gransha 's ammunition . Vice-Admiral Keyes — who had been walking with Commander Diggle when Glatton 's magazine exploded — boarded the recently arrived destroyer Cossack once apprised of the danger . He ordered Cossack to torpedo Glatton in an attempt to flood the magazine before it detonated . Cossack 's first 18-inch ( 460 mm ) torpedo struck the anti-torpedo bulge amidships , but failed to explode because it had been fired too close to Glatton . Her second torpedo blew a hole in Glatton at 7 : 40 , but the torpedo 's 200-pound ( 91 kg ) warhead was too small to penetrate through her bulge and Glatton remained afloat , still burning . Keyes transferred to the destroyer Myngs and ordered her to fire on Glatton with her 21-inch ( 530 mm ) torpedoes at 8 : 15 . They were aimed at the hole blown in Glatton 's starboard side by Cossack 's second torpedo and succeeded in causing Glatton to capsize until her masts and superstructure rested on the harbour bottom and dousing the fire . Casualties were heavy : 60 men were killed outright and 124 were injured of whom 19 later died of their burns .

A Court of Enquiry held immediately afterwards found that the explosion had occurred in the midships 6-inch magazine situated between the boiler and engine rooms . The cause was more difficult to establish , but the Court did note that the stokers were in the habit of piling the red-hot clinker and ashes from the boilers against the bulkhead directly adjoining the magazine to cool down before they were sent up the ash ejector . The magazine was well insulated with 5 inches ( 13 cm ) of cork , covered by wood planking .75 inches ( 1.9 cm ) thick and provided with special cooling equipment so it was not likely that the cordite had spontaneously combusted . The magazine of Glatton 's sister ship Gorgon was emptied and examined . The red lead paint on the bulkhead was blistered beneath the lagging and tests at the National Physical Laboratory demonstrated that it had been subject to temperatures of at least 400 ° F ( 204 ° C ) . Recorded temperatures inside the magazine did not exceed 83 ° F ( 28 ° C ) and a test of red-hot ashes was inconclusive as the temperature in the lagging only reached 70 ° F ( 21 ° C ) with occasional hot spots of 150 ° F ( 66 ° C ) . Other tests did reveal that the cork could give off flammable fumes under high heat and pressurized air . While not entirely satisfied with this conclusion it found in April 1919 that " The slow combustion of the cork lagging of the 6-inch midship magazine of the Glatton led to the ignition of the magazine and then to the ignition of the cordite in it and so caused the explosion . "

As a precaution , Gorgon 's lagging was stripped out and replaced with silicate wool , revealing the real cause . Part of the cork was missing and folded newspapers were found in the empty space which were left there by the dockyard workers during construction . Furthermore , a number of rivets were entirely missing which meant that 0.5 inches ( 12.7 mm ) holes were present , which could have allowed the hot ashes to ignite the newspapers . The forced-draught pressure in the boiler room would have supplied air through the rivet holes , causing the cork to give off flammable gases , and eventually ignite the cordite charges .

Glatton remained in Dover Harbour , an obstruction to shipping , with her hull visible at low tide as the Harbour Board could not afford the £ 45,000 quoted on average by salvage companies . Finally they asked the Harbourmaster , Captain John Iron , if he could do it for less . He estimated it would cost about £ 5,000 if he was granted use of the salvage craft already at Dover . The Board accepted his offer and work began in May 1925 . Some 12,000 short tons ( 11,000 t ) of silt were removed from underneath Glatton and her mainmast and superstructure were blasted away from the wreck . Four lifting lighters , with a capacity of 1,000 long tons ( 1,000 t ) , were hired , but they would not suffice to lift a water-logged 5,000 long tons ( 5,100 t ) ship . It was necessary to seal all of the holes on her topside and pump air into each compartment at a rate of 70,000 cubic feet ( 2,000 m3 ) per minute to restore her buoyancy . The first attempt to lift her began on 2 December 1925 and was successful in breaking the suction holding her to the bottom in combination with the rising tide . That was enough for the first try and the major lifting effort began the following day . Slowly she was moved , taking advantage of the tides , until on 16 March 1926 she was moved to a deep gully next to the western pier of the submarine harbour , close by the shore . The total cost was considerably more than originally estimated , but still far less than that quoted by the salvage companies , at no more than £ 12,000 . There she remains , buried by landfill underneath the current car ferry terminal .

Leo Martello ( September 26 , 1931 – June 29 , 2000 ) was a Sicilian-American witch and gay rights activist , and author . He was a founding member of the Strega Tradition of Witchcraft , a form of the modern Pagan new religious movement which drew upon his own Sicilian heritage . During his lifetime he published a number of books on such esoteric subjects as Witchcraft , astrology , and tarot reading . Born to a working-class Italian American family in Dudley , Massachusetts , he was raised Roman Catholic although became interested in esotericism as a teenager . He later claimed that when he was 21 , relatives initiated him into a tradition of witchcraft inherited from their Sicilian ancestors ; this conflicts with other statements that he made , and there is no independent evidence to corroborate his claim . During the 1950s , he was based in New York City , where he worked as a graphologist and hypnotist . After beginning to publish books on paranormal topics in the early 1960s , he publicly began identifying as Wiccan in 1969 , and stated that he was involved in a New York coven .

After the Stonewall riots of 1969 , Martello – himself a gay man – involved himself in gay rights activism , becoming a member of the Gay Liberation Front ( GLF ) . Leaving the GLF following an internal schism , he became a founding member of the Gay Activist Alliance ( GAA ) and authored a regular column , " The Gay Witch " , for its newspaper . In 1970 he founded the Witches International Craft Associates ( WICA ) as a networking organization for Wiccans , and under its auspices organized a " Witch In " that took place in Central Park at Halloween 1970 , despite opposition from the New York City Parks Department . To campaign for the civil rights of Wiccans , he founded the Witches Anti-Defamation League , which was later renamed the Alternative Religions Education Network . In 1973 , he visited England , there being initiated into Gardnerian Wicca by the Gardnerian High Priestess Patricia Crowther . He continued practicing Wicca into the 1990s , when he retreated from public life , eventually succumbing to cancer in 2000 .

Martello was born on September 26 , 1930 , in Dudley , Massachusetts , being raised on a small farm rented by his father , the Italian immigrant Rocco Luigi Martello . Following the economic turmoil of the Great Depression , the Martellos were forced from their land and moved first to Worcester , Massachusetts and then to Southbridge , Massachusetts . It was here that Leo was baptized into the Roman Catholic Church , but his parents divorced soon after . Unable to care for him alone , his father sent Martello to the Catholic boarding preparatory school attached to Assumption College , Worcester , which was run by the Augustinians of the Assumption . He spent six years at the school , later describing it as the unhappiest period of his life . He studied graphology and from the age of 16 began making radio appearances as a graphologist , also writing stories for magazines . Martello later claimed to have experienced psychic phenomena as a child , sparking his interest in occultism . By his early teenage years , he had begun studying palmistry and tarot card reading with a Gypsy named Marta . He also later claimed that his father had informed him that his grandmother , Maria Concetta , had been a psychic known as a Strega Maga ( " Great Witch " ) in her hometown of Enna , Sicily , Italy . According to Martello 's account , Concetta had worked as a folk magician and tarot card reader , and attracted the hatred and envy of the local Catholic clergy . He also related that on one occasion , she had killed a Mafioso using magic when he threatened her husband for not paying protection money . Martello related that when he was 16 , his father told him that he had cousins in New York City who wished to meet him . He proceeded to do so and – according to his account – they informed him that they were initiates of an ancient Italian witchcraft religion , La Vecchia ( " the Old Religion " ) . After identifying his possession of psychic powers , they initiated him into the tradition on his 21st birthday in 1951 , making him swear an oath never to reveal the secrets of the La Vecchia . Moving to the city , he studied at Hunter College and the Institute for Psychotherapy .

Martello never produced any proof to support his claims , and there is no independent evidence that corroborate them . An anonymous woman who had known Martello informed the researcher Michael G. Lloyd that during the 1980s , he had told her that he had never been initiated into a tradition of Witchcraft , and that he had simply embraced occultism in the 1960s in order to earn a living . The Pagan studies scholar Ethan Doyle White expressed criticism of Martello 's claims , noting that it was " extremely doubtful " that a tradition of Wicca could have been passed down through Martello 's Sicilian family . Instead , he suggested that Martello might have been instructed in a tradition of folk magic that he later embellished into a form of Wicca , that the cousins themselves had constructed a form of Wicca that they passed on to Martello , or that the entire scenario had been a fabrication of Martello 's .

Based in New York City , in 1950 Martello founded the American Hypnotism Academy , continuing to direct the organization until 1954 . From 1955 to 1957 , he served as treasurer of the American Graphological Society , and worked as a freelance graphologist for such corporate clients as the Unifonic Corporation of America and the Associated Special Investigators International . He also published a column titled " Your Handwriting Tells " for eight years that ran in the Chelsea Clinton News , and supplied various articles on the subject of graphology to different magazines . In the city , he also began to frequent the gay scene . In 1955 , Martello was awarded a Doctorate in Divinity by a non-accredited organization , the National Congress of Spiritual Consultants , a clearing house for registered yet unaffiliated ministers . That year , he founded the Temple of Spiritual Guidance , taking on the role of Pastor , which he would continue in until 1960 , when he began to focus on his writing and his new philosophy of " psychoselfism " . In 1961 he published his first book , Your Pen Personality , in which he discussed the manner in which handwriting could be used to reveal the personality of the writer . Martello corresponded with California-based Pagan Victor Henry Anderson , and it was at Martello 's encouragement that Anderson established his Mahaelani Coven circa 1960 .

Martello claimed that in the summer of 1964 , he moved to Tangier , Morocco , where he researched the history of the tarot , resulting in the publication of It 's in the Cards ( 1964 ) . Returning to the U.S. in 1965 , he moved in to an apartment in Greenwich Village , New York City , writing a book on astrology , It 's Written in the Stars , and a book on psychic protection , How to Prevent Psychic Blackmail . He also began attending the Spiritualist gatherings that were operated by Clifford Bias at the Ansonia Hotel . At some point High Priestess Lori Bruno founded a witchcraft coven and church , Our Lord and Lady of the Trinacrian Rose , in which Leo was acknowledged as Elder . In 1969 he publicly revealed himself to be a practitioner of Witchcraft ; claiming that he had gained the permission of his coven to do so . Intent on countering the negative publicity that Wicca had been receiving , he published The Weird Ways of Witchcraft in 1969 , the same year that he also published The Hidden World of Hypnotism .

In July 1969 , Martello attended an open meeting of the Mattachine Society 's New York branch . He was appalled at the Society 's negative reaction to the Stonewall riots , and castigated those gay people in the audience who accepted the categorization of homosexuality as a mental illness , accusing them of being self-loathing . He proceeded to publish his thoughts in an essay in which he stated that " homosexuality is not a problem in itself . The problem is society 's attitude towards it . " Those gay rights activists who rejected the Mattachine Society 's approach and who favored a confrontational stance against the police and authorities founded the Gay Liberation Front ( GLF ) , with Martello elected the group 's first moderator . Martello supported the GLF 's stance that condemned " this rotten , dirty , vile , fucked-up capitalist conspiracy " that dominated American society , and he volunteered by producing articles both for the group 's newsletter Come Out ! and for the wider press . He was involved in the GLF 's campaign against The Village Voice 's decision to ban the word " gay " from advertisements ; the magazine preferred the term " homophile " , which had also been used by the Mattachine Society . Wanting to break from previous gay liberation organizations , the GLF embraced the term " gay " , with Martello dismissing " homophile " as sounding like a nail file for homosexuals .

The GLF was structured around a system of anarchic consensus , which made it difficult for the group to reach conclusions on any issue , and heated arguments became commonplace at its meetings . In November 1969 , the group 's membership voted to provide political and financial support to the Black Panthers , an armed African-American leftist group . This was heavily controversial among the GLF , given the homophobic nature of the Black Panthers , and resulted in a walk-out of many senior members , including Martello , Arthur Evans , Arthur Bell , Lige Clarke , and Jack Nichols . That month , Martello was invited to a private meeting of these disaffected GLF members which resulted in the formation of the Gay Activist Alliance ( GAA ) . Although continuing the GLF 's emphasis on taking a confrontational approach to conventional American society and authority , the group was more tightly organized and structured , and focused exclusively on attaining equal rights for gay and lesbian people . The businessman Al Goldstein agreed to invest $ 25,000 in the GAA 's new venture , a newspaper written by , and aimed at , the country 's gay community . It was launched in December 1969 as GAY , and it soon gained a readership of 25,000 . Martello contributed a regular column known as " The Gay Witch " , reaching his widest audience to date , also authoring a variety of other articles that appeared in it .

In 1970 , Martello founded the Witches International Craft Associates ( WICA ) , through which he issued The WICA Newsletter , set up to explain what Witchcraft and Wicca was to the wider public and to serve as a resource through which occultists could contact one another . In April 1970 he appeared on the WNEW-TV Channel 5 documentary series Helluva Town , performing Witchcraft rites with several assistants in Central Park . That year saw one of New York 's first substantial gatherings of occultists , the Festival of Occult Arts , as well as the first Earth Day celebration and the first Christopher Street Gay Liberation Day parade . These events inspired Martello 's desire to hold a public Witchcraft Sabbat celebration . Acting under the auspices of WICA , in late summer he approached the New York City Parks Department asking for permission to hold a " Witch-In " in Sheep Meadow , at the south end of Central Park , on October 31 , 1970 . The Department refused , and when Martello stated that the Witchcraft community would gather there regardless in their capacity as private individuals , he was threatened with police action . Martello gained the legal assistance of the New York Civil Liberties Union ( NYCLU ) , who informed the Parks Department that they were in breach of the First Amendment . The Department subsequently reversed their decision , and the event went ahead .

Inspired by his victory over the Parks Department , Martello founded an organization devoted to campaigning for the religious rights of Witches , the Witches Anti-Defamation League ( WADL ) , which would eventually be renamed the Alternative Religions Education Network ( AREN ) . For WADL , he authored an essay titled " The Witch Manifesto " , likely influenced by Carl Wittman 's " Refugees from Amerika : A Gay Manifesto " ( 1970 ) , which demanded that the Roman Catholic Church face a tribunal for crimes committed against accused witches in the Early Modern period and that they pay reparations to the modern Witchcraft community for those actions . During this decade he authored a column for Gnostica magazine which was titled " Wicca Basket " , a pun on the phonetic similarity between " Wicca " and " wicker " . In 1971 , a young gay Wiccan named Eddie Buczynski contacted Martello , and requested initiation . Due to Buczynski 's inexperience in the religion , Martello turned him down , although developed a friendship with him . Martello introduced Buczynski both to other covens who might initiate him , and to Herman Slater , who would become his long-time partner . Slater was ill with various medical complications , and on one occasion was rehabilitating at the New York University Medical Center when Martello performed a healing ritual on him with the assistance of Buczynski . Martello would come to be known as a regular at The Warlock Shop , an occult store opened by Slater in New York . Through The WICA Newsletter , Martello had met Lady Gwen Thompson , the founder of the New England Covens of Traditionalist Witches ( NECTW ) , and decided to introduce Buczynski to her , resulting in Buczynski 's initiation into the tradition in Spring 1972 . Martello and Thompson later fell out , with some unconfirmed accounts claiming that it was because he lent her money and she did not pay him back . In October 1972 , Buczynski founded his own tradition of Wicca , termed Welsh Traditionalist Witchcraft , with Martello becoming an early initiate and taking on the name of " Nemesis " within that tradition . In turn , Martello welcomed Buczynski into his La Vecchia tradition , and initiated him through its three degree system .

In November 1972 , Martello lectured at the first Friends of the Craft conference , held at New York 's First Unitarian Church . In April 1973 , he moved to England for six months , where he was initiated and trained in the three degrees of Gardnerian Wicca by the Sheffield coven run by Patricia Crowther and her husband Arnold Crowther . He continued to encourage acceptance of homosexuality within the Pagan and Witchcraft community , authoring an article titled " The Gay Pagan " for Green Egg magazine . He expressed the view that homophobic Wiccans were " sexually insecure " and that they viewed the religion simply as " a ritual means of fornication " . He was also among the prominent male Pagans to endorse feminist and female-only variants of Wicca , such as the Dianic Wicca promoted by Zsuzsanna Budapest .

Lloyd described Martello as " a lanky , hungry scrapper with piercing eyes , the face of a dark angel , and a mouth like a bear trap " , while in her encyclopaedia on Wicca , Rosemary Ellen Guiley described him as " a colourful figure , known for his humor " . Bruno described him as " a loving man , yet sometimes caustic " , stating that to know him " was an honor , and ever a challenge " . He was often noted for his scruffy appearance , with him typically wearing second-hand clothes .

Martello defended the growing rise of feminists in Wicca during the 1970s , criticizing what he deemed as the continual repression of women within the Pagan movement . He also espoused the view that any Pagan who was involved in the U.S. government or military was a hypocrite . He was critical of Wiccans who espoused a division between white magic and black magic , commenting that it had racial overtones and that many of those advocating such a view were racist . Although aware that historians had criticized the witch-cult hypothesis of Margaret Murray , Martello stood by her claims , believing that the cult had been passed through oral tradition and thus evaded appearing in the textual sources studied by historians . Martello thought it unimportant that many Wiccans had lied about the origins of their beliefs , being quoted by Pagan journalist Margot Adler in her book Drawing Down the Moon as having stated " Let 's assume that many people lied about their lineage . Let 's further assume that there are no covens on the current scene that have any historical basis . The fact remains : they do exist now . And they can claim a spiritual lineage going back thousands of years . All of our pre-Judeo-Christian or Moslem ancestors were Pagans ! "

Tropical Storm Julio was a tropical storm that made landfall on the southern tip of Baja California Sur in August 2008 . The tenth named storm of the 2008 Pacific hurricane season , it developed from a tropical wave on August 23 off the coast of Mexico . It moved parallel to the coast , reaching peak winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) before moving ashore and weakening . On August 26 it dissipated in the Gulf of California . Julio was the third tropical cyclone to make landfall in the Pacific Ocean basin during the season , after Tropical Storm Alma , which struck Nicaragua in May , and Tropical Depression Five-E , which moved ashore along southwestern Mexico in July . The storm brought locally heavy rainfall to southern Baja California , killing one person and leaving several towns isolated . Moisture from Julio reached Arizona , producing thunderstorms , including one which damaged ten small planes in Chandler .

On August 20 , a tropical wave became discernible about 800 miles ( 1300 km ) off the coast of Mexico , which in the next day developed a large area of convection , or thunderstorms . Initially , conditions were unfavorable for development , due to strong upper-level wind shear . Tracking northwestward parallel to the Mexican coast , the system became better organized on August 22 , though later that day its structure deteriorated . On August 23 , a strong area of convection developed and persisted near a circulation center , despite strong wind shear . With banding features becoming more prominent , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) classified the system as Tropical Depression Eleven-E about 345 miles ( 555 km ) south-southeast of the southern tip of the Baja California Peninsula . The tropical depression initially moved northwestward around the southwestern periphery of a ridge over Mexico . Convection continued to develop to the west of the center , and late on August 23 , a ship report confirmed the depression intensified Tropical Storm Julio . Initially , the persistent shear left the center partially exposed from the thunderstorm activity , though upper level conditions gradually became more favorable for strengthening . On August 24 , Tropical Storm Julio attained peak winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) as intense convection developed near the center . Shortly thereafter , the center became difficult to locate , and late on August 24 the storm moved ashore along the southwestern coast of the Baja California Peninsula .

Shortly before it was named , the government of Mexico issued a tropical storm watch in the state of Baja California Sur , from Santa Fe on the Pacific coast around the peninsula to Buenavista along the Gulf of California . About 24 hours prior to landfall , the watch was replaced with a warning from Santa Fe to San Evaristo , and the tropical storm watch was extended along both sides of the peninsula . Prior to it making landfall , more than 2,500 families in susceptible areas left their homes . Officials opened several shelters in the area where the storm struck . As Julio made landfall , it produced lightning and locally heavy rainfall , which left more than a dozen communities isolated due to flooding . The flooding damaged several houses and killed two people . Winds were generally light , although strong enough to damage a few electrical poles and small buildings . In nearby Sinaloa , rainfall from the storm led to an emergency evacuation of 500 residents . Moisture from Julio developed thunderstorms across Arizona , including one near Chandler which produced winds of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) ; the storm damaged ten small planes at Chandler Municipal Airport , as well as a hangar . The damages at the airport were estimated at $ 1 million ( USD ) . The storms also dropped heavy rainfall , reaching over 1 inch ( 25 mm ) in Gilbert , which caused flooding on Interstate 17 .

The Hubble Space Telescope ( HST ) is a space telescope that was launched into low Earth orbit in 1990 , and remains in operation . Although not the first space telescope , Hubble is one of the largest and most versatile , and is well known as both a vital research tool and a public relations boon for astronomy . The HST is named after the astronomer Edwin Hubble , and is one of NASA 's Great Observatories , along with the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory , the Chandra X-ray Observatory , and the Spitzer Space Telescope . With a 2.4-meter ( 7.9 ft ) mirror , Hubble 's four main instruments observe in the near ultraviolet , visible , and near infrared spectra . Hubble 's orbit outside the distortion of Earth 's atmosphere allows it to take extremely high-resolution images , with substantially lower background light than ground-based telescopes . Hubble has recorded some of the most detailed visible-light images ever , allowing a deep view into space and time . Many Hubble observations have led to breakthroughs in astrophysics , such as accurately determining the rate of expansion of the universe . The HST was built by the United States space agency NASA , with contributions from the European Space Agency . The Space Telescope Science Institute ( STScI ) selects Hubble 's targets and processes the resulting data , while the Goddard Space Flight Center controls the spacecraft .

Space telescopes were proposed as early as 1923 . Hubble was funded in the 1970s , with a proposed launch in 1983 , but the project was beset by technical delays , budget problems , and the Challenger disaster ( 1986 ) . When finally launched in 1990 , Hubble 's main mirror was found to have been ground incorrectly , compromising the telescope 's capabilities . The optics were corrected to their intended quality by a servicing mission in 1993 . Hubble is the only telescope designed to be serviced in space by astronauts . After launch by Space Shuttle Discovery in 1990 , four subsequent Space Shuttle missions repaired , upgraded , and replaced systems on the telescope . A fifth mission was canceled on safety grounds following the Columbia disaster ( 2003 ) . However , after spirited public discussion , NASA administrator Mike Griffin approved one final servicing mission , completed in 2009 . The telescope is operating as of 2016 , and could last until 2030 – 2040 . Its scientific successor , the James Webb Space Telescope ( JWST ) , is scheduled for launch in 2018 .

In 1923 , Hermann Oberth — considered a father of modern rocketry , along with Robert H. Goddard and Konstantin Tsiolkovsky — published Die Rakete zu den Planetenräumen ( " The Rocket into Planetary Space " ) , which mentioned how a telescope could be propelled into Earth orbit by a rocket . The history of the Hubble Space Telescope can be traced back as far as 1946 , to the astronomer Lyman Spitzer 's paper " Astronomical advantages of an extraterrestrial observatory " . In it , he discussed the two main advantages that a space-based observatory would have over ground-based telescopes . First , the angular resolution ( the smallest separation at which objects can be clearly distinguished ) would be limited only by diffraction , rather than by the turbulence in the atmosphere , which causes stars to twinkle , known to astronomers as seeing . At that time ground-based telescopes were limited to resolutions of 0.5 – 1.0 arcseconds , compared to a theoretical diffraction-limited resolution of about 0.05 arcsec for a telescope with a mirror 2.5 m in diameter . Second , a space-based telescope could observe infrared and ultraviolet light , which are strongly absorbed by the atmosphere .

Spitzer devoted much of his career to pushing for the development of a space telescope . In 1962 , a report by the US National Academy of Sciences recommended the development of a space telescope as part of the space program , and in 1965 Spitzer was appointed as head of a committee given the task of defining scientific objectives for a large space telescope . Space-based astronomy had begun on a very small scale following World War II , as scientists made use of developments that had taken place in rocket technology . The first ultraviolet spectrum of the Sun was obtained in 1946 , and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration ( NASA ) launched the Orbiting Solar Observatory ( OSO ) to obtain UV , X-ray , and gamma-ray spectra in 1962 . An orbiting solar telescope was launched in 1962 by the United Kingdom as part of the Ariel space program , and in 1966 NASA launched the first Orbiting Astronomical Observatory ( OAO ) mission . OAO-1 's battery failed after three days , terminating the mission . It was followed by OAO-2 , which carried out ultraviolet observations of stars and galaxies from its launch in 1968 until 1972 , well beyond its original planned lifetime of one year .

The OSO and OAO missions demonstrated the important role space-based observations could play in astronomy , and in 1968 , NASA developed firm plans for a space-based reflecting telescope with a mirror 3 m in diameter , known provisionally as the Large Orbiting Telescope or Large Space Telescope ( LST ) , with a launch slated for 1979 . These plans emphasized the need for manned maintenance missions to the telescope to ensure such a costly program had a lengthy working life , and the concurrent development of plans for the reusable space shuttle indicated that the technology to allow this was soon to become available .

The continuing success of the OAO program encouraged increasingly strong consensus within the astronomical community that the LST should be a major goal . In 1970 , NASA established two committees , one to plan the engineering side of the space telescope project , and the other to determine the scientific goals of the mission . Once these had been established , the next hurdle for NASA was to obtain funding for the instrument , which would be far more costly than any Earth-based telescope . The U.S. Congress questioned many aspects of the proposed budget for the telescope and forced cuts in the budget for the planning stages , which at the time consisted of very detailed studies of potential instruments and hardware for the telescope . In 1974 , public spending cuts led to Congress deleting all funding for the telescope project . In response to this , a nationwide lobbying effort was coordinated among astronomers . Many astronomers met congressmen and senators in person , and large scale letter-writing campaigns were organized . The National Academy of Sciences published a report emphasizing the need for a space telescope , and eventually the Senate agreed to half of the budget that had originally been approved by Congress .

The funding issues led to something of a reduction in the scale of the project , with the proposed mirror diameter reduced from 3 m to 2.4 m , both to cut costs and to allow a more compact and effective configuration for the telescope hardware . A proposed precursor 1.5 m space telescope to test the systems to be used on the main satellite was dropped , and budgetary concerns also prompted collaboration with the European Space Agency . ESA agreed to provide funding and supply one of the first generation instruments for the telescope , as well as the solar cells that would power it , and staff to work on the telescope in the United States , in return for European astronomers being guaranteed at least 15 % of the observing time on the telescope . Congress eventually approved funding of US $ 36 million for 1978 , and the design of the LST began in earnest , aiming for a launch date of 1983 . In 1983 the telescope was named after Edwin Hubble , who made one of the greatest scientific breakthroughs of the 20th century when he discovered that the universe is expanding .

Once the Space Telescope project had been given the go-ahead , work on the program was divided among many institutions . Marshall Space Flight Center ( MSFC ) was given responsibility for the design , development , and construction of the telescope , while Goddard Space Flight Center was given overall control of the scientific instruments and ground-control center for the mission . MSFC commissioned the optics company Perkin-Elmer to design and build the Optical Telescope Assembly ( OTA ) and Fine Guidance Sensors for the space telescope . Lockheed was commissioned to construct and integrate the spacecraft in which the telescope would be housed .

Optically , the HST is a Cassegrain reflector of Ritchey – Chrétien design , as are most large professional telescopes . This design , with two hyperbolic mirrors , is known for good imaging performance over a wide field of view , with the disadvantage that the mirrors have shapes that are hard to fabricate and test . The mirror and optical systems of the telescope determine the final performance , and they were designed to exacting specifications . Optical telescopes typically have mirrors polished to an accuracy of about a tenth of the wavelength of visible light , but the Space Telescope was to be used for observations from the visible through the ultraviolet ( shorter wavelengths ) and was specified to be diffraction limited to take full advantage of the space environment . Therefore , its mirror needed to be polished to an accuracy of 10 nanometers , or about 1 / 65 of the wavelength of red light . On the long wavelength end , the OTA was not designed with optimum IR performance in mind — for example , the mirrors are kept at stable ( and warm , about 15 ° C ) temperatures by heaters . This limits Hubble 's performance as an infrared telescope .

Perkin-Elmer intended to use custom-built and extremely sophisticated computer-controlled polishing machines to grind the mirror to the required shape . However , in case their cutting-edge technology ran into difficulties , NASA demanded that PE sub-contract to Kodak to construct a back-up mirror using traditional mirror-polishing techniques . ( The team of Kodak and Itek also bid on the original mirror polishing work . Their bid called for the two companies to double-check each other 's work , which would have almost certainly caught the polishing error that later caused such problems . ) The Kodak mirror is now on permanent display at the National Air and Space Museum . An Itek mirror built as part of the effort is now used in the 2.4 m telescope at the Magdalena Ridge Observatory . Construction of the Perkin-Elmer mirror began in 1979 , starting with a blank manufactured by Corning from their ultra-low expansion glass . To keep the mirror 's weight to a minimum it consisted of top and bottom plates , each one inch ( 25.4 mm ) thick , sandwiching a honeycomb lattice . Perkin-Elmer simulated microgravity by supporting the mirror from the back with 130 rods that exerted varying amounts of force . This ensured that the mirror 's final shape would be correct and to specification when finally deployed . Mirror polishing continued until May 1981 . NASA reports at the time questioned Perkin-Elmer 's managerial structure , and the polishing began to slip behind schedule and over budget . To save money , NASA halted work on the back-up mirror and put the launch date of the telescope back to October 1984 . The mirror was completed by the end of 1981 ; it was washed using 2,400 gallons ( 9,100 L ) of hot , deionized water and then received a reflective coating of 65 nm-thick aluminum and a protective coating of 25 nm-thick magnesium fluoride .

Doubts continued to be expressed about Perkin-Elmer 's competence on a project of this importance , as their budget and timescale for producing the rest of the OTA continued to inflate . In response to a schedule described as " unsettled and changing daily " , NASA postponed the launch date of the telescope until April 1985 . Perkin-Elmer 's schedules continued to slip at a rate of about one month per quarter , and at times delays reached one day for each day of work . NASA was forced to postpone the launch date until March and then September 1986 . By this time , the total project budget had risen to US $ 1.175 billion .

The spacecraft in which the telescope and instruments were to be housed was another major engineering challenge . It would have to withstand frequent passages from direct sunlight into the darkness of Earth 's shadow , which would cause major changes in temperature , while being stable enough to allow extremely accurate pointing of the telescope . A shroud of multi-layer insulation keeps the temperature within the telescope stable , and surrounds a light aluminum shell in which the telescope and instruments sit . Within the shell , a graphite-epoxy frame keeps the working parts of the telescope firmly aligned . Because graphite composites are hygroscopic , there was a risk that water vapor absorbed by the truss while in Lockheed 's clean room would later be expressed in the vacuum of space ; resulting in the telescope 's instruments being covered by ice . To reduce that risk , a nitrogen gas purge was performed before launching the telescope into space . While construction of the spacecraft in which the telescope and instruments would be housed proceeded somewhat more smoothly than the construction of the OTA , Lockheed still experienced some budget and schedule slippage , and by the summer of 1985 , construction of the spacecraft was 30 % over budget and three months behind schedule . An MSFC report said that Lockheed tended to rely on NASA directions rather than take their own initiative in the construction .

The two initial , primary computers on the HST were the 1.25 MHz DF-224 system , built by Rockwell Autonetics , which contained three redundant CPUs , and two redundant NSSC-1 ( NASA Standard Spacecraft Computer , Model 1 ) systems , developed by Westinghouse and GSFC using diode-transistor logic ( DTL ) . A co-processor for the DF-224 was added during Servicing Mission 1 in 1993 , which consisted of two redundant strings of an Intel-based 80386 processor with an 80387 math co-processor . The DF-224 and its 386 co-processor were replaced by a 25 MHz Intel-based 80486 processor system during Servicing Mission 3A in 1999 . Additionally , some of the science instruments and components had their own embedded microprocessor-based control systems . The MATs ( Multiple Access Transponder ) components , MAT-1 and MAT-2 , utilize Hughes Aircraft CDP1802CD microprocessors . The Wide Field and Planetary Camera ( WFPC ) also utilized an RCA 1802 microprocessor ( or possibly the older 1801 version ) . The WFPC-1 was replaced by the WFPC-2 during Servicing Mission 1 in 1993 , which was then replaced by the Wide Field Camera 3 ( WFC3 ) during Servicing Mission 4 in 2009 .

When launched , the HST carried five scientific instruments : the Wide Field and Planetary Camera ( WF / PC ) , Goddard High Resolution Spectrograph ( GHRS ) , High Speed Photometer ( HSP ) , Faint Object Camera ( FOC ) and the Faint Object Spectrograph ( FOS ) . WF / PC was a high-resolution imaging device primarily intended for optical observations . It was built by NASA 's Jet Propulsion Laboratory , and incorporated a set of 48 filters isolating spectral lines of particular astrophysical interest . The instrument contained eight charge-coupled device ( CCD ) chips divided between two cameras , each using four CCDs . Each CCD has a resolution of 0.64 megapixels . The " wide field camera " ( WFC ) covered a large angular field at the expense of resolution , while the " planetary camera " ( PC ) took images at a longer effective focal length than the WF chips , giving it a greater magnification . The GHRS was a spectrograph designed to operate in the ultraviolet . It was built by the Goddard Space Flight Center and could achieve a spectral resolution of 90,000 . Also optimized for ultraviolet observations were the FOC and FOS , which were capable of the highest spatial resolution of any instruments on Hubble . Rather than CCDs these three instruments used photon-counting digicons as their detectors . The FOC was constructed by ESA , while the University of California , San Diego , and Martin Marietta Corporation built the FOS .

The final instrument was the HSP , designed and built at the University of Wisconsin – Madison . It was optimized for visible and ultraviolet light observations of variable stars and other astronomical objects varying in brightness . It could take up to 100,000 measurements per second with a photometric accuracy of about 2 % or better . HST 's guidance system can also be used as a scientific instrument . Its three Fine Guidance Sensors ( FGS ) are primarily used to keep the telescope accurately pointed during an observation , but can also be used to carry out extremely accurate astrometry ; measurements accurate to within 0.0003 arcseconds have been achieved .

The Space Telescope Science Institute ( STScI ) is responsible for the scientific operation of the telescope and the delivery of data products to astronomers . STScI is operated by the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy ( AURA ) and is physically located in Baltimore , Maryland on the Homewood campus of Johns Hopkins University , one of the 39 US universities and seven international affiliates that make up the AURA consortium . STScI was established in 1981 after something of a power struggle between NASA and the scientific community at large . NASA had wanted to keep this function in-house , but scientists wanted it to be based in an academic establishment . The Space Telescope European Coordinating Facility ( ST-ECF ) , established at Garching bei München near Munich in 1984 , provided similar support for European astronomers until 2011 , when these activities were moved to the European Space Astronomy Centre . One rather complex task that falls to STScI is scheduling observations for the telescope . Hubble is in a low-Earth orbit to enable servicing missions , but this means that most astronomical targets are occulted by the Earth for slightly less than half of each orbit . Observations cannot take place when the telescope passes through the South Atlantic Anomaly due to elevated radiation levels , and there are also sizable exclusion zones around the Sun ( precluding observations of Mercury ) , Moon and Earth . The solar avoidance angle is about 50 ° , to keep sunlight from illuminating any part of the OTA . Earth and Moon avoidance keeps bright light out of the FGSs , and keeps scattered light from entering the instruments . If the FGSs are turned off , however , the Moon and Earth can be observed . Earth observations were used very early in the program to generate flat-fields for the WFPC1 instrument . There is a so-called continuous viewing zone ( CVZ ) , at roughly 90 ° to the plane of Hubble 's orbit , in which targets are not occulted for long periods . Due to the precession of the orbit , the location of the CVZ moves slowly over a period of eight weeks . Because the limb of the Earth is always within about 30 ° of regions within the CVZ , the brightness of scattered earthshine may be elevated for long periods during CVZ observations .

Hubble orbits in the upper atmosphere at an altitude of approximately 569 kilometers ( 354 mi ) and an inclination of 28.5 ° . The position along its orbit changes over time in a way that is not accurately predictable . The density of the upper atmosphere varies according to many factors , and this means that Hubble 's predicted position for six weeks ' time could be in error by up to 4,000 km ( 2,500 mi ) . Observation schedules are typically finalized only a few days in advance , as a longer lead time would mean there was a chance that the target would be unobservable by the time it was due to be observed . Engineering support for HST is provided by NASA and contractor personnel at the Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt , Maryland , 48 km ( 30 mi ) south of the STScI . Hubble 's operation is monitored 24 hours per day by four teams of flight controllers who make up Hubble 's Flight Operations Team .

By early 1986 , the planned launch date of October that year looked feasible , but the Challenger accident brought the U.S. space program to a halt , grounding the Space Shuttle fleet and forcing the launch of Hubble to be postponed for several years . The telescope had to be kept in a clean room , powered up and purged with nitrogen , until a launch could be rescheduled . This costly situation ( about $ 6 million per month ) pushed the overall costs of the project even higher . This delay did allow time for engineers to perform extensive tests , swap out a possibly failure-prone battery , and make other improvements . Furthermore , the ground software needed to control Hubble was not ready in 1986 , and in fact was barely ready by the 1990 launch . Eventually , following the resumption of shuttle flights in 1988 , the launch of the telescope was scheduled for 1990 . On April 24 , 1990 , shuttle mission STS-31 saw Discovery launch the telescope successfully into its planned orbit . From its original total cost estimate of about US $ 400 million , the telescope had by now cost over $ 2.5 billion to construct . Hubble 's cumulative costs were estimated to be about US $ 10 billion in 2010 , twenty years after launch .

Within weeks of the launch of the telescope , the returned images indicated a serious problem with the optical system . Although the first images appeared to be sharper than those of ground-based telescopes , Hubble failed to achieve a final sharp focus and the best image quality obtained was drastically lower than expected . Images of point sources spread out over a radius of more than one arcsecond , instead of having a point spread function ( PSF ) concentrated within a circle 0.1 arcsec in diameter as had been specified in the design criteria . Analysis of the flawed images showed that the cause of the problem was that the primary mirror had been ground to the wrong shape . Although it was probably the most precisely figured mirror ever made , with variations from the prescribed curve of only 10 nanometers , at the perimeter it was too flat by about 2,200 nanometers ( 2.2 micrometers ) . This difference was catastrophic , introducing severe spherical aberration , a flaw in which light reflecting off the edge of a mirror focuses on a different point from the light reflecting off its center . The effect of the mirror flaw on scientific observations depended on the particular observation — the core of the aberrated PSF was sharp enough to permit high-resolution observations of bright objects , and spectroscopy of point sources was only affected through a sensitivity loss . However , the loss of light to the large , out of focus halo severely reduced the usefulness of the telescope for faint objects or high-contrast imaging . This meant that nearly all of the cosmological programs were essentially impossible , since they required observation of exceptionally faint objects . NASA and the telescope became the butt of many jokes , and the project was popularly regarded as a white elephant . For instance , in the 1991 comedy The Naked Gun 2 ½ : The Smell of Fear , Hubble was pictured with the Titanic , the Hindenburg , and the Edsel . Nonetheless , during the first three years of the Hubble mission , before the optical corrections , the telescope still carried out a large number of productive observations of less demanding targets . The error was well characterized and stable , enabling astronomers to partially compensate for the defective mirror by using sophisticated image processing techniques such as deconvolution .

A commission headed by Lew Allen , director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory , was established to determine how the error could have arisen . The Allen Commission found that the main null corrector , a testing device used to achieve a properly shaped non-spherical mirror , had been incorrectly assembled — one lens was out of position by 1.3 mm . During the initial grinding and polishing of the mirror , Perkin-Elmer analyzed its surface with two conventional null correctors . However , for the final manufacturing step ( figuring ) , they switched to a custom-built null corrector , designed explicitly to meet very strict tolerances . The incorrect assembly of the device resulted in the mirror being ground very precisely but to the wrong shape . There was one later opportunity to catch the error , since for technical reasons a few of the final tests needed to use the two conventional null correctors . These tests correctly reported spherical aberration , but were dismissed since the reflective null corrector was considered more accurate . The commission blamed the failings primarily on Perkin-Elmer . Relations between NASA and the optics company had been severely strained during the telescope construction , due to frequent schedule slippage and cost overruns . NASA found that Perkin-Elmer did not review or supervise the mirror construction adequately , did not assign its best optical scientists to the project ( as it had for the prototype ) , and in particular did not involve the optical designers in the construction and verification of the mirror . While the commission heavily criticized Perkin-Elmer for these managerial failings , NASA was also criticized for not picking up on the quality control shortcomings , such as relying totally on test results from a single instrument .

The design of the telescope had always incorporated servicing missions , and astronomers immediately began to seek potential solutions to the problem that could be applied at the first servicing mission , scheduled for 1993 . While Kodak had ground a back-up mirror for Hubble , it would have been impossible to replace the mirror in orbit , and too expensive and time-consuming to bring the telescope back to Earth for a refit . Instead , the fact that the mirror had been ground so precisely to the wrong shape led to the design of new optical components with exactly the same error but in the opposite sense , to be added to the telescope at the servicing mission , effectively acting as " spectacles " to correct the spherical aberration . The first step was a precise characterization of the error in the main mirror . Working backwards from images of point sources , astronomers determined that the conic constant of the mirror as built was − 1.01390 ± 0.0002 , instead of the intended − 1.00230 . The same number was also derived by analyzing the null corrector used by Perkin-Elmer to figure the mirror , as well as by analyzing interferograms obtained during ground testing of the mirror .

Because of the way the HST 's instruments were designed , two different sets of correctors were required . The design of the Wide Field and Planetary Camera 2 , already planned to replace the existing WF / PC , included relay mirrors to direct light onto the four separate charge-coupled device ( CCD ) chips making up its two cameras . An inverse error built into their surfaces could completely cancel the aberration of the primary . However , the other instruments lacked any intermediate surfaces that could be figured in this way , and so required an external correction device . The Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement ( COSTAR ) system was designed to correct the spherical aberration for light focused at the FOC , FOS , and GHRS . It consists of two mirrors in the light path with one ground to correct the aberration . To fit the COSTAR system onto the telescope , one of the other instruments had to be removed , and astronomers selected the High Speed Photometer to be sacrificed . By 2002 , all of the original instruments requiring COSTAR had been replaced by instruments with their own corrective optics . COSTAR was removed and returned to Earth in 2009 where it is exhibited at the National Air and Space Museum . The area previously used by COSTAR is now occupied by the Cosmic Origins Spectrograph .

Hubble was designed to accommodate regular servicing and equipment upgrades . Five servicing missions ( SM 1 , 2 , 3A , 3B , and 4 ) were flown by NASA space shuttles , the first in December 1993 and the last in May 2009 . Servicing missions were delicate operations that began with maneuvering to intercept the telescope in orbit and carefully retrieving it with the shuttle 's mechanical arm . The necessary work was then carried out in multiple tethered spacewalks over a period of four to five days . After a visual inspection of the telescope , astronauts conducted repairs , replaced failed or degraded components , upgraded equipment , and installed new instruments . Once work was completed , the telescope was redeployed , typically after boosting to a higher orbit to address the orbital decay caused by atmospheric drag .

After the problems with Hubble 's mirror were discovered , the first servicing mission assumed greater importance , as the astronauts would need to do extensive work to install corrective optics . The seven astronauts for the mission were trained to use about a hundred specialized tools . SM1 flew aboard Endeavour in December 1993 , and involved installation of several instruments and other equipment over ten days . Most importantly , the High Speed Photometer was replaced with the COSTAR corrective optics package , and WFPC was replaced with the Wide Field and Planetary Camera 2 ( WFPC2 ) with an internal optical correction system . The solar arrays and their drive electronics were also replaced , as well as four gyroscopes in the telescope pointing system , two electrical control units and other electrical components , and two magnetometers . The onboard computers were upgraded with added coprocessors , and Hubble 's orbit was boosted . On January 13 , 1994 , NASA declared the mission a complete success and showed the first sharper images . At the time , the mission was one of the most complex , involving five long extra-vehicular activity periods . Its success was a boon for NASA , as well as for the astronomers with a more capable space telescope .

Servicing Mission 2 , flown by Discovery in February 1997 , replaced the GHRS and the FOS with the Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph ( STIS ) and the Near Infrared Camera and Multi-Object Spectrometer ( NICMOS ) , replaced an Engineering and Science Tape Recorder with a new Solid State Recorder , and repaired thermal insulation . NICMOS contained a heat sink of solid nitrogen to reduce the thermal noise from the instrument , but shortly after it was installed , an unexpected thermal expansion resulted in part of the heat sink coming into contact with an optical baffle . This led to an increased warming rate for the instrument and reduced its original expected lifetime of 4.5 years to about 2 years .

Servicing Mission 3A , flown by Discovery , took place in December 1999 , and was a split-off from Servicing Mission 3 after three of the six onboard gyroscopes had failed . The fourth failed a few weeks before the mission , rendering the telescope incapable of performing scientific observations . The mission replaced all six gyroscopes , replaced a Fine Guidance Sensor and the computer , installed a Voltage / temperature Improvement Kit ( VIK ) to prevent battery overcharging , and replaced thermal insulation blankets . The new computer is 20 times faster , with six times more memory , than the DF-224 it replaced . It increases throughput by moving some computing tasks from the ground to the spacecraft , and saves money by allowing the use of modern programming languages .

Servicing Mission 3B flown by Columbia in March 2002 saw the installation of a new instrument , with the FOC ( which , except for the Fine Guidance Sensors when used for astrometry , was the last of the original instruments ) being replaced by the Advanced Camera for Surveys ( ACS ) . This meant that COSTAR was no longer required , since all new instruments had built-in correction for the main mirror aberration . The mission also revived NICMOS by installing a closed-cycle cooler and replaced the solar arrays for the second time , providing 30 percent more power .

Plans called for Hubble to be serviced in February 2005 , but the Columbia disaster in 2003 , in which the orbiter disintegrated on re-entry into the atmosphere , had wide-ranging effects on the Hubble program . NASA Administrator Sean O 'Keefe decided that all future shuttle missions had to be able to reach the safe haven of the International Space Station should in-flight problems develop . As no shuttles were capable of reaching both HST and the ISS during the same mission , future manned service missions were canceled . This decision was assailed by numerous astronomers , who felt that Hubble was valuable enough to merit the human risk . HST 's planned successor , the James Webb Telescope ( JWST ) , is not expected to launch until at least 2018 . A gap in space-observing capabilities between a decommissioning of Hubble and the commissioning of a successor is of major concern to many astronomers , given the significant scientific impact of HST . The consideration that JWST will not be located in low Earth orbit , and therefore cannot be easily upgraded or repaired in the event of an early failure , only makes these concerns more acute . On the other hand , many astronomers felt strongly that the servicing of Hubble should not take place if the expense were to come from the JWST budget .

In January 2004 , O 'Keefe said he would review his decision to cancel the final servicing mission to HST due to public outcry and requests from Congress for NASA to look for a way to save it . The National Academy of Sciences convened an official panel , which recommended in July 2004 that the HST should be preserved despite the apparent risks . Their report urged " NASA should take no actions that would preclude a space shuttle servicing mission to the Hubble Space Telescope " . In August 2004 , O 'Keefe asked Goddard Space Flight Center to prepare a detailed proposal for a robotic service mission . These plans were later canceled , the robotic mission being described as " not feasible " . In late 2004 , several Congressional members , led by Senator Barbara Mikulski , held public hearings and carried on a fight with much public support ( including thousands of letters from school children across the country ) to get the Bush Administration and NASA to reconsider the decision to drop plans for a Hubble rescue mission . The nomination in April 2005 of a new NASA Administrator with an engineering rather than accounting background , Michael D. Griffin , changed the situation , as Griffin stated he would consider a manned servicing mission . Soon after his appointment Griffin authorized Goddard to proceed with preparations for a manned Hubble maintenance flight , saying he would make the final decision after the next two shuttle missions . In October 2006 Griffin gave the final go-ahead , and the 11-day mission by Atlantis was scheduled for October 2008 . Hubble 's main data-handling unit failed in September 2008 , halting all reporting of scientific data until its back-up was brought online on October 25 , 2008 . Since a failure of the backup unit would leave the HST helpless , the service mission was postponed to incorporate a replacement for the primary unit .

Servicing Mission 4 , flown by Atlantis in May 2009 , was the last scheduled shuttle mission for HST . SM4 installed the replacement data-handling unit , repaired the ACS and STIS systems , installed improved nickel hydrogen batteries , and replaced other components . SM4 also installed two new observation instruments — Wide Field Camera 3 ( WFC3 ) and the Cosmic Origins Spectrograph ( COS ) — and the Soft Capture and Rendezvous System , which will enable the future rendezvous , capture , and safe disposal of Hubble by either a crewed or robotic mission . Except for the High Resolution Channel of the ACS which was unable to be repaired , the work accomplished during SM4 rendered the telescope fully functional , and it remains so as of 2015 .

In an August 2013 press release , CANDELS was referred to as " the largest project in the history of Hubble " . The survey " aims to explore galactic evolution in the early Universe , and the very first seeds of cosmic structure at less than one billion years after the Big Bang . " The CANDELS project site describes the survey 's goals as the following : The Cosmic Assembly Near-IR Deep Extragalactic Legacy Survey is designed to document the ﬁrst third of galactic evolution from z = 8 to 1.5 via deep imaging of more than 250,000 galaxies with WFC3 / IR and ACS . It will also find the first Type Ia SNe beyond z > 1.5 and establish their accuracy as standard candles for cosmology . Five premier multi-wavelength sky regions are selected ; each has multi-wavelength data from Spitzer and other facilities , and has extensive spectroscopy of the brighter galaxies . The use of ﬁve widely separated ﬁelds mitigates cosmic variance and yields statistically robust and complete samples of galaxies down to 109 solar masses out to z ~ 8 .

The program , officially named " Hubble Deep Fields Initiative 2012 " , is aimed to advance the knowledge of early galaxy formation by studying high-redshift galaxies in blank fields with the help of gravitational lensing to see the " faintest galaxies in the distant universe . " The Frontier Fields web page describes the goals of the program being : to reveal hitherto inaccessible populations of z = 5 – 10 galaxies that are 10 to 50 times fainter intrinsically than any presently known to solidify our understanding of the stellar masses and star formation histories of sub-L * galaxies at the earliest times to provide the first statistically meaningful morphological characterization of star forming galaxies at z > 5 to find z > 8 galaxies stretched out enough by cluster lensing to discern internal structure and / or magnified enough by cluster lensing for spectroscopic follow-up .

Anyone can apply for time on the telescope ; there are no restrictions on nationality or academic affiliation , but funding for analysis is only available to US institutions . Competition for time on the telescope is intense , with about one-fifth of the proposals submitted in each cycle earning time on the schedule . Calls for proposals are issued roughly annually , with time allocated for a cycle lasting about one year . Proposals are divided into several categories ; " general observer " proposals are the most common , covering routine observations . " Snapshot observations " are those in which targets require only 45 minutes or less of telescope time , including overheads such as acquiring the target . Snapshot observations are used to fill in gaps in the telescope schedule that cannot be filled by regular GO programs . Astronomers may make " Target of Opportunity " proposals , in which observations are scheduled if a transient event covered by the proposal occurs during the scheduling cycle . In addition , up to 10 % of the telescope time is designated " director 's discretionary " ( DD ) time . Astronomers can apply to use DD time at any time of year , and it is typically awarded for study of unexpected transient phenomena such as supernovae .

The first director of STScI , Riccardo Giacconi , announced in 1986 that he intended to devote some of his director discretionary time to allowing amateur astronomers to use the telescope . The total time to be allocated was only a few hours per cycle but excited great interest among amateur astronomers . Proposals for amateur time were stringently reviewed by a committee of amateur astronomers , and time was awarded only to proposals that were deemed to have genuine scientific merit , did not duplicate proposals made by professionals , and required the unique capabilities of the space telescope . Thirteen amateur astronomers were awarded time on the telescope , with observations being carried out between 1990 and 1997 . One such study was " Transition Comets — UV Search for OH " . The very first proposal , " A Hubble Space Telescope Study of Posteclipse Brightening and Albedo Changes on Io " , was published in Icarus , a journal devoted to solar system studies . A second study from another group of amateurs was also published in Icarus . After that time , however , budget reductions at STScI made the support of work by amateur astronomers untenable , and no additional amateur programs have been carried out .

In the early 1980s , NASA and STScI convened four panels to discuss Key Projects . These were projects that were both scientifically important and would require significant telescope time , which would be explicitly dedicated to each project . This guaranteed that these particular projects would be completed early , in case the telescope failed sooner than expected . The panels identified three such projects : 1 ) a study of the nearby intergalactic medium using quasar absorption lines to determine the properties of the intergalactic medium and the gaseous content of galaxies and groups of galaxies ; 2 ) a medium deep survey using the Wide Field Camera to take data whenever one of the other instruments was being used and 3 ) a project to determine the Hubble Constant within ten percent by reducing the errors , both external and internal , in the calibration of the distance scale .

Hubble has helped resolve some long-standing problems in astronomy , as well as raising new questions . Some results have required new theories to explain them . Among its primary mission targets was to measure distances to Cepheid variable stars more accurately than ever before , and thus constrain the value of the Hubble constant , the measure of the rate at which the universe is expanding , which is also related to its age . Before the launch of HST , estimates of the Hubble constant typically had errors of up to 50 % , but Hubble measurements of Cepheid variables in the Virgo Cluster and other distant galaxy clusters provided a measured value with an accuracy of ± 10 % , which is consistent with other more accurate measurements made since Hubble 's launch using other techniques . The estimated age is now about 13.7 billion years , but before the Hubble Telescope scientists predicted an age ranging from 10 to 20 billion years . While Hubble helped to refine estimates of the age of the universe , it also cast doubt on theories about its future . Astronomers from the High-z Supernova Search Team and the Supernova Cosmology Project used ground-based telescopes and HST to observe distant supernovae and uncovered evidence that , far from decelerating under the influence of gravity , the expansion of the universe may in fact be accelerating . The cause of this acceleration remains poorly understood ; the most common cause attributed is dark energy .

The high-resolution spectra and images provided by the HST have been especially well-suited to establishing the prevalence of black holes in the nuclei of nearby galaxies . While it had been hypothesized in the early 1960s that black holes would be found at the centers of some galaxies , and astronomers in the 1980s identified a number of good black hole candidates , work conducted with Hubble shows that black holes are probably common to the centers of all galaxies . The Hubble programs further established that the masses of the nuclear black holes and properties of the galaxies are closely related . The legacy of the Hubble programs on black holes in galaxies is thus to demonstrate a deep connection between galaxies and their central black holes . The collision of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 with Jupiter in 1994 was fortuitously timed for astronomers , coming just a few months after Servicing Mission 1 had restored Hubble 's optical performance . Hubble images of the planet were sharper than any taken since the passage of Voyager 2 in 1979 , and were crucial in studying the dynamics of the collision of a comet with Jupiter , an event believed to occur once every few centuries .

Other discoveries made with Hubble data include proto-planetary disks ( proplyds ) in the Orion Nebula ; evidence for the presence of extrasolar planets around Sun-like stars ; and the optical counterparts of the still-mysterious gamma ray bursts . HST has also been used to study objects in the outer reaches of the Solar System , including the dwarf planets Pluto and Eris . A unique window on the Universe enabled by Hubble are the Hubble Deep Field , Hubble Ultra-Deep Field , and Hubble Extreme Deep Field images , which used Hubble 's unmatched sensitivity at visible wavelengths to create images of small patches of sky that are the deepest ever obtained at optical wavelengths . The images reveal galaxies billions of light years away , and have generated a wealth of scientific papers , providing a new window on the early Universe . The Wide Field Camera 3 improved the view of these fields in the infrared and ultraviolet , supporting the discovery of some of the most distant objects yet discovered , such as MACS0647-JD . The non-standard object SCP 06F6 was discovered by the Hubble Space Telescope in February 2006 . During June and July 2012 , US astronomers using Hubble discovered a tiny fifth moon moving around icy Pluto .

In March 2015 , researchers announced that measurements of aurorae around Ganymede revealed that the moon has a subsurface ocean . Using Hubble to study the motion of its aurorae , the researchers determined that a large saltwater ocean was helping to suppress the interaction between Jupiter 's magnetic field and that of Ganymede . The ocean is estimated to be 100 km ( 60 mi ) deep , trapped beneath a 150 km ( 90 mi ) ice crust . On December 11 , 2015 , Hubble captured an image of the first-ever predicted reappearance of a supernova , dubbed " Refsdal " , which was calculated using different mass models of a galaxy cluster whose gravity is warping the supernova 's light . The supernova was previously seen in November 2014 behind galaxy cluster MACS J1149.5 + 2223 as part of Hubble 's Frontier Fields program . Astronomers spotted four separate images of the supernova in an arrangement known as an Einstein Cross . The light from the cluster has taken about five billion years to reach Earth , though the supernova exploded some 10 billion years ago . The detection of Refsdal 's reappearance served as a unique opportunity for astronomers to test their models of how mass , especially dark matter , is distributed within this galaxy cluster .

Many objective measures show the positive impact of Hubble data on astronomy . Over 9,000 papers based on Hubble data have been published in peer-reviewed journals , and countless more have appeared in conference proceedings . Looking at papers several years after their publication , about one-third of all astronomy papers have no citations , while only 2 % of papers based on Hubble data have no citations . On average , a paper based on Hubble data receives about twice as many citations as papers based on non-Hubble data . Of the 200 papers published each year that receive the most citations , about 10 % are based on Hubble data . Although the HST has clearly helped astronomical research , its financial cost has been large . A study on the relative astronomical benefits of different sizes of telescopes found that while papers based on HST data generate 15 times as many citations as a 4 m ( 13 ft ) ground-based telescope such as the William Herschel Telescope , the HST costs about 100 times as much to build and maintain . Deciding between building ground- versus space-based telescopes is complex . Even before Hubble was launched , specialized ground-based techniques such as aperture masking interferometry had obtained higher-resolution optical and infrared images than Hubble would achieve , though restricted to targets about 108 times brighter than the faintest targets observed by Hubble . Since then , advances in adaptive optics have extended the high-resolution imaging capabilities of ground-based telescopes to the infrared imaging of faint objects . The usefulness of adaptive optics versus HST observations depends strongly on the particular details of the research questions being asked . In the visible bands , adaptive optics can only correct a relatively small field of view , whereas HST can conduct high-resolution optical imaging over a wide field . Only a small fraction of astronomical objects are accessible to high-resolution ground-based imaging ; in contrast Hubble can perform high-resolution observations of any part of the night sky , and on objects that are extremely faint .

Hubble data was initially stored on the spacecraft . When launched , the storage facilities were old-fashioned reel-to-reel tape recorders , but these were replaced by solid state data storage facilities during servicing missions 2 and 3A . About twice daily , the Hubble Space Telescope radios data to a satellite in the geosynchronous Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System ( TDRSS ) , which then downlinks the science data to one of two 60-foot ( 18-meter ) diameter high-gain microwave antennas located at the White Sands Test Facility in White Sands , New Mexico . From there they are sent to the Space Telescope Operations Control Center at Goddard Space Flight Center , and finally to the Space Telescope Science Institute for archiving . Each week , HST downlinks approximately 140 gigabytes of data .

All Hubble data is eventually made available via the Mikulski Archive for Space Telescopes at STScI , CADC and ESA / ESAC . Data is usually proprietary — available only to the principal investigator ( PI ) and astronomers designated by the PI — for one year after being taken . The PI can apply to the director of the STScI to extend or reduce the proprietary period in some circumstances . Observations made on Director 's Discretionary Time are exempt from the proprietary period , and are released to the public immediately . Calibration data such as flat fields and dark frames are also publicly available straight away . All data in the archive is in the FITS format , which is suitable for astronomical analysis but not for public use . The Hubble Heritage Project processes and releases to the public a small selection of the most striking images in JPEG and TIFF formats .

Astronomical data taken with CCDs must undergo several calibration steps before they are suitable for astronomical analysis . STScI has developed sophisticated software that automatically calibrates data when they are requested from the archive using the best calibration files available . This ' on-the-fly ' processing means that large data requests can take a day or more to be processed and returned . The process by which data are calibrated automatically is known as ' pipeline reduction ' , and is increasingly common at major observatories . Astronomers may if they wish retrieve the calibration files themselves and run the pipeline reduction software locally . This may be desirable when calibration files other than those selected automatically need to be used .

It has always been important for the Space Telescope to capture the public 's imagination , given the considerable contribution of taxpayers to its construction and operational costs . After the difficult early years when the faulty mirror severely dented Hubble 's reputation with the public , the first servicing mission allowed its rehabilitation as the corrected optics produced numerous remarkable images . In the United States , outreach efforts are coordinated by the Space Telescope Science Institute ( STScI ) Office for Public Outreach , which was established in 2000 to ensure that U.S. taxpayers saw the benefits of their investment in the space telescope program . To that end , STScI operates the HubbleSite.org website . The Hubble Heritage Project , operating out of the STScI , provides the public with high-quality images of the most interesting and striking objects observed . The Heritage team is composed of amateur and professional astronomers , as well as people with backgrounds outside astronomy , and emphasizes the aesthetic nature of Hubble images . The Heritage Project is granted a small amount of time to observe objects which , for scientific reasons , may not have images taken at enough wavelengths to construct a full-color image .

Since 1999 , the leading Hubble outreach group in Europe has been the Hubble European Space Agency Information Centre ( HEIC ) . This office was established at the Space Telescope European Coordinating Facility in Munich , Germany . HEIC 's mission is to fulfill HST outreach and education tasks for the European Space Agency . The work is centered on the production of news and photo releases that highlight interesting Hubble results and images . These are often European in origin , and so increase awareness of both ESA 's Hubble share ( 15 % ) and the contribution of European scientists to the observatory . ESA produces educational material , including a videocast series called Hubblecast designed to share world-class scientific news with the public . The Hubble Space Telescope has won two Space Achievement Awards from the Space Foundation , for its outreach activities , in 2001 and 2010 . There is a replica of the Hubble Space Telescope on the courthouse lawn in Marshfield , Missouri , the hometown of namesake Edwin P. Hubble .

Past servicing missions have exchanged old instruments for new ones , both avoiding failure and making possible new types of science . Without servicing missions , all of the instruments will eventually fail . In August 2004 , the power system of the Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph ( STIS ) failed , rendering the instrument inoperable . The electronics had originally been fully redundant , but the first set of electronics failed in May 2001 . This power supply was fixed during servicing mission 4 in May 2009 . Similarly , the Advanced Camera for Surveys ( ACS ) main camera primary electronics failed in June 2006 , and the power supply for the backup electronics failed on January 27 , 2007 . Only the instrument 's Solar Blind Channel ( SBC ) was operable using the side-1 electronics . A new power supply for the wide angle channel was added during SM 4 , but quick tests revealed this did not help the high resolution channel . HST uses gyroscopes to stabilize itself in orbit and point accurately and steadily at astronomical targets . Normally , three gyroscopes are required for operation ; observations are still possible with two , but the area of sky that can be viewed would be somewhat restricted , and observations requiring very accurate pointing are more difficult . There are further contingency plans for observations with just one gyro , but if all gyros fail , continued scientific observations will not be possible . In 2005 , it was decided to switch to two-gyroscope mode for regular telescope operations as a means of extending the lifetime of the mission . The switch to this mode was made in August 2005 , leaving Hubble with two gyroscopes in use , two on backup , and two inoperable . One more gyro failed in 2007 . By the time of the final repair mission , during which all six gyros were replaced ( with two new pairs and one refurbished pair ) , only three gyros were still working . Engineers are confident that they have identified the root causes of the gyro failures , and the new models should be much more reliable .

Hubble orbits the Earth in the extremely tenuous upper atmosphere , and over time its orbit decays due to drag . If it is not re-boosted , it will re-enter the Earth 's atmosphere within some decades , with the exact date depending on how active the Sun is and its impact on the upper atmosphere . If Hubble were to descend in a completely uncontrolled re-entry , parts of the main mirror and its support structure would probably survive , leaving the potential for damage or even human fatalities . In 2013 , deputy project manager James Jeletic projected that Hubble could survive into 2020 . Based on solar activity and atmospheric drag , or lack thereof , a natural atmospheric reentry for Hubble will occur between 2030 and 2040 . In June 2016 , NASA extended the service contract for Hubble until June 2021 . NASA 's original plan for safely de-orbiting Hubble was to retrieve it using a space shuttle . Hubble would then have most likely been displayed in the Smithsonian Institution . This is no longer possible since the space shuttle fleet has been retired , and would have been unlikely in any case due to the cost of the mission and risk to the crew . Instead , NASA considered adding an external propulsion module to allow controlled re-entry . Ultimately NASA installed the Soft Capture and Rendezvous System , to enable deorbit by either a crewed or robotic mission .

There is no direct successor to Hubble as an ultraviolet and visible-light space telescope , as near-term space telescopes do not duplicate Hubble 's wavelength coverage ( near-ultraviolet to near-infrared wavelengths ) , instead concentrating on the farther infrared bands . These bands are preferred for studying high redshift and low-temperature objects , objects generally older and farther away in the universe . These wavelengths are also difficult or impossible to study from the ground , justifying the expense of a space-based telescope . Large ground-based telescopes can image some of the same wavelengths as Hubble , sometimes challenge HST in terms of resolution by using adaptive optics ( AO ) , have much larger light-gathering power , and can be upgraded more easily , but cannot yet match Hubble 's excellent resolution over a wide field of view with the very dark background of space . Plans for a Hubble successor materialized as the Next Generation Space Telescope project , which culminated in plans for the James Webb Space Telescope ( JWST ) , the formal successor of Hubble . Very different from a scaled-up Hubble , it is designed to operate colder and farther away from the Earth at the L2 Lagrangian point , where thermal and optical interference from the Earth and Moon are lessened . It is not engineered to be fully serviceable ( such as replaceable instruments ) , but the design includes a docking ring to enable visits from other spacecraft . A main scientific goal of JWST is to observe the most distant objects in the universe , beyond the reach of existing instruments . It is expected to detect stars in the early Universe approximately 280 million years older than stars HST now detects . The telescope is an international collaboration between NASA , the European Space Agency , and the Canadian Space Agency since 1996 , and is planned for launch on an Ariane 5 rocket . Although JWST is primarily an infrared instrument , its coverage extends down to 600 nm wavelength light , or roughly orange in the visible spectrum . A typical human eye can see to about 750 nm wavelength light , so there is some overlap with the longest visible wavelength bands , including orange and red light .

A complementary telescope , looking at even longer wavelengths than Hubble or JWST , was the European Space Agency 's Herschel Space Observatory , launched on May 14 , 2009 . Like JWST , Herschel was not designed to be serviced after launch , and had a mirror substantially larger than Hubble 's , but observed only in the far infrared and submillimeter . It needed helium coolant , of which it ran out on April 29 , 2013 . Further concepts for advanced 21st-century space telescopes include the Advanced Technology Large-Aperture Space Telescope , a conceptualized 8- to 16-meter ( 320- to 640-inch ) optical space telescope that if realized could be a more direct successor to HST , with the ability to observe and photograph astronomical objects in the visible , ultraviolet , and infrared wavelengths , with substantially better resolution than Hubble or the Spitzer Space telescope . This effort is being planned for the 2025 – 2035 time frame . Existing ground-based telescopes , and various proposed Extremely Large Telescopes , can exceed the HST in terms of sheer light-gathering power and diffraction limit due to larger mirrors , but other factors affect telescopes . In some cases , they may be able to match or beat Hubble in resolution by using adaptive optics . However , AO on large ground-based reflectors will not make Hubble and other space telescopes obsolete . Most AO systems sharpen the view over a very narrow field — Lucky Cam , for example , produces crisp images just 10 " to 20 " wide , whereas Hubble 's cameras are super sharp across a 2 ½ ' ( 150 " ) field . Furthermore , space telescopes can study the universe across the entire electromagnetic spectrum , most of which is blocked by Earth 's atmosphere . Finally , the background sky is darker in space than on the ground , because air absorbs solar energy during the day and then releases it at night , producing a faint — but nevertheless discernible — airglow that washes out low-contrast astronomical objects .

The California spiny lobster ( Panulirus interruptus ) is a species of spiny lobster found in the eastern Pacific Ocean from Monterey Bay , California to the Gulf of Tehuantepec , Mexico . It typically grows to a length of 30 cm ( 12 in ) and is a reddish-brown color with stripes along the legs , and has a pair of enlarged antennae but no claws . The interrupted grooves across the tail are characteristic for the species . Females can carry up to 680,000 eggs , which hatch after 10 weeks into flat phyllosoma larvae . These feed on plankton before the metamorphosis into the juvenile state . Adults are nocturnal and migratory , living among rocks at depths of up to 65 m ( 213 ft ) , and feeding on sea urchins , clams , mussels and worms . The spiny lobster is eaten by various fish , octopuses and sea otters , but can defend itself with a loud noise produced by its antennae . The California spiny lobster is the subject of both commercial and recreational fishery in both Mexico and the United States , with sport fishermen using hoop nets and commercial fishermen using lobster traps .

In common with all spiny lobsters , the California spiny lobster has two large , spiny antennae , but no large claws on its legs . The California spiny lobster is one of the largest spiny lobster species , and grows up to 60 centimeters ( 24 in ) long , but does not usually exceed 30 cm ( 12 in ) . Males can weigh up to 7.4 kilograms ( 16 lb ) . , with the record being a 16 lbs . , 1 oz. male caught off Catalina island in 1968 . The upper side of the animal is brownish red , without the paler bands or spots seen in some other spiny lobsters . The legs are a similar color , but with one or more lighter streaks running along their length . Males and females of all ages can be distinguished by the position of the two round genital openings or gonopores . In females , they are at the bases of the third pair of pereiopods , while in males they are at the base of the fifth ( last ) pereiopods , furthest from the head and the closest to the abdomen . Mature females have a small claw on the fifth pereiopod , and enlarged pleopods .

The California spiny lobster is found in parts of the Gulf of California , and along the Pacific coast of the length of the Baja California peninsula , extending as far north as San Luis Obispo Bay , California . There are occasional records from Monterey Bay , but the water there is too cold for the California spiny lobster to breed , and it is thought that any adult found in Central California arrived as a larva during El Niño years . California spiny lobsters live on rocky substrates , at depths of up to 65 meters ( 213 ft ) . Although they can be found in shallow water , including tide pools , they are more frequent in deeper waters . Juveniles generally inhabit rocky habitats at a depth of 0 – 4 m ( 0 – 13 ft ) with dense plant cover , especially the surf grass Phyllospadix torreyi .

California spiny lobsters are nocturnal , hiding in crevices during the day , with only the tips of their long antennae showing , as a means of avoiding predators . Towards dawn , the spiny lobsters form aggregations , which they maintain until dusk . At night , they emerge and feed on sea urchins , clams , mussels and worms . This activity is important in limiting sea urchin populations , and so maintaining healthy seabed communities . Natural predators of the California spiny lobster include bony fish such as the California sheepshead , giant sea bass and cabezone , sharks including the horn shark and leopard shark , octopuses and sea otters . In response to an approaching predator , spiny lobsters including the California spiny lobster can produce a loud noise using the stick-slip phenomenon , akin to a bowed instrument . The bases of the antennae act as a plectrum , which is rubbed over a file on the edge of the antennular plate . If a predator is very close , spiny lobsters will flex their muscular tail in order to escape the predator , backwards . There is an annual migration , in which spiny lobsters enter shallower water in spring and summer , and head out to deeper water in fall and winter , reaching depths as great as 240 ft ( 73 m ) , perhaps to avoid the effects of winter storms .

Female California spiny lobsters reach sexual maturity at a length of 65 – 69 millimeters ( 2.6 – 2.7 in ) , which is typically at an age of 5 – 9 years ; males are sexually mature after 3 – 6 years . Because all the hard parts are lost at each molt , the life span of mature spiny lobsters is uncertain ; they are thought to live for 50 years or more . Spiny lobsters do not have the gonopods ( first pleopods modified for reproduction ) that occur in clawed lobsters and crabs , and females do not have a deep pocket on the sternum in which to store sperm . Instead , a spermatophore is transferred directly from one of the male 's gonopores to the sternum of the female . The male gonopore is , however , adorned with a " penile process " , which is straight and serrated , with a small " hairbrush " . The sternum of mature females has three " windows " on the last three segments , which uniquely among Panulirus species , span both halves of the sternum . These windows are softer than the rest of the exoskeleton , and are thought to help the male locate the correct location to place the tar-like spermatophore .

After mating , the fertilized eggs are carried on the female 's pleopods until they hatch , with between 120,000 and 680,000 carried by a single female . The eggs begin coral red , but darken as they develop to a deep maroon . When she is carrying the eggs , the female is said to be " berried " . The eggs are ready to hatch after 10 weeks , and spawning takes place from May to August , The larvae that hatch ( called phyllosoma larvae ) do not resemble the adults . Instead , they are flat , transparent animals around 14 mm ( 0.55 in ) long , but as thin as a sheet of paper . The larvae feed on plankton , and grow through ten molts into ten further larval stages , the last of which is around 30 – 32 mm ( 1.2 – 1.3 in ) long . The full series of larval molts takes around 7 months , and when the last stage molts , it metamorphoses into the puerulus state , which is a juvenile form of the adult , albeit still transparent . The puerulus larvae settle to the sea floor when the water is near its maximum temperature , which in Baja California is in the fall .

In his original description , John Witt Randall noted that the California spiny lobster is " used as food by the natives " of Upper California . The California spiny lobster is now the most economically important lobster on the American West Coast . Sport fishing may account for up to half the entire catch , while most of the commercial catch comes from lobster traps , with smaller amounts coming from the use of trammel nets or by trawling . The major fishing area is west of Baja California , and imports from Mexico to the United States are twice the amount produced in California .

Recreational fishermen are allowed to catch lobsters with hoop nets or by SCUBA diving or free-diving ; almost all come from California , with only small numbers from other U.S. states . The California Department of Fish and Game estimates that recreational fishers caught more than 200,000 spiny lobsters in the first half of the 2008 / 2009 season , amounting to around 280,000 pounds ( 130,000 kg ) , compared to commercial fishermen , who caught a total of 580,000 lb ( 260,000 kg ) in the same time . The California Department of Fish and Game sets and enforces a number of regulations pertaining to recreational fishing of spiny lobsters : Open season for California spiny lobster runs from the Saturday before the first Wednesday in October until the first Wednesday after March 15 . No implements other than hoop nets may be used ; no one person may have more than 5 nets and no vessel may use more than 10 hoop nets . When fishing from land , each fisherman is limited to two hoop nets . Lobster fishers may not land more than seven California spiny lobsters on any given day , and may not have more than seven in their possession at any time .

Fishers must carry a lobster gauge , and any lobster smaller than the minimum landing size must be returned to the sea immediately . The minimum size is a carapace length of 3 1 ⁄ 4 inches ( 82.6 mm ) , measured along the midline from the rear of the eye socket between the horns , to the end of the carapace . This is equivalent to a total body length of 20 centimeters or 7.9 inches . To fish for spiny lobster south of Point Arguello , a sport fishing license with ocean enhancement stamp must be displayed or kept nearby . A report card for the season must be bought , filled in and returned before April 30 after the season ends .

The open season for commercial fishing begins on the first Wednesday in October and runs until the first Wednesday after the 15th of March . Commercial fishermen may use individually buoyed traps , but may not dive for lobsters . For those using lobster traps , the fishing effort is greatest at the beginning of the permitted season in California , and peters out towards the end of the season , 24 weeks later . Although the fishing effort becomes better concentrated on areas with more spiny lobsters during the season , the fishing efficiency ( catch per unit effort ) nonetheless decreases throughout the season .

In Mexico , spiny lobsters are an important commercial resource , representing the fifth most valuable fishery , worth US $ 18 million . Three species are exploited along the Pacific coast of the Baja California peninsula , but the catch of 744 t of the California spiny lobster makes up 95 % – 97 % of the total , with only small quantities of Panulirus inflatus and Panulirus gracilis . The fishing rights are held by 26 local co-operatives . The main legal restrictions on fishing for California spiny lobster in Mexico are a minimum landing size of 82.5 mm ( 3.25 in ) , the prohibition of catching berried females , and a closed season : from February 16 to November 15 , fishing for spiny lobsters is prohibited in a region which moves south along Mexico 's Pacific coast during the season . The Mexican fishery for the California spiny lobster was the first Latin American fishery to be awarded the Marine Stewardship Council 's sustainable fishery ecolabel , and the species is classed as Least Concern on the IUCN Red List .

Panulirus interruptus is called the California spiny lobster by the Food and Agriculture Organization , but a number of other local , vernacular names exist , including California lobster , California marine crayfish , and red lobster in the United States , and langosta colorada and langosta roja in Mexico . The preferred common name of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service is simply spiny lobster . John Witt Randall described the species in the Journal of the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia in 1840 , based on material given to him by Thomas Nuttall . The exact locality is not known , being given only as " Upper California " , but the most likely sources are the places where Nuttall was most active , namely Santa Barbara and San Diego . The specific epithet interruptus refers to the grooves on the abdominal tergites , which are interrupted in this species . Although originally placed in the genus Palinurus , the California spiny lobster was later transferred to Adam White 's new genus Panulirus , together with other spiny lobsters that have long flagella on their first antennae .

The California spiny lobster is one of 19 species in the genus Panulirus , which is one of several genera of spiny lobsters whose names are anagrams of the original spiny lobster genus , Palinurus . Its closest relatives are not the other species that occur in the East Pacific , but rather Panulirus argus from the Caribbean Sea and West Pacific species such as Panulirus japonicus , Panulirus marginatus , Panulirus pascuensis , Panulirus cygnus and Panulirus longipes ; this relationship has been recovered from comparative studies of adult and larval morphology , as well as from molecular phylogenetics , using the sequences from cytochrome c oxidase and 16S ribosomal RNA genes . The California spiny lobster can be differentiated from the other species in the genus by the interrupted grooves across the abdomen ; other species either lack grooves , or have grooves which span the entire body segment .

Hybrid Theory is the debut album by the American rock band Linkin Park , released on October 24 , 2000 through Warner Bros. Records . The album was a commercial success , having been certified Diamond for sales of over 11 million units in the United States alone as of 2010 , peaking at number two on the Billboard 200 , and also reaching high positions on other charts worldwide . Recorded at NRG Recordings in North Hollywood , California , and produced by Don Gilmore , the album 's lyrical themes deal with problems lead vocalist Chester Bennington experienced during his adolescence , including drug abuse and the constant fighting and divorce of his parents . Hybrid Theory takes its title from the previous name of the band as well as the concept of music theory and combining different styles . Four singles were released from the album : " One Step Closer " , " Crawling " , " Papercut " , and " In the End " , all of them being responsible for launching Linkin Park into mainstream popularity . While " In the End " was the most successful of the four , all of the singles in the album remain some of the band 's most successful songs to date . Although " Runaway " , " Points of Authority " , and " My December " from the special edition bonus disc album were not released as singles , they were minor hits on alternative rock radio stations thanks to the success of all of the band 's singles and the album . At the 2002 Grammy Awards , Hybrid Theory was nominated for Best Rock Album . The album is listed in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . It was ranked # 11 on Billboard 's Hot 200 Albums of the Decade . A special edition of Hybrid Theory was released March 11 , 2002 , a year and a half after its original pressing . Hybrid Theory has sold over 28 million copies worldwide , which makes it the best selling debut album of the 2000s . Linkin Park performed the album in its entirety for the first time at the Download Festival on June 14 , 2014 .

Linkin Park was founded in 1996 as the rap rock band , Xero : lead guitarist Brad Delson , vocalist and rhythm guitarist Mike Shinoda , drummer Rob Bourdon , turntablist Joe Hahn , lead vocalist Mark Wakefield and bassist Dave Farrell ( who was not with the band during this point to tour with Tasty Snax ) . In 1999 , after Wakefield 's departure , lead vocalist Chester Bennington joined the five members Xero and the band was renamed to Linkin Park . Bennington 's previous band , Grey Daze , had recently disbanded , so his lawyer recommended him to Jeff Blue , vice president of A & R coordination for Zomba , who at the time was seeking a lead vocalist for Xero . Blue sent Bennington two tapes of Xero 's unreleased recordings — one with vocals by former Xero member Mark Wakefield , and the other with only the instrumental tracks — asking for his " interpretation of the songs " . Bennington wrote and recorded new vocals over the instrumentals and sent the tapes back to Blue . As Delson recalls , " [ Bennington ] really was kind of the final piece of the puzzle [ ... ] We didn 't see anything close to his talent in anybody else . " After Bennington joined , the group first renamed itself to Hybrid Theory and released a self-titled EP . Legal complications with Welsh electronic music group Hybrid prompted a second name change , thus deciding on " Linkin Park " . Throughout 1999 , Linkin Park was a regular act at the Los Angeles club , The Whisky .

The music that would ultimately become the Hybrid Theory album was first produced by Linkin Park in 1999 as a nine-track demo tape . The band sent this tape to various recording companies and played forty-two different showcases for recording industry representatives , including performances for Los Angeles promoter and impresario , Mike Galaxy 's showcase at The Gig on melrose . However , they were initially turned down by most of the major labels and several independent record labels . The band was signed by Warner Bros. Records in 1999 , due in large part to the constant recommendations of Jeff Blue , who had joined the label after resigning from Zomba . Despite initial difficulties in finding a producer willing to take charge of the debut album of a newly signed band , Don Gilmore ultimately agreed to head up the project , with Andy Wallace hired as the mixer . Recording sessions , which mostly involved re-recording the songs off the demo tape , began at NRG Recordings in North Hollywood , California in early 2000 and lasted four weeks . Shinoda 's rapping sections in most of the songs were significantly altered from the original , while most choruses remained largely unchanged . Due to the absence of Dave Farrell and Kyle Christener , who took part in the 1999 extended play , the band hired Scott Koziol and Ian Hornbeck as stand-in bassists ; Delson also played bass throughout most of the album . The Dust Brothers provided additional beats for the track “ With You ” .

The music of Hybrid Theory draws from diverse inspirations . Bennington 's singing style is influenced by acts such as Depeche Mode and Stone Temple Pilots , while the riffs and playing techniques of guitarist Brad Delson are modeled after Deftones , Guns N ' Roses , U2 , and The Smiths . Mike Shinoda 's rapping , present in seven tracks , is very close to The Roots ' style . The lyrical content of the songs primarily touches upon the problems that Bennington encountered during his childhood , including child abuse , constant and excessive drug and alcohol abuse , the divorce of his parents , isolation , disappointments , and the aftermath feelings of failed relationships . Stylistically , the album has been described as nu metal , rap metal and alternative metal . The album eventually produced four singles . " One Step Closer " , the album 's second track and first single , was gradually recorded in increments after Linkin Park struggled with " Runaway " , and features a guitar riff and electronic percussion in the introduction transitioning into a bridge with distortion-heavy guitars and aggressive drums . It is also infamous for the " Shut up when I 'm talkin ' to you ! " refrain screamed by Bennington one minute and 48 seconds into the song . The music video for " One Step Closer " was shot in a Los Angeles subway and became an instant hit , eventually receiving heavy rotation on MTV and other music television networks . Stand-in bassist Scott Koziol is shown performing with the band in the video .

The second single was " Crawling " . Lyrically , the song focuses on Bennington 's personal experiences with child abuse — the physical violence , the difficulty in breaking the cycle of abuse , and the subsequent loss of self-esteem . This concept is echoed in the music video , in which a girl ( Katelyn Rosaasen ) is abused by her father and can be seen in the beginning of the video with several visible bruises . " Papercut " was the album 's third single , and its lyrics describe paranoia . The music video for " Papercut " features the band performing in a hallway opposite a completely dark room on the walls of which are scribbled the song 's lyrics . Various supernatural themes are present in the video , and special effects are used to create eerie renditions , such as the " stretching " of Shinoda 's fingers and the “ melting ” of Bourdon 's face . The fourth single to come from Hybrid Theory was " In the End " , which prominently features a signature piano riff performed by Shinoda . His rapping also dominates the verses of the song and is later joined by Bennington 's vocals in the chorus . The song 's concept is mainly based on one person 's failure . It is considered symbolic of an ending relationship , however , it can also represent broken trust in a once long-lasting friendship . The music video for " In the End " was shot at various stops along the 2001 Ozzfest tour and was directed by Nathan " Karma " Cox and the band 's DJ Joe Hahn , who would go on to direct many of Linkin Park 's future videos ( the two also directed the music video for " Papercut " ) . Although the background for the " In the End " video was filmed in a California desert , the band itself performed on a studio stage in Los Angeles , with prominent CGI effects and compositing being used to create the finished version . Performing on a studio stage allowed Hahn and Cox to set off water pipes above the stage near the end and drench the band . The music video won the Best Rock Video award at the 2002 MTV Video Music Awards .

" Points of Authority " , the fourth track on the album , has its own music video that can be found on Frat Party at the Pankake Festival , the band 's first DVD . Drummer Rob Bourdon describes the recording process of the song : “ Brad wrote this riff , then went home . Mike decided to cut it up into different pieces and rearranged them on the computer [ ... ] Brad had to learn his own part from the computer . ” Regarding the song , Delson praised Shinoda 's skill , describing him as “ a genius ” and “ Trent Reznor-talented ” . On live performances of the song , when Shinoda raps the line , " Forfeit the game " verse for the third time in the song , Bennington would rap the verse along with Mike .

With Hybrid Theory being Linkin Park 's first album , Mike Shinoda , who had worked as a graphic designer before becoming a professional musician , has stated that the band had looked through books for inspiration on how to present themselves for the first time . The result was a winged-soldier which Shinoda illustrated himself . According to Chester Bennington , the idea of the soldier with dragonfly wings was to describe the blending of hard and soft musical elements by the use of the jaded looks of the soldier and frail touches of the wings . The art style was largely influenced by stencil graffiti , including early works by Banksy . The cover also features scrambled lyrics of the album 's songs within the background , though the lyrics of " One Step Closer " are the most prominent . A different version of the soldier can be seen on some of the album 's singles . The cover of Reanimation , a remix album of Hybrid Theory , features a robotic version of the soldier that is similar in appearance to a mobile suit Gundam , a line of robotic combat machines that are featured in the popular Gundam Wing anime series .

Hybrid Theory was released in the United States on October 24 , 2000 following radio airplay of " One Step Closer " . Hybrid Theory also sold 50,000 copies in its first week , entering the U.S. Billboard 200 charts at # 16 in late 2000 , and was certified gold by the RIAA five weeks after its release . In 2001 , Hybrid Theory sold 4.8 million copies in the United States , making it the best-selling album of the year , and it was estimated that the album continued selling 100,000 copies per week in early 2002 . Throughout the following years , the album continued to sell at a fast pace and was certified diamond by the RIAA in 2005 for shipment of 10 million copies in the US . As of June 2014 , the album has sold 10,222,000 copies in the US . Four singles from the album were released throughout 2001 ( though " Points of Authority " was released as a promotional single ) , three of which were chart successes on the US Billboard Modern Rock Tracks charts . The single " In the End " was the highest charting single from the album , which peaked at # 1 on the Modern Rock Tracks charts and appearing on charts worldwide . The success of " In the End " was partly responsible for Hybrid Theory 's chart success ; it reached # 2 in the Billboard 200 in early 2002 behind Weathered by Creed and by J to tha L – O ! : The Remixes by Jennifer Lopez . Hybrid Theory was the 11th best performing album on the Billboard 200 during the decade , the album reached the top ten in its 38th week on the chart and stayed in the top ten for 34 weeks . The album spent 105 weeks on the chart ( roughly 2 years ) and re entered at # 167 in February 2011 . The album also charted in 11 other countries at fairly high positions and ranked among the top ten in the charts of the United Kingdom , Sweden , New Zealand , Austria , Finland , and Switzerland . At the 44th Grammy Awards in 2002 , Linkin Park won Best Hard Rock Performance for their song " Crawling " . Additional nominations for Best New Artist and Best Rock Album lost out to Alicia Keys and All That You Can 't Leave Behind by U2 .

Following the success of Hybrid Theory , Linkin Park received invitations to perform at various rock concerts and tours , including Ozzfest , the Family Values Tour , KROQ-FM 's Almost Acoustic Christmas , and the band 's self-created tour , Projekt Revolution , which was headlined by Linkin Park and featured other bands such as Cypress Hill and Adema . During this time , Linkin Park reunited with their original bassist , Dave “ Phoenix ” Farrell . The band kept an online journal on their official website throughout their 2001 and 2002 touring regime , in which each band member made a respective notation . Although the notes are no longer on their website , they are available on fansites . Linkin Park played 324 shows in 2001 .

A two-disc special edition of Hybrid Theory was released on March 11 , 2002 in Asia . The first disc contains the original album , and the second disc features live performances of " Papercut " , " Points of Authority " , and " A Place for My Head " recorded at the Docklands Arena for BBC Radio 1 . Also featured on the second disc are two studio tracks : " My December " — a song written after the release of Hybrid Theory for inclusion on KROQ 's " Slim Santa " CD , and " High Voltage " , a remix of the song originally on the Hybrid Theory EP . On August 12 , 2014 , the band released a Live CD of the Download Festival 2014 performance where they played their debut album in its entirely , " Hybrid Theory : Live at Download Festival 2014 " .

Hybrid Theory received generally positive reviews from critics . Stephanie Dickison of PopMatters commented that the band was a " far more complex and talented group than the hard rock boy bands of late " , and claimed that " they will continue to fascinate and challenge music 's standard sounds . " Q magazine gave Hybrid Theory four out of five stars . Robert Christgau of The Village Voice wrote that “ the men don 't know what the angry boys understand ” , and gave the album a " two-star honorable mention rating " , citing " Papercut " and " Points of Authority " as highlights of the album . Jenny Eliscu of Rolling Stone gave the album two and a half stars and commented that Hybrid Theory had " as much potency as albums by Limp Bizkit or Korn " and called it an album that " reflects the frustration of life " . AllMusic writer William Ruhlmann said that " Linkin Park sounds like a Johnny-come-lately to an already overdone musical style " and called " One Step Closer " " a typical effort " , referring to the lyrics of the song 's chorus . Johan Wippsson from Melodic praised Don Gilmore 's production and described the albums as " destructive and angry but always with a well controlled melodic feeling all over . " NME 's Noel Gardner commented that " otherwise damn fine soaring emo-crunchers like ' With You ' and ' A Place for My Head ' are pointlessly jazzed up with tokenistic scratching , " giving the album a score of six out of ten . Tyler Fisher at Sputnikmusic gave the album a 3.0 / 5 , saying " Hybrid Theory stands as a defining mainstream album at the turn of the century , and for good reason . " , but calling the guitar riffs " often bland and unoriginal " . Mike Ross of Jam ! declares the albums as a combination of the best of hip hop and heavy metal . He goes on to state " ... they can actually rap . They can actually crank out a ferocious , head-banging groove . They can write introspective lyrics with intelligence . It adds up to one of the finest new rap metal bands I 've ever heard . "

Later in 2002 , Linkin Park released an album entitled Reanimation . It included the songs of Hybrid Theory remixed and reinterpreted by nu metal and underground hip hop artists . Contributors to the album included Black Thought , Pharoahe Monch , Jonathan Davis , Stephen Carpenter , and Aaron Lewis . The sound of later Linkin Park albums would involve experimentation with classical instruments such as strings and piano , both of which , along with the same elements of electronica from Hybrid Theory , are prominently included in the band 's second studio album Meteora . As Shinoda explains the difference in the sound between Hybrid Theory and Meteora : " That electronic element has always been there in the band – it 's just that sometimes we bring it closer to the front . "

The Eurasian wryneck ( Jynx torquilla ) is a species of wryneck in the woodpecker family . This species mainly breeds in temperate regions of Europe and Asia . Most populations are migratory , wintering in tropical Africa and in southern Asia from Iran to the Indian Subcontinent , but some are resident in northwestern Africa . It is a bird of open countryside , woodland and orchards . Eurasian wrynecks measure about 16.5 cm ( 6.5 in ) in length and have bills shorter and less dagger-like than those of other woodpeckers . Their upperparts are barred and mottled in shades of pale brown with rufous and blackish bars and wider black streaks . Their underparts are cream speckled and spotted with brown . Their chief prey is ants and other insects , which they find in decaying wood or on the ground . The eggs are white as is the case with many birds that nest in holes and a clutch of seven to ten eggs is laid during May and June . These birds get their English name from their ability to turn their heads through almost 180 degrees . When disturbed at the nest , they use this snake-like head twisting and hissing as a threat display . This odd behaviour led to their use in witchcraft , hence to put a " jinx " on someone .

The Eurasian wryneck was first described by Carl Linnaeus in the tenth edition of his Systema Naturae in 1758 . The type species came from Sweden . The genus name Jynx is from the Ancient Greek name for this bird , iunx . The specific torquilla is Medieval Latin derived from torquere , to twist , referring to the strange snake-head movements . The bird was used a a charm to bring back an errant lover , the bird being tied to a piece of string and whirled around . The English " wryneck " refers to the same twisting movement and was first recorded in 1585 . The Picidae family has four subfamilies , the Picinae ( woodpeckers ) , the Picumninae ( piculets ) , the Jynginae ( wrynecks ) and the monotypic Nesoctitinae ( Antillean piculet ) . Based on morphology and behaviour , the Picumninae was considered to be the sister clade of the Picinae . This has now been confirmed by phylogenetic analysis and the Jynginae are placed basal to the Picinae , Nesoctitinae and Picumninae . Jynginae includes one genus ( Jynx ) and two species , the Eurasian wryneck and the red-throated wryneck ( Jynx ruficollis ) , resident in sub-Saharan Africa . There are six subspecies of Jynx torquilla :

The Eurasian wryneck grows to about 17 cm ( 6.7 in ) in length . The subspecies Jynx torquilla tschusii weighs 26 to 50 g ( 0.92 to 1.76 oz ) . It is a slim , elongated-looking bird with a body shape more like a thrush than a woodpecker . The upperparts are barred and mottled in shades of pale brown with rufous and blackish bars and wider black streaks . The rump and upper tail coverts are grey with speckles and irregular bands of brown . The rounded tail is grey , speckled with brown , with faint bands of greyish-brown and a few more clearly defined bands of brownish-black . The cheeks and throat are buff barred with brown . The underparts are creamy white with brown markings shaped like arrow-heads which are reduced to spots on the lower breast and belly . The flanks are buff with similar markings and the under-tail coverts are buff with narrow brown bars . The primaries and secondaries are brown with rufous-buff markings . The beak is brown , long and slender with a broad base and sharp tip . The irises are hazel and the slender legs and feet are pale brown . The first and second toes are shorter than the others . The first and fourth toes point backwards and the second and third point forwards , a good arrangement for clinging to vertical surfaces .

The Eurasian wryneck has a palearctic distribution . The breeding range of the nominate subspecies includes all of Europe from Britain to the Urals . In the north it reaches the Arctic Circle and the range includes Spain in the southwest . In the south and east it intergrades with J. t. tschusii ( smaller and more reddish brown ) which is found in Corsica , Italy , Dalmatia and parts of the Balkans . J. t. mauretanica ( also smaller than the nominate form , light , with whitish throat and breast ) is resident in Algeria and Morocco and possibly also the Balearic Islands , Sardinia and parts of Sicily . J. t. sarudnyi ( considerably paler than the nominate with fainter markings ) occurs in the Urals and then in a wide strip of Asia through southern Siberia , Central Asia , including the north-western Himalayas to the Pacific coast . J. t. chinensis breeds in eastern Siberia and northeastern and central China while J. t. himalayana breeds in Pakistan and the northwestern Himalayas . Eurasian wrynecks also inhabit the island of Sakhalin , Japan and the coastal areas of southern China . The Eurasian wryneck is the only European woodpecker to undertake long distance migrations . The wintering area of European species is located south of the Sahara , in a wide strip across Africa extending from Senegal , Gambia and Sierra Leone in the west to Ethiopia in the east . Its southern limit extends to the Democratic Republic of Congo and Cameroon . The populations from West Asia use the same wintering areas . The Central and East Asian breeding birds winter in the Indian subcontinent or southern East Asia including southern Japan .

The Eurasian wryneck sometimes forms small groups during migration and in its winter quarters but in the summer is usually found in pairs . It characteristically holds its head high with its beak pointing slightly upwards . A mutual display that occurs at any time of year involves two birds perched facing each other with their heads far back and beaks wide open , bobbing their heads up and down . Sometimes the head is allowed to slump sideways and hang limply . On other occasions , when excited , the head is shaken and twisted about violently . When disturbed on the nest or held in the hand , the neck contorts and twists in all directions . The bird sometimes feigns death and hangs limply with eyes closed . On returning to the breeding area after migration , the birds set up territories . On farmland in Switzerland it has been found that old pear orchards with large numbers of ant nests are preferentially selected over other habitata . Areas used for vegetable cultivation provided useful habitat when they include areas of bare ground on which the birds can forage . Territories are not chosen at random as arriving birds favoured certain areas over others with the same territories being colonised first year after year . The presence of other Eurasian wrynecks in the vicinity is also a positive influence . Orchards in general , and older ones in particular , provide favoured territories , probably because the dense foliage is more likely to support high numbers of aphids and the ground beneath has scant vegetation cover , both of which factors increase the availability of ants , the birds ' main prey . Despite some territories being consistently chosen over others , reproductive success in these territories was no higher than in others . Limiting factors for such crevice-nesting species as Eurasian wrynecks are both the availability of nesting sites and the number of ants and their ease of discovery . Modern farming practices such as the removal of hedges , forest patches and isolated trees and the increasing use of fertilisers and pesticides are disadvantageous to such birds .

The diet of the Eurasian wryneck consists chiefly of ants but beetles and their larvae , moths , spiders and woodlice are also eaten . Although much time is spent in the upper branches of trees , the bird sometimes perches in low bushes and mostly forages on the ground , moving around with short hops with its tail held in a raised position . It can cling to tree trunks , often moving obliquely , and sometimes pressing its tail against the surface as a prop . It does not make holes in bark with its beak but picks up prey with a rapid extension and retraction of its tongue and it sometimes catches insects while on the wing . Its flight is rather slow and undulating .

The nesting site is variable and may be in a pre-existing hole in a tree trunk , a crevice in a wall , a hole in a bank , a sand martin 's burrow or a nesting box . In its search for a safe , protected site out of reach of predators , it sometimes evicts a previous occupant , its eggs and nestlings . It uses no nesting material and a clutch of normally seven to ten eggs is laid ( occasionally five , six , eleven or twelve ) . The eggs average 20.8 by 15.4 millimetres ( 0.82 in × 0.61 in ) and weigh about 0.2 g ( 0.007 oz ) . They are a dull white colour and partially opaque . Both sexes are involved in incubation which takes twelve days , but the female plays the greater part . Both parents feed the chicks for about twenty days before they fledge . There is usually a single brood .

The IUCN lists the Eurasian wryneck as being of " Least Concern " in its Red List of Threatened Species . This is because it has a world population estimated at up to fifteen million individual birds and a very wide geographical range . The population may be decreasing to a certain extent but not at such a rate as to make the bird reach the threshold for a more threatened category . In continental Europe , the largest populations are in Spain , Italy , Germany , Poland , Romania , Hungary , Belarus and Ukraine , and only in Romania is the population trend believed to be upward . In Russia , where there are believed to be 300,000 to 800,000 individuals , the population trend is unknown . In the United Kingdom the numbers of bird are on the decrease and it is protected under Schedule 1 of the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 and is listed on Appendix II of the Bern Convention . It is protected as a migratory species under the Birds Directive in the European Union .

" Dream a Little Dream of Me " is the tenth episode of the paranormal drama television series Supernatural 's third season . It was first broadcast on The CW on February 7 , 2008 . The narrative follows series protagonists Sam ( Jared Padalecki ) and Dean Winchester ( Jensen Ackles ) as they enter the dreamscape to rescue the comatose Bobby Singer ( Jim Beaver ) . Developed by Sera Gamble and Cathryn Humphris , the episode was written by the latter and directed by Steve Boyum . It delves into the backstory of Bobby , and also features a major turning point in Dean 's search for self-worth . Many dream sequences had to be altered due to production issues , though series creator Eric Kripke believes it ultimately benefited the episode . Critics gave generally positive reviews that praised Ackles for his dual performance and the production staff for their work on the dream sequences . However , they heavily criticized the actions of character Bela Talbot ( Lauren Cohan ) .

Within a dreamscape , hunter Bobby Singer ( Beaver ) searches around an old house and is suddenly attacked by a woman ( Elizabeth Marleau ) . A maid tries to no avail to wake him up in his motel room . Meanwhile , Dean Winchester ( Ackles ) finds his brother Sam ( Padalecki ) drinking at a bar in the middle of the afternoon . When Dean questions him about it , a drunken Sam admits that he is upset about not being able to save Dean from his demonic pact , which left him only a year to live . What bothers Sam even more is that Dean , who has little self-worth , is not even concerned about his fate . Their conversation is interrupted by a call from the hospital . After the brothers visit Bobby , who is in an unexplainable coma , they search his motel room and find a newspaper article about a doctor who suffered a sleep-related death . Dean visits the doctor 's office , and learns that he was conducting secret dream experiments for his study on sleep disorders . Dean tracks down Jeremy , a young man who was part of the sleep study because he could not dream . While they talk , Jeremy offers Dean a beer , and he drinks it . Jeremy ( G. Michael Gray ) reveals that the experiment allowed him to dream by drinking a yellow tea , but the dreams scared him so much that he dropped out of the study . Sam , who has been busy conducting research , later tells Dean that a plant known as " African Dream Root " allegedly allows a person to enter and manipulate others ' dreams ; they believe someone killed the doctor in this manner and is now targeting Bobby . As a terrified Bobby hides in a closet within his dream , Dean suggests to Sam that they themselves use the dream root to save him .

The brothers contact Bela Talbot ( Cohan ) — a thief and frequent thorn in the Winchesters ' sides — to supply them with dream root . She enters the motel room wearing a trench coat , and removes it to reveal the lingerie underneath . She begins to passionately kiss Sam , and they lie on the bed . However , Sam is soon awakened from his dream by Dean , and Bela arrives moments later . She gives them the dream root without argument — she claims Bobby saved her life in Flagstaff — but is then kicked out . The brothers use the root to make tea , and soon find themselves in a clean version of Bobby 's house . Sam goes outside into brightly lit scenery of flowers and singing birds , but becomes locked out of the house . Inside , Dean locates Bobby , who does not believe that he is dreaming . A woman with stab wounds approaches them , and Bobby reveals that she is his wife . Years prior , she became possessed , and Bobby was forced to stab her because he did not know how to exorcise the demon from her ; her death led him to become a hunter . As Sam is attacked outside by an angry Jeremy , Bobby takes control of the dream , and they awaken .

Bobby explains that the man who attacked Sam is Jeremy Frost ; he was unable to dream because his father brutally hit him in the head with a baseball bat . The target 's DNA is a required ingredient for the dream-root tea , and Jeremy acquired Bobby 's by offering him a beer . Dean realizes that he made the same mistake . Vulnerable to Jeremy , they both stay awake for two days while attempting to track him down . Unable to endure it any longer , Dean goes to sleep to face Jeremy , and Sam uses the dream root to enter his dream . The brothers encounter a dream version of Lisa Braeden ( Cindy Sampson ) — Dean 's former love interest — outstide on a blanket with a picnic basket . She invites Dean to join her , and tells him that she loves him before disappearing . Though Dean denies ever having that dream before , it is an obvious lie . Sam then sees Jeremy nearby and chases after him , and Dean finds himself in a long hallway . He enters his motel room , and comes face-to-face with a dream version of him ; he is his own worst nightmare . The Dream Dean comments on the real Dean 's feelings of worthlessness and self-loathing ; he also deems Dean to be as " mindless and obedient as an attack dog " , noting that his possessions , personality , and motives all stem from his father . When the Dream Dean calls him a " good soldier and nothing else " , the real Dean reacts violently and exclaims that he did not deserve the burdens that his father put onto him and that he does not deserve to go to Hell . The real Dean shoots his doppelganger with a shotgun , but he returns to life as a demon . The Dream Dean taunts him that he cannot escape his fate , and reminds him that exposure to Hell will transform him into a demon .

Elsewhere , Sam finds and confronts Jeremy . The latter manipulates the dreamscape to his favor , but Sam retaliates by summoning the form of Jeremy 's father . A terrified Jeremy is distracted , and Sam kills him with a baseball bat . The brothers then awaken from their dreams . When they find that Bela lied about Bobby saving her life , they realize that she stole the Colt — a mystical gun capable of killing anything — from them . As the brothers prepare to leave to hunt her down , Dean admits that he does not want to die . Sam promises him that they will figure out a way to save him .

Deemed by series creator Eric Kripke to be his homage to the film Dreamscape , the episode was the culmination of many previous pitches . Series writer Sera Gamble had been suggesting a dream-based episode since the show 's first season , but it was not until the third season that the writers found the concept feasible . Although Cathryn Humphris was selected to pen " Dream a Little Dream of Me " due to her position on the writers ' rotation , she was teamed with Gamble to develop the story . On this pairing , Humphris commented , " I think that we complement each other well . Sera 's great at the really scary moments , and I think I 'm pretty good at some of the connective tissue and putting stuff together in the larger landscape . "

" Dream a Little Dream of Me " delves into the backstory of hunter Bobby Singer . The writers always knew his history would be " grounded in family " . Reflecting this , the original teaser depicted the supernatural deaths of Bobby 's children ; while eating dinner with his family , his children 's throats are supernaturally slit , and they would ask him , " Why , daddy , why did you let this happen ? " However , the writers could not determine where to go from there . Following Humphris ' earlier pitch of Bobby being an expert exorcist because of a previous failed exorcism , the focus changed to Bobby 's torment about killing his demonically possessed wife . Other planned dream sequences were drastically altered due to production issues . One such scene , made to look like 80 's-style film stock , had Dean being confronted by serial killer Jason Voorhees of the Friday the 13th film series . After production cleared the rights to use the character , Kripke made everyone view Friday the 13th : The Final Chapter to help them create the " perfect facsimile " of Jason . However , the film studio that had granted permission realized a few days before filming that it did not actually own the rights . In dire need of a new concept , the writers recalled Sam 's dream sequence with Bela ; since Sam is revealed to be a " horn dog " underneath , the writers wanted Dean to be the opposite . Dean secretly desires a normal family , so they had Cindy Sampson reprise her role as Lisa Braeden — Dean 's love interest from " The Kids are Alright " . On retrospect , Kripke preferred this scene over Jason because it is more illuminating of Dean 's character .

Dean 's other dream is a major turning point in the character 's storyline , after which he starts gaining self-respect and realizes that he truly wants to live . He begins the season with little self-worth , and the writers realized that this outlook stems from his father , John Winchester . Initially , they planned to have Jeffrey Dean Morgan reprise his role as John , who would browbeat Dean within the dreamscape . When they learned that Morgan was busy filming Watchmen , the writers instead found inspiration in the junkyard scene from the film Superman III , in which good and evil versions of Superman confront one another . Kripke noted , however , that the conversation between the two Deans still focuses on John .

On its initial broadcast , the episode was watched by 2.68 million viewers . It received generally positive reviews from critics . Tina Charles of TV Guide was happy to see Jim Beaver become more involved in the storyline , and praised Ackles for his " amazing job " during the confrontation between the two Deans . She described the latter scenes as " seamless , yet painful to watch " . Although Charles was happy to see the Colt get stolen — she thought the weapon was " too easy " and had lost its mystique — she noted her annoyance that the brothers continue to " look ridiculous " because Bela is able to steal things from them . Karla Peterson of The San Diego Union-Tribune gave the episode an A- . Despite the " sluggish pacing " of the first half , the " paternal baggage " and monster of the week " built up enough emotional resonance to triumph " . She noted the actors ' performances , such as the " great Winchester moment " in which Sam discusses Dean 's demonic pact ; for Peterson , " ... the dark , wounded look in Jared Padalecki 's eyes totally sells it " . The " brutally good character writing " and " truly impressive work " done for Dean 's dream-encounter with himself was also lauded , with Peterson writing , " Ackles gives two of his best performances in the history of the show . At the same time . " Like Charles , however , she pointed out how " uncharacteristically stupid about Bela " the Winchesters have been . She commented , " Bela appears to have eaten the writers ' brains for breakfast . " The episode received a score of 7 out of 7 from TV Squad 's Brett Love . Bobby 's backstory at first was a " bit of a shock " for him , but he eventually came to realize that it " fits very well " . Love also thought that the dream root aspect " worked out great " , and deemed the dreamscapes " creepy and unsettling " .

Sir William Schwenck Gilbert ( 18 November 1836 – 29 May 1911 ) was an English dramatist , librettist , poet and illustrator best known for the fourteen comic operas ( known as the Savoy operas ) produced in collaboration with the composer Sir Arthur Sullivan . The most famous of these include H.M.S. Pinafore , The Pirates of Penzance and one of the most frequently performed works in the history of musical theatre , The Mikado . These , as well as several of the other Savoy operas , continue to be frequently performed in the English-speaking world and beyond by opera companies , repertory companies , schools and community theatre groups . Lines from these works have become part of the English language , such as " short , sharp shock " , " What , never ? Well , hardly ever ! " , and " Let the punishment fit the crime " . Gilbert also wrote the Bab Ballads , an extensive collection of light verse accompanied by his own comical drawings . His creative output included over 75 plays and libretti , numerous stories , poems , lyrics and various other comic and serious pieces . His plays and realistic style of stage direction inspired other dramatists , including Oscar Wilde and George Bernard Shaw . According to The Cambridge History of English and American Literature , Gilbert 's " lyrical facility and his mastery of metre raised the poetical quality of comic opera to a position that it had never reached before and has not reached since " .

Gilbert was born at 17 Southampton Street , Strand , London . His father , also named William , was briefly a naval surgeon , who later became a writer of novels and short stories , some of which were illustrated by his son . Gilbert 's mother was the former Anne Mary Bye Morris ( 1812 – 1888 ) , the daughter of Thomas Morris , an apothecary . Gilbert 's parents were distant and stern , and he did not have a particularly close relationship with either of them . They quarrelled increasingly , and following the break-up of their marriage in 1876 , his relationships with them , especially his mother , became even more strained . Gilbert had three younger sisters , two of whom were born outside England because of the family 's travels during these years : Jane Morris ( b . 1838 in Milan , Italy – 1906 ) , who married Alfred Weigall , a miniatures painter ; Anne Maude ( 1845 – 1932 ) and Mary Florence ( b . 1843 in Boulogne , France – 1911 ) , neither of whom married . Gilbert was nicknamed " Bab " as a baby , and then " Schwenck " , after his father 's godparents .

As a child , Gilbert travelled to Italy in 1838 and then France for two years with his parents , who finally returned to settle in London in 1847 . He was educated at Boulogne , France from the age of seven ( he later kept his diary in French so that the servants could not read it ) , then at Western Grammar School , Brompton , London , and then at the Great Ealing School , where he became head boy and wrote plays for school performances and painted scenery . He then attended King 's College London , graduating in 1856 . He intended to take the examinations for a commission in the Royal Artillery , but with the end of the Crimean War , fewer recruits were needed , and the only commission available to Gilbert would have been in a line regiment . Instead he joined the Civil Service : he was an assistant clerk in the Privy Council Office for four years and hated it . In 1859 he joined the Militia , a part-time volunteer force formed for the defence of Britain , with which he served until 1878 ( in between writing and other work ) , reaching the rank of Captain . In 1863 he received a bequest of £ 300 that he used to leave the civil service and take up a brief career as a barrister ( he had already entered the Inner Temple as a student ) , but his legal practice was not successful , averaging just five clients a year .

To supplement his income from 1861 on , Gilbert wrote a variety of stories , comic rants , grotesque illustrations , theatre reviews ( many in the form of a parody of the play being reviewed ) , and , under the pseudonym " Bab " ( his childhood nickname ) , illustrated poems for several comic magazines , primarily Fun , started in 1861 by H. J. Byron . He published stories , articles , and reviews in papers such as the Cornhill Magazine , London Society , Tinsley 's Magazine and Temple Bar . In addition , Gilbert was the London correspondent for L 'Invalide Russe and a drama critic for the Illustrated London Times . In the 1860s he also contributed to Tom Hood 's Christmas annuals , to Saturday Night , the Comic News and the Savage Club Papers . The Observer newspaper in 1870 sent him to France as a war correspondent reporting on the Franco-Prussian War . The poems , illustrated humorously by Gilbert , proved immensely popular and were reprinted in book form as the Bab Ballads . He would later return to many of these as source material for his plays and comic operas . Gilbert and his colleagues from Fun , including Tom Robertson , Tom Hood , Clement Scott and F. C. Burnand ( who defected to Punch in 1862 ) frequented the Arundel Club , the Savage Club , and especially Evans 's café , where they had a table in competition with the Punch ' Round table ' .

After a relationship in the mid-1860s with novelist Annie Thomas , Gilbert married Lucy Agnes Turner , whom he called " Kitty " , in 1867 ; she was 11 years his junior . He wrote many affectionate letters to her over the years . Gilbert and Lucy were socially active both in London and later at Grim 's Dyke , often holding dinner parties and being invited to others ' homes for dinner , in contrast to the picture painted by fictionalisations such as the film Topsy-Turvy . The Gilberts had no children , but they had many pets , including some exotic ones .

Gilbert wrote and directed a number of plays at school , but his first professionally produced play was Uncle Baby , which ran for seven weeks in the autumn of 1863 . In 1865 – 66 , Gilbert collaborated with Charles Millward on several pantomimes , including one called Hush-a-Bye , Baby , On the Tree Top , or , Harlequin Fortunia , King Frog of Frog Island , and the Magic Toys of Lowther Arcade ( 1866 ) . Gilbert 's first solo success , however , came a few days after Hush-a-Bye Baby premiered . His friend and mentor , Tom Robertson , was asked to write a pantomime but did not think he could do it in the two weeks available , and so he recommended Gilbert instead . Written and rushed to the stage in 10 days , Dulcamara , or the Little Duck and the Great Quack , a burlesque of Gaetano Donizetti 's L 'elisir d 'amore , proved extremely popular . This led to a long series of further Gilbert opera burlesques , pantomimes and farces , full of awful puns ( traditional in burlesques of the period ) , though showing , at times , signs of the satire that would later be a defining part of Gilbert 's work . For instance :

This was followed by Gilbert 's penultimate operatic parody , Robert the Devil , a burlesque of Giacomo Meyerbeer 's opera , Robert le diable , which was part of a triple bill that opened the Gaiety Theatre , London in 1868 . The piece was Gilbert 's biggest success to date , running for over 100 nights and being frequently revived and played continuously in the provinces for three years thereafter . In Victorian theatre , " [ to degrade ] high and beautiful themes ... had been the regular proceeding in burlesque , and the age almost expected it " However , Gilbert 's burlesques were considered unusually tasteful compared to the others on the London stage . Isaac Goldberg wrote that these pieces " reveal how a playwright may begin by making burlesque of opera and end by making opera of burlesque . " Gilbert would depart even further from the burlesque style from about 1869 with plays containing original plots and fewer puns . His first full-length prose comedy was An Old Score ( 1869 ) .

Theatre , at the time Gilbert began writing , had fallen into disrepute . Badly translated and adapted French operettas and poorly written , prurient Victorian burlesques dominated the London stage . As Jessie Bond vividly described it , " stilted tragedy and vulgar farce were all the would-be playgoer had to choose from , and the theatre had become a place of evil repute to the righteous British householder . " From 1869 to 1875 , Gilbert joined with one of the leading figures in theatrical reform , Thomas German Reed ( and his wife Priscilla ) , whose Gallery of Illustration sought to regain some of theatre 's lost respectability by offering family entertainments in London . So successful were they that by 1885 Gilbert stated that original British plays were appropriate for an innocent 15-year-old girl in the audience . Three months before the opening of Gilbert 's last burlesque ( The Pretty Druidess ) , the first of his pieces for the Gallery of Illustration , No Cards , was produced . Gilbert created six musical entertainments for the German Reeds , some with music composed by Thomas German Reed himself . The environment of the German Reeds ' intimate theatre allowed Gilbert quickly to develop a personal style and freedom to control all aspects of production , including set , costumes , direction and stage management . These works were a success , with Gilbert 's first big hit at the Gallery of Illustration , Ages Ago , opening in 1869 . Ages Ago was also the beginning of a collaboration with the composer Frederic Clay that would last seven years and produce four works . It was at a rehearsal for Ages Ago that Clay formally introduced Gilbert to his friend , Arthur Sullivan . The Bab Ballads and Gilbert 's many early musical works gave him much practice as a lyricist even before his collaboration with Sullivan .

Many of the plot elements of the German Reed Entertainments ( as well as some from his earlier plays and Bab Ballads ) would be reused by Gilbert later in the Gilbert and Sullivan operas . These elements include paintings coming to life ( Ages Ago , used again in Ruddigore ) , a deaf nursemaid binding a respectable man 's son to a " pirate " instead of to a " pilot " by mistake ( Our Island Home , 1870 , reused in The Pirates of Penzance ) , and the forceful mature lady who is " an acquired taste " ( Eyes and No Eyes , 1875 , reused in The Mikado ) . During this time , Gilbert perfected the ' topsy-turvy ' style that he had been developing in his Bab Ballads , where the humour was derived by setting up a ridiculous premise and working out its logical consequences , however absurd . Mike Leigh describes the " Gilbertian " style as follows : " With great fluidity and freedom , [ Gilbert ] continually challenges our natural expectations . First , within the framework of the story , he makes bizarre things happen , and turns the world on its head . Thus the Learned Judge marries the Plaintiff , the soldiers metamorphose into aesthetes , and so on , and nearly every opera is resolved by a deft moving of the goalposts ... His genius is to fuse opposites with an imperceptible sleight of hand , to blend the surreal with the real , and the caricature with the natural . In other words , to tell a perfectly outrageous story in a completely deadpan way . "

At the same time , Gilbert created several ' fairy comedies ' at the Haymarket Theatre . This series of plays was founded upon the idea of self-revelation by characters under the influence of some magic or some supernatural interference . The first was The Palace of Truth ( 1870 ) , based partly on a story by Madame de Genlis . In 1871 , with Pygmalion and Galatea , one of seven plays that he produced that year , Gilbert scored his greatest hit to date . Together , these plays and their successors such as The Wicked World ( 1873 ) , Sweethearts ( 1874 ) , and Broken Hearts ( 1875 ) , did for Gilbert on the dramatic stage what the German Reed entertainments had done for him on the musical stage : they established that his capabilities extended far beyond burlesque , won him artistic credentials , and demonstrated that he was a writer of wide range , as comfortable with human drama as with farcical humour . The success of these plays , especially Pygmalion and Galatea , gave Gilbert a prestige that would be crucial to his later collaboration with as respected a musician as Sullivan .

During this period , Gilbert also pushed the boundaries of how far satire could go in the theatre . He collaborated with Gilbert Arthur à Beckett on The Happy Land ( 1873 ) , a political satire ( in part , a parody of his own The Wicked World ) , which was briefly banned because of its unflattering caricatures of Gladstone and his ministers . Similarly , The Realm of Joy ( 1873 ) was set in the lobby of a theatre performing a scandalous play ( implied to be the Happy Land ) , with many jokes at the expense of the Lord Chamberlain ( the " Lord High Disinfectant " , as he 's referred to in the play ) . In Charity ( 1874 ) , however , Gilbert uses the freedom of the stage in a different way : to provide a tightly-written critique of the contrasting ways in which Victorian society treated men and women who had sex outside of marriage , which anticipated the ' problem plays ' of Shaw and Ibsen .

Once he became established , Gilbert was the stage director for his plays and operas and had strong opinions on how they should best be performed . He was strongly influenced by the innovations in ' stagecraft ' , now called stage direction , by the playwrights James Planché and especially Tom Robertson . Gilbert attended rehearsals directed by Robertson to learn this art firsthand from the older director , and he began to apply it in some of his earliest plays . He sought realism in acting , settings , costumes and movement , if not in content of his plays ( although he did write a romantic comedy in the " naturalist " style , as a tribute to Robertson , Sweethearts ) , shunned self-conscious interaction with the audience , and insisted on a style of portrayal in which the characters were never aware of their own absurdity , but were coherent internal wholes . In Gilbert 's 1874 burlesque , Rosencrantz and Guildenstern , the character Hamlet , in his speech to the players , sums up Gilbert 's theory of comic acting : " I hold that there is no such antick fellow as your bombastical hero who doth so earnestly spout forth his folly as to make his hearers believe that he is unconscious of all incongruity " . Robertson " introduced Gilbert both to the revolutionary notion of disciplined rehearsals and to mise-en-scène or unity of style in the whole presentation – direction , design , music , acting . " Like Robertson , Gilbert demanded discipline in his actors . He required that his actors know their words perfectly , enunciate them clearly and obey his stage directions , which was something quite new to many actors of the day . A major innovation was the replacement of the star actor with the disciplined ensemble , " raising the director to a new position of dominance " in the theatre . " That Gilbert was a good director is not in doubt . He was able to extract from his actors natural , clear performances , which served the Gilbertian requirements of outrageousness delivered straight . "

Gilbert prepared meticulously for each new work , making models of the stage , actors and set pieces , and designing every action and bit of business in advance . Gilbert would not work with actors who challenged his authority . Even during long runs and revivals , Gilbert closely supervised the performances of his plays , making sure that the actors did not make unauthorised additions , deletions or paraphrases . Gilbert was famous for demonstrating the action himself , even as he grew older . Gilbert himself went on stage in a number of productions throughout his lifetime , including several performances as the Associate in Trial by Jury , as substitute for an ailing actor in his play Broken Hearts , and in charity matinees of his one-act plays , such as King Claudius in Rosencrantz and Guildenstern .

In 1871 , John Hollingshead commissioned Gilbert to work with Sullivan on a holiday piece for Christmas , Thespis , or The Gods Grown Old , at the Gaiety Theatre . Thespis outran five of its nine competitors for the 1871 holiday season , and its run was extended beyond the length of a normal run at the Gaiety , However , nothing more came of it at that point , and Gilbert and Sullivan went their separate ways . Gilbert worked again with Clay on Happy Arcadia ( 1872 ) , and with Alfred Cellier on Topsyturveydom ( 1874 ) , as well as writing several farces , operetta libretti , extravaganzas , fairy comedies , adaptations from novels , translations from the French , and the dramas described above . Also in 1874 , he published his last contribution for Fun magazine ( " Rosencrantz and Guildenstern " ) , after a gap of three years , then resigned due to disapproval of the new owner 's other publishing interests . It would be nearly four years after Thespis was produced before the two men worked together again . In 1868 , Gilbert had published a short comic sketch libretto in Fun magazine entitled " Trial by Jury : An Operetta " . In 1873 , Gilbert arranged with the theatrical manager and composer , Carl Rosa , to expand the piece into a one-act libretto . Rosa 's wife was to sing the role of the plaintiff . However , Rosa 's wife died in childbirth in 1874 . Later in 1874 Gilbert offered the libretto to Richard D 'Oyly Carte , but Carte could not use the piece at that time . By early 1875 , Carte was managing the Royalty Theatre , and he needed a short opera to be played as an afterpiece to Offenbach 's La Périchole . He contacted Gilbert , asked about the piece , and suggested Sullivan to set the work . Sullivan was enthusiastic , and Trial by Jury was composed in a matter of weeks . The little piece was a runaway hit , outlasting the run of La Périchole and being revived at another theatre .

Gilbert continued his quest to gain respect in and respectability for his profession . One thing that may have been holding dramatists back from respectability was that plays were not published in a form suitable for a " gentleman 's library " , as , at the time , they were generally cheaply and unattractively published for the use of actors rather than the home reader . To help rectify this , at least for himself , Gilbert arranged in late 1875 for publishers Chatto and Windus to print a volume of his plays in a format designed to appeal to the general reader , with an attractive binding and clear type , containing Gilbert 's most respectable plays , including his most serious works , but mischievously capped off with Trial by Jury . After the success of Trial by Jury , there were discussions towards reviving Thespis , but Gilbert and Sullivan were not able to agree on terms with Carte and his backers . The score to Thespis was never published , and most of the music is now lost . It took some time for Carte to gather funds for another Gilbert and Sullivan opera , and in this gap Gilbert produced several works including Tom Cobb ( 1875 ) , Eyes and No Eyes ( 1875 , his last German Reed Entertainment ) , and Princess Toto ( 1876 ) , his last and most ambitious work with Clay , a three-act comic opera with full orchestra , as opposed to the shorter works for much reduced accompaniment that came before . Gilbert also wrote two serious works during this time , Broken Hearts ( 1875 ) and Dan 'l Druce , Blacksmith ( 1876 ) .

Also during this period , Gilbert wrote his most successful comic play , Engaged ( 1877 ) , which inspired Oscar Wilde 's The Importance of Being Earnest . Engaged is a parody of romantic drama written in the " topsy-turvy " satiric style of many of Gilbert 's Bab Ballads and the Savoy Operas , with one character pledging his love , in the most poetic and romantic language possible , to every single woman in the play ; the " innocent " Scottish rustics being revealed to be making a living through throwing trains off the lines and then charging the passengers for services , and , in general , romance being gladly thrown over in favour of monetary gain . Engaged continues to be performed today by both professional and amateur companies .

Carte finally assembled a syndicate in 1877 and formed the Comedy Opera Company to launch a series of original English comic operas , beginning with a third collaboration between Gilbert and Sullivan , The Sorcerer , in November 1877 . This work was a modest success , and H.M.S. Pinafore followed in May 1878 . Despite a slow start , mainly due to a scorching summer , Pinafore became a red-hot favourite by autumn . After a dispute with Carte over the division of profits , the other Comedy Opera Company partners hired thugs to storm the theatre one night to steal the sets and costumes , intending to mount a rival production . The attempt was repelled by stagehands and others at the theatre loyal to Carte , and Carte continued as sole impresario of the newly renamed D 'Oyly Carte Opera Company . Indeed , Pinafore was so successful that over a hundred unauthorised productions sprang up in America alone . Gilbert , Sullivan and Carte tried for many years to control the American performance copyrights over their operas , without success . For the next decade , the Savoy Operas ( as the series came to be known , after the theatre Carte later built to house them ) were Gilbert 's principal activity . The successful comic operas with Sullivan continued to appear every year or two , several of them being among the longest-running productions up to that point in the history of the musical stage . After Pinafore came The Pirates of Penzance ( 1879 ) , Patience ( 1881 ) , Iolanthe ( 1882 ) , Princess Ida ( 1884 , based on Gilbert 's earlier farce , The Princess ) , The Mikado ( 1885 ) , Ruddigore ( 1887 ) , The Yeomen of the Guard ( 1888 ) , and The Gondoliers ( 1889 ) . Gilbert not only directed and oversaw all aspects of production for these works , but he actually designed the costumes himself for Patience , Iolanthe , Princess Ida , and Ruddigore . He insisted on precise and authentic sets and costumes , which provided a foundation to ground and focus his absurd characters and situations .

During this time , Gilbert and Sullivan also collaborated on one other major work , the oratorio The Martyr of Antioch , premiered at the Leeds music festival in October 1880 . Gilbert arranged the original epic poem by Henry Hart Milman into a libretto suitable for the music , and it contains some original work . During this period , also , Gilbert occasionally wrote plays to be performed elsewhere – both serious dramas ( for example The Ne 'er-Do-Weel , 1878 ; and Gretchen , 1879 ) and humorous works ( for example Foggerty 's Fairy , 1881 ) . However , he no longer needed to turn out multiple plays each year , as he had done before . Indeed , during the more than nine years that separated The Pirates of Penzance and The Gondoliers , he wrote just three plays outside of the partnership with Sullivan . Only one of these works , Comedy and Tragedy , proved successful . In 1878 , Gilbert realised a lifelong dream to play Harlequin , which he did at the Gaiety Theatre as part of an amateur charity production of The Forty Thieves , partly written by himself . Gilbert trained for Harlequin 's stylised dancing with his friend John D 'Auban , who had arranged the dances for some of his plays and would choreograph most of the Gilbert and Sullivan operas . Producer John Hollingshead later remembered , " the gem of the performance was the grimly earnest and determined Harlequin of W. S. Gilbert . It gave me an idea of what Oliver Cromwell would have made of the character . " Another member of the cast recalled that Gilbert was tirelessly enthusiastic about the piece and often invited the cast to his home for dinner extra rehearsals . " A pleasanter , more genial , or agreeable companion than he was it would have been difficult , if not impossible , to find . " In 1882 , Gilbert had a telephone installed in his home and at the prompt desk at the Savoy Theatre , so that he could monitor performances and rehearsals from his home study . Gilbert had referred to the new technology in Pinafore in 1878 , only two years after the device was invented and before London even had telephone service .

Gilbert sometimes had a strained working relationship with Sullivan , partly because each man saw himself allowing his work to be subjugated to the other 's , and partly due to their opposing personalities . Gilbert was often confrontational and notoriously thin-skinned , though prone to acts of extraordinary kindness , while Sullivan eschewed conflict . In addition , Gilbert imbued his libretti with " topsy-turvy " situations in which the social order was turned upside down . After a time , these subjects were often at odds with Sullivan 's desire for realism and emotional content . In addition , Gilbert 's political satire often poked fun at those in the circles of privilege , while Sullivan was eager to socialise among the wealthy and titled people who would become his friends and patrons . Throughout their collaboration , Gilbert and Sullivan disagreed several times over the choice of a subject . After both Princess Ida and Ruddigore , which were less successful than the seven other operas from H.M.S. Pinafore to The Gondoliers , Sullivan asked to leave the partnership , saying that he found Gilbert 's plots repetitive and that the operas were not artistically satisfying to him . While the two artists worked out their differences , Carte kept the Savoy open with revivals of their earlier works . On each occasion , after a few months ' pause , Gilbert responded with a libretto that met Sullivan 's objections , and the partnership continued successfully .

In April 1890 , during the run of The Gondoliers , however , Gilbert challenged Carte over the expenses of the production . Among other items to which Gilbert objected , Carte had charged the cost of a new carpet for the Savoy Theatre lobby to the partnership . Gilbert believed that this was a maintenance expense that should be charged to Carte alone . Gilbert confronted Carte , who refused to reconsider the accounts . Gilbert stormed out and wrote to Sullivan that " I left him with the remark that it was a mistake to kick down the ladder by which he had risen " . Helen Carte wrote that Gilbert had addressed Carte " in a way that I should not have thought you would have used to an offending menial . " As scholar Andrew Crowther has explained : After all , the carpet was only one of a number of disputed items , and the real issue lay not in the mere money value of these things , but in whether Carte could be trusted with the financial affairs of Gilbert and Sullivan . Gilbert contended that Carte had at best made a series of serious blunders in the accounts , and at worst deliberately attempted to swindle the others . It is not easy to settle the rights and wrongs of the issue at this distance , but it does seem fairly clear that there was something very wrong with the accounts at this time . Gilbert wrote to Sullivan on 28 May 1891 , a year after the end of the " Quarrel " , that Carte had admitted " an unintentional overcharge of nearly £ 1,000 in the electric lighting accounts alone . "

Gilbert brought suit , and after The Gondoliers closed in 1891 , he withdrew the performance rights to his libretti , vowing to write no more operas for the Savoy . Gilbert next wrote The Mountebanks with Alfred Cellier and the flop Haste to the Wedding with George Grossmith , and Sullivan wrote Haddon Hall with Sydney Grundy . Gilbert eventually won the lawsuit and felt vindicated , but his actions and statements had been hurtful to his partners . Nevertheless , the partnership had been so profitable that , after the financial failure of the Royal English Opera House , Carte and his wife sought to reunite the author and composer . In 1891 , after many failed attempts at reconciliation by the pair , Tom Chappell , the music publisher responsible for printing the Gilbert and Sullivan operas , stepped in to mediate between two of his most profitable artists , and within two weeks had succeeded . Two more operas resulted : Utopia , Limited ( 1893 ) and The Grand Duke ( 1896 ) . Gilbert also offered a third libretto to Sullivan ( His Excellency , 1894 ) , but Gilbert 's insistence on casting Nancy McIntosh , his protegée from Utopia , led to Sullivan 's refusal . Utopia , concerning an attempt to " anglicise " a south Pacific island kingdom , was only a modest success , and The Grand Duke , in which a theatrical troupe , by means of a " statutory duel " and a conspiracy , takes political control of a grand duchy , was an outright failure . After that , the partnership ended for good . Sullivan continued to compose comic opera with other librettists but died four years later . In 1904 , Gilbert would write , " ... Savoy opera was snuffed out by the deplorable death of my distinguished collaborator , Sir Arthur Sullivan . When that event occurred , I saw no one with whom I felt that I could work with satisfaction and success , and so I discontinued to write libretti . "

Gilbert built the Garrick Theatre in 1889 . The Gilberts moved to Grim 's Dyke in Harrow in 1890 , which he purchased from Robert Heriot , to whom the artist Frederick Goodall had sold the property in 1880 . In 1891 , Gilbert was appointed Justice of the Peace for Middlesex . After casting Nancy McIntosh in Utopia , Limited , he and Lady Gilbert developed an affection for her , and she eventually gained the status of an unofficially adopted daughter , moving to Grim 's Dyke to live with them . She continued living there , even after Gilbert 's death , until Lady Gilbert 's death in 1936 . A statue of Charles II , carved by Danish sculptor Caius Gabriel Cibber in 1681 , was moved in 1875 from Soho Square to an island in the lake at Grim 's Dyke , where it remained when Gilbert purchased the property . On Lady Gilbert 's direction , it was restored to Soho Square in 1938 . Although Gilbert announced a retirement from the theatre after the poor initial run of his last work with Sullivan , The Grand Duke ( 1896 ) and the poor reception of his 1897 play The Fortune Hunter , he produced at least three more plays over the last dozen years of his life , including an unsuccessful opera , Fallen Fairies ( 1909 ) , with Edward German . Gilbert also continued to supervise the various revivals of his works by the D 'Oyly Carte Opera Company , including its London Repertory seasons in 1906 – 09 . His last play , The Hooligan , produced just four months before his death , is a study of a young condemned thug in a prison cell . Gilbert shows sympathy for his protagonist , the son of a thief who , brought up among thieves , kills his girlfriend . As in some earlier work , the playwright displays " his conviction that nurture rather than nature often accounted for criminal behaviour " . The grim and powerful piece became one of Gilbert 's most successful serious dramas , and experts conclude that , in those last months of Gilbert 's life , he was developing a new style , a " mixture of irony , of social theme , and of grubby realism , " to replace the old " Gilbertianism " of which he had grown weary . In these last years , Gilbert also wrote children 's book versions of H.M.S. Pinafore and The Mikado giving , in some cases , backstory that is not found in the librettos .

Gilbert was knighted on 15 July 1907 in recognition of his contributions to drama . Sullivan had been knighted for his contributions to music almost a quarter of a century earlier , in 1883 . Gilbert was , however , the first British writer ever to receive a knighthood for his plays alone — earlier dramatist knights , such as Sir William Davenant and Sir John Vanbrugh , were knighted for political and other services . On 29 May 1911 , Gilbert was about to give a swimming lesson to two young women , Winifred Isabel Emery ( 1890 – 1972 ) , and 17-year-old Ruby Preece in the lake of his home , Grim 's Dyke , when Preece lost her footing and called for help . Gilbert dived in to save her but suffered a heart attack in the middle of the lake and died . He was cremated at Golders Green and his ashes buried at the Church of St. John the Evangelist , Stanmore . The inscription on Gilbert 's memorial on the south wall of the Thames Embankment in London reads : " His Foe was Folly , and his Weapon Wit " . There is also a memorial plaque at All Saints ' Church , Harrow Weald .

Gilbert was known for being prickly . Aware of this general impression , he claimed that " If you give me your attention " , the misanthrope 's song from Princess Ida , was a satiric self-reference , saying : " I thought it my duty to live up to my reputation . " However , many people have defended him , often citing his generosity . Actress May Fortescue recalled , " His kindness was extraordinary . On wet nights and when rehearsals were late and the last buses were gone , he would pay the cab-fares of the girls whether they were pretty or not , instead of letting them trudge home on foot ... He was just as large-hearted when he was poor as when he was rich and successful . For money as money he cared less than nothing . Gilbert was no plaster saint , but he was an ideal friend . " Journalist Frank M. Boyd wrote : I fancy that seldom was a man more generally given credit for a personality quite other than his own , than was the case with Sir W. S. Gilbert ... Till one actually came to know the man , one shared the opinion held by so many , that he was a gruff , disagreeable person ; but nothing could be less true of the really great humorist . He had rather a severe appearance ... and like many other clever people , he had precious little use for fools of either sex , but he was at heart as kindly and lovable a man as you could wish to meet .

Jessie Bond wrote that Gilbert " was quick-tempered , often unreasonable , and he could not bear to be thwarted , but how anyone could call him unamiable I cannot understand . " George Grossmith wrote to The Daily Telegraph that , although Gilbert had been described as an autocrat at rehearsals , " That was really only his manner when he was playing the part of stage director at rehearsals . As a matter of fact , he was a generous , kind true gentleman , and I use the word in the purest and original sense . " Aside from his occasional creative disagreements with , and eventual rift from , Sullivan , Gilbert 's temper led to the loss of friendships with a number of people . For instance , he quarrelled with his old associate C. H. Workman , over the firing of Nancy McIntosh from the production of Fallen Fairies , and with actress Henrietta Hodson . He also saw his friendship with theatre critic Clement Scott turn bitter . However , Gilbert could be extraordinarily kind . During Scott 's final illness in 1904 , for instance , Gilbert donated to a fund for him , visited nearly every day , and assisted Scott 's wife , despite having not been on friendly terms with him for the previous sixteen years . Similarly , Gilbert had written several plays at the behest of comic actor Ned Sothern . However , Sothern died before he could perform the last of these , Foggerty 's Fairy . Gilbert purchased the play back from his grateful widow . According to one London society lady :

[ Gilbert ] ' s wit was innate , and his rapier-like retorts slipped out with instantaneous ease . His mind was naturally fastidious and clean ; he never asserted himself , never tried to make an effect . He was great-hearted and most understanding , with an underlying poetry of fancy that made him the most delicious companion . They spoke of his quick temper , but that was entirely free from malice or guile . He was soft-hearted as a babe , but there was nothing of the hypocrite about him . What he thought he said on the instant , and though by people of sensitive vanity this might on occasion be resented , to a sensitiveness of a finer kind it was an added link , binding one to a faithful , valued friend . As the writings about Gilbert by husband and wife Seymour Hicks and Ellaline Terriss ( frequent guests at his home ) vividly illustrate , Gilbert 's relationships with women were generally more successful than his relationships with men . According to George Grossmith , Gilbert " was to those who knew him a courteous and amiable gentleman – a gentleman without veneer . " Grossmith and many others wrote of how Gilbert loved to amuse children :

During my dangerous illness , Mr. Gilbert never failed a day to come up and enquire after me ... and kept me in roars of laughter the whole time ... But to see Gilbert at his best , is to see him at one of his juvenile parties . Though he has no children of his own , he loves them , and there is nothing he would not do to please them . I was never so astonished as when on one occasion he put off some of his own friends to come with Mrs. Gilbert to a juvenile party at my own house . Gilbert 's niece Mary Carter confirmed , " ... he loved children very much and lost no opportunity of making them happy ... [ He was ] the kindest and most human of uncles . " Grossmith quoted Gilbert as saying , " Deer-stalking would be a very fine sport if only the deer had guns . "

In 1957 , a review in The Times explained " the continued vitality of the Savoy operas " as follows : [ T ] hey were never really contemporary in their idiom ... Gilbert and Sullivan 's [ world ] , from the first moment was obviously not the audience 's world , [ it was ] an artificial world , with a neatly controlled and shapely precision which has not gone out of fashion – because it was never in fashion in the sense of using the fleeting conventions and ways of thought of contemporary human society ... The neat articulation of incredibilities in Gilbert 's plots is perfectly matched by his language ... His dialogue , with its primly mocking formality , satisfies both the ear and the intelligence . His verses show an unequalled and very delicate gift for creating a comic effect by the contrast between poetic form and prosaic thought and wording ... How deliciously [ his lines ] prick the bubble of sentiment . Gilbert had many imitators , but no equals , at this sort of thing ... [ Of ] equal importance ... Gilbert 's lyrics almost invariably take on extra point and sparkle when set to Sullivan 's music ... The two men together remain endlessly and incomparably delightful ... Light , and even trifling , though [ the operas ] may seem upon grave consideration , they yet have the shapeliness and elegance that can make a trifle into a work of art .

Gilbert 's legacy , aside from building the Garrick Theatre and writing the Savoy Operas and other works that are still being performed or in print over a hundred and twenty-five years after their creation , is felt perhaps most strongly today through his influence on the American and British musical theatre . The innovations in content and form of the works that he and Sullivan developed , and in Gilbert 's theories of acting and stage direction , directly influenced the development of the modern musical throughout the 20th century . Gilbert 's lyrics employ punning , as well as complex internal and two and three-syllable rhyme schemes , and served as a model for such 20th century Broadway lyricists as P.G. Wodehouse , Cole Porter , Ira Gershwin , and Lorenz Hart . Gilbert 's influence on the English language has also been marked , with well-known phrases such as " A policeman 's lot is not a happy one " , " short , sharp shock " , " What never ? Well , hardly ever ! " , and " let the punishment fit the crime " arising from his pen . In addition , biographies continue to be written about Gilbert 's life and career , and his work is not only performed , but frequently parodied , pastiched , quoted and imitated in comedy routines , film , television and other popular media .

There has been much discussion about Gilbert 's proper place in British literary and dramatic history . Was he essentially a writer of burlesque , a satirist , or , as some have argued , the forerunner of the theatre of the absurd ? ... Perhaps he stands most clearly in that distinctively English satirical tradition which stretches back to Jonathan Swift . ... Its leading exponents lampoon and send up the major institutions and public figures of the day , wielding the weapon of grave and temperate irony with devastating effect , while themselves remaining firmly within the Establishment and displaying a deep underlying affection for the objects of their often merciless attacks . It is a combination that remains a continuing enigma .

Ned Manning is an Australian playwright , actor and teacher , whose film credits include the lead role in Dead End Drive-In ( 1986 ) and an appearance in the teen film Looking for Alibrandi ( 2000 ) . Manning 's television credits include Bodyline , The Shiralee , " Prisoner " " , and Brides of Christ . His first major play was Us or Them , and its production by Griffin Theatre Company marked the company 's transition to being staffed by professional actors . Other plays have included Milo , Kenny 's Coming Home and Close to the Bone ; in 2007 Manning played the lead in his own play Last One Standing at the Old Fitzroy theatre in Sydney . The plays have received mixed reviews , with Last One Standing in particular being criticised for its formulaic and predictable narrative . Manning has written for the Bell Shakespeare Company 's Actors at Work program , a travelling community and schools theatrical education initiative . At one time the husband of Indigenous Australian artist Bronwyn Bancroft , Manning has since remarried , to theatre director Marion Potts . His children include New South Wales Young Australian of the Year for 2010 , Jack Manning Bancroft .

Manning 's first play , Us or Them , was initially produced at the Childers Street Hall in Canberra on 1 November 1977 . It was then re-written and performed in 1984 at the Stables Theatre for the Griffin Theatre Company , where it marked a turning point in Griffin 's history as the play 's success led to the cast and creatives being paid full professional rates . The play then transferred to the Philip St Theatre and on to the Q Theatre in Penrith . Milo premiered at the Sydney Theatre Company 's Wharf 2 Theatre in October 1984 before productions at the Q Theatre , Theatre Up North in Townsville , Theatre South in Wollongong and regional performances . Milo has been recorded for Radio National , had numerous other productions , and also been published by Currency Press . However a 2001 production in Sydney was panned by the reviewer , who described it as " formulaic and obvious , complete with clunky and unconvincing pat ending " , and thought the play should be " put out to pasture " . The same year , The Australian 's reviewer was more positive , considering the performance to be " passionate and funny . Seven years after it first appeared , it remains one of the best plays written about the bush-city divide " .

Manning 's next play , Kenny 's Coming Home ( 1991 ) , was performed at the Q Theatre , Penrith and was subsequently recorded for radio on ABC Radio National . The play is centred on a Rugby league footballer , Kenny , who gets caught up in a preselection battle between two of his family members . Kenny 's Coming Home included songs by Shane McNamara . Close to the Bone was written in collaboration with the Indigenous students at the EORA Centre for Performing and Visual Arts in Redfern , and first produced there in September 1991 . Luck of the Draw was produced by the Darwin Theatre Company in May 1999 and was the first play written by a non-Indigenous writer to be produced by Kooemba Jdarra theatre company in Brisbane . Last One Standing was performed at Sydney theatre the Old Fitzroy in 2007 . Manning played lead character Joe in the Old Fitzroy production ; The Sydney Morning Herald 's reviewer Bryce Hallett described his performance as " terrific " , providing the play " with an emotional anchor " , but considered the play itself to be predictable , lacking in depth and with " nothing revelatory on offer " ; The Sun-Herald reviewer was of a similar view .

Manning has created many works for young audiences . He has prepared scripts for ten works for The Bell Shakespeare Company 's Actors at Work program , a travelling community and schools theatrical education initiative . Other plays for young people have included Alice Dreaming , which is one of the Australian Script Centre 's anthology of large cast plays . In 2012 he contributed to a Federation Press anthology of monologues for drama students , No Nudity , Weapons or Naked Flames . His play Romeo and Juliet Intensive was nominated for a 2011 AWGIE Award . In 2012 , NewSouth Books published Manning 's memoir of a life of school teaching , Playground Duty . Reviewed by the New South Wales Writers ' Centre 's Amanda Calwell , it was described as showing " the value that one person with drive , ambition and compassion can offer by applying themselves to teaching " .

Manning 's film credits include the lead role in the 1986 Ozploitation film Dead End Drive-In . Based on a Peter Carey short story called " Crabs " , Dead End Drive-In is a post-apocalyptic tale about a young man stranded in a small town 's drive-in theater when the wheels are stolen off his car . He finds himself amongst a community of misfits trapped at the site , and seeks to break out . The film , directed by Brian Trenchard-Smith , received mixed reviews : Tim Kroenert writing for Eureka Street described it as " Mad Max-lite " and said that the film " is an example of how literality of translation can result in the sacrifice of the story ’ s essence . The film is fun on its own terms , but much of the nuance and irony that lend ‘ Crabs ’ its magic are simply lost " . Philippa Hawker writing for The Age said the film was " an energetic , inventively designed , cheerfully satirical and entertaining film " , and it is one of American film director Quentin Tarantino 's favourites . The film received only a short box-office season ; Manning was critical of the distributor Greater Union and worked with the film 's other actors to secure separate release in independent cinemas . Manning 's other film credits include an appearance in the teen film Looking for Alibrandi . He has also made a short film , Love Bites . Manning 's television credits include Bodyline , The Shiralee and Brides of Christ .

The " Burnside Burn " was an event held on the Burnside Bridge in Portland , Oregon , starting at midnight on July 1 , 2015 , the day recreational marijuana became legal in the U.S. state of Oregon . It was organized by Portland NORML , the local chapter of the National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws , having originated from its executive director , who wanted to photograph himself in front of the White Stag sign in the moments after Oregon Ballot Measure 91 took effect . The crowd , larger than anticipated , numbered in the thousands and at times blocked traffic lanes on the bridge . Some attendees wanted to commemorate the moment , while others were motivated by announcements of free marijuana and seeds . No fines were issued for consumption in public . The event was covered by cannabis publications , local and national news outlets , and the HBO television series Vice .

The " Burnside Burn " was organized by Portland NORML , the local chapter of the National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws , in celebration of the legalization of recreational marijuana use in Oregon and to circumnavigate a temporary limit on recreational sales . According to Russ Belville , the chapter 's executive director , the event began with the idea of taking a photograph in front of the White Stag sign . He recalled : " It evolved from me saying that when legalization happens , I want to take a photo under the Portland , Oregon sign . Other people said , ' Can we give marijuana away ? ' [ and ] I said , ' I can 't stop you ! ' " On the evening of June 30 , beginning as early as 8pm , and into the morning of July 1 , 2015 , between a few hundred and a few thousand people gathered on the Burnside Bridge 's north sidewalk for the free event . The crowd sometimes spilled into the road and blocked multiple traffic lanes , resulting at one point in the complete blockage of west-bound traffic . Activists chanted " Free the weed " and " Fuck the DEA " . Cannabis was shared and consumed openly .

The crowd was larger than anticipated and spanned the entire length of the 1,400-foot ( 430 m ) Burnside Bridge . Belville had initially expected " between 50 and 5,000 people " , but details of the event spread online and through word of mouth , and ultimately it was estimated that " thousands " had turned out . Some attendees said they were there to commemorate an historic moment , while others admitted having come for free marijuana and cannabis seeds . One man , known as " Pork Chop " ( or " Porkchop " ) , reportedly announced over a megaphone that he had 420 pounds of marijuana to distribute , though his claim was not supported by news outlets . Two women with Ideal Farms , who wished to " share the love " , distributed joints to attendees who could prove that they were of legal age . One man distributed drops of hash oil , and Belville himself shared an ounce of marijuana ( the maximum allowed under Oregon Ballot Measure 91 ) . Some participants did receive free marijuana , seeds , and / or starter plants , but many did not , due to the larger than expected crowd . Coupons were also distributed for later redemption .

The event was covered by cannabis publications , local and national media outlets , and the HBO documentary television series Vice . The Oregonian described the event as " loud and energetic " , attracting a diverse and " eclectic " crowd of activists , marijuana enthusiasts , and first-time consumers , some from as far away as Canada and San Diego . According to Willamette Week , attendees ranged from octogenarians to " tweens with rainbow hair " and the crowd was " generally happy " . The newspaper summarized , " All and all , the mood was celebratory as befit such an historic occasion . " NORML 's Kaliko Castille told The Huffington Post he was " happy to see a community able to come together — peacefully — over something positive . It 's great to see people from all walks of life out here , handing out joints to each other and getting to know their neighbors . " The Huffington Post 's Andy Campbell called the event a " smoke-out with a message " and opined , " Legalization is so much more than being able to smoke a joint in your home without being a criminal . It 's a health care issue ; it 's a tax revenue issue ; it saves states millions in the court system ; and it ends the hidden costs of prosecution , which emerge when someone can 't get a job because there 's a possession charge on their record . " The Washington Post called the " Burnside Burn " an opportunity for marijuana enthusiasts to " celebrate their new freedom together " .

Interstate 295 ( abbreviated I-295 ) in New Jersey and Delaware is an auxiliary Interstate Highway , designated as a bypass around Philadelphia , Pennsylvania . The route begins at a junction with I-95 south of Wilmington , Delaware , and runs to another junction with I-95 north of Trenton , New Jersey . The highway heads east from I-95 and crosses the Delaware River from Delaware to New Jersey on the Delaware Memorial Bridge concurrent with U.S. Route 40 ( US 40 ) . Upon entering New Jersey , the two routes split and I-295 runs parallel to the New Jersey Turnpike for most of its course in the state . After a concurrency with US 130 in Gloucester County , I-295 has an interchange with I-76 and Route 42 in Camden County . The freeway continues northeast toward Trenton , where it intersects I-195 and Route 29 before bypassing the city to the east and ending at US 1 in Lawrence Township , where the road becomes I-95 southbound . Three portions of I-295 predate the Interstate Highway System : the Delaware Memorial Bridge and its approach , built in 1951 , a section in Salem County built in 1953 , and the part concurrent with US 130 , built in two sections that opened in 1948 and 1954 . The route was designated on these sections in New Jersey in 1958 and in Delaware in 1959 . The portion of I-295 connecting to I-95 in Delaware opened in 1963 while most of the route in New Jersey was finished by the 1980s . The last part of I-295 to be completed , near the interchange with I-195 and Route 29 , was finished in 1994 . I-95 was originally supposed to continue northeast from the routes ' junction near Trenton on the proposed Somerset Freeway , but this plan was canceled . I-295 previously extended a few miles past US 1 to where it would have met the Somerset Freeway ; in the 1990s , the section past US 1 became part of I-95 . As a result of the Pennsylvania Turnpike / Interstate 95 Interchange Project in Bristol Township , Pennsylvania , I-295 will be extended along the existing I-95 freeway and connect to the Pennsylvania Turnpike at Bristol .

I-295 begins at I-95 , I-495 , US 202 , and Delaware Route 141 ( DE 141 ) near Newport , Delaware and heads east over the Delaware River on the Delaware Memorial Bridge into New Jersey . The highway intersects the southern terminus of the New Jersey Turnpike and runs northeast through suburban areas of South Jersey parallel to the turnpike , providing a bypass of Philadelphia and Camden . I-295 turns north and bypasses Trenton to the east and turns west as I-95 at the US 1 junction in Lawrence Township . The portion of I-295 running through New Jersey is sometimes referred to as the Camden Freeway by the New Jersey Department of Transportation ( NJDOT ) . As part of the Interstate Highway System , the entire length of I-295 is a part of the National Highway System .

I-295 begins at an interchange with I-95 ( Delaware Turnpike ) , I-495 , US 202 , and DE 141 south of Newport in New Castle County , Delaware . The northbound beginning of I-295 has direct ramps from both directions of I-95 , southbound I-495 , and southbound DE 141 , while the southern end of I-295 had direct ramps to both directions of I-95 , northbound I-495 , and northbound DE 141 . From this junction , the highway heads southeast on the Delaware Turnpike , an eight-lane freeway maintained by the Delaware River and Bay Authority ( DRBA ) that passes to the northeast of suburban neighborhoods in Wilmington Manor . I-295 reaches an interchange with US 13 / US 40 . Here , the Delaware Turnpike ends and US 40 splits from US 13 by heading east concurrent with I-295 . The road has an eastbound ramp to Landers Lane before it passes between residential neighborhoods and has an interchange with DE 9 north of New Castle . This interchange provides access to Veterans Memorial Park , where a war memorial honoring veterans from Delaware and New Jersey is located . Past DE 9 , the median of the freeway widens to include the DRBA headquarters , with direct access to and from the southbound lanes while northbound access is provided by way of DE 9 . After this , the southbound direction comes to a toll plaza for the Delaware Memorial Bridge . I-295 / US 40 continues east and passes over Norfolk Southern 's New Castle Secondary before crossing the Delaware River on the twin-span Delaware Memorial Bridge .

Upon reaching the east bank of the Delaware River , I-295 / US 40 enters Pennsville Township in Salem County , New Jersey and heads east-southeast through industrial areas . The freeway comes to an interchange with the southern terminus of US 130 and the western terminus of Route 49 , at which point it also meets the southern terminus of the New Jersey Turnpike . Here , I-295 splits onto its own freeway maintained by NJDOT while US 40 continues along the New Jersey Turnpike for a short distance before it splits to the southeast . A short distance later , the roadway enters Carneys Point Township and CR 551 merges onto I-295 , with the four-lane freeway heading northeast . The highway comes to a junction with Route 140 , where CR 551 splits from I-295 by continuing east along Route 140 . I-295 heads into wooded areas and features a rest area in the northbound direction . The freeway continues northeast and comes to a northbound weigh station before it reaches the Route 48 exit . The highway runs through a mix of farmland and woodland and enters Oldmans Township , where it comes to an interchange providing access to CR 643 .

I-295 crosses Oldmans Creek into Logan Township in Gloucester County and passes near some residential development and warehouses as it comes to the Center Square Road ( CR 620 ) exit . The road crosses Raccoon Creek and reaches an interchange serving US 322 / CR 536 . Following this , the highway runs through agricultural and wooded areas before northbound US 130 merges into the freeway . At this point , I-295 and US 130 head east as a six-lane freeway with a narrow median and soon comes to the CR 684 exit . Continuing east , the freeway crosses into Greenwich Township and has a junction with CR 607 . After passing near Greenwich Lake , there are exits for CR 653 and CR 673 within a short distance of each other . I-295 / US 130 reaches an interchange with CR 680 on the border of Greenwich Township and East Greenwich Township . The road runs through a portion of East Greenwich Township before crossing back into Greenwich Township and coming to a junction with CR 678 and CR 667 on the border of Greenwich Township and Paulsboro . Past this point , the freeway runs through marshy areas of Mantua Creek and continues into West Deptford Township . Here , there is an exit for CR 656 . Passing near more industrial areas , I-295 / US 130 has an interchange with the Mid-Atlantic Parkway , which provides access to Route 44 as well as to CR 643 and CR 660 . Continuing northeast , the freeway reaches an interchange with Route 44 and CR 640 . At this point , Route 44 begins to parallel I-295 / US 130 on its northwest side as the two roads cross the Woodbury Creek . Route 44 ends at a cul-de-sac that has a ramp from the southbound direction of I-295 / US 130 prior to another exit that provides access to CR 644 . The freeway passes near some homes before US 130 splits from I-295 at an interchange that also has access to CR 642 . The median of I-295 becomes wider again and it continues east through woods , coming to a southbound exit and northbound entrance with Route 45 . The roadway passes over Conrail Shared Assets Operations 's Vineland Secondary and passes through a small strip of Deptford Township before it has a partial interchange with CR 551 , with a southbound exit and northbound entrance . The highway enters Westville and skirts near residential and commercial development , with another southbound exit and northbound entrance serving Route 47 .

I-295 crosses the Big Timber Creek into Bellmawr in Camden County and runs northeast before it comes to the junction with the North-South Freeway , which serves as the northern terminus of Route 42 and the eastern terminus of I-76 . At this point , the travel lanes of I-295 head north for a short distance along the outside of the North-South Freeway , with the northbound lanes of I-295 having access from northbound Route 42 and eastbound I-76 and access to westbound I-76 while the southbound lanes of I-295 having access from eastbound I-76 and access to southbound Route 42 . Past this , I-295 continues east as a six-lane freeway through wooded areas near suburban development , passing under Conrail Shared Assets Operations 's Grenloch Industrial Track before reaching an interchange with Route 168 . The highway heads east along the border between Haddon Heights to the north and Barrington to the south and passes over Conrail Shared Assets Operations 's Beesleys Point Secondary before reaching the junction with US 30 near its junction with Route 41 / CR 573 . The road fully enters Barrington before crossing into Lawnside , where it comes to a southbound exit and northbound entrance serving Warwick Road ( CR 669 ) . After this , I-295 curves northeast and passes through a corner of Tavistock before entering a part of Haddonfield and coming to a trumpet interchange providing access to the Woodcrest Station along the PATCO Speedline . At this point , the road becomes closely parallel to the New Jersey Turnpike to the southeast . The highway crosses into Cherry Hill and passes over the tracks carrying the PATCO Speedline and New Jersey Transit 's Atlantic City Line before it reaches the CR 561 exit . The roadway runs through wooded areas with suburban neighborhoods to the west and the New Jersey Turnpike to the east as it comes to a cloverleaf interchange at Route 70 . Past this , the highway curves north farther west from the turnpike .

I-295 enters Mount Laurel in Burlington County upon crossing Pennsauken Creek and runs northeast through woods near development , reaching a cloverleaf interchange with Route 73 that provides access to the New Jersey Turnpike to the east . Past this , the road passes east-northeast near commercial areas to the southeast of Moorestown Mall before curving northeast to closely follow the turnpike . The highway runs through wooded areas and encounters the Route 38 junction . The roadway passes over Conrail Shared Assets Operations 's Pemberton Branch and CR 537 and runs through a mix of fields and trees with occasional development , with an exit serving CR 635 . I-295 crosses the Rancocas Creek into Westampton Township and runs through an area of warehouses , where it has a cloverleaf interchange at CR 626 . The highway runs north through rural land with nearby buildings and enters Burlington Township . Here , the road curves northeast and comes to a cloverleaf junction at CR 541 that provides access to a commercial area that includes the Burlington Center Mall along with the New Jersey Turnpike . The freeway runs through woodland and heads into Springfield Township , where it passes a pair of closed rest areas in each direction . I-295 crosses Assiscunk Creek into Florence Township and heads through a mix of farm fields and trees before it enters Mansfield Township and comes to a cloverleaf interchange at CR 656 that provides access to nearby CR 543 . The highway passes over the Pearl Harbor Memorial Extension of the New Jersey Turnpike and continues through rural land into Bordentown Township , where a northbound exit and southbound entrance serves Rising Sun Road that provides access to US 206 and the New Jersey Turnpike . Past this , the road curves north and reaches the exit for US 130 west of Bordentown before passing through woodland and crossing over New Jersey Transit 's River Line .

I-295 crosses Crosswicks Creek into Hamilton Township in Mercer County and runs through woods and marshland a short distance east of the Delaware River . A scenic overlook of the river is located along the southbound side of the road ; access from the northbound lanes is provided by a pedestrian bridge over the highway . The freeway heads farther from the river and passes over the River Line again before it reaches a modified cloverleaf interchange serving the western terminus of I-195 and the southern terminus of the Route 29 freeway to Trenton . Following this junction , the road heads northeast near residential neighborhoods and comes to an interchange at Arena Drive ( CR 620 ) that provides access to nearby White Horse Avenue ( CR 533 ) . A short distance later , a southbound exit and northbound entrance provides access to northbound Olden Avenue ( CR 622 ) . I-295 continues through wooded areas with nearby development and curves north to come to an interchange at Route 33 and CR 606 . The next junction is a southbound exit and northbound entrance at CR 535 . The highway continues through woods and reaches a cloverleaf junction serving Sloan Avenue ( CR 649 ) . The roadway comes to a bridge over Amtrak 's Northeast Corridor and crosses into Lawrence Township , where it curves northwest and comes to a modified interchange with US 1 . At this point , I-295 ends and the freeway continues west as southbound I-95 .

In the 1927 New Jersey state highway renumbering , Route 39 was legislated to begin at the Yardley – Wilburtha Bridge and bypass Trenton to the north and east before continuing south to Hammonton along present-day US 206 . Route 39 , which was not built around Trenton , was decommissioned in the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering . Portions of I-295 in Salem and Gloucester counties predate the Interstate Highway System as part of freeway bypasses for the surface section of US 130 / Route 44 through Carneys Point and between Bridgeport and Westville . In 1948 , the first section of the US 130 / Route 44 bypass in Gloucester County between current exits 21 and 24 opened , with a second section between exits 14 and 21 opening in 1954 . The section of the present highway between the southern terminus of the New Jersey Turnpike and the present-day CR 618 bridge was built as part of the US 130 bypass of Carneys Point in 1953 . The concurrent Route 44 designation was removed from US 130 in the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering , and was later assigned to the former surface alignment of US 130 through Carneys Point and between Bridgeport and Westville . In 1958 , the US 130 bypass of Carneys Point and the freeway in Gloucester County was designated as part of I-295 .

Construction on the Delaware Memorial Bridge began in 1949 . At the same time , work was underway on the Delaware Memorial Bridge approach in Delaware , a divided highway which would begin at a directional-T interchange with US 13 in Farnhurst and head east to a cloverleaf interchange at New Castle Avenue ( present DE 9 ) before leading to the bridge . Construction on the US 13 interchange at Farnhurst began on July 12 , 1950 . On August 16 , 1951 , the Delaware Memorial Bridge opened to traffic . The Delaware Memorial Bridge and the approach road to US 13 became a part of US 40 following the opening of the bridge . I-295 was designated onto the New Jersey approach of the bridge in 1958 . That same year , construction began for a bridge at the Farnhurst interchange that would link the US 40 approach to the Delaware Memorial Bridge to the Delaware Turnpike that was proposed to run west to the Maryland border . A year later , the Farnhurst interchange and the bridge approach were upgraded to Interstate Highway standards , and it was designated as part of I-295 . Construction at the interchange connecting to the Delaware Turnpike at Farnhurst was completed in July 1961 . On November 14 , 1963 , the Delaware Turnpike opened to traffic , with I-295 extended west along that road to I-95 , which continued along the Delaware Turnpike towards Maryland . In the middle of 1964 , work began on a second span at the Delaware Memorial Bridge due to increasing traffic volumes . The second span of the bridge was opened to traffic in fall 1968 .

The remainder of I-295 through New Jersey was planned as Federal Aid Interstate Route 108 , which was created by NJDOT in 1956 . I-295 was built between the Big Timber Creek and Route 42 in 1958 . In 1960 , the section of the interstate between Route 42 and Warwick Road was finished . The highway was built between US 130 and Route 45 in 1960 and was extended east to the Big Timber Creek a year later . In 1963 , I-295 was completed between Warwick Road and just south of Route 70 . A year later , the roadway was extended north to Route 73 . The freeway was built between Route 73 and Route 38 in 1966 . In 1968 , the section of I-295 between Carneys Point and Bridgeport was finished . Following the completion of this section , US 130 reverted to its previous surface alignment through Carneys Point , replacing that portion of Route 44 . In 1972 , the highway was finished between Route 38 and CR 541 . I-295 was extended from CR 541 northward to US 130 near Bordentown a year later . I-295 was completed from US 1 west to a proposed interchange with I-95 in Hopewell Township in 1974 . In 1975 , the roadway was constructed from south of the Route 33 interchange north to US 1 . The section of I-295 between Arena Drive and south of Route 33 was finished in 1984 . In 1987 , I-295 was built between I-195 / Route 29 and Arena Drive , with the highway between I-195 / Route 29 and Route 33 opened to traffic on August 16 of that year . The final section of I-295 between US 130 in Bordentown and I-195 / Route 29 was finished in 1994 .

At its original northern terminus , the freeway continued west as I-95 toward the Scudder Falls Bridge while I-95 was proposed to head north along the Somerset Freeway . In 1983 , the Somerset Freeway portion of I-95 was cancelled as a result of community opposition . In the 1990s , the northern terminus of I-295 was moved to its current location at the US 1 interchange , with the route west of there replaced by an extended I-95 . Due to the cancellation of the Somerset Freeway , a gap exists along I-95 in New Jersey . To bridge the gap , motorists from northbound I-95 are directed to follow I-295 southbound and I-195 eastbound to reach the New Jersey Turnpike to continue north along I-95 , and vice versa . In 1995 , the southbound rest area along I-295 in Burlington County was named for radio personality Howard Stern . Governor Christine Todd Whitman named the rest area after Stern as payback for him granting Whitman airtime during her 1993 gubernatorial campaign . A plaque proclaiming the rest area as the " Howard Stern Rest Stop " was installed , with an image of Stern poking his head from an outhouse . Days after the plaque was installed , it was stolen and later mailed to Stern . In 2003 , the rest areas along I-295 in Burlington County were closed as part of funding cuts in Governor Jim McGreevey 's budget , saving the state $ 1 million a year .

I-295 , like many other highways in New Jersey , once had solar-powered emergency call boxes every mile ( about 1.6 km ) ; the use of the call boxes became limited due to the increasing popularity of cell phones . To save on maintenance costs , NJDOT removed these call boxes in 2005 . NJDOT has broken ground on the missing express connection between I-295 and Route 42 to provide an easier connection between the Baltimore-Washington Metropolitan Area and points south to Atlantic City and vice versa . This project , dubbed the I-295 / I-76 / Route 42 Direct Connection , will reconstruct the dangerous and congested Route 42 / I-295 / I-76 interchange , which currently requires traffic on I-295 to use 35 mph ( 56 km / h ) ramps that merge onto the North – South Freeway for a short distance , among a series of other indirect connections . In 2007 , " Alternative D " for the reconstructed interchange was selected , calling for I-295 to cross over the North – South Freeway . This interchange is projected to cost $ 900 million . Construction began in 2013 and is scheduled to be complete in 2021 .

With the completion of the Pennsylvania Turnpike / Interstate 95 Interchange Project in Bristol Township , Pennsylvania , I-95 will be redesignated along the Pennsylvania Turnpike ( I-276 ) to connect with the New Jersey Turnpike ( currently the northern section of I-95 ) at exit 6 , and the I-95 designation will be removed from the section north of the interchange in Pennsylvania . I-295 will be extended past its current terminus at US 1 along current I-95 , across the Scudder Falls Bridge , and into Pennsylvania to the new interchange . Between September 2005 and May 2015 , the states of New Jersey and Pennsylvania had an agreement that , instead , I-195 would be extended along this section of I-95 . This means that the extended I-195 would have replaced the portion of I-95 between the Pennsylvania Turnpike in Bristol Township , Pennsylvania , and US 1 in Lawrence Township , New Jersey . It would have also replaced I-295 north of exit 60 in Hamilton Township , New Jersey ( its exit with I-195 ) , truncating I-295 at that junction . This option would have reduced the confusion of having I-295 parallel itself in New Jersey and Pennsylvania . Interchange renumbering would have also taken place that will coordinate with the future I-195 designation in Pennsylvania , as well as the new and current I-195 designation , from Ewing to Belmar in New Jersey . This proposal had received conditional approval from AASHTO . On May 20 , 2015 , it was decided to revert to the original decision to extend I-295 to the interchange .

The Blockhaus d 'Éperlecques ( English : Bunker of Éperlecques , also referred to as " the Watten bunker " or simply " Watten " ) is a Second World War bunker , now part of a museum , near Saint-Omer in the northern Pas-de-Calais département of France , and only some 14.4 kilometers ( 8.9 miles ) north-northwest from the more developed La Coupole V-2 launch facility , in the same general area . The bunker , built by Nazi Germany under the codename Kraftwerk Nord West ( Powerplant Northwest ) between March 1943 and July 1944 , was originally intended to be a launching facility for the V-2 ( A-4 ) ballistic missile . It was designed to accommodate over 100 missiles at a time and to launch up to 36 daily . The facility would have incorporated a liquid oxygen factory and a bomb-proof train station to allow missiles and supplies to be delivered from production facilities in Germany . It was constructed using the labour of thousands of prisoners of war and forcibly conscripted workers used as slave labourers . The bunker was never completed as a result of the repeated bombing by the British and United States air forces as part of Operation Crossbow against the German V-weapons programme . The attacks caused substantial damage and rendered the bunker unusable for its original purpose . Part of the bunker was subsequently completed for use as a liquid oxygen factory . It was captured by Allied forces at the start of September 1944 , though its true purpose was not discovered by the Allies until after the war . V-2s were instead launched from Meillerwagen-based mobile batteries which were far less vulnerable to aerial attacks . Today , the bunker is preserved as part of a privately owned museum that presents the history of the site and the German V-weapons programme . It has been protected by the French state as a monument historique since 1986 .

The A-4 ballistic missile ( referred to as the V-2 from September 1944 ) was developed by the Germans between 1939 and 1944 . It was regarded by Adolf Hitler as a Wunderwaffe ( wonder weapon ) that he believed to be capable of turning the tide of the war . Its operational deployment was restricted by several factors . Large supplies of cryogenic liquid oxygen ( LOX ) were required as the oxidizer to fuel the missiles . LOX evaporates rapidly , necessitating a source reasonably close to the firing site in order to minimise loss through evaporation . Germany and the occupied countries did not at that time have sufficient manufacturing capacity for the amount of LOX required for a full-scale A-4 campaign ; the total production capacity in 1941 and 1942 was about 215 tons daily , but each A-4 launch required about 15 tons . As the missile was intended for use against London and southern England , its operational range of 320 kilometres ( 200 mi ) meant that the launch sites had to be located fairly close to the English Channel or southern North Sea coasts , in northern France , Belgium or the western Netherlands . This was within easy reach of the Allied air forces , so any site would have to be able to resist or evade the expected aerial bombardments .

Various concepts were mooted for the A-4 's deployment in a March 1942 study by Walter Dornberger , the head of the A-4 development project at the Peenemünde Army Research Center . He suggested that the missiles should be based in heavily defended fixed sites of a bunker-style design similar to the massive submarine pens then under construction in occupied France and Norway . The rockets could be stored in such sites , armed , fuelled from an on-site LOX production plant , and launched . This offered significant technical advantages ; not only would the LOX loss be minimised , but the complex process of pre-launch testing would be simplified . A high rate of fire could be sustained as the facility could effectively operate like a production line , sending a steady flow of missiles to the launch pads . The submarine pens and other Atlantic Wall fortifications had been built in 1940 and 1941 , when the Germans had air superiority and could deter Allied air attacks . By 1942 this advantage had been lost to the United States Army Air Forces , which had begun deploying to England in May 1942 , and a greatly expanded Royal Air Force . The German Army preferred an alternative approach which would use trailer-style mobile launch platforms called Meillerwagen accompanied by testing and fuelling equipment mounted on railway cars or trucks . Although this configuration was far less efficient and would have a much lower rate of fire , it would have the great advantage of presenting a much smaller target for the Allied air forces . The Army was not convinced that fixed bunkers could resist repeated air attacks and was particularly concerned about the vulnerability of the launch sites ' road and rail links , which were essential for resupplying them with missiles and fuel .

In November 1942 , Hitler and Minister of Munitions Albert Speer discussed possible launch configurations and examined models and plans of the proposed bunkers and mobile launchers . Hitler strongly preferred the bunker option , though he also gave the go-ahead for the production of mobile launchers . Two different bunker designs had been prepared : the B.III-2a design envisaged preparing the missile for launch inside the bunker , then transporting it outside to a launch pad , while the B.III-2b design would see the missile being elevated from within the bunker to a launch pad on the roof . Speer gave orders that two bunkers were to be constructed by the Organisation Todt construction group to a " special fortification standard " ( Sonderbaustärke ) , requiring a steel-reinforced concrete ceiling 5 metres ( 16 ft ) thick and walls 3.5 metres ( 11 ft ) thick . They would be built near the coasts opposite England , one on the Côte d 'Opale near Boulogne-sur-Mer and the other on the Cotentin Peninsula near Cherbourg . Each would be capable of launching 36 missiles a day , would hold sufficient supplies of missiles and fuel to last three days , and would be manned by 250 troops .

In December 1942 , Speer ordered Peenemünde officers and engineers ( including Colonel Gerhard Stegmair , Dr Ernst Steinhoff and Lieutenant-Colonel Georg Thom ) to tour the Artois region in northwest France and locate a suitable site for an A-4 launch facility . The site chosen was just to the west of the small town of Watten , in the Forest of Éperlecques , near Saint-Omer in the Pas-de-Calais department . It was given the cover name of Kraftwerk Nord West ( Northwest Power Plant ) . The location was conveniently close to the main railway line between Calais and Saint-Omer , the canalised River Aa , main roads and electric grid lines . Situated 177 kilometres ( 110 mi ) from London , it was far enough inland to be safe from naval guns and it was sheltered to an extent by a ridge that rises to a height of 90 metres ( 300 ft ) to the north . At nearby Saint-Omer , there was a major Luftwaffe base which was capable of providing air defence for the area . There were existing gravel and sand quarries as well as cement works in the vicinity , which would help with the enormous amount of material that would be needed for the construction works . The quantities required were very substantial indeed ; 200,000 tons of concrete and 20,000 tons of steel would be required to build the facility . When US Army Major General Lewis H. Brereton inspected the site after it had been captured by the Allies , he described the bunker as " more extensive than any concrete constructions we have in the United States , with the possible exception of Boulder Dam . "

The Watten bunker was to be built to a design based on the B.III-2a bunker , though substantially larger . The Germans had originally planned to build a separate LOX plant at Stenay but this option was abandoned in favour of installing a LOX production facility within the Watten bunker . The bunker consisted of three main elements . The main part of the building was a giant structure some 92 metres ( 302 ft ) wide and 28 metres ( 92 ft ) high , housing the LOX plant and a vault where missiles would be assembled and prepared . Its walls were up to 7 metres ( 23 ft ) thick and the bunker 's working levels descended 6 metres ( 20 ft ) below ground . The plant would house five Heylandt compressors , each capable of producing about 10 tons of LOX per day . About 150 tons of LOX were to be stored in insulated tanks on-site . The facility was intended to store up to 108 missiles and enough fuel to supply three days ' worth of launches . The Germans planned to fire up to 36 rockets a day from the site .

On the north side of the building was a fortified standard gauge railway station , linked to the main Calais-Saint-Omer line at Watten via a 1.2 kilometres ( 0.75 mi ) spur line . Missiles , warheads and other components would be shipped to the station and transported on trucks into the main area of the bunker . Here the rockets were to be assembled , raised into a vertical position and fuelled and armed . From the arming halls , they would be moved to either end of the building through pivoting doors 18 metres ( 59 ft ) high . They would exit through the south face of the building and would be moved on tracks to the launch pads . There were no doors on the exit portals so chicanes were installed in the exit passage to deflect the blast of rockets being launched from outside . Launches would be overseen from a command tower located in the centre of the south side of the bunker , overlooking the launch pads . To the north of the bunker , the Germans erected a bomb-proof power station with a 2,000 horsepower ( 1.5 MW ) generating capacity . The site was initially powered from the main electricity grid , but it was intended that it would have its own independent power source to minimise the likelihood of disruption . Also associated with the Watten complex was a radar tracking site at Prédefin , 29 kilometres ( 18 mi ) south of Saint-Omer . A Giant Würzburg radar system was installed there to follow the trajectories of V-2s being launched from Watten . The intention was to follow the trajectory for as long as possible so that the accuracy of the missile launches could be determined .

The site was designed in January and February 1943 by engineers from the Peenemünde research facility and the Organisation Todt . On 25 March 1943 the construction plans were presented to Hitler , who immediately gave the go-ahead for the project to begin . The construction firm Holzman & Polanski was awarded the contract and 6,000 workers from Building Battalion 434 started construction that same month using plans by Franz Xaver Dorsch , Construction Director at the Organisation Todt . It was envisaged that the structure would be ready by the end of July 1943 , though not its wiring and plant , and it was intended that it would be fully operational by 1 November 1943 . The workforce consisted of a mixture of German specialists and forcibly conscripted Frenchmen from the Service du Travail Obligatoire ( STO ) . They were supplemented by Belgian , Dutch , French , Polish , Czech and Soviet prisoners of war and civilian conscripts , who were used as slave labour . The labour force also included many French political prisoners and Spanish Republicans who had fled to France after General Franco 's victory in the Spanish Civil War but had then been interned by the invading Germans . The non-German workers lived in two camps officially known as Organisation Todt Watten Zwangsarbeitslager 62 ( Forced Labour Camp 62 ) about 2 kilometres ( 1.2 mi ) distant from the site , near the village of Éperlecques . The camps were guarded by the French civil police with the assistance of Belgian and Dutch Nazis and Russian POWs who had volunteered for guard duty . Although escape attempts were punished by immediate execution , there were up to three escapes daily with external assistance . The commandant of the camp is said to have complained that it would have been easier to " guard a sack of fleas " . Over 35,000 foreign workers passed through the camps during the period in which they were operational .

The labourers worked in 12-hour shifts of 3,000 – 4,000 men , with three 20-minute breaks during each shift . The work continued around the clock , seven days a week , under giant floodlights during the night . The living and working conditions were extremely harsh , especially for the political prisoners and the eastern Europeans , who were given especially punitive treatment due to their status as the most expendable members of the workforce . For the non-German workers , falling ill or being unable to work through injury was the equivalent of a death sentence , as they would either be left to die or be transported back to the concentration camps from which they had been brought . A German commission that inspected the labour camps in the area in late 1943 commented : " The Eastern [ European ] worker is very tough . He works at his job until he falls flat on his face in the mire , and all that is left for the doctor to do is to issue the death certificate . " A large supply dump was established at Watten next to the River Aa . This site was eventually used to store material required for all the V-weapon sites in the Saint-Omer area . Building materials were brought there by barges and trains where they were unloaded onto a Decauville narrow-gauge railway for transportation to the construction site , where concrete mixers operated day and night . A 90 kV power line running to a transformer at Holque north of Watten provided electricity . An old quarry at Wizernes codenamed Schotterwerk Nordwest ( Gravel Quarry Northwest ) , some 12 kilometres ( 7.5 mi ) south of Watten , was also converted into a storage dump to supply the Watten facility .

In early April 1943 , an Allied agent reported " enormous trenches " being excavated at the Watten site , and on 16 May 1943 an RAF reconnaissance mission led to Allied photographic interpreters noticing unidentified activity there . Other large facilities were observed to be under construction elsewhere in the Pas-de-Calais . The purpose of the construction works was very unclear ; Lord Cherwell , Winston Churchill 's scientific adviser , admitted that he had little idea what " these very large structures similar to gun emplacements " were but he believed that " if it is worth the enemy 's while to go to all the trouble of building them it would seem worth ours to destroy them " . At the end of May , the British Chiefs of Staff ordered that aerial attacks be carried out against the so-called " heavy sites " being built by the Germans . On 6 August , Duncan Sandys , who headed a high-level Cabinet committee to coordinate the British defence against the German V-weapons , recommended that the Watten site should also be attacked because of the progress being made in its construction . The British Chiefs of Staff noted that a daylight attack by US bombers was under consideration but they raised objections to the proposal , as the Air Staff thought that Watten had nothing to do with rockets , suggesting that instead it might be merely a " protected operations room " .

The timing of the first raid was influenced by advice given by Sir Malcolm McAlpine , the chairman of the construction company Sir Robert McAlpine , who suggested that the Watten site should be attacked while the concrete was still setting . On 27 August 1943 , 187 B-17 Flying Fortresses of the US 8th Air Force attacked the site with devastating effect . The fortified train station on the north side of the bunker was especially badly damaged , as concrete had just been poured there . Dornberger later wrote that following the attack the site was " a desolate heap of concrete , steel , props and planking . The concrete hardened . After a few days the shelter was beyond saving . All we could do was roof in a part and use it for other work . " The bombing killed and injured hundreds of the slave workers on site ; although the Allies had sought to avoid casualties by timing the raid with what they thought was a change of shifts , the shift pattern had been changed by the Germans at the last minute to achieve the day 's work quota . Only 35 % of the Watten bunker had been completed by this time . It was clearly no longer possible to use it as a launch site , but the Germans still needed LOX production facilities to supply V-2 sites elsewhere . After surveying the site in September and October 1943 , Organisation Todt engineers determined that the northern part of the facility was irretrievably damaged but decided to focus on completing the southern part to serve as a LOX factory . One of the OT 's engineers , Werner Flos , came up with an idea to protect the bunker from bombardment by building it up from the roof first . This was done by initially constructing a concrete plate , flat on the ground , which was 5 metres ( 16 ft ) thick and weighed 37,000 tons . It was incrementally raised by hydraulic jacks and then supported by walls which were built underneath it as it was raised , becoming the roof . The resulting concrete cavern was intended to be used by the Germans as a bombproof liquid oxygen factory . The thickness of the roof was chosen on the assumption that Allied bombs were incapable of penetrating such a depth of concrete ; the Germans , however , were unaware of the British development of earthquake bombs .

The Germans ' main focus of attention switched instead to Schotterwerk Nordwest , the former quarry at nearby Wizernes , where work had been ongoing to build a bombproof V-2 storage facility . This project was expanded to turn the quarry into a fixed launch facility . Plans were put into effect to build a huge concrete dome – now open to the public as the museum of La Coupole – under which missiles would be fuelled and armed in a network of tunnels before being transported outside for launching . The Allies carried out further heavy bombing against both the Watten and Wizernes sites with little initial effect on the buildings themselves , although the rail and road network around them was systematically destroyed . On 3 July 1944 , Oberkommando West gave permission to stop construction at both sites , which had been so disrupted by bombing that work could no longer proceed . Three days later an Allied raid succeeded in wrecking the interior of the Watten bunker with a Tallboy bomb that brought down part of the roof . Finally , on 18 July 1944 , Hitler decreed that plans for launching missiles from bunkers need no longer be pursued . Dornberger 's staff subsequently decided to continue minor construction at Watten " for deception purposes " . The site itself was now useless , as the Germans recognised when they wryly codenamed it Concrete Lump , and the liquid oxygen generators and machinery were transferred to the Mittelwerk V-2 factory in central Germany , well away from Allied bombers .

The bunker was inspected on 10 September 1944 by the French atomic scientist Frédéric Joliot-Curie , accompanied by Sandys . Following the visit , Sandys ordered a Technical Inter-Services Mission under Colonel T.R.B. Sanders to investigate the sites at Mimoyecques , Siracourt , Watten , and Wizernes , collectively known to the Allies as the " Heavy Crossbow " sites . Sanders ' report was submitted to the War Cabinet on 19 March 1945 . Despite the capture of Watten , it was still not known at this time what the site had been intended for . Sanders noted that " the purpose of the structures was never known throughout the period of intensive reconnaissance and attack " . Based on the discovery of large aluminium tanks installed in the main part of the bunker , he opined that the Germans had intended to use it as a factory for the production of hydrogen peroxide for use in the fuelling of V-1 and V-2 missiles . He ruled out the possibility that it could have been used for LOX production and concluded , erroneously , that " the site had no offensive role . " He recommended that ( unlike the Mimoyecques and Wizernes sites ) the Watten bunker presented no threat to the UK 's security and " there is thus no imperative need , on that account , to ensure the destruction of the workings . "

The bunker was targeted again by the Allies in February 1945 , this time to test the newly developed CP / RA Disney bomb – a 4,500 lb ( 2,000 kg ) concrete-piercing rocket-assisted bomb designed to double the normal impact velocity , and thereby increase the penetration , of the projectile . The site had been chosen for testing purposes in October 1944 as it had the largest accessible interior area of the targets under consideration and was furthest from an inhabited town . On 3 February 1945 , a B-17 of the US Eighth Air Force dropped a Disney bomb on the Watten bunker and scored a hit over the wall section , but the results were inconclusive and the Air Force was not able to determine how well the bomb had penetrated the concrete . Although Disney bombs were used operationally on a number of occasions , the weapon 's introduction came too late to be of any significance in the war effort . In January 2009 the body of the Disney bomb was extracted from the roof , where it had embedded itself . The Watten bunker was inspected again on 20 June 1951 by an Anglo-French commission to determine whether it was capable of being reused for military purposes . The British Assistant Military Attaché , Major W.C. Morgan , reported to the Director of Military Intelligence at the War Office that the main part of the bunker had not been significantly damaged by bombing and that although it was flooded , if it was patched and drained " the building could be quickly made ready to receive oxygen liquifying plant machinery , or for any other purpose requiring a large and practically bomb-proof building . "

No further military use was made of the bunker and the land on which it stands reverted to private ownership . It was left abandoned for many years before the owners decided to redevelop the site . In 1973 , the bunker was opened to the public for the first time under the name of Le Blockhaus d 'Éperlecques . The ownership was taken over by Hubert de Mégille in the mid-1980s and on 3 September 1986 the French state declared it a monument historique . The area around the bunker has been re-forested , though it is still heavily scarred by bomb craters , and various items of Second World War military equipment ( including a V-1 on a launch ramp ) are on display alongside paths around the site . An open-air trail leads to and around the bunker with interpretative signs posted at various points to tell the story of the site and the German V-weapons programme . In 2009 , the museum welcomed 45,000 visitors .

The Agreement on Friendship and Cooperation between Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia was signed by Alija Izetbegović , President of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina , and Franjo Tuđman , President of the Republic of Croatia , in Zagreb on 21 July 1992 during the Bosnian and Croatian wars for independence from Yugoslavia . It established cooperation , albeit inharmonious , between the two and served as a basis for joint defense against Serb forces . It also placed the Croatian Defence Council ( HVO ) under the command of the Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina ( ARBiH ) . Izetbegović , who had hoped to prevent Bosnia Herzegovina from falling under the influence of Croatia or Serbia , signed the agreement after Stjepan Kljuić , president of the Croatian Democratic Union 's ( HDZ ) branch in Bosnia and Herzegovina , was replaced by Tuđman with Mate Boban , who blocked the delivery of supplies to Sarajevo where a siege was under way and had proclaimed an independent Croatian Republic of Herzeg-Bosnia ( HR-HB ) . The agreement fell apart in October after a number of events including the assassination of Blaž Kraljević , leader of Croatian Defence Forces ( HOS ) in Bosnia and Herzegovina , the fall of the areas of Posavina , Bosanski Brod , and Jajce into the hands of the Army of Republika Srpska ( VRS ) , and after a major battle broke out between the HVO and the ARBiH in Prozor .

In 1990 and 1991 , Serbs in Croatia and in Bosnia and Herzegovina had proclaimed a number of " Serbian Autonomous Regions " with the intent of later unifying them to create a Greater Serbia . Serbs used the well equipped Yugoslav People 's Army ( JNA ) in defending these territories . As early as September or October 1990 , the JNA had begun arming Bosnian Serbs and organizing them into militias . By March 1991 , the JNA had distributed an estimated 51,900 firearms to Serb paramilitaries and 23,298 firearms to Serbian Democratic Party ( SDS ) . The Croatian government began arming Croats in the Herzegovina region in 1991 and in the start of 1992 , expecting that the Serbs would spread the war into Bosnia and Herzegovina . It also helped arm the Bosniak community . From July 1991 to January 1992 , the JNA and Serb paramilitaries used Bosnian territory to wage attacks on Croatia . On 25 March 1991 , Franjo Tuđman met with Serbian president Slobodan Milošević in Karađorđevo , reportedly to discuss partition of Bosnia and Herzegovina . In November , the autonomous Croatian Community of Herzeg-Bosnia ( HZ-HB ) was established , it claimed it had no secessionary goal and that it would serve a " legal basis for local self-administration " . It vowed to respect the Bosnian government under the condition that Bosnia and Herzegovina was independent of " the former and every kind of future Yugoslavia . " In December , Tuđman , in a conversation with Bosnian Croat leaders , said that " from the perspective of sovereignty , Bosnia-Herzegovina has no prospects " and recommended that Croatian policy " support for the sovereignty [ of Bosnia and Herzegovina ] until such time as it no longer suits Croatia . "

In April 1992 , the siege of Sarajevo began , by which time the Bosnian Serb-formed Army of Republika Srpska ( VRS ) controlled 70 % of Bosnia and Herzegovina . On 8 April , Bosnian Croats were organized into the Croatian Defence Council ( HVO ) . A sizable number of Bosniaks also joined . The Croatian Defence Forces ( HOS ) , led by Blaž Kraljević in Bosnia and Herzegovina , which " supported Bosnian territorial integrity much more consistently and sincerely than the HVO " was also created . On 15 April 1992 , the multi-ethnic Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina ( ARBiH ) was formed , with slightly over two-thirds of troops consisting of Bosniaks and almost one-third of Croats and Serbs . In the winter Bosniaks began leaving the HVO and joining the ARBiH which also began receiving supplies from Croatia . In May , HVO Major General Ante Roso declared that the only " legal military force " in HZ-HB was the HVO and that " all orders from the TO [ Territorial Defense ] command [ of Bosnia and Herzegovina ] are invalid , and are to be considered illegal on this territory " .

The Croatian government played a " double game " in Bosnia and Herzegovina and " a military solution required Bosnia as an ally , but a diplomatic solution required Bosnia as a victim " . Tuđman 's Croatian Democratic Union ( HDZ ) party held important positions in the Bosnian government including the premiership and the ministry of defence , but despite this carried out a separate policy and refused for the HVO to be integrated into ARBiH . Jerko Doko , the Bosnian defence minister , gave the HVO priority in the acquisition of military weapons . In January 1992 , Tuđman had arranged for Stjepan Kljuić , president of the Croatian Democratic Union of Bosnia and Herzegovina ( HDZ BiH ) who favored cooperating with the Bosniaks towards a unified Bosnian state , to be ousted and replaced by Mate Boban , who favored Croatia to annex Croat-inhabited parts of Bosnia and Herzegovina . A rift existed in the party between Croats from ethnically mixed areas of central and northern Bosnia and those from Herzegovina . Milivoj Gagro , prewar Croat mayor of Mostar and ally of Kljuić said : " The secessionist policy [ union with Croatia ] was consistently supported by the Herzegovina side , not by Sarajevo , Posavina , or Central Bosnia Croats . [ ... ] Croats from Central Bosnia and Posavina , as well as those from urban centers who lived with Muslims and Serbs , thought differently . But when the war picked up , Posavina Croats were attacked , Sarajevo was surrounded [ ... ] Kljuić was sidelined and Boban came in with idea [ the Croat separatist idea ] in this area . [ ... ] When they [ Croats in Sarajevo as well as Northern and Central Bosnia ] felt they could not survive any more they lifted their hands and accepted their fate . And the Herzegovina Croats promised them the stars in the sky and told them " come here and we will give you a place . " And what happened ? It resulted in an exodus . And all these miserable Croat refugee communities that look absolutely ugly . "

Izetbegović came under intense pressure from Tuđman to agree for Bosnia and Herzegovina to be in a confederation with Croatia ; however , Izetbegović wanted to prevent Bosnia and Herzegovina from coming under the influence of Croatia or Serbia . Because doing so would cripple reconciliation between Bosniaks and Serbs , make the return of Bosniak refugees to eastern Bosnia impossible and for other reasons , Izetbegović opposed . He received an ultimatum from Boban warning that if he did not proclaim a confederation with Tuđman that Croatian forces would not help defend Sarajevo from strongholds as close as 40 kilometres ( 25 mi ) away . On 9 May , Boban , Josip Manolić , Tuđman 's aide and previously the Croatian Prime Minister , and Radovan Karadžić , president of the self-proclaimed Republika Srpska , secretly met in Graz and formed an agreement on the division of Bosnia and Herzegovina , the Graz agreement . Beginning in June , discussions between Bosniaks and Croats over military cooperation and possible merger of their armies started to take place . The Croatian government recommended moving ARBiH headquarters out of Sarajevo and closer to Croatia and pushed for its reorganization in an effort to heavily add Croatian influence .

In June and July , Boban increased pressure " by blocking delivery of arms that the Sarajevo government , working around a United Nations embargo on all shipments to the former Yugoslavia , has secretly bought . " On 3 July , Boban declared the independence of the Croatian Republic of Herzeg-Bosnia ( HR-HB ) . He was established as its president . It claimed power over its own police , army , currency , and education and extended its grasp to many districts where Bosniaks were the majority . It only allowed a Croat flag to be used , the only currency allowed was the Croatian kuna , its only official language was Croatian , and a Croat school curriculum was enacted . Mostar , a town where Bosniaks constituted a slight majority , was set as the capital . There was no mention on the defense of Bosnia and Herzegovina 's territorial integrity . On 21 July , Izetbegović and Tuđman signed the " Agreement on Friendship and Cooperation between the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Republic of Croatia " in Zagreb , Croatia . The agreement allowed them to " cooperate in opposing [ the Serb ] aggression " and coordinate military efforts . It placed the HVO under the command of the ARBiH . Cooperation was inharmonious , but enabled the transportation of weapons to ARBiH through Croatia in spite of the UN sanctioned arms embargo , reopening channels blocked by Boban . It established " economic , financial , cultural , educational , scientific and religious cooperation " between the signatories . It also stipulated that Bosnian Croats hold dual citizenship for both Bosnia and Herzegovina and for Croatia . This was criticized as Croatian attempts at " claiming broader political and territorial rights in the parts of Bosnia and Herzegovina where large numbers of Croats live " . After its signature Boban vowed to Izetbegović that HR-HB would remain an integral part of Bosnia and Herzegovina when the war ended .

In the summer of 1992 , the HVO started to purge its Bosniak members . At the same time armed incidents started to occur among Croats in Bosnia and Herzegovina between the HVO and the HOS . The HOS was loyal to the Bosnian government and accepted subordination to the Staff of the ARBiH of which Kraljević was appointed a member . On 9 August , Kraljević and eight of his staff were assassinated by HVO soldiers under the command of Mladen Naletilić , who supported a split between Croat and Bosniaks , after Kraljević 's HOS attacked the VRS near Trebinje . The HOS 's advance into eastern Herzegovina and occupation of Trebinje angered Boban who had affirmed to Karadžić that Croat forces were uninterested in the region . The HOS was disbanded , leaving the HVO as the only Croat force . Bosnian officials suspected that Tuđman 's government was involved . According to Manolić the order to kill Kraljević was given by Šušak and approved by Tuđman . Božidar Vučurević , the war-time mayor of Trebinje , stated he safeguarded records showing that SDS and HDZ figures considered it a " task " that need to be carried out .

In late September , Izetbegović and Tuđman met again and attempted to create military coordination against the VRS , but to no avail . By October , the agreement had collapsed and afterwards Croatia diverted delivery of weaponry to Bosnia and Herzegovina by seizing a significant amount for itself . Boban had abandoned a Bosnian government alliance and ceased all hostilities with Karadžić . The dominant Croatian – Bosnian defense of Posavina fell apart after Tuđman and / or Gojko Šušak ordered the withdrawal of the Croatian Army ( HV ) , enabling the Serbs to gain control of the corridor and connect their captured territories in western and eastern Bosnia . On 8 October , the town of Bosanski Brod was abandoned by the HVO and left to the VRS . By that time , the HV and the HVO had sustained approximately 7,500 casualties , out of 20,000 troops committed to the battle to control Posavina . The pullout appeared to be a quid pro quo for the JNA withdrawal from Dubrovnik 's hinterland that took place in July . Still , a Central Intelligence Agency analysis concluded that there is no direct evidence of such arrangements . On 9 October , the HVO signed a cease-fire with the VRS in Jajce in exchange for providing electricity .

The strained relations escalated rapidly and led to an armed clash between the two forces in Novi Travnik on 18 October . Low-scale conflicts spread in the region , and the two forces engaged each other along the supply route to Jajce three days later , on 21 October , as a result of an ARBiH roadblock set up the previous day on authority of the " Coordinating Committee for the Protection of Muslims " rather than the ARBiH command . Just as the roadblock was dismantled , a new skirmish occurred in the town of Vitez the following day . On 29 October , the VRS captured Jajce due to the inability of ARBiH and HVO forces to construct a cooperative defense , against the VRS which held the advantage in troop size and firepower , staff work and planning was significantly superior to the defenders of Jajce . Six days prior the first major battle in the impending Croat – Bosniak war broke out when the HVO pushed ARBiH from Prozor and expelled the Bosniak population after carrying out rapes , attacking the local mosque , and torching the property of Bosniaks . Initial reports indicated about 300 Bosniaks were killed or wounded in the attack , but subsequent reports by the ARBiH made in November 1992 indicated eleven soldiers and three civilians were killed . Another ARBiH report , prepared in March 1993 , revised the numbers saying eight civilians and three ARBiH soldiers were killed , while 13 troops and 10 civilians were wounded .

Wizards & Warriors is a platforming video game developed by Rare Ltd. for the Nintendo Entertainment System ( NES ) . It was published by Acclaim and released in North America in December 1987 and in Europe on January 7 , 1990 . It was also released in Japan by Jaleco on July 15 , 1988 , under the title Densetsu no Kishi Elrond ( 伝説の騎士エルロンド ) . In the game , players control Kuros , the " Knight Warrior of the Books of Excalibur " , as he sets out in the Kingdom of Elrond to defeat the evil wizard Malkil , who holds the princess captive in Castle IronSpire , located deep within Elrond 's forests . During the game , players make their way through forests , tunnels , and caves , battling hordes of enemies and collecting treasure , magical items , and additional weaponry to get past the obstacles and hazards that lie in their path . It was Rare 's second game released for the NES , after Slalom . Wizards & Warriors was featured in early video gaming magazines such as Nintendo Fun Club News , Nintendo Power , and VideoGames & Computer Entertainment in 1988 and 1989 . The main characters Kuros and Malkil would make appearances in the animated series The Power Team ( part of the TV video game reviewing show Video Power ) and Captain N : The Game Master . The game would also be novelized for the Worlds of Power series of NES game adaptations , created by Seth Godin . It received general praise for its graphics , sound , difficulty , and arcade-style gameplay . Criticisms include the presence of unlimited continues , which allow players to restart the game right where they previously left off while retaining all items that were collected before . Retro Gamer called Wizards & Warriors " a unique experience for NES gamers in 1987 , and technically well ahead of other games for the console at the time " . The game also spawned three sequels : Ironsword : Wizards & Warriors II , Wizards & Warriors III : Kuros : Visions of Power and Wizards & Warriors X : The Fortress of Fear .

Wizards & Warriors pits the story 's hero Kuros , the " Knight Warrior of the Books of Excalibur " , against the main antagonist , the evil wizard Malkil . He was considered one of the greatest wizards in the land , such that Merlin was one of his students . However , the aging Malkil has gone mad and has started using his magic for evil . As a result , Malkil has captured the princess and holds her prisoner in Castle IronSpire , deep within the forests of Elrond . The game 's protagonist , the brave knight Kuros , is summoned to venture through the forests of Elrond . He is armed with the legendary Brightsword , a sword that is powerful enough to beat demons , insects , undead , and the other creatures which have fallen under Malkil 's spell . With the sword , he ventures out through the forests of Elrond and the various caves and underground tunnels and to Castle IronSpire , where he must defeat Malkil and rescue the princess .

Wizards & Warriors is a platformer in which players control Kuros as he makes his way through the forests of Elrond to Castle IronSpire , where he must defeat Malkil and rescue the princess . After starting the game , the map is briefly shown for players to look at ; afterwards , gameplay starts . Starting in the Elrond forest , players must explore the trees – both on top and inside – to find items and to make it into the caves and tunnels . There , players start collecting the various magical items and treasure ; they must make their way through caves filled with ice as well as lava . Afterwards , players fight through a second set of forests before arriving at Castle IronSpire , in which the player must go over the castle in order to enter it . The castle consists of a series of mazes in which players must use keys to open doors and possibly find other damsels which can be rescued . At the end lies the final confrontation with the wizard Malkil . Players use the control pad to move horizontally and to crouch . Kuros can attack enemies by using his Brightsword or with other weapons and magic . He can also attack enemies while in the air or while standing by simply holding the sword in position . The objective of the game is to collect the various weapons and magic as well as the gems and treasure along the way ; players use these items to make it past the enemies and other obstacles and hazards . Players collect gems in order to " bribe " the creature who guards the entrance to the next level ; if players do not have enough gems , they cannot progress to the next level . At the end of each level is a boss creature which has been empowered by Malkil 's black magic . Bosses have an " Enemy 's Black Magic Power " meter which shows how difficult the boss is , how many hits are required to defeat it , and what type of weaponry needs to be used . Kuros has a life meter which decreases as time passes and when he sustains damage from enemies . Players loses a life when Kuros ' life meter runs out , but upon restarting they keep all the items they have obtained up to that point . The game ends when all three lives have been lost , but players have the choice to continue and restart at the level in which they lost their last life ; upon continuing , players keep all their items obtained up to that point , but their score goes back to zero . Along the way , players can replenish Kuros ' life meter by collecting pieces of meat scattered throughout the levels .

Along the way , players pick up many items which will help Kuros along his way . Acorns , torches , and treasure chests contain objects for players to collect . Chests are color-coded and require a key of that matching color to open the chest ; the same color-coded keys are used to open doors of matching colors . Some weapons and magic items are replaced once the player collects a new item , but others remain throughout the course of the game . Items include the following : " Boots of Force " which can kick open chests and doors ; magical potions which temporarily grant Kuros invulnerability , extra speed , or extra jumping ability ; gems to help bribe the end-of-level guardian ; a shield to protect from enemy attacks ; the " Potion of Levitation " which allows Kuros to float upwards ; the " Dagger of Throwing " and the " Battle Axe of Agor " which are thrown at enemies and return like a boomerang ; the " Feather of Feather Fall " which slows Kuros ' falling speed ; the " Wand of Wonder " and " Staff of Power " which shoot out balls of ice and fire , respectively ; the " Cloak of Darkness " which makes Kuros invisible to enemies ; the " Boots of Lava Walk " which allows Kuros to walk on the lava ; " Exploding Eggs " which destroys all on-screen enemies ; " Alarm Clocks " which stops all enemies for a brief period ; knife and axe upgrades and an item simply called a " horn " ( trumpet ) which had many players confused as it appeared to be useless , its purpose was to reveal hidden doors to gem caves in some places . Other valuable treasures increase the player 's score and include coins , orbs , chalices , and entire hoards of treasure . Rescuing the damsels in the levels also increase the player 's score .

Wizards & Warriors was developed by UK-based video game company Rare for the Nintendo Entertainment System . It was released by Acclaim in North American in December 1987 ; it would later be released by the same company in Europe on January 7 , 1990 . It was released in Japan by Jaleco under the title Densetsu no Kishi Elrond on July 15 , 1988 . The game would be Rare 's second NES release , after Slalom . The game 's soundtrack was composed by video game composer David Wise . Wizards & Warriors was reviewed in Nintendo Fun Club News – the precursor to Nintendo Power – in which a brief overview of the gameplay was given . The game would be featured again in Nintendo Power 's November – December 1989 issue , where it was chosen as the best game to use with the NES Advantage controller , saying that the joystick would allow players to concentrate on other strategic gameplay elements . In 1989 , Wizards & Warriors was nominated by the magazine for " Best Graphics & Sound " and " Best Character " ( Kuros ) for its " Nintendo Power Awards ' 88 " , but it did not win in either category . It also received coverage in a 1989 issue of VideoGames & Computer Entertainment . The reviewer lauded the game 's challenge and need for problem solving – more particular the need to use different items aside from the Brightsword in order to defeat some enemies and progress in the game , and the need to find hidden rooms where required items are located . However , he noted that the high level of difficulty is offset by the ability to continue at exactly the same spot in which the player left off . Overall , the reviewer praised Wizards & Warriors for its " excellent graphics and sound " , arcade-style gameplay , and overall challenge . German magazine Power Play praised the game 's good graphics , sound and extras , but criticized its " stale gameplay " .

In a retrospective of the entire Wizards & Warriors series , UK-based magazine Retro Gamer gave a positive review of the first title , saying that " Kuros 's first adventure was a unique experience for NES gamers in 1987 , and technically well ahead of other games for the console at the time . " The review said that the game , while a platformer , placed much emphasis on finding treasure and items . The review said that most gamers found fault in relatively easy difficulty level , most symbolized by its unlimited continues in which players can continue at the point right where they left off . According to the retrospective , in 1988 , Rare showed Wizards & Warriors to Zippo Games , who was touring Rare and their NES library . Rare asked them to develop a sequel to the game , which would become Ironsword : Wizards & Warriors II . In another retrospective of Rare as part of the company 's 25th anniversary , GamePro looked back on the game , calling it " unique at the time " due to the unlimited amount of continues players received . Wizards & Warriors has received scant coverage from modern video gaming websites . Video gaming website GamesRadar named the opening theme for the game as " Game music of the day " , noting that the theme " suggests , from the moment you turn on the game , that knights , wizards , goblins and who knows what else are about to collide in a battle so epic it 's destined for a Frazetta painting . " JC Fletcher from Joystiq called the game " a simple action-platformer about a guy in thick armor who kicks open treasure chests in order to bribe knights " . He also notes the variety of good and bad items such as the " Staff of Power " which inflicts much damage to enemies and conversely the " Cloak of Darkness " , which he says " makes Kuros invisible to you but not to enemies " . He said that the game has an arcade feel , with unlimited continues , a high-score list , name entry for high scores , and good music . Houston Press ' Jef Rouner lauded the game 's music and animation , and noted its high difficulty level , especially during boss battles . IGN listed Wizards & Warriors at # 56 on its " Top 100 NES Games " list , reviewer Sam Claiborn said that the game was inspired by Dungeons & Dragons-type RPGs , but it went further in incorporating action platforming elements along with more traditional RPG elements . Columnist and comedy writer Seanbaby humorously criticized the game for items that did not work as intended , including the " Cloak of Darkness " and the " Boots of Lava Walk " .

Wizards & Warriors was ported as a standalone handheld game by Acclaim in September 1989 , as part of a series of handheld ports by the company which also included WWF WrestleMania Challenge , Knight Rider , 1943 : The Battle of Midway , and Rocky . Kuros and his nemesis Malkil were featured – along with the title characters from Kwirk and BigFoot , Tyrone from Arch Rivals , and characters from NARC – in the 1990 animated series The Power Team , part of the video game reviewing show Video Power . Malkil appeared in an episode of Captain N : The Game Master called " Nightmare on Mother Brain 's Street " where the world of the game was referred to as " Excalibur " and not Elrond . Wizards & Warriors was one of the eight games that were novelized for the Worlds of Power series of NES game adaptations , published by Scholastic Corporation ; the novelization was written by the series ' creator Seth Godin , under the pseudonym " F. X. Nine " . The book was the only one in the series in which no effort was made to edit out the protagonist 's weapons on the cover . However , on the cover , Kuros ' loincloth was airbrushed on both sides in order to more completely conceal his underside – which is more visible on the cover of the game itself . The novelization is about a boy named Matthew who is having trouble using his imagination for a creative writing class , when he accidentally brings his father 's knight figurine to life . He is then spirited away to the land of Elrond to help Kuros defeat Malkil . As with the other books in the series in which nobody actually " died " , all of the creatures that they killed were made from the lives of the people of Elrond , and whenever a creature was slain , a person was returned to their normal state . Further in the novel , the two save Kuros sister in the pink caves . While Matthew was invulnerable at the start of the mission , as the two drew closer to the evil wizard , he becomes more vulnerable to the attacks of Malkil 's villains .

Disasterpieces is the second video album by American metal band Slipknot . Released on November 26 , 2002 , a 2-disc case DVD features Slipknot performing a concert at London Dockland Arena , as well all of the band 's music videos until its release including songs from Slipknot and Iowa . The concert was filmed by 26 cameras , including a camera on the headstock of Mick Thomson 's guitar and a " first person " point of view of several band-members . The show was edited in part by band member Shawn Crahan who watched all of the footage recorded from the show . Disasterpieces was met with positive critical reception , with many citing the quick editing and high sound quality as strong points . In 2005 the DVD was certified quadruple platinum by the RIAA and is the band 's highest selling DVD to date shipping at least 400,000 units as a longform video .

Disasterpieces was recorded at the now defunct London Dockland Arena in England on February 16 , 2002 , it was one of the final dates on the band 's European tour which was subsequently their final tour until 2004 . The concert was shot with 26 different cameras under the direction of Matthew Amos and documents the show , backstage action and an in-store signing in Paris , France . In addition to operated cameras each band member had an individual camera which was attached to the side of their masks , apart from Mick Thomson whose camera was attached to the headstock of his guitar . The concept behind these cameras was to allow the viewer to see the show from the band member 's point of view . However they did cause some discomfort and problems for some band members . Bassist Paul Gray removed his after four songs , explaining that " they gave us this big [ camera ] pack to wear around our waist . So when I was jumping around , the thing started sliding down my leg " . Also during the song " Spit It Out " DJ Sid Wilson had his camera stolen when he was in the crowd , however it was returned at the end of the show , all of this is documented on the DVD .

The performance was edited by percussionist Shawn Crahan and Paul Richardson . Crahan later explained that he didn 't have an outline when he began editing , to the disbelief of others closest to him he watched all the footage in order to find the most appropriate footage to help immerse the viewer in the show . Additional content on the two-disc set includes all music videos by the band at the time of release and the track " Purity " , which was removed from Slipknot due to legal reasons , in audio form . The DVD also gives the ability to the viewer to use the remote to change the viewing angle during " Disasterpiece " and also to view the individual band member mask cameras during " People = Shit " and " The Heretic Anthem " . The DVD was unveiled at an advance screening in New York City on November 1 , 2002 and was released on November 22 .

Disasterpieces was generally well received by critics . Kirk Miller of Rolling Stone complimented the multitude of camera angles and quick edits , writing that they helped to " [ take ] advantage of the masked metal giants ' sprawling live show " . Ottawa XPress reviewer Mitch Joel wrote that the sound was " mixed perfectly ... [ making ] songs like ' People = Shit ' , ' Spit It Out ' and ' Surfacing ' rocket " . Overall , he concluded , " Disasterpieces is an awesome and all-embracing package . " Disasterpieces peaked at number 3 in the Billboard Top Music Videos chart and rose to number 1 in Finland . On January 6 , 2003 the RIAA certified Disasterpieces platinum in the United States , and it was declared quadruple platinum on November 18 , 2005 .

Spike Spiegel ( Japanese : スパイク ・ スピーゲル , Hepburn : Supaiku Supīgeru ) is the central protagonist of the 1998 anime series Cowboy Bebop . Spike is a former member of the criminal Red Dragon Syndicate , who left by faking his death after falling in love with a woman called Julia . He is first introduced as the partner of Jet Black , captain of the spaceship Bebop : the two are legalized bounty hunters pursuing criminals across the populated worlds . During his adventures on board the Bebop , he is drawn back into a bitter feud with Vicious , a rival from the Syndicate who seeks to kill him . Spike was created by Shinichirō Watanabe and Toshihiro Kawamoto as part of the production entity Hajime Yatate . Created as a mirror image of Watanabe and based on Yusaku Matsuda 's character in Tantei Monogatari , he was designed as someone who would expect others to follow his lead . Kawamoto deliberately designed him to appear " uncool " to create the opposite effect for viewers . His final confrontation with Vicious was planned well in advance . His portrayal in the later movie adaptation displayed the character 's softer side and inner thoughts . Spike is voiced in Japanese by Kōichi Yamadera . In the English dub , he is voiced by Steven Blum .

In addition to the series , Spike has been featured in two manga adaptations , and been the main protagonist of two video game adaptations . Reception of Spike has been positive in Japan and the West , with multiple reviewers praising his portrayal . He has appeared on multiple reader and critic lists of the best anime characters . In addition to the series , many reviewers of the movie positively noted his expanded portrayal in The Movie . Both actors have been praised for their performances , with Blum commenting that it boosted his voice acting career .

Spike is a fictional bounty hunter who was born on Mars on June 26 , 2044 : he is 27 years old , has fluffy dark-green hair and brown eyes . His right eye is artificial , and consequently lighter than the other . He stands 6 ' 1 " and weighs 155 lbs . Spike is a heavy smoker , and is frequently seen smoking despite rain or " no smoking " signs . A skilled martial artist who practices Jeet Kune Do , he is a devote follower of the philosophies of Bruce Lee . He also owns a converted antique Asteroid racer called the Swordfish II . During gunfights , he most often uses a Jericho 941 . In his younger days before joining the Bebop , Spike was part of the Red Dragon Syndicate , a Chinese criminal organization : during his time there , he was impetuous and volatile , but after leaving he became a calm and collected character with a love for combat . While holding little value in money or justice , he always holds true to his own values and fulfills his obligations . He also generally does this his way rather than following orders , which generally gets him into trouble . Watanabe has said that Spike has a habit of being very indirect with his emotions ; for example , he may behave antagonistically towards someone he actually likes . He says that this could apply to Spike 's relationship with Faye Valentine .

Years before the beginning of the series , Spike is a rising member of the Red Dragon crime syndicate . While there , he becomes a partner and friend of Vicious , another member of the Syndicate . Wounded from a gun battle , Spike is nursed back to health by Vicious ' girlfriend Julia , and the two fall in love . They plan to elope and escape the Syndicate , but Vicious finds out and attempts to force Julia to kill Spike or risk her own death . After Spike fakes his death to escape the Syndicate , Julia goes into hiding and does not meet up with him . Spike eventually met and teamed up with former Inter Solar System Police officer Jet Black . As legalized bounty hunters , they travel the Solar System 's inhabited worlds hunting criminals . During his time on the Bebop , he and Jet are joined by Ein , an intelligent Welsh corgi ; Faye Valentine , a gambler and original resident of Earth woken from cryogenic sleep ; and Edward " Ed " Wong Hau Pepelu Tivruski IV , an eccentric girl from Earth who is a master hacker . Spike also has run-ins with Vicious on two occasions : in " Ballad of Fallen Angels " , while pursuing a Red Dragon executive , Spike and Vicious battle in a derelict church and Spike is nearly killed . Later , in " Jupiter Jazz " , Spike hears that Julia was seen on Callisto and abandons the Bebop to look for her . Once there , he stumbles into a drug deal orchestrated by Gren , a man Vicious betrayed who is seeking revenge . During their confrontation , a three-way battle ensues : Vicious escapes , and Gren is fatally injured , but he succeeds in telling Spike that Julia is alive and in hiding .

During the final story of the series , " The Real Folk Blues " , Julia comes out of hiding and sends a message to Spike through Faye : the two meet and resolve to flee as originally planned . Vicious , having staged a coup d 'état and taken over the Red Dragon Syndicate , sends assassins after the two . During a battle , Julia is shot and killed . After saying his goodbyes to Jet and Faye , Spike storms the headquarters of the Syndicate and has a final confrontation with Vicious : Spike is severely wounded and Vicious is killed . Shortly after this , Spike walks into and collapses in the entrance hall . Spike 's ultimate fate was deliberately left ambiguous , with Watanabe eventually unable to say whether he lived or died .

Spike is the main protagonist of Cowboy Bebop : The Movie , a story set between Episodes 22 and 23 of the original series while the Bebop crew are still working together . The crew of the Bebop take on a massive bounty for Vincent Volaju , who releases a cloud of deadly protean-based nanomachines in Mars ' capital city . During his pursuit , Spike initially fights then allies with Elektra Ovirowa , a former comrade of Vincent 's . Spike appears along with the other main characters in the manga adaptation of Cowboy Bebop and the alternate manga Cowboy Bebop : Shooting Star . In the PlayStation Cowboy Bebop , players control Spike as he pilots the Swordfish II during aerial battles through pre-set courses . Spike appears as one of the playable characters in the PlayStation 2 action / beat ' em up video game Cowboy Bebop : Tsuioku no Serenade , a game set within the continuity of the series .

During the first work by Shinichirō Watanabe on Cowboy Bebop , the first image that came to him was of Spike . Prior to that , Watanabe had the character of Spike in mind for a long time beforehand . From that point on , Watanabe " tried to build a story around him , trying to make him cool . " Watanabe created Spike as a mirror image of himself : in Watanabe 's words , " I don 't smoke or drink or fight , but I want to – so Spike does . " Spike forms the main focus on the series , with the central theme being his past and its karmic effect on him . Spike was portrayed as a very old-fashioned type of man , who would simply do what he wanted and expect others to follow his lead and watch him from the sidelines . Spike 's artificial eye was included as Watanabe wanted his characters to have flaws . He was originally going to give Spike an eye patch , but the producers vetoed it . In order to portray him as cool , Toshihiro Kawamoto designed Spike to look " uncool " : when he stands still , he has a hunched appearance . This meant that when the character was moving vigorously , he came across as " extra cool " . Spike 's appearance was primarily based on the main protagonist of Tantei Monogatari , portrayed by famous Japanese actor Yusaku Matsuda . Spike 's Swordfish II spaceship was created by mecha designer Kimitoshi Yamane . Yamane liked the English biplane torpedo-bomber Fairey Swordfish , which led him to name the Swordfish II after the bomber . The conclusion of Spike 's story and his final battle with Vicious were planned by Watanabe well in advance , with each episode featuring them meant to shadow their final confrontation . Some of the staff were unhappy about this approach as a continuation of the series would be difficult . While he considered altering the ending , he eventually settled with his original idea .

Spike 's Japanese voice actor , Kōichi Yamadera , was pleased to have gotten the part , but Unshō Ishizuka , Jet 's voice actor , was surprised that Yamadera was not cast as Jet . Spike and Jet were designed to be opposites , with Spike being thin and wearing smart attire , while Jet was bulky and wore more casual clothing . His English voice actor , Steven Blum , used film noir imagery to get himself in the right frame of mind to voice the character convincingly . Blum had some difficulty portraying the character in scenes where he was showing vulnerability . He called Spike an " example of a character [ he ] didn 't fully appreciate until the series was over " , also adding that he would like to reprise his role as the character if given the chance . Spike 's portrayal was expanded in Cowboy Bebop : The Movie . Specifically , according to Yamadera , the character displayed more of his inner thoughts and showed a gentler side than he did in the series . This was because the team had more time available to express such details . Blum found his performance in the movie one of his most difficult from an emotional standpoint , as there were scenes where Spike was portrayed quite differently from the version he had been playing in the series .

Spike 's character has been well received in Japan . He won first place in the Best Male Character category at Animage 's annual Anime Grand Prix awards two consecutive times in 1998 and 1999 . In the August 2001 issue of Newtype , Spike was ranked first on the magazine 's list of " Top 10 Most Popular Male Anime Characters in Japan " . The next year in July 2002 , Spike was again placed at number one on Newtype 's anime list of " Favorite Male Character " . In a Newtype poll from March 2010 , Spike was voted by readers as the eighteenth most popular male anime character from the 1990s . In 2014 , Kōichi Yamadera was voted by fans as the third coolest " old guy " voice actor in a Goo Ranking poll , with his portrayal of Spike cited as one of the contributing factors . Western critics have also directed significant praise towards Spike . In his review of Cowboy Bebop , Anime News Network 's Mike Crandol praised the character portrayals , especially Spike 's , stating that " Spike 's character in particular runs the gamut from goofy to blasé to teeth-gnashing tough ; he is one of most three-dimensional anime leads in recent memory . " Christi of THEM Anime Review 4.0 complimented Spike 's story arc in the series , saying that " the underlying theme of Spike Spiegel and his motivations for what he does is absolutely intriguing . " DVDTalk 's Kyle Mills called Spike the epitome of a good lead protagonist , referring to him as " composed , always cool , and is essentially the ultimate badass " , although his true nature is gradually shown throughout the series . In an article in The Atlantic , writer Alex Suskind was positive about Spike 's portrayal and development , saying that the word " cool " was the most apt way of describing him and referring to him as " a space-age samurai-cum-Marlboro Man " . Richard Eisenbeis of Kotaku , writing a retrospective on the series , praised the relationship between Spike and Faye , especially the way it evolved through the series without overt verbal expressions of affection .

His portrayal in The Movie has also received praise : IGN 's Andy Patrizio said that Spike " opens up his soul a little " during the film , while Chris Beveridge of Mania.com found Spike more likable in the film than in some parts of the series , comparing him to Lupin III and praising the moments where he could be himself and show more of his inner self . Carlos Ross of THEM Anime Review said that Spike 's portrayal was one of the things that worked in the film , and DVD Talk 's Neil Lumbard , alongside general praise of the characters , positively noted the further exploration of his personality . Anime News Network 's Mike Crandol was less enthusiastic , saying that while Spike was the only one who got much attention during the film , some sequences felt like they could work without him . Blum 's portrayal as Spike has also drawn praise . Isler stated that " Steve Blum launched his career into new heights when he gave the performance of a lifetime in the English dub of the series , giving Spike a sense of smooth , effortless cool that many argue surpassed the original Japanese version . " While praising the whole principal cast of the series as one of the best English dubs , Serdar Yegulalp of About.com highlighted Blum as Spike as the standout performance of the series , stating that " Cynicism never sounded this suave or self-assured " . Blum himself has called Spike a " gigantic benchmark " in his career and life , saying that " Spike changed everything " for him . He stated that his role as Spike opened up new opportunities for voicing characters , including T.O.M. on Toonami and Jamie on Megas XLR .

In 2009 and 2014 , IGN ranked Spike among the best anime characters of all time . In 2009 , Chris Mackenzie ranked Spike as the fourth greatest anime character behind Goku , Astro Boy , and Speed Racer . In 2014 , Ramsey Isler ranked him as second greatest behind Shinji Ikari of Neon Genesis Evangelion . At the 2005 Anime Awards from About.com , Spike was nominated in the category " Best Lead Male Character " , though he lost to Goku . In 2010 , Wired included Spike on its list of the " 6 Genre-Tripping Gunfighters Jonah Hex Must Duel FTW ! " , with writer Scott Thill complimenting his abilities , while also commenting on his presence of heart compared to other equivalent protagonists . In 2013 , Complex ranked Spike the fourth most stylish anime character ever , with writer Jian DeLeon commenting that " The Mars-born bounty hunter knows the benefit of a good uniform " . In 2014 , WatchMojo.com named Spike an honorable mention on its list of the " Top 10 Anime Anti-Heroes " , and also ranked him at number nine on its list of the " Top 10 Anime Heroes " .

No. 1 Squadron is a Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) squadron headquartered at RAAF Base Amberley , Queensland . Controlled by No. 82 Wing , it is equipped with Boeing F / A-18F Super Hornet multi-role fighters . The squadron was formed under the Australian Flying Corps in 1916 and saw action in the Sinai and Palestine Campaigns during World War I. It flew obsolete Royal Aircraft Factory B.E.2s , B.E.12s , Martinsyde G.100s and G.102s , as well as Airco DH.6s , Bristol Scouts and Nieuport 17s , before re-equipping with the R.E.8 in October 1917 and finally the Bristol Fighter in December . Its commanding officer in 1917 – 18 was Major Richard Williams , later known as the " Father of the RAAF " . Disbanded in 1919 , No. 1 Squadron was re-formed on paper as part of the RAAF in 1922 , and re-established as an operational unit three years later . During World War II , the squadron flew Lockheed Hudson bombers in the Malayan and Dutch East Indies campaigns , suffering severe losses before being reduced to cadre in 1942 . It was re-formed with Bristol Beauforts the following year , and re-equipped with de Havilland Mosquitos in 1945 for further operations in the Dutch East Indies . Reduced to cadre once more after the war ended , No. 1 Squadron was re-established at Amberley in 1948 as an Avro Lincoln heavy bomber unit . From 1950 to 1958 it was based in Singapore , flying missions during the Malayan Emergency , where it bore the brunt of the Commonwealth air campaign against communist guerillas . When it returned to Australia it re-equipped with English Electric Canberra jet bombers . It operated McDonnell Douglas F-4E Phantoms from 1970 to 1973 , as a stop-gap pending delivery of the General Dynamics F-111C swing-wing bomber . The F-111 remained in service for 37 years until replaced by the Super Hornet in 2010 . From September 2014 to March 2015 , a detachment of Super Hornets was deployed to the Middle East as part of Australia 's contribution to the military intervention against ISIL .

No. 1 Squadron is located at RAAF Base Amberley , Queensland , and controlled by No. 82 Wing , which is part of Air Combat Group . Its mission responsibilities include air-to-air and air-to-surface combat . The squadron is nicknamed the " Fighting First " . The blazon of its crest is " the Australian Kookaburra in a diving position superimposed on the cross of Jerusalem " , which symbolises the Victoria Cross-winning action of No. 1 Squadron pilot Frank McNamara in Palestine during World War I. The unit motto is Videmus Agamus ( " We see and we strike " ) . The squadron operates Boeing F / A-18F Super Hornet multi-role fighters , the first of which entered service in March 2010 . Nicknamed the " Rhino " , its missions include air superiority , fighter escort , land strike , maritime strike , close air support , and reconnaissance . The Super Hornet is larger than the " classic " McDonnell Douglas F / A-18 Hornet operated by the RAAF , carries more ordnance , and has a greater fuel capacity . It is fitted with a 20 mm cannon and can be armed with air-to-air and anti-shipping missiles , as well as a variety of air-to-ground bombs and missiles . Flown by a crew of two , a pilot and an air combat officer ( ACO ) , it is capable of engaging targets in the air and on the surface simultaneously . It can be refuelled in flight by the RAAF 's Airbus KC-30A Multi Role Tanker Transports . The Super Hornets are serviced at the operating level by No. 1 Squadron technical staff ; heavier maintenance is conducted by Boeing Defence Australia and other contractors .

No. 1 Squadron was established as a unit of the Australian Flying Corps ( AFC ) at Point Cook , Victoria , in January 1916 under the command of Lieutenant Colonel E.H. Reynolds . With a complement of 28 officers , 195 airmen , no aircraft and little training , it sailed for Egypt in mid-March 1916 , arriving at Suez a month later . There it came under the control of the 5th Wing of the Royal Flying Corps ( RFC ) . After training in England and Egypt , the unit was declared operational at its new headquarters in Heliopolis on 12 June , when it took over aircraft belonging to No. 17 Squadron RFC . Its three flights were , however , operating in isolation at different bases in the Sinai Desert , and the squadron did not reunite until December . Flying primitive and poorly armed Royal Aircraft Factory B.E.2 two-seat biplanes , its primary roles during this period of the Sinai Campaign were reconnaissance — including aerial photography — and artillery spotting for the British Army . No. 1 Squadron pilots attached to No. 14 Squadron RFC took part in the Battle of Romani in July and August . In September and October , B and C Flights , led by Captains Oswald Watt and Richard Williams respectively , undertook bombing and reconnaissance missions in support of the Australian Light Horse in northern Sinai .

On 12 September 1916 , the British began to refer to No. 1 Squadron as No. 67 ( Australian ) Squadron RFC . This practice continued until January 1918 , when the unit officially became known as No. 1 Squadron AFC . The relationship between airmen and ground crew was less formal than in British units ; squadron members recalled that " The CO is the only one who is ever called ' sir ' " and that officers did not demand " saluting and standing to attention and all that rot " . The unit received the first of several Martinsyde G.100 single-seat fighters to augment the B.E.2s on 16 October ; although considered obsolete , the " Tinsyde " was substantially faster than the B.E.2 , and armed with forward-firing machine guns . Shortly before the squadron took part in a bombing raid against Beersheba on 11 November , Lieutenant Lawrence Wackett managed to fix a machine gun to the top plane of one of the B.E.2s , using a mount he designed himself . Each flight was also assigned a Bristol Scout beginning in December , but it too was obsolete and under-powered , and the squadron ceased operating the type within three months . Other older models issued to the unit included the Airco DH.6 , Martinsyde G.102 and Nieuport 17 . On 17 December , the squadron 's flights were finally brought together at one base , Mustabig .

Early March 1917 saw the heaviest bombing campaign carried out by the squadron to date ; short of its regular 20-pound ( 9.1 kg ) ordnance , the pilots improvised by dropping 6-inch ( 150 mm ) howitzer shells on Turkish forces along the Gaza – Beersheba line . During one such mission on 20 March , Lieutenant Frank McNamara earned the Victoria Cross for landing his Martinsyde in the desert under enemy fire and rescuing a fellow pilot whose B.E.2 had been forced down . On 26 March , No. 1 Squadron took part in the First Battle of Gaza ; it suffered its first combat death the next day , when one of its B.E.2s was attacked by a German Rumpler . The unit participated in the Second Battle of Gaza on 19 April ; like its predecessor , the attack was a failure for the Allies . Williams , later to become known as the " Father of the RAAF " , assumed command of the squadron in May . Two B.E.12s were delivered the same month ; like the Martinsydes , they were armed with a forward-firing machine gun and employed as escorts for the B.E.2s. By June , mechanical issues caused by hot summer weather and the threat from new German Albatros scouts were rendering the B.E.2s largely ineffective , and Williams urgently requested newer models . Modern aircraft were eventually delivered , first the Royal Aircraft Factory R.E.8 in October , and then the Bristol F.2 Fighter in December . " Now for the first time , " wrote Williams , " after 17 months in the field we had aircraft with which we could deal with our enemy in the air . "

No. 1 Squadron joined the 40th ( Army ) Wing of the RFC 's Palestine Brigade on 5 October 1917 . On 22 and 24 November , the squadron bombed Bireh village during the Battle of Jerusalem . The first of its 29 confirmed aerial victories , over an Albatros , occurred on 3 January 1918 . By month 's end , its complement of aircraft included five B.E.2s , five Martinsydes , two R.E.8s , and nine Bristol Fighters . The squadron supported the Capture of Jericho in February 1918 . It carried out air raids and reconnoitred prior to the First Transjordan attack on Amman in March and prior to the Second Transjordan attack on Shunet Nimrin and Es Salt a month later ; it also flew reconnaissance missions during the advance to and fighting near Es Salt and Jisr ed Damieh . By the end of March , it was equipped with 18 Bristol Fighters , which had replaced all the other types . As well as undertaking offensive operations , the Bristol Fighters served in the photo-reconnaissance role . During the last week of April 1918 , the squadron moved its base forward from Mejdel to a new aerodrome outside Ramleh . Williams relinquished command in June to take over 40th Wing .

Beginning in August 1918 , members of No. 1 Squadron , including one of its aces , Lieutenant Ross Smith , were attached to Colonel T.E. Lawrence 's Arab army to protect it against German bombing . In September , the squadron began operating a Handley Page 0 / 100 , the only Allied heavy bomber in the Middle East and the only twin-engined aircraft flown by the AFC . That month it joined the Bristol Fighters in the final offensive of the Palestinian Campaign , the Battle of Armageddon , inflicting what the Australian official history described as " wholesale destruction " on the Turkish Seventh Army . By October , the Bristol Fighters had moved forward from Ramleh to Haifa and by the middle of the month were required to patrol and reconnoitre an exceptionally wide area of country , sometimes between 500 and 600 miles ( 800 and 970 km ) , flying over Rayak , Homs , Beirut , Tripoli , Hama , Aleppo , Killis and Alexandretta . They bombed the German aerodromes at Rayak , where 32 German machines had been either abandoned or burnt , on 2 October . On 19 October , the first German aircraft was seen in the air since fighting over Deraa in mid-September , just prior to the Battle of Sharon . Smith and another pilot forced a DFW two-seater to land , and destroyed it on the ground by firing a Very light into the aircraft after the German pilot and observer had moved to safety . In the wake of the 31 October armistice with Turkey , the squadron relocated to Ramleh in December , and then in February 1919 to Kantara . There its members were personally farewelled by General Sir Edmund Allenby , who congratulated them for achieving " absolute supremacy of the air ... a factor of paramount importance " to the Allied campaign .

No. 1 Squadron returned to Australia on 5 March 1919 , and was disbanded . In 1921 , the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) was established as a separate branch of the military , and on 1 January 1922 , the squadron was re-formed on paper . Its planned strength , approved by the Air Board in December 1921 , was three officers and five airmen , operating four Airco DH.9s. Funding problems for the fledgling Air Force resulted in the disbandment on 1 July of No. 1 Squadron and other units established at the same time , their aircraft and personnel instead forming a single squadron of six flights under the control of No. 1 Flying Training School ( No. 1 FTS ) at Point Cook . No. 1 Squadron was reactivated as an operational unit of the RAAF reserve , known as the Citizen Air Force ( CAF ) , at Point Cook on 1 July 1925 . Its commanding officer was Flight Lieutenant Harry Cobby . Like No. 3 Squadron , formed the same day at Point Cook but transferred to RAAF Richmond , New South Wales , three weeks later , No. 1 Squadron was a multi-purpose or " composite " unit made up of three flights , each of which had a different role and comprised four aircraft : A Flight operated DH.9s for army cooperation , B Flight operated Royal Aircraft Factory S.E.5 fighters , and C Flight operated DH.9A bombers . A third of the squadron 's complement of 27 officers and 169 airmen was Permanent Air Force ( PAF ) , and the rest CAF . No. 1 Squadron relocated from Point Cook to nearby RAAF Laverton on 1 January 1928 . The RAAF retired its S.E.5s the same year , and in 1929 took delivery of Westland Wapiti general-purpose aircraft to replace its DH.9s and DH.9As. Through the inter-war years , No. 1 Squadron undertook various tasks including civil aid , flood and bushfire relief , search and rescue , aerial surveys , and air show demonstrations . In October 1930 , a de Havilland DH.60 Moth attached to the unit conducted Australia 's first crop-dusting operation , at the behest of the Victorian Forestry Commission .

RAAF squadrons began adopting specialised roles in the early 1930s , No. 1 Squadron becoming No. 1 Single-Engined Bomber Squadron . By November 1935 it was made up of two flights of newly delivered Hawker Demon fighter-bombers , and one of Wapitis . In December 1935 it was augmented by No. 1 FTS 's Fighter Squadron and its six Bristol Bulldogs , which were redesignated fighter-bombers . Nos. 21 and 22 ( Cadre ) Squadrons were formed on 20 April 1936 at Laverton and Richmond , respectively , absorbing the CAF personnel of Nos. 1 and 3 Squadrons , which became PAF units . The same day , No. 1 Squadron was renamed No. 1 ( Fighter Bomber ) Squadron . This reorganisation temporarily denuded No. 1 Squadron of most of its aircraft , leaving only A Flight , with four Bulldogs and a Wapiti , in operation . The Wapiti was transferred to No. 1 FTS in July , and by the end of the month the squadron 's complement of aircraft stood at four Bulldogs and one Moth . No. 1 Squadron began receiving new Demons in November 1936 . In January 1937 , it relinquished its Bulldogs to No. 21 Squadron , which was to hold them until they could be transferred to the soon-to-be-formed No. 2 Squadron . By the end of February , No. 1 Squadron 's strength was 12 Demons and one Moth , 11 officers and 108 airmen . The unit was redesignated No. 1 ( Bomber ) Squadron in August 1937 . Towards the end of the year , it was plagued by several Demon accidents , resulting in a series of inquiries and a review of RAAF procedures in 1938 by Marshal of the RAF Sir Edward Ellington ; the so-called Ellington Report and its criticism of air safety standards led to the removal of Air Vice-Marshal Richard Williams from his position as Chief of the Air Staff , which he had held since the formation of the Air Force . No. 1 Squadron received the RAAF 's first three CAC Wirraways on 10 July 1939 . As the likelihood of war increased , the squadron 's role was altered to incorporate reconnaissance as well as bombing , resulting in the transfer out of all Demons and Wirraways and the transfer in from other units of nine Avro Ansons on 28 – 29 August 1939 ; at the end of the month its personnel comprised nine officers and 122 airmen .

Following the outbreak of World War II , No. 1 Squadron 's Ansons were tasked with maritime patrol and convoy escort duties . In 1940 , the squadron became the RAAF 's inaugural Lockheed Hudson unit ; it received its first Hudson on 30 March , and by the end of May had transferred out the last of its Ansons and was operating 11 of the new aircraft . Deployed to Malaya to conduct maritime reconnaissance , No. 1 Squadron arrived at Sembawang , Singapore , on 4 July 1940 . It relocated to Kota Bharu , near the Malaya – Thailand border , in August 1941 . Two days before the attack on Malaya , its Hudsons spotted the Japanese invasion fleet but , given uncertainty about the ships ' destination and instructions to avoid offensive operations until attacks were made against friendly territory , Air Chief Marshal Sir Robert Brooke-Popham did not allow the convoy to be bombed . Shortly after midnight , local time , on the night of 7 / 8 December , the Japanese force started landing on the beaches at Kota Bharu , close to the airfield , and from about 02 : 00 , No. 1 Squadron launched a series of assaults on the Japanese forces , becoming the first aircraft to make an attack in the Pacific War . The Hudsons sank a Japanese transport ship , the IJN Awazisan Maru , and damaged two more transports , the Ayatosan Maru and Sakura Maru , for the loss of two Hudsons , an hour before the attack on Pearl Harbor . By the end of the day , Japanese ground forces had advanced to the outskirts of the airfield , forcing the squadron 's remaining airworthy aircraft to be evacuated to Kuantan , and from there back to Singapore .

By Christmas Eve 1941 , No. 1 Squadron had five serviceable aircraft . Together with No. 8 Squadron RAAF , also equipped with Hudsons , it was tasked with maritime patrols to the east of Singapore . On 26 January 1942 , two of the squadron 's Hudsons spotted a Japanese convoy heading for Endau , on the east coast of Malaya . It was decided to attack the convoy with all possible strength , including four Hudsons from No. 1 Squadron and five from No. 8 Squadron , together with obsolete Vickers Vildebeest and Fairey Albacore biplanes of Nos. 36 and 100 Squadrons RAF , and with what little fighter escort could be found . The convoy was strongly defended by Japanese fighters , and although all nine Hudsons returned to Singapore , several were badly shot up . The rest of the strike force did not fare as well ; 11 Vildebeests , two Albacores , two Hudsons ( of No. 62 Squadron RAF ) and three fighters were lost . By the end of the month , No. 1 Squadron had withdrawn to airfield P.2 on Sumatra , along with several other Commonwealth units including No. 8 Squadron . It continued to attack Japanese bases in Malaya and convoys in the Dutch East Indies , relocating to Semplak , Java , in mid-February . At Semplak it took over the Hudsons of No. 8 Squadron and No. 65 Squadron RAF , giving it a strength of 25 aircraft ; at one stage it was to be renumbered as an RAF squadron , but this never occurred . Heavily outnumbered by Japanese air units , which raided Allied bases with impunity , No. 1 Squadron suffered heavy losses and was ordered to withdraw its four remaining Hudsons to Australia on 2 March 1942 , disbanding soon after . Although 120 of the squadron 's personnel were evacuated from Java , 160 men including the commanding officer , Wing Commander Davis , were unable to escape and were taken prisoner by the Japanese ; less than half survived captivity .

No. 1 Squadron was re-formed with Bristol Beauforts on 1 December 1943 at Menangle , New South Wales . By March 1944 it had deployed to Gould , Northern Territory , where it was controlled by No. 79 Wing under North-Western Area Command . Its strength at the beginning of the month was some 350 officers and men , and 19 Beauforts . The squadron commenced reconnaissance operations on 20 March , and undertook its first bombing mission on 4 April against Lautem , East Timor . It attacked other targets in Timor during May , losing two aircraft . Having undertaken 82 sorties in July , the Beauforts concentrated on maritime reconnaissance from August , using air-to-surface radar during operations from Gould and Gove . After re-equipping with Mosquito fighter-bombers at Kingaroy , Queensland , in January 1945 , the squadron deployed to Morotai in May and then Labuan Island in June – July . Now part of No. 86 ( Attack ) Wing , it flew only a few missions before the end of the war , losing one Mosquito . No. 1 Squadron returned to Australia in December 1945 and was disbanded at Narromine , New South Wales , on 7 August 1946 .

No. 1 Squadron was re-formed as a heavy bomber unit on 23 February 1948 , when No. 12 Squadron was re-designated . Operating Avro Lincolns , it was based at RAAF Station Amberley , Queensland , where it formed part of No. 82 ( Bomber ) Wing . The wing 's aircraft were serviced by No. 482 ( Maintenance ) Squadron . From July 1950 to July 1958 — for the first two-and-a-half years under the auspices of No. 90 ( Composite ) Wing — it was based in Singapore , flying missions against communist guerrillas during the Malayan Emergency . Tasked by RAF Air Headquarters Malaya , the Lincolns generally conducted area bombing missions , as well as strikes against pinpoint targets . They operated singly and in formations , sometimes in concert with RAF bombers , and often strafed targets with their machine guns and 20 mm cannon after dropping ordnance . The Lincolns were considered well suited to the campaign , owing to their range and ability to fly at low speeds to search for targets , as well as their firepower and heavy bomb load . Not having to contend with anti-aircraft fire , they flew mainly by day , but No. 1 Squadron also operated by night , the only Commonwealth unit to do so .

The squadron carried out its own day-to-day maintenance in Malaya ; the Lincolns were rotated back to Australia for major work . Its original complement of six aircraft was increased to eight after the British Air Ministry requested in February 1951 that Australia augment its bomber force to partly offset the imminent withdrawal of the RAF 's Lincolns to Bomber Command in Europe . The squadron was awarded the Gloucester Cup for proficiency in 1950 – 51 and 1954 – 55 . It suffered no casualties during the campaign but two of its aircraft were written off : one that overshot the landing strip at Tengah in November 1951 , and another that crashed into the sea off Johore after striking trees on takeoff in January 1957 . Although the original purpose of the bombing campaign in Malaya was to kill as many insurgents as possible , the impracticality of achieving this in operations over dense jungle resulted in a shift towards harassing and demoralising the communists , driving them out of their bases and into areas held by Commonwealth ground troops . Operation Kingly Pile , which involved two sorties by No. 1 Squadron and one by English Electric Canberra jet bombers of No. 12 Squadron RAF on 21 February 1956 , was considered the most successful of the more than 4,000 missions conducted by the Lincolns , killing at least 14 communist troops . By the time it was withdrawn to Australia in July 1958 , the squadron had dropped over 14,000 tonnes of bombs — 85 per cent of the total delivered by Commonwealth forces during the Emergency . Its service was recognised with the presentation of a Squadron Standard by the Commander-in-Chief Far East Air Force , Air Marshal The Earl of Brandon . Until 2014 , the Malayan Emergency had marked the last occasion that the unit took part in combat operations .

No. 1 Squadron re-equipped with Canberra Mk.20s after returning to Australia . The RAAF 's first jet bomber , the Canberra was subsonic but had long range and was highly manoeuvrable . It had been procured partly for its capacity to deliver nuclear weapons , an ordnance option the government seriously contemplated but never acquired . Initially the Canberra 's envisaged mission profile was medium-to-high-altitude area bombing but its primitive bombsight and light load made this a dubious proposition , and by mid-1961 crews were training in low-level army cooperation tactics . No. 1 Squadron was awarded successive Gloucester Cups for its proficiency in 1959 – 60 and 1960 – 61 . As of January 1962 , its strength was eight aircraft and 53 personnel , including 18 officers . The unit effectively ceased operations in 1968 , to begin converting to the General Dynamics F-111C supersonic bomber , which was expected to enter service soon afterwards . Already controversial owing to its escalating cost , the F-111 program was heavily delayed by airworthiness concerns related to its swing-wing technology . In September 1970 , as an interim measure while awaiting delivery of the F-111 , No. 1 Squadron relinquished its Canberras for leased McDonnell Douglas F-4E Phantoms , which it operated until June 1973 . Although the Phantom had a multi-role capability , the RAAF employed it as a strike aircraft to maintain compatibility with the proposed F-111 mission profile . One of No. 1 Squadron 's Phantoms was lost with its crew of two in June 1971 , the only fatalities and hull loss of the 24 aircraft leased to the RAAF . Though not as sophisticated an aircraft as the F-111 , the Phantom was a significant advance over the Canberra , and well regarded by its Australian crews .

No. 82 Wing accepted its first F-111Cs in June 1973 . The Chief of the Air Staff , Air Marshal Charles Read , ordered that the new aircraft be flown with great caution initially , well within operational limits , to minimise the possibility of further damage to its reputation through early attrition . No. 1 Squadron was assigned 12 of the initial 24 aircraft delivered . It was No. 82 Wing 's lead strike force , while No. 6 Squadron was primarily tasked with crew conversion training . The wing employed a centralised servicing regime , whereby all aircraft and maintenance personnel were held by No. 482 Squadron , which released the F-111s in line with Nos. 1 and 6 Squadrons ' joint flying program . In February 1981 , responsibility for operating-level servicing of the F-111s was transferred to the flying squadrons , which for the first time took direct control of their F-111s . No. 482 Squadron continued to provide intermediate-level servicing , while major upgrades and complex maintenance were carried out by No. 3 Aircraft Depot . These two organisations merged in 1992 to form No. 501 Wing , which handed over heavy maintenance of the F-111 to Boeing Australia in 2001 . Between 1977 and 1993 , the RAAF lost seven F-111Cs in crashes . Three of the accidents involved aircraft flown by No. 1 Squadron : in August 1979 , January 1986 and September 1993 , the last two killing both crew members . In July 1996 , No. 1 Squadron took responsibility for aerial reconnaissance using specially modified RF-111Cs previously operated by No. 6 Squadron . This gave No. 1 Squadron five mission types : land strike , maritime strike , close air support , long-range air defence , and reconnaissance . In May 1999 the unit was again awarded the Gloucester Cup for proficiency .

Along with its revolutionary variable-sweep wings , the F-111 was equipped with terrain-following radar and an escape module that allowed the entire cockpit to be jettisoned in an emergency , instead of individual ejection seats . Its top speed was Mach 2.5 and its combat radius gave it the capability of reaching targets in Indonesia from bases in northern Australia . Upon delivery in 1973 it was fitted with analogue avionics and could only drop unguided ( " dumb " ) bombs . In its 37 years of service with the RAAF the type went through several upgrades , including the Pave Tack infra-red and laser-guided precision weapons targeting system , Harpoon anti-shipping missiles , and advanced digital avionics . Alan Stephens , in the official history of the post-war Air Force , described the F-111 as " the region 's pre-eminent strike aircraft " and the RAAF 's most important acquisition . The closest they came to being used in anger , however , was during Australian-led INTERFET operations in East Timor commencing in September 1999 . Both F-111 squadrons were deployed to RAAF Base Tindal , Northern Territory , to support the international forces in case of action by the Indonesian military , and remained there until December ; six of No. 1 Squadron 's aircraft and approximately 100 personnel were involved . From 20 September , when INTERFET forces began to arrive in East Timor , the F-111s were maintained at a high level of readiness to conduct reconnaissance flights or air strikes if the situation deteriorated . As it happened , INTERFET did not encounter significant resistance , and F-111 operations were limited to reconnaissance by RF-111Cs from 5 November through 9 December .

In 2007 , the Australian government decided to retire the F-111s by 2010 , and acquire 24 Boeing F / A-18F Super Hornets as an interim replacement , pending the arrival of the Lockheed Martin F-35 Lightning then being developed . The F-111 fleet was considered to be at risk due to fatigue , and too expensive to operate as each aircraft required 180 hours of maintenance for every hour of flying time . No. 1 Squadron ceased operating the F-111 in January 2009 , in preparation for converting to the Super Hornet . Former F-111 aircrew , familiar with side-by-side seating and a different performance envelope , found conversion more challenging than pilots experienced in the RAAF 's McDonnell Douglas F / A-18 Hornet fighters , which shared many characteristics with the newer model . No. 1 Squadron re-equipped between 26 March 2010 and 21 October 2011 , making it the first Australian unit , and the first squadron outside the United States , to fly the Super Hornet . It became operational with its new aircraft on 8 December 2011 . The multi-role Super Hornet allowed No. 1 Squadron to augment its previous offensive strike role with an air-to-air combat function . The RAAF attained full operational capability with the Super Hornet in December 2012 .

On 14 September 2014 , the Federal government committed to deploying up to eight Super Hornets of No. 1 Squadron to Al Minhad Air Base in the United Arab Emirates , as part of the Australian Air Task Group joining the coalition against Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant ( ISIL ) forces in Iraq . Aircraft from the squadron conducted their first mission over Iraq on 5 October , and their first strike four days later . According to the Department of Defence , as of 20 December 2014 the Super Hornets had flown over 180 sorties , dropped 113 weapons , and destroyed 36 ISIL targets , damaging another six . In March 2015 , having flown almost 3,000 hours in over 400 missions , the detachment was replaced by six F / A-18As from No. 75 Squadron .

In May 2013 , the Federal government announced plans to purchase 12 Boeing EA-18G Growlers to supplement the Super Hornet fleet . No. 6 Squadron is expected to begin taking delivery of the Growlers in 2017 , at which point its Super Hornets will be transferred to No. 1 Squadron . In April 2014 , the government announced the purchase of 58 F-35s in addition to 14 already ordered , for the express purpose of replacing the 71 " classic " Hornets of Nos. 3 , 75 and 77 Squadrons and No. 2 Operational Conversion Unit . A government decision on whether to purchase a further 28 F-35s , to be based at Amberley , will depend on how long the Super Hornets are to be retained . According to Australian Aviation , continuing delays to the F-35 program have increased the likelihood that the Super Hornets of Nos. 1 and 6 Squadrons will , rather than being disposed of early as originally planned , continue to be operated by the RAAF for their full service life of over 20 years .

The 2012 Australia women 's national wheelchair basketball team , known as the Gliders , was a wheelchair basketball team that played in the 2012 Summer Paralympics . The team of twelve included nine Paralympic veterans with fifteen Paralympic Games between them : Bridie Kean , Amanda Carter , Sarah Stewart , Tina McKenzie , Kylie Gauci , Katie Hill , Cobi Crispin , Clare Nott and Shelley Chaplin . There were three newcomers playing in their first Paralympics : Amber Merritt , Sarah Vinci and Leanne Del Toso . The Gliders had won silver at the 2000 Summer Paralympics in Sydney and the 2004 Summer Paralympics in Athens , but had never won gold . The first stage of the Paralympic competition was the group stage , a round robin tournament . The Gliders faced a formidable task just to make the finals , as their pool included Brazil , Great Britain , Canada and the Netherlands , the last two of which had recently beaten them . After a narrow victory over Brazil and an easier one against Great Britain , the Gliders were again defeated by Canada , but they won their final match against the Netherlands to finish at the top of their pool . The Gliders went on to win in the quarterfinal against Mexico and the semifinal against the United States , but lost to Germany in the final , winning silver .

Prior to 2012 , the Australia women 's national wheelchair basketball team , known as the Gliders , had won silver in the 2000 Summer Paralympics in Sydney and the 2004 Summer Paralympics in Athens , and bronze at the 2008 Summer Paralympics in Beijing , but had never won gold . The official announcement of the membership of the Paralympic team was made on 5 July 2012 . The team of twelve included nine veterans with 15 Paralympic Games between them : Bridie Kean , Amanda Carter , Sarah Stewart , Tina McKenzie , Kylie Gauci , Katie Hill , Cobi Crispin , Clare Nott and Shelley Chaplin . Amber Merritt , Sarah Vinci and Leanne Del Toso were newcomers competing at their first Paralympics . Kean was selected as captain . The oldest team member was Amanda Carter , aged 48 , who was coming back for a fourth Paralympic games having competed in the 1992 Summer Paralympics in Barcelona , the 1996 Summer Paralympics in Atlanta and the 2000 Summer Paralympics in Sydney , at which she had been sidelined by a crippling elbow injury . She returned to the Gliders ' lineup in 2009 . The youngest , who had not even been born when Carter had played in Barcelona , was her 19-year-old teammate Amber Merritt . British-born Merritt was originally a swimmer , but had been recruited into basketball by the Paralympic Hall of Fame coach Frank Ponta . Merritt had averaged 20 points and 8.4 rebounds per game in the Gliders World Challenge series against Japan , Germany and China in Sydney in July 2012 , including a game against Germany in which she scored 21 points and eight rebounds . Another young player from whom much was hoped was Cobi Crispin , whose performances in the Paralympic World Cup in Manchester and the Gliders World Challenge led to her being named Australian Women ’ s Wheelchair Basketball International Player of the Year .

The first part of the competition was the group stage . The Gliders ' pool included Brazil , Great Britain , Canada and the Netherlands . Canada had beaten them in the bronze medal game at the 2010 Wheelchair Basketball World Championship in Birmingham in July 2010 , and the Netherlands had also beaten them recently . Australian Gliders head coach , John Triscari admitted that Canada would be hard to beat . He added : We ’ ve worked really hard to improve the team ’ s shooting percentage , we ’ ve had strength and conditioning coaches working with the girls to up their fitness and we ’ ve increased the volume of shooting during training . Hopefully all the hard work the girls are putting in now , will pay off in London .

The Gliders ' first game was on 30 August in front of a crowd of 3,288 at the Basketball Arena in Olympic Park in Stratford , London , also known as " the Marshmallow " . The Gliders had not played Brazil in four years , and what little they knew about them came from watching video tapes . The scores were tied fifteen times , and at no point were the Australians more than five points in front . With six minutes to go in the final quarter , the Gliders were up by only two points , with the score 45 – 43 . Crispin was sent to the free throw line where she extended her team 's lead to 47 – 43 . A technical foul saw her straight back to the free throw line to make it 48 – 43 , the Glider 's biggest lead of the game . Brazil then struck back , scoring five unanswered points to tie the score again at 48 – 48 , but Merritt scored one from the paint to put the Gliders back in front . She followed by taking a defensive rebound and then another shot to make it 52 – 48 . Brazil scored once more , but time ran out , and the Gliders won , 52 – 50 . Leading scorers for the Gliders were Crispin with 18 points and Merritt with 16 .

The Gliders ' next match was against Great Britain , and was held at the North Greenwich Arena , which could accommodate a larger crowd than the Marshmallow . A crowd of 5,331 saw a low-scoring affair . The Gliders concentrated on defence , and led by only 11 – 5 at quarter time . By half time , they had extended their lead to 25 – 11 . The third quarter went badly for Team Great Britain , which only scored three more points to Australia 's 14 , making the score 39 – 14 at three-quarter time . The final quarter was Great Britain 's best , but the score was still 51 – 24 . Merritt and Crispin were again the Gliders ' top scorers , with 10 and 8 points respectively , but they shared the ball around , and every Glider except McKenzie scored at least two points . The British coach was scathing about his team 's performance . " They know that 's not the way we play " , he said , " and I 'm disappointed for the crowd and them because they are tons better than that . It was an absolutely disgraceful effort out there . It really was bad . "

The Gliders returned to the Marshmallow the next day for a match against Canada , another team considered a strong chance for a medal , in front of a capacity crowd of 7,200 . The Gliders squandered early opportunities , and Canada won the first quarter 20 – 12 . Strong defensive play by Nott and Gauci helped the Gliders reverse this in the second , and left Canada with only a one-point 33 – 32 lead at half time . The second half saw Canada slowly increase their lead , keeping tied with Australia 4 – 4 in the first half of third , 6 – 4 in the last half of the third 6 – 4 in the first half of the fourth , and 8 – 6 in the last half of the fourth . Australia 's top players were Crispin , who had 13 points and 15 rebounds ; Merritt , who earned 16 points ; and Chaplin , with eight points , five rebounds and seven assists . The loss raised the prospect that Australia might not make the finals at all , but Crispin remained confident that they could . Triscari identified the Gliders ' poor shooting as their critical problem . " That was a really tough game , " he said , " and full credit to Canada , but we can 't beat top teams in the world when we only shoot at 34 % , that was the key statistic . " Merritt , in her British accent , said that she had " the utmost respect for Canada . They 're a great team , but we 'll refocus on the game tomorrow and go out and play like we know we can , the Australian way . "

The loss to Canada meant that the Gliders needed a win against the Netherlands , considered one of the competition 's best teams , and one which had beaten Canada . Crispin told the media that " We will go out like we have in every other game and stick to our game plan and hopefully we 'll come out on top " . The Netherlands scored first , but Kean soon equalised , assisted by Stewart . The Dutch team responded , but Gauci took two points with a fast break , and then assisted Crispin in putting Australia in the lead , one which the Gliders would not relinquish . Stewart made the next two scores , from outside the paint , and assisted Crispin to bring the score to 6 – 16 . The Dutch team fought back , but there was a six-point 12 – 18 deficit at quarter time . The Australian defence shut down their opportunities in the second quarter , and the score was 20 – 30 in Australia 's favour at half time , and 29 – 40 by the end of the third quarter . The Dutch team redoubled their efforts in the final quarter , and won the quarter 20 – 18 , but the Gliders won the game , 39 – 58 .

Once again Merritt led Australia 's scoring , with 19 points , with a considerably improved accuracy of 9 shots from 14 attempts , while Crispin had ten points and seven rebounds . The rest of the team performed equally well . Stewart scored six points and five rebounds . Chaplin 's reputation as a play maker was burnished with four rebounds and seven assists . Gauci had eight points and six assists . Nott had played all 40 minutes of the game against Canada the night before , then over 32 minutes in this game , and was particularly active in the final quarter . Triscari praised both the Gliders and their opponents : We wanted to get on top early and have them chasing us , so , in that respect , I suppose it did . We focused on stopping a lot of their big players , particularly Beijer [ Mariska Beijer ] , from getting into the keyway , and the girls did a sensational job . Gert [ Gertjan van der Linden ] is very hard to coach against because he throws a lot of stuff at you . Tonight , he was the one having to make the changes . Another day , it will probably be me .

The loss to Canada meant that the Gliders had won three out of four games , the same number as Canada and the Netherlands , but they were placed ahead of the Netherlands based on defeating them . Canada failed to defeat Great Britain by a sufficient margin , and therefore finished third . As a result , the Gliders topped their pool , and received a quarterfinal berth against Mexico , which had managed to qualify despite only winning one game . Triscari was confident , but was not taking the match lightly . He warned the media : No game 's easy , you know . We finished on top , so the crossover with the other side is in our favour . But they are by no means easy . We only beat Brazil by two points and Brazil only beat Mexico by two in the PanAm ( Parapan championships ) play-offs for third and fourth , so it 's going to be tough . " The Gliders planned to dominate Mexico early , playing as aggressively against them as they had played against the Netherlands . Stewart took the tap , and lost . Australia 's first shots at goal were taken by Kean from the free throw line , but she missed both . Mexico 's Lucia Vazquez Delgadillo then opened the scoring to give Mexico a two-point lead , which turned out to be their biggest of the game . Gauci then put points on the scoreboard for the Gliders . Mexico turned the ball over , and Crispin got her first from the paint , assisted by Gauci , which was repeated on the next play , with Stewart providing the assist this time . Mexico scored , but the Gliders responded with another shot from Crispin . On the next play , Gauci stole the ball and charged down the court , but failed to make the shot . Nott then took a defensive rebound , leading to Crispin scoring again . She was also fouled , but missed the resulting free throw . Shortly thereafter , Stewart drew another foul , and made both shots to bring the score to 14 – 4 .

The Gliders put Mexico under intense defensive pressure . Mexico had six team turnovers to the Gliders ' one , and wound up with 19 turnovers in total to Australia 's 6 . Australia scored 18 points from turnovers , compared to 6 for Mexico . Gauci , a two-point player , took a three-pointer to take the score to 17 – 8 . Mexico was unable to recover from Australia 's high scoring from Merritt , who ultimately scored 14 points with 70 per cent shooting , and Crispin , who scored twelve points with 67 per cent shooting . The two teams went into the quarter time break with the score 21 points to 10 . Mexico fell further behind in the second quarter . Amanda Carter immediately stole the ball from Mexico , which let Merritt score two points . A few minutes later , Carter , assisted by Chaplin , scored a basket from the paint , and was fouled in the process . A successful free throw made the score 36 – 16 . Another steal by Merritt led to a runaway break , bringing her contribution to ten points , and the score to 38 – 16 . At the half-time break , the score was 44 – 20 .

In the third quarter , a team turnover and a series of missed shots by Hill , Kean and Crispin , allowed Mexico to outscore Australia by one point , leaving the score at 50 – 27 at the end of the quarter . The final quarter saw Australia 's Del Toso miss a shot at one end , and Mexico 's Floralia Estrada Bernal miss one at the other . Stewart also missed , before a Mexican turnover led to the first score of the quarter , by Stewart . Mexico 's Rocio Torres Lopez scored in response . Another shot by Stewart missed , but Carter took an offensive rebound , and scored . Turnovers by Kean and Del Toso allowed Mexico put four points on the board , but successive fouls sent Kean to the free throw line to score three points in response . Merritt brought the score to 59 – 35 with her seventh scoring shot . As the game drew to a close , there were several missed shots by Sarah Vinci and Hill , but Mexico was unable to capitalise on the opportunities , continuing to miss shots and turn over the ball . With nineteen seconds of play remaining , Hill took a two-point shot from inside the paint ; attracting a foul , she scored another point from a free throw . Although Mexico 's Wendy Garcia Amador scored the last two points of the game , her team lost to Australia 62 – 37 .

In the semifinal , the Gliders had to beat the reigning champions , Team USA , in front of a small crowd of 4,428 at the North Greenwich Arena . Stewart took the tap , and lost . Team USA had first possession and earned the first points of the game , but Gauci responded quickly . Then Team USA turned the ball over , but Nott lost it . Chaplin stole it back , but Kylie Gauci put the ball out of bounds . Nott stole it back again , but Gauci turned it over again . Team USA took a shot at the basket inside the paint , and missed , but took a rebound and scored . A Team USA free throw extended their lead to 2 – 6 . Thereafter both teams ' shooting was poor , and the score was only 10 – 12 at quarter time . The second quarter started with Merritt scoring twice to give Australia the lead 14 – 12 . Team USA turned the ball over the Gliders several times , but they were unable to capitalise on their strong defence , leaving the score tied at 26 – 26 at half time . In the third quarter , an early goal by Gauci from outside the paint gave the Gliders the lead . A series of steals gave the Gliders additional shots , most of which they missed , but Team USA gave over a series of turnovers , and their shooting was worse than their rivals , resulting in a 10 – 0 run by the Gliders . Team USA were unable to score at all until the last minute of the quarter . A hurried goal with seconds to go by Hill saw the Gliders leading 38 – 28 . Team USA would ultimately post 28 turnovers to Australia 's 17 , and the Gliders would score 12 points from turnovers to Team USA 's three .

In the fourth quarter , the Australian defence remained strong , but their shooting did not improve . For the entire game , Crispin made only 3 out of 10 attempts , and Merritt just 4 out of 16 . Nott , who played the entire game , ended up being the team 's most accurate player , with four out of five attempts . Meanwhile , Team USA fought back to 40 – 39 . Three timeouts were taken in the last minute . Merritt was fouled twice , which sent her to the free throw line , but she missed both shots . The game went down to the last second , with Team USA 's Rose Hollermann missing one from inside the paint just before the shot clock ran out .

The Gliders had to defeat Germany in front of a capacity crowd of 12,985 at the North Greenwich Arena to win the gold medal . Australia had narrowly defeated the German team 48 – 46 in the Gliders World Challenge in Sydney a few months earlier , and at that point had beaten them three of the previous four times they had played . Once again , Stewart took the tap , and lost . A defensive rebound by Kean after Germany missed two free throw shots resulted in the Gliders scoring first , with Gauci assisting Crispin . The Gliders played Germany like they had played against and defeated the United States , with a strong defence against a normally high-scoring team . At first , they were successful ; with three minutes to go in the quarter , despite several missed shots , Australia was ahead 10 – 4 . In the last minutes , Germany scored ten points that gave them a 10 – 14 lead at quarter time . In the second quarter , Germany extended their lead to ten points , but Kean scored a point from a free throw , and then , with seconds left on the clock , stole the ball , enabling Crispin to score , so the Gliders were only seven points behind at half time . The Gliders won the third quarter in previous games in London , which happened again against Germany , but only by 9 – 8 . The Gliders had six points to make up , with strong defences from both teams . Gauci scored the most in this game , scoring 15 points , including a three-pointer , with five assists and four rebounds . In the end , the Gliders lost by fourteen points , 44 – 58 .

Triscari felt that the Gliders did not put enough pressure on the Germans , and that their shooting was not accurate enough . In Australia , Basketball Australia CEO Kristina Keneally praised the Gliders ' efforts . " The Gliders have been nothing short of brilliant at the Paralympic Games , " she said , " and this Silver Medal is just reward for their outstanding performance . This is the Gliders ' fourth consecutive Paralympic Medal – a remarkable achievement . All of the players , coaches and support staff have done a fantastic job and we can ’ t wait to greet them on their return home . " In 2013 , Keneally announced a four-year development program for the Gliders that included the appointment of a full-time head coach for the first time , based at the National Wheelchair Centre of Excellence at the New South Wales Institute of Sport in Homebush , New South Wales . In May 2013 , Tom Kyle was appointed the Gliders ' new head coach . " We have had the opportunity to play Germany a fair bit in our preparation so our game plan was to have strong defensive pressure and take it from there " , Kean told the media . " It started off really good for us , unfortunately they just got a couple more runs than us and that 's the way it goes sometimes . They played a great game . We stuck together 12 deep from the second the buzzer started , to that end buzzer and no one gave up . I think that we can hold our heads high because of that . I guess the plan is , next four years , Rio we go one more . "

The 1892 Alabama Cadets football team represented the University of Alabama in the 1892 college football season . The team was led by their head coach E. B. Beaumont and played their home games at Lakeview Park in Birmingham , Alabama . In what was the inaugural season of Alabama football , the team finished with a record of two wins and two losses ( 2 – 2 ) . William Little of Livingston , Alabama is credited with being responsible for the introduction of football at the university . After playing the game in 1891 while in attendance at a northern prep school , Little returned to Alabama where he helped establish the first team at the university for the 1892 season . The first game in Alabama football history was played on November 11 , 1892 , against Birmingham High School and was won by the Cadets 56 – 0 . They then split a pair of games with the Birmingham Athletic Club , and closed out the season with a 32 – 22 loss in the first Iron Bowl against Auburn on February 22 , 1893 . After the season , Beaumont was fired as head coach and replaced by Eli Abbott for the 1893 season .

The first college football game was played on November 6 , 1869 , between Rutgers and the College of New Jersey . Although the sport continued to grow , it was not introduced for another 23 years at Alabama . The man credited with the introduction of football at Alabama was William G. Little of Livingston . Little attended the Phillips Exeter Academy in New Hampshire for the 1891 – 92 school year . It was there that he first played and became an advocate for football . Originally he intended to attend Yale University . However , after his brother died , Little returned to Livingston in 1892 and enrolled at Alabama . He proposed the university field a football team , which was introduced for the 1892 season . Alabama selected Little as the first team captain for the inaugural 1892 season . The team was called the " Cadets , " as the current " Crimson Tide " moniker was not used until 1907 .

In what was the first ever game played by the University of Alabama , a team of Birmingham-area high school players lost to the Cadets 56 – 0 at Birmingham 's Lakeview Park . Played on November 11 , the game served as a practice game for Alabama 's contest against the Birmingham Athletic Club scheduled for the next day . Although details of the second half are unavailable , touchdowns in the first half were scored by David Grayson , G. H. Kyser , Dan Smith ( twice ) , William Little and T. S. Frazer . The play utilized most throughout the game was a rushing formation developed by Harvard earlier in the season called the flying wedge .

A day after their victory over Birmingham High School , Alabama suffered their first all-time loss against the Birmingham Athletic Club ( B.A.C. ) 5 – 4 . In a game noted for numerous fumbles by both squads , Alabama scored first and took a 4 – 0 lead on a William G. Little touchdown run late in the first half . However , the B.A.C. won the game 5 – 4 late in the second half when J. P. Ross successfully kicked a 63-yard field goal on a drop kick . Alabama would not lose another game by a single point until their 1947 game against Tulane .

Before 5,000 fans at Birmingham 's Lakeview Park , Alabama lost to the Agricultural & Mechanical College of Alabama ( now known as Auburn University ) 32 – 22 in the first of what was subsequently dubbed the Iron Bowl . Auburn scored first on a 20-yard Rufus Dorsey touchdown run and again on a one-yard Dorsey run and took an 8 – 0 lead early in the first half . Frank Savage then scored Alabama 's first touchdown on a 10-yard run and William B. Bankhead converted a successful extra point to cut the Auburn lead to 8 – 6 . After Auburn scored a third touchdown to go up 14 – 6 , Alabama responded with a 20-yard Dan Smith touchdown run and G. H. Kyser extra point to make the halftime score 14 – 12 in favor of Auburn . In the second half , Auburn scored first again when Dorsey recovered an Alabama fumble and returned it 65-yards for a touchdown . After a successful extra point the blue and orange extended their lead to 20 – 12 . Alabama responded on their following possession with a 30-yard William Little touchdown run and Kyser extra point to cut the lead to 20 – 18 . Thomas Daniels then scored Auburn 's final two touchdowns on runs of one and 25 yards and also converted both extra points to give them a 32 – 18 lead . Smith scored the final points of the game late in the second half for Alabama on a short run that made the final score 32 – 22 .

Although they finished with a .500 record , after the completion of the season , E. B. Beaumont was fired as Alabama 's head coach . The 1894 edition of the university yearbook The Corolla stated of the Beaumont firing : " We were unfortunate in securing a coach . After keeping him for a short time , we found that his knowledge of the game was very limited . We , therefore , ' got rid of ' him . " After Beaumont 's departure , William G. Little continued the training of the team until Abbott was selected to serve as head coach for the 1893 season . Other notable players from the first Alabama team included William B. Bankhead who served as the Speaker of the United States House of Representatives from 1936 to 1940 and Bibb Graves who served as the 38th Governor of Alabama from 1927 to 1931 and again from 1935 to 1939 .

Dungeons & Dragons ( abbreviated as D & D or DnD ) is a fantasy tabletop role-playing game ( RPG ) originally designed by Gary Gygax and Dave Arneson , and first published in 1974 by Tactical Studies Rules , Inc . ( TSR ) . The game has been published by Wizards of the Coast ( now a subsidiary of Hasbro ) since 1997 . It was derived from miniature wargames with a variation of the Chainmail game serving as the initial rule system . D & D 's publication is commonly recognized as the beginning of modern role-playing games and the role-playing game industry . D & D departs from traditional wargaming and assigns each player a specific character to play instead of a military formation . These characters embark upon imaginary adventures within a fantasy setting . A Dungeon Master serves as the game 's referee and storyteller , while maintaining the setting in which the adventures occur and playing the role of the inhabitants . The characters form a party that interacts with the setting 's inhabitants ( and each other ) . Together they solve dilemmas , engage in battles and gather treasure and knowledge . In the process the characters earn experience points to become increasingly powerful over a series of sessions .

The early success of Dungeons & Dragons led to a proliferation of similar game systems . Despite this competition , D & D remains the market leader in the role-playing game industry . In 1977 , the game was split into two branches : the relatively rules-light game system of Dungeons & Dragons and the more structured , rules-heavy game system of Advanced Dungeons & Dragons ( abbreviated as AD & D or ADnD ) . AD & D 2nd Edition was published in 1989 . In 2000 , the original line of the game was discontinued and the AD & D version was renamed Dungeons & Dragons with the release of its 3rd edition with a new system . These rules formed the basis of the d20 System which is available under the Open Game License ( OGL ) for use by other publishers . Dungeons & Dragons version 3.5 was released in June 2003 , with a ( non-OGL ) 4th edition in June 2008 . A 5th edition was released during the second half of 2014 . As of 2004 , Dungeons & Dragons remained the best-known and best-selling role-playing game , with an estimated 20 million people having played the game and more than US $ 1 billion in book and equipment sales . The game has been supplemented by many pre-made adventures as well as commercial campaign settings suitable for use by regular gaming groups . Dungeons & Dragons is known beyond the game for other D & D-branded products , references in popular culture and some of the controversies that have surrounded it , particularly a moral panic in the 1980s falsely linking it to Satanism and suicide . The game has won multiple awards and has been translated into many languages beyond the original English .

Dungeons & Dragons is a structured yet open-ended role-playing game . It is normally played indoors with the participants seated around a tabletop . Typically , each player controls only a single character , which represents an individual in a fictional setting . When working together as a group , these player characters ( PCs ) are often described as a " party " of adventurers , with each member often having their own area of specialty which contributes to the success of the whole . During the course of play , each player directs the actions of their character and their interactions with other characters in the game . This activity is performed through the verbal impersonation of the characters by the players , while employing a variety of social and other useful cognitive skills , such as logic , basic mathematics and imagination . A game often continues over a series of meetings to complete a single adventure , and longer into a series of related gaming adventures , called a " campaign " . The results of the party 's choices and the overall storyline for the game are determined by the Dungeon Master ( DM ) according to the rules of the game and the DM 's interpretation of those rules . The DM selects and describes the various non-player characters ( NPCs ) that the party encounters , the settings in which these interactions occur , and the outcomes of those encounters based on the players ' choices and actions . Encounters often take the form of battles with " monsters " – a generic term used in D & D to describe potentially hostile beings such as animals , aberrant beings , or mythical creatures . The game 's extensive rules – which cover diverse subjects such as social interactions , magic use , combat , and the effect of the environment on PCs – help the DM to make these decisions . The DM may choose to deviate from the published rules or make up new ones if they feel it is necessary .

The most recent versions of the game 's rules are detailed in three core rulebooks : The Player 's Handbook , the Dungeon Master 's Guide and the Monster Manual . The only items required to play the game are the rulebooks , a character sheet for each player , and a number of polyhedral dice . Many players also use miniature figures on a grid map as a visual aid , particularly during combat . Some editions of the game presume such usage . Many optional accessories are available to enhance the game , such as expansion rulebooks , pre-designed adventures and various campaign settings .

Before the game begins , each player creates their player character and records the details ( described below ) on a character sheet . First , a player determines their character 's ability scores , which consist of Strength , Constitution , Dexterity , Intelligence , Wisdom , and Charisma . Each edition of the game has offered differing methods of determining these statistics . The player then chooses a race ( species ) such as human or elf , a character class ( occupation ) such as fighter or wizard , an alignment ( a moral and ethical outlook ) , and other features to round out the character 's abilities and backstory , which have varied in nature through differing editions . During the game , players describe their PC 's intended actions , such as punching an opponent or picking a lock , and converse with the DM , who then describes the result or response . Trivial actions , such as picking up a letter or opening an unlocked door , are usually automatically successful . The outcomes of more complex or risky actions are determined by rolling dice . Factors contributing to the outcome include the character 's ability scores , skills and the difficulty of the task . In circumstances where a character does not have control of an event , such as when a trap or magical effect is triggered or a spell is cast , a saving throw can be used to determine whether the resulting damage is reduced or avoided . In this case the odds of success are influenced by the character 's class , levels and ability scores .

As the game is played , each PC changes over time and generally increases in capability . Characters gain ( or sometimes lose ) experience , skills and wealth , and may even alter their alignment or gain additional character classes . The key way characters progress is by earning experience points ( XP ) , which happens when they defeat an enemy or accomplish a difficult task . Acquiring enough XP allows a PC to advance a level , which grants the character improved class features , abilities and skills . XP can be lost in some circumstances , such as encounters with creatures that drain life energy , or by use of certain magical powers that come with an XP cost . Hit points ( HP ) are a measure of a character 's vitality and health and are determined by the class , level and constitution of each character . They can be temporarily lost when a character sustains wounds in combat or otherwise comes to harm , and loss of HP is the most common way for a character to die in the game . Death can also result from the loss of key ability scores or character levels . When a PC dies , it is often possible for the dead character to be resurrected through magic , although some penalties may be imposed as a result . If resurrection is not possible or not desired , the player may instead create a new PC to resume playing the game .

A typical Dungeons & Dragons game consists of an " adventure " , which is roughly equivalent to a single story . The DM can either design an adventure on their own , or follow one of the many pre-made adventures ( also known as " modules " ) that have been published throughout the history of Dungeons & Dragons . Published adventures typically include a background story , illustrations , maps and goals for PCs to achieve . Some include location descriptions and handouts . Although a small adventure entitled " Temple of the Frog " was included in the Blackmoor rules supplement in 1975 , the first stand-alone D & D module published by TSR was 1978 's Steading of the Hill Giant Chief , written by Gygax . A linked series of adventures is commonly referred to as a " campaign " . The locations where these adventures occur , such as a city , country , planet or an entire fictional universe , are referred to as " campaign settings " or " world " . D & D settings are based in various fantasy genres and feature different levels and types of magic and technology . Popular commercially published campaign settings for Dungeons & Dragons include Greyhawk , Dragonlance , Forgotten Realms , Mystara , Spelljammer , Ravenloft , Dark Sun , Planescape , Birthright , and Eberron . Alternatively , DMs may develop their own fictional worlds to use as campaign settings .

The wargames from which Dungeons & Dragons evolved used miniature figures to represent combatants . D & D initially continued the use of miniatures in a fashion similar to its direct precursors . The original D & D set of 1974 required the use of the Chainmail miniatures game for combat resolution . By the publication of the 1977 game editions , combat was mostly resolved verbally . Thus miniatures were no longer required for game play , although some players continued to use them as a visual reference . In the 1970s , numerous companies began to sell miniature figures specifically for Dungeons & Dragons and similar games . Licensed miniature manufacturers who produced official figures include Grenadier Miniatures ( 1980 – 1983 ) , Citadel Miniatures ( 1984 – 1986 ) , Ral Partha , and TSR itself . Most of these miniatures used the 25 mm scale . Periodically , Dungeons & Dragons has returned to its wargaming roots with supplementary rules systems for miniatures-based wargaming . Supplements such as Battlesystem ( 1985 & 1989 ) and a new edition of Chainmail ( 2001 ) provided rule systems to handle battles between armies by using miniatures .

The original Dungeons & Dragons , now referred to as OD & D , was a small box set of three booklets published in 1974 . It was amateurish in production and assumed the player was familiar with wargaming . Nevertheless , it grew rapidly in popularity , first among wargamers and then expanding to a more general audience of college and high school students . Roughly 1,000 copies of the game were sold in the first year followed by 3,000 in 1975 , and much more in the following years . This first set went through many printings and was supplemented with several official additions , such as the original Greyhawk and Blackmoor supplements ( both 1975 ) , as well as magazine articles in TSR 's official publications and many fanzines .

In 1977 , TSR created the first element of a two-pronged strategy that would divide the D & D game for nearly two decades . A Dungeons & Dragons Basic Set boxed edition was introduced that cleaned up the presentation of the essential rules , made the system understandable to the general public , and was sold in a package that could be stocked in toy stores . Also in 1977 , the first part of Advanced Dungeons & Dragons ( AD & D ) was published , which brought together the various published rules , options and corrections , then expanded them into a definitive , unified game for hobbyist gamers . TSR marketed them as an introductory game for new players and a more complex game for experienced ones ; the Basic Set directed players who exhausted the possibilities of that game to switch to the advanced rules . As a result of this parallel development , the basic game included many rules and concepts which contradicted comparable ones in AD & D. John Eric Holmes , the editor of the basic game , preferred a lighter tone with more room for personal improvisation . AD & D , on the other hand , was designed to create a tighter , more structured game system than the loose framework of the original game . Between 1977 and 1979 , three hardcover rulebooks , commonly referred to as the " core rulebooks " , were released : the Player 's Handbook ( PHB ) , the Dungeon Master 's Guide ( DMG ) , and the Monster Manual ( MM ) . Several supplementary books were published throughout the 1980s , notably Unearthed Arcana ( 1985 ) that included a large number of new rules . Confusing matters further , the original D & D boxed set remained in publication until 1979 , since it remained a healthy seller for TSR .

In the 1980s , the rules for Advanced Dungeons & Dragons and " basic " Dungeons & Dragons remained separate , each developing along different paths . In 1981 , the basic version of Dungeons & Dragons was revised by Tom Moldvay to make it even more novice-friendly . It was promoted as a continuation of the original D & D tone , whereas AD & D was promoted as advancement of the mechanics . An accompanying Expert Set , originally written by David " Zeb " Cook , allowed players to continue using the simpler ruleset beyond the early levels of play . In 1983 , revisions of those sets by Frank Mentzer were released , revising the presentation of the rules to a more tutorial format . These were followed by Companion ( 1983 ) , Master ( 1985 ) , and Immortals ( 1986 ) sets . Each set covered game play for more powerful characters than the previous . The first four sets were later compiled as a single hardcover book , the Dungeons & Dragons Rules Cyclopedia ( 1991 ) , along with a new introductory boxed set . Advanced Dungeons & Dragons 2nd Edition was published in 1989 , again as three core rulebooks ; the primary designer was David " Zeb " Cook . The Monster Manual was replaced by the Monstrous Compendium , a loose-leaf binder that was subsequently replaced by the hardcover Monstrous Manual in 1993 . In 1995 , the core rulebooks were slightly revised , although still referred to by TSR as the 2nd Edition , and a series of Player 's Option manuals were released as optional rulebooks .

The release of AD & D2 deliberately excluded some aspects of the game that had attracted negative publicity . References to demons and devils , sexually suggestive artwork , and playable , evil-aligned character types – such as assassins and half-orcs – were removed . The edition moved away from a theme of 1960s and 1970s " sword and sorcery " fantasy fiction to a mixture of medieval history and mythology . The rules underwent minor changes , including the addition of non-weapon proficiencies – skill-like abilities that originally appeared in 1st Edition supplements . The game 's magic spells were divided into schools and spheres . A major difference was the promotion of various game settings beyond that of traditional fantasy . This included blending fantasy with other genres , such as horror ( Ravenloft ) , science fiction ( Spelljammer ) , and apocalyptic ( Dark Sun ) , as well as alternative historical and non-European mythological settings .

In 1997 , a near-bankrupt TSR was purchased by Wizards of the Coast . Following three years of development , Dungeons & Dragons 3rd edition was released in 2000 . The new release folded the Basic and Advanced lines back into a single unified game . It was the largest revision of the D & D rules to date , and served as the basis for a multi-genre role-playing system designed around 20-sided dice , called the d20 System . The 3rd Edition rules were designed to be internally consistent and less restrictive than previous editions of the game , allowing players more flexibility to create the characters they wanted to play . Skills and feats were introduced into the core rules to encourage further customization of characters . The new rules standardized the mechanics of action resolution and combat . In 2003 , Dungeons & Dragons v.3.5 was released as a revision of the 3rd Edition rules . This release incorporated hundreds of rule changes , mostly minor , and expanded the core rulebooks . In early 2005 , Wizards of the Coast 's R & D team started to develop Dungeons & Dragons 4th Edition , prompted mainly by the feedback obtained from the D & D playing community and a desire to make the game faster , more intuitive , and with a better play experience than under the 3rd Edition . The new game was developed through a number of design phases spanning from May 2005 until its release . Dungeons & Dragons 4th Edition was announced at Gen Con in August 2007 , and the initial three core books were released June 6 , 2008 . 4th Edition streamlined the game into a simplified form and introduced numerous rules changes . Many character abilities were restructured into " Powers " . These altered the spell-using classes by adding abilities that could be used at will , per encounter , or per day . Likewise , non-magic-using classes were provided with parallel sets of options . Software tools , including player character and monster building programs , became a major part of the game .

On January 9 , 2012 , Wizards of the Coast announced that it was working on a 5th edition of the game . The company planned to take suggestions from players and let them playtest the rules . Public playtesting began on May 24 , 2012 . At Gen Con 2012 in August , Mike Mearls , lead developer for 5th Edition , said that Wizards of the Coast had received feedback from more than 75,000 playtesters , but that the entire development process would take two years , adding , " I can 't emphasize this enough ... we 're very serious about taking the time we need to get this right . " The release of the 5th Edition , coinciding with D & D 's 40th anniversary , occurred in the second half of 2014 .

The game had more than three million players around the world by 1981 , and copies of the rules were selling at a rate of about 750,000 per year by 1984 . Beginning with a French language edition in 1982 , Dungeons & Dragons has been translated into many languages beyond the original English . By 2004 , consumers had spent more than US $ 1 billion on Dungeons & Dragons products and the game had been played by more than 20 million people . As many as six million people played the game in 2007 . The various editions of Dungeons & Dragons have won many Origins Awards , including All Time Best Roleplaying Rules of 1977 , Best Roleplaying Rules of 1989 , and Best Roleplaying Game of 2000 for the three flagship editions of the game . Both Dungeons & Dragons and Advanced Dungeons & Dragons are Origins Hall of Fame Games inductees as they were deemed sufficiently distinct to merit separate inclusion on different occasions . The independent Games magazine placed Dungeons & Dragons on their Games 100 list from 1980 through 1983 , then entered the game into the magazine 's Hall of Fame in 1984 .

Dungeons & Dragons was the first modern role-playing game and it established many of the conventions that have dominated the genre . Particularly notable are the use of dice as a game mechanic , character record sheets , use of numerical attributes and gamemaster-centered group dynamics . Within months of Dungeons & Dragons 's release , new role-playing game writers and publishers began releasing their own role-playing games , with most of these being in the fantasy genre . Some of the earliest other role-playing games inspired by D & D include Tunnels & Trolls ( 1975 ) , Empire of the Petal Throne ( 1975 ) , and Chivalry & Sorcery ( 1976 ) . The role-playing movement initiated by D & D would lead to release of the science fiction game Traveller ( 1977 ) , the fantasy game RuneQuest ( 1978 ) , and subsequent game systems such as Chaosium 's Call of Cthulhu ( 1981 ) , Champions ( 1982 ) , GURPS ( 1986 ) , and Vampire : The Masquerade ( 1991 ) . Dungeons & Dragons and the games it influenced fed back into the genre 's origin – miniatures wargames – with combat strategy games like Warhammer Fantasy Battles . D & D also had a large impact on modern video games .

Early in the game 's history , TSR took no action against small publishers ' production of D & D compatible material , and even licensed Judges Guild to produce D & D materials for several years , such as City State of the Invincible Overlord . This attitude changed in the mid-1980s when TSR took legal action to try to prevent others from publishing compatible material . This angered many fans and led to resentment by the other gaming companies . Although TSR took legal action against several publishers in an attempt to restrict third-party usage , it never brought any court cases to completion , instead settling out of court in every instance . TSR itself ran afoul of intellectual property law in several cases . With the launch of Dungeons & Dragons 's 3rd Edition , Wizards of the Coast made the d20 System available under the Open Game License ( OGL ) and d20 System trademark license . Under these licenses , authors were free to use the d20 System when writing games and game supplements . The OGL and d20 Trademark License made possible new games , some based on licensed products like Star Wars , and new versions of older games , such as Call of Cthulhu .

With the release of the fourth edition , Wizards of the Coast has introduced its Game System License , which represents a significant restriction compared to the very open policies embodied by the OGL . In part as a response to this , some publishers ( such as Paizo Publishing with its Pathfinder Roleplaying Game ) who previously produced materials in support of the D & D product line , have decided to continue supporting the 3rd Edition rules , thereby competing directly with Wizards of the Coast . Others , such as Kenzer & Company , are returning to the practice of publishing unlicensed supplements and arguing that copyright law does not allow Wizards of the Coast to restrict third-party usage . During the 2000s , there has been a trend towards reviving and recreating older editions of D & D , known as the Old School Revival . Game systems based on earlier editions of D & D. Castles & Crusades ( 2004 ) , by Troll Lord Games , is a reimagining of early editions by streamlining rules from OGL . This in turn inspired the creation of " retro-clones " , games which more closely recreate the original rule sets , using material placed under the OGL along with non-copyrightable mechanical aspects of the older rules to create a new presentation of the games .

At various times in its history , Dungeons & Dragons has received negative publicity , in particular from some Christian groups , for alleged promotion of such practices as devil worship , witchcraft , suicide , and murder , and for the presence of naked breasts in drawings of female humanoids in the original AD & D manuals ( mainly monsters such as harpies , succubi , etc . ) . These controversies led TSR to remove many potentially controversial references and artwork when releasing the 2nd Edition of AD & D. Many of these references , including the use of the names " devils " and " demons " , were reintroduced in the 3rd edition . The moral panic over the game led to problems for fans of D & D who faced social ostracism , unfair treatment , and false association with the occult and Satanism , regardless of an individual fan 's actual religious affiliation and beliefs . Dungeons & Dragons has been the subject of rumors regarding players having difficulty separating fantasy from reality , even leading to psychotic episodes . The most notable of these was the saga of James Dallas Egbert III , the facts of which were fictionalized in the novel Mazes and Monsters and later made into a TV movie . The game was blamed for some of the actions of Chris Pritchard , who was convicted in 1990 of murdering his stepfather . Research by various psychologists , the first being that of Armando Simon , has concluded that no harmful effects are related to the playing of D & D.

D & D grew in popularity through the late 1970s and 1980s . Numerous games , films , and cultural references based on D & D or D & D-like fantasies , characters or adventures have been ubiquitous since the end of the 1970s . D & D players are ( sometimes pejoratively ) portrayed as the epitome of geekdom , and have become the basis of much geek and gamer humor and satire . Famous D & D players include Pulitzer Prize winning author Junot Díaz , professional basketball player Tim Duncan , comedian Stephen Colbert , and actors Vin Diesel and Robin Williams . D & D and its fans have been the subject of spoof films , including Fear of Girls and The Gamers : Dorkness Rising .

Ninja Gaiden is an action-adventure hack and slash video game developed by Team Ninja for the Xbox video game console . It went through five years of development before its release by Tecmo in 2004 , and had a number of expansion packs and two remakes , Ninja Gaiden Black and Ninja Gaiden Sigma . The game follows the fictional story of Ryu Hayabusa , a master ninja , in his quest to recover a stolen sword and avenge the slaughter of his clan . Tecmo specifically targeted Ninja Gaiden at a western audience , and despite difficulties in obtaining content ratings due to the game 's graphic depictions of violence , it was generally well received , and 362,441 copies were sold in North America in the first month after its release . Nevertheless , the game had to be censored for release in some regions , and Japanese sales were poor , with only 60,000 in the four months following its release . Making use of the Xbox 's internet connectivity , Ninja Gaiden was the focus of a series of online contests across North America , Europe and Japan . Record-breaking numbers of players took part , competing for places in the live final , which was held during the Tokyo Game Show ( TGS ) 2004 .

Team Ninja continued to update the game after its release : two Hurricane Packs were made available as free downloadable content that added extra content , gameplay challenges , and game engine improvements . These were incorporated into a reworked version , released in 2005 and entitled Ninja Gaiden Black , that was regarded by the game 's creator Tomonobu Itagaki and many players as the definitive version . In 2007 , Ninja Gaiden was graphically enhanced on the PlayStation 3 , with extra content , in the form of Ninja Gaiden Sigma . This version was later released on the PlayStation Vita as Ninja Gaiden Sigma Plus .

Ninja Gaiden develops its narrative thread through the actions of its player-controlled protagonist , Ryu Hayabusa . Viewed from a third person over-the-shoulder perspective , in typical action-adventure fashion Ryu starts the game with basic , low-level abilities and weapons that can be upgraded as he progresses , by discovering or buying items . In keeping with his ninja persona , his character can interact with the game environment to perform acrobatic feats , such as running along and jumping off walls , swinging from pole to pole , or running across water . The game world is made up of several distinct regions , most of which are connected via the city of Tairon , which functions as a hub . Access to these regions are obtained by fighting enemies , finding keys , or solving puzzles , inspired by the mechanics of the The Legend of Zelda video games . Dragon busts scattered throughout the regions provide the means to save player progress , permitting gameplay to be resumed at a later time . Ryu 's movements are directed using the console gamepad . The game 's control system , which comprises the left thumbstick , two attack buttons , and a block button , was described as fluid and responsive , and Ninja Gaiden was regarded as having one of the deeper combat engines among Xbox games at the time , comparing well to the PlayStation 2 action-adventures God of War and Devil May Cry . Eric Williams , the designer of the God of War combat engine , explained that Ninja Gaiden prohibits players from stopping or changing attacks in mid-stroke . In contrast , God of War allows players to do so , and Devil May Cry grants this freedom to certain attacks . Williams said that , compared to those two games , the combat system in Ninja Gaiden was harder to master ; however , it lets players fight their computer controlled foes on equal terms .

Ninja Gaiden features a large selection of weapons for Ryu to wield , each with advantages and disadvantages that affect the way the player approaches combat . These include one-handed swords , such as the Dragon Sword and Kitetsu , which grant quick attacks , and a move called the " Flying Swallow " , which allows Ryu to leap and slash through enemies . In addition these light weapons allow Ryu to smash foes into the ground and perform his signature Izuna Drop — a spinning piledriver . Heavy weapons , such as the Dabilahro and the Unlabored Flawlessness , are slow but cause more damage to opponents . With flails and staves , the player can string together long sequences of attacks . To engage distant foes Ryu can throw shuriken and shoot arrows . In addition to using standard melee techniques , Ryu can employ essences — colored globes of energy that are released on the death of enemies and absorbed into Ryu 's body when he comes into proximity with them . Essences have an important role in general gameplay , acting to heal Ryu , restore his magic , or increase his cash . However , in combat the player can cause Ryu to deliberately draw in essences , which can then be used to unleash powerful attacks known as Ultimate Techniques that allow Ryu to damage enemies without taking damage himself . These techniques deal heavy damage and make Ryu immune to injury for a short time .

Ninja Gaiden also provides Ryu with magical spells in the form of ninpo spells . When activated by the player , these make Ryu cast fireballs , ice storms , or bolts of lightning . Functioning in a similar manner to the bombs or grenades of shooter action games , these spells allow Ryu to inflict heavy damage on enemies while potentially avoiding damage himself . But , dissatisfied with their programmed visual effects , the game 's director Tomonobu Itagaki wanted to deter players from using ninpo . He therefore tweaked the game to award bonus points when players cleared stages without employing magic . For Ryu 's defense , the player has two options . First , Ryu can stand still and attempt to block attacks . However , certain enemies can break his guard — either through particularly strong attacks or by grappling him . The second option is to make Ryu dodge , by rolling away from the attack in a maneuver called " reverse wind " .

Inspired by the 1990s Ninja Gaiden series for the Nintendo Entertainment System ( NES ) , the 2004 version was originally set in a re-imagined game world based on another Team Ninja creation , the Dead or Alive ( DOA ) series of fighting games . However , interviews with Tomonobu Itagaki indicate that the Xbox games are prequels to the NES series and that both possibly share a single continuity . Ninja Gaiden is set in the game world of the Dead or Alive series . Located mainly in Japan and the fictional Vigoor Empire , the game draws on Heian period structures for its Japanese locales — a ninja fortress and village set in the mountains . In contrast the Vigoor Empire , with its capital city of Tairon , is a blend of architectural types from around the world . European-style buildings display Arabic lettering , and the monastery in Tairon exhibits Gothic influences with a vaulted hall , pointed arches , and large stained glass windows . A hidden underground level features statues with the heads of cats , walls covered with carvings , hieroglyphics , Aztec pyramid and a labyrinth . This mix of styles was the result of Itagaki 's deliberate refusal to constrain the game 's creative process .

Ryu Hayabusa , the " super ninja " , is the protagonist of Ninja Gaiden , and the only player-controllable character in the game . Itagaki believed that creating extra player characters might distract his team from focusing on Ryu 's development . Ryu has a long history with Tecmo ; he was the star of the 1990s Ninja Gaiden series , and has been part of the DOA roster since 1996 . His roles in these games played a part in his popularity among fans and the video game industry . Ninja Gaiden provides a backstory to Ryu 's appearance and character as seen in the Dead or Alive series , being set two years before the first DOA game . Rachel is the leading female character , and tragic heroine of the game . She and her twin sister , Alma , are afflicted with a blood curse that turns humans into fiends . Believing that there is no cure for their condition , Rachel seeks to kill Alma to redeem her sister 's soul . The relationship between the sisters and the Greater Fiend Doku , who cursed them , serves as a plot device to drive the game forward , with Rachel occasionally needing to be rescued by Ryu . Although not a player-controlled character in Ninja Gaiden , in a few sections of the Ninja Gaiden Sigma remake she is controllable . Two other characters assist the player in the game . Ayane , a young female ninja and one of the DOA regular cast members , acts as a guide throughout Ninja Gaiden by supplying advice and objectives to the player . Muramasa , a bladesmith , has shops scattered throughout the game world where players can purchase useful items and upgrades for Ryu 's weapons . Muramasa also gives quests and relates back-stories and other crucial information ; for example , he tells Ryu how he can obtain the item required to upgrade his Dragon Sword to its full potential . Players have the option to customize the appearance of player characters , with selectable costumes for Ryu and hairstyles for Rachel .

Most of the enemies are fiends — humans changed into monsters by their blood curse . Three Greater Fiends lead their lesser brethren against Ryu , playing major roles in the game 's plot : Alma , Rachel 's sister , whose story forms a significant part of the game ; Doku , Ryu 's main antagonist , whose raid on Hayabusa village and theft of the Dark Dragon Blade comprise the main plot thread ; and Marbus , lord of the fiend underworld who is responsible for the final set of challenges Ryu faces in the realm of the fiends before encountering the Vigoor Emperor .

Ninja Gaiden 's story spans 16 chapters , each beginning and ending with a cutscene . At the start of the game , the player takes control of Ryu as he infiltrates the Shadow clan fortress . Ryu is there to visit his uncle , the clan leader Murai . During their chat , Ayane delivers news of a raid on the Hayabusa village . Fighting his way back to his village , Ryu encounters Doku , who has killed the Hayabusa shrine maiden Kureha and has taken the Dark Dragon Blade . Ryu is cut down by Doku with the stolen Blade , but he is brought back to life as a " soldier of revenge " by a falcon , the spiritual animal of the Hayabusa clan . Seeking vengeance for Kureha 's death , Ryu learns from Murai that the raiders were from Vigoor , so he stows away on an airship bound for the empire . Fighting his way through the streets of its capital city , Tairon , Ryu faces several bosses including the three Greater Fiends . He defeats Alma in a battle that wrecks the city , but leaves her to Rachel 's mercy . Conversely , Rachel cannot bring herself to kill her sister , and instead is taken by Doku , who prepares to sacrifice her in a ritual to enhance Alma 's power . With Alma 's help Ryu rescues Rachel and destroys Doku 's spirit , but with his dying breath Doku casts the blood curse on Ryu . The only way for Ryu to lift the curse is to kill the emperor , so he storms the palace , defeating Marbus who bars his way to the emperor 's personal realm . Two successive boss fights must be completed to destroy the Emperor and reclaim the Dark Dragon Blade — once this is accomplished his realm starts to destruct . Ryu must then be maneuvered up a series of ledges to escape , but in the process he loses his grip on the Dark Dragon Blade .

The fallen Blade lands at the feet of a figure , the Dark Disciple , who has been shadowing Ryu throughout the game . Taking the Blade , the Disciple reveals himself to be the clan leader Murai . He admits that the raid on Hayabusa village was part of his plan to restore the Blade 's evil power , using souls harvested by Ryu . Drawing on the Blade , Murai transforms himself , setting the stage for the final boss fight . Ryu defeats Murai and shatters the Blade with the True Dragon Sword . Victorious , Ryu turns himself into a falcon and flies to the Hayabusa village . In the game 's final scene he places the Dragon Eye , used to enhance his sword , on Kureha 's tombstone and disappears into the night . The story of Ninja Gaiden is continued in the sequels Ninja Gaiden : Dragon Sword , Ninja Gaiden II and Ninja Gaiden 3 .

In 1999 , Team Ninja started work on the " Next-Generation Ninja Gaiden Project " . The first stage of development was to create the game on the Sega NAOMI arcade system board . They then planned to move the project to the Dreamcast console for further development and release , but this was abandoned when Sega announced the end of Dreamcast product line in 2001 . At this point , Tecmo decided to release Ninja Gaiden as a launch title for the Sony PlayStation 2 in the United States . Itagaki , however , had other plans ; the Team Ninja Leader was impressed with the software development kits for the Xbox and pushed for his team to develop for the Microsoft console . The company kept silent on this change in direction , and surprised both the games industry and fans when they announced at E3 2002 that Ninja Gaiden would be released exclusively on the Xbox gaming console . Most fans who voted on Tecmo 's poll wanted the game on the Nintendo GameCube . Ninja Gaiden was Team Ninja 's first action title . Its initial concept had nothing in common with the original Ninja Gaiden series that was released for the NES . However , for retail reasons Tecmo wanted to retain a link with the previous games , which had many adherents in the West , so Itagaki was asked to rethink his ideas to target the foreign market . Analysing the earlier games , he concluded that their violence appealed to players , and included gory content , such as beheadings , in the Xbox game to retain that spirit . He also aimed to make his new game hard but alluring ; it would challenge players on their reflexes rather than on their memories of layouts and timings . His team made a point of designing smoothly-flowing gameplay with high-quality animations that reacted quickly to the player 's input . Itagaki paid homage to the earlier Ninja Gaiden series by including updated versions of foes and special attacks . Team Ninja based their 3D computer models , from the pistols of the henchman upwards , on real world material . Character models were taken from studies of human anatomy , and the team hired martial artists in order to digitally capture their movement . Rather than import the motion captures directly into the game , however , the animators used them as templates to give a sense of realism to the game characters ' exaggerated movements . Itagaki found it more interesting to design nonhuman creatures than human enemies .

As released , Ninja Gaiden contained bloody acts of violence , decapitations and grotesque monsters . The North American games rating body , the Entertainment Software Rating Board ( ESRB ) , rated it as a " Mature " game , which prohibits sale to anyone under the age of 17 . The depiction of beheadings , though , attracts stricter ratings in other parts of the world . In Germany , the Unterhaltungssoftware Selbstkontrolle ( USK ) deemed these excessive , and refused to rate the game at all . Since this had the potential to place Ninja Gaiden in Germany 's " List of Media Harmful to Young People " , which would have meant that shops could neither advertise the game nor sell it unless by request to customers of 18 years or older , Tecmo censored the European PAL version to obtain a USK rating . A year later , Tecmo managed to obtain a USK 18 + rating for the uncensored release of Ninja Gaiden Black . Japan 's Computer Entertainment Rating Organization ( CERO ) rated Ninja Gaiden and Black , on their release , as 18 + games . At the time , CERO ratings acted as guidelines for consumers . However , on March 1 , 2006 , the Japanese rating system changed . A scale from A to D was introduced , with an additional Z rating for games with large amounts of gore and sexual content . The Z rating is legally enforced , it being illegal to sell such games to anyone under the age of 18 . As a result , Tecmo removed the human beheadings in Sigma to obtain a D rating for the East Asian market . However , CERO reclassified the two previous games as D , despite them also depicting human decapitations .

Team Ninja kept working on the Ninja Gaiden project after its release , with the aim of pushing the action genre and their first such title as far as they could . To this end , they released downloadable expansions , known as Hurricane Packs , free of charge . Itagaki said that since the packs were born out of his team 's interest , they did not care to charge players for their efforts . The two packs were available over Xbox Live in the third quarter of 2004 . Hurricane Pack 1 was a revamped version of Story Mode ; Team Ninja tweaked the encounters and artificial intelligence ( AI ) of Ryu 's foes to increase the difficulty of the game . The pack introduced additional foes such as humanoid cats , giants wearing dinosaur skulls , and cyborgs , and Team Ninja made a key change to the camera system by which the on-screen action is displayed ; players could now control the camera and change its viewing angle . Another feature of the pack was to enhance the combat engine ; the new " Intercept " skill let players counter any enemy attack with the proper timing .

Hurricane Pack 2 kept the enhancements of the first , but took place in an alternative world comprising only two regions , where players have to fight through several encounters to rescue Rachel from two new bosses ( Nicchae and Ishtaros ) . This expansion introduced fiends who wield giant swords and cast fireballs . Team Ninja later compiled both expansion packs , and added new features , to create Ninja Gaiden Black . This game , which Itagaki viewed as the final version of Ninja Gaiden , went on sale on September 20 , 2005 . A few years later , Team Ninja upgraded the graphics of the game and ported it to the PlayStation 3 ( PS3 ) . This version was released as Ninja Gaiden Sigma on June 14 , 2007 . Black became an Xbox Original game on February 11 , 2008 .

The Master Ninja Tournaments were a series of three online contests held by Microsoft and Tecmo in 2004 . They took place over Xbox Live , and were open to participants in Europe , Japan , and North America . Winner selection was based on the scores achieved through playing Ninja Gaiden or its Hurricane Packs . Players had 14 to 24 days to complete the required games and submit their scores to an online scoreboard . The first two tournaments formed regional qualification stages for a live Ninja Gaiden Master Tournament World Championship , held on September 25 at the TGS 2004 . Competition for places was intense , with both tournaments breaking records for online participation in Xbox Live events . Six of the highest scoring players from Europe and North America won bokkens bearing Itagaki 's signature , and five regional winners were selected to proceed to the final . Here , the finalists simultaneously played a custom game drawn from Hurricane Pack 2 while commentators called out the action . They had 15 minutes to complete the game and post the highest score ; the winner emerged only in the last 20 seconds , when Yasunori Otsuka cleared the game and outscored his rivals . At the award ceremony , the finalists received their prize plaques from Itagaki .

The tournaments were not without controversy . Players complained about Microsoft 's tardiness in posting the official rules for the first playoff , and it was believed that the top posted score was not achievable by fair means . Officials , however , stated that the score was possible , and allowed the results to stand . In the second playoff , Microsoft initially named the runner up as the North American finalist , after disqualifying the winner for no publicly stated reason , but eventually had to send the second runner up to Tokyo when the first was unable to produce a passport in time . Master Ninja Tournament 3 started on September 27 and lasted 26 days . Rankings were decided by scores obtained while playing Hurricane Pack 2 , and the prizes were Tecmo apparel and Team Ninja games . This marked the end of official tournaments for Ninja Gaiden , although Microsoft have retained the ranking boards for players to upload their scores .

Tecmo has built up a line of merchandise around the Ninja Gaiden name . Its online shop carries apparel and accessories such as caps , wristbands , T-shirts , key holders , and mugs . Most of the merchandise is based on that associated with the various Ninja Gaiden game launches or given as prizes in the Master Ninja Tournaments . Tecmo also published the original soundtrack of the game under their record label Wake Up on March 20 , 2004 . Kotobukiya , a figurine maker , includes 1 / 6 scale plastic figurines of Ninja Gaiden characters in their range of products . As of 2007 , they have produced figures of Ryu , Ayane , Kureha and Rachel .

Tecmo published two versions of Ninja Gaiden : Ninja Gaiden Black for Xbox and Ninja Gaiden Sigma for PS3 . Essentially the same game as the original , they tell the same story of Ryu and the Dark Dragon Blade , but include additional content and updated game mechanics . Itagaki deemed Black to be the final version of Ninja Gaiden , but with the release of the PS3 , Tecmo ported the game to this platform as Sigma . In addition to the narrative Story Mode , Black and Sigma introduced a gameplay variation called Mission Mode . Focused on action rather than character development , this provides combat-based missions set mainly in small areas , where the player 's goal is to " destroy all enemies " . In both Story and Mission modes , game scoring is based on the player 's speed in clearing encounters , the number of kills achieved , the number of unused ninpo spells remaining at the end , and the amount of cash collected . Players can compare their scores on online ranking boards .

Tecmo announced at E3 2005 that Team Ninja was working on Ninja Gaiden Black , and later exhibited a working version of the game at the TGS 2005 . Black is a reworked compilation of the original Ninja Gaiden and the two Hurricane Packs . The game features new foes , such as exploding bats and doppelgänger fiends who can imitate Ryu . It contains more costumes than the original , and swaps Ninja Gaiden 's unlockable NES games for an arcade version . One key feature of this version is its two new difficulty settings — the easy Ninja Dog and the very hard Master Ninja . Itagaki added Ninja Dog after receiving complaints of Ninja Gaiden being too hard in its default incarnation , although he believed that , with persistence , any player was capable of completing the game . Hence he ensured that those players selecting Ninja Dog would be subjected to gentle mockery by the game — players on this difficulty setting receive colored ribbons as accessories , and Ayane treats Ryu as an inferior . In compensation , Itagaki made the other difficulty settings harder than in Ninja Gaiden . Another feature of Black is its Mission Mode , which comprises 50 combat missions , one of which is adapted from the custom game designed for the Ninja Gaiden Master Tournament World Championship final . The last five missions are based on those in Hurricane Pack 2 and form a linked series known as " Eternal Legend " . While most of the improvements made in the Hurricane Packs carried forward through this game , including the camera system tweaks and new boss battles , the Intercept maneuver , introduced in Hurricane Pack 1 , was not included in Black , adding to its increased challenge .

Ninja Gaiden was released to much critical acclaim . Greg Kasavin of GameSpot called it " one of the best most challenging action adventure games ever made " , and IGN 's Erik Brudvig said that it " sets a new standard for third-person action games in terms of length , depth , speed , and gore . " Electronic Gaming Monthly ( EGM ) called it " an unmissable instant classic " , and declared that " no Xbox should go without [ Ninja ] Gaiden . " Critics also regarded it to be one of the most difficult games released prior to 2007 . Its enhanced version , Ninja Gaiden Black , also impressed reviewers . GameSpot noted that it had the best visual and audio presentation on the Xbox , and praised its new Mission Mode for " [ distilling ] the game down to its purest essentials . " IGN called its release " a rare and welcome day " , which brought their " excitement levels back to the first time [ they ] played the game . " From a technical point of view , critics regarded Ninja Gaiden and Black as the best of the available Xbox software at the time ; the console hardware had been pushed to its limits without showing significant drops in performance . GameSpot 's Kasavin was impressed with their " first-rate presentation " and said that no other games at that time came close in visuals and audio . According to IGN , the games could " make [ them ] momentarily forget about the next generation of consoles " . Both Ninja Gaiden and Black were top-sellers , which led to them being compatible with the Xbox 360 for all regions on the new platform 's release . Ninja Gaiden attracted criticism for the way on-screen action is framed by the game 's camera . The default camera system centers the action on Ryu and his surroundings , but reviewers were frustrated by occasions when the camera locked on to part of the scenery , thus losing track of Ryu . Tecmo attempted to address this with the introduction of manual camera controls in the Hurricane Packs , and most critics judged that either the camera frame was usually acceptable , or that Ninja Gaiden was a good enough game that its flaws could be overlooked .

Consumers purchased 1.5 million copies of Ninja Gaiden and Black to August 2007 , with the bulk of these sales going to North America and Europe . According to the NPD Group , in its first month Ninja Gaiden sold 362,441 copies in the United States . These sales figures reflect Tecmo 's decision to target the non-Japanese market . Japanese gamers were not particularly excited — according to Itagaki , only 60,000 copies of Ninja Gaiden were sold in Japan in the four months following its release . The critical and commercial successes of Ninja Gaiden have led CNET and GameSpot Asia to induct the game into their halls of fame . The Ninja Gaiden games gained a reputation throughout the gaming community for their difficulty and attention to detail . Although they appealed to gamers who , like Pro-G 's Struan Robertson , wanted a " bloody hard , but also bloody good " challenge , it was feared that casual gamers would find the learning curve daunting . IGN warned that gamers with lesser skills might not " get as much out of this game as others due to [ its ] incredible difficulty " , and Edge commented that " Tecmo ’ s refusal to extend any kind of handhold to less dedicated players is simply a failure of design , not a badge of hardcore honour " and " it ’ s impossible to believe they couldn ’ t have found a way to increase the accessibility of the game without undermining the gloriously intractable nature of the challenges it contains . " EGM found the challenge to be " rewarding " as it " motivates you to actually get better at the game . " Clive Thompson focused on Ninja Gaiden in his Slate article examining the motivation for playing difficult games . He contends that extreme levels of challenge can be initially very frustrating and may cause a game to be abandoned in disgust . However , where a game also rewards a player 's perseverance by teaching the skills required to overcome its challenges , that player will have the motivation to finish the game . Ninja Gaiden , in his opinion , strikes the correct balance between challenge and reward ; completion brings " a sort of exhausted exhilaration , like finally reaching the end of War and Peace . " In 2012 , CraveOnline included it on their list of five " badass ninja games " , calling it " the pinnacle of action gaming at the time , holding onto that crown for an entire year until God of War released in 2005 " and " a true video game classic , and maybe the best ninja game of all time . " That same year , G4tv ranked it as the 83rd top video game of all time , also calling it " the best ninja game ever made and one of the all around hardest . "

Milutin Bojić ( Serbian Cyrillic : Милутин Бојић ; 18 May [ O.S. 7 May ] 1892 – 8 November [ O.S. 25 October ] 1917 ) was a Serbian poet , theatre critic , playwright , and soldier . A native of Belgrade , he began writing poetry at an early age and published a number of literary reviews under a pseudonym while he was still a teenager . He rose to prominence during the Balkan Wars , writing about his experiences in territories newly retaken from the Ottoman Empire . The outbreak of World War I interrupted Bojić 's studies at the University of Belgrade and forced him to postpone marrying his girlfriend , Radmila Todorović . The couple were separated in the chaos of war , and Bojić left Belgrade with his family and relocated to Niš , where he worked as a military censor and wrote articles for a local newspaper to pay his family 's bills . In October 1915 , the Serbian Army was overwhelmed by a combined Austro-Hungarian , Bulgarian and German invasion and forced to retreat to neutral Greece via Albania . Bojić and his younger brother joined the exodus , marching for several weeks through Kosovo , Montenegro and northern Albania , where they were finally reunited with Bojić 's fiancée . Bojić was not allowed to accompany his brother and fiancée on a ship destined for Italy because he was of fighting age , and had to continue marching to Greece without them .

In early 1916 , Bojić reached the Greek island of Corfu , where he was recruited to work for Serbian military intelligence . That summer , he was transferred to Thessaloniki , where he continued working for the military . In August , he was granted leave and sailed to France , where he reunited with his fiancée and his brother . Bojić returned to Greece several weeks later , and was diagnosed with tuberculosis in September the following year . Owing to the political connections of his patrons , he managed to find care at an exclusive military hospital in Thessaloniki , but by late October his condition worsened . He died in early November at the age of 25 . He was initially buried at the Allied military cemetery at Zeitenlik , but in 1922 , his siblings had his remains relocated to Belgrade , where they were reburied beside those of his parents . Bojić 's popularity grew exponentially following his death . Many of his poems received widespread critical acclaim for their portrayal of the Serbian Army 's retreat during the winter of 1915 – 16 and its stay on Corfu , where thousands of soldiers succumbed to disease and exhaustion and were buried at sea . Bojić 's work remained popular in Yugoslavia for much of the 20th century , cementing his reputation as one of the greatest Serbian poets of the Romantic period .

Milutin Bojić was born in Belgrade on 18 May [ O.S. 7 May ] 1892 , the eldest child of Jovan and Sofia Bojić ( née Bogojević ) . His father 's family was originally from Herzegovina . Following the First Serbian Uprising , Bojić 's great-grandfather fled his ancestral homeland and settled in the Austro-Hungarian city of Semlin ( modern Zemun ) to escape Ottoman persecution . Bojić 's father and grandfather were born in Semlin , and were good-standing members of the town 's fledgling Serb community . In 1875 , Bojić 's father was conscripted into the Austro-Hungarian Army . Shortly afterwards , he entered into an argument with a high-ranking Hungarian officer , insulted him , then fled to the Serbian capital to escape punishment . He attended trade school in Belgrade and became a successful shoemaker . Bojić 's matrilineal line traces its origins to the town of Tetovo , in what is now northern Macedonia . His mother 's family had fled the town in 1690 as part of the Great Serb Migration and settled in Bečkerek ( modern Zrenjanin ) . Bojić 's maternal grandfather , Jovan , had lived in the border town of Pančevo since he was a child , married and started a family there . Much like Bojić 's father , he was a successful shoemaker , and in 1890 he offered to marry his only daughter to him . After initial disagreement over the price of the dowry , Bogojević gave the marriage his blessing and Bojić 's parents were soon married .

At the time of Bojić 's birth , his parents were living in a small flat at No. 4 Sremska Street , situated just above his father 's shop in Belgrade 's Stari Grad . Over the next decade , they had four more children – Jelica ( b . 1894 ) , Danica ( b . 1896 ) , Radivoje ( b . 1900 ) and Dragoljub ( b . 1905 ) . All of their children survived to adulthood . When Bojić was a child , he and his family were frequently visited by his mother 's cousin Jovan Sremac , the brother of humourist Stevan Sremac . Jovan is said to have greatly influenced the young Bojić , having introduced him to Serbian folk tales and medieval legends at an early age .

Bojić began attending the Terazije Elementary School in 1898 , and finished with excellent grades . He likely began writing poetry between the ages of eight and ten , and this caught the attention of some of his teachers . Jovan Dravić , who taught Serbian in Bojić 's school , wrote : " One of my pupils has been writing poetry since his first year of elementary school . His father , a shoemaker on Sremska Street , is very proud of his son 's work . He keeps his poems locked away in a safe as great treasures , convinced that they are of immense value and proof of his son 's brilliant future . " In 1902 , the Bojićes moved into a small house on Hilandarska Street . That autumn , Bojić enrolled into Belgrade 's Secondary School No. 2 , which taught children from the ages of ten to eighteen . Over the next several years , Bojić distinguished himself as an excellent student . In 1907 , he was recognized as the best student in his school , and was exempt from final examinations . By this time , Bojić 's poems started appearing in his school 's periodical . He also began writing literary reviews for Jovan Skerlić and Milan Grol 's Daily News ( Dnevni list ) , and became the paper 's youngest contributor . All of Bojić 's contributions there were written under a pseudonym because he feared he would not be taken seriously if his true age was uncovered . Bojić also authored articles in the newspapers Artwork ( Delo ) , Wreath ( Venac ) and The Serbian Literary Gazette ( Srpski književni glasnik ) . In 1908 , during the Austro-Hungarian annexation of Bosnia and Herzegovina , Bojić penned his first stage play , titled " The Blind Despot " ( Slepi despot ) . It was meant to be the first play of a trilogy titled " The Despot 's Crown " ( Despotova kruna ) . Bojić shared the play with his friend Radoslav Vesnić , who then showed it to Rista Odović , the director of the National Theatre in Belgrade .

By the end of his secondary school studies , Bojić was elected chairman of his school 's literary club . Upon turning eighteen , in May 1910 , he was deemed unfit to serve in the Serbian Army and excused from mandatory service . After graduation , in the autumn of 1910 , he enrolled in the University of Belgrade 's Faculty of Philosophy , where he studied the works of Immanuel Kant , as well as German , Italian and South Slavic literature with varying rates of success . Shortly after entering the university , Bojić began contributing theatrical reviews to Pijemont , an ultra-nationalist daily strongly opposed to the Prime Minister of Serbia , Nikola Pašić , and his People 's Radical Party ( Serbian : Narodna radikalna stranka ; NRS ) . Pijemont was also the quasi-official paper of the secret organization Unification or Death ( better known as the Black Hand ) , which played an important role in Serbian political life between 1903 and 1914 . Milutin K. Dragutinović was one of Bojić 's greatest influences during his teenage years . Dragutinović was one of Bojić 's former secondary school teachers , as well as a literary critic and member of the National Theatre 's artistic committee . He advised Bojić to continue writing poetry and dramatic verse . In 1911 , Bojić shared the first draft of a stage play titled " Chains " ( Lanci ) with Dragutinović , who encouraged him to submit it to a competition held by the Literary Committee of the National Theatre in Belgrade . Bojić 's play was one of forty-two works that were submitted . A number of prominent writers took part in the competition , including Ivo Vojnović , Branislav Nušić , Aleksa Šantić , and Svetozar Ćorović . " Chains " was rejected as being too " naïve " and " full of youthful exaggerations " , and the prize went to another contestant . In May , Bojić 's father died suddenly of a heart attack , aged 56 .

Despite his busy schedule , during his university years Bojić spent many of his nights in cafés and bars , mingling with other artists in Skadarlija , Belgrade 's Bohemian quarter . He was extremely popular among the writers and artists of his generation . During this time , many of Belgrade 's merchant elite became art patrons . Bojić 's patrons were Ljuba Jovanović-Patak and his wife Simka , who used their power and influence to publicize his works . During the Balkan Wars , Bojić accompanied the Serbian Army as a war reporter and wrote several travelogues about his experiences in Kosovo and Macedonia . The expulsion of the Turks , who had occupied much of the Balkans for 500 years , seemed to fill Bojić with optimism about the future . Helena Malířová , a Czech volunteer nurse with the 17th Reserve Hospital of the Serbian Army 's 7th Regiment , recalled : " His spirit was in constant opposition to everything ; at the same time he was an enthusiast . He was bursting with desires , and he drank the sap of life through his senses . " Historian Mihailo Đorđević writes : [ Bojić ] was an impulsive young man . From rare photographs and the testimony of his contemporaries emerges [ ... ] a figure of medium stature , with slightly drooped shoulders , thick brown hair , and a pale oval face . His eyebrows were dark , and one of them was almost always raised , giving his face an expression of intense irony . His eyes burned with constant passion , and his lips were full and sensuous . There was also something young and vulnerable in his smile . He smiled often , and his conversation was reputed to be brilliant .

At the outbreak of World War I , Bojić was in his final year at the University of Belgrade and had gotten engaged to his girlfriend , Radmila Todorović . The war put a stop to his education , and Bojić decided to postpone the marriage until peace was restored . He remained employed at Pijemont until 1915 , when he left Belgrade with his family , never to return . While Todorović remained in the city , the Bojićes moved to the town of Aranđelovac in the Serbian interior . Shortly after , they moved to Niš as it was further from the frontlines . There , Bojić worked as a military censor . He wrote articles for the Niš Gazette ( Niški glasnik ) to pay his family 's bills . In early February 1915 , Bojić 's mother died of cancer , leaving him to take care of his younger siblings . Bojić devoted most of his creative energy to the completion of an epic poem titled Cain , which was published just before the combined Austro-Hungarian , Bulgarian and German invasion of Serbia in October 1915 . A deeply patriotic work , Cain compares Bulgaria 's impending attack on Serbia to the Biblical story of Cain jealously murdering his brother Abel . Upon capturing Niš , the Bulgarians burned every copy of the poem , and the only one that survived was the one that Bojić carried with him out of the city . Upon leaving Niš , Bojić and his brother Radivoje joined the Serbian Army in its retreat to the Adriatic coast . Their sisters and infant brother went to live with a cousin in occupied Kraljevo . The Bojić brothers ' journey took them through Kuršumlija , Mitrovica , Pristina , Prizren , Đakovica , Dečani and Peć , from where they continued to Andrijevica and Podgorica . The two intended to join retreating Montenegrin Army columns and head on to Scutari , where they hoped that Allied ships would evacuate them and other Serbian troops to Italy .

The Serbs quickly realized that they had no hope of being evacuated at Scutari due to the Austro-Hungarian naval presence off the northern Albanian coast , and the Serbian and Montenegrin military leaderships elected to retreat further into the Albanian interior rather than surrender . The Serbs and Montenegrins marched south , first to Durrës and then to Vlorë . From there , they intended to meet up with a French expeditionary force that was to evacuate them to the Greek island of Corfu . Thousands of soldiers either died of hunger or succumbed to the cold . Many were ambushed by hostile Albanian tribesmen and killed while traversing the countryside . While marching through the wilderness , Bojić began writing a poetry anthology titled " Songs of Pride and Suffering " ( Pesme bola i ponosa ) , which would comprise some of his best known works . He also started working on a new drama in verse titled " The Marriage of Uroš " ( Uroševa ženidba ) . He was dressed in a strange way . A šajkača was pulled to the front of his head and almost completely covered his forehead . His eyebrows were hardly visible . Under its weight , the ears seemed to have collapsed . He wore a kind of long , black coat , covered in mud and held in place by a string . He used another piece of string for a belt , and from it hung a pot for boiling water , a tea strainer , a canteen , and other useful things . He walked slightly bent forward , followed everywhere by the noise of the things clashing at his waist .

The occupation of Serbia by the Central Powers pained Bojić far more than the everyday struggles of the exodus itself . He is said to have slept very little , telling Živadinović : " You don 't realize what you are missing by sleeping . In circumstances like these , the entire soul must be kept constantly awake . Whole centuries have never painted such a vast fresco . Never has death been so greedy , nor heroes so indifferent to it . " In December 1915 , Bojić reached Shëngjin with the others and reunited with his fiancée . Živadinović recalled : " I shall never forget the day that we saw the sea . Only then did Bojić begin to speak about the future . He was making plans for a vast novel in verse , for comedies , dramas , tragedies , all intended to bring the great events of our history back to life . " Upon reaching the coast , Bojić was told that he could not board the ship to Italy because he was of fighting age . His fiancée was allowed to board and his fifteen-year-old brother was judged to be too young for military service and granted passage as well . Unable to go with them , Bojić and his companions continued down the length of the Albanian coast until they reached Corfu , where the Allies had sent ships to transport the remnants of the Serbian Army to the Greek mainland .

Upon reaching Corfu , thousands of Serb troops began showing symptoms of typhus and had to be quarantined on the island of Vido , where 11,000 died over the span of two months . Seven thousand of these had to be buried at sea because there was not enough space for their remains to be interred on land ; corpses were simply piled onto barges and tossed overboard . Bojić was appalled by the suffering . " Our church bells toll dead instead of hours , " he wrote . Witnessing the disposal of bodies inspired Bojić to write the poem " Ode to a Blue Sea Tomb " ( Plava Grobnica ) , which Đorđević describes as " Bojić 's best ... a masterpiece of Serbian patriotic poetry . " Shortly after arriving at Corfu , Bojić was recruited to work for Serbian military intelligence . In mid-1916 , he was transferred to Thessaloniki .

Upon reaching Thessaloniki , Bojić spent much of his spare time reading the works of French authors and writing poetry . In August 1916 , he received a month 's leave and sailed for France , where his fiancée and brother had gone to escape from the war , shortly after landing in Italy . Bojić spent the month with his fiancée in Nice . Upon returning to Greece , Bojić resumed his army service , and continued writing poetry . " Songs of Pride and Suffering " was first published in Thessaloniki in mid-1917 . Nearly every copy of the anthology was destroyed in the Great Fire of Thessaloniki , in August 1917 . The only copy that survived was one sent by Bojić to his fiancée in France and this became the basis for the post-war edition . In September 1917 , Bojić was diagnosed with tuberculosis . Owing to the influence of his old patron , Ljuba Jovanović-Patak , he was admitted to a military hospital in central Thessaloniki which tended exclusively to Serbian Army officers , where Jovanović 's wife often visited him . Bojić continued writing poetry , and as his condition deteriorated , his poems began to take a melancholy tone . Nevertheless , he remained optimistic that he would recover from his illness and see his family again . One month before his death , he sent his fiancée and brother a telegram assuring them that he was " ... only slightly ill " and promised they would be reunited . Bojić died of tuberculosis on 8 November [ O.S. 25 October ] 1917 . Even a few hours before his death , he appeared convinced of his survival . According to a fellow patient , Bojić " ... died choking in half-sleep from a fit of coughing that destroyed the tissues of his lungs . " He was buried at the Zeitenlik military cemetery in Thessaloniki . His family was shocked by the news of his death , particularly his brother and fiancée , who believed him to be on the road to recovery . In 1922 , Bojić 's remains were exhumed and transferred to Belgrade 's New Cemetery , where they were reburied beside those of his parents .

All of Bojić 's siblings survived the war ; his brother Radivoje became a diplomat and worked in the Yugoslav Ministry of Foreign Affairs until the Axis invasion of the country in April 1941 , when he left Yugoslavia with his family and emigrated to the West . Bojić 's youngest brother , Dragoljub , spent the rest of his life in Belgrade and became a high school geography teacher . His sister Jelica married and lived in Belgrade until her death in 1942 . His youngest sister , Danica , died single in 1952 . Bojić 's fiancée Radmila remained loyal to him and never married after his death ; she returned to Serbia after the war and died in Belgrade in 1971 .

While at the University of Belgrade , Bojić studied The Bible in his free time and read the works of Victor Hugo , Friedrich Nietzsche , Charles Baudelaire , Leo Tolstoy , Anton Chekhov and Sigmund Freud , among others . Đorđević notes that Bojić 's early poems reflect the degree to which he was influenced by the " exalted sensuality " of Baudelaire 's works . He contends that Baudelaire 's influence on Bojić 's early work is " rather unfortunate " , as by striving to imitate Baudelaire 's style , Bojić failed to achieve originality and instead merely used Baudelaire as a " crutch in the absence of spontaneous emotion " . As he matured , Bojić was influenced by the works of Irish writer Oscar Wilde , particularly the play Salome , which was being performed at the National Theatre in Belgrade during Bojić 's university years . The play influenced Bojić to such an extent that he later composed a poem of the same name . According to Đorđević , Bojić was " thrilled by the beauty of Wilde 's descriptions " , and reading his work inspired Bojić to use Biblical rhythm and accentuation . Đorđević notes that the archaic phrase " thou art " only appears in Bojić 's poems after he began reading Wilde . Wilde 's influence can also be observed in Bojić 's lyric plays , especially " The King 's Autumn " . Bojić was also inspired by French playwright Edmond Rostand , whose play L 'Aiglon was Bojić 's " dramatic ideal incarnate " . Rostand 's influence is most clearly felt in " The Marriage of Uroš " , where Bojić paid homage to Rostand by writing the entire drama in verse , a style that was considered obsolete at the time . Serbian history and medieval legends had the greatest influence on Bojić 's plays ; Đorđević notes that " all Bojić 's dramas , published or not , are inspired by Serbian medieval motifs " .

The Balkan Wars inspired Bojić to write his first patriotic poetry , where he attempted to emulate Hugo 's rhetorical verse . By 1914 , much of Bojić 's poetry revolved around patriotic themes , and by 1917 this theme had overtaken all others . In his last months , the only non-patriotic poems that Bojić wrote were about the love he felt towards his fiancée . The historian John K. Cox opines that Bojić 's " personal suffering ... [ embodied ] Serbian history at the crossroads of greatness and disaster . " Cox considers Bojić the most famous of the many Serbian artists and writers who perished during World War I. Đorđević contends that Bojić achieved more during his short career than a number of other writers and poets who led far longer lives . He writes that Bojić 's influence on Serbian literature would have been even greater had he survived the war , and praises him as " one of the great poets of the 20th century " . In May 2014 , the inaugural Milutin Bojić Prize was awarded to a student from Čačak by the Milutin Bojić Library , a Belgrade-based learning institution dedicated exclusively to studies on Bojić 's life and work . The Library is funded by the Serbian Ministry of Culture , and operates an extensive online database known as the Milutin Bojić Virtual Library . In August 2014 , researchers discovered the original manuscript of " Ode to a Blue Sea Tomb " in the Library 's archives . The yellowed slip of paper was immediately given to experts at the National Library of Serbia , who went about restoring it so as to prevent further decay .

Oscar Martinez ( Oscar Nunez ) believes that Angela Lipton ( Angela Kinsey ) does not know about his affair with her husband , but in fact she is playing dumb in order to keep Oscar off his guard while she makes arrangements to have him killed . She goes to Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) for help , without telling him the details , and he calls a fellow former volunteer sheriff 's deputy named Trevor ( Chris Gethard ) for assistance . After Trevor shows his credentials , Angela says she wants the target murdered , which Dwight protests is too extreme , so they compromise to breaking the target 's kneecaps . Dwight realizes the target is Oscar when Angela angrily crushes a cookie given to her by Oscar . Dwight tries to get Angela to reconsider , but Trevor has already arrived to carry out the job . Dwight rushes to get Oscar out . They run into Trevor outside . A struggle between the three men ensues , with Oscar ultimately managing to take away Trevor 's lead pipe . When Trevor runs away , Oscar and Dwight are confronted by Angela , who blames Oscar for turning her husband gay . Oscar says that he was always gay , and refuses to hand the lead pipe over to Angela . She kicks him in the shin instead . Upset that they don 't understand homosexuality , Dwight and Angela go to Toby Flenderson ( Paul Lieberstein ) , who is confounded by their outlandish questions over homosexual activity .

Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) asks Dunder Mifflin CEO David Wallace ( Andy Buckley ) if he can work part-time so he can go to Philadelphia to help with his sports marketing job . David Wallace says that he might be needed in the office if there 's a crisis with one of his clients , to which he responds that Stanley Hudson ( Leslie David Baker ) and Phyllis Vance ( Phyllis Smith ) have agreed to cover for him , though he in fact hasn 't asked them yet . Stanley and Phyllis respond with their usual disinterest in helping others , so Jim offers to treat them to lunch . Stanley and Phyllis order extra side dishes and help themselves to an excess of wine , annoying Jim with drunken behavior and silencing him whenever he brings up the subject of their covering for him . When they arrive back at the office , a drunk Stanley and Phyllis are seemingly passed out in Jim 's backseat . When Jim puts his coat on them to keep them warm , Phyllis and Stanley say they will cover for him as they care for Jim and his family , laughing as they reveal they were only pranking him . Jim gives both of them a hug .

Pam Halpert ( Jenna Fischer ) decides to start painting her mural in the warehouse , but has a hard time getting started as she is afraid of it not being perfect . Meanwhile , bored with having to fill out customer complaint cards ( which he finds redundant because the complaints are already in the computer ) , Pete ( Jake Lacy ) uses them to build a card tower in the annex with other employees . The card tower takes on a deeper meaning for the employees when Pete points out that it is composed of failures made by every one of them ( excepting only Pam ) , and thus proves that they should not be ashamed of their failures . They decide to try to make it go all the way to the ceiling , but end up one complaint card short . Not wanting to use a blank card as it would defy the point of the tower , Pam offers to complete the tower by getting her first customer complaint . She calls one of their smaller clients , delivers a yo mama joke , and hangs up . The client , whose mother was actually obese and is now deceased , drops Dunder Mifflin as their paper supplier , leaving them simultaneously excited over getting that last complaint and disappointed over losing a client . After celebrating the completion of the card tower , Pam finally starts painting the mural , saying artists should not care too much in what others think , further asserting this by telling off Hide ( Hidetoshi Imura ) when he insults her artwork .

" The Target " was written by producer Graham Wagner , marking his debut writing credit for the series after joining the writing staff in the ninth season . It was directed by executive producer Brent Forrester , his fourth directing credit for the series and first since the eighth season episode , " Test the Store " . Ed Helms and Clark Duke did not appear in the episode . This is due to the fact that they were both written out of several episodes of the season in order to film The Hangover Part III and Kick-Ass 2 , respectively . The official website of The Office included several cut scenes from " The Target " within a week of the episode 's release . In the first 58-second clip , Pam feels further pressure over her mural and reveals that several of the warehouse workers think her name is Pat . In the second 60-second clip , The Senator comes by the office , Jim pretends to beg to Stanley and Phyllis while they are sleeping , and Pam talks more about her mural . In the third 66-second clip , Angela checks out Trevor 's qualifications .

Dwight assures Angela that she is not stupid , rather " Jazz is stupid . " Angela concurs , saying : " Just play the right notes ! " " The Target " features several meta-references and references to previous episodes . Dwight tells Angela and Trevor that " this documentary crew has been following our every move for the past nine years but I don 't see them so I think we 're good " , when they are in Trevor 's van . Angela and Dwight question Toby about the tendencies of homosexuals in a way similar to how Dwight questions Toby about the appearance of female genitalia in the second season episode " Sexual Harassment " . While working on her mural , Pam is seen wearing a Pratt Institute hoodie , which she attended for three months during the fifth season . Angela tells Dwight to meet up in the " usual place " , which Dwight shows up to nude , referencing their previous secretive relationship .

" The Target " received mostly positive reviews from critics , with many praising the performances of Oscar Nunez and Angela Kinsey . The A.V. Club reviewer Erik Adams wrote that the episode was a perfect mix , between the more subtle , realistic style of the early seasons , and the more-farcical style of the most recent seasons . He named the Oscar-Angela plotline a " season highlight " , and complimented Angela Kinsey 's commitment to Angela throughout the plotline . He also praised the other storylines of the episode for showing the family-like bond between the whole ensemble . He ultimately gave the episode an " A – " . Cindy White of IGN commented that the episode proved the series did not need a character in the role of the boss . She complimented the confrontation between Oscar and Angela and the Pam subplot for marking some " development " in her character , but criticized the Jim-Stanley-Phyllis subplot for being " over the top " . She ultimately gave the episode an 8.0 / 10 . Paste writer Bonnie Stiernberg called the episode " strong " , and compared it to the older episodes . She praised the Oscar-Angela plotline , calling it Oscar Nunez and Kinsey 's best performance of the year . She also complimented the Jim-Stanley-Phyllis subplot , calling the ending to it sweet , and the Pam-Pete-Erin subplot , calling it " more complex-but no less enjoyable " and praised the development of Pam 's character , considering it to be " touching " . Stiernberg ultimately gave the episode an 8.6 / 10 .

Michael Tedder of New York praised the writers work and for giving " nice character moments " to the cast , particularly Kinsey . He also praised them for giving Kinsey " more to work with " , comparing her role in previous episodes which featured her character being " exaggerated to cartoon levels for the sake of a laugh " . ScreenCrush reviewer Damon Houx was slightly more critical with his review , writing that while the cast was quite good , the episode was too struggled with " find [ ing ] stuff for everyone to do " , and that the Pete-Erin-Pam and Jim-Stanley-Phyllis subplots " ultimately have nowhere interesting to go " . Multiple critics noted similarities between the style of this episode with the early seasons of the series , particularly for its use of callbacks .

The Royal Question ( French : Question royale , Dutch : Koningskwestie ) was a major political crisis in Belgium that lasted from 1945 to 1951 , coming to a head between March and August 1950 . The " Question " at stake surrounded whether King Leopold III could resume his royal powers and duties as King of the Belgians amid allegations that his actions during World War II had gone contrary to the provisions of the Belgian Constitution . It was eventually resolved by the abdication of Leopold in favour of his son , Baudouin , in 1951 . The crisis emerged from the division between Leopold and his government , led by Hubert Pierlot , during the German invasion of 1940 . Leopold , who was suspected of authoritarian sympathies , had taken over command of the Belgian Army at the outbreak of war . Considering his constitutional position as Commander-in-Chief to take precedence over his civil role as head of state , he refused to leave his army and join the Belgian government in exile in France . Leopold 's refusal to obey the Government marked a constitutional crisis and , after having negotiated the surrender to the Germans on 28 May , Leopold was widely condemned . During the subsequent German occupation , Leopold was held under house arrest in his palace where he was praised for stoically sharing the suffering of ordinary Belgians . Shortly before the Allies liberated the country in 1944 , he was deported to Germany by the Nazis .

With Belgium liberated but the King still in captivity , a regency was proclaimed and Leopold 's brother , Prince Charles , Count of Flanders , was elected as prince regent . The King was declared officially " unable to rule " in accordance with the Constitution . With the country divided along political lines over whether the King could ever return to his functions , and with the left wing dominant politically , Leopold went into exile in Switzerland . In 1950 , a national referendum was organised by a new centre-right government to decide on whether Leopold could return . Although the result was a victory for the Leopoldists , it produced a strong regional split between Flanders , which was broadly in favour of the King 's return , and Brussels and Wallonia which generally opposed it . Leopold 's return to Belgium in July 1950 was greeted with widespread protests in Wallonia and a general strike . The unrest culminated in the killing of four workers by police on 31 July . With the situation fast deteriorating , on 1 August 1950 Leopold announced his intention to resign . After a transition period , he formally abdicated in favour of Baudouin in July 1951 .

Belgium gained its independence from the United Netherlands in 1830 and was established as a popular and constitutional monarchy under a bicameral parliamentary democracy . A liberal Constitution was written in 1831 which codified the responsibilities and restrictions imposed on the monarch . Although the King , as head of state , was prevented from acting without the approval of a government minister , he was allowed full control of military matters in his capacity as Commander-in-Chief . Which responsibility would take precedence if they became incompatible was left ambiguous and this uncertainty would lie at the heart of the Royal Question . The first king , King Leopold I , accepted the terms of the Constitution but attempted to use its ambiguities to subtly increase his own powers . This was continued by his successors , although with little real success .

King Leopold III came to the throne in 1934 after his father , Albert I , died in a mountaineering accident . Albert , known as the " Knight King " ( roi-chevalier or koning-ridder ) , had been hugely popular in Belgium after commanding the Belgian army during World War I ( 1914 – 18 ) while much of the country was under German occupation . Leopold 's reign was marked by economic crisis in the wake of the Great Depression , and political agitation by both far-left and far-right parties . Amid this period of crisis , Leopold attempted to expand the powers of the monarch . He was widely suspected of holding authoritarian and right-wing political views . From 1936 , Leopold was a strong supporter of Belgium 's " independence policy " of political neutrality in the face of Nazi Germany 's increasingly aggressive territorial expansion .

Soon after the outbreak of war , the King and Government began to disagree . While the Government argued that the German invasion had violated Belgian neutrality and made Belgium one of the Allies , Leopold argued that Belgium was still a neutral country and had no obligations beyond defending its borders . Leopold opposed allowing British and French forces into Belgian territory to fight alongside Belgian troops , as a breach of its neutrality . On 25 May 1940 , Leopold met senior representatives of his Government for a final time at the Kasteel van Wijnendale in West Flanders . The meeting is frequently cited as the start of the Royal Question and the moment of the decisive break between King and Government . Four ministers of the Government were present : Hubert Pierlot , Paul-Henri Spaak , Henri Denis and Arthur Vanderpoorten . By the time of the meeting , against the backdrop of the bloody Battle of the Lys , the Belgian government was preparing to continue the fight against Germany from exile in France . They urged the King to join them , following the examples of Queen Wilhelmina of the Netherlands and Charlotte , Grand Duchess of Luxembourg . The King rejected their arguments and hardened his own position . He refused to leave Belgian territory and his army in Flanders at any cost . The ministers suspected that Leopold 's aides were already negotiating with the Germans . The meeting broke up with no agreement and the Belgian Government left for France .

Leopold negotiated a cease-fire with the Germans on 27 May 1940 , and the Belgian armed forces officially surrendered the following day . Leopold became a prisoner of war and was placed under house arrest at the Royal Palace of Laeken , near Brussels . Furious that the King had both ignored the government and negotiated a surrender without consulting them , Pierlot gave an angry speech on Radio Paris , condemning the King and announcing the Government 's intention to continue fighting alongside the Allies . French politicians , notably Paul Reynaud , blamed Leopold for the growing disaster of the Battle of France and angrily condemned him as a " criminal king " ( roi-félon ) .

With the Belgian surrender on 28 May 1940 , Belgium was placed under German occupation and a military administration was established under General Alexander von Falkenhausen to govern the country . Belgian civil servants were ordered to remain at their posts in order to ensure the continued functioning of the state and to attempt to protect the population from the demands of the German authorities . With France 's defeat and the installation of the pro-German Vichy regime , it was widely believed that Germany was about to win the war . Leopold was hailed as a " martyr " or a symbol of national resilience , in contrast to a Government that appeared to place its ideology above the interests of the Belgian people . On 31 May 1940 , the senior representative of the Catholic Church in Belgium , Cardinal Jozef-Ernest van Roey , circulated a pastoral letter calling for all Belgians to unite around the King . Other figures in the King 's entourage , particularly the authoritarian socialist Henri De Man , believed that democracy had failed and that the end of the war would see the King as the ruler of an authoritarian Belgian state .

Imprisoned , the King continued to follow his own political programme . He believed that after the German victory a " New Order " would be established in Europe and that , as the senior Belgian figure in occupied Europe , he could negotiate with the German authorities . Leopold corresponded with Adolf Hitler and tried to organise a meeting with him . Hitler remained uninterested and distrustful of the King , but on 19 November 1940 Leopold succeeded in gaining an unproductive audience with him at Berchtesgaden . Popular support for Leopold in Belgium declined sharply in December 1941 when news of Leopold 's remarriage to Lilian Baels was made public . The marriage was deeply unpopular with the Belgian public . The image of the " prisoner-king " ( roi prisonnier ) , sharing the suffering of the Belgian prisoners of war , was undermined and his popularity fell sharply , especially in Wallonia , the home of the majority of the Belgian prisoners still detained . Popular opinion also turned on the king for his perceived unwillingness to speak out against German occupation policies . Amid German defeats against the Russians on the Eastern Front after 1942 , the King prepared for the end of the war . He ordered the preparation of a document , known as the Political Testament ( Testament Politique ) , which would justify his behaviour under the occupation and detail his interventions on behalf of Belgian prisoners of war and deported workers . Leopold however continued to condemn the action of the Belgian government in exile ( based in London after October 1940 ) . On 7 June 1944 , following D-Day , he was deported to Germany . He was finally liberated by American forces on 7 May 1945 .

After D-Day , Allied troops crossed the Belgian frontier on 1 September 1944 . German forces did little to oppose the liberating forces , which by 4 September were in control of Brussels , although the last occupied parts of Belgian territory were only liberated in February 1945 . On 8 September 1944 , the government in exile returned to Brussels and was greeted with general indifference . Although the King was no longer in the country , his Political Testament was presented to the returned Government as he had wished , and was soon circulated publicly . At the same time , a copy was presented to the British king , George VI , and was seen by the Foreign Secretary Anthony Eden . The text reignited the divisions within the Government which had been largely hidden since earlier in the war . Since the King was still in German custody , there was no opposition to the creation of a regent in his absence . On 20 September 1944 , a meeting of both Chambers of Parliament was called . Article 82 of the Constitution was invoked , declaring the King " unable to reign " ( dans l 'impossibilité de régner ) . Leopold 's reclusive brother , Prince Charles , Count of Flanders , was elected prince regent and took the oath the following day . Further action on the Royal Question was pushed aside by more pressing economic and political issues that occupied most of the Government 's time .

Soon after the liberation , Belgium began a period of rapid economic recovery and the process of political reconstruction began . The traditional party system had been torn apart by the war and occupation . The two major ideological blocks proceeded to create their own parties : socialists created the Belgian Socialist Party ( PSB-BSP ) , while Catholics and conservatives created the Christian Social Party ( PSC-CVP ) . The biggest change in early post-liberation politics was the surge of support for the Communist Party of Belgium , which become the third party in Belgian politics until 1949 , temporarily displacing the Liberal Party . The Walloon Movement also re-emerged after the war , promoting the culture and economic interests of the French-speaking areas in the south . The period saw major reform of trade unions following the creation of the first large unified union , the General Federation of Belgian Labour ( FGTB-ABVV ) , in April 1945 with 248,000 members nationwide . By 1947 , however , the political structure of the Belgian state had stabilised . Under the early regency , both the Pierlot and subsequent Achille Van Acker governments attempted to avoid confronting the issue of Leopold 's return despite calls from Communists , some Socialists and trade unionists for the King 's resignation in April and May 1945 . Soon after the King 's liberation , Van Acker and a government delegation headed to Strobl , Austria to negotiate with Leopold . At a series of meetings between 9 and 11 May 1945 , Van Acker insisted that the King publicly announce his support for the Allied cause and his commitment to parliamentary democracy . No agreement was reached . In the meantime , Leopold took up residence in Pregny ( near Geneva ) in Switzerland under the pretext that heart palpitations made further negotiations or thoughts of return to political life impossible .

In Belgium , political debate about the Royal Question continued and grew after the war , and remained a polemical topic in the popular press , notably in the Francophone newspaper Le Soir . In the general election of 1949 , the PSC-CVP campaigned on a pro-Leopold royalist platform . The results reshaped the political landscape ; the Communists were routed and the PSB-BSP lost seats to both the Liberals and Catholics . The Catholics gained a new majority in the Senate and a plurality in the Chamber of Representatives , their best results since the war . Gaston Eyskens took over as Prime Minister at the head of a Liberal-Catholic coalition . Both parties in the government ( and Leopold himself ) supported a referendum on the King 's return , which became the focus of political attention .

The Eyskens government agreed to a national referendum , known as the " popular consultation " ( consultation populaire or volksraadpleging ) , which was scheduled for 12 March 1950 . Although campaigning was vigorous on both sides , there was little disruption to the polls . The results of the referendum were indecisive . Leopold 's return won a clear 57.68 per cent majority in the national vote , with majorities in seven of the nine provinces . However , the vote was heavily divided by region . In Flanders , 72 per cent voted in favour of Leopold 's return , but in Brussels the Leopoldists won only a minority of 48 per cent . In Wallonia a mere 42 per cent voted for the restitution of the King . The final results , in percentages by province , were : * The majority in the arrondissement of Verviers voted in favour of the King 's return . ‡ The arrondissement of Namur voted against the return . The result confirmed the worries of some , including Spaak , that the vote would not be sufficiently decisive in either direction and could divide the country along regional and linguistic lines . On 13 March , Eyskens traveled to Pregny to attempt to encourage Leopold to abdicate . Paul Van Zeeland and Spaak attempted to broker a new agreement by which Leopold would resign in favour of his son . On 15 April 1950 , Leopold announced that he was willing to temporarily delegate his authority . Many within the PSC-CVP realised that , despite the referendum 's result , their party 's lack of a parliamentary majority would undermine their ability to build a national reconciliation around the King as long as their Liberal coalition partners and Socialist opponents were unwilling to accept the King 's return .

On 29 April 1950 , Charles dissolved parliament pending fresh elections . His intention was probably to prevent the formation of a PSC-CVP government under Van Zeeland , a staunch Leopoldist , which would lead to the return of the King without further discussion . The following election produced an absolute PSC-CVP majority in both Chamber and Senate , and a new single-party government under Jean Duvieusart was formed . One of the first acts of the Duvieusart government was to introduce a bill bringing the " impossibility to reign " to an end . On 22 July 1950 , Leopold returned to Belgium for the first time since June 1944 and resumed his functions .

In 1949 , the FGTB-ABVV voted a special budget of ten million Belgian francs to establish a Committee of Common Action ( Comité d 'action commune ) aimed at supporting strike action taken in event of the King 's return . The union took the lead in the opposition which emerged in the summer of 1950 . André Renard , a Walloon trade union leader , called for " insurrection " and " revolution " in the newspaper La Wallonie shortly after the King 's return in July 1950 . Modern historians have noted that " the smell of revolution was on the air " as Walloon nationalists called for the immediate secession of Wallonia and the creation of a republic . The general strike of 1950 began in the coal mining centres of Hainaut and quickly spread . Workers were soon on strike across Wallonia , Brussels , and , to a lesser extent , Flanders . The port of Antwerp was one of the key sites affected and the country was virtually paralysed . On 30 July , four workers were shot dead by the Gendarmerie at Grâce-Berleur , near Liège and the violence intensified . Staunch Leopoldists in the Government called for a stronger stance but found themselves in a minority , even in the PSC-CVP . Frustrated at the lack of progress , the Government threatened to resign en masse .

As the situation escalated , the National Confederation of Political Prisoners and their Dependents ( Confédération nationale des prisonniers politiques et des ayants droit , Nationale Confederatie van Politieke Gevangenen en Rechthebbenden , or CNPPA-NCPGR ) , the organisation representing political prisoners detained during the German occupation , offered to act as intermediaries between the different parties because of their respected status . The CNPPA-NCPGR succeeded in persuading both parties to reopen negotiations . A tense meeting between the King and Government took place during the night of 31 July to 1 August at Laeken . In the afternoon on 1 August , Leopold publicly announced his intention to resign in favour of his eldest son , Baudouin , to avoid further bloodshed . Baudouin , at the age of 19 , formally became prince royal on 11 August 1950 .

On 17 July 1951 , as Baudouin was taking the oath of allegiance to the Constitution in front of the Parliament , an unidentified individual in the Communist benches shouted " vive la république ! " ( " Long Live the Republic ! " ) . The interruption caused outrage . It was widely suspected that the culprit was Julien Lahaut , the noted Communist leader , who had been one of the leading opponents of Leopold 's return . On 18 August , Lahaut was shot dead by an unidentified assassin outside his house in Seraing , near Liège . The murder shocked the Belgian public and an estimated 200,000 people attended Lahaut 's funeral . Although no-one was ever prosecuted for the murder , it was widely attributed to clandestine Leopoldist militia like the Ligue Eltrois or the Bloc anticommuniste belge who operated with the knowledge of the security services .

In the aftermath of the Royal Question , national priorities shifted to other political questions . On 17 September 1950 , the government of Joseph Pholien announced its intention of dispatching Belgian volunteers to fight in the Korean War . Negotiations about the European Defence Community followed and , by the mid-1950s , Belgium was immersed in a new political crisis , known as the Second School War , surrounding the secularisation of education . Modern historians describe the Royal Question as an important moment in Belgian recovery after World War II . The opposition between Leopoldists and anti-Leopoldists led to the re-establishment of Socialist and Catholic political parties from before the war . The Question was also an important moment in the Belgian linguistic conflict . It also put an end to the federalisation of Belgian institutions which might exacerbate the regional tensions exposed by the Royal Question . In addition , the perceived failure of the PSC-CVP to realise Flemish demands for the return of Leopold helped to strengthen support for the Flemish nationalist Volksunie party after 1954 . In Wallonia , the legacy of trade union and socialist political mobilisation during the general strike paved the way for a left-wing revival of the Walloon Movement .

The Indian Princess ; or , La Belle Sauvage , is a musical play with a libretto by James Nelson Barker and music by John Bray , based on the Pocahontas story as originally recorded in John Smith 's The Generall Historie of Virginia ( 1624 ) . The piece is structured in the style of a Ballad-opera , with songs and choruses , and also has music underlying dialogue , like a melodrama . Pocahontas persuades her father , King Powhatan , to free Smith and becomes attracted to John Rolfe , breaking off her arranged marriage with a neighboring tribal prince , an action that leads to war . Her tribe wins the war , but her father loses trust in the white settlers ; Pocahontas warns the settlers who reconcile with Powhatan . Several comic romances end happily , and Smith predicts a great future for the new country . The play deals with relations between Native Americans and the first European settlers in America . Scholars have debated whether the piece is progressive in its depiction of the natives and have commented that the work reflects an emerging American dramatic and musical sensibility . It served to popularize and romanticize the Pocahontas story as an important American myth .

The comedy was first performed in 1808 at The Chestnut Street Theatre in Philadelphia . It has been cited as the first play about American Indians by an American playwright known to be produced on a professional stage , and possibly the first play produced in America to be then performed in England , although the validity of both statements has been questioned . Its portrayal of Native Americans has been criticized as racially insensitive , but the piece is credited with inspiring a whole new genre of plays about Pocahontas specifically and Native Americans in general , that was prevalent throughout the 19th and early 20th Century . The play was subsequently produced throughout the country .

Barker was motivated to create a truly " American " style of drama to counteract what he saw as " mental colonialism " and the American tendency to feel culturally inferior to Europe . For this reason , he looked to native subject matter for the play , as opposed to other American dramatists like John Howard Payne who neglected American subject matter and locations . Although in his preface , Barker cites his primary source of inspiration as John Smith 's The Generall Historie of Virginia ( 1624 ) , he was likely more influenced by a series of popular books by John Davis , including , Travels of Four Years and a Half in the United States of America ( 1803 ) , Captain Smith and Princess Pocahontas ( 1805 ) , and The First Settlers of Virginia ( 1806 ) which featured a more sexualized and romanticized characterization of Pocahontas . Much of the known background about the piece comes from a letter Barker wrote to William Dunlop , dated June 10 , 1832 . In it , he indicates that he had been working on The Indian Princess for a number of years before it was first produced in 1808 . In fact in 1805 , he wrote a Masque entitled " America " ( which has not survived ) that he intended to serve as a conclusion to the play , in which characters called " America , " " Science , " and " Liberty " sing and engage in political debate . Barker originally intended the piece as a play without music , but John Bray , an actor / translator / composer employed by The New Theatre in Philadelphia , convinced him to add a musical score .

At the Powhatan River , Smith , Rolfe , Percy , Walter , Larry , Robin , and Alice disembark from a barge as the chorus of soldiers and adventurers sing about the joy of reaching the shore . Larry , Walter , Alice ( Walter ’ s wife ) , and Robin reminisce about love , and Robin admits to Larry his lustful feelings about Alice . Meanwhile , Nima is preparing a bridal gown for Pocahontas in the royal village of Werocomoco , but Pocahontas expresses displeasure about the arrangement her father made for her to marry Miami , a rival Indian prince . Smith is then attacked by a party of Indians , including Nantaquas , Pocahontas ’ s brother . Due to his fighting prowess , Nantaquas thinks he is a god , but Smith explains he is only a trained warrior from across the sea . The Indians capture Smith to bring him to their chief . Back at the Powhatan River , Robin attempts to seduce Alice , but is foiled by Walter and Larry . When Walter tells the group about Smith ’ s capture , they depart to go after him . Before they leave , Rolfe tries to convince Percy to move on after his lover , Geraldine , apparently was unfaithful .

When King Powhatan is presented with the captured Smith , he decides , at the urging of the tribe ’ s priest Grimosco , to execute him . Pocahontas , having been moved by Smith ’ s nobility , says she will not allow Smith to be killed unless she herself dies with him . This persuades Powhatan to free Smith . Soon , Percy and Rolfe encounter Smith and his Indian allies on the way back to the settlement , and Rolfe is immediately struck by Pocahontas , whose manner suggests the attraction is mutual . They speak of love , but Rolfe must soon depart with Smith . Pocahontas confesses her love for Rolfe to Miami , who receives the news with anger , jealousy and rage . Pocahontas convinces her father to dissolve her arranged engagement with Miami , which will mean war between their two tribes .

Jamestown has now been built and Walter tells his wife Alice about Powhatan ’ s victory over Miami . They then discuss a banquet hosted by Powhatan that Smith , Rolfe and Percy will attend . Meanwhile , Pocahontas and Nima witness Grimosco and Miami plotting to kill the European settlers . When Grimosco coerces Powhatan into believing he should kill all the White men , by casting doubt about their intentions , creating fear about how they will act in the future , and invoking religious imagery , Pocahontas runs to warn the settlers about the danger . Back in Jamestown , a comic bit ensues in which Larry ’ s wife Kate has arrived disguised as a male page , and teases him before revealing herself . She says she has come with Percy ’ s lover , Geraldine , also disguised as a page , who has come to convince Percy he was wrong about her infidelity . Pocahontas arrives and convinces the settlers to go to Powhatan ’ s palace to rescue their colleagues from Grimosco ’ s plot . They arrive just in time to prevent the disaster . Grimosco is taken away , and Miami stabs himself in shame . Everyone else has a happy ending : Pocahontas is with Rolfe , Walter is with Alice , Larry is with Kate , Percy is with Geraldine , and even Robin is with Nima . Smith forgives Powhatan , and gives the play 's final speech , predicting a great future for the new country that will form in this land .

The surviving published version of the musical score appears in the format of a simplified keyboard transcription using a two-staff system ( treble and bass ) . It includes only occasional notations about the instruments used in the original full orchestral score , which has not survived . Therefore , musical elements from the original production such as inner harmonic parts , countermelodies , and accompaniment figurations are no longer known . Based on records of payments made to musicians at The Chestnut Street Theatre at the time of the premiere , it was likely that the production employed approximately 25 pieces , which may have consisted of pairs of woodwinds ( flutes , oboes , clarinets , and bassoons ) and brasses ( horns and trumpets ) as well as some timpani and strings . Typically , however , the entire orchestra was used only for the overture and selected large chorus numbers , while solo numbers were accompanied by strings and one or two pairs of woodwinds . The brasses and timpani may have been used to invoke a sense of the military in numbers like Walter ’ s “ Captain Smith . ”

The play first premiered at The Chestnut Street Theatre in Philadelphia on April 6 , 1808 . In Barker 's letter to Dunlop , he writes the performance was done as a benefit for Mr. Bray ( who also played the role of Walter ) . However , other sources suggest it was a benefit for a Mrs. Woodham . In any case , it is clear that the performance was interrupted by an offstage commotion which may have cut the performance short . Mr. Webster , a tenor who played the role of Larry , was an object of public scorn at the time because of his effeminate manner and dress , and audience members rioted in outrage at his participation , causing Barker himself to order the curtain to be dropped . The play was subsequently performed again in Philadelphia on February 1 , 1809 , although it was advertised for January 25 . There is some discrepancy about the date of the New York premiere , which took place at The Park Theatre , either on June 14 , 1808 , or on January 14 , 1809 , as a benefit for English actress Mrs. Lipman . It was performed again in New York as a benefit for Dunlop on June 23 , 1809 , There was a performance benefiting Bray and an actor named Mr. Cone advertised for August 25 , 1808 , at The Alexandria Theatre in Virginia . There was also a gala premiere on an unspecified date in Baltimore . Barker wrote in his letter to Dunlop that the play was subsequently and frequently performed in all the theatres across the country . It was the standard practice in all these productions for the Native American roles to be played by white actors wearing dark makeup .

The The Indian Princess has been cited as the first well-documented case of a play that was originally performed in America being subsequently staged in England . Although records indicate there was a play called Pocahontas ; or the Indian Princess , credited as being adapted by T.A. Cooper , that played The Theatre Royal at Drury Lane in London on December 15 , 1820 , and subsequently on December 16 and December 19 , the piece differed drastically from Barker 's original and featured a completely different cast of characters . Barker himself wrote that the production was done without his permission or even his knowledge , and based on a critical response he read of the London performance , he deduced that there was very little in the play that was his own . Other evidence suggests that the script used in England was not only a completely different play , but that it was likely not even originated by an American . This assertion is based primarily on three factors : the kinder and meeker portrayal of the Natives , which reduces the grandeur of the play 's American heroes , the more vague listing of the setting as " North America " rather than specifically " Virginia , " and the lack of implications about America 's great destiny that was evident in Barker 's version . The distinction between the London and American versions is also supported by a review of the London production , in which the reviewer cites a lack of comic characters ( Barker ’ s version included several ) , and the presence of a character named “ Opechancaough , ” who is nowhere to be found in Barker ’ s play .

Structurally , the play resembles a typical English Ballad-opera . The plot of the play can be seen as a blending of a comedy of racial and cultural stereotypes with a love story and an historical drama . Barker borrows heavily from Shakespearean comedy , as can be seen most blatantly in the gender disguises employed by the characters of Kate and Geraldine . The use of verse writing for higher class characters and prose for those of lesser status also borrows from the Shakespearean tradition . It is of note that Pocahontas switches from prose to verse after falling in love with Rolfe . The Indian Princess is also one of the first American plays to call itself a “ melo-drame ” ( or melodrama ) which literally is French for “ play with music . ” Like the French and German melodramas typical of the period , the score contained open-ended snippets of background mood music that can be repeated as much as necessary to heighten the sentimentality of the drama , although some have argued that it bears no other resemblance to the typical French melodrama of the period . Still others have said that the categorization of the piece as a melodrama is accurate , considering the play ’ s portrayal of the genre ’ s typical persecuted heroine ( Pocahontas ) , villainous antagonists ( Miami and Grimosco ) , virtuous hero ( Smith ) , and comic relief ( Robin and others ) .

The Indian Princess is one example of an attempt by an artist of the early 19th Century to define an American national identity . Pocahontas , representing the spirit of America , literally shields Smith from injury and serves as foster mother , protecting colonists from famine and attack , achieving mythic status as a heroic mother , and preserving , nurturing and legitimizing America as a country . The play allows for an acknowledgement of the troubling aspects of the nation ’ s history of conquest , violence , and greed , by couching the negative implications in a romantic plot . In other words , the romantic conquest helps to soften the harshness and brutality of the colonial conquest . The success of the play reflects a larger cultural desire to express its sense of self through the Pocahontas myth . Barker also had commercial interests , and was motivated by a drive for artistic and financial success . In this vein , the play was an attempt to please the anglophile public , but create something truly American in setting and theme . The portrayals of the Indians in the play , from a perspective of racial sensitivity , have been met with mixed reviews by modern critics . Some write positively about the portrayals , saying that , other than Grimosco and Miami , the natives are noble , though primitive , and have a more “ American ” value system than the savages traditionally portrayed in British media of the period . Others , however , see the characters portrayed stereotypically as lusty , childlike , weak and corruptible beings , with the exceptions of Pocahontas and Nantaquas , who are portrayed positively only because they accept English values . Still others take a middle ground , noting the range of representations . In any case , the play can be seen as a justification of White assimilation of the natives , especially when examining Pocahontas ’ s choice to be with Rolfe as a microcosm of their societies .

Critics have pointed out several inherent flaws in the script , including the early placement of the play ’ s climax ( Smith at the chopping block ) at the beginning of Act II , loose construction , song lyrics that trivialize characters , and a main character in Pocahontas that is somewhat stilted and overly poetic . In contrast , however others have argued that Pocahontas ’ s love scene in Act III is where the truest poetry of the piece emerges . There has been less critique of Bray ’ s musical work , but Victor Fell Yellin tried to recreate what he felt was the score 's melodic expressiveness and sonorous grandeur in his 1978 recording of it . In the liner notes , he points out that the music does not critically compare with the great musical masters of its time , but its success is derived from its charm . While it lacks modulation , it contains well-turned melodic and rhythmic phrases , and syncopations that add to its American style . The Indian Princess certainly began a long American tradition of romanticizing and sexualizing Pocahontas , who was only a child in Smith ’ s original accounts . Therefore , it deserves recognition for inaugurating a genre , but it can be criticized for diminishing the potential richness of the subject matter .

Barker 's The Indian Princess has been cited as the first American play featuring Native American characters to ever be staged , although Barker 's play is predated by at least two offerings by Europeans featuring Native Americans , including Tammany in 1794 by British playwright Ann Kemble Hatton , and German writer Johann Wilhelm Rose 's Pocahontas : Schauspiel mit Gesang , in fünf Akten ( A Play with Songs , in five Acts ) in 1784 . At least one American play was also written before Barker 's : Ponteach , published by Robert Rogers in 1766 , though the piece was apparently never produced . However , more recently uncovered evidence shows a record of an anonymous melodrama entitled Captain Smith and the Princess Pocahontas produced at The Chestnut Street Theatre in 1806 , calling into question whether Barker ’ s play was really the first of its kind ( though no further information is known about the earlier piece ) . Barker 's play has also been cited as the earliest surviving dramatized account of Smith and Pocahontas , although this idea is debunked by the availability of the aforementioned Johann Wilhelm Rose work . In any case , The Indian Princess is credited as being primarily responsible for elevating the Pocahontas story to one of the nation 's most celebrated myths , and is thought to mark the beginning of the popular American genre of Indian Drama . The piece is also of note as one of very few of its time to have the entire musical score published and available today , as opposed to only individual popular songs .

Barker ’ s play directly or indirectly inspired many other stage adaptations of the Pocahontas story , including : Additionally , there were approximately 40 plays with Indian themes recorded from 1825 to 1860 that likely were directly influenced by The Indian Princess . Edward Henry Corbould ’ s engraving ( c . 1850 ) , “ Smith Rescued by Pocahontas ” was possibly also directly inspired by The Indian Princess . Disney ’ s animated Pocahontas ( 1995 ) is one of the more recent of several films also in the same tradition as Barker ’ s play .

The 1996 Atlantic hurricane season had the most major hurricanes since 1964 , which are Category 3 or higher on the Saffir-Simpson hurricane wind scale . Featuring a total of thirteen named storms , nine hurricanes , and six major hurricanes , the season officially began on June 1 , 1996 , and ended on November 30 , 1996 , dates which conventionally delimit the period of each year when most tropical cyclones form in the Atlantic basin . The season 's first tropical cyclone , Tropical Storm Arthur , developed on June 17 , while the final cyclone , Hurricane Marco dissipated on November 26 . The most intense hurricane , Edouard , was a powerful Cape Verde-type hurricane that affected portions of the Mid-Atlantic states and New England . The season featured nine tropical cyclone landfalls , including six hurricanes , one of which was a major hurricane . In total , six major hurricanes formed during the 1996 Atlantic hurricane season — the highest number produced in a single season since 1964 . The four most notable tropical cyclones of the season were hurricanes Bertha , Cesar , Fran , and Hortense . Bertha made landfall as a Category 2 hurricane on the coast of North Carolina , causing a total of 12 deaths and $ 335 million ( 1996 USD ) in damage . Hurricane Fran made landfall in the same general area a little over a month later as a Category 3 hurricane , causing 37 deaths and $ 6.9 billion in damage . Hurricane Cesar developed in the east Caribbean during late-July and crossed Nicaragua into the east Pacific as a strong tropical storm several days later , at which time it earned the name Douglas . The system produced strong winds and flooding , leading to 113 deaths and $ 202.96 million in damage . Finally , Hurricane Hortense formed in the east Atlantic during the month of September and crossed Hispaniola and Puerto Rico , causing 39 direct deaths and $ 158 million in damage . Collectively , the tropical cyclones of the 1996 Atlantic hurricane season caused $ 8.41 billion in damage and 256 deaths .

Forecasts of hurricane activity are issued before each hurricane season by noted hurricane experts such as Dr. William M. Gray and his associates at Colorado State University ( CSU ) and the Weather Research Center ( WRC ) . A normal season , as defined by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ( NOAA ) , has 12.1 named storms , of these 6.4 reach hurricane strength , and 2.7 major hurricanes , which are Category 3 or higher on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . Additional , the 1950-2000 CSU average for a normal season is 9.6 named storms , of these 5.9 reach hurricane strength , and 2.3 become major hurricanes . In December 1995 , CSU predicted that only 8 named storms would form and 5 of those would become hurricanes ; no specific number of major hurricanes was given . However , in April 1996 , CSU revised their forecast , stating that 11 named storms would develop , with seven of those intensifying into a hurricane , and three reaching major hurricane intensity . In June , CSU predicted 10 named storms , 6 hurricanes , and 2 major hurricanes . The forecast by the WRC in early 1996 was 10 named storms and 6 hurricanes , though there was no prediction on the number of major hurricanes .

The 1996 Atlantic hurricane season officially began on June 1 , but the first named storm did not form until seventeen days later . It was an above average season in which 13 tropical cyclones formed , with all cyclones attaining tropical storm status . Nine of these sixteen attained hurricane status and six of those reached major hurricane status , which was well above the 1980 – 2010 average of 2.7 per season . Although there was neither an El Niño or a La Niña , the above average activity in the season was likely due to abnormally warm sea surface temperatures . Six hurricanes and three tropical storms made landfall during the season , causing 256 deaths and more than $ 8.41 billion in damage . Hurricane Edouard and Hurricane Marco also caused damage and fatalities , but neither storm made an official landfall . Tropical cyclogenesis in the 1996 Atlantic hurricane season began with the development of Tropical Storm Arthur on June 17 . In the month of July , two tropical cyclones formed , both of which later attained hurricane status . August was the most active month of the season , with a total of four storms developing in that period of time . The month of August also featured the strongest and costliest tropical cyclones of the season , Hurricane Edouard and Hurricane Fran , respectively . Although September is the climatological peak of hurricane season , only two tropical cyclones developed in that month . Despite this , both reached major hurricane status . Three tropical cyclones formed in October , with one attaining hurricane status . Finally , one tropical cyclone developed in November , Hurricane Marco . The storm lasted 10 days before dissipating on November 26 , only four days before the official end of the season on November 30 .

An area of increasing convection , possibly associated with a tropical wave , developed into Tropical Depression One on June 17 at 1800 UTC , while located near Grand Bahama . Initially , the depression moved north-northwestward and then northward around the western periphery of a Atlantic subtropical ridge . Despite moderately strong wind shear , the depression strengthened and was upgraded to Tropical Storm Arthur while re-curving northeastward at 0000 UTC on June 19 . About 24 hours later , Arthur made landfall near Cape Lookout , North Carolina with winds of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) . The storm weakened to a tropical depression early on June 20 , before becoming extratropical the next day . As the center of Arthur passed east of Cape Romain , South Carolina , minor increases in surf were reported . Rainfall peaked at 5.85 inches ( 149 mm ) in Georgetown , South Carolina , though because it fell gradually , no significant flooding was reported , other than minor ponding of water on roads . In addition , Arthur also brought precipitation to Georgia and Virginia , though amounts rarely exceeded 3 inches ( 76 mm ) . In North Carolina , swells ranged as high as 7 ft ( 2.1 m ) . A C-Man station located about 34.5 miles ( 55.5 km ) southeast of Cape Fear reported sustained winds of 39 mph ( 64 km / h ) and gusts up to 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) . Overall , damage caused by Arthur was minimal , totaling only $ 1 million .

A tropical wave developed into Tropical Depression Two at 0000 UTC on July 5 , while located about 575 miles ( 925 km ) east of Cape Verde . Twelve hours later , it was upgraded to Tropical Storm Bertha . Over the next few days , it continued to strengthen , becoming a hurricane on July 7 , prior to moving through the northern Leeward Islands . A period of rapid intensification began late on July 8 , with Bertha peaking as a Category 3 hurricane with winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) on the following day . Moving around the western periphery of a subtropical ridge , Bertha passed north of the Bahamas as a weakening hurricane before turning towards the north-northeast and re-strengthened . Late on July 12 , Bertha made landfall between Wrightsville Beach and Topsail Beach , North Carolina with winds of 90 mph ( 140 km / h ) . Gradual weakening ensued the following day as Bertha moved up the Mid-Atlantic states and into New England before becoming extratropical on July 14 . In the United States Virgin Islands , heavy rainfall and hurricane-force winds damaged about 2,500 homes , of which 43 lost their roofs . Many boats were destroyed . Total damage was estimated near $ 7.5 million . The storm caused 3 deaths in Puerto Rico . Additionally , damage in Puerto Rico totaled $ 7.5 million . Two deaths were confirmed in Saint Martin . The storm caused numerous power outages and damaged 10 homes in Antigua and Barbuda . Four deaths occurred in Florida , three of which due to rip currents . North Carolina bore the brunt of the hurricane in the United States . Storm surge destroyed several fishing piers , marinas , and boats . A combination of storm surge and strong winds damaged over 5,000 homes and buildings , with at least 4 destroyed . There were 2 deaths in the state . The remnants brought local flooding and minor wind damage to the Mid-Atlantic , New England , and Atlantic Canada . One surfer died in New Jersey . Overall , the storm caused 12 deaths and about $ 285 million in damage , primarily in eastern North Carolina .

A tropical wave emerged into the Atlantic from the west coast of Africa on July 17 . It developed into Tropical Depression Three near Isla Margarita of Venezuela on July 24 . The depression headed westward , steered by a strong high pressure area over the Bahamas . On July 25 , the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Cesar . Around that time , it struck Curaçao . Cesar caused minor damage in the ABC islands to roofs and trees ; one person drowned in heavy surf on Curçao . An additional three people drowned offshore Venezuela . In Colombia , heavy rainfall caused 3 deaths , 2 of which were from a mudslide in Pueblo Bello . Strong winds and significant amounts of precipitation lashed the Archipelago of San Andrés , Providencia and Santa Catalina , unroofing 60 homes , and resulting in 11 fatalities , and resulting in 800 million COP ( $ 440,00 USD ) in damage . The storm continued westward and intensified into a hurricane on July 27 . At 0400 UTC on July 28 , Cesar made landfall near Bluefields , Nicaragua , with winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) . After weakening to a tropical storm later that day , Cesar moved into the Pacific and was reclassified as Tropical Storm Douglas on July 29 . In Nicaragua , the storm wrought about $ 50.5 million in losses . More than 2,500 homes , 39 bridges and 25 miles ( 40 km ) of roads were destroyed . The storm killed 42 people and left an estimated 100,000 homeless in Nicaragua . In Costa Rica , river flooding damaged or destroyed 3,874 homes ; 150 bridges were also destroyed . The road network was significantly damaged . Across the country , at least 39 people were killed and damage amounted to $ 151 million . Additionally , 12 people died in El Salvador . Overall , Cesar caused 113 deaths and $ 202.96 million in damage .

A tropical wave developed into Tropical Depression Four at 0600 UTC on August 19 , while located west-southwest of Jamaica . The system strengthened into Tropical Storm Dolly about twelve hours later . Dolly headed westward and intensified into a Category 1 hurricane late on August 20 . It then made landfall near Chetumal , Quintana Roo with winds of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) . The system weakened to a tropical depression on August 21 . Later that day or early on August 22 , Dolly emerged into the Bay of Campeche and quickly re-strengthened into a tropical storm . The storm deepened further and was upgraded to a hurricane again at 1200 UTC on August 23 ; Dolly simultaneously peaked with winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . Around that time , it struck between Tuxpan , Veracruz and Tampico , Tamaulipas . Dolly quickly weakened to a tropical depression early on August 24 , but remained intact while crossing Mexico and dissipated over the eastern Pacific Ocean on August 25 . The storm brought heavy rainfall to much of Mexico , peaking at 37.41 inches ( 950 mm ) . In Quintana Roo , flooding destroyed a large amount of farmlands . Widespread flooding occurred after a river in the Pueblo Viejo area overflowed its banks . Hundreds of homes were destroyed , displacing about 35,000 people . Large scale evacuations occurred in San Luis Potosí , while about 6,500 fled their homes in the Tampico area . Communications and power outages were reported as far west as Mazatlán , Sinaloa . Throughout Mexico , there were fourteen fatalities reported , six in Veracruz , three in Nuevo León , one in Monterrey , and one in . Additionally , two people were left missing in Nuevo León . The outer bands of Dolly brought rainfall to southern Texas , which caused minor flooding , but was mostly beneficial due to drought conditions in the state .

A tropical wave developed into Tropical Depression Five on August 19 , while located about 345 miles ( 555 km ) southeast of Cape Verde . The depression moved westward and strengthened into Tropical Storm Edouard on August 22 . Further intensification occurred , with the storm being upgraded to a hurricane on the following day . Early on August 24 , the storm re-curved west-northwestward and began to undergo rapid deepening . At 0600 UTC on August 25 , Edouard attained its maximum sustained winds of 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 933 mbar ( 27.6 inHg ) ; it was the most intense tropical cyclone of the season . The storm remained a major hurricane for nearly eight days . Edouard passed well north of the Lesser Antilles and then began re-curving northward on August 29 . Later , the storm passed midway between Cape Hatteras and Bermuda on September 1 . Edouard approached Nantucket , Massachusetts , but turned to the east before reaching land . On September 3 , the storm weakened and became extratropical . It was absorbed by a larger system on the September 7 . Edouard brought rough seas and gusty winds along the East Coast of the United States from South Carolina northward . Strong waves in New Jersey drowned 2 people . Minor erosion and coastal flooding also occurred in several states , especially in New York and Massachusetts . In the latter , wind gusts up to 90 mph ( 145 km / h ) left two-thirds of Nantucket , most of Cape Cod , and all of Martha 's Vineyard without electricity . Gusty winds in Maine left about 1,900 without power in Portland . Damage in the United States totaled about $ 20 million . In Canada , the storm brought rainfall up to 5.35 inches ( 136 mm ) and gusts to 75 mph ( 121 km / h ) . Rough seas disrupted ferry service and caused the closure of several beaches .

A tropical wave developed into Tropical Depression Six on August 23 , while located southeast of Cape Verde . The depression moved westward for several days and was upgraded to Tropical Storm Fran on August 27 while 1,035 miles ( 1,665 km ) east of the Lesser Antilles . Fran tracked west-northwestward and intensified into a hurricane on August 29 . However , Fran became less organized after a disruption to inflow due to Hurricane Edouard and weakened back to a tropical storm . Fran quickly re-intensified into a hurricane by August 31 . While moving west-northwestward and then north-northwestward , the storm slowly strengthened . At 0000 UTC on September 5 , Fran peaked as a Category 3 hurricane with maximum sustained winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 946 mbar ( 27.9 inHg ) . Early on the following day , the storm made landfall near Cape Fear , North Carolina at the same intensity . Fran weakened and moved inland , becoming extratropical over Ontario on September 8 . Its remnants moved over the Great Lakes and were absorbed by a front on September 10 . In South Carolina , the outer bands of Fran produced high winds and light to moderate rainfall , downing numerous trees and power lines . As a result , a number of cars were damaged and over 63,000 people were left without electricity . Damage in South Carolina reached about $ 40 million . The state of North Carolina bore the brunt of the storm . Wind gusts as strong as 137 mph ( 220 km / h ) were reported . Additionally , storm tide heights ranging from 8 to 12 feet ( 2.4 to 3.7 m ) lashed the coast . Damage was most severe in the Raleigh area , exceeding $ 2 billion . Several hundred thousand falling trees damaged at least 10,000 homes . Throughout the state , approximately 1.7 million people were left without electricity . Damage in North Carolina reached about $ 5.1 billion , with about $ 2.3 billion to homes and businesses , $ 1.1 billion to public property , $ 1 billion to forestry and timber , and $ 700 million to agriculture . Elsewhere , Fran brought flooding to several states , including Virginia , West Virginia , Maryland , Ohio , and Pennsylvania , as well as Washington , D.C. Outside North Carolina , effects were worst in Virginia , where flooding and winds left 400,000 people without electricity and caused about $ 350 million in damage . Hurricane Fran was responsible for 37 deaths , with 24 of them in North Carolina . Property damage in the United States was estimated at $ 6.9 billion .

An area of disturbed weather , accompanied with a low-level circulation , emerged into the Atlantic from the west coast of Africa on August 24 . It organized further over the next few days , becoming Tropical Depression Seven on August 26 , while located about 150 miles ( 240 km ) south of Cape Verde . With a ridge to its north , the system moved west-southwestward . Conditions were initially unfavorable for development due to outflow from Hurricane Fran . On August 28 , the depression began moving northwestward due to an approaching trough . Around the same time , the influence from Fran decreased , allowing it to intensify into Tropical Storm Gustav on August 28 . At 0000 UTC on August 29 , Gustav reached its peak intensity as a 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 1,005 mbar ( 29.7 inHg ) . Thereafter , the trough previously causing the storm 's northwestward motion transitioned into an upper-level low , increasing shear across the region . As a result , the storm slowly weakened and was downgraded to a tropical depression late on September 1 . Gustav dissipated at 0600 UTC on the following day , while situated about 1,015 miles ( 1,633 km ) east-northeast of the northernmost Lesser Antilles .

A tropical wave developed into Tropical Depression Eight on September 3 , while located about halfway between the Lesser Antilles and Cape Verde . The depression headed westward and barely strengthened until becoming Tropical Storm Hortense early on September 7 . Hortense passed over Guadeloupe on the following day and entered the Caribbean Sea . It strengthened into a hurricane on September 9 and then curved northwestward . The storm intensified slightly further , before making landfall near Guánica , Puerto Rico with winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) at 0600 UTC on September 10 . It soon moved back offshore and brushed Dominican Republic while crossing the Mona Passage . After re-entering the Atlantic , Hortense substantially strengthened and peaked as a 140 mph ( 220 km / h ) Category 4 hurricane early on September 13 . Thereafter , the storm weakened as it tracked rapidly north-northeastward . Early on September 15 , Hortense made landfall in Nova Scotia as a minimal Category 1 hurricane . It quickly weakened further to a tropical storm before re-entering the Atlantic and became extratropical later that day . The storm produced heavy rainfall and gusty winds as it passed through the Lesser Antilles . On Guadeloupe , damage was most significant to crops , with over 50 % of banana plantains destroyed . Localized flooding was reported on Martinique . Impact was most significant in Puerto Rico . Across the island , 11,463 houses were severely damaged . About 1.4 million people on Puerto Rico were left without electricity – equivalent to about 40 % of the island 's population . Damage in Puerto Rico was estimated at $ 153.4 million . There were also 19 deaths , most of which due to drowning during flash floods . In the Dominican Republic , strong winds damaged a number of buildings and houses , and downed several power lines . Flooding also forced the closure of several roads and impacted 80 % of crops in Samaná Province . At least 3 fatalities were confirmed in that country . The storm brought strong winds to the Bahamas and Turks and Caicos Islands , and lesser winds to Bermuda . Later in its duration , Hortense struck Nova Scotia , bringing heavy rainfall and hurricane force winds to isolated locations . There were many power outages , trees blown down , roofs torn away , and roads damaged in the state . New Brunswick , Newfoundland , and Prince Edward Island were also impacted , though not as severely as in Nova Scotia . Damage in Atlantic Canada reached approximately $ 3.64 million .

A tropical wave with a well-defined circulation developed into Tropical Depression Nine at 1200 UTC on September 24 , while located south of Cape Verde . Due to an anticyclone to its north , the depression initially moved west-northwestward . After convection wrapped around the circulation and banding features increased , the National Hurricane Center upgraded the depression to Tropical Storm Isidore on September 25 . Isidore deepened further and began developing an eye feature . Early on September 26 , the storm was upgraded to a hurricane . About 24 hours later , it reached Category 2 intensity . At 0000 UTC on September 28 , Isidore attained its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 960 mbar ( hPa ; 28.35 inHg ) . After reaching peak intensity on September 28 , steering current from a quasi-stationary mid- to upper-level low pressure area turned Isidore northward . Later that day , the eye feature disappeared and the storm began weakening due to strong upper-level winds . On September 28 , Isidore weakened to a Category 2 hurricane . By the following day , it was downgraded to a Category 1 hurricane . Early on September 30 , Isidore weakened to a tropical storm . The storm deteriorated further and was downgraded to a tropical depression at 1200 UTC on the following day . Because much of the deep convection diminished , Isidore was declared extratropical at 0000 UTC on October 1 , while located about 490 miles ( 790 km ) west-southwest of Flores Island in the Azores .

Tropical Depression Ten developed from the remnants of a cold front in the southwestern Gulf of Mexico on October 6 . Moving generally eastward , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Josephine on October 6 . The next day , it peaked with winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . Josephine made landfall in Taylor County , Florida near peak intensity early on October 8 . Shortly after moving inland , the storm became extratropical . Early in its duration , the system interacted with a ridge , resulting in strong winds and high tides in Texas . The outer bands caused flooding rainfall in southern Texas , and in Louisiana , high tides flooded roads and stranded residents on Grand Isle . In Florida , the storm produced a storm surge reaching 9.3 feet ( 2.8 m ) in Suwannee . High tides flooded about 3,600 houses along the west coast . Strong winds left about 400,000 people without power . The storm also spawned at least 16 tornadoes , one of which damaged 130 homes . The extratropical remnants of Josephine moved along the eastern coast of the United States , producing wind gusts as strong as 77 mph ( 124 km / h ) in St. Mary 's County and in Ocean City , Maryland . The winds caused widespread power outages , including 26,000 in Virginia and 31,000 in New Jersey . Heavy rainfall flooded low-lying areas and rivers along the storm 's path , including in North Carolina which had previously been affected by hurricanes Bertha and Fran earlier in the year . In the Southeastern United States , the storm contributed to dozens of traffic accidents , which killed a person each in Georgia , North Carolina , and Virginia . Damage throughout the United States totaled about $ 130 million . Josephine later moved offshore , and after passing southeast of Cape Cod , moved through Atlantic Canada with moderate rainfall and gusty winds .

A tropical wave exited the west coast of Africa on September 27 and crossed the Atlantic and Caribbean before eventually developing into Tropical Depression Eleven on October 11 . The depression drifted slowly southwestward and strengthened into Tropical Storm Kyle later that day . Slightly further intensification occurred and Kyle peaked as a 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) tropical storm early on October 12 . However , upper-level southwesterly shear caused Kyle to quickly weaken back to a tropical depression later that day . At 1800 UTC on October 12 , Kyle made landfall in eastern Guatemala with winds of 30 mph ( 45 km / h ) . By early on October 13 , the storm had completely dissipated inland . Portions of the coasts of Belize , Guatemala , Honduras , and Mexico were under a tropical storm warning or hurricane watch as Kyle was approaching ; however they were cancelled after Kyle weakened back to a tropical depression . Impact from Kyle was minimal and limited to light rainfall in the countries of Belize , Guatemala , Honduras , and the Yucatán Peninsula of Mexico . In Belize , rainfall peaked at 2.32 inches ( 59 mm ) . Rainfall to the northwest of the center of Kyle was heavier , with some areas of Mexico 's Yucatán Peninsula receiving over 3 inches ( 76 mm ) ; precipitation peaked at 5.71 inches ( 145 mm ) in Tulum .

A tropical wave developed into Tropical Depression Twelve on October 14 . After the storm formed , further strengthening of Lili was gradual , first to tropical storm status on October 16 and then to hurricane status on October 17 . The next day , Lili made landfall in Matanzas Province , Cuba with winds of 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) and moved across the central portion of the island ; it was first hurricane to hit the country since Kate in 1985 . After emerging into the Atlantic Ocean , the hurricane accelerated northeastward , briefly peaking as a Category 3 hurricane with winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) near the Bahamas on October 19 . For almost an entire week , Hurricane Lili oscillated in intensity while fluctuating several times in forward speed . About two weeks passed before Lili transitioned into an extratropical storm north of the Azores on October 27 , which subsequently moved across Ireland and Great Britain . Early in its duration , Lili caused flooding in Central America that left thousands homeless and killed 14 people . In Cuba , 269,995 people were evacuated in advance of Lili , resulting in no deaths in the country . Damage was heaviest in Cuba , mostly due to the hurricane 's heavy rainfall peaking at 29.41 inches ( 747 mm ) . The hurricane affected 11 Cuban provinces , damaging 92,542 houses and destroying another 6,369 . The rains heavily damaged the sugar cane and banana crops . Overall , damage in the country was estimated at $ 362 million . In nearby Florida , one person died after being swept into a drain during the storm 's heavy rains . Moisture from Lili also fueled a storm that struck the northeastern United States , which contributed indirectly to a death when a man in Maine tried to drive across a flooded roadway . Damage in the Bahamas was not severe and was limited to some damaged roofs and downed trees . When the remnants of Lili struck Ireland and the United Kingdom , it produced strong winds and high seas that damaged hundreds of houses , causing $ 300 million in damage and six deaths .

A cold front interacted with several tropical waves , eventually spawning Tropical Depression Thirteen late on November 16 , while southwest of Jamaica . Initially a tropical depression , it remained weak while tracking southwestward and eventually southward . On November 19 , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Marco . It re-curved eastward and continued to strengthen , briefly becoming a hurricane on November 20 . Marco weakened back to a tropical storm later that day . The storm turned northeastward toward Hispanola , but later became stationary before curing eastward . Afterwards Marco doubled-back to the west . After weakening to a tropical depression on November 23 , Marco became a tropical storm again on the following day . Thereafter , it tracked northwestward while fluctuating in intensity , before dissipating on November 26 . Although it did not make landfall , Marco produced heavy rainfall in the Greater Antilles and Central America , which caused significant flooding in some areas . In Honduras , 4,000 homes were destroyed , 40 bridges washed away , and nearly 50,000 acres of fruit plantations were flooded . Nine deaths were also reported . Flood damage in other Central American countries was also reported , though affects were less severe . Heavy rainfall was also reported in Cuba . Marco also contributed to an ongoing flood in Jamaica and caused three additional fatalities in Dominican Republic . Overall , Marco caused 15 fatalities and approximately $ 8.2 million in damage .

The following names were used for named storms that formed in the north Atlantic in 1996 . The World Meteorological Organization retired three names in the spring of 1997 : Cesar , Fran , and Hortense . They were replaced in the 2002 season by Cristobal , Fay , and Hanna . The names not retired from this list were used again in the 2002 season . This is the same list used for the 1990 season except for Dolly and Kyle , which replaced Diana and Klaus , respectively . A storm was named Kyle for the first time in 1996 . Names that were not assigned are marked in gray .

Riot Act is the seventh studio album by American rock band Pearl Jam , released on November 12 , 2002 through Epic Records . Following a full-scale tour in support of its previous album , Binaural ( 2000 ) , Pearl Jam took a year-long break . The band then reconvened in the beginning of 2002 and commenced work on a new album . The music on the record featured a diverse sound , including songs influenced by folk , art rock , and experimental rock . The lyrics deal with mortality and existentialism , with much influence from both the political climate after the September 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks and the accidental death of nine fans during Pearl Jam 's performance at the 2000 Roskilde Festival . The band supported the album with a politically charged concert tour in 2003 . Riot Act was the band 's last album of all-new material for Epic . The album received mostly positive reviews , and has been certified gold by the RIAA in the United States .

Producer Adam Kasper was brought in to work with the band on its seventh album . Kasper had engineered other Pearl Jam albums , and was brought to produce following a suggestion by drummer Matt Cameron , who worked with Kasper on his previous groups Wellwater Conspiracy and Soundgarden . Riot Act was recorded in two sessions in February 2002 and April 2002 at Studio X in Seattle , Washington . The album was mixed by Brendan O 'Brien at Studio X. Similar to the process for Yield and Binaural , band members worked on material individually before starting the recording sessions together . According to Cameron , everyone in the band had " four or five " ideas coming into the sessions , and there was " a lot to just kind of weed through and work on . " The band often recorded material intended to be demo recordings , but lead vocalist Eddie Vedder would come along and record his vocals afterwards , stating , " I just sang it , that 's the take . " Regarding the creative process , guitarist Stone Gossard said that while playing alone " the anal-retentive side of you goes , ' I think I could play better . ' " , but when reuniting " the entire band goes ' No , it 's great as it is , ' then you just get in the mood and embrace it . " Gossard stated that " the process of letting go is constant in this band " , adding that bandmembers would arrive with " a clear idea of what a song is going to be " but eschew for other musical ideas while discussing the song with the group . Riot Act was the first Pearl Jam album to feature Kenneth " Boom " Gaspar on Keyboards , most notably on the song " Love Boat Captain " . According to Gaspar , the song initially developed out of a jam session he had with Vedder in Hawaii shortly after the two first met . When they were done , Vedder asked Gaspar if he was " ready to go to Seattle . " According to Gossard , bringing in Gaspar was about being " open to new things , " while Vedder stated Gaspar " was able to find his place " and fit in easily with the band dynamics . Guitarist Mike McCready said that he had always wanted the band to feature keyboards .

McCready described the recording environment as " a pretty positive one " and " very intense and spiritual . " Cameron said that producer Adam Kasper created a " really relaxed " atmosphere and that the band was able to complete lot of material in a short amount of time . Vedder set up his typewriter in a corner of the studio and would write lyrics as the band members played their material . Most of the album was recorded live , with Cameron describing the album as " our anti-Pro Tools record . " Gossard said that the band fed off Cameron 's playing as well as Vedder 's excitement about the recording process .

Riot Act features a diverse sound , including folk-based and experimental songs . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic said " Riot Act is the album that Pearl Jam has been wanting to make since Vitalogy — a muscular art rock record , one that still hits hard but that 's filled with ragged edges and odd detours . " Gossard said " Riot Act really seems to showcase all of our thing . There 's the simple rock songs we could have written in the earlier era , but it covers all the different times and dynamics we 've had and still holds together . " The musical experiments also lead several songs on the album to use alternate tunings , including " You Are " , " All or None " and " Bu $ hleaguer " . The lyrics on Riot Act were more direct than on preceding records , in response to the political climate after the September 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks . Bassist Jeff Ament commented that he felt that love was a major theme of the album , and Vedder tried to convey themes such as love , loss and struggle to make a difference because of the difficulty in leading with events such as the September 11 attacks and the accidental death of nine fans during Pearl Jam 's performance at the 2000 Roskilde Festival - " You start feeling like , ' What do I have to say ? What is my opinion ? ' Then I realized I did have an opinion . Not only did I have one , but I felt like it was formed by processing a lot of information and having good influences . Ament also told that " I think the time 's right to turn our voice up a bit [ . . . ] And Ed did it in a great way , with humour and a mystical , magical approach . It isn 't just , ' We 're pissed off , and fuck you ! Riot ! Anarchy ! ' Cos I don 't think that 's the method . At least at this point . " Vedder , however , said , " I have to admit this record came out a bit one-sided . But I think we as a country need to understand why we 're involved in the Middle East . This hollow patriotism frightens me . " The singer added that the Riot Act lyrics " represent [ ed ] my state of mind these days . I 'm optimistic yet disillusioned , hopeful yet frustrated . " Several songs on the album were inspired by Roskilde tragedy , with the album 's first single , " I Am Mine " , being written by Vedder in 2000 in a hotel room before the band 's first show after Roskilde , and " Love Boat Captain " including a brief lyrical reference ( " Lost nine friends we 'll never know ... two years ago today " ) . Regarding the time period when the lyrics were being written , Vedder said , " There 's been a lot of mortality ... It 's a weird time to be writing . Roskilde changed the shape of us as people , and our filter for seeing the world changed . "

A few songs feature lyrical collaborations between Vedder and other members of the group , including one with Ament ( " Ghost " ) , one with Cameron ( " You Are " ) , and two with Gossard ( " Bu $ hleaguer " and " All or None " ) . Sole lyrical contributions from band members other than Vedder include Cameron with " Get Right " and Ament with " Help Help " . The album 's lyrics tackle existential matters ( " Love Boat Captain " , " Cropduster " , and " I Am Mine " ) , as well as social and political concerns ( " Green Disease " , " Bu $ hleaguer " , and " 1 / 2 Full " ) . The lyrics of " Save You " represent the anger felt by anyone who watches a close friend waste away his or her life . Regarding " Love Boat Captain " , Vedder said , " Love is one resource that the corporations aren 't going to be able to monopolize . " Vedder said that " Cropduster " is " about man 's giant ego , that he 's the most important thing on the planet . " Regarding " Green Disease " , Vedder stated he was " mystified " at CEO and corporate-management salaries and " how someone can justify taking that much at the cost of other people 's livelihoods . " " Bu $ hleaguer " is a satirical commentary on President George W. Bush .

The album 's cover art , photographed by Ament , features two skeletons wearing crowns , suggesting the possibility that the two represent a king and a queen . The forged metal figurines were created by blacksmith Kelly Gilliam . According to Ament , the band had trouble coming up with a name for the album . After the artwork had been finalized and the tracks were sequenced , the band spent weeks trying to come up with a title . Vedder suggested Riot Act , and the band members went with it as they were tired with trying to come up with a title . McCready stated that the title has no real significance . He said , " I guess we were trying to come up with a title that reflected some of the music on the record , which we thought was urgent-sounding and kind of loud ... It just seemed to fit . " Ament implied that the title has to do with " getting your act together . "

Pearl Jam promoted the album with tours in Australia , Japan , and North America in 2003 . The tours were the band 's first with keyboardist Boom Gaspar . The two legs of the North American tour focused on the Midwestern United States , the East Coast , and the West Coast , and had more concerts in arenas . The trauma of Roskilde lead the tour to lack performances on festivals and open floor venues . The band received much publicity for its energetic politically charged performances during the tour . At many shows during the 2003 North American tour , Vedder performed " Bu $ hleaguer " with a rubber mask of George W. Bush , wearing it at the beginning of the song and then hanging it on a mic stand to allow him to sing . The band made news when it was reported that several fans left after Vedder had " impaled " the Bush mask on his mic stand at the band 's April 1 , 2003 show in Denver , Colorado show at the Pepsi Center . Following a performance of the song at Pearl Jam 's April 30 , 2003 show in Uniondale , New York at the Nassau Coliseum , the band was met with boos from the crowd and chants of " U-S-A. " Vedder responded by defending his right to free speech and the band followed with a performance of The Clash 's " Know Your Rights " . The song " Arc " was performed by Vedder at nine shows during the second North American leg of the tour as a tribute to the victims of the Roskilde disaster . The concerts were documented by a long series of official bootlegs , all of which were available through the band 's official website , and six of which were released in record stores : Perth , Tokyo , State College , Pennsylvania , two shows from Madison Square Garden , and Mansfield , Massachusetts . Two concerts became DVDs , the Seattle one being issued as Live at the Showbox , and the first of two shows at Madison Square Garden was released as the Live at the Garden DVD . Pearl Jam also supported the album 's material at a series of political rallies and benefit concerts while preparing for its eighth studio album .

Riot Act reached number five in the U.S. on the Billboard 200 album chart , with 166,000 copies sold in its first week of release . The album would end up selling only 508,000 copies in the United States according to Nielsen SoundScan , short of the 718,000 sold by predecessor Binaural . Riot Act has been certified gold by the RIAA . The international response to Riot Act was more positive . The album topped the charts in Australia , where it went platinum and ended among the best-selling records of the year in both 2002 and 2003 . Riot Act also went to number two in both Italy , and New Zealand , three in Norway , and number four in Canada . Three singles were released from Riot Act . Lead single " I Am Mine " entered the Billboard Hot 100 at number 43 , and reached number six on the Modern Rock charts . While " Save You " was released as the second single for North America , " Love Boat Captain " was the second single for international markets . " Save You " did not chart on the Hot 100 , but it did place on the Mainstream Rock and Modern Rock charts . Music videos for several songs from the album , including " I Am Mine " , " Save You " , " Love Boat Captain " , " Thumbing My Way " , and " 1 / 2 Full " , were filmed at Seattle 's Chop Suey club in September 2002 .

Riot Act received mixed to favorable reviews from music critics according to Metacritic , where it holds a 73 after 20 reviews . NME gave Riot Act an eight out of ten . Reviewer Louis Pattison stated that " Riot Act is the sound of a band entering a powerful middle-age . They still deserve your attention . " AllMusic staff writer Stephen Thomas Erlewine gave the album four out of five stars , saying " given several plays , this does indeed seem like the richest record Pearl Jam has made in a long time . " Spin gave the album seven out of ten stars . The review said , " Pearl Jam 's seventh studio album balances emotive bombast with a taut-sweaty hard-rock attack . " Critic Robert Christgau described Pearl Jam on the album as " masters of their own audio , with soft spots where their emotions can go . " Rolling Stone staff writer Keith Harris gave the album three out of five stars , saying that " like Neil Young at his most deliberately despondent , Pearl Jam sound purposefully tired . " Chris Willman of Entertainment Weekly gave the album a B , saying that Vedder ’ s lyrics " rarely cohere , " and that " too few of the tense rhythmic setups build to the kind of ... catharsis that would be something to Riot home about . " Q gave the album three out of five stars . The review called the album " An adult rock record in which nuance succeeds over bombast . "

Hugo Lindgren of The New York Times stated that the " record sounds as if it were made to slip quietly into the marketplace , connect with the faithful and leave everyone else alone , " and that " there 's no catchy single , and not even the slightest echo of anything else happening in pop music now . " He added that the " band 's grooves still sound taut , emotive and world-class . " Adam Sweeting of The Guardian gave the album two out of five stars . In the review he stated that " Riot Act isn 't one thing or the other : tracks such as " Ghost " or " Get Right " gesture towards hard rock without really putting the hammer down , while a more reflective piece like " All or None " doesn 't exploit its own possibilities . " Sweeting observed , " On full , Pearl Jam sound like Stillwater , Cameron Crowe 's fictional 1970s second-raters from his film Almost Famous . " Kyle Reiter of Pitchfork Media said that the album " meanders from one song to the next with an overwhelming insipidness , " and stated that it " [ brings ] them ever closer to homogenous bar-band territory . "

The album 's singles featured three B-sides from the Riot Act recording sessions that weren 't included on the album : " Down , " " Undone " and " Other Side . " " Down " and " Undone " were B-sides on the " I Am Mine " single , and " Other Side " was featured on the " Save You " and " Love Boat Captain " singles . All three songs were included on the 2003 Lost Dogs collection of rarities , although " Undone " appeared in a slightly different form . McCready said that " Down " came out lighter than intended , and was ultimately left off Riot Act because it did not fit with the other songs on the album . Also recorded during the sessions was " 4 / 20 / 02 , " a song honoring Alice in Chains frontman Layne Staley which Vedder wrote the same day that he heard the news of Staley 's death . According to Vedder , " 4 / 20 / 02 " was not included on Riot Act because the band already had too many songs . It was included on Lost Dogs as well , albeit in the form of a hidden track . A recording of " Severed Hand , " a song that later appeared on the band 's next studio album Pearl Jam , was attempted during the recording sessions ; however the band only spent a few hours on the song before it was shelved . " Last Soldier , " which appeared on the band 's 2001 fan club Christmas single as a live version recorded at the 2001 Bridge School Benefit , was written by McCready following September 11 , 2001 . McCready said the band played around with the song , but never seriously considered recording it for Riot Act .

Oasis were an English rock band formed in Manchester in 1991 . Developed from an earlier group , the Rain , the band originally consisted of Liam Gallagher ( vocals and tambourine ) , Paul " Bonehead " Arthurs ( guitar ) , Paul " Guigsy " McGuigan ( bass guitar ) , and Tony McCarroll ( drums , percussion ) . They were later joined by Liam 's older brother Noel Gallagher ( lead guitar and vocals ) as a fifth member , becoming the band 's settled line-up until April 1995 . Oasis signed to independent record label Creation Records in 1993 and released their record-setting debut album Definitely Maybe ( 1994 ) . The following year the band recorded ( What 's the Story ) Morning Glory ? ( 1995 ) with their new drummer Alan White , formerly of Starclub , in the midst of a chart rivalry with Britpop peers Blur . Along with Suede , Pulp and the aforementioned Blur , Oasis came to be regarded as a component of the Britpop " big four " , and the Gallagher brothers were featured regularly in tabloid newspapers for their sibling disputes and wild lifestyles . In 1997 Oasis released their third album , Be Here Now ( 1997 ) , and although it became the fastest-selling album in UK chart history , the album 's popularity tapered off quickly , not before selling 8 million copies . McGuigan and Arthurs left Oasis in 1999 as the band went on to record and release Standing on the Shoulder of Giants ( 2000 ) . After their departures , they were replaced by former Heavy Stereo guitarist / frontman Gem Archer and former Hurricane No. 1 guitarist / frontman Andy Bell who joined the group for the tour in support of Standing on the Shoulder of Giants , which had moderate success . Their fifth studio album Heathen Chemistry ( 2002 ) saw Noel Gallagher 's releasing strict creative control in the band 's output with all members contributing songs , which led to more relaxed recording sessions . In 2004 the band were joined by The Who 's drummer Zak Starkey , replacing Alan White , and found renewed success and popularity with Don 't Believe the Truth ( 2005 ) .

Following the recording of the band 's seventh album Dig Out Your Soul ( 2008 ) , Starkey left and was replaced by Chris Sharrock on Oasis ' last tour as a collective band . During the tour the brothers ' increasingly deteriorating relationship ultimately led to Noel Gallagher announcing in August 2009 that he would be leaving the band after a backstage altercation with Liam before a festival appearance . The band , comprising the remaining members of Oasis and led by Liam Gallagher , decided to continue working together under the name Beady Eye until breaking up in 2014 , while Noel went on to form his solo project Noel Gallagher 's High Flying Birds . Oasis have had eight UK number-one singles and eight UK number-one albums , and won fifteen NME Awards , nine Q Awards , four MTV Europe Music Awards and six Brit Awards , including one in 2007 for Outstanding Contribution to Music and one for the Best Album of the Last 30 Years as voted by BBC Radio 2 listeners ; they have been nominated for three Grammy Awards . By 2009 , the band had sold over 70 million records worldwide . The band were listed in the Guinness World Records book in 2010 for " Longest Top 10 UK Chart Run by a Group " after an unprecedented run of 22 top 10 hits in the UK . The band also holds the Guinness World Record for being the most successful act in the UK between the years 1995 and 2005 , spending 765 weeks in the Top 75 singles and albums charts .

Oasis evolved from an earlier band called the Rain , composed of Paul McGuigan ( bass guitar ) , Paul Arthurs ( guitar ) , Tony McCarroll ( drums ) and Chris Hutton ( vocals ) . Unsatisfied with Hutton , Arthurs invited and auditioned acquaintance Liam Gallagher as a replacement . Liam suggested that the band name be changed to Oasis . This change was inspired by an Inspiral Carpets tour poster that hung in the Gallagher brothers ' bedroom . One of the venues the poster listed was the Oasis Leisure Centre in Swindon , Wiltshire . Oasis played their first ever live gig on 18 August 1991 at the Boardwalk club in Manchester . Liam 's brother Noel Gallagher , who was a roadie for Inspiral Carpets , went with the band to watch his younger brother 's band play . Whilst Noel and his friends did not think Oasis sounded particularly spectacular , he did begin to consider the possibility of using his brother 's group as a possible outlet for a series of songs he had been writing for several years . Noel approached the group about joining with the proviso that he would become the band 's sole songwriter and leader , and that they would commit to an earnest pursuit of commercial success . " He had loads of stuff written , " Arthurs recalled . " When he walked in , we were a band making a racket with four tunes . All of a sudden , there were loads of ideas . " Oasis under Noel Gallagher crafted a musical approach that relied on simplicity , with Arthurs and McGuigan restricted to playing barre chords and root bass notes ; McCarroll playing basic rhythms , and the band 's amplifiers turned up to create distortion , Oasis created a sound " so devoid of finesse and complexity that it came out sounding pretty much unstoppable . "

After over a year of live shows , rehearsals and a recording of a proper demo ( known as the Live Demonstration tape ) , the band 's big break came in May 1993 when they were spotted by Creation Records co-owner Alan McGee . Oasis were invited to play a gig at King Tut 's Wah Wah Hut club in Glasgow , Scotland , by a band called Sister Lovers , who shared their rehearsal rooms . Oasis , along with a group of friends , found the money to hire a van and make the journey to Glasgow . When they arrived , they were refused entry to the club as they were not on that night 's set list , which reportedly caused the band to bully their way in ( although both the band and McGee have given contradicting statements about how they actually managed to get into the club on that night ) . They were given the opening slot and impressed McGee , who was there to see 18 Wheeler , one of his own bands , that night . McGee was so impressed by what he saw he offered them a recording contract then and there ; they however did not sign until several months later . Due to problems securing an American contract , Oasis ended up signing a worldwide contract with Sony , which in turn licensed Oasis to Creation in the UK . Following a limited white label release of the demo of their song " Columbia " , their first single , " Supersonic " , was released in April 1994 , reaching number 31 in the charts . The release was followed by " Shakermaker " . This song would become the subject of a plagiarism suit , with Oasis paying $ 500,000 in damages . Their third single , " Live Forever " , was their first to enter the top ten of the UK charts . After troubled recording and mixing sessions , their debut album , Definitely Maybe , was released on 29 August 1994 , entering the charts at number one within a week of its release , and at the time becoming the fastest selling debut album in the UK .

The best part of a year of constant live performances and recordings , along with a hedonistic lifestyle , were taking their toll on the band . This behaviour culminated during a gig in Los Angeles in September 1994 , leading to inept performance by Liam during which he made offensive remarks about American audiences and hit Noel with a tambourine . The incident upset Noel to such an extent that he temporarily quit the band immediately after and flew to San Francisco ( it was from this incident that the song " Talk Tonight " was written ) . He was tracked down by Creation 's Tim Abbot and they made a trip to Las Vegas . Once there , the elder Gallagher was persuaded to continue with the band . He reconciled with his brother and the tour resumed in Minneapolis . The group followed up the fourth single from Definitely Maybe , " Cigarettes & Alcohol " , with the Christmas single " Whatever " , which entered the British charts at number three . This song would later carry a co-writer 's credit for Neil Innes , who sued and also won damages .

Oasis had their first UK number one single in April 1995 with " Some Might Say " . At the same time , drummer Tony McCarroll was ousted from the band . McCarroll said , on leaving Oasis , that he was " unlawfully expelled from the partnership " for what he called a " personality clash " with the brothers . The Gallaghers , on the other hand , doubted McCarroll 's musical ability , with Noel saying : " I like Tony as a geezer but he wouldn 't have been able to drum the new songs " . McCarroll was replaced by Alan White , formerly of Starclub and younger brother of renowned studio percussionist Steve White , whom Paul Weller recommended to Noel . White made his debut for the band at a Top of the Pops performance of " Some Might Say " . Oasis began recording material for their second album in May of that year in Rockfield Studios near Monmouth . The band , by this point , had recorded the concert that would see release in August as Live by the Sea . During this period , the British press seized upon a supposed rivalry between Oasis and Britpop band Blur . Previously , Oasis did not associate themselves with the Britpop movement and were not invited to perform on the BBC 's " Britpop Now " programme introduced by Blur singer Damon Albarn . On 14 August 1995 , Blur and Oasis released new singles on the same day , setting up " The Battle of Britpop " that dominated the national news . Blur 's " Country House " outsold Oasis ' " Roll with It " 274,000 copies to 216,000 during the week . Oasis ' management came up with several reasons for this , claiming " Country House " sold more because it was less expensive ( £ 1.99 vs £ 3.99 ) and because there were two different versions of " Country House " with different B-sides forcing serious fans to buy two copies . An alternative explanation given at the time by Creation was that there were problems associated with the barcode on the " Roll with It " single case , which did not record all sales . Noel Gallagher told The Observer in September that he hoped Damon Albarn and Alex James of Blur would " catch AIDS and die " , which caused a media furore . He subsequently apologised for this in a formal letter to various publications .

Bassist Paul McGuigan briefly left the band in September 1995 , citing nervous exhaustion . He was replaced by Scott McLeod , formerly of The Ya Ya 's , who was featured on some of the tour dates as well as in the " Wonderwall " video before leaving abruptly while on tour in the US . McLeod later contacted Noel Gallagher claiming he felt he had made the wrong decision . Gallagher curtly replied " I think you have too . Good luck signing on . " To complete the tour , McGuigan was successfully convinced to return to the band . Although a softer sound led to mixed reviews , Oasis ' second album , ( What 's the Story ) Morning Glory ? was a commercial success , becoming the fourth best-selling album in UK Chart history with over four million copies sold . The album spawned two further hit singles , " Wonderwall " and " Don 't Look Back in Anger " , which reached numbers two and one respectively . It also contained the non-UK single " Champagne Supernova " — featuring guitar and backing vocals by Paul Weller — that received widespread critical acclaim and peaked at number one on the US modern rock chart .

The group played their first headline outdoor concerts at Maine Road football stadium , home of Manchester City F.C. whom the Gallagher brothers have been fans of since childhood , on 27 and 28 April 1996 . Highlights from the second night featured on the video ... There and Then , released later the same year . As their career reached its zenith , Oasis performed back-to-back concerts at Knebworth on 10 and 11 August . The band sold out both shows within minutes . The audience of 125,000 people each night for two nights ( 2.5 million people applied for tickets , and 250,000 were actually sold , meaning the possibility of 20 sold out nights ) , was at the time a record-breaking number for an outdoor concert held in the UK , and to this day the largest demand for a show in British history . The rest of the month proved to be difficult for the group . Oasis were due to record an episode of MTV Unplugged at the Royal Festival Hall but Liam pulled out , citing a sore throat . He watched the performance from a balcony with cold beer and cigarettes , heckling Noel 's singing between songs . Four days later the group left for a tour of American arenas but Liam refused to go ; the band decided to continue the tour with Noel on vocals . Liam rejoined the tour on 30 August , and on 4 September 1996 , Oasis performed " Champagne Supernova " at the 1996 MTV Video Music Awards at Radio City Music Hall in New York City . Liam made gestures at Noel during his guitar solo , then spat beer all over the stage before storming off . A few weeks later Noel flew home without the band , who followed on another flight . This event prompted media speculation that the group were splitting up . The brothers soon reconciled and decided to complete the tour .

Oasis spent the end of 1996 and the first quarter of 1997 at Abbey Road Studios in London and Ridge Farm Studios in Surrey recording their third album . Quarrels between the Gallagher brothers plagued the recording sessions . Be Here Now was released in August 1997 . Preceded by the UK number one single " D 'You Know What I Mean ? " , the album was their most anticipated effort , and as such became the subject of considerable media attention . By the end of the first day of release , Be Here Now sold 424,000 units and by the end of business on Saturday of that week sales had reached 696,000 , making it the fastest-selling album in British history . The album debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 in the US , but its first week sales of 152,000 — below expected sales of 400,000 copies — were considered a disappointment . Although early media reviews were positive , once the hype had died down , the album was criticised for being bloated and derivative with most of the critics focused on the extensive length of several songs , the heavier sound , and overproduction .

By this time the Britpop movement was in decline , and the band had failed to meet expectations with their third album . After the conclusion of the Be Here Now Tour in early 1998 , amidst much media criticism the group kept a low profile . Later in the year , Oasis released a compilation album of fourteen B-sides , entitled The Masterplan . " The really interesting stuff from around that period is the B-sides . There 's a lot more inspired music on the B-sides than there is on Be Here Now itself , I think " , related Noel in an interview in 2008 .

In early 1999 , the band began work on their fourth studio album . First details were announced in February with Mark " Spike " Stent revealed to be taking a co-producing role . Things were not going well and the shock departure of founding member Paul " Bonehead " Arthurs was announced in August . This departure was reported at the time as amicable , with Noel stating that Arthurs wanted to spend more time with his family . Arthurs ' statement clarified his leaving as " to concentrate on other things " . However , Noel has since offered a contradicting version : that a series of violations of Noel 's " no drink or drugs " policy ( imposed by Noel so that Liam could sing properly ) for the album 's sessions resulted in a confrontation between the two . Two weeks later the departure of bassist Paul McGuigan was announced . The Gallagher brothers held a press conference shortly thereafter where they assured reporters that " the future of Oasis is secure . The story and the glory will go on . " The now three-piece Oasis chose to continue recording the album , with Noel Gallagher re-recording most of Arthurs ' guitar and McGuigan 's bass parts . After the completion of the recording sessions , the band began searching for replacement members . The first new member to be announced was new lead / rhythm guitarist Colin " Gem " Archer , formerly of Heavy Stereo , who later claimed to have been approached by Noel Gallagher only a couple of days after Arthurs ' departure was publicly announced . Finding a replacement bassist took more time and effort . The band were rehearsing with David Potts , but he quickly resigned , and they brought in Andy Bell , former guitarist / songwriter of Ride and Hurricane No. 1 as their new bassist . Bell had never played bass before and had to learn to play it ( with Noel since saying that Liam said , " If he can play the guitar , he can play the fookin ' bass " ) , along with a handful of songs from Oasis ' back catalogue , in preparation for a scheduled tour of America in December 1999 .

With the folding of Creation Records , Oasis formed their own label , Big Brother , which released all of Oasis ' subsequent records in the UK and Ireland . Oasis ' fourth album , Standing on the Shoulder of Giants , was released in February 2000 to good first-week sales . It peaked at number one on the British charts and number 24 on the Billboard charts . Three singles were released from the album : " Go Let It Out " , " Who Feels Love ? " and " Sunday Morning Call " , all of which were top five UK singles . The " Go Let It Out " video was shot before Bell joined the group and therefore featured the unusual line-up of Liam on rhythm guitar , Archer on lead guitar and Noel on bass . With the departure of the founding members , the band made several small changes to their image and sound . The cover featured a new " Oasis " logo , designed by Gem Archer , and the album was also the first Oasis release to include a song written by Liam Gallagher , entitled " Little James " . The songs also had more experimental , psychedelic influences . Standing on the Shoulder of Giants received only lukewarm reviews and is the band 's lowest selling studio album .

To support the record the band staged an eventful world tour . While touring in Barcelona in 2000 , Oasis were forced to cancel a gig when an attack of tendinitis caused Alan White 's arm to seize up , and the band spent the night drinking instead . After a row between the two brothers , Noel declared he was quitting touring overseas altogether , and Oasis were supposed to finish the tour without him . Noel eventually returned for the Irish and British legs of the tour , which included two major shows at Wembley Stadium . A live album of the first show , called Familiar to Millions , was released in late 2000 to mixed reviews .

Throughout 2001 , Oasis split time between sessions for their fifth studio album and live shows around the world . Some gigs included the month-long Tour of Brotherly Love with The Black Crowes and Spacehog and a show in Paris supporting Neil Young . The album , Heathen Chemistry , Oasis ' first album with new members Andy Bell and Gem Archer , was released in July 2002 . The album reached number 1 in the UK and number 23 in the US , although critics gave it mixed reviews . There were four singles released from the album : " The Hindu Times " , " Stop Crying Your Heart Out " , " Little by Little / She Is Love " , and " Songbird " , written by Liam – Oasis ' first single not written by Noel . The record blended the band 's sonic experiments from their last albums , but also went for a more basic rock sound . The recording of Heathen Chemistry was much more balanced for the band , with all of the members , apart from White , writing songs . Johnny Marr provided additional guitar as well as backup vocals on a couple of songs .

After the album 's release , the band embarked on a successful world tour that was once again filled with incidents . In late summer 2002 , whilst the band were on tour in the US , Noel , Bell and touring keyboardist Jay Darlington were involved in a car accident in Indianapolis . While none of the band members sustained any major injuries , some shows were cancelled as a result . In December 2002 , the latter half of the German leg of the band 's European tour had to be postponed after Liam Gallagher , Alan White and three other members of the band 's entourage were arrested after a violent brawl at a Munich nightclub . The band had been drinking heavily and tests showed that Liam had used cocaine . Liam lost two front teeth and kicked a police officer in the ribs , while Alan suffered minor head injuries after getting hit with an ashtray . Two years later Liam was fined around £ 40,000 . The band finished their tour in March 2003 after returning to those postponed dates .

Liam Gallagher said Oasis began recording a sixth album in late December 2003 with producers Death in Vegas at Sawmills Studios in Cornwall . The album was originally planned for a September 2004 release to coincide with the 10th anniversary of the release of Definitely Maybe . However , long-time drummer Alan White , who at this time had played on nearly all of the band 's material , left the band in early January 2004 . At the time , his brother Steve White stated on his own website that " the spirit of being in a band was kicked out of him " and he wanted to be with his current girlfriend . White was replaced by Zak Starkey , drummer of The Who and the son of The Beatles ' Ringo Starr . Though Starkey performed on studio recordings and toured with the band , he was not officially a member and the band were a four-piece for the first time in their career . Starkey played publicly for the first time at Poole Lighthouse . A few days later , Oasis , with Starkey , headlined the Glastonbury Festival for the second time in their career and performed a largely greatest hits set , which included two new songs — Gem Archer 's " A Bell Will Ring " and Liam Gallagher 's " The Meaning of Soul " . The performance received negative reviews , with NME calling it a " disaster . " The BBC 's Tom Bishop called Oasis ' set " lacklustre and uneventful ... prompting a mixed reception from fans " , mainly because of Liam 's uninspired singing and Starkey 's lack of experience with the band 's material .

After much turbulence , the band 's sixth album was finally recorded in Los Angeles-based Capitol Studios from October to December the same year . Producer Dave Sardy took over the lead producing role from Noel , who decided to step back from these duties after a decade of producing leadership over the band . In May 2005 , after three years and as many scrapped recording sessions , the band released their sixth studio album , Don 't Believe the Truth , fulfilling their contract with Sony BMG . It followed the path of Heathen Chemistry as being a collaborative project again , rather than a Noel-written album . The album was the first in a decade not to feature drumming by Alan White , marking the recording debut of Starkey . The record was generally hailed as the band 's best effort since Morning Glory by fans and critics alike , spawning two UK number one singles : " Lyla " and " The Importance of Being Idle " , whilst " Let There Be Love " entered at number 2 . Oasis picked up two awards at the Q Awards : one People 's Choice Award and the second for Don 't Believe the Truth as Best Album . Following in the footsteps of Oasis ' previous five albums , Don 't Believe the Truth also entered the UK album charts at number one . To date the album has sold more than 7 million copies worldwide .

In May 2005 , the band 's new line-up embarked on a large scale world tour . Beginning on 10 May 2005 at the London Astoria , and finishing on 31 March 2006 in front of a sold out gig in Mexico City , Oasis played more live shows than at any time since the Definitely Maybe tour , visiting 26 countries and headlining 113 shows for over 3.2 million people . The tour passed without any major incidents and was the band 's most successful in more than a decade . The tour included sold out shows at New York 's Madison Square Garden and LA 's Hollywood Bowl . A rockumentary film made during the tour , entitled Lord Don 't Slow Me Down directed by Dick Carruthers was released in October 2007 . A second DVD included live footage from an Oasis gig in Manchester from 2 July 2005 . Oasis released a compilation double album entitled Stop the Clocks in 2006 , featuring what the band considers to be their " definitive " songs . The band received the Brit Award for outstanding contribution to music in February 2007 , playing several of their most famous songs afterwards . Oasis released their first ever digital-only release , " Lord Don 't Slow Me Down " , in October 2007 . The song debuted at number ten in the UK singles chart .

The band 's resurgence in popularity since the success of Don 't Believe The Truth was highlighted in February 2008 when , in a poll to find the fifty greatest British albums of the last fifty years conducted by Q magazine and HMV , two Oasis albums were voted first and second ( Definitely Maybe and ( What 's The Story ) Morning Glory ? respectively ) . Two other albums by the band appeared in the list – Don 't Believe The Truth came in at number fourteen , and the album that has previously been heavily criticised by some of the media , Be Here Now , made the list at No.22. Oasis recorded for a couple of months in 2007 – between July and September — completing work on two new songs and demoing the rest . They took a two-month break , because of the birth of Noel 's son . The band re-entered the studio on 5 November 2007 and finished recording around March 2008 with producer Dave Sardy . In May 2008 , Zak Starkey left the band after recording Dig Out Your Soul , the band 's seventh studio album . He was replaced by former Icicle Works drummer Chris Sharrock on their tour and , like Zak , Chris was not an official member of the band and Oasis remained as a four-piece . The first single from the record was " The Shock of the Lightning " written by Noel Gallagher , and was pre-released on 29 September 2008 . Dig Out Your Soul , the band 's seventh studio album , was released on 6 October and went to number one in the UK and number five on the Billboard 200 . The band started touring for a projected 18-month-long tour expected to last till September 2009 , with support from Kasabian , The Enemy and Twisted Wheel . On 7 September 2008 , while performing at Virgin Festival in Toronto , a member of the audience ran on stage and physically assaulted Noel . Noel suffered three broken and dislodged ribs as a result from the attack , and the group had to cancel several shows while he recovered . In June 2008 , the band re-signed with Sony BMG for a three-album deal .

On 25 February 2009 , Oasis received the NME Award for Best British Band of 2009 as well as best blog for Noel 's ' Tales from the Middle of Nowhere ' . On 4 June 2009 , Oasis played the first of three concerts at Manchester 's Heaton Park and after having to leave the stage twice due to a generator failure , came on the third time to declare the gig was now a free concert ; it delighted the 70,000 ticket holders , 20,000 of whom claimed the refund . The band 's two following gigs at the venue , on 6 and 7 June , proved a great success , with fans turning out in their thousands despite the changeable weather and first night 's sound issues .

As a result of Liam suffering laryngitis , Oasis cancelled a planned gig at V Festival in Chelmsford on 23 August 2009 . Noel Gallagher later made a statement saying the gig was cancelled due to Liam having ' a hangover ' . Tension between the brothers rose and a fight between them in a backstage area on 28 August 2009 reportedly resulted in Liam throwing a plum and wielding Noel 's guitar like an axe . The group 's manager announced the cancellation of their concert at the Rock en Seine festival near Paris just minutes before it was about to begin , along with the cancellation of the last date at I-Day Festival and a statement that the group " does not exist anymore " . Two hours later , a statement from Noel appeared on the band 's website : " It is with some sadness and great relief ... I quit Oasis tonight . People will write and say what they like , but I simply could not go on working with Liam a day longer . " On the 6th of July 2011 Absolute Radio uploaded a video to YouTube where Noel Gallagher speaks about the night Oasis ended . Noel states within this video . ' If i had my time again i would have gone back and done the gig . I 'd have done that gig and i 'd have done the next gig and we 'd have all gone away and we could have probably discussed it . We may never have split up.'

On 16 February 2010 , Oasis won the award for Best Brit Album of the Last 30 Years at the 2010 Brit Awards . Liam Gallagher collected the award alone before presenting his speech , which thanked Bonehead , McGuigan and Alan White but not his brother , Noel . Liam threw his microphone and the band 's award into the crowd . On 15 March 2010 , Liam defended his actions at the awards ceremony , saying " I 'm sick of it all being about me and Noel , the last couple of months has pretty much been all about me and him so I thought it was only right to mention the other lads who played on the album and the best fans in the world , " and " I thought it was a nice gesture to give this to the fans , obviously it was misinterpreted as per usual . " about throwing the award . Time Flies ... 1994 – 2009 , a compilation album containing singles by the group , was released on 14 June 2010 . The decision to make the compilation a singles collection , and the track order , was decided by Noel Gallagher , who released a number of videos to the Oasis YouTube account relating to the collection .

On 26 February 2014 , Noel via the band 's official website announced that the first three studio albums would be reissued , remastered and re-released throughout the remainder of 2014 to commemorate the 20th anniversary of Definitely Maybe . A remastered 3-disc version of Definitely Maybe was released on 19 May 2014 . A documentary titled Supersonic is set to be released in October 2016 , and will tell the story of Oasis from their beginnings to the height of their fame during the summer of 1996 . Produced by the same team behind the Academy Award-winning biopic Amy , Supersonic is said to feature up close and personal footage , as well as never before seen archive material and interviews with the band .

Oasis were most heavily influenced by the Beatles , an influence that was frequently labelled as an " obsession " by the British media . In addition , members of Oasis have cited the Stone Roses , U2 , Bee Gees , T. Rex , Sex Pistols , Slade , Small Faces , the Who , Nirvana , the Rolling Stones , the Stooges , the La 's , the Doors , Jimi Hendrix , Bob Dylan , Neil Young , Humble Pie , Happy Mondays , the Hollies , Inspiral Carpets , Peter Green-era Fleetwood Mac , the Kinks , the Jam , Pink Floyd , the Verve , Led Zeppelin , David Bowie , the Velvet Underground , Talking Heads , and the Smiths as an influence or inspiration .

Legal action has been taken against Noel Gallagher and Oasis for plagiarism on three separate occasions during the course of Oasis ' career . The first was the case of Neil Innes ( formerly of the Bonzo Dog Doo-Dah Band and the Rutles ) suing to prove the Oasis song " Whatever " borrowed from his song " How Sweet to Be an Idiot " . Innes was eventually awarded royalties and a co-writer credit . Noel Gallagher claimed in 2010 that the plagiarism was unintentional and he was unaware of the similarities until informed of Innes 's legal case . In the second incident , Oasis were also sued by Coca-Cola and forced to pay $ 500,000 in damages to the New Seekers after it was alleged that the Oasis song " Shakermaker " had lifted words and melody from " I 'd Like to Teach the World to Sing " . When asked about the incident , Noel Gallagher joked " Now we all drink Pepsi . " On the third and final occasion , when promotional copies of ( What 's the Story ) Morning Glory ? were originally distributed , they contained a previously unreleased bonus song called " Step Out " . This promotional CD was quickly withdrawn and replaced with a version that omitted the controversial song , which was allegedly similar to the Stevie Wonder song " Uptight ( Everything 's Alright ) " . " Step Out " later reappeared as the B-side to " Don 't Look Back in Anger " , albeit now listing " Wonder , et. al " as co-writers .

On the flip side , the 2003 song " Life Got Cold " by UK girl band Girls Aloud received attention due to similarities between the guitar riff and melody of " Life Got Cold " and that of the song " Wonderwall " . A BBC review stated " part of the chorus sounds like it is going to turn into Wonderwall by Oasis . " A source told The Sun that Girls Aloud " are all big Oasis fans so I 'm sure they won 't mind comparisons with their classic love song . " Warner / Chappell Music has since credited Oasis songwriter Noel Gallagher .

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows is the seventh and final novel of the Harry Potter series , written by British author J. K. Rowling . The book was released on 21 July 2007 by Bloomsbury Publishing in the United Kingdom , in the United States by Scholastic , and in Canada by Raincoast Books , ending the series that began in 1997 with the publication of Harry Potter and the Philosopher 's Stone . The novel chronicles the events directly following Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince ( 2005 ) , and the final confrontation between the wizards Harry Potter and Lord Voldemort , as well as revealing the previously concealed back story of several main characters . The title of the book refers to three mythical objects featured in the story , collectively known as the " Deathly Hallows " — an unbeatable wand , a stone to bring the dead to life , and a cloak of invisibility . Rowling finished writing Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows in January 2007 . Before its release , Bloomsbury reportedly spent £ 10 million to keep the book 's contents safe before its release date . American publisher Arthur Levine refused any copies of the novel to be released in advance for press review , although two reviews were submitted early . Shortly before release , photos of all 759 pages of the U.S. edition were leaked and transcribed , leading Scholastic to look for the source that had leaked it .

Released globally in 93 countries , Deathly Hallows broke sales records as the fastest-selling book ever , a record it still held in 2012 . It sold 15 million copies in the first 24 hours following its release , including more than 11 million in the U.S. and UK alone . The previous record , 9 million in its first day , had been held by Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince . The novel has also been translated into over 120 languages . The title proved difficult to translate and was often rendered closer to " Harry Potter and the Relics of Death " in other languages . Major themes in the novel are death and living in a corrupted society , and critics have compared them to Christian allegories . Generally well-received , the book won the 2008 Colorado Blue Spruce Book Award , and the American Library Association named it a " Best Book for Young Adults " . A two-part film adaptation began showing in November 2010 when Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 1 was released ; Part 2 was released on 15 July 2011 .

Throughout the six previous novels in the series , the titular character Harry Potter has struggled with the difficulties of adolescence along with being famous as the only wizard to survive the Killing Curse . The curse was cast by the evil Tom Riddle , better known as Lord Voldemort , a powerful evil wizard , who had murdered Harry 's parents and attempted to kill Harry as a baby , in the belief this would frustrate a prophecy that Harry would become his equal . As an orphan , Harry was placed in the care of his Muggle ( non-magical ) relatives Aunt Petunia and Uncle Vernon . In Philosopher 's Stone , Harry re-enters the wizarding world at age 11 and enrols in Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry . He makes friends with fellow students Ron Weasley and Hermione Granger , and is mentored by the school 's headmaster , Albus Dumbledore . He also meets Professor Severus Snape , who intensely dislikes and bullies him . Harry fights Voldemort several times while at school , as the wizard tries to regain a physical form . In Goblet of Fire , Harry is mysteriously entered in a dangerous magical competition called the Triwizard Tournament , which he discovers is a trap designed to allow the return of Lord Voldemort to full strength . During Order of the Phoenix , Harry and several of his friends face off against Voldemort 's Death Eaters , a group of Dark witches and wizards , and narrowly defeat them . In Half-Blood Prince , Harry learns that Voldemort has divided his soul into several parts , creating " horcruxes " from various unknown objects to contain them ; in this way he has ensured his immortality as long as at least one of the horcruxes still exists . Two of these had already been destroyed , one a diary destroyed by Harry in the events of Chamber of Secrets and one a ring destroyed by Dumbledore shortly before the events of Half-Blood Prince . Dumbledore takes Harry along in the attempt to destroy a third horcrux contained in a locket . However the horcrux has been taken by an unknown wizard , and upon their return Dumbledore is ambushed and disarmed by Draco Malfoy who cannot bring himself to kill him , then killed by Snape .

Following Dumbledore 's death , Voldemort consolidates his support and power , including covert control of the Ministry of Magic , while Harry is about to turn seventeen , losing the protection of his home . The Order of the Phoenix move Harry to a new location before his birthday , but are attacked upon departure . Mad-Eye is killed , and George Weasley wounded , the rest arrive safely . Abandoning school , Ron and Hermione accompany Harry to finish Dumbledore 's quest : to hunt and destroy Voldemort 's four remaining Horcruxes . Initially they have very few clues — one is a locket once owned by Hogwarts ' co-founder Salazar Slytherin which was stolen by the mysterious " R.A.B. " , one is possibly a cup originally belonging to co-founder Helga Hufflepuff , a third might be connected to co-founder Rowena Ravenclaw , and the fourth might be Nagini , Voldemort 's snake familiar . They also receive apparently meaningless bequests from Dumbledore 's possessions — a Golden Snitch for Harry , a Deluminator for Ron , and a book of fairy tales for Hermione . Before leaving , they attend Ron 's brother Bill 's wedding , but the Ministry of Magic finally falls to Voldemort and the wedding is attacked . They flee to 12 Grimmauld Place in London , the family home of Sirius Black and headquarters of the Order of the Phoenix , where they identify R.A.B. as Sirius ' brother Regulus Black , and learn from the house-elf Kreacher that Slytherin 's locket was stolen from the house and then seized by Dolores Umbridge of the Ministry of Magic . They infiltrate the Ministry of Magic and take back the locket , but have no way to destroy it . Under the object 's evil influence and the strain of constant vigilance , they argue and Ron leaves .

Harry and Hermione continue the quest , discovering more about Dumbledore 's past , including the death of Dumbledore 's younger sister and his connection to the dark wizard Gellert Grindelwald . They travel to Godric 's Hollow , Harry 's birthplace and the place where his parents died , and meet the elderly magical historian Bathilda Bagshot , but she turns out to be Nagini in disguise , awaiting their arrival ; the snake attacks Harry and again they barely escape , this time to the Forest of Dean , where their luck appears to turn . A mysterious silver doe , similar to a Patronus , appears and silently guides Harry to an icy pond containing the Sword of Hogwarts co-founder Godric Gryffindor , a Goblin-made weapon and one of the few objects able to destroy Horcruxes . During Harry 's attempt to recover the sword , the Horcrux attempts to kill him . He is saved by Ron , who was guided back by the deluminator , and they realise Dumbledore 's gifts may be meaningful . Ron obtains the sword , and uses it to destroy the locket . Harry continues to have visions of Voldemort torturing and killing wizards , apparently in pursuit of some object . Hermione identifies in her book , a strange symbol also worn at the wedding by Xenophilius Lovegood . They visit him and are told the symbol represents the mythical Deathly Hallows , three objects from an old fairy tale titled The Tale of the Three Brothers : the Elder Wand , an unbeatable wand ; the Resurrection Stone , able to summon the dead ; and an infallible Invisibility Cloak . Harry realises that Voldemort is seeking ( and shortly afterwards , successfully obtains ) the Elder Wand , won by Dumbledore after Grindelwald 's defeat , recognises the Resurrection Stone as that found by Dumbledore which had become the second Horcrux , and his own inherited Invisibility Cloak as the third Hallow .

The trio are captured and taken to Malfoy Manor , where Bellatrix Lestrange tortures Hermione to learn how the three acquired the sword , which she had believed was in her vault at Gringotts bank . They escape , along with Luna Lovegood , Ollivander , Dean Thomas , and the goblin Griphook , aided by the elf Dobby . During the escape Harry disarms Draco Malfoy and Dobby dies . Bellatrix ' terror in interrogating Hermione suggests to Harry that some exceptional object is in her vault , and when questioned , Griphook confirms that a gold cup is indeed in her vault . They break into the vault , retrieve the cup , and escape on a dragon , although they lose the sword . Harry has a vision of Voldemort and sees that he now understands their plan , and intends to make his remaining horcruxes even safer . The vision also confirms that the unidentified horcrux is at Hogwarts . They enter the school through an undiscovered secret entrance . The teachers drive out Snape , and defend the school to win time for Harry to locate the penultimate horcrux . Voldemort had set a guard in the Ravenclaw tower , corroborating Harry 's belief that the horcrux is Rowena Ravenclaw 's diadem , lost centuries ago . The Ravenclaw ghost 's story further confirms this belief , and Harry remembers an old diadem in the Room of Requirement . Ron and Hermione destroy the cup with basilisk fangs from the Chamber of Secrets as Voldemort and his army besiege the castle . They find the diadem but are ambushed by Draco Malfoy and his friends Crabbe and Goyle . Crabbe tries to kill them using Fiendfyre , a cursed fire , but is unable to control it ; the fire destroys the diadem and himself . Harry and his friends save Malfoy and Goyle , and several major characters are killed in the battle , including Remus Lupin , Nymphadora Tonks , and Fred Weasley .

In his encampment , Voldemort feels that the Elder Wand is not performing as he expected . According to legend , its allegiance must be won by killing the previous owner , and Voldemort concludes — incorrectly — that as Snape killed Dumbledore , he will not be able to fully wield the wand 's power until he kills Snape , which he does . Harry arrives as Snape is dying , and Snape passes him memories to view in a pensieve . They reveal finally , that Snape had a lifelong love for Harry 's mother , and felt haunted by causing her death , that despite hating Harry 's father he agreed at Dumbledore 's request to watch over their son Harry and act as a double agent against Voldemort , that Dumbledore 's death was planned with Snape in advance , that Snape cast the doe Patronus to lead Harry to the sword , and that — apparently — he himself must die if Voldemort is to be killed . He accepts his death and Dumbledore 's scheming that has guided his life , and goes to seek out and be killed by Voldemort . On the way he tells Neville Longbottom that Voldemort 's snake Nagini — the last known horcrux — must be killed to make Voldemort vulnerable . He uses the Resurrection Stone to seek comfort and courage from his dead loved ones — his parents , Sirius and Lupin — dropping the stone in the forest before reaching Voldemort 's camp . Voldemort uses the Killing Curse and Harry does not defend himself .

Harry awakens in a dreamlike location somewhat like Kings Cross Station , and is greeted by Dumbledore who explains that Voldemort 's original Killing Curse left a fragment of Voldemort 's soul in Harry which caused the connection they had felt , that when Voldemort used Harry 's blood to regain his full strength , this further protected Harry from Voldemort , that this fragment of Voldemort 's soul has now been killed by Voldemort 's own spell , and that Harry is free to return or " go on " . Harry chooses to return and feigns death . Voldemort displays Harry 's body and offers a truce if the defenders surrender , but Neville kills Nagini with the sword , leaving Voldemort unprotected , and Harry escapes under his cloak as the battle resumes . In a final onslaught , Bellatrix is killed and Harry reveals to Voldemort that he is alive . He explains to Voldemort that the Elder Wand 's loyalty transfers upon the defeat , not necessarily the killing , of its previous master . Although Voldemort believed he has won the wand 's allegiance by killing Snape , who killed Dumbledore , in fact he ( Harry ) had defeated Draco Malfoy who had previously disarmed Dumbledore . Therefore , the outcome of their duel will depend upon whether the Elder Wand knows its previous master was disarmed , which will have left Harry as its true master , even though neither Draco nor Harry ever physically held it . He also explains that his attempted self-sacrifice has protected the remaining defendants , who can now no longer be hurt by Voldemort . Harry urges Voldemort to feel remorse , in order to save his soul . Enraged , Voldemort attempts one final Killing Curse , but the Elder Wand refuses to act against Harry and the spell rebounds , killing him finally .

After Voldemort 's death , Harry uses the Elder Wand to repair his original broken wand , saying that he will return it to Dumbledore 's tomb , where its power may vanish if Harry dies undefeated and where it may drop out of history , and the wizarding world returns to peace once more . In an epilogue set in King 's Cross station 19 years later , Harry and Ginny Weasley are a couple with three children : James Sirius , Albus Severus , and Lily Luna . Ron and Hermione also have two children , Rose and Hugo ; Harry 's godson Teddy Lupin , is found kissing Bill and Fleur Weasley 's daughter Victoire ; Neville Longbottom is now a Hogwarts professor ; and Draco Malfoy and his wife are also at the station to send off their son , Scorpius . Albus is departing for his first year at Hogwarts , and is worried he will be placed into Slytherin House . Harry reassures him , telling his son that he is named for two Hogwarts headmasters , and one of them ( Snape ) was a Slytherin and " the bravest man he had ever met " , but that the Sorting Hat could take account of personal preferences , as it did for Harry . The book ends with the words : " The scar had not pained Harry for nineteen years . All was well . "

Harry Potter and the Philosopher 's Stone was published by Bloomsbury , the publisher of all Harry Potter books in the United Kingdom , on 30 June 1997 . It was released in the United States on 1 September 1998 by Scholastic — the American publisher of the books — as Harry Potter and the Sorcerer 's Stone , after Rowling had received US $ 105,000 for the American rights — an unprecedented amount for a children 's book by a then-unknown author . The second book , Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets was originally published in the UK on 2 July 1998 , and in the US on 2 June 1999 . Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban was then published a year later in the UK on 8 July 1999 , and in the US on 8 September 1999 . Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire was published on 8 July 2000 at the same time by Bloomsbury and Scholastic . Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix is the longest book in the series at 766 pages in the UK version and 870 pages in the US version . It was published worldwide in English on 21 June 2003 . Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince was published on 16 July 2005 , and it sold 9 million copies in the first 24 hours of its worldwide release .

Shortly before releasing the title , J. K. Rowling announced that she had considered three titles for the book . The final title , Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows , named after the mythical Deathly Hallows in the novel , was released to the public on 21 December 2006 , via a special Christmas-themed hangman puzzle on Rowling 's website , confirmed shortly afterwards by the book 's publishers . When asked during a live chat about the other titles she had been considering , Rowling mentioned Harry Potter and the Elder Wand and Harry Potter and the Peverell Quest .

Rowling completed the book while staying at the Balmoral Hotel in Edinburgh in January 2007 , and left a signed statement on a marble bust of Hermes in her room which read : " J. K. Rowling finished writing Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows in this room ( 552 ) on 11 January 2007 " . In a statement on her website , she said , " I 've never felt such a mixture of extreme emotions in my life , never dreamed I could feel simultaneously heartbroken and euphoric . " She compared her mixed feelings to those expressed by Charles Dickens in the preface of the 1850 edition of David Copperfield , " a two-years ' imaginative task " . " To which , " she added , " I can only sigh , try seventeen years , Charles " . She ended her message by saying " Deathly Hallows is my favourite , and that is the most wonderful way to finish the series " . When asked before publication about the forthcoming book , Rowling stated that she could not change the ending even if she wanted . " These books have been plotted for such a long time , and for six books now , that they 're all leading a certain direction . So , I really can 't " . She also commented that the final volume related closely to the previous book in the series , Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince , " almost as though they are two-halves of the same novel " . She has said that the last chapter of the book was written " in something like 1990 " , as part of her earliest work on the series . Rowling also revealed she originally wrote the last words to be " something like : ' Only those who he loved could see his lightning scar ' " . Rowling changed this because she did not want people to think Voldemort would rise again and to say that Harry 's mission was over .

Academics and journalists have developed many other interpretations of themes in the books , some more complex than others , and some including political subtexts . Themes such as normality , oppression , survival , and overcoming imposing odds have all been considered as prevalent throughout the series . Similarly , the theme of making one 's way through adolescence and " going over one 's most harrowing ordeals — and thus coming to terms with them " has also been considered . Rowling has stated that the books comprise " a prolonged argument for tolerance , a prolonged plea for an end to bigotry " and that also pass on a message to " question authority and ... not assume that the establishment or the press tells you all of the truth " . Some political commentators have seen J. K. Rowling 's portrayal of the bureaucratised Ministry of Magic and the oppressive measures taken by the Ministry in the later books ( like making attendance at Hogwarts School compulsory and the " registration of Mudbloods " with the Ministry ) as an allegory of criticising the state .

The Harry Potter series has been criticised for supposedly supporting witchcraft and the occult . Before publication of Deathly Hallows , Rowling refused to speak out about her religion , stating , " If I talk too freely , every reader , whether 10 or 60 , will be able to guess what 's coming in the books " . However , many have noted Christian allegories apparent in Deathly Hallows . For example , Harry dies and then comes back to life to save mankind , like Christ . The location where this occurs is King 's Cross . Harry also urges Voldemort to show remorse , to restore his shattered soul . Rowling also stated that " my belief and my struggling with religious belief ... I think is quite apparent in this book " , which is shown as Harry struggles with his faith in Dumbledore . Deathly Hallows begins with a pair of epigraphs , one by Quaker leader William Penn and one from Aeschylus ' The Libation Bearers . Of this , Rowling said " I really enjoyed choosing those two quotations because one is pagan , of course , and one is from a Christian tradition . I 'd known it was going to be those two passages since Chamber was published . I always knew [ that ] if I could use them at the beginning of book seven then I 'd cued up the ending perfectly . If they were relevant , then I went where I needed to go . They just say it all to me , they really do " .

When Harry visits his parents ' grave , the biblical reference " The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death " ( 1 Corinthians 15 : 26 ) is inscribed on the grave . The Dumbledores ' family tomb also holds a biblical quote : " Where your treasure is , there your heart will be also " , which is from Matthew 6 : 21 . Rowling states , " They 're very British books , so on a very practical note Harry was going to find biblical quotations on tombstones ... [ but ] I think those two particular quotations he finds on the tombstones at Godric 's Hollow , they sum up – they almost epitomise the whole series " . Harry Potter pundit John Granger additionally noted that one of the reasons the Harry Potter books were so popular is their use of literary alchemy ( similar to Romeo and Juliet , C. S. Lewis 's Perelandra and Charles Dickens 's A Tale of Two Cities ) and vision symbolism . In this model , authors weave allegorical tales along the alchemical magnum opus . Since the medieval period , alchemical allegory has mirrored the passion , death and resurrection of Christ . While the entire series utilises symbols common in alchemy , the Deathly Hallows completes this cycle , tying themes of death , rebirth , and the Resurrection Stone to the principal motif of alchemical allegory , and topics presented in the first book of the series .

The launch was celebrated by an all-night book signing and reading at the Natural History Museum in London , which Rowling attended along with 1,700 guests chosen by ballot . Rowling toured the US in October 2007 , where another event was held at Carnegie Hall in New York City with tickets allocated by sweepstake . Scholastic , the American publisher of the Harry Potter series , launched a multimillion-dollar " There will soon be 7 " marketing campaign with a " Knight Bus " travelling to 40 libraries across the United States , online fan discussions and competitions , collectible bookmarks , tattoos , and the staged release of seven Deathly Hallows questions most debated by fans . In the build-up to the book 's release , Scholastic released seven questions that fans would find answered in the final book : J. K. Rowling arranged with her publishers for a poster bearing the face of the missing British child Madeleine McCann to be made available to book sellers when Deathly Hallows was launched on 21 July 2007 , and said that she hoped that the posters would be displayed prominently in shops all over the world . After it was told that the novel would be released on 21 July 2007 , Warner Bros. shortly thereafter said that the film adaptation of Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix would be released shortly before the novel would be released , on 13 July 2007 , making many people proclaim that July 2007 , was the month of Harry Potter .

Bloomsbury invested £ 10 million in an attempt to keep the book 's contents secure until 21 July , the release date . Arthur Levine , U.S. editor of the Harry Potter series , denied distributing any copies of Deathly Hallows in advance for press review , but two U.S. papers published early reviews anyway . There was speculation that some shops would break the embargo and distribute copies of the book early , as the penalty imposed for previous instalments — that the distributor would not be supplied with any further copies of the series — would no longer be a deterrent .

In the week before its release , a number of texts purporting to be genuine leaks appeared in various forms . On 16 July , a set of photographs representing all 759 pages of the U.S. edition was leaked and was fully transcribed prior to the official release date . The photographs later appeared on websites and peer-to-peer networks , leading Scholastic to seek a subpoena in order to identify one source . This represented the most serious security breach in the Harry Potter series ' history . Rowling and her lawyer confirmed that there were genuine online leaks . Reviews published in both The Baltimore Sun and The New York Times on 18 July 2007 , corroborated many of the plot elements from this leak , and about one day prior to release , The New York Times confirmed that the main circulating leak was real . Scholastic announced that approximately one-ten-thousandth ( 0.0001 ) of the U.S. supply had been shipped early — interpreted to mean about 1,200 copies . One reader in Maryland received a copy of the book in the mail from DeepDiscount.com four days before it was launched , which evoked incredulous responses from both Scholastic and DeepDiscount . Scholastic initially reported that they were satisfied it had been a " human error " and would not discuss possible penalties ; however , the following day Scholastic announced that it would be launching legal action against DeepDiscount.com and its distributor , Levy Home Entertainment . Scholastic filed for damages in Chicago 's Circuit Court of Cook County , claiming that DeepDiscount engaged in a " complete and flagrant violation of the agreements that they knew were part of the carefully constructed release of this eagerly awaited book . " Some of the early release books soon appeared on eBay , in one case being sold to Publishers Weekly for US $ 250 from an initial price of US $ 18 .

Asda , along with several other UK supermarkets , having already taken pre-orders for the book at a heavily discounted price , sparked a price war two days before the book 's launch by announcing they would sell it for just £ 5 a copy . Other retail chains then also offered the book at discounted prices . At these prices the book became a loss leader . This caused uproar from traditional UK booksellers who argued they had no hope of competing in those conditions . Independent shops protested loudest , but even Waterstone 's , the UK 's largest dedicated chain bookstore , could not compete with the supermarket price . Some small bookstores hit back by buying their stock from the supermarkets rather than their wholesalers . Asda attempted to counter this by imposing a limit of two copies per customer to prevent bulk purchases . Philip Wicks , a spokesman for the UK Booksellers Association , said , " It is a war we can 't even participate in . We think it 's a crying shame that the supermarkets have decided to treat it as a loss-leader , like a can of baked beans . " Michael Norris , an analyst at Simba Information , said : " You are not only lowering the price of the book . At this point , you are lowering the value of reading . "

In Malaysia , a similar price war caused controversy regarding sales of the book . Four of the biggest bookstore chains in Malaysia , MPH Bookstores , Popular Bookstores , Times and Harris , decided to pull Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows off their shelves as a protest against Tesco and Carrefour hypermarkets . The retail price of the book in Malaysia is MYR 109.90 , while the hypermarkets Tesco and Carrefour sold the book at MYR 69.90 . The move by the bookstores was seen as an attempt to pressure the distributor Penguin Books to remove the books from the hypermarkets . However , as of 24 July 2007 , the price war has ended , with the four bookstores involved resuming selling the books in their stores with discount . Penguin Books has also confirmed that Tesco and Carrefour are selling the book at a loss , urging them to practice good business sense and fair trade . The book 's early Saturday morning release in Israel was criticised for violating Shabbat . Trade and Industry Minister Eli Yishai commented " It is forbidden , according to Jewish values and Jewish culture , that a thing like this should take place at 2 am on Saturday . Let them do it on another day . " Yishai indicated that he would issue indictments and fines based on the Hours of Work and Rest Law .

The Baltimore Sun 's critic , Mary Carole McCauley , noted that the book was more serious than the previous novels in the series and had more straightforward prose . Furthermore , reviewer Alice Fordham from The Times wrote that " Rowling 's genius is not just her total realisation of a fantasy world , but the quieter skill of creating characters that bounce off the page , real and flawed and brave and lovable " . Fordham concluded , " We have been a long way together , and neither Rowling nor Harry let us down in the end " . The New York Times writer Michiko Kakutani agreed , praising Rowling 's ability to make Harry both a hero and a character that can be related to . Time magazine 's Lev Grossman named it one of the Top 10 Fiction Books of 2007 , ranking it at No. 8 , and praised Rowling for proving that books can still be a global mass medium . Novelist Elizabeth Hand criticised that " ... the spectacularly complex interplay of narrative and character often reads as though an entire trilogy 's worth of summing-up has been crammed into one volume . " In a starred review from Kirkus Reviews , the reviewer said , " Rowling has shown uncommon skill in playing them with and against each other , and also woven them into a darn good bildungsroman , populated by memorable characters and infused with a saving , irrepressible sense of fun " . They also praised the second half of the novel , but criticised the epilogue , calling it " provocatively sketchy " . In another review from The Times , reviewer Amanda Craig said that while Rowling was " not an original , high-concept author " , she was " right up there with other greats of children 's fiction " . Craig went on to say that the novel was " beautifully judged , and a triumphant return to form " , and that Rowling 's imagination changed the perception of an entire generation , which " is more than all but a handful of living authors , in any genre , have achieved in the past half-century " .

In contrast , Jenny Sawyer of The Christian Science Monitor said that , " There is much to love about the Harry Potter series , from its brilliantly realised magical world to its multilayered narrative " , however , " A story is about someone who changes . And , puberty aside , Harry doesn 't change much . As envisioned by Rowling , he walks the path of good so unwaveringly that his final victory over Voldemort feels , not just inevitable , but hollow " . In The New York Times , Christopher Hitchens compared the series to World War Two-era English boarding school stories , and while he wrote that " Rowling has won imperishable renown " for the series as a whole , he also stated that he disliked Rowling 's use of deus ex machina , that the mid-book camping chapters are " abysmally long " , and Voldemort " becomes more tiresome than an Ian Fleming villain " . Catherine Bennett of The Guardian praised Rowling for putting small details from the previous books and making them large in Deathly Hallows , such as Grindelwald being mentioned on a Chocolate Frog Card in the first book . While she points out " as her critics say , Rowling is no Dickens " , she says that Rowling " has willed into a fictional being , in every book , legions of new characters , places , spells , rules and scores of unimagined twists and subplots " .

Stephen King criticised the reactions of some reviewers to the books , including McCauley , for jumping too quickly to surface conclusions of the work . He felt this was inevitable , because of the extreme secrecy before launch which did not allow reviewers time to read and consider the book , but meant that many early reviews lacked depth . Rather than finding the writing style disappointing , he felt it had matured and improved . He acknowledged that the subject matter of the books had become more adult , and that Rowling had clearly been writing with the adult audience firmly in mind since the middle of the series . He compared the works in this respect to Huckleberry Finn and Alice in Wonderland which achieved success and have become established classics , in part by appealing to the adult audience as well as children .

Sales for Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows were record setting . The initial U.S. print run for Deathly Hallows was 12 million copies , and more than a million were pre-ordered through Amazon.com and Barnes & Noble , 500 percent higher than pre-sales had been for Half-Blood Prince . On 12 April 2007 , Barnes & Noble declared that Deathly Hallows had broken its pre-order record , with more than 500,000 copies pre-ordered through its site . On opening day , a record 8.3 million copies were sold in the United States ( over 96 per second ) , and 2.65 million copies in the United Kingdom . It holds the Guinness World record for fastest selling book of fiction in 24 hours for U.S. sales . At WH Smith , sales reportedly reached a rate of 15 books sold per second . By June 2008 , nearly a year after it was published , worldwide sales were reportedly around 44 million . Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows has won several awards . In 2007 , the book was named one of The New York Times 100 Notable Books , and one of its Notable Children 's Books . The novel was named the best book of 2007 , by Newsweek 's critic Malcolm Jones . Publishers Weekly also listed Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows among their Best Books of 2007 . In 2008 , the American Library Association named the novel one of its Best Books for Young Adults , and also listed it as a Notable Children 's Book . Furthermore , Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows received the 2008 Colorado Blue Spruce Book Award .

Due to its worldwide fame , Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows has been translated into many languages . The first translation to be released was the Ukrainian translation , on 25 September 2007 ( as Гаррі Поттер і смертельні реліквії – Harry Potter i smertel 'ni relikviji ) . The Swedish title of the book was revealed by Rowling as Harry Potter and the Relics of Death ( Harry Potter och Dödsrelikerna ) , following a pre-release question from the Swedish publisher about the difficulty of translating the two words " Deathly Hallows " without having read the book . This is also the title used for the French translation ( Harry Potter et les reliques de la mort ) , the Spanish translation ( Harry Potter y las Reliquias de la Muerte ) , the Dutch translation ( Harry Potter en de Relieken van de Dood ) and the Brazilian Portuguese translation ( Harry Potter e as Relíquias da Morte ) . The first Polish translation was released with a new title : Harry Potter i Insygnia Śmierci – Harry Potter and the Insignia of Death . The Hindi translation Harry Potter aur Maut ke Tohfe ( हैरी पॉटर और मौत के तोहफे ) , which means " Harry Potter and the Gifts of Death " , was released by Manjul Publication in India on 27 June 2008 . The Romanian version was released on the 1st of December 2007 using the title ( Harry Potter și Talismanele Morții ) .

Deathly Hallows was released in hardcover on 21 July 2007 and in paperback in the United Kingdom on 10 July 2008 and the United States on 7 July 2009 . In SoHo , New York , there was a release party for the American paperback edition , with many games and activities . An " Adult Edition " with a different cover illustration was released by Bloomsbury on 21 July 2007 . To be released simultaneously with the original U.S. hardcover on 21 July with only 100,000 copies was a Scholastic deluxe edition , highlighting a new cover illustration by Mary GrandPré . In October 2010 , Bloomsbury released a " Celebratory " paperback edition , which featured a foiled and starred cover . Lastly , on 1 November 2010 , a " Signature " edition of the novel was released in paperback by Bloomsbury .

A two-part film adaptation of Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows is directed by David Yates , written by Steve Kloves and produced by David Heyman , David Barron and J. K. Rowling . Part 1 was released on 19 November 2010 , and Part 2 on 15 July 2011 . Filming began in February 2009 , and ended on 12 June 2010 . However , the cast confirmed they would reshoot the epilogue scene as they only had two days to shoot the original . Reshoots officially ended around December 2010 . Part 1 ended at Chapter 24 of the book , when Voldemort regained the Elder Wand . However , there were a few omissions , such as the appearances of Dean Thomas and Viktor Krum , and Peter Pettigrew 's death . James Bernadelli of Reelviews said that the script stuck closest to the text since Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets , yet this was met with negativity from some audiences as the film inherited " the book 's own problems " .

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows was released simultaneously on 21 July 2007 , in both the UK and the United States . The UK edition features the voice of Stephen Fry and runs about 24 hours while the U.S. edition features the voice of Jim Dale and runs about 21 hours . Both Fry and Dale recorded 146 different and distinguishable character voices , and was the most recorded by an individual on an audiobook at the time . For his work on Deathly Hallows , Dale won the 2008 Grammy Award for the Best Spoken Word Album for Children . He also was awarded an Earphone Award by AudioFile , who claimed , " Dale has raised the bar on audiobook interpretation so high it 's hard to imagine any narrator vaulting over it . "

On 4 December 2008 , Rowling released The Tales of Beedle the Bard both in the UK and US . The Tales of Beedle the Bard is a spin-off of Deathly Hallows and contains fairy tales that are told to children in the " Wizarding World " . The book includes five short stories , including " The Tale of the Three Brothers " which is the story of the Deathly Hallows . Amazon.com released an exclusive collector 's edition of the book which is a replica of the book that Amazon.com purchased at auction in December 2007 . Seven copies were auctioned off in London by Sotheby 's . Each was illustrated and handwritten by Rowling and is 157 pages . It was bound in brown Moroccan leather and embellished with five hand-chased hallmarked sterling silver ornaments and mounted moonstones .

Apollo Global Management , LLC is an American private equity firm , founded in 1990 by former Drexel Burnham Lambert banker Leon Black . The firm specializes in leveraged buyout transactions and purchases of distressed securities involving corporate restructuring , special situations , and industry consolidations . Apollo is headquartered in New York City , and also has offices in Purchase , New York , Los Angeles , Houston , London , Frankfurt , Luxembourg , Singapore , Hong Kong and Mumbai . As of August 2015 , Apollo managed over US $ 162 billion of investor commitments across its private equity , credit and real estate funds and other investment vehicles making it one of the largest alternative investment management firms globally . Among the most notable companies currently owned by Apollo are Claire 's , Caesars Entertainment Corporation , Norwegian Cruise Line , Novitex Enterprise Solutions , and CORE Media Group ( American Idol ) .

Apollo , originally referred to as Apollo Advisors , was founded in 1990 , on the heels of the collapse of Drexel Burnham Lambert in February 1990 . It was founded by Leon Black , the former head of Drexel 's mergers and acquisitions department , along with other Drexel alumni . Among the most notable founders are John Hannan , Drexel 's former co-director of international finance ; Craig Cogut , a lawyer who worked with Drexel 's high-yield division in Los Angeles ; and Arthur Bilger , the former head of the corporate finance department . Other founding partners included Marc Rowan , Josh Harris and Michael Gross , who both worked under Black in the mergers and acquisitions department , and Antony Ressler , who worked as a senior vice president in Drexel 's high yield department with responsibility for the new issue / syndicate desk . Less than six months after the collapse of Drexel , the founders of Apollo had already begun a series of ventures . Apollo Investment Fund L.P. , the first of their private equity investment funds , was formed to make investments in distressed companies . Apollo 's first fund raised approximately $ 400 million of investor commitments on the strength of Black 's reputation as a prominent lieutenant of Michael Milken and key player in the buyout boom of the 1980s . Lion Advisors was set up to provide investment services to Credit Lyonnais , which was seeking to profit from depressed prices in the high yield market .

At the time of Apollo 's founding , financing for new leveraged buyouts was minimal and Apollo turned instead to a strategy of distressed-to-control takeovers . Apollo would purchase distressed securities which could be converted into a controlling interest in the equity of the company through a bankruptcy reorganization or other restructuring . Apollo used distressed debt as an entry point , enabling the firm to invest in such firms as Vail Resorts , Walter Industries , Culligan and Samsonite . Early on , Apollo made a name for itself by acquiring interests in companies that Drexel had helped finance by purchasing high-yield bonds from failed savings and loans and insurance companies . Apollo acquired several large portfolios of assets from the U.S. government 's Resolution Trust Corporation . One of Apollo 's earliest and most successful deals involved the acquisition of Executive Life Insurance Company 's bond portfolio . Using this vehicle , Apollo would purchase the Executive Life portfolio , generating tremendous profits when the value of high yield bonds recovered , but also resulting in a variety of state regulatory issues for Apollo and Credit Lyonnais over the purchase . More than a decade after the purchase , in 2002 , California Attorney General Bill Lockyer accused Apollo , Leon Black , and an investor group led by French bank Credit Lyonnais , of illegally acquiring the assets and bond portfolio of Executive Life Insurance Co. in 1991 . According to the State of California , Lion allegedly violated a California law that prohibited foreign government-owned banks from owning California insurance companies .

In 1993 , Apollo Real Estate Advisers was founded in collaboration with William Mack to seek opportunities in the U.S. property markets . Apollo Real Estate Investment Fund , L.P. , the first in a family of real estate " opportunity funds " was closed in April 1993 with $ 500 million of investor commitments . In 2000 , Apollo exited the partnership , which continued to operate as Apollo Real Estate Advisers until changing its name to AREA Property Partners , effective January 15 , 2009 . That firm is owned and controlled by its remaining principals , who include William Mack , Lee Neibart , William Benjamin , John Jacobsson , Stuart Koenig and Richard Mack . Apollo Real Estate Investment Fund , L.P. , the first in a family of real estate " opportunity funds " was closed in April 1993 with $ 500 million of investor commitments . As of 2008 , the firm was investing out of three funds : Apollo Real Estate Investment Fund V , Apollo European Real Estate Fund II and Apollo Value Enhancement Fund VII . In 2004 , Apollo Real Estate acquired the Value Enhancement Funds family of investment vehicles to broaden its offerings in the " value-added " segment of the real estate investment spectrum . Apollo also operates a real estate mezzanine lending program and real estate securities hedge fund called Claros Real Estate Securities Fund , L.P.

In 1995 , Apollo raised its third private equity fund , Apollo Investment Fund III with $ 1.5 billion of investor commitments from investors that included CalPERS and the General Motors pension fund . Unlike its first two funds and later funds , Fund III would ultimately prove only an average performer for private equity funds of its vintage . Among the investments made in Fund III ( invested through 1998 ) were : Alliance Imaging , Allied Waste Industries , Breuners Home Furnishings , Levitz Furniture , Communications Corporation of America , Dominick 's , Ralphs ( acquired Apollo 's Food-4-Less ) , Move.com , NRT Incorporated , Pillowtex Corporation , Telemundo and WMC Mortgage Corporation . Also in 1995 , Apollo founding partner Craig Cogut left the firm to found a smaller competitor Pegasus Capital Advisors . Since inception Pegasus has raised $ 1.8 billion in four private equity funds focused on investments in middle-market companies in financial distress . In 1997 , Apollo co-founder Tony Ressler founded Ares Management as the successor to its Lion Advisors business which would manage collateralized debt obligation vehicles . In 1998 , Apollo raised its fourth private equity fund , Apollo Investment Fund IV , with $ 3.6 billion of investor commitments . Among the investments made in Fund IV ( invested through 2001 ) were : Allied Waste Industries , AMC Entertainment , Berlitz International , Clark Retail Enterprises , Corporate Express ( Buhrmann ) , Encompass Services Corporation , National Financial Partners , Pacer International , Rent-A-Center , Resolution Performance Products , Resolution Specialty Materials , Sirius Satellite Radio , SkyTerra Communications , United Rentals and Wyndham Worldwide .

Apollo deployed its fourth fund during the booming markets of the late 1990s , only to experience difficulties with the collapse of the Internet bubble and the onset of the recession . Amid the turmoil of collapsing markets , Apollo was able to raise its fifth private equity fund in 2001 , Apollo Investment Fund V , with $ 3.7 billion of investor commitments , roughly the same amount raised as for its previous fund . Among the investments made in Fund V ( invested through 2006 ) were Affinion Group , AMC Entertainment , Berry Plastics , Cablecom , Compass Minerals , General Nutrition Centers ( GNC ) , Goodman Global , Hexion Specialty Chemicals ( Borden ) , Intelsat , Linens ‘ n Things , Metals USA , Nalco Investment Holdings , Sourcecorp , Spectrasite Communications , and Unity Media . Meanwhile , Ares continued to grow through the late 1990s , and profited significantly from investments made after the collapse of the high yield market in 2000 and 2001 . Although technically , the founders of Ares had completed a spin out with the formation of the firm in 1997 , they had maintained a close relationship with Apollo over its first five years and operated as the West Coast affiliate of Apollo . By 2002 , when Ares raised its first corporate opportunities fund , the firm announced that it was more formally separating itself from its former parent company . The timing of this separation also coincided with Apollo 's legal difficulties with the State of California over its purchase of Executive Life Insurance Company in 1991 .

Following the spin-off of Ares in 2002 , Apollo developed two new affiliates to continue its investment activities in the capital markets . The first of these new affiliates , founded in 2003 , was Apollo Distressed Investment Fund ( DIF ) Management a credit opportunity investment vehicle . The following year , in April 2004 , Apollo raised $ 930 million through an initial public offering ( IPO ) for a listed business development company , Apollo Investment Corporation ( NASDAQ : AINV ) ) . Apollo Investment Corporation was formed to invest primarily in middle-market companies in the form of mezzanine debt and senior secured loans , as well as by making certain direct equity investments in companies . The Company also invests in the securities of public companies .

The 2005 - 2007 period marked a boom period in private equity with new " largest buyout " records set and surpassed several times in an 18-month window from the beginning of 2006 through the middle of 2007 . Apollo was among the most active investors in leveraged buyout transactions during this period . Although Apollo was involved in a number of notable and large buyouts , the firm largely avoided the very largest transactions of this period . Among Apollo 's most notable investments during this period included Harrah 's Entertainment , a leading US gaming and casino company ; Norwegian Cruise Line , the cruise line operator ; Claire 's Stores , the retailer of costume jewelry ; and Realogy , the real estate franchisor that owns Coldwell Banker , Century 21 and Sotheby 's International Realty . In August 2006 , Apollo launched a $ 2 billion publicly traded private equity vehicle in Europe , AP Alternative Assets ( ENXTAM : AAA ) . The IPO of this new vehicle followed in the footsteps of Kohlberg Kravis Roberts , which raised $ 5 billion for its KKR Private Equity Investors vehicle in May 2006 . Apollo initially attempted to raise $ 2.5 billion for the public vehicle , but fell short when it offered the shares in June , raising only $ 1.5 billion . Apollo raised an additional $ 500 million via private placements in the weeks following that sale .

As the private equity industry expanded through 2006 and 2007 , several of the largest private equity firms , most notably The Blackstone Group and Kohlberg Kravis Roberts , announced plans to realize value from their firms through the sale of shares in the public equity markets . Apollo Management chose a slightly different path , by completing a private placement of shares in its management company in July 2007 . By pursuing a private placement rather than a public offering , Apollo would be able to avoid much of the public scrutiny applied to Blackstone and KKR . In November 2007 , Apollo was able to realize additional value from the sale of a 9 % ownership interest in its management company to the Abu Dhabi Investment Authority ( ADIA ) . Ultimately , in April 2008 , Apollo would file with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission ( SEC ) to permit some holders of its privately traded stock to sell their shares on the New York Stock Exchange and in March 2011 , Apollo completed its initial public offering ( NYSE : APO ) . In 2008 , the firm opened an office in India , marking their first push into Asia .

As the deterioration of the financial markets worsened into 2008 , Apollo saw several of its investments come under pressure . Apollo 's 2005 investment in the struggling US retailer , Linens ' n Things suffered from a significant debt burden and softening consumer demand . In May 2008 , Linens was forced to file for bankruptcy protection , one of several high profile retail bankruptcies in 2008 , costing Apollo all of its $ 365 million investment in the company . At the same time , Apollo 's investment in Claire 's , Realogy and Harrah 's Entertainment came under pressure . Apollo would respond actively to its investment difficulties seeking to exchange a portion of the existing debt at Harrah 's and Realogy to more favorable securities . At Claire 's , Apollo exercised its " PIK toggle " option to shut off cash interest payments to its bondholders and issue more debt instead , in order to provide the company with additional financial flexibility . In December 2008 , Apollo completed fundraising for its latest fund , Apollo Investment Fund VII with approximately $ 14.7 billion of investor commitments . Apollo had been targeting $ 15 billion , but had been in fundraising for more than 16 months , with the bulk of the capital raised in 2007 .

In March 2012 it made a second attempt to acquire an amusement park operator with a $ 225.7 million offer for Great Wolf Resorts . In November 2012 , The McGraw-Hill Companies sold their education division ( " McGraw-Hill Education " ) to Apollo Global Management , in a deal totaling $ 2.5 billion . On 11 March 2013 , Apollo Global Management made the only bid for the snacks business of Hostess Brands , including Twinkies , for $ 410 million . In December 2013 , Apollo bought a portfolio of Irish home loans from Lloyds Bank for € 307m , less than half their nominal £ 610m ( € 367m ) value . The shares were bought by an Apollo Global Management subsidiary , Tanager Limited . The portfolio made a £ 33m loss last year . On 16 January 2014 , The Financial Times reported Apollo will buy CEC Entertainment , the parent of Chuck E. Cheese 's , for about $ 1 billion . In June 2015 , Apollo Global Management made a successful offer of around $ 1.03 billion in cash to privatise OM Group . Also that month , Apollo won the bidding during an auction for Saint-Gobain ’ s Verallia glass bottle manufacturing unit for a rumoured fee of around 2.95 billion .

Apollo is operated by its managing partners , Leon Black , Joshua Harris and Marc Rowan and a team of more than 250 investment professionals , as of March 31 , 2013 . The firm 's headquarters are located in the Solow Building at 9 West 57th Street in New York City , and the firm operates additional offices in Purchase , New York , Los Angeles , Houston , London , Frankfurt , Luxembourg , Singapore , Hong Kong and Mumbai Apollo ’ s executive committee includes : Leon Black , chairman and chief executive officer ; Josh Harris , senior managing director ; Marc Rowan , senior managing director ; and Marc Spilker who was hired as President in November 2010 . Private equity — The private equity business is the cornerstone of Apollo 's investment activities . Apollo invests through a variety of private equity strategies , most notably leveraged buyouts and distressed buyouts and debt investments . This business operates primarily through the firm 's family of private equity investment funds ( See : Investment funds ) Credit — Apollo invests through a variety of credit strategies to complement its core private equity business . Apollo invests through a variety of investment vehicles including mezzanine funds , hedge funds , European non-performing loan funds and senior credit opportunity funds .

Apollo has historically relied primarily on private equity funds , pools of committed capital from pension funds , insurance companies , endowments , fund of funds , high-net-worth individuals , family offices , sovereign wealth funds and other institutional investors . Since 2014 , Apollo has begun investing its eighth private equity fund , Apollo Investment Fund VIII , which raised approximately $ 18 billion of investor commitments , making it the largest private equity fund raised since the financial crisis . Since inception in 1990 , Apollo has raised a total of eight private equity funds , including :

AP Alternative Assets ( Euronext : AAA ) is a Guernsey-domiciled publicly traded private equity closed-end limited partnership , managed by Apollo Alternative Assets , an affiliate of Apollo Management . AAA was formed to invest alongside Apollo 's main private equity funds and hedge funds . AAA was launched in August 2006 , shortly after Kohlberg Kravis Roberts completed an initial public offering for its $ 5 billion for its KKR Private Equity Investors vehicle in May 2006 . Apollo raised a total of $ 2 billion for AAA including the vehicle 's $ 1.5 billion IPO and a subsequent private placement .

Ares Management , founded in 1997 , was initially established to manage a $ 1.2 billion market value collateralized debt obligation vehicle . Ares would grow to manage a family of collateralized loan obligation ( CLO ) vehicles that would invest in capital markets-based securities including senior bank loans and high-yield and mezzanine debt . Ares was founded by Antony Ressler and John H. Kissick , both partners at Apollo as well as Bennett Rosenthal , who joined the group from the global leveraged finance group at Merrill Lynch . Ares I and II which were raised were structured as market value CLOs . Ares III though Ares X were structured as cash flow CLOs . In 2002 , Ares completed a spinout from Apollo management . Although technically , the founders of Ares had completed a spinout with the formation of the firm in 1997 , they had maintained a close relationship with Apollo over its first five years and operated as the West Coast affiliate of Apollo . Shortly thereafter , Ares completed fundraising for Ares Corporate Opportunities Fund , a special situations investment fund with $ 750 million of capital under management . In 2004 , Ares debuted a publicly traded business development company , Ares Capital Corporation ( NASDAQ : ARCC ) . In 2006 , Ares raised a $ 2.1 billion successor special situations fund ( Ares Corporate Opportunities Fund II ) .

The Bankers ' Toadies incident occurred in 1937 in Alberta , Canada when a pamphlet was discovered advocating the " extermination " of nine men identified as " Bankers ' Toadies " . The men were opponents of the Social Credit government of Premier William Aberhart , which had been elected on a platform of giving all Albertans monthly dividends ; Aberhart blamed the banking system for his failure to follow through on this pledge . After David Duggan , leader of the Conservative Party and one of the men named , raised his concern over the pamphlet in the Legislative Assembly of Alberta , police raided the Social Credit League 's Edmonton headquarters . Social Credit whip Joe Unwin and Social Credit Board advisor George Frederick Powell were arrested and charged with criminal libel and counselling to murder . Both were convicted of the libel charge , and Justice William Carlos Ives sentenced them to hard labour .

William Aberhart 's Social Credit League won a substantial victory in the 1935 Alberta provincial election on the strength of its promise to implement social credit , an economic theory proposed by British engineer C. H. Douglas . Social credit held that the poverty of the Great Depression was in part the fault of bankers , who kept the cost of credit , and by extension of production , high . Aberhart 's solution involved , among other things , monthly " credit dividends " to Albertans in the amount of C $ 25 . By 1937 , Aberhart 's failure to implement these dividends or make other progress towards implementing social credit made many of his backbenchers suspect that he was either unwilling or unable to do so . This belief , combined with a suspicion that he did not properly understand Douglas 's theories , led to the 1937 Social Credit backbenchers ' revolt . One outcome of the revolt was Aberhart 's ceding a number of the government 's powers to the Social Credit Board , made up of five Social Credit backbenchers . Glenville MacLachlan , its chair , travelled to the United Kingdom , where he asked Douglas to come to Alberta and serve as its advisor . Douglas declined , but in his stead sent two of his lieutenants , L. D. Byrne and George Frederick Powell . Part of the Board 's mandate was to educate the public about social credit ; to this end , Powell and Social Credit whip Joseph Unwin were assigned to write educational materials .

In October 1937 , Conservative leader David Duggan rose in the Legislative Assembly of Alberta to draw its attention to a pamphlet distributed in and around the legislature building that called for his " extermination " . The front of the leaflet read as follows : My child , you should NEVER say hard or unkind things about Bankers ' Toadies . God made snakes , slugs , snails and other creepy-crawly , treacherous , and poisonous things . NEVER , therefore , abuse them — just exterminate them ! And to prevent all evasion demand the RESULT you want — $ 25.00 a month and a lower cost to live . William Antrobus Griesbach , lawyer , member of the Canadian Senate , and former member of the Canadian House of Commons and mayor of Edmonton Below this list of names were the words " Exterminate Them . And to prevent all Evasion , Demand the Result You Want — $ 25.00 a MONTH and a lower cost to live . " On October 3 , the police raided the Social Credit League 's Edmonton office and seized 4,000 copies of the pamphlet . Griesbach pressed charges against Powell and Unwin for criminal libel and counselling to murder .

Aberhart , who besides being Premier was Attorney-General , tried to prevent the trial from proceeding by withdrawing the Crown prosecutor assigned to it . Either trial judge William Carlos Ives or a justice of the peace countered by appointing a private prosecutor so the case could go ahead . Both defendants were held on $ 20,000 bail . Both hired lawyers : Powell was represented by Hugh Calais Macdonald , while Unwin retained one R. Jackson . George Steer acted for the prosecution . On October 27 , both men appeared before police magistrate A. H. Gibson for their preliminary hearings on the criminal libel charge ( the counselling to murder charge had been dropped ) . Unwin opted for a jury trial , while Powell elected to be tried by a judge alone . Unwin 's trial proceeded first , on November 12 . He testified that he had ordered the pamphlets , which were paid for by the government , and then circulated them as a publication of the " United Democrats " , a fictitious organization that listed its address as that of Unwin 's home . According to Unwin , the leaflet 's text , minus the named individuals , had been provided to him by Powell , he had sent it to the printer 's in exactly that form , and he was surprised to see the list of names in the final version . Though his testimony was vague and apparently evasive , he admitted to destroying 4,000 copies of the leaflet on the day of the police raid . He was convicted and Ives , dismissing his role in the affair as that of an " errand boy " , sentenced him to three months hard labour .

The case attracted considerable media attention and mixed reactions . A Toronto spokesman for the Communist Party of Canada protested the arrests and called for a " united front " against the People 's League . Aberhart maintained that the men had been jailed on the basis of some harmless political humour , and encouraged the federal government to grant them clemency ; Prime Minister of Canada William Lyon Mackenzie King responded that to do so would be to engage in " direct interference by the federal executive with the free and proper functioning of our courts " . Every night , some Social Crediters drove to the Fort Saskatchewan Penitentiary , where the men were being held , to show their support . On February 11 , 1938 , the legislature passed a resolution calling for the men 's release . Douglas reacted to his deputy 's arrest with anger , telling reporters that " whoever is instigating the proceedings is asking for a great deal of trouble , and is likely to get it . " On December 10 , 1937 , he wrote King to tell him that he had been invited to come to Alberta to provide advice , and asked if he would be risking arrest and deportation if he did so . King responded that as long as Douglas , unlike Powell , refrained from running afoul of the Criminal Code , he had nothing to fear .

At the end of Unwin 's sentence , the Social Credit members of the legislature celebrated with a snake dance . Powell was released early , on March 21 , 1938 , in an attempt by King to bolster his Liberals ' chances in a by-election in Edmonton East the same day ; the by-election was won by Social Crediter Orvis A. Kennedy , and a jubilant celebration followed . Once again , the Communists expressed solidarity with the Social Crediters , with Jan Lakeman thanking the voters for giving " an overwhelming defeat to the forces of reaction " . Powell left Canada immediately upon his release , but not before being paid $ 4,000 by the Alberta government as thanks for his services . On August 18 , 1938 , police magistrate A. H. Gibson , who had presided over the prosecution of Unwin and Powell , was dismissed without cause by provincial Order in Council . Gibson believed that his dismissal was due to " the government 's resentment over my action in the Powell-Unwin case and the fact that they hold me more or less to blame for the fact that the accused men were sent to jail . " Aberhart 's Social Crediters were re-elected with a reduced majority in the 1940 provincial election ; Aberhart remained premier until his 1943 death . Unwin was defeated in 1940 by Labour candidate Angus James Morrison . Though he lived until January 4 , 1987 , Unwin remains most remembered for his involvement in the Bankers ' Toadies incident .

The Hôtel d 'Alluye is a hôtel particulier in Blois , Loir-et-Cher , France . Built for Florimond Robertet when he was secretary and notary to Louis XII , the residence bears the name of his barony of Alluyes . On Rue Saint-Honoré near Blois Cathedral and the Château de Blois , it is now significantly smaller than it was originally as the north and west wings were destroyed between the seventeenth and nineteenth centuries . Built between 1498 ( or 1500 ) and 1508 , the hôtel particulier is one of the first examples of Renaissance architecture in Blois . Its façades consist of Gothic , French Renaissance and Italian Renaissance architecture . The Hôtel d 'Alluye was owned by the Robertet family from 1508 until 1606 before undergoing frequent changes in ownership ; since 2007 , it has been divided into ten apartments and a large office . As a result of its ownership changes the building has been considerably altered , with only the east and south wings retaining their original appearance . Destruction of the west wing began during the seventeenth century , and the north wing was destroyed in 1812 . The Hôtel d 'Alluye was classified as a monument historique on 6 November 1929 , and its courtyard has been open to the public on European Heritage Days since 2011 .

Built near Blois Cathedral and the Royal Château de Blois , the Hôtel d 'Alluye is located on Rue Saint-Honoré . Its south side originally extended along Rue Saint-Honoré between the current No. 4 and No. 10 , and its west side extended along Rue Porte-Chartraine . Records indicate that the north side was extended to Rue Beauvoir in 1643 , enlarging the hôtel particulier over a large quadrangle 30 m ( 98 ft ) wide . How Robertet obtained such a large plot in the centre of Blois is unknown ; he may have acquired the land gradually for the building 's future construction , or could have been granted a fief by the Crown for his services . Although , it is known that Robertet sought to acquire an adjoining building ( the Hôtel Denis-Dupont ) to extend his property . Lawyer Denis Dupont ( the building 's owner ) strongly opposed the idea , and over half of the former Hôtel Denis-Dupont remains .

Under Louis XII the courtesans of France settled in Blois from 1498 to 1515 , and the city became the capital of the Kingdom of France . As a result , many people purchased residences in Blois and the Loire Valley . Named after Robertet 's barony of Alluyes , construction of the Hôtel d 'Alluye began in 1498 or 1500 and was completed in 1508 . It was built during his tenure as secretary and notary to Louis XII , and a diplomatic document from the Republic of Florence described the hôtel as new in September 1508 . The hôtel particulier is an example of French Renaissance architecture ; this , coupled with its ornamentation , were intended to reflect the tastes of Robertet , who was well known for his artistic collections . One of the first examples of Renaissance architecture in Blois , the hôtel indicates the influence of the Quattrocento on him . The Hôtel d 'Alluye was owned by the descendants of Robertet and Michelle Gaillard de Longjumeau until the early sixteenth century . In 1588 , it hosted Louis II , Cardinal of Guise , the brother of Henry I , Duke of Guise ( " Scarface " ) , who was on the Estates General of Blois until his assassination was ordered by Henry III . Robertet 's grandson , Baron François Robertet of Alluyes , died in 1603 with no male offspring ; three years later , the residence and its surrounding property were seized by the Crown .

The 1620s saw the fragmentation of the west wing of the original residence . Sold to a number of owners , this part of the building was gradually distorted until only a few remnants were left . The other three wings of the building were acquired by the Huraults of Saint-Denis in 1621 , and on 5 July 1637 the residence was acquired by the Bégon family . In 1644 , major restoration work was done on the north wing under Charles Turmel . The Hôtel d 'Alluye was sold by Michel Bégon de la Picardière to the Terrouanne family on 5 August 1718 for 9,000 livres .

Around 1812 Lambert Rosey , a member of the Terrouanne family , demolished the building 's north wing . In 1832 , Rosey sold the building to Amédée Naudin for 12,000 francs . Work began in the east wing , with its depth reduced and its layout becoming more irregular . Naudin died on 21 November 1864 , and his two daughters sold the residence on 5 June 1866 for 40,000 francs . From 1868 to 1869 , it was restored under the direction of Félix Duban ; in 1877 , further restoration work was planned but not done . From 1890 to 1895 major changes were made to the Rue Saint-Honoré section , with many attics and roofs transformed . In 2007 , the residence was purchased by a developer , who divided it into ten apartments three years later . This helped save the rear of the residence , which had a badly-damaged roof . Currently , the building comprises ten apartments and a large office .

Destroyed in 1812 , the original layout of the north wing is unknown but it is described in a 1644 document . Narrower than the other wings , the wing and its gallery were no more than 8 m ( 26 ft ) wide and contained two bedrooms . A staircase at the northeast corner linked it to the other wings . Although the east wing is well-preserved , it has undergone many changes and its initial appearance is unknown . The wing has two levels overlooking the courtyard retaining their arcades ( now glassed-in ) , which are the same shape as those in the south wing . The southeast end of the wing contained a kitchen ( with a well ) and a large pantry . Opening onto Rue Saint-Honoré with a large portal , the south wing was the hotel 's main building ; like the east wing , it is well-preserved . To the left of the portal is an area which previously served as a stable . The ground floor has a large room opening onto the courtyard and another , smaller room . The first floor consists of three rooms : two small rooms and a garderobe . During the eighteenth century , it was recorded that the top floor had two chambres de bonne .

The hotel 's exterior façade was inspired by the Louis XII wing of the Château de Blois . Since its construction , dormers have been added and the window design has changed . The original façade can be seen in the decoration of some ground-floor windows and the portal , and the walls , windows and corbels of this hôtel particulier are in the Gothic style . More modern than the exterior façades and contrary to French architectural tradition , the interior façades embrace the Italian Renaissance style . The hotel 's galleries had two levels of " basket-handle " arches , columns on the first floor and rectangular pillars . Italian influence on the buildings appears in the moldings and carvings on its doors and pillars — for example , facing birds . Thirteen antique terracotta medallions adorn the balustrade of the gallery 's first floor , representing Roman emperors and influenced by Italian architecture . Surrounded by a thick garland of fruits and flowers , these medallions were originally painted green to suggest bronze and distinguish the façade . The building 's perforated railings are inspired by the François I wing of the Château de Blois . The windows were probably added during the late-nineteenth-century restoration . Dismantled in 1812 , the northern galleries were originally supported by two sets of six white marble columns ( rarely found in sixteenth-century buildings ) .

The hôtel d 'Alluye originally had three entrances linking it to shopping areas . The original main entrance , on the south side of the hotel , has been preserved . The hotel was accessible from the west by a path from Rue Porte-Chartraine ; that entrance was bricked up in 1606 . A third , seventeenth-century entrance linked the north side of the hotel to Rue Beauvoir . The inner courtyard was originally decorated with a bronze copy of Donatello 's David , which was inspired by Michelangelo . Placed in 1509 , the statue was given to Robertet by the Florentine Republic . As early as 1513 , it was moved to his Château de Bury .

" The Last Temptation of Homer " is the ninth episode of The Simpsons ' fifth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on December 9 , 1993 . In the episode , a female employee named Mindy is hired at the nuclear power plant . Homer and Mindy find themselves attracted to each other , but even though Homer is very tempted by her , he stays faithful to his wife Marge . Meanwhile , Bart becomes an outcast and makes friends with a group of nerds after he is prescribed glasses , special shoes , and throat spray which changes his voice . The episode was written by Frank Mula and directed by Carlos Baeza . It did not get the usual amount of laughs at the test screenings , which made the staff worry the show was not as funny as they expected . Michelle Pfeiffer guest starred in the episode as Mindy and received praise for her performance , including a spot on Entertainment Weekly 's list of the 16 best guest appearances on The Simpsons . The episode features cultural references to films such as The Wizard of Oz , It 's A Wonderful Life , and A Christmas Carol . Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . It acquired a Nielsen rating of 12.7 , and was the highest-rated show on the Fox network the week it aired .

After Homer and his coworkers barely escape from a gas leak at the nuclear power plant , Homer 's coworker is fired when he asks Mr. Burns to put in a real emergency exit . After breaking numerous labor laws in hiring a replacement , such as hiring illegal aliens and ducks , the United States Department of Labor demands that Burns make changes in the power plant 's policies , including hiring at least one female worker . A beautiful woman named Mindy Simmons is brought in and Homer finds he is falling in love with her . Barney advises Homer to talk to Mindy because they will most likely have nothing in common . Homer does so , and to his horror , he finds they have exactly the same personality and interests . Meanwhile , Marge is sick with a bad cold , which makes her very unattractive to Homer . Meanwhile , Bart is sent to an eye specialist after it is discovered he has poor vision . The optometrist decides he has lazy eye and fits him with special , thick glasses he has to wear for two weeks . Bart also finds out he has a dry scalp that can only be treated by matting his hair down with a medicated salve , therefore parting his hair to both sides . He also receives a pair of oversized shoes to help his posture , and a spray in his throat to cure the redness , which temporarily gives him a squeaky voice . These adjustments give Bart the appearance of , and gradually turn him into , a nerd . He is picked on and beaten up regularly by bullies for the duration of the two weeks . Eventually , Bart comes back to school in his normal appearance , explaining he is no longer a nerd , but the bullies still decide to beat him up anyway .

Homer does his best to avoid Mindy , who is falling in love with Homer , but despite his best efforts , they keep ending up together . Eventually , Homer decides to talk to Mindy , and say that due to their attraction , they should completely avoid each other . However , things get worse when Homer and Mindy are sent to represent the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant at the National Energy Convention in Capital City . After a romantic dinner as an award for winning the Convention , Homer and Mindy go back to their hotel room , and Homer expresses his worries . Mindy tells Homer how she feels about him , but assures him that nothing has to happen between them , and that it is up to him to decide how far their relationship will go . Even though he is very tempted by her , Homer declares his faithfulness to Marge . Mindy accepts his decision and leaves after they share a kiss . Later , Marge shows up with Homer to share a romantic evening together .

The episode was written by Frank Mula and directed by Carlos Baeza . The idea was conceived by the then-show runner David Mirkin . When he was hired to work on The Simpsons , one of his goals was to study the aspect of Homer 's character if he was " really tempted away " from Marge . Mirkin wanted to find out what would happen in a situation where Homer finds himself attracted to another woman . The Simpsons creator Matt Groening had previously written an episode for the show 's third season , called " Colonel Homer " , where Homer finds himself attracted to a country singer named Lurleen Lumpkin . In that episode , Lurleen immediately had a " crush " on Homer , but Homer was not aware of it until later on . With this episode , Mirkin wanted Homer to immediately know he was attracted to Mindy . Mirkin thought it was a " great exploration " to see what happened to Homer in this particular case . The episode did not get the usual amount of laughs at the animatic test screening , which made the staff worry it was not as funny as they expected . Mirkin said it had to do with the fact that because there were very " subtle " performances in the episode , the animation had to be " exactly right " for it to be funny . Baeza and David Silverman , another animation director on the show , worked " hard " on the episode . Mirkin said from the very beginning it was a " huge group effort " from both the writing and the animation staff .

Many scenes in the animatic portrayed Mindy as flirty . Mirkin did not like this because the secret of the episode was Homer and Mindy are two good people who are thrown into the situation and " can 't help that their libidos are going crazy upon seeing each other " . He added that the two characters have " so much in common " that it is " not just a physical relationship , but a mental connection as well " , and that Mindy is not a seductress but rather a woman just as nervous as Homer . Mirkin also pointed out that while Homer is being tempted by a " seemingly perfect " woman at work , his wife could not be more " imperfect " since she has got a cold and looks sick . " He 's trying to connect with his family , but with Marge looking sick and Bart looking like a nerd , everything is just not working , " Mirkin said . American actress Michelle Pfeiffer provided the voice of Mindy Simmons in the episode . All the writers showed up at the recording studio in West Los Angeles to see her record her lines . When Pfeiffer entered the room with her daughter , Pfeiffer was " mobbed " by the energy of the writers and directors , who were excited to see her . Mirkin , who directed Pfeiffer in the studio , was nervous because he thought she was a beautiful woman who was on a " completely different level " than the other actors and actresses he had directed on the show . Pfeiffer was also nervous because she had never voiced an animated character . Mirkin told her : " You 're gonna love this more than anything you have ever done because it 's calm and pleasant , and we have so much time to play and experiment . " This helped her calm down and by the end of the session , she was " really relaxed " and they had a " fantastic " time . Silverman told Pfeiffer to not sound too flirty , and that she should just act herself . In one scene in the episode , Mindy drools as she eats doughnuts , much like Homer does . To get the right drool sound , Pfeiffer put broccoli and water in her mouth . Mirkin said he did not have to give much direction during the recording of Homer and Mindy 's final scene together , in which Mindy tells Homer how she feels about him . Pfeiffer " hit it really well " and they did it several times to get it " more and more real " . Mirkin also thought that Pfeiffer completely understood the part and played it perfectly . He described her as " one of those actresses that you don 't even have to see to know they 're great , instead you can hear from her voice what a brilliant actress she is . " Dan Castellaneta was also praised by Mirkin for his performance as Homer . Castellaneta struggled to be " sweet " and " moving " in his performance .

When Homer calls a marriage counseling hotline in the episode , he accidentally knocks himself unconscious in the phone booth . In a dream , he is approached by his guardian angel . The angel , in the form of Colonel Klink , shows Homer what his life would be like without Marge . Colonel Klink is a character on the American television series Hogan 's Heroes . Klink 's actor in Hogan 's Heroes , Werner Klemperer , provided the voice of Klink in this episode . Mirkin said Klemperer was a " fantastic sport " to do the character . Since Hogan 's Heroes had gone off the air in 1971 , he had forgotten how to play Klink . Mirkin therefore had to do an impression of Klink that Klemperer could imitate to get it right .

When Bart receives new glasses , scalp treatment , orthopedic shoes , and throat spray , he does an impersonation of Jerry Lewis ' nerdy character in The Nutty Professor . When Homer first meets Mindy , he imagines her as Venus in Sandro Botticelli 's painting The Birth of Venus . To deal with Homer and Mindy charging room service to the company , Mr. Burns unleashes flying monkeys in the manner of the Wicked Witch of the West , as seen in the 1939 film The Wizard of Oz . However , the attempt fails as the monkeys all fall to their deaths . The scene between Homer and Colonel Klink from Hogan 's Heroes , wondering what his life would have been like if he married Mindy and not Marge , draws from the films It 's A Wonderful Life and A Christmas Carol . When Homer meets Mindy in the elevator , he thinks " unsexy thoughts " to avoid being seduced by her . He imagines Barney in a bikini and humming the theme tune to the American sitcom I Dream of Jeannie . Homer attempts to read the notes for Mindy that he wrote on his hand , but they have smeared out because of sweat . In his attempt , Homer unknowingly babbles the Nam Myoho Renge Kyo , a Buddhist chant in Nichiren Buddhism and SGI . This is a reference to an Akbar and Jeff cartoon , written by Matt Groening , in which the same mantra is used . When Homer notices the sweat , he says he is " sweating like [ film critic ] Roger Ebert " . In the bathroom , Homer sings a rough version of the song " Mandy " by Barry Manilow , replacing " Mandy " with " Mindy " . Homer refers to comic strip Ziggy when he wonders if Mindy agrees the title character has become " too preachy " . Barry White 's song " Can 't Get Enough of Your Love , Babe " is played in the episode 's final scene where Homer and Marge make out at the hotel room . When Bart is being fitted for correctional glasses the optician reveals former Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin had a pair just like Bart 's .

In its original American broadcast , " The Last Temptation of Homer " finished 24th ( tied with The Fresh Prince of Bel Air ) in the ratings for the week of December 6 – 12 , 1993 . It acquired a Nielsen rating of 12.7 . The episode was the highest-rated show on the Fox network that week . Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . In 2003 , it was placed tenth on Entertainment Weekly 's top 25 The Simpsons episode list , and The Daily Telegraph characterized the episode as one of " The 10 Best Simpsons Television Episodes " . Nancy Basile of About.com named it one of her top twenty favorite episodes of the show , and said Michelle Pfeiffer " is so elegant and beautiful , that the irony of her playing a burping love interest for Homer Simpson is funny enough . " She added " the thorny issue of adultery is tackled in a way only The Simpsons could , " and " though Homer is contemplating cheating , he 's a sympathetic and almost innocent character . " Robert Canning of IGN called the episode " smart , touching and funny " , and said " it did a great job showing Homer 's struggle to deal with the flirtations of a co-worker . "

The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , called it a " wonderfully scripted episode " . DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson said , " Given Homer ’ s utter devotion to Marge , it may seem off-character for him to fall for Mindy , but the show makes it fit , as his obsession doesn ’ t come across as inconsistent . " He added the plot with Bart becoming a nerd is the " funnier one " of the two . Bill Gibron of DVD Talk called it a " jest fest loaded with insight into the human heart and hilarious over-the-top goofiness . " TV DVD Reviews 's Kay Daly called it the season 's finest episode with the " greatest foray into emotional resonance " . Matt Groening thought it was an amazing episode with " a lot of fun " in it . David Mirkin said Frank Mula 's script was great . In a 2008 article , Entertainment Weekly named Pfeiffer 's role as Mindy one of the 16 best guest appearances on The Simpsons . She also appeared on AOL 's list of their top favorite guest stars on the show . Brett Buckalew of Metromix Indianapolis wrote that Pfeiffer " gives arguably the best celebrity guest-vocal performance in series history . " Total Film 's Nathan Ditum ranked her performance as the 15th best guest appearance in the show 's history .

The European storm petrel , British storm petrel or just storm petrel ( Hydrobates pelagicus ) is a seabird in the storm petrel family , Hydrobatidae . It is the only member of the genus Hydrobates . The small , square-tailed bird is entirely black except for a broad white rump and a white band on the underwings , and it has a fluttering , bat-like flight . The large majority of the population breeds on islands off the coasts of Europe , with the greatest numbers in the Faroe Islands , United Kingdom , Ireland and Iceland . The Mediterranean population is a separate subspecies , but is inseparable at sea from its Atlantic relatives ; its strongholds are Filfla Island ( Malta ) , Sicily and the Balearic Islands . The storm petrel nests in crevices and burrows , sometimes shared with other seabirds or rabbits , and lays a single white egg , usually on bare soil . The adults share the lengthy incubation and both feed the chick , which is not normally brooded after the first week . This bird is strongly migratory , spending the northern hemisphere winter mainly off the coasts of South Africa and Namibia , with some birds stopping in the seas adjoining West Africa , and a few remaining near their Mediterranean breeding islands . This petrel is strictly oceanic outside the breeding season . It feeds on small fish , squid and zooplankton while pattering on the sea 's surface , and can find oily edible items by smell . The food is converted in the bird 's stomach to an oily orange liquid which is regurgitated when the chick is fed . Although usually silent at sea , the storm petrel has a chattering call given by both members of a pair in their courtship flight , and the male has a purring song given from the breeding chamber .

The storm petrels , Hydrobatidae , are one of the four major families of the Procellariiformes or " tubenoses " , an order of seabirds that also includes the albatrosses , the Procellariidae , and the diving petrels . The family is an ancient group of small species which is thought to have diverged early from the rest of the tubenoses ; the supporting fossil record is poor , with specimens from California dating back only to the Late Miocene ( 11.6 – 5.3 million years ago ) . The Hydrobatidae are often divided into two subfamilies , the mainly southern hemisphere Oceanitinae and the northern Hydrobatinae ; cytochrome b DNA sequence analysis suggests that these might be full families . The European storm petrel is the only member of the genus Hydrobates , the remainder of the Hydrobatinae being placed in Oceanodroma , although the least storm petrel is sometimes separated as the sole member of Halocyptena . The relationships within the Hydrobatinae are complex and uncertain , and it has been suggested that all the members of the subfamily could be subsumed into an enlarged Hydrobates . The storm petrel was first described from by Linnaeus in his Systema naturae in 1758 as Procellaria pelagica . It was moved to the genus Hydrobates by Friedrich Boie in 1822 . Petrel , first recorded in 1602 , is a corruption of pitteral , referring to the bird 's pitter-pattering across the water . The suggestion that the word refers to St Peter walking on the waves is a later invention . Storm arises from seamen 's association of this bird with bad weather . In English , the name of the species was written as " stormy petrel " by some 19th-century authors .

The storm petrel is a small bird , 14 – 18 cm ( 5.5 – 7.1 in ) in length with a 36 – 39 cm ( 14 – 15 in ) wingspan . It weighs 20 – 38 g ( 0.71 – 1.34 oz ) , with an average of 28 g ( 0.99 oz ) . It is square-tailed and has all-black plumage except for a snow-white rump that extends to the sides of the tail base and a broad white band on the underwings . Juveniles in fresh plumage can also show a narrow white bar on the upperwing . The plumage becomes dark brown rather than black as it becomes worn . There are no obvious differences between the sexes , although in the Mediterranean subspecies , at least , most captured birds can be sexed using a formula which involves multiplying the wing length by the length of the white rump band ; females are slightly larger and have a longer white rump than males . The Mediterranean subspecies has longer wings and a heavier bill on average than the nominate form , but neither sex nor subspecies can be determined by observation at sea .

Moult is prolonged in all tubenoses , since they must maintain an ability to fly . Northern populations start replacing their plumage after those further south , reflecting the later start to their breeding season . Birds in a Welsh colony commenced moulting in early August , while populations in northern Spain and the Balearics started in early July and mid-June respectively . Breeding birds moult later than non-breeders . The storm petrel 's large nasal olfactory bulbs facilitate a keen sense of smell , and the birds themselves have a distinctive musty aroma which can help researchers to locate breeding colonies . Individual petrels recognise their own body scent and can use it to locate their nest in the dark . The flight is weak-looking and resembles that of a bat , with fluttering interspersed with short glides . When feeding , the birds hang with raised wings and patter on the surface with their feet , but , unlike the Wilson 's storm petrel , do not look as if they are walking on the water . Birds will sometimes settle on the sea . Like other petrels , the European storm petrel cannot walk properly on land , but shuffles on its tarsi ; once there is enough room , the bird flaps its wings to support itself on its toes .

In its display flight , the storm petrel gives a call consisting of eight or more repetitions of a fast ter-CHICK sounds ending in a trill ( rapid alternation of notes ) . This chattering , staccato call is highly variable in pitch , stress and length . Both sexes make the call , which is used as an advertisement for a mate , for pair recognition , and in the nuptial flight . The details of the vocalisation vary geographically , including between the Atlantic and Mediterranean populations , and birds recognise calls from their own breeding area . The chatter-call of the Mediterranean subspecies is distinctive . It has the first two notes running into each other , and the final element is sometimes doubled . The storm petrel is usually silent at sea , but sometimes gives the chattering call . A purring song arrr-r-r-r-r-r-r … ending with a sharp chikka is given in the burrow by the male only ; it was described by Charles Oldham as " like a fairy being sick " . Other vocalisations include a fast wick-wick-wick , sometimes given in flight , and an up-CHERRK alarm which resembles the chatter-call . Chicks give a whistling pee-pee-pee call when being fed , and a faster version of this vocalisation is used by adults and young to signal distress .

Storm petrels breed only in the Western Palaearctic on islands off the Atlantic and Mediterranean coasts of Europe . The largest colonies are in the Faroe Islands ( 150,000-400,000 pairs ) , United Kingdom ( 20,000-150,000 ) , Ireland ( 50,000-100,000 ) and Iceland ( 50,000-100,000 ) , with smaller breeding areas off Norway , Malta , Spain , the Canary Islands , Italy , France and Greece . The strongholds of the melitensis subspecies are the island of Filfla ( Malta ) , Sicily and the Balearic Islands , with smaller sites elsewhere in the Mediterranean . This latter form also breeds in North Africa ; definitely in Tunisia , probably in Algeria and possibly in Morocco . Because of its nocturnal habits and the problems of accessing some of the small islands on which it breeds , the distribution is poorly known . A colony was discovered as recently as 2009 , on Lampedusa . The storm petrel has been recorded as a vagrant in several European countries as far east as the Ukraine , in the Guinea region of West Africa , and in Turkey , Israel , Lebanon , and the US . Although there were no North American records for more than 30 years after the first in 1970 , this bird has been more or less annual in small numbers since 2003 .

The storm petrel breeds on exposed and usually uninhabited islands which it visits only at night . It otherwise frequents mid-depth waters away from the coastal zone , but not over the ocean deeps . In the breeding season , it is mainly found between the 10 – 25 ° C July isotherms . In Europe , it is rarely seen from land except in autumn storms . The storm petrel is migratory , spending the northern hemisphere winter mainly in cool waters off the coasts of South Africa and Namibia , south to latitude 38 ° S and east to KwaZulu-Natal . Some birds stay north of the equator in the seas adjoining Mauritania and Rio de Oro , and a few remain near the breeding islands , especially in the Mediterranean . It is strictly oceanic outside the breeding season , although it is described as regularly seen from land in West Africa . Young birds do not return to the breeding colonies until their second or third year . Birds mostly head south from the breeding islands between September and November , reaching West Africa by mid-November and the south Atlantic by the end of the year . The return passage starts in April , with late records from the tropics and further south probably representing sub-adult birds that will not breed that year .

The storm petrel is sexually mature at age 4 – 5 years , with the Mediterranean subspecies typically breeding a year earlier than the Atlantic form . Breeding happens in colonies and normally begins in late May or June . Pairs have a repeated nocturnal display flight in which the male chases the female , the chase being accompanied by flight calls . Some near-adult birds may pair up and occupy a hole at the same time , prior to breeding in the following year . Storm petrels normally nest in crevices between or under rocks , or burrow in the soil . When they make their own tunnels , they loosen the earth with their bills and kick out the debris with their feet . The birds less commonly nest in walls , under buildings or down rabbit burrows . Disused or occupied burrows of Atlantic puffins and Manx shearwaters are sometimes used , and the petrel pair may share a common entrance with those seabirds , rabbits or other pairs of its own species . Where other occupants are present , the petrels dig a side burrow or use an existing low-roofed tunnel which the larger birds or rabbits cannot easily enter . Even so , puffins and shearwaters will sometimes access and destroy nests , and adult petrels may be killed by their larger neighbours . Human-made plastic nesting tubes are readily used , and may provide protection against predators . Birds usually mate for life and use the same hole every year .

The nest tunnel is 10 – 300 cm ( 3.9 – 118.1 in ) long and 5 – 8 cm ( 2.0 – 3.1 in ) across , with a slightly narrower entrance . The nest chamber is typically unlined , although pairs may bring in some grass , bracken or seaweed . Although the storm petrel is generally non-territorial when breeding , a pair will defend the nest chamber itself after the eggs have been laid . The clutch is a single egg , usually pure white , sometimes with some reddish brown spots that soon disappear . The average size of the egg is 28 mm × 21 mm ( 1.10 in × 0.83 in ) , and it weighs 6.8 g ( 0.24 oz ) , of which 6 % is shell . If an egg is lost early enough , on rare occasions a replacement may be laid . This is very unusual for tubenoses . The eggs are incubated by both parents for 38 – 50 days , the longer periods arising when the eggs have become chilled through adult absence . One adult typically spends three days at a time on the egg while its partner feeds at sea . The chicks are altricial and covered with silver-grey down , and are fed by both parents with their regurgitated oily stomach contents . The adults do not normally stay with the chick after first week , visiting only to bring food . After about 50 days , the chicks are fed less regularly , sometimes with gaps of several days , and the parents may stop visiting completely shortly before the chick leaves the nest . The chicks fledge about 56 – 86 days after hatching , and receive no parental support after leaving the nest hole .

Tubenoses have smaller egg clutches and much longer and more variable incubation and fledging times than passerines with similarly sized eggs , resembling swifts in these developmental factors . Tubenoses and swifts have generally secure nest sites , but their food sources are unreliable , whereas passerines are vulnerable in the nest but food is usually plentiful . In the particular case of the storm petrel , it has a body temperature perhaps 3 ° C lower than other small birds , and this may also contribute to the lengthy incubation . The adult petrel 's annual death rate is 12 – 13 % , and the typical life span is 11 years . Longevity records established from bird ringing recoveries include a bird aged 31 years 11 months 9 days , and another aged more than 33 years .

The storm petrel normally flies within 10 m ( 33 ft ) of the water surface and typically feeds by picking items off the sea as it patters over the surface . Birds have been observed diving for food to a depth of not more than 0.5 m ( 20 in ) . and it is claimed , using indirect measurements , that the Mediterranean subspecies reaches depths of up to 5 m ( 16 ft ) ) . A bird may range up to 200 km ( 120 mi ) over the course of two or three days in search of food . Although the bird usually feeds during the day , in the breeding season petrels will often feed at night close to the shore . The typical prey consists of surface organisms such as small fish , squid , crustaceans and jellyfish . The storm petrel will also eat offal and oily food , often located by smell , and will follow ships . In the Atlantic , more than half the food items are zooplankton and the fish caught include small herring and sprats ; whale carcasses are scavenged where available . During digestion , the plankton is quickly converted to an oily orange liquid that owes its colour to carotenoids . Larger prey items take longer to digest . The oil , rich in vitamin A , is produced by a large gland in the stomach . The Mediterranean subspecies ' diet is mainly fish , particularly Mediterranean sand eels . Petrels also catch opossum shrimps from waters close to the colony . Bluefin tuna farms are exploited on the Maltese island of Filfla ; birds from the large local colony feed on the unwashed food fed to the farmed tuna , a mixture of fish , squid and prawns which produces a sizeable oily slick . Small numbers of insects are caught near breeding colonies , and some plant material , including angiosperm seeds and sorrel , has been found in the stomach contents . A study on Leach 's storm petrel , which consumes similar items , showed that the petrels were snipping pieces off plant leaves in flight , but it could not be confirmed that this was in the course of catching insects . Nasal glands remove excess salt from seawater consumed by the petrel as a concentrated solution excreted through the nostrils .

Adults and young are vulnerable to predation at the breeding colonies , their only defence being to spit oil . Petrels cannot breed on islands where rats have been introduced , and feral cats frequently kill these birds on Foula in the Shetland Islands . The American mink , a non-native species in Europe , is a strong swimmer , and can colonise islands up to 2 km ( 2,200 yd ) from the mainland . Natural predators of petrels and other seabirds include skuas and large gulls . The yellow-legged gull is a particular problem in the Mediterranean , and great skuas were estimated to kill 7,500 petrels a year on St Kilda , an unsustainable number . Some great black-backed gulls on the Atlantic islands specialise in taking seabird chicks at night , and peregrine falcons hunt adults at sea . Localised predators include Eleonora 's falcon on the Columbretes Islands and the nocturnal barn owl on the Balearics ; a few owls can wipe out a colony . The little owl is also a predator of both adults and young where it occurs . Feather mites of at least two species have been found on the storm petrel , with Halipeurus pelagicus occurring at much higher densities than Philoceanus robertsi . The flea Xenopsylla gratiosa and dermanyssid mites are commonly found , with lower numbers of ticks . These blood-sucking parasites slow the growth rate of nestlings and may affect their survival rate .

The European population of the storm petrel has been estimated at 430,000 – 510,000 breeding pairs or 1,290,000 – 1,530,000 individual birds and makes up 95 % of the world total numbers . The population estimate includes about 11,000 to 16,000 breeding pairs of the Mediterranean subspecies . Although this species ' population now appears to be declining , the decrease is not rapid or large enough to trigger conservation vulnerability criteria . Given its high numbers , this petrel is therefore classified by the International Union for Conservation of Nature as being of Least Concern . The perceived decline may be due increased predation from gulls , skuas and introduced mammals . Eradication of rats protects seabird colonies and may enable recolonisation of islands cleared of rodents . Predation of cave-nesting petrels in the Balearics by yellow-legged gulls is restricted to relatively few individual gulls specialising in this prey item ; this means that the problems can be controlled by selective culling and the provision of plastic nest boxes . Because it feeds in flight , the storm petrel is less affected by oil pollution than other seabirds , and may be able to use its good sense of smell to avoid slicks , although a large spill near a breeding colony could have serious consequences .

Its association with storms makes the storm petrel a bird of bad omen to mariners ; they are said to either foretell or cause bad weather . A more prosaic explanation of their appearance in rough weather is that , like most oceanic seabirds , they rely on the winds to support them in flight and just sit on the water surface when becalmed . The birds were sometimes thought to be the souls of perished sailors , and killing a petrel was believed to bring bad luck . The petrel 's reputation led to the old name of witch , although the commonest of the folk names is Mother Carey 's Chicken , a name also used for storm petrels in general in the UK and USA from at least 1767 . This is believed to be a corruption of mater cara ( dear mother , the Virgin Mary ) , a reference to the supernatural Mother Carey , or a superstitious modification of an earlier Mother Mary 's Chicken to reduce the potency of the religious name . The Mother Carey character appears a number of times in literature . In the Cicely Fox Smith poem " Mother Carey " , she calls old sailors to return to the sea , but in John Masefield 's poem of the same name she is seen as a wrecker of ships . She appears as a fairy in Charles Kingsley 's The Water Babies and is depicted in one of Jessie Willcox Smith 's illustrations for the book .

The association of the storm petrel with turbulent weather has led to its use as a metaphor for revolutionary views , the epithet " stormy petrel " being applied by various authors to characters as disparate as Roman tribune Publius Clodius Pulcher , a Presbyterian minister in the early Carolinas , an Afghan governor , or an Arkansas politician . A 1901 poem by Russian writer Maxim Gorky is invariably titled in English as " The Song of the Stormy Petrel " , although that may not be a perfectly accurate translation of the Russian title " Песня о Буревестнике " , because " Буревестник " ( the name of the bird in Russian ) translates to the English general term " storm bird " . The poem was called " the battle anthem of the revolution " , and earned Gorky the nickname " The Storm Petrel of the Revolution " . Various revolutionary anarchist groups adopted the bird 's name , either as a group identifier , as in the Spanish Civil War , or for their publications . The Stormy Petrel ( Burevestnik ) was the title of the magazine of the Anarchist Communist Federation in Russia around the time of the 1905 revolution , and is still an imprint of the London group of the Anarchist Federation ( Britain and Ireland ) . To honor Gorky and his work , the name Burevestnik was bestowed on a variety of institutions , locations , and products in the USSR .

The bluespotted ribbontail ray ( Taeniura lymma ) is a species of stingray in the family Dasyatidae . Found from the intertidal zone to a depth of 30 m ( 100 ft ) , this species is common throughout the tropical Indian and western Pacific Oceans in nearshore , coral reef-associated habitats . It is a fairly small ray , not exceeding 35 cm ( 14 in ) in width , with a mostly smooth , oval pectoral fin disc , large protruding eyes , and a relatively short and thick tail with a deep fin fold underneath . It can be easily identified by its striking color pattern of many electric blue spots on a yellowish background , with a pair of blue stripes on the tail . At night , small groups of bluespotted ribbontail rays follow the rising tide onto sandy flats to root for small benthic invertebrates and bony fishes in the sediment . When the tide recedes , the rays separate and withdraw to shelters on the reef . Reproduction is aplacental viviparous , with females giving birth to litters of up to seven young . This ray is capable of injuring humans with its venomous tail spines , though it prefers to flee if threatened . Because of its beauty and size , the bluespotted ribbontail ray is popular with private aquarists despite being poorly suited to captivity . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has listed this species as Near Threatened , as it faces widespread habitat degradation and intensive fishing pressure throughout its range .

The bluespotted ribbontail ray was originally described as Raja lymma by Swedish naturalist Peter Forsskål , in his 1775 Descriptiones Animalium quae in itinere ad maris australis terras per annos 1772 , 1773 , et 1774 suscepto collegit , observavit , et delineavit Joannes Reinlioldus Forster , etc . , curante Henrico Lichtenstein . The specific epithet lymma means " dirt " . Forsskål did not designate a type specimen . In 1837 , German biologists Johannes Peter Müller and Friedrich Gustav Jakob Henle created the genus Taeniura for Trygon ornatus , now known to be a junior synonym of this species . Other common names used for this species include bluespotted ray , bluespotted fantail ray , bluespotted lagoon ray , bluespotted stingray , fantail ray , lesser fantail ray , lagoon ray , reef ray , ribbon-tailed stingray , and ribbontail stingray . Morphological examination has suggested that the bluespotted ribbontail ray is more closely related to the amphi-American Himantura ( H. pacifica and H. schmardae ) and the river stingrays ( Potamotrygonidae ) than to the congeneric blotched fantail ray ( T. meyeni ) , which is closer to Dasyatis and Indo-Pacific Himantura .

Widespread in the nearshore waters of the tropical Indo-Pacific region , the bluespotted ribbontail ray has a range that extends around the periphery of the Indian Ocean from South Africa to the Arabian Peninsula to Southeast Asia , including Madagascar , Mauritius , Zanzibar , the Seychelles , Sri Lanka , and the Maldives . It is rare in the Persian Gulf and Gulf of Oman . In the Pacific Ocean , this species is found from the Philippines to northern Australia , as well as around numerous Melanesian and Polynesian islands as far east as the Solomon Islands . Rarely found deeper than 30 m ( 100 ft ) , the bluespotted ribbontail ray is a bottom-dwelling species that frequents coral reefs and adjacent sandy flats . It is also commonly encountered in the intertidal zone and tidal pools , and has been sighted near seagrass beds . Every summer , considerable numbers of bluespotted ribbontail rays arrive off South Africa .

The pectoral fin disc of the bluespotted ribbontail ray is oval in shape , around four-fifths as wide as long , with a rounded to broadly angular snout . The large , protruding eyes are immediately followed by the broad spiracles . There is a narrow flap of skin between the nares with a fringed posterior margin , reaching past the mouth . The lower jaw dips at the middle and deep furrows are present at the mouth corners . There are 15 – 24 tooth rows in either jaw , arranged into pavement-like plates , and two large papillae on the floor of the mouth . The pelvic fins are narrow and angular . The thick , depressed tail measures about 1.5 times the disc length and bears one or two ( usually two ) serrated spines well behind the tail base ; there is a deep fin fold on the ventral surface , reaching the tip of the tail , and a low midline ridge on the upper surface . The skin is generally smooth , save for perhaps a scattering of small thorns on the middle of the back . The dorsal coloration is striking , consisting of numerous circular , neon blue spots on a yellowish brown or green background ; the spots vary in size , becoming smaller and denser towards the disc margin . The tail has two stripes of the same blue running along each side as far as the spines . The eyes are bright yellow and the belly is white . Individuals found off southern Africa may lack the blue tail stripes . The bluespotted ribbontail ray grows to 35 cm ( 14 in ) across , 80 cm ( 31 in ) long , and 5 kg ( 11 lb ) .

One of the most abundant stingrays inhabiting Indo-Pacific reefs , the bluespotted ribbontail ray generally spends the day hidden alone inside caves or under coral ledges or other debris ( including from shipwrecks ) , often with only its tail showing . At night , small groups assemble and swim onto shallow sandy flats with the rising tide to feed . Unlike many other stingrays , this species seldom buries itself in sand . The bluespotted ribbontail ray excavates sand pits in search of molluscs , polychaete worms , shrimps , crabs , and small benthic bony fishes ; when prey is located , it is trapped by the body of the ray and maneuvered into the mouth with the disc . Other fishes , such as goatfish , frequently follow foraging rays , seeking food missed by the ray . Breeding in the bluespotted ribbontail ray occurs from late spring to summer ; the male follows the female and nips at her disc , eventually biting and holding onto her for copulation . There is also a documented instance of a male holding onto the disc of a smaller male bluespotted stingray ( Dasyatis kuhlii ) , in a possible case of mistaken identity . Adult males have been observed gathering in shallow water , which may relate to reproduction . Like other stingrays , this species is aplacental viviparous : the embryos are initially sustained by yolk , which later in development is supplemented by histotroph ( " uterine milk " , containing mucus , fat , and proteins ) produced by the mother . The gestation period is uncertain , but is thought to be between four and twelve months long . Females bear litters of up to seven young , each a miniature version of the adult measuring around 13 – 14 cm ( 5.1 – 5.5 in ) across . Males attain sexual maturity at a disc width of 20 – 21 cm ( 7.9 – 8.3 in ) ; the maturation size of females is unknown .

Known predators of the bluespotted ribbontail ray include hammerhead sharks ( Sphyrna ) and bottlenose dolphins ( Tursiops ) ; it is also potentially preyed upon by other large fishes and marine mammals . When threatened , this ray tends to flee at high speed in a zigzag pattern , to throw off pursuers . Numerous parasites have been identified from this species : the tapeworms Aberrapex manjajiae , Anthobothrium taeniuri , Cephalobothrium taeniurai , Echinobothrium elegans and E. helmymohamedi , Kotorelliella jonesi , Polypocephalus saoudi , and Rhinebothrium ghardaguensis and R. taeniuri , the monogeneans Decacotyle lymmae , Empruthotrema quindecima , Entobdella australis , and Pseudohexabothrium taeniurae , the flatworms Pedunculacetabulum ghardaguensis and Anaporrhutum albidum , the nematode Mawsonascaris australis , the copepod Sheina orri , and the protozoan Trypanosoma taeniurae . This ray has been observed soliciting cleanings from the bluestreak cleaner wrasse ( Labroides dimidiatus ) by raising the margins of its disc and pelvic fins .

While timid and innocuous towards humans , the bluespotted ribbontail ray is capable of inflicting an excruciating wound with its venomous tail spines . Its attractive appearance and relatively small size has resulted in its being the most common stingray found in the home aquarium trade . However , it seldom fares well in captivity and very few hobbyists are able to maintain one for long . Many specimens refuse to feed in the aquarium , and even seemingly healthy individuals often inexplicably die or stop feeding . A higher degree of success has been achieved by public aquariums and a breeding project is maintained by the European Association of Zoos and Aquaria ( for example , a total of 15 pubs were born at Lisbon Oceanarium from 2011 to 2013 ) . The bluespotted ribbontail ray is utilized as food in East Africa , Southeast Asia , and Australia ; it is captured intentionally or incidentally using gillnets , longlines , spears , and fence traps . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has assessed the bluespotted ribbontail ray as Near Threatened . Although still relatively common and widely distributed , this species faces continuing degradation of its coral reef habitat throughout its range , from development and destructive fishing practices using cyanide or dynamite . In addition , its populations are under heavy pressure by artisanal and commercial fisheries , and by local collecting for the aquarium trade .

Douglas Robert Jardine ( 23 October 1900 – 18 June 1958 ) was a cricketer who played 22 Test matches for England , captaining the side in 15 of those matches between 1931 and 1934 . A right-handed batsman , he is best known for captaining the English team during the 1932 – 33 Ashes tour of Australia . During that series , England employed " Bodyline " tactics against the Australian batsmen , wherein bowlers pitched the ball short on the line of leg stump to rise towards the bodies of the batsmen in a manner that most contemporary players and critics viewed as intimidatory and physically dangerous . Jardine is generally believed to be the person responsible for the implementation of Bodyline . A controversial figure among cricketers , he was well known for his dislike of Australian players and crowds and was unpopular in Australia , particularly for his manner and especially after the Bodyline tour . Many who played under his leadership regarded him as an excellent captain ; not all regarded him as good at managing people . He was also famous in cricket circles for wearing a multi-coloured Harlequin cap . After establishing an early reputation as a prolific schoolboy batsman , Jardine played cricket for Winchester College , attended the University of Oxford , playing for its cricket team , and played for Surrey County Cricket Club as an amateur . He developed a defensive method of batting which was unusual for an amateur , receiving occasional criticism for negative batting . Despite this , Jardine was selected in Test matches for the first time in 1928 , and went on to play with some success in the Test series in Australia in 1928 – 29 . Following this tour , his business commitments prevented him from playing as much cricket . However , in 1931 , he was asked to captain England in a Test against New Zealand . Although there were some initial misgivings about his captaincy , Jardine led England in the next three cricket seasons and on two overseas tours , one of which was the Australian tour of 1932 – 33 . Of his 15 Tests as captain , he won nine , lost one and drew five . He retired from all first-class cricket in 1934 following a tour to India .

Douglas Jardine was born on 23 October 1900 in Bombay , British India , to Scottish parents . His parents were Malcolm Jardine , also a former first-class cricketer but later a barrister , and Alison Moir . At the age of nine , Douglas was sent to stay with his mother 's sister in St Andrews , Scotland . She lived in a large mansion where he spent most of his school holidays while going to Horris Hill School near Newbury , Berkshire , from May 1910 . The school had high standards and Jardine was moderately successful academically . From 1912 , he played cricket for the school first eleven , enjoying success as a bowler and as a batsman . He captained the team in his final term , when the team were unbeaten . Jardine was influenced by the writing of former England captain C. B. Fry on batting technique , which contradicted the advice of his coach at Horris Hill . The coach disapproved of Jardine 's batting methods , but Jardine did not back down and quoted a book by Fry to support his viewpoint . In 1914 , Jardine entered Winchester College . At the time , life at Winchester was arduous and austere ; discipline was harsh . Sport and exercise were vital parts of the school day . In Jardine 's time , preparing the pupils for war was also important . According to Jardine 's biographer , Christopher Douglas , the pupils were " taught to be honest , impervious to physical pain , uncomplaining and civilised . " All pupils were required to be academically competent and Jardine was able to get along without exhibiting brilliance ; successful sportsmen , on the other hand , were revered . Jardine enjoyed a slightly better position than some other pupils , already possessing when he arrived a reputation as a cricketer and soon excelling at other sports , representing the school at football as a goalkeeper and rackets , and playing Winchester College football , a sport which has resemblances to rugby union . However , his main sporting reputation came from cricket . He was in the first eleven for three years from 1917 and received coaching from Harry Altham , Rockley Wilson and Schofield Haigh , the latter two of whom were distinguished cricketers . Jardine later said that Wilson helped to develop his batting . In 1919 , his final year , Jardine came top of the school batting averages with 997 runs at an average of 66.46 . He also became captain although there were doubts within the school about his ability to unify the team . Despite these doubts , Winchester won their annual match against Eton College in 1919 , a fixture in which Eton usually held the upper hand . Jardine 's batting ( 35 and 89 in the match ) and captaincy were believed by critics to be the key factors in his side 's first victory over Eton for 12 years . After his retirement from cricket , he named his 89 in that match as his favourite innings . Jardine went on to score 135 not out against Harrow School .

Jardine 's achievements in the season were widely reported in the local and national press . He went on to play in two representative schools matches at Lord 's Cricket Ground , where he scored 44 , 91 , 57 and 55 in two matches and won favourable reviews in the press . Wisden , in 1928 , described Jardine at this time as being obviously of a much higher standard than his contemporaries , particularly in defence and on side batting . However , at this stage in his batting , he was sometimes criticised for being too cautious and not using all the batting strokes of which he was capable . His good batting technique gave the impression that he could easily score more quickly .

Jardine entered New College , Oxford , in September 1919 at a time when the university was more crowded than usual due to the arrival of men whose entrance had been delayed due to the war . He still took part in several sports , representing New College as goalkeeper in matches between the colleges , and being given a trial for the University football team , although he was not chosen . He continued to play rackets and began to play real tennis , making such progress and showing such promise that he went on to represent the University successfully and won his Blue . In cricket , Jardine came under the coaching of Tom Hayward who influenced his footwork and defence . Wisden commented in 1928 that Jardine had come with an excellent reputation , but did not quite achieve the success which was expected . However , his batting ability , particularly defensively , remained unquestionable . In the 1920 season , Jardine made his first-class debut , played eight first-class matches and scored two fifties . Playing mainly as an opening batsman , he won his Blue , appearing in the University Match against Cambridge but fell short of expectations , according to Wisden . Although his batting technique was excellent , he received criticism from those who saw him bat as they believed him to be too cautious . At this stage in his career , Jardine did limit his strokes , not feeling confident enough to play them all safely enough . In all , he scored 217 runs at an average of 22.64 . In the match for Oxford against Essex , he took six wickets for six runs in a bowling spell of 45 balls , bowling leg breaks , to have bowling figures of six for 28 . It was the only occasion in his career where he took five or more wickets in an innings .

Playing more confidently and fluently in 1921 , Jardine began the season well , scoring three fifties in his first three first-class matches . Then Oxford played against the Australian touring side which dominated the season . In the second innings , Jardine scored 96 not out to save the game but was unable to complete his century before the game ended . Even so , the innings was praised by those who saw it . The tourists were criticised in the press for not allowing Jardine to reach his hundred , particularly as the match was reduced from three days to two days at the request of the Australians , who wished to have a rest day in between matches . The Australians had tried to help him with some easy bowling but the situation was confused by the batsmen 's scores not being displayed on a scoreboard at the cricket ground . There has been speculation that this incident led to Jardine 's later hatred of Australians , although Christopher Douglas denies this was the case . Cricket historian David Frith believed it is possible that Australian captain Warwick Armstrong could have addressed sarcastic comments to Jardine but Wisden believed his slow approach cost him his century . The Australian manager expressed regret that he missed out . This innings was the highest that had been played to that point in the season against the Australians , and only one higher score was made before the first Test . It could have led to Jardine playing for England in 1921 as Plum Warner , an influential figure who had recently captained Middlesex , suggested in The Cricketer magazine that Jardine should play in the first Test , which followed the Oxford match . He had been impressed by Jardine on the other occasions he had seen him bat . He remained in Test contention for a short time , but was not selected . In the meantime , he scored his first first-class hundred in a match against The Army and another followed against Sussex . Both innings were cautious , with defence his main priority for much of the innings , but he failed in the match against Cambridge . Jardine then went on to play for Surrey , for whom he was qualified , replacing the injured Jack Hobbs as an opening batsman before dropping down to number five in the batting order . Jardine played in a vital match against reigning County Champions Middlesex which would determine the champions for the season . In a situation of great pressure , Jardine scored a vital 55 to hold the innings together after the loss of early wickets , although Surrey went on to lose the match . Jardine finished the season with 1,015 runs at an average of 39.03 , although critics still did not believe his potential had been fulfilled .

Jardine missed most of the 1922 season due to a serious knee injury , playing only four matches at a time when he was expected to make a big impression . There was speculation in the newspapers about whether he would be fit for the match against Cambridge , but he missed it and was also unable to play for Surrey that season . Even so , in 1922 he was selected by The Isis as one of its men of the year . After some early problems with his troublesome knee , Jardine returned to cricket by May of the 1923 season . He was not given the Oxford captaincy in his final year , which has led to speculation that his manner and unfriendliness prevented him from being made captain . However , his injury and the availability of other deserving candidates may have provided at least part of the explanation . After a cautious start on his return , Jardine gradually found his batting form , and contributed to Oxford 's only win over Cambridge in the decade . During one innings of another match , he received criticism for using his pads to stop the ball from hitting the wickets : this was within the laws of the game but was controversial and seen by critics to be against the spirit of the game . Christopher Douglas traces Jardine 's hostility towards the press and critics to this incident . He also received criticism for his slow batting for Oxford , again being singled out due to his known ability to play attacking shots . Partly this was because Jardine held a responsible position , the team often reliant on his success . The complaints were a manifestation of wider criticism of young amateur batting at the time for its lack of enterprise , as commentators began to hark back to the " golden age " before the war . Jardine left Oxford in 1923 having scored a total of 1,381 runs and a fourth class degree in modern history .

When Jardine went on to play for Surrey that season , a strong batting side , he played with more freedom and in a varied style . Batting at number five , he had to play different types of innings , either attacking or defensive , depending on the match situation . He made a success of it , playing long defensive innings or sacrificing his innings in an attempt to hit quick runs . His captain Percy Fender seemed satisfied with his role , keeping him in it all season despite his reputation for caution . He scored his first century for Surrey against Yorkshire and was awarded his County Cap , making 916 runs at an average of 38.16 in the whole season .

Once Jardine left Oxford , he began to qualify as a solicitor while still playing for Surrey . He made steady progress over the next three seasons but was overshadowed by other amateur batsmen . His contemporaries at Oxford and Cambridge attracted much attention in the press , as did the next generation of amateur batsmen . He was appointed vice-captain to Fender for the 1924 season , due in large part to the stigma attached to professional cricketers being appointed as captain . There were professionals such as Jack Hobbs playing for Surrey who could have been made captain , but Jardine was preferred as an amateur . In that season , Jardine was selected for the Gentlemen v Players match for the first time and came third in the Surrey averages . In all first-class matches , he scored 1,249 runs at an average of 40.29 . The following season , Jardine was less successful , scoring fewer runs at a lower average and with a highest score of 87 ( 1,020 runs at 30.90 ) . It had also been suggested in the press that Jardine should captain the Gentlemen , with a view towards the future of the England Test team , but this did not happen . In fact , owing to an injury sustained playing village cricket at Ashtead for a team called C.E. McIver 's XI , he was unable to appear in the Gentlemen v Players match at Lord 's . In 1926 , Jardine had his most successful season to date , with 1,473 runs ( average 46.03 ) , although he was again overshadowed by other players and by the attention given to the Ashes series being played . Towards the end of the season , his batting became more attractive and his rate of scoring increased as he began to play more shots . His assurance and judgement against all bowling , even international bowlers , became noticed and he scored 538 runs in his final ten innings .

In 1927 , Jardine achieved his highest average in a season , scoring 1,002 runs and averaging 91.09 in a very wet summer which led to difficult wickets to bat on . Wisden named him as one of its Cricketers of the Year , commenting that he had improved his style and footwork . That season , he could only play 11 matches due to work commitments as a clerk with Barings Bank , for whom he had worked since qualifying as a solicitor . Despite his lack of practice , he scored hundreds in his first three matches and came top of the Surrey batting averages . He scored a century in the Gentlemen v Players match , which impressed influential people at Lord 's , and represented England in a trial match against The Rest . In this latter match , when Percy Chapman withdrew at the last minute , Jardine took over the captaincy , earning praise in the press for his performance . By this stage , he was considered a certainty to tour Australia the following winter .

Jardine 's batting performance in 1928 was similar to that from the previous season . He played 14 matches , but scored 1,133 runs at an average of 87.15 . He also enjoyed success in high profile matches , scoring 193 for Gentlemen at the Oval , where the crowd had booed his slow start ( at one stage , he took half an hour to score two runs ) but later cheered him as his last fifty runs were scored in half an hour . For the same team at Lord 's , he scored 86 and 40 . He captained The Rest against England in a Test trial and made the highest score in each innings , scoring 74 not out in the fourth innings to help his team to draw the game on a difficult pitch , against international bowlers Maurice Tate and Harold Larwood . Immediately after this match , Jardine made his Test debut against the West Indies who were touring England that season . This was West Indies ' first ever Test match . The team possessed several fast bowlers who bowled with hostility and enjoyed some success on the tour of England . Many batsmen only played them with difficulty , particularly on the occasional fast-paced pitch , but Jardine played them confidently in the Test series . Jardine played in the first two Tests , both of which were won by England by an innings , but missed the third for unknown reasons . He scored 22 on his debut , but was more successful in the second Test . He scored an eventful 83 : when he had scored 26 , he hit his wicket when setting off for a run , but was given not out . At the time , a batsman was not out if he had completed his shot and was setting off for a run . West Indian cricketer Learie Constantine later recalled that Jardine would have been given out except that the batsman informed the umpire that he had already finished his shot . Jardine was later run out by Tate , a player with whom he did not enjoy a good relationship , when they were batting together in the England innings : Tate refused to go for a run causing Jardine to be run out .

In the first Test , Jardine scored 35 and 65 not out . His first innings began with England in an uncertain position , having lost three wickets for 108 on a very good batting wicket . His innings led England to a stronger position . He played very cautiously , being troubled by Clarrie Grimmett and Bert Ironmonger , the Australian spinners . Jardine believed that Ironmonger threw the ball , and this bowler gave him considerable trouble throughout his career . Thanks to the bowling of Harold Larwood , England took a huge first innings lead . In his second innings , although he played well in his 65 , Jardine was not under much pressure . He scored a large number of singles , giving his partners most of the bowling and building up the lead to the point where England achieved a massive victory by 675 runs . This victory surprised and troubled the Australian cricketing public . Jardine played a similar role in the second Test , batting with Wally Hammond to retrieve a poor start for England in his only innings as they won by eight wickets . Jardine scored 62 in the third Test , supporting Hammond who made a double century . However , when Australia batted a second time , they built up a big lead and left England needing 332 to win on an exceptionally bad wicket which had been damaged by rain . Jack Hobbs and Herbert Sutcliffe , in one of their most famous partnerships , put on 105 . Hobbs sent a message to the team that Jardine should be the next batsmen to come in , even though he usually batted later on , as he was the batsman most likely to survive in the conditions . When Hobbs was dismissed , Jardine came in to bat . He survived , although finding batting exceptionally difficult , until the day 's play ended . Percy Fender believed that Jardine was the only batsman in the side who could have coped with the difficult conditions . He went on to make 33 next day , and England won by three wickets .

During the team 's brief visit to Tasmania , Jardine made his highest first-class score of 214 . In the fourth Test , Jardine only scored one run in the first innings , before he was given out leg before wicket ( lbw ) despite obviously hitting the ball . In the second innings , coming out to bat with the score 21 for two , Jardine scored 98 in a partnership of 262 with Hammond which was then the highest partnership for the third wicket in all Test matches . The scoring was very slow , and the crowd protested throughout Jardine 's innings , even though he scored faster than Hammond . He was out when Wisden believed he looked certain to reach a century . England went on to win the match by 12 runs . Jardine was not successful in the final Test , won by Australia . He was used as an opener , due to an injury to Sutcliffe , and made just 19 and a first ball duck . Once both of his innings were completed , on the fifth day of a match which lasted eight days , he left the match and set off across Australia to catch a boat to India for a holiday . It is not clear if this was planned or if he had simply had enough . Jardine never provided an explanation , to the Australian press nor afterwards . Later , Jardine wrote about the Australian crowds , complaining over their involvement , but praising their knowledge and judgement of the game and describing them as more informed than English crowds . He also expressed later reservations to Bob Wyatt about Percy Chapman , saying that he would have shot him if a gun was available . Jardine did not appear in first-class cricket in the 1929 season due to business commitments .

At the beginning of the 1930 season , Jardine was offered the vice-captaincy of Surrey . He was unable to accept owing to business commitments and played just nine matches for the season , scoring 402 runs at an average of 36.54 and managing one century and one fifty . He was never in the running for Test selection that season , although his presence may have been missed as the English batting was unreliable in the Tests . Christopher Douglas argues that had Jardine been playing regularly , he would have been made captain for the final Test , when Chapman was dropped in favour of the sounder batsman Bob Wyatt . The sensation of the Test series was Donald Bradman , who dominated the English bowling to score 974 runs with unprecedented speed and certainty , making the English selectors realise that something must be done to address his skill . With Bradman at the fore , Australia regained the Ashes 2 – 1 . Jardine played a full season of cricket in 1931 . In June , he was appointed as captain for the Test against New Zealand ( two more Tests were later added ) . The English selectors were searching for possible captains for the 1932 – 33 tour of Australia , with Bradman and Australia 's strong batting line up foremost in their minds . Christopher Douglas believes that , as Jardine was not a regular county captain , the selectors wanted to assess his leadership ability but had probably not settled on him as a final choice . He was also chosen as a dependable , proven batsman . While Percy Fender approved of his appointment , The Times ' correspondent believed that he was unproven and others were more deserving of the leadership . Ian Peebles , writing 40 years later , claimed that Jardine 's appointment was popular but cricket administrators had misgivings . Alan Gibson believed that Jardine was chosen because the other candidates were either not worth their place in the side , too old or had controversy attached to them . Furthermore , Jardine impressed the chairman of selectors , Pelham Warner , who stated that he was very effective in selection meetings through his knowledge of cricket history and went into great detail to choose the correct players ; it seems that Warner was the driving force behind Jardine 's appointment .

In his first Test as captain , Jardine clashed with several players . Frank Woolley was unhappy with his captain 's manner , feeling humiliated at his treatment in the field at one point . He also rebuked Ian Peebles and Walter Robins , two young amateur bowlers , for their amusement over an incident in the match . The home team 's fortunes were mixed , as New Zealand put up a very good fight in their first Test in England , and both sides could have won . The New Zealanders were so successful that a further two Tests were arranged . Jardine was criticised in the press for not instructing his batsmen to score quickly enough to win in the fourth innings , although this strategy was unlikely to succeed , and the match was drawn . England won the second Test by an innings and the third Test was drawn , sealing the series 1 – 0 . Jardine had a top score of just 38 in the series , but only batted four times and was not out in three of the innings . At the beginning of the following season , Wisden 's editor believed that , as Jardine had failed to impress ( unspecified ) people with his captaincy , he was no longer a certainty to lead the side to Australia , and only Percy Chapman 's lack of form prevented his reinstatement at Jardine 's expense . As a batsman , Jardine was more impressive in Wisden 's opinion , showing himself to be good in defence despite his lack of cricket in the past two seasons . A notable innings was his 104 for The Rest to prevent defeat against champion county Yorkshire . The opposition bowling , particularly from Bill Bowes , was short and hostile , but Jardine survived for over four hours . He scored 1,104 first-class runs for the season at an average of 64.94 .

At the beginning of the 1932 season , Jardine became captain of Surrey . There was much speculation that Fender had been replaced due to disputes with the Surrey committee but it was some time before this , and Jardine 's appointment , was confirmed . Fender was supportive of Jardine and happy to play under him . Jardine overcame a cautious beginning to develop a more aggressive captaincy style , and Surrey finished in their highest position in the championship for six years . England played one international match that season , India 's first ever Test match , and Jardine was selected as captain . India possessed a very effective bowling attack on this tour , which surprised many teams , and England 's batsmen struggled against them . Jardine , who had played a long innings against the tourists for M.C.C. earlier in the season , was the only English batsman to pass 30 in both innings . He scored 79 and 85 not out , and was praised for two excellent defensive innings in a difficult situation by Wisden and The Cricketer . During the match , Jardine again clashed with his team . He gave Bill Bowes and Bill Voce the very unusual instruction to bowl one full toss each over to take advantage of the batsmen 's trouble seeing the ball against the crowd . The bowlers did not do so , and were later reprimanded by Jardine who told them to obey orders . Jardine himself went on to score 1,464 runs in the season at an average of 52.28 .

Following Jardine 's appointment , a meeting was arranged with Nottinghamshire captain Arthur Carr and his two fast bowlers Larwood and Voce at London 's Piccadilly Hotel . Jardine explained his belief that Bradman was weak against bowling directed at leg stump and that if this line of attack could be maintained , it would restrict Bradman 's scoring to one side of the field , giving the bowlers greater control of his scoring . Jardine asked Larwood and Voce if they could bowl accurately on leg stump and make the ball rise up into the body of the batsman . The bowlers agreed that they could , and that it might prove effective , but Jardine stressed that bowling accurately was vitally important , or Bradman would dominate the bowling . Larwood believed that Jardine saw Bradman as his main target and wished to attack him psychologically as well as in a cricketing sense . At the same time , other Australian batsmen were also discussed . Larwood and Voce practised the plan over the remainder of the 1932 season with mixed success . Jardine also visited Frank Foster who had toured Australia in 1911 – 12 to discuss field placings appropriate to Australian conditions . Foster had bowled leg theory on that tour with his fielders placed close in on the leg-side , as had George Hirst in 1903 – 04 . During the second half of the season , the team to tour Australia was announced . The selection of four fast bowlers and a few medium pacers was very unusual at the time , and it was commented on by the hosts ' media , including Bradman . The selection of Eddie Paynter , who did not have a strong record , to replace the ill Kumar Shri Duleepsinhji was very likely a choice of Jardine . He had a history of good performances against Yorkshire , and Jardine considered that a player 's record against northern counties was a good indication of his potential at international level .

In Jardine 's obituary , Wisden described this tour as " probably the most controversial tour in history . England won four of the five Tests , but it was the methods they employed rather than the results which caused so much discussion and acrimony . " On the journey to Australia , by the boat Orontes , Jardine kept away from his team . He issued some instructions on their conduct , such as giving autographs or keeping out of the sun . He also began to have disagreements with Plum Warner , who was one of the two team managers along with Richard Palairet . He discussed tactics with Harold Larwood and other bowlers , spoke to Hedley Verity about his role in the team , and he may have met batsmen Wally Hammond and Herbert Sutcliffe . Some players reported that Jardine told them to hate the Australians in order to defeat them , while instructing them to refer to Bradman as " the little bastard . " At this stage , he seems to have settled on leg theory , if not full Bodyline , as his main tactic . Once the team arrived in Australia , Jardine quickly alienated the press by refusing to give team details before a match and being uncooperative when interviewed by journalists . The press printed some negative stories as a result and the crowds barracked as they had done on his previous tour , which made him angry . Jardine still wore his Harlequin cap and began the tour well with 98 and 127 before the first Test . Once again , he clashed with paceman Bill Bowes , refusing to give his bowler the requested field placings in an early match . As a result , Bowes deliberately gave away easy runs in an attempt to get his way , but following a discussion , Bowes was converted to Jardine 's tactics and ultimately to his ability as a captain . In a tour match , Jardine also instructed Hammond to attack the bowling of Chuck Fleetwood-Smith , whom he considered dangerous and thus did not want him to play in the Tests . Up until this point , there had been little unusual about the English bowling except the number of fast bowlers . Larwood and Voce were given a light workload in the early matches by Jardine . This changed in the match against an Australian XI , from which Jardine rested himself , where the bowlers first used the tactics that came to be known as Bodyline . Under the captaincy of Wyatt , the bowlers bowled short and around leg stump , with fielders positioned close by on the leg side to catch any deflections . Wyatt later claimed that this was not planned beforehand and he simply passed on to Jardine what happened after the match . These tactics continued in the next match ; several players were hit . Many commentators criticised this style of bowling ; although bowlers had previously used leg theory bowling , where bowlers bowled outside leg stump with a concentration of fielders on the leg side , using these tactics with fast bowlers dropping the ball short was almost unprecedented . It was seen as dangerous and against the spirit of the game . In a letter , Jardine told Fender that his information about the Australian batting technique was correct and that it meant he was having to move more and more fielders onto the leg side . He said that " if this goes on I shall have to move the whole bloody lot to the leg side . " Jardine increasingly came into disagreement with Warner over Bodyline as the tour progressed , but his tactics were successful in one respect : in six innings against the tourists ahead of the Tests , Bradman had scored only 103 runs , causing concern among the Australian public who expected much more from him .

When the first Test began , Jardine persisted with Bodyline tactics , even though Bradman , the main target , did not play in the match . David Frith has pointed out that Bradman would have been watching and seeing the tactics that England were using . However , when Stan McCabe was scoring 187 not out , Jardine was briefly seen to be unsettled as runs came quickly , and he may not have been fully convinced that the tactics would be successful . England eventually won the match comfortably . In the second Test , Jardine completely misjudged the pitch and left out a specialist spinner when conditions later in the match favoured one . The match seemed to be going well when Bill Bowes unexpectedly bowled the returning Bradman first ball in the first innings ; Jardine was seen to be so delighted that he had clasped his hands above his head and performed a " war dance " . This was an extremely unusual reaction in the 1930s , particularly from Jardine who rarely showed any emotion while playing cricket . In the second innings , Bradman scored an unbeaten century which helped Australia to win the match and level the series at one match each . This made it seem to critics that Bodyline was not quite the threat that had been perceived and Bradman 's reputation , which had suffered slightly with his earlier failures , was restored . On the other hand , the pitch was slightly slower than was customary throughout the series , and Larwood was suffering from problems with his boots which reduced his effectiveness .

Jardine had clashed with more of his team by this stage : he had argued with Gubby Allen at least twice about his refusal to bowl Bodyline ( although he did bowl bouncers and fielded in the " leg trap " , the fielders who waited for catches close in on the leg side ) ; and the Nawab of Pataudi had refused to field in the " leg trap " , to which Jardine responded , " I see his highness is a conscientious objector " , and subsequently allowed Pataudi to play little part in the tour . The teams went into the third Test with the series level ; England won that match but the controversy nearly ended the tour . Jardine , concerned by his poor run of batting form , had promoted himself to open the batting but was part of a drastic England collapse to 30 for four in the first innings . However , the trouble began when Bill Woodfull was struck on the chest by a Larwood delivery , drawing the comment from Jardine of " Well bowled , Harold " , aimed mainly at Bradman who was also batting at the time . For the next ball faced by Woodfull , at the start of Larwood 's next over , the fielders moved into the Bodyline fielding positions for the next ball he faced . Jardine wrote that Larwood had asked for the field to be moved , while Larwood said that it was Jardine 's decision . The crowd became noisily angry as the ill feeling caused by the English bowling tactics spilled out , and Jardine later expressed regret that he had moved the fielders when he did . There was further anger later in the innings when Bert Oldfield suffered a fractured skull . At this point , several of the players feared that there may be a riot and that the crowd would jump onto the field to attack them ; mounted police were deployed as a precaution , but the spectators remained behind the fences . Jardine then batted very slowly in an innings of 56 , during which he was continuously barracked by the crowd . Despite England 's win , Wisden believed that it was probably the most unpleasant match ever played . However , it commended Jardine 's courage , claimed that praise of his leadership was unanimous , and said that " above all he captained his team in this particular match like a genius " . In the immediate aftermath , journalists in England and Australia took up viewpoints both for and against Jardine . The M.C.C. sent a telegram congratulating him on winning the match .

Once the fourth Test got underway , England won the match to take the series . Partly prompted by Jardine , Eddie Paynter scored 83 having released himself from hospital . Jardine went on to make a painstaking 24 , at one point facing 82 balls without scoring a single run . He was not proud of his batting performance , being shamefaced to Australian Test opener Jack Fingleton , and describing his batting to Bill O 'Reilly as being " like an old maid defending her virginity . " England also won the final Test ending on 28 February , with a final clash taking place between Jardine and Larwood . After a long bowling spell , Larwood was furious when Jardine sent him in to bat as nightwatchman but went on to score 98 runs . Later , Larwood broke his foot while bowling in the second innings , but Jardine was not convinced that he was seriously injured . He made him stay on the field until Bradman was out . Larwood , partly through this injury and partly through political repercussions from this series , never played another Test . Also in this match , Jardine enraged Harry Alexander by asking him not to run on the pitch as he was damaging it and giving his side an advantage . He proceeded to bowl hostile bouncers at Jardine , who was struck painfully to the delight of the crowd .

While Jardine won the series as captain , he contributed just 199 runs at an average of 22.11 in the Tests , and 628 runs ( average 36.94 ) in all first-class cricket in Australia . Jardine only played in the first Test of the short series which followed in New Zealand , due to rheumatism . All the players enjoyed the short tour although rain ruined the cricket , and Jardine was observed to show signs of paranoia towards all things Australian . Pelham Warner , although he later stated that he disapproved of Bodyline bowling , praised Jardine 's captaincy on the tour and believed that he was cruelly treated by the Australian crowds . He further believed that Jardine was convinced that the tactics were legitimate .

Controversy over Bodyline continued throughout the following summer . Jardine himself contributed his opinion in a book , In Quest for the Ashes , a first-hand account of the Bodyline tour . He defended his tactics and heavily criticised the Australian barrackers , to the extent of suggesting that fixtures between England and Australia should be halted until this problem was solved . While arguments continued to rage in print and discussion , even at government level , Jardine received a hero 's welcome on his return to England , making several public appearances . Despite his fears that the M.C.C. might sack him in the face of criticism , he was appointed as England captain for the series against the West Indies in 1933 . He continued to captain Surrey during his infrequent first-class appearances that summer , although business commitments prevented him from playing a full season . He was cheered by the crowd or given a standing ovation when he came out to bat as M.C.C. captain against the West Indians in May , at Sheffield for Surrey against Yorkshire , and in the first and second Test matches . In all first-class cricket that season , Jardine scored 779 runs at an average of 51.93 , including three hundreds . One of these centuries came in the second Test ( Jardine missed the third with an injury that ended his season ) .

During the 1933 season , Jardine was appointed as captain for the M.C.C. tour of India that winter which would feature the hosts ' first Tests at home . This continued support for Jardine in the face of growing unhappiness towards Bodyline bowling came with some reservations , as the President and Secretary of the M.C.C. met Jardine for discussions prior to his appointment . This was probably about the need for diplomacy and tact on what may have proved to be a sensitive tour . With only two players from the Bodyline tour , Jardine and Verity , taking part , it was not a full-strength side but won the Test series 2 – 0 . India were weaker than expected , and lacked a large group of quality players . Jardine nevertheless won praise from Wisden for his captaincy and his batting . He approached the matches with a very competitive spirit , seeking to gain every advantage with his tactics and research . At the same time , he was far more willing to take up speaking engagements than on the Bodyline tour , showed an appreciation and regard for Indian crowds which he had never extended to Australia , and played the diplomatic role that was usually expected of a captain of the M.C.C. at the time . He often spoke of his affection for India , describing it as the land of his birth and seemed to be relaxed and happy on this tour .

England won the Test series 2 – 0 . Jardine contributed three fifties in four innings in the series , scoring 221 runs at an average of 73.66 . He scored 60 , 61 and 65 before his final Test innings ended at 35 not out . Jardine scored 831 first-class runs on the Indian leg of the tour — he played one match in Ceylon ( now Sri Lanka ) — averaging 55.40 . Although Jardine enjoyed the tour , there were still clashes evident . There was an argument with the Viceroy over Jardine selecting the Maharaja of Patiala to play for the M.C.C. in one match ; in a subsequent match , Jardine complained that the pitch was rolled for too long . He also clashed , later on , with the umpire Frank Tarrant , initially due to suspicion over the number of lbw decisions given against the M.C.C. , but also because Tarrant had warned him against using Bodyline and was employed by Indian princes . Jardine threatened to stop him umpiring and sent a telegram to Lord 's , with the result that Tarrant , having officiated the first two Tests , was not used in the third . For much of the time , Jardine used different tactics to those employed in Australia . Slow bowling , particularly that of Hedley Verity , played a key part in the bowling attack . At times , the faster bowlers Nobby Clark and Stan Nichols bowled Bodyline , resulting in several injuries . In this case , the Indian bowlers Mohammad Nissar and Amar Singh retaliated with Bodyline bowling of their own .

As the tour went on , there was discussion at a high level over Jardine 's future . The M.C.C. authorities had realised that Bodyline was dangerous and should not be continued , but some figures such as Lord Hawke did not want to let Jardine down . Australians saw him as more of a problem ; the likes of Alexander Hore-Ruthven wanted guarantees that Jardine would not use Bodyline and even that he not play . Plum Warner also believed that Jardine should no longer captain . Jardine himself saved the English selectors from any possible dilemma . In March 1934 , he first told Surrey that he would be unable to play regularly any more and he resigned as captain . Then in an announcement in the Evening Standard , he stated that " I have neither the intention nor the desire to play cricket against Australia this summer . " It is unclear whether this was due to the pressure over Bodyline , over assurances that the M.C.C. may have asked him to give or simply due to financial worries . This decision effectively ended his first-class career . He never played another Test and played only two more first-class matches in England , in 1937 and 1948 , and one in India in 1943 – 44 .

Jardine was seen as having a classical technique . While batting , he stood very straight and side on to the bowler . His off-driving was powerful , his defence was excellent , and he was superb at judging the line of the ball and letting it pass by if it was going to miss his wickets . His on-side play was also excellent , being able to place the ball between fielders for easy runs . Christopher Douglas described Jardine as " the epitome of the old-fashioned amateur " . However , he also comments that his approach to batting was like that of a professional and that his back-foot batting was of a quality that few amateurs could manage . In 1928 , Wisden 's correspondent described Jardine as the most secure amateur batsman of the time , and identified his greatest strength as his defence and his " mental gifts . " He played very straight and hit the ball hard in defence , but could not play all the strokes , particularly on the off side . R. C. Robertson-Glasgow believed that Jardine had modelled himself on C. B. Fry . He also noted that Jardine displayed good concentration , a strong desire to improve his batting and a fighting spirit that brought out his best in a crisis . He also said that Jardine could play every recognised cricket shot , but would not do so in a match and Robertson-Glasgow believed it was Jardine 's one weakness as a batsman . The more important the occasion , the more defensive and restricted Jardine 's batting became : " In general , as the task grew greater , the strokes grew fewer . "

Christopher Douglas argues that Jardine liked to make his runs when his side was in difficulty and enjoyed being tested ; his approach would often lead his team to recovery from an unfavourable situation . Douglas comments that Jardine held his place in the England side despite strong competition from other batsmen . His defensive technique rescued England from weak positions in around a dozen innings and only played in two losses with England ( which were his two least successful games with the bat ) . He also excelled in the main Gentlemen v Players fixture at Lord 's , making a good score in each of his appearances in this match . Jack Hobbs classed him as a great batsman and believed that he was under-rated by his contemporaries . Wisden believed that Jardine 's effective batting technique meant that fast bowlers troubled him less than other batsmen . He did have difficulties with a few bowlers . Alec Kennedy , a medium paced inswing bowler , took Jardine 's wicket eleven times , eight of these occasions before the batsman had scored 20 runs . Kennedy found that Jardine had slightly slow footwork , often bowling him or trapping him lbw . Bert Ironmonger also troubled Jardine , taking his wicket in five of the eleven Test innings in which they faced each other . Jardine displayed a slight weakness against Australian slow bowlers , not moving his feet well enough against them . In 16 Test innings in Australia , he was out to slow bowlers ten times , but he rarely experienced similar difficulties against English spinners . One other bowler to cause Jardine problems was the Australian paceman Tim Wall , who took his wicket five times on the nine occasions he bowled to him .

As a captain , Jardine inspired great loyalty in his players , even if they did not approve of his tactics . Christopher Douglas judges that Jardine did very well to keep the team united and loyal on the Bodyline tour . He points out that team spirit was always excellent and the players showed great determination and resolve . Jardine particularly impressed Yorkshiremen who played under him , as they believed he thought about cricket in a similar way to their county colleagues . He became close to Herbert Sutcliffe during the Bodyline tour , even though Sutcliffe was sceptical about Jardine on the previous Australian tour in 1928 – 29 . Hedley Verity was impressed by Jardine 's tactical understanding and named his younger son Douglas after the captain . Bill Bowes expressed approval of his leadership after initial misgivings , and went on to call him England 's greatest captain . Nevertheless , some players such as Arthur Mitchell who played under Jardine believed he was intolerant and unsupportive of players of lesser talent , expecting everyone to perform at world-class standards . Jardine insisted on strict discipline from his players but in return he went to great lengths to look after them , such as organising dental treatment or providing champagne for his tired bowlers . Critics praised his skill in field placing , which was sometimes interpreted as panic when he made frequent changes if the batsmen were on top . He also displayed great physical courage , such as when he was struck by a ball hard enough to draw blood on the Bodyline tour , but refused to show pain before reaching the dressing room . On the same tour , he instructed his men not to be friendly or to socialise with the Australian players ; Gubby Allen even claimed that Jardine instructed the team to hate the Australians . Robertson-Glasgow wrote that Jardine made thorough preparation for games in which he was captain , studying individual batsmen at great length to find weaknesses . He had very clear plans , judged the strengths and weaknesses of his teams and knew how to get the best out of individual players . However , Robertson-Glasgow considered it a grave misjudgement to make Jardine captain of England , particularly given his known antipathy towards Australia . Pelham Warner described how Jardine " was a master of tactics and strategy , and was especially adept in managing fast bowlers and thereby preserving their energy . He possessed a great capacity for taking pains , which , it has been said , is the mark of a genius ... As a field tactician and selector of teams he was , I consider , surpassed by no one and equalled by few , if any . "

Laurence Le Quesne argues that one of Jardine 's greatest talents , and at the same time greatest weaknesses , was his ability to formulate a winning strategy without consideration of wider contexts such as the social aspect of the game . On the Bodyline tour , he ignored the diplomacy required of an M.C.C. delegation . Instead , he embarked , according to Le Quesne , to win the Tests and settle personal scores with the Australians . Jardine was personally incapable of reacting to the crowds or responding to the controversy in a way that would have eased tensions , and so was not a good choice as captain given what the selectors already knew of him . Nevertheless , Le Quesne believed that when trouble arose , Jardine conducted himself with " great moral courage and an impressive degree of dignity and restraint . " In his Wisden obituary , Jardine was described as one of England 's best captains , while Jack Hobbs rated him the second best captain after Percy Fender . Warner also said that he was a fine captain on and off the field , and in dealing with administrators . In fact , he stated that , " If ever there was a cricket match between England and the rest of the world and the fate of England depended upon its result , I would pick Jardine as England captain every time . "

Jardine divided opinion among those with whom he played . He could be charming and witty or ruthless and harsh , while many people who knew him believed him to be innately shy . David Frith describes him as a complex figure who could change moods quickly . Although he could be friendly off the field , he became hostile and determined once he stepped onto the field . At his memorial service , he was described by Hubert Ashton as being " provocative , austere , brusque , shy , humble , thoughtful , kindly , proud , sensitive , single-minded and possessed of immense moral and physical courage , " and Frith argues that these varied qualities are easily proven by what was said about him . Harold Larwood maintained great respect for Jardine , treasuring a gift his captain gave him after the Bodyline tour and believing him to be a great man . Jardine showed affection for Larwood in return even after both of their retirements ; he expressed his concern for the way Larwood was treated , hosted a lunch for the former fast bowler shortly before he emigrated to Australia and met him there in 1954 . On the other hand , Donald Bradman would never speak to journalists about Bodyline or Jardine , and refused to give a tribute when Jardine died in 1958 . Jack Fingleton admitted that he had liked Jardine and stated that he and Larwood had each done their job on the Bodyline tour , and expressed regret at the way both left cricket in acrimonious circumstances . Fingleton also described Jardine as an aloof individual who preferred to take his time in judging a person before befriending them , a quality that caused problems in Australia . Bill O 'Reilly stated that he disliked Jardine at the time of Bodyline , but on meeting him later found him agreeable and even charming .

Alan Gibson said that Jardine had " irony rather than humour " . He sent Herbert Sutcliffe an umbrella as a joke on the day of his benefit match , when rain would have ruined the match and lost Sutcliffe a considerable amount of money . Many people who knew Jardine later in his life described him as having a sense of humour . Robertson-Glasgow noted that while he could curse very eloquently , Jardine displayed " dislike of waste in material or words . " He also commented that " if he has sometimes been a fierce enemy , he has also been a wonderful friend . "

Shortly before the tour of India in 1933 – 34 , Jardine became engaged and on 14 September 1934 , married Irene " Isla " Margaret Peat in London . She had met Jardine at shooting parties at her father 's Norfolk home . According to Gerald Howat , Jardine 's marriage was the probable reason for his giving up playing first-class cricket . Jardine 's father-in-law was keen for him to pursue his law career but he instead continued as a bank clerk and began to work as a journalist . He reported on the 1934 Ashes for the Evening Standard . His writing for the press , and in a follow-up book on the series , was critical of selectors but less so of the players . In 1936 , he penned Cricket : how to succeed , which was written as an instruction book for the National Union of Teachers . There was a possibility of his going to Australia as a journalist to cover the M.C.C. tour of 1936 – 37 , to the dismay of Hore-Ruthven , but nothing came of this . With alterations to the law in 1935 , changing the lbw law and preventing Bodyline bowling , Jardine became increasingly disillusioned with top-level cricket . He had grown uncomfortable with the nationalism stirred up by Tests , the greed of clubs and the large public following of individual players , particularly Bradman . At the same time , Jardine seemed to be ostracised by cricket writers and commentators , who simply ignored him . For example , Wisden made no mention of his retirement . Christopher Douglas believes that Jardine was used as a scapegoat for Bodyline once the M.C.C. stopped supporting the tactic and that a stigma was attached to him for the rest of his life and beyond .

Although Jardine had retired from regular first-class competition , he continued to play club cricket . Jardine and his wife initially lived in Kensington but moved to Reading after the birth of their first child , daughter Fianach . A second daughter , Marion , followed but the family suffered from financial worries . Jardine , as well as working in journalism , earned money from playing bridge . The family also tried unsuccessfully to engage in market gardening . To make more money , Jardine became a salesman with Cable & Wireless before working for a coal mining company in the late 1930s . In 1939 , he returned to cricket journalism and according to Christopher Douglas , achieved his highest standard as a writer .

Jardine joined the Territorial Army in August 1939 . Once World War II began , he was commissioned into the Royal Berkshire Regiment and went with the British Expeditionary Force to France . He served at Dunkirk , where he was fortunate to escape but suffered some injuries . After serving as staff captain at St. Albans , he was posted to India for the remainder of the war . He served in Quetta , then Simla as a major in the Central Provisions Directorate . He became fluent in the Hindustani language and although friendly , never formed close relationships with other officers . He gave lectures and played some cricket while in India . He left the army in 1945 only to find his job with the coal mining company was no longer available . In the meantime , his wife had moved to Somerset . In 1940 , she gave birth to a son , Euan , who had many medical problems , and in 1943 she bore a third daughter , Iona . The pressure of running the household and caring for Euan led Isla to have a nervous breakdown after Iona 's birth . When Jardine returned from the war , the family moved to Radlett to be closer to London . Isla recovered and Jardine found a job with paper manufacturers Wiggins Teape . In 1946 , Jardine was chosen to play for Old England in a popular and successful fund raising match against Surrey . He displayed much of his old batting skill but did not show much involvement with his team-mates . By 1948 , Jardine was more accepted in the cricket world . This was partly due to English perception of the short-pitched fast bowling of Australian pairing Ray Lindwall and Keith Miller as being hostile . England 's poor performance in the 1946 – 47 and 1948 Ashes also caused writers to remember Jardine more fondly as an icon of past English success .

In 1953 , Jardine resumed journalism for the Ashes series and expressed a high opinion of Len Hutton 's captaincy . He also did some broadcasting and wrote short stories to supplement his income ; Isla was in poor health and her medical care was expensive . In the same year , he became the first President of the Umpires Association , while from 1955 to 1957 he was President of the Oxford University Cricket Club . In 1953 , he travelled , with some trepidation , as a board member of the Scottish Australian Company to inspect some land in Australia . While there , he struck up a friendship with Fingleton and was surprised to be well received in the country , in his own words , as " an old so-and-so who got away with it . " In 1957 , Jardine travelled to Rhodesia , again to inspect some land , with his daughter Marion . While there , he became ill with tick fever . He showed no improvement upon his return to England and further tests revealed that he had advanced lung cancer . After some treatment , he travelled with his wife to a clinic in Switzerland but it was discovered that the cancer had spread and was incurable . He died in Switzerland on 18 June 1958 and his ashes were scattered over the top of Craigs Cross mountain in Perthshire , Scotland . His family had enquired about having his ashes dispersed at Lord 's , but this honour was restricted to war dead . When he died , his estate was valued at just over £ 71,000 , which would have been worth around £ 1 ¼ million in 2008 .

Jardine is inextricably associated with Bodyline . John Arlott wrote in 1989 that " It is no exaggeration to say that , among Australians , Douglas Jardine is probably the most disliked of cricketers . " In the view of Christopher Douglas , his name " stands for the legendary British qualities of cool-headed determination , implacable resolve , patrician disdain for crowds and critics alike – if you 're English that is . To Australians the name is synonymous with the legendary British qualities of snobbishness , cynicism and downright Pommie arrogance . " He also argues that Bodyline , which was legal at the time , was a necessary step to overcome the unfair advantage which batsmen of the time enjoyed . After the Bodyline tour , according to cricket writer Gideon Haigh , Jardine was seen as " the most reviled man in sport . " This perception faded from the 1950s onwards , and in more recent times , Jardine has been viewed more sympathetically . In 2002 , the England captain Nasser Hussain was compared to Jardine as a compliment when he displayed ruthlessness against the opposition .

Maniac Mansion is a 1987 graphic adventure video game developed and published by Lucasfilm Games . It follows teenage protagonist Dave Miller as he attempts to rescue his girlfriend from a mad scientist , whose mind has been enslaved by a sentient meteor . The player uses a point-and-click interface to guide Dave and two of his six playable friends through the scientist 's mansion while solving puzzles and avoiding dangers . Gameplay is nonlinear , and the game must be completed in different ways based on the player 's choice of characters . Initially released for the Commodore 64 and Apple II , Maniac Mansion was Lucasfilm Games ' first self-published product . The game was conceived in 1985 by Ron Gilbert and Gary Winnick , who sought to tell a comedic story based on horror film and B movie clichés . They mapped out the project as a paper-and-pencil game before coding commenced . While earlier adventure titles had relied on command lines , Gilbert disliked such systems , and he developed Maniac Mansion 's simpler point-and-click interface as a replacement . To speed up production , he created a game engine called SCUMM , which was used in many later LucasArts titles . After its release , Maniac Mansion was ported to several platforms . A port for the Nintendo Entertainment System had to be reworked heavily , in response to complaints by Nintendo of America that the game was inappropriate for children .

Maniac Mansion was critically acclaimed : reviewers lauded its graphics , cutscenes , animation and humor . Writer Orson Scott Card praised it as a step toward " computer games [ becoming ] a valid storytelling art . " It influenced numerous graphic adventure titles , and its point-and-click interface became a standard feature in the genre . The game 's success solidified Lucasfilm as a serious rival to adventure game studios such as Sierra On-Line . In 1990 , Maniac Mansion was adapted into a three-season television series of the same name , written by Eugene Levy and starring Joe Flaherty . A sequel to the game , entitled Day of the Tentacle , was released in 1993 .

Maniac Mansion is a graphic adventure game in which the player uses a point-and-click interface to guide characters through a two-dimensional game world and to solve puzzles . Fifteen action commands , such as " Walk To " and " Unlock " , may be selected by the player from a menu on the screen 's lower half . The player starts the game by choosing two out of six characters to accompany protagonist Dave Miller . Each character possesses unique abilities : for example , Syd and Razor can play musical instruments , while Bernard can repair appliances . The game may be completed with any combination of characters ; but , since many puzzles are solvable only by certain characters , different paths must be taken based on the group 's composition . Maniac Mansion features cutscenes , a word coined by Ron Gilbert , that interrupt gameplay to advance the story and inform the player about offscreen events . The game takes place in the mansion of the fictional Edison family : Dr. Fred , a mad scientist ; Nurse Edna , his wife ; and their son Weird Ed . Living with the Edisons are two large , disembodied tentacles , one purple and the other green . The intro sequence shows that a sentient meteor crashed near the mansion twenty years earlier ; it brainwashed the Edisons and directed Dr. Fred to obtain human brains for use in experiments . The game begins as Dave Miller prepares to enter the mansion to rescue his girlfriend , Sandy Pantz , who was kidnapped by Dr. Fred . With the exception of the green tentacle , the mansion 's inhabitants are hostile , and will throw the player characters into the dungeon — or , in some situations , kill them — if they see them . When a character dies , the player must choose a replacement from the unselected characters ; and the game ends if all characters are killed . Maniac Mansion has five possible endings , based on which characters are chosen , which survive , and what the characters accomplish .

Maniac Mansion was conceived in 1985 , when Lucasfilm Games employees Ron Gilbert and Gary Winnick were assigned to create an original game . Gilbert had been hired the previous year as a programmer for the game Koronis Rift . He befriended Winnick over their similar tastes in humor , film and television . Company management provided little oversight in the creation of Maniac Mansion , a trend to which Gilbert credited the success of several of his games for Lucasfilm . Gilbert and Winnick co-wrote and co-designed the project , but they worked separately as well : Gilbert on programming and Winnick on visuals . As both of them enjoyed B horror films , they decided to make a comedy-horror game set in a haunted house . They drew inspiration from a film whose name Winnick could not recall . He described it as " a ridiculous teen horror movie " , in which teenagers inside a building were killed one by one without any thought of leaving . This film , combined with clichés from popular horror movies such as Friday the 13th and A Nightmare on Elm Street , became the basis for the game 's setting . Early work on the game progressed organically : according to Gilbert , " Very little was written down . Gary and I just talked and laughed a lot , and out it came . " Lucasfilm Games relocated to the Stable House at Skywalker Ranch during Maniac Mansion 's conception period , and the ranch 's Main House was used as a model for the mansion . Several rooms from the Main House received exact reproductions in the game , such as a library with a spiral staircase and a media room with a large-screen TV and grand piano .

Story and characters were a primary concern for Gilbert and Winnick . The pair based the game 's cast on friends , family members , acquaintances and stereotypes . For example , Winnick 's girlfriend Ray was the inspiration for Razor , while Dave and Wendy were based , respectively , on Gilbert and a fellow Lucasfilm employee named Wendy . According to Winnick , the Edison family was shaped after characters from EC Comics and Warren Publishing magazines . The sentient meteor that brainwashes Dr. Fred was inspired by a segment from the 1982 anthology film Creepshow . A man-eating plant , similar to that of Little Shop of Horrors , was included as well . The developers sought to strike a balance between tension and humor with the game 's story . Initially , Gilbert and Winnick struggled to choose a gameplay genre for Maniac Mansion . While visiting relatives over Christmas , Gilbert saw his cousin play King 's Quest : Quest for the Crown , an adventure game by Sierra On-Line . Although he was a fan of text adventures , this was Gilbert 's first experience with a graphic adventure , and he used the holiday to play the game and familiarize himself with the format . As a result , he decided to develop his and Winnick 's ideas into a graphic adventure game .

Maniac Mansion 's story and structure were designed before coding commenced . The project 's earliest incarnation was a simple paper-and-pencil board game , in which the mansion 's floor plan was used as a game board , and cards represented events and characters . Lines connected the rooms to illustrate pathways by which characters could travel . Strips of cellulose acetate were used to map out the game 's puzzles by tracking which items worked together when used by certain characters . Impressed by the map 's complexity , Winnick included it in the final game as a poster hung on a wall . Because each character contributes different skills and resources , the pair spent months working on the event combinations that could occur . This extended the game 's production time beyond that of previous Lucasfilm Games projects , which almost led to Gilbert 's firing . The game 's dialogue , written by David Fox , was not created until after programming had begun .

Gilbert started programming Maniac Mansion in 6502 assembly language , but he quickly decided that the project was too large and complex for this method . He decided that a new game engine would have to be created . Its coding language was initially planned to be LISP-inspired , but Gilbert opted for one similar to C. Lucasfilm employee Chip Morningstar contributed the base code for the engine , which Gilbert then built on . Gilbert hoped to create a " system that could be used on many adventure games , cutting down the time it took to make them " . Maniac Mansion 's first six-to-nine months of production were dedicated largely to engine development . The game was developed around the Commodore 64 home computer , an 8-bit system with only 64 KB of memory . The team wanted to include scrolling screens , but as it was normally impossible to scroll bitmap graphics on the Commodore 64 , they had to utilize lower-detail tile graphics . Winnick gave each character a large head made of three stacked sprites to make them recognizable . Although Gilbert wrote much of the foundational code for Maniac Mansion , the majority of the game 's events were programmed by Lucasfilm employee David Fox . Fox was between projects and planned to work on the game only for a month , but he remained with the team for six months . With Gilbert , he wrote the characters ' dialog and choreographed the action . Winnick 's concept art inspired him to add new elements to the game : for example , Fox allowed the player to place a hamster inside the kitchen 's microwave .

The team wanted to avoid punishing the player for applying everyday logic in Maniac Mansion . Fox noted that one Sierra game features a scene in which the player , without prior warning , may encounter a game over screen simply by picking up a shard of glass . He characterized such game design as " sadistic " , and he commented , " I know that in the real world I can successfully pick up a broken piece of mirror without dying " . Because of the project 's nonlinear puzzle design , the team struggled to prevent no-win scenarios , in which the player unexpectedly became unable to complete the game . As a result of this problem , Gilbert later explained , " We were constantly fighting against the desire just to rip out all the endings and just go with three characters , or even sometimes just one character " . Lucasfilm Games had only one playtester , and many dead-ends went undetected as a result . Further playtesting was provided by Gilbert 's uncle , to whom Gilbert mailed a floppy disk of the game 's latest version each week . The Maniac Mansion team wanted to retain the structure of a text-based adventure game , but without the standard command-line interface . Gilbert and Winnick were frustrated by the genre 's text parsers and frequent game over screens . While in college , Gilbert had enjoyed Colossal Cave Adventure and the games of Infocom , but he disliked their lack of visuals . He found the inclusion of graphics in Sierra On-Line games , such as King 's Quest , to be a step in the right direction . However , these games still require the player to type , and to guess which commands must be input . In response , Gilbert programmed a point-and-click graphical user interface that displays every possible command . Fox had made a similar attempt to streamline Lucasfilm 's earlier Labyrinth : The Computer Game , and he conceived the entirety of Maniac Mansion 's interface , according to Gilbert . Forty input commands were planned at first , but the number was gradually reduced to 12 . Gilbert finished the Maniac Mansion engine — which he later named " Script Creation Utility for Maniac Mansion " ( SCUMM ) — after roughly one year of work . Although the game was designed for the Commodore 64 , the SCUMM engine allowed it to be ported easily to other platforms .

After 18 to 24 months of development , Maniac Mansion debuted at the 1987 Consumer Electronics Show in Chicago . The game was released for the Commodore 64 and Apple II in October 1987 . While previous Lucasfilm Games products had been published by outside companies , Maniac Mansion was self-published . This became a trend at Lucasfilm . The company hired Ken Macklin , an acquaintance of Winnick 's , to design the game 's packaging artwork . Gilbert and Winnick collaborated with the marketing department to design the back cover . The two also created an insert that includes hints , a backstory and jokes . An MS-DOS port was released in early 1988 , developed in part by Lucasfilm employees Aric Wilmunder and Brad Taylor . Ports for the Amiga , Atari ST and Nintendo Entertainment System ( NES ) followed , with the Amiga and Atari ST ports in 1989 and the NES port in 1990 . The 16-bit versions of Maniac Mansion featured a copy protection system requiring the user to enter graphical symbols out of a code book include with the game . This was not present in the Commodore 64 and Apple versions due to lack of disk space , so those instead used an on-disk copy protection .

There were two separate versions of the game developed for the NES . The first port was handled and published by Jaleco only in Japan . Released in 1989 it featured characters redrawn in a cute art style and generally shrunken rooms . No scrolling is present , leading to rooms larger than a single screen to be displayed via flip-screens . Many of the background details are missing , and instead of a save feature an over 100 character long password is required to save progress . In September 1990 Jaleco released an American version of Maniac Mansion as the first NES title developed by Lucasfilm Games in cooperation with Realtime Associates . Generally , this port is regarded as being far closer to the original game than the Japanese effort . Company management was occupied with other projects , and so the port received little attention until employee Douglas Crockford volunteered to direct it . The team used a modified version of the SCUMM engine called " NES SCUMM " for the port . According to Crockford , " [ One ] of the main differences between the NES and PCs is that the NES can do certain things much faster " . The graphics had to be entirely redrawn to match the NES 's display resolution . Tim Schafer , who later designed Maniac Mansion 's sequel Day of the Tentacle , received his first professional credit as a playtester for the NES version of Maniac Mansion .

During Maniac Mansion 's development for the Commodore 64 , Lucasfilm had censored profanity in the script : for instance , the early line of dialogue " Don 't be a shit head " became " Don 't be a tuna head " . However , additional content was removed from the NES version to make it suitable for a younger audience , and to conform with Nintendo 's policies . Jaleco USA president Howie Rubin warned Crockford about content to which Nintendo might object , such as the word " kill " . After reading the NES Game Standards Policy for himself , Crockford suspected that further elements of Maniac Mansion could be problematic , and he sent a list of questionable content to Jaleco . When the company replied that the content was reasonable , Lucasfilm Games submitted Maniac Mansion for approval . One month later , Nintendo of America contacted Lucasfilm Games to request the removal of offensive text and nude graphics . Crockford censored this content but attempted to leave the game 's essence intact . For example , Nintendo wanted graffiti in one room — which provided an important hint to players — removed from the game . Unable to comply without simultaneously removing the hint , the team simply shortened it . Sexually suggestive and otherwise " graphic " dialogue was edited , including a remark from Dr. Fred about " pretty brains [ being ] sucked out " . The nudity described by Nintendo encompassed a swimsuit calendar , a classical sculpture and a poster of a mummy in a Playmate pose . After a brief fight to keep the sculpture , the team ultimately removed all three . The phrase " NES SCUMM " in the credits sequence was censored as well .

Lucasfilm Games re-submitted the edited version of Maniac Mansion to Nintendo , which then manufactured 250,000 cartridges . Each cartridge was fitted with a battery-powered back-up to save data . Nintendo announced the port through its official magazine in early 1990 , and it provided further coverage later that year . The ability to microwave a hamster remained in the game , which Crockford cited as an example of the censors ' contradictory criteria . However , Nintendo later noticed it , and after the first batch of cartridges was sold , Jaleco was forced to remove the content from future shipments . Late in development , Jaleco commissioned Realtime Associates to provide background music , which no previous version of Maniac Mansion had featured . Realtime Associates ' founder and president David Warhol noted that " video games at that time had to have ' wall to wall ' music " . He brought in George " The Fat Man " Sanger and his band , along with David Hayes , to compose the score . Their goal was to create songs that suited each character , such as a punk rock theme for Razor , an electronic rock theme for Bernard and a version of Thin Lizzy 's " The Boys Are Back in Town " for Dave Miller . Warhol translated their work into NES chiptune music .

Keith Farrell of Compute ! ' s Gazette was struck by Maniac Mansion 's similarity to film , particularly in its use of cutscenes to impart " information or urgency " . He lauded the game 's graphics , animation and high level of detail . Commodore User 's Bill Scolding and three reviewers from Zzap ! 64 compared the game to The Rocky Horror Picture Show . Further comparisons were drawn to Psycho , Friday the 13th , The Texas Chain Saw Massacre , The Addams Family and Scooby-Doo . Russ Ceccola of Commodore Magazine found the cutscenes to be creative and well made , and he commented that the " characters are distinctively Lucasfilm 's , bringing facial expressions and personality to each individual character " . In Compute ! , Orson Scott Card praised the game 's humor , cinematic storytelling and lack of violence . He called it " compellingly good " and evidence of Lucasfilm 's push " to make computer games a valid storytelling art " . German magazine Happy-Computer commended the point-and-click interface and likened it to that of Uninvited by ICOM Simulations . The publication highlighted Maniac Mansion 's graphics , originality and overall enjoyability : one of the writers called it the best adventure title yet released . Happy-Computer later reported that Maniac Mansion was the highest-selling video game in West Germany for three consecutive months . The game 's humor received praise from Zzap ! 64 , whose reviewers called the point-and-click controls " tremendous " and the total package " innovative and polished " . Shay Addams of Questbusters : The Adventurer 's Newsletter preferred Maniac Mansion 's interface to that of Labyrinth : The Computer Game . He considered the game to be Lucasfilm 's best , and he recommended it to Commodore 64 and Apple II users unable to run titles with better visuals , such as those from Sierra On-Line . A writer for ACE enjoyed the game 's animation and depth , but he noted that fans of text-based adventures would dislike the game 's simplicity .

Reviewing the MS-DOS and Atari ST ports , a critic from The Games Machine called Maniac Mansion " an enjoyable romp " that was structurally superior to later LucasArts adventure games . However , the writer noticed poor pathfinding and disliked the limited audio . Reviewers for The Deseret News lauded the audiovisuals and considered the product " wonderful fun " . Computer Gaming World 's Charles Ardai praised the game for attaining " the necessary and precarious balance between laughs and suspense that so many comic horror films and novels lack " . Although he faulted the control system 's limited options , he hailed it as " one of the most comfortable ever devised " . Writing for VideoGames & Computer Entertainment , Bill Kunkel and Joyce Worley stated that the game 's plot and premise were typical of the horror genre ; but they praised the interface and execution . Reviewing Maniac Mansion 's Amiga version four years after its release , Simon Byron of The One Amiga praised the game for retaining " charm and humour " , but suggested that its art direction had become " tacky " compared to more recent titles . Stephen Bradly of Amiga Format found the game derivative , but he encountered " loads of visual humour " in it ; and he added , " Strangely , it 's quite compelling after a while . " Michael Labiner of Germany 's Amiga Joker considered Maniac Mansion to be one of the best adventure games for the system . He noted minor graphical flaws , such as a limited color palette , but he argued that the gameplay made up for such shortcomings . Writing for Datormagazin in Sweden , Ingela Palmér commented that the Amiga and Commodore 64 versions of Maniac Mansion were nearly identical . She criticized the graphics and gameplay of both releases , but felt the game to be highly enjoyable regardless .

Reviewing the NES release , British magazine Mean Machines commended the game 's presentation , playability and replay value . However , the publication noted undetailed graphics and " ear-bashing tunes " . The magazine 's Julian Rignall compared Maniac Mansion to the title Shadowgate , but he preferred the former 's controls and lack of " death-without-warning situations " . Writers for Germany 's Video Games referred to the NES version as a " classic " . Co-reviewer Heinrich Lenhardt stated that Maniac Mansion was unlike any other NES adventure game , and that it was no less enjoyable than its home computer releases . Co-reviewer Winnie Forster found it to be " one of the most original representatives of the [ adventure game ] genre " . In retrospective features , Edge magazine called the NES version " somewhat neutered " and GamesTM referred to it as " infamous " and " heavily censored " .

Lucasfilm conceived the idea for a television adaptation of Maniac Mansion , the rights to which were purchased by The Family Channel in 1990 . The two companies collaborated with Atlantis Films to produce a sitcom named after the game , which debuted in September of that year . It aired on YTV in Canada and The Family Channel in the United States . Based in part on the video game , the series focuses on the Edison family 's life and stars Joe Flaherty as Dr. Fred . Its writing staff was led by Eugene Levy . Gilbert later said that the premise of the series changed during production , until it differed heavily from the game 's original plot . Upon its debut , the adaptation received positive reviews from Variety , Entertainment Weekly and the Los Angeles Times . Time named it one of the year 's best new series . However , Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly questioned the decision to air the series on The Family Channel , given Flaherty 's subversive humor . Discussing the series in retrospect , Richard Cobbett of PC Gamer criticized its generic storylines and lack of relevance to the game . The series lasted for three seasons ; sixty-six episodes were filmed .

In the early 1990s , LucasArts tasked Dave Grossman and Tim Schafer , both of whom had worked on the Monkey Island series , with designing a sequel to Maniac Mansion . Gilbert and Winnick initially assisted with the project 's writing . The team included voice acting and more detailed graphics , which Gilbert had originally envisioned for Maniac Mansion . The first game 's nonlinear design was discarded , and the team implemented a Chuck Jones-inspired visual style , alongside numerous puzzles based on time travel . Bernard and the Edison family were retained . The sequel , entitled Day of the Tentacle , was released in 1993 .

In 2010 , the staff of GamesTM dubbed Maniac Mansion a " seminal " title that overhauled the gameplay of the graphic adventure genre . Removing the need to guess syntax allowed players to concentrate on the story and puzzles , which created a smoother and more enjoyable experience , according to the magazine . Eurogamer 's Kristan Reed agreed : he believed that the design was " infinitely more elegant and intuitive " than its predecessors , and that it freed players from " guessing-game frustration " . Designer Dave Grossman , who worked on Lucasfilm Games ' later Day of the Tentacle and The Secret of Monkey Island , felt that Maniac Mansion had revolutionized the adventure game genre . Although 1985 's Uninvited had featured a point-and-click interface , it was not influential . Maniac Mansion 's implementation of the concept was widely imitated in other adventure titles . Writing in the game studies journal Kinephanos , Jonathan Lessard argued that Maniac Mansion led a " Casual Revolution " in the late 1980s , which opened the adventure genre to a wider audience . Similarly , Christopher Buecheler of GameSpy called the game a contributor to its genre 's subsequent critical adoration and commercial success .

Reed highlighted the " wonderfully ambitious " design of Maniac Mansion , in reference to its writing , interface and cast of characters . Game designer Sheri Graner Ray believed the game to challenge " damsel in distress " stereotypes through its inclusion of female protagonists . Conversely , writer Mark Dery argued that the goal of rescuing a kidnapped cheerleader reinforced negative gender roles . The Lucasfilm team built on their experiences from Maniac Mansion and became increasingly ambitious in subsequent titles . Gilbert admitted to making mistakes — such as the inclusion of no-win situations — in Maniac Mansion , and he applied these lessons to future projects . For example , the game relies on timers rather than events to trigger cutscenes , which occasionally results in awkward transitions : Gilbert worked to avoid this flaw with the Monkey Island series . Because of Maniac Mansion 's imperfections , however , Gilbert considers it his favorite of his games . According to writers Mike and Sandie Morrison , Lucasfilm Games became " serious competition " in the adventure genre after the release of Maniac Mansion . The game 's success solidified Lucasfilm as one of the leading producers of adventure games : authors Rusel DeMaria and Johnny Wilson described it as a " landmark title " for the company . In their view , Maniac Mansion — along with Space Quest : The Sarien Encounter and Leisure Suit Larry in the Land of the Lounge Lizards — inaugurated a " new era of humor-based adventure games " . This belief was shared by Reed , who wrote that Maniac Mansion " set in motion a captivating chapter in the history of gaming " that encompassed wit , invention and style . The SCUMM engine was reused by Lucasfilm in eleven later titles ; improvements were made to its code with each game . Over time , rival adventure game developers adopted this paradigm in their own software . GamesTM attributed the change to a desire to streamline production and create enjoyable games . Following his 1992 departure from LucasArts — a conglomeration of Lucasfilm Games , ILM and Skywalker Sound formed in 1990 — Gilbert used SCUMM to create adventure games and Backyard Sports titles for Humongous Entertainment .

In 2011 , Richard Cobbett summarized Maniac Mansion as " one of the most intricate and important adventure games ever made " . Retro Gamer ranked it as one of the ten best Commodore 64 games in 2006 , and IGN later named it one of the ten best LucasArts adventure game . Seven years after the NES version 's debut , Nintendo Power named it the 61st best game ever . The publication dubbed it the 16th best NES title in 2008 . The game 's uniqueness and clever writing were praised by Nintendo Power : in 2010 , the magazine 's Chris Hoffman stated that the game is " unlike anything else out there — a point-and-click adventure with an awesome sense of humor and multiple solutions to almost every puzzle . " In its retrospective coverage , Nintendo Power several times noted the ability to microwave a hamster , which the staff considered to be an iconic scene . In March 2012 , Retro Gamer listed the hamster incident as one of the " 100 Classic Gaming Moments " . Maniac Mansion enthusiasts have drawn fan art of its characters , participated in tentacle-themed cosplay and produced a trailer for a fictitious film adaptation of the game . German fan Sascha Borisow created a fangame remake , entitled Maniac Mansion Deluxe , with enhanced audio and visuals . He used the Adventure Game Studio engine to develop the project , which he distributed free of charge on the Internet . By the end of 2004 , the remake had over 200,000 downloads . A remake with three-dimensional graphics called Meteor Mess was created by the German developer Vampyr Games , and , as of 2011 , another group in Germany is producing one with art direction similar to that of Day of the Tentacle . Fans have created an episodic series of games based on Maniac Mansion as well . Gilbert has said that he would like to see an official remake , similar in its graphics and gameplay to The Secret of Monkey Island : Special Edition and Monkey Island 2 Special Edition : LeChuck 's Revenge . However , he expressed doubts about its potential quality , in light of George Lucas ' enhanced remakes of the original Star Wars trilogy .

East Carolina University is a public , doctoral / research university in Greenville , North Carolina , United States . Named East Carolina University by statute and commonly known as ECU or East Carolina , the university is the third-largest in North Carolina . The Association of Public and Land Grant Universities designates East Carolina as a Sea Grant university and an Innovation and Economic Prosperity campus . Founded on March 8 , 1907 as a teacher training school , East Carolina has grown from 43 acres ( 17 ha ) to almost 1,600 acres ( 647 ha ) today . The university 's academic facilities are located on five properties : Main Campus , Health Sciences Campus , West Research Campus , the Field Station for Coastal Studies in New Holland , North Carolina and the Millennial Research and Innovation Campus in Greenville 's warehouse district . The nine undergraduate colleges , graduate school , and four professional schools are located on these four properties . All of the non-health sciences majors are located on the main campus . The College of Nursing , College of Allied Health Sciences , The Brody School of Medicine , and School of Dental Medicine are located on the health science campus . There are ten social sororities , 16 social fraternities , four historically black sororities , five historically black fraternities , one Native American fraternity , and one Native American sorority . There are over 300 registered clubs on campus including fraternities and sororities .

Public Laws of North Carolina , 1907 , Chapter 820 titled An Act to Stimulate High School Instruction in the Public Schools of the State and Teacher Training is the official law chartering East Carolina Teachers Training School ( ECTTS ) on March 8 , 1907 by the North Carolina General Assembly . The chairman of its original Board of Trustees , Thomas Jordan Jarvis , a former Governor of North Carolina now known as the " Father of ECU " , participated in groundbreaking ceremonies for the first buildings on July 2 , 1908 in Greenville , North Carolina and ECTTS opened its doors on October 5 , 1909 . Although its purpose was to train " young white men and women " , there were no male graduates until 1932 . In 1920 , ECTTS became a four – year institution and renamed East Carolina Teachers College ( ECTC ) ; its first bachelor 's degrees were awarded the following year in education . A master 's degree program was authorized in 1929 ; the first such degree granted by ECTC was in 1933 . Progress toward full college status was made in 1948 with the designation of the bachelor of arts as a liberal arts degree , and the bachelor of science as a teaching degree . A change of name to East Carolina College in 1951 reflected this expanded mission . Over the objections of Governor Dan K. Moore , who opposed the creation of a university system separate from the Consolidated University of North Carolina , ECC was made a regional university effective July 1 , 1967 , and assumed its present name , East Carolina University . The university did not remain independent for long ; on July 1 , 1972 , it was incorporated into the University of North Carolina System , the successor to the Consolidated University . Today , ECU is the third – largest university in North Carolina with 21,589 undergraduate and 5,797 graduate students , including the 308 medicine and 52 dental students .

The main campus , also known as the east campus , is about 530 acres ( 2 km2 ) in an urban residential area of downtown Greenville . The 158 buildings on main campus comprise more than 4.6 million square feet ( 325,000 m ² ) of academic , research , and residential space . Many of the Main Campus buildings feature the Spanish – Mission style architecture ; inspiration drawn from Thomas Jarvis ' time as an ambassador to Brazil . He wanted to bring the unique architecture to eastern North Carolina . On the main campus , there are five districts : Campus Core , Downtown District , Warehouse District , Athletic fields and the South Academic District . On the Campus Core , there are 15 residence halls which are divided into three separate neighborhoods . The distinct feature of the main campus is the mall , which is a large tree – laden grassy area where many students go to relax . In the middle of the mall is the replica of the cupola on the original Austin building .

The varsity athletics fields are located south of the College Hill residential neighborhood . Fourteenth Street divides College Hill to the north , with the athletic fields to the south . Charles Boulevard borders the fields to the west and Greenville Boulevard borders it to the south . A residential neighborhood and Elmhurst Elementary School are the eastern borders . The northern portion of the area sits Dowdy-Ficklen Stadium , Minges Coliseum , and Minges Natatorium , along with parking . The Murphy Center , which is the primary strength and conditioning , and banquet building , is located between Dowdy-Ficklen and Minges Coliseum . The Tennis Complex , Ward Sports Medicine Building , Scales Field House , and the Pirate Club Building also surround Dowdy-Ficklen . The Ward Sports Medicine Building houses offices for football and basketball , Pirate Club , media relations , and the director of athletics . The Scales Field House provides locker rooms , offices and equipment storage . The Pirate Club Building houses a ticket office , other offices , and an area for Pirate Club members . South of those facilities is the Cliff Moore Practice Facility which has a pair of natural grass fields and one FieldTurf field designed exclusively for the football team . On the southern border of the practice facility is Clark-LeClair Stadium , which is the men 's baseball stadium . It opened in 2005 and seats 3,000 in permanent seating with another 2,000 located in the outfield . At the southern end of the fields is the Olympic Sports Complex , which include women 's soccer stadium , softball stadium , track and field facility , and Olympic Sports Team building . The Olympic Sports Complex was completed in 2011 with a price of $ 23.4 million . The Smith-Williams Center is a $ 17 million basketball development and practice facility , opened in 2013 . The football stadium is planning for a $ 40 million upgrade . The upgrades will include a new press , club , and suite areas , and upper deck , all located on the south side . This addition will increase the capacity from 50,000 to 60,000 .

The Health Sciences campus is situated beside Vidant Medical Center ( VMC ) . VMC was originally Pitt County Memorial Hospital . After becoming a private non-profit hospital , the renaming occurred . VMC , an 861 – bed flagship Level I Trauma Center , serves as the academic medical center for The Brody School of Medicine . Vidant Health owns VMC , leases or owns six and manages one . The area is about 2 miles ( 3.2 km ) west of Main Campus on 206 acres ( 0.8 km2 ) with nearly 1,300,000 square feet ( 121,000 m2 ) of academic and research space in 62 buildings . Other buildings besides VMC include Brody Medicine Science Building , the East Carolina Heart Institute , Leo Jenkins Cancer Center , and the Allied Health building composed of the College of Nursing , Laupus Medical Library and College of Allied Health Sciences . The 117,000 square feet ( 11,000 m2 ) Family Medicine Center opened in the fall of 2011 . Ross Hall , which will house the School of Dental Medicine , will be just under 200,000 square feet is currently being built .

West Research Campus lies on approximately 600 acres ( 2.4 km2 ) 4 miles ( 6.4 km ) west of the Health Sciences Campus . It consists of four buildings with 36,000-square-foot ( 3,300 m2 ) on the former Voice of America site . Approximately 367 acres ( 1.49 km2 ) are designated wetlands and large areas of biology , botany and other sciences field study sites . It has an environmental health onsite wastewater demonstration facility which is open to the public and all educators . It is also the home of the North Carolina Institute for Health and Safety in Agriculture , Forestry , and Fisheries with an administrative and several support buildings .

The field station is located in New Holland , North Carolina . The area serves as a field station for the coastal studies , coastal resource management , and biology programs . The main goal of the field station is economic development into the region through both environmental education and eco – tourism . It also serves as a facility for small retreats and as a base for research on coastal issues . It was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1980 . It is adjacent to the 49,925-acre ( 202 km2 ) Mattamuskeet Wildlife Refuge .

North Recreational Complex ( NRC ) is an athletic complex located on a 129-acre ( 522,044.5 m2 ) parcel of land north of East Carolina University 's main campus . The NRC is one of the Nation 's largest recreational complexes . It will augment the Blount Intramural Sports Fields located behind the Carol Belk Building on Charles Boulevard . The first of three phases of the complex opened on September 2 , 2008 . Phase one includes eight lighted fields , a 5.6 acres ( 0 km2 ) lake with a beach , walking trails / areas , and a field house . The complex is located near the intersection of the North Carolina Highway 33 and U.S. Route 264 . Phase II opened in August 2011 , with the grand opening occurring on September 15 , 2011 . This phase includes a 5.6-acre ( 0.0 km2 ) lake on with a 51,000-square-foot ( 4,700 m2 ) beach . A 2,000-square-foot ( 190 m2 ) boat house is also located there . Canoes and kayaks can be rented at the boathouse for use in the lake . Other amenities include sand volleyball courts , horseshoes , grills , fitness equipment , six walking / running trails , a disc golf course , and an Odyssey Course which includes a 300-foot zip line .

ECU is home to nine undergraduate colleges , a graduate school , and four professional schools . The oldest school is the modern day College of Education . The University offers 16 doctoral degree programs , 4 first professional degree programs , 76 master 's degree programs , and 102 bachelor 's degree programs . ECU 's liberal arts college is the Thomas Harriot College of Arts and Sciences . It consists of 16 departments , making it the third largest College . The liberal arts college has its roots in the beginning of the University . The College of Business is a professional school consisting of six departments with undergraduate concentrations in each , plus the Miller School of Entrepreneurship and a Master of Business Administration and Master of Science in Accounting program . The College 's beginnings came in 1936 when the Department of Commerce was organized . It later changed to the Department of Business Education , and then to the Department of Business . Finally , in 1960 , the School of Business was formed . The college undergraduate program was accredited in 1967 , and the graduate program was accredited in 1976 by The Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business . The college is a governing school of the Graduate Management Admission Council . The college runs a Small Business Institute to advise small business owners on how to succeed .

The College of Education is the oldest and largest college at ECU . It houses and administers all of the education majors and an international open access journal , the Journal of Curriculum and Instruction . There are 17 undergraduate degree programs , 22 graduate degree programs , six advanced certifications , and the Doctor of Education program . The College prepares more professionals for North Carolina schools than any other university in the state . The College scored higher than other North Carolina universities when the state board evaluated teacher education programs in 2006 . In addition , the Institution of Higher Education Performance Report showed ECU was first in the number of graduates who were employed in public schools across the state . The college is considered one of the exemplary professional preparation programs according to the North Carolina State Board of Education 's Higher Education Performance Report . The College of Fine Arts and Communication comprises four schools that range from dance to design and broadcast journalism . The college officially opened on July 1 , 2003 , but can trace its roots to ECU founding ; the school hired art and music professionals in 1907 to train teachers .

The College of Health and Human Performance is made up of three departments and handles all of the recreational and exercise degrees at East Carolina University . It took on its name in 2003 , but traces its legacy to the Department of Physical Education in 1930 . It was the 1930 East Carolina Teachers College Planning Document number two priority . In 1938 , the Department of Physical Education was established and Physical education became a specialty area for high school teachers . The College of Human Ecology houses four departments and one school along with two institutes . It was first incorporated in 1968 and started to admit students in 1971 . " The Carolyn Freeze Baynes Institute for Social Justice is an international forum for addressing questions , presenting ideas , and developing innovations . The Institute 's focus in these activities is the identification of injustices and development of more just alternatives through systematic professional research , scholarship , and public presentation of findings and ideas . " The College of Engineering and Technology comprises four departments . The college offers nine degrees including engineering , computer science , construction management , design , distribution and logistics , industrial engineering technology , information and computer technology , and industrial technology .

The College of Allied Health Sciences encompasses the health science majors outside of nursing . The school offers over 15 majors . All of the health sciences majors are located in the Allied Health Sciences building which is on the Health Sciences Campus beside The Brody School of Medicine . It was established in the 1967 – 68 school year . The College of Nursing is a professional school that offers one undergraduate degree , Bachelor of Science in Nursing . The school was created in 1959 and now offers Bachelor of Science , Masters , and Ph.D programs . The college has over 100 faculty teaching the students everything about the nursing field while practicing in the under-served Eastern North Carolina . There are three departments within this school : Department of Undergraduate Nursing Science Junior Division , Department of Undergraduate Nursing Science Senior Division , and the Department of Graduate Nursing Science . On October 12 , 2007 , the University of North Carolina Board of Governors permitted the re – designation of the School of Nursing to the College of Nursing . The National League for Nursing named the college a Center of Excellence . The college produces more nurses than any other school in the Mid-Atlantic region .

The Graduate School consist of 85 master 's degree , 21 doctoral programs and 62 certificates . It coordinates the graduate offerings of all departments in the nine colleges . The School also runs the non – professional degree programs of the professional School of Medicine . The school offers 17 master 's degree in Accounting , Arts , Business Administration , Construction Management , Education , Environmental Health , Fine Arts , Library Science , Music , Nursing , Occupational Therapy , Public Administration , Public Health , School AdministrationScience , Social Work and Teaching . It also offers four doctoral degrees in Audiology , Education , Philosophy , and Physical Therapy . The Brody School of Medicine is a professional school at the university . It consists of seven graduate majors , plus the Doctor of Medicine , all located on the Health Sciences Campus . The first appropriations were approved in 1974 , with the first medical students arriving in 1977 . The medical school is one of five in North Carolina . The School of Dental Medicine is a professional school at the university . The school graduates one degree , Doctor of Dental Medicine . It will also have two residencies in Advanced Education in General Dentistry and Dental General Practice . The school also will offer a specialty program in Pedodontics . It was founded on February 24 , 2006 at the East Carolina Board of Trustees meeting . The dental school was unanimously approved by the UNC System Board of Governors as well . The facilities are located on the Health Sciences Campus and will house the first three years of education . Dental students will complete their final year at ECU Community Service Learning Centers to be located throughout the state . The School of Dental Medicine is one of two dental schools in the state .

Randolph Chitwood , a cardiothoracic surgeon with East Carolina , performed the first minimally invasive robotic-assisted mitral-valve heart surgery in the United States . East Carolina researchers also developed an electronic fluency device called SpeechEasy ; the device is designed to improve the fluency of a person who stutters by changing the sound of the user 's voice in his or her ear . Walter Pories , a faculty member at The Brody School of Medicine developed the standard procedure for gastric bypass surgery . Researchers here also first discovered that 80 % of obese / type 2 diabetic patients who underwent this surgical procedure had a reversal of the disease . The Biofeedback Lab is currently developing techniques to help service members recover from posttraumatic stress disorders and traumatic brain injuries they received in Afghanistan and Iraq . The in vitro fertilization program is ranked first in North Carolina and fourth overall in the United States . Jason Bond , a former scientist in the Department of Biology , discovered many new species of spiders , including Myrmekiaphila neilyoungi and Aptostichus stephencolberti . During an archaeological dig on Hatteras Island in 1998 , archaeologists discovered a 10-carat gold English signet ring from the 16th century , among other artifacts . The discovered ring was the first material connection between The Lost Colony on Roanoke Island and the Algonquian peoples on Croatan Island . In 2011 , underwater archaeologists raised the anchors of the Queen Anne 's Revenge , the flagship vessel of Blackbeard , near Beaufort .

J.Y. Joyner Library is the main library located beside the Mall on the main campus . It holds nearly 1.9 million bound volumes , 2.1 million pieces of microform , 532,000 government documents , and more than 24,000 journal subscriptions . The library , which houses the East Carolina manuscript collection , is the largest library east of Raleigh . It is one of the leading repositories in the nation for modern naval and maritime history . It also holds materials related to North Carolina , the tobacco industry , worldwide missionary activities , and American military history . The library is the official repository of the records of the United States Coast Guard Auxiliary . The J. Edgar Hoover Collection on International Communism contains many items dealing with communism worldwide . The Rare Book Collections has items dating from 1589 , including a 1733 Edward Moseley map , the first to comprehensively map the colony of North Carolina and the only original copy in the United States . The Music Library is a branch of Joyner Library located on the first floor of A.J. Fletcher Music Center . It houses approximately 93,000 items , including the entire audio recording collection . It is the largest music collection east of Raleigh . The primary users of the library are faculty and students within the School of Music and the School of Theatre and Dance , but anyone can use its resources . It began in 1958-59 academic year when a small library was created . Today a staff of five oversee the library duties .

The William E. Laupus Library is the medical and health library for East Carolina . It is the primary library for the Brody School of Medicine , the College of Nursing , the College of Allied Health Sciences , and the School of Dental Medicine . It holds approximately 160,000 volumes ( print and non – print ) and 10,000 current print , non – print , and electronic serial titles . In 2006 , it moved to the Health Sciences Building on the Health Sciences campus . The library is named for Dr. Laupus , a former Dean of Brody School of Medicine .

There are ten social sororities at the East Carolina Campus , most of which own a house located at or near 5th or 10th Street . There are currently 17 social fraternities at East Carolina . The majority are located off or near 5th Street or 10th Street . Of the 17 social fraternities , seven currently do own a house . Greek life started in 1958 with the introduction of four social fraternities : Kappa Alpha Order , Lambda Chi Alpha , Pi Kappa Alpha , and Theta Chi . Two years later , eight of the ten social sororities were founded . National Pan-Hellenic Council ( NPHC ) has a presence on campus , as well . There are four historically black sororities and five historically black fraternities . There are over 18 honor and 13 service or religious fraternities or sororities at ECU .

ECU 's sports teams , nicknamed the Pirates , compete in NCAA Division FBS as a full – member of the American Athletic Conference ( The American ) . The Pirates joined The American on July 1 , 2014 . Jeff Compher is the Athletic Director . The football team is supported by world-class spirit groups , such as the East Carolina University Marching Pirates , National Award winning Cheerleading squads , and spirit teams . Facilities include the 50,000 seat Dowdy-Ficklen Stadium for football , the 8,000 – seat Williams Arena at Minges Coliseum for men 's and women 's basketball , and Clark-LeClair Stadium , with a seating capacity of 3,000 ( max capacity of 6,000 + when including outfield " Jungle " areas ) for baseball . The Ward Sports Medicine building comprises 82,095-square-foot ( 7,600 m2 ) and houses the athletic department , Pirate Club offices and the Human Performance Laboratory . Athletes train in the Murphy Center a 52,475-square-foot ( 4,875 m2 ) edifice , housing the strength and conditioning facilities , along with banquet rooms , sport memorabilia , and an academic enhancement center . The Murphy Center was built for approximately $ 13 million and opened its doors to ECU student – athletes in June 2002 .

There have been six presidents and seven Chancellors in the university 's history . Robert Herring Wright was inaugurated as the first president of ECTTS on November 13 , 1909 . The chief administrator changed names after ECU joined the UNC System in 1972 . The chancellor is chosen by the University of North Carolina Board of Governors on the recommendation of the board 's president , and he reports to the 12 – member Board of Trustees at ECU . Four of the twelve trustees are picked by the Governor of North Carolina , while the other eight are picked by the Board of Governors . The ECU student body president is an ex officio member of the Board of Trustees . The current chancellor , Cecil Pope Staton , Jr . , has held that post since replacing chancellor Steve Ballard on July 1 . 2016 The University of North Carolina Board of Governors are the policy-making body legally charged with " the general determination , control , supervision , management , and governance of all affairs of the constituent institutions . " It has 32 voting members who are elected by the General Assembly for four-year terms .

In 2012 , East Carolina was classified by U.S. News & World Report as a National University in its second-tier rankings . In 2010 , Forbes ranked the school 36th in its America 's Best College Buys story . In the 2012 edition of U.S. News & World Report , The Brody School of Medicine is ranked 10th in the country for primary care physician preparation , 13th in the rural medicine specialty and 14th in family medicine . In 2010 , Brody was ranked seventh on the social mission scale . The College of Business is named one of the best business schools according to The Princeton Review for the fifth year in a row . The College of Business is also named by GetEducated.com as the third best buy for affordability and quality in the Online Masters of Business Administration ( AACSB-accredited ) category . In 2009 , the university was awarded the Patriot Award . The Patriot Award recognizes employers who go above and beyond what the law requires in supporting their employees who serve in the National Guard or reserves . In 2010 , the university was awarded the Secretary of Defense Employer Support Freedom Award . It is the highest recognition given by the U.S. Government to employers for their outstanding support of their employees who serve in the Guard and Reserve .

" Hail to Thy Name So Fair " is the alma mater at East Carolina University . It first appeared in the 1940-41 East Carolina Teachers College ( ECTC ) Student Handbook . It was written by Harold A. McDougle ( ' 44 ) who became a part-time instructor in the Music Department from 1946-47 . The Marching Pirates perform the song during all home football and basketball games . At every home football game , after the National Anthem is played by the band , the Alma Mater is played followed by the E.C. Victory song . At the end of football games , the football team walks to the student section to sing the Alma Mater and E.C. Victory song in unison .

Pirate graduates have been influential in teaching , business , and the arts . Actress Emily Procter , Beth Grant , and screenwriter Kevin Williamson , creator of Scream and Dawson 's Creek , graduated from East Carolina . Acclaimed screen actress Sandra Bullock attended , but graduated later after leaving to pursue her acting career . Marcus Crandell ( born June 1 , 1974 , in Charlotte , North Carolina ) is a former quarterback and current coach in professional Canadian football ; he played 11 seasons for the Edmonton Eskimos , Calgary Stampeders and Saskatchewan Roughriders from 1997 to 2008 while also spending time in NFL Europe and the XFL . Crandell was named the Grey Cup Most Valuable Player after the Stampeders won the 89th Grey Cup in 2001 . Class of 1974 Alumnus Rick Atkinson , wrote An Army at Dawn : The War in North Africa , 1942 – 1943 followed by " The Day of Battle , The War in Sicily , 1943 – 1944 " and Dan Neil wrote criticism on automobiles ; both received Pulitzer Prizes . The most notable teaching alumnus is Ron Clark , a teacher , author , and founder of the Ron Clark Academy in Atlanta , Georgia . James Maynard graduated with a degree in psychology and founded the Golden Corral restaurant chain . Kelly King is the current chief executive officer for BB & T and graduated with an undergraduate degree in business accounting and a master 's of business administration . Former Jacksonville Jaguars quarterback David Garrard attended where he majored in Construction Management . Chris Johnson was drafted by the Tennessee Titans in the first round of the 2008 NFL Draft . WWE Chairman and CEO Vincent K. McMahon and his wife Linda McMahon both graduated with a degree in business administration as well . Scott Avett of the folk-rock band The Avett Brothers earned degrees in 1999 and 2000 . Henry " Gizmo " Williams , Canadian Football League inductee , graduated from East Carolina University .

" We Are the World 25 for Haiti " is a charity single recorded by the supergroup Artists for Haiti in 2010 . It is a remake of the 1985 hit song " We Are the World " , which was written by American musicians Michael Jackson and Lionel Richie , and was recorded by USA for Africa to benefit famine relief in Africa . Initially , in late 2009 , it had been suggested to Richie and Quincy Jones — producer of the original " We Are the World " — that a re-cut version of the song be re-released under the title " Live 25 " . Following the magnitude 7.0 Mw earthquake in Haiti , which devastated the area and killed thousands of people , it was agreed that the song would be re-recorded by new artists , in the hope that it would reach a new generation and help benefit the people of Haiti . The song was recorded in fourteen and a half hours by over eighty artists on February 1 , 2010 . It was produced by Quincy Jones , and executively produced by Lionel Richie , and Haitian-American musician Wyclef Jean . A music video directed by Paul Haggis was released to accompany and promote the song . The song was also recorded in Spanish by a Latin supergroup and was named Somos el Mundo . The song was directed by Emilio Estefan and his wife , Gloria Estefan .

" We Are the World 25 for Haiti " is musically structured similar to " We Are the World " , but includes a rap verse which was written by some of the song 's hip hop artists . Michael Jackson died months before the song 's release , but his material from the 1985 recording sessions was incorporated into the song and music video , as per the request of his mother , Katherine . His sister Janet duets with him on the song , and his nephews Taj , TJ , and Taryll — collectively known as 3T — feature on the track 's chorus . " We Are the World 25 for Haiti " was released on February 12 , 2010 , during the opening ceremony of the 2010 Winter Olympics , as a CD single and a music download . Critically , " We Are the World 25 for Haiti " received generally negative reviews by contemporary music reviewers , with criticism focused on the song 's new musical additions , as well as the choice of artists who appear on the track . Some critics have even named it one of the worst songs of all time . However , the song was commercially successful worldwide , charting within the top 20 in multiple countries .

In 1985 , " We Are the World " , a song and charity single originally recorded by USA for Africa was released . It was written by American musicians Michael Jackson and Lionel Richie , and produced by Quincy Jones and Michael Omartian for the album We Are the World . The song was well received by music critics and was the recipient of several awards . The song was a worldwide commercial success , as it topped music charts throughout the world and became the fastest-selling American pop single in history , as well as the first single to be certified multi-platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America . " We Are the World " was the best selling pop single of all time until it was eclipsed by Elton John 's 1997 version of " Candle in the Wind " . On January 12 , 2010 , Haiti was struck by a magnitude 7.0 Mw earthquake . It was the country 's most severe earthquake in over 200 years and caused widespread damage . The epicenter of the quake was just outside the Haitian capital Port-au-Prince . It has been estimated that the death toll could reach 200,000 . Before the earthquake , Jones and Richie had planned to organize a re-recording of " We Are the World " on January 28 , 2010 — the 25th anniversary of the original recording of the song . Randy Phillips , who was a key figure in the song being re-issued , said that " We Are The World " producer Ken Kragen had suggested to re-cut " We Are the World " and title it " Live 25 " . However , Lionel Richie and Jones were " very lukewarm " about the idea . Phillips commented that ,

" [ They felt ] that what happened 25 years ago was iconic and they did everything they could for Africa at that time , and they didn 't feel re-cutting the song really made any sense . Basically , Lionel didn 't really want to do it , and we kind of let it die by not issuing the publishing license , because Lionel owns the copyright along with Michael Jackson 's estate . That was in November / December [ 2009 ] . They had gotten Visa on board as an underwriter of that effort , and I think they were going to try and premiere it at the World Cup . " However , because of the devastation caused in Haiti , these plans were postponed . Phillips said that Jones had called Lionel and said , " this is what this song is written for , as a fundraising vehicle for causes , tragedies , catastrophes like this . Why don 't we take over the process , call our friends , and actually do this ? " Lionel understood the urgency of Haiti , and in January 2010 , it was agreed that " We Are the World " would be re-recorded to help benefit Haiti , similar to how the original recording helped famine relief in Africa . Richie commented , " Unfortunately , sometimes it takes a hit record to make someone decide to save a life . I want this song to be the battle cry again . Every once in a while , you have to wake the world up . We slept right through Katrina . If we are not a socially aware culture , we 're going to fail . "

The new version of the song was recorded on February 1 , 2010 , in a session lasting 14 hours . Eighty-five musicians were reportedly involved in the song 's recording , which was held in the same place as the original , at Henson Recording Studio on Beverly Boulevard in Los Angeles , California . Also similar to the 1985 process , some of the participating musicians were already in Los Angeles to attend an awards ceremony : the 52nd Grammy Awards . Jones said of the recording session , " It was a big challenge . It takes a serious army and serious emotional architecture . I 've never seen such a diverse group of people , and they came for the right reasons . " The recording process brought together diverse artists , with the oldest being 83-year-old Tony Bennett and the youngest being 9-year-old Ethan Bortnick . The new version features updated lyrics and music , such as a rap segment including LL Cool J , will.i.am , Snoop Dogg & 7 others pertaining to Haiti , described as a " Greek chorus extension " , which was written by will.i.am. Other writers included Kanye West , Jones and LL Cool J. Lionel Richie and Jones revealed that Michael Jackson 's sister Janet duets with her late brother , as per a request from their mother , Katherine . In the official video , there is archive footage of Michael Jackson from the original 1985 recording . Richie said that he agreed with Katherine 's request , commenting , " It made me feel more secure about this . We definitely felt a void . He 's the other parent [ to the song ] . " The production team for the song included Humberto Gatica , RedOne , Mervyn Warren , Patti Austin and Rickey Minor . RedOne said that it took a week to create the new arrangement for " We Are The World 25 For Haiti " . He commented that he wanted to keep the " class of the original one " and did not want to " mess it up , because it 's too good . " He noted that he wanted to make the song " sound more now and current " while keeping the originals " whole chord progressions , the feeling and the vibe , but brought fresher sounds that are more now . "

Haitian-American musician Wyclef Jean also serves as a producer . In addition , Wyclef Jean sings the first line of the second chorus in Haitian Creole . Richie said new artists were selected for the song so the song could be aimed at a new audience , commenting , " We have a familiar song that kids learn in school . Why not bring in Miley Cyrus and the Jonas Brothers and let them address the issues ? " adding that " It was designed so that we wouldn 't have any of the originals there , so that we could pass on the baton to the next generation " . Phillips said that the producers received 80 percent of the people they wanted as recording artists for the song . In addition to Jean , Haitian actor Jimmy Jean-Louis , most famous for playing The Haitian on Heroes , appears in the chorus . At the time of the recording , numerous artists commented on the process , the 1985 version of the song and co-writer Michael Jackson . R & B singer Jordin Sparks revealed that , despite having been born after the release of the original , the song had a " huge impact " on her . Celine Dion said that the release of the song would not only benefit the Haitian people , but also serve as a remembrance of " the passion [ Michael ] Jackson had for helping those in need " . Lionel Richie and Quincy Jones echoed Dion 's sentiments and further stated that if the singer were alive , he would have wanted to be just as involved as he had been a quarter of a century ago . According to Phillips , there was a " handful " of musicians who either declined or could not rearrange their schedules for the song 's recording , including country singer Taylor Swift , who was going to be touring in Australia .

The 2010 version of " We Are the World " , released under the name Artists for Haiti , debuted on the NBC television network on February 12 during their coverage of the 2010 Winter Olympics opening ceremony . When the song premiered in its paid time spot , the video was edited in length , due in part to the time spent introducing the song . However , the full-length music video was shown on NBC the following day during daytime Olympic coverage . Similar to marketing of " We Are the World " , a music video of the song was filmed and released . The music video was directed by Academy Award-winning film director Paul Haggis . Haggis said that he finished the video 12 hours early . Haitian film students were involved in the video as part of the production crew . The official video for the song was formatted similar to the original ; the video opens with the song 's title with the recording artists ' signatures surrounding it , as well as clips of the artists performing their parts in the recording studio and included archive footage of Michael Jackson performing his part of the song . The video was intercut with clips showing people in Haiti following the earthquake .

" We Are the World 25 for Haiti " received extremely negative reviews from contemporary music critics . The song was criticized for its use of Auto-Tune , the choice of recording artists , and for the song 's rap . Chris Richards , a writer for The Washington Post , described the song as being " horribly oversung " . Richards commented that the most " disappointing " thing about the song was that " there were too few voices from the country , rock and Latin music communities . " He also noted that " nobody can argue with its worthy cause " because of the song 's proceeds to relief in Haiti , but remarked that the song did not have " We Are the World " ' s " original thrill " due to the song 's " panoply of voices " . Jon Pareles , a writer for The New York Times , remarked that while the song 's " Hollywood gloss " was " durable " , the song has " all the pitfalls of a Hollywood remake " . Parales commented that the quality of the song and performance " rises or falls on its talent pool " and criticized the choice of male musicians compared to " We Are the World " ' s original male artists .

US Magazine mentioned that " this version features second-by-second unexplainable absurdities , including Justin Bieber being given the opening verse , Nicole Scherzinger and other Z-listers assigned more than one prime slot , and Wyclef Jean 's incomprehensible yodeling " . Maura Johnston , a writer for MTV , wrote more positively about the song , commenting favorably on the contemporary artists ' performances in living up to their predecessors . " Despite the different faces , the overall feel is similar to the original 's , " Johnston wrote . Simon Vozick-Levinson , a writer for Entertainment Weekly , gave the song a mixed review , noting that We Are the World 25 for Haiti was not as good as the original : " All in all , I can ’ t say this new ' We Are the World ' measured up to the 1985 version . " Eight days after the Artists for Haiti 2010 celebrity remake was released , a " video response " to the song 's official YouTube video was posted by Internet personality and singer-songwriter Lisa Lavie , and was " favorited " on the YouTube channel of the We Are The World Foundation . Lavie 's " We Are the World 25 for Haiti ( YouTube Edition ) " excluded the rap segment and minimized the Auto-tune that were the subject of critical reviews of the celebrity version . Lavie 's video , an Internet collaboration of 57 unsigned or independent YouTube musicians geographically distributed around the world , received positive reception from media , including CNN ( " certainly is a sign of the times " ) and ABC World News with Diane Sawyer ( " Persons of the Week " ... " in effect saying , We are the world , too ... who proved that anthem is not just for glittering names . " ) Both videos link to the We Are the World Foundation for donations .

" We Are the World 25 for Haiti " debuted within the top 30 in multiple territories . " We Are the World 25 for Haiti " charted at number 27 on the Spanish Singles Chart on the charts issue date February 14 , 2010 . The song debuted at number 17 in New Zealand on the charts issue date of February 15 , 2010 . " We Are the World 25 for Haiti " peaked within the top five , charting at number three in Norway on the charts issue date of February 16 , 2010 ; the chart 's position is currently the song 's highest charting international territory since its release . The song debuted at number 25 in France on the issue date of February 13 . " We Are the World 25 for Haiti " charted at number two on the Billboard Hot 100 , behind Kesha 's " Tik Tok " . " We Are the World 25 for Haiti " charted higher in its debut week than the original version , which entered the Billboard Hot 100 at number 21 . According to Billboard , the song 's charting position stemmed mainly from download sales , with a reported 96 % of the song 's charting being from such sales . Following the song 's debut during the Olympics , 246 radio stations sampled the song in the United States . Radio stations in New York expressed that they would play the song frequently to raise awareness of Haitian citizens in need . Other radio stations throughout the United States echoed similar responses on the song getting airplay .

The song also sold over 267,000 downloads in three days . " We Are the World 25 for Haiti " debuted at number eight on the Canadian Hot 100 dated for February 27 . The song also debuted at number six in Belgium Wallonia and Flanders , as well at debuting at number 17 in Sweden . The song also charted at number 28 in Denmark . The song entered Irish charts at number nine . In the song 's second week of release in Norway , " We Are the World 25 for Haiti " moved up two spaces , topping the chart . Unlike the song 's chart performance in territories like Norway , the song dropped four places on the Billboard Hot 100 to sixth place and stayed in the charts for only five weeks more .

The episode opens in medias res to police investigating a dead body in the apartment of FBI agent Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) . Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) confirms the unseen body 's identity and leaves . She subsequently appears before an FBI panel led by Section Chief Scott Blevins ( Charles Cioffi ) , reviewing her work with Mulder on the X-Files . In Canada 's St. Elias Mountains , a frozen extraterrestrial body is discovered by an expedition team . Professor Arlinsky , the team 's leader , sends ice core samples containing presumably alien DNA to Mulder . Scully has the samples tested and confirms the DNA 's non-terrestrial origin , but is attacked by a man who steals the samples . Scully learns that her attacker is Michael Kritschgau ( John Finn ) , a Defense Department employee . When she tracks down Kritschgau and holds him at gunpoint , he reveals that he might be killed . Meanwhile , Mulder and Arlinsky return to the mountains , but finds that most of the expedition members have been shot dead . The sole survivor is a man named Babcock , who reveals that he has saved the alien corpse from theft by burying it . Together , the three men bring the corpse to the United States . There , Mulder and Arlinsky perform an autopsy on the corpse , believing it belongs to a genuine extraterrestrial . After Mulder leaves to meet with Scully , a mysterious assassin , Scott Ostelhoff , arrives and kills Arlinsky .

Scully introduces Mulder to Kritschgau , who claims that everything Mulder thinks he knows about aliens is a lie . He tells him that his sister 's abduction was fabricated , that all evidence of alien biology are merely scientific anomalies , and that the alien body he has just examined was fake . Kritschgau claims that the entire alien mythos is a hoax perpetrated by the U.S. government as a cover for the activities of the military – industrial complex . Mulder dismisses these claims until Scully tells him Kritschgau told her that she was given cancer to make him believe . Mulder finds Arlinsky and Babcock dead , with the alien body missing . Mulder , distraught , sits in his apartment watching a conference about extraterrestrial life on television . The narrative returns to the present , where Scully reveals to the panel that Mulder died the previous night of an apparent self-inflicted gunshot wound to the head .

The icy caverns featured in the episode were constructed inside a warehouse which had previously been used for cold storage ; and required the use of truckloads of lumber and 10,000 square feet ( 930 m2 ) of Styrofoam . The set would become one of the most expensive and elaborate built during the series ' history . The set required a constant temperature of − 21 ° F ( − 29 ° C ) in order to maintain the real snow and ice used to decorate it . This refrigeration allowed the actors ' breath to visibly fog up , and allowed the cast to " have a place that feels real " to aid their acting . The outdoor scenes were filmed around Vancouver 's Mount Seymour , with weather conditions making shooting difficult enough to require an extra day of work . The episode 's production took place just a week before David Duchovny 's wedding , with his fiancée Téa Leoni visiting the set during filming . The first cut of the episode was twelve minutes too long , resulting in some of the scenes in the mountains being removed . Series creator Chris Carter re-edited the entire episode two days before it aired .

Carter has described " Gethsemane " as a " big ideas episode " , noting that its main concern is debating " the existence of God " . The title of the episode is an allusion to the biblical garden of Gethsemane where Jesus was betrayed by Judas Iscariot . The character Michael Kritschgau was named after a former drama teacher of Gillian Anderson . The tagline for this episode is " Believe the lie " , changed from the usual " The truth is out there " . This episode marks the first appearance of one of Scully 's brothers since a flashback in the season two episode " One Breath " . Section Chief Scott Blevins makes his first appearance since the fourth episode of the first season , " Conduit " .

" Gethsemane " received mixed to positive reviews from critics . Lon Grahnke of Chicago Sun-Times reacted positively toward the episode , calling it a " stunning " season finale . Paula Vitaris , writing for Cinefantastique , rated " Gethsemane " two stars out of four , noting that it " withholds so much information that it barely qualifies as a complete episode " . Vitaris felt that the large degree of ambiguity in the episode 's script left the actors ' performances " curiously neutral " , adding that the cast " struggle manfully " with the material . Writing for The A.V. Club , Zack Handlen rated the episode a B + , noting that " everything here has a ring of familiarity to it " . Handlen felt that the episode 's premise and ending were poorly executed , as " trying to balance possible truths while maintaining the plausibility of both is incredibly difficult to pull off on a long-running show " , adding that the episode " comes down on the only side of the fence it really could " given that " there 've been too many scenes of shape-changing bounty hunters and mystical alien healers to really let this idea play out know [ sic ] in any real way " . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X-Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode four stars out of five , noting that while it " attempts to do too much " , it " has a passion behind it which makes it gripping " . Shearman and Pearson felt that the episode 's cliffhanger ending , centering on the apparent death of Mulder , was too unbelievable , noting that it would be out of character for him to grow so disillusioned as to take his own life . In the 1999 FX Thanksgiving Marathon , containing fan-selected episodes , " Gethsemane " ( along with " Redux " and " Redux II " ) was presented as the " Best Mythology Episode " .

The episode created speculation about whether or not Mulder was actually dead . An article in the Wall Street Journal discussed fan theories behind Mulder 's madness while a cartoon ran in The New Yorker a few weeks later surrounding Mulder 's " death " . Series creator Chris Carter noted that " the whole plot line of ' Gethsemane ' revolved around a hoax , but there are actually huge revelations in this show . And it 's an amazing thing that we could get people to believe that Mulder could actually kill himself because his belief system was stolen from him " . UGO Networks listed the episode at number 21 in a countdown of " TV 's Best Season Finales " , noting that it " rocked the core of the series ' entire mythology " . Den of Geek 's John Moore felt that the episode was " one of the finest season-enders " of the series , noting that it " ended by completely pulling the carpet out from under the fans " . Moore listed the character of Michael Kritschgau as the seventh-best villain of the series , adding that he shook " what we knew about the show to its core " by " provid [ ing ] nourishment to a seed of doubt that had been playing on Mulder 's mind for the entire season " .

Cultura Profética ( in English , Prophetic Culture ) is a Puerto Rican reggae band formed in 1996 . The band has undergone several lineup changes , but founding members Willy Rodríguez ( bass guitar , vocals ) , Boris Bilbraut ( drums , vocals ) , Eliut González ( guitar ) , and Omar Silva ( guitar , bass guitar ) have remained in the group throughout its history . Despite primarily performing reggae music , Cultura Profética has experimented with genres such as bossa nova , tango , jazz , and salsa . Lyrically , the group discusses socio-political and ecological issues including Latin American identity and environmental concerns , as well as interpersonal relationships and love . After gaining popularity in Puerto Rico as a cover band , Cultura Profética began performing original music and released its debut album , Canción de Alerta , in 1998 . The group followed up with Ideas Nuevas in 2000 , which featured further musical experimentation with a wider variety of musical styles , and then Diario in 2004 . After relocating to Mexico , the band released M.O.T.A. in 2005 , which peaked at number 12 on the Billboard Hot Latin Albums chart . In 2010 , La Dulzura was released , which took a more romantic lyrical focus and produced the radio hit " La Complicidad " . Cultura Profética released its most recent single , " Saca , Prende y Sorprende " in 2014 , and is reported to be working on a new album .

Cultura Profética originally began as a cover band , performing popular reggae songs in small bars and clubs before beginning to perform original music in Spanish . Shortly after transitioning to perform original music , the group adopted the name Cultura Profética , which was inspired by the view that " music is a voice of culture and is prophetic because the reggae music that we love , and that influenced us , is from the ’ 70s with themes of what 's happening now that can affect our future " , according to guitarist / bassist Omar Silva . Many of the original members of the group attended the Escuela Elemental and the Escuela Secundaria of the University of Puerto Rico , an institution noted for its progressive and experimental teaching approaches . Vocalist / bassist Willy Rodriguez commented , " It is a school in which you are allowed to decide a few things on your own , you have free time between classes [ when ] you can do your own things , and there is a lot of musical culture in the school . It tends to allow you to explore your artistic interests ... There was always an air of liberation , of thinking on your own . I think that influenced a lot in what we do today musically and ideologically . " Group members Boris Bilbraut , Willy Rodríguez , Eliut González , Juan Costa , and Ivan Gutiérres began jamming together in 1996 , bonding over a shared interest in reggae music , particularly Bob Marley . These rehearsal sessions took place in El Hoyo , a neighborhood in the San Juan metropolitan area .

After transitioning away from being a cover band , the group quickly gained popularity in the Puerto Rican reggae scene . Cultura Profética began performing in major reggae festivals and opening for Jamaican reggae musician Don Carlos . The band 's first album , Canción de Alerta ( 1998 ) , was recorded in the Tuff Gong studios at Jamaica with Errol Brown , frontman of Hot Chocolate and Bob Marley 's sound engineer . The group was the first Spanish-language act to record in Marley 's studios . The record discusses a number of social issues in Puerto Rico , including the importance of acknowledging the island 's African influence .

The group returned to Tuff Gong studios in 1999 to record its second album , Ideas Nuevas , which was released in May 2000 . On this record , the band began experimenting with a variety of rhythms such as bossa nova , salsa , ska , and jazz . The album was dedicated to a music instructor at the University of Puerto Rico . The band performed in Tito Puente 's amphitheater on May 12 , 2000 , later releasing a recording of the performance in the form of the live album Cultura en Vivo . In 2002 , the band released its third studio album , Diario . On this album , the band aimed to produce a record that represents Puerto Rican daily life , occasionally introducing songs with interludes of casual conversations and background noise , exemplified by songs such as " De Antes " and " Pa 'l Tanama " . In 2004 , Cultura Profetica began to focus on the international stage , eventually moving temporarily to Mexico . Their fourth studio album , M.O.T.A. , was released in October 2005 after a tour through Mexico . M.O.T.A peaked at number 12 on the Billboard Hot Latin Albums chart , remaining at the position for two weeks . Also in 2005 , the group collaborated with Puerto Rican rapper Vico C on his song " Te Me Puedo Escapar " from his album Desahogo . In January 2006 , the song " Ritmo Que Pesa " from M.O.T.A peaked at number 35 on the Billboard Latin Pop Songs chart . In 2007 , the group released Tribute to the Legend : Bob Marley , a live recording of the group performing Bob Marley songs . After the release of the tribute album , Cultura Profética toured extensively through Latin America and expanded its fan base , particularly in Argentina . A DVD covering their performance at Jose Miguel Agrelot Coliseum was released in late summer of 2008 .

In 2010 , Cultura Profética released La Dulzura , the group 's first album on its own record label , La Mafafa . While discussing the decision to create an independent record label , Rodríguez explained " I can 't deny we spoke with different labels , but we didn 't find anything favorable . Labels are going through tough times and we decided to brave it on our own . " Many of the songs on the album were written and performed during the band 's extensive touring beginning in 2007 , and the songs went through numerous transformations during this time . Before the album 's official release , the band posted songs on the internet , including " La Complicidad " , which became a radio hit in Puerto Rico . La Dulzura debuted at number five on Billboard 's Top Latin Albums Chart . La Dulzura represented a stylistic departure for the group , both musically and lyrically . The song " Del Tope al Fondo " is influenced by Argentine music , especially the genre of tango . Lyrically , the band discusses more romantic themes as opposed to the political emphasis of the group 's previous records . Guitarist Eliut Gonzalez remarked that the band aimed to shift discussion to " the good things in the world " , explaining that " We know that people need help , and that behind every revolution or movement , there is love . We wanted to document that in our music , but without doing it in a cheesy or typical way . " The singles " Baja la Tensión " , " La Complicidad " , " Para Estar " and " Ilegal " all charted on the Billboard Latin Pop Songs chart . In 2011 , the group collaborated with Dominican musician Vicente García on his single " Mi Balcón " .

Cultura Profética has been described as roots reggae . The group has often made use of the moog synthesizer , an instrument commonly used in traditional reggae but is generally rare in contemporary reggae . Despite primarily performing reggae music , the group incorporates various other rhythms into its compositions , including those of Caribbean genres such as salsa . The song " Reggae Rústico " from Ideas Nuevas includes an extended soneo , an improvised call-and-response section common in the salsa genre , at its closing , calling for unity in reggae music . Additionally , the band 's music features a strong emphasis on improvisation and polyrhythmic patterns . Rodríguez notes that " We 've developed what I think is our own genre . We don 't consider ourselves a pop act but we do make popular music in the sense that we are supported by many people . People have finally understood what we do . " Leila Cobo of Billboard observed elements of jazz in the single " La Complicidad , " additionally describing it as " more mellow rock than reggae . " Lyrically , the group addresses social issues including corruption , environmentalism , personal liberty , and Latin American identity . Canción de Alerta contains the song " Por qué cantamos , " an adaptation of Uruguayan writer Mario Benedetti 's poem of the same name . Author Eunice Rojas cites this as an example of the group using " the power of music to advance social causes . " The song " Suelta Los Amarres " from Ideas Nuevas discourages listeners from using violence to advance a political cause . However , the lyrics on La Dulzura place more emphasis on interpersonal relationships and love . Silva notes that the group refrains from writing " romantic " lyrics , noting that " romanticism has a connotation of suffering for love . We are talking about the love that elevates and purifies your soul . We are talking in the sense of the love that sets you free . "

The Bridgewater Canal connects Runcorn , Manchester and Leigh , in North West England . It was commissioned by Francis Egerton , 3rd Duke of Bridgewater , to transport coal from his mines in Worsley to Manchester . It was opened in 1761 from Worsley to Manchester , and later extended from Manchester to Runcorn , and then from Worsley to Leigh . The canal is connected to the Manchester Ship Canal via a lock at Cornbrook ; to the Rochdale Canal in Manchester ; to the Trent and Mersey Canal at Preston Brook , southeast of Runcorn ; and to the Leeds and Liverpool Canal at Leigh . It once connected with the River Mersey at Runcorn but has since been cut off by a slip road to the Silver Jubilee Bridge . Often considered to be the first " true " canal in England , it required the construction of an aqueduct to cross the River Irwell , one of the first of its kind . Its success helped inspire a period of intense canal building in Britain , known as " canal mania " . It later faced intense competition from the Liverpool and Manchester Railway and the Macclesfield Canal . Navigable throughout its history , it is one of the few canals in Britain not to have been nationalised , and remains privately owned . Pleasure craft now use the canal which forms part of the Cheshire Ring network of canals .

Francis Egerton , 3rd Duke of Bridgewater , owned some of the coal mines dug to supply north west England with fuel for the steam engines instrumental in powering England 's industrial revolution . The duke transported his coal along the Mersey and Irwell Navigation and also by packhorse , but each method was inefficient and expensive ; river transport was subject to the vagaries of river navigation , and the amount of coal packhorses could carry was limited by its relative weight . The duke 's underground mines also suffered from persistent flooding , caused by the geology of the Middle Coal Measures , where the coal seam lies beneath a layer of permeable sandstone . Having visited the Canal du Midi in France and watched the construction of the Sankey Canal in England , the duke 's solution to these problems was to build an underground canal at Worsley , connected to a surface canal between Worsley and Salford . In addition to easing overland transport difficulties and providing drainage for his mines , an underground canal would provide a reliable source of water for the surface canal , and also eliminate the need to lift the coal to the surface ( an expensive and difficult proposition ) . The canal boats would carry 30 long tons ( 30 t ) at a time , pulled by only one horse – more than ten times the amount of cargo per horse that was possible with a cart . The duke and his estate manager John Gilbert produced a plan of the canal , and in 1759 obtained an Act of Parliament , enabling its construction .

James Brindley was brought in for his technical expertise ( having previously installed a pumping system at the nearby Wet Earth Colliery ) , and after a six-day visit suggested varying the route of the proposed canal away from Salford , instead taking it across the River Irwell to Stretford and thereon into Manchester . This route would make connecting to any future canals much easier , and would also increase competition with the Mersey and Irwell Navigation company . Brindley moved into Worsley Old Hall and spent 46 days surveying the proposed route , which to cross the Irwell would require the construction of an aqueduct at Barton-upon-Irwell . At the duke 's behest , in January 1760 Brindley also travelled to London to give evidence before a parliamentary committee . The duke therefore gained a second Act of Parliament , which superseded the original . Brindley 's planned route began at Worsley and passed southeast through Eccles , before turning south to cross the River Irwell on the Barton Aqueduct . From there it continued southeast along the edge of Trafford Park , and then east into Manchester . Although a connection with the Mersey and Irwell Navigation was included in the new Act , at Hulme Locks in Castlefield ( on land previously occupied by Hulme Hall ) , this was not completed until 1838 . The terminus would be at Castlefield Basin , where the nearby River Medlock was to help supply the canal with water . Boats would unload their cargoes inside the duke 's purpose-built warehouse . There were no locks in Brindley 's design , demonstrating his ability as a competent engineer . The Barton Aqueduct was built relatively quickly for the time ; work commenced in September 1760 and the first boat crossed on 17 July 1761 .

The duke invested a large sum of money in the scheme . From Worsley to Manchester its construction cost £ 168,000 ( equivalent to £ 23,348,370 in 2015 ) , but its advantages over land and river transport meant that within a year of its opening in 1761 , the price of coal in Manchester fell by about half . This success helped inspire a period of intense canal building , known as Canal Mania . Along with its stone aqueduct at Barton-upon-Irwell , the Bridgewater Canal was considered a major engineering achievement . One commentator wrote that when finished , " [ the canal ] will be the most extraordinary thing in the Kingdom , if not in Europe . The boats in some places are to go underground , and in other places over a navigable river , without communicating with its waters " . In addition to the duke 's warehouse at Manchester , more buildings were built by Brindley and extended to Alport Street ( now called Deansgate ) . The warehouses were of timber-frame design , with load-bearing hand-made brick walls , supported on cast iron posts . The duke 's warehouse was badly damaged by fire in 1789 but was rebuilt .

In September 1761 , with his assistant Hugh Oldham , Brindley surveyed an extension from Longford Bridge to Hempstones , near Halton , Cheshire . He assisted in obtaining Parliamentary approval for the Bridgewater Canal Extension Act of 1762 which allowed the construction of an extension to the canal , from Manchester , to the River Mersey at Runcorn . Despite objections from the Mersey and Irwell Navigation Company , Royal assent was given on 24 March 1762 . A junction , Waters Meeting , was created in Trafford Park , at which the new extension branched south through Stretford , Sale , Altrincham , Lymm and finally to Runcorn . In December 1761 Brindley undertook a survey of the route at Runcorn . His initial plan was to make the terminus at Hempstones , east of Runcorn Gap , but following a study of the tides and depth of water there , he decided instead to build the terminus west of Runcorn Gap . This change was designed to accommodate Mersey flats , although the low fixed bridges required that traffic on the canal be able to lower or unship their masts . Runcorn basin was almost 90 feet ( 27 m ) above the Mersey , so a flight of ten locks , described as " the wonder of their time " , was built to connect the two . Nine locks had a fall of 2 metres ( 7 ft ) , with a fall at the river lock of more than 6 metres ( 20 ft ) at low water . It allowed vessels to enter and leave the canal on any tide . The connection to the Mersey was made on 1 January 1773 . The river 's tidal action tended to deposit silt around the lower entrance to the locks , so to counteract this a channel , equipped with gates at each end and known as the Duke 's Gut , was cut through the marshes upriver from the locks . At high tide the gates were closed , and with the ebb of the tide were opened to release water , which scoured the silt from the entrance to the locks . The cut created an island , known as Runcorn Island , crossed by Castle Bridge .

The connection to Manchester was delayed by Sir Richard Brooke of Norton Priory . Concerned that boatmen might poach his game and wildfowl , Brooke did not want the canal to pass through his land . The Act included several stipulations : the canal should not come within 325 metres ( 1,066 ft ) of his house ; the towpath should be on the south side of the canal , furthest away from Brooke 's house ; there should be no quays , buildings , hedges or fences to obstruct the view ; no vessels were to be moored within 1,000 metres ( 3,281 ft ) of the house , other than during construction . Eventually , though , a compromise was reached . This included the construction of a link to the Trent and Mersey Canal at Preston Brook ( permitted by the Trent and Mersey Canal Act of 1766 ) , and the building of the canal 's terminus to the west of Runcorn Gap . The Trent and Mersey link gave the Duke access to the Midlands , and forestalled the Weaver Trustees from making their own junction with the canal . The new extension also met with opposition from the Mersey and Irwell Navigation , until the duke purchased a controlling interest in the company . The first part of the new extension was opened in 1767 , and completed in full by March 1776 , but Brindley did not live to see its completion ; it was continued by his brother-in-law , Hugh Henshall .

In 1766 the Duke gained a fourth act of parliament for a branch canal between Sale Moor and Stockport which was to follow the valley of the Mersey . The Act was applied for to counter a proposed canal that would give the towns of Stockport and Macclesfield access to the Mersey , via the River Weaver . The work was not done , the Act lapsed and this section of canal was never built . Over two decades later , the nearby Manchester Bolton & Bury Canal had sought a connection to other waterways , and it appears that the Duke had planned to limit the activities of the new company . On 15 December 1792 the Duke purchased a portion of the Ringspiggot estate in Salford which blocked the MB & BC 's plans to build a riverside basin and wharfs there .

In 1795 the duke secured a fifth Act which enabled him to extend the canal a further 5 miles ( 8 km ) from Worsley via Boothstown , Astley Green and Bedford to Leigh . The new extension enabled the supply to Manchester of coal from Leigh and the surrounding districts . On 21 June 1819 an Act of Parliament was enacted to create a link between this extension and the Wigan branch of the Leeds and Liverpool Canal . Access to the canal brought about a rapid development in coal mining on the Manchester Coalfield west of Worsley . Chaddock pits in the east of Tyldesley were connected to an underground level from Worsley . In 1820 , to ease congestion at the Delph in Worsley , Chaddock Pit was connected to the canal at Boothstown basin by an underground canal , the Chaddock Level which ran in a north west direction from the canal at Boothstown to the pit . Sometime after 1840 Samuel Jackson built a narrow gauge tramroad worked by horses from his Gin Pit Colliery to Marsland Green where he installed cranes and tipplers to load barges at a wharf . The tramroad was later worked by locomotives . In 1867 the Fletchers built a private railway line and the Bedford Basin with facilities for loading coal from Howe Bridge onto barges . Astley Green Colliery began winding coal on the north bank of the canal in 1912 . In the 1940s and 50s coal was sent to Barton Power Station and Runcorn Gas Works .

Upon completion of the Rochdale Canal in 1804 , the two canals were joined at Castlefield . This connection may have been a factor in the failure of the Manchester Bolton & Bury Canal Company 's rival scheme to build a canal between Bury and Sladen . The River Medlock , a major source of water for the canal and which was almost as badly polluted as the nearby Irwell , was diverted through a tunnel under the canal at Castlefield by Charles Edward Cawley , a civil engineer for the Salford Corporation and later MP for Salford . The canal was from that point supplied by the much purer water of the Rochdale Canal .

Worsley Delph , in Worsley , originally a centuries-old sandstone quarry near Worsley Brook , was the entrance to the Navigable Levels . It is now a Scheduled Monument . Two entrances , built years apart , allow access to the specially built M-boats ( also known as Starvationers ) , the largest of which could carry 12 long tons ( 12 t ) of coal . Inside the mines 46 miles ( 74 km ) of underground canal on four levels , linked by inclined planes , were constructed . The mines ceased production in 1887 . As the canal passes through Worsley , iron oxide from the mines has , for many years , stained the water bright orange . The removal of this colouration is currently the subject of a £ 2.5 million remedial scheme .

In 1791 the mines at Worsley produced 100,282 long tons ( 101,891 t ) of coal , 60,461 long tons ( 61,431 t ) of which were " sold down the navigation " ; 12,000 long tons ( 12,000 t ) of rocksalt was also transported from Cheshire . Sales of coal were £ 19,455 , and nearly £ 30,000 was earned from other cargoes . Passenger traffic in 1791 brought in receipts of £ 3,781 . The canal also carried passengers and was in keen competition with the Mersey and Irwell Navigation Company ( M & IN ) . The journey down river by the latter route took eight hours ( nine hours in the up direction ) while the journey on the Bridgewater canal took nine hours each way . Fares were similar but the Bridgewater route was said to be " more picturesque " . Boating men also used the canal . They lifted their small lightweight boats out of the M & IN at Runcorn , and carried them a short distance up the steep streets onto the Bridgewater Canal . Barges on the canal continued to be towed by horses until the middle of the 19th century , when they were replaced by steam-powered boats after a fatal epidemic spread through the horse population . The " dense smoke " produced by the steam barges and their " harsh unnecessary whistling " proved unpopular with some local residents , who also began to suffer from a condition known as canal throat , " no doubt caused by the foul emanations given off by its [ the Bridgewater Canal 's ] horribly filthy water " .

The Duke of Bridgewater died on 8 March 1803 . By his will the income from the canal was to be paid to his nephew George Leveson-Gower , the Marquess of Stafford ( later the 1st Duke of Sutherland ) . On his death it was to go to Stafford 's second son Francis , provided he changed his name to Egerton ; and then to his heirs and successors . The management of the company was placed in the hands of three trustees . These were Sir Archibald Macdonald , who was Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer , Edward Venables-Vernon-Harcourt , at the time the Bishop of Carlisle and later the Archbishop of York , and , as Superintendent , Robert Haldane Bradshaw , the Duke 's agent . Bradshaw managed the estate , for which he received a salary of £ 2,000 a year and the use of the duke 's mansions at Worsley and Runcorn . The other two trustees had each married nieces of the duke and were " dummy trustees " . During the time the canal was administered by the Bridgewater Trustees , it made a profit every year . Until his retirement in 1834 , the administration was carried out entirely by Bradshaw . It has been calculated that the average annual profit between 1806 and 1826 was of the order of 13 per cent , and in 1824 , the best year , it was 23 per cent . Bradshaw found it difficult to delegate , and complained of being over-worked , but he was also regarded as being a " formidable bargainer " . In 1805 he was approached by the proprietors of the nearby Manchester Bolton & Bury Canal to resolve a dispute with a Salford landowner , but his response was delayed . In 1810 there was a general agreement with the Mersey and Irwell Navigation Company ( M & IN ) to simultaneously raise freight charges . However any cooperation between the two companies was short-lived and by 1812 the Mersey and Irwell had reduced their charges . Further competition was to come from other carriers who used the canal ; in 1824 the traffic carried by private companies exceeded that carried by the Trustees for the first time . However , in time more profit came from " tonnage traffic " ( that carried by private companies ) than from the Bridgewater 's own carriage of freight . Bradshaw 's administration saw increased deterioration of the fabric of the canal , the locks , docks and warehouses . The undertakings were starved of capital largely owing to inadequate provision for it in the duke 's will . There were also problems caused by silting around the entrance to the Mersey and by the changing channels of the river itself .

During the 1820s there was increased dissatisfaction with the canals . They did not cope well with increasing volumes of cargo , and they were perceived as monopolistic , and the preserve of the landed gentry class . There was increased interest in the possibility of railway construction . The possible construction of a railway between Liverpool and Manchester was vigorously opposed by Bradshaw , who refused railway surveyors access to land owned by the Trustees . When the first bill was presented to parliament in 1825 , the Trustees opposed and it was overthrown . However , later in the year Lord Stafford , possibly persuaded to do so by William Huskisson , invested £ 100,000 ( one-fifth of the required capital ) , in the Liverpool and Manchester Railway . Following this the Trustees withdrew their opposition to the construction of the railway ; they did not petition against the second bill , which was passed in 1826 . At the same time as he made his investment in the railway , Lord Stafford advanced £ 40,000 for improvements to the canal . This was spent mainly on a second line of locks at Runcorn , which were completed in 1828 , plus new warehouses at Manchester and Liverpool . The additional line of locks cost £ 35,000 and was used for traffic heading to Manchester , while the old line was used for traffic passing down to the Mersey .

In 1830 the new railway opened and by the end of the year was carrying freight . Bradshaw immediately went into competition by lowering the rates of carriage on the canal and by offering improved terms to the private carriers . By so doing he managed to maintain the volume of traffic carried by the canal , both freight and passengers , at a time when the country was suffering a trade depression . However Bradshaw 's tactics led to a sharp decline in profits . At the same time costs were rising , partly due to the use of steamboats on the Mersey . Further competition came with the opening of the Macclesfield Canal in 1831 which gave separate access to Manchester from the Midlands . In November 1831 Bradshaw suffered a stroke , as a result of which he lost the use of his left arm and leg , and there is evidence that it also impaired his judgement . Matters came to a head in 1833 , the year in which the canal made its lowest profit since the death of the Duke . On 19 July the Marquess of Stafford ( now the 1st Duke of Sutherland ) died and the profits from the canal passed to Francis Egerton . On 25 September Bradshaw 's son , Captain James Bradshaw , who had been acting as a deputy superintendent to the Trustees , and who had been expected to succeed his father as Superintendent , committed suicide . The agent for both Francis Egerton and his older brother , who was now the 2nd Duke of Sutherland , was James Loch . The events that followed were " stage-managed by Loch " . He reported to Francis Egerton that Bradshaw was no longer fit to be Superintendent , and then persuaded Bradshaw to retire on his full salary . It had been expected that he would appoint his other son , William Rigby Bradshaw , as his successor , but Loch persuaded him to appoint James Sothern in the position ; Sothern had been the principal agent of the Trust since December 1832 . He took over the position of Superintendent on 3 February 1834 . The appointment of Sothern was not a success . Charges were made against him of dishonesty and of nepotism . He entered into disputes and disagreements with Loch , with Francis Egerton , and with the other two trustees . ( Sir Archibald Macdonald had died in 1826 ; by this time his place had been taken by the 10th Earl of Devon ) . To avoid a costly lawsuit , at the end of 1836 Sothern agreed to retire on various conditions which included receipt of £ 45,000 . On 1 March 1837 , he was succeeded as Superintendent by James Loch .

Loch was extremely busy and did not have time to deal with the detailed administration of the Trust . He therefore looked for a deputy to take on these duties . His first choice was Richard Smith who was the mine agent to the Trustees of the 1st Earl of Dudley . However this was perceived as poaching and it led to such controversy that Smith declined the offer and recommended his son , George Samuel Fereday Smith for the post . Fereday Smith was appointed as Deputy Superintendent in March 1837 on a salary of £ 600 a year , half of the salary which had been offered to his father . Loch immediately undertook a reorganisation of the administration and efficiency of the business , restored the agreement with the Old Quay Company to raise freight charges , and improved the facilities for passengers , including the introduction of " swift boats " . By 1837 , the Trustees employed around 3,000 people ( including those working in the colliery and in Worsley Yard ) , making it one of the largest employers in the country at the time . Since the death of the Duke the amount of freight carried by the canal had almost trebled ; in 1803 it carried 334,495 long tons ( 339,863 t ) of goods and in 1836 968,795 long tons ( 984,341 t ) .

In 1843 a new dock , the Francis Dock , was opened at Runcorn . The late 1830s and early 1840s had seen increased competition between the Bridgewater Canal on the one hand , and other canal companies and the railways on the other . The most dangerous of the rivals was the Mersey and Irwell Navigation Company who started to reduce their rates again in 1840 . This led to a price war between the two canal companies and the Liverpool and Manchester Railway , who had previously cooperated on rates . Eventually , in desperation , the Bridgewater Trustees bought the Mersey and Irwell and took over its ownership on 1 January 1844 . During the same year competition with other canals was further reduced by agreements made with the Ellesmere and Chester Canal Company and with the Anderton Carrying Company . In 1844 the canal made a profit of £ 76,410 , the second highest during the time it was administered by the Trustees . Having seen off competition from other canal companies , the next major threat was to come from the railways . This was the period in the mid-1840s known as the Railway Mania . The railways competed with the canals in three ways ; by building , or threatening to build , new lines which would be in direct competition with the canals ; by amalgamation into giant companies ( such as the Midland and the London and North Western companies ) , which gave them more political power ; and by taking over ownership of canal companies . On 13 April 1844 The Times newspaper reported that the canal was to be emptied of water , and converted into a railway , although nothing came of this scheme . In 1845 , in return for concessions , the Trustees supported the Grand Junction Railway in its campaign to build a more direct line to Liverpool , which crossed the Mersey over a bridge at Runcorn Gap . However the bill was overthrown in the House of Lords . Competition from the railways and other canals led to a decline in the trading and the profits between 1845 and 1848 , but there was no " disastrous collapse " . During this time the Trustees and their representatives were engaged in vigorous campaigns in Parliament to protect their interests .

By October 1844 a bonding warehouse had been built in Manchester and the first cargo to arrive was announced in a letter to the Manchester Guardian , later printed in The Times : We have great pleasure in recording the first arrival in the Port of Manchester of a vessel , with an entire cargo of wines and spirits removed in bond , and for bonding in Manchester . The vessel , a flat named the Express , was wholly laden with a valuable cargo of wines and spirits , in all about 40 tons weight , belonging to Mr. William Gibb , spirit merchant , of this town , whose active and long-continued exertions in the struggle to obtain the privilege of bonding for this great and important borough are about to be acknowledged in the form of a substantial mark of respect and gratitude by his fellow-townsmen . The Express arrived from Liverpool on Saturday evening ; but it was yesterday morning before she began to unload . She is lying in the Bridgewater Canal , Knott Mill where the Duke 's trustees have constructed a large bonding vault , which Mr. Gibb has taken and had licensed for the purpose , and we believe he is now removing his stock of wine and spirits from other ports to Manchester , for the greater convenience of sampling and sale . The lockers , gaugers , and other officers of Customs were in attendance , superintending the unloading of the vessel and thus have commenced the operations of the Manchester Custom-house . It is a gratifying circumstance that a gentleman who took so prominent a part in the struggle to obtain the boon of bonding for Manchester should be the first to enjoy the fruits of its success . We hope ere long to record the general operation of the system ; though it will require a little time , perhaps , as it must have a beginning . - Manchester Guardian

However , this venture was less successful than expected , as is evidenced by a letter to The Observer later that year , also printed in The Times : After the pressing demands which have been made by some of our principal manufacturing towns for the privileges of inland bonded warehouses for goods subject to Customs duties , it would naturally be supposed that the formation of a Custom-house establishment at Manchester would have occasioned a vast quantity of business in that extensive seat of British manufacturers ; but we are informed that the result is very different from what had been expected . Although the system has been introduced into Manchester only as an experiment and a large establishment has been formed entirely of old and experienced officers ; under the impression that the extent of business there would require the constant services of well tried men , we believe that , up to the present period , little trade has passed through the Manchester Custom-house and the officers ' duties are nearly approaching to a sinecure . The total annual expense of this establishment , exclusive of that for the Custom-house and warehouse is £ 2,620 . The town council of the borough of Manchester , however , are made liable , under the act of the 7th and 8th of Victoria cap 81 , to the charges of maintaining this establishment , and the public are thereby exonerated from the expense .

Between 1849 and 1851 the competition between the Trustees and the railway companies intensified . Agreements and alliances were made and broken . Their major opponents were the London and North Western Railway and the Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway who reduced tariffs and took business away from the canals . For the first time the railways carried more trade between Liverpool and the towns of central Lancashire than the canals . The value of the traffic carried by the Bridgewater Canal in 1851 was the lowest in the time it was administered by the Trustees . In 1851 the Earl of Ellesmere hosted a visit to Manchester by Queen Victoria and Prince Albert . They stayed at Worsley Hall , with a view of the canal , and were given a trip between Patricroft railway station and Worsley Hall , on state barges . Large crowds had gathered to cheer the royal party , which apparently frightened the horses drawing the barge so much that they fell into the canal . The Trustees spent much time between 1851 and 1855 in negotiations to ease the competition , especially that from the London and North Western Railway . The most likely allies seemed to be other railway companies , including the Shrewsbury and Birmingham and the Shrewsbury and Chester railway companies , and the Great Western Railway . Of these , the most likely seemed to be the Great Western Railway who , in their concern to expand northwards were willing to help the Trustees with the carriage of their traffic to the south . However years of negotiations came to no agreement and , in the end , the Trustees ' railway deal was done with the London and North Western Railway , who agreed to cooperate with the onward passage of the Trustees ' traffic .

On 28 June 1855 James Loch , the Superintendent , died and was succeeded by Hon. Algernon Fulke Egerton , Lord Ellesmere 's third son . He was then aged 29 , and had been educated at Harrow and Christ Church , Oxford ; he had been destined for a political life and had no experience of managing coal mines or canals . Since James Loch had been appointed , he had been mainly in control of the management of the Trustees , assisted by his son George Loch . During this time the role of Fereday Smith had been diminished ; initially appointed as Deputy Superintendent , his position was reduced to that of Principal Agent in 1845 . With the arrival of the inexperienced Algernon Egerton , Fereday Smith had a much greater say in the management . During the previous four years the Lochs had been reluctant to invest in improvements to the canal or Runcorn Dock , despite the increasing demand for the passage of goods through the dock , and the profits made during these years became stagnant . Fereday Smith had been keen on expansion and now his opportunity came . He first reduced the top-heavy administration of the Trust , and then took on the planning of the expansion of the business . The steamers owned by the Trustees had been neglected and were in a poor state ; these were repaired or sold .

George Loch , who had been opposed to using the Trustees ' investments for improvements to the canals or docks , died in 1857 . Between 1857 and 1872 the Trustees provided more capital for improvements from their own resources than at any previous time . The Runcorn and Weston Canal was built in 1858 – 59 , providing a connection between Runcorn Docks and the Weaver Navigation . A new half tide dock , the Alfred Dock was opened at Runcorn in 1860 . Electric telegraph was installed in 1861 – 62 . In 1862 the 2nd Earl of Ellesmere died and his son and heir , the 3rd Earl was a minor , aged 15 . This gave Algernon Egerton even more power to invest the profits of the company in developments . Negotiations were made to increase sea-borne trade , both British and foreign , through the canal . Building started on a new dock at Runcorn in 1867 . Work was carried out in the Mersey estuary around the docks to improve access for vessels . Some of this was carried out in conjunction with the London and North Western Railway who were building a bridge across Runcorn Gap to take their line from Weaver Junction to Liverpool ; the railway paid half the cost of the improvements , amounting to about £ 20,000 ( £ 1.6 million today ) . Improvements were made to the Trustees ' facilities at Liverpool , to the Mersey and Irwell Navigation and to the Bridgewater Canal itself . Agreements were made with the railway companies to cooperate on the transit of goods and the rates of carriage and " the Trustees ' fortunes entered a calmer phase " .

In 1872 the Bridgewater Navigation Company Ltd was formed , and on Monday 9 September the canal was purchased in the names of Sir Edward William Watkin and William Philip Price , respectively chairmen of the Manchester , Sheffield and Lincolnshire Railway and the Midland Railway for £ 1,120,000 . The canal was sold again in 1885 , when the Manchester Ship Canal Company paid the Bridgewater Navigation Company £ 1,710,000 for all their property . The construction of the ship canal forced the removal of Barton Aqueduct and the construction of Barton Swing Aqueduct , as the former was too low for the vessels which would use the new canal . In 1907 The Manchester Ship Canal ( Bridgewater Canal ) Act 1907 was passed , permitting coal mining near the canal between Monton Bridge and Leigh , in exchange for which the mine owners were obliged to pay the associated costs of keeping the canal open and navigable . In 1923 Bridgewater Estates Ltd was formed to acquire the Ellesmere family estate in Worsley . In 1984 Bridgewater Estates Ltd was purchased by a subsidiary of Peel Holdings . In 1987 Highams acquired a majority shareholding of the Manchester Ship Canal Company ( subsequently the shares held by Highams were transferred to Peel Holdings ) . In 1994 the Manchester Ship Canal Company became a wholly owned subsidiary of the Peel Holdings group . In 2004 ownership of the Manchester Ship Canal Company was transferred to the Peel Ports group .

The Bridgewater is often considered to be the first true canal in Britain , as it relied upon existing watercourses as sources of water rather than as navigable routes . It now terminates in Runcorn basin , just before the disused flight of 10 locks which ( before the approach road to the Silver Jubilee Bridge was built ) used to lower the canal to the Runcorn Docks on the River Mersey and later , to the Manchester Ship Canal . The old line of locks in Runcorn fell into disuse in the late 1930s , and they were closed under the Ship Canal Act of 1949 and filled in . The Ship Canal Act of 1966 allowed the closure and filling in of the newer line of locks . The gates from this flight of locks were removed and installed at Devizes on the Kennet and Avon Canal . The Duke 's warehouse in Manchester was demolished in 1960 . The canal has suffered three breaches ; one soon after opening , another in 1971 near the River Bollin aqueduct , and another in the summer of 2005 when a sluice gate failed in Manchester . Cranes are located at intervals along the canal 's length to allow boards to be dropped into slots in the banks . These allow sections of the canal to be isolated in the event of a leak .

The canal now forms an integral part of the Cheshire Ring network of canals . Pleasure craft have been allowed on the canal since 1952 . The new road crossing of the Mersey now under construction may allow a realignment of the Bridge approach road and the complete restoration of the original flight of locks – thus re-opening the link to Runcorn Docks , the Runcorn and Weston Canal , the River Mersey , the Manchester Ship Canal , and the River Weaver . This would create a new ring route for leisure boats involving the Trent and Mersey Canal , the Anderton Boat Lift and the River Weaver . The Hulme Locks Branch Canal in Manchester is now disused , and on 26 May 1995 was replaced by the nearby Pomona Lock .

Jules Émile Frédéric Massenet ( French : [ ʒyl emil fʁedeʁik masnɛ ] ; 12 May 1842 – 13 August 1912 ) was a French composer of the Romantic era best known for his operas , of which he wrote more than thirty . The two most frequently staged are Manon ( 1884 ) and Werther ( 1892 ) . He also composed oratorios , ballets , orchestral works , incidental music , piano pieces , songs and other music . While still a schoolboy , Massenet was admitted to France 's principal music college , the Paris Conservatoire . There he studied under Ambroise Thomas , whom he greatly admired . After winning the country 's top musical prize , the Prix de Rome , in 1863 , he composed prolifically in many genres , but quickly became best known for his operas . Between 1867 and his death forty-five years later he wrote more than forty stage works in a wide variety of styles , from opéra-comique to grand-scale depictions of classical myths , romantic comedies , lyric dramas , as well as oratorios , cantatas and ballets . Massenet had a good sense of the theatre and of what would succeed with the Parisian public . Despite some miscalculations , he produced a series of successes that made him the leading composer of opera in France in the late 19th and early 20th centuries .

Like many prominent French composers of the period , Massenet became a professor at the Conservatoire . He taught composition there from 1878 until 1896 , when he resigned after the death of the director , Ambroise Thomas . Among his students were Gustave Charpentier , Ernest Chausson , Reynaldo Hahn and Gabriel Pierné . By the time of his death , Massenet was regarded by many critics as old-fashioned and unadventurous although his two best-known operas remained popular in France and abroad . After a few decades of neglect , his works began to be favourably reassessed during the mid-20th century , and many of them have since been staged and recorded . Although critics do not rank him among the handful of outstanding operatic geniuses such as Mozart , Verdi and Wagner , his operas are now widely accepted as well-crafted and intelligent products of the Belle Époque .

Massenet was born at Montaud , then an outlying hamlet and now a part of the city of Saint-Étienne , in the Loire . He was the youngest of the four children of Alexis Massenet ( 1788 – 1863 ) and his second wife Eléonore-Adelaïde née Royer de Marancour ( 1809 – 1875 ) ; the elder children were Julie , Léon and Edmond . Massenet senior was a prosperous ironmonger ; his wife was a talented amateur musician who gave Jules his first piano lessons . By early 1848 the family had moved to Paris , where they settled in a flat in Saint-Germain-des-Prés . Massenet was educated at the Lycée Saint-Louis and , from either 1851 or 1853 , the Paris Conservatoire . According to his colourful but unreliable memoirs , Massenet auditioned in October 1851 , when he was nine , before a judging panel comprising Daniel Auber , Fromental Halévy , Ambroise Thomas and Michele Carafa , and was admitted at once . His biographer Demar Irvine dates the audition and admission as January 1853 . Both sources agree that Massenet continued his general education at the lycée in tandem with his musical studies . At the Conservatoire Massenet studied solfège with Augustin Savard and the piano with François Laurent . He pursued his studies , with modest distinction , until the beginning of 1855 , when family concerns disrupted his education . Alexis Massenet 's health was poor , and on medical advice he moved from Paris to Chambéry in the south of France ; the family , including Massenet , moved with him . Again , Massenet 's own memoirs and the researches of his biographers are at variance : the composer recalled his exile in Chambéry as lasting for two years ; Henry Finck and Irvine record that the young man returned to Paris and the Conservatoire in October 1855 . On his return he lodged with relations in Montmartre and resumed his studies ; by 1859 he had progressed so far as to win the Conservatoire 's top prize for pianists . The family 's finances were no longer comfortable , and to support himself Massenet took private piano students and played as a percussionist in theatre orchestras . His work in the orchestra pit gave him a good working knowledge of the operas of Gounod and other composers , classic and contemporary . Traditionally , many students at the Conservatoire went on to substantial careers as church organists ; with that in mind Massenet enrolled for organ classes , but they were not a success and he quickly abandoned the instrument . He gained some work as a piano accompanist , in the course of which he met Wagner who , along with Berlioz , was one of his two musical heroes .

In 1861 Massenet 's music was published for the first time , the Grande Fantasie de Concert sur le Pardon de Ploërmel de Meyerbeer , a virtuoso piano work in nine sections . Having graduated to the composition class under Ambroise Thomas , Massenet was entered for the Conservatoire 's top musical honour , the Prix de Rome , previous winners of which included Berlioz , Thomas , Gounod and Bizet . The first two of these were on the judging panel for the 1863 competition . All the competitors had to set the same text by Gustave Chouquet , a cantata about David Rizzio ; after all the settings had been performed Massenet came face to face with the judges . He recalled : Ambroise Thomas , my beloved master , came towards me and said , " Embrace Berlioz , you owe him a great deal for your prize . " " The prize , " I cried , bewildered , my face shining with joy . " I have the prize ! ! ! " I was deeply moved and I embraced Berlioz , then my master , and finally Monsieur Auber . Monsieur Auber comforted me . Did I need comforting ? Then he said to Berlioz pointing to me , " He 'll go far , the young rascal , when he 's had less experience ! "

The prize brought a well-subsidised three-year period of study , two-thirds of which was spent at the French Academy in Rome , based at the Villa Medici . At that time the academy was dominated by painters rather than musicians ; Massenet enjoyed his time there , and made lifelong friendships with , among others , the sculptor Alexandre Falguière and the painter Carolus-Duran , but the musical benefit he derived was largely self-taught . He absorbed the music at St Peter 's , and closely studied the works of the great German masters , from Handel and Bach to contemporary composers . During his time in Rome , Massenet met Franz Liszt , at whose request he gave piano lessons to Louise-Constance " Ninon " de Gressy , the daughter of one of Liszt 's rich patrons . Massenet and Ninon fell in love , but marriage was out of the question while he was a student with modest means .

Massenet returned to Paris in 1866 . He made a living by teaching the piano and publishing songs , piano pieces and orchestral suites , all in the popular style of the day . Prix de Rome winners were sometimes invited by the Opéra-Comique in Paris to compose a work for performance there . At Thomas 's instigation , Massenet was commissioned to write a one-act opéra comique , La grand 'tante , presented in April 1867 . At around the same time he composed a Requiem , which has not survived . In 1868 he met Georges Hartmann , who became his publisher and was his mentor for twenty-five years ; Hartmann 's journalistic contacts did much to promote his protégé 's reputation . In October 1866 Massenet and Ninon were married ; their only child , Juliette , was born in 1868 . Massenet 's musical career was briefly interrupted by the Franco-Prussian War of 1870 – 71 , during which he served as a volunteer in the National Guard alongside his friend Bizet . He found the war so " utterly terrible " that he refused to write about it in his memoirs . He and his family were trapped in the Siege of Paris but managed to get out before the horrors of the Paris Commune began ; the family stayed for some months in Bayonne , in southwestern France .

After order was restored , Massenet returned to Paris where he completed his first large-scale stage work , an opéra comique in four acts , Don César de Bazan ( Paris , 1872 ) . It was a failure , but in 1873 he succeeded with his incidental music to Leconte de Lisle 's tragedy Les Érinnyes and with the dramatic oratorio , Marie-Magdeleine , both of which were performed at the Théâtre de l 'Odéon . His reputation as a composer was growing , but at this stage he earned most of his income from teaching , giving lessons for six hours a day . Massenet was a prolific composer ; he put this down to his way of working , rising early and composing from four o 'clock in the morning until midday , a practice he maintained all his life . In general he worked fluently , seldom revising , although Le roi de Lahore , his nearest approach to a traditional grand opera , took him several years to complete to his own satisfaction . It was finished in 1877 and was one of the first new works to be staged at the Palais Garnier , opened two years previously . The opera , with a story taken from the Mahabharata , was an immense success and was quickly taken up by the opera houses of eight Italian cities . It was also performed at the Hungarian State Opera House , the Bavarian State Opera , the Semperoper , Dresden , the Teatro Real in Madrid , and the Royal Opera House , Covent Garden , in London . After the first Covent Garden performance , The Times summed the piece up in a way that was frequently to be applied to the composer 's operas : " M. Massenet 's opera , although not a work of genius proper , is one of more than common merit , and contains all the elements of at least temporary success . "

This period was an early high point in Massenet 's career . He had been made a chevalier of the Legion of Honour in 1876 , and in 1878 he was appointed professor of counterpoint , fugue and composition at the Conservatoire under Thomas , who was now the director . In the same year he was elected to the Institut de France , a prestigious honour , rare for a man in his thirties . Camille Saint-Saëns , whom Massenet beat in the election for the vacancy , was resentful at being passed over for a younger composer . When the result of the election was announced , Massenet sent Saint-Saëns a courteous telegram : " My dear colleague : the Institut has just committed a great injustice " . Saint-Saëns cabled back , " I quite agree . " He was elected three years later , but his relations with Massenet remained cool . Massenet was a popular and respected teacher at the Conservatoire . His pupils included Bruneau , Charpentier , Chausson , Hahn , Leroux , Pierné , Rabaud and Vidal . He was known for the care he took in drawing out his pupils ' ideas , never trying to impose his own . One of his last students , Charles Koechlin , recalled Massenet as a voluble professor , dispensing " a teaching active , living , vibrant , and moreover comprehensive " . According to some writers , Massenet 's influence extended beyond his own students . In the view of the critic Rodney Milnes , " In word-setting alone , all French musicians profited from the freedom he won from earlier restrictions . " Romain Rolland and Francis Poulenc have both considered Massenet an influence on Debussy 's Pelléas et Mélisande ; Debussy was a student at the Conservatoire during Massenet 's professorship but did not study under him .

Massenet 's growing reputation did not prevent a contretemps with the Paris Opéra in 1879 . Auguste Vaucorbeil , director of the Opéra , refused to stage the composer 's new piece , Hérodiade , judging the libretto either improper or inadequate . Édouard-Fortuné Calabresi , joint director of the Théâtre de la Monnaie , Brussels , immediately offered to present the work , and its première , lavishly staged , was given in December 1881 . It ran for fifty-five performances in Brussels , and had its Italian premiere two months later at La Scala . The work finally reached Paris in February 1884 , by which time Massenet had established himself as the leading French opera composer of his generation . Manon , first given at the Opéra-Comique in January 1884 , was a prodigious success and was followed by productions at major opera houses in Europe and the United States . Together with Gounod 's Faust and Bizet 's Carmen it became , and has remained , one of the cornerstones of the French operatic repertoire . After the intimate drama of Manon , Massenet once more turned to opera on the grand scale with Le Cid in 1885 , which marked his return to the Opéra . The Paris correspondent of The New York Times wrote that with this new work Massenet " has resolutely declared himself a melodist of undoubted consistency and of remarkable inspiration . " After these two triumphs , Massenet entered a period of mixed fortunes . He worked on Werther intermittently for several years , but it was rejected by the Opéra-Comique as too gloomy . In 1887 he met the American soprano Sibyl Sanderson . He developed passionate feelings for her , which remained platonic , although it was widely believed in Paris that she was his mistress , as caricatures in the journals hinted with varying degrees of subtlety . For her , the composer revised Manon and wrote Esclarmonde ( 1889 ) . The latter was a success , but it was followed by Le mage ( 1891 ) , which failed . Massenet did not complete his next project , Amadis , and it was not until 1892 that he recovered his earlier successful form . Werther finally received its first performance in February 1892 , when the Vienna Hofoper asked for a new piece , following the enthusiastic reception of the Austrian premiere of Manon .

Though in the view of some writers Werther is the composer 's masterpiece , it was not immediately taken up with the same keenness as Manon . The first performance in Paris was in January 1893 by the Opéra-Comique company at the Théâtre Lyrique , and there were performances in the United States , Italy and Britain , but it met with a muted response . The New York Times said of it , " If M. Massenet 's opera does not have lasting success it will be because it has no genuine depth . Perhaps M. Massenet is not capable of achieving profound depths of tragic passion ; but certainly he will never do so in a work like Werther " . It was not until a revival by the Opéra-Comique in 1903 that the work became an established favourite . Thaïs ( 1894 ) , composed for Sanderson , was moderately received . Like Werther , it did not gain widespread popularity among French opera-goers until its first revival , which was four years after the premiere , by when the composer 's association with Sanderson was over . In the same year he had a modest success in Paris with the one-act Le portrait de Manon at the Opéra-Comique , and a much greater one in London with La Navarraise at Covent Garden . The Times commented that in this piece Massenet had adopted the verismo style of such works as Mascagni 's Cavalleria rusticana to great effect . The audience clamoured for the composer to acknowledge the applause , but Massenet , always a shy man , declined to take even a single curtain call .

The death of Ambroise Thomas in February 1896 made vacant the post of director of the Conservatoire . The French government announced on 6 May that Massenet had been offered the position and had refused it . The following day it was announced that another faculty member , Théodore Dubois , had been appointed director , and Massenet had resigned as professor of composition . Two explanations have been advanced for this sequence of events . Massenet wrote in 1910 that he had remained in post as professor out of loyalty to Thomas , and was eager to abandon all academic work in favour of composing , a statement repeated by his biographers Hugh Macdonald and Demar Irvine . Other writers on French music have written that Massenet was intensely ambitious to succeed Thomas , but resigned in pique after three months of manoeuvring , once the authorities finally rejected his insistence on being appointed director for life , as Thomas had been . He was succeeded as professor by Gabriel Fauré , who was doubtful of Massenet 's credentials , considering his popular style to be " based on a generally cynical view of art " . With Grisélidis and Cendrillon complete , though still awaiting performance , Massenet began work on Sapho , based on a novel by Daudet about the love of an innocent young man from the country for a worldly-wise Parisienne . It was given at the Opéra-Comique in November 1897 , with great success , though it has been neglected since the composer 's death . His next work staged there was Cendrillon , his version of the Cinderella story , which was well received in May 1899 .

Macdonald comments that at the start of the 20th century Massenet was in the enviable position of having his works included in every season of the Opéra and the Opéra-Comique , and in opera houses around the world . From 1900 to his death he led a life of steady work and , generally , success . According to his memoirs , he declined a second offer of the directorship of the Conservatoire in 1905 . Apart from composition , his main concern was his home life in the rue de Vaugirard , Paris , and at his country house in Égreville . He was uninterested in Parisian society , and so shunned the limelight that in later life he preferred not to attend his own first nights . He described himself as " a fireside man , a bourgeois artist " . The main biographical detail of note of his latter years was his second amitié amoureuse with one of his leading ladies , Lucy Arbell , who created roles in his last operas . Milnes describes Arbell as " gold-digging " : her blatant exploitation of the composer 's honourable affections caused his wife considerable distress and even strained Massenet 's devotion ( or infatuation as Milnes characterises it ) . After the composer 's death Arbell pursued his widow and publishers through the law courts , seeking to secure herself a monopoly of the leading roles in several of his late operas .

A rare excursion from the opera house came in 1903 with Massenet 's only piano concerto , on which he had begun work while still a student . The work was performed by Louis Diémer at the Conservatoire , but made little impression compared with his operas . In 1905 Massenet composed Chérubin , a light comedy about the later career of the sex-mad pageboy Cherubino from Mozart 's The Marriage of Figaro . Then came two serious operas , Ariane , on the Greek legend of Theseus and Ariadne , and Thérèse , a terse drama set in the French Revolution . His last major success was Don Quichotte ( 1910 ) , which L 'Etoile called " a very Parisian evening and , naturally , a very Parisian triumph " . Even with his creative powers seemingly in decline he wrote four other operas in his later years – Bacchus , Roma , Panurge and Cléopâtre . The last two , like Amadis , which he had been unable to finish in the 1890s , were premiered after the composer 's death and then lapsed into oblivion . In August 1912 Massenet went to Paris from his house at Égreville to see his doctor . The composer had been suffering from abdominal cancer for some months , but his symptoms did not seem imminently life-threatening . Within a few days his condition deteriorated sharply . His wife and family hastened to Paris , and were with him when he died , aged seventy . By his own wish his funeral , with no music , was held privately at Égreville , where he is buried in the churchyard .

In the view of his biographer Hugh Macdonald , Massenet 's main influences were Gounod and Thomas , with Meyerbeer and Berlioz also important to his style . From beyond France he absorbed some traits from Verdi , and possibly Mascagni , and above all Wagner . Unlike some other French composers of the period , Massenet never fell fully under Wagner 's spell , but he took from the earlier composer a richness of orchestration and a fluency in treatment of musical themes . Although when he chose Massenet could write noisy and dissonant scenes – in 1885 Bernard Shaw called him " one of the loudest of modern composers " – much of his music is soft and delicate . Hostile critics have seized on this characteristic , but the article on Massenet in the 2001 edition of Grove 's Dictionary of Music and Musicians observes that in the best of his operas this sensual side " is balanced by strong dramatic tension ( as in Werther ) , theatrical action ( as in Thérèse ) , scenic diversion ( as in Esclarmonde ) , or humour ( as in Le portrait de Manon ) . " Massenet 's Parisian audiences were greatly attracted by the exotic in music , and Massenet willingly obliged , with musical evocations of far-flung places or times long past . Macdonald lists a great number of locales depicted in the operas , from ancient Egypt , mythical Greece and biblical Galilee to Renaissance Spain , India and Revolutionary Paris . Massenet 's practical experience in orchestra pits as a young man and his careful training at the Conservatoire equipped him to make such effects without much recourse to unusual instruments . He understood the capabilities of his singers , and composed with close , detailed regard for their voices .

Massenet wrote more than thirty operas . Authorities differ on the exact total because some of the works , particularly from his early years , are lost and others were left incomplete . Still others , such as Don César de Bazan and Le roi de Lahore , were substantially recomposed after their first productions and exist in two or more versions . Grove 's Dictionary of Music and Musicians lists forty Massenet operas in all , of which nine are shown as lost or destroyed . The " OperaGlass " website of Stanford University shows revised versions as premieres , and The New Grove Dictionary of Opera , does not : their totals are forty-four and thirty-six respectively . Having honed his personal style as a young man , and sticking broadly with it for the rest of his career , Massenet does not , as some other composers do , lend himself to classification into clearly defined early , middle and late periods . Moreover , his versatility means that there is no plot or locale that can be regarded as typical Massenet . Another respect in which he differed from many opera composers is that he did not work regularly with the same librettists : Grove lists more than thirty writers who provided him with librettos .

The 1954 ( fifth ) edition of Grove said of Massenet , " to have heard Manon is to have heard the whole of him " . In 1994 Andrew Porter called this view preposterous . He countered , " Who knows Manon , Werther and Don Quichotte knows the best of Massenet , but not his range from heroic romance to steamy verismo . " Massenet 's output covered most of the different subgenres of opera , from opérette ( L 'adorable Bel ' -Boul and L 'écureuil du déshonneur – both early , lost pieces ) and opéra-comique such as Manon , to grand opera – Grove categorises Le roi de Lahore as " the last grand opera to have a great and widespread success " . Many of the elements of traditional grand opera are written into later large-scale works such as Le mage and Hérodiade . Massenet 's operas consist of anything from one to five acts , and although many of them are described on the title pages of their scores as " opéra " or " opéra comique " , others have carefully nuanced descriptions such as " comédie chantée " , " comédie lyrique " , " comédie-héroïque " , " conte de fées " , " drame passionnel " , " haulte farce musicale " , " opéra légendaire " , " opéra romanesque " and " opéra tragique " .

In some of his operas , such as Esclarmonde and Le mage , Massenet moved away from the traditional French pattern of free-standing arias and duets . Solos meld from declamatory passages into more melodic form , in a way that many contemporary critics thought Wagnerian . Shaw was not among them : in 1885 he wrote of Manon : Of Wagnerism there is not the faintest suggestion . A phrase which occurs in the first love duet breaks out once or twice in subsequent amorous episodes , and has been seized on by a few unwary critics as a Wagnerian leit motif . But if Wagner had never existed , Manon would have been composed much as it stands now , whereas if Meyerbeer and Gounod had not made a path for M. Massenet , it is impossible to say whither he might have wandered , or how far he could have pushed his way . The 21st-century critic Anne Feeney comments , " Massenet rarely repeated musical phrases , let alone used recurrent themes , so the resemblance [ to Wagner ] lies solely in the declamatory lyricism and enthusiastic use of the brass and percussion . " Massenet enjoyed introducing comedy into his serious works , and writing some mainly comic operas . In Macdonald 's view of the comic works , Cendrillon and Don Quichotte succeed , but Don César de Bazan and Panurge are less satisfying than " the more delicately tuned operas such as Manon , Le portrait de Manon and Le jongleur de Notre-Dame , where comedy serves a more complex purpose . "

According to Operabase , analysis of productions around the world in 2012 – 13 shows Massenet as the twentieth most popular of all opera composers , and the fourth most popular French one , after Bizet , Offenbach and Gounod . The most often performed of his operas in the period are shown as Werther ( 63 productions in all countries ) , followed by Manon ( 47 ) , Don Quichotte ( 22 ) , Thaïs ( 21 ) , Cendrillon ( 17 ) , La Navarraise ( 4 ) , Cléopâtre ( 3 ) , Thérèse ( 2 ) , Le Cid ( 2 ) , Hérodiade ( 2 ) , Esclarmonde ( 2 ) , Chérubin ( 2 ) and Le mage ( 1 ) .

Between 1862 and 1900 Massenet composed eight oratorios and cantatas , mostly on religious subjects . There is a degree of overlap between his operatic style and his choral works for church or concert hall performance . Vincent d 'Indy wrote that there was " a discreet and semi-religious eroticism " in Massenet 's music . The religious element was a regular theme in his secular as well as sacred works : this derived not from any strong personal faith , but from his response to the dramatic aspects of Roman Catholic ritual . The mingling of operatic and religious elements in his works was such that one of his oratorios , Marie-Magdeleine , was staged as an opera during the composer 's lifetime . Elements of the erotic and some implicit sympathy for sinners were controversial , and may have prevented his church works establishing themselves more securely . Arthur Hervey , a contemporary critic not unsympathetic to Massenet , commented that Marie-Magdeleine and the later oratorio Ève ( 1875 ) were " the Bible doctored up in a manner suitable to the taste of impressionable Parisian ladies – utterly inadequate for the theme , at the same time very charming and effective . " Of the four works categorised by Irvine and Grove as oratorios , only one , La terre promise ( 1900 ) , was written for church performance . Massenet used the term " oratorio " for that work , but he called Marie-Magdeleine a " drame sacré " , Ève a " mystère " , and La Vierge ( 1880 ) a " légende sacrée " .

Massenet composed many other smaller-scale choral works , and more than two hundred songs . His early collections of songs were particularly popular and helped establish his reputation . His choice of lyrics ranged widely . Most were verses by poets such as Musset , Maupassant , Hugo , Gautier and many lesser-known French writers , with occasional poems from overseas , including Tennyson in English and Shelley in French translation . Grove comments that Massenet 's songs , though pleasing and impeccable in craftsmanship , are less inventive than those of Bizet and less distinctive than those of Duparc and Fauré .

Massenet was a fluent and skilful orchestrator , and willingly provided ballet episodes for his operas , incidental music for plays , and a one-act stand-alone ballet for Vienna ( Le carillon , 1892 ) . Macdonald remarks that Massenet 's orchestral style resembled that of Delibes , " with its graceful movement and bewitching colour " , which was highly suited to classical French ballet . The Méditation for solo violin and orchestra , from Thaïs , is possibly the best known non-vocal piece by Massenet , and appears on many recordings . Another popular stand-alone orchestral piece from the operas is Le dernier sommeil de la Vierge from La Vierge , which has featured on numerous discs since the middle of the 20th century . A Parisian critic , after seeing La grand ' tante , declared that Massenet was a symphonist rather than a theatre composer . At the time of the British premiere of Manon in 1885 , the critic in The Manchester Guardian , reviewing the work enthusiastically , nevertheless echoed his French confrère 's view that the composer was really a symphonist , whose music was at its best when purely orchestral . Massenet took a wholly opposite view of his talents . He was temperamentally unsuited to writing symphonically : the constraints of sonata form bored him . He wrote , in the early 1870s , " What I have to say , musically , I have to say rapidly , forcefully , concisely ; my discourse is tight and nervous , and if I wanted to express myself otherwise I would not be myself . " His efforts in the concertante field made little mark , but his orchestral suites , colourful and picturesque according to Grove , have survived on the fringes of the repertoire . Other works for orchestra are a symphonic poem , Visions ( 1891 ) , an Ouverture de Concert ( 1863 ) and Ouverture de Phèdre ( 1873 ) . After early attempts at chamber music as a student , he wrote little more in the genre . Most of his early chamber pieces are now lost ; three pieces for cello and piano survive .

The only known recording made by Massenet is an excerpt from Sapho , " Pendant un an je fus ta femme " , in which he plays a piano accompaniment for the soprano Georgette Leblanc . It was recorded in 1903 , and was not intended for publication . It has been released on compact disc ( 2008 ) , together with contemporary recordings by Grieg , Saint-Saëns , Debussy and others . In Massenet 's later years , and in the decade after his death , many of his songs and opera extracts were recorded . Some of the performers were the original creators of the roles , such as Ernest van Dyck ( Werther ) , Emma Calvé ( Sapho ) , Hector Dufranne ( Grisélidis ) , and Vanni Marcoux ( Panurge ) . Complete French recordings of Manon and Werther , conducted by Élie Cohen , were issued in 1932 and 1933 and have been republished on CD . The critic Alan Blyth comments that they embody the original , intimate Opéra-Comique style of performing Massenet . Of Massenet 's operas , the two best known , Manon and Werther , have been recorded many times , and studio or live recordings have been issued of many of the others , including Cendrillon , Le Cid , Don Quichotte , Esclarmonde , Hérodiade , Le jongleur de Notre-Dame , Le mage , La Navarraise and Thaïs . Conductors on these discs include Sir Thomas Beecham , Richard Bonynge , Riccardo Chailly , Sir Colin Davis , Patrick Fournillier , Sir Charles Mackerras , Pierre Monteux , Sir Antonio Pappano and Michel Plasson . Among the sopranos and mezzos are Dame Janet Baker , Victoria de los Ángeles , Natalie Dessay , Renée Fleming , Angela Gheorghiu and Dame Joan Sutherland . Leading men in recordings of Massenet operas include Roberto Alagna , Gabriel Bacquier , Plácido Domingo , Thomas Hampson , José van Dam , Alain Vanzo and Rolando Villazón .

By the time of the composer 's death in 1912 his reputation had declined , especially outside his native country . In the second edition ( 1907 ) of Grove , J A Fuller Maitland accused the composer of pandering to the fashionable Parisian taste of the moment , and disguising a uniformly " weak and sugary " style with superficial effects . Fuller Maitland contended that to discerning music lovers such as himself the operas of Massenet were " inexpressibly monotonous " , and he predicted that they would all be forgotten after the composer 's death . Similar views were expressed in an obituary in The Musical Times His early scores are , for the greater part , his best ... Later , and for the plain reason that he never attempted to renovate his style , he sank into sheer mannerism . Indeed , one can but marvel that so gifted a musician , who lacked neither individuality nor skill , should have so utterly succeeded in throwing away his gifts . Success spoiled him ... the actual progress of musical art during the past forty years left Massenet unmoved ... he has taken no part in the evolution of modern music .

Massenet was never entirely without supporters . In the 1930s Sir Thomas Beecham told the critic Neville Cardus , " I would give the whole of Bach 's Brandenburg Concertos for Massenet 's Manon , and would think I had vastly profited by the exchange . " By the 1950s critics were reappraising Massenet 's works . In 1951 Martin Cooper of The Daily Telegraph wrote that Massenet 's detractors , including some fellow composers , were on the whole idealistic , even puritanical , " but few of them have in practice achieved anything so near perfection in any genre , however humble , as Massenet achieved in his best works . " In 1955 Edward Sackville-West and Desmond Shawe-Taylor commented in The Record Guide that , although usually dismissed as an inferior Gounod , Massenet wrote music with a distinct flavour of its own . " He had a gift for melody of a suave , voluptuous and eminently singable kind , and the intelligence and dramatic sense to make the most of it . " The writers called for revivals of Grisélidis , Le jongleur de Notre-Dame , Don Quichotte and Cendrillon , all then neglected . By the 1990s , Massenet 's reputation had been considerably rehabilitated . In The Penguin Opera Guide ( 1993 ) , Hugh Macdonald wrote that though Massenet 's operas never equalled the grandeur of Berlioz 's Les Troyens , the genius of Bizet 's Carmen or the profundity of Debussy 's Pelléas et Mélisande , from the 1860s until the years before the First World War , the composer gave the French lyric stage a remarkable series of works , two of which – Manon and Werther – are " masterpieces that will always grace the repertoire " . In Macdonald 's view , Massenet " embodies many enduring aspects of the belle époque , one of the richest cultural periods in history " . In France , Massenet 's 20th-century eclipse was less complete than elsewhere , but his oeuvre has been revalued in recent years . In 2003 Piotr Kaminsky wrote in Mille et un opéras of Massenet 's skill in translating French text into flexible melodic phrases , his exceptional orchestral virtuosity , combining sparkle and clarity , and his unerring theatrical instinct .

Rodney Milnes , in The New Grove Dictionary of Opera ( 1992 ) , agrees that Manon and Werther have a secure place in the international repertoire ; he counts three others as " re-establishing a toehold " ( Cendrillon , Thaïs and Don Quichotte ) , with many more due for re-evaluation or rediscovery . He concludes that comparing Massenet with the handful of composers of great genius , " It would be absurd to claim that he was anything more than a second-rate composer ; he nevertheless deserves to be seen , like Richard Strauss , at least as a first-class second-rate one . "

Everything in Time ( B-sides , Rarities , Remixes ) is a compilation album comprising B-sides , remixes , and rare songs by the American third wave ska band No Doubt , first released on November 23 , 2003 as disc three of No Doubt 's box set , Boom Box , which also contained The Singles 1992 – 2003 , The Videos 1992 – 2003 and Live in the Tragic Kingdom . Everything in Time was later released separately on October 12 , 2004 . The album 's B-sides and rarities originate in recording sessions for the band 's fourth studio album , Return of Saturn . The first six tracks were used as B-sides for three of the singles released off the album , " Ex-Girlfriend " , " Simple Kind of Life " and " Bathwater " . Everything in Time also includes a remix of the song " New " , also from Return of Saturn , and two remixes of " Rock Steady " , the title track from No Doubt 's fifth studio album , Rock Steady . The album received little coverage , not being a studio album , although the publications that did cover it gave average or good reviews , both in the box set Boom Box and its in solo release . It charted on the U.S. Billboard 200 album chart at number 182 .

No Doubt 's fourth studio album , Return of Saturn was recorded between 1998 and 1999 and released on April 11 , 2000 . Over 40 demo tracks were recorded for Return of Saturn , but the list was whittled down to the fourteen for the album 's final composition , four of which were released as singles : " New " , " Ex-Girlfriend " , " Simple Kind of Life " and " Bathwater " . No Doubt released their fifth studio album , Rock Steady , in December 2001 and from it released four singles , " Hey Baby " , " Hella Good " , " Underneath It All " and " Running " between 2001 and 2003 . The album sold 3 million copies and was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America . Later , in April 2003 , No Doubt went into hiatus to take a break to spend time with their families before starting to compile Everything in Time ; The Singles 1992 – 2003 , a greatest hits album featuring songs from their previous studio albums ; and Boom Box , a box set compiling The Singles 1992 – 2003 , Everything in Time , The Videos 1992 – 2003 and Live in the Tragic Kingdom , which would all be released on the same date . The main reason to go into hiatus was that , in early 2003 , lead singer Gwen Stefani started work on her 1980s-inspired new wave / dance-pop music side project , under which she released two solo albums : Love . Angel . Music . Baby. on November 22 , 2004 and The Sweet Escape on December 4 , 2006 .

The first six tracks on the album are B-sides from No Doubt 's fourth album , Return of Saturn . " Big Distraction " is a B-side to the British CD single release of " Ex-Girlfriend " and appears on the Australian and Japanese versions of Return of Saturn . " Leftovers " is a B-side to the European enhanced and Australian CD single releases of " Ex-Girlfriend " . " Full Circle " is a B-side to the European , European enhanced , and Australian CD single releases of " Ex-Girlfriend " and " Simple Kind of Life " and appears on the Japanese version of Return of Saturn . " Cellophane Boy " is a B-side to the CD single release of " Simple Kind of Life " . " Beauty Contest " is a B-side to the British and German CD single releases of " Simple Kind of Life " and " Bathwater " . " Under Construction " is a B-side to the British CD single releases of " Simple Kind of Life " and " Bathwater " . " Everything in Time " , " You 're So Foxy " , and " Panic " are outtakes from recording sessions of Return of Saturn , while " New Friend " is a leftover from the Rock Steady recordings . " Sailin ' On " is a cover of the song by Bad Brains , an American hardcore punk band , from their debut album Bad Brains . " Oi to the World " is a cover of the original version by The Vandals , a Californian punk rock band , from their album Oi to the World ! . " I Throw My Toys Around " is a song from the soundtrack of The Rugrats Movie , performed by No Doubt and Elvis Costello .

In its 2003 release as part of Boom Box , Everything in Time was described as " certainly worth having " by Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic in a review for the box set . RockMusicReview called the song " Full Circle " , from Everything in Time , one of the highlights of Boom Box . In its 2004 solo release , few critics reviewed Everything in Time because it was not a studio album . However , Laura Sinagra for Blender magazine gave it three stars out of five , saying it contained " endearing , younger examples of the marriage-minded tomboy [ Gwen Stefani ] agonizing over the task of taming restless playboys " . She complimented " New Friend " , " Under Construction " and both versions of " Everything in Time " as " satisfying laments " with " truth-serum lyrics " , and praised Stefani 's " just-a-girl sass " in " Oi to the World " . However , she criticized " Big Distraction " and " Leftovers " , which in her opinion were " pale beside the singles [ The Singles 1992 – 2003 ] " . Both Allmusic and Artistdirect gave the album three stars out of five but neither gave an actual review .

Thomas Edward Neil Driberg , Baron Bradwell ( 22 May 1905 – 12 August 1976 ) was a British journalist , politician and High Anglican churchman who served as a Member of Parliament ( MP ) from 1942 to 1955 and from 1959 to 1974 . A member of the British Communist Party for more than 20 years , he was first elected to parliament as an Independent , and joined the Labour Party in 1945 . He never held any ministerial office , but rose to senior positions within the Labour Party and was a popular and influential figure in left-wing politics for many years . The son of a retired colonial officer , Driberg was educated at Lancing and Christ Church , Oxford . After leaving the university without a degree , he attempted to establish himself as a poet before joining the Daily Express as a reporter , later becoming a columnist . In 1933 he began the " William Hickey " society column , which he continued to write until 1943 . He was later a regular columnist for the Co-operative Group newspaper Reynold 's News and for other left-leaning journals . He wrote several books , including biographies of the press baron Lord Beaverbrook and the fugitive British diplomat Guy Burgess . He retired from the House of Commons in 1974 , and was subsequently raised to the peerage as Baron Bradwell , of Bradwell juxta Mare in the County of Essex .

Driberg made no secret of his homosexuality , which he practised throughout his life despite it being a criminal offence in Britain until 1967 ; his ability to avoid any consequences for his risky and often brazen behaviour baffled his friends and colleagues . Always in search of bizarre experiences , Driberg befriended at various times the occultist Aleister Crowley and the Kray twins , along with honoured and respected figures in the worlds of literature and politics . He combined this lifestyle with an unvarying devotion to Anglo-Catholicism . After his death , allegations were published about his role over many years as an MI5 informant , a KGB agent , or both . The extent and nature of Driberg 's involvement with these agencies remain uncertain .

Driberg was born on 22 May 1905 in Crowborough , a small dormitory town about 40 miles ( 64 km ) south of London . He was the third and youngest of three sons born to John James Street Driberg , a former officer in the Indian Civil Service , and his wife Amy Mary Irving Driberg ( née Bell ) . The Driberg family had immigrated from Holland about 200 years previously ; the Bells were lowland Scots from Dumfriesshire . John Driberg had retired in 1896 after 35 years in Assam , latterly as head of the state 's police , and was 65 years old when his youngest son was born . For Driberg , growing up mostly alone with his elderly parents was a stifling experience ; he would later describe Crowborough as " a place which I can never revisit , or think of , without a feeling of sick horror " . At the age of eight Driberg began as a day-boy at the Grange school in Crowborough . In his autobiography he mentions in particular two aspects of his time there : learning the " facts of life " from other boys , with extensive experimentation , and his discovery of what he calls " exotic " religion — High Anglicanism . These experiences formed what he called two " conflicting compulsions " , soon to be joined by a third — left-wing politics — to shape the ruling passions of his life .

In 1918 , when he was 13 , Driberg left the Grange for Lancing College , the public school on the south coast where , after some initial bullying and humiliation , he was befriended by fellow-pupil Evelyn Waugh . Under Waugh 's sponsorship Driberg joined an intellectual society , the Dilettanti , which promoted literary and artistic activities alongside political debate . He began to write poetry ; his aesthetic education was further assisted by the charismatic J. F. Roxburgh , " a magnetically brilliant teacher " who later became headmaster of Stowe School . Lancing 's Gothic chapel gave Driberg the religious atmosphere he sought , though he found the services disappointingly " moderate " . By 1920 he was inclining to the political left and was in rebellion against his conservative upbringing . Finding the Labour Party too dull and respectable for his radical tastes , he joined the Brighton branch of the newly formed British Communist Party . After Driberg had risen to responsible positions within the school ( deputy head boy , head librarian , and chief sacristan , among others ) , his Lancing career ended suddenly in the autumn of 1923 , when two boys complained about his sexual overtures . To avoid distressing the widowed Amy Driberg ( John Driberg had died in 1919 ) , the headmaster allowed him to remain in the school for the remainder of the term , stripped of his offices and segregated from all social contact with other boys . At the end of the term he was required to leave , on the pretext that he needed private tuition to pass his Oxford entrance examination which he had failed the previous summer . Back in Crowborough , after several months ' hard application under the guidance of his tutor , the future Lord Justice Pearson , Driberg won a classics scholarship to Christ Church , Oxford .

Oxford in 1924 featured an avant-garde aesthetic movement in which personalities such as Harold Acton , Brian Howard , Cyril Connolly and , a little later , W. H. Auden were leading lights . Driberg was soon immersed in a world of art , politics , poetry and parties : " There was just no time for any academic work " , he wrote later . With Auden , he discovered T. S. Eliot 's The Waste Land , which they read again and again , " with growing awe " . A poem of Driberg 's in the style of Edith Sitwell was published in Oxford Poetry 1926 ; when Sitwell came to Oxford to deliver a lecture , Driberg invited her to have tea with him , and she accepted . After her lecture he found an opportunity to recite one of his own poems , and was rewarded when Sitwell declared him " the hope of English poetry " . Meanwhile , together with the future historian A. J. P. Taylor , Driberg formed the membership of the Oxford University Communist Party . During the General Strike of May 1926 , most Oxford students supported the government and enrolled as special constables and strike-breakers . A minority , which included the future Labour Party leader Hugh Gaitskell and the future Poet Laureate John Betjeman , sided with the strikers , while Driberg and Taylor offered their services at the British Communist Party 's headquarters in London . The Party showed no urgency to employ them , and Taylor soon left . Driberg , given a job distributing strike bulletins , was arrested by the police before he could begin and was detained for several hours . This ended his active role in the strike . Notwithstanding his extreme left-wing associations , he secured 75 votes ( against the winner 's 152 ) in the 1927 elections for the presidency of the Oxford Union .

Throughout his time at Oxford , Driberg followed his passion for Anglican rituals by regularly attending Mass at Pusey House , an independent religious institution with a mission to " [ restore ] the Church of England 's Catholic life and witness " . In spite of the prevalent Oxford homoerotic ethos , his sexual energies were largely devoted to casual encounters with working-class men , rather than to relationships with his fellow undergraduates . He experienced sexual relations with only one don , whom he met outside the university , unaware of the latter 's identity . One of Driberg 's elaborate hoaxes was a concert called " Homage to Beethoven " , which featured megaphones , typewriters and a flushing lavatory . Newspaper accounts of this event raised the interest of the occultist Aleister Crowley . Driberg accepted an invitation to lunch with Crowley for the first of several meetings between them , at one of which Crowley nominated Driberg as his successor as World Teacher . Nothing came of the proposal , though the two continued to meet ; Driberg received from Crowley manuscripts and books that he later sold for sizeable sums . The consequence of these various extracurricular involvements was neglect of his academic work ; failure in his final examinations was inevitable , and in the summer of 1927 he left Oxford without a degree .

After leaving Oxford , Driberg lived precariously in London , attempting to establish himself as a poet while doing odd jobs and pawning his few valuables . Occasionally he had chance encounters with Oxford acquaintances ; Evelyn Waugh 's diary entry for 30 October 1927 records : " I went to church in Margaret Street where I was discomposed to observe Tom Driberg 's satanic face in the congregation " . Driberg had maintained his contact with Edith Sitwell , and attended regular literary tea parties at her Bayswater flat . When Sitwell discovered her protégé 's impoverished circumstances she arranged an interview for him with the Daily Express . After his submission of an article on London 's nightlife , he was engaged in January 1928 for a six-week trial as a reporter ; coincidentally , Waugh had undergone an unsuccessful trial with the same newspaper a few months earlier . Within a month of beginning his duties , Driberg achieved a scoop with the first national newspaper reports of the activities in Oxford of the American evangelist Frank Buchman , whose movement would in time be known as Moral Re-Armament . Driberg 's reports were generally abrasive , even mocking in tone , and drew complaints from Buchman 's organisation about news bias . The trial period at the Express was extended , and in July 1928 Driberg filed an exclusive report on a society party at the swimming baths in Buckingham Palace Road , where the guests included Lytton Strachey and Tallulah Bankhead . This evidence of Driberg 's social contacts led to a permanent contract with the Express , as assistant to Percy Sewell who , under the name " The Dragoman " , wrote a daily feature called " The Talk of London " . Driberg later defended his association with an inconsequential society column by arguing that his approach was satirical , and that he deliberately exaggerated the doings of the idle rich as a way of enraging working-class opinion and helping the Communist Party .

Driberg used the column to introduce readers to up-and-coming socialites and literary figures , Acton , Betjeman , Nancy Mitford and Peter Quennell among them . Sometimes he introduced more serious causes : capital punishment , modern architecture , the works of D. H. Lawrence and Jacob Epstein , and the lesbian novel The Well of Loneliness by Radclyffe Hall , which had been denounced in the Express editorial columns as " infamous " . By prior arrangement with Waugh , the column included a discreet announcement in September 1930 of Waugh 's conversion to Roman Catholicism ; Driberg was his only guest at the service . He further assisted Waugh in 1932 by giving him space in the column to attack the editor of the Catholic journal The Tablet , after it had described Waugh 's Black Mischief as blasphemous .

Sewell retired in 1932 , leaving Driberg in sole charge of " The Talk of London " column . He grew increasingly frustrated with the trivial nature of his work . Following the intervention of Express proprietor Lord Beaverbrook , the column was relaunched in May 1933 as " These Names Make News " , and its by-line changed to " William Hickey " , after the 18th century diarist and rake . Driberg described the new feature as " ... an intimate biographical column about ... men and women who matter . Artists , statesmen , airmen , writers , financiers , explorers ... " Historian David Kynaston calls Driberg the " founder of the modern gossip column " , although it soon began to move decisively away from chit-chat and towards social and political issues . The tone of the column was described by Driberg 's ODNB biographer Richard Davenport-Hines as " wry , compassionate , and brimm [ ing ] with ... open-minded intelligence " . Beaverbrook , who had developed a fondness for Driberg , was amused by the disparity between his columnist 's professed left-wing sympathies and bon vivant lifestyle . The proprietor knew of Driberg 's persistent mismanagement of his personal finances , and on various occasions helped out with loans and gifts . During his time in London , Driberg had continued to indulge his taste for rough , casual sex ; his memoir records many such instances . In the autumn of 1935 he was charged with indecent assault , after an incident in which he had shared his bed with two Scotsmen picked up late one night , in the bohemian district of London which Driberg had christened " Fitzrovia " in the Hickey column . Beaverbrook paid for a leading counsel , J. D. Cassels , and two unimpeachable character witnesses were recruited by the defence . Driberg was acquitted , and Beaverbrook 's influence ensured that the case went unreported by the press . This was the first known instance of what writer Kingsley Amis called the " baffling immunity [ Driberg ] enjoyed from the law and the Press to the end of his days " .

In the latter part of the 1930s Driberg travelled widely : twice to Spain , to observe the Spanish Civil War , to Germany after the Munich Agreement of 1938 , to Rome for the coronation of Pope Pius XII and to New York for the 1939 New York World 's Fair . After the Nazi-Soviet Pact was announced in August 1939 , he informed his readers that there would be " no war this crisis " . Nine days later , after the German invasion of Poland precipitated the Second World War , he apologised for his mistake , and ended his first wartime column with the words " We 're all in it " . His opposition to the Nazi-Soviet Pact and his support for the war in September 1939 may have been the reason for his expulsion from the Communist Party in 1941 . An alternative explanation , proffered later , is that he was reported by Anthony Blunt for passing information on the Party to Maxwell Knight of MI5 . Driberg and Knight were long-standing acquaintances who met frequently and , among other things , shared a mutual interest in the works of Aleister Crowley .

Driberg 's mother had died in July 1939 . With his share of her money and the help of a substantial mortgage , he bought and renovated Bradwell Lodge , a country house in Bradwell-on-Sea on the Essex coast , where he lived and entertained until the house was requisitioned by the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) in 1940 . He continued to write the Hickey column , not always to his editor 's satisfaction ; his protestations against indiscriminate bombing of German civilians were particularly frowned on . In November 1941 he went to America and was in Washington on Monday 8 December , after the attack on Pearl Harbor , to report President Roosevelt 's speech to Congress announcing America 's entry into the war .

When Driberg returned to Britain in March 1942 he found widespread public dissatisfaction with the government 's conduct of the war . This mood was reflected in a series of parliamentary by-elections in which candidates supporting the wartime coalition government were defeated by Independents — the major parties had agreed to a pact under which they would not contest by-elections in seats held by their respective parties . Driberg , in his column , generally welcomed this trend , while questioning " the merit of some of the candidates likely to get in if the reaction against the Party machines continues " . On 12 May 1942 the death was announced of Sir Edward Ruggles-Brise , the Conservative member for Maldon — the constituency in which Bradwell Lodge was situated . Next day , Driberg requested three weeks ' leave from his column to fight the by-election . Contrary to the belief of prime minister Winston Churchill and others that Driberg was being " run " by Beaverbrook , the Express proprietor was unenthusiastic ; an editorial on 25 May drew attention to Driberg 's individual viewpoint and stated that " The Daily Express does not support his candidature " .

Driberg 's campaign slogan was " A Candid Friend For Churchill " , personally supportive but critical of many of the prime minister 's circle . The lacklustre campaign of his right-wing Conservative opponent helped to secure Driberg a wide range of support , from moderate Conservatives , Liberals and socialists . His fame as " William Hickey " , and his stance as the only candidate with a home in the constituency , gave him a strong local profile . His previous Communist Party associations were not revealed . At the poll , on 25 June , he overturned a previous Conservative majority of 8,000 to finish 6,000 votes ahead of his opponent . In his war memoirs , Churchill called the result " one of the by-products of Tobruk " — which had fallen to Rommel on 21 June . Waugh , in his diary , remarked that the presentation of Driberg during the by-election merely as a journalist and churchwarden gave " a very imperfect picture of that sinister character " . On 2 July 1942 Driberg cast his first vote in the House of Commons , in support of Churchill against a rebel motion of censure on the government 's conduct of the war . The rebels ' case was put incompetently , which ensured that the motion gained only 25 votes , as against 477 cast for the government . Driberg delivered his maiden speech on 7 July , in a debate on the use of propaganda . He called for the lifting of the ban on the Communist Party 's newspaper , the Daily Worker , which he saw as a potentially valuable weapon of home propaganda .

In the following months he tabled questions and intervened in debates on behalf of various progressive causes . For example , on 29 September 1942 he asked the prime minister to " make friendly representations to the American military authorities asking them to instruct their men that the colour bar is not a custom in this country " . He continued to write the Hickey column , and used his parliamentary salary to fund a constituency office in Maldon . In January 1943 , while in Edinburgh to campaign in another by-election , Driberg was caught by a policeman while in the act of fellating a Norwegian sailor . In his own account of the incident Driberg records that he escaped arrest by identifying himself as " William Hickey " and as a member of parliament . These disclosures evidently overawed the constable , who took no further action ; indeed , Driberg says , the incident began a chaste friendship with the officer that endured for more than 10 years . Meanwhile , Beaverbrook had become disenchanted with him , and did not intervene when Arthur Christiansen , the Express editor , sacked the columnist in June 1943 over a story detrimental to a government minister , Andrew Rae Duncan . Driberg subsequently signed up with Reynolds News , a Sunday newspaper owned by the Co-operative Group , and undertook a regular parliamentary column for the New Statesman . He also contributed to a weekly BBC European Service broadcast until , in October 1943 , he was banned after government pressure . He reported the post-D-Day allied advances in France and Belgium as a war correspondent for Reynolds News , and as a member of a parliamentary delegation witnessed the aftermath of the liberation of Buchenwald concentration camp in April 1945 .

In the General election of July 1945 Driberg increased his majority at Maldon to 7,727 . Before the election he had joined the Labour Party and had been welcomed by the local constituency party as their candidate . He was thus one of the 393 Labour MPs in the landslide election victory that replaced Churchill as prime minister with Clement Attlee . Within a few days of his victory , Driberg left for the Far East , to report on the conditions of the allied troops in Burma . The Supreme Allied Commander , Lord Mountbatten , knew him slightly and made him an unofficial temporary special adviser . In this role he met the Patriotic Burmese Forces leader , Aung San , who impressed him as honest and incorruptible , " unlike some of the older Burmese politicians " . Later , he visited Saigon and offered to mediate with Ho Chi Minh , who had recently declared an independent Vietnam state . Driberg later maintained that , had his offer been taken up , he might have prevented the Vietnam War . Because of his journalism , Driberg was a well-known figure within the Labour Party generally , and in 1949 was elected to the party 's National Executive Committee ( NEC ) . In the February 1950 General Election he was again elected at Maldon , while nationally Labour lost 68 seats , reducing its parliamentary majority to six . With so small a majority , members ' regular attendance in the Commons chamber became important ; however , in August 1950 Driberg left the country for Korea , where Britain had joined the United States in a United Nations military expedition to repel the North Korean invasion of the South . Driberg and a few other left-wing MPs had objected to British involvement ; In his Reynolds News column , Driberg had written of " Tories ( Conservatives ) who ... cannot help baying their delight at the smell of blood in the air " , a comment that caused outrage in parliament among the Conservative members . Whatever his reservations , Driberg 's war dispatches to Reynolds News were strongly supportive of the British troops . He participated in several night operations , and won respect from many of the soldiers for his courage despite , as one Marine put it " being a bit bent " . He was away from parliament for three months , missing many critical House of Commons divisions , and on his return was severely censured by his fellow Labour MPs for neglecting his duties . His general standing in the party was unaffected ; he had been re-elected in absentia to the NEC in September 1950 .

In April 1951 the Labour government was hit by the resignations of three ministers — Aneurin Bevan , the future prime minister Harold Wilson , and John Freeman — over the imposition of prescription charges to pay for an increased armaments programme . Driberg was sympathetic to the rebels , though he tried to find a basis for compromise that would avoid resignations . The former ministers strengthened the small Labour group known as " Keep Left " , in which Driberg was prominent ; the group would henceforth be known as " Bevanites " . In the October 1951 General Election the Labour Party was defeated , and Churchill resumed office ; Driberg held on to his Maldon seat by 704 votes . Through the years of Labour government he had neither received nor sought office , having what historian Kenneth O. Morgan called a " backbench mindset " . He still enjoyed aspects of his parliamentary life , such as in 1953 when he showed the American singing sensation Johnnie Ray round the House of Commons ; his attempts to seduce the singer were politely resisted . However , he needed to earn more money , and in the spring of 1952 responded to a suggestion that he should write a biography of Beaverbrook . The press lord was amenable , and work began in the summer of 1953 . The project extended over several years , by which time Driberg was no longer in parliament ; he had announced in March 1954 that he was standing down from Maldon , which at the General Election of May 1955 fell , as he had expected , to the Conservatives .

On 16 February 1951 Driberg surprised his friends by announcing his engagement to Ena Mary Binfield ( née Lyttelton ) . A former Suffolk county councillor , she worked as an administrator at the Marie Curie Hospital in London and was well known in senior Labour circles ; she had met Driberg in 1949 , at a weekend party given by the government minister George Strauss . According to her son , she was fully aware of Driberg 's sexual preferences , but looked forward to some political excitement , and " thought they could do a useful job as Mr. and Mrs. " Driberg 's motives are less clear , but he told his friend John Freeman that he needed someone to run Bradwell Lodge , to which he had returned in 1946 after its release by the RAF . At Driberg 's insistence , Ena , a non-practising Jew , was baptised into the Church of England before the wedding at St Mary the Virgin , Pimlico , on 30 June 1951 . The bride entered the church to a chorale arranged from the Labour Party anthem " The Red Flag " ; this was followed by a nuptial mass described by Driberg 's biographer Francis Wheen as " outrageously ornate " . Four hundred guests then attended an elaborate reception at the House of Commons .

In the ensuing years Ena tried hard to adapt to Driberg 's way of life and to control his wayward finances , but with little success . He continued his frequent travels and casual homosexual liaisons , and was hostile to her efforts to control or change any aspect of his life . In 1961 she wrote to him : " I have tried for ten years to make a compromise with you in your extraordinary mode of life and have now given up . " Thereafter they often lived apart , though they never formally separated . Even after a final breach in 1971 , they remained legally married .

On leaving parliament in 1955 , Driberg 's main task was to complete the Beaverbrook biography . Although Beaverbrook had initially promised no interference with the text , he changed his mind when he began to read Driberg 's drafts . In the course of a prolonged disagreement , Beaverbrook accused his biographer of being driven by " malice and hatred " . When the manuscript was finally cleared for publication , much of the objectionable material had been removed ; nevertheless , Beaverbrook used the Daily Express to campaign against the book and denounce its hostile tone . Evelyn Waugh , to whom Driberg sent a copy , expressed disappointment that the work was in fact " a honeyed eulogy " . In an effort to build his post-parliamentary career , Driberg turned briefly to creative writing , but without success . In his more familiar field of journalism he caused a sensation by flying to Moscow in August 1956 to interview Guy Burgess , the former British diplomat who in 1951 had defected to Russia with his colleague Donald Maclean . The pair had emerged in Moscow in March 1956 , to give a brief press conference . Driberg had known Burgess in the 1940s , and the two shared similar homosexual inclinations ; this acquaintance was sufficient to secure the Moscow interview . On his return home Driberg rapidly wrote a book from the interview material , the serial rights of which were sold to the Daily Mail . Critics drew attention to the book 's relatively sympathetic portrayal of Burgess ; some believed the book had been vetted by the KGB , while others saw it as part of an MI5 plot to trap Burgess into revealing secret information for which he could be prosecuted should he ever return to Britain .

In 1956 Driberg convened a group of Christian socialists that met regularly at the Lamb public house in Bloomsbury to discuss issues such as imperialism , colonialism , immigration and nuclear disarmament . The group 's dispatches , Papers from the Lamb , led to the foundation in 1960 of the Christian Socialist Movement . Although no longer an MP , Driberg remained a member of the Labour Party 's NEC and was active in party affairs . In 1957 , in the face of antagonism from trade union leaders repelled by his lifestyle , he became Labour Party chairman , a largely ceremonial role . He travelled widely during his year in office , generally as a Reynolds News correspondent but using the party title to advantage whenever he could . Thus , in a 1958 visit to Moscow to interview space scientists , he obtained two meetings with Nikita Khrushchev . In his final speech as chairman , to the party conference in 1958 , Driberg angered the Conservatives and their press supporters by referring to the Tory ideology as not essentially different from the German Herrenvolk philosophy . He had been contemplating for some time a return to the House of Commons , and in February 1959 was adopted as a candidate by the safe Barking constituency . In the General Election of October 1959 , which delivered a 100-seat majority to Harold Macmillan 's Conservative government , he won at Barking with a majority of exactly 12,000 .

A dominant issue when Driberg returned to Westminster was that of the use or outlawing of nuclear weapons . The Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament ( CND ) had been launched on 17 February 1958 , though Driberg 's involvement with the issue predated CND by three years . On 2 March 1955 , in an amendment to a House of Commons motion , he had called for Great Britain to " regain the moral leadership of the world by taking an initiative ... that may lead to the outlawing of ... thermo-nuclear weapons " . In October 1960 he supported the unilateralist motions passed at the Labour Party conference , and fought unsuccessfully in the NEC for them to be adopted as party policy . The conference motion was reversed the following year , but he continued to pursue the matter in parliament . On 29 May 1962 he urged that Britain not be a party to the renewal of nuclear tests , and in a speech on 23 July he said : " The unilateral abandonment of testing — or , better still , a test ban agreement — would be the most valuable first step towards general and complete disarmament . "

According to his colleague Ian Mikardo , Driberg was less than enthusiastic about his duties in Barking — " a very , very bad constituency MP " . Even his strongest supporters acknowledged that he attended as few local events as possible . In the Commons chamber he was a regular speaker on issues that concerned him , in particular disarmament , church affairs and racial discrimination . He supported the lowering of the voting age to 18 , and the broadcasting of parliamentary debates ; he opposed increases to judges ' salaries , and the extension of Stansted Airport . After the General Election of 1964 , which narrowly returned Labour to power under Harold Wilson , he was not offered a place in the new government , and soon found himself in opposition to Wilson 's policies on Vietnam , the Common Market , immigration and other major issues . He joined with Mikardo and other dissidents to form the " Tribune Group " , with the aim of promoting more left-wing policies . The group 's influence lessened after March 1966 , when in another General Election Wilson increased his majority to 98 . Driberg embraced enthusiastically the climate of the 1960s and the social and cultural freedoms that the decade introduced . In 1963 he met the Kray twins , prominent London gangland figures , and began a lengthy friendship with them and their associates . In July 1964 two backbench Conservative MPs reported to their Chief Whip that Driberg and Lord Boothby ( a well-known Conservative peer ) had been importuning males at a dog track , and were involved with gangs of thugs .

At parties which Driberg and Boothby attended at the Krays ' flat , " rough but compliant East End lads were served like so many canapés " , according to Wheen . While Driberg avoided publicity , Boothby was hounded by the press and forced to issue a series of denials . After the twins had been convicted of murder in 1969 , Driberg frequently lobbied the Home Office about their prison conditions , requesting that they be given more visits and allowed regular reunions . Driberg was impressed with Mick Jagger , to whom he was introduced in 1965 , and tried hard over a number of years to persuade the singer to take up active Labour politics . He also began a long association with the satirical magazine Private Eye , supplying it with political gossip and , under the pseudonym " Tiresias " , compiling a regular , highly risqué prize cryptic crossword puzzle which on one occasion was won by the wife of the Archbishop of Canterbury . In 1964 Driberg published a critical study of Moral Re-armament , which brought him attacks from the movement on the basis of his homosexuality and communist past . Although he made money from this book , throughout the 1960s he was beset by financial problems . When Reynolds News , which had evolved into the Sunday Citizen , finally folded in 1967 , he became fully dependent on his parliamentary salary and casual journalism . He had long considered selling Bradwell Lodge , preferably to the National Trust on a basis that would allow him to continue living there . However , the Trust required the property to be mortgage-free and endowed with a substantial fund to cover future repairs , neither of which terms could be arranged . In the event the house remained unsold until 1971 . As the 1970 election approached , Driberg wished to retire from parliament , and asked Wilson to appoint him as ambassador to the Vatican . Wilson refused , citing Driberg 's age — at 65 he was beyond the retirement age for senior diplomats . Against his will , but with few other sources of income available to him , Driberg fought the June 1970 General Election . He was returned for Barking with a comfortable though reduced majority ; nationally , Wilson 's government was defeated by Edward Heath 's Conservatives .

Hampered by age and declining health , Driberg became less active politically , and in 1972 was voted off Labour 's NEC . The sale of Bradwell Lodge to a private buyer removed his main burden of debt , and he rented a small flat in the Barbican development in the City of London . In February 1974 , at the age of 68 , he retired from the House of Commons with the intention of writing his memoirs . Still short of income , he first completed a biography of his fellow-journalist Hannen Swaffer , which was indifferently received — " a feeble potboiler " , according to Davenport-Hines . Friends organised an elaborate 70th birthday party for him on 21 May 1975 ; " one duke , two dukes ' daughters , sundry lords , a bishop , a poet laureate — not bad for an old left-wing MP " , Driberg observed to a guest . In November 1975 he was granted a life peerage , and on 21 January 1976 was introduced to the House of Lords as Baron Bradwell of Bradwell juxta Mare . On 14 April he tabled a motion in the Lords calling on the government to consider the withdrawal of troops from Northern Ireland , but won little support . His health was failing , though he continued to work on his memoirs . His final contribution to the House of Lords was on 22 July , in a debate on entry vouchers for the dependents of immigrants .

After the publication of his relatively sympathetic portrait of Burgess in 1956 , Driberg had been denounced as a " dupe of Moscow " by some elements of the press . Two years after Driberg 's death , the veteran investigative reporter Chapman Pincher alleged that he had been " a Kremlin agent of sympathy " and a supporter of Communist front organisations . In 1979 Andrew Boyle published The Climate of Treason , which exposed Anthony Blunt and led to a period of " spy mania " in Britain . Boyle 's exhaustive account of the Burgess – Maclean – Philby – Blunt circle mentioned Driberg as a friend of Burgess , " of much the same background , tastes and views " , but made no allegations that he was part of any espionage ring . In this atmosphere , Pincher published Their Trade is Treachery ( 1981 ) , in which he maintained that Driberg had been recruited by MI5 to spy on the Communist Party while still a schoolboy at Lancing , and that he was later " in the KGB 's pay as a double agent " . Other writers added further details ; the former British Intelligence officer Peter Wright , in Spycatcher ( 1987 ) , alleged that Driberg had been " providing material to a Czech controller for money " . The former Kremlin archivist Vasili Mitrokhin asserted that the Soviets had blackmailed Driberg into working for the KGB by threatening to expose his homosexuality .

The weight of information , and its constant repetition , made an apparently strong case against Driberg , and former friends such as Mervyn Stockwood , the Bishop of Southwark , became convinced that he had indeed betrayed his country . Other friends and colleagues were more sceptical . According to ex-Labour MP Reginald Paget , not even the security services were " lunatic enough to recruit a man like Driberg " , who was famously indiscreet and could never keep a secret . Mitrokhin 's " blackmail " story is questioned by historian Jeff Sharlet , on the grounds that by the 1950s and 1960s Driberg 's homosexuality had been an open secret in British political circles for many years ; he frequently boasted of his " rough trade " conquests to his colleagues . The journalist A. N. Wilson quotes Churchill commenting years before that " Tom Driberg is the sort of person who gives sodomy a bad name " . Pincher , however , argued that as homosexual acts were criminal offences in Britain until 1967 , Driberg was still vulnerable to blackmail , although he also asserted that the MI5 connection secured Driberg a lifelong immunity from prosecution . Driberg 's colleague Michael Foot denied Pincher 's claim that Margaret Thatcher , when prime minister , had made a secret agreement with Foot to protect Driberg if Foot , in turn , would remain silent about the supposed treachery of Roger Hollis , another of Pincher 's recently dead targets .

Wheen asserts that Pincher was not an objective commentator ; the Labour Party , and its supposed infiltration by Communist agents , had been his target over many years . Pincher 's verdict on Driberg is that " in journalism , in politics and intelligence ... eventually he betrayed everybody " . Wheen argues that Driberg 's greatest vice was indiscretion ; he gossiped about everyone , but " indiscretion is not synonymous with betrayal " . Driberg 's Labour Party colleague , Leo Abse , offers a more complex explanation : Driberg was an adventurer who loved taking risks and played many parts . " Driberg could have played the part of the spy with superb skill , and if the officers of MI5 were indeed inept enough to have attempted to recruit him , then , in turn , Tom Driberg would have gained special pleasure in fooling and betraying them " .

In his will Driberg had stipulated that at his funeral his friend Gerald Irvine should deliver an " anti-panegyric " in place of the normal eulogy . Irvine obliged , with a detailed assessment of Driberg against the Seven Deadly Sins , finding him guilty of Gluttony , Lust and Wrath , but relatively free from Avarice and Envy and entirely untouched by Sloth . Pride , Irvine maintained , was in Driberg 's case mitigated by " the contrary virtue of humility " . Ena did not attend the funeral ; she gave a single press interview in which she expressed " huge respect for Tom 's journalistic skills , political power and championship of the underdog " . She added that if her admiration for him did not extend to their personal life together , that was a private matter . Driberg prided himself on being an exception to a rule propounded by Cyril Connolly , that the war between the generations is the one war in which everyone changes sides eventually . Mervyn Stockwood , in his address at the funeral service , praised Driberg as " a searcher for truth " , whose loyalty to the socialist cause was beyond question . This verdict was echoed by Michael Foot , who in a postscript to Driberg 's memoir wrote of Driberg 's " great services " to the Labour Party in the various offices that he occupied . Foot believed that Driberg 's homosexual passion , rather than bringing him fulfilment , had " condemned him to a lifetime of deep loneliness " The Times obituarist described Driberg as " A journalist , an intellectual , a drinking man , a gossip , a high churchman , a liturgist , a homosexual " , the first time , according to journalist Christopher Hitchens , that the newspaper had ever defined a public figure specifically as homosexual .

Nevertheless , Driberg 's incomplete memoir Ruling Passions , when published in June 1977 , was a shock to the public and to some of his erstwhile associates , despite advance hints of the book 's scandalous content . Driberg 's candid revelations of his " cottaging " and his descriptions of casual oral sex were called by one commentator " the biggest outpouring of literary dung a public figure has ever flung into print . " The comedians Peter Cook and Dudley Moore depicted Driberg as a sexual predator , wearing " fine fishnet stockings " and cavorting with a rent boy , in a sketch , " Back of the Cab " , which they recorded in 1977 . More vituperation followed when Pincher 's allegations of Driberg 's links with the Russian secret service were published in 1981 ; Pincher christened him " Lord of the Spies " . However , Foot dismissed these accusations as typical of the " fantasies of the secret service world that seem to have taken possession of Pincher 's mind " . Foot added that Driberg " had always been much too ready to look forgivingly on Communist misdeeds , but this attitude was combined with an absolutely genuine devotion to the cause of peace " .

In his 2004 biographical sketch Davenport-Hines describes Driberg as " a sincere if eccentric Christian socialist who detested racism and colonialism " , who at the same time " could be pompous , mannered , wayward , self-indulgent , ungrateful , bullying and indiscreet " . As to the apparent contradiction between sincere Christianity and promiscuous homosexuality , Wheen argues that " there had been a recognisable male homosexual subculture in the Anglo-Catholic movement since the late nineteenth century " . This theme is explored in a paper by David Hilliard of Flinders University , who maintains that " the [ 19th century ] conflict between Protestantism and Anglo-Catholicism within the Church of England was ... regularly depicted by Protestant propagandists as a struggle between masculine and feminine styles of religion " . Driberg throughout his life was a devout Anglo-Catholic ; Wheen suggests that Evelyn Waugh , in Brideshead Revisited , may have had Driberg in mind when the novel 's protagonist Charles Ryder is warned on arrival at Oxford to " beware of Anglo-Catholics — they 're all sodomites with unpleasant accents . " Driberg was the subject of a play , Tom and Clem , which was staged at London 's Aldwych Theatre in April 1997 . The action takes place during Driberg 's brief visit to the Potsdam Conference in July 1945 , and deals with the contrast of compromise , represented by the pragmatic Clement Attlee , and post-war idealism , personified by Driberg . Michael Gambon 's portrayal of Driberg , as " a slovenly , paunchy Bacchus with a mouth that can suddenly gape like a painfully-hooked fish " , won special praise from The Times critic Benedict Nightingale .

SMS Pommern was one of five Deutschland-class pre-dreadnought battleships built for the Kaiserliche Marine between 1904 and 1906 . Named after the Prussian province of Pomerania , she was built at the AG Vulcan yard at Stettin , where she was laid down on 22 March 1904 and launched on 2 December 1905 . She was commissioned into the navy on 6 August 1907 . The ships of her class were already outdated by the time they entered the service , being inferior in size , armor , firepower , and speed to the revolutionary new battleship HMS Dreadnought . After commissioning , Pommern was assigned to the II Battle Squadron of the High Seas Fleet , where she served throughout her peacetime career and the first two years of World War I. During this period , Pommern participated in several fruitless sorties into the North Sea in attempts to lure out and destroy a portion of the British Grand Fleet . The ship was present at the Battle of Jutland on 31 May – 1 June 1916 . She and her sisters briefly engaged the British battlecruisers commanded by David Beatty ; Pommern was hit once by a 12 in ( 30.5 cm ) shell from the battlecruiser HMS Indomitable . During the confused night actions in the early hours of 1 June , she was hit by one , or possibly two , torpedoes from the British destroyer HMS Onslaught , which detonated one of Pommern 's 17-centimeter ( 6.7 in ) gun magazines . The resulting explosion broke the ship in half and killed the entire crew . Pommern was the only battleship of either side sunk during the battle .

Pommern was ordered under the contract name " O " . She was laid down on 22 March 1904 at the AG Vulcan dockyard in Stettin . She was originally scheduled to be launched on 19 November 1905 , but the water level in the harbor was too low . As a result , the ship could not be launched until 2 December . The Oberpräsident of Pommern , Helmuth von Maltzahn , gave the launching speech . In July 1907 Pommern was transferred to Kiel where she had her main battery of four 28 cm ( 11 in ) guns installed . She was commissioned for trials on 6 August ; during her speed run , she made 18.7 knots ( 34.6 km / h ; 21.5 mph ) , which made her the fastest pre-dreadnought battleship in the world . The ship was 127.6 m ( 418 ft 8 in ) long and had a beam of 22.2 m ( 72 ft 10 in ) , and a draft of 8.21 m ( 26 ft 11 in ) . Her full-load displacement was 14,218 metric tons ( 13,993 long tons ) . She was equipped with triple expansion engines that were rated at 17,453 indicated horsepower ( 13,015 kW ) and a top speed of 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . Steam was provided by twelve Schulz-Thornycroft boilers . In addition to being the fastest ship of her class , Pommern was the most fuel efficient . At a cruising speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) , she could steam for 5,830 nautical miles ( 10,800 km ; 6,710 mi ) . The ship had a peacetime crew of 35 officers and 708 enlisted men , though during military operations , the size of the crew expanded .

Pommern 's primary armament consisted of four 28 cm ( 11 in ) SK L / 40 guns in two twin turrets . She was equipped with fourteen 17 cm ( 6.7 in ) guns mounted in casemates and twenty 8.8 cm ( 3.5 in ) guns in pivot mounts . The ship was also armed with six 45 cm ( 17.7 in ) torpedo tubes , all submerged in the hull . One was in the bow , one in the stern , and four on the broadside . Her armored belt was 240 mm ( 9.4 in ) thick amidships and she had a 40 mm ( 1.6 in ) thick armored deck . The main battery turrets had 280 mm ( 11 in ) thick sides .

Pommern was assigned to the II Battle Squadron of the High Seas Fleet alongside her sisters . She took part in the annual training cruises and maneuvers with the rest of the High Seas Fleet between 1908 and 1914 . This included fleet training in the Baltic in 1908 and a cruise into the Atlantic the following year . In May 1910 Pommern took part in fleet training in the Kattegat between Denmark and Norway , followed by a cruise to Norway in the summer . At the end of 1910 , the fleet conducted another cruise into the Baltic . The next two years followed a similar pattern , though the summer cruise in 1912 was interrupted by the Agadir Crisis . As a result , the cruise was only into the Baltic . Later in the year Pommern took part in maneuvers off the island of Helgoland in the North Sea . In July 1914 , about two weeks after the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand in Sarajevo , Pommern was with the High Seas Fleet during its annual summer cruise to Norway . As a result of rising international tensions , the cruise was cut short and the German fleet was back in Wilhelmshaven by 29 July . At midnight on 4 August , the United Kingdom declared war on Germany . Pommern remained with the High Seas Fleet throughout the first two years of the naval war . At the outbreak of war , the ship and her sisters in the II Battle Squadron were deployed to the mouth of the Elbe River to guard the area from possible British incursions .

Pommern and the rest of the II Battle Squadron then rejoined the High Seas Fleet as part of the battleship support for the battlecruisers in the I Scouting Group that bombarded Scarborough , Hartlepool , and Whitby on 15 – 16 December 1914 . During the operation , the German battle fleet of some twelve dreadnoughts and eight pre-dreadnoughts came to within 10 nmi ( 19 km ; 12 mi ) of an isolated squadron of six British battleships . However , skirmishes between the rival destroyer screens convinced Admiral Friedrich von Ingenohl that he was confronted with the entire Grand Fleet , and so he broke off the engagement and turned for home . Two fruitless fleet advances followed on 17 – 18 and 21 – 23 April 1915 . A third took place on 17 – 18 May , and a fourth occurred on 23 – 24 October . On 24 – 25 April 1916 , Pommern and her sisters joined the dreadnoughts of the High Seas Fleet to support the battlecruisers , which were again tasked with conducting a raid of the English coast . While en route to the target , the battlecruiser Seydlitz was damaged by a mine . Seydlitz was detached to return home , and the rest of the ships continued with the mission . Due to poor visibility , the battlecruisers conducted a brief bombardment of the ports of Yarmouth and Lowestoft . The operation was quickly called off , which prevented the British fleet from being able to intervene .

Vice Admiral Reinhard Scheer , the new commander of the High Seas Fleet , immediately planned another foray into the North Sea , but the damage to Seydlitz delayed the operation until the end of May . Pommern remained assigned to the II Battle Squadron , now under the command of Rear Admiral Franz Mauve . The squadron was positioned at the rear of the German line . During the " Run to the North , " Scheer ordered the fleet to pursue the British V Battle Squadron at top speed . The slower Deutschland-class ships could not keep up with the faster dreadnoughts and quickly fell behind . Later in the evening of the first day of the battle , the hard-pressed battlecruisers of the I Scouting Group were being pursued by their British opponents . Pommern and the other so-called " five-minute ships " came to their aid by steaming in between the opposing battlecruiser squadrons . Pommern could not make out a target in the darkness , though her several of her sisters could . Despite this , their shooting was ineffective . The British battlecruisers scored several hits on the German ships , including one on Pommern by a 12 in ( 30.5 cm ) shell fired by Indomitable , forcing her to haul out of line . Admiral Mauve ordered an 8-point turn to the south to disengage from the British , and they did not follow .

At 3 : 10 on the morning of 1 June , Pommern was torpedoed by the British destroyer Onslaught . At least one torpedo , and possibly a second , struck the ship , detonating one of the 17 cm ammunition magazines . A tremendous explosion broke the ship in half . The stern capsized and remained afloat for at least 20 minutes with her propellers jutting into the air . Hannover , the ship directly astern of Pommern , was forced to haul out of line to avoid the wreck . Pommern 's entire crew of 839 officers and enlisted men were killed when the ship sank . She was the only battleship , pre-dreadnought or dreadnought , in either fleet to be sunk at Jutland ; her loss , coupled with the vulnerabilities of the surviving pre-dreadnoughts , prompted Scheer to leave them behind during the sortie of 18 – 19 August 1916 .

Sleaford is a market town and civil parish in the North Kesteven district of Lincolnshire , a non-metropolitan county in the east of England . It is on the edge of the fertile Fenlands , about 11 miles ( 18 km ) north-east of Grantham , 16 miles ( 26 km ) west of Boston , and 17 miles ( 27 km ) south of the city and county town of Lincoln . With an estimated resident population of 17,671 at the time of the 2011 Census , the town is the largest settlement in North Kesteven , and makes up roughly 15 % of its total population . Bypassed by the A17 and the A15 , it is connected to Lincoln , Newark , Peterborough and King 's Lynn . Sleaford railway station is on the Nottingham to Skegness ( via Grantham ) and Peterborough to Lincoln Lines . The first settlement formed during the Iron Age where a prehistoric track crossed the River Slea . It was a tribal centre and home to a mint for the Corieltauvi during the 1st centuries BC and AD . Evidence of Roman and Anglo-Saxon settlement has been uncovered , and by the late Saxon period the town was an economic and jurisdictional centre with a court and market . During the medieval period , records differentiate between Old and New Sleaford , the latter emerging in the areas around the present day market place and St Denys ' Church . Sleaford Castle was constructed in the 12th century for the Bishops of Lincoln , who owned the manor . Granted the right to hold a market in the mid-12th century , New Sleaford developed into a market town and became locally important in the wool trade , while Old Sleaford declined .

From the 16th century , the landowners were the Carre family , who operated tight control over the town , and it grew little in the early modern period . The manor passed from the Carre family to the Hervey family by the marriage of Isabella Carre to John Hervey , 1st Earl of Bristol , in 1688 . The town 's common land and fields were legally enclosed by 1794 , giving ownership mostly to the Hervey family ; this coincided with making the Slea into a canal , and heralded the first steps towards modern industry . The Sleaford Navigation brought economic growth until it was superseded by the railways in the mid-1850s . In the 20th century , the sale of farmland around Sleaford by Bristol Estates led to the development of large housing estates . The subsequent availability of affordable housing combined with the town 's educational facilities and low crime rates made it an attractive destination for home-buyers . As a result , the town 's population underwent the fastest growth of any town in the county during the 1990s . Sleaford was primarily an agricultural town until the 20th century , supporting a cattle market , with seed companies , such as Hubbard and Phillips , and Sharpes International Seeds , being established in the late 19th century . The arrival of the railway made the town favourable for malting . Industry has declined , and in 2011 the most common occupations are in wholesale and retail trade , health and social care , public administration and defence and manufacturing . Regeneration of the town centre has led to the redevelopment of the old industrial areas , including the construction of the National Centre for Craft & Design on an old wharf .

Archaeological material from the Bronze Age and earlier has been recovered and excavations have shown that there was unsustained late-Neolithic and Bronze Age human activity in the vicinity . The earliest known permanent settlement dates from the Iron Age and began where a track running northwards from Bourne crossed the River Slea . Although only sparse pottery evidence has been found for the middle Iron Age period , 4,290 pellet mould fragments , likely used for minting and dated to 50 BC – AD 50 , have been uncovered south east of the modern town centre , south of a crossing of the River Slea and near Mareham Lane in Old Sleaford . The largest of its kind in Europe , the deposit has led archaeologists to consider that the site in Old Sleaford was probably one of the largest Corieltauvian settlements during this period and may have been a tribal centre . During the Roman occupation of Britain ( AD 43 – 409 ) , the settlement was " extensive and of considerable importance . " Its location along the fen-edge may have made it economically and administratively significant as a centre for managers and owners of fenland estates . There is evidence to suggest that a road connected Old Sleaford to Heckington ( about 4.5 miles ( 7.2 km ) east ) , where Roman tile kilns have been uncovered and may imply the presence of a market at Sleaford . When the first roads were constructed by the Romans , Sleaford was bypassed due to it being " less conveniently located " and more " geared to native needs " . A smaller road , Mareham Lane , which the Romans renewed , ran through Old Sleaford , and southwards along the fen edge , towards Bourne . Where it passed through Old Sleaford , excavations have revealed a large stone-built domestic residence , associated farm buildings , corn-driers , ovens and field systems , all from the Roman period , and a number of burials . Other Roman remains , including a burial , have been excavated in the town .

There is little evidence of continuous settlement between the late Roman and Anglo-Saxon periods but the Saxons did establish themselves eventually . South of the modern town , a 6th – 7th century cemetery has been uncovered containing an estimated 600 burials , many showing signs of pagan burial rites . It is possible that the Anglo-Saxon inhabitants were foederati first brought over by the Romano-Britons to defend settlements from other Saxon invaders . The now ruined Church of St Giles / All Saints at Old Sleaford has been discovered and excavations of the Market Place in 1979 uncovered Anglo-Saxon remains from the 8th – 9th centuries , indicating some form of enclosure with domestic features . The earliest documentary reference to Sleaford is in a charter from the 9th century , when it was owned by Medehamstede Abbey in Peterborough , a Mercian royal foundation . There is little evidence of estate structure until the late Saxon period , but there may have been a market and court in pre-Conquest Sleaford and it was probably an economic and jurisdictional centre for surrounding settlements . The Slea played an important role in the town 's economy : it never ran dry nor froze , and by the 11th century a dozen watermills lined its banks . The mills and others in nearby Quarrington and the lost hamlet of Millsthorpe , constituted the " most important mill cluster in Lincolnshire " .

Later in the Middle Ages , the Romano-British settlement became known as " Old Sleaford " , while " New Sleaford " was used to describe the settlement centred on St Denys ' Church and the Market Place . The Domesday Book ( 1086 ) has two entries under Eslaforde ( Sleaford ) recording land held by Ramsey Abbey and the Bishop of Lincoln . The location of the manors recorded in Domesday is not made clear in the text . One theory endorsed by Maurice Beresford is that they focused on the settlement at Old Sleaford because of evidence that New Sleaford was planted in the 12th century by the bishop to increase his income , which was associated with the construction of Sleaford Castle between 1123 and 1139 . Beresford 's theory has been criticised by the local historians Christine Mahany and David Roffe who have reinterpreted the Domesday material and argued that by 1086 the Bishop 's manor included a church and associated settlement in what became New Sleaford . The right to hold a fair on the feast day of St Denis was granted by a charter of King Stephen to Alexander , Bishop of Lincoln , in 1136 – 40 . Between 1154 and 1165 , Henry II granted the bishop of Lincoln the right to hold a market at Sleaford ; bishop Oliver Sutton argued in 1281 that his right to hold a market and fair had existed since time immemorial . In 1329 , Edward III confirmed the market and , in 1401 , Henry IV granted the bishop fairs on the feast days of St Denis and St Peter 's Chains . A survey of 1258 is the first to mention burgage tenure ; tenants in the nearby hamlet of Holdingham held tofts with other land , while those in New Sleaford held only tofts , indicating that demesne farming centred on the hamlet . The town later had at least two guilds comparable to those found in developed towns . However , there was no formal charter outlining the town 's freedoms ; it was not a centre of trade and tight control by the bishops meant the economy was primarily geared to serve them . Hence , it retained a strong tradition of demesne farming well into the 14th century . As the economic initiative fell more to the burgesses and middlemen who formed connections with nearby towns , such as Boston , evidence suggests that Sleaford developed a locally important role in the wool trade . In the Lay Subsidy of 1334 , New Sleaford was the wealthiest settlement in the Flaxwell wapentake , with a value of £ 16 0s . 81 / 4d . Meanwhile , Old Sleaford , an " insignificant " place since the end of the Roman period , declined and may have been deserted by the 16th century .

During the late 15th and early 16th centuries , the Hussey family owned the manor of Old Sleaford . John Hussey , 1st Baron Hussey of Sleaford was executed for treason for his part in the Lincolnshire Rising . The manor and his residence at Old Place reverted to the Crown and were later sold to Robert Carre . George Carre or Carr from Northumberland had settled in Sleaford by 1522 when he was described as a wool merchant . His son Robert bought Hussey 's land and the castle and manor of New Sleaford from Edward Clinton , 1st Earl of Lincoln . His eldest surviving son Robert , founded Carre 's Grammar School in 1604 , and his youngest son Edward was created a baronet ; his son founded Sleaford Hospital in 1636 . The last male descendent died in 1683 and the heiress , Isabella Carre , married John Hervey , Earl of Bristol , in whose family the estates remained until the 1970s . The Carres and Herveys had a strong influence : in addition to extracting dues from their tenants , they took leading tradesmen to the Exchequer Court to gain legal force behind their monopoly on charging tolls on market and cattle traders and for driving animals through the town .

Industry was slow to take hold , and by the second half of the 18th century , Cogglesford Mill was the only working corn mill in the town . An old mill at the junction of Westgate and Castle Causeway supplied hemp to the growing rope-making business of the Foster and Hill families . As local historian Simon Pawley wrote , " in many respects , things had changed little [ by 1783 ] since the survey of 1692 " , with few of the buildings or infrastructure being improved . Major changes to agriculture and industry took place in the last decade of that century . From the Middle Ages , Sleaford was surrounded by three open fields : North , West and Sleaford Fields . At the enclosure of the open fields in 1794 more than 90 % of the 1,096 acres of open land was owned by Lord Bristol . Despite the costs of fencing and re-organising the fields , the system was easier to farm , and cottages were built closer to fields , while the landowner could charge more rent owing to the increased profitability of the land ; those who lost out were the cottagers , who could no longer keep a few animals grazing on the common land at no cost . The process allowed the land boundaries and pathways to be tidied up ; Drove Lane , which ran to Rauceby , was shifted north and straightened .

Canalisation of the River Slea began in the 1790s . Canals in England were constructed from the 1760s to make inland trade easier ; Sleaford 's businessmen were keen to benefit from the improved communication they allowed . The Sleaford Navigation opened in 1794 . It facilitated the export of agricultural produce to the Midlands , and the import of coal and oil . Mills along the Slea benefited and wharves were constructed around Carre Street . Between 1829 and 1836 the navigation 's toll rights increased in value by 27 times . The railways emerged in the 19th century as an alternative to canals and arrived at the town in 1857 , when a line from Grantham to Sleaford opened . It made agricultural trade easier and improved communication , but led to the decline of the Navigation Company . Income from tolls decreased by 80 % between 1858 and 1868 ; it made its first loss in 1873 and was abandoned in 1878 . The town 's rural location and transport links meant that the late 19th century saw the rise of two local seed merchants : Hubbard and Phillips , and Charles Sharpe ; the former took over the Navigation Wharves , and the latter was trading in the US and Europe by the 1880s . The railway , Sleaford 's rural location and its artesian wells , were key factors in the development of the 13-acre Bass & Co maltings complex at Mareham Lane ( 1892 – 1905 ) .

In the first half of the 19th century , Sleaford 's population more than doubled from 1,596 in 1801 to 3,539 in 1851 . Coinciding with this is the construction or extension of public buildings , often by the local contractors Charles Kirk and Thomas Parry . The gasworks opened in 1839 to provide gas lighting in the town . Sleaford 's Poor Law Union was formed in 1836 to cater for the town and the surrounding 54 parishes . The workhouse was constructed by 1838 and could house 181 inmates . Despite these advances , the slums around Westgate were over-crowded , lacking sanitation and disease-ridden ; the local administration failed to deal with the matter until 1850 , when a report on the town 's public health by the General Board of Health heavily criticised the situation and set up a Local Board of Health to undertake public works . By the 1880s , Lord Bristol had allowed clean water to be pumped into the town , but engineering problems and a reluctance to sell land to house the turbines had delayed the introduction of sewers .

Although largely undamaged in the First and Second World Wars , Sleaford has close links with the Royal Air Force due to its proximity to several RAF bases , including RAF Cranwell and RAF Waddington . Lincolnshire 's topography — flat and open countryside — and its location on the east of the country made it ideal for the development of Britain 's airfields , constructed in the First World War . Work began on Cranwell in late 1915 ; it was designated an RAF base in 1918 and the RAF College opened in 1920 as he world 's first air academy . The Cranwell branch railway linking Sleaford station to the RAF base opened in 1917 and closed in 1956 . During the Second World War , Lincolnshire was " the most significant location for bomber command " and Rauceby Hospital , south-west of Sleaford , was requisitioned by the RAF as a specialist burns unit which plastic surgeon Archibald McIndoe regularly visited . In the inter-war period , Sleaford 's population remained static , but the Great Depression in the 1930s caused unemployment to rise . Council-housing developments along Drove Lane proved insufficient to house low-income families after the Westgate slums were cleared in the 1930s so Jubilee Grove opened in that decade to meet the demand . In the post-war period , there were new housing developments at St Giles Avenue , the Hoplands , Russell Crescent , Jubilee Grove , and Grantham Road . Parts of the town were redeveloped : in 1958 , the Bristol Arms Arcade opened , the Corn Exchange was demolished in the 1960s , and the Waterside Shopping Precinct opened in 1973 , as did Flaxwell House , designed to house a department store , though later becoming the national headquarters for Interflora .

By 1979 , the major landowner , Victor Hervey , 6th Marquess of Bristol , heavily in debt , had sold most of his estates in Sleaford and Quarrington and the estate 's office closed in 1989 . Much of the land was sold to property developers and in the following decades saw the construction of residential buildings and a considerable population increase . According to a council report , " the quality of life , low crime rates , relatively low house prices and good-quality education " attracted people to the town . From 1981 to 2011 , Sleaford 's population rose from 8,000 to 18,000 ; the growth rate from 1991 to 2001 was the fastest of any town in the county . Its infrastructure struggled to cope , especially with increased traffic congestion ; two bypasses around the town and a one-way system were introduced , a process which Simon Pawley argues accelerated the decline of the High Street . In the early 2000s , the Single Regeneration Budget of £ 15 million granted to Sleaford improved the town centre and funded development of the Hub ( since 2011 , the National Centre for Craft & Design ) in the old Navigation wharves area .

Sleaford is the principal market town in the North Kesteven district of Lincolnshire . The civil parish includes the hamlet of Holdingham to the north east and the village of Quarrington to the south east , both of which merge with the town . The County Council 's State of the Environment Report ( 1994 ) found that roughly three-quarters of Lincolnshire is low-lying , with much of it near sea-level ; Sleaford lies approximately 43 feet ( 13 m ) above sea level close to Lincoln Cliff , a Limestone scarp running north – south through Lindsey and Kesteven . The bedrock under the western half of the town belongs to the Great Oolite Group of Jurassic Sandstone , Limestone and Argillaceous rocks formed 168 − 165 million years ago ; Kellaways and Oxford Clay formations , dated to 165 – 156 million years ago , underlie the eastern half . Alluvium deposits are found along the Slea 's course , and Fen sand and gravel are found to the east and south . The county 's agricultural land is generally of " very good " quality ; as a result , intensive arable and vegetable farming is predominant and pastoral farming declined over the course of the 20th century . Sleaford is on the edge of the Fens , a low-lying region of the East of England which , before drainage from the 17th to the 20th centuries , were marshy and liable to flooding . Draining has revealed nutrient-rich soils and enabled 88 % of the land to be cultivated , especially for arable farming , and most of it is graded amongst the most productive farmland in the country .

According to the Köppen classification , the British Isles experience a maritime climate characterised by relatively cool summers and mild winters . Lincolnshire 's position on the east of the Isles allows for a sunnier and warmer climate relative to the national average , and it is one of the driest counties in the United Kingdom . Although it may vary depending on altitude and proximity to the coast , the mean average temperature for the East of England is approximately 9 ° C to 10.5 ° C ; the highest temperature recorded in the region was 37.3 ° C at Cavendish on 10 August 2003 . On average , the region experiences 30 days of rainfall in winter and 25 in summer , with 15 days of thunder and 6 – 8 days of hail per year ; on 25 August 2001 , hail the size of golf balls were reported in Sleaford and other parts of central Lincolnshire . Wind tends to affect the north and west of the country more than the East , and Lincolnshire tends to receive no more than 2 days of gale per year ( where gale is a gust of wind at > 34 knots , sustained for at least 10 minutes ) . Despite this , tornadoes form more often in the East of England than elsewhere in the country ; Sleaford experienced tornadoes in 2006 and 2012 , both of which caused damage to property .

Before 1832 , Sleaford was in the Lincolnshire parliamentary constituency , which encompassed all of the county except for four boroughs . In the 1818 election , 49 of the 2,000 people living in New and Old Sleaford and Quarrington qualified to vote . In 1832 , the Reform Act widened the franchise and divided Lincolnshire . Sleaford was in the South Lincolnshire constituency that elected two members to parliament . Following the 1867 reforms , the South Lincolnshire constituency 's borders were redrawn , but Sleaford remained within it . The franchise was widened by the reforms so that roughly 15 % ( 202 ) of males in Sleaford and Quarrington could vote in 1868 . The constituency was abolished in 1885 and the Sleaford constituency was formed . It merged with the Grantham seat in 1918 . In 1997 , Sleaford was reorganised into Sleaford and North Hykeham . The member returned in 2010 for Sleaford and North Hykeham was the Conservative candidate Stephen Phillips , who replaced Douglas Hogg . Lincolnshire elected a Member of the European Parliament from 1974 until 1994 , and then became part of the Lincolnshire and Humberside South constituency until 1999 ; since then , it has elected members as part of the East Midlands constituency ; from 1999 , there were six members for the East Midlands , but the number was reduced to five in 2009 .

From the early medieval period , New Sleaford was in the Flaxwell Wapentake and Old Sleaford in the Ashwardhurn Wapentake . Sleaford Poor Law Union , overseen by a Board of Guardians , was established in 1836 . A Local Board of Health was formed in 1851 . Public health was reorganised by the Public Health Act 1872 , which established Urban and Rural Sanitary Districts ( USD or RSD ) ; Sleaford USD covered New and Old Sleaford , Holdingham and Quarrington , while the Sleaford RSD included all other parishes in the Poor Law Union . The Local Government Act 1894 converted the Board of Health and USD into the Sleaford Urban District Council and , in 1899 , the town became the administrative base of Kesteven County Council . A rural district formed in 1894 was abolished in 1931 . In 1973 , Sleaford Urban District merged with the North and East Kesteven districts to form North Kesteven , a district of Lincolnshire ; by statutory instrument , Sleaford civil parish became the urban district 's successor , thus merging Quarrington , New Sleaford , Old Sleaford and Holdingham civil parishes . Sleaford Town Council , the parish-level local government body beneath the district council is composed of 18 councillors from six wards : Castle , Holdingham , Mareham , Navigation , Quarrington , and Westholme . The Chairman of the Town Council is also the Mayor of Sleaford ; Cllr Keith Dolby is Mayor for 2014 – 15 . The six wards are also represented on North Kesteven District Council , although Mareham and Quarrington are merged into a single ward . Sleaford sends one councillor to Lincolnshire County Council . Sleaford Town Council has offices on Carre Street and the District Council offices are in the Lafford Terrace building on Eastgate , which was purchased by the council in 1934 .

Sleaford Urban District Council was granted a coat of arms on 26 October 1950 and after it was abolished the arms were used by its successor , Sleaford Town Council . The arms are blazoned : Gules on a Chevron Or three Estoiles Sable on a Chief Argent as many Trefoils slipped Vert . The trefoils in the chief are from the arms of the Marquess or Bristol , while the lower portion of the shield is the arms of the Carre family . Its crest is blazoned : On a Wreath of the Colours an Eagle wings extended and head downwards and to the sinister proper holding in the beak an Ear of Wheat stalked and leaved Or , the eagle symbolises Sleaford 's links with the Royal Air Force and the ear of wheat represents agriculture .

Policing is provided by the Lincolnshire Police , and fire-fighting by the Lincolnshire Fire and Rescue Service . The police station is on Boston Road , although older premises on Kesteven Street were erected in 1845 and reconstructed in 1912 . The fire station is on Church Lane although plans to move it to East Road by 2016 were approved in 2014 . East Midlands Ambulance Service ( EMAS ) operates from Kesteven Street . The United Lincolnshire Hospitals NHS Trust provides services at three hospitals , Pilgrim Hospital in Boston , Grantham and District Hospital , and Lincoln County Hospital , all of which have 24-hour accident and emergency departments as of January 2015 . Mains water and sewerage services are provided by Anglian Water , a former nationalised industry and natural monopoly , privatised in 1989 and regulated by the Water Services Regulation Authority ( OFWAT ) . In 1879 , an Act of Parliament was passed to set up a water company for the town ; pumping machinery was installed and works constructed in 1880 to provide a clean water supply to the town . In 1948 , the council took over the company and in 1962 its operation was handed to the Kesteven Water Board , which was absorbed by the Anglian Water Authority in 1973 .

Lincolnshire County Council promoted a Bill to Parliament to build an electricity generating station which passed in 1900 . It was built at the cost of £ 6,700 in 1901 on Castle Causeway and remained there until nationalisation in 1948 . Following nationalisation , electricity was provided by the East Midlands Electricity Board until it was privatised in 1990 ; in 1998 , East Midlands Electricity , the privately owned predecessor company , was purchased by PowerGen . A " virtually carbon neutral " straw-burning power-station at Sleaford opened in 2013 ; capable of supplying electricity to 65,000 homes , it is powered by straw bales from farms within a 50-mile radius . Most electricity generated is fed into the National Grid and the facility provides free heat to public buildings in the town . Natural Gas was supplied by British Gas , which was privatised in 1986 . Distribution of gas and electricity is the responsibility of the National Grid . The energy markets are regulated by the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets ( OFGEM ) . The Sleaford Gas Light Company was formed in 1838 and the following year , gas lighting was provided and a gasworks was constructed on Eastgate . In 1866 , the company was incorporated ; in 1895 – 96 , the works were rebuilt and lit the town until the company was nationalised in 1948 . Gas ceased to be made here in the 1960s and the original buildings were retained although later extensions were demolished from 1966 to 1968 .

Sleaford served the surrounding agricultural communities and the town maintained a weekly market throughout the 19th century and a livestock market on Northgate from 1874 until 1984 . According to a 2010 council report , the public sector was the town 's main employer , along with agriculture and manufacturing . Unemployment was lower than the national average as were wages reflecting pay in the food processing and agricultural industries . At the 2011 Census , the largest group of working-age persons by economic activity are those in full-time employment , who make up 43.8 % of this section of the population , while 15 % are part-time employees and 7.7 % are self-employed ; 15 % of the working-age population are retired . 4.2 % were unemployed , with 40 % of those in long-term unemployment and roughly one third were aged 16 to 24 . The largest socio-economic grouping is those working in lower-tier managerial or administrative roles ( 21.9 % ) , followed by semi-routine ( 17.8 % ) , routine ( 15 % ) and intermediate ( 12.5 % ) occupations ; no other group comprised 10 % or more . In terms of industry , the most common , based on those working in the sector , are wholesale and retail trade ( including automotive repairs ) at 16.9 % , health and social care ( 13.4 % ) , public administration and defence ( 13.3 % ) and manufacturing ( 10.9 % ) , with no other groups representing 10 % or more . An unemployment survey of Lincolnshire in 2014 found that the county experienced a decline in unemployment ( based on Jobseekers Allowance claimants ) by 29 % over the preceding 12 months , while the county 's unemployment rate was marginally below the national average .

In 2011 North Kesteven District Council produced a 25-year strategy to regenerate the town because its rapid growth since the 1990s had outgrown improvements to its infrastructure . It plans future residential developments and outlines ways of improving the town centre . It suggests developing more parking around the centre and reverting parts the one-way system , developing southern Southgate and turning Money 's Yard into an attraction to link with the National Centre for Craft and Design . North Kesteven District Council granted planning permission for a £ 56 m project to redevelop the derelict Bass Maltings site by converting it into residential and retail space and creating about 500 permanent jobs . The development including a supermarket was delayed when the town council opposed a link road through part of the recreation ground . Tesco , who had pledged to invest in a £ 20 million store in the development withdrew in January 2015 following financial set-backs .

The A17 road from Newark-on-Trent to King 's Lynn bypasses Sleaford from Holdingham Roundabout to Kirkby la Thorpe . It ran through the town until the bypass opened in 1975 . The Holdingham roundabout connects the A17 to the A15 road from Peterborough to Scawby . It also passed through Sleaford until 1993 , when its bypass was completed . Three roads meet at Sleaford 's market place : Northgate ( B1518 ) , Southgate and Eastgate ( B1517 ) . A one-way system set up in 1994 creates a circuit around the town centre . The railways arrived in the 19th century . Early proposals to bring a line to Sleaford failed , but in 1852 plans were made to build the Boston , Sleaford and Midland Counties Railway and its Act of Parliament passed in 1853 . The line from Grantham opened in 1857 ; Boston was connected in 1859 , Bourne in 1871 and Ruskington on Great Northern and Great Eastern Joint Railway in 1882 . Sleaford is a stop on the Peterborough to Lincoln Line and the Poacher Line , from Grantham to Skegness . Grantham , roughly 14.8 miles ( 23.8 km ) away by road and two stops on the Poacher Line , is a major stop on the East Coast Main Line . Trains from Grantham to London King 's Cross take approximately 1 hour 15 minutes .

The River Slea through the town was converted into use as a canal for much of the 19th century . Plans to canalise it were drawn up in 1773 , but faced opposition from land-owners who feared it might affect the drainage of fens . Plans were approved in 1791 with the support of Brownlow Bertie , 5th Duke of Ancaster and Kesteven who owned estates and quarries that he hoped would benefit . An Act of Parliament passed in 1792 , establishing the Sleaford Navigation , which opened two years later . After falling revenues due to competition from the railways , the navigation company closed in 1878 . The river , although no longer navigable , passes under Carre Street and Southgate . The Nine Foot Drain , also unnavigable , meets the Slea just before Southgate .

The resident population at the 2011 Census was 17,671 , which accounts for roughly 15 % of the population of the North Kesteven District ; the urban area contained 8,690 houses . The town 's population grew by 39 % between 1991 and 2001 , the fastest growth rate of any town in Lincolnshire . The district population is predicted to rise by 29 % between 2008 and 2033 , compared with a national average of 18 % ; in 2013 , county councillors approved plans to build 4,500 new homes . A joint planning strategy report found that " This growth has largely been the result of people moving to the area attracted by the quality of life , low crime rates , relatively low house prices and good-quality education . " The 2011 Census revealed that approximately 93.6 % of the town 's resident population were White British ; the second largest ethnic group was White Irish at approximately 3.4 % , followed by Asian ( including Asian British ) at 1.09 % ; no other ethnic group represented 1 % or more of the population . 88.5 % of residents were born in England and 4.41 % in other parts of the United Kingdom ; 4.3 % were from EU countries , with 2.5 % coming from EU member states which joined after 2001 .

Most people in the town identify as Christian , although the proportion has declined between the last two censuses . At the 2011 Census , 70.3 % of residents identified as Christian , while 21.8 % reported no religion , and 6.6 % did not state a religion ; no other religious group comprised 1 % or more of the population . The 2001 Census recorded that 81.6 % of Sleaford residents identified as Christian , nearly ten percentage points higher than the national figure ( 71.8 % ) ; 11.5 % of the town 's residents had no religion and 6 % did not disclose a religion . In the Compton Census ( 1676 ) , New Sleaford had a Conformist population of 576 people , no " Papists " , and 6 Non-conformists . In the 19th century , it had a sizeable Non-conformist population and a large Anglican congregation ; at the 1851 Census of Religious Worship , an estimated 2,000 people attended Non-conformist places of worship , while an estimated 600 – 700 people attended Anglican services in the parish . The Wesleyans met in Westgate in the early 19th century ; by 1848 , the congregation had set up in Northgate , an area known for its taverns and poor tenements .

New Sleaford had a church and priest by the time of the Domesday Book ( 1086 ) and the vicarage was founded in 1274 . During the Commonwealth ( 1649 – 1660 ) , the vicar was expelled and replaced by Puritan ministers , the last of whom was removed following the Restoration in 1660 and replaced with an Anglican clergyman . In 1616 , the vicarage was valued at £ 8 and in 1872 at £ 180 . As of 2015 , the ecclesiastical parish of St Denys , Sleaford , encloses the town of Sleaford and hamlet of Holdingham north of the railway line and does not include Quarrington . It falls within the Lafford Deanery , the Lincoln Archdeaconry and the Diocese of Lincoln . The patron is the Bishop of Lincoln and the incumbent vicar is the Rev. Philip Anthony Johnson , who was instituted in 2013 . Old Sleaford was in the possession of Ramsey Abbey at the time of Domesday and later Haverholme Priory , and was eventually served by a vicar ; the church was dedicated either to St Giles or to All Saints . At the Dissolution of the Monasteries ( 1536 – 1541 ) , the king took over collection of the tithes , eventually leasing them to Thomas Horseman and then selling them to Robert Carre . In the 17th century , the rectory of Quarrington and the vicarage were combined to form the parish of Quarrington with Old Sleaford ; the current rector of Quarrington is the Rev. Sandra Benham . The parish boundaries of New Sleaford and Quarrington with Old Sleaford were last altered in 1928 .

The prebendary of New Sleaford or Lafford had a seat in the Lincoln Cathedral ; it existed before 1274 and was in the patronage of the bishop . Sleaford 's tithes paid to the prebendary were valued at £ 11 19s . 7d . ( £ 11.98 ) in 1616 . After the enclosure of Sleaford 's fields , a farm at Holdingham Anna was allotted to the prebendary in place of the tithes . The Prebendal Court of Sleaford had jurisdiction over New and Old Sleaford and Holdingham to grant administration and probate . The parishes of New and Old Sleaford were in the peculiar jurisdiction of the predendary until 1846 , when they became part of Aswardhurn and Lafford Rural Deanery . In 1866 they were placed in Aswardhurn and Lafford No. 2 Rural Deanery , from 1884 in the Lafford No. 2 Rural Deanery , the Lafford South Rural Deanery from 1910 , and since 1968 , in the Lafford Rural Deanery .

The Anglican parish church is dedicated to St. Denys . The oldest parts date to the late-12th century and the broach-spire , built around 1220 , is one of the oldest in England . Regular Sunday services are held at the parish church . Non-conformist meetings took place on Hen Lane ( later Jermyn Street ) from about 1776 . The Congregationalists who met there constructed a chapel on Southgate in 1867 – 68 ; in 1972 , it became Sleaford Reformed Church . Wesleyans first met in the 1790s at the house of Thomas Fawcett on Westgate . They built a chapel nearby in 1802 , which was replaced in 1823 ; it housed the congregation until 1848 when a larger one was built on North Street . It was demolished and replaced by another on the same site in 1972 . A Baptist chapel was built in Old Sleaford in 1811 to house a congregation of 250 , it served the Strict Baptists until possibly the mid-20th century . The premises have been converted into a house . A Wesleyan Reform Methodist chapel opened in West Banks in 1864 , but since 1896 has been occupied by the Salvation Army .

The Fens were increasingly cultivated after the Napoleonic Wars , prompting migrant Catholic Irish farm-workers to move to the area . By 1879 a Roman Catholic missionary , Father Hermann Sabela , was conducting services in the town . A Catholic school and chapel were built in 1881 on land in Jermyn Street and in 1888 , Our Lady of Good Counsel Roman Catholic Church , opened beside it . The incumbent priest is Father Michael John Bell , who was appointed in 2001 . Mass is held on Sundays and throughout the week . The Sleaford Muslim Community Association has met in St Deny 's Church Hall since the early 2000s . Plans to build a prayer hall on Station Road were approved in November 2013 . Protests were planned by the English Defence League , but were cancelled .

Sleaford has four primary schools . In 1726 William Alvey bequeathed land to fund teaching children in Sleaford . The school and master 's house for Alvey 's Endowed School , a national school , was built in 1851 . New buildings for the infants ' school were constructed in 1888 . William Alvey Church of England School is housed in the same buildings . It became an academy in 2012 . St Botolph 's School is a Church of England Primary School , which opened at its current site in 2002 . Church Lane School is housed in buildings constructed in 2002 , when the original school house was demolished ; in 2013 , it had c . 201 children on roll . Our Lady of Good Counsel Roman Catholic School had 155 pupils on roll in 2011 . In 1835 , there were eight day schools and three Sunday schools in New Sleaford and two daily schools in Old Sleaford . An infant school in the old playhouse on Westgate opened in 1855 ; Wesleyan schools attached to the chapel on North Street accommodated up to 200 pupils . In addition to private girls ' schools , short-lived private schools for boys were established by Mr Herring and Charles Boyer in 1851 , Henry Carruthers , and Edwin Reginald Dibben in 1870 in competition with the grammar school . Charles Kirk built a school and chapel at Quarrington in 1867 . It became St Botolph 's Primary School and in 2002 moved to a new site . In 1879 , an art school was established in Duke Street in connection with the Science and Art Department ; by 1896 , two Wesleyan schools and a Catholic school were also in operation .

The town has three secondary schools with sixth forms : Carre 's Grammar School , a boys ' grammar school , Kesteven and Sleaford High School , a selective academy girls ' grammar school , and St George 's Academy , formerly St George 's College of Technology , and before that Sleaford ( County ) Secondary Modern School ( mixed non-selective secondary school ) . The grammar schools are selective and pupils are required to pass the Eleven plus exam . St George 's is not selective . The co-educational Joint Sixth Form consortium between Carre 's and St George 's allows pupils to choose subjects taught at either school . Carre 's Grammar School was founded in 1604 by a bequest of Robert Carre of Aswarby . It has received Specialist Sports and Science statuses , became an academy in 2011 and was judged to be " good " by Ofsted in 2013 , at which time it had 817 pupils , including the co-educational sixth form . Sleaford and Kesteven High School for Girls was established in 1902 . It has specialist art status , became an academy in 2011 and was judged to be " good " by Ofsted in 2013 , at which time there were 825 pupils on roll , including those in the co-educational sixth form . St George 's opened in 1908 as Sleaford Council School . It has received specialist technology college status , converted to an academy in 2010 and operates a satellite school at Ruskington . St George 's had 2,247 pupils on roll in 2012 , across both sites and including the sixth form ; when assessed by Ofsted in that year , was judged to be " good " .

The National Centre for Craft & Design opened as The Hub in 2003 with support from a Single Regeneration Budget grant . It attracts 90,000 visitors on average each year and houses exhibitions of applied and contemporary art . The Playhouse theatre on Westgate was constructed in 1825 , and sold in 1856 to be converted into an infants school and later a library and offices . In 1994 , Sleaford Little Theatre bought and restored it and in 2000 it opened to the public . The Sleaford Picturedrome opened in 1920 ; the cinema closed in 2000 and the building became a snooker hall and then a nightclub that closed in 2008 . Sleaford Museum Trust was formed in the 1970s to collect and preserve historical artefacts from the town 's history . A Heritage Lottery Fund grant of more than £ 94,000 in December 2013 allowed the trust to establish a museum on Southgate , which opened in April 2015 . Sleaford and District Civic Trust was founded in 1972 to " preserve the best features " of the town . There is a volunteer twinning association , the Sleaford and District Town Twinning Association , which was founded in 1999 . The association has created and maintains links and annual visits with Marquette-lez-Lille in France since 1999 , and with Fredersdorf-Vogelsdorf in Germany since 2009 .

Sleaford Town F.C. played in the United Counties League Premier Division for the 2014 – 15 season . Formed as Sleaford Amateurs F.C. in 1920 , the club was renamed Sleaford Town in 1968 . In 2007 it moved to its present grounds at Eslaforde Park . Sleaford Rugby FC 's clubhouse opened in 1999 off the A153 . Sleaford Golf Club was founded in 1905 and had roughly 100 members the following year , which increased to 193 in 1911 . The original golf course has been altered . In 2014 , the club had roughly 600 members . Sleaford Cricket Club has grounds at London Road ; the earliest record of the club is in 1803 . The town is also home to Bristol Bowls Club , an all-discipline gymnastics club founded in 1996 . An outdoor lido opened in 1872 on riverside land owned by the Bristol estate but handed over to the community as public baths . Indoor facilities were built in the 20th century and the old lido became Sleaford Leisure Centre . In 2011 Kesteven District Council received a grant of £ 2.85 million , to fund reconstruction of the centre and its gym .

The main radio stations for the county are BBC Radio Lincolnshire , broadcasting on 94.9 FM and 104.7 FM frequencies , and the commercial station Lincs FM , on 102.2 , 96.7 and 97.6 FM . The town 's local newspapers are the Sleaford Standard ( founded in 1924 ) , the Sleaford Advertiser ( founded in 1980 ) and the Sleaford Target ( founded in 1984 ) . Historically , the Sleaford Gazette operated between 1854 and 1960 ; the Sleaford Journal from at least 1884 until it was incorporated into the Gazette in December 1929 , the Sleaford Telegraph ran from 1888 to 1889 and the Sleaford Guardian was in print for a year from 1945 to 1946 .

A small number of medieval buildings remain standing in the town . St Denys ' Church and St Botolph 's in Quarrington date to the 12th and 13th centuries respectively , while Sleaford 's half-timbered vicarage is 15th century . St Denys ' Church is noted for its tracery and its stone broach spire is one of the oldest in England . Cogglesford Mill is the only remaining watermill in town and is a testament to the economic importance of the River Slea from the late-Saxon period onwards . The Bishops of Lincoln used the medieval town as a base , constructing the now-ruined Sleaford Castle , and as a means of extracting produce and wealth through demesne farming and by granting a market and limited freedoms to the town . As a result , the oldest areas are the market place and the four roads which meet there : Northgate , Southgate , Eastgate and Westgate ; many 18th and 19th century buildings are found in this area . Buildings dating from these centuries include William Alvey 's baroque house on Northgate , the Manor House on Northgate inset with medieval masonry , and Sessions House on the Market Place . The Carre family founded the grammar school which was rebuilt in 1834 , the hospital , rebuilt in 1830 , and the almshouses , rebuilt 1857 , while the Victorian builders Charles Kirk and Thomas Parry constructed or added to numerous public buildings and private residences , including Lafford Terrace and their own houses on Southgate and at Westholme .

During the Industrial Revolution , the Slea was canalised in 1794 and the Sleaford Navigation Company constructed offices and wharves along Carre Street . The canal brought trade , while the Gothic-fronted gasworks on Eastgate lit the town from 1839 . Benjamin Handley and Anthony Peacock financed and benefited from the navigation and founded the bank that took over Alvey 's House on Northgate and later added a Baroque extension ; Henry Handley , a Member of Parliament , is commemorated by the Handley Memorial on Southgate , a Gothic monument in the style of an Eleanor Cross . During the 1850s , the railways arrived and the station was built in a Gothic style . Sleaford 's agricultural location and its new transport links encouraged seed trading and malting in the late 19th century : the seed merchant Charles Sharpe 's house , The Pines , is on Boston Road . The massive Bass and Company maltings complex , constructed in brick off Mareham Lane between 1892 and 1905 , is grade II * listed and has a frontage more than 1,000 feet long .

The Handley family were well-connected with business ; Benjamin Handley was a lawyer , prominent in the Navigation Company and partner in the local bank Peacock , Handley and Kirton . His son , Henry was M.P. for South Lincolnshire ; after his death , the residents erected a monument to him on Southgate . Robert Armstrong Yerburgh the son of Rev Richard Yerburgh , vicar of New Sleaford was twice M.P. for Chester . Sir Thomas Meres , politician was educated at the grammar school . Sir Robert Pattinson was also educated at the grammar was M.P. for Grantham and Sleaford . The religious controversialist Henry Pickworth was born in New Sleaford and challenged the opponent of Quakerism Francis Bugg to an open debate at Sleaford . John Austin , a religious writer , was educated at the grammar school . William Scoffin served as the town 's Presbyterian minister and preached there for more than forty years , while Benjamin Fawcett , Presbyterian minister , was born and educated at Sleaford . Andrew Kippis , the Presbyterian minister , biographer and Fellow of the Royal Society , attended the Grammar School . Richard Banister , the oculist , practised for 14 years in Sleaford where he trained in couching cataracts . Henry Andrews astronomer and astrologer , worked in Sleaford during his youth .

The royalist poet Thomas Shipman was educated at Carre 's Grammar School , as was novelist Henry Jackson ; Joseph Smedley , the actor and comedian , built the theatre in 1824 , before settling in the town in 1842 , establishing a printing business and dying in North Street ; and Charles Haslewood Shannon , the artist , was born in the town . The actress and comedian Jennifer Saunders was born in Sleaford . In popular culture , the singer Lois Wilkinson of the Caravelles was born in the town ; glamour model Abi Titmuss grew up in Ruskington and was educated at Kesteven and Sleaford High School ; and Bernie Taupin , Elton John 's songwriter , was born in the town . Eric Thompson who narrated The Magic Roundabout television series , was born in a house on Jermyn Street . In sport , the professional footballer Mark Wallington who played for Leicester City , Derby County and Lincoln City , grew up in Sleaford and , after retiring taught Physical Education at St George 's Academy .

The Tsugaru clan ( 津軽氏 , Tsugaru-shi ) was a Japanese samurai clan originating in northern Japan , specifically Mutsu Province ( the northeast coast of Honshū ) . A branch of the local Nanbu clan , the Tsugaru rose to power during the Azuchi-Momoyama period . It was on the winning side of the Battle of Sekigahara , and entered the Edo period as a family of lords ( daimyo ) ruling the Hirosaki Domain . A second branch of the family was later established , which ruled the Kuroishi Domain . The Tsugaru survived as a daimyo family until the Meiji Restoration , when Tsugaru Tsuguakira of Hirosaki and Tsugaru Tsugumichi of Kuroishi were relieved of office . Their extended family then became part of the new nobility in the Meiji era .

The Tsugaru clan initially claimed descent from the Kawachi Genji branch of the Minamoto clan ; in later years , this claim of origin would change to the Konoe family , which was a branch of the Fujiwara clan . It was first known as the Ōura clan ( 大浦氏 , Ōura-shi ) , a branch family of the Nanbu clan , which ruled sections of northern Mutsu Province . Relations between the two families soured after the Ōura declared their independence from the Nanbu in 1571 , during the headship of Ōura Tamenobu . He had been vice-district magistrate ( 郡代補佐 , gundai hosa ) under the Nanbu clan 's local magistrate Ishikawa Takanobu ; however , he attacked and killed Ishikawa and began taking the Nanbu clan 's castles . Tamenobu also attacked Kitabatake Akimura ( another local power figure ) and took his castle at Namioka . The Ōura clan 's fight against the Nanbu clan , under Nanbu Nobunao , would continue in the ensuing years . In 1590 , Tamenobu pledged fealty to Toyotomi Hideyoshi ; Hideyoshi confirmed Tamenobu in his holdings . As the Ōura fief had been in the Tsugaru region on the northern tip of Honshū , the family then changed its name to Tsugaru .

The Tsugaru clan sided with Tokugawa Ieyasu 's Eastern Army during the Battle of Sekigahara in 1600 . Its immediate neighbors also all supported the Eastern Army . After the Tokugawa victory at Sekigahara , the Tsugaru clan was granted an increase in territory , along with permission to keep its existing domain of Hirosaki ( named for the family 's castle town ) . The domain started out small at 45,000 koku , before being increased in size to 100,000 koku . Tamenobu remained politically active in the early years of the Edo era , mainly in the Kansai area ; he died in Kyoto in 1608 . The early years of the Edo era were marked by a series of major O-Ie Sōdō disturbances that shook the Tsugaru family : the Tsugaru Disturbance ( 津軽騒動 , Tsugaru-sōdō ) of 1607 , Kōsaka Kurando 's Riot ( 高坂蔵人の乱 , Kōsaka Kurando no ran ) of 1612 , the Funabashi Disturbance ( 船橋騒動 , Funabashi-sōdō ) of 1634 , and the Shōhō Disturbance ( 正保騒動 , Shōhō-sōdō ) of 1647 . In 1821 , there was a foiled plot by Sōma Daisaku , a former retainer of the Nanbu clan , to assassinate the Tsugaru lord ; this stemmed from the old enmity between the two clans .

A major branch of the Tsugaru clan was founded in 1656 , which was first given hatamoto rank , before being promoted to daimyo status in 1809 ; this became the ruling family of the Kuroishi Domain , which immediately bordered its parent family 's domain . A lesser branch was founded by Tsugaru Nobuzumi , the son of the first Kuroishi-Tsugaru family head ; this branch remained hatamoto through the end of the Edo period . The main Tsugaru family 's funerary temple in Hirosaki was located at Chōshō-ji . Though neither Tsugaru daimyo family ever held shogunate office , the Tsugaru of Hirosaki ( together with many of the other domains of northern Honshū ) assisted the shogunate in policing the frontier region of Ezochi ( now Hokkaido ) . In the late Edo period , during the headship of Tsugaru Tsuguakira , the Hirosaki domain 's forces were modernized along western lines .

During the Boshin War of 1868-69 , the Tsugaru clan first sided with the imperial government , and attacked the forces of the nearby Shōnai Domain . However , it soon switched course , and was briefly a signatory to the pact that created the Ōuetsu Reppan Dōmei , before backing out , once again in favor of the imperial government . It did not take part in any of the major military action against the imperial army . The Kuroishi branch joined the Hirosaki-Tsugaru in siding with the imperial government . As a result , the entire clan was able to evade the punishment meted out by the government on the northern domains . After northern Honshū was pacified , Tsugaru forces joined the imperial army in attacking the Republic of Ezo at Hakodate . In return for its assistance , the Meiji government granted the Tsugaru family of Hirosaki a 10,000 koku increase to its fief . Both branches of Tsugaru daimyo were made imperial governors ( 藩知事 , han chiji ) of their domains in 1869 . Two years later , as with all other daimyo , both Tsugaru lines were relieved of their offices by the abolition of the han system .

In the Meiji era , Tsugaru Tsuguakira , who had been the last daimyo of the main Tsugaru family , was ennobled with the title of count ( hakushaku ) . Tsugaru Tsugumichi , the last daimyo of the Kuroishi-Tsugaru , became a viscount ( shishaku ) . Tsuguakira later worked as a supervisor in the Number 15 National Bank ( 第十五国立銀行 , Dai jūgo kokuritsu ginkō ) , and Tsugumichi became a member of the House of Peers in 1890 . As Tsuguakira was heirless , he adopted Konoe Hidemaro , the son of court noble Konoe Tadafusa , as his heir ; Hidemaro succeeded to headship upon Tsuguakira 's death in 1916 .

Neptunium is a chemical element with symbol Np and atomic number 93 . A radioactive actinide metal , neptunium is the first transuranic element . Its position in the periodic table just after uranium , named after the planet Uranus , led to it being named after Neptune , the next planet beyond Uranus . A neptunium atom has 93 protons and 93 electrons , of which seven are valence electrons . Neptunium metal is silvery and tarnishes when exposed to air . The element occurs in three allotropic forms and it normally exhibits five oxidation states , ranging from + 3 to + 7 . It is radioactive , poisonous , pyrophoric , and can accumulate in bones , which makes the handling of neptunium dangerous . Although many false claims of its discovery were made over the years , the element was first synthesized by Edwin McMillan and Philip H. Abelson at the Berkeley Radiation Laboratory in 1940 . Since then , most neptunium has been and still is produced by neutron irradiation of uranium in nuclear reactors . The vast majority is generated as a by-product in conventional nuclear power reactors . While neptunium itself has no commercial uses at present , it is widely used as a precursor for the formation of plutonium-238 , used in radioisotope thermal generators to provide electricity for spacecraft . Neptunium has also been used in detectors of high-energy neutrons .

Neptunium is a hard , silvery , ductile , radioactive actinide metal . In the periodic table , it is located to the right of the actinide uranium , to the left of the actinide plutonium and below the lanthanide promethium . Neptunium is a hard metal , having a bulk modulus of 118 GPa , comparable to that of manganese . Neptunium metal is similar to uranium in terms of physical workability . When exposed to air at normal temperatures , it forms a thin oxide layer . This reaction proceeds more rapidly as the temperature increases . Neptunium has been determined to melt at 639 ± 3 ° C : this low melting point , a property the metal shares with the neighboring element plutonium ( which has melting point 639.4 ° C ) , is due to the hybridization of the 5f and 6d orbitals and the formation of directional bonds in the metal . The boiling point of neptunium is not empirically known and the usually given value of 4174 ° C is extrapolated from the vapor pressure of the element . If accurate , this would give neptunium the largest liquid range of any element ( 3535 K passes between its melting and boiling points ) .

Neptunium is found in at least three allotropes . Some claims of a fourth allotrope have been made , but they are so far not proven . This multiplicity of allotropes is common among the actinides . The crystal structures of neptunium , protactinium , uranium , and plutonium do not have clear analogs among the lanthanides and are more similar to those of the 3d transition metals . α-neptunium takes on an orthorhombic structure , resembling a highly distorted body-centered cubic structure . Each neptunium atom is coordinated to four others and the Np – Np bond lengths are 260 pm . It is the densest of all the actinides and the fifth-densest of all naturally occurring elements , behind only rhenium , platinum , iridium , and osmium. α-neptunium has semimetallic properties , such as strong covalent bonding and a high electrical resistivity , and its metallic physical properties are closer to those of the metalloids than the true metals . Some allotropes of the other actinides also exhibit similar behaviour , though to a lesser degree . The densities of different isotopes of neptunium in the alpha phase are expected to be observably different : α-235Np should have density 20.303 g / cm3 ; α-236Np , density 20.389 g / cm3 ; α-237Np , density 20.476 g / cm3 .

Due to the presence of valence 5f electrons , neptunium and its alloys exhibit very interesting magnetic behavior , like many other actinides . These can range from the itinerant band-like character characteristic of the transition metals to the local moment behavior typical of scandium , yttrium , and the lanthanides . This stems from 5f-orbital hybridization with the orbitals of the metal ligands , and the fact that the 5f orbital is relativistically destabilized and extends outwards . For example , pure neptunium is paramagnetic , NpAl3 is ferromagnetic , NpGe3 has no magnetic ordering , and NpSn3 behaves fermionically . Investigations are underway regarding alloys of neptunium with uranium , americium , plutonium , zirconium , and iron , so as to recycle long-lived waste isotopes such as neptunium-237 into shorter-lived isotopes more useful as nuclear fuel . One neptunium-based superconductor alloy has been discovered with formula NpPd5Al2 . This occurrence in neptunium compounds is somewhat surprising because they often exhibit strong magnetism , which usually destroys superconductivity . The alloy has a tetragonal structure with a superconductivity transition temperature of − 268.3 ° C ( 4.9 K ) .

A neptunium atom has 93 electrons , arranged in the configuration [ Rn ] 5f46d17s2 . This differs from the configuration expected by the Aufbau principle in that one electron is in the 6d subshell instead of being as expected in the 5f subshell . This is because of the similarity of the electron energies of the 5f , 6d , and 7s subshells . In forming compounds and ions , all the valence electrons may be lost , leaving behind an inert core of inner electrons with the electron configuration of the noble gas radon ; more commonly , only some of the valence electrons will be lost . The electron configuration for the tripositive ion Np3 + is [ Rn ] 5f4 , with the outermost 7s and 6d electrons lost first : this is exactly analogous to neptunium 's lanthanide homolog promethium , and conforms to the trend set by the other actinides with their [ Rn ] 5fn electron configurations in the tripositive state . The first ionization potential of neptunium was measured to be at most ( 6.19 ± 0.12 ) eV in 1974 , based on the assumption that the 7s electrons would ionize before 5f and 6d ; more recent measurements have refined this to 6.2657 eV .

20 neptunium radioisotopes have been characterized with the most stable being 237Np with a half-life of 2.14 million years , 236Np with a half-life of 154,000 years , and 235Np with a half-life of 396.1 days . All of the remaining radioactive isotopes have half-lives that are less than 4.5 days , and the majority of these have half-lives that are less than 50 minutes . This element also has at least four meta states , with the most stable being 236mNp with a half-life of 22.5 hours . The isotopes of neptunium range in atomic weight from 225.0339 u ( 225Np ) to 244.068 u ( 244Np ) . Most of the isotopes that are lighter than the most stable one , 237Np , decay primarily by electron capture although a sizable number , most notably 229Np and 230Np , also exhibit various levels of decay via alpha emission to become protactinium . 237Np itself , being the beta-stable isobar of mass number 237 , decays almost exclusively by alpha emission into 233Pa . All of the known isotopes except one that are heavier than this decay exclusively via beta emission . The lone exception , 240mNp , exhibits a rare ( > 0.12 % ) decay by isomeric transition in addition to the beta emission . 237Np eventually decays to form bismuth-209 and thallium-205 , unlike most other common heavy nuclei which decay into isotopes of lead . This decay chain is known as the neptunium series .

The isotopes neptunium-235 , -236 , and -237 are predicted to be fissile ; only neptunium-237 's fissionability has been experimentally shown , with the critical mass being about 60 kg , only about 10 kg more than that of the commonly used uranium-235 . Calculated values of the critical masses of neptunium-235 , -236 , and -237 respectively are 66.2 kg , 6.79 kg , and 63.6 kg : the neptunium-236 value is even lower than that of plutonium-239 . In particular 236Np also has a low neutron cross section . Despite this , a neptunium atomic bomb has never been built : uranium and plutonium have lower critical masses than 235Np and 237Np , and 236Np is difficult to purify as it is not found in quantity in spent nuclear fuel and is nearly impossible to separate in any significant quantities from its parent 237Np .

Since all isotopes of neptunium have half-lives that are many times shorter than the age of the Earth , any primordial neptunium should have decayed by now . After only about 80 million years , the concentration of even the longest lived isotope , 237Np , would have been reduced to less than one-trillionth ( 10 − 12 ) of its original amount ; and even if the whole Earth had initially been made of pure 237Np ( and ignoring that this would be well over its critical mass of 60 kg ) , 2100 half-lives would have passed since the formation of the Solar System , and thus all of it would have decayed . Thus neptunium is present in nature only in negligible amounts produced as intermediate decay products of other isotopes . Trace amounts of the neptunium isotopes neptunium-237 , -239 , and -240 are found naturally as decay products from transmutation reactions in uranium ores . In particular , 239Np and 237Np are the most common of these isotopes ; they are directly formed from neutron capture by uranium-238 atoms . These neutrons come from the spontaneous fission of uranium-238 , naturally neutron-induced fission of uranium-235 , cosmic ray spallation of nuclei , and light elements absorbing alpha particles and emitting a neutron . The half-life of 239Np is very short , although the detection of its much longer-lived daughter 239Pu in nature in 1951 definitively established its natural occurrence . In 1952 , 237Np was identified and isolated from concentrates of uranium ore from the Belgian Congo : in these minerals , the ratio of neptunium-237 to uranium is less than or equal to about 10 − 12 to 1 . Finally , the short-lived 240Np occurs as an intermediate in the decay chain of primordial 244Pu .

Most neptunium ( and plutonium ) now encountered in the environment is due to atmospheric nuclear explosions that took place between the detonation of the first atomic bomb in 1945 and the ratification of the Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty in 1963 . The total amount of neptunium released by these explosions and the few atmospheric tests that have been carried out since 1963 is estimated to be around 2500 kg . The overwhelming majority of this is composed of the long-lived isotopes 236Np and 237Np since even the moderately long-lived 235Np ( half-life 396 days ) would have decayed to less than one-billionth ( 10 − 9 ) its original concentration over the intervening decades . An additional very small amount of neptunium , created by neutron irradiation of natural uranium in nuclear reactor cooling water , is released when the water is discharged into rivers or lakes . The concentration of 237Np in seawater is approximately 6.5 × 10 − 5 millibecquerels per liter : this concentration is between 0.1 % and 1 % that of plutonium . Once in the environment , neptunium generally oxidizes fairly quickly , usually to the + 4 or + 5 state . Regardless of its oxidation state , the element exhibits a much greater mobility than the other actinides , largely due to its ability to readily form aqueous solutions with various other elements . In one study comparing the diffusion rates of neptunium ( V ) , plutonium ( IV ) , and americium ( III ) in sandstone and limestone , neptunium penetrated more than ten times as well as the other elements . Np ( V ) will also react efficiently in pH levels greater than 5.5 if there are no carbonates present and in these conditions it has also been observed to readily bond with quartz . It has also been observed to bond well with goethite , ferric oxide colloids , and several clays including kaolinite and smectite . Np ( V ) does not bond as readily to soil particles in mildly acidic conditions as its fellow actinides americium and curium by nearly an order of magnitude . This behavior enables it to migrate rapidly through the soil while in solution without becoming fixed in place , contributing further to its mobility . Np ( V ) is also readily absorbed by concrete , which because of the element 's radioactivity is a consideration that must be addressed when building nuclear waste storage facilities . When absorbed in concrete , it is reduced to Np ( IV ) in a relatively short period of time . Np ( V ) is also reduced by humic acid if it is present on the surface of goethite , hematite , and magnetite . Np ( IV ) is absorbed efficiently by tuff , granodiorite , and bentonite ; although uptake by the latter is most pronounced in mildly acidic conditions . It also exhibits a strong tendency to bind to colloidal particulates , an effect that is enhanced when in soil with a high clay content . The behavior provides an additional aid in the element 's observed high mobility .

When the first periodic table of the elements was published by Dmitri Mendeleev in the early 1870s , it showed a " — " in place after uranium similar to several other places for then-undiscovered elements . Other subsequent tables of known elements , including a 1913 publication of the known radioactive isotopes by Kasimir Fajans , also show an empty place after uranium . Up to and after the discovery of the final component of the atomic nucleus , the neutron in 1932 , most scientists did not seriously consider the possibility of elements heavier than uranium . While nuclear theory at the time did not explicitly prohibit their existence , there was little evidence to suggest that they did . However , the discovery of induced radioactivity by Irène and Frédéric Joliot-Curie in late 1933 opened up an entirely new method of researching the elements and inspired a small group of Italian scientists led by Enrico Fermi to begin a series of experiments involving neutron bombardment . Although the Joliot-Curies ' experiment involved bombarding a sample of 27Al with alpha particles to produce the radioactive 30P , Fermi realized that using neutrons , which have no electrical charge , would most likely produce even better results than the positively charged alpha particles . Accordingly , in March 1934 he began systematically subjecting all of the then-known elements to neutron bombardment to determine whether others could also be induced to radioactivity .

After several months of work , Fermi 's group had tentatively determined that lighter elements would disperse the energy of the captured neutron by emitting a proton or alpha particle and heavier elements would generally accomplish the same by emitting a gamma ray . This latter behavior would later result in the beta decay of a neutron into a proton , thus moving the resulting isotope one place up the periodic table . When Fermi 's team bombarded uranium , they observed this behavior as well , which strongly suggested that the resulting isotope had an atomic number of 93 . Fermi was initially reluctant to publicize such a claim , but after his team observed several unknown half-lives in the uranium bombardment products that did not match those of any known isotope , he published a paper entitled Possible Production of Elements of Atomic Number Higher than 92 in June 1934 . In it he proposed the name ausonium ( atomic symbol Ao ) for element 93 , after the Greek name Ausonia ( Italy ) . Several theoretical objections to the claims of Fermi 's paper were quickly raised ; in particular , the exact process that took place when an atom captured a neutron was not well understood at the time . This and Fermi 's accidental discovery three months later that nuclear reactions could be induced by slow neutrons cast further doubt in the minds of many scientists , notably Aristid von Grosse and Ida Noddack , that the experiment was creating element 93 . While von Grosse 's claim that Fermi was actually producing protactinium was quickly tested and disproved , Noddack 's proposal that the uranium had been shattered into two or more much smaller fragments was simply ignored by most because existing nuclear theory did not include a way for this to be possible . Fermi and his team maintained that they were in fact synthesizing a new element , but the issue remained unresolved for several years .

Although the many different and unknown radioactive half-lives in the experiment 's results showed that several nuclear reactions were occurring , Fermi 's group could not prove that element 93 was being created unless they could isolate it chemically . They and many other scientists attempted to accomplish this , including Otto Hahn and Lise Meitner who were among the best radiochemists in the world at the time and supporters of Fermi 's claim , but they all failed . Much later , it was determined that the main reason for this failure was because the predictions of element 93 's chemical properties were based on a periodic table which lacked the actinide series . This arrangement placed protactinium below tantalum , uranium below tungsten , and further suggested that element 93 , at that point referred to as eka-rhenium , should be similar to the group 7 elements , including manganese and rhenium . Thorium , protactinium , and uranium , with their dominant oxidation states of + 4 , + 5 , and + 6 respectively , fooled scientists into thinking they belonged below hafnium , tantalum , and tungsten , rather than below the lanthanide series , which was at the time viewed as a fluke , and whose members all have dominant + 3 states ; neptunium , on the other hand , has a much weaker , more unstable + 7 state , with + 4 and + 5 being the most stable . Upon finding that plutonium and the other transuranic elements also have dominant + 3 and + 4 states , along with the discovery of the f-block , the actinide series was firmly established .

While the question of whether Fermi 's experiment had produced element 93 was stalemated , two additional claims of the discovery of the element appeared , although unlike Fermi , they both claimed to have observed it in nature . The first of these claims was by Czech engineer Odolen Koblic in 1934 when he extracted a small amount of material from the wash water of heated pitchblende . He proposed the name bohemium for the element , but after being analyzed it turned out that the sample was a mixture of tungsten and vanadium . The other claim , in 1938 by Romanian physicist Horia Hulubei and French chemist Yvette Cauchois , claimed to have discovered the new element via spectroscopy in minerals . They named their element sequanium , but the claim was discounted because the prevailing theory at the time was that if it existed at all , element 93 would not exist naturally . However , as neptunium does in fact occur in nature in trace amounts , as demonstrated when it was found in uranium ore in 1952 , it is possible that Hulubei and Cauchois did in fact observe neptunium . Although by 1938 some scientists , including Niels Bohr , were still reluctant to accept that Fermi had actually produced a new element , he was nevertheless awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in November 1938 " for his demonstrations of the existence of new radioactive elements produced by neutron irradiation , and for his related discovery of nuclear reactions brought about by slow neutrons " . A month later , the almost totally unexpected discovery of nuclear fission by Hahn , Meitner , and Otto Frisch put an end to the possibility that Fermi had discovered element 93 because most of the unknown half-lives that had been observed by Fermi 's team were rapidly identified as fission products .

As research on nuclear fission progressed in early 1939 , Edwin McMillan at the Berkeley Radiation Laboratory of the University of California , Berkeley decided to run an experiment bombarding uranium using the powerful 60-inch ( 1.52 m ) cyclotron that had recently been built at the university . The purpose was to separate the various fission products produced by the bombardment by exploiting the enormous force that the fragments gain from their mutual electrical repulsion after fissioning . Although he did not discover anything of note from this , McMillan did observe two new beta decay half-lives in the uranium trioxide target itself , which meant that whatever was producing the radioactivity had not violently repelled each other like normal fission products . He quickly realized that one of the half-lives closely matched the known 23-minute decay period of uranium-239 , but the other half-life of 2.3 days was unknown . McMillan took the results of his experiment to chemist and fellow Berkeley professor Emilio Segrè to attempt to isolate the source of the radioactivity . Both scientists began their work using the prevailing theory that element 93 would have similar chemistry to rhenium , but Segrè rapidly determined that McMillan 's sample was not at all similar to rhenium . Instead , when he reacted it with hydrogen fluoride ( HF ) with a strong oxidizing agent present , it behaved much like members of the rare earths . Since these elements comprise a large percentage of fission products , Segrè and McMillan decided that the half-life must have been simply another fission product , titling the paper " An Unsuccessful Search for Transuranium Elements " .

However , as more information about fission became available , the possibility that the fragments of nuclear fission could still have been present in the target became more remote . McMillan and several scientists , including Philip H. Abelson , attempted again to determine what was producing the unknown half-life . In early 1940 , McMillan realized that his 1939 experiment with Segrè had failed to test the chemical reactions of the radioactive source with sufficient rigor . In a new experiment , McMillan tried subjecting the unknown substance to HF in the presence of a reducing agent , something he had not done before . This reaction resulted in the sample precipitating with the HF , an action that definitively ruled out the possibility that the unknown substance was a rare earth . Shortly after this , Abelson , who had received his graduate degree from the university , visited Berkeley for a short vacation and McMillan asked the more able chemist to assist with the separation of the experiment 's results . Abelson very quickly observed that whatever was producing the 2.3-day half-life did not have chemistry like any known element and was actually more similar to uranium than a rare earth . This discovery finally allowed the source to be isolated and later , in 1945 , led to the classification of the actinide series . As a final step , McMillan and Abelson prepared a much larger sample of bombarded uranium that had a prominent 23-minute half-life from 239U and demonstrated conclusively that the unknown 2.3-day half-life increased in strength in concert with a decrease in the 23-minute activity through the following reaction :

This proved that the unknown radioactive source originated from the decay of uranium and , coupled with the previous observation that the source was different chemically from all known elements , proved beyond all doubt that a new element had been discovered . McMillan and Abelson published their results in a paper entitled Radioactive Element 93 in the Physical Review on May 27 , 1940 . They did not propose a name for the element in the paper , but they soon decided on the name neptunium since Neptune is the next planet beyond Uranus in our solar system .

It was also realized that the beta decay of 239Np must produce an isotope of element 94 ( now called plutonium ) , but the quantities involved in McMillan and Abelson 's original experiment were too small to isolate and identify plutonium along with neptunium . The discovery of plutonium had to wait until the end of 1940 , when Glenn T. Seaborg and his team identified the isotope plutonium-238 . Neptunium 's unique radioactive characteristics allowed it to be traced as it moved through various compounds in chemical reactions , at first this was the only method available to prove that its chemistry was different from other elements . As the first isotope of neptunium to be discovered has such a short half-life , McMillan and Abelson were unable to prepare a sample that was large enough to perform chemical analysis of the new element using the technology that was then available . However , after the discovery of the long-lived 237Np isotope in 1942 by Glenn Seaborg and Arthur Wahl , forming weighable amounts of neptunium became a realistic endeavor . Early research into the element was somewhat limited because most of the nuclear physicists and chemists in the United States at the time were focused on the massive effort to research the properties of plutonium as part of the Manhattan Project . Research into the element did continue as a minor part of the project and the first bulk sample of neptunium was isolated in 1944 .

Much of the research into the properties of neptunium since then has been focused on understanding how to confine it as a portion of nuclear waste . Because it has isotopes with very long half-lives , it is of particular concern in the context of designing confinement facilities that can last for thousands of years . It has found some limited uses as a radioactive tracer and a precursor for various nuclear reactions to produce useful plutonium isotopes . However , most of the neptunium that is produced as a reaction byproduct in nuclear power stations is considered to be a waste product .

The vast majority of the neptunium that currently exists on Earth was produced in artificial nuclear reactions . Neptunium-237 is the most commonly synthesized isotope due to it being the only one that both can be created via neutron capture and also has a half-lifelong enough to allow weighable quantities to be easily isolated . As such , it is by far the most common isotope to be utilized in chemical studies of the element . When an 235U atom captures a neutron , it is converted to an excited state of 236U . About 81 % of the excited 236U nuclei undergo fission , but the remainder decay to the ground state of 236U by emitting gamma radiation . Further neutron capture creates 237U which has a half-life of 7 days and thus quickly decays to 237Np through beta decay . During beta decay , the excited 237U emits an electron , while the atomic weak interaction converts a neutron to a proton , thus creating 237Np . 237U is also produced via an ( n , 2n ) reaction with 238U . This only happens with very energetic neutrons . 237Np is the product of alpha decay of 241Am , which is produced through neutron irradiation of uranium-238 .

Heavier isotopes of neptunium decay quickly , and lighter isotopes of neptunium cannot be produced by neutron capture , so chemical separation of neptunium from cooled spent nuclear fuel gives nearly pure 237Np . The short-lived heavier isotopes 238Np and 239Np , useful as radioactive tracers , are produced through neutron irradiation of 237Np and 238U respectively , while the longer-lived lighter isotopes 235Np and 236Np are produced through irradiation of 235U with protons and deuterons in a cyclotron . Artificial 237Np metal is usually isolated through a reaction of 237NpF3 with liquid barium or lithium at around 1200 ° C and is most often extracted from spent nuclear fuel rods in kilogram amounts as a by-product in plutonium production . By weight , neptunium-237 discharges are about 5 % as great as plutonium discharges and about 0.05 % of spent nuclear fuel discharges . However , even this fraction still amounts to more than fifty tons per year globally .

Recovering uranium and plutonium from spent nuclear fuel for reuse is one of the major processes of the nuclear fuel cycle . As it has a long half-life of just over 2 million years , the alpha emitter 237Np is one of the major isotopes of the minor actinides separated from spent nuclear fuel . Many separation methods have been used to separate out the neptunium , operating on small and large scales . The small-scale purification operations have the goals of preparing pure neptunium as a precursor of metallic neptunium and its compounds , and also to isolate and preconcentrate neptunium in samples for analysis . Most methods that separate neptunium ions exploit the differing chemical behaviour of the differing oxidation states of neptunium ( from + 3 to + 6 or sometimes even + 7 ) in solution . Among the methods that are or have been used are : solvent extraction ( using various extractants , usually multidentate β-diketone derivatives , organophosphorus compounds , and amine compounds ) , chromatography using various ion-exchange or chelating resins , coprecipitation ( possible matrices include LaF3 , BiPO4 , BaSO4 , Fe ( OH ) 3 , and MnO2 ) , electrodeposition , and biotechnological methods . Currently , commercial reprocessing plants use the Purex process , involving the solvent extraction of uranium and plutonium with tributyl phosphate .

When it is in an aqueous solution , neptunium can exist in any of its five possible oxidation states ( + 3 to + 7 ) and each of these show a characteristic color . The stability of each oxidation state is strongly dependent on various factors , such as the presence of oxidizing or reducing agents , pH of the solution , presence of coordination complex-forming ligands , and even the concentration of neptunium in the solution . In acidic solutions , the neptunium ( III ) to neptunium ( VII ) ions exist as Np3 + , Np4 + , NpO + 3 . In basic solutions , they exist as the oxides and hydroxides Np ( OH ) 3 , NpO2 , NpO2OH , NpO2 ( OH ) 2 , and NpO3 − 5 . Not as much work has been done to characterize neptunium in basic solutions . Np3 + and Np4 + can easily be reduced and oxidized to each other , as can NpO + 2O ) 3 + n . It is a dark blue-purple and is analogous to its lighter congener , the pink rare earth ion Pm3 + . In the presence of oxygen , it is quickly oxidized to Np ( IV ) unless strong reducing agents are also present . Nevertheless , it is the second-least easily hydrolyzed neptunium ion in water , forming the NpOH2 + ion . Np3 + is the predominant neptunium ion in solutions of pH 4 – 5 .

Np ( IV ) or Np4 + is pale yellow-green in acidic solutions , where it exists as hydrated complexes ( Np ( H 2O ) 4 + n ) . It is quite unstable to hydrolysis in acidic aqueous solutions at pH 1 and above , forming NpOH3 + . In basic solutions , Np4 + tends to hydrolyze to form the neutral neptunium ( IV ) hydroxide ( Np ( OH ) 4 ) and neptunium ( IV ) oxide ( NpO2 ) . 2 is green-blue in aqueous solution , in which it behaves as a strong Lewis acid . It is a stable ion and is the most common form of neptunium in aqueous solutions . Unlike its neighboring homologues UO + 2 , the neptunyl ion , shows a light pink or reddish color in an acidic solution and yellow-green otherwise . It is a strong Lewis acid and is the main neptunium ion encountered in solutions of pH 3 – 4 . Though stable in acidic solutions , it is quite easily reduced to the Np ( V ) ion , and it is not as stable as the homologous hexavalent ions of its neighbours uranium and plutonium ( the uranyl and plutonyl ions ) . It hydrolyzes in basic solutions to form the oxo and hydroxo ions NpO2OH + , ( NpO

The oxides and hydroxides of neptunium are closely related to its ions . In general , Np hydroxides at various oxidation levels are less stable than the actinides before it on the periodic table such as thorium and uranium and more stable than those after it such as plutonium and americium . This phenomenon is because the stability of an ion increases as the ratio of atomic number to the radius of the ion increases . Thus actinides higher on the periodic table will more readily undergo hydrolysis . Neptunium ( III ) hydroxide is quite stable in acidic solutions and in environments that lack oxygen , but it will rapidly oxidize to the IV state in the presence of air . It is not soluble in water . Np ( IV ) hydroxides exist mainly as the electrically neutral Np ( OH ) 4 and its mild solubility in water is not affected at all by the pH of the solution . This suggests that the other Np ( IV ) hydroxide , Np ( OH ) − 2 is very stable , it can only form a hydroxide in high acidity levels . When placed in a 0.1 M sodium perchlorate solution , it does not react significantly for a period of months , although a higher molar concentration of 3.0 M will result in it reacting to the solid hydroxide NpO2OH almost immediately . Np ( VI ) hydroxide is more reactive but it is still fairly stable in acidic solutions . It will form the compound NpO3 · H2O in the presence of ozone under various carbon dioxide pressures . Np ( VII ) has not been well-studied and no neutral hydroxides have been reported . It probably exists mostly as [ NpO

Three anhydrous neptunium oxides have been reported , NpO2 , Np2O5 , and Np5O8 , though some studies have stated that only the first two of these exist , suggesting that claims of Np5O8 are actually the result of mistaken analysis of Np2O5 . However , as the full extent of the reactions that occur between neptunium and oxygen has yet to be researched , it is not certain which of these claims is accurate . Although neptunium oxides have not been produced with neptunium in oxidations as high as those possible with the adjacent actinide uranium , neptunium oxides are more stable at lower oxidation levels . This behavior is illustrated by the fact that NpO2 can be produced by simply burning neptunium salts of oxyacids in air . The greenish-brown NpO2 is very stable over a large range of pressures and temperatures and does not undergo phase transitions at low temperatures . It does show a phase transition from face-centered cubic to orthorhombic at around 33-37GPa , although it returns to is original phase when pressure is released . It remains stable under oxygen pressures up to 2.84 MPa and temperatures up to 400 ° C. Np2O5 is black-brown in color and monoclinic with a lattice size of 418 × 658 × 409 picometres . It is relatively unstable and decomposes to NpO2 and O2 at 420-695 ° C. Although Np2O5 was initially subject to several studies that claimed to produce it with mutually contradictory methods , it was eventually prepared successfully by heating neptunium peroxide to 300-350 ° C for 2 – 3 hours or by heating it under a layer of water in an ampoule at 180 ° C.

Neptunium also forms a large number of oxide compounds with a wide variety of elements , although the neptunate oxides formed with alkali metals and alkaline earth metals have been by far the most studied . Ternary neptunium oxides are generally formed by reacting NpO2 with the oxide of another element or by precipitating from an alkaline solution . Li5NpO6 has been prepared by reacting Li2O and NpO2 at 400 ° C for 16 hours or by reacting Li2O2 with NpO3 · H2O at 400 ° C for 16 hours in a quartz tube and flowing oxygen . Alkali neptunate compounds K3NpO5 , Cs3NpO5 , and Rb3NpO5 are all created by a similar reaction : 2 ] 3 − ) with a compound of the alkali metal nitrate and ozone . Additional compounds have been produced by reacting NpO3 and water with solid alkali and alkaline peroxides at temperatures of 400 - 600 ° C for 15 – 30 hours . Some of these include Ba3 ( NpO5 ) 2 , Ba2NaNpO6 , and Ba2LiNpO6 . Also , a considerable number of hexavelant neptunium oxides are formed by reacting solid-state NpO2 with various alkali or alkaline earth oxides in an environment of flowing oxygen . Many of the resulting compounds also have an equivalent compound that substitutes uranium for neptunium . Some compounds that have been characterized include Na2Np2O7 , Na4NpO5 , Na6NpO6 , and Na2NpO4 . These can be obtained by heating different combinations of NpO2 and Na2O to various temperature thresholds and further heating will also cause these compounds to exhibit different neptunium allotropes . The lithium neptunate oxides Li6NpO6 and Li4NpO5 can be obtained with similar reactions of NpO2 and Li2O .

Although neptunium halide compounds have not been nearly as well studied as its oxides , a fairly large number have been successfully characterized . Of these , neptunium fluorides have been the most extensively researched , largely because of their potential use in separating the element from nuclear waste products . Four binary neptunium fluoride compounds , NpF3 , NpF4 , NpF5 , and NpF6 , have been reported . The first two are fairly stable and were first prepared in 1947 through the following reactions : Later , NpF4 was obtained directly by heating NpO2 to various temperatures in mixtures of either hydrogen fluoride or pure fluorine gas . NpF5 is much more difficult to create and most known preparation methods involve reacting NpF4 or NpF6 compounds with various other fluoride compounds . NpF5 will decompose into NpF4 and NpF6 when heated to around 320 ° C. NpF6 or neptunium hexafluoride is extremely volatile , as are its adjacent actinide compounds uranium hexafluoride ( UF6 ) and plutonium hexafluoride ( PuF6 ) . This volatility has attracted a large amount of interest to the compound in an attempt to devise a simple method for extracting neptunium from spent nuclear power station fuel rods . NpF6 was first prepared in 1943 by reacting NpF3 and gaseous fluorine at very high temperatures and the first bulk quantities were obtained in 1958 by heating NpF4 and dripping pure fluorine on it in a specially prepared apparatus . Additional methods that have successfully produced neptunium hexafluoride include reacting BrF3 and BrF5 with NpF4 and by reacting several different neptunium oxide and fluoride compounds with anhydrous hydrogen ﬂuorides .

Four neptunium oxyfluoride compounds , NpO2F , NpOF3 , NpO2F2 , and NpOF4 ; have been reported although none of them have been extensively studied . NpO2F2 is a pinkish solid and can be prepared by reacting NpO3 · H2O and Np2F5 with pure fluorine at around 330 ° C. NpOF3 and NpOF4 can be produced by reacting neptunium oxides with anhydrous hydrogen ﬂuoride at various temperatures . Neptunium also forms a wide variety of fluoride compounds with various elements . Some of these that have been characterized include CsNpF6 , Rb2NpF7 , Na3NpF8 , and K3NpO2F5 . Two neptunium chlorides , NpCl3 and NpCl4 , have been characterized and although several attempts to create NpCl5 have been made , they have not been successful . NpCl3 is created by reducing neptunium dioxide with hydrogen and carbon tetrachloride ( CCl4 ) and NpCl4 by reacting a neptunium oxide with CCl4 at around 500 ° C. Other neptunium chloride compounds have also been reported , including NpOCl2 , Cs2NpCl6 , Cs3NpO2Cl4 , and Cs2NaNpCl6 . Neptunium bromides NpBr3 and NpBr4 have also been created ; the latter by reacting aluminium bromide with NpO2 at 350 ° C and the former in an almost identical procedure but with zinc present . The neptunium iodide NpI3 has also been prepared by the same method as NpBr3 .

Neptunium chalcogen and pnictogen compounds have been well studied primarily as part of research into their electronic and magnetic properties and their interactions in the natural environment . Pnictide and carbide compounds have also attracted interest because of their presence in the fuel of several advanced nuclear reactor designs , although the latter group has not had nearly as much research as the former . A wide variety of neptunium sulfide compounds have been characterized , including the pure sulfide compounds NpS , NpS3 , Np2S5 , Np3S5 , Np2S3 , and Np3S4 . Of these , Np2S3 , prepared by reacting NpO2 with hydrogen sulfide and carbon disulfide at around 1000 ° C , is the most well-studied and three allotropic forms are known . The α form exists up to around 1230 ° C , the β up to 1530 ° C , and the γ form , which can also exist as Np3S4 , at higher temperatures . NpS can be created by reacting Np2S3 and neptunium metal at 1600 ° C and Np3S5 can be prepared by the decomposition of Np2S3 at 500 ° C or by reacting sulfur and neptunium hydride at 650 ° C. Np2S5 is made by heating a mixture of Np3S5 and pure sulfur to 500 ° C. All of the neptunium sulfides except for the β and γ forms of Np2S3 are isostructural with the equivalent uranium sulfide and several , including NpS , α − Np2S3 , and β − Np2S3 are also isostructural with the equivalent plutonium sulfide . The oxysulfides NpOS , Np4O4S , and Np2O2S have also been created , although the latter three have not been well studied . NpOS was first prepared in 1985 by vacuum sealing NpO2 , Np3S5 , and pure sulfur in a quartz tube and heating it to 900 ° C for one week .

Neptunium selenide compounds that have been reported include NpSe , NpSe3 , Np2Se3 , Np2Se5 , Np3Se4 , and Np3Se5 . All of these have only been obtained by heating neptunium hydride and selenium metal to various temperatures in a vacuum for an extended period of time and Np2Se3 is only known to exist in the γ allotrope at relatively high temperatures . Two neptunium oxyselenide compounds are known , NpOSe and Np2O2Se , are formed with similar methods by replacing the neptunium hydride with neptunium dioxide . The known neptunium telluride compounds NpTe , NpTe3 , Np3Te4 , Np2Te3 , and Np2O2Te are formed by similar procedures to the selenides and Np2O2Te is isostructural to the equivalent uranium and plutonium compounds . No neptunium − polonium compounds have been reported . Neptunium nitride ( NpN ) was first prepared in 1953 by reacting neptunium hydride and ammonia gas at around 750 ° C in a quartz capillary tube . Later , it was produced by reacting different mixtures of nitrogen and hydrogen with neptunium metal at various temperatures . It has also been created by the reduction of neptunium dioxide with diatomic nitrogen gas at 1550 ° C. NpN is isomorphous with uranium mononitride ( UN ) and plutonium mononitride ( PuN ) and has a melting point of 2830 ° C under a nitrogen pressure of around 1 MPa . Two neptunium phosphide compounds have been reported , NpP and Np3P4 . The first has a face centered cubic structure and is prepared by converting neptunium metal to a powder and then reacting it with phosphine gas at 350 ° C. Np3P4 can be created by reacting neptunium metal with red phosphorus at 740 ° C in a vacuum and then allowing any extra phosphorus to sublimate away . The compound is non-reactive with water but will react with nitric acid to produce Np ( IV ) solution .

Three neptunium arsenide compounds have been prepared , NpAs , NpAs2 , and Np3As4 . The first two were first created by heating arsenic and neptunium hydride in a vacuum-sealed tube for about a week . Later , NpAs was also made by confining neptunium metal and arsenic in a vacuum tube , separating them with a quartz membrane , and heating them to just below neptunium 's melting point of 639 ° C , which is slightly higher than the arsenic 's sublimation point of 615 ° C. Np3As4 is prepared by a similar procedure using iodine as a transporting agent . NpAs2 crystals are brownish gold and Np3As4 is black . The neptunium antimonide compound NpSb was created in 1971 by placing equal quantities of both elements in a vacuum tube , heating them to the melting point of antimony , and then heating it further to 1000 ° C for sixteen days . This procedure also created trace amounts of an additional antimonide compound Np3Sb4 . One neptunium-bismuth compound , NpBi , has also been reported . The neptunium carbides NpC , Np2C3 , and NpC2 ( tentative ) have been reported , but have not characterized in detail despite the high importance and utility of actinide carbides as advanced nuclear reactor fuel . NpC is a non-stoichiometric compound , and could be better labelled as NpCx ( 0.82 ≤ x ≤ 0.96 ) . It may be obtained from the reaction of neptunium hydride with graphite at 1400 ° C or by heating the constituent elements together in an electric arc furnace using a tungsten electrode . It reacts with excess carbon to form pure Np2C3 . NpC2 is formed from heating NpO2 in a graphite crucible at 2660 – 2800 ° C.

Neptunium reacts with hydrogen in a similar manner to its neighbor plutonium , forming the hydrides NpH2 + x ( face-centered cubic ) and NpH3 ( hexagonal ) . These are isostructural with the corresponding plutonium hydrides , although unlike PuH2 + x , the lattice parameters of NpH2 + x become greater as the hydrogen content ( x ) increases . The hydrides require extreme care in handling as they decompose in a vacuum at 300 ° C to form finely divided neptunium metal , which is pyrophoric . Being chemically stable , neptunium phosphates have been investigated for potential use in immobilizing nuclear waste . Neptunium pyrophosphate ( α-NpP2O7 ) , a green solid , has been produced in the reaction between neptunium dioxide and boron phosphate at 1100 ° C , though neptunium ( IV ) phosphate has so far remained elusive . The series of compounds NpM2 ( PO4 ) 3 , where M is an alkali metal ( Li , Na , K , Rb , or Cs ) , are all known . Some neptunium sulfates have been characterized , both aqueous and solid and at various oxidation states of neptunium ( IV through VI have been observed ) . Additionally , neptunium carbonates have been investigated to achieve a better understanding of the behavior of neptunium in geological repositories and the environment , where it may come into contact with carbonate and bicarbonate aqueous solutions and form soluble complexes .

A few organoneptunium compounds are known and chemically characterized , although not as many as for uranium due to neptunium 's scarcity and radioactivity . The most well known organoneptunium compounds are the cyclopentadienyl and cyclooctatetraenyl compounds and their derivatives . The trivalent cyclopentadienyl compound Np ( C5H5 ) 3 · THF was obtained in 1972 from reacting Np ( C5H5 ) 3Cl with sodium , although the simpler Np ( C5H5 ) could not be obtained . Tetravalent neptunium cyclopentadienyl , a reddish-brown complex , was synthesized in 1968 by reacting neptunium ( IV ) chloride with potassium cyclopentadienide : It is soluble in benzene and THF , and is less sensitive to oxygen and water than Pu ( C5H5 ) 3 and Am ( C5H5 ) 3 . Other Np ( IV ) cyclopentadienyl compounds are known for many ligands : they have the general formula ( C5H5 ) 3NpL , where L represents a ligand . Neptunocene , Np ( C8H8 ) 2 , was synthesized in 1970 by reacting neptunium ( IV ) chloride with K2 ( C8H8 ) . It is isomorphous to uranocene and plutonocene , and they behave chemically identically : all three compounds are insensitive to water or dilute bases but are sensitive to air , reacting quickly to form oxides , and are only slightly soluble in benzene and toluene . Other known neptunium cyclooctatetraenyl derivatives include Np ( RC8H7 ) 2 ( R = ethanol , butanol ) and KNp ( C8H8 ) · 2THF , which is isostructural to the corresponding plutonium compound . In addition , neptunium hydrocarbyls have been prepared , and solvated triiodide complexes of neptunium are a precursor to many organoneptunium and inorganic neptunium compounds .

Few neptunium ( III ) coordination compounds are known , because Np ( III ) is readily oxidized by atmospheric oxygen while in aqueous solution . However , sodium formaldehyde sulfoxylate can reduce Np ( IV ) to Np ( III ) , stabilizing the lower oxidation state and forming various sparingly soluble Np ( III ) coordination complexes , such as Np 8 , which is isostructural with the analogous uranium ( IV ) coordination compound . Other Np ( IV ) coordination compounds are known , some involving other metals such as cobalt ( CoNp 10 · 6H2O , formed at 600 K ) . Complex nitrate compounds are also known : the experimenters who produced them in 1986 and 1987 produced single crystals by slow evaporation of the Np ( IV ) solution at ambient temperature in concentrated nitric acid and excess 2,2 ′ -pyrimidine . The coordination chemistry of neptunium ( V ) has been extensively researched due to the presence of cation – cation interactions in the solid state , which had been already known for actinyl ions . Some known such compounds include the neptunyl dimer Na 4 ( which is unstable , usually becoming Np ( IV ) ) to such complicated compounds as the green ( NH

2 ) . A great many complexes for the other neptunium oxidation states are known : the inorganic ligands involved are the halides , iodate , azide , nitride , nitrate , thiocyanate , sulfate , carbonate , chromate , and phosphate . Many organic ligands are known to be able to be used in neptunium coordination complexes : they include acetate , propionate , glycolate , lactate , oxalate , malonate , phthalate , mellitate , and citrate . Analogously to its neighbours , uranium and plutonium , the order of the neptunium ions in terms of complex formation ability is Np4 + > NpO2 + 2 . ( The relative order of the middle two neptunium ions depends on the ligands and solvents used . ) The stability sequence for Np ( IV ) , Np ( V ) , and Np ( VI ) complexes with monovalent inorganic ligands is F − > H 4 . These follow the strengths of the corresponding acids . The divalent ligands are more strongly complexing than the monovalent ones . NpO + Al , Ga , Sc , In , Fe , Cr , Rh ) in perchloric acid solution : the strength of interaction between the two cations follows the order Fe > In > Sc > Ga > Al . The neptunyl and uranyl ions can also form a complex together .

An important of use of 237Np is as a precursor in plutonium production , where it is irradiated with neutrons to create 238Pu , an alpha emitter for radioisotope thermal generators for spacecraft and military applications . 237Np will capture a neutron to form 238Np and beta decay with a half-life of just over two days to 238Pu . 238Pu also exists in sizable quantities in spent nuclear fuel but would have to be separated from other isotopes of plutonium . Irradiating neptunium-237 with electron beams , provoking bremsstrahlung , also produces quite pure samples of the isotope plutonium-236 , useful as a tracer to determine plutonium concentration in the environment .

Neptunium is fissionable , and could theoretically be used as fuel in a fast neutron reactor or a nuclear weapon , with a critical mass of around 60 kilograms . In 1992 , the U.S. Department of Energy declassified the statement that neptunium-237 " can be used for a nuclear explosive device " . It is not believed that an actual weapon has ever been constructed using neptunium . As of 2009 , the world production of neptunium-237 by commercial power reactors was over 1000 critical masses a year , but to extract the isotope from irradiated fuel elements would be a major industrial undertaking . In September 2002 , researchers at the Los Alamos National Laboratory briefly created the first known nuclear critical mass using neptunium in combination with shells of enriched uranium ( uranium-235 ) , discovering that the critical mass of a bare sphere of neptunium-237 " ranges from kilogram weights in the high fifties to low sixties , " showing that it " is about as good a bomb material as [ uranium-235 ] . " The United States Federal government made plans in March 2004 to move America 's supply of separated neptunium to a nuclear-waste disposal site in Nevada .

Neptunium accumulates in commercial household ionization-chamber smoke detectors from decay of the ( typically ) 0.2 microgram of americium-241 initially present as a source of ionizing radiation . With a half-life of 432 years , the americium-241 in an ionization smoke detector includes about 3 % neptunium after 20 years , and about 15 % after 100 years . Neptunium-237 is the most mobile actinide in the deep geological repository environment . This makes it and its predecessors such as americium-241 candidates of interest for destruction by nuclear transmutation . Due to its long half-life , neptunium will become the major contributor of the total radiotoxicity in 10,000 years . As it is unclear what happens to the containment in that long time span , an extraction of the neptunium would minimize the contamination of the environment if the nuclear waste could be mobilized after several thousand years .

Guide to the Elements – Revised Edition , Albert Stwertka , ( Oxford University Press ; 1998 ) ISBN 0-19-508083-1 Lester R. Morss , Norman M. Edelstein , Jean Fuger ( Hrsg . ) : The Chemistry of the Actinide and Transactinide Elements , Springer-Verlag , Dordrecht 2006 , ISBN 1-4020-3555-1 . Ida Noddack ( 1934 ) . " Über das Element 93 " . Zeitschrift für Angewandte Chemie 47 ( 37 ) : 653 – 655. doi : 10.1002 / ange.19340473707. Eric Scerri , A Very Short Introduction to the Periodic Table , Oxford University Press , Oxford , 2011 , ISBN 978-0-19-958249-5 .

" Michael " is the eleventh episode of the third season of the American musical television series Glee , and the fifty-fifth overall . Written by co-creator Ryan Murphy and directed by Alfonso Gomez-Rejon , the episode aired on Fox in the United States on January 31 , 2012 . It is a special tribute episode to Michael Jackson , and features eight of his songs as a solo artist , and one he sang as part of The Jackson 5 . Reviews were widely varied for the episode : some felt it was the best of the third season to date , and others were quite critical , though the overall mix was somewhat more positive than negative . A number of reviewers noted that tribute episodes have tended to be light on plot , though several felt that this episode had surmounted the usual storyline problems that had plagued past tributes . The episode 's musical performances were viewed more favorably , with many of the nine performances given high praise , including " Wanna Be Startin ' Somethin ' " , " Human Nature " , " Smooth Criminal " , and " Scream " , the last of these primarily for Kevin McHale 's dancing . Five of the songs — the first three above plus " Bad " and " Black or White " — charted on the Billboard Hot 100 and the Canadian Hot 100 , while the other four were also released as singles but did not chart .

Glee club members Mercedes ( Amber Riley ) , Santana ( Naya Rivera ) and Brittany ( Heather Morris ) are disappointed that they missed their chance to sing Michael Jackson 's music at Sectionals , so director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) says that New Directions might include Jackson for the upcoming Regionals competition . Blaine ( Darren Criss ) performs " Wanna Be Startin ' Somethin ' " to demonstrate his suggested number . However , he mentions this possibility to Sebastian Smythe ( Grant Gustin ) , the new captain of the Dalton Academy Warblers and a Regionals competitor , and Sebastian later announces that the Warblers , who will be performing first , will also be doing Jackson 's music . New Directions challenges the Warblers for the right to perform Jackson , and they meet in a parking garage at night and compete to " Bad " . At the end of the number , Sebastian throws a slushie at Kurt ( Chris Colfer ) but Blaine interposes himself : he is hit in the face and badly injured . Finn ( Cory Monteith ) asks Rachel ( Lea Michele ) for her answer to his proposal since he has waited the three days she requested , but she is not ready , so he agrees to wait longer . Rachel asks Quinn ( Dianna Agron ) for advice , and Quinn advises her to refuse and leave her past behind . Quinn has done so , and she has been accepted at Yale ; she sings " Never Can Say Goodbye " to former boyfriends Puck ( Mark Salling ) , Finn and Sam ( Chord Overstreet ) , and to the glee club . Sam calls Mercedes to the auditorium and asks her to sing with him — they have never duetted in glee club . She refuses and starts to leave , but he begins " Human Nature " and she joins in . Afterward , they kiss .

Blaine 's cornea was deeply scratched in the incident and he needs surgery . The club wants revenge on Sebastian ; Kurt says he should be expelled from Dalton , but Will asks them to let the system handle it . Artie ( Kevin McHale ) refuses : he is fed up with being told it will get better and says it should be better now , and leaves . Despite wanting revenge , Kurt is unwilling to use violence , so Santana goes to Dalton and accuses Sebastian of lying about the composition of the damaging slushie . He challenges her to a duel : the song " Smooth Criminal " . He admits after they finish that he rigged the slushie with rock salt , and hits her with an unadulterated one . Santana secretly recorded the encounter , and plays her evidence to New Directions , who in turn invite the Warblers to their auditorium , show them that they " get " Jackson better by performing " Black or White " , and reveal to the Warblers the proof that Sebastian deliberately tried to injure one of them . Kurt 's father Burt ( Mike O 'Malley ) takes Kurt out of class to hand him his letter from NYADA . Kurt opens it and discovers to his elation he is a finalist for admission ; Burt is overcome with pride . Kurt tells Rachel , only to discover that she has not received any letter from the school ; Rachel dissolves in tears . Finn later sings " I Just Can 't Stop Loving You " to Rachel , and she tells him she loves him and that she accepts his proposal . She ultimately does get a finalist letter from NYADA and tells Kurt , to his joy , but she has not yet told Finn .

Executive producers Ryan Murphy and Brad Falchuk had been mentioning since before the second season ended that they were planning another big tribute episode that they had been wanting to do since the first season , but would not reveal the name of the artist . On December 6 , 2011 , the same day that they were airing the " Hold On to Sixteen " episode that featured three Jackson family songs , Murphy announced that they had finally obtained the rights to do a Michael Jackson tribute episode . The episode was written by Murphy and directed by Alfonso Gomez-Rejon , who had most recently directed Asian F. Filming had begun by December 12 , 2011 , and was interrupted by a two-week holiday vacation . Both of the last two shooting days before the vacation began , December 15 and 16 , ran a couple of hours past midnight , with the final night not ending until three in the morning . Filming had not yet completed when the twelfth episode , with guest star Ricky Martin , began filming on January 5 , 2012 , the third day after the holiday vacation ended . The two episodes continued in parallel until the final Michael Jackson number was shot on January 13 , 2012 , over a month after filming began and the same day that the thirteenth episode commenced filming .

It had been announced late in the summer that Darren Criss , who plays Blaine Anderson , would be starring on Broadway in How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying from January 3 through 22 , 2012 , with rehearsals beginning there a couple of weeks before his debut . At the time , the reports said he would be missing " an episode and a half of Glee " . The final scene filmed before the holiday break was the first song in the episode , for which Criss sang lead , and he filmed several scenes in the episode in those last four days . He is singing lead on the song " Wanna Be Startin ' Somethin ' " . Criss spent five weeks in New York City , the last three starring in How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying from January 3 through 22 , 2012 . The Dalton Academy Warblers return in this episode , and perform " Bad " with New Directions , which was shot on location in a " parking garage just outside the Paramount Studio gates " . On the previous day , several members of New Directions did their first location shoots in the building used for Dalton Academy . The Warblers shot their own number , " I Want You Back " by The Jackson 5 with Gustin on lead vocal , but the song was omitted from the final cut of the episode . This was the second time in the third season that ten musical performances were shot for an episode but only nine were ultimately included : Rivera 's rendition of " Santa Baby " was cut from the episode two before this one , " Extraordinary Merry Christmas " . " I Want You Back " , like " Santa Baby " before it , was nevertheless released as a single , and on August 3 , 2012 , Murphy released the originally filmed scene including it uploaded to his YouTube page . The Warblers number had already run into difficulties earlier in production : it was originally planned to be Jackson 's " Rock with You " , but there were problems clearing the rights , so " I Want You Back " was selected and filmed instead . Gustin and Rivera performed " Smooth Criminal " with on-screen musical guests 2Cellos , Luka Šulić and Stjepan Hauser , who became famous when their instrument-only two-cello cover of the piece received over three million views on YouTube in its first two weeks . The arrangement used for the performance is based on the 2Cellos version .

The remaining six songs that are covered in the episode include " I Just Can 't Stop Loving You " , performed by Michele and Monteith ; The Jackson 5 's " Never Can Say Goodbye " , sung by Agron ; " Ben " sung by Colfer , Michele and Monteith ; " Black or White " featuring Riley , Rivera , Michele , McHale and Colfer ; " Human Nature " sung by Riley and Overstreet ; and the Michael and Janet Jackson song " Scream " , performed by McHale and Harry Shum , Jr . " Human Nature " was originally reported as being part of a mash-up with Nat King Cole 's " Nature Boy " , but the song as performed is the Jackson song alone . All ten songs recorded — the nine in the episode plus " I Want You Back " which was ultimately cut — have been released as singles , available for download . Recurring guest stars in the episode include Kurt 's father Burt Hummel ( O 'Malley ) , glee club members Sam Evans ( Overstreet ) and Rory Flanagan ( Damian McGinty ) , and Dalton Academy Warbler Sebastian Smythe ( Gustin ) .

" Michael " was first broadcast on January 31 , 2012 in the United States on Fox . It received a 3.7 / 10 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic , and attracted 9.07 million American viewers during its initial airing , an increase of over 20 % from the 3.1 / 8 rating / share and 7.50 million viewers of the previous episode , " Yes / No " , which was broadcast on January 17 , 2012 . In Canada , 1.84 million viewers watched the episode on the same day as its American premiere . It was the tenth most-viewed show of the week , up two slots and 14 % from the 1.61 million viewers who watched " Yes / No " two weeks earlier . In the United Kingdom , " Michael " first aired on March 8 , 2012 , and was watched on Sky 1 by 682,000 viewers . Viewership was down over 15 % from " Yes / No " , which attracted 805,000 viewers when it aired the week before . In Australia , " Michael " was broadcast on February 24 , 2012 . It was watched by 535,000 viewers , which made Glee the thirteenth most-watched program of the night , down from eleventh the week before . The viewership was down nearly 4 % from the previous episode , " Yes / No " , which was seen by 556,000 viewers .

The episode was given a widely varied reception by reviewers , ranging from Erica Futterman of Rolling Stone , who called it " season three 's best episode so far " , to BuddyTV 's John Kubicek , who described the episode as " just plain silly and ridiculous " , though the overall mix was somewhat more positive than negative . Raymund Flandez of The Wall Street Journal wrote that " the episode was well paced , well sung and well danced " , though he was unhappy with the concluding number , and Entertainment Weekly 's Joseph Brannigan Lynch said the episode " contained some of this season 's best dramatic and musical performances " . Crystal Bell of HuffPost TV stated that she was " a little underwhelmed " by the episode , which " never quite lived up to the greatness that is Michael Jackson " . IGN 's Robert Canning gave the episode a " great " 8 out of 10 , and characterized it as " more than just a theme episode " in which he was " connecting to characters " that had not " grabbed " him since the first season .

MTV 's Kevin P. Sullivan summarized the episode as follows : " When all was said and done , it was another tribute episode , something that can 't be uttered by a Glee fan without a sigh and an eye roll . " Bell noted that tribute episodes usually mean that " all sense of plot continuity " is forgone , but that this one ranked " at the top of all of the other Glee tribute episodes because even though it was absurd at times , at least there was a plot — and it kind of made sense " . Futterman was more complimentary and described it as the " most effortless tribute episode yet " , and Canning wrote that " with songs we know and love and storylines that actually connected and delivered some meaningful and moving moments " it was " more than just a theme episode " . Jen Chaney of The Washington Post , however , thought that it was very much like previous tributes in that it also " featured scattered plot lines engineered to include as many songs by said artists as possible " and also " glorified their respective pop stars ’ images to an absurd degree " . The A.V. Club 's Todd VanDerWerff also noted the glorification of Jackson , and noted " every time the show turns into an episode about Michael Jackson , it stops dead in its tracks entirely " . He stated that what was " weird " about the episode was that " what didn ’ t work was the spectacle , while what did work were the smaller , character-based stories " which " provided a spine some of the other spectacle-oriented episodes have lacked " . Futterman was one of many reviewers who took note of a new feature of this tribute episode when she commented on the " initial whiff of product placement and forced timing " related to the " Immortal World Tour " dialogue . Rae Votta of Billboard thought the inclusion a " brilliant bit of marketing synergy " , but TVLine 's Michael Slezak called it " ridiculously unsubtle product-placement " .

Although Rachel 's decision to accept Finn 's proposal of marriage was greeted with skepticism , Canning spoke for many when he stated that her " arc in the episode was her best in a while " with " some compelling moments " . He also cited the " fantastically true advice " from Quinn , and VanDerWerff thought the scene " was going along great until the last 10 seconds " of that advice . Bell praised as " believable " the scene where Rachel " breaks down in front of Kurt " , and Slezak said he " loved that scene of Kurt holding his sobbing friend in front of the lockers " . Kurt 's scene with his father was Bell 's " favorite scene " which she said was " an incredibly touching moment between father and son . It was perfect . " Flandez also called Burt " perfect " for " delivering the NYADA envelope to his son " , and The Hollywood Reporter 's Lesley Goldberg described his scene as " another great Burt gem " . Kubicek characterized the fact that Sebastian was not arrested for injuring Blaine as " an absurd plot twist " . He criticized Kurt for withholding the evidence and wrote , " Santana 's plan isn 't vicious or mean , it 's getting justice . Sebastian committed a crime and he should pay for it . " Slezak thought the decision as to whether the police would be given Santana 's evidence should have been Blaine 's to make , and Lynch posited that " a talk with the police " might teach Sebastian " that violent actions have legal consequences " . Chaney was incredulous at Will 's statements to the glee club on the matter , especially , " Unless you have proof that he tampered with the slushie , the police aren ’ t getting involved . " Kubicek called Artie 's anger that led to " Scream " a story arc that " goes nowhere and was just a poorly written excuse to do that song " , but Votta was impressed that " we learn more about Artie 's frustration in this fantasy scene than we have in 3 seasons " . Canning wrote that " as extraneous as the extended " Scream " segment was , the build up to that moment was perfect " .

The episode 's musical performances were given a better reception than the episode as a whole , though there were some dissenting voices , and not every song was received with the same enthusiasm . Slezak described the episode as " jam-packed with terrific song-and-dance numbers " , and Votta wrote that " the musical numbers themselves were strong , fantastical and poignant to the story " . Amy Reiter of The Los Angeles Times declared , " The music was good ; the dancing , better . " Chaney wrote that " too many " of the musical numbers were " weak imitations " , which was reflected in her grading : her median grade for the nine numbers was a " C + " , and her highest grade was a single " B + " . The first song was " Wanna Be Startin ' Somethin ' " , which Bell said " was a fun homage to Michael Jackson , and it set the tone for the rest of the episode " . Futterman said that Blaine 's " slick showmanship " made him a " natural for lead vocals " , and Slezak called it " the best use of Darren Criss ' voice on Glee in quite some time " and gave it an " A − " . Lynch also gave it an " A − " , and said Criss " captured the excitement and the spunky bravado of the original " . Sullivan was another fan of " the sheer awesomeness of Darren Criss " on the song , and characterized it as " a tribute that 's more respectful than any other in the episode " . Chaney dissented from the general approval ; she gave it a " C + " and wrote that " the number was appropriately big and splashy , but musically , it sounded like all the funk had been drained right out of it " . She described " Bad " similarly as she gave it a " C − " : " this tune also sounded noticeably defunkified " . Sullivan was also unimpressed ; he wrote that the performance let " the world know what ' Bad ' sounds like after it 's drained of every ounce of danger " . Lynch gave it a " B " and wrote that " as silly as a choreographed gang fight between teenagers in a parking lot sounds ( and was ) , the choreography was crisp and the attitude was a lot of fun " . Slezak also praised the fight choreography , and stated that he " got chills " when Santana sang the chorus , and gave the song a " B + " . Futterman noted the " interesting twist " in the song 's arrangement " thanks to the Warblers ' penchant for a cappella " , and said that " Artie and Santana " began their battle for " vocal MVP of the episode " with " Bad " . Votta described the number as " up there with the Dreamgirls performance from earlier this season as one of the strangest and best things Glee has done " .

Kevin McHale 's performance as Artie in " Scream " inspired several reviewers , including Kate Stanhope of TV Guide and Bell , to write of their regret that McHale could not dance more often on the show . Reiter called him " a sorely underused Glee resource " and called the number " the best dance moment " of the episode , and Bell declared , " I have one word for this number : Epic . " Flandez called it a " phenomenal job " , and Stanhope cited " killer performances " by McHale on this number and others as evidence that with Artie only a junior " there is life " in New Directions after McKinley 's current seniors graduate . Lynch called the number " awesome " and gave it an " A + " , and Goldberg described it as " a perfect example of what the show looks like when it 's firing on all cylinders " ; both reviewers praised the dancing of both performers . Chaney wrote that the performance " lacked the energy and genuine aggression of the original Michael / Janet Jackson collaboration , although at least Kevin McHale and Harry Shum Jr. got to show off their dance skills " , and gave it a " C " . She felt that " Never Can Say Goodbye " , to which she gave a " B − " , " worked much better than every track that preceded it " because it adapted the song to the show " instead of trying to out-Jackson Jackson " . Lynch called it " a nice summation of her character 's journey , but not vocally impressive enough to justify listening to outside of the episode " and gave it a " B " . Bell described it as a " blah performance " , but Stanhope said it was " sweet and reflective " . Futterman wrote that it was " a tune well-suited for Quinn 's sultry voice and the flipped meaning she gives the lyrics " , and Slezak had a similar take : he gave it an " A " and called it a " remarkably lovely fit " for her voice .

Votta and Futterman both said that Sam and Mercedes sounded " great together " on " Human Nature " , and Futterman also complimented their individual voices — " hers restrained and soulful , his rock-tinged and raw " — and summarized , " It 's a crisp , well-executed cover " . Most other reviewers also noted how good their voices sounded together , including Chaney , who gave the song a " B − " , and Bell , who called their harmonies " out-of-this-world amazing " . Lynch and Slezak each praised the tenderness in Riley 's vocals ; Lynch gave the song an " A " , and Slezak an " A − " . " Ben " , however , received far more mixed commentary , and several reviewers felt it was odd to , as Chaney put it , sing a song about a rat " to a guy who isn 't named Ben and was wearing an eye patch " , which Futterman called " a little creepy " and VanDerWerff , more bluntly , " fucking weird " . Despite this , Chaney gave the song a " B " , one of her highest grades of the night , in part because it gave Colfer " an excuse to hit those ' You ’ ve got a friend in me ' high notes " , while Futterman noted that he " does well in the high range " , and praised the verses by Rachel and Finn . Bell , however , called the song " a snooze-fest " , and Slezak was very unhappy with the " interminable rendition " which he graded a " D " . In December 2012 , TV Guide listed the rendition as one of Glee 's worst performances .

" Smooth Criminal " was the most highly praised number of the night . Both Slezak and Lynch gave it an " A + " : the former called it " an instant Glee classic " that " had me on the edge of my musical chair from start to finish " , and Lynch wrote , " Santana declared herself the winner , but the actual victors were 2Cellos , the real-life Croatian cellists whose manic intensity stole the scene . " Slezak was similarly impressed by 2Cellos — " this was really a duet between Santana and those amazing black cellos " — and Futterman called them " furiously awesome " and said of the song , " It 's the perfect soundtrack for the show 's slickest villains : Santana wails , Sebastian channels his Chuck Bass and we are sold . " Bell described it as " easily one of the best performances of the night " and added " Santana was flawless " . Chaney dissented from the acclaim with a " D " grade . Slezak described the duet of " I Just Can 't Stop Loving You " as " really pretty " , and Chaney said that " Lea Michele ... sang this Jackson love song in the loveliest possible fashion with Cory Monteith " . Votta wrote that " Finn sounds the best he 's sounded " , and Futterman noted that Finn held " his own against Rachel , vocally " — she liked the fact that it was Finn singing to Rachel instead of the usual other way around and was " grateful to the Glee team for assigning plot-relevant songs " . Lynch felt that the song " seemed to slow down the otherwise wonderfully paced episode " and would have preferred it if they had cut the song and " kept the Warblers ' version of ' I Want You Back ' instead " . He was more enthusiastic about " Black or White " , which he characterized as " musically awesome but dramatically confusing " and graded an " A − " . Futterman said that " Artie once again nails the MJ impression " , and Goldberg declared that the " chorus with Santana leading charge and Artie 's rap " were " spot on " . Bell agreed that the song showed that " Artie is still New Directions ' go-to rapper " , but noted that she did not feel that New Directions had successfully demonstrated that they " knew the true meaning of Michael Jackson " . Chaney was unenthusiastic and gave the song a " C " , while Flandez had more negative opinion than hers : " Sebastian Smythe got our reaction right : a slow-handed clap " .

Of the nine cover versions of Michael Jackson 's music , all of which were released as singles , five debuted on US and Canadian top 100 charts , and ranked in the same order in both countries . " Smooth Criminal " debuted in the US at number twenty-six on the Billboard Hot 100 , with sales of 108,000 ; only nine songs sold more digital downloads that week . " Human Nature " debuted at number fifty-six , " Black or White " at number sixty-four , " Wanna Be Startin ' Somethin ' " at number seventy-eight and " Bad " at number eighty . " Smooth Criminal entered the Billboard Canadian Hot 100 chart at number twenty-eight , and was followed by " Human Nature " at number sixty-two , " Black or White " at number sixty-nine , " Wanna Be Startin ' Somethin ' " at number eighty-eight and " Bad " at number ninety .

George Lawrence Mikan , Jr . ( June 18 , 1924 – June 1 , 2005 ) , nicknamed Mr. Basketball , was an American professional basketball player for the Chicago American Gears of the National Basketball League ( NBL ) and the Minneapolis Lakers of the NBL , the Basketball Association of America ( BAA ) and the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) . Invariably playing with thick , round spectacles , the 6 ft 10 in ( 2.08 m ) , 245 pounds ( 111 kg ) Mikan is seen as one of the pioneers of professional basketball , redefining it as a game of so-called big men with his prolific rebounding , shot blocking , and his talent to shoot over smaller defenders with his ambidextrous hook shot , the result of his namesake Mikan Drill . Mikan had a successful playing career , winning seven NBL , BAA , and NBA championships , an All-Star MVP trophy , and three scoring titles . He was a member of the first four NBA All-Star games , and the first six All-BAA and All-NBA Teams . Mikan was so dominant that he caused several rule changes in the NBA , among them , the introduction of the goaltending rule , the widening of the foul lane — known as the " Mikan Rule " — and the creation of the shot clock .

After his playing career , Mikan became one of the founders of the American Basketball Association ( ABA ) , serving as commissioner of the league . He was also vital for the forming of the Minnesota Timberwolves . In his later years , Mikan was involved in a long-standing legal battle against the NBA , fighting to increase the meager pensions for players who had retired before the league became lucrative . In 2005 , Mikan died after a long battle with diabetes . For his feats , Mikan was inducted into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame in 1959 , made the 25th and 35th NBA Anniversary Teams of 1970 and 1980 , and was elected one of the NBA 's 50 Greatest Players ever in 1996 . Since April 2001 , a statue of Mikan shooting his trademark hook shot graces the entrance of the Timberwolves ' Target Center .

George Mikan was born in Joliet , Illinois , as an American of Croatian descent . As a boy , he shattered one of his knees so badly that he was kept in bed for a year and a half . In 1938 , Mikan attended the Chicago Archbishop Quigley Preparatory Seminary and originally wanted to be a priest , but then moved back home to finish at Joliet Catholic . Mikan did not seem destined to become an athlete . When Mikan entered Chicago 's DePaul University in 1942 , he stood 6 ' 10 " , weighed 245 pounds , moved awkwardly because of his frame , and wore thick glasses for his near-sightedness .

However , Mikan met 28-year-old rookie DePaul basketball coach Ray Meyer , who saw potential in the bright and intelligent , but also clumsy and shy , freshman . Put into perspective , Meyer 's thoughts were revolutionary , because at the time it was believed that tall players were too awkward to ever play basketball well . In the following months , Meyer transformed Mikan into a confident , aggressive player who took pride in his height rather than being ashamed of it . Meyer and Mikan worked out intensively , and Mikan learned how to make hook shots accurately with either hand . This routine would become later known as the Mikan Drill . In addition , Meyer made Mikan punch a speed bag , take dancing lessons , and jump rope to make him a complete athlete . From his first National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) college games for DePaul on , Mikan dominated his peers . He intimidated opponents with his size and strength , was unstoppable on offense with his hook shot , and soon established a reputation as one of the hardest and grittiest players in the league , often playing through injuries and punishing opposing centers with hard fouls . In addition , Mikan also surprised the basketball world with his unique ability of goaltending , i.e. jumping so high that he swatted the ball away before it could pass the hoop . In today 's basketball , touching the ball after it reaches its apogee is a violation , but in Mikan 's time it was legal because people thought it was impossible anyone could reach that high . " We would set up a zone defense that had four men around the key and I guarded the basket " , Mikan later recalled his DePaul days . " When the other team took a shot , I 'd just go up and tap it out . " As a consequence , the NCAA and later the NBA , outlawed goaltending . One of the few opposing centers to have any success against Mikan was Bob Kurland , a seven-footer from Oklahoma A & M.

Mikan was named the Helms NCAA College Player of the Year twice in 1944 and 1945 and an All-American three times , leading DePaul to the NIT title in 1945 , which was as prestigious as the NCAA tournament at the time . Mikan led the nation in scoring with 23.9 points per game in 1944 – 45 and 23.1 in 1945 – 46 . When DePaul won the 1945 National Invitation Tournament , Mikan was named Most Valuable Player for scoring 120 points in three games , including 53 points in a 97 – 53 win over Rhode Island , equalling the score of the entire Rhode Island team .

After the end of the 1945 – 46 college season , Mikan signed with the Chicago American Gears of the National Basketball League , a predecessor of the modern NBA . He played with them for 25 games at the end of the 1946 – 47 NBL season , scoring 16.5 points per game as a rookie . Mikan led the Gears to the championship of the World Basketball Tournament , where he was elected Most Valuable Player after scoring 100 points in five games , and also voted into the All-NBL Team . However , before the start of the 1947 – 48 NBL season , Maurice White , the president of the American Gear Company and the owner of the American Gears NBL team , pulled the team out of the league . White planned to create a 24-team league called the Professional Basketball League of America , in which he owned all the teams and arenas . However , the league folded after just a month , and the players of White 's teams were equally distributed among the 11 remaining NBL franchises . As a consequence , every team had a 9.09 % chance of landing Mikan , who ended up on the Minneapolis Lakers , playing for coach John Kundla .

In his first season with the Lakers , Mikan led the league in scoring with 1,195 points , becoming the first and only NBL player to score more than 1,000 points in an NBL season . He was named league MVP , and the Lakers won the NBL title . The following year , the Lakers and three other NBL franchises jumped to the fledgling Basketball Association of America . Mikan led his new league in scoring , and again set a single-season scoring record . The Lakers defeated the Washington Capitols in the 1949 BAA Finals . In 1949 , the BAA and NBL merged to form the NBA . The new league started the inaugural 1949 – 50 NBA season , featuring 17 teams , with the Lakers in the Central Division . Mikan again was dominant , averaging 27.4 points per game and 2.9 assists per game and taking another scoring title ; Alex Groza of Indianapolis Olympians was the only other player to break the 20-point-barrier that year . After comfortably leading his team to an impressive 51 – 17 record and storming through the playoffs , Mikan 's team played the 1950 NBA Finals against the Syracuse Nationals . In Game 1 , the Lakers beat Syracuse on their home court when Lakers reserve guard Bob Harrison hit a 40-foot buzzer beater to give Minneapolis a two-point win . The team split the next four games , and in Game 6 , the Lakers won 110 – 95 and won the first-ever NBA championship . Mikan scored 31.3 points per game in the playoffs .

In the 1950 – 51 NBA season , Mikan was dominant again , scoring a career-best 28.4 points per game in the regular season , again taking the scoring crown , and had 3.1 assists per game . In that year , the NBA introduced a new statistic : rebounds . In this category , Mikan also stood out ; his 14.1 rebounds per game ( rpg ) was only second to the 16.4 rpg of Dolph Schayes of Syracuse . In that year , Mikan participated in one of the most notorious NBA games ever played . When the Fort Wayne Pistons played against his Lakers , the Pistons took a 19 – 18 lead . Afraid that Mikan would mount a comeback if he got the ball , the Pistons passed the ball around without any attempt to score a basket . With no shot clock invented yet to force them into offense , the score stayed 19 – 18 to make it the lowest-scoring NBA game of all time . This game was an important factor in the development of the shot clock , which was introduced four years later . Mikan had scored 15 of the Lakers ' 18 points , thus scoring 83.3 % of his team 's points , setting an NBA all-time record . In the post season , Mikan fractured his leg before the 1951 Western Division Finals against the Rochester Royals . With Mikan hardly able to move all series long , the Royals won 3 – 1 . Decades later , in 1990 , Mikan recalled that his leg was taped with a plate ; however , despite effectively hopping around the court on one foot , he said he still averaged 20-odd points per game .

In the 1951 – 52 NBA season , the NBA decided to widen the foul lane under the basket from 6 feet to 12 feet . As players could stay in the lane for only three seconds at a time , it forced big men like Mikan to post-up from double the distance . A main proponent of this rule was New York Knicks coach Joe Lapchick , who regarded Mikan as his nemesis , and it was dubbed " The Mikan Rule " . While Mikan still scored an impressive 23.8 points per game , it was a serious reduction from his 27.4 points per game the previous season , and his field goal percentage sank from .428 to .385 . He still pulled down 13.5 rebounds per game , asserting himself as a top rebounder , and logged 3.0 assists per game . Mikan also had a truly dominating game that season , in which he scored a personal-best 61 points in a double overtime victory against the Rochester Royals . At the time , it was the second-best performance in league history behind Joe Fulks ' 63-point score in 1949 , and Mikan 's output more than doubled that of his teammates , whose output that game totaled 30 points . In the 1952 NBA All-Star Game , Mikan had a strong performance with 26 points and 15 rebounds in a West loss . Later that season , the Lakers reached the 1952 NBA Finals and were pitted against the New York Knicks . This qualified as one of the strangest Finals series in NBA history , as neither team could play on their home court in the first six games . The Lakers ' Minneapolis Auditorium was already booked , and the Knicks ' Madison Square Garden was occupied by the Ringling Bros. and Barnum & Bailey Circus . Instead , the Lakers played in St. Paul and the Knicks in the damp , dimly lit 69th Regiment Armory . Perpetually double-teamed by Knicks ' Nat Clifton and Harry Gallatin , Mikan was unable to assert himself and it was more Vern Mikkelsen 's credit that the first six games were split . In the only true home game , Game 7 in the Auditorium , the Lakers won 82 – 65 and edged the Knicks 4 – 3 , winning the NBA title and earning themselves $ 7,500 to split among the team .

During the 1952 – 53 NBA season , Mikan averaged 20.6 points and a career-high 14.4 rebounds per game , the highest in the league , as well as 2.9 assists per game . In the 1953 NBA All-Star Game , Mikan was dominant again with 22 points and 16 rebounds , winning that game 's MVP Award . The Lakers made the 1953 NBA Finals , and again defeated the Knicks 4 – 1 . In the 1953 – 54 NBA season , the now 29-year-old Mikan slowly declined , averaging 18.1 points , 14.3 rebounds and 2.4 assists per game . Under his leadership , the Lakers won another NBA title in the 1954 NBA Finals , making it their third-straight championship and fifth in six years ; the only time they lost had been when Mikan fractured his leg . From an NBA perspective , the Minneapolis Lakers dynasty has only been convincingly surpassed by the eleven-title Boston Celtics dynasty of 1957 – 69 . At the end of the season , Mikan announced his retirement . He later said : " I had a family growing , and I decided to be with them . I felt it was time to get started with the professional world outside of basketball . " Injuries also were a factor , as Mikan had sustained 10 broken bones and 16 stitches in his career , often having to play through these injuries .

Without Mikan , the Lakers made the playoffs , but were unable to reach the 1955 NBA Finals . In the middle of the 1955 – 56 NBA season , Mikan returned to the Lakers lineup . He played in 37 games , but his long absence had affected his play . He averaged only 10.5 points , 8.3 rebounds and 1.3 assists , and the Lakers lost in the first round of the playoffs . At the end of the season , Mikan retired for good . His 10,156 points were a record at the time ; he was the first NBA player to score 10,000 points in a career . He was inducted into the inaugural Basketball Hall of Fame class of 1959 and was declared the greatest player of the first half of the century by The Associated Press .

In 1956 , Mikan was the Republican candidate for the United States Congress in Minnesota 's 3rd congressional district . He challenged incumbent Representative Roy Wier in a closely fought race that featured a high voter turnout . Despite the reelection of incumbent Republican President Dwight Eisenhower , the inexperienced Mikan lost by a close margin of 52 % to 48 % . Wier received 127,356 votes to Mikan 's 117,716 . Returning to the legal profession , Mikan was frustrated , after hoping for an influx of work . For six months , Mikan did not get any assignments at all , leaving him in financial difficulties that forced him to cash in on his life insurance . Problems also arose in Mikan 's professional sports career . In the 1957 – 58 NBA season , Lakers coach John Kundla became general manager and persuaded Mikan to become coach of the Lakers . However , this was a failure , as the Lakers endured a 9 – 30 record until Mikan stepped down and returned coaching duties to Kundla . The Lakers ended with a 19 – 53 record , to record one of the worst seasons in their history . After this failure , Mikan then concentrated on his law career , raising his family of six children , successfully specializing in corporate and real estate law , and buying and renovating buildings in Minneapolis .

In 1967 , Mikan returned to professional basketball , becoming the first commissioner of the American Basketball Association , a rival league to the NBA . In order to lure basketball fans to his league , Mikan invented the league 's characteristic red-white-and-blue ABA ball , which he thought more patriotic , better suited for TV , and more crowd-pleasing than the brown NBA ball , and instituted the three-point line . Mikan resigned from the ABA in 1969 . In the mid-1980s , Mikan headed a task force with a goal of returning professional basketball to Minneapolis , decades after the Lakers had moved to Los Angeles to become the Los Angeles Lakers , and after the ABA 's Minnesota Muskies and Minnesota Pipers had departed . This bid was successful , leading to the inception of a new franchise in the 1989 – 90 NBA season , the Minnesota Timberwolves . In 1994 , Mikan became the part-owner and chairman of the board of the Chicago Cheetahs , a professional roller hockey team based in Chicago , Illinois , that played in Roller Hockey International . The franchise folded after their second season . In his later years , Mikan suffered from diabetes and failing kidneys , and eventually , his illness caused his right leg to be amputated below the knee . When his medical insurance was cut off , Mikan soon found himself in severe financial difficulties . He fought a long and protracted legal battle against the NBA and the NBA Players ' Union , protesting the $ 1,700 / month pensions for players who had retired before 1965 , the start of the so-called " big money era " . According to Mel Davis of the National Basketball Retired Players Union , this battle kept him going , because Mikan hoped to be alive when a new collective bargaining agreement would finally vindicate his generation . In 2005 , however , his condition worsened .

When superstar center Shaquille O 'Neal became a member of the Los Angeles Lakers , Mikan appeared on a Sports Illustrated cover in November 1996 with O 'Neal and Kareem Abdul-Jabbar , calling Abdul-Jabbar and Mikan the " Lakers legends " to whom O 'Neal was compared . Since April 2001 , a statue of Mikan shooting his trademark hook shot graces the entrance of the Minnesota Timberwolves ' Target Center . In addition , a banner in the Staples Center commemorates Mikan and his fellow Minneapolis Lakers . He is also honored by a statue and an appearance on a mural in his hometown of Joliet , Illinois .

Mikan became so dominant that the NBA had to change its rules of play in order to reduce his influence , such as widening the lane from six to twelve feet ( " The Mikan Rule " ) . He also played a role in the introduction of the shot clock ; and in the NCAA , his dominating play around the basket led to the outlawing of defensive goaltending . Mikan was a harbinger of the NBA 's future , which would be dominated by tall , powerful players . As an official , Mikan is also directly responsible for the ABA three-point line which was later adopted by the NBA ; the existence of the Minnesota Timberwolves ; and the multi-colored ABA ball , which still lives on as the " money ball " in the NBA All-Star Three-Point Contest .

Mikan died in Scottsdale , Arizona , on June 1 , 2005 , of complications from diabetes and other ailments . His son Terry reported that his father had undergone dialysis three times a week , four hours a day , for the last five years . He was interred at Lakewood Cemetery in Minneapolis . Mikan 's death was widely mourned by the basketball world , and also brought media attention to the financial struggles of several early-era NBA players . Many felt that the current players of the big-money generation should rally for larger pensions for the pre-1965 predecessors in upcoming labor negotiations . Shaquille O 'Neal paid for Mikan 's funeral . He said : " Without number 99 [ Mikan ] , there is no me . " Before Game 5 of the 2005 Eastern Conference Finals between the Heat and the Detroit Pistons , there was a moment of silence to honor Mikan . Bob Cousy remarked that Mikan figuratively carried the NBA in the early days and single-handedly made the league credible and popular . The 2005 NBA Finals between the Pistons and the San Antonio Spurs was dedicated to Mikan .

Harry Edwin Strom ( July 7 , 1914 – October 2 , 1984 ) was the ninth Premier of Alberta , Canada , from 1968 to 1971 . His two-and-a-half years as Premier were the last of the thirty-six-year Social Credit dynasty , as his defeat by Peter Lougheed saw its replacement by a new era Progressive Conservative government . He is remembered as an honest , decent man who lacked the political skills of his predecessor , Ernest Manning , or of Lougheed . Alberta 's first native-born Premier , Strom was born in Burdett , Alberta . He worked most of his young adult life on the family farm , and was also actively involved in his church . After a stint in municipal politics , he ran for the Legislative Assembly of Alberta in the 1955 provincial election , and was elected . In 1962 , Manning appointed him to his cabinet as Minister of Agriculture , a position he held until 1967 when he was appointed Minister of Municipal Affairs . When Manning decided to resign in 1968 , Strom became a candidate to succeed him , and finished on top of a six candidate field .

Strom was born in Burdett , Alberta , on July 7 , 1914 . His parents , Nils Hjalmar Strom ( 1877 – 1928 ) and Elna Maria Olivia Ekensteen ( 1883 – 1969 ) , were second generation Swedish Canadians . He attended school in Burdett before moving to Calgary to attend high school at East Calgary High School and Calgary Technical High School , where he studied mechanics . In 1931 , he received a certificate from the Provincial Institute of Technology and Art . His father died the same year , and Strom returned home to help his mother with the operation of the family farm . On October 27 , 1938 , Strom married Ruth Johnson , with whom he would have six children — Howard , Faith , Beverly , Brian , Ronald , and Arlene . The family attended the Evangelical Free Church of Canada in Bow Island until 1962 . There , Strom served as Sunday school teacher , deacon , and board chair , in addition to his twenty years of involvement with the church 's Overseas Missions Board . Besides his activities with the church , Strom was involved in the Forty Mile Rural Electrification Association , the Burdett Home and School Association , and the Agricultural Improvement Association of Burdett .

In the 1955 provincial election , Strom ran as the Social Credit candidate in Cypress , where the incumbent , Social Crediter James Underdahl , was not seeking re-election . He easily defeated his only opponent , Liberal Joe Flaig , and was elected to the Legislative Assembly of Alberta . He would be re-elected to this seat in each of the 1959 , 1963 , 1967 , and 1971 elections , always winning more than 60 % of the vote . In October 1962 , Premier Ernest Manning appointed Strom Minister of Agriculture . In this capacity , he undertook a series of initiatives related to water use , including developing an agreement with Saskatchewan and Manitoba of the use of water emanating from the eastern slopes of Alberta 's Rocky Mountains . He also passed a series of legislation , including the Soil Conservation Act and Crop Insurance Act , and undertook a major departmental organization . The Alberta Agriculture Hall of Fame , which inducted Strom in 1985 , credited him with expanding the use of irrigation in the province and for being a key figure leading up to the signing of a 1973 cost-sharing agreement on the subject with the federal government . He also served as Minister of Municipal Affairs for the last five months of the Manning government .

When Manning decided to retire in 1968 , he called a key group of senior ministers to his office to advise them of his decision . This group includes Strom , Treasurer Anders Aalborg , Industry Minister Russ Patrick , Education Minister Randy McKinnon . Aalborg was the natural choice to succeed Manning , but he had health problems and declined to run . Strom had no desire for the job and rejected any suggestion from the others that he be a candidate . This rejection was not to last : a group of influential young Social Crediters , including the Premier 's son Preston , started a movement to draft Strom . They settled on him because he was personally popular among party members and because he had displayed an openness to new ideas in the past . Strom accepted their overtures , but as late as a week before he announced his candidacy he was still offering to step aside in favour of another candidate of the young Turks ' choice . Strom 's campaign theme was " the social development of Alberta " , and this general theme encompassed such diverse policy planks as a citizens ' committee on constitutional reform , a head start program for disadvantaged youth , commissions on the future of urban planning and education , an expansion of the role of backbenchers in policy development , and the opening of a branch of the Premier 's office in Calgary . Though he entered as the favourite , a poll in spring 1969 showed him running second of five candidates behind Minister of Transportation Gordon Taylor . However , he had the strongest organization of any candidate , thanks in large part to his young backers , and overcame this deficit by the fall .

Many of Strom 's policy initiatives revolved around education and youth . He created the Alberta Service Corps , which allowed young Albertans to work summers on public services and environmental projects for remuneration , and which was one of several models for the federal government 's later Katimavik program . In response to increasing use of illicit drugs by Alberta youth , his government , led by Education Minister Bob Clark , inserted anti-narcotics messages into the province 's school curriculum . Strom implemented trial kindergarten programs in Edmonton and Calgary — the Calgary program , provided jointly by an inner-city community association and the Mount Royal College , has been called one of Canada 's first public-private partnerships . His interest in educational matters was perhaps best exemplified by his government 's Commission on Educational Planning , which travelled the province to solicit Albertans ' views and whose final report , A Choice of Futures , was credited by Barr as setting " the tone and direction for education in Alberta for the next generation " . The Strom government also made substantial reforms to Alberta 's post-secondary education system , expanding distance learning through the creation of Athabasca University and laying the foundation 's for ACCESS television , and effectively creating the province 's College ( as distinct from University ) system . This latter move led to the creation of Grant MacEwan College .

Strom resisted leadership and saw himself as a conciliator , charged with maintaining unity among his cabinet and caucus . Soon after becoming Premier , Strom chief of staff Don Hamilton and strategist Owen Anderson scheduled strategy meetings with agendas drawn from Strom 's leadership platform . The meetings did not lead to action , and some began to grumble that " talking about decisions was a form of action " . According to Barr , Hamilton eventually started using the same agenda every week , with only the date changed , and Strom did not notice . Strom was not an effective speaker and often would not look at the text of his speeches until he was delivering them . Realizing this , Hamilton once handed him a folder with nothing but a paper reading " Sock it to ' em , Harry " before the Premier was to give a speech at the University of Alberta . The Premier opened the folder and , as he became visibly alarmed , gratefully received the real speech when an aide brought it to him . Strom also resisted calling an early election to give his government a fresh mandate , despite Hamilton 's impassioned advocacy for this course of action . He was no more positive towards Anderson 's proposals for a radical overhaul of the party , including the computerization of political data ( such as voting trends , demographic shifts , and polling results ) and the purchase of an office building to make the party a profit and free it from the need for fundraising . The ideas that Strom did not reject outright were referred to committees and study groups where they were watered down or shelved .

Despite these failings , Strom was recognized as possessing a number of virtues : he was kind , considerate , and honest . Most of all , he was humble : he had not sought the party leadership and notoriously asked after being repeatedly addressed as " Premier " at his first cabinet meeting why it could not " just be plain ' Harry ' anymore " . When travelling to Ottawa , he stayed at the un-posh Skyline Hotel and ate meals in its basement cafeteria , where he ordered bread and pea soup for $ 0.25 . On final analysis , Barr concludes that this temperament , commendable though it may be , was unsuited to running the government of an emerging economic powerhouse .

Though the legislature 's mandate from the 1967 election was not due to expire until May 1972 , five years after it started , convention in Canadian politics is for legislatures to be dissolved every four years or less . Accordingly , Strom resolved to call an election in 1971 , sometime between May and September . After considering the spring , in the hopes that the planting season would have farmers feeling optimistic and therefore inclined to support the incumbent government , Strom finally settled on August 30 ( partly out of concerns that farmers would resent an election called in the middle of the planting or harvest seasons ) . A campaign committee was assembled , and recommended a budget of $ 580,000 . The party recruited star candidates , including Calgary alderman George Ho Lem and former Calgary Stampeder star Don Luzzi ( Edmonton alderman and future mayor Cec Purves was defeated in his bid to win the Social Credit nomination in Edmonton-Strathcona from Strathcona Centre incumbent Joseph Donovan Ross ) , but was handicapped in these efforts by Strom 's unwillingness to offer cabinet posts or other incentives to potential new candidates . Strom 's lack of personal charisma was also a liability : tellingly , of the large budget recommended by the central committee , only $ 72,000 was recommended for use on television advertising , where Strom did not shine . The party tried to revitalize the Premier 's image through publicity movies , though efforts were mixed . In one , which was pulled after a single showing , Strom appeared scowling in his living room , urging Albertans to lower their expectations of government . Another , produced by Tommy Banks and showing Strom in a variety of settings talking about the province 's changing face , was more successful .

The campaign did not give Social Credit partisans much reason for optimism . Strom did not draw the crowds that Progressive Conservative Peter Lougheed did , although an August 25 rally in Edmonton 's Jubilee Auditorium featuring speeches by Strom and Manning was full . After criticizing the Conservatives ' medicare platform , which promised free medicare to Albertans older than 65 , as spendthrift , Strom announced Social Credit 's barely cheaper alternative : medicare to Albertans older than 65 for one dollar per month . The Edmonton Journal , which had earlier published a poll showing that a plurality of Edmontonians intended to vote P.C. , endorsed Lougheed for Premier . Election night saw Social Credit defeated , taking 25 seats to the P.C.s ' 49 . Though Social Credit 's share of the vote had only slipped slightly , Lougheed benefited from a substantial reduction in the New Democrats ' vote and a near-collapse of the Liberals ' . The party was also decimated in the province 's two largest cities , losing all of its seats in Edmonton and all but five in Calgary .

Strom continued as Social Credit leader , serving as leader of the opposition , until 1972 , when he resigned and was replaced by Werner Schmidt . He continued in the legislature until the 1975 election , in which he did not seek re-election . After leaving politics , he returned to his farm and his involvement with his church . He died of cancer October 2 , 1984 , and was buried in Medicine Hat . In honour of his political services , Strom received honorary Doctor of Laws degrees from the University of Calgary ( 1969 ) , the University of Lethbridge ( 1979 ) , and the University of Alberta ( 1980 ) . While several of his acts as premier had consequences extending well beyond his term , today he is largely forgotten , though he experienced a brief resurgence in name recognition in 2007 . That year , critics of Ed Stelmach compared Stelmach to Strom , with the insinuation being that Stelmach was destined to lose the next election and be the last of the Progressive Conservative dynasty in the same way that Strom was the last of the Social Credit dynasty . In the end , it would not be until the 2015 provincial election under the leadership of Jim Prentice that the Progressive Conservatives would be defeated , with some pundits also comparing Prentice to Strom .

" Wind It Up " is a song by American singer and songwriter Gwen Stefani . Originally written for inclusion on Stefani 's Harajuku Lovers Tour 2005 , the song was later recorded for her second solo studio album , The Sweet Escape ( 2006 ) , due to favorable reception . The track contains an interpolation of The Sound of Music song " The Lonely Goatherd " . " Wind It Up " was negatively received by music critics , who criticized the song 's use of yodeling and found the track to be over the top . It was released as the album 's lead single on October 31 , 2006 and reached the top 20 in most music markets . The accompanying music video , which became popular on stations such as Total Request Live , was directed by Sophie Muller and takes influence from The Sound of Music .

In July 2005 , Stefani began writing and recording material with Pharrell Williams in Miami , Florida . During one of their sessions , they penned " Wind It Up " for a September 2005 fashion show revealing the 2006 collection of Stefani 's fashion line L.A.M.B. Stefani asked DJ Jeremy Healy to create a mashup of the song and " The Lonely Goatherd " , a song from the 1959 Rodgers and Hammerstein musical and 1965 film The Sound of Music . Stefani considered The Sound of Music her favorite film , and she had wanted to incorporate a beat to one of its songs all her life . Stefani commented , " I literally cried , and I 'm not exaggerating , when I heard the mash-up . " Williams , however , did not like the addition of yodeling and The Sound of Music to the track . The lyrics are not narrative , and Stefani stated , " A song like ' Wind It Up ' isn 't about anything . " In the song , Stefani discusses how boys watch girls dance . The song includes a reference to Stefani 's fashion line , with Stefani going , " They like the way that L.A.M.B. is going ' cross my shirt " .

" Wind It Up " received negative reviews by contemporary pop music critics . Entertainment Weekly 's Michael Slezak found the bassline " rubbery " and criticized the song for lacking a melody as well as its reference to Stefani 's own clothing line . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic stated that The Neptunes had forced the sampling " into one of their typical minimalist tracks , over which Gwen spouts off clumsy material-minded lyrics touting her fashion line and her shape " . Bill Lamb of About.com rated the song three and a half stars , giving it " high marks for entertainment value " , but commented that it sounded like a retread of " Rich Girl " from Stefani 's debut album Love . Angel . Music . Baby . Charles Merwin of Stylus Magazine was mixed on the track , writing that " it 's preventing something far less interesting from getting played . " John Murphy from musicOMH panned the track as " just horrible , and possibly the worst start to an album this year " . Spence D. from IGN characterized the song as " a bugged out Sound Of Music bhangra blitz that sounds like part M.I.A. and part Julie Andrews " .

Many criticized the inclusion of yodeling and " The Lonely Goatherd " sample . In a review for Rolling Stone , Rob Sheffield called the track " yodel-trocious " and argued that " the problem isn 't the Swiss Miss motif so much as the fourth-rate Neptunes track . Caroline Sullivan of The Guardian was pleased with the track , describing the yodeling as " off-her-head " , and referred to the track as " a pinnacle of madness " . IndieLondon 's Jack Foley noted " Wind It Up " as a highlight of The Sweet Escape and called it " Stefani 's gift that she can take something that , on paper , sounds cheesy and make it utterly , utterly cool . " USA Today 's Ken Barnes , however , found the track " campy " and " a tacky attempt at sexiness " , adding that the combination of yodeling and the interpolation was " awkward " . Alex Miller of the NME also found the song campy , commenting that its " dumb sexual bravado has all the sophistication of a teenage boy 's wet dream " , and compared the yodeling , interpolation , and " erotic rap " to " a trench foot which screams for amputation from the tracklisting " .

" Wind It Up " debuted on the US Billboard Hot 100 at number 40 on the issue dated November 18 , 2006 , becoming Stefani 's highest debut on the chart , both solo and as a member of No Doubt . It peaked four weeks later at number six and remained on the chart for 18 weeks . It peaked at number seven on the Pop 100 chart , but was less successful on the Pop 100 Airplay chart , only reaching number 19 . The single performed well in clubs , reaching number five on the Hot Dance Club Play chart , and peaked at number 18 on the Mainstream Top 40 chart . " Wind It Up " met similar success in Europe , reaching number five on the European Hot 100 Singles . The single debuted at number eight on the UK Singles Chart , selling 10,381 downloads in its first week . The following week , it rose to number three ( behind Take That 's " Patience " and Cliff Richard 's " 21st Century Christmas " ) with 17,706 copies sold , earning Stefani her second highest-peaking single in the United Kingdom after " The Sweet Escape " . It had less success across the continent , reaching the top 10 in Belgium , the Czech Republic , Finland , Ireland , Italy , the Netherlands , and Norway , and the top 20 in Austria , France , Sweden , and Switzerland .

The song was generally successful elsewhere . In Australia , " Wind It Up " debuted at number eight on the ARIA Singles Chart and spent its first seven weeks within the top 10 . It peaked at number five in its fifth week on the run , spending 19 weeks on the chart , and was certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) . The track topped the New Zealand Singles Chart in its third and fourth week , and stayed on the chart for 20 weeks altogether . Three years later , on March 14 , 2010 , the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) certified " Wind It Up " gold .

The song 's music video was directed by Sophie Muller . Although it does not follow a substantial plot , it features outfits and scenes inspired by The Sound of Music . Stefani and her Harajuku Girls are often dancing in front of fields of flowers and a background of key-like symbols composed of two G 's placed back to back . In a scene mimicking The Sound of Music , Stefani portrays Maria von Trapp while the dancers , dressed in pajamas , portray her children and jump on a bed . In another scene , Stefani uses curtains to create sailor suits for the Harajuku Girls . Stefani also appears as a nun and an orchestra conductor . One scene uses smoke to create the illusion that Stefani is a submerged escape artist searching for a key . She pulls the key , a symbol of " the sweet escape " , from her mouth as an allusion to performances by escapologist Harry Houdini . The song 's title is often visualized by a colorful sign that reads " wind it up " . Another video was produced in 3-D , but this version was never released . After seeing the video , Jimmy Iovine , co-founder of Interscope Records , decided to work with James Cameron to produce other 3-D music presentations .

The video was successful on music video television programs . " Wind It Up " was first aired November 10 , 2006 on MTV , and it premiered on the station 's top-10 chart program Total Request Live four days later . The video debuted at number eight on the countdown and reached a peak at number two . After its November 17 debut on MuchMusic 's Countdown , it reached number two for the week of January 26 , 2007 . In a review of the music video , The Guardian 's Anna Pickard poked fun at the number of personas that appear in the video , referring to some of them as " Nunzilla " , " Gweninatrix " , and " CinderGwennie " , and commented that " your speakers have a mute setting for good reason . "

Tropical Storm Podul , known in the Philippines as Tropical Depression Zoraida , was a weak but destructive tropical cyclone that affected the Philippines shortly after the devastating Typhoon Haiyan . The 31st named storm of the 2013 Pacific typhoon season , Podul developed as a tropical depression on November 11 between Palau and the Philippine island of Mindanao . The system moved west-northwestward and struck Davao Oriental in Mindanao on November 12 , bringing heavy rainfall that killed two people and disrupted relief efforts following Haiyan . After crossing the Philippines , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Podul on November 14 . Shortly thereafter , the storm struck southeastern Vietnam , and its circulation dissipated on November 15 . In Vietnam , Podul produced heavy rainfall that resulted in severe flooding . The storm damaged or destroyed 427,258 houses , and overall damage was estimated at 1.5 trillion ₫ ( 2013 Vietnamese dong , $ 72 million 2013 USD ) . Podul killed 42 people in the country and caused 74 injuries .

On November 9 , an area of disorganized convection , or thunderstorms , persisted about 1175 km ( 730 mi ) southeast of Palau . The system consisted of a broad circulation , affected to its detriment by moderate wind shear . Moving west-northwestward , the convection persisted and organized into the circulation , indicative of an increased potential for tropical cyclogenesis . Late on November 10 , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert ( TCFA ) , meaning the agency anticipated a tropical depression would develop within 24 hours . Shortly thereafter , the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration ( PAGASA ) initiated advisories on Tropical Depression Zoraida after the system entered its area of responsibility of the agency . At 1200 UTC on November 11 , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) estimated that a tropical depression formed about halfway between Palau and the Philippine island of Mindanao , although operationally the agency had classified the system two days prior . After passing south of Palau , the system 's circulation became more broad and its convection became less organized , despite decreased wind shear . Early on November 12 , the depression made landfall on Mindanao in Davao Oriental province . Shortly thereafter , PAGASA discontinued advisories on Zoraida , declaring that the depression degenerated into a low pressure area . By contrast , the JMA continued monitoring the depression as it moved through the Philippines and into the Sulu Sea . On November 13 , the center crossed over Palawan island into the South China Sea . At 1200 UTC the next day , the JMA upgraded the depression to Tropical Storm Podul about 275 km ( 170 mi ) east of the Vietnam coast . Around the same time , the JTWC began issuing warnings on the system as a tropical depression 32W , noting that convection had rapidly increased over the circulation . The agency also mentioned the continued presence of wind shear , although warm water temperatures and moderate outflow were expected to allow intensification . Although the JMA estimated peak 10 – minute winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) , the JTWC only estimated tropical depression-force 1 – minute winds of 45 km / h ( 30 mph ) .

Late on November 14 , Podul made landfall in southeastern Vietnam near Phan Rang – Tháp Chàm and quickly weakened into a tropical depression . The JTWC assessed the circulation was dissipating near the coast , and the JMA declared Podul dissipated at 1200 UTC on November 15 . Operationally , the agency tracked the system into the Gulf of Thailand , and the Thai Meteorological Department tracked Podul to near the Malay Peninsula on November 16 , before ceasing advisories on the storm . The remnants later redeveloped into Cyclonic Storm Helen in the Bay of Bengal , which later struck southeastern India on November 22 before dissipating .

The Guam National Weather Service warned of the potential of heavy rainfall and high surf for Palau and nearby Yap island . While passing south of Palau , the system produced light winds of about 28 km / h ( 17 mph ) . Late on November 10 , as the system moved into the Philippine area of responsibility , PAGASA issued the Public Storm Warning Signal Number 1 for seven areas in Mindanao , indicating the potential for winds between 30 – 60 km / h ( 20 – 35 mph ) . Over the next day these warnings were extended to cover three provinces in Luzon , eight provinces in Visayas and twenty-one provinces in Mindanao . On Cebu Island , officials ordered schools to close during the storm 's passage . After the extreme damage due to Typhoon Haiyan in the Philippines , the depression that became Podul affected the same areas just days later , which affected rescue work . The depression caused additional difficulties in travel and communications . In addition to causing a landslide in Monkayo , flooding from the depression covered roads and forced about 1,000 families to evacuate . In Davao del Norte , the depression resulted in river flooding that killed two people .

In Vietnam , Podul produced heavy rainfall , peaking at 973 mm ( 38.3 in ) in two districts in Quảng Ngãi Province . The rains caused flooding that forced over 78,000 people to flee their homes , including 1,400 the resort town Hội An where floodwaters reached 1.6 m ( 5.2 ft ) deep . High volumes of flooding caused water to be released from reservoirs , which some local officials credited for the widespread flooding . About 260 km ( 160 mi ) of canals and dykes were washed away during the storm . The high rainfall increased water levels along rivers , with the Ba River in Gia Lai Province reaching 410 mm ( 16 in ) higher than the record set in 1981 . Flooding also damaged over 6,000 ha ( 15,000 acres ) of crops , mostly to rice . Podul damaged or flooded about 280,000 m2 ( 3,000,000 sq ft ) of roadways and bridges , resulting in traffic jams , and halted three train lines . The storm damaged or destroyed 427,258 houses , and overall damage was estimated at 1.5 trillion ₫ ( 2013 Vietnamese dong , $ 72 million 2013 USD ) . Throughout Vietnam , Podul killed 42 people and injured 74 others . By November 20 , the floods began receding from most locations . Newspapers described the flooding as the worst in Vietnam since 1999 . After the storm , the Vietnamese provincial governments assisted in rebuilding houses and roads .

State Route 213 ( SR 213 ) is the shortest state highway in the U.S. state of Washington . The 0.35-mile ( 0.56 km ) long unsigned highway serves Malott , a community in Okanogan County . Extending from U.S. Route 97 ( US 97 ) over the Okanogan River via a bridge to First Avenue in Malott , the roadway is semi-complete , as state law designates that the road should extend to SR 20 southwest of Okanogan . First appearing in a map in 1954 , SR 213 originated as a branch of Primary State Highway 16 ( PSH 16 ) in 1959 and later SR 20 Spur in 1964 . SR 20 Spur became SR 213 in 1973 because another SR 20 Spur was recently established in Anacortes .

SR 213 originated as a minor road that connected U.S. Route 97 ( US 97 ) to the area south of the Okanogan River and Malott ; the road first appeared on a map in 1954 . In 1959 , the Washington State Legislature passed a law that created a branch of Primary State Highway 16 ( PSH 16 ) that extended from PSH 16 near Okanogan to US 97 in Malott to take effect on July 1 , 1961 . By 1963 , US 97 was realigned south of the Okanogan River and the PSH 16 branch was extended across the river . During a highway renumbering in 1964 , PSH 16 became SR 20 and the branch of PSH 16 became SR 20 Spur . In 1973 , SR 20 Spur became SR 213 , while another SR 20 Spur was established in Anacortes . Beginning in 2008 , the Washington State Department of Transportation ( WSDOT ) has been maintaining a short , 0.35-mile ( 0.56 km ) long segment of the proposed SR 213 as the a state route . The highway between Malott and SR 20 will be eventually built as state law dictates it .

M-10 is a state trunkline highway in the Metro Detroit area of Michigan in the United States . The southernmost portion follows Jefferson Avenue in downtown Detroit , and the southern terminus is at the intersection of Jefferson and M-3 ( Randolph Street ) next to the entrance to the Detroit – Windsor Tunnel . The northern terminus is in West Bloomfield Township at the intersection with Orchard Lake Road . The highway has several names as it runs through residential and commercial areas of the west side of Detroit and into the suburb of Southfield . It is called the John C. Lodge Freeway , The Lodge , James Couzens Highway and Northwestern Highway . M-10 was built in segments through the late 1950s and early 1960s . It carried several different names before the entire route was finally officially named the John C. Lodge Freeway in 1987 . The freeway has carried a few other highway designations . The southern segment was part of US Highway 12 ( US 12 ) and the whole thing was later renumbered Business Spur Interstate 696 ( BS I-696 ) . From 1970 until 1986 , it was part of US 10 , and the freeway has been M-10 since . The non-freeway segment that runs between I-696 in Southfield and Orchard Lake Road was previously numbered M-4 . M-10 was named after John C. Lodge , an influential Detroiter and Mayor of Detroit from 1927 – 28 .

Running about 22.8 miles ( 36.7 km ) in the Metro Detroit area , M-10 runs roughly northwest – southeast from Downtown Detroit into the northern suburbs in Oakland County . The entire length of the highway is listed as a part of the National Highway System , a system of roads importance to the nation 's economy , defense and mobility . As a state trunkline highway , the roadway is maintained by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) , and it includes approximately 18.5 miles ( 29.8 km ) of freeway . M-10 has six lanes from Detroit to Inkster Road in Farmington Hills , where it drops to four ; a few segments have eight lanes for short distances between interchanges . According to the department , 28,964 vehicles use M-10 on average near on Jefferson Avenue in Detroit , and 139,800 vehicles do so between US 24 ( Telegraph Road ) and Lahser Road in Southfield , the lowest and highest traffic counts along the highway in 2013 , respectively .

M-10 starts at the corner of Jefferson Avenue and Randolph Street in Downtown Detroit , an intersection that also marks the southern end of M-3 and the western end of Business Spur I-375 . This intersection is also the access to the Detroit – Windsor Tunnel between the Renaissance Center and the Old Mariners ' Church . From here , M-10 runs west-southwesterly parallel to the Detroit River on Jefferson Avenue past Hart Plaza . At the intersection with Woodward Avenue , M-10 transitions onto the John C. Lodge Freeway , which runs under Cobo Center , home of the North American International Auto Show each January . The freeway turns north-northwesterly and away from the Detroit River next to Joe Louis Arena . North of the Cobo Center curve , M-10 forms the boundary between Downtown Detroit to the east and the Corktown neighborhood to the west . The freeway has a pair of service drives as it leaves the commercial areas near the MGM Grand Detroit and the interchange with I-75 ( Fisher Freeway ) . North of I-75 , M-10 forms the border between North Corktown ( west ) and Midtown Detroit ( east ) . The freeway passes the MotorCity Casino at at the interchange with Grand River Avenue . The rest of its route in the part of the city passes through residential zones . Near the interchange with I-94 ( Edsel Ford Freeway ) , M-10 passes the campus of Wayne State University . North of I-94 , the Lodge Freeway is the border between the West Side and New Center . This area is residential on either side of the freeway north of the campus of the Henry Ford Hospital . North of Clairmont Avenue , M-10 curves to the northwest before resuming its north-northwesterly course near Chicago Boulevard . North of Webb Avenue , the freeway follows the western city limits of Highland Park , an enclave within the city of Detroit . M-10 intersects M-8 where it transitions between Davison Avenue and the Davison Freeway on the western edge of Highland Park before the Lodge Freeway curves around to run due west .

M-10 runs for about two miles ( 3.2 km ) on this due westward course before it intersects Wyoming Avenue and turns northwest . The frontage roads change names from John C. Lodge Service Drive to James Couzens Freeway at the Wyoming Avenue interchange . The freeway continues for another 3 1 ⁄ 2 miles ( 5.6 km ) with interchanges for local streets in this part of Detroit , including 7 Mile Road . At the interchange with M-102 ( 8 Mile Road ) , the freeway crosses out of Detroit and Wayne County into Southfield in Oakland County .

The service drives change names again to Northwestern Highway upon crossing into Oakland County . The east side of M-10 is flanked by the Northland Shopping Center and a campus of Oakland Community College ; the west side is residential . About 1 1 ⁄ 4 miles ( 2.0 km ) into Southfield , M-10 intersects the northern end of M-39 ( Southfield Freeway ) and 9 Mile Road . The adjacent properties are mostly residential , but there are some commercial areas centered around the various Mile Roads , such as the campus of Lawrence Technological University at 10 Mile Road . Near Lahser and 11 Mile roads , M-10 meets I-696 ( Reuther Freeway ) and US 24 ( Telegraph Road ) in a complex interchange called the Mixing Bowl . This interchange spans over two miles ( 3.2 km ) near the American Center . The carriageways for I-696 run in the median of M-10 while partial interchanges connect to Lahser and Franklin roads on either end of the various ramps that connect to I-696 and US 24 . Northwest of this interchange , M-10 transitions to a boulevard with Michigan lefts . Called just Northwestern Highway , M-10 runs through suburban residential areas of Southfield . At the intersection with Inkster Road , the highway clips the southwest corner of the city of Franklin and enters the northeastern corner of Farmington Hills . The roadway is lined with commercial properties while just behind them are residential subdivisions and two golf courses . At the intersection with 14 Mile Road , Northwestern Highway crosses into West Bloomfield Township , and 1 ⁄ 4 mile ( 0.40 km ) further on , the highway ends at Orchard Lake Road .

In 1919 , the state numbered its highways for the first time . In the initial allocation of numbers , M-10 was assigned to a highway that started at the Ohio state line south of Monroe , ran northeasterly along Telegraph Road into Dearborn and turned easterly into Detroit . From there , the highway turned north along Woodward Avenue through Pontiac and Dixie Highway through Flint and Saginaw to Bay City . Then M-10 ran along the Saginaw Bay to Standish and turned to follow the Lake Huron shoreline , with some substantial deviations inland . The highway generally followed the lakeshore as far north as Alpena and Rogers City , and from there , M-10 ran due west through Onaway before turning north into Cheboygan . The last section of M-10 followed the Lake Huron shoreline to Mackinaw City , where it terminated . This designation lasted until November 11 , 1926 , when the United States Numbered Highway System was created . In Michigan 's initial allocation of highways , four new designations replaced M-10 : US 24 from the state line north to Dearborn , US 112 between Dearborn and Detroit , US 10 from Detroit to Saginaw , and US 23 from Saginaw to Mackinaw City . At the time , no M-10 designation was reassigned to any other roads .

During the 1950s , the Lodge Freeway was proposed to run from Detroit as far as the Fenton – Clio Expressway ( US 23 ) at Fenton . The intersection with the Edsel Ford Freeway , next to Wayne State University was built in 1953 and was the first full freeway-to-freeway interchange built in the United States . The freeway was dedicated on November 7 , 1957 , and opened without any state trunkline designation between downtown and the Wyoming Curve . The section from the Edsel Ford Freeway ( now I-94 ) into downtown Detroit was designated as US 12 by the middle of 1960 . The freeway was then redesignated Business Spur I-696 ( BS I-696 ) in 1962 , and the next year the freeway was extended northwesterly along James Couzens Highway and Northwestern Highway into Southfield , connecting with the completed first phase of I-696 that opened in 1963-64 . That designation remained until 1970 when US 10 was shifted off Woodward Avenue to follow the Lodge Freeway between downtown Detroit and Telegraph Road , replacing the BS I-696 designation . An extension to the Northwestern Highway was again proposed in 1966 to connect with the proposed I-275 extension . The I-275 project was then cancelled in 1977 . The section of Northwestern Highway under state control between the West Bloomfield Township – Farmington Hills border into Southfield was numbered M-4 in 1979 .

The Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) petitioned the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials in the mid-1980s to truncate US 10 to Bay City . The request was approved on October 11 , 1985 , and the signage was changed the next year . After the change , the Lodge Freeway was redesignated M-10 . The non-freeway Northwestern Highway , until then designated M-4 , was also renumbered as M-10 . The southernmost portion of the Lodge Freeway was also initially redesignated as a portion of BS I-375 from I-75 south . By the next year however , the southern end of M-10 was moved to the corner of Jefferson and Randolph , placing all of the Lodge Freeway as part of M-10 . From 2006 to 2007 , the Lodge underwent major reconstruction to ease traffic congestion in the metro area , temporarily closing down much of the freeway . The $ 133 million project ( equivalent to $ 155 million in 2015 ) included concrete pavement reconstruction and rehabilitation , new barrier walls , repairs or replacements to 50 bridges , upgrades to 22 ramps , utility upgrades , and replacement of freeway signs between Lahser Road in Southfield and Jefferson Avenue in Detroit .

Starting in 1924 , officials in southeastern Michigan proposed building a highway from Detroit to run northwesterly across the state to Ludington , bisecting the angle created by Woodward and Grand River avenues . This roadway was named Northwestern Highway when it was built in 1929 to an endpoint at 14 Mile Road . Further construction on Northwestern Highway was halted by the Great Depression . The freeway segment northwest of Wyoming Avenue to the county line was previously known as James Couzens Highway after the street it replaced . That street was named after the death of James J. Couzens . Couzens was a former Commissioner of Detroit 's Department of Street Railways from 1913 through 1915 , after which he served as Police Commissioner from 1916 until 1918 . He was Mayor of Detroit from 1919 until 1922 and United States Senator from Michigan from 1922 until his death on October 22 , 1936 . During his years of public service , he is said not to have accepted a salary , giving it all to charity . After his death , Detroit renamed its section of Northwestern Highway after Couzens . John C. Lodge was a member of the constitutional convention which drafted the Michigan Constitution of 1908 , a former member of the Michigan Legislature and Detroit alderman and councilman . He later served as Mayor of Detroit in 1918 – 1919 before returned to the City Common Council from 1932 to 1947 . He was then elected to the Wayne County Board of Supervisors from 1948 until 1950 . In total , he held elective office longer than anyone in city history . He died on February 6 , 1950 , and the future Lodge Freeway was named in his honor on January 20 , 1953 . The entire freeway , including segments previously named for James Couzens and the Northwestern Highway was named the John C. Lodge Freeway in 1987 , although the service drives retained their original names .

Vanaja is a 2006 Indian Telugu-language drama film written and directed by Rajnesh Domalpalli on a story that constituted his Master of Fine Arts thesis at Columbia University . The film was made on a shoestring budget using a cast of non-professional first-timers for two and a half months . The film stars Mamatha Bhukya as the title character : a 15-year-old daughter of a poor fisherman set in the backdrop of a rustic state of Andhra Pradesh in Southern India . She learns Kuchipudi , a classical Indian dance form , while being employed at a local landlady 's house . All seems to be going well for her until sexual chemistry evolves between her and the landlady 's son , and this eventually leads her being raped by him . The ensuing pregnancy disrupts her simple life , and she must choose how to deal with the child . Vanaja was screened at several international festivals such as the Toronto International Film Festival and the Berlin International Film Festival , among others . It was nominated for the Diesel Discovery Award at the former and won the Best First Feature award at the latter . Beside this , it won several jury prizes at other film festivals , and was nominated for the Best First Feature and Best Cinematography awards at the Independent Spirit Awards . Vanaja found favour with many international critics as well . Roger Ebert ranked it among the five best foreign language films of 2007 . It runs for 111 minutes in with subtitles in English .

Vanaja ( Mamatha Bhukya ) is the 15-year-old daughter of Somayya ( Ramachandriah Marikanti ) , a poor , low caste fisherman from rural Andhra Pradesh . Somayya struggles to support his family due to dwindling catches at sea and mounting debts . One day , Vanaja and her teenage friend Lacchi ( Bhavani Renukunta ) watch a theatrical performance by a former Kuchipudi ( a native classical Indian dance form ) great , Rama Devi ( Urmila Dammannagari ) . The sequence of events lead to a soothsayer predicting to Vanaja that she will be a great dancer . With permission from her father , she goes to work in the house of the local landlady Rama Devi with the hope of learning Kuchipudi . While she is employed as a farmhand , she is entrusted with tending the chickens . When she gets caught playfully chasing them , she lies to conceal her pranks . Her vivaciousness and spunk soon catch the landlady ’ s eye . To keep her out of trouble , Rama Devi soon promotes her to a kitchen underhand where she meets Rama Devi ’ s cook , the old , crusty and extremely loyal Radhamma ( Krishnamma Gundimalla ) .

After settling down at the landlady 's house , Vanaja gets invited to play a game of ashta chamma ( a leisurely game in rural towns of Andhra Pradesh ) against the landlady . Knowing that losing isn ’ t the mistress ’ s forte , she deliberately gives up her game . This gesture , in turn , eventually secures her the landlady ’ s mentorship , first in music and then in dance . Vanaja excels at these art forms and seems to be on a steadily ascending path until the arrival of Shekhar ( Karan Singh ) , the landlady 's 23-year-old son , from the United States . Shekhar is a handsome , muscular young man who is running for an office in the local government . Sexual chemistry is ignited between Shekhar and Vanaja ( still a minor at 15 ) when flirtation and sexual innuendo bloom . In the meanwhile , her father 's fishing boat is taken away by creditors . He sinks into a state of sadness and begins to drink away their savings . On one occasion , Vanaja ’ s superior intellect pits her against Shekhar in a public incident which ultimately humiliates him in front of his mother . Matters escalate , and one day Vanaja is raped by Shekhar . She eventually loses her job when she becomes pregnant . She gives birth to a boy , much against Rama Devi ’ s wishes who would have liked her to abort the foetus . Vanaja hopes that the physical evidence of the child will be proof of the rape and that somehow Shekhar will be brought to justice . However , Shekhar has no desire to marry Vanaja because she is from a lower caste . In the end Rama Devi and Shekhar gain possession of the child , who will grow up to be an upper caste boy .

Director Rajnesh Domalpalli graduated with bachelor 's and master 's degrees in electrical engineering in 1984 and 1986 . While working on his bachelor 's degree at the Indian Institute of Technology Bombay , he wrote short stories . One of his stories , The Dowry , was twice selected for broadcast by BBC World Service while he was in graduate school . During schooling , he was introduced to south Indian classical music , especially on the veena , and followed this up with years of training on the vocals . While he was working as a software engineer in Silicon Valley , California , he pursued filmmaking and graduated with a Master of Fine Arts degree from Columbia University . A short synopsis , including a character and a conflict study of Vanaja , was Domalpalli 's project submission in his first semester at the Columbia University in fall of 2001 . The story was inspired by a child 's scream upon being separated from her mother in Sophie 's Choice . Over the next three semesters , however , the story veered from its original focus of mother-child separation to what Domalpalli later described as a study of " elements of class distinction and conflict that continue to infuse our society and culture even today . " Referring to its emphasis , he said the film was also about " fading institutions of folk art , old buildings that are collapsing , things which we should be protecting — which are a part of our heritage . " Speaking of the need for preservation of Indian culture and heritage , he said that making the film was an opportunity to emphasize the Indian folk arts , too .

With the early version of the script being ready at the end of his fourth semester , Domalpalli 's initial intent was to find financing for the film in India and then in the United States . However , he could not find financing . Domalpalli decided to select non-professionals and train them in a year . In the United States , producers voiced similar concerns over the marketability of the film and what they referred to as " its lack of cohesion . " Beside this , Domalpalli 's inexperience in filmmaking added to their concerns . Recalling initial hurdles , Domalpalli later said , " it was only when I showed my professors a rough cut of the film , and they approved , that purse strings finally came loose . " It eventually constituted the thesis for his master 's degree . He imbibed socio-cultural ethos from his upbringing in several rural areas of Andhra Pradesh , and this prompted him to make the movie in the Telugu language . In 2004 , he began filming with a meagre sum of USD 20000 provided by his mother Latha Domalpalli , the eventual film producer . Referring to filming the burrakatha ( a story telling technique used in southern India ) scene at the beginning of the film , Domalpalli said :

If you talk to people who perform a Burrakatha , you will see a huge difference in the way the older generation performs the art vis-à-vis the way the way the younger generation performs it ... This has happened because of the advent of television . Burrakatha is a long-format art form . The point we are making is that if we don 't protect these folk arts , they will be on their way out . The producers faced a stiff challenge in securing a rural bungalow to serve as the landlady 's mansion . Even after obtaining a building as the best possible fit in the coastal town of Bobbili , infestation of snakes and bats posed a problem for the crew . In addition , the building was not strong enough to support the filming equipment . Under these circumstances , the makeshift production designers refurbished the building with space for chicken coops and goat pens as required by the script . To make the space look inhabited , local help was sought for trampling the ground with their livestock . The local people wanted to act as extras in exchange for providing farming tools , bullock carts and other material . As a result , the crew had to ensure that these extras didn 't look into the camera during filming .

" Given the rural nature of the story , and the tendency of most local acting to lean towards the theatrical , it was clear that non-actors drawn from hutments , labor camps and the vast Indian middle class were the right choice , " said Domalpalli , referring to his choice of casting . In addition , the inclusion of Radhamma 's character was to bring a natural feel for the film . Her behavior such as the way she " sits , stands , moves , grunts and groans — that is the way people from a village talk and behave ... You would immediately recognize a person who served you breakfast ... That makes a point . " Referring to the challenges faced in casting , he said that while they were canvassing local people for auditions , they were warding off rumors that they were after the people 's kidneys . When placing a newspaper advertisement for the landlady 's character did not seem viable , they advertised for household help instead . Upon seeing this , Urmila Dammannagari turned up for the interview with Domalpalli . Inadvertently , their conversation veered toward the film and the real motive behind the advertisement became evident . Though initially shocked and despite the fact that she had to commute 25 kilometres ( 16 mi ) from her house to the location , she took up the role . Professionally Krishnamma Gundimalla , who played the role of Radhamma , carried bricks on her head as a construction worker . On the other hand , Ramachandriah Marikanti , who plays Vanaja 's fisherman father , was a municipal sweeper and worked as a security guard .

For casting Vanaja and Lacchi , he said that they met approximately 2500 children , interviewed about 260 , and finally selected two from a shortlist of five to play the roles of Vanaja and Lacchi . Parents of these children were distrustful of them because their wards would have to frequently commute to Domalpalli 's house for acting lessons for at least a year . Domalpalli felt that " to convince people to devote so much of their children 's time and energy was hard enough , but to find the right combination of intelligence , commitment and talent as well was probably the steepest cliff they had to climb . " While visiting schools for identifying the child cast , Mamatha Bhukya at first was not selected because her hair was short . But after she sang a song on Mahatma Gandhi , she was selected for the role . Srinivas Devarakonda , a disciple of well-known Kuchipudi guru Vempati Chinna Satyam , taught Mamatha the classical dance form for a year in the basement of Domalpalli 's house . Due to this sustained effort , she altered her ambitions from becoming a doctor to an actress and a Kuchipudi dancer . Bhavani Renukunta was chosen for Lacchi 's role after an interview at the Hyderabad office of Varija Films , the company that handled the publicity .

Suriname-born Milton Kam , who had shot 10 feature films and more than 50 short films , was chosen as the director of photography . Since Domalpalli 's experience was limited to short video films with a different aspect ratio , he was shocked to look through the Super 16mm lens the day they commenced the shoot . However , Kam helped him to stay composed during the production . Domalpalli used Carnatic music for the background score . This featured the violin-playing of B. S. Narayanan , a student of renowned Carnatic violinist T. N. Krishnan . Narayanan played the popular Jayadeva Ashtapadi " Sa virahe " , having retuned it in the mode or rāga known as " Behag " . Domalpalli used " janapada geetalu " in the film ; folk songs that are rarely heard . To record these songs for the film , Domalpalli and his crew traveled to towns and villages in rural Andhra .

The film was released in the United States on 31 August 2007 . After being screened at over 100 film festivals in 49 countries , Vanaja has won 24 international awards and 2 nominations . The Motion Picture Association of America ( MPAA ) , the body that governs the Oscars , invited the screenplay to be placed in the permanent archives of the Margaret Herrick Library . The DVD , which released on 8 March 2008 , has subtitle options in English . Besides interviews with Domalpalli and Bhukya , unedited dance sequences and several short films of Domalpalli , the DVD is available in 16 : 9 Anamorphic widescreen , Dolby Digital 5.1 Surround , widescreen and NTSC format . While reviewing it , Jeffrey Kauffman from DVD Talk observed that though most of the film was made using natural lighting situations , the color and saturation quality was excellent . Further , the reviewer was quite favourable about the use of exotic sounds right from birds to the instruments .

On 11 September 2006 , Vanaja first premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival . The same year , it won an Honorable Mention for the Golden Starfish Award at the Hamptons International Film Festival . It won the Best Narrative Film award at the Indo-American Arts Council Film Festival . Following that , it was showcased at the International Film Festival of India and the International Film Festival of Kerala by the end of 2006 . At the film 's screening at the 2007 Berlin Film Festival , it won a standing ovation from the audience , bringing Mamatha Bhukya to tears and emotionally affecting Rajnesh Domalpalli . The film won the Best First Feature award at this festival . The same year , Vanaja received a special international jury prize at the Cairo International Film Festival , Best Feature at the Memphis International Film Festival , Best International Film at the Sacramento International Film Festival , and a Platinum award at the WorldFest-Houston International Film Festival . It received a special mention for the grand jury prize at the Indian Film Festival of Los Angeles , the Miloš Macourek Award in special recognition for a feature film for youth at the Zlín International Film Festival , an Achievement Award at the Newport Beach Film Festival , and a special jury prize for Best Production Design at the RiverRun International Film Festival . It won the prize for Best Cinematography at the Rhode Island International Film Festival , the first prize in the live-action feature film category at the Chicago International Children 's Film Festival , and the Camério Meilleur Long Métrage / Starlink Aviation award at the Carrousel international du film de Rimouski . In addition , the film won also won an award for the best live-action film at the International Young Audience Film Festival . Bhukya won the best actress award at the Asian Festival of First Films . It was chosen as one of 13 " key films " when the Locarno International Film Festival focused on India in 2011 .

The film received an overall positive response from critics and was particularly noted for the theme and for Mamatha Bhukya 's performance . The review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a score of 85 % based on 26 critic reviews with an average rating of 7 / 10 . Roger Ebert described Bhukya as " a natural star , her eyes and smile illuminating a face of freshness and delight . " Writing about Vanaja , he added that " there are the glorious colors of saris and room decorations , the dazzle of dance costumes and the dusty landscape that somehow becomes a watercolor by Edward Lear , with its hills and vistas , its oxen and elephants , its houses that seem part of the land . In this setting , Domalpalli tells his story with tender precision , and never an awkward moment . " Ebert listed it among the top five foreign films of 2007 . According to Laura Kern from The New York Times , the film " is a coming-of-age tale that is engrossing , if slightly overlong , and absolutely timeless , unfolding against an antiquated class system that sadly stands firm in rural areas of India to this day . "

A review in Variety called it " a film that touches the heartstrings as it brings home the cruel class distinctions that poison Indian societ , " and said it " is more than a children 's film , despite revolving around a central character of 14 . Its social message , linked to the story of a poor farm girl who aspires to be a dancer , never feels forced , and the moral issues it depicts are realistically complex . " Commenting on its commercial feasibility , the review concluded that " while that might not translate into obvious box office potential , art house appeal is there for distributors willing to seek out a market . " The Chicago Tribune wrote : It 's a touching , believable , often funny but ultimately sad tale of how one class can take advantage of another , even in the guise of patronizing benevolence . Though sometimes shifting abruptly in time , Vanaja is an arresting story of modern-day hardship and class exploitation , recalling Charles Dickens as well as Western fairy-tale lore . Domalpalli 's settings are ultra-real in detail and color , from the crude , almost feudal deprivations of Vanaja 's dirt-floor background to the stately rituals and autocratic entitlement of the well-to-do .

Speaking of Bhukya 's performance , the San Francisco Chronicle writes , " Bhukya delivers an entrancing and natural performance , deftly balancing both the wide-eyed childishness of a young girl with the dawning awareness of life 's darker possibilities . She 's also an accomplished dancer , which she proves at several points in the film . " It adds , " can this wonder-filled film truly be not only Domalpalli 's first feature , but originally part of a thesis submission at Columbia University ? Both in the film 's writing and direction , Domalpalli displays maturity , wisdom and a loving sense of visual and character detail . " Marc Savlov of The Austin Chronicle proclaimed , " director Domalpalli , who , with his debut feature , turned in what may well be the best Columbia University master 's thesis ever . " The Hartford Courant also claimed like the Chicago Tribune that the film would remind the Western audience of Charles Dickens , and further stated that it " ... gives a detailed sense of place and shows a mastery of story telling . The themes of fate and class resonate and the work of the amateur players is remarkably moving . "

The New York and New Jersey campaign was a series of battles for control of New York City and the state of New Jersey in the American Revolutionary War between British forces under General Sir William Howe and the Continental Army under General George Washington in 1776 and the winter months of 1777 . Howe was successful in driving Washington out of New York City , but overextended his reach into New Jersey , and ended the active campaign season in January 1777 with only a few outposts near the city . The British held New York harbor for the rest of the war , using it as a base for expeditions against other targets . First landing unopposed on Staten Island on July 3 , 1776 , Howe assembled an army composed of elements that had been withdrawn from Boston in March following their failure to hold that city , combined with additional British troops , as well as Hessian troops rented from several German principalities . Washington had New England soldiers as well as regiments from states as far south as Virginia . Landing on Long Island in August , Howe defeated Washington in the largest battle of the war , but the Continental Army was able to retreat to Manhattan under cover of darkness and fog . Washington suffered a series of defeats in Manhattan , with the exception of a victory at Harlem Heights , but was nevertheless chased north to White Plains , New York . At that point Howe returned to Manhattan to capture forces Washington had left in the north of that island .

Washington and much of his army crossed the Hudson River into New Jersey , and retreated all the way across the Delaware River into Pennsylvania , shrinking due to ending enlistment periods , desertions , and poor morale . Howe ordered his troops into winter quarters in December , establishing a chain of outposts from New York to Burlington , New Jersey . Washington , in a tremendous boost to American morale , launched a successful strike against the Trenton garrison after crossing the icy Delaware River , prompting Howe to withdraw his chain of outposts back to New Brunswick and the coast near New York , while Washington established his winter camp at Morristown . During the remaining winter months , both sides skirmished frequently as the British sought forage and provisions . Britain maintained control of New York City and some of the surrounding territory until the war ended in 1783 , using it as a base for operations elsewhere in North America . In 1777 , General Howe launched a campaign to capture Philadelphia , leaving General Sir Henry Clinton in command of the New York area , while General John Burgoyne led an attempt to gain control of the Hudson River valley from Quebec that failed at Saratoga . Northern New Jersey was the scene of skirmishing between the opposing forces for the rest of the war .

When the American Revolutionary War broke out in April 1775 , British troops were under siege in Boston . They defeated Patriot forces in the Battle of Bunker Hill , suffering very high casualties . When news of this expensive British victory reached London , General William Howe and Lord George Germain , the British official responsible , determined that a " decisive action " should be taken against New York City using forces recruited from throughout the British Empire as well as troops hired from small German states . General George Washington , recently named by the Second Continental Congress as the commander-in-chief of the Continental Army , echoed the sentiments of others that New York was " a post of infinite importance " , and began the task of organizing military companies in the New York area when he stopped there on his way to take command of the siege of Boston . In January 1776 Washington ordered Charles Lee to raise troops and take command of New York 's defenses . Lee had made some progress on the city 's defenses when word arrived in late March 1776 that the British army had left Boston after Washington threatened them from heights south of the city . Concerned that General Howe was sailing directly to New York , Washington hurried regiments from Boston , including General Israel Putnam , who commanded the troops until Washington himself arrived in mid-April . At the end of April , Washington dispatched General John Sullivan with six regiments to the north to bolster the faltering Quebec campaign .

General Howe , rather than moving against New York , withdrew his army to Halifax , Nova Scotia , and regrouped while transports full of British troops , shipped from bases around Europe and intended for New York , began gathering at Halifax . In June he set sail for New York with the 9,000 men assembled there , before all of the transports arrived . German troops , primarily from Hesse-Kassel , as well as British troops from Henry Clinton 's ultimately unsuccessful expedition to the Carolinas , were to meet with Howe 's fleet when it reached New York . General Howe 's brother , Admiral Lord Howe , arrived at Halifax with further transports after the general sailed , and immediately followed . When General Howe arrived in the outer harbor of New York , the ships began sailing up the undefended Narrows between Staten Island and Long island on July 2 , and started landing troops on the undefended shores of Staten Island that day . Washington learned from prisoners taken that Howe had landed 10,000 men , but was awaiting the arrival of another 15,000 . General Washington , with a smaller army of about 19,000 effective troops , lacked significant intelligence on the British force and plans , and was uncertain exactly where in the New York area the Howes intended to strike . He consequently split the Continental Army between fortified positions on Long Island , Manhattan and other mainland locations , and also established a " Flying Camp " in northern New Jersey . This was intended as a reserve force that could support operations anywhere along the Jersey shore of the Hudson .

The Howe brothers had been granted authority as peace commissioners by Parliament , with limited powers to pursue a peaceful resolution to the conflict . King George III was not optimistic about the possibility of a peace , " yet I think it right to be attempted , whilst every act of vigour is unremittingly carried on " . Their powers were limited to granting of " general and special pardons " and to " confer with any of his Majesty 's subjects " . On July 14 , pursuant to these powers , Admiral Howe sent a messenger with a letter addressed to " George Washington , Esq . " across the harbor . Washington 's adjutant , Joseph Reed , politely informed the messenger that no person with that title was in their army . Admiral Howe 's aide wrote that " the Punctilio of an Address " should not have prevented the letter 's delivery , and Howe was said to be visibly annoyed by the rejection . A second request , addressed to " George Washington , Esq . , etc . " was similarly rejected , although the messenger was told that Washington would receive one of Howe 's adjutants . In that fruitless meeting , held July 20 , Washington pointed out that the limited powers the Howe brothers had been given were not of much use , as the rebels had done no wrong requiring an amnesty .

In late August , the British transported about 22,000 men ( including 9,000 Hessians ) from Staten Island to Long Island . In the Battle of Long Island on August 27 , 1776 , the British outflanked the American positions , driving the Americans back to their Brooklyn Heights fortifications . General Howe then began to lay siege to the works , but Washington skillfully managed a nighttime retreat through his unguarded rear across the East River to Manhattan Island . Howe then paused to consolidate his position and consider his next move . During the battle , the British had captured General John Sullivan . Admiral Howe convinced him to deliver a message to Congress in Philadelphia , and released him on parole . Washington also gave his permission , and on September 2 Sullivan told the Congress that the Howes wanted to negotiate , and had been given much broader powers to treat than those they actually held . This created a diplomatic problem for Congress , which did not want to be seen as aggressive , which is how some representatives felt a direct rejection of the appeal would appear . Consequently , Congress agreed to send a committee to meet with the Howes in a move they did not think would bear any fruit . On September 11 , the Howe brothers met with John Adams , Benjamin Franklin , and Edward Rutledge in the Staten Island Peace Conference . It had exactly the outcome the Americans expected .

During this time , Washington , who had previously been ordered by Congress to hold New York City , was concerned that he might have escaped one trap for another , since the army was still vulnerable to being surrounded on Manhattan . To keep his escape routes open to the north , he placed 5,000 troops in the city ( which then only occupied the lower portion of Manhattan ) , and took the rest of the army to Harlem Heights . In the first recorded use of a submarine in warfare , he also attempted a novel attack on the Royal Navy , launching the Turtle in a failed attempt to sink the HMS Eagle , Admiral Howe 's flagship . On September 15 , General Howe landed about 12,000 men on lower Manhattan , quickly taking control of New York City . The Americans withdrew to Harlem , where they skirmished the next day , but held their ground . Rather than attempting to dislodge Washington from his strong position a second time , Howe again opted for a flanking maneuver . Landing troops with some opposition in October in Westchester County , he sought once again to encircle Washington . To defend against this move , Washington withdrew most of his army to White Plains , where after a short battle on October 28 he retreated further north . This isolated the remaining Continental Army troops in upper Manhattan , so Howe returned to Manhattan and captured Fort Washington in mid November , taking almost 3,000 prisoners .

Four days later , November 20 , Fort Lee , across the Hudson River from Fort Washington , was also taken . Washington brought much of his army across the Hudson into New Jersey , but was immediately forced to retreat by the aggressive British advance . General Howe , after consolidating British positions around New York harbor , detached 6,000 men under the command of two of his more difficult subordinates , Henry Clinton , and Hugh , Earl Percy to take Newport , Rhode Island ( which they did without opposition on December 8 ) , while he sent General Lord Cornwallis to chase Washington 's army through New Jersey . The Americans withdrew across the Delaware River into Pennsylvania in early December .

The outlook of the Continental Army — and thus the revolution itself — was bleak . " These are the times that try men 's souls " , wrote Thomas Paine in The American Crisis . Washington 's army had dwindled to fewer than 5,000 men fit for duty and would be significantly reduced after enlistments expired at the end of the year . Spirits were low , popular support was wavering , and Congress had abandoned Philadelphia , fearing a British attack . Washington ordered some of the troops that returned from the failed invasion of Quebec to join him , and also ordered General Lee 's troops , which he had left north of New York City , to join him . Lee , whose relationship with Washington was at times difficult , made excuses and only traveled as far as Morristown , New Jersey . When Lee strayed too far from his army on December 12 , his exposed position was betrayed by Loyalists , and a British company led by Lieutenant Colonel Banastre Tarleton surrounded the inn where he was staying and took him prisoner . Lee 's command was taken over by John Sullivan , who finished marching the army to Washington 's camp across the river from Trenton .

The capture of Lee presented the Howes with a problematic prisoner . As with a number of other Continental Army leaders , he had previously served in the British Army . Because of this the Howes at first treated him as a deserter , with threats of military punishment . However , Washington intervened , tying the treatment of Lee to the treatment of prisoners he held . Lee was ultimately treated well , and apparently offered the British commanders advice on how to win the war . Because the Americans did not have a prisoner of comparable rank , Lee remained a prisoner in New York until 1778 , when was exchanged for Richard Prescott . The failure of the Continental Army to hold New York also brought about a rise in Loyalist activity , as the city became a haven for refugee supporters of the Crown from elsewhere across the country . The British actively recruited in New York and New Jersey to build regiments of provincial militia , with some success . Loyalists in these areas may have been motivated by seeing elements of the rebel army head home after their enlistments ended . One New York Patriot militia leader wrote that thirty of his men , rather than reenlisting with him , had instead signed up with the enemy . On November 30 Admiral Howe offered amnesty to anyone that had taken up arms against the Crown , provided they swore an oath to it . Washington responded with his own proclamation suggesting that those who did not renounce such oaths should immediately go behind British lines . As a result , New Jersey became a civil battlefield , with militia activity as well as spying and counterspying continuing for the rest of the war .

News of the capture of New York was favorably received in London , and General Howe was awarded the Order of the Bath for his work . Combined with news of the recovery of Quebec , circumstances suggested to British leaders that the war could be ended with one more year 's campaigning . News of Admiral Howe 's amnesty proclamation was met with some surprise , as its terms were more lenient than the hardliners in the government expected . Politicians opposed to the war pointed out that the proclamation failed to mention the primacy of the Parliament . Furthermore , the Howes were criticized for failing to keep Parliament informed of the various peace efforts they embarked on .

With the campaign at an apparent conclusion for the season , the British established a chain of outposts stretching from Perth Amboy to Bordentown and entered winter quarters . They controlled much of New York and New Jersey and were in a good position to resume operations in the spring , with the rebel capital of Philadelphia in striking distance . Howe detached General Clinton with 6,000 men to occupy Newport , Rhode Island as a base for future operations against Boston and Connecticut ( Clinton occupied Newport in early December without opposition . ) Howe then sketched a campaign for the following year in a letter to Lord Germain : 10,000 men at Newport , 10,000 for an expedition to Albany ( to meet an army descending from Quebec ) , 8,000 to cross New Jersey and threaten Philadelphia , and 5,000 to defend New York . If additional foreign forces were available , operations could also be considered against the southern states .

While worrying over how to hold his army together , Washington organized attacks on the relatively exposed British outposts , which were as a result continually on edge due to ongoing militia and army raids . German commanders Carl von Donop and Johann Rall , whose brigades were at the end of the chain of outposts , were frequent targets of these raids , but their repeated warnings and requests for support from General James Grant were dismissed . Beginning in mid-December , Washington planned a two-pronged attack on Rall 's outpost in Trenton , with a third diversionary attack on Donop 's outpost in Bordentown . The plan was aided by the fortuitous presence of a militia company that drew Donop 's entire 2,000-man force away from Bordentown to the south that resulted in a skirmish at Mount Holly on December 23 . The consequence of this action was that Donop was not in a position to assist Rall when Washington 's attack on Trenton took place . On the night of December 25 – 26 , Washington and 2,400 men stealthily crossed the Delaware and surprised Rall 's outpost the following morning , killing or capturing nearly 1,000 Hessians . This action not only significantly boosted the army 's morale ; it also brought Cornwallis out of New York . He reassembled an army of more than 6,000 men , and marched most of them against a position Washington had taken south of Trenton . Leaving a garrison of 1,200 at Princeton , Cornwallis then attacked Washington 's position on January 2 , 1777 , and was three times repulsed before darkness set in . During the night Washington once again stealthily moved his army , going around that of Cornwallis with the intention of attacking the Princeton garrison .

Hugh Mercer , leading the American advance guard , encountered British soldiers from Princeton under the command of Charles Mawhood . The British troops engaged Mercer and in the ensuing battle , Mercer was mortally wounded . Washington sent reinforcements under General John Cadwalader , which were successful in driving Mawhood and the British from Princeton , with many of them fleeing to Cornwallis in Trenton . The British lost more than one quarter of their force in the battle , and American morale rose with the victory . The defeats convinced General Howe to withdraw most of his army from New Jersey , only leaving outposts at New Brunswick and Perth Amboy . Washington entered winter quarters at Morristown , having retaken most of the state from the British . However , provisions for both armies were limited , and commanders on both sides sent out parties to forage for food and other supplies . For the next few months , they engaged in a forage war , in which each targeted the foraging parties of the other . This led to numerous skirmishes and minor confrontations including the Battle of Millstone . The British also sniped with each other over the subject of provisions . Lord Percy resigned his command after a series of disagreements with Howe came to a head over the ability of the Newport station to provide forage to the New York and New Jersey forces .

The British gained control of New York harbor and the surrounding agricultural areas , and held New York City and Long Island until the war ended in 1783 . The Americans suffered significant casualties and lost important supplies , but Washington managed to retain the core of his army and avoid a decisive confrontation that could have ended the war . With the bold strokes of Trenton and Princeton , he had regained initiative and boosted morale . The areas around New York City in New York , New Jersey , and Connecticut were an ongoing battleground for the rest of the war . The early reports that General Howe sent to his superiors in London concerning the battles at Trenton and Princeton attempted to minimize their significance , blaming Rall for Trenton , and trying to recast Princeton as a nearly successful defense . Not everyone was fooled by his accounts , in particular Lord Germain . In a letter to the Hessian General Leopold Philip von Heister Germain wrote that " the officer who commanded [ the forces at Trenton ] and to whom this misfortune is to be attributed has lost his life by his rashness . " Heister in turn had to report the loss to his ruler , Frederick II , Landgrave of Hesse-Kassel , with the news that not only had an entire brigade been lost , but sixteen regimental colors and six cannon as well . The news reportedly enraged Frederick , who broadly suggested that Heister return home ( which he did , turning over command of the Hessian forces to Wilhelm von Knyphausen ) . Frederick also ordered extensive inquiries into the events of 1776 , that took place in New York from 1778 to 1782 . These inquiries created a unique archive of materials about the campaign .

The news of Washington 's successes reached Paris at a critical time . Britain 's ambassador to France , Lord Stormont , was preparing complaints to France 's foreign minister , the Comte de Vergennes , concerning the semi-secret financial and logistical support France had been giving to the rebels . Stormont had learned that supplies bound for America were to be shipped under French flags , where they had previously sent under American colors . He wrote that the French court was extremely happy with the news , and that the French diplomatic position noticeably hardened : " that M. de Vergennes is hostile in his heart and anxious for the success of the Rebels I have not a shadow of a doubt . "

The British planned two major operations for the 1777 campaign season . The first was an ambitious plan to gain control of the Hudson River valley , whose central thrust was a move along Lake Champlain by the army from Quebec under General John Burgoyne . Execution of this plan ultimately failed , ending with the surrender of Burgoyne 's army at Saratoga , New York , in October . The second operation was General Howe 's plan to take Philadelphia , which , after a difficult start , met with success in September . Washington 's strategy in 1777 continued to be a basically defensive one . He successfully fended off an attempt by Howe to draw him into a general engagement in northern New Jersey , but was unable to prevent Howe 's later success taking Philadelphia . He did send material help to General Horatio Gates , who was tasked with defending against Burgoyne 's movements . Major General Benedict Arnold and Daniel Morgan 's riflemen all played a notable role in the defeat of Burgoyne , following which France entered the war .

Sauganash Hotel ( originally Eagle Exchange Tavern ) is a former hotel ; regarded as the first hotel in Chicago , Illinois . It was located at Wolf Point in the present day Loop community area at the intersection of the north , south and main branches of the Chicago River . The location at West Lake Street and North Wacker Drive ( formerly Market Street ) was designated a Chicago Landmark on November 6 , 2002 . The hotel changed proprietors often in its twenty-year existence and briefly served as Chicago 's first theater . It was named after Billy Caldwell , an interpreter in the British Indian Department .

Mark and Monique Beaubien , the owners and builders of the hotel , were French Indian traders . In 1826 they moved to Chicago on the advice of Mark 's brother Jean , who lived at Fort Dearborn . The Beaubiens settled in a small cabin on Wolf 's Point and continued their trade with the Indians . They built a tavern on the east bank of the south branch of the Chicago River at the point where the north and south branches meet . The tavern was named Eagle Exchange Tavern . In 1831 , they added a frame to the log structure to create Chicago 's first hotel , the Sauganash Hotel . When completed , it was one of only two residential structures on the south side of the main branch of the Chicago River , the other being that of Col. John B. Beaubien , Mark 's brother . The settlement had only twelve houses at the time . The hostelry immediately became famous , and when reconstructed later became the city 's largest and finest hotel . Immediately adjacent to the hotel 's public bar was Chicago 's first drug store . The Greek Revival trim of the new hotel contrasted with the other eleven buildings of Chicago . The symmetry of its facade was typical to contemporary Greek Revival practiced on the East Coast . Juliette Kinzie , who came to Chicago from Connecticut in 1831 , described it as " a pretentios white two-story building , with bright blue wood shutters , the admiration of all the little circle at Wolf Point " . The hostelry 's clientele transcended race , with natives and settlers enjoying each other 's company .

The flow of travelers and settlers intensified with the end of the Black Hawk War in 1832 . In 1833 the hotel housed election of the first town trustees of the newly formed Town of Chicago . Beaubien kept the Hotel until 1834 and during his ownership he regularly entertained guests with his violin . On August 18 , 1835 , two years after the Potawatomi natives signed the treaty agreeing to be moved to a reservation beyond the Mississippi River in northwestern Missouri , they selected 800 braves to perform their last war dance parade on a path that passed in front of the hotel . In 1835 , a Mr. Davis assumed control of the hotel , which subsequently had a series of proprietors . The building briefly served as Chicago 's first theater , and hosted the first Chicago Theatre company in November 1837 in an abandoned dining room . By 1839 , it returned to service as a hotel , but was destroyed by fire in 1851 , and subsequently torn down . The Wigwam was built in its place nine years later .

Billy Caldwell " Sauganash " , who served as an interpreter for the Indian Agents , was the honoree of the hotel . Born in approximately 1780 , " Sauganash " was an Indian half-breed , whose father was Colonel Caldwell , an Irish officer in the British Army stationed at Detroit ; his mother was a Pottawatomi . He was schooled at a Jesuit school in Detroit , where he learned English and French . Caldwell learned several Indian dialects . Billy Caldwell 's Indian Name was " Straight Tree " , but he was known by " Sauganash " , meaning Englishman in the Potawatomi language . As a warrior , Sauganash was under the influence of Tecumseh until his death and he became a Captain in the British Indian Department .

In 1834 ( three years before Chicago incorporated as a city ) , the hotel hosted the first professional public performance in Chicago at a cost of $ .50 ( $ 11.85 today ) for adults and $ .25 for children . The show promised a wide variety of talents including ventriloquism . In the following two years , several traveling showmen performed at the hotel . In 1837 , the Chicago Theater , which was the first local theater company , set up shop in the hotel 's abandoned dining room . Co-managers Harry Isherwood and Alexander McKinzie procured an amusement license for the company from the city council , and it began performing a different billed show every night starting in late October or early November for approximately six weeks . The plays included titles The Idiot Witness , The Stranger , and The Carpenter of Rouen . Production of The Stranger took place in the dining room of the hotel . Following a six-week engagement , the company went on tour until the following spring , when it returned to a different local venue .

Ed the Happy Clown is a graphic novel by Canadian cartoonist Chester Brown . Its title character is a large-headed , childlike children 's clown who undergoes one horrifying affliction after another . The story in is a dark , humorous mix of genres and features scatological humour , sex , body horror , extreme graphic violence , and blasphemous religious imagery . Central to the plot are a man who cannot stop defecating ; the head of a miniature , other-dimensional Ronald Reagan attached to the head of Ed 's penis ; and a female vampire who seeks revenge on her adulterous lover who had murdered her to escape his sins . The surreal , largely improvised story began with a series of unrelated short strips that Brown went on to tie into a single narrative . Brown first serialized it in his comic book Yummy Fur , and the first , incomplete collected edition in 1989 , titled Ed the Happy Clown : A Yummy Fur Book . Shortly after , Brown became unsatisfied with the direction of the serial ; he brought it to an abrupt end in the eighteenth issue of Yummy Fur and turned to autobiography . A second edition titled Ed the Happy Clown : The Definitive Ed Book appeared in 1992 with an altered ending and most of the later parts of the series eliminated . The contents of this edition were re-serialized with extensive endnotes in 2005 – 2006 as a nine-issue Ed the Happy Clown series and collected as Ed the Happy Clown : A Graphic-Novel in 2012 .

Brown grew up in Châteauguay , Quebec , a Montreal suburb with a large English-speaking minority . He was an introverted youth attracted to comic books from a young age . He aimed at a career drawing superhero comics , but was unsuccessful in getting work with Marvel or DC Comics after graduating from high school . He moved to Toronto and discovered underground comix and the small-press community . By the early 1980s Marvel and DC had come to dominate comic-book publishing in North America , and comic shops became the main places of purchase , with a clientele of dedicated comics fans . During this time , a trend towards greater ambition and expressiveness was developing on the fringes , such as Dave Sim 's long Cerebus series and the avant-garde graphics magazine Raw in which the serialization of Art Spiegelman 's graphic novel Maus appeared . Brown was to find himself in the alternative comics scene that grew throughout the decade . Brown was feeling himself in a creatively stagnant period when he came across a book on Surrealism : Wallace Fowley 's The Age of Surrealism ( 1950 ) . The book motivated Brown to work on an improvised minicomic series which he called Yummy Fur and self-published from 1983 .

Ed suffers one indignity after another as the plot gets grimmer and more surreal . His bizarre misfortunes include having the tip of his penis replaced by the head of a miniature , talking Ronald Reagan from another universe . Ed 's adventures featured encounters with penis-worshipping pygmies , flesh-eating rats , Martians , Frankenstein 's monster , and other characters from traditional genre fiction . The story unfolds with a black-comedic sensibility topped with Christian symbolism . Despite his ordeals — being imprisoned for a crime he did not commit , falling in love with a vampire — Ed remains a gentle , childlike innocent , with a Candide-like optimism . The story has had more than one ending and is a challenge to summarize .

The children 's hospital Ed is about to visit burns down with all the children in it . A number of apparently unrelated short gag strips appear before Brown begins to tie the narrative together into one plot . Ed is imprisoned when he finds hospital janitor Chet Doodley 's severed hand and the police assume Ed had taken it . In the prison a man is unable stop defecating and his faeces fill the jail , engulfing all , including Ed . When Ed emerges he finds the head of his penis replaced with the head of a miniature Ronald Reagan from Dimension X — a world much like Ed 's but whose people are tiny . Dimension X has dumped its waste into a trans-dimensional portal , which turns out to be the anus of the man who could not stop defecating . Reagan 's body remains in Dimension X , and the professor who discovered the portal travels to Ed 's dimension to find the head , making contact with the authorities of Ed 's world . Chet believes the loss of his hand is due to his unfaithfulness to his wife ; as a child his mother read Chet the story of a Saint Justin who cuts off his right hand to avoid sinning , and Chet assumes his lost hand is a like punishment from God . He tries to atone for it by killing his girlfriend , Josie , in the woods . Penis-worshipping , rat-eating pygmy cannibals drag the bodies of both Josie and Ed into the sewers . As they are about to sever Ed 's penis Josie reanimates in time to save him . The two attempt to escape from the sewers when they are accidentally shot by a mother – daughter team of pygmy hunters . Josie dies again , and her disembodied spirit learns from the ghost of Chet 's sister that she has become a vampire .

The professor from Dimension X and members of the staff of the Adventures in Science TV show find Ed and the President and bring them to the TV studio . The discovery is big news , and the professor and the President make a TV appearance . When it is discovered that the people of Dimension X are homosexual or bisexual the professor is put to a violent death , and Ed and the body of Josie are put in confinement . The studio is invaded by the pygmies when they recognize their " Penis God " on television . Josie 's spirit returns to her body , and she and Ed escape and make their way to the hospital where Chet works . Josie gets her revenge by seducing Chet and killing him before he is able to repent , thus sending him to Hell . Ed is one of a number of men secretly kidnapped to provide another , Bick Backman , with a penis transplant — a larger one to please his wife . Out of the lineup of unconscious men , Ed 's penis with the President 's head on it stands out and is chosen for Backman . After the operation , Mounties raid the hospital and , finding Reagan , take Backman and leave Ed , who has had a larger penis sewn on in the President 's place . The hospital hands Ed over to Mrs Backman , claiming he is her husband . Though suspicious , she accepts Ed — and his newly transplanted penis .

The ending that appeared in Yummy Fur has not appeared in book editions . In it , Mrs Backman takes Ed home , but her children are not convinced he is their father . After he spends some time in the house they decide " he 's way better than the other one " . There is a resemblance between Ed and Mrs Backman , and it is revealed they were twins separated at birth . While at church , the Backman children are kidnapped by stone aliens and are saved by Frankenstein 's monster , who brings them to Washington , D.C. where they find their kidnapped real father . Josie and Ed 's zombie friend rescues the Backmans . Ed has his clown makeup restored and reverts to his cheerful self . When he goes to visit Josie , he learns her apartment building has burned down , and she was the only casualty . Her charred skeleton is brought out , clutching an unburnt severed hand . The alternate ending from the 1992 and later versions drops most of the story that follows Chet 's death , replacing it with 17 new pages . In this version , Chet 's severed hand visits Josie 's apartment at night and rolls up her window shade . As she is a vampire , the sunlight in the morning burns her to death while she sleeps , and she and Chet are reunited in the flames of Hell .

A big-headed , childlike clown with Candide-like optimism , despite the hardships his creator puts him through . He is a passive protagonist to and around whom events occur . He spends much of the story with the head of a miniature Ronald Reagan from another dimension for a penishead . He later discovers , after having the president severed from his penis and having a new one attached , that he has a long-lost twin sister in Becky Backman . Brown considers Ed to be an " adult who 's pre-adolescent " , whose sexuality is not fully formed . A janitor working at a hospital , he is plagued with guilt over cheating on his wife after his hand falls off for no apparent reason . After having a dream in which a statue of the Virgin Mary turns into his girlfriend , Josie , and has sex with him , he murders Josie while having sex with her by stabbing her in the back in the woods . Josie , who becomes a vampire afterwards , hunts him down and eventually breaks his neck , sending him to Hell . " Chet " is short for " Chester " , and Douglas Wolk sees Chet as perhaps a stand-in for Brown himself , though Brown denies any autobiographical elements in the story . Brown has stated he had a phobia of losing his hand , as it would end his ability to draw , and so named the character " Chet " .

Chet 's beautiful former girlfriend , who becomes a vampire " for actively engaging in a grievous sin " for committing adultery with her boyfriend Chet , when he murders her by stabbing her in the back . Her vampire self ends up saving Ed from having his penis decapitated by pygmy cannibals , and eventually tracks down Chet and kills him , sending him to Hell . In an alternate ending , she finds herself in Hell as well , eternally embracing Chet while being consumed by fire . Though bearing the American president 's name and position , the diminutive Reagan bears no resemblance to his namesake . He comes from Dimension X , and his head becomes attached to the end of Ed 's penis after falling into an interdimensional portal . The president 's body remains in Dimension X , where people are much smaller than in Ed 's , and are homosexual . Brown had intended to use Ed Broadbent , a left-wing politician of the Canadian New Democratic Party ( NDP ) , but changed it to the right-wing Reagan as he believed Broadbent would have been too obscure to his American readers . He later regretted the decision and said he could have included an explanation . The idea of a talking penis has appeared in a number of other comics , such as The Talking Head ( 1990 ) by Paolo Baciliero and Pete Sickman-Garner 's Young Tim .

Ed spans a range of Brown 's interests , from political skepticism to scatological humour to vampires and werewolves . The story is dark and surreal , desperate and humorous . Christian elements especially — largely sacriligeous — are prominent in the book . They are at first innocuous and unimportant : a zombie named Christian , another character who believes he has found Christ 's face on a piece of adhesive tape . With the fourth issue of Yummy Fur , Brown 's surreal take on Christianity becomes central : the cover depicts the Virgin Mary holding not just the infant Christ , but also a severed hand . Within is the story of Saint Justin , whose amputation becomes a key motif : Chet loses his own hand and finds another ; his own appears mysteriously under Ed 's pillow . Only by praying for forgiveness for his adultery and by murdering his lover is Chet 's hand miraculously restored . According to the Lives of the Saints , the fictional Saint Justin severed his own hand , but in another version Brown presents , Justin 's wife cuts it off with a woodaxe when she catches her husband masturbating after rejecting her advances . The altered ending from 1992 has both Josie and Chet reunited in Hell , and the ghost of Chet 's sister becomes a devil . As Brown mixes surreal sacrilege with the sort of moralism that compels him to condemn Josie for her bloody revenge , Brian Evenson calls Brown " deft at muddying the waters in a way that makes it very hard to pin him down as either belieever or satirist , as either anti-religionist or apologist " .

While not part of the Ed story , Brown had been serializing straight adaptations in Yummy Fur of the Gospels of Mark and of Matthew during most of Ed 's run . R. Fiore called these adaptations " the best exploration of Christian mythology since Justin Green 's Binky Brown " , comparing Chet 's excessive Christian guilt with the " almost childlike retelling " of Mark . Yummy Fur readers also found " I Live in the Bottomless Pit " , a short strip in which a man discovers the Antichrist , who after millennia underground has forgotten his mission — a paradoxical one , as he states his orders were from God . Ed prominently features transgressive content including nudity , graphic violence , racist imagery , blasphemy , and profanity . Brown grew up in a strictly Baptist household in which he was not allowed to swear , as depicted in Brown 's graphic novel I Never Liked You ( 1994 ) . Brown challenged his own anxieties by tackling subjects such as scatological humour . Imagery such as the recurring Pygmy characters and their " ooga booga " language , Chris Lanier asserted , reinforce " old colonial imaging of ' third world natives ' " .

According to comics historian John Bell , " Brown arrived in print almost fully formed as an artist " . His style , while showing the influence of artists such as Robert Crumb , Harold Gray , and Jack Kirby , was distinct from his predecessors . He continued to mature as an artist and draughtsman throughout the run of Ed , showing enormous growth from the beginning to end of the graphic novel . Unlike most cartoonists , Brown does not compose his pages , but draws each panel on separate sheets of paper and assembles them into pages afterwards . The panels in Ed were on 5-by-5-inch ( 13 cm × 13 cm ) squares of cheap typewriter paper , which he placed on a block of wood on his lap in lieu of a drawing board . He used a number of different drawing tools , including Rapidograph technical pens , markers , crowquill pens and ink brushes . He had some photocopies printed from his pencilled work , which he found both faster to produce and more spontaneous in feel . Brown worked freely , without ruling lines or lettering . Usually he roughly sketched the artwork with a light blue pencil , then elaborated it with an HB pencil , at which stage he has said " most of the work [ was ] done " . Brown inked the pre-Vortex stories with a brush ; when he committed himself to a regular schedule , he felt inking with a brush would be too slow , and switched to cheap markers or pencils to increase his productivity . He continued to use a brush to fill in blacks and to letter his dialogue balloons . Brown came to favour the quality of the brush again toward the end of the story 's run , but found it slow to work with and thus used it less than he would have preferred . By photocopying before sending the artwork to the printer , Brown could ensure that the copy printed from was sufficiently black .

While he occasionally scripted certain pages or scenes , more frequently he did not , and often wrote dialogue only after having drawn the artwork . Brown did not plan out the stories , though he might have certain ideas prepared . Some ideas he found carried him for up to two to three issues of Yummy Fur . Brown used of flashback scenes different perspectives to alter the story to his needs — for example , when Brown revisited the scene of Josie 's murder , he placed Ed behind a bush , linking the two characters ' fates . When he had originally done the murder scene , he says he did not " know that Ed was over in the bushes a couple feet away " . Brown found himself dissatisfied with much of the work , and later abandoning about a hundred printed pages which he intends not to have reprinted . He found that the improvisational method did not work well with Underwater in the 1990s ; after cancelling that series he turned to carefully scripting out his stories , beginning with Louis Riel .

When Brown started Ed , he was largely influenced by the comics he had grown up with , especially monster stories from Marvel Comics such as Werewolf by Night and Frankenstein 's Monster by artists such as Mike Ploog , and from DC Comics such as Swamp Thing by artists such as Bernie Wrightson and Jim Aparo . Since graduating from high school , Brown had been inching towards underground comix , starting with the work of Richard Corben and especially Moebius in Heavy Metal , and eventually getting over his disgust over Robert Crumb 's sex-laden comics to become a huge fan of the Zap and Weirdo artist . He says the book that finally pulled him over into the underground was The Apex Treasury of Underground Comics , which included Crumb as well as Art Spiegelman 's original short " Maus " story . He was also affected by Will Eisner 's graphic novel , A Contract with God . Brown had already been an Eisner fan , but this book was different , " something that wasn 't about a character with a mask on his face " . He started drawing in a more underground style , and submitting work to Raw , Last Gasp and Fantagraphics . The work was rejected from these publishers for one reason or another , and Brown was eventually convinced by his friend Kris Nakamura , who was active in the Toronto small press scene , to take it and self-publish it . His minicomic , Yummy Fur , was the result , and included the earliest instalments of the Ed the Happy Clown story .

The story began in July 1983 in the second issue of Brown 's original Yummy Fur minicomic , the seven issues of which were reprinted in 1986 – 87 in the first three issues of the Vortex Comics-published Yummy Fur . Ed ran in the first eighteen issues of Yummy Fur , along other features , such as Brown 's Gospel adaptations . Brown envisioned Ed as an ongoing character in the vein of Marvel and DC comic-book characters . In the late 1980s he came to feel restricted by the character ; inspired by the revealing autobiographical work of Julie Doucet and Joe Matt and the simple cartooning of fellow Toronto cartoonist Seth , Brown turned to autobiography . While Ed was the main feature of Yummy Fur until Brown switched to autobiographical comics in 1990 , it was juxtaposed against straight adaptations of the gospels of Mark and Matthew , which filled up the rest of the Yummy Fur issues starting with issue # 4 . In 2004 Brown set to work on a revised Ed ; he pencilled a number of pages , but stopped when he came to believe the new version was no better than the original . Drawn and Quarterly — Brown 's publisher since 1991 — reissued the contents of the Definitive Ed collection in a nine issue series on smaller-sized pages from 2005 to 2006 titled Ed the Happy Clown , with new covers , previously unpublished art and extensive commentary by Brown . The contents came mainly from issues two through twelve , and some from issue seventeen . About 80 pages — a third of the original Ed material — remains uncollected , including the entire 24-page ending that appeared in issue eighteen .

The first collection , Ed the Happy Clown : A Yummy Fur Book , appeared in 1989 from Vortex Comics before Brown decided to end the story . It collects the Ed stories up to the twelfth issue of Yummy Fur and includes a cartoon foreword scripted by Harvey Pekar and drawn by Brown . It was this edition that in 1990 won Brown one of his two Harvey Awards , for Best Graphic Album , and a UK Comic Art Award the same year for Best Graphic Novel / Collection . The second edition came from Vortex in 1992 , after Brown had taken Yummy Fur to Drawn and Quarterly . Bill Marks had it labelled The Definitive Ed Book for marketing reasons . The edition reprinted what was in the first edition with an altered ending and some material from Yummy Fur # 17 , and excluded most of the material in the series from after Chet 's death . In June 2012 , Drawn and Quarterly published a third edition , Ed the Happy Clown : A Graphic-Novel , reprinting the contents of the Ed series of a few years earlier , including somewhat modified endnotes and annotations . It had a new introduction by Brown , replacing those by Pekar and Solomos in the previous editions . Compared to those editions , it was printed on higher-quality paper with higher contrast in the printing , and the artwork was reduced in size . Brown subtitled the book with a hyphen : " graphic-novel " . This reflects Brown 's distaste yet reluctant acceptance of the term , as its usage had by then become widespread . Brian Evenson sees this as a Brown-like eccentricity and a gesture emphasizing the equal importance Brown places on both word and image . The book was a bestseller .

The 2012 edition also included a ten-page story called " The Door " , which Brown redrew from an anonymous public domain story from a horror comic book . In the story , a couple go through a door in a funhouse which leads through a passage in which they get lost for years . Their clothes disintegrate over that time , exposing their genitals , until they finally come across another door — one that leads them to Hell . Brown wrote he found the original story truly horrifying , as the couple had done nothing apparent to deserve their fate . He had originally intended to incorporate it into the Ed story , but capriciously veered off in another narrative direction . The artwork appeared at its largest in the Vortex Yummy Fur issues ; it was somewhat smaller in the minicomics and first two collected editions . The artwork was smallest in the 2012 Drawn and Quarterly edition , a size Brown considered ideal , stating , " The smaller the better , as long as the words are still legible . " The 2012 edition also had wider page margins and gutters between the images .

Ed was seen by many critics a high point of the early alternative comics scene in the 1980s , echoes of which can be seen in such later surrealistic graphics novels as Like a Velvet Glove Cast in Iron by Daniel Clowes and Black Hole by Charles Burns . The story won praise from The Comics Journal and mainstream publications such as The Village Voice and Rolling Stone , which placed Ed on an early-1990s " Hot " list . Time placed Ed at seventh on its list of " All Time Top Ten Graphic Novels " , while publisher and critic Kim Thompson placed Ed 27th on his top 100 comics of the 20th Century , and editor and critic Tom Spurgeon called Ed " one of the three best alt-comix serials of all time " . The book appeared in Gene Kannenberg 's 500 Essential Graphic Novels ( 2008 ) . Ed had a large impact on a number of Brown 's contemporaries , including fellow Canadians Dave Sim and Seth , the latter of whom was taken in by the ambitiousness of Brown 's storytelling , saying " Those brilliant sequences where he would show a situation and then return to it later from a different perspective , like the death of Josie , really blew me away " — and Dave Cooper , who called Ed " the most perfect book ever " . Others who cite Ed as an influence on their work include Daniel Clowes , Chris Ware , Craig Thompson , Matt Madden , Eric Reynolds and the Canadian cartoonists Alex Fellows , whose Canvas shows the influence of Ed , and Bryan Lee O 'Malley , who calls Brown " a Golden God " and whose Lost at Sea was heavily influenced by Ed . Anders Nilsen calls Ed " completely amazing and one of the best comics ever " , placing it in his top five comic books , and citing it as a major influence on his spontaneous Big Questions .

Critic Chris Lanier placed Ed in a tradition that included Like a Velvet Glove Cast in Iron , Max Andersson 's Pixy , and Eric Drooker 's Flood ! ; he wrote that symbols appear with such frequency and importance in these works as to suggest significance , while remaining symbolically empty . He finds predecessors for these works in German Dada and the Theatre of the Absurd . Reviewer Brad McKay found Ed " both hopeless and funny , a trick moviemakers like Tim Burton and Todd Solondz wish they could pull off more regularly " . D. Aviva Rothschild likened the story to " staring at six-day-old roadkill " . Brown 's father was too offended to keep reading after the fifth minicomic issue , " Ed and the Beanstalk " . In Yummy Fur # 4 , there was a scene in which a fictional " Saint Justin " masturbates after putting off his wife 's advances . In one panel " Saint Justin " had just ejaculated all over his hand , his penis in full view and his semen-covered hand clearly visible behind it . Vortex publisher Bill Marks had the panel covered up with another illustration after discussing it with Brown . Brown agreed to this censorship , but was " annoyed " by it . Marks later called it a mistake that he would not make again , and when Brown included a scene in the following issue of the Ronald Reagan penishead vomiting Marks made no objection , and all future collections of Ed have the original uncensored panel . The censored portion of the panel was covered with a note delivered by a rabbit that Brown often used as a surrogate self ; the message read :

" Sorry folks but this picture of a penis ejaculating onto a hand has been censored . If any of you want to see this page as I originally drew it send me a self addressed envelope ( and an age statement ) care of Vortex Comics and I 'll send you a photocopy . " In stores , Yummy Fur was often wrapped in plastic with " adults only " labels on it . It is not known if Ed or Yummy Fur were banned from any stores , but Diamond , the largest American comics distributor , stopped carrying it for a time in 1988 . A publisher discovered that boxes of its feminist publication were lined with discarded pages of Yummy Fur , included pages in which Chet stabs Josie while having sex with her . The publisher lodged a complaint with the Ontario-based printer , which informed Vortex it would no longer handle Yummy Fur . The third issue of the Drawn and Quarterly Ed series was seized at the Canadian border , but was later deemed admissible . Critic R. Fiore initially found the 1992 ending disappointing , but changed his mind 2012 , saying the sad ending gave Ed " an emotional punch that it wouldn 't otherwise have " . Cartoonists such as Craig Thompson at first found the story off-putting , but later came to admire it . Critic Douglas Wolk wrote that it is not surprising that Brown had not settled on one conclusion to the story , as that " would mean some kind of narrative closure " , while Ed 's premise is that " everything makes sense as a big picture eventually , but nothing can be relied on from moment to moment " .

Canadian filmmaker Bruce McDonald has had the rights since 1991 to adapt Ed to film , for which he has planned to use Yummy Fur as the title . Such a film could use stop-motion animation , but the project has yet to get off the ground . At one point McDonald hoped to have Macaulay Culkin star as Ed , Rip Torn as Ronald Reagan and Drew Barrymore as Nancy Reagan . In 2000 , it was reported that the movie would have a budget of $ 6,000,000 , but it was unable to get the financial backing . A script was written by Don McKellar , and later with John Frizzell . The City of Toronto commissioned Brown to do as part of their Live with Culture campaign ; the strip in Now magazine for six weeks in 2007 . In one episode a zombie and his human girlfriend attend a screening of McDonald 's still-unmade adaptation of Ed . The same year , McDonald placed Brown 's graphic novel in scenes in his film The Tracey Fragments .

Lilioid monocots ( lilioids , liliid monocots , petaloid monocots , petaloid lilioid monocots ) is an informal name used for a grade ( grouping of taxa with common characteristics ) of five monocot orders ( Petrosaviales , Dioscoreales , Pandanales , Liliales and Asparagales ) in which the majority of species have flowers with relatively large , coloured tepals . This characteristic is similar to that found in lilies ( " lily-like " ) . Petaloid monocots refers to the flowers having tepals which all resemble petals ( petaloid ) . The taxonomic terms Lilianae or Liliiflorae have also been applied to this assemblage at various times . From the early nineteenth century many of the species in this group of plants were put into a very broadly defined family , Liliaceae sensu lato or s.l. ( lily family ) . These classification systems are still found in many books and other sources . Within the monocots the Liliaceae s.l. were distinguished from the Glumaceae . The development of molecular phylogenetics , cladistic theory and phylogenetic methods in the 1990s resulted in a dismemberment of the Liliaceae and its subsequent redistribution across three lilioid orders ( Liliales , Asparagales and Dioscoreales ) . Subsequent work has shown that two other more recently recognized orders , Petrosaviales and Pandanales also segregate with this group , resulting in the modern concept of five constituent orders within the lilioid monocot assemblage . This has resulted in treating monocots as three informal groups , alismatid , lilioid and commelinid monocots . The lilioids are paraphyletic in the sense that commelinids form a sister group to Asparagales .

The descriptive term " petaloid lilioid monocot " relates to the conspicuous petal-like ( petaloid ) tepals which superficially resemble true lilies ( Lilium ) . Morphologically , the petaloid or lilioid monocots can be considered to possess five groups ( pentacyclic ) of three-fold ( trimerous ) whorls . Lilioid monocots all have flowers which can be considered to have been derived from a lily-like flower with six relatively similar tepals , and six stamens . The typical lilioid gynoecium has three carpels fused into a superior trilocular ( three-chambered ) superior ovary , axile placentation , a single hollow style , and several ovules with anatropous orientation in one or two rows per locule and nectaries at the base . However , floral synapomorphy ( shared characteristics ) is rare since most conform to the general monocot pattern . This pattern is ancestral ( plesiomorphic ) for the lilioid monocots . Structural monosymmetry is rare , except for Orchidaceae . Various trends are apparent among the lilioids , notably a change to an inferior ovary and a reduction of the number of stamens to three . In some groups ( such as the genus Trillium in the Liliaceae ) , the tepals have become clearly differentiated , so that the flower has three coloured petals and three smaller green sepals . Almost all lilioid monocots retain at least three petal-like tepals . Since some commelinids ( e.g. Tradescantia ) have petaloid flowers , the term ' lilioid ' is a more accurate one for the group which excludes them , since the term petaloid monocot is still occasionally used in describing commelinids . The morphological concept of petaloid monocots has been equated with " animal-attracting " ( that is , for pollination ) as opposed to wind-pollinating plants ( such as grasses ) that have evolved very different floral structures . Pollen structure shows that of the two main tapetum types , secretory and plasmodial , the lilioid monocots are nearly all secretory .

In the orders that branched off before the lilioid monocots , the Acorales and Alismatales , flowers differ in several ways . In some cases , like Acorus ( Acorales ) , they have become insignificant . In others , like Butomus ( Alismatales ) , they have six coloured tepals , and so could be called ' petaloid ' , but stamens and carpels are more numerous than in the lilioid monocots . The later evolved commelinids have various kinds of flower , few of which are ' lily-like ' . In the order Poales , comprising grasses , rushes and sedges , flowers are either petal-less or have small , unshowy petals . Many Zingiberales species have brightly coloured and showy flowers . However , their apparent structure is misleading . For example , the six tepals of cannas are small and hidden under expanded and brightly coloured stamens or staminodes which resemble petals and may be mistaken for them .

In one of the earliest monocot taxonomies , that of John Lindley ( 1830 ) , the grouping corresponding to the lilioid monocots was the " tribe " Petaloideae . In Lindley 's system the monocots consisted of two tribes , the Petaloideae , and the Glumaceae ( the grasses and sedges ) . Lindley divided the Petaloideae into 32 " orders " ( roughly corresponding to families ) and the Glumaceae into two further orders . Various successive taxonomies of the monocots also emphasized the grouping of species with petaloid ( undifferentiated ) perianths , such as Bentham and Hooker 's Coronarieæ and Hutchinson 's Corolliferae ( " Corolla bearing " ) ( 1936 ) . Hence the concept that there was a natural grouping of monocots whose flowers were predominantly petaloid , gave notion to the term " petaloid monocots " . The core group of petaloids were the Liliaceae , hence " lilioid monocots " . The term " lilioid monocot " or lilioid " has had widely varying interpretations . One of the narrower applications is " lily-like " monocots , meaning the two orders Asparagales and Liliales , but the term has also been applied to Takhtajan 's superorder Lilianae , the whole of Liliales , or restricted to Cronquist 's broadly defined Liliaceae . Although " petaloid " and " lilioid " have often been used interchangeably , as Heywood points out , some usages of " petaloid monocot " , particularly in horticulture , are so broad as to be almost meaningless in that it had been used to refer to all species with conspicuous petals or perianth segments ( tepals ) , which would cover a broad swathe of families ( he estimated three dozen across many orders ) . Other authors have defined it equally broadly as " having two whorls of tepals ( sepals and petals ) that are petal-like " .

As Kron and Chase stated in 1995 , this taxonomic unit had been in a considerable state of flux , with significant variation between the systems of Cronquist ( 1981 ) , Thorne ( 1983 , 1992 ) , and Dahlgren ( 1985 ) . When classification systems were based on morphological characters alone , lilioid species which clearly departed from the " lily " pattern were easily placed into separate families . For example , the Amaryllidaceae contained species whose flowers had six stamens and an inferior ovary . The Iridaceae contained those with three stamens and an inferior ovary . The remaining taxa were put together in a very broadly defined Liliaceae , usually refereed to as Liliaceae sensu lato ( s.l. ) . The Cronquist system 's definition , for example , is the broadest of all . Rolf Dahlgren and colleagues were responsible for one of the most radical reorganisation of families , and in their 1985 monocot monograph defined the two orders ( Asparagales and Liliales ) which contain the bulk of monocot geophytes , as constituting the lilioid monocots . The development of DNA sequencing and the use of genetic data in determining relationships between species of monocots confirmed what many taxonomists had long suspected : Liliaceae s.l. was highly polyphyletic . The family was demonstrated to include a significant number of unrelated groups , which belonged to quite separate families and even orders . For instance some genera such as Hyacinthus , previously placed in Liliaceae s.l. , were reclassified in families within Asparagales ( in this case Asparagaceae ) . In 1995 Chase et al. reviewed the understanding of the lilioids and equated them to Dahlgreen 's Liliiflorae , which they designated as superorder Lilianae . They pointed out that the understanding of the phylogenetics of this group was critical for the establishment of a monocot classification . They also noted that while many authors treated this group as monophyletic ( having a common ancestor ) , a closer reading of their texts revealed evidence of paraphyly ( excluding some descendants of a common ancestor ) . For instance , Dahlgren had based monophyly on a single synapomorphy , that of a petaloid perianth , yet in discussing his Lilliflorae admitted it was undoubtedly paraphyletic . Dahlgren treated the monocots as split between ten superorders and placed five orders ( Dioscoreales , Asparagales , Liliales , Melanthiales , Burmanniales and Orchidales ) in his Liliiflorae .

In the 1995 study by Chase et al. referred to above , which was the largest yet to use purely molecular data , the results demonstrated paraphyly of the lilioids . However , because their data contradicted purely morphological phylogenies they were reluctant to draw definite conclusions as to the monophyly of this group . They identified four major clades of monocots . They named these alismatids , aroids , stemonoids and dioscoreoids , in addition to Acorus , and a core group of Asparagales , Liliales and commelinoids . They based the names of these groups on the closest corresponding superorders and orders of Dahlgren , with the exception of stemonoids ( based on Stemonaceae for which there was no obvious equivalent ) . There was no clear clade corresponding to Dahlgren 's Liliiflorae , whose families were distributed amongst the aroids and dioscoreoids . Of Dahlgren 's Liliiflorae , the Dioscoreales largely grouped into dioscoreoids , with the exception of Stemonaceae . The Asparagales formed two major groupings , which they labelled " higher " and " lower asparagoids " , and included both the Iridaceae and Orchidaceae from Dahlgren 's Liliales . On the other hand , a number of families from three other orders ( Asparagales , Dioscoreales , Melanthiales ) segregated together with the remaining Liliales families . Genera from Dahlgren 's Melanthiales were found in both dioscoreoids and the redefined Liliales . Finally Dahlgren 's Burmanniales were found to belong with the dioscoreoids . Some Asparagales taxa were also found amongst the commelinoids . The stemonoids were formed from Stemonaceae and other families from a variety of orders , including Pandanaceae ( which alone formed Dahlgren 's Pandaniflorae ) .

In an attempt to resolve the apparent differences between morphological and molecularly defined trees , a combined analysis was undertaken which confirmed superorder Liliiflorae as monophyletic , provided that a few modifications were undertaken . These included the removal of two tribes of Melanthiaceae ( Melanthiales ) and the inclusion of three additional families ( Cyclanthaceae , Pandanaceae and Velloziaceae ) from other superorders . This newly and more narrowly redefined Lilianae / Liliiflorae contained three orders , Aparagales , Liliales and Dioscoreales ( which now included the stemonoids ) . This analysis also allowed for the establishment of a single synapomorphy , although this time by the presence of an inferior ovary . Significantly , the authors noted that it was no wonder the authors of angiosperm classifications had been exasperated by the Lilianae .

These findings , presented at the first Monocot Conference in 1993 , with the addition of several studies that had become available in the interim , formed the basis of the 1998 consensus Angiosperm Phylogeny Group ( APG ) ordinal scheme . Among other things , the Alismatales were expanded and new orders such as Acorales ( a placement for Acorus ) and Pandanales ( which now represented the stemonoids as well as new families ) added . While not formally assigning any supraordinal ranks , the classification did recognize an informal grouping of monocot orders as the commelinoids . Otherwise the APG recognized only six monocot orders ( Acorales , Alismatales , Asparagales , Dioscoreales , Liliales and Pandanales ) . The last four were however grouped together in the resulting cladogram and most closely represent the concept of lilioids , although this left some unplaced monocot families , including Corsiaceae and Petrosaviaceae . Simultaneous with the release of the 1998 APG classification were two events : the publication of Kubitzki 's major monograph on the monocots and the Second Monocot Conference . Kubitzki defined superorder Lilianae as all monocots except superorders Commelinae , Alismatanae and the Acoraceae , that is the four orders Asparagales , Liliales , Dioscoreales and Pandanales . The Monocot Conference devoted an entire section to Systematics of the Lilioids and included an update of their previous research by Chase and colleagues . On this occasion the latter felt that there was now enough data to put forward a definitive classification , defining the Lilioids as comprising the four orders placed in Lilianae by Kubitzki . Rudall and colleagues ( 2002 ) followed Chase ( 2000 ) , in using the term " lilioid monocots " and again noting unresolved polytomy between these four orders and the remaining monocot clades ( commelinids and Petrosaviaceae ) , although at that time the Petrosaviaceae were still unplaced .

There was now enough new data to justify revising the APG system , and a new classification was issued in 2003 . Although this resulted in changes within the orders , it did not affect the relationship between them . Lilioid monocots were discussed but not formally recognized ( commelinids , renamed from commelinoids , being the only supraordinal grouping in the monocots to be named ) and Petrosaviaceae remained unplaced . The second version of the APG coincided with the third Monocot Conference ( 2003 ) , the findings from which , using additional molecular markers , helped to resolve some of the remaining questions regarding relationships within this assemblage . Petrosaviaceae was shown to be included in what Chase refers to as " liliids " and placed in order Petrosaviales , while Dioscoreales and Pandanales were demonstrated to be sister clades . Rapid advances in understanding monocot relationships necessitated the release of another revision of the APG classification ( 2009 ) , which incorporated these advances . Further definition of the relationships between lineages using multiple markers is continuing . Textbooks and other sources produced in the last century are inevitably based on older classifications . Publications using versions of the APG system are now appearing and the World Checklist of Selected Plant Families from the Royal Botanic Gardens , Kew now uses the APG III system , as does the Angiosperm Phylogeny Website and hence the classification of the lilioid monocots shown in the cladogram below . The Kew botanists treat the monocots as falling into three major groupings : alismatid monocots ( Acorales , Alismatales ) , lilioid monocots ( the five other non-commelinid monocots ) and commelinid monocots . They also organize their monocot research into two teams I : Alismatids and Lilioids and II : Commelinids . A similar approach is taken by Judd in his Plant systematics .

The cladogram shown below displays the orders of Lilianae sensu Chase & Reveal ( monocots ) based on molecular phylogenetic evidence . Lilioid monocot orders are bracketed , namely Petrosaviales , Dioscoreales , Pandanales , Liliales and Asparagales . These constitute a paraphyletic assemblage , that is groups with a common ancestor that do not include all direct descendants ( in this case commelinids which are a sister group to Asparagales ) ; to form a clade , all the groups joined by thick lines would need to be included . While Acorales and Alismatales have been collectively referred to as " alismatid monocots " , the remaining clades ( lilioid and commelinid monocots ) have been referred to as the " core monocots " . The relationship between the orders ( with the exception of the two sister orders ) is pectinate , that is diverging in succession from the line that leads to the commelinids . Numbers indicate crown group ( most recent common ancestor of the sampled species of the clade of interest ) divergence times in mya ( million years ago ) . While this is the most commonly understood relationship , Davis et al . ( 2013 ) using a combination of plastid genomes have suggested that if Asparagales is treated sensu stricto by excluding its largest and most atypical family , Orchidaceae then Aparagales sensu APG may not be monophyletic and that Orchidaceae and Liliales may be sister groups , and in turn are the sister of Asparagales . However , their data produced conflicting models . Zeng et al . ( 2014 ) using nuclear genes also found evidence for a sister relationship between Asparagales and Liliales . Although divergence time estimates within the lilioids have varied considerably , they were also able to obtain molecular clock estimates for the origin of the lilioids at approximately 125 mya ( Cretaceous period ) . On the other hand , a large data set using a combined analysis of nuclear , mitochondrial and plastid genes together with nuclear phytochrome C was in agreement with the earlier APG relationships .

Nunney Castle is a medieval castle at Nunney in the English county of Somerset . Built in the late 14th century by Sir John Delamare on the profits of his involvement in the Hundred Years War , the moated castle 's architectural style , possibly influenced by the design of French castles , has provoked considerable academic debate . Remodelled during the late 16th century , Nunney Castle was damaged during the English Civil War and is now ruined . English Heritage maintain the site as a tourist attraction . The architectural historian Nikolaus Pevsner has described Nunney as " aesthetically the most impressive castle in Somerset . "

Nunney Castle was built near the village of Nunney in Somerset by Sir John Delamare . Delamare had been a soldier during the Hundred Years War with France , where he had made his fortune . He obtained a licence to crenellate from Edward III to build a castle on the site of his existing , unfortified manor house in 1373 and set about developing a new , substantial fortification . The resulting castle centred on a stone tower-keep , measuring 60 feet by 24 feet ( 18 m by 7 m ) internally and 54 feet ( 16 m ) tall , with four round corner-towers . The tower-keep had eight-foot ( 2.4 m ) thick walls made from Lias Oolite ashlar stone and was designed around three floors . The corner towers had conical roofs and prominent machicolations . The ground floor of the tower-house included the kitchen and other service areas . The functions of the first and second floors are uncertain ; one theory is that the first floor was another service area , with the hall on the second floor ; another approach argues that the first floor formed the hall , and the second floor living accommodation ; a minority view proposes that the first floor was an armoury . The third floor was used as living accommodation for the owning family . The original design had a number of windows and fireplaces on the upper floors , but the hall would have been relatively dark and the stairs were inconveniently narrow .

The tower-keep had a modest entrance , which was reached by a draw-bridge that lay across the surrounding moat , which initially reached right up to the base of the castle . A simple , 12-foot ( 3.6 m ) high bailey wall , with minimal defensive value , surrounded the moat , which was in contrast wide , 10-foot ( 3 m ) deep , and would have been difficult for an attacker to drain . On the east side of the castle Nunney Brook was used as a line of defence rather than a bailey wall . Historians , such as Adrian Pettifer and Stuart Rigold , previously believed that the design of Nunney was heavily influenced by the French castle designs that Delamare would have seen on his military campaigns . Nunney closely resembles the Bastille in Paris , for example , and the machicolations are typical of those found in French castles . Nunney was considered a conservative , even slightly backward design and probably built to protect against French invasion . Historians such as Robert Liddiard and Matthew Johnson are now less certain . Nunney is regarded as a bold , striking design , similar in many ways to those at Herstmonceux or Saltwood Castle . Whilst Nunney does resemble many French castles , there is no direct evidence that it was built in imitation of these designs , and indeed there are other English castles , such as Mulgrave and Dudley , that have a similar structure to Nunney 's . Nunney Castle may be better understood instead as characteristic of a wider range of tower-keeps built in England during the period , designed , as Nigel Pounds puts it , " to allow very rich men to live in luxury and splendour . "

Nunney Castle was inherited by John 's son , Philip Delamere , and grandson , Elias , before passing by marriage into the Poulet family following Elias ' probable death during Henry V 's campaigns in France . Sir John Poulet and his son John , and grandson , also called John , held the castle during most of the 15th century , but their primary residence was Basing Castle in Hampshire rather than Nunney . William Paulet , the Marquess of Winchester , was the final member of the family to own the castle ; after his death in 1572 it passed rapidly through several owners and in 1577 was sold by Swithun Thorpe to John Parker , who only kept it for a year before selling it to Richard Prater , at a cost of £ 2,000 . The castle was redeveloped in the second half of the 16th century , probably by the Praters : the windows were enlarged to let in more light ; a grand staircase was built in one of the towers ; a Catholic altar was installed , and a revetment , or terrace , was built around the inside of the moat , leaving it 25 feet ( 7.6 m ) wide .

Nunney Castle continued to be owned by the Roman Catholic Prater family into the 17th century . In 1642 the English Civil War broke out between the rival factions of Parliament and the king ; like many Catholics , Colonel Richard Prater supported Charles I. As the war progressed the Royalist situation deteriorated , however , and the south-west became one of the few remaining Royalist strongholds ; Nunney Castle was garrisoned in anticipation of Parliamentary attack and took in a number of refugees , including many Catholics . In September 1645 a Parliamentary army under the command of Lord Fairfax and Oliver Cromwell advanced into Somerset , taking Sherborne , Cary and Shepton Mallet before turning to Nunney . Two regiments of soldiers with cannons surrounded the castle on 18 September ; when Richard Prater refused to surrender , the cannons opened fire on the north side of the castle , breaching the castle wall . Richard continued to resist , hoisting a flag with a Catholic crucifix on it above the castle to taunt the besiegers , but two days later the garrison surrendered . Due to the damage caused by the cannon , the castle escaped the slighting , or deliberate damaging , that occurred to many other castles at the end of the civil war . Nonetheless , Richard Prater was forbidden to return to the castle , despite his promises to support Parliament , and his son , George Prater , only recovered Nunney from its interim owners after Charles II was restored to the throne in 1660 . The castle declined and was sold by the Praters to William Whitchurch around 1700 . During the 18th century the building was still in a reasonable condition and in 1789 an order was received make it ready to receive French prisoners , although it is unlikely they ever arrived .

By the 20th century , Nunney Castle was increasingly ruined and covered in thick ivy . As a result , on 25 December 1910 a portion of the damaged north wall entirely collapsed — most of the fallen stone was stolen by local people . In 1926 , with the fabric of the castle under threat , the owner , Robert Bailey-Neale , transferred the property to the Commissioner of Works , who began a programme of restoration work . The castle is now run by English Heritage as a tourist attraction and is a scheduled monument . The architectural historian Nikolaus Pevsner has described the castle as " aesthetically the most impressive castle in Somerset . "

Air Marshal John William " Jake " Newham , AC ( born 30 November 1930 ) is a retired senior commander of the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) . He served as Chief of the Air Staff ( CAS ) from 1985 until 1987 . Joining the RAAF in 1951 , he flew Gloster Meteor jets with No. 77 Squadron in the Korean War in 1953 , and subsequently de Havilland Vampires with No. 78 Wing on garrison duty in Malta . From 1958 to 1960 , he served with No. 3 Squadron , operating CAC Sabres during the Malayan Emergency . He took charge of No. 3 Squadron in 1967 , when it re-equipped with the Dassault Mirage III supersonic fighter . His commands in the early 1970s included the Aircraft Research and Development Unit , RAAF Base Laverton , and No. 82 Wing , the last-mentioned during its first years operating the long-delayed General Dynamics F-111C swing-wing bomber . He was appointed Deputy Chief of the Air Staff in March 1984 , and CAS in May the following year . His tenure as CAS coincided with the release of the Dibb Report on Australia 's defence capabilities , and the controversial transfer of the RAAF 's battlefield helicopters to the Australian Army . Newham retired from the Air Force in July 1987 and became a company director .

John William Newham , known as " Jake " , was born in Cowra , New South Wales , and educated at Cowra High School . After matriculating , he worked as a clerk in the Commonwealth Bank , and joined the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) in February 1951 . He underwent flying training at RAAF Base Point Cook , Victoria , and graduated as a sergeant pilot in July 1952 . Following fighter training , he saw operational service in the Korean War , flying Gloster Meteor jets with No. 77 Squadron from February to September 1953 . He later recalled that his first sortie was as wingman to a Royal Air Force flight lieutenant : " We flew up past P 'yongyang and he showed me enemy gun locations by arranging for them to shoot at us " . Having been commissioned as a pilot officer midway through his Korean service , Newham 's next posting was with No. 78 ( Fighter ) Wing on Malta , where he flew de Havilland Vampires until 1955 . The wing had been on garrison duty in Malta since July 1952 , and Newham was one of five Korean War veterans who replaced pilots posted back to Australia . He married Jo Cranston in 1956 ; the couple had two daughters and a son . By November 1957 , Newham had been promoted to flight lieutenant and was undergoing conversion training on the CAC Sabre . From 1958 to 1960 he served in Malaya with No. 3 Squadron , whose Sabres conducted operations against communist guerrillas in the final years of the Malayan Emergency .

Newham attended RAAF Staff College , Canberra , from January to December 1964 . He then served as Chief Flying Instructor at No. 2 Operational Conversion Unit at RAAF Base Williamtown , New South Wales , taking temporary command of the unit as a squadron leader from July 1965 to April 1966 . That August , he commenced conversion training on the Dassault Mirage III supersonic jet fighter . Promoted to wing commander , from July 1967 to October 1968 he led No. 3 Squadron at Williamtown as it re-equipped with the Mirage . In 1971 , Newham was appointed commanding officer of the Aircraft Research and Development Unit . The following year he became Officer Commanding RAAF Base Laverton , Victoria . By now a group captain , Newham was appointed Officer Commanding No. 82 Wing at RAAF Base Amberley , Queensland , in 1973 . He formed the RAAF Washington Flying Unit at McClellan Air Force Base , California , on 31 March to ferry the first twelve ( out of a total order of twenty-four ) General Dynamics F-111C swing-wing bombers to Australia . On 1 June , Newham led the first three F-111s in to land at Amberley , a gala occasion attended by the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Defence , Lance Barnard , the Chief of the Air Staff , Air Marshal Charles Read , the Air Officer Commanding Operational Command , Air Vice Marshal Brian Eaton , and a large media contingent . Newham later recalled that " our air force cred went up in the area and in the world with that aeroplane " . Read ordered Newham to operate the F-111 with great caution initially , well within limits , lest the long-delayed and controversial aircraft suffer greater damage to its reputation through early attrition . Despite Newham 's protests over the plane 's capabilities , the restrictions remained in place until 1975 . That year he was appointed Staff Officer Operations at Headquarters Operational Command ( OPCOM ) .

Newham was promoted air commodore in 1976 and became Senior Air Staff Officer at OPCOM , serving through the following year . In 1978 he attended the Royal College of Defence Studies , London , and was made Director General of Operational Requirements in 1979 . In this capacity he visited Israel to investigate air-to-air refuelling operations , coming away favourably impressed : " the Israelis had more match practice than anybody around at the time . The experience gave me confidence in operational judgments . " He was promoted air vice marshal and appointed Chief of Air Force Operations in March 1980 , effective from April , and served on the Chief of the Air Staff Advisory Committee . In 1982 he was posted to the United States as the Head of Australian Defence Staff in Washington , D.C. Returning to Australia , Newham became Deputy Chief of the Air Staff in March 1984 . He was appointed an Officer of the Order of Australia on 11 June for services to the RAAF . Promoted to air marshal , Newham became Chief of the Air Staff ( CAS ) on 21 May 1985 , succeeding Air Marshal David Evans . Newham initially endorsed the Federal government 's 1986 Review of Australia 's Defence Capabilities , otherwise known as the Dibb Report , but shortly afterwards publicly criticised its " understanding of the application of air power " and " debatable judgments " , especially its lukewarm attitude to the employment of the F-111s for strategic strike . At a conference the same year , he reiterated the RAAF 's position that " defensive action may prevent defeat , but wars can be won only by offensive action " . On 9 June , he was raised to Companion of the Order of Australia for service to the RAAF , " particularly as Chief of the Air Staff " . Newham 's term as CAS was also marked by the Federal government 's decision to transfer the RAAF 's battlefield helicopters to the Australian Army , against the recommendation of an independent committee . According to Air Force historians Alan Stephens and Keith Isaacs , " Newham protected the best interests of the Australian Defence Force by getting on with the business of effecting the transfer , notwithstanding the deep disappointment within his own service . In February 1987 , OPCOM ( subsequently Air Command ) was restructured into Force Element Groups ( FEGs ) , large functional organisations that supplanted the earlier concept of all-powerful air base commands , to which every unit on a base reported . Initially established on a one-year trial basis , the FEGs have remained in place .

Parasaurolophus ( / ˌpærəsɔːˈrɒləfəs / PARR-ə-saw-ROL-ə-fəs or / ˌpærəˌsɔːrəˈloʊfəs / PARR-ə- SAWR-ə-LOH-fəs ; meaning " near crested lizard " in reference to Saurolophus ) is a genus of ornithopod dinosaur that lived in what is now North America during the Late Cretaceous Period , about 76.5 – 74.5 million years ago . It was a herbivore that walked both as a biped and a quadruped . Three species are recognized : P. walkeri ( the type species ) , P. tubicen , and the short-crested P. cyrtocristatus . Remains are known from Alberta ( Canada ) , and New Mexico and Utah ( USA ) . The genus was first described in 1922 by William Parks from a skull and partial skeleton found in Alberta . Parasaurolophus was a hadrosaurid , part of a diverse family of Cretaceous dinosaurs known for their range of bizarre head adornments . This genus is known for its large , elaborate cranial crest , which at its largest forms a long curved tube projecting upwards and back from the skull . Charonosaurus from China , which may have been its closest relative , had a similar skull and potentially a similar crest . Visual recognition of both species and sex , acoustic resonance , and thermoregulation have been proposed as functional explanations for the crest . It is one of the rarer hadrosaurids , known from only a handful of good specimens .

Like most dinosaurs , the skeleton of Parasaurolophus is incompletely known . The length of the type specimen of P. walkeri is estimated at 9.5 m ( 31 ft ) , and its weight is estimated at 2.5 tonnes ( 2.8 short tons ) . Its skull is about 1.6 m ( 5 ft 3 in ) long , including the crest , whereas the type skull of P. tubicen is over 2 m ( 6 ft 7 in ) long , indicating a larger animal . Its single known forelimb was relatively short for a hadrosaurid , with a short but wide shoulder blade . The thighbone measures 103 cm ( 41 in ) long in P. walkeri and is robust for its length when compared to other hadrosaurids . The upper arm and pelvic bones were also heavily built . Like other hadrosaurids , it was able to walk on either two legs or four . It probably preferred to forage for food on four legs , but ran on two . The neural spines of the vertebrae were tall , as was common in lambeosaurines ; tallest over the hips , they increased the height of the back . Skin impressions are known for P. walkeri , showing uniform tubercle-like scales but no larger structures .

The most noticeable feature was the cranial crest , which protruded from the rear of the head and was made up of the premaxilla and nasal bones . William Parks , who named the genus , hypothesized that a ligament ran from the crest to the notch to support the head , and cited the presence of possibly pathological notch as evidence . Although this idea seems unlikely , Parasaurolophus is sometimes restored with a skin flap from the crest to the neck . The crest was hollow , with distinct tubes leading from each nostril to the end of the crest before reversing direction and heading back down the crest and into the skull . The tubes were simplest in P. walkeri , and more complex in P. tubicen , where some tubes were blind and others met and separated . While P. walkeri and P. tubicen had long crests with only slight curvature , P. cyrtocristatus had a short crest with a more circular profile .

As its name implies , Parasaurolophus was initially thought to be closely related to Saurolophus because of its superficially similar crest . However , it was soon reassessed as a member of the lambeosaurine subfamily of hadrosaurids — Saurolophus is an hadrosaurine . It is usually interpreted as a separate offshoot of the lambeosaurines , distinct from the helmet-crested Corythosaurus , Hypacrosaurus , and Lambeosaurus . Its closest known relative appears to be Charonosaurus , a lambeosaurine with a similar skull ( but no complete crest yet ) from the Amur region of northeastern China , and the two may form a clade Parasaurolophini . P. cyrtocristatus , with its short , rounder crest , may be the most basal of the three known Parasaurolophus species , or it may represent subadult or female specimens of P. tubicen . The following cladogram is after the 2007 redescription of Lambeosaurus magnicristatus ( Evans and Reisz , 2007 ) :

Meaning " near crested lizard " , the name Parasaurolophus is derived from the Greek para / παρα " beside " or " near " , saurus / σαυρος " lizard " and lophos / λοφος " crest " . It is based on ROM 768 , a skull and partial skeleton missing most of the tail and the hind legs below the knees , which was found by a field party from the University of Toronto in 1920 near Sand Creek along the Red Deer River in Alberta , Canada . These rocks are now known as the Campanian-age Upper Cretaceous Dinosaur Park Formation . William Parks named the specimen P. walkeri in honor of Sir Byron Edmund Walker , Chairman of the Board of Trustees of the Royal Ontario Museum . Parasaurolophus remains are rare in Alberta , with only one other partial skull from ( probably ) the Dinosaur Park Formation , and three Dinosaur Park specimens lacking skulls , possibly belonging to the genus . In some faunal lists , there is a mention of possible P. walkeri material in the Hell Creek Formation of Montana , a rock unit of late Maastrichtian age . This occurrence is not noted by Sullivan and Williamson in their 1999 review of the genus , and has not been further elaborated upon elsewhere . It is possible that the fossil specimen could be an undescribed lambeosaurine .

In 1921 , Charles H. Sternberg recovered a partial skull ( PMU.R1250 ) from what is now known as the slightly younger Kirtland Formation in San Juan County , New Mexico . This specimen was sent to Uppsala , Sweden , where Carl Wiman described it as a second species , P. tubicen , in 1931 . The specific epithet is derived from the Latin tǔbǐcěn " trumpeter " . A second , nearly complete P. tubicen skull ( NMMNH P-25100 ) was found in New Mexico in 1995 . Using computed tomography of this skull , Robert Sullivan and Thomas Williamson gave the genus a monographic treatment in 1999 , covering aspects of its anatomy and taxonomy , and the functions of its crest . Williamson later published an independent review of the remains , disagreeing with the taxonomic conclusions . John Ostrom described another good specimen ( FMNH P27393 ) from New Mexico as P. cyrtocristatus in 1961 . It includes a partial skull with a short , rounded crest , and much of the postcranial skeleton except for the feet , neck , and parts of the tail . Its specific name is derived from the Latin curtus " shortened " and cristatus " crested " . The specimen was found in either the top of the Fruitland Formation or , more likely , the base of the overlying Kirtland Formation . The range of this species was expanded in 1979 , when David B. Weishampel and James A. Jensen described a partial skull with a similar crest ( BYU 2467 ) from the Campanian-age Kaiparowits Formation of Garfield County , Utah . Since then , another skull has been found in Utah with the short / round P. cyrtocristatus crest morphology .

Parasaurolophus is known from three certain species , P. walkeri , P. tubicen , and P. cyrtocristatus . All of them can be distinguished from each other , and have many differences . The first named species , therefore the type , is P. walkeri . One certain specimen , from the Dinosaur Park Formation is referred to it , but many more are almost certainly referable . Like stated above , it is different from the other two species , with it having a simpler internal structure than P. tubicen , a straighter crest and different internal structuring than P. cyrtocristatus . The next named species is P. tubicen , which is the largest of the Parasaurolophus species . It lived in New Mexico , where three specimens are known , and can be differentiated from its other species . It possesses a long and straight crest , with a very complex interior compared to the other species . All known specimens of P. tubicen come from the De-Na-Zin Member of the Kirtland Formation . In 1961 , the third species , P. cyrtocristatus was named by John Ostrom . Its three known specimens , have been found in the Fruitland and Kaiparowits formations from Utah and New Mexico . The second specimen , the first known from the Kaiparowits Formation , was originally unassigned to a specific taxon . Of the Parasaurolophus species , P. cyrtocristatus it is the smallest , and has the most curved crest . Because of its possession of the two above features , it has often been speculated that it was a female of P. walkeri or P. tubicen , which were males , although P. tubicen lived approximately a million years later . As noted by Thomas Williamson , the type material of P. cyrtocristatus is about 72 % the size of P. tubicen , close to the size at which other lambeosaurines are interpreted to begin showing definitive sexual dimorphism in their crests ( ~ 70 % of adult size ) . Even though many scientists have supported the possible fact of P. cyrtocristatus being a female , many other studies have found that it is not , because of the differences in age , distribution , and the large differences in the crest and its internal structure .

As a hadrosaurid , Parasaurolophus was a large bipedal / quadrupedal herbivore , eating plants with a sophisticated skull that permitted a grinding motion analogous to chewing . Its teeth were continually being replaced ; they were packed into dental batteries containing hundreds of teeth , only a relative handful of which were in use at any time . It used its beak to crop plant material , which was held in the jaws by a cheek-like organ . Vegetation could have been taken from the ground up to a height of around 4 m ( 13 ft ) . As noted by Bob Bakker , lambeosaurines have narrower beaks than hadrosaurines , implying that Parasaurolophus and its relatives could feed more selectively than their broad-beaked , crestless counterparts .

Parasaurolophus is known from many adult specimens , and a juvenile described in 2013 . The juvenile was discovered in the Kaiparowits Formation in 2009 . Excavated by the joint expedition by The Webb Schools and Raymond M. Alf Museum of Paleontology ( RAM ) , the juvenile has been identified as around only one year old when it died . Referred to Parasaurolophus sp . , the juvenile , under specimen number RAM 14000 , is the most complete , as well as youngest Parasaurolophus ever found , and measures 2.5 m ( 8.2 ft ) . This individual fits neatly into the currently known Parasaurolophus growth stages , and lived approximately 75 million years ago . Even though no complete skull of the intermediate age between RAM 14000 and adult Parasaurolophus has been found yet , a partial braincase of about the right size is known . At 25 % of the total adult size , the juvenile show that crest growth of Parasaurolophus began sooner than in related genera , such as Corythosaurus . It has been suggested that Parasaurolophus adults bore such large crests , especially when compared to the related Corythosaurus , because of this difference in age between when their crests started developing . Its age also means that Parasaurolophus had an very fast growth , which took place in about a year . The crest of the juvenile is not long and tubular like the adults , but low and hemispherical .

The skull of RAM 14000 is almost complete , with the left side only lacking a piece of the maxilla . However , the skull was split down the middle by erosion , possibly when it was resting on the bottom of a river bed . The two sides are displaced slightly , with some bones of the right being moved off the main block , also by erosion . After reconstruction , the skull viewed from the side resembles other juvenile lambeosaurines found , being roughly a trapezoid in shape . A partial cranial endocast for RAM 14000 was reconstructed from CT scan data , the first ever for a Parasaurolophus of any ontogenetic stage . The endocast was reconstructed in two sections , one on the portion of the braincase articulated with the left half of the skull and the remainder on the disarticulated portion of the braincase . Their relative position was then approximated based on cranial landmarks and comparison with other hadrosaurids . Because of weathering , many of the smaller neural canals and foramina could not be identified for certain .

As for other lambeosaurines , it is believed that the cranial crest of Parasaurolophus changed with age and was a sexually dimorphic characteristic in adults . James Hopson , one of the first researchers to describe lambeosaurine crests in terms of such distinctions , suggested that P. cyrtocristatus , with its small crest , was the female form of P. tubicen . Thomas Williamson suggested it was the juvenile form . Neither hypothesis became widely accepted . As only six good skulls , one juvenile braincase , and one recently discovered juvenile skull are known , additional material will help clear up these potential relationships . Williamson noted that in any case , juvenile Parasaurolophus probably had small , rounded crests like P. cyrtocristatus , that probably grew faster as individuals approached sexual maturity . Recent restudy of a juvenile braincase previously assigned to Lambeosaurus , now assigned to Parasaurolophus , provides evidence that a small tubular crest was present in juveniles . This specimen preserves a small upward flaring of the frontal bones that was similar to but smaller than what is seen in adult specimens ; in adults , the frontals formed a platform that supported the base of the crest . This specimen also indicates that the growth of the crest in Parasaurolophus and the facial profile of juvenile individuals differed from the Corythosaurus-Hypacrosaurus-Lambeosaurus model , in part because the crest of Parasaurolophus lacks the thin bony ' coxcomb ' that makes up the upper portion of the crest of the other three lambeosaurines .

Many early suggestions focused on adaptations for an aquatic lifestyle , following the hypothesis that hadrosaurids were amphibious , a common line of thought until the 1960s . Thus , Alfred Sherwood Romer proposed it served as a snorkel , Martin Wilfarth that it was an attachment for a mobile proboscis used as a breathing tube or for food gathering , Charles M. Sternberg that it served as an airtrap to keep water out of the lungs , and Ned Colbert that it served as an air reservoir for prolonged stays underwater . Other proposals were more physical in nature . As mentioned above , William Parks suggested that it was joined to the vertebrae with ligaments or muscles , and helped with moving and supporting the head . Othenio Abel proposed it was used as a weapon in combat among members of the same species , and Andrew Milner suggested that it could be used as a foliage deflector , like the helmet crest ( called a ' casque ' ) of the cassowary . Still other proposals made housing specialized organs the major function . Halszka Osmólska suggested that it housed salt glands , and John Ostrom suggested that it housed expanded areas for olfactory tissue and much improved sense of smell of the lambeosaurines , which had no obvious defensive capabilities . One unusual suggestion , made by creationist Duane Gish , is that the crest housed chemical glands that allowed it to throw jets of chemical " fire " at enemies , similar to the modern-day bombardier beetle .

Most of these hypotheses have been discredited or rejected . For example , there is no hole at the end of the crest for a snorkeling function . There are no muscle scars for a proboscis and it is dubious that an animal with a beak would need one . As a proposed airlock , it would not have kept out water . The proposed air reservoir would have been insufficient for an animal the size of Parasaurolophus . Other hadrosaurids had large heads without needing large hollow crests to serve as attachment points for supporting ligaments . Also , none of the proposals explain why the crest has such a shape , why other lambeosaurines should have crests that look much different but perform a similar function , how crestless or solid-crested hadrosaurids got along without such capabilities , or why some hadrosaurids had solid crests . These considerations particularly impact hypotheses based on increasing the capabilities of systems already present in the animal , such as the salt gland and olfaction hypotheses , and indicate that these were not primary functions of the crest . Additionally , work on the nasal cavity of lambeosaurines shows that olfactory nerves and corresponding sensory tissue were largely outside the portion of the nasal passages in the crest , so the expansion of the crest had little to do with the sense of smell .

The large surface area and vascularization of the crest also suggests a thermoregulatory function . The first to propose the cranial crests of lambeosaurines related to temperature regulation was Wheeler ( 1978 ) . He proposed that there was a nerve connection between the crest and the brain , so that the latter could be cooled by the former . The next people to publish a related idea were Maryanska and Osmólska , who realized that like modern lizards , dinosaurs could have possessed salt glands , and cooled off by osmo-regulation . In 2006 Evans published an argument about the functions of lambeosaurine crests , and supported why this could be a causing factor for the evolution of the crest .

Parasaurolophus is often hypothesized to have used its crest as a resonating chamber to produce low frequency sounds to alert other members of a group or its species . This function was originally suggested by Wiman in 1931 when he described P. tubicen . He noted that the crests internal structures are similar to those of a swan , and theorized that an animal could use its elongated nasal passages to create noise . However , the nasal tubes of Hypacrosaurus , Corythosaurus , and Lambeosaurus are much more variable and complicated than the airway of Parasaurolophus . A large amount of material and data supports the hypothesis that the large , tubular crest of Parasaurolophus was a resonating chamber . Weishampel in 1981 suggested that Parasaurolophus made noises ranging between the frequencies 55 and 720 Hz , although there was some difference in the range of individual species because of the crest size , shape , and nasal passage length , most obvious in P. cyrtocristatus ( interpreted as a possible female ) . Hopson found that there is anatomical evidence that hadrosaurids had strong hearing . There is at least one example , in the related Corythosaurus , of a slender stapes ( reptilian ear bone ) in place , which combined with a large space for an eardrum implies a sensitive middle ear . Furthermore , the hadrosaurid lagena is elongate like a crocodilian 's , indicating that the auditory portion of the inner ear was well-developed . Based on similarity of hadrosaurid inner ears to those of crocodiles , he also proposed that adult hadrosaurids were sensitive to high frequencies , such as their offspring might produce . According to Weishampel , this is consistent with parents and offspring communicating .

Computer modeling of a well-preserved specimen of P. tubicen , with more complex air passages than those of P. walkeri , has allowed the reconstruction of the possible sound its crest produced . The main path resonates at around 30 Hz , but the complicated sinus anatomy causes peaks and valleys in the sound . The other main behavioural theory is that the crest was used for intra-species recognition . This means that the crest could have been used for species recognition , as a warning signal , and for other , non-sexual uses . These could have been some of the reasons crests evolved in Parasaurolophus and other hadrosaurids . Instead , social and physiological functions have become more supported as function ( s ) of the crest , focusing on visual and auditory identification and communication . As a large object , the crest has clear value as a visual signal , and sets this animal apart from its contemporaries . The large size of hadrosaurid eye sockets and the presence of sclerotic rings in the eyes imply acute vision and diurnal habits , evidence that sight was important to these animals . If , as is commonly illustrated , a skin frill extended from the crest to the neck or back , the proposed visual display would have been even showier . As is suggested by other lambeosaurine skulls , the crest of Parasaurolophus likely permitted both species identification ( such as separating it from Corythosaurus or Lambeosaurus ) and sexual identification by shape and size .

Parasaurolophus walkeri is known from one specimen which might contain a pathology . The skeleton shows a v-shaped gap or notch in the vertebrae at the base of the neck . Originally thought to be pathologic , Parks published a second interpretation of this , as a ligament attachment to support the head . The crest would attach to the gap via muscles or ligaments , and be used to support the head while bearing a frill , like predicted to exist in some hadrosaurids . One other possibility , is that during preparation , the specimen was damaged , creating the possible pathology . The notch , however , is still considered more likely to be a pathology , even though some illustrations of Parasaurolophus restore the skin flap . Another possible pathology was noticed by Parks , and from around the notch . In the fourth , fifth , and sixth vertebrae , directly anterior to the notch , the neural spines were damaged . The fourth had an obvious fracture , with the other two possessing a swelling at the base of the break .

Parasaurolophus walkeri , from the Dinosaur Park Formation , was a member of a diverse and well-documented fauna of prehistoric animals , including well-known dinosaurs such as the horned Centrosaurus , Chasmosaurus , and Styracosaurus ; fellow duckbills Gryposaurus and Corythosaurus ; tyrannosaurid Gorgosaurus ; and armored Edmontonia , Euoplocephalus and Dyoplosaurus . It was a rare constituent of this fauna . The Dinosaur Park Formation is interpreted as a low-relief setting of rivers and floodplains that became more swampy and influenced by marine conditions over time as the Western Interior Seaway transgressed westward . The climate was warmer than present-day Alberta , without frost , but with wetter and drier seasons . Conifers were apparently the dominant canopy plants , with an understory of ferns , tree ferns , and angiosperms . Some of the less common hadrosaurs in the Dinosaur Park Formation of Dinosaur Provincial Park , such as Parasaurolophus , may represent the remains of individuals who died while migrating through the region . They might also have had a more upland habitat where they may have nested or fed . The presence of Parasaurolophus and Kritosaurus in northern latitude fossil sites may represent faunal exchange between otherwise distinct northern and southern biomes in Late Cretaceous North America . Both taxa are uncommon outside of the southern biome , where , along with Pentaceratops , they are predominate members of the fauna .

In the Fruitland Formation of New Mexico , P. cyrtocristatus shared its habitat with other ornithischians and theropods . Specifically , its contemporaries were the ceratopsian Pentaceratops sternbergii ; the pachycephalosaur Stegoceras novomexicanum ; and some unidentified fossils belonging to Tyrannosauridae , ? Ornithomimus , ? Troodontidae , ? Saurornitholestes langstoni , ? Struthiomimus , Ornithopoda , ? Chasmosaurus , ? Corythosaurus , Hadrosaurinae , Hadrosauridae , and Ceratopsidae . When Parasaurolophus existed , the Fruitland Formation was swampy , positioned in the lowlands , and close to the shore of the Cretaceous Interior Seaway . The lowermost part of the Fruitland Formation is just younger than 75.56 ± 0.41 mya , with the uppermost boudary dating to 74.55 ± 0.22 mya . Existing slightly later than the species from the Fruitland Formation , P. tubicen is also found in New Mexico , in the Kirtland Formation . Numerous vertebrate groups are from this formation , including fishes , crurotarsans , ornithischians , saurischians , pterosaurs , and turtles . The fishes are represented by the two species Melvius chauliodous and Myledalphus bipartitus . The crurotarsans include Brachychampsa montana and Denazinosuchus kirtlandicus . Ornithischians from the formation are represented by the hadrosaurids Anasazisaurus horneri , Naashoibitosaurus ostromi , Kritosaurus navajovius , and P. tubicen ; the ankylosaurids Ahshislepelta minor and Nodocephalosaurus kirtlandensis ; the ceratopsians Pentaceratops sternbergii and Titanoceratops ouranos ; and the pachycephalosaurs Stegoceras novomexicanum and Sphaerotholus goodwini . Saurischians include the tyrannosaurid Bistahieversor sealeyi ; the ornithomimid Ornithomimus sp . ; and the troodontid " Saurornitholestes " robustus . One pterosaur is known , named Navajodactylus boerei . Turtles are fairly plentiful , and are known from Denazinemys nodosa , Basilemys nobilis , Neurankylus baueri , Plastomenus robustus. and Thescelus hemispherica . Unidentified taxa are known , including the crurotarsan ? Leidyosuchus , and the theropods ? Struthiomimus , Troodontidae and Tyrannosauridae . The beginning of the Kirtland Formation dates to 74.55 ± 0.22 mya , with the formation ending at around 73.05 ± 0.25 mya .

Argon-argon radiometric dating indicates that the Kaiparowits Formation was deposited between 76.6 and 74.5 million years ago , during the Campanian stage of the Late Cretaceous period . During the Late Cretaceous period , the site of the Kaiparowits Formation was located near the western shore of the Western Interior Seaway , a large inland sea that split North America into two landmasses , Laramidia to the west and Appalachia to the east . The plateau where dinosaurs lived was an ancient floodplain dominated by large channels and abundant wetland peat swamps , ponds and lakes , and was bordered by highlands . The climate was wet and humid , and supported an abundant and diverse range of organisms . This formation contains one of the best and most continuous records of Late Cretaceous terrestrial life in the world . Parasaurolophus shared its paleoenvironment with other dinosaurs , such as dromaeosaurid theropods , the troodontid Talos sampsoni , ornithomimids like Ornithomimus velox , tyrannosaurids like Albertosaurus and Teratophoneus , armored ankylosaurids , the duckbilled hadrosaur Gryposaurus monumentensis , the ceratopsians Utahceratops gettyi , Nasutoceratops titusi and Kosmoceratops richardsoni and the oviraptorosaurian Hagryphus giganteus . Paleofauna present in the Kaiparowits Formation included chondrichthyans ( sharks and rays ) , frogs , salamanders , turtles , lizards and crocodilians . A variety of early mammals were present including multituberculates , marsupials , and insectivorans .

The Action of 24 June 1801 was a minor naval engagement during the French Revolutionary Wars . A British ship of the line , HMS Swiftsure under Captain Benjamin Hallowell was passing westwards through the Southern Mediterranean near Cape Derna when it encountered a much larger French squadron under Contre-Amiral Honoré Ganteaume that was also returning westwards after a failed attempt to reinforce the besieged French garrison in Egypt . Although Hallowell immediately recognised the danger his vessel was in and turned to flee , the French ships were much faster and soon closed with his ship . At 14 : 00 , three French vessels were within long gunshot and Hallowell decided that his only hope of escape lay in disabling the three ships before the rest of the French squadron could join the engagement . Turning towards the enemy , Hallowell found that his sluggish ship was unable to respond rapidly to French manoeuvres and within two hours Swiftsure was surrounded . Threatened with complete destruction and unable to escape , the British captain surrendered . The action was a rare victory for the French in the Mediterranean Sea , which had been largely under British control since the French Mediterranean Fleet had been destroyed in 1798 at the Battle of the Nile . This had trapped the French army in Egypt on the African side of the Mediterranean , and all efforts to reinforce and resupply them had ended in failure , including three separate expeditions by Ganteaume 's squadron . Swiftsure was later commissioned into the French Navy and fought at the Battle of Trafalgar in 1805 , where the ship was recaptured by the British and rejoined the Royal Navy . Hallowell was subsequently court martialed for the loss of his ship , but was honourably acquitted and returned to naval service .

On 1 August 1798 , during the Battle of the Nile , a British fleet under Rear-Admiral Sir Horatio Nelson destroyed the French Mediterranean Fleet at Aboukir Bay on the Egyptian coast . The battle completely reversed the strategic situation in the Mediterranean : British forces had evacuated the region in 1796 after the Treaty of San Ildefonso brought Spain into the war on the French side , but they were now able to return in large numbers . As French maritime lines of communication were cut , the French Armée d 'Orient under General Napoleon Bonaparte became trapped in Egypt . Unable to return to Europe by sea , the army attempted and failed to pass overland through Palestine and was subsequently abandoned by Bonaparte , who returned to France with his closest advisors in the frigates Muiron and Carrère in November 1799 , promising to send reinforcements to the forces that remained in North Africa . By 1801 , the Armée d 'Orient was on the verge of collapse . No supplies or support had arrived from France , their commander Jean Baptiste Kléber had been assassinated , and a British invasion was impending . Frustrated at his failure to assist his men in Egypt , Bonaparte ordered a squadron of ships of the line to sail from Brest in January 1801 under the command of Contre-Amiral Honoré Ganteaume . This force was instructed to sail to the Eastern Mediterranean and land over 5,000 troops at Alexandria . In February , Ganteaume 's force reached Toulon , the admiral concerned that his ships would be outnumbered further east where the British expeditionary force was gathering . Bonaparte sent him back to sea to complete the operation but again he returned , driven back by bad weather and a patrolling British squadron off Sicily under Rear-Admiral Sir John Borlase Warren . On 27 April Ganteaume made a third attempt to reach Egypt , and reached Benghazi before pressure from larger British forces under Admiral Lord Keith drove his squadron back westwards . On 24 June , Ganteaume 's ships were retreating along the North African coast , passing close to Cape Derna .

Also in the region was the British 74-gun ship of the line HMS Swiftsure under Captain Benjamin Hallowell , a veteran of the Battle of the Nile three years earlier . Swiftsure was passing slowly along the North African coast after being detached from Keith 's fleet to join Warren 's squadron off Malta , escorting a small convoy en route . Hallowell 's ship was understrength as more than 80 men had been removed from the ship for service in Egyptian waters and illness rendered another 59 unfit for duty , while the vessel itself was in a poor state of repair and leaking badly . Progress had been slow , and a northeasterly wind had also significantly delayed Hallowell 's passage . When he learned from a passing vessel that there was a French squadron in the region , he ordered the convoy to separate and sailed for Malta alone in an effort to join Warren more rapidly and warn him of Ganteaume 's return . At 03 : 30 on 24 June his lookouts sighted sails to the southwest . Hallowell immediately assumed that the distant ships were the enemy and he turned away from the French and tacked into the wind . By 05 : 30 , lookouts on the nearest French ships , the ships of the line Jean Bart and Constitution had spotted the distant British vessel and were ordered to give chase .

The French ships followed Swiftsure by tacking into the wind and a complicated chase developed , with Jean Bart and Constitution maintaining the pressure on the slow moving British vessel , while the rest of Ganteaume 's squadron used the prevailing wind to push far ahead of the ongoing chase before tacking at 08 : 00 across Hallowell 's intended course . Unless Hallowell could escape the trap , his ship would be caught between the two French divisions and overwhelmed . For six hours Hallowell continued his efforts to escape , but the French ships were too fast , Ganteaume 's force passing some distance ahead of the British ship and then turning back towards him so that by 14 : 00 Swiftsure was at serious risk of being surrounded . Hallowell determined that his only option was to attempt to drive though those ships of Ganteaume 's division that blocked his passage to leeward , the ships of the line Indivisible ( under Pierre-Paulin Gourrège ) and Dix-Août ( under Louis-Marie Le Gouardin ) and the frigate Créole . At 15 : 00 , with the detached division rapidly approaching from astern , Hallowell turned his ship towards the ships sailing ahead of Swiftsure and attempted to pass across the stern of the rearmost ship in an effort to rake and disable it , creating enough confusion to mask an escape . The manoeuvere was recognised by the French captains , and all three vessels turned to face the British ship as it approached . By 15 : 30 the ships of the line had opened a mutual fire , during which the faster French warships were able to easily outmanoeuvere the lumbering Swiftsure . At 16 : 37 , after more than an hour of fruitless firing at long range , the arrival of Jean Bart and Constitution within gunshot convinced Hallowell that further resistance was hopeless and he struck his flag to signal his surrender .

Ganteaume 's fleet remained off the Cape Derna for the next six days , performing repairs to the captured vessel to make it seaworthy . Detachments of sailors were taken from all of the ships in the squadron and transferred to the prize , and on 30 June Ganteaume 's force was ready to sail northwest once again , eventually reaching Toulon without further incident on 22 July . Ganteaume used the capture of Swiftsure to excuse the failure of his effort to reinforce Egypt , which was invaded and captured by a British expeditionary force in the spring and summer of 1801 . While in captivity , Hallowell wrote a letter that was published in Britain praising the treatment he and his men had received while prisoners of war under Ganteaume , and he and his officers were released on parole the following month . On 18 August they faced a court martial on board HMS Genereux at Port Mahon in Minorca to investigate the loss of their ship , and were all honourably cleared of any blame . He was also praised for detaching the convoy , which otherwise might have also been lost . Hallowell subsequently returned to naval service in 1803 at the start the Napoleonic Wars , operating in the Caribbean and Mediterranean and eventually becoming a rear-admiral in 1811 . Swiftsure , one of only five British ships of the line to be captured by the French during the entire war , was subsequently commissioned into the French Navy and remained in service for the next four years until recaptured at the Battle of Trafalgar in 1805 .

Burton v. United States is the name of two appeals to the Supreme Court of the United States by Senator Joseph R. Burton ( R-KS ) following his conviction for compensated representation of a party in a proceeding in which the United States was interested : Burton v. United States , 196 U.S. 283 ( 1905 ) and Burton v. United States , 202 U.S. 344 ( 1906 ) . Burton was convicted of acting as counsel to Rialto Grain and Securities Company in the United States Postmaster General 's investigation of Rialto for mail fraud . On Burton 's first appeal , the Supreme Court reversed his convictions because venue and vicinage could not be proper in the Eastern District of Missouri on the sole ground that Burton 's bank sent the check to St. Louis after he cashed it . Further , the Court cited the prejudicial refusal of jury instructions . After Burton was retried and convicted , the Court affirmed , inter alia , on the ground that the agreement between Burton and Rialto had occurred in St. Louis . Burton was the first defendant convicted under § 1782 of the Revised Statutes , 40 years after its 1864 enactment . Burton and his supporters argued that he was selectively prosecuted , on the orders of President Theodore Roosevelt , for political reasons . Burton also became the first member of the United States Senate to be convicted of public corruption , in fact the first member of the Senate to be convicted of any crime . The next year , Senator John H. Mitchell ( R-OR ) was convicted under the same statute for his role in the Oregon land fraud scandal .

In 1872 , Congress created the crime of mail fraud . Rev. Stat . § 3929 authorized the United States Postmaster General , " upon evidence satisfactory to him " that mail fraud was being committed , to instruct the post master at the fraudster 's local post office to return registered mail addressed to the fraudster to the sender with the word " Fraudulent " written or stamped on the envelope . In 1895 , this authority was extended to all mail . Further , Rev. Stat . § 4041 authorized the Postmaster to also bar suspected fraudsters from cashing postal money orders . The Rialto Grain and Securities Company , whose principal place of business was in St. Louis , Missouri , was under investigation by the Postmaster for mail fraud . The Postmaster had received two complaints and forwarded them for investigation on November 7 , 1902 . State courts were also investigating complaints from investors against Rialto . Hugh C. Dennis , the President of Rialto , and other officers had been criminally indicted , but ( at the time of Burton 's indictment ) none had been convicted . As of Burton 's indictment , Dennis had been once acquitted in federal court and four indictments were pending against him in state courts . For a time , Rialto 's offices had been closed due to a judicial attachment by its creditors .

That same month — while the two were in Illinois , en route from St. Louis to Chicago — former state judge Thomas B. Harlan , the general counsel of Rialto , arranged to hire Senator Joseph R. Burton ( R-KS ) , a lawyer , to appear before the Postmaster as counsel for Rialto in connection with these investigations for a monthly salary of $ 500 . When the general counsel returned to St. Louis on November 18 , he communicated Burton 's offer to Rialto and Rialto accepted . Rialto notified Burton of its acceptance by telegram to him in Washington that same day . Burton informed Rialto by mail that he had learned of the two complaints from the Postmaster , arranged for himself to be notified of any future complaints , and arranged to represent Rialto in a hearing before the Postmaster before any sanctions would issue . Burton continued to represent Rialto before the Postmaster , and draw his monthly salary , for five months . Burton 's intervention was successful , and the Postmaster 's investigation was ceased without the entry of a fraud order . Rialto paid Burton by monthly checks for the first four months . Burton received the first check on November 22 . Burton indorsed and deposited the checks at Riggs National Bank in Washington , D.C. , which in turn sent the checks to Rialto 's bank , the Commonwealth Trust Company in St. Louis , Missouri , for payment . The last $ 500 was paid in cash to Burton in person , at Rialto 's office in St. Louis , on March 26 , 1903 , after which Burton 's representation of Rialto terminated .

A federal grand jury in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Missouri was already investigating the Brooks Brokerage Company , with which Dennis , the President of Rialto , was associated . Witnesses against Burton at the grand jury included Chief Post Office Inspector William E. Cochran , Dennis , and W.B. Mehaney , the Vice President of Rialto . About two weeks before Burton 's indictment , the grand jury came into possession of the checks from Rialto to Burton . Burton was indicted on January 24 , 1904 , in the Eastern District of Missouri , on nine counts of violating Rev. Stat . § 1782 . Section 1782 ( enacted 1864 ) provided , in relevant part : No Senator . . . after his election and during his continuance in office . . . shall receive or agree to receive any compensation whatever , directly or indirectly , for any services rendered , or to be rendered , to any person , either by himself or another , in relation to any proceeding . . . controversy . . . or other matter or thing in which the United States is a party , or directly or indirectly interested , before any Department . . . whatever . Every person offending against this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor , and shall be imprisoned not more than two years , and fined not more than ten thousand dollars , and shall , moreover , by conviction therefor , be rendered forever thereafter incapable of holding any office of honor , trust , or profit under the Government of the United States .

The first and second counts of the indictment pertained to the receipt of the final cash payment from Rialto with reference to two separate interests of the United States . The third count pertained to receipt of the final cash payment from Mahaney . The sixth , seventh , eighth , and ninth counts of the indictment pertained to the receipt of the four check for the first four months . Burton arguably could not have been arrested at the time of his indictment because Congress was in session . Article One provides that Senators and Representatives " shall in all Cases , except Treason , Felony and Breach of the Peace , be privileged from Arrest during their Attendance at the Session of their respective Houses , and in going to and returning from the same . " But , Burton voluntarily surrendered . On January 24 , Burton and his wife departed for St. Louis .

Judge Elmer Bragg Adams , sitting as the United States Circuit Court for the Eastern District of Missouri , presided over Burton 's trial . Former state judge Chester H. Krum appeared as Burton 's attorney . Assistant U.S. Attorney Horace Dyer acted as prosecutor . In his opening statement , Krum argued that Burton had only agreed to act as general counsel and to allow his name to be placed in Rialto 's literature , and that the agreement explicitly provided that Burton would never represent Rialto before any federal agency . On March 23 , the prosecution began its case in chief . Post Office Department employees identified the letters of complaint received against Rialto . Ernest H. Kastor , of a St. Louis advertising firm , testified that he introduced Burton to Dennis and Harlan in November 1902 . Witnesses said that the agreement was as Krum described and that the pay was agreed as $ 2,500 in $ 500 installments . Dyer read into evidence the letter from Burton to Rialto . The prosecution 's case continued on March 24 . Inspector Cochran testified that Burton had attempted to discuss the case with him the day his indictment was made public . Cochran refused to discuss it . Reporter J.H. Aubere testified that he had interviewed Burton that day , and that Burton had denied practicing before the Post Office . Hector McRea , the Controller of Rialto , testified to a meeting between Mahaney and Burton , where Burton 's representation was ended because the matter before the Post Office had concluded . Inspector Cochran was recalled to state that his conversation with Burton took place before Aubere 's interview . Further , Cochran testified that , on February 5 , 1902 , Burton had told him that he wished to represent Rialto before the Department for a fee , having been assured by other Senators that such conduct was common and legal . Burton also told Cochran that he needed to repay a disputed debt of $ 70,000 . Finally , Mahaney testified that , on the day he personally paid Burton $ 500 , Burton advised Rialto to destroy its correspondence with him and that two such letters were destroyed . Thereafter , the prosecution rested .

The defense case commenced on March 25 . The third count of the indictment was quashed as duplicative with the first . Burton testified that he had accepted Rialto 's employment due to personal financial reversals . Burton testified that his duties would include acting as a criminal defense attorney for Dennis , but would not include any activity in Washington . Burton testified that he received notice of his appointment from Harlan on November 20 , 1902 , and that he had only contacted the Post Office to notify them of his intent to defend Dennis in a criminal case . He explained that he only asked to be notified of complaints against Rialto so that he could terminate his association with them should any arise . After the jury returned deadlocked 11-1 , Judge Adams delivered an Allen charge . Soon afterwards , the jury returned a verdict that failed to address the third count in the indictment , so the Judge Allen ordered the jury to return to deliberations without reading the verdict . On March 28 , 1904 , after forty-one total hours of deliberation , the jury convicted Burton on five counts — counts one , two , six , eight , and nine — but acquitted on count three . Burton 's convictions would have authorized a maximum sentence of 10 years imprisonment and a $ 50,000 fine .

Burton asked that the jury be polled , and each stated that the verdict was his own . Burton moved for a new trial . Judge Adams indicated that he would accept a supersedeas bond of $ 5,000 , and Burton was not sentenced . Burton became the first defendant ever convicted under § 1782 , more than 40 years after its enactment . Burton had a right to appeal to the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit , but instead opted for a direct appeal to the Supreme Court . On July 2 , Judge Adams certified Burton 's direct appeal on the grounds that Burton was convicted of an " infamous offense . " Burton posted a $ 10,000 bond . On July 11 , Justice Brewer allowed the direct appeal .

Article III provides that : " The Trial of all Crimes , except in Cases of Impeachment , shall be by Jury ; and such Trial shall be held in the State where the said Crimes shall have been committed . " The Vicinage Clause of the Sixth Amendment provides that : " In all criminal prosecutions , the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial , by an impartial jury of the State and district wherein the crime shall have been committed , which district shall have been previously ascertained by law . . . . " Burton argued that both constitutional provisions were violated because the crime had not occurred in the Eastern District of Missouri . Justice Peckham , writing for the entire Court except for Justice Harlan in dissent , reversed Burton 's convictions on these grounds . The Court held that Burton 's negotiation of the check in Washington , D.C. did not constitute conduct by Burton in St. Louis ( the site of the drawee bank ) . In other words , whatever the Washington , D.C. bank did with the check afterwards , it did for itself , not as Burton 's agent . " From the time of the delivery of the check by the defendant to the bank it became the owner of the check ; it could have torn it up or thrown it in the fire or made any other use or disposition of it which it chose , and no right of defendant would have been infringed . " Thus , the Court held that it was error for the trial judge to have submitted the question of the " understanding . . . between the defendant and the bank " to the jury . In support of this argument , the Court cited several of its own precedents concerning negotiable instrument law , as well as cases from the House of Lords and the courts of New York and Massachusetts .

In a single paragraph , the Court rejected the application of the continuing offense doctrine , which had been codified in Rev. Stat . § 731 . " This is not a case of the commencement of a crime in one district and its completion in another , so that under the statute the court in either district has jurisdiction . There was no beginning of the offense in Missouri . The payment of the money was in Washington , and there was no commencement of that offense when the officer of the Rialto Company sent the checks from St. Louis to defendant . The latter did not thereby begin an offense in Missouri . " Justice Harlan dissented on this ground . " As between the accused and his client , " Harlan argued , " he was not , in any true sense , compensated for the services alleged to have been rendered in violation of the statute , until by payment of the checks by the St. Louis bank he was relieved of all liability to the Riggs National Bank arising from his indorsing the checks to it . " Harlan concluded that the majority had " sacrificed substance to mere form , " illustrating the Latin maxim " Qui haeret in litera haeret in cortice . "

By the same 8-1 majority , the Court found a separate and independent ground for the reversal of Burton 's convictions . Burton had requested certain jury instructions , which the trial judge had delivered . But , along with the requested instructions , the trial judge had stated that : " [ These instructions were ] asked by counsel for the defendant to give certain declarations here , and while I think they have , in the main , been covered by the charge , yet I will give them to you . . . . These are abstract propositions of law , which I give in connection with the charge , as perhaps more fully amplifying it . I am willing to give them , inasmuch as they are asked , and they contain general propositions of law . " After the jury returned deadlocked 11-1 , the trial judge delivered an Allen charge . At this point , the judge refused Burton 's request to instruct the jury that the earlier requested instructions stood on the same footing as the other instructions . The Court held that this was reversible error . Harlan also dissented from this ground for reversal , arguing that Burton was not substantially prejudiced .

Burton was reindicted , still in the circuit court Eastern District of Missouri , on April 13 , 1905 , and arraigned on June 4 before Judge John Henry Rogers , of the Western District of Arkansas , sitting by designation . The new indictment had eight counts . The first , second , fourth , sixth , and eighth counts charged that Burton had agreed to receive compensation from Rialto . The third , fifth , and seventh counts charged that Burton had actually received compensation from Rialto . The counts different only in the interest of the United States which was alleged to have been involved in the matter . Counts four and five were dismissed before trial . Unlike the first indictment , the second alleged that Burton had received $ 500 in person in St. Louis . The first indictment alleged only compensated representation , the second indictment also alleged an agreement to do so . While the indictment was pending , Burton was robbed in Chicago and his wallet was recovered in a mail box by postal employees . Before Burton 's second trial , the Department of Justice learned that Burton had also collected $ 14,000 for representing the Chickasaw before the Interior Department : $ 5,000 of which was paid directly to him , and $ 9,000 of which was paid to his brother Z.R. Burton .

The trial date was originally set for October 3 , and subpoenas to witnesses — many of whom resided in Washington , D.C. — issued on September 12 . Judge Willis Van Devanter ( a future Supreme Court justice ) , of the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit presided over Burton 's second trial . On November 20 , Assistant U.S. Attorney Dyer gave the opening statement for the prosecution and Lehmann for the defense . As in the first trial , Lehmann argued that Burton 's intent was to represent Dennis ( now deceased ) in a criminal case . On November 21 , the prosecution introduced the letters , telegrams , and checks into evidence . On November 22 , Harland testified that Burton had stated : " I am not going to do anything inconsistent with my duty as a Senator . " Mahaney testified to the in-person payment and the destruction of the letters at Burton 's request on March 22 , 1902 . Inspector Cochran testified that Burton represented Rialto before him . On November 26 , 1905 , after two hours of deliberation , the jury convicted Burton on the six remaining counts : counts one , two , three , six , seven , and eight . Burton was sentenced on the sixth and seventh counts only ( because some of the counts involved the same transactions ) . Burton was sentenced to six months imprisonment in a county jail and a $ 2,000 fine on the sixth count and six months imprisonment and a $ 500 fine on the seventh count . In addition , he was " rendered forever hereafter incapable of holding any office of honor , trust or profit under the Government of the United States . "

The second time before the Court , on April 3 – 4 , 1906 , Burton was again represented by Dillon and Lehmann , plus Bailey P. Waggener , again with Hubbard and Rossington on the brief , plus W. Knox Haynes and W.P. Hackney . All together , Burton was represented by a team of ten lawyers , led by Dillon . Waggener delivered the argument in chief , assisted by Lehmann . Assistant Attorney General ( and future judge ) Charles Henry Robb represented the United States . On May 21 , 1906 , the Supreme Court upheld Burton 's convictions . That same day , another of Burton 's lawyers , former Senator John Mellen Thurston , filed a petition for rehearing , which operated as a 60 day continuance , and in effect stayed the matter much longer because the Court was set to adjourn until October .

Article One provides : " Each House shall be the Judge of the Elections , Returns and Qualifications of its own Members . . . . Each House may . . . punish its Members for disorderly Behavior , and , with the Concurrence of two-thirds , expel a Member . " Burton argued that § 1782 was an unconstitutional violation of the separation of powers because the Senate 's power to punish its members was exclusive . Burton 's brief compared the ban on legislators practicing before executive agencies to a ban on the President lobbying legislators for legislation . The New York Times called this " one of the most interesting efforts to get a new meaning out of the Constitution that has appeared for some time . " A later article noted that , " [ t ] he decision is especially interesting because of the large array of legal talent in the case and the ingenious argument made by Bailey Wagner [ sic ] of Topeka that the Senate is the judge of the qualifications of its own members . . . . " The Court unanimously rejected this argument . The Court cited earlier laws prohibiting members of Congress from practicing before the United States Court of Claims and from entering into contracts with the United States . Further , the Court noted that " [ t ] he proper discharge of those duties does not require a Senator to appear before an executive Department in order to enforce his particular views , or the views of others , in respect of matters committed to that Department for determination . "

Burton next argued that the indictment was insufficient because the Postmaster 's decision to return mail addressed to suspected fraudsters back to senders and to bar suspected fraudsters from cashing money orders was not a " proceeding . . . controversy . . . or other matter or thing in which the United States is . . . directly or indirectly interested . " The Court rejected this argument , 6-3 . Although the Court admitted that the United States had no pecuniary interest in the proceeding , it argued : The United States was the real party in interest on one side , while the Rialto Company was the real party in interest on the other side . If the Postmaster General did not represent the United States , whom did he represent ? . . . [ I ] t is , we think , a mistake to say that the United States was not interested , directly or indirectly , in protecting its property , that is , its mails and postal facilities , against improper and illegal use . . . . " Justice Brewer , joined by Justices White and Peckham dissented on this point . They argued that the statute applied only to the pecuniary interests of the United States . These justices were among the four ( in addition to Chief Justice Fuller ) who would have held the indictment insufficient in Burton I , presumably for this reason . The dissenters argued that the majority 's interpretation would find the United States interested in any administrative proceeding , thus rendering the statutory words " before any Department , court martial , bureau , officer , or any civil , military , or naval commission whatever " to be mere surplussage . Further , the dissent cited the Reconstruction Era legislative history pointing towards a narrower interpretation .

Section 1782 provided that " No Senator . . . shall receive or agree to receive any compensation . . . . " Burton argued that he could not simultaneously be charged with separate offenses for agreeing to receive compensation and actually receiving compensation for the same transaction . The Court rejected this argument . The Court stated that Burton 's interpretation " does violence to [ the statute 's ] words , " emphasizing the word " or . " Justice McKenna disagreed with this holding . Thus , he concurred only in the affirmance of the charges alleging receipt , not the charges alleging agreement .

Finally , Burton argued that the Eastern District of Missouri was an unconstitutional venue and vicinage ( an argument that the Court had accepted in Burton I ) . This time , the Court rejected the argument . The Court held that the agreement had occurred in St. Louis ( as the jury had been instructed that it was required to find ) based on Rialto 's acceptance in St. Louis , the telegram , and the letter . The Court bolstered this view by citation to its own and other precedents concerning offer and acceptance in contract law . The Court further cited its earlier precedents holding that the venue provision of Article III does not require the physical presence of the defendant in the forum state .

Burton remained a Senator while each of his appeals were pending . Allegedly , his colleagues made it known that they would move to expel him if he appeared in the Senate . However , Burton did appear in the Senate after his conviction . On April 6 , 1904 , Burton appeared to push for appropriations for the acquisition of land in the Adirondacks and Catskills . On January 22 , 1906 , Burton appeared in the Senate chamber again , for 30 seconds , in order to be eligible for $ 1,000 in travel reimbursements from the federal government . Burton 's term was due to expire on March 4 , 1907 . After his conviction was finally affirmed , a resolution to expel Burton from the Senate was referred to the United States Senate Committee on Privileges and Elections on May 22 , 1906 . Burton resigned from office on June 4 , 1906 , before the Senate could act . Burton served five months of his six-month sentence in the Iron County Jail in Ironton , Missouri . In March 1907 , he returned to Abilene .

Contemporary rumor held that Burton 's indictment had been ordered by President Theodore Roosevelt . Although Joseph W. Folk , the Circuit Attorney for the City of St. Louis ( and future Governor of Missouri ) , had recently visited with the President and Attorney General , the New York Times reported that " there was not a word in either of those interviews about the Burton case . " Burton himself alleged that Roosevelt had orchestrated his prosecution in March 23 , 1907 speech in Abilene , Kansas after his release from prison . Burton pointed out that his was the first prosecution under § 1782 and that numerous other public officials before him had potentially violated it , under the interpretation that prevailed in the Supreme Court . Burton and Roosevelt had a complicated history . Burton , as a leader at the 1900 Republican National Convention , was perhaps instrumental in Roosevelt 's securing his party 's nomination . Roosevelt 's last appointment to the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit ( whose jurisdiction , at the time , included appeals from Kansas ) had been William Cather Hook , a choice favored by Burton 's political opponents : Senator Chester I. Long ( R-KS ) and Governor Willis J. Bailey ( R-KS ) . When the next vacancy opened on the Eighth Circuit , Burton and his allies favored the appointment of Charles Blood Smith . D.W. Mulvane was unsuccessful in pressing Smith 's candidacy in a June 1903 meeting with Roosevelt .

Earlier that year , while accompanying Roosevelt on a visit to Kansas , Burton told Roosevelt about his project to create a reproduction of Jerusalem at the time of Christ 's birth for the St. Louis World 's Fair . Roosevelt gave Burton a letter praising the exhibit , which Burton in turn published by facsimile in a magazine advertisement for the sale of stock in the exhibit . The White House received a letter from the magazine inquiring into the authenticity of the letter on the same day that Mulvane returned for a second meeting to press Smith 's appointment . Roosevelt was enraged , demanded the return of the letter , and declared that " from now on Burton would be considered politically a Democratic Senator , as far as patronage is concerned . " " The President 's indignation knew no bounds . He had never been so grossly and humiliatingly deceived during his incumbency in office . " Burton was also in a " long standing feud " with Fourth Assistant Postmaster ( and future Senator ) Joseph L. Bristow , whom Burton had lobbied Roosevelt ( and his predecessor , William McKinley ) to replace . Roosevelt refused to remove Bristow except for cause , and in any case refused to appoint one of Burton 's friends to replace him .

" ( I 've Just Begun ) Having My Fun " is a song by American recording artist Britney Spears , taken from her first greatest hits album Greatest Hits : My Prerogative ( 2004 ) . The song was produced by Bloodshy & Avant and originally recorded for In the Zone . It was released as a digital download on August 17 , 2004 , prior to the album 's release . The track has drawn comparisons to No Doubt 's single " Hella Good " as well as 1970s American funk bands . Lyrically , the songs refers to having a good time at a party . " ( I 've Just Begun ) Having My Fun " received mixed reviews from critics , some naming it one of the best songs in the compilation , while others dismissed its lyrical content . The song was featured on the soundtrack of the 2011 film Bridesmaids .

" ( I 've Just Begun ) Having My Fun " was originally recorded for Spears 's fourth studio album , In the Zone ( 2003 ) . The song was written by Spears , Michelle Bell , Christian Karlsson , Pontus Winnberg , Henrik Jonback , and was produced by Bloodshy & Avant . The song was first included as a bonus track in the European version of the In the Zone DVD . In the United States , the track was a free download in the Wal-Mart edition of In the Zone , due to an exclusive deal with Wal-Mart and Sony Connect . When the deal ended in mid-2004 , Jive Records released the song on the iTunes Store and Rhapsody on August 17 , 2004 . " ( I 've Just Begun ) Having My Fun " peaked at number seven on the iTunes chart while it was speculated to be in the tracklist of Greatest Hits : My Prerogative . The song was featured on the soundtrack of the 2011 film Bridesmaids .

" ( I 've Just Begun ) Having My Fun " is composed in the key of G minor with 108 beats per minute . It has a dance-oriented beat that has been compared by Jennifer Vineyard of MTV and Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic to No Doubt 's 2002 single " Hella Good " . Spears 's vocal range spans from the high-tone of G3 to the low-tone of Eb5 . The track features mainly guitar and bass , along with string arrangements and 1970s synthesizers reminiscent of Zapp and The Gap Band . Its lyrics refer to a make-believe situation in which Spears describes an encounter with a man at a party . During the song , she declares to prefer having a good time rather than settling down .

Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic said " the In the Zone outtake [ ... ] betters most of the songs that were featured on the album " . Annabel Leathes of BBC Online commented that along with " Do Somethin ' " , they are " [ two ] robust , unreleased tracks [ that ] suggest , however , that she may still be churning out a few more No.1s before taking time out to sing lullabies to her brood " . Ann Powers of Blender magazine called the song " instantly forgettable and biographically inaccurate , " while Mike McGuirk of Rhapsody said the song " is on a level with her best work , namely " I 'm a Slave 4 U " . " Louis Pattison of the New Musical Express stated that the lyrics " chime rather oddly with Britney ’ s much-vaunted desire to start a family " . On the week of September 4 , 2004 , " ( I 've Just Begun ) Having My Fun " debuted at number 23 on Billboard Hot Digital Tracks , and fell to number 41 in the following .

The River Don Navigation was the result of early efforts to make the River Don in South Yorkshire , England , navigable between Fishlake and Sheffield . The Dutch engineer Cornelius Vermuyden had re-routed the mouth of the river in 1626 , to improve drainage , and the new works included provision for navigation , but the scheme did not solve the problem of flooding , and the Dutch River was cut in 1635 to link the new channel to Goole . The first Act of Parliament to improve navigation on the river was obtained in 1726 , by a group of Cutlers based in Sheffield ; the Corporation of Doncaster obtained an Act in the following year for improvements to the lower river . Locks and lock cuts were built , and , by 1751 , the river was navigable to Tinsley . The network was expanded by the opening of the Stainforth and Keadby Canal in 1802 , linking to the River Trent , the Dearne and Dove Canal in 1804 , linking to Barnsley , and the Sheffield Canal in 1819 , which provided better access to Sheffield . All three were bought out by the Don Navigation in the 1840s , after which the canals were owned by a series of railway companies . The Sheffield and South Yorkshire Navigation Company was created in 1889 and eventually succeeded in buying back the canals and the Don Navigation in 1895 , but plans for expansion were hampered by a lack of capital . One success was the opening of the New Junction Canal in 1905 , jointly funded with the Aire and Calder Navigation .

During the 20th century , there were several plans to upgrade the Don , to handle larger craft . It was eventually upgraded to take 700-tonne barges in 1983 , but the scheme was a little too late , as an anticipated rise in commercial traffic did not occur . Most use of the navigation is now by leisure boaters , whose boats are dwarfed by the huge locks . The navigation and river are crossed by a wide variety of bridges , from a medieval bridge complete with a chapel on it , one of only three to have survived in Britain , to a motorway viaduct that pioneered the use of rubber bearings and a new waterproofing system . In between are a number of railway bridges , including two that were built to carry the internal railway system at the Blackburn Meadows sewage treatment plant . The former railway viaduct at Conisbrough now carries cyclists 113 feet ( 34 m ) above the Don , as part of the National Cycle Network .

Before 1626 the River Don had two outlets , an eastern branch that meandered across Hatfield Chase to enter the River Trent , and a northern branch , which was a Roman navigation channel , and joined the River Aire at Turnbridge , near East Cowick . Cornelius Vermuyden 's drainage scheme for Hatfield Chase , begun in 1626 and largely completed by 1628 , included the construction of Ashfield Bank , which ran for 2 miles ( 3.2 km ) along the southern bank of the Don from Fishlake to Thorne , cutting off the eastern branch . Navigation to Sandtoft was made possible by the provision of a navigable sluice in the bank , which had lifting gates and a 50-by-15-foot ( 15.2 by 4.6 m ) lock chamber . A further bank some distance to the east of the northern channel ran for 5 miles ( 8 km ) from Thorne to Turnbridge to provide washlands , which would flood when high levels in the Aire prevented the Don discharging into it . In the winter of 1628 , there was flooding at Fishlake and Sykehouse , which was followed by rioting . A navigable sluice was built at Turnbridge in 1629 , with a lock 60 by 18 feet ( 18.3 by 5.5 m ) , and an outfall sluice called the " Great Sluice " was completed in 1630 , probably by Hugo Spiering , who had assisted Vermuyden with the main project . Continued problems with flooding led to the construction of a 5-mile ( 8 km ) channel from Newbridge near Thorne eastwards to Goole , where water levels in the Ouse were between 5 and 10 feet ( 1.5 and 3.0 m ) lower than at Turnbridge . The channel , called the Dutch River , ended in another outfall sluice , and was completed in 1635 at a cost of £ 33,000 . Boats continued to use the lock at Turnbridge . In about 1688 the Goole sluice was washed away by a flood , and was never replaced . The tidal scour widened the channel , and barges of up to 30 tonnes could normally reach Fishlake , and often Wilsick House , in Barnby Dun . Smaller boats could reach Doncaster for most of the year , and large barges could do so when there was a flood tide .

Initial attempts to seek powers to make the River Don navigable were hampered by opposition from local landowners and disunity between the authorities in Sheffield , Rotherham and Doncaster . The first Act of Parliament was presented in 1698 by the MP for Thirsk , Sir Godfrey Copley of Sprotborough , representing the interests of Rotherham . Although there was support from the " gentlemen , traders and inhabitants " of Doncaster , the Corporation opposed the Bill in view of the likely impact on their mills . There was no support from Sheffield either , and the Bill failed at its first reading . In 1704 Doncaster Corporation , with the support of its traders , presented a Bill that received a first reading , but disappeared without a second reading ever happening . By 1722 there was some agreement between Sheffield and Doncaster , with a tacit agreement that Doncaster would be responsible for the river below their town , and Sheffield for the section above Doncaster . There was organised resistance to the scheme from local landowners , and it appears that their influence resulted in the proposed Bill being defeated in committee , so it could not be presented to parliament .

However , in 1726 Sheffield 's Company of Cutlers sought parliamentary approval to make the river navigable from Holmstile in Doncaster to Tinsley , on the edge of Sheffield . Terminating at Tinsley placated the Duke of Norfolk , who represented the opposition from Sheffield , and a great deal of work had been done to reduce the opposition from landowners . The Act of Parliament was passed on 6 May 1726 giving the Cutlers powers to make cuts and to make the river deeper and wider so that boats of 20 tonnes could reach Tinsley . There were a number of restrictions , intended to protect existing water-powered installations . Lord Frederick Howard 's mills at Rotherham , Kilnhurst forge , Thrybergh dam and Sprotborough mills and water engine were specifically mentioned . The Corporation of Doncaster sought powers in 1727 to improve the river below Holmstile , as far as Wilsick House in Barnby Dun . The Bill passed through parliament uneventfully , and again included detailed restrictions on what could and could not be done , designed to protect the landowners . The details were very specific in that they included the permissible heights of dams , the maximum length of cuts , and many other details of the work to be carried out .

Both Acts were unusual in that they gave the bodies powers to borrow money , but did not create the companies to do the work . Nor were the financial arrangements clearly laid down , and both groups resorted to issuing shares to fund the improvements , although they were not actually empowered to do so . In October 1730 , the two groups decided to amalgamate , but a 1731 Act to formalise the agreement and legalise the issuing of shares was defeated because it also included powers to make further changes to the river , including the section below Barnby Dun . Finally an Act of 1733 created The Company of the Proprietors of the Navigation of the River Don , with powers to create a new cut from Bromley Sands above Rotherham to Ickles Dam . The problems presented by the river below Wilsick House , including shallows and fords at Bramwith and Stainforth , and bridges on the Dutch River that were difficult to navigate , resulted in the proprietors trying again to obtain powers to improve the lower river in 1737 , but again the petition was defeated in a parliamentary committee . Work continued , and it appears that Aldwarke was the head of navigation for some years , but Rotherham was reached in 1740 .

A further Bill in 1740 sought powers to improve the river from Barnby Dun to Fishlake Ferry . Despite serious opposition , which included the merchants and traders of Doncaster as well as Doncaster Corporation , the Bill was passed , giving the company new powers to make the river deeper and create a cut to avoid the shallows at Stainforth and Bramwith . Work on this northern section started almost immediately . The southern section to Tinsley was navigable by 1751 , although the wharf and warehouse had not been completed by that date , and the towpath from Rotherham was not completed until 1822 . In 1737 , the navigation was leased to three of the company shareholders for 14 years , and a new 7-year lease was made in 1751 . After 1758 , the company managed the navigation itself . Tolls for the next 10 years raised an average of £ 7006 per annum , indicating healthy traffic levels .

The early 19th century saw the completion of a number of canals which linked to the Don . The first was the Stainforth and Keadby Canal , which had been proposed by the Don Navigation shareholders in 1792 . Construction was started in 1793 and completed in 1802 , with John Thompson , the engineer to the Don Navigation Company , overseeing the work until his death in 1795 . It provided a link from Bramwith Lock to the River Trent , broadly following the old course of the River Don prior to Vermuyden 's improvements . Two years later , the Dearne and Dove Canal opened , connecting with the Barnsley Canal near Barnsley . The canal had also been proposed by Don Navigation shareholders in 1792 , and again John Thompson had overseen the initial construction . The third opening was in 1819 , when the Sheffield Canal connected the Tinsley terminus to the centre of Sheffield . There were several plans to create a link to the Chesterfield Canal , including one in 1793 by Benjamin Outram , and a proposal by Richard Gresley in 1810 for a North East Junction Canal , which would have linked to the Don at Rotherham , broadly following the modern ideas for the Rother Link . Neither of these , nor a revival of the idea in 1832 gained sufficient support to proceed .

The Company bought out the Dearne and Dove Canal in 1846 , the Sheffield Canal in 1848 , and the Stainforth and Keadby Canal in 1849 . They then amalgamated with the South Yorkshire , Doncaster and Goole Railway in 1850 , to become the South Yorkshire Railway and River Dun Company . This in turn was leased to the Manchester , Sheffield and Lincolnshire Railway in 1864 . In order to allow an extension of the railway from Mexborough to Sheffield to pass under the railway line to Rotherham Westgate railway station , the Holmes cut below Ickles lock was diverted into the river , and the Eastwood cut below Rotherham lock was diverted to the east in 1864 . The original bed was then filled in and the railway built along its course . Despite attempts to divert coal traffic to the railway , the canals maintained their traffic levels , carrying 982,000 tonnes in 1878 and 927,254 in 1888 . However , there was dissatisfaction among users of the canals that the rates for traffic were higher than on the railways , and the canals were failing to modernise , as steam boats were banned , despite them having been in use for 50 years on the neighbouring Aire and Calder Navigation .

A plan to upgrade the waterways to allow the use of 300 to 500-tonne boats led to the formation of the Sheffield and South Yorkshire Canal Company Limited in November 1888 . The cost of the scheme was estimated to be around £ 1 million , in addition to the cost of acquiring the canals from the railway company . The new company obtained an Act of Parliament on 26 August 1889 , creating the Sheffield and South Yorkshire Navigation Company , which was authorised to raise £ 1.5 million and to purchase the four canals either by negotiation , or by compulsory purchase if negotiations failed . The railway company was unwilling to sell , and it was not until 1895 , after protracted negotiation and legal battles that the transfer was agreed . The Navigation Company had only succeeded in raising £ 625,000 , which was less than the purchase price of the canals , and therefore the railway company nominated half of the ten directors , while the Aire and Calder Company declined to buy any shares because of railway influence . Many of the ambitious plans for the modernisation of the system were hindered by a lack of capital , although some further developments took place .

One improvement that was completed was the construction of the New Junction Canal . This had been authorised by an Act of Parliament obtained on 28 July 1891 by the Aire and Calder Navigation , which specified that the Sheffield and South Yorkshire Navigation Company would share the cost of construction and the ownership of the new waterway . No work could start until the company actually owned their canals , and they were required to raise £ 150,000 at a time when they had just failed to raise the finance for the takeover of the original canals . However , three-quarters of the cost had been raised by 1903 . The new canal leaves the original navigation at Bramwith Junction , runs over the River Don on an aqueduct , and continues in a straight line for 5.5 miles ( 8.9 km ) , to join the Aire and Calder Navigation upstream from Goole . It provided a much more direct route from Sheffield to Goole , and was opened on 2 January 1905 . The company had hoped to run compartment boats for the transport of coal along the canal , as the Aire and Calder did , but although straightening of the navigation was completed at Doncaster in April 1905 and at Sprotborough in late 1907 , and Doncaster Town Lock was lengthened in 1909 and 1910 , most of the locks could only hold three compartments at a time , and so there was little advantage to using this type of boat .

Towards the end of the First World War , Sheffield City Council proposed a major upgrade of the navigation . They expected the government to nationalise the waterway , and pay for the improvements , to which they would contribute , providing that the railway influence was removed . The scheme involved deepening the channel from 6 feet ( 1.8 m ) to 8 feet ( 2.4 m ) , and constructing 18 new locks which would be 270 by 22 feet ( 82.3 by 6.7 m ) , to replace the existing 62-by-16-foot ( 18.9 by 4.9 m ) locks . The locks would have multiple gates , and be capable of holding four 110-tonne barges or one 300-tonne barge . The estimated cost was £ 1,483,426 , but the government was unwilling to support the scheme , and Sheffield City Council was not prepared to proceed without government backing . During the inter-war years the navigation struggled to hold its own against competition from the railways and later the roads , and was affected by miners ' strikes in the coal industry . Traffic was spasmodic , rising from 381,727 tonnes in 1926 , the year of the general strike , to 815,329 tonnes in 1937 , but much of the latter was short-haul traffic , rather than long-haul , and the revenues did not increase correspondingly . In an agreement with Hatfield Main Colliery and the Aire and Calder , Bramwith Lock on the Stainforth and Keadby Canal was lengthened in 1932 , to allow compartment boats to be used for the coal traffic , while straightening of a stretch near Doncaster and the construction of a new warehouse and wharf were largely funded by Doncaster Corporation in 1934 .

The major traffic on the navigation had always been coal , but after the Second World War there was a steady increase in oil traffic . By 1946 , all of the mortgages that the company had used to fund expansion were repaid , and the financial position of the canal gradually improved . Control of the navigation , as with most British canals , passed to the British Transport Commission on 1 January 1948 , under the terms of the Transport Act ( 1947 ) . Some improvements continued to be made , with two coal wharfs being built at Mexborough in 1954 , to serve the new Doncaster power station , and Long Sandall Lock being extended to 215 by 22 feet ( 65.5 by 6.7 m ) . The new lock was opened on 10 July 1959 , and allowed trains of 17 compartment boats to work through to Doncaster and Hexthorpe , as Doncaster Town Lock above it and Sykehouse Lock below it on the New Junction Canal were already of a similar size . In 1961 , the British Transport Commission , together with the British Iron and Steel Federation and Sheffield Chamber of Commerce considered plans to upgrade the navigation to handle 250-tonne barges , and work started on new wharfs and warehouses at Rotherham . Control of the navigation passed on again in 1963 , this time to the British Waterways Board , who submitted a proposal to the government for a £ 2.5 million upgrade , covering the stretch from Bramwith to Rotherham . This would have involved the construction of ten new locks , each 225 by 25 feet ( 68.6 by 7.6 m ) , to replace the existing 12 locks . The new main line would then have been the same size as the Aire and Calder Navigation , although some of the bridges would have had less clearance . In 1972 , a further proposal for a £ 2 million scheme to upgrade the waterway to handle 700-tonne barges up to Mexborough , and 400-tonne barges from there to Rotherham was submitted to the Department of the Environment .

Finally , the navigation was the subject of one of the last major attempts in the UK to attract commercial freight to the waterways . In 1983 , it was upgraded to the 700-tonne Eurobarge standard by deepening the channels and enlarging the locks as far as Rotherham . Conisbrough lock was removed altogether , and the two Eastwood locks were combined into one . The new lock was initially named the Sir Frank Price Lock , after the chairman of the British Waterways Board who formally opened it on 1 June 1983 . The expected rise in freight traffic did not occur , however . At Kilnhurst and Long Sandall , the new larger locks were built alongside the original locks , and so a comparison of the relative sizes can be made . The new locks are 198 by 20 feet ( 60.4 by 6.1 m ) , and the navigation accommodates boats with a draught of 8.2 feet ( 2.5 m ) and needing headroom of 10.5 feet ( 3.2 m ) . Beyond Rotherham , the locks are 70 by 15.1 feet ( 21.3 by 4.6 m ) , and so can accommodate a 70 feet ( 21 m ) broad boat , but Rotherham lock is smaller , being only 61.5 feet ( 18.7 m ) long , and so the upper reaches are effectively restricted to 60-foot ( 18 m ) boats .

The River Don Navigation ended at Tinsley Wharf , but it forms a convenient place to start a description of the route . The wharf was on the river , just upstream from the present junction with the canal to Sheffield . It was close to the site of the Meadowhall Shopping Centre and the Tinsley Viaduct , which carries the M1 motorway over the valley of the River Don . From here there is a towpath along the canal to Victoria Quays ( formerly Sheffield Basin ) in Sheffield City Centre , or the Five Weirs Walk follows the course of the River Don to the same destination . The towpath extends to Rotherham in the opposite direction , passing the large Jordans Weir and the three locks on the Holmes Cut . Beside Jordans Weir is the outfall from Blackburn Meadows sewage treatment plant . In dry weather , this discharges 30 million gallons ( 136,000 m3 ) of treated water each day , more than doubling the flow in the river . The towpath continues to Rotherham Lock , where the Rotherham cut starts , but from here to Conisbrough , the only way to see the navigation is from a boat or from one of the bridges which cross it . To the north of the cut are the remains of the Greasbrough Canal , now culverted under the embankment of the A633 road . Eastwood lock marks the end of the Rotherham Cut , to be followed by Aldwarke Lock , in the shadow of the A6123 road bridge , and Kilnhurst flood lock , which marks the start of the Kilnhurst Cut . In Swinton , the stub of the Dearne and Dove Canal turns off to the left , and there are three more locks before the cut ends . Immediately following this , the River Dearne flows into the Don , and the towpath resumes , where the Dearne Way footpath ends .

The route continues through a wooded valley , past the site of the Sprotborough Flash Site of Special Scientific Interest ( SSSI ) , with the towpath forming part of the Trans Pennine Trail . Sprotborough lock and weir are situated just before Sprotborough . Just below the lock on the north bank are the remains of an engine house , built in the 1690s for Sir Godfrey Copley of Sprotborough Hall . A water wheel pumped river water some 100 feet ( 30 m ) upwards to supply a fountain in the grounds of the hall , a swimming pool , and also provided a water supply for the village . The pump was powered by a water wheel which was removed in the 1970s . Soon the edge of Doncaster is reached , where amongst the railway marshalling yards , the River Don leaves the navigation for the final time , as does the towpath . The two weir streams flow either side of Doncaster prison , effectively forming an island on which the building sits . Doncaster Town Lock is situated close to Doncaster railway station , and between here and Long Sandall Lock , some of the changes which have occurred over the years can be visualised , with the river on the left and ox-bow lakes on the right , severed by the course of the Wheatley Cut . The final section to Bramwith is usually called the River Dun Navigation . At Bramwith , the waterway splits , with the New Junction Canal heading north-east for the Aire and Calder Navigation and Goole , and the Stainforth and Keadby Canal heading east to the River Trent at Keadby . The River Don heads northwards too , turning to the east where the Dutch River starts at Newbridge . The original course to the River Aire can be traced across the fields , now little more than a drainage ditch crossed by an oversized Grade II listed bridge on the A1041 at East Cowick , and Vermuyden 's embankments are closely followed by the A614 road after it has crossed the M18 motorway .

Called " Jordan Bridge 21 " by British Waterways , this bridge carried a railway that linked Blackburn Meadows Sewage Works to additional filters and contact beds to the east of the navigation . It was constructed by Logan and Hemmingway , who won a contract valued at £ 41,046 in April 1907 , which included six settling tanks , 24 contact beds , and the bridge . The eastern approach consists of three brick arches , which allowed a siding to pass through it . Continued expansion of the works required a second bridge to be constructed in 1922 , to carry the railway over the river channel . The steelwork for Holmes bridge was supplied by Charles Ross Ltd , who were based in Sheffield , while piling work was carried out by Yorkshire Hennebique Concreting Co Ltd .

This carries the Centenary Way dual carriageway over the navigation , which has now been re-joined by the River Don . The road ( A630 ) is an upgrading of the old Canklow Road and is the main access into Rotherham from the M1 . It also forms part of the Rotherham Ring Road which was begun about 1968 , actually only goes half way around town , was built in sections and completed in 1995 . The towpath of the navigation ( part of the Trans-Pennine Trail ) is carried on a walkway that is cantilevered over the Don from the retaining wall of the factory site to the north .

Bridge Street Bridge ( Chantry Bridge ) is a single-span metal bridge that carries Bridge Street over the navigation . The street continues eastwards and originally crossed the river at Rotherham Bridge . As originally constructed in 1483 the bridge had four arches and was 15-foot ( 4.6 m ) wide , but it was widened and a fifth arch added in 1768 . In 1930 a new bridge was built nearby , a little further upstream , and as part of the work , the fifth arch was removed and the bridge was returned to its Medieval width . Because of improvements to the river made in the 18th and 19th centuries , it is wider than it used to be , and the bridge no longer reaches the west bank . The chapel on the bridge is one of only three complete bridge chapels that still exist in Britain , the other two being at Wakefield , West Yorkshire , and St Ives , Huntingdonshire . Dating from about 1483 , it remained in use as a chapel until the reign of King Edward VI ( 1547 – 1553 ) . It was put to use as almshouses during the 17th and 18th centuries , and in 1779 it was used as a prison . Later , it became a private dwelling and finally a tobacconist 's shop , before being returned to its original use as a chapel ; it was formally reconsecrated in 1924 by the Bishop of Sheffield .

Conisbrough Viaduct was built in the first decade of the 20th century as part of the Dearne Valley Railway . This was a line which essentially served a coalfield , although there was a rudimentary passenger service between 1912 and 1951 . The remaining coal traffic on the line ceased in 1966 . The viaduct has 21 arches and was built from 12 million Conisbrough blue bricks . The central metal span is 150 feet ( 46 m ) long and crosses the Don at a height of 113 feet ( 34 m ) . The viaduct remained out of use until 2001 , when ownership was transferred to Railway Paths Ltd , who manage potentially useful railway structures until they can be incorporated into the National Cycle Network . Installation of a new deck surface and safety railings were funded by the Railway Heritage Trust in early 2008 , and the viaduct re-opened as part of the Sustrans network in April 2008 .

Sprotbrough Bridge is actually two bridges that carry Mill Lane , the southern one crossing the weir stream and the northern one crossing the lock cut . Replacing a ferry crossing of the river , the first bridge and associated toll house were built in 1849 for Sir Joseph William Copley of Sprotbrough Hall . The designers of the southern bridge were Benjamin Brundell and William Arnold , and the present structure has three segmental arches on each side , which originally formed the approaches to a central arch . The arch was replaced by an above-deck truss in 1897 . The ironwork was manufactured by Newton Chambers & Co . Ltd . , who were based at Thorncliffe Ironworks in Sheffield , as recorded by plates attached to the bridge . The northern bridge was a single-arched masonry structure , which has been replaced by a plate girder bridge resting on the original piers . The toll house , consisting of a single storey with a half basement , made of dressed sandstone with an asphalt roof , still survives on the northern bank of the lock cut . Tolls collected here for passage over Sprotbrough Bridge were said to have been given by the Copley family to the Doncaster Dispensary .

This bridge carries the A1 ( M ) motorway over the river ; it was opened by Ernest Marples , the Minister of Transport , on 31 July 1961 . It consists of two separate structures , one for each carriageway , each having seven spans . The longest span , formed from two 40-foot ( 12 m ) cantilevers and a suspended central span of 100 feet ( 30 m ) , carries the motorway over the river at a height of 70 feet ( 21 m ) . The total length of the structure is 760 feet ( 230 m ) , and it has a slight horizontal and vertical curve at its southern end . Five riveted steel girders and a 9-inch ( 23 cm ) composite concrete deck support each carriageway . The bridge was one of the first to use rubber bearings , and the first to use bitumen membranes lined with copper to make the decks waterproof . The design includes jacking points to compensate for mining subsidence .

There are two railway viaducts at Warmsworth . The western one was completed in 1914 and formed part of the Hull & Barnsley and Great Central Joint Railway . This was essentially a railway to serve the coalfield and was closed in 1958 . For some years after closure , the viaduct was used to carry a conveyor belt over the Don . It became part of the Doncaster spur on the Trans-Pennine Trail , which was officially opened in 2001 . The steel pillars supporting the viaduct are filled with limestone . Its construction , which uses an above-deck truss , contrasts with the below-deck truss of the eastern viaduct , which was completed in 1910 and formed part of the Great Central Railway . It still carries a freight-only line that avoids a crossing on the level of the East Coast Main Line at Doncaster Station .

North Bridge Road is carried over the railway and then the navigation at Doncaster Town Lock by North Bridge , and over the Don by St Mary 's Bridge . North Bridge Road was previously part of the Great North Road . Until 1910 , this crossed the railway on the level before crossing the Don Navigation . After 1910 , a lengthy iron bridge took the road over the railway , navigation and river . This bridge was replaced by the current North Bridge in 2003 . Its use has been restricted to buses , taxis , cyclists and pedestrians since the new St George 's Bridge opened . The new bridge was constructed over the top of the old one while it was still in situ . Once the old bridge had been stripped of its surface trimmings the deck was cut up into 25-tonne sections , which were suspended from the new structure . A pulley system was used to transport these sections along the underside of the new bridge , so that they could be lowered onto the towpath , where they were cut up further before removal from the site .

St George 's Bridge is one of the newest bridges over the Don . It carries the dual carriageway New Bridge Road , part of the A19 , which is now the main road north out of Doncaster . It was opened on 22 November 2001 , and was named St George 's Bridge as a result of a public competition . It consists of a 690-yard ( 630 m ) long steel-composite bridge with spans of 49 yards ( 45 m ) over the River Don , the East Coast Main Line , and the Don Navigation . The ladder beam layout , using two main plate girders , cross-girders at 13 feet ( 4.0 m ) centres and precast planks , was chosen both to optimise the deck and to minimise the size and number of the piers .

At this point , the Navigation runs parallel to , and a few metres to the south-east of , the River Don . A pipe bridge high above both the Navigation and the River once carry waste from the glass works which adjoined the towpath ( to the south-east ) across to a series of settling ponds ( to the north-west ) . The glass works was a major employer in the Kirk Sandall area . The St Helens-based Pilkington Bros established a plate glass works here in the early 1920s . The site was chosen for its proximity to the canal and railway , and for the sandy terrain which was needed for the production of glass . Pilkingtons also funded the building of 400 new houses in the Brecks Lane area , together with associated school and recreational facilities . The glass works closed in the 1990s and its site is now occupied by various units on an industrial estate .

This was built in 1983 to replace the original ( 1900 ) swing bridge . It is built of steel and powered by electricity . The replacement work cost £ 0.5M and was part of a wider upgrade of the Navigation to conform to the 700-tonne Eurobarge standard ( see Later Development section of this article ) . An elevated control house was built for the sole use of operational staff , but in recent years a freestanding low level standard control console has been built for the use of boaters when the bridge is not staffed . Sykehouse Lift Bridge ( downstream of Barnby Dun ) was built to the same technical specification . Although the bridge carries an unclassified road linking Barnby Dun and Bentley , the bridge also provided the only access for heavy loads to the nearby Thorpe Marsh power station , so the bridge was designed to carry abnormal loads of up to 180 tons gross weight . Although Thorpe Marsh Power Station has now been demolished , the bridge is still busy with road traffic . This is because it is one of the few crossings of the Navigation in this area .

" The Alliance " is the fourth episode of the first season of the American comedy television series The Office , and the show 's fourth episode overall . The episode aired on NBC in the United States on April 12 , 2005 . It was written by Michael Schur and directed by Bryan Gordon , marking their first credits for the show . In this episode , paranoia takes over the members of the office as downsizing rumors swirl . Dwight ( Rainn Wilson ) forms a Survivor-esque alliance with Jim ( John Krasinski ) against the other employees — later adding Pam ( Jenna Fischer ) also . Meanwhile , Michael ( Steve Carell ) arranges a morale-boosting birthday party for Meredith ( Kate Flannery ) — although her birthday is more than a month away . Michael agonizes over writing the perfect greeting in her birthday card , and in the end , his joke falls flat , ruining the party . The episode was inspired by popular reality television shows , most notably Survivor . Originally , the first cut of the episode ran 37 minutes long and the producers considered making the episode a two-parter , one focusing on the Alliance and another focusing on Meredith 's birthday party , but later decided against the idea . In addition , several of the lines and scenes from the episode were improved or ad-libbed by the cast . " The Alliance " was viewed by an estimated 5.4 million viewers and received a 2.4 / 6 % rating share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . The episode received positive reviews from critics .

Although time has dragged on , the downsizing rumors at Dunder Mifflin have not ceased . Dwight ( Rainn Wilson ) feels particularly threatened by the impending crisis , and , in an act of desperation , forms an alliance with his office nemesis Jim ( John Krasinski ) . Jim sees the alliance as an opportunity with great potential and agrees as a lark . He immediately enlists Pam ( Jenna Fischer ) ' s help in the situation . The two continue to perform a series of office pranks at the expense of Dwight . Meanwhile , Michael ( Steve Carell ) tries to boost morale in the office by having an office birthday party for Meredith ( Kate Flannery ) , even though her birthday is a month away . Michael agonizes over writing the perfect greeting in her birthday card . In the end , his joke ( and subsequent rejected ones ) falls flat and ruins the party . At the same time Oscar also gets him to donate money to his nephew 's cerebral palsy walk-a-thon , which Michael accidentally overcontributes to in an effort to look like a good boss . At the end of the day , after a breakthrough in his pranks on Dwight , Jim giddily grabs Pam 's hand in an attempt to explain what has just happened . However , Pam 's fiancé Roy ( David Denman ) catches this and sees it as an attempt by Jim to make a move on Pam . Jim tries to convince Roy that it was just " office pranks " and asks Dwight to back him up , but he simply denies any involvement leaving Jim awkwardly embarrassed . Dwight reveals that he had no problems betraying Jim , despite the fact that he recently fell into one of Jim 's tricks .

The episode was inspired by popular reality television shows , most notably Survivor . The " Can I trust Jim ... " line was a direct reference to the show and was a " last-second addition " according to Daniels . In addition , Randall Einhorn , the camera man for the episode , was a camera man for Survivor . When the episode was being written , many of the cast and crew feared that it would bear too many stylistic resemblances to Curb Your Enthusiasm . Daniels later defended the show , saying that the show was different because of " the fact that they are on TV and they know they are being filmed . [ They know they 're ] on camera . " During the writing of the episode , Daniels made the writers spend actual time on the set , most notably in Michael 's office . Mindy Kaling later noted that she " hated it . " The first cut of the episode ran 37 minutes long and the producers were tasked with cutting the footage down to 22 minutes . Executive producer Greg Daniels considered making the episode a two-parter , one focusing on the Alliance and another focusing on Meredith 's birthday party , but the appearance of party hats in the Alliance-only scenes caused him to nix this idea . Because the episode had to be cut down due to time , several scenes were drastically cut . The filming crew actually shot about 15 – 20 minutes of Steve Carell coming up with terrible card ideas , which was drastically cut for the episode . During the party , Ryan talks to a different woman in the background of each scene . Although not much footage made it into the final episode , the producers thought this was a nice character touch for the new employee . The penultimate scenes of Michael telling several terrible jokes to Meredith was cut down from the original 15 . The final scene where Roy confronts Jim was shot ten different times , each in a different style , ranging from Roy slamming Jim into the wall to Roy asking Jim , " Hey , what are you doing ? " Although the crew felt that the wall-slamming version was more dramatic , they realized that it caused the episode to go from a comedy to an " angry drama . "

Several of the lines and scenes from the episode were improved or ad-libbed by the cast . Jenna Fischer named the party planning scene her favorite scene and called it " longest most horrible meeting of all time " . On the commentary track for the episode , Fischer revealed that the scene was almost entirely ad-libbed . At one point , Phyllis Smith , who portrays Phyllis Margaret Vance ( née Lapin ) , made a joke that made every one on set laugh , forcing production to halt for almost 45 minutes . Dwight 's " gun show " joke was written by Rainn Wilson . Larry Wilmore later called the " gun show " scene his favorite . Wilmore later said of ab-libs , " part of the fun in writing a show like this is trying to write lines that sound like ad-libs . " Daniels also praised the episode 's lines , saying , " when you know the acting is really good , it all sounds like it 's been improvised . " The scenes where Dwight climbs into a box almost did not make the episode . Mike Schur , who wrote the episode , feared that Dwight climbing into the box would not only make the episode " crazy broad , " but also make the rest of the episode look boring by comparison . After shooting the scene , however , he described it as " the most natural thing in the world . " Phil Shaw , the stunt man for The Office , did most of the work in the box . Schur described Dwight 's emergence from the box as his " action hero " moment . Daniels likened the scene to the movie Alien .

The episode received positive reviews from critics , with many praising the developing relationship between Pam and Jim . Travis Fickett from IGN praised the episode and compared Jim and Pam 's relationship in the first season to that of the fourth , saying , " Jim and Pam simply work better before they were a couple . The fact that Roy can come between them here is fun – and reminds us that it was more interesting when something could still come between them ! " In summary , he concluded that , " [ ' The Alliance ' ] is one of the better early episodes of the show , and going out with Dwight talking to the camera – his hair dyed blonde – is genius and gives us ( up to this point ) the most perfect ' Dwight ' moment of the show so far . " Television critic Robin Pierson noted that in the episode , " The Jim and Pam relationship begins to take real shape here . " He later called the moment when Roy nearly attacks Jim as " a much more ' real ' moment that the rest of the episode . " Furthermore , Pierson criticized the characterization of Dwight , noting that his actions were " stupidly naïve " . Miss Alli from Television Without Pity gave the episode an A.

Erik Adams of The A.V. Club awarded the episode a " B – " . He felt that the episode was " akin to a newborn deer working the wobbles out of its legs " and that " it ’ s a milestone for The Office , in that it represents the first time an episode generated so much material it could ’ ve occupied a full hour of airtime " . He felt that Michael 's plot was funny , but had issues . He argued that the retooling of Michael 's character made him a more likable character even when he was doing something inappropriate ; in this episode , however , his behavior is too cringe-inducing . Adams praised the scene wherein Dwight emerged from the box , calling it one of " The Office 's first great sigh gags " . Furthermore , he felt that the scene was symbolic , as it produced " a stronger , deadlier , better character " .

In the month leading up to the race , Cambridge 's crew saw some significant changes , including the removal of David Sturge ( who had rowed in the 1973 race ) due to glandular fever . However , the Cambridge boat club president Steve Tourek was circumspect : " Cambridge might be slower than planned but still fast enough to beat Oxford . " On 24 March 1975 , Cambridge beat Oxford 's record time ( set five days earlier ) between Hammersmith Bridge and the Mile Post by two seconds . The following day , Oxford 's coach Dan Topolski revealed that the Oxford reserve crew , Isis , had equalled the record time , downplaying Cambridge 's efforts : " Shows how fast conditions really were yesterday . " Cambridge coach Lou Barry remarked of his charges : " this is a fast crew " .

The Cambridge crew weighed an average of 13 st 9.75 lb ( 86.8 kg ) , 7 pounds ( 3.2 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Oxford 's crew contained two former Blues in boat club president Nick Tee and stroke Graham Innes , while Cambridge saw Nick Bradley , Henry Clay and Tourek return from the 1974 boat . Although the British international rower David Sturge was replaced through illness prior to the race , the Light Blues also saw international-standard rowers Alistair Christie and James Macleod in the crew , both of whom had withdrawn from selection for the 1974 race to represent Great Britain . Only two competitors in the race were registered as " overseas " Blues , Oxford 's number five John Hutchings and his counterpart and Tourek , both from the United States .

Cambridge started as pre-race favourite ; according to the author and former rower Dickie Burnell , although Oxford had some " useful new recruits " no-one " outside their immediate camp thought they could win . " Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station . Oxford took an early lead , but by the Mile Post , Cambridge had recovered to lead by two seconds . Extending their lead , the Light Blues gained a clear water advantage by Harrods Furniture Depository and moved in front of the Dark Blue boat . Shooting Hammersmith Bridge five seconds ahead , Cambridge held a length-and-a-quarter lead which they defended against a number of Oxford pushes . Midway round the Surrey bend , Oxford 's bow man Andrew Baird 's oar came out of its gate , allowing Cambridge to increase their lead by another length . A seven-second lead at Chiswick Steps was extended to nine seconds by Barnes Bridge , and along the final bend , Cambridge pushed their lead further out to nearly four lengths , passing the finishing post in 19 minutes 27 seconds , thirteen seconds ahead of their rivals . It was Cambridge 's seventh victory in the previous eight years , having lost to Oxford in 1974 .

Oxford 's Baird claimed " I might have caught a crab , but I do not really know what happened . " Cambridge number six MacLeod said of the Dark Blues : " They kept coming at us time and time again . I was only sure of victory in the last mile of the race . " Christopher Dodd , writing in The Guardian was impressed : " The contest had a rare element ... it was a race nearly all the way , and was not all over in the first 20 stokes as has so often been the case in recent years . " Burnell suggested it was a race for the aficionados : " This was surely one of those so common Boat Races , which are hard fought all the way , yet never exciting from the point of view of the average spectator . "

Reginald de Warenne was the third son of William de Warenne , the second Earl of Surrey , who died in 1138 . Reginald 's mother was Isabel de Vermandois . Reginald was likely born between 1121 and 1126 . Reginald 's brothers were William de Warenne , the third Earl of Surrey , and Ralph de Warenne . Reginald 's two sisters were Gundrada de Warenne who married first Roger , Earl of Warwick and then William of Lancaster , and Ada de Warenne who married Henry , Earl of Huntingdon . Ada 's husband was the only son of King David I of Scotland , and she was the mother of two kings of Scotland – Malcolm IV and William I. From their mother 's first marriage to Robert de Beaumont , Reginald and his siblings were half-siblings of the twins Robert de Beaumont the Earl of Leicester and Waleran de Beaumont , the Count of Meulan and Earl of Worcester . There was another Reginald de Warenne alive during Reginald 's lifetime – this may have been an illegitimate half-brother .

Reginald first appears in the historical record around 1138 when he was a witness on some of his father 's charters . Reginald was one of the main administrators of his elder brother 's estates up until 1147 . Reginald also had his own lands that he was granted from his brother 's honour in Norfolk and Sussex . While his brother was on crusade , Reginald granted the right to form a merchant guild to the inhabitants of the town of Lewes , as long as his brother agreed after his return from crusade . William , the third earl , died in early 1148 while on crusade and the earldom and estates passed to William 's daughter Isabel , whom King Stephen of England married to the king 's second son , William . Reginald continued to serve the new earl and also began to serve the king , witnessing a number of royal charters . Reginald eventually became the main advisor to the new earl . Reginald was granted the castles of Bellencombre and Mortemer in the charter of Westminster in 1153 which settled the rights that William , the surviving son of King Stephen , received for not contesting the crown of England going to Henry of Anjou after Stephen 's death , and was also a witness to the charter . Reginald continued to serve as a royal official , witnessing a number of the new king 's charters .

In 1157 Reginald was one of the justices present when King Henry II decided a case between Hilary of Chichester , the Bishop of Chichester and Walter de Luci , the Abbot of Battle Abbey . In 1164 he was present at the Council of Clarendon , which was part of the long struggle between King Henry II and the new Archbishop of Canterbury , Thomas Becket , over the control of the English church . Reginald also accompanied the king 's daughter Matilda to Germany for her marriage to Henry the Lion , Duke of Saxony . Reginald was one of the four main justices involved with the general eyre in 1168 through 1170 , along with Richard of Ilchester , Guy the Dean of Waltham Holy Cross , and William Basset . In 1168 , Henry II summoned Reginald as a Serjeant-at-law , one of the first identifiable members of that order in the historical record . Besides these administrative and judicial roles , Reginald was a baron of the exchequer in 1169 and held the office of Sheriff of Sussex from 1170 to 1176 . In 1170 , Reginald was involved with attempts to keep Thomas Becket , who had been in exile , from returning to England . Working with Reginald were Roger de Pont L 'Évêque – the Archbishop of York , Gilbert Foliot – the Bishop of London , Josceline de Bohon – the Bishop of Salisbury , Gervase de Cornhill – the Sheriff of Kent , and Ranulf de Broc . At that time , Reginald was a royal justiciar . Reginald was part of the party that met Becket at Sandwich on 1 December 1070 when the archbishop returned to England . Reginald 's group , led by Gervase of Cornhill , complained that the archbishop was sowing dissension in the land by his excommunication of the three ecclesiastics , but Becket managed to calm the officials by stating he would consider the matter and reply to them the next day . The next day the group was accompanied by some clergy sent by the ecclesiastics who had been excommunicated by Becket . Nothing further was accomplished by this meeting except further offers from Becket to consider other options . Reginald was involved in a further attempt at resolving the differences between the king and Becket later in December 1170 , which again came to nothing .

Reginald married Alice , the daughter and heiress of William de Wormegay , Baron of Wormegay in Norfolk . William de Wormegay died in 1166 and Reginald was fined a bit over 466 pounds by the king for the right to inherit his father-in-law 's lands . With his father-in-law 's death he became Lord of Wormegay , or Baron Wormegay . This lordship was assessed at 14 and a quarter knight 's fees and was located mostly in Norfolk and Suffolk . The centre of the honour was at Lynn , Norfolk . Sometime between Michaelmas 1178 and the start of 1179 , Reginald retired from public life and became a monk at Lewes Priory , which had been founded by his family . When he retired , the Exchequer began to pressure him to repay his debts owed to the king , which for the previous decade or more they had ignored . Reginald died in 1179 , and his heir was his son William de Warenne . Besides his son , Reginald also had several daughters . One was Gundrada who married three times – first to Peter de Valognes , son of Roger de Valognes , second to William de Courcy , son of William de Courcy and Avice de Rumilly the daughter of William Meschin , and third to Geoffrey Hose , the son of Henry Hose . Another daughter was Alice who married Peter , constable of Mealton . A possible third daughter was Muriel , who was a nun at Carrow Abbey . Another possible daughter was Ela , who married Duncan the Earl of Fife . At his death , Reginald still owed a large portion of the fine he 'd been assessed for the inheritance of his father-in-law 's estates .

The 1988 Winter Olympics , officially known as the XV Olympic Winter Games ( French : Les XVes Jeux olympiques d 'hiver ) , was a Winter Olympics multi-sport event celebrated in and around Calgary , Alberta , Canada between February 13 and 28 , 1988 . The host city was selected in 1981 over Falun , Sweden and Cortina d 'Ampezzo , Italy . Most events took place in Calgary while several skiing events were held in the mountain resorts of Nakiska and Canmore , west of the city . A then-record 57 nations competed and 1,423 athletes participated . The Soviet Union won the most medals with 29 , followed by East Germany with 25 . As it had in Montreal in 1976 , Canada again failed to win a gold medal in an official medal event as the host nation . Finnish ski jumper Matti Nykänen and Dutch speed skater Yvonne van Gennip were individual medal leaders , capturing three gold medals apiece . The games are also remembered for the " heroic failure " of British ski jumper Eddie " The Eagle " Edwards and the Winter Olympic début of the Jamaica national bobsled team , both of which would be subjects of major feature films about their participation in the games .

The Calgary games were at the time one of the most expensive Olympics ever held , but the organizing committee turned record television and sponsorship revenue into a net surplus that was used to maintain the facilities built for the Olympics and develop the Calgary region into the heart of Canada 's elite winter sports program . The five purpose-built venues continue to be used in their original functions , and have helped the country develop into one of the top nations in Winter Olympic competition ; Canada more than quintupled the five medals it won in Calgary at the 2010 games , the next Winter Olympics hosted on Canadian soil .

The bid for the 1988 Winter Olympics was Canada 's seventh attempt at hosting a winter games and Calgary 's fourth . Previous bids representing Montreal ( 1956 ) and Vancouver ( 1976 and 1980 ) bookended failed attempts by the Calgary Olympic Development Association ( CODA ) to host the 1964 , 1968 and 1972 games . The CODA became dormant in 1966 after losing its bid for the 1972 Olympics , but was revived in 1979 under the leadership of Frank King to bid for the 1988 games . Calgary earned the right to bid on behalf of Canada by the Canadian Olympic Association ( COA ) , defeating a rival challenge from a group representing Vancouver . The defeated organizing group lamented that they lost to Calgary 's " big-ticket games " ; the Calgary bid proposed to spend nearly three times what the Vancouver group expected to pay to host the Olympics . The CODA then spent two years building local support for the project , selling memberships to 80,000 of the city 's 600,000 residents . It secured C $ 270 million in funding from the federal and provincial governments while civic leaders , including Mayor Ralph Klein , crisscrossed the world attempting to woo International Olympic Committee ( IOC ) delegates . Driven by the arrival of the National Hockey League 's Calgary Flames , the city had already begun constructing an Olympic coliseum ( later named the Olympic Saddledome ) prior to the IOC vote , an action that demonstrated Calgary 's determination to host the games and positively influenced delegates . The city was one of three finalists , opposed by the Swedish community of Falun and Cortina d 'Ampezzo , the Italian town that hosted the 1956 Winter Olympics .

McMahon Stadium , Calgary 's primary outdoor facility , was the site of both the opening and closing ceremonies , the first time in 28 years that the same venue hosted both events . Three other existing venues served as secondary facilities : The Max Bell Centre hosted the demonstration events of curling and short track speed skating . The Father David Bauer Olympic Arena hosted some ice hockey matches , as did the Stampede Corral , which also played host to some figure skating events . Though the Corral did not support the size of the International Ice Hockey Federation ( IIHF ) ' s standard ice surface , the Calgary Organizing Committee ( Olympiques Calgary Olympics ' 88 or OCO ' 88 ) was able to convince the IIHF to sanction the arena in exchange for a $ 1.2 million payment . The Games ' five primary venues were all purpose-built however , at significant cost . The Olympic Saddledome was the primary venue for ice hockey and figure skating . Located at Stampede Park , the facility was expected to cost $ 83 million but cost overruns pushed the facility to nearly $ 100 million . The Olympic Oval was built on the campus of the University of Calgary . It was the first fully enclosed 400-metre speed skating venue in the world as it was necessary to protect against the possibility of either bitter cold temperatures or ice-melting chinook winds . Seven world and three Olympic records were broken during the Games , resulting in the facility earning praise as " the fastest ice on Earth " . Canada Olympic Park was built on the western outskirts of Calgary and hosted bobsled , luge , ski jumping and freestyle skiing . It was the most expensive facility built for the games , costing $ 200 million .

Two facilities were built west of Calgary , in the foothills of the Rocky Mountains . The Canmore Nordic Centre was 90-percent funded by the Province of Alberta at a cost of $ 17.3 million . Located near the community of Canmore it was built with the intention that it would become a year-round recreation destination for Albertans . The facility hosted cross-country skiing , biathlon and Nordic combined events . Nakiska ( Cree for " to meet " ) was the most controversial facility built . The province paid the $ 25 million construction cost for the alpine skiing facility on Mount Allan , about an hour west of Calgary . It was initially criticized for the location 's relative lack of snow , requiring artificial snow making machines to be installed , and for an initial lack of technical difficulty . International Ski Federation officials proposed modifications to the courses that ultimately met with praise from competitors .

The Calgary Olympics were the first to earn a significant television revenue base ; where the 1980 Lake Placid Games generated only US $ 20.7 million worldwide , OCO ' 88 generated $ 324.9 million in broadcast rights . The overwhelming majority of television revenues came from the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) , which agreed in 1984 to pay $ 309 million for American television rights , over three times the $ 91.5 million it paid for the 1984 Winter Olympics in Sarajevo . The deal , at the time the highest amount ever paid for a sporting event , allowed organizers to announce the Games would be debt-free . The CTV Television Network paid C $ 4.5 million for Canadian rights and to act as the host broadcaster , while western European nations paid US $ 5.7 million combined . OCO ' 88 made several alterations to the Olympic program as part of efforts to ensure value for its broadcast partners . Premier events , including ice hockey and figure skating , were scheduled for prime time and the Games were lengthened to 16 days from the previous 12 to ensure three weekends of coverage . However , a significant downturn in advertising revenue for sporting events resulted in ABC forecasting significant financial losses on the Games . Calgary organizers appreciated their fortunate timing in signing the deal . King described the timing of the contract with ABC as " the passing of the sun and the moon at the right time for Calgary . " ABC lost an estimated $ 60 million , and broadcast rights to the 1992 Winter Olympics were later sold to the CBS network for $ 243 million , a 20 % reduction compared to Calgary .

A series of ticket-related scandals plagued the organizing committee as the Games approached , resulting in widespread public anger . Demand for tickets was high , particularly for the premier events which had sold out a year in advance . Residents had been promised that only 10 percent of tickets would go to " Olympic insiders " , IOC officials and sponsors , but OCO ' 88 was later forced to admit that up to 50 percent of seats to top events had gone to insiders . The organizing committee , which was subsequently chastised by mayor Klein for running a " closed shop " , admitted that it had failed to properly communicate the obligations it had to supply IOC officials and sponsors with priority tickets . These events were preceded by OCO ' 88 's ticketing manager being charged with theft and fraud after he sent modified ticket request forms to Americans that asked them to pay in United States funds rather than Canadian and to return them to his company 's post office box rather than that of the organizing committee . Organizers attempted to respond to public concern by asking sponsors to consider reducing their orders and by paying $ 1.5 million to add 2,600 seats to the Saddledome . King also noted that the Calgary Games offered a then-record 1.7 million tickets for sale , three times the amount available at Sarajevo or Lake Placid , and that 82 percent of them were going to Calgarians . By their start , a Winter Games ' record of over 1.4 million tickets had been sold , a figure that eclipsed the previous three Winter Games combined .

The city , which already had a strong volunteering tradition with the annual Calgary Stampede , also relied heavily on volunteers to run the Olympics . Over 22,000 people signed up to fill 9,400 positions , no matter how inglorious : doctors , lawyers and executives offered to clean manure dropped by horses at the opening ceremonies . Many residents participated in a " Homestay " program , opening their homes to visitors from around the world and renting rooms to those who could not stay in a hotel . Klein was among those who felt it necessary that the event be community driven , a decision which allowed the city 's welcoming spirit to manifest . The Games ' mascots , Hidy and Howdy , were designed to evoke images of " western hospitality " . The smiling , cowboy-themed polar bears were popular across Canada . Played by a team of students from Bishop Carroll High School , the sister-brother pair made up to 300 appearances per month in the lead up to the Games . From their introduction at the closing ceremonies of the Sarajevo Games in 1984 until their retirement at the conclusion of the Calgary Games , the pair made about 50,000 appearances . The iconic mascots graced signs welcoming travelers to Calgary for nearly two decades until they were replaced in 2007 .

Held at a price of C $ 829 million , the Calgary Olympics cost more to stage than any previous Games , summer or winter . The high cost was anticipated , as organizers were aware at the outset of their bid that most facilities would have to be constructed . The venues , constructed primarily with public money , were designed to have lasting use beyond the Games and were planned to become the home of several of Canada 's national winter sports teams . Despite the high costs , OCO ' 88 anticipated a C $ 36 million surplus , though the organizing committee counted only its own expenditures and excluded government spending . The Games were a major economic boon for the city which had fallen into its worst recession in 40 years following the collapse of both oil and grain prices in the mid-1980s . A report prepared for the city in January 1985 estimated the games would create 11,100 man-years of employment and generate C $ 450-million in salaries and wages . In its post-Games report , OCO ' 88 estimated the Olympics created C $ 1.4 billion in economic benefits across Canada during the 1980s , 70 percent within Alberta , as a result of capital spending , increased tourism and new sporting opportunities created by the facilities .

The 1988 Olympic torch relay began on November 15 , 1987 , when the torch was lit at Olympia and Greek runner Stellos Bisbas began what was called " the longest torch run in history " . The flame arrived in St. John 's , Newfoundland on the Atlantic Ocean two days later and over 88 days traveled west across Canada . It passed through most major cities , north to the Arctic Ocean at Inuvik , Northwest Territories , then west to the Pacific Ocean at Victoria , British Columbia before returning east to Alberta , and finally Calgary . The torch covered a distance of 18,000 kilometres ( 11,000 mi ) , the greatest distance for a torch relay in Olympic history until the 2000 Sydney Games , and a sharp contrast to the 1976 Montreal Games when the relay covered only 775 kilometres ( 482 mi ) . Relay sponsor Petro Canada issued entry forms allowing citizens the chance to become one of 6,214 people to carry the torch for 1 kilometre ( 0.62 mi ) . Organizers , who initially expected to receive 250,000 entries , were inundated with over 6.6 million forms and called the response a sign that the Olympics had " fired the imagination of Canada " . The relay , called " Share the Flame " , also saw the torch travel by boat , snowmobile and dogsled .

The relay was subject to peaceful protests by members and supporters of the Lubicon Cree First Nation at several stops in Ontario and Alberta in protest of ongoing land claim disputes between the band and the Crown , as well as discontent over an exhibit at Calgary 's Glenbow Museum called " The Spirit Sings " that featured numerous artifacts stolen from native land . The identity of the final torchbearer who would light the Olympic cauldron was one of OCO ' 88 's most closely guarded secrets . The relay began at St. John 's with Barbara Ann Scott and Fred Hayward representing Canada 's past Olympians , and ended with Ken Read and Cathy Priestner carrying the torch into McMahon Stadium representing the nation 's current Olympians . They then handed the torch to 12-year-old Robyn Perry , an aspiring figure skater who was selected to represent future Olympians , to light the cauldron . The choice of Perry was an unusual departure from most Games as the cauldron has typically been lit by a famous individual or group from the host nation . Constructed of maple and aluminum , the torch was designed to remain lit despite the sometimes adverse conditions of Canadian winters . It was modeled after the Calgary Tower , constructed entirely of Canadian materials and designed to be light enough for the relay runners to carry comfortably . The Calgary Tower itself was retrofitted to install a cauldron at its peak and was lit for the duration of the Games , one of several " replica cauldrons " constructed at Olympic venues throughout Calgary and Canmore .

The 1988 Winter Games began on February 13 with a $ 10 million opening ceremony that featured 5,500 performers , an aerial flyover by the Royal Canadian Air Force 's Snowbirds , the parade of nations and the release of 1,000 homing pigeons . Canadian composer David Foster performed the instrumental theme song ( " Winter Games " ) and its vocal counterpart ( " Can 't You Feel It ? " ) , while internationally recognized Canadian folk / country musicians Gordon Lightfoot and Ian Tyson were among the featured performers . Governor General Jeanne Sauvé opened the Games on behalf of Queen Elizabeth II as an estimated 1.5 billion people watched the ceremony . The weather was a dominant story throughout much of the Games , as strong chinook winds that brought daily temperatures as high as 17 ° C ( 63 ° F ) wreaked havoc on the schedules for outdoor events . Events were delayed when winds were deemed unsafe for competitors and organizers used artificial snow making equipment to ensure skiing venues were properly prepared . It was the first time in Olympic history that alpine events were held on artificial snow . The Games were also marred by the death of the Austrian ski team 's doctor , Joerg Oberhammer , on February 25 after a collision with another skier sent him crashing into a snow grooming machine at Nakiska , crushing and killing him instantly . The incident was ruled an accident .

The top individual competitors at the Olympics were Finnish ski jumper Matti Nykänen and Dutch speed skater Yvonne van Gennip as they each won three gold medals . Italy 's Alberto Tomba won gold in two skiing events , his first of five career Olympic medals en route to becoming the first alpine skier to win medals at three Winter Games . East Germany 's Katarina Witt defended her 1984 gold medal in women 's figure skating , capturing a second gold in Calgary . Her compatriot Christa Rothenburger won the gold medal in the 1000 metre race in speed skating , then went on to win a silver medal in the team sprint cycling event at the 1988 Summer Games to become the only person in Olympic history to win medals at both Olympic Games in the same year . The Soviet Union won gold in hockey as Scandinavian neighbours Finland and Sweden took silver and bronze , respectively . As it had in 1976 , Canada again failed to win an official gold medal as the host of an Olympic Games . Canadians won two gold medals in demonstration events , including by Sylvie Daigle as one of her five medals in short-track speed skating . Canada 's top official performances came in figure skating where Brian Orser and Elizabeth Manley each won silver medals . Promoted by the media as the " Battle of the Brians " , the competition between Orser and American rival Brian Boitano was the marquee event of the Games . Boitano won the gold medal over Orser by only one-tenth of a point . Manley was not viewed as a medal contender , but skated the greatest performance of her career to come within a fraction of Witt 's gold medal winning score .

American speed skater Dan Jansen 's personal tragedy was one of the more poignant events of the Games as he skated the 500 metre race mere hours after his sister Jane died of leukemia . A gold medal favourite , Jansen chose to compete as he felt it is what his sister would have wanted . Viewers around the world witnessed his heartbreak as he fell and crashed into the outer wall in the first quarter of his heat . In the 1000 metre race four days later , Jansen was on a world record pace when he again fell . After failing again in Albertville , Jansen finally won a gold medal at the 1994 Lillehamer Games . One of the most popular athletes from the games was British ski jumper Eddie " The Eagle " Edwards , who gained infamy by placing last in both the 70 and 90 metre events finishing 70 and 53 points behind his next closest competitor , respectively . Edwards ' " heroic failure " made him an instant celebrity ; he went from earning £ 6,000 per year as a plasterer before the Games to making £ 10,000 per hour per appearance afterward . Left embarrassed by the spectacle he created , the International Ski Federation altered the rules following Calgary to eliminate each nation 's right to send at least one athlete and set minimum competition standards for future events . Regardless , the President of the Organizing Committee , Frank King , playfully saluted Edwards ' unorthodox sporting legacy , which would also be commemorated with a 2016 feature film , Eddie the Eagle .

The Jamaican bobsleigh team , making their nation 's Winter Olympic debut , was also popular in Calgary . The team was the brainchild of a pair of Americans who recruited individuals with strong sprinting ability from the Jamaican military to form the team . Dudley Stokes and Michael White finished the two-man event in 30th place out of 41 competitors and launched the Jamaican team into worldwide fame . The pair , along with Devon Harris and Chris Stokes crashed in the four man event , but were met with cheers from the crowd as they pushed their sled across the finish line . Their odyssey was made into the 1993 movie Cool Runnings , a largely fictionalized comedy by Walt Disney Pictures .

Prior to Calgary , the Winter Olympics were viewed as a second-rate event compared to their summer counterpart , so much so that the IOC had at one point considered eliminating them entirely . Few cities bid on the Winter Games due to challenges faced in generating revenue . In its bid for the Games , CODA convinced the IOC that it could not only generate enough revenue to turn a profit , but enough of one to ensure a lasting legacy of winter sport development . Organizers followed the lead of their counterparts in Los Angeles for the 1984 Summer Olympics , attracting a large television contract in the United States and was the first host city to benefit from a change in the IOC 's strategy on corporate sponsorship . The Calgary Games attracted support from over two dozen major Canadian and multinational corporations , generating millions of dollars in revenues . Many program changes were made in Calgary to grow the appeal of the Winter Games for sponsors : the extension to 16 days from 12 added an extra weekend of coverage , while the additional programming time was filled by television friendly demonstration events popular in Canada . The exposure curling , freestyle skiing and short-track speed skating gained in Calgary influenced the growth in their popularity and led to all three becoming full medal sports by 1998 .

Hosting the Games helped fuel a significant increase in Calgary 's reputation on the world stage . Crosbie Cotton , a reporter for the Calgary Herald who covered the city 's Olympic odyssey from its bid to the closing ceremonies , noted a change in the attitude of the city 's population over time . He believed that the populace began to outgrow its " giant inferiority complex " that is " typically Canadian " , replacing it with a new level of confidence as the Games approached . They helped the city grow from a regional oil and gas centre best known for the Calgary Stampede to a destination for international political , economic and sporting events . A study prepared for the organizing committee of the 2010 Vancouver Olympics claimed that Calgary hosted over 200 national and international sporting competitions between 1987 and 2007 due to the facilities it had constructed for the Olympics . The Games ' enduring popularity within Calgary has been attributed to efforts to make them " everybody 's Games " . Aside from the sense of community fostered by the level of volunteer support , organizers included the public in other ways . People were given opportunity to purchase a brick with their names engraved on it and used to build Olympic Plaza , where medal ceremonies were held in 1988 . It remains a popular public park and event site in the city 's downtown . Members of the community have attempted to bring a second Winter Games to the city . Calgary offered to take over the 2002 Winter Olympics after a bribery scandal resulted in speculation that Salt Lake City would be unable to remain the host . The city also made an effort to bid for the 2010 Games on Canada 's behalf , losing to Vancouver . A 2013 Calgary Sun online poll found that 81 % of respondents would support the city hosting a second Olympics .

Mindful of the financial disaster the Montreal Olympics became , OCO ' 88 parlayed its ability to generate television and sponsorship revenues and government support into what was ultimately a C $ 170 million surplus . ( The claim of a surplus has frequently been challenged as OCO ' 88 counted only its own revenues and expenses and did not include government funded facilities in its accounting . ) The surplus was turned into endowment funds split between Canada Olympic Park ( $ 110 million ) and CODA , which was reformed following the Games to manage the Olympic facilities with a trust fund that had subsequently grown to be worth over $ 200 million by 2013 . Consequently , all five of the primary facilities built for the 1988 Olympics remained operational in their original intended purpose 25 years after the Games concluded . Calgary and Canmore became the heart of winter sport in Canada as CODA ( now known as Winsport Canada ) established itself as the nation 's leader in developing elite athletes ; in 2006 , one-quarter of Canada 's Olympic athletes were from the Calgary region and three-quarters of its medalists were from or trained in Alberta . Canada was not a winter sport power in 1988 ; the nation 's five medals in Calgary was its second best total at a Winter Olympics behind the seven it won at the 1932 Lake Placid Games . After 1988 , Canada won an increasing number of medals at each successive Olympics , culminating in a 26-medal performance in 2010 that included a Winter Olympic record of 14 gold medals , one more than the previous record holders Soviet Union ( 1976 ) and Norway ( 2002 ) .

Ensign Harry S. L. Kim is a fictional character who appeared in each of the seven seasons of the American television series Star Trek : Voyager . Portrayed by Garrett Wang , he is the Operations Officer aboard the Starfleet starship USS Voyager . There was some difficulty in casting the part prior to the start of the series in 1995 , with a reported lack of young Asian actors to choose from . The character first appeared in the pilot episode of the series , " Caretaker " . The character continued to appear throughout the series in a main cast role , with his final appearance in the finale , " Endgame " . In that episode , an alternative future version of the character is seen as a Starfleet Captain . He is typically shown as being naive , especially in romantic situations , but gifted . The character finds the ship 's first possible route home , and in one alternative future , he manages to develop a transwarp drive which allows him and Chakotay to travel home in a matter of hours but kills the rest of the crew . The producers had considered whether or not to kill off Kim during the third season . Wang subsequently reprised the role of Harry Kim for the fan-made Star Trek : Renegades .

The character went through more than one name prior to casting , with it being called Jay Osaka at one point . The series bible for Star Trek : Voyager described Kim as being a sheltered individual who had sought to repay the love of his parents through fulfilling their expectations for him at Starfleet Academy . Winrich Kolbe , the director of the Voyager pilot " Caretaker " , was involved in the casting process and found Kim difficult as there wasn 't a great number of young Asian actors to choose from . He said that the role was an " inexperienced , naive character " , and that the actor cast as Kim would need to fight to stay in the forefront of episodes . At the time of the casting , Garrett Wang had only been acting for about a year and a half , and after he was cast in the role he was described by Kolbe as a " young , up-and-coming actor , but he needs to learn , and that 's going to take some time . He 's one of the actors who has to really work hard on his craft in order to keep up with the others . " The naivety of the character was emphasized in the media reports , with TV Guide describing the character prior to the launch of the series as " green-around-the-gills " .

Wang was enthusiastic about his new role , describing Kim 's background by saying that " I had a stellar Starfleet Academy career and am basically the rookie on the bridge . I 'm an Asian-American . There 's the professional competence , but also the inner fear , ' Oh my God , are these britches too big for me ? ' His heritage is one of focus , of Zen and martial arts " . Of the casting , he said that " My goal now is to do the best job possible playing Harry Kim and to begin repaying my parents for the unaccountable financial support they have given me throughout the years . " The pilot of Voyager was broadcast on January 16 , 1995 . Wang had initially gone along with the writing on the show until towards the end of the second season when he asked the production writers if he could have some actions scenes and perhaps a romance . He had realised at the time that he was the only member of the main cast without a stunt double as he had never had an action scene that required one . This resulted in the Brannon Braga penned " Non Sequitur " , to which Wang said to Rick Berman that there wasn 't a need to give him all his requests in a single episode . Following that , he became more involved in suggestions for character direction , but the writers avoided giving Kim more of a comedic element similar to The Doctor ( Robert Picardo ) and Neelix ( Ethan Phillips ) . Wang described himself as someone who tells jokes and makes impersonations on sets and was disappointed at not being able to utilise this nature . The producers at one point had planned to permanently kill off Harry Kim during season three , but after Wang was included in the People list of sexiest people alive 1997 , the plan was abandoned .

By season five of Voyager , certain characters were seen by the production staff as being under-utilised , Kim amongst them . This led to episodes placing Kim , Chakotay and Tuvok in central positions , including the episode " Timeless " for the character of Kim . Wang was pleased with the episode , and felt that being able to act as the two different versions of Kim showed " a great dichotomy " . Following the end of the show in 2001 , Wang had felt that the character should have been promoted during the course of the series , but was told by producers that " someone 's got to be the ensign " .

Kim was born in 2349 . After graduating from Starfleet Academy in 2370 , his first assignment was as the Operations Officer aboard USS Voyager as seen in " Caretaker " . Kim immediately became friends with Tom Paris ( Robert Duncan McNeill ) after he was assigned to the vessel for the mission which saw Voyager sent to track down a Maquis vessel in the Badlands . During this mission , the ship is sent some 70,000 light years into the Delta Quadrant , where Kim and B 'Elanna Torres ( Roxann Dawson ) are abducted to an Ocampan medical facility . Both infected by an unknown ailment , they are rescued by and cured on Voyager on their escape from the underground city ; they are cured on board . At the time of the stranding of the ship , Kim was engaged to be married , but Kim was encouraged to date other crew members by Paris . In " Eye of the Needle " , Kim found the ship 's first contact back with the Alpha Quadrant when he discovered a micro-wormhole . It was discovered that it linked through to Romulan space some twenty years in the past . Kim twice travels through long-range transportation systems . In " Emanations " , he is accidentally transported to the Vhnori homeworld by the effects of an alien burial system . He escapes the Vhnori and manages to go through the funeral system , killing him but returning him to Voyager where he is revived . When the crew meet the Sikaris in " Prime Factors " , Kim is the first crewman to be transported through their spatial trajector over a distance of some 40,000 light years . Ultimately the technology proves incompatible with Voyager 's systems . On stardate 48693.2 ( the episode " Heroes and Demons " ) , Kim is the first crewmember to be converted into energy by an alien creature appearing in a Beowulf holodeck programme . After the Doctor resolves the situation , Kim and two other crewmembers are restored .

Following a transporter accident , Kim awakes in San Francisco next to his fiancée , Libby ( Jennifer Gatti ) in the episode " Non Sequitur " . He finds that he never travelled on board Voyager , and nor did Paris . After being contacted by an alien , he discovers that the transporter interacted with an alien " time-stream " and sent him into an alternative reality . After he receives assistance from Paris and the alien , he manages to restore the timeline and return to Voyager . During the episode " Persistence of Vision " , Kim hallucinates Libby after Voyager attempts to enter Bothan space . On stardate 49548.7 , Voyager enters a plasma cloud to avoid Vidiian vessels in " Deadlock " . It is damaged , and Kim is sucked out through a hull breach into space and killed , while Naomi Wildman dies shortly after being born . The crew then find a duplicate Voyager in better condition occupying the same space but slightly out of phase . When the Vidiians attack the other Voyager , the alternative Kim is sent to the damaged version of the ship carrying the living Naomi Wildman shortly before the alternative Voyager self-destructs . This destroys the two Vidiian vessels , and the damaged version of Voyager continues on its way , carrying a different version of Kim and Wildman .

Whilst on shore leave on Akritiri , Kim and Paris are falsely accused of a terrorist bombing . They are imprisoned on the planet , while the Voyager crew track down the real offenders , who help them rescue their crewmen ( episode " The Chute " . ) Whilst the crew are studying a nebula ( " Alter Ego " ) , Kim and Tuvok both become romantically attached to a holodeck character ; she turns out to be controlled by an alien on a nearby space station . Kim becomes infected with Taresian DNA leading him to suspect that he may be a member of their species in " Favorite Son " . But after discovering that it is all a ploy to extract his genetic material , he is saved by Voyager . In an alternative future seen in " Before and After " , Tom Paris and Kes ( Jennifer Lien ) marry , and give birth to a daughter Linnis ( Jessica Collins ) . Linnis and Kim marry , beget a child , Andrew Kim . Kim becomes infected after being attacked by a member of Species 8472 whilst as a member of an away team aboard a Borg Cube in " Scorpion " . He is cured by the Doctor after the hologram develops a process utilising Borg nano-probes . He is initially apprehensive working with the former Borg Seven of Nine ( Jeri Ryan ) but soon forms a new friendship . Following the events of " Demon " , Kim is one of the first crewmembers to be duplicated by an alien entity on a class-Y planet . The duplicate crew are later killed after they leave the planet , and forget that they are duplicates . The duplicate version of Kim is the last Captain of the ship , before deciding to drop out of warp by ejecting the warp core , destroying it . Kim develops a transwarp drive in " Timeless " , which should allow Voyager to return to the Alpha Quadrant in hours . During the trip home , the ship is destroyed but Kim and Chakotay make it through on a shuttle . Years later , an older Kim and Chakotay find the destroyed Voyager and Kim manages to send a message back in time to Seven of Nine , averting the disaster and resetting the timeline .

Kim becomes infected with a bio-chemical bond after having sex with a Varro named Tal ( Musetta Vander ) in " The Disease " , but the effects are removed by the Doctor . Alongside Tom Paris , Kim creates an Irish village holodeck program in " Fair Haven " . This later causes problems when the holodeck characters begin to recognise changes made to the program and that the Starfleet crew are not from their " world " . Kim is once again imprisoned by an alien race in " Body and Soul when he is part of the crew on the Delta Flyer which is captured by the Lokirrim for transporting a hologram through their space . Whilst on another mission in the Delta Flyer in " Nightingale " , Kim takes command of an Kraylor vessel , wanting to show that he can command after spending the past seven years as an Ensign on board Voyager . He manages to return the ship to its homeworld , evading an Annari fleet en route . In " Prophecy " , Kim is sexually pursued by the Klingon Ch 'Rega ( Peggy Jo Jacobs ) ; she later chooses Neelix instead . In the alternative future seen at the start of the series finale , " Endgame " , Kim has been promoted to the rank of Captain aboard the USS Rhode Island . He attempts to convince Admiral Kathryn Janeway ( Kate Mulgrew ) out of her plan to travel back in time to help Voyager return home , but instead helps her when a Klingon vessel attacks her shuttle .

The mothering nature of Janeway on Kim has been described by reviewers , with the crew forming a type of family network which has Kim as a surrogate son . His separation from his nuclear family at a young age is described as cruel , and Janeway , Chakotay and Tuvok are highlighted as his de facto parents in the series . This motherly position was described by Michelle Erica Green in her review of the episode " The Disease " for TrekNation , who described certain scenes as Kim needing to request permission from " Mommy " in order to have a relationship with an alien . She felt that the disease itself caused the character to grow a " backbone " as he had rarely asserted himself previously to the Captain . Kim has been used to show the multiculturalism of Star Trek : Voyager . One scene was described in " Faces " by Elisabeth Anne Leonard which featured a sweeping shot around the command table of Janeway , Chakotay , Tuvok and Kim , showing a Caucasian race woman , a Native American , a man of Asian descent and a black Vulcan in a single shot . Kim 's persistent optimism has been highlighted , with him being one of the few characters in the series who by the seventh series still believed that they would return home in their lifetime . Kim seemed to be frequently captured by alien species during the course of the series to the extent that it was described as one of the typical storylines seen in Voyager during an overview by The A.V. Club .

The authors of the book Deep Space and Sacred Time : Star Trek in the American Mythos state that the episode " Deadlock , " which featured the death of Kim , was one of several examples in the Star Trek franchise where the death of a major character is reversed by a parallel existence . Other examples included in The Next Generation with the return of Tasha Yar in " Yesterday 's Enterprise " and the death of Miles O 'Brien in the Deep Space Nine episode " Visionary " . They felt that Kim also shared another similarity with " Yesterday 's Enterprise " in that in the episode " Non Sequitur " , he feels that reality has been changed – which was similar to the experience that Guinan felt in The Next Generation episode . Amongst Kim 's relationships included the relationship with a character on the ship 's holodeck in the episode " Alter Ego " , but after building a rivalry for the character 's affections with Tuvok , he becomes disinterested after finding out that the character was being played by a real person . This relationship was highlighted as an example of how Star Trek describes the ideal woman as an " objectified embodiment of male desire with no inner self to complicate the so-called relationship that a man may have with her " .

Juliette Harrisson for the website Den of Geek described " Timeless " as the best Harry Kim episode , and was the third best episode of Voyager overall . She said that " Wang ’ s bitter , emotionally scarred performance holds together an hour which also features some lovely imagery " . Episodes centering on Kim were included in io9 's list of the worst holodeck related episodes in Star Trek . These included " The Thaw " , with the worst moment described as " the Harry Kim baby thing " . Other episodes highlighted as bad included " Fair Haven " while it stated that it skipped the first season " Heroes and Demons " . Wang later returned to Star Trek in fan-made productions and to the role of Harry Kim in Star Trek : Renegades , alongside Manu Intiraymi and Tim Russ from Voyager .

Boyce Dawkins McDaniel ( June 11 , 1917 - May 8 , 2002 ) was an American nuclear physicist who worked on the Manhattan Project and later directed the Cornell University Laboratory of Nuclear Studies ( LNS ) . McDaniel was skilled in constructing " atom smashing " devices to study the fundamental structure of matter and helped to build the most powerful particle accelerators of his time . Together with his graduate student , he invented the pair spectrometer . During World War II , McDaniel used his electronics expertise to help develop cyclotrons used to separate Uranium isotopes . McDaniel is also noted as having performed the final check on the first atomic bomb prior to its detonation in the Trinity test .

Born in Brevard , North Carolina , McDaniel attended Chesterville High School in Ohio . After graduating in 1933 , he attended Ohio Wesleyan University , from which he graduated in 1938 with a Bachelor of Science . His initial postgraduate studies took place at the Case School of Applied Science , graduating with a Master 's degree in 1940 . McDaniel continued postgraduate studies when he moved to Cornell University , and in 1943 he completed his doctoral thesis , examining the absorption rates of neutrons in indium . The research was not classified , but McDaniel and Robert Bacher , his adviser at Cornell , marked it as " secret " on their own initiative . From Cornell , McDaniel moved to MIT where he held a postdoctoral position , studying " the rapidly evolving field of fast electronics " , which he applied to research in particle physics . After the outbreak of World War II , McDaniel joined Bacher in Los Alamos , New Mexico to work for the Manhattan Project , where he became a part of Robert R. Wilson 's cyclotron research team . McDaniel was to have " a crucial role in helping to identify the amount of uranium-235 needed to ... detonate the world 's first nuclear bomb " . McDaniel is also noted as having performed the final check on the first atomic bomb prior to its detonation in the Trinity test .

McDaniel was one of many Manhanttan Project researchers to join the Cornell faculty after the war . He became an assistant professor in 1946 and became a full professor in 1955 . With his Ph.D. student Robert Walker , he invented the pair spectrometer , a device that measures gamma ray energies . He was a co-founder of Cornell 's Laboratory for Nuclear Studies ( LNS ) and had a helped create the 300 megavolt ( MeV ) electron synchrotron , one of the first such accelerators in the world . He and Wilson , who was McDaniel 's predecessor as director of LNS , built three more electron synchrotrons of 1 GeV , 2 GeV , and 10 GeV , each of which enabled physicists to study phenomena in a new energy range . McDaniel quickly earned a reputation as a hands-on designer as indicated by this episode in the construction of the 300 MeV synchrotron : The magnet coil was wound incorrectly , a fatal flaw . To get it repaired by the manufacturer could take months . Mac made a toy model of the coil , studied it carefully for an evening , and discovered an ingenious but simple way to repair it , which he did in about a day , and defused the crisis .

He was a Fulbright research fellow in 1953 at the Australian National University and a Guggenheim fellow in 1959 at the University of Rome . In 1967 , McDaniel became director of LNS and served until he retired from the Cornell faculty in 1985 . He research included important measurements with each of the series of LNS accelerators , including studies lambda-meson photo production , K-meson production , and measurements of the neutron electromagnetic form factors . Wilson and McDaniel continued to collaborate at Cornell until Wilson left to head Fermilab in Batavia , Illinois in 1967 . In 1972 , Wilson invited McDaniel to serve as acting head of the accelerator section at Fermilab , and McDanield took a one year leave of absence from Cornell . Though the Fermilab accelerator had been placed into operation , it suffered from frequent component failures . When McDaniel left eight months later , he led the effort which increased the power of Fermilab 's accelerator from 20 GeV to 300 GeV and its beam density by a factor of 1000 . Of McDaniel 's contribution to Fermilab , Wilson said , " This bravura performance demonstrated Mac ’ s skill for leadership as well as his celebrated sixth sense for finding sources of trouble and fixing them . ” Upon returning to Cornell in 1974 , McDaniel proposed upgrading the then existing 10 GeV synchrotron with an 8 GeV electron-positron storage ring , which would greatly increase the energy of particle collisions when the particles in the storage ring hit the particles traveling in the opposite direction in the synchrotron . When constructed in 1979 , the Cornell Electron Storage Ring became the world 's primary source of information about one of the fundamental building blocks of matter , the b-quark . After the end of particle physics experiments 20 years later , CESR is now used as a test facility of damping rings for a future international linear collider . In 1981 , McDaniel developed a proposal for a new mile-diameter electron-positron collider called CSER II , but could not obtain the necessary $ 200 million in funding for it . In 1988 , McDaniel was Visiting Distinguished Professor at Arizona State University .

" What Is ... Cliff Clavin ? " is an eighth season episode of the American television series Cheers . It was directed by Andy Ackerman rather than James Burrows — who directed 243 out of 273 episodes of the show — and originally aired on January 18 , 1990 . In this episode , Cliff Clavin ( John Ratzenberger ) appears on the game show Jeopardy ! and game show host Alex Trebek guest stars as himself . Cliff racks up US $ 22,000 during the game but loses it all in the final round . The episode received praise from critics for its concept and its guest star .

Cliff Clavin ( John Ratzenberger ) competes on the television game show Jeopardy ! , which has temporarily moved taping to Boston for a special occasion , and amasses $ 22,000 by the end of the Double Jeopardy ! round , more than twice the score of the second place contestant , theoretically ensuring a win . For the Final Jeopardy ! clue of " Archibald Leach , Bernard Schwartz and Lucille LeSueur " in the category of " Movies " , Cliff responds incorrectly with " Who are 3 people who 've never been in my kitchen ? " Having wagered his entire score , Cliff loses all of his winnings . Cliff objects and argues , demanding that his answer be accepted . The show 's host , Alex Trebek , later arrives at Cheers , tells Cliff that his response should have been accepted earlier , and announces his resignation as the host of Jeopardy ! . However , Cliff convinces Trebek to remain as host by telling him how much the show and Trebek mean to him . After Cliff shares the news with others , Norm Peterson ( George Wendt ) praises Trebek for doing this just to make Cliff feel better . However , Trebek says that he did not realize that Cliff was at the bar and that meeting him had been a coincidence . Trebek says that Cliff scares him and that the story about quitting the show was a fabrication to placate him .

Meanwhile , Sam Malone ( Ted Danson ) receives telephone calls from women whom he previously dated ; they are angry with him for making dates and not arriving . He eventually discovers that his " little black book " has been stolen and enrolls the help of bar patrons to find it . Through their detective work , Sam discovers that the thief has called Sam 's women alphabetically and that Rebecca Howe ( Kirstie Alley ) is the next recipient on the list . The thief turns out to be a teenage boy named Timmy ( Greg E. Davis ) , who wants to become a " babe hound " like Sam . To let Timmy go , Sam tells him to start as a " babe pup " and to call girls who are around his age , and gives him $ 25 for a haircut and a tip for a shampoo girl .

General Norman Schwarzkopf said this was the funniest episode of Cheers . Don Leighton from Superior Telegram called this episode the greatest and said the Final Jeopardy ! moment was hilarious . Jeffrey Robinson from DVD Talk said the category topics – specifically " Civil Servants " , " Stamps from Around the World " , " Mothers and Sons " , " Beer " , " Bar Trivia " , and " Celibacy " from the first round of Jeopardy ! – and the concept of the episode were a riot . Hot Springs Village Voice called Cliff 's Final Jeopardy ! moment a classic example of his mishaps caused by his own " know-it-all nature " . Andrew Razeghi , in his book Hope , called this episode " one of the most memorable episodes " of Cheers , found Cliff 's response to the Final Jeopardy ! clue neither right nor wrong and an example of divergent thinking , and called Cliff a poster child of Joy Paul Guilford . Former Jeopardy ! contestant Ken Jennings , in his book Brainiac , considered this episode of all Jeopardy ! -related episodes essential as other episodes that focus on characters who either are trapped in an elevator or have two dates on the same night .

An early Jeopardy ! reference to the Cheers episode happened during the airing of the final round of the Jeopardy ! College Championship on May 18 , 1990 . Soon-to-be champion Michael Thayer of Rutgers College bet $ 0 and wrote " Who was someone I never met ? " as his response in the Final Jeopardy ! round . When the contestants ' wagers and responses were revealed , Trebek commented , " Michael , looks like you were watching that episode of Cheers . " In 1999 , another Jeopardy ! contestant responded to the Final Jeopardy ! clue with this question , inspired by Cliff Clavin 's incorrect response in the Final Jeopardy ! round : " What is a book that has never been in my kitchen ? " According to Michael Gordeuk from Westfield , New Jersey , Alex Trebek later recalled Cliff 's losing moment and then " broke into a huge laugh " . Peter Wayner from InfoWorld defined " pulling a Clavin " as a reference to Cliff Clavin 's wagering all his leading score and then losing all to a zero in the Final Jeopardy ! round and as a tactic to avoid in Jeopardy ! In the Jeopardy ! fan community , the episode gave rise to what is known as " Clavin 's Rule " ( or " pulling a Cliff Clavin " ) , a rule of thumb that states that a player should not wager enough to endanger a " lock " or " runaway " game ( one where the first-place player has more than twice the score of the second-place player ) , no matter how tempting the category .

In the Double Jeopardy ! round of the Jeopardy ! episode from May 10 , 2005 , the categories were the same as those shown in Cliff Clavin 's game : CIVIL SERVANTS , STAMPS FROM AROUND THE WORLD , MOTHERS & SONS , BEER , " BAR " TRIVIA , and CELIBACY . On the first episode of Jeopardy ! season 31 , which aired on September 15 , 2014 , Jeopardy ! champion Elizabeth Williams echoed Cliff Clavin 's answer in her response to the Final Jeopardy clue . Williams ' $ 600 wager combined with her opponents ' incorrect responses allowed Williams to triumph that day , nonetheless .

Chrono Break was a trademark for a video game registered by Square ( now Square Enix ) in the United States on December 5 , 2001 . A similar trademark was registered by the company in the European Union on December 14 , 2001 , while the trademark Chrono Brake was registered in Japan . Although no official announcement was made , the trademark 's name coupled with Final Fantasy series video game developer Hironobu Sakaguchi 's comment in regards to Chrono Cross 's development teams interest in creating a sequel , led journalists to suggest that Square was working on a new game in the Chrono series . Since the trademark was registered , however , much of the staff who worked on prior games in the series either left the company , or moved on to other long-term projects . No announcements have been made by Square Enix either supporting or rejecting the idea of making another sequel , and the trademarks all expired as of 2012 .

The registration followed a press report of talks about a new Chrono series game . Within this report , Hironobu Sakaguchi stated that the development team of Chrono Cross , especially Masato Kato , was interested in creating a new game in the series , and that script and story ideas were currently being considered , but that the project had not yet been greenlighted . Kato had previously mentioned in the Ultimania guide for Chrono Cross that he wanted to create a direct sequel to Chrono Trigger to wrap up certain story elements and plot threads , but the pitfalls of a direct sequel prompted them to do Chrono Cross instead . The registration , and Sakaguchi 's comments , led video game journalists to believe that a sequel to Chrono Trigger and Chrono Cross was in full development . IGN Editor Douglass Perry went as far as to say " ... we 're almost positive that you can expect to see this awaited monster in 2004 . " On November 13 , 2003 , the trademark was dropped in the U.S. It expired on December 14 , 2011 in the European Union , and on July 26 , 2012 in Japan . A similar trademark was registered in 2001 by Square Enix in Japan as Chrono Brake ( Japanese : クロノ ・ ブレイク ) .

Inquiry over a new title was subsequently large enough to warrant an entry in Square Enix 's FAQ page , in which the company noted that no new game was in development , though this did not mean the series was dead . In 2006 , the entry was revised to include sequel inquiries for any series . After the release of Chrono Cross , a number of key staff from the title left Square to form a new development studio , Monolith Soft , which was initially owned by Namco and is currently a first-party developer working under Nintendo . Other staff who had worked on the title remained at Square and proceeded to work on Final Fantasy XI , an MMORPG conceived by Hironobu Sakaguchi - one of Chrono Trigger ′ s creators . During an interview at E ³ 2003 , this development team stated that they would love to develop a new Chrono game , but their commitment to Final Fantasy XI would keep them busy for a long time . Richard Honeywood , localization director for Square Enix , explained , Final Fantasy XI is pretty much it for a while . We still have a lot of possible expansion packs we could do , and plenty of support to give . As far as Chrono is concerned , that 's huge ; but we can 't do two or three things at the same time , and it 's tough to do FFXI and another Chrono game at the same time or too close together . We 'd love to do one though , but yeah , not yet .

Takashi Tokita , who directed Chrono Trigger , mentioned a " Chrono Trigger 2 " in a 2003 interview which has not been translated to English . Trigger developer Yuji Horii expressed no interest in returning to the Chrono franchise in 2005 . In February 2007 , Square Enix producer Hiromichi Tanaka took part in several interviews while promoting games in Europe . Tanaka reiterated that no new game was in development , but that a return was certainly not out of the question . ... it 's very difficult to be able to reunite the original team , to be able to make a sequel to the Chrono series ... because if we don 't try to reunite these people but take other people instead , we will find ourselves at that point with a game which will feel different , since there would be different persons in charge , and we would possibly lose the Chrono spirit . In January 2008 , composer Yasunori Mitsuda remarked that " there are a lot of politics involved " in creating a new game , and stressed that Masato Kato should participate in development should a new entry in the series materialize . He did say that he was open to working with the company on the series again " if they had a good concept for the game " , and he speculated that Kato " probably would " as well .

In August 2014 , at a PAX Prime panel , Sakaguchi stated that he had intended on continuing the Chrono series into another game , but that problems with Square Enix management prevented it from coming to fruition . I think the statute of limitations has passed and expired so I think I 'm okay saying this — but we just didn 't see eye-to-eye with management , and so I went and fought for it , and I officially lost the battle ... Nothing 's confirmed . But again , it would be nice to be able to work on a continuation of my old creations .

The February 2008 issue of Game Informer ranked the Chrono series eighth among the " Top Ten Sequels in Demand " , naming the games " steadfast legacies in the Square Enix catalogue " and asking " what 's the damn holdup ? ! " . In Electronic Gaming Monthly ′ s June 2008 " Retro Issue " , writer Jeremy Parish cited Chrono as the franchise video game fans would be most thrilled to see a sequel to . In the first May Famitsu of 2009 , Chrono Trigger placed 14th out of 50 in a vote of most-wanted sequels by the magazine 's readers . At E3 2009 , SE Senior Vice President Shinji Hashimoto remarked " If people want a sequel , they should buy more ! " In 2012 , a trademark for Chrono Bind by Square Enix lead Siliconera to speculate that the game had switched titles from Chrono Break to Chrono Bind ; however , it was later revealed to merely be the name of a DLC card game in Final Fantasy XIII-2 . In the same year , Kotaku expressed disappointment that Square Enix had not acted on the Chrono Break name , citing strong sales of the DS port of Chrono Trigger as a reason as to why the company should release a third game in the series .

Whitefriars was a Carmelite friary on the lower slopes of St Michael 's Hill , Bristol , England . It was established in 1267 ; in subsequent centuries a friary church was built and extensive gardens developed . The establishment was dissolved in 1538 . Much of the site was then redeveloped by Sir John Young , who built a " Great House " there . This later became a boys ' school founded by Edward Colston in the 18th century . The Red Lodge , which survives today as a museum , had its origins as a prospect house for the Prior . The Colston Hall , a venue for concerts , was built on part of the friary site in the 19th century . A 20th-century office block named Whitefriars , built a short distance way , preserves the name .

Whitefriars was founded in 1267 by the Prince of Wales , the future king Edward I. The friars , also known as Friars of the Blessed Virgin , wore white habits , hence the name Whitefriars . In the fifteenth century William of Worcester , described the church as having dimensions of 45 by 25 yards ( 41 m × 23 m ) , with a tower 200 feet ( 61 m ) high . The friary was described by the antiquary Leyland , writing in the early sixteenth century , as standing on the right bank of the Frome by the quay . He added that it was " the fairest friary in England " . The friary had a large expanse of adjoining land extending up St Michael 's Hill . This was used for horticulture and the Carmelites sold produce to augment their income . Writing to Thomas Cromwell in 1538 , Richard Yngworth , one of the commissioners or visitors charged with inspecting monastic houses , reported that the contents of the friary only just met the debts owed by the friars . He described a chapel with lead roofing , gardens and a " goodly howse in byldenge , mete for a great man " , also a conduit bringing fresh water from Brandon Hill , later taken over by St John 's Church . Four remaining friars surrendered their possessions to the commissioner in the presence of the Mayor .

Some monastic cells , thought to belong to the friary , survive under the Red Lodge , which had its origins as a prospect house for the prior of Whitefriars . This building became the lodge house of an Elizabethan mansion , the Great House , built in the late 16th century by John Young , who had bought the friary from Bristol Corporation after the Dissolution of the Monasteries . The Great House was where Elizabeth I stayed , as a guest of John Young , in 1574 . In the 18th century , the house was acquired by Edward Colston , who established the original Colston 's School there . After the school moved to Stapleton in 1857 , the Colston Hall Society purchased the premises , and demolished the house to build the Colston Hall , which now occupies the site . Excavations during the building of the adjacent Colston House in the early 20th century found medieval walls , burials and floor tiles . As part of the post-war redevelopment of Bristol city centre , the name Whitefriars was given to a large multi-storey office development located in Lewin 's Mead , a few hundred yards from the site of the original Whitefriars and adjoining the site of the Greyfriars office complex . The building has thirteen floors and stands 49 metres ( 161 ft ) high . It was completed in 1976 .

The National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) , located at Florida International University in University Park , unincorporated Miami-Dade County , Florida , is the division of the United States ' National Weather Service responsible for tracking and predicting weather systems within the tropics between the Prime Meridian and the 140th meridian west poleward to the 30th parallel north in the northeast Pacific ocean and the 31st parallel north in the northern Atlantic ocean . Its Tropical Analysis and Forecast Branch ( TAFB ) routinely issues marine forecasts , in the form of graphics and high seas forecasts , for this area year round , with the Ocean Prediction Center having backup responsibility for this unit . The Technology and Science Branch ( TSB ) provides technical support for the center , which includes new infusions of technology from abroad . The Chief , Aerial Reconnaissance Coordination , All Hurricanes ( CARCAH ) unit tasks planes , for research and operational purposes , to tropical cyclones during the Atlantic hurricane season and significant weather events , including snow storms , during winter and spring . Research conducted to improve operational forecasts is done through the Hurricane Forecast Improvement Project ( HFIP ) and Joint Hurricane Test Bed ( JHT ) initiatives .

During the Atlantic and northeast Pacific hurricane seasons , the Hurricane Specialists Unit ( HSU ) issues routine tropical weather outlooks for the northeast Pacific and northern Atlantic oceans . When tropical storm or hurricane conditions are expected within 48 hours , the center issues the appropriate watches and warnings via the news media and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ( NOAA ) Weather Radio . Although the NHC is an agency of the United States , the World Meteorological Organization has designated it as Regional Specialized Meteorological Center for the North Atlantic and eastern Pacific , making it the central clearinghouse for all tropical cyclone forecasts and observations occurring in these areas . If the center loses power or becomes incapacitated in some manner , the Central Pacific Hurricane Center backs tropical cyclone advisories and tropical weather outlooks for the northeast Pacific ocean while the Weather Prediction Center backs up tropical cyclone advisories and tropical weather outlooks for the north Atlantic ocean .

The first hurricane warning service was set up in the 1870s from Cuba with the work of Father Benito Viñes . After his passing , hurricane warning services were assumed by the United States Signal Corp and United States Weather Bureau over the next decade , first based in Jamaica in 1898 and Cuba in 1899 before shifting to Washington , D.C. in 1902 . The central office in Washington , which evolved into the National Meteorological Center and Weather Prediction Center ( formally known as the Hydrometeorological Prediction Center ) , assumed hurricane warning / advisory responsibility at that time . This responsibility passed to regional hurricane offices in 1935 , and the concept of the Atlantic hurricane season was established in order to keep a vigilant lookout for tropical cyclones during certain times of the year . Hurricane advisories issued every six hours by the regional hurricane offices began at this time . The Jacksonville hurricane warning office moved to Miami , Florida in 1943 . Tropical cyclone naming began for Atlantic tropical cyclones using the Joint Army / Navy Phonetic Alphabet by 1947 . Starting in 1950 , the Miami Hurricane Warning Office began to prepare the annual hurricane season summary articles . In the 1953 Atlantic season , the United States Weather Bureau began naming storms which reach tropical storm intensity with human names .

The National Hurricane Research Project , begun in the 1950s , used aircraft to study tropical cyclones and carry out experiments on mature hurricanes through its Project Stormfury . On July 1 , 1956 , a National Hurricane Information Center was established in Miami , Florida which became a warehouse for all hurricane-related information from one United States Weather Bureau office . The Miami Hurricane Warning Office ( HWO ) was moved from Lindsey Hopkins Hotel to the Aviation Building 4 miles ( 6.4 km ) to the northwest on July 1 , 1958 . Forecasts within the hurricane advisories were issued one day into the future in 1954 before being extended to two days into the future in 1961 , three days into the future in 1964 , and five days into the future in 2001 . The Miami HWO moved to the campus of the University of Miami in 1964 , and was referred to as the NHC in 1965 . The Miami HWO tropical cyclone reports were done regularly and took on their modern format in 1964 . Beginning in 1973 , the National Meteorological Center duties ( renamed the Hydrometeorological Prediction Center ; renamed for a second time in 2013 ) gained advisory responsibility for tracking and publicizing inland tropical depressions . The World Meteorological Organization assumed control of the Atlantic hurricane naming list in 1977 . In 1978 , the NHC 's offices moved off the campus of the University of Miami across U.S. Highway 1 to the IRE Financial Building . Male names were added into the hurricane list beginning in the 1979 season . The hurricane warning offices remained active past 1983 . In 1984 , the NHC was separated from the Miami Weather Service Forecast Office , which meant the meteorologist in charge at Miami was no longer in a position above the hurricane center director . By 1988 , the NHC gained responsibility for eastern Pacific tropical cyclones as the former Eastern Pacific Hurricane Center in San Francisco was decommissioned . In 1992 , Hurricane Andrew blew the WSR-57 weather radar and the anemometer off the roof of NHC 's / the Miami State Weather Forecast offices . The radar was replaced with a WSR-88D NEXRAD system in April 1993 installed near Metro Zoo , near where Hurricane Andrew made landfall .

In 1995 , the NHC moved into a new hurricane-resistant facility on the campus of Florida International University , capable of withstanding 130 mph ( 210 km / h ) winds . Its name was changed to the Tropical Prediction Center in 1995 . After the name change to TPC , the Hurricane Specialists were grouped as a separate NHC unit under the Tropical Prediction Center , separating themselves from the Tropical Analysis and Forecast Branch . On October 1 , 2010 , the Tropical Prediction Center was renamed the NHC , and the group formerly known as the NHC became known as the Hurricane Specialists Unit ( HSU ) . Tropical cyclone forecasting is done nowadays using statistical methods based on tropical cyclone climatology , as well as methods of numerical weather prediction where computers use mathematical equations of motion to determine their movement . The World Meteorological Organization continues to create and maintain the annual hurricane naming lists . Naming lists continue to use a six-year rotation , with the deadliest or most notable storms having their names retired from the rotation . The current director of the National Hurricane Center is Richard Knabb .

Known as the NHC from 1995 through 2010 , the hurricane specialists within the hurricane specialists unit ( HSU ) are the chief meteorologists that predict the actions of tropical storms . The specialists work rotating eight-hour shifts from May through November , monitoring weather patterns in the Atlantic and Eastern Pacific oceans . Whenever a tropical or subtropical cyclone forms , they begin to issue advisories every six hours until the storm runs its course . Public advisories are issued more often when the storm expected to be of tropical storm or hurricane intensity threatens land . The specialists coordinate with officials in each country likely to be affected . They forecast and recommend watches and warnings . During the hurricane season , the HSU routinely issues their Tropical Weather Outlook product , which identifies areas of concern within the tropics which could develop into tropical cyclones . If systems occur outside the defined hurricane season , special Tropical Weather Outlooks will be issued . Backup responsibility for their northeast Pacific area resides at the Central Pacific Hurricane Center ( CPHC ) , and vice versa if CPHC were to have communication issues . North Atlantic responsibilities are backed up by the Weather Prediction Center ( WPC ) . Routine coordination occurs at 1700 UTC each day between the Weather Prediction Center and National Hurricane Center to identify systems for the pressure maps three to seven days into the future within the tropics , and points for existing tropical cyclones six to seven days into the future . Outside of the hurricane season , the specialists concentrate on public education efforts .

The Technology & Science Branch ( TSB ) develops and transitions new tools and techniques into operations for tropical weather prediction in conjunction with other government and academic entities . TSB created and continues development of the Automated Tropical Cyclone Forecasting ( ATCF ) system , used to incorporate various data and model outputs , create and update HURDAT , and to generate tropical cyclone forecasts . The TSB provides support for NHC computer and communications systems including its website . TSB maintains a number of statistical and dynamical models used in predicting both tropical cyclone behavior and associated weather conditions . The Storm Surge Unit , which develops and maintains software to forecast the storm surge of tropical cyclones , is part of this branch . The Techniques Development and Applications Unit ( TDAU ) is part of TSB .

The Chief , Aerial Reconnaissance Coordination , All Hurricanes ( CARCAH ) is a subunit of the 53d Weather Reconnaissance Squadron ( Hurricane Hunters ) . CARCAH 's mission is to provide a point-of-contact and to coordinate all tropical cyclone operational reconnaissance requirements at NHC and the Central Pacific Hurricane Center for the North Atlantic , Caribbean , Gulf of Mexico , and the North Pacific basin east of the International Date Line in accordance with the National Hurricane Operations Plan ( NHOP ) . During the winter , CARCAH coordinates the Atlantic and Pacific winter storm requirements in support of the National Winter Storms Operations Plan ( NWSOP ) . Missions are flown in advance of the high-impact weather events forecast to affect the U.S. , such as heavy snowfall , and at times when there is significant uncertainty within / between numerical weather prediction output .

The Hurricane Liaison Team ( HLT ) supports hurricane response through information exchange between the NHC , the National Weather Service ( NOAA / NWS ) , and the emergency management community . The HLT is composed of federal , state , and local emergency managers , as well as NWS meteorologists and hydrologists , who maintain open lines of communication about the progress and threat level of the storm with appropriate Federal , state , and local officials . The team establishes and facilitates video and / or teleconferences with the NHC , FEMA and other Federal agencies , state Emergency Operations Centers ( EOCs ) , Weather Prediction Center ( HPC ) , Storm Prediction Center ( SPC ) , and River Forecast Centers ( RFCs ) . During significant landfalling hurricanes , the President of the United States as well as affected city mayors and state governors join the daily briefing call , which occurs at noon Eastern Daylight Time .

As part of their annual tropical cyclone activity , the agency issues a report on every tropical cyclone in the Atlantic and Eastern Pacific Ocean basins , which are available since 1958 and 1988 , respectively . The report summarizes the synoptic history , meteorological statistics , casualties and damages , and the post-analysis best track of a storm . The reports were formally known as Preliminary Reports up until 1999 . The agency maintains archives and climatological statistics on Atlantic and Pacific hurricane history , including annual reports on every tropical cyclone , a complete set of tropical cyclone advisories , digitized copies of related materials on older storms , season summaries published as the Monthly Weather Review , and HURDAT , which is the official tropical cyclone database . Programs are dedicated to improving the accuracy of tropical cyclone forecasts from the center . The Joint Hurricane Testbed ( JHT ) is a joint operation between the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ( NOAA ) and United States Weather Research Program to speed up the transfer of tropical cyclone-related research into forecast operations . Since 2001 , with its annual budget of between $ 1.0 and $ 1.5 million , the JHT has funded 62 initiatives , with most of them being implemented operationally . The projects have had varied success , ranging from minor to significant advances in the way the NHC operates . The Hurricane Forecast Improvement Program 's ( HFIP ) five-year goal is to lead to a 20 percent improvement within the numerical weather prediction models provided by the National Centers for Environmental Prediction to NHC by 2015 and a 50 percent improvement within tropical cyclone track forecasting and intensity guidance by 2020 .

Ranavalona III ( November 22 , 1861 – May 23 , 1917 ) was the last sovereign of the Kingdom of Madagascar . She ruled from July 30 , 1883 to February 28 , 1897 in a reign marked by ongoing and ultimately futile efforts to resist the colonial designs of the government of France . As a young woman , she was selected from among several Andriana qualified to succeed Queen Ranavalona II upon her death . Like both preceding queens , Ranavalona entered a political marriage with a member of the Hova elite named Rainilaiarivony , who in his role as Prime Minister of Madagascar , largely oversaw the day-to-day governance of the kingdom and managed its foreign affairs . Ranavalona tried to stave off colonization by strengthening trade and diplomatic relations with the United States and Great Britain throughout her reign . French attacks on coastal port towns and an assault on the capital city of Antananarivo ultimately led to the capture of the royal palace in 1895 , ending the sovereignty and political autonomy of the century-old kingdom . The newly installed French colonial government promptly exiled Rainilaiarivony to Algiers . Ranavalona and her court were initially permitted to remain as symbolic figureheads , but the outbreak of a popular resistance movement – the menalamba rebellion – and discovery of anti-French political intrigues at court led the French to exile the queen to the island of Réunion in 1897 . Rainilaiarivony died that same year and shortly thereafter Ranavalona was relocated to a villa in Algiers , along with several members of her family . The queen , her family and the servants accompanying her were provided an allowance and enjoyed a comfortable standard of living including occasional trips to Paris for shopping and sightseeing . Despite Ranavalona 's repeated requests , she was never permitted to return home to Madagascar . She died of an embolism at her villa in Algiers in 1917 at the age of 55 . Her remains were buried in Algiers but were disinterred 21 years later and shipped to Madagascar , where they were placed within the tomb of Queen Rasoherina on the grounds of the Rova of Antananarivo .

Ranavalona III , daughter of Andriantsimianatra and his wife Princess Raketaka , was born Princess Razafindrahety on November 22 , 1861 , at Amparibe , a rural village in the district of Manjakazafy outside Antananarivo . Razafindrahety 's lineage , as niece to Queen Ranavalona II and great-granddaughter of King Andrianampoinimerina , qualified her to potentially inherit the throne of the Kingdom of Madagascar . Her parents assigned the care of the infant Razafindrahety to a slave who served the family . When she was old enough to attend school , Razafindrahety was taken into the custody of her aunt , Queen Ranavalona II , who ensured she began receiving a private education from a London Missionary Society ( LMS ) teacher . She was described as an industrious and inquisitive child with a strong love of studying the Bible , learning and reading , and she developed affectionate relationships with her teachers . She continued her education throughout her adolescence at the Congregational School of Ambatonakanga , the Friends High School for Girls , and the LMS Girls ' Central School . She was baptized as a Protestant at Ambohimanga on April 5 , 1874 . Her teachers consistently described her as ranking among their strongest students .

As a young woman , Razafindrahety married an Andriana ( nobleman ) named Ratrimo ( Ratrimoarivony ) . Her husband died several years later on May 8 , 1883 , aged 22 , leaving Razafindrahety a premature widow . According to rumor , Prime Minister Rainilaiarivony may have arranged to have Ratrimo poisoned for political reasons . The Aristocratic Revolution of 1863 , which had been orchestrated by Rainilaiarivony 's older brother , Prime Minister Rainivoninahitriniony , had replaced the absolute rule of the Andriana with a constitutional monarchy in which power was shared between an Andriana monarch and a Hova ( freeman ) prime minister . This arrangement was to be cemented by a political marriage between the prime minister and a ruling queen effectively selected by him . As Queen Ranavalona II neared death and the search for her successor began , Rainilaiarivony may have had Ratrimo deliberately poisoned so that Razafindrahety , the most eligible successor , would be free to marry the prime minister and succeed to the throne .

Ranavalona III was proclaimed queen upon the death of her predecessor , Queen Ranavalona II , on July 13 , 1883 , and moved into Tsarahafatra , a wooden house on the grounds of the royal Rova complex in Antananarivo . Her coronation took place in the Mahamasina neighborhood of Antananarivo on November 22 , 1883 , her 22nd birthday , where she was given the title " Her Majesty Ranavalona III by the grace of God and the will of the people , Queen of Madagascar , and Protectoress of the laws of the Nation " . She chose to break with tradition by supplementing the customary retinue of soldiers at her ceremony with a group of 500 male and 400 female pupils from the capital 's best schools . The girls were dressed in white while the boys wore soldiers ' uniforms and performed traditional military drills with spears . Ranavalona was crowned wearing a white silk gown with a red train featuring embroidery and gold embellishments . The queen was described in the American press in the following terms : " She is a little above the ordinary height and has delicate features , her complexion is a little darker than that of most of her subjects . She appears quite timid and she presides well at the solemn functions of her court . "

Like her two predecessors , Ranavalona concluded a political marriage with Prime Minister Rainilaiarivony . The young queen 's role was largely ceremonial as nearly all important political decisions continued to be made by the much older and more experienced prime minister . Ranavalona was frequently called upon to deliver formal speeches ( kabary ) to the public on behalf of Rainilaiarivony and would make appearances to inaugurate new public buildings , such as a hospital at Isoavinandriana and a girls ' school at Ambodin 'Andohalo . Throughout her reign , Ranavalona 's aunt , Ramisindrazana , acted as an adviser and exercised considerable influence at court . Ranavalona 's older sister , Rasendranoro , whose son Rakatomena and daughter Razafinandriamanitra lived with their mother at the Rova , was also a close companion . An American journalist who visited her palace reported that Ranavalona spent much of her leisure time flying kites or playing lotto , a parlor game , with her relatives and other ladies at court . She also enjoyed knitting , needlework and crocheting and would frequently bring her latest craft project to work on at cabinet meetings . She had a great love of fine garments and was the only Malagasy sovereign to import the majority of her clothing from Paris rather than London .

As sovereign of Madagascar , Ranavalona III became a pawn in the endgame of the maneuvering that had been taking place between the British and French since the beginning of the century . The tension between France and Madagascar had grown especially acute in the three years prior to Ranavalona 's succession , with an intensification of attacks in the months prior to her coronation . In February 1883 the northwestern coast was bombarded , followed by the occupation of Mahajanga by the French in May , and bombardment and capture of Toamasina in June . Attacks along the northern coast were ongoing at the time Ranavalona III was crowned in the summer of 1883 . Shortly after the French initiated this latest round of hostilities , Prime Minister Rainilaiarivony decided to engage Lieutenant Colonel Willoughby , a Briton who had gained combat experience in the Anglo-Zulu War ( but without having been a member of the British armed forces ) , to oversee the nation 's military affairs and train the queen 's army to defend the island against the seemingly inevitable French invasion . Throughout this period Madagascar continued to engage the French in negotiations , but these were to prove unsuccessful with both sides unwilling to capitulate on key points of contention . After two years of stalemate , a column brought an ultimatum to Antananarivo in December 1885 , asking for recognition of French rights in northeastern Madagascar , a French protectorate over the Sakalava , recognition of French property principles and an indemnity of 1,500,000 francs . This peace treaty was ratified by Ranavalona and Rainilaiarivony in January 1886 and French government representatives two months later .

Prior to ratification , the queen and her prime minister sought clarification about several articles in the main treaty that stated " foreign relations " would be controlled by a French resident and referenced " establishments " at Diego-Suarez Bay . Two key French negotiators , Minister Patrimonio and Admiral Miot , provided an explanation affixed to the treaty as an annex , which led the rulers of Madagascar to deem the treaty an adequate enough safeguard of their nation 's sovereignty to warrant their approval and signature . However , the official treaty was published in Paris without the annex or any reference to it . When the annex was later published in London , the French denied it had any legal validity . France declared a protectorate over the island despite the opposition of the Malagasy government and the omission of this term from the treaty . The international reaction to this latest turn of events was varied and greatly colored by national interests . The British were unwilling to defend Madagascar 's sovereignty for fear that the French might retaliate and fail to recognize the British claim to certain protectorates of its own . All official British engagement with Madagascar was henceforth transacted through the French resident , but these communiques were not officially recognized by Ranavalona and her court . The United States and Germany , on the other hand , continued to deal directly with the queen 's government as the rightful authority in Madagascar . This discrepancy forced a reinterpretation of one aspect of the treaty , resulting in the queen 's authority over internal affairs being maintained .

In 1886 the queen attempted to solicit the support of the United States in preserving Madagascar 's sovereignty by sending gifts to then-President Grover Cleveland , including silk akotofahana cloths , an ivory pin and a woven basket . However , the United States was neither able nor inclined to assert itself militarily or diplomatically in favor of preserving Madagascar 's independence . Ranavalona signed a treaty granting further concessions to the French on December 12 , 1887 . France 's claim to Madagascar as its protectorate was officially recognized by Britain in the Anglo-French agreement of 1890 . Between 1890 and 1894 , the French sought to aggressively claim what they believed to be the territorial rights established by the treaty . However , these French land claims and settlements were perceived by Ranavalona and Rainilaiarivony as an unjustifiable encroachment upon Malagasy sovereignty . Ultimately Charles Le Myre de Vilers was sent to persuade the queen and her prime minister to submit to the French interpretation of the treaty with the intent to launch a war and take the island by force if an agreement was not reached . The French offer was flatly refused and diplomatic relations between France and Madagascar were broken off in November 1894 .

Upon terminating diplomatic relations , the French bombarded and occupied the harbor of Toamasina on the east coast in December 1894 , then captured Mahajanga on the west coast the following month and immediately began their gradual advance , constructing roads through the malarial swamps that hindered passage to the island 's interior . The main expeditionary troops arrived in May . Over 6,000 of the original 15,000 French soldiers lost their lives to disease as they gradually moved inland , necessitating several thousand reinforcements drawn from French colonies in Algeria and Sub-Saharan Africa . The column reached the capital in September 1895 . For three days the Malagasy army managed to hold the French troops at the periphery of the city , but upon French bombardment of the Rova palace compound with heavy artillery , Ranavalona agreed to surrender control of her kingdom to the French .

France officially annexed Madagascar on January 1 , 1896 . That August , the French officially declared Madagascar to be their colony and exiled Prime Minister Rainilaiarivony to Algiers ( in French Algeria ) where he died the following year . The queen and much of her administration remained but were afforded no real political power . Shortly after Rainilaiarivony 's exile , Ranavalona was approached by a French official who informed her that a new prime minister would need to be selected . The queen hastily concluded that General Jacques Duchesne , the French general who had successfully led the military campaign against the Merina monarchy , would be a probable choice . Assuming that Malagasy political tradition would be preserved , Ranavalona believed she would be forced to marry whichever man was chosen for the job and worriedly asked if Duchesne was to be her next husband . Surprised , the French official reassured her that France had no intention of imposing a husband on the queen and would never again require her to marry a prime minister . The queen 's minister of foreign affairs , Rainitsimbazafy , was nominated to the post of prime minister by mutual consent .

In December 1895 , two months after the French capture of Antananarivo , popular resistance to French rule emerged in the form of the menalamba ( " red shawl " ) rebellion . This guerrilla war against foreigners , Christianity and political corruption quickly spread throughout the island and was principally conducted by peasants who wore shawls smeared with the red laterite soil of the highlands . The resistance movement gained ground until it was effectively put down by the French military at the end of 1897 . Members of Ranavalona 's court were accused of encouraging the rebels and many leading figures were executed , including the queen 's uncle Ratsimamanga ( brother of her favored adviser , Ramisindrazana ) and her minister of war , Rainandriamampandry . Ramisindrazana , the queen 's aunt , was exiled to Réunion , as the French were reluctant to execute a woman . The resistance led the government of France to replace the island 's civil governor , Hippolyte Laroche , with a military governor , Joseph Gallieni . The day before Gallieni arrived in Antananarivo , he had a message sent to the queen requiring her to present herself and her entourage at the military headquarters , preceded by a standard bearer carrying a French flag . The queen was obliged to sign documents handing over all royal property to France before being placed under arrest and imprisoned in her own palace . She was only allowed to receive visitors who had obtained prior authorization from Gallieni himself . While imprisoned , Ranavalona offered to convert to Roman Catholicism in an attempt to curry French favor but was informed that such a gesture was no longer necessary .

Gallieni exiled Ranavalona from Madagascar on February 27 , 1897 , and officially abolished the monarchy the next day . French officials ordered the queen to leave her palace at 1 : 30 in the morning . She was carried from Antananarivo by palanquin as the city slept , accompanied by 700 – 800 escorts and porters . Throughout the days spent traveling to the eastern port of Toamasina where she would board a ship to Réunion , Ranavalona reportedly drank heavily , swigging rum directly from the bottle in an uncustomarily coarse fashion . At Toamasina on March 6 , Ranavalona was notified that her sister Rasendranoro and aunt Ramasindrazana would be arriving shortly , as would the queen 's fourteen-year-old niece , Razafinandriamanitra , who was nine months pregnant with the illegitimate child of a French soldier .

Together , the family sailed on La Peyrouse to the port of Pointe des Galets , a site twenty kilometers ( 12.5 miles ) from the capital of St. Denis , to secure a discreet arrival . Despite this effort , a crowd of French onlookers jeered and shouted as the boat docked , angry at the queen for the loss of French lives incurred during France 's campaign to occupy Madagascar . After waiting for the crowd to disperse , the captain escorted the queen and her party into a horse-drawn buggy , the first Ranavalona had ever seen , and drove to the Hotel de l 'Europe in St. Denis . Young Razafinandriamanitra , suffering from the emotional and physical strains of the journey into exile , went into labor shortly after reaching the hotel . She gave birth to a little girl on her second day in Réunion , but could not recover her strength and died five days later . The infant was named Marie-Louise and was baptised a Catholic to avoid antagonizing the French . Marie-Louise , who could have become heir-apparent according to the traditional rules of succession , was adopted by Ranavalona as her own daughter .

Within a month the party had been moved to a house owned by a Madame de Villentroy , located at the corner of rue de l 'Arsenal and rue du Rempart near the French government offices in St. Denis . Ranavalona was reportedly pleased with the two-story house , which had a large walled garden and featured a peaked roof and wrap-around veranda reminiscent of the traditional highland homes of Madagascar . In addition to the queen and her aunt , sister , and grand-niece , the royal household included two secretaries , a cook , a maid , three servants for Ranavalona , and several more servants for her aunt and sister . The queen 's private pastor was authorized to make visits freely to the royal household . The queen 's party occupied the house in Réunion for just under two years . As tensions between England and France began to mount once again , this time over the conflict in Sudan , the French authorities became concerned that elements of the population in Madagascar might seize the opportunity to launch a new rebellion against French rule . The queen 's proximity to Madagascar was seen as a possible source of encouragement for would-be Malagasy rebels . French authorities made an abrupt decision to remove Ranavalona and her party to Algeria , a more distant location . On February 1 , 1899 , with very little forewarning , Ranavalona and her family were ordered aboard the Yang-Tse accompanied by a secretary-interpreter and several maids . During the 28-day journey to the French port of Marseilles , the passengers stopped over at such ports as Mayotte , Zanzibar , Aden and Djibouti . Throughout the trip , the various captains responsible for the journey were under orders to prevent Ranavalona from speaking with anyone who was not French . The party was held for several months at Marseilles before being transferred to a villa in the Mustapha Superieur area in Algiers . Ranavalona had hoped to continue on to Paris and was greatly disappointed to learn she was instead being sent to Algeria , reportedly bursting into tears and remarking , " Who is certain of tomorrow ? Only yesterday I was a queen ; today I am simply an unhappy , broken-hearted woman . "

At the queen 's villa in Algiers , Ranavalona was provided with servants and a French female attendant who kept her under observation and remained present whenever the queen entertained guests in her home . In addition , the government of France initially provided Ranavalona with an annual allowance of 25,000 francs paid from the budget for the colony of Madagascar and authorized by the colony 's Governor General . Nearly all the queen 's property had been seized by the colonial authority , although she had been permitted to keep certain personal belongings , including some of her jewelry . Her initial pension allowed such a humble lifestyle that the colonial government of Algeria lobbied unsuccessfully several times on her behalf to obtain an increase for her . Ranavalona also tasked a servant with selling some of her jewelry for cash , but the plan was discovered by the French colonial authorities and the servant was discharged and sent back to Madagascar . During the first years of her exile in Algeria , Ranavalona soon discovered the excitement of the socialite lifestyle among the elite of Algiers . She was regularly invited to parties , outings and cultural events and often hosted events of her own . However , homesickness was ever-present and the impossibility of visiting Madagascar contributed to melancholy and boredom . She would frequently take long walks alone in the countryside , along the beach , or through the town to clear her mind and lift her spirits . The queen was eager to see mainland France and especially Paris and repeatedly submitted formal requests for permission to travel . These were routinely denied until May 1901 when Ranavalona received the first of many authorizations to visit France . That very month , the queen moved into a small apartment in the 16th arrondissement of Paris near the Avenue Champs-Élysées and what is now the Place Charles de Gaulle , from which she visited the major sights of the city and was invited to numerous receptions , balls , shows and other events . She was widely received by high society with courtesy and admiration and was offered many gifts including a costly gown . During this first trip , Ranavalona visited the Palace of Versailles , was formally received at the Paris City Hall , and spent three weeks on vacation in Bordeaux . Finally , Ranavalona visited the beaches of Arcachon before exhausting her budget and boarding an Algeria-bound ship at Marseilles in early August . The details of her visit attracted much attention from the Parisian press , which expressed sympathy for the queen 's fate and recrimination toward the French government for failing to provide a larger pension or accord her the consideration she deserved as a recipient of the Legion of Honor .

Ranavalona would return to France six more times over the course of the next twelve years . Her frequent visits and excellent reputation made her the cause célèbre of many French citizens who pitied the queen 's fate and admired her gracious acceptance of her new life . Ranavalona 's visits were generally accompanied by much media fanfare and the queen 's popularity among the French public grew to the extent that she was featured on the box of Petit Beurre cookies in 1916 . The queen 's second visit to France occurred in September 1903 , when she visited Vic-sur-Cère and Aurillac . Pressure by citizens during this visit succeeded in raising her pension to 37,000 francs . Two years later she would visit Marseilles and Saint-Germain and inhabit a large five-bedroom Parisian apartment in the sixteenth arrondissement from which she would attend the Paris Opera , observe a session of the French House of Representatives and be formally received at the Ministry of the Colonies . Again due to pressure from sympathetic French citizens , Ranavalona 's pension was further raised to 50,000 francs per annum . On her next visit in 1907 , the queen would use Dives-sur-Mer as a home base to visit the Calvados region , where she was photographed for the French press . From August to September 1910 , Ranavalona would visit Paris , Nantes , La Baule and Saint-Nazaire and was repeatedly the target of undesired attention from press photographers . Her 1912 trip to the tiny , remote village of Quiberville would coincide with the increase of her annual pension to 75,000 francs . The queen 's final voyage in 1913 would take her to Marseilles , Aix-les-Bains and Allevard .

Ranavalona died without ever having returned to Madagascar , after two formal requests in 1910 and 1912 were refused on the pretext of insufficient funds in the colonial coffers . The exiled queen died suddenly at her villa in Algeria on May 23 , 1917 , the victim of a severe embolism . Ranavalona was buried at the Saint-Eugene cemetery in Algiers at 10 : 00 a.m. on May 25 . Her funeral was attended by dozens of personal friends , admirers , Red Cross colleagues , members of her church congregation and prominent figures of the political and cultural elite of Algiers . By nine in the morning , a long line of cars had already formed at the entrance to the memorial site . This effusive display of respect and remembrance on the part of Ranavalona 's friends was not mirrored by subsequent actions of the French colonial administration in Madagascar . In June 1925 , eight years after the queen 's death , the Governor-General of Algeria informed the Governor-General of Madagascar by letter that payments for the maintenance of Ranavalona 's tomb were in default . He urged the colonial government in Madagascar to provide funds for the upkeep of the dilapidated tomb , emphasizing that such neglect was unworthy of the queen 's memory and the government of France alike . The request was twice refused and the tomb was never refurbished . In November 1938 , Ranavalona 's remains were exhumed and re-interred in the tomb of Queen Rasoherina at the Rova of Antananarivo in Madagascar . A fire on the night of 6 November 1995 severely damaged the royal tombs and destroyed most of the other buildings at the site . The lamba-wrapped remains of Ranavalona III were the only ones that could be saved from the flames . These have since been re-interred in the royal tombs at Ambohimanga .

Following Ranavalona 's death , her aunt Ramasindrazana left Algeria and moved to Alpes-Maritimes where she lived out the few remaining years of her life . The heir-apparent , Marie-Louise , had left Ranavalona 's villa several years earlier to study at a French high school and would go on to marry a French agricultural engineer named Andre Bosshard on June 24 , 1921 . Although she continued to receive a small pension from the French government throughout her lifetime , Marie-Louise chose to pursue a career as a nurse and was awarded the Legion of Honor for her medical services during World War II . After Bosshard and the childless Marie-Louise divorced , the young woman reportedly made the most of her new-found freedom as a flamboyant and vivacious socialite . Marie-Louise died in Bazoches-sur-le-Betz on January 18 , 1948 , without leaving any descendants , and was buried in Montreuil , France .

Flight Unlimited is a 1995 aerobatic flight simulator video game developed and published by Looking Glass Technologies . It allows players to pilot reproductions of real-world aircraft and to perform aerobatic maneuvers . They may fly freely , race through floating rings against a timer or take lessons from a virtual flight instructor . The instructor teaches basic and advanced techniques , ranging from rudder turns to maneuvers such as the tailslide , Lomcevak and Immelmann turn . Flight Unlimited was the first self-published game released by Looking Glass Technologies . It was intended to establish the company as a video game publisher and to compete with flight simulator franchises such as Microsoft Flight Simulator . Project leader Seamus Blackley , a particle physicist and amateur pilot , conceived the game in 1992 . He felt that other flight simulators failed to convey the experience of real flight , and he reacted by coding a simulated atmosphere for Flight Unlimited based on real-time computational fluid dynamics . Aerobatic pilot Michael Goulian endorsed the game and assisted the team in making it more true to life . Flight Unlimited received positive reviews from critics and was a commercial success ; its sales exceeded 780,000 copies by 2002 . Reviewers lauded its realism , flight instruction , graphics and sense of flight , but some criticized its high system requirements . The game was followed by two sequels : Flight Unlimited II ( 1997 ) and Flight Unlimited III ( 1999 ) . A combat-oriented successor , Flight Combat , was released in 2002 as Jane 's Attack Squadron after a series of setbacks . Soon after Flight Unlimited 's completion , Blackley was fired from Looking Glass . He went on to design Jurassic Park : Trespasser at Dreamworks Interactive and later spearhead the Xbox project at Microsoft .

Flight Unlimited is a three-dimensional ( 3D ) flight simulator video game : its gameplay is a simulation of piloting real-world airplanes . Players may control the Bellanca Decathlon , Extra 300S , Pitts Special S-2B , Sukhoi Su-31 and Grob G103a Twin II sailplane . The game begins at the fixed-base operator ( FBO ) interface — a traversable 3D room whose contents represent menu options . For example , the player interacts with a row of scale airplane models to select an aircraft , and with a world globe to change airfield locations . Six settings are available , including Sedona , Arizona and Springfield , Vermont . The player may choose to begin flight on a runway or taxiway , or in the air . Aircraft are controlled via keyboard , joystick , head-mounted display or specialized input devices such as pedals . During flight , several third- and first-person camera angles may be selected . For example , the third-person Flyby View places the camera in front of the plane as it flies past , while the first-person Three-Way View displays more information about the plane 's position and speed than other angles . Certain camera angles , including the Three-Way View and 3-D Cockpit view , provide the player with simulated flight instruments such as an altimeter , airspeed indicator , accelerometer , variometer and tachometer . The game is designed to allow players to perform aerobatic maneuvers such as the Immelmann turn , tailslide , Lomcevak and Cuban Eight . Performances may be recorded and played back , with controls that allow the player to pause , rewind and fast forward . At any time , the player may stop a recording and resume flight from that point .

The game contains lessons that cover basic and advanced flight techniques , ranging from rudder turns to challenging aerobatic maneuvers . A simulated flight instructor offers real-time advice based on the player 's performance . Certificates are earned by performing well during lessons . In Hoops courses , the player undertakes a time trial through rings that float in the sky , with the option to enable a " ghost plane " of the highest score . Four types of Hoops courses are available : Basic , Challenge , Distance and Trick . The last is intended as a highly demanding test of the player 's aerobatic ability . The game 's sole non-powered aircraft , the Grob G103a Twin II sailplane , features its own game mode focused on energy management . The player attempts to use the direction of the wind , thermals — which realistically occur above areas that absorb more heat , such as plains and parking lots — and the orographic lift caused by slopes to stay airborne for as long as possible .

The concept of Flight Unlimited originated from Looking Glass Technologies ' discontent with contemporary flight simulators . Company co-founders Paul Neurath and Ned Lerner wanted to develop an exceptional game in the genre , and Neurath considered the idea during the production of Ultima Underworld : The Stygian Abyss and Ultima Underworld II : Labyrinth of Worlds . In 1992 , Seamus Blackley , who had been undertaking graduate studies in particle physics at the Fermilab research facility , was hired through a want advertisement that Lerner had placed on a bulletin board . At the company , Blackley programmed the physics modeling system for a racing game and designed a large number of standalone physics demonstrations . He became fascinated by physics programming . An amateur pilot and flight devotee , Blackley asked Lerner extensive questions about his earlier game Chuck Yeager 's Advanced Flight Trainer , which Blackley held in high regard . In reaction to Blackley 's enthusiasm , Neurath suggested that the company develop a " traditional Cessna sim " . However , Blackley instead proposed an aerobatics training simulation , which he had conceived while reading an aerobatics magazine on a Lexington , Massachusetts bus . Collaborating with Ultima Underworld II programmer Greg Travis , he created a thirty page concept document that outlined the game . His core idea was to recreate the " yummy , visceral , fluid feeling that you get when flying a real airplane " . He wanted the project to bear more resemblance to a playground than to a video game , and he sought to give it simple controls and realistic terrain to decrease the learning curve for beginners . Blackley assumed the role of project leader and then engaged the team in " flaming sessions " to generate ideas . According to programmer Doug Church , Blackley 's concept of the game was not fully developed , but he clearly expressed his thoughts and motivated the team . The first months of the project produced disparate prototypes that demonstrated prospective features . The company committed to full development of the game in early 1993 , and production commenced in March .

Blackley 's first objective was to code the game 's simulated physics . He began by deciding on a programming method — in particular , he sought one that would allow aircraft to perform the " knife-edge spin " maneuver that he had witnessed at air shows . In 1995 , he said that he had never played a flight simulator with an accurate sense of flight . He later described his belief that the genre had stagnated , and that flight games were evaluated " by [ their ] implementation of the standard feature set " , rather than by their enjoyability . Blackley researched physics programming in contemporary flight simulators , and he discovered that many used large databases of wind tunnel and plane sensory equipment information to dictate how aircraft would operate in prerecorded scenarios . Higher-end simulators used a " Newtonian " system , in which algebra-based measurements of force vectors determine a plane 's position in real-time . However , Blackley believed that neither system correctly simulated the experience of flight . In reaction , he used his knowledge of particle physics to create a real-time computational fluid dynamics ( CFDs ) model for Flight Unlimited . The result is a simulated atmosphere : air acts as a fluid that automatically reacts to the shape of any object placed within it . Blackley gave the example that a lawn chair , if placed within the game 's real-time CFDs model , would fall merely because of its shape . The game 's planes fly because the interaction of their architecture with the atmosphere creates lift , as with real-world aircraft . Changes in the plane 's direction are caused by the interaction of their flight control surfaces ( ailerons , elevators and rudders ) with the simulated atmosphere . Because it simulates the dynamics of flight in real-time , the system allows for aerobatic maneuvers that were impossible in previous flight simulators . In 1994 , Blackley said that it was possibly the first flight code designed for aerobatics . In constructing the CFDs model , Blackley and the team built from the Navier – Stokes equations of fluid motion , which Blackley described as " horrible , complicated partial differential equations " . According to Computer Gaming World , Blackley did not seek to represent the equations with perfect accuracy , and he was satisfied when the results were consistent and the sensation that they generated was correct .

After programming a basic version of the CFDs model , Blackley used several programs to examine the simulated currents of air that flowed across a model of a flat plate . He adjusted the code until the plate fell realistically , and then constructed test models for a plane wing and fuselage . He eventually built a complete but dysfunctional plane by using data from " pinhead books " . By reading aircraft design manuals , he discovered that the problems were caused by his plane 's incorrect tail and center of gravity . Following this , he created an exact three-dimensional model of the Extra 300S over roughly three days . As he had not yet simulated the physical attributes of its propeller , Blackley programmed the plane to be propelled from the rear . However , the accurate model performed properly in the simulated atmosphere . Artists Mike Marsicano and Kurt Bickenbach played critical roles in the creation of the game 's aircraft models , which were built in 3D Studio . As reference material , the team photographed real planes at several airfields , and they received blueprints and datasheets from aircraft manufacturers . The game 's Grob G103a Twin II sailplane was based directly on the one that Blackley owned at the time . The sophistication of the real-time CFDs complicated the 3D modeling process , as the planes required accurate geometry to fly properly . While attempting to meet this goal , however , Bickenbach said that the models he created were overly detailed , which caused the team to struggle with performance issues related to the high number of polygons . Reducing the number altered the plane 's shape , which in turn reduced its flight realism ; this necessitated a balance between performance and accuracy . To obtain audio for the planes , Greg LoPiccolo and Tom Streit — former bassist and road manager , respectively , of the band Tribe — visited a Florida importer of Russian aerobatic aircraft . The two placed microphones inside the cockpits and next to the engines , and they flew each plane at multiple speeds while recording with a digital audio tape machine . Combining this material with digital recordings of wind sounds , the team fashioned a physics-based sound system : sounds of the wind and engine are altered in real-time based on wind speed in the game .

The flight instructor was created by programmer Andrew Grant and voiced by Tom Streit . It monitors the player 's controller input during " each frame of animation " . If a maneuver is attempted , the instructor " interpolates the initial control movements " and predicts which maneuver is being performed . The instructor then gives advice on how to complete the maneuver and offers guidance if a mistake is made . Grant believed that the code is sometimes " too picky " , and he stated that it expects players to perform maneuvers more precisely than is humanly possible . The team initially planned to include an online multiplayer component , which would have allowed 64 planes to fly in the same area — thereby giving players the ability to compete with one another . However , the feature was not implemented into the final game . The staff members also sought to include aerobatic competitions in which the player could participate , but the idea was dropped because of difficulties with realism . Problems with artificially intelligent judges were also a factor in the feature 's removal . Flight Unlimited 's terrain graphics were created with stereophotogrammetry . The team gathered aerial photographs from locations in France and the United States . They combined two to three images of each area to create digital reproductions roughly 11 square miles ( 28 km2 ) in size . Each location in the game was based on two stereoscopic sets of photographs , which were processed for more than 72 hours by a " dedicated Pentium tucked away in a dark corner " . From the contrasting images , the computer generated a terrain " data blanket " with 3D height variations . While the team had considered using satellite or surveillance aircraft images to create the game 's terrain graphics , they found that the resolution was inadequate . Material from geographic information systems was also studied , but associate producer Paul Schaffer said that it would have been " astronomically expensive " to obtain data with the necessary resolution .

After assembling a playable demo of Flight Unlimited , the team requested assistance from then-US Aerobatic Team member Michael Goulian , who worked as a flight instructor at the nearby Hanscom Field . Because of the game 's flight code , Goulian was able to execute aerobatic maneuvers within less than three minutes of playing the game ; and he later performed his " entire basic aerobatic routine " . Blackley told PC Gamer US that , while Goulian disliked flight simulators , " When he flew Flight Unlimited , he just said ' pretty cool . ' I was so psyched " . Goulian assisted the team during the next year of development : he co-designed the game 's flight lessons and advised the team on adjustments to the plane models . Aerobatic pilot Patty Wagstaff was also consulted . At one point , the team encountered problems while testing a maneuver in the game 's Sukhoi Su-31 , and Blackley was concerned that he would need to rework the game 's physics code . However , Goulian phoned a colleague — a Russian pilot — who told them to compensate for the plane 's abnormally large ailerons . Using his advice on flying the real-world plane , the team found that the maneuver worked correctly . Goulian endorsed Flight Unlimited and wrote the foreword to its official strategy guide .

The graphics and physics code increased the game 's system requirements , and the team worked to optimize performance during development . They struggled to improve the game 's memory usage : the process consumed nearly as much time as the creation of the physics model , according to Church . Programmer Eric Twietmeyer ran weekly tests of the game 's performance by disabling certain parts of the code — such as the physics calculations — to isolate which parts used the most memory . By 1994 , Blackley 's physics code took up only 1 % of CPU time , with the rest allocated to the terrain renderer . Blackley optimized his code by converting the mathematical calculations of air from the 3D game world into a " math-friendly space " , during which time the Navier-Stokes equations are applied . Afterwards , the data is returned to 3D space . According to Computer Gaming World , this method increased speed by " a factor of 100 , with almost no loss in precision . " The team had trouble with complex memory-related glitches during development . Church called them " crazy " , and programmer Greg Travis noted that debugging the terrain cache system was a " nightmare " .

While leading the team , Blackley adopted a loose style of supervision . According to Opening the Xbox author Dean Takahashi , " Blackley [ was not ] ultra-organized . His idea of good management was to invite someone over for a gourmet dinner and have a casual conversation about work " . However , Takahashi wrote that " Blackley worked hard to inspire his team " , and he described artist James Dollar 's belief that , " in contrast to other Looking Glass managers , he didn 't take over tasks and make others feel stupid " . During the first two years of production , the team was divided into small groups that worked on the game 's elements separately . For example , Blackley programmed the game 's physics , while Eric Twietmeyer and Tim Day created the terrain renderer . However , Doug Church later said that , while " the team [ did ] a bunch of very cool stuff , the FBO , the flight model , the instructor , the renderer , so on " , the result " was almost like four separate programs , with no connection " . Following the completion of the concurrently-developed System Shock , a significant part of that game 's team — including Church , Marc LeBlanc and Rob Fermier — moved to Flight Unlimited to add connective material . At the time , Church said that it was difficult to meld the game 's elements , but he later stated that they largely coalesced by the end .

Flight Unlimited was self-published by Looking Glass Technologies . Their previous games had been developed for other video game publishers , and had generated $ 90 million total earnings for those companies . However , Ronald Rosenberg of The Boston Globe reported that Looking Glass was " no longer satisfied as a backroom player surviving on royalties " . Doug Church later explained that the company wanted to self-publish in order to escape the " treadmill of waiting for advances " , which would allow them to make long-term plans without needing to satisfy the immediate demands of a publisher . In late 1994 , Looking Glass announced that venture capital investors , including Matrix Partners and Institutional Venture Partners , had provided the company with $ 3.8 million . The sum was intended to fund the development and self-publication of Flight Unlimited . According to Michael Humphreys of Matrix Partners and Ruthann Quindlen of Institutional Venture Partners , the decision was partly influenced by the past success of the company 's co-founders , Paul Neurath and Ned Lerner . Looking Glass intended Flight Unlimited as a gateway into the video game publishing industry . According to Lerner , the idea of self-publishing had been considered when the company was founded . In 1995 , Looking Glass projected that sales of Flight Unlimited would increase royalty revenues to $ 10 million that year , up from $ 1.5 million in 1994 . Jeffrey A. Kalowski , the company 's vice president of finance and administration , expected that the game would recoup its development costs and make a return before the end of the year . He predicted that , over the following 12 to 18 months , the company 's number of employees would increase from 52 to 82 . The company 's executive vice president and general manager , Jerry Wolosenko , told The Boston Globe that the company hoped to publish six games each year . According to Doug Church , the pressure for Flight Unlimited to succeed meant that the concurrently-developed System Shock , which was not self-published , received little attention from the company 's management .

Flight Unlimited was placed in direct competition with several major flight simulator franchises . Before the game 's release , Shelby Bateman of Next Generation Magazine wrote , " 1995 is going to be a real dogfight in the flight-sim and aerial-combat categories , and LookingGlass [ sic ] is betting its bankroll ... that it can capture significant market share from the likes of Microsoft Flight Simulator and the debut of Spectrum HoloByte 's Falcon 4.0 , among others . " Describing the situation , Johnny L. Wilson of Computer Gaming World wrote , " The games that sell big are the ones that allow you to blow stuff up , so , if anything , that could be a problem for Flight Unlimited . " Doug Church explained that , because the game did not feature combat and bore little resemblance to Microsoft Flight Simulator , the team spent " many late nights " on marketing strategies . However , he noted that the game had a wide appeal among those who tested it during development , which he called " a really good sign " . Talking to Bernie Yee of PC Gamer US , Paul Neurath said that he thought the game would sell well . Yee noted that Neurath " fully [ expected ] it to prove more popular than Microsoft Flight Simulator " .

In January 1995 , Looking Glass showed Flight Unlimited alongside Terra Nova : Strike Force Centauri at the Winter Consumer Electronics Show , under their " Immersive Reality " marketing label . In March 1995 , the Boston Globe reported that the team was performing " 11th hour checks " of the game to prepare it for shipment to a Midwestern United States Compact Disc manufacturer . According to the newspaper , Looking Glass planned to begin by shipping 100,000 units to retailers in Canada and the United States . Another 100,000 copies were to be sent to France , Germany and the United Kingdom at a later date . However , upon the game 's June 7 , 1995 release for DOS , 200,000 units were distributed simultaneously in the United States and Europe . The game 's European releases were localized with German , French and English text and voice acting , which was made possible by " close coordination with international partners " . Versions for Macintosh and Windows 95 were later released ; the former was shown at the Macworld Expo in April 1996 .

Flight Unlimited was a commercial success . It debuted in twelfth place on a June 1995 sales chart compiled by NPD Group , while Microsoft Flight Simulator 5.1 took first place . The game went on to sell more than 300,000 copies by 1997 , and more than 780,000 by 2002 . According to Constantine von Hoffman of the Boston Herald , Flight Unlimited successfully competed with Microsoft Flight Simulator . PC Gamer 's Lee Buchanan wrote that it " soars above the pack of flight simulations " , and he considered it to be " the most fun [ he had ] had in a computerized cockpit " . Frank Vizard of Popular Mechanics hailed it as " the new top gun of flight simulators " , and Doug Bailey of The Boston Globe considered it to be the " first real serious challenge to Microsoft 's dominance of the genre " . The Record 's David Noack believed that the game 's physics and stereoscopic terrain set " a new standard in flight simulation " . Writing for Computer Gaming World , Bob and John Nolan stated , " If anything , you should at least take a look at this product , because you 'll be looking at the future of simulations . " The game was a finalist in the 12th Annual Awards for Technical Excellence held by PC Magazine , whose staff called it " the simulator by which all others will be judged . "

Vizard stated that Flight Unlimited 's " very advanced computational fluid dynamics make [ each ] plane react according to spec " . Buchanan lauded the fluid model for creating a " sensation of actual flight [ that ] is nothing short of magnificent " , while PC Magazine 's staff commented that it makes " planes behave more like real aircraft than any simulator we have seen " . Bob and John Nolan called the game 's physics programming " groundbreaking " , and Chris Ware of the Lexington Herald-Leader found the game to be the most accurate simulation of flight beyond " those multimillion-dollar flight simulators [ used by ] fighter pilots and astronauts " . Noack agreed : he wrote that the game " is about as close to flying within going to the airport " . In 1996 , Computer Gaming World presented Flight Unlimited with a Special Artistic Achievement Award For Physical Model . The magazine 's staff praised Seamus Blackley 's programming for pushing the genre " higher into the realm of simulation " . Ware found Flight Unlimited approachable and noted its " simplicity of use and depth of instruction " . Buchanan hailed the lesson mode as " a dream come true for any budding pilot " . A writer for The Washington Post called the game " [ the ] world 's first truly easy-to-use flight simulator " and " a good entry product " , in which " rank amateurs can just launch the program and start cruising immediately " . The Washington Post 's John Gaudiosi wrote that , while many games in the genre are overly complex , Flight Unlimited lets " those who aren 't rocket scientists ... experience the thrills of stunt flying . " He found its control scheme simple to understand . By contrast , Bailey found the game difficult and initially " frustrating " : he complained that he had to play the lesson mode before even taking off . Denny Atkin of Computer Gaming World characterized the game 's learning curve as steep , thanks to the accuracy of the physics programming , but he noted the scalable difficulty options . Bailey later recommended the game in a holiday shopping guide . He wrote that " it can be difficult to master . But once you 're up , it 's worth the trouble . "

A writer for The Washington Post commented that " serious flight freaks will like the racing and advanced maneuvers " . According to Gaudiosi , dedicated players will learn " all about aerodynamics and stunt flying " ; he considered the latter to be " hard stuff , even with green hoops guiding you " . Similarly , Buchanan characterized the Hoops courses as " incredibly demanding " , and Atkin cited that mode 's Trick difficulty level as " amazingly tough " . Bob and John Nolan wrote that people who " love to loop around the skies of Flight Simulator 5 will go bananas for " the aerobatics ; but the pair commented that combat flight simulator players " might get a little edgy once the wow-power wears off . " However , Atkin believed that only those " never happy without something to shoot at " could be disappointed by the lack of combat : other players will " be too busy choreographing aerial ballets , pulling off death-defying aerobatic stunts , or just enjoying a quiet soar down the ridge line to miss that stuff " . Likewise , Ware called the non-violent gameplay " refreshing " , and Buchanan wrote , " If [ you are ] a battle-weary veteran of air combat sims , Flight Unlimited might be just the sort of [ rest and relaxation ] you need . "

Atkin found the cockpit and terrain graphics to look " almost real " . He commented , " Every few years a sim comes along that lets reviewers use the ' sets new standards for graphics ' cliché , and Flight Unlimited is the 1995 entry in this club . " Bob and John Nolan called Flight Unlimited " the ultimate show off piece for your new Pentium " , thanks to " unbelievable " graphics superior to those of any other computer game . Gaudiosi concurred : he characterized the visuals as " photo-sharp " and " better than any I have seen " . PC Magazine 's staff found the graphics " impressive " and " even more stunning than those in Microsoft Flight Simulator " . Ware noted the " stunning 3-D photo-realistic scenery " , while Bailey stated that the " graphics are brilliantly rendered and whiz by smoothly " . Buchanan called Flight Unlimited 's terrain " just superb " and Vizard described it as " amazingly real " . Buchanan believed that " what you hear in Flight Unlimited is every bit as good as what you see " , thanks to " utterly convincing " sound effects . Atkin praised the instructor as " one of the best uses of voice ever in a multimedia title " .

Flight Unlimited was the first of three self-published titles released by Looking Glass Technologies . However , the next two products , Terra Nova : Strike Force Centauri ( 1996 ) and British Open Championship Golf ( 1997 ) , were commercial failures . As a result , the company ceased self-publishing and was left in dire financial circumstances . Doug Church later explained that Looking Glass ' attempt to publish came at a difficult time for the video game industry : " the other mid-sized publishers were mostly going out of business or getting bought " . He believed that the company had been " overreaching itself " with the venture , and that it was " being a little overambitious and a little cocky " .

Flight Unlimited was intended to be followed by a combat-oriented sequel , which was developed under the working title Flight Combat . In 1995 , Seamus Blackley told PC Gamer US that he wanted the game to " feel so real that pilots will be afraid . They 'll feel the gun hits . " Talking to Computer Gaming World , he stated that the game would teach players the " same curriculum [ as ] the Air Force " , and that it would feature competitive online play . However , a company manager , newly instated by venture capital investors who disliked Looking Glass ' management style , instead demanded that Blackley create a direct sequel to Flight Unlimited . The two argued regularly , and Blackley later accused the manager of " ripp [ ing ] the guts out of Looking Glass " . In response to Blackley 's refusal to create Flight Unlimited II , the manager fired him . Blackley left the company in late 1995 with designer Austin Grossman , and both were hired by Dreamworks Interactive to create Jurassic Park : Trespasser . He later spearheaded development of the Xbox at Microsoft .

Constantine Hantzopoulos directed Flight Unlimited II , which was published by Eidos Interactive in 1997 . The team could not continue using the real-time computational fluid dynamics of Flight Unlimited because , according to Hantzopoulos , it was " all black box spaghetti code from Seamus " . The aerobatics focus of its predecessor was dropped in favor of general civilian aviation . The development of Flight Combat was hinted at during the production of Flight Unlimited II . A third game , Flight Unlimited III , was published by Electronic Arts in 1999 ; and it continued the focus on general aviation . That year , Flight Combat was officially announced as the World War II-themed , Electronic Arts-published Flight Combat : Thunder Over Europe , but its name was eventually changed to Jane 's Attack Squadron . The game was canceled as a consequence of Looking Glass Studios ' closure in 2000 . However , it was later finished by developer Mad Doc Software and released in 2002 by publisher Xicat Interactive .

Octavarium is the eighth studio album by American progressive metal / rock band Dream Theater . Released on June 7 , 2005 , it was the band 's final release with Atlantic Records . Recorded between September 2004 and February 2005 , the album holds the distinction of being the last album ever recorded at The Hit Factory in New York City . With Octavarium , the band decided to create " a classic Dream Theater album " , drawing upon their various stylistic influences while trying to make the music less complex . The album takes as its creative concept the musical octave . Octavarium peaked in the top five in the Finnish , Italian , and Swedish charts , and in the top ten in the Dutch , Japanese , and Norwegian charts . Critical reception of the album was generally positive ; the diversity of the music was praised , although critics found some of the songwriting to be inconsistent . Dream Theater promoted the album on a year-long world tour , with the majority of concerts lasting almost three hours and featuring a different setlist each night . The tour finished at Radio City Music Hall accompanied by an orchestra ; this performance was recorded and released as a live album and concert video entitled Score . They co-headlined the 2005 North American Gigantour with Megadeth .

After completing a North American tour supporting one of their main influences , Yes , in summer 2004 , Dream Theater took a two-month break . The band reconvened at The Hit Factory in New York City in November 2004 to begin work on their eighth studio album . The Hit Factory , a studio in which artists such as Michael Jackson , Madonna , Stevie Wonder , U2 and John Lennon had recorded , was earmarked for closure . Dream Theater was the last band to record there before it was permanently closed . After writing the concept album Metropolis Pt . 2 : Scenes from a Memory , the double album Six Degrees of Inner Turbulence and the metal-focused Train of Thought , the band decided to create " a classic Dream Theater album " . Keyboardist Jordan Rudess described it as " really going back to creating a real band effort , as well as drawing upon all our various stylistic influences . " On Octavarium , the band wanted to make the music less complex , featuring songs which Rudess regards as " quicker to appreciate " , although noted that the twenty-four-minute " Octavarium " was not as accessible . Guitarist John Petrucci noted that they wanted to focus on writing strong songs . To achieve this , the band stripped the sound down to piano , guitar and vocals when writing , focusing on the melodies and song structures .

Drummer Mike Portnoy dismissed claims that Octavarium was an attempt to write a more commercial album , stating that the band simply " [ has ] that side to [ them ] . We love bands like U2 or Coldplay , as well as liking shorter songs as well . " Portnoy noted that , after writing Six Degrees of Inner Turbulence and Train of Thought , they had not written an album of shorter songs for some time . He said that the band had found writing longer songs easier than writing shorter ones , and that the band was not trying to write a radio hit as " the label wouldn 't have done crap with it anyway . " The band had previously written an orchestral-style piece in the form of " Overture " on Six Degrees of Inner Turbulence , but recorded it using keyboards . The tracks " The Answer Lies Within " , " Sacrificed Sons " and " Octavarium " marked the first time Dream Theater worked with an orchestra , conducted by Jamshied Sharifi ( who studied at Berklee College of Music at the same time as Portnoy , Petrucci and bassist John Myung ) . The orchestra was selected based on their sight reading ability , allowing all their parts to be recorded in a maximum of two takes , even though they had never seen or played the music before .

When starting to work on what would become Octavarium , Portnoy noted that it would be their eighth studio album and that they had recently released their fifth live album , Live at Budokan . This sequence mirrored the octave on a musical keyboard : each octave contains eight naturals and five accidentals . Portnoy suggested that they use that concept for the entire album . When writing , the band delegated each song a different key . Sound effects were placed between songs to connect them : for example , " The Root of All Evil " , written in F , and the following track , " The Answer Lies Within " , written in G , were connected by a sound effect in the key of F # . The album 's lyrics and song titles featured references to this concept . Portnoy cited the titles " The Root of all Evil " ( referring to the musical term " root " ) and " Octavarium " ( " the octave of the octave " ) as two examples of this . Octavarium begins " The Root of All Evil " with the final note of the band 's previous album , Train of Thought with " In the Name of God " . Train of Thought started " As I Am " with the last note from Six Degrees of Inner Turbulence with the title track , which in turn started with the noise that ended Scenes from a Memory at the end of " Finally Free " . Portnoy was inspired to do this thanks to the Van Halen album Women and Children First ; the outro of the album 's final song ended with a new riff being played which faded out . Portnoy recalled that he expected Van Halen 's next album to start with that ending riff , but was disappointed when it did not . He later realized he had " dug a hole where we 're expected to do it every time " . He solved this problem on Octavarium , where the final track ends with the beginning of the first one . This made the album a cycle in itself , allowing the band to have a clean start with their next album . At 04 : 52 – 5 : 17 , there is a lyrical and musical reference to the chorus of " This Dying Soul " from Train of Thought .

" The Root of All Evil " is the third part of Portnoy 's Twelve-step Suite , a set of songs from various Dream Theater albums which describe his journey through Alcoholics Anonymous . The song contains parts six and seven of the suite : " Ready " and " Remove " . " The Answer Lies Within " and " I Walk Beside You " are the two shortest tracks on the album . Rudess regards them as radio-friendly songs which still maintain Dream Theater 's style . Portnoy wrote the lyrics to " Never Enough " as a response to fans who Portnoy perceived to complain about every thing that Dream Theater did . Portnoy stated that while he appreciated the devotion of Dream Theater 's fans , he was frustrated because he was " constantly tearing [ himself ] away from [ his ] family " to give more to the fans . He found it discouraging that , even though he spent " countless nights " writing special setlists and the band spent days rehearsing , some fans would still complain that they went to a show and did not hear " Pull Me Under " . " It 's discouraging and makes me crazy sometimes , " he said .

" Sacrificed Sons " , at just over ten minutes long , is the second-longest song on the album . Its lyrics , written by vocalist James LaBrie , deal with the September 11 attacks . Rudess noted that the band enjoyed writing about more serious topics instead of love songs . When working on the lyrics , LaBrie said that there was " a lot of discussion " about the song 's wording and how direct it should be . The title track " Octavarium " is the longest track on the album , at 24 : 00 . Petrucci stated that the band wanted to write an epic song that thematically developed and would use an orchestra . The band was heavily influenced by the progressive rock sound of Genesis , Yes and Pink Floyd . The instrumental introduction , heavily influenced by Pink Floyd 's " Shine On You Crazy Diamond " , was performed by Rudess using a lap steel guitar and Continuum . Additionally , there are many references to other progressive rock songs in the lyrics .

Hugh Syme provided the artwork for Octavarium . The idea of depicting a giant Newton 's cradle was born out of discussions between Syme and Portnoy . The two talked about how " for everything you do in music you create either a cluster or triad " , according to Syme . " And then it became evident that for every action there is an opposite reaction . So I thought we could do something based on the Newton 's cradle . " There are numerous references to the numbers five and eight throughout the artwork , alluding to the album 's concept . For example , the Newton 's cradle has eight suspended balls , and there are five birds on the cover . The album booklet features an octagonal maze , spider and octopus , among other references . The landscape on the cover is made up of a sky and grass from Indiana , and a background from the Lake District .

A week before the scheduled release of Octavarium , Portnoy shut down the official Dream Theater and Mike Portnoy forums . Blabbermouth.net reported that this was in response to the album being leaked . Portnoy stated that " [ he ] chose to do this mainly [ emphasis removed ] to build anticipation for the big ' official ' unveiling next week " , although noted that " the repeated requests to refrain from spoilers and links for the new album against the band 's wishes were frustrating " . Octavarium was released on June 7 , 2005 . It was their final album with Atlantic Records , ending a contract which had lasted fourteen years . Although in recent years the band had been allowed creative freedom , they were dissatisfied by the lack of promotion the label offered them . Portnoy released a DVD entitled Drumavarium in 2005 , containing footage of his drum performance from the Octavarium recording sessions . Rudess released a solo piano version of " The Answer Lies Within " on his 2009 album Notes on a Dream . " Panic Attack " is featured as a playable song in Rock Band 2 , where it is listed as the hardest song for both bass and drums .

Octavarium reached the top five in the Finnish , Italian , and Swedish charts , as well as the top ten in the Dutch , Japanese , and Norwegian charts . Critical reception of the album was generally positive . Writing for Blistering , Justin Donnelly praised the album as " diverse , melodic and hard hitting all at the same time " , ranking it as one of Dream Theater 's best releases . He particularly praised the title track , considering it to be " another Dream Theater classic " . Billboard considered the results of the band 's attempt to write shorter songs and use warmer instrumental textures to be " excellent " , particularly praising " The Root of All Evil " , " These Walls " and " I Walk Beside You " . Harley Carlson of MetalReview.com regarded Octavarium as " successfully [ showcasing ] the band 's ability to craft emotive music , " although noted that it is " unquestionably Dream Theater , yet there is something missing . " Vik Bansal of musicOMH praised " Never Enough " , " Panic Attack " and " Sacrificed Sons " , but dismissed " The Root of All Evil " as " Dream Theater by the numbers " . He criticized " Octavarium " as " bloated " , although noted that fans of the band 's A Change of Seasons would enjoy it . He said that " there 's enough on the remainder of Octavarium to keep the rest of us interested and the prog rock haters whining dismissively " . Writing for Exclaim ! , Greg Pratt praised the album 's artwork and production , but said that " there ’ s nothing that blows any minds here , or even gives a mild bend ; hell , a good chunk of this disc feels like basic radio rock from the local old-guy bar band " . He noted that although there were some longer songs on the album , " this just feels like 76 minutes of overdramatic rock , too heavy on the light and weak , and not enough time spent on just showing off " .

Donnelly considered Octavarium to be " somewhere between Images and Words , Six Degrees of Inner Turbulence and Train of Thought " . Carlson stated that the album " draws closest comparison to Falling into Infinity and Metropolis II : Scenes from a Memory , but with far less complexity and edge . " Tammy La Gorce of AllMusic noted that " a post-hardcore edge - call it a leap into 2005 - has invaded [ the band 's ] pledge of allegiance to theatrical heavy rock ... What 's changed is Dream Theater 's commitment to carrying on their reputation as underground progressive rock 's classicists , and it seems well-timed . " Critics noted a strong Muse influence on some tracks , on some cases generating negative reviews .

Dream Theater began the Octavarium Tour in support of Octavarium in Europe on June 10 , 2005 , beginning at the Sweden Rock Festival in Sölvesborg . The band co-headlined the Gigantour with Megadeth across North America from July 21 to September 3 . The Montreal concert was recorded and released as a live album and concert video on August 22 , 2006 and September 5 , 2006 respectively , titled Gigantour . The main Octavarium world tour began in September in Finland , and saw the band continue with their " An Evening With Dream Theater " concert format . This meant the band would play for almost three hours , with a different setlist each evening . Many of the shows would center around a tour of the band 's history to that point , featuring a song ( or part of a longer song ) for each album before wrapping up the regular set with several from Octavarium Combined with interviews , rehearsals during soundcheck and meet-and-greet sessions with fans , the band became physically and mentally drained . Dream Theater performed two shows on consecutive nights both in Amsterdam and London . On the second night in both cities , the band covered the entirety of Pink Floyd 's The Dark Side of the Moon album . Theresa Thomason , who had previously performed on Scenes From a Memory , was flown in to perform vocals on " The Great Gig in the Sky " . The London performance was released as a live album and concert video in 2006 by Portnoy 's YtseJam Records . The band covered all of Deep Purple 's Made in Japan at concerts in Tokyo and Osaka ; a recording of which was also released as a live album by YtseJam Records in 2007 .

Peniophora quercina is a species of wood-decay fungus in the family Peniophoraceae . The species produces fruit bodies which vary in appearance depending on whether they are wet or dry . The wet fruit bodies are waxy and lilac , and attached strongly to the wood . When dry , the edges curl up and reveal the dark underside , while the surface becomes crusty and pink . P. quercina is the type species of Peniophora , and was moved to the genus upon its creation by Mordecai Cubitt Cooke . The species is found primarily in Europe , where it can be encountered all year . Though primarily growing upon dead wood , especially oak , it is also capable of growing upon still-living wood .

Early descriptions of the species came from Carl Ludwig Willdenow , who named it Lichen carneus in 1787 , and Jean Baptiste François Pierre Bulliard , who , in 1790 , named it Auricularia corticalis . However , the sanctioned name is Thelephora quercina , given by Christiaan Hendrik Persoon in 1801 , and sanctioned by Elias Magnus Fries in the first volume of his Systema Mycologicum . The specific name quercina is in reference to Quercus , the generic name for oak . A number of authors ( including Jean-Baptiste Lamarck , Lucien Quélet and Giacomo Bresadola ) reclassified Bulliard 's Auricularia corticalis throughout the 19th century , while Persoon 's Thelephora quercina was reclassified by Samuel Frederick Gray in 1821 , who placed it in Corticium as Corticium quercinum . However , in 1879 , Mordecai Cubitt Cooke transferred the species to his newly described genus Peniophora , declaring it the type species . Despite subsequent attempts at reclassification , Cooke 's name is the one currently used .

Peniophora quercina produces resupinate fruit bodies which vary in appearance depending on whether they are wet or dry . They are up to 0.5 mm ( 0.020 in ) thick , and form irregular patches that sometimes measure several centimetres across . Initially , the species forms small , disc-shaped fruit bodies through holes in bark , but these expand and merge to form the irregular patches . When fresh , the surface is reminiscent of jelly or wax , and can be smooth or warty , varying in colour from a dull blue to lilac . Initially , they are firmly attached to the wood on which they are growing , but as they dry , the edges roll inwards and reveal the dark brown or black underside . The dry specimens have a crusty and slightly fissured surface , and , in colour , are a bright pink or grey , tinted with lilac . There is a relatively thick layer of gelatinous flesh . Apart from a brown layer close to the wood , the flesh is hyaline . The species has no distinctive odour or taste , and is inedible .

Peniophora quercina produces spores which take the shape of a curved cylinder ( sausage shaped ) , and have been variously reported as light red , pink and white . They measure from 8 to 12 by 3 to 4 micrometres ( μm ) . The spores are borne on basidia , with four spores per basidium , which measure 50 to 70 by 5 to 12 μm . The species has hyaline cystidia with thick cell walls , which are " heavily encrusted with crystalline material " . The cystidia are often buried within the fruit body as it grows , but can be found in large numbers . They have been variously described as spindle-shaped or conical , and measure 25 to 35 by 10 to 15 μm . The hyphae have clamp connections , and the base of the fruit body is made up of brown hyphae with moderately thick cell walls , measuring 3 to 4 μm in width .

Peniophora quercina typically grows upon dead wood , which can be attached to the tree or fallen , where it causes white rot . It favours oak , but can also be found on other deciduous trees , such as beech . P. quercina is known to be a pioneer species on dead wood , which means it can be the first species to grow . It is found in Europe , where it is very common . Though it can be encountered all year , it produces spores in late summer and autumn . It has also been recorded in Amur , in eastern Asia . The species has also been identified in living sapwood , though it is latent at this time , and it is probable that it waits until the wood begins to die ( when it is drier , but contains more oxygen ) before the mycelia begin to grow . When the species was inoculated into living wood , it did grow , but only around the inoculation wound ; the species did not spread as it would have done on dead wood . Another study found that the species actively colonised partially living branches , causing white rot . However , the species had little effect on the cambium , and was mostly limited to the ends of branches .

In 1752 , Henry Fielding started a " paper war " , a long term dispute with constant publication of pamphlets attacking other writers , between the various authors on London 's Grub Street . Although it began as a dispute between Fielding and John Hill , other authors , such as Christopher Smart , Bonnell Thornton , William Kenrick , Arthur Murphy , and Tobias Smollett were soon dedicating their works to aid various sides of the conflict . The dispute lasted until 1753 and involved many of London 's periodicals . It eventually resulted in countless essays , poems , and even a series of mock epic poems starting with Smart 's The Hilliad . Although it is unknown what actually started the dispute , it resulted in a divide of authors who either supported Fielding or supported Hill , and few in between .

Fielding started a " paper war " in the first issue of The Covent-Garden Journal ( 4 January 1752 ) by declaring war against " hack writers " . In response , John Hill claimed in the London Daily Advertiser ( 9 January 1752 ) Fielding had met with him prior to January and proposed what would be a fake paper war that would involve London writers " giving Blows that would not hurt , and sharing the Advantage in Silence . " Such a meeting between Fielding and Hill to discuss the proposed war is believed to have occurred ( if it occurred ) on 28 December 1751 . It is known that Hill met Fielding for legal business between 26 and 28 December 1751 after Hill was robbed . Before Hill had revealed this information , he attacked Fielding 's Amelia in the London Daily Advertiser on 8 January 1752 . The book 's title character , Amelia , was involved in an accident that damaged her face , and Hill , mocking the way Fielding described the scene , claimed that she " could charm the World without the Help of a Nose . " In response to both the revelation and personal attacks , Fielding wrote on 11 January 1752 : " If the Betrayer of a private Treaty could ever deserve the least Credit , yet his Lowness here must proclaim himself either a Liar , or a Fool . None can doubt that he is the former , if he hath feigned this Treaty , and I think few would scruple to call him the latter , if he had rejected it . " Regardless of the merits of Hill 's claim , a war was soon started : by the third issue of The Covent-Garden Journal , Fielding narrowed his satire upon John Hill .

Although Hill , Fielding , Smart , Thornton , Kenrick , Murphy , and Smollett were all involved in the dispute , not all of them used their actual names ; instead , many preferred to use pseudonyms along with attacks under their own name : Fielding wrote as " Sir Alexander Drawcansir " ; Hill wrote as " The Inspector " ; Thornton wrote as " Madam Roxanna " ; and Smart wrote as " Mrs. Mary Midnight " . It was under these pseudonyms that various authors soon responded to Fielding 's attacks and to Fielding 's plan for a " Universal Register Office " , a planned center of advertisement of jobs , goods for sale , and other items . If this was not enough , Fielding started a dispute , just a few months before , with Philip D 'Halluin , a former employee who established the competing " Public Register Office " in King Street , Covent Garden , who hired Bonnell Thorton , a friend of Smart , to attack Fielding and Hill . However , Hill had previously aided Fielding in this matter . Later , Hill attacked both Fielding and Smart , 13 August 1752 , in the only issue of the The Impertinent to be produced . Although the work was published anonymously , it was commonly known that it was produced by Hill , and he soon followed up the pamphlet with his 25 August 1752 The Inspector column in the London Daily Advertiser . With the column , he harshly criticized Smart 's Poems on Several Occasions . Fielding eventually left the dispute after the sixth issue of The Covent-Garden Journal was published .

Although it is quite possible that the first work in the " war " was produced by Smart on 29 April 1751 , it is also possible that the origins of the dispute could be traced even further back to Hill 's publications between February and March 1751 . Fielding 's first paper in the " war " was also the first issue of The Covent-Garden Journal on 4 January 1752 . In it , Fielding attacked all of the writers of Grub Street , which brought a quick response . Hill responded twice and claimed that Fielding was planning a fake dispute on 9 January 1752 , Smollet attacked Hill 's piece on 15 January 1752 , and Thornton soon responded against Fielding in Have At You All : or , The Drury Lane Journal on 16 January 1752 . During this time , personal works , such as Fielding 's Amelia , became targets . On 11 January 1752 , Fielding responded to Hill and those who supported his view of Amelia in The Covent-Garden Journal by ironically stating : a famous Surgeon , who absolutely cured one Mrs Amelia Booth , of a violent Hurt in her Nose , insomuch , that she had scarce a Scar left on it , intends to bring Actions against several ill-meaning and slanderous People , who have reported that the said Lady had no Nose , merely because the Author of her History , in a Hurry , forgot to inform his Readers of that Particular .

Hill was not the only one to attack the work ; Thornton wrote satires of Amelia in the Drury-Lane Journal . Thornton 's satires were first published on 16 January 1752 and included a fake advertisement for a parody novel called " Shamelia " , playing off of title of Fielding 's parody Shamela . He later parodied Amelia again on 13 February 1752 in a piece called " A New Chapter in Amelia . " Tobias Smollett joined in and published the pamphlet Habbakkuk Hilding anonymously on 15 January 1752 . Although there were many attacks against Fielding 's novel , there was some support for the work , and an anonymous pamphlet was written to attack " Hill and ' the Town ' " while praising Amelia . On 25 January 1752 , Fielding defended his work again by bringing the novel before the imaginary " Court of Censorial Enquiry " , in which Hill and the other critics are the prosecutors and it is they , not Amelia , that are truly put on trial . The Covent-Garden Journal served Fielding well and he used it in his attacks upon Hill and Hill 's supporters in the Journal piece called " Journal of the present Paper War between the Forces under Sir Alexander Drawcansir , and the Army of Grub-street " . The work was modelled after Jonathan Swift 's The Battle of the Books and Fielding pretended to be a military leader that would lead " English VETERANS " against those who were compared to characters from the Greek and Roman classics along with those from modern French literature . However , he changed roles on the fourth issue , produced on 14 January 1752 , and transformed himself into a " judge " . By February , Kenrick joined in and " dramatized " the " Paper War " in a production called Fun and proceeded to defend Fielding . Charles Macklin followed suit by holding a benefit on 8 April 1752 at the Covent Garden with a two-act play called The Covent Garden Theater , or Pasquin Turn 'd Drawcansir ; the play portrayed Fielding attacking the Hill and his followers , the " Town " .

A pamphlet in the London Daily Advertiser published on 29 January 1752 called The March of the Lion links various authors involved in the war and is the first to introduce Smart via a reference to his " Mrs. Mary Midnight " pseudonym , although Smart was not yet a participant . However , Smart did begin directly participating in the matter 4 August 1752 with the publication in The Midwife of a parody on Hill 's " Inspector " persona . In the piece , Smart responded to Hill 's attack on Smart 's " Old Woman 's Oratory " show and Hill 's claim that the show was dead . Hill was quick to respond ; he attacked both Fielding and Smart in a piece published on 13 August 1752 in the only issue of the The Impertinent . In the work , Hill claimed that authors either write because " they have wit " or " they are hungry " . He further claimed that Smart , wears a ridiculous comicalness of aspect , that makes people smile when they see him at a distance : His mouth opens , because he must be fed ; and the world often joins with the philosopher in laughing at the insensibility and obstinancy that make him prick his lips with thistles . "

The work was published anonymously . Some tried to claim that Samuel Johnson was the author and Hill tried to hide his authorship by attacking the essay in the 25 August 1752 " The Inspector " ( No. 464 ) . However , he was soon exposed and it became commonly known that Hill produced both and he soon followed up the pamphlet in the London Daily Advertiser . With his 25 August 1752 The Inspector column , Hill harshly criticised Smart 's Poems on Several Occasions . Although Hill claimed to praise Smart , he did so in a manner , as Betty Rizzo claims , " that managed to insult and degrade Smart with patronizing encouragement . " Arthur Murphy responded to this essay , and to Hill , in the 21 October 1752 edition of the Gray 's Inn Journal . Following Murphy , Thornton attacked both Hill and Fielding in The Spring-Garden Journal on 16 November 1752 . The Gentleman 's Journal issue of November 1752 came out with a quick retort and claimed that those who supported Hill " espoused the cause of Gentleman " and those who sided with Fielding espoused the cause " of the comedian . " This essay accomplished little but to polarise both sides even more . Hill then responded to Murphy , and their dispute was printed in a supplement of the December issue of the Gentleman 's Journal .

Temperatures Rising is an American television sitcom that aired on the ABC network from September 12 , 1972 to August 29 , 1974 . During its 46-episode run , it was presented in three different formats and cast line-ups . The series was developed for the network by William Asher and Harry Ackerman for Ashmont Productions and Screen Gems . Set in a fictional Washington , D.C. hospital , the series featured James Whitmore as the no-nonsense chief-of-staff who is forced to deal with the outlandish antics of a young intern played by Cleavon Little , and three nurses ( Joan Van Ark , Reva Rose , and Nancy Fox ) . For the first season , 26 episodes were produced and broadcast . Whitmore was replaced in the lead role by comedian Paul Lynde and Asher was replaced as producer by Duke Vincent and Bruce Johnson in the second season . The series was re-titled The New Temperatures Rising Show , and featured a new supporting cast consisting of : Sudie Bond , Barbara Cason , Jennifer Darling , Jeff Morrow , and John Dehner . Cleavon Little was the only returning member of the original cast . In this season , Lynde was presented as the penny-pinching chief-of-staff , with Bond as his nagging mother and owner of the hospital .

The New Temperatures Rising Show ran for 13 episodes before being placed on hiatus in January 1974 due to poor ratings . It returned in July in yet another incarnation . Asher returned as producer and restored the series to its original format — albeit with Paul Lynde continuing in the lead . Reverting to the original title of Temperatures Rising , Little remained in the show 's cast and a new line-up of supporting players consisting of Alice Ghostley , Barbara Rucker and , returning from the first season 's cast , Nancy Fox . Offered as a summer replacement on Thursday nights , the third version of the sitcom ran for seven episodes after which it was cancelled permanently .

Temperatures Rising was one of two sitcoms that the ABC network premiered in its 1972 – 73 prime time schedule , the other being The Paul Lynde Show . Both series were produced and developed by William Asher and his partner Harry Ackerman for Ashmont Productions and Screen Gems , which had scored a major success for the network with Bewitched , a fantasy sitcom that first aired in 1964 starring Asher 's wife , Elizabeth Montgomery . Asher and Screen Gems made a deal with ABC to cancel Bewitched a year earlier than contracts stipulated , thereby allowing them the opportunity to develop the two new sitcoms . Ackerman served as executive producer and Asher as producer . Asher and Ackerman derived the format of the series from an unsold pilot they had produced for ABC in 1965 . Entitled This is a Hospital ? , and written by Sheldon Keller , it starred comedian Shecky Greene as a mischievous intern who Asher referred to as " Sgt. Bilko in a hospital " . Asher also drew on the British Carry On franchise as his inspiration for Temperatures Rising .

Set in Capitol General , a fictional Washington , D.C. , hospital , the series centered on five characters . Cleavon Little starred as Dr. Jerry Noland , a ghetto-raised intern who works on the side as the hospital bookie and finds humor in anything from an operation to a con job . Joan Van Ark played Annie Carlisle , the hospital 's beautiful , young , sexy , head nurse , who is " always covering up for the inept crew " . Reva Rose played Nurse Mildred " Millie " MacInerny , who offers satirical comments on the shenanigans going on in the hospital . Nancy Fox was cast as Ellen Turner , a shy student nurse who becomes Noland 's most faithful follower . James Whitmore starred as Dr. Vincent Campanelli , the hospital 's chief of surgery . Campanelli is presented as an Italian-American , former combat surgeon , who looks upon Noland with both pride and shock , and refers to the young intern and nurses Carlisle , MacInerny , and Turner as the " Four Horsemen of Aggravation " . Cleavon Little 's guest appearance on All in the Family led to his casting in Temperatures Rising , which in turn led to the leading role in the Mel Brooks comedy film Blazing Saddles ( 1974 ) . Little 's casting reflected " pressure from the government and Negro organizations and concerned whites who believe that black representation on television was long overdue " . William Asher later stated that Temperatures Rising gave him a chance to work with a black actor . Nancy Fox was cast in Temperatures Rising after Elizabeth Montgomery spotted her in a commercial for Close-Up toothpaste . Asher had considered her for a part in The Paul Lynde Show . During the time that Temperatures Rising was in production Fox declined an offer to leave the series and star in another , Needles and Pins .

In a 2000 interview , William Asher described Temperatures Rising as being about : " a young black surgeon who was always into mischief and things , but he was a very competent surgeon . James Whitmore was the head surgeon and he used to drive Whitmore crazy " . The pilot episode of Temperatures Rising was written by Sheldon Keller , who turned to his This is a Hospital ? script for inspiration . It features Noland broadcasting a bingo game in code over the hospital 's public-address system . Jack Albertson guest starred as a United States Senator . Subsequent episodes feature Noland performing a secret operation on a young baseball player while Campanelli deals with a hospital inspector ( Ed Platt ) and John Astin as a gangster wanting Noland to be his personal physician . In another episode , Noland hypnotizes a patient ( Alice Ghostley ) and , accidentally , Nurse Turner as well . This nearly costs the hospital a large donation from a potential benefactor ( Charles Lane ) . In later episodes , Campanelli is seen having a brief romance with Nurse Turner 's aunt ( Beverly Garland ) , Noland helping out a new intern ( Bernie Kopell ) who has a reputation for being a jinx , and performing a witchcraft ritual on a patient ( Alan Oppenheimer ) who thinks he has been cursed .

Jack Albertson returned in a later episode that features Dr. Campanelli participating in a documentary film about hospital surgery . Unfortunately , Campanelli develops stage fright during filming . Noland then takes over the operation and receives all the acclaim . Bernie Kopell returned to his role as a hospital orderly in two episodes , one in which he causes a furor with a hospital scandal sheet , the other when Noland has to save him from being fleeced by a patient who is also a card sharp . There was some racially tinged comic bantering in the series , such as scenes with Noland giving cotton to a nurse and stating , " Honey , picking cotton is part of my heritage , " or observing some adhesive strips labeled " flesh colored " and remarking , " Maybe this is your idea of flesh colored , but it wouldn 't make it in my neighborhood . " Aside from these , racial issues were avoided , as Asher and Ackerman felt that ABC was not interested in having them mixed into the comedy . We too often forget the humanity of doctors and nurses . They become godlike to most of us and yet it is their humanity that makes them so interesting and enjoyable . We are not doing a drama and have no intention of doing anything like dealing with life and death issues . We want to make people laugh so we de-emphasize the more serious elements of hospital life . It isn 't that he [ Noland ] just sees things differently , he also deals with them differently . That is why Noland will dream up a baby derby , a gambling night at the hospital , a variety show at Christmas and off-truck betting when patients get bored with the hospital routine .

In his review of the premiere episode of Temperatures Rising for the Los Angeles Times , critic Don Page felt that James Whitmore was " totally wasted in this silly exercise " and that " guest Jack Albertson almost saves it with his portrayal of an annoyed senator . Otherwise , the diagnosis is terminal comedy " . Likewise , Cecil Smith , another writer for the Times , claimed it was the " worst show of the season . Avoid it like the plague " . Other reviews were more favorable . Columnist Joan Crosby noted that " This is the kind of show you don 't think you 'll laugh at , but you do , mostly because the cast is so good . " She noted that Cleavon Little , Joan Van Ark , and Reva Rose were , respectively , " marvelous " , " pretty " , and " funny " , and that Nancy Fox " wins this year 's cute-as-a-kitten award " . Barbara Holsopple , TV and radio editor for the Pittsburgh Press , noted that " ABC did a gutsy turnabout in taking the heavy drama out of a hospital and replacing it with comedy . The venture worked well , thanks to excellent performances from the Temperatures Rising cast " . She praised Jack Albertson , noted that Whitmore " was little seen " , and that the series : " is the kind of tidy little show that brings chuckles " . Win Fanning , a syndicated columnist , stated that : " the comedy writing and performances by a beautifully integrated cast give Temperatures a bright , light quality so seldom achieved in a situation comedy " , and that it was : " loaded with one-liners and sight gags , which , if kept on the level of the opener , promise many hours of hilarity " . Fanning praised Cleavon Little as " one of the comedy finds of any TV season " , and Nancy Fox as " a fresh new face and talent giving promise of a long , successful career ahead " . More praise for the series came after the broadcast of its fourth episode . An unidentified reviewer , writing for the Armored Sentinel ( of Temple , Texas ) , stated " If you 're suffering from the case of the ' downs , ' this series is a sure pick up ! " The reviewer went on to note that " the brightest spot of the series is wacky Nancy Fox . Her role applies the wackiness of Goldie Hawn , but in situation comedy form . I 'd watch the show just for her ! The whole series is wacky and funny ; it 's downright good . I highly recommend it . "

ABC placed Temperatures Rising in its 8 : 00 PM Tuesday night time-slot , where it debuted on September 12 , 1972 . Because one of the stars was black , some of ABC 's affiliated stations in the southern and mid-western parts of the United States refused to air the series or broadcast it in a different time slot . Airing opposite it were Bonanza on NBC , and the new sitcom Maude on CBS . Bonanza was entering its fourteenth year and offered up an ambitious two-hour season premiere dealing with the marriage of Little Joe Cartwright ( Michael Landon ) . Maude , starring Beatrice Arthur in the title role , was a spin-off of All in the Family . Both shows presented Temperatures Rising with stiff opposition in the " ratings game " . This turned out to be partly true , as the two-hour season premiere of Bonanza performed exceptionally well in the ratings . Maude did much better than Temperatures Rising in the New York City area , while Temperatures Rising fared better than Maude in the Los Angeles area . In subsequent weeks , Bonanza 's ratings dropped sharply and NBC cancelled the series in November 1972 . According to Asher : " Temperatures Rising put Bonanza out of business and was beating Maude in the Los Angeles area until mid-season , when NBC switched to some heavy movies which hurt us " . Despite this the series finished its first year with a consistent 29 share of the ratings at a time when a 30 share was enough to assure renewal for another season . ABC , however , wanted to improve the ratings and decided to make significant changes to Temperatures Rising for its second season .

As early as November 1972 , James Whitmore expressed a desire to leave Temperatures Rising , claiming that " the show [ was ] basically a broad farce and I didn 't feel it was right for me " . Screen Gems head John Mitchell , and ABC chief programmer Barry Diller , decided to replace Whitmore with comedian Paul Lynde , whose sitcom , The Paul Lynde Show , was airing on Wednesday nights . At the time , Lynde was scoring second only to Peter Falk in TV popularity polls even though his sitcom , which aired opposite The Sonny & Cher Comedy Hour on CBS , was floundering in the ratings . Asher was against making this change but was overruled as his contractual commitments to ABC had been used up . The network – ugh – they 're so stupid sometimes . The shows ( Temperatures Rising and The Paul Lynde Show ) were doing good , they weren 't big hits , but they were doing good . They felt that if they could put Paul [ Lynde ] and Cleavon Little together that they would have a big hit . I didn 't want to do that . I said I won 't do it , not at the sacrifice of the show . It 's wrong . I don 't think it 's a good idea . But they wanted to bring in somebody else as the head of the hospital . They wanted his [ Lynde 's ] mother to be head of the hospital and his conflicts would be with her and I just didn 't think it was right . I didn 't want to write it . I just didn 't want to do it [ and ] I didn 't . Someone else came in . It was a big thing with the network . They cancelled The Paul Lynde Show and put Paul in Temperatures Rising . "

Asher was replaced as producer by Bruce Johnson and Duke Vincent , whose previous credits included : Gomer Pyle – USMC , The Jim Nabors Hour , Arnie , and The Little People . They changed the title of the series to The New Temperatures Rising Show , and the tone went from lighthearted wackiness to a form of black comedy similar to The Hospital , a 1971 film written by Paddy Chayefsky , starring George C. Scott . The sitcom became : " a savage satire of the medical profession " with $ 185-a-day hospital rooms , incompetent , fee-splitting doctors , operations on the wrong patients , misread X-rays , and rampant malpractice . Commenting on the series Vincent noted : We 're not doing stories about a fouled-up hospital . These things really happen . Every story we 've told is true . They 're the results of untrained people , inadequate staff , horrendous costs , worn-out equipment , the demands of doctors . The doctors , not the patients , are the customers ; they 're the ones the hospitals have to please ...

For this new season , Johnson and Vincent dropped Joan Van Ark , Reva Rose , and Nancy Fox from the series , leaving Cleavon Little as the only returning cast member . His character , Dr. Jerry Noland , was now being presented as the hospital 's only sane figure . Paul Lynde played Dr. Paul Mercy , the sneering , unscrupulous , hospital administrator while Sudie Bond was cast as Martha Mercy , his obnoxious , overbearing mother and the owner , and permanent resident , of the hospital . She constantly calls him with her pager to complain about everything . Also in the new cast were Barbara Cason as Miss Tillis , the head of administrative and accounting : " ... who would let you bleed to death filling out forms " , Jennifer Darling as the romantically inclined nurse " Windy " Winchester , Jeff Morrow as Dr. Lloyd Axton , a fraudulent surgeon who has published two books , Profit in Healing and Malpractice and Its Defense , and John Dehner as " society " Dr. Charles Claver .

For the 1973 – 74 television season ABC continued to air the revamped Temperatures Rising on Tuesday nights at 8 : 00 PM . CBS continued to air Maude , and NBC introduced Chase , an hour-long crime drama starring Mitchell Ryan , in the same time slot . Although the season premiere of Maude and Chase ' s debut aired on September 11 , 1973 , ABC delayed the premiere of The New Temperatures Rising Show until September 25 . The episodes produced by Johnson and Vincent included Dr. Mercy exploiting a 125-year-old American Civil War veteran and dealing with a strike by the doctors and nurses . Another episode saw Noland create a mythical patient and then claim that the patient died , the cause of death being the result of a lack of cardiac crash carts on each floor of the hospital . Johnson and Vincent 's favorite episode was one where the X-rays of a professional footballer are misread , resulting in him being placed by mistake in " Crutchfield 's Traction " , in which holes are drilled in his head and tongs inserted in them .

In reviewing The New Temperatures Rising Show , Associated Press television writer Jay Sharbutt noted : First the hopeful note : There are faint signs the tinkering with Temperatures format could make the series funny later on , but only if the writing improves . The show now leaves most of the mugging to Lynde and no longer insists that each regular is wacky . It 's all feeble stuff but the cast is vastly improved and the new approach portends to better things ahead . Likewise , Los Angeles Times critic Cecil Smith , who considered the original format " maybe the three worse shows on television rolled into one " now remarked : " Paul Lynde for the first time that I can recall has a part worthy of his mettle . The people surrounding him are first rate . "

Despite some heavy promotion the black comedy approach was not what audiences wanted to see , especially with Paul Lynde . As a result , the ratings for the series fell well below the levels of the previous season . The last of The New Temperatures Rising Show 's thirteen episodes aired on January 8 , 1974 . The following Tuesday , January 15 , ABC premiered Happy Days in its place . According to co-producer Mitchell , " ... the audience didn 't buy that at all . They just didn 't get it . It was funny if you like black comedy , but if you don 't it would disturb you . So the show failed miserably and we lost the job and the show . "

When John Mitchell and Barry Diller noticed that The New Temperatures Rising Show was failing they contacted William Asher and asked him to salvage the series . According to Asher : They asked if I 'd go back to the old Temperatures , only this time with Paul [ Lynde ] . At this point we were still hoping to make it for the midseason . After a couple of weeks we agreed that the show should go off the air in January , but continue production so that we would have 11 shows ready for airing any time they wanted them . Some of the nonsense and hijinks of the first season are gone and we have managed to keep a touch of reality of the second version . As to why the series was not cancelled , Asher remarked , " I can answer that in two words : Paul Lynde . "

For the third format , the show reverted to its original title Temperatures Rising and the proposed number of episodes was reduced from eleven to seven . The series ' production resumed on November 17 , 1973 , after a three week shutdown . Sudie Bond , Barbara Cason , Jennifer Darling , Jeff Morrow , and John Dehner were dropped from the cast and a new line-up was assembled . Paul Lynde continued as Dr. Paul Mercy while Alice Ghostley played Edwina Moffitt , the admissions nurse and Dr. Mercy 's sister . She had appeared as a guest star in an episode in the first season of Temperatures Rising . Nancy Fox returned as student nurse Ellen Turner , and Barbara Rucker was introduced as Nurse Amanda Kelly . Cleavon Little returned for a third time as Dr. Jerry Nolan , whose character was now being presented as somewhere between the jive-talking surgeon of the first season and the serious one of the second .

Temperatures Rising returned to the ABC network on July 18 , 1974 after a six-month hiatus . Its new time slot , Thursday nights at 8 : 00 PM , had previously been occupied by Chopper One , an adventure series . The situations presented this time around included Dr. Mercy saving the life of a popular country music singer ( Dick Gautier ) , and setting up a surveillance system so that staff would be kept on their toes . The final episode of Temperatures Rising aired on August 29 , 1974 . The attempt to resurrect the series was unsuccessful and ABC finally cancelled it permanently . Andy Siegel , a comedy development executive for ABC at the time , felt the series failed because audiences did not want to watch a show displaying inadequate medical care , even though it was done in a humorous fashion . In reminiscing about the series he stated : " When people see doctors on television they really want to feel that they 're in good hands . That no matter what happens it is a reassuring experience . " William Asher , in a 2000 interview , summed up the demise of the series by saying : " It didn 't get on . It 's too late . You can 't do that to an audience . They won 't accept it . "

New York State Route 382 ( NY 382 ) was a state highway in the town of Red House in Cattaraugus County , New York , in the United States . The highway was 0.8 miles ( 1.3 km ) long and served as a connector between NY 17 and the Red House entrance of Allegany State Park , where it connected to Allegany State Park Route 2 ( ASP Route 2 ) . NY 382 was assigned in the early 1930s and removed in the early 1970s after the highway 's connection to the park was dismantled , and the hamlet it served evacuated , as part of the Southern Tier Expressway 's construction . The NY 382 designation is currently reserved by the New York State Department of Transportation as a replacement for NY 88 in Ontario and Wayne counties .

The western terminus of NY 382 was at an intersection with Bay State Road and NY 17 in the now abandoned hamlet of Red House , located 5 miles ( 8.0 km ) southwest of the city of Salamanca in the town of Red House . At the time , NY 17 was routed along an at-grade highway that paralleled the future routing of the Southern Tier Expressway to the north and west . NY 382 headed southeast from the junction , passing through the center of what was then the hamlet of Red House before turning eastward ahead of Red House Brook , a small stream that branched off the nearby Allegheny River . NY 382 paralleled Red House Brook east to the Allegany State Park boundary , where the NY 382 designation ended and the highway continued east as Allegany State Park Route 2 .

NY 382 was assigned c . 1932 to a short roadway linking NY 17 to an entrance to Allegany State Park in Red House . The route remained intact until the construction of the Southern Tier Expressway ( STE ) through Red House in the late 1960s and early 1970s . Unwanted tourism in Jimerson Town , a newly built settlement northeast of Red House , prompted Seneca leaders to seek ways to reduce through traffic in the settlement ; to do so , the state built a trumpet interchange off the expressway where NY 382 used to be , which , coupled with the flooding of the roadway of old Route 17 to the west , effectively cut Jimerson Town off from the highway system . The construction of the highway also allowed the state to claim eminent domain over most of the hamlet of Red House , leading to the hamlet 's destruction ; the few remaining private residences in the town as of 2015 are located southwest of what was Route 382 . When the interchange at exit 19 of the STE was constructed c . 1970 , NY 382 was disconnected from Allegany State Park Route 2 , which was realigned to meet the new exit . The NY 382 designation was removed around this time as a result . The roadway still runs from the former NY 17 ( now NY 951T , which terminates near the former NY 382 's end at a dilapidated bridge ) to the Exit 19 on / off ramp , but due to safety concerns , the road was blocked off at its eastern terminus .

Zahir al-Umar al-Zaydani ( alternatively spelled Dhaher al-Omar or Dahir al-Umar ) ( Arabic : ظاهر آل عمر الزيداني ; Ẓāhir āl-ʿUmar az-Zaydānī , 1689 – 90 – 21 August 1775 ) was the virtually autonomous Arab ruler of northern Palestine in the mid-18th century , while the area was nominally part of the Ottoman Empire . For much of his reign , starting in the 1730s , his domain mainly consisted of Galilee , with successive headquarters in Tiberias , Arraba , Nazareth , Deir Hanna and finally Acre , in 1746 . He fortified Acre , and the city became a center of the cotton trade between Palestine and Europe . In the mid-1760s , he reestablished the port town of Haifa nearby . Zahir successfully withstood assaults and sieges by the Ottoman governors of the Sidon and Damascus provinces , who attempted to limit or eliminate his influence . He was often supported in these confrontations by the rural Shia Muslim clans of Jabal Amil . In 1771 , in alliance with Ali Bey al-Kabir of Egypt Eyalet and with backing from the Russian Empire , Zahir captured Sidon , while Ali Bey 's forces conquered Damascus , both acts in open defiance of the Ottoman sultan . At the peak of his power in 1774 , Zahir 's autonomous sheikhdom extended from Beirut to Gaza and included the Jabal Amil and Jabal Ajlun regions . By then , however , Ali Bey had been killed , the Ottomans entered into a truce with the Russians , and the Sublime Porte felt secure enough to check Zahir 's power . The Ottoman Navy attacked his Acre stronghold in the summer of 1775 and he was killed outside of its walls shortly after .

The wealth Zahir accumulated through monopolizing Palestine 's cotton and olive oil trade to Europe financed his sheikhdom . For much of his rule , he oversaw a relatively efficient administration and maintained domestic security , although he faced and suppressed several rebellions by his sons . The aforementioned factors , along with Zahir 's flexible taxation policies and his battlefield reputation made him popular among the local peasantry . Zahir 's tolerance of religious minorities encouraged Christian and Jewish immigration to his domain . The influx of immigrants from other parts of the empire stimulated the local economy and led to the significant growth of the Christian communities in Acre and Nazareth and the Jewish community in Tiberias . He and his family , the Zaydani clan , also patronized the construction of commercial buildings , houses of worship and fortifications throughout Galilee . Zahir 's founding of a virtually autonomous state in Palestine has made him a national hero among Palestinians today .

Zahir was born in the village of Arraba ( also called ' Arrabat al-Battuf ) in central Galilee . The date of his birth is not clear , with the dates 1686 , 1689 – 90 and 1694 listed as his birth year by Zahir 's contemporary biographers Volney , Mikha 'il Sabbagh and Khalil al-Muradi , respectively . According to contemporary biographer Ahmad Hasan Joudah , 1689 – 1690 is the most likely year of his birth because he considers Sabbagh to be the most reliable source for Zahir 's personal life . The proper transliteration of his given name is Ẓāhir , but in the local dialect of Arabic used in Galilee , his name was pronounced Ḍāhir . Zahir 's family , the Zaydani clan , were Sunni Muslim notables from the Qaisi tribal confederation based in the Tiberias area who had strong connections to the Arab-Bedouin tribesmen of Galilee , which at the time was part of the Ottoman Empire . Zahir was the youngest of four sons born to Sheikh Umar al-Zaydani . Zahirs brothers were Sa 'd , Salih " Abu Dani " and Yusuf , and his sister was Shammah . Zahir grew up in the village of Saffuriya .

Zahir 's father and grandfather had both served as the multazim ( chief tax collector ) of Tiberias , having been appointed by the Druze emirs ( princes ) of the Ma 'an dynasty which governed the region from their headquarters in Mount Lebanon . In 1698 , Umar az-Zaydani was appointed multazim of the Safad region by Bashir Shihab I , the Sunni Qaisi emir who succeeded the Ma 'ans as governor of the Mount Lebanon Emirate . The Zaydani family maintained commercial trade relations extending from Galilee to Aleppo , and members of the family controlled tax farms in Galilee ; Zahir 's uncle Ali , for instance , held the tax farm of al-Damun . Zahir 's elder brother Sa 'd became the head of the family when their father died in 1706 , but the family 's tax farms were transferred to Zahir , who was still a teenager . This was done as a precautionary measure , so that in the event of a default in tax payments , the Ottoman government would not be able to hold the practical owners of the tax farms accountable . Nonetheless , legal ownership of the Zaydani tax farms gave Zahir considerable power within his clan .

In 1707 , Zahir was involved in a brawl in Tiberias in which he killed a man . As a result , Sa 'd opted to move the family to Arraba after being offered safe haven there by the Bani Saqr tribe . It was in Arraba that Zahir gained a degree of formal education under the tutelage of a Muslim scholar named Abd al-Qadir al-Hifnawi . During his youth , Zahir also learned how to hunt and fight . When the village of Bi 'ina was attacked by forces dispatched by the governor of Sidon Eyalet sometime between 1713 and 1718 , Zahir played an important role in defending the village and managed to evade the governor 's troops . According to chroniclers of the time , this event , along with Zahir 's moderation , turned Zahir into a folk hero in the area . He continued to gain the respect of the local peasantry throughout the 1720s for his martial skills . Along with Sa 'd , he also gained prestige among the people of Damascus with whom he continued the commercial relationships his father had previously established . The contacts Zahir made in Damascus included the Muslim scholar Abd al-Ghaffar al-Shuwaki , who introduced Zahir to Sayyid Muhammad of the al-Husayni family , which provided the sharifs of Damascus at the time . Zahir married Sayyid Muhammad 's daughter and thereafter moved to Nazareth because she considered Arraba too small . When Sayyid Muhammad died , Zahir inherited his fortune .

In the late 1720s , Zahir and his brother Yusuf took control of the town of Tiberias with the backing of the Bani Saqr by capturing its multazim . Concurrently , Zahir issued a letter to Köprülü Abdullah Pasha , governor of Sidon Eyalet , accusing the multazim of oppression and of imposing illegal taxes on the population . Zahir further wrote that if Abdullah Pasha appointed him multazim of Tiberias and Arraba , he would guarantee the timely payment of taxes and rule justly . Abdullah Pasha consented to Zahir 's rule and sent him an honorary robe . This marked a significant change from the past appointments of his relatives as multazims of various Galilee subdistricts , because it came directly from the governor of Sidon rather than the semi-autonomous rural chiefs of Mount Lebanon . Zahir made Tiberias his principle base and was joined by his Zaydani kinsmen . He appointed his cousin Muhammad ibn Ali , the multazim of al-Damun , as commander of the family 's militia . Zahir extended his rule southward toward Nazareth and the Marj Ibn Amer plain ( Jezreel Valley ) between Galilee and Jabal Nablus . Capturing these areas was likely a drawn-out process , and Zahir 's efforts to wrest control of Nazareth ( a town in Safad Sanjak , but controlled by the Jarrar clan based in Nablus Sanjak ) caused the ruling clans of the Nablus hinterland ( Jabal Nablus ) , along with Zahir 's erstwhile allies in the Bani Saqr tribe , to challenge him . Zahir , meanwhile , relied on his Zaydani kinsmen , Maghrebi mercenaries who he commissioned in the mid-1730s under commander Ahmad Agha al-Dinkizli , and Nazareth 's residents . In 1735 , Zahir 's forces , composed of 2,000 men , routed the Jarrars and the Bani Saqr at a place called al-Rawha in Marj Ibn Amer , killed their leader Sheikh Ibrahim al-Jarrar , and captured Nazareth . According to historian Hanna Samarah , Zahir 's forces inflicted 8,000 fatalities among the Jarrar-Saqr coalition during the battle .

Following his victory at Marj Ibn Amer , 4,000 locals , including many residents of Nazareth , joined Zahir 's forces to completely subdue Jabal Nablus . Among Zahir 's supporters were Christian women from Nazareth who supplied his troops with food and water . Zahir 's forces pursued the Jarrars to their throne village of Sanur , but ultimately withdrew after failing to subdue the fortress . This defeat marked the limit of Zahir 's influence south of Marj Ibn Amer and established the Jarrars as the dominant force of Jabal Nablus over their rivals , the Tuqans . While the Jarrars and Zahir eventually concluded a truce , the former continued to mobilize the clans of Jabal Nablus to prevent Zahir 's southward expansion . In 1738 , Zahir 's forces captured the fortress at Jiddin and the villages in its political orbit , Abu Snan and Tarshiha . Jiddin had been ruled by Ahmad al-Husayn , whose family historically controlled it . The peasants under his rule complained that he governed oppressively and appealed to Zahir , who was known for treating the peasantry fairly , to relieve them of al-Husayn . Zahir , eager to expand his control toward the Mediterranean , accepted their requests and obtained permission from the governor of Sidon , Ibrahim Pasha al-Azm , to seize the fortress . Likewise , al-Husayn had also approached the governor , who , hoping to see two powerful local leaders weakened , gave al-Husayn his blessing as well . Zahir assembled a 1,500-strong force and defeated al-Husayn 's forces near the fortress . He was then appointed multazim of Jiddin 's subdistrict .

Bi 'ina , which was also fortified , withstood a siege by Zahir in 1739 , but Zahir later married the daughter of Bi 'ina 's mukhtar ( headman ) , and thus brought Bi 'ina into his domain . He also acquired the fortress of Suhmata through diplomatic means . This further solidified his rule over northern and eastern Galilee . In 1740 , Zahir made an agreement with the neighboring Bedouin tribes to end their looting raids in the area . By then , Sa 'd had taken control of Deir Hanna and Muhammad ibn Ali captured Shefa- ' Amr , entrenching the presence of the Zaydani clan in western Galilee . After negotiations , Muhammad al-Naf 'i , the multazim of Safad , surrendered the city to Zahir . Safad was the administrative seat of the sanjak and situated on a strategic hill overlooking the Galilee countryside . He later acquired the fortified village of Deir al-Qassi after marrying the daughter of its sheikh , Abd al-Khaliq Salih . Zahir 's conquest of the Safad region and western Galilee removed the barriers between him and the Metawali ( Shia Muslim ) clans of Jabal Amil . Zahir informed the Metawalis ' sheikh , Nasif al-Nassar , of his intent to acquire the fortified villages of al-Bassa and Yaroun on the borders between the Zaydani and Metawali sheikhdoms . In response , Sheikh Nasif launched an assault against Zahir and the two sides confronted each other in indecisive skirmishes in the border village of Tarbikha . Zahir then received reinforcements from his Maghrebi cavalry and defeated the Metawalis , pursuing Sheikh Nasif to his headquarters in Tibnin . Zahir 's brother Sa 'd mediated an end to the fighting and thereafter a mutual defense pact was arranged between Zahir and Sheikh Nasif , whereby the former would receive control of al-Bassa and Yaroun and the Metawalis ' support in his confrontations with the governors of Damascus . In return , Sheikh Nasif 's sons , who were captured by Zahir 's troops , were released , the Metawalis ' tax payments to Sidon were reduced by some 25 percent , and Zahir guaranteed his backing of a Sheikh Nasif in any confrontation with the governors of Sidon .

Zahir , similar to other local strongmen in the Ottoman Empire who did not owe their power to the central Ottoman authorities , was disliked by the Ottoman administration . The Ottoman Sultan sent an order to the governor of Damascus Eyalet , Sulayman Pasha al-Azm , to put an end to Zahir 's rule in Galilee . In September 1742 , a military force led by the governor of Damascus came to Galilee and laid siege to Tiberias . After 83 days , the siege was lifted due to the departure of the Hajj pilgrim caravan . Using this respite , Zahir reinforced the defenses of Tiberias and Shefa- ' Amr . In July 1743 , backed by the Bani Saqr , the wali of Tripoli and the district governors of Jerusalem , Gaza and Irbid , Sulayman Pasha renewed his expedition , this time seeking to reduce Deir Hanna and sever Tiberias 's links to the outside . Sulayman died suddenly in Lubya and Zahir used the opportunity to assault Sulayman 's troops , capturing their camp . In 1745 , Zahir had a fortress erected on a hill overlooking Saffuriya .

Zahir consolidated his authority over Acre in a drawn-out process starting in the 1730s . His Acre-based partner , the Melkite merchant Yusuf al-Qassis , served as an early link between Zahir and the French merchants of Acre . His first direct contact with the French merchants was in 1731 when he negotiated a settlement of his brother Sa 'd's debts to the merchants . In 1743 , as part of his bid to gain control of the town , Zahir had his cousin , Muhammad al-Ali of al-Damun , arrested and executed due to the latter 's ambitions in Acre . In 1743 , Zahir requested the tax farm of Acre from the governor of Sidon , Ibrahim Pasha al-Azm , who , wary of Zahir 's growing power in the province , rejected the request . Instead , Zahir took Acre by force in July 1746 . In the first few years following his takeover of Acre , Zahir resided in the fortress of Deir Hanna in the heart of Galilee . He began fortifying Acre by building walls around the city in 1750 . He built other fortifications and buildings in Acre as well . In 1757 he took control of the Mediterranean port cities of Haifa and Tantura , and nearby Mount Carmel , all of which had been part of Damascus Eyalet , unlike most of Zahir 's domain at the time , which was in Sidon Eyalet . He also captured the port village of al-Tira , between Tantura and Haifa , at that time . Zahir 's stated justification to the Ottoman authorities for conquering Palestine 's northern coastal plain was to protect the area from Maltese pirates .

In late 1757 , the Bani Saqr and Sardiyah tribes , who Zahir maintained ties with , launched an assault on the Hajj caravan as it coming back to Syria from Mecca . Thousands of Muslim pilgrims were killed in the raid , including Sultan Osman III 's sister . The attack shocked the Sublime Porte ( Ottoman imperial government ) , and discredited the governor of Damascus and amir al-hajj , Husayn Pasha ibn Makki , for failing to ward off the Bedouin . Husayn Pasha had been serving his first term as governor , having replaced As 'ad Pasha al-Azm , who Zahir had peaceful relations with , and among Husayn Pasha 's priorities were subduing Zahir and annexing his territories , which were part of Sidon Eyalet . Husayn Pasha lodged a complaint to the Sublime Porte alleging Zahir 's involvement in the raid . Zahir denied the allegation and pressed for an investigation into the assault . He also sought to earn the Sublime Porte 's favor by purchasing the looted goods of the caravan from the tribes , including the decorated banners representing Muhammad and the sovereignty of the sultan , and restoring them to Sultan Mustafa III ( Osman III had died on 30 October ) . Moreover , Zahir 's enemy Husayn Pasha was dismissed from office that year .

Husayn Pasha 's replacement , Uthman Pasha al-Kurji , who took office in 1760 , sought to retrieve control of Haifa from Zahir . Uthman Pasha requested that the governor of Sidon , Nu 'man Pasha , recapture the port city on his behalf , to which Nu 'man Pasha complied , dispatching 30 Maghrebi soldiers on a vessel captained by a Frenchman on 20 May 1761 . The effort was a meager attempt and upon arrival , Zahir had the ship confiscated and its soldiers arrested , while the French captain paid a fine . The issue over Haifa 's annexation was smoothed over with the assistance of an Istanbul-based Ottoman official and friend of Zahir , Yaqub Agha . Yaqub had a high-ranking official named Sulayman Agha intervene in the matter and revoke Uthman Pasha 's orders .

In 1761 , Zahir ordered his son Uthman al-Zahir to assassinate Zahir 's brother Sa 'd because the latter had been collaborating with Uthman Pasha and the Bani Saqr tribe to kill Zahir and replace him . Sa 'd's assassination indirectly led to the first conflict between Zahir and his sons , in this case Uthman . The latter had been promised control over Shefa- ' Amr in return for killing Sa 'd , but Zahir reneged due to pleas by Shefa- ' Amr 's residents not to appoint Uthman as their governor . Backed by his full-brothers Ahmad and Sa 'd al-Din , who were angered by Zahir 's refusal to cede them more territory , Uthman besieged Shefa- ' Amr in 1765 . However , under Zahir 's instructions , the locals in the vicinity defended the town and succeeded in preventing its capture . The three brothers then appealed to Zahir 's eldest and most loyal son , Salibi , to intervene on their behalf with Zahir , but Salibi was unable to persuade Zahir to make concessions . The four brothers then attempted to rekindle their alliance with the Bani Saqr , who Zahir had since routed at the Marj Ibn Amer plain in 1762 .

The brothers ' efforts to recruit the Bani Saqr failed when Zahir bribed the tribe not to back his sons and subsequently had Uthman imprisoned in Haifa for six months before exiling him to a village near Safad . Meanwhile , in 1765 , Zahir had Haifa demolished and then rebuilt and fortified at a site three kilometers to the southeast in 1769 . While the old village was situated on a plain , the new town , which remained a port along the Haifa Bay , was built on a narrow strip of land at the northern foot of Mount Carmel to make it easier to defend by land . In May 1766 , Uthman renewed his rebellion against Zahir with backing from the Druze clans of Galilee , but this coalition was defeated by Zahir near Safad . This conflict expanded to include competing Druze and Shia factions from Mount Lebanon and Jabal Amil , with Emir Mansur Shihab ( the Sunni leader of a Druze faction ) and the Metawali , Sheikh Qublan , siding with Zahir , while Emir Yusuf Shihab ( the leader of another Druze faction ) and Sheikh Nasif sided with Uthman . Mediation by Emir Isma 'il Shihab of Hasbaya culminated in a successful peace summit near Tyre between the two factions and a reconciliation between Zahir and Uthman , whereby the latter was granted control of Nazareth .

In September 1767 , conflict between Zahir and his son Ali al-Zahir of Safad commenced over the former 's refusal to cede to the latter control of the strategic fortress of Deir Hanna or the village of Deir al-Qassi . Prior to the dispute , Ali had been loyal to Zahir and proven himself effective in helping his father suppress dissent among his brothers and in battles against external enemies . Zahir 's forces intimidated Ali into surrendering later that month , and Zahir pardoned and ultimately ceded to him Deir al-Qassi . However , conflict was renewed weeks later with Ali and his brother Sa 'id , backed by Sheikh Nasif , Emir Yusuf and Uthman Pasha poised against Zahir , Uthman , Sheikh Qublan and Muhammad Pasha al-Azm , governor of Sidon . With mediation from Ibrahim Sabbagh , Zahir 's financial adviser , Zahir settled his dispute with Sa 'id , granting the latter control over Tur 'an and Hittin . Ali refused to negotiate , gained the backing of Salibi , and the two defeated their father , who had since demobilized his troops and was relying on local civilian volunteers from Acre . When Zahir re-mobilized his Maghrebi mercenaries in Acre he launched an offensive and defeated Ali , who subsequently fled Deir Hanna in October . Out of sympathy for Ali 's children , who remained in the fortress village , he pardoned Ali on the condition he pay 12,500 piasters and 25 Arabian horses for the fortress . By December 1767 , Zahir 's intra-family disputes were put to rest for several years ( until 1774 – 75 ) , and through the intercession of Uthman , a close and enduring alliance was established between Zahir and Sheikh Nasif .

In 1768 the central Ottoman authorities partially recognized or legitimized Zahir 's de facto political position by granting him the title of " Sheikh of Acre , Emir of Nazareth , Tiberias , Safed , and Sheikh of all Galilee " . However , this official recognition was tempered when Yaqub Agha was executed shortly after and Sulayman Agha died in 1770 , depriving Zahir of close allies in Istanbul . In November 1770 , Uthman Pasha had the governor of Sidon replaced by his son Darwish Pasha and had his other son , Muhammad Pasha , appointed governor of Tripoli Eyalet . Uthman Pasha was committed to ending Zahir 's rule , and Zahir 's position was left particularly vulnerable with the loss of support in Istanbul . In response to threats from Damascus , Zahir further strengthened Acre 's fortifications and armed every adult male in the city with a rifle , two pistols and a sabre . He also moved to mend ties with his sons , who held various tax farms in Galilee , and consolidate his relationship with the Shia clans of Jabal Amil , thereby strengthening his local alliances .

Although Zahir was bereft of friends in Istanbul and Damascus , he was forging a new alliance with the increasingly autonomous Mamluk ruler of Egypt and the Hejaz , Ali Bey al-Kabir . Ali Bey shared a common interest with Zahir to subdue Damascus as he sought to extend his influence to Syria for strategic purposes vis-a-vis his conflict with the Sublime Porte . He had dispatched 15,000-20,000 Egyptian troops to the port cities of Gaza and Jaffa under commander Ismail Bey . Together , Zahir and Ismail crossed the Jordan Valley with their armies and moved north toward Damascus . They made it as far as Muzayrib , but Ismail abruptly halted his army 's advance after confronting Uthman Pasha as he was leading the Hajj caravan in order to avoid harming the Muslim pilgrims . Ismail considered attacking the governor at that point to be a grave religious offense . He subsequently withdrew to Jaffa . Zahir was surprised and angered by Ismail 's reticence to attack . In a unilateral move to impose his authority in Uthman Pasha 's jurisdiction , Zahir had his son Ahmad and other subordinate commanders collect taxes from villages in Damascus Eyalet , including Quneitra , while he dispatched his other son Ali on a campaign against the Bani Nu 'aym tribe in Hauran , also part of Damascus . In response to Zahir 's indignation , Ali Bey sent him 35,000 troops under Abu al-Dhahab in May . Together with Ismail 's troops in Jaffa , the Egyptian army captured Damascus from Uthman Pasha in June , while Zahir and his Metawali allies captured the city of Sidon from Darwish Pasha . However , Abu al-Dhahab was persuaded by Ismail that confronting the Ottoman sultan , who carried a high religious authority as the caliph of Islam , was " truly ... a scheme of the Devil " and a crime against their religion . A short time after capturing Damascus , Abu al-Dhahab and Ismail subsequently withdrew from the city , whose inhabitants were " completely astonished at this amazing event " , according to a chronicler of the time period . The sudden turn of events compelled Zahir 's forces to withdraw from Sidon on 20 June .

In an attempt to expand his zone of influence to Nablus , the commercial center of Palestine and its agriculturally-rich hinterland , Zahir besieged Nablus in late 1771 . By then , Zahir had secured an alliance with the powerful Jarrar clan , who were incensed at Uthman Pasha 's assignment of Mustafa Bey Tuqan as the collector of the miri ( hajj pilgrimage tax ) . Nablus was under the de facto control of the Tuqan and Nimr clans , local rivals of the Jarrars . The loss of Jaffa and Bani Sa 'b stripped Nablus of its sea access . Nablus was defended by 12,000 mostly peasant riflemen under Nimr and Tuqan commanders . After nine days of clashes , Zahir decided to withdraw and avoid a costly stalemate . As he departed Nablus , his forces raided many of the city 's satellite villages , from which its peasant defenders originated . Uthman Pasha had resumed his governorship of Damascus at the end of June 1771 and was determined to eliminate Zahir . To that end , he assembled a coalition that included his sons Darwish Pasha al-Kurji and Muhammad Pasha al-Kurji , who were the governors of Sidon and Tripoli , respectively , and Emir Yusuf Shihab of Mount Lebanon . In late August Uthman Pasha reached Lake Hula at the head of 10,000 Ottoman troops . Before Uthman Pasha could be joined by his allies , Zahir and Sheikh Nasif of the Metawalis confronted the governor 's troops on 2 September . Ali al-Zahir , Zahir 's son and a commander of one of his four battlefield regiments , raided Uthman Pasha 's camp , while Zahir 's other troops blocked them from the west . Uthman Pasha 's troops hastily retreated towards the Jordan River , the only place where they were not surrounded . The overwhelming majority drowned in the river , with only 300 – 500 survivors , including Uthman Pasha who almost drowned but was rescued by one of his men . The Battle of Lake Hula marked a decisive victory for Zahir , who entered Acre triumphantly with the spoils of Uthman Pasha 's camp . He was celebrated by the residents of the city and on the way there , he was given honorary gun salutes by each of his fortified villages on the route between Tiberias and Acre . He also received congratulations from the French merchant ships at the port of Acre . Zahir 's victory encouraged Ali Bey to relaunch his Syrian campaign .

Following his victory against Uthman Pasha , Zahir demanded Darwish Pasha vacate Sidon , which he did on 13 October . He returned two days later after receiving the backing of Emir Yusuf . Zahir decided to move against Emir Yusuf , and together with his ally Sheikh Nasif , he confronted him at Nabatieh on 20 October . Emir Yusuf 's men numbered some 37,000 . Zahir 's Metawali cavalry engaged in a maneuver where they fled the battlefield in apparent defeat , only to have the pursuant troops of Emir Yusuf surrounded by Zahir 's men , who dealt Emir Yusuf 's army a decisive blow . Emir Yusuf thereafter retreated to his mountain village of Deir al-Qamar , while Sidon was left under the protection of Ali Jumblatt and 3,000 Druze defenders . However , with news of Zahir 's victory , Ali Jumblatt and Darwish Pasha withdrew from Sidon , which was subsequently occupied by Zahir and Sheikh Nasif . Uthman Pasha and all of his sons were consequently dismissed from their posts by the Sublime Porte . Although , he could not capture Nablus and its hinterland , Zahir 's domain by the end of 1771 extended from Sidon to Jaffa and included an influential presence in the Hauran plain .

Muhammad Tuqan captured Jaffa from Zahir in May 1772 , the same month that Ali Bey arrived in Acre to seek Zahir 's protection after being forced out of Egypt by rival mamluks . In June , the Ottoman loyalist Jazzar Pasha sought to establish himself in Lebanon and took over Beirut from the local Druze chieftains . The Druze had previously been in conflict with Zahir , but due to Jazzar 's offensive , the circumstances fostered an alliance between them , Zahir and the Metawali clans of Jabal Amil . Zahir and Ali Bey sought to take back Jaffa and , with help from the Russian Fleet , succeeded after a nine-month siege , in which they exhausted many of their resources . Prior to that , in late October 1772 , Zahir and his Lebanese allies captured Beirut from Jazzar , also with Russian naval support . In March 1773 , Ali Bey left Palestine to reestablish himself in Egypt , but Abu al-Dhahab had him killed when he arrived there . With this came an end to the alliance between Zahir and Ali Bey , which had brought together Egypt and Palestine politically and economically in a way that had not occurred since the early 16th century . While their attempts to unite their territories economically and politically were unsuccessful , their rule posed the most serious domestic challenge to Ottoman rule in the 18th century . As a consequence of Ali Bey 's death , Zahir moved to further strengthen his hold over Jaffa and capture Jerusalem , but he failed in the latter attempt . All of Ottoman Syria came under the official command of Uthman Pasha al-Misri in 1774 in order to bring stability to the provinces of the region . Al-Misri did not seek conflict with Zahir and sought to establish friendly terms with him . As such , he convinced the Sublime Porte to officially appoint Zahir as the governor of Sidon as long as Zahir paid all of the taxes the province had owed to the Porte . Al-Misri further promoted Zahir in February by declaring him " Governor of Sidon , Nablus , Gaza , Ramla , Jaffa and Jabal Ajlun " , although this title was not officially sanctioned by the Porte . In effect , Zahir was the de facto ruler over Palestine ( with the exception of Nablus and Jerusalem ) , Jabal Amil , and the Syrian coast from Gaza to Beirut .

Al-Misri was recalled to Istanbul in the summer of 1774 and Muhammad Pasha al-Azm was appointed governor of Damascus . Thus , Zahir 's governorship of Sidon was left vulnerable because it had largely depended on guarantees from al-Misri . Al-Azm sought peaceful relations with Zahir , but the Sublime Porte , having made peace with Russia and relieving itself from that conflict , aimed to undermine the rebellious rulers of its provinces , including Zahir . Al-Azm managed to secure an official pardon of Zahir from the Porte in April 1775 , but not the governorship of Sidon . Meanwhile , conflict between Zahir and his sons had reignited , with Ali of Safad attempting to capture Zahir 's villages in Galilee in 1774 . Zahir defeated Ali with support from his other son , Ahmad of Tiberias . Afterward , Zahir 's rule was again challenged by one of his other sons , Sa 'id , later that year . In response to this challenge , Zahir armed and mobilized 300 of Acre 's civilian inhabitants to counter Sa 'id . Ali continued to undermine Zahir 's rule by encouraging defections by Zahir 's Maghrebi mercenaries through bribes .

On 20 May 1775 , Abu al-Dhahab , having been encouraged by the Porte to eradicate Zahir 's influence , captured Jaffa and slaughtered its male inhabitants . News of the massacre spurred the people of Acre into a mass panic , with its residents fleeing and storing their goods in the city 's Khan al-Ifranj ( the French Caravanserai ) for safekeeping . On 24 May , Zahir also departed the city , leaving for Sidon . Ali al-Zahir , subsequently entered it and declared himself governor . However , Ali 's Maghrebi troops abandoned him and looted the city as Abu al-Dhahab 's troops approached it a few days later . They proceeded to conquer Sidon by sea , prompting Zahir to seek shelter with Shia allies in Jabal Amil . Some of Zahir 's sons attempted to secure their own peace with Abu al-Dhahab , but the latter became ill and died on 10 June , causing the collapse and chaotic withdrawal of his Egyptian troops from Acre . Zahir re-entered the city two days later and reestablished order with the assistance of Ahmad Agha al-Dinkizli . However , the setback of Abu al-Dhahab 's death did not preclude the Sublime Porte from attempting to check Zahir 's power and Sidon remained in Ottoman hands .

On 23 April , the Porte dispatched the Ottoman Navy admiral , Hasan Pasha al-Jazayiri , to blockade Acre . He reached Haifa on 7 August taking Jaffa from Zahir 's son-in-law , Karim al-Ayyubi . Hasan Pasha ordered Zahir to pay the miri dues he owed to the Sublime Porte dating back to 1768 . Zahir initially agreed to pay 500,000 piasters of the total amount upfront and a further 50,000 piasters to Hasan Pasha himself to " spare the blood of the people " . Hasan Pasha apparently accepted Zahir 's proposals , but the arrangements fell apart . The accounts differ as to exactly how the negotiations collapsed , but sources agree that their failure was the result of disputes within Zahir 's inner circle between his financial adviser Ibrahim Sabbagh and his chief military commander , al-Dinkizli . Most accounts claim that Sabbagh urged Zahir not to pay Hasan 's requested sums and agitated for war . Sabbagh argued that Zahir 's treasury did not have the funds to pay the miri dues and that Zahir 's forces were capable of defeating Hasan . Al-Dinkizli pressed Zahir to pay the amount , arguing that mass bloodshed could be averted . He advised Zahir to force Sabbagh to pay the amount if Zahir could not afford to himself . When the negotiations dragged on , Hasan pressed for a full repayment of the miri dues , warning Zahir that he would be executed if he failed to satisfy the demand . Zahir was insulted by Hasan 's threat and in turn threatened to destroy Hasan 's entire fleet unless he withdrew his ships .

Hasan proceeded to bombard Acre , and Zahir 's Maghrebi artillerymen responded with cannon fire , damaging two of Hasan 's ships . The following day , Hasan 's fleet fired roughly 7,000 shells against Acre without returning fire from the city 's artillerymen ; al-Dinkizli had called on his Maghrebi forces to refrain from returning fire because as Muslims they were forbidden from attacking the sultan 's military . Realizing his long-time deputy commander 's betrayal , he attempted to flee Acre on 21 August or 22 August . As he departed its gates , he was fired on by Ottoman troops , with a bullet striking his neck and causing him to fall off his horse . A Maghrebi soldier then decapitated him . Zahir 's severed head was subsequently delivered to Istanbul .

Following his death , Sabbagh and Zahir 's sons Abbas and Salih were arrested by Hasan Pasha 's men . The Sublime Porte also seized property belonging to Zahir , his sons and Sabbagh , which valued at 41,500,000 piasters . They were imprisoned in Istanbul , the Ottoman capital along with their physician , who was known to be talented in his profession . The physician was summoned by the sultan to treat his wife 's ailment , which he did successfully , earning him his freedom from incarceration and a medal of honor from the sultan . The physician used his influence with the authorities to have Zahir 's children and grandchildren released and returned to their hometowns . Sabbagh was executed by Hasan Pasha . Al-Dinkizli was rewarded with the governorship of Gaza , but died on the way to his new headquarters , likely having been poisoned by Hasan . Zahir 's sons Uthman , Ahmad , Sa 'id and Ali continued to put up resistance , with the latter putting up the longest fight from his fortress in Deir Hanna . The fortress eventually capitulated to the combined forces of Hasan Pasha and Jazzar Pasha on 22 July 1776 . Ali fled , but was killed later that year in the area between Tiberias and Safad . By then , the rest of Zahir 's sons had been arrested or killed . Abbas was later appointed by Sultan Selim III as the Sheikh of Safad . However , in 1799 , when Napoleon invaded Palestine , but withdrew after being defeated in Acre , Abbas and Salih both left Safad with the departing French forces . This marked the end of Zaydani influence in Galilee .

Zahir appointed many of his brothers and sons as local administrators , particularly after he consolidated his control over Acre , which became the capital of his territory . Except for Acre and Haifa , Zahir divided the remainder of his territory between his relatives . His eldest brother was appointed to Deir Hanna , and his younger brothers Yusuf and Salih Abu Dani were installed in I 'billin and Arraba , respectively . Zahir appointed his eldest son Salibi as the multazim of Tiberias . Salibi was killed in 1773 fighting alongside Ali Bey 's forces in Egypt . His death deeply distressed Zahir , who was around 80 years old at the time . He appointed Uthman in Kafr Kanna then Shefa- ' Amr , Abbas in Nazareth , Ali in Safad , and Ahmad in Saffuriya . Ahmad replaced Salibi in Tiberias as well , and also conquered Ajlun and Salt in Transjordan . In addition , Ahmad was given authority over Deir Hanna after Sa 'd's death . Zahir appointed his nephew Ayyub al-Karimi in Jaffa and Gaza , while al-Dinkizli was made multazim in Sidon in 1774 . The appointment of Zahir 's relatives and close associates was meant to ensure the efficient administration of his expanding realm and the loyalty of his circle . Among their chief functions was to ensure the supply of cotton to Acre . It is not clear if these posts were recognized by the Ottoman government .

Zahir had an aide who jointly served in the capacity of mudabbir ( manager ) and wazir ( vizier ) to assist him throughout much of his rule in matters of finance and correspondence . This official had always been a Melkite ( local Greek Catholic ) . His first wazir was Yusuf al-Arqash , followed by Yusuf Qassis in 1749 . Qassis continued in this role until the early 1760s when he was arrested for attempting to smuggle wealth he had accumulated during his service to Malta . He was succeeded by Ibrahim Sabbagh , who had served as a personal physician for Zahir in 1757 when he replaced Zahir 's longtime physician Sulayman Suwwan . Suwwan was a local Greek Orthodox Christian and when he failed to properly treat Zahir during a serious illness in 1757 , Qassis used the opportunity to replace him with Sabbagh , a friend and fellow Melkite . Sabbagh became the most influential figure in Zahir 's administration , particularly as Zahir grew old . This caused consternation among Zahir 's sons as they viewed Sabbagh to be a barrier between them and their father and an impediment to their growing power in Zahir 's territory . Sabbagh was able to gain increased influence with Zahir largely because of the wealth he amassed through his integral role in managing Zahir 's cotton monopoly . Much of this wealth was acquired through Sabbagh 's own deals where he would purchase cotton and other cash crops from the local farmers and sell them to the European merchants in the Syria 's coastal cities and to his Melkite partners in Damietta , Egypt . Sabbagh served other important roles as well , including as Zahir 's political adviser , main administrator and chief representative with European merchants and Ottoman provincial and imperial officials .

There were other officials in Zahir 's civil administration in Acre , including chief religious officials , namely the mufti and the qadi . The mufti was the chief scholar among the ulama ( Muslim scholarly community ) and oversaw the interpretation of Islamic law in Zahir 's realm . He was appointed by the Sublime Porte , but Zahir managed to maintain the same mufti for many years at a time in contrast with the typical Syrian province which saw its mufti replaced annually . Zahir directly appointed the qadi from Palestine 's local ulama , but his judicial decisions had to be approved by the qadi of Sidon . Zahir had a chief imam , who in the last years of his rule was Ali ibn Khalid al-Shaabi . An agha was also appointed to supervise the customs payments made by the European merchants in Acre and Haifa . Zahir 's initial military forces consisted of his Zaydani kinsmen and the local inhabitants of the areas he ruled . They numbered about 200 men in the early 1720s , but grew to about 1,500 in the early 1730s . During this early period of Zahir 's career , he also had the key military backing of the Bani Saqr and other Bedouin tribes . As he consolidated his hold over Galilee , his army rose to over 4,000 men , many of the later recruits being peasants who supported Zahir for protecting them against Bedouin raids . This suppression of the Bedouin in turn caused the tribes to largely withdraw their military backing of Zahir . The core of his private army were the Maghrebi mercenaries . The Maghrebis ' commander , Ahmad Agha al-Dinkizli , also served as Zahir 's top military commander from 1735 until al-Dinkizli 's defection during the Ottoman siege of Acre in 1775 . From the time Zahir reconciled with Sheikh Nasif al-Nassar of Jabal Amil in 1768 until most of the remainder of his rule , Zahir also had the support of Nasif 's roughly 10,000 Metawali cavalrymen . However , the Metawalis did not aid Zahir during the Ottoman offensive of 1775 . Zahir 's fortified villages and towns were equipped with artillery installments and his army 's arsenal consisted of cannons , matchlock rifles , pistols and lances . Most of the firearms were imported from Venice or France , and by the early 1770s , from the Russian imperial navy .

According to biographer Ahmad Hasan Joudah , the two principal conditions Zahir established to foster his sheikhdom 's prosperity and its survival were " security and justice " . Prior to Zahir 's consolidation of power , the villages of northern Palestine were prone to Bedouin raids and robberies and the roads were under constant threat from highway robbers and Bedouin attacks . Although following the looting raids , the inhabitants of these agrarian villages were left destitute , the Ottoman provincial government would nonetheless attempt to collect from them the miri ( hajj tax ) . To avoid punitive measures for not paying the miri , the inhabitants would abandon their villages for safety in the larger towns or the desert . This situation hurt the economy of the region as the raids sharply reduced the villages ' agricultural output , the government-appointed mutasallims ( tax farmers ) could not collect their impositions , and trade could not be safely conducted due to insecurity on the roads . By 1746 , however , Zahir had established order in the lands he ruled . He managed to co-opt the dominant Bedouin tribe of the region , the Bani Saqr , which greatly contributed to the establishment of security in northern Palestine . Moreover , Zahir charged the sheikhs of the towns and villages of northern Palestine with ensuring the safety of the roads in their respective vicinity and required them to compensate anyone who was robbed of his / her property . General security reached a level whereby " an old woman with gold in her hand could travel from one place to another without fear or danger " , according to biographer Mikhail Sabbagh .

This period of calm that persisted between 1744 and 1765 greatly boosted the security and economy of Galilee . The security established in the region encouraged people from other parts of the Ottoman Empire to immigrate to Galilee . Conflict between the local clans and between Zahir and his sons remained limited to periodic clashes , while there were no attacks against Zahir 's domain from outside forces . While Zahir used force to strengthen his position in the region , the local inhabitants generally took comfort in his rule , which historian Thomas Philip described as " relatively just and reasonably fair " . According to Richard Pococke who visited the area in 1737 , the local people had great admiration for Zahir , especially for his war against bandits on the roads .

In addition to providing security , Zahir and his local deputies adopted a policy of aiding the peasants cultivate and harvest their farmlands to further guarantee the steady supply of agricultural products for export . These benefits included loans to peasants and the distribution of free seeds . Financial burdens on the peasants were also reduced as Zahir offered tax relief during drought seasons or when the harvest seasons were poor . This same tax relief was extended to newcomers who sought to begin cultivating new farmlands . Moreover , Zahir assumed responsibility for outstanding payments the peasants owed to merchants from credit-based transactions if the merchants could provide proof of unsatisfactory payment . According to historian Thomas Philipp , Zahir " had the good business sense not to exploit peasants to the point of destruction , but kept his financial demands to a more moderate level . " He regularly paid the Ottoman authorities their financial dues , ensuring a degree of stability in his relationship with the sultanate . When Zahir conquered Acre , he transformed it from a decaying village into a fortified market hub for Palestinian products , including silk , wheat , olive oil , tobacco and cotton , which he exported to Europe . With cotton in particular , Zahir was able to monopolize the market for it and its foreign export . He did business with European merchants based in Galilee 's ports , who competed with one another for the cotton and grain cultivated in the rural villages under Zahir 's dominion or influence in Galilee 's hinterland and Jabal Amil . Previously , European merchants made direct transactions with local cotton growers , but Zahir , with the help of Ibrahim Sabbagh , put an end to this system of commerce by making himself the middleman between the merchants and the growers living under his rule . This allowed him to both monopolize cotton production and the merchants ' price for the product . Zahir 's designation of prices for the local cash crops also prevented " exploitation " of the peasants and local merchants by European merchants and their " manipulation of the prices " , according to Joudah . This caused financial losses to the European merchants who lodged numerous complaints to the French and English ambassadors to the Sublime Porte . A formal agreement to regulate commerce between Zahir and the European merchants was reached in 1753 . Zahir further encouraged trade by offering local merchants interest-free loans .

The high European demand for the product enabled Zahir to grow wealthy and finance his autonomous sheikhdom . This control of the cotton market also allowed him to gain unofficial control over all of the Sidon Eyalet , outside the city of Sidon itself . With mixed success , Zahir attempted to have French merchant ships redirected from the ports of Tyre and Sidon to Haifa instead , in order to benefit from the customs fees he could exact . The city of Acre underwent an economic boom as a result of its position in the cotton trade with France , and became the fortified headquarters of Zahir 's sheikhdom .

Zahir maintained tolerant policies and encouraged the involvement of religious minorities in the local economy . As part of his larger efforts to enlarge the population of Galilee , Zahir invited Jews to resettle in Tiberias around 1742 , along with Muslims . Zahir did not consider Jews to be a threat to his rule and believed that their connections with the Jewish diaspora would encourage economic development in Tiberias , which the Jews considered particularly holy . His tolerance towards the Jews , the cuts in taxes levied on them , and assistance in the construction of Jewish homes , schools and synagogues , helped foster the growth of the Jewish community in the area . The initial Jewish immigrants came from Damascus and were later followed by Jews from Aleppo , Cyprus and Smyrna . Many Jews in Safad , which was governed by Zahir 's son Ali , moved to Tiberias in the 1740s to take advantage of better opportunities in that city , which at the time was under Zahir 's direct rule . The villages of Kafr Yasif and Shefa- ' Amr also saw new Jewish communities spring up under Zahir 's rule . Zahir encouraged local Christian settlement in Acre , in order to contribute to the city 's commercial dynamism in trade and manufacturing . Christians grew to become the largest religious group in the city by the late 18th century . Zahir 's territory became a haven for Melkite and Greek Orthodox Christians from other parts of Ottoman Syria who migrated there for better trade and employment opportunities . In Nazareth , the Christian community prospered and grew under Zahir 's rule , and saw an influx from the Maronite and Greek Orthodox communities of Lebanon and Transjordan , respectively . The Melkite patriarch lived in Acre between 1765 and 1768 . Along with the Jews , the Christians contributed to the economy of Zahir 's sheikhdom in a number of ways , including the relative ease with which they were able to deal with European merchants , the networks of support many of them maintained in Damascus or Istanbul , and their role in service industries .

Zahir allowed the Franciscan community of Nazareth to build churches in 1730 , 1741 and 1754 on sites Christians associated with Jesus 's life . He allowed the Greek Orthodox community to build St. Gabriel 's Church over a ruined Crusader church in Nazareth , and in 1750 they enlarged St. George 's Church . The largest Christian community in Acre , the Melkites , built the largest church in the city , St. Andrew 's Church , in 1764 , while the Maronites built St. Mary 's Church for their congregation in 1750 . As a testament to the prosperity that the Christians enjoyed under Zahir 's rule , no further churches were built under the auspices of Zahir 's less tolerant successors . A strong relationship existed between Zahir and the Shia Muslim peasants of Jabal Amil and their sheikhs . Zahir maintained law and order in Jabal Amil , while leaving its mostly Shia inhabitants to their own devices . The Shia also benefited economically from Zahir 's monopoly of the cotton industry and their sheikhs provided him men of great military skill to support his struggle against the Ottoman authorities . Zahir was a key backer of the Shia in their war with the Druze Jumblatt clan and the Shihab dynasty under Mulhim Shihab , and likewise , Shia forces were critical to the defense of Zahir 's sheikhdom against expeditions by the Ottoman governor of Damascus in 1771 and 1772 .

The relationship between Zahir and the rural sheikhs of the Druze of Mount Lebanon under the Shihab dynasty were mixed . While Sheikh Mansur Shihab of Chouf allied himself with Zahir , his nephew and rival , Yusuf Shihab of the Tripoli region remained supportive of the Ottomans . Owing largely to the conflict between Zahir and the Druze emirs of Mount Lebanon , he Druze of Galilee did not fare well under Zahir and his Zaydani clan . In the oral traditions of Galilee 's Druze inhabitants , Zahir 's reign was synonymous with oppression . During this period , many Druze villages were either destroyed or abandoned and there was a partial Druze exodus from Galilee , particularly from the villages around Safad , to the Hauran region east of the Jordan River .

Zahir 's clan belonged to the Qaisi political faction in the centuries-long struggle between the Qais and Yaman confederations . The Ma 'an and Shihab dynasties , who ruled Mount Lebanon ( and often Galilee ) semi-autonomously , also belonged to the Qaisi faction . For the most part , Zahir respected the socio-political system that prevailed in the region he ruled . The alliances between him and local notables were bolstered by a network of marriages between the influential families of the area , including Zahir 's Zaydani clan . Zahir 's own marriages were politically advantageous as they allowed him to consecrate his rule over certain areas or his relationships with certain Bedouin tribes , local clans or urban notables . Zahir had five wives during his lifetime . Among his wives was a woman from the Sardiyah , a Bedouin tribe active in Transjordan and Palestine . Zahir was also married to a daughter of Sayyid Muhammad , a wealthy religious notable from Damascus , a daughter of the mukhtar ( headman ) of Bi 'ina , and a daughter of the mukhtar of Deir al-Qassi . Zahir had eight sons from his wives , and according to Tobias Smollett , a daughter as well . His sons , from eldest to youngest , were Salibi , Ali , Uthman , Sa 'id , Ahmad , Salih , Sa 'd al-Din and Abbas . His daughter 's husband 's name was Karim al-Ayyubi , who was also Zahir 's cousin . By 1773 , Zahir had a total of 272 children , grandchildren and great-grandchildren .

As Zahir consolidated his power and reduced external threats to his rule in the 1760s , his sons aspired for more influence and ultimately fought against their father and each other in order to secure their place as Zahir 's successor . Besides support from elements of the Zaydani clan , Zahir 's sons maintained their own power bases , largely derived from their mothers ' clans , and also made their own alliances with other powerful actors in the region . Zahir was victorious in the many conflicts he had with his sons , but their frequent dissent weakened his rule and played a contributory role to his downfall in 1775 . Prior to his sons ' individual rebellions , Zahir had eliminated other relatives who challenged his power .

Zahir 's rule radically changed the landscape of Galilee . With the restoration and re-fortification of Acre and the establishment of the secondary port city of Haifa , Galilee significantly strengthened its ties with the Mediterranean world . Following Zahir 's death , his successor Jazzar Pasha maintained the cotton monopoly Zahir had established and Galilee 's economy remained almost completely dependent on the cotton trade . The region prospered for decades , but with the rise of the cotton market in the southern United States during the early-mid 19th century , European demand shifted away from Palestine 's cotton and because of its dependency on the crop , the region experienced a sharp economic downturn from which it could not recover . The cotton crop was largely abandoned , as were many villages , and the peasantry shifted its focus to subsistence agriculture . In the late 19th century , the Palestine Exploration Fund 's Claude Reignier Conder wrote that the Ottomans had successfully destroyed the power of Palestine 's indigenous ruling families who " had practically been their own masters " but had been " ruined so that there is no longer any spirit left in them " . Among these families were the " proud race " of Zahir , which was still held in high esteem , but was powerless and poor . Zahir 's modern-day descendants in Galilee use the surname " Dhawahri " or " al-Zawahirah " in Zahir 's honor . The Dhawahri clan constitute one of the traditional elite Muslim clans of Nazareth , alongside the Fahum , Zu 'bi and ' Onallas families . Other villages in Galilee where descendants of Zahir 's clan live are Bi 'ina and Kafr Manda and , prior to its 1948 destruction , al-Damun . Many of the inhabitants of modern-day northern Israel , particularly the towns and villages where Zahir or his family left an architectural legacy , hold Zahir in high regard .

Although he was mostly overlooked by historians of the Middle East , some scholars view Zahir 's rule as a forerunner to Palestinian nationalism . Among these scholars is Karl Sabbagh , who asserts the latter view in his book Palestine : A Personal History , which was widely reviewed in the British press in 2010 . Zahir was gradually integrated into Palestinian historiography . In Murad Mustafa Dabbagh 's Biladuna Filastin ( 1965 ) , a multi-volume work about Palestine 's history , Zahir is referred to as the " greatest Palestinian appearing in the eighteenth century " . The Palestine Liberation Organization ( PLO ) radio station , Voice of Palestine , broadcast a series about Zahir in 1966 , praising him as a Palestinian national hero who fought against Ottoman imperialism . Zahir is considered by many Arab nationalists as a pioneer of Arab liberation from foreign occupation . According to Joudah However historians may look at Shaykh Zahir al- ' Umar and his movement , he is highly respected by the Arabs of the East . In particular the Palestinians consider him a national hero who struggled against Ottoman authority for the welfare of his people . This praise is reflected in the recent academic , cultural and literary renaissance within Palestinian society that has elevated Zahir and his legacy to near-iconic status . These re-readings are not always bound to historical objectivity but are largely inspired by the ongoing consequences of the Nakba . Still it is precise to say that Shaykh Zahir had successfully established an autonomous state , or a " little Kingdom , " as Albert Hourani called it , in most of Palestine for over a quarter of a century .

Zahir and his family built fortresses , watchtowers , warehouses , and khans ( caravanserais ) . These buildings improved the domestic administration and general security of Galilee . Today , many of these structures are in a state of disrepair and remain outside the scope of Israel 's cultural preservation laws . In Acre , Zahir rebuilt the Crusader-era walls and built on top of various Crusader and Mamluk structures in the city . Among these were the caravanserais of Khan al-Shawarda and its Burj al-Sultan tower and Khan al-Shunah . In 1758 , he commissioned the construction of the al-Muallaq Mosque , He also built the Seraya government house in Nazareth , which served as that city 's municipal headquarters until 1991 . In Haifa , which Zahir founded , he built a wall with four towers and two gates around the new settlement . Within Haifa , he built the Burj al-Salam fortress , a small mosque , a customs building , and a government residence ( saraya ) . In Tiberias , he commissioned the building of a citadel ( now ruined ) and the al-Amari Mosque . The latter was built with alternating white and black stone , typical of the architectural style of Zahir 's building works , and a minaret .

Fortifications and other structures were built in the rural villages under Zahir 's control . In Deir Hanna , Zahir 's brother Sa 'd built a large fortress and an adjacent mosque , both of which were severely damaged during a siege by Jazzar Pasha in 1776 . In Khirbat Jiddin , he rebuilt the demolished Crusader fortress with the addition of a mosque and hamaam ( bathhouse ) . The mosque was destroyed by Israeli forces when the village was captured during the 1948 Arab-Israeli War . In Shefa- ' Amr , Zahir 's son Uthman built a large fortress with four towers , of which one remains standing . Another of his sons , Ahmad , rebuilt the Crusader fortress in Saffuriya . In Tibnin , in modern-day Lebanon , and in Safad , Zahir or his son Ali had Crusader-era fortresses rebuilt . Zahir fortified the village of Harbaj , although the village and its fort were in ruins by the late 19th century . At Tabgha on the Sea of Galilee , Zahir built five fountains , one of which remained standing by the 19th century . That remaining fountain was the largest of its kind in Galilee . In the village of I 'billin , Zahir 's brother Yusuf built fortifications and a mosque . The I 'billin fortress was later used as the headquarters of Aqil Agha , the 19th century semi-autonomous Arab sheikh of Galilee .

M-204 starts at an intersection with M-22 ( Manitou Trail ) south of Leland next to Duck Lake . From there it follows Duck Lake Road along the south shore of Lake Leelanau 's northern lobe . The two-lane roadway runs eastward and then southeasterly through a mixture of woods and fields to the village of Lake Leelanau . One there , M-204 follows Phillip Street across the Narrows and turns northeasterly . The bridge that the trunkline uses is eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places . Outside of town , the highway follows Duck Lake Road again past the county seat of Leelanau County . Near the intersection with Horn Road , M-204 turns southeasterly toward the village of Suttons Bay . As the trunkline descends a hill into the village , it passes through vineyards and woods . Inside town , M-204 follows Race Street and ends downtown at M-22 ( St. Joseph Avenue ) . Like other state highways in Michigan , M-204 is maintained by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) . In 2011 , the department 's traffic surveys showed that on average , 3,397 vehicles used the highway daily in Suttons Bay and 2,931 vehicles did so each day near the western terminus , the highest and lowest counts along the highway , respectively . No section of M-204 is listed on the National Highway System , a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility .

M-204 was first designated on July 12 , 1933 between Leland and Suttons Bay along what is today Duck Lake Road . The highway was paved by the middle of 1936 . The road was realigned on July 13 , 1939 , across the narrows of Lake Leelanau in the village of the same name . Another realignment near Suttons Bay was completed on March 26 , 1956 , to smooth out a curve in the road . A second completed on May 4 , 1956 , straightened a curve by Sylt Road east of Lake Leelanau . The western section was completely rebuilt between Duck Lake Corner and the Lake Leelanau Narrows Bridge to smooth out curves in the roadway . Sections not obliterated by the reconstruction were turned over to local control as Main Street or Old M-204 in Lake Leelanau when the project was finished on July 1 , 1970 .

" What Goes Around ... / ... Comes Around ( Interlude ) " is a song recorded by American singer-songwriter Justin Timberlake for his second studio album , FutureSex / LoveSounds ( 2006 ) . It was written and produced by Timberlake , Timbaland , and Danja . The song was said by Timberlake to be about betrayal and forgiveness , and was described by some music critics as a " sequel " to his 2002 single " Cry Me a River " . The song received generally positive reviews from music critics . " What Goes Around ... " is about the love life of a friend of Timberlake , Trace Ayala , and his relationship with Elisha Cuthbert . It also is rumored that the song talks about the relationship the two had in the TV series 24 . The song was retitled " What Goes Around ... Comes Around " for its December 19 , 2006 , release as the third single from FutureSex / LoveSounds . It became Timberlake 's third consecutive number-one hit on the Billboard Hot 100 . Internationally the song was also successful , reaching the top ten in countries such as the United Kingdom , Canada , New Zealand , Germany , and Australia . The song was later certified two-times platinum in Australia , gold in the United States and gold in New Zealand . The song won Best Male Pop Vocal Performance at the 50th Grammy Awards , where it also received a nomination for Record of the Year .

When Timberlake began working on FutureSex / LoveSounds at Timbaland 's studio in Virginia Beach , Virginia , they had no idea of what the album would be like with no plan for it or even a title . He told his collaborators to do a remake of his previous single , " Cry Me a River " . Danja , a protégé of Timbaland , stated : " We had no direction at all other than ' Cry Me a River , ' and not in the sense of mimicking the track , but in how big the song was . There was no direction for how he wanted the song to sound , because there was no direction for how he wanted [ his album FutureSex / LoveSounds ] to sound . " The song was written and produced by Justin Timberlake , Timbaland , and Nate " Danja " Hills . While in the studio , the three men were just " fooling around " and " freestyling " . When Danja began playing a guitar riff , it caught Timberlake 's attention . Timberlake started humming to the melody , and then the lyrics came . Timbaland , who was at his keyboards beside Danja , added drums to the melody . Danja commented that " everything was coming together at the same time " . After coming up with the music , Timberlake never wrote down the lyrics and , in an hour , he was ready to record it . By the time Timberlake was in the vocal booth , the basic track was done , then Timbaland produced a prelude of the song . Timberlake sang the song in a couple of takes and went back line by line to fill up the gaps . During the recording sessions , Timbaland and Danja added everything else , including the basses and strings . Danja compared the process to scoring to a movie , thinking the song was like a horror flick .

" What Goes Around ... / ... Comes Around " is a pop-R & B song performed in a slow manner . It is composed in the key of A Dorian ( A Minor ) in common time . With a gentle and midtempo beat , the tempo is pacing to 76 beats per minute . The song features a two-minute interlude titled " Comes Around " , featuring the album 's producer Timbaland , spanning to a seven-minute and 28-second track . Timberlake 's voice ranges from B3 to D6 . Musically , the song is similar to the type of music produced on Timberlake 's Justified album ; however , it is the only link from FutureSex / LoveSounds to Justified . In the beginning of the song , there is a five-second harmony line of two bağlamas ( one each panned far left and far right on respect octaves ) , a Turkish folk instrument . The beat is then changed to a more upbeat version of the same melody with more percussion . The basic ornamentation is loyal to characteristic Turkish string ornamentations . Timbaland also used the Turkish oud to mellow out the guitar riff . The chord series follows the Am-C-G-D keys . Following the instrumental , Timberlake begins the verse at thirteenth bar . The original track had a bridge , including the pre-verses , the verses and the choruses . After hearing the vocals of Timberlake , they decided to remove the bridge and follow a simple flow , because they felt its " too much " to have it and a break at the end of the song . Timbaland provides backing vocals on the song .

" What Goes Around ... / ... Comes Around " is about betrayal and forgiveness . Timberlake revealed that the song was written for the experience his friend went through . However , the public came up with different interpretation of the lyrics , that being a sequel to " Cry Me A River " . Bill Lamb wrote that the song has a " cautionary tale in the lyrics " . According to him , many fans and critics alike , after hearing the song , insisted that it is similar in meaning to " Cry Me a River " , which allegedly accounts to Timberlake 's relationship with former girlfriend , pop singer Britney Spears . However , Timberlake 's account of the song 's meaning contradicts this . Spence D. of IGN commented that the song presents " some intriguing ambiance " .

The song received generally positive reviews from critics . Rolling Stone called the single " a soaring ballad featuring Timberlake 's falsetto , with verses and choruses that pile on top of one another with dizzying effect . " About.com reviewer Bill Lamb stated that the song " is one of the most gorgeous pop melodies of the year . " He complimented the string-based arrangement of the song . Chris Willman of Entertainment Weekly called it " superior " , along with " LoveStoned " . Zach Baron of Pitchfork Media referred to it " some real can 't-let-go shit that 'll save you the repeat stabs on the bad night . " Spence D. of IGN called it " annoying " but he complimented the use of echo vocals and swirling synths . " What Goes Around ... / ... Comes Around " placed at number twenty-four on Rolling Stone 's list of the 100 Best Songs of 2007 . The song was nominated twice at the 50th Annual Grammy Awards , winning Best Male Pop Vocal Performance but lost to Amy Winehouse 's " Rehab " for Record of the Year .

" What Goes Around ... / ... Comes Around " was commercially successful in the United States . The single debuted at number 64 on December 23 , 2006 on the Billboard Hot 100 , prior to its physical release . From number eight on February 24 , 2007 , it propelled to number one the following week . " What Goes Around ... / ... Comes Around " became Timberlake 's third consecutive number one hit on the Billboard Hot 100 from his FutureSex / LoveSounds album , becoming the first male artist since Usher in 2004 to have three or more consecutive number-one hits from one album . The single charted on Hot 100 for 25 weeks . " What Goes Around ... / ... Comes Around " was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America on June 7 , 2007 . By September 3 , 2010 , the song had passed the two million sales plateau , and has sold 2,375,000 copies as of April 2013 . In the United Kingdom , " What Goes Around ... / ... Comes Around " debuted at number 59 on the UK Singles Chart on January 28 , 2007 . The digital download sales helped propel the single to number 11 on February 25 , 2007 . " What Goes Around ... / ... Comes Around " peaked at number four on March 11 , to become his sixth top five single in the United Kingdom . It stayed on the chart for 22 weeks . The single entered the top five in Austria , Belgium , Denmark , Finland , France , Germany , Ireland , Norway , Romania , Sweden , Switzerland . In Australia , the single debuted and peaked at number three on the Australian ARIA singles chart on March 26 , 2007 , gaining the Highest Debut certification . It spent a total of 22 weeks on the chart . " What Goes Around ... / ... Comes Around " was certified two-times platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association for selling over 30,000 units . The single peaked at number three in the New Zealand on April 9 , 2007 , and spent 16 weeks on the chart . " What Goes Around ... / ... Comes Around " was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand .

The music video for the " What Goes Around ... Comes Around " was produced as a short movie . The video was directed by Samuel Bayer , who had first directorial works with Nirvana 's 1991 single " Smells Like Teen Spirit " . The video features dialogues written by Alpha Dog writer and director Nick Cassavetes , who had previously worked with Timberlake in the film . Timberlake and Bayer enlisted American actress Scarlett Johansson after deciding on using " real " actors . The shooting went for three days between Christmas and New Year 's Eve in Los Angeles . The dawn scene was shot on January 8 , after the original sessions were done .

The video starts off with Timberlake flirting with Johansson on the burlesque-style club . She rejects with a tease at first but eventually leaves with him to go back to his place . In between cuts , they are shown in bed caressing each other . Johansson jumps into a pool outside the house , and floats below the surface as if she is drowning . Timberlake runs out and pulls her up ; she laughs at Timberlake and kisses him . In another scene , Timberlake introduces her to a drunk Shawn Hatosy at the club calling her " The One " . Hatosy seems to be interested in Johansson and Timberlake asks him to " keep an eye on her for me " perhaps suspecting she has another man on the side . Timberlake returns and finds them kissing in the stairway . After punching Hatosy he chases after Johansson , who speeds off in her 1967 Chevrolet Corvette C2 Sting Ray ; Timberlake follows in his Porsche Carrera GT . Johansson runs into a fiery car crash pile up and is ejected from the car as it tumbles through the air and lands several feet away 2 times . Timberlake notices a motionless body lying supine on the ground . He gets out and kneels over her while the camera view moves toward the sky .

The music video of " What Goes Around ... Comes Around " was exclusively premiered on February 9 , 2007 on the iTunes Store . The music video debuted on MTV 's Total Request Live at number nine on February 13 , 2007 . " What Goes Around ... " retired on May 7 at number seven . In Canada , the music video debuted on Muchmusic 's Top 30 countdown at number 22 on January 26 , 2007 . It peaked at number one on April 27 and stayed on the chart for seven non-consecutive weeks . The video was commercially successful , becoming the fastest selling pop promo on iTunes . It has sold 50,000 in downloads for four days . Timberlake was the first major artist to release a video on the download platform . In September 2007 , " What Goes Around ... Comes Around " won an MTV Video Music Award for Best Direction . It was also nominated for Video of the Year but lost to singer Rihanna 's 2007 video " Umbrella " .

On May 23 , 2007 , Marilyn Manson and Tim Skold appeared on UK radio station BBC Radio 1 's program Live Lounge to promote Marilyn Manson 's 2007 album Eat Me , Drink Me . They performed an acoustic version of " Heart-Shaped Glasses ( When the Heart Guides the Hand ) " , followed with an acoustic cover of " What Goes Around ... Comes Around " . The Manson cover does not include the interlude . French singer Myriam Abel , the winner of Nouvelle Star 3 , also recorded a non-commercial cover of " What Goes Around ... / ... Comes Around " with a Raï influence , accessible through her official MySpace page . An a cappella rendition was recorded by Overboard for their 2007 album , Stranded . American post hardcore band Alesana recorded a cover for the Punk Goes ... compilation series , Punk Goes Pop 2 , released March 10 , 2009 . Benny Davis , of the Australian musical comedy act The Axis of Awesome , also heavily sampled the song on his track " Another Four Chords " on The Human Jukebox EP , released in 2013 . Taylor Swift performed a mashup of " You 're Not Sorry " and " What Goes Around ... Comes Around " during her Fearless Tour ( 2009 − 10 ) .

The Woodstock Library is a branch of the Multnomah County Library in southeast Portland , Oregon , United States . The library 's origins date back to 1908 , when the people of the Woodstock neighborhood established a reading room at the Woodstock Fire Station , which soon became one of fifteen " deposit stations " ( packing crates that turned into two-shelf bookcases and could hold up to 50 books each ) . The Woodstock collection began as an assemblage of children 's books and was housed within a public school . In 1911 , the station was replaced by a " sub-branch " library offering more books for adults and children , but without the reference works and services available at regular branches . The collection moved into a larger facility in 1914 , which became a full branch in 1917 , offering additional resources and services . The library occupied a series of temporary locations during the 1920s – ' 40s . Construction began on Woodstock 's permanent library building in 1959 . It was dedicated on June 1 the following year , the fourth community library built by Multnomah County . Until the mid-1990s the library was maintained as-is with only regular maintenance , though capacity strained as public use grew and new technologies demanded additional shelf space . In 1995 , the City of Portland 's Bureau of Planning released the " Adopted Woodstock Neighborhood Plan " , which included a policy to improve the branch and its services . In 1996 , the county adopted a $ 28 million bond measure to renovate some branches and upgrade technology throughout the system . Given multiple issues with the existing building , including structural problems and non-compliance with building codes , Multnomah County Library determined reconstruction was necessary . The library was demolished in January 1999 .

In 1906 , the Multnomah County Library began distributing books to neighborhoods outside downtown Portland . A reading room was established in the Woodstock neighborhood 's fire station building in 1908 ; later that year it was recognized as a branch of Multnomah County Library . Deposit stations , containing packing crates that turned into two-shelf bookcases holding up to 50 books each , were often set up within fire stations or private homes . Woodstock received its deposit station , a collection of children 's books housed within a public school , in 1909 , becoming one of fifteen outlying service areas . On May 16 , 1911 , the Woodstock deposit station was replaced by a sub-branch library , supplying more reading material for adults and children but without the reference works and other library services offered at regular branches . The collection was moved to a larger storefront facility , west of SE 44th on SE Woodstock Boulevard , on September 12 , 1914 . The library achieved full branch status in 1917 , offering a collection and services comparable to other branches . In 1918 , the Woodstock branch and several others were threatened with closure after employees received a $ 10 per month salary increase , but funding sources helped to defray the additional expense . Along with other county libraries , the branch closed between November 1 and November 16 in response to the 1918 flu pandemic .

During the 1920s – ' 40s the library occupied a series of temporary locations within rented storefronts . Library resources and services were used heavily by unemployed residents during the Great Depression as well as during and after World War II , as people requested information ranging from foreign locales to victory gardens to jobs . In the 1950s , responding to population changes and the rise in automobile use , Multnomah County Library divided the county into six regions , each of which had a single " Class A " branch offering extended operating hours and full services . Deposit stations and smaller branch libraries were to be eliminated or merged to house larger collections .

Multnomah County Library decided to consolidate the Woodstock and Sellwood-Moreland branches , both of which had struggled to operate in rented spaces for years . Construction of Woodstock 's first permanent library building , located at 6008 SE 49th Avenue , began in 1959 . The new library , measuring 5,640 square feet ( 524 m2 ) , was dedicated on June 1 the following year , the fourth community library built by Multnomah County . The president of the Library Association of Portland wrote in the organization 's annual report : " Community response to this fine example of an adequate extension agency has been gratifying . This accelerated use fortifies the principle that excellent , strong book collections , strategically placed , provide economical and satisfactory extension [ branch ] service . " The library received regular maintenance and refurbishment from the 1970s through the mid-1990s , including repairs following a small fire . Capacity became strained as video and audiobook collections demanded additional shelf space and public use continued to grow . In 1995 , the City of Portland 's Bureau of Planning released the " Adopted Woodstock Neighborhood Plan " , which included a policy to enhance the branch . Objectives included promoting its use , upgrading the facility and its services , improving cyclist and pedestrian access , and strengthening its cultural and educational role within the community . In May 1996 , Multnomah County voters passed a $ 28 million bond measure to renovate some branches and upgrade technology throughout the system . Multnomah County Library determined building reconstruction was necessary given multiple issues including electrical , lighting , mechanical , plumbing and structural problems , mold growth within the walls and underneath flooring , and non-compliance with earthquake engineering and Americans with Disabilities Act codes . Cost analysis revealed reconstruction was more effective than repairing the existing structure ; additional factors included data and communications upgrades and the need for meeting space . Woodstock Library closed on January 17 , 1999 and was demolished soon after . Many of its building materials were recycled or salvaged for reuse .

The current Woodstock Library building is at the intersection of one commercial street ( SE Woodstock Boulevard ) and one tree-lined residential street ( SE 49th ) , which links to the Woodstock School and Woodstock Park . Measuring 7,500 square feet ( 700 m2 ) , it opened on March 14 , 2000 , the first branch within the Multnomah County Library system to undergo complete reconstruction . Architects were Folger Johnson and Donald Mayer as well as Thomas Hacker and Associates P.C. ( also referred to as Thomas Hacker Architects Inc. or THA Architecture ) . Becca Cavell served as project architect , project manager and construction administrator . Some of the building 's architectural features were designed by the engineering firm Degenkolb Engineers . Contractor services were provided by McCarthy Building Companies , Inc . Designers had in mind a " lantern-like " quality for the library , " open , light and inviting " . THA said the goal was to create a " feeling of openness and availability " , with a focus on " books and people " . Most of the library 's collection is housed within a single large room level with the sidewalk outside . The building has an exposed gridded steel roof 19 feet ( 580 cm ) high , supported by six pairs of slender steel columns and lined with windows . From several column options , Degenkolb chose cantilevered columns designed in a cruciform shape , built from four steel angles measuring 6 by 6 inches ( 15 cm × 15 cm ) . The columns taper from the top and provide even distribution of loads , protecting the structure against wind and earthquakes without lateral bracing ( or the need for supporting walls ) . The library features a 32-person capacity meeting room for hosting community events at no charge on a first come , first served basis . The building houses original artwork , including a work by Margot Voorhies-Thompson and , at the entrance , a 15-line poem by Kim Stafford titled " Open This Door of All Doors " . The exterior includes 36 stainless steel panels etched with words depicting the history of books .

Kari Hauge became the first librarian of the new facility . In addition to offering the Multnomah County Library catalog of two million books , periodicals and other materials , the Woodstock Library houses collections in Chinese and Spanish and employs Chinese-speaking staff . Self-checkout stations and radio frequency identification gates were installed in July 2010 . The current building has received several design awards . In 2000 , the American Institute of Steel Construction awarded Degenkolb with the I.D.E.A.S. Merit Award for quality structural engineering . Thomas Hacker Architects was presented with the 2002 AIA Regional Honor Award by the Northwest and Pacific Region of the American Institute of Architects through its Design Awards Program ; jurors noted the library 's " rigorous but poetic " structure and its " outstanding tectonic harmony , from the smallest scale of details to the basic design concept " . The building also received the 2000 AIA Portland Chapter Honor Award , the 2000 Portland General Electric EarthSmart Award , the 2001 AIA American Library Association Award of Excellence ( for its " simple and elegant design " ) and the 2002 Chicago Athenaeum American Architecture Award . The Illuminating Engineering Society of North America presented an award for the library 's quality lighting design . Ginnie Cooper , director of libraries for Multnomah County , said of the recognition : " Library users love this building and we 're pleased with how much the architectural community has applauded it as well . "

Over the years both Woodstock Library buildings have hosted numerous activities , clubs , events and programs . According to the " Adopted Woodstock Neighborhood Plan " , the Woodstock Library and Woodstock Community Center enhance the Village Center 's role within the community as a " gathering place " . Recent examples include appearances by actors and authors , a clown show , " conversation circles " for non-native English speakers , crafting , cultural celebrations , knitting groups , a mobile zoo , and neighborhood organization meetings and storytelling . The library has also hosted town hall meetings and served as a ballot drop-off site during elections .

In Norse mythology , Ragnarök is a series of future events , including a great battle , foretold to ultimately result in the death of a number of major figures ( including the gods Odin , Thor , Týr , Freyr , Heimdallr , and Loki ) , the occurrence of various natural disasters , and the subsequent submersion of the world in water . Afterward , the world will resurface anew and fertile , the surviving and returning gods will meet , and the world will be repopulated by two human survivors . Ragnarök is an important event in the Norse canon , and has been the subject of scholarly discourse and theory . The event is attested primarily in the Poetic Edda , compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources , and the Prose Edda , written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson . In the Prose Edda , and in a single poem in the Poetic Edda , the event is referred to as Ragnarök or Ragnarøkkr ( Old Norse " Fate of the Gods " and " Twilight of the Gods " respectively ) , a usage popularised by 19th-century composer Richard Wagner with the title of the last of his Der Ring des Nibelungen operas , Götterdämmerung ( 1876 ) .

The Old Norse compound ragnarok has a long history of interpretation . Its first element , ragna , is unproblematic , being the genitive plural of regin ( n. pl . ) " the ruling powers , gods " . The second element is more difficult , as it occurs in two variants , -rök and -røkkr . Zoega 's Old Icelandic Dictionary treats the two forms as two separate compounds , glossing ragnarök as " the doom or destruction of the gods " and ragnarøkkr as " the twilight of the gods " ( 1910 ) . The plural noun rök , has several meanings , such as " development , origin , cause , relation , fate . " The word ragnarök as a whole is then usually interpreted as the " final destiny of the gods . " The singular form ragnarøk ( k ) r is found in stanza 39 of the Poetic Edda poem Lokasenna , and in the Prose Edda . The noun røk ( k ) r means " twilight " ( from a verb røkkva " to grow dark " ) , suggesting a translation " twilight of the gods " . This reading was widely considered a result of folk etymology , or a learned reinterpretation , of the original term due to the merger of / ǫ / and / ø / in Old Icelandic after ca . 1200 ( nevertheless giving rise to the concept of Götterdämmerung " Twilight of the Gods " in the German reception of Norse mythology ) . Nevertheless , Haraldur Bernharðsson in a 2007 paper suggested that the singular form -røkr " twilight " ( from a Proto-Germanic * rekwa ) might have been the original reading . Haraldur Bernharðsson argues instead that the words ragnarök and ragnarøkkr are closely related , etymologically and semantically , and suggests a meaning of " renewal of the divine powers . "

Other terms used to refer to the events surrounding Ragnarök in the Poetic Edda include aldar rök ( aldar means age , " end of an age " ) from stanza 39 of Vafþrúðnismál , tíva rök from stanzas 38 and 42 of Vafþrúðnismál , þá er regin deyja ( " when the gods die " ) from Vafþrúðnismál stanza 47 , unz um rjúfask regin ( " when the gods will be destroyed " ) from Vafþrúðnismál stanza 52 , Lokasenna stanza 41 , and Sigrdrífumál stanza 19 , aldar rof ( " destruction of the age " ) from Helgakviða Hundingsbana II stanza 41 , regin þrjóta ( " end of the gods " ) from Hyndluljóð stanza 42 , and , in the Prose Edda , þá er Muspellz-synir herja ( " when the sons of Muspell move into battle " ) can be found in chapters 18 and 36 of Gylfaginning .

In the Poetic Edda poem Völuspá , references to Ragnarök begin from stanza 40 until 58 , with the rest of the poem describing the aftermath . In the poem , a völva recites information to Odin . In stanza 41 , the völva says : The völva then describes three roosters crowing : In stanza 42 , the jötunn herdsman Eggthér sits on a mound and cheerfully plays his harp while the crimson rooster Fjalar ( Old Norse " hider , deceiver " ) crows in the forest Gálgviðr . The golden rooster Gullinkambi crows to the Æsir in Valhalla , and the third , unnamed soot-red rooster crows in the halls of the underworld location of Hel in stanza 43 . After these stanzas , the völva further relates that the hound Garmr produces deep howls in front of the cave of Gnipahellir . Garmr 's bindings break and he runs free . The völva describes the state of humanity : The " sons of Mím " are described as being " at play " , though this reference is not further explained in surviving sources . Heimdall raises the Gjallarhorn into the air and blows deeply into it , and Odin converses with Mím 's head . The world tree Yggdrasil shudders and groans . The jötunn Hrym comes from the east , his shield before him . The Midgard serpent Jörmungandr furiously writhes , causing waves to crash . " The eagle shrieks , pale-beaked he tears the corpse , " and the ship Naglfar breaks free thanks to the waves made by Jormungandr and sets sail from the east . The fire jötnar inhabitants of Muspelheim come forth .

The völva continues that Jötunheimr , the land of the jötnar , is aroar , and that the Æsir are in council . The dwarfs groan by their stone doors . Surtr advances from the south , his sword brighter than the sun . Rocky cliffs open and the jötnar women sink . The gods then do battle with the invaders : Odin is swallowed whole and alive fighting the wolf Fenrir , causing his wife Frigg her second great sorrow ( the first being the death of her son , the god Baldr ) . Odin 's son Víðarr avenges his father by rending Fenrir 's jaws apart and stabbing it in the heart with his spear , thus killing the wolf . The serpent Jörmungandr opens its gaping maw , yawning widely in the air , and is met in combat by Thor . Thor , also a son of Odin and described here as protector of the earth , furiously fights the serpent , defeating it , but Thor is only able to take nine steps afterward before collapsing . The god Freyr fights Surtr and loses . After this , people flee their homes , and the sun becomes black while the earth sinks into the sea , the stars vanish , steam rises , and flames touch the heavens .

The völva sees the earth reappearing from the water , and an eagle over a waterfall hunting fish on a mountain . The surviving Æsir meet together at the field of Iðavöllr . They discuss Jörmungandr , great events of the past , and the runic alphabet . In stanza 61 , in the grass , they find the golden game pieces that the gods are described as having once happily enjoyed playing games with long ago ( attested earlier in the same poem ) . The reemerged fields grow without needing to be sown . The gods Höðr and Baldr return from Hel and live happily together . The völva says that the god Hœnir chooses wooden slips for divination , and that the sons of two brothers will widely inhabit the windy world . She sees a hall thatched with gold in Gimlé , where nobility will live and spend their lives pleasurably . Stanzas 65 , found in the Hauksbók version of the poem , refers to a " powerful , mighty one " that " rules over everything " and who will arrive from above at the court of the gods ( Old Norse regindómr ) , which has been interpreted as a Christian addition to the poem . In stanza 66 , the völva ends her account with a description of the dragon Níðhöggr , corpses in his jaws , flying through the air . The völva then " sinks down . " It is unclear if stanza 66 indicates that the völva is referring to the present time or if this is an element of the post-Ragnarök world .

The Vanir god Njörðr is mentioned in relation to Ragnarök in stanza 39 of the poem Vafþrúðnismál . In the poem , Odin , disguised as Gagnráðr faces off with the wise jötunn Vafþrúðnir in a battle of wits . Vafþrúðnismál references Njörðr 's status as a hostage during the earlier Æsir – Vanir War , and that he will " come back home among the wise Vanir " at " the doom of men . " In stanza 44 , Odin poses the question to Vafþrúðnir as to who of mankind will survive the " famous " Fimbulwinter ( " Mighty Winter " ) . Vafþrúðnir responds in stanza 45 that those survivors will be Líf and Lífþrasir , and that they will hide in the forest of Hoddmímis holt , that they will consume the morning dew , and will produce generations of offspring . In stanza 46 , Odin asks what sun will come into the sky after Fenrir has consumed the sun that exists . Vafþrúðnir responds that Sól will bear a daughter before Fenrir assails her , and that after Ragnarök this daughter will continue her mother 's path . In stanza 51 , Vafþrúðnir states that , after Surtr 's flames have been sated , Odin 's sons Víðarr and Váli will live in the temples of the gods , and that Thor 's sons Móði and Magni will possess the hammer Mjolnir . In stanza 52 , the disguised Odin asks the jötunn about Odin 's own fate . Vafþrúðnir responds that " the wolf " will consume Odin , and that Víðarr will avenge him by sundering its cold jaws in battle . Odin ends the duel with one final question : what did Odin say to his son before preparing his funeral pyre ? With this , Vafþrúðnir realizes that he is dealing with none other than Odin , whom he refers to as " the wisest of beings , " adding that Odin alone could know this . Odin 's message has been interpreted as a promise of resurrection to Baldr after Ragnarök .

In the Prose Edda book Gylfaginning , various references are made to Ragnarök . Ragnarök is first mentioned in chapter 26 , where the throned figure of High , king of the hall , tells Gangleri ( King Gylfi in disguise ) some basic information about the goddess Iðunn , including that her apples will keep the gods young until Ragnarök . In chapter 34 , High describes the binding of the wolf Fenrir by the gods , causing the god Týr to lose his right hand , and that Fenrir remains there until Ragnarök . Gangleri asks High why , since the gods could only expect destruction from Fenrir , they did not simply kill Fenrir once he was bound . High responds that " the gods hold their sacred places and sanctuaries in such respect that they chose not to defile them with the wolf 's blood , even though the prophecies foretold that he would be the death of Odin . " As a consequence of his role in the death of the god Baldr , Loki ( described as father of Fenrir ) is bound on top of three stones with the internal organs of his son Narfi ( which are turned into iron ) in three places . There , venom drops onto his face periodically from a snake placed by the jötunn Skaði , and when his wife Sigyn empties the bucket she is using to collect the dripping venom , the pain he experiences causes convulsions , resulting in earthquakes . Loki is further described as being bound this way until the onset of Ragnarök .

Chapter 51 provides a detailed account of Ragnarök interspersed with various quotes from Völuspá , while chapters 52 and 53 describe the aftermath of these events . In Chapter 51 , High states the first sign of Ragnarök will be Fimbulwinter , during which time three winters will arrive without a summer , and the sun will be useless . High details that , prior to these winters , three earlier winters will have occurred , marked with great battles throughout the world . During this time , greed will cause brothers to kill brothers , and fathers and sons will suffer from the collapse of kinship bonds . High then quotes stanza 45 of Völuspá . Next , High describes that the wolf will first swallow the sun , and then his brother the moon , and mankind will consider the occurrence as a great disaster resulting in much ruin . The stars will disappear . The earth and mountains will shake so violently that the trees will come loose from the soil , the mountains will topple , and all restraints will break , causing Fenrir to break free from his bonds . High relates that the great serpent Jörmungandr , also described as a child of Loki in the same source , will breach land as the sea violently swells onto it . The ship Naglfar , described in the Prose Edda as being made from the human nails of the dead , is released from its mooring , and sets sail on the surging sea , steered by a jötunn named Hrym . At the same time , Fenrir , eyes and nostrils spraying flames , charges forward with his mouth wide open , his upper jaw reaching to the heavens , his lower jaw touching the earth . At Fenrir 's side , Jörmungandr sprays venom throughout the air and the sea .

During all of this , the sky splits into two . From the split , the " sons of Muspell " ride forth . Surtr rides first , surrounded by flames , his sword brighter than the sun . High says that " Muspell 's sons " will ride across Bifröst , described in Gylfaginning as a rainbow bridge , and that the bridge will then break . The sons of Muspell ( and their shining battle troop ) advance to the field of Vígríðr , described as an expanse that reaches " a hundred leagues in each direction , " where Fenrir , Jörmungandr , Loki ( followed by " Hel 's own " ) , and Hrym ( accompanied by all frost jötnar ) join them . While this occurs , Heimdallr stands and blows the Gjallarhorn with all his might . The gods awaken at the sound , and they meet . Odin rides to Mímisbrunnr in search of counsel from Mímir . Yggdrasil shakes , and everything , everywhere fears . High relates that the Æsir and the Einherjar dress for war and head to the field . Odin , wearing a gold helmet and an intricate coat of mail , carries his spear Gungnir and rides before them . Odin advances against Fenrir , while Thor moves at his side , though Thor is unable to assist Odin because he has engaged Jörmungandr in combat . According to High , Freyr fiercely fights with Surtr , but Freyr falls because he lacks the sword he once gave to his messenger , Skírnir . The hound Garmr ( described here as the " worst of monsters " ) breaks free from his bonds in front of Gnipahellir , and fights the god Týr , resulting in both of their deaths .

Thor kills Jörmungandr , yet is poisoned by the serpent , and manages to walk nine steps before falling to the earth dead . Fenrir swallows Odin , though immediately afterward his son Víðarr kicks his foot into Fenrir 's lower jaw , grips Fenrir 's upper jaw , and rips apart Fenrir 's mouth , killing Fenrir . Loki fights Heimdallr , and the two kill one another . Surtr covers the earth in fire , causing the entire world to burn . High quotes stanzas 46 to 47 of Völuspá , and additionally stanza 18 of Vafþrúðnismál ( the latter relating information about the battlefield Vígríðr ) .

At the beginning of chapter 52 , Gangleri asks " what will be after heaven and earth and the whole world are burned ? All the gods will be dead , together with the Einherjar and the whole of mankind . Didn 't you say earlier that each person will live in some world throughout all ages ? " The figure of Third , seated on the highest throne in the hall , responds that there will be many good places to live , but also many bad ones . Third states that the best place to be is Gimlé in the heavens , where a place exists called Okolnir that houses a hall called Brimir — where one can find plenty to drink . Third describes a hall made of red gold located in Niðafjöll called Sindri , where " good and virtuous men will live . " Third further relates an unnamed hall in Náströnd , the beaches of the dead , that he describes as a large repugnant hall facing north that is built from the spines of snakes , and resembles " a house with walls woven from branches ; " the heads of the snakes face the inside of the house and spew so much venom that rivers of it flow throughout the hall , in which oath breakers and murderers must wade . Third here quotes Völuspá stanzas 38 to 39 , with the insertion of original prose stating that the worst place of all to be is in Hvergelmir , followed by a quote from Völuspá to highlight that the dragon Níðhöggr harasses the corpses of the dead there .

Chapter 53 begins with Gangleri asking if any of the gods will survive , and if there will be anything left of the earth or the sky . High responds that the earth will appear once more from the sea , beautiful and green , where self-sown crops grow . The field Iðavöllr exists where Asgard once was , and , there , untouched by Surtr 's flames , Víðarr and Váli reside . Now possessing their father 's hammer Mjölnir , Thor 's sons Móði and Magni will meet them there , and , coming from Hel , Baldr and Höðr also arrive . Together , they all sit and recount memories , later finding the gold game pieces the Æsir once owned . Völuspá stanza 51 is then quoted . High reveals that two humans , Líf and Lífþrasir , will have also survived the destruction by hiding in the wood Hoddmímis holt . These two survivors consume the morning dew for sustenance , and from their descendants the world will be repopulated . Vafþrúðnismál stanza 45 is then quoted . The personified sun , Sól , will have a daughter at least as beautiful as she , and this daughter will follow the same path as her mother . Vafþrúðnismál stanza 47 is quoted , and so ends the foretelling of Ragnarök in Gylfaginning .

Thorwald 's Cross , a partially surviving runestone erected at Kirk Andreas on the Isle of Man , depicts a bearded human holding a spear downward at a wolf , his right foot in its mouth , while a large bird sits at his shoulder . Rundata dates it to 940 , while Pluskowski dates it to the 11th century . This depiction has been interpreted as Odin , with a raven or eagle at his shoulder , being consumed by Fenrir at Ragnarök . On the other side of the stone is a depiction of a large cross and another image parallel to the Odin figure that has been described as Christ triumphing over Satan . These combined elements have led to the cross as being described as " syncretic art " ; a mixture of pagan and Christian beliefs .

The Gosforth Cross ( 920 – 950 ) , in Cumbria , England , is a standing cross of a typical Anglo-Saxon form , carved on all sides of the long shaft , which is nearly square in section . Apart from panels of ornament , the scenes include a Christian crucifixion , and possibly another scene in Hell , but the other scenes are generally interpreted as narrative incidents from the Ragnarök story , even by a scholar as cautious of such interpretations as David M. Wilson . The Ragnarök battle itself may be depicted on the north side . The cross features various figures depicted in Borre style , including a man with a spear facing a monstrous head , one of whose feet is thrust into the beast 's forked tongue and on its lower jaw , while the other is placed against its upper jaw , a scene interpreted as Víðarr fighting Fenrir .

The 11th century Ledberg stone in Sweden , similarly to Thorwald 's Cross , features a figure with his foot at the mouth of a four-legged beast , and this may also be a depiction of Odin being devoured by Fenrir at Ragnarök . Below the beast and the man is a depiction of a legless , helmeted man , with his arms in a prostrate position . The Younger Futhark inscription on the stone bears a commonly seen memorial dedication , but is followed by an encoded runic sequence that has been described as " mysterious , " and " an interesting magic formula which is known from all over the ancient Norse world . "

Rudolf Simek theorizes that the survival of Líf and Lífþrasir at the end Ragnarök is " a case of reduplication of the anthropogeny , understandable from the cyclic nature of the Eddic eschatology " . Simek says that Hoddmímis holt " should not be understood literally as a wood or even a forest in which the two keep themselves hidden , but rather as an alternative name for the world-tree Yggdrasill . Thus , the creation of mankind from tree trunks ( Askr , Embla ) is repeated after the Ragnarǫk as well " . Simek says that in Germanic regions , the concept of mankind originating from trees is ancient , and additionally points out legendary parallels in a Bavarian legend of a shepherd who lives inside a tree , whose descendants repopulate the land after life there has been wiped out by plague ( citing a retelling by F. R. Schröder ) . In addition , Simek points to an Old Norse parallel in the figure of Örvar-Oddr , " who is rejuvenated after living as a tree-man ( Ǫrvar-Odds saga 24 – 27 ) " .

Theories have been proposed about the relation between Ragnarök and the 9th century Old High German epic poem Muspilli about the Christian Last Judgment , where the word Muspille appears , and the 9th century Old Saxon epic poem Heliand about the life of Christ , where various other forms of the word appear . In both sources , the word is used to signify the end of the world through fire . Old Norse forms of the term also appear throughout accounts of Ragnarök , where the world is also consumed in flames , and , though various theories exist about the meaning and origins of the term , its etymology has not been solved .

Parallels have been pointed out between the Ragnarök of Norse religion and the beliefs of other related Indo-European peoples . Subsequently , theories have been put forth that Ragnarök represents a later evolution of a Proto-Indo-European belief along with other cultures descending from the Proto-Indo-Europeans . These parallels include comparisons of a cosmic winter motif between the Norse Fimbulwinter , the Iranian Bundahishn and Yima . Víðarr 's stride has been compared to the Vedic god Vishnu in that both have a " cosmic stride " with a special shoe used to tear apart a beastly wolf . Larger patterns have also been drawn between " final battle " events in Indo-European cultures , including the occurrence of a blind or semi-blind figure in " final battle " themes , and figures appearing suddenly with surprising skills .

Hilda Ellis Davidson theorizes that the events in Völuspá occurring after the death of the gods ( the sun turning black , steam rising , flames touching the heavens , etc . ) may be inspired by the volcanic eruptions on Iceland . Records of eruptions on Iceland bear strong similarities to the sequence of events described in Völuspá , especially the eruption at Laki that occurred in 1783 . Bertha Phillpotts theorizes that the figure of Surtr was inspired by Icelandic eruptions , and that he was a volcano demon . Surtr 's name occurs in some Icelandic place names , among them the lava tube caves Surtshellir , a number of dark caverns in the volcanic central region of Iceland .

Parallels have been pointed out between a poem spoken by a jötunn found in the 13th century þáttr Bergbúa þáttr ( " the tale of the mountain dweller " ) . In the tale , Thórd and his servant get lost while traveling to church in winter , and so take shelter for the night within a cave . Inside the cave they hear noises , witness a pair of immense burning eyes , and then the being with burning eyes recites a poem of 12 stanzas . The poem the being recites contains references to Norse mythology ( including a mention of Thor ) and also prophecies ( including that " mountains will tumble , the earth will move , men will be scoured by hot water and burned by fire " ) . Surtr 's fire receives a mention in stanza 10 . John Lindow says that the poem may describe " a mix of the destruction of the race of giants and of humans , as in Ragnarök " but that " many of the predictions of disruption on earth could also fit the volcanic activity that is so common in Iceland . "

In late 2013 and early 2014 , it was widely reported in English-language media outlets that Ragnarök would occur on February 22 , 2014 . Apparently patterned after the 2012 phenomenon , the claim was at times attributed to a " Viking Calendar " . No such calendar is known to have existed , and the source was a " prediction " made to media outlets by the Jorvik Viking Centre in York , England , and intended to draw attention to an event that the institution was to hold on that date . The Jorvik Viking Centre was criticized for intentionally or unintentionally misleading the public ; however , in an article on the incident , Joseph S. Hopkins perceives the media response as an example of a broad revival of interest in the Viking Age and ancient Germanic topics .

Chiswick Bridge is a reinforced concrete deck arch bridge over the River Thames in west London . One of three bridges opened in 1933 as part of an ambitious scheme to relieve traffic congestion west of London , it carries the A316 road between Chiswick on the north bank of the Thames and Mortlake on the south bank . Built on the site of a former ferry , the bridge is 606 feet ( 185 m ) long and faced with 3,400 tons of Portland stone . At the time of its opening its 150-foot ( 46 m ) central span was the longest concrete span over the Thames . The bridge is possibly best known today for its proximity to the end of The Championship Course , the stretch of the Thames used for the Boat Race and other rowing races .

The villages of Chiswick and Mortlake , about 6 miles ( 9.7 km ) west of central London on the north and south banks of the River Thames , had been linked by a ferry since at least the 17th century . Both areas were sparsely populated , so there was little demand for a fixed river crossing at that point . With the arrival of railways and the London Underground in the 19th century commuting to London became practical and affordable , and the populations of Chiswick and Mortlake grew rapidly . In 1909 the Great Chertsey Road scheme was proposed , which envisaged building a major new road from Hammersmith , then on the outskirts of London , to Chertsey , 18 miles ( 29 km ) west of central London , bypassing the towns of Kingston and Richmond . However , the scheme was abandoned due to costs and arguments between various interested parties over the exact route the road should take . After the First World War , the population of the west London suburbs continued to grow , thanks to improved rail transport links and the growth in ownership of automobiles . In 1925 , the Ministry of Transport convened a conference between Surrey and Middlesex county councils with the aim of reaching a solution to the congestion problem , and the Great Chertsey Road scheme was revived . In 1927 , the Royal Commission on Cross-River Traffic approved the scheme to relieve the by then chronic traffic congestion on the existing , mostly narrow , streets in the area , and on the narrow bridges at Richmond Bridge , Kew and Hammersmith . The Ministry of Transport agreed to pay heavy subsidies towards the cost .

The new bridge was designed in reinforced concrete by architect Sir Herbert Baker and engineer Alfred Dryland , with additional input from Considère Constructions , at the time Britain 's leading specialist in reinforced concrete construction . The bridge has concrete foundations supporting a five-arch cellular reinforced concrete superstructure . The deck is supported by a concealed lattice of columns and beams rising from the arched superstructure . The structure is faced with 3,400 tons of Portland stone , except for underneath the arches . The bridge is 606 feet ( 185 m ) long , and carries two 15-foot ( 4.6 m ) wide walkways , and a 40-foot ( 12 m ) wide road . At the time it was built , the 150-foot ( 46 m ) central span was the longest concrete span over the Thames . Unusually for a Thames bridge , only three of Chiswick Bridge 's five spans cross the river ; the shorter spans at each end of the bridge cross the former towpaths . To allow sufficient clearance for shipping without steep inclines , the approach roads to the bridge are elevated from some distance back from the river . The bridge was built by the Cleveland Bridge & Engineering Company at a cost of £ 208,284 ( about £ 13,335,000 in 2016 ) . Additional costs such as building the approach roads and purchasing land brought the total cost of the bridge to £ 227,600 ( about £ 14,572,000 in 2016 ) . The Ministry of Transport paid 75 % of the cost , with Surrey and Middlesex county councils paying the remainder .

Chiswick Bridge is a major transport route , and the eighth busiest of London 's 20 Thames road bridges . It is possibly best known for its proximity to the finishing line of The Championship Course , the stretch of the Thames used for the Boat Race and other rowing events . A University Boat Race Stone on the south bank , and a brightly painted blue and black marker post near the north bank of the river , 370 feet ( 110 m ) downstream of the bridge , mark the end of the course . The towpath under the bridge on the southern bank now forms part of the Thames Path . As at 2009 the northernmost arch was used by the Tideway Scullers sculling club as storage space .

Kubah ( literally Cupola or Dome ) is an Indonesian novel written by Ahmad Tohari . It follows a poor man named Karman who becomes a member of the Indonesian Communist Party , only to find himself a victim of the ongoing political struggles in 1950s Indonesia . After the Party 's destruction he spends twelve years as a prisoner at Buru before returning to his hometown and becoming a devout Muslim . Tohari 's second novel , Kubah was written in two months and based on the events surrounding the Communist Party and the 30 September Movement coup in 1965 . Published in 1980 by Pustaka Jaya , Kubah came at a time when literary works with similar themes – the victimisation of Communist Party members – were scarce . The novel has also been characterised as dawah ( Islamic preaching ) . Reception of Kubah was mostly mixed ; critics praised the novel for its subject matter and criticised it for its predictability . It received a literary award in 1981 , and in 1986 it was translated into Japanese .

After twelve years imprisoned at Buru Island , the former Communist Party of Indonesia ( Partai Komunis Indonesia , or PKI ) member Karman returns to Central Java . During his time at Buru , his wife Marni has remarried and the area has modernised considerably , rendering him uncertain where to go . He decides to stay at his cousin 's home for a while . Meanwhile , Marni has heard of Karman 's release and realises that she still loves him , and would thus feel uncomfortable if he returned to their hometown of Pegaten . However , their grown daughter Tini wishes to meet her father . In a series of flashbacks , Karman 's life is told . He lost his pro-Dutch father during the Indonesian National Revolution and was raised in poverty before going to work for the rich merchant Haji Bakir as a child , babysitting his daughter Rifah . In the two years Karman lived with them , the family raised him to be a devout Muslim ; Karman , for his part , was a diligent worker and cared deeply for Rifah . When his uncle returned from the front , Karman was brought back home and educated until junior high school , dropping out for a lack of funds . When he was in his twenties Karman found a job at the local village chief 's office with the help of a civil employee named Triman and a teacher named Margo .

Unknown to Karman , both men were PKI members and intent on making him join the party . They gave him communist pamphlets and indoctrinated him in Party philosophy . When Karman was late in telling Rifah his feelings , losing her to another man , the PKI manipulated his emotions to make him leave Islam and hate Haji Bakir . Ultimately this was successful : Karman abandoned his mandatory prayers and began to espouse the Party 's politics . After Karman was refused marriage to Rifah a second time , following her husband 's death , he had Haji Bakir imprisoned . In this time Karman married Marni , intending to convert her family to communism . By 1965 Karman had become a respected member of the PKI , although the public knew him as a member of Partindo . However , following the failure of the 30 September Movement ( Gerakan 30 September , or G30S ) coup in the national capital at Jakarta – orchestrated by the PKI – Karman realised that his position was unsound . He and his fellow PKI members began praying regularly , but many were ultimately killed – including Triman and Margo . Karman escaped from Pegaten hours before soldiers came to arrest him and managed to avoid capture for nearly two months , generally hiding in cemeteries . After his capture Karman was exiled to Buru .

Kubah was inspired by Indonesian history , beginning in the 1940s and continuing until the 1980s . Following the national revolution from 1945 to 1949 , the country was set in a state of political turmoil and abject poverty which became increasingly severe towards the end of the 1950s . By the early 1960s the PKI and other leftist parties had the support of President Sukarno , giving them greater power ; PKI membership grew quickly in this period , aided by a hyperinflation and widespread poverty . On 1 October 1965 , a group of Indonesian National Armed Forces members calling themselves the 30 September Movement killed six Army generals and announced that the president was under their power ; the coup was quashed the following day . Contemporary reports indicated that the PKI had been behind the G30S , a position endorsed by the Indonesian government . As a result , hundreds of thousands of registered and suspected PKI members were killed or exiled over the following decade , effectively destroying the Party . By 1974 Buru held some 10,000 prisoners , while others were held elsewhere or forced to stay abroad . Political prisoners began to be released by the 1970s , but saw systematic discrimination at all levels of society : they found themselves under surveillance and with little hope of employment .

Kubah was the second novel written by Ahmad Tohari , who had been in senior high school when the G30S announced its coup . A devout Muslim who had trained as a doctor and ran a pesantren ( Islamic boarding school ) in Central Java , Tohari began to focus on writing when his first novel , Di Kaki Bukit Cibalak ( On the Foothill of Cibalak ; 1978 ) , won a prize from the Jakarta Arts Council . He finished Kubah in two months , first making a thematic overview for each chapter and then developing it further while writing . He deliberately left the novel 's ending open to interpretation , intending for readers to think for themselves .

Kubah is an early example of literature dealing with the G30S and PKI , although earlier examples exist . Former Indonesian president Abdurrahman Wahid described it as the first to deal with reconciliation between PKI members and general Indonesian society after G30S , an issue which was " hyper-sensitive " at the time . The historian Anna-Greta Nilsson Hoadley writes that Kubah explored why a person would be motivated to join the party , emphasizing poverty , cultural pressure , and active propaganda by the PKI . In the end , Karman is ultimately an " innocent victim " , who only joined the Party to improve his own standing . Even after his release Karman remains in a state of fear , " marked by a prisoner 's vulnerability . " The literary critics Maman S. Mahayana , Oyon Sofyan , and Achmad Dian wrote that , in this sense , Karman becomes representative of all PKI members who were arrested following G30S . Mahayana , writing elsewhere , sees Karman as undergoing an existential quest to establish his identity , seemingly finding an answer in the PKI but ultimately becoming trapped by them . Mahayana indicates that a religious message is evident beginning with the novel 's opening , in which Tohari provides a four-line quote from an old Javanese text regarding faith and becoming more explicit later on . He finds Karman 's dealing with the raftsman Kastagethek while escaping from the government the most explicit expression of Tohari 's intent ; unlike Karman , Kastagethek is a devout yet simple man who is happy in his poverty , leading Karman to question his own views before ultimately finding his identity in Islam . Mahayana thus argued that Kubah was meant as dawah , or Islamic preaching , with its message that humans should recognise their status as creatures of God conveyed through characters ' dialogue and actions .

Kubah was originally published by the Jakarta-based Pustaka Jaya in 1980 ; unlike Di Kaki Bukit Cibalak and most of Tohari 's later novels , it had not been serialised first . Since 1995 it has been published by Gramedia , seeing four printings as of 2012 . The work was translated into Japanese by Shinobu Yamane in 1986 , under the title Shinsei . The novel 's reception was mixed . It was awarded the Buku Utama Prize in 1981 for " increasing knowledge , spreading manners , and maturing Indonesian culture , " an award which included a trophy and Rp . 1 million in prize money . Mahayana found it worthy of this prize , praising Kubah 's use of flashback and the complicated issues it raised . Wahid , at the time an active Islamic intellectual with the Nahdlatul Ulama , wrote in 1980 that Kubah had poorly realised its potential ; he characterised it as a beginner 's work : lacking suspense , overly moralistic , and predictable . Tohari 's trilogy Ronggeng Dukuh Paruk ( The Dancer of Paruk Village ; 1981 – 1985 ) , which has proven to be his most famous , also dealt with the G30S and the PKI . However , unlike Kubah , parts of Ronggeng Dukuh Paruk remained censored until 2003 . Numerous novels dealing with G30S and the PKI , written by other authors , have also been published since Kubah .

Broaching is a machining process that uses a toothed tool , called a broach , to remove material . There are two main types of broaching : linear and rotary . In linear broaching , which is the more common process , the broach is run linearly against a surface of the workpiece to effect the cut . Linear broaches are used in a broaching machine , which is also sometimes shortened to broach . In rotary broaching , the broach is rotated and pressed into the workpiece to cut an axis symmetric shape . A rotary broach is used in a lathe or screw machine . In both processes the cut is performed in one pass of the broach , which makes it very efficient . Broaching is used when precision machining is required , especially for odd shapes . Commonly machined surfaces include circular and non-circular holes , splines , keyways , and flat surfaces . Typical workpieces include small to medium-sized castings , forgings , screw machine parts , and stampings . Even though broaches can be expensive , broaching is usually favored over other processes when used for high-quantity production runs . Broaches are shaped similar to a saw , except the height of the teeth increases over the length of the tool . Moreover , the broach contains three distinct sections : one for roughing , another for semi-finishing , and the final one for finishing . Broaching is an unusual machining process because it has the feed built into the tool . The profile of the machined surface is always the inverse of the profile of the broach . The rise per tooth ( RPT ) , also known as the step or feed per tooth , determines the amount of material removed and the size of the chip . The broach can be moved relative to the workpiece or vice versa . Because all of the features are built into the broach no complex motion or skilled labor is required to use it . A broach is effectively a collection of single-point cutting tools arrayed in sequence , cutting one after the other ; its cut is analogous to multiple passes of a shaper .

The process depends on the type of broaching being performed . Surface broaching is very simple as either the workpiece is moved against a stationary surface broach , or the workpiece is held stationary while the broach is moved against it . Internal broaching is more involved . The process begins by clamping the workpiece into a special holding fixture , called a workholder , which mounts in the broaching machine . The broaching machine elevator , which is the part of the machine that moves the broach above the workholder , then lowers the broach through the workpiece . Once through , the broaching machine 's puller , essentially a hook , grabs the pilot of the broach . The elevator then releases the top of the pilot and the puller pulls the broach through the workpiece completely . The workpiece is then removed from the machine and the broach is raised back up to reengage with the elevator . The broach usually only moves linearly , but sometimes it is also rotated to create a spiral spline or gun-barrel rifling . Fortified petroleum cutting fluids are the most common . However , heavy-duty water-soluble cutting fluids are being used because of their superior cooling , cleanliness , and non-flammability .

Broaching was originally developed for machining internal keyways . However , it was soon discovered that broaching is very useful for machining other surfaces and shapes for high volume workpieces . Because each broach is specialized to cut just one shape either the broach must be specially designed for the geometry of the workpiece or the workpiece must be designed around a standard broach geometry . A customized broach is usually only viable with high volume workpieces , because the broach can cost US $ 15,000 to US $ 30,000 to produce . Broaching speeds vary from 20 to 120 surface feet per minute ( SFPM ) . This results in a complete cycle time of 5 to 30 seconds . Most of the time is consumed by the return stroke , broach handling , and workpiece loading and unloading . The only limitations on broaching are that there are no obstructions over the length of the surface to be machined , the geometry to be cut does not have curves in multiple planes , and that the workpiece is strong enough to withstand the forces involved . Specifically for internal broaching a hole must first exist in the workpiece so the broach can enter . Also , there are limits on the size of internal cuts . Common internal holes can range from 0.125 to 6 in ( 3.2 to 152.4 mm ) in diameter but it is possible to achieve a range of 0.05 to 13 in ( 1.3 to 330.2 mm ) . Surface broaches ' range is usually 0.075 to 10 in ( 1.9 to 254.0 mm ) , although the feasible range is 0.02 to 20 in ( 0.51 to 508.00 mm ) .

Tolerances are usually ± 0.002 in ( ± 0.05 mm ) , but in precise applications a tolerance of ± 0.0005 in ( ± 0.01 mm ) can be held . Surface finishes are usually between 16 and 63 microinches ( μin ) , but can range from 8 to 125 μin . There may be minimal burrs on the exit side of the cut . Broaching works best on softer materials , such as brass , bronze , copper alloys , aluminium , graphite , hard rubbers , wood , composites , and plastic . However , it still has a good machinability rating on mild steels and free machining steels . When broaching , the machinability rating is closely related to the hardness of the material . For steels the ideal hardness range is between 16 and 24 Rockwell C ( HRC ) ; a hardness greater than HRC 35 will dull the broach quickly . Broaching is more difficult on harder materials , stainless steel and titanium , but is still possible .

If the broach is large enough the costs can be reduced by using a built-up or modular construction . This involves producing the broach in pieces and assembling it . If any portion wears out only that section has to be replaced , instead of the entire broach . Most broaches are made from high speed steel ( HSS ) or an alloy steel ; TiN coatings are common on HSS to prolong life . Except when broaching cast iron , tungsten carbide is rarely used as a tooth material because the cutting edge will crack on the first pass .

The slab broach is the simplest surface broach . It is a general purpose tool for cutting flat surfaces . Slot broaches ( G & H ) are for cutting slots of various dimensions at high production rates . Slot broaching is much quicker than milling when more than one slot needs to be machined , because multiple broaches can be run through the part at the same time on the same broaching machine . Contour broaches are designed to cut concave , convex , cam , contoured , and irregular shaped surfaces . Pot broaches are cut the inverse of an internal broach ; they cut the outside diameter of a cylindrical workpiece . They are named after the pot looking fixture in which the broaches are mounted ; the fixture is often referred to as a " pot " . The pot is designed to hold multiple broaching tools concentrically over its entire length . The broach is held stationary while the workpiece is pushed or pulled through it . This has replaced hobbing for some involute gears and cutting external splines and slots . Straddle broaches use two slab broaches to cut parallel surfaces on opposite sides of a workpiece in one pass . This type of broaching holds closer tolerances than if the two cuts were done independently . It is named after the fact that the broaches " straddle " the workpiece on multiple sides .

Solid broaches are the most common type ; they are made from one solid piece of material . For broaches that wear out quickly shell broaches are used ; these broaches are similar to a solid broach , except there is a hole through the center where it mounts on an arbor . Shell broaches cost more initially , but save the cost overall if the broach must be replaced often because the pilots are on the mandrel and do not have to be reproduced with each replacement . Modular broaches are commonly used for large internal broaching applications . They are similar to shell broaches in that they are a multi-piece construction . This design is used because it is cheaper to build and resharpen and is more flexible than a solid design . A common type of internal broach is the keyway broach ( C & D ) . It uses a special fixture called a horn to support the broach and properly locate the part with relation to the broach . A concentricity broach is a special type of spline cutting broach which cuts both the minor diameter and the spline form to ensure precise concentricity .

For defining the geometry of a broach an internal type is shown below . Note that the geometries of other broaches are similar . The most important characteristic of a broach is the rise per tooth ( RPT ) , which is how much material is removed by each tooth . The RPT varies for each section of the broach , which are the roughing section ( tr ) , semi-finishing section ( ts ) , and finishing section ( tf ) . The roughing teeth remove most of the material so the number of roughing teeth required dictates how long the broach is . The semi-finishing teeth provide surface finish and the finishing teeth provide the final finishing . The finishing section 's RPT ( tf ) is usually zero so that as the first finishing teeth wear the later ones continue the sizing function . For free-machining steels the RPT ranges from 0.006 to 0.001 in ( 0.152 to 0.025 mm ) . For surface broaching the RPT is usually between 0.003 to 0.006 in ( 0.076 to 0.152 mm ) and for diameter broaching is usually between 0.0012 to 0.0025 in ( 0.030 to 0.064 mm ) . The exact value depends on many factors . If the cut is too big it will impart too much stress into the teeth and the workpiece ; if the cut is too small the teeth rub instead of cutting . One way to increase the RPT while keeping the stresses down is with chip breakers . They are notches in the teeth designed to break the chip and decrease the overall amount of material being removed by any given tooth ( see the drawing above ) . For broaching to be effective , the workpiece should have 0.020 to 0.025 in ( 0.51 to 0.64 mm ) more material than the final dimension of the cut .

The hook ( α ) angle is a parameter of the material being cut . For steel , it is between 15 and 20 ° and for cast iron it is between 6 and 8 ° . The back-off ( γ ) provides clearance for the teeth so that they don 't rub on the workpiece ; it is usually between 1 and 3 ° . When radially broaching workpieces that require a deep cut per tooth , such as forgings or castings , a rotor-cut or jump-cut design can be used ; these broaches are also known as free egress or nibbling broaches . In this design the RPT is designated to two or three rows of teeth . For the broach to work the first tooth of that cluster has a wide notch , or undercut , and then the next tooth has a smaller notch ( in a three tooth design ) and the final tooth has no notch . This allows for a deep cut while keeping stresses , forces , and power requirements low . There are two different options for achieving the same goal when broaching a flat surface . The first is similar to the rotor-cut design , which is known as a double-cut design . Here four teeth in a row have the same RPT , but each progressive tooth takes only a portion of the cut due to notches in the teeth ( see the image gallery below ) . The other option is known as a progressive broach , which completely machines the center of the workpiece and then the rest of the broach machines outward from there . All of these designs require a broach that is longer than if a standard design were used .

For some circular broaches , burnishing teeth are provided instead of finishing teeth . They are not really teeth , as they are just rounded discs that are 0.001 to 0.003 in ( 0.025 to 0.076 mm ) oversized . This results in burnishing the hole to the proper size . This is primarily used on non-ferrous and cast iron workpieces . The pitch defines the tooth construction , strength , and number of teeth in contact with the workpiece . The pitch is usually calculated from workpiece length , so that the broach can be designed to have at least two teeth in contact with the workpiece at any time ; the pitch remains constant for all teeth of the broach . One way to calculate the pitch is :

Broaching machines are relatively simple as they only have to move the broach in a linear motion at a predetermined speed and provide a means for handling the broach automatically . Most machines are hydraulic , but a few specialty machines are mechanically driven . The machines are distinguished by whether their motion is horizontal or vertical . The choice of machine is primarily dictated by the stroke required . Vertical broaching machines rarely have a stroke longer than 60 in ( 1.5 m ) . Vertical broaching machines can be designed for push broaching , pull-down broaching , pull-up broaching , or surface broaching . Push broaching machines are similar to an arbor press with a guided ram ; typical capacities are 5 to 50 tons . The two ram pull-down machine is the most common type of broaching machine . This style machine has the rams under the table . Pull-up machines have the ram above the table ; they usually have more than one ram . Most surface broaching is done on a vertical machine . Horizontal broaching machines are designed for pull broaching , surface broaching , continuous broaching , and rotary broaching . Pull style machines are basically vertical machines laid on the side with a longer stroke . Surface style machines hold the broach stationary while the workpieces are clamped into fixtures that are mounted on a conveyor system . Continuous style machines are similar to the surface style machines except adapted for internal broaching .

A somewhat different design of cutting tool that can achieve the irregular hole or outer profile of a broach is called a rotary broach or wobble broach . One of the biggest advantages to this type of broaching is that it does not require a broaching machine , but instead is used on lathes , milling machines , screw machines or Swiss lathes . Rotary broaching requires two tooling components : a tool holder and a broach . The leading ( cutting ) edge of the broach has a contour matching the desired final shape . The broach is mounted in a special tool holder that that allows it to freely rotate . The tool holder is special because it holds the tool so that its axis of rotation is inclined slightly to the axis of rotation of the work . A typical value for this misalignment is 1 ° . This angle is what produces a rotating edge for the broach to cut the workpiece . Either the workpiece or the tool holder is rotated . If the tool holder is rotated , the misalignment causes the broach to appear as though it is " wobbling " , which is the origin of the term wobble broach .

For internal broaching the sides of the broach are drafted inward so it becomes thinner ; for external broaching the sides are drafted outward , to make the pocket bigger . This draft keeps the broach from jamming ; the draft must be larger than the angle of misalignment . If the work piece rotates , the broach is pressed against it , is driven by it , and rotates synchronously with it . If the tool holder rotates , the broach is pressed against the workpiece , but is driven by the tool holder . Rate of cut [ inches per rotation ( IPR ) ] = ( diameter of tool [ inches ] ) × sin ( Angle of misalignment [ degrees ] ) If it advances much faster , then the tool becomes choked ; conversely , if it advances much slower , then an interrupted or zig-zag cut occurs . In practice the rate of cut is slightly less than the ideal rate so that the load is released on the non-cutting edge of the tool . There is some spiraling of the tool as it cuts , so the form at the bottom of the workpiece may be rotated with respect to the form at the top of the hole or profile . Spiraling may be undesirable because it binds the body of the tool and prevents it from cutting sharply . One solution to this is to reverse the rotation in mid cut , causing the tool to spiral in the opposite direction . If reversing the machine is not practical , then interrupting the cut is another possible solution .

Uncanny Tales was a Canadian science fiction pulp magazine edited by Melvin R. Colby that ran from November 1940 to September 1943 . It was created in response to the wartime reduction of imports on British and American science-fiction pulp magazines . Initially it contained stories only from Canadian authors , with much of its contents supplied by Thomas P. Kelley , but within a few issues Colby began to obtain reprint rights to American stories from Donald A. Wollheim and Sam Moskowitz . Paper shortages eventually forced the magazine to shut down , and it is now extremely rare .

By the end of the 1930s the science fiction magazine field was booming , with multiple new magazines launched in a short period . Most of the publishers also printed versions of their magazines for the Canadian market , but with the outbreak of World War II , paper shortages and import restrictions reduced the availability of these magazines in Canada . Uncanny Tales was begun in response to these conditions ; the editor was Melvin R. Colby , and the first issue was dated November 1940 . The first issue was digest-sized , and was printed in green ink . Colby initially focused on weird fiction , with Thomas P. Kelley , a Canadian writer whose work had appeared in Weird Tales , a prolific contributor . For the first four issues the format remained unchanged , and almost all the stories were by Kelley or other Canadian writers . Colby subsequently began to obtain reprint rights to U.S. stories from both Donald A. Wollheim and Sam Moskowitz , though Wollheim 's and Moskowitz 's accounts of the events differ . In Wollheim 's account , he happened to meet Colby early in 1941 in New York ; Wollheim had been editing Cosmic Stories and Stirring Science Stories but both magazines had ceased publication at the time of the meeting . Colby , who worked for a Toronto newspaper , told Wollheim that he was editing Uncanny Tales to make extra money , and asked if Wollheim knew where he might be able to obtain stories at a low word rate . Since Stirring and Cosmic had never been distributed in Canada , Wollheim was able to offer him Canadian rights to the stories in those magazines , and Colby agreed to pay a quarter of a cent per word . According to Moskowitz , Wollheim heard rumors of the new magazine , perhaps via Nils Frome , a Canadian fan whom he knew . Wollheim obtained more details from Chester Cuthbert , a Canadian author he was in correspondence with , and contacted Colby to arrange reprints of stories from Stirring and Cosmic . Moskowitz had also heard of Uncanny Tales and wrote to him separately , arranging reprints at a tenth of a cent per word . He sent Colby several stories , which were duly printed , but subsequent correspondence with Colby failed to elicit payment , and eventually Colby stopped responding to his letters . The manuscripts were never returned . A few months later , Moskowitz spoke to John B. Michel — an author associated with Wollheim 's group of writers — and found out that a long-standing feud between Wollheim and Moskowitz was at least partly responsible for his problems . Wollheim and many of the group of writers he represented held very left-wing political positions ; Moskowitz was strongly opposed , and Michel told Moskowitz that Colby was politically left-wing and had been put off by indications from Moskowitz that he was anti-communist . However , the main reason that Colby stopped responding , according to Michel , was that once Wollheim found out that Moskowitz was also supplying stories , he offered Colby further material for free on condition that Colby stopped accepting Moskowitz 's submissions .

The sixth issue saw a story by Wollheim appear , and in the seventh issue there were three by Wollheim and one by Robert W. Lowndes . In total , 37 stories from Uncanny Tales have been identified as reprints from either Stirring or Cosmic . There were also a handful of new stories from the same group of authors , including three by Wollheim and two by Lowndes , one of which , " Lure of the Lily " , had been rejected by Wollheim for the American magazines for being too risqué . The stories supplied by Sam Moskowitz included Moskowitz 's own " The Way Back " ( reprinted from Comet ) , which appeared in the February 1942 issue ; Stanton Coblentz 's novel After 12,000 Years , and James Taurasi 's story " Magician of Space " , which was not a reprint . Canadian writers continued to appear in the magazine , including C.V. Tench , who had sold a story to the very first issue of Astounding Stories in January 1930 . The stories of Canadian origin were generally unmemorable , and in some cases the stories may have been plagiarized or rewritten versions of other works .

Uncanny Tales was published by Adam Publishing Co. of Toronto for the first 17 issues , and by Norman Book Co. of Toronto for the last four issues . The publisher may have been owned by Valentine , of the Toronto publishers Valentine , Koniac and Chamberlain . The editor , who was not credited in the magazine , was Melvin R. Colby . The first four issues were digest-sized and 64 pages long ; the format then switched to a large pulp size with 96 pages for all the remaining issues except the last , which had 128 pages . The price was 15 cents throughout except for the last issue , which was 25 cents . There was no volume numbering . A complete index by Dennis Lien of the contents of all issues can be found in issue 9 of Megavore , a science fiction and fantasy bibliography magazine . In the early 1950s an anthology titled Brief Fantastic Tales appeared from Studio Publications in Toronto ; it consisted mostly of reprints from Uncanny Tales .

" Playmate to Jesus " is a song by Danish-Norwegian pop band Aqua from their third studio album , Megalomania . The song , which was released in 2011 , is about universal love and " what goes around comes around " . The song was published the same day as their other single , " Like a Robot " , which was originally planned to be released in July 2011 . Despite the song 's positive critical reaction , it only charted in Denmark , becoming the group 's second lowest-charting single . The music video , directed by Michael Sauer Christensen and filmed in Lyngby , Denmark , premiered on 22 September 2011 .

" Playmate to Jesus " was written by Aqua members Søren Rasted , Claus Norreen , René Dif and Lene Nystrøm , and produced by Norreen and Rasted . The song was recorded at Electron Studio in Copenhagen , and later mixed and mastered by Anders Schumann at C4 Studio . It is a midtempo pop song played in an E major key and following the chord progression E − B − C ♯ m − A. The song is about universal love and " what goes around comes around " . The sounds in the first seconds of the song are recorded on the spacecraft Discovery . A piano and violins start the song , before the beat kicks in . A Vocoder synth come 's through Nystrom 's vocal in certain parts of the song , and a synth bass and distorted snare drum are also played . Dif 's bridge only appears on the album version .

A preview of " Playmate to Jesus " was uploaded to Universal Music 's Danish YouTube account on 6 September 2011 . It was released as the album 's second single and as a radio single on 12 September , the same day as their club single " Like a Robot " , which was originally planned to be released in July . " Playmate to Jesus " is the first track of their third album Megalomania . The track was Aqua 's second-lowest charting single . It debuted at number twenty-six on the Danish Singles Chart , issue dated 7 October 2011 . The following week the song peaked at number thirteen . In its third and final week on the chart it fell to number thirty-three . It is the group 's third single not to chart within the top 10 in Denmark , the others being " We Belong to the Sea " and " Spin Me a Christmas " . The song has been certified gold in Denmark by the IFPI for sales of 300,000 units . Despite the song 's commercial performance , critical reactions to the song were mixed to positive . Jon O 'Brien of Allmusic , in a review of Megalomania , viewed " Playmate to Jesus " as one of the highlight songs of the album saying , " The sweeping strings , inspired sound effects , and driving country-pop melodies of the lushly produced opener ' Playmate to Jesus ' , [ ... ] shows the reunion hasn 't been completely without merit . " Time said the song " has the dubious distinction of sounding vaguely like a Lady Gaga track that didn ’ t pass quality control , " but was " relatively catchy , boasting the kind of musical infectiousness that causes you to hum it under your breath on the subway . " Gaffa 's Signe Bønsvig Wehding considered the song to be " among the best tracks on the album " , along with " Dirty Little Popsong " , " Sucker for a Superstar " and " Like A Robot " . Idolator considered the song to be a knock-off of Far East Movement 's " Like a G6 " , and more old school than " How R U Doin ? . "

Pictures of shooting the music video in Lyngby , Denmark were released on Aqua 's Facebook page on 14 September 2011 . A take of the video was also uploaded on their YouTube channel . The video was officially uploaded on YouTube on 22 September . Directed by Michael Sauer Christensen , it is set in an eerie , empty house that is reminiscent of a horror film , where a black cloud wanders through the halls of the house . The members wear black and gray clothing in the video , with Nystrom 's costume gradually changing throughout . The video ends by the members exiting the house through the roof and transforming into a beam of light shooting into the sky . The video uses a shortened radio edit of the original song , omitting the bridge .

A Perfect Circle is an American rock supergroup formed in 1999 by guitarist Billy Howerdel and Tool vocalist Maynard James Keenan . The original incarnation of the band also included Paz Lenchantin on bass , Troy Van Leeuwen on guitar , and Tim Alexander on drums , with Josh Freese as the primary drummer after the band 's initial round of touring prior to their first album . The latest lineup features Puscifer and Ashes Divide bassist Matt McJunkins ; former The Smashing Pumpkins guitarist James Iha ; and Puscifer and Ashes Divide touring drummer , Jeff Friedl . Despite having a varied cast since inception , the stylistic content of the songs has remained consistent with Howerdel as composer , and Keenan penning the lyrics and melodies . A Perfect Circle has released three albums : their debut Mer de Noms in 2000 , a follow up , Thirteenth Step in 2003 , and an album of cover songs titled Emotive in 2004 . Shortly after Emotive 's release , the band went into hiatus while members focused on other projects , the most notably being Keenan 's work with Tool and Puscifer , and Howerdel 's putting out a solo album , Keep Telling Myself It 's Alright , under the moniker Ashes Divide .

In late 2008 , Keenan and Howerdel announced the band would reform , though the band 's activity would ultimately be sporadic in the coming years . The band toured in 2011 and 2013 , and then released a live album , A Perfect Circle Live : Featuring Stone and Echo , and a greatest hits album , Three Sixty in late 2013 . Work on new material has been alluded to by members since 2008 , though progress has been slow due to Keenan 's other commitments and uncertainty in the direction of the releases . The only new studio material released since the band 's hiatus was the single " By and Down " in 2013 .

A Perfect Circle was conceived by Billy Howerdel , a former guitar technician for Nine Inch Nails , The Smashing Pumpkins , Fishbone and Tool . Howerdel met singer Maynard James Keenan in 1992 , when Tool was opening for Fishbone , and the two became friends . Three years later , Keenan offered Howerdel , who was looking for lodging , a room in his North Hollywood home . This provided Howerdel the opportunity to play demos of his music for Keenan . Pleased with what he heard , Keenan remarked , " I can hear myself singing [ those songs ] . " Although he originally desired a female vocalist , Howerdel agreed that Keenan would be a good fit , and A Perfect Circle was formed a short time later . They were then joined by bassist and violinist Paz Lenchantin , former Failure guitarist Troy Van Leeuwen , and previous Primus drummer Tim Alexander . The band played their first show at LA 's Viper Club Reception on August 15 , 1999 . After playing shows in L.A. , the band entered the studio to begin work on their first album . Alexander was soon replaced with session drummer and member of The Vandals , Josh Freese , who previously worked with Howerdel on the Guns N ' Roses album , Chinese Democracy . Alexander 's performance can still be heard on the album version of the song , " The Hollow " .

The band 's debut album , Mer de Noms ( French for " Sea of Names " ) , was released on May 23 , 2000 . The album is distinctive in that it is the highest ever debut for a rock band , selling over 188,000 copies in its first week , and appearing at number four on the Billboard 200 . Howerdel had been working on some of the music , including tracks " The Hollow " and " Breña " , as far back as 1988 . The band began touring soon after recording for the album was finished . Initially , they served as the opening act for Nine Inch Nails on the 2000 Fragility v2.0 tour , but subsequently embarked on a number of headlining tours all over the world , including the Canadian festival , Summersault . As Keenan was well known through his other band , he would often wear long wigs on his otherwise bald head when performing , to distinguish himself from his Tool persona . Mer de Noms went certified platinum by the RIAA on October 31 , 2000 , while the band was on tour . The album produced three singles : " Judith " , " 3 Libras " , and " The Hollow " . " Judith " is named after , and is about , Keenan 's mother , who suffered a stroke and was left paralyzed when he was 11 . The song " Renholdër " is a reference to guitarist and sound engineer Danny Lohner and reads Re : D.Lohner backwards . Lohner did not know the song was about him despite his first name being sung — albeit in a distorted fashion — in the song .

During the recording , release and tour for Tool 's album Lateralus , from 2000 to 2002 the band experienced a considerable amount of downtime . This made the band extremely dynamic in terms of its members . During the recording of Thirteenth Step , A Perfect Circle lost two of its members , Paz Lenchantin and Troy Van Leeuwen . Lenchantin left to join Billy Corgan 's new band Zwan in April 2002 , while Van Leeuwen left to handle touring duties as the new guitarist for Queens of the Stone Age . Ex-Marilyn Manson bassist Jeordie White , formerly known as Twiggy Ramirez , replaced Lenchantin on bass in January 2003 , with Danny Lohner taking the reins on guitar . However , Lohner did not quite fit as a second guitarist , and former The Smashing Pumpkins guitarist James Iha eventually replaced him . The band released their second album , Thirteenth Step , on September 16 , 2003 . With the new album came a new sound . While Mer de Noms had a heavier , deeper sound , Thirteenth Step was more melodic and straightforward . After the release of the album , John Lappen from The Hollywood Reporter wrote , " They were never a band who beat the listener over the head with metal brutality , but now they 're even more song-oriented than before — a move that illustrates that the band has a knack for writing instrumental hooks that show off a melodic talent that was not as apparent on the first album . " This different sound can be heard in the three singles that came off the album : " Weak and Powerless " , " The Outsider " and " Blue " . Following the release of the album , the band toured throughout the U.S. until the year 's end . Then , in January 2004 , the group left the country to play shows in Europe , Australia , New Zealand and Japan . They headed home in mid-March and finished touring in mid-June .

The album received mostly positive reviews . AllMusic 's review stated the album " is the sound of a musical and lyrical maturity that normally doesn 't occur until a band 's third or fourth albums " . The review by Yahoo ! Music expressed that the album " has its share of anthemic moments , but the real passion spills over in the moody overtures where menacing danger feels seconds away " . Rolling Stone wrote in an attempt to summarize the album that it " sounds more like the dusky thrum of Disintegration-era Cure than it does any of the members ' previous bands " , and continued " Thirteenth Step doesn 't bludgeon listeners into submission — it lulls them with droning guitars , dub-deep bass and simmering vocals . " A third album , Emotive , was released on November 2 , 2004 ( election day in the United States ) , and contains covers of anti-war songs by artists such as John Lennon ( " Imagine " ) and Joni Mitchell ( " Fiddle and the Drum " ) . Emotive was recorded with current and former members of the band , but is mostly the work of Keenan and Howerdel . The single " Passive " was adapted from the defunct band Tapeworm , a project composed mainly of Keenan , Trent Reznor of Nine Inch Nails , and Danny Lohner . " Passive " first appeared under the title " Vacant " at a show played by A Perfect Circle in Portland , Oregon on January 31 , 2001 , notably , without the blessing of Reznor to play the song . The song remained unreleased by any artist until it appeared on Emotive as the song " Passive " . The single " Passive " can also be heard in the 2005 movie Constantine when John Constantine ( Keanu Reeves ) enters Papa Midnite 's office in his club in the second half of the movie . The song " Counting Bodies Like Sheep to the Rhythm of the War Drums " is used in the teaser trailer for The Fantastic Four as well as the trailer for The Taking of Pelham 123 .

The album received mixed reviews . An AllMusic review stated the album " falls flat and fails to raise the bar set so high by the quality of their previous two releases " . Rolling Stone praised half the album while criticizing the other , as did The Guardian which stated " cover versions are often hobbled by the artist 's inability to step outside the original and find a fresh perspective , but some of these treatments verge on the visionary . " Ken Micallef of Yahoo ! Music wrote " the band builds on the power of the previous Thirteenth Step , applying hypnotic arrangements , brooding melodies , and droning rhythms to a collection that sounds absurd on its surface , but is woven together by A Perfect Circle 's heavy and dark-lidded instrumental approach . " On November 16 , 2004 , the CD-DVD set entitled Amotion was released . The DVD contains music videos for six singles ; previously unreleased videos for other songs , including three contest runner-up videos and the winning video for " Blue " ; and three trailers for Bikini Bandits . The CD is composed entirely of remixes of the singles from Mer de Noms and Thirteenth Step . The songs were retooled by Danny Lohner , Joshua Eustis , Massive Attack , and James Iha among others .

The future of A Perfect Circle remained uncertain and wobbled between " done for now " and " alive and well . " The band became inactive after they played their last show in Denver , Colorado on June 13 , 2004 . Keenan left to work on Tool 's album 10,000 Days while Howerdel began work on a side-project with Josh Freese that flourished into Ashes Divide . In addition to Keenan 's work with Tool , his side-project Puscifer released its first album , V is for Vagina on October 30 , 2007 . The rest of the band also went their separate ways . Freese once again took up the reins as drummer for Nine Inch Nails . White moved on to rejoin Marilyn Manson at guitar under his pseudonym Twiggy Ramirez , and while there was talk of Iha joining Billy Corgan for The Smashing Pumpkins reunion tour in 2007 , this idea was rebuffed and he instead began work on a solo record . Both Howerdel and Keenan discussed the future of the band in various mediums from 2006 through 2008 . During a February 2006 interview with Rock Hard , Keenan remarked , " I think [ APC ] is over . ... We pushed this project as far as it could go , and I see ourselves playing again together only in a few years to make one or two songs , nothing more . " Howerdel 's thoughts on the reunion of the band were similar to those of Keenan in a May 2006 interview with MTV . In a November 2007 issue of Spin featuring Keenan , when asked " Will there ever be another APC album , " he reiterated his comments from 2006 replying , " Um , no . Maybe , someday , a song on a soundtrack . But an album ? No . " Despite these comments , in an interview with Revolver the following month , Keenan discussed the other members of A Perfect Circle 's recent activities and also hinted at the possibility of a reunion . During the interview , Keenan stated :

The real problem with running Tool and A Perfect Circle at the same time was they both operate the same way . They 're both live touring bands with a label , still working under the old contract mentality . So I thought it was time to let A Perfect Circle go for now and let Billy explore himself . It 's tough for a guy who went from being a guitar tech [ for Tool ] to being in a band with a pretentious , famous singer and having to live in that shadow . It was important for Billy to go and do his own thing and really explore his own sound and let people hear what he has to say and how he would do it on his own , and then we 'll get back and do some A Perfect Circle stuff . Although the band 's official website had offered no insight as to whether or not the group would reunite , news continued to arrive through Keenan about the existence of the band . In Puscifer 's May 2008 newsletter , Keenan remarked on the status of A Perfect Circle : " As many of you may have heard , Billy and I are engaged in our own little projects for the moment . His is called Ashes Divide and mine is called Puscifer ... Please be advised that A Perfect Circle and Tool are still alive and well . This is simply more . "

As early as December 2008 , Keenan had announced that he and Howerdel had been writing new music for A Perfect Circle , although it wasn 't until over year and a half later , mid-2010 , when various band members began teasing a return on respective Twitter accounts , that the band actually became active . This led up to a September announcement of tour dates in which they would be playing the entirety of each of their three albums at each concert , with one album being played per night . The new touring lineup was announced Maynard James Keenan , Billy Howerdel , Josh Freese , Matt McJunkins , and James Iha . There have been conflicting reports as to what degree the band will be releasing new material . Keenan 's initial thoughts in 2008 referred to focusing on " one or two songs at a time " , which would most likely be released digitally via the internet , rather than a full album release on compact disc . Keenan jokingly mentioned that CDs have become " plastic discs that no one cares about anymore . " In June 2010 , Keenan stated that he was working on a fourth LP for A Perfect Circle . However , when asked about an album again in August , his response focused on single songs again , stating that he 's " ... not really into albums anymore . Might be more going back to the singles . The days of the singles market makes a lot more sense at this point . " and that " We have no label , so neither Billy nor I are really into kicking down hundreds of thousands of dollars to record a record and put it out . " Howerdel , in a September 2010 interview , said that he had been working on demos for the last three to four years , and he presents them to Keenan , who decides which he would like to develop into A Perfect Circle songs , or leave for Howerdel to develop into Ashes Divide songs . No new songs were played at the initial reunion concerts , as no songs were finished yet , and the band was still trying to " remind everybody " who they are at these concerts . The possibility of a live concert DVD was discussed , but ultimately not released .

In addition the initial 2010 concerts , the band also played a few songs on live television programs Jimmy Kimmel Live ! and Last Call with Carson Daly in October and November 2010 respectively . The band continued touring into 2011 , stopping in 24 cities and performing at events such as Rock on the Range Festival in Columbus , Ohio on May 21 and 22 , 2011 , Boonstock Music Festival in Edmonton , Alberta on July 2 , 2011 , Edgefest in Toronto , Canada on July 9 , 2011 , Bluesfest in Ottawa , Canada on July 10 , 2011 . Kanrocksas Music Festival in Kansas City , KS on August 6 , 2011. and Lollapalooza in Chicago , IL , on August 5 – 7 , 2011 . Freese was unavailable for the 2011 touring due to a scheduling conflict with Weezer . Jeff Friedl , drummer for Ashes Divide , filled in for him . The band continued to allude to working on new music throughout 2011 , referring to the process as " Slow but steady . " Howerdel also referred to " road testing " new songs during touring , that could ultimately be placed on a future album . On June 29 , 2011 , The sole new song , " By and Down " , was debuted in Portland , Oregon . After this , Howerdel reiterated the band 's stance on a new album , stating " Right now the intention is not to put out a ( full album ) but just to release some songs along the way , and then they might be re-imagined and put together in some collection ... If you need to have an album then there will be something more like a photo album where you collect these things and you put them in . "

After the 2011 tour , Keenan said that new material still was not ready , and that for the time , he and Howerdel were turning back to their respective side projects , Puscifer and Ashes Divide . During this time , in October 2012 , Freese left the band without any intentions of returning . The band returned to touring in 2013 , playing Soundwave Music Festival and Lollapalooza Chile in early 2013 . In February 2013 , Keenan again stated that a new album was still " currently off the table " , due to his continued work with Puscifer , and Howerdel 's commitment to working on a second yet-to-be-released Ashes Divide album . He shortly after appended that they are still working on new material , but it is still mostly just " jamming " and working on bits and pieces , not entire songs .

In September 2013 , it was announced that the band would release two separate compilations in November 2013 . The first , a greatest hits album entitled Three Sixty , containing one new song , " By and Down " , the second , a box set entitled A Perfect Circle Live : Featuring Stone and Echo . The box set contains their three concerts in 2011 where they played one album in its entirety each night , and a performance of the band at Red Rocks . In regards to future material from the band , Keenan stated " Of course , there 's always writing going on constantly . It 's just stuff that 's not quite sitting right yet , so you don 't know about it " . In November 2013 , Howerdel stated that " there are fully developed songs without lyrics and melody ... as far as the music end goes , I ’ ve got 75 % of the foundation of [ the next ] A Perfect Circle record ready to go . " He did concede that this could change depending on Keenan 's stance on music , and that Keenan prefers smaller releases , while Howerdel prefers the form of a full album . While the band was quiet over the course of 2014 and 2015 , in March 2016 , Keenan stated that he still hopes to make and release new music with the band .

Nguyễn Chánh Thi ( 23 February 1923 – 23 June 2007 ) was an officer in the Army of the Republic of Vietnam ( ARVN ) . He is best known for being involved in frequent coups in the 1960s and wielding substantial influence as a key member of various juntas that ruled South Vietnam from 1964 until 1966 , when he was overpowered by Vietnam Air Force chief and Prime Minister Nguyễn Cao Kỳ in a power struggle and exiled to the United States . Known for his flamboyant style and hostility to U.S. advice , Thi 's ouster was supported by the American leadership , who backed Kỳ 's pro-U.S. regime . Thi joined the French Army at the age of 17 and was captured by Japan after they invaded French Indochina during World War II . After several months he escaped . He later transferred to the Vietnamese National Army of the French-backed State of Vietnam , which , in October 1955 , became the ARVN and Republic of Vietnam ( South Vietnam ) , respectively . A paratrooper , he fought for then-Prime Minister Ngô Đình Diệm against the Bình Xuyên organized crime syndicate in the 1955 Battle for Saigon . Impressed by Thi 's performance , Diệm referred to him as " my son " and put him in command of the Airborne Brigade .

In November 1960 , Thi led the paratroopers in a coup against Diệm , citing political interference in the military . The rebels gained the upper hand but Thi was reluctant to push for a complete victory , and the coup was defeated after Diệm falsely promised to make reforms in order to buy time for loyalists to rescue him . Thi fled into exile in Cambodia , but returned after Diệm was deposed and executed in November 1963 . He became the deputy commander of I Corps under Nguyễn Khánh , and helped his superior to overthrow Diệm 's subjugators three months later . Thi became the commander of the 1st Division , before taking control of I Corps later in the year . During the year after Khánh 's rise to power , Thi helped Khánh stage or put down several coup attempts , making him a key player in South Vietnamese military politics . In September 1964 , he and Kỳ helped rescue Khánh from a coup attempt by two disgruntled Catholic Diệmist generals , Lâm Văn Phát and Dương Văn Đức . This gave Kỳ and Thi increased leverage in the junta . Two months later , he was prominent in shutting down a junta-appointed civilian advisory body after they disapproved of a plan by younger officers to compulsorily retire old generals . In January 1965 , he helped Khánh depose the junta-appointed civilian Prime Minister Trần Văn Hương , but by this time he had turned against Khánh . In February 1965 , he helped defeat a coup attempt by Phát and Phạm Ngọc Thảo , and helped to force Khánh 's resignation at the same time . Over the next year , Kỳ and Thi were the foremost officers in the junta , and in June 1965 , Thi declined an opportunity to serve as prime minister after being nominated by his fellow officers following the resignation of civilian Phan Huy Quát . Thi wanted to let a rival take the job and then step in after they had failed , but he never received a second opportunity .

Thi oversaw I Corps with a great deal of autonomy , and the other officers felt threatened , which was accentuated by Thi 's alignment with Buddhist activist movements in his region , traditionally a Buddhist stronghold . The Buddhists were opposed to expansion of the Vietnam War and the American leadership viewed Thi negatively . In early 1966 , feeling more confident about his hold on power , Kỳ orchestrated Thi 's removal , and announced that Thi would be going to the US for medical treatment , but in reality into exile . Thi refused to go along with Kỳ 's false story and wanted to stay in Vietnam , and this led to civil unrest in I Corps , where Thi was popular . The disquiet escalated into open rebellion by pro-Thi military units , allied to Buddhist anti-junta activists who were calling for civilian government and an end to the US-driven war expansion policy . After three months of virtual secession , Kỳ 's forces quelled the dissidents , and Thi emigrated to the U.S. , where he lived for the rest of his life .

Thi was born on 23 February 1923 in Huế , then the capital of Vietnam and the seat of the Nguyễn dynasty . At the time , Vietnam was part of the colony of French Indochina and his father was a low-level mandarin in the French-controlled monarchy and had served in the French Army during World War I. Thi joined the French Army at 17 ; a few months later , Imperial Japan invaded Indochina during World War II , wresting control from France . Thi was a Japanese prisoner of war for several months until he escaped amidst the confusion of an Allied bombing raid on the Japanese military jail . According to family documents , Thi was captured and imprisoned by the communist Viet Minh of Ho Chi Minh for three months at the end of the war in 1945 as they declared independence during the August Revolution . At the time , a power vacuum emerged as the defeated Japanese withdrew from Vietnam . France attempted to reassert its colonial grip over Indochina , while various Vietnamese groups jockeyed for power at the head of an independent country . In 1946 , full-scale conflict erupted between the Vietminh , who had declared the Democratic Republic of Vietnam ( DRV ) independent , and France . As part of their political effort , the French created the State of Vietnam ( SoV ) , an associated state in the French Union , and installed former Emperor Bảo Đại as the head of state . Thi served in the SoV 's Vietnamese National Army ( VNA ) , and rose steadily up the ranks .

In 1954 , the Vietminh defeated the French Union forces at the Battle of Dien Bien Phu and France decided to withdraw from Vietnam . Under the provisions of the Geneva Accords , the Vietminh 's DRV would take control of the northern half of the country , and the SoV the south , pending national reunification elections in 1956 . In the meantime , the State of Vietnam remained unstable . The Cao Đài and Hòa Hảo religious sects had their own private armies and de facto states in the Mekong Delta , while the Bình Xuyên organized crime syndicate controlled the national police , had their own military , and dominated the rampant drug trade , prostitution and illegal gambling in the southern capital Saigon . In April and May 1955 , Thi fought in VNA airborne units for Prime Minister Diệm against the Binh Xuyen in the Battle for Saigon after Diệm gave them an ultimatum to surrender . When they did not , the VNA attacked and decisively dispersed the Binh Xuyen after a few days of heavy street fighting . This performance so impressed the lifelong bachelor Diệm that he thereafter referred to Thi as " my son " . Diệm promoted Thi to the rank of colonel and put him in charge of the Airborne Brigade , which was expanded into a division a few years later . The Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA ) was not as impressed . One of their reports described Thi as " an opportunist and a man lacking strong convictions " . An American military advisor assessed Thi as " tough , unscrupulous , and fearless , but dumb " . In October 1955 , Diệm deposed Bảo Đại in a fraudulent referendum overseen by his brother Ngô Đình Nhu and declared himself President of the newly proclaimed Republic of Vietnam . The VNA thus became the Army of the Republic of Vietnam , and after Diệm canceled the reunification elections , the Vietnam War ensued .

In 1960 , Thi led a revolt against Diệm after lobbying by his Airborne Division deputy commander , Lieutenant Colonel Vương Văn Đông . Đông had become discontented with Diệm 's arbitrary rule and constant meddling in military affairs . Diệm , who promoted officers on religion and loyalty , rather than skill , gave orders directly to individual commanders , and played senior officers against one another in order to weaken the military leadership and prevent them from becoming effective , lest they try to challenge his rule . Đông later claimed his sole objective was to force Diệm to improve the governance of the country . Đông was clandestinely supported by his brother-in-law , Lieutenant Colonel Nguyễn Triệu Hồng , and Hong 's uncle , Hoang Co Thuy , members of the Việt Nam Quốc Dân Đảng ( VNQDĐ , the Vietnamese Nationalist Party ) , which was an anti-communist political organization whose members had been marginalized by Diệm . The coup was organized with the help of some VNQDĐ and Đại Việt Quốc Dân Đảng ( Nationalist Party of Greater Vietnam , known as Đại Việt ) members , civilians and officers alike.Đông enlisted the cooperation of an armored regiment , a marine unit and three paratrooper battalions . The operation was launched on November 11 at 05 : 00.The coup was executed ineffectually ; although the rebels captured the headquarters of the Joint General Staff at Tan Son Nhut Air Base , they failed to block the roads leading into Saigon and cut off loyalist reinforcements . Thi 's men also failed to disconnect phone lines into the palace , which allowed Diệm to appeal for aid from loyal units . After taking the key military points , the paratroopers headed towards Independence Palace . At first , they did not attack , believing that Diệm would capitulate . Most of Thi 's soldiers had been tricked into thinking that they were attacking in order to save Diệm from a Presidential Guard mutiny . When the attack finally started , Diệm was nearly killed in the opening salvoes when gunfire hit his bed , but he had arisen just a few minutes earlier . Despite their numerical advantage , the paratroopers ' first assault was repelled by the loyalists . Thi and Dong held fire ; they brought in reinforcements and attacked again , but the loyalists held firm . In the meantime , Thi 's rebels had captured the national police offices , the studios of Radio Saigon and the Presidential Guard barracks . They had also put most of the Saigon-based generals under house arrest .

Apparently poised for a military victory , the rebels hesitated . Đông wanted to storm the palace and capture the president and his family . Thi was worried Diệm could be killed in an attack and thus felt that despite Diệm 's shortcomings , he was South Vietnam 's best available leader . Thi thought that enforced reform was the best outcome . The rebels wanted Nhu , Diệm 's younger brother and chief advisor , and his wife , Madame Nhu , who were widely regarded as the powers behind Diệm 's rule , out of the government , although they disagreed over whether to assassinate or deport the couple . Thi demanded that Diệm appoint an officer as Prime Minister and remove Madame Nhu from the palace . Saigon Radio broadcast a speech authorized by Thi 's Revolutionary Council , claiming that Diệm was being removed for corruption and suppression of liberty . Worried by the uprising , Diệm sent representatives to negotiate . After lengthy talks , the parties agreed to a ceasefire . In the meantime , loyalist forces headed towards the capital . Diệm promised to end press censorship , liberalize the economy , and hold free and fair elections . Diệm refused to sack Nhu , but agreed to dissolve the cabinet and form a new government which would accommodate members of the Revolutionary Council . In the early hours of 12 November , Diệm taped a speech detailing the concessions , and Thi broadcast the message on Saigon Radio .

When the loyalist reinforcements rolled into the capital aboard tanks and armored vehicles and began to wrest the initiative , the rebels began to break . After a brief , violent battle that killed around 400 people , the coup attempt was crushed . The casualties included a large number of anti-Diệm civilians ; Thi exhorted them to bring down the Ngô family by charging the palace ; 13 were gunned down by the loyalist soldiers as they invaded the grounds . After the failed coup , Đông , Thi and other prominent officers fled to Tan Son Nhut and climbed aboard a C-47 . They fled to Cambodia , where they were given asylum by Prince Norodom Sihanouk , a long-time Diệm opponent . Diệm promptly reneged on his promises , and intensified his authoritarian rule and crackdowns on dissidents . Almost three years after the incident , Diệm opened the trial for those involved in the coup on 8 July 1963 . Thi and his fellow exiled officers were found guilty and sentenced to death in absentia . In the meantime , Thi lived self-sufficiently in Cambodia for three years .

Diệm was killed in a November 1963 coup , allowing Thi to return to South Vietnam and resume his military service . Soon after arriving home , Thi found himself involved in another coup plot , acting as the link between Khánh and Đỗ Mậu , two generals disgruntled with their position under the military junta of Minh , who oversaw the overthrow of Diệm . Mau was one of the principal tacticians in the 1963 coup ; although he did not command troops , he had a thorough knowledge of the backgrounds of the ARVN officers and their strengths , weaknesses and characteristics through his role as Diệm 's director of military security , and this understanding had allowed him to engineer the previous coup . Minh 's junta feared Mau 's shrewdness and tried to sideline him by making him the Minister of Information , a relatively unimportant position . Disgruntled , Mau began recruiting for a coup , targeting Khánh , who had been moved to the I Corps in the far north of South Vietnam to keep him far away from Saigon . Khanh made no attempt to hide his annoyance at not being given a more important job , and had long been regarded as an ambitious and unscrupulous officer by his colleagues . Mau persuaded the junta to install Thi as Khanh 's deputy in I Corps . He tricked the junta by telling them that as Khánh had played a large part in putting down the 1960 coup attempt , Thi would still be harboring resentment . According to Mau , Thi would thus be an ideal mechanism for keeping the disliked Khánh in check . Privately , Mau predicted that Thi would act as a bridge between him in Saigon , and Khánh in Huế . He was correct in thinking the 1960 conflict would be irrelevant as allegiances shifted over time and that the pair would work together for their current aims .

The trio were joined by General Trần Thiện Khiêm , the disaffected commander of the III Corps that surrounded Saigon , and an assortment of Marine , Air Force and Special Forces officers and their units . Other notable recruits were Diem loyalist and former chief of the Civil Guard , Duong Ngoc Lam , who was under investigation for corruption , and General Đức , who had recently returned from exile in Paris . The cabal scheduled the coup for 04 : 00 , 30 January . On 29 January , Thi followed Khanh to the capital . The plotters and their agents met in obscure locations spots around town . On the night of 29 January , the rebel troops assumed their positions around Saigon . A number of American officers and embassy officials were alerted to be in their offices at 2 : 00 . At 03 : 00 , Khánh took over the Joint General Staff Headquarters at Tan Son Nhut , and by dawn , the coup had succeeded without a shot being fired as Minh 's junta was caught unaware . The popular Minh was allowed to stay on as a ceremonial but powerless head of state , but his colleagues were taken into custody . Nevertheless , Minh remained disgruntled and persistently tried to regain his influence through political means . On 2 February 1964 , Thi was appointed to be commander of the 1st Division based in Huế , as part of I Corps . He stayed in the post until 21 October and on 14 November , he took control of the entire corps . This corps oversaw the five northernmost provinces of central Vietnam and the 1st and 2nd Divisions .

In August , Khánh gave himself more powers , provoking widespread riots and demonstrations across the nation , with Buddhist activists prominent in expressing opposition against Khánh . The anarchy forced Khánh to back down and make concessions , and he ended up in a weaker position than before . Among the concessions he made was to remove or demote some Catholic officials who had been close to Diệm 's religiously discriminatory rule , angering the minority Catholic community . Among those demoted were Generals Phát and Đức , both Catholic . They launched a coup attempt backed mainly by Catholic elements against Khánh before dawn on 13 September . They took over the city without firing a shot , and used the national radio station to proclaim the deposing of Khanh 's junta . There was little initial reaction from most of the military commanders , including Thi . However , Phát and Đức could not apprehend Khánh , and the Americans decided to support the incumbent after concluding that the rebels did not have a satisfactory plan to rule . Thi and Air Force chief Kỳ were then prominent in helping to crush the coup . Kỳ and Thi 's role in putting down the coup attempt gave them more leverage in Saigon 's military politics . Indebted to Kỳ , Thi and their so-called Young Turks for maintaining his hold on power , Khánh was now in a weaker position . This group of young officers were headlined by Thi , Kỳ , IV Corps commander General Nguyễn Văn Thiệu , and Admiral Chung Tấn Cang , the head of the Republic of Vietnam Navy . They publicly called on Khanh to remove " corrupt , dishonest and counterrevolutionary " officers , civil servants and exploitationists , and threatened to remove him if he did not enact their proposed reforms .

Some observers accused Kỳ and Thi of either allowing or deliberately orchestrating the plot to embarrass Khánh , portray themselves as heroes , and therefore gain prominence on the political stage . In later years , Cao Huy Thuan , a professor and Buddhist activist based in the city of Đà Nẵng in I Corps , claimed Kỳ and Thi met with him a few days before the coup , and had discussed their plans for joining a coup against Khánh . At the subsequent military trial of Phát and Đức 's faction , the plotters were acquitted . According to the historian George McTurnan Kahin , Khánh rigged the trial so that Đức and Phát were acquitted so they would be used as a Catholic counterweight to the Young Turks faction of Kỳ and Thi , who in Khánh 's eyes had become increasingly strong and ominous . Khánh decided to build an alliance with the generals from Minh 's junta by releasing them from house arrest and recalling them to active roles . However , Thi and Kỳ were aware of the motives for these moves and adjusted accordingly .

In late January 1965 , Buddhist protests against junta-appointed civilian Prime Minister Trần Văn Hương broke out across South Vietnam . The unrest came after Huong had unveiled plans to expand conscription and the war against the communists , and demonstrations were at their largest in I Corps , a Buddhist and anti-war escalation stronghold . In Huế , matters degenerated into a riot as 5,000 demonstrators attacked the United States Information Service Library and burned 8,000 books . Khánh and Thi were thought to have turned a blind eye to the rioting in order to allow the disorder to ruin the Huong government and allow them to inherit power . Khánh decided to have the armed forces replace Huong , and on the morning of 27 January , Khánh staged a bloodless putsch with the support of Thi and Kỳ . However , many of the officers had agreed to Khánh 's plan in hopes he would fail and discredit himself .

By this time , Taylor 's relationship with Khánh had already broken down irreparably over the issue of the HNC , and the US became increasingly intent on a regime change as Khánh was becoming increasingly reliant on Buddhist support , which they saw as an obstacle to their war expansion plans . In the first week of February , Taylor told the leading South Vietnamese officers that the US was " in no way propping up General Khánh or backing him in any fashion " . Despite their mutual alignment with Buddhist activists , Thi was known to have become personally hostile to Khánh by this time . During this time , many officers were organizing separate plots against Khánh . Shortly before noon on 19 February , the undetected communist agent , Colonels Thảo and Phát used tanks and some infantry battalions to seize control of the national military headquarters , post office and the radio station of Saigon . The rebels failed to capture Kỳ , who fled to Tan Son Nhut , where he ran into Khánh , and the pair flew off together , while some junta figures were arrested there . Thao made a radio announcement stating his desire to get rid of Khánh , whom he described as a " dictator " , while some of his fellow rebels made comments eulogizing Diem and indicating that they would start a hardline Catholic regime . This alarmed Thi , as the tone of the comments indicated that the rebels might punish people who had fought against Diệm in the past , such as those involved in the 1960 and 1963 coups .

The Americans decided that while they wanted Khánh out , they did not approve of Thảo and Phát , and their polarizing policies , so they began to lobby Kỳ and Thi , the two most powerful officers apart from Khánh , to defeat both sides . While Kỳ used air power to stop the two sides from confrontation by threatening to bomb them if they opened fire , the Americans consulted with Thi and General Cao Văn Viên , the commander of III Corps surrounding Saigon . They wanted Thi and Vien to assemble units hostile to both Khánh and the rebels into a Capital Liberation Force . The Americans provided Thi with a plane so that he could fly in from his I Corps headquarters in Đà Nẵng to lead ground forces against both Khanh and the rebels . Late in the night , Thảo and Phát met with Kỳ in a meeting organized by the Americans , and insisted that Khanh be removed from power . The coup collapsed when , between midnight and dawn , anti-coup forces swept into the city ; it was generally thought that the rebels did not put up a fight after being assured that Khánh would be ousted . Early in the morning , Thi , who gained the support of Kỳ , proposed a motion within the junta to remove Khánh and force him into exile , and the final vote was unanimous — Khanh was absent from the meeting . Kỳ , Thi and Thiệu then became the key figures in a junta that continued with Sửu and Prime Minister Phan Huy Quát as a civilian front , although General Minh became the nominal commander-in-chief of the armed forces .

Thi was a senior member in the ten-man ruling junta , which wanted to expand the military effort against the communists , something that was opposed by the Buddhist protestors . Thi performed a balancing act and accommodated the Buddhists , wanting them to see him as a friend . He allowed the students to publish a magazine that was highly critical of military rule . Thi also manoeuvred to have his trusted subordinate Colonel Pham Van Lieu installed as the head of the national police — a body controlled by the army and effectively a military unit — increasing his political power . Following his ascension , Lieu replaced most of the Saigon district police chiefs with Thi supporters , raising the ire of some other prominent officers . The Buddhist activist leader Thích Trí Quang said that " Thi is nominally a Buddhist , but does not really care about religion " . In June 1965 , Quat and Sửu resigned because of persistent disputes with the military and one another ; Thi had an opportunity to take power . Quat resigned and tried to directly hand over power to Thi , but this was not allowed by the generals . Nevertheless , Thi was offered the prime ministerial position by his colleagues . He was seen as having a similar level of political influence to Kỳ , and was voted in as prime minister by the ten-man junta . However , he declined the job offer on the private advice of Lieu , who told him that the political conditions were not ideal and that he should let a rival take control and fail before stepping in himself . According to Kahin , " to his [ Thi 's ] own bitter disappointment , he was never given a second chance " . Thi 's blunder was a great relief to the Americans , who were aware of the fact that Thi — despite being anti-communist — had a hostility towards American advice . Kỳ and Thiệu , both pro-American and supportive of a drastic escalation in anti-communist military activity , became prime minister and head of state respectively , the latter post being largely ceremonial . Regardless of who held the top jobs , no officer had firm control over his peers , and the respective corps commanders were effectively allowed to independently rule their own regions in return for ongoing support of the junta .

In the same year , U.S. ground forces were introduced into combat roles in large numbers , and the first US Marines came ashore at Da Nang in Thi 's I Corps . The flamboyant Thi organized for the American troops to be greeted by military bands , welcoming banners and teenage girls who garlanded them with flowers . This caused embarrassment to US military officials who felt the introduction of combat troops and resultant American casualties would not be received well by the public when contrasted with Thi 's celebratory fanfare . Soon after the Americans were in position , Thi tipped off Marine Lieutenant General Lewis W. Walt about a major movement of Việt Cộng insurgents near Chu Lai in Quảng Trị Province near the border with North Vietnam . This resulted in Operation Starlite , generally regarded as the first offensive action undertaken by the Americans in the Vietnam War . Occurring between 18 – 24 August , it resulted in the 1st Việt Cộng Regiment being pushed to the coast .

Air Marshal Kỳ , the prime minister and the most powerful member of the junta feared Thi as a rival . Many political observers in Saigon thought Thi actively wanted to depose Kỳ , and regarded him as the biggest threat to the other officers ' factions and the junta 's stability . According to Kỳ 's memoirs , Thi was a " born intriguer " who had " left-wing inclinations " . Time magazine published a piece in February 1966 claiming Thi was more dynamic than Kỳ and could seize power at any time . Historian Robert Topmiller thought Kỳ may have seen the article as destabilizing and therefore decided to move against Thi , who was known to have the " deep-rooted " loyalty of his soldiers . A large part of the South Vietnamese military was the Regional and Popular Forces , militia that served in their native areas , and they appreciated a commander with whom they had a regionalistic rapport . The support from the Buddhists , his troops and the regionalistic tendencies gave Thi a strong power base and made it hard for the other generals and the Americans to move against him . The outspoken Thi was also known as the general most likely to question and speak out against US policy .

The historian Stanley Karnow said of Kỳ and Thi : " Both flamboyant characters who wore gaudy uniforms and sported sinister moustaches , the two young officers had been friends , and their rivalry seemed to typify the personal struggles for power that chronically afflicted South Vietnam . But their dispute mirrored more than individual ambition . " Both were also known for their colorful red berets . There were reports Thi was showing insubordination towards Kỳ . The US military commander in Vietnam , General William Westmoreland , said that Thi once refused to report to Kỳ in Saigon when requested . On one occasion , when Kỳ came to I Corps to remonstrate with him , Thi turned to address his staff and mockingly asked " Should we pay attention to this funny little man from Saigon or should we ignore him ? " Thi made this comment rather loudly , within earshot of Ky , and the Vietnamese politician Bùi Diễm thought that Kỳ viewed Thi 's comment as a direct and calculated challenge to his authority . Time said Thi " ran it [ I Corps ] like a warlord of yore , obeying those edicts of the central government that suited him and blithely disregarding the rest " . Of the four corps commanders , Thi was seen as the one with the most power and independence from Saigon . Kahin thought Kỳ may have feared that Thi would secede from Saigon and turn central Vietnam into an independent state . The CIA analyst Douglas Pike , who worked in Vietnam , speculated that this would have been a large part of Ky 's thinking , as Vietnamese people have often had strong regional tendencies .

Knowing that Westmoreland and the US Embassy were hostile to Thi and supportive of his leadership , Kỳ mustered the support of eight generals on the 10-man junta , meaning that along with his vote , there were nine officers in favor of Thi 's removal . With Thi the only non-supporter , Kỳ and his colleagues removed Thi from the junta and his corps command on 10 March 1966 . Thi claimed that during this meeting , knowing the other generals ' antipathy to him , he nettled them by chastising their commitment to the country . He said the populace would never support the generals ' war effort as long as they lived so comfortably , and he mocked them for ostentatiously flying their wives and mistresses to Hong Kong for shopping expeditions . The junta put Thi under house arrest pending his deportation from the country , and appointed General Nguyễn Văn Chuân , the erstwhile commander of 1st Division and a Thi subordinate , as the new I Corps commander . The Americans supported Thi 's removal as they regarded him as being soft on communism , and a " virtual warlord " . US Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge , Jr . , Westmoreland and the Defense Secretary Robert McNamara were supportive of the Kỳ-Thiệu regime , their prosecution of the war against the communists and support of a US escalation , and they opposed Thi , regarding him as lacking firmness against communism . At a White House meeting after news of the dismissal came through , Taylor said that Thi was " a bad character and good riddance " . Lodge wrote in a report that Thi " cherished some resentment against the Americans in respect of what he considers political and military interference and infringement of sovereignty " , claiming he had contemplated " the possibility of establishing a government in the south which would be of such a character that the bulk of the population including the Vietcong would support it — and presumably neutralization of the country and possibly federation with the North would soon be possible " . The Americans wanted to ease Thi out of the corridors of power by offering him an economic future in the US and free education for his children , and Lodge and Westmoreland personally spoke to him in an attempt to convince him to accept , but they were unsuccessful . On the other hand , Thi had the support of Walt , who commanded American forces in I Corps and was the senior advisor to Thi 's forces . Unlike his countrymen , Walt thought highly of Thi , and his ability as an officer .

Kỳ claimed Thi was leaving the country to receive medical treatment for his nasal passages , as well as a general health examination . An official announcement said that the junta " had considered and accepted General Thi 's application for a vacation " . Thi retorted that " The only sinus condition I have is from the stink of corruption . " With the health story exposed as a sham , Kỳ gave a series of reasons for dismissing Thi , accusing him of being too left-wing , ruling I Corps like a warlord , having a mistress who was suspected of being a communist , and being too conspiratorial . Kỳ knew that Thi supported negotiations with the communists as a means of ending the war , and had a history of consistently removing officials and military figures who promoted such a policy , but did not publicly mention this as a reason . Thi 's dismissal provoked the Buddhist Uprising , led by the " Struggle Movement " . Thi was immensely popular in the Buddhist stronghold of Huế , a city of approximately 120,000 , and civil unrest erupted throughout the region . When he returned to the former imperial capital five days after being relieved of his command , around 20,000 supporters mobbed him , shouting and trying to touch him . This was part of a gamble by Kỳ to allow Thi back to his home city in an attempt to placate the dismayed locals , but it did not work . A general strike incapacited 90 % of Da Nang , the second biggest city in South Vietnam and the main port in central Vietnam .

During a rally , a Buddhist student leader cried " Do you want the general to stay with us ? " to which the students and other protestors answered , " Yes ! Yes ! " Thi told the large crowd to " Think about our country , not about me " . During the tongue-in-cheek speech , he made sarcastic references about his need to go to the US for health treatment . He told a journalist that he would accept " any position which is useful for the country " , leading some to think that he wanted Kỳ or Thiệu 's job . According to Time magazine , Thi 's speeches showed he " was obviously torn between a desire to rally support for a comeback and his soldier 's distaste for adding to dissension " . Kahin said that " despite the circumspection of his public addresses , [ they ] undoubtedly helped encourage the Struggle Movement . " The various dissidents formed a pro-Thi , anti-Kỳ organization called the Military-Civilian Struggle Committee , better known as the Struggle Movement . Their message and influence quickly spread as they called for the end of military rule and took over radio stations and government buildings in I Corps . They intensified their calls for Kỳ to fulfil his promise to hold democratic elections . Some I Corps units supportive of Thi then decided to join the Struggle Movement and ceased military operations against the Vietcong , instead starting a stand-off against Kỳ . Throughout April and May there were tense incidents as units loyal to the junta were flown in from Saigon , and the factions came close to warfare .

Thi publicly disassociated himself from the Struggle Movement . However , he remained in I Corps and was still regarded as a significant political influence and motivating factor for the Struggle Movement . Regardless of what he may have thought , the discontent against Kỳ was by then too much for him to control even if he had wanted to . By June , ARVN loyalists , with the help of the American forces , prevailed . Their superior numbers convinced many in the Struggle Movement to back down and realign with the government , and those who refused were militarily defeated , often in bitter street-to-street fighting . While the Struggle Movement was finally ebbing away , Thi agreed to meet with Kỳ at an American air base in Chu Lai to reach a settlement , seeing as the junta was going to prevail in any case . Thi agreed to the original offers of subsidies and the cover story of a medical trip .

After the uprising was crushed , Thi was deported to the USA , and lived in a small apartment on Connecticut Avenue on Dupont Circle , Washington , D.C. Although the apartment was small , Kahin , who interviewed Thi after his exile , described it as " handsome " . However , The New York Times called it " shabby " . Thi left his uniforms in his closet in Vietnam and disposed of all his medals . The only thing he kept from his military career was an army blanket . As part of his removal from South Vietnam , the American government gave him a substantial living allowance and paid for all his children 's education fees . Around 1973 , the payments were suddenly discontinued . In Washington , Thi spent much of his time at the Library of Congress , reading books about Asian history . Outspoken and still supported by many Buddhists , Thi tried to return to South Vietnam in February 1972 , but troops loyal to the Diệmist President Thiệu surrounded his plane on the tarmac and prevented him from disembarking ; the aircraft eventually took off and returned to the U.S.

Thi lived in the American capital until 1975 , when he moved to Arkansas . He lived in the southern state for a short period before settling in Lancaster , Pennsylvania . He worked in a variety of jobs and occasionally made speeches at universities and to Vietnamese American organizations and meetings . According to his relatives , Thi remained popular among the Vietnamese American community , most of whom had come to the US after the fall of Saigon and were stridently anti-communist . His family said their refugee compatriots often recognized him , and usually refused to let him pay for meals at their restaurants . Thi 's second marriage , to Oanh Nguyen , ended in divorce . They had five children , four sons and a daughter . He later remarried , to Catherine Nguyen , who bore him a daughter . In all , Thi had six children and 12 grandchildren . He died at the Hospice of Lancaster County from heart ailments on 23 June 2007 .

James Ernest Newland , VC ( 22 August 1881 – 19 March 1949 ) was an Australian recipient of the Victoria Cross , the highest decoration for gallantry " in the face of the enemy " that can be awarded to members of the British and Commonwealth armed forces . Newland was awarded the Victoria Cross following three separate actions in April 1917 , during attacks against German forces retreating to the Hindenburg Line . While in command of a company , Newland successfully led his men in several assaults on German positions and repulsed subsequent counter-attacks . Born in the Victorian town of Highton , Newland joined the Australian military in 1899 and saw active service during the Second Boer War . He continued to serve in the Australian Army 's permanent forces on his return to Australia , and completed several years service in the artillery . Transferring to the militia in 1907 , Newland became a police officer in Tasmania before re-joining the permanent forces in 1910 . Following the outbreak of the First World War , he was appointed to the Australian Imperial Force and was among the first wave of men to land at Gallipoli . In the days following the landing , Newland was wounded and evacuated to Egypt where he was commissioned as a second lieutenant .

Newland was born in the Geelong suburb of Highton , Victoria , on 22 August 1881 to William Newland , a labourer , and his wife Louisa Jane ( née Wall ) . In 1899 , he enlisted in the Commonwealth Military Forces and was assigned to the 4th Battalion , Australian Commonwealth Horse , as a private . The unit later embarked for South Africa , where Newland saw active service in Cape Town during the Second Boer War . Returning to Australia in 1902 , Newland re-settled in Victoria and joined the Royal Australian Artillery in July the following year . He served in the artillery for over four years , before transferring to the militia in September 1907 . In 1909 , he became a police officer in the Tasmanian Police Force , where he remained until August 1910 , when he re-enlisted in the permanent army . He was posted to the Australian Instructional Corps ; he served with this unit until the outbreak of the First World War . In a ceremony at Sheffield , Tasmania on 27 December 1913 , Newland married Florence May Mitchell .

On 17 August 1914 , Newland transferred to the newly raised Australian Imperial Force following the British Empire 's declaration of war on Germany and her allies . Assigned to the 12th Battalion , he was made its Regimental Quartermaster Sergeant and embarked from Hobart aboard HMAT Geelong on 20 October , bound for Egypt . Following a brief stop in Western Australia , the troopship arrived at its destination seven weeks later . The 12th Battalion spent the following four months training in the Egyptian desert . At the commencement of the Gallipoli Campaign , the 3rd Australian Brigade — of which the 12th Battalion was part — was designated as the covering force for the ANZAC landing , and as such was the first unit ashore on 25 April 1915 , at approximately 04 : 30 . Newland was wounded in the days following the landing , suffering a gunshot wound to his arm , and was evacuated to the 1st General Hospital . While at the hospital , he was commissioned as a second lieutenant on 22 May , before returning to the 12th Battalion four days later . Newland was engaged in operations on the Gallipoli Peninsula until 9 June , when he was withdrawn from the area and placed in command of the 12th Battalion 's transport elements stationed in Egypt . Promoted to lieutenant on 15 October , he was hospitalised for ten days in November due to dengue fever . Following the Allied evacuation of Gallipoli in December , the 12th Battalion returned to Egypt where Newland continued as transport officer . Promoted to captain on 1 March 1916 , he was made adjutant of the 12th Battalion fifteen days later . It embarked for France and the Western Front later that month .

Disembarking at Marseilles , the 12th Battalion was initially posted to the Fleurbaix sector of France . After involvement in minor operations , it transferred to the Somme in July , where it participated in the Battle of Pozières , its first major French action . Newland was posted to command A Company from 8 August , and was subsequently moved to Sausage Valley along with the rest of the 12th Battalion in preparation for an attack on Mouquet Farm . Mouquet Farm was a ruined complex connected to several German strongpoints , and formed part of the Thiepval defences . On 21 August , Newland led his company in an assault on a series of trenches slightly north east of the farm . By 18 : 30 , the company had captured its objectives and several of Newland 's men rushed off in pursuit of the retreating Germans . Newland immediately stopped them and organised the company into a defensive position ; the trench was consolidated by 05 : 00 the next morning . Praised for his " ... great coolness and courage under heavy fire " during the attack , he was recommended for the Military Cross . The award , however , was downgraded to a Mention in Despatches , the announcement of which was published in a supplement to the London Gazette on 4 January 1917 .

Following its involvement at Pozières and Mouquet Farm , the 12th Battalion was briefly transferred to the Ypres sector in Belgium in September , before returning to Bernafay Wood on the Somme late the following month . Newland was admitted to the 38th Casualty Clearing Station with pyrexia on 4 December . He was moved to the 2nd General Hospital at Le Havre , and returned to the 12th Battalion two weeks later following recuperation . On the same day , he was attached to the headquarters of the 2nd Australian Brigade for duty as a staff officer . He was granted leave on 21 January 1917 on completion of this stint . Re-joining the 12th Battalion , Newland once again assumed command of A Company . On 26 February 1917 , he was tasked with leading it during the 12th Battalion 's attack on the village of La Barque during the German retreat to the Hindenburg Line . At Bark Trench , a position on the north side of the centre of La Barque , the company encountered a German strongpoint and Newland received a gunshot wound to the face . He was admitted to the 1st Australian Field Ambulance , and returned to the 12th Battalion on 25 March after a period of hospitalisation at the 7th Stationary Hospital in Boulogne .

By early April 1917 , there remained three German-held outpost villages — Boursies , Demicourt and Hermies — between the area to the south of the I Anzac Corps position and the Hindenburg Line . An attack by the 1st Australian Division to capture them was planned for 9 April , the same day the British offensive opened at Arras . For his actions on three separate occasions during the assault , Newland was awarded the Victoria Cross . On the night of 7 / 8 April , the 12th Battalion was tasked with the capture of Boursies , on the Bapaume – Cambrai road . The attack was a feint to mislead the German forces on the direction from which Hermies was to be assaulted . Leading A Company as well as an attached platoon from B Company , Newland began his advance on the village at 03 : 00 . The company was soon subject to heavy rifle and machine gun fire from a derelict mill approximately 400 metres ( 440 yd ) short of the village , and began to suffer heavy casualties . Rallying his men , Newland charged the position and bombed the Germans with grenades . The attack dislodged the Germans , and the company secured the area and continued its advance .

Throughout 8 April , the Australians were subjected to heavy shellfire from German forces . At approximately 22 : 00 , the Germans launched a fierce counter-attack under the cover of a barrage of bombs and trench mortars against A Company 's position at the mill . They had some initial success and entered the forward posts of the mill , which were occupied by a platoon of Newland 's men under the command of Sergeant John Whittle . Newland , bringing up a platoon from the battalion 's reserve company , charged the attackers and re-established the lost ground with Whittle 's assistance . The 12th Battalion was relieved by the 11th Battalion on 10 April , having succeeded in capturing Boursies at the cost of 240 casualties , of which 70 were killed or missing . After a four-day reprieve from the frontline , the 12th Battalion relieved the 9th Battalion at Lagnicourt on 14 April . Around dawn the next day , the Germans launched a severe counter-attack against the 1st Australian Division 's line . Breaking through , they forced back the 12th Battalion 's D Company , which was to the right of Newland 's A Company . Soon surrounded and under attack on three sides , Newland withdrew the company to a sunken road which had been held by Captain Percy Cherry during the capture of the village three weeks earlier , and lined the depleted company out in a defensive position on each bank .

The German forces attacked Newland 's company several times during the battle , but were repulsed each time . During one of the assaults , Newland observed that the German attack was weakening and gathered a party of twenty men . Leading the group , he charged the Germans and seized forty as prisoners . As reinforcements from the 9th Battalion began to arrive , a combined counter-attack was launched and the line recaptured by approximately 11 : 00 . During the engagement , the 12th Battalion suffered 125 casualties , including 66 killed or missing . Newland and Whittle were both awarded the Victoria Cross for their actions at Boursies and Lagnicourt ; they were the only two permanent members of the Australian military to receive the decoration during the war . At 35 years and 7 months old , Newland was also the oldest Australian Victoria Cross recipient of the First World War . The full citation for Newland 's Victoria Cross appeared in a supplement to the London Gazette on 8 June 1917 : His Majesty the KING has been graciously pleased to approve of the award of the Victoria Cross to the undermentioned Officers , Non-commissioned Officers and Men : —

For most conspicuous bravery and devotion to duty , in the face of heavy odds , on three separate occasions . On the first occasion he organised the attack by his company on a most important objective , and led personally , under heavy fire , a bombing attack . He then rallied his company , which had suffered heavy casualties , and he was one of the first to reach the objective . On the following night his company , holding the captured position , was heavily counter-attacked . By personal exertion , utter disregard of fire , and judicious use of reserves , he succeeded in dispersing the enemy and regaining the position . On a subsequent occasion , when the company on his left was overpowered and his own company attacked from the rear , he drove off a combined attack which had developed from these directions . These attacks were renewed three or four times , and it was Capt. Newland 's tenacity and disregard for his own safety that encouraged the men to hold out . The stand made by this officer was of the greatest importance , and produced far-reaching results .

In early May 1917 , the 12th Battalion was involved in the British and Australian attempt to capture the village of Bullecourt . While engaged in this operation on 6 May , Newland was wounded for the third and final time of the war by a gunshot to his left armpit . Initially admitted to the 5th Field Ambulance , he was transferred to No 1 Red Cross Hospital , Le Touquet , the next day . The injury necessitated treatment in England , and Newland was shipped to a British hospital eight days later . On recovering from his wounds , Newland attended an investiture ceremony at Buckingham Palace on 21 July , where he was decorated with his Victoria Cross by King George V. Later the same day , Newland boarded a ship to Australia . It arrived in Melbourne on 18 September , and Newland travelled to Tasmania . He was discharged from the Australian Imperial Force as medically unfit on 2 March 1918 .

Following his discharge , Newland retained the rank of captain and returned to service with the permanent military forces . Between the two world wars , he held various appointments in the army , including adjutant and quartermaster of the 8th , 49th , 52nd , 38th and 12th Battalions , as well as area officer and recruiting officer . In 1924 , Newland 's wife Florence died of tuberculosis . On 30 April 1925 , he married Heather Vivienne Broughton in a ceremony at St Paul 's Anglican Church , Bendigo ; the couple would later have a daughter . Promoted to major on 1 May 1930 , Newland was awarded the Meritorious Service Medal in 1935 . Following the outbreak of the Second World War , Newland was seconded for duties as quartermaster instructor at the 4th Division headquarters . On 10 May 1940 , he assumed his final army appointment as quartermaster , A Branch , at Army Headquarters in Melbourne . He served in this position until August 1941 , when he was placed on the retired list with the honorary rank of lieutenant colonel . In retirement , Newland served as Assistant Commissioner of the Australian Red Cross Society in the Northern Territory during the later months of 1941 . He joined the inspection staff at Ammunition Factory , Footscray on 2 January 1942 . At his home in Caulfield , Victoria on 19 March 1949 , he died suddenly of heart failure at the age of 67 . He was accorded a funeral with full military honours , and was buried at Brighton Cemetery . In 1984 , Newland 's daughter , Dawn , donated her father 's medals to the Australian War Memorial in Canberra , where they currently reside .

Yamashiro ( 山城 , " Mountain castle " , named for Yamashiro Province ) was the second of two Fusō-class dreadnought battleships built for the Imperial Japanese Navy . Launched in 1915 and commissioned in 1917 , she initially patrolled off the coast of China , playing no part in World War I. In 1923 , she assisted survivors of the Great Kantō earthquake . Yamashiro was modernized between 1930 and 1935 , with improvements to her armor and machinery and a rebuilt superstructure in the pagoda mast style . Nevertheless , with only 14-inch guns , she was outclassed by other Japanese battleships at the beginning of World War II , and played auxiliary roles for most of the war . By 1944 , though , she was forced into front-line duty , serving as the flagship of Vice-Admiral Shōji Nishimura 's Southern Force at the Battle of Surigao Strait , the southernmost action of the Battle of Leyte Gulf . During fierce night fighting in the early hours of 25 October against a superior American force , Yamashiro was sunk by torpedoes and naval gunfire . Nishimura went down with his ship , and only 10 crewmembers survived .

The ship had a length of 192.024 meters ( 630.00 ft ) between perpendiculars and 202.7 meters ( 665 ft ) overall . She had a beam of 28.7 meters ( 94 ft 2 in ) and a draft of 8.7 meters ( 29 ft ) . Yamashiro displaced 29,326 long tons ( 29,797 t ) at standard load and 35,900 long tons ( 36,500 t ) at full load . Her crew consisted of 1,198 officers and enlisted men in 1915 and about 1,400 in 1935 . During the ship 's modernization during 1930 – 35 , her forward superstructure was enlarged with multiple platforms added to her tripod foremast . Her rear superstructure was rebuilt to accommodate mounts for 127-millimeter ( 5.0 in ) anti-aircraft ( AA ) guns and additional fire-control directors . Yamashiro was also given torpedo bulges to improve her underwater protection and to compensate for the weight of the additional armor . In addition , her stern was lengthened by 7.62 meters ( 25.0 ft ) . These changes increased her overall length to 212.75 m ( 698.0 ft ) , her beam to 33.1 m ( 108 ft 7 in ) and her draft to 9.69 meters ( 31 ft 9 in ) . Her displacement increased nearly 4,000 long tons ( 4,100 t ) to 39,154 long tons ( 39,782 t ) at deep load .

The ship had two sets of Brown-Curtis direct-drive steam turbines , each of which drove two propeller shafts . The turbines were designed to produce a total of 40,000 shaft horsepower ( 30,000 kW ) , using steam provided by 24 Miyahara-type water-tube boilers , each of which consumed a mixture of coal and oil . Yamashiro had a stowage capacity of 4,000 long tons ( 4,100 t ) of coal and 1,000 long tons ( 1,000 t ) of fuel oil , giving her a range of 8,000 nautical miles ( 15,000 km ; 9,200 mi ) at a speed of 14 knots ( 26 km / h ; 16 mph ) . The ship exceeded her designed speed of 22.5 knots ( 41.7 km / h ; 25.9 mph ) during her sea trials , reaching 23.3 knots ( 43.2 km / h ; 26.8 mph ) at 47,730 shp ( 35,590 kW ) . During her modernization , the Miyahara boilers were replaced by six new Kanpon oil-fired boilers fitted in the former aft boiler room , and the forward funnel was removed . The Brown-Curtis turbines were replaced by four geared Kanpon turbines with a designed output of 75,000 shp ( 56,000 kW ) . On her trials , Yamashiro 's sister ship Fusō reached a top speed of 24.7 knots ( 45.7 km / h ; 28.4 mph ) from 76,889 shp ( 57,336 kW ) . The fuel storage of the ship was increased to a total of 5,100 long tons ( 5,200 t ) of fuel oil that gave her a range of 11,800 nautical miles ( 21,900 km ; 13,600 mi ) at a speed of 16 knots ( 30 km / h ; 18 mph ) .

The twelve 45-calibre 14-inch guns of Yamashiro were mounted in six twin-gun turrets , numbered one through six from front to rear , each with an elevation range of − 5 to + 30 degrees . The turrets were arranged in an unorthodox 2-1-1-2 style with superfiring pairs of turrets fore and aft ; the middle turrets were not superfiring , and had a funnel between them . The main guns and their turrets were modernized during the ship 's 1930 reconstruction ; the maximum elevation of the main guns was increased to + 43 degrees , increasing their maximum range from 25,420 to 32,420 metres ( 27,800 to 35,450 yd ) . Initially , the guns could fire at a rate of 1.5 rounds per minute , and this was also improved during her first modernization . Originally , Yamashiro was fitted with a secondary armament of sixteen 50-caliber 6-inch guns mounted in casemates on the upper sides of the hull . Each gun could fire a high-explosive projectile to a maximum range of 22,970 yards ( 21,000 m ) at up to six shots per minute . She was later fitted with six high-angle 40-caliber three-inch AA guns , in single mounts on both sides of the forward superstructure and both sides of the second funnel , as well as on both sides of the aft superstructure . These guns had a maximum elevation of + 75 degrees , and could fire a 5.99-kilogram ( 13.2 lb ) shell at a rate of 13 to 20 rounds per minute to a maximum height of 7,200 meters ( 23,600 ft ) . The ship was also fitted with six submerged 533-millimeter ( 21.0 in ) torpedo tubes , three on each broadside .

The ship 's waterline armor belt was 229 to 305 millimeters ( 9 to 12 in ) thick ; below it was a strake of 102 mm ( 4 in ) armor . The deck armor ranged in thickness from 32 to 51 mm ( 1.3 to 2.0 in ) . The turrets were protected with an armor thickness of 279.4 mm ( 11.0 in ) on the face , 228.6 mm ( 9.0 in ) on the sides , and 114.5 mm ( 4.51 in ) on the roof . The barbettes of the turrets were protected by armor 305 mm thick , while the casemates of the 152 mm guns were protected by 152 mm armor plates . The sides of the conning tower were 351 millimeters ( 13.8 in ) thick . Additionally , the vessel contained 737 watertight compartments ( 574 underneath the armor deck , 163 above ) to preserve buoyancy in the event of battle damage . During her first reconstruction Yamashiro 's armor was substantially upgraded . The deck armor was increased to a maximum thickness of 114 mm ( 4.5 in ) . A longitudinal bulkhead of 76 mm ( 3.0 in ) of high-tensile steel was added to improve the underwater protection .

The ship was originally fitted with two 3.5-meter ( 11 ft 6 in ) and two 1.5-meter ( 4 ft 11 in ) rangefinders in her forward superstructure , a 4.5-meter ( 14 ft 9 in ) rangefinder on the roof of Turret No. 2 , and 4.5-meter rangefinders in Turrets 3 , 4 , and 5 . While in drydock in July 1943 , a Type 21 air search radar was installed on the roof of the 10-meter rangefinder at the top of the pagoda mast . In August 1944 , two Type 22 surface search radar units were installed on the pagoda mast and two Type 13 early warning radar units were fitted on her mainmast .

Yamashiro , named for Yamashiro Province , the former province of Kyoto , was laid down at the Yokosuka Naval Arsenal on 20 November 1913 and launched on 3 November 1915 . She was completed on 31 March 1917 with Captain Suketomo Nakajima in command , and was assigned to the 1st Division of the 1st Fleet in 1917 – 18 . She did not take part in any combat during World War I , as there were no longer any forces of the Central Powers in East Asia by the time she was completed , but she did patrol off the coast of China briefly during the war . On 29 March 1922 , a Gloster Sparrowhawk fighter successfully took off from the ship . She aided survivors of the 1923 Great Kantō earthquake , in September 1923 . Little detailed information is available about Yamashiro 's activities during the 1920s , although she did make a port visit to Ryojun Guard District , in Manchuria , on 5 April 1925 and also conducted training off the coast of China . The ship 's reconstruction began on 18 December 1930 at the Yokosuka Naval Arsenal where her machinery was replaced , her armor was reinforced , and torpedo bulges were fitted . Yamashiro 's armament was also upgraded and her torpedo tubes were removed . Captain Chuichi Nagumo assumed command of the ship on 15 November 1934 , her modernization was completed on 30 March 1935 , and she became flagship of the Combined Fleet . Captain Masakichi Okuma relieved Nagumo on 15 November and he , in turn , was replaced by Captain Masami Kobayashi on 1 December 1936 . Yamashiro began a lengthy refit on 27 June 1937 and Captain Kasuke Abe assumed command on 20 October . Her refit was completed on 31 March 1938 and Captain Kakuji Kakuta relieved Abe on 15 November . In early 1941 , the ship experimentally launched radio-controlled Kawanishi E7K2 floatplanes . Captain Chozaemon Obata assumed command on 24 May 1941 and Yamashiro was assigned to the 1st Fleet 's 2nd Division , consisting of the two Fusō-class and the two Ise-class battleships .

Yamashiro and her sister ship Fusō spent most of the war around Japan , mostly at the anchorage at Hashirajima in Hiroshima Bay . When the war started for Japan on 8 December , the division , reinforced by the battleships Nagato and Mutsu and the light carrier Hōshō , sortied from Hashirajima to the Bonin Islands as distant support for the 1st Air Fleet attacking Pearl Harbor , and returned six days later . On 18 April 1942 , Yamashiro chased the Doolittle Raider force that had just launched an air raid on Tokyo , but returned four days later without having made contact . On 28 May , she set sail , commanded by Captain Gunji Kogure , with the rest of the 2nd Battleship Division and the Aleutian Support Group at the same time that most of the Imperial Fleet began an attack on Midway Island ( Operation MI ) . Commanded by Vice-Admiral Shirō Takasu , the division was composed of Japan 's four oldest battleships , including Yamashiro , accompanied by two light cruisers , 12 destroyers , and two oilers . Official records do not show the squadron as part of the larger Midway operation , known as Operation AL ; they were to accompany the fleet under Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto , but were only to provide support to the Aleutian task force if needed . They were not needed , and Yamashiro returned to home waters where she was employed mostly for training duties , in the Inland Sea till 1 February 1943 and at Yokosuka until September , when she became a training ship for midshipmen .

In an effort to replace the aircraft carriers lost at the Battle of Midway , the Navy made plans to convert the two Fusō-class ships to hybrid battleship / carriers , but the two Ise-class battleships were chosen instead . In July 1943 , Yamashiro was at the Yokosuka drydock for fitting of a radar and additional 25 mm AA guns . The ship was briefly assigned as a training ship on 15 September before loading troops on 13 October bound for Truk Naval Base , arriving with the battleship Ise on the 20th . The two battleships sailed for Japan , accompanied by the carriers Jun 'yō and Unyō , on 31 October . On 8 November , the submarine USS Halibut fired torpedoes at Jun 'yo that missed , but hit Yamashiro with a torpedo that failed to detonate . Yamashiro resumed her training duties in Japan , and Captain Yoshioki Tawara assumed command . He was promoted to Rear Admiral on 1 May , but died of natural causes four days later , and Captain Katsukiyo Shinoda was appointed to replace him . During the US invasion of Saipan in June 1944 , Japanese troop ships attempting to reinforce the defenses were sunk by submarines . Shigenori Kami , chief of operations of the Navy Staff , volunteered to command Yamashiro to carry troops and equipment to Saipan . If the ship actually reached the island , he intended to deliberately beach the ship before it could be sunk and to use its artillery to defend the island . After Ryūnosuke Kusaka , Chief of Staff of the Combined Fleet , also volunteered to go , Prime Minister Hideki Tōjō approved the plan , known as Operation Y-GO , but the operation was cancelled after the decisive defeat in the Battle of the Philippine Sea on 19 and 20 June .

The ship was refitted in July at Yokosuka , where additional radar systems and light AA guns were fitted . Yamashiro and her sister ship were transferred to Battleship Division 2 of the 2nd Fleet on 10 September . The ship briefly became the division 's flagship under Vice Admiral Shōji Nishimura until 23 September when he transferred his flag to Fusō . They departed Kure on 23 September for Lingga Island , carrying the Army 's 25th Independent Mixed Regiment , and escaped an attack by the submarine Plaice the next day . They arrived on 4 October , where Nishimura transferred his flag back to Yamashiro . The ships then transferred to Brunei to offload their toops and refuel in preparation for Operation Shō-Gō , the attempt to destroy the American fleet conducting the invasion of Luzon .

As flagship of Nishimura 's Southern Force , Yamashiro left Brunei at 15 : 30 on 22 October 1944 , heading east into the Sulu Sea and then to the northeast into the Mindanao Sea . Intending to join Vice-Admiral Takeo Kurita 's force in Leyte Gulf , they passed west of Mindanao Island into Surigao Strait , where they met a large force of battleships and cruisers lying in wait . The Battle of Surigao Strait would become the southernmost action in the Battle of Leyte Gulf . At 09 : 08 on 24 October , Yamashiro , Fusō and the heavy cruiser Mogami spotted a group of 27 planes , including Grumman TBF Avenger torpedo bombers and Curtiss SB2C Helldiver dive bombers escorted by Grumman F6F Hellcat fighters , coming from the carrier Enterprise . Around 20 sailors on Yamashiro were killed by strafing and rocket attacks , and the ship listed by almost 15 degrees after a bomb 's near miss damaged the hull and flooded the starboard bilge , until counter-flooding in the port bilge righted the ship . Nishimura issued a telegram to Admiral Soemu Toyoda at 20 : 13 : " It is my plan to charge into Leyte Gulf to [ reach ] a point off Dulag at 04 : 00 hours on the 25th . " At 22 : 52 , his force opened fire , damaging PT 130 and PT 152 and forcing them to retreat before they could launch their torpedoes . Three American destroyers launched torpedoes at 03 : 00 that morning , hitting Fusō at 03 : 08 and forcing her to fall out of formation . Yamashiro opened fire with her secondary battery seven minutes later . Around 03 : 11 , the destroyers Monssen and Killen fired their torpedoes , one or two of which hit Yamashiro amidships . The resulting damage temporarily slowed the ship down , gave her a list to port and forced the flooding of the magazines for the two aft turrets . Yamashiro may have been hit a third time near the bow at 03 : 40 .

At 03 : 52 , the battleship was attacked by a large formation to the north commanded by Rear Admiral Jesse Oldendorf . First came 6- and 8-inch ( 200 mm ) shells from three heavy cruisers , Louisville , Portland , and Minneapolis , and four light cruisers , Denver , Columbia , Phoenix and Boise . Six battleships formed a battle line ; the Pearl Harbor veteran West Virginia was the first to open fire a minute later , scoring at least one hit with 16-inch ( 410 mm ) shells in the first 20,800-meter ( 22,700 yd ) salvo , followed by Tennessee and California . Hampered by older radar equipment , Maryland joined the fight late , Pennsylvania never fired , and Mississippi managed to fire exactly one salvo — the last of the engagement . The Australian heavy cruiser HMAS Shropshire also had radar problems and did not begin firing until 03 : 56 . The main bombardment lasted 18 minutes , and Yamashiro was the only target for seven of them . The first rounds hit the forecastle and pagoda mast , and soon the entire battleship appeared to be ablaze . Yamashiro 's two forward turrets targeted her assailants , and the secondary armament targeted the American destroyers plaguing Mogami and the destroyer Asagumo . The ship continued firing in all directions , but was not able to target the battleships with the other four operable 14-inch guns of her amidships turrets until almost 04 : 00 , after turning west . There was a big explosion at 04 : 04 , possibly from one of the middle turrets . Yamashiro increased her firing rate between 04 : 03 and 04 : 09 , despite the widespread fires and damage , and was hit during this time near the starboard engine room by a torpedo . By 04 : 09 , her speed was back up to 12 knots , and Nishimura wired to Kurita : " We proceed till totally annihilated . I have definitely accomplished my mission as pre-arranged . Please rest assured . " At the same time , Oldendorf issued a brief cease-fire order to the entire formation after hearing that the destroyer Albert W. Grant was taking friendly fire , and the Japanese ships also ceased fire .

Yamashiro increased speed to 15 knots in an attempt to escape the trap , but she had already been hit by two to four torpedoes , and after two more torpedo hits near the starboard engine room , she was listing 45 degrees to port . Shinoda gave the command to abandon ship , but neither he nor Nishimura made any attempt to leave the conning tower as the ship capsized within five minutes and quickly sank , stern first , vanishing from radar between 04 : 19 and 04 : 21 . Only 10 crewmembers of the estimated 1,636 officers and crew on board survived . John Bennett claimed to have discovered Yamashiro 's wreck in April 2001 , but confirmation of the wreck 's identity has not been made as of 2013 .

Stuyvesant High School / ˈstaɪvəsənt / , commonly referred to as Stuy / ˈstaɪ / or Stuyvesant , is one of nine specialized high schools in New York City , United States . Operated by the New York City Department of Education , these schools offer tuition-free accelerated academics to city residents . Stuyvesant is a college preparatory science , technology , engineering , and mathematics ( STEM ) focused liberal arts high school . Admission to Stuyvesant involves passing the Specialized High Schools Admissions Test . Each November , about 27,000 eighth and ninth graders take the 2 1 ⁄ 2-hour exam , and roughly 950 students , or 3.5 % of applicants , are accepted to Stuyvesant each year .

Stuyvesant High School is named after Peter Stuyvesant , the last Dutch governor of New Netherland before the colony was transferred to England in 1664 . The school was established in 1904 as a manual training school for boys , hosting 155 students and 12 teachers . In 1907 , it moved from its original location at 225 East 23rd Street to a building designed by C. B. J. Snyder at 345 East 15th Street . The building , built in 1905 for $ 1.5 million , housed the Stuyvesant campus for the next 85 years . The school became renowned for excellence in math and science , and enrollment continued to grow so that by 1919 , admission began to be restricted based on scholastic achievement . Stuyvesant went on a double session plan in 1919 to accommodate the rising number of students , with some students attending in the morning and others in the afternoon and early evening . All students studied a full set of courses . These double sessions ran until 1956 . The school implemented a system of entrance examinations starting in 1934 . The examination program was later expanded to include the newly founded Bronx High School of Science , and was developed with the assistance of Columbia University . During the 1950s , the building underwent a $ 2 million renovation to update its classrooms , shops , libraries and cafeterias . In 1956 , a team of six students designed and began construction of a cyclotron , and a low-power test of the device succeeded six years later . A later attempt at full-power operation , however , knocked out the power to the school and surrounding buildings .

Prior to 1969 , Stuyvesant did not accept female students . That year , 14 girls were admitted to Stuyvesant and 12 enrolled at the start of September , marking the school 's first co-educational year . By 2002 , female enrollment had grown to 42 % . New York State Legislature passed the Hecht-Calandra act in 1972 , designating Brooklyn Tech , Bronx Science , Stuyvesant , and The High School of Music & Art ( now Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music & Art and Performing Arts ) as specialized high schools of New York City . The act called for a uniform exam to be administered for admission to Brooklyn Tech , Bronx Science and Stuyvesant High School . The exam , named the Specialized High Schools Admissions Test ( SHSAT ) , tested students in math and verbal abilities for students entering all of New York City 's specialized high schools , except for students applying for entry to LaGuardia High School , who are accepted by audition rather than examination . The school building , meanwhile , deteriorated over the years . Although Stuyvesant was a top-notch school even through the 1970s and 1980s , when New York City public schools in general were marked by violence and low grades among their students , Stuyvesant 's school building was in a broken-down state . A New York Times report stated that the building had " held out into old age with minimal maintenance and benign neglect until its peeling paint , creaking floorboards and antiquated laboratories became an embarrassment . " The five-story building could not cater adequately to the several thousand students , leading the New York City Board of Education to secure an agreement with the Battery Park City Authority for a new building to be built in Battery Park City , near lower Manhattan 's Financial District .

The 15th Street building remains in use as of 2012 , as " Old Stuyvesant Campus " , and houses three schools : the Institute for Collaborative Education , the High School for Health Professions and Human Services , and P.S. 226 . During the 2003 – 4 school year , Stuyvesant celebrated the 100th anniversary of its founding with a full year of activities . Events included a procession from the 15th Street building to the Chambers Street one ; a meeting of the National Consortium for Specialized Secondary Schools of Mathematics , Science and Technology ; an all-class reunion ; and visits and speeches from notable alumni . In recent years , keynote graduation speakers have included Attorney General Eric Holder ( 2001 ) , former President Bill Clinton ( 2002 ) , United Nations Secretary General Kofi Annan ( 2004 ) , Late Night comedian Conan O 'Brien ( 2006 ) , and the founder of Humans of New York , Brandon Stanton ( 2015 ) .

The new building is 0.5 miles ( 0.80 km ) from the site of the World Trade Center , which was destroyed on September 11 , 2001 . The school was evacuated during the attack . Although the smoke cloud coming from the World Trade Center engulfed the building at one point , there was no structural damage to the building , and there were no reports of physical injuries . Less than an hour after the collapse of the second WTC tower , concern over a bomb threat at the school prompted an evacuation of the surrounding area , as reported live by NBC news reporter Pat Dawson on the Today show . When classes resumed on September 21 , 2001 , students were moved to Brooklyn Technical High School while the Stuyvesant building served as a base of operations for rescue and recovery workers . This caused serious congestion at Brooklyn Tech , and required the students to attend in two shifts , with the Stuyvesant students attending the evening shift . Normal classes resumed three weeks later on October 9 . Because Stuyvesant was so close to the World Trade Center site , there were concerns of asbestos exposure . The US EPA indicated at that time that Stuyvesant was safe from asbestos , and conducted a thorough cleaning of the Stuyvesant building , but the Stuyvesant High School Parents ' Association has contested the accuracy of the assessment . Some problems , including former teacher Mark Bodenheimer 's respiratory problems , have been reported — he accepted a transfer to The Bronx High School of Science after having difficulty continuing his work at Stuyvesant . Other isolated cases include Stuyvesant 's 2002 Class President Amit Friedlander , who received local press coverage in September 2006 after he was diagnosed with cancer . While there have been other cases linked to the same dust cloud that emanated from Ground Zero , a spot precariously close to Stuyvesant , there is no definitive evidence that such cases have directly affected the Stuyvesant community . Stuyvesant students did spend a full year in the building before the theater and air systems were cleaned , however , and a group of Stuyvesant alumni is currently lobbying for health insurance as a result .

Nine alumni were killed in the World Trade Center attack . Another alumnus , Richard Ben-Veniste ' 60 , was on the 9 / 11 Commission . On October 2 , 2001 , the school paper , The Spectator , under Editor in Chief Jeff Orlowski and Faculty Advisor Holly Ojalvo , created a special 24-page full-color 9 / 11 insert containing student photos , reflections and stories . On November 20 , 2001 , the magazine was distributed for free in 830,000 copies of The New York Times to the entire New York Greater Metropolitan Area . In the months after the attacks , Annie Thoms ( 1993 ) , an English teacher at Stuyvesant and the theater adviser at the time , suggested that the students take accounts of staff and students ' reactions during and after September 11 , 2001 and turn them into a series of monologues . Thoms then published these monologues as With Their Eyes : September 11 — The View from a High School at Ground Zero .

Stuyvesant has a total enrollment of over 3,000 students , and is open to residents of New York City entering either ninth or tenth grade . Enrollment is based solely on performance on the Specialized High Schools Admissions Test ( SHSAT ) . The list of schools using the SHSAT has since grown to include all of New York 's specialized high schools except LaGuardia High School , where entry is by audition rather than examination . The test score necessary for admission to Stuyvesant has consistently been higher than that needed for admission to the other schools using the test . Admission is currently based on an individual 's score on the examination and his or her pre-submitted ranking of Stuyvesant among the other specialized schools . Each year , about 26,000 of New York City 's eighth-graders sit for the test . Ninth and rising tenth graders are also eligible to take the test for enrollment , though far fewer students are admitted this way . The test covers math ( word problems and computation ) and verbal ( reading comprehension , logical reasoning , unscrambling paragraphs ) skills . According to Article 12 of New York education law , " Admissions to the Bronx High School of Science , Stuyvesant High School , and Brooklyn Technical High School shall be solely and exclusively by taking a competitive , objective , and scholastic achievement examination , which shall be open to each and every child in the city of New York . " The current admission policy is available from the NYC Department of Education . According to the Department of Education , Stuyvesant accepts students solely based on their performance on the SHSAT , although former Mayor John Lindsay and community activist group ACORN have argued that the exam may be biased against African and Hispanic Americans . A major cheating scandal on another standardized test , which eventually implicated seventy students , emerged in late June 2012 . According to the Department of Education , a student used a smartphone to send text messages to other students during a state Regents examination . Some students involved were suspended as a result . The ring leader , Nayeem Ahsan , was said to be the source of the cheating . This scandal would lead to the retirement of the Principal Stanley Teitel .

The paucity of Black and Hispanic students at Stuyvesant has often been an issue for some city administrators . As of the 2014-15 school year , Asian students made up 73 % of the school 's population ; White students , 20 % ; Latinos , 3 % ; Blacks , 1 % ; and unknown / other , 7 % . In 1971 , Mayor John Lindsay argued that the test was culturally biased against black and Hispanic students and sought to implement an affirmative action progr " am . However , protests by parents forced the plan to be scrapped and led to the passage of the Hecht-Calandra Act , which preserved admissions by examination only . A small number of students judged to be economically disadvantaged and who come within a few points of the cut-off score were given an extra chance to pass the test . Community activist group Association of Community Organizations for Reform Now ( ACORN ) published two reports in 1996 , titled Secret Apartheid and Secret Apartheid II . In these reports , ACORN called the SHSAT " permanently suspect " and a " product of an institutional racism " , and claimed that black and Hispanic students did not have access to proper test preparation materials . Along with Schools Chancellor Rudy Crew , they began an initiative for more diversity in the city 's gifted and specialized schools , in particular demanding that since only a few districts send the majority of Stuyvesant 's and Bronx Science 's students , that the SHSAT be suspended altogether " until the Board of Education can show that the students of each middle school in the system have had access to curricula and instruction that would prepare them for this test regardless of their color or economic status . " Jesse Shapiro , Stuyvesant valedictorian , and Alan Van Dyke and Micah C. Lasher , then sophomores , published several editorials in response , and change was averted .

A number of students take preparatory courses offered by private companies such as The Princeton Review and Kaplan , in order to perform better on the SHSAT , often leaving those unable to afford such classes at a disadvantage . To bridge this gap and boost minority admissions , the Board of Education started the Math Science Institute in 1995 , a free program to prepare students for the admissions test . Students attend preparatory classes through the program , now known as the Specialized High School Institute , at several schools around the city from the summer after 6th grade until the 8th grade exam . Despite these free programs , the black and Hispanic enrollment continue to decline .

The new 10-story building opened in 1992 . It housed 2,700 students and 103 faculty members initially . With five gymnasiums , an enormous swimming pool , modern computers , 12 science labs , multiple escalators , spacious studios , and Hudson River views , the school building was considered a paragon at the time of its opening . In 1997 , the eastern end of the mathematics floor was dedicated to Dr. Richard Rothenberg , the math-department chairman who had died from a sudden heart attack earlier that year . Sculptor Madeleine Segall-Marx was commissioned to create the Rothenberg Memorial in his honor . She created a mathematics wall entitled " Celebration " , consisting of 50 wooden boxes — one for each year of his life — behind a glass wall , featuring mathematical concepts and reflections on Rothenberg . In 2006 , Robert Ira Lewy ' 60 made a gift worth $ 1,000,000 to found the Dr. Robert Ira Lewy M.D. Multimedia Center. and donated his personal library in 2007 . The school 's library has a capacity of 40,000 volumes and overlooks Battery Park City . In late 2010 , the school library merged with the New York Public Library ( NYPL ) network in a four-year pilot program , in which all students of the school received a student library card that can check books out of the school library or any other public library in the NYPL system .

In early 2011 , Stuyvesant conducted a pilot program in conjunction with Amazon.com , IBM , the City University of New York , and the New York City Department of Education . One hundred freshmen from the class of 2014 , as well as three teachers , were given electronic textbooks on Kindle DXs instead of traditional paper textbooks . The students received textbooks for Geometry , Biology , and World History and shared the same teachers for each of those subjects . While many universities have experimented with ebooks , Stuyvesant was the first high school to do so . Stanley Teitel , the principal at the time , told the Spectator he hoped to expand the program school-wide if the pilot program proved successful , but the program was discontinued at the end of the 2011 spring term after a focus group was conducted five months after the start of the program . The group revealed that many students found the Kindles difficult to study from because of the small screen and the lag while flipping pages ; the teachers also complained saying the textbooks provided were below Stuyvesant 's level of study . The New York City Department of Education reports that public per student spending at Stuyvesant is slightly lower than the city average . Stuyvesant also receives private contributions . Shortly after the new building was completed , the $ 10 million Tribeca Bridge was built to allow students to enter the building without having to cross the busy West Street . The new school building was designed to be fully compliant with the Americans with Disabilities Act , and is listed as such by the New York City Department of Education . As a result , the building is one of the 5 additional sites of P721M , a school for older ( aged 15 – 21 ) students with multiple disabilities .

During construction , the Battery Park City Authority ( in conjunction with the Percent for Art Program of the City of New York , the Department of Cultural Affairs and the New York City Board of Education ) commissioned Mnemonics , an artwork by public artists Kristin Jones and Andrew Ginzel . Four hundred hollow glass blocks were dispersed randomly from the basement to the tenth floor of the new Stuyvesant High School building . Each block contains relics providing evidence of geographical , natural , cultural and social worlds , from antiquity to the present time . The blocks are set into the hallway walls and scattered throughout the building . Each block is inscribed with a brief description of its contents or context . The items displayed include a section of the Great Wall of China , fragments of the Mayan pyramids , leaves from the sacred Bo tree , water from the Nile and Ganges Rivers , a Revolutionary War button , pieces of the 15th Street Stuyvesant building , a report card of a student who studied in the old building , and fragments of monuments from around the world , various chemical compounds , and memorabilia from each of the 88 years ' history of the 15th Street building . As an ongoing work , empty blocks were installed , to be filled with items chosen by the 88 graduating classes following its installation , up through 2080 . The installation received the Award for Excellence in Design from the Art Commission of the City of New York .

Stuyvesant students undertake a college preparatory curriculum that includes four years of English , history , and laboratory-based sciences , of which biology , chemistry , and physics are required . In addition , students take four years of mathematics , changed from three beginning with the class of 2015 . Students also take three years of a single foreign language ; a semester each of introductory art , music , health , and technical drawing ; two semesters of computer science ( changed from one for the class of 2015 ) ; and two lab-based technology courses . Several exemptions from technology education exist for seniors . Stuyvesant offers students a broad selection of elective courses . Some of the more unusual offerings include robotics , astronomy , New York City history , Women 's Voices , and the mathematics of financial markets . Most students complete the New York City Regents courses by junior year and take calculus during their senior year . However , the school offers math courses through differential equations for the more advanced students . A year of technical drawing used to be required ; students learned how to draft by hand in its first semester and how to draft using a computer ( CAD ) in the second . Now , students take a one-semester technical drawing class ( a compacted version of the former drafting course ) , and a semester of introductory computer science , which introduces NetLogo and Racket . For the class of 2015 , the one-semester computer science course was replaced with a two-semester course .

Students can choose from 55 Advanced Placement courses to earn college credits ; a few are thus able to start college as sophomores . Such courses include an AP English course focusing on literature and media in the realm of physics and mechanics . Computer science enthusiasts can take three additional computer programming courses after the completion of Advanced Placement computer science : systems level programming , computer graphics , and software development . There is also a one-year computer networking class which can earn students Cisco Certified Network Associate ( CCNA ) certification . Stuyvesant 's foreign language offerings include Mandarin Chinese , French , German , Hebrew , Italian , Latin , Japanese , and Spanish . The school 's Muslim Student Association raised funds to support courses in Arabic , which began in 2005 . Stuyvesant 's Biology and Geo-science department offers courses in molecular biology ( a course sequence composed of a molecular science class in the Fall and a molecular genetics class in the Spring ) , human physiology , medical ethics , medical and veterinary diagnosis , human disease , anthropology and sociobiology , vertebrate zoology , laboratory techniques , medical human genetics , botany , the molecular basis of cancer , nutrition science , and psychology . The Chemistry and Physics department offers organic chemistry , physical chemistry , astronomy , engineering mechanics , and electronics .

Although Stuyvesant is primarily known for its math and science focus , the school also has a comprehensive humanities program , offering students courses in British and classical literature , Shakespearean literature , science fiction , philosophy , existentialism , debate , acting , journalism , creative writing , and poetry . The history core requires two years of global history ( or one year of global followed by one year of European history ) , one year of American history , as well as a semester each of economics and government . Humanities electives include American foreign policy , civil and criminal law , prejudice and persecution , race , ethnicity and gender issues , small business management , and Wall Street . Stuyvesant entered into an agreement with City College of New York in 2004 , in which the college funds advanced after-school courses that are taken for college credit but taught by Stuyvesant teachers . Some of these courses include physical chemistry , linear algebra , advanced Euclidean geometry , and women 's history . Before the 2005 revision of the SAT , Stuyvesant graduates had an average score of 1408 out of 1600 ( 685 verbal , 723 math ) . In 2010 , the average score on the SAT for Stuyvesant students was 2087 out of 2400 , or 674 , 735 , and 678 on the Reading , Math and Writing sections , respectively . The class of 2013 had an average SAT score of 2096 . Stuyvesant also was the high school with the highest number of Advanced Placement exams taken , and also the highest number of students reaching the mastery level .

Stuyvesant is noted for its academic programs , having produced many notable alumni including four Nobel laureates . U.S. News & World Report ranked it as one of the best high schools nationwide in their 2012 list of America 's best " Gold-Medal " public high schools and fifth best in its 2012 list of STEM schools . According to a September 2002 high school ranking by Worth magazine , 3.67 % of Stuyvesant students went on to attend Harvard , Princeton , and Yale Universities , ranking it as the 9th top public high school in the United States and 120th among all schools , public or private . In December 2007 , The Wall Street Journal studied the freshman classes at eight selective colleges ( Harvard , Princeton , MIT , Williams College , Pomona College , Swarthmore College , U. Chicago , and Johns Hopkins ) , and reported that Stuyvesant sent 67 , or 9.9 % of its 674 seniors , to them . Stuyvesant , along with other similar schools , has regularly been excluded from Newsweek 's annual list of the Top 100 Public High Schools . The May 8 , 2008 issue states the reason as being , " because so many of their students score well above average on the SAT and ACT . " U.S. News & World Report , however , included Stuyvesant on its list of " Best High Schools " published in December 2009 , ranking 31st . In its 2010 progress report , the New York City Department of Education assigned it the highest possible grade of " A " .

Stuyvesant fields 32 varsity teams , including a swimming team , as well as golf , bowling , volleyball , soccer , basketball , gymnastics , wrestling , fencing , baseball / softball , handball , tennis , track / cross country , cricket , football , and starting in Spring 2008 , lacrosse teams . In addition , Stuyvesant club teams include boys ' varsity and junior varsity , and girls ' varsity Ultimate teams . The boys ' Ultimate team , the Stuyvesant Sticky Fingers , won the UPA New York State Championships in 2002 , 2009 , 2010 , 2014 , and 2015 . The girls ' Ultimate team , Sticky Fingers , won the UPA Junior National tournament in 1998 . In 2016 , both the boys and girls Ping Pong teams won the city championship . In September 2007 the Stuyvesant football team was given a home field at Pier 40 , located north of the school at Houston Street and West Street . In 2008 , the baseball team was granted use of the pier after construction and delivery of an artificial turf pitching mound that met PSAL specifications . Stuyvesant does not , however , have its own track or tennis court , although the new building does have a pool . Unlike most American high schools , most sports teams at Stuyvesant are individually known by different names . Only the football , cheerleading , badminton , girls ping pong , baseball , girls handball , girls bowling , and boys ' lacrosse teams retain the traditional Pegleg moniker ; other teams have their own unique names , such as the Runnin ' Rebels ( boys ' basketball ) , Vixens ( girls ' volleyball ) , Lemurs ( boys ' gymnastics ) , Phoenix ( girls ' basketball ) , Renegades ( girls ' softball ) , Felines ( girls ' gymnastics ) , Birdies ( girls ' golf ) , Eagles ( boys ' golf ) , Hookers ( boys ' bowling ) , Huskies ( girls ' lacrosse ) , Penguins ( girls ' swimming ) , Pirates ( boys ' swimming ) , Centaurs ( boys ' soccer ) , Mimbas ( girls ' soccer ) , Dragons ( boys ' handball ) , Smokin ' Aces ( boys ' tennis ) , Sticky Fingers ( boys ' and girls ' Ultimate ) , Lobsters ( girls ' tennis ) , Vipers ( girls ' fencing ) , Flying Dutchmen ( hockey ) , Greyducks ( track ) , Tigers ( cricket ) and Spartans ( wrestling and roller hockey ) .

The Stuyvesant chapter of ARISTA , the National Honor Society , was founded in 1910 . It is an organization dedicated to upholding the four pillars of Character , Scholarship , Leadership , and Service . ARISTA is highly selective . Once selected , ARISTA 's members are asked to complete a service requirement of 10 credits per month and to uphold all the pillars for which this organization stands . The ARISTA Executive Council consists of the President , Vice President , Vice President of Events and Services , Vice President of Tutoring , and Vice President of Communications . The ARISTA office is located in the Student Government Room , behind the Senior Bar . ARISTA provides a number of important and useful programs to the community , the school , and the student body . ARISTA 's Tutoring Service includes many programs both inside and outside of school and online . First of these programs is the Peer Tutoring Service , sponsored by the Tutoring Committee and directed by the Vice President of Tutoring . Peer tutoring allows any student who is having trouble in any subject to get help . Also , The Tutoring Committee sponsors numerous Peer Study Workshops throughout the year . New this year is tutoring online .

Stuyvesant offers clubs , publications , teams and other opportunities under a system similar to that of many colleges . It hosts over 200 clubs ranging from The Thinkers ( philosophy ) club , to the Photography Club . The sheer number of clubs at the school is due to Stuyvesant 's relatively free policy of " student rule " . Most clubs are entirely student run , requiring only a Faculty Advisor to maintain their existence . One example of this policy is the Stuyvesant Model UN club , which is one of the largest clubs in the school . The club attends as many as 6 Model UN Conferences each year , held at various colleges across the Northeast . The club also hosts StuyMUNC , an annual conference organized and run almost entirely by the students . Stuyvesant also has a Junior State of America program ( a political debate club ) . The Stuyvesant Theater Community puts on three student-run productions a year ( a fall musical , a winter drama , and a spring comedy ) as well as a one-act festival and several smaller studio productions . Key Club International 's branch at Stuyvesant was founded in 1990 . With over 350 members , it is one of the largest clubs in the school .

The Spectator is Stuyvesant 's official in-school newspaper , which is published biweekly and is independent from the school . It contains twelve sections : news , features , op-ed , arts & entertainment , sports , photography , art , layout , copy , business , humor , and web . There are over 250 total staff members who help with publication . At the beginning of the fall and spring terms , there are recruitments , but interested students may join at any time . The Spectator , founded in 1915 , is one of Stuyvesant 's oldest publications . It has a long-standing connection with its older namesake , Columbia University 's Columbia Daily Spectator , and has been recognized by the Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism 's Columbia Scholastic Press Association .

The Voice was founded in the 1973 – 4 academic year as an independent publication only loosely sanctioned by school officials . It had the appearance of a magazine and gained a large readership . The Voice attracted a considerable amount of controversy and a First Amendment lawsuit , after which the administration forced it to go off-campus and to turn commercial in 1975 – 6 . In the beginning of the 1975 – 6 academic year , The Voice decided to publish the results of a confidential random survey measuring the " sexual attitudes , preferences , knowledge and experience " of the students . The administration refused to permit The Voice to distribute the questionnaire , and the Board of Education refused to intervene , believing that " irreparable psychological damage " would be occasioned on some of the students receiving it . The editor-in-chief of The Voice , Jeff Trachtman , brought a First Amendment challenge to this decision in the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York in front of Judge Constance Baker Motley . Judge Motley , relying on the relatively recent Supreme Court precedent Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District ( holding that " undifferentiated fear or apprehension of disturbance is not enough to overcome the right to freedom of expression " ) , ordered the Board of Education to come up with an arrangement permitting the distribution of the survey to the juniors and seniors .

Stuyvesant 's academic teams include its nationally recognized Speech and Debate team , Science Olympiad , Quiz Bowl , chess , and math , which regularly compete successfully at major regional ( New York State Mathematics League ) , national ( American Regions Mathematics League ) , and international ( International Mathematical Olympiad ) tournaments , and whose members fill up a considerable percentage of the New York City Math Team . A FIRST Robotics team , StuyPulse , first competed in 2001 , and has since grown and won many regional competitions , most recently the New York Regional in 2016 , as well as winning the Curie Division at the 2016 FIRST Robotics Championship in St. Louis . Stuyvesant also has a Model United Nations team , a Junior State of America chapter , and a Model Congress team which competes at regional colleges . The Model United Nations team hosts StuyMUNC , an annual conference which takes place at Stuyvesant .

The annual theater competition known as SING ! pits seniors , juniors , and " soph-frosh " ( freshmen and sophomores working together ) against each other in a contest to put on the best performance . Started in 1947 at Midwood High School in Brooklyn , SING ! is a tradition at many New York City high schools . At Stuyvesant , SING ! started as a small event in 1973 and has grown to a huge school-wide event — in 2005 , nearly 1,000 students participated . The entire production is written , directed , produced , and funded by students . Their involvement ranges from being members of the production 's casts , choruses , or costume and tech crews to Irish dance , Step , Bollywood , Hip-Hop , Swing , Ballet , Jazz or Latin dance groups . SING ! begins in late January to February and culminates in final performances on three nights in March / April . Scoring is done on each night 's performances and the winner is determined by the overall total .

Stuyvesant has contributed to the education of several Nobel laureates , winners of the Fields Medal and the Wolf Prize , and other accomplished alumni . In recent years , it has had the second highest number of National Merit Scholarship semi-finalists , behind Thomas Jefferson High School for Science and Technology in Alexandria , Virginia . Over the past nine years ( 2002 – 2010 ) , Stuyvesant has produced 103 semi-finalists and 13 finalists on the Intel Science Talent Search , the second most of any secondary school in the United States . For most of the 20th century , the student body at Stuyvesant was heavily Jewish . A significant influx of Asian students began in the 1970s . For the 2013 academic year , the student body was 72.31 % Asian and 21.44 % Caucasian , 1.03 % African American , 2.34 % Hispanic and 3 % unknown / other .

Notable scientists among Stuyvesant alumni include mathematician Paul Cohen ( 1950 ) , string theorist Brian Greene ( 1980 ) , physicist Lisa Randall ( 1980 ) , and genomic researcher Eric Lander ( 1974 ) . Other prominent alumni include civil rights leader Robert Parris Moses , entertainers such as Thelonious Monk ( 1935 ) , and actors Lucy Liu ( 1986 ) , Tim Robbins ( 1976 ) , and James Cagney ( 1918 ) , comedian Paul Reiser ( 1973 ) and NBA basketball player and game fixer and bookmaker Jack Molinas ( 1949 ) . In business , government and politics , former United States Attorney General Eric Holder ( 1969 ) is a Stuyvesant alumnus , as are Senior Advisor to President Obama David Axelrod ( 1972 ) , former adviser to President Clinton Dick Morris ( 1964 ) , and founder of 5W Public Relations Ronn Torossian ( 1992 ) . Pulitzer Prize-winning author Frank McCourt taught English at Stuyvesant before the publication of his memoirs Angela 's Ashes , ' Tis , and Teacher Man . Teacher Man 's third section , titled Coming Alive in Room 205 , concerns McCourt 's time at Stuyvesant , and mentions a number of students and faculty . New York City Council member Eva Moskowitz ( 1982 ) graduated from the school , as did the creator of the BitTorrent protocol , Bram Cohen ( 1993 ) .

George Seale Armstrong ( May 16 , 1867 – June 9 , 1947 ) was a Canadian businessman and politician . He served on the Edmonton City Council from 1907 to 1910 and as Mayor of Edmonton from 1910 to 1912 . Armstrong was born in what would soon become the province of Ontario in 1867 . After briefly teaching school , he entered the business industry , as a druggist . After initially gaining experience in politics on the council of Eastnor Township , he relocated west to the city of Edmonton , Alberta . In Edmonton , he established his pharmaceutical business once again and worked briefly with his brother on real estate and construction projects . In 1907 , he ran for election to the Edmonton City Council and was elected to a two-year term . In 1910 , he decided to run for the mayoralty in the municipal election ; uncontested as the only nominated candidate on election day , Armstrong was acclaimed to the mayor 's chair for the upcoming year . During his term , several issues were brought up to attention , including the city 's need of a new civic building and the possibility of two new gas plants for the city .

His first term as mayor also saw the issue of possible amalgamation of the " twin cities " of Edmonton and Strathcona , an issue that had been spoken of as a possibility in the previous few years . Approved by councils of both cities , a successful plebiscite was held , and bylaws permitting the merge were passed and Edmonton 's annex of Strathcona came into effect in February 1912 . Armstrong put his name up once again in the mayoral election mandated by the agreement and defeated his rival candidate , and thus became the first post-amalgamation mayor of the city of Edmonton . During his term , he introduced a new hospital , improvements to the street rail system , and commissioning a report on the expansion of the city . Another election was held later that December , and he did not stand for re-election . Armstrong later gained employment with the Edmonton post office after leaving the office of mayor , in which he would later rise to the position of postmaster , which he served in for 14 years . Armstrong also operated his drug store once again . He remained at the post office until his retirement in 1937 , and died ten years later in Edmonton at the age of 80 .

Armstrong was born in 1867 at Hopeville , Canada West , to William and Sarah ( née Seale ) Armstrong . After attending schools in Mount Forest , Ontario , Armstrong briefly became a schoolteacher before moving to Lion 's Head , Ontario where entered the pharmacy business . Armstrong would also spend some time at Eastnor Township , Ontario , where he served on the town council and as treasurer , from 1903 to 1905 . He then moved west and settle at the city of Edmonton , Alberta , in 1906 . That same year he opened up the Armstrong Drug Store , on Namayo Avenue and Boyle Street ( presently 97 Street and 103 Avenue ) . In his early years in Edmonton he also involved himself in several real estate ventures and construction projects along with his brother , Gordon .

In 1906 , at a citizen 's meeting at a local store , Armstrong 's name was speculated as a possible candidate for alderman for the upcoming 1906 election . Armstrong , despite being a newcomer to the city , was open to the fact of running in the election , but ultimately did not run . Armstrong would however decide to run for council as an alderman in the 1907 election , on a platform based on assuring the availabilities of utilities to the people of Edmonton , as well as ensuring a sense of openness as a council to the people . During the time leading up to the election , he also voiced his opposition to the city 's arbitrary divisions into sections . He was elected to council for a two-year term , receiving 774 votes , finishing second in a field of 12 candidates . Despite being a preferred candidate for the mayoralty in 1909 , he opted to run for council instead and was re-elected for another two-year term in the 1909 election . In 1910 , his name was once again speculated to run for the mayoralty of the city in the upcoming election , with many citizens approaching him to run . He later decided in favour of running , publishing an acceptance letter in the Edmonton Bulletin stating :

Ladies and Gentleman — At the request of a large number of ratepayers I have consented to be a candidate for Mayor at the coming municipal election . My platform and address to the elctorate will appear in the press in a few days . His platform would consist of the main points of leading the city out of debt , assuring the completion of city projects that were in progress before introducing news ones , and again , ensuring that utilities were available to everyone and were of high quality . He had also expressed desire to amalgamate the existing city of Edmonton with the city of Strathcona , which was divided from Edmonton by the North Saskatchewan River , situated on the south . Though former councillor William Harold Clark was urged to run by a group of citizens , Armstrong would be the only nominated mayoral candidate when nomination deadline day came , and thus he was acclaimed mayor ; the first occurrence since Kenneth W. MacKenzie was acclaimed in 1900 . Amongst his supporters for his candidacy were outgoing mayor Robert Lee and former mayor Charles May .

During his first term as mayor , Armstrong oversaw many issues that concerned the city . In March 1911 , he expressed his support for a new city hall building to be built , expressing his dissatisfaction with the existing building that housed the council and civic employees , mentioning the ever-expanding number of staff . Later in that year , a committee would be formed concerning the issue , and a new structure would be planned with a planned cost of one million dollars . In July of that same year , he would sign a bylaw that would allow an American entrepreneur to establish a gas plant in the city , an issue that had been presented to council for debate several months prior . Later that year , the prospect of a municipal gas plant would also be supplied to city council . In July 1911 , when , along with the city council , he dismissed a pair of city commissioners after months of debate . The firing triggered a by-election when alderman James H. McKinley would resign in protest to the action . In 1911 , he also served as a vice president of the Union of Alberta Municipalities . Involved in national and provincial affairs , he voiced his support for a canal to be constructed in the Georgian Bay of Lake Huron , stating that the presence of such canal would improve the trading relations of Canada with the United States by allowing an easier route between the two countries . He also was in favour of a hydroelectric project in the Athabasca River . Additionally , during this first term as mayor , Armstrong also oversaw the city 's festivities on George V 's coronation and moved to form a municipal purchasing department .

Another issue presented to council during his first term in office was that of potential amalgamation with the city south of the North Saskatchewan River , Strathcona . Regarding the issue , Armstrong would gauge public interest as in favour of it , stating he was " satisfied that [ it ] would carry " . The particular issue had been in works as early as 1909 , when draft versions of a bylaw permitting the two cities to join where presented to each respective city council , but serious talks had not begun until this particular year . Plans for the action were set out by negotiations of a committee of both cities , reaching an agreement with conditions including an election to be held after the amalgamation law takes place , a new bridge to be constructed over the river separating the two cities , and the expansion of the street rail system to cover the land of the unified cities . It was also hoped at the time that being a larger city would lower taxes . A plebiscite was held in both Edmonton and Strathcona on September 26 , 1911 , with results at both municipalities overwhelmingly in favour of the joining of the two " twin cities " . With the law passed by council on December 19 , 1911 and approved by the Legislative Assembly of Alberta , the amalgamation was set for February 1 , 1912 , with the first combined election to take place on February 16 . The population of the new combined city would rise to over 40,000 people .

Armstrong would later declare his candidacy for that particular election ( the Edmonton municipal election , February 1912 ) , for the position of what was referred to as the first mayor of " Greater Edmonton " Stating that in his belief , 1911 was one of the most successful years in the history of the city , he ran on the premise that he had unfinished work from his first term , stating , " I ask for a continuance of your confidence , support and influence to allow me an opportunity to complete those undertakings which are in the best interests of Greater Edmonton " . His opponent , Bryce J. Saunders charged that the city had long lacked efficiency in its utilities , particular the water supply , which he believed in the public ownership of . Armstrong would later go on to defeat Saunders in the general election , 1791 votes to Saunders ' 1072 , a margin of just over 700 , with a voter turnout of around 30 percent . During his brief second term as mayor in 1912 , Armstrong and council approved a plan to construct 110 miles of electric railway lines in the city , considered legislation permitting band concerts on Sundays , oversaw the opening of the Royal Alexandra Hospital , advocated for the availability of housing accommodations for all Edmontonians in the face of an influx of new settlers , and welcomed a visit from Governor General of Canada Prince Arthur , Duke of Connaught and Strathearn to the city , planning a grand celebration . It was also in 1912 that the Hudson 's Bay Company put its Edmonton land holdings on the market , the first bridge across the North Saskatchewan River in the city 's east end opened , and that Armstrong commissioned a master plan for the newly amalgamated city , from an American firm based out of Minneapolis named Morell and Nichols . Among the suggestions in the report was the recommendation for a civic square to be built , which was opened 53 years later as Sir Winston Churchill Square . In his final week as mayor , the retiring Armstrong delivered the city 's annual report at an annual meeting , thanked the people of Edmonton for entrusting him as mayor , and advised his successor to be fiscally responsible ; stating , " If a reckless administration gets in next year , Edmonton will become a city like I was in recently , where they could not borrow enough money to clean their streets . " In the election held later that week , he would be succeeded by former mayor from 1901 – 04 , William Short , whom he supported and campaigned for . Armstrong was later honoured with an informal gathering in the city council chamber where he was presented with a gift of silverware ; with the city fire chief proclaiming that " Mayor Armstrong is bound to become a historical character " .

The year after he left office as mayor , Armstrong began work with the Edmonton post office . After being recommended for the position by city notables , he was named postmaster of the city on November 12 , 1913 . In the same year he oversaw the construction of a new building on Namayo Avenue , the Fairbairn Block , mainly for use by his business but with additional space for offices and housing in the upper levels . In 1920 , Armstrong was involved in a legal case involving his office as postmaster when he was accused in the 1919 disappearance of a sum of $ 50,000 from the post office . Although exonerated in 1920 , he would again be arrested in 1923 and charged with theft . During the trial , it was testified that a witness had seen Armstrong on the day of the robbery , with only a paper in his hand as if he were heading out . Armstrong , who had proclaimed his innocence , and provided evidence for the trial was eventually acquitted and found not guilty of the charges in a decision made on May 29 , which was followed by an eruption of applause . Later in 1923 , Armstrong was appointed postmaster of the Strathcona ( south side ) Post Office . He remained with the post office until he retired in January 1937 . At the time of his retirement he was serving as postmaster of the south post office . In his years with the post office , he served a total of 14 years as postmaster . The Armstrong Drug Store would later go through multiple owners until its closing on December 10 , 1993 .

Armstrong married Margaret Irene McFarlane in 1893 at Greenock ( Bruce County ) , Ontario . They had one daughter , Helen Laverne Armstrong . After Margaret died , George remarried to Jessie Mathieson at Elora , Ontario in 1897 . With her he had a son and daughter , William Sloan Seale Armstrong and Jessie Eileen Armstrong Watson . He was a member of a hospital board , the Edmonton Exhibition Board and the Masonic Order . He was affiliated with the Presbyterian Church and later the United Church of Canada , attending Robertson United Church in Edmonton , where he served as an elder . Politically , he aligned himself with the Conservative Party of Canada . In his free time he enjoyed the sports of baseball and football . He died at a hospital in Edmonton on June 9 , 1947 at the age of 80 , after an illness of two weeks . He was survived by his wife and children as well as a brother . He was later interred at the Edmonton Cemetery after his funeral held at Robertson United Church . His wife Jessie died in 1952 and was interred next to him . The Edmonton Historical Board states that Armstrong was remembered as " hardworking , fair and honest person who served our city well during a time of rapid change and growth " .

State Route 85 ( SR 85 ) is a 128.86-mile-long ( 207.38 km ) state highway in the U.S. state of Arizona . The highway runs from the United States-Mexico border near Lukeville to the north ending at Interstate 10 ( I-10 ) in Buckeye . The highway also intersects I-8 in Gila Bend and serves as a connector between I-8 and I-10 and for travelers between Phoenix and Yuma as well as San Diego . SR 85 between I-10 and I-8 , as well as I-8 between SR 85 and I-10 in Casa Grande , is touted as a bypass of the Phoenix area for long-distance travelers on I-10 . SR 85 was established in 1936 as a route between Gila Bend and Ajo . It was extended southward to the US-Mexico border in 1955 , and extended northward to Phoenix when it replaced U.S. Route 80 ( US 80 ) in 1977 . The northern end of the highway was realigned in 1994 onto the connecting highway between I-10 and Buckeye . The remaining portion of the highway between Buckeye and Phoenix was gradually turned over to the cities and county along the route during the 1990s with the final portion turned over in 2001 .

The southern terminus of SR 85 is located at the United States-Mexico border near Lukeville in Pima County . The road continues across the border into Mexico to the town of Sonoita as Mexican Federal Highway 8 . SR 85 heads north from the border as a two-lane road , passing through the Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument . The highway leaves the monument boundary and heads to a junction with SR 86 in Why . SR 86 heads east from this junction towards Tucson and southeastern Arizona . SR 85 heads northwest from this junction to the town of Ajo . From Ajo , the highway heads north and enters the Barry M. Goldwater Air Force Range . While within the range , the highway enters Maricopa County . After the highway passes through the range , it continues towards the north to a junction with I-8 in Gila Bend . After passing I-8 , the highway intersects the business loop of I-8 and turns towards the east to run concurrently with business loop along Pima Street in Gila Bend . The two highways split , with the business loop heading towards the southeast and SR 85 heading northeast providing access to Gila Bend Municipal Airport

SR 85 continues north from Gila Bend towards the Phoenix Metropolitan Area . This stretch of highway north of Gila Bend is a part of the National Highway System . The highway passes near the western edge of the Sonoran Desert National Monument and also provides access to the Buckeye Hills Recreational Area . SR 85 continues northward to a crossing of the Gila River as it nears Buckeye . The highway intersects Buckeye Road which is where the original routing of US 80 and later SR 85 followed into Phoenix before being rerouted onto its current alignment . The highway continues towards the north , crossing over the Buckeye Canal before reaching its northern terminus at exit 112 on I-10 .

The first numbered highway along the SR 85 corridor was established in 1927 between Gila Bend and Phoenix as US 80 . At the time , it was only paved from Phoenix to Hassayampa . Although not paved between Hassayampa and Gila Bend , it was an improved road . This original routing of US 80 still exists as Old US 80 west of the SR 85 alignment . A dirt road between Gila Bend and Ajo did exist at this time , but it was not a part of the state highway system . By 1935 , the entire route of US 80 between Gila Bend and Phoenix had been paved . The road south of Gila Bend had also been improved to a gravel road . In 1936 , SR 85 was established , but it only extended as far north as Gila Bend and as far south as Ajo . By 1938 , SR 85 had been paved as well as the portion between Ajo and Why that would eventually become part of SR 85 . The portion between Why and the border with Mexico began showing up on maps at this time as a gravel road . In 1943 , the portion of the highway between Ajo and Why was added to the state highway system , but as SR 86 , when it was extended west from Tucson to Ajo . In 1955 , the highway was extended to Lukeville at the United States-Mexico border with an overlap with SR 86 between Ajo and Why when a county road was added to SR 85 .

In 1973 , the connector between I-10 and Baseline Road was established , and was redesignated in 1978 as a spur route of SR 85 . As the old , indirect US 80 was removed from Arizona , SR 85 was extended north in 1977 over the old alignment of US 80 to Buckeye and extended east to Phoenix . Portions of the route in Buckeye and Phoenix were turned over to their respective cities for maintenance in 1990 . The following year , a portion of the highway between Avondale and Phoenix was turned over to Maricopa County for maintenance . Also in 1991 , the overlap between SR 85 and SR 86 was eliminated and the western terminus of SR 86 was changed to its junction with Route 85 in Why . In 1994 , the northern end of SR 85 was moved onto the SR 85 Spur that connected to I-10 and the remaining portions along the old alignment to the east were redesignated as a temporary route of SR 85 . In 1999 , the portion of the old route in Avondale was turned over to the city for maintenance . The portion of the old route around the state capitol complex , the last remaining section of the old route between Phoenix and Buckeye , was turned over to the city of Phoenix in 2001 .

The segment of SR 85 between Buckeye and Gila Bend is a connector between I-8 and I-10 , and serves both as a connector from I-8 from San Diego , California to Phoenix . This segment is being upgraded to a divided highway , and is planned to become a freeway . Most of the four-lane road upgrades have already been completed . In 2010 an environmental study into building a freeway to freeway interchange in Gila Bend from SR 85 to I-8 was completed by ADOT and the Federal Highway Administration . The study found no significant impact on the local environment and outlined a finalized full freeway standard design , bypassing the I-8 Business / Maricopa Road intersection SR 85 currently traverses through . A diamond interchange Exit 121 is planned at Maricopa Road / I-8 Business along with a second diamond interchange slightly northeast of the proposed Exit 121 .

Rugby union has been a men 's medal sport at the modern Summer Olympic Games , being played at four of the first seven competitions . The sport debuted at the 1900 Paris games where the gold medal was won by the host nation . It was subsequently featured at the London games in 1908 , the Antwerp games in 1920 and the Paris games in 1924 . The United States is the most successful nation in Olympic rugby tournaments , having won the gold medal in both 1920 and 1924 ; France has the most medals , one gold ( in 1900 ) and two silvers ( in 1920 and 1924 ) . Shortly after the 1924 games , the International Olympic Committee ( IOC ) dropped rugby union as an Olympic sport . Since then there have been numerous attempts to bring the sport back to the Olympic programme . In October 2009 the IOC voted at its session in Copenhagen to include the sevens version of the sport in the 2016 Summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro . The event made its debut in an Olympic programme at the 2014 Summer Youth Olympics .

Three National Olympic Committees ( NOCs ) , France , Germany and Great Britain , entered teams at the 1900 games . The German and British teams were not national teams in the current sense of the word : Moseley Wanderers RFC represented Great Britain and the Frankfurt Club represented Germany . Rules were also different from today 's ; 3 points , not 5 , were awarded for tries and 4 , not 3 , were given for a drop goal . Also , 4 points were awarded for a goal from mark , which would be reduced to 3 points in 1905 and eliminated completely in 1977 . Points for penalties and conversions , 3 and 2 respectively , were the same as in the modern game . France won the gold , beating Great Britain 27 points to 8 and defeating Germany 27 points to 17 . Other sources list the German team as second , because of the points difference , but no such determination was made in 1900 . 6,000 people watched the game between France and Great Britain , which was the largest crowd at the games . Constantin Henriquez , a player on the French team , is the first known coloured athlete to compete in the Olympic Games .

Rugby union was not played at the 1904 games in St. Louis , nor at the 1906 Intercalated Games , but was included in 1908 , when the Olympics were held in the sport 's native country . The Rugby Football Union ( RFU ) was involved in the organization of the sport at this edition of the Olympics . Like the 1900 games , three teams entered : Australasia ( representing Australia and New Zealand ) , France , and hosts Great Britain ( which included the whole of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland ) . France pulled out prior to the commencement of the tournament , being unable to field a representative team . Australasia was represented by the Wallabies , who were already on tour in Britain . As the best English and Welsh players were on tour in New Zealand at the time , Great Britain was represented by the Cornwall county team , who were chosen by the RFU as an appropriate side after they defeated Durham in the 1907 English county championship . The choice of Cornwall was controversial , as only three of their players had ever represented England and the Wallabies had defeated them 18 points to five .

As expected , Australasia defeated Great Britain , claiming the gold medal , the score being 32 points to three . The match at the White City Stadium was played under poor conditions , in fog and on a slippery field . Two of the Australian team members would later win another Olympic gold medal . Danny Carroll would win another rugby gold with the United States in 1920 , while Sydney Middleton would win a gold medal in rowing at the 1912 Games , where rugby was not on the programme . The sport also failed to appear on the provisional schedule of the 1916 Summer Olympics , which were cancelled due to World War I.

A campaign to send an American side to the 1920 games in Antwerp started in California after a Berkeley rugby union touring party returned from British Columbia undefeated in 1920 . The United States Olympic Committee ( USOC ) granted permission for entry . A pool of players from Stanford , Berkeley , and Santa Clara made up the squad . 1908 champion Danny Carroll , a player-coach at Stanford at the time , was the team 's most prominent member . When the U.S. arrived in Antwerp , the Czechoslovakian and Romanian teams had withdrawn , leaving only France and the United States . The English RFU had decided not to enter a team , so as not to interfere with the start of the English domestic season . The only match was played in rain in front of around 20,000 spectators . The U.S. , featuring many players new to the sport of rugby , caused a shock by winning the only match eight points to zero , all points being scored in the second half . One of the U.S. team members , Morris Kirksey , took home two more medals from Antwerp , finishing second to Charles Paddock in the 100 meters dash , and anchoring the winning 4 × 100 meters relay team .

The sport was again included in the subsequent 1924 games in Paris . The USOC decided to send a team in order to defend their gold medal . Along with the U.S. and the host nation , Romania entered . The American team was again made up of mainly Californian players , seven of whom were members of the 1920 team . The U.S. squad departed on a seven-day voyage to England on an ocean liner from New York City . The U.S. defeated Romania 37 to 0 in front of a crowd of 6,000 . France then defeated Romania 61 to 3 and entered the final game as favorites . The gold medal game was played on 18 May in front of 21,000 spectators at the Colombes venue , which had a large wire fence built around the field for the game . The U.S. defeated France 17 to 3 , becoming the only team to win gold twice in the sport . At the final whistle the pitch was invaded and the French team , aided by the police , did their best to protect their opponents . The medal ceremony took place with police protection – gold for the U.S. , silver for France , and bronze for Romania .

The pitch invasion at the 1924 Paris Olympics had given rugby a poor image and this , together with the problems of attracting sufficient teams to make it a viable sport and the desire to include more individual and women 's events , spelled the death knell for rugby at the Olympics . Baron Pierre De Coubertin stepped down as head of the Olympic Movement after 1925 and with his departure the sport lost one of its major advocates . In 1928 the IOC turned down a request to stage rugby at the Amsterdam games . An exhibition tournament was held at the 1936 Berlin Games , with France , Germany , Italy and Romania competing . In what was , to date , the last rugby match played at the Olympics , France beat Germany in the final 19 to 14 . In 1976 , 22 African countries and Guyana boycotted the 1976 Summer Olympics in Montreal , after their demand to have New Zealand excluded was not met . A New Zealand rugby team had toured South Africa , which had been banned from the Olympics since 1964 because of its apartheid politics . Rugby union not being an Olympic sport , the IOC declined to exclude New Zealand .

Italy in 1960 , the Soviet Union in 1980 , and South Korea in 1988 made requests to have rugby union brought back . The 1980 request did not pass , and the 1988 games came close but failed to see the sport 's admission , which was backed by the International Rugby Football Board ( now , World Rugby ( WR ) ) . Apart from supporting the individual host cities ' requests , the IRB did not focus its own efforts on returning the sport to the Olympics until the early 1990s , when efforts began to reunite the two movements with a series of informal meetings between the then IRB Secretary , Keith Rowlands , and the British Olympic Association Secretary , Dick Palmer . In 1994 , when Vernon Pugh QC of Wales was elected Chairman of the IRB , the march towards Olympic recognition began in earnest . Pugh convinced the IRB Council that Olympic membership – initially as a non-participation sport – would be beneficial to rugby and offer the IRB member unions membership of their National Olympic Committees . Many European Federations , such as France , Italy and Romania , had been members of their National Olympic Committees for decades . The demand to get rugby back in the Olympics mounted as more rugby nations from Africa , Asia , Oceania and the Americas joined the IRB , because it was a sport seen as providing a realistic medal opportunity for a number of smaller nations .

A significant step in the process of acceptance back into the Olympic Movement was achieved at a ceremony held in Cardiff in November 1994 , when the IRB was officially confirmed as a Recognised International Federation of the IOC . At that ceremony , International Olympic Committee President , Juan Antonio Samaranch , pointed out that rugby 's history and values were very much in tune with the Olympic philosophy and traditions . This historic meeting in Cardiff led to IRB representation at annual IOC meetings and consideration for inclusion in the programme of future Olympic Games . In 2002 , a plan was presented to induct rugby sevens , golf and the Chinese martial art of wushu . Sevens was one of five sports that submitted a proposal to the IOC at a meeting in Singapore for inclusion in the 2012 games . The IOC stated that no sport would be added unless others were dropped . The IRB was confident that the sport would finally be included in the official Olympic programme . However , the selection of two sports out of the five nominees as potential 2012 sports went to squash and karate , as determined by a voting procedure .

Most recently , rugby sevens competed with golf for two available spaces in the 2016 Olympics . The final decision was made at the IOC Session in Copenhagen in October 2009 . The IRB used a number of high-profile people and events to influence the IOC to include sevens at the 2016 games . In March 2009 , two senior delegates from the IOC attended the Rugby World Cup Sevens in Dubai at the invitation of the IRB . The event attracted 78,000 fans over the three days and saw Wales crowned Men ’ s World Champions and Australia won the first ever Women 's World Cup . Along with the World Cup , the IRB enlisted some of rugby ’ s biggest names to assist in the bid . In March 2009 , Jonah Lomu and Lawrence Dallaglio were announced as ambassadors for the bid and in April 2009 Waisale Serevi was unveiled as an ambassador to coincide with the Oceania National Olympic Committees ' general assembly . May 2009 saw the IRB announce that they would drop the Rugby World Cup Sevens in order to improve the chances of the sport being included . The benefit of this move would be to make the Olympics the premier event in international rugby sevens .

As well as rugby sevens , baseball and softball , which were dropped from the Olympic programme in 2005 , karate , squash , golf and roller sports ( inline speed skating ) were all seeking to be included in the 2016 games and leaders of the seven sports made formal presentations to the IOC executive board in June 2009 . A new system was in place at this session in which a sport now needs only a simple majority rather than the two-thirds majority that was required before . On 13 August 2009 it was announced that the IOC executive board was recommending rugby sevens for inclusion in the 2016 Olympic Games and on 9 October 2009 the full IOC , at its 121st IOC Session in Copenhagen , voted to include Rugby Sevens in the 2016 games . Separate competitions for men and women will be held , using a similar format to the existing IRB Sevens World Series . The IRB had originally proposed including 12 teams of each sex , the same number as other team ball sports events . During the IRB 's presentation at the IOC Session , two IOC members asked why only 12 teams were included . IRB Chief Executive Mike Miller responded , " We followed the guidance of the Executive Members of the IOC , but if the IOC feels we should have more teams , we will add more . "

Pierre de Coubertin , founder of the modern Olympics , was a rugby fan and referee of the first ever French championship rugby union final on 20 March 1892 between Racing Club de France and Stade Français . James Cecil Parke , Ireland and track events ( also represented Ireland in cricket and golf , and as well as competing at Wimbledon and in the Davis Cup ) Noel Purcell , Ireland and gold in Olympic water polo – the first Olympic internationalist to represent two countries , Great Britain and the Irish Free State . Danny Crates , who has carried the torch twice at the Olympics , and is a notable Paralympian , also plays competitive rugby . Kevin O 'Flanagan , Ireland international . Represented Ireland on the International Olympic Committee Victor Costello , who competed for Ireland in the shot put at the 1992 Games in Barcelona before winning 39 caps for the Ireland rugby union team .

The United States Senate election in New York in 2000 was held on November 7 , 2000 . First Lady of the United States Hillary Rodham Clinton , the first First Lady to run for political office , defeated Congressman Rick Lazio . The general election coincided with the presidential election . The race began in November 1998 when four-term incumbent New York Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan announced his retirement . Both the Democratic Party and Republican Party sought high-profile candidates to compete for the open seat . By early 1999 Clinton and Mayor of New York City Rudolph Giuliani were the likely respective nominees . Clinton and her husband , President Bill Clinton , purchased a house in Chappaqua , New York , in September 1999 ; she thereby became eligible for the election , although she faced characterizations of carpetbagging since she had never resided in the state before . The lead in statewide polls swung from Clinton to Giuliani and back to Clinton as the campaigns featured both successful strategies and mistakes as well as dealing with current events . In late April and May 2000 , Giuliani 's medical , romantic , marital , and political lives all collided in a tumultuous four-week period , culminating in his withdrawing from the race on May 19 .

When four-term New York Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan announced his retirement in November 1998 , his previously safe Senate seat became open in the 2000 U.S. Senate election . Both parties tried to find high-profile candidates to run for it . New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani , who was prevented by term limits from running for mayoral reelection in 2001 , immediately indicated interest . Due to his high profile and visibility , Giuliani was supported by the state Republican Party , even though he had irritated many by endorsing incumbent Democratic Governor Mario Cuomo over Republican George Pataki in 1994 . Giuliani became the presumptive Republican nominee , and by April 1999 had formed a formal exploratory committee for a Senate run . There were still possible Republican primary opponents . Rick Lazio , a Congressman representing Suffolk County on Long Island , was raising money and had a candidacy announcement scheduled for August 16 ; he had openly discussed a primary against Giuliani , believing his more conservative record would be appealing to Republican primary voters . In early August , under pressure from state and national Republican figures , Pataki endorsed Giuliani . Pataki prevailed upon Lazio to forgo his candidacy , which Lazio agreed to despite frustration that Giuliani had still not officially announced that he was running ; Lazio said , " If the mayor wants to be a candidate , I think he needs to get into this race . It 's time to put the soap opera aside and step up to the plate . " Nassau County Congressman Pete King also considered running and had raised some funds .

New York Congresswoman Nita Lowey was the candidate first expected to be the Democratic nominee , while other mentioned possible candidates included Secretary of Housing and Urban Development Andrew Cuomo , New York State Comptroller Carl McCall , and New York Congresswoman Carolyn Maloney . State Democratic figures were concerned that neither Lowey nor the others had the star power to rival Giuliani , and that the seat would be lost . Late in 1998 , prominent Democratic politicians and advisors , including New York Representative Charles Rangel , urged First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton to run for the New York Senate seat . An unprecedented action if she did it , Clinton spent considerable time mulling over the idea while Lowey waited in the wings . Her political advisors told her the race would be difficult and some of them told her she would lose . She waited for the impeachment proceedings of Bill Clinton to conclude , which it did with his acquittal on February 12 , 1999 .

On February 16 , 1999 , the First Lady 's office announced that she was considering running for the Senate position . Once it was clear Clinton was going to run , Lowey stepped aside , although she would be disappointed at the lost opportunity . On July 7 , 1999 , Clinton formally announced an exploratory committee for the Senate run ; the setting was Moynihan 's farm in Pindars Corners , in rural Delaware County . Bill Clinton was less than enthusiastic about her candidacy . The staging of the event was brokered by the Clintons ' political consultant Mandy Grunwald . Hillary Clinton embarked upon a " listening tour " of all parts of New York after her entrance into the race . She planned to visit all 62 counties in New York , talking to New Yorkers in small-group settings according to the principles of retail politics . During the race , she spent considerable time campaigning in traditionally Republican upstate regions . Clinton faced charges of carpetbagging , since she had never resided in the State of New York nor directly participated in state politics prior to her Senate race . Meanwhile , in September 1999 , the Clintons purchased a $ 1.7 million , 11-room , Dutch Colonial style home in Chappaqua , New York , north of New York City . Even the commonplace activity of house hunting leading up to this was the subject of considerable media attention ; coverage of personal lives would be the norm in this contest of two " electrifying and polarizing figures " ( as one reporter put it ) . In November 1999 , Hillary Clinton announced that she would set aside most of her official duties as First Lady in order to take up residency in New York and pursue her campaign . Her move-in took place in January 2000 , with the house furnished with many of the couple 's possessions from their Arkansas days . It became the first time since Woodrow Wilson 's first wife died in 1914 that a president lived in the White House without a spouse .

The early stages of her campaign were not without mistakes , and as she later wrote , " Mistakes in New York politics aren 't easily brushed aside . " In a much-publicized move , Clinton donned a New York Yankees baseball cap at a June 1999 event when she had been a lifelong fan of the Chicago Cubs . This brought her much criticism , and Thomas Kuiper would later write an anti-Clinton book titled : I 've Always Been a Yankees Fan : Hillary Clinton in Her Own Words . Clinton said she had to develop an American League rooting interest , since fans of the Cubs were not expected to root for the American League Chicago White Sox . In her 2003 autobiography , she said that putting on the hat had been a " bad move " , but reiterated what had been reported in the press prior to the incident , that she had been " a die-hard Mickey Mantle fan ; " the book included a photograph of her with a Yankees cap on from 1992 . More seriously , on November 11 , 1999 , at the dedication of a U.S.-funded health program in the West Bank , she exchanged kisses with Suha Arafat , wife of Palestinian President Yasser Arafat , after Suha Arafat had delivered a speech claiming that Israel had deliberately poisoned Palestinians through environmental degradation and the use of " poisonous gas " . Some Israeli supporters said that Clinton never should have kissed the wife of the Palestinian leader , especially after such inflammatory remarks . The following day , Clinton denounced Suha Arafat 's allegations , and said that Palestinian negotiator Saeb Erekat had told her Suha Arafat had been referring to ' tear gas ' and not ' poison gas ' . The kiss became a campaign issue , especially with Jewish voters . Clinton said it as a formality akin to a handshake , saying that to not have done so would have caused a diplomatic incident . Clinton later wrote that the live Arabic-to-English translation had failed to convey the accurate nature of her remarks : " Had I been aware of her hateful words , I would have denounced them on the spot . "

Somewhat surprisingly , Clinton faced an erosion of support from women voters during her campaign , with her numbers declining throughout 1999 . This was partly a typical pattern seen with women candidates where they have an early surge of female support , which then wears off , and it was partly due to her early campaign stumbles . But it also reflected the particular set of mixed feelings that women had towards Clinton 's marriage and the ambition and the power she derived from it . The problem was especially acute among some female demographics ; one of her longtime advisers later said , " Women in the educated professional class ? They fucking couldn 't stand her . We could never figure out why . We had psychologists come in . " Clinton 's campaign to all counties , carried by a Ford conversion van , helped to defuse the carpetbagger issue , with many New York residents saying that Clinton " seems like one of us . " She discussed local issues such as price supports for the dairy industry , fares for air travel , college tuition levels , and the brain drain in parts of the state . Her political positions were well matched to the different constituencies in the state that she targeted . In a January 2000 appearance on the Late Show with David Letterman , she established a rapport with the host that would continue throughout her Senate years and into her 2008 presidential campaign . Clinton formally announced her official candidacy in Purchase , New York in February 2000 , adopting the simple name " Hillary " for her campaign literature .

Distrustful of the press since her husband 's 1992 presidential campaign and her early days as First Lady , she imposed limits on her availability to the press van following her . Associated Press reporter Beth Harpaz later recounted a typical day from this time : " But we 'd been told there 'd be no ' avail ' today , and we 'd accepted it . That didn 't prevent me from feeling slightly humiliated . I was so worn down and so exasperated by the lack of access and the lack of news in this campaign that I 'd given up fighting . "

An early January 1999 Marist Institute of Public Opinion poll showed Giuliani trailing Clinton by 10 points . By January 2000 , the Marist poll showed Giuliani up by 9 points . Giuliani 's tactics involved intentionally baiting the Clinton campaign with deliberate overstatements , keeping them off balance and behind in the response cycle . Giuliani emphasized his depiction of Clinton as a carpetbagger . He made a one-day visit to Little Rock , Arkansas , where he announced he would fly the Arkansas state flag over New York 's City Hall . When Hillary Clinton visited New York from Washington , he said , “ I hope she knows the way . I hope she doesn ’ t get lost on one of the side streets . ” Giuliani 's campaign prepared a 315-page opposition research dossier that went back to her time at Wellesley College ; it included eleven pages of what they termed " Stupid Actions and Remarks " . The Giuliani campaign had no problems raising money , getting over 40 percent of its funds from out-of-state and outraising Clinton overall two-to-one . The Giuliani campaign showed some structural weaknesses . So closely identified with New York City , he had somewhat limited appeal to naturally Republican voters in Upstate New York . The Farmersville Garbage Scandal was indicative of his lower levels of support upstate . By late December 1999 , Clinton adapted to Giuliani 's psychological warfare , saying in response to one such gambit , " I can ’ t be responding every time the mayor gets angry . Because that ’ s all I would do . " A February 2000 attempt by Giuliani to capitalize on a Clinton campaign event 's accidental playing of Billy Joel 's suburban drug tale " Captain Jack " led to more ridicule for him than for her .

On March 11 , 2000 , Giuliani and Clinton met face-to-face for the first time since the campaigning began , at the New York Inner Circle press dinner , an annual event in which New York politicians and the press corps stage skits , roast each other and make fun of themselves , with proceeds going to charity . Giuliani was on stage in male disco garb spoofing John Travolta in Saturday Night Fever , but also appeared in drag in taped video clips that reworked the " Rudy / Rudia " theme of a past Inner Circle dinner , as well as in an exchange with Joan Rivers that sought to make fun of Clinton . Other performers ' skits made fun of Clinton 's Yankees claim and the infidelity of her husband . The New York Police Department 's fatal shooting of Patrick Dorismond on March 15 , 2000 inflamed Giuliani 's already strained relations with the city 's minority communities , and Clinton seized on it as a major campaign issue . By April , reports showed Clinton gaining upstate and generally outworking Giuliani , who stated that his duties as mayor prevented him from campaigning more . He gave priority to city duties over campaign activities . Some Giuliani aides and national Republican figures concluded that his interest in the campaign was flagging , as although he was desirous of winning in political combat against a Clinton , he was by nature an executive personality and the prospect of serving as one of a hundred legislators was unappealing to him .

Giuliani 's marriage to his wife , broadcast journalist and actress Donna Hanover , had been distant since 1996 , and the two were rarely seen in public together . There had been no formal announcement of any change in their relationship , although Hanover had indicated that she and their children would not move to Washington if Giuliani won the race . Beginning in October 1999 , a new woman was being spotted at mayoral functions . By March 2000 , Giuliani had stopped wearing his wedding ring and was being seen more in the company of this other woman , including at the Inner Circle press dinner , the St. Patrick 's Day parade , and town hall meetings , but it was not yet fully clear whether the relationship was personal or professional . While this woman had become a frequent subject of insider talk among the New York political circle , she had not been mentioned in the press . On April 20 Hanover announced that she would soon be taking over the lead role in Eve Ensler 's controversial play The Vagina Monologues . Political observers speculated that Hanover was partly engaging in a political act against her husband , as Ensler was a friend and supporter of Hillary Clinton and the role would not go over well with social conservatives within the Republican Party . Giuliani declined to say whether he would attend one of her performances . On April 22 , the New York Post obtained photographs of Giuliani openly strolling on a Manhattan street with the other woman after they left a restaurant , but did not have more than a first name for her ; the Post sat on the story , but it was clear the relationship was a personal one .

On April 26 , television channel NY1 reported that Giuliani had undergone a second round of tests for prostate cancer at Mount Sinai Medical Center ; the same disease had led to the death of his father . On April 28 , Giuliani held a news conference to announce that he did in fact have prostate cancer , but it was in an early stage . He was unsure of which of several types of treatment he might undergo , and that decision would impact whether he could stay in the senate race or not . Hanover was not present at the conference , but issued a note saying she would support him in his decision process . As Giuliani mulled over his medical options , on May 1 Hanover announced that she was postponing her appearance in The Vagina Monologues due to " personal family circumstances . " On May 2 the New York Daily News published a brief item about Giuliani 's other woman , without name or description . On May 3 the New York Post finally published its photographs of Giuliani and the woman , now identified as Judith Nathan , leaving a restaurant together , under the front page headline " Rudy 's Mystery Brunch Pal is Upper East Side Divorcée " . ( Some observers felt that Giuliani , known for his ability to manipulate the New York media , had been eager for news of the relationship to come out . ) Later that day , Giuliani responded to a barrage of questions on the subject at a news conference by acknowledging Judith Nathan publicly for the first time , calling her " a very good friend " and expressing his annoyance that her privacy was being invaded . The next days were filled with New York media coverage on Nathan 's background and on the relationship . On May 6 Hanover held an unusually-located news conference at the back of St. Patrick 's Cathedral before the funeral of Cardinal John O 'Connor ; visibly trembling , she said , " I will be supportive of Rudy in his fight against his illness , as this marriage and this man have been very precious to me . " The following day half the press tried to stake out Nathan 's known locations while the rest pestered Nathan 's hometown relatives in Hazleton , Pennsylvania ; Giuliani looked weak in a public appearance .

On May 10 , Giuliani held what The New York Times described as an " extraordinary , emotional news conference " in Bryant Park to announce that he was seeking a separation from Hanover , saying , " This is very , very painful . For quite some time it 's probably been apparent that Donna and I lead in many ways independent and separate lives . " Regarding Nathan , Giuliani said " I 'm going to need her now more than maybe I did before , " making reference to his battle with cancer and her background in nursing . Regarding the senate race , he again did not commit to a decision , saying , " I don 't really care about politics right now . I 'm thinking about my family , the people that I love and what can be done that 's honest and truthful and that protects them the best . I 'm not thinking about politics . Politics comes at least second , maybe third , maybe fourth , somewhere else . It 'll all work itself out some way politically . " Giuliani had , however , neglected to inform Hanover in advance of his announcement ; her reaction was described as distraught . Three hours later , she held her own news conference at Gracie Mansion , where she said , " Today 's turn of events brings me great sadness . I had hoped to keep this marriage together . For several years , it was difficult to participate in Rudy 's public life because of his relationship with one staff member . " In this , she was making reference to Cristyne Lategano , the former communications director for Giuliani ; Vanity Fair had reported in 1997 that Lategano and Giuliani were having an affair , which both of them had denied . Hanover continued , " Beginning last May , I made a major effort to bring us back together . Rudy and I re-established some of our personal intimacy through the fall . At that point , he chose another path . "

State Republican leaders , who until now had avoided talk of replacements for Giuliani should he not run , now gave more attention to the matter , with the state party convention coming up on May 30 . Former possible contenders Rick Lazio and Pete King immediately indicated they were available ; other names mentioned included Wall Street financier Theodore J. Forstmann and Governor Pataki , although the latter indicated no interest . Giuliani continued to ponder his senate race decision ; when he had dinner with Nathan on May 12 , they were trailed by a flock of photographers . Giuliani canceled campaigning and fundraising trips to upstate New York and California on May 13 , suggesting he would not run , but then resumed fundraising and suggested he was inclined towards running on May 15 . Two Republican county chairmen became upset at the indecision , saying , " Like Waiting for Godot , we have Waiting for Rudy , " and , " We need a decision . Like tomorrow would be nice . Because this is getting ridiculous . " A top state Republican said , " He seem [ s ] to like the attention . He seems to be going through some sort of catharsis in public . And we 're like psychiatrists watching it . I can 't quite figure it out . I don 't think anybody can . " Clinton , meanwhile , said as little as possible about the situation , preferring to let Giuliani 's drama play out on its own ; on May 17 , as he huddled with his doctors over whether to choose surgery or radiation as his treatment while facing conflicting political advice from his aides , she won the unanimous approval of delegates to the Democratic Party state convention at the Pepsi Arena in Albany , New York , giving a constrained acceptance speech because she did not know her general election opponent .

Finally , on May 19 , Giuliani held what The New York Times again described as " an emotional , riveting news conference " that " reached a new level of introspection " to announce that he was dropping out of the senate race : " This is not the right time for me to run for office . If it were six months ago or it were a year from now or the timing were a little different , maybe it would be different . But it isn 't different and that 's the way life is . " He added that , " I used to think the core of me was in politics , probably . It isn 't . When you feel your mortality and your humanity you realize that , that the core of you is first of all being able to take care of your health . " He said that he would instead devote the remainder of his mayoralty trying to overcome the hostile relations he had with many of the city 's minority groups .

While previous Republican nominee candidates and fellow Long Island Congressmen Rick Lazio and Pete King had both indicated an interest in replacing Giuliani , upon Giuliani 's withdrawal the state party quickly rallied around Lazio , who had more campaign funds and who was viewed as a potentially strong candidate . In particular , Governor Pataki — who never cared much for Giuliani to begin with — was strongly in favor of Lazio , and praised him as " fresh , unencumbered challenger " to Clinton . This also caused a shuffle in New York 's unique third-party ballot-line alignments : the Liberal Party of New York , which was previously set to run Giuliani ( whom they had supported in all three of his mayoral races ) , now switched to Clinton , while the Conservative Party of New York , which had previously been loath to endorse the socially liberal Giuliani ( and was set to nominate former Westchester Congressman Joe DioGuardi ) lined up behind Lazio . Lazio accepted the unanimous approval of delegates to the Republican Party state convention at a hotel ballroom in Buffalo on May 30 . Clinton now faced a lesser-known candidate in Lazio . While a relative moderate among House Republicans , Lazio had frequently supported former House Speaker Newt Gingrich , a largely despised figure among many New Yorkers . Lazio did bring to the table an ethnic suburban background familiar to many New Yorkers , and had a reputation as an energetic campaigner .

One formality left were New York 's late-in-the-season primary elections on September 12 , which in this case merely served to ratify the state party conventions ' choices . Lazio won unopposed , while Clinton won 82 percent of the vote in easily defeating unknown Manhattan doctor Mark McMahon , who ran on the grounds that " the Clintons have tried to hijack the Democratic Party . " For her part , Clinton said that she was " surprised , in a way [ to see her name in the voting booth ] . I stood there for a minute , staring at my name . " In any case , the general election was already well underway .

The contest drew considerable national attention and both candidates were well-funded . By the end of the race , Democrat Clinton and Republicans Lazio and Giuliani had spent a combined $ 90 million , the most of any U.S. Senate race in history . Lazio outspent Clinton $ 40 million to $ 29 million , with Clinton also getting several million dollars in soft money from Democratic organizations . Among Clinton antagonists circles , direct mail-based fundraising groups such as the Emergency Committee to Stop Hillary Rodham Clinton sprung up , sending out solicitations regarding the " carpetbagging " issue : just as one Clinton leaves office , another one runs . Clinton secured a broad base of support , including endorsements from conservation groups and organized labor , but notably not the New York City police union which endorsed Lazio while firefighters supported Hillary . While Clinton had a solid base of support in New York City , candidates and observers expected the race to be decided in upstate New York where 45 percent of the state 's voters live . During the campaign , Clinton vowed to improve the economic picture in upstate New York , promising that her plan would deliver 200,000 New York jobs over six years . Her plan included specific tax credits with the purpose of rewarding job creation and encouraging business investment , especially in the high-tech sector . She called for targeted personal tax cuts for college tuition and long-term care . Lazio faced a unique tactical problem campaigning upstate . The major issue there was the persistently weak local economy , which Lazio hoped to link to his opponent 's husband 's tenure in office . Attacks on the state of the upstate economy were frequently interpreted as criticism of incumbent Republican governor George Pataki , however , limiting the effect of this line of attack .

Opponents continued to make the carpetbagging issue a focal point throughout the race and during debates . Talk radio hammered on this , with New York-based Sean Hannity issuing a daily mantra , " Name me three things Hillary Clinton has ever done for the people of New York ! " Clinton 's supporters pointed out that the state was receptive to national leaders , such as Robert F. Kennedy who was elected to the Senate in 1964 despite similar accusations . In the end , according to exit polls conducted in the race , a majority of the voters dismissed the carpetbagging issue as unimportant . During the campaign , Independent Counsel Robert Ray filed his final reports regarding the long-running Whitewater , " Travelgate " , and " Filegate " investigations of the White House , each of which included specific investigations of Hillary Clinton actions . The reports exonerated her on the files matter , said there was insufficient evidence regarding her role in Whitewater , and said that she had made factually false statements regarding the Travel Office firings but there was insufficient evidence to prosecute her . Although The New York Times editorialized that the release of the reports seemed possibly timed to coincide with the Senate election , in practice the findings were not seen as likely to sway many voters ' opinions .

A September 13 , 2000 debate between Lazio and Clinton proved important . Lazio was on the warpath against soft money and the amounts of it coming from the Democratic National Committee into Clinton 's campaign , and challenged Clinton to agree to ban soft money from both campaigns . He left his podium and waved his proposed paper agreement in Clinton 's face ; many debate viewers thought he had invaded her personal space and as a result Clinton 's support among women voters solidified . Late in the campaign Lazio criticised Clinton for accepting campaign donations from various Arab groups in the wake of the USS Cole attack . This issue caused former New York Mayor Ed Koch to take out ads telling Lazio to " stop with the sleaze already , " and did not change the dynamic of the race .

Clinton won the election on November 7 with 55 % of the vote to Lazio 's 43 % , a difference larger than most observers had expected . Clinton won the traditionally Democratic base of New York City by large margins , and carried suburban Westchester County , but lost heavily populated Long Island , part of which Lazio represented in Congress . She won surprising victories in Upstate counties , such as Cayuga , Rensselaer , and Niagara , to which her win has been attributed . In comparison with other results , this 12 % margin was smaller than Gore 's 25 % margin over Bush in the state Presidential contest , was slightly larger than the 10 % margin by which fellow New York senator Charles Schumer defeated incumbent Republican Al D 'Amato in the hotly contested 1998 race , but was considerably smaller than the 47 % margin by which Senator Schumer won reelection in 2004 against little-known Republican challenger Howard Mills . The victory of a Democrat in the Senate election was not assured , because in recent decades the Republicans had won about half the elections for governor and senator . Lazio 's bid was handicapped by the weak performance of George W. Bush in New York in the 2000 election , but it is also clear Hillary Clinton had made substantial inroads in upstate New York prior to Lazio 's entry into the race . Exit polls also showed a large gender gap with Clinton running stronger than expected among moderate women and unaffiliated women .

In January 2001 , two months after Hillary Clinton 's election to the Senate , President Clinton pardoned four residents of the New Square Hasidic enclave in Rockland County , New York , who had been convicted of defrauding the federal government of $ 30 million by establishing a fictitious religious school . New Square had voted almost unanimously for Hillary Clinton in the New York Senate race . A lawyer following the matter stated that even if Hillary Clinton had promised to lobby her husband for clemency in exchange for the town 's votes — a claim for which there was no proof — it would be difficult to establish a crime had taken place : " Politicians make promises all the time . That 's nothing new — or illegal . " Hillary Clinton acknowledged sitting in on a post-election meeting discussing possible clemency for the four , but said she had played no part in her husband 's decision . A federal investigation launched to investigate various Clinton pardons , closed its investigation of the New Square matter in June 2002 by taking no action against Bill Clinton , Hillary Clinton , or any residents of New Square .

Hillary Clinton 's former finance director , David Rosen , was indicted on January 7 , 2005 on campaign finance charges related to a fund-raising event produced by Peter F. Paul . Paul , a convicted drug dealer who would soon after be convicted on stock fraud charges after being extradited from Brazil , stated that he spent $ 1.2 million to produce the August 12 , 2000 Hollywood Gala Salute to President William Jefferson Clinton event , which was both a tribute to honor President Clinton and a fundraiser for the First Lady 's 2000 Senate campaign . The Justice Department indictment charged Rosen with filing false reports with the Federal Election Commission by reporting only $ 400,000 in contributions . On May 27 , 2005 , the jury acquitted Rosen on all counts . On January 5 , 2006 it was reported that Clinton 's campaign group agreed to pay a $ 35,000 fine related to the underreporting of the fundraiser 's expenses . Peter Paul has also filed a civil suit in this matter , Paul v. Clinton . On April 10 , 2006 , the judge in charge of the case removed Hillary Clinton as a defendant , citing a lack of evidence . However , she may still be called to testify as a witness in the case . The removal was upheld by the California Second District Court of Appeal on October 16 , 2007 .

Clinton 's victory would establish her as an effective campaigner and an electoral force on her own , able to capture Republican and independent votes and overcome her polarizing image . She would easily win re-election in 2006 , and in 2007 began her presidential campaign for 2008 . Lazio gave up his House seat to run for Senate . Following his defeat , which set a record for the most money spent in a losing Senate effort , he took positions in the corporate world and avoided electoral politics until becoming a candidate in New York 's 2010 gubernatorial election . However , he was defeated by a wide margin in the Republican primary . Giuliani would undergo treatment for his cancer and eventually recover ; he would also divorce Donna Hanover and eventually marry Judith Nathan . After his campaign withdrawal , his political future looked uncertain at best . But less than a year after the senate general election , the September 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks took place , with Giuliani still mayor . Giuliani 's performance in the aftermath of September 11 earned him many accolades and resurrected his political prospects . After a successful stint in the private sector , in 2007 he also began his presidential campaign for 2008 .

Throughout much of 2007 , Clinton and Giuliani led in national polls for their parties ' respective nominations , and media reports often looked back to the 2000 " race that wasn 't " as a preview of what might lie in wait for the entire nation in 2008 . Such extrapolating ended with the Giuliani campaign 's precipitous decline and January 2008 withdrawal . Clinton as well failed to gain the 2008 nomination and , in June 2008 , she finished in a close second place to Illinois Senator Barack Obama . In December 2008 , Lowey would have another chance at the Senate seat , when Clinton was nominated for U.S. Secretary of State by President-elect Obama and Lowey was considered a front-runner to be named as her appointed replacement . But Lowey withdrew from consideration , as in the intervening years she had gained enough seniority to become one of the powerful " cardinals " on the House Appropriations Committee and did not want to relinquish that position . When Caroline Kennedy announced her interest in the vacancy , comparisons were drawn to Clinton in 2000 , with both being famous people seeking to hold elective office for the first time . Others pointed out that Clinton had won election to the office while Kennedy would first be appointed . In any case , Kennedy 's effort soon faltered , in part due to not having the same desire or willingness to work for the seat as Clinton had had , and she soon withdrew as abruptly as she had entered .

Christopher Dodd writing in The Guardian noted Oxford 's aggressiveness during the preparations for the race , suggesting that they were " set to humiliate their opponents if they possibly can . " Dodd went on to predict that Oxford would win by their greatest margin since the 1898 race . Meanwhile , Cambridge had reorganised their seating order the week before the race . Oxford 's boat was named after Russell Crockford who had rowed in Oxford 's successful 1978 and 1979 races . He was killed in a car accident the previous year on his way to a regatta in Australia . Umpire Ronnie Howard modified the starting arrangements , making the boats commence the race closer together to dissuade the coxes steering into one another from the start . He warned both coxes that should they foul , he would disqualify them .

Sue Brown was selected to cox the Oxford boat , and became the first female competitor in the history of the Boat Race . Although she had learned to cox at Wadham , she had already been selected to represent Great Britain in the Women 's coxed fours at the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow . She had impressed Oxford coach Dan Topolski who chose her for the Dark Blues . Her selection caused a furore ; according to Dodd , " Sue Brown must have passed before more shutters than anyone except for Lady Diana Spencer " . She was advised by Colin Moynihan who had coxed Oxford to their largest victory of the century in the 1977 race . Boris Rankov was making his fourth appearance , but this time as a junior fellow of St Hugh 's , rather than as an undergraduate at Corpus Christi . In doing so , he became the first representative of a women 's college in the men 's Boat Race . The Oxford crew weighed an average of 13 st 8 lb ( 86.0 kg ) , 1.5 pounds ( 0.68 kg ) more per rower than their opponents . The race saw the return of no fewer than twelve former Blues , six in each crew . Only Richard Yonge , Richard Emerton and Brown for Oxford and R. Stephens , M. Clark and Mike Cowie for Cambridge were new to the race . Graeme Hall was the Cambridge finishing coach , while Oxford 's Dan Topolski took over that role from Steve Royle two weeks prior to the race .

Oxford were strong pre-race favourites ; Ladbrokes themselves quoted Oxford at odds of five-to-one on to win . Cambridge won the toss for the first time in seven years and elected to start on the Surrey station . The race started at 1 pm under umpire Howard 's guidance . Both crews rating equally off the start , Oxford took an early lead and lead by nine seconds by the Mile Post , allowing her to move the Dark Blue boat in front of Cambridge . Pushing her crew to outrate Cambridge , Oxford extended their lead to 10 seconds by Hammersmith Bridge , 14 seconds by Chiswick Steps , 18 seconds by Barnes Bridge and 23 seconds by the finishing post . Oxford won their sixth consecutive victory by eight lengths in a time of 18 minutes 11 seconds , the largest margin of victory since the Cambridge won the 1973 race by thirteen lengths , and the largest margin of victory in the 20th century for the Dark Blues . In the reserve race , Isis beat Goldie by five lengths , their second consecutive victory . In the 36th running of the Women 's Boat Race , Oxford triumphed , their second consecutive victory .

In the opening scene , Michael has arranged a meeting to discuss making the Quarterly Report more exciting , unaware that the office workers are all more interested in the DVD screensaver , and believes their disappointment whenever the bouncing box on the screensaver doesn 't make it into a corner are reactions to his statements . Eventually , the box does make it into a corner , and the cheering employees all leave , to his confusion . Dunder Mifflin is preparing a party for the launch of their new website " Dunder Mifflin Infinity " . Since Jan Levenson ( Melora Hardin ) doesn 't want to go to the launch party , Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) invites Pam Beesly ( Jenna Fischer ) , who makes Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) take her place . Only after they reach New Jersey does Jim realize that Michael received an " invitation " to a chat room , not the actual party . Jim also reveals that he turned down the Corporate job that Ryan Howard ( B.J. Novak ) accepted . Michael returns to Scranton dejected and attempts to plan a better party . This irritates party planner Angela Martin ( Angela Kinsey ) , who has already been in an exceptionally irritable mood . She viciously and patronizingly takes out her frustrations on fellow Party Planning Committee member Phyllis , who quits the committee in frustration .

Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) decides to compete against the website to see who can make more sales . Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) keeps a running tally of reams sold , blowing an airhorn each time Dwight makes a sale . Irritated by the distraction , Jim and Pam plot a prank . They send Dwight instant messages pretending to be the company 's computer system , taunting Dwight to believe it has achieved self-awareness . Dwight wins the challenge , but when he gloats to Angela about his victory , she rejects him outright and makes it clear that they are broken up for good . She also asks Pam to set her up with a single friend of hers . Pam , feeling sorry for Dwight , sends another message as the computer acknowledging him as a superior being . Andy later sets up a conference call with some of his old Cornell friends to serenade Angela with Take a Chance on Me ; she doesn 't agree to date him , but appears to be somewhat charmed by the spectacle . Michael finally realizes that Ryan doesn 't respect him , and once he gets online for the party 's chat room he snaps that Dwight single-handedly outsold DMI and curses at Ryan . But his emotional reactions haven 't stopped for the night : he is angered after everyone complains that he confused the office 's favorite pizza place ( Alfredo 's Pizza Cafe , which is a real restaurant in Scranton ) with a terrible pizza place ( Pizza by Alfredo , which is fictional ) . When his coupon is then refused , he takes a stand for justice and holds the teenaged delivery driver ( Kevin McHale ) hostage , with both he and Dwight acting out their frustrations about Ryan and Angela , respectively . After some time , Michael realizes he is breaking the law and lets the kid go , and then heads up to crash the party in NYC and get some sushi , with Dwight joining him . They get to enjoy a little leftover food , but Michael 's most cheered when one of the younger Corporate workers says they liked his rant against Ryan and " It was funny to see Ryan embarrassed by all that " , and heads home in good spirits .

" Launch Party " was the sixth episode of the series directed by Ken Whittingham . Whittingham had previously directed " Health Care " , " Michael 's Birthday " , " The Convention " , " The Merger " , and " Phyllis ' Wedding " . " Launch Party " was written by Jennifer Celotta , making it the sixth episode written by her . According to Jennifer Celotta , the idea for the first scene of the episode where the office workers are watching a logo bounce around a television screen , came when the writers were in a room watching the DVD logo bounce around the television screen , and were arguing about whether it would ever hit the corner .

" Launch Party " received a 5.2 Nielsen Rating and an 8 % Share . The episode was watched by 8.91 million viewers and achieved a 4.7 / 11 in the key adults 18 – 49 demographic . " Launch Party " received mixed reviews from critics . TV Squad 's Jay Black wondered why the writers " feel the need to veer off into increasingly more ridiculous places " , especially because The Office is " hailed by critics and adored by fans for its ability to find humor in the smallest pieces of real-life human interaction " . Black did say that except for the kidnapping , he " thought tonight 's episode was the best of the season . " Travis Fickett of IGN wrote that " Launch Party " was " a very entertaining episode with some terrific moments . " Fickett did say that with all the hour-long episodes " things start to feel stretched and some scenes take on a sense of redundancy and certain storylines seem to peter out before they even get going . "

Courbet was the lead ship of her class , the first dreadnoughts built for the French Navy . She was completed before World War I and named in honour of Admiral Amédée Courbet . She spent the war in the Mediterranean , helping to sink the Austro-Hungarian protected cruiser Zenta in August 1914 . She spent the rest of the war providing cover for the Otranto Barrage that blockaded the Austro-Hungarian Navy in the Adriatic Sea . Although upgraded several times before World War II , she was not deemed to be a first-class battleship and spent most of the interwar period as a gunnery training ship . Upon the German invasion of France , beginning on 10 May 1940 , Courbet was hastily rearmed . She supported Allied troops in the defence of Cherbourg during June , later that month taking refuge in England . As part of Operation Catapult , she was seized in Portsmouth by British forces on 3 July and was turned over to the Free French a week later . She was used as a patrol vessel depot ship and an anti-aircraft ship there until 31 March 1941 when she was disarmed and hulked . Her engines and boilers were removed in 1944 to prepare her for use as a breakwater during the Normandy landings in June 1944 . She was scrapped where she lay after the war .

Courbet was 166 metres ( 544 ft 7 in ) long overall . She had a beam of 27 metres ( 88 ft 7 in ) and at full load a draft of 9.04 metres ( 29 ft 8 in ) at the bow . She displaced 23,475 tonnes ( 23,100 long tons ) at standard load and 25,579 tonnes ( 25,180 long tons ) at full load . She proved to be rather wet in service as she was bow-heavy because of the superimposed turrets forward . Courbet had four propeller shafts powered by four Parsons direct-drive steam turbines , rated at 28,000 shaft horsepower ( 20,880 kW ) . Twenty-four Niclausse boilers provided steam for her turbines . These boilers were coal-burning with auxiliary oil sprayers . She had a designed speed of 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) , although she reached 22 knots ( 41 km / h ; 25 mph ) during trials . She carried up to 2,700 long tons ( 2,700 t ) of coal and 906 long tons ( 921 t ) of oil and could steam for 4,200 nautical miles ( 7,800 km ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 12 mph ; 19 km / h ) .

Courbet 's main armament consisted of twelve 305-millimetre ( 12 in ) Mle 1910 45-calibre guns mounted in six twin gun turrets , with two turrets superimposed fore and aft , and one on each flank of the ship . For anti-torpedo boat defence she carried twenty-two 138-millimetre ( 5.4 in ) Mle 1910 guns , which were mounted in casemates . Four 47-millimetre ( 1.9 in ) Modèle 1902 Hotchkiss guns were fitted , two on each beam . She was also armed with four 450-millimetre ( 18 in ) submerged Modèle 1909 torpedo tubes with twelve torpedoes . Courbet 's waterline armoured belt extended well below the waterline as the French were concerned about protection from underwater hits . Her main armour was also thinner than that of her British or German counterparts , but covered more area . It was 270 mm ( 11 in ) thick between the fore and aft turrets and tapered to 180 mm ( 7.1 in ) towards the bow and stern . It extended 2.4 m ( 7 ft 10 in ) below the normal waterline . Above the main belt was another belt , 180 mm thick , that covered the sides , and the secondary armament , up to the forecastle deck , 4.5 m ( 15 ft ) deep , between the fore and aft turrets . The conning tower had armour 300 mm ( 11.8 in ) thick . The main gun turrets had 290 mm ( 11.4 in ) of armour on their faces , 250 mm ( 9.8 in ) on their sides and roofs 100 mm ( 3.9 in ) thick . Their barbettes had 280 mm ( 11.0 in ) of armour . There was no anti-torpedo bulkhead although there was a longitudinal bulkhead abreast the machinery spaces that was used either as a coal bunker or left as a void .

Courbet joined the 1st Division of the 1st Squadron of the French Mediterranean Fleet , at Toulon , upon commissioning in 1913 . She became the flagship of Vice-Amiral Augustin Boué de Lapeyrère , commander of the 1st Squadron , after the beginning of the war until 12 April 1915 . Lapeyrère decided immediately on a sweep into the Adriatic to surprise the Austrian vessels enforcing a blockade of Montenegro and the Anglo-French force , which included her sister ship Jean Bart , succeeded in cutting off and sinking the Austro-Hungarian protected cruiser Zenta in an engagement off Antivari on 16 August 1914 , although her accompanying destroyer managed to escape . She spent most of the rest of 1914 providing gunfire support for the Montenegrin Army until U-12 hit Jean Bart on 21 December with a torpedo . This forced the battleships to fall back to either Malta or Bizerte to cover the Otranto Barrage . After the French occupied the neutral Greek island of Corfu in 1916 she moved forward to Corfu and Argostoli , but her activities were very limited as much of her crew was used to man anti-submarine ships . Before the end of the war she was fitted with seven 75-millimetre ( 3 in ) Mle 1918 anti-aircraft ( AA ) guns in single mounts . These guns were adaptations of the famous French Mle 97 75-mm field gun .

Courbet served as Vice-Amiral Charlier 's flagship between 6 June 1919 and 20 October 1920 . The following year she became a gunnery training ship at Toulon , but she suffered a serious boiler fire in June 1923 that required repairs , so she was given the first of her upgrades between 9 July 1923 and 16 April 1924 , at La Seyne-sur-Mer . This included replacing one set of boilers with oil-fired boilers , trunking together her two forward funnels , increasing the maximum elevation of the main armament from 12 ° to 23 ° , removal of her bow armour to make her more seaworthy , the installation of a fire-control director , with a 4.57 metres ( 15 ft 0 in ) rangefinder , atop the new tripod foremast as well as the installation of an experimental 7.6 metres ( 24 ft 11 in ) rangefinder on top of her conning tower . She had another boiler fire in August 1924 and remained under repair for the rest of the year , but resumed her duties as a gunnery training ship upon her return from the dockyard . She was refitted again between 15 January 1927 and 12 January 1931 . This was much more extensive than her earlier refit as another set of boilers was converted to oil-firing , her high and medium pressure direct-drive turbines were replaced by geared turbines and her fire-control systems were comprehensively upgraded . A large cruiser-type fire-control director was added atop the foremast with a 4.57-m coincidence rangefinder and a 3-metre ( 9 ft 10 in ) stereo rangefinder . The rangefinder above the conning tower was replaced by a duplex unit carrying two 4.57-m rangefinders and another 4.57-m rangefinder was added in an armoured hood next to the main mast . Two directors for the secondary guns were added on the navigation bridge , each with a 2-metre ( 6 ft 7 in ) coincidence rangefinder . A 8.2 metres ( 26 ft 11 in ) rangefinder was added to the roof of ' B ' turret , the second one from the bow . Her Mle 1918 AA guns were exchanged for Mle 1922 guns and they were provided with three 1.5-metre ( 4 ft 11 in ) rangefinders , one on top of the duplex unit on the conning tower , one on ' B ' turret and one in the aft superstructure . The 75-mm guns had a maximum depression of 10 ° and a maximum elevation of 90 ° . They fired a 5.93-kilogram ( 13.1 lb ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 850 m / s ( 2,800 ft / s ) at a rate of fire of 8 – 18 rounds per minute and had a maximum effective ceiling of 8,000 metres ( 26,000 ft ) .

Courbet and her sister Paris formed a Fifth Squadron at the beginning of the war . They were transferred to the Atlantic to continue their training duties without interference . Both ships were ordered restored to operational status on 21 May 1940 by Amiral Mord and they were given six Hotchkiss 13.2-millimetre ( 0.52 in ) twin machine gun mounts and two single 13.2-mm Browning machine guns at Cherbourg . Courbet was ordered to provide gunfire support to the defenders of Cherbourg against the advancing 7th Panzer Division and covered the evacuation of the town by the Allies , although the lack of spotting aircraft meant that she was not particularly effective in that role . Courbet sailed for Portsmouth on 20 June . She was seized there , as part of Operation Catapult , by British forces on 3 July and a week later was turned over to the Free French , who used her as a depot and an anti-aircraft ship in Portsmouth until 31 March 1941 when she was disarmed . Up to April 1944 she was deployed as a target ship in Scotland . At Loch Striven she was initially used as a target vessel for the " Highball " trials . " Highball " was a smaller version of " Upkeep " used in the Dambuster Raid . She remained in use as a depot and target ship until she was earmarked for use as a " Gooseberry " breakwater at Sword Beach during the Battle of Normandy . She had to be towed from Weymouth on 7 June by the British tugboats HMRT Growler and HMRT Samsonia as her engines and boilers had been removed earlier and replaced with concrete . She was scuttled on 9 June and was hit by Neger manned torpedoes during the nights of 15 – 16 and 16 – 17 August . She was scrapped in place after the war .

" I 'm That Chick " is a song by American singer and songwriter Mariah Carey from her eleventh studio album , E = MC ² ( 2008 ) . A disco track with influences of R & B , it was written by Carey , Johntá Austin and production duo Stargate ( Mikkel S. Eriksen and Tor E. Hermansen ) . It contains elements of a song called " Off the Wall " originally performed by Michael Jackson . Rod Temperton , the songs composer , received a songwriting for " I 'm That Chick " as result . The track was positively received amongst most music critics , many of whom called it the best song on the album and praised is disco composition . Carey performed " I 'm That Chick " on The Hills season premiere party , the 2008 Fashion Rocks , Canadian Idol , and included it on the set-list of her eighth concert tour , The Elusive Chanteuse Show ( 2014 ) . It peaked at number 82 on the U.S. Billboard Hot R & B / Hip-Hop Songs chart .

" I 'm That Chick " was written by Mariah Carey , Johntá Austin and production duo Stargate ( Mikkel S. Eriksen and Tor E. Hermansen ) for Carey 's eleventh studio album , E = MC ² ( 2008 ) . It was produced by Carey for Maroon Entertainment and by Stargate on behalf of Delirious Blacksmith Management Ltd . Copyright is held by Rye Songs which is administered by Songs of Universal ( BMI ) / Zomba Songs / Sony ATV Publishing Ltd . / EMI Music Publishing / Naked Under My Clothes / Chrysalis Music ( ASCAP ) . The song contains elements of " Off the Wall " , written by Rod Temperton in 1980 and originally performed by Michael Jackson . Temperton received as songwriting credit as a result . " Off the Wall " is published by RodSongs and administered by Almo Music Corp ( ASCAP ) . The track was recorded by Eriksen and Brian Garten at Roc the Mic Studios in New York City and Honeysouth Studios in Miami , and mixed by Phil Tan for Riotproof Productions Ltd. at Soapbox Studios in Atlanta . Tan was assisted Josh Houghkirk , All instrumentation was provided for and performed by Eriksen and Hermansen . Carey performed background vocals along with Johnson and MaryAnn Tatum .

It is a disco song with R & B influences The Guardian 's Alex Macpherson noted that the R & B element borrowed from 2008 trend in the genre of using a time signature of 44 . He thought that the disco style of the song was reminiscent of some of Carey 's compositions in the beginning of her career , and believed that it was not a coincidence that Carey 's album shares its name with one released by Giorgio Moroder , a disco and EDM DJ and producer , 1979 . Carey employs a " gritty " but " effortless " " feathery vocal approach " on the track , similar to that of Jackson 's on " Off the Wall " .

Sarah Rodman of The Boston Globe declared " I 'm That Chick " as the best track on the album . PopMatters writer Evan Sawdey wrote " the few times that she is handed a truly effortless stunner on E = MC2 , she absolutely knocks it out of the park " with regard to " I 'm That Chick " and " Side Effects " . He continued to write that the former " could very well be the disc ’ s highlight " , but felt that Carey sounded like an unknown popstar . However , Jayanthi Daniels of The New York Sun was critical of " I 'm That Chick " as well as " Side Effects " , describing them as " throwaway pop tracks " on a hip-hop album . The Advocate 's Sara Levy called described the track as " irresistible " and a " coy surprise " , while Nick Levine of Digital Spy similarly wrote that it is " irresistible disco candy . " Joey Guerra from the Houston Chronicle felt that the " Off the Wall " sample " breathed life " into the track , writing that the only things which are missing are " roller skates and short-shorts " . Eric Henderson of Slant Magazine gave a detailed evaluation of the song 's composition , comparing it to Carey 's 2001 soundtrack album Glitter and to Janet Jackson 's 2008 song " Feeback " :

'I 'm That Chick ' is a retro treatsicle in the best , most Glitter-iest sense . It 's pinker than Pepto-Bismol and just as soothing , and for whatever reason , Mariah 's fudged enunciation on the chorus turns ' I 'm that chick you like ' into ' I 'll have chicken , lite . ' The triumph of the song is that , when all of our dance-floor divas these days seem to throw one disco-descendant banger on their otherwise hip-hop-hybrid LPs almost out of obligation , ' I 'm That Chick ' doesn 't feel even as tokenistic as Janet 's ' Feedback ' ( which I like more , but only out of context ) .

On March 25 , 2008 , Carey was featured as the special guest performer at The Hills season premiere party , an event marking the start of a span of ten episodes airing in between season three and four . Carey performed " Touch My Body " , " I 'm That Chick " and " We Belong Together " . After the performance , Carey received strong praise from the program 's cast members , with Lauren Conrad saying " I 've always been a huge Mariah fan , and she 's just so beautiful and talented ' , while Whitney Port and Audrina Patridge referred to Carey as " an amazing singer " , while claiming to have listened to her music from a young age . On July 22 , 2008 , Carey was announced as one of the performers at the 2008 Fashion Rocks ceremony . At the event on September 6 , 2008 , the event opened with a live performance of " Just Stand Up " , a charity single in which Carey partook alongside other female artists including Carrie Underwood . Carey later performed " I 'm That Chick " alongside several male dancers , opening the song with a spontaneous a cappella of the track 's chorus to positive critical response . A writer from Marie Claire complimented the performance , describing the rendition as " true glamtastic Mariah style " . A few days later , Carey reprised her performance of " I 'm That Chick " on Canadian Idol , along with " We Belong Together " . The track was included on the set-list Carey 's eighth concert tour The Elusive Chanteuse Show in 2014 .

The 1967 International and Universal Exposition or Expo 67 , as it was commonly known , was a general exhibition , Category One World 's Fair held in Montreal , Quebec , Canada , from April 27 to October 29 , 1967 . It is considered to be the most successful World 's Fair of the 20th century with the most attendees to that date and 62 nations participating . It also set the single-day attendance record for a world 's fair , with 569,500 visitors on its third day . Expo 67 was Canada 's main celebration during its centennial year . The fair had been intended to be held in Moscow , to help the Soviet Union celebrate the Russian Revolution 's 50th anniversary ; however , for various reasons , the Soviets decided to cancel , and Canada was awarded it in late 1962 . The project was not well supported in Canada at first . It took the determination of Montreal 's mayor , Jean Drapeau , and a new team of managers to guide it past political , physical and temporal hurdles . Defying a computer analysis that said it could not be done , the fair opened on time .

After Expo 67 ended in October 1967 , the site and most of the pavilions continued on as an exhibition called Man and His World , open during the summer months from 1968 until 1984 . By that time , most of the buildings — which had not been designed to last beyond the original exhibition — had deteriorated and were dismantled . Today , the islands that hosted the world exhibition are mainly used as parkland and for recreational use , with only a few remaining structures from Expo 67 to show that the event was held there .

The idea of hosting the 1967 World Exhibition dates back to 1956 , but it was in 1958 that Conservative Senator Mark Drouin suggested during his speech at the Brussels Exhibition that Canada should host a World Exhibition to celebrate its centennial . The exposition was offered first to Toronto but politicians there rejected the idea . However , Montreal 's mayor , Sarto Fournier , backed the proposal , allowing Canada to make a bid to the Bureau International des Expositions ( BIE ) . At the BIE 's May 5 , 1960 meeting in Paris , Moscow was awarded the fair after five rounds of voting that eliminated Austria 's and then Canada 's bids . In April 1962 , the Soviets scrapped plans to host the fair because of financial constraints and security concerns . Montreal 's new mayor , Jean Drapeau , lobbied the Canadian government to try again for the fair , which they did . On November 13 , 1962 , the BIE changed the location of the World Exhibition to Canada , and Expo 67 went on to become the fourth-best attended BIE-sanctioned world expositions , after Shanghai , Osaka , and Paris .

Expo did not get off to a smooth start ; in 1963 , many top organizing committee officials resigned . The main reason for the resignations was Mayor Drapeau 's choice of the site on new islands to be created around the existing St. Helen 's Island and also that a computer program predicted that the event could not possibly be constructed in time . Another more likely reason for the mass resignations was that on April 22 , 1963 , the federal Liberal government of Prime Minister Lester Pearson took power . This meant that former Prime Minister John Diefenbaker 's Progressive Conservative government appointees to the board of directors of the Canadian Corporation for the 1967 World Exhibition were likely forced to resign . Canadian diplomat Pierre Dupuy was named Commissioner General , after Diefenbaker appointee Paul Bienvenu resigned from the post in 1963 . One of the main responsibilities of the Commissioner General was to attract other nations to build pavilions at Expo . Dupuy would spend most of 1964 and 1965 soliciting 125 countries , spending more time abroad than in Canada . Dupuy 's ' right-hand ' man was Robert Fletcher Shaw , the deputy commissioner general and vice-president of the corporation . He also replaced a Diefenbaker appointee , C.F. Carsley , Deputy Commissioner General . Shaw was a professional engineer and builder , and is widely credited for the total building of the Exhibition . Dupuy hired Andrew Kniewasser as the general manager . The management group became known as Les Durs - the tough guys - and they were in charge of creating , building and managing Expo . Les Durs consisted of : Jean-Claude Delorme , Legal Counsel and Secretary of the Corporation ; Dale Rediker , Director of Finances ; Colonel Edward Churchill , Director of Installations ; Philippe de Gaspé Beaubien , Director of Operations , dubbed " The Mayor of Expo " ; Pierre de Bellefeuille , Director of Exhibitors ; and Yves Jasmin , Director of Information , Advertising and Public Relations . To this group the chief architect Édouard Fiset was added . All ten were honoured by the Canadian government as recipients of the Order of Canada , Companions for Dupuy and Shaw , Officers for the others .

Jasmin wrote a book , in French , La petite histoire d 'Expo 67 , about his 45-month experience at Expo and created the Expo 67 Foundation ( available on the web site under that name ) to commemorate the event for future generations . As historian Pierre Berton put it , the cooperation between Canada 's French- and English-speaking communities " was the secret of Expo 's success — ' the Québécois flair , the English-Canadian pragmatism . ' " However , Berton also points out that this is an over-simplification of national stereotypes . Arguably Expo did , for a short period anyway , bridge the ' Two Solitudes.'

In May 1963 , a group of prominent Canadian thinkers — including Alan Jarvis , director of the National Gallery of Canada ; novelists Hugh MacLennan and Gabrielle Roy ; J. Tuzo Wilson , geophysicist ; and Claude Robillard , town planner — met for three days at the Seigneury Club in Montebello , Quebec . The theme , " Man and His World " , was based on the 1939 book entitled Terre des Hommes ( translated as Wind , Sand and Stars ) by Antoine de Saint-Exupéry . In Roy 's introduction to the Expo 67 corporation 's book , entitled Terre des Hommes / Man and His World , she elucidates the theme : In Terre des Hommes , his haunting book , so filled with dreams and hopes for the future , Antoine de Saint-Exupéry writes of how deeply moved he was when , flying for the first time by night alone over Argentina , he happened to notice a few flickering lights scattered below him across an almost empty plain . They " twinkled here and there , alone like stars .... " In truth , being made aware of our own solitude can give us insight into the solitude of others . It can even cause us to gravitate towards one another as if to lessen our distress . Without this inevitable solitude , would there be any fusion at all , any tenderness between human beings . Moved as he was by a heightened awareness of the solitude of all creation and by the human need for solidarity , Saint-Exupéry found a phrase to express his anguish and his hope that was as simple as it was rich in meaning ; and because that phrase was chosen many years later to be the governing idea of Expo 67 , a group of people from all walks of life was invited by the Corporation to reflect upon it and to see how it could be given tangible form .

Construction started on August 13 , 1963 , with an elaborate ceremony hosted by Mayor Drapeau on barges anchored in the St. Lawrence River . Ceremonially , construction began when Prime Minister Lester B. Pearson pulled a lever that signalled a front-end loader to dump the first batch of fill to enlarge Saint Helen 's Island , and Quebec premier Jean Lesage spread the fill with a bulldozer . The 25 million tons of fill needed to construct the islands was coming from the Montreal Metro 's excavations , a public works project that was already under construction before Expo was awarded to Montreal . Expo 's initial construction period mainly centred on enlarging Saint Helen 's Island , creating the artificial island of Notre Dame Island and lengthening and enlarging the Mackay Pier which became the Cité du Havre . While construction continued , the land rising out of Montreal harbour was not owned by the Expo Corporation yet . After the final mounds of earth completed the islands , the grounds that would hold the fair were officially transferred from the City of Montreal to the corporation on June 20 , 1964 . This gave Colonel Churchill only 1042 days to have everything built and functioning for opening day . To get Expo built in time , Churchill used the then new project management tool known as the critical path method ( CPM ) . On April 28 , 1967 , opening day , everything was ready , with one exception : Habitat 67 , which was then displayed as a work in progress .

Building and enlarging the islands , along with the new Concorde Bridge built to connect them with the site-specific mass transit system known as the Montreal Expo Express , plus a boat pier , cost more than the Saint Lawrence Seaway project did only five years earlier : this was even before any buildings or infrastructure were constructed . With the initial phase of construction completed , it is easy to see why the budget for the exhibition was going to be larger than anyone expected . In the fall of 1963 , Expo 's general manager , Andrew Kniewasser , presented the master plan and the preliminary budget of $ 167 million for construction : it would balloon to over $ 439 million by 1967 . The plan and budget narrowly passed a vote in Pearson 's federal cabinet , passing by one vote , and then it was officially submitted on December 23 , 1963 .

The official Expo 67 theme song was composed by Stéphane Venne and was titled : " Hey Friend , Say Friend / Un Jour , Un Jour " . Complaints were made about the suitability of the song , as its lyrics mentioned neither Montreal nor Expo 67 . The song was selected from an international competition with over 2,200 entries from 35 countries . However , the song that most Canadians associate with Expo was written by Bobby Gimby , a veteran commercial jingle writer who composed the popular Centennial tune " Ca-na-da " . Gimby earned the name the " Pied Piper of Canada " . The theme song " Something to Sing About " , used for the Canadian pavilion , had been written for a 1963 television special . The Ontario pavilion also had its own theme song : " A Place to Stand , A Place to Grow " , which has evolved to become an unofficial theme song for the province .

Official opening ceremonies were held on Thursday afternoon , April 27 , 1967 . The ceremonies were an invitation-only event , held at Place des Nations . Canada 's Governor General , Roland Michener , proclaimed the exhibition open after the Expo flame was ignited by Prime Minister Pearson . On hand were over 7,000 media and invited guests including 53 heads of state . Over 1,000 reporters covered the event , broadcast in NTSC Colour , live via satellite , to a worldwide audience of over 700 million viewers and listeners . Expo 67 opened to the public on the morning of Friday , April 28 , 1967 , with a space age-style countdown . A capacity crowd at Place d 'Accueil participated in the atomic clock-controlled countdown that ended when the exhibition opened precisely at 9 : 30 a.m. EST . An estimated crowd of between 310,000 and 335,000 visitors showed up for opening day , as opposed to the expected crowd of 200,000 . The first person through the Expo gates at Place d 'Accueil was Al Carter , a 41-year-old jazz drummer from Chicago , who was recognized for his accomplishment by Expo 67 's director of operations Philippe de Gaspé Beaubien . Beaubien presented Carter with a gold watch for his feat .

The World Festival of Art and Entertainment at Expo 67 featured art galleries , opera , ballet and theatre companies , orchestras , jazz groups , famous Canadian pop musicians and other cultural attractions . Many pavilions had music and performance stages , where visitors could find free concerts and shows . Most of the featured entertainment took place in the following venues : Place des Arts , Expo Theatre , Place des Nations , La Ronde , and Automotive Stadium . The La Ronde amusement park was always intended to be a lasting legacy of the fair . Most of its rides and booths were permanent . When the Expo fairgrounds closed nightly , at around 10 : 00 p.m. , visitors could still visit La Ronde , which closed at 2 : 30 a.m. In addition , The Ed Sullivan Show was broadcast live on May 7 and May 21 from Expo 67 . Stars on the shows included America 's The Supremes , Britain 's Petula Clark and Australia 's The Seekers . The fair was visited by many of the most notable people of the day , including Canada 's monarch , Queen Elizabeth II , Lyndon B. Johnson , Princess Grace of Monaco , Jacqueline Kennedy , Robert F. Kennedy , Ethiopia 's emperor Haile Selassie , Charles de Gaulle , Bing Crosby , Harry Belafonte , Maurice Chevalier , Maharishi Mahesh Yogi and Marlene Dietrich . Musicians like Thelonious Monk , Grateful Dead , Tiny Tim , The Tokens and Jefferson Airplane entertained the crowds .

Despite its successes , there were problems : Front de libération du Québec militants had threatened to disrupt the exhibition , but were inactive during this period . Vietnam war protesters picketed during the opening day , April 28 . American President Lyndon B. Johnson 's visit became a focus of war protesters . Threats that the Cuba pavilion would be destroyed by anti-Castro forces were not carried out . In June , the Arab-Israeli conflict in the Middle East flared up again in the Six Day War , which resulted in Kuwait pulling out of the fair in protest to the way Western nations dealt with the war . The president of France , Charles De Gaulle , caused an international incident on July 24 when he addressed thousands at Montreal City Hall by yelling out the now famous words " Vive Montréal ... Vive le Québec ... Vive le Québec Libre ! " In September , the most serious problem turned out to be a 30-day transit strike . By the end of July , estimates predicted that Expo would exceed 60 million visitors , but the strike cut deeply into attendance and revenue figures , just as the fair was cruising to its conclusion . Another major problem , beyond the control of Expo 's management , was guest accommodation and lodging . Logexpo was created to direct visitors to accommodations in the Montreal area , which usually meant that visitors would stay at the homes of people they were unfamiliar with , rather than traditional hotels or motels . The Montreal populace opened their homes to thousands of guests . Unfortunately for some visitors , they were sometimes sent to less than respectable establishments where operators took full advantage of the tourist trade . Management of Logexpo was refused to Expo and was managed by a Quebec provincial authority . Still , Expo would get most of the blame for directing visitors to these establishments . But overall , a visit to Expo from outside Montreal was still seen as a bargain .

Expo 67 closed on Sunday afternoon , October 29 , 1967 . The fair had been scheduled to close two days earlier , however a two-day extension granted by the International Exhibitions Bureau allowed it to continue over the weekend . On the final day 221,554 visitors added to the more than 50 million ( 50,306,648 ) that attended Expo 67 at a time when Canada 's population was only 20 million , setting a per-capita record for World Exhibition attendance that still stands . Starting at 2 : 00 p.m. , Expo Commissioner General Pierre Dupuy officiated over the medal ceremony , in which participating nations and organizations received gold and silver medallions , and over the ceremony in which national flags were lowered in the reverse order to which they had been raised , with Canada 's flag lowered first and Nigeria 's lowered last . After Prime Minister Pearson doused the Expo flame , Governor General Michener closed Expo at Place des Nations with the mournful spontaneous farewell : " It is with great regret that I declare that the Universal and International Exhibition of 1967 has come to an official end . " All rides and the minirail were shut down by 3 : 50 p.m. , and the Expo grounds closed at 4 : 00 p.m. , with the last Expo Express train leaving for Place d 'Accueil at that time . A fireworks display , that went on for an hour , was Expo 's concluding event .

Expo 67 featured 90 pavilions representing Man and His World themes , nations , corporations , and industries including the U.S. pavilion , a geodesic dome designed by Buckminster Fuller . Expo 67 also featured the Habitat 67 modular housing complex designed by architect Moshe Safdie , which was later purchased by private individuals and is still occupied . The most popular pavilion was the Soviet Union 's exhibit . It attracted about 13 million visitors . Rounding out the top five pavilions , in terms of attendance were : the Canadian Pavilion ( 11 million visitors ) , the United States ( 9 million ) , France ( 8.5 million ) , and Czechoslovakia ( 8 million ) . Countries conspicuously absent were Spain , South Africa , the People 's Republic of China , and many South American countries .

After 1967 , the exposition struggled for several summer seasons as a standing collection of international pavilions known as " Man and His World " . However , as attendance declined , the physical condition of the site deteriorated , and less and less of it was open to the public . After the 1971 season , the entire Notre Dame Island site closed and three years later completely rebuilt around the new rowing and canoe sprint ( then flatwater canoeing ) basin for Montreal 's 1976 Summer Olympics . Space for the basin , the boathouses , the changing rooms and other buildings was obtained by demolishing many of the former pavilions and cutting in half the area taken by the artificial lake and the canals . In 1976 , a fire destroyed the acrylic outer skin of Buckminster Fuller 's dome , and the previous year the Ontario pavilion was gutted by a major fire . With the site falling into disrepair , and several pavilions left abandoned and vandalized , it began to resemble ruins of a futuristic city . In 1980 the Notre Dame Island site was reopened ( primarily for the Floralies ) making both islands simultaneously accessible again , albeit only for a brief time . Minor thematic exhibitions were held at the Atlantic pavilion and Quebec pavilion ( and continued even several years beyond ) . After the 1981 season , the Saint Helen 's Island site permanently closed , shutting out the majority of attractions . Man and His World was able to continue in a limited fashion with the small number of pavilions left standing on Notre Dame Island . However , the few remaining original exhibits closed permanently in 1984 .

After the Man and His World summer exhibitions were discontinued , with most pavilions and remnants demolished between 1985 and 1986 , the former site for Expo 67 on Saint Helen 's Island and Notre Dame Island was incorporated into a municipal park run by the city of Montreal . In 2000 , the park was renamed from Parc des Îles to Parc Jean-Drapeau , after Mayor Jean Drapeau , who had brought the exhibition to Montreal . In 2006 , the corporation that runs the park also changed its name from the Société du parc des Îles to the Société du parc Jean-Drapeau . Two prominent buildings remain in use on the former Expo grounds : the American pavilion 's metal-lattice skeleton from its Buckminster Fuller dome , now enclosing an environmental sciences museum called the Montreal Biosphère ; and Habitat 67 , now a condominium residence . Also , the French and Quebec pavilions now form the Montreal Casino . La Toundra Hall is part of the surviving structural remains of the Canadian pavilion . It is now a special events hall with dining facilities available , while another part of the pavilion serves as the administration building of Parc Jean-Drapeau ( Katimavik 's distinctive inverted pyramid and much of the rest of the Canadian pavilion were dismantled during the 1970s ) .

Place des Nations , where the opening and closing ceremonies were held , remains however in an abandoned and deteriorating state . The Jamaican , Tunisian and Korean pavilion ( roof only ) and the CIBC banking centre also survive . In Cite du Havre the Expo Theatre , Administration and Fine Arts buildings remain . Other remaining structures include sculptures , lampposts and landscaping . The Montreal Metro subway station Berri Uqam still has a " Man and His World " logo and welcome sign above the pedestrian tunnel entrance to the yellow line . La Ronde survives , and since 2001 it has been leased to the New York amusement park company Six Flags . The Alcan Aquarium built for the Expo remained in operation for a number of decades until its closure in 1991 . The Expo 67 parking lot was converted into Victoria STOLport , an experimental short-take off airport for a brief time in the 1970s . Another attraction on today 's Notre Dame Island site is the Circuit Gilles Villeneuve race track that is used for the Canadian Grand Prix . The Olympic basin is used by many local rowing clubs . A beach was built on the shores of the remaining artificial lake . There are many acres of parkland and cycle paths on both Saint Helen 's Island and the western tip of Notre Dame Island . The site has been used for a number of events such as a BIE-sponsored international botanical festival , Les floralies . The young trees and shrubs planted for Expo 67 are now mature . The plants introduced during the botanical events have flourished also .

In a political and cultural context , Expo 67 was seen as a landmark moment in Canadian history . In 1968 , as a salute to the cultural impact the exhibition had on the city , Montreal 's Major League baseball team , the Expos ( now the Washington Nationals ) , was named after the event . 1967 was also the year that invited Expo guest Charles De Gaulle , on July 24 , addressed thousands at Montreal City Hall by yelling out the now famous words : " Vive Montréal ... Vive le Québec ... Vive le Québec Libre ! " ( See Vive le Québec libre speech ) . De Gaulle was rebutted in Ottawa by Prime Minister Lester B. Pearson : " Canadians do not need to be liberated , Canada will remain united and will reject any effort to destroy her unity . " In the years that followed , the tensions between the English- and French-speaking communities would continue . As an early 21st-century homage to the fair , satirists Bowser and Blue wrote a full-length musical set at Expo 67 called The Paris of America , which ran for six sold-out weeks at Centaur Theatre in Montreal in April and May 2003 .

Expo 67 was one of the most successful World Exhibitions , and is still regarded fondly by Canadians . In Montreal , 1967 is often referred to as " the last good year " before economic decline , Quebec sovereignism ( seen as negative from a federalist viewpoint ) , deteriorating infrastructure and political apathy became common . In this way , it has much in common with the 1964-65 New York World 's Fair . In 2007 , a new group , Expo 17 , was looking to bring a smaller-scale — BIE sanctioned — exposition to Montreal for Expo 67 's 50th anniversary and Canada 's sesquicentennial in 2017 . Expo 17 hoped a new world 's fair would regenerate the spirit of Canada 's landmark centennial project .

The British Aerospace Sea Harrier is a naval short take-off and vertical landing / vertical take-off and landing jet fighter , reconnaissance and attack aircraft ; the second member of the Harrier Jump Jet family developed . It first entered service with the Royal Navy in April 1980 as the Sea Harrier FRS1 and became informally known as the " Shar " . Unusual in an era in which most naval and land-based air superiority fighters were large and supersonic , the principal role of the subsonic Sea Harrier was to provide air defence of Royal Navy aircraft carriers . The Sea Harrier served in the Falklands War , both of the Gulf Wars , and the Balkans conflicts ; on all occasions it mainly operated from aircraft carriers positioned within the conflict zone . Its usage in the Falklands War was its most high profile and important success , where it was the only fixed-wing fighter available to protect the British Task Force . The Sea Harriers shot down 20 enemy aircraft during the conflict with one lost to enemy ground fire . They were also used to launch ground attacks in the same manner as the Harriers operated by the Royal Air Force .

The Sea Harrier was marketed for sales abroad , but by 1983 India was the only operator other than Britain after sales to Argentina and Australia were unsuccessful . A second , updated version for the Royal Navy was made in 1993 as the Sea Harrier FA2 , improving its air-to-air abilities and weapons compatibilities , along with a more powerful engine ; this version continued manufacture until 1998 . The aircraft was withdrawn from service early by the Royal Navy in 2006 . The Sea Harrier remained in service for another decade with the Indian Navy until its retirement in 2016 thus ending the career of the historic British jet .

In the post-war era , the Royal Navy began contracting in parallel with the break-up of the British Empire overseas and the emergence of the Commonwealth of Nations , reducing the need for a larger navy . By 1960 , the last battleship , HMS Vanguard , was retired from the Navy , having been in service for less than fifteen years . Perhaps the biggest sign of the new trend towards naval austerity came in 1966 , when the planned CVA-01 class of large aircraft carriers destined for the Royal Navy was cancelled . During this time , requirements within the Royal Navy began to form for a vertical and / or short take-off and landing ( V / STOL ) carrier-based interceptor to replace the de Havilland Sea Vixen . Afterward , the first V / STOL tests on a ship began with a Hawker Siddeley P.1127 landing on HMS Ark Royal in 1963 . A second concept for the future of naval aviation emerged in the early 1970s as the first of a new class of " through deck cruisers " was planned . These were very carefully and politically designated as cruisers to deliberately avoid the term " aircraft carrier " , in order to increase the chances of funding from a hostile political climate against expensive capital ships , they were considerably smaller than the previously sought CVA-01 . These ships were ordered as the Invincible class in 1973 , and are now popularly recognised as aircraft carriers . Almost immediately upon their construction , a ski-jump was added to the end of the 170-metre deck , enabling the carriers to effectively operate a small number of V / STOL jets . The Royal Air Force 's Hawker Siddeley Harrier GR1s had entered service in April 1969 . A navalised variant of the Harrier was developed by Hawker Siddeley to serve on the upcoming ships , this became the Sea Harrier . In 1975 , the Royal Navy ordered 24 Sea Harrier FRS.1 ( standing for ' Fighter , Reconnaissance , Strike ' ) aircraft , the first of which entered service in 1978 . During this time Hawker Siddeley became part of British Aerospace through nationalisation in 1977 . By the time the prototype Sea Harrier was flown at Dunsfold on 20 August 1978 the order had been increased to 34 . The Sea Harrier was declared operational in 1981 on board the first Invincible class ship HMS Invincible , and further aircraft joined the ageing HMS Hermes aircraft carrier later that year .

Following their key role in the 1982 Falklands War , several lessons were learned from the aircraft 's performance , which led to approval for an upgrade of the fleet to FRS.2 ( later known as FA2 ) standard to be given in 1984 . The first flight of the prototype took place in September 1988 and a contract was signed for 29 upgraded aircraft in December that year . In 1990 , the Navy ordered 18 new-build FA2s , at a unit cost of around £ 12 million , four further upgraded aircraft were ordered in 1994 . The first aircraft was delivered on 2 April 1993 .

The Sea Harrier is a subsonic aircraft designed to fill strike , reconnaissance and fighter roles . It features a single Rolls-Royce Pegasus turbofan engine with two intakes and four vectorable nozzles . It has two landing gear on the fuselage and two outrigger landing gear on the wings . The Sea Harrier is equipped with four wing and three fuselage pylons for carrying weapons and external fuel tanks . Use of the ski jump allowed the aircraft to take off from a short flight deck with a heavier loadout than otherwise possible , although it can also take off like a conventional loaded fighter without thrust vectoring from a normal airport runway . The Sea Harrier was largely based on the Harrier GR3 , but was modified to have a raised cockpit with a " bubble " canopy for greater visibility , and an extended forward fuselage to accommodate the Ferranti Blue Fox radar . Parts were changed to use corrosion resistant alloys or coatings were added to protect against the marine environment . After the Falklands War , the Sea Harrier was fitted with the new anti-ship Sea Eagle missile . The Sea Harrier FA2 featured the Blue Vixen radar , which was described as one of the most advanced pulse doppler radar systems in the world ; the Blue Fox radar was seen by some critics as having comparatively low performance for what was available at the time of procurement . The Blue Vixen formed the basis for development of the Eurofighter Typhoon 's CAPTOR radar . The Sea Harrier FA2 also carried the AIM-120 AMRAAM missile , the first UK aircraft to be provided with this capability . An upgraded model of the Pegasus engine , the Pegasus Mk 106 , was used in the Sea Harrier FA2 ; in response to the threat of radar-based anti aircraft weapons electronic countermeasures were added . Other improvements included an increase to the air-to-air weapons load , look-down radar , increased range , and improved cockpit displays .

The cockpit in the Sea Harrier includes a conventional centre stick arrangement and left-hand throttle . In addition to normal flight controls , the Harrier has a lever for controlling the direction of the four vectorable nozzles . The nozzles point rearward with the lever in the forward position for horizontal flight . With the lever back , the nozzles point downward for vertical takeoff or landing . The usefulness of the vertical landing capability of the Sea Harrier was demonstrated in an incident on 6 June 1983 , when Sub Lieutenant Ian Watson lost contact with the aircraft carrier HMS Illustrious and had to land Sea Harrier ZA176 on the foredeck of the Spanish cargo ship Alraigo . In 2005 , although already timetabled to be retired , a Sea Harrier was modified with an ' Autoland ' system to allow the fighter to perform a safe vertical landing without any pilot interaction . Despite the pitching of a ship posing a natural problem , the system was designed to be aware of such data , and successfully performed a landing at sea in May 2005 .

The first three Sea Harriers were a development batch and were used for clearance trials . The first production aircraft was delivered to RNAS Yeovilton in 1979 to form an Intensive Flying Trials Unit ( also known as 700A Naval Air Squadron ) . In March 1980 the Intensive Flying Trials Unit became 899 Naval Air Squadron and would act as the landborne headquarters unit for the type . The first operational squadron 800 Naval Air Squadron was also formed in March 1980 initially to operate from HMS Invincible before it transferred to HMS Hermes . In January 1981 , a second operation squadron 801 Naval Air Squadron was formed to operate from HMS Invincible .

Sea Harriers took part in the Falklands War of 1982 , flying from the aircraft carriers HMS Invincible and HMS Hermes . The Sea Harriers performed the primary air defence role with a secondary role of ground attack ; the RAF Harrier GR3 provided the main ground attack force . A total of 28 Sea Harriers and 14 Harrier GR3s were deployed in the theatre . The Sea Harrier squadrons shot down 20 Argentine aircraft in air-to-air combat with no air-to-air losses , although two Sea Harriers were lost to ground fire and four to accidents . Out of the total Argentine air losses , 28 % were shot down by Harriers . A number of factors contributed to the failure of the Argentinian fighters to shoot down a Sea Harrier . Although the Mirage III and Dagger jets were faster , the Sea Harrier was considerably more manoeuvrable . Moreover , the Harrier employed the latest AIM-9L Sidewinder missiles and the Blue Fox radar . Contrary to contemporary reports that " viffing " proved decisive in dogfights , the maneuver was not used by RN pilots in the Falklands as it was only used in emergencies against enemies unfamiliar with the aircraft . The British pilots had superior air-combat training , one manifestation of which was that they thought they noticed Argentinian pilots occasionally releasing weapons outside of their operating parameters . This is now thought to have been Mirages releasing external fuel tanks rather than weapons , and turning away from conflict with the Sea Harrier . This later reduced their capability to fight an effective campaign against the Sea Harrier due to reduced range and lack of external fuel tanks .

British aircraft received fighter control from warships in San Carlos Water , although its effectiveness was limited by their being stationed close to the islands , which severely limited the effectiveness of their radar . The differences in tactics and training between 800 Squadron and 801 Squadron has been a point of criticism , suggesting that the losses of several ships were preventable had Sea Harriers from Hermes been used more effectively . Both sides ' aircraft were operating in adverse conditions . Argentine aircraft were forced to operate from the mainland because airfields on the Falklands were only suited for propellor-driven transports . In addition , fears partly aroused by the bombing of Port Stanley airport by a British Vulcan bomber added to the Argentinians ' decision to operate them from afar . As most Argentine aircraft lacked in-flight refuelling capability , they were forced to operate at the limit of their range . The Sea Harriers also had limited fuel reserves due to the tactical decision to station the British carriers out of Exocet missile range and the dispersal of the fleet . The result was that an Argentine aircraft could only allow five minutes over the islands to search and attack an objective , while a Sea Harrier could stay near to 30 minutes waiting in the Argentine approach corridors and provide Combat Air Patrol coverage for up to an hour .

The Sea Harriers were outnumbered by the available Argentinian aircraft , and were on occasion decoyed away by the activities of the Escuadrón Fénix or civilian jet aircraft used by the Argentine Air Force . They had to operate without a fleet early warning system such as AWACS that would have been available to a full NATO fleet in which the Royal Navy had expected to operate , which was a significant weakness in the operational environment . However , it is now known that Chile did provide early radar warning to the Task Force . The result was that the Sea Harriers could not establish complete air superiority and prevent Argentine attacks during day or night , nor could they completely stop the daily C-130 Hercules transports ' night flights to the islands . A total of six Sea Harriers were lost during the war to either enemy fire , accidents or mechanical failure . The total aggregate loss rate for both the Harriers and Sea Harriers on strike operations was 2.3 % .

The Sea Harrier saw action in war again when it was deployed in the 1992 – 1995 conflict in Bosnia , part of the Yugoslav Wars . It launched raids on Serb forces and provided air-support for the international taskforce units conducting Operations Deny Flight and Deliberate Force against the Army of Republika Srpska . On 16 April 1994 , a Sea Harrier of the 801 Naval Air Squadron , operating from the aircraft carrier HMS Ark Royal , was brought down by a Igla-1 surface-to-air missile fired by the Army of Republika Srpska while attempting to bomb two Bosnian Serb tanks . The pilot , Lieutenant Nick Richardson , ejected and landed in territory controlled by friendly Bosnian Muslims . It was used again in the 1999 NATO campaign against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in Operation Allied Force , Sea Harriers which operated from HMS Invincible frequently patrolled the airspace to keep Yugoslavian MiGs on the ground . They were also deployed to Sierra Leone on board HMS Illustrious in 2000 , which was itself part of a Royal Navy convoy to supply and reinforce British intervention forces in the region .

The Sea Harrier was withdrawn from service in 2006 and the last remaining aircraft from 801 Naval Air Squadron were decommissioned on 29 March 2006 . The plans for retirement were announced in 2002 by the Ministry of Defence . The aircraft 's replacement , the F-35 Lightning II , was originally due in 2012 , the MoD arguing that significant expenditure would be required to upgrade the fleet for only six years of service . By March 2010 , the F-35 's introduction had been pushed back to 2016 at the earliest , with the price doubled . The decision to retire the Sea Harrier early has been criticised by some officers within the military . Both versions of Harrier experienced reduced engine performance ( Pegasus Mk 106 in FA2 – Mk 105 in GR7 ) in the higher ambient temperatures of the Middle East , which restricted the weight of payload that the Harrier could return to the carrier in ' vertical ' recoveries . This was due to the safety factors associated with aircraft " land-on " weights . The option to install higher-rated Pegasus engines would not have been as straightforward as on the Harrier GR7 upgrade and would have likely been an expensive and slow process . Furthermore , the Sea Harriers were subject to a generally more hostile environment than land-based Harriers , with corrosive salt spray a particular problem . A number of aircraft were retained by the School of Flight Deck Operations at RNAS Culdrose .

In 1977 , the Indian government approved of plans to acquire the Sea Harrier for the Indian Navy ; prior to this , rumours reportedly were circulating of a potential Indian purchase of the Soviet V / STOL-capable Yak-36 . The BAE Sea Hawk was phased out from the Indian Navy in 1978 , in preparation for the purchase of Sea Harriers . In November 1979 , India placed its first order for six Sea Harrier FRS Mk 51 fighters and two T Mk 60 Trainers ; the first three Sea Harriers arrived at Dabolim Airport on 16 December 1983 , and were inducted the same year . Ten more Sea Harriers were purchased in November 1985 ; eventually a total of 30 Harriers were procured , 25 for operational use and the remainder as dual-seat trainer aircraft . Until the 1990s , significant portions of pilot training was carried out in Britain due to limited aircraft availability . The introduction of the Sea Harrier allowed for the retirement of India 's previous carrier fighter aircraft , the Hawker Sea Hawk , as well as for the Navy 's aircraft carrier , INS Vikrant ( ex-HMS Hercules ) , to be extensively modernised between 1987 and 1989 . India has operated Sea Harriers from both the aircraft carriers INS Vikrant and INS Viraat ( ex-HMS Hermes ) . The Sea Harrier allowed several modern missiles to be introduced into naval operations , such as the British anti-ship Sea Eagle missile , and the French Matra Magic missile for air-to-air combat . Other ordnance has included 68 mm rockets , runway-denial bombs , cluster bombs , and podded 30 mm cannons .

There have been a significant number of accidents involving the Sea Harrier ; this accident rate has caused approximately half the fleet to be lost with only 11 fighters remaining in service . Following a crash in August 2009 , all Sea Harriers were temporarily grounded for inspection . Since the beginning of operational service in the Indian Navy , seven pilots have died in 17 crashes involving the Sea Harrier , usually during routine sorties . In 2006 , the Indian Navy expressed interest in acquiring up to eight of the Royal Navy 's recently retired Sea Harrier FA2s in order to maintain their operational Sea Harrier fleet , Neither the Sea Harrier FA2 's Blue Vixen radar , the radar warning receiver or AMRAAM capability was proposed to be included ; certain US software would be also be uninstalled prior to shipment . By October 2006 , reports emerged that the deal had not materialised due to the cost of airframe refurbishment . In 2006 , the Indian Navy was in the process of upgrading up to 15 Sea Harriers in collaboration with Israel by installing the Elta EL / M-2032 radar and the Rafael ' Derby ' medium-range air-to-air BVR missile . This will enable the Sea Harrier to remain in Indian service until beyond 2012 , and also see limited service off the new carriers it will acquire by that time frame . By 2009 , crashes had reduced India 's fleet to 12 ( from original 30 ) . India plans to introduce larger aircraft carriers that can operate Russian MiG-29K carrier fighters from their flight decks to replace the Sea Harrier .

A number of surviving Sea Harrier airframes are held by museums and private owners , and some others are at the Royal Navy School of Flight Deck Operations at RNAS Culdrose . The following is an incomplete list of some of the surviving aircraft . One BAe Sea Harrier FRS 51 ( IN-621 ) preserved at the Naval Aviation Museum ( India ) in Goa , India . Nine Sea Harrier FA2s - XZ440 , ZD579 , ZE690 , ZE692 , ZH797 , ZH798 , ZH802 , ZH803 , ZH813 - are still used by the School of Flight Deck Operations at RNAS Culdrose , as of November 2012 Two Sea Harriers , an FRS1 XZ493 / 001 / N and an FA2 ( XZ499 ) are also on public display at the Fleet Air Arm Museum at Yeovilton . Sea Harrier T.8 ZD992 was written off in an accident at Yeovilton on 16 November 2000 but was later restored to non-airworthy condition by Everett Aero in Suffolk and is now believed to be privately owned in the Manchester area . Sea Harrier FA2 serial number XZ439 , Hawker-Siddeley build number 912002 Nalls Aviation St Mary 's County , Maryland . The former Royal Navy Sea Harrier FA2 was purchased in 2006 by Art Nalls , who spent the next two years restoring it to flying condition . In December 2007 , it was damaged in a hard landing , while undergoing testing at Naval Air Station Patuxent River and had to be repaired . The aircraft made its first public appearance at an air show in Culpeper , Virginia in October 2008 . The aircraft is the only privately owned , civilian-flown Harrier in the world . Nalls recently purchased Sea Harrier T.8 ZD993 .

The pied currawong ( Strepera graculina ) is a medium-sized black passerine bird native to eastern Australia and Lord Howe Island . One of three currawong species in the genus Strepera , it is closely related to the butcherbirds and Australian magpie of the family Artamidae . Six subspecies are recognised . It is a robust crowlike bird averaging around 48 cm ( 19 in ) in length , black or sooty grey-black in plumage with white undertail and wing patches , yellow irises , and a heavy bill . The male and female are similar in appearance . Known for its melodious calls , the species ' name currawong is believed to be of indigenous origin . Within its range , the pied currawong is generally sedentary , although populations at higher altitudes relocate to lower areas during the cooler months . It is omnivorous , with a diet that includes a wide variety of berries and seeds , invertebrates , bird eggs and juvenile birds . It is a predator which has adapted well to urbanization and can be found in parks and gardens as well as rural woodland . The habitat includes all kinds of forested areas , although mature forests are preferred for breeding . Roosting , nesting and the bulk of foraging take place in trees , in contrast with the ground-foraging behaviour of its relative , the Australian magpie .

The pied currawong was first described by English ornithologist George Shaw in 1790 as Coracias strepera , although Strepera was adopted as a generic name . Its binomial names were derived from the Latin strepera , meaning " noisy " , and graculina for resembling a jackdaw . Pied crow-shrike is an old vernacular name from colonial days , and the term " pied " refers to two or more colors in blotches . Other common names include pied chillawong , currawang , charawack , kurrawack , tallawong , tullawong , mutton-bird , Otway forester , and pied afternoon-tea bird . The onomatopoeic term currawong itself is derived from the bird 's call . However , the exact origin of the term is unclear ; the most likely antecedent is the word garrawaŋ from the indigenous Jagera language from the Brisbane region , although the Darug word gurawaruŋ from the Sydney basin is a possibility . Yungang as well as Kurrawang and Kurrawah are names from the Tharawal people of the Illawarra region . Its closest relative is the black currawong ( S. fuliginosa ) of Tasmania , which has sometimes been considered a subspecies . Together with the larger grey currawong ( S. versicolor ) , they form the genus Strepera . Although crow-like in appearance and habits , currawongs are only distantly related to true crows , and instead belong to the family Artamidae , together with the closely related Australian magpie and the butcherbirds . The affinities of all three genera were recognised early on and they were placed in the family Cracticidae in 1914 by ornithologist John Albert Leach after he had studied their musculature . Ornithologists Charles Sibley and Jon Ahlquist recognised the close relationship between woodswallows and butcherbirds in 1985 , and combined them into a Cracticini clade , which became the family Artamidae .

Six subspecies are currently recognised , characterised principally by differences in size and plumage . There is a steady change to the birds ' morphology and size the further south they are encountered , with lighter and more greyish plumage , larger body size , and a shorter bill . Southerly populations also show more white plumage in the tail , with less whiteness on the wing . S. g. graculina is the nominate form , found from the Sydney region north to the Burdekin River in northern Queensland . S. g. ashbyi , ( critically endangered ) , the western Victorian pied currawong , was described by Australian amateur ornithologist Gregory Mathews in 1913 . It is threatened by hybridization with the neighbouring subspecies nebulosa whose range is expanding westwards . A 2000 estimate placed the number of breeding birds at around 250 . It resembles subspecies nebulosa , with sooty plumage , a long tail and a short bill . There is some doubt over whether ashbyi , which is little known , is a distinct subspecies or a colour morph of nebulosa . It is thought to have evolved after the two populations became separated by basalt plains in western Victoria , with the return of trees after the abandonment of regular Aboriginal burning in the late 18th century contributing to the remixing of populations . Hybrid forms have been identified in the Grampians and Yarra Valley .

S. g. crissalis , ( vulnerable ) the Lord Howe currawong was described by English naturalist Richard Bowdler Sharpe in 1877 . It appears to have adapted well to human habitation on Lord Howe Island , though the population is small overall , somewhere around 70 – 80 birds . Although regarded as a subspecies , it has yet to be studied with molecular DNA techniques , which may lead to it being reclassified as a separate species . S. g. magnirostris is found on the Cape York Peninsula to the Normanby River in northern Queensland . First described by Henry Lake White in 1923 , it has a longer and heavier bill and shorter tail than the nominate subspecies . It has been little studied to date . S. g. robinsoni is found on the Atherton Tableland in northeastern Queensland . First described by Gregory Mathews in 1912 , it is combined with magnirostris by some authors . Little researched , it appears to be smaller than other subspecies . S. g. nebulosa , found in southeastern New South Wales , the Australian Capital Territory and central Victoria , is very similar to the nominate subspecies but has a shorter bill , longer tail and larger wing . Its upperparts are sooty black , a little paler than the nominate subspecies , and underparts sooty black to slate-grey . The white patch on the primary flight feathers is also smaller . It was first defined in 1999 by ornithologists and bird taxonomists Richard Schodde and Ian Mason . There is a hybrid zone with subspecies graculina in southern and central New South Wales , from Eden north to the Illawarra region and stretching northwest to the Blue Mountains .

The pied currawong is generally a black bird with white in the wing , undertail coverts , the base of the tail and most visibly , the tip of the tail . It has yellow eyes . Adult birds are 44 – 50 cm ( 17 – 20 in ) in length , with an average of around 48 cm ( 19 in ) ; the wingspan varies from 56 to 77 cm ( 22 to 30 in ) , averaging around 69 cm ( 27 in ) . Adult males average around 320 g ( 11 oz ) , females 280 g ( 10 oz ) . The wings are long and broad . The long and heavy bill is about one and a half times as long as the head and is hooked at the end . Juvenile birds have similar markings to adults but have softer and brownish plumage overall , although the white band on the tail is narrower . The upperparts are darker brown with scallops and streaks over the head and neck , and the underparts lighter brown . The eyes are dark brown and the bill dark with a yellow tip . The gape is a prominent yellow . Older birds grow darker until adult plumage is achieved , but juvenile tail markings only change to adult late in development . Birds appear to moult once a year in late summer after breeding . The pied currawong can live for over 20 years in the wild .

The smaller white-winged chough has similar plumage but has red eyes and is found mainly on the ground . Australian crow and raven species have white eyes and lack the white rump , and the similar-sized Australian magpie has red eyes and prominent black and white plumage . The larger grey currawong is readily distinguished by its lighter grey overall plumage and lack of white feathers at the base of the tail . In northwestern Victoria , the black-winged currawong ( subspecies melanoptera of the grey ) does have a darker plumage than other grey subspecies , but its wings lack the white primaries of the pied currawong .

The pied currawong is common in both wet and dry sclerophyll forests , rural and semi-urban environments throughout eastern Australia , from Cape York Peninsula to western Victoria and Lord Howe Island , where it occurs as an endemic subspecies . In general , the pied currawong is sedentary , although some populations from higher altitudes move to areas of lower elevation in winter . However , evidence for the extent of migration is conflicting , and the species ' movements have been little studied to date . It has adapted well to European presence , and has become more common in many areas of eastern Australia , with surveys in Nanango , Queensland , Barham , New South Wales , Geelong , Victoria , as well as the Northern Tablelands and South West Slopes regions in New South Wales , all showing an increase in population . This increase has been most marked , however , in Sydney and Canberra since the 1940s and 1960s respectively . In both cities , the species had previously been a winter resident only , but now remains year-round and breeds there . They are a dominant species and common inhabitant of Sydney gardens . More recently still , a survey of the population of pied currawongs in southeastern Queensland between 1980 and 2000 had found the species had become more numerous there , including suburban Brisbane . One 1992 survey reported the total number of pied currawongs in Australia had doubled from 3 million birds in the 1960s to 6 million in the early 1990s .

The pied currawong is able to cross bodies of water of some size , as it has been recorded from Rodondo Island , which lies 10 km ( 6.2 mi ) off the coast of Wilsons Promontory in Victoria , as well as some offshore islands in Queensland . It has disappeared from Tryon , North West , Masthead and Heron Islands in the Capricorn Group on the Great Barrier Reef . The presence of the Lord Howe subspecies is possibly the result of a chance landing there . The pied currawong 's impact on smaller birds that are vulnerable to nest predation is controversial : several studies have suggested that the species has become a serious problem , but the truth of this widely held perception was queried in a 2001 review of the published literature on their foraging habits by Bayly and Blumstein of Macquarie University , who observed that common introduced birds were more affected than native birds . However , predation by pied currawongs has been a factor in the decline of Gould 's petrel at a colony on Cabbage Tree Island , near Port Stephens in New South Wales ; currawongs have been reported preying on adult seabirds . Their removal from the islands halted a decline of the threatened petrels . Furthermore , a University of New England study published in 2006 reported that the breeding success rates for the eastern yellow robin ( Eopsaltria australis ) and scarlet robin ( Petroica boodang ) on the New England Tablelands were improved after nests were protected and currawongs culled , and some yellow robins even re-colonised an area where they had become locally extinct . The presence of pied currawongs in Sydney gardens is negatively correlated with the presence of silvereyes ( Zosterops lateralis ) .

Pied currawongs are generally tree-dwelling , hunting and foraging some metres above the ground , and thus able to share territory with the ground-foraging Australian magpie . Birds roost in forested areas or large trees at night , disperse to forage in the early morning and return in the late afternoon . Although often solitary or encountered in small groups , the species may form larger flocks of fifty or more birds in autumn and winter . On the ground , a pied currawong hops or struts . During the breeding season , pied currawongs will pair up and become territorial , defending both nesting and feeding areas . A 1994 study in Sydney 's leafy northern suburbs measured an average distance of 250 m ( 820 ft ) between nests , while another in Canberra in 1990 had three pairs in a 400 m ( 1,300 ft ) segment of pine-tree lined street . Territories have been measured around 0.5 – 0.7 ha in Sydney and Wollongong , although these were restricted to nesting areas and did not include a larger feeding territory , and 7.9 ha in Canberra . Pied currawongs vigorously drive off threats such as ravens , and engage in bill-snapping , dive-bombing and aerial pursuit . They adopt a specific threat display against other currawongs by lowering the head so the head and body are parallel to the ground and pointing the beak out forward , often directly at the intruder . The male predominates in threat displays and territorial defence , and guards the female closely as she builds the nest .

Flocks of birds appear to engage in play ; one routine involves a bird perching atop a tall tree , pole or spire , and others swooping , tumbling or diving and attempting to dislodge it . A successful challenger is then challenged in its turn by other birds in the flock . The pied currawong bathes by wading into water up to 15 cm ( 5.9 in ) deep , squatting down , ducking its head under , and shaking its wings . It preens its plumage afterwards , sometimes applying mud or soil first . The species has also been observed anting .

The pied currawong is an omnivorous and opportunistic feeder , eating fruit and berries as well as preying on many invertebrates , and smaller vertebrates , mostly juvenile birds and bird eggs . Currawongs will hunt in trees , snatching birds and eggs from nests , as well as insects and berries from trees . They also hunt in the air and on the ground . Insects predominate in the diet during summer months , and fruit during the winter . They will often scavenge , eating scraps and rubbish and can be quite bold when seeking food from people , lingering around picnic areas and bird-feeding trays . Beetles and ants are the most common types of insects consumed . Pied currawongs have been recorded taking mice , as well as chickens and turkeys from farms . The pied currawong consumes fruit , including a wide variety of figs , such as the Moreton Bay ( Ficus macrophylla ) , Port Jackson ( F. rubiginosa ) , Banyan ( F. virens ) and Strangler fig ( F. watkinsiana ) , as well as lillypillies ( Syzygium species ) , white cedar ( Melia azedarach ) , plum pine ( Podocarpus elatus ) , and geebungs ( Persoonia species ) . Other fruit is also sought after , and currawongs have been known to raid orchards , eating apples , pears , strawberries , grapes , stone fruit , citrus , and corn . Pied currawongs have been responsible for the spread of the invasive ornamental Asparagus aethiopicus ( often called A. densiflorus ) in the Sydney area , the weedy privet species Ligustrum lucidum and L. sinense , and firethorn species Pyracantha angustifolia and P. rogersiana around Armidale .

Birds forage singly or in pairs in summer , and more often in larger flocks in autumn and winter , during which time they are more likely to loiter around people and urban areas . They occasionally associate with Australian magpies ( Cracticus tibicen ) or common starlings ( Sturnus vulgaris ) when foraging . Birds have also been encountered with grey currawongs ( S. versicolor ) and satin bowerbirds ( Ptilinorhynchus violaceus ) . The species has been reported stealing food from other birds such as the Australian hobby ( Falco longipennis ) , collared sparrowhawk ( Accipiter cirrocephalus ) , and sulphur-crested cockatoo ( Cacatua galerita ) . Pied currawongs will also harass each other . A 2007 study conducted by researchers from the Australian National University showed that white-browed scrubwren ( Sericornis frontalis ) nestlings became silent when they heard the recorded sound of a pied currawong walking through leaf litter .

Although found in many types of woodland , the pied currawong prefers to breed in mature forests . It builds a nest of thin sticks lined with grass and bark high in trees in spring ; generally eucalypts are chosen and never isolated ones . It produces a clutch of three eggs ; they are a light pinkish-brown colour ( likened by one author to that of silly putty ) with splotches of darker pink-brown and lavender . Tapered oval in shape , they measure about 30 mm × 42 mm ( 1.2 in × 1.7 in ) . The female broods alone . The incubation period is not well known , due to the difficulty of observing nests , but observations indicate around 30 days from laying to hatching . Like all passerines , the chicks are born naked , and blind ( altricial ) , and remain in the nest for an extended period ( nidicolous ) They quickly grow a layer of ashy-grey down . Both parents feed the young , although the male does not begin to feed them directly until a few days after birth . The channel-billed cuckoo ( Scythrops novaehollandiae ) parasitizes pied currawong nests , laying eggs which are then raised by the unsuspecting foster parents . The eggs closely resemble those of the currawong hosts . Pied currawongs have been known to desert nests once cuckoos have visited , abandoning the existing currawong young , which die , and a channel-billed cuckoo has been recorded decapitating a currawong nestling . The brown goshawk ( Accipiter fasciatus ) and lace monitor ( Varanus varius ) have also been recorded taking nestlings .

" Love in This Club " is a song by American R & B singer Usher . Featuring rapper Young Jeezy , it was released on February 22 , 2008 as the lead single from Usher 's fifth studio album , Here I Stand . The song was written by Usher , Polow da Don , Young Jeezy , Darnell Dalton , Ryon Lovett , Lamar Taylor and Keith Thomas , and produced by da Don with a Las Vegas-inspired synth-driven beat . Its lyrics refer to seducing someone in a nightclub . The song was originally leaked by da Don prior to its release . " Love in This Club " received mixed reviews from critics , who praised the song 's production , but criticized it for its slow tempo and lack of originality . The song topped the Billboard Hot 100 as well as the New Zealand Singles Chart , while appearing on multiple other record charts . The accompanying music video , which received a nomination at the 2008 MTV Video Music Awards , features cameo appearances from several musicians . In the video , R & B singer Keri Hilson plays Usher 's love interest in a club . Usher performed the song at the 2008 BET Awards , as well as on several television programs . A remix of the song , titled " Love in This Club Part II " , features Beyoncé and Lil Wayne .

Atlanta-based music producer Polow da Don was inspired to create a beat during his weekend stay in Las Vegas for the MTV Video Music Awards . He said of the song , " If you listen to the beat , the synths and everything has a [ Las ] Vegas feel to it . Making love in the club , people in [ Las ] Vegas are kinda wild . " He also noted its Euro influences . When he finished working on the material , da Don felt it fit for Usher , hoping that it would keep female listeners interested in Usher 's music , as his popularity had declined among women since his marriage to stylist Tameka Foster in July 2007 . Da Don and Usher wrote the track with rapper Young Jeezy , Darnell Dalton , Ryon Lovett , Lamar Taylor and Keith Thomas , and it was recorded at Zac Recording , Atlanta and Hitland Studios , Alpharetta . It was not originally planned for Young Jeezy to appear on the track . After hearing " Love in This Club " , he wanted to contribute to it . Da Don was skeptical , but recorded Young Jeezy 's verse . He played the new version to Usher who , enjoying the new version , allowed the verse to stay . Usher has since called Young Jeezy " one of the greatest rappers of our generation " . According to Alabama rapper Gucci Mane , it was initially intended that he feature on the track , rather than Young Jeezy .

" Love in This Club " is a mid-tempo R & B slow jam , with a brass bassline , and shuddering synth-driven beats that have been called " space age " and " sex-drenched " by critics . It contains hip-hop influences . Rap-Up likened the song to Lil Jon 's song , " Lovers and Friends " , on which Usher appeared , while Fraser McAlpine of BBC Radio 1 wrote that it features vague similarities to " No Woman , No Cry " by Bob Marley . According to the sheet music published by Hal Leonard Corporation at Musicnotes.com , the song is written in common time with a tempo of 70 beats per minute and follows the chord progression of C major – E minor – A minor – F major . About.com 's Mark Edward Nero wrote that " on the song , Usher talks about a lust so immediate , so powerful , that it makes him want to get down [ and have sex ] right then and there " . The song 's chorus consists of the hook , " I wanna make love in this club " . Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly called the lyrics of the song " libidinous " .

Early in 2008 , several songs for Usher 's fifth studio album leaked into the Internet , including " Love in This Club " . Usher called the incident an " internal conspiracy " because it was unofficially released beyond his awareness . This also happened to the lead single " Yeah ! " off his 2004 album Confessions , which was intentionally leaked by its producer , Lil Jon , in 2003 . Polow da Don later told that he had leaked " Love in This Club " , echoing Lil John 's actions . He felt the song would be a hit , but that " it was so much back-and-forth between Usher and his record label " and he was tired of waiting on " label politics " . The song was released for sale on February 22 , 2008 . The production of " Love in This Club " was praised by the Los Angeles Times , as was Usher 's vocal effort . Andy Kellman of Allmusic and Jonathan Tjarks of Austin360.com noted the song as a standout from Here I Stand . Blender rated the song two-and-a-half out of five stars , calling it too safe and lethargic . Digital Spy 's Nick Levine enjoyed the song , but noted its lack of originality . Jim Farber from Daily News was not impressed , writing " ' Love in This Club ' doesn 't sound like a club anthem at all . It 's too slow and quiet , and ... its smeary synth hook sounds like a planed-down version of a Justin Timberlake hit . "

Young Jeezy 's addition received clashing responses from reviewers . Billboard 's Sophie Baratta was not impressed with the verse , but called the song " a catchy tune " . Bill Lamb of About.com praised the rapper 's effort , but expected better from Usher after a four-year break since Confessions , writing that he is " retread [ ing ] territory familiar to fans of Akon and T-Pain " , awarding the song two-and-a-half out of five stars . BBC Radio 1 's Fraser McAlpine rated the song four stars out of five , but called Young Jeezy 's rap " growling " and " wheezy " . This single ranked at number one on the " 10 Best Singles of 2008 " list by American magazine Entertainment Weekly , while Time 's Josh Tyrangiel placed it at number eight on its 2008 " Songs of Summer " list . MTV News listed the song as the fifth-best R & B tune of the year , and it won the Ozone Award for Best Rap / R & B Collaboration . On " The 50 Sexiest Songs of All Time " , compiled by Billboard in 2010 , " Love in Thus Club " placed at number twenty-seven .

" Love in This Club " debuted at number eighty-three on the Billboard Hot 100 , on the issue dated March 1 , 2008 . The next week it moved to number fifty-one , due to high airplay . The song continued to receive many spins , and in its third week it reached the top of the Hot 100 , gaining the ' Airplay Gainer ' honor the same week . Replacing " Low " by Flo Rida and T-Pain , " Love in This Club " also sold 198,000 downloads in that week . On April 5 , 2008 , the song was again named the ' Airplay Gainer ' , however it was shifted from the number-one spot by Leona Lewis ' " Bleeding Love " , having spent three weeks atop the chart . It fell off on June 7 , having spent twelve weeks on the chart . On the Hot R & B / Hip-Hop Songs , the song first appeared on February 23 , 2008 at number fifty-one making it the highest debut of the week . On April 12 it replaced Keyshia Cole 's " I Remember " at number one . After four weeks " Love in This Club " was moved from the top spot by Lil Wayne 's " Lollipop " . The song also reached number four on the Pop 100 , and has been certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . On the year-end charts for 2008 , it was ranked number eight on the Hot 100 , number fifteen on the Hot R & B / Hip-Hop Songs and number thirteen on the Pop 100 . It was also ranked number eighty-five on the 2000s ' Hot 100 list , and number ninety-nine on the decade-end Hot R & B / Hip-Hop Songs . As of August 1 , 2010 , " Love in This Club " has sold 2,453,000 units , according to Nielsen Soundscan .

Internationally , the song reached the top ten of numerous singles charts . It reached number six on the Canadian Hot 100 , number four on the UK Singles Chart , number eight on the Australian ARIA Singles Chart , number three on the Irish Singles Chart , and number five on the Japan Hot 100 , and was certified silver by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) and gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) . Having been certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand , it also topped the New Zealand Singles Chart , replacing " No Air " by Jordin Sparks and Chris Brown on May 5 , 2008 . After one week it was removed by Brown 's " Forever " , and was certified platinum on June 1 , 2008 . The single also found chart success in Europe , reaching number three on the European Hot 100 Singles . In individual countries , " Love in This Club " attained top-ten places in Flanders , France , Germany , Norway , Slovakia , Sweden and Switzerland . It also appeared on the singles charts of Austria , Wallonia , Czech Republic , Denmark , Finland , Hungary , and the Netherlands . In 2008 , " Love in This Club " sold 5.6 million digital downloads worldwide .

In February 2008 Usher said that the song 's music video would be shot " very soon " . Directed by the Brothers Strause , it features cameo appearances from Keri Hilson , Kanye West , Diddy , Nelly , Rick Ross and Robin Thicke . Hilson plays Usher 's love interest in the video . Usher 's then-wife , Tameka Foster , worked as the stylist on the video set . It was alleged that Foster was upset with Hilson playing the love interest in the video , and , according to a person on the set , " Tameka dressed Keri very badly – she looked like an extra . " However , Usher 's manager , Benny Medina , reported that " Keri could not have been happier with Tameka 's choices in the styling " . The music video starts with Usher waking up inside an empty nightclub . He calls out to see if anyone is there and sees Hilson , whom he follows into a room full of people dancing as a disc jockey starts playing music . Usher chases Hilson around the club , who at times mysteriously vanishes . The two dance intimately throughout the video at the club 's bar , dance floor and lounge . Its choreography was likened to Janet Jackson 's " Rhythm Nation " routine . The video concludes with the club burning down and Usher waking up in a valley . The storyline is continued in the " Moving Mountains " clip . During the video Usher is shown using a Sony Ericsson W350i Walkman , as part of Usher 's endorsement of the company .

Banagher ( Beannchar na Sionna in Irish ) is a town in Republic of Ireland , located in the midlands on the western edge of County Offaly in the province of Leinster , on the banks of the River Shannon . The name Banagher comes from its Irish name , which translates to English as " the place of the pointed rocks on the Shannon " . Banagher was a town of 3,000 people at the height of its economic growth in the mid-19th century . The current population is just over half of that figure , at about 1,600 . Banagher has an important strategic position on the River Shannon , and was long one of the few crossing points between the provinces of Leinster and Connacht . It thus became a natural focus for many great historical buildings , including a 19th-century Martello Tower and a number of important castles around the town , which were built in the 14th and 15th centuries . The town used to be the focus of thriving river business and was an important stop on the Dublin to Limerick navigation . It supported a number of large industries , most notably a maltings and distillery , which are now defunct . Tourism has supplanted this to a certain extent with a modern marina providing support for river cruisers and watersports facilities and the town is an important angling centre , with particular attraction for pike anglers . Banagher is the centre of the Shannon Callows , grassy meadows which flood in winter and provide living space for myriads of waterfowl .

Banagher lies in the local council area of Offaly County Council . Local authorities have responsibility for such matters as planning , local roads , sanitation , and libraries . The Council is an elected body of 21 members with councillors elected from four electoral areas in the county . Banagher lies in the Birr electoral area , which can return 5 members to the council . The town lies in the Barony of Garrycastle ( Garraí an Chaisleáin ) and was in the poor law union of Birr . Divided by the road to Birr from Eyrecourt , its eastern part lies in the townland of Curraghavarna and Portavrolla and its western part in the townland of Banagher or Kylebeg . Banagher is in the Roman Catholic parish of Gallen and Rynagh ( Reynagh ) which lies in the diocese of Ardagh and Clonmacnoise . The diocese is in the Archdiocese of Armagh in the ecclesiastical province of Armagh . It is in the Church of Ireland parish group of Clonfert Cathedral which is in the Diocese of Limerick and Killaloe , part of the ecclesiastical province of Dublin .

It is thought that St. Rynagh ( also Reynagh , Rinagh ) , who founded Banagher and after whom the parish is named , was a sister of St. Finnian of Clonard . According to research , they came from a place near New Ross in County Wexford . It is known that contact was maintained between Rynagh 's Wexford home and her foundation at Banagher ; and her mother came to live there . It is recorded that Reynagh 's mother , Talech , or Talacia , became Abbess of the Banagher convent . The death of St. Finnian is assigned to 563 , but there does not seem to be any authoritative statement as to the date of St. Rynagh 's death , although according to St. Rynagh 's Parish Church in Banagher , St. Rynagh died about 610 . The place of her burial is uncertain but it is likely to have been in either Banagher or Kilmacduagh near Gort , the monastery founded by her son , St. Colman .

The settlement that grew to become Banagher , originated at a ford on the east bank of the River Shannon . The river banks and surrounding countryside were flood-free all year round . Travellers intending to cross the Shannon converged on this point along tracks which were the forerunners of the modern roads , and a community grew at this crossing point . Many of the early travellers were pilgrims . North-west of Banagher , on the Connacht side of the river , was the monastic establishment of Clonfert , with the more famous Clonmacnoise a short distance further north . Not far to the south-west on the same side was another monastic foundation , at Meelick . At Meelick , the three provinces , Leinster , Munster and Connacht meet and just south of Banagher in the direction of Birr , the four dioceses of Clonmacnoise , Meath , Killaloe and Clonfert meet .

At Banagher , there are ridges on both sides of the river and roads were built along these many centuries ago . The first bridge was built over the Shannon at that point as early as 1049 . It was a place of great strategic importance because the Shannon and its lowlands provided a natural barrier between Connacht and Leinster . An army that wanted to cross the river had few choices ; apart from Banagher , the only other suitable places were Athlone , Shannonbridge and Portumna . The importance of Banagher as a military position on the Shannon and on the highway from Leinster and Munster to Connacht was early appreciated by the English , whose forces seized it about the middle of the 16th century , coming up the river to do so . They constructed some fortifications which they called Fort Frankford ( later Fort Falkland ) and held the place in spite of the fact that the part of Offaly for some miles around Banagher was in the hands of the MacCoghlan clan . The MacCoghlans , aided by boundaries of bog and river , held their territories against all comers for about 500 years , even maintaining a footing by open defiance well into the 17th century . Garry Castle , Clonony Castle , and Moystown Castle are remains of MacCoghlan strongholds . Sometime after 1554 , when Queen Mary married Philip II of Spain , Offaly County was named King 's County in honour of Philip , but it is doubtful if the royal jurisdiction extended to any of the MacCoghlan areas except Banagher . Ultimately , the MacCoghlans were overthrown and their lands were planted by order of James I issued in 1621 .

The town was incorporated by charter of Charles I on 16 September 1628 . The corporation was allowed to elect two members to Parliament and hold two fairs per year , amongst other wide-ranging powers . In 1628 , a permanent military garrison was established which continued with slight interruptions until 1863 . The defences were further strengthened and it was officially named Fort Falkland , after Henry Cary , 1st Viscount Falkland who was Lord Deputy of Ireland from 1622 – 29 . The forces of the Confederate Catholics took Banagher in 1642 , but it was retaken by the Cromwellian Army in 1650 , under the command of Henry Ireton , Cromwell 's son-in-law . By 1652 the Cromwellian conquest was completed and the transplantation of the Catholic land holders to Connacht began in 1654 . The lands from which they were expelled were divided among the adventurers and the soldiers of Cromwell 's army . During the Williamite Wars of 1690 – 1691 , the garrison espoused the cause of James II in contrast with that of Birr , which took the side of William . A stone bridge across the Shannon was erected in 1685 , and a Williamite army advancing from Birr in 1690 attempted to break it down but abandoned the attempt as too risky in consequence of the presence of Sarsfield 's Army on the Connacht side . A broken arch of this bridge is still to be seen on that side a few yards below the present bridge of seven arches , which was erected by the Commissioners for the Improvement of Navigation of the Shannon in 1841 – 1843 . The square tower on the lower side of the bridge at the Galway end was erected to protect the old bridge , as was the Salt Battery , with emplacements for four cannons facing west and north , a few hundred yards from town along the Crank Road .

In the 17th century , Banagher was the centre of a flourishing woollen trade . In 1699 , the impost placed on the export of woollen goods to England practically killed the woollen trade . At the outbreak of the American Revolutionary War in 1775 , an embargo placed on the export of foodstuffs to the American Colonies dealt another blow to the trade of Banagher . In 1780 , the British Parliament withdrew all these restrictions and Banagher 's economy began to improve rapidly . From 1800 to 1847 , Banagher enjoyed a period of prosperity unequalled in its history . Corn growing had long been one of the chief agricultural activities of the district and the opening of the Grand Canal at the end of the 18th century gave easy access to Dublin and Limerick and brought cheap and efficient water transport to the district . Banagher became the outlet for the grain raised in a wide area round the town , and the Banagher corn market on Fridays was one of the largest of its kind in Ireland . The canal arrived at Shannon Harbour in 1804 , and the water transport facilities stimulated the growth of existing industries and encouraged the establishment of new ones . Neat two and three-storey houses were built on each side of the road in Banagher to provide shops and dwellings for the merchants and other people who came to live there for the canal business . In 1834 , there was a distillery , a brewery , two tanyards , a malthouse and corn mills in full operation in the town . Several craftsmen carried on industries in smaller workshops and in their homes . With the increase in trade and manufactures went a corresponding increase in population . In 1800 , the population was estimated at 1500 ; in 1841 , it was 2836 , and in 1846 , it was estimated at 3000 .

Contrasted with the flourishing state of trade in the first half of the 19th century is the rapid and sustained decline during the second half . In the period of 40 years from 1841 to 1881 , the population fell from 2836 to 1192 , a loss of over 57 % . By the end of the century , all that remained of the major industries of the town was the malthouse of F.A. Waller & Co . , while all smaller industries had vanished completely . Various causes contributed to this decline . The abolition of the Corn Laws in 1846 allowed the free importation of grain into these islands . Unable to compete with foreigners , the Irish farmer turned his land to pasture and grew only sufficient grain for his own use . The Banagher corn trade rapidly declined , and would have completely vanished were it not that barley growing was kept alive by Waller 's malthouse . The clearances in East Galway in the years immediately succeeding the Great Irish Famine adversely affected the trade of the town while the smaller industries were unable to compete against the highly organised industries of Britain . The opening of Banagher Railway station in 1884 , as the terminus of the 29 km ( 18 mi ) Clara to Banagher branch of the Great Southern & Western Railway Company , brought some improvement , with a number of passenger and goods trains every day . However , the fuel crisis of 1947 caused passenger services to be withdrawn from the line and it closed altogether in 1963 . Although the site of the station is now covered by the marina , the trackway can still be seen , minus the track , at the gateway at the eastern corner of the marina .

Banagher is situated in north-west County Offaly on the east bank of the River Shannon . It is 106 km ( 66 mi ) south west of Dublin , 14 km ( 8.7 mi ) south east of Ballinasloe , 27 km ( 17 mi ) south of Athlone and 85 km ( 53 mi ) north east of Limerick . It provides a crossing point between Offaly in Leinster and Galway in Connacht . Although Banagher is located in the flood-plain of the River Shannon , the town itself was developed on high ground and remains virtually flood-free all year round . North of Lough Derg , the River Shannon has a very shallow gradient and regularly floods parts of the surrounding countryside . The resultant wet grassland area , known as the Shannon Callows , is an internationally recognised wild bird and wildlife habitat and is classified as a Special Area of Conservation . The country on either side of the Shannon in the Offaly-Galway area has been described as " reminiscent of the Fens , cut off and intersected by waterways , by the wide meandering Shannon itself , by its tributaries , the Suck , the Brosna and the Little Brosna and by the Grand Canal ; traversed by a maze of narrow roads . "

The travel writer and biographer , James Pope-Hennessy , described the River Shannon at Banagher in September in his biography of Anthony Trollope : " The month of September in Banagher , and all along the Shannon banks , is visually a glorious one , with golden autumn mornings , the low sun making long shadows of the houses in the street . At dusk the whole river reflects the varied sunsets as the days draw in – effects of palest pink , for instance , striped by cloudy lines of green , or an horizon aflame with scarlet and orange light . " The Slieve Bloom Mountains lie to the south of Banagher and the town is surrounded by the great bogs of the midlands , particularly to the east and west . The River Brosna is a major tributary of the River Shannon and meets the Shannon at Shannon Harbour , three kilometres north of Banagher .

In autumn and winter , the extensive flood plain of the Shannon Callows supports a large number of waders , swans , wildfowl and other bird life . The most obvious of all Shannon birds is the mute swan . Also seen are the coot , moorhen and little grebe ( or dabchick ) . The kingfisher is widespread as are the meadow pipit and pied wagtail . The area has one of the largest concentrations of breeding waders in Ireland including lapwing , redshank , sandpiper and godwit . The corncrake can be seen at the bridge of Banagher in the summer . Once a common summer visitor to Ireland , corncrakes have suffered drastic population declines over the last few decades and are threatened with global extinction . Conservation efforts have focused on changing harvesting times to avoid the nesting season , May to August . The hay meadows of the callows support large numbers of these birds – one of the few places in the world where this globally threatened species is still common . In winter , the resident bird population is increased by visitors from north-east Europe , in particular the widgeon and Greenland white-fronted goose . Riverside mammals are seen frequently and otters , mink and fox are common . Trout and salmon are less common in the Shannon than they once were , however pike is still plentiful and attracts many anglers .

Banagher was extensively planted by the English , particularly during the periods 1621 – 1642 and 1650 – 1690 . The plantations had a profound impact on Ireland in several ways . The first was the destruction of the native ruling classes and their replacement with the Protestant Ascendancy , of British-origin ( mostly English ) Protestant landowners . Their position was buttressed by the Penal Laws , which denied political and land-owning rights to Roman Catholics . The dominance of this class in Irish life persisted until the late 18th century , and it voted for the Act of Union with Britain in 1800 . As a result , by the early 20th century , Banagher had a mix of Irish of native descent and Irish of English descent and supported two churches , one Catholic and one Protestant , both of which still exist . During the late 1960s to the early 1980s , a number of German , Dutch and Swiss settlers were attracted to Banagher , mainly because of its proximity to the River Shannon and associated lifestyle . A number of these are still resident in Banagher . As with the majority of towns and cities in Ireland , Banagher has seen an influx of foreign nationals , mostly of Eastern European origin , in recent years and these now make up just over 10 % of the population .

The demise of the once thriving canal and maltings businesses brought about a serious decline in Banagher 's fortunes , including a significant population decrease . However , a number of businesses kept many people in the locality employed during lean times . The most notable of these was Bord na Móna , a semi-state company founded in 1946 to manage the harvesting of peat from Ireland 's bogs , the most extensive of which are located in the midlands . However , the advancement of mechanised harvesting , the exhaustion of the bogs and the closure of a number of peat-fired power stations , means that this is no longer a significant employer in the region . Green Isle Foods had a facility just outside Banagher and provided good employment during the 1970s and 1980s . It was taken out of production some years ago and is now used as a storage facility only . The largest industry in Banagher these days is Banagher Precast Concrete Limited , a company specialising in precast concrete structures . The company employs approximately 50 people and was one of the largest concrete firms in the country , employing over 400 people at its peak in 2008 . It has supplied components for many major projects , including the Aviva Stadium , Croke Park , Channel Tunnel , the Dublin Port Tunnel , Thomond Park and the Limerick Tunnel . Other notable employers include Banagher Sawmills and the cruise liner businesses located at the marina .

Banagher is an important crossing point on the River Shannon and consequently experiences a large volume of through traffic . Two regional roads meet in Banagher ; the R356 , which links the N62 and N65 national primary roads and is known as Harbour Street in Banagher and the R439 which links Birr with Banagher and is known as Main Street in Banagher . Harbour Street leads to the road to Shannon Harbour and Main Street begins at the hill at the southern entrance to the town and leads down to the bridge crossing the Shannon . A railway station opened in Banagher in 1884 as the terminus for the Clara to Banagher line of the Great Southern & Western Railway Company . It operated both a passenger and goods service until 1947 , when the passenger service was withdrawn . The station closed completely in 1963 . Banagher was once a main centre for river transportation on the Shannon system . River transportation fell into decline with the advent of rail and road transportation improvements . Banagher is still a major centre for river cruisers , with a number of hire companies operating from an extensive and modern marina .

As part of the charter of incorporation of 1628 , the corporation was given powers to : " hold two fairs , one on the Feast of St. Philip and Jacob , the other on the Feast of St. Simon and Jude , each to continue for two days . " These feast days equated to 1 May and 28 October . However , a fair was already in existence in Banagher since 1612 and was held in September . These three fairs were certainly still in existence in the mid-1830s , as they were described in a government-commissioned report in 1835 . The fairs established by the first corporation continued to gain in size and importance during the 18th century and the early part of the 19th century . In 1826 , the enormous number of 43,000 sheep was offered for sale at the September fair , with three-quarters of that number being sold . Pigot 's Directory of 1824 described the workings of the fair : " ... and there are three fairs ; the principal one commences on the 15 September and continues for four days , the first for sheep , the second for horned cattle , the third for horses , and the last day is the country fair for linen , woollens and other merchandise . "

It seems that the fair held in September was the main fair and is the one that has survived to the present . Pope Hennessy described the granting of the charter by Charles I which " empowered them to hold the famous Banagher Great Fair , at which everything from cattle and sheep to boots and basket chairs was on sale . This Fair , the greatest in all the Irish Midlands , began on September 15 and lasted four days . The line of horses tethered on each side of Banagher Main Street stretched from the Shannon river bridge to the crossroads two and a half miles outside the town known as Tailor 's Cross . " The fair had achieved an international reputation by the early 20th century and a local newspaper report of 1909 states " The Banagher Great Fair was a huge success and among those present were Senor Gelline of Milan to make purchase on behalf of the Italian Government , while Mr. Rodzanko bought for the Russian Government . " The report also stated that " Eighty-nine wagons of horses were entrained at Banagher Railway Station ... this representing in round numbers about 500 horses . "

The first bridge that is known to have been built at this point was erected as a " spacious stone bridge of 18 arches " by Ruaidrí Ua Conchobair ( Anglicised Roderic O 'Connor ) , the King of Connacht , around 1049 . However , medieval sources tell of a " bridge of 27 arches of divers ( e ) architectural form , each different from its fellow " , which stood here for over 500 years . A stone bridge of 17 arches was certainly constructed in 1685 and this was detailed in profile drawings by Thomas Rhodes in 1833 . The bridge of 1685 featured prominently in the Williamite War in Ireland of the 17th century and was used by Patrick Sarsfield to retreat to Connacht after his ambush of a Williamite convoy at Ballyneety in Co . Limerick during the Siege of Limerick . Because of its affording Sarsfield and his army a method of advance and retreat , the old bridge was often referred to as Sarsfield 's Bridge . This bridge was blown up in 1843 by gunpowder by a section of the Corps of Royal Engineers . The abutment of this bridge can still be seen adjacent to Cromwell 's Castle on the Connacht side of the river .

The present bridge of seven arches was erected by the Commissioners for the Improvement of Navigation of the Shannon in 1841 – 1843 . The engineer was Thomas Rhodes , one of the commissioners of the Shannon Navigation , whose name can be seen on many of the bridges over the Shannon and on surviving lock mechanisms , notably at Victoria and Athlone locks . This bridge was reconstructed and widened jointly by Offaly County Council and Galway County Council in 1971 . Their work included replacing massive stone parapets on either side of the bridge with aluminium railings , and the removal of a swivel arch which had allowed passage for masted boats . A heritage review of the bridges of County Offaly in 2005 described Banagher Bridge as of national heritage significance , of high architectural merit and demonstrative of mid-19th century construction work by a government body . It states " This is the only six-arch masonry span in the county . It is an interesting contrast with the 1750s bridge at Shannonbridge . Although both are approximately the same length , Banagher Bridge achieves the crossing with fewer spans ( six as opposed to 16 ) . It also has the longest masonry arch spans of all the county 's bridges , averaging 17.88 m " .

All of the castellations around and near the bridge were built to protect it , including Cromwell 's Castle , The Salt Battery ( Fort Eliza ) , Fort Falkland and the Martello Tower . However , the guns mounted on these forts could be used to destroy the bridge if necessary , as well as to bombard attacking forces on the river . A narrow quay passes under the old swivel section of the bridge from Waller 's Quay to the marina . A well-worn handrail offers the pedestrian some protection against a slip into the river . This rail has been known as the Duke 's Rail since in 1897 the then Duke of York , later to become George V , paid a state visit to Ireland . The royal party travelled up-river from Portumna on the steamship Countess of Mayo . Disembarking at Waller 's Quay , the Duke was received by Lord Rosse , the Lord Lieutenant of King 's County . The party had to traverse the narrow quay under the bridge to get to Banagher Railway Station , and undoubtedly made good use of the Duke 's Rail . The stretch of the Shannon from Portumna to Banagher was known for some time after as the Duke of York 's Route .

This former constabulary barracks was built around 1800 . Irregular in plan and now in ruins , it comprises a partially roughcast rendered rubble limestone enclosing wall with a cut stone segmental-headed entrance to the east and is situated to the south of the River Shannon , adjacent to the bridge . Remains of structures within the enclosure include a barrel-vaulted powder magazine built around 1806 , with a gun platform above . These walls are thought to be the perimeter walls of Fort Falkland from 1642 . According to Pigot 's Directory of 1824 , the barracks housed two companies of foot , had apartments for three officers , a bomb and waterproof magazine and an artillery battery mounting three 12-pound guns . The Directory also states that the barracks was formerly a nunnery ( possibly that of Saint Rynagh , which would have been founded around 580 ) and communicated with Saint Rynagh 's Old Abbey by a subterranean passage of some 400 yards . Although the British garrison had left the town in 1863 , the barracks was looted and burned shortly after the signing of the Anglo-Irish Treaty of 1921 – 22 .

Banagher has two bow-fronted Georgian buildings dating from the mid-to-late 18th century and both are listed as protected structures . One is a detached seven-bay , two-storey building , called Crank House , due to its location on the corner of Main Street and Crank Road . It was restored in the early 1990s by the Offaly West Enterprise Co-operative Society and opened in 1992 . It now houses an exhibition hall , tourist office , retail and enterprise units and a hostel . It was formerly used as the headquarters for Crann , an NGO dedicated to planting native trees and protecting Ireland 's woodlands . It is now used by the West Offaly Partnership as a Community Enterprise Centre . The second of these buildings is a terraced , three-bay , three-storey house with an adjoining four-bay , two-storey coach house , which still has its original limestone carriage arch . It has been used as a hotel since the early 19th century and was home to Anthony Trollope during his stay in Banagher in the 1840s . It has a prominent location next to the marina and close to the bridge . Long called The Shannon Hotel , the name was changed to The Royal Shannon in the 1990s . It has ceased to trade as a hotel and is now falling into neglect .

Charlotte 's Way , formerly known as Hill House , is located in a prominent setting close to Saint Paul 's Church of Ireland church . This house was once the home of Charlotte Brontë 's husband , Mr. Nicholls , who returned to Banagher after Charlotte 's death . Nicholls remarried and lived at Hill House until his death in 1906 . The house was sold to a Major Bell in 1919 . He died in 1944 and his wife inherited the property . Florence Bell died in 1959 . This connection to Brontë , one of the most renowned writers of the 19th century , is revealed in its present name , giving the house cultural interest . It is a detached three-bay two-storey house , built in 1753 , with a gabled central bay to the façade with modern porch and single-bay two-storey wing to the south and two-bay two-storey wing to the north . It is now used as a bed and breakfast and visitors can enjoy its restored appearance and sense the history of a place connected in a curious way with the Brontë family .

The structure that stands on what is known locally as the Canal Bank , called Cromwell 's Castle , primarily derives its current form from the Napoleonic Wars . Similar to the Martello Tower that stands opposite it , on the same bank of the river , Cromwell 's Castle was largely reconstructed as a defensive position to repel any invading fleet coming upstream towards Banagher . The English had established a number of forts on the Leinster bank of the river , including Fort Frankford and , later , Fort Falkland ( see Military History ) . The garrison at Fort Falkland was overrun by the forces of the Confederate Catholics in 1642 but was recaptured by Cromwell 's army in 1650 . The Cromwellians established a new fortification on the Connacht bank of the river leading up to the plantation of Connacht in 1654 . The castle was modified in 1817 to enable it to mount artillery with a platform for a 24-pound traversing gun constructed on its roof . Its interior became a powder magazine and housed a garrison of 20 soldiers . Having fallen somewhat into disrepair , the structure came under the care of the Banagher Branch of the Offaly Historical Society in the 1980s and considerable restoration work has been undertaken since then . The Canal Bank on which it stands , is the property of the people of Banagher and is held in trust as a public amenity . Considerable works around the castle have also taken place and the castle , park and riverside walk are open to the public .

Cuba Court , also known as Cuba House , was a house dating from the 1730s and may have been constructed by one George Frazer , a former Governor of Cuba and perhaps to a design of Sir Edward Lovett Pearce , who designed the Irish Houses of Parliament in Dublin . It is certainly known to have been constructed with money from the sugar plantations in Cuba . In his biography of Anthony Trollope , James Pope-Hennessy describes Cuba Court as " a fine example of an Irish country-house of the mid-eighteenth century in the manner of the Dublin architect , Pierce ( sic ) . The building contained ... two circular rooms ... and an avenue of lime trees led to the front door . " The Belfast writer , Maurice Craig , in his 1976 book Classic Irish Houses of the Middle Size , describes Cuba Court as " perhaps the most splendidly masculine house in the whole country . " Towards the end of the 18th century , Cuba Court was the home of Denis Bowes Daly , who was a prominent member of the local ascendancy . Prior to his death in 1821 he had leased Cuba Court to the Army Medical Board on a 61-year lease . The building was little used as a hospital and the Medical Board was quite happy to give it up to the Commissioners of Education for the purpose of the Royal School , which had eventually been established as a result of the Royal Charter of 1621 .

Charlotte Brontë spent her honeymoon at Cuba Court in 1854 following her marriage to Arthur Bell Nicholls ( See Charlotte Brontë ) . She noted of Cuba Court : " It is very large and looks externally like a gentleman 's country seat – within most of the rooms are lofty and spacious , and some – the drawing room and dining room are handsomely and commodiously furnished . The passages look desolate and bare – our bedroom , a great room of the ground floor , would have looked gloomy when we were shown into it but for the turf fire that was burning in the wide old chimney . " During the 1820s , the Royal School at Cuba Court was attended by Sir William Wilde , who later married the poet Jane Francesca Agnes Elgee . The couple had two sons : Willie and Oscar Wilde , and a daughter , Isola Francesca , who died in childhood . Another pupil at the school was William Bulfin , the journalist and writer associated with Argentina through his work Tales of the Pampas , who attended in the 1870s . His son , Eamon Bulfin was one of the main participants in the 1916 Easter Rising in Dublin and was sentenced to death , but this was commuted to deportation to Argentina where he had been born .

Due to the Irish policy on rates at the time , the house was unroofed in 1946 and this hastened its demise . Pope Hennessy described Cuba Court in 1971 : " Like so many of Ireland 's great houses , Cuba Court is now being slowly but deliberately demolished . The lime trees have long since been hacked down . " In spite of this , it was described as " a superb ruin that could tell the history of Ascendancy Ireland " , as late as 1979 . It was eventually acquired by a local businessman and demolished in the 1980s . Craig describes the loss of Cuba Court as " particularly to be lamented " . A development of four houses was built on the site at Cuba Avenue in 2003 . An archaeological survey revealed nothing of significance .

Fort Eliza , also known as The Salt Battery , is a freestanding five-sided four-gun battery , constructed around 1812 , and standing on the east side of the River Shannon . Three sides face the river and were formed of broad parapets . The other two sides meet at the rear salient angle at a guardhouse , which is now ruined . The battery is surrounded by a dry moat , with the entrance originally across a drawbridge close to the guardhouse . At the centre of the enclosure was the brick-vaulted powder magazine . This fort , combined with Cromwell 's Castle , the Martello tower and Fort Falkland would have protected both the town and the river crossing from all angles .

Martello towers ( or simply Martellos ) are small defensive forts built in several countries of the British Empire during the 19th century , from the time of the Napoleonic Wars onwards . They stand up to 40 feet ( 12 m ) high ( with two floors ) and typically had a garrison of one officer and 15 – 25 men . Their round structure and thick walls of solid masonry made them resistant to cannon fire , while their height made them an ideal platform for a single heavy artillery piece , mounted on the flat roof and able to traverse a 360 ° arc . Fear of an invasion by Napoleon Bonaparte reached panic proportions amongst the authorities in Ireland and England in 1804 and the first towers were built in Ireland that year . In case an invasion fleet tried to sail up the River Shannon , two towers were built on the middle reaches of the river to defend its crossing points . One of these was located at Meelick and the other at Banagher . The tower at Banagher is located on the west ( Galway ) bank of the river and measures 36 feet ( 11 m ) in diameter and height . The tower was described in 1970 as having " ... no corbels , a ridge around the top , much vegetation growing around it , and its general condition is fair . "

A memorial in the form of a stone Celtic Cross is situated at the eastern side of the town . It is known as the Barnes & McCormack Memorial and dedicated to two local men who were executed in Birmingham in 1940 for their involvement in the Coventry Explosion of 1939 in which five people died . The executions caused a public outcry in Britain and internationally as the men had admitted to constructing the bomb , which was intended to be used to destroy a power station , but claimed not to be involved in planting it . The cross was erected in 1963 by The Barnes & McCormack Memorial Committee in association with The National Graves Committee and bears an inscription in both Irish and English : " In commemoration of Staff Captain James McCormack and Company Captain Peter Barnes , Irish Republican Army , who for love of country , were executed by the British Government at Winson Green Prison , Birmingham on the 7th February 1940 . " The monument was sculpted by Desmond Broe of Dublin and features images of the two men , a female head representing Ireland and symbols of the four provinces .

Arising from its history as a plantation garrison town , Banagher has active Catholic and Church of Ireland communities . The lane between Market Square and Pucka Lane ( formerly Queen Street ) is called Church Lane and it is here that the first church in Banagher was sited . The 6th-century abbey of St. Rynagh is now in ruins . This church later became the Church of the Blessed Mary in the 16th century , and was also known as the Church of Banagher . According to tradition , the Cross of Banagher once stood next to a crystal spring in the Market Square . The surviving sandstone shaft of the cross was found in the churchyard by a Birr antiquarian named Thomas Cooke in the 1840s and was in reasonable condition then as he described it in great detail in an article in the Transactions of the Kilkenny Archaeological Society in 1853 . The stone that he found appears to have been part of a sepulchral or commemorative cross , set up at Banagher well to record the death of Bishop William O 'Duffy , who was killed by a fall from his horse in 1297 . Cooke had become so perturbed by the deterioration of the stone by 1852 that he had it removed to his residence in Birr . It is now housed in the National Museum of Ireland in Dublin .

The Church of Ireland community had worshipped at the old church , which was in a ruinous state by 1829 when the new St. Paul 's Church was built at the top of the hill , overlooking the town . The new Catholic church of St. Rynagh 's had been constructed some three years earlier and on land given by the Armstrongs , the most influential and wealthiest Protestant family in the area , who consistently and energetically advocated Catholic Emancipation and repeal of the Penal Laws . This situation demonstrated the friendly relations that existed between the two communities in Banagher during those difficult times for Catholics in Ireland . St. Rynagh 's Church houses a work by the well-known German sculptor , Imogen Stuart , called The Madonna and Child , a mandorla carved in 1974 . The most outstanding feature of St. Paul 's Church is the Window of the Resurrection , a stained-glass window commemorating the Bell family that was originally intended for Westminister Abbey in London .

Banagher has a thriving poetry scene and an annual poetry festival called Readings from the Pallet takes place in local bars . The town was one of the settings for the series Pure Mule , as featured on RTÉ television . The mini-series was an RTÉ production and shot in 2005 in Banagher , Birr and Tullamore . The series was favourably received by the critics , although some locals maintain that it portrays Midlanders in a bad light . The series won four IFTA awards in 2005 . Johnny McEvoy is a well known singer and songwriter of the country and Irish genre who was born in Banagher in 1945 . He has had a number of chart hits since the 1960s and has toured extensively , both in Ireland and abroad . The internationally renowned folk-singer Roger Whittaker took up residence in Banagher for about 10 years until 2006 . During the time he purchased and renovated Lairakeen House . Mark Boylan is a singer / songwriter from Banagher . He was born in 1997 and first came to prominence when he wrote the theme song for the 2011 Cheltenham horse racing festival in England . The song is entitled The Festival and it received over 40,000 views on YouTube . Boylan went on to write a song for one of the biggest horse races in the world , The Breeders ' Cup . He performed the song at the event which took place at Churchill Downs in Louisville , Kentucky on 4 November 2011 . The proceeds of the song went to the Permanently Disabled Jockeys Fund ( PDJF ) and the song was made available through the iTunes medium .

Banagher 's greatest literary association is probably with Anthony Trollope , who became one of the most successful , prolific and respected English novelists of the Victorian era . Trollope had been employed by the General Post Office in 1835 and was sent to Ireland in September 1841 at the age of 26 . Trollope had had an unhappy life up to that point and remarked in his autobiography : " This was the first good fortune of my life . " After landing in Dublin on 15 September , he travelled by canal-boat to Shannon Harbour and then on to Banagher , arriving on 16 September , which coincided with the second day of the annual Great Fair . Although very much smaller than the town of Birr , which is only eight miles away , Banagher had been chosen as the base of a Postal Surveyorship , probably because its position on the Shannon offered easy access by can boat to Dublin and Limerick . Trollope established himself at The Shannon Hotel , a long bow-fronted Georgian building , which was over 100 years old at that time . The hotel , which still exists , is located at the bottom of the town , a mere one hundred yards from the river . The post office where Trollope worked was at the top of the town , which is only a matter of minutes on foot . Next to the post office was a two-roomed bungalow which was used by the Postal Surveyor and his new deputy as their working headquarters . This building is often erroneously considered to have been the residence of Trollope himself .

Although Trollope 's initial knowledge of Ireland was limited , he soon discovered that the Irish were good-humoured and clever – " ... the working classes very much more intelligent than those in England . They were not , as they were reputed to be , spendthrifts , but were economical , hospitable and kind . " Their chief defects , he judged , were that they could switch to being very perverse and very irrational , and that they were " but little bound by the love of truth . " Trollope remained stationed at Banagher until late 1844 when he was transferred to Clonmel . It was while in Banagher that Trollope began to write his first novel , The Macdermots of Ballycloran . He had begun to contemplate this novel whilst walking outside Drumsna in County Leitrim where the ruins of Ballycloran House stood into the 1840s and were still there in the 1970s . Trollope had been up in Leitrim inspecting the accounts of an errant postmaster . He thought the ruins of Ballycloran " one of the most melancholy spots I had ever visited " and he later described it in the first chapter of his novel . Although , his first novel was initially unsuccessful , Trollope was undeterred and in all , went on to write forty-seven novels , as well as dozens of short stories and a few books on travel . He returned to England in 1856 and by the mid-1860s had reached a fairly senior position within the Post Office hierarchy . Postal history credits him with introducing the pillar box ( the ubiquitous bright red mail-box ) to Britain . Anthony Trollope died in London in 1882 and is buried at Kensal Green Cemetery .

Charlotte Brontë had a brief association with Banagher in the mid-1850s when she married one Arthur Bell Nicholls , her father 's curate . Nicholls was born of Scottish parents in County Antrim in 1818 . He was orphaned early and subsequently brought up by his uncle , Alan Bell , in Banagher . Alan Bell was headmaster at the Royal School at Cuba Court at that time . The couple honeymooned in Ireland and stayed at Cuba Court for a period in June 1854 . According to Pope Hennessy , Mrs. Nicholls disliked both Banagher and its inhabitants , although she greatly admired the surrounding countryside . If Bell Nicholls was a poor unknown curate in England – in Banagher he was a member of a respectable family . In a letter quoted by Elizabeth Gaskell in her book The Life of Charlotte Brontë , Charlotte wrote : " My dear husband , too , appears in a new light in his own country . More than once I have had deep pleasure in hearing his praises on all sides . Some of the old servants and followers of the family tell me I am a most fortunate person ; for that I have got one of the best gentlemen in the country .... I trust I feel thankful to God for having enabled me to make what seems a right choice ; and I pray to be enabled to repay as I ought the affectionate devotion of a truthful , honourable man . "

In January 1855 , Brontë discovered she was pregnant . It was accompanied by severe illness and she died on 31 March 1855 , officially from tuberculosis . Mr. Nicholls remained with Brontë 's father for a further six years before returning to Banagher in 1861 , taking with him his wife 's portrait , her wedding dress ( of which a copy has been made ) , some of Charlotte 's letters and other mementoes . Forty years later , when the critic Clement Shorter prepared to write Charlotte Brontë and Her Circle , he found at Banagher among other relics , two diaries of Emily and Anne , in a tin box , and some of Charlotte 's minute childhood writings wrapped in newspaper at the bottom of a drawer .

James Pope-Hennessy came to Banagher in 1970 to write his biography of Anthony Trollope . Pope Hennessy had published his first book , London Fabric in 1939 , for which he was awarded the Hawthornden Prize and was a well-established biographer and travel writer by the time he arrived in Banagher . Among his more notable works were a biography of Queen Mary for which he was rewarded by being created a Commander of the Royal Victorian Order in 1960 , Verandah ( 1964 ) a biography of his grandfather , the Irish colonial governor John Pope Hennessy and Sins of the Fathers ( 1967 ) , an account of the Atlantic slave traffickers . Like Trollope before him , Pope Hennessy took rooms at The Shannon Hotel , near the river and set about trying to capture the essence of the town which had inspired Trollope 's first novel , The Macdermots of Ballycloran . He proved to be a very popular figure in the town , evidenced by the fact that he was asked to adjudicate at a local beauty pageant and the horse fair . Pope Hennessy gives particular mention to the Corcoran family , the proprietors of The Shannon Hotel in the 1960s and 1970s , for their help in the production of his work . They sold the hotel in 1977 .

Pope Hennessy stayed in Banagher from March 1970 to April 1971 and largely completed his study of Trollope during this time . The finished biography , Anthony Trollope , won the Whitbread Award for Biography in 1972 and is largely regarded as Pope Hennessy 's finest work since Queen Mary . Pope Hennessy grew very fond of Banagher and returned to stay at The Shannon Hotel a number of times before his premature death in 1974 . This is illustrated by his description of Banagher in Anthony Trollope : " ... in Trollope 's words , Banagher then seemed ' little more than a village ' . It retains a quality of friendly village life to this day and can have changed little since Trollope 's time , save that its population has declined to eleven hundred . "

Sir Jonah Barrington was born in 1760 near Abbeyleix in the Queen 's County ( Co . Laois ) . He was first elected to Parliament as a member for Tuam in 1790 . He lost this seat in 1798 and was elected as a member for Banagher in 1799 . He voted against the Act of Union in 1801 and as a result he was deprived of his £ 1,000 a year sinecure in the Customs House and this also stopped his further advancement . In 1809 he published , in five parts , the first volume of the Historic Memoirs of Ireland . It is thought that he was induced to delay the second volume – the English government shrinking from the exposure of their conduct in carrying the Act of Union , and it was understood that to purchase his silence he was permitted to reside in France from about 1815 . In 1827 , he published two volumes of Personal Sketches of His Own Times . In 1830 , by an address from both Houses of Parliament , he was removed from the Bench , in consequence of well-proven misappropriation of public moneys . The third volume of Personal Sketches appeared in 1833 as did the delayed volume of his Historic Memoirs . This book was subsequently reproduced in a cheaper form as The Rise and Fall of the Irish Nation . His works are interesting , racy , and valuable – although his statements of fact cannot always be depended on – containing much of personal incident , related in a fascinating style . He died at Versailles on 8 April 1834 .

The town of Banagher is most likely the source of a phrase that is widely known in many English speaking countries in the world . " That beats Banagher ! " is a common reaction to something extraordinary or to describe something that surpasses everything . The most commonly proposed explanation is that Banagher was entitled to send two members to Parliament following its charter of incorporation in 1628 . It was known as an infamous pocket borough where the members were representative of the landed class , or indeed nominated by the local lord , without a vote taking place at all . When a member of the house spoke of a family ( or rotten ) borough , it was not unusual for someone to reply " Well , that beats Banagher ! " An alternative explanation is suggested , whereby there was an Irish minstrel called Bannagher , who was famous for telling wonderful stories ; and a line from W.B. Yeats gives this theory some credence : " ' Well ' , says he , ' to gratify them I will . So just a morsel . But Jack , this beats Bannagher . ' " There is also an entry in Captain Francis Grose 's Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue of 1785 which says : " He beats Banaghan ; an Irish saying of one who tells wonderful stories . Perhaps Banaghan was a minstrel famous for dealing in the marvellous " .

There are numerous uses of the phrase in literature , including Trollope 's The Kelly 's and the O 'Kellys ( 1848 ) , p . 221 ; James Joyce 's Finnegan 's Wake ( 1939 ) , p . 87.31 ; James Plunkett 's Farewell Companions ( 1977 ) , p . 293 and Edna O 'Brien 's Down by the River ( 1996 ) , p . 1 . The phrase has a riposte : " And Banagher beats the Devil ! " . The origins of this are more difficult to trace but it does feature in a work by the Irish writer Brian Oswald Donn-Byrne , Messer Marco Polo ( 1925 ) , p . 25 , and it is in common usage in Ireland . Trollope asserted on his arrival in Ireland , " I was to live at a place called Banagher on the Shannon which I had heard of because of its having once been conquered , though it had heretofore conquered everything , including the Devil " . Interestingly , a John O 'Donovan , in an Ordnance Survey letter for King 's County in 1838 , attempts to trace the origins of the name Banagher . He states : " Of all the words which enter into Irish nomenclature Beannchair seems the most difficult of explanation " and goes on to say " This name ' beats the Devil . ' " M.F. Kenny in his 2003 book Marathon Marriage uses a story of the devil losing a game of cards to a blacksmith named Banagher at the Black Stile at Garry Castle on the road between Banagher and Birr , as an explanation for the phrase .

St. Rynagh 's National School ( NS ) caters for children between the ages of 4 and 12 and accommodates approximately 200 students . Secondary education is provided by Banagher College ( Coláiste na Sionna ) , a multi denominational school under the responsibility of Laois and Offaly Education and Training Board . Banagher College is an amalgamation of La Sainte Union Secondary School and St. Rynagh 's Community College . La Sainte Union is a voluntary Catholic School run by the Sisters of La Sainte-Union des Sacrés-Coeurs , a congregation founded in France in 1826 by Abbé Jean-Baptiste Debrabant to promote Christian education . The school was their first in Ireland and opened its doors in 1863 in a house on Main Street when the Abbé arrived with Mother Anatolie Badger and three sisters of the order . St Rynagh 's CC , originally known as Banagher Vocational School , opened in 1953 with 40 students enrolling under the guidance of the first principal , Ms. Elsie Naughton . Amalgamation discussions began in 1999 and by November 2005 it was agreed that a new school be constructed on the La Sainte Union site . The school accommodates approximately 500 students .

Banagher is most associated with the game of hurling and is home to St. Rynagh 's GAA Club . The club was founded in 1961 and represents the parishes of Banagher and Cloghan , with hurling played at Banagher and football at Cloghan . St. Rynagh 's has won 16 Offaly Senior Hurling Championships ( Sean Robins Cup ) and dominated senior hurling in the county from the mid-1960s to the early 1990s . Outside of the county , St. Rynagh 's were the inaugural winners of the Leinster Senior Club Hurling Championship , in 1971 and have won the title on a further three occasions , 1973 , 1983 and 1994 . The club also contested the first All-Ireland Senior Club Hurling Championship final in 1971 , losing to Roscrea from County Tipperary . Three St. Rynagh 's players have captained the Offaly hurling team to All-Ireland success , Padraig Horan in 1981 , Martin Hanamy in 1994 and Hubert Rigney in 1998 . A number of St. Rynagh 's players have also won All Stars – Martin Hanamy ( 3 ) , Aidan Fogarty ( 2 ) , Damien Martin , Padraig Horan , Hubert Rigney and Michael Duignan . Damien Martin was the goalkeeper on the first All Stars team in 1971 , effectively making him the first ever GAA All Star .

Banagher schools have won the All-Ireland Vocational Schools Championship on seven occasions . Banagher College were the most recent winners of the senior championship in 2010 , with Banagher having won on three previous occasions , in 1985 , 1986 and 1989 . Banagher also won a junior championship in 1984 and St. Rynagh 's Banagher won a junior championship in 2004 . Soccer is popular in Banagher and the Banagher United club fields teams in the Midlands Senior and Junior Leagues . A Billiards and Snooker Hall is located between The Shannon Hotel and the Marina and has an active membership . There is a Pitch & Putt course located adjacent to Cromwell 's Castle on the Canal Bank and part of the river on this bank has been enclosed to form a swimming pool . There is also an active Sub Aqua Club in the town .

Guitar Hero : Van Halen is the third and final band-specific music rhythm game in the Guitar Hero series . As with the previous games Guitar Hero : Aerosmith and Guitar Hero : Metallica , the game features 25 songs from Van Halen along with 19 additional songs from selected artists that have been inspired by the group . The game was released in retail for the PlayStation 2 , PlayStation 3 , Xbox 360 , and Wii systems on December 22 , 2009 , in North America , and in February 2010 for PAL regions . However , as part of a promotion with Guitar Hero 5 , the game was shipped to Guitar Hero 5 purchasers in North America prior to its retail release . The game was developed by Neversoft with Underground Development assisting Neversoft on developing the Xbox 360 port and published by Activision . The game has received mostly negative reviews from critics , most of which consider the game 's quality to be greatly inferior to its predecessor , Guitar Hero : Metallica and other games of the series . The reviewers criticized the lack of former Van Halen members , Sammy Hagar , Michael Anthony and Gary Cherone , the limited tracks selected from Van Halen 's discography , the selection of other tracks included in the game , and the general lack of features introduced in the previous band-centric games and Guitar Hero 5 .

Guitar Hero : Van Halen is similar to the preceding band-centric game , Guitar Hero : Metallica , featuring support for four players in a single band on lead and bass guitar , drums , and vocals . The game is based off the engine originating from Guitar Hero World Tour , and thus does not feature the additions that are present in Guitar Hero 5 , such as drop-in / drop-out play . Only the current members of the band — Eddie Van Halen , David Lee Roth , Alex Van Halen and Wolfgang Van Halen — are playable avatars in the game for the Van Halen songs ; former band members Sammy Hagar , Gary Cherone and Michael Anthony are not included . The band appear as they did in 2009 but , by completing challenges in the game , players can unlock their older appearances from the " spandex era [ … ] with the big hair and tight pants " . Despite not being alive during this period of the band 's history , Wolfgang Van Halen 's avatar has a retro outfit copied from the dice-shirt-and-patchwork-jeans getup worn by his father in the video for " Panama " .

While the game was formally announced by Activision on May 7 , 2009 , several sources reported a month earlier that Van Halen was in development . USK , the German software ratings board , posted a content rating for a Van Halen-based game in the series . GameStop temporarily listed the game for pre-order during the month of April . A list of Xbox 360 Achievements was posted to the Internet in early May . Throughout September 2009 , people who purchased or preordered Guitar Hero 5 in the US were given a code which they could redeem to receive a free copy of Guitar Hero : Van Halen prior to its retail release . These copies began arriving to customers in early October for PlayStation 2 , Xbox 360 , and Wii players , while the PlayStation 3 version was delayed due to a printing error . The game came in a cardboard sleeve with cover art indicating that it was for promotional use .

Like the other band-centric Guitar Hero games , Guitar Hero : Van Halen includes 25 songs from the band Van Halen , including 3 guitar solos by Eddie Van Halen , in addition to 19 guest acts . The Van Halen songs in the game are taken during the time when David Lee Roth was in the band , and do not include any works during the period that Sammy Hagar and Gary Cherone were band members ; Activision 's head of music licensing , Tim Riley , notes that the lack of such material was not due to any demands or requests made by David Lee Roth . Riley also stated that most of the guest acts were selected by Wolfgang Van Halen , at the suggestion of Roth . The following songs are included in the game : ^ + Song contains both a single and double bass drums chart . ^ a Song is a guitar solo by Eddie Van Halen .

Early reviews of the promotional version of the game received by redeeming a code that came with Guitar Hero 5 were critical of the game . IGN 's Erik Brudvig rated the game 4.9 / 10 , citing problems with the lack of relevance of Van Halen relative to the culture of the 2000s , including having their avatars based on their current appearances rather than that of their 80s heyday , the lack of songs from Sammy Hagar 's period in the band , and the lack of features since introduced with Guitar Hero 5 . Brudvig ultimately stated that those who got the game free through the Guitar Hero 5 promotion " got what they paid for " . Robert Workman of Game Daily was less critical of the title , but still noted that the game lacked features , including some mention of Hagar and Gary Cherone and songs from their period with the band , and felt that the title was below the quality of Guitar Hero : Metallica . Both Brudvig and Workman commented positively on the sound recordings and the note tracking of the Van Halen songs . Guitar Hero : Van Halen reviews following its release were similarly negative . Ben Kuchera of Ars Technica considered the game 's limited coverage of the band 's history to be " a sadly revisionist and dishonest take " , and felt that the non-Van Halen songs clashed with the band 's own material . Kuchera further pointed to Activision 's distribution strategy for the game , stating that he felt that giving the game away free with Guitar Hero 5 showed that Activision did not have confidence in the game . Philip Horton of The Telegraph was critical of the game 's song selection , the band 's modern appearance , and the lack of any additional extras compared with either the previous band-centric games or Guitar Hero 5 , and described it as " the weakest offering in the series to date " . Kate Carter of The Guardian commented that the game is " neither one thing or the other " , as it neither succeeds at bringing anything new to the Guitar Hero series nor fully pays tribute to Van Halen . Computer and Video Games ' review complained about the " shoddy character models " and described it as " the laziest Guitar Hero yet " , and Nathan Meunier of GamePro said that while the Van Halen songs were good and challenging , the remaining tracks did not fit the theme of the game , and that " the lackluster presentation makes the game feel more like a glorified track pack than a true homage " .

Nancy Freeman-Mitford CBE ( 28 November 1904 – 30 June 1973 ) , known as Nancy Mitford , was an English novelist , biographer and journalist . One of the renowned Mitford sisters and one of the " Bright Young People " on the London social scene in the inter-war years , she is best remembered for her novels about upper-class life in England and France and for her sharp and often provocative wit . She also established a reputation for herself as a writer of popular historical biographies . Mitford enjoyed a privileged childhood as the eldest daughter of the Hon. David Freeman-Mitford , later 2nd Baron Redesdale . Educated privately , she had no training as a writer before publishing her first novel in 1931 . This early effort and the three that followed it created little stir ; it was her two semi-autobiographical postwar novels , The Pursuit of Love ( 1945 ) and Love in a Cold Climate ( 1949 ) , that established her reputation . Mitford 's marriage to Peter Rodd in 1933 proved unsatisfactory to both ( they divorced in 1957 after a lengthy separation ) , and during the Second World War she formed a liaison with a Free French officer , Gaston Palewski . He became the love of her life , although the pair were never a formal couple . After the war Mitford settled in France and lived there until her death , maintaining social contact with her many English friends through letters and regular visits .

During the 1950s Mitford was identified with the concept of " U " ( upper ) and " non-U " language , whereby social origins and standing were identified by words used in everyday speech . She had intended this as a joke , but many took it seriously , and Mitford was considered an authority on manners and breeding — possibly her most recognised legacy . Her later years were bitter-sweet , the success of her biographical studies of Madame de Pompadour , Voltaire and King Louis XIV contrasting with the ultimate failure of her relationship with Palewski . From the late 1960s her health deteriorated , and she endured several years of painful illness before her death in 1973 .

The Mitford family dates from the Norman era , when Sir John de Mitford held the Castle of Mitford in Northumberland . A later Sir John held several important public offices during the late 14th and early 15th centuries , and the family maintained a tradition of public service for many generations . In the 18th century William Mitford was a leading classical historian , responsible for the definitive history of ancient Greece . His great-grandson Algernon Bertram Mitford , born in 1837 and known as " Bertie " , was a diplomat and traveller who held minor office in Disraeli 's second ministry , from 1874 to 1880 . In 1874 he married Clementina , the second daughter of David Ogilvy , 10th Earl of Airlie , a union that linked the Mitfords to some of Britain 's most prominent aristocratic families . Blanche Ogilvy , Clementina 's elder sister , became the wife of Sir Henry Montague Hozier , a soldier turned businessman . Their four children included daughters Clementine ( " Clemmie " ) , who in 1908 married the future British prime minister Winston Churchill , and Nellie who married Bertram Romilly . Both Hozier and Blanche were promiscuous , and it is generally accepted by historians and family members that Hozier was not Clemmie 's father , although he was registered as such . Blanche told her friend Lady Londonderry , shortly before Clemmie 's birth , that the father of the expected child was her own brother-in-law , Bertie Mitford ; most historians believe that other candidates for the paternity are more likely .

Bertie Mitford 's marriage produced five sons and four daughters . His career in government service ended in 1886 , when after the death of a cousin he inherited a considerable fortune . A condition of the inheritance was that he adopt the surname " Freeman-Mitford " . He rebuilt Batsford House , the family 's country seat , served briefly as a Unionist MP in the 1890s , and otherwise devoted himself to books , writings and travel . In 1902 he was raised to the peerage as 1st Baron Redesdale , a re-creation of a title that had previously been held in the family but had lapsed in 1886 .

Nancy Mitford 's father , David Bertram Ogilvy Freeman-Mitford , was Bertie Mitford 's second son , born on 13 March 1878 . After several years as a tea planter in Ceylon he fought in the Boer War of 1899 – 1902 and was severely wounded . In 1903 he became engaged to Sydney Bowles , the elder daughter of Thomas Gibson Bowles , known as " Tap " , a journalist , editor and magazine proprietor whose publications included Vanity Fair and The Lady . The couple were married on 16 February 1904 , after which they rented a house in Graham Street in West London . Bowles provided his son-in-law with a job , as business manager of The Lady magazine . David had little interest in reading and knew nothing of business ; thus , according to Nancy Mitford 's biographer Selena Hastings , " a less congenial post ... could hardly have been imagined " . He remained in this position for ten years . The couple 's first child , a daughter , was born on 28 November 1904 ; they had intended to call her Ruby , but after she was born they changed their minds and named her Nancy .

Responsibility for Nancy 's day-to-day upbringing was delegated to her nanny and nursemaid , within the framework of Sydney 's short-lived belief that children should never be corrected or be spoken to in anger . Before this experiment was discontinued , Nancy had become self-centred and uncontrollable ; Hastings writes that her first years were " characterised by roaring , red-faced rages " . Just before her third birthday , a sister , Pamela , was born ; the nanny 's apparent change of loyalty in favour of the new arrival was a further source of outrage to Nancy , and throughout their childhood and into young adulthood she continued to vent her displeasure on her sister . In January 1909 a brother , Tom was born , and in June 1910 another sister , Diana , followed . That summer , to relieve the pressure on what was becoming an overcrowded nursery , Nancy attended the nearby Francis Holland School . The few months she spent there represented almost the whole of her formal schooling ; in the autumn the family moved to a larger house in Victoria Road , Kensington , after which Nancy was educated at home by successive governesses . Summers were spent at the family 's cottage near High Wycombe , in Buckinghamshire , or with the children 's Redesdale grandparents at Batsford Park . In the winter of 1913 – 14 David and Sydney visited Canada , prospecting for gold on a claim that David had purchased in Swastika , Ontario . It was here that their fifth child was conceived , a daughter born in London on 8 August 1914 and christened Unity .

On the outbreak of the First World War on 4 August 1914 , David rejoined his regiment and was soon in France . In May 1915 , Clement , David 's older brother , was killed while serving with the 10th Royal Hussars , which made David heir to the Redesdale title and lands . On 17 August 1916 Bertie Mitford died ; David , still serving at the front , became the 2nd Baron Redesdale . Sydney quickly took possession of Batsford House , much of which had been shut up for many years , and occupied the portion of it that she could afford to heat . The children had the run of the house and grounds , and were taught together in the schoolroom . This was a source of frustration for Nancy , whose lively intelligence required greater stimulus . She spent many hours reading in the Batsford House library where , according to Hastings , the foundations of her intellectual life were laid . The Redesdale estates were extensive , but uneconomical . At the end of the war Redesdale decided to sell Batsford Park and move his increasing family ( a fifth daughter , Jessica , had been born in September 1917 ) to less extravagant accommodation . The house was sold early in 1919 , together with many of its contents — including , to Nancy 's great dismay , much of its library . The new family home was Asthall Manor , a Jacobean mansion near Swinbrook in Oxfordshire . This was intended as a short-term measure while a new house was built on land nearby . The family stayed in Asthall Manor for seven years , and it became the basis of many of the family scenes which Nancy was later to portray in her semi-autobiographical novels .

Growing up proved a difficult process for Nancy . Unable to form a relationship with Pamela , the sister nearest to her in age , she was bored and irritated by her younger siblings , and vented her feelings by teasing and tormenting them . Although there was undoubtedly cruelty in her taunting — the other children , led by Tom , formed a " Leag ( sic ) against Nancy " — her teasing was also , according to the later reflections of her nephew Alexander Mosley : " a highly-honed weapon to keep a lot of highly competitive , bright , energetic sisters in order . She used it ... as a form of self protection " . Not all her interactions with her siblings were hostile ; for their amusement she edited and produced a magazine , The Boiler , to which she contributed entertainingly gruesome murder stories . In 1921 , after years of pleading for proper schooling , Nancy was allowed a year 's boarding at Hatherop Castle , an informal private establishment for young ladies of good family . Laura Thompson , in her biography of Nancy , describes Hatherop as not so much a school , " more a chaste foretaste of debutante life " . Here Nancy learned French and other subjects , played organised games and joined a Girl Guide troop . It was her first extended experience of life away from home , and she enjoyed it . The following year she was allowed to accompany four other girls on a cultural trip to Paris , Florence and Venice ; her letters home are full of expressions of wonder at the sights and treasures : " I had no idea I was so fond of pictures ... if only I had a room of my own I would make it a regular picture gallery " .

Nancy 's eighteenth birthday in November 1922 was the occasion for a grand " coming-out " ball , marking the beginning of her entry into Society . This was followed in June 1923 by her presentation at Court — a formal introduction to King George V at Buckingham Palace — after which she was officially " out " and could attend the balls and parties that constituted the London Season . She spent much of the next few years in a round of social events , making new friends and mixing with the " Bright Young People " of 1920s London . Nancy declared that " we hardly saw the light of day , except at dawn " . In 1926 Asthall Manor was finally sold . While the new house at Swinbrook was made ready , the female members of the family were sent for three months to Paris , a period which , says Hastings , began Nancy 's " lifelong love affair " with France . Among Nancy 's new London friends was Evelyn Gardner who , Nancy informed her brother Tom , was engaged " to a man called Evelyn Waugh who writes , I believe , very well " . She and Waugh later developed a lasting friendship . Although she was now of age , her father maintained an aggressive hostility towards most of her male friends , particularly since , as Hastings remarks , these tended towards the frivolous , the aesthetic and the effeminate . Among them was Hamish St Clair Erskine , the second son of the 5th Earl of Rosslyn , an Oxford undergraduate four years Nancy 's junior . He was , according to Hastings , the least suitable partner of all , " the most shimmering and narcissistic of all the beautiful butterflies " — and the one most likely to offend Lord Redesdale . The pair met in 1928 and became unofficially engaged , despite his homosexuality ( of which Nancy may not have been aware ) . Against a backdrop of negativity from family and friends — Waugh advised her to " dress better and catch a better man " — the affair endured sporadically for several years .

As a means of augmenting the meagre allowance provided by her father , Mitford began writing , encouraged by Waugh . Her first efforts , anonymous contributions to gossip columns in society magazines , led to occasional signed articles , and in 1930 The Lady engaged her to write a regular column . That winter , she embarked on a full-length novel , Highland Fling , in which various characters — mostly identifiable among her friends , acquaintances and family — attend a Scottish house-party which develops chaotically . The book made little impact when it was published in March 1931 , and she immediately began work on another , Christmas Pudding . Like the earlier novel , the plot centres on a clash between the " Bright Young People " and the older generation . Hamish Erskine is clearly identifiable in the character of " Bobby Bobbin " , and John Betjeman is the basis for the supporting role of Bobby 's tutor . The thinly disguised caricatures pervading the book shocked Lady Redesdale , who thought it could not possibly be published under Mitford 's own name . The affair between Erskine and Mitford continued intermittently . While she often despaired of the relationship , she refused other offers of marriage , saying that she would " never marry anyone except Hamish . " In 1932 her plight was overshadowed by a family scandal involving her younger sister Diana , who had married Bryan Guinness in 1928 and was the mother of two young sons . In 1932 Diana deserted her husband to become the mistress of Sir Oswald Mosley , the leader of the British Union of Fascists , himself married with three children . Almost alone of her family , Mitford offered her sister support , regularly visiting her and keeping her up to date with family news and social gossip . Her own love affair with Erskine came to an abrupt end when , in June 1933 , he informed her that he intended to marry the daughter of a London banker . In a final letter after their parting , Mitford wrote to him : " I thought in your soul you loved me & that in the end we should have children & look back on life together when we are old " .

Within a month of Erskine 's departure , Mitford announced her engagement to Peter Rodd , the second son of Sir Rennell Rodd , a diplomat and politician who was ennobled that year as Baron Rennell . According to Mitford 's friend Harold Acton , Rodd was " a young man of boundless promise ... he had abundant qualifications for success in any profession he deigned to choose " . Other biographers describe him as irresponsible , unfaithful , a bore and unable to hold down a regular job , and as the model for Waugh 's unscrupulous , amoral character Basil Seal from Black Mischief . They were married on 4 December 1933 , after which they settled into a cottage at Strand-on-the-Green on the western edges of London . Mitford 's initial delight in the marriage was soon tempered by money worries , Rodd 's fecklessness and her dislike of his family . In 1934 Mitford began her third novel , Wigs on the Green , a satire on Mosley 's fascist " Blackshirt " movement . Mitford herself had briefly flirted with this cause , although her enthusiasm was short-lived and she soon became a vociferous opponent of fascism . When the novel was published in 1935 it made little critical impact , while seriously offending members of her own family , particularly her sisters Diana and Unity , both of whom were supporters of Mosley 's movement and devotees of the German dictator Adolf Hitler . Diana eventually forgave her , but the rift with Unity , who was outraged by her depiction in the book as the ridiculous " Eugenia Malmains " , was never fully healed .

By 1936 Mitford 's marriage was largely a sham . Rodd was engaged in an affair with the wife of a friend , a situation that continued into the new year , when the Mitford family was further shaken by the 19-year-old Jessica 's elopement with her cousin Esmond Romilly . A rebellious ex-Wellington schoolboy and avowed Communist , Romilly had been invalided home after fighting on the Republican side in the Spanish Civil War . The young couple were traced to Bilbao ; Mitford was despatched to bring them home , but failed to persuade them , and they were married in May . Through the winter of 1937 – 38 Mitford 's main literary task was editing the letters of her cousins the Stanleys of Alderley , with whom she was connected through her great-grandmother Blanche Airlie . Her preoccupation with this project — nine or ten hours a day , she informed her friend Robert Byron — further damaged her relationship with Rodd , who resented the time thus spent . Nevertheless , in the summer of 1938 she discovered she was pregnant . She hoped for a girl : " 2 Peter Rodds in 1 house is unthinkable " , but in September she miscarried . Early in 1939 Rodd left for the South of France , to work with the relief organisations assisting the thousands of Spanish refugees who had fled from General Franco 's armies in the final stages of the civil war . In May Mitford joined him , and spent several weeks there as a relief worker . She was much affected by what she saw : " I have never cried so much in all my life " . The experience hardened her anti-fascism to the extent that she wrote : " I would join hands with the devil himself to stop any further extension of the disease " .

The outbreak of war in September 1939 divided the Mitford family . Nancy and Rodd supported the war ; the Romillys had by this time departed for America , while the others either hoped for an Anglo-German détente or , as with Unity , were openly pro-Nazi . Unity was in Munich when war was declared ; in despair she attempted suicide by shooting herself in the head . She survived , and was sent home through neutral Switzerland . Mosley and Diana , who had married secretly in 1936 , were detained under Defence Regulation 18B . Nancy , in full anti-fascist mode , had described her sister to the British Intelligence agency MI5 as " a ruthless and shrewd egotist , a devoted fascist and admirer of Hitler [ who ] sincerely desires the downfall of England and democracy in general . " During the " phoney war " of 1939 – 40 , Nancy was briefly an Air Raid Precautions ( ARP ) driver , and later worked shifts at a first-aid post in Paddington . She drew on these experiences in her fourth novel , Pigeon Pie , a comedy about spying . It was published by Hamish Hamilton in May 1940 , at a time when there was little public appetite for lighthearted war satire , and the book was a commercial failure .

In April 1940 Mitford suffered her second miscarriage . Shortly afterwards Rodd , who had been commissioned into the Welsh Guards , departed overseas . Alone in London , Mitford moved to the family 's Rutland Gate house where she remained during the London blitz . The main house had been requisitioned to provide a refuge for Jewish families evacuated from the bombed areas of the East End . Mitford spent much of her time looking after these families , " so hard-working , clean and grateful " . A brief affair with a Free French officer , André Roy , resulted in a third pregnancy . Mitford again miscarried , with complications that led , in November 1941 , to a hysterectomy . After convalescence , at a loose end , she began working as an assistant at the Heywood Hill bookshop in Curzon Street . The shop became the centre of Mitford 's daily activities , and was a favoured meeting place for London 's literati . In September 1942 she met Gaston Palewski , a French colonel attached to General Charles de Gaulle 's London staff . She found him fascinating , and he became the love of her life — though her feelings were never fully reciprocated — and an inspiration for much of her future writing . For the sake of Mitford 's reputation the affair was pursued with discretion , before Palewski left for Algeria in May 1943 . Thereafter the relationship was conducted mainly by letters and occasional phone calls , since Palewski was only intermittently in England before the end of the war .

Pigeon Pie 's failure had cooled Mitford 's desire to write , but in 1944 , with Waugh 's encouragement , she began planning a new novel . In March 1945 she was given three months ' leave from the shop to write it . The Pursuit of Love is a heavily autobiographical romantic comedy in which many of her family and acquaintances appear in thin disguises . Despite the distraction of learning that her brother Tom had died fighting in Burma , she finished the book and , in September , went to Paris . Ostensibly this was to establish a French branch of Heywood Hill but in reality she wished to be close to Palewski , who was now a member of de Gaulle 's postwar provisional government . She was back in London in December 1945 for the publication of The Pursuit of Love which was , Hastings records , " an instant and phenomenal success ... the perfect antidote to the long war years of hardship and austerity , providing the undernourished public with its favourite ingredients : love , childhood and the English upper classes " . The book sold 200,000 copies within a year of publication , and firmly established Mitford as a best-selling author .

At the end of the war Rodd returned home , but the marriage was essentially over ; although remaining on friendly terms , the couple led separate lives . Mitford 's visit to France in late 1945 had revived her longing to be there , and in April 1946 , having given up working in the shop the previous month , she left London to make her permanent home in Paris ; she never lived in England again . She was a prolific letter writer , and kept contact with her large cohort of friends by a voluminous correspondence . According to Hastings , she developed many of her friendships far further on paper than she could have done through normal social intercourse .

During her first 18 months in Paris Mitford lived in several short-term lodgings while enjoying a hectic social life , the hub of which was the British Embassy under the regime of the ambassador , Duff Cooper , and his socialite wife Lady Diana Cooper . Eventually Mitford found a comfortable apartment , with a maid , at No. 7 rue Monsieur on the Left Bank , close to Palewski 's residence . Settled there in comfort , she established a pattern to her life that she mostly followed for the next 20 years , her precise timetable determined by Palewski 's varying availability . Her socialising , entertaining and working were interspersed with regular short visits to family and friends in England and summers generally spent in Venice . In 1948 Mitford completed a new novel , a sequel to The Pursuit of Love she called Love in a Cold Climate , with the same country house ambience as the earlier book and many of the same characters . The novel 's reception was even warmer than that of its predecessor ; Waugh was one of the few critics to qualify his praise — he thought the descriptions were good but the conversations poor . In 1950 she translated and adapted André Roussin 's play La petite hutte ( " The Little Hut " ) , in preparation for its successful West End début in August , The Times 's critic noted the " habit of speech at once colloquial and unexpected which instantly declares itself the creation of Miss Mitford . " The play ran for 1,261 performances , and provided Mitford with a steady £ 300 per month in royalties . The same year The Sunday Times asked her to contribute a regular column , which she did for four years . This busy period in her writing life continued in 1951 with her third postwar novel , The Blessing , another semi-autobiographical romance this time set in Paris , in which an aristocratic young Englishwoman is married to a libidinous French marquis . Harold Acton deems it her most accomplished novel , " permeated with her joyous love of France " . This time Waugh ( to whom the book was dedicated ) had no criticism ; he found the book " admirable , deliciously funny , consistent and complete , by far the best of your writings " .

In 1954 Alan Ross , a University of Birmingham professor of linguistics , devised the terms " U " and " Non-U " to differentiate the speech patterns of the social classes in England . " U " indicated upper-class usage , and " Non-U " the conventions of the lower strata of society . His article , in a learned Finnish journal and with an illustrative glossary , used The Pursuit of Love to exemplify upper-class speech patterns . In a spirit of mischief , Mitford incorporated the U and Non-U thesis into an article she was writing for Encounter on the English aristocracy . Although this aspect formed only a small section of Mitford 's article , when it was published in September 1955 it caused a major stir . Few recognised the tongue-in-cheek aspect ; Mitford received hundreds of letters from worried readers desperate to know if they were snobs or merely " common " . The level of anxious or amused interest was sustained to such an extent that in 1956 Hamish Hamilton reproduced the article in a short book , entitled Noblesse Oblige . The book also included an abbreviated version of Ross 's original article , and contributions from Waugh , Betjeman , Peter Fleming and Christopher Sykes , It was a tremendous success ; as Lovell records , " ' U and Non-U ' was the buzz phrase of the day ... Nancy 's comments made her the arbiter of good manners for several generations " . Thompson notes the irony that the U and Non-U labels , perhaps Mitford 's best-known legacy , were not her own but were borrowed for the purpose of a " tease " .

In October 1957 Palewski was appointed as France 's ambassador to Italy . Mitford 's meetings with him , which had become increasingly rare because of his many political and social commitments , were now reduced to a single visit a year , supplemented with occasional letters . Mitford mainly concealed her true feelings on this separation , although one acquaintance noted her increasingly " savage " teasing of friends , which was perhaps a safety valve : " If she would only tell one she is unhappy one would do what one could to comfort her " . In March 1958 Mitford 's father , Lord Redesdale , died . After the cremation , she informed her sister Jessica , " the ashes were done up in the sort of parcel he used to bring back from London , rich thick brown paper & incredibly neat knots " . Meanwhile Mitford had completed her latest book , Voltaire in Love , an account of the love affair between Voltaire and the Marquise du Châtelet . She considered it her first truly grown-up work , and her best . Published in 1957 , it sold well , was taken seriously by the critics and was warmly praised by Mitford 's friends . Its writing had been hampered by painful headaches arising from her apparently failing eyesight and worries that she might be going blind . The problem was resolved after a visit to the opthalmic surgeon Patrick Trevor-Roper , who gave her new spectacles : " It is heavenly to be able to read for a long time on end & now I see how handicapped I was when doing Voltaire " . She then returned to writing fiction , with Don 't Tell Alfred , in which she revived Fanny Wincham , the narrator of The Pursuit of Love and Love in a Cold Climate , and placed her in a Paris setting as wife of the British ambassador . Several characters familiar from the earlier novels appear in minor roles . The book , published in October 1960 , was popular with the public , but received indifferent reviews . Some of Mitford 's friends disliked it , and she decided she would write no more fiction .

In August 1962 Palewski was appointed a minister in Georges Pompidou 's government , and returned to Paris . This did not mean more regular or frequent meetings , and the affair with Mitford continued at arm 's length . In April 1963 Mitford was in England for the wedding of her cousin Angus Ogilvy to Princess Alexandra . A month later she was back for the funeral of her mother , Lady Redesdale , who died on 25 May . Mitford 's friends were dying , too , " in middle age " , she informed her long-time friend Violet Hammersley . The premature deaths included that of Evelyn Waugh , who died on 10 April 1966 . Mitford saw the kindness and humour concealed behind his hostile public image , and said after his death : " What nobody ever remembers about Evelyn is everything with him was jokes . Everything " . Thompson calls their relationship " one of the great literary friendships of the twentieth century " . Amidst these personal upheavals Mitford continued writing . In 1964 she began work on The Sun King , a biography of King Louis XIV . Her publishers decided to issue it as a lavishly illustrated " coffee table " book . When it was published in August 1966 , among the many tributes to the book was that of President de Gaulle , who recommended it to every member of his cabinet . By this time , Mitford 's relationship with Palewski had become dormant , and she recognised that the best days would never return . Under pressure from her landlords to leave her rue Monsieur apartment — they had raised her rent " exorbitantly " — she decided to leave Paris and buy herself a house in Versailles .

Mitford moved to No. 4 rue d 'Artois , Versailles , in January 1967 . The modest house had a half-acre ( 0.2 hectare ) garden , which soon became one of her chief delights . In 1968 she began work on her final book , a biography of Frederick the Great . While confined at home in March 1969 after a series of illnesses she learned from a newspaper announcement that Palewski had married the Duchesse de Sagan , a rich divorcée . Mitford had long accepted that Palewski would never marry her . Nevertheless , she was deeply hurt by the news , although she affected a typical nonchalance . Shortly after , she entered hospital for the removal of a tumour . After the operation she continued to suffer pain , although she was able to continue working on her book . In October 1969 she undertook a tour of East Germany , to visit former royal palaces and battlefields . She finished the book , but in April 1970 was back in hospital for further tests , which did not lead to either a diagnosis or effective treatment . Frederick the Great was published later in 1970 to a muted reception . Mitford 's remaining years were dominated by her illness , although for a time she enjoyed visits from her sisters and friends , and working in her garden . In April 1972 the French government made her a Chevalier of the Légion d 'Honneur , and later that year the British government appointed her a Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( CBE ) . She was delighted by the former honour , and amused by the latter — which she remembered Waugh had called an " insult " and turned down . At the end of 1972 she entered the Nuffield Clinic in London , where she was diagnosed with Hodgkin 's lymphoma , a cancer of the blood . She lived for another six months , unable to look after herself and in almost constant pain , struggling to keep her spirits up . She wrote to her friend James Lees-Milne : " It 's very curious , dying , and would have many a drôle amusing & charming side were it not for the pain " . She died on 30 June 1973 at her home in the rue d 'Artois and was cremated in Versailles , after which her ashes were taken to Swinbrook for burial alongside her sister Unity .

Mitford had no training as a writer or journalist ; her style , particularly in the pre-war novels , is chatty and informal , much as in her letters . She may have inherited some of her natural wit and sharpness of expression from her maternal grandfather Thomas Bowles , who in his youth during the Franco-Prussian War had provided dispatches which Acton describes as " extremely graphic and amusing " . Mitford 's fiction , based on upper-class family life and mores , belongs to the genre of the comedy of manners . Her protagonists — typically , intelligent women surrounded by eccentric characters determined to find life amusing — are broadly autobiographical . It is unsurprising , says Thompson , that Mitford should first attempt to write a novel in the early 1930s , since many of her friends were doing the same thing . What is surprising , Thompson adds , is the ease with which she found a publisher for this first book . Perhaps , says Thompson , her publishers Thornton Butterworth " liked the idea of this pretty , well-connected girl who wrote in the style du jour " . Mitford was later embarrassed by her prewar novels ; Rachel Cooke , writing on their reissue in 2011 , believes she had no reason to be : " There is a special kind of energy here , and its engine is the admirable and irresistible commitment of a writer who would rather die than be boring " .

Critics generally place the postwar novels in a different league from the earlier efforts ; Cooke describes The Pursuit of Love as " an immaculate novel that soars many miles above what came before " . In Acton 's view it and its companion volume Love in a Cold Climate present an entirely authentic picture of country house life in England between the wars , and will long be consulted by historians of the period . In these later novels Zoë Heller of the Daily Telegraph hears in the prose , behind a new level of care and artfulness . " the unmistakeable Mitford trill , in whose light , bright cadences an entire hard-to-shock and easy-to-bore view of life is made manifest " . At times a more serious undertone , contrasting with the " bright , brittle , essentially ephemeral " nature of her early works , becomes evident ; Olivia Laing in the Guardian , discerns " a faint and beguiling pessimism about love 's pursuit and its consequences " beneath the light superficiality . The Blessing has provoked a more divided response . Waugh 's judgement was that those who criticised the book were " lazy brutes ... [ who ] ... can 't bear to see a writer grow up " . More recently , Philip Hensher and others have argued that although the novel is immensely enjoyable and that Mitford 's " marvellous voice " is undiminished , she is on less sure ground with her " Frenchness " than with the English country house ambience , and her picture of France as the embodiment of everything civilised is less than convincing . Similar mixed comments greeted Mitford 's final novel , Don 't Tell Alfred , Waugh again hailing it as her best , " clamouring for a sequel " . In this judgement he was largely alone ; other critics perceived in the anecdotal framework of the book an uncertainty as to what it was about . An American reviewer wondered what parts were to be taken seriously : " What exactly goes on ? ... Can you always tell an Etonian , even when he goes beat ? Is all modern architecture a fraud ? Do U-people really talk this way ? " Similar questions were raised in the Times Literary Supplement 's review , in relation to Mitford 's fictional output as a whole : " Would she have been a better novelist if she had ' tried harder ' , gone in further , dropped the pose of amateurishness , cut the charm , looked beyond the worlds that she knew and , more importantly , loved ? "

The gift for vivid characterisation , which Mitford developed in her fiction , was used to full effect in her four biographical works . In the first of these , Madame de Pompadour , she followed Waugh 's advice not to write for experts but to fashion " a popular life like Strachey 's Queen Victoria " , with " plenty of period prettiness " . This remained her yardstick in her subsequent biographical writings . Her own description of Voltaire in Love is " a Kinsey report of his romps with Mme de Châtelet and her romps with Saint-Lambert and his romps with Mme de Boufflers ... I could go on for pages " . Acton thought The Sun King the most entertaining introduction to the subject in the English language . Mitford 's informal style was remarked on by the literary critic Cyril Connolly , who wrote that her facility for transforming unpromising source material into readable form was a skill that any professional historian might envy . The historian Antonia Fraser considered Mitford an important contributor to the " remorseless process by which historical and biographical sales have soared since 1950 " .

Mitford did not regard herself as a journalist : nevertheless , her articles were popular , particularly those she contributed on Paris life to The Sunday Times . Thomson describes this series as " a more sophisticated version of A Year in Provence , bringing France to the English in just the way that they most like it " . Thompson adds that although Mitford was always a competent writer , it is in her letters , with their freedom of expression and flights of fancy , that her true character emerges . Many have been published within collections ; they are , according to The Independent 's reviewer : " a delight , full of the sparks of an abrasive and entertaining wit , refreshingly free from politeness " .

Mosley , Charlotte ( ed . ) ( 1993 ) . Love from Nancy : The Letters of Nancy Mitford . London : Hodder & Stoughton . ISBN 978-0-340-53784-8 . Mosley , Charlotte ( ed . ) ( 1996 ) . The Letters of Nancy Mitford and Evelyn Waugh . London : Hodder & Stoughton . ISBN 0-340-63804-4 . Smith , John Saumarez ( ed . ) ( 2004 ) . The Bookshop at 10 Curzon Street : Letters between Nancy Mitford and Heywood Hill 1952 – 73 . London : Frances Lincoln . ISBN 978-0-7112-2452-0 . Mosley , Charlotte ( ed . ) ( 2007 ) . The Mitfords : Letters Between Six Sisters . London : Fourth Estate . ISBN 978-1-84115-790-0 .

Amphicoelias ( / ˌæmfᵻˈsiːliəs / , meaning " biconcave " , from the Greek αμφι , amphi : " on both sides " , and κοιλος , koilos : " hollow , concave " ) is a genus of herbivorous sauropod dinosaur that is probably synonymous with the genus Diplodocus . It includes what has sometimes been estimated to be the largest dinosaur specimen ever discovered , originally named " A. fragillimus " . Based on surviving descriptions of a single fossil bone , scientists had over the years estimated A. fragillimus to have been the longest known animal at 58 metres ( 190 ft ) in length , with potentially a mass of up to 122.4 tonnes ( 135 short tons ) . However , because the only fossil remains were lost at some point after being studied and described in the 1870s , evidence survived only in drawings and field notes . More recent analysis of the surviving evidence , and the biological plausibility of such a large land animal , has suggested that the enormous size of this animal were over-estimates due partly to typographical errors in the original 1878 description .

The type species of Amphicoelias , A. altus , was named by paleontologist Edward Drinker Cope in December 1877 ( though not published until 1878 ) for an incomplete skeleton consisting of two vertebrae , a pubis ( hip bone ) , and a femur ( upper leg bone ) . Cope also named a second species , A. fragillimus , in the same paper . However , all subsequent researchers have considered A. fragillimus to be a synonym of A. altus . Even by 1881 however , it was recognized that A. altus could not be distinguished from other genera , as the features described by Cope were misinterpreted and are widespread . In 1921 , Osborn and Mook assigned additional bones to A. altus — a scapula ( shoulder blade ) , a coracoid ( shoulder bone ) , an ulna ( lower arm bone ) , and a tooth . Henry Fairfield Osborn and Charles Craig Mook noted the overall close similarity between Amphicoelias and Diplodocus , as well as a few key differences , such as proportionally longer forelimbs in Amphicoelias than in Diplodocus . The dentition of Amphicoelias is homodont . Its teeth are shaped like long slender cylindrical rods , are spaced apart and project forward towards the front of the mouth . The femur of Amphicoelias is unusually long , slender , and round in cross section ; while this roundness was once thought to be another distinguishing characteristic of Amphicoelias , it has since been found in some specimens of Diplodocus as well . A. altus was also similar in size to Diplodocus , estimated to be about 25 m ( 82 ft ) long . While most scientists have used these details to distinguish Amphicoelias and Diplodocus as separate genera , at least one has suggested that Amphicoelias is probably the senior synonym of Diplodocus .

Amphicoelias fragillimus was collected by Oramel Lucas , a fossil collector employed by E. D. Cope , shortly after he was hired by Cope in 1877 . Lucas discovered a partial vertebra ( the neural arch and spine ) of the new sauropod species in Garden Park , north of Cañon City , Colorado , close to the quarry that yielded Camarasaurus . The vertebra was in poor condition , but astonishingly large , measuring 1.5 metres ( 4.9 ft ) up to 2.7 metres ( 8.9 ft ) in height . Lucas shipped the specimen to Cope in the spring or early summer of 1878 , and Cope published it as the holotype specimen ( catalogue number AMNH 5777 ) of a new species , A. fragillimus , that August . The name derives from the Latin fragillimus ( " very fragile " ) , referring to the delicateness of the bone produced by very thin laminae ( vertebral walls ) . As revealed in Cope 's notebooks , which he recorded based on Lucas ' report on excavation site locations in 1879 , the specimen came from a hill south of the Camarasaurus quarry now known as " Cope 's Nipple . " While Cope originally wrote that the site belonged to the Dakota Formation ( mid-Cretaceous in age ) , the presence of dinosaurs such as Camarasaurus in the same rocks indicates that they probably belong to the Morrison Formation , which places the age of the site at 150 million years ago in the late Jurassic period , specifically the Tithonian age .

The gigantic bones attributed to A. fragillimus have often been ignored in summaries of the largest dinosaurs partly because , according to various subsequent reports , the whereabouts of both the vertebra and the femur are unknown , and all attempts to locate them have failed . Carpenter , in 2006 , presented a possible scenario for the disappearance of the A. fragillimus specimens . As Cope noted in his description , the neural arch bone material was very fragile , and techniques to harden and preserve fossil bone had not yet been invented ( Cope 's rival , paleontologist O.C. Marsh , was the first to use such chemicals , in the early 1880s ) . Carpenter observed that the fossil bones known from the A. fragillimus quarry would have been preserved in deeply weathered mudstone , which tends to crumble easily and fragment into small , irregular cubes . Therefore , the bone may have crumbled badly and been discarded by someone at the American Museum of Natural History ( possibly even by Cope himself ) soon after he illustrated it in rear view for his paper . Carpenter suggested that this may explain why Cope drew the vertebra in only one view , rather than from multiple angles as he did for his other discoveries .

In 1994 , an attempt was made to relocate the original quarry where A. fragillimus and other species had been found , using ground-penetrating radar in an attempt to image bones still buried in the ground . This attempt failed because the fossilized mudstone bones were the same density as the surrounding rock , making it impossible to differentiate the two . A study of the local topography also showed that the fossil-bearing rock strata was severely eroded , and probably was so at the time Lucas made his discovery of A. fragillimus , indicating that a majority of the skeleton was gone by the time the vertebra and femur were recovered . Cope 's description of A. fragillimus has been met with skepticism , with some researchers noting that there were typographical errors in his measurements . For example , the measurement units are given in ( obviously incorrect ) centimeters rather than millimeters . Carpenter argued that there is every reason to take Cope at his word , noting that the paleontologist 's reputation was at stake . The discovery took place during the Bone Wars , and Cope 's rival Marsh , who was " ever ready to humiliate " Cope , never called the claims into question . Marsh was known to have employed spies to monitor Cope 's discoveries , and may have even had confirmation of the enormous size of the Amphicoelias fragillimus bones . Paleontologists Henry Fairfield Osborn and C.C. Mook in 1921 , as well as John S. McIntosh in 1998 , also accepted Cope 's data without question in published reviews . In 2015 , Woodruff and Foster published an analysis of the evidence and circumstances surrounding the publication and interpretation of A. fragillimus .

Producing an estimate of the complete size of A. fragillimus requires scaling the bones of better-known species of diplodocid ( a family of extremely long and slender sauropods ) in the assumption that their relative proportions were similar . In his original paper , Cope did this by speculating on the size of a hypothetical A. fragillimus femur ( upper leg bone ) . Cope noticed that in other sauropod dinosaurs , specifically A. altus and Camarasaurus supremus , the femora were always twice as tall as the tallest dorsal vertebra , and estimated the size of an A. fragillimus femur to be 12 ft ( 3.6 m ) tall . In 1994 , using the related Diplodocus as a reference , Gregory S. Paul estimated a femur length of 3.1 to 4 metres ( 10 to 13 ft ) for A. fragillimus . The 2006 re-evaluation of A. fragillimus by Ken Carpenter also used Diplodocus as a scale guide , finding a femur height of 4.3 to 4.6 metres ( 14 to 15 ft ) . Carpenter went on to estimate the complete size of A. fragillimus , though he cautioned that relative proportions in diplodocids could vary from species to species . Assuming the same proportions as the well-known Diplodocus , Carpenter presented an estimated total length of 58 m ( 190 ft ) , which he noted fell within the range presented by Paul in 1994 ( 40 to 60 metres ( 130 to 200 ft ) ) . Carpenter pointed out that even the lowest length estimates for A. fragillimus were higher than those for other giant sauropods , such as the diplodocid Supersaurus ( 32.5 metres ( 107 ft ) ) , the brachiosaurid Sauroposeidon ( 34 metres ( 112 ft ) ) , and the titanosaur Argentinosaurus ( 30 metres ( 98 ft ) ) . Carpenter presented more speculative , specific proportions for A. fragillimus ( again , based on a scaled-up Diplodocus ) , including a neck length of 16.75 metres ( 55.0 ft ) , a body length of 9.25 metres ( 30.3 ft ) , and a tail length of 32 metres ( 105 ft ) . He estimated the total forelimb height at 5.75 metres ( 18.9 ft ) and hind limb height at 7.5 metres ( 25 ft ) , and the overall height ( at the highest point on the back ) at 9.25 metres ( 30.3 ft ) . By comparison the blue whale , which is on average the longest living creature , reaches 30 metres ( 98 ft ) in length .

While A. fragillimus was relatively thin , its enormous size still made it very massive . Weight is much more difficult to determine than length in sauropods , as the more complex equations needed are prone to greater margins of error based on smaller variations in the overall proportions of the animal . Carpenter used Paul 's 1994 estimate of the mass of Diplodocus carnegii ( 11.5 metric tons ( 11.3 long tons ; 12.7 short tons ) ) to speculate that A. fragillimus could have weighed up to 122.4 metric tons ( 120.5 long tons ; 134.9 short tons ) . The heaviest blue whale on record weighed about 190 metric tons ( 190 long tons ; 210 short tons ) , and the heaviest dinosaur known from reasonably good remains , Argentinosaurus , weighed 80 to 100 metric tons ( 79 to 98 long tons ; 88 to 110 short tons ) , although if the size estimates can be validated , it could still be lighter than Bruhathkayosaurus , which has been estimated to have weighed 126 metric tons ( 124 long tons ; 139 short tons ) , but is also known from highly fragmentary remains .

Other unpublished estimates have appeared online . A paleoartist on DeviantArt estimated the length of A. fragillimus to be around 73 m ( 240 ft ) , based on a linear scaling of a 26.25 meter long , 11.5 tonne Diplodocus , assuming that A fragillimus was 2.79 times larger in linear dimension . In 2010 , Mike Taylor addressed the issue of A. fragillimus 's size on the blog SV-POW ( Sauropod Vertebrae Picture of the Week ) . Based on comparisons to A. altus and to Diplodocus , he estimated that it may have been around 49 m ( 161 ft ) long and 78.5 tonnes . However , he concluded with the disclaimer that it is impossible to determine with any degree of certainty at all how large A. fragillimus was in reality because of the lack of accurate information .

Edward Drinker Cope described his finds in two 1878 issues of the American Naturalist , and assigned them to the new genus Amphicoelias . He placed it in a unique family , Amphicoeliidae , though this is now considered a nomen oblitum ( forgotten name ) . The genus is usually assigned to the family Diplodocidae , though some modern analyses have found it at the base of the larger group Diplodocoidea or as a diplodocid incertae sedis ( uncertain placement ) . The first named species in the genus , Amphicoelias altus ( holotype specimen AMHD 5764 ) , was discovered by Cope in 1877 . But while it is only represented by a partial skeleton , there are enough diagnostic characteristics to provisionally define the genus . A. altus is known from better remains , but is smaller than A. fragillimus . Cope also named a second species in 1878 : Amphicoelias latus . The third named Amphicoelias species , A. fragillimus , was known only from a single , incomplete 1.5 m tall neural arch ( the part of a vertebra with spines and processes ) , either last or second to last in the series of back vertebrae , D ( dorsal ) 10 or D9 . Based only on an illustration published in 1878 , this vertebra would have measured 2.7 metres ( 8.9 ft ) tall in life . However , it has been argued that the scale bar in the published description contained a typographical error , and the fossil vertebra was in fact only 1.38 metres ( 4.5 ft ) tall . In addition to this vertebra , Cope 's field notes contain an entry for an " [ i ] mmense distal end of femur ” , located only a few tens of meters away from the giant vertebra . It is likely that this undescribed leg bone belonged to the same individual animal as the neural spine .

In 2010 , a monograph was made available , but not formally published , by Henry Galiano and Raimund Albersdorfer in which they referred a fourth species to Amphicoelias , as " A. brontodiplodocus " based on several complete specimens found in the Dana Quarry of Big Horn Basin , Wyoming and held in a private collection . The specific name referred to their hypothesis based on these specimens that nearly all Morrison diplodocid species are either growth stages or represent sexual dimorphism among members of the genus Amphicoelias , but this analysis has been met with skepticism and the publication itself has been disclaimed by its lead author , explaining that it is " obviously a drafted manuscript complete with typos , etc . , and not a final paper . In fact , no printing or distribution has been attempted " . Osborn and Mook , in 1921 , provisionally synonymized the three species , sinking A. latus into Camarasaurus supremus , and suggesting also that A. fragillimus is just a very large individual of A. altus , a position which most subsequent studies , including McIntosh 1998 , Foster ( 2007 ) , and Woodruff and Foster ( 2015 ) have agreed with . Carpenter ( 2006 ) disagreed about the synonymy of A. altus and A. fragillimus , however , citing numerous differences in the construction of the vertebra also noted by Cope , and suggested these differences are enough to warrant a separate species or even a separate genus for A. fragillimus . However , he went on to caution that the validity of A. fragillimus as a separate species is nearly impossible to determine without the original specimen to study . Although Amphicoelias latus is clearly not Amphicoelias , it is probably synonymous with Camarasaurus grandis rather than C. supremus because it was found lower in the Morrison Formation and the deeply concave articular faces on the caudal vertebrae are more consistent with C. grandis .

In 2007 , John Foster suggested that the differences usually cited to differentiate Amphicoelias altus from the more well known Diplodocus are not significant and may be due to individual variation . Foster argued that Amphicoelias is probably the senior synonym of Diplodocus , and that if further research bears this out , the familiar name Diplodocus would need to be abandoned in favor of Amphicoelias , as was the case with Brontosaurus and its senior synonym Apatosaurus . In 2015 , Woodruff and Foster reiterated this conclusion , stating that there is only one species of Amphicoelias and that it could be referred to Diplodocus as Diplodocus altus . They considered the name Amphicoelias to be a nomen oblitum . It has also been hypothesized that Amphicoelias should be considered an apatosaurine , and therefore should be placed in the subfamily Apatosaurinae . The following cladogram of the Diplodocidae after Tschopp , Mateus , and Benson ( 2015 ) instead shows A. altus outside Diplodocinae .

In his 2006 re-evaluation , Carpenter examined the paleobiology of giant sauropods , including Amphicoelias , and addresses the question of why this group attained such a huge size . He pointed out that gigantic sizes were reached early in sauropod evolution , with very large sized species present as early as the late Triassic Period , and concluded that whatever evolutionary pressure caused large size was present from the early origins of the group . Carpenter cited several studies of giant mammalian herbivores , such as elephants and rhinoceros , which showed that larger size in plant-eating animals leads to greater efficiency in digesting food . Since larger animals have longer digestive systems , food is kept in digestion for significantly longer periods of time , allowing large animals to survive on lower-quality food sources . This is especially true of animals with a large number of ' fermentation chambers ' along the intestine which allow microbes to accumulate and ferment plant material , aiding digestion . Throughout their evolutionary history , sauropod dinosaurs were found primarily in semi-arid , seasonally dry environments , with a corresponding seasonal drop in the quality of food during the dry season . The environment of Amphicoelias was essentially a savanna , similar to the arid environments in which modern giant herbivores are found , supporting the idea that poor-quality food in an arid environment promotes the evolution of giant herbivores . Carpenter argued that other benefits of large size , such as relative immunity from predators , lower energy expenditure , and longer life span , are probably secondary advantages .

The Morrison Formation environment in which Amphicoelias lived would have resembled a modern savanna , though since grass did not appear until the Late Cretaceous , ferns were probably the dominant plant and main food source for Amphicoelias . Though Engelmann et al . ( 2004 ) dismissed ferns as a sauropod food source due to their relatively low caloric content , Carpenter argued that the sauropod digestive system , well adapted to handle low-quality food , allows for the consumption of ferns as a large part of the sauropod diet . Carpenter also noted that the occasional presence of large petrified logs indicate the presence of 20 – 30 m ( 66 – 98 ft ) tall trees , which would seem to conflict with the savanna comparison . However , the trees are rare , and since tall trees require more water than the savanna environment could generally provide , they probably existed in narrow tracts or " gallery forests " along rivers and gulleys where water could accumulate . Carpenter speculated that giant herbivores like Amphicoelias may have used the shade of the gallery forests to stay cool during the day , and done most of their feeding on the open savanna at night .

Kesha Rose Sebert ( born March 1 , 1987 ) ( formerly stylized as Ke $ ha ) is an American singer , songwriter , and rapper . In 2005 , at age 18 , Kesha was signed to producer Dr. Luke 's label Kemosabe Records . Her breakthrough came in early 2009 after appearing on American rapper Flo Rida 's number-one single " Right Round " . Her debut album , Animal , and her first extended play , Cannibal , were released in 2010 . Kesha 's music and image propelled her to immediate commercial success , with Animal debuting as the number-one album in the United States . She also achieved two number-one singles , " Tik Tok " and " We R Who We R " , and a string of top-ten singles from the album and its re-release . At the same time , she continued to write songs for other artists , including " Till the World Ends " for Britney Spears . Warrior , her second studio album , was released in December 2012 , spawning Kesha 's eighth top-ten single with " Die Young " , and her ninth and tenth Top 40 hits with " C 'Mon " and " Crazy Kids " . " Tik Tok " is among the best-selling digital singles in history , selling over 14 million units internationally .

Influenced by various genres and artists , Kesha primarily draws inspiration from music of the 1980s ; Madonna , Queen , and Beck have been cited as instrumental to her music . After experimenting with country , pop rock , and electronic music , Kesha stuck with the latter . Thematically , her music generally revolves around escapism , partying , individuality , supernatural moments , rebellion , and grief . Kesha has been involved with animal rights and LGBT activism . She has received several awards and nominations , including her win for MTV Europe Music Award for Best New Act in 2010 . As of November 2013 , she has reportedly sold over 33 million records ( albums , tracks , and ringtones ) in the United States and 60 million records worldwide .

Kesha was born in Los Angeles , California . Her mother , Patricia Rose " Pebe " Sebert , is a singer-songwriter who co-wrote the 1978 single " Old Flames Can 't Hold a Candle to You " with Hugh Moffatt for Joe Sun , made popular by country music artist Dolly Parton on her 1980 album Dolly , Dolly , Dolly . Pebe , a single mother , struggled financially while supporting herself , Kesha , and Kesha 's older brother Lagan ; they relied on welfare payments and food stamps to get by . When Kesha was an infant , Pebe would often have to look after her onstage while performing . Kesha says she has no knowledge of her father 's identity . However , a man named Bob Chamberlain who called himself her father approached Star magazine in 2011 with pictures and letters , claiming them as proof that they had been in regular contact as father and daughter before she turned 19 . Her mother is of German and Hungarian ( from Szentes ) descent . One of Kesha 's great-grandfathers was Polish . Pebe moved the family to Nashville , Tennessee , in 1991 after securing a new publishing deal for her songwriting . Pebe frequently brought Kesha and her brothers along to recording studios and encouraged Kesha to sing when she noticed Kesha 's vocal talent . Kesha attended Franklin High School and Brentwood High School , but claimed that she did not fit in , explaining that her unconventional style ( e.g. , homemade purple velvet pants and purple hair ) did not endear her to other students . She played the trumpet and later the saxophone in the marching band in school , and described herself in an interview with NPR as being a diligent student . After attaining a near-perfect score on her SATs , she was offered a full scholarship at Barnard College , but instead chose to drop out before graduation to pursue her music career .

In addition to taking songwriting classes , Kesha was also taught how to write songs by Pebe , and they would often write together when she returned home from high school . Kesha began recording demos which Pebe would give to people she knew . Kesha was also in a band with Lagan . Kesha and Pebe co-wrote the song " Stephen " together when Kesha was 16 , Kesha then tracked down David Gamson , a producer that she admired , from Scritti Politti who agreed to produce the song . She dropped out of school at 17 , after being convinced by Dr. Luke and Max Martin to return to Los Angeles to pursue a music career , and earned her GED after . Around this time , Pebe answered an ad by reality series The Simple Life , looking for an " eccentric " family to host Paris Hilton and Nicole Richie . The episode aired in 2005 . Luke and Martin had received one of Kesha 's demos from Samantha Cox , senior director of writer / publisher relations at Broadcast Music Incorporated , and were impressed . Two of the demos were described in a cover story for Billboard , the first " a gorgeously sung , self-penned country ballad " and the second " a gobsmackingly awful trip-hop track " where Kesha raps ad lib for a minute when she runs out of lyrics near the end . Dr. Luke stated in an interview for the story that it was the latter track that caught his attention , saying " when you 're listening to 100 CDs , that kind of bravado and chutzpah stand out . "

In 2005 , at 18 , Kesha was signed to Dr. Luke 's label , Kemosabe Entertainment , and his music publishing company , Prescription Songs . Kemosabe Records is owned by Sony Music Entertainment and is located in Los Angeles , California . Sony Music Entertainment partnered with Dr. Luke to create Kemosabe Records . Some artists that have signed with Kemosabe Records are Juicy J , Rock City , Zara Larsson , Lil Bibby and many others . Kesha later sang background vocals for Paris Hilton 's single , " Nothing in This World " . Dr. Luke became preoccupied with other incoming projects , having enjoyed success writing and producing for pop star Kelly Clarkson 's album , Breakaway . Kesha then signed with David Sonenberg 's management company , DAS Communications Inc . , in 2006 , hardly interacting with Dr. Luke after that . DAS was tasked with obtaining a major label record deal for Kesha in a year 's time in exchange for 20 percent of her music income , with her having the option of ending the relationship if they failed . She worked with several writers and producers while at the company and ended up co-writing Australian pop group The Veronicas ' single , " This Love " with producer Toby Gad . While furthering her career in studio , Kesha earned her living as a waitress . While struggling to get by , she began stylizing her name as Ke $ ha , explaining the dollar sign as an ironic gesture .

Kesha appeared in the video for her friend Katy Perry 's single " I Kissed a Girl " , and sang background vocals for the Dr. Luke-produced song , " Lace and Leather " by Britney Spears in 2008 . DAS soon attracted the attention of songwriter and A & R Kara DioGuardi , who wanted to sign Kesha to Warner Bros. Records . The deal fell through due to her existing contract with Dr. Luke 's label . In September , she terminated her contract with DAS , reuniting with Dr. Luke . Kesha gained exposure in the mainstream media in early 2009 after appearing on rapper Flo Rida 's number one single , " Right Round " . The collaboration happened by accident ; she had walked into a recording session for the song with Flo Rida and Dr. Luke . Flo Rida wanted a female voice for the song ; Dr. Luke then suggested Kesha for the part . Flo Rida liked the end result so much that they did two more tracks . However , she is not credited for her feature on the United States release of " Right Round " and did not collect any money for the part . She also refused to appear in the video , explaining to men 's magazine Esquire that she wanted to make a name for herself on her own terms .

After failing to negotiate with Lava Records and Atlantic Records in 2009 , Kesha signed a multi-album deal with RCA Records through Dr. Luke 's imprint . Having spent the previous six years working on material for her debut album , she began putting finishing touches to the album with Luke and Max Martin . For the album , she wrote 200 songs . The album was executive produced by Luke , who produced the majority of the songs with Martin , and producers Benny Blanco and Ammo . The album is primarily of the electropop genre with beats and synths , marking a shift in sound for Luke from then on from his signature pop-rock productions . Animal debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 when it was released in January 2010 . It was certified platinum in the United States and had sold two million albums worldwide by September . The lead single of the album , " Tik Tok " , broke the record in the United States for the highest single week sales , selling 610,000 digital downloads , the highest ever by a female artist since tracking began in 2003 . It spent nine weeks at number one and became the longest running number one by a female artist on her debut single since Debby Boone and " You Light Up My Life " in 1977 . As of 2015 , " Tik Tok " has sold about 15 million copies , becoming the second best-selling single in the digital history – being the most sold single in history by a female solo artist . Subsequent singles from the album , " Blah Blah Blah " , " Your Love Is My Drug " and " Take It Off " achieved similar commercial success each reaching the top ten in Australia , Canada , and the United States . Kesha was also featured on two top ten singles by musician Taio Cruz and electro-pop duo 3OH ! 3 .

Kesha 's deliberately unpolished aesthetic and juvenile stage persona , which she described as her own personality " times ten " , quickly made her a deeply polarizing figure . Some of her critics found her output to be unsophisticated , while others felt that she was manufactured and lacked credibility . Kesha 's former managers from DAS Communications Inc. filed a lawsuit later that month , seeking $ 14 million from Kesha and $ 12 million from Luke for commissions on her RCA Records deal , alleging that she had extended the deadline for them to get her a major record label contract and squeezed them out of her career under pressure from Dr. Luke . Kesha launched her own lawsuit in October , citing the California-exclusive Talent Agencies Act and asking the California Labor Commissioner to declare her contract with DAS void because it had acted as an unlicensed talent agent while procuring work for her in California , where only licensed agents can do so . The case was settled in 2012 before the release of her second album . Kesha held a benefit concert on June 16 , 2010 where all proceeds went to aid victims of the May 2010 Tennessee floods from her hometown Nashville . She raised close to $ 70,000 from the event . She was a supporting act on the summer North American leg of Rihanna 's Last Girl on Earth Tour and was awarded Best New Act at the 2010 MTV Europe Music Awards . In November 2010 , Animal was re-released with a companion extended play , Cannibal . The lead single taken from Cannibal , " We R Who We R " debuted at the top of the Billboard Hot 100 . With two number ones and four top ten hits , Kesha was named Hot 100 Artist of 2010 by Billboard , with " Tik Tok " topping the year-end chart . The follow-up single from Cannibal , " Blow " charted in the top ten on the Hot 100 . As of June 2011 , she has accumulated almost 21 million digital single downloads in the United States alone . In February 2011 , Kesha embarked on her first headlining world tour , Get Sleazy . The tour was expanded with a summer leg due to the first leg selling out and spanned three continents . Kesha also co-wrote the song " Till the World Ends " for American popstar Britney Spears and she was featured on the remix of the song along with rapper Nicki Minaj . After meeting Kesha at the 2010 Grammy Awards and guesting at a number of her concerts , rock singer Alice Cooper asked her to write lyrics for and vocally perform as a devil character for their duet track , " What Baby Wants " , on Cooper 's album , Welcome 2 My Nightmare .

Kesha was named rights group Humane Society of the United States 's first global ambassador for animal rights , for which she is expected to bring attention to such practices as cosmetics testing on animals and shark finning . Kesha received the Wyler Award presented by The Humane Society as a celebrity or public figure who increases awareness of animal issues via the media . She received the award March 23 , 2013 at The 2013 Genesis Awards Benefit Gala . She also appeared alongside rock singer Iggy Pop in a campaign for PETA , protesting the clubbing of baby seals in Canada and later wrote on behalf of the organization to fast food chain McDonald 's over the conditions of their slaughterhouses .

Kesha 's second studio album , Warrior was released on November 30 , 2012 . She began writing for the album while on her own headlining tour in 2011 . The album featured productions from her main collaborators Dr. Luke and Max Martin , as well as a song by Wayne Coyne , the lead singer of the alternative band The Flaming Lips . Coyne had reached out to Kesha for a collaboration after hearing that she was a fan of the band . Besides working on Kesha 's album , they recorded the song " 2012 ( You Must Be Upgraded ) " for the band 's album , The Flaming Lips and Heady Fwends . To coincide with the release of the album , Kesha released an illustrated autobiography , My Crazy Beautiful Life through Touchstone Books in November 2012 . The first single taken from Warrior was " Die Young " . The song debuted at number thirteen on Billboard Hot 100 and eventually peaked at number 2 . The song also charted across Europe and the Anglosphere and reached the top ten in Australia , Canada , and Belgium . " C 'Mon " , the album 's second single , underperformed commercially ; only peaking at 27 on Billboard Hot 100 and ending her string of top ten hits on the chart . Despite this , " C 'Mon " continued Kesha 's streak of top ten hits ( with nine ) on the Mainstream Top 40 Pop Songs chart graphed by Billboard . In March 2013 , Kesha announced the Warrior Tour , which will support the album . The North American leg was co-headlined with rapper Pitbull . Kesha 's third single from Warrior , " Crazy Kids " , was released in April 2013 and also under-performed , peaking at number 40 on the Hot 100 , number 19 on Mainstream Top 40 , yet did achieve massive success in South Korea and Belgium peaking at numbers 2 , and 5 in those countries respectively . A TV series documentary , Kesha : My Crazy Beautiful Life began airing on MTV in April 2013 .

In July 2013 , The Flaming Lips announced that they hoped to release a full-length collaborative album with Kesha , called Lipsha , although it was eventually cancelled in the winter of the same year . Kesha sent a message to a fan expressing how it was out of her control and that she wanted to release the material , even for free , saying that she did not care about the money . On October 7 , 2013 , Kesha and Pitbull released a collaboration , " Timber " , produced by Luke , which was an international commercial success and became Kesha 's third number-one and her eleventh top 10 single on the Hot 100 chart .

In January 2014 , Kesha checked into rehab , following this she chose to use her birth name in favor of her previous moniker , using a normal " s " instead of the symbol " $ " . In June 2014 , Kesha claimed a seat as an Expert in ABC 's Rising Star alongside Brad Paisley and Ludacris . In October 2014 , Kesha sued producer Dr. Luke for alleged sexual assault and battery , sexual harassment , gender violence , emotional abuse , and violation of California business practices which had occurred over 10 years working together . The lawsuit went on for about a year before Kesha sought a preliminary injunction to release her from Kemosabe Records . On February 19 , 2016 , New York Supreme Court Justice Shirley Kornreich ruled against Kesha 's request . On April 6 , 2016 , Judge Shirley Kornreich rejected all of Kesha 's claims against Dr Luke . On June 13 , 2015 , Kesha headlined LA ! Pride 2015 Presented by Christopher Street West in West Hollywood , California . On August 4 , 2015 , Kesha signed with SESAC Inc . Kesha guest starred in the second season of the U.S. television series Jane the Virgin , which aired on October 12 , 2015 . The singer played Annabelle , Jane 's hostile neighbor . As of August 2015 , Kesha has released little information about her upcoming third studio album . In her August 2014 Teen Vogue cover interview , Kesha revealed she had recorded 14 new songs while in rehab . On November 2 , 2014 , a new song written by Kesha titled " Lover " , reportedly from Kesha 's upcoming third studio album , was uploaded to Schpilkas ' SoundCloud , who produced the track alongside Spookey Ruben . The track was later included on Ruben 's album " Welsh Rarebits " . On June 10 , 2015 , Kesha posted a photo to Instagram that supposedly teased the title of her upcoming single " Child of the Moon " , but the photo has since been removed . Kesha also spoke about the song in her Teen Vogue interview , saying that it had a " Stevie Nicks-witchy vibe " . In December 2015 , Kesha revealed that she had formed a country music and classic rock-influenced band called Yeast Infection and performed a live show with the band in Nashville on December 23 .

Kesha wrote or co-wrote every song on her first two albums and considers herself a songwriter primarily , writing for artists including Britney Spears and Miley Cyrus . She possesses a " strong , sneering vibrato " , with a distinct yodel-like quality to her voice ; she employs actual yodeling on the songs , " Tik Tok " and " Cannibal " . Having previously done country , pop rock , and electro , she had a clear idea of the synthpop sound that she wanted for her debut album . The genre was popular at the time , with many of her peers releasing similar output as well . Both of her albums are of the genre with catchy hooks and synthesized productions often compared to pop singer Dev by music critics , creating misunderstandings among the fans of the two . " Party at a Rich Dude 's House " and " C U Next Tuesday " have 1980s derived backing , while " Stephen " begins with " Kansas-style vocal harmonies " . With the lyrics , " Oh my Nicolas Cage , you 're so old / you 're prehistoric / you 're like a dinosaur / D-I-N-O-S-A-you are a dinosaur " , " Dinosaur " follows a verse-chorus formula , reminiscent of " Girlfriend " ( 2007 ) by Avril Lavigne and " Hollaback Girl " ( 2005 ) by Gwen Stefani ; the song uses the overt symbolism of dinosaurs , carnivory , and other primitive motifs to tell the story of an older man who preys on younger women . According to Kesha , the song is based on true events . While her vocals on Animal were heavily processed with auto-tune , often to produce rapid stuttering or over-pitch corrected vocal effects , leading to questions on vocal talent , she expressed confidence in her abilities , showing some of her vocal talent in the ballads " Animal " and " Hungover " on the album .

Kesha 's second studio album Warrior used considerably less autotune , although it still showed in a number of songs . The album 's piano and guitar-driven ballads such as " Love Into The Light " , " Wonderland " and " Past Lives " display Kesha 's vocal ability . Kesha also uses a trademark talky " white-girl " rapping style with exaggerated discordant phrasing and enunciation . Her vocal technique has led her to be credited as a rapper , a topic she disagreed with until fellow rappers André 3000 , Wiz Khalifa , and Snoop Dogg endorsed her . On the subject , she said : " The first time someone called me a rapper , I started laughing . I was shocked , and thought it was hilarious . It 's crazy and funny to me . " The New York Times said Kesha " threatens to become the most influential female rapper of the day , or at least the most popular . Pretending Kesha isn 't a rapper is no longer feasible . " " Crazy Kids " and " C 'Mon " took greater shifts into " party rap " . Most of her lyrics chronicle her relationships and partying ; the lighthearted subject matter of the latter and her unfiltered language saw many critics criticizing her for releasing frivolous and crass music . Jonah Weiner of Slate , however , stated that her jarring lyrics allowed her songs to become more memorable . In " Blah Blah Blah " and " Boots & Boys " , she objectifies men to poke fun at how male fronted rock bands and rappers can get away with objectifying women and not vice versa . The title track to her debut , " Animal " , is more aspirational and is intended to inspire people to embrace their individuality . Much more experimental than Animal , her second album , Warrior , contains dubstep elements and explores erotic experiences Kesha encountered with ghosts on the song , " Supernatural " . Overall , Kesha said the theme of Warrior is magic .

Critics praised Warrior for its rock music influences , despite the album being deeply rooted in technopop . Applauding the album 's rock sound , Rolling Stone called the album Kesha 's rock manifesto . Rock icons The Flaming Lips , Iggy Pop , and Alice Cooper have collaborated with Kesha , endorsing her as a rock singer . Cooper told Billboard , " I immediately looked at her and went , ' This girl is not a pop diva . She 's a rock singer . ' She would much rather be the female Robert Plant than the next Britney Spears . " The A.V. Club noted that Warrior proved Kesha a capable vocalist and songwriter . The Washington Post said that the album the is " pure fun " , acknowledging her proneness for finding good hooks despite her sometimes vapid lyricism .

Kesha 's musical influences consist of hip hop , punk rock , crunkcore , glam rock , 1980s pop , dance music and classic country . Her country influences of Dolly Parton and Johnny Cash come from her mother 's country songwriting , while her older brother exposed her to hip-hop and punk bands , Fugazi , Dinosaur Jr. and the Beastie Boys . She has additionally cited Beck , Queen , David Bowie , Led Zeppelin , Madonna , Elton John , Aaron Neville , Britney Spears , Bob Dylan , The Damned , The Velvet Underground , Blondie and graffiti artist Banksy as influences . She credits her straightforward story-based lyrics to her love for the honest storytelling style of country music , while the title track from her debut album was created with music from alternative rock bands The Flaming Lips and Arcade Fire in mind . She singled out the Beastie Boys as a major influence , telling Newsweek that she had always wanted to be like them and aspired to make " youthful , irreverent anthems " as well . She called her debut album , Animal , an homage to the Beastie Boys ' Licensed to Ill and credited the creation of the rap driven " Tik Tok " to her love for the Beastie Boys ' rap music . For her first headlining tour , Kesha wanted to emulate the stage theatrics of Iggy Pop 's performances . She listed Pop 's The Idiot as well as Led Zeppelin and AC / DC as inspirations for her second studio album , Warrior , intended to feature 1970s rock inspired music . Warrior , to this effect , includes a collaboration with Pop himself .

Kesha is a vegetarian and an ordained minister , having been ordained online . She also has performed legal commitment ceremonies for both gay and heterosexual couples . She talked about her sexual orientation with Seventeen magazine in 2013 , " I don 't love just men . I love people . It 's not about a gender . " She made a similar statement to Out magazine in 2010 , when she confessed to simply " liking people " : " I wouldn ’ t say I ’ m gay or straight . I don ’ t like labeling things anyway . " On January 3 , 2014 , Kesha checked into Timberline Knolls Residential Treatment Center , the rehab facility in Lemont , Illinois , for eating disorder treatment . Kesha 's mother Pebe Sebert confirmed that the eating disorder Kesha was suffering with is bulimia nervosa and that she had been struggling with it since she was signed . She also alleged that Dr. Luke was partly the cause of Kesha 's eating disorder , saying that Luke had allegedly told her to lose weight after he signed her , comparing the shape of her body to a refrigerator . Sebert asserted that this had caused Kesha 's disorder to worsen . Kesha had completed her treatment on March 6 , 2014 , after spending two months in rehab .

" The Devil Wears Nada " is the fifth episode of the twenty-first season of The Simpsons . It first aired on the Fox network in the United States on November 15 , 2009 . In the episode , Marge and a group called the " Charity Chicks " pose for a history-oriented calendar in hopes of raising money for charity , but Marge becomes the talk of the town due to the erotic poses she made after a few drinks of red wine . Meanwhile , Carl is chosen as the newest supervisor at the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant , and hires Homer to be his personal assistant . The episode was written by Tim Long and directed by Nancy Kruse . It was broadcast soon after the character Marge had appeared on the cover of Playboy , though there was no connection between the episode and the cover ; the idea for the episode was conceived first , and Marge 's appearance was due to an unrelated offer from Playboy . Since airing , " The Devil Wears Nada " has received mixed reviews from television critics . It was watched by approximately 9.04 million viewers during its original broadcast . Clips showing the satirical appearances of French president Nicolas Sarkozy and his wife Carla Bruni in the episode became Internet hits in France , with hundreds of thousands of views on Dailymotion and YouTube .

The episode opens at a retirement party for the current Sector 7G supervisor at the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant . Just as Homer , Lenny , and Carl are celebrating their freedom from supervision , plant owner Mr. Burns arrives and chooses Carl as the new supervisor , after quickly deducing that he is the only semi-competent employee of the three . Meanwhile , in an effort to raise money , Marge and her " Charity Chicks " philanthropic group decide to follow the Springfield Police Department 's lead and pose for a history-themed " sexy " calendar . At the photo studio , however , Marge does not want to show any skin . The photographer loosens her up with red wine , and she ends up revealing more than she planned . Marge and her erotic poses are soon the hottest talk in town . Back at the plant , Carl makes Homer his new executive assistant . That evening , Marge 's libido pumped up by the male population 's positive feedback on her calendar is running high , but Homer is too overworked and exhausted to satisfy her . This becomes an unhappy trend , and Marge feels ignored . Homer tries to make up for it by taking Marge out to a hotel . During their attempt to have a romantic night together , Homer receives a phone call from Carl who tells him they are going to Paris on a business trip . When Homer leaves the Simpsons ' house the next morning , a frustrated Marge throws a mallet after his retreating taxicab , and she accidentally knocks out neighbor Ned Flanders instead and invites him and his children over for a family dinner by way of apology .

In Paris , Carl is having a great time flirting with a beautiful woman , and he reveals to Homer that he plans to extend their stay indefinitely . Homer is devastated , and walks forlornly through the streets where everything reminds him of Marge . Back in Springfield , Bart and Lisa bail on Marge 's dinner , and Ned shows up alone because Rod and Todd have been grounded . The innocent dinner soon turns romantic , and Marge and Ned nearly kiss , until Marge catches sight of her wedding photo in Ned 's glasses and realizes that it would be wrong . Homer , meanwhile , has forced Carl to give him his old job back by revealing that the woman Carl has been flirting with is actually Carla Bruni , the wife of Nicolas Sarkozy , the President of France . Homer arrives home just as Marge is bidding Ned goodnight , and Homer and Marge make love , undisturbed at last .

" The Devil Wears Nada " was written by Tim Long and directed by Nancy Kruse . It is partly based on the film The Devil Wears Prada , especially the scenes that feature an overworked and over-utilized Homer . The episode aired soon after the character Marge had appeared on the cover of the real-life adult magazine Playboy . Executive producer Al Jean told the Toronto Sun that this episode was " a little bit of a reference to Marge 's recent encounter with Playboy " . Jean explained , though , that the writers came up with the storyline for " The Devil Wears Nada " over a year before the episode aired and they did not know back then that Marge would become a Playboy cover girl . Jean said that was " an independent offer from Playboy . But we thought , to be smart , we should probably have the episode and Marge 's cover come out around the same time . " In regards to Marge 's explicit plotline in the episode , Jean commented that the Simpsons staff is " always a bit nervous when we push the boundaries or do something unusual and I usually think that 's where we do our best stuff , and this episode is definitely one of those cases . "

During the episode 's original broadcast on the Fox network in the United States on November 15 , 2009 , it was watched by approximately 9.04 million viewers . In the demographic for adults aged 18 – 49 , the episode received a 4.2 rating ( up 2 % from the previous episode ) and a 10 % share . It was the second-highest rated television series in the 8 : 00 p.m. timeslot , following Football Night in America , which received a 5.3 rating and 15.1 million viewers . Since airing , " The Devil Wears Nada " has received mixed reviews from television critics . AOL TV 's Jason Hughes was positive about it , commenting that " everything about the episode worked , from Marge 's sexy calendar to Ned Flanders ' role in the final moments . " He added that he thought the episode featured " the heart I felt was missing all season . The love between Homer and Marge dominated this episode , coming in equal strength from both sides . " Hughes concluded that " The Devil Wears Nada " featured " good moments for humor " and that it was " perfectly balanced , written and executed " .

Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club was less positive , giving the episode a C + rating . He commented that because there have already been so many episodes about Homer and Marge 's marital troubles , it becomes more difficult every time to make the episodes emotional . VanDerWerff added that " while the flip side of the usual husband / wife sexual dynamics had a few promising jokes in it and while there were the usual funny sight gags and one-liners , the entirety of the episode felt stale . [ ... ] There 's no way Homer or Marge will ever cheat on each other , and that makes a story like this essentially boring . " IGN 's Robert Canning gave the episode a rating of 6.2 out of 10 , calling it disappointing . He commented that he enjoyed the first act of the episode because it had a lot of potential storylines , but it went downhill from there and became boring . Canning added : " This was another case of the series returning to familiar storylines . It 's tough to get away from this one — trouble in the bedroom — as they are a married couple and this is , essentially , a sitcom . Unfortunately , ' The Devil Wears Nada ' doesn 't give the story anything new . " Similarly to VanDerWerff , Canning did not find the episode enjoying because it was obvious that Marge and Ned would not have " a night of passion " since " Marge is too loving a wife and Ned is too good a Christian " .

" The Devil Wears Nada " features the satirical appearances of French president Nicolas Sarkozy and his wife Carla Bruni . In the episode , Carl is approached by Bruni at a reception at Élysée Palace , the official residence of the president , where she tells him that she wants " to make love , right now . " Homer later reveals to Carl that the woman he has been seeing is Bruni , and threatens to tell Sarkozy if he does not get his old job back . Carl does not believe Homer will tell , so Homer calls Sarkozy ( who is seen eating cheese and drinking red wine in his office with Bruni ) . Sarkozy answers the phone saying " You 're getting cosy with Sarkozy . " At this point , Carl gives in , and Homer hangs up the phone . Unlike other high-ranking politicians such as Tony Blair , who have guest starred on The Simpsons , the couple did not actually lend their voices to the show and the appearances were made without their permission . Agence France-Presse wrote that as a result , it was a " harsher " parody in comparison to the parodies on the show of people that have provided their own voices . The Daily Mail described Bruni 's portrayal in the episode as a " sex-mad femme fatale " and " chain-smoking man-eater " , and the French newspaper Le Figaro said she was characterized as " a nymphomaniac with an exaggerated French accent " . Bruni had previously attracted media attention in the United States because of her many reported partners and lovers . A reporter for The Times in Paris , Charles Bremner , wrote that her " sulphurous former image as the girlfriend of rock stars and celebrities was mocked by [ the episode ] . "

Clips on YouTube and Dailymotion showing Sarkozy 's and Bruni 's appearances were viewed hundreds of thousands of times in France , becoming Internet hits . According to Agence France-Presse , the cameos " passed largely unnoticed in France until Friday [ November 22 ] , when news websites started linking to pirated clips of the episode , creating a buzz which saw more than 117,000 fans linking to the DailyMotion site alone . " As of Saturday November 23 , the Dailymotion clip had received 440,000 hits . Reactions to the clips were mixed from the French viewers . The Daily Mail wrote that a spokesman working for the Élysée Palace said in November 2009 that " they had no comment to make on the latest mockery of their first couple " . Bruni 's spokeswoman did not respond to requests for comment either , but Bremner reported that Bruni " laughed when asked about the programme " . The French news website Rue 89 commented that the episode provided the writers with a good opportunity to mock all the French clichés , including the accent , the cheese , the cheek kissing between men , and the supposed nymphomania . This was not the first time that France had been made fun of on The Simpsons . For example , the writers had previously come up with the derogatory phrase " cheese-eating surrender monkeys " as a description of the French people , and had made fun of the French in the first season episode The Crepes of Wrath .

Ocean Rain is the fourth studio album by the English post-punk band Echo & the Bunnymen . It was released on 4 May 1984 and reached number four on the UK Albums Chart , number 87 on the United States Billboard 200 , number 41 on the Canadian RPM 100 Albums and number 22 on the Swedish chart . Since 1984 the album has been certified gold by the British Phonographic Industry . Ocean Rain includes the singles " The Killing Moon " , " Silver " and " Seven Seas " . The band wrote the songs for the new album in 1983 . In early 1984 they recorded most of the album in Paris using a 35-piece orchestra , with other sessions taking place in Bath and Liverpool . Receiving mixed reviews the album was originally released as an LP and a cassette in May 1984 before it was reissued on CD in August . The album was reissued on CD in 2003 , along with the other four of the band 's first five studio albums , having been remastered and expanded before again being reissued in 2008 with a live bonus disc . The artwork for the album was designed by Martyn Atkins and the photography was by Brian Griffin . Echo & the Bunnymen played a number of concerts in 2008 where they performed Ocean Rain in full and with the backing of an orchestra .

Following the poor reception of Echo & the Bunnymen 's third album , 1983 's Porcupine , the band recorded the single " Never Stop " . The title track of the single was produced by Hugh Jones , who had produced the band 's second album , 1981 's Heaven Up Here . The single introduced a new sound for the band with an expanded arrangement including congas , marimbas , violins and cellos . After " Never Stop " was released on 8 July 1983 the band toured the Outer Hebrides in Scotland before two successful concerts at the Royal Albert Hall in London on 18 and 19 July . Also that month , the band was filmed by RPM Productions for the Channel 4 documentary series Play at Home . Filmed in a café used by the band they recorded acoustic versions of two old songs , " Stars Are Stars " and " Villiers Terrace " , as well as two new songs , " The Killing Moon " and " Silver " , for their episode of Play at Home titled Life at Brian 's . After spending some time in Liverpool writing new songs for the album , the band recorded their sixth session for John Peel 's radio show on BBC Radio 1 on 6 September 1983 . The songs recorded were " Nocturnal Me " , " Ocean Rain " , " My Kingdom " and " Watch Out Below " , which would all later appear on the band 's fourth album Ocean Rain – " Watch Out Below " was later renamed " The Yo Yo Man " . When the band 's John Peel session was broadcast on 10 October 1983 , the punk zine Jamming said , " [ The songs ] hint at a readjustment and a period of new positive recovery . "

Echo & the Bunnymen were booked to headline a two-week youth festival at the Royal Shakespeare Theatre in Stratford-upon-Avon on the evening of 23 October 1983 . Due to a high demand for tickets a matinee performance was added . The matinee concert at Stratford-upon-Avon saw the live debut of " The Killing Moon " , " Seven Seas " and " Silver " . With representatives from the band 's record company and lead singer Ian McCulloch 's mother in the audience , the performance was nervous and uncertain ; although the evening performance , without the record company representatives and McCulloch 's mother , was much improved . At the end of 1983 Echo & the Bunnymen recorded a live special called A Crystal Day for the Channel 4 programme The Tube . Ignoring their old material , the band played " The Killing Moon " , " Nocturnal Me " , " Ocean Rain " – which had now developed into a ballad – and an early version of " Thorn of Crowns " called " Cucumber " .

The band recorded and self-produced " The Killing Moon " – which was released on 20 January 1984 – at Crescent Studio in Bath , Somerset . After catching a cold , McCulloch completed the recording of the vocals for the song at Amazon Studio in Liverpool , where de Freitas also completed the drumming . The band then went to Paris where they were booked into Les Studios des Dames and Studio Davout . Henri Loustau , the engineer at des Dames , assisted on the string passages and Adam Peters provided the string arrangements and played cello and piano . McCulloch , not happy with the lead vocals he had recorded in Paris , re-recorded most of the vocals at Amazon Studio in Liverpool . Continuing the band 's prominent use of strings – which began with the 1982 single " The Back of Love " – they recorded Ocean Rain using a 35-piece orchestra . Lead guitarist Will Sergeant said , " We wanted to make something conceptual with lush orchestration ; not Mantovani , something with a twist . It 's all pretty dark . ' Thorn of Crowns ' is based on an eastern scale . The whole mood is very windswept : European pirates , a bit Ben Gunn ; dark and stormy , battering rain ; all of that . " During recording De Freitas used xylophones and glockenspiels in addition to his usual percussion , bass player Les Pattinson used an old reverb machine at des Dames and Sergeant 's solo on " My Kingdom " was played using a Washburn acoustic guitar which he distorted through a valve radio .

As with their previous albums , the album cover was designed by Martyn Atkins and the photography was by Brian Griffin . With the band wanting to continue the elemental theme of the previous three albums , the photograph used on the front cover of the album is a picture of the band in a rowing boat which was taken inside Carnglaze Caverns , Liskeard , Cornwall . In his 2002 book Turquoise Days : The Weird World of Echo & the Bunnymen , author Chris Adams describes the cover as " a perfect visual representation of arguably the Bunnymen 's finest album " . The picture on the front cover of the original album was kept for the 2003 reissue . However , the design was altered slightly by graphic designer Rachel Gutek of the design company guppyart . This release contains an expanded booklet written by music journalist Max Bell giving the background to the album . The booklet contains a number of photographs which are credited to Sergeant and Pattinson .

Ocean Rain was first released on 4 May 1984 as an LP and on cassette by Korova in Europe . It was subsequently released by Sire Records in the United States on 14 May and on CD in Europe and the United States on 24 August 1984 . The album was marketed as " the greatest album ever made " and McCulloch later said it was because they believed it was . Although he also said it was meant as a joke when he said , " That wasn 't my idea ! I was on the phone to [ Rob Dickins , managing director of Warner Bros. ] , just joshing and I said ' Oh , it 's the greatest album ever made . ' And he used it on the poster . " In a 2005 interview for Record Collector magazine , Sergeant asked , " Why not ? " . After wondering " what all the fuss was about " , he went on to ask , " Doesn 't every band think that way when they 've got a new record out ? " Along with the other four of the band 's first five albums , Ocean Rain was remastered and reissued on CD in 2003 – these releases were marketed as 25th anniversary editions . Eight bonus tracks were added to the album : " Angels and Devils " , which had been recorded at The Automatt in San Francisco , was the B-side to the single " Silver " and was produced by The Bunnymen and Alan Perman ; five Life at Brian 's – Lean and Hungry tracks ( " All You Need Is Love " , " The Killing Moon " , " Stars Are Stars " , " Villiers Terrace " and " Silver " ) which had been recorded for the Channel 4 programme Play at Home ; and two live tracks ( " My Kingdom " and " Ocean Rain " ) which were recorded for A Crystal Day , a Channel 4 special for The Tube . The Life at Brian 's – Lean and Hungry track , " Silver " , and the two A Crystal Day tracks had previously been unreleased .

The reissued album in 2003 was produced by Andy Zax and Bill Inglot . A collector 's edition was released in October 2008 which , while still including " Angels and Devils " , replaced the bonus tracks of the 25th anniversary edition with the extended 12-inch single versions of " Silver " and " The Killing Moon " . The collector 's edition also includes a bonus disc containing a recording of the band 's 1983 Royal Albert Hall concert . There were three tracks from the original Ocean Rain album which have been released as singles . The first of these was " The Killing Moon " which was released on 20 January 1984 . The second single was " Silver " which was released on 13 April 1984 . The final single to be released from the original album was " Seven Seas " which was released on 6 July 1984 . This was the first time Echo & the Bunnymen have released more than two singles from one album .

The album was released to mixed reviews . Describing Echo & the Bunnymen 's change from the more rock sound of their previous albums to the lighter sound of Ocean Rain , music journalist Max Bell said in his 1984 review for The Times newspaper , " This time vocalist Ian McCulloch has tempered his metaphysical songs with a romantic sweetness and the band 's melodies are more to the fore . Acoustic guitars , brushes and sparingly used keyboards all add to the album 's optimistic warmth and there is a consistency of atmosphere in songs like ' Seven Seas ' and ' Silver ' , the current single , which justifies the departure . " However , Rolling Stone described the album as " too often a monochromatic dirge of banal existential imagery cloaked around the mere skeleton of a musical idea " . Saying that the album had some nifty choruses and nice atmospheres , the review went on to say it " evinces too little melodic development and too much tortured soul-gazing " . In his 1984 review for NME , Biba Kopf said , " ... Ocean Rain has been designed to buttress the notion of the group 's importance . Not unnaturally the results have the opposite effect . " He went on to criticise McCulloch 's lyrics , which he described as " tired juxtapositions of mysterious buzzwords , nonsense , and banality " , and the music , " mellotron-style wash of strings and bleating wood winds " .

Ocean Rain reached number four on the UK Albums Chart in its first week of release and stayed on the chart for 26 weeks . In the United States it entered the Billboard 200 at number 172 on 9 June 1984 and stayed on the chart for 11 weeks , reaching a peak of number 87 . It entered the Canadian RPM 100 Albums chart at number 89 before it reached a peak of number 41 . Staying on the Swedish chart for three weeks the album reached a peak of number 22 . As of 1984 , Ocean Rain has been certified gold by the British Phonographic Industry for having sold more than 100,000 copies . Of the singles from the album ; " The Killing Moon " , which was released on 20 January 1984 , reached number nine on the UK Singles Chart and number seven on the Irish Singles Chart ; " Silver " , released on 13 April 1984 , reached number 30 on the UK Singles Chart and number 14 on the Irish Singles Chart ; and " Seven Seas " , released on 6 July 1984 , reached number 16 on the UK Singles Chart and number 10 on the Irish Singles Chart .

The album still attracts mixed critical commentary . In a highly positive retrospective review on AllMusic , Jason Ankeny gave the album a 5-star rating . He described the album as " dramatic and majestic " , praising the " sweeping string arrangements and hauntingly evocative production . " He felt that in comparison to the band 's album Porcupine , the " conventional and simple structural parameters " of Ocean Rain made it Echo & the Bunnymen 's " most beautiful and memorable effort " and he asserted that " The Killing Moon " was the band 's " unrivalled pinnacle " . When reissued in 2003 , Andrew Harrison in Blender described the album as " a portrait of splendid derangement with spectacular orchestrations " . Mojo said the album had " effervescent songs , sympathetically orchestrated " . In his 2005 book Rip It Up and Start Again : Post Punk 1978 – 1984 , British music journalist Simon Reynolds describes the album as " lush , orchestrated and [ ... ] overtly erotic " . Mark Blacklock , in Robert Dimery 's 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die , wrote that the album 's confidence , lush strings , romance , warmth and poetry , means that " it stands the test of time better than any other Bunnymen album " .

Among less positive commentaries , Pitchfork described the album as being " stuffed with queasy midtempo tracks and bizarre orchestration " although they did say that the album was not impenetrable , ultimately giving it an 8.6 / 10 . Reviewing the collector 's edition for the BBC , Chris Jones described the album as " the point where the cracks began to show , but were masked with such beauty as to hardly matter " . Jones went on to say how the 35-piece orchestra helped on tracks such as " Nocturnal Me " but made others , such as " The Yo-Yo Man " , " flounder under the weight of intrusive arrangements " .

On 16 September 2008 , Echo & the Bunnymen played a concert at the Royal Albert Hall in London playing the album with the backing of a 16-piece orchestra . Two similar concerts subsequently took place at Radio City in New York City on 1 October 2008 and at the Liverpool Echo Arena on 27 November 2008 . These concerts were played with a 10-piece orchestra which was conducted by Rupert Christie . The posters used to advertise the concerts have the image of the band from the cover of the album overlaying an image of the venue . Further concerts took place in Europe and North America during 2009 . The concerts were received well . Simon O 'Hagan , reviewing the London concert in The Independent , described it as " a moving , memorable evening " and went on to describe McCulloch 's voice as " torn silk " and " magnificent " . Giving the London concert five out of five stars , Angus Batey , writing in The Guardian , described " The Killing Moon " as a " dizzying high " which was " topped by ' Ocean Rain ' itself , where the strings are held back until the end of the second verse so that they hit with a euphoric punch of almost physical intensity , sunny melodic optimism piercing the lyrics ' chiaroscuro of storm clouds and ' blackest thoughts ' . " However , Adam Sweeting , for The Daily Telegraph , said the orchestra " often didn 't add much beyond a vague sonic sludge " .

State Route 161 ( SR 161 ) is a 36.25-mile-long ( 58.34 km ) state highway serving Pierce and King counties in the U.S. state of Washington . The highway begins at SR 7 southwest of Eatonville and travels north as Meridian Avenue to Puyallup , becoming concurrent with SR 512 and SR 167 . SR 161 continues northwest as the Enchanted Parkway to end at an intersection with SR 18 in Federal Way , west of Interstate 5 ( I-5 ) . The highway serves the communities of Graham and South Hill before reaching Puyallup and the communities of Edgewood , Milton , and Lakeland South before reaching Federal Way . SR 161 was established during the 1964 highway renumbering , replacing three Secondary State Highways ( SSHs ) : Secondary State Highway 5D ( SSH 5D ) and SSH 5G , both established in 1937 , and SSH 5N , established in 1955 . SSH 5D served as a connector between Federal Way and Puyallup and SSH 5G served as a connector between Puyallup and South Hill . SSH 5N connected Eatonville to South Hill and was extended south towards La Grande in 1967 . SR 161 was moved onto a bypass of Puyallup in the 1980s and formed concurrencies with SR 167 and SR 512 as a result . As of 2013 , projects to expand the highway in Edgewood and Milton and adding new offramps at the I-5 and SR 18 interchange are in progress .

SR 161 begins southwest of Eatonville and north of La Grande in rural Pierce County at an intersection with SR 7 . The highway travels northeast to pass the Charles Lathrop Pack Experimental and Demonstration Forest and cross the Little Mashel River into Eatonville . The roadway crosses the Mashel River into Downtown Eatonville , turning north onto Mashell Avenue and later Washington Avenue . SR 161 turns west onto Meridian Avenue north of Eatonville High School and leaves the city on a two-lane highway . Meridian Avenue continues north through rural Pierce County , passing Clear Lake and Tanwax Lake , before entering the community of Graham and crossing a Tacoma Rail line near Graham-Kapowsin High School . SR 161 travels north and passes South Hill and Pierce County Airport ( Thun Field ) before entering Puyallup . The highway turns northwest at the South Hill Mall onto 31st Avenue and intersects the SR 512 freeway in a partial cloverleaf interchange , beginning a 3.41-mile-long ( 5.49 km ) concurrency . SR 161 and SR 512 travel north on a freeway in Puyallup , intersecting Meridian Street at the Puyallup Fairgrounds and Pioneer Avenue at a partial cloverleaf interchange . After the intersection with Pioneer Avenue , the freeway travels over a BNSF rail line that serves Puyallup Station and crosses the Puyallup River before a trumpet interchange with SR 167 . At the interchange , SR 512 ends and SR 161 northbound turns west on a 1.83-mile-long ( 2.95 km ) wrong-way concurrency with SR 167 , designated as traveling southbound . SR 161 turns north onto Meridian Avenue at Fort Malone as SR 167 travels south into Downtown Puyallup , and the highway continues north and crosses a Union Pacific rail line . Meridian Avenue continues north into to form the boundary between Edgewood and Milton , where the highway intersects Milton Way , the former route of SR 514 . SR 161 turns northwest into King County as the Enchanted Parkway , passing through Lakeland South and Wild Waves Theme Park before crossing over I-5 . The Enchanted Parkway turns north into Federal Way and ends at an intersection with SR 18 , located between SR 99 and I-5 .

SR 161 was formed during the 1964 highway renumbering as the successor to SSH 5N from Primary State Highway 5 ( PSH 5 ) north of La Grande to South Hill , SSH 5G from South Hill to U.S. Route 410 ( US 410 ) in Puyallup , and SSH 5D from US 410 north of Puyallup to US 99 Federal Way . The highway was also concurrent with US 410 , signed in 1926 , between the eastern end of SSH 5G in Downtown Puyallup and the southern end of SSH 5D . SSH 5D and SSH 5G were established during the creation of the Primary and secondary state highways in 1937 , and SSH 5N was established in 1955 to Eatonville and extended south to PSH 5 near La Grande in 1967 after SR 161 was created . SR 161 , including the concurrency with US 410 , was signed into law in 1970 as a highway extending from SR 7 near Eatonville to US 99 . US 410 was replaced with an extension of SR 167 in the Tacoma area and US 12 east of the Cascade Mountains in 1967 and the highway was shortened from US 99 to SR 18 in 1971 .

SR 161 was moved east onto a bypass of Puyallup , creating concurrences with SR 512 and SR 167 , in the late 1980s , and designated , within King County , as the Enchanted Parkway in 1987 as the last major revision to the highway . A freeway extension to SR 167 between Tacoma and Puyallup has been proposed since the 1990s and would create a new interchange with SR 161 north of the Puyallup River , but as of 2013 the freeway has not been built . The eastbound ramps at end of the concurrency between SR 161 and SR 167 was realigned in late 2008 to reduce congestion and started recent improvements to the highway . WSDOT is widening the Enchanted Parkway through the Edgewood and Milton area from 2 lanes to 4 lanes with wider shoulders and sidewalks to be completed by 2027 . The interchange between I-5 and SR 18 is being reconstructed in Federal Way , with a new flyover ramp from westbound SR 18 to SR 161 being completed in September 2012 . Another ramp , from southbound I-5 to SR 161 , is under construction .

Glutinoglossum glutinosum , commonly known as the viscid black earth tongue or the glutinous earthtongue , is a species of fungus in the family Geoglossaceae ( the earth tongues ) . Widely distributed in the Northern Hemisphere , it has been found in northern Africa , Asia , Europe , and North America . Although previously thought to exist in Australasia , collections made from these locations have since been referred to new species . G. glutinosum is a saprophytic species that grows on soil in moss or in grassy areas . The smooth , nearly black , club-shaped fruitbodies grow to heights ranging from 1.5 to 5 cm ( 0.6 to 2.0 in ) . The head is up to 0.7 cm ( 0.3 in ) long , and the stipes are sticky . Several other black earth tongue species are quite similar in external appearance , and many can be reliably distinguished only by examining differences in microscopic characteristics , such as spores , asci , and paraphyses . First described in 1796 as a species of Geoglossum , the fungus has gone through several changes of genera in its taxonomic history . It was placed in its current genus , Glutinoglossum , in 2013 .

The fungus was first officially described in 1796 as Geoglossum glutinosum by Dutch mycologist Christiaan Hendrik Persoon , who proposed several defining characteristics , including the black color ; the smooth , compressed , club-shaped head ( clavula ) with grooves ; and the somewhat curved and glutinous stipe . In 1908 , Elias Judah Durand transferred it to Gloeoglossum , a genus he circumscribed to contain species with paraphyses ( filamentous , sterile cells interspersed between the asci ) present as a continuous gelatinous layer on the stipe ; Gloeoglossum has since been reduced to synonymy with Geoglossum . In 1942 Japanese mycologist Sanshi Imai thought the species should be in Cibalocoryne , a genus name used earlier by Frigyes Ákos Hazslinszky , and so published Cibalocoryne glutinosa . Later authors thought Cibalocoryne to be ambiguous , and the name was synonymized with Geoglossum . Persoon also described the species Geoglossum viscosum ( 1801 ) and the variety Geoglossum glutinosum var. lubricum ( 1822 ) , but both of these taxa were placed into synonymy with G. glutinosum by Elias Judah Durand in 1908 . The species was transferred by Vincent Hustad and colleagues to the newly created genus Glutinoglossum in 2013 when molecular analysis revealed that it and the species G. heptaseptatum formed a well-defined clade in the Geoglossaceae . In 2015 , Hustad and Andrew Miller published an emended description of G. glutinosum with a narrower range of spore dimensions , suggesting that material collected in Australia and New Zealand represent unique species , which they referred to G. australasicum and G. exiguum . These species , along with G. americanum and G. methvenii , were added to Glutinoglossum in 2015 . Hustad and Miller noted their new spore size range for G. glutinosum were more closely aligned with those given by Durand in his measurements of Persoon 's type specimen .

The club-shaped fruitbodies , which have a distinct blackish head and a more lightly colored stipe ( dark brown ) , grow to heights ranging from 1.5 to 5 cm ( 0.6 to 2.0 in ) . The head is up to 0.7 cm ( 0.3 in ) tall and ranges in shape from fuse-shaped to narrowly ellipsoidal to nearly cylindrical , and is somewhat compressed on the sides . The nearly black , somewhat waxy head has a vertical groove down the middle . The stipe has a glutinous , dark grey-brown surface . The spores are smooth and cylindrical , sometimes with a slight swelling in the middle , and sometimes slightly curved ; they measure 59 – 65 by 4 – 5 µm . G. glutinosum spores have between two and seven septa , although three is most typical in mature specimens . The thin-walled asci ( spore-bearing cells ) are cylindrical to narrowly club-shaped , eight-spored , and typically measure 200 – 265 µm long by 12 – 16 µm wide . Ascospores occupy about the upper two-thirds to three-quarters of the ascus , leaving a hyaline ( transparent ) base . The paraphyses , hyaline at the base and brown in the upper regions , are 4 – 11 µm wide , and longer than the asci . Cells at the end of the paraphyses are pear-shaped ( piriform ) or spherical , brownish , and measure 8 – 10 µm wide . The sticky material on the stipe is a gelatinous matrix made of a layer of paraphyses .

Geoglossum nigritum is similar in appearance to Glutinoglossum glutinosum , but lacks a slimy stipe . Trichoglossum species , such as the common T. hirsutum , have a velvety surface texture acquired from thick-walled bristles called setae . Several other earth tongue species are roughly similar in external appearance to G. glutinosum , and can be difficult to distinguish from that species without considering distribution and microscopic characteristics such as the size and shape of the asci , ascospores , and paraphyses . Geoglossum peckianum and G. uliginosum can develop a glutinous stipe ; the former has spores measuring 90 – 120 by 6 – 7 µm with 14 septa , while the latter has spores that are 60 – 80 by 4.5 – 6 µm with 7 septa . The Australasian species Glutinoglossum methvenii is distinguished from G. glutinosum by its short , stout ascospores ( mostly measuring 70 – 80 by 5 – 6 µm ) and the presence of curved to hooked paraphyses tips . G. australasicum , the most abundant Glutinoglossum species in Australasia , has asci measuring 205 – 270 by 17 – 20 µm , while those of G. exiguum are 165 – 260 by 13.5 – 17 µm . The latter species tends to have smaller fruitbodies , up to 3.5 cm ( 1.4 in ) tall .

Glutinoglossum glutinosum is a saprophytic species . Its fruitbodies grow scattered on soil in moss beds or in grassy areas . North American collections are typically associated with hardwoods , while European collections are often made in pasture and dune slacks . The fungus has been used as an indicator of medium-quality grassland in the UK . In India , it has been encountered on the soil of oak forests , and among mosses on stony slopes at an elevation of 2,000 m ( 6,600 ft ) . A widely distributed species , Glutinoglossum glutinosum has been recorded from northern Africa ( Macaronesia and Morocco ) , Asia ( Bhutan , China , India , Japan , and the Philippines ) and Europe . It is listed as vulnerable in Switzerland . In Bulgaria , where it is considered critically endangered , threats to G. glutinosum include " habitat changes as result of agriculture activities ( crops , livestock ) , atmospheric and land pollution , drought , global warming . " In a preliminary Regional Red List of Dutch macrofungi , G. glutinosum was considered threatened , and it was noted that before 1970 , the fungus was " rather common " , compared to " rather rare " after that year . The North American distribution includes Canada , the United States , and Mexico .

Phillip Joseph Nevin ( born January 19 , 1971 ) is an American professional baseball manager for the Reno Aces , the Arizona Diamondbacks ' Triple-A affiliate in the Pacific Coast League . He spent twelve seasons as a player in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) from 1995 through 2006 , playing for the Houston Astros , Detroit Tigers , Anaheim Angels , San Diego Padres , Texas Rangers , Chicago Cubs , and Minnesota Twins . Nevin attended California State University , Fullerton where he played college baseball for the Cal State Fullerton Titans team . He led the Titans to the championship game in the 1992 College World Series ( CWS ) , after which he was named the CWS Most Outstanding Player and won the Golden Spikes Award . Chosen with the first-overall pick in the 1992 Major League Baseball draft , Nevin went on to play in MLB for seven teams across 12 seasons . He was selected to appear in the 2001 Major League Baseball All-Star Game . After retiring , Nevin stayed involved in baseball . He briefly went into broadcasting , then managed the unaffiliated Orange County Flyers for a season . He managed the Class AA Erie SeaWolves and the Class AAA Toledo Mud Hens in the Tigers organization before joining the Diamondbacks organization in 2014 , managing the Aces .

Nevin attended El Dorado High School in Placentia , California . After graduating , he was selected by the Los Angeles Dodgers in the third round of the 1989 Major League Baseball draft with the 82nd overall selection . He decided to attend California State University , Fullerton after turning down an offer that included a signing bonus of $ 100,000 . A two-sport star , Nevin played American football and baseball for the Cal State Fullerton Titans , competing in the Big West Conference of NCAA Division I. He was a punter and placekicker on the Cal State Fullerton Titans football team . He was named an All-American placekicker his freshman year for the Titans as he connected successfully on his first nine field goal attempts and finished the year with a 15-for-21 field goal percentage . His longest field goal of the season was 54 yards ( 49 m ) . In his junior year , he averaged 40.9 yards ( 37.4 m ) per punt . For the Cal State Fullerton Titans baseball team , Nevin batted .358 with 56 runs batted in ( RBI ) as a freshman . The Titans won the conference championship and reached the 1990 College World Series ( CWS ) that year . The Titans lost two games in the 1990 CWS , however , and were eliminated . Nevin batted .335 in his sophomore season . As a junior , he batted .391 with 20 home runs and 71 RBI , winning the Big West Conference Triple Crown . Collegiate Baseball and Baseball America named Nevin the College Player of the Year . He credited his past CWS experience with allowing him to remain calm .

The Houston Astros chose Nevin with the first overall pick in the 1992 Major League Baseball draft . Hal Newhouser , a scout for the Astros , had evaluated Derek Jeter extensively prior to the draft . Convinced that Jeter would anchor a winning team , Newhouser lobbied team management to select Jeter , and quit in protest over the Astros ' decision to take Nevin instead . The Astros believed that Jeter would insist on a salary bonus of at least $ 1 million to forgo his college scholarship for a professional contract . Signing bonuses given to the best player in the draft were increasing rapidly . Todd Van Poppel , regarded by many at the time the first pick of the 1990 MLB draft , signed for $ 1.2 million , while the 1991 MLB draft 's first pick , Brien Taylor , signed for $ 1.55 million after insisting he would otherwise enroll in college . Meanwhile , the Astros were unable to sign their first-round draft pick in 1991 , John Burke , who insisted on a bonus of $ 500,000 as the sixth overall selection . Consequently , the Astros passed on Jeter in the draft .

Bill Wood , the Astros ' general manager , said the team believed Nevin was close to a major-league level and would require little development in minor league baseball . As evidence for this , the Astros pointed to Nevin 's training with the wooden bats used in professional baseball in an effort to prepare himself for the transition from metal bats . The Astros believed he would be a solid power hitter and have a strong work ethic . Nevin also did not intend to seek a signing bonus approaching those received by Van Poppel and Taylor . The Astros decided to employ Nevin as a third baseman . Not wanting to draw out his contract negotiations , Nevin signed with Houston in June , receiving a $ 700,000 bonus .

Nevin tried out for the United States national baseball team in the summer of 1990 to play in that year 's Goodwill Games and World University Baseball Championship ( WUBC ) . To prepare for those tournaments , the team played a series against Japan and a game in Cuba . Nevin played second and third base for Team USA in 13 of its 22 games , batting .229 . The team released him before the Goodwill Games and WUBC as it cut players to meet the roster maximum . Nevin was also considered for the 1991 Pan American Games . Nevin tried out for Team USA again before the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona . The team embarked on a 30-game tour and 38-city exhibition-game schedule in the United States before leaving for Spain . He made the team and served as its starting third baseman throughout the tournament . Olympic coach Ron Fraser called Nevin an excellent player and student of the game . The United States finished fourth out of eight teams in the Olympics .

Nevin traveled with the Astros at the end of their 1992 season but was not on the team 's roster . The Astros sent Nevin to the instructional Arizona Fall League during the off-season . Before the 1993 season , Baseball America ranked Nevin as the 30th-best prospect in baseball . The Astros considered sending Nevin to the Jackson Generals of the Class AA Texas League to start his professional career . The team also considered promoting him directly to the major leagues , skipping the minor leagues entirely . At the Astros ' spring training in 1993 , Nevin batted .350 and showed good power hitting . The Astros weighed bringing Nevin to Houston for Opening Day as they sought to add a right-handed batter to complement the left-handed power of Luis Gonzalez , Steve Finley and Eric Anthony and make the team less vulnerable to left-handed pitching . But with Ken Caminiti in the first year of a three-year contract to play as the starting third baseman , Nevin had nowhere to play defensively . The Astros assigned him to the Class AAA Tucson Toros of the Pacific Coast League , one level below the major leagues , where he made his professional debut .

While Nevin was with the Toros , the Astros asked Toros manager Rick Sweet to play Nevin as a left fielder , which would allow the Astros to promote Nevin sooner , as he and Caminiti could play different positions . Veteran first baseman Jim Lindeman served as Nevin 's mentor , helping him keep his composure under significant attention and pressure to perform . Nevin started the 1993 season with a .247 batting average , but batted .309 with baserunners in scoring position and had 49 RBI . By July , he had made ten starts in left field , without committing an error . The Astros , however , were concerned that Nevin did not apply the level of intensity he had in " clutch " situations to cases where there were no baserunners and the score was not close . Nevin 's intensity almost got the best of him during a June 1993 game with Tucson . He was taunted by a man seated in the front row , and nearly attempted to jump into the stands to confront the fan before he was restrained by teammates . The fan was arrested . Nevin played third base and left field in 1993 . He batted .286 that season , with 10 home runs and 91 RBI . He had a .359 on-base percentage ( OBP ) and .413 slugging percentage ( SLG ) . Baseball America rated him the 24th best prospect before the 1994 season . He returned to Tucson that year , posting a .263 batting average with 12 home runs and 71 RBI . He had a .343 OBP , and .393 SLG . Nevin also played first base . His major-league debut , however , was delayed both by his defense ( 61 errors in his first two seasons ) and the MLB 1994 – 95 work stoppage .

The Astros traded Caminiti to the San Diego Padres before the 1995 season . With Caminiti no longer blocking his path to the major leagues , Nevin hoped he would be named the Astros ' starting third baseman . But the Astros did not invite him to spring training . Nevin attributed the snub to his refusal to work out with replacement players during the work stoppage . Not wanting to be seen as " scabs " by the Major League Baseball Players Association , minor league players who felt they would play in MLB after the resolution of the strike felt pressure to avoid playing with replacement players , while career minor-leaguers were happy to get a taste of the major leagues . When prospects including Nevin and Billy Wagner refused to play with the replacement players , Astros ' general manager Bob Watson issued an ultimatum , saying anyone who refused to play in the team 's first exhibition game would be sent out of camp until further notice and be held in breach of contract . The Astros sent Nevin back to Tucson to start the 1995 season , while Dave Magadan started at third base on Opening Day . The Astros also planned to use Shipley and Chris Donnels at third base .

With the Toros in 1995 , Nevin 's batting average improved to .291 . He also posted a .367 OBP , and .463 SLG , while contributing seven home runs and 41 RBI . The Astros promoted him on June 10 , 1995 , and he made his major-league debut a day later . Nevin played 18 games for the Astros during the 1995 season . He struggled with the Astros , however , batting .117 with no home runs , one RBI , a .221 OBP , and .133 SLG in 60 at-bats . When he learned of his demotion to Tucson on July 5 in Colorado , Nevin cursed at Watson and Astros manager Terry Collins . After Watson called for an apology , Nevin said he would use the incident as a learning experience in controlling his temper . The Astros acquired pitcher Mike Henneman from the Detroit Tigers for a player to be named later on August 10 ; Nevin was identified as the player five days later . In 1996 , Nevin played in Class AA for the Tigers with the Jacksonville Suns of the Southern League , where he was converted into a catcher .

After the 1997 season , the Tigers traded Nevin and catcher Matt Walbeck to the Anaheim Angels , where Collins was manager , for minor league player Nick Skuse . After an injury to starting catcher Todd Greene , Collins gave Nevin the opportunity to compete for the starting job with Walbeck . Nevin , by then well known for his volatile temper , tore off his jersey while arguing balls and strike calls with the home plate umpire in a 1998 game . Before the 1999 season , the Angels traded Nevin and minor league player Keith Volkman to the San Diego Padres . Nevin made a late-career break with the Padres , appearing in 100 games for the first time during the 1999 season . He then had the best offensive years of his career : he hit 31 home runs with a .916 on-base plus slugging ( OPS ) during the 2000 season . He was named to the National League All-Star team in 2001 , when he hit 41 home runs with 126 RBI and had a .976 OPS . He also led major-league third basemen in errors , however , with 27 , and had the lowest fielding percentage of all major league third basemen ( .930 ) .

Nevin in 2002 played first base , which was considered his strongest defensive position . But injuries shortened his 2002 and 2003 seasons . In 2002 , he missed time with a strained left elbow . Three games after returning from the elbow injury , he broke his arm diving for a ground ball , causing him to miss another six weeks . After being heckled by a fan during a September 2002 game , Nevin gave the fan the finger , for which he apologized . Nevin suffered a dislocated shoulder in spring training in 2003 while making a diving catch . He had surgery on his left shoulder and returned to the Padres in June . The Padres acquired Rondell White to replace Nevin , and White went on to have an All-Star season in left field . Ryan Klesko filled in at first base and rookie Sean Burroughs played well at third base , Nevin 's favorite position . Nevin offered to be used in a utility role , alternating with White , Klesko , and Burroughs , as well as Xavier Nady in right field . In 2004 , Nevin had more than 100 RBI for the third time in his career , but underwent arthroscopic surgery to repair torn cartilage in his right knee in July .

Nevin was often frustrated with the dimensions of Petco Park . He hit a double during a 2004 game that he believed would have been a home run in other stadiums ; when he reached second base , he pointed toward Padres ' general manager Kevin Towers ' suite and threw down his helmet , resulting in a postgame argument . Towers said the two had a " love-hate " relationship . Two nights after San Diego Padres management informed Nevin that Xavier Nady would replace him as the starting first baseman , Nevin rejected a trade to the Baltimore Orioles for Sidney Ponson on July 25 , 2005 . Nevin exercised a clause in his contract that gave him the right to block transactions that would send him to any of eight franchises , one of which was the Orioles . He was instead traded on July 30 , a day before the non-waiver trade deadline , to the Texas Rangers for Chan Ho Park , whose salary the Rangers wanted to dump . In his first thirteen games with the Rangers , the team posted a 1 – 12 record as Nevin batted 5-for-44 . That put his season batting average under .200 , known as the " Mendoza Line " . The Rangers benched Nevin in September , giving his starts to prospect first baseman Adrian Gonzalez after the team was eliminated from playoff contention . In his first game back in the lineup on September 24 , his average dropped to .182 . He refuted opinions that he was losing bat speed .

Nevin had one year remaining on a contract worth $ 9 million . Manager Buck Showalter said that despite Nevin 's benching at the end of the 2005 season , he was his starting designated hitter for the 2006 season . Despite hopes that help from renowned hitting coach Rudy Jaramillo and the hitter-friendly Ameriquest Field would increase Nevin 's offensive production in 2006 , he continued to struggle . He batted .216 with nine home runs and 31 RBI in 46 games . The Rangers promoted rookie Jason Botts on May 23 , and Botts began to receive Nevin 's playing time . Nevin had only two hits in his last 32 at-bats with the Rangers , though both of them were home runs . The Chicago Cubs sought a slugging first baseman to replace the injured Derrek Lee , and the Rangers traded Nevin to Chicago on May 31 , 2006 . The Rangers received second baseman and outfielder Jerry Hairston , Jr. in return . The Rangers also agreed to pay the difference in the two players ' salaries . On August 31 , the deadline for trades of players who had cleared waivers , the Cubs traded Nevin to the Twins for cash and a player to be named later . To make room for Nevin , Twins ' outfielder Shannon Stewart was placed on the 60-day disabled list .

Unsigned at the beginning of the following season , Nevin announced his retirement on May 12 , 2007 . During his twelve-season career , Nevin had a .270 batting average with 208 home runs and 743 RBI in 1,217 games . After retiring , Nevin joined the Padres ' pre-game radio show . He also joined ESPN as an analyst for the college baseball regionals during the College World Series . Two seasons removed from his playing career , Nevin decided to return to baseball as a manager in 2008 . That December , he was named the manager of the Orange County Flyers in the independent Golden Baseball League ( GBL ) . The Flyers finished with a 37 – 39 record in 2009 , fourth in the five-team GBL . Nevin planned to return to the Flyers in 2010 , but a chance meeting at baseball 's winter meetings led to Nevin 's hiring as manager of the Erie SeaWolves , the Class-AA minor-league affiliate of the Detroit Tigers . He replaced the previous manager , Tom Brookens after Brookens was promoted to the Tigers ' major-league first-base coach . Nevin managed the SeaWolves for one season . On November 11 , 2010 , Nevin was named manager of the Toledo Mud Hens , the Tigers ' Class AAA minor league affiliate . He is considered a potential future MLB manager . Catcher Omir Santos described his managing the Mud Hens as " like having a big league manager in [ Class AAA ] . " On August 31 , 2013 , Nevin was fired after the team 's final home game of the season . Nevin 's record as manager was 192 – 238 ; the team never finished higher than third in the International League 's West division .

Nevin 's first daughter , Koral , was born during his freshman year at Cal State Fullerton ; he is no longer in a relationship with Koral 's mother . He met his wife , Kristin , at Cal State Fullerton . The couple have two children together ; though they were separated during the late 1990s , the couple reconciled . His son , Tyler Nevin , was drafted by the Colorado Rockies as the 38th pick in the 2015 MLB draft . Nevin lives in the Heritage Estates neighborhood of Poway , California , along with San Diego sporting figures including Bruce Bochy and LaDainian Tomlinson . The neighborhood suffered significant damage in the October 2007 California wildfires .

Body Language is the ninth studio album by Australian singer Kylie Minogue , released on 10 November 2003 by Parlophone . Following the massive commercial success of her eighth studio album Fever ( 2001 ) , Minogue enlisted a diverse group of writers and producers to aid in creating a new album , including Cathy Dennis , Dan Carey , Emiliana Torrini , Johnny Douglas and Mantronix among others . Influenced by the musical works of the 1980s and artists like Prince and Scritti Politti , Body Language musically differs from Minogue 's previous albums , which mainly featured disco-oriented dance-pop tracks , and instead explores genres like synthpop , electroclash , R & B , and hip hop . Many tracks in Body Language contain references to songs from the 1980s and lyrically , the album touches upon themes of enjoyment , flirting , and sex . Three singles were released from Body Language . " Slow " was released as the lead single in November 2003 and was a commercial success , peaking at number one on the singles charts of Australia , Denmark , Spain and the United Kingdom . " Red Blooded Woman " was released as the second single in March 2004 and reached the top five in Australia and the United Kingdom . " Chocolate " was released as the final single in June 2004 and peaked inside the top 10 in the United Kingdom . Minogue performed at a one-off concert show held at entertainment venue Hammersmith Apollo , London , on 15 November 2003 to mark the release of the album . No tickets were publicly made available for sale and only fans with invitations were allowed to attend the show , which was entitled " Money Can 't Buy " .

Upon its release , Body Language received generally favourable to mixed reviews from music critics , many of whom complimented Minogue for experimenting with new genres and the overall production of the album . Some critics , however , opined that many songs lacked catchy material and were not suitable for dancing . Commercially , Body Language performed well , although it was not as successful as Fever . It peaked at number two on the albums chart of Australia and was certified double-platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) . In the United Kingdom , Body Language peaked at number six and was certified platinum by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) . Elsewhere , the album performed well in Austria and Switzerland . Body Language became notable for displaying another change in Minogue 's persona and is cited as an example of her numerous " reinventions " .

In October 2001 , Minogue released her eighth studio album Fever . The disco and Europop-influenced dance-pop album became an international commercial success , debuting at number one on the record charts of Minogue 's native Australia and the United Kingdom . It was Minogue 's first album to be released in the United States since her second studio album Enjoy Yourself ( 1989 ) , and became her biggest commercial success in the region after peaking at number three on the Billboard 200 chart . Fever was certified seven-times platinum in Australia by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , five-times platinum in the United Kingdom by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) , and platinum in the United States by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . With worldwide sales over six million copies , Fever became Minogue 's highest selling album to date . The success of the album , particularly in the US , was credited to the commercial impact of its lead single " Can 't Get You Out of My Head " , which reached number one in 40 countries , including every European country except Finland , and Australia and New Zealand . " Can 't Get You Out of My Head " sold over five million copies worldwide , becoming Minogue 's highest selling single to date and also one of the best-selling singles of all time .

Soon , Minogue began work on her ninth studio album Body Language . Aiming to create a dance-pop album inspired by electronic music from the 1980s , Minogue enlisted collaborators such as Cathy Dennis , Dan Carey , Emiliana Torrini , Johnny Douglas and Mantronix . In an interview with VH1 , Minogue explained how 1980s music , had influenced her , saying : " I first got into pop music in ' 81 , I 'd say . It was all about Prince , Adam [ and ] the Ants , that whole New Romantic period . Prior to that , it was the Jackson 5 , Donna Summer , and my dad 's records – the [ Rolling ] Stones and Beatles . The influence we used on Body Language was more mid- ' 80s , specifically Scritti Politti " Talking further about Scritti Politti , a British post-punk band , Minogue reminisced about her collaboration with the band 's frontman Green Gartside , who provides vocals on the track " Someday " , saying , " To this day I haven 't met him ! I left a message on his answering machine , saying , " Hi , it 's Kylie ! I just wanted to say thanks so much ! You sound brilliant ! " " After Dark " was co-written by Dennis , who had previously co-written " Can 't Get You Out of My Head " for Minogue . Torrini , who co-wrote " Slow " , revealed how she was approached for writing the song , saying " It was like I had just accidentally walked into the line of fire with , " Hey ! You There ! It was all quite surreal . I still think Kylie 's people were trying to call Jamelia , and they just got the wrong number . It 'd be much more funny if that is how it actually happened " . The recording of Body Language took place during the summer of 2003 , in locations such as London , Ireland , and Spain .

Inspired by music from the 1980s , Body Language deviates from Minogue 's usual disco-influenced dance-pop style , evident on albums like Light Years ( 2000 ) and Fever , and instead explores genres like synthpop , electroclash , club and R & B. In comparison to her previous work , Body Language is a " slower-burning record " and begins with the song " Slow " , a " minimal " and simple track which serves as a primary example of the synthpop-styled production of the album . Adrien Begrand from PopMatters compared it to " More More More " , the opening track of Fever , saying " In contrast to the pulsating , hi-hat driven dance beat of Fever 's " More More More " , Body Language gets off to a more understated start " . Other synthpop songs on the album include " Still Standing " and " Promises " , which make use of " buzzing , low synth lines driving the beats , and chord flourishes that sound straight out of 1984 " . The former track also displays influences of nu-disco and club music . Many songs on Body Language are influenced by R & B and hip hop music , two genres Minogue newly experimented with on the album . " Red Blooded Woman " " blends the 1980s sound with an almost garage-like beat " and contains a " Boy ! Boy ! " hook and " la la la " bridge . Critics felt its production was similar to that by American hip hop and R & B producer Timbaland . Elements of funk are also present and are notably clear on tracks like " Sweet Music " and " I Feel For You " . " Secret ( Take You Home ) " received considerable coverage as it features a " coquettish " rap section delivered by Minogue . Body Language also contains ballads such as the quiet storm-influenced " Chocolate " and " Obsession " . Minogue 's vocal delivery on the album is mostly seductive and breathy in tone , such as in songs like " Slow " and " Chocolate " , although the track " Obsession " features raspy vocals .

Critics noted references and similarities to 1980s pop music throughout the album . Adrien Begrand from PopMatters found the hook of " Sweet Music " similar to those in songs by Prince and INXS . " Still Standing " was described by Helen Pidd from The Guardian as " a magnificent blend of Prince 's " Kiss " and Peter Gabriel 's " Sledgehammer " " . " Red Blooded Woman " contains a reference to British band Dead or Alive 's 1985 song " You Spin Me Round ( Like a Record ) " , in the line " You got me spinning round , round , round , round like a record " . The title of " I Feel For You " is the same as the 1979 / 1984 song by Prince and Chaka Khan , although it is not a cover of the song . " Secret ( Take You Home ) " directly refers to urban contemporary band Lisa Lisa and Cult Jam 's 1984 song " I Wonder If I Take You Home " , both in its title and refrain . The line of the song in which Minogue sings " don 't confuse emotions with the pleasure principle " also refers to American recording artist Janet Jackson 's 1987 song " The Pleasure Principle " .

Lyrically , Body Language touches upon themes like enjoyment , flirting , sex , and " partying like it 's 1987 all over again " . In an interview with VH1 , Minogue was asked why the lyrics on the album " sound more personal than they might have been a few years ago " , and she responded by saying " Some of that could be just chance ! I wrote lyrics that were intensely personal to me on an album a few years ago . Maybe people know me better now , and therefore , if a songwriter pitches me a song , they might tailor it [ to fit me ] . I get the lyrics of a tune and interpret them my way " . Although the lyrics of " Slow " seem like an invitation to the dance floor , Minogue revealed that " it 's about how time and space have a different meaning when you meet someone [ you really like ] " . In " Sweet Music " , Minogue sings about the " magic of the modern singer / producer partnership " in lines like " I think we 're on to something / Your taste it mirrors mine / So hot and in the moment " and " Let 's make this demo right " . The song also makes use of double entendre in some lines . Similarly , " Chocolate " is " packed with saccharine innuendo " . " Secret ( Take You Home ) " contains various metaphors that compare flirting and sex to car racing . Ballads like " Obsession " deal with issues of loss and the ending of a relationship .

Body Language was released on 14 November 2003 in Australia , while in the United Kingdom it was released three days later . In the United States , Body Language was released on 10 February 2004 . The cover art of the album , as well as other promotion shoots , show Minogue striking a pose in a black and white striped crop top , which reveals her midriff , and low-cut pants . Her appearance is similar to that of French actress and singer Brigitte Bardot , who was regarded as the " first foreign-language star ever to attain a level of international success comparable to America 's most popular homegrown talents " and one of the best known sex symbols of the 1950s and 1960s , frequently cited as the " archetypal sex kitten " and " sex goddess " . Minogue described the promotion shoots as " the perfect mix of coquette , kitten and rock ' n ' roll " , and revealed that " We shot it on location in the South of France , so it was [ easy to ] channel the spirit of [ Brigitte ] Bardot . She 's a great iconic reference , particularly that period where she was working with Serge Gainsbourg " . The title of the album was taken from a line from the song " Slow " in which Minogue sings " Read my body language " .

" Slow " was released on 3 November 2003 as the lead single from Body Language . The song garnered critical acclaim , with Minogue 's breathy and seductive vocal delivery receiving particular praise . Commercially , the single was a success . It debuted at number one on both the Australian Singles Chart and UK Singles Chart . In the latter region , it became Minogue 's seventh number one single and made her a record-holding female artist for spending the longest duration as a UK chart topper . Elsewhere , it reached number one in Denmark , Spain , and on the US Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs chart . In Australia , " Slow " was certified platinum by the ARIA for shipments of 70,000 units . The accompanying music video for " Slow " was directed by Baillie Walsh and was shot in Barcelona , Spain . It features Minogue and a number of beach models performing synchronised choreography to the song while sunbathing next to the Piscina Municipal de Montjuïc swimming pool . " Red Blooded Woman " was released as the second single on 10 March 2004 . Critics praised its radio-friendly sound and lyrical content . The song performed well on charts , peaking at numbers four and five in Australia and the United Kingdom , respectively . An accompanying music video for the song was directed in Los Angeles by Jake Nava , and features Minogue performing dance routines in various locations .

" Chocolate " was released as the third and final single on 28 June 2004 . It received mixed reviews from critics , some of whom praised its sensual nature but criticised Minogue 's vocals for being over-processed . The song was a moderate commercial success , peaking at number six in the United Kingdom but narrowly missing the top 10 in Australia . It became Minogue 's 27th single to peak inside the top 10 in the UK . Dawn Shadforth , who had previously directed the video for " Can 't Get You Out of My Head " , collaborated on the music video for " Chocolate " which sees Minogue and a number of backup dancers performing a ballet-like dance routines as a tribute to Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer musicals .

A one-off concert show was held at entertainment venue Hammersmith Apollo , London , on 15 November 2003 to mark the release of Body Language . The show was entitled " Money Can 't Buy " as no tickets were publicly made available for sale and only fans with invitations were allowed to attend the concert . The 75-minute long concert cost one million pounds to set up and display manufacturer Barco was hired to provide LED displays as backdrops to Minogue 's performances . The singer wore five different costumes during the show which were designed by fashion houses like Chanel , Balenciaga , and Helmut Lang . 4000 seats were made available for viewing the show and while most were reserved for invited guests , some tickets were auctioned at a charity ball for the " Full Stop " campaign by the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children ( NSPCC ) . The show was directed by Minogue 's stylist and friend William Baker , with musical arrangement and choreography being handled by Steve Anderson and Michael Rooney , respectively . The setlist of the concert show was composed primarily of songs from Body Language ; other songs were taken from Impossible Princess ( 1997 ) , Light Years , and Fever . The show was split in four acts : " Paris By Night , " " Bardello " , " Electro " and " On Yer Bike " . " Still Standing " and " Red Blooded Woman " were performed in the first act , " After Dark " and " Chocolate " in the second , " Slow " and " Obsession " in the third , and " Secret ( Take You Home ) " in the last . The performances were recorded for inclusion in the DVD recording of the event , which was released as Body Language Live on 12 July 2004 . The DVD was certified platinum and gold in Australia and the United Kingdom , respectively .

Body Language received generally positive to mixed reviews from music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , Body Language received an average score of 62 based on 17 reviews which indicates that the album received " generally favourable reviews " . Chris True from AllMusic complimented Minogue for expanding her " horizons " and felt that the album was consistent and worked as a " piece " , calling it " stylish without being smarmy , retro without being ironic " . He favoured the overall production of the album and praised Minogue for displaying a " sense of class " , which he felt was lacking in the work of female artists like Britney Spears , Christina Aguilera , and Madonna ; he concluded by labelling Body Language a " near perfect pop record " and " what may well be the best album of her [ Minogue 's ] career " . Keith Caulfield from Billboard was also positive in his review and complimented Minogue for selecting a talented creative team , saying " The sexy , solid set is glued together by danceable beats and Minogue 's knack for picking great songs and producers . " The The Irish Times review of the song called the album a " worthy successor to 2001 's smash hit Fever , a supremely danceable collection of electro-pop songs that 's clearly in thrall to the 80s " and complimented Minogue 's versatile vocal delivery . Ethan Brown from New York was greatly impressed by opening track " Slow " , and commented that most of the songs on the album " mimic its sound , none of the other songs on Body Language comes close to the achievement of " Slow " " . Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine felt Body Language was a better album than Fever , calling it " less immediate and more experimental , a midway point between the alternative / electronica of 1997 's Impossible Princess and Minogue 's more mainstream post-millennium work " , and praised it for being cohesive . He also complimented Minogue 's " willingness to try something new – even if it 's within the confines of dance-pop – is what 's made her an international sensation 15 years running " . Rob Sheffield from Rolling Stone favoured the sensual nature of the album , calling it " fantastic " and that " At thirty-five , she 's ten times hotter than she was ten years ago – on Body Language , Kylie Minogue definitely sounds like she has a few more tricks stored on her hard drive than Britney [ Spears ] or Christina [ Aguilera ] " .

Chris Willman from Entertainment Weekly called it Minogue 's " Madonna-meets-Mirwais move " and felt that her exploration of new genres is " ludicrously enjoyable " , although he opined that the album was " synthetic " and " all Body [ sic ] no soul " . Helen Pidd from The Guardian favoured the blend of 1980s musical styles on the album , but felt that it lacked danceable songs , saying " Problem is , as with the majority of other tracks – including , most disappointingly , the Dennis-penned " After Dark " – you would be hard pushed to dance to it , which could well be Body Language 's downfall " . John Robinson from NME gave Body Language an overall positive review and called it " an extremely tastefully done , soulful modern r 'n'b record " , but felt that it " fails to live up to its predecessor [ Fever ] " . Likewise , Adrien Begnard from PopMatters felt that Body Language lacked the " undeniably catchy " material which was present in Fever , but praised the overall production and the first half of the album ; he concluded that " Even though Body Language is a bit of a misstep for Minogue , there 's a sense of class to it " and that " Britney [ Spears ] could learn a thing or two " . The Spin review of the album commented that Minogue " wears the ' 80s well " and praised the dance-oriented songs on the tracklist , although they criticised the ballads and pointed out that " [ at times ] Minogue 's vocals are so over-processed that they barely seem to exist at all " . On the other hand , Andy Battaglia from The A.V. Club opined that the ballads " work " and concluded that " Body Language shows Minogue as a surprisingly impressive presence in spurts , but she sounds better with her pleasure engine revving at full purr " .

Although Body Language was not as much of a commercial success as Fever , it performed well nonetheless . In Minogue 's native Australia , Body Language entered and peaked at number two on the albums chart and spent a total of 18 weeks on the chart . The Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) certified the album double-platinum for shipping 140,000 units in the country . In the United Kingdom , the album entered and peaked at number six on the UK Albums Chart . It remained inside the top 10 for one week , and for two weeks in the top 20 . In total , it stayed on the chart for a total of 30 weeks . Body Language was certified platinum by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) for shipments of 300,000 units . Elsewhere , Body Language peaked at number 23 on the Austrian Albums Chart and was certified gold by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ( IFPI ) for selling 7,500 units . In the Dutch-speaking Flanders region of Belgium , it peaked at number 10 on the Ultratop chart and spent a total of 17 weeks on the chart . It became Minogue 's first album to reach the top 10 in the region . Body Language entered and peaked at number eight on the Swiss Albums Chart , and spent a total of 17 weeks on the chart . In this region , the IFPI certified it gold for selling 20,000 units . In the United States , Body Language debuted at number 42 on the Billboard 200 chart with " meagre " first-week sales of 43,000 units . According to Nielson SoundScan , Body Language had sold 177,000 units in the US as of March 2011 .

Following its release , Body Language was considered to be an example of Minogue 's constant " reinventions " . During this period , Minogue was often referred to as " Bardot Kylie " due to the Brigitte Bardot-inspired look she sported on the cover , and Body Language was seen as a step forward from the " slick , minimalist and postmodern " image she had adopted during the release of Fever . Chris True from AllMusic regarded the album as " another successful attempt [ by Minogue ] at broadening her sound ( with electro and hip-hop for instance ) and winning more fans " . Later in his review of Minogue 's tenth studio album X ( 2007 ) , he remarked that " By the time of 2004 's Body Language , Kylie Minogue was seemingly unassailable , with three hit albums , a number of hit singles , and a recharged career that only a few years before had seemed precarious at best " . In 2006 , Larissa Dubecki from The Age commented that " Kylie has beaten her early detractors by inhabiting almost a dozen identities , from the " singing budgie " who emerged from Neighbours to score her first hit single with a cover of the Little Eva classic " Locomotion " in 1987 , to the 1960s ingenue of her most recent album , 2003 's Body Language " . She used the title " Eurotrash princess " to describe Minogue during this period .

In 2004 , Minogue was nominated for " Best Female Artist " at the 18th Annual Australian Recording Industry Association Music Awards and Body Language was nominated for " Best Pop Release " . At the 2004 Brit Awards , the singer received her third-consecutive nomination for " Best International Female Solo Artist " . At the 47th Grammy Awards ceremony held in the year 2005 , lead single " Slow " was nominated for " Best Dance Recording " , and in 2012 , Minogue picked the song as her all-time favourite song from her 25 years in music .

Mills came to public attention in 1993 , when a collision with a police motorcycle in London resulted in the amputation of her left leg below the knee . She continued to model using a prosthetic limb and sold her story to a tabloid newspaper . Her relationship with Sir Paul McCartney brought further public attention in the year 2000 . They married in June 2002 and Mills gave birth to Beatrice Milly McCartney on 28 October 2003 . The couple separated in 2006 and finalised their divorce in 2008 . After her marriage to McCartney , Mills became involved in animal rights advocacy and as of 2012 is a patron of Viva ! ( Vegetarians ' International Voice for Animals ) and the Vegetarian and Vegan Foundation . She is also vice-president of the Limbless Association and skied in the British disabled ski team 's development squad in 2013

Heather Mills was born in Aldershot , Hampshire , to John " Mark " Francis Mills , a former British paratrooper , and his wife , Beatrice Mary Mills , née Finlay , who was the daughter of a colonel in the British Army . Her father was adopted at age seven and grew up in Brighton , where his foster parents had a grocery shop , although his foster-father also worked as a mechanic for a Grand Prix racing team . Her mother was born in India , during World War II , but was educated at English boarding schools . They met at Newcastle University , and were married against the wishes of Finlay 's father , who did not attend the wedding and only saw his daughter once more before he died . Beatrice spoke several languages and played the piano , and Mark played banjo and guitar , liked photography ( winning an Evening Standard award ) , and took part in numerous sports . He was very fond of animals ( working for the RSPCA for a time ) , and Mills remembered her family always having a dog and a cat , as well as once having a pet goose and a white nanny goat that was allowed to roam the house owned by Mark 's parents in Libanus , near Brecon .

The Mills family spent their holidays in Libanus and also lived there for a time . When Mills was six years old , the family moved north to Alnwick , in Northumberland , but moved shortly after to a block of flats in Washington , Tyne and Wear , and then on to Cockshott Farm , in Rothbury , Northumberland . She attended Usworth Grange Primary school , and then Usworth Comprehensive school in Washington . She visited Usworth Comprehensive in 2003 , as guest of honour at a prize-giving event and to support the school against plans for its closure . Mills later wrote that she was kidnapped and sexually assaulted by a swimming pool attendant when she was eight years old , but her next-door neighbour , Margaret Ambler , who was sexually abused by the swimming pool attendant , alleged that Mills ' story was " nothing what she made it out to be " , that Mills was never a victim , and the pool attendant did not commit suicide , as Mills had written . Although having received a letter from Mills offering £ 10,000 to stop a court case , Ambler complained that the story had caused her deep discomfort by bringing the incident to national attention , so she sued for breach of privacy , accepting an out-of-court settlement of £ 5,000 in compensation , and £ 54,000 legal costs .

Beatrice left home when Mills was nine years old , which left her , her older brother Shane , and her younger sister , Fiona , in the care of their father . Mills said that her father once threw her brother against a window for making a mess on the carpet with crayons . The window broke and her brother had to be taken to hospital , where their father explained that the boy had fallen on some glass in the garden . Fiona said : " Our family were always short of money and our father demanded that we find food and clothes so we turned to shoplifting , learnt to hide from the bailiffs and became experts at domestic duties . I ’ m not ashamed to say that we were forced to steal because when you are a young child , you ’ d rather do that than face a beating from your father " . ( Their father disputed his daughters ' allegations that he was violent towards them , later releasing home movies of family holidays in Wales , showing Mills playing happily ) .

When her father was jailed for 18 months after being convicted of fraud , she left home with her sister to live with her mother and partner ( Crossroads actor Charles Stapley ) , in Clapham , London , although her brother went to Brighton to live with his paternal grandparents . She later wrote that at the age of 15 she ran away to join a funfair , and then lived in a cardboard box under Waterloo Station for four months , although Stapley denied this by saying that she occasionally left home at weekends to travel with a young man who worked for a funfair in London . During her stated period of homelessness , her school records indicate that she and her sister were both enrolled at Usworth comprehensive in Tyne and Wear until April 1983 , and then at Hydeburn Comprehensive , in Balham , on 6 June 1983 , where they both stayed until 2 July 1984 . She remembered that a teacher at the Hydeburn once said , " there 's no hope for her at all " , and that she left school with no academic qualifications . In the same year , her father had another daughter , Claire Mills , with a new partner . Mills worked for a croissant shop , but was sacked , and vowed " never to work for anyone else again " . She later wrote that the owner of a jewellery shop in Clapham gave her a job on Saturdays , but Jim Guy , the owner of Penrose Jewellers , later stated : " Everything she wrote about me was lies , I never gave her a job ; she just hung around and made tea . She told me her father was dead . The only thing that was true was she nicked stuff from the shop " , which Guy said was worth £ 20,000 . She admitted that she had stolen some gold chains and sold them to buy a moped , and when Guy reported the theft , she was put on probation .

Alfie Karmal ( the son of a Palestinian father and Greek mother ) was ten years older than Mills when they met in 1986 . Karmal bought her new clothes and Cartier jewellery , and paid for cosmetic surgery when she complained that her breasts were sagging . She later said that she had had a breast reduction operation , reducing her bra size from a 34E to a 34C. so Karmal , who had moved into the computer industry , set up a model agency for her , ExSell Management , although it was not successful . In 1987 , Mills went to live in Paris , telling Karmal that a cosmetics company had given her a modelling contract , but became the mistress of millionaire Lebanese businessman George Kazan for two years and took part in a photo session for a stills-only German sex education manual called Die Freuden der Liebe ( The Joys of Love ) . She also modelled for full-frontal nude photographs . After returning to London , Mills asked Karmal to marry her . Karmal said yes , but on one condition : " I told her I couldn 't marry her until she did something about her compulsive lying , and she agreed to see a psychiatrist for eight weeks . She admitted she had a problem and said it was because she 'd been forced to lie as a child by her father " . Although Mills proposed to Karmal , she later said that every man she has been out with " has asked me to marry him within a week " . While married to Karmal , she suffered two ectopic pregnancies , so Karmal paid for her to go on holiday to Croatia with his children and ex-wife ( with whom Mills had become friends ) in 1990 , but Mills ended up living with her ski instructor , Miloš Pogačar , shortly before the Croatian War began . Mills then set up a refugee crisis centre in London , helping over 20 people to escape the war . She drove by herself to deliver donations to Croatia , taking modelling assignments in Austria on the way to pay for the trip , later saying that she " worked on the front line in a war zone in the former Yugoslavia for two years where there were mines everywhere that weren 't marked " . Karmal and Mills were divorced and Mills was later engaged to Raffaele Mincione ( a bond dealer for the Industrial Bank of Japan ) in 1993 .

On 8 August 1993 , Mills and Mincione walked to the corner of De Vere Gardens and Kensington Road , London , but while crossing Kensington Road , Mills was knocked down by a police motorcycle ( the last in a convoy of three ) , which was responding to an emergency call . Mills suffered crushed ribs , a punctured lung , and the loss of her left leg 6 inches below the knee ; a metal plate was later attached to her pelvis . In October 1993 , she had another operation which further shortened her leg . Mills was awarded £ 200,000 by the police authority as recompense for her injuries , even though the police motorcyclist , PC Osbourne , was later cleared by magistrates of driving without due care and attention . After the accident , Mills sold her story to the News of the World , and gave other interviews , saying she earned £ 180,000 . She used the money to set up the Heather Mills Health Trust ( existed 2000 – 2004 ) which delivered prosthetic limbs to people , particularly children , who had lost limbs after stepping on landmines . Mills often shows people her prosthetic leg , once taking it off during an interview on the American talk show Larry King Live , in 2002 .

Mills booked herself into the Hippocrates Health Institute in Florida , which put her on a raw food vegan diet , using wheat grass and garlic poultices to heal her wound . After an operation , Mills discovered that she had been previously identified as having an O rhesus negative blood type , when in fact she was A rhesus negative , which had interfered with her attempts to follow the so-called blood type diet . As her prosthetic leg had to be replaced on a regular basis ( because the size of the amputated stump kept changing as it healed ) , she had the idea to collect thousands of discarded prosthetic limbs for amputees in Croatia . Mills persuaded the Brixton prison governor to get inmates to dismantle and pack the prosthetic limbs before being transported , which resulted in 22,000 amputees obtaining limbs in addition to the Croatian citizens who were already supplied with prosthetic limbs by the Croatian Institute for Health Insurance , which paid for the fitting of limbs and rehabilitation of patients . The first convoy of limbs arrived in Zagreb in October 1994 and Mills travelled with the convoy to film interviews with some of the recipients for the Good Morning with Anne and Nick daytime TV show . She received an award in 2001 from Croatia 's prime minister for the money she raised to help clear that country of landmines .

With the help of ghostwriter Pamela Cockerill , Mills wrote a book about her experience titled Out on a Limb ( 1995 ) , which was republished in the United States as A Single Step ( 2002 ) . Extracts from Out on a Limb were serialised in The Daily Mail in March 2000 . Mills handed all the proceeds from the book to Adopt-A-Minefield , and stated that it was one of " the few charities that 100 % of their donations goes to clear minefields and survivor assistance " . In 1995 , Mills got engaged to British media executive Marcus Stapleton , after being together for only 16 days , and was then engaged to respected documentary filmmaker Chris Terrill in 1999 , after only 12 days in Cambodia , where they were making a film about landmines . Mills ended their relationship five days before their planned wedding day , later telling friends in the media that she had called the wedding off because Terrill was gay , an MI6 agent , and that his mission was to sabotage her anti-landmine work . Terrill had once told Mills that he had been interviewed by the intelligence services when he was thinking of a career with the Foreign Office , but later said , " I soon realised that Heather [ Mills ] had a somewhat elastic relationship with the truth , which she was able to stretch impressively sometimes " . Terrill also claims that although Mills said she was a vegetarian at the time , she often cooked her speciality dish , Lancashire hotpot , which contains lamb , for him ; and her ex sister-in-law , Dianna Karmal , claims that Mills only became a vegetarian after meeting McCartney .

In 2003 , the Open University awarded her an honorary doctorate for her philanthropic work on behalf of amputees . She continues to campaign , in addition to promoting the distribution of prostheses around the world and has been involved with the development of the Heather Mills McCartney Cosmesis , which gives amputees in America the chance to wear a Dorset Orthopaedic cosmesis , without having to travel to the UK . Mills is also vice-president of the Limbless Association . In 2004 , she received a " Children in Need " award from the annual International Charity Gala in Düsseldorf and in the same year , the University of California , Irvine , gave her their 2004 Human Security Award and created the Heather Mills McCartney Fellowship in Human Security to support graduate students conducting research on pressing human security issues . She is a former Goodwill Ambassador for the United Nations Association Adopt-A-Minefield programme .

Mills met McCartney at the Dorchester Hotel , during the Pride of Britain Awards event in April 1999 , which McCartney had attended to present an award to an animal rights activist . Mills presented the Outstanding Bravery Award to Helen Smith ; also making an appeal on behalf of the Heather Mills Health Trust . McCartney also presented an award dedicated to his late wife , Linda McCartney . McCartney talked to Mills about donating to her charity – later giving her £ 150,000 . In the autumn of 1999 , Mills and her sister recorded " VO ! CE " ; a song they wrote to raise funds for Mills ' charity , with McCartney agreeing to sing backing vocals . After recording the song in Greece ( where Mills ' sister lived , running the independent label Coda Records ) , the sisters stayed overnight at McCartney 's estate in Peasmarsh , Sussex , in early November , where McCartney added vocals to the song . Having sparked the interest of the tabloids about his appearances with Mills at events , McCartney appeared publicly beside her at a party in January 2000 to celebrate her 32nd birthday .

Mills and McCartney were married on 11 June 2002 , four years after McCartney 's first wife had died of breast cancer . The McCartney – Mills wedding was an elaborate ceremony at Castle Leslie ( once the home of Shane Leslie ) , in the village of Glaslough in County Monaghan , Ireland . A song specially composed by McCartney , called " Heather " , was played , which had been included on the 2001 album , Driving Rain . Mills said that she liked to cook traditional ( but meat-free ) Christmas dinners for McCartney and as many of his family as possible , and that McCartney had encouraged her to give up her self-confessed addiction to chocolate and Snickers bars . When asked by chat-show host Larry King ( in 2003 ) , how life was with McCartney , Mills replied " Great , really great , " but also said that she was surprised at how tidy McCartney was : " He always cleans up before the cleaner comes . So I said for a while that 's crazy , but what 's good is if I cook the dinner , he 'll clean everything up . "

In 2003 , McCartney played a concert in Red Square , Russia . Vladimir Putin gave the couple a tour of the Kremlin . McCartney later said that Mills ' contribution was giving him an acrylic fingernail to protect a finger on his left hand that often bled after playing guitar . McCartney admitted that Mills inspired him , as " Being in love with her makes me want to write songs " , such as " Too Much Rain " on Chaos and Creation in the Backyard , and " See Your Sunshine " ( " She makes me feel glad / I want her so bad " ) from Memory Almost Full . Another composition inspired by Mills was used as the bridal march at their wedding . During a Parkinson chat show on 22 February 2003 , host Michael Parkinson asked if it was because of McCartney that Mills did not give any interviews , and she replied that she wanted to protect McCartney , his children , and their privacy . On the same show she said that her previous ectopic pregnancies had damaged her fertility , and that her chances of getting pregnant were small , although the couple announced that they were expecting their first child in May 2003 . Mills gave birth to Beatrice Milly McCartney on 28 October 2003 , who was named after Mills ' mother , and McCartney 's aunt . It was later revealed that Mills had suffered a miscarriage in the first year of marriage to McCartney . Mills was invited by Larry King to interview Paul Newman , which was broadcast by CNN on 17 April 2004 . McCartney had arranged for Newman to be interviewed by Mills , but critical reactions to the show were mixed . Mills appeared on other TV programmes , such as BBC1 's Question Time and GMTV , and persuaded McCartney to join her on ITV 's Who Wants To Be A Millionaire ?

After some time apart , Mills and McCartney separated on 17 May 2006 . In November 2007 , Mills gave a number of interviews , saying that the breakdown of the marriage was caused by her husband 's daughter , Stella , whom she described as " jealous " and " evil " . Mills had previously talked with New York magazine , saying Stella had once issued a press release confirming how much she liked her new stepmother , although Stella 's publicist denied that such a statement had ever been issued . After dismissing Anthony Julius , a Mishcon de Reya lawyer , Mills stated she would represent herself in the upcoming divorce hearing , with help from her sister Fiona , David Rosen ( a solicitor-advocate ) , and Michael Shilub , an American attorney . In leaked documents , Mills complained that McCartney was often drunk , smoked cannabis , stabbed her with a broken wine glass , pushed her over a table , and pushed her into a bathtub when she was pregnant . Referring to her part in the marriage , Mills said that she had been a full-time wife , mother , lover , confidante , business partner and psychologist to McCartney . McCartney 's lawyers studied Mills ' book : Life Balance : The Essential Keys to a Lifetime of Wellbeing ( published on 25 May 2006 ) , as it contradicted many of her claims , such as when she praised McCartney for " Bringing me breakfast in bed every morning , no matter how he feels , and I do the dinner , so we ’ ve got that agreement . It ’ s thoughtfulness " . Mills ' father reconciled with his daughter after meeting her and McCartney , when they introduced him to his granddaughter , Beatrice . After their separation , he said that it " took guts to represent yourself at the High Court " , and that he was proud of his daughter , even though he thought she would be " torn to shreds " by McCartney 's lawyers .

The case was heard in court 34 at the Royal Courts of Justice in London . At the start of the proceedings Mills asked for £ 125 million , but McCartney offered £ 15.8 million . Before the court case , Mills had employed the accountancy firm Lee and Allen to examine McCartney 's publishing company , business assets and properties , saying that she had a tape recording of McCartney admitting his true worth , but the presiding judge , Mr Justice Bennett , turned down numerous requests for information by Lee and Allen . The hearing took six days , finishing on 18 February 2008 , with the judgment being made public on 17 March 2008 . Mills was eventually awarded a lump sum of £ 16.5m , together with assets of £ 7.8m , which included the properties she owned at the time . The total was £ 24.3 million , plus payments of £ 35,000 per annum , for a nanny and school costs for their daughter . In his judgment , Justice Bennett stated : " The husband 's evidence was , in my judgment , balanced . He expressed himself moderately though at times with justifiable irritation , if not anger . He was consistent , accurate and honest . But I regret to have to say I cannot say the same about the wife 's evidence . Having watched and listened to her give evidence , having studied the documents , and having given in her favour every allowance for the enormous strain she must have been under ( and in conducting her own case ) I am driven to the conclusion that much of her evidence , both written and oral , was not just inconsistent and inaccurate but also less than candid . Overall she was a less than impressive witness . " The divorce was granted on 12 May 2008 , and the preliminary divorce decree was finalised six weeks later . She later considered trying to have the injunction lifted that stopped her talking publicly about the case , as the sections released were against her wishes , saying that it would " perhaps be better for the public to see everything " .

Long before the decision , Mills talked about McCartney : " I will never get over it . I will always love Paul . He is the father of my child , but I just have to move on and deal with it and there is nothing I can do ... I have never spoken badly about my husband . I never will , he is the father of my child " . After the judgement was issued , however , she said to the press , " I can 't say if Paul is cruel . For the sake of my daughter , I can 't say that but my sister thinks he is . " This statement to the press was accompanied by her sister , Fiona Mills , saying " I just think he didn 't need to put her through this . I just think it is really sad . Why can 't he look after the mother of his child ? " She continued , " He wants to make himself look good , " she said . " To him the most important person is him . It has been a nightmare and I am not exaggerating . "

Mills ' relationship with McCartney triggered considerable media interest , but after her divorce , the attitude of the British media was hostile . Mills frequently accuses the press of misquoting her , and of using material out of context to give a negative impression of her , telling the Evening Standard that the claims that she had married McCartney for his money were more hurtful than losing her leg . Mills has been accused by several newspapers of having embellished her life story . A journalist with the same name , Heather Mills , then at The Observer , accused Mills of impersonating her for over a year in the late 1990s , showing people cuttings of articles the journalist had written , which helped Mills secure a job presenting The General , a BBC TV programme about Southampton General Hospital . There were also doubts about Mills ' claim that she had been nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize ( because the Heather Mills Health Trust had given away thousands of prosthetic limbs to landmine victims ) , but the nomination cannot yet be proven because the identities of all nominees remain secret for 50 years . Stapely ( Mills ' stepfather ) disputed Mills ' statement that her mother had nearly lost a leg in a car crash , after Mills said , " her leg was only hanging on by a tiny flap of skin and flesh ... miraculously the surgeons managed to insert a metal plate and reattach it " . Stapely said that Mills ' mother had suffered a leg injury after a car crash , but recovered and was " a keen tennis player " and that Mills , " is simply a very confused woman for whom reality and fantasy have become blurred " .

Mills said that she had once been asked to stand for parliament by the three main political parties , and had been offered a peerage in 2001 ( to become Baroness Mills ) by the then British Prime Minister , Tony Blair , and a certain " Lord Macdonald " . An ITV documentary ( McCartney vs McCartney : The Ex Files ) interviewed three Lord Macdonalds , but not one of them could remember ever meeting Mills . British journalist Jasper Gerard , to whom Mills made the claims , also says she told him that she had cancelled a meeting with Bill Clinton in case her endorsement affected a US election outcome . Mills stated that she was once awarded the Outstanding Young Person of the Year award by the British Chambers of Commerce , but did not challenge newspapers after they discovered there was no such award . In October 2006 , Mills announced her intention to sue The Daily Mail , The Sun and the Evening Standard . All the newspapers said that their stories " were obtained by proper methods and in accordance with good journalistic practice " . The Sun , which regularly refers to Mills as " Mucca " – a play on McCartney 's nickname " Macca " – responded by asking her to " tick the boxes " on a series of allegations the newspaper had made , stating , " It is not clear what exactly she plans to sue us about " . Underneath the questions , The Sun listed six allegations about her , with a blank box beside each one . The words beside the boxes read : " Hooker , Liar , Porn Star , Fantasist , Trouble Maker , Shoplifter " .

In December 2006 , Mills told the BBC that she had received death threats , and on 17 December 2006 , police stated that a " non-specific threat " had been made to her safety . This led to more criticism that she was calling out the emergency services too often . In March 2007 , Kevin Moore , Chief Superintendent of Sussex Police , said that Mills was running " the risk of being treated as the little boy who cried wolf " , and added , " We do have to respond to a disproportionate high volume of calls from Heather Mills McCartney because of the situations she finds herself in , and this is regrettable as it takes officers away from other policing matters " . Mills responded that the police had told her to contact them whenever she was being harassed . During a 5-day trial in July 2007 , it was revealed that Mills had been physically assaulted by Jay Kaycappa in Brighton . Kaycappa was a notorious paparazzo trying to photograph Mills while on shifts for a national newspaper and a regional press agency . Kaycappa , who had 132 previous criminal convictions , including perverting the course of justice , obtaining property by deception , driving offences and using ten aliases , was found guilty and sentenced to a 140-hour community order and ordered to pay Mills £ 100 , plus £ 1,000 court costs .

During several interviews in October 2007 , Mills accused the media of giving her " worse press than a paedophile or a murderer " . She also criticised the media over the treatment of Diana , Princess of Wales – who , according to Mills , was " chased and killed " by paparazzi – and of Kate McCann . Immediately before giving these interviews , her PR adviser , Phil Hall ( the ex-Editor of the News of the World ) , quit . In 2008 , a survey commissioned by Marketing magazine showed Mills as one of the top five most hated celebrity women , along with Amy Winehouse , Victoria Beckham and Kerry Katona . In December 2008 , the Channel 4 television comedy series Star Stories broadcast a satirical mockumentary of Mills ' life story from her point of view . In 2009 , after petitioning the Press Complaints Commission in the UK about being lied about in the press , five British tabloids ( The Sun , The Daily Express , News of the World , Sunday Mirror and Daily Mirror ) publicly apologised to Mills about printing false , hurtful or defamatory stories about her . Another tabloid ( the Daily Mail ) , sent a private letter of apology . Mills has complained that over 4,400 abusive articles about her have been published .

In 2002 , Mills accepted damages of £ 50,000 plus costs from the Sunday Mirror , after a false report that the Charity Commission had investigated her about the money she raised for the Indian earthquake victims appeal in 2001 . The extent and nature of the British press coverage of Mills has been criticised , as in May 2003 , when Guardian columnist Matt Seaton wrote a piece declaring " There is little that is edifying in the symbolic lynching of Heather . The poisonous judgmentalism that drives it is in the worst tradition of small town gossip . It is prurient , spiteful , hypocritical , and we should cry ' shame ' on it " . Publicist Mark Borkowski wrote in the Independent on Sunday , on 23 March 2008 : " Not since the cult of Myra Hindley have we encountered so much vitriol aimed at one woman " . Feminist writer Natasha Walter has compared the coverage to that of Britney Spears . Terence Blacker wrote that public figures who are young , female , pretty and fair-haired , are often subjected to public bullying which is explained as " intense media interest " , such as Diana , Princess of Wales , Paula Yates , Ulrika Jonsson and Mills .

Kira Cochrane , in The Guardian , said that " every misogynist epithet available " has been used against Mills . " She has somehow become the vessel through which it is acceptable for both pundits and the public to express their very worst feelings about women " . Joan Smith , writing in The Independent , said that newspaper " Bullies love a weakling " ; quoting the Daily Mirror 's front page headline : " Lady Liar " and The Sun newspaper writing " Pornocchio " over Mills ' face ( in reference to Pinocchio 's nose getting longer when he lied and her past photographs ) . Smith went on to say that Mills had " dreamt of becoming the wife of a famous man but did not realise that he had fantasies of his own , marrying an attractive younger woman when he hadn 't got over the loss of his first wife . Mills behaved foolishly when the marriage failed but she does not deserve the treatment she has had in the mass-market press . It is merciless bullying of an unstable , vulnerable woman " . In 2009 , Mills reported a bogus charity had been set up to extract information about her marriage . News Corp , owned by Rupert Murdoch , is alleged to have set up the sting . The British tabloid newspaper the Daily Mirror ran the headline " Macca marriage to Heather was mistake of the decade " following an interview McCartney gave to Q magazine . McCartney immediately moved to deny this statement and then went on to publicly print the original transcript on his official website to prove the Daily Mirror article was false .

Celia Larkin , writing on 12 February 2012 in the Irish Sunday Independent , said " There was something very satisfying about Heather Mills finally having her voice heard above the roar of the Red Tops . If you actually take the time to listen to Mills , I mean listen , not just read what 's written about her , you 'll see she is a strong , sincere , independent woman . She didn 't lie down under the weight of McCartney 's fame and wealth , she continued to plough her own furrow , campaigning for her charities , maintaining a strong individuality . And that , it seems , is the greatest sin of all . Is it any wonder she was reduced to tears in the October 2007 GMTV interview ? Did we feel sympathy for her then ? No . ' Heather Mills has Melt Down ' screamed the headlines , so now she had lost her marbles to boot . And if that wasn 't enough , Carole Malone of the Sunday Mirror , one of the papers that was relentless in its attacks on Mills , accused her of staging an act on live TV in order to further her cause in the upcoming divorce hearing . How cruel can you get ? "

On 5 May 2011 , The Guardian reported that Mills had met with officers from the London Metropolitan Police who showed her evidence , seized from private investigator Glenn Mulcaire , which could form the basis of a claim against the News of the World for breach of privacy over alleged phone hacking . Mills ' name and private mobile phone number were listed in Mulcaire 's notes along with those of her friends and associates . Mills later alleged that a journalist working for the Mirror Group had admitted to her in 2001 that he had hacked her phone . Appearing as a witness at the Leveson Inquiry on 9 February 2012 , Mills was asked under oath if she had ever made a recording of Paul McCartney 's phone calls or answer phone messages and had ever played it to Piers Morgan or " anybody else " , she replied , " Never , ever . " Giving evidence in December 2011 , Morgan , who bragged in a newspaper column for the Daily Mail in 2006 about hearing the message , refused to say who had played him the recorded message of the call , saying he was protecting a source . Mills told the inquiry that Morgan was " a man that has written nothing but awful things about me for years and would have relished telling the inquiry if I had played a personal voicemail message to him . " In the official findings of his Inquiry , Lord Justice Leveson said Morgan 's testimony under oath on phone hacking was " utterly unpersuasive . This was not , in any sense at all , a convincing answer " and " What it does , however , clearly prove is that he was aware that it was taking place in the press as a whole and that he was sufficiently unembarrassed by what was criminal behaviour that he was prepared to joke about it . " ( see the testimony : [ 1 ] )

In 2005 , Mills became a patron of the British animal rights organisation Viva ! , and the Vegetarian and Vegan Foundation , which are both run by Juliet Gellatley . In 2006 , Mills and Gellatley attended a debate on fur at the Oxford Union , where she presented a video depicting the skinning of a dog . She posed with her own dog in an anti-fur advertisement for People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals ( PETA ) , which read : " If you wouldn 't wear your dog , please don 't wear fur " . In March 2006 , Mills and McCartney travelled to Canada to bring attention to the country 's annual seal hunt . Sponsored by the Humane Society of the United States , they complained that the hunt was inhumane , and called on the Canadian government to put an end to it . Their arrival on the floes sparked much attention in Newfoundland and Labrador , where 90 per cent of the sealers live . Mills and McCartney protested against seals being clubbed to death , pierced with boat hooks and sometimes skinned alive . Newfoundland and Labrador 's Premier , Danny Williams , debated the issue with them on Larry King Live , the issue being that seals are no longer hunted that way , and have not been for a while . Mills joined a Viva ! film team at a pig farm in Somerset , in February 2007 , to publicise the use of restrictive farrowing crates , which are used for sows who are suckling piglets . A video of the investigation was made available on the Internet .

Mills 's relationship with PETA ended in 2007 , when McCartney 's daughter , Mary , said she would not continue to take photographs for the organisation if Mills was involved with them . A PETA representative told the New York Post : " Heather 's exposé of the Chinese fur industry remains one of the most popular videos on our site , but we don 't have any imminent campaigns planned with her " . Mills spoke in Hyde Park , London , on 19 November 2007 . Mills said : " Eighty per cent of global warming comes from livestock and deforestation . I 'm not telling people to go vegan overnight . But if they stop drinking their cows ' milk lattes , maybe this sort of thing won 't have to happen " . In 2008 , an old video surfaced of Mills wearing a mink coat she had owned in 1989 , but explained to reporters that she had bought it years before becoming involved in animal rights organisations or vegetarianism . Although she had separated from McCartney , Mills said : " It 's only since I met Paul [ McCartney ] that I really got to understand how vegetarianism not only benefits your health massively but also makes a huge difference to the planet , to animals , and to feeding the world . " In August 2008 , she was honoured by the organisation Farm Animal Rights Movement ( FARM ) , with the Celebrity Animal Activist Award , presented at the Animal Rights National Conference . On 28 August 2009 , at the Celebrity Catwalk event in Hollywood , Mills showed off her new " recycled clothes from charity shops " range , called Be @ one . After her divorce , Mills pledged to give a " large portion " of her £ 24.3 million divorce settlement to Adopt-A-Minefield , but the charity has not received any to date . In June 2008 , Mills was asked to talk at a New York party about the cruelty of puppy farms and to promote her book about animals , but was angry about the guests speaking over her speech , saying : " Listen up at the back . I haven ’ t been up for 24 hours and flew here from London to be ignored " . Mills 's publicist of four years , Michele Elyzabeth , stopped representing her on 25 July 2008 .

On 4 July 2009 , Mills opened a vegan restaurant called VBites at Hove Lagoon , Hove , Sussex . Mills is quoted as saying that she intends it to be the first in a worldwide chain of vegan restaurants . Whilst promoting the restaurant , Mills gave an interview to the BBC , stating that she 'd been very proactive in the building stages and now that it was open , would give as much time to it as she could – working it around her charity work . In May 2013 she sold the restaurant premises to local record producer Fatboy Slim and opened a new , enlarged VBites in East Street in Brighton . In 2009 , Mills bought the vegan food company VBites Foods ( then known as Redwood Foods ) . The company in Corby , Northamptonshire , sells 50 meat-free products under the brand names Cheatin ' , VegiDeli and Cheezly . In 2014 products sold under the brand " Wot no Dairy " were recalled , because it was revealed that they contained traces of dairy and were dangerous for those with dairy intolerance . Mills was one of the celebrity performers competing on the US television series Dancing with the Stars in 2007 , with dancing partner Jonathan Roberts . On 21 December 2009 , she was revealed as one of the contestants on the fifth series of Dancing on Ice , being paired with Matt Evers .

Harry Bassett ( 1868 – 1878 ) was an American Thoroughbred racehorse , winner of the 1871 Belmont Stakes and an outstanding racehorse of the 19th century . He also won a number of other stakes races , and was named the Champion male of his age group in 1870 , 1871 and 1872 . He was retired to stud duties in New Jersey when his five-year racing career ended , having recorded 23 wins from 36 starts . Harry Bassett died in New Jersey in 1878 and was inducted into the United States Racing Hall of Fame in 2010 .

Harry Bassett was a chestnut stallion , foaled on 27 April 1868 , that was sired by Lexington and out of the mare Canary Bird . Canary Bird was by the imported stallion Albion and out of the mare Panola , who was sired by the imported stallion Ainderby . Canary Bird 's second dam , or maternal grandmother , was the imported mare Sweetbriar by Recovery . Harry Basset was bred either by R. A. Alexander or by A. J. Alexander , both of the Woodburn Stud of Woodburn , Kentucky , and was the second of Canary Bird 's foals . He was sold at the 1869 S. D. Bruce yearling sale to trainer David McDaniel for $ 315 .

Harry Bassett was trained by his owner David McDaniel ; his jockey was W. Miller . As a two-year-old he won the 1870 Nursery Stakes at Pimlico Race Course , the Central Stakes , the Kentucky Stakes , and the Saratoga Stakes . He made a total of four starts as a two-year-old of which he won three , placing third in the other . Harry Bassett won the fifth running of the Belmont Stakes in 1871 at Jerome Park Racetrack in a time of 2 minutes 56 seconds . He carried 110 pounds ( 50 kilograms ) pounds in the race , and won $ 5,400 ( approximately $ 107,000 as of 2016 ) for his owner . The race was run on June 10 over a distance of 1 5 ⁄ 8 miles ( 13 furlongs / 2,600 meters ) on a fast track . Harry Bassett won by three lengths from the second placed finisher Stockwood ; the third place went to August Belmont 's By The Sea . This was the first of three consecutive wins of the Belmont Stakes by David McDaniel as both owner and trainer , as he went on to win the 1872 race with Joe Daniels and the 1873 race with Springbok .

As a three-year-old , Harry Bassett also won the Jerome Handicap , the Travers Stakes , the Reunion Stakes , the Kenner Stakes , the Champion Stakes and the Jersey Derby . He was undefeated in nine starts at age three . During his three-year-old year Harry Bassett started 11 times and won eight , finishing second in the remaining three . At four he increased his win record to 14 , with wins in the Westchester Cup and a victory in a 2 miles ( 3,200 m ) heat , before he was beaten in the Monmouth Cup by Longfellow . He then won the 2 1 ⁄ 4 mile Saratoga Cup , in which he defeated Longfellow . His jockey in that race was James Rowe , Sr. , who went on to become a leading trainer for James R. Keene . At age five , Harry Bassett started eight times , winning two , placing second in two , and third once . At six , he started four times , winning once and placing third once . Harry Bassett 's racing career spanned five years and ended with 23 wins from 36 starts ; he finished second five times and third three times . His total earnings on the racetrack were $ 55,920 ( approximately $ 1,046,000 as of 2016 ) . He was awarded the title of Champion Two-Year-Old Male in 1870 , the title of Champion Three-Year-Old Male in 1871 , and the Champion Older Horse title in 1872 .

When his racing career ended Harry Bassett was retired to McDaniel ’ s stud farm in Trenton , New Jersey , where he sired stakes winners such as Bowstring and Lettina out of the imported mare Letty by imported Australian . Lettina won the Young America Stakes , the Jackson Stakes and the Ladies Stakes in 1881 , when she was two years old . Harry Bassett died on October 27 , 1878 at McDaniel 's farm in New Jersey . He was inducted into the United States ' National Museum of Racing and Hall of Fame in 2010 .

SM UB-13 was a German Type UB I submarine or U-boat in the German Imperial Navy ( German : Kaiserliche Marine ) during World War I. The submarine was probably sunk by a British mine net in April 1916 . UB-13 was ordered in October 1914 and was laid down at the AG Weser shipyard in Bremen in November . UB-13 was a little under 28 metres ( 92 ft ) in length and displaced between 127 and 141 tonnes ( 125 and 139 long tons ) , depending on whether surfaced or submerged . She carried two torpedoes for her two bow torpedo tubes and was also armed with a deck-mounted machine gun . UB-13 was broken into sections and shipped by rail to Antwerp for reassembly . She was launched in March 1915 and commissioned as SM UB-13 in April . UB-13 spent her entire career in the Flanders Flotilla and sank 11 merchant ships , about half of them British fishing vessels . In March 1916 , UB-13 was responsible for sinking the Dutch ocean liner Tubantia , raising the ire of the Dutch public . Tubantia was the largest neutral vessel sunk during the war and among the 30 largest ships sunk by U-boats . On 24 April 1916 , UB-13 was sunk with all hands .

After the German Army 's rapid advance along the North Sea coast in the earliest stages of World War I , the German Imperial Navy found itself without suitable submarines that could be operated in the narrow and shallow seas off Flanders . Project 34 , a design effort begun in mid-August 1914 , produced the Type UB I design : a small submarine that could be shipped by rail to a port of operations and quickly assembled . Constrained by railroad size limitations , the UB I design called for a boat about 28 metres ( 92 ft ) long and displacing about 125 tonnes ( 123 long tons ) with two torpedo tubes . UB-13 was part of the initial allotment of seven submarines — numbered UB-9 to UB-15 — ordered on 15 October from AG Weser of Bremen , just shy of two months after planning for the class began . UB-13 was laid down by Weser in Bremen on 7 November . As built , UB-13 was 27.88 metres ( 91 ft 6 in ) long , 3.15 metres ( 10 ft 4 in ) abeam , and had a draft of 3.03 metres ( 9 ft 11 in ) . She had a single 59-brake-horsepower ( 44 kW ) Körting 4-cylinder diesel engine for surface travel , and a single 119-shaft-horsepower ( 89 kW ) Siemens-Schuckert electric motor for underwater travel , both attached to a single propeller shaft . Her top speeds were 7.45 knots ( 13.80 km / h ; 8.57 mph ) , surfaced , and 6.24 knots ( 11.56 km / h ; 7.18 mph ) , submerged . At more moderate speeds , she could sail up to 1,500 nautical miles ( 2,800 km ; 1,700 mi ) on the surface before refueling , and up to 45 nautical miles ( 83 km ; 52 mi ) submerged before recharging her batteries . Like all boats of the class , UB-13 was rated to a diving depth of 50 metres ( 160 ft ) , and could completely submerge in 33 seconds .

UB-13 was armed with two 45-centimeter ( 17.7 in ) torpedoes in two bow torpedo tubes . She was also outfitted for a single 8-millimeter ( 0.31 in ) machine gun on deck . UB-13 's standard complement consisted of one officer and thirteen enlisted men . After work on UB-13 was complete at the Weser yard , she was readied for rail shipment . The process of shipping a UB I boat involved breaking the submarine down into what was essentially a knock down kit . Each boat was broken into approximately fifteen pieces and loaded on to eight railway flatcars . In February 1915 , the sections of UB-13 were shipped to Antwerp for assembly in what was typically a two- to three-week process . After UB-13 was assembled and launched on 8 March , she was loaded on a barge and taken through canals to Bruges where she underwent trials .

The submarine was commissioned into the German Imperial Navy as SM UB-13 on 6 April 1915 under the command of Oberleutnant zur See Walter Gustav Becker , a 29-year-old first-time U-boat commander . On 26 April , UB-13 joined the Flanders Flotilla ( German : U-boote des Marinekorps U-Flotille Flandern ) , which had been organized on 29 March . When UB-13 joined the flotilla , Germany was in the midst of its first submarine offensive , begun in February . During this campaign , enemy vessels in the German-defined war zone ( German : Kriegsgebiet ) , which encompassed all waters around the United Kingdom , were to be sunk . Vessels of neutral countries were not to be attacked unless they definitively could be identified as enemy vessels operating under a false flag . Submarines of the Flanders Flotilla sank over 14,000 tons of merchant vessels in June 1915 , and UB-13 's first ship sunk , Dulcie , contributed almost one-seventh of that total . The British steamer Dulcie , listed at 2,033 gross register tons ( GRT ) , was headed from Dunston for Le Havre with a load of coal when Becker torpedoed her 6 nautical miles ( 11 km ; 6.9 mi ) east of Aldeburgh . One man on Dulcie lost his life in the attack . Dulcie was the only ship sunk by UB-13 in June .

On 27 and 28 July , Becker and UB-13 sank three British fishing vessels while patrolling between 15 and 30 nautical miles ( 28 and 56 km ; 17 and 35 mi ) off Lowestoft . All three of the sunken ships were smacks — sailing vessels traditionally rigged with red ochre sails — which were stopped , boarded by crewmen from UB-16 , and sunk with explosives . In response to American demands after German submarines had sunk the Cunard Line steamer Lusitania in May 1915 and other high profile sinkings in August and September , the chief of the Admiralstab , Admiral Henning von Holtzendorff , issued orders suspending the first offensive on 18 September . His directive ordered all U-boats out of the English Channel and the South-Western Approaches and required that all submarine activity in the North Sea be conducted strictly along prize regulations . On 20 February 1916 , under the command of Kapitänleutnant Karl Neumann , who replaced Becker in December 1915 , UB-13 captured a Belgian ship named Z10 David Marie and retained her as a prize . There are no further details about where Z10 David Marie was taken or her final disposition , but other ships captured as prizes by Flanders boats were sailed into Zeebrugge by prize crews .

By early 1916 , the British blockade of Germany was beginning to have an effect on Germany and her imports . The Royal Navy had stopped and seized more cargo destined for Germany than the quantity of cargo sunk by German U-boats in the first submarine offensive . As a result , the German Imperial Navy began a second offensive against merchant shipping on 29 February . The final ground rules agreed upon by the German Admiralstab were that all enemy vessels in Germany 's self-proclaimed war zone would be destroyed without warning , that enemy vessels outside the war zone would be destroyed only if armed , and — to avoid antagonizing the United States — that enemy passenger steamers were not to be attacked , regardless of whether in the war zone or not . The day after the beginning of the second offensive , Neumann and UB-13 sank four more fishing smacks northeast of Lowestoft . All four ships were boarded and sunk in the same manner as the three sunk the previous July . Shortly after , Neumann was transferred to command UB-2 in early March , and was replaced by Oberleutnant zur See Arthur Metz , who had been in command of UB-17 for the preceding month .

Shortly after 02 : 30 on 16 March , a torpedo from UB-13 struck the starboard side of the neutral Dutch ocean liner Tubantia , which was at anchor near the North Hinder Lightship , about 50 nautical miles ( 93 km ; 58 mi ) off the Dutch coast . The Royal Holland Lloyd ( Dutch : Koninklijke Hollandsche Lloyd ) ship had been fully illuminated , with her name spelled out in electric lights between the twin funnels . Distress calls from Tubantia were heeded and all 80 passengers and 294 crew were rescued by three nearby ships before the ship foundered . Tubantia was the largest neutral ship sunk during the war , and among the 30 largest ships sunk by U-boats . Germany initially tried to implicate British mines or torpedoes , but relented when confronted with evidence that it was one of their own torpedoes — which had been assigned to UB-13 — that had sunk Tubantia . The Germans , however , presented a forged log from UB-13 that showed her nowhere near Tubantia at the time of the attack . Further , they reported , UB-13 had fired that specific torpedo at a British warship on 6 March — ten days before Tubantia was sunk — which would have been under her previous commander , Kapitänleutnant Neumann . The U.S. Minister to the Netherlands , Henry van Dyke , writing in Fighting for Peace in 1917 , called this explanation " amazing " and derided it :

This certain U-boat had fired this particular torpedo at a British war-vessel somewhere in the North Sea ten days before the Tubantia was sunk . The shot missed its mark . But the naughty undisciplined little torpedo went cruising around in the sea on its own hook for ten days waiting for a chance to kill somebody . Then the Tubantia came along and the wandering-Willy torpedo promptly , obstinately , ran into the ship and sank her . This was the explanation . Germany was not to blame . The Dutch public was furious at what they believed a hostile German act , which caused German diplomats to spread rumors of an impending British invasion of the Netherlands to divert the unwanted attention . Amidst all of the denials and diplomatic wrangling over Tubantia 's sinking , UB-13 continued to sink ships . On 31 March , off Lowestoft , Metz and UB-13 sank the Norwegian steamer Memento . The 1,076 GRT ship was carrying a load of coke destined for Porsgrunn when she went down with one crewman . Twelve days later , in the Kentish Knock area , UB-13 sank the Danish ship Proeven . The 276-ton sailing vessel was the last ship sunk by UB-13 .

On the evening of 23 April 1916 , UB-13 departed Zeebrugge for a patrol off the mouth of the Thames and was never heard from again . Author Dwight Messimer , in his book Verschollen : World War I U-boat Losses , reports that the British had deployed a new explosive anti-submarine net at position 51 ° 33 ′ N 2 ° 45 ′ E in the early morning hours of 24 April . He suggests that it was possible UB-13 had set off some of the contact mines on the net , or possible that the submarine had struck a mine in one of the many British minefields off the Flemish coast . However , according to authors R. H. Gibson and Maurice Prendergast , in their book The German Submarine War , 1914 – 1918 , UB-13 fouled the anchor cable of the British naval drifter Gleaner of the Sea on 24 April , and was depth charged by E.E.S .. Then for good measure , the British destroyer Afridi deployed explosive sweeps against the submarine . Whatever the specific cause of her demise , all seventeen crewmen on board the submarine were killed .

I Am ... Yours : An Intimate Performance at Wynn Las Vegas is a live CD / DVD by American R & B recording artist , Beyoncé . It was filmed at the Encore Theater , Las Vegas by Ed Burke , on August 2 , 2009 , during a stint of Beyoncé 's worldwide I Am ... Tour ( 2009 – 2010 ) . It features performances of over 30 songs , including her solo material , her recordings with the girl group Destiny 's Child as well as behind-the-scenes footage . The album was made available in DVD and 2 CD / DVD deluxe format on November 23 , 2009 , and in Blu-ray format on December 15 , 2009 . It was directed by Nick Wickham and produced by Emer Patten . Footage from the DVD titled Beyoncé – I Am ... Yours , aired on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) on November 26 , 2009 . The special featured behind-the-scenes footage of Beyoncé 's I Am ... Tour and it was watched by over 5.2 million viewers . The album was also promoted by being broadcast on Channel 4 in the UK and re-released in the form of a live instrumentals album . Upon its release , I Am ... Yours : An Intimate Performance at Wynn Las Vegas received positive reviews from music critics , who generally praised the acoustic live performances of the songs . Beyoncé 's vocals , the intimate performances , and the narrating story of the album were also complimented . The live version of " Halo " ( 2009 ) , which is featured on the album , was nominated for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance at the 53rd Grammy Awards .

On August 2 , 2009 , Beyoncé had a revue titled I Am ... Yours at the Encore Theater , in Wynn Las Vegas during a stint on her worldwide I Am ... Tour ( 2009 – 2010 ) . Her performance was backed by her all-female band , Suga Mama , and an orchestra . The show was choreographed by Beyoncé and Frank Gatson Jr . Regarding her I Am ... Yours revue , Beyoncé said , " I 've always wanted to perform in Las Vegas , I 've always wanted to do my own show there , because a lot of the icons that I look up to had amazing shows in Las Vegas . I thought if I 'm going to have my own Las Vegas show , it has to be right and it has to have heart and soul and it has to be something memorable ... My whole objective here is for people to see what they don 't get to see . Just give me my band , give me a stage , some cool smoke and lights and you see the sweat , you see the pain , you see the love , you see the soul and it 's about music . "

The show begins with a narrator introducing Beyoncé to the audience . She appears from the back of the theater performing " Hello " . She greets the audience and makes her way towards the stage as she continues to perform . At the stage , Beyoncé sings " Halo " . Next , she performs " Irreplaceable " and interacts with the audience . She later moves into an acoustic medley , performing a down-tempo version of " Sweet Dreams " , " Dangerously in Love 2 " and " Sweet Love " ( originally recorded by Anita Baker ) . The medley leads into " If I Were a Boy " ( which contains excerpts from " You Oughta Know " ) and " Scared of Lonely " . The show continues with a performance of " That 's Why You 're Beautiful " , intertwined with excerpts from " The Beautiful Ones " ( originally recorded by Prince ) , " Satellites " , and " Resentment " . The first act concludes with Beyoncé performing a jazz-fused " Déjà Vu " . Before the next act begins , three dancers appear and perform a tap sequence called " Bebop " .

Beyoncé begins the second act by telling the story of her career , starting from when she was nine years old to her then-latest album I Am ... Sasha Fierce ( 2008 ) . Beyoncé highlights one of the very first songs she remembers learning was Michael Jackson 's " I Wanna Be Where You Are " . She continues with a medley of Destiny 's Child 's hits songs , including " No No No " , " Bug a Boo " , " Bills , Bills , Bills " , and " Say My Name " whilst in between the songs , she talks about the story behind them . The medley leads into " Work It Out " and " ' 03 Bonnie & Clyde , as she begins to talk about the start her solo career . As the set continues , Beyoncé explains how her record company felt her debut album did not have " one " hit song . She sarcastically remarks , " I guess they were kinda right ... I had five . " Beyoncé goes on to perform " Crazy in Love " ( reminiscent of " Proud Mary " by Tina Turner ) , " Naughty Girl " and " Get Me Bodied " . As the show draws to a close , Beyoncé performs " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " ; she then exits the stage after thanking the audience for their presence .

After Beyoncé finished her I Am ... Yours revue , several publications reported that a live album containing the performance of the revue would be released . In early November 2009 , it was announced that she would be releasing a concert performance DVD and live CD titled I Am ... Yours : An Intimate Performance at Wynn Las Vegas . The DVD features performances from the I Am ... Yours revue containing performances of over 30 songs , including Beyoncé 's solo material as well as her recordings with the girl group Destiny 's Child . Exclusive behind-the-scenes footage was also placed on the album ; part of which was later added on Beyoncé 's 2011 video album Live at Roseland : Elements of 4 . According to Music World Entertainment president and CEO , Mathew Knowles , the decision to release I Am ... Yours : An Intimate Performance at Wynn Las Vegas was prompted by the way the music was presented in the digital world and because " the live experience is becoming more important " . He added that the live performances show the ability of the artists to entertain live , something that , according to him , " Beyoncé has proven [ ... ] time after time " . The album was directed by Nick Wickham and produced by Emer Patten . It was filmed by Ed Burke and executively produced by Beyoncé , Mathew Knowles and Sheira Rees-Davies .

The album was available in DVD and a 2 CD / DVD deluxe edition on November 23 , 2009 , and in Blu-ray format on December 15 , 2009 . The DVD and Blu-ray editions feature the entire concert ( split into three parts ) , as well as over 23 minutes of behind-the-scenes footage , while the two CDs include only the audio from the main performances . On November 26 , 2009 , ABC Network aired a one-hour television special called Beyoncé – I Am ... Yours at 9 : 00 PM / EST . A one-minute trailer of the special was posted online on November 12 , 2009 ; it showed Beyoncé during her I Am ... Tour , behind-the-scenes footage including rehearsals , as well as personal videos . According to USA Today , the special was watched by 5.2 million viewers . Entertainment Weekly 's Brad Wete commented that she " danced her tail off " during the special . John Griffiths of Us Weekly reviewed the special positively , calling it " shimmery ... mostly culled from her lavish concert " . He added that she further " dishes about her career , shows off her childhood home videos , belts out her hits and more . " The show was broadcast on Channel 4 in the UK on December 25 , 2009 . A live instrumentals album of the songs performed on the revue was released at Amazon.com and the iTunes Store on September 28 , 2010 . Several videos of the live performances of " Halo " , " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " and " Scared of Lonely " were released in MTV Latin America . These videos were used to promote the album in Latin America as well as the television special titled " MTV World Stage : Beyoncé Live from Las Vegas " .

Tanya Remekie of Rap-Up felt that the album contains a " show-stopping event as Sasha Fierce and Bey [ oncé ] come out to play " . She finished her review by writing that the " Broadway-fashioned narration of her life story , told through song and dance .. shares her magical story . " During a review of the album , the writers of People magazine rated it with three-and-a-half out of four stars and wrote that it " offers nicely subdued versions of her hits " , further describing the show as a " magic " . Another writer of the same publication praised the album , writing that " You 'll get to know Beyoncé like never before " . Similarly , a writer of Eye Weekly called the album " extraordinary " , before adding that it is " the chance to experience her ( Beyoncé ) up close and personal " . A writer of Us Weekly said that to see Beyoncé 's " fiereceness " , people should listen to her album I Am ... Sasha Fierce or buy the DVD I Am ... Yours : An Intimate Performance at Wynn Las Vegas to see the live experience . Allmusic 's Andy Kellman awarded I Am ... Yours : An Intimate Performance at Wynn Las Vegas a rating of four out of five stars , describing it as a " theatrical production worthy of Vegas , with Beyoncé and her large backing band energetically rolling [ through Beyoncé 's songs ] " . He noted that " what makes I Am ... Yours stand apart from a typical live-album cash-in is the mostly unexpected covers that are weaved into the set . " Kellman finished his review by writing , " As live albums go , this is not quite destined to be one of those all-time classics ; a couple missing songs and a little too much talk aside , however , the fans couldn ’ t ask for more . "

Ed Masley of The Arizona Republic praised the intimacy of the concert and the acoustic versions of the songs . A writer of The Boston Globe also gave I Am ... Yours : An Intimate Performance at Wynn Las Vegas a positive review , comparing it with Sin City . He commended the jazz interlude , the acoustic rearrangements of the songs , and the " charming B [ eyoncé ] telling her life story in [ the ] song [ s ] " . Darryl Sterdan of the website Jam ! also compared the album with Sin City and commented : " Only Beyoncé would think an ' intimate ' theatre gig should include her massive all-girl band , an orchestra , lasers , dancers , costume changes and a wind machine to keep her hair blowing majestically . And only Beyoncé could pull it all together as superbly as she does in this 98-minute ... show " . Grading I Am ... Yours : An Intimate Performance at Wynn Las Vegas with an A- and calling it the " best live concert film of the year " , David Burger of The Salt Lake Tribune concluded , " Instead of a traditional retread of her hits , she narrates and emotionally sings her way through a souful musical journey that takes her from her first audition song to the mega-hits she unleashed this past year ... This is a thrilling tour de force . "

Likewise , Mike Diver of BBC Online reviewed the album positively , praising the narrating story of the performances , calling it " polished , [ and ] professional " . Diver further noted that Beyoncé 's vocals " peak and dip , tremble and roar , mercifully without ever hitting Mariah Carey levels of skull-rattling intensity " . He added that the album would look predictable because it was an " entirely second-guessable affair with each movement telegraphed and every realigned arrangement ( bombast turned down , jazz and funk switched up ) meeting the listener 's expectations head on " . The Huffington Post 's Mike Ragogna compared Beyoncé with Diana Ross during the concert , adding , " Beyoncé 's I Am ... Yours is a satisfying decade-and-then-some retrospective that reveals the artist 's interesting back story with a personal warmth " . Nate Chinen of The New York Times noted that the album documents a smaller show than the other ones Beyoncé usually makes . He further stated , " But the stagecraft — wind machines , lasers , arena lighting — keeps a viewer at a worshipful remove ... Of course Beyoncé has always fared better with declaration than with disclosure , framing her sentiments as actions . Still , the old-fashioned extravagance of this production ... feels like some kind of honesty : it 's a sincere gesture from a show-business savant . "

Before the release of I Am ... Yours : An Intimate Performance at Wynn Las Vegas , Rap-Up listed it as one of the " most notable releases " for the fall of 2009 . Likewise , MTV News placed the album on its list of " Holiday Album Preview " . USA Today 's Mike Snider also mentioned it on his list of " Music-video DVDs that make worthy gifts this season " comparing its acoustic style to the VH1 Storytellers series . Jay Lustig of New Jersey On-Line listed I Am ... Yours : An Intimate Performance at Wynn Las Vegas in two of his lists of most notable albums in the fourth quarter of 2009 . Mark Edward Nero of the website About.com put it in his list of " 2009 Holiday Gift Guide for R & B Fans " . The live performance of " Halo " ( 2009 ) , which is featured on the album , was nominated for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance at the 53rd Grammy Awards . The live recording charted at number fifty-eight on the Canadian Hot 100 chart . On The Village Voice 's 2009 Pazz & Jop albums list , the DVD was ranked at number 1,643 .

I Am ... Yours : An Intimate Performance at Wynn Las Vegas debuted at number one on the US Billboard Top Music Video chart , becoming Beyoncé 's second number-one DVD in that country . The following week , it fell to number two , but later rebounded to the top where it stayed for the next seven consecutive weeks . It spent ten weeks inside the top five – eight of them at the top . In 2009 , the album sold 99,000 copies in the US , making it the sixth best-selling music DVD of the year . As of December 29 , 2010 it had sold 162,000 units in the US , and ranked at number fifteen on the DVD year-end chart of 2010 . It additionally became the best-selling music video of 2010 in the US . It was certified double-platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipping over 200,000 copies . I Am ... Yours : An Intimate Performance at Wynn Las Vegas spent a total of fifty two weeks on the chart . Outside the US , I Am ... Yours : An Intimate Performance at Wynn Las Vegas peaked at number eleven on the Australian DVD Chart and on the Australian Urban Albums Chart . It was certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , denoting sales of over 15,000 copies . It became the forty-fourth best-selling DVD of 2010 in Australia . On the New Zealand Music DVD Chart , the album peaked at number six . I Am ... Yours : An Intimate Performance at Wynn Las Vegas debuted at number twenty four on the UK R & B Albums Chart on December 19 , 2009 . The next week it fell at number thirty one , and it was last seen in the top forty of the chart on January 2 , 2010 , at number thirty three .

2012 is a 2009 American science fiction disaster film directed by Roland Emmerich . It stars John Cusack , Chiwetel Ejiofor , Amanda Peet , Oliver Platt , Thandie Newton , Danny Glover , and Woody Harrelson . The film was produced by Centropolis Entertainment and distributed by Columbia Pictures . Filming began in August 2008 in Vancouver , although it was originally planned to be filmed in Los Angeles . The plot follows novelist Jackson Curtis as he attempts to bring his family to refuge , amidst the events of a geological and meteorological super-disaster . The film includes references to Mayanism , the Mesoamerican Long Count calendar , and the 2012 phenomenon in its portrayal of cataclysmic events unfolding in the year 2012 . After a prolonged marketing campaign comprising the creation of a website from the point of view of the main character , and a viral marketing website on which filmgoers could register for a lottery number to save them from the ensuing disaster , the film was released internationally on November 13 , 2009 . Critics gave 2012 mostly mixed reviews , praising its special effects and dark tone compared to Emmerich 's other work , but criticizing its screenplay and 158-minute length . However , it was a huge commercial success , and one of the highest-grossing films of 2009 .

In 2009 , American geologist Adrian Helmsley visits astrophysicist Satnam Tsurutani in India and learns that neutrinos from a massive solar flare are heating the Earth 's core . In Washington , D.C , Helmsley presents his information to White House Chief of Staff Carl Anheuser , who takes him to meet the President . In 2010 , U.S. President Thomas Wilson and other international leaders begin a secret project to ensure humanity 's survival . The G8 nations , plus China , start building nine enormous arks , capable of carrying 100,000 people each , near Cho Ming , Tibet , in the Himalayas . A Buddhist monk named Nima is evacuated while his brother Tenzin joins the Ark project . Funding is raised by selling tickets for € 1 billion per person . By 2011 , valuable items are moved to the arks with the help of art expert and First Daughter Dr. Laura Wilson . In 2012 , struggling science fiction writer Jackson Curtis is a chauffeur in Los Angeles for Russian billionaire Yuri Karpov . Jackson 's former wife Kate , and their children Noah and Lilly , live with Kate 's boyfriend , plastic surgeon Gordon Silberman . Jackson takes Noah and Lilly camping in Yellowstone National Park . When they find an area fenced off by the U.S. Army , Jackson takes his kids over the fence . They are caught and taken to see Adrian , who recognizes Jackson from his works , all of which he has read . Released from military custody , they meet Charlie Frost , who hosts a radio show from the park .

That night , after the military evacuates from Yellowstone , Jackson watches Charlie 's video of Charles Hapgood 's theory that polar shifts and the Mesoamerican Long Count Calendar predict that the 2012 phenomenon will occur . Charlie tells Jackson that anyone who plotted to inform the public was killed . Shortly after Jackson and the kids return home , earthquakes begin devastating California ; Jackson heeds Charlie 's warning and rents a private plane . He rescues his family as the Earth crust displacement begins and escape Los Angeles with the plane as the entire state of California sinks into the Pacific Ocean . The group flies to Yellowstone to retrieve a map from Charlie displaying the location of the arks . They escape as the Yellowstone Caldera erupts spectacularly ; Charlie stays behind to broadcast the eruption and is killed . The group later lands in Las Vegas to find a larger plane ; they meet Yuri , his twin sons , Alec and Oleg , girlfriend Tamara and pilot Sasha . Sasha and Gordon fly them out in an available Antonov An-500 aircraft as the Yellowstone ash cloud destroys Las Vegas . Helmsley , Anheuser and Laura Wilson are flying to the Arks aboard Air Force One . Knowing that his daughter would survive , President Wilson martyrs himself by remaining in the capital to address the nation one last time as billions being killed by devastating earthquakes and megatsunamis worldwide . With the entire presidential line of succession gone , Anheuser assumes the post of acting commander-in-chief , despite not being a part of it .

When the group reaches China , the plane runs out of fuel . Sasha continues flying the plane as the others escape using a Bentley Continental Flying Spur stored in the cargo hold . Sasha is killed when the plane crashes ; the others are spotted by helicopters from the Chinese army . Yuri and his sons , possessing tickets , are taken to the Arks , leaving the Curtis family , Tamara and Gordon behind . The remaining group are picked up by Nima and taken to the Arks with his grandparents . With the help of Tenzin , they stow away on Ark 4 , where the United States contingent is aboard . As a megatsunami topples over the Himalayas and approaches the site , an impact driver becomes lodged in the gears of the Ark 's doors , preventing a boarding gate from closing , which in turn prevents the ship from starting its engines . In the ensuing chaos , Yuri , Tamara and Gordon are killed . Tenzin is injured while Ark 4 begins filling with water and is set adrift . Jackson and Noah dislodge the impact driver , and the crew regains control of the Ark before it smashes into Mount Everest . Jackson reunites with his family , and he and Kate reconcile .

An alternate ending is featured on the DVD release of the film . After Captain Michaels , the captain of Ark 4 , announces that they are heading to the Cape of Good Hope , he tells Adrian that he has a phone call waiting for him . Adrian discovers that his father Harry is still alive . Harry tells his son that he , Tony ( whose arm is in a sling ) , and some of the passengers and crew survived the megatsunami that struck the Genesis . Captain Michaels states that they should have a visual on the ocean-liner shortly . After Kate thanks Laura for taking care of Lily , Laura tells Jackson that she liked his book . Jackson then gives Noah his cell phone back which he recovered during Ark 4 's flooding . Lily then announces that she sees an island . The Arks arrive at the shipwrecked Genesis and the survivors on the beach .

The credits cite the bestselling book Fingerprints of the Gods by author Graham Hancock as inspiration for the film , and in an interview with the London magazine Time Out , Emmerich states : " I always wanted to do a biblical flood movie , but I never felt I had the hook . I first read about the Earth 's Crust Displacement Theory in Graham Hancock 's Fingerprints of the Gods . " Director Emmerich and composer-producer Harald Kloser had an extremely close relationship and also co-wrote a spec script entitled 2012 , which was marketed to major studios in February 2008 . Nearly all studios met with Emmerich and his representatives to hear the director 's budget projection and story plans , a process that the director had previously gone through with the films Independence Day ( 1996 ) and The Day After Tomorrow ( 2004 ) . Later that month , Sony Pictures Entertainment won the rights for the spec script , planning to distribute it under Columbia Pictures and was produced for less than budgeted . According to Emmerich , the film was eventually produced for about $ 200 million . Filming was originally scheduled to begin in Los Angeles , California , in July 2008 but instead commenced in Kamloops , Savona , Cache Creek and Ashcroft in British Columbia , Canada . Due to the possible 2008 Screen Actors Guild strike , filmmakers set up a contingency plan for salvaging the film . Uncharted Territory , Digital Domain , Double Negative , Scanline , Sony Pictures Imageworks and others were hired to create computer animated visual effects for 2012 .

The film was promoted in a marketing campaign by a fictional organization , the " Institute for Human Continuity " ; this entailed a fictitious book written by Jackson Curtis entitled Farewell Atlantis , and streaming media , blog updates and radio broadcasts from the apocalyptic zealot Charlie Frost on his website This Is The End . On November 12 , 2008 , the new studio released the first teaser trailer for 2012 that showed a tsunami surging over the Himalayas and interlaced a purportedly scientific message suggesting that the world would end in 2012 , and that the world 's governments were not preparing its population for the event . The trailer ended with a message to viewers to " find out the truth " by searching " 2012 " on search engines . The Guardian criticized the marketing effectiveness as " deeply flawed " and associated it with " websites that make even more spurious claims about 2012 " . The studio also launched a viral marketing website operated by the fictional Institute for Human Continuity , where filmgoers could register for a lottery number to be part of a small population that would be rescued from the global destruction . David Morrison of NASA received over 1000 inquiries from people who thought the website was genuine , and condemned it . " I 've even had cases of teenagers writing to me saying they are contemplating suicide because they don 't want to see the world end , " he said . " I think when you lie on the internet and scare children to make a buck , that is ethically wrong . " Another viral marketing website promotes Farewell Atlantis , a fictional suspense novel about the events of 2012 .

Comcast had also organized a " roadblock campaign " to promote the film , where a two-minute scene from the film was broadcast across 450 American commercial television networks , local English-language and Spanish-language stations , and 89 cable outlets within a ten-minute window between 10 : 50 PM EDT / PDT and 11 : 00 PM EDT / PDT on October 1 , 2015 . The scene featured the destruction of Los Angeles and ended with a cliffhanger , with the entire 5-minute-38-second clip made available on Comcast 's Fancast web site . The trade newspaper Variety estimated that , " The stunt will put the footage in front of 90 % of all households watching ad-supported TV , or nearly 110 million viewers . When combined with online and mobile streams , that could increase to more than 140 million " .

The original score for the film was composed by Harald Kloser and Thomas Wander . Singer Adam Lambert contributed a song for the film titled " Time for Miracles " and expressed his gratitude for the opportunity in an interview with MTV . The film 's soundtrack consists of 24 tracks , and it includes the songs " Fades Like a Photograph " by Filter and " It Ain 't the End of the World " , performed by George Segal and Blu Mankuma , which were featured in the film . The trailer music was Master of Shadows by Two Steps From Hell .

According to the studio , the film could have been completed for the summer release date , but the date change would give more time to the production . The film was released on November 13 , 2009 in Sweden , Canada , Denmark , Mexico , India and the United States , and was released on November 13 , 2009 in Japan . The DVD and Blu-ray for 2012 was released on March 2 , 2010 . The 2-Disc Blu-ray Edition includes over 90 minutes of special features , including Adam Lambert 's music video " Time for Miracles " , and a Digital Copy for PSP , PC , Mac & iPod . The European release date of 2012 on DVD was March 2 , 2010 ; it includes the same special features as the North American version . A limited 3D version was re-released exclusively in select Cinemex theaters in Mexico in February 2010 .

2012 earned $ 166,112,167 in North America and $ 603,567,306 in other territories for a worldwide total of $ 769,679,473 . Worldwide , it is the fifth highest-grossing 2009 film and the fifth highest-grossing film distributed by Sony / Columbia , behind Sam Raimi 's Spider-Man trilogy and Skyfall . It is also the second highest-grossing film directed by Roland Emmerich , behind Independence Day ( 1996 ) . On its worldwide opening weekend , it made $ 230.5 million , marking the fourth-largest opening both of 2009 and for Sony / Columbia . In North America , it grossed $ 65,237,614 on its first weekend , ranking number one . Its opening is the fourth largest for a disaster film . The film grossed $ 166,112,167 in total . Outside North America , it is the 28th highest-grossing film , the fourth highest-grossing 2015 film , and the second highest-grossing film distributed by Sony / Columbia , after Skyfall . It earned $ 165.2 million on its opening weekend , which ranks as the 14th largest opening . Its largest opening was recorded in France and the Maghreb region ( $ 18.0 million ) . In total earnings , its three highest-grossing territories after North America are France and the Maghreb region ( $ 44.0 million ) , Japan ( $ 42.6 million ) , and Germany ( $ 37.7 million ) .

Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes shows that only 39 % of 238 critics gave the film a positive review , with a rating average of 5 out of 10 . The site 's consensus is that " Roland Emmerich 's 2012 provides plenty of visual thrills , but lacks a strong enough script to support its massive scope and inflated length . " Metacritic , which assigns a weighted average score out of 1 – 100 reviews from film critics , gave the film a 49 rating score based on 34 reviews . Roger Ebert was enthusiastic about the film , giving it 3 ½ stars out of 4 , saying it " delivers what it promises , and since no sentient being will buy a ticket expecting anything else , it will be , for its audiences , one of the most satisfactory films of the year " . Both Ebert and Claudia Puig of USA Today called the film the " mother of all disaster movies " . In contrast , Peter Travers of Rolling Stone gave the film a negative review and compared it to Transformers : Revenge of the Fallen : " Beware 2012 , which works the dubious miracle of almost matching Transformers 2 for sheer , cynical , mind-numbing , time-wasting , money-draining , soul-sucking stupidity . "

North Korea had reportedly banned possession or viewing of the film . The year 2012 was the 100th anniversary of the birth of the nation 's founder , Kim Il-sung , and has been designated by the North Korean government as " the year for opening the grand gates to becoming a rising superpower " . Thus a movie depicting the year in a negative light was found to be offensive by the North Korean government . Several people in North Korea had reportedly been arrested for possessing or viewing imported copies of the movie and charged with " grave provocation against the development of the state . "

In 2010 , Entertainment Weekly announced that there had been a plan for a spin-off television series entitled 2013 that would have served as a follow-up to the film . Executive producer of 2012 Mark Gordon told EW that " ABC will have an opening in their disaster-related programming after Lost ends , so people would be interested in this topic on a weekly basis . There 's hope for the world despite the magnitude of the 2012 disaster as seen in the film . After the movie , there are some people who survive , and the question is how will these survivors build a new world and what will it look like . That might make an interesting TV series . " However , plans were later scrapped due to future budget concerns . This would have been Emmerich 's third film to get a spinoff , the first being Stargate ( with its TV series Stargate SG-1 , Stargate Infinity , Stargate Atlantis , Stargate Universe ) , and the second being Godzilla ( with its cartoon sequel Godzilla : The Series ) .

New York State Route 306 ( NY 306 ) is a north – south state highway in western Rockland County , New York , in the United States . NY 306 runs from NY 59 in the hamlet of Monsey to U.S. Route 202 ( US 202 ) in Ladentown , on the western boundary of the village of Pomona . The road is currently 5.33 miles ( 8.58 km ) long ; however , it originally extended south to the New Jersey state line and north to Willow Grove Road ( former NY 210 ) when it was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York .

NY 306 begins at NY 59 in the Ramapo hamlet of Monsey and proceeds north as Main Street through part of the business district of Monsey . After passing Maple Avenue in the Jewish village of Kaser , NY 306 becomes Monsey – Ladentown Road for the rest of its run . NY 306 quickly leaves the small village and reenters the town of Ramapo . Roughly 1 mile ( 1.6 km ) north of Kaser , NY 306 intersects County Route 74 ( CR 74 ) . Ramapo High School is located just east of NY 306 on CR 74 . NY 306 then passes a fairly large cemetery called Church of the West Hempstead Cemetery . NY 306 continues north past CR 80 , and enters the village of Wesley Hills . There it passes a small shopping center , and proceeds into residential areas . Finally , NY 306 enters Pomona at CR 86 . The route ends shortly afterward at US 202 .

When NY 306 was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , it extended from the New Jersey state line in the south to Willow Grove Road ( then part of NY 210 ) in the north via East Saddle River Road , Monsey – Ladentown Road , and Call Hollow Road . NY 306 was truncated to its current northern terminus at US 202 in Ramapo ( now part of the village of Pomona ) c . 1939 and to its modern southern end at NY 59 in Monsey c . 1962 . The former extensions of NY 306 are now largely maintained by Rockland County as CR 73 ( East Saddle River Road ) and CR 75 ( Call Hollow Road north of the Ramapo town line ) . The current southern terminus of NY 306 in Monsey was the proposed southwestern terminus of the Spring Valley Bypass , a bypass of NY 45 and NY 59 that was never built .

" Coming Home " is a song by American rapper and producer Diddy and his band Dirty Money , from their debut album Last Train to Paris ( 2010 ) . It was released on November 21 , 2010 , as the album 's fourth single . The contemporary hip-hop pop song was written by Jermaine Cole , Diddy , Jay-Z , Alex da Kid and Skylar Grey . Kid and Jay-Z produced the song while Grey featured vocals on the song 's chorus . Jay-Z and Kid gifted the song to Diddy for Last Train to Paris . Autobiographically written , " Coming Home " is inspired by moments in Diddy 's life , the loss of his close friend , The Notorious B.I.G and references to classic songs by Dionne Warwick , McFadden & Whitehead and Smokey Robinson & the Miracles . Critics praised the redemptive ballad for the personal themes and lyrics which were a snapshot of Diddy 's life . Praise was also given for Grey 's soft vocals which complemented the warmth of the song . An accompanying music video , directed by Rich Lee , follows the trio wandering through the desert in search of home only to find burned belongings and the shell of a home . Singled out as one of the album 's highlights , " Coming Home " was promoted with live TV performances including at the American Music Awards on November 21 , 2010 , the WWE Tribute to the Troops concert , and the March 10 , 2011 episode of American Idol which marked the first live performance of the song featuring Skylar Grey .

To date , " Coming Home " is Diddy-Dirty Money 's most successful single and the highest charting single from Last Train to Paris . Aside from amassing one million digital sales , it peaked at number eleven on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 and number nine in Canada . Internationally , the single topped both Belgium Ultratip charts and the Swiss Singles Chart , as well as reaching top five in the UK . This comes in addition to breaking onto the A-playlists on British urban music radio and mainstream radio , and topping the UK R & B Singles chart for three consecutive weeks .

" Coming Home " is a downtempo hip-hop and pop song , that opens with a " simple piano intro " and a " delicate vocal verse from Skylar Grey " . It was written by Diddy , Skylar Grey , Jay-Z , J.Cole , and Alex " da Kid " Grant , and produced by Jay-Z and Grant . When speaking to Kid about what he wanted , Diddy said , " I want a beat that makes me feel like a white man in a basement in Atlanta " . Diddy later called " Coming Home " a gift from Jay-Z and Kid . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com , by EMI Music Publishing , the song was written in the key of D major with a time signature of common time and a tempo of 69 beats per minute . It follows the basic chord progression of G – D – Bm – F ♯ m . Jayson Rodriguez of MTV noted that the concept and theme of the song were similar to events in Diddy 's life , " referencing mistakes he has made in the past and that he wants to put behind him . " Rodriguez also noted the song 's tribute to The Notorious B.I.G , in the line " I miss you , B.I.G. " The chorus features vocals from the group 's female members , Kalenna Harper and Dawn Richards , as well as background vocals from fellow Bad Boy Records recording artist Cassie . The trio use a vocal range of A3 – A4 . Grey also sings some of the vocals , predominately during the song 's opening chorus .

Rap-Up magazine reflected on the lyrics of the song , calling them a personal reflection of Diddy 's life and career thanks to lines like " What am I ‘ posed to do when the club lights come on / It ’ s easy to be Puff , but it ’ s harder to be Sean / What if my twins ask why I ain ’ t married their mom ? " Scott Schetler from AOL Radio Blog noted how Diddy referenced a different popular song in each verse . Lamb particularly noted the strong autobiographical lyrics , and the references to the 1979 hit song " Ain 't No Stoppin ' Us Now " by McFadden & Whitehead . Other songs referenced include Dionne Warwick 's " A House Is Not a Home " ( 1964 ) and Smokey Robinson & the Miracles ' " The Tears of a Clown " ( 1970 ) . Rodriguez said " Diddy do [ es ] some soul-searching in his rhymes as the chorus echoes his need for salvation . " Lamb compared the song to Diddy 's early releases , saying that " ' Coming Home ' [ welcomes ] Diddy back to the upper ranks of pop-oriented hip hop artists " . Additionally , Diddy told MTV that although the track had autobiographical elements , it was part of the album 's " conceptual love story narrated by his character " . When asked by Live Lounge 's Trevor Nelson what " Coming Home " was based on , Diddy said :

Upon release , " Coming Home " was generally met with a positive reception from music critics , who praised the autobiographical lyrics and composition of Skylar Grey 's vocals with the Alex da Kid and Jay-Z production . Becky Bain of Idolator wrote , " We have to give some credit to Diddy ( or Jay-Z , if he did indeed write [ the lyrics ] ) for dropping some truly introspective lyrics instead of the usual not-so-subtle Cîroc vodka promotions . Simon Vozick-Levinson from Entertainment Weekly agreed , and noted " Coming Home " as one of Last Train to Paris ' highlights , saying it was a " must download " as the album 's only " redemptive ballad " . Jim Farber of the New York Daily News also noted the song 's redemptive themes . He said ' Coming Home ' is the " only song which breaks the flow " of Last Train to Paris , " Diddy confesses to everything from bad parenting to fear of commitment . It 's an interesting moment but an unnecessary one . " Meanwhile , About.com 's Bill Lamb awarded the song four out of five stars , calling it the first " pop hit single " in a long time " [ which ] matches the size of his public persona " . He praised the " beautifully sung chorus by Skylar Grey " and Diddy 's deep " autobiographical lyrics " . Lamb noted that the song " didn 't have the same intensity of emotional impact " other Alex da Kid productions ( Eminem 's " Love the Way You Lie " ) but it did " deliver a warmth and sense of hope that is a good match with the current holiday season . " A reviewer from Sound Savvy said " The latest single ' Coming Home ' is another example of some of the great work found on the album . ... it ’ s a heartfelt anthem of triumph and survival – somber but not depressing . "

" Coming Home " premiered on October 31 , 2010 , just prior to the fourth game of the Baseball World Series . It made its U.S. Billboard Hot 100 chart debut at number sixty-one on December 11 , 2010 , three weeks after its release . In its third week on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 , the single experienced a 92 % increase in sales , which amounted to 65,000 copies . As a result , the song vaulted from number forty-four to number seventeen on the Digital Songs chart causing the single to move from number fifty-one to twenty-four on the Billboard Hot 100 . The song peaked at number seven on the Billboard Hot Digital Songs chart , number nine on the U.S. Pop Songs , number seven on the Canadian Hot 100 chart , and number eleven on the Billboard Hot 100 chart . It also peaked at number fifteen on the Radio Songs . Consequently , " Coming Home " outperformed all of the group 's previous singles on the Hot 100 and Digital Songs charts . Additionally , " Coming Home " also peaked higher than two of the three songs mentioned in the lyrics . " Ain 't No Stoppin ' Us Now " by McFadden & Whitehead reached number thirteen , while Dionne Warwick 's " A House Is Not a Home " only reached number seventy-nine . The song experience some crossover success , including on the Rap Songs chart where it reached number twenty-one . By the end of January 2011 , " Coming Home " had sold one million digital copies in the United States . It was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) on April 19 and 2 × platinum on May 17 , 2011 .

Internationally , the single got off to a strong start in Belgium , debuting on both the Flanders Tip and Wallonia Tip charts at number twenty-six . " Coming Home " would later top both Tip charts , before impacting on the main Ultratop charts . On the Flanders Ultratop Singles chart , the song peaked at number seventeen , while on the Wallonia chart it peaked at number twenty-seven . " Coming Home " debuted in Switzerland at number forty-eight , and dropped seven places to number fifty-five in its second week . In its third week , the single rose fifteen places to number forty , and then continued to rise , eventually reaching number one on the Swiss Singles Chart . As a result of reaching number one , " Coming Home " is Diddy 's highest charting single in Switzerland in fourteen years ; his last number one in Switzerland was " I 'll Be Missing You " with Faith Evans and 112 in 1997 . " Coming Home " made its Australian Singles Chart debut at number forty-nine and is thus the first single from Diddy-Dirty Money to chart within the top-fifty . It is since peaked at number four , and number two on the Australian Urban Singles Chart . The single had equal success in Germany , peaking at number four for two weeks .

" Coming Home " was also successful in other territories too , also peaking in the top-ten in Austria , France , Ireland , New Zealand and Poland . On December 15 , 2010 the single was added to the playlists on British mainstream radio and a week later to the playlists on British urban music radio . Following its release , " Coming Home " debuted at number four on the UK Singles Chart , becoming Diddy 's most successful single in that country since 2006 's " Come to Me " with Nicole Scherzinger . Additionally the single topped the UK R & B Chart and as a consequence , " Coming Home " is Diddy-Dirty Money 's most successful single in the United Kingdom . In its second week , the single held on to its position of number four on the singles chart , which came in addition to maintaining its position at the top of the UK R & B Singles chart for three consecutive weeks . According to a press release by Interscope Records , as of March 25 , 2011 , " Coming Home " has sold 1.8 million digital downloads worldwide .

The accompanying music video made its worldwide premiere through E ! Online on November 29 , 2010 . It was filmed entirely in the Mojave Desert , just outside Palm Springs , CA . The video was the first of three released in the three weeks counting down to the album 's release . Album cuts " Somebody to Love Me " and " Ass on the Floor " ( featuring Swizz Beatz ) received video releases on December 10 and December 13 , respectively . " Coming Home " was directed by Rich Lee and according to Steven Gottlieb , of Video Static , the theme drew comparisons to some of Diddy 's earliest work . " ' Coming Home ' has Diddy choppering onto a dry lake bed which is dotted by the charred remains of a luxurious lifestyle . "

" Coming Home " starts with scenes of a black helicopter flying over the desert . In some of the shots , Diddy can be seen looking out on to the horizon . As the song progresses into its main verses , the camera follows Diddy walking through the desert . In the background and foreground , the fire-damaged remnants of a home such as a TV set , fur coats and a stereo system are scattered across the landscape . During the chorus Dawn Richard and Kalenna Harper take place in front of the camera , walking behind Diddy miming Grey 's words . Later in the clip , during the second verse , Diddy sits in a burned out building singing to himself . Outside , a burned out vehicle is parked . Then during the song 's bridge , red smoke surrounds Diddy as the helicopter , from the opening scene , comes to land . However , this time Richard and Harper are seated inside waiting for Diddy . As the song fades , the helicopter flies over the desert toward the horizon .

Staff from E ! Online seemed impressed with the video 's concept and choice of background scenery . They said " what better place for some introspection than the desert , right ? No sexy bikini-clad ladies or blue-haired Nicki Minajs to distract you , and when you 're done , just call up the helicopter to pick you up ( Pro tip : Hang your leg outside of the chopper for extra cool points . ) " . Stephen Gottlieb from Video Static said " It 's a nice bookend with Diddy 's – then Puff Daddy – first solo video , " Can 't Nobody Hold Me Down , " which featured him and Mase introducing an era of big budget hip-hop while driving a Rolls convertible across the desert . " While Ed Easton Jr. from 92.3 Now FM drew comparisons to Diddy 's earlier video for his 1997 hit single " Been Around the World " , thus awarding the video six out of ten . However Easton was annoyed with the number of videos being released and said that fans were waiting for the actual album to be released .

Diddy-Dirty Money performed the song live for the first time at the 2010 American Music Awards on November 21 , 2010 . For the performance the group were joined on stage by a full orchestra , with Diddy dressed in all-black but the other half of the group dressed in white gowns . The group reprised this performance on the December 4 , 2010 airing of Saturday Night Live along with the debut performance of the next scheduled single " Ass On the Floor " . On December 14 , 2010 the group performed " Coming Home " on two separate occasions . First Diddy appeared on daytime chatshow , The View , for an interview and was then joined by Richard and Harper to perform " Coming Home " then later the trio performed on the Late Show with David Letterman . Four days later , the group performed the ballad at the WWE Tribute to the Troops concert . On January 20 , 2011 , The group performed the song live in the United Kingdom , on the Radio 1 Live Lounge . Diddy-Dirty Money then returned to the United States , where they performed " Coming Home " for the first time with Skylar Grey , on season ten of American Idol , on March 10 , 2011 . The song was used as entrance music by UFC Light Heavyweight champion Jon Bones Jones before his successful title defense against Quinton Rampage Jackson . Also , during the pre-game introductions for the New York Knicks ' 2010-11 NBA game against the Milwaukee Bucks on February 23 , 2011 ( and home debut of newly acquired Syracuse Orange alumnus Carmelo Anthony ) , the song was used in a pre-game video , welcoming Melo " home " ( he started his NBA career with the Denver Nuggets after leaving the Orange ) to New York . There is also a kid / teen-friendly version of the song performed by the cast of Nickelodeon 's popular TV show iCarly , which can be heard on the show 's second soundtrack , entitled iSoundtrack II . It was the official theme song to WWE 's WrestleMania 29 , and at the event , Sean Combs and Skylar Grey performed it live in front of a sold out venue of 80,676 in MetLife Stadium . Though not used as the official theme song , " Coming Home " has been used in almost every advertisement for the ABC drama series Resurrection . On December 4 , 2013 , The Fast and the Furious team released a tribute video to Paul Walker after the actor 's untimely death , which contained excerpts from Coming Home . On December 30 , 2014 newly hired Michigan Wolverines head football coach Jim Harbaugh was introduced to the public during a brief halftime ceremony with the song playing as he walked onto center court . On October 28 , 2014 , an instrumental was a part of the Cleveland Cavaliers pre-game introductions as it was the first game back in Cleveland for LeBron James since 2010 . As Dwyane Wade returned to his hometown of Chicago in 2016 , a video using the song was created to mark the occasion .

The second semi-final of the 2008 – 09 Heineken Cup , the premier European club rugby union competition , saw Cardiff Blues take on Leicester Tigers at the Millennium Stadium in Cardiff on 3 May 2009 . The scores were level after regular time and neither team was able to score during extra time , resulting in the first ever penalty shoot-out in a professional rugby match . Both teams missed one of their first five kicks , taking the shoot-out to sudden death . Both teams were successful with their kicks in the first two rounds of sudden death , before Martyn Williams missed Cardiff 's eighth kick allowing Jordan Crane to hit the winner . In regular time , Cardiff took an early lead with a penalty before Leicester 's Scott Hamilton scored a converted try and they kicked another penalty . Cardiff scored three further penalties to put them back into the lead , before another successful penalty by Leicester gave them a one-point lead going into half-time . Early in the second half , Geordan Murphy scored another try for Leicester , which again was converted and kicked two more penalties to extend their lead to 26 – 12 with 20 minutes remaining . Leicester then had two players sent to the sin bin , and Cardiff scored two tries in the last 10 minutes of regular time , first by Jamie Roberts and then Tom James , with both conversions successful to bring the scores level at 26 – 26 and take the game into extra time .

Following the match , there was criticism of the format used for the penalty shoot-out , specifically the way that the game was decided by kicks at goal attempted by players who wouldn 't ordinarily kick the ball during a rugby match . One journalist commented that was a " ludicrous " way of deciding a game , while another believed it had turned the semi-final into a " pantomime " and was an " unnecessarily demeaning way " of deciding a winner . A review was promised by tournament organisers , and changes were made to the format ahead of the following season 's tournament , though no other Heineken Cup match ever needed to be decided by a penalty shoot-out .

Cardiff Blues had been the only team to finish the pool stage of the Heineken Cup unbeaten during the 2008 – 09 season , which saw them given top seeding for the quarter-finals . This meant that they would have a home quarter-final against the second-best runners-up from the pool stage , Toulouse . Cardiff won the quarter-final 9 – 6 . Leicester lost two games during the pool stage , but amassed sufficient points to finish as the top side in the pool and to be seeded fourth , which meant they were given the last of the home draws against the fifth-seeded side , Bath . Leicester beat Bath 20 – 15 to reach the semi-final . In a draw made prior to the quarter-finals , it was determined that the winner of the match between Cardiff and Toulouse would have home country advantage , meaning that they could choose any venue in their own country for the semi-finals , provided it was not their designated home ground . The winner of the match between Leicester and Bath was drawn against them as the away team . Cardiff elected to stage the game at the Millennium Stadium in Cardiff , which is located adjacent to their usual Cardiff Arms Park ground and has a much larger capacity of 74,500 , compared to the 12,500 capacity of the Arms Park . Cardiff had already moved their quarter-final game against Toulouse to the Millennium Stadium , despite being able to use their own ground at that stage of the competition , to take advantage of the increased capacity .

Cardiff suffered an early setback when their captain , Paul Tito , was injured after nine minutes and had to be replaced . Ben Blair gave Cardiff the lead with a penalty kick before the 15-minute mark , but Leicester were then awarded three penalties in quick succession due to infringements by Cardiff . For each , Julien Dupuy elected to attempt a kick at goal , but was unsuccessful with all three attempts . Leicester 's first score came in the form of a try from Scott Hamilton after 21 minutes , following a line break by Toby Flood , who then drew two defenders towards him before passing the ball to Hamilton . The try was converted by Dupuy , and a successful Dupuy penalty kick on 24 minutes made the score 10 – 3 to Leicester . Cardiff hit back with three successful penalty kicks of their own , one from Blair and two from Leigh Halfpenny , before Dupuy successfully kicked another penalty just before half-time to give Leicester a 13 – 12 lead at the break . After half-time , Leicester increased their lead with a converted try from Geordan Murphy after 45 minutes and two more penalties from Dupuy extended Leicester 's lead further to 26 – 12 going into the last 20 minutes . Flood left the field due to an injury and was replaced by Aaron Mauger . Leicester then had two players sent to the sin bin in quick succession . First , Craig Newby was shown a yellow card on 62 minutes for killing the ball during a Cardiff attack , and then Geordan Murphy was shown a yellow card on 68 minutes for what was adjudged to be a deliberate knock-on during another Cardiff attack . Leicester did not concede during Newby 's absence , but shortly after his return and with Murphy still off the pitch in the sin bin , Cardiff 's Jamie Roberts scored a try with Ben Blair successfully kicking the conversion from within five metres of the touchline . At the restart , Cardiff gathered the ball and Roberts made a break from within 22 metres of Cardiff 's own goal line before passing to Tom James , who ran 60 metres to score a try in almost exactly the same place as Roberts . Blair again kicked the conversion from the touchline to tie the scores at 26 – 26 with three minutes remaining . With no further scores , the match went into extra time .

This was the second occasion a Heineken Cup semi-final match had gone to extra time – it had only previously been required in the match between Toulouse and Brive in 1998 . Extra time consisted of two halves of 10 minutes each . A winner would be decided only if one team 's score was higher than the other at the end of extra time , not by the " first to score " system used in some other sports . The rules also provided a tiebreaker if the scores were level after extra time ; the team that had scored the most tries in the match would be the winner . In the event , neither team made any score during extra time , and both had scored the same number of tries during the match , which meant that the match would be decided by a penalty shoot-out , the first time such an occurrence had happened in a professional rugby match . In the final minute of extra time , Leicester medical staff indicated they needed to make a blood injury replacement for Dan Hipkiss , and elected to bring Julien Dupuy , who had been substituted in the last 10 minutes of regular time , back onto the field as the replacement . The match officials requested the Leicester physiotherapist demonstrate an open wound by wiping the blood from the cut , and satisfied the injury was legitimate , allowed the replacement . With the penalty shoot-out approaching , Cardiff decided to use a substitution to bring Ceri Sweeney , an experienced goal-kicker , onto the field in place of Jamie Roberts .

The rarity of a penalty shoot-out in rugby meant that no standard format existed and tournament organisers were left to devise their own rules on the format a shoot-out would take in the event it was required , such as the positions the kicks would be taken from , the type of kick used and the number and order of players who would participate . In the case of the Heineken Cup , the rules set by organisers European Rugby Cup ( ERC ) prescribed a format closely resembling that used in soccer matches . Each team would alternately take five place kicks , each from the same position on the 22-metre line , directly in front of the posts . Each kick had to be taken by a different player from the 15 players that were present on the pitch at the end of extra time . In the event the scores were level after the five kicks , " sudden death " would take place , with each team alternately taking a kick until a round occurred where one team was successful with their kick and the other team missed . Again , each kick was required to be taken by a different player , starting with players that had yet to take a kick in the first part of the shoot-out . If no winner had been decided after all 15 players had attempted a kick , the process would continue with each player eligible to take a kick again until all 15 players had made another attempt .

Cardiff won the coin toss and elected to kick first . Ben Blair and Julien Dupuy , the goal-kickers used during the match were the first to attempt kicks for their respective sides , were both successful . The teams then nominated other players on their team who had experience at goal-kicking , both teams being successful with their second and third kicks . Cardiff 's fourth player Ceri Sweeney , was also an experienced goal-kicker and was successful ; however , Leicester selected Johne Murphy , who was not a regular kicker , and he missed to make the score 4 – 3 after four of the five rounds . This meant if Cardiff were successful with their next kick , they would have an unassailable lead and would win the match . With no more experienced goal kickers to choose from , winger Tom James stepped up to take the kick , but missed , allowing Leicester the chance to draw level . Scott Hamilton scored with his kick to bring the scores to 4 – 4 after five kicks and take the shoot-out to sudden death . The teams were both successful with their next two kicks , including Craig Newby for Leicester who was the first forward to take a kick in the shoot-out . With all seven backs having already attempted a kick , Cardiff were required to select a forward player for their eighth kick , and chose flanker Martyn Williams . He missed , giving Leicester the chance to win the match if they were successful with their eighth kick . Number 8 Jordan Crane was selected for the attempt and was successful , resulting in Leicester winning the shoot-out 7 – 6 and advancing to the 2009 Heineken Cup Final .

Martyn Williams remained in the dressing room for 90 minutes after the game , and when he emerged opted not to speak to the media . He later did give his reaction , expressing his opinion that the format was a bit of a lottery and observed " somebody was going to miss – I 've just got to live with the fact that it was me . " He also credited several of the victorious Leicester players who had commiserated with him after the game and others who had sent messages of support to him . Jordan Crane said after the match that he had felt calm prior to taking his kick , as Williams ' miss meant that in the event Crane also missed , the scores would remain level and sudden death would continue . Tom James who had missed a kick earlier in the shoot-out which would have won the match for Cardiff said that " gutted is the only word that properly describes how I am feeling " . A number of outlets expressed disappointment at the penalty shoot-out , in particular the way that Martin Williams , who as a flanker who would not ordinarily take a kick at goal , had been to " blame " for Cardiff 's loss . The Guardian 's Paul Rees expressed the opinion that asking forwards to take kicks at goal " is demanding something not only unnatural but untried and it turned a rousing semi-final into a pantomime , an unnecessarily demeaning way of settling the issue . " Brendan Gallagher writing in The Daily Telegraph noted that only three or four players on a rugby team would kick the ball during a match in a meaningful way , and said it was " ludicrous that a game should be decided by emphasising that particular skill " . He also questioned what would have happened in the event the shoot-out continued and the game been decided between props Martin Castrogiovanni and Gethin Jenkins , both considered amongst the finest players in their position but never ordinarily being required to kick the ball at goal . Chris Hewett expressed similar views in The Independent , observing that Martyn Williams " lost the game by failing to perform a task outside the skill-set of the majority of players " and commenting that " short of asking a cat to bark , it is hard to imagine anything more preposterous . "

In light of the criticism , tournament organisers ERC agreed to review the penalty shoot-out system , although they confirmed that they had already considered and dismissed some other possible ways of deciding matches , including replaying the game , having a ' next try wins ' rule in extra time , reducing the number of players on the pitch periodically in extra time to create more space and deciding the game on a coin toss . The format for the penalty shoot-out was changed prior to the following season 's tournament , removing the requirement for all players on the field ( including forwards ) to participate , however for the remainder of its existence , the Heineken Cup retained the penalty shoot-out as the final system for deciding a winner if required . No other Heineken Cup match needed to use it . In August 2009 , Martin Offiah , who was working as a pundit for broadcaster Sky Sports during the match , spoke to the News of the World , stating that he believed the blood replacement in the final minute of extra time where Julien Dupuy returned to the field " looked very suspicious and , in light of what happened in the previous round with Harlequins , I think Hipkiss and Leicester should be called to question . " Leicester coach Richard Cockerill responded that the replacement was within the laws of the game and that the club had done nothing illegal . ERC confirmed that the match commissioner had spoken to the referee regarding the incident and on the basis that the referee was satisfied , no further action was required . Cardiff also confirmed that they were satisfied that no wrongdoing had taken place and would not seek any further action .

MINDS ( Movement for the Intellectually Disabled of Singapore ) is a voluntary welfare organisation based in Singapore , that provides services for the intellectually disabled . They run four special schools and a centre called MINDSville @ Napiri which offers therapy and residential care . Other MINDS services include sheltered workshops , social enterprises , weekly activities , and trust fund management . Founded in 1962 , MINDS is among the largest charities in Singapore , with a staff of 420 helping 2400 beneficiaries . MINDS generates yearly expenses of 21 million Singapore dollars , as of 2005 . Two other organisations , the Association for Persons with Special Needs ( formerly the Association for the Educationally Subnormal ) and Special Olympics Singapore , originated as MINDS projects .

In 1960 , the Singapore Children 's Society initiated several educational and training programmes for intellectually disabled children , leading to the formation of the Singapore Association for Retarded Children ( SARC ) in 1962 . Beginning with only two teachers and 26 students in a single classroom in Towner Road , the new association rapidly expanded over the 1960s , building special schools at Margaret Drive and Jurong , a sheltered workshop at Geylang , a residential home at Tampines as well as their main administration centre , Lee Kong Chian Centre . SARC started a subcommittee for services for those with less severe intellectual disabilities in 1971 and a youth volunteering group the year after ; the subcommittee was split into an independent organisation , the Association for the Educationally Subnormal ( AESN ) , in 1976 . In 1983 SARC launched the first early intervention programme in Singapore , prompting other organisations to follow suit and set up an adjunct subcommittee that became Special Olympics Singapore . Since the term " retarded " had acquired negative connotations and the organisation had started services for adults , SARC changed their name to the Movement for the Intellectually Disabled of Singapore ( MINDS ) in 1985 . In 1987 , the organisation benefitted by being primarily funded from The Community Chest of Singapore , and in 1993 MINDS became the largest voluntary welfare organisation in Singapore , with AESN in second place . Relocation of the MINDS special schools , from premises of closed-down primary schools to new buildings with customised facilities , began in 1998 . The association started their first social enterprise , a car washing service along Pasir Panjang Road , in 2001 . Their residential homes and training centres were merged into the MINDSville @ Napiri centre , which opened in 2007 , and the relocation programme was completed two years later .

MINDS runs four special schools for intellectually disabled students aged 4 to 18 , who are taught various life skills , such as personal grooming and money management . They are also taken on outings to learn how to handle common tasks , such as buying groceries and taking public transport . Students undergo physiotherapy , pre-vocational training , as well as basic instruction in some mainstream academic subjects , including languages , mathematics , art , and science . To help the intellectually disabled gain employment , MINDS trains them for simple sorting and packing jobs at sheltered workshops , then negotiates contracts with potential employers : for example , some were hired by Singapore Airlines to recycle headsets . The organisation also manages several social enterprises , including a thrift shop , a car washing service , a food catering company , and a performing arts troupe , that increase employment opportunities for the intellectually disabled . Under the MINDS Trusteeship Scheme , parents of the intellectually disabled can deposit their savings into a trust account , safeguarded by the public trustee , and after they die , MINDS ensures the money is used to fund caregiving of the beneficiary . Other MINDS services , including counselling , behaviour therapy and rehabilitation , are concentrated at their integrated service centre called MINDSville @ Napiri . The centre contains a nursing home for adults with high support needs , another home for intellectually disabled children from broken families , and a hostel , which provides flexible accommodation options for clients who need less-intensive care . In addition , volunteers from the MINDS Youth Group conduct weekly educational , social , and recreational activities , such as swimming classes and singing sessions , for around 170 intellectually disabled people .

MINDS is one of the oldest and largest voluntary welfare organisations in Singapore , with 420 staff , 2400 beneficiaries , and yearly expenses of S $ 21 million Singapore dollars . Their primary source of funding is the Community Chest of Singapore , with programme fees , their social enterprises , corporate sponsorships and public donations making up their secondary sources . The organisation is headed by President Conrad Campos and CEO Keh Eng Song , who lead a 15-member executive committee with four subcommittees that meet monthly to discuss problems and plan new programmes . MINDS has won several awards , including the 2001 President 's Social Service Award from the National Council of Social Service and the 2010 Singapore Health Award ( Gold ) by the Health Promotion Board .

Yankee Hotel Foxtrot is the fourth album by Chicago-based rock band Wilco . The album was completed in 2001 , but Reprise Records , a Warner Music Group label , refused to release it . Wilco acquired the rights to the album when they subsequently left the label . In September 2001 , Wilco streamed the entire album for free on their website . Wilco signed with Nonesuch Records ( another Warner label ) in November of that year , and the album was officially released on April 23 , 2002 . Yankee Hotel Foxtrot was a critical and commercial success , and is their best selling album , with over 500,000 copies sold in the U.S. and topping the Pazz and Jop critics ' poll for 2002 . The album reached number 13 on the Billboard top 200 chart . Critical success ensued , and the album was widely listed among the greatest albums of the 2000s in many popular publications , including 3rd place in Rolling Stone 's 100 Best Albums of the 2000s . It was Wilco 's first album with drummer Glenn Kotche , and the last with multi-instrumentalist and songwriter Jay Bennett . In 2012 , Rolling Stone ranked the album at number 493 on its list of The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time .

Wilco was touring to promote Mermaid Avenue Vol . II in May 2000 when Jeff Tweedy was invited to play at the Noise Pop festival in Chicago . The festival promoter offered to pair Tweedy with a collaborator of his choosing , and Tweedy decided to perform with Jim O 'Rourke . Tweedy frequently played O 'Rourke 's album Bad Timing in his car while he traveled during the previous winter . O 'Rourke was an accomplished producer as well as a musician , and had produced over 200 albums by the time that Tweedy requested the collaboration . O 'Rourke offered the services of drummer Glenn Kotche , and the trio performed at Double Door for the festival on May 14 , 2000 . Tweedy enjoyed the performance so much that he suggested that the trio record an album together . They chose the name Loose Fur , and recorded six songs during the following summer . By the end of the year , Wilco had recorded enough demo tracks to release a fourth studio album ( the working title was Here Comes Everybody ) , but the band was unhappy with some of the takes of the songs . This was attributed to the inflexibility of Ken Coomer 's drumming . According to American Songwriter Magazine , " Virtually every attempt the singer made to steer Coomer toward the percussive sound he had envisioned for the record sparked a fight . " The band decided to bring Glenn Kotche into the studio to record with the band . Wilco officially replaced Coomer with Kotche in January 2001 , a decision originally proposed by Tweedy and almost immediately approved by the rest of the band .

Wilco guitarist Jay Bennett recorded the entire album with Chris Brickley , and agreed with Tweedy that O 'Rourke would be a good choice to mix the album , after a failed attempt by Bennett and Brickley to mix a few of the songs at CRC and after hearing O 'Rourke 's " audition mix " . One of the conflicts , exhibited in the film I Am Trying to Break Your Heart : A Film About Wilco , was over the ten-second transition between " Ashes of American Flags " and " Heavy Metal Drummer " . Bennett attempted to explain to Tweedy that there were several slightly different ways to approach the transition , each of which would yield slightly different results , but Tweedy explained that he just wanted the problem fixed , and was not concerned with understanding the different approaches . Bennett focused on the individual songs , while Tweedy focused on larger conceptual and thematic issues — a tried and true division of labor that had worked well on the four releases on which they co-wrote the material . In order to achieve the band 's musical goals , Tweedy invited Jim O 'Rourke into the studio to mix " I Am Trying to Break Your Heart " ( sample ) , and the results impressed the band members . O 'Rourke was then asked to mix the rest of the album .

The cover of the album is a picture of Marina City in the band 's adopted hometown of Chicago . The album was named after a series of letters in the phonetic alphabet that Tweedy had heard on the Irdial box set The Conet Project : Recordings of Shortwave Numbers Stations . On the fourth track of the album Phonetic Alphabet - Nato , a woman repeats the words " Yankee Hotel Foxtrot " numerous times ; a clip from this Numbers Station transmission was placed in the Yankee Hotel Foxtrot song " Poor Places " . Irdial sued Wilco for copyright infringement , and a settlement was reached out of court . After the album 's completion , Tweedy decided to remove Bennett from the band . The album was completed in 2001 , and Tweedy believed it to be ready for release .

In 2001 , AOL merged with Time Warner to form AOL Time Warner . Time Warner 's market share of the music industry had dropped by almost five percent from the mid-1990s , and the new executives ordered the termination of 600 jobs . One of those jobs was Reprise Records president Howie Klein , who had been a big supporter of Wilco on the label . Klein 's dismissal placed head A & R representative David Kahne in charge of the decision whether to release Yankee Hotel Foxtrot . Josh Grier , Wilco 's lawyer , was able to negotiate a buy-out of the band from Reprise . The band would keep the rights to the album if they paid Reprise $ 50,000 . Before Wilco could accept the deal , Reprise called the band and changed their offer to give the band the rights to Yankee Hotel Foxtrot for free . Despite Reprise 's efforts to accommodate Wilco 's departure , the process marred public relations after an article in the Chicago Tribune described what had happened . Wilco had planned on releasing Yankee Hotel Foxtrot on September 11 , 2001 , but Tweedy did not want a change in record labels to significantly delay the release of the album . Within weeks of being released from the label and Jay Bennett leaving the band , MP3s of all tracks from the album began to appear on file sharing networks . In a decision aimed at discouraging the downloading of lower quality unlicensed MP3s and having some control over how the album was distributed , on September 18 , 2001 , Wilco began streaming the entirety of the album on their official website . The wilcoworld.net website registered over 50,000 hits that day , eight times as much as typical daily traffic . Traffic to the website quadrupled the normal traffic over the next few months . The following tour was a success financially , and members of Wilco observed that fans sang along with unreleased songs from the album .

Both independent and major record labels bid for the right to release Yankee Hotel Foxtrot , including Artemis Records and Nonesuch Records . Tweedy denied the bids of record labels that did not have a roster of signed artists that matched his liking . He also decided to ignore small independent companies because he wanted to be able to put the album out for a large audience and felt that they would be unable to produce more than 100,000 records . Wilco decided to sign with AOL Time Warner subsidiary Nonesuch Records in November 2001 , basing the decision on the label 's small size and artist-friendly atmosphere . In the end , Wilco recorded and produced Yankee Hotel Foxtrot with Reprise , received the rights to the album for free , and then sold it back to a different AOL Time Warner affiliate . Yankee Hotel Foxtrot was commercially released by Nonesuch Records on April 23 , 2002 . The album sold 55,573 copies during its first week of release , peaking on the Billboard 200 album chart at number 13 . The album was certified Gold by the Recording Industry Association of America and has sold over 590,000 units .

The More Like the Moon EP ( also called Bridge and Australian EP ) was originally released as a bonus disc to the Australian version of Yankee Hotel Foxtrot . The EP comprised six songs that were recorded but not released during the Yankee Hotel Foxtrot sessions including a re-working of " Kamera " . On the one-year anniversary of the release of Yankee Hotel Foxtrot , Wilco uploaded the EP onto their official website , and offered it for free to anyone who purchased the album . The band would later allow anyone to download the EP for free off the website , regardless of whether they had purchased the full-length album .

The album received widespread acclaim upon release , including positive reviews from media outlets such as Rolling Stone and BBC Music . Yankee Hotel Foxtrot was voted as the best album of the year in The Village Voice Pazz & Jop critics poll . Brent Sirota of Pitchfork Media gave the album a perfect 10 rating , noting that the album was " simply a masterpiece . " David Fricke of Rolling Stone praised its resemblance to psychedelia while Allmusic writer Zac Johnson lauded its musical complexity . There are more favorable reviews : E ! Online gave the album an A and said that its " rich , exotic flavor gets more intense the longer you chew on it . " Stylus Magazine called it " a great album , and an outstanding place for prospective new Wilco fans to start . " Neumu.net gave it nine stars out of ten and called it " a fierce record " . Almost Cool gave it a score of 8.75 out of ten and said , " I 'm not sure if it 's the work by O 'Rourke or the progression of the group ( or a little of both ) , but this disc is so multi-layered that it 's easy to hear new things many many times after the first listen . " Billboard gave it a favorable review and called it " a more adventurous and rewarding release " . The Austin Chronicle gave it four stars out of five and said that " After a while -- a familiarity period if you will -- it becomes clear that these songs are not only fully realized , they 're damn near brilliant . " Playlouder gave it four stars out of five and called it " The most worth-the-wait long-awaited album in the world ... ever ? Could be ... " Uncut also gave the album four stars out of five and said , " The most common description of this much-discussed album over the past few months is that YHF is Americana 's Kid A. In truth , it 's more successful than that . " Blender likewise gave it four stars out of five and stated : " Tweedy whittles down the arrangements and drops in enough experimental nuances to make the whole thing sound refreshingly lo-fi . " Q likewise gave it four stars and called it " battered , bonkers and bewitching in equal parts " and that it " at last finds Wilco 's ' interesting ' phase become downright fascinating . " Yahoo ! Music UK gave it eight stars out of ten and said , " Tweedy takes conventional songforms birthed on his acoustic guitar and scrambles them completely , reassembled into fractured , dissonant epics with the help of the reliably brilliant Jim O 'Rourke . "

Trouser Press was one of the few major media outlets that did not give the album a good review , instead giving it an average review and stating that " more time spent in the songwriting lab might have yielded material more suitable to the evident studio effort invested and brought Wilco closer to making a truly great album . " Robert Christgau gave the album a one-star honorable mention rating , describing the music as " purty " but stating that he found the lyrics and vocals in general to be boring . Though Yankee Hotel Foxtrot was recorded before the September 11 , 2001 attacks , critics perceived references in the album to the attacks . For example , Jeff Gordinier of Entertainment Weekly compared the two towers of Marina City to the World Trade Center towers . Also containing similar themes are the songs " War on War " and " Ashes of American Flags " which contains the line " I would like to salute the ashes of American flags . " The song " Jesus , Etc . " also contains these lyrics : " Tall buildings shake , Voices escape singing sad sad songs ... Voices whine , Skyscrapers are scraping together , your voice is smoking . "

The album was voted as the 100th " Greatest Album Ever " in a 2006 Q Magazine poll . In 2008 , Rolling Stone critic Tom Moon listed Yankee Hotel Foxtrot among the 1,000 Recordings to Hear Before You Die . The album was also included in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . Yankee Hotel Foxtrot found a place on many lists of the greatest albums of the 2000s . Rolling Stone ranked the album at number three on its list of the 100 Best Albums of the Decade . Pitchfork Media put the album at number four on the Top 200 Albums of the 2000s . The alternative music website also named " Poor Places " and " Jesus , Etc . " as the 147th and 61st best songs of the decade , respectively . Paste named the album the second-best album of the decade .

The 1948 Summer Olympics torch relay was run 17 – 29 July 1948 , prior to the 1948 Summer Olympics , held in London , United Kingdom . The relay was nicknamed the " relay of peace " . It was only the second occasion that a torch relay was held for the Olympics ; the first was at the 1936 Summer Olympics . There were three types of torches designed for use on the relay : a standard solid fuel powered torch made of aluminium , a special butane gas torch used onboard HMS Whitesand Bay , and a final torch used to enter Empire Stadium that was made of stainless steel and powered by a magnesium candle . The route itself was initially designed to be a direct one from Olympia to Wembley , taking in Italy , Switzerland and France . Belgium and Luxembourg were added to the route after those countries requested it . It was expected that the Greek part of the relay would be 750 kilometres ( 470 mi ) , but was reduced to 35 kilometres ( 22 mi ) due to concerns over security . After the 12-day journey , the torch arrived at the Empire Stadium only thirty seconds later than expected .

Each of the torches contained a solid fuel tablet made of hexamine and 6 % naphthalene ( following torch running tests in May 1947 ) that fuelled the flame itself . The solid fuel increased the distance each runner could run to 2 miles ( 3.2 km ) over flat terrain , decreasing the number of torches needed to be produced , which in turn reduced the cost of the relay . There were eight tablets loaded into each torch , with the bottom tablets pushed up by the use of a spring . The design increased the burning time of each torch up to around fifteen minutes , an increase from the four-minute torches of the 1936 Olympics . The torch itself was designed by Ralph Lavers , with the brief that it should be " inexpensive and easy to make , of pleasing appearance and a good example of British craftmanship " . The torches were made from aluminium , with a long shaft holding a cup that contained the burner . " With thanks to the bearer " was written on the cup of the torch itself , along with the Olympic rings . The torches for the Greek leg of the relay were shipped to the Mediterranean aboard HMS Liverpool , along with a purpose built torch for the leg aboard a Royal Navy vessel from Corfu to Italy .

While the general negotiation with other countries and the specific route were handled by the Organising Committee for the Games , the detailed organisation was delegated to a subgroup led by F.W. Collins . Due to cost implications , the extensive route conducted by the 1936 Games was ruled out . Instead , the simplest route from Olympia to London was to be used , going by sea to Italy and then run through Switzerland and France . The route was modified only when Luxembourg and Belgium both requested that the torch travel their territories . A longer Greek route was planned , but reduced from an expected 750 kilometres ( 470 mi ) down to 35 kilometres ( 22 mi ) due to concerns over instability in the country and a lack of security . The torch lighting ceremony took place on 17 July 1948 in Olympia , Greece . As with the 1936 Summer Olympic relay , the torch relay was begun by focusing the sun 's rays onto kindling using a parabolic reflector , which then lit the first torch . The kindling was conducted by a Girl Guide leader from Pyrgos , Elis . She was only chosen the previous evening due to the unsettled state of the country ; the Athenian girl who was trained for the ceremony was unable to travel to Olympia . In a symbolic gesture , the first runner , Corporal Dimitrelis of the Greek Army , laid down his arms and removed his military uniform before taking his torch in hand . The kindling material for the first torch was handed over as a gift from the Chairman of the Greek Olympic Committee to Collins , for Princess Elizabeth . It was then run to the Greek coast at Katakolo , where at 7 pm it boarded the Greek destroyer Hastings bound for the island of Corfu . It stayed overnight in the city of Corfu , and boarded HMS Whitesand Bay at 1 : 30 pm the following day where the flame was switched to a specially equipped butane gas torch in order to ensure that there was a 48-hour lifespan available for the flame , despite the crossing only being expected to take 22 hours .

The ship dropped the torch off in Bari at 12 : 30 pm on 19 July . It was run north through several Italian cities before crossing the Simplon Pass into Brig , Switzerland on 23 July . From there it was run west until leaving the country at Perly-Certoux , and entering France at Saint-Julien-en-Genevois . The route then detours from the direct route to take in Luxembourg and into Belgium before re-entering France at Lille on 28 July , finally departing the country at Calais . HMS Bicester carried the torch across the English Channel to Dover , arriving at 8 : 25 pm on 28 July . It travelled through several towns in the South East of England until it arrived at Wembley , where it arrived only thirty seconds late after the entire journey . That delay may have only been in the final few hundred yards of the relay down Olympic Way outside of Empire Stadium as the pressure of the crowds on the torch carrier and their escorts reduced the pace to walking speed . Special celebrations were held at each border crossing , and at Pierre de Coubertin 's tomb in Lausanne , Switzerland .

The 2011 – 12 Washington Capitals season was the franchise 's 38th season in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . Washington finished the year as the seventh place team in the Eastern Conference . In the opening round of the playoffs , they matched up with the defending Stanley Cup champion Boston Bruins . Due to injuries , the Capitals were forced to play rookie goaltender Braden Holtby . Washington 's defeat of the Bruins marked the first time in NHL history in which all seven games of a series were decided by one goal . Facing the East 's top seed in the Conference Semifinals , Washington was defeated in seven games by the New York Rangers . Holtby was lauded for his playoff performance , where he recorded a .935 save percentage and was credited with putting Washington in a position to win each game . Washington won their first seven games , setting a franchise record for consecutive victories to start a season . Shortly after , however , an early season slump prompted the benching of offensive star players Alexander Ovechkin and Alexander Semin in separate games . The moves failed to produce results , and Head Coach Bruce Boudreau was eventually replaced by Dale Hunter . Boudreau 's firing came seven days after he won his 200th game as an NHL head coach , achieving the feat faster anyone in NHL history . Under Hunter , the Capitals battled the Florida Panthers for the Southeast Division title , ultimately losing out on their fifth-straight division title on the final day of the season . Two days after Washington 's playoff elimination , Hunter stepped down as head coach ; Adam Oates was hired as his replacement .

During the off-season , the Capitals made several player changes . One of the players that was not retained by the team , Matt Bradley , started a controversy with his comments from a radio interview in Ottawa . In the interview , Bradley said his former team was " a little bit too nonchalant and guys weren ’ t disciplined the way they should have been , " which he claimed were the two biggest reasons why the team was not able to advance past the second round of the Stanley Cup playoffs . He later stated that Head Coach Bruce Boudreau did not give the most ice time to players who were playing well , but went with his star players . He further noted that Boudreau was a " great coach " who had been put in a tough position . When asked to point out examples , Bradley stated that Alexander Semin " could easily be the best player in the league , " but he " just doesn ’ t care , " further noting , " When you 've got a guy like that , you need him to be your best player , or one of your best players , and when he doesn 't show up , you almost get the sense that he wants to be back in Russia . " Semin 's agent came to his client 's defense , stating he " always cares . " Teammate Mike Knuble noted that because Semin speaks limited English , the language barrier affects the way that he is perceived , further noting that the interview comments were something Bradley regretted . When asked about the comments , former Capitals forward David Steckel stated that , " It 's not like he went out and told lies . " Bradley later apologized for his comments in an interview with the Sun Sentinel .

Including Bradley , the Capitals lost six players who played for them in the playoffs , as well as back-up goaltender Semyon Varlamov . [ note 1 ] To replace some of the departed players , Washington traded its 2011 first round draft pick to the Chicago Blackhawks for veteran winger Troy Brouwer , who was a member of the Blackhawks ' Stanley Cup championship team in 2010 . They then signed Joel Ward as a free agent , adding grit and the hopes that he could duplicate his 2011 playoff success . Ward scored seven goals and 13 points in 12 playoff games with the Nashville Predators , after scoring 10 goals and 29 points in 80 regular season games . In net , they added veteran Tomas Vokoun , who was considered to be one of the top goaltenders in the 2011 free agent class . He signed a one-year , $ 1.5 million contract , well below his believed market value , to have a chance at winning the Stanley Cup . After making these and other off-season moves , the Capitals were over the NHL salary cap . The expectation was that defenseman Tom Poti would not be able to play due to injury and Washington would be forced to place him on long-term injured reserve , where his $ 2.9 million salary would not count against the cap total . Unexpectedly , Poti told the Capitals that he would be ready to play by training camp . Poti , however , failed his medical exam prior to training camp and was placed on long-term injured reserve .

In the season opener against the Carolina Hurricanes , Boudreau made a " surprise " decision to start goaltender Michal Neuvirth . Boudreau stated that the reason behind his decision was a reward for Neuvirth 's hard work in training camp . Prior to the Capitals ' second game , Neuvirth sustained a bruised foot and was unable to play . In his Capitals debut , Vokoun struggled , allowing five goals on 28 shots , but nevertheless Washington won the game 6 – 5 in a shootout . In the post-game interview , Vokoun blamed himself for the high number of goals and thanked his teammates for getting him the win in a game he should have lost . Vokoun rebounded in his second game , making 39 saves in a 3 – 2 win over the Pittsburgh Penguins . He continued his strong play and was named the NHL 's third star of the week ending October 23 and helped the Capitals to a franchise-record seven game winning streak to start a season . After losing two straight games , Washington was down 4 – 3 to the Anaheim Ducks in the final minutes of the game . With the goaltender pulled , Boudreau decided to play the third line of Joel Ward , Brooks Laich and Jason Chimera with Nicklas Backstrom as the extra attacker . Boudreau stated that he was " playing a hunch " by leaving star forward Alexander Ovechkin on the bench . The move paid off , however , as Backstrom scored to force overtime . He also scored the game winner in overtime assisted by Ovechkin . When asked about being left on the bench in a post-game interview , Ovechkin stated that Laich 's line deserved to be on the ice – though the video showed Ovechkin visibly upset about being left on the bench . The following day , Ovechkin stated that he was upset about not being on the ice in the final minutes , but that he understood Boudreau 's decision . The Hockey News ' Ken Campbell applauded the benching of Ovechkin stating that in the past Boudreau had shown a willingness to continually put his star players out on the ice despite how they were playing and accepted the consequences . Campbell noted the move was Boudreau " addressing his most glaring problem as a coach " .

Following the benching incident , the Capitals went 2 – 5 – 0 leading up to their November 21 game against the Phoenix Coyotes . [ note 2 ] For the game , Boudreau again made headlines for not playing one of his star players , this time making Alexander Semin a healthy scratch ( a non-dressing player ) . Semin led the team in penalties-in-minutes ( PIMs ) , as well as being tied for second in the NHL with 14 minor penalties . Boudreau previously benched Semin for the second half of a game against the New Jersey Devils after the winger had taken two minor penalties and was deemed not focused . Washington defeated Phoenix in the game 4 – 3 . NBC 's Mike Halford echoed Campbell 's statement when discussing the benching of Semin , commenting that it was a " bold move " and the latest in a series of messages sent by Boudreau . Halford further questioned if the new stance would eventually cost Boudreau his job . The benchings did not produce the desired results , however , as the Capitals lost six of eight games , with Ovechkin scoring only one goal during the same stretch . As a result , Washington fired Boudreau on November 28 and replaced him with former Capitals captain Dale Hunter . Hunter was the head coach of the Ontario Hockey League 's ( OHL ) London Knights when he was hired . During his time with London , he set an OHL record for fastest coach to 300 and 400 career wins . The Capitals lost Hunter 's coaching debut 2 – 1 to the St. Louis Blues . The following day , Boudreau spoke to the media about being fired , stating that General Manager George McPhee made the " right decision at the time " and that despite speculation , he did not feel that Ovechkin was a problem , stating that he " worked as hard and tried as hard as he could . "

The Capitals did not give Hunter his first NHL win until his third game , a 3 – 2 win over the Ottawa Senators that broke a four-game losing streak . Brooks Laich scored the game-winning goal just 12 seconds into the overtime period . The goal would prove to be the fastest overtime goal scored during the 2011 – 12 NHL regular season . In the rematch four days later , Ovechkin appeared to spear Senators forward Chris Neil . Following a Neil hit on Ovechkin , the pair skated up the ice , whereupon Neil fell to the ice following the alleged spear . Neil was given an unsportsmanlike conduct penalty for diving . A spearing penalty , if called , would have resulted in a five-minute major penalty and a game misconduct . Later in the game , Ovechkin scored the eventual game-winning goal , his first goal in six games . When asked about the incident after the game , Neil described it as a " pitchfork in the gut , " while Ovechkin stated he was " not the type of guy who spears players . " The following day , a league spokesman stated that Ovechkin would not be suspended or fined for the incident .

The December 28 game against the New York Rangers marked the return of fourth line forward Jay Beagle , who previously missed 31 games with a concussion suffered in a fight against the Pittsburgh Penguins ' Arron Asham . The fight itself had generated a minor controversy , as Asham , an experienced fighter , made celebratory gestures after knocking out Beagle , who was in his first career NHL fight . Several Capitals expressed their displeasure with Asham after the game , while Asham himself later called his actions " classless . " Beagle 's work ethic in his return was called contagious by teammate Matt Hendricks , and he helped the Capitals to a 4 – 1 victory . In late December , Ovechkin went on a seven-game point streak that featured the two-point games in the final four games of the streak . In conjunction with the point streak , he scored eight goals in nine games . [ note 3 ] Washington went 5 – 1 – 1 during the streak , which was eventually snapped in a 5 – 2 loss to the San Jose Sharks on January 7 . In the game prior to the streak being snapped , Capitals ' defenseman Mike Green returned from a groin injury that had kept him out of the lineup for 23 games . Washington defeated the Calgary Flames 3 – 1 in the contest , which moved their record to 9 – 0 – 0 with Green in the line-up . However , the news coming out of the game was not all good . During the game , the Capitals ' leading scorer , Nicklas Backstrom , was elbowed in the head by the Flames ' Rene Bourque . Backstrom underwent concussion testing , which proved inconclusive ; he suffered from what was described as " concussion-like symptoms " and was eventually placed on the injured reserve . For his actions , Bourque was suspended five games for delivering the elbow . Compounding the Capitals ' injury problem was the loss of Mike Green in just his second game back ; he re-injured his groin during the contest and was placed on the long-term injured reserve . During a game against the Pittsburgh Penguins , Ovechkin delivered a hit to Pittsburgh defenseman Zbynek Michalek . On the hit , Ovechkin launched himself into Michalek 's shoulder , where the force of the hit caused Ovechkin to make contact with Michalek 's head . Later in the game , Michalek delivered an elbow to the back of Matt Hendricks ' head , driving it into the glass . The following day , it was announced that Ovechkin was suspended for three games for the reckless hit despite not receiving a penalty on the play during the game . Vice President of Player Safety Brendan Shanahan stated the length of the suspension took into account that Ovechkin was a repeat offender , having been suspended twice before and fined twice as well . It also took into consideration that Michalek was not injured on the play . Despite his own actions , Michalek avoided a fine or suspension . Without Ovechkin , Backstrom or Green , Washington nonetheless defeated defending Stanley Cup champion Boston Bruins in the final game before the All-Star break to move into first place in the Southeast Division .

Washington started the second half of the season with a 2 – 2 – 1 record . In their next game , against the Winnipeg Jets , the Capitals lost a two-goal lead late in the game , eventually losing in a shootout . The loss knocked the Capitals out of first place in their division and they dropped from third to ninth in the conference . Washington lost their next two games before defeating the Southeast Division-leading Florida Panthers 2 – 1 . The game marked goaltender Tomas Vokoun 's first game in Florida after leaving the team as a free agent in the off-season . With the win , Washington moved two points behind the Panthers . Despite being close , however , Washington could not build any momentum , later losing their next three games before closing out the month of February on a three-game win streak . Washington continued its inconsistent play into the month of March , losing three games before going on a four-game winning streak leading up to another game against the Winnipeg Jets . During the loss to the Jets , Vokoun re-aggravated a reoccurring groin injury ; he had been dealing with the injury since late February , and it forced him out of the lineup . Braden Holtby was recalled to serve as the team 's back-up . During Vokoun 's absence , Ovechkin began a goal-scoring streak , notching nine goals in seven games , culminating in a two-goal performance during a 3 – 0 victory over the Minnesota Wild . The scoring steak helped Ovechkin to be named NHL 's third star of the week . The win moved the Capitals into the eighth and final playoff spot . They did not remain there long , however , as their next game was a lost 5 – 1 to the Buffalo Sabres , who passed Washington for eighth place . The following game , against the Boston Bruins , Vokoun returned to action , but played only 18 : 25 before the same injury forced him from the game . Although the Capitals won the game , it was Vokoun 's final game of the season as well as his last as a Capital , with Vokoun later describing the injury as a " pretty severe [ groin ] tear . " Washington 's final game of March marked the return of Nicklas Backstrom , who had missed 40 games with a concussion . The Capitals won the game 3 – 2 in a shootout , moving them back into eighth place .

Entering April , the Capitals had a chance to clinch a playoff spot against the Tampa Bay Lightning . The game was tied 2 – 2 with 1 : 03 remaining when Steven Stamkos scored , leading Tampa to the eventual 4 – 2 victory . Facing the Division-leading Panthers in their next game , Washington succeeded in clinching a playoff spot with a 4 – 2 win of their own . The victory also gave the Capitals a chance at winning their Division in their final game . During the game , Neuvirth was hurt when former Capital Marco Sturm fell on top of him while he was making a save . Neuvirth left after the incident and did not return . Neuvirth suffered a lower body injury and was not ready to return for the final game or the start of the playoffs . Washington won its final game of the year behind a 35-save performance from Holtby , clinching at least the seventh seed in the Eastern Conference pending the outcome of Florida ’ s game . A win by the Panthers in their final game , however , prevented Washington from winning their fifth-straight Division title and moving into the third playoff seed .

Finishing the regular season as the seventh seed , Washington was matched up with the defending champion Boston Bruins . As Tomas Vokoun and Michal Neuvirth were still injured , the Capitals were forced to start Braden Holtby in Game 1 . Through the first two periods , Boston was in control of the game , out-shooting Washington 26 – 7 . Despite the disparity in shots , the game remained tied 0 – 0 after regulation . Washington lost the game shortly into overtime . They rebounded to tie the series when Nicklas Backstrom scored in double overtime of game two . Through the first two games of the series , Holtby stopped 72 of 74 Bruins ' shots . In Game 3 , the two teams again looked to be heading to overtime tied 3 – 3 late in the third when Backstrom took a penalty . Zdeno Chara scored on the man advantage with under two minutes remaining , giving Boston the win . After the game ended , Backstrom was given a match penalty for intent to injure following a cross-check to Rich Peverley . Backstrom received a one-game suspension for his actions . Without Backstrom in Game 4 , the Capitals evened the series with a 2 – 1 victory that featured a 44-save performance from Holtby . The Capitals took their first lead in the series thanks to a Troy Brouwer power-play goal with 1 : 27 left in regulation of game five . Facing elimination , Boston did not trail throughout Game 6 and was in position to win late in the third . However , an Alexander Ovechkin goal led to overtime , were Tyler Seguin scored to force a seventh and deciding game . Game 7 went to overtime , where a dump-in attempt was blocked by Mike Knuble , giving him a breakaway . He took a backhand that was stopped by Boston 's Tim Thomas . Joel Ward followed the play and scored the game-winning goal on the rebound . With Washington 's victory in the series , Holtby became just the third rookie goaltender in NHL history to defeat the reigning Stanley Cup champions . It was also the first playoff series in NHL history which all seven games were decided by one goal .

In the second round , Washington was matched up with the top-seeded New York Rangers . After losing Game 1 by giving up two goals in a 1 : 30 span , Washington took a 2 – 0 lead in Game 2 , only to have the Rangers come back and tie the score in the third period . The Capitals , however , won the game on an Ovechkin power-play goal late in the third . Game 3 was a triple-overtime contest that ended when Marian Gaborik scored to give New York a 2 – 1 win . The 114 : 41 game was the 20th longest game in NHL history , and Washington 's third-longest game in franchise history . Washington evened the series in Game 4 with a one-goal win . In the win , Ovechkin was benched for the majority of the third period , where after the tilt , he noted that the most important thing was that the Capitals won the game . Washington looked to be heading for their first series lead as Game 5 was coming to an end . The Capitals were leading 2 – 1 with 21.3 seconds remaining when Joel Ward took a double minor penalty for high-sticking . On the ensuing power play , Brad Richards scored with 6.6 seconds left in regulation to tie the game . The Rangers remained on the power play to start the overtime period , with Ward serving the second half of his double minor when Marc Staal scored to give New York the win . Facing elimination in Game 6 , Washington took the lead 1 : 28 into the game on an Ovechkin power play tally . They did not trail in the game and won 2 – 1 to force Game 7 . Ovechkin 's goal was the 30th of his post-season career , which tied him for the Capitals all-time franchise record with Peter Bondra . In the deciding game , Brad Richards scored 1 : 32 into the first period helping New York to the eventual 2 – 1 victory and the series win . Holtby finished the playoffs with a 1.95 goals against average , a .935 save percentage and was praised for his " breakout " performance while being credited with giving the Capitals a " chance to win every game . "

Two days after the loss , Head Coach Dale Hunter stepped down for personal reasons . General Manager George McPhee announced that he would take his time considering candidates to replace Hunter . The search lasted a month-and-a-half before the team hired former NHL and Capitals star , Adam Oates . The intention was to have a coach that combined the up-tempo style implored by Bruce Boudreau and the " defense first " system of Hunter . McPhee said of the hiring " you try to get the smartest guy in the room " and he believed Oates was that person . Ovechkin noted that he was excited to play under a coach he believed would bring more offense back to Washington 's system . Oates ' hiring came on the same day that he was elected to the Hockey Hall of Fame as a player .

Entering the season , Boudreau had amassed 189 wins in 309 NHL games . The win total put him on track to surpass Don Cherry as the fastest head coach to reach 200 NHL victories . After reaching 199 wins , Washington went on a four-game losing streak before finally earning Boudreau the milestone win . Despite the losing streak , Boudreau registered his 200th win in 326 games , eclipsing Cherry 's previous mark of 341 games . While Boudreau set the record , he had the advantage of overtime and shootout victories , which did not exist during Cherry 's coaching career . Boudreau was fired seven days after setting the record . Besides Ovechkin 's March and Vokoun 's third star award , Washington had players named NHL weekly stars three other times . Backstrom was named a third star after recording four points in two games . John Carlson earned third star honors with back-to-back three-point games and finishing the week with seven points . Ovechkin received the first of his two star awards by scoring eight points in six games in January .

Going into the off-season , there was concern over the future of goaltender Semyon Varlamov . Washington had given the restricted free agent a qualifying offer , giving the Capitals the right to match any other NHL offers or receive draft pick compensation if they did not match . Though Washington had control of his negotiating rights , Varlamov indicated that he would leave the NHL to play in the Kontinental Hockey League ( KHL ) . He stated that while he wanted to play in the NHL , he did not want to be a back-up . If Varlamov left the League , Washington would not receive any compensation but would retain his NHL rights . In the KHL , a war for Varlamov 's services was developing . Lokomotiv Yaroslav claimed to retain Varlamov 's KHL rights and wanted to sign him to a contract around $ 2 million a season . Alternatively , SKA Saint Petersburg filed a complaint with the KHL , stating his rights were not owned because his original contract with Yaroslav predated the formation of the KHL and was therefore invalid . Before the situation could be resolved , the Capitals traded Varlamov 's rights to the Colorado Avalanche for a first round pick in the 2012 NHL Entry Draft , along with a conditional second-round selection 2012 or 2013 . Following the trade , team owner Ted Leonsis noted that Varlamov " wanted assurances that we couldn ’ t make to him . " He was disappointed , but wished Varlamov well with Colorado . The Avalanche then signed the goaltender to a three-year , $ 8.5 million contract , thus keeping him in the NHL .

The 2011 NHL Entry Draft was held in St. Paul , Minnesota , on June 24 and 25 . Heading into the draft , the Capitals had only five picks due to a variety of trades , which was tied for the fewest in franchise history . Believing that they had prospect depth in their organization and not seeing an available player who could help immediately , Washington traded their first round pick for Troy Brouwer . With just late round selections remaining , the Capitals decided to take players that required time to develop . Three of their four picks were in , or set to attend , college . Fourth-round pick Steffen Soberg , the lone player not attending college , played in the GET-ligaen , Norway 's highest level of competition . At the 2011 IIHF World U18 Championships , he posted the second-highest save percentage in the tournament and was considered one of Norway 's top three players , though no Norwegian goaltender has ever played an NHL game . The Capitals ' first-round pick in the draft was traded to the Chicago Blackhawks in exchange for Troy Brouwer . The Capitals ' second-round pick in the draft , along with Brian Pothier and Oskar Osala , was traded to the Carolina Hurricanes in exchange for Joe Corvo in 2010 .

The deaths of brothers Christopher Arepa and Cru Omeka Kahui ( 20 March 2006 – 18 June 2006 ) , two New Zealand infants from a Māori family who died in Auckland 's Starship Children 's Hospital after being admitted with serious head injuries , highlighted the fact that Māori children are more than twice as likely to die as a result of abuse than non-Māori and that New Zealand ranks fifth highest among OECD nations for child deaths due to maltreatment according to a 2003 UNICEF report . Their family initially refused to cooperate with police in the homicide investigation into the children 's deaths . The father , 21-year-old , Christopher Sonny Kahui was charged with their murder . His defence was that the mother was responsible for the deaths . After a six-week trial , the jury took just one minute to acquit him . A coroner 's report released in July 2012 concluded that the children 's injuries occurred " whilst they were in the sole custody , care and control of their father " .

Chris and Cru Kahui were the two survivors of triplets born prematurely at 29 weeks on 20 March 2006 at the National Women 's Hospital in Grafton , New Zealand . They spent six weeks at the Kidz First neonatal intensive care unit at Middlemore Hospital . During this time , nurses and social workers at the facility had informally raised concerns with a Department of Child , Youth and Family Services worker , as the parents , Chris Kahui and Macsyna King , did not spend a lot of time with the babies . According to the hospital , parents not visiting is not considered child abuse , but was a " cause for concern " . Because the infants were still technically patients of Middlemore Hospital , hospital workers regularly visited the family home . During their last visit to the hospital , Chris and Cru were reported to be healthy and well-fed . However , an autopsy showed that the infants had suffered fractured ribs in an incident prior to the fatal injuries .

On 13 June , the infants ' mother , Macsyna King , returned to the house after being away overnight . She found that the boys suffered extensive bruises , and that their grandfather , William " Banjo " Kahui , had performed cardiopulmonary resuscitation on them . Police said the grandfather was not the only person in the house at the time . According to former MP John Tamihere , a member of the Kahui extended family had said " a young relative " was caring for the babies the day they were fatally injured . King and her husband took their children to the family G.P. , who ordered immediate hospitalisation for the infants . The Coroner made a finding that Chris Kahui refused to take the children to hospital , running away from the family car and leaving a distraught Macsyna King carrying two babies in their carriers into the hospital on her own . Doctors immediately discovered that the infants had serious brain injuries . After the infants were transferred to Starship Hospital , hospital workers notified the police . The Kahui infants were ultimately taken off life support , with Cru being the first to die at 5 a.m. on 18 June . Chris died at 6 : 45 p.m. later in the day . The deaths resulted in an initial serious assault investigation by the New Zealand Police before charges were upgraded to homicide .

Both infants had suffered skull fractures from blunt force trauma and Chris Kahui had a broken femur . An orthopaedic specialist told The Sunday Star-Times that in order to break the femur of a baby , the bone would have to bend at a 90 degree angle , ruling out an accidental cause of the injury . The bodies were released to the family on 21 June and taken to the Manurewa marae for a tangihanga ( funeral rites ) . They were buried at the Manukau City cemetery on 24 June . While the infants were in hospital , Child , Youth and Family removed a 12-month-old brother Shane and their female cousin Cayenne , aged six months from two rented Housing New Zealand homes — one in Clendon , the other in Mangere — where the Kahui babies had lived . Police said they were treated in hospital for injuries resulting from " neglect " . They had been found to be malnourished and " dirty " . According to the Herald on Sunday newspaper , the two children were to be returned to the family in September 2006 . But neither the parents or so-called " Tight 12 " of family members who initially refused to cooperate with police , would be their caregivers .

The police believe that , while the infants were in hospital prior to their deaths , the family was uncooperative with any investigation . Pita Sharples , the co-leader of the Māori Party , said the family had agreed to talk to police on 26 June , but this did not happen . Following the deaths , Sharples said he was disgusted by the Kahui family 's behaviour . He claimed some members of the family were more interested in going " to the pub and have a drink " than coming forward to police . Prime Minister Helen Clark said it was " absolutely shocking " for the family to hide behind the funeral while everyone in the country was " shocked and revolted " by the injuries . There were even reports that gang members were threatening the Kahui family in utu ( or revenge ) over their refusal to speak . After refusing to speak to police in the week after the death , police went to family homes on 27 June . At least four family members , including the children 's mother and aunt , were escorted to police stations . By 4 July , at least 20 extended family members were questioned , as well as 90 medical practitioners and staff who were in contact with the babies . Forensic scientists removed items such as clothing from the Kahui homes . By September , police said that the family was no longer " stone-walling " their inquiries , but a prima facie case had yet to be established . Sunday News reported on 17 September that the list of suspects was down to three and an arrest was imminent . This was followed by a police statement nine days later stating that they now knew who was responsible for the deaths . However , other family members could still be charged with related crimes .

Two half-sisters of the infants ' mother Macsyna King , appeared on TVNZ 's Sunday 23 July episode . They claimed that Macsyna and her brother , Robert King , had told them the name of the killer . TVNZ censored the name when one of the women said it , but the gender was revealed to be male . The infants ' paternal grandmother , who appeared the next day on TV3 's Campbell Live , contradicted this information , stating that the killer was female . The homes where the babies lived were also home to at least nine adult occupants , eight of whom were on some form of social welfare . They may have been receiving payments totalling between $ 845 and $ 1395 a week , depending on their age and circumstances . Work and Income New Zealand launched an investigation to see whether all the payments were legitimate . Two instances of substantiated benefit fraud were found for one individual . The Clendon house had been occupied for two to three months , but neighbours had not noticed that babies were living there . According to the neighbours , Tuesday and Thursday nights were " party nights , " as this was when benefit payments were received . Loud music and fighting were often heard . One neighbour said that a sixteen-year-old female appeared on their doorstep at 3 : 30 a.m. one morning after she said an older man at the Clendon house attempted to sexually assault her .

The 1 October edition of the Sunday Star-Times newspaper published an interview with the infants ' father , Chris Kahui . Kahui said that he did not kill his sons , but if Police could not find anyone else , " I go down for something I didn 't do " . Investigators called Kahui 's interview with the police on 3 October a " major development " . On 26 October , a " carload of detectives " had gone to several addresses looking for Chris Kahui , who was brought in for questioning . At 10 p.m. , it was announced in a press conference that a 21-year-old man had been arrested and charged with the murder of the infants , and would appear in the Manukau District Court the next day . No other family members faced charges with relation to the deaths . Contrary to this , the Sunday News reported on 31 December 2006 that , according to an unnamed source , a second arrest was expected . Neither the exact charges that would be laid nor the relationship of the person to the infants were revealed . Three weeks later the same newspaper said four people involved in the investigation had been summoned to the appear at the Manukau district court on 24 January . Sources told the newspaper that the new charges relate to dead infants and a pre-school child . One of those to be charged was Macsyna King , the mother of Chris and Cru . None of these charges eventuated .

Kahui appeared in the Number One court of the Manukau District Court on 27 October for a two-minute hearing , where he was formally charged with murder . He was asked not to plead ; however , outside the court , Kahui 's lawyer , Lorraine Smith , said her client would " fight the charges " . He was remanded in police custody until 10 November when he was freed on bail . A pre-depositions hearing was held 17 January . A second pre-depositions hearing was intended to take place on 21 March . This was so his lawyer could read 60 files of evidence collected by police , and for a medical expert from Australia to become available . This second hearing was delayed because the defence was still waiting for the medical report from Australia . The depositions hearing was finally set for 18 June , with a brief court appearance on 18 April . This date was later changed to sometime on 13 August . Kahui was found not guilty on Thursday 22 May 2008 , after only one minute of deliberation by the jury . The officer who led the police investigations into the murders , Detective Inspector John Tims , said he was " disappointed " at the verdict , finding " no evidence to support a charge against any other person and that includes the mother , Macsyna King " . He acknowledged the prosecutor , who had " said in his opening and closing address that there is no new evidence to support a charge being laid against the mother , Macsyna King " . No charges were laid against Macsyna King .

Coroner Gary Evans released a report into the deaths of the children in July 2012 . He found that the twins had suffered the brain injuries which led to their deaths during the afternoon or early evening of 12 June 2006 , at a time " whilst they were in the sole custody , care and control of their father " , Chris Kahui . He said there was no evidence or fact to support that injuries being caused by the children 's mother , Macsyna King . Chris Kahui , who gave evidence to the coroner 's inquest , attempted to prevent the publication of the report .

Francis J. " Frank " Underwood is a fictional character and the protagonist of the American version of House of Cards . He is portrayed by Kevin Spacey . He is a variation of Francis Urquhart , the protagonist of the British novel and television series House of Cards , from which the American Netflix series is adapted . He is married to Claire Underwood ( Robin Wright ) , but also had a sexual relationship with Zoe Barnes ( Kate Mara ) in season 1 . He made his first appearance in the series ' pilot episode , " Chapter 1 " . Underwood is from Gaffney , South Carolina . He graduated from The Sentinel , a fictionalized version of The Citadel , The Military College of South Carolina , and Harvard Law School . Some of Underwood 's dialogue throughout the series is presented in a direct address to the audience , a narrative technique that breaks the fourth wall . The character speaks with a Southern accent . During season 1 , he is the Democratic Majority Whip in the United States House of Representatives . In season 2 , he is the newly appointed Vice President of the United States , before becoming President of the United States in the season finale .

Frank is described as manipulative , conniving , Machiavellian , sociopathic , and even evil . Throughout the series , he manipulates and destroys several people for his own ends , and commits murder twice . Spacey has received positive reviews for his portrayal of Frank Underwood , but the character itself has been criticized for it 's repetitive nature and one dimensionality . Spacey shared the distinction of being among the first three leading web-television roles to be nominated for Primetime Emmy Awards at the 65th Primetime Emmy Awards . Spacey has also been nominated for two Golden Globe Awards , winning one , and five Screen Actors Guild Awards , including two cast nominations and including two wins , for his performance .

Francis J. Underwood was born on November 5 , 1959 to Catherine and Calvin T. Underwood in Gaffney , South Carolina . He is an only child . He was raised in impoverished circumstances , with the threat of bank foreclosure on their farm they lived on . He entered the The Sentinel , a military school in Charleston , South Carolina , loosely based on The Citadel , The Military College of South Carolina , in 1976 of which he was nearly expelled from due to suffering grades after he volunteered for a U.S. Senate campaign in 1980 , however , he graduated soon after and was accepted into Harvard Law School that fall . Despite poor grades at The Sentinel , he was able to graduate from law school in 1984 . He had a homosexual relationship with his friend from military school , Tim Corbet , during his first year of law school . Underwood was raised Christian , but privately holds God in complete contempt .

Underwood 's great-great-great-grandfather , Corporal Augustus Elijah Underwood , was a Confederate soldier who served in the 12th South Carolina Infantry Regiment of McGowan 's Brigade at the Battle of Spotsylvania . He served at the Bloody Angle on May 12 , 1864 , during the Civil War and was killed by a bludgeon to the back of the head from his own regiment during the middle of the night . Underwood is fascinated by his ancestry . When Underwood fell in a coma following an assassination attempt , Augustus appears in several of his hallucinations . However , he dismisses the Confederacy as weak and calls their cause of preserving the institution of slavery " asinine " . His great-great grandfather was two when Augustus was killed . His father , Calvin T. Underwood , was a peach farmer in his home town of Gaffney who died at the age of 43 of a heart attack . The Underwoods lived in poverty , and nearly lost the farm when Frank was a child ; to get a bank loan and avoid foreclosure , his father attended a meeting of the Ku Klux Klan , of which the bank manager was a member . Underwood speaks fondly of his father in public , but this is a political ploy ; in his asides to the audience , Underwood describes his father as a weak man who accomplished nothing with his life . He even urinates on his father 's grave in season 3 . Despite disliking his father , however , Underwood was influenced by him . Calvin was an abusive alcoholic , and caused his wife and son years of misery . Underwood has said that when he was 13 , he walked in on his father putting a shotgun in his mouth . Calvin asked him to pull the trigger , which he refused to do . He has stated that his biggest regret is not killing his father when he had the chance .

Underwood was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives in 1990 as a Democratic representative for the 5th Congressional District of South Carolina , being sworn in around January 1991 . He won another 11 consecutive elections , winning his final term in 2012 . He was elected Whip for the Democratic Party in 2005 , serving as House Majority Whip between 2005 and 2013 . Often , Underwood 's thoughts throughout the series are presented in a direct address to the audience , a narrative technique known as breaking the fourth wall . Immediately prior to starring in House of Cards , Spacey had starred in a production of William Shakespeare 's Richard III as Richard III of England , a character that serves as a partial basis for both Urquhart and Underwood . His last name is derived from Oscar Underwood , who served as the first Democratic House Minority Whip from about 1900 to 1901 . Among his few vices are smoking cigarettes . He has a hobby of playing video games ; when the Secret Service cuts off his online gaming service after he becomes Vice President , he takes up creating model figurines . Spacey viewed portraying Underwood for a second season as a continuing learning process . " There is so much I don ’ t know about Francis , so much that I 'm learning ... I 've always thought that the profession closest to that of an actor is being a detective ... We are given clues by writers ... Then you lay them all out and try to make them come alive as a character who ’ s complex and surprising , maybe even to yourself . "

Underwood 's sexuality is ambiguous throughout much of the first two seasons ; he has sexual liaisons with both men and women , but he is never explicitly identified by any sexual label . Before Season 2 , various sources speculated about his homosexuality . It is revealed in " Chapter 8 " he had an experience with homosexuality in college . Underwood and Claire are never depicted having sex in season 1 . Slate journalist Hanna Rosin noted : if Frank and Claire Underwood were a real-life Washington couple and they were found each to be having an affair , he would be accused of being " secretly gay , turned on by women only when he can use them for a pure power play " . Other sources make no definite stance on Underwood 's sexuality , but hypothesize that he is not sexually attracted to Claire . In season 2 , Underwood is involved in a threesome with Claire and Secret Service agent Edward Meechum ( Nathan Darrow ) , while in season 3 , there is a moment of sexual tension between Underwood and his biographer , Tom Yates ( Paul Sparks ) . The same season , however , also features the only scene in the series in which Underwood and Claire have sex exclusively with each other .

Underwood is an Americanized version of the original BBC series lead character Francis Urquhart , a Machiavellian post-Margaret Thatcher Chief Whip of the Conservative Party . Urquhart employs deceit , cunning , murder , and blackmail to influence and pursue the office of Prime Minister of the United Kingdom . According to series producer Beau Willimon , the change in last name stemmed from the " Dickensian " feeling and " more legitimately American " sounding resonance of the name ' Underwood ' . Whereas Urquhart is an aristocrat by birth , Underwood is a self-made man . Urquhart was one of television 's first antiheroes , whereas Underwood follows the more recent rash of antiheroes that includes Tony Soprano of The Sopranos , Walter White of Breaking Bad , and Dexter Morgan of Dexter . However , unlike most other antiheroes , Underwood is not forced into immorality either by circumstance ( White ) , birth ( Soprano ) or upbringing ( Morgan ) . In his review of Season 2 , Slant Magazine 's Alan Jones writes that Underwood is evil by choice . Although the character is based on the BBC show 's lead character , in interviews during the writing and filming of season 2 , creator and showrunner Willimon said that he used Lyndon B. Johnson as a source of themes and issues addressed in House of Cards . Unlike the right-wing Urquhart , who leads the Conservative Party , the center-left Underwood is a member of the Democratic Party , but cares little for ideology in favor of " ruthless pragmatism " in furthering his own political influence and power .

Stelter described Frank and Claire Underwood as a " scheming " couple . Michael Dobbs , the author of the trilogy of novels upon which the British miniseries is based , compares the compelling nature of their relationship favorably to the characters in the original miniseries , and likens them to Macbeth and Lady Macbeth . Underwood has strong feelings for Claire , and frequently plots with her at night . He says , " I love that woman . I love her more than sharks love blood . " While Underwood is Machiavellian , Claire , like Lady Macbeth , encourages her husband to do whatever is necessary to seize power . Hank Stuever of The Washington Post describes her as an ice-queen wife . She encourages his vices while noting her disapproval of his weakness , saying , " My husband doesn ’ t apologize ... even to me . " Her overt encouragement gives a credibility to their symbiosis . Smith says " The Underwoods have proven themselves almost robotic in their pursuit of power . " Upon viewing a four-episode preview of season 2 , Goodman says the series " ... sells husband and wife power-at-all-costs couple ... as a little too oily and reptilian for anyone 's good . " Willimon notes that " What 's extraordinary about Frank and Claire is there is deep love and mutual respect , but the way they achieve this is by operating on a completely different set of rules than the rest of us typically do . " Los Angeles Times critic Mary McNamara makes the case that House of Cards is a love story on many levels , but most importantly between Underwood and Claire . It is a story about a man who will commit almost any crime imaginable while in pursuit of power and a political wife who gives him the encouragement to pursue that power .

Underwood and Claire engage in a threesome with their Secret Service bodyguard Edward Meechum at one point in season 2 , but have otherwise largely given up intramarital and extramarital sex in favor of their pursuit of power . International Business Times critic Ellen Killoran notes that this may relate back to Underwood 's quotation of Oscar Wilde to Zoe Barnes in Season 1 : " A great man once said , ' everything is about sex except sex . Sex is about power . ' " Avoiding sex may retain the balance of power in their relationship . His relationship with Claire is the epicenter of season 2 .

Underwood develops an intimate relationship with Washington Herald and Slugline reporter Zoe Barnes ( Kate Mara ) , with Claire 's knowledge . As the show begins , Barnes is desperate to rise from covering the Fairfax County Council beat to covering what 's going on behind the veil of power in the Capitol hallways . " By the end of the first episode , Barnes is among the cadre of Underwood 's accomplices . They begin a relationship , with Barnes promising to earn his trust and not " ask any questions " in return for his supplying her with sensitive political information . Toward the end of Season 1 , she ends their personal relationship and begins investigating his connection to Congressman Peter Russo 's apparent suicide ( Underwood had in fact killed him by locking him in his car in a closed garage ) . Underwood ultimately kills Barnes in the season 2 premiere , by pushing her in front of an oncoming Washington Metro train after she begins to follow clues related to the murder .

Underwood is fond of the head of his Secret Service detail , Edward Meechum ( Nathan Darrow ) , and it is hinted several times that they harbor unacknowledged sexual feelings for each other . When Meechum stumbles upon Underwood watching pornography , Underwood and Claire joke about there being sexual chemistry between the two men . Shortly after Underwood becomes vice president , he , Claire and Meechum have a threesome . Meechum remains Underwood 's bodyguard once he becomes the president , and there does not appear to be any continuing sexual relationship . Meechum remains fiercely loyal , however ; he warns Underwood 's biographer Tom Yates ( Paul Sparks ) not to write anything that would damage Underwood 's reputation . In season 4 , Underwood traces Meechum 's hand with a marker on one of the walls of the White House when he wants to replace a confederate painting ; Meechum suggests he put up something he likes instead . When Lucas Goodwin shoots Underwood during a campaign event , Meechum trades fire with the assassin , and both are killed instantly . Meechum 's death is one of the tragedies Claire mentions in a press briefing for a gun control bill she is sponsoring , and Underwood has him buried in Arlington National Cemetery , a rare privilege for a Secret Service agent . When Underwood recovers and finds that Meechum 's hand tracing has been painted over , he expresses grief and regret at the loss to Claire , who says that Meechum was one of the few people who truly understood them .

Spacey summed up Underwood 's relationship with the viewer - i.e. whenever he breaks the fourth wall - as being like that of a " best friend " and " the person [ he trusts ] more than anyone . " Because of this , his asides to the viewer serves as an indication of Underwood 's true feelings and intentions - typically when he is feigning politeness and courtesy to people whom he despises . In the season 2 premiere , after having gone the whole episode without doing so , Underwood addresses the viewer directly , saying , " Did you think I had forgotten you ? Perhaps you hoped I had . " In addition , in season 3 , after an argument with Claire that ends with her storming out on him , he looks directly at the viewer and snaps , " What 're you lookin ' at ? ! " For the first four seasons , Underwood was the only character to break the fourth wall until the very end of the fourth season , during which his wife Claire - though silent - addresses the camera directly with Frank .

At the start of the show , Underwood is a Democratic Majority Whip in the House of Representatives , where he has represented South Carolina 's 5th congressional district since 1990 . Underwood is passed over for an appointment as United States Secretary of State even though he had been promised the position after ensuring the election of Colorado Governor Garrett Walker ( Michel Gill ) as President . Walker 's Chief of Staff Linda Vasquez ( Sakina Jaffrey ) gives him this news prior to the January 2013 United States presidential inauguration . With the aid of Claire , and his fiercely loyal Chief of Staff Doug Stamper ( Michael Kelly ) , Underwood uses his position as House Whip to seek retribution . He quickly allies with Washington Herald reporter Zoe Barnes ( Kate Mara ) , whom he uses to undermine his rivals via the press . The viciousness of Underwood 's manipulations escalates over the course of the season . He befriends Pennsylvania Rep. Peter Russo ( Corey Stoll ) , encouraging him to quit drinking and run for Governor of Pennsylvania ; then his underlings create enough pressure in the race to push Russo into publicly falling off the wagon and ruining his career , and finally murders him and makes it look like suicide . He then persuades Vice President Jim Matthews ( Dan Ziskie ) to resign so he can run for the office he previously held , Governor of Pennsylvania , the race being wide open following Russo 's death . In the season finale , " Chapter 13 " , Underwood is appointed Vice President to replace Matthews .

Underwood assumes the position of Vice President of the United States . Over the course of the season , he " faces challenges from similarly ambitious businessmen , the Chinese government and Congress itself " as he continues to pursue his political aspirations . His plotline revolves around battles with billionaire Raymond Tusk ( Gerald McRaney ) , involving Chinese money laundering . Over the course of the season his biggest challenges are the institutional power of the Office of the President and Tusk 's power as a billionaire industrialist . He finds new rivals in Tusk , who seeks to maintain his position as Walker 's right-hand adviser against Underwood 's intrusion , and his former communications director , Remy Danton ( Mahershala Ali ) , who is now a lobbyist working with Tusk . At the beginning of the season , Underwood is trying to erase all links to Russo 's death . Thus , he kills Barnes by shoving her in front of an oncoming Washington Metro train , and frames her colleague and lover Lucas Goodwin ( Sebastian Arcelus ) for cyberterrorism . Another early task for newly promoted Underwood is finding his own replacement as House Majority Whip . He supports Jacqueline Sharp ( Molly Parker ) , a military veteran and third-term Representative from California , although he refrains from offering public backing .

Season 3 begins with Underwood 's presidency off to a rocky start : six months into his term , he is unpopular with the public , and Congress is blocking his attempts to move legislation forward . He plans to secure his legacy with an ambitious jobs bill , America Works , but the Democratic Congressional leadership refuses to support it ; they also tell him that they will not support him if he seeks the presidential nomination in the next election . To make matters worse , Claire 's nomination for United States Ambassador to the United Nations is defeated after she makes a gaffe during a Senate nomination hearing . Underwood announces that he will not run for reelection , and advocates for America Works , which he intends to pay for by stripping entitlement programs . He fails to get the jobs bill through Congress and uses that as a reason to renege on his promise to not run in 2016 . Solicitor General Heather Dunbar ( Elizabeth Marvel ) announces that she will seek the presidential nomination , and actually gives Underwood a battle . Underwood convinces Sharp to get married so she can announce her candidacy , for the sole reason of sapping women ’ s votes from Dunbar , at which point she will withdraw and accept the nomination for VP . After the presidential debate , where Underwood attacks Dunbar and Sharp , she announces her withdrawal from the race , and gives her support to Dunbar . Ultimately , however , Underwood wins the Iowa caucuses .

Underwood trails Dunbar in the polls , eventually losing the New Hampshire primary . Realizing that he needs Claire to win , he persuades her to come back by promising to support her run for a Senate seat in Texas . However , he sandbags her prospective candidacy by endorsing a political ally 's daughter , in order to keep Claire focused on his campaign . On the day of the South Carolina primary , Claire retaliates by arranging for two compromising photos to be leaked : one of Underwood 's father with a Klansman , and one of Underwood posing with a Confederate Civil War re-enactor , putting his campaign in jeopardy . Underwood deduces that Claire was behind the leaks , and confronts her . Claire calmly admits what she did , and puts forth a proposition : that she run as his vice president . He angrily rejects the idea . Lucas Goodwin is released from prison and , seeking revenge for Barnes ' death , shoots Underwood at a campaign rally , hitting him in the liver . He also mortally wounds Meechum , who manages to kill him before succumbing to his wounds . Underwood is rushed to the hospital for immediate surgery , rendering him in a coma . It is soon discovered that he needs a liver transplant . Stamper manages to bump him to the top of the transplant list , and he survives . Once he recovers , he agrees to let Claire run as his vice president .

After Dunbar drops out of the race due to the discovery of a meeting she 'd had with Goodwin a few days before the attempt on Underwood 's life , Underwood begins planning to maneuver Claire into the VP spot and to use the NSA to illegally obtain voter information and spy on the Republican nominee , Will Conway ( Joel Kinnaman ) . This happens while Underwood and Claire advocate for a controversial gun control bill for the sole purpose of creating an atmosphere divisive enough to weed out potential running mates . During the resulting open convention , Underwood intimidates the front-runner , Secretary of State Catherine Durant ( Jayne Atkinson ) , into surrendering her delegates , and uses the public sympathy from Claire 's mother 's death to ensure that he and Claire are nominated . When American extremists loyal to the terrorist group Islamic Caliphate Organization ( ICO ) kidnaps a suburban family , Underwood allows Conway to negotiate with them , making his opponent look like a hero - and then releases NSA data that proves Conway illegally influenced Congress . Soon afterward , however , Underwood is hit with two crises at once : ICO 's leader orders his followers to kill one of the hostages , while journalist Tom Hammerschmidt ( Boris McGiver ) exposes Underwood 's crimes in the Washington Herald . Facing disgrace and possible impeachment , Underwood decides to declare war on ICO and allow the public to see the hostage die in order to distract from the scandal and create an atmosphere of widespread fear that he and Claire can exploit in the weeks before the election .

The New York Times ' David Itzkoff called Underwood a " scheming politician " who does " some of the most evil and underhanded things imaginable " . Brian Stelter of The New York Times said Underwood " … is on a quest for power that ’ s just as suspenseful as anything on television . " New York Daily News critic Don Kaplan says " … conniving Congressman Frank Underwood , is easily one of the most complex antiheroes on TV — except he ’ s not on TV " . David Wiegand of the San Francisco Chronicle describes the character as one who " all but salivates over the chance to use his considerable power to gain more power , especially if it involves pulling the rug out from under some colleagues and the wool over the eyes of others . " Andrew Davies , the producer of the original UK TV series , feels that Underwood lacks the " charm " of the original character , Francis Urquhart . The Independent praised Spacey 's portrayal as a more " menacing " character , " hiding his rage behind Southern charm and old-fashioned courtesy , " while The New Republic noted that " When Urquhart addressed the audience , it was partly in the spirit of conspiratorial fun . His asides sparked with wit . He wasn 't just ruthlessly striving , he was amusing himself , mocking the ridiculousness of his milieu . There is no impishness about Spacey ’ s Frank Underwood , just numb , machine-like ambition . Even his affection for his wife is a calculation . "

According The Kansas City Star 's Smith , " Frank hasn ’ t changed , and neither has his brand of Machiavellian political theater " and " Spacey has lost none of his smarmy magnetism as the cartoonish villain " . According to Variety 's Brian Lowry , " Kevin Spacey ’ s showy performance as an unscrupulous politician " is foremost among the show 's strengths , but the show 's weakness is the " failure to present its scheming protagonist with equally matched foes " . Lowry feels that as conniving as Underwood is , it is unfathomable that " nobody else in a town built on power seems particularly adept at recognizing this or combating him " . Goodman says " Spacey is nothing if not constantly magnetic " . The delayed use of the fourth wall is perceived as clever . Alison Willmore of Indiewire says that " Unlike Walter White or Tony Soprano , Frank feels at peace with his ruthless pragmatism and what he does in pursuit of power , and reminds us of the fact in his asides to the camera ... he may be a ruthless sociopath , but there 's something to admire there " . However Willmore noted that Frank became lighter in season 2 noting that the season was " ... delivered with more of a wink by Frank than before . "

Poniewozik notes that " It also remains a delight to watch Spacey pump the humid breath of life into House of Cards ’ arid Capitol chill . If only his character weren ’ t so dominant of his surroundings as well . One reason the series ’ movements can feel so mechanical is that , so far , no one seems nearly in Underwood ’ s league : not the adversaries he battles directly , nor the sad sacks that he gulls without their even knowing it . " Chuck Barney of the San Jose Mercury News notes that the preview episodes show that " Frank 's " Survivor " -like back-stabbing is beginning to feel a bit repetitive . " and that his lack of an adversarial foil has become an issue : " ... things always seem to fall neatly into place for him . Even his showdowns with the president ( Michel Gill ) come off as one-sided ... " Verne Gay of Newsday notes that " Frank Underwood has no remorse , no superannuated sense of Washington tradition or decorum , and certainly no second thoughts . He is TV 's perfect monster of the moment - a compleat malefactor , with a pleasing honey-toned drawl . "

Alessandra Stanley of The New York Times says " By positing a Johnsonesque power broker and master schemer who wields cabalistic influence behind the scenes , House of Cards assigns order and purpose to what , in real life , is too often just an endless , baffling tick-tack-toe stalemate . " NPR 's Eric Deggans says that Underwood " blends velvety charm and mesmerizing menace like no other character on television " . New York Observer critic Drew Grant notes that although the series aired during the golden age of dramatic antiheroes , Underwood 's villainy has become trite : " House of Cards is a good reminder , however , that there is a reason Iago wasn ’ t the center of Othello . Unrelenting , unexplained cruelty can be as pedantic as constant kindness . " However , Hitfix reviewer , Alan Sepinwall was highly critical of Spacey 's performance and accused him of " hamming it up " and " phoning it in on a not very good show to begin with " .

Reviews for season 3 of House of Cards were mostly positive . However , a few critics found the Underwood character was becoming repetitive : the critical consensus on the review aggregation site Rotten Tomatoes held that , " Season three introduces intriguing new political and personal elements to Frank Underwood 's character , even if it feels like more of the same for some . " Ed Power of The Daily Telegraph wrote , " Everyone in House of Cards has an agenda - a secret twitching in the attic . The thrill , and the horror , may lie in the degree to which we catch reflections of real life in its dark , cool contours . " Some critics opined that the Underwood character is less interesting once he achieves his goal of becoming president and actually has to govern . " You could take the show seriously just as long as you didn ’ t have to take it seriously , as long as it only took place in the dream world of imaginary fantasy politics , " wrote Aaron Bady of The New Republic , who compared Underwood unfavorably with Josiah Bartlett of The West Wing . " But when a cartoon becomes president , it starts to look too fake to be real , but too real to be a cartoon . Frank plays the role of President Bartlett , a cartoon president doing things that would actually , in reality , be kind of great . But Bartlett was too good to be true , and the old Frank was too evil to be true . President Underwood is just too dull to be a fantasy , and so the props take center stage . "

In season 4 , Jacob Solworthy wrote in his review of the first six episodes of season four : " Until now , ' House of Cards ' has centred on the character 's outward expression of power -- not to mention his hunger for it -- but the writers have shrewdly stripped that back , instead focusing on the character 's internal fears in a way not dissimilar from Tony 's dream sequences in ' The Sopranos ' , " he later added , " You 'll never root for Frank more than you do by the end of these six episodes . " On the other hand , Daniel Fienberg from The Hollywood Reporter was critical of Spacey 's performance , writing : " Spacey 's performance , which at least had an appealingly theatrical extravagance when the series began , has grown less enjoyable . Having reached a pinnacle , there 's no way to root for Frank 's striving anymore , if you ever were , but House of Cards has yet to commit to urging us to root for Frank 's downfall . " There was also considerable mention of the evolution of Underwood 's relationship with Claire . " [ T ] heir partnership has morphed into an entirely professional exercise , with a shared lust for power having supplanted more conventional matrimonial bonds , " wrote Brian Lowry of Variety . The Atlantic 's Spencer Kornhaber remarked , however , that the utter ruthlessness displayed by Underwoods in the season finale may have represented a " jump the shark " moment for the series : " The Underwoods have murdered a politician and a journalist , and some innocents have also been collateral damage to their activities . Now , though , they ’ ve set out to maintain their power at the cost of mass casualties . Netflix hasn ’ t said how many seasons are to come , but it ’ s hard to imagine the show being watchable for all that much longer now that this rubicon of despicability has been crossed . "

Some compared Underwood 's storyline in season 4 to the 2016 U.S. presidential election . Brian Moyland of The Guardian wrote , " ' House of Cards ' has never felt like the real presidency : Frank Underwood is evil incarnate , bumping off junior Congressmen and pushing journalists in front of trains . But now that , in real life , we 're in the throes of such a bizarre presidential race , his machinations are starting to look almost viable . There are several parallels between Underwood 's re-election campaign and the 2016 campaigns of Donald Trump , Ted Cruz , Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders . "

Reflections on Having Left a Place of Retirement is a poem written by English poet Samuel Taylor Coleridge in 1796 . Like his earlier poem The Eolian Harp , the poem discusses Coleridge 's understanding of nature and his married life , which was suffering from problems that developed after the previous poem . Overall , the poem focuses on humanity 's relationship with nature in its various aspects ranging from experiencing an Edenic state to having to abandon a unity with nature in order to fulfill a moral obligation to humanity . The discussion of man 's obligation to each other leads into a discussion on the difference between the life of a philosopher and the life of a poet . By the end of the poem , the narrator follows the philosophical path in a manner similar to what Coleridge sought to do . The response to the poem from critics was mostly positive with many of them emphasizing the religious aspects of the poem in their analysis .

After marrying Sarah Fricker in autumn 1795 , Coleridge left their home at Clevedon and began to travel throughout England in order to meet with various philosophers and political theorists . In part , he was trying to meet with people so he could raise subscriptions for his various works . During this time , he would write home constantly to his pregnant wife and was concerned about her state of health . His feelings of guilt , along with a fever that he treated with laudanum , affected him greatly and caused him to express these feelings in a letter to Josiah Wade on 10 February 1796 : " My past life seems to me like a dream , a feverish dream ! all one gloomy huddle of strange actions , and dim-discovered motives ! Friendships lost by indolence , and happiness murdered by mismanaged sensibilities . " After the letter , Coleridge returned to his wife who was now living with her family at Redcliffe Hill , Bristol . As he wrote The Eolian Harp to commemorate coming to his home at Clevedon , Coleridge composed Reflections on Having Left a Place of Retirement on leaving it . The poem was not included in Coleridge 's 1796 collection of poems as it was probably still incomplete , but it was published in the October 1796 Monthly Magazine under the title Reflections on Entering into Active Life . A poem Which Affects Not to be Poetry . Reflections was included in Coleridge 's 28 October 1797 collection of poems and the collections that followed . Of his early poems , Coleridge believed that Reflections was his best .

The themes of Reflections are connected to Coleridge 's The Eolian Harp as the scene for both is the same . The land of Clevedon is praised and seen full of life , and it serves as contrast to escaping from the real world into fantasy and pondering about the abstract . Both poems also describe Coleridge 's relationship with his wife and feelings of sexual desire . The imagination aspects of the poem represent an unwillingness to accept nature on its own and rejects the conclusion of The Eolian Harp . Although the land of Clevedon can bring one closer to God , one cannot just simply exist in such an area but must seek out truth . Feeling the need to seek out truth creates a separation between the mind of a poet and the mind of a philosopher . The poem reconciles the two by allowing the pursuer of truth to reflect on his time of simply enjoying nature and God 's presence . However , the philosopher aspect is dominant and the individual must go out and try to help humanity . Nature can be soothing , but the narrator must reject the Edenic quality of nature because such a state is not yet appropriate . The Edenic imagery figures into many of Coleridge 's poems and is reinforced with the image of myrtle trees and takes on many forms within his poetry . In Reflections , to dwell in an Edenic state is a paradise in which the narrator leaves voluntarily because he cannot ignore the problems of the world like a coward . Instead , the individual is compelled to join with humanity and even the lowest form of benefiting humanity is superior to doing nothing at all .

The image of nature and other themes reappears in Fears in Solitude ( 1798 ) . The later poem recreates the " Valley of Seclusion " image in the form of a dell . Even the image of a passerby looking in on the cottage found in Reflection is repeated . Similarly , the compulsion to enter into the world and help humanity is included , but it is altered from being motivated by guilt to a warning message against a possible invasion from outside forces . As such , Fears in Solitude does not seek to leave the location to help humanity , but to stay as a protector over his family . In Coleridge 's own life , he tried to follow the path of the philosopher , but the 10 July 1834 entry in Table Talk admits that he was unable to do so : " so I own I wish life and strength had been spared to me to complete my Philosophy . For , as God hears me , the originating , continuing , and sustaining wish and design in my heart were to exalt the glory of his name ; and , which is the same thing in other words , to promote the improvement of humanity . But visum aliter Deo , and his will be done . "

In terms of Coleridge 's marriage , Reflections differs from The Eolian Harp by saying that there were problems within the marriage , especially with it distracting Coleridge from nature and the world outside of the home that he shared with his wife . The poem expresses feelings of solitude and confinement , and there is a difference between the worlds inside and outside of the cottage in a similar manner to the focus found within Coleridge 's Kubla Khan . This is especially true with a focus from the private to the public spheres . Within the outside world , the poem 's narrator is separate from humanity , but his focus is ever on humanity and contains both a religious and political component . The image of " One Life " within the poem compels him to abandon the sensual pleasures of the cottage and to pursue a path of helping humanity .

The Critical Review saw favor with " To the River Otter " and Reflections in their review of the 1797 collection of Coleridge 's poem . The July review claims that the poem " evince a feeling heart . The comparison between the weeping eyes of a humane friend and the unmoved face of another equally benevolent , and the contrast between the latter and those who merely affect sympathy , are well drawn . " During the 20th century , Virginia Radley declares that Reflections " although not so striking in imagery as is the ' Eolian Harp , ' still has much to recommend it in this respect [ ... ] The impression left with the reader that the cottage and its surroundings are inestimably lovely , quiet , and peaceful is a paramount one , while the dead lines [ ... ] do not move the reader at all , except to make him wonder if the move from Clevedon for the cause of humanity was a necessary one . " Richard Haven argues that the poem 's image of the moral path is weak because " the returned traveller can only dismiss his ascent to another mode of being as a pleasant but useless memory " .

Anthony Harding believes " it is important to recognize that it steps outside the idyllic but circumscribed scene of ' The Eolian Harp ' , and admits the impossibility , in a fallen world , of human self-sufficiency . " Oswald Doughty states that the " most important additions " to Coleridge 's 1797 edition of poems included Reflections . Richard Holmes points out that both Reflections and The Eolian Harp " mark a new stage in Coleridge 's exploration of the sacred relations between man and nature , which gradually become more serious and impassioned as they carry increasingly theological implications behind his Romanticism . "

HMS Pioneer was a Colossus-class aircraft carrier built for the Royal Navy during World War II . She was modified whilst under construction into an aircraft maintenance carrier . The ship arrived in Australia in mid-1945 to support operations by the British Pacific Fleet against Japanese forces . She supported the British attacks on the Japanese Home Islands from mid-June until the end of the war in August from a base in the Admiralty Islands . The ship and her facilities were used to help repair Hong Kong 's infrastructure in late 1945 and she returned to the UK in early 1946 . Pioneer was immediately placed in reserve upon her arrival and she was sold in 1954 for scrap .

The Colossus-class carriers were intended to meet a shortage of naval flight decks . Their design was based on that of the Illustrious-class aircraft carriers , but modified to permit rapid construction in commercial yards . Pioneer was not completed to her original design ; the success of the maintenance aircraft carrier Unicorn prompted modification of the ship , whilst under construction , to an aircraft maintenance ship without aircraft catapults . Pioneer had an overall length of 695 feet ( 211.8 m ) , a beam of 80 feet 4 inches ( 24.5 m ) , and a draught of 23 feet ( 7.0 m ) at deep load . She displaced 12,000 long tons ( 12,000 t ) at standard load . Each of the ship 's two sets of Parsons geared steam turbines drove one propeller shaft . Steam was supplied by four Admiralty three-drum water-tube boilers operating at a pressure of 400 psi ( 2,758 kPa ; 28 kgf / cm2 ) . The turbines were designed for a total of 40,000 shaft horsepower ( 30,000 kW ) and gave Pioneer a speed of 25 knots ( 46 km / h ; 29 mph ) . The ship carried 3,196 long tons ( 3,247 t ) of fuel oil which gave her a range of 8,500 nautical miles ( 15,700 km ; 9,800 mi ) at 11 knots ( 20 km / h ; 13 mph ) .

In order to maximize space for workshops and stores , the ship 's arresting gear and catapult were not fitted ; two large deckhouses were added to port of the island and on the rear of the flight deck . The ship had a single hangar , 17 feet 6 inches ( 5.33 m ) high . Aircraft were transported between the hangars and the flight deck by two aircraft lifts ( elevators ) ; each measured 34 by 45 feet ( 10.4 m × 13.7 m ) . Two large cranes were mounted on the flight deck to move aircraft and stores to and from the flight deck . The ship carried two small self-propelled lighters to allow unflyable aircraft to be transferred between ships or to shore facilities . Bulk petrol storage consisted of 98,600 imperial gallons ( 448,000 l ; 118,400 US gal ) . The ship 's crew totaled 854 , plus 222 in her aircraft repair department . The ship was equipped with six quadruple mounts for the 40-millimetre ( 1.6 in ) QF 2-pounder Mk VIII gun ( " pom-pom " ) . These gun mounts could depress to − 10 ° and elevate to a maximum of + 80 ° . The Mk VIII 2-pounder gun fired a 40-millimetre ( 1.6 in ) 0.91-pound ( 0.41 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 1,920 ft / s ( 590 m / s ) to a distance of 3,800 yards ( 3,500 m ) . The gun 's rate of fire was approximately 96 – 98 rounds per minute . She was also fitted with 19 Bofors 40 mm autocannon in single mounts . The Bofors fired a 0.719-pound ( 0.326 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 2,890 ft / s ( 880 m / s ) . It had a rate of fire of about 120 rounds per minute and a maximum range of 10,750 yards ( 9,830 m ) . All of the guns were mounted on the flight deck , not in sponsons on the side of the hull like her half-sisters that were completed as aircraft carriers . Each " pom-pom " mount was provided with a separate fire-control director fitted with a Type 262 gunnery radar .

After working up , Pioneer sailed for Australia on 30 March 1945 . She arrived in Sydney on 13 May and was transferred to Manus Island , in the Admiralty Islands , on 21 June to prepare for operations off Japan . She was still there when Japan surrendered on 15 August and had repaired 24 aircraft since her arrival . Pioneer arrived in Hong Kong in late September to help with the rebuilding of the colony 's infrastructure . Her sailors restored power , telephone service and repaired trains and buses . She made one trip back to Manus , but was back in Hong Kong in late November . The ship sailed for Sydney the following month and departed for the UK on 17 February 1946 . Upon her arrival , she was placed in reserve . Pioneer was sold to Thomas W. Ward Ltd for scrap in September 1954 and broken up in Inverkeithing .

In mathematics , the Pythagorean theorem , also known as Pythagoras ' theorem , is a fundamental relation in Euclidean geometry among the three sides of a right triangle . It states that the square of the hypotenuse ( the side opposite the right angle ) is equal to the sum of the squares of the other two sides . The theorem can be written as an equation relating the lengths of the sides a , b and c , often called the " Pythagorean equation " : where c represents the length of the hypotenuse and a and b the lengths of the triangle 's other two sides . Although it is often argued that knowledge of the theorem predates him , the theorem is named after the ancient Greek mathematician Pythagoras ( c . 570 – c . 495 BC ) as it is he who , by tradition , is credited with its first recorded proof . There is some evidence that Babylonian mathematicians understood the formula , although little of it indicates an application within a mathematical framework . Mesopotamian , Indian and Chinese mathematicians all discovered the theorem independently and , in some cases , provided proofs for special cases .

The theorem has been given numerous proofs – possibly the most for any mathematical theorem . They are very diverse , including both geometric proofs and algebraic proofs , with some dating back thousands of years . The theorem can be generalized in various ways , including higher-dimensional spaces , to spaces that are not Euclidean , to objects that are not right triangles , and indeed , to objects that are not triangles at all , but n-dimensional solids . The Pythagorean theorem has attracted interest outside mathematics as a symbol of mathematical abstruseness , mystique , or intellectual power ; popular references in literature , plays , musicals , songs , stamps and cartoons abound .

The Pythagorean Theorem was known long before Pythagoras , but he may well have been the first to prove it . In any event , the proof attributed to him is very simple , and is called a proof by rearrangement . The two large squares shown in the figure each contain four identical triangles , and the only difference between the two large squares is that the triangles are arranged differently . Therefore , the white space within each of the two large squares must have equal area . Equating the area of the white space yields the Pythagorean Theorem , Q.E.D. That Pythagoras originated this very simple proof is sometimes inferred from the writings of the later Greek philosopher and mathematician Proclus . Several other proofs of this theorem are described below , but this is known as the Pythagorean one .

As pointed out in the introduction , if c denotes the length of the hypotenuse and a and b denote the lengths of the other two sides , the Pythagorean theorem can be expressed as the Pythagorean equation : If the length of the hypotenuse c and of one side ( a or b ) are known , then the length of the other side can be calculated as The Pythagorean equation relates the sides of a right triangle in a simple way , so that if the lengths of any two sides are known the length of the third side can be found . Another corollary of the theorem is that in any right triangle , the hypotenuse is greater than any one of the other sides , but less than their sum . A generalization of this theorem is the law of cosines , which allows the computation of the length of any side of any triangle , given the lengths of the other two sides and the angle between them . If the angle between the other sides is a right angle , the law of cosines reduces to the Pythagorean equation .

This proof is based on the proportionality of the sides of two similar triangles , that is , upon the fact that the ratio of any two corresponding sides of similar triangles is the same regardless of the size of the triangles . Let ABC represent a right triangle , with the right angle located at C , as shown on the figure . Draw the altitude from point C , and call H its intersection with the side AB . Point H divides the length of the hypotenuse c into parts d and e . The new triangle ACH is similar to triangle ABC , because they both have a right angle ( by definition of the altitude ) , and they share the angle at A , meaning that the third angle will be the same in both triangles as well , marked as θ in the figure . By a similar reasoning , the triangle CBH is also similar to ABC . The proof of similarity of the triangles requires the triangle postulate : the sum of the angles in a triangle is two right angles , and is equivalent to the parallel postulate . Similarity of the triangles leads to the equality of ratios of corresponding sides :

In outline , here is how the proof in Euclid 's Elements proceeds . The large square is divided into a left and right rectangle . A triangle is constructed that has half the area of the left rectangle . Then another triangle is constructed that has half the area of the square on the left-most side . These two triangles are shown to be congruent , proving this square has the same area as the left rectangle . This argument is followed by a similar version for the right rectangle and the remaining square . Putting the two rectangles together to reform the square on the hypotenuse , its area is the same as the sum of the area of the other two squares . The details follow . Let A , B , C be the vertices of a right triangle , with a right angle at A. Drop a perpendicular from A to the side opposite the hypotenuse in the square on the hypotenuse . That line divides the square on the hypotenuse into two rectangles , each having the same area as one of the two squares on the legs . If two triangles have two sides of the one equal to two sides of the other , each to each , and the angles included by those sides equal , then the triangles are congruent ( side-angle-side ) .

The area of a triangle is half the area of any parallelogram on the same base and having the same altitude . Next , each top square is related to a triangle congruent with another triangle related in turn to one of two rectangles making up the lower square . On each of the sides BC , AB , and CA , squares are drawn , CBDE , BAGF , and ACIH , in that order . The construction of squares requires the immediately preceding theorems in Euclid , and depends upon the parallel postulate . From A , draw a line parallel to BD and CE . It will perpendicularly intersect BC and DE at K and L , respectively . Angles CAB and BAG are both right angles ; therefore C , A , and G are collinear . Similarly for B , A , and H. Angles CBD and FBA are both right angles ; therefore angle ABD equals angle FBC , since both are the sum of a right angle and angle ABC . Since A-K-L is a straight line , parallel to BD , then rectangle BDLK has twice the area of triangle ABD because they share the base BD and have the same altitude BK , i.e. , a line normal to their common base , connecting the parallel lines BD and AL . ( lemma 2 )

We have already discussed the Pythagorean proof , which was a proof by rearrangement . The same idea is conveyed by the leftmost animation below , which consists of a large square , side a + b , containing four identical right triangles . The triangles are shown in two arrangements , the first of which leaves two squares a2 and b2 uncovered , the second of which leaves square c2 uncovered . The area encompassed by the outer square never changes , and the area of the four triangles is the same at the beginning and the end , so the black square areas must be equal , therefore a2 + b2 = c2 . A second proof by rearrangement is given by the middle animation . A large square is formed with area c2 , from four identical right triangles with sides a , b and c , fitted around a small central square . Then two rectangles are formed with sides a and b by moving the triangles . Combining the smaller square with these rectangles produces two squares of areas a2 and b2 , which must have the same area as the initial large square .

Albert Einstein gave a proof by dissection in which the pieces need not get moved . Instead of using a square on the hypotenuse and two squares on the legs , one can use any other shape that includes the hypotenuse , and two similar shapes that each include one of two legs instead of the hypotenuse . In Einstein 's proof , the shape that includes the hypotenuse is the right triangle itself . The dissection consists of dropping a perpendicular from the vertex of the right angle of the triangle to the hypotenuse , thus splitting the whole triangle into two parts . Those two parts have the same shape as the original right triangle , and have the legs of the original triangle as their hypotenuses , and the sum of their areas is that of the original triangle . Because the ratio of the area of a right triangle to the square of its hypotenuse is the same for similar triangles , the relationship between the areas of the three triangles holds for the squares of the sides of the large triangle as well .

The theorem can be proved algebraically using four copies of a right triangle with sides a , b and c , arranged inside a square with side c as in the top half of the diagram . The triangles are similar with area <formula> , while the small square has side b − a and area ( b − a ) 2 . The area of the large square is therefore A similar proof uses four copies of the same triangle arranged symmetrically around a square with side c , as shown in the lower part of the diagram . This results in a larger square , with side a + b and area ( a + b ) 2 . The four triangles and the square side c must have the same area as the larger square , A related proof was published by future U.S. President James A. Garfield ( then a U.S. Representative ) . Instead of a square it uses a trapezoid , which can be constructed from the square in the second of the above proofs by bisecting along a diagonal of the inner square , to give the trapezoid as shown in the diagram . The area of the trapezoid can be calculated to be half the area of the square , that is

One can arrive at the Pythagorean theorem by studying how changes in a side produce a change in the hypotenuse and employing calculus . The triangle ABC is a right triangle , as shown in the upper part of the diagram , with BC the hypotenuse . At the same time the triangle lengths are measured as shown , with the hypotenuse of length y , the side AC of length x and the side AB of length a , as seen in the lower diagram part . If x is increased by a small amount dx by extending the side AC slightly to D , then y also increases by dy . These form two sides of a triangle , CDE , which ( with E chosen so CE is perpendicular to the hypotenuse ) is a right triangle approximately similar to ABC . Therefore , the ratios of their sides must be the same , that is : This can be rewritten as <formula> , which is a differential equation that can be solved by direct integration :

√ a2 + b2 , the same as the hypotenuse of the first triangle . Since both triangles ' sides are the same lengths a , b and c , the triangles are congruent and must have the same angles . Therefore , the angle between the side of lengths a and b in the original triangle is a right angle . The above proof of the converse makes use of the Pythagorean Theorem itself . The converse can also be proven without assuming the Pythagorean Theorem . A corollary of the Pythagorean theorem 's converse is a simple means of determining whether a triangle is right , obtuse , or acute , as follows . Let c be chosen to be the longest of the three sides and a + b > c ( otherwise there is no triangle according to the triangle inequality ) . The following statements apply :

A Pythagorean triple has three positive integers a , b , and c , such that a2 + b2 = c2 . In other words , a Pythagorean triple represents the lengths of the sides of a right triangle where all three sides have integer lengths . Evidence from megalithic monuments in Northern Europe shows that such triples were known before the discovery of writing . Such a triple is commonly written ( a , b , c ) . Some well-known examples are ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) and ( 5 , 12 , 13 ) . A primitive Pythagorean triple is one in which a , b and c are coprime ( the greatest common divisor of a , b and c is 1 ) . ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) , ( 5 , 12 , 13 ) , ( 7 , 24 , 25 ) , ( 8 , 15 , 17 ) , ( 9 , 40 , 41 ) , ( 11 , 60 , 61 ) , ( 12 , 35 , 37 ) , ( 13 , 84 , 85 ) , ( 16 , 63 , 65 ) , ( 20 , 21 , 29 ) , ( 28 , 45 , 53 ) , ( 33 , 56 , 65 ) , ( 36 , 77 , 85 ) , ( 39 , 80 , 89 ) , ( 48 , 55 , 73 ) , ( 65 , 72 , 97 )

One of the consequences of the Pythagorean theorem is that line segments whose lengths are incommensurable ( so the ratio of which is not a rational number ) can be constructed using a straightedge and compass . Pythagoras 's theorem enables construction of incommensurable lengths because the hypotenuse of a triangle is related to the sides by the square root operation . The figure on the right shows how to construct line segments whose lengths are in the ratio of the square root of any positive integer . Each triangle has a side ( labeled " 1 " ) that is the chosen unit for measurement . In each right triangle , Pythagoras 's theorem establishes the length of the hypotenuse in terms of this unit . If a hypotenuse is related to the unit by the square root of a positive integer that is not a perfect square , it is a realization of a length incommensurable with the unit , such as √ 2 , √ 3 , √ 5 . For more detail , see Quadratic irrational . Incommensurable lengths conflicted with the Pythagorean school 's concept of numbers as only whole numbers . The Pythagorean school dealt with proportions by comparison of integer multiples of a common subunit . According to one legend , Hippasus of Metapontum ( ca . 470 B.C. ) was drowned at sea for making known the existence of the irrational or incommensurable .

The distance formula in Cartesian coordinates is derived from the Pythagorean theorem . If ( x1 , y1 ) and ( x2 , y2 ) are points in the plane , then the distance between them , also called the Euclidean distance , is given by More generally , in Euclidean n-space , the Euclidean distance between two points , <formula> and <formula> , is defined , by generalization of the Pythagorean theorem , as : If Cartesian coordinates are not used , for example , if polar coordinates are used in two dimensions or , in more general terms , if curvilinear coordinates are used , the formulas expressing the Euclidean distance are more complicated than the Pythagorean theorem , but can be derived from it . A typical example where the straight-line distance between two points is converted to curvilinear coordinates can be found in the applications of Legendre polynomials in physics . The formulas can be discovered by using Pythagoras 's theorem with the equations relating the curvilinear coordinates to Cartesian coordinates . For example , the polar coordinates ( r , θ ) can be introduced as : Performing the squares and combining terms , the Pythagorean formula for distance in Cartesian coordinates produces the separation in polar coordinates as :

In a right triangle with sides a , b and hypotenuse c , trigonometry determines the sine and cosine of the angle θ between side a and the hypotenuse as : where the last step applies Pythagoras 's theorem . This relation between sine and cosine is sometimes called the fundamental Pythagorean trigonometric identity . In similar triangles , the ratios of the sides are the same regardless of the size of the triangles , and depend upon the angles . Consequently , in the figure , the triangle with hypotenuse of unit size has opposite side of size sin θ and adjacent side of size cos θ in units of the hypotenuse .

A generalization of the Pythagorean theorem extending beyond the areas of squares on the three sides to similar figures was known by Hippocrates of Chios in the 5th century BC , and was included by Euclid in his Elements : If one erects similar figures ( see Euclidean geometry ) with corresponding sides on the sides of a right triangle , then the sum of the areas of the ones on the two smaller sides equals the area of the one on the larger side . This extension assumes that the sides of the original triangle are the corresponding sides of the three congruent figures ( so the common ratios of sides between the similar figures are a : b : c ) . While Euclid 's proof only applied to convex polygons , the theorem also applies to concave polygons and even to similar figures that have curved boundaries ( but still with part of a figure 's boundary being the side of the original triangle ) . The basic idea behind this generalization is that the area of a plane figure is proportional to the square of any linear dimension , and in particular is proportional to the square of the length of any side . Thus , if similar figures with areas A , B and C are erected on sides with corresponding lengths a , b and c then :

At any selected angle of a general triangle of sides a , b , c , inscribe an isosceles triangle such that the equal angles at its base θ are the same as the selected angle . Suppose the selected angle θ is opposite the side labeled c . Inscribing the isosceles triangle forms triangle ABD with angle θ opposite side a and with side r along c . A second triangle is formed with angle θ opposite side b and a side with length s along c , as shown in the figure . Thābit ibn Qurra stated that the sides of the three triangles were related as : As the angle θ approaches π / 2 , the base of the isosceles triangle narrows , and lengths r and s overlap less and less . When θ

Pappus 's area theorem is a further generalization , that applies to triangles that are not right triangles , using parallelograms on the three sides in place of squares ( squares are a special case , of course ) . The upper figure shows that for a scalene triangle , the area of the parallelogram on the longest side is the sum of the areas of the parallelograms on the other two sides , provided the parallelogram on the long side is constructed as indicated ( the dimensions labeled with arrows are the same , and determine the sides of the bottom parallelogram ) . This replacement of squares with parallelograms bears a clear resemblance to the original Pythagoras 's theorem , and was considered a generalization by Pappus of Alexandria in 4 A.D. The lower figure shows the elements of the proof . Focus on the left side of the figure . The left green parallelogram has the same area as the left , blue portion of the bottom parallelogram because both have the same base b and height h . However , the left green parallelogram also has the same area as the left green parallelogram of the upper figure , because they have the same base ( the upper left side of the triangle ) and the same height normal to that side of the triangle . Repeating the argument for the right side of the figure , the bottom parallelogram has the same area as the sum of the two green parallelograms .

In terms of solid geometry , Pythagoras 's theorem can be applied to three dimensions as follows . Consider a rectangular solid as shown in the figure . The length of diagonal BD is found from Pythagoras 's theorem as : where these three sides form a right triangle . Using horizontal diagonal BD and the vertical edge AB , the length of diagonal AD then is found by a second application of Pythagoras 's theorem as : This result is the three-dimensional expression for the magnitude of a vector v ( the diagonal AD ) in terms of its orthogonal components { vk } ( the three mutually perpendicular sides ) : This one-step formulation may be viewed as a generalization of Pythagoras 's theorem to higher dimensions . However , this result is really just the repeated application of the original Pythagoras 's theorem to a succession of right triangles in a sequence of orthogonal planes . A substantial generalization of the Pythagorean theorem to three dimensions is de Gua 's theorem , named for Jean Paul de Gua de Malves : If a tetrahedron has a right angle corner ( like a corner of a cube ) , then the square of the area of the face opposite the right angle corner is the sum of the squares of the areas of the other three faces . This result can be generalized as in the " n-dimensional Pythagorean theorem " :

Let <formula> be orthogonal vectors in ℝn . Consider the n-dimensional simplex S with vertices <formula> . ( Think of the ( n − 1 ) -dimensional simplex with vertices <formula> not including the origin as the " hypotenuse " of S and the remaining ( n − 1 ) -dimensional faces of S as its " legs " . ) Then the square of the volume of the hypotenuse of S is the sum of the squares of the volumes of the n legs . This statement is illustrated in three dimensions by the tetrahedron in the figure . The " hypotenuse " is the base of the tetrahedron at the back of the figure , and the " legs " are the three sides emanating from the vertex in the foreground . As the depth of the base from the vertex increases , the area of the " legs " increases , while that of the base is fixed . The theorem suggests that when this depth is at the value creating a right vertex , the generalization of Pythagoras 's theorem applies . In a different wording : Given an n-rectangular n-dimensional simplex , the square of the ( n − 1 ) -content of the facet opposing the right vertex will equal the sum of the squares of the ( n − 1 ) -contents of the remaining facets .

The Pythagorean theorem can be generalized to inner product spaces , which are generalizations of the familiar 2-dimensional and 3-dimensional Euclidean spaces . For example , a function may be considered as a vector with infinitely many components in an inner product space , as in functional analysis . In an inner product space , the concept of perpendicularity is replaced by the concept of orthogonality : two vectors v and w are orthogonal if their inner product <formula> is zero . The inner product is a generalization of the dot product of vectors . The dot product is called the standard inner product or the Euclidean inner product . However , other inner products are possible . In an inner-product space , the Pythagorean theorem states that for any two orthogonal vectors v and w we have Here the vectors v and w are akin to the sides of a right triangle with hypotenuse given by the vector sum v + w . This form of the Pythagorean theorem is a consequence of the properties of the inner product : A further generalization of the Pythagorean theorem in an inner product space to non-orthogonal vectors is the parallelogram law :

which says that twice the sum of the squares of the lengths of the sides of a parallelogram is the sum of the squares of the lengths of the diagonals . Any norm that satisfies this equality is ipso facto a norm corresponding to an inner product . The Pythagorean identity can be extended to sums of more than two orthogonal vectors . If v1 , v2 , ... , vn are pairwise-orthogonal vectors in an inner-product space , then application of the Pythagorean theorem to successive pairs of these vectors ( as described for 3-dimensions in the section on solid geometry ) results in the equation

The broadest generalization of the Pythagorean theorem , introduced by Donald R. Conant and William A. Beyer , applies to a wide range of objects and sets of objects in any number of dimensions . Specifically , the square of the measure of an m-dimensional set of objects in one or more parallel m-dimensional flats in n-dimensional Euclidean space is equal to the sum of the squares of the measures of the orthogonal projections of the object ( s ) onto all m-dimensional coordinate subspaces . <formula> is a measure in m-dimensions ( a length in one dimension , an area in two dimensions , a volume in three dimensions , etc . ) . <formula> is a set of one or more non-overlapping m-dimensional objects in one or more parallel m-dimensional flats in n-dimensional Euclidean space . <formula> represents an m-dimensional projection of the original set onto an orthogonal coordinate subspace . <formula> is the measure of the m-dimensional set projection onto m-dimensional coordinate subspace <formula> . Because object projections can overlap on a coordinate subspace , the measure of each object projection in the set must be calculated individually , then measures of all projections added together to provide the total measure for the set of projections on the given coordinate subspace .

This generalized formula can be applied in the simplest case to a single one-dimensional object , a line segment , in two-dimensional space . The animation illustrates this case with a line segment shown in blue and its projections onto the x- and y- axes shown in green . The lengths of the projections squared and added together are equal to the length of the original line segment squared . This produces the familiar Pythagorean theorem formula : where c is the length of the original line segment , a is the length of the segment projected onto the x-axis , and b is the length of the segment projected onto the y-axis . In the animation , a2

9 , and c2 = 36 . Bringing the line segment together with its coordinate projections forms the traditional right triangle . Similarly , for any two-dimensional object in three-dimensional space , the formula can be stated as : where D is the area of a specified two-dimensional object , A is the area of the object 's projection onto the xy-coordinate plane , B is the area of the object 's projection onto the xz-coordinate plane , and C is the area of the object 's projection onto the yz-coordinate plane . The animation showing a blue three-by-three square object in three dimensions of space illustrates this application of the generalization to an object of more than one dimension . As the orientation of the object changes , the proportions of the green coordinate plane projections adjust accordingly , so the squares of the areas of the projections always add up to the same value : the square of the area of the original object . In this case , the sum of the squares of the projection areas always add up to 81 .

The generalization applies equally to sets of multiple objects , as long as they are in the same plane or parallel planes . The measures of the objects in such a set can be added together and essentially treated as a single object . The multiple line-segment animation illustrates the generalization applied to a set of three one-dimensional objects in three dimensions of space . In this case , two sequential line segments exist in parallel to a third line segment . Because lines are one-dimensional , the coordinate subspaces onto which they are projected must also be one-dimensional . Thus , projections appear on the coordinate axes rather than on the coordinate planes . The lengths of the projected line segments on a given axis are summed , then squared , then added to the total lengths squared on the other axes . The result is the squared sum of the lengths of the original line segments . For the sake of simplicity , when projections are single points of zero length , they are not shown , since they do not affect the calculations . The generalization applies to flat objects of any shape , regular or irregular . The multi-object animation illustrates the use of the generalization on a set of several different objects in different planes – in this case , a triangle and a circle on one plane , and a flat cat on a parallel plane ( shown in blue ) . Projections of the set are shown in green on the coordinate plane subspaces . Objects shown initially upright in the yz-plane are subsequently tilted in parallel . Again , regardless of set orientation , the result remains the same . On each coordinate plane subspace , the areas of object projections are calculated individually ( to avoid miscalculations due to projection overlap ) , then added together to produce the total projection area of the set on that plane . The projection set area is then squared for each coordinate plane . The sum of all projection set areas squared is always equal to the original set area squared .

The Pythagorean theorem is derived from the axioms of Euclidean geometry , and in fact , the Pythagorean theorem given above does not hold in a non-Euclidean geometry . ( The Pythagorean theorem has been shown , in fact , to be equivalent to Euclid 's Parallel ( Fifth ) Postulate . ) In other words , in non-Euclidean geometry , the relation between the sides of a triangle must necessarily take a non-Pythagorean form . For example , in spherical geometry , all three sides of the right triangle ( say a , b , and c ) bounding an octant of the unit sphere have length equal to π / 2 , and all its angles are right angles , which violates the Pythagorean theorem because a2 + b2 ≠ c2 . Here two cases of non-Euclidean geometry are considered — spherical geometry and hyperbolic plane geometry ; in each case , as in the Euclidean case for non-right triangles , the result replacing the Pythagorean theorem follows from the appropriate law of cosines . However , the Pythagorean theorem remains true in hyperbolic geometry and elliptic geometry if the condition that the triangle be right is replaced with the condition that two of the angles sum to the third , say A + B = C. The sides are then related as follows : the sum of the areas of the circles with diameters a and b equals the area of the circle with diameter c .

For any right triangle on a sphere of radius R ( for example , if γ in the figure is a right angle ) , with sides a , b , c , the relation between the sides takes the form : This equation can be derived as a special case of the spherical law of cosines that applies to all spherical triangles : By expressing the Maclaurin series for the cosine function as an asymptotic expansion with the remainder term in big O notation , it can be shown that as the radius R approaches infinity and the arguments a / R , b / R , and c / R tend to zero , the spherical relation between the sides of a right triangle approaches the Euclidean form of the Pythagorean theorem . Substituting the asymptotic expansion for each of the cosines into the spherical relation for a right triangle yields The constants a4 , b4 , and c4 have been absorbed into the big O remainder terms since they are independent of the radius R. This asymptotic relationship can be further simplified by multiplying out the bracketed quantities , cancelling the ones , multiplying through by − 2 , and collecting all the error terms together :

In a hyperbolic space with uniform curvature − 1 / R2 , for a right triangle with legs a , b , and hypotenuse c , the relation between the sides takes the form : where cosh is the hyperbolic cosine . This formula is a special form of the hyperbolic law of cosines that applies to all hyperbolic triangles : By using the Maclaurin series for the hyperbolic cosine , cosh x ≈ 1 + x2 / 2 , it can be shown that as a hyperbolic triangle becomes very small ( that is , as a , b , and c all approach zero ) , the hyperbolic relation for a right triangle approaches the form of Pythagoras 's theorem . For small right triangles ( a , b < < R ) , the hyperbolic cosines can be eliminated to avoid loss of significance , giving

On an infinitesimal level , in three dimensional space , Pythagoras 's theorem describes the distance between two infinitesimally separated points as : with ds the element of distance and ( dx , dy , dz ) the components of the vector separating the two points . Such a space is called a Euclidean space . However , in Riemannian geometry , a generalization of this expression useful for general coordinates ( not just Cartesian ) and general spaces ( not just Euclidean ) takes the form : which is called the metric tensor . ( Sometimes , by abuse of language , the same term is applied to the set of coefficients gij . ) It may be a function of position , and often describes curved space . A simple example is Euclidean ( flat ) space expressed in curvilinear coordinates . For example , in polar coordinates :

There is debate whether the Pythagorean theorem was discovered once , or many times in many places , and the date of first discovery is uncertain , as is the date of the first proof . According to Joran Friberg , a historian of mathematics , evidence indicates that the Pythagorean Theorem was well-known to the mathematicians of the First Babylonian Dynasty ( 20th to 16th centuries BC ) , which would have been over a thousand years before Pythagoras was born . ( Yale 's Institute for the Preservation of Cultural Heritage 's 3-D scan of a cuneiform tablet depicting the proof is one of their mostly widely used images . ) Other sources , such as a book by Leon Lederman and Dick Teresi , mention that Pythagoras discovered the theorem , although Teresi subsequently stated that the Babylonians developed the theorem " at least fifteen hundred years before Pythagoras was born . " The history of the theorem can be divided into four parts : knowledge of Pythagorean triples , knowledge of the relationship among the sides of a right triangle , knowledge of the relationships among adjacent angles , and proofs of the theorem within some deductive system .

Bartel Leendert van der Waerden ( 1903 – 1996 ) conjectured that Pythagorean triples were discovered algebraically by the Babylonians . Written between 2000 and 1786 BC , the Middle Kingdom Egyptian Berlin Papyrus 6619 includes a problem whose solution is the Pythagorean triple 6 : 8 : 10 , but the problem does not mention a triangle . The Mesopotamian tablet Plimpton 322 , written between 1790 and 1750 BC during the reign of Hammurabi the Great , contains many entries closely related to Pythagorean triples . In India , the Baudhayana Sulba Sutra , the dates of which are given variously as between the 8th and 5th century BC , contains a list of Pythagorean triples discovered algebraically , a statement of the Pythagorean theorem , and a geometrical proof of the Pythagorean theorem for an isosceles right triangle . The Apastamba Sulba Sutra ( c . 600 BC ) contains a numerical proof of the general Pythagorean theorem , using an area computation . Van der Waerden believed that " it was certainly based on earlier traditions " . Carl Boyer states that the Pythagorean theorem in Śulba-sũtram may have been influenced by ancient Mesopotamian math , but there is no conclusive evidence in favor or opposition of this possibility .

With contents known much earlier , but in surviving texts dating from roughly the 1st century BC , the Chinese text Zhou Bi Suan Jing ( 周髀算经 ) , ( The Arithmetical Classic of the Gnomon and the Circular Paths of Heaven ) gives a reasoning for the Pythagorean theorem for the ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) triangle — in China it is called the " Gougu Theorem " ( 勾股定理 ) . During the Han Dynasty ( 202 BC to 220 AD ) , Pythagorean triples appear in The Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art , together with a mention of right triangles . Some believe the theorem arose first in China , where it is alternatively known as the " Shang Gao Theorem " ( 商高定理 ) , named after the Duke of Zhou 's astronomer and mathematician , whose reasoning composed most of what was in the Zhou Bi Suan Jing . Pythagoras , whose dates are commonly given as 569 – 475 BC , used algebraic methods to construct Pythagorean triples , according to Proclus 's commentary on Euclid . Proclus , however , wrote between 410 and 485 AD . According to Thomas L. Heath ( 1861 – 1940 ) , no specific attribution of the theorem to Pythagoras exists in the surviving Greek literature from the five centuries after Pythagoras lived . However , when authors such as Plutarch and Cicero attributed the theorem to Pythagoras , they did so in a way which suggests that the attribution was widely known and undoubted . " Whether this formula is rightly attributed to Pythagoras personally , [ ... ] one can safely assume that it belongs to the very oldest period of Pythagorean mathematics . "

John Aubrey in his Brief Lives records of Thomas Hobbes that " He was forty years old before he looked on geometry ; which happened accidentally . Being in a gentleman 's library Euclid 's Elements lay open , and ' twas the forty-seventh proposition * in the first book . He read the proposition . ' By G , ' said he , ' this is impossible ! ' So he reads the demonstration of it , which referred him back to such a proof ; which referred him back to another , which he also read . Et sic deinceps , that at last he was demonstratively convinced of that truth . This made him in love with geometry . " Hans Christian Andersen wrote in 1831 a poem about the Pythagorean theorem : Formens Evige Magie ( Et poetisk Spilfægteri ) . A verse of the Major-General 's Song in the Gilbert and Sullivan comic opera The Pirates of Penzance , " About binomial theorem I 'm teeming with a lot o ' news , With many cheerful facts about the square of the hypotenuse " , makes an oblique reference to the theorem . The Scarecrow in the film The Wizard of Oz makes a more specific reference to the theorem . Upon receiving his diploma from the Wizard , he immediately exhibits his " knowledge " by reciting a mangled and incorrect version of the theorem : " The sum of the square roots of any two sides of an isosceles triangle is equal to the square root of the remaining side . Oh , joy ! Oh , rapture ! I 've got a brain ! "

In 2000 , Uganda released a coin with the shape of an isosceles right triangle . The coin 's tail has an image of Pythagoras and the equation α2 + β2 = γ2 , accompanied with the mention " PYTHAGORAS MILLENNIUM " . Greece , Japan , San Marino , Sierra Leone , and Suriname have issued postage stamps depicting Pythagoras and the Pythagorean theorem . In Neal Stephenson 's speculative fiction Anathem , the Pythagorean theorem is referred to as ' the Adrakhonic theorem ' . A geometric proof of the theorem is displayed on the side of an alien ship to demonstrate the aliens ' understanding of mathematics .

In Blessing , Tennessee , Jared Chirp , while attempting to flee his home , is attacked by rattlesnakes inside his car and killed . Federal agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) , after conferring with the completely ordinary Reverend Mackey , go to Reverend Enoch O 'Connor 's church , Church of God with Signs and Wonders , where Biblical literalism is stressed and snakes are used during his services . As such , O 'Connor becomes the prime suspect . Later , a woman named Iris , tells Reverend Mackey that she feels guilty because Jared called her on the night he died in order to talk to his girlfriend , Gracie . Iris , however , refused because Gracie was in bed . Later that night , Iris is bitten when her staple remover turns into a snake ; she promptly goes into the bathroom to clean up but is killed when snakes appear everywhere in the bathroom . Gracie is questioned by Mulder and Scully about O 'Connor because she is a former member of his church . The two agents discover that she is , in fact , O 'Connor 's daughter and was kicked out of his congregation and home when she became pregnant . The agents go back to O 'Connor 's church and Scully is attacked by O 'Connor , who attempts to stick her head in a box of snakes . He is promptly arrested . Later , while in his cell , he is attacked by snakes in his cell , but is not killed . O 'Connor later wakes up in the hospital and is visited by Gracie . O 'Connor then takes Gracie and leaves the hospital . Reverend Mackey tells Mulder and Scully that Enoch O 'Connor is the father of Gracie 's child .

Meanwhile , O 'Connor takes Gracie back to his church and baptizes her . Suddenly , she goes into labor and gives birth to live snakes . O 'Connor goes to Mackey 's church and attempts to kill him , but Mulder intervenes and saves Mackey . In the ambulance , Gracie tells Scully that Mackey was the real murderer , and the father of Gracie 's baby . He killed everyone to keep the fact that he was the father a secret and in order to destroy O 'Connor . Back at the church , Mulder realizes O 'Connor was innocent all along , but Mackey summons snakes who promptly attack Mulder . Luckily , Scully is able to break down the door and save Mulder . Mackey , unfortunately , disappears to Connecticut , changes his name to Reverend Wells , and starts another church . The episode ends with a snake coming out of Mackey 's mouth and eating a mouse .

" Signs and Wonders " was written by The X-Files staff writer Jeffrey Bell . Bell had long desired to write a " down-and-dirty " horror story for the series . In addition , he had informally studied the practice of snake handling , concluding that " anything involving snakes would be scary and I saw the church stuff as something that would be really fascinating . " However , unlike most stories featuring the radical religious , the theme of the episode was that in certain circumstances , " intolerance can be good " , according to executive producer Frank Spotnitz . Bell " wanted the snake church people to end up being the good guys . " However , the trick would be to disguise the real bad guys in plain sight . According to Bell , " The way the shows usually work out , Mulder is the one to figure out who the bad guys are . So I went into the story meeting with the idea of having Mulder being wrong . Because Mulder believes so strong it 's the other guy , it helped hide the true identity of the bad guy from the audience . "

During the snake handling scene at the Church of God with Signs and Wonders , the song being sung by the congregation is called " May Glory Protect Us " . The song was written by executive producer Paul Rabwin , who was heavily involved in the episode 's music production . Rabwin later noted , " I auditioned a bunch of gospel songs [ to episode director Kim Manners ] . I told him I could write one that was better and he told me to go for it . And I did . [ … ] Kim loved it . [ … ] It was a great tribute that he was able to ask me and accept my opinion on it . "

The casting for " Signs & Wonders " was " rather unorthodox " . In order to prevent ophidiophobia from hitting the actors on the day of filming , live rattlesnakes were brought in during the casting sessions . Strangely enough , many of the actors were " thrilled " about holding the snakes , according to Kim Manners . He later noted that " the funny thing was that the actors couldn 't wait to hold the rattlesnakes [ … ] but we were still nervous . " In addition , Michael Childers , who portrayed Reverend O 'Connor , was actually the son of a real life snake preacher . Manners later noted that " he had gone to church as a child and handled snakes . " A series of safety meetings were scheduled in order to prevent accidents on the set . One of the items on the agenda was finding the closest hospital to the set , according to make-up effects coordinator John Vulich . Furthermore , several of the cast and crew members had a fear of snakes , including Manners , David Duchovny , and John Shiban . During one of the days that the show was being prepped , a snake wrangler brought several live rattlesnakes to the set , but one escaped . It was eventually found behind Manners ' desk . In order to prevent future accidents , the mouths of the snakes were sutured shut .

At any one time , there were between six and fifty snakes on the set . During the scene where Mulder is attacked , fifteen live snakes were used . However , Duchovny was " not within blocks " of the shot and a stunt double was used . Several faux-body parts were used to simulate snake bites . One of the fake arms , which was used for Mulder , was recycled from the sixth season episode " Dreamland " . A false stomach was created for Tracy Middendorf , who portrayed Gracie , to give the illusion that live snakes were wriggling inside of her . At one point in the episode , Expulsion from the Garden of Eden , a famous painting by Italian Early Renaissance artist Masaccio appears in the background . Because the painting contains nudity , Fox 's network executives took issue with the scene , forcing the show to edit out the genitalia on the painting . Paul Rabwin later noted that " the network executive censors didn 't feel it was appropriate for us to show all the details [ ... ] course , they could see people giving birth to hundreds of snakes , but that 's OK . " On the seventh season DVD special features , the painting is erroneously attributed to the famed Michelangelo .

Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a mixed review and awarded it two stars out of four . Vitaris criticized the polarization of religion viewed in the episode , noting that " although ' Signs and Wonder 's purports to be an examination of different modes of faith , it offers a pessimistic — and distorted view of religion . " Tom Kessenich , in his book Examinations , gave the episode a mixed review , writing " I have always been the type of person who admires the creative attempt , even if the attempt isn 't a complete success . [ … ] This is precisely the mindset I 'm feeling after watching ' Signs and Wonders ' . I admire the attempt to spook me , to offer up conflicting views of religion and righteousness , even if I 'm not completely sure what the point of it all was . " Nevertheless , Kessenich praised the snake attack scenes and the episode 's occasional quips of humor . Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club awarded the episode a " C + " . Despite writing that the snake attack scenes were " surprisingly horrifying " and that the episode contained " plenty [ of elements ] to recommend " , he was critical about the lack of explanation behind Mackey . Although he had a positive opinion of the first 30 minutes , he wrote that the " last 10 minutes just sink everything good the episode has going , and in a way that hurts everything that came before . "

Cody Douglas Hodgson ( born February 18 , 1990 ) is a Canadian professional ice hockey centreman currently an unrestricted free agent who most recently played for the Milwaukee Admirals in the American Hockey League ( AHL ) while under contract to the Nashville Predators of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . Hodgson played at the major junior level for four seasons with the Brampton Battalion of the Ontario Hockey League ( OHL ) . After being selected tenth overall in the 2008 NHL Entry Draft by the Vancouver Canucks , Hodgson won the William Hanley Trophy ( OHL 's most sportsmanlike player ) , Red Tilson Trophy ( OHL player of the year ) and the CHL Player of the Year Award , as well as First Team All-Star honours for the 2008 – 09 season . While training in the 2009 off-season , Hodgson suffered a back injury that required a year for him to fully recover . In 2010 – 11 , he played his professional rookie season with the Canucks ' minor league affiliate , the Manitoba Moose of the American Hockey League ( AHL ) . The season also marked his debut at the NHL level with the Canucks and he went on to participate in the team 's run to the 2011 Stanley Cup Finals . During his rookie season the subsequent year , Hodgson was dealt to the Buffalo Sabres at the 2012 trade deadline .

Hodgson was born in Toronto , Ontario , to Marie and Chris Hodgson . His father is the president of the Ontario Mining Association and a former Ontario provincial Progressive Conservative cabinet minister in Premier Mike Harris 's government , while his mother is the executive director of a day care . He has an older brother , Clayton , and two younger sisters . His sister Charlotte attends the University of Western Ontario and Caroline attends Belmont University in Nashville , Tennessee . Both girls played organized hockey in Markham , Ontario . Hodgson grew up in Haliburton , Ontario , with his family until they moved to Markham , Ontario , in 1998 . The family would return in the summers to their cottage on Haliburton Lake . Hodgson began playing organized hockey at age four in Haliburton . Playing for the Ontario Minor Hockey Association ( OMHA ) ' s Haliburton Huskies , he was teammates with Matt Duchene . The two were childhood friends and played together throughout their minor and junior careers , including with the Brampton Battalion and on Canada 's national under-18 and under-20 teams . His family was also friends with Jeff Skinner 's family growing up in Markham . Hodgson played bantam hockey with the Toronto Jr . Canadiens of the Greater Toronto Hockey League ( GTHL ) , captaining a team that included four other eventual 2008 NHL draftees – Alex Pietrangelo , Tyler Cuma , Josh Brittain and Stefan Della Rovere . His tenure with the team included a provincial championship . Hodgson then joined the OMHA 's Markham Waxers , competing with their bantam team in 2004 – 05 , then at the midget level in 2005 – 06 . He recorded a 511-point campaign over 31 games in his midget season , while also recording one assist over two games with the club 's Junior A side . During his tenure with the Waxers program , he played alongside future NHL players Steven Stamkos and Michael Del Zotto . Hodgson had also played alongside Stamkos on annual summer teams , starting at the age of 11 .

Hodgson attended Buttonville Public School and Unionville High School in Markham , the latter of which he helped win numerous hockey tournaments . Following his draft by the Vancouver Canucks , Hodgson was accepted into the business program at York University for the 2008 fall semester . However , due to missing classes from his commitments to the Canucks ' training camp and a subsequent university staff strike , he placed his academics on hiatus . In December 2009 , Hodgson was chosen to be the city of Markham 's official torchbearer for the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver . The torch passed through Markham on its way to Vancouver on December 17 , 2009 , on day 49 of the cross-country relay .

Hodgson was drafted 17th overall by the Brampton Battalion in the 2006 OHL Priority Selection . The following season , he joined the Battalion wearing number 19 in honour of his favourite hockey player growing up , Steve Yzerman of the Detroit Red Wings . He led the team in rookie scoring with 23 goals and 46 points . He added four points in four playoff games as the Battalion were eliminated by the Barrie Colts in the first round . In his second season with Brampton , Hodgson improved to 85 points in 68 games , second in team-scoring , behind centre John Hughes . He was chosen to the Eastern Conference squad in the 2008 OHL All-Star Classic and scored one goal . Hodgson added five goals in five playoff games , as Brampton was eliminated in the opening round for the second-straight season by Barrie . Heading into the 2008 NHL Entry Draft , Hodgson was ranked ninth among North American skaters by the NHL Central Scouting Bureau . He went on to be chosen tenth overall by the Vancouver Canucks . Scouting reports and former coaches emphasized Hodgson 's hockey sense and character , while Canucks General Manager Mike Gillis cited his leadership as a strong factor in drafting him . After the 2007 – 08 season , OHL coaches had voted him the smartest player in the Eastern Conference . As his skating was considered a weakness , he spent the subsequent off-season training to improve it .

Hodgson was expected to compete for a roster spot on the Canucks immediately after being drafted . He was then signed to a three-year , entry-level contract worth the rookie maximum of $ 2.625 million on October 5 , 2008 . However , the next day , he was sent back to Brampton for the 2008 – 09 season . Upon his return , Hodgson was named the ninth captain in Battalion team history . He succeeded forward Thomas Stajan , who served as captain for the start of the season while Hodgson competed in the NHL pre-season . Stajan himself had just replaced defenceman John de Gray , who had turned professional . Chosen to represent the OHL in the 2008 ADT Canada-Russia Challenge in November , Hodgson recorded a hat-trick and added an assist in the first of two games against Russia ; he was chosen as game MVP . He went on to complete the month of November with 27 points in 13 games to be named OHL Player of the Month . Hodgson had also been chosen as the OHL Player of the Week for the week ending on November 9 after scoring nine points in three games . After a second Player of the Week recognition , scoring seven points in three games for the week ending February 1 , 2009 , Hodgson participated in the 2009 OHL All-Star Classic . Joined by teammates Matt Duchene , Evgeny Grachev and Thomas McCollum for the Eastern Conference , Hodgson received player of the game honours after a five-point effort in an 11 – 6 win . He recorded a hat-trick , along with Western Conference representative Justin DiBenedetto , to tie Scott Barney , who first scored three goals in 1999 , for the OHL All-Star Game record . Hodgson 's five points also tied the All-Star Game record for most points ( shared by five others ) . He recorded another record later in the month with a 23-game point-scoring streak , registering 17 goals , 23 assists and 40 points in that span . The streak was both a Battalion club record and OHL season-high .

Hodgson finished the season with 43 goals and 92 points in 53 games , fourth in League scoring . The annual OHL coaches poll distinguished Hodgson as the smartest player ( for the second consecutive season ) , the hardest worker , the best on faceoffs and the best penalty killer . In addition to OHL First All-Star Team honours , he was awarded both the William Hanley Trophy as the League 's most sportsmanlike player and the Red Tilson Trophy as OHL player of the year . The media voted Hodgson ahead of forward John Tavares and goaltender Mike Murphy for the Tilson award . Hodgson was then distinguished over fellow major junior league MVP 's Brett Sonne of the Western Hockey League ( WHL ) and Nicola Riopel of the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League ( QMJHL ) as the CHL Player of the Year . Early in the subsequent playoff season , Hodgson received his second OHL Player of the Month recognition for March ( 26 points in 11 games ) . He helped the Battalion advance to the OHL Finals , where they lost the J. Ross Robertson Cup to the Windsor Spitfires . He led his team with 31 points in the post-season .

Following the Battalion 's playoff elimination , Hodgson was assigned to the Canucks ' American Hockey League ( AHL ) affiliate , the Manitoba Moose , for their 2009 playoff run . Making his professional debut with the Moose in Game 1 of the semi-finals against the Houston Aeros , he notched an assist on the game 's first goal for his first professional point . He followed up with his first professional goal the next night , a wrist shot against Aeros goaltender Nolan Schaefer , in a 5 – 2 victory . While Hodgson started on the fourth line for the Moose , he quickly moved his way up to the second line with fellow Canucks first-round pick Michael Grabner . Advancing past the Aeros , Moose Head Coach Scott Arniel chose not to play Hodgson in Game 4 of the Calder Cup Finals against the Hershey Bears . Arniel explained the decision was attributed to fatigue on Hodgson 's part from a lengthy season in the juniors ( including the 2009 World Juniors and a lengthy OHL playoff run ) . He returned the next game to help the Moose stave off elimination with a goal in a 3 – 2 Game 5 victory . Manitoba went on to lose the Calder Cup in Game 6 by a 4 – 1 score . Hodgson 's assisted on the Moose 's lone tally by Mário Bližňák .

Preparing for the Canucks ' training camp for the 2009 – 10 season , Hodgson injured his back while working out in the summer . The injury , which was misdiagnosed as a bulging disc in his lower back , caused him to miss two months of summer training . After being cleared to play by Canucks team doctors on September 11 , 2009 , and a back specialist in Toronto , Hodgson was again expected to secure a roster spot during training camp . After struggling in six pre-season games , he was returned to the Brampton Battalion on September 29 in the final round of team cuts . Hodgson subsequently sought a third opinion regarding his back at the Cleveland Clinic in Ohio . In response , then-Canucks Head Coach Alain Vigneault publicly speculated whether Hodgson was simply having a hard time being cut and was trying to " roll the [ blame ] in another direction . " Despite having been cleared earlier to play in the pre-season by two sets of doctors , the Cleveland Clinic judged him unfit to play for a month . Previously undetected nerve damage in one leg was also revealed . Due to Hodgson 's misdiagnosis , which was not corrected until a year later , subsequent treatment and rehabilitation was designed for a bulging disc , which further aggravated his real injury – a muscle strain .

After missing the first 50 games of the 2009 – 10 OHL season , Hodgson returned to the Battalion line-up on February 4 , 2010 , recording two assists in a 4 – 2 win against the Erie Otters . Following his return , he declared he would no longer be training in the off-season with Canucks Director of Player Development Dave Gagner , under whose supervision he suffered his back injury . Combined with the Canucks doctors ' initial misdiagnosis and Vigneault 's disparaging comments regarding Hodgson following the NHL pre-season , there was speculation in the media of a possible conflict between Hodgson and the Canucks organization . General Manager Mike Gillis , however , dismissed such speculation . Eight days after his OHL return , Hodgson suffered another injury , breaking a toe on his right foot while blocking a shot against the Sudbury Wolves . Initial X-rays came up negative and he continued playing for nine more games before a second X-ray revealed a hairline fracture in one his right metatarsal bones . Missing the Battalion 's final five regular season games , he finished the campaign with eight goals and 20 points over 13 contests . Despite missing the majority of the season , he was voted as the smartest player in the Eastern Conference for the third consecutive year in the OHL coaches poll .

Hodgson returned to the Brampton line-up for the opening game of the 2010 playoffs , scoring the game-winning goal against the Kingston Frontenacs . In Game 5 of the series , he scored his 20th career playoff goal in the OHL , surpassing Wojtek Wolski for the all-time lead among Battalion players . The Battalion eliminated the Frontenacs in seven games before themselves being ousted in four games by Barrie in the second round . Hodgson completed the post-season with ten points in 11 games , second in team-scoring to Sean Jones . He admitted publicly after the playoffs that his health " was never 100 percent " during the 2009 – 10 season . The Battalion 's playoff elimination marked the end of Hodgson 's four-year OHL career . He left Brampton ranked second on the club 's all-time scoring list behind Wojtek Wolski in regular season goals ( 114 ) , assists ( 129 ) , points ( 243 ) , powerplay goals ( 46 ) and shorthanded goals ( 7 ) , while ranking first in game-winning goals ( 23 ) . In playoff games , he left as the all-time leader in goals ( 20 ) , assists ( 30 ) and points ( 50 ) .

Following his 2009 – 10 OHL season , it was expected Hodgson would join the Manitoba Moose for a second consecutive AHL playoff season . However , after being assessed by Canucks team doctors , his broken toe was judged to have not yet fully healed and he was not cleared for AHL assignment . Hodgson additionally believed that he had re-injured his back while colliding head-first into the boards during Game 7 of the opening playoff round . He underwent an MRI in the off-season , which uncovered the misdiagnosed bulging disc to be a muscle strain instead . With the Canucks ' consent , he trained in the off-season with former NHL player Gary Roberts , who had himself overcome a back injury during his career .

After challenging for a Canucks roster spot once again during the team 's 2010 training camp , Hodgson was assigned to the Manitoba Moose . He scored his first regular season AHL goal against goaltender Peter Delmas of the Hamilton Bulldogs on October 22 , 2010 . With the score tied 3 – 3 after overtime , Hodgson added a shootout goal to help the Moose win the game . Later , in December 2010 , Hodgson suffered a broken orbital bone after he was high-sticked by teammate Lee Sweatt during a Moose practice . Eight days after returning to Manitoba 's line-up , Hodgson earned his first NHL call-up to Vancouver . Hodgson made his NHL debut on February 1 , 2011 , in a 4 – 1 win against the Dallas Stars . Centring the fourth line and playing on the second powerplay unit , he registered two shots in over nine minutes of ice time . The following day , he scored his first career NHL goal against Ilya Bryzgalov in a 6 – 0 win against the Phoenix Coyotes . In his third game , he recorded his first career NHL assist on a goal by Christian Ehrhoff against the Chicago Blackhawks ; Vancouver won 4 – 3 . After appearing in his first five NHL games , Hodgson was returned to the Moose on February 11 . Team management explained to the media his call-up was a means to introduce him to NHL play and that they were more comfortable having him continue developing in the AHL with first-line minutes and a bigger role with the Moose . However , with the team 's fourth-line centre role unfilled ( Alain Vigneault had been using natural winger Tanner Glass in that position ) , he was called back to Vancouver within ten days . Hodgson played three more games for the Canucks before the team acquired fourth-line centre Maxim Lapierre from the Anaheim Ducks at the trade deadline on February 28 . Hodgson was subsequently sent back down to Manitoba . He completed his professional rookie season with 30 points in 52 AHL games – ranking fifth in Moose scoring – and two points in eight NHL games .

At the end of the regular season , Hodgson was called up to the Canucks for the 2011 playoffs . He registered his first NHL playoff point in Game 2 of the opening round against the Chicago Blackhawks , assisting on a goal by defenceman Alexander Edler in a 4 – 3 win . Hodgson drew in and out of the line-up throughout the post-season , appearing in 12 of the Canucks ' 25-game playoff run , which ended in a Game 7 loss to the Boston Bruins in the Stanley Cup Finals . During the off-season , Canucks centre Ryan Kesler underwent hip surgery , sidelining him for the start of the 2011 – 12 campaign . With the centre position on the second line vacant , Hodgson competed with the newly-acquired Andrew Ebbett to temporarily replace Kesler . After being cut in his previous three training camps with the team , Hodgson emerged with the second-line position to start the season . After wearing 39 on his jersey the previous season as a rookie , Hodgson switched to 9 , a number historically associated in the NHL with high-profile players . He had previously spoken to team trainers regarding the number , but decided having the number is " something you have to earn [ by ] mak [ ing ] the team first . " When Kesler returned to the team 's line-up six games into the season , Hodgson was moved to the right wing to remain on the second line , before settling in as the team 's third-line centre . On December 10 , 2011 , Hodgson left a game against the Ottawa Senators after a hit from opposing forward Nick Foligno left him unsteadily skating back to the bench . Hodgson was reportedly uninjured , as Vigneault told media he was kept out of the contest for precautionary measures .

Ranking fifth among NHL rookies in scoring by January 2012 , he was selected as one of 12 first-year players to participate in the NHL All-Star Game SuperSkills Competition in Ottawa , Ontario . He was designated to Team Chara during the All-Star Draft and went on to participate in one SuperSkills event , the shooting accuracy segment . Hitting all four targets in 20.929 seconds , he lost the rookie heat to Matt Read of the Philadelphia Flyers , who had a time of 14.011 seconds . Hodgson 's time ranked fifth among the eight players who participated in the event . Canucks teammates Henrik Sedin , Daniel Sedin and Alexander Edler joined Hodgson in Ottawa as NHL All-Stars , though they competed against him in the SuperSkills Competition as part of Team Alfredsson . Following the NHL All-Star weekend , Hodgson was named the League 's Rookie of the Month for January after having recorded ten points ( six goals and four assists ) over 11 games , first among Canucks and NHL first-year players . Playing behind Henrik Sedin and Ryan Kesler on the Canucks ' depth chart at centre , Hodgson earned limited ice-time with the Canucks . By mid-season , his success as a rookie led many in the media to question the 10 – 12 minutes of ice time Alain Vigneault routinely allotted him per game .

Minutes before the NHL trade deadline on February 27 , 2012 , Hodgson was dealt , along with defenceman Alexander Sulzer , to the Buffalo Sabres in exchange for fellow rookie forward Zack Kassian and defenceman Marc-André Gragnani . Canucks General Manager Mike Gillis acknowledged the trade as an effort to balance his team out by trading Hodgson 's skill and finesse in return for Kassian 's size and toughness . Analysts from TSN and The Vancouver Sun also echoed the sentiment , commenting that while the Canucks gained elements in Kassian that were required to succeed in the playoffs , Hodgson 's skill set reflected the style of play that Vancouver 's success was based upon . In a telephone interview with TSN shortly after the trade , Hodgson told reporters he was " in shock , " adding that " It 's tough to leave Vancouver . " There were , however , reports in the media that Hodgson had asked for a trade from the Canucks , an allegation that Mike Gillis neither confirmed nor denied . The reaction in the Vancouver media was largely of surprise that Gillis would trade away a well-performing rookie . Vancouver Sun columnist Iain MacIntyre declared it " a stunner " and " one of the most unpopular trades in Vancouver in years . " Another Sun article likened the deal to a lopsided 1996 trade between the Canucks and Pittsburgh Penguins in which two first-round prospects of opposite playing styles – the skilled Markus Näslund and the larger , more aggressive Alek Stojanov – were exchanged . Näslund went on to become the Canucks ' all-time leading goal- and point-scorer , while the latter had a short career in the minor leagues .

Hodgson made his Sabres debut two days after the trade , registering four shots on goal and 16 minutes of ice time in a 2 – 0 win against the Anaheim Ducks . After going pointless in his first ten games with Buffalo , Hodgson recorded two assists in a 7 – 3 win against the Tampa Bay Lightning on March 19 . Two nights later , he scored his first two goals as a Sabre in a game against the Montreal Canadiens . Leaving Vancouver gave Hodgson a larger on-ice role , earning nearly five minutes more ice time per game as a Sabre . Completing his first NHL season with the Sabres , he finished with 41 points ( 19 goals and 22 assists ) over 83 games . He ranked fifth in League rookie scoring and first in power play goals ( 7 ) , despite earning less ice time than his first-year peers ( his 13 minutes and 49 seconds per game averaged the least among the top 14 rookie scorers ) . As a team , the Sabres then failed to qualify for the 2012 playoffs , finishing ninth in the Eastern Conference . Hodgson was assigned to the AHL 's Rochester Americans immediately before the 2012 – 13 NHL lock-out took effect .

Hodgson signed a six-year , $ 25.5 million extension with the Sabres on September 11 , 2013 . In the second year of his contract extension with the Sabres in the 2014 – 15 season , Hodgson suffered the worst season in his professional career , contributing with just 6 goals and 13 points in 78 outings for the cellar-dwelling Sabres . With the option to buy-out his contract at a lower rate due to his age , on June 29 , 2015 , the Sabres , in the midst of a rebuild , placed Hodgson on unconditional waivers in order for a release to free agency .

On the opening day of free agency , Hodgson signed a one-year contract with the Nashville Predators . Hodgson made the opening night roster of the Predators to begin the 2015 – 16 season . He was used primarily in a depth role , centering the fourth-line . After posting 8 points in 39 games , Hodgson was placed on waivers by the Predators on January 13 , 2016 . Hodgson passed through waivers unclaimed and was subsequently assigned to AHL affiliate , the Milwaukee Admirals the following day . Hodgson was not offered a new contract by the club , and became an unrestricted free agent on July 1 .

Hodgson first competed internationally for Canada at the 2007 Ivan Hlinka Memorial Tournament in Hodonín , Czech Republic , and Piešťany , Slovakia . Although favoured to win the tournament , Canada finished in fourth place . He scored two goals in the 5 – 4 bronze medal game loss to Russia . In total , Hodgson contributed a team-high five points in four games , tied with Steven Stamkos . Hodgson also represented Ontario later that year at the 2007 Canada Winter Games , winning gold over Manitoba 6 – 4 in the gold medal game . Hodgson next represented Canada at the 2008 IIHF World U18 Championships in Kazan , Russia . Playing in the quarter-finals against Finland , Hodgson was named player of the game after scoring the game-winning goal in a 2 – 1 victory . Hodgson finished with a tournament-high 12 points in seven games , leading Canada as team captain to its second IIHF World U18 gold medal with an 8 – 0 victory over tournament host Russia . He was chosen as one of Canada 's three top players by tournament coaches , along with forward Jordan Eberle and goaltender Jake Allen .

In his third year of junior , Hodgson was selected to compete in the 2009 World Junior Championships with Team Canada in Ottawa . He was chosen as an alternate captain to defenceman Thomas Hickey . In the second round-robin game against Kazakhstan , Hodgson accumulated six points ( two goals and four assists ) , coming within one point of the single-game Canadian record held by Michael Cammalleri and Dave Andreychuk . In the following round-robin game against the United States , he scored the game-winning goal in a 7 – 4 win to lead Team Canada to first place in their pool and a bye to the semi-finals . Facing Sweden in the final game , Hodgson scored two goals – one on the powerplay and an empty-netter – and one assist to overtake John Tavares as the tournament leading scorer with five goals and 11 assists for 16 points in six games . Team Canada defeated Sweden 5 – 1 to capture the gold medal while Hodgson was named to the Tournament All-Star Team . Returning from the tournament , Hodgson was asked to drop the ceremonial faceoff for a Toronto Maple Leafs game against the Florida Panthers on January 6 , 2009 .

Simba ( from the Swahili word for lion ) is a fictional character who appears in The Lion King franchise . Introduced in Walt Disney Animation 's 32nd animated feature film The Lion King ( 1994 ) , the character subsequently appears in its sequels The Lion King II : Simba 's Pride ( 1998 ) and The Lion King 1 ½ ( 2004 ) . Simba was created by screenwriters Irene Mecchi , Jonathan Roberts and Linda Woolverton . While Mark Henn served as Simba 's supervising animator as a cub , Ruben A. Aquino animated the character as he appears as an adult . Although considered an original character , Simba was inspired by the character Bambi from Disney 's Bambi ( 1942 ) , as well as the stories of Moses and Joseph from the Bible . Additionally , several similarities have been drawn between Simba and Prince Hamlet from William Shakespeare 's tragedy of the same name . In 1997 , The Lion King was adapted into Broadway musical , with actors Scott Irby-Ranniar and Jason Raize originating the roles of the cub and adult Simbas , respectively .

The idea for The Lion King originated from Disney chairman Jeffrey Katzenberg in 1989 and was originally conceived under the title King of the Jungle . The story , which has been compared to Bambi ( 1942 ) , was jokingly referred to as " Bambi in Africa " because of the similarities between the two films and their respective main characters . Co-director Rob Minkoff said that both films are " more true-life adventure than mythical epic . " Though considered an original coming-of-age story that follows the life of Simba as he grows up and " tak [ es ] on the responsibility of adulthood , " co-directors Roger Allers and Minkoff drew inspiration from other sources . In particular , the biblical figures Moses and Joseph served as creative inspiration for the character . Producer Don Hahn said that , like them , Simba is " born into royalty , is then exiled , and has to return to claim [ his ] kingdom . " Several film and entertainment critics have noted similarities and parallels between the stories of The Lion King and William Shakespeare 's tragedy Hamlet , and their protagonists . Allers said that these similarities were not initially intentional and came as a surprise to the filmmakers themselves ; they noticed the similarities only after the story was established and they eventually decided to pursue it . According to Hahn , " When we first pitched the revised outline of the movie ... someone in the room announced that its themes and relationships were similar to Hamlet . Everyone responded favorably to the idea that we were doing something Shakespearean , so we continued to look for ways to model our film on that all-time classic . "

Matthew Broderick provided the speaking voice of Adult Simba . The first actor to be assigned to The Lion King , Broderick learned of the role while he was on vacation in Ireland , where he received a telephone call from his agent informing him that the directors were interested in casting him as Simba . At the time , Broderick was well known for portraying the title character in Ferris Bueller 's Day Off ( 1986 ) . The directors decided to cast him as Simba because they felt that he was " perfect " for the role ; according to producer Don Hahn , Broderick 's voice resembled " the kind of character who could be irresponsible and likeable , but you also felt that he could come back in a very heroic way . " Jonathan Taylor Thomas , who was starring as Randy Taylor on the television sitcom Home Improvement at the time , was cast as the speaking voice of Young Simba . His appearance and personality would later serve as creative inspiration for supervising animator Mark Henn . Though Broderick is a trained Broadway singer , he was not up to the task , and neither was non-singer Thomas , so Toto lead singer Joseph Williams and actor Jason Weaver were hired to dub their respective singing voices . Williams ' voice is heard on the song " Can You Feel the Love Tonight " . Impressed by Weaver 's performance as a young Michael Jackson in the miniseries The Jacksons : An American Dream , songwriters Elton John and Tim Rice recruited him to record " I Just Can 't Wait to Be King " and " Hakuna Matata " while the film was still in its early stages of production . As directors , Roger Allers and Rob Minkoff worked closely with the actors in order to ensure credible performances . As is frequently done in animated films , the filmmakers videotaped the actors while they recorded their dialogue , allowing the animators to incorporate their specific mannerisms into the designs of their characters .

When The Lion King was green-lit , its concept and story were not well received by studio employees . To guarantee the release of at least one successful film , Disney CEO Jeffrey Katzenberg divided the studio into two separate projects : The Lion King and Pocahontas ( 1995 ) , with Pocahontas expected to be the more successful of the two . Because of this assumption , the majority of the studio 's more seasoned animators gravitated towards Pocahontas because The Lion King was deemed a " risk " , while less experienced animators were assigned to work on The Lion King . Co-director Rob Minkoff received this positively , saying that this decision " gave a lot of newer animators a chance to step up to leadership roles . " The role of animating Simba was divided between Mark Henn and Ruben A. Aquino . While Henn served as the supervising animator of Simba as a cub , credited as Young Simba , Aquino was placed in charge of animating the character as he appears as an adult . The Lion King was Disney 's first animated feature film to feature a cast of quadrupeds since Oliver & Company ( 1988 ) . According to Aquino , animating four-legged creatures is difficult because the artists are faced with the task of drawing " twice as many legs ... as you do with human characters " and must also attribute to them both human and animal-like qualities . For assistance , Aquino drew influence from previous animated films that feature four-legged creatures as their main characters , citing Bambi , Lady and the Tramp ( 1955 ) and The Jungle Book ( 1967 ) as his main sources of inspiration .

Before The Lion King , Henn 's experience as a supervising animator was limited to predominantly female characters ; he had just recently completed work on Ariel from The Little Mermaid ( 1989 ) , Belle from Beauty and the Beast ( 1991 ) and Jasmine from Aladdin ( 1992 ) . When he became involved with The Lion King , Henn initially expressed interest in animating the film 's villain , Scar , because he wanted to do " something different . " However , producer Don Hahn felt that he was better suited for animating Simba . Henn approaches animating new characters by " put [ ting himself ] into the character ’ s situation . " Simba proved to be a challenge because Henn was faced with the task of creating an animated character who would both appear and behave like a real lion cub . To achieve this , Henn visited zoos , sketched and studied live lion cubs that were brought into the studio for research , and frequently consulted with wildlife experts . When it came time to animate Simba during the " I Just Can 't Wait to Be King " musical sequence , Henn felt it essential that the character remain on all fours at all times , despite the fact that he is meant to be dancing . In terms of personality , Henn aimed to depict Simba as a " cocky , confident character " at the beginning of the film , who must eventually mature and learn to take responsibility . The animators would often observe and document the voice actors while they recorded their dialogue , using their movements and mannerisms as a visual aid . Actor Jonathan Taylor Thomas , who provided the voice of Young Simba , served as inspiration for the design and personality of Simba . Henn said , " I loved watching Jonathan Taylor Thomas when he was a boy on Home Improvement , and getting to meet him and observe him . " Although Aquino was responsible for animating the majority of Simba 's adult sequences , Henn animated the character 's first appearance as an adult that occurs near the end of the " Hakuna Matata " musical number .

Released in theaters in 1994 , The Lion King marks Simba 's first appearance . All the animals in the Pride Lands gather at the foot of Pride Rock to commemorate the birth of Simba , who will eventually succeed to the throne and take his father Mufasa 's place as king . Furious by the fact that he is no longer next in line , Simba 's jealous uncle Scar refuses to attend the ceremony . While Simba grows into a rambunctious lion cub who frequently boasts about the fact that he will someday rule over the Pride Lands , Scar secretly plots against him . Scar plots regicide and familicide against Simba and Mufasa by luring Simba into a vast gorge , where he triggers a wildebeest stampede . Notified by Scar that Simba is in danger , Mufasa rushes to his aid and manages to place him safely on a ledge . Weakened and unable to pull himself up the steep slope to safety , Mufasa asks his brother for assistance . However , Scar 's true nature is revealed and he betrays Mufasa , throwing him into the gorge where he is killed by the fall .

Convinced by Scar that he is responsible for his father 's death , Simba runs away to a distant jungle where he is befriended by Timon and Pumbaa , who teach him to ignore his past and avoid his responsibilities . There , he grows into a handsome young lion , while Scar wreaks havoc on the Pride Lands . When Simba is discovered by his childhood friend Nala several years later , she confronts him , warning him of Scar 's tyranny and begging him to return home . Afraid of facing his past , Simba refuses until a wise mandrill named Rafiki leads him to Mufasa 's ghost , who convinces him to return home and reclaim his kingdom from Scar . Simba returns to the Pride Lands and finds them barren because their natural resources have been squandered and abused by Scar . After witnessing Scar strike his mother Sarabi , Simba orders Scar to resign . At first thrown by the fact that he is alive , Scar soon regains composure and forces Simba to reveal that he is responsible for Mufasa 's death , while cornering him at the edge of Pride Rock , hoping to subject him to a similar fate as his father . Having grown overconfident , Scar finally reveals to Simba that he killed Mufasa . Furious , Simba tackles Scar and forces him into announcing this to the pride , initiating a battle between Simba 's pride of lionesses , Timon , & Pumbaa and Scar 's army of hyenas . Simba eventually defeats Scar and throws him into a pit , where he is cornered and killed by the hyenas , who have had enough of Scar treating them like slaves . Simba then takes his rightful place as king . When the kingdom returns to its former glory , the animals welcome the birth of King Simba and Queen Nala 's first born .

A direct-to-video sequel released in 1998 , Simba 's Pride takes place shortly after the events of the first film , depicting Simba and Nala as king and queen of the Pride Lands . In a ceremony at Pride Rock , the Pride Lands commemorate the birth of Simba and Nala 's daughter Kiara , whom Simba is overprotective of . He discovers that Kiara has disobeyed him by visiting the forbidden Outlands , home to an enemy pride of Scar 's followers known as the Outsiders , and befriending a young member of the pride named Kovu . After a close confrontation with Kovu 's mother Zira , the leader of the Outsiders and Scar 's most loyal follower , Simba separates the two and reminds Kiara of her responsibilities as the future queen . Meanwhile , Zira plots to manipulate Kovu to exact revenge on Simba for Scar 's death . Several years later , Simba grants a young adult Kiara 's request to embark on her first hunt , but has Timon and Pumbaa follow her in secret . Realizing this , Kiara rebels and pursue her hunt outside of the Pride Lands , where she nearly falls victim to a wildfire . Kiara is rescued by Kovu , who returns her to the Pride Lands , which is actually part of Zira 's plan to overthrow Simba . Saying that he has left the Outsiders , Kovu asks Simba to let him join his pride . Simba reluctantly accepts , but distrusts Kovu because of his similarities to Scar , and continues to treat him ruthlessly . That night , Simba has a nightmare about attempting to save his father Mufasa from falling into the stampede but is stopped by Scar who turns into Kovu and throws Simba off the cliff into the stampede .

While Kiara and Kovu 's friendship continues to grow , Simba , encouraged by Nala , attempts to show Kovu kindness by spending a day with him . Realizing that Kovu is beginning to side with Simba because of his love for Kiara , Zira ambushes and attacks Simba . Convinced by Zira that Kovu is responsible for the ambush , Simba exiles him and forbids Kiara to see him , but she makes her father realize that he is acting irrationally and finds Kovu . When a battle ensues between the Pride Landers and the Outsiders , Kiara and Kovu arrive and stops them . When a furious Zira attacks Simba , she is intercepted by Kiara , causing the two to fall over the edge of a cliff . Having landed safely on a ledge , Kira offers to help Zira , who is struggling to hang on . However , Zira , consumed by her resentment towards Simba , declines her assistance and falls into the raging water below . Simba finally approves of Kiara 's love for Kovu and reconciles with his daughter , and accepts the two lions as future king and queen .

In The Lion King 1 ½ , a direct-to-video followup released in 2004 , Simba appears as a less prominent character because the film 's primary focus is on Timon and Pumbaa 's behind-the-scenes role and involvement in The Lion King , in which they appear as supporting characters . Although the two films technically share the same story and timeline , the plot of The Lion King 1 ½ focuses more on Timon and Pumbaa . The meerkat and warthog unknowingly coexist alongside Simba , and the story fills in the two characters ' backstories and events that lead up to their long-lasting friendship , coinciding with and often initiating the events that affect Simba 's life during the first film . These events include the commemorative bow that occurs during the opening " Circle of Life " musical number and the collapsing of the animal tower that takes place during " I Just Can 't Wait to Be King . " The film also explores , in further detail , the relationship among the three characters as Timon and Pumbaa struggle to raise Simba as adoptive " parents " and disapprove of his relationship with Nala , portraying Simba as he grows from an energetic young lion cub , into an incorrigible teenager and , finally , an independent young lion .

The success of The Lion King and popularity of its characters led to the production of Timon & Pumbaa , an animated television series starring Timon and Pumbaa . Simba makes several appearances , including one episode in which Timon drags him out to try to revive Pumbaa 's lost memory . In the episode " Congo On Like This , " Timon and Pumbaa ( especially Timon ) suspect that Simba has reverted to his carnivorous nature . The episode " Shake Your Djibouti " again features Simba , when Timon and Pumbaa are forced to train him to protect them from a laboratory monster . Another episode , entitled " Rome Alone , " shows Simba being captured by Romans and forced into gladiatorial battle with another lion named Claudius . Simba makes brief appearances in " Once Upon a Timon " , " Zazu 's Off-By-One Day " , and " Beethoven 's Whiff " . He also appears in a music video of " The Lion Sleeps Tonight " . Simba was featured as a guest in the animated series House of Mouse , in which he alternates between cub and adult .

The success of The Lion King led to the production of a Broadway musical based on the film . Directed by Julie Taymor , with a book by Irene Mecchi and Roger Allers , The Lion King premiered at the New Amsterdam Theatre on November 13 , 1997 , where it ran for nine years until being moved to the Minskoff Theatre on June 13 , 2006 . The role of Simba was originated by Scott Irby-Ranniar and Jason Raize , with Irby-Ranniar portraying Young Simba and Raize portraying Adult Simba . Raize auditioned for the role of Adult Simba after hearing that Taymor was looking to cast an actor who was of " unidentifiable ethnicity . " Raize revealed in an interview that there was a lot of competition for the role because the musical required " triple-threat work -- singing , dancing and acting -- that you don 't get to such an extent in other shows . It was more the sense of who can take the challenge and not be daunted by the task . " Raize , who instantly felt that he " had a connection with Simba , " eventually won the role with the approval of Taymor and choreographer Garth Fagan , with Fagan admiring the fact that Raize was " willing to try , to fail , and then to try again . " Once cast , Raize found it difficult to maintain Taymor 's " sense of duality " because Simba is " both man and beast . " He said , " The tendency is to sacrifice one for the other , but you can 't . " Although hundreds of children auditioned for the role of Young Simba , the casting process was far less grueling for Irby-Ranniar who , according to Taymor , simply " walked in and he had the part . "

As part of the franchise 's merchandising , Simba has appeared in various The Lion King-related products . The character 's likeness has been used in and adapted into a variety of items , including plush toys and figurines , clothing , bedding , household decor and appliances . The success of the Broadway musical has also lead to its own line of merchandising , including the Simba beanbag doll , based on the character 's appearance and costume in the Broadway show . Since the film 's 1994 debut , Simba has appeared as a playable character in a variety of video game releases , both directly and indirectly associated with the franchise . The character 's first appearance as a video game character was in The Lion King , which was released by Virgin Interactive on November 1 , 1994 , for the video game platforms Super Nintendo Entertainment System , Sega Game Gear , Nintendo Entertainment System and PC . The game follows the plot of the original film and features Simba as both a cub and an adult . On December 28 , 2000 , Activision released The Lion King : Simba 's Mighty Adventure for Game Boy Color and PlayStation . The game encompasses 10 levels and incorporates the plot of both The Lion King and The Lion King II : Simba 's Pride as " Simba ... matures from a precocious cub to an adult lion . " Simba also appears as a playable character in Disney Interactive Studios ' Disney 's Extreme Skate Adventure , released on September 3 , 2003 , for Game Boy Advance , PlayStation 2 , GameCube and Xbox , and Disney Friends , released for Nintendo DS on February 26 , 2008 . Additionally , Simba appears in the Square Enix Kingdom Hearts video game franchise as a friend and ally of the series ' main character , Sora .

Live versions of Simba appear in the Lion King musical and in the parades and shows at the Walt Disney Parks and Resorts . Simba was also the main character in " Legend of the Lion King , " a former Fantasyland attraction in Walt Disney World 's Magic Kingdom , which retold the story of the film using fully articulated puppets . Other Disney attractions that have featured Simba include the Mickey 's PhilharMagic 3D show and the Hong Kong Disneyland version of It 's a Small World . He appears as one of the main characters at Epcot 's Land Pavilion 12-minute edutainment film Circle of Life : An Environmental Fable .

Although The Lion King itself has garnered Universal acclaim from film critics , reception towards Simba has been generally mixed . The Christian Science Monitor 's David Sterritt hailed Simba as " a superbly realized character , " specifically praising the scene in which the character " faces discipline by his dad after his adventure with the hyenas . " Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly wrote that Simba " has been given a marvelously expressive face " to the point of which " He seems more human than the Ken and Barbie types featured in Aladdin and The Little Mermaid . " Peter Travers of Rolling Stone described " the father-son relationship " shared by Simba and Mufasa as " movingly rendered , " while About.com 's David Nusair wrote , " it ’ s the touching father / son stuff that lies at the heart of the movie that cements The Lion King 's place as an utterly timeless piece of work . " James Berardinelli of ReelViews enjoyed the fact that the film focuses more on the story of Simba himself as opposed to the romantic relationship developing between the character and Nala . However , Berardinelli criticized Matthew Broderick 's vocal performance , describing it as " nondescript . " Rob Humanick of Slant Magazine hailed the fact that " it 's never laid on [ Simba ] that his time as king will directly correspond with the eventual passing of his father " as one of the film 's " most important facets . " However , he criticized The Lion King 's characters , describing them as well-designed but " lazy and troublesome . " The Austin Chronicle 's Robert Faires felt that Simba and the other Lion King characters , though " true " , were simply unoriginal retreads of preceding animated characters who were " swiped from other Disney cartoons . "

Hal Hinson of The Washington Post gave the character a negative review . Labeling Timon and Pumbaa the only interesting characters in The Lion King , Hinson questioned Simba 's role as the film 's hero . Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times agreed , " A movie 's heroes may have their names above the title , but often as not it 's the sidekicks who get the real work done . " Turan went on to pan Simba , describing him as " irritatingly callow . " Chris Hick of the Deseret News complained about the fact that Simba and the other " characters in The Lion King are not as warm and fuzzy as other Disney animated features , " crediting this with making " the film a bit tougher to warm [ up ] to . " ComingSoon.net strongly panned Simba as a lead character , writing , " typically for Disney animated fare , it 's the hero who is the weak link being both blandly designed and blandly performed . " Acknowledging the character 's Shakespearean origins , The Baltimore Sun 's Stephen Hunter gave Simba a negative review , writing , " Alas ... Simba stands in for Hamlet , but he 's a lot less complicated ; in fact , he 's less complicated than Morris the Cat or Sylvester . " Hunter continued , " Simba the Exile is even less interesting than Simba the Prince . " Christopher Null of Contactmusic.com was critical of Weaver 's performance as the singing voice of Young Simba , writing , " If there 's anything annoying about the film , it 's the singing . Young Simba sounds like a young Michael Jackson ... You almost don 't want him to succeed . " However , Null reacted more positively towards Broderick 's performance .

During the film 's opening number , " Circle of Life " , Rafiki introduces a newborn Simba to the crowd of animals gathered at the foot of Pride Rock by holding him high above their heads while parents Mufasa and Sarabi look on . Since the film 's 1994 release , this scene has grown to iconic status . In November 2002 , singer Michael Jackson sparked controversy by holding his son over the protective railing of a hotel balcony in Berlin . The event was witnessed by a large crowd of spectators who were watching from below . Some sources have claimed that Jackson was harmlessly attempting to emulate the scene from The Lion King . When Kate Middleton , Duchess of Cambridge went into labor with hers and Prince William 's baby in July 2013 , the idea that the couple should reenact the famous scene from The Lion King became quite popular among Twitter users . Radio journalist Darren Simpson reportedly tweeted , " when your baby arrives please re-enact the scene from the Lion King " . Shortly after Middleton gave birth to a boy , England native Tommy Peto initiated a petition asking the couple to welcome their baby by having the Archbishop of Canterbury emulate the scene by holding him over the balcony of Buckingham Palace . Ultimately , the idea was deemed " outside the responsibility of the government " and was declined .

The scene has found itself the subject of both reference and parody in various forms of media , such as in the film George of the Jungle ( 1997 ) . In what is almost an exact replica of the scene , George , portrayed by actor Brendan Fraser , takes the place of both Rafiki and Mufasa by standing at the tip of Pride Rock and presenting his young son to a crowd of onlooking animals , accompanied by wife Ursula , portrayed by Leslie Mann . During the season 3 finale of Once upon a Time the main character Emma Swan asked her parents Snow White and Prince charming ) that they aren 't going to hold up her yet unnamed baby brother like in the Lion King Since the release of The Lion King in 1994 , the name " Simba " has increased in use and popularity among dog and cat owners . According to Comcast in 2010 , the use of Simba as a dog name reemerged in popularity in 2009 after experiencing a noticeable decline in 2001 , ranking the name ninth out of 10 on its list of " Top 10 Trendiest Dog Names of the Year . " In May 2013 , Yahoo ! Lifestyle included the name on its list of " Trendiest Dog Names . " According to YouPet , Simba is the 17th most popular cat name out of 100 candidates . Care2 included Simba in its article " All-around Cool Cat Names , " while DutchNews.nl reported that Simba ranks among the country 's most popular cat names as of July 2013 . In its list of " Top Popular Pet Names , " BabyNames.com placed Simba at number 64 on its list of most popular dog names out of the 100 that were considered .

Altrincham ( / ˈɒltrɪŋəm / OL-tring-əm ) is a market town in Trafford , Greater Manchester , England , south of the River Mersey about 8 miles ( 13 km ) southwest of Manchester city centre , 3 miles ( 5 km ) south-southwest of Sale and 10 miles ( 16 km ) east of Warrington . At the 2001 UK census , it had a population of 41,000 increasing to 52,419 at the 2011 census . Historically part of Cheshire , Altrincham was established as a market town in 1290 , a time when the economy of most communities was based on agriculture rather than trade , and there is still a market in the town today . Further socioeconomic development came with the extension of the Bridgewater Canal to Altrincham in 1765 and the arrival of the railway in 1849 , stimulating industrial activity in the town . Outlying villages were absorbed by Altrincham 's subsequent growth , along with the grounds of Dunham Massey Hall , formerly the home of the Earl of Stamford , and now a tourist attraction with three Grade I Listed Buildings and a deer park . Altrincham today is an affluent commuter town , partly because of its transport links . The town has a strong middle class presence ; there has been a steady increase in Altrincham 's middle classes since the 19th century . It is also home to Altrincham F.C. and three ice hockey clubs , Manchester Storm , Altrincham Aces and Trafford Tornados . Altrincham 's population increased to 45,809 in 2011 .

Local evidence of prehistoric human activity exists in the form of two Neolithic arrowheads found in Altrincham , and further afield , a concentration of artefacts around Dunham . The remains of a Roman road , part of one of the major Roman roads in North West England connecting the legionary fortresses of Chester ( Deva Victrix ) and York ( Eboracum ) , run through the Broadheath area . As it shows signs of having been repaired , the road was in use for a considerable period of time . The name Altrincham first appears as " Aldringeham " , probably meaning " homestead of Aldhere 's people " . As recently as the 19th century it was spelt both Altrincham and Altringham . Until the Normans invaded England , the manors surrounding Altrincham were owned by the Saxon thegn Alweard ; after the invasion they became the property of Hamon de Massey , though Altrincham is not mentioned in the Domesday Book . The earliest documented reference to the town is from 1290 , when it was granted its charter as a Free Borough by Baron Hamon de Massey V. The charter allowed a weekly market to be held , and it is possible that de Massey established the town to generate income through taxes on trade and tolls . This suggests that Altrincham may have been a planned market town , unusual during the Middle Ages , when most communities were agricultural . Altrincham was probably chosen as the site of the planned town rather than Dunham – which would have been protected by Dunham Castle – because its good access to roads was important for trade .

Altrincham Fair became St James 's Fair or Samjam in 1319 and continued until 1895 . Fair days had their own court of Pye Powder ( a corruption of the French for " dusty feet " ) , presided over by the mayor and held to settle disputes arising from the day 's dealings . By 1348 the town had 120 burgage plots – ownership of land used as a measure of status and importance in an area – putting it on a par with the Cheshire town of Macclesfield and above Stockport and Knutsford . The earliest known residence in Altrincham was The Knoll , on Stamford Street near the centre of the medieval town . An 1983 excavation on the demolished building , made by South Trafford Archaeological Group , discovered evidence that the house dated from the 13th or 14th century , and that it may have contained a drying kiln or malting floor . During the English Civil War , men from Altrincham fought for the Parliamentarian Sir George Booth . During the war , armies camped on nearby Bowdon Downs on several occasions . In 1754 , a stretch of road south of Altrincham , along the Manchester to Chester route , was turnpiked . Turnpikes were toll roads which taxed passengers for the maintenance of the road . Further sections were turnpiked in 1765 from Timperley to Sale , and 1821 from Altrincham to Stockport . The maintenance of roads passed to local authorities in 1888 , although by then most turnpike trusts had already declined . The connection of the Bridgewater Canal to Altrincham in 1765 stimulated the development of market gardening , and for many years Altrincham was noted for its vegetables . By 1767 , warehouses had been built alongside the canal at Broadheath , the first step in the development of Broadheath as an industrial area and the beginning of Altrincham 's industrialisation . The canal was connected in 1776 to the River Mersey , providing the town not only with a water route to Manchester , but also to the Irish Sea .

Moves to connect the town to the UK 's railway network gained pace in 1845 , when the Act of Parliament for the construction of the Manchester South Junction and Altrincham Railway ( MSJAR ) was passed . The first train left Altrincham early on 20 July 1849 , carrying 65 passengers . The MSJAR had two stations in the town : Altrincham , on Stockport Road , and Bowdon – though not actually in Bowdon – on Lloyd Street / Railway Street . Both were replaced in 1881 by Altrincham & Bowdon station on Stamford New Road . The London and North Western Railway 's station at Broadheath , on the town 's northern edge , was opened in 1854 , while a further connection was created on 12 May 1862 by the Cheshire Midland Railway ( later the Cheshire Lines Committee ) , who opened their line from Altrincham to Knutsford . With its new railway links , Altrincham and the surrounding areas became desirable places for the middle classes and commuters to live . Professionals and industrialists moved to the town , commuting into Manchester . While some travelled daily by coach , the less well – to – do commuted by express or " flyer " barges from Broadheath . Between 1851 and 1881 the population increased from 4,488 to 11,250 . Broadheath 's industrial area , covering about 250 acres ( 1.0 km2 ) , was founded in 1885 by Harry Grey , 8th Earl of Stamford , to attract businesses . By 1900 Broadheath had its own docks , warehouses and electricity generating station . The site 's proximity to rail , canal and road links proved attractive to companies making machine tools , cameras and grinding machines . The presence of companies like Tilghmans Sand Blast , and the Linotype and Machinery Company , established Broadheath as an industrial area of national standing . By 1914 , 14 companies operated in Broadheath , employing thousands of workers . One of those was the Budenberg Gauge Company . Linotype also created 172 workers ' homes near its factory , helping cater for the population boom created by Broadheath 's industrialisation . Between 1891 and 1901 the population of Altrincham increased by 35 per cent , from 12,440 to 16,831 .

Altrincham became a Free Borough , a self-governing township , when it was granted a charter in June 1290 by the Lord of the Manor , Hamon de Massey V. The charter allowed for the creation of a merchants ' guild , run by the town 's burgesses to tax people passing through the borough . Burgesses were free men who lived in the town . The borough was ruled by a Court Leet and elected a mayor since at least 1452 . Amongst the court 's responsibilities were keeping the public peace and regulating the markets and fairs . The borough was not one of those reformed by the Municipal Corporations Act of 1835 , and continued to exist under the control of the Lord of the Manor and the Court Leet until its final abolition in 1886 . The Public Health Act of 1848 led to the creation of Altrincham 's Local Board of Health in 1851 to address the unsanitary conditions created by the town 's growing population – the first such board in Trafford . The local board was reconstituted as an urban district council in the administrative county of Cheshire under the Local Government Act 1894 . Altrincham Urban District was expanded in 1920 when parts of Carrington and Dunham Massey Civil Parishes were added . A further expansion took place in 1936 ; Timperley Civil Parish was abolished and most of its area incorporated into Altrincham UD . At the same time , there was a minor exchange of areas with Hale Urban District ; a minor addition from Bowdon Urban District ; and a further substantial portion of Dunham Massey Civil Parish was added . In 1937 the urban district was granted a charter of incorporation and became a municipal borough . The new borough was granted armorial bearings which featured heraldic references to the Masseys and Earls of Stamford . With the passage of the Local Government Act 1972 , the administrative counties and municipal boroughs were abolished and Altrincham became part of the Metropolitan Borough of Trafford in Greater Manchester on 1 April 1974 .

Trafford Council is responsible for the administration of local services , such as education , social services , town planning , waste collection and council housing . The area is divided into seven electoral wards : Altrincham , Bowdon , Broadheath , Hale Barns , Hale Central , Timperley , and Village . These wards have 21 out of the 63 seats on the Trafford Council ; as of the 2014 local elections fifteen of these seats were held by the Conservative Party , three by the Labour Party , and three by the Liberal Democrats . Altrincham was in the eponymous parliamentary constituency which was created in 1885 . This lasted until 1945 when it was replaced by Altrincham and Sale . In 1997 , this in turn became part of the newly created constituency of Altrincham and Sale West . Since its formation , Altrincham and Sale West has been represented in the House of Commons by the Conservative MP , Graham Brady . This is one of only two Conservative seats in Greater Manchester .

At 53 ° 23 ′ 2 ″ N 2 ° 21 ′ 17 ″ W ( 53.3838 , − 2.3547 ) , Altrincham is on the southwestern edge of the Greater Manchester Urban Area , immediately south of the town of Sale , and 8 miles ( 13 km ) southwest of Manchester city centre . It lies in the northwest corner of the Cheshire Plain , just south of the River Mersey . The Bridgewater Canal passes through the Broadheath area of the town . Altrincham 's drinking water is supplied by United Utilities . The local bedrock consists mainly of Keuper Waterstone , a type of sandstone , and water retrieved from those rocks is very hard and often saline , making it undrinkable . The town 's climate is generally temperate , with few extremes of temperature or weather . The mean temperature is slightly above average for the United Kingdom ; whereas both annual rainfall and average hours of sunshine are slightly below the average for the UK . Along with Sale , Stretford and Urmston , Altrincham is one of the four major urban areas in Trafford . The Altrincham area , as defined by Trafford Council , comprises the south of Trafford . In addition to the town of Altrincham , it includes the villages of Timperley , Bowdon , Hale and Hale Barns . The Broadheath area of the town was a light industrial centre until the 1970s and is now a retail park . The most densely populated part of the town is around the town centre , with the less populated areas and more green space further from the centre of town in villages such as Bowdon and Hale . The Oldfield Brow area lies on the outskirts of the town beside the Bridgewater Canal and close to Dunham Massey .

As of the 2001 UK census , the town of Altrincham had a total population of 40,695 . Of its 27,900 households , 38.7 per cent were married couples living together . 30.4 per cent contained one person , 8.2 per cent co-habiting couples and 9.0 per cent lone parents . The town 's population density is 10,272 inhabitants per square mile ( 3,966 / km2 ) , with 94.8 males for every 100 females . Of those aged 16 to 74 , 21.7 per cent had no academic qualifications , similar to the 21.3 per cent in all of Trafford , but lower than the 28.9 per cent in England . At 4.6 per cent , Altrincham has a low proportion of non-white people . Asians are the area 's largest ethnic minority , at 1.3 per cent of the population . In 1931 , 14.6 per cent of Altrincham 's population was middle class , slightly higher than the figure for England and Wales , which was 14 per cent . By 1971 this gap had increased to 28.8 per cent compared to 24 per cent nationally , while the town 's working class population had declined , from 30.3 per cent in 1931 ( 36 per cent in England and Wales ) to 18.6 per cent ( 26 per cent nationwide ) . The remainder comprised clerical and skilled manual workers . This change in social structure was similar to that seen across the nation – although biased towards the middle classes – making Altrincham the middle-class town it is today .

According to the hearth tax returns from 1664 , the township of Altrincham had a population of about 636 , making it the largest of the local settlements ; this had increased to 1,692 in 1801 . In the first half of the 19th century , the town 's population increase by 165 per cent , higher than 89 per cent across England and 98 per cent in the Trafford area . The growth of the settlement was a result of the Industrial Revolution , and although Altrincham was one of the fastest growing townships in the Trafford area , but paled in comparison to new industrial areas such as Ashton-under-Lyne , Hyde , and Manchester . In the second half of the 19th century , Altrincham 's population grew by 275 per cent , higher than the 235 per cent for Trafford and 69 per cent nationally in the same period . This was due to the late industrialisation of the area and the introduction of the Manchester South Junction and Altrincham Railway in 1849 . The table below details the population change since 1801 , including the percentage change since the last census .

Historically , Altrincham was a market town and the two main areas of employment were agriculture and market trade . Although the town went into decline in the 15th century , it recovered and the annual fairs lasted until the mid-19th century and the market still continues . During the Industrial Revolution , Altrincham grew as an industrial town , particularly the Broadheath area , which was developed into an industrial estate . In 1801 there were four cotton mills in Altrincham , part of its textile industry , although they had closed by the 1851 census . The decline of the textile industry in Altrincham mirrored the decline of the industry in the Trafford area as a result of a lack of investment and the development of more established industrial areas such as Manchester , Ashton-under-Lyne , and Oldham . During the late 19th and early 20th centuries , heavier industries moved into Broadheath , providing local employment . The area steadily declined during the second half of the 20th century , with employment at Broadheath falling from 8,000 to 5,000 between 1960 and 1970 . Despite the presence of retailers such as Tesco , Sainsbury 's and Marks & Spencer in the town , a new Asda superstore in Broadheath , and redevelopment schemes costing over £ 100 million , Altrincham 's 15.5 per cent level of employment in retail is below the national average of 16.9 per cent . Altrincham , with its neighbours Bowdon and Hale , is said to constitute a " stockbroker belt " , with well-appointed dwellings in an area of sylvan opulence .

The historic market town developed as a residential area in the 19th century although it retains its retail heritage in the Old Market Place ( a conservation area ) and a new pedestrianised shopping centre . The retail districts of the town have more recently fallen victim to decline due to competition from the nearby Trafford Centre and a regenerated Manchester city centre . In 2006 Trafford Metropolitan Borough Council unveiled plans for a £ 1.5 million redevelopment for the town centre . The renovation will create 146,000 square feet ( 13,600 m2 ) of new retail space and 203,000 square feet ( 18,900 m2 ) of refurbished space , providing 349,000 square feet ( 32,400 m2 ) in total . Construction on Altair , a £ 100 million development on Oakfield Road , is expected to begin in 2013 . The scheme includes a hotel , offices , shops and eating places , and is expected to create 2,000 permanent jobs . A further £ 20 million is earmarked for a refurbishment of the nearby Altrincham Interchange . A 2010 survey found that despite being in one of the country 's most affluent areas , nearly a third of the shops in Altrincham were vacant ; Trafford council attributed the high number ( 78 ) to the effects of the recession and plans to refurbish Stamford House , which left most of its shops unused .

According to the 2001 UK census , the industry of employment of residents in Altrincham was 18.4 per cent property and business services , 16.0 per cent retail and wholesale , 12.1 per cent manufacturing , 10.7 per cent health and social work , 8.3 per cent education , 8.3 per cent transport and communications , 5.8 per cent finance , 5.7 per cent construction , 4.2 per cent hotels and restaurants , 4.2 per cent public administration and defence , 0.8 per cent agriculture , 0.8 per cent energy and water supply , 0.2 per cent mining , and 4.6 per cent other . This was roughly in line with national figures , except for the town 's relatively high percentage of workers in property and business services . The census recorded the economic activity of residents aged 16 – 74 , 5.3 per cent looking after home or family , 4.3 per cent permanently sick or disabled , 3.2 per cent students without jobs , 2.2 per cent students were with jobs , and 2.4 per cent economically inactive for other reasons . The 2.2 per cent unemployment rate of Altrincham was low compared with the national rate of 3.3 per cent .

The Old Market Place is thought to stand on the site of the original town settlement . Now a registered conservation area it consists of a series of part timber-framed buildings echoing the wattle and daub constructions of the original houses and burgage plots . The cobblestone paving was replaced in 1896 . The Buttermarket which stood in the area near the Old Market Place from the 17th century until the late 19th century was also the site for dispensing early local justice . A courtroom , stocks and whipping post saw public floggings take place there until the early 19th century . The whipping post and stocks were restored as a tourist attraction by local traders in the 1990s . However the Buttermarket area was also a site of religious importance , since prospective brides and grooms are thought to have declared their intentions here . In 1814 Thomas de Quincey described the Old Market Place in his Confessions of an English Opium Eater while travelling from Manchester to Chester . He noted how little the place had changed since his visit 14 years earlier at the age of three , and that " fruits , such as can be had in July , and flowers were scattered about in profusion : even the stalls of the butchers , from their brilliant cleanliness , appeared attractive : and bonny young women of Altrincham were all tripping about in caps and aprons coquettishly disposed " . Another of Altrincham 's attractions is the historic market , set up over 700 years ago when the town was first established .

Of the 21 conservation areas in Trafford , ten are in Altrincham : The Downs , The Devisdale , Bowdon , Ashley Heath , Goose Green , Old Market Place , Sandiway , George Street , the Linotype Housing Estate and Stamford New Road . On the town 's outskirts is the 18th-century Dunham Massey Hall , surrounded by its 250-acre ( 1 km2 ) deer park , both now owned by the National Trust . The hall is early Georgian in style , and along with its stables and carriage house , is a Grade I listed building . Royd House was built between 1914 and 1916 , by local architect Edgar Wood , as his own residence . It has a flat concrete roof , a concave façade , and is faced in Portland red stone and Lancashire brick . It is regarded as one of the most advanced examples of early 20th-century domestic architecture , and is referenced in architectural digests . It has been a Grade I listed building since 1975 , one of six such buildings in Trafford . The Grade II listed clock outside the main transport interchange was built in 1880 . The 16-acre ( 6.5 ha ) Stamford Park was designed by landscape gardener John Shaw . It opened to the public in 1880 , as a sports park with areas for cricket and football . The land was donated by George Grey , the 7th Earl of Stamford , and is now owned and run by Trafford Council . The park is listed as Grade II on the Register of Parks and Gardens of Special Historic Interest in England , and has won a bronze award from the Greenspace award scheme .

Altrincham has two theatres , the Altrincham Garrick Playhouse and the Club Theatre . The Altrincham Garrick group was formed in 1913 . The Garrick held the world stage premier of Psycho in 1982 . In 1998 , it received a grant of £ 675,000 from the National Lottery as part of a £ 900,000 redevelopment of the theatre , which was completed in 1999 . The Club Theatre group began in 1896 , as the St Margaret 's Church Institute Amateur Dramatics Society . It provides a venue for the Trafford Youth Theatre production each year , and it runs the Hale One Act Festival , an annual week-long event started in 1972 . The club has received awards from both the Greater Manchester Drama Federation and the Cheshire Theatre Guild . Altrincham also had Greater Manchester 's only Michelin starred restaurant , the Juniper .

Altrincham F.C. , nicknamed " The Robins " , were founded in 1903 and play home matches at Moss Lane . The club plays in the Vanarama Conference , the fifth tier of English football . In the 1970s and 1980s Altrincham F.C. built a reputation for " giant-killing " acts against Football League teams in FA Cup matches . The club has knocked out Football League opposition on a record 16 occasions , including a 1986 victory against top-flight Birmingham City . Altrincham won the forerunner of the Football Conference in its first two seasons , but was denied election to the Football League on both occasions , falling a single vote short in 1980 . Altrincham have since had mixed fortunes . Relegated to the Northern Premier League in 1997 , the club earned promotion two years later , but suffered a second relegation after a single season in the Conference . In the 2010 – 11 season Altrincham were relegated to Conference North . Altrincham is one of the few towns in North West England with an ice rink , and has had an ice hockey team since 1961 , when Altrincham Ice Rink was built in Broadheath . The Altrincham Aces ( later renamed the Trafford Metros ) played from 1961 until 2003 , when Altrincham Ice Rink closed . The town then had a three-year period without a rink or ice hockey team , until construction of the 2,500 capacity Altrincham Ice Dome was completed . Manchester Phoenix , a club having a professional presence in the English Premier Ice Hockey League and an extensive junior development aspect , relocated to the Ice Dome during the 2006 – 07 season , having withdrawn from competition two years earlier due to the high cost of playing matches at Manchester 's MEN Arena . In 2009 the Manchester Phoenix English National Ice Hockey League team was renamed Trafford Metros , bringing the old Altrincham team 's name back into use . When not being used by Phoenix the Altrincham Ice Dome is open to the public for ice skating .

Founded in 1897 , Altrincham Kersal RUFC plays rugby union in North One , the competition below the National Leagues , and is amongst the top 80 clubs in England . Altrincham has been promoted five times in the past ten seasons . The club has produced England and Sale Sharks players Mark Cueto and Chris Jones and continues to produce players for the Sale Jets . Altrincham and District Athletics Club was founded in 1961 , and provides training facilities for track and field , road running , cross-country running and fell running . Seamons Cycling Club was formed in 1948 in the area of Altrincham known locally as Seamons Moss .

As Altrincham was part of the Bowdon parish , children from the township may have gone to the 16th-century school established at Bowdon ; before that point , the town had no formal education system . A salt merchant from Dunham Woodhouses founded a school at Oldfield House intended for 40 boys aged 8 – 11 from the surrounding area . Sunday schools were set up in the late 18th and early 19th centuries . Altrincham 's increasing population prompted the founding of more schools during the early 19th century and by 1856 the town had 9 schools , 1 college , and 23 teachers . The introduction of compulsory education during the second half of the 19th century increased the demand for schools , and by 1886 Altrincham had 12 church schools and 8 private schools . Responsibility for local education fell to Cheshire County Council in 1903 . Loreto Convent , the County High School for Girls , and Altrincham County High School for Boys , were founded in 1909 , 1910 , and 1912 respectively . Although still open these schools have since changed their names to Altrincham Grammar School for Girls , Altrincham Grammar School for Boys , and Loreto Grammar School . Altrincham received evacuees during the Second World War , and it was in this period that St. Ambrose College was founded .

Altrincham now has eighteen primary schools , one special school and eight secondary schools , including five grammar schools ; the Trafford district maintains a selective education system assessed by the Eleven Plus exam . Several of Altrincham 's secondary schools have specialist status : Altrincham College of Arts ( arts ) ; Altrincham Grammar School for Boys ( language ) ; Altrincham Grammar School for Girls ( language ) ; Blessed Thomas Holford Catholic College ( maths and computing ) ; Loreto Grammar School ( science and maths ) ; and St. Ambrose College ( maths and computing ) . Altrincham College of Arts , Altrincham Grammar School for Boys , Altrincham Grammar School for Girls , Blessed Thomas Holford Catholic College , Loreto Grammar School , and St. Ambrose College were all rated as outstanding in their most recent Ofsted reports . Brentwood Special School is a mixed school for 11- to 19-year-olds who have special needs or learning difficulties .

During the medieval and post-medieval periods the township of Altrincham was part of Bowdon parish . Low population density meant that the town did not have a church until the Anglican church established a chapel of ease in 1799 . Nonconformists were also present in Altrincham ; Methodists set up a chapel in 1790 , and Baptists built one in the 1870s . Irish immigrants in the 1830s and 1840s also returned Roman Catholicism to the area , the first Roman Catholic church built in Altrincham being St Vincent 's , in 1860 . Several churches in Altrincham are deemed architecturally important enough to be designated Grade II listed buildings . These are Christ Church , the Church of St Alban , the Church of St George , the Church of St John the Evangelist and Trinity United Reformed Church . Of the nine Grade II * listed buildings in Trafford , three are in Altrincham : the Church of St Margaret , the Church of St John the Divine and Hale Chapel in Hale Barns . As of the 2001 UK census , 78.8 per cent of Altrincham 's residents reported themselves as being Christian , 1.1 per cent Jewish , 1.1 per cent Muslim , 0.4 per cent Hindu , 0.2 per cent Buddhist and 0.1 per cent Sikh . The census recorded 12.1 per cent as having no religion , 0.2 per cent with an alternative religion , while 6.1 per cent did not state a religion . Altrincham is in the Roman Catholic Diocese of Shrewsbury , and the Church of England Diocese of Chester . The nearest synagogue , belonging to Hale and District Hebrew Congregation , is on Shay Lane in Hale Barns .

Construction of the Manchester South Junction and Altrincham Railway began in 1845 . The line was opened in October 1849 , with services from Manchester London Road via Sale to Altrincham . In 1931 it became one of Great Britain 's first electrified railway lines , with a 1,500V DC overhead line . At the same time a new Altrincham station was opened on the same line , at Navigation Road , serving housing developments in the area . By 1937 , 130 train services ran daily between Manchester and Altrincham . The line was renovated in the early 1990s to form part of the Manchester Metrolink light rail system . Broadheath railway station served the northern part of Altrincham between 1853 and 1962 , on the line from Manchester , via Lymm to Warrington . Altrincham Interchange is one of the Metrolink 's termini . The interchange has been refurbished , and now includes a brand new footbridge , with 3 lifts to cope with increased passenger demands , including a larger scale ticket office , and modern bus interchange . The redeveloped interchange is now going through finishing touches , with just the lifts to be completed . The new Interchange is a modern design building that looks fantastic and is helping to regenerate Altrincham city centre as the new building has helped to transform the surrounding area . The Interchange connects the town to several locations in Greater Manchester , such as Sale and Bury . The service also includes Navigation Road station . Metrolink services leave around every six minutes , between 07 : 15 and 19 : 30 on weekdays , and less frequently at other times . National Rail services link the Altrincham and Navigation Road stations with Chester via Northwich , and with Manchester via Stockport . Altrincham Interchange , next to the railway station , is a hub for local bus routes . Manchester Airport , the largest in the UK outside London , is 5 miles ( 8 km ) to the southeast of the town , and is connected via the Manchester Picadilly – Crewe line . There are plans in the future to create a new link between Manchester Airport and the Mid Cheshire Line , which Altrincham Interchange is a station on . Recently the Metrolink completed connections to this airport and opened the line 12 months early , but this is not a direct connection from the Metrolink line at Altrincham Interchange

The artist Helen Allingham , born in 1848 , lived in Altrincham and then Bowdon during her childhood years . Alison Uttley wrote the Little Grey Rabbit books while living in Bowdon . Dramatist Ronald Gow lived there in his youth and later taught at the local grammar school . The town was also the birthplace of the film and television actress Angela Cartwright . Ian Brown and John Squire of The Stone Roses both attended Altrincham Grammar School for Boys , and Paul Young of Sad Café and Mike and the Mechanics lived in Altrincham until his death in 2000 . Hewlett Johnson , later known as the " Red Dean " of Canterbury , was curate , and later vicar of St Margaret 's in the town from 1904 to 1924 . Edward Kinder Bradbury was born ( 16 August 1881 ) in the town , he was awarded the Victoria Cross for gallantry and ability in organising the defence of ' L ' Battery against heavy odds at Nery on 1 September 1914 . Altrincham born Bill Speakman received the Victoria Cross for valour in 1951 in the Korean War . Sir Michael Pollock , an officer in the Royal Navy who rose to the position of First Sea Lord , was born in Altrincham .

Towson United Methodist Church is a large United Methodist Church in the historic Baltimore County , Maryland suburb of Towson . Its past , rooted in 19th century America , and subsequent growth in the two centuries since then , have closely paralleled the nation 's political and sociological trends . It was a congregation split asunder in 1861 on the eve of the American Civil War in a border state of divided loyalties , which eventually reunited and built a church in the post-World War II era of the 1950s , a time of reconciliation and rapid growth by mainline Protestant denominations , especially in the more affluent suburbs . The 1,000-member church , currently pastored by Rev. Roderick Miller , has a number of community outreach programs , including an accredited child care center and a Boy Scout troop , and actively supports a home for unwed mothers , overseas missions , and Habitat for Humanity projects . The congregation worships in a 1,000-seat sanctuary built in 1958 . The large building 's prominent 235-foot ( 72 m ) spire and cupola , a landmark visible for miles from the nearby Baltimore Beltway ( Interstate 695 ) , has been called " the beacon of Towson " .

First settled by brothers William and Thomas Towson in 1752 , the hamlet now bearing their name remained mostly farmland until the 1830s , with no churches and little more than a roadside inn / tavern for travelers on York Road ( now Md . Route 45 ) . In the 1790s , Rebecca Dorsey Ridgely , the wife of Charles Ridgely III and described as an ardent Methodist , began holding prayer meetings at the Ridgelys ' grandiose Hampton Mansion , located one-half mi ( one km ) east of the present church site . By 1825 , the first Sunday School was started in a private home near a blacksmith 's shop on York Road . In 1839 , the citizenry of sparsely populated Towsontown , as the village was called by then , built the tiny community 's first church in a wooded location north of Joppa Road and east of Dulaney Valley Road . The site was previously used for a powder magazine built by Gen. Nathan Towson prior to the British attack on Baltimore in September 1814 , during the War of 1812 . Called Epsom Chapel , the 1,000-square-foot ( 93 m2 ) structure was built of stones salvaged from the arsenal . Led by Methodist Episcopal minister Daniel Helpler , Epsom Chapel was dedicated and opened for Towsontown 's first public church service on Sunday , November 10 , 1839 . In line with Methodist practice of the time in rural areas , circuit rider ministers would travel on horseback to preach to the villagers at Epsom Chapel . With the designation of Towson as the county seat in 1854 , the town began to grow more rapidly . The small chapel was shared with other denominations until the 1870s , when Towson 's increasing population spurred the construction of larger churches .

The Methodist movement was growing rapidly in pre-Civil War America , but was beset by disputes about slave-holding and the rule over the church by bishops , resulting in a formal split into two groups in 1844 . The faction in favor of giving church authority to a hierarchy of bishops called themselves the Methodist Episcopal Church and took an anti-slavery stance in the north . Those in opposition formed the Methodist Protestant Church in the United States . As the impending Civil War loomed over the nation in the 1850s , local Towson Methodists continued to worship together at Epsom Chapel . This ended in 1861 , when a reed organ was purchased for Epsom Chapel , sparking a disagreement over the use of musical instruments in worship . A minority opposed to the idea joined the southern-leaning Methodist Protestant Church , withdrawing from Epsom Chapel to worship at Towson 's Odd Fellows Hall during the Civil War . In 1867 , the Methodist Protestants returned to Epsom Chapel , but met separately on Sunday afternoons .

The northern-leaning Methodist Episcopal congregation , which continued worshiping at Epsom Chapel during the Civil War , began building their own church nearby , with the laying of a cornerstone on August 14 , 1869 . The Towson Methodist Episcopal ( M.E. ) Church , a neo-Gothic brick structure , was located on York Road next to the present Prospect Hill Cemetery , one block north of the intersection with Joppa and Dulaney Valley Roads . Designed by Edmund George Lind and built at a cost of $ 29,000 , the 350-seat church was completed and dedicated on October 26 , 1871 . The M.E. Church 's eighty-seven members soon found themselves in financial difficulties , however , having gone heavily in debt to build their new sanctuary . The chairman of the church 's building committee had advanced his personal funds to complete the construction , thereafter becoming embroiled in years of litigation with the church . By 1874 , the church was drawing larger crowds under then-pastor Joseph Stitt , who was described as an " excellent leader of singing " . An afternoon Sunday school session was particularly popular , " principally devoted to learning new hymns , which attracted many of the young people of the town , especially the young men " , noted one account . When the ME church held its twenty-fifth anniversary celebration in 1896 , it opened with prayer and a piano concert , " favored with a beautiful selection sung by Mrs. Randolph Murphy " , said a contemporary report .

The Methodist Protestant group continued to use Epsom Chapel until 1908 , when they built a $ 6,000 church seating 150 persons at the corner of Allegheny and Bosley Avenues . Located in the heart of Towson near the County Circuit Courthouse , the Towson Methodist Protestant Church was constructed of stone with a slate roof and a bell tower . With the merger in 1939 of the Methodist Episcopal ( M.E. ) and Methodist Protestant ( M.P. ) denominations in the U.S. , Towson 's Methodist Episcopal and Methodist Protestant churches were known thereafter as First Methodist Church and Second Methodist Church , respectively .

Following the reunification of the two branches of Methodism in 1939 , First Methodist Church and Second Methodist Church of Towson continued as separate entities for another thirteen years . After the end of World War II in 1945 , mainline Protestant church attendance increased significantly in the U.S. By early 1952 , faced with facilities fast becoming inadequate for the burgeoning population of suburbia in the postwar period and with a boom in modern commercial development of Towson 's core area starting to displace older buildings , the two churches formed a joint committee to evaluate a merger . The committee recommended that the two churches become one , concluding : " The properties of the First and Second Churches are located in close proximity to each other ... the identical objectives , program and methods of work of the two churches , will continue to make competition and overlapping inevitable ... by pooling their resources and unifying ... they can better serve the community and the Kingdom of God " . — Joint Committee Report , 1952 In April 1952 , more than ninety years after the two churches split , the congregations of both finally voted to reunite , merging on June 1 , 1952 , and adopting the name Towson Methodist Church . The members of both Methodist churches then began worshiping together at the First Methodist Church . Plans to construct a much larger building with ample parking were announced when the two churches merged and 16 acres ( 65,000 m2 ) of undeveloped land , originally part of the Ridgelys ' Hampton estate and north of the planned alignment of the Baltimore Beltway ( I-695 ) , were purchased soon thereafter from Goucher College .

A groundbreaking ceremony was held on October 7 , 1956 , and construction of the new church was completed by the John K. Ruff Company in May 1958 , with a service of dedication held on May 11 , 1958 . A crowd of 1,250 attended the ceremonies in the new sanctuary , with an overflow of 550 persons watching by closed-circuit television in the lower level Fellowship Hall . The old First M.E. Church structure adjacent to Prospect Hill Park Cemetery on McCurdy Avenue ( now Investment Place ) and York Road was abandoned and eventually demolished in 1965 . An illuminated display of the stained glass windows in the former church is located in the foyer of the current building . The Second M.P. Church structure was sold in 1954 to the Women 's Club of Towson and still stands today — in 2005 , the building was resold to an office development firm and is now used by an insurance agency . The erstwhile Epsom Chapel eventually became a meeting hall for Boy Scout troops in the 1920s – 1930s . It was subsequently abandoned and finally demolished in 1952 to make way for construction of a parking lot for the old Hutzler 's department store , now a Barnes & Noble store near the present Macy 's department store and Towson Town Center mall . No trace of Epsom Chapel exists today , except for an historical marker placed near the site by the Baltimore County Historical Society , designating it as the " cradle of Methodism in Towson " .

Towson United Methodist Church is an L-shaped structure , with the main sanctuary on a north-south axis . Designed by architect J. Alfred Hamme and completed in 1958 , the church is built of red brick in the Georgian architectural style , with a prominent , floodlighted spire surmounted by a 9-foot ( 3 m ) porcelain enamel gold cross visible at 3 – 5 mi ( 5 – 8 km ) distance on the Beltway . The imposing front facade is of cut stone from Pennsylvania , with the 18-foot ( 5 m ) high main entranceway capped by a curved stone pediment . Inside , the sanctuary has three aisles with a rear balcony and can accommodate up to one thousand persons . Rows of Corinthian columns standing on 4-foot ( 122 cm ) bases flank the pews along both side aisles . The pulpit and doors are made of mahogany . The 3-story east-west wing has classrooms , offices , a chapel , and the John D. Hoffman library featuring an exhibit of memorabilia and historical artifacts along with archival records . Construction of the church cost $ 950,000 in 1958 ( equivalent to almost $ 7 million in 2008 ) , not including the expense of land acquisition .

Towson United Methodist Church has a 3-manual , 49-rank Casavant pipe organ of 2,516 pipes , including seven ranks of 16 ft. pipes and tubular chimes . It was dedicated in memory of S. Clayton Seitz by then-organist John Duwane Hoffman on May 11 , 1958 . Hoffman , the church 's esteemed virtuoso organist and Minister of Music between 1957 – 1988 , was a graduate of Union Theological Seminary 's renowned Master of Sacred Music degree program , after having earned Bachelor of Music and Master of Music degrees at the University of Denver . At Union , Hoffman studied the organ with Clarence Dickinson and Vernon De Tar . In addition to serving as the church 's organist and choral director , Hoffman was professor of organ at Towson State University . He died unexpectedly on July 4 , 1988 of complications following heart bypass surgery . The church library is named in his memory . Hoffman was succeeded by Kathie Metz , a graduate of Marshall University , as Director of Music and Organist 1988 – 2012 . The current Director of Music and Organist since July , 2013 , is Douglas Hollida . An ordained minister , Rev. Hollida studied music at Shepherd University , graduating with a Bachelor of Arts degree , and then earned a Master of Divinity degree from Trinity Episcopal School for Ministry . World-famous concert organists who have performed at the church 's organ include Pierre Cochereau , Flor Peeters , and Marilyn Mason .

Towson United Methodist Church is in the midst of a $ 3 million phased renovation and expansion project started in 2006 . In the first phase , completed in 2007 , an elevator and additional facilities were installed for improved disabled accessibility , along with a new fire sprinkler system and replacement of the building 's climate control system ( HVAC ) . Additional classrooms in an expanded education wing are planned in future phases of a multiyear master plan adopted by the church in 2005 . To help fund the future works , the church announced plans in January 2008 to sell 3.5 acres ( 14,000 m2 ) of undeveloped , wooded property it owns on Hampton Lane to Shelter Development Corp. for construction of a senior citizen housing complex . A zoning change application was submitted to Baltimore County officials to allow sixteen residential units per acre ( current zoning limits density to two residential units per acre ) for a total of 80 – 100 beds . The Hampton Improvement Association , representing neighboring Hampton , Maryland residents , said they " ... oppose [ d ] zoning changes that would allow higher density residential development and require trees to be knocked down " . Then-pastor David Cooney told the Baltimore Sun , " We entered into this with Shelter , believing this is a good use for the land — that this is a good company and a needed service " . In the face of community objections , however , Shelter and the church subsequently announced on March 3 , 2008 , that the development plans had been dropped . A Shelter official said that his company and Towson United Methodist Church had jointly come to the conclusion that " this is not something we are going to pursue " . Pastor Cooney said , " It had become clear that we weren 't going to be able to reach a compromise and we certainly don 't want to be at war with our neighbors " . In the wake of the plan 's shelving , the president of the Hampton Improvement Association told the Towson Times that his group wishes to work with Towson United Methodist Church to find an alternative use for the land besides commercial development , as they " don 't want to preclude the church from trying to get some money out of it . " In April 2008 , Dr. Cooney said that the church " did not set out to sell this land ; the proposal came to us , and we have no other plans to sell or develop the land " .

Roderick J. Miller is Lead Pastor of Towson United Methodist Church , succeeding David S. Cooney in July , 2011 . Miller grew up in Pennsylvania , where he graduated from Allegheny College in 1976 , receiving a B.A. in Religion . He then studied at Wesley Theological Seminary in Washington , D.C. , earning a Master of Divinity degree in 1982 . While ministering at Union Chapel United Methodist Church in Joppa , Maryland , Miller continued his postgraduate studies , receiving a Doctor of Ministry degree in Church Revitalization from Chicago 's McCormick Theological Seminary in 1992 . He was later Lead Pastor at Bethany UMC church in Ellicott City , Maryland ( 1994 – 2005 ) , after which he was named Director of Connectional Ministries for the denomination 's Baltimore-Washington Conference , serving in that role 2005 – 2011 . The mission statement of Towson United Methodist Church is : " To proclaim the Word of God and to make disciples of Jesus Christ " . The church 's staff of twelve includes assistant ministers , directors of music and education , and building and administrative personnel . It is a part of the denomination 's Baltimore-Washington Conference ( district ) . In addition to Sunday morning worship services , the 1,200 member congregation participates in graded Sunday school classes , various adult Bible study classes , youth activities , and a midweek " Praise , Prayer & Healing " service . The music program includes both adult and youth choirs , as well as handbell ringers . The church 's Alleluia Singers , a 50 – voice ensemble of high school-age young people , sings frequently for weekly worship services and tours the eastern U.S. each summer .

David Cooney was Senior Pastor of Towson United Methodist Church between September 1 , 2001 – June 30 , 2011 . He earned a Master of Divinity degree from Wesley Theological Seminary and a Ph.D. from Iliff School of Theology in Denver , Colorado . He is the son of Rev. C. Douglas Cooney ( 1928 – 2003 ) , who was also a Methodist minister at various churches , including the First Methodist Church of Hyattsville , Maryland , as well as an official of the Methodist denomination . Other former senior ministers of Towson Methodist Church and its predecessor First Methodist Church , with their years of appointment , are :

Towson United Methodist Church sponsors a Boy Scout troop , overseas missions , the Susanna Wesley House for unwed mothers , and actively participates in Habitat for Humanity projects . Over the years , members of the Towson Methodist Men 's group and Women 's Society of Christian Service ( now United Methodist Women ) have supported Meals on Wheels , the League of Women Voters , and Head Start , as well as serving as volunteers at local hospitals and the Maryland School for the Blind . For more than thirty years , the church has hosted a weekly meeting of Alcoholics Anonymous . The large size of the sanctuary and its convenient location make it well-suited for community gatherings attracting sizable crowds , such as concerts by the Handel Choir of Baltimore . The church hosts an annual memorial service for fallen Baltimore County firefighters and rescue personnel . Senior Baltimore County officials , including the County Executive and Fire Chief , participate in the service 's memorial wreath laying and the tolling of a bell , as part of the commemoration . Nationally-known guest speakers , such as Tony Campolo and Millie Dienert , have also spoken there .

The Lovejoy Columns , located in Portland , Oregon , United States , supported the Lovejoy Ramp , a viaduct that from 1927 to 1999 carried the western approach to the Broadway Bridge over the freight tracks in what is now the Pearl District . The columns were painted by Greek immigrant Tom Stefopoulos between 1948 and 1952 . In 1999 , the viaduct was demolished but the columns were spared due to the efforts of the architectural group Rigga . For the next five years , attempts to restore the columns were unsuccessful and they remained in storage beneath the Fremont Bridge . In 2005 , two of the original columns were resited at Northwest 10th Avenue between Everett and Flanders Streets . The Regional Arts & Culture Council was searching for photographs showing the murals in their original location for an ongoing restoration project . In 2006 , Randy Shelton reconstructed the artworks on the columns using the photographs for reference .

The Lovejoy Columns supported the Lovejoy Ramp , a 2,000-foot ( 610 m ) viaduct that stretched from Northwest 14th Avenue and Lovejoy Street to the Broadway Bridge . It was constructed in 1927 – 1928 . Between 1948 and 1952 , Athanasios Efthimiou " Tom " Stefopoulos ( died 1971 ) , a Spokane , Portland and Seattle Railway night watchman , artist and master calligrapher in the copperplate style , drew upon the columns in chalk and later painted them . His work was spontaneous and not commissioned . Stefopoulos painted Greek mythology and Americana imagery in a calligraphic style ; the designs depicted " fanciful " owls , landscapes " bedecked with homespun aphorisms " , and ancient Greek philosopher Diogenes of Sinope navigating the streets of Athens with a lantern . He painted around a dozen murals , though photographic evidence does not exist for each of them . The paintings became a local landmark and quickly gained Stefopoulos notoriety and media coverage . In the late 1990s , developer Homer Williams persuaded the city to demolish the viaduct to open up dozens of blocks in the redeveloping Pearl District . Preservation efforts began immediately . In 1998 , Georgiana Nehl completed a painting of the columns called Guardians : Under the Lovejoy Ramp to " catch a small flavor of these ' guardians , ' while they were still in place in their surprising location — before they were lost in the name of progress " . In 1999 , James Henderson took a series of photographs of the remaining pigments of the original paintings ; he recorded the murals using cross-polarized lighting and used digital enhancement to restore the colors . The Regional Arts & Culture Council administers at least six of Henderson 's photographs , which were printed in 2002 and each called Lovejoy Column .

The viaduct was removed in 1999 , but the architectural group Rigga persuaded the city to preserve the paintings and the columns . Rigga said that if the murals had been removed from the columns , " much of their magic would be lost " . The City of Portland 's Office of Transportation earmarked funds to remove ten columns ; an ad hoc committee called Friends of the Columns was formed to raise money for their storage , restoration and public display , which was estimated to cost $ 460,000 . City Commissioner Charlie Hales said , " Saving the Lovejoy columns and the artwork provides a real bridge between the rich history of this industrial area and its future as a residential neighborhood . I am pleased that we are able to save these columns and look forward to them being placed on some of the park spaces in the River District . " According to the James M. Harrison Art and Design Studio , " Extracting the columns both captured the space created by Tom and preserved a ruin that would continue to tell a story . The fragile paintings preserved the mighty concrete . " During the next five years , attempts by the city , and non-profit and entrepreneurial groups to restore the columns were unsuccessful . Boora Architects ' Northwest Marshall Street Pedestrian Bridge Feasibility Study ( 2001 ) , funded by the Portland Development Commission , proposed installing the columns at the intersection of Northwest 9th Avenue and Naito Parkway .

The columns were featured in a 2003 article by the Getty Conservation Institute called " The Conservation of Outdoor Contemporary Murals " , which described best practices for preserving murals and included photographs of the columns during the demolition phase , with conservator J. Claire Dean assessing one of them . From August 10 to September 4 , 2004 , Portland-based artist and filmmaker Vanessa Renwick exhibited a paper and video installation called Lovejoy Lost , featuring camera work by her and Gus Van Sant , for the PDX Window Project . In November 2004 , Willamette Week reported that the columns were being held at a storage yard at Northwest 14th Avenue and Savier Street , beneath the Fremont Bridge . The paper said , " [ h ] alf-covered in blue tarps , their rusted steel girders sticking out of concrete like veins from a freshly amputated arm , they await the political momentum to rescue them from rot " . Real estate developer John Carroll hoped to site the columns at the Elizabeth Lofts , but former Rigga member James Harrison said he was reluctant to believe it would happen , given their history . Harrison told Willamette Week , " [ t ] hese things can turn on a dime " .

Carroll 's and Harrison 's efforts were realized in 2005 when two of the ten original columns were resited at Northwest 10th Avenue between Everett and Flanders streets . The 29,000 lb ( 13,000 kg ) columns featured a majority of Stefopoulos ' paintings . Harrison reportedly watched with " something like fatherly joy " during the installation and said , " [ w ] e 're installing a ruin " . Carroll said displaying the columns as public art " will preserve an element of the city ’ s past for current and future generations " and acknowledged support from the neighborhood , Friends of the Columns and the Portland Development Commission . The Regional Arts & Culture Council was searching for photographs showing the murals in their original location for a restoration project , which would be completed the following summer . In 2006 , the columns were reconstructed from the photographs by Randy Shelton . The City of Portland 's Bureau of Planning said the resited columns " [ celebrate ] a period in the district ’ s history , showcasing the art for a broader audience " . An event called " Public Space Invasion " was held in the plaza containing the columns in 2011 , inviting guests to " explore the legal limits of Portland 's more peculiar public spaces " . It advertised " crafts among the condos " and the opportunity to " picnic beside a freeway " . In 2013 , a bicycle tour called " Lovejoy Columns and Tom " focused on the conservation of the columns , the " almost forgotten history " of Stefopoulos and the rise of the Pearl District . The tour was narrated by Harrison on behalf of Friends of the Columns and guided by " Portland 's Museum Lady " Carye Bye ; it raised money for a gravestone for Stefopoulos ' unmarked grave at Rose City Cemetery . It included a guided tour at the Hellenic-American Cultural Center and Museum , which was exhibiting Master Penworks of Tom Stefopoulos to view pen-and-ink art by Stefopoulos . It also included a viewing of Renwick ’ s unfinished film Lovejoy and an optional visit to Stefopoulos ' grave . In her documentary , Renwick chronicled the effort to save the columns and restore the paintings .

The Daily Journal of Commerce called the columns a Portland " urban legend " . According to Richard Speer of Willamette Week , " generations of Portlanders grew up counting the Lovejoy columns as one of the city 's most unique attractions " . Speer also said the columns were once " postcard favorites and seemed as much a part of the city 's landscape as the Hawthorne Bridge " and have an " endearing , perspectiveless style " . The murals appeared in Van Sant 's film Drugstore Cowboy ( 1989 ) , Foxfire ( 1996 ) and a music video by Elliott Smith . The resited columns have been included in published walking tours of Portland . In her 2006 book Walking Portland : 30 Tours of Stumptown 's Funky Neighborhoods , Historic Landmarks , Park Trails , Farmers Markets , and Brewpubs , Becky Ohlsen said , " Whatever you make of the artwork , the inspired effort that went into preserving it — not to mention the awesome spectacle of those massive columns ripped free , their rebar guts exposed to the air — is damned impressive " .

According to Drinkwater , despite Oxford being " manifestly the weaker crew " , they were pre-race favourites based on their " prestige " . A report in The Graphic noted that only two steamers were present , following the race , one carrying the umpire , the other to transport the Edward , Prince of Wales ( who later became King Edward VII ) and the Francis , Prince of Teck amongst others . Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station , handing the Middlesex side of the river to Oxford . Cambridge took an early lead even though their stroke rate was lower than that of the Dark Blues , and led by three-quarters of a length by the time the crews shot Hammersmith Bridge . Oxford stayed in touch for the next 0.5 miles ( 0.8 km ) but following a spurt , they almost levelled the race by Chiswick Eyot . Cambridge 's stroke John Goldie led a surge to pull back ahead of Oxford , and despite their best efforts , Oxford could not recover . Cambridge won by one-and-a-half lengths in a time of 22 minutes 4 seconds . The victory was Cambridge 's first since the 1860 race , and brought the overall record to 16 – 11 in Oxford 's favour .

Marco Kartodikromo ( 1890 – 18 March 1932 ) , also known by his pen name Mas Marco , was an Indonesian journalist and writer . Born to a low-ranking priyayi ( noble ) family in Blora , Dutch East Indies , Kartodikromo 's first employment was with the national railway . Disgusted by the racism shown there , in 1911 he moved to Bandung and found work as a journalist for Medan Prijaji . The following year he moved to Surakarta and worked with two publications , Saro Tomo and Doenia Bergerak ; he soon began to write pieces critical against the Dutch colonial government , which led to his arrest . After a period as a correspondent in the Netherlands , Kartodikromo continued his journalism and critique of the government ; he also wrote several pieces of fiction . Involved with the Communist Party of Indonesia , after a 1926 communist-led revolt Kartodikromo was exiled to Boven-Digoel prison camp in Papua . He died in the camp of malaria in 1932 . Kartodikromo , who preferred writing in Malay , experimented with new phrasings at a time when the state-owned publisher Balai Pustaka was attempting to standardise the language . According to literary critic Bakri Siregar , he was the first Indonesian writer to openly criticise the Dutch colonial government and the traditional form of feudalism practised in the country . For this vocal criticism , the Dutch government decried him as a " crazy " man who could spark unrest among the native populations .

Kartodikromo was born in Blora , Central Java , Dutch East Indies , in 1890 to a low-ranking priyayi ( noble ) family . At the age of fifteen , he took up a job at the Nederlandsch-Indische Spoorweg , the national railway company of the Indies , in Semarang . In 1911 he chose to leave the company as he was disgusted by its racist policies , including the use of race as a basis for the amount paid in wages . Kartodikromo made his way to Bandung , West Java , where he found employment at Medan Prijaji , a newspaper run by Tirto Adhi Soerjo . When the paper was closed by the Dutch , in 1912 Kartodikromo went to Surakarta . There , he joined Sarekat Islam , an organisation of Muslim merchants , and found employment at the Sarekat Islam-backed weekly Saro Tomo . In 1914 he took lead of the magazine Doenia Bergerak . The paper was the mouthpiece of the Native Indonesian Journalists ' Group ( Inlandse Journalisten Bond ) , which Kartodikromo led and had helped establish with Tjipto Mangoenkoesoemo and Darnakoesoemo . That same year , he published the three-volume work Mata Gelap ( Dark Eyes ) ; this led to a long polemic between Doenia Bergerak and the Chinese-owned Tjoen Tjioe in Surabaya due to perceived racism .

While with Doenia Bergerak , Kartodikromo wrote an attack on the Dutch Advisor on Native Affairs R.A. Rinkes ; in his editorial , he wrote that the Dutch loved themselves far more than the natives they were subjugating . On 26 January 1915 , Kartodikromo came under investigation by the Justice Office of the Dutch East Indies for publishing several further anti-Dutch editorials . The journalist unsuccessfully attempted to raise money to protest this at the Dutch parliament in The Hague . He was convicted of revolutionary activity and sentenced to nine months at Mlaten Prison ; however , due to public outcry he was released after 100 days . When Doenia Bergerak went bankrupt , Kartodipuro then headed the Saro Tomo .

Kartodikromo was soon chosen by Goenawan , chief editor of the daily Pantjaran Warta , to go to the Netherlands as a correspondent . In his five months there at the end of 1916 and beginning of 1917 , the journalist published Boekoe Sebaran Jang Pertama ( The First Publication Book ) . After his return to Indonesia , he became an editor for Pantjaran Warta and based himself in Batavia ( now Jakarta ) . Within a month he was imprisoned again for his writing . On 21 February 1918 Kartodikromo was released from prison . He moved to Semarang and became a commissioner of the Sarekat Islam with Semaun ; he also joined the newspaper Sinar Djawa ( later Sinar Hindia ) . In a conference that year , Kartodikromo stated that there were two kinds of press in Indonesia : the " black press " ( pers item ) , which struggled against the imperialistic Dutch ; and the " white press " ( pers putih ) , which worked to subjugate the Indonesian people . In 1918 he published Student Hidjo ( Student Green ) , which told of a young Indonesian student who falls in love while studying in the Netherlands despite already having a fiancée in Indonesia . The work , originally published as a serial , was novelised in 1919 . Also in 1918 he published a collection of poems , Sair-sair Rempah ( Poems on Spices ) .

Kartodikromo published another novel , Matahariah , in 1919 . It was based on the life of the Dutch spy Mata Hari . On 15 December 1919 , Kartodikromo left Sinar Hindia and took a position as head of Soero Tamtomo , published by the Forestry Union Staff Union Wono Tamtomo . He was imprisoned for six months for one of his writings , Sjairnja Sentot ( Sentot 's Poem ) , with the paper . In 1921 Kartodikromo moved to Salatiga and became involved with the press there . He was sentenced to two years in a Batavian prison for another of his writings . In 1924 , Kartodikromo published Rasa Merdika ( A Sense of Independence ) , which dealt with a young man who goes against his priyayi father , a tool of the Dutch colonial government , and tries to find personal independence . Another novel , Cermin Buah Keroyalan ( Mirror of the Fruit of Royalty ) , and stage play , Kromo Bergerak ( Kromo is Moving ) , were published not long after . Kartodikromo was exiled to Boven-Digoel , Papua , in 1926 for his writings and involvement in the 1926 revolt led by the Communist Party of Indonesia . He died there of malaria on 18 March 1932 .

Most of Kartodikromo 's fictional works took place in Bandung or Surabaya . He was an early Indonesian example of the social realist movement . Like most nationalist writers at the time , Kartodikromo preferred writing in Malay ( the predecessor of modern Indonesian ) rather than his native Javanese ; however , he did write several pieces in Javanese . While the state-owned publisher Balai Pustaka was attempting to standardise Malay , Kartodikromo experimented with the language , using words , phrases , and scenes which had never before been used . Socialist literary critic Bakri Siregar writes that Kartodikromo drew on his experiences while visiting the Netherlands in writing Studen Hidjo . He also writes that , unlike writers published by Balai Pustaka , Kartodikromo was heavily against the " white superiority " which the Dutch impressed upon native Indonesians ; this was achieved through showcasing the " depravity of bourgeois morals and the Dutch colonials . "

Due to his vocal criticism of the Dutch , the East Indies government banned Kartodikromo 's books several times . In response to his critiques in Doenia Bergerak , they described him as a " crazy " man who could spark unrest among the native populations . Kartodikromo himself enjoyed baiting the colonial government , reportedly inviting his readers to work together and criticise the Dutch for their " mismanagement and caprice " . Siregar described Kartodikromo as the first Indonesian writer to openly criticise the Dutch colonial government and the traditional form of feudalism practised in the country ; he also notes that the writer was the first Indonesian to consciously depict class struggles in his works . As Siregar considered Indonesian literature to have been born from a nationalist understanding , he considered Marco one of the first truly Indonesian writers . Hendrik Maier , a lecturer at Leiden University , writes that Kartodikromo was " primarily inspired by dreams and ideals " , noting that the writer intended to create a community of politically aware Indonesians to work against the colonial government in solidarity and equality . Kartodikromo described his ideal political state as having " sama rata sama rasa " ( " the same standards , the same feelings " ) .

The sharptooth houndshark , or spotted gully shark ( Triakis megalopterus ) , is a species of houndshark , belonging to the family Triakidae , found in shallow inshore waters from southern Angola to South Africa . Favoring sandy areas near rocky reefs and gullies , it is an active-swimming species that usually stays close to the bottom . This robust shark reaches 1.7 m ( 5.6 ft ) in length and has characteristically large , rounded fins ; the pectoral fins in particular are broad and sickle-shaped in adults . It also has a short , blunt snout and long furrows around its mouth . This species is gray or bronze in color above , with variable amounts of black spotting . Mainly active at night , the sharptooth houndshark feeds mostly on crustaceans , bony fishes , and cephalopods . It has been observed gathering in groups in shallow water during summertime , possibly for reproductive purposes . This species is aplacental viviparous , meaning that the unborn young are sustained mainly by yolk . Females give birth to 6 – 12 pups between late May and August , on a two- or three-year cycle . The sharptooth houndshark is often hooked by recreational anglers , and some are also captured on commercial bottom longlines . Because of its small range , its low growth and reproductive rates , it is very vulnerable to overfishing . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has therefore listed this species as Near Threatened .

Scottish zoologist Andrew Smith originally described the sharptooth houndshark as a species of Mustelus in 1839 , as part of his work Illustrations of the Zoology of South Africa . His account was based on two specimens caught off the Cape of Good Hope , South Africa . Smith named the shark megalopterus , from the Greek mega ( " large " ) and pteron ( " wing " ) , referring to its large fins . Another common name for this shark is " sweet William " . Later authors have reassigned the sharptooth houndshark to the genus Triakis , more specifically to the subgenus Cazon alongside the sharpfin houndshark ( T. acutipinna ) and the spotted houndshark ( T. maculata ) . A 2006 phylogenetic study by J. Andrés López and colleagues , based on four protein-coding gene sequences , found that this species did not group with the leopard shark ( T. semifasciata ) . Instead , it and the flapnose houndshark ( Scylliogaleus quecketti ) formed a clade within the Mustelus lineage . This result suggests that the two subgenera of Triakis — Cazon and Triakis — may not be closely related , which would warrant a redefinition of the genus .

The sharptooth houndshark is a stout-bodied species with a short , thick , and blunt snout . The nostrils are widely spaced and preceded by lobe-like flaps of skin that do not reach the mouth . The horizontally oval eyes have ridges underneath and are equipped with nictitating membranes . The large mouth bears long , deep furrows at the corners , with those on the lower jaw almost meeting in the middle . The teeth are small and tightly packed to form pavement-like surfaces . Each tooth has a rounded , molar-like base that rises to a sharp , upright central cusp ; rarely , a pair of barely developed lateral cusplets may also be present . There are five pairs of gill slits . The fins are distinctively large and rounded at the tips . The pectoral fins of adults are broad and falcate ( sickle-shaped ) . The dorsal fins have nearly vertical trailing margins , with the first originating over the pectoral fin rear tips . The second dorsal fin is about three-quarters as high as the first . The anal fin is much smaller than the second dorsal fin and originates well behind it . The short , thick caudal peduncle lacks notches at the caudal fin origins . The caudal fin has a small but well-defined lower lobe and a longer upper lobe with a ventral notch near the tip . The skin is often loose . This species is dark gray to bronze above and white below . Young sharks are mostly unmarked , while adults vary from plain to densely covered with irregular black spots . It may reach 1.7 m ( 5.6 ft ) in length and 40 kg ( 88 lb ) in weight . Females grow larger than males .

The range of the sharptooth houndshark is limited to the coastal waters of southern Africa , from southern Angola to the Eastern Cape ( or rarely KwaZulu-Natal ) in South Africa . This locally common species inhabits sandy habitats such as bays ; it can be found from the surf zone to a depth of 50 m ( 160 ft ) , but the majority are found no deeper than 10 m ( 33 ft ) . It generally swims just barely above the bottom , favoring flat areas near rocky reefs or gullies , and seldom rises into open water .

The sharptooth houndshark is a highly active species , though it can sometimes be found resting inside rocky crevices . It mainly hunts at night and has been known to pursue prey almost onto the shore . The pointed cusps of its teeth allow it to grasp slippery prey , while their broad bases allow it to crush hard-shelled prey . This shark feeds on a variety of crustaceans ( crabs , slipper lobsters , and spiny lobsters ) , bony fishes ( including morwongs , sea catfishes , drums , and porgies ) , and cephalopods ( in particular Octopus vulgaris ) . Sharks and rays ( including catsharks and guitarfishes ) and their egg capsules are a minor food source for larger individuals . Off South Africa , the most important prey species is the crab Plagusia chabrus . Its dietary composition changes with age : young sharks under 1.0 m ( 3.3 ft ) long subsist almost completely on crabs , while larger sharks consume more bony fishes and cephalopods , as well as a greater variety of prey overall . This shark has been observed deviating from its nocturnal habits to feed on chokka squid ( Loligo reynaudii ) during their mass spawnings . The broadnose sevengill shark ( Notorynchus cepedianus ) is known to prey on this species .

During the summer , the sharptooth houndshark forms groups in shallow water . These aggregations are particularly well-documented in False Bay and may be related to reproduction , given the presence of many pregnant females . It is aplacental viviparous , with the developing embryos nourished mainly by yolk . Mature females have a single functional ovary and two functional uteruses . Litters of 6 – 12 pups are birthed between late May and August , following a gestation period of some 20 months . Larger females tend to produce larger litters . The length at birth has been variously estimated as 30 – 32 cm ( 12 – 13 in ) and 42 – 44 cm ( 17 – 17 in ) by different sources ; pups within a single litter may vary in size by up to 30 % . Females apparently reproduce either every two years or every three years , depending on whether she has ovarian eggs developing during the pregnancy that would allow her to mate again within a few months of giving birth . The sharptooth houndshark is a slow-growing species , with both sexes following a similar growth pattern . Males mature sexually at 1.2 – 1.4 m ( 3.9 – 4.6 ft ) long and 11 – 13 years of age , while females mature sexually at 1.3 – 1.5 m ( 4.3 – 4.9 ft ) long and 15 – 16 years of age . The maximum lifespan is at least 25 years .

Harmless to humans , the sharptooth houndshark adapts well to captivity and has been displayed in public aquariums . It is frequently caught by recreational anglers from shore or ski-boats ; it is edible but rarely eaten . Small numbers are also caught incidentally by a commercial demersal longline fishery targeting the school shark ( Galeorhinus galeus ) in the Gansbaai and False Bay region . The meat from sharks caught in the fishery is either made into biltong or jerky and sold locally , or exported fresh or frozen to Italy and Taiwan . Although in South Africa the sharptooth houndshark is listed as a noncommercial species and thus cannot be harvested commercially , it is often mistaken for the common smooth-hound ( Mustelus mustelus ) by fishers . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has assessed the sharptooth houndshark as Near Threatened . This species is highly susceptible to even moderate levels of fishing pressure , due to its restricted range , slow growth rate , and low fecundity . The fact that most sharks caught by fishers are immature is an additional source of concern .

The 1933 Cuba – Brownsville hurricane was one of two storms in the 1933 Atlantic hurricane season to reach the intensity of a Category 5 strength on the Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale . It formed on August 22 off the west coast of Africa , and for much of its duration it maintained a west-northwest track . The system intensified into a tropical storm on August 26 and into a hurricane on August 28 . Passing north of the Lesser Antilles , the hurricane rapidly intensified as it approached the Turks and Caicos islands . It reached Category 5 status and its peak winds of 160 mph ( 260 km / h ) on August 31 . Subsequently , it weakened before striking northern Cuba on September 1 with winds of 120 mph ( 190 km / h ) . In the country , the hurricane left about 100,000 people homeless and killed over 70 people . Damage was heaviest near the storm 's path , and the strong winds destroyed houses and left areas without power . Damage was estimated at $ 11 million . After exiting from Cuba , the hurricane entered the Gulf of Mexico and restrengthened . On September 2 , it re-attained winds of 140 mph ( 230 km / h ) . Initially the hurricane posed a threat to the area around Corpus Christi , Texas , and the local United States Weather Bureau forecaster advised people to stay away from the Texas coastline during the busy Labor Day Weekend . Officials declared martial law in the city and mandated evacuations . However , the hurricane turned more to the west and struck near Brownsville early on September 5 with winds estimated at 125 mph ( 205 km / h ) . It quickly dissipated after causing heavy damage in the Rio Grande Valley . High winds caused heavy damage to the citrus crop . The hurricane left $ 16.9 million in damage and 40 deaths in southern Texas .

The origins of the hurricane were from a tropical disturbance near the west coast of Africa on August 20 . Two days later , the system organized enough to be classified a tropical depression just southwest of Cape Verde . For the next few days , the system moved west-northwestward with little change in intensity . It is estimated the depression strengthened into a tropical storm on August 26 , about halfway between the Lesser Antilles and Cape Verde . Initially , the storm was elongated , although beginning on August 28 it began to intensify more quickly . That night , the storm attained hurricane status , and many nearby ships reported gale force winds . On August 29 , the hurricane passed north of the Lesser Antilles as it approached the southeastern Bahamas . It underwent rapid deepening : in a 24 ‑ hour period beginning late on August 29 , the winds increased from 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) to 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) . It also became a small storm , as Grand Turk Island reported winds of 56 mph ( 90 km / h ) while the hurricane passed slightly to the north on August 30 . At 0130 UTC the next day , a ship near Mayaguana reported a barometric pressure of 930 mbar ( 27 inHg ) and hurricane-force winds . The pressure would ordinarily suggest winds of 152 mph ( 245 km / h ) , but because it was not reported in the eye and the storm was smaller than normal , the winds were estimated at 160 mph ( 260 km / h ) . The hurricane 's winds rank as a Category 5 on the Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale , one of two such storms in the 1933 season .

After maintaining peak winds for about 12 hours , the hurricane began weakening as it passed through the southern Bahamas . At around 1200 UTC on September 1 , the hurricane made landfall on northern Cuba near Sagua La Grande , with winds of about 120 mph ( 190 km / h ) . The eye moved along the northern coast of Cuba , crossing over Matanzas . Shortly thereafter the storm exited into the Straits of Florida , and late on September 1 the hurricane passed about 16 mi ( 26 km ) north of Havana . After entering the Gulf of Mexico , the hurricane restrengthened , and a ship reported a pressure of 948 mbar ( 28.0 inHg ) late on September 2 ; this suggested winds of about 140 mph ( 230 km / h ) . The hurricane turned more to the west on September 3 , and as it approached southern Texas it weakened slightly as it decelerated . At 0400 UTC on September 5 , the hurricane made its final landfall on South Padre Island in southern Texas , with winds estimated at 125 mph ( 205 km / h ) . It quickly weakened over land as it crossed into northeastern Mexico , and the storm dissipated late on September 5 .

Throughout its path , the hurricane killed at least 179 people collectively in the Turks and Caicos Islands , Cuba , and south Texas . It first affected the Turks and Caicos , producing winds of 54 mph ( 87 km / h ) on Grand Turk . Before the hurricane struck Cuba , officials warned of the impending storm , and military workers warned people to remain indoors . About 4,000 people evacuated the coastal town of Isabela on three trains specifically run for the residents . In Havana , business owners secured their properties in anticipation of the storm . Most of the deaths from the hurricane occurred in northern Cuba . Winds of over 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) affected the coastline , and Havana reported maximum winds of 94 mph ( 151 km / h ) . There , the winds downed power lines and uprooted trees . High waves flooded six blocks of the city with up to 4 ft ( 1.2 m ) of water , entering the cellars of some homes . East of Havana in Cárdenas , high waves destroyed the aqueduct , while high winds severely damaged the local sugar industry . A nearby coastal town 20 mi ( 32 km ) east of Cárdenas was described as being " virtually leveled by the storm " in news reports . In Cienfuegos along the southern coast , the hurricane destroyed many ships and piers . High waves washed four ships ashore , one of which damaged another ship . High winds destroyed hundreds of houses and damaged many others along the storm 's path . About 100,000 people were left homeless , many of whom lacking food or medical supplies . In the interior of the country , the hurricane dropped rainfall that flooded rivers and towns . Damage was estimated at $ 11 million , and a report published in 2003 indicated that there were about 70 deaths in the country ; however , newspaper accounts from shortly after the hurricane indicated there were around 100 deaths . After the storm , police officers were deployed to maintain order . Officers shot and killed five people caught looting in Havana , although the deaths were not included in the overall death toll . Officials deployed trucks to pick up wounded citizens .

While the hurricane was over the Bahamas late on August 30 , the United States Weather Bureau issued storm warnings for southern Florida . Two days later , the storm struck Cuba and passed south of the state , producing peak winds of 42 mph ( 68 km / h ) in Key West . The winds caused little damage ; however , high waves destroyed a sea wall and washed onto a coastal roadway . High waves also sank a boat , killing three people . Three days before the hurricane made its final landfall , officials at the Weather Bureau in Brownsville issued a warning to all stations along the Texas coast , declaring that it was " uncertain where tropical storm in Gulf will reach coast line , but all persons should be warned to remain away from inaccessible places on Texas coast over week end . " The early warning was to prevent travelers from being on the Texas beaches on Labor Day Weekend . As a result , an official at the Corpus Christi Weather Bureau office estimated that the warning " probably saved thousands of lives . " Early on September 4 about a day before landfall , the Weather Bureau issued a hurricane warning from Corpus Christi to Freeport and storm warnings for other locations along the Texas coast . When the storm 's westward motion became more apparent , the hurricane warning was dropped north of Corpus Christi and extended southward to Brownsville . Officials in Corpus Christi declared martial law before the storm struck and ordered mandatory evacuations of low-lying areas . Shelters opened in the city , and many businesses closed .

When the storm moved across the area , winds were estimated at 90 mph ( 140 km / h ) in Brownsville , with gusts to 125 mph ( 201 km / h ) . High tides were reported along the coast , and the storm surge reached 13 ft ( 4.0 m ) near Brownsville . The tides flooded portions of Corpus Christi about 3 ft ( 0.91 m ) deep , sinking boats and damaging piers . Storm-generated waves destroyed 20 buildings in one settlement . The storm destroyed the causeway from Padre Island to Flour Bluff , and there were over 40 breaches in the island , some up to a mile wide . The storm dropped heavy rainfall from southern Texas through northeastern Mexico , peaking at over 15.0 in ( 380 mm ) at a station near Mercedes ; the total was one of four 24 ‑ hour precipitation records set by the storm . The rains from the storm and two previous hurricanes led to a large increase in tropical butterfly species across the area . Throughout the Rio Grande Valley , the strong winds destroyed about 90 % of the citrus crop . Overall , the hurricane left $ 16.9 million in damage and 40 deaths , mostly in Cameron County . However , none of the deaths were in Brownsville or Corpus Christi , which was credited to the advance warning . Damage was less than expected in Corpus Christi , and many business owners who lost revenue sent letters of outcry to the Weather Bureau Headquarters ; however , the Bureau determined that the evacuations and warnings were warranted given the storm 's threat .

Tom Swift is the main character of five series of American juvenile science fiction and adventure novels that emphasize science , invention and technology . First published in 1910 , the series total more than 100 volumes . The character was created by Edward Stratemeyer , the founder of the Stratemeyer Syndicate , a book-packaging firm . Tom 's adventures have been written by various ghostwriters , beginning with Howard Garis . Most of the books are credited to the collective pseudonym " Victor Appleton " . The 33 volumes of the second series use the pseudonym Victor Appleton II for the author . For this series , and some of the later series , the main character is " Tom Swift , Jr . " New titles have been published as recently as 2007 . Most of the various series emphasized Tom 's inventions . The books generally describe the effects of science and technology as wholly beneficial , and the role of the inventor in society as admirable and heroic . Translated into many languages , the books have sold more than 30 million copies worldwide . Tom Swift has also been the subject of a board game and a television series .

In his various incarnations , Tom Swift , usually a teenager , is inventive and science-minded , " Swift by name and swift by nature . " Tom is portrayed as a natural genius . In the earlier series , he is said to have had little formal education , the character modeled originally after such inventors as Henry Ford , Thomas Edison , and aviation pioneer Glenn Curtiss . For most of the five series , each book concerns Tom 's latest invention , and its role either in solving a problem or mystery , or in assisting Tom in feats of exploration or rescue . Often Tom must protect his new invention from villains " intent on stealing Tom 's thunder or preventing his success , " but Tom is always successful in the end . Many of Tom Swift 's fictional inventions described actual technological developments . Tom Swift Among the Diamond Makers ( 1911 ) was based on Charles Parsons 's attempts to synthesize diamonds using electric current . Tom Swift and His Photo Telephone was published in 1912 . One source claims the process for sending photographs by telephone was not developed until 1925 . However , the first commercial wired telefax service was established in 1865 , more than a decade before the invention of the telephone . Tom Swift and His Wizard Camera ( 1912 ) features a portable movie camera , not invented until 1923 according to one source . However , many early movie cameras were portable by one man , and a hand-held home movie camera for semi-professional work was designed in 1921 by Emanuel Goldberg . One source mentions Tom Swift and His Electric Locomotive ( 1922 ) was published two years before the Central Railroad of New Jersey began using the first diesel electric locomotive ; however , the book refers to a purely electrical locomotive powered from overhead lines , of the sort that began regular service during the late 19th century . The house on wheels that Tom invents for 1929 's Tom Swift and His House on Wheels pre-dated the first house trailer by a year , but post-dates the widespread use of Romany caravans for living by about a century . Tom Swift and His Diving Seacopter ( 1952 ) features a flying submarine similar to one planned by the United States Department of Defense four years later in 1956 , but this book was published more than a decade after the Soviet flying submarine project began and nearly 50 years after Jules Verne 's 1904 novel Master of the World featured a flying submarine . Other inventions of Tom 's have not happened , such as the device for silencing airplane engines that he invents in Tom Swift and His Magnetic Silencer ( 1941 ) . In any case , technical ideas are often described speculatively by newspapers and magazines for many years prior to commercial realization .

The character of Tom Swift was conceived about 1910 by Edward Stratemeyer , founder of the Stratemeyer Syndicate , a book-packaging business , although the name " Tom Swift " was first used in 1903 by Stratemeyer in Shorthand Tom the Reporter ; Or , the Exploits of a Bright Boy . Stratemeyer invented the series to capitalize on the market for children 's science adventure . The Syndicate 's authors created the Tom Swift stories by first preparing an outline with the plot elements , followed by drafting and editing the detailed manuscript . The books were published using the house pseudonym " Victor Appleton " . Edward Stratemeyer and Howard Garis wrote most of the volumes of the original series ; Stratemeyer 's daughter , Harriet Stratemeyer Adams , wrote the last three volumes . The first Tom Swift series ended 1941 . In 1954 , Harriet Adams created the Tom Swift , Jr. series , which was published using the pseudonym " Victor Appleton II " as author . The main character Tom Swift , Junior , was described as the son of the original Tom Swift . Most of the stories were outlined and plotted by Adams . The texts were written by various writers , among them William Dougherty , John Almquist , Richard Sklar , James Duncan Lawrence , Tom Mulvey and Richard McKenna . The Tom Swift , Jr . , series ended in 1971 .

The longest-running series of books to feature Tom Swift is the first , which consists of forty volumes . Tom Swift ( technically Tom Swift , Jr . ) was also the name of the protagonist of the 33 volumes of the Tom Swift , Jr . Adventures , the 11 volumes of the third Tom Swift series , the 13 volumes of the fourth , and a half-dozen more for the most recent series , Tom Swift , Young Inventor , for a total of 103 volumes for all the series . In addition to publication in the United States , Tom Swift books have been published extensively in England , and translated into Norwegian , French , Icelandic , and Finnish .

In the original series , Tom Swift lives in fictional Shopton , New York . He is the son of Barton Swift , the founder of the Swift Construction Company . Tom 's mother is deceased , but the housekeeper , Mrs. Baggert , functions as a surrogate mother . Tom usually shares his adventures with close friend Ned Newton , who eventually becomes the Swift Construction Company 's financial manager . For most of the series , Tom dates Mary Nestor . It has been suggested that his eventual marriage to Mary led to the series ' demise , as young boys found a married man harder to identify with than a young , single one ; however , after the 1929 marriage the series continued for 12 more years and eight further volumes . Regularly appearing characters include Wakefield Damon , an older man , whose dialogue is characterized by frequent use of such whimsical expressions as " Bless my brakeshoes ! " and " Bless my vest buttons ! " The original Tom Swift has been claimed to represent the early 20th-century conception of inventors . Tom has no formal education after high school ; according to critic Robert Von der Osten , Tom 's ability to invent is presented as " somehow innate " . Tom is not a theorist but a tinkerer and , later , an experimenter who , with his research team , finds practical applications for others ' research ; Tom does not so much methodically develop and perfect inventions as find them by trial and error .

Tom 's inventions are not at first innovative . In the first two books of the series , he fixes a motorcycle and a boat , and in the third book he develops an airship , but only with the help of a balloonist . Tom is also at times unsure of himself , asking his elders for help ; as Von der Osten puts it , " the early Tom Swift is more dependent on his father and other adults at first and is much more hesitant in his actions . When his airship bangs into a tower , Tom is uncharacteristically nonplussed and needs support . " However , as the series progresses , Tom 's inventions " show an increasingly independent genius as he develops devices , such as an electric rifle and a photo telephone , further removed from the scientific norm " . Some of Tom 's inventions are improvements of then-current technologies , while other inventions were not in development at the time the books were published , but have since been developed .

In this series , presented as an extension and continuation of the first , the Tom Swift of the original series is now the CEO of Swift Enterprises , a four-mile-square enclosed facility where inventions are conceived and manufactured . Tom 's son , Tom Swift , Jr . , is now the primary inventive genius of the family . Stratemeyer Syndicate employee Andrew Svenson described the new series as based " on scientific fact and probability , whereas the old Toms were in the main adventure stories mixed with pseudo-science " . Three Ph.D.s in science were hired as consultants to the series to ensure scientific accuracy . The younger Tom does not tinker with motorcycles ; his inventions and adventures extend from deep within the Earth ( in Tom Swift and His Atomic Earth Blaster [ 1954 ] ) to the bottom of the ocean ( in Tom Swift and His Diving Seacopter [ 1956 ] ) to the moon ( in Tom Swift and the Race to Moon [ 1958 ] ) and , eventually , the outer solar system ( in Tom Swift and His Cosmotron Express [ 1970 ] ) . Later volumes of the series increasingly emphasized the extraterrestrial " space friends " , as they are termed throughout the series . The beings appear as early as the first volume of the series , Tom Swift and His Flying Lab ( 1954 ) . The Tom Swift , Jr . , Adventures were less commercially successful than the first series , selling 6 million copies total , compared with sales of 14 million copies for the first series .

In contrast to the earlier series , many of Tom Jr . ' s inventions are designed to operate in space , and his " genius is unequivocally original as he constructs nuclear-powered flying labs , establishes outposts in space , or designs ways to sail in space on cosmic rays " . Unlike his father , Tom Jr. is not just a tinkerer ; he relies on scientific and mathematical theories , and , according to critic Robert Von der Osten , " science [ in the books ] is , in fact , understood to be a set of theories that are developed based on experimentation and scientific discussion . Rather than being opposed to technological advances , such a theoretical understanding becomes essential to invention . " Tom Swift , Jr . ' s Cold War-era adventures and inventions are often motivated by patriotism , as Tom repeatedly defeats the evil agents of the fictional nations " Kranjovia " and " Brungaria " , the latter a place that critic Francis Molson describes as " a vaguely Eastern European country , which is strongly opposed to the Swifts and the U.S. Hence , the Swifts ' opposition to and competition with the Brungarians is both personal and patriotic . "

The third Tom Swift series differs from the first two in that the setting is primarily outer space , although Swift Enterprises ( located now in New Mexico ) is occasionally mentioned . Tom Swift explores the universe in the starship Exedra , using a faster-than-light drive he has reverse-engineered from an alien space probe . He is aided by Benjamin Franklin Walking Eagle , a Native American who is Tom 's co-pilot , best friend , and an expert computer technician , and Anita Thorwald , a former rival of Tom 's who now works with him as a technician and whose right leg has been rebuilt to contain a miniature computer . This series maintains only an occasional and vague continuity with the two previous series . Tom is called the son of " the great Tom Swift " and said to be " already an important and active contributor to the family business , the giant multimillion-dollar scientific-industrial complex known as Swift Enterprises " . However , as critic Francis Molson indicates , it is not explained whether this Tom Swift is the grandson of the famous Tom Swift of the first series or still the Tom Swift , Jr . , of the second .

The Tom Swift of this third series is less of an inventor than his predecessors , and his inventions are rarely the main feature of the plot . Still , according to Molson , " Tom the inventor is not ignored . Perhaps the most impressive of his inventions and the one essential to the series as a whole is the robot he designs and builds , Aristotle , which becomes a winning and likeable character in its own right . " The books are slower-paced than the Tom Swift , Jr. adventures of the second series , and include realistic , colloquial dialogue . Each volume begins where the last one ended , and the technology is plausible and accurate .

The fourth series featuring Tom Swift ( again a " Jr . " ) is set mostly on Earth ( with occasional voyages to the Moon ) ; Swift Enterprises is now located in California . In the first book , The Black Dragon , it 's mentioned that Tom is the son of Tom Swift Sr. and Mary Nestor . The books deal with what Richard Pyle describes as " modern and futuristic concepts " and , as in the third series , feature an ethnically diverse cast of characters . Like the Tom Swift , Jr. series , the series portrays Tom as a scientist as well as an inventor whose inventions depend on a knowledge of theory . The series differs from previous versions of the character , however , in that Tom 's inventive genius is portrayed as problematic and sometimes dangerous . As Robert Von der Osten argues , Tom 's inventions for this series often have unexpected and negative repercussions . a device to create a miniature black hole which casts him into an alternative universe ; a device that trains muscles but also distorts the mind of the user ; and a genetic process which , combined with the effect of his black hole , results in a terrifying devolution . Genius here begins to recapitulate earlier myths of the mad scientist whose technological and scientific ambitions are so out of harmony with nature and contemporary science that the results are usually unfortunate .

As early as 1914 , Edward Stratemeyer proposed making a Tom Swift movie , but no such movie was made . A Tom Swift radio series was proposed in 1946 . Two scripts were written , but , for unknown reasons , the series was never produced . A television pilot show for a series to be called The Adventures of Tom Swift was filmed in 1958 , featuring Gary Vinson . However , legal problems prevented the pilot 's distribution , and it was never broadcast ; no copies of the pilot are known to exist , though the pilot script is available . Twentieth Century Fox planned a Tom Swift feature movie in 1968 , to be directed by Gene Kelly . A script was written and approved , and filming was to have begun during 1969 . However , the project was canceled owing to the poor reception of the movies Doctor Dolittle and Star ! ; a $ 500,000 airship that had been built as a prop was sold to an amusement park . Yet another movie was planned in 1974 , but , again , was cancelled . Scripts were also written for a proposed television series involving both Tom Swift Jr. and his father , the hero of the original book series . Glen A. Larson wrote an unproduced television pilot show entitled " TS , I Love You : The Further Adventures of Tom Swift " in 1977 , as well . This series was to be combined with a Nancy Drew series , a Hardy Boys series , and a Dana Girls series . Nancy Drew and the Hardy Boys were eventually combined into a one-hour program with alternating episodes .

It has been suggested that the book Tom Swift and His Electric Rifle contains heavy racism , depicting Africans as brutish , uncivilized animals , and the white protagonist as their paternal savior . In the book , as in America today , the black people are rendered as either passive , simple and childlike , or animalistic and capable of unimaginable violence . They are described in the book at various points as " hideous in their savagery , wearing only the loin cloth , and with their kinky hair stuck full of sticks " , and as " wild , savage and ferocious ... like little red apes " . "

The Tom Swift books have been credited with assisting the success of American science fiction and with establishing the edisonade ( stories focusing on brilliant scientists and inventors ) as a basic cultural myth . Tom Swift 's adventures have been popular since the character 's inception in 1910 : by 1914 , 150,000 copies a year were being sold and a 1929 study found the series to be second in popularity only to the Bible for boys in their early teens . By 2009 , Tom Swift books had sold more than 30 million copies worldwide . The series ' writing style , which was sometimes adverb heavy , suggested a name for a type of adverbial pun promulgated during the 1950s and 1960s , a type of wellerism known as " Tom Swifties " . Originally this kind of pun was called a " Tom Swiftly " in reference to the adverbial usage , but over time has come to be called a " Tom Swifty . " Some examples are : " ' I lost my crutches , ' said Tom lamely " ; and " ' I 'll take the prisoner downstairs ' , said Tom condescendingly . "

Tom Swift 's fictional inventions have apparently inspired several actual inventions , among them Lee Felsenstein 's " Tom Swift Terminal " , which " drove the creation of an early personal computer known as the Sol " , and the taser . The name " taser " was originally " TSER " , for " Tom Swift Electric Rifle " . The invention was named for the central device in the story Tom Swift and His Electric Rifle ( 1911 ) ; according to inventor Jack Cover , " an ' A ' was added because we got tired of answering the phone ' TSER . ' " A number of scientists , inventors , and science fiction writers have also credited Tom Swift with inspiring them , including Ray Kurzweil , Robert A. Heinlein , and Isaac Asimov . The Tom Swift , Jr. adventures were Steve Wozniak 's favorite reading as a boy and inspired him to become a scientist . According to Wozniak , reading the Tom Swift books made him feel " that engineers can save the world from all sorts of conflict and evil " .

" Nannygate " is a popular term for the 1993 revelations that caused two of President Bill Clinton 's choices for United States Attorney General to become derailed . In January 1993 , Clinton 's nomination of corporate lawyer Zoë Baird for the position came under attack after it became known that she and her husband had broken the law by employing two illegal aliens from Peru as a nanny and chauffeur for their young child . They had also failed to pay Social Security taxes for the workers until shortly before the disclosures . While the Clinton administration thought the matter was relatively unimportant , the news elicited a firestorm of public opinion , most of it against Baird . Within eight days , her nomination lost political support in the U.S. Congress and was withdrawn . The following month , Clinton 's choice of federal judge Kimba Wood for the job was leaked to the press , but within a day it became known that she too had employed an undocumented immigrants to look after her child . Although Wood had done so at a time when this was legal , and had paid Social Security taxes for the worker , the disclosures were enough to cause the immediate withdrawal of Wood from consideration . The Clinton administration then said that the hiring practices for household help would be examined for all of the more than thousand presidential appointments under consideration , causing the whole process to slow down significantly . Determined to choose a woman for the Attorney General post , Clinton finally selected state prosecutor Janet Reno , who was confirmed and served through all eight years of the administration .

The Nannygate matter caused wealthy Americans to ask each other if they too had a " Zoë Baird problem " , as the hiring of undocumented workers and the paying of household help off the books were both commonplace . Two fault lines , gender and class , were exposed in the discussion over Nannygate : in the former , a double standard was seen wherein female appointees faced a greater risk of being questioned and disqualified based upon their childcare arrangements , while in the latter , affluent professional women who could afford live-in childcare arrangements were seen as trying to get away with an illegal act . Nannygate-type controversies have subsequently affected other political appointees both in the U.S. and in other countries .

President-elect Bill Clinton had vowed to assemble an administration that " looked like America " , and it was widely assumed that one of the major cabinet posts would go to a woman . In particular , he wanted to nominate one for the position of United States Attorney General , something women 's political action groups were also requesting . No woman had previously served in this post . His choice , whose nomination was announced on December 24 , 1992 , was Zoë Baird , a 40-year-old senior vice president and general counsel at Aetna Life and Casualty Company who had previously worked in the Justice Department during the Carter administration . Little known before the nomination ( Clinton had not met her until their interview ) , Baird was a skilled networker who had been the protégé of several powerful Washington insiders , including Clinton transition team leader Warren Christopher and once-and-future White House Counsel Lloyd Cutler . Picking Baird gave Clinton the ability to satisfy the women 's groups ' desires while still showing independence by not choosing one of their preferred selections . Despite the lack of familiarity and getting a lukewarm response from some Clinton backers – those in the legal public interest community said " Zoë who ? " and her corporate sympathies discouraged liberals – Baird was expected to gain confirmation in the U.S. Senate . Baird and her husband , Yale Law School professor Paul Gewirtz , had a three-year-old son .

On January 14 , 1993 , a page-one story in The New York Times broke the news that Baird had hired a married pair of illegal aliens from Peru , Lillian and Victor Cordero , between 1990 and 1992 . The Peruvian woman served as the nanny for Baird 's son and the Peruvian man as a part-time driver . Furthermore , Baird had not paid Social Security taxes for the couple , until making a lump-sum payment earlier in January 1993 . Baird had brought forward this information willingly to transition officials and authorities performing background checks ; she said that she had thought that the fact that they were sponsoring the couple for citizenship made the hiring acceptable , and that they could not pay the taxes for people who were not yet in the country legally . ( Baird 's immigration lawyer would dispute some aspects of exactly when the sponsorship request took place . ) This was the first time a presidential cabinet nominee had faced such an issue . While the Clinton transition team had found out about the matter during their vetting of Baird , they had underestimated the seriousness of its impact . Their attitude about Baird 's infraction was that it was a technical violation and that ' Everybody does it ' . Clinton operatives initially thought the Baird revelation was no big deal and would quickly lose the attention of the media and public .

Employment of illegal aliens was not uncommon at the time , but in Baird 's case it was especially bad public relations , since the Attorney General was in charge of the Immigration and Naturalization Service ( INS ) . Baird 's wealth – she made $ 500,000 a year in her job and together with her husband had a combined income of $ 600,000 – made her , in the context of the early 1990s recession , an unsympathetic figure to not be paying taxes . Moreover , Baird and Gewirtz had been wealthy enough to afford legal child care , but instead had paid the Corderos $ 250 a week plus board , well below minimum wage . The news brought about an immediate and large-scale negative reaction . As Guardian U.S. correspondent Martin Walker later wrote , " [ Baird and Gewirtz ] were the overpaid yuppies and ubiquitous lawyers whom American voters had come to resent . " On January 16 , Baird paid $ 2,900 in fines for the infractions to the INS . This was on top of the $ 8,000 in back Social Security taxes she had paid earlier . George Stephanopoulos , the transition communications director , said that " President-elect Clinton has complete confidence in Zoë Baird . "

Some in the Clinton inner circle persisted in believing that Baird 's offense was akin to a traffic ticket in seriousness , but Democratic senators told them otherwise ; Senate Judiciary Committee chair Joe Biden of Delaware likened it more to a " freeway crash . " Baird met with Biden twice , both times leaving his office in tears , although Biden publicly stated that he did not think the matter would prevent her nomination . Baird actually had more immediate support from ranking member Orrin Hatch , who called it " no big deal . " This reflected a considerable degree of Republican support for Baird , as they decided she was more in tune with their stance on some issues than a replacement would likely be . Appearing before the Judiciary Committee on January 19 , Baird apologized for having knowingly broken the law : " In my hope to find appropriate child care for my son , I gave too little emphasis to what was described to me as a technical violation of law . " She added that , " People are fairly questioning if there are classes of individuals who hold themselves above the law . I do not . " Baird 's statement that her husband had handled many of the legal issues surrounding the Corderos ' employment drew little support for her . Overall , the questioning of Baird was tougher from Democrats on the committee than Republicans , again reflecting the latter 's support for Baird . At the close of the initial testimony , Baird 's confirmation still seemed quite possible .

As the inauguration of Bill Clinton took place on January 20 , the nomination crisis was reaching its final phase , with Biden telling Clinton at a luncheon following the ceremony that the next day or two would be crucial . But political and public opposition continued to mount . Calls opposing the nomination flooded the switchboards of members of Congress . Senator David Boren of Oklahoma reported getting a thousand calls to his office , with 80 percent of them against the nomination . Senator Paul Simon of Illinois also received a thousand calls . Senator Patrick Leahy of Vermont said , " In 18 years in the Senate , I had never seen so many telephone calls , spontaneously , in such a short period . " Television crews staked out the New Haven home of Baird . As one top Senate official later stated , " There were phone calls to offices , local editorials . The people were just way ahead of us . " The issue created a firestorm on conservative talk radio , then emerging as a potent force in American politics . Talker Rush Limbaugh was especially involved in the issue , for instance weighing in to say that Baird 's " blame-it-on-the-husband " defense was a " feminazi " ploy . A USA Today / CNN / Gallup poll showed that 63 percent of the American public did not think Baird should be confirmed ; the reaction was broad , with majorities of Republicans and Democrats , men and women , and young and old all opposing it .

Clinton faced a choice of either quickly jettisoning her , and risk appearing weak , or defiantly continuing to back her , and opposing a popular groundswell ; he opted to wait and see a little more . There was also much confusion about when exactly Clinton had learned of the Baird problem , with Christopher saying he had informed Clinton of it in some manner during the transition and Clinton saying he had not . This led to a " What did the President know and when did he know it " grilling of Stephanopoulos on January 21 during his first news conference as White House Communications Director . The treatment of Stephanopoulos got rough and his evasive answers bordered on nonsense . A second round of Judiciary Committee hearings were also taking place on January 21 , and by then , Baird was politically isolated , with no major groups coming to her defense . A growing number of senators came out in opposition to Baird during the day , including two Republican members of the Judiciary Committee and influential centrist Democrats John Breaux of Louisiana and David Boren of Oklahoma . Baird gamely continued to smile and testify well into the evening , but as Stephanopoulos later wrote , " She didn 't know it yet , but she was toast . " Biden called Clinton and told him the nomination was lost .

On January 22 , 1993 , two days after Clinton had assumed the presidency , the White House announced in the middle of the night the withdrawal of Baird 's nomination . Clinton now publicly stated that he had been informed of Baird 's hiring of the illegal aliens after discussing the position with her but before actually nominating her . He had not halted the process to gain all information but rather had erred by going through with the nomination in order to meet a self-imposed Christmas deadline for naming his cabinet . On January 23 , Anna Quindlen used the term " Nannygate " in her syndicated column and it soon gained wide-scale use . While Lillian and Victor Cordero had done their jobs well ( before hiring them , Baird had made several attempts to employ U.S. citizens , but none had worked out ) , on January 22 the INS said it sought to question them and very likely deport them . The couple had previously separated and were about to be divorced . Lillian Cordero agreed to leave the country and return to Peru , under a 30-day " voluntary departure " program . Victor Cordero first went into hiding , hoping to stay in the country ; his lawyer said he had been in the wrong place at the wrong time and that , " He doesn 't understand why he 's being singled out . " But by January 29 , he too had voluntarily left the U.S. for Peru . Neither of them ever appeared in the media . Although illegal domestics were rarely deported unless they had been involved in crimes , the INS maintained that the couple were treated no differently than any other illegal aliens who were brought to their attention .

On February 4 , 1993 , the Clinton White House made it known via deliberate background statements to several major newspapers that 49-year-old United States federal judge Kimba Wood of the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York would be his new choice for Attorney General . However , no official announcement or nomination was being made , pending the completion of background checks and to gauge reaction to the pick . White House officials indicated that First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton had insisted that the position still be filled by a woman . Wood , who was prominent in New York social circles , was married to Time magazine writer Michael Kramer and the couple had a six-year-old son . However , later that day , investigations by the office of the White House Counsel and the FBI background check were completed , and Clinton and the White House learned that she had employed an illegal immigrant to look after her son , even though she had done it when it was still legal to do so . The immigrant , from Trinidad , had been hired in March 1986 , several months before enactment of the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 made hiring of illegal aliens unlawful . The nanny obtained legal status in December 1987 , and overall worked for Wood for seven years .

Clinton decided the nomination could not go forward , and the next day , February 5 , Wood publicly withdrew herself from consideration . The case was different from the Baird one in that Wood had not broken immigration law and had paid Social Security taxes for the person . Nevertheless , the White House feared reaction from Congress and the public , as well as that from radio and television talk shows , in the apparent , if not actual , repetition of the Baird controversy , and asked Wood to withdraw . A further burden was the disclosure that while she was a student in London , Wood had trained for five days as a Playboy bunny . The White House was annoyed with Wood , because they said that when they had initially asked her if she had a " Zoë Baird problem , " she had responded in the negatory . Allies of Wood gave a starkly different account and said that she had been fully forthcoming about the details of her dealings with the immigrant . According to a Gallup Poll , 65 percent of the American public did not think Wood should have been forced down .

One of the few men to make the short list for the Attorney General selection , Washington lawyer Charles Ruff , was ruled out of consideration by the White House on February 6 , because he had not paid Social Security taxes for years for a woman who cleaned his house . On February 8 , Stephanopoulos broadened the scope of the affair by announcing that the past hiring of an illegal alien would " probably be disqualifying " for applicants to any of the 1,100 presidential appointments that were subject to confirmation by the Senate . As one White House official said , " If you ever knowingly hired an illegal alien , that 's a killer . If you hired someone who was legal but didn 't pay Social Security taxes , you 're probably O.K. , but only if you come clean and pay the back taxes . " Several Clinton appointees then came forward . Secretary of Commerce Ron Brown said he had failed to pay the taxes for a maid . The Brown case attracted a fair amount of attention , with 40 percent of Americans thinking he should step down as a result ( he did not ) . Secretary of Transportation Federico Peña said he would pay back taxes owed for a part-time babysitter . Other appointees said they had examined their records and were clean . Stephanopoulos himself came under attention , but said the cleaner he had hired was from a cleaning company . The matter resulted in a slowdown of hiring for all positions , in what Secretary of Defense Les Aspin called a " chilling effect " . One-third of the nominations for the U.S. State Department were held up while being examined for the question .

On February 11 , 1993 , Janet Reno was nominated for the post . Clinton had known of her since her days with the groundbreaking Miami Drug Court , where as state attorney she had worked with public defender and Clinton brother-in-law Hugh Rodham , but otherwise although qualified for the job had no federal experience and was relatively obscure . Reno was 54 years old , had never married and had no children , and , as Clinton later wrote , " Public service was her life . " Without the chance of a nanny problem , and with her mowing her own lawn reducing the chances for an immigrant problem , Reno was the perfect choice after the Baird and Wood failures . In addition , Reno 's down-to-earth image contrasted with the wealthy corporate lawyer Baird and the socially prominent Wood . ( Reno would instead face something often experienced by unmarried woman of her age , speculation about her sexual orientation . ) In making the announcement , Clinton said that he had considered men for the post and that " I never felt hamstrung by any commitment , even though I did want to name a woman Attorney General . " When asked how he would have handled the selection were he to do it all over again , Clinton responded , " I would have called Janet Reno on November 5th . "

The Nannygate matter did some damage to the Clinton administration politically . A cover of Time magazine , featuring a half-portrait of Baird , was titled " Clinton 's First Blunder " and subtitled " How a popular outcry caught the Washington elite by surprise " . The Baird nomination was emblematic of other difficulties Clinton had during the transition period and his early days in office , including most prominently the dropping of a promised middle-class tax cut and resistance to his proposal to allow gays in the military . Stephanopoulos later wrote that " We should have never let the Baird nomination get as far as it did , but our systems failed us at every crucial step . " And the timing of the announcement of the Wood withdrawal detracted attention from the signing of the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 , the first legislative achievement of the Clinton administration . While a Gallup Poll showed that only 22 percent of the public said that Clinton 's difficulties in naming someone for Attorney General decreased their confidence in his ability to lead the country , overall , Clinton experienced the highest disapproval ratings at the start of any presidency since such polling began . His " presidential honeymoon " period was thus extremely brief .

Clinton 's desire to appoint a woman to the post engendered some criticism for devaluing the position to an affirmative action post , and Stephanopoulos later conceded that " we put ourselves in a box " . The failure of the Baird and Wood picks , along with Lani Guinier 's failed nomination ( for unrelated reasons ) to Assistant Attorney General for Department of Justice Civil Rights Division a few months later , made Congressional Democrats cautious in endorsing future Clinton personnel choices . When federal judge Stephen Breyer was first considered for a U.S. Supreme Court vacancy in mid-1993 , he was not selected , in part because he too had a ' Zoë Baird problem ' ( he would be nominated and confirmed the following year , following another vacancy ) . The Baird case became the first national scandal over child-care arrangements , but the situation that these nominees faced was in part at least a common one to Americans . Two-thirds of American women with school-age children were in the workforce and three-fifths of married men with children had working wives . They all needed some form of day care , and with there being no organized or subsidized day care system in the U.S. , many families turned to arrangements within the underground economy . That this administration ran into this problem was considered ironic , given that Bill and Hillary Clinton were the first dual-career couple to occupy the White House .

Once the Nannygate matter broke into the news , the question " Do you have a Zoë Baird problem ? " became frequently asked by Americans of each other in casual conversation , with many answers being in the affirmative . U.S. Census Bureau and Internal Revenue Service data indicated that only one-quarter of people who employed household help paid Social Security taxes to the workers , and that even figure may have been higher than the real one due to people not responding to surveys honestly . Most of those doing the hiring did not think about breaking the law or getting caught . Meanwhile , Baird had graduated within a matter of hours from anonymity to dubious icon . One employment agency head who only hired legal household workers said , " You have no idea , the frustration , sitting here , knocking your head against the wall , trying to do what 's right . And then you have a Zoë Baird who exposes the fact that everybody else is breaking the law . " The phrase " to have a Zoë Baird problem " became rooted in the vocabulary of the American professional and political classes .

The matter exposed the practices of the barely underground economy of wealthy households and largely illegal immigrant suppliers . The owner of one Manhattan nanny agency stated , " It 's just a reality of life that without the illegal girls , there wouldn 't be any nannies , and the mommies would have to stay home and mind their own kids . " The practice had grown as both married women with children and single working mothers entered the workforce in large numbers during the 1980s , with the extended hours and long commutes of many professional positions further exacerbating it . The Irish and Central and South American immigrant population of domestic workers was augmented by those from the Philippines , China , Ireland , or Poland . People hiring nannies often preferred illegal aliens , who were thought to be easier to find , considerably less expensive , and more loyal if they worked out and easier to fire if they did not . As one Floral Park , Queens , woman said , " I want someone who cannot leave the country , who doesn 't know anyone in New York , who basically does not have a life . I want someone who is completely dependent on me and loyal to my family . " Americans themselves were largely unwilling to do the jobs .

While some men were affected by Nannygate , most of the public commentary revolved around its effect on women . The February 10 , 1993 , op-ed page of The New York Times , which carried considerable Nannygate coverage in general , was exclusively devoted towards discussing it as a women 's issue . The press themselves came in for some criticism in this respect , with the group Fairness and Accuracy in Reporting complaining that the Times and other media outlets focused on the effect of Nannygate on white , upper-middle-class women , and excluded the perspective of the actual immigrant childcare workers . Stuart Taylor , Jr . , in his March 1993 piece " Inside the Whirlwind : How Zoë Baird Was Monstrously Caricatured for the Smallest of Sins , Pounded by Press and Popular Righteousness , and Crucified by Prejudice and Hypocrisy " for The American Lawyer , concluded that Baird was done in by a political-media culture bent on populism and symbolic blood sport and that she was penalized for being honest . He also said Baird had fallen victim to " the cold , capricious cruelty of fate " . Two fault lines , gender and class , were exposed in the debate over Nannygate : in the former , a double standard was seen wherein female appointees faced a greater risk of being questioned and disqualified based upon their childcare arrangements , while in the latter , wealthy or upper middle-class professional women who could afford live-in childcare arrangements were seen as trying to get away a white-collar criminal act . In particular , the competing gendered narratives revolved around whether the affluent Baird was considered " one of us " by women . Baird failed to gain support from some feminists , who believed that as a protégé of powerful Washington insiders , she had not paid her feminist dues . University of Michigan scholar Diane Sampson , publishing in a collection entitled " Bad " Mothers : The politics of blame in twentieth-century America , saw Baird as trying to establish motherhood as a ' site ' in elaborating her qualifications for Attorney General during her confirmation hearings , an effort that was subverted by her affluence and her earning far more than her husband did . Sampson concluded that " The dissonance between Baird 's rhetorical stance and her lived life was jarring " and that her case presented " culturally accepted signifiers of a bad mother " .

A modified and fictionalized account of the Baird nomination formed the core of Wendy Wasserstein 's 1996 play An American Daughter , which was later made into a 2000 television film . Wasserstein saw the episode , as well as what happened to Wood , as an example of double standards and sexism , and used it as a vehicle to explore the nature and status of American feminism as of the 1990s . She said of its role in illustrating feminist issues , " I mean , if Nannygate hadn 't existed , what a great thing to make up as a way of talking about it . " An American Daughter became one of Wasserstein 's most ambitious works , and also her most political . Mary Romero , Professor of Justice Studies at Arizona State University , discussed the class aspect in a new 2002 edition of her classic work Maid in the U.S.A .. She saw Nannygate as a follow-on to the long-running " servant problem " , and illustrated how labor and immigration laws were still structured so as to benefit employers rather than employees . Taunya Lovell Banks , Professor of Equality Jurisprudence at University of Maryland School of Law , saw Nannygate as also having a racial dimension , in that it illustrated how the professional class exploited domestic workers of color .

In the wake of Nannygate , effective 1995 Congress changed the way taxes for household help are filed , creating a Form 1040 Schedule H that shifting the federal reporting burden from separate documents onto the main return for income taxes . ( The new regulations still were more focused on employers than domestic employees . ) The full procedure for handling payments of Social Security and Medicare taxes , as well as state and federal unemployment insurance premiums , for household and child-care help remained quite complex , however , and over the following two decades , self-help articles were published with titles such as " How to Avoid Your Very Own Nannygate " and " Time to Come Clean " and with admonitions like " we all know what happened to Kimba Wood and Zoë Baird . "

Later instances of political problems caused by the hiring of nannies that were in some way illegal have also been dubbed " Nannygate " , both in the U.S. and outside it . In 2001 , President George W. Bush nominated Linda Chavez for Secretary of Labor . She was the first Hispanic woman nominated to a United States cabinet position . However , she withdrew from consideration after it was revealed that she had given money to a one-time illegal immigrant from Guatemala who lived in her home more than a decade earlier . Chavez 's claims that she had been engaged in an act of charity and compassion rather than employment , and that she was now the victim of the " politics of personal destruction " , were not enough to save her nomination . The Chavez case did further illustrate the question of the status of female illegal aliens in households across the nation . In December 2004 , Bernard Kerik was nominated by President Bush to succeed Tom Ridge as United States Secretary of Homeland Security . After a week of press scrutiny , Kerik withdrew his nomination , saying that he had unknowingly hired an undocumented worker and had not paid her taxes . The Times wrote that " the curse of Nannygate " had returned to claim a fourth high-level victim . As Jim Gibbons was campaigning for Governor of Nevada in 2006 , it was brought to light that more than ten years earlier , he and his wife Dawn Gibbons had employed an illegal immigrant as a housekeeper and babysitter . Gibbons went on to win the election anyway . By 2009 and the stepping down of Nancy Killefer as nominee for Chief Performance Officer of the United States at the beginning of the Obama administration , at least ten top-level cabinet or other federal appointees had run into trouble over failure to pay the " Nanny Tax " . Despite the possible peril it brought , most Americans were still paying their nannies off the books . The problem recurred in the 2010 California gubernatorial election , where candidate Meg Whitman lost despite spending over $ 140 million of her own money . Her campaign was seriously damaged during its final two months by the revelation that she had employed an illegal immigrant as a nanny and housekeeper , and by the alleged manner in which she treated ( and fired ) the housekeeper .

David Blunkett , a British politician , ran into political trouble for fast tracking a visa application for his family 's nanny in 2004 . In 2006 , the Minister affair at the announcement of the Reinfeldt cabinet in Sweden included the quick resignations of Maria Borelius , a Swedish trade minister who had hired a live-in nanny without paying taxes , and Cecilia Stegö Chilò , the Swedish culture minister , who also hired a live-in nanny without paying taxes . The matter was widely reported by the international press , with the Financial Times dubbing it " Nannygate " . In 2009 , Canadian member of parliament Ruby Dhalla was accused of having employed nannies without proper work permits as required of anyone hiring foreign nationals under the federal caregiver program , and some newspaper headline writers dubbed the resulting controversy as " Nannygate " . The 2013 arrest of Devyani Khobragade , Deputy Consul General of the Consulate General of India in New York City , charged with committing visa fraud and providing false statements in order to gain entry to the United States for her nanny , was referred by some in the American press as " Nannygate " .

The Royal Gold Cup or Saint Agnes Cup is a solid gold covered cup lavishly decorated with enamel and pearls . It was made for the French royal family at the end of the 14th century , and later belonged to several English monarchs before spending nearly 300 years in Spain . It has been in the British Museum since 1892 , where it is normally on display in Room 40 , and is generally agreed to be the outstanding surviving example of late medieval French plate . It has been described as " the one surviving royal magnificence of the International Gothic age " ; and according to Thomas Hoving , former director of the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York , " of all the princely jewels and gold that have come down to us , this is the most spectacular — and that includes the great royal treasures . " The cup is made of solid gold , stands 23.6 cm ( 9.25 inches ) high with a diameter of 17.8 cm ( 6.94 inches ) at its widest point , and weighs 1.935 kg ( 4.26 lb ) . It has a cover that lifts off , but the triangular stand on which it once stood is now lost . The stem of the cup has twice been extended by the addition of cylindrical bands , so that it was originally much shorter , giving the overall shape " a typically robust and stocky elegance . " The original decorated knop or finial on the cover has been lost , and a moulding decorated with 36 pearls has been removed from the outer edge of the cover ; a strip of gold with jagged edges can be seen where it was attached . Presumably it matched the one still in place round the foot of the cup .

The gold surfaces are decorated with scenes in basse-taille enamel with translucent colours that reflect light from the gold beneath ; many areas of gold both underneath the enamel and in the background have engraved and pointillé decoration worked in the gold . In particular the decoration features large areas of translucent red , which have survived in excellent condition . This colour , known as rouge clair , was the most difficult to achieve technically , and highly prized for this and the brilliance of the colour when it was done successfully . Scenes from the life of Saint Agnes run round the top of the cover and the sloping underside of the main body . The symbols of the Four Evangelists run round the foot of the cup , and there are enamel medallions at the centre of the inside of both the cup and the cover . The lower of the two added bands contains enamel Tudor roses on a diapered pointillé background ; this was apparently added under Henry VIII . The upper band has an engraved inscription filled in with black enamel , with a barrier of laurel branches in green to mark off the end of the inscription from its beginning .

There is no firm evidence as to the date and circumstances of the creation of the cup . It is first clearly documented in an inventory from 1391 of the valuables belonging to Charles VI of France ( reigned 1380 – 1422 ) , surviving in two copies in the Bibliothèque nationale de France . This lists : A hanap of gold , all its cover well and richly enamelled on the outside with the life of Madame St Agnes ; and the cresting of the foot is garnished with 26 pearls , and the crown around the cover with 36 pearls ; and the finial of the said cover ( is ) garnished with four sapphires , three balas rubies and fifteen pearls . And it weighs 9 marcs 3 ounces of gold. and the said hanap rests on a stand of gold in the form of a tripod , and in the middle of the tripod is represented Our Lady in a sun on a ground of clear red , and the three feet of the tripod are formed by three winged dragons . The said hanap and cover were given to the king by monseigneur the duc de Berry on his journey into Touraine in the year 91 .

John , Duke of Berry ( 1340 – 1416 ) was Charles VI 's uncle and a powerful figure in the kingdom , as well as the most famous and extravagant collector and commissioner of art of his day . He is still best known for commissioning the Très Riches Heures du Duc de Berry , the famous International Gothic illuminated manuscript , and also commissioned the Holy Thorn Reliquary , now in the British Museum . The young king Charles had been forced to remove his uncle from governorships after the latter 's rapacious conduct had led to unrest , and the meeting in 1391 marked their reconciliation after a period of bad relations . Lavish gifts among the Valois court circle were routine , and on this occasion Berry had special reason to be generous . The cup appears in another inventory of Charles V in 1400 , and then is not recorded until it appears as the property of another royal uncle , and collector , John of Lancaster , 1st Duke of Bedford ( 1389 – 1435 ) , son of Henry IV , who was briefly Regent of both France and England for his infant nephew Henry VI . How he acquired the cup is not known , but he would have received many gifts from Charles VI , and had both lent the king money and bought from him things such as the library of the Palais du Louvre , in the uneasy period when Charles had made peace with the English and made Henry V his heir . After the death of his brother Henry V , Bedford struggled to stem the resurgent French resistance , which was energised by Joan of Arc . He died in Normandy in 1435 , leaving Henry VI as his heir . The cup is more briefly described as the first item in a list of valuables received from Bedford 's estate prepared for Henry VI 's minister Cardinal Henry Beaufort , but the tripod is not mentioned , some of the jewels are missing , and the subject is misidentified as the life of Saint Suzanna not Saint Agnes . For some reason it does not appear in a royal inventory of 1441 ; Jenny Stratford suggests that this was because Beaufort still had it at this point . Another possibility is that it had been pawned , as it was in 1449 and again in 1451 , on both occasions to finance England 's increasingly unsuccessful efforts to hold on to French territory ;

The cup first appears in the records of the new Tudor dynasty under Henry VIII in 1521 . By now the cover had lost the finial " garnished with four sapphires , three balas rubies and fifteen pearls " described in Charles VI 's inventory and had a new one of gold in the form of a closed , or " imperial " crown . This matches a propaganda drive at this time by Henry to assert England as an " empire " , a contemporary sense meaning a state recognising no superior , though the Great Seal of England had already used a closed crown since 1471 . Other uses had probably been found for the jewels of the old finial ; it is assumed that the lower band with the Tudor roses was added in Henry 's reign , as part of a programme of adding Tudor badges to possessions inherited from earlier dynasties , which covered tapestries , illuminated manuscripts and buildings such as King 's College Chapel in Cambridge . The cup is described in inventories in 1532 and after Henry 's death in 1547 , and then under Elizabeth I it was inventoried in 1574 and 1596 .

When James I succeeded to the English throne in 1603 , one of his first priorities was to end the Anglo-Spanish War , which had been dragging on since 1585 . A Spanish delegation arrived for the Somerset House Conference , which concluded with a treaty signed in 1604 . The leader of the Habsburg diplomats was Juan Fernández de Velasco , 5th Duke of Frías and Constable of Castile . The upper extension to the stem of the cup has a Latin inscription that translates as : This cup of solid gold , a relic of the sacred treasure of England and a memorial to the peace made between the kings , the Constable Juan de Velasco , returning thence after successfully accomplishing his mission , presented as an offering to Christ the Peacemaker . The gift of " some 70 items of silver and gold plate " by James to the Constable , of which the cup was the most notable item , is documented on both the English and Spanish sides ; the Constable wrote an account of his mission on his return , which mentions the gift from James . The Constable had previously presented both James and the queen with elaborate cups , among other valuable gifts . According to Pauline Croft , " With his usual over-generosity the king gave the departing envoys around half the large gold vessels from the royal possessions he had inherited from Elizabeth . The Constable himself received a stupendous gift of plate , including possibly the most venerable item in the collection , known as " the Royal Gold Cup of the Kings of France and England . " In 1610 the Constable gave the cup to a convent in Medina de Pomar , near Burgos , as the inscription describes . His deed of gift survives , and records that the gift was on condition that the cup was never alienated by the convent . A marginal note on the deed , in the Constable 's own handwriting , records that he had obtained the permission of the Archbishop of Toledo , Bernardo de Sandoval y Rojas , for the cup to be used as a ciborium , or container for consecrated hosts . By this period a rule of the church normally forbade the use of vessels decorated on their inner surface as ciboria .

The cup stayed in the convent until 1882 when the nuns were short of funds and wanted to sell it . It was at some point during this period that the pearl border to the cover and the Tudor finial were removed . The nuns decided they would get a better price in Paris than in Spain , and the cup was entrusted to Simon Campo , a priest , who took it to Paris and approached several leading dealers and collectors . There had been a spate of forgeries of medieval objects , and the Parisians were suspicious , until one , Baron Jerome Pichon , researched the second added cylinder and was sufficiently convinced that this was the cup documented in 1604 to make a rather low offer , which was accepted . In the course of his researches the baron had contacted the current Duke of Frías , who had supplied useful information , and then initially congratulated the buyer on his purchase . However , on looking further into the matter the duke realized that the sale was contrary to the 1610 deed of gift he had discovered in the family archives , and sued in the French courts to recover the cup .

The duke eventually lost his case in 1891 , enabling a further sale that had been set up by Baron Pichon to proceed . This was to the leading firm of Messrs. Wertheimer of Bond Street in London , where the cup was seen by Augustus Wollaston Franks , who had been Keeper of British and Mediaeval Antiquities and Ethnography at the British Museum since 1866 , and was president of the Society of Antiquaries . Samson Wertheimer agreed " with much public spirit " to sell the cup to the British Museum for the £ 8,000 ( £ 790,000 in 2016 ) it had cost the firm . Franks was worried by the new American collectors such as J. P. Morgan , and in 1891 wrote to Sir Henry Tate , of Tate Gallery fame : " A very wonderful gold cup has appeared returned to this country after an absence of 287 years , and I am anxious to see it placed in the National Museum and not removed to America . " He tried to get wealthy individuals to subscribe £ 500 ( £ 49,000 in 2016 ) each , but even with a grant of £ 2,000 from HM Treasury could not raise the price . He was forced to put up £ 5,000 of his own money temporarily while he continued to try to get smaller amounts from others , and succeeded in 1892 when the Treasury agreed to contribute the final £ 830 ; " to Franks this was his greatest acquisition , and the one of which he was most proud . " Apart from the Treasury , the £ 500 contributors were Franks and Wertheimer , the Worshipful Company of Goldsmiths , Charles Drury Edward Fortnum , the Duke of Northumberland , Lord Savile , Lord Iveagh and the Earl of Crawford . In 1901 Morgan succeeded in buying the Lindau Gospels in London , which the museum had also wanted .

Much the most prominent decoration on the cup is the cycle of scenes from the life of Saint Agnes , which is rarely depicted in such detail in art . However , there was one outstanding devotee of the saint in the period : King Charles V of France , Berry 's older brother and Charles VI 's father . Charles V was born in 1338 on Saint Agnes ' feast day , January 21 , and is recorded as owning at least 13 works of art featuring her , including a different gold cup enamelled with scenes from her life ( both are recorded in the 1391 inventory ) . Until recent decades the generally accepted hypothesis was that Berry ordered the cup as a present for his brother in 1380 , to be ready for his birthday in January 1381 . When the king died in September 1380 , Berry had retained it for a decade before presenting it to Charles VI . However , in 1978 Ronald Lightbown , Keeper of Metalwork at the V & A Museum , rejected this theory on stylistic grounds , considering that the cup must have been created only shortly before it appeared in Charles VI 's inventory in 1391 . He says that " in 1380 figure-style was a softly undulating , flowing style , with slender elongated figures and much use of serpentine or curving folds in the drapery , and with trailing dresses ending in sinuous Gothic hem-lines " — a style that can be seen in the miniature of the coronation of Charles VI in 1380 illustrated above . In contrast , Lightbown says " the figures on the cup are broad , some might even be called stocky , with soft drapery of cylindrical form , or of smooth , tight outlines . The folds are tubular and the hems of the robes are straight with no waving , trailing outlines . The style in fact is the ' Italianate ' manner which developed in France as a result of contact with ' trecento ' art , and not the purely Northern Gothic International manner . " This view was rejected in 1981 by Neil Stratford , former Keeper of Medieval and Later Antiquities at the British Museum , who pointed to a number of manuscript illuminations in a similar style that date from earlier than 1390 . John Cherry , another former Keeper of the medieval collections at the British Museum , still presents the older dating in a work of 2010 , and the British Museum website dates the cup to " about 1370 – 1380 " .

Another traditional assumption , based on the language of the inventories and shared by almost all writers , was that the cup was a piece of secular plate , for use at table , or display on a buffet beside it . The buffet of the period was more like a modern Welsh dresser or shop display unit , with receding shelves for displaying on important occasions all the plate of the household that was not in use . Neil Stratford suggests that the cup was only used to drink from on special occasions , including St Agnes ' feast day , while Lightbown remarks that at over four pounds in weight the cup is much too heavy to drink from conveniently . However John Cherry , noting the exclusively religious subjects depicted ( including that on the lost tripod stand ) considers that the cup may have been intended as a ciborium from the start . It might have been used either to accompany in its carrying case the duke on his tours of his many castles and palaces , or perhaps for his foundation of the Saint Chapelle at his capital of Bourges , intended to rival the king 's Sainte-Chapelle in Paris and his brother 's foundation at Champmol in Dijon .

The four sons of King John II of France — Charles V , Louis I , Duke of Anjou ( 1339 – 1384 ) , Berry and Philip the Bold , Duke of Burgundy ( 1342 – 1404 ) — all spent huge sums on works in gold and silver , as well as on other works of art . Although it is Berry who is especially remembered as a patron , partly because he specialized in illuminated manuscripts which have little value in their materials , it was his brother Louis of Anjou who was the " most passionately interested in the goldsmith 's art " ; he had over 3,000 pieces of plate at one point . These included wholly secular pieces with sculptures in enamel that can only be imagined by comparison : in terms of technique to the handful of reliquaries , like the British Museum 's Holy Thorn Reliquary , that have survived from the period , and in terms of subject matter to tapestries and illuminations . However , in 1381 Anjou melted down almost all his plate to finance a war to pursue his claim to the Kingdom of Naples . According to the sculptor and goldsmith Lorenzo Ghiberti , writing seventy years later , one of Anjou 's goldsmiths , called Gusmin and " a most skillful sculptor , of great talent " , was so affected by the destruction of his life 's work that he joined an eremetic monastic order and lived out his days in silence . The Royal Gold Cup was " probably not exceptional as to size or decoration " in this milieu ; once " but one member of a class , it now stands alone " . An inventory of Charles V records 25 gold cups weighing between five and fifteen marcs ; this is slightly over nine without its stand . Smaller gold cups are recorded in sets of a dozen , of which Charles V had three . The largest items were the great table ornaments , in the shape of ships , called nefs , of which Charles V had five , the heaviest weighing over 53 marcs .

Berry died in 1416 with no male heir , and deeply in debt . Those of his works in precious metal and jewels that had not already gone to his creditors were mostly seized by the English when they took Paris in July 1417 . This was the first of a number of periods that saw the large-scale destruction of goldsmiths ' work that the cup escaped , but thousands of other pieces did not , a survival that Brigitte Buettner finds " almost miraculous " . In particular , the move to Spain in 1604 enabled it to avoid the dispersal and destruction of the English Crown Jewels and royal collection of plate under the English Commonwealth . As a secular piece the cup would be an almost unique survival at this level of quality , " the one representative left to us of medieval secular plate in its most sumptuous development " . Although French plate in silver and gold was made in great quantities , and at a high level of quality , " French silver made prior to the early 19th century is probably scarcer than that of any other European country . " The cost of even very skilled labour was low compared to that of the materials , and in the absence of any reliable way of either depositing or investing money , it was turned into lavish objects , in the knowledge that it might well need to be sold or melted down to finance some future project . If it survived long enough to become old-fashioned it was likely to be melted down and remodelled in a new style .

There are only four other known survivals , secular or religious , of basse taille enamel on gold , one the small Salting Reliquary , also in the British Museum , and none as fine as the cup . The " King John Cup " in King 's Lynn , of ca . 1340 , silver-gilt with transparent enamel , is the best example of basse-taille work probably made in England ; the metalwork expert Herbert Maryon describes this and the Royal Gold Cup as the " two examples of outstanding merit , unsurpassed in any collection . " However it is unclear if most of the enamel at King 's Lynn is original . The closest comparison to the Royal Gold Cup is perhaps the silver-gilt Mérode Cup of about 1400 , which is the only surviving medieval example of plique á jour enamel , a difficult technique which creates a see-through effect like stained glass . A silver-gilt cup in the Rijksmuseum , Amsterdam of before 1376 has no enamels or gems , and a different shape , but offers an interesting comparison as it has a tripod stand with winged grotesques as legs , a short stem , and the cover has both an elaborate finial and a raised decorated strip around the rim , so that all the altered aspects of the Royal Gold Cup are present .

The cycle of scenes from the life of Saint Agnes , and that of her foster-sister Saint Emerentiana , follows the traditional story of Golden Legend of Jacobus de Voragine ; the most popular compilation of hagiographies of the age , whose wording corresponds to some of the inscriptions in banderoles or scrolls that explain the scenes . Other texts are quotations from the Latin Vulgate Bible , mostly derived from the liturgy for St Agnes ' feast day , and it has been suggested that the two rings of pearls also reflect the language of the chants for these services . It seems likely that clerical advice was taken , at least over the texts used in the inscriptions . It is tempting to relate the depiction of the story , with its " distinct and vivid tableaux , well suited to adaptation for performance " to medieval drama , often a source for iconography , but the fragmentary records mention no dramas on the life of St Agnes that are close in time or place to the origin of the cup . Agnes and her sister were virgins of Rome in the time of the Emperor Constantine , though all figures are shown in contemporary 14th-century dress . The story begins on the inside of the bowl , which has a round medallion showing St Agnes kneeling before a bearded figure , representing her teacher , wearing a chaperon . She holds a book inscribed Miserere mei Deus sancte ( " Have pity on me , Holy God " ) , while a banderole says In corde meo abscondi eloquia tua ut non peccem tibi ( " Thy words have I hid in my heart that I might not sin against thee " . Psalms 119 : 11 ) . The top of the cover continues the story up to Agnes ' martyrdom in five scenes , shown with a continuous groundline from which small rocks rise up to demarcate the scenes ; on the base trees perform this function . Sunrays radiate from the centre of the cover above all the scenes ; the red enamel which once filled these is nearly all lost .

In the first scene the two girls are returning from school , Agnes accompanied by her punning attribute , a lamb with a cruciform halo , and carrying a martyr 's palm . They are accosted by Procopius , the young son of the Prefect of Rome , who has fallen in love with Agnes and shows her an open casket of jewels to persuade her to marry him . The inside of the casket is white , the only colour of opaque enamel in the original work , used only for a few highlights like the tiny area of the host held by Christ on the inside of the cover . Agnes rejects him , with the words Illi sum desponsata cui angeli serviunt ( " I am betrothed to him who the angels serve " ) in a banderole above . In the Caxton her rejection is unequivocal and not polite , and she points out that her heavenly fiancé has promised her much better jewels . The Prefect stands behind his son , and in the next scene has sentenced her to serve in a brothel for being a Christian who refuses to sacrifice to the goddess Vesta . Caxton 's Legend fills in the intervening action :

Then made she of the bordel her oratory , ... All they that entered made honour and reverence to the great clearness that they saw about St. Agnes , and came out more devout and more clean than they entered . At last came the son of the provost with a great company for to accomplish his foul desires and lusts . And when he saw his fellows come out and issue all abashed , he mocked them and called them cowards . And then he , all araged , entered for to accomplish his evil will . And when he came to the clearness , he advanced him for to take the virgin , and anon the devil took him by the throat and strangled him that he fell down dead . In the next scene on the cup , Agnes stands outside the sentry box-like brothel , looking down at the Prefect 's son who has been strangled to death by the devil crouched over him ; a banderole reads Quo modo cecidisti qui mane oriebaris ( " How has thou fallen that risest in the morning " , Isaiah 14 : 12 ) , and the Prefect looks on sadly .

In the following scene Agnes has been moved by the Prefect 's grief , and prayed for the son to be restored to life , which an angel has done . The repentant Procopius kneels before her , while she leans down to tell him Vade amplius noli peccare ( " Go forth and sin no more " ; from John 8 : 11 ) . However the result of the miracle was that ( in William Caxton 's translation ) " the bishops of the idols made a great discord among the people , so that all they cried : Take away this sorceress and witch that turned men 's minds and alieneth their wits " . The Prefect is now sympathetic to Agnes but fears he will lose his position if he does nothing , so leaves the matter in the hands of another official ; the two are seen talking together , with words from Luke 23 : 4 Nihil invenio cause in eam ( " I find no cause against her " ) above . The last scene shows her martyrdom ; she was sentenced to be burned but the flames part away from her so that finally the magistrate orders her killed by a spear . Her last words , from Luke 23 : 46 , are In manus tuas domine commendo animam meam ( " Into your hands , O Lord , I commend my spirit " ) .

The scenes continue on the underside of the bowl , starting with Agnes ' burial . A pall is being laid over her sarcophagus , whose red enamel has significant losses , which reveal clearly the engraved lines beneath . A tonsured priest with an aspergil for sprinkling holy water and an acolyte with a cross attend , with Emerentiana with halo to the left , and Agnes ' mother to the right . The banderole above says Ecce quod concupivi iam teneo ( " Behold what I have desired I now possess " ) . In the next scene pagans have arrived to disrupt the burial , and only Emerentiana has stayed , kneeling in prayer as she is pelted with rocks . The inscription reads Veni soror mea mecum in gloria ( " Come with me my sister into glory " ) . She dies , and the following scene shows the two martyrs , accompanied by two other unnamed female martyrs ( in the source " a great multitude of virgins clad in vestments of gold and silver " ) , as they appear in a vision to Agnes ' friends eight days after her death , as they gather round her sarcophagus , into which Emerentiana 's body has also been placed .

The next scene shows the sarcophagus with Constantina , the daughter of the Emperor Constantine , asleep on top of it , wearing a crown . She has been afflicted with leprosy , and heard of the vision at Agnes ' tomb , and come to pray there . The presence at left of a young man on crutches , not in the source , suggests that others are doing the same . The sleeping woman beside the tomb is either another such , or an attendant on the princess . As Constantina sleeps , Agnes , holding her lamb , appears to her , saying Si in xpm ( Christum ) credideris sanaberis ( " If you believe in Christ you will be healed " , an adaptation of the text in the source ) . In the final scene , the cured , and baptized , Constantina tells her crowned father the story , with the inscription Hec est virgo sapiens una de numero prudencium ( " This is a wise virgin , one of the number of the prudent " ) . The inside of the cover has a circular enamel medallion with worked gold borders , showing a half-length Christ making a blessing gesture and holding a chalice with a host inside . Around him is a sun-like aureole in red . Below the two added cylinders on the stem , the four traditional symbols of the Evangelists run round the sloping foot of the cup , in pairs facing each other , above a green ground area . Lightbown notes this as " another sign of care for naturalistic effect " .

Each of the cover , main body , and foot of the cup is made of an inner and outer plate , and the enamelled medallions inside the cover and bowl were made separately before attachment . The enamel areas may have been designed by the goldsmith , or an artist more used to painting on panels or in manuscripts may have produced drawings . A number of names of goldsmiths appear in records of the period , but in contrast to many contemporary manuscripts , the few surviving goldsmith 's pieces are not signed or marked and cannot be matched to any names . Not a single maker 's name is recorded for the more than 3,000 items in precious metal in the inventory mentioned above of the possessions of Berry 's brother Anjou . High quality courtly work like the cup is conventionally assigned to Paris in the absence of other stylistic evidence ; this is where other documentary sources locate the main concentration of goldsmiths . The process for creating the basse-taille enamel areas began by marking the outline of the design and the main internal outlines on the gold with a tool called a " tracer " . Then the interior area was worked with chasing tools , hammering and punching rather than cutting , to form a shallow recess to hold the enamel . The more important parts of the design were modelled by varying the depth of the surface to produce different intensities of colour when the translucent enamel was added ; the gold under folds of drapery often rises near the surface to create a paler highlight . In many of the recessed areas decoration was added by either engraving or punching which would show through the translucent enamel , or to facet the background so the reflections change as the viewing angle changes slightly . In these last-mentioned areas cutting tools were used . Most of the background outside the enamelled areas was decorated in the same way . After the enamel was added and fired the surfaces were cleaned up , made good and polished , including removing by scraping any bumps showing through on the reverse of the metal .

The enamel lies flush with the gold surfaces ; it was a preparation of finely ground glass paste applied with great care to the prepared recessed areas , and then fired . Different colours of enamel meet each other with a neat boundary , which was achieved by firing one colour with a retaining border of gum tragacanth before adding the next . The difficulty was increased by the application of tints of a different colour to a base shade of enamel before firing , so that the added colour blends gradually into the background colour around the edges of the tinted area . This is especially used on " flux " , or colourless enamel , as in the ground areas , rocks and trees . Flux was also used for flesh areas as on a gold background it darkens slightly when fired to a suitable colour for skin . The rouge clair or " ruby glass " red , used so effectively here , was made by adding tiny particles of copper , silver and gold to the glass ; here scientific tests have shown that copper was used . After firing the enamel was polished flush with the surrounding metal . The technique had been known to the Ancient Romans ( see the Lycurgus Cup , also in the British Museum ) , but was lost at the end of the Middle Ages until the 17th century . The added cylinders use opaque enamel , except for the red on the Tudor roses , which is translucent rouge clair , of a similar composition to the original reds . Translucent enamel is more fragile than opaque , and medieval survivals in good condition are very rare .

The giant freshwater stingray ( Himantura polylepis , also widely known by the junior synonym H. chaophraya ) is a species of stingray in the family Dasyatidae . It is found in large rivers and estuaries in Indochina and Borneo , though historically it may have been more widely distributed in South and Southeast Asia . One of the largest freshwater fish in the world , this species grows upwards of 1.9 m ( 6.2 ft ) across and may reach 600 kg ( 1,300 lb ) in weight . It has a relatively thin , oval pectoral fin disc that is widest anteriorly , and a sharply pointed snout with a protruding tip . Its tail is thin and whip-like , and lacks fin folds . This species is uniformly grayish brown above and white below ; the underside of the pectoral and pelvic fins bear distinctive wide , dark bands on their posterior margins . Bottom-dwelling in nature , the giant freshwater stingray inhabits sandy or muddy areas and preys on small fishes and invertebrates . Females give live birth to litters of one to four pups , which are sustained to term by maternally produced histotroph ( " uterine milk " ) . This species faces heavy fishing pressure for meat , recreation , and aquarium display , as well as extensive habitat degradation and fragmentation . These forces have resulted in substantial population declines in at least central Thailand and Cambodia . As a result , the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has assessed the giant freshwater stingray as Endangered .

The first scientific description of the giant freshwater stingray was authored by Dutch ichthyologist Pieter Bleeker in an 1852 volume of the journal Verhandelingen van het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen . His account was based on a juvenile specimen 30 cm ( 12 in ) across , collected from Jakarta , Indonesia . Bleeker named the new species polylepis , from the Greek poly ( " many " ) and lepis ( " scales " ) , and assigned it to the genus Trygon ( now a synonym of Dasyatis ) . However , in subsequent years Bleeker 's description was largely overlooked , and in 1990 the giant freshwater stingray was described again by Supap Monkolprasit and Tyson Roberts in an issue of the Japanese Journal of Ichthyology . They gave it the name Himantura chaophraya , which came into widespread usage . In 2008 , Peter Last and B. Mabel Manjaji-Matsumoto confirmed that T. polylepis and H. chaophraya refer to the same species , and since Bleeker 's name was published earlier , the scientific name of the giant freshwater stingray became Himantura polylepis . This species may also be called the giant freshwater whipray , giant stingray , or freshwater whipray .

There is a complex of similar freshwater and estuarine Himantura in South Asia , Southeast Asia , and Australasia that are or were tentatively identified with H. polylepis . The Australian freshwater Himantura were described as a separate species , H. dalyensis , in 2008 . The freshwater Himantura in New Guinea are probably H. dalyensis rather than H. polylepis , though confirmation awaits further study . Trygon fluviatilis from India , as described by Nelson Annandale in 1909 , closely resembles and may be conspecific with H. polylepis . On the other hand , comparison of freshwater whipray DNA and amino acid sequences between India and Thailand has revealed significant differences . Finally , additional research is needed to assess the degree of divergence amongst populations of H. polylepis inhabiting various drainage basins across its distribution , so as to determine whether further taxonomic differentiation is warranted . In terms of the broader evolutionary relationships between the giant freshwater whipray and the rest of the family Dasyatidae , a 2012 phylogenetic analysis based on mitochondrial DNA reported that it was most closely related to the porcupine ray ( Urogymnus asperrimus ) , and that they in turn formed a clade with the mangrove whipray ( H. granulata ) and the tubemouth whipray ( H. lobistoma ) . This finding adds to a growing consensus that the genus Himantura is paraphyletic .

The giant freshwater stingray has a thin , oval pectoral fin disc slightly longer than wide and broadest towards the front . The elongated snout has a wide base and a sharply pointed tip that projects beyond the disc . The eyes are minute and widely spaced ; behind them are large spiracles . Between the nostrils is a short curtain of skin with a finely fringed posterior margin . The small mouth forms a gentle arch and contains four to seven papillae ( two to four large at the center and one to four small to the sides ) on the floor . The small and rounded teeth are arranged into pavement-like bands . There are five pairs of gill slits on the ventral side of the disc . The pelvic fins are small and thin ; mature males have relatively large claspers . The thin , cylindrical tail measures 1.8 – 2.5 times as long as the disc and lacks fin folds . A single serrated stinging spine is positioned on the upper surface of the tail near the base . At up to 38 cm ( 15 in ) long , the spine is the largest of any stingray species . There is band of heart-shaped tubercles on the upper surface of the disc extending from before the eyes to the base of the sting ; there is also a midline row of four to six enlarged tubercles at the center of the disc . The remainder of the disc upper surface is covered by tiny granular denticles , and the tail is covered with sharp prickles past the sting . This species is plain grayish brown above , often with a yellowish or pinkish tint towards the fin margins ; in life the skin is coated with a layer of dark brown mucus . The underside is white with broad dark bands , edged with small spots , on the trailing margins of the pectoral and pelvic fins . The tail is black behind the spine . The giant freshwater stingray reaches at least 1.9 m ( 6.2 ft ) in width and 5.0 m ( 16.4 ft ) in length , and can likely grow larger . With reports from the Mekong and Chao Phraya Rivers of individuals weighing 500 – 600 kg ( 1,100 – 1,300 lb ) , it ranks among the largest freshwater fishes in the world .

The giant freshwater stingray is known to inhabit several large rivers and associated estuaries in Indochina and Borneo . In Indochina , it occurs in the Mekong River to potentially as far upstream as Chiang Khong in Thailand , as well as in the Chao Phraya , Nan , Mae Klong , Bang Pakong , Prachin Buri and Tapi Rivers . In Borneo , this species is found in the Mahakam River in Kalimantan and the Kinabatangan and Buket Rivers in Sabah ; it is reportedly common in the Kinabatangan River but infrequently caught . Though it has been reported from Sarawak as well , surveys within the past 25 years have not found it there . Elsewhere in the region , recent river surveys in Java have not recorded its presence , despite the island being the locality of the species holotype . Historical records from Myanmar , the Ganges River in India , and the Bay of Bengal ( the latter two as Trygon fluviatilis ) have similarly not been corroborated by any recent accounts . Disjunct populations of the giant freshwater stingray in separate river drainages are probably isolated from one another ; though the species occurs in brackish environments , there is no evidence that it crosses marine waters . This is a bottom-dwelling species that favors a sandy or muddy habitat . Unexpectedly , it can sometimes be found near heavily populated urban areas .

The diet of the giant freshwater stingray consists of small fishes and invertebrates such as crustaceans and molluscs , which it can detect using its electroreceptive ampullae of Lorenzini . Individuals can often be seen at the edge of the river , possibly feeding on earthworms . Parasites documented from this species include the tapeworms Acanthobothrium asnihae , A. etini , A. masnihae , A. saliki , A. zainali , Rhinebothrium abaiensis , R. kinabatanganensis , and R. megacanthophallus . The giant freshwater stingray is viviparous , with the developing embryos nourished initially by yolk and later by histotroph ( " uterine milk " ) provided by the mother . This species does not appear to be diadromous ( migrating between fresh and salt water to complete its life cycle ) . Observed litter sizes range from one to four pups ; newborns measure around 30 cm ( 12 in ) across . Pregnant females are frequently found in estuaries , which may serve as nursery areas . Males mature sexually at approximately 1.1 m ( 3.6 ft ) across ; female maturation size and other life history details are unknown .

The giant freshwater stingray is not aggressive , but it merits caution as its sting is sheathed in toxic mucus and is capable of piercing bone . Across its range , this species is caught incidentally by artisanal fishers using longlines , and to a lesser extent gillnets and fish traps . It is reputedly difficult and time-consuming to catch ; a hooked ray may bury itself under large quantities of mud , becoming almost impossible to lift , or drag boats over substantial distances or underwater . The meat and perhaps the cartilage are used ; large specimens are cut into kilogram pieces for sale . Adults that are not used for food are often killed or maimed by fishers regardless . In the Mae Klong and Bang Pakong Rivers , the giant freshwater stingray is also increasingly targeted by sport fishers and for display in public aquariums . These trends pose conservation concerns ; the former because catch and release is not universally practiced and the post-release survival rate is unknown , the latter because this species does not survive well in captivity . The major threats to the giant freshwater stingray are overfishing and habitat degradation resulting from deforestation , land development , and damming . The construction of dams also fragments the population , reducing genetic diversity and increasing the susceptibility of the resulting subpopulations to extinction . Due to its low reproductive rate , the giant freshwater stingray is not resilient to anthropogenic pressures . In central Thailand and Cambodia , the population is estimated to have been reduced by 30 – 50 % over the past 20 – 30 years , with declines as severe as 95 % in some locations . The size of rays caught has decreased significantly as well ; for example , in Cambodia the average weight of a landed ray has dropped from 23.2 kg ( 51 lb ) in 1980 to 6.9 kg ( 15 lb ) in 2006 . The status of populations in other areas , such as Borneo , is largely unknown . As a result of documented declines , the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has assessed this species as Endangered overall , and as Critically Endangered in Thailand . In the 1990s , the Thai government initiated a captive breeding program at Chai Nat to bolster the population of this and other freshwater stingray species until the issue of habitat degradation can be remedied . However , by 1996 the program had been put on hold .

A live action role-playing game ( LARP ) is a form of role-playing game where the participants physically act out their characters ' actions . The players pursue goals within a fictional setting represented by the real world while interacting with each other in character . The outcome of player actions may be mediated by game rules or determined by consensus among players . Event arrangers called gamemasters decide the setting and rules to be used and facilitate play . The first LARPs were run in the late 1970s , inspired by tabletop role-playing games and genre fiction . The activity spread internationally during the 1980s and has diversified into a wide variety of styles . Play may be very game-like or may be more concerned with dramatic or artistic expression . Events can also be designed to achieve educational or political goals . The fictional genres used vary greatly , from realistic modern or historical settings to fantastic or futuristic eras . Production values are sometimes minimal , but can involve elaborate venues and costumes . LARPs range in size from small private events lasting a few hours to large public events with thousands of players lasting for days .

The participants in a LARP physically portray characters in a fictional setting , improvising their characters ' speech and movements somewhat like actors in improvisational theatre . This is distinct from tabletop role-playing games , where character actions are described verbally . LARPs may be played in a public or private area and may last for hours or days . There is usually no audience . Players may dress as their character and carry appropriate equipment , and the environment is sometimes decorated to resemble the setting . LARPs can be one-off events or a series of events in the same setting , and events can vary in size from a handful of players to several thousand . Events are put on for the benefit of the players , who take on roles called player characters ( PCs ) that the players may create themselves or be given by the gamemasters . Players sometimes play the same character repeatedly at separate events , progressively developing the character and its relations with other characters and the setting . Arrangers called gamemasters ( GMs ) determine the rules and setting of a LARP , and may also influence an event and act as referees while it is taking place . The GMs may also do the logistical work , or there may be other arrangers who handle details such as advertising the event , booking a venue , and financial management . Unlike the GM in a tabletop role-playing game , a LARP GM seldom has an overview of everything that is happening during play because numerous participants may be interacting at once . For this reason , a LARP GM 's role is often less concerned with tightly maintaining a narrative or directly entertaining the players , and more with arranging the structure of the LARP before play begins and facilitating the players and crew to maintain the fictional environment during play .

Participants sometimes known as the crew may help the GMs to set up and maintain the environment of the LARP during play by acting as stagehands or playing non-player characters ( NPCs ) who fill out the setting . Crew typically receive more information about the setting and more direction from the GMs than players do . In a tabletop role-playing game , a GM usually plays all the NPCs , whereas in a LARP , each NPC is typically played by a separate crew member . Sometimes players are asked to play NPCs for periods of an event . Much of play consists of interactions between characters . Some LARP scenarios primarily feature interaction between PCs . Other scenarios focus on interaction between PCs and aspects of the setting , including NPCs , that are under the direction of the GMs .

LARP does not have a single point of origin , but was invented independently by groups in North America , Europe , and Australia . These groups shared an experience with genre fiction or tabletop role-playing games , and a desire to physically experience such settings . In addition to tabletop role-playing , LARP is rooted in childhood games of make believe , play fighting , costume parties , roleplay simulations , Commedia dell 'arte , improvisational theatre , psychodrama , military simulations , and historical reenactment groups such as the Society for Creative Anachronism . The earliest recorded LARP group is Dagorhir , which was founded in 1977 in the United States and focuses on fantasy battles . Soon after the release of the movie Logan 's Run in 1976 , rudimentary live role-playing games based on the movie were run at US science fiction conventions . In 1981 , the International Fantasy Gaming Society ( IFGS ) started , with rules influenced by Dungeons & Dragons . IFGS was named after a fictional group in the 1981 novel Dream Park , which described futuristic LARPs . In 1982 , the Society for Interactive Literature , a predecessor of the Live Action Roleplayers Association ( LARPA ) , formed as the first recorded theatre-style LARP group in the US .

Treasure Trap , formed in 1982 at Peckforton Castle , was the first recorded LARP game in the UK and influenced the fantasy LARPs that followed there . The first recorded LARP in Australia was run in 1983 , using the science fiction Traveller setting . In 1993 , White Wolf Publishing released Mind 's Eye Theatre , which is still played internationally and is probably the most commercially successful published LARP . The first German events were in about 1994 ( other sources claim 1992 or 1991 ) , with fantasy LARP in particular growing quickly there , so that since 2001 , two major German events have been run annually that have between 3000 and 7000 players each and attract players from around Europe . Today , LARP is a widespread activity internationally . Games with thousands of participants are run by for-profit companies , and a small industry exists to sell costume , armour and foam weapons intended primarily for LARP .

Most LARPs are intended as games for entertainment . Enjoyable aspects can include the collaborative creation of a story , the attempt to overcome challenges in pursuit of a character 's objectives , and a sense of immersion in a fictional setting . LARPs may also include other game-like aspects such as intellectual puzzles , and sport-like aspects such as fighting with simulated weapons . Some LARPs stress artistic considerations such as dramatic interaction or challenging subject matter . Avant-garde or arthaus events have especially experimental approaches and high culture aspirations and are occasionally held in fine art contexts such as festivals or art museums . The themes of avant-garde events often include politics , culture , religion , sexuality and the human condition . Such LARPs are common in the Nordic countries but also present elsewhere . In addition to entertainment and artistic merit , LARP events may be designed for educational or political purposes . For example , the Danish secondary school Østerskov Efterskole uses LARP to teach most of its classes . Language classes can be taught by immersing students in a role-playing scenario in which they are forced to improvise speech or writing in the language they are learning . Politically themed LARP events may attempt to awaken or shape political thinking within a culture .

During a LARP , player actions in the real world represent character actions in an imaginary setting . Game rules , physical symbols and theatrical improvisation are used to bridge differences between the real world and the setting . For example , a rope could signify an imaginary wall . Realistic-looking weapon props and risky physical activity are sometimes discouraged or forbidden for safety reasons . While the fictional timeline in a tabletop RPG often progresses in game-time , which may be much faster or slower than the time passing for players , LARPs are different in that they usually run in real-time , with game-time only being used in special circumstances . There is a distinction between when a player is in character , meaning they are actively representing their character , and when the player is out-of-character , meaning they are being themselves . Some LARPs encourage players to stay consistently in character except in emergencies , while others accept players being out-of-character at times . In a LARP , it is usually assumed that players are speaking and acting in character unless otherwise noted , which is the opposite of normal practice in tabletop role-playing games . Character knowledge is usually considered to be separate from player knowledge , and acting upon information a character would not know may be viewed as cheating .

Many LARPs have game rules that determine how characters can affect each other and the setting . The rules may be defined in a publication or created by the gamemasters . These rules may define characters ' capabilities , what can be done with various objects that exist in the setting , and what characters can do during the downtime between LARP events . Because referees are often not available to mediate all character actions , players are relied upon to be honest in their application of the rules . Some LARP rules call for the use of simulated weapons such as foam weapons or airsoft guns to determine whether characters succeed in hitting one another in combat situations . In Russian LARP events , weapons made of hard plastic , metal or wood are used . The alternative to using simulated weapons is to pause role-play and determine the outcome of an action symbolically , for example by rolling dice , playing rock-paper-scissors or comparing character attributes . There are also LARPs that do without rules , instead relying on players to use their common sense or feel for dramatic appropriateness to cooperatively decide what the outcome of their actions will be .

LARPs can have any genre , although many use themes and settings derived from genre fiction . Some LARPs borrow a setting from an established work in another medium ( e.g. , The Lord of the Rings or the World of Darkness ) , while others use settings based on the real world or designed specifically for the LARP . Proprietary campaign settings , together with rulesets , are often the principal creative asset of LARP groups and LARP publishers . LARPs set in the modern day may explore everyday concerns , or special interests such as espionage or military activity . Such LARPs sometimes resemble an Alternate Reality Game , an Assassin game , or a military simulation using live combat with airsoft , laser tag , or paintball markers . LARPs can also be set in historical eras or have semi-historical settings with mythological or fantastical aspects incorporated . Fantasy is one of the most common LARP genres internationally and is the genre that the largest events use . Fantasy LARPs are set in pseudo-historical worlds inspired by fantasy literature and fantasy role-playing games such as Dungeons & Dragons . These settings typically have magic , fantasy races , and limited technology . Many fantasy LARPs focus on adventure or on competition between character factions . In contrast , science fiction LARPs take place in futuristic settings with high technology and sometimes with extraterrestrial life . This describes a broad array of LARPs , including politically themed LARPs depicting dystopian or utopian societies and settings inspired by cyberpunk , space opera and post-apocalyptic fiction .

Horror LARPs are inspired by horror fiction . Popular subgenres include zombie apocalypse and Cthulhu Mythos , sometimes using the published Cthulhu Live rules . The World of Darkness , published by White Wolf Publishing , is a widely used goth – punk horror setting in which players usually portray secretive supernatural creatures such as vampires and werewolves . This setting can be played using Mind 's Eye Theatre , which is a set of LARP rules also published by White Wolf . World of Darkness LARPs are usually played in a chronicle , a series of short events held at regular intervals , and are also popular at conventions . An international chronicle is run by White Wolf 's official fan club , the Camarilla .

LARP events have a wide variety of styles that often overlap . Simple distinctions can be made regarding the genre used , the presence of simulated weapons or abstract rules , and whether players create their own characters or have them assigned by gamemasters . There is also a distinction between scenarios that are only run once and those that are designed to be repeatable . A number of other common classifications follow . Theatre-style , or freeform , LARP is characterised by a focus on interaction between characters that are written by the gamemasters , not using simulated weapons for combat , and an eclectic approach to genre and setting . Events in this style typically only last a few hours and require relatively little preparation by players and are sometimes played at gaming conventions . Some murder mystery games where players are assigned characters and encouraged to roleplay freely also resemble theatre-style LARP . Some very large events known as fests ( short for festival ) have hundreds or thousands of participants who are usually split into competing character factions camped separately around a large venue . There are relatively few fests in the world , all based in Europe and Canada ; however , their size means that they have a significant influence on local LARP culture and design . At the other end of the size scale , some small events known as linear or line-course LARPs feature a small group of PCs facing a series of challenges from NPCs and are often more tightly planned and controlled by GMs than other styles of LARP .

Roleplaying may be seen as part of a movement in Western culture towards participatory arts , as opposed to traditional spectator arts . Participants in a LARP cast off the role of passive observer and take on new roles that are often outside of their daily life and contrary to their culture . The arrangers of a LARP and the other participants act as co-creators of the game . This collaborative process of creating shared fictional worlds may be associated with a broader burgeoning " geek " culture in developed societies that is in turn associated with prolonged education , high uptake of information technology and increased leisure time . In comparison to the mainstream video-game industry , which is highly commercialized and often marketed towards a male audience , LARP is less commoditized , and women actively contribute as authors and participants . LARP is not well known in most countries and is sometimes confused with other role-playing , reenactment , costuming , or dramatic activities . While fan and gamer culture in general has become increasingly mainstream in developed countries , LARP has often not achieved the same degree of cultural acceptability . This may be due to intolerance of the resemblance to childhood games of pretend , a perceived risk of over-identification with the characters , and the absence of mass marketing . In US films such as the 2006 documentary Darkon , the 2007 documentary Monster Camp , and the 2008 comedy Role Models , fantasy LARP is depicted as somewhat ridiculous and escapist , but also treated affectionately as a " constructive social outlet " . In the Nordic countries , LARP has achieved a high level of public recognition and popularity . It is often shown in a positive light in mainstream media , with an emphasis on the dramatic and creative aspects . However , even in Norway , where LARP has greater recognition than in most other countries , it has still not achieved full recognition as a cultural activity by government bodies .

Communities have formed around the creation , play and discussion of LARP . These communities have developed a subculture that crosses over with role-playing , fan , reenactment , and drama subcultures . Early LARP subculture focused on Tolkien-like fantasy , but it later broadened to include appreciation of other genres , especially the horror genre with the rapid uptake of the World of Darkness setting in the 1990s . Like many subcultures , LARP groups often have a common context of shared experience , language , humour , and clothing that can be regarded by some as a lifestyle . LARP has been a subject of academic research and theory . Much of this research originates from role-players , especially from the publications of the Nordic Knutepunkt role-playing conventions . The broader academic community has recently begun to study LARP as well , both to compare it to other media and other varieties of interactive gaming , and also to evaluate it in its own right . It has been speculated that LARP may one day evolve into a major industry in the form of location-based games using ubiquitous computing .

" Friday " is a song by American singer Rebecca Black , written and produced by Los Angeles record producers Clarence Jey and Patrice Wilson . It was released on March 14 , 2011 , by ARK Music Factory as Black 's debut single . The song features a rap verse from Wilson , which was uncredited on the single . Its music video caught a sudden surge of hits after Mystery Science Theater 3000 and Rifftrax comedian Michael J. Nelson called it " the worst video ever made " on Twitter and the song was featured on the Tosh.0 blog . The song 's reception was highly negative , mainly because of its songwriting and Black 's singing performance . The original video was removed from YouTube on June 16 , 2011 due to legal disputes between ARK Music and Black herself . By then , it had already amassed more than 166 million views , with over 3.2 million " dislikes " ( 88 % of total ratings ) from YouTube users . The video was uploaded to YouTube again on September 16 , 2011 . ( The video currently has 2.08 million " dislikes " — 79 % of total ratings — on YouTube . ) Since the growth in popularity of the song and video , there have been numerous parody videos and remixes . Forbes stated that the notoriety of the song is another sign of the power of social media — specifically Twitter , Facebook , and Tumblr , in this instance — in the ability to create " overnight sensations . "

" Friday " co-writer Patrice Wilson , a worker at Ark Music Factory , explained that he wrote the lyrics " on a Thursday night going into a Friday . I was writing different songs all night and was like , ' Wow , I 've been up a long time and it 's Friday . ' And I was like , wow , it is Friday ! " An Ark Music Factory client told Black 's mother about the company 's production services in late 2010 ; Black was 13 at the time , and living in Anaheim Hills , California . Black 's mother , Georgina Kelly , paid Ark Music $ 4,000 for a song and accompanying video that included a choice of two pre-written songs . According to Kelly , the payment covered one half or less of the production costs of the music video , and Black 's family could have paid nothing in exchange for giving up all rights to the song . Black chose " Friday " , as " the other song was about adult love – I haven 't experienced that yet . I felt like it was my personality in that song . " Ark Music extensively used the pitch-correcting software Auto-Tune . Although Kelly had some doubts over the quality of the lyrics , Black assured her that " I sang it as they wrote it , Mom . "

" Friday " uses the 50s progression , an I-vi-IV-V chord progression that many popular songs have used such as " Heart and Soul " and " Unchained Melody " . It is performed in the key of B major at a tempo of 112 beats per minute . According to Randy Lewis of Los Angeles Times , the familiar structure contributes to the song 's catchiness , making it what others have called an earworm . The song also sees Black on a harmony track . In a review for Rolling Stone , writer Matthew Perpetua described the vocals as having " a peculiar tonality that inadvertently highlights the absurdity of boilerplate pop lyrics , " adding that the tone in the refrain " sounds unlike anything else in pop music . " He noted the sound as being not entirely agreeable to listen to , but stated that Black ultimately ends up " sounding like a distinct singer with an alluring sort of anti-charisma . " The lyrics of the song speak about " hanging out with friends and having fun . " Paul Asay of Plugged In noted that lyrics reflect the happenings of a day , in the life of a teenager like Black , like eating breakfast and going to school . " She 's excited ' cause it 's Friday . Which means a weekend full of possibility awaits , " he concluded .

The song has received almost universally negative reviews from music critics , mainly because of its poorly-written lyrics , instrumentation , and Black 's singing voice . It was rumored to be hated because of the gimmick Black pulled on YouTube during the YouTube Rewind 2011 , where her song was " Number One " . Lyndsey Parker of Yahoo ! Music asked if it could be " the worst song ever . " On March 29 , 2011 , it surpassed Justin Bieber 's " Baby " as the most disliked YouTube video , with 1.16 million negative votes , and once had over 3 million " dislikes " , accounting for 88 % of the total ratings of the video . The video was later removed , though it has since been officially re-uploaded . The co-writer and producer of " Friday " , Clarence Jey said about the song that " the concept we feel seems to have crossed a lot of boundaries , for the better or worse . " Observers have called it " bizarre , " " inept , " and " hilariously dreadful . " The song and Black herself were " savaged " on social networks across the Internet , while being seen as a " YouTube laughing stock . " On YouTube , the video was met with negative comments and video responses , including comments interpreted as " violent " . Kevin Rutherford , a columnist for Billboard magazine , wrote , " Black 's video for ' Friday ' is one of those rare occurrences where even the most seasoned critics of Internet culture don 't know where to begin . From the singing straight out of Auto-Tuned hell to lyrics such as ' Tomorrow is Saturday / And Sunday comes afterwards / I don 't want this weekend to end ' and a hilariously bad rap about passing school buses , ' Friday ' is something that simply must be seen and heard to be fully appreciated . " Many other reviewers also singled out the lyrics in particular for criticism , which were described as " overly simple and repetitive " by TNT Magazine . Jim Edwards of BNET and Doug Gross of CNN both noted that the rap break from the considerably older rapper was " creepy . " Time ranked it number two on a list of " Top 10 Songs with Silly Lyrics . "

Despite the overwhelmingly negative reviews , a few reviewers had positive things to say about the song and video . Entertainment Weekly writer Joseph Lynch noted that there was " something sickeningly catchy about this tune that keeps you coming back for more . " Rolling Stone 's Perpetua stated , " When you see this video , you immediately notice everything that it does ' wrong ' , but it actually gets a lot of things about pop music right , if just by accident . " OK ! Magazine also noted that " some are calling the 13-year-old signed singer the next Justin Bieber . " After watching the video , singer Chris Brown said : " Honest opinion ? It was great . I 'll be jammin ' to it on Friday , Friday . " Fellow teenage singer Miley Cyrus denied that she had criticized Black , saying " I am a fan " and that she sang " Friday " while driving . Simon Cowell praised Black , saying " I love her [ and ] the fact that she 's gotten so much publicity . People are so upset about the song , but I think it 's hysterical . [ ... ] Anyone who can create this much controversy within a week , I want to meet . I love people like that . " He observed that " any song to do with the weekend annoys you . It reminds me of ' Saturday Night ' ... It 's what we call a ' hair-dryer song , ' a song girls sing into their hair dryers as they 're getting ready to go out . But the fact that it 's making people so angry is brilliant . " Cowell advised Black not to " listen to anyone over the age of 18 . I 'm being deadly serious . Whatever she 's done has worked . Whether you like her or not , she 's the most talked-about artist in America right now . Nobody over the age of 18 should understand her or like her . So she should just do it her way . "

By March 21 , 2011 , the " Friday " music video had been viewed more than 30 million times on YouTube . Forbes estimated that as of that date , Black and ARK Music had earned $ 20,000 from YouTube 's revenue-sharing program , and Billboard estimated iTunes sales of approximately 43,000 copies , roughly equivalent to $ 26,700 in royalties . Within a week after being released on iTunes , it had jumped to 19 on their sales chart , on March 19 , 2011 . " Friday " debuted on the US Hot Digital Songs chart at number 57 and went on to peak at number 38 . " Friday " debuted on the New Zealand Singles Chart at number 33 on March 21 , 2011 . The song entered the Billboard Hot 100 at number 72 and rose to 58 the next week . It sold 87,000 copies in the United States over its first two weeks and has gone on to sell 442,000 copies , as of December 2013 . The song also received airplay in Sweden . In the United States , it was played 12 times from March 16 to 22 , considered low for a Hot 100 song . Despite the song 's strong performance elsewhere , Georgina Kelly claimed in late March 2011 that her daughter had not received any money from the song 's sales to that point in time , saying " We haven 't received a dime from anywhere . "

The concept for the music video is based on the lyrics and presented as a typical Friday for Black . She wakes up and goes to school , meeting her friends on the way . In the evening , after debating whether to sit in the front or back of a convertible , Black and her friends ride the car to a party at 7 : 45 pm . Patrice Wilson appears near the end of the song to deliver a short rap . The video was shot on January 6 , 2011 at Black 's father 's house with friends and family as extras , and requiring multiple takes over 12 hours . Some of those extras became stars in their own right ; her friends Benni Cinkle , Amanda Cooper and Hayley Grodt . Ark Music , according to Black 's parents , cautioned them and her that they should not expect her to become famous . Black hoped that her friends and family would enjoy watching the video on YouTube and that it would perhaps help her to later begin a singing career .

The video was posted on February 10 , 2011 and received 4,000 views , enough to please Black , before comedian Michael J. Nelson 's Twitter account and a Tosh.0 blog post , " Songwriting Isn ’ t for Everyone " , drew attention to it on March 11 , 2011 , turning the video into a viral hit . Criticism of the song 's lyrics , the use of Auto-Tune on Black 's vocals , as well as the content of the video also caused it to become viral . On May 9 , 2011 , comments became subject to prior approval for posting . Two days later , commenting was disabled altogether and archives removed . By June 15 , 2011 , the video had more than 166 million views , and 3.2 million " dislikes " from YouTube users against just 454,000 " likes " . It also peaked in the top 20 most watched YouTube videos of all time . After Ark Music attempted to begin charging $ 2.99 to watch the video a limited number of times on YouTube in June , Black asked YouTube to take the video down . After reading the harsh reviews of " Friday " , Black said that " those hurtful comments really shocked me . " Ark Music offered to take the video down from YouTube , but Black refused the offer , saying that she did not wish " to give the haters the satisfaction that they got me so bad I gave up . " Black 's father has accompanied her in public to guard against potential accosters . In response to criticism over the song 's significant use of Auto-Tune , Black performed an acoustic version during an interview with ABC News , which earned over 180,000 dislikes on YouTube ( 84 % of total ratings ) by November 2011 . Later in the interview Black 's mother , Kelly , stated that she was " angry and upset " after Black was brought to tears by comments , such as " I hope you go cut yourself and die " and " ' I hope you cut yourself and get an eating disorder so you 'll look pretty . " Black said , however , that soon she was able to ignore such comments , and asked Justin Bieber , her idol , to perform a duet with her . Although Bieber has not released an official announcement regarding the offer , he posted on Twitter " sunday comes after saturday ? weird . " Bieber later sang part of the chorus at one of his concerts . Rolling Stone 's Perpetua again praised Black after the interview and said , " She is actually a pretty decent singer . [ ... ] She is a total sweetheart . [ ... ] Black comes off as a well-adjusted , happy and grateful kid . " He also pointed out Black 's intention to donate part of the profits from the song to school arts programs and relief efforts in Japan following the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami . Benni Cinkle , who became known as " that girl in pink " and appears during the second verse of the video , released her own song entitled " Can You See Me Now " and created an anti-bullying organization ( That Girl In Pink Foundation ) due to the negative response she got from " Friday " .

Not long after the " Friday " video went viral on YouTube , Black and her mother , Georgina Kelly , got into legal issues with Ark Music over rights to the song . In a March 29 , 2011 letter from Kelly 's lawyer to Ark Music , it was alleged that Ark Music failed to fulfill the terms of their November 2010 agreement by not giving her the song and video 's master recordings , by claiming Black as exclusively signed to the label , and by exploiting the song without permission – for example , selling a " Friday " ringtone . While Wilson stated that Kelly " will get the masters and the song ... [ t ] hey can have it all " , and agreed that Black was not exclusive to Ark , his attorney claimed that Ark owns the copyright for the song and the November agreement is invalid . In June 2011 , Ark Music Factory started charging $ 2.99 to watch the music video on YouTube . Black 's initial response was through a message through her Twitter account saying : " Thanks for all the messages regarding the $ 2.99 fee added to Friday video , I have nothing to do with this ! ! "

On June 16 , 2011 , YouTube took down the official video for " Friday " . Instead a message in place of the video read : " This video is no longer available due to a copyright claim by Rebecca Black . Sorry about that . " A spokesman for Rebecca Black said her legal team had asked YouTube to take the video down because of an ongoing legal dispute with the song 's producers Ark Music Factory . Ark Music Factory responded by saying it was disappointed that Black decided to have the video pulled from YouTube despite the two parties being in " good faith negotiations " . It added : " There 's been an ongoing , open dialogue with our company . So we were blindsided to get a ' Take Down Notice ' alleging copyright infringement instead of a call or e-mail from Rebecca 's representatives . Our use of the video has fully been authorized ( as evidenced by four uninterrupted months and 160 million-plus viewings without objection ) by both Ms. Black and the copyright holder . Regardless , we are going to continue to take the high road and work out the complaint as soon as possible , so that the million-plus people who watch Friday for free each day can continue to enjoy the video . " On September 16 , 2011 , the video was restored to YouTube , on Black 's official channel .

A cover version was released by the cast of season two of the television series Glee . The cast performed it on the show as well . The official release features cast members Puck ( Mark Salling ) , Artie ( Kevin McHale ) and Sam ( Chord Overstreet ) on vocals , as part of the prom festivities on the " Prom Queen " episode that aired on May 10 , 2011 . Series co-creator Ryan Murphy explained to The Hollywood Reporter the use of the viral hit as a tribute to popular culture . He said : " There ’ s a rule for it that 's explained in the show . The Glee Club is hired to perform songs for the prom and they were told by the principal to please do popular songs that the kids know . " Murphy noted that Glee 's " Friday " cover offers a different take since it 's sung by males for other 17-year olds . The show pays tribute to pop culture and , love it or hate it , that song is pop culture . "

On April 1 , 2011 , " Friday " was performed by Stephen Colbert , Jimmy Fallon , Taylor Hicks and The Roots on Late Night with Jimmy Fallon . The New York Knicks City Dancers joined in . Jimmy Fallon released " Friday " as part of his 2012 Warner Records album , Blow Your Pants Off , which featured high profile acts such as Paul McCartney and Bruce Springsteen . The album won Best Comedy Album at the 2013 Grammy Awards . The song has also been covered in a recording by Richard Cheese , and live in concerts by Todd Rundgren , Nick Jonas , Katy Perry , and Justin Bieber . Singer Katy Perry performed the song on selected dates during her California Dreams Tour , including at the Rod Laver Arena , Newcastle Entertainment Centre , TD Garden , Air Canada Centre and the 1stBank Center . During the August 5 concert at the Nokia Theatre L.A. Live , Rebecca Black joined Perry onstage , performing the song as a duet . Numerous parodies of " Friday " have been uploaded to YouTube and become viral in their own right . Conan O 'Brien and Andy Richter also made a joint parody entitled " Thursday " on the Conan show on TBS . The YouTube phenomenon Bad Lip Reading was launched when an anonymous music and video producer replaced the audio to the " Friday " video with new music and lyrics about gang fighting . " Gang Fight " , released in March 2011 , earned Bad Lip Reading a million hits and thousands of subscribers , with many spoofs soon following .

Black appears as herself in the music video of Katy Perry 's single " Last Friday Night ( T.G.I.F. ) " . She appears as the host of a party in the house next door to that of " Kathy Beth Terry " . At the end of the video , " Terry " attempts to blame the excesses of the party ( which had subsequently moved to her own house ) on Black , only for her parents ( Corey Feldman and Debbie Gibson ) to disbelieve her . ARK Music Factory launched its " Ark 's TGI Friday Covers " project , showcasing cover versions of " Friday " by well-known artists alongside other user-submitted tributes , re-works , and parodies of the song / video and inviting users to submit their versions for relaying through Ark Music Factory 's site . In November 2012 , multiple outlets suggested that Nicole Westbrook was " the new Rebecca Black " , on release of Patrice Wilson 's " It 's Thanksgiving " . Kohl 's Department Stores used a modified version of the song as its 2011 Black Friday advertising jingle . The hook " It 's Friday , Friday , gotta get down on Friday " was changed to " It 's Black Friday , Black Friday , Gotta go to Kohl 's on Black Friday " .

Black made her national television debut by performing a mash-up of the song along with her second single , " My Moment " , during America 's Got Talent 's result night for the YouTube Special round on August 10 , 2011 . The round featured various acts who have auditioned via YouTube . Rebecca Black sang an acoustic version of the song on Good Morning America . Rebecca performed Friday along with " My Moment " , live in Suncorp Place , Sydney as a part of Telstra 's 4G LTE network launch . She also sang " Friday " live on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno .

" Homeless " is a song by British singer-songwriter Leona Lewis from her debut studio album , Spirit ( 2007 ) . The song was written by Swedish songwriter Jörgen Elofsson and produced by Steve Mac . Musically , it is an R & B Power ballad , with instrumentation consisting of a piano and a guitar . The song 's lyrics revolve around Lewis singing about waiting for her boyfriend to come home to where she is waiting for him , but feels homeless without him . The song garnered mixed reviews from music critics , some of whom praised Lewis 's vocal performance but criticized its composition . Upon the release of Spirit , the song debuted at number 173 on the UK Singles Chart on the strength of digital download sales . Lewis performed " Homeless " at the annual WXKS-FM Boston KISS Concert in 2008 , along with " Bleeding Love " and " Better in Time " . It was also included on the set list of The Labyrinth tour in 2010 .

The song garnered mixed reviews from music critics . Matt O 'Leary for Virgin Media complimented " Homeless " as well as " I Will Be " , and wrote that when the emphasis is laid purely on the singer 's vocals without too much " glossy production trappings " , her " uniqueness is allowed to shine . " Levine was critical of " Homeless " in general , but praised some of its compositional elements . Although he thought that the song was " almost unbearably bleak " , Levine praised the long note which Lewis sustains during the bridge , and wrote that " the 12-second ' eeeeeeyeeaayaaaaay ' that jump-starts the crescendo of ' Homeless ' is one of the most dazzling pop moments of the year . " Kitty Empire for The Guardian wrote , " Lewis ' voice is impressively elastic throughout but lacks any grit or style . It is too perfect , jumping up ladders of notes on ' Homeless ' , never catching , never breaking . " A reviewer for The Sun described " Homeless " a " string-drenched , tear-jerker . "

Until the Quiet Comes is the fourth studio album by American electronic producer Flying Lotus , released on September 26 , 2012 , by Warp Records . After releasing his 2010 album Cosmogramma , Flying Lotus continued his creative partnership with bassist Thundercat and worked with him on music that led to the album . For Until the Quiet Comes , he drew on African percussion and psychedelic musical influences , human-subconscious and dream world concepts , and different mixing techniques and dynamics . He recorded for two years at his home in Los Angeles primarily using an Ableton Live sequencer along with other instruments and software , and recorded with guest vocalists including Erykah Badu , Thom Yorke , Laura Darlington , and Niki Randa . An electronic jazz album , Until the Quiet Comes features free jazz elements , varying musical tones , contracting scale , and shifts in feel . Its songs are sequenced together and characterized by ghostly vocal production , irregular drum beats , pulsating percussive textures , trembling basslines , trilled synthesizers , and fluctuating samples . The album has a journey-like concept and dreamy musical narrative , which Flying Lotus conceived through astral projection and felt could be interpreted uniquely by listeners . Music writers interpret it as a musical accompaniment to dreams , as well as emotional introspection by Flying Lotus .

In 2010 , Flying Lotus released his third album Cosmogramma to critical acclaim and mainstream exposure . He recorded the album while grieving his mother 's death , and titled it as a reference to his late great-aunt Alice Coltrane . The album showcased his dense , loose mix of electronic and live instrumentation with avant-garde jazz , dance , and hip hop influences . During its recording , he developed a creative relationship with contributing bassist Thundercat , a member of his Brainfeeder record label . They continued working together on Flying Lotus ' 2010 EP Pattern + Grid World , which continued the dense electronic style of Cosmogramma . They developed more musical ideas together , from which Flying Lotus culled and produced for Thundercat 's debut album The Golden Age of Apocalypse in 2011 . For Until the Quiet Comes , Flying Lotus was inspired by African percussion music and psychedelic bands such as Silver Apples , Can , Stereolab , Portishead , and Gentle Giant . He also returned to listening to the music of his relatives Alice and John Coltrane after listening excessively to austere electronica while recording Cosmogramma . Musically , he wanted to avoid repeating himself and chose a more minimal direction for the album , seeking to eschew the " strange sense of urgency " of Cosmogramma 's music for " tension and release " . He elaborated on his direction for the album in an interview for The National , saying that " I think I 'd have been in a bad position if I tried to recreate the same energy as I did on Cosmogramma – like , go in further . How about we pull back , try to do something that gets to the core of the emotional sentiment . Not so grand , more intimate . But still have the core of what it is . "

Conceptually , Flying Lotus pursued human-subconscious and dream world themes . He sought to tone down Cosmogramma 's grandiose , universal concept and create a timeless , journey-like work with Until the Quiet Comes , from which he felt listeners could interpret their own stories . He imagined himself astral projecting when conceiving the album and tried to translate ideas from fiction he had read into music , including holographic universes , metaphysics , New Age philosophy , and astrodynamics . In conceiving a narrative for the album , he drew on Joseph Campbell 's hero 's journey literary theory to introduce a world , characters , and situations musically . He characterized the album as both " a collage of mystical states , dreams , sleep and lullabies " , and " a children 's record , a record for kids to dream to " . He clarified the idea in an interview for Spin as " that whole experience of being innocent in this new world that you don 't really understand . I imagined Little Nemo on a flying bed floating over the city , and this is the soundtrack to it . " Flying Lotus felt more confident in his ideas and as a recording artist after striving to distinguish himself from his contemporaries on previous albums .

Flying Lotus started working on Until the Quiet Comes at his home in Mount Washington , Los Angeles , which featured more acoustic space than his previous house in Echo Park . He recorded the album for two years , using a spacious room there as a recording studio . He revisited scrapped ideas from the sessions for Thundercat 's debut album and revised their direction for Until the Quiet Comes . The song " Hunger " developed from a demo he had recorded for the soundtrack to one of the Twilight films , and " Sultan 's Request " was performed live by Flying Lotus for three years before the album . For " Electric Candyman " , he used a beat he had prepared for sessions that ultimately fell through with Burial , and he used a five-year-old recording with Samiyam for the second half of " The Nightcaller " . Flying Lotus recorded Until the Quiet Comes in a three-part process — first composing rought drafts for songs , then refining them for several months with additional instrumentation to make them substantial , and finally mixing the songs for a cohesive album . Unlike with his previous work , he concentrated on his music 's dynamics rather than just its production when working on the album . Interested in music theory and arrangements , he started taking piano lessons at the beginning of the album 's recording to learn more chords and progressions . Rather than emphasize conventional song structure elements such as hooks and choruses , Flying Lotus composed instrumentals that he found to be more intellectual and less danceable than Cosmogramma and treated them as the basis of tracks when recording the album . He also recorded melodic refrains to evoke feelings of childlike innocence on songs .

Flying Lotus worked primarily with an Ableton Live music sequencer through his MacBook Pro laptop . At his home studio , he had upgraded monitors acquired from after his move there , and various digital and analog instruments , including a drum kit , a Fender Rhodes piano , Wurlitzer electric pianos , Access Virus and Minimoog Voyager synthesizers , a drum machine , three Mac Powerbooks , and a DSP unit . He played drums without quantizing them and referred to the personal library of samples he had amassed over his career while producing the album . He recorded the song " Dream to Me " the day after purchasing a microKORG synthesizer . He ultimately recorded over 60 songs for the album before editing them down . To attain certain dynamics on songs , Flying Lotus studied different mixing techniques and switched software midway through the album 's recording . He later cited the switch as the reason for the album 's completion being overdue , although he felt that it was productive to challenge himself as a student of music . Flying Lotus employed a trial and error approach to mixing and applied his new knowledge of compression to attain a more satisfactory result before the album 's master . He also sought to limit distracting frequencies and segues in favor of more important sounds throughout the album . To make certain sounds more affecting , he used the side-chain compression technique to trigger compression of different organ , strings , and bass sounds upon a drum kick on a song . He said of his production and the music 's dynamic range in an interview for Electronic Musician , " I 've been learning to bring things down before I even start . I 'll start composing a track at like – 8dB , then I have all this headroom to play with afterward . I 've learned how to tuck and limit things , learned to EQ before you limit . "

As with his previous releases , Until the Quiet Comes was mastered by engineer Daddy Kev at his Echo Chamber Studio in Eagle Rock . He used a Pro Tools 9 workstation and various EQ plug-ins on his Mac Pro , while working at a 24-bit , 96 kHz audio quality to comply with iTunes ' " Mastered for iTunes " regulations . To preserve the tracks ' original dynamics , Daddy Kev used a signal chain that processed both digital and analog signals . He found the mastering process to be " very intimate " and likened it to " giving birth " for Flying Lotus , saying in an interview , " We may go through multiple mixes so a certain 808 can sit right in the pocket for him , and while he 's finishing his edits its my job to boost just the right things by a decibel or two , and keep things sonically correct . " He used both professional and club-oriented amplifiers and monitors to minimize harmonic distortion and maintain Flying Lotus ' minimalist aesthetic , which , along with his need to find a quiet mental space , inspired the album 's title : " I wanted to set people up to this idea , before they even heard it , that the quiet was a key word in the whole thing ... [ A ] part of pulling it back is some kind of growing up . "

Flying Lotus collaborated with other musicians for additional elements on songs . He worked with instrumentalist and musical director Miguel Atwood Ferguson to incorporate strings arrangements to songs . Thundercat played live bass on nine of the album 's songs . To develop basslines for songs , Flying Lotus had Thundercat 's bass plugged into a DI unit of a FireWire interface as he improvised riffs to Flying Lotus ' suggestions . Flying Lotus captured flat-levelled bass ideas into the interface , which allowed him to manipulate their tone and integrate them with digital instruments and samples on songs . He attributes the continuity of the album 's music to Thundercat 's bass playing . For certain tracks on the album , Flying Lotus wanted to use vocalists that would " see their sound as texture as opposed to the song " , and said of this preference in an interview for Vibe , " Sometimes singers overdo it so that you only focus on the voice , which is cool sometimes , but it 's my record – I 'm producing it – so the songs should be about the track as a whole . The people that are my favorites are ones who have such a respect for what 's already there . They don 't try to approach it thinking they 're going to turn it into a song , but rather going to add to it . "

Flying Lotus enlisted other vocalists , including Thom Yorke on " Electric Candyman " , Laura Darlington on " Phantasm " , Erykah Badu on " See Thru to U " , and Thundercat on " DMT Song " . Yorke wanted to be involved with the album after collaborating on " ... And the World Laughs with You " for Cosmogramma , and exchanged his vocals via email . Flying Lotus admired him for knowing " when things work and [ when ] they don 't . He doesn 't bullshit in that way . He spends his time wisely . I wish I could say that about a lot more people . " He met Badu through Thundercat , who had played in her backing band and collaborated with her on The Golden Age of Apocalypse , and started working on her own upcoming album while recording Until the Quiet Comes . Flying Lotus also planned to work with Jonny Greenwood , but the collaboration fell through . Instead , he appropriated music from one of Greenwood 's film soundtracks for the song " Hunger " , for which Greenwood is credited as composer .

Until the Quiet Comes is characterized by varying musical tones , contracting scale , both consonant and dissonant sounds , counterpoint , and shifts in feel . Its complex , diverse soundscapes deviate from popular music song forms and employ contrast and improvisational adjustments in mood , structure , and time signature . Darryl Kirchner of The Huffington Post notes an emphasis on timbre throughout the album . Mark Richardson of Pitchfork observes Flying Lotus " putting a smaller frame around each individual part " throughout the album 's shifts and finds the " energy " to be " just as strong " as on his previous albums , but " concentrated into a smaller space . " Although he finds it less " imposing " than its predecessor , Thomas May of musicOMH comments that " Until the Quiet Comes is like a chamber concerto to Cosmogramma 's symphony " , noting " an increased sense of space and separation " on the former . Songs on the album incorporate ghostly vocal production , winding basslines , uptempo drum-and-bass fills , broad orchestral elements , pulsating percussive textures , bright keyboards , trilled synthesizers , and fluctuating samples . They are sequenced together and exhibit a diminishing pace from the end of one track to the start of another . Joe Tacopino of Rolling Stone views that the album 's guest vocalists " float into [ Flying Lotus 's ] realm like visitors , just as fragile and malleable as the other elements he employs . This reiterates the album 's feel as one complete story , instead of disparate songs . " Vincent Pollard of Exclaim ! comments that most of the vocals are " used as subtle textures " and observes Flying Lotus " employing more organic tropes in his digital mix " . He incorporates horn arrangements and live drum patterns , while his programmed beats evoke the " in the pocket " drumming of percussionists such as Rashied Ali . The songs also exhibits Flying Lotus ' characteristic mix of skittering , muffled percussion atop slightly irregular drum beats , accompanied by Thundercat 's trembling basslines .

Stylistically , the album eschews Flying Lotus ' hip hop roots for jazz influences , including free form jazz tonality and undertones , and jazz-based time signatures and patterns . Gabrielle Ahern of CMJ calls it " a moody , electronic version of experimental jazz . " Jonny Ensall of Time Out views the album as " a digital jazz record which pushes hip hop beats and R & B melodies into bold , new syncopated and atonal territory . " Tony Ware of Electronic Musician attributes " certain chord choices and the interest in astral mystical states that permeates Until the Quiet Comes " to Flying Lotus ' " family lineage " of jazz musicians . Uncut finds it " often reminiscent of his auntie 's work " , while Consequence of Sound 's Derek Staples perceives a " free jazz aesthetic " similar to " his great-uncle John Coltrane 's Ascension " , viewing both albums as " exercise [ s ] in dense rhythmic layers and melodic dissonance . " The album also repurposes elements of pop , soul , fusion , and psychedelia in a modern classical fashion . Q describes the album as " a lush , almost psychedelic mood piece . " Lucy Jones of NME attributes the album 's " meander [ ing ] and experiment [ ing ] " to a progressive rock influence .

Until the Quiet Comes has been described as having a dreamy musical narrative by Uncut , and Mojo , who called it " quite literally , a dream album " . Andy Beta from Spin likened it to the " dreams within dreams within dreams " concept from the 2010 film Inception . Karen Lawler of State said " if the limbo between awake and sleeping , dreams and nightmares could be expressed through music , this album might well be it . " Jeff Weiss , writing in LA Weekly , felt the record had a loose concept that " surrounds the nocturnal visions of a child lost in spacedust dreams " and likens it to a narcotic film in the vein of Little Nemo and Michel Gondry , writing that " swirling voices seem like clouds communing . Snare crashes mimic obscene villains . Hard beats propel chase scenes . Basslines gurgle like goofy dancing sidekicks . Erykah Badu plays the all-powerful good witch . Thom Yorke guests as the gnomish sorcerer with the seraphic yawp . " In the opinion of Will Ryan from Beats Per Minute , Until the Quiet Comes was another " journey " concept work by Flying Lotus , but distinguished it as an introspective , " subconscious " journey following the " temporal " journey idea of his 2006 debut 1983 , the " geographical " 2008 album Los Angeles , and the " cosmic " , " out-and-out musical " Cosmogramma . Rory Gibb from The Quietus wrote that the narrative on this album veered into " the corridors " of Flying Lotus ' " own mind " , interpreting his guest vocalists as " disembodied phantoms , reanimated figments of his imagination stripped of agency and directed to their roles by [ his ] subconscious . " Gibb argued that Until the Quiet Comes was " an important and significant album " partly for engaging with " grand narratives " such as " the shifting identities of both humans and electronic music forms in a digital age " , and " the internet 's erosion of memory processes " .

Reef Younis of Clash perceived an emotional context to the album , writing that , " where [ Flying Lotus ] grieved on Cosmogramma , he believes on Until The Quiet Comes and there 's a burgeoning sense of hope and coherence and optimism " . Arnold Pan of PopMatters calls Until the Quiet Comes " a subliminal soundtrack to the postmodern experience of everyday life " and views that Flying Lotus ' subtle , " sentient and sensual " details throughout the album 's music represent " an undertone of yearning emotion and even soulfulness that separates [ his ] aesthetic on Quiet from that of other producer-types who may be just as proficient , technically speaking . "

The opening track " All In " incorporates bells , kick and snare drums , shakers , harps , guitar , and electric bass . It features a reverberating , high-pitched note , whose discordant sound is subsequently offset by keyboard flourishes and cursory snare drums . Lilting background vocals during the song 's melodic section lead to a bass kick and aggressive drum patterns . The wistful " Getting There " expands on the previous track with a basic drum kick , emotional vocals by Niki Randa , Sonar blip sounds , chimes , and a walking bassline . It has heavy emphasis on the first and third beat of every measure . " Until the Colours Come " contains modulated synthesizers . " Heave ( n ) " features bright , round keyboards , jazz and electronica elements , and tonal shading . Mark Richardson of Pitchfork views that the music from " All In " to " Heave ( n ) " comprise an opening section on the album that " functions as a sort of miniature suite of downtempo jazz . " " Tiny Tortures " features echoing , tendrillar guitar , minimal glitch sounds , and post-rock melodies . The song begins with a skeletal , irregular rhythm , comprising a digital wood block , snare drum , and hissing cymbals , that is subsequently contrasted by Thundercat 's harmonic bass runs . " All the Secrets " has a new-age sound and features Casiotone breakdowns , deftly timed vocal samples , restless drumming , poignant piano , and post-dub elements . " Sultan 's Request " has a square wave bassline , tense synthesizers , and transitioning pitches and textures , spanning from a low-end drop to an upper register of high-pitched samples and steady hand claps . " Putty Boy Strut " features an alien critter voice , complex drum programming , and acousmatic jazz guitars . It concludes with a brief violin section .

" See Thru to U " incorporates jazz fusion and funk styles . It features a loose arrangement , tom-tom drums , hi-hats , double bass , and tribal rhythms . Erykah Badu 's vocals on the song are distorted and layered into loose , overlapping patterns , scat arrangements , and high-pitched vocal runs . " DMT Song " and " Nightcaller " serve as the album 's centerpiece . The former song , titled after the natural psychedelic compound dimethyltryptamine , incorporates jazz-funk and light tenor to chorused falsetto vocals by Thundercat . It transitions into " The Nightcaller " , which has analog 4 / 4 percussion , piercing synthesizers , and interplay between Thundercat 's bass and virtuosic cello . The song 's smooth , muffled beat climaxes as a euphoric crescendo . The densely textured title track features expressive bass playing by Thundercat , continuous gong and handclaps , and J Dilla-like keyboard . " Only If You Wanna " is a futuristic jazz trio piece with both digital and analog sounds . Allmusic 's Andy Kellman delineates the songs from " See Thru to U " to " Only If You Wanna " as the album 's most musically connected and " least divisible " section .

" Electric Candyman " has a dreamy R & B style and features distant , cooing vocals by Thom Yorke , a rattling drum sample , ghostly drones , and anthropoid shrieks . Yorke chants on the song , " look into my mirror and say my name " , a reference to the titular character in the 1992 film Candyman . Flying Lotus said of his vocals on the song , " I like it when he gets into that spooky pocket . People are like , that doesn 't sound like Thom , make it sound more like Thom – but I 'm like , it 's my album . " The electro-acoustic " Phantasm " contains slinky vocals by Laura Darlington , metronome clicks , oscillating string arrangements , and agitated downtempo sounds . " me Yesterday / / Corded " features bright arpeggios , twisted bass grooves , and a subsuming vocal chorus . Flying Lotus characterizes the song as a reflection of his past emotions . " Dream to Me " has overlapping synthesizers and serves as an exodus in the album 's conceptual arc .

First released in Japan on September 26 , 2012 , as a CD , Until the Quiet Comes was made available on all formats — CD , vinyl , and digital — on October 2 by Warp Records . It was also made available for streaming online from September 26 to October 2 , the date of its release in North America . Until the Quiet Comes was sent as a single 47-minute digital track to music critics who would be reviewing it . Flying Lotus intended for the album to be listened as a whole instead of skimmed through by listeners . During October , he appeared at several release events , including in-store appearances , signings , DJ sets , and interview sessions at music venues and retailers . In its first week of release , Until the Quiet Comes debuted at number 34 on the Billboard 200 , selling 13,000 copies . By October 7 , 2012 , it had sold 14,000 copies , according to Nielsen SoundScan . The album also debuted at number 34 on the UK Albums Chart , and became Flying Lotus ' highest-charting record in the United Kingdom . In Belgium , it charted for four weeks , peaking at number 26 .

Two singles were released in promotion of Until the Quiet Comes . Lead single " See Thru to U " was released on August 16 , 2012 , as a digital download on iTunes . It was accompanied by the release of an abstract music video online . On September 17 , Flying Lotus released a teaser video called Small Moments , in which previews of the album 's songs were accompanied by mysterious , botanical imagery . " Putty Boy Strut " was released on September 19 with an accompanying animated , robot-themed video by Cyriak . A music video for " Tiny Tortures " was released on November 29 and featured Elijah Wood playing a depressed man without a right arm who envisions objects in his room recreating his arm , but is revealed to be torturing himself . Flying Lotus released a short film on September 6 to promote Until the Quiet Comes . It was titled after the record and directed by Kahlil Joseph , who shot it in 35 mm film at the Nickerson Gardens housing project in Watts , Los Angeles and incorporated three songs from the album — " See Thru to U " , " Hunger " , and " Getting There " . The film was intended to be a tragic depiction of urban life featuring Joseph 's interpretations of innocence , violence , and death . It begins with an African-American youth 's death , segues into a scene of affection shared among other African-American males , and concludes with the shooting of another , whose death is reversed to the effect of a dance . A scene in the film also features an inner city youth wearing a shirt bearing the words " J Dilla Changed My Life " , an allusion to the influence of J Dilla on Flying Lotus . The film received praise from critics , and its viral success led to Warp Records ' decision to pitch it to a music video network ; it was ultimately accepted and aired by MTV2 . Hilton Als of The New Yorker called the film " an amalgamation of horrifying beauty " and wrote of Joseph 's use of rewind , " the character ’ s fall becomes a kind of dance — for life . "

On September 23 , Flying Lotus performed at the Hollywood Bowl in Los Angeles . He then embarked on an international tour for the album during October to November 2012 , playing 11 concert dates in North America and eight dates abroad , including Europe and Japan . He performed strictly with his laptop , and excluded takes of songs he had recorded with Miguel Atwood Ferguson 's string quartet , feeling that the strings would not translate live . Along with his own material , Flying Lotus included remixes of other artists ' songs in his live sets , including Jay-Z , Alicia Keys , and Kanye West . Flying Lotus felt that his grasp on new mixing techniques helped make his live shows more " evolved and changed a little bit " , saying in an interview for Exclaim ! , " It 's more dynamic . But still a party ! Not like my albums , [ which ] are more like personal exchange ; [ live ] it 's nice to have that social experience . " Reviewing his performance at Danforth Music Hall , Now magazine observed a " resoundingly maximal aesthetic and sound " that was " way more bombastic EDM " than the album 's " IDM abstraction " , citing as an example his mixing of " the recognizable with the weird , like when Kanye West 's Mercy gave way to the hand-claps of Quiet cut Putty Boy Strut . " Flying Lotus also worked with longtime collaborator Dr. Strangeloop to create collage-like imagery during the shows , including geometric visuals synched to the performed music . Joshua P. Ferguson of Time Out wrote of the visual effects in Flying Lotus ' performance at Metro Chicago , " all manner of Tron-like halos , expanding and contracting orbs , starscapes and unidentifiable amorphous globs of color raced , shot and oozed their way across screens placed both in front of and behind Flying Lotus . "

Until the Quiet Comes received rave reviews from critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream publications , the album received an average score of 83 , which indicates " universal acclaim " , based on 36 reviews . It was dubbed " the sound of the future " by NME magazine 's Lucy Jones , and a " masterpiece of sound engineering " by Scott Kara of The New Zealand Herald . Allmusic 's Andy Kellman commented that Flying Lotus " not only peels away layers from his sound but organizes his tracks into a gracefully flowing sequence " on what is " his most accessible and creative release yet . " Filter magazine 's Kyle Lemmon found his musicianship deft and the songs invariably " vaporous and angelic or menacing and silhouetted . " Thomas May of musicOMH praised both the difficult concept and its execution : " With an unprecedented melodic disposition and busy yet rarely cluttered arrangements , this album possesses remarkable poise and balance in the face of its fearsome complexity . " Drowned in Sound 's Jazz Monroe said that it may ultimately be Flying Lotus ' best album because of his ability to " close the schism between the true avant-garde and the leftfield mainstream " . Arnold Pan of PopMatters said that his amalgamated music is achieved with admirable ease and lucidity , as Flying Lotus " conducts a master class on both how to create flow as well as how to maintain it through an entire album . "

In a mixed review , Alex Macpherson from The Guardian found the record to be " packed full of ideas " on tracks that " feel less like fully fleshed-out compositions than lightly drawn sketches started , but not always finished " . State magazine 's Karen Lawler said that its songs are " too short for any single musical concept to fully develop . " Will Hermes of Rolling Stone complimented Flying Lotus ' " taste for 21st-century soul jazz with swarming high-end displays " and stated , " It all adds up to something so captivating that vocal guests ... can get a little lost . Although maybe that 's the point " . Although he found its " complicated brilliance " less " boisterous " than Cosmogramma , Jonah Bromwich of The A.V. Club felt that the album " does a better job than its predecessor of weaving together the tangled strands of " disparate styles and concluded , " after multiple listens , the album reveals itself to be as nuanced , as subtle , and a lot more digestible " .

Sir George Eyre KCB KCMG ( d . 15 February 1839 ) was an officer of the Royal Navy who saw service during the American War of Independence and the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars , eventually rising to the rank of Vice-Admiral of the Red . Eyre served with James King in the Caribbean during the American War of Independence , seeing action in a number of engagements . With the conclusion of the war , he was based at times at Halifax , and later off the South American coast and in the Mediterranean . With the outbreak of the French Revolutionary Wars , Eyre served in the Mediterranean and was involved in the Siege of Toulon , before being given his first command , the 14-gun brig-sloop HMS Speedy . The command was short-lived , and Speedy was chased down and captured by a large French fleet . Taken into captivity , Eyre and his men endured harsh conditions until being exchanged back to Britain . Acquitted for the loss of his ship and given a new command , Eyre went out to the West Indies , but returned to Britain in 1799 and saw little further employment until 1806 , when he joined the Mediterranean fleet and was active off the coast of Spain , supporting Spanish resistance to the French .

In 1809 he went to the Adriatic and took part in the campaign there , helping to capture several islands . He launched an assault on Santa Maura and was wounded during the operations . After participating in the blockade of Corfu he returned to the Spanish coast and resumed operations there in support of the Spanish partisans . Returning to England again in 1811 , he went ashore and was not actively employed for the rest of the Napoleonic Wars , though he received a knighthood and was later appointed a Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath . He returned to service in 1823 , commanding the South American station during a time of particular diplomatic difficulties , and on returning home in 1826 retired ashore owing to illness . He died in 1839 .

George Eyre was born the fourth and youngest son of politician Anthony Eyre , who had represented the constituency of Boroughbridge in a number of parliaments , and his wife , Judith Letitia . George 's elder brother , Anthony Hardolph Eyre , also entered politics and represented Nottinghamshire during the 1800s . George attended Harrow School and after spending several months at an academy in Chelsea , entered the navy in 1782 . His first ship was the 44-gun HMS Resistance , under the command of Captain James King . They went out to Jamaica escorting a convoy , and remained in the area for the rest of the American War of Independence . On 2 March 1783 , while sailing in company with HMS Duguay Trouin , two ships were discovered anchored in Turks Island passage . On being spotted the two ships cut their cables and stood to the southwest , upon which Resistance promptly gave chase . The rearmost ship , carrying 20 guns , sprang her main topmast , and surrendered after Resistance came up and fired a broadside . She then gave chase to the other , carrying 28 guns , and after enduring fire from her stern chasers , came alongside and the Frenchman promptly surrendered . The ships were discovered to be two transports that had taken troops to Turks Island , garrisoning it with 530 men . One of the ships , the 28-gun Coquette was commanded by the Marquis de Grasse , nephew of the Comte de Grasse . One or two days later Resistance fell in with a small squadron under Captain Horatio Nelson , consisting of HMS Albemarle , HMS Tartar , HMS Drake and the armed ship Barrington . Nelson decided to attack the recently garrisoned Turks Island , and 250 men were landed under the cover of supporting fire from the ships . The French were found to be heavily entrenched , and the British withdrew after being unable to dislodge them .

With the end of the war Eyre returned to England with King aboard HMS Diamond , but soon rejoined the Resistance and went out to Halifax to join Sir Charles Douglas . As Douglas ' flagship spent most of her time in port , Eyre was sent out to cruise on other ships , including HMS Mercury under Captain Stanhope , and HMS Atalanta under Captain Thomas Foley . Eyre returned to Britain with Resistance in 1786 , and the following year joined the 44-gun HMS Adventure under Captain Francis Parry . Parry went out as commodore to Guinea , but ill-health obliged him to resign his command , and Eyre went to Newfoundland aboard Captain Trigge 's HMS Nautilus . Eyre joined Admiral Lord Howe 's flagship HMS Queen Charlotte during the Spanish Armament , and in November 1790 was promoted to lieutenant . He then joined HMS Scipio under Captain Edward Thornbrough , and after Scipio was paid off , HMS Aquilon under Captain Robert Stopford , in which he sailed to the Mediterranean .

On the outbreak of war with France in 1793 Eyre was appointed to HMS St George , the flagship of Rear-Admiral John Gell , a relation of Eyre 's . He was present at the capture of a French privateer and her Spanish registered prize St Jago . St George went on to join Admiral Lord Hood 's fleet at Gibraltar , and went with him to Toulon . Eyre took an active part in the Siege of Toulon , volunteering to command the detachment of marines landed from St George and sent to defend Fort La Malgue . He went from there to command the battery at Fort Pharon , and after some time attracted Hood 's attention with his good service . Hood appointed him to his flagship HMS Victory . After the fall of Toulon and the British evacuation he was advanced to commander and appointed to command the sloop HMS Speedy , succeeding Commander George Cockburn , who had been appointed to command HMS Inconstant . He assisted in the capture of Bastia , and was then ordered to join HMS Diadem off Nice .

While making his way there he ran into the French fleet on 9 June , the French having sailed from Toulon some days earlier and headed east along the coast . Despite pressing on sail Speedy was overrun and captured . Eyre was taken aboard one of the French ships , and later transferred to the flagship of the fleet 's commander , Rear-Admiral Pierre Martin . Martin asked him if he had heard of the decree from the National Convention which declared that ' no quarter should be given to either the English or the Hanoverians ' . Eyre replied that they had not , on which he was told by Martin that " ... I must tell you that it is now un guerre à mort [ a war to the death ] ; and if I had been the first to come alongside of you , I should have instantly sent you to the bottom . " At this point the main British fleet was seen approaching , and Eyre was hurried back to the first ship he had been brought onto , and the French hurried into Gourjean roads , taking Speedy and the captured British crew with them .

Eyre and the crew were landed and marched to Antibes , where they were imprisoned with the crew of a Sardinian frigate that had been captured the day before Speedy . The crew had been imprisoned on Martin 's flagship Sans Culotte and had been severely treated , with their captain , Ross , not being allowed to wash or shave . The British were placed in a dungeon at Antibes , with only straw to lie on , awaiting the decision of the authorities . After three weeks in this state , they were marched to Aix-en-Provence and were confined in the prison there . After a month imprisoned in Aix , Maximilien Robespierre fell and the Reign of Terror came to an end . The British were paroled . Eyre and the officers were taken to Romans , in Dauphiné where Eyre remained until May 1795 when he was released in exchange for a French officer . He faced a court-martial for the loss of Speedy , but was honourably acquitted .

Eyre was next appointed to command the sloop HMS Albacore , before being made post-captain on 6 June 1796 and given command of the 20-gun HMS Prompte . He went out with Sir Hugh Cloberry Christian to the West Indies and took part in the reduction of Saint Lucia . While there he was appointed by Sir Hyde Parker to command the 44-gun HMS Regulus and carried out a number of cruises , capturing several prizes and winning himself riches and recognition . While cruising off Puerto Rico on 11 July 1798 Eyre located five merchant ships at anchor under a shore battery at Aguada , and decided to attempt to capture or destroy them . The ship 's boats were sent in under Lieutenants Good and Holman while Regulus and a prize schooner stood close by to support them . The wind failed however , and neither ship could get near enough to support them , but Lieutenant Good pressed on , and boarded the ships . With no wind he was unable to bring them all out , and so destroyed the two he was unable to sail out . British casualties , despite being under fire for the whole operation , amounted to one man wounded . Eyre returned to Britain in September 1799 , transporting Vice-Admiral Richard Rodney Bligh .

Eyre was then unemployed for a while , with the exception of a brief period in temporary command of HMS San Josef from 11 February to 18 March 1801 , succeeding Thomas Hardy and in turn being succeeded by William Wolseley . He finally received a posting in July 1806 when he was appointed to the 64-gun HMS Ardent , but was soon moved to command the newly built 74-gun HMS Magnificent . Magnificent initially served with the Channel Fleet , which was then under Admiral Lord St Vincent , before going out to the Bay of Biscay with Sir Eliab Harvey 's squadron . Eyre moved to the Mediterranean in June 1807 , coming under Lord Collingwood 's orders while based off Cadiz . With the Spanish rising on 2 May 1808 and the surrender of the French squadron in Cadiz on 14 June , Collingwood sent Eyre to patrol off Toulon . Shortly afterwards he was sent to Rosas to support the Spanish there , and several days later evacuated Lord Cochrane and his garrison from Fort Trinidad .

Eyre was next appointed by Lord Collingwood to take command of the squadron in the Adriatic in April 1809 , a command that then consisted of three ships of the line and seven or eight frigates . In October 1810 he was sent with Magnificent , HMS Belle Poule and HMS Kingfisher to join Captain John William Spranger 's squadron and assist in the capture of Cephalonia , Zante and Cerigo , part of a long running campaign in the Adriatic . Santa Maura initially remained in French hands , and became a base for small cruisers which were an annoyance to the British forces . Eyre resolved to attack and capture it and together with General John Oswald and troops of the 35th Regiment of Foot made a landing on 22 March 1810 . The French withdrew to a citadel , protected by three redoubts , which the British attacked . During the heavy fighting Eyre was hit in the head by a musket ball and knocked to the ground , narrowly avoiding death as three other balls passed through his clothing . Eyre handed over command of the expedition to Captain James Brisbane of HMS Belle Poule while he recovered , and was well enough to resume command on 25 March . The British forced the French to surrender on 16 April , the British casualties being seven dead and 39 wounded . Eyre was personally thanked by Admirals Sir George Martin and Sir Charles Cotton , and the Lords of the Admiralty .

With the islands secure Eyre enforced the blockade of Corfu . On 6 February 1811 he encountered an enemy relief convoy bound from Otranto to Corfu , consisting of 25 ships . Eyre captured 22 of them , carrying grain , ordnance and 500 troops . Eyre also stationed several frigates in the northern part of the Adriatic under the command of Captain William Hoste . Hoste went on to win a significant victory over a French squadron under Bernard Dubourdieu at the Battle of Lissa . Eyre spent a total of two years commanding the station , the time spent almost constantly at sea , only briefly putting into port to refit and replenish supplies . He was succeeded in the post by Captain Charles Rowley and went to join the fleet of Toulon . On the occasion of his departure his subordinate , James Brisbane wrote

The Mediterranean fleet was by now under Sir Edward Pellew , and Eyre was sent to the Spanish coast to support the Spanish forces fighting the French . Eyre was particularly active off the coast of Valencia and evacuated the garrison of Oropesa del Mar , earning the thanks of General Joaquín Blake y Joyes . On being ordered back to England in 1811 Pellew also wrote a private letter of thanks , following on from his earlier declaration that ' I have to express my complete approbation of Captain Eyre 's methods , and have much satisfaction of employing the services of that most excellent officer in the aid of the Valencia patriots . ' Eyre arrived in England in 1812 , his health having been affected by his five years on a foreign station , and requested and received permission to go ashore . As a mark of his services in the Adriatic and off Spain he was knighted by King George III . Eyre was appointed a Colonel of Marines on 4 June 1814 and was nominated as a Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath following the expansion of the order on 12 January 1815 .

Eyre was promoted to rear-admiral on 12 August 1819 and shortly afterwards received an offer from Lord Melville to take command of the Cape and St Helena stations , but was unable to accept owing to matters of a personal nature . In 1823 he was able to accept the offer of the command of the South American station , at a time when several of the former Spanish colonies were declaring independence . Eyre was able to successfully manage delicate diplomatic and military duties , and was able to protect British rights and possessions in the area during periods of upheaval . His actions in the region included signing treaties with Spain and Portugal involving the prevention of illegal slave trafficking . He stepped down after the expiration of his posting and was succeeded by Admiral Sir Robert Otway .

Eyre returned to Britain , arriving at Spithead on 10 December 1826 , and was almost immediately offered command of a squadron fitting out for Lisbon . The changes in climate had brought on an attack of gout , and on being informed that as Sir Thomas Hardy 's squadron was already on the spot , he was at liberty to refuse the offer . Eyre did so , and retired ashore . He appears to have had no further commands , and was advanced to vice-admiral in 1830 . He had married Georgiana Cooke , the daughter of Sir George Cooke , 7th Baronet , at Doncaster on 1 November 1800 , with whom he had a family of eight children , including two sons named George-Hardolf and William . Sir George Eyre died on 15 February 1839 at the rectory , Carlton , Derbyshire .

Queer Eye is an American reality television series that premiered on the cable television network Bravo during July 2003 . The program 's name was changed from Queer Eye for the Straight Guy after the third season to generalize the scope of its content . The series was created by executive producers David Collins and Michael Williams along with their producing partner David Metzler ; it was produced by their production company , Scout Productions . The series is premised on and uses the stereotypes that homosexual ( " queer " ) men are superior in matters of fashion , style , personal grooming , interior design and culture . In each episode , the team of five homosexual men known collectively as the " Fab Five " perform a " makeover " ( in the parlance of the show , a " make-better " ) on a person , usually a heterosexual ( " straight " ) man , revamping his wardrobe , redecorating his home and offering advice on grooming , lifestyle and food . Queer Eye for the Straight Guy debuted during 2003 , and quickly became a surprise success . The success of the series resulted in merchandising , franchising of the concept internationally , and a woman-oriented spin-off , Queer Eye for the Straight Girl . Queer Eye won an Emmy Award for Outstanding Reality Program during 2004 . The series ' name was abbreviated to Queer Eye at the beginning of its third season to represent the show 's change from making over only heterosexual men to including women and homosexual men . Queer Eye ended production during 2006 June and the final ten episodes were broadcast during October 2007 . The series ended October 30 . During September 2008 , the Fine Living Network briefly aired Queer Eye in syndication .

Producers Collins and Metzler were given approval by Bravo to develop Queer Eye after the ratings success the network experienced when it counterprogrammed a marathon of its 2002 series Gay Weddings at the same time as Super Bowl XXXVII during 2003 January . The pilot episode was filmed in Boston , Massachusetts during June 2002 . Of the eventual Fab Five , only Kressley and Allen appeared . The culture , design and grooming roles were filled by James Hannaham , Charles Daboub , Jr. and Sam Spector , respectively . The pilot was delivered to Bravo during September 2002 , and was well received in audience testing . Soon thereafter NBC purchased Bravo and ordered 12 episodes of the series . NBC promoted the show extensively , including billboard campaigns and print advertisements in national magazines . Kyan Douglas and Thom Filicia joined the show for these episodes , along with Blair Boone in the role of " culture guy . " Boone filmed two episodes ( which were broadcast as the second and third episodes and for which he was credited as a " guest culture expert " ) but was replaced by Rodriguez beginning with production of the third episode . Each episode was shot over a span of four days and edited to create the perception that the events of the episode took place in a single day .

The majority of Queer Eye episodes use the same basic format . The episode begins with the Fab Five in an SUV ( usually in New York City , where the series was based ) discussing their heterosexual subject . The Five review details of the subject 's personal life and note problems in their various areas of expertise . The Five usually have a specific event for which they plan to prepare the subject . These included everything from throwing a backyard barbecue for friends to preparing to ask for a salary increase to proposing marriage . Upon arriving at the subject 's home , the Fab Five go through his belongings , performing a running commentary of catty remarks about the state of his wardrobe , home decor , cleanliness and grooming . They also speak with the subject and family members to get an idea of the sort of style they like and their goals for the experience and to discuss the planned event . The remainder of the first half of the episode follows the Fab Five as they escort the subject to various locales to select new furniture and clothes . Often , Ted demonstrates how to select and prepare food for a particular dish that the subject will prepare for the special event , Kyan takes him for spa treatments and a new haircut . Each such segment includes a style tip superimposed on the screen , summarizing in a sentence or two the style issues addressed in the segment . Interspersed with this are interview segments in which friends and family members of the subject discuss his style issues .

In the next section , the subject returns to a completely redecorated home and models articles of his new wardrobe for the Fab Five . Each of the Five offer final words of advice and encouragement , accompanied by supplies of grooming products , food and kitchenware and in some cases expensive electronics items such as entertainment centers and computers . The final section follows the subject as he prepares for the special event , with the Fab Five watching edited footage of his preparations and critiquing how well or how poorly he followed their advice . Finally , the subject is followed through the event itself , with the Five again performing a running commentary and the subject often expressing his deep gratitude to the Fab Five for their counsel . A final tip from each of the Fab Five , usually relating to one of the topics covered in the episode , plays just before the credits . Special episodes of Queer Eye that deviated from this formula included episodes in which the Fab Five journeyed outside the greater New York area , including shows filmed in England , Texas , and Las Vegas . In two episodes , the Fab Five made over homosexual men ( both of which aired during June , Gay Pride Month , during 2004 and 2006 ) and in one episode made over a female-to-male transgender person . The show also featured makeovers of members of the Boston Red Sox after their 2004 World Series victory , several holiday specials and in the final season , a " Mister Straight Guy " pageant featuring subjects from the series ' history .

Queer Eye for the Straight Guy debuted on July 15 , 2003 and the series quickly attained high ratings , maximizing during September of that year with 3.34 million viewers per episode . The popularity of the series established the Fab Five as media celebrities , with high-profile appearances at the Emmys and a " make-better " of Jay Leno and his The Tonight Show set in August of that year . Fab Five members parlayed their celebrity into endorsement deals , notably Thom Filicia 's becoming the spokesperson for Pier 1 Imports . The American press almost universally complimented the series and the Fab Five . Out magazine listed the Fab Five in its " OUT 100 " , the " greatest gay success stories " of 2003 . Instinct magazine declared Kressley one of the " Leading Men " of 2004 . The series attracted criticism for making generalizations about sexual identity , namely that homosexual men are inherently more fashionable and stylish than heterosexuals . Among those making this critique were Tom Shales in the Washington Post ( " stereotypes on parade " ) , Richard Goldstein in Village Voice ( " Haven 't fags always been consigned to the role of body servant ? " ) and United States Congressman Barney Frank speaking to the New York Post ( " The notion that gay men have a superior fashion sense is not true and it 's damaging . It 's perfectly possible to enjoy that show and say , look at those clever homosexuals . What they do with hair ! And not support gays at all . " ) . Anthropologist Lionel Tiger described the program as typical of a widespread acceptance of insulting heterosexual men : " Heteromales are the last group it is acceptable to bash as a class . The homosexual fellows on Queer Eye seem to provide riveting hilarity to especially female viewers . What if there were 5 Swedes telling Kenyans how to live elegantly and fashionably ? What if 5 Catholics told Jews how to dress , decorate , and court ? The program is degraded and degrading , Cheap Shots for A Humiliated Guy . "

With the success of the first season , original " culture guy " Blair Boone sued the show for breach of contract , claiming he should be paid not just for two episodes but for the season that he had been contracted to film . The popularity of the series inspired a number of parodies . Comedy Central hosted a satirical television series named Straight Plan for the Gay Man , which featured four heterosexual men teaching homosexual men how to be more ( stereotypically ) straight , redecorating their homes with neon beer signs and teaching them about sports . South Park spoofed the show and its hosts in the episode " South Park Is Gay ! " , in which the protagonists learn that the Fab Five are actually evil Crab People trying to control the world by converting heterosexual men into metrosexuals . Queer Eye won an Emmy Award for Outstanding Reality Program during 2004 and was nominated for another Emmy in the same category during 2005 . The series also received GLAAD Media Awards for Outstanding Reality Program during 2004 and 2005 , and was nominated for a third during 2006 . In the second season , ratings decreased , averaging about 1.8 million viewers per episode with an average 804,000 viewers in the important 18-40 demographic . New episodes continued to be broadcast for two more seasons . Bravo confirmed during early 2007 that Queer Eye had been cancelled . The remaining fifth season episodes were billed as Queer Eye : The Final Season and aired twice weekly beginning October 2 , 2007 .

Queer Eye 's American success caused television networks in several countries to syndicate the American episodes , with a number of countries creating their own local versions of Queer Eye for broadcast in their countries . However , few of these homegrown versions have proven as successful as the original and most did not last long before cancellation . Licensing of the format is managed by NBCUniversal . NBCU licensed television producer David Hedges and his UK production house vialondon.tv to produce local versions for Europe , with Flextech 's Living channel doing the same to produce the United Kingdom 's version after a first attempt at a UK production by Making Time was abandoned . The first episode of the Finnish version , Sillä silmällä created controversy , not for the homosexual content but for the blatant product placement considered to be a transgression of a Finnish law against " hidden advertising " .

The soundtrack for Queer Eye for the Straight Guy was released February 10 , 2004 , in the USA . It reached number one on the electronic music chart , number two on the soundtrack charts and the top 40 in the Billboard 200 album chart . In Australia , the soundtrack was released for the Sydney Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras and the popularity of the series in Australia resulted in the soundtrack scoring the top 10 of the Australian album chart on March 8 , 2004 . It was certified gold in Australia during March 2004 . The song " Superstar " by Jamelia from the soundtrack also went to number one on the Australian singles charts in the same week , and the theme song of the show , " All Things ( Just Keep Getting Better ) " by Widelife , went to the top 20 that same month . " All Things " would score a 2005 Juno Award for " Dance Recording of the Year " for Widelife ( Rachid Wehbi & Ian Nieman ) . Rob Eric was the executive producer for the album .

Named to the see of Canterbury in 735 , Nothhelm was consecrated the same year . Pope Gregory III sent him a pallium in 736 . He may have been appointed by Æthelbald , King of Mercia , whose councilor he was . Whether or not he owed his appointment to Æthelbald , Nothhelm was one of a number of Mercians who became Archbishop of Canterbury during the 730s and 740s , during a time of expanding Mercian influence . He held a synod in 736 or 737 , which drew nine bishops ; the meeting adjudicated a dispute over the ownership of a monastery located at Withington . A significant feature of this synod was the fact that no king attended , but yet the synod still rendered judgement in the ownership even without secular oversight , which was more usual . Nothhelm oversaw the reorganisation of the Mercian dioceses which took place in 737 . The archbishop consecrated Witta as Bishop of Lichfield and Totta as Bishop of Leicester . The diocese of Leicester was firmly established by this action , although earlier attempts had been made to establish a bishopric there . In 738 , Nothhelm was a witness on the charter of Eadberht I , the King of Kent .

Bede addressed his work In regum librum XXX quaestiones to Nothhelm , who had asked the thirty questions on the biblical book of Kings that Bede answered . Bede 's work De VIII Quastionibus may have been written for Nothhelm . While he was archbishop , Boniface wrote to him , requesting a copy of the Libellus responsionum of Pope Gregory I for use in Boniface 's missionary efforts . Boniface also asked for information on when the Gregorian mission to England arrived in England . This text of the Libellus responsionum has been the subject of some controversy , with the historian Suso Brechter arguing that the text was a forgery created by Nothhelm and a Roman archdeacon . The historian Paul Meyvaert has refuted this view , and most historians incline towards the belief that the text is genuine , although it is not considered conclusively proven .

Duff Gordon " Sir Richard " Cooley ( March 29 , 1873 – August 9 , 1937 ) was a professional baseball player whose career spanned 17 seasons , 13 of which were spent in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . Cooley , an outfielder and first baseman , had a career batting average of .294 in 1,317 games played . He compiled 849 runs , 1,579 hits , 180 doubles , 102 triples , 26 home runs , and 557 runs batted in ( RBI ) . In Major League history , he is tied in 148th place for most all-time triples and , his 224 career stolen bases , place him equal 279th on the all-time list . Cooley made his Major League debut at the age of 20 , and spent the majority of his career there , but he also appeared in minor league baseball . After breaking his leg with the Tigers in 1905 , he was replaced with future Hall of Fame outfielder Ty Cobb . Cooley , nicknamed " Sir Richard " due to his aristocratic manner , was listed as standing 5 feet 11 inches ( 180 cm ) and weighing 158 pounds ( 72 kg ) .

Cooley was born on March 29 , 1873 , in Leavenworth , Kansas . He began his Major League career in 1893 , playing for Topeka , Kansas , before playing for the St. Louis Browns of the National League ( NL ) . Although the seventh youngest player in the league during his first season , he batted .346 , which remained a career-high . Defensively , Cooley was a utility player , starting at multiple positions for the Cardinals . On September 30 of 1873 , Cooley recorded six hits against the Boston Beaneaters . He played for St. Louis in 1894 , nearly doubling his at bats ( 206 ) and games played ( 54 ) . Cooley played more regularly in 1895 and averaged 4.2 at bats per game throughout the season . One of the most successful batters on the team , he had the highest batting average at .342 and led the Cardinals in hits , triples , runs scored and total bases . His slugging ( .466 ) and on-base plus slugging ( .851 ) percentages remained the highest of his career . His 20 triples and 264 total bases were both the fifth-highest total in a season for the Cardinals franchise from between the years of 1892 when they entered the NL to 1920 , which marked the end of the Dead-ball era . At the end of the year , he had played 133 games , two behind Major League leader and teammate , Joe Quinn . Offensively , Cooley tied for seventh in most hits and finished fourth in triples .

At the beginning of the 1896 season , Cooley continued to play for the Browns . However , after 40 games in which he had a .307 batting average , he was moved to the Philadelphia Phillies in exchange for Joe Sullivan , Tuck Turner , and an unknown sum of money . The Phillies , under manager Billy Nash , finished 62 – 68 , eighth in the NL . Cooley remained with the Phillies in 1897 , when he tied with Fred Tenney , George Van Haltren , and Gene DeMontreville for the MLB lead in at-bats . Cooley led his team in runs scored and stolen bases , and finished third , behind Ed Delahanty and Nap Lajoie , in hits . The following two seasons , playing for Philadelphia , he hit .312 in 1898 and .276 in 1899 , before he was purchased by the Pittsburgh Pirates for US $ 1,000 in April 1900 . In his only season with the Pirates , Cooley recorded a batting average of .201 , the worst of his career . He also compiled 30 runs , 50 hits , and 22 RBI . After being purchased by the Boston Beaneaters in 1901 , Cooley made his minor-league debut for the Syracuse Stars of Syracuse , New York . After recording a team-high in batting average and slugging percentage , Cooley was promoted to the Major League Beaneaters . Next season , under manager Al Buckenberger , Cooley played in 135 games , more than double the previous year for the Beaneaters . He finished the year eighth in the NL in both hits and total bases , and third in doubles .

Cooley remained with the Beaneaters for the following two seasons , hitting .289 in 1903 . On June 20 , 1904 , Cooley hit for the cycle ( a single , double , triple , and home run in the same game ) , becoming the second Beaneater to do so . Cooley finished the 1904 season with six total errors , five in the outfield and one at first base . Cooley 's 70 RBIs were eighth most in the NL . After the season , in October 1904 , he was selected off the Beaneater 's waivers by the Detroit Tigers . In his final Major League season , Cooley played in 97 games before breaking his leg , which led to Ty Cobb , a future inductee to the National Baseball Hall of Fame taking his place as center fielder for the rest of the season . He was sold to the Beaneaters following the 1905 season , but decided to retire instead .

" England expects that every man will do his duty " was a signal sent by Vice Admiral Horatio Nelson , 1st Viscount Nelson , from his flagship HMS Victory as the Battle of Trafalgar was about to commence on 21 October 1805 . Trafalgar was a decisive naval engagement of the Napoleonic Wars . It gave the United Kingdom control of the seas , removing all possibility of a French invasion and conquest of Britain . Although there was much confusion surrounding the wording of the signal in the aftermath of the battle , the significance of the victory and Nelson 's death during the battle led to the phrase becoming embedded in the English psyche , and it has been regularly quoted , paraphrased and referenced up to the modern day .

As the British fleet closed with the opposing combined fleets of France and Spain , Lord Nelson signalled all the necessary battle instructions to his ships . Aware of the momentousness of events to come , Lord Nelson felt that something extra was required . He instructed his signal officer , Lieutenant John Pasco , to signal to the fleet , as quickly as possible , the message " England confides [ i.e. is confident ] that every man will do his duty . " Pasco suggested to Nelson that expects be substituted for confides , since the former word was in the signal book , whereas confides would have to be spelt out letter-by-letter . Nelson agreed to the change ( even though it produced a less trusting impression ) : His Lordship came to me on the poop , and after ordering certain signals to be made , about a quarter to noon , he said , ' Mr. Pasco , I wish to say to the fleet , ENGLAND CONFIDES THAT EVERY MAN WILL DO HIS DUTY ' and he added ' You must be quick , for I have one more to make which is for close action . ' I replied , ' If your Lordship will permit me to substitute the confides for expects the signal will soon be completed , because the word expects is in the vocabulary , and confides must be spelt , ' His Lordship replied , in haste , and with seeming satisfaction , ' That will do , Pasco , make it directly.'

Thus , at around 11 : 45 a.m. on 21 October 1805 , the most famous naval signal in British history was sent . The exact time the signal was sent is not known ( one account puts it as early as 10 : 30 ) , as the message was repeated throughout the fleet , but Pasco puts it at " about a quarter to noon " and logs from other ships of the line also put it close to this time . The signal was relayed using the numeric flag code known as the " Telegraphic Signals of Marine Vocabulary " , devised in 1800 by Rear Admiral Sir Home Popham , and based on the signal books created earlier by Admiral Lord Howe . This code assigned the digits 0 to 9 to ten signal flags , which were used in combination . Code numbers 1 – 25 represented letters of the alphabet ( omitting J and with V = 20 before U = 21 ) ; higher numbers were assigned meanings by a code book . The code numbers are believed to have been hoisted on the mizzenmast , one after another , with the " telegraphic flag " also being flown to show that the signals employed Popham 's code . As well as digit flags , the code used " repeat " flags so that only one set of digits was needed ; thus the word " do " , coded as " 220 " , used a " 2 " flag , a " first repeat " flag here serving as a second 2 , and a " 0 " flag . The word " duty " was not in the codebook ( and was not replaced as " confides " had been ) , so had to be spelt out , and the whole message required twelve " lifts " . It is believed that it would have taken about four minutes . A team of four to six men , led by Lt. Pasco , would have prepared and hoisted the flags onboard Lord Nelson 's flagship HMS Victory . The message shows one of the shortcomings of Popham 's code — even the two-letter " do " required three flags hoisted for the signal . It is reported that a great cheer went up as the signal was hoisted and repeated throughout the fleet .

Almost immediately , the signal began to be misquoted . A number of ships in the fleet recorded the signal as " England expects every man to do his duty " ( omitting that and replacing will with to ) . This version became so prevalent that it is recorded on Nelson 's tomb in St. Paul 's Cathedral . The word that is also omitted on the version around the base of Nelson 's Column , as seen in the photo above . However , the Victory 's log and the accounts of signal officer John Pasco and Henry Blackwood ( captain of the frigate Euryalus ) , both present at the preparation of the signal , agree on the form given here . On 26 December 1805 , The Times newspaper in London reported the signal as ; " England expects every officer and man to do his duty this day " . In 1811 , the tenor John Braham composed a song , " The Death of Nelson " , including the words of the signal . The song became popular almost immediately and was performed throughout the British Empire during the 19th century . To make the words fit the metre , they were altered to " England expects that every man this day will do his duty " . This version of the wording is also persistent .

Between 1885 and 1908 it was believed that the signal had been sent using the 1799 code book , as in 1885 it was pointed out that this had not been replaced until 1808 . In 1908 it was discovered , the Admiralty had , in fact , changed the signal code in November 1803 , after the 1799 version had been captured by the French , and new code books had been issued to Nelson 's fleet at Cadiz in September , 1805 . As a result , books published between these two dates show the signal using the wrong flags . The signal is still hoisted on the Victory at her dry dock in Portsmouth on Trafalgar Day ( 21 October ) every year , although the signal flags are displayed all at once , running from fore to aft , rather than hoisted sequentially from the mizzenmast .

Nelson 's famous signal has been imitated in other navies of the world . Napoleon ordered the French equivalent , " La France compte que chacun fera son devoir " , to be displayed on French vessels . At the opening of the Battle of Plattsburgh in September 1814 , Commodore Thomas MacDonough of the U.S. Navy flew the signal " Impressed seamen call on every man to do his duty " , referring to the fact that impressment of U.S. mariners had been a popular cause of the War of 1812 . Before the Battle of Tsushima , Japanese Admiral Togo ( who had studied naval science in England from 1871 to 1878 ) signalled to his fleet : " The fate of the Empire depends upon today 's battle : let every man do his utmost " .

" ... as the poet informs us , England expects Every man to do his duty , England is the most sanguine country on the face of the earth , and will find itself continually disappointed . " In Ogden Nash 's collection of poems I 'm a Stranger Here Myself ( 1938 ) there is a short poem " England Expects " . During the Second World War , an Admiralty propaganda poster intended to increase industrial production on the home front , carried the slogan ; " Britain expects that you too , this day , will do your duty " . Nelson 's flag signal was hoisted by the Royal Navy monitor , HMS Erebus at the start of the bombardment for the Normandy landings on 6 June 1944 . It was also referenced by Margaret Thatcher during her crucial speech to the cabinet which finally persuaded them to rally behind her over the divisive issue of the poll tax . Further afield , it has been adapted by James Joyce in his novel , Ulysses , such as " Ireland expects that every man this day will do his duty " . In the United States , former Secretary of the Navy of the United States of America Gordon R. England wore a tie with the flags representing the famous quote when he visited naval vessels .

Waddesdon Road railway station , called Waddesdon railway station before 1922 , was a small halt in open countryside in Buckinghamshire , England . It was opened in 1871 as part of a short horse-drawn tramway to assist with the transport of goods from and around the Duke of Buckingham 's extensive estates in Buckinghamshire and to connect the Duke 's estates to the Aylesbury and Buckingham Railway at Quainton Road . In 1872 the line was expanded and converted for passenger use , becoming known as the Brill Tramway . In 1899 the operation of the line was taken over by the London-based Metropolitan Railway . In 1933 the Metropolitan Railway was taken into public ownership to become the Metropolitan line of the London Underground , and despite its rural setting Waddesdon Road station became a part of the London Transport system . The new management could not see a future for the line as a financially viable passenger route , and Waddesdon Road , along with the rest of the former Brill Tramway , was closed in late 1935 . The station was heavily used for the transport of construction materials during the building of Baron Ferdinand de Rothschild 's estate at Waddesdon Manor in the 1870s and 1880s , but aside from that it saw little use . The station was inconveniently sited and served by few passenger trains , and other more frequently served stations were in easy walking distance . In 1932 , the last full year of operations prior to the Metropolitan Railway being taken into public ownership , the station was used for only 281 passenger journeys and generated just £ 4 of passenger revenue .

On 23 September 1868 the small Aylesbury and Buckingham Railway ( A & BR ) was opened . It ran south from the London and North Western Railway 's Oxford to Bletchley line at Verney Junction , via Quainton Road railway station , to connect with the Great Western Railway at Aylesbury . The 3rd Duke of Buckingham and Chandos served as Chairman of the London and North Western Railway from 1852 to 1861 and had a long interest in railways . In the early 1870s he decided to build a light railway to carry goods between his estates in Buckinghamshire and the A & BR 's line at Quainton Road . The first stage of the line , known as the Wotton Tramway , was a 4-mile ( 6.4 km ) line from Quainton Road via Wotton to a coal siding at Kingswood , and opened on 1 April 1871 . Intended for use by horse trams , the line was built with longitudinal sleepers to avoid horses tripping on the sleepers . Lobbying from residents and businesses in the nearby town of Brill led to an extension being built in 1872 from Wotton to Brill railway station , at the foot of Brill Hill three-quarters of a mile ( 1.2 km ) from the hilltop town of Brill itself . Two mixed trains each day were introduced in each direction , and the line was renamed the Brill Tramway . The Duke bought two Aveling and Porter traction engines modified to work as locomotives for the line , each with a top speed of 8 miles per hour ( 13 km / h ) , although a speed limit of 5 miles per hour ( 8 km / h ) was enforced .

The Duke died in 1889 , and in 1894 the trustees of his estate set up the Oxford & Aylesbury Tramroad Company ( O & ATC ) with the intention of extending the line from Brill to Oxford . On 1 September 1894 London 's Metropolitan Railway ( MR ) reached Aylesbury , and shortly afterwards connected to the A & BR line , with local MR services running via Quainton Road to Verney Junction from 1 April 1894 . Through trains from the MR 's London terminus at Baker Street commenced on 1 January 1897 . From 1 December 1899 the MR leased the Brill Tramway from the O & ATC and took over the operation of services on the line , although the Tramway continued to be owned by the O & ATC .

Waddesdon Road was the first station out from the Quainton Road junction station , in open countryside immediately north of Akeman Street ( the A41 road after 1919 ) , about 1.1 miles ( 1.8 km ) southeast of Quainton Road , 1 mile ( 1.6 km ) northwest of the town of Waddesdon , and 1,300 yards ( 1,200 m ) from Waddesdon Manor . The station was initially built with a single low wooden platform , primarily intended for loading and unloading freight . After the 1899 transfer of services to the Metropolitan Railway , the MR introduced a single Brown Marshall passenger carriage on the line ; at this time , a short section of platform was raised to conventional height to allow access to the higher doors on the new carriage . Initially known as " Waddesdon Road Siding " , the station was renamed " Waddesdon " shortly after opening . On 1 October 1922 the nearby Waddesdon Manor railway station , on the Metropolitan Railway southeast of Quainton Road , was renamed " Waddesdon " and the former Waddesdon station was renamed " Waddesdon Road " in an effort to reduce confusion . The station was heavily used during the construction of Baron Ferdinand de Rothschild 's estate at Waddesdon Manor in the 1870s and 1880s . The brickworks at Brill sent 25,000 bricks per week along the Brill Tramway , and 7,000 tons ( 7,100 t ) of Bath Stone were shipped from Corsham . Aside from goods traffic associated with the building of Waddesdon Manor , the station was little used other than for shipping milk from nearby farms to Aylesbury and London . Inconveniently sited away from any nearby towns and villages , and with the far more frequently served Quainton Road and Waddesdon Manor stations within easy walking distance , the station saw very little passenger use . In 1932 , the last year of private operation , Waddesdon Road station saw only 281 passengers and made only £ 4 ( about £ 300 in 2016 ) in passenger receipts over the entire year .

Limited by poor quality locomotives and bumpy , cheaply laid track which followed the contours of the hills , trains ran very slowly in the area : in 1882 trains took 13 minutes to travel the short distance from Waddesdon Road to Quainton Road , and 57 minutes from Waddesdon Road to Brill . From 1872 to 1894 the station was served by two passenger trains per day in each direction , and between 1895 and 1899 the number was increased to three per day . Following the 1899 transfer of services to the Metropolitan Railway , the station was served by four trains per day in each direction until closure in 1935 . Improvements to the line carried out at the time of the transfer to the Oxford & Aylesbury Tramroad , and the improved locomotives of the Metropolitan Railway , reduced journey times from Waddesdon Road to Quainton Road and Brill to 6 minutes and 22 minutes respectively .

On 1 July 1933 the Metropolitan Railway , and all of London 's other underground railways except the small Waterloo & City Railway , were taken into public ownership as part of the newly formed London Passenger Transport Board ( LPTB ) . As a consequence , despite its distance from London , Waddesdon Road station became part of the London Underground network . By this time the Brill Tramway was losing significant sums of money . Goods traffic had dwindled , and unlike other areas served by the former Metropolitan Railway there had not been a growth in population and thus passenger numbers remained low . Frank Pick , Managing Director of the Underground Group from 1928 and the Chief Executive of the LPTB , planned to move the new London Underground away from goods services to concentrate solely on serving passengers . He saw the lines beyond Aylesbury to Brill and Verney Junction as having little future as financially viable passenger routes , concluding that over £ 2,000 ( about £ 130,000 in 2016 ) would be saved by closing the Brill Tramway . As a result , the LPTB decided to abandon all passenger services beyond Aylesbury .

The Brill Tramway was closed on 1 December 1935 , with the last trains running on 30 November . Upon the withdrawal of London Transport services the railway and stations reverted to the control of the by now almost dormant Oxford & Aylesbury Tramroad Company . With no funds and no rolling stock of its own the O & ATC was unable to operate the line , and on 2 April 1936 the entire infrastructure of the line was sold at auction ; the most expensive lot sold was the 37-yard ( 34 m ) platform of Waddesdon Road station , which fetched £ 7 10s ( about £ 1,070 in 2016 ) . Excluding the station houses at Westcott and Brill , which were sold separately , the auction raised £ 112 10s ( about £ 6,890 in 2016 ) in total . No trace of the buildings at Waddesdon Road remains , but the former trackbed is now a public footpath known as the Tramway Walk . Metropolitan line passenger trains ceased to run north of Aylesbury from 6 July 1936 . London and North Eastern Railway services ( British Rail from 1948 ) continued to run from London 's Marylebone station over the line to Verney Junction via Quainton Road until March 1963 , and the LPTB continued to maintain and to operate freight services over the Verney Junction line until 6 September 1947 . After the withdrawal of services from London , Verney Junction station remained open to serve trains on the Oxford – Bletchley line . It was closed following the withdrawal of services between Oxford and Cambridge from 1 January 1968 .

" Son of Three " is a song by the American group the Breeders that was written and sung by band member Kim Deal . The original version of the composition was recorded at Grandmaster Recording Ltd. in Hollywood , and was released in May 2002 on the album Title TK . The Breeders — who then consisted of Kim Deal , Kelley Deal , Jose Medeles , Richard Presley , and Mando Lopez — later re-recorded " Son of Three " at a different Hollywood studio as Title TK 's third European single . This subsequent recording is shorter and faster than the album track , and matches how they were playing the song in concert in 2002 . The " Son of Three " single was released in September 2002 on 4AD , and reached No. 72 in the United Kingdom . The single includes a live performance of the group 's 1992 song " Safari " and a cover of Nerf Herder 's theme from the Buffy the Vampire Slayer television series . Deal , a Buffy fan , also negotiated to have the Breeders appear in an episode of the show . Critics have praised both the album and single versions of " Son of Three " .

The original version of " Son of Three " appeared on the Breeders ' 2002 album Title TK . While most of the album 's tracks were recorded by Steve Albini at his Electrical Audio studio in Chicago , " Son of Three " is one of two songs from a session recorded by Mark Arnold and Andrew Alekel at Grandmaster Recording Ltd. in Hollywood . The composition was written by Kim Deal , who also sang on the track . The other musicians who played on the recording were Kim 's sister Kelley Deal on guitar and vocals ; Richard Presley on guitar ; Mando Lopez on bass and guitar ; and Jose Medeles on percussion . Following the release of Title TK 's first two singles , " Off You " and " Huffer " , a third single was requested for the European market . For this purpose , the Breeders decided to record a new version of " Son of Three " . The session , which took place in July 2002 at Track Record Studios in North Hollywood , was fit in during a short break between a European and a US concert tour . This recording is faster than the album version , and reflects the sound of the group 's live performances of the song in 2002 . The engineers for this session were Ai Fujisaki and Justin Hamilton , with additional engineering credited to Marc Arnold .

The sound of " Son of Three " has been described as " dark punk " , and elsewhere as a " garage symphony of bubblegum grunge , woo-woo gurly harmonies and body-snatching sci-fi eeriness " . One interviewer in 2002 described the lyrics of " Son of Three " as " motorific " , noting the numerous references to driving in the song and throughout the Title TK album . The song 's lyrics include lines such as " No more time on the meter " , " Cross another county line " , and " Are we there ? " The second track on the three-song single , " Buffy Theme " , was also recorded at the July 2002 session . This composition was originally performed by the group Nerf Herder , whose version was included on Buffy the Vampire Slayer : The Album . It was written by Nerf Herder members Dennis , Grip , and Sherlock . Kim and Kelley Deal were both fans of the Buffy the Vampire Slayer television show and had been playing " Buffy Theme " in concert in the first half of 2002 . At some point after the July recording session , Kim Deal telephoned Buffy musical supervisor John King to ask whether the Breeders could be on the show . On November 5 , the group appeared on the episode " Him " , in which they performed " Son of Three " and " Little Fury " . The Breeders ' " Buffy Theme " was also later included on the album Buffy the Vampire Slayer : Radio Sunnydale .

Title TK came out on May 20 – 21 , 2002 , and the " Son of Three " single on September 2 of that year . The single reached No. 72 on the UK Singles Chart . The album and single versions of " Son of Three " have mostly been well received by critics . AllMusic 's Heather Phares calls the Title TK track " sweet [ and ] playfully spiky " , while Will Bryant of Pitchfork cites it as a " standout " of the album , that " get [ s ] the job done " . PopMatters ' Matt Cibula reports " rockin ' ... hard " to the song and comments on the originality of the lyrics , such as the line “ If I find the door / I am the son of Go ” . A reviewer at Contactmusic.com describes the single version of " Son of Three " as " special " , and for NME 's Stephen Dalton , it is a " jewel " . Richard Garnett of Leeds Music Scene similarly praises the track , commenting that " the beefy descending bass line is enough to send shivers " .

Ef : A Fairy Tale of the Two ( stylized as ef - a fairy tale of the two . ) is a two-part Japanese adult visual novel series by Minori for Windows PCs . The first game in the series , Ef : The First Tale , was released on December 22 , 2006 , and the second game , Ef : The Latter Tale , was released on May 30 , 2008 . The opening video for the game was animated by Makoto Shinkai , and a majority of the music was produced by Tenmon , who has worked in the past with Shinkai and Minori . Female character design was by Naru Nanao of Da Capo fame , while male character design was by 2C Galore . Before the release of Ef : The First Tale , a manga based on the overall story was serialized between 2005 and 2015 starting in Dengeki Comic Gao , but later transferred to Dengeki Daioh . In addition , a light novel was serialized in Kadokawa Shoten 's Comptiq from July 2006 to July 2008 . A 12-episode anime adaptation titled Ef : A Tale of Memories was produced by Shaft and aired between October and December 2007 . A second season of the anime titled Ef : A Tale of Melodies aired 12 episodes between October and December 2008 .

The gameplay requires little interaction from the player as most of the duration of the game is spent simply reading the text that appears on the screen which represents either dialogue between the various characters or the inner thoughts of the protagonist . The player has a chance to assume the role of four protagonists , two in each Ef : The First Tale and Ef : The Latter Tale . Each protagonist is paired with a heroine , and each scenario in the original PC versions of the visual novels includes scenes with sexual content . These scenes are removed or modified in the PlayStation 2 port . Every so often , the player will come to a point where he or she is given the chance to choose from multiple options . The time between these points is variable and can occur anywhere from a minute to much longer . Gameplay pauses at these points and depending on which choice the player makes , the plot will progress in a specific direction . There are four main plot lines that the player will have the chance to experience , one for each of the heroines in the story . The plot lines carry on from each other in a linear fashion . The game can end prematurely if the player makes the wrong decisions . When this occurs , the player must go back to a previously saved spot and choose different decisions .

For Ef , Minori attempted to create a movie-like experience , using a lot of animated two-dimensional computer graphics presented from various angles . Instead of presenting the visuals straight-on with a character 's image in the middle of the screen and the character being the main focus , the character images in the Ef series are off-center and appear closer to " event " computer graphics ( CGs ) in typical visual novels . These types of CGs occur at certain pivotal times in a visual novel 's story and are meant to be artistic and much more detailed than normal visuals .

Ef : A Fairy Tale of the Two consists of two parts . The first part is titled Ef : The First Tale and primarily consists of the story of Hiro Hirono , Miyako Miyamura , Kyosuke Tsutsumi , Kei Shindo , and Yuko Amamiya . It consists of a prologue and two main chapters with Miyako as the focus for the first chapter , and Kei for the second . This is followed by the second part of the story , Ef : The Latter Tale , which primarily deals with the story of Renji Aso , Chihiro Shindo , Shuichi Kuze , Mizuki Hayama , and Yu Himura . The second part consists of two more main chapters and an ending chapter , with Chihiro as the focus for the third chapter , and Mizuki for the fourth . Bringing the two parts together forms the all-encompassing Ef : A Fairy Tale of the Two . The story is set in the town Otowa ( 音羽 ) .

Yuko Amamiya ( 雨宮 優子 , Amamiya Yūko , voiced by : Yumiko Nakajima ( Japanese ) , Carli Mosier ( English ) ) , a mysterious girl dressed like a nun , and Yu Himura ( 火村 夕 , Himura Yū , voiced by : Kōichi Tōchika ( Japanese ) , David Matranga ( English ) ) , a mysterious gentleman who is somehow attached to the church where Yuko first appears , are having a reunion in a church during Christmas time . Despite her attire , Yuko is not affiliated with the church . She always appears generally out of nowhere , and disappears just as quickly in various places throughout the story to talk with Hiro or other characters and give them advice . Yuko and Yu reminisce about the past and remember events of the previous year around the same time at the beginning of the first chapter of the story . Yuko hints of events that are revealed throughout Ef : A Fairy Tale of the Two . After the conclusion of the first chapter , the story cycles back to the prologue and the talk between Yuko and Yu . Yuko ends with her talk about the events in the first chapter . At the end of the second chapter , the story shifts again to the scene with Yuko and Yu . Yuko finishes her talk on the events from the second chapter and says that she misses talking to Hiro , Kyosuke , and their friends . Their talk ends with allusions to the continuation of the story , Ef : The Latter Tale .

The first chapter 's protagonist is Hiro Hirono ( 広野 紘 , Hirono Hiro , voiced by : Hiro Shimono ( Japanese ) , Greg Ayres ( English ) ) , an already established manga author despite still attending high school . Due to the pressures of his work , he often skips school and puts most of his time into his job as a manga artist of shōjo manga under the pseudonym " Nagi Shindo " ( 新堂 凪 , Shindō Nagi ) . Writing manga causes him to lose interest in school and focuses mainly on his work in order to earn an income , as usually he does not have much money as it is . While out one Christmas night , a purse snatcher rushes past Hiro on a bike and soon Miyako Miyamura ( 宮村 みやこ , Miyamura Miyako , voiced by : Hiroko Taguchi ( Japanese ) , Luci Christian ( English ) ) appears , chasing after the purse thief , taking Hiro 's bike without asking to pursue the culprit . She ends up destroying his bike , and later hangs out with him for the rest of the night . Hiro later meets Miyako again at school , and learns that she is a student of the same year there , but in a different class ; she too does not attend classes much because she finds them boring . Miyako has an energetic personality and enjoys doing unorthodox things . She eventually starts to become attracted to Hiro after they start spending more time together , but during this time Hiro 's childhood friend Kei Shindo ( 新藤 景 , Shindō Kei , voiced by : Junko Okada ( Japanese ) , Brittney Karbowski ( English ) ) begins to feel left out and a love triangle develops between the three students . She is attracted to Hiro , and becomes jealous when she finds out how much time he is spending with Miyako Miyamura . Hiro and Miyako eventually become a couple , despite Kei 's feelings for him .

The second chapter begins several months after the end of the first . It is now summer , and the story focuses on a new protagonist named Kyosuke Tsutsumi ( 堤 京介 , Kyōsuke Tsutsumi , voiced by : Yūki Tai ( Japanese ) , Chris Patton ( English ) ) . Kyosuke is an acquaintance of Hiro 's and happens to be in the same grade and school . He has a passion for filming , and constantly carries a digital video recorder around with him . On Christmas night , he saw Kei Shindo , who is the main heroine of the second chapter , running down the street and tried to get a shot of her , but a truck passed by , so he could not get a clean shot of the mystery girl . After thinking about the mystery girl , he ends up quitting the film club and agrees with his girlfriend to break up . One day , while filming near the gymnasium , Kyosuke catches sight of Kei practicing basketball for her school 's girl 's basketball team and becomes infatuated by her image . He desires to cast Kei in an amateur film he is making for an upcoming film festival . Occupied with thoughts of Kei , he sets out determined to get closer to Kei by becoming better friends with Hiro , Kei 's childhood friend . Kei is one year younger than Hiro and she attends the same school as him too . After being asked to be cast in one of his films , Kei initially refuses Kyosuke 's offer , but agrees to watch some of his previous films . While initially put off by the films , she eventually comes to like aspects of his work . After hanging out together more , the two eventually fall in love and go out together .

Ef : The Latter Tale begins once again with Yuko Amamiya and Yu Himura in the middle of a reunion in a church during Christmas time . Yuko tells Yu how she has influenced people in two separate stories ( from Ef : The First Tale ) . After she is done with this , she asks him to tell her about the people he has influenced . Yu starts to tell his first story , that of Chihiro Shindo ; the third chapter begins . Like Yuko , Yu also abruptly appears out of nowhere and disappears just as mysteriously . He often gives advice and warnings to Renji and others . Yu is close to Chihiro and takes care of her . After the conclusion of the third chapter , the story goes back to Yuko and Yu with Yu ending his recount of the third chapter , and goes on to talk about how he and Yuko were separated in the past . Yu starts his recount of the events from the fourth chapter . At the end of the fourth chapter , the story shifts one final time back to Yuko and Yu . Up to this point the two have been recounting individual tales to each other . The meaning of the overall title Ef : A Fairy Tale of the Two is revealed to be in connection with Yuko and Yu .

Like the first chapter , the third chapter is also set in winter , but now focuses on another protagonist named Renji Aso ( 麻生 蓮治 , Asō Renji , voiced by : Motoki Takagi ( Japanese ) , Clint Bickham ( English ) ) who is half German , half Japanese . One day , he goes to an abandoned train station in town he would often frequent to read at since it is so quiet there and meets a girl wearing an eyepatch over her left eye and sitting alone named Chihiro Shindo ( 新藤 千尋 , Shindō Chihiro , voiced by : Natsumi Yanase ( Japanese ) , Monica Rial ( English ) ) . Chihiro is the younger twin sister of Kei Shindo from Ef : The First Tale and the main heroine of the third chapter in the story . Despite them being mutually shy , Renji comes back to see her at the station every day after school and quickly becomes friends with her . Renji later learns that she has a severe case of anterograde amnesia , where she can only remember 13 hours ' of memory at a time , aside from the events before the accident that led to her current state , which she can recall perfectly . Now , she carries a diary with her which she writes in every day the events of that day so that the next day , after she had forgotten everything , she will be able to remind herself of what happened the previous day . Ironically , she has a fantastic memory of anything that happened that is less than thirteen hours old .

Renji also finds out that it is her dream to write a fantasy novel , but due to her condition has never been able to get far . Renji loves to read novels , and after discussing it with Chihiro , he collaborates with her to see if he can finally make her dream come true . Through the process of writing the novel , the two eventually become very close and they fall in love with each other . As the story progresses and more of the novel is written , Renji soon discovers that the novel is an allegory for Chihiro 's life and how she sees the world around her due to the state of her limited memory . Shuichi Kuze ( 久瀬 修一 , Kuze Shūichi , voiced by : Kenji Hamada ( Japanese ) , Illich Guardiola ( English ) ) is the main protagonist of the fourth chapter in the story . He is an older man who is a professional violinist . He had been studying abroad in Germany for a time , and comes back to where Ef 's story takes place . Shuichi is a neighbor of Renji 's and is good friends with him despite the age difference . Shuichi knows Yu Himura and Chihiro as well , but she forgets Shuichi due to her condition . He meets the main heroine from the fourth chapter of the story named Mizuki Hayama ( 羽山 ミズキ , Hayama Mizuki , voiced by : Mai Goto ( Japanese ) , Hilary Haag ( English ) ) after being introduced by Renji 's mother . She goes to an affiliated school and admires Kei greatly as someone who is older than she is ; in fact , Mizuki is also on her school 's girl 's basketball team . She greatly enjoys reading shōjo manga . She has a straightforward attitude and likes to be frank towards others , especially to Kei . She initially comes to Otowa to visit her older cousin Renji , and this is when she meets Shuichi . Shuichi keeps to himself that he is dying of a special case of neurosis , of which Mizuki is aware of , but even though she tries to get closer to him , he forcibly pushes her away and rejects her affections . Mizuki becomes depressed and obtains Chihiro 's diary . Casually reading it , she finds Yu 's name which she recognizes from her past . Mizuki goes to the church to find Yu , but the chapter ends shortly after .

Planning for Ef started in 2004 headed by Nobukazu Sakai ( also known as nbkz ) , who is the main producer for Minori . The director for Ef was Mikage , who was also one of the main scenario writers along with Yū Kagami . Character design for Ef was headed by two artists , Naru Nanao who drew the female characters , and 2C Galore who drew the males . The opening movie animation was done via a collaboration between the animation studio Ajia-do Animation Works and Makoto Shinkai . Music in the Ef series was provided by Tenmon , who was the sole composer for Ef : The First Tale , and was accompanied by Eiichirō Yanagi for additional music used in Ef : The Latter Tale . It cost Minori over 100 million yen to produce the Ef series . A fan disc entitled Ef : First Fan Disc was initially released during Comiket 72 between August 11 and August 13 , 2007 ; the disc , playable on a PC was later sold in retail stores starting on August 25 , 2007 . The disc , unlike the normal visual novels in the series , did not contain adult content , and offered a glimpse into the world of Ef , though only touched on points from Ef : The First Tale , the first game in the series . Ef : The First Tale was released as an adult game for the PC on December 22 , 2006 . The second game in the series , Ef : The Latter Tale was released on May 30 , 2008 . MangaGamer released both games in English : Ef : The First Tale was released on July 27 , 2012 and Ef : The Latter Tale was released on December 20 , 2013 .

A game demo of Ef : The First Tale is available via a free download at Getchu.com 's special website for Ef : The First Tale . A second fan disc entitled Ef : Second Fan Mix , released as a preview of Ef : The Latter Tale , was initially released at during Comiket 73 on December 29 , 2007 ; the disc , playable on a PC , was later sold in retail stores starting on February 8 , 2008 . A PlayStation 2 port combining The First Tale and The Latter Tale was released on April 29 , 2010 published by Comfort . A fan disc titled Tenshi no Nichiyōbi " Ef : A Fairy Tale of the Two " Pleasurable Box . ( 天使の日曜日 " ef - a fairy tale of the two " Pleasurable Box . ) was released on September 17 , 2010 .

A manga adaptation titled Ef : A Fairy Tale of the Two began serialization in the April 2005 issue of the shōnen manga magazine Dengeki Comic Gao ! sold on February 27 , 2005 , published by MediaWorks . The manga ended serialization in the April 2008 issue Dengeki Comic Gao ! at 35 chapters , but continued serialization in the June 2008 issue of ASCII Media Works ' manga magazine Dengeki Daioh sold on April 21 , 2008 . After a lengthy hiatus , the manga ended serialization in the March 2015 issue . The story was written by Mikage and Yū Kagami , two scenario writers of Minori , and illustrated by Juri Miyabi . Ten tankōbon volumes were published under ASCII Media Works ' Dengeki Comics imprint between February 27 , 2006 and January 27 , 2015 . A series of 24 short side-stories in a light novel form were serialized under the title Ef : A Fairy Tale of the Two Another Tale in Kadokawa Shoten 's seinen magazine Comptiq between the July 2006 and July 2008 issues sold on June 10 , 2006 and June 10 , 2008 , respectively . The stories are written by the same scenario staff as with the original games and manga , and illustration is handled by Naru Nanao , 2C Galore , and Mitsuishi Shōna . The chapters of Another Tale were released in a single volume on February 27 , 2009 entitled Another Tales .. Another two separate light novels , under the general title Ef : A Fairy Tale of the Two , were published by Fujimi Shobo on October 25 , 2007 . They were written by Yū Kagami , and illustrated by Kinusa Shimotsuki . The first novel was a novelization of Miyako 's route , and the second was centered around Kei 's route .

The Ef series , encompassing the visual novels and anime adaptation , was the only Minori title to receive coverage in an entire issue of Dengeki G 's Festival ! Deluxe , a special edition version of Dengeki G 's Magazine which is published by ASCII Media Works ; the issue in question was the first , and was published on November 30 , 2007 . Along with information pertaining to Ef : A Fairy Tale of the Two and Ef : A Tale of Memories , the magazine came bundled with an ergonomic mousepad , a small cell phone cleaner which can also attach to a cell phone , and an ID card / pass case .

There are two Internet radio shows for Ef : A Fairy Tale of the Two The first , entitled Omoshiro Minori Hōsōkyoku ( おもしろミノリ放送局 ) , was broadcast between October 13 , 2006 to June 1 , 2007 every Friday and was produced by Onsen , Cospa , and Minori . The show contained thirty-three episodes and was mainly used to promote the visual novels . In this way , the promotion mainly entailed news about the series and any updates related to the visual novels while also discussing points about the games themselves . The second radio broadcast began on June 8 , 2007 called Yumiko & Yūna no Ef Memo Radio ( ゆみこ & ゆうなのえふメモらじお ) . This broadcast is mainly used to promote the anime series which entails reporting on updates related to the anime and goods for the anime including musical CDs or DVDs . A set of four drama CDs were released by Frontier Works based on the series between October 2006 and April 2007 . A special edition drama CD was released on November 21 , 2007 , and another special drama CD was released on January 1 , 2008 . The first print release of the special edition CD will contain comments from the cast . The drama CDs used the same female cast as with the games and anime versions ( albeit under assumed names ) , but the two males that appeared in the dramas , Hiro and Kyosuke , had different voice actors in respect to the anime version . Hiro was voiced by Takashi Shōman , and Kyosuke was by Shō Shiroki .

On August 24 , 2007 , a short prologue for an Ef anime series was released as a DVD . The prologue was a teaser which introduced the characters and some conflict that would appear in the series . The anime series , under the title Ef : A Tale of Memories , aired 12 episodes on Chiba TV between October 7 and December 22 , 2007 . The anime was produced by Shaft and directed by Shin Ōnuma who volunteered for the job when it was offered . Even though the script for Ef : The Latter Tale was finished at the time of the anime 's production , in order to direct the anime from the viewer 's standpoint , Shin Ōnuma himself never read it . However , Katsuhiko Takayama who wrote the screenplay for the anime , had read the script . Each episode ends with a still image drawn by Japanese illustrators of anime , manga , and visual novels . The first letter in each episode 's title , plus the " coda " title of the last episode , can be brought together to form " Euphoric Field " . The series was released in six limited and regular edition DVD compilations , each containing two episodes . The first DVD volume was released on December 7 , 2007 , and the sixth DVD was released on May 9 , 2008 . A second season entitled Ef : A Tale of Melodies aired 12 episodes between October 7 and December 22 , 2008 in Japan . The license holding company Sentai Filmworks licensed both Ef anime series . The DVD and Blu-ray Disc box sets of Ef : A Tale of Memories were released on January 31 , 2012 in North America with an English dub , and the Ef : A Tale of Melodies box sets were released on March 20 , 2012 .

The opening theme song for Ef : The First Tale is " Yūkyū no Tsubasa " ( 悠久の翼 , Eternal Feather ) by Hitomi Harada which was released as a maxi single called " Eternal Feather " on October 27 , 2006 . For Ef : The Latter Tale , the opening theme is " Emotional Flutter " , and the ending theme is " Ever Forever " ; the single containing the two themes was released on April 11 , 2008 . Ef : A Fairy Tale of the Two 's original soundtrack , Alato , was released on February 27 , 2009 containing three CDs . The PlayStation 2 version released by Comfort will include an image song CD in the game disc , which will contain a song called " Echt Forgather " by Hitomi Harada . The opening theme for Ef : A Tale of Memories , starting with episode three , is the English version of " Euphoric Field " by Tenmon featuring Elisa . The first episode used a background music track for the opening theme , and the second and tenth episodes had no opening theme ; the English version of " Euphoric Field " was also used for the ending theme in episode two . The Japanese version of " Euphoric Field " was used as the opening theme for the twelfth episode . The opening theme single was released on October 24 , 2007 by Geneon . The first ending theme for the anime is " I 'm here " by Hiroko Taguchi which was used for episodes one , three , seven , and ten ; the single for the song ( entitled " Adagio by Miyako Miyamura " ) was also released on October 24 , 2007 by Geneon . The second ending theme , " Kizamu Kisetsu " ( 刻む季節 , Carving Season ) by Junko Okada , was used for episodes four , five , and nine , and the single ( entitled " Vivace by Kei Shindo " ) was released on November 21 , 2007 . The third ending theme , " Sora no Yume " ( 空の夢 , Sky 's Dream ) by Natsumi Yanase , was used for episode six , eight , and eleven , though the second verse of the song was used in that episode ; the single ( entitled " Andante by Chihiro Shindo " ) was released on December 21 , 2007 . A remix of the visual novel 's theme song called " Yūkyū no Tsubasa 07.mix " ( 悠久の翼 07.mix , Eternal Feather 07.mix ) sung by Yumiko Nakajima was used as the ending theme in episode twelve . The single for this ( entitled " Yūkyū no Tsubasa 07.mix / Euphoric Field live.mix " ) was released on September 26 , 2008 . The first original soundtrack for the anime series ( Espressivo ) was released on February 8 , 2008 , and the second ( Fortissimo ) was released on April 2 , 2008 .

The opening theme of Ef : A Tale of Melodies is the English version of " Ebullient Future " , also by Tenmon featuring Elisa , with the sixth episode featuring the instrumental version and episode eleven with the second verse . The opening sequence is shown to change many times ; episode ten contains no opening , but a piano remix of the song was used as the ending for that same episode . Episode twelve uses the Japanese version of the song , with a different opening sequence . The first ending theme is called " Egao no Chikara " ( 笑顔のチカラ , Strength of Smiles ) by Mai Goto and was used in episode two through five , seven , and the second verse was used in episode eleven . The second ending theme is called " Negai no Kakera " ( 願いのカケラ , Pieces of Wish ) by Yumiko Nakajima which was used in episode six , nine , and the second verse was used in episode eight . The song " A moon filled sky . " by Mai Goto was featured at the end of episode eleven and a new Japanese version of the opening sequence of the first season was inserted in the same episode . Episode twelve uses the song " Ever Forever OG.mix " sung by the voice actresses of all the major female characters . The singles for " Ebullient Future " and " Egao no Chikara " ( the latter entitled " Fermata by Mizuki Hayama " ) were released on November 5 , 2008 and the single for " Negai no Kakera " ( entitled " Fine by Yuko Amamiya " ) was released on November 26 , 2008 . The first original soundtrack for the series ( Elegia ) was released on December 26 , 2008 while the second original soundtrack ( Felice ) was released on February 27 , 2009 .

In the October 2007 issue of Dengeki G 's Magazine , poll results for the fifty best bishōjo games were released . Out of 249 titles , Ef : A Fairy Tale of the Two ranked 23rd with 11 votes , tying with Muv-Luv Alternative and Snow . The first game in the Ef series , Ef : The First Tale , was the highest selling game for the month of December 2006 on Getchu.com , and dropped to 19th in the ranking the following month . Also , Ef : The First Tale was the fourth most widely sold game of 2006 on Getchu.com despite it being released with a little over a week left in 2006 . In the January 25 , 2007 issue of the Japanese gaming magazine PC News , it was reported that Ef : The First Tale was the fifth-highest selling game of 2006 with 40,843 units sold . Across the national ranking of bishōjo games in amount sold in Japan , Ef : The First Tale premiered at number two , and ranked twice more at number five and 32 . From mid-April to mid-May 2008 , Ef : The Latter Tale ranked fourth in national PC game pre-orders in Japan . Ef : The Latter Tale ranked first in terms of national sales of PC games in Japan in May 2008 , and ranked at 30th on the same ranking the following month .

Theron Martin of Anime News Network reviewed the Blu-ray edition of Ef : A Tale of Memories , where he praised the anime series for not resorting to " even a whiff of the supernatural " , and called the way in which characters behave as " largely believable " . The anime received a mostly positive review from Bradley Meek THEM Anime Reviews . Bradley appreciated the animation , saying that " It does wonders for the mood in the series , adding a tangible layer of mysticism and fantasy . " However , he criticized the series being " cheesy and melodramatic more often than not . " He concluded the review saying , " Despite some laughable melodrama , the raw emotions and Shaft 's hypnotic animation makes ef ~ a tale of memories ~ a memorable romance . The plotting is slow , though , so it 's not for people with short attention spans . "

A social identity is the portion of an individual 's self-concept derived from perceived membership in a relevant social group . As originally formulated by Henri Tajfel and John Turner in the 1970s and the 1980s , social identity theory introduced the concept of a social identity as a way in which to explain intergroup behaviour . Social identity theory is best described as a theory that predicts certain intergroup behaviours on the basis of perceived group status differences , the perceived legitimacy and stability of those status differences , and the perceived ability to move from one group to another . This contrasts with occasions where the term " social identity theory " is used to refer to general theorizing about human social selves . Moreover , and although some researchers have treated it as such , social identity theory was never intended to be a general theory of social categorization . It was awareness of the limited scope of social identity theory that led John Turner and colleagues to develop a cousin theory in the form of self-categorization theory , which built on the insights of social identity theory to produce a more general account of self and group processes . The term social identity approach , or social identity perspective , is suggested for describing the joint contributions of both social identity theory and self-categorization theory .

Social identity theory states that social behavior will vary along a continuum between interpersonal behavior and intergroup behaviour . Completely interpersonal behaviour would be behaviour determined solely by the individual characteristics and interpersonal relationships that exists between two or more people . Completely intergroup behaviour would be behaviour determined solely by the social category memberships that apply to two or more people . The authors of social identity theory state that purely interpersonal or purely intergroup behaviour is unlikely to be found in realistic social situations . Rather , behaviour is expected to be driven by a compromise between the two extremes . The cognitive nature of personal vs. social identities , and the relationship between them , is more fully developed in self-categorization theory . Social identity theory instead focuses on the social structural factors that will predict which end of the spectrum will most influence an individual 's behaviour , along with the forms that that behavior may take .

A key assumption in social identity theory is that individuals are intrinsically motivated to achieve positive distinctiveness . That is , individuals " strive for a positive self-concept " . As individuals to varying degrees may be defined and informed by their respective social identities ( as per the interpersonal-intergroup continuum ) it is further derived in social identity theory that " individuals strive to achieve or to maintain positive social identity " . It should be noted that the precise nature of this strive for positive self-concept is a matter of debate ( see the self-esteem hypothesis ) . Both the interpersonal-intergroup continuum and the assumption of positive distinctiveness motivation arose as outcomes of the findings of minimal group studies . In particular , it was found that under certain conditions individuals would endorse resource distributions that would maximize the positive distinctiveness of an ingroup in contrast to an outgroup at the expense of personal self-interest .

Building on the above components , social identity theory details a variety of strategies that may be invoked in order to achieve positive distinctiveness . The individual 's choice of behaviour is posited to be dictated largely by the perceived intergroup relationship . In particular the choice of strategy is an outcome of the perceived permeability of group boundaries ( e.g. , whether a group member may pass from a low status group into a high status group ) , as well as the perceived stability and legitimacy of the intergroup status hierarchy . The self-enhancing strategies detailed in social identity theory are detailed below . Importantly , although these are viewed from the perspective of a low status group member , comparable behaviours may also be adopted by high status group members .

Here an ingroup seeks positive distinctiveness via direct competition with the outgroup in the form of ingroup favoritism . It is considered competitive in that in this case favoritism for the ingroup occurs on a value dimension that is shared by all relevant social groups ( in contrast to social creativity scenarios ) . Social competition is predicted to occur when group boundaries are considered impermeable , and when status relations are considered to be reasonably unstable . Although not privileged in the theory , it is this positive distinctiveness strategy that has received the greatest amount of attention .

By the late 1920s the collectivist perspective had all but disappeared from mainstream social psychology . Around the time of the first formal statement of social identity theory , Tajfel wrote this on the state of social psychology : " Thus , social categorization is still conceived as a haphazardly floating ' independent variable ' which strikes at random as the spirit moves it . No links are made or attempted , between the conditions determining its presence and mode of operation , and its outcomes in widely diffused commonalities of social behaviour . Why , when and how is social categorisation salient or not salient ? What kind of shared constructions of social reality , mediated through social categorization , lead to a social climate in which large masses of people feel they are in long-term conflict with other masses ? What , for example , are the psychological transitions from a stable to an unstable social system ? " ( Original emphasis , p . 188 ) Thus , social identity theory in part reflects a desire to reestablish a more collectivist approach to social psychology of the self and social groups .

In-group favoritism ( also known as " ingroup bias " , despite Turner 's objections to the term ) is an effect where people give preferential treatment to others when they are perceived to be in the same ingroup . Social identity attributes the cause of ingroup favoritism to a psychological need for positive distinctiveness and describes the situations where ingroup favoritism is likely to occur ( as a function of perceived group status , legitimacy , stability , and permeability ) . It has been shown via the minimal group studies that ingroup favoritism may occur for both arbitrary ingroups ( e.g. a coin toss may split participants into a ' heads ' group and a ' tails ' group ) as well as non-arbitrary ingroups ( e.g. ingroups based on cultures , genders , sexual orientation , and first languages ) . Continued study into the relationship between social categorization and ingroup favoritism has explored the relative prevalences of the ingroup favoritism vs. outgroup discrimination , explored different manifestations of ingroup favoritism , and has explored the relationship between ingroup favoritism and other psychological constraints ( e.g. , existential threat ) .

Social identity theory proposes that people are motivated to achieve and maintain positive concepts of themselves . Some researchers , including Michael Hogg and Dominic Abrams , thus propose a fairly direct relationship between positive social identity and self-esteem . In what has become known as the " self-esteem hypothesis " , self-esteem is predicted to relate to in-group bias in two ways . Firstly , successful intergroup discrimination elevates self-esteem . Secondly , depressed or threatened self-esteem promotes intergroup discrimination . Empirical support for these predictions has been mixed . Some social identity theorists , including John Turner , consider the self-esteem hypothesis as not canonical to social identity theory . In fact , the self-esteem hypothesis is argued to be conflictual with the tenets of the theory . It is argued that the self-esteem hypothesis misunderstands the distinction between a social identity and a personal identity . Along those lines , John Turner and Penny Oakes argue against an interpretation of positive distinctiveness as a straight forward need for self-esteem or " quasi-biological drive toward prejudice " . They instead favour a somewhat more complex conception of positive self-concept as a reflection of the ideologies and social values of the perceiver . Additionally , it is argued that the self-esteem hypothesis neglects the alternative strategies to maintaining a positive self-concept that are articulated in social identity theory ( i.e. , individual mobility and social creativity ) .

In what has been dubbed the Positive-Negative Asymmetry Phenomenon , researchers have shown that punishing the out-group benefits self-esteem less than rewarding the in-group . From this finding it has been extrapolated that social identity theory is therefore unable to deal with bias on negative dimensions . Social identity theorists , however , point out that for ingroup favouritism to occur a social identity " must be psychologically salient " , and that negative dimensions may be experienced as a " less fitting basis for self-definition " . This important qualification is subtly present in social identity theory , but is further developed in self-categorization theory . Empirical support for this perspective exist . It has been shown that when experiment participants can self-select negative dimensions that define the ingroup no positive – negative asymmetry is found .

Social identity theory has been criticised for having far greater explanatory power than predictive power . That is , while the relationship between independent variables and the resulting intergroup behaviour may be consistent with the theory in retrospect , that particular outcome is often not that which was predicted at the outset . A rebuttal to this charge is that the theory was never advertised as the definitive answer to understanding intergroup relationships . Instead it is stated that social identity theory must go hand in hand with sufficient understanding of the specific social context under consideration . The latter argument is consistent with the explicit importance that the authors of social identity theory placed on the role of " objective " factors , stating that in any particular situation " the effects of [ social identity theory ] variables are powerfully determined by the previous social , economic , and political processes " .

Some researchers interpret social identity theory as drawing a direct link between identification with a social group and ingroup favoritism . For example , Charles Stangor and John Jost state that " a main premise of social identity theory is that ingroup members will favour their own group over other groups " . This interpretation is rejected by other researchers . For example , Alex Haslam states that " although vulgarized versions of social identity theory argue that ' social identification leads automatically to discrimination and bias ' , in fact … discrimination and conflict are anticipated only in a limited set of circumstances " . The likening of social identity theory with social competition and ingroup favouritism is partly attributable to the fact that early statements of the theory included empirical examples of ingroup favouritism , while alternative positive distinctiveness strategies ( e.g. , social creativity ) were at that stage theoretical assertions . Regardless , in some circles the prediction of a straightforward identification-bias correlation has earned the pejorative title " social identity theory-lite " .

SMS Jagd was an aviso of the Imperial German Navy , the second and final member of the Wacht class . She had one sister ship , Wacht . Jagd was laid down in 1887 at the AG Weser shipyard , launched in July 1888 , and commissioned in June 1889 . She served in the German fleet for the next fifteen years , until she was withdrawn from active duty in 1904 . Thereafter , she was used as a harbor ship . In 1910 , she was stricken from the naval register and hulked . She was later used as a torpedo training platform until 1920 , when she was sold for scrapping .

Jagd was 85.5 meters ( 281 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 9.66 m ( 31.7 ft ) and a maximum draft of 3.74 m ( 12.3 ft ) forward . She displaced 1,499 metric tons ( 1,475 long tons ; 1,652 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two angled 3-cylinder triple expansion engines . Steam for the engines was provided by four coal-fired locomotive boilers . The ship 's propulsion system provided a top speed of 19 kn ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) and a range of approximately 2,860 nautical miles ( 5,300 km ; 3,290 mi ) at 10 kn ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . Jagd had a crew of 7 officers and 134 enlisted men . As built , the ship was armed with three 10.5 cm ( 4.1 in ) K L / 35 gun placed in single pivot mounts . The guns were supplied with a total of 180 rounds of ammunition . Jagd also carried three 35 cm ( 14 in ) torpedo tubes , one mounted submerged in the bow and the other two in deck-mounted launchers on the broadside . In 1891 , four 8.8 cm SK L / 30 guns in single mounts were added . The ship was the first German aviso to carry armor : a 10 mm ( 0.39 in ) thick deck , along with 25 mm ( 0.98 in ) of armor plating for the conning tower .

Jagd was laid down at the AG Weser shipyard in Bremen in 1887 . She was launched on 7 July 1888 , after which fitting-out work was completed . The finished ship was commissioned into the German fleet on 25 June 1889 . She served in the fleet starting in 1889 . Jagd served in the Training Squadron in 1891 as a torpedo boat flotilla leader , along with the avisos Blitz and Pfeil . During the annual summer exercises , the Training Squadron served as the hostile fleet , and conducted a mock attack on the harbor at Kiel . In 1893 , Jagd was assigned as the dispatch vessel for the II Division of the Maneuver Squadron . During the 1896 annual maneuvers , Jagd was assigned to the I Division . She was transferred to the I Division in 1897 , where she participated in the annual fleet exercises in August and September . After the conclusion of the maneuvers , the Maneuver Squadron returned to its home port in Wilhelmshaven . She served in the defending squadron during the August – September 1900 maneuvers . In 1904 , Jagd was withdrawn from active service and used as a harbor ship . Jagd was stricken from the naval register on 14 May 1910 and subsequently hulked . She was based in Friedrichsort outside Kiel and used as a firing platform for torpedo training until she was broken up for scrap in 1920 at Rüstringen .

William Shirley ( 2 December 1694 – 24 March 1771 ) was a British colonial administrator who was the longest-serving governor of the Province of Massachusetts Bay ( 1741 – 1749 and 1753 – 1756 ) and then Governor of the Bahamas ( 1760 – 1768 ) . He is best known for his role in organizing the 1745 Siege of Louisbourg during King George 's War , and for his role in military affairs during the French and Indian War . He spent most of his years in the colonial administration of North America working to defeat New France , but his lack of formal military training led to political difficulties and his eventual downfall . Politically well connected , Shirley began his career in Massachusetts as advocate general in the admiralty court , and quickly became an opponent of Governor Jonathan Belcher . He joined with Belcher 's other political enemies to bring about Belcher 's recall , and was appointed Governor of Massachusetts Bay in Belcher 's place . He successfully quieted political divisions within the province , and was able to bring about united action against New France when King George 's War began in 1744 . The successful Siege of Louisbourg , which Shirley had a major role in organizing , was one of the high points of his administration .

After King George 's War Shirley became mired in disputes over funding and accounting for the war effort , and returned to England in 1749 to deal with political and legal matters arising from those disputes . He was then assigned to a commission established by Great Britain and France to determine the colonial borders in North America . His hard-line approach to these negotiations contributed to their failure , and he returned to Massachusetts in 1753 . Military matters again dominated Shirley 's remaining years in Massachusetts , with the French and Indian War beginning in 1754 . Shirley led a military expedition to reinforce Fort Oswego in 1755 , and became Commander-in-Chief , North America upon the death of General Edward Braddock . His difficulties in organizing expeditions in 1755 and 1756 were compounded by political disputes with New York politicians , and over military matters with Indian agent Sir William Johnson . These disagreements led to his recall in 1757 as both Commander-in-Chief and as governor . In his later years he served as governor of the Bahamas , before returning to Massachusetts , where he died .

William Shirley , the son of William and Elizabeth Godman Shirley , was born on 2 December 1694 at Preston Manor in East Sussex , England . He was educated at Pembroke College , Cambridge , and then read law at the Inner Temple in London . In 1717 his grandfather died , leaving him Ote Hall in Wivelsfield and some funds , which he used to purchase a clerkship in London . About the same time he married Frances Barker , with whom he had a large number of children . He was called to the bar in 1720 . Although his inheritance had been substantial ( about £ 10,000 ) , he cultivated an expensive lifestyle , and suffered significant financial reverses in the depression of 1721 . The financial demands of his large family ( he and Frances had eight children by 1731 ) prompted him to seek an appointment in the North American colonies . His family was connected by marriage to the Duke of Newcastle , who became an important patron and sponsor of Shirley 's advancement , and to that of Arthur Onslow , the Speaker of the House of Commons . Armed with letters of introduction from Newcastle and others ( but no appointment ) , Shirley arrived in Boston , Massachusetts in 1731 .

Shirley was initially received with indifference by Massachusetts Governor Jonathan Belcher , who refused him patronage positions that became available . In 1733 Shirley sought to secure from David Dunbar the commission as the crown surveyor general , but Dunbar eventually decided to retain the office . Influence from Newcastle eventually yielded Shirley a position as advocate general in the admiralty court . Belcher resisted further entreaties from Newcastle to promote Shirley , and Shirley began using his position to actively prosecute Belcher supporters whose illegal logging activities came under his jurisdiction . Shirley also made common cause with Samuel Waldo , a wealthy merchant and major landowner in the province eastern district ( present-day Maine ) where Belcher 's lax enforcement of timber-cutting laws was harming his business with the Royal Navy . In 1736 Shirley sent his wife to London to lobby on his behalf against Belcher . Waldo also eventually went to London ; the combination of Shirley 's connection to Newcastle and Waldo 's money soon made inroads in the colonial administration . When these were joined by discontented New Hampshire interests ( Belcher was also governor of New Hampshire ) , a full-scale offensive was launched in the late 1730s to unseat Belcher . This included at least one forged letter on the part of Belcher opponents in an attempt to discredit the governor , which Shirley denounced . By 1738 Newcastle was in a dominant position in not just the colonial administration , but also in the British government as an opponent of Prime Minister Sir Robert Walpole , and he actively encouraged Belcher 's opponents .

In 1739 the Privy Council reprimanded Belcher , voted to separate the Massachusetts and New Hampshire governorships , and began debating the idea of replacing the governor . The exact reasons for Belcher 's dismissal have been a recurring subject of scholarly interest , due to the many colonial , imperial , and political factors at play . Two principal themes within these analyses are Belcher 's acquisition of many local enemies , and the idea that good imperial governance in London eventually required his replacement . Before the issues of 1739 most of the efforts to unseat Belcher had failed : Belcher himself noted in that year that " the warr I am ingag 'd in is carrying on in much the same manner as for 9 years past . " Historian Stephen Foster further notes that someone as powerful as Newcastle was at the time generally had much weightier issues to deal with than arbitrating colonial politics . In this instance , however , imperial and colonial considerations coincided over the need for Massachusetts to provide a significant number of troops for Newcastle 's proposed West Indies expedition in the War of Jenkins ' Ear . In April 1740 Newcastle in effect offered Shirley the opportunity to prove , in the light of Belcher 's political difficulties , that he could more effectively raise troops than the governor could . Shirley consequently engaged in recruiting , principally outside Massachusetts ( where Belcher refused his offers of assistance , understanding what was going on ) , and deluged Newcastle with documentation of his successes while Belcher was preoccupied with a banking crisis . Newcastle handed the issue off to Martin Bladen , secretary to the Board of Trade and a known Belcher opponent . The Board of Trade then apparently decided , based on the weight of the extant evidence , that Belcher needed to be replaced . In April 1741 the Privy Council approved William Shirley 's commission as governor of Massachusetts , and Benning Wentworth 's commission as governor of New Hampshire was issued the following June .

When Shirley assumed the governorship of Massachusetts in August 1741 , he was immediately confronted with a currency crisis . The province had been suffering for many years with inflation caused by issuance of increasing quantities of paper currency . Late in Belcher 's tenure , competing banking proposals had been made in a bid to address the issue , and a popular proposal for a bank secured by real estate had been enacted . This bank ( the controversy over it having contributed to Belcher 's recall ) had been dissolved by an Act of Parliament , and Shirley had to negotiate the dissolution of the bank 's assets and reclamation of the notes it had issued . In this process , which occupied the rest of 1741 , Shirley deftly navigated legislation through the provincial assembly that provided a schedule for redeeming the bank 's currency without causing the bank 's principal owners to collapse under a deluge of redemptions . With rising tensions Shirley acted to strengthen the military defenses of the colony . He created a series of volunteer militia companies along the frontier . These included Burke 's Rangers and Gorham 's Rangers which became the model for Shirley 's more famous creation Roger 's Rangers .

Britain captured Acadia from France in Queen Anne 's War ( 1702 – 1713 ) , but the Treaty of Utrecht left Cape Breton Island in French hands , and did not clearly demarcate a boundary between New France and the British colonies on the Atlantic coast . To protect the crucial passageway of the Saint Lawrence River into the heart of New France , France built a strong fortress at Louisbourg on the Atlantic coast of Cape Breton Island . When Shirley took office , relations between France and Britain were strained , and there was a possibility that Britain would be drawn into the War of the Austrian Succession , which had started on the European mainland in 1740 . Shirley was able to finesse his restrictions on the production of paper currency to achieve an updating of the province 's defences , and in 1742 requested permission from the Board of Trade for the printing of additional currency should war break out . This permission was granted in 1743 , along with a warning that war with France was likely . France declared war against Britain in March 1744 , and forces from Louisbourg raided the British fishing port of Canso on the northern end of mainland Nova Scotia before its residents were aware they were at war . French privateers also began preying on British and colonial vessels . British colonial governors along the coast , including Shirley , sent colonial guard ships and authorized their own privateers in response , neutralizing the French activity .

Canso was used by New England fishermen , and as such its fall was of interest to Massachusetts . Shirley had , prior to its capture , received a request for assistance from the lieutenant governor of Nova Scotia , Paul Mascarene , for support in the defence of Annapolis Royal . In response to the fall of Canso and a second , urgent request from Mascarene , Shirley promptly despatched two companies of volunteers to Annapolis Royal . The timely arrival of these troops in early July broke up a siege . John Bradstreet , who had been captured at Canso and held prisoner at Louisbourg , returned to New England in a prisoner exchange , and gave a detailed report to Shirley that emphasised the weaknesses of the French fort . William Vaughn , who owned several businesses in Maine that were vulnerable to raids from New France , toured New England advocating an expedition to capture Louisbourg . Shirley and other leaders in New England and New York sent letters to colonial authorities in London seeking support for such an expedition , citing the vulnerable conditions at Louisbourg . Vaughn and Bradstreet wanted to attack Louisbourg that winter with an all-colonial force . Shirley doubted the practicality of that plan , but in January 1745 submitted it to the provincial assembly ( General Court ) , which declined to support the plan , but did request that Britain undertake an attack on Louisbourg .

Vaughn continued to advocate for a quick all-American expedition , enlisting the support of fishing captains , merchants and 200 " principal gentlemen " of Boston . Shirley called the General Court into session to discuss the matter once more , and the proposal was submitted to a committee chaired by William Pepperrell . The committee reported favourably on the plan , and it was approved by a single vote when several opponents were absent from the chamber . Shirley appointed a reluctant William Pepperrell to command the expedition , William Vaughn was appointed colonel , but without a command position , and John Bradstreet was appointed as a military advisor to Pepperrell . Shirley requested support for the expedition from Peter Warren , commodore of the Royal Navy squadron in the West Indies , but Warren declined due to the strenuous objections of his captains . This news arrived in Boston just as the expedition was preparing to leave . Despite the absence of support from the Royal Navy , the New England expedition set out in March 1745 for Louisbourg . More than 4,000 men on more than 90 transports ( mainly fishing boats and coastal traders ) , escorted by six colonial guard ships , descended on Canso , where the expedition waited for the ice to clear from Gabarus Bay , the site just south of Louisbourg that had been chosen for the troop landing . Starting on 22 April the expedition was joined by four Royal Navy warships under the command of Commodore Warren , who received orders ( issued in January , but not received until after his previous refusal ) to assist the expedition .

The provincial forces began landing at Gabarus Bay on 30 April , and laid siege to the fortress while the British ships blockaded the harbour . The Americans began suffering battle losses , while the British naval officers , who had a low opinion of American soldiers , grew increasingly critical of the American efforts . Warren tried to exert control over the provincial troops , but Pepperrell resisted him . Louisbourg surrendered on 17 June . The Americans lost 180 men in combat , to disease or at sea during the siege , while the Royal Navy ships did not fire on the fortress , and lost just one sailor . As the victors settled into occupation of Louisbourg , friction grew between the Americans and the British . The terms of surrender guaranteed the French in all of their possessions ; there was no plunder for the American troops . On the other hand , the Royal Navy had captured several rich French prizes , and British sailors on shore leave bragged to the Americans about how rich they were going to be from their shares . The American troops had signed up to capture Louisbourg , and expected to go home after siege ended . The British government , who had believed that the provincial troops were incapable of capturing Louisbourg on their own , had made no plans to send British troops to take over occupation of the fortress . When it become evident that British troops would not be relieving the provincials until after winter had passed , Governor Shirley travelled to Louisbourg to raise the morale of the troops . His first speech to the troops had little effect , and some troops were close to mutiny . In a second speech Shirley promised to send home more troops immediately , and provide higher pay and better supplies for those who stayed until spring . Honors from the British government were sparse ; Pepperrell was made a baronet , he and Shirley were made colonels in the British Army with the right to raise their own regiments , and Warren was promoted to rear admiral .

Shirley had engaged in the Louisbourg campaign primarily as a way to ensure British interests in the Atlantic fisheries . The victory , however , made him expand his vision to encompass the possibility of capturing all of New France . After capturing the French fort he wrote to Newcastle , proposing a series of expeditions to gain control of all of North America as far west as the Mississippi River , starting with one that would go up the Saint Lawrence from Louisbourg . Upon his return to Boston , Shirley began making preparations for such an expedition . In May 1746 he received plans for London outlining an attempt on Quebec using Royal Navy and provincial forces , while a second expedition was to attack Fort Saint-Frédéric on Lake Champlain . Shirley stepped up recruiting in Massachusetts and asked neighboring governors to contribute men and resources to the effort . Expected support from Britain never arrived , however , and the 1746 expeditions were called off . While waiting for definite word from London of plans for 1747 Shirley beefed up the province 's western defenses , and in the spring of 1747 he began sending supplies to the Hudson River valley in anticipation of a move toward Fort Saint-Frédéric . Word then arrived from Newcastle that the British establishment would not support any expeditions against New France . The drop in military spending that resulted had negative consequences on the Massachusetts economy , harming Shirley 's popularity .

While Governor Shirley was at Louisbourg trouble had been brewing between the Royal Navy and the people of Boston . The Navy had long sought to press Americans into service on its ships . Impressment was a long-standing practice in Britain , but its application in America was resisted by the colonists . In 1702 Fort William on Castle Island had fired on HMS Swift as it tried to leave Boston Harbour with six recently impressed men aboard . As a result of American complaints ( reinforced by British merchants ) , Parliament in 1708 banned impressment in the American colonies . Navy leaders argued that the American exemption from impressment had been in force only during Queen Anne 's War , which ended in 1713 . In practice , Royal Navy captains had to apply to colonial governors for a license to press men . In late November 1745 a fight between a press gang and some sailors staying in a boarding house in Boston left two of the sailors with fatal injuries . Two members of the press gang were charged with murder and convicted , but were released when the indictment was found invalid . Two years later Commodore Charles Knowles , who served as Governor of Louisbourg after its capture , had a large number of seamen from Boston harbour impressed for service in his squadron . A mob of more than 300 men seized three naval officers and a deputy sheriff and beat the sheriff . The mob then went to Governor Shirley 's house , demanding the release of the men impressed by Knowles . Shirley tried to call out the militia , but they did not respond . Shirley did succeed in getting the naval officers into his house , and the mob eventually left . Later in the day Shirley went to the Town House to meet the people . The mob , now consisting of several thousand people , attacked the Town House , breaking many windows in the building . Shirley spoke to the mob and promised to present their demands to Commodore Knowles . The mob left , intending to find a Royal Navy ship to burn .

After Shirley had returned home that afternoon , the mob , which had seized another naval officer and several petty officers , returned to his house . Shirley ordered a number of armed men who were protecting his house to fire at the mob , but William Pepperrell was able to stop Shirley 's men from firing and to persuade the mob to leave . In the meantime , Commodore Knowles threatened to bombard Boston with his squadron . It was only after the Massachusetts Council adopted resolutions in support of the demands of the mob that the situation became quieter in Boston . The mob eventually released its hostages and Knowles released the impressed seamen .

Another issue of contention was compensation to the American colonies by Britain for the costs of the expedition against Louisbourg and the long occupation by American troops until the British Army finally took over . This presented Shirley with a problem , because the expedition 's leaders , including his former ally Samuel Waldo , grossly inflated their claimed costs . Waldo used Shirley 's unwillingness to openly act against him to begin his own efforts to topple the governor . Shirley was only able to forestall this effort by promising the colonial administration that he would achieve financial stability in the province by retiring its paper currency . The British government was also slow in responding to requests for compensation . While waiting for a response , the question of how to use any compensation was debated in provincial newspapers and pamphlets . Some , such as Samuel Adams ( father of the famous American Revolution leader ) , advocated placing the money in London banks to serve as backing for the paper currency issued by the colonies . Others , including William Douglass and Thomas Hutchinson , speaker of the General Court , favoured using the compensation to redeem the paper currency and give Massachusetts a hard currency . In 1748 the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle returned Louibourg to France , with Massachusetts still awaiting compensation for its seizure .

In the meantime , Governor Shirley had been trying to finance a campaign to capture Fort St. Frédéric ( at present-day Crown Point , New York ) , for which he issued more paper money . The campaign was abandoned when the colonies failed to support it , but the resulting inflation helped turn supporters of Shirley against him . The loss of Louisbourg increase public dissatisfaction with Shirley , who seen as complicit in British scheming against the American colonies . Even William Pepperrell joined the large number of citizens calling for Shirley 's removal . Samuel Adams edited and Gamaliel Rogers and Daniel Fowle published The Independent Advertiser , which regularly criticised the British government and Shirley 's administration . The paper published several of Shirley 's letters to officials in Britain that were critical of Americans , and regularly called for the governor 's removal . William Douglass , a prominent physician in Boston , wrote a series of pamphlets ( published by Rogers and Fowle ) attacking Shirley , Commodore Knowles , and the whole conduct of the campaign for Louisbourg and its occupation . Both Shirley and Knowles sued Douglass for libel , but lost their cases in court .

Shirley 's conflict with Samuel Waldo over expenses eventually reached a high pitch : Shirley had successfully attached some of Waldo 's assets in legal action , which Waldo had countered with further legal action . Shirley appealed these actions to London , and was granted permission ( received in August 1749 ) to travel to London to deal with the matter . He sailed for Britain in September 1749 , just before the long promised compensation reached Boston . Under legislation shepherded by Thomas Hutchinson , the specie delivered was used to retire the paper currency . While Shirley was abroad , Hutchinson , Andrew Oliver , and others served as his surrogates , and he carefully instructed Lieutenant Governor Spencer Phips to not give his enemies opportunities to manoeuvre in his absence .

In London Shirley met with Newcastle and the colonial secretary , the Duke of Bedford to discuss colonial matters and his situation . Newcastle ordered the military books of Waldo and Pepperrell to be scrutinized ; the analysis was found to confirm Shirley 's position . Shirley 's accounts were also examined , and were found to be " made up with great exaction " , " more conformable to his Majesty 's orders ... than any other of the colonies . " Shirley also communicated political concerns over which he and New York Governor George Clinton had commiserated . While he was in London , word arrived that Clinton wanted to leave his post . Shirley applied to Newcastle for the job , but was turned down . Newcastle may have been upset with Shirley , who had accepted an unexpected offer from Bedford to participate in a commission established to delineate the boundaries between the British and French territories in North America . The commission was set to meet in Paris , and Shirley saw it as an opportunity to advance his expansionist views . Newcastle and Bedford were at the time involved in a political struggle , and Newcastle was unhappy that Shirley had accepted Bedford 's offer . Shirley was able to convince Newcastle that his experience and position would be of use in the negotiations .

The commission met in Paris , and Shirley was accompanied by William Mildmay , a somewhat mild-mannered merchant , as cocommissioner . Shirley adopted a hard line in the negotiations , arguing in a technical and lawyerly fashion for an expansive reading of British territory ; he claimed all territory east of a line from the Kennebec River north to the Saint Lawrence River , while the French claimed all of that area except peninsular Nova Scotia . Shirley 's approach served to harden negotiating positions and bogged the commission 's work down in minutiae . When Mildmay complained of this to London , Bedford rebuked Shirley for spending too much effort on trivialities . While the negotiations dragged on , both French and British operatives were actively expanding their interests in the Ohio River valley , raising tensions . In 1751 Shirley incited a minor scandal when he married Julie , the young daughter of his Paris landlord . He was recalled to London after Mildmay complained that Shirley was taking actions without consulting him . Shirley returned to London convinced that the French needed to be driven from North America . Mildmay attempted to continue the negotiations , believing that he could overcome Shirley 's previous obstructionism , but the negotiations ended in failure .

The opposition in Massachusetts to Shirley had died down while he was in England and Paris . Shirley soon had to deal with the increasing conflict on the frontier with French Canada . Tensions had been increasing , particularly in the Ohio Country , where British and French traders were coming into conflict . When ( false ) rumors reached Boston in 1754 of French military activity on the province 's northern frontier ( Maine ) , Shirley was quick to organize an expedition to the Kennebec River to bolster the area 's defenses . This expedition erected Fort Halifax in what is now Winslow , Maine . News of hostilities in the Ohio Country brought further urgency to that matter , as well as attendance at a planned conference of colonies at Albany , New York . Because of the urgency , and the support of politically powerful Maine landowners , Shirley 's relationship with the provincial assembly was relatively good . Shirley instructed the provincial representatives to the Albany Conference to seek a colonial union , but the provincial assembly ( along with those of other provinces ) rejected the conference 's proposals .

Shirley was approached by Nova Scotia Governor Charles Lawrence for assistance in dealing with the French threat on that province 's frontiers , suggesting that the collaborate on military actions there . Shirley and Lawrence believed their proposed expedition would also require assistance from Britain , and sent letters requesting the same . At the same time they ramped up preparations in anticipation of the request being approved . Shirley was also ordered to activate and recruit for his regiment , which was to serve in Braddock 's force . Because he could not leave the province he sent one of his sons to New York to recruit troops there ; Massachusetts men were being drafted for the Nova Scotia expedition . He furthermore revived the idea of an expedition against Fort St. Frédéric , although he limited the first year 's action to the establishment of a fort at the southern end of Lake George , and sought to draw the leaders of neighboring colonies to assist in the operation . He mollified New York 's Acting Governor James DeLancey , who was generally hostile to Massachusetts interests , by proposing that the expedition be led by New York 's Indian Commissioner , Colonel William Johnson . Johnson was at first reluctant , but Shirley was able to convince him to take the command .

Since the French and Indian War had become a matter of imperial concern , two British Army regiments under General Edward Braddock were sent to America . In written exchanges , Braddock announced his intention to use this force against Fort Duquesne in the Ohio Country , while Shirley unsuccessfully lobbied him to instead target Fort Niagara . At a conference of governors and military leaders in April 1755 Shirley favorably impressed Braddock . Braddock declared that Duquesne would be his target , but he authorized Shirley to take his regiment and that of Sir William Pepperrell to Fort Niagara , and confirmed Johnson 's command of the Lake George campaign . Braddock 's instructions only gave Shirley the vaguest command over Johnson , which was to later become a source of trouble . The two northern expeditions were to be made without logistical assistance from the regular army . From the conference Shirley traveled to New York City , where he negotiated with merchants for supplying his expedition . The frosty relationship he had with Governor DeLancey continued ; the DeLanceys objected to what they saw as Massachusetts interference in their provincial affairs . When Shirley moved to prevent New York agent Oliver DeLancey from recruiting in Connecticut , it caused a stink and threatened to derail planning for the New York expeditions . Shirley then created a breach with Johnson by attempting to siphon troops from Johnson 's command to increase his own force for the Fort Niagara expedition . The antagonism was furthered by the fact that the two expeditions were competing for supplies from the same sources , and was also exacerbated by ongoing border disputes between the provinces .

When Shirley and Johnson met in July 1755 before their respective expeditions set off , tension between the two men continued , and Johnson delayed decisions on assigning Indian auxiliaries to Shirley 's campaign , observing that much of the expedition was traveling through friendly Iroquois territory , where they would not yet be needed . Shirley took offense at this as an act of insubordination . Believing he outranked Johnson , Shirley next sought to bypass the Indian agent and negotiate directly with the tribes for recruits , but Johnson and his subordinates actively opposed the move . The Iroquois also objected to the presence of Shirley 's recruiting agent , Colonel John Lydius , with whom they had outstanding issues over past land transactions . The situation was not made easier by the fact that neither Johnson nor Shirley had ever commanded expeditions of the size and scope proposed . Shirley 's expedition reached Fort Oswego in mid-August . The trek up the Mohawk River had been slowed by low water , and it was being incompetently supplied , resulting in a shortage of provisions . Shirley learned en route that General Braddock had died in the aftermath of the 13 July Battle of the Monongahela , which also claimed the life of Shirley 's son William . As a result , he became temporary commander-in-chief of North American forces . His expedition then became bogged down at Fort Oswego by the need to improve its defenses , and the ongoing provisioning crisis . In a council on 18 September it was decided to proceed with plans to reach Fort Niagara , but one week later the decision was reversed . Shirley returned to Albany , preoccupied with the need to manage the entire British war effort on the continent .

William Johnson 's expedition fared little better than Shirley 's . He reached the southern end of Lake George , where his forces had an inconclusive encounter with French forces on 8 September , and began work on Fort William Henry . Rumors of French movements brought a flurry of activity in November , but when the opposition failed to materialize , much of Johnson 's force abandoned the camp to return home . Shirley had to pressure New England 's governors to assign militia to the new posting for the winter . In Nova Scotia , Governor Lawrence had easily captured Fort Beauséjour , and had then embarked on what has since become known as the Great Expulsion , the forcible removal of more than 12,000 Acadians from Nova Scotia . When some of the ships carrying the Acadians entered Boston Harbor in early December 1755 , Shirley ordered that they not disembark . For three winter months , until March 1756 , the Acadians remained on the ships , where half died from the cold weather and malnutrition .

During the winter of 1755 – 56 Shirley 's feud with Johnson continued . Johnson , who was being advised by Thomas Pownall , continued to assert his exclusive authority over interactions with Indians , and renewed complaints about Shirley 's interference in recruiting for the 1755 campaign . In one letter Johnson wrote that Shirley had " become my inveterate enemy " who would do everything he could " to blast if he can my character . " Johnson made common cause with the DeLanceys ( to whom he was related by marriage ) in their dislike of Shirley . They all fed unflattering reports to the new New York governor , Sir Charles Hardy , who forwarded them on to London . Shirley was unaware of this looming threat to his authority . As commander-in-chief , Shirley made a grandiose proposal for the 1756 campaign season in November 1755 , continuing the routes of attack begun in 1755 and adding an expedition to Quebec via the Kennebec River . However , the complaints against him had reached the Duke of Newcastle , who felt he needed someone less embroiled in controversies with other leaders in charge of military matters in North America . British leaders had also received intercepted letters destined for France that some believed might have been written by Shirley , in part because he married a Frenchwoman . Thomas Pownall traveled to London in early 1756 and further denounced Shirley to the colonial administration . Shirley did not learn of these matters until April 1756 , by which time the British leadership had already decided to replace him as commander-in-chief .

While waiting for his replacement ( Lord Loudoun ) Shirley made every effort to advance supplies and reinforcements to the Fort Oswego garrison , which had been on short rations for the winter , and whose supply line had been interrupted by the Battle of Fort Bull in March 1756 . He continued to mobilize resources and personnel for at least the Oswego and Lake George efforts , but his authority was waning due to widespread knowledge of his replacement . Military affairs continued to deteriorate on the New York frontier before Loudoun finally arrived in July 1756 ; Fort Oswego fell to the French on 10 August . Although Shirley had been removed as commander-in-chief , he retained the Massachusetts governorship . He expected to lose even that post not long after his return to Boston in August . However , no replacement had yet been named , and Loudoun saw either Shirley 's interference or ineffectiveness in all that was wrong on the New York frontier . He also raised detailed questions about Shirley 's war-related expenditures , which he ( and later historians ) concluded was poorly-disguised patronage spending . Loudoun and Shirley argued over many issues , including Shirley 's continuance of military preparations after January 1756 , when Loudoun 's commission was issued . Shirley pointed out that British leadership could hardly expect preparations to cease in the interval between Loudoun 's commission and his arrival to take command . While he waited for a replacement to be announced , Shirley took depositions , gathered evidence to support his version of affairs , and worked to close his financial affairs down . ( Loudoun was of the opinion that Shirley delayed his departure intentionally as a political maneuver . ) He sailed for England in October 1756 . Shirley would be formally replaced by Thomas Pownall in 1757 .

Upon his arrival in London , Shirley was received by Newcastle and other sympathetic figures , but Newcastle had been forced from office by the poor showing in the war , and Shirley 's ongoing disagreements with Loudoun meant he was unlikely to receive another North American posting . Newcastle then withdrew his support from Shirley over a hearing into matters disputed between Loudoun and Shirley . Shirley was not granted formal hearings on other aspects of his conduct , and managed to convince Newcastle to overlook the matter of his " muddled " accounts . His prospects brightened when Loudoun and Pownall were both damaged by the continued poor military performance in North America ( notably the debacle of the Siege of Fort William Henry in August 1757 , which resulted in Loudoun 's recall ) . These failures served to rehabilitate Shirley and bring him back into Newcastle 's good graces . In late 1758 Shirley was commissioned as Governor of the Bahamas . This was followed in early 1759 with a promotion to lieutenant general . After a lengthy passage , Shirley arrived in the Bahamas on 31 December , when his ship was wrecked on a reef in the islands . He eventually arrived without incident or injury at Nassau and assumed the reins of power . His rule was quiet ; dealing with smugglers in the islands was the major issue demanding the governor 's attention . In part to combat illicit trade he lobbied the London government that Nassau be established as a free port . Although he was influential in this regard , Nassau did not receive this status until after he left office . He also oversaw renovations to the governor 's mansion , and promoted the construction of churches with funding from the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel . In 1765 , after his wife 's death , he took his children to England so that they could be properly cared for . He returned to the islands , where he had to deal with protests of the recently enacted Stamp Act . When he proposed the use of the stamps on official documents to the local assembly , the reaction in opposition was so visceral that Shirley dissolved the body . By the time the next assembly met , the Stamp Act had been repealed .

His son Thomas became a major general in the British army , was created a baronet in 1786 , and served , after his posting to the Bahamas , as Governor of Dominica and Governor of the Leeward Islands . He died in 1800 . Another son , William Jr . , was killed in 1755 at the Battle of the Monongahela whilst serving with Edward Braddock . Shirley 's daughter Anne married John Erving , a member of the Massachusetts Governor 's Council . Shirley built a family home in Roxbury between 1747 and 1751 . He sold it to his daughter and son-in-law , Eliakim Hutchinson , in 1763 . It later came into the hands of William Eustis , Governor of Massachusetts in the 19th century . Now known as the Shirley-Eustis House , it still stands at 33 Shirley Street . It has largely been restored and is a museum open to the public . The town of Shirley , Massachusetts was founded during his term as Massachusetts governor . The Winthrop , Massachusetts geographical feature Shirley Point and the former feature Shirley Gut are named for him . Shirley helped to establish a cod fishery in Winthrop in 1753 . Shirley is also the namesake of Shirley Street in Halifax , Nova Scotia ( which is parallel to Pepperell Street , named after William Pepperell ) .

Shirley , William ( 1746 ) . Letter to the Duke of Newcastle , with a Journal of the Siege of Louisburg . London : E. Owen . OCLC 753169340 . Shirley , William ; Alexander , William ( 1758 ) . The Conduct of Major Gen. William Shirley briefly stated . London : R. and J. Dodsley . OCLC 10899657 . Shirley , William ( 1912 ) . Lincoln , Charles Henry , ed . Correspondence of William Shirley , Volume 1 . New York : Macmillan . OCLC 1222698 . Shirley , William ( 1912 ) . Lincoln , Charles Henry , ed . Correspondence of William Shirley , Volume 2 . New York : Macmillan . OCLC 1222698 .

The 1925 Florida tropical storm was the deadliest tropical cyclone to impact the United States that did not become a hurricane . The fourth and final storm of the season , it formed as a tropical depression on November 27 near the Yucatán Peninsula , the system initially tracked southeastward before turning north as it gradually intensified . After skirting western Cuba on November 30 , the storm reached peak winds of 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) before striking central Florida on December 1 . Within hours , the system transitioned into an extratropical cyclone and emerged into the Atlantic Ocean . The system moved onshore once more on December 2 in North Carolina before turning east , away from the United States . On December 5 , the system is presumed to have dissipated offshore . Throughout the system 's existence , it was responsible for 73 fatalities , most of which resulted from offshore incidents . The worst loss of life took place off East Coast , where the 30 crewmen of the American SS Catopazi drowned . Property damage amounted to $ 3 million , $ 1 million of which was in Jacksonville .

The 1925 Florida tropical storm was first identified on November 27 , 1925 as a tropical depression situated to the southeast of the Yucatán Peninsula , nearly a month after the official end of the hurricane season . Situated over 80 ° F ( 27 ° C ) waters , the system slowly intensified , attaining tropical storm status roughly 12 hours after forming , as it drifted towards the southeast before abruptly turning north-northwestward . Throughout November 30 , the storm quickly strengthened as it brushed the western tip of Cuba with winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) . Once in the Gulf of Mexico , the storm turned northeastward and intensified to peak winds of 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) . The lowest known barometric pressure attained by the storm was 995 mbar ( hPa ; 29.38 inHg ) as it moved inland . Within hours of reaching this strength , the storm made landfall just south of Fort Myers , Florida early on December 1 as it began to transition into an extratropical cyclone . The storm was originally thought to have moved ashore as a minimal hurricane , thus becoming the latest-landfalling hurricane in United States history . However , a reanalysis in 2011 lowered the peak winds . While crossing the Florida peninsula , the storm briefly weakened as it completed its transition ; however , once back over water , it re-intensified .

Off the coast of The Carolinas , the former tropical storm became a large and powerful extratropical cyclone , attaining peak winds of 90 mph ( 140 km / h ) along with a pressure of 979 mbar ( hPa ; 28.91 inHg ) , measured by the USS Patoka . Gale force winds extended to at least New Jersey , where winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) were recorded . Throughout December 2 , the storm gradually slowed as it tracked roughly parallel to the East Coast . Later that day , the system moved onshore again , this time between Wilmington and Cape Hatteras , with winds equivalent to a minimal hurricane . A strong area of high pressure located over the Canadian Maritimes caused the system to turn towards the east-southeast . Over the following few days , the storm gradually weakened as it moved away from North Carolina . By December 5 , the storm was no longer identifiable and is presumed to have dissipated offshore . However , a monthly weather review published in 1925 that documented the system indicated that the cyclone continued towards the east , eventually impacting Bermuda and the Azores . Later analysis in 2009 concluded that a separate extratropical low , which formed near the remnants of the storm , was responsible for inclement weather in both areas .

During its passage through Florida , the storm produced torrential rain over coastal cities , peaking in Miami at 14.08 in ( 358 mm ) . The storm caused significant property and crop damage along the Gulf Coast of Florida . Trees , power lines , and telegraph wires were knocked down by high winds along the Suwannee River . Communication throughout southern Florida was severed as miles of telegraph wires were downed during the evening of November 30 . Structures previously considered safe from storms due to their location over 100 ft ( 30.4 m ) inland sustained significant damage , probably from storm surge . Beaches along the Atlantic coast also sustained considerable damages from the storm . Four people were killed near Tampa in two separate incidents . The first occurred when a house collapsed on three men , pinning them to the ground . The second incident occurred after a woman ran outside her home and was struck by a tree limb . At least 12 workmen were killed and 38 others injured after the bunkhouse they were sleeping in collapsed due to high winds . The facility in which they were working in also sustained $ 200,000 in damage from a fire ignited by the cyclone . Throughout Florida , property loses were estimated at $ 3 million , with $ 1 million in Jacksonville alone . Damages to the citrus industry were also significant , with total losses exceeding $ 600,000 . Losses in Miami amounted to $ 250,000 as up to 2 ft ( 0.61 m ) inundated the city for more than two days .

Shipping incidents resulting from the storm caused several deaths . A schooner carrying seven people sunk , killing all its occupants . A tug boat sank off the coast of Mobile , Alabama while towing a lumber barge ; the fate of the crew is unknown . A ship named the American SS Catopazi sank between Charleston , South Carolina and the northern coast of Cuba , with all 30 crew members lost . Near Daytona Beach , a vessel carrying 2,000 cases of liquor sank along with all six crewmen . The last incident , involving a yacht , occurred off the coast of Georgia . The ship sank near Savannah , Georgia with the 12 crew members drowning . The total loss of life at sea was at least 55 . Shipping throughout the East Coast was crippled by the storm as vessels were forced to seek shelter at port . Due to the large size of the storm as an extratropical cyclone , gale and storm warnings in force from Beaufort , North Carolina to Eastport , Maine . In North Carolina , heavy rains and strong winds were reported along the coast . Near record high water rises were recorded around Wilmington . Cape Hatteras was temporarily isolated from the surrounding areas as the high winds from the storm knocked down power lines throughout the area . Several buildings along the coast and numerous boats sustained considerable damage . As far north as New Jersey , gale-force winds produced by the powerful extratropical storm caused significant damage and killed at least two people . Large swells and high winds throughout New Jersey , southern New York and Connecticut resulted in significant damage . Along the coast of Long Island , large waves resulted in severe beach erosion which threatened to undermine homes . Parts of Coney Island were inundated by the increased surf , damaging homes and businesses . Several barges in nearby marinas were torn from their moorings and swept out to sea . In Sandy Hook , several workmen were nearly killed after a building collapsed amidst high winds . Minor precipitation was recorded throughout Rhode Island , peaking at 0.62 in ( 16 mm ) .

Joan Elizabeth Strothers was born on 26 February 1916 in Swansea , Wales , the daughter of an optician , Charles William Strothers , and his wife , Margaret Beatrice , née Millington . She was educated at Swansea Girls ' High School , and in 1934 won an open scholarship to Newnham College , Cambridge . In 1935 , she rowed for the ladies ' university eight , in the first real Women 's boat race against Oxford . She gained an honours degree in physics , which was not awarded because it was before women were allowed Cambridge degrees . In her seventies , in 1987 , she was honoured with the degree of Doctor of Laws honoris causa by the University of Strathclyde . Strothers , who " had the scientific equivalent of gardening green fingers " , was awarded a government grant to study for a higher degree , and elected to go to the Cavendish Laboratory at Cambridge , where she joined Sam Curran in a team under the direction of Philip Dee . She soon established a reputation for " extreme dexterity and being outstandingly neat and skilful in the deployment of equipment . " In 1939 , Dee proposed that the team spend a month at the Royal Aircraft Establishment at Farnborough Airfield . They arrived on 1 September 1939 . Two days later , Britain declared war on Germany , and Britain entered the Second World War .

Instead of returning to the Cavendish , the team moved to Exeter , where Dee and three others worked on developing rockets as anti-aircraft weapons , while Strothers and Curran joined a group under John Coles working on the development of the proximity fuse . Strothers was based at Leeson House and Durnford School . She and Curran developed a workable fuse , which was codenamed VT , an acronym of " Variable Time fuze " . The system was a small , short-range , Doppler radar that used a clever circuit . However , Britain lacked the capacity to mass-produce the fuze , so the design was shown to the United States by the Tizard Mission in late 1940 . The Americans perfected and mass-produced the fuse . In due course , these proximity fuses arrived in the United Kingdom , where they played an important part in the defence of the kingdom against the V-1 flying bomb . Strothers married Curran on 7 November 1940 . Soon afterwards they were transferred to the Telecommunications Research Establishment near Swanage , where Sam worked on centimetric radar , while Joan joined the Counter Measures Group in an adjoining lab . It was with this group , at Swanage , and later at Malvern , that Joan devised the technique that was codenamed Window , which is also known as chaff . She tried various types of radar reflectors , including wires and sheets , before settling on strips of tin foil 1 to 2 centimetres ( 0.39 to 0.79 in ) wide and 25 centimetres ( 9.8 in ) long that could be scattered from bombers , thus disrupting the enemy 's radar . Window was first employed in Operation Gomorrah , a series of raids on Hamburg , and resulted in a much lower loss rate than usual . As part of Operation Taxable on 5 – 6 June 1944 , Window was dropped by Avro Lancasters of 617 Squadron to synthesise a phantom invasion force of ships in the Straits of Dover and keep the Germans unsure as to whether the brunt of the Allied assault would fall on Normandy or in the Pas de Calais area . R. V. Jones later declared : " In my opinion , Joan Curran made an even greater contribution to victory , in 1945 , than Sam . "

In early 1944 the Currans were part of a group of British scientists invited to go to the US to take part in the Manhattan Project – the Allied project to develop an atomic bomb . They joined the British Mission at the Berkeley Radiation Laboratory in California , headed by Mark Oliphant , a distinguished Australian scientist that Joan knew from the Cavendish Laboratory . Oliphant also acted as de facto deputy to Ernest Lawrence , the director of the Radiation Laboratory . The mission of the laboratory was to develop the electromagnetic isotope separation process to create enriched uranium for use in atomic bombs . While at Berkeley , Joan gave birth to her first child , a daughter , Sheena , who was born severely mentally handicapped . They later had three sons , all of whom went on to complete a PhD .

After the war ended , Sam took up an offer from Dee to become Professor of Natural Philosophy at Glasgow University . In Glasgow , the Currans , together with a few friends , set up the Scottish Society for the Parents of Mentally Handicapped Children ( Enable ) , which eventually grew to 100 branches and more than 5000 members . Later , when Joan was a member of the Greater Glasgow Health Board and the Scottish Special Housing Association , the needs of the disabled were always at the forefront of her mind , and she did much to promote their welfare . She took a close interest in the work of the Council for Access for the Disabled and helped improve the range of facilities , especially for disabled university students . Sam worked at the Atomic Weapons Research Establishment at Aldermaston on the development of the British hydrogen bomb from 1955 to 1959 . He returned to Glasgow in 1959 as principal the Royal College of Science and Technology . When it became the University of Strathclyde in 1964 , the first new university in Scotland in 384 years , he became its first Principal and Vice Chancellor . While her husband was Principal , Joan founded the Strathclyde Women 's Group and became its president .

During the war the Polish 1st Armoured Division had been based in Scotland , establishing ties between the community and Poland . Joan promoted a special relationship with the Technical University of Lodz , and also devoted care and attention to the children 's hospital of that city . Later she established the Lady Curran Endowment fund for overseas , particularly Polish , students . Sam died on 25 February 1998 . While gravely ill with cancer in 1998 , Joan unveiled a memorial plaque in Barony Hall , Glasgow , to commemorate her husband , and it was announced that the walled garden at Ross Priory , on Loch Lomondside , was to be named in her honour , and the Joan Curran Summer House would be built there . Joan died on 10 February 1999 , and was cremated at the Daldowie Crematorium . Her daughter , Sheena , three sons and three grandsons survived her .

" The Last Temptation of Krust " is the fifteenth episode of The Simpsons ' ninth season . It first aired on the Fox network in the United States on February 22 , 1998 . It was written by Donick Cary and directed by Mike B. Anderson . Comedian Jay Leno makes a guest appearance . In the episode , Bart convinces Krusty the Clown to appear at a comedy festival organized by Jay Leno , but Krusty 's old material does not go over well with the audience and he receives bad reviews . He briefly retires from comedy but returns with a new , more well received gimmick . He soon returns to his old ways , selling out to a motor-vehicle company . The production team 's decision to write an episode about stand-up comedy was influenced by comedy festivals . The writing staff initially had trouble getting Krusty 's offensive bad jokes through network censors , but convinced them this was simply a way to emphasize his old and dated comedic material . The " Canyonero " sequence was modeled after Ford commercials and was given its own segment at the end of the episode because the production staff liked it so much . The episode was highlighted by USA Today in a review of The Simpsons ' ninth season and received positive reviews in The Washington Times , the Evening Herald , and in books on The Simpsons .

Krusty is persuaded by Bart to appear at a comedy festival organized by Jay Leno . His old-fashioned and outdated material fails to impress the audience when compared with the more trendy comedians also appearing . After reading a critical review of his act in the press , Krusty decides to go on a " bender to end all benders " and a montage sequence shows him getting drunk . After Bart finds him passed out on Ned Flanders ' lawn , he enlists the help of Leno to clean him up . Krusty holds a press conference to announce his retirement and in short order launches into a bitter tirade against modern-day comedians . The audience finds Krusty 's rant hysterically funny and he subsequently announces his return to comedy . Krusty is inspired to return to doing low-key events , where he structures a new image for himself as a stand-up comedian who tells the truth , criticizes commercialism , and refuses to sell out to corporate America . He also changes his appearance , sporting a dark sweater and tying his hair in a ponytail . Observing his newfound popularity , two marketing executives try to persuade Krusty to endorse a new sport utility vehicle called the Canyonero . Although he tries to resist , he eventually succumbs to the lure of money . After promoting the Canyonero at a comedy performance in Moe 's Tavern , he is booed off stage by the patrons . He finally admits to himself that comedy is not in his blood and selling out is . The episode ends with an extended advertisement for the Canyonero , as Krusty and Bart leave Moe 's tavern in Krusty 's new SUV .

In the DVD commentary for The Simpsons ' ninth season , writer Donick Cary stated that the inspiration for the idea of an episode about stand-up comedy came out of comedy festivals at the time . Executive producer Mike Scully said that the writers had difficulty getting Krusty 's offensive bad jokes through the network censors . The stereotypical jokes were allowed because the writers convinced the network censors that viewers would understand it was simply emphasizing Krusty 's dated comedic material . Mike B. Anderson stated that at least three different acts of material were written and animated for Krusty 's comeback stand-up appearance at Moe 's Tavern . It was not until the editing process that the material used was decided upon . The episode was still being animated three weeks before it was due to air and the production process moved frantically shortly before completion . The Canyonero sequence was originally planned to be displayed during the closing credits . The production team liked the scene so much that they did not want it to be obscured by the credits and gave it its own segment at the end of the episode .

In addition to Jay Leno , other real-life comedians that portrayed themselves in the episode include Steven Wright , Janeane Garofalo , Bobcat Goldthwait , and Bruce Baum , whose appearance helped increase his popularity . Krusty 's " Krustylu Studios " is a spoof on the company Desilu studios , set up by Lucille Ball and her husband Desi Arnaz , where the series Star Trek was once filmed . During Krusty 's " bender to end all benders " montage , he is seen drinking out of and vomiting into the Stanley Cup . The National Hockey League sent a letter regarding this scene . Mike Scully described it as a " kind of a cease and desist " , but the production staff decided not to cut the scene from the episode . Krusty attends the coffee shop Java the Hut , a reference to the Star Wars character Jabba the Hutt .

The " Canyonero " song and visual sequence was modeled after Ford commercials . The sequence is a parody of a commercial for a sport utility vehicle and Hank Williams Jr. sings a song about the Canyonero accompanied by country guitar music and whip cracks . The song " Canyonero " closely resembles the theme to the 1960s television series Rawhide . This episode was the first appearance of the Canyonero , which again appeared in the season 10 episode " Marge Simpson in : " Screaming Yellow Honkers " " . The " Canyonero " song is included on the 1999 soundtrack album Go Simpsonic with The Simpsons . Chris Turner wrote positively of the Canyonero spoof piece in Planet Simpson : How a Cartoon Masterpiece Defined a Generation , calling it " a brilliant parody of an SUV ad " . In an article in the journal Environmental Politics Steve Vanderheiden commented that the Canyonero reflected an " anti-SUV " stance by The Simpsons . Vanderheiden wrote : " Even the popular animated television series ‘ The Simpsons ’ joined the anti-SUV fray in 1998 , featuring a mammoth vehicle called the ‘ Canyonero ’ ( marketed with the jingle : ‘ Twelve yards long , two lanes wide / Sixty-five tons of American pride ! ’ ) , which promised to help the family transcend its mundane station-wagon existence but instead brought only misery . " The term " Canyonero " has since been used in the news media to refer critically to large trucks and SUVs . In an article in the San Francisco Chronicle about SUV owners , Vicki Haddock wrote " SUV owners have become something of a punch line , succinctly captured in a " Simpsons " parody touting the apocryphal Canyonero " . In a 2006 article , Seth Jayson of The Motley Fool compared the wording in a Ford advertisement myFord Owner Magazine to this episode , writing : " the unholiest of unholies is the writing , which is so thick with absurd adspeak , you 'd think it was written by the crew at The Onion or The Simpsons – especially that episode where Krusty starts shilling for the Canyonero . " In a 2004 article in the Chicago Tribune , Jim Mateja noted that people have pointed out a similarity between the GMC Canyon and the Canyonero . When contacted , GMC responded that the GMC is a pickup truck , while the Canyonero is a parody of an SUV . Joshua Dowling of The Sun Herald described the philosophy of the Ford F-250 as " The Canyonero comes to life " .

In its original broadcast , " The Last Temptation of Krust " finished 21st in ratings for the week of February 16 – 23 , 1998 , with a Nielsen rating of 9.7 , equivalent to approximately 9.5 million viewing households . It was the fourth highest-rated show on the Fox network that week , following The X-Files , The World 's Scariest Police Chases , and King of the Hill . In 2006 , USA Today highlighted the episode in a review of The Simpsons ninth season . In his review of the season nine DVD , Joseph Szadkowski of The Washington Times noted : " Among the 22-minute gems found in the set , I most enjoyed ... [ Krusty 's ] work with Jay Leno . " Mark Evans of the Evening Herald wrote : " ' The Last Temptation of Krust ' is a winner for its title alone as Krusty the clown becomes a satiric ' alternative ' comedian but then sells out by advertising the Canyonero SUV road hazard . " Alan Sepinwall wrote positively of the episode in The Star-Ledger , citing the Canyonero sequence as " the real reason to watch " the episode and that " It 's an oversize vehicle that will create oversized laughs . " Some sources mistakenly refer to this episode as " The Last Temptation of Krusty " .

In the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood characterized the episode as " a good twist on the never-ending Krusty story " and suggested that while " Jay Leno turns in a nice cameo [ ... ] the show is stolen by the advert for the Canyonero " . The authors also praised Krusty 's " ponytail and black sweater " look . In the DVD audio commentary for " The Last Temptation of Krust " , Leno said that he believed the essence of comedy clubs was depicted very well in the episode and referred to Krusty 's remodeled appearance as " [ George ] Carlin post-Vegas act " . He also appreciated Krusty 's poke at Leno 's use of news headlines on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno and said that he could not figure out whether parts of the episode were making fun of him or complimenting him . William Irwin 's The Simpsons and Philosophy : The D 'oh ! of Homer references a scene from the episode as an example of Marge 's passive resistance , her moral influence on Lisa , and her value as a role model for her children .

Reginald Walter " Reg " Saunders , MBE ( 7 August 1920 – 2 March 1990 ) was the first Aboriginal Australian to be commissioned as an officer in the Australian Army . He came from a military family , his forebears having served in the Boer War and the First World War . Enlisting as a soldier in 1940 , he saw action during the Second World War in North Africa , Greece and Crete , before being commissioned as a lieutenant and serving as a platoon commander in New Guinea during 1944 – 45 . His younger brother Harry also joined the Army , and was killed in 1942 . After the war , Saunders was demobilised and returned to civilian life . He later served as a company commander with the 3rd Battalion , Royal Australian Regiment ( 3 RAR ) during the Korean War , where he fought at the Battle of Kapyong . Saunders left the Army in 1954 and worked in the logging and metal industries , before joining the Office of Aboriginal Affairs ( later the Department of Aboriginal Affairs ) as a liaison officer in 1969 . In 1971 , he was appointed a Member of the Order of the British Empire ( MBE ) for his community service . He died in 1990 , aged 69 .

Saunders was born near Purnim on the Framlingham Aboriginal Reserve in western Victoria on 7 August 1920 . He was a member of the Gunditjmara people . His father , Chris , was a veteran of the First World War , having served as a machine gunner in the Australian Imperial Force . One of his uncles , William Reginald Rawlings , who was killed in action and after whom Saunders was named , had been awarded the Military Medal for service with the 29th Battalion in France . Another ancestor , John Brook , fought with the Victorian Rifles and the Australian Commonwealth Horse in the Boer War . Saunders ' mother died in 1924 from complications caused by pneumonia while giving birth to her third child , a girl who also died . After this , his father moved to Lake Condah in Victoria , with Reg and his younger brother , Harry , born in 1922 . As their father undertook various labouring jobs , the two boys were raised largely by their grandmother . Saunders attended the local mission school at Lake Condah , where he did well in maths , geometry and languages . His father , meanwhile , taught Reg and Harry about the bush , and encouraged them to read Shakespeare and Australian literature . After completing eight years of schooling , Saunders earned his merit certificate . His formal education thus ended , he went to work at the age of 14 as a millhand in a sawmill . Employers regularly withheld payments for Aboriginal labourers at this time , but Saunders refused to work unless he was paid his full entitlement , and his employer relented . He worked and furthered his education until 1937 , when he went into business with his father and brother , operating a sawmill in Portland , Victoria ; the sawmill was destroyed in a bushfire in 1939 .

Following the outbreak of the Second World War , Saunders was determined to serve in the armed forces . Patriotism and his family 's history of soldiering both played a major part in his decision . His father suggested that he wait six months ; according to Reg , " They were talking about this war being all over in six months with the Maginot Line and all the other garbage that we were told ... But we waited six months and the duck season was over so there was no more shooting to do except go to war " . Saunders enlisted in the Second Australian Imperial Force on 24 April 1940 , joining up with friends he had made while playing Australian rules football . The armed forces later adopted a policy to accept only persons " substantially of European origin or descent " , but at the time Saunders encountered no barriers to his enlistment . He recalled that his fellow soldiers " were not colour-conscious " , and that during training in northern Queensland his white mates would sit alongside him in the " Aboriginal " section of movie theatres . His natural leadership qualities gained him temporary promotions in quick succession : within six weeks of enlistment he was a lance corporal , and after three months he made sergeant .

After completing his training , Saunders was allocated to an infantry unit , the 2 / 7th Battalion , which was serving overseas in North Africa at the time . Upon reaching the 2 / 7th , Saunders reverted to the rank of private . His first experience of war came fighting the Italians around Benghazi . In early April 1941 , the 6th Division , to which the 2 / 7th belonged , was sent to Greece to help defend against a German invasion . Following a series of withdrawals , the battalion was evacuated on 26 April , embarking upon the Costa Rica at Kalamata . It was originally bound for Alexandria , but after the ship was attacked in Suda Bay by German aircraft and began to sink , the men of the 2 / 7th , including Saunders , were picked up by several British destroyers and disembarked on the island of Crete . The 2 / 7th was subsequently allocated to the island 's defending garrison . Following the invasion of Crete in May 1941 , the 2 / 7th Battalion was initially employed in a coastal defence role , before taking part in the fighting around Canea . After this , it took part in a devastating bayonet charge at 42nd Street , along with the New Zealand Maori Battalion , which killed almost 300 Germans and briefly checked their advance . It was during this battle that Saunders killed his first opponent : " ... I saw a German soldier stand up in clear view about thirty yards [ 30 m ] away . He was my first sure kill ... I can remember for a moment that it was just like shooting a kangaroo ... just as remote . " As the Allies began to evacuate the island , the 2 / 7th was called upon to carry out a series of rearguard actions in order to allow other units to be taken off the island . After the final Allied ships departed the island on 1 June 1941 , the battalion was left behind . As a result , many of its men were taken prisoner , though some were able to evade capture by hiding out in the hills and caves around the island . Adopting Cretan dress , learning the dialect , and enlisting the help of local inhabitants , Saunders managed to remain hidden for eleven months .

Saunders was among a party of men evacuated from Crete by a British submarine in May 1942 , and returned to Australia in October . He rejoined his old unit , the 2 / 7th Battalion , which had re-formed in Palestine and been brought back to Australia along with the rest of the 6th Division to help defend against the threat posed by Japan 's entry into the war . In November 1942 , Saunders ' younger brother Harry , who had enlisted shortly after him in 1940 , was killed in action while serving in New Guinea with the 2 / 14th Battalion . When Harry had joined up , Reg recalled , " I was angry because I was the only one that was supposed to go . ... with two of us there , one of us was going to get killed ... " The elder Saunders subsequently served in New Guinea as well , fighting in the Salamaua – Lae campaign in mid-1943 where , having again been promoted temporary sergeant , he took over command of a platoon when its commander was wounded in action . For his leadership , he was recommended for a commission by his commanding officer , Lieutenant Colonel Henry Guinn . When Guinn told him of his plan , Saunders laughed and said , " I don 't want to be an officer ... I 'd rather be Regimental Sergeant Major " . Guinn responded , " Christ , they don 't make boys RSMs " .

Saunders went before an officer selection board that had been set up on the Atherton Tablelands in Queensland , where the units of the 6th Division had been based following their return from New Guinea . The interview panel on the board consisted of three senior officers – all experienced infantry battalion commanders – who were tasked with determining a candidate 's suitability for commissioning as an infantry officer . Saunders was found to be an acceptable candidate and posted to an officer training unit in Seymour , Victoria . Upon completion of the 16-week course , he was promoted to lieutenant in November 1944 , becoming the first Aboriginal commissioned officer in the Australian Army . The precedent of his commissioning had caused the Army some concern due to its " special significance " , and as a result the paperwork for its confirmation was eventually sent to the Commander-in-Chief , General Sir Thomas Blamey , for approval . Nevertheless , Blamey is reported to have " insisted upon following the usual procedure " , believing that there should be no difference in the way Saunders ' commission should be treated to any other soldier who had completed the necessary training . The story garnered much press coverage in Australia , most of it favourable , if in parts paternalistic .

Saunders was discharged from the Army on 5 October 1945 , following the end of the Second World War . Returning to Australia , he volunteered for service in Japan with the British Commonwealth Occupation Force , but the government would not accept Aborigines for the operation . Saunders spoke publicly against this policy , calling it " narrow-minded and ignorant " ; the wartime restriction on non-European enlistments in the armed forces was not lifted until 1949 . Saunders moved to Melbourne with his family , which by this time consisted of his wife Dorothy , whom he had married in 1944 , and their three young children . Dorothy had served in the Women 's Auxiliary Australian Air Force during the war . Saunders recalled that he " had a hard time after the war ... and poor old Dotty , she , you know , didn 't know what the hell to make of it " . Facing discrimination that he had rarely encountered as a soldier , he worked in the ensuing years as a tram conductor , a foundry worker , and a shipping clerk . In August 1950 , the government called for Second World War veterans to serve in the Korea War as part of the specially raised ' K ' Force . Saunders volunteered and returned to the Army as a lieutenant . After training at Puckapunyal , Victoria , and in Japan , he arrived in Korea in November 1950 . He served with the 3rd Battalion , Royal Australian Regiment ( 3 RAR ) , initially as a platoon commander in A Company . In February 1951 , he took charge of A Company when its commander was wounded ; he was subsequently given command of C Company . Promoted to captain , Saunders led C Company during the Battle of Kapyong in April , when 3 RAR and a Canadian battalion held off a Chinese division north-east of the South Korean capital Seoul . Frustrated by the conduct of the war prior to Kapyong , he afterwards recorded that , " At last I felt like an Anzac and I imagine there were 600 others like me " . The 3rd Battalion was awarded a US Presidential Unit Citation for its part in the action . Saunders himself was recommended for a decoration but turned it down . Leading a Vickers machine gun platoon at the Battle of Maryang San in October , he reportedly shared the following exchange with a fellow 3 RAR officer : as they surveyed the forbidding mountain before them , Saunders ' companion remarked , " No country for white men " , to which Saunders replied , " It 's no country for black men , either " . He returned to Australia in November 1951 .

In 1953 the Returned and Services League ( RSL ) , a veterans organisation , recommended Saunders for inclusion in the official Australian contingent to the coronation of Elizabeth II ; the Federal government rejected the suggestion on the grounds that including Saunders would have meant excluding an officer who had been previously selected . Following his service in the Korean War , Saunders remained in the Army overseeing training for national servicemen at Puckapunyal . Away from active service , however , he soon became dissatisfied and in 1954 was discharged at his own request . The same year , he married an Irish nurse , Pat Montgomery ; his first marriage had broken down soon after he returned from Korea . Saunders went to work in the logging industry in Gippsland , after which he moved to Sydney , where he was employed by the Austral Bronze Company . Seen by many as a role model and spokesman for Aboriginal Australians , in 1969 Saunders took up a position in the Office of Aboriginal Affairs as one of its first liaison officers . Among his tasks was promulgating information on recently legislated Federal funding for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander businesses and schooling , following up on recommendations made to government departments , and liaising with Aboriginal welfare groups . He later stated , " I felt a sense of leadership of Aboriginal people and a desire to do something about the Aboriginal situation " . His community work was recognised in the Queen 's Birthday Honours of June 1971 when he was appointed a Member of the Order of the British Empire ( MBE ) in the Civil Division . He continued to serve with the Department of Aboriginal Affairs in Canberra until retiring in 1980 . In July 1985 he was appointed to the Council of the Australian War Memorial , and held this position until his retirement . He was also involved in the RSL , though he fell out with leaders Alf Garland and Bruce Ruxton over Garland 's suggestion that Aborigines be blood-tested to determine their entitlement to government benefits . " They can take all the blood they want from me , " Saunders declared in a 1986 interview , " and they 'll never find out what I am – least of all an Aborigine – bloody stupid ! "

On 14 December 2001 , Saunders was honoured with the dedication of Reg Saunders Way , which passes through the Canberra suburbs of Campbell and Russell , in a ceremony attended by the Secretary of Defence , Dr Allan Hawke , and the Chief of the Defence Force , Admiral Chris Barrie . Saunders was also commemorated with a room in the Canberra Services Club , and by the RSL 's Captain Reg Saunders Scholarship . The Australian War Memorial holds Saunders ' medals and several personal effects in its national collection , along with an official portrait and several photographs .

Hurricane Cosme was an unusually large tropical cyclone that made landfall in south-western Mexico in June 1989 . The third tropical storm and second hurricane of the 1989 Pacific hurricane season , Cosme formed on June 19 from a tropical wave , the storm initially moved westward before being upgraded into Tropical Storm Cosme . It ultimately intensifying into a Category 1 hurricane . Cosme turned northward and made landfall near Acapulco during the night of June 21 . It rapidly weakened over land . The storm caused excessive rainfall on land , leading to deadly and destructive flooding . It is estimated that 30 people died in the hurricane .

In early June 1989 , a tropical wave emerged from the west coast of Africa and traversed the Atlantic Ocean , eventually crossing into the eastern North Pacific . Initially , several centers of circulation were associated with the system . Continuing organize , the storm is estimated to have attained tropical depression status at 0000 UTC on June 18 . The depression was broad and lacked substantial thunderstorm activity . However , it did have respectable outflow and banding . It moved towards the west and intensified into a tropical storm at 0000 UTC on June 20 , 48 hours after being classified . Upon being named , Cosme meandered and remained nearly stationary as it continued to intensify . It became a hurricane midday UTC on June 21 ; this upgrade was delayed in real time . At this time , the hurricane accelerated towards the north . As the cyclone approached the coast of Mexico , it reached maximum sustained winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 979 millibars . During the night of June 21 , Cosme made landfall just east of Acapulco . It moved inland and quickly deteriorated , weakening into a tropical storm shortly after coming ashore . It trekked northward through eastern Mexico and further diminished into a tropical depression before becoming indistinguishable south of Brownsville , Texas on June 23 . Tropical Storm Allison 's development in the Gulf of Mexico was partially related to residual conditions from Cosme 's remnants .

Prior to the hurricane 's landfall , Mexican officials evacuated nearly 260 people from low-lying areas near Acapulco . Ports in the region were also closed several days before the storm and remained closed for two days after as a precaution . In addition , flash flood watches and warnings were issued . Cosme brought heavy rains , which killed at least 30 people due to drowning . Many adobe homes were destroyed , but the specific cost of damage is unknown . The highest rainfall recorded in relation to Cosme was 16.1 in ( 410 mm ) in San Bartolo Yautepec , Mexico . Many mountainous areas received rainfall in excess of 7 in ( 180 mm ) and most other areas received 1 in ( 25 mm ) . High winds produced by the storm damaged numerous trees and power lines throughout the affected areas . Authorities in Acapulco stated that there were no major damage or injuries from the storm , with only one hotel sustaining minor damage .

Hurricane Greta – Olivia was one of six Atlantic hurricanes to cross over Central America into the eastern Pacific while remaining a tropical cyclone . The seventh named storm of the 1978 Atlantic hurricane season , Greta formed from a tropical wave just northwest of Trinidad on September 13 , and despite being in a climatologically unfavorable area , gradually intensified while moving west-northwestward . On September 16 , it became a hurricane south of Jamaica . Two days later , the well-defined eye approached northeastern Honduras but veered to the northwest . After reaching peak winds of 130 mph ( 215 km / h ) that day , Greta weakened while paralleling the northern Honduras coast just offshore . On September 19 , it made landfall on Belize near Dangriga and quickly weakened into a tropical depression while crossing Guatemala and southeastern Mexico . After entering the eastern Pacific , the system re-intensified into a hurricane and was renamed Olivia , which weakened before dissipating over Chiapas on September 23 . Taking a similar path to Hurricane Fifi four years prior , Greta threatened to reproduce the devastating effects of the catastrophic storm ; however , damage and loss of life was significantly less than feared . In Honduras , about 1,200 homes were damaged , about half of which in towns along the coastline . The storm damaged about 75 % of the houses on Roatán along the offshore Bay Islands , and there was one death in the country . In the Belize Barrier Reef , Greta downed trees and produced high waves , while on the mainland , there was minimal flooding despite a high storm surge . In Dangriga where it made landfall , the hurricane damaged or destroyed 125 houses and the primary hospital . In Belize City , a tornado flipped over a truck and damaged four houses . Damage in Belize was estimated at $ 25 million ( 1978 USD ) , and there were four deaths .

A tropical wave exited the west coast of Africa near Dakar , Senegal on September 7 . Moving westward across the Atlantic Ocean , the wave spawned an area of convection three days later , which gradually organized . On September 13 , the wave moved through the Windward Islands , producing wind gusts of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) on Barbados . Later that day , it is estimated the system developed into a tropical depression about 75 mi ( 120 km ) west-northwest of Trinidad , based on ship and land reports . Though located in a climatologically unfavorable area , the depression intensified and continued to develop . A Hurricane Hunters flight on September 14 indicated that the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Greta to the north of the Netherlands Antilles . After becoming a tropical storm , Greta intensified slowly due to a strong trough to the northwest , and with the South American coastline located to the south , the southerly inflow was disrupted . With a ridge to the north along the 30th parallel , the storm moved quickly west-northwestward across the Caribbean . On September 16 , Greta intensified into a hurricane about 275 mi ( 443 km ) south of Jamaica . Shortly thereafter , the trough to the northwest weakened , which had been preventing the storm 's intensification . An increasingly well-defined eye developed while approaching the coast of Honduras as the barometric pressure quickly dropped . Early on September 18 , the eyewall passed just offshore Cabo Gracias a Dios , the sparsely populated border between Honduras and Nicaragua The NHC described the eye as having " literally ricocheted off of the protruding northeast coast of Honduras " , thus sparing much of the country from the strongest winds . At 0710 UTC on September 18 , the Hurricane hunters observed a minimum pressure of 947 mbar ( 28.0 inHg ) just off the northern Honduras coast , which was the basis for the estimated peak intensity of 130 mph ( 215 km / h ) . This made it a Category 4 hurricane on the Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale .

Despite the proximity to land , Greta initially maintained a well-defined structure . The hurricane continued generally west-northwestward due to the ridge to the north , and initially was expected to enter the Bay of Campeche . After passing through the Bay Islands off northern Honduras , Greta weakened slightly while approaching Belize , and made landfall near Dangriga at 0000 UTC on September 19 , with winds of about 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) . The calm of the eye was reported for three to five minutes there . Rapidly weakening over land , the hurricane deteriorated to tropical depression status over Guatemala within 12 hours of landfall . A large high pressure area from the Carolinas to the central Gulf of Mexico turned Greta southwestward toward the eastern Pacific Ocean . At 0000 UTC on September 20 , the Eastern Pacific Hurricane Center ( EPHC ) took over responsibility for issuing advisories while Greta was 30 mi ( 50 km ) from the coast . Soon after , the depression emerged over the warm waters of the eastern Pacific and re-intensified . At 0600 UTC , the depression re-attained tropical storm status and was named Olivia by the EPHC , due to the storm entering the Pacific basin . After initially moving to the north , Olivia began executing a slow counterclockwise loop . Based on observations from nearby ships and radar , it is estimated Olivia attained hurricane status early on September 22 . While tracking towards the Mexican coastline , the system weakened below hurricane threshold ; between 1900 and 2000 UTC , Olivia made landfall about 60 mi ( 95 km ) east of Salina Cruz . Early on September 23 , Olivia dissipated over the Mexican state of Chiapas .

Early in its duration , Greta produced heavy rainfall in the Netherlands Antilles , but the strongest winds remained north of the island . Late on September 17 when Greta 's eye was just offshore Honduras , the country 's government issued a hurricane warning for the eastern coastline . Around the same time , the Mexican government issued a hurricane warning for the eastern Yucatán peninsula , and on September 18 a hurricane warning was issued for the Belize and Guatemala coastlines . These advanced warnings helped reduce fatalities . In Puerto Castilla , Honduras , about 2,000 people were evacuated in advance of the storm . The Honduran government put its military , police , and Red Cross on standby in advance of the storm , due to fears of a repeat of Hurricane Fifi in 1974 . However , unlike Fifi , which caused deadly floods in the region four years prior and took a similar track , Greta did not cause as significant river flooding in Honduras . Across much of Greta 's track in Central America , the hurricane dropped locally heavy rainfall . When Greta passed just offshore northeastern Honduras , it produced sustained winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) in Puerto Lempira , with gusts to 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) . Winds along the northern Honduras coast were diminished due to the eyewall passing to the north . In Honduras , meteorologists estimated that upwards of 15 in ( 380 mm ) of rain fell in mountainous regions . Many villages were isolated and communication with them was severely hampered . In Puerto Lempira , roughly 1,500 of the town 's 7,000 residents sought refuge in five large structures during the storm . In twelve communities along the coastline , military officials reported that 656 homes were destroyed , of which 278 were in Punta Potuca . In the offshore Bay Islands , the hurricane destroyed 26 houses on Guanaja , where many roofs were lost and several boats were destroyed . On nearby Roatán , about 75 % of the houses lost their roofs after experiencing wind gusts of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . There was one death in Honduras , and nationwide , the hurricane damaged about 1,200 homes , washed out roads and bridges , and wrecked coconut and rice crops .

At Greta 's final landfall in Belize , the highest sustained winds were 55 mph ( 89 km / h ) in Belize City , with gusts to 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) at Dangriga near the landfall location . On the offshore Ambergris Caye , winds reached 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) , and there was heavy rainfall . On Half Moon Caye , the hurricane damaged the base of a lighthouse and knocked over several coconut trees . Along the Belize Barrier Reef , the hurricane downed palm trees and produced high waves , with significant wave heights of about 33 ft ( 10 m ) along Carrie Bow Caye . On the mainland , storm tides in Dangriga were 6 to 7 ft ( 1.8 to 2.1 m ) above normal , which did not cause much flooding . The strong winds destroyed 50 houses there and unroofed a further 75 , including damage to the hospital . There were also disruptions to power and water service . About 90 % of the grapefruit crop was destroyed , and 50 % of the orange crop was lost . Tides were 2 to 4 ft ( 0.61 to 1.22 m ) above normal in Belize City , which caused flooding in conjunction with swollen rivers . The United States embassy was flooded with about one foot of mud . There was little damage in the city , although a tornado in Belize City that damaged four houses and flipped over a truck . During the storm , the Belize International Airport was closed . Farther inland , strong winds caused heavy damage at Guanacaste National Park . Damage throughout Belize was estimated at $ 25 million ( 1978 USD ) , and there were four deaths . Three of the deaths were on offshore islands in areas without radios , and the other was due to electrocution .

Following the storm damage in Honduras , the country requested help from the United States . The Tactical Air Command had sent two squadrons to Central America in the middle of 1978 , and in response to the request from Honduras , two aircraft delivered over 100,000 lb ( 45,000 kg ) of cots , water , and generators ; the units also deployed a 13 – person crew who specialized in disaster relief . The aid was distributed by the Military of Honduras . In late October 1978 , the United Methodist Church sent books and other supplies via aircraft to Belize , after a youth group rode out the storm there and desired to help residents . Despite the hurricane damage , the economy of Belize continued to grow after Greta struck , including an increase in banana production . Although the National Hurricane Center does not consider it retired , the World Meteorological Organization lists Greta in its retired hurricane name list .

Radiohead are an English rock band from Abingdon , Oxfordshire , formed in 1985 . The band consists of Thom Yorke ( lead vocals , guitar , piano , keyboards ) , Jonny Greenwood ( lead guitar , keyboards , other instruments ) , Ed O 'Brien ( guitar , backing vocals ) , Colin Greenwood ( bass ) , and Phil Selway ( drums , percussion , backing vocals ) . They have worked with producer Nigel Godrich and cover artist Stanley Donwood since 1994 . Radiohead released their debut single " Creep " in 1992 . It became a worldwide hit after the release of the band 's debut album , Pablo Honey ( 1993 ) . Their popularity and critical standing rose in the United Kingdom with the release of their second album , The Bends ( 1995 ) . Radiohead 's third album , OK Computer ( 1997 ) , propelled them to international fame ; with an expansive sound and themes of modern alienation , it is often acclaimed as a landmark record of the 1990s and one of the best albums of all time . The group 's next album Kid A ( 2000 ) marked a dramatic evolution in their style , as they incorporated influences from experimental electronic music , 20th-century classical music , krautrock , and jazz . Despite initially dividing fans and critics , Kid A was later named the best album of the decade by Rolling Stone , Pitchfork and the Times . Amnesiac , recorded during the same sessions as Kid A , was released the following year .

Radiohead 's sixth album , Hail to the Thief ( 2003 ) , mixed rock and electronic music with lyrics inspired by the War on Terror , and was the band 's final album for their record label , EMI . Their subsequent releases have pioneered alternative release platforms such as pay-what-you-want and BitTorrent . Radiohead released their seventh album , In Rainbows ( 2007 ) , as a download for which customers could set their own price , to critical and chart success . Their eighth album , The King of Limbs ( 2011 ) , an exploration of rhythm , was developed using extensive looping and sampling . Their ninth album , A Moon Shaped Pool ( 2016 ) , prominently featured Jonny Greenwood 's orchestral arrangements . Radiohead have sold more than 30 million albums worldwide . Their work places highly in both listener polls and critics ' lists of the best music of the 1990s and 2000s . In 2005 , they were ranked 73rd in Rolling Stone 's list of " The Greatest Artists of All Time " ; Jonny Greenwood ( 48th ) and O 'Brien were both included in Rolling Stone 's list of greatest guitarists , and Yorke ( 66th ) in their list of greatest singers . In 2009 , Rolling Stone readers voted the group the second best artist of the 2000s .

The members of Radiohead met while attending Abingdon School , an independent school for boys in Abingdon , Oxfordshire . Guitarist and singer Thom Yorke and bassist Colin Greenwood were in the same year , guitarist Ed O 'Brien and drummer Phil Selway in the year above , and multi-instrumentalist Jonny Greenwood two years below . In 1985 , they formed On a Friday , the name referring to the band 's usual rehearsal day in the school 's music room . Jonny was the last to join , first on harmonica and then keyboards , but soon became the lead guitarist ; he had previously been in another band , Illiterate Hands , with musician Nigel Powell and Yorke 's brother Andy Yorke . According to Colin , the band members picked their respective instruments " because we wanted to play music together , rather than just because we wanted to play that particular instrument . So it was more of a collective angle , and if you could contribute by having someone else play your instrument , then that was really cool . " The band disliked the school 's strict atmosphere and found solace in the school 's music department . They credited their music teacher for introducing them to jazz , film scores , postwar avant-garde music , and 20th-century classical music . Colin said : " When we started , it was very important that we got support from him , because we weren 't getting any from the headmaster . You know , the man once sent us a bill , charging us for the use of school property , because we practiced in one of the music rooms on a Sunday . " Oxfordshire and the Thames Valley had an active independent music scene in the late 1980s , but it centred on shoegazing bands such as Ride and Slowdive . At one point , On a Friday featured a saxophone section .

Although all but Jonny had left Abingdon by 1987 to attend university , On a Friday continued to rehearse on weekends and holidays . At the University of Exeter , Yorke played with the band Headless Chickens , performing songs including future Radiohead material , and met artist Stanley Donwood , who would later create artwork for the band . In 1991 , On a Friday regrouped , sharing a house on the corner of Magdalen Road and Ridgefield Road , Oxford . They recorded demos such as Manic Hedgehog , and performed in Oxford , including more performances at the Jericho Tavern . As On a Friday continued to perform live , record labels and producers became interested . Chris Hufford , Slowdive 's producer and the co-owner of Oxford 's Courtyard Studios , attended an early On a Friday concert at the Jericho Tavern . Impressed , he and his partner Bryce Edge produced a demo tape and became On a Friday 's managers ; they remain Radiohead 's managers today . In late 1991 , after a chance meeting between Colin Greenwood and EMI A & R representative Keith Wozencroft at Our Price , the record shop where Colin Greenwood worked , the band signed a six-album recording contract with EMI . At the request of EMI , the band changed their name ; " Radiohead " was taken from the song " Radio Head " on the Talking Heads album True Stories ( 1986 ) .

Radiohead recorded their debut release , the Drill EP , with Chris Hufford and Bryce Edge at Courtyard Studios . Released in May 1992 , its chart performance was poor . The band enlisted Paul Kolderie and Sean Slade , who had worked with US indie bands Pixies and Dinosaur Jr . , to produce their debut album , recorded quickly in an Oxford studio in 1992 . With the release of the " Creep " single later that year , Radiohead began to receive attention in the British music press , not all of it favourable ; NME described them as " a lily-livered excuse for a rock band " , and " Creep " was blacklisted by BBC Radio 1 because it was deemed " too depressing " . Radiohead released their debut album , Pablo Honey , in February 1993 . It stalled at number 22 in the UK charts , as " Creep " and its follow-up singles " Anyone Can Play Guitar " and " Stop Whispering " failed to become hits . " Pop Is Dead " , a non-album single , also sold poorly . Some critics compared the band 's early style to the wave of grunge music popular in the early 1990s , dubbing them " Nirvana-lite " , and Pablo Honey failed to make a critical or a commercial splash upon its initial release . Despite shared influences with popular guitar acts , and some notice for Yorke 's falsetto , Radiohead toured only British universities and clubs .

In early 1993 , Radiohead began to attract listeners elsewhere . " Creep " had been played frequently on Israeli radio by influential DJ Yoav Kutner , and in March , after the song became a hit in that country , Radiohead were invited to Tel Aviv for their first live gig overseas . Around the same time , the San Francisco alternative radio station KITS added " Creep " to its playlist . Soon other radio stations along the west coast of the United States followed suit . By the time Radiohead began their first North American tour in June 1993 , the music video for " Creep " was in heavy rotation on MTV . The song rose to number two on the US modern rock chart , entered the lower reaches of the top 40 pop chart , and hit number seven in the UK Singles Chart when EMI rereleased it in the UK in September . Unexpected attention for the single in America prompted EMI to improvise new promotional plans , and the band shuttled back and forth between continents , playing over 150 concerts in 1993 . Radiohead nearly broke up due to the pressure of sudden success as the Pablo Honey supporting tour extended into its second year . The band members described the tour as difficult to adjust to , saying that towards its end they were " still playing the same songs that [ they had ] recorded two years previously ... like being held in a time warp , " when they were eager to work on new songs .

Radiohead began work on their second album in 1994 , hiring veteran Abbey Road Studios producer John Leckie . Tensions were high , with mounting expectations to deliver a follow-up to match the success of " Creep " . Recording felt unnatural in the studio , with the band having over-rehearsed the material . Seeking a change of scenery , they toured the Far East , Australasia and Mexico and found greater confidence performing their new music live . However , troubled by the fame he had achieved , Yorke became disillusioned with being " at the sharp end of the sexy , sassy , MTV eye-candy lifestyle " he felt he was helping to sell to the world . My Iron Lung , an EP and single released late in 1994 , was Radiohead 's reaction , marking a transition towards the greater depth they aimed for on their second album . It was their first time working with their future producer Nigel Godrich , then working under Leckie as an audio engineer . It was also Radiohead 's first collaboration with artist Stanley Donwood , who has produced all of their artwork since . Promoted through alternative radio stations , My Iron Lung 's sales were better than expected , and suggested for the first time that the band had found a loyal fanbase and were not one-hit wonders .

Having introduced more new songs on tour , Radiohead finished recording their second album by year 's end , and released The Bends in March 1995 . The album was driven by dense riffs and ethereal atmospheres from the band 's three guitarists , with greater use of keyboards than their debut . It received stronger reviews for its songwriting and performances . While Radiohead were seen as outsiders to the Britpop scene that dominated media attention at the time , they were finally successful in their home country with The Bends , as singles " Fake Plastic Trees " , " High and Dry " , " Just " , and " Street Spirit ( Fade Out ) " made their way to UK chart success ; the latter song placed Radiohead in the top five for the first time . In 1995 , Radiohead again toured North America and Europe , this time in support of R.E.M. , one of their formative influences and at the time one of the biggest rock bands in the world . The buzz generated by such famous fans as R.E.M singer Michael Stipe , along with distinctive music videos for " Just " and " Street Spirit " , helped to sustain Radiohead 's popularity outside the UK .

" High and Dry " became a modest hit , but Radiohead 's growing fanbase was insufficient to repeat the worldwide success of " Creep " . The Bends peaked at 88 on the US album charts , which remains Radiohead 's lowest showing there . Nonetheless , Radiohead were satisfied with the album 's reception . Jonny Greenwood said : " I think the turning point for us came about nine or twelve months after The Bends was released and it started appearing in people 's [ best of ] polls for the end of the year . That 's when it started to feel like we made the right choice about being a band . " In later years , The Bends appeared in many publications ' lists of the best albums of all time , including Rolling Stone 's 2012 edition of the " 500 Greatest Albums of All Time " at # 111 .

By late 1995 , Radiohead had already recorded one song that would appear on their next record . " Lucky " , released as a single to promote the War Child charity 's The Help Album , had come out of a brief session with Nigel Godrich , the young audio engineer who assisted on The Bends and produced a 1996 B-side , " Talk Show Host " . The band decided to self-produce their next album with Godrich 's assistance , and began work in early 1996 . By July they had recorded four songs at their rehearsal studio , Canned Applause , a converted apple shed in the countryside near Didcot , Oxfordshire . In August 1996 , Radiohead toured as the opening act for Alanis Morissette . " It was silly money and it gave us a chance to work out everything live , " explained Colin Greenwood . " That , and the strangely perverse kick out of being these five men in black , scaring prepubescent American girls with our own brand of dark music . ' Paranoid Android ' used to have this appalling , ten-minute , Brian Auger Hammond solo at the end of it , which went on and on , with Jonny just jamming . We 'd beg him not to do it . That was quite full-on . There 'd be little children crying at the end , begging their parents to take them home . ( But ) I don 't think you could say that OK Computer is a reaction against the crass commercialism of the most successful solo artist in the world at the moment and her music . It 's a desperate bid on our behalf to emulate that crass commercialisation , which I think we 've singularly failed to do . "

They then resumed recording , not at a traditional music studio , but instead at St. Catherine 's Court , a 15th-century mansion near Bath . The sessions were relaxed , with the band playing at all hours of the day , recording songs in different rooms , and listening to the Beatles , DJ Shadow , Ennio Morricone and Miles Davis for inspiration . Radiohead contributed " Talk Show Host " and the newly recorded " Exit Music ( For a Film ) " to Baz Luhrmann 's adaptation of Romeo + Juliet ( 1996 ) late in the year . Most of the rest of the album was complete by the end of 1996 , and by March 1997 , the record was mixed and mastered . Radiohead released their third album , OK Computer , in June 1997 . Largely composed of melodic rock , the new record also found the band experimenting with song structures and incorporating ambient , avant garde and electronic influences , prompting Rolling Stone to call the album a " stunning art-rock tour de force " . Radiohead denied being part of the progressive rock genre , but critics in the mid- ' 90s began to compare their work to Pink Floyd , a band whose early 1970s work influenced Greenwood 's guitar parts at the time . Some compared OK Computer thematically to Floyd 's best-seller The Dark Side of the Moon ( 1973 ) , although Thom Yorke said the album 's lyrics had been inspired by observing the " speed " of the world in the 1990s . Yorke 's lyrics , embodying different characters , had expressed what one magazine called " end-of-the-millennium blues " in contrast to the more personal songs of The Bends . According to journalist Alex Ross , the band had become " the poster boys for a certain kind of knowing alienation — as the Talking Heads and R.E.M. had been before . " OK Computer met with great critical acclaim , and Yorke admitted that he was " amazed it got the reaction it did . None of us fucking knew any more whether it was good or bad . What really blew my head off was the fact that people got all the things , all the textures and the sounds and the atmospheres we were trying to create . "

OK Computer was the band 's first number one UK chart debut , propelling them to commercial success around the world . Despite peaking at number 21 in the US charts , the album eventually met with mainstream recognition there , receiving the first Grammy Awards recognition of the band 's career , a win for Best Alternative Album and a nomination for Album of the Year . " Paranoid Android " , " Karma Police " and " No Surprises " were released as singles from the album , of which " Karma Police " was most successful internationally . In the same year , Radiohead became one of the first bands in the world to have a website , and developed a devoted online following ; within a few years , there were dozens of fan sites devoted to the band . The release of OK Computer was followed by the " Against Demons " world tour . Grant Gee , the director of the " No Surprises " video , accompanied and filmed the band , releasing the footage in the 1999 documentary Meeting People Is Easy . The film portrays the band 's disaffection with the music industry and press , showing their burnout as they progressed from their first tour dates in mid-1997 to mid-1998 , nearly a year later . The film is also notable for documenting earlier versions of songs that were never released or were not released until years later , such as " How to Disappear Completely " , " Life in a Glasshouse " , " I Will " and " Nude " . The film was screened at festivals such as the 1999 Maryland Film Festival and had a limited theatrical release in select cities . During this time the band also released a music video compilation , 7 Television Commercials , as well as two EPs , Airbag / How Am I Driving ? and No Surprises / Running from Demons , that compiled their B-sides from OK Computer singles .

Radiohead were largely inactive following their 1997 – 1998 tour ; after its end , their only public performance in 1998 was at an Amnesty International concert in Paris . Yorke later said that during that period the band came close to splitting up , and that he had developed severe depression . In early 1999 , Radiohead began work on a follow-up to OK Computer . Although the album 's success meant there was no longer any pressure or a deadline from their record label , tension during this period was high . Band members all had different visions for Radiohead 's future , and Yorke experienced writer 's block , influencing him toward a more abstract , fragmented form of songwriting . Radiohead secluded themselves with producer Nigel Godrich in studios in Paris , Copenhagen , and Gloucester , and in their newly completed studio in Oxford . Eventually , all the members agreed on a new musical direction , redefining their instrumental roles . After nearly 18 months , Radiohead 's recording sessions were completed in April 2000 . In October 2000 Radiohead released their fourth album , Kid A , the first of two albums from these recording sessions . A departure from OK Computer , Kid A featured a minimalist and textured style with more diverse instrumentation , including the ondes Martenot , programmed electronic beats , strings , and jazz horns . It debuted at number one in many countries , including the US , where its debut atop the Billboard chart marked a first for the band , and the first US number one album by any UK act since the Spice Girls in 1996 . This success was attributed variously to marketing , to the album 's leak on the file-sharing network Napster a few months before its release , and to advance anticipation based , in part , on the success of OK Computer . Although Radiohead did not release any singles from Kid A , promos of " Optimistic " and " Idioteque " received radio play , and a series of " blips " , or short videos set to portions of tracks , were played on music channels and released freely on the internet . The band had read Naomi Klein 's anti-globalisation book No Logo during the recording , and they decided to continue a summer 2000 tour of Europe later in the year in a custom-built tent free of advertising ; they also promoted Kid A with three sold-out North American theatre concerts .

Kid A received a Grammy Award for Best Alternative Album and a nomination for Album of the Year in early 2001 . It won both praise and criticism in independent music circles for appropriating underground styles of music ; some mainstream British critics saw Kid A as a " commercial suicide note " , labelling it " intentionally difficult " and longing for a return to the band 's earlier style . Radiohead 's fans were similarly divided ; along with those who were appalled or mystified , there were many who saw the album as the band 's best work . Yorke , however , denied that Radiohead had set out to eschew commercial expectations , saying : " I was really , really amazed at how badly [ Kid A ] was being viewed ... because the music 's not that hard to grasp . We 're not trying to be difficult ... We 're actually trying to communicate but somewhere along the line , we just seemed to piss off a lot of people ... What we 're doing isn 't that radical . " The album has since been ranked one of the best of all time by publications including Rolling Stone , Time , Pitchfork , the Times and the Guardian .

Radiohead 's fifth album , Amnesiac , was released in June 2001 . It comprised additional tracks from the Kid A recording sessions , plus one track recorded after Kid A 's release , " Life in a Glasshouse " , featuring the Humphrey Lyttelton Band . Radiohead stressed that they saw Amnesiac not as a collection of B-sides or " leftovers " from Kid A but an album in its own right . It topped the UK Albums Chart and reached number two in the US , being nominated for a Grammy Award and the Mercury Music Prize . Radiohead embarked on a world tour , visiting North America , Europe and Japan . " Pyramid Song " and " Knives Out " , Radiohead 's first singles since 1998 , were modestly successful . A live album , I Might Be Wrong : Live Recordings , released in November 2001 , features performances of seven songs from Kid A and Amnesiac , and the previously unreleased acoustic track " True Love Waits " .

In July and August 2002 , Radiohead toured Portugal and Spain , playing a number of new songs . They recorded the new material in two weeks in a Los Angeles studio with Godrich , adding several tracks later in Oxford , where they continued their work into the next year . The band described the recording process as relaxed , in contrast to the tense sessions for Kid A and Amnesiac . Radiohead 's sixth album , Hail to the Thief , was released in June 2003 , combining guitar rock with electronic music . Its lyrics were influenced by what Yorke called " the general sense of ignorance and intolerance and panic and stupidity " following the 2000 election of US President George W. Bush . The album debuted at number one in the UK and number three on the Billboard chart , and was eventually certified platinum in the UK and gold in the US . The singles " There There " , " Go to Sleep " and " 2 + 2 = 5 " achieved heavy circulation on modern rock radio . At the 2003 Grammy Awards , Radiohead were again nominated for Best Alternative Album , and producer Godrich and engineer Darrell Thorp received the Grammy Award for Best Engineered Album . In May 2003 , Radiohead embarked in on a world tour and headlined Glastonbury Festival . The tour finished in May 2004 with a performance at the Coachella Festival . A compilation of Hail to the Thief B-sides , remixes and live performances , COM LAG ( 2plus2isfive ) , was released in April 2004 .

Following the Hail to the Thief tour , Radiohead went on hiatus to spend time with their families . Jonny Greenwood composed soundtracks for the films Bodysong ( 2004 ) and There Will Be Blood ( 2007 ) . In July 2006 , Yorke released his debut solo album , The Eraser . He told Pitchfork : " I 've been in the band since we left school and never dared do anything on my own ... It was like , ' Man , I 've got to find out what it feels like , ' you know ? " Radiohead began work on their seventh album in February 2005 with no record label . In an effort to " get out of the comfort zone " , they decided against involving producer Godrich , with whom they had recorded five albums , and hired producer Spike Stent . The collaboration with Stent was unsuccessful and ended in April 2006 . In September 2005 , Radiohead recorded " I Want None of This " for the War Child charity album Help : A Day in the Life . The album was sold online , with " I Want None of This " the most downloaded track , though it was not released as a single . In late 2006 , after touring Europe and North America with new material , the band resumed work with Godrich in London , Oxford and rural Somerset , England . Work was finished in June 2007 and the recordings were mastered the following month .

Radiohead 's seventh album , In Rainbows , was released through the band 's website in October 2007 as a download for any amount users wanted , including £ 0 — a landmark use of the pay-what-you-want model for music sales . The pay-what-you-want release , the first for a major act , made headlines worldwide and sparked debate about the implications for the music industry . According to Mojo , the release was " hailed as a revolution in the way major bands sell their music " , and the media 's reaction was " almost overwhelmingly positive " ; Time called it " easily the most important release in the recent history of the music business " . 1.2 million downloads were reportedly sold by the day of release , but the band 's management did not release official sales figures , claiming that the internet-only distribution was intended to boost later retail sales . Colin Greenwood explained the internet release as a way of avoiding the " regulated playlists " and " straitened formats " of radio and TV , ensuring fans around the world could all experience the music at the same time , and preventing leaks in advance of a physical release . O 'Brien said the self-release strategy sold fewer records , but made more money for the band as there was no middleman . A special " discbox " edition of In Rainbows , including a second disc from the recording sessions , vinyl and CD editions of the album , and a hardcover book of artwork , was also sold and shipped in late 2007 .

In Rainbows was released physically in the UK in late December 2007 on XL Recordings and in North America in January 2008 on TBD Records , charting at number one both in the UK and in the US . The record 's retail success in the US – after having been legally available for months as a free download – was Radiohead 's highest chart success in that country since Kid A , while it was their fifth UK number one album . In Rainbows sold more than three million copies within one year . The album received critical acclaim for its more accessible sound and personal lyrics . It was nominated for the short list of the Mercury Music Prize and went on to win the 2009 Grammy Award for Best Alternative Music Album . Their production team won the Grammy for Best Boxed or Special Limited Edition Package , while Radiohead received their third nomination for Album of the Year . Along with three other nominations for the band , Godrich 's production and the " House of Cards " music video also received nominations . Radiohead released a number of singles from In Rainbows : " Jigsaw Falling into Place " in January 2008 , followed by " Nude " , which debuted at number 37 in the Billboard Hot 100 , Radiohead 's first song to make that chart since 1995 's " High and Dry " and their first top 40 hit in the US since " Creep " . In July they released a digitally-shot video for " House of Cards " . " House of Cards " , along with " Bodysnatchers " , also received a single release on radio . In September the band announced a fourth single , " Reckoner " , and a remix competition similar to one organised for " Nude " . In April 2008 , Radiohead launched W.A.S.T.E. Central , a social networking service for Radiohead fans .

EMI released a greatest hits album , Radiohead : The Best Of , in June 2008 . The compilation was made without Radiohead 's input and only contains songs released under their recording contract with EMI . Yorke was critical of the release , saying : " There 's nothing we can do about it . The work is really public property now anyway , in my head at least . It 's a wasted opportunity in that if we 'd been behind it , and we wanted to do it , then it might have been good . " In August 2008 , EMI reissued " special editions " of OK Computer , Kid A , Amnesiac and Hail to the Thief as part of the " From the Capitol Vaults " series . From mid-2008 to early 2009 , Radiohead toured North America , Europe , Japan and South America to promote In Rainbows , and headlined the Reading and Leeds Festivals in August 2009 . As social media began to expand , Radiohead gradually withdrew their public presence , with no promotional interviews or tours to promote new releases . Pitchfork wrote that around this time " their popularity became increasingly untethered from the typical formalities of record promotion , placing them on the same level as Beyoncé and Kanye West . "

In May 2009 , Radiohead began new recording sessions with Godrich . In August , they released " Harry Patch ( In Memory Of ) " , a tribute song to Harry Patch , the last surviving British soldier to have fought in World War I , with proceeds donated to the British Legion . Later that month , another new song , " These Are My Twisted Words " , was leaked via torrent , possibly by Radiohead themselves . It was released as a free download on the Radiohead website the following week . Yorke formed a new band to perform The Eraser live , Atoms for Peace , with musicians including Godrich and Red Hot Chili Peppers bassist Flea ; the band played eight North American shows in 2010 . In January 2010 , Radiohead played their only full concert of the year in the Los Angeles Henry Fonda Theater as a benefit for Oxfam . Tickets were auctioned , raising over half a million US dollars for the NGO 's 2010 Haiti earthquake relief . In June , Yorke and Jonny Greenwood performed a surprise set at Glastonbury Festival , performing Eraser and Radiohead songs . On 30 August , Selway released his debut solo album , Familial . In December , a fan-made video of Radiohead 's Oxfam benefit performance was released via YouTube and torrent with Radiohead 's support and a " pay-what-you-want " link to donate to Oxfam . In September 2010 , Radiohead released the soundboard recording of their 2009 Prague performance for use in another fan-made concert video . The Radiohead for Haiti and Live in Praha videos were described as examples of the band 's openness to fans and positivity toward non-commercial internet distribution .

Radiohead finished recording their eighth album , The King of Limbs , in January 2011 . Following the protracted recording and more conventional rock instrumentation of In Rainbows ( 2007 ) , Radiohead developed The King of Limbs by sampling and looping their recordings with turntables while incorporating ambient sounds . According to O 'Brien : " Rhythm is the king of limbs ! The rhythm dictates the record . It 's very important . " The album was announced on Valentine 's Day and self-released on 18 February 2011 through the Radiohead website . It was followed by a retail release on CD and vinyl formats in March , and a special " newspaper album " edition in May . The King of Limbs sold an estimated 300,000 to 400,000 copies through Radiohead 's website ; the retail edition debuted at number six on the United States Billboard 200 and number seven on the UK Albums Chart . It was nominated for five categories in the 54th Grammy Awards : Best Alternative Music Album , Best Boxed or Special Limited Edition Package , Best Short Form Music Video ( for " Lotus Flower " ) , Best Rock Performance ( " Lotus Flower " ) and Best Rock Song ( " Lotus Flower " ) . Two tracks not included on The King of Limbs but worked on during the same sessions , " Supercollider " and " The Butcher " , were released as a single for Record Store Day on 16 April 2011 . A series of King of Limbs remixes by various artists were compiled on TKOL RMX 1234567 , released in September 2011 .

To perform the rhythmically complex King of Limbs material live , Radiohead enlisted a second drummer , Clive Deamer , who has worked with Portishead and Get the Blessing . Selway said of the collaboration : " That was fascinating . One played in the traditional way , the other almost mimicked a drum machine . It was push-and-pull , like kids at play , really interesting . " With Deamer , Radiohead recorded a second From the Basement session , released as The King of Limbs : Live from the Basement in December 2011 . The performance included two new songs , " The Daily Mail " and " Staircase " , released as a double A-side download single on 19 December 2011 . Deamer has joined Radiohead on subsequent tours . On 24 June , Radiohead played a surprise performance on the Park stage at the 2011 Glastonbury Festival , performing songs from The King of Limbs before an audience for the first time . In September , they played two dates at New York City 's Roseland Ballroom and made American TV appearances including a one-hour special episode of The Colbert Report and the season première of Saturday Night Live . In February 2012 , they began their first extended North American tour in four years , including dates in the United States , Canada and Mexico . While on tour , Radiohead spent a day working on new material at Jack White 's Third Man Records studio .

On 16 June 2012 , an hour before gates were due to open at Toronto 's Downsview Park for the final concert of Radiohead 's North American tour , the roof of the venue 's temporary stage collapsed , killing drum technician Scott Johnson and injuring three other members of Radiohead 's touring technical crew . The collapse also destroyed the band 's light show and much of their musical equipment . No band members were on stage . The concert was cancelled and Radiohead 's tour dates in Europe were postponed . After rescheduling the tour , Radiohead paid tribute to Johnson and their stage crew at their next concert , in Nîmes , France , in July . Yorke later wrote that finishing the tour after the collapse was his " biggest achievement so far " . In June 2013 , the Ontario Ministry of Labour charged Live Nation Canada Inc , Live Nation Ontario Concerts GP Inc , Optex Staging & Services Inc and an engineer with 13 charges under the Occupational Health and Safety Act . The hearing began in November 2015 .

After the King of Limbs tour , during which the band performed several new songs , Radiohead entered hiatus again . In February 2013 , Yorke and Godrich 's band Atoms for Peace released a studio album , Amok . The pair made headlines that year for their criticism of the free music streaming service Spotify , which they believe cannot support new artists ; Yorke accused Spotify of only benefiting major labels with large back catalogues , and encouraged artists to build their own " direct connections " with audiences instead . On 11 February 2014 , Radiohead released the Polyfauna app for Android and iOS phones , an " experimental collaboration " between the band and the British digital arts studio Universal Everything which uses musical elements and imagery from The King of Limbs . On 26 September 2014 , Yorke released his second solo album , Tomorrow 's Modern Boxes , and on 7 October , Selway released his second solo album , Weatherhouse . Jonny Greenwood composed the soundtrack for the Paul Thomas Anderson film Inherent Vice , released in October 2014 , featuring a new version of an unreleased Radiohead song , " Spooks " , performed by Greenwood and two members of Supergrass . In 2015 , Yorke contributed a soundtrack , Subterranea , to The Panic Office , an installation of Radiohead artwork in Sydney , Australia .

Radiohead began work on their ninth studio album with Godrich in September 2014 in France . In February 2015 , Greenwood told Pitchfork that Radiohead had changed their methods again , " working in limits " and using " very old and very new technology " together . In October , Radiohead sued their previous record label , Parlophone , for deductions made from downloads of their back catalogue . The following month , Junun , a collaboration between Greenwood , Israeli composer Shye Ben Tzur and Indian musicians , produced by Godrich , was released . It was accompanied by a documentary of the same name directed by Paul Thomas Anderson , for whom Greenwood has composed several film scores . On Christmas Day 2015 , Radiohead released a new song , " Spectre " , on the audio streaming site SoundCloud . It was written for the James Bond film of the same name , but was rejected , in Greenwood 's words , for being " too dark " . In April 2016 , XL Recordings purchased Radiohead 's back catalogue from Warner Music Group ( WMG ) . The catalogue was recorded under Parlophone before Radiohead 's recording contract ended with the release of Hail to the Thief in 2003 , and sold approximately 115,000 units in 2015 . As part of WMG 's purchase of Parlophone in 2013 , WMG made an agreement with the independent music label trade group Impala to reach distribution agreements with independent labels for the 11,000 acquired acts , which required artist approval . XL Recordings has released the physical editions of every Radiohead release since In Rainbows , along with records by Atoms for Peace and some of Yorke 's solo work . As a result of the purchase , the " special editions " of the albums , issued by WMG in the mid-2000s without Radiohead 's approval , were removed from streaming services .

On 30 April , fans who had previously made orders from Radiohead received embossed cards with lyrics from a new song , " Burn the Witch " . On 1 May 2016 , Radiohead deleted all content from their website and social media profiles , replacing them with blank images , a move Pitchfork interpreted as symbolic of Radiohead 's re-emergence . " Burn the Witch " was released as a download on 3 May , accompanied by a stop-motion animated music video . On 6 May , Radiohead released another new download single , " Daydreaming " , accompanied by a music video directed by Paul Thomas Anderson ; the video was screened in 35 mm film in select cinemas . Radiohead 's ninth studio album , A Moon Shaped Pool , was released digitally on 8 May 2016 , followed by physical versions on 17 June via XL Recordings . It includes several songs written some years earlier , including " True Love Waits " ( which dates to at least 1995 ) along with strings and choral vocals performed by the London Contemporary Orchestra and additional percussion from Deamer . The album was simultaneously released on paid streaming services including Tidal and Apple Music , but was not released on Spotify , a free service , until 17 June , six weeks later . Spotify had been in " advanced discussions " with Radiohead ’ s management and label to make A Moon Shaped Pool the first album available exclusively to Spotify 's paid subscribers , but the deal fell through , according to Spotify , due to technical hurdles . In Rainbows , the only other Radiohead album not previously available on Spotify , was added on 10 June .

Radiohead began a tour in support of A Moon Shaped Pool in May 2016 , joined again by Deamer , with performances in Europe , North America , and Japan . The physical release of the album was promoted with " Live From a Moon Shaped Pool " , which took place in participating record shops around the world . The event featured a " day-long " audio stream , including playlists curated by Radiohead and a recording of their recent performance at the London Roundhouse , along with competitions , artwork , and other activities . Attendees in a record shop in Istanbul , Turkey , were attacked by a group of men who were angry that customers were drinking beer and playing music during Ramadan , the Muslim holy month of fast . Radiohead released a statement condemning the attacks and offering " love and support " to Istanbul fans .

Among Radiohead members ' earliest influences were Queen , Pink Floyd and Elvis Costello , post-punk acts such as Joy Division , Siouxsie and the Banshees and Magazine , and significantly 1980s alternative rock bands such as R.E.M. , Pixies , the Smiths and Sonic Youth . By the mid-1990s , Radiohead began to adopt some recording methods from hip hop , inspired by the sampling work of DJ Shadow , and became interested in using computers to generate sounds . Other influences on the group include the jazz music of Miles Davis , Charlie Mingus and Alice Coltrane , the soundtracks of Ennio Morricone , 1960s rock groups such as the Beatles and the Beach Boys , and Phil Spector 's " wall of sound " production technique . The electronic music of Kid A and Amnesiac was inspired by Yorke 's admiration for glitch , ambient techno and IDM as exemplified by Warp Records artists such as Autechre and Aphex Twin ; in 2013 , Yorke named Aphex Twin as biggest influence . The album also samples early computer music . The jazz of Charles Mingus , Alice Coltrane and Miles Davis , and 1970s krautrock bands such as Can and Neu ! , were other major influences during this period . Jonny Greenwood 's interest in 20th century classical music also had a role , as the influence of composers Krzysztof Penderecki and Olivier Messiaen was apparent ; for several songs on Kid A and later albums , Greenwood has played the ondes Martenot , an early electronic instrument popularised by Messiaen .

Recording In Rainbows , Radiohead members mentioned a variety of rock , electronic , hip hop and experimental musicians as influences , including Björk , M.I.A , Liars , Modeselektor and Spank Rock . In 2011 , Yorke denied that Radiohead had ever set out deliberately to change musical styles or to make " experimental music " , saying the band was " constantly absorbing music " and that a variety of musicians are always influencing their work . Drummer Clive Deamer , who has recorded and performed with Radiohead since 2012 , said that Radiohead did not see themselves as a rock band and felt their methodology had closer parallels with jazz : “ they deliberately try to avoid cliché and standard forms for the sake of the song ... Rock bands don ’ t do that . It ’ s far more like a jazz mentality . " Since their formation , Radiohead have been lyrically and musically spearheaded by Yorke . Although Yorke is responsible for writing nearly all the lyrics , songwriting is a collaborative effort , with all the band members having roles in the process ; all the band 's songs are officially credited to " Radiohead " . Radiohead songs usually begin with a sketch by Yorke , which is harmonically developed by Jonny Greenwood before the other members develop their own parts . The Kid A and Amnesiac sessions brought about a change in Radiohead 's musical style and working method . Since their shift from conventional rock music instrumentation toward an emphasis on electronic sound , the members have gained flexibility and now regularly switch instruments depending on the particular song requirements . On Kid A and Amnesiac , Yorke played keyboard and bass , while Jonny Greenwood often played ondes Martenot rather than guitar , bassist Colin Greenwood worked on sampling , and O 'Brien and Selway branched out to drum machines and digital manipulations , also finding ways to incorporate their primary instruments , guitar and percussion , respectively , into the new sound . The relaxed 2003 recording sessions for Hail to the Thief led to a different dynamic in Radiohead , with Yorke admitting in interviews that his power in the band had been " absolutely unbalanced " and that he would " subvert everybody else 's power at all costs . But ... it 's actually a lot more healthy now , democracy-wise , than it used to be . "

Radiohead have maintained a close relationship with a number of frequent collaborators . Producer Nigel Godrich made his name with Radiohead , working with the band as an audio engineer on The Bends and as their producer on every studio album afterwards . He has been dubbed the " sixth member " of the band , in an allusion to George Martin being called the " Fifth Beatle " . In 2016 , Godrich said of the collaboration : " I can only ever have one band like Radiohead who I 've worked with for this many years . That 's a very deep and profound relationship . The Beatles could only have ever had one George Martin ; they couldn 't have switched producers halfway through their career . All that work , trust , and knowledge of each other would have been thrown out of the window and they 'd have to start again . " Graphic artist Stanley Donwood met Yorke when both were art students , and with Yorke has produced all of Radiohead 's album covers and visual artwork since 1994 . Donwood works in the studio with the band as they record , allowing the music to influence the artwork . He and Yorke won a Grammy in 2002 for the special edition of Amnesiac packaged as a library book .

Dilly Gent has been responsible for commissioning all Radiohead music videos since OK Computer , working with the band to find a director suitable for each project . Since Radiohead 's inception , Andi Watson has been their lighting and stage director , designing the visuals of live concerts , such as the carbon-neutral " LED forest " of the In Rainbows tour . Radiohead 's chief live technician , Peter " Plank " Clements , has worked with the band since before The Bends , overseeing the setup of their instruments for studio recordings and live performances . Drummer Clive Deamer has performed and recorded with Radiohead since 2011 .

The white-eared titi ( Callicebus donacophilus ) , also known as the Bolivian titi or Bolivian gray titi , is a species of titi , a type of New World monkey , from eastern Bolivia and an area of western Brazil . The species has a range that extends east from the Manique River in Beni Department , Bolivia to southern Rondônia in Brazil . The southern end of its range includes forests around the city of Santa Cruz de la Sierra . It is a medium-sized monkey with a grey back , orange underside and distinctive white ear tufts . It has an omnivorous diet , eating fruits , other plant materials and invertebrates . It is predated upon primarily by raptors , though felids and other monkey species have been known to attack the species . It is a monogamous species and lives in small groups of two to seven members consisting of the pair and their offspring . The family group has a home range of 0.005 to 0.14 square kilometres ( 0.0019 to 0.0541 sq mi ) and the adults have a complex vocal repertoire to maintain their territory . It is also known for its characteristic twining of tails when groups are sitting together . White-eared titis can live for more than 25 years in captivity .

The white-eared titi belongs to the New World monkey family Pitheciidae , which contains the titis ( Callicebus ) , saki monkeys ( Pithecia ) , bearded sakis ( Chiropotes ) , and uakaris ( Cacajao ) . It is a member of the subfamily Callicebinae , of which the only extant genus is Callicebus , containing all of the titi monkeys . Although the exact position of species within the Callicebus genus is debated , the white-eared titi has been placed within the subgenus Callicebus in the C. donacophilus group with the Rio Beni titi ( C. modestus ) , Rio Mayo titi ( C. oenanthe ) , Ollala brothers ' titi ( C. olallae ) , and white-coated titi ( C. pallescens ) . The white-coated titi has sometimes been considered a subspecies of the white-eared titi , but they are treated as separate species in the latest edition of Mammal Species of the World .

The white-eared titi is a medium-sized primate with grey to orange pelage . The species does not exhibit sexual dimorphism ; the male 's head and body length averages 311 millimetres ( 12.2 in ) while females average 340 millimetres ( 13 in ) . The white-eared titi 's fluffy tail is longer than the length of its head and body together . It typically has thick fur , with a dorsal side and limbs that vary in colour from grey agouti to orange agouti , with an orange underside and white ear tufts . Body weight ranges from around 800 to 1,200 grams ( 1.8 to 2.6 lb ) , with the female generally a little lighter . It has the dental formula 2 : 1 : 3 : 32 : 1 : 3 : 3 × 2 = 36 , meaning that on each side of the jaw it has two incisors , one canine tooth , three premolars , and three molar teeth . The canine teeth are relatively short when compared with other New World monkeys . In captivity , the white-eared titi has been known to live for over 25 years .

The white-eared titi is cryptic , diurnal and known to live in small family groups . It is a monogamous species that is thought to mate for life and lives in groups that usually consist of two to seven members ; an adult pair and up to five young . Multi-male groups have also been recorded . Offspring are carried by the male , and are always with them , except when feeding . Between the ages of two to four years , offspring will disperse from the natal group , with females leaving earlier than the males . There is a strong bond between the adult mating pair , they stay close and carry out activities together . Either member of the pair may follow the other and leadership changes through the day . Evidence of the strength of the pair bond is shown by grooming , huddling together with their tails twined , nuzzling , and gentle grasping . Titi monkeys are highly territorial and when confronted with another family group , both will respond with threatening behaviour , males showing increased agitation towards intruding males . When not close together , the pair show a significant amount of distress and agitation .

Titi monkeys are well known for their vocal communication , and have a complex repertoire of calls . The calls can be divided into two categories : high-pitched quiet calls and low-pitched loud calls . Vocalisations are often combined and repeated to form sequences that are used to indicate distress , conflict , play , bonding , disturbance , and to strengthen territory . The high-pitched quiet calls are mostly used when the monkeys are disturbed , but may also be used before or after group calling , while foraging , or to find other members of the group . The loud low-pitched calls are mostly used in long distance group calling . Their function is to ensure adequate spacing between the home ranges of different family groups . These vocalisations are known as duets , and generally involve the male and female . If a neighbouring group is within earshot of these calls they will respond with their own duetting . The white-eared titi is arboreal , spending most of its time in the lower strata of the forest . It may enter the main canopy when travelling longer distances and may also cross small areas of open ground , though the latter is rare . During normal movement through its environment it is quadrupedal and mostly walks , clambers and leaps , but it can also bound and climb . It leaps small distances , no more than a few body lengths , between trees where vegetation is not thick enough to support its primary forms of locomotion . When travelling on the ground it is said to use a " bounding movement " whereby it leaps more than 1 metre ( 3.3 ft ) off the ground . The titi monkey prefers branches which are less than 5 centimetres ( 2.0 in ) in diameter and its tail never touches the support it is on .

There is relatively little known about the ecology of the white-eared titi or even titi monkeys in general , and few studies have focused on the white-eared titi . It is diurnal , commencing activity around sunrise and continuing until sunset . Food availability may influence activity times ; if there is an abundance of food in the warmer months when plants are fruiting titi monkeys may start earlier , or if there is a lack of food , titi monkeys may remain at the feeding tree into the evening . The titi monkey usually rests during the middle of the day and has two main feeding periods , in the morning and in the afternoon . It has an increased period of feeding towards the end of the day . In total , the titi monkey is active for an average of 11.5 hours , 2.7 hours of which is spent feeding . Titi monkeys sleep on branches at least 15 metres ( 49 ft ) above the ground . In the same manner as resting during the day , titi monkeys huddle together and twine tails to sleep . Though there is little published research on the diet of the white-eared titi , titi monkeys in general are omnivores that eat fruit , leaves , insects , and seeds . They mostly eat leaves , especially protein-rich young leaves and leaf buds , so a significant period of the day is spent resting to digest the cellulose . They consume more than 100 different species of plants and fruit . Titi monkeys will also eat small insects ( ants , moths , butterflies , and their cocoons ) , spiders , and can catch flying prey if it comes close to them . During the dry season there is an increased feeding time on leaves , and during lactation it is thought insect consumption increases to augment the protein content of the diet .

The titi monkey may travel between 425 and 1,152 m ( 1,394 and 3,780 ft ) during the day , and can maintain a home range of 0.005 to 0.14 km2 ( 0.0019 to 0.0541 sq mi ) . During the dry season there is less fruit available and therefore less need to travel large distances , so the day range may only be a third of the usual distance . Its home range is often shared with other primate species including marmosets , squirrel monkeys , capuchins , owl monkeys , howler monkeys , and spider monkeys . It is sometimes chased from feeding sites by larger species , and will generally try to avoid other primates .

The white-eared titi is found in tropical humid forests , preferring drier regions to more humid ones . It is found in riparian zones and gallery forests and is clearly associated with open habitats like grasslands and swampy grasslands . It is found in areas with dense vegetation , often choosing to inhabit the thickest parts of the forest . The species seems to be quite tolerant of habitat disturbance . In Bolivia , the white-eared titi is found in the upper parts of the Mamoré , Grande , and San Miguel river basins , east of the Manique River in Beni and in the forests surrounding the city of Santa Cruz de la Sierra . Its range extends north to southern Rondônia in Brazil .

The white-eared titi is considered to be of least concern on the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) Red List . The species is not considered threatened due to its adaptability and abundance over a relatively wide range , and despite having a decreasing population trend the decline is not rapid enough to be placed in a threatened category . The species is also listed on CITES Appendix II . The white-eared titi 's main threat is deforestation and habitat loss due to agriculture . The area of greatest habitat loss is around the city of Santa Cruz de la Sierra , but it still survives within the city limits and on the edges of many rural establishments . It has few natural predators and is proven to be adaptable to habitat disturbance . Farmland may surround and isolate areas of titi habitat which occasionally has positive benefits to the monkey . Farmers may prevent hunters on the land , thereby inadvertently protecting the species . It also appears that the titi monkey can cross open ground between forest fragments , and some groups can thrive in disturbed habitats near human activities . However , the fragmented habitats may prevent the establishment of new territories and decrease reproductive opportunities . Forest corridors to connect fragmented forests have been proposed as an effective means to help ensure the survival of the titi monkey . The white-eared titi is found in the Beni Biological Station Biosphere Reserve and the Amboro National Park in Bolivia and benefits from the protection these reserves provide .

Lamellerie 's expedition was a French naval operation launched in February 1806 . Four French Navy frigates and a brig , all survivors of the Battle of Trafalgar in October 1805 , attempted to break past the British blockade of Cadiz on 23 February 1806 , taking advantage of the withdrawal of the principal blockade squadron several months earlier at the start of the Atlantic campaign of 1806 . Although the squadron was intercepted by elements of the British blockade force , Captain Louis-Charles-Auguste Delamarre de Lamellerie escaped with the four frigates by abandoning the slower brig , which was captured . During the next six months , Lamellerie 's squadron cruised the Atlantic , visiting Senegal , Cayenne and the West Indies but failing to cause any significant disruption to British trade . On 27 July , as the squadron neared Rochefort , it was spotted by HMS Mars , a Royal Navy ship of the line stationed off the port to intercept French ships entering or leaving . Signalling to the rest of the British squadron , Captain Robert Dudley Oliver took Mars in pursuit , chasing the French squadron all through the night and into the next morning , by which time the frigate Rhin had fallen far behind the others . Recognising that Rhin was in danger of being captured , Lamellerie turned back to her defence with his main squadron but then changed his mind , turning once more and retreating to Rochefort as Oliver took possession of the heavily outgunned Rhin .

On 21 October 1805 , the French and Spanish allied fleet was almost destroyed at the Battle of Trafalgar by a Royal Navy fleet under Vice-Admiral Lord Nelson . Among the scattered survivors of the Allied fleet were five French frigates , untouched during the action . With the rest of the surviving ships , the frigates anchored in Cadiz during the week that followed the battle and remained there for the rest of the year , contained in the harbour by a large British blockade squadron led by Vice-Admiral Sir John Thomas Duckworth . In December 1805 however , Duckworth abandoned the station in search of a French squadron under Vice-Admiral Zacharie Allemand that was raiding British convoys off the Savage Islands . Although Allemand escaped Duckworth , the British admiral became embroiled in the Atlantic campaign of 1806 and did not return to Cadiz , eventually sailing to the Caribbean where he won the Battle of San Domingo on 6 February 1806 . In his absence , Duckworth 's squadron was replaced at Cadiz by ships grudgingly despatched from the Mediterranean Fleet , under the command of Vice-Admiral Lord Collingwood . The French Navy was concerned about its ships trapped in Cadiz and sought to bring them back to French harbours , particularly to make up for the heavy losses suffered in the Trafalgar Campaign . Therefore four frigates and a brig were prepared for sea under the most senior frigate captain , Captain Louis-Charles-Auguste Delamarre de Lamellerie of Hortense . These ships were to break out of Cadiz , conduct a six-month raiding mission in the Atlantic to distract attention from the ongoing Atlantic campaign , and raid British merchant shipping . At the conclusion of the six months , Lamellerie was to return to Rochefort to join the French Atlantic Fleet .

Word of Lamellerie 's preparations reached Collingwood , and he planned a ruse to lure the French frigate squadron out into open water . Withdrawing all the large vessels of the blockade squadron , Collingwood kept only the 36-gun frigate HMS Hydra and the 18-gun sloop HMS Moselle in position to create the impression that the principal blockading force had been driven off . This it was hoped would draw Lamellerie into an attack on the lone ships that would allow the rest of Collingwood 's squadron , hidden just beyond the horizon , to counterattack and annihilate the French squadron . However on 23 February a strong westerly wind blew up and the main squadron , Hydra and Moselle were all blown too far to the east . This was spotted by lookouts on shore and Lamellerie took the opportunity to leave port on 26 February , while the British ships were still out of position . Lamellerie 's squadron was spotted late on 26 February by lookouts on Hydra and Captain George Mundy , supported by Captain John Surman Carden on Moselle , steered a parallel course in the hope of cutting off their advance . At 23 : 00 , Carden was detached to look for Collingwood and inform him of the location and direction of the French while Mundy continued to follow the enemy squadron . Although Hydra was now isolated and hopelessly outnumbered , Lamellerie made no effort to attack the British ship : he even failed to respond when the brig Furet , falling behind the larger and faster frigates , came within range of Hydra . Mundy opened fire at 04 : 30 , Lieutenant Dumay on Furet acknowledging that he was hopelessly outgunned and completely unsupported by immediately striking his colours . As Collingwood 's squadron was nowhere within sight and the French were rapidly pulling ahead , Mundy abandoned the chase , secured his prize and turned back eastwards as the French continued into the Atlantic . It is not known why Lamellerie fled from such an inferior force and allowed one of his ships to be captured without opposition : modern historian Richard Woodman describes his conduct as " astonishing , given the weakness of the opposition and [ the strength of his ] own combined force " , but in a separate work suggests that Lamellerie 's orders precluded any engagement until his force was safely off the coast .

Following the escape from Cadiz , the remaining four ships of Lamellerie 's squadron sailed southwards , reaching the French African trading post of Senegal in March and then crossing the Atlantic to Cayenne , arriving on 27 March . Taking on fresh supplies , the squadron sailed from Cayenne on 7 April and operated with limited success against British merchant shipping in the Caribbean Sea , including 15 days cruising off Barbados . Retiring to the Spanish colony of Puerto Rico , Lamellerie resupplied his ships again in preparation for the journey back to France . The frigate squadron sailed on 18 May , leaving the Caribbean just as a large French squadron under Vice-Admiral Jean-Baptiste Willaumez arrived .

The journey back to France was largely uneventful , Lamellerie crossing the Atlantic during May , June and July without meeting any Royal Navy vessels . At 18 : 00 on 27 July however , at 47 ° 00 ′ N 07 ° 00 ′ W in the Bay of Biscay , the frigates were spotted by lookouts on the British ship of the line HMS Mars . Mars was a large and powerful ship , a veteran of Trafalgar that was operating as a scout for the squadron under Commodore Richard Goodwin Keats , detailed to blockade the French Atlantic port of Rochefort . Immediately giving chase , Captain Robert Dudley Oliver signaled from Mars to the nearest British ship HMS Africa , warning of the position and direction of the French . Africa passed this information on to Keats while Mars set all sail in pursuit of Lamellerie . Running before the more powerful ship under all possible sail , the four French frigates gradually became separated from one another in the dark . Mars too was alone , Dudley easily outrunning the rest of his squadron but unable to catch the leading French ships . When dawn rose on 28 July , it was clear that Hortense and the other leading vessels were stretching the distance between themselves and Mars but that the rearmost French ship , the frigate Rhin was struggling to keep up . Realising that he was gaining on Rhin , Oliver continued pushing his ship forward and Lamellerie , recognising the danger to his rearmost frigate , turned his squadron about and bore down on the isolated ship of the line . Although Mars was far larger than any of the individual frigates , together they carried more guns and could have made an effective defence if handled efficiently . Determined to engage the French , Oliver continued to sail towards Lamellerie and at 15 : 00 the French captain suddenly reversed his direction and fled eastwards with his three faster ships , abandoning Rhin to Oliver .

By the time Lamellerie had turned away , the chase had traveled over 150 nautical miles ( 280 km ) from its original position and Rhin could no longer hold off the British ship . A fierce rain squall caused the frigate to roll and Oliver maintained the pursuit so that at 18 : 00 he was close enough to fire a single shot at Rhin , a warning of that a full broadside was to follow . Aware that his ship could not hope to withstand an attack from the ship of the line , Captain Michel Chesneau hauled down his flag and surrendered without a fight . Although the rest of Lamellerie 's ships were still within sight , the approaching night , increasingly stormy weather and the large number of prisoners of war to be transferred from the prize persuaded Oliver to give up any further pursuit . Lamellerie steered his remaining squadron along the coast , where it split up during the night . The following day Hortense and Hermione entered Bordeaux while Thémis was the only one of the squadron to reach its intended destination of Rochefort . Oliver secured his prize , but was so far from his station that he did not manage to rejoin Keats ' squadron until 31 July .

Rhin and the prisoners were taken to Britain , where the frigate was immediately fitted out as a Royal Navy ship under her old name as HMS Rhin . Oliver was commended for his perseverance and he and his men shared in the prize money from the frigate . In France , there appears to have been no condemnation of Lamellerie 's repeated failure to engage Royal Navy forces that in terms of weight of shot at least were the inferior of his squadron . In his official report he inaccurately claimed that his frigates had all been too badly damaged during the Atlantic cruise to consider fighting a ship of the line . He was later made a peer after the return of the French monarchy and remained in the French Navy for many years . In British histories his actions have been roundly condemned – William James accuses him of lying in his official despatches and wrote in 1827 : " What , then , but a misrepresentation of the facts could have saved this French commodore from being cashiered ? " , while Richard Woodman wrote in 1998 that " such apparent pusillanimity fed stories of British superiority against all odds and tended to breed a dangerous conceit " .

The Witch 's Tales was a pulp magazine edited by Tom Chadburn which published two issues in November and December 1936 . It was a companion to a radio program , called The Witch 's Tale , which had begun broadcasting in May 1931 . With the exception of the lead story in each issue , all the stories were reprints from the American edition of Pearson 's Magazine . Alonzo Deen Cole , who wrote the radio series , contributed one lead story , and provided the plot for the other . The authors of the reprint stories included George Daulton , Wardon Allan Curtis , William Hamilton Osborne , and John C. Haywood .

The Witch 's Tale was a radio program that began on American radio in May 1931 . A weekly anthology show , it was the first radio horror program , and soon became quite popular . In 1936 , the magazine The Witch 's Tales appeared as a companion to it , perhaps inspired by The Shadow , a successful pulp magazine which had also been launched as the companion of a radio program of the same name . The Witch 's Tales was published by The Carwood Publishing Co . , a small and relatively inexperienced firm . The named editor of the magazine was Alonzo Deen Cole , who wrote the radio episodes , but the editorial work was actually done by Tom Chadburn . Having both a pulp magazine and radio show act as vehicles for Cole 's work is an early example of the 21st century 's media industry 's approach , with content tied together across more than one media platform , but although Street & Smith demonstrated that this could be done successfully for The Shadow , Carwood did little to promote the radio show in the magazine , probably because of their inexperience . Only one more issue appeared , the following month ; it is unlikely that the publisher could have received sales data on the first issue by that time , so there may have been reasons other than poor sales for the magazine 's short run , perhaps including weak financing and distribution .

The first issue , dated November 1936 , led with " The Madman " , a story by Cole about a mad scientist . Cole 's work also appeared in the second issue with " Mrs. Hawker 's Will " . Originally an episode Cole had written for the radio show , it was adapted from the script for the magazine by Laurence D. Smith . All the other stories , from both issues , were reprinted from the American edition of Pearson 's Magazine . These included " The Monster of Lake LaMetrie " , by Wardon Allan Curtis , from 1899 ; " The Fountain of Youth " , by William Hamilton Osborne , and " Phantom of the Links " , by John C. Haywood , both from 1906 ; and " The Death-Trap " , by George Daulton , which had originally appeared in 1908 . The reprints were good stories , in the opinion of Mike Ashley , and they often had science fiction themes : Curtis 's story involved the transplant of a man 's brain into the body of a prehistoric monster . Despite the relatively high quality of the material , the stories were not action-oriented enough to have pleased a typical pulp magazine reader of the era .

Djibouti women 's national football team represents the country in international competitions . Football is organised by Fédération Djiboutienne de Football , with women 's football formally organised in the country in 2002 , and a national team was later created . The country has no women 's youth national teams . Djibouti has only played in one FIFA recognised match , which they lost to Kenya by a score of 7 – 0 . The team is unranked . The development of women 's football in the country faces both national and regional issues that impede the team 's potential success .

Between 1977 and April 2012 , Djibouti women 's national football team played in only one FIFA sanctioned match . It was played in Nairobi on 26 March 2006 , with Kenya women 's national football team winning 7 – 0 , holding a lead of 4 – 0 over Djibouti at the half . The women 's national team has not competed at the Women 's World Cup . They played two non-sanctioned games , one in 2004 and one in 2005 . In March 2012 , the team was not ranked in the world by FIFA and did not formally exist .

L 'Arianna ( English : Ariadne ) ( SV 291 ) , composed in 1607 – 1608 , was the second opera by the Italian composer Claudio Monteverdi . One of the earliest operas , it was first performed on 28 May 1608 , as part of the musical festivities for a royal wedding at the court of Duke Vincenzo Gonzaga in Mantua . All the music is lost apart from the extended recitative known as " Lamento d 'Arianna " ( " Ariadne 's Lament " ) . The libretto , which survives complete , was written in eight scenes by Ottavio Rinuccini , who used Ovid 's Heroides and other classical sources to relate the story of Ariadne 's abandonment by Theseus on the island of Naxos and her subsequent elevation as bride to the god Bacchus . The opera was composed under severe pressure of time ; the composer later said that the effort of creating it almost killed him . The initial performance , produced with lavish and innovative special effects , was highly praised , and the work was equally well received in Venice when it was revived under the composer 's direction in 1640 as the inaugural work for the Teatro San Moisè .

In about 1590 Claudio Monteverdi , born in Cremona in 1567 , secured a position as a viol player at the Mantuan court of Duke Vincenzo Gonzaga . Over the following ten years he advanced to become the duke 's maestro della musica . During that time , significant developments were taking place in the world of musical theatre ; in 1598 the work generally recognised as the first in the new genre of " opera " — Jacopo Peri 's Dafne — was performed in Florence . The duke was quick to recognise the potential of this new musical form , and its potential for bringing prestige to those willing to sponsor it . As part of his duties to the Gonzaga court , Monteverdi was often required to compose or arrange music for staged performances . These works included a fully-fledged opera , L 'Orfeo , written to a libretto by Alessandro Striggio the Younger and presented before the court on 24 February 1607 . This performance pleased the duke , who ordered a repeat showing for 1 March . A contemporary account records that the piece " could not have been done better ... The music , observing due propriety , serves the poetry so well that nothing more beautiful is to be heard anywhere " . Monteverdi was then required to write several pieces for performance at the wedding of the duke 's son and heir Francesco , planned for early May 1608 . These included a musical prologue for Battista Guarini 's play L 'idropica and a setting of the dramatic ballet Il ballo delle ingrate ( " Dance of the Ungrateful Ladies " ) , with a text by Ottavio Rinuccini . There was also to be an opera , though it was not initially certain that Monteverdi would provide this . Other works under consideration were Peri 's Le nozze di Peleo e Titede ( " The marriage of Peleus and Thetis " ) with a libretto by Francesco Cini , and a new setting of Dafne by Marco da Gagliano . In the event , the former was rejected and the latter designated for performance at the 1607 – 08 Carnival . The duke decreed that the wedding opera should be based on the myth of Arianna ( Ariadne ) , and that Rinuccini should write the text . Monteverdi was instructed to provide the music .

At the time of his commission for L 'Arianna , Rinuccini was probably the most experienced and distinguished of all librettists . His writing career stretched back to 1579 , when he had written verses for the Florentine court entertainment Maschere d 'Amazzoni . He had become widely known through his verse contributions to the celebrated intermedi for Girolamo Bargagli 's play La Pellegrina ( The Pilgrim Woman ) , performed in May 1589 at the wedding of Ferdinando I de ' Medici and Christina of Lorraine . According to Gagliano , Rinuccini was a primary influence in the emergence of opera as a genre ; he adapted the conventions of his contemporary lyric poets to produce the librettos for two of the earliest operas , Dafne and Euridice — the latter set to music by both Peri and Giulio Caccini . For his Arianna libretto Rinuccini drew on a variety of classical sources , notably the tenth book of Ovid 's Heroides , parts of the Carmina of Catullus , and the section in Virgil 's epic Aeneid dealing with Dido 's abandonment by Aeneas . He also used aspects of more recent literary works — Ludovico Ariosto 's Orlando Furioso , Torquato Tasso 's Gerusalemme liberata , and Giovanni Andrea dell ' Anguillara 's 1561 translation of Ovid 's Metamorphoses . The libretto was extended during the rehearsals when Carlo de ' Rossi , a member of the duke 's court , reported the Duchess Eleonora 's complaint that the piece was " very dry " and needed to be enriched with further action . The libretto published in Venice in 1622 takes the form of a prologue and eight scenes , although other arrangements of the text have been suggested . For example , the musicologist Bojan Bujić has posited an alternative of a prologue and five scenes .

Monteverdi probably began composing in late October or early November 1607 , since Rinuccini 's arrival in Mantua can be dated to 23 October . With rehearsals due to begin in the new year , Monteverdi composed the work in a hurry and under considerable pressure ; nearly 20 years later he was still complaining , in a letter to Striggio , of the hardships he had been made to suffer : " It was the shortness of time that brought me almost to death 's door in writing L 'Arianna " . Monteverdi had apparently completed the score by early January , and rehearsals began . However , his work was not over as he was required to write further music when the work was extended after Rossi 's intervention . Among the material added or lengthened were the early scene between Venus and Cupid , and Jupiter 's blessing from heaven at the end of the opera . In March 1608 , well into the rehearsal period , the opera 's scheduled performance was jeopardised by the death , from smallpox , of the leading soprano Caterina Martinelli . Fortunately a replacement was to hand , a renowned actress and singer , Virginia Ramponi-Andreini , known professionally as " La Florinda " , who was performing in Mantua . A courtier , Antonio Costantini , later reported that she learned the part of Arianna in six days . The musicologist Tim Carter suggests that Arianna 's lament may have been added to the opera at this late stage , to exploit La Florinda 's well-known vocal capabilities .

The action is preceded by a brief prologue , delivered by Apollo . Venus and Cupid are then discovered , in conversation , on a desolate seashore . Venus informs Cupid that Duke Theseus of Athens , together with Ariadne , will soon be arriving on the island of Naxos on their way to Athens . They are fleeing from Crete , where the pair have been complicit in the slaying of Ariadne 's monster half-brother , the Minotaur , in the labyrinth below the palace of her father , King Minos . Venus is aware that Theseus intends to abandon Ariadne on Naxos , and to proceed to Athens alone . Cupid offers to rekindle Theseus 's passion for Ariadne , but Venus has decided to unite her with the god Bacchus , and asks Cupid to arrange this . Cupid conceals himself , as Theseus and Ariadne arrive on the island a short distance away . Ariadne muses over her disloyalty to her father , but declares her love for Theseus . She departs to find shelter for the night , after which a fishermen 's chorus compares her eyes with the stars of heaven . Theseus , alone with his counsellor , discusses his abandonment of Ariadne , and is advised that this decision is justified , as she will not be acceptable to the people of Athens as their ruler 's consort .

A chorus greets the dawn as Ariadne , after a troubled night 's sleep , returns to the shore with her companion , Dorilla , to find that Theseus has departed . Dorilla offers her comfort . In despair at the thought that Theseus will not return , Ariadne nevertheless decides to go to the landing area to wait for him . In a pastoral interlude a chorus sings of the joys of rural life , and expresses the hope that Theseus will not forget Ariadne . Primed by an envoy with the news that Ariadne is alone and sorrowing , the chorus again sings in sympathy with her . On the beach , Ariadne sings her lament for her lost love and prepares to kill herself . At this point fanfares are heard heralding an arrival , causing Ariadne to hope that it is Theseus returning . In another interlude the chorus empathises , but a second envoy announces that it is Bacchus who has arrived , having taken pity on Ariadne . A sung ballo celebrates the anticipated betrothal of Bacchus and Ariadne . In the final scene Cupid reappears , and Venus rises from the sea before Jupiter speaks his blessing from the heavens . The union is sealed as Bacchus promises Ariadne immortality in heaven , and a crown of stars .

The date of the Gonzaga wedding was repeatedly postponed , because of diplomatic problems which delayed the bride 's arrival in Mantua until 24 May . The wedding festivities began four days later ; L 'Arianna was performed on 28 May 1608 , the first of the several spectacular entertainments . A large temporary theatre had been built for the occasion ; according to the court 's chronicler Federico Follino this held 6,000 people — a figure which Carter deems unlikely . Whatever its size , the arena could not hold everyone who wished to be present . Follino 's account records that although the duke had strictly limited the numbers from his household entitled to be there , many distinguished foreign visitors could not be seated and were obliged to crowd around the doors . Although contained within a single stage set , the production was lavish , with 300 men employed to manipulate the stage machinery . Follino 's report described the set as " a wild rocky place in the midst of the waves , which in the furthest part of the prospect could be seen always in motion " . As the action began , Apollo was revealed " sitting on a very beautiful cloud ... which , moving down little by little ... reached in a short space of time the stage and ... disappeared in a moment " . Thereafter , all the performers proved excellent in the art of singing ; " every part succeeded more than wondrously " . Follino 's enthusiasm was echoed in other reports made by dignitaries to their own courts . The ambassador for the House of Este , who referred to the work as " a comedy in music " , mentioned in particular Andreini 's performance which , in her lament , " made many weep " , and that of Francesco Rasi , who as Bacchus " sang divinely " . Monteverdi 's fellow composer Marco da Gagliano wrote that Monteverdi 's music had " moved the entire audience to tears " . In all , the opera lasted for two and a half hours .

Despite the positive reception accorded to L 'Arianna at its premiere , the duke did not request a second showing , as he had with L 'Orfeo the previous year " . The next hint of a performance of L 'Arianna is in 1614 , when the Medici court in Florence requested a copy of the score , presumably with the intention of staging it . There is , however , no record of any such performance there . Early in 1620 Striggio asked Monteverdi to send him the music for a projected performance in Mantua as part of the celebration for the Duchess Caterina 's birthday . Monteverdi went to the trouble and expense of preparing a new manuscript with revisions ; had he had more time , he informed Striggio , he would have revised the work more thoroughly . Hearing nothing further from the Mantuan court , Monteverdi wrote to Striggio on 18 April 1620 , offering to help with the staging . A month or so later , however , he learned that the duchess 's celebrations had been scaled back , and that there had been no performance of L 'Arianna . There is some evidence to suggest a possible performance in Dubrovnik , in or some time after 1620 ; a Croatian translation of the libretto was published in Ancona in 1633 . However , the only known revival of the work came in Venice , in 1640 . Public theatre opera had come to the city in March 1637 , when the new Teatro San Cassiano opened with a performance of L 'Andromeda by Francesco Manelli . The popularity of this and other works led to more theatres converting their facilities for opera ; L 'Arianna was chosen to inaugurate the Teatro San Moisè as an opera house during the 1639 – 40 Carnival ( the precise date of this performance is not recorded ) . A revised version of the libretto had been published in 1639 , with substantial cuts and revisions from the 1608 version to remove passages too specifically linked to the Mantuan wedding . The composer , who was by then 73 years old , had acquired considerable prestige in Venice , having been director of music at St Mark 's Basilica since 1613 . The dedication in the revised and republished libretto describes him as " [ the ] most celebrated Apollo of the century and the highest intelligence of the heavens of humanity " . The opera was received with great enthusiasm by a Venetian audience already familiar with the lament , which had been published in the city in 1623 . Within a few weeks the theatre replaced L 'Arianna with Monteverdi 's new opera Il ritorno d 'Ulisse in patria , which proved an even greater success .

After the Venice revival of 1639 – 40 there are no further records of performances of L 'Arianna . Rinuccini 's libretto , which was published on several occasions during Monteverdi 's lifetime , has survived intact , but the opera 's music disappeared some time after 1640 , with the exception of Ariadne 's Scene 6 lament , known as Lamento d 'Arianna . In the loss of its music the opera shares the fate of most of Monteverdi 's theatrical works , including six of his other nine operas . Carter 's explanation for the high rate of attrition is that " memories were short and large-scale musical works often had limited currency beyond their immediate circumstances " ; such music was rarely published and quickly discarded .

The lament was saved from oblivion by Monteverdi 's decision to publish it independently from the opera : first in 1614 as a five-voice madrigal , then in 1623 as a monody , and finally in 1641 as a sacred hymn , Lamento della Madonna . The five-voice adaptation was included in the composer 's Sixth Book of Madrigals ; there is evidence that this arrangement was made at the suggestion of an unnamed Venetian gentleman who thought that the melody would benefit from counterpoint . In 1868 the lament was published in Paris , and in 1910 the Italian composer Ottorino Respighi issued an edited , orchestral transcription . In her analysis of the lament , the musicologist Suzanne Cusick asserts that " [ T ] o a large extent Monteverdi 's fame and historical status rested for centuries on the universal appreciation of his achievement in the celebrated lament [ which ] was among the most emulated , and therefore influential , works of the early 17th century " . In Cusick 's view Monteverdi " creat [ ed ] the lament as a recognizable genre of vocal chamber music and as a standard scene in opera ... that would become crucial , almost genre-defining , to the full-scale public operas of 17th-century Venice " and she concludes by noting that the women of Mantua would have recognised the transformations enacted in the lament as representative of their own life stories . Monteverdi , she believes , sought to represent in music the eventual triumph of female piety over promiscuity : " Arianna 's gradual loss of her passionate self in the lament constitutes a public musical chastening of this incautious woman who dared to choose her own mate " . In her study The Recitative Soliloquy , Margaret Murata records that laments of this kind became a staple feature of operas until about 1650 , " thereafter more rarely until the total triumph of the aria around 1670 " . Mark Ringer , in his analysis of Monteverdi 's musical drama , suggests that the lament defines Monteverdi 's innovative creativity in a manner similar to that in which , two-and-a-half centuries later , the " Prelude " and the " Liebestod " in Tristan und Isolde announced Wagner 's discovery of new expressive frontiers .

In its operatic context the lament takes the form of an extended recitative of more than 70 vocal lines , delivered in five sections divided by choral comments . Some of the wording is prefigured in the immediately preceding scene in which the First Envoy describes Arianna 's plight to a sympathetic chorus of fishermen . The lament depicts Arianna 's various emotional reactions to her abandonment : sorrow , anger , fear , self-pity , desolation and a sense of futility . Cusick draws attention to the manner in which Monteverdi is able to match in music the " rhetorical and syntactical gestures " in Rinuccini 's text . The opening repeated words " Lasciatemi morire " ( Let me die ) are accompanied by a dominant seventh chord which Ringer describes as " an unforgettable chromatic stab of pain " ; Monteverdi was one of the first users of this musical device . What follows , says Ringer , has a range and depth " comparable to Shakespeare 's most searching soliloquies " . The words " Lasciatemi morire " are followed by " O Teseo , O Teseo mio " ( O Theseus , my Theseus " ) ; the two phrases represent Arianna 's contrasting emotions of despair and longing . Throughout the lament indignation and anger are punctuated by tenderness , until the final iteration of " O Teseo " , after which a descending line brings the lament to a quiet conclusion .

Among other composers who adopted the format and style of Arianna 's lament were Francesco Cavalli , whose opera Le nozze di Teti e di Peleo contains three such pieces ; Francesco Costa , who included a setting of Rinuccini 's text in his madrigal collection Pianta d 'Arianna ; and Sigismondo d 'India , who wrote several laments in the 1620s after the monodic version of Arianna 's lament was published in 1623 . Monteverdi himself used the expressive lament format in each of his two late operas , Il ritorno d 'Ulisse in patria and L 'incoronazione di Poppea , for the respective characters of Penelope and Ottavia . In 1641 Monteverdi adapted Arianna 's lament into a sacred song with a Latin text , " Pianto dell Madonna " , which he included in Selva morale e spirituale , the last of his works published during his lifetime .

An election for the Speaker of the U.S. House of Representatives took place on October 29 , 2015 , during the 114th U.S. Congress . The election was necessitated by the announcement of Speaker John Boehner 's resignation , set for October 30 . The Speaker of the House follows the Vice President in the line of succession to the presidency of the United States in accordance with the Presidential Succession Act . Due to friction within the Republican Party caucus , Boehner decided to step down as speaker and resign his seat in Congress . He scheduled a Republican caucus non-binding vote for speaker on October 8 , and a full floor vote on October 29 . Kevin McCarthy , the House Majority Leader and second-in-command to the Speaker , was initially viewed as the favorite to win the Speakership . However , due to the opposition of the Freedom Caucus , McCarthy dropped out of the race on October 8 , and the caucus vote was postponed . Jason Chaffetz initially declared his candidacy to challenge McCarthy , and Bill Flores declared his candidacy after McCarthy withdrew , but both dropped out later to express their support for Paul Ryan , who entered the race after being widely viewed as a potential frontrunner . Daniel Webster of the Republican Party and former Speaker Nancy Pelosi of the Democratic Party were also declared candidates . Ryan won the rescheduled caucus vote on October 28 , and was elected Speaker of the House , receiving 54.6 % of the House vote , on October 29 .

The Speaker of the United States House of Representatives is the presiding officer of the United States House of Representatives , and is second in the United States presidential line of succession , after the Vice President and ahead of the President pro tempore of the United States Senate . Though the Constitution does not require that the Speaker be an elected member of the House of Representatives , every Speaker to date has been elected from House membership . The 435 members of the House of Representatives elect a Speaker by majority rule at the beginning of each session of the United States Congress , who serves until the end of the Congress . Typically , the election is a formality , as the majority party 's members vote as a bloc for their party 's previously-chosen Speaker-designate ( such as the speaker , majority leader , or minority leader from the previous term ) . Open elections are uncommon but have occurred . The last Speaker election to require multiple ballots occurred in 1923 .

John Boehner , a member of the Republican Party from Ohio , served as the Majority Leader of the United States House of Representatives from February 2006 until January 2007 . As the Democratic Party assumed control of the House following the 2006 elections , Boehner served as Minority Leader from January 2007 until January 2011 . When Republicans reassumed control of the House of Representatives in January 2011 , Boehner was elected as Speaker , with the votes of all 241 of his fellow Republicans . In 2014 , some House Republicans reached out to Ben Carson about his interest in becoming Speaker should they be able to oust Boehner ; Carson declined , citing his impending candidacy for president . Boehner 's Republican opponents formed a congressional caucus , called the Freedom Caucus , in January 2015 to focus their opposition . Though Boehner was reelected as Speaker at the beginning of the 114th United States Congress that month , 25 conservative members of the Republican caucus did not vote for him . Daniel Webster , a Republican from Florida , received 12 votes . Throughout 2015 , Boehner and the Freedom Caucus remained at odds . Boehner stripped his opponents of leadership posts and other perks , while the American Action Network , a group allied with Boehner , aired television ads against Freedom Caucus members in their home districts . Meanwhile , the Freedom Caucus opposing Boehner 's plans , forcing him to rely on Democratic votes to pass bills . Needing to pass a federal budget for the 2016 fiscal year beginning October 1 , the Freedom Caucus , now consisting of approximately 40 conservative Republicans affiliated with the Tea Party movement , threatened to block a resolution from passing unless it would defund Planned Parenthood and to initiate a vote to vacate the speakership if Boehner did not support their demands . The caucus sought the following promises : ( 1 ) the decentralization of the House Steering Committee , so that the Speaker and House Majority Leader are not solely in charge of committee assignments , ( 2 ) not supporting an increase in the U.S. debt ceiling without entitlement reform , ( 3 ) willingness to impeach John Koskinen , the Commissioner of Internal Revenue , and ( 4 ) passing spending bills approved by the caucus rather than a continuing resolution favored by Democrats in the United States Senate .

On July 28 , 2015 , Mark Meadows , a member of the Freedom Caucus from North Carolina , filed a motion to vacate the speakership , only the second time the motion had been filed . The next day , Boehner referred to the motion as " no big deal . " However , following continued pressure from the Freedom Caucus , and to avoid the vacation of his speakership , Boehner announced on September 25 that he would resign the Speakership and retire from Congress effective October 30 . Sources from his office indicated he chose to resign due to the increasing discord within the Republican caucus so that he could manage passage of a continuing resolution to fund the government and avoid a government shutdown .

On September 28 , Kevin McCarthy of California , the House Majority Leader , and Webster announced that they would run for Speaker of the House . McCarthy was considered the presumptive favorite in the race . Jason Chaffetz , a Republican from Utah and the Chairman of the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee , announced his candidacy on October 4 , claiming that McCarthy did not have the votes to win the election . Several Republicans urged Paul Ryan of Wisconsin , the running mate of Mitt Romney in the 2012 presidential election , to run for Speaker , but he declined , saying he is a " policy guy " with a preference to focus on his role as Chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee . Democrat Nancy Pelosi , who served as the Speaker from January 2007 through January 2011 , asked her Democratic colleagues for their vote in the election . Steny Hoyer , the House Minority Whip , said that he expects that the " overwhelming majority " of Democrats will vote for Pelosi . He said that if a Republican cannot get the votes needed , Democrats may consider their options .

On October 7 , the day before the Republican caucus scheduled a non-binding vote for speaker , Ryan and former Vice President Dick Cheney endorsed McCarthy , as did 11 of the 13 House Republicans from Pennsylvania . The Freedom Caucus decided to endorse Webster in the race . Other Republicans said they would vote against McCarthy , including Thomas Massie of Kentucky , who called McCarthy " absolutely not an option " because of his previous role as Boehner 's " right-hand man " . Also , Walter B. Jones , Jr. of North Carolina sent a letter to the Republican Conference Chairwoman Cathy McMorris Rodgers stating that any candidates for a leadership position with " misdeeds " should withdraw from the race . Jones has stated that his comment did not specifically refer to McCarthy , but it was widely seen as referring to rumors that McCarthy had been committing an extramarital affair with a fellow Representative , a rumor that both have denied ; the basis for such an allegation and interpretation is unclear . Citing opposition from within the Republican Party , as well as fallout from controversial comments he made about the United States House Select Committee on Benghazi , McCarthy dropped out of the race on October 8 . Following McCarthy 's departure from the race , Republicans renewed their efforts to recruit Ryan as a candidate . Boehner personally called Ryan twice to ask him to run , and Chaffetz said that he would not run against Ryan if he chose to enter the race . Ryan also received calls from Mitt Romney and Trey Gowdy , among others , encouraging him to run for Speaker . Additional Ryan endorsements came from Wisconsin Senator Ron Johnson , 2016 Republican presidential frontrunner Donald Trump , and House Majority Whip Steve Scalise from Louisiana . On October 9 , close aides of Ryan confirmed that Ryan was reconsidering the possibility of a run .

A possible Ryan candidacy received support from the same Freedom Caucus that opposed Boehner and McCarthy , as Meadows said on October 11 that Ryan running would " definitely change the equation , " and Chairman Jim Jordan described Ryan as " a good man " and stated that the Freedom Caucus would view a Ryan run " favorably . " Others who expressed their interest in running included Texas representatives Bill Flores and Michael McCaul , Georgia representative Lynn Westmoreland , Montana representative Ryan Zinke , and California representative and former Oversight Committee Chairman Darrell Issa . However , several candidates have made clear that they would only run if Ryan chooses not to , including Issa , McCaul , and Minnesota representative John Kline . On October 12 , Flores confirmed that he would run for Speaker . He stated that he would run only if Ryan stayed out of the contest . Ryan held a closed-door meeting with the Republican Caucus on October 20 , where he explained that he would run for Speaker if he could be guaranteed an overwhelming majority of the Republican caucus would support him . Specifically , Ryan requested an increased threshold for the political maneuver of vacating the Speakership , stated that he would not lessen the amount of time he spends with his family , and requested an official endorsement from the Freedom Caucus , Republican Study Committee , and The Tuesday Group by October 23 , before he could make his decision . Immediately after Ryan 's announcement , Chaffetz announced that he would be dropping out of the race to support Ryan . The next day , the Freedom Caucus held a vote to determine which of its members would support Ryan ; although the exact tally was not revealed , roughly two-thirds of the caucus voted to endorse Ryan . Although this was shy of the 80 % vote needed for an official endorsement over Webster , both the caucus leaders and Ryan were satisfied with the result , and Ryan made efforts to move forward with a potential Speaker bid .

Nancy Pelosi , ( Democratic Party ) , Minority Leader of the United States House of Representatives ( since 2011 ; 2003 – 2007 ) , United States representative for California 's 12th congressional district ( since 2013 ) , and Speaker of the United States House of Representatives ( 2007 – 2011 ) . Paul Ryan , ( Republican Party ) , United States representative for Wisconsin 's 1st congressional district ( since 1999 ) , Chairman of the Ways and Means Committee ( since 2015 ) , Republican Party nominee for Vice President of the United States in the 2012 election . Daniel Webster , ( Republican Party ) , United States representative for Florida 's 10th congressional district ( since 2013 ) .

Darrell Issa , ( Republican Party ) , United States representative for California 's 49th congressional district ( since 2003 ) , Chairman of the House Oversight Committee ( 2011 – 2015 ) . Newt Gingrich , ( Republican Party ) , Speaker of the United States House of Representatives ( 1995 – 1999 ) , House Minority Whip ( 1989 – 1995 ) , United States representative for Georgia 's 6th congressional district ( 1979 – 1999 ) . Michael McCaul , ( Republican Party ) , United States representative for Texas 's 10th congressional district ( since 2005 ) , Chairman of the House Homeland Security Committee ( since 2013 ) . Mike Pompeo , ( Republican Party ) , United States representative for Kansas 's 4th congressional district ( since 2011 ) . Lynn Westmoreland , ( Republican Party ) , United States representative for Georgia 's 3rd congressional district ( since 2007 ) . Ryan Zinke , ( Republican Party ) , United States representative for Montana 's at-large congressional district ( since 2015 ) .

Jason Chaffetz , ( Republican Party ) , United States representative for Utah 's 3rd congressional district ( since 2008 ) , Chairman of the United States House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform ( since 2015 ) ( Withdrew on October 20 , 2015 ; endorsed Paul Ryan ) . Bill Flores , ( Republican Party ) , United States representative for Texas 's 17th congressional district since 2011 . ( Withdrew on October 22 , 2015 ; endorsed Paul Ryan ) . Kevin McCarthy ( Republican Party ) , United States representative for California 's 23rd congressional district ( since 2013 ) , Majority Leader of the United States House of Representatives ( since 2014 ) . ( Withdrew on October 8 , 2015 ) .

The following received some speculation about a possible candidacy , but subsequently ruled themselves out : Marsha Blackburn , ( Republican Party ) , United States representative for Tennessee 's 7th congressional district ( since 2003 ) . Trey Gowdy ( Republican Party ) , United States representative for South Carolina 's 4th congressional district ( since 2011 ) , Chairman of the House Benghazi Committee ( since 2014 ) . Jeb Hensarling ( Republican Party ) , United States representative for Texas 's 5th congressional district ( since 2003 ) , Chairman of the House Committee on Financial Services ( since 2013 ) . Cathy McMorris Rodgers ( Republican Party ) , United States representative for Washington 's 5th congressional district ( since 2005 ) , Chairman of the House Republican Conference ( since 2013 ) . Peter Roskam , ( Republican Party ) , United States representative for Illinois 's 6th congressional district ( since 2007 ) . Steve Scalise ( Republican Party ) , United States representative for Louisiana 's 1st congressional district ( since 2008 ) , Majority Whip of the United States House of Representatives ( since 2014 ) .

House Republicans planned to hold a non-binding caucus vote on October 8 , followed by the official floor vote on October 29 . The winning candidate requires a 218-vote majority to win . Multiple ballots may be cast if the majority of the House cannot agree on a candidate . While McCarthy and Chaffetz both said they would vote for the winner of the caucus vote in the floor vote , Webster did not make the same promise . Following McCarthy dropping out of the race on October 8 , the caucus vote was indefinitely postponed . Massie and Peter T. King referred to the House as a " banana republic . " Massie also criticized Boehner for postponing the election , saying they " called off the election because they didn ’ t like the result , " which was echoed by Tom Rice , Louie Gohmert , and Justin Amash . McMorris Rodgers and Conference Vice Chairwoman Lynn Jenkins defended Boehner , saying the matter was handled properly , as conference rules give him sole discretion . Rich Lowry of National Review asked McCarthy in a phone interview if the House was governable , to which McCarthy replied " I don ’ t know . Sometimes you have to hit rock bottom . " Charlie Dent , a Republican from Pennsylvania who had supported McCarthy , suggested that if Republicans are unable to agree on a candidate , the best option might be for a bipartisan coalition to select a Speaker .

On October 29 , Ryan was elected Speaker with 236 of the 432 votes cast . Others receiving votes were Pelosi ( 184 ) , Webster ( 9 ) , Jim Cooper , John Lewis , and Colin Powell ( 1 each ) . Votes were cast by 432 of the 435 House members . Following the election , Raúl Labrador , a Freedom Caucus member from Idaho , said that Paul will need to " realize the honeymoon is over and start bringing us some conservative policy , " and that " the final exam for Paul Ryan will be in January 2017 , when there is a Speaker election , and we will look at his body of work and determine whether he gets a passing grade or not . "

The history of vigilante justice and the Montana Vigilantes began in 1863 in what was at the time a remote part of eastern Idaho Territory . Vigilante activities continued , although somewhat sporadically , through the Montana Territorial period until the territory became the state of Montana in 1889 . Vigilantism arose because territorial law enforcement and the courts had very little power in the remote mining camps during the territorial period . In 1863 – 1864 , Montana Vigilantes followed the model of the San Francisco Committee of Vigilance that existed in 1850s California to bring order to lawless communities in and around the gold fields of Alder Gulch and Grasshopper Creek . There are estimates that over 100 persons were killed in " road agent " robberies in the fall of 1863 . The Vigilance Committee of Alder Gulch organized in December 1863 , and in the first six weeks of 1864 at least 20 road agents of the infamous Plummer gang , known as the " Innocents " , were captured and hanged by the organization . Formal territorial law reached Alder Gulch in late 1864 with the arrival of Territorial Judge Hezekiah L. Hosmer and vigilante activity ceased in the region .

As the gold fields of Alder Gulch and Grasshopper Creek declined in 1865 , prospectors and fortune seekers migrated to newly discovered areas in and around Last Chance Gulch ( now Helena , Montana ) . As lawlessness increased , vigilante justice continued there with the formation of the Committee of Safety in 1865 . During the period 1865 – 1870 , at least 14 alleged criminals were executed by Helena 's vigilantes . In 1884 , ranchers in Central and Eastern Montana resorted to vigilante justice to deal with cattle rustlers and horse thieves . The best-known vigilante group in that area were " Stuart 's Stranglers " , organized by Granville Stuart in the Musselshell region . As formal law enforcement became more prevalent in the region , vigilantism fell into decline . Vigilantism in pre-territorial and territorial Montana has been written about , romanticized and chronicled in personal memoirs , biographies , documentary and scholarly works , film and fiction for well over a century . The first book published in Montana was Thomas J. Dimsdale 's 1866 first edition of The Vigilantes of Montana , which was compiled from a series of newspaper articles he wrote for the Montana Post in 1865 . Historical analysis of the period ranges from disrepute to heroism , with debates over whether the lack of any functioning justice system and the understanding of due process at the time meant the vigilantes acted in a way they thought was best for their communities or if modern standards of due process should govern analysis of their actions .

On July 28 , 1862 , gold was discovered along Grasshopper Creek , a tributary of the Beaverhead River , in a remote part of eastern Idaho Territory , leading to the establishment of the town of Bannack . Bannack was a gold rush boomtown that was the first territorial capital of Montana Territory for a brief period after the territory was established in 1864 . Less than a year after the Grasshopper Creek find , on May 26 , 1863 , gold was discovered along Alder Gulch , a tributary creek northeast of the Ruby River that lies between the Tobacco Root Mountains and the Gravelly Range and 70 miles ( 110 km ) east of Bannack . The Alder Gulch find became one of the largest placer mining gold fields in the western U.S. The mining settlements of Virginia City and Nevada City , Montana , which sprang up in Alder Gulch , boasted thousands of prospectors and fortune seekers by the end of 1863 . These new settlements generally lacked justice systems found in populated portions of the territory , such as in the territorial capital in Lewiston , Idaho . In 1863 , gold was the preferred form of currency in western frontier communities and had a value , fixed and guaranteed by the U.S. Government , of $ 20.67 per ounce . Almost all economic transactions in western mining communities were accomplished with gold nuggets , flakes or dust as currency and not surprisingly , the more gold one had , the more wealth one possessed . During the early years of the territory , there was no secure way to transport wealth out of the region . The only means of transporting wealth out of the Alder Gulch gold fields was via horseback or slow moving wagons and stagecoaches on a limited number of trails and primitive roads leading south and west to Salt Lake City and San Francisco or east to Minnesota . Roads and trails leading to Alder Gulch included the Bozeman and Bridger Trails connecting to the Oregon Trail from the east , the Mullan Road from points west and from Fort Benton , Montana the head of navigation on the Missouri River and the Corinne Road from Corinne , Utah and points south . Additionally , there was a single track , 70-mile ( 110 km ) stage road that connected Alder Gulch with Bannack . Several commercial freight and two passenger stage companies — Peabody and Caldwell 's and A.J. Oliver 's — operated on this route . Stagecoaches had to stop at several different ranches during the trip to water and change horses , feed passengers and provide overnight lodging . One of these ranches , the Rattlesnake Ranch , was owned by Bill Bunton and Frank Parish , who were later hanged by the vigilantes as road agents and members of the Plummer gang .

In a region where valuable gold was plentiful , transportation was insecure and effective law and order was lacking , travelers became easy prey for robbers . By late 1863 , thefts and murders along the routes in and around Alder Gulch had become common . In their writings about the vigilantes , Thomas Dimsdale and Nathaniel P. Langford estimated that at least 102 travelers were killed by robbers in the fall of 1863 . Many more travelers left the region and were never heard from again . As this became a more frequent occurrence locals began suspecting that these crimes were being carried out by a single group of outlaws , known as " road agents " , under the control of Bannack sheriff Henry Plummer . The gang became known as the Innocents because of their passwords , I am innocent .

On October 13 , 1863 , Lloyd Magruder was killed by road agent Chris Lowrie . Magruder was an Idaho merchant leaving Virginia City with $ 12,000 in gold dust from goods he had sold there . Several of the men he hired to accompany him back to Lewiston , Idaho were in fact criminals . Four other men in the party were also murdered in camp — Charlie Allen , Robert Chalmers , Horace Chalmers and William Phillips — by Lowrie , Doc Howard , Jem Romaine and William Page . On October 26 , 1863 , the Peabody and Caldwell 's stage was robbed between the Rattlesnake Ranch and Bannack by two road agents believed to be Frank Parish and George Ives . Bill Bunton , the owner of the Rattlesnake Ranch who joined the stage at the ranch was also complicit in the robbery . The road agents netted $ 2,800 in gold from the passengers and threatened them all with death if they talked about the robbery . On November 13 , 1863 , a teenage Henry Tilden was in the employ of Wilbur Sanders and Sidney Edgerton to locate and corral some horses owned by Sanders and Edgerton . Near Horse Prairie , Tilden was confronted by three armed road agents . He was carrying very little money and was allowed to depart unmolested , but with the warning that if he talked , he would be killed . He did not heed the warning and told Sanders ' wife , Hattie and Sidney Edgerton that he had recognized one of the road agents as sheriff Henry Plummer . Although Tilden 's report was discounted because Plummer was respected , this incident led to increased suspicion in the region that Plummer was the leader of a gang of road agents .

On November 22 , 1863 , the A.J. Oliver stage was robbed on its way to Bannack from Virginia City by road agents George Ives , " Whiskey Bill " Graves and Bob Zachary . The robbery netted less than $ 1000 in gold and treasury notes . One of the victims , Leroy Southmayd made the mistake of reporting the robbery and identifying the road agents to Bannack Sheriff , Henry Plummer . Members of Plummer 's gang confronted Southmayd on his return trip to Virginia City , but Southmayd was cunning enough to avoid injury or death . In November 1863 , Conrad Kohrs traveled to Bannack from Deer Lodge , Montana with $ 5000 in gold dust to buy cattle . A conversation with Sheriff Plummer in Bannack led Kohrs to believe he might be robbed while on the trail back to Deer Lodge . While in an overnight camp his associates located road agents George Ives and " Dutch John " Wagner surveying the camp , armed with shotguns . A day or two later , Kohrs was on horseback returning to Deer Lodge when Ives and Wagner gave chase . Kohrs ' horse proved the faster and he evaded confrontation before reaching the safety of Deer Lodge .

In early December 1863 , a three wagon freight outfit organized by Milton S. Moody was going to Salt Lake City from Virginia City . Among the seven passengers was John Bozeman . The freight wagons were carrying $ 80,000 in gold dust and $ 1500 in treasury notes . While camped on Blacktail Deer Creek , road agents " Dutch John " Wagner and Steve Marshland entered the camp , armed and ready to rob the train . Members of the camp had armed themselves well and Wagner and Marshland were able to escape , claiming they were just looking for lost horses . Two days later , Wagner and Marshland were both wounded in an unsuccessful attempt to rob the wagon train as it crossed the Continental Divide at Rock Creek . On December 8 , 1863 , Anton Holter ( who later became a Montana Power Company executive and had Holter Dam named for him ) , who was taking oxen to sell in Virginia City , survived an attempted robbery and murder . When road agents George Ives and Aleck Carter , whom Holter recognized , discovered Holter was not carrying any significant wealth , they tried to shoot him . He was able to avoid being shot and escaped into the brush .

Prior to the creation of the Montana Territory on May 26 , 1864 , and the arrival of the territorial courts , the only court system available for the residents of Bannack and Virginia City were the informal miners ' courts . The miners ' courts were a vehicle of the organized mining districts to resolve mining claims and disputes between miners in the district . When confronted with a major crime such as murder , they usually proved ineffective at resolving the crime to the satisfaction of the community . While there are not many accounts of early courts in Alder Gulch , probably due to their informality and short existence , John X. Beidler recalled a murder trial in the Virginia City miners ' court in his memoirs . The trial recalled by Beidler occurred in the fall of 1863 . It concerned the matter of the murder of J.W. Dillingham . The trial was held outside , due to the fact that every resident took part . In the end all three defendants were set free . The first , Charley Forbes , was freed after he gave an eloquent and sentimental speech about his mother . The other two , Buck Stinson and Haze Lyons , were convicted and set to be the first men executed in what would become the state of Montana . However , at what would be a very public hanging friends and sympathizers of Stinson and Lyons convinced the crowd to vote again on the execution . Two attempts at counting the vote were made according to Beidler . The first people voting ' hang ' were to walk up-hill while those voting ' no hang ' were to walk down-hill . This vote was rejected and the next attempt had four men form two gates and people would cast their vote by walking through the ' hang ' gate or the ' no hang ' gate . Beidler claims that friends of the condemned men simply walked through the ' no hang ' gate multiple times casting multiple fraudulent votes that possibly allowed two murderers to walk free .

On December 19 – 21 , 1863 , a public trial was held for George Ives , the suspected murderer of a young Dutch immigrant Nicholas Tiebolt . Hundreds of miners from around the area attended the 3-day , outdoor trial . George Ives was prosecuted by Wilbur F. Sanders and Ives was convicted and hanged on December 21 , 1863 . Sanders played a prominent role in Montana history and eventually became the first U.S. Senator from Montana when the territory gained statehood in 1889 . While the Ives trial resulted in an execution many residents were frustrated by a cumbersome process that could easily be manipulated . This sentiment is illustrated by a quote from Thomas Dimsdale who wrote the first published account of the Montana Vigilantes , originally written in 1865 as a series of articles for the Montana Post and later compiled into a book . Another powerful incentive to wrong-doing is the absolute nulity of the civil law in such cases . No matter what may be the proof , if the criminal is well liked in the community ' Not Guilty ' is almost certain to be the verdict , despite the efforts of the judge and prosecutor .

On December 23 , 1863 , two days after the Ives trial , a group of five Virginia City residents , led by Wilbur F. Sanders , and including Major Alvin W. Brockie , John Nye , Captain Nick D. Wall and Paris Pfouts organized the Vigilance Committee of Alder Gulch . The committee was organized similar to the earlier San Francisco Committee of Vigilance ( 1851 – 56 ) in California of which some of the Alder Gulch organizers were familiar with . The original committee oath signed by its earliest members was : We the undersigned uniting ourselves in a party for the laudable purpos [ sic ] of arresting thievs [ sic ] & murderers & recovering stollen [ sic ] property do pledge ourselves upon our sacred honor each to all others & solemnly swear that we will reveal no secrets , violate no laws of right & never desert each other or our standard of justice so help us God as witness our hand and seal this 23 of December ad 1863 Paris Pfouts was elected as the president of the committee which drafted and adopted a comprehensive set of by-laws establishing a formal structure and process . The by-laws established the position of president , an executive officer , an executive committee , a secretary , treasurer and positions of captains and lieutenants of companies . The most relevant process contained in the by-laws was :

It shall be the duty of members to attach themselves to some company and whenever any criminal act shall come to their knowledge to inform his Captain or Lieutenant of the same , when the officers so informed shall call together the members of his Company , ( unless the Company has chosen a committee for such purpose ) when they shall proceed to investigate the case , and elicit the facts and should the said company conclude that the person charged with any offense should be punished by the committee , the Captain or Lieutenant will first take steps to arrest the Criminal and then report same with proof to the Chief who will thereupon call a meeting of the Executive Committee and the judgement of such Executive Committee shall be final . The only punishment that shall be inflicted by this Committee is death .

Although the vigilance committee started as a small secret institution in Virginia City , knowledge of it soon spread in the territory and membership grew . As a secret organization , exact accounts of membership vary , but many members became prominent in the history of the territory and state . Among those who were members include Wilbur Sanders ( 1st U.S. Senator from Montana ( 1890 ) ) , Sidney Edgerton ( first Governor of Montana Territory ( 1864 ) ) , Nelson Story ( famous for his 1866 cattle drive from Texas to Bozeman and prominent Bozeman merchant ) , John Bozeman ( founder of Bozeman , Montana ( 1864 ) and the Bozeman Trail ) , Nathaniel P. Langford ( first Yellowstone National Park superintendent ( 1872 – 1877 ) ) , James Stuart ( brother of Granville Stuart , who would form the Stuarts ' Stranglers in 1884 ) , Tom Cover ( one of the Alder Gulch prospectors who discovered the first gold there and alleged murderer of John Bozeman ( 1867 ) ) and Thomas Dimsdale ( editor of Montana 's first newspaper , the Montana Post and author of The Vigilantes of Montana ( 1866 ) ) .

Due to the secret nature of the organization it is difficult to be sure when an execution was carried out by the vigilance committee or another group of motivated citizens . In the months following the Ives trial many suspected road agents were hanged . Notably , Henry Plummer , the sheriff of Bannack , who was suspected by many of being the ringleader of the road agents . The Montana Vigilantes hanged men using the testimony of other men who faced their imminent executions as the sole evidence . Of the few accounts of the early actions of the Alder Gulch Vigilantes , Beidler and Dimsdale are the most complete , although they give little information about the secret trials conducted by the vigilantes . Estimates vary , but noted vigilante historian Frederick Allen believes that between the years 1863 and 1865 somewhere from 15 to 35 people were killed due to the actions of the Alder Gulch vigilantes .

Shortly after its formation , the Vigilance Committee dispatched a posse of men to search for Aleck Carter , " Whiskey Bill " Graves and Bill Bunton , known associates of George Ives . The posse was led by vigilante Captain James Williams , the man who had investigated the Nicolas Tiebolt murder by George Ives . Near the Rattlesnake Ranch on the Ruby River , the posse located " Erastus Red " Yeager and George Brown , both suspected road agents . While traveling back to Virginia City , Yeager made a complete confession , naming the majority of the road agents in Plummer 's gang , including Henry Plummer . After obtaining the confession , Yeager and Brown were found guilty by the posse and summarily hanged from a cottonwood tree on the Lorrain 's Ranch on the Ruby River . On January 6 , 1864 , " Dutch John " Wagner , a road agent wounded in the Moody robbery was captured by vigilante Captain Nick Wall and Ben Peabody on the Salt Lake City trail . The vigilantes transported Wagner to Bannack where he was hanged on January 11 , 1864 . By this time , Yeager 's confession had mobilized vigilantes against Plummer and his key associates , deputies Buck Stinson and Ned Ray . Plummer , Stinson and Ray were arrested on the morning of January 10 , 1864 and summarily hanged . On January 11 , 1864 , " Greaser Joe " Pizanthia , a road agent on Yeager 's list , was located in his cabin just outside Bannack . A gunfight ensued that took the life of one vigilante , George Copley . Pizanthia 's cabin was bombarded with three shells from a mountain howitzer belonging to Sidney Edgerton . The bombardment severely wounded Pizanthia and he was shot and killed as he was removed from the wreckage of the cabin .

After Wagner 's execution on January 11 , 1864 , the vigilantes who were mostly men from Virginia City , returned there to deal with the remaining road agents in the Plummer gang . On the evening of January 13 , 1864 , the Vigilance Committee voted to arrest and hang six road agents believed to be living in Virginia City — Frank Parish , Boone Helm , Hayes Lyons , Jack Gallagher , George " Clubfoot " Lane and Bill Hunter . On the morning of January 14 , 1864 , five of the six road agents were located in town and arrested . They were all summarily hanged from a beam in a building under construction on Wallace Street . Bill Hunter escaped capture in Virginia City , but was later arrested at a cabin on the Gallatin River and was hanged from a Cottonwood tree on February 3 , 1864 . After the January 14 , 1864 hangings , the vigilante companies left Virginia City in search of the remaining road agents on Yeager 's list . The first to be located was Steve Marshland holed up in a cabin on the Big Hole River and was hanged on January 16 , 1864 . A posse led by Captain Williams found Bill Bunton at his Cottonwood Ranch on the Ruby River and hanged him on January 18 , 1864 .

After the Bunton execution , the vigilante companies regrouped and made a 90-mile ( 140 km ) ride to Hell Gate , Montana where they believed more road agents were hiding . In Hell Gate , Captain William 's vigilante company located and arrested Cyrus Skinner , Aleck Carter , and John Cooper . A vigilante trial of Skinner and Carter was held in the Worden and Higgins dry goods store on January 24 , 1864 . Both men were found guilty and hanged outside the store . Later that same day , Cooper was tried , convicted and hanged . On January 25 , 1864 , the vigilantes located Bob Zachary in a cabin outside of Hell Gate and George Shears in another cabin in the Bitterroot Valley . Zachary was brought to Hell Gate and hanged . Shears was hanged outside the cabin he was captured in . As the vigilante companies were leaving Hell Gate to return to Virginia City , they received word that " Whiskey Bill " Graves was at Fort Owen , Montana . Three vigilantes located and arrested him on January 26 , 1864 . He was hanged the same day .

An unknown 19-year-old boy was hanged on February 17 , 1864 , in Virginia City for shooting an unarmed man in a tavern . Chris Lowrie , Doc Howard , and Jem Romaine were convicted of the Magruder murders by a Idaho Territorial court in Lewiston and hanged on March 4 , 1864 , based on the testimony of William Page . Page was not executed . On March 10 , 1864 , vigilantes hanged J.A. Slade in Virginia City for serious drunken behavior , breaches of the peace and reckless gun play that endangered the communities ' citizens . Jem Kelly was apprehended near present day Jackson , Idaho Territory on the Snake River by Montana vigilantes for a series of petty thefts in Alder Gulch . He was hanged on September 5 , 1864 , along the Snake River in Idaho Territory . On September 17 , 1864 , vigilantes hanged John " The Hat " Dolan in Virginia City for stealing $ 700 from a roommate . On October 31 , 1864 , vigilantes captured and hanged J.C. Rawley in Bannack for his alleged spying on behalf of the road agent gang in 1863 . This was the last execution performed by the Vigilance Committee of Alder Gulch .

Another tactic employed by the vigilantes was banishment from the territory . It is unknown how many men were given the warning to leave the territory or suffer execution for their misdeeds . Alexander Toponce , a merchant in Bannack at the time believed the number of banishments was high but wrote this in his autobiography : Reminiscences of Alexander Toponce ( 1923 ) : I don 't think they [ the vigilantes ] made any mistake in hanging anybody . The only mistake they made was about fifty percent of those whom they merely banished should have been hung instead , as quite a number of these men were finally hung . Some of the road agents in Plummer 's gang or on Yeager 's list were able to escape vigilante justice by fleeing the territory . Notable among these men were Augustus " Gad " Moore , Billy Terwilliger , William Mitchell , Harvey Meade , " Rattlesnake Dick " , " Cherokee Bob " , Tex Caldwell , Jeff Perkins , Samuel Bunton , " Irwin of the Big Hole " , William Moore and Charles Reeves .

During the summer of 1864 , Hezekiah L. Hosmer , a lawyer from Ohio , was working for the U.S. House of Representative Committee on Territories . After working on the formation of Montana Territory for the committee , he was formally appointed as the first Chief Justice of Montana Territory . He arrived in Montana in October 1864 . Prior to the first session of the Territorial Legislature which convened on December 12 , 1864 , in Bannack , Hosmer announced that he was adopting Common Law as the primary criminal and civil law and Idaho 's Territorial Law as a basis for criminal and civil procedure . On December 5 , 1864 , Hosmer boldly convened a public Grand Jury session in Virginia City and announced that the vigilantes had served their purpose and from this day forward , unilateral actions by the vigilantes would be considered criminal acts .

On July 14 , 1864 , four prospectors — John S. Cowan , John Crab , Bob Staley and Daniel Jackson — found gold in a small creek they named " Last Chance Gulch " . As word of the strike spread throughout the area , prospectors and fortune seekers , including many from Alder Gulch and Bannack , migrated to Last Chance Gulch and the town of Helena , Montana was founded . By the middle of 1865 , many prominent vigilantes of Alder Gulch , including Wilbur Sanders , John X. Biedler , and Anton Holter , had moved to Helena . When the territory was formed , three judicial districts were established . The First District belonged to Judge Hosmer and included the towns of Bannack , Virginia City , Nevada City and Deer Lodge . The Third District encompassed the towns around Helena . From July 1864 , until August 1865 , the only justice system was the miners ' court ; the Third District did not get its first chief judge until August 1865 , when Judge Lyman Munson arrived from the east . On June 8 , 1865 , John Keene and Harry Slater , two men who had an unresolved quarrel from their days in Salt Lake City , spotted each other in Sam Greer 's saloon on Helena 's Bridge Street . Keene shot Slater in the head , killing him instantly . Keene surrendered himself to Helena sheriff George Wood and freely admitted his guilt in the shooting . A two-day trial ensued where some members of the jury were known vigilantes from Alder Gulch . Since there was no official trial judge , Stephan Reynolds , a respected member of the Helena community , presided . At the end of the trial , the jury returned a unanimous guilty verdict and Keene was hanged from the lone pine tree just outside town . The large tree , one of few that remained in proximity to Helena because most had been cut down for lumber , became known as the " Old Hangman 's Tree " . Although Keene 's trial and execution was not considered vigilantism , the Helena community , similar to the Alder Gulch community in 1863 , felt the need to establish a more reliable means of law and order .

Vigilante justice in Helena followed a pattern similar to that of Alder Gulch . Immediately after Keene 's hanging , leading members of the Helena community established the Helena Committee of Safety , akin to the Vigilance Committee of Alder Gulch . Although no records of the committee 's membership or bylaws exist , Nathaniel Langford , who had been asked to lead the organization but declined ( he did serve on its Executive Committee ) , reflected in his book Vigilante Days and Ways , that crimes of horse stealing , murder , and highway robbery would be punishable by death . In July 1865 , the Helena vigilantes captured Jack Silvie in Diamond City , Montana and charged him with various crimes of robbery . Prior to his execution by hanging from Helena 's " Hangman 's Tree " , Silvie confessed to being a member of the Virginia City road agents and to at least a dozen murders in the territory . Shortly after Judge Lyman Munson 's arrival in Helena , he convened a Grand Jury on August 12 , 1865 . However , unlike Judge Hosmer in Alder Gulch , Munson made no remarks about vigilantism nor did he threaten vigilantes with prosecution if they continued their activities . The vigilantes showed little respect for Munson 's court and proceeded to carry out at least 14 executions in the next eight months . No member of Helena 's vigilantes was ever indicted by Munson 's grand jury for executions carried out by the Helena Committee of Safety . The last execution by the Helena vigilantes occurred on April 27 , 1870 when Joseph Wilson and Arthur Compton were hanged from the " Old Hangman 's Tree " for the robbery and attempted murder of George Leonard . The double hanging is significant because it was photographed at the time and the image , widely circulated , had the effect of seriously dampening public sentiment for vigilantism .

By the 1870s , cattle ranching and related livestock raising was a large and prosperous business in Montana . Cattle and horses were valuable commodities and always subject to rustling by thieves . After 1879 , with the threat from the Indian wars diminished on the plains of Montana , stock ranches and open range cattle ranching moved east into Central and Eastern Montana . The DHS ranch , owned by Samuel Hauser , Andrew Davis and Granville Stuart was established in 1879 in the Musselshell region of Central Montana and became one of the largest open range ranches in Montana . The first stockmen 's association in Montana was formed in Virginia City in 1873 . The association was established to discuss branding standards , how to deal with rustling and how to influence the territorial legislature to pass laws favorable to the cattle industry . This association did not survive , but led to the creation of other organizations in subsequent years . In 1878 , the Montana Stock Association of Lewis and Clark County was organized . One of its prominent members , Ross Deegan , editorialized about the need for extralegal action if the territorial legislature did not enact laws to protect the cattle industry :

Will [ our legislators ] give us ... protection , or shall we be compelled against our wishes to become judges and executors of what we deem a proper penalty for the commission of such infringement upon the rights of property ? In July , 1879 , a Territorial Stock Association was formed that ultimately spawned a number of small county or district based associations throughout Montana . By 1883 , the value of cattle in Montana was estimated at greater than $ 25 million and annual losses from rustling exceeded three percent . By the summer of 1884 , cattle men resorted to vigilatism to deal with rustlers and the first recorded hanging occurred at Fort Maginnis on July 3 , 1884 , when Reese Anderson , a DHS ranch foreman , and several other ranch hands hanged Sam McKenzie for horse thievery .

The hanging of Sam McKenzie and other citizen justice in early July 1884 prompted many thieves and rustlers to leave the territory . However , a large band of horse thieves still operated in the Musselshell region . With the tacit approval of the stockgrower 's associations , Granville Stuart organized a small intelligence network and mobilized forces to go after the thieves . The group included many of Stuart 's ranch hands and stock detectives employed by various stock associations . Known as " Stuart 's Stranglers " , the vigilantes were responsible for the recovery of dozens of stolen horses and the deaths of at least 18 thieves in July 1884 , by hanging , shootings or fire . The last hanging occurred on August 1 , 1884 . In July 1884 , Theodore Roosevelt who later became the 26th President of the United States , was operating a cattle ranch in Medora , North Dakota along the Little Missouri River in cooperation with cattle merchant Marquis de Mores . His ranch was suffering from rustling as well . Both Mores and Roosevelt offered their services to the Stranglers , but Stuart declined the offer to avoid the undue notoriety they would bring . From that point forward , stock detectives , employed by the various stock associations , took responsibility for enforcing stock laws and deterring rustling . Although there was minor public outrage about the killings , none of Stuart 's Stranglers were ever brought to trial for their actions and editorials in regional newspapers praised their efforts . General acclamation of Granville Stuart 's actions was reflected by his election as the first president of the Montana Stockgrower 's Association in late July 1884 .

The numerical symbol 3-7-77 has long been associated with Montana vigilantes . Its meaning is unclear though many theories have been put forward trying to explain what it symbolized , none conclusive , including references to the dimensions of a grave , the amount of time a miscreant had to leave town , assorted Masonic symbolism , details of membership structure , and a simple copying of the symbol from organizations in Colorado and California . Although it has been associated with vigilantes in Alder Gulch , this is not supported by historical evidence . The first documented evidence of use of the symbol in a vigilante scenario occurred in November 1879 in Helena when it was mentioned in a newspaper article . A 1914 dissertation noted that it was simply used as part of a meeting notice . It was incorporated into the uniform patch of the Montana Highway Patrol ( MHP ) in 1956 . MHP administrator Alex Stephenson designed the insignia and explained , " we chose the symbol to keep alive the memory of this first people 's police force . "

The first written account of the vigilantes was Thomas Dimsdale 's Vigilantes of Montana which first appeared as a series of articles in 1865 editions of the Montana Post , Virginia City 's and Montana 's first newspaper . Dimsdale was a member of the Alder Gulch Vigilance Committee and editor of the Montana Post . His early accounts of the Alder Gulch vigilante events are widely cited and the book version of his articles , the first book published in Montana Territory in 1866 , has been extensively reprinted since its first edition . The value of Dimsdale 's work lies in the fact that the volume at first a series of articles for his own paper , The Montana Post is exactly what it purports to be . Truth than fiction is ever stranger , and no glorified romance of the old west has ever succeeded in echoing like authenticity . What we have in The Vigilantes is the statement of fact before it becomes fiction , the unadorned moment in history before hearsay , the folk imagination , and the teller of tales weaves it into saga . X. Biedler , one of the Alder Gulch and Helena vigilante enforcers wrote about his vigilante activities in his personal journals . They weren 't available until well after his death when Helen F. Sanders , the daughter-in-law of Wilbur Sanders finally got them published in 1957 . Nathaniel Langford , also a member of the vigilantes , explorer of the upper Yellowstone ( 1870 ) , first superintendent of Yellowstone National Park ( 1872 – 1877 ) , territorial tax collector ( 1864 – 1869 ) and author published Vigilante Days and Ways-Pioneers of the Rockies in 1893 after he returned to his home in Minnesota . In a 1912 speech to the Montana Historical Society , western historian , Olin Wheeler provided positive commentary on the Alder Gulch vigilantes in a tribute to the life of Nathaniel Langford .

... Under the domination of the Vigilantes the desperadoes were hung or banished , crime was actually and swiftly punished , life and property were rendered safe , and society was rescued from a state of anarchy . Some of the best citizens in the territory were Vigilantes . ... Mr. Langford himself , happily , in the Introduction to his Vigilante Days and Ways and a most valuable chronicle of the time of which it treats , has presented a statement of facts and of arguments justifying the Vigilante methods , that is impartial , honest , cogent , forceful , and convincing to an open and discriminating mind . Honor and praise , instead of adverse criticism , are due those men , and no apologies are necessary for what they did and dared . Another account , not published until 1982 , is that of former Montana Supreme Court Justice ( 1922 – 1935 ) Lew L. Callaway . Edited by his son Lew Callaway Jr . , Montana 's Righteous Hangmen : The Vigilantes in Action stems from Callaway 's association with vigilante Captain James William in the late 1800s . Lew Callaway wrote extensively about the vigilantes and his stories which add more intimate details about how the vigilantes operated are captured in this volume . Although some vigilante activities during this period were criticized by citizens and civic leaders , there was a general affirmation of their purpose and contribution to law and order in a growing territory . Mark C. Dillon 's Montana Vigilantes 1863 – 1870 Gold , Guns and Gallows ( 2013 ) concludes that given the lawless environment and criminal activity in Alder Gulch and Helena at the time , the lack of any functioning justice system and the understanding of due process at the time , the vigilantes acted in a way they thought was best for their communities . He contends that judging the vigilantes by today 's understanding and standards of due process is problematic .

Justice Dillon 's book is the first work of its kind that examines western vigilante history through the prism of substantive , procedural , and constitutional law , and the role that lawyers and judges ultimately played in restoring a credible system of criminal justice to the region by the end of the decade . ... Universities only publish books that survive rigorous peer reviews . Historian Paul R. Wylie , who was among the historians that reviewed Dillon 's manuscript , predicts that the book " will be the best work on the Montana Vigilantes , and will likely be around for years to come . " Wylie describes the book as having a " careful , informative , judicial approach [ that is ] well-written and very readable , " and that to his knowledge , " there has never been a work in the area quite like this . " In 2004 , Frederick Allen , a journalist and historian , published A Decent and Orderly Lynching : The Montana Vigilantes reviewed as an up-to-day balanced account of Montana 's vigilante history ( 1864 – 1870 ) . Allen 's book reinforces the motivations and methods of the earliest vigilantes in Alder Gulch while commenting on the growing disdain for vigilantism in the late 1860s . More generalist works on Montana history such as Merrill G. Burlingame 's The Montana Frontier ( 1942 ) and Michael P. Malone 's Montana-A History of Two Centuries ( 1991 ) adequately summarize the vigilante period largely based on earlier accounts by Dimsdale , Langford and Biedler . Additionally , many topical histories of Montana , such as novelist and Montana historian Dan Cushman 's Montana : The Gold Frontier ( 1973 ) cover the vigilante period .

Some works published in the late 20th century about vigilante activity in Alder Gulch portray the vigilantes and their leaders as conspirators with political motives rather than restoring law and order , making an argument that victims were not afforded due process prior to their execution and evidence was insufficient to prove their guilt or innocence . Two works , of Ruth E. Mather and F. E. Boswell , Hanging the Sheriff-A Biography of Henry Plummer ( 1987 , 1999 ) and Vigilante Victims : Montana 's 1864 Hanging Spree ( 1991 ) have been criticized as revisionist , and received poor reviews by Montana historians such as Michael P. Malone and Richard B. Roeder . Additional criticism came from later authors such as Mark C. Dillon and Carol Buchanan . Mather , R. E. ; Boswell , F. E. ( 1987 ) . Hanging the Sheriff-A Biography of Henry Plummer . Salt Lake City , Utah : University of Utah Press . ISBN 0-9663355-0-3 . In Hanging the Sheriff , R. E. Mather and F. E. Boswell have radically redrawn the portrait of Sheriff Henry Plummer and effectively challenged the conventional justification of the Montana vigilantes of 1863 – 64 . The authors reject the vigilante defenders assertion that Plummer 's reign of terror necessitated the formation of a vigilance committee to bring law and order to the area . First , law had been established at Bannack through the miners ' court , Plummer 's election , and the arrival of Judge Edgerton in September 1863 . Second , Plummer 's alleged leadership of the road agents was based on an unsubstantiated and unexamined accusation .

Mather , R. E. ; F. E. Boswell ( 1991 ) . Vigilante Victims : Montana 's 1864 Hanging Spree . San Jose , CA : History West Publishing . This is a " revisionist " history of the Vigilante movement that claims the road agents were victims of a plot perpetrated in a struggle for power between two factions , one favoring the North and the other favoring the South . It overlooks the cooperation between Pfouts , a strong Confederate , and Sanders , a Union abolitionist , in the leadership of the Vigilantes , and that Jack Gallagher was a Union sympathizer , while Boone Helm died shouting , " Hoorah for Jeff Davis ! " Another account from John C. Fazio , who writes for the Cleveland Civil War Roundtable , contends that the Vigilance Committee of Alder Gulch had more to do with national politics than with dealing with criminals . He contends that Sidney Edgerton and Wilbur Sanders were pawns of Abraham Lincoln and other unionists who sought ways to rid Montana gold fields of southerners and confederate sympathizers . His views have been rebutted by novelist Carol Buchanan .

On May 7 , 1993 , the Twin Bridges , Montana public schools organized a mock trial of Henry Plummer at the Madison County courthouse in Virginia City . The trial received national media attention . Adults and students role played events using the accounts of Dimsdale , X. Biedler and Langford . After a six hour trial , the jury of four men and eight women was in deadlock , 6-6 . The student playing the role of Henry Plummer was told he was " free " . Based in part on the notoriety of the mock trial , academics sympathetic to the view that Plummer was innocent , petitioned the Montana Board of Pardons and Parole to grant Plummer a pardon . Although supported by a number of prominent historians and scholars , the pardon was denied by the board as Plummer had never actually been convicted of a crime in Montana and therefore the board was without jurisdiction to act .

Ernest Haycox 's 1942 novel Alder Gulch depicts Bannack Sheriff Henry Plummer as a cold and calculating murderer and thief . John Dehner played Henry Plummer in an episode of the 1950s western television series , Stories of the Century , starring and narrated by Jim Davis . Montana Territory is a 1952 Western film starring Wanda Hendrix , Clayton Moore , Hugh Sanders and Lon McCallister . It is a classic western movie , with bandits , a corrupt sheriff [ Plummer ] and a hero who falls for a beautiful woman . In " Two for the Gallows " ( April 11 , 1961 ) of NBC 's Laramie , series character Slim Sherman ( John Smith ) is hired under false pretenses to take a " Professor Landfield " , played by Donald Woods , into the Badlands to seek gold . Landfield , however , is really Morgan Bennett , a member of the former Plummer gang who has escaped from prison . The Missouri Breaks is a 1976 American western action film starring Marlon Brando and Jack Nicholson that portrays rustling and retribution in 1880s eastern Montana . Buchanan , Carol ( 2008 ) . God 's Thunderbolt : The Vigilantes of Montana . Charleston , SC : BookSurge Publishing . ISBN 1-4196-9709-9 . — An historical fiction novel set in Alder Gulch , Montana 1863

Little , Michael Edward ( 2010 ) . Twelve Quiet Men : The Story of the Cowboy Vigilantes Known as Stuart 's Stranglers at War with the Outlaws of Montana and Dakota in 1884 . Inkwater Press . ISBN 1-59299-548-9 . — an historical fiction novel . Scottish folk act , The David Latto Band , wrote a song about the story of Henry Plummer called ' Plummer 's Song ' released on their 2012 eponymous debut album . The song was written from the viewpoint of a member of the Bannack community who had reservation about Plummer 's alleged crimes .

Viewtiful Joe ( ビューティフル ジョー , Byūtifuru Jō ) is a side scrolling beat ' em up video game developed by Team Viewtiful for the GameCube . It was originally released in 2003 as a part of the Capcom Five under director Hideki Kamiya and producer Atsushi Inaba . The game was later ported to the PlayStation 2 by the same design team under the name Clover Studio , subtitled Aratanaru Kibō ( 新たなる希望 , lit . " A New Hope " ) in Japan . The game 's story concerns Joe , an avid movie-goer whose girlfriend Silvia is kidnapped during a film starring Joe 's favorite superhero , Captain Blue . Joe is shortly thereafter thrust into Movieland , where Silvia is taken by the villainous group known as Jadow . After accepting a special V-Watch from Captain Blue , Joe transforms into the tokusatsu-style persona " Viewtiful Joe " and sets out to rescue her . The gameplay of Viewtiful Joe features traditional 2D platform side-scrolling intermixed with 3D cel-shaded graphics . Abilities known as " VFX Powers " grant the player special actions for combat and puzzle-solving , such as slowing down or speeding up time . Viewtiful Joe was critically acclaimed for its unique visual style and gameplay , earning itself a number of awards from various media publications . A minor commercial success , the game spawned a few sequels with releases seen on other consoles such as the PlayStation Portable ( PSP ) and Nintendo DS . An anime adaption of the game was also produced .

Viewtiful Joe 's core gameplay is similar to a traditional side-scrolling beat ' em up . Taking control of Joe , the player is mostly limited to moving left , right , up , and down on a fixed 2D path . The game contains platforming elements such as the ability to jump and double jump . Combat consists of fighting multiple enemies on screen at once , with the enemies appearing from all directions , including the foreground and background . Joe has the ability to punch , kick , and dodge — which he can do by leaping upward or ducking . Dodging enemies ' attacks successfully temporarily dazes them , leaving them wide open for attack . The player has certain number of hit points in the form of " Life Marks " located above the VFX Gauge , which decrease whenever Joe takes damage . Health can be restored by picking up hamburgers . Viewtiful Joe features unique gameplay elements in the form of Joe 's " Viewtiful Effects ( VFX ) Power " , which is designed to emulate camera tricks seen in films . VFX Power is used in both battling enemies and solving various puzzles . These three powers are limited by the " VFX Gauge " located at the top of the screen . Normally , the meter is full , giving the player access to Joe 's super powers via his Viewtiful Joe transformation . The meter slowly empties when an ability is in use . Once it depletes , Viewtiful Joe changes to normal Joe , lowering his attack and defense and leaving him temporarily devoid of VFX Power . The VFX Gauge automatically refills over time and can also be manually filled by picking up bottles of " VFX Juice " . The first VFX Power is " Slow " , which slows time , causing the player 's attacks to be more powerful , increasing Joe 's reflexes , and allowing him to dodge attacks more easily . The second VFX Power , " Mach Speed " , allows Joe to move at a faster speed , creating multiple after-images of him when he unleashes a flurry of attacks on all enemies on the screen . It can additionally cause his attacks to envelop Joe in a temporary heat shield , rendering him immune to flame attacks and setting enemies on fire when struck . The last VFX Power , " Zoom In " , causes a camera close-up of Joe , powering up his normal attacks , granting him a set of new attacks , and paralyzing all lesser foes in proximity to him . However , any damage dealt to Joe whilst zoomed in is increased too . Any two VFX Powers can be combined . The VFX Gauge can be extended by collecting a certain number of V-Films present in each stage . The bar reverts to its normal length when a new stage begins .

Defeating enemies gives the player " V-Points " in the form of small and large coins , while using special attacks gives them " V-Marks " , or " Viewtifuls " , which can be converted into V-Points . Viewtifuls can be quickly gained by using combos or long chains of attacks . For example , while using Slow , striking a dazed enemy sets up all other enemies on the screen for a chain reaction , causing all points accrued during the duration of Slow to be multiplied by the number of enemies struck . If used deftly , the player will accumulate a large number of Viewtifuls due to the multiplier effect called " X-Bonus " . Each stage in Viewtiful Joe consists of several interconnected missions , or scenes , that the player must complete in order to advance . When completing the stage , the player is graded on the number of V-Points earned , the amount of time taken , and how much damage Joe took . V-Points can be used between stages to purchase new abilities , expendable weapons ( which include the " Voomerang " and " Shocking Pink Bombs " ) , more health , and health-restorative items . Clearing the game on various difficulties allows players to play as different characters such as Silvia , Captain Blue and Alastor , with the PlayStation 2 version also allowing players to play as Devil May Cry 's Dante .

Viewtiful Joe is divided into seven stages , or " episodes " , interspersed with storyline cutscenes and bookended by an opening and ending cinematic . The setting is divided between Earth , or the real world , and " Movieland " , the game 's fictional world of films . The plot begins in a movie theatre on Earth in which the game 's central character Joe and his girlfriend Silvia are watching a tokusatsu drama starring the aged superhero Captain Blue . The movie 's antagonist , having seemingly defeated Captain Blue , suddenly reaches out of the screen and abducts Silvia , taking her into Movieland . Joe is likewise picked up and taken into Movieland by Captain Blue 's giant mecha . Inside the movie , Joe must rescue Silvia from the evil Jadow , the game 's organization of villains . To help him , Captain Blue entrusts him with a V-Watch , a device Joe can use to transform into a superhero upon saying the word " henshin ( transform ) . " Joe promptly does so , inventing his own catchphrase : " Henshin-a-go-go , baby ! " With the guidance of Captain Blue , Joe fights his way through a number of Movieland 's locations such as cities , underground caves , an underwater base , and a submarine , often travelling via his trusty , robot aircraft " Six Machine " . One by one , Joe defeats the members of the Jadow , the game 's bosses . These include Dark Fiend Charles the 3rd , Iron Ogre Hulk Davidson , Aquatic Terror Gran Bruce , a doppelgänger of Viewtiful Joe , and Blade Master Alastor . Before fighting Alastor , he reveals that in order for the Jadow to break out of Movieland and into the land of humans , they need the " DNA of the Creator " , namely Silvia . Joe makes his way to her , trumping the Jadow 's leader Inferno Lord Fire Leo in combat , only to witness Silvia being kidnapped once again afterwards . Joe and Six Machine race off into outer space after her in the game 's final episode .

Finding Silvia atop the control room of a space station , Joe discovers that Captain Blue has been behind the plot the entire time . The former hero reveals that he is the creator of the film in which they currently exist and that he is Silvia 's seemingly-deceased father . Transforming into the colossal robot King Blue , the villain proclaims that he will take Sylvia 's energy by force in order to break into the real world . Joe tells him off , telling him that he 's no hero . Joe summons a newly transformed mecha " Six Majin " , and the two engage in combat . When the fight ends , Captain Blue and Viewtiful Joe abandon their respective vehicles and face off in a final battle within the space station . Joe is victorious , and Captain Blue , finally coming to his senses , thanks the young hero for stopping him . He explains that two decades earlier , Blue was a revolutionary film maker who was soon thought of as a fad . Wanting nothing more than to create heroes , Blue was sucked into one of his own films , allowing him to live out his dream as a hero . However , he had lost touch with reality and wanted revenge on the people who had betrayed him . As Captain Blue and Silvia embrace in a heartfelt reunion , the director tells Joe that the story is not complete . He snaps his fingers , and the space station 's onboard computer warns of a large number of UFOs heading towards Earth . Blue tells Joe that a hero will be needed twice more to save the world . Joe attempts to leave but not before Silvia requests a V-Watch from her father and to accompany her boyfriend . Viewtiful Joe and a newly transformed Silvia head out to stop the impending threat together .

Viewtiful Joe was developed by the design staff " Team Viewtiful " , a part of Capcom Production Studio 4 . The game was announced in late 2002 as part of the Capcom Five , a line-up of five then-upcoming GameCube games to introduce new content to the console . It was directed by Capcom alumnus Hideki Kamiya , whose previous credits include the planning of Resident Evil and Resident Evil 2 and the direction of Devil May Cry . It was produced by Atsushi Inaba , who previously worked on the Ace Attorney series and Steel Battalion . In its earliest stages of development , Viewtiful Joe went under the working title " Red Hot Man " , but the name was changed due to copyright conflicts with the American rock band Red Hot Chili Peppers . Viewtiful Joe 's development team initially consisted of six people working under a twelve-month deadline . As work continued , the size of the team grew , and development ended up taking a full 21 months to complete . The game was conceived as a " staff-focused project " aimed at increasing the skill of its creators , specifically director Kamiya .

Inaba stated , " We wanted to create was a challenging game with stunning visuals and fluid gameplay " . As a lifelong fan of superheroes , Inaba 's aim was to combine traditional Japanese tokusatsu with American comic books . The character designs created by Kumiko Suekane were inspired specifically by 1960s and 1970s Japanese-costumed tokusatsu television shows such as Kamen Rider and Ultraman . Graphically , the game adopted a 2D side-scrolling style mixed with 3D cel-shaded animation . Despite many games in the then-modern industry shying away from 2D graphical formats , Inaba said , " We have been able to breathe new life into the genre because we are using a new stylistic way that hasn 't been seen before . " The team chose the GameCube as its platform because of their target audience and because it lent itself well to Viewtiful Joe 's gameplay . The musical score for Viewtiful Joe was co-composed by Masakazu Sugimori and Masami Ueda . It was released alongside the score for Viewtiful Joe 2 on a double album titled Viewtiful Joe + Viewtiful Joe 2 Original Soundtrack in Japan on 22 December 2004 by Suleputer . A music video is played within the game featuring a rap vocal song titled " Viewtiful World " composed by D.A.I. The video features a group of people , including Inaba himself , motion captured as some of the game 's characters . On 11 June 2003 , Avex released the video on DVD and released the song as a single . Both the North American and Japanese releases of Viewtiful Joe feature English voice acting in order to keep a " western comic book feel to [ the game ] . " Voice-over work in Viewtiful Joe was provided by Soundelux Design Music Group . Voice actors for the game include Dee Bradley Baker , Christina Puccelli , Gregg Berger , Mikey Kelley , Roger Rose , and Kevin Michael Richardson . Director Hideki Kamiya provides the voice for Six Machine .

A budget re-release of the game for the GameCube titled Viewtiful Joe : Revival was released in Japan in late 2003 , adding a " Sweet Mode " to decrease the difficulty setting from the original game 's " Kids Mode " . A PlayStation 2 port of Viewtiful Joe was released by Clover Studio in 2004 . It was released in Japan with the subtitle A New Hope . The release added the character Dante of Devil May Cry as an unlockable character . The PlayStation 2 version does not feature progressive scan seen in the GameCube version . The game was also re-released under Nintendo 's GameCube Player 's Choice label in 2004 in North America and Europe . It is said that Director Kamiya based Joe 's run animation on how he got to work , and the bosses of the game are based on Capcom executives .

Viewtiful Joe received positive reviews upon its release . The GameCube version of the game currently holds a GameRankings aggregate score of 92 % , while its PlayStation 2 port holds a score of 88 % . Metacritic lists the GameCube and PlayStation 2 versions of the game at 93 out of 100 and 90 out of 100 , respectively . The game 's graphics , gameplay , and challenge have all been common areas of praise among many reviewers . IGN gave Viewtiful Joe an " Outstanding " rating , noting that the beautiful cel-shaded graphics and high-intensity action make it one of the best action games on the GameCube and PlayStation 2 . Likewise , Eurogamer called it " imaginative , beautiful , engaging and above all else entertaining " . Game Informer praised it as " a completely original and highly entertaining work of art " . Criticisms about Viewtiful Joe have been few but consistent among reviews . IGN complained of the game 's lack of boss variety . GameSpy has concurred , noting that the bosses were too easy due to a powerful attack that the player can perform . Reviewers have also criticized the lack of progressive scan in the game 's PlayStation 2 port . IGN and Eurogamer have additionally pointed out that the PlayStation 2 port suffers slowdown in later stages of the game .

In Japan , the GameCube version of Viewtiful Joe sold through its initial shipment of less than 100,000 copies during the week of its release . Preorders of the GameCube version sold out on Capcom 's North American website prior to its ship date , and Viewtiful Joe debuted as the tenth best-selling game in the region . The PlayStation 2 version sold a poor 9,912 units in its first week of release in Japan . Worldwide , sales of the game reached 275,000 copies on the GameCube and 46,000 on the PlayStation 2 . Sales of the game in both North America and Europe were lower than what Capcom had predicted , but due to its small budget , the game was considered by Inaba to be relatively successful commercially .

Viewtiful Joe garnered a number of awards and nominations from various magazines , popular gaming websites , and video game award programs . IGN named Viewtiful Joe " GameCube Game of the Year " and " Best Action Game of 2003 " . At GameSpot 's Best of 2003 , the game was nominated for " Best Artistic Achievement in a Game " , " Coolest New Character " , " Best GameCube Game " , " Readers ' Choice Best GameCube Action Game " , and " Readers ' Choice GameCube Game of the Year " . It was also named the fourth-best GameCube game of 2003 by GameSpy , winning the website 's " Most Stylish " award for the year . Viewtiful Joe won " Most Innovative Game Design " in Nintendo Power magazine 's 2003 Player 's Choice Awards . It won " GameCube Game of the Year " awards for 2003 from both USA Today and GMR . The game was nominated by the Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences for " Platform Action / Adventure Game of the Year " in 2003 and was nominated for three British Academy of Film and Television Arts ( BAFTA ) Awards including " Best Design " , " Best Intro / Animation " , and " Best GameCube Game " . The game won " Unsung Hero Game of the Year " at the 2003 Golden Joystick Awards and " Best New Franchise " at the 2004 G-Phoria awards . Finally , it was recognized at the 4th Annual Game Developers Choice Awards as one of three " Game Innovation Spotlights " .

Viewtiful Joe has been included in a number of " best games " lists in the years following its release . It was rated the 27th best game made on a Nintendo system in Nintendo Power 's " Top 200 Games " list in February 2006 and the 10th best game on the GameCube in its August 2008 issue reflecting on the top 20 games for each system . Both GameSpy and the G4 television program X-Play named Viewtiful Joe the ninth best game of all time for the GameCube . In 2007 , Viewtiful Joe was named the 17th best GameCube game of all time in IGN 's feature reflecting on the system 's long lifespan . Later in 2007 , ScrewAttack listed the game at seventh on their Top 10 GameCube Games of All Time . Viewtiful Joe was successful enough to establish a franchise , and a few other related media titles were released . Viewtiful Joe was followed by a direct sequel titled Viewtiful Joe 2 — released for both the GameCube and PlayStation 2 — and two spinoffs : Viewtiful Joe : Red Hot Rumble for the PSP and GameCube and Viewtiful Joe : Double Trouble ! for the Nintendo DS . An anime adaption of the game was produced by Group TAC , airing on the Japanese television station TV Tokyo beginning in 2004 and being licensed for US distribution by Geneon Entertainment in 2005 . A set of Viewtiful Joe trading figures was released by Agatsuma Entertainment in October 2005 , while a series of action figures made by Jazwares was released in July 2006 .

In 2004 , Capcom registered the domain name ViewtifulJoe3.com , suggesting another sequel . Shortly thereafter , the website was devoid of content . In January 2006 , Atsushi Inaba expressed interest in developing a title in the series for the Wii . However , as none of Clover Studio 's games proved to be an outstanding financial success , Capcom officially dissolved the subsidiary in March 2007 after the release of its final two games , Ōkami and God Hand . Its key members left to form a new company called Platinum Games . Capcom producer Jun Takeuchi commented at the 2009 San Diego Comic-Con International that there have been currently no plans to continue with the series , although Viewtiful Joe has appeared as a playable character in Capcom 's 2008 Wii fighting game Tatsunoko vs. Capcom : Ultimate All Stars and is a playable character in Marvel vs. Capcom 3 : Fate of Two Worlds for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 . However , in 2012 , Platinum Games announced the development of The Wonderful 101 , then known as Project P-100 . This was the first project that reunited Kamiya and Inaba as director and producer on a title since the development of the Viewtiful Joe series . Furthermore , The Wonderful 101 uses the same tokusatsu thematics of the Viewtiful Joe series , and the two share a similar art style albeit different gameplay . This has led fans to hail The Wonderful 101 as a spiritual successor of sorts . The franchise would also later be featured in Archie Comics ' Worlds Unite crossover with several other Capcom and Sega series , taking place in the Sonic the Hedgehog and Mega Man comics .

The constitutional history of Zimbabwe starts with the arrival of white people to what was dubbed Southern Rhodesia in the 1890s . The country was initially run by an administrator appointed by the British South Africa Company . The prime ministerial role was first created in October 1923 , when the country achieved responsible government , with Sir Charles Coghlan as its first Premier . The third Premier , George Mitchell , renamed the post Prime Minister in 1933 . The Rhodesian Prime Minister acted as Head of His or Her Majesty 's Rhodesian Government , under the largely symbolic supervision of a British colonial Governor , until Rhodesia issued its unrecognised Unilateral Declaration of Independence on 11 November 1965 . British-appointed figures such as the Governor were thereafter ignored by Salisbury . The unrecognised state 's system of government , however , remained otherwise unchanged , right down to its declared loyalty to Elizabeth II , which Britain did not acknowledge . This situation remained until March 1970 , when Rhodesia adopted a republican system of government . In republican Rhodesia , the Prime Minister instead nominally reported to the President . The Prime Minister was responsible for nominating the other members of the government , chairing meetings of the Rhodesian Cabinet , and deciding when to call a new general election for the House of Assembly . He retained this role following the reconstitution of Rhodesia under black majority rule , first into Zimbabwe Rhodesia in 1979 , then into Zimbabwe the following year . The Zimbabwean government was headed by a Prime Minister from 1980 to 1987 , when that post was superseded by an executive presidency . The former Prime Minister , Robert Mugabe , became President ; as of 2015 he retains this post .

Having secured the Rudd Concession on mining rights from King Lobengula of Matabeleland on 30 October 1888 , Cecil Rhodes and his British South Africa Company were granted a Royal Charter by Queen Victoria in October 1889 . Under this charter , the Company was empowered to trade with indigenous rulers , form banks , own and manage land , and raise and run a police force . In return for these rights , the British South Africa Company would administer and develop any territory it acquired , while respecting laws enacted by extant African rulers , and upholding free trade within its borders . Though the Company made good on most of these pledges , the assent of Lobengula and other native leaders , particularly regarding mining rights , was often evaded , misrepresented or simply ignored . Lobengula reacted by making war on the new arrivals , their Tswana allies and the local Mashona people in 1893 . The resulting conflict ended with Lobengula 's torching of his own capital at Bulawayo , his death from smallpox in early 1894 , and the subsequent submission of his izinDuna ( advisors ) to the Company . Violent rebellion to the north-east , in neighbouring Mashonaland , was forcibly put down by the Company during 1897 .

Following these victories , the British South Africa Company controlled a country equivalent to modern Zambia and Zimbabwe . This domain was initially referred to as " Zambesia " ( or Zambezia ) after the Zambezi , which bisected it ; however , the first immigrants almost immediately began instead calling their new home " Rhodesia " in honour of their Company benefactor , and this name was officially adopted in 1895 . Matabeleland and Mashonaland , both of which lay south of the Zambezi , were first formally referred to by Britain as " Southern Rhodesia " in 1898 , and were united under that name in 1901 . The areas to the river 's north , Barotziland-North-Western Rhodesia and North-Eastern Rhodesia , were governed separately , and amalgamated in 1911 to form Northern Rhodesia .

The head of the southern territories ' government during this time was in effect the Company 's regional administrator . The first of these was appointed in 1890 , soon after the Pioneer Column 's establishment of Fort Salisbury , the capital , on 12 September that year . From 1899 , the administrator governed as part of a ten-man Legislative Council , originally made up of himself , five other members nominated by the Company , and four elected by registered voters . The number of elected members rose gradually under Company rule until they numbered 13 in 1920 , sitting alongside the administrator and six other Company officials in the 20-member Legislative Council . The Company 's Royal Charter , which originally ran out in October 1914 , was renewed for a further ten years in 1915 . The post of national administrator was held by three people , with three others holding the post while it only covered Mashonaland ; between 1898 and 1901 , a separate office existed in Matabeleland .

Southern Rhodesians of all races fought for Britain in the First World War , during which the Responsible Government Association ( RGA ) was formed in 1917 . By 1919 , Sir Charles Coghlan , a South African-born Bulawayo lawyer , had become the RGA 's leader . The RGA sought self-government for Southern Rhodesia within the British Empire — the same " responsible government " previously granted to Britain 's colonies in Australia , Canada , New Zealand and South Africa as a precursor to full dominion status — and opposed Southern Rhodesia 's proposed integration into the recently formed Union of South Africa . The accession of territories governed by the British South Africa Company was explicitly provisioned for by Section 150 of the South Africa Act 1909 , the British Act of Parliament which created the union in 1910 by consolidating the Empire 's Cape , Natal , Orange River and Transvaal Colonies into a unitary dominion . The Company originally stood against Southern Rhodesia 's addition , fearing the territory 's potential domination by Afrikaners , but changed its tune dramatically when , in 1918 , the Privy Council in London ruled that unalienated land in the Rhodesias was owned not by the Company but by the Crown .

The loss of the ability to raise funds through the sale of land hampered the Company 's ability to pay dividends to its shareholders , and caused its development of Southern Rhodesia to slow . Believing that membership in the union could help solve both problems , the Company now backed Southern Rhodesia 's incorporation as South Africa 's fifth province . However , this prospect proved largely unpopular among Southern Rhodesian settlers , most of whom wanted self-government , and came to vote for the RGA in large numbers . In the 1920 Legislative Council election , the RGA won ten of the 13 seats contested . A referendum on the colony 's future was held on 27 October 1922 — at the suggestion of Winston Churchill , then Britain 's Colonial Secretary , continuing the initiative of his preprocessor Viscount Milner — and responsible government won the day by 59 % . Southern Rhodesia was duly annexed by the Empire on 12 September 1923 , and granted full self-government on 1 October the same year . The new Southern Rhodesian government immediately purchased the land from the British Treasury for £ 2 million , and ten years later paid the same sum to the British South Africa Company for the country 's mineral rights .

The RGA reorganised itself to become the governing Rhodesia Party , with Coghlan as Southern Rhodesia 's first Premier . The title was changed to Prime Minister in 1933 by George Mitchell , the third man to hold the office . In 1932 , the Southern Rhodesian leader was first invited to an Imperial Conference . Although Southern Rhodesia was not a dominion , it was seen elsewhere in the Empire as a sui generis case among Britain 's colonies , and worthy of inclusion , particularly as it was the only one which governed itself . Southern Rhodesian Prime Ministers thereafter became a regular fixture at such meetings and , from 1944 , at Commonwealth Prime Ministers ' Conferences . The Rhodesia Party remained in power until September 1933 , when , despite narrowly topping the popular vote , it lost the month 's election , winning only nine of the 30 seats compared to the Reform Party 's 16 . Although the Reform Party was left-wing in name , many of its leading members , including the new Prime Minister Dr Godfrey Huggins , were politically conservative ; the more rightist members of the party merged with the Rhodesia Party in 1934 to form the United Party , and , with Huggins at the helm , roundly defeated the rump left wing of the Reform Party to begin 28 years of uninterrupted stewardship .

Though uninvolved in foreign affairs , and therefore obliged to follow Britain 's lead , the colony enthusiastically supported the mother country during the Second World War , symbolically affirming the British declaration of war before any other part of the Empire . During the ensuing conflict over 26,100 Southern Rhodesians of all races served in the armed forces , pro rata to white population a higher contribution of manpower than any other British colony or dominion , and more than the UK itself . George VI knighted Huggins in 1941 , and , with the war still ongoing , Britain made overtures towards dominion status . Huggins dismissed this , saying it was imperative to win the war first . The idea of dominionship was raised again in 1952 , but Salisbury once more did not pursue it , instead following the results of a referendum held early the next April to enter an initially semi-independent Federation with the directly administered British colonies of Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland .

A month after Southern Rhodesia , Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland formed the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland in August 1953 , Huggins became the amalgamated body 's first Prime Minister . Salisbury was designated the Federal capital , and the United Party renamed itself the United Rhodesia Party . Garfield Todd took over as Southern Rhodesia 's Prime Minister . Huggins headed the Federal government for three years , then retired in November 1956 after a combined 23 years as a national leader . The United Rhodesia Party merged with the Federal Party to become the United Federal Party ( UFP ) in November 1957 , and the liberal Todd was voted out of office by the more right-wing members of his party four months later , in February 1958 . He was replaced by Sir Edgar Whitehead . Todd led his own version of the United Rhodesia Party against the UFP and the Dominion Party in June the same year , but failed to win a single seat — the UFP won 17 of the 30 seats , with the Dominion Party taking the remainder . Whitehead served as Prime Minister for the next four years , under Federal leader Roy Welensky , as black nationalist ambitions and changing international attitudes propelled the Federation towards collapse . In Southern Rhodesia , constitutional changes adopted in 1961 as the result of a referendum split the heretofore non-racial ( though qualified ) electoral roll into graduated " A " and " B " rolls ; the latter had lower qualifications , and was intended to cater for prospective black voters who had previously not qualified .

This plan was given assent by the Southern Rhodesian and British governments , and initially enjoyed support from black nationalists in the country , though the latter soon reversed their stance , saying the changes did not go far enough . Some government members opposed this partitioning of the electorate , which essentially divided it along ethnic lines ; the UFP 's chief whip in the Federal assembly , Ian Smith , resigned in protest , saying the new system was " racialist " . Former Dominion Party leader Winston Field formed the pro-independence Rhodesian Front ( RF ) in 1962 to contest that November 's Southern Rhodesian election , with Smith running as his deputy , and in a shock result won 35 of the 50 territorial " A " -roll seats . Field and Smith became Prime Minister and Deputy Prime Minister respectively , and remained in office after the Federation 's dissolution on the last day of 1963 .

After the Federation broke up on 31 December 1963 , Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland became independent during 1964 , respectively renamed Zambia and Malawi , and under black majority governments . Southern Rhodesia was denied the same under the ideal of " no independence before majority rule " that was newly ascendant in Britain and elsewhere . The RF was enraged by what it saw as British duplicity ; according to Field and Smith , Britain 's Deputy Prime Minister and First Secretary of State R. A. Butler had verbally promised " independence no later than , if not before , the other two territories " at a meeting in 1963 , in return for Salisbury 's help in winding up the Federation . Butler denied having said this . Under severe pressure from his ministers to resolve this issue , Field travelled to England in March 1964 to pursue sovereign statehood , but returned empty-handed a month later . He resigned his position on 13 April ; this came as no surprise to many government insiders , but appeared sudden to most sections of the general public . Smith promptly accepted the cabinet 's invitation to take over , though he expressed surprise at the nomination . A farmer and erstwhile British Royal Air Force pilot from the rural town of Selukwe , Smith was Southern Rhodesia 's first native-born head of government . He immediately promised to take a harder line on independence than his predecessor .

Only two months into his premiership , Smith was deeply offended when Whitehall informed him that , for the first time since 1930 , Southern Rhodesia would not be represented at the Commonwealth Prime Ministers ' Conference . Huggins described this in 1969 as tantamount to " kicking [ Southern Rhodesia ] out of the Commonwealth " . When Northern Rhodesia became Zambia on 24 October 1964 , Southern Rhodesia dropped " Southern " from its name , and initiated legislation to this effect . Britain refused assent two months later , saying that although the colony was self-governing , it did not have the power to rename itself . Salisbury continued using the shortened name anyway . The Rhodesian government , which remained predominantly white , contended that it had almost complete support from all races in its drive for full statehood ; in October 1964 , a national indaba ( tribal conference ) comprising 622 black representatives unanimously backed independence under the 1961 constitution , and a month later a general independence referendum yielded an 89 % " yes " vote for the same . Harold Wilson 's British Labour Cabinet did not give credence to either of these tests of opinion , and continued to insist on an immediate shift to majority rule before the granting of sovereign independence . Campaigning on an election promise of independence , the RF called a new general election for May 1965 , and won all 50 " A " -roll seats .

Negotiations between Smith and Wilson took place throughout the rest of the year , but repeatedly broke down ; between July and September , a parallel development concerned Rhodesia 's opening of a representative mission in Lisbon , which Britain opposed , but proved unable to stop . Soon after Smith visited London in October 1965 , Wilson resolved to curb his rival 's ambitions . During his own visit to Salisbury later that month , he proposed to safeguard future black representation in the Rhodesian parliament by withdrawing control over the Rhodesian parliamentary structure to London . Salisbury had held these powers since 1923 . This proved the last straw for Smith 's Rhodesian government , which issued the Unilateral Declaration of Independence ( UDI ) on 11 November .

The Rhodesians modelled their independence document on that of the American Thirteen Colonies in 1776 , which remains the only other such proclamation in the history of the British Empire . According to UDI — which went unrecognised by Britain , the Commonwealth and the United Nations , all of which declared it illegal and imposed economic sanctions — the Rhodesian government still professed loyalty to Elizabeth II , whom it called the " Queen of Rhodesia " . The British-appointed Governor , Sir Humphrey Gibbs , remained at his post in Salisbury , but was now ignored by the local government , which appointed its own " Officer Administrating the Government " to fill his ceremonial role . Smith represented Rhodesia in two abortive rounds of talks with Wilson , first aboard HMS Tiger in 1966 , then on HMS Fearless two years later . Under Rhodesia 's 1965 constitution , the Prime Minister remained at the head of Her Majesty 's Rhodesian Government until 2 March 1970 , when a republican constitution was adopted in line with the results of a referendum held the previous June . In the Republic of Rhodesia , the Prime Minister formally reported to the President .

Smith and the RF decisively won three more general elections during the 1970s . The Anglo-Rhodesian Agreement of 1971 – 72 , which would have legitimised the country 's independence in Britain 's eyes , fell apart after a British test of Rhodesian national opinion reported most blacks to be against it . The Rhodesian Bush War , fought against the government by the Zimbabwe African National Liberation Army ( ZANLA ) and the Zimbabwe People 's Revolutionary Army ( ZIPRA ) , the respective guerrilla armies of the Maoist Zimbabwe African National Union ( ZANU ) and its Warsaw Pact-aligned Marxist rival , the Zimbabwe African People 's Union ( ZAPU ) , intensified soon after , starting with ZANLA 's attack on Altena and Whistlefield Farms in the country 's north-east in December 1972 . After a strong security force counter-campaign , the South African détente initiative of December 1974 introduced a ceasefire , which the security forces respected , and the guerrillas ignored . This shifted the course of the war significantly in the nationalists ' favour . Mozambican independence under a communist government in 1975 further assisted the cadres , and exacerbated the Rhodesian government 's economic dependency on South Africa . Unproductive talks between Smith and the guerrilla leaders took place at Victoria Falls in 1975 , then in Geneva the following year . In March 1978 , the Internal Settlement was agreed between the government and moderate nationalist parties , the most prominent of which was Bishop Abel Muzorewa 's United African National Council ( UANC ) . The militant nationalist campaigns continued , however , and indeed extended to attacks on civilian aircraft : ZAPU shot down Air Rhodesia Flight 825 in September 1978 , then Air Rhodesia Flight 827 in February 1979 . ZANU and ZAPU boycotted the elections held per the Internal Settlement in April 1979 , which UN Security Council Resolution 448 called " sham elections ... [ held ] in utter defiance of the United Nations " . In these elections , the UANC won a majority in the new House of Assembly , with 51 of the 72 common roll seats ( for which universal suffrage applied ) and 67 % of the popular vote . The RF took all 20 of the seats elected by white voters and also provided eight non-constituency members . All of this settled , Rhodesia became black majority-ruled Zimbabwe Rhodesia on 1 June 1979 , with Muzorewa replacing Smith as Prime Minister .

With Muzorewa and the UANC in government , Zimbabwe Rhodesia failed to gain international acceptance . ZANU leader Robert Mugabe publicly damned Muzorewa 's new order , dismissing the bishop as a " neocolonial puppet " ; he pledged to continue ZANLA 's campaign " to the last man " . Muzorewa took office at the head of a UANC – RF coalition cabinet made up of 12 blacks and five whites . " Instead of the enemy wearing a white skin , he will soon wear a black skin , " said Mugabe , just before the bishop took over . The Bush War went on until December 1979 , when Salisbury , Whitehall and the revolutionary nationalists signed the Lancaster House Agreement in London . Zimbabwe Rhodesia came under the temporary control of Britain , and a Commonwealth monitoring force was convened to supervise fresh elections , in which ZANU and ZAPU would take part for the first time . ZANU won , and , with Mugabe as Prime Minister , formed the first government of Zimbabwe following its recognised independence on 18 April 1980 .

The National Intercollegiate Band ( NIB ) is a concert band , sponsored by honorary band fraternity and sorority Kappa Kappa Psi and Tau Beta Sigma , that performs every two years at the national convention of the two organizations . Organized in 1947 , the NIB is the oldest national intercollegiate band in the United States , and is open to all collegiate band members regardless of membership in Kappa Kappa Psi or Tau Beta Sigma . Since 1953 , the National Intercollegiate Band has been the resident ensemble of Kappa Kappa Psi and Tau Beta Sigma 's Commissioning Program , which has added thirty new works to the band repertoire since its inception and is the longest-running commissioning program for wind band music in the United States . The National Intercollegiate Band has performed under the baton of some of the most renowned wind band conductors in the history of the ensemble , including William Revelli , Frederick Fennell , James Croft , and others , several of whom have been honored as inductees into the National Band Association Hall of Fame of Distinguished Band Conductors .

In 1922 , Kappa Kappa Psi announced its plan to hold the first national intercollegiate band contest in American history . A brief dispatch in the 1922 Baton explained , " Sometime within the next two years the Kappa Kappa Psi Fraternity will hold a National Intercollegiate Band Contest . This enterprise will be the first of its kind ever attempted . As Music ( sic ) is becoming the foremost Art in America , our Fraternity aims to assist in so spreading the good work . " This early announcement did not culminate in a contest , and the idea of a national intercollegiate band was not revisited again by Kappa Kappa Psi until the 1940s . In the meantime , the first Kappa Kappa Psi-sponsored intercollegiate band was established by F. Lee Bowling in 1933 , with musicians from the University of Colorado ( home of the Alpha Iota chapter of Kappa Kappa Psi ) , the University of Denver ( Alpha Lambda ) , Colorado State College of Agricultural and Mechanical Arts ( Kappa ) , Colorado State College of Education ( Alpha Theta ) , the Colorado School of Mines ( Xi ) , and the University of Utah participating . In 1934 , the University of Utah left the intercollegiate band and the University of Wyoming ( Alpha Nu ) took its place . The concerts held by this Rocky Mountain Intercollegiate Band were sponsored by the local chapters of Kappa Kappa Psi and many members of the fraternity participated in the ensemble . The first concert of the Rocky Mountain Intercollegiate Band was held in February 1933 , and the band gave annual concerts during Denver Music Week . Bowling left the band 's managership in 1937 .

Bowling was elected Grand President of Kappa Kappa Psi in 1941 and presented a plan to hold a national intercollegiate band concert , modeled after the Rocky Mountain intercollegiate bands . The delegation endorsed the plan , which was to be executed at the next biennial national convention in Stillwater in 1943 , the silver jubilee of the fraternity . However , due to World War II , the 1943 and 1945 national conventions were not held , and so the next biennial convention was held in 1947 . The first National Intercollegiate Band gave a concert on the evening of Friday , March 7 , 1947 . All delegates , officers , and visitors to the convention performed in the ensemble , which was augmented by Kappa Kappa Psi members from the Oklahoma A & M Symphonic Band so the band had a balanced instrumentation . Grand First Vice-President William A. Scroggs , founder of the fraternity , conducted the band in their first piece , Semper Fidelis . Max A. Mitchell , Grand Second Vice-President , conducted Leonard Smith 's Spanish Caprice , a piece for band and solo cornet . Bohumil Makovsky , Past Grand President and Chairman of the Board of Trustees , conducted his march , Kappa Kappa Psi , and F. Lee Bowling conducted J. DeForest Cline 's Kappa Kappa Psi march . The 1947 NIB was recognized as the first-ever intercollegiate band assembled with a national scope in the United States . Since 1947 , the fraternity has presented the F. Lee Bowling Participation Award to the college or university who has had the most students participate in the National Intercollegiate Band , regardless of membership in Kappa Kappa Psi or Tau Beta Sigma . In the case of a tie , multiple awards are presented .

The 1957 National Intercollegiate Band performed in the Salt Lake Tabernacle in Salt Lake City on August 24 , 1957 , under the direction of Lieutenant Colonel William F. Santelmann , retired director of the United States Marine Band . The band comprised 112 musicians from Utah , Florida , Maryland , Colorado , Ohio , Texas , Indiana , and New Mexico , and premiered Robert Russell Bennett 's new work Symphonic Songs for Band . In 1969 , the fiftieth anniversary of Kappa Kappa Psi , there were enough performers to create two bands . The National Intercollegiate Symphonic Band , the top ensemble , was conducted by Norman Dello Joio and premiered his new work , Songs of Abelard . The Symphonic Band also performed several other Dello Joio works , including Scenes from the Louvre , Variants on a Mediaeval Tune , and Fantasies on a Theme by Haydn . The National Intercollegiate Concert Band was conducted by Past Grand President Jay L. Slaughter , and performed Makovksy 's Kappa Kappa Psi march and several other works .

In June and July 2002 , Kappa Kappa Psi and Tau Beta Sigma sponsored the first National Intercollegiate Marching Band , which traveled to the French Riviera , including the cities of Nice , Grasse , Aix-en-Provence , Cannes , Antibes , and the Principality of Monaco . The thirty-five member band , directed by Past National President Dr. Michael Golemo , performed at Le Suquet in Cannes , in Nice , and in front of the Prince 's Palace of Monaco . Despite being billed as the " first biennial " intercollegiate marching band , the program was dissolved by the joint national councils after the inaugural trip due to its high cost and low attendance , which was believed to be caused by a fear of traveling abroad after the September 11 attacks .

In 1953 , Kappa Kappa Psi Grand President Hugh McMillen began the Commissioning Program to add new music to the band repertoire , beginning with a $ 500 commission of Don Gillis , who provided Ballet for Band for the NIB . The Commissioning Program is now the longest-running commissioning program for wind band music in American history , and has produced works that have secured a place in the emerging band canon and have garnered critical acclaim , such as Robert Russell Bennett 's Symphonic Songs for Band and Karel Husa 's Concerto for Trumpet and Wind Orchestra .

Hurricane Lily was a short-lived Category 1 hurricane of August 1971 that devastated the city of Puerto Vallarta in Mexico . Forming from an area of cloudiness associated with former Atlantic Tropical Storm Chloe , the storm slowly intensified , building to peak intensity just before landfall northwest of Manzanillo , Colima on August 31 . The hurricane quickly weakened and became extratropical . After leaving land , the extratropical remnants of Lily dissipated on September 1 . The storm 's movement close to land affected shipping due to the limited warning , which was partially set back due to difficulties in clarifying the hurricane 's position on radar from reconnaissance aircraft . The hurricane was Puerto Vallarta 's worst in two decades and the second hurricane of the season to heavily impact Mexico after Hurricane Bridget . The storm caused the Cuale River to overflow its banks , inundating the downtown section of Puerto Vallarta with water that was up to 8 feet ( 2.4 m ) deep in some sections . The Mexican army flew in aid after trucks were blocked by flooded roads . The hurricane claimed three lives on the mainland and nine lives when a boat capsized .

On August 25 , Tropical Storm Chloe made landfall on British Honduras ( present day Belize ) as a tropical depression . After dissipating , the remnants of the storm crossed into the Pacific Ocean , where they contributed to an area of shower activity that persisted over the Gulf of Tehuantepec . On August 28 , the tropical activity organized around a circulation which quickly developed into a tropical depression the same day . The depression was upgraded to a tropical storm on August 29 based on satellite presentation that depicted significant cirrus outflow and a comma – shaped cloud mass spanning 2 ° of latitude in diameter and was subsequently named Lily . Following its upgrade to tropical storm intensity , Lily began developing a spiral cloud structure and heavy anticyclonic outflow on August 30 and was upgraded to a hurricane the same day . During its intensification , United States Air Force reconnaissance tried to fly into the hurricane , but penetration was rendered impossible due to the cumulonimbus clouds in the spiral bands , causing the aircraft to rely on radar readings , which showed an eye 40 miles ( 65 km ) in diameter . Following the flight , the hurricane turned to the north-northwestward towards the Mexican coast . On August 31 , a ship called the Turrialba reported a 980-millibar ( 29 inHg ) sea – level pressure while in the eye of the hurricane . Shortly after the report , the hurricane peaked in intensity with winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) just prior to landfall 30 miles ( 50 km ) northwest of Manzanillo . The cyclone quickly weakened overland , and after only six hours over land , its winds weakened to only 30 mph ( 50 km / h ) , a decline of 55 mph ( 90 km / h ) and the cyclone became extratropical . The now – extratropical Lily continued to cross the Mexican coast , and shortly after emerging over water on September 1 , the cyclone dissipated .

The north-northwestward track Lily took off the Mexican coast was not well-forecast due in part to difficulties in interpreting the radar data from the reconnaissance flight . As a result , many ships got caught in hurricane-force winds and high seas while trying to cross between it and the coastline . The Turrialba also reported that many exhausted tropical birds were taken aboard the ship while in the eye . The ship had to maneuver in order to avoid hitting other ships in the area . Another boat with twelve people aboard capsized off a beach near Puerto Vallarta while weathering wind gusts of 110 mph ( 180 km / h ) from the hurricane . Nine aboard the ship were reported dead as a result , but four others were able to swim back to shore . The hurricane was the worst to strike Puerto Vallarta in 20 years . 5,000 people were evacuated due to the hurricane with an addition 500 people on vacation becoming stranded inside their hotels . At least 600 evacuees sought refuge in a customs house , with an additional 1000 more evacuating to an airport terminal . More evacuees sought shelter in schools and the city hall . Four major rivers , including the Cuale River , which flows into the city , overflowed their banks , inundating the city along with several neighboring communities . Some areas of downtown Puerto Vallarta were submerged in depths of up to 8 feet ( 2.4 m ) due to the flooding . Telephone lines in the city were suspended and highways were rendered impassable by the floods . One person died during a house collapse in the city and two others drowned . Another source reported five deaths from house collapses , although the post-season report regards only three deaths in association with Lily in Mexico . The hurricane also passed over the nearby town of Barra de Navidad , where the residents took refuge inside the church of San Antonio . A local legend states that during the hurricane , the arms of Jesus Christ on the church 's crucifix broke and hung down . The moment the arms broke , the hurricane 's effects in the town stopped . The figure has since been known as the Christ of the Cyclone .

Relief efforts following the hurricane were mostly affected by the associated flooding . Trucks transporting food and medicine from the Jalisco state government were forced to turn back because of flooded roads . The army then decided on an aerial transport . This effort was hampered because , after three federal helicopters and Air Force planes touched down at the local airport , the road into the city was still flooded , meaning the aid could not be distributed . Lily 's effects in Puerto Vallarta made it the second hurricane of the season to be declared the worst hurricane to strike a specific city in twenty or more years . The first was Hurricane Bridget , which struck Acapulco . Despite the damage , the name was not retired and was reused in 1975 , but due to a change in names lists in 1978 , the name Lily has not been used since .

Fidel Alejandro Castro Ruz ( American Spanish : [ fiˈðel aleˈxandɾo ˈkastɾo ˈrus ] audio ; born August 13 , 1926 ) , commonly known as Fidel Castro , is a Cuban politician and revolutionary who governed the Republic of Cuba as Prime Minister from 1959 to 1976 and then as President from 1976 to 2008 . Politically a Marxist – Leninist and Cuban nationalist , he also served as the First Secretary of the Communist Party of Cuba from 1961 until 2011 . Under his administration Cuba became a one-party communist state ; industry and business were nationalized , and state socialist reforms implemented throughout society . Born in Birán as the son of a wealthy farmer , Castro adopted leftist anti-imperialist politics while studying law at the University of Havana . After participating in rebellions against right-wing governments in the Dominican Republic and Colombia , he planned the overthrow of Cuban President Fulgencio Batista , launching a failed attack on the Moncada Barracks in 1953 . After a year 's imprisonment , he traveled to Mexico where he formed a revolutionary group , the 26th of July Movement , with his brother Raúl Castro and Che Guevara . Returning to Cuba , Castro took a key role in the Cuban Revolution by leading the Movement in a guerrilla war against Batista 's forces from the Sierra Maestra . After Batista 's overthrow in 1959 , Castro assumed military and political power as Cuba 's Prime Minister . The United States was alarmed by Castro 's friendly relations with the Soviet Union , and unsuccessfully attempted to remove him by assassination , economic blockade , and counter-revolution , including the Bay of Pigs invasion of 1961 . Countering these threats , Castro formed an alliance with the Soviets and allowed them to place nuclear weapons on the island , sparking the Cuban Missile Crisis – a defining incident of the Cold War – in 1962 .

Adopting a Marxist-Leninist model of development , Castro converted Cuba into a one-party socialist state under Communist Party rule , the first in the Western hemisphere . Reforms introducing central economic planning and expanding healthcare and education were accompanied by state control of the press and the suppression of internal dissent . Abroad , Castro supported anti-imperialist revolutionary groups , backing the establishment of Marxist governments in Chile , Nicaragua , and Grenada , and sending troops to aid allies in the Yom Kippur War , Ethio-Somali War , and Angolan Civil War . These actions , coupled with Castro 's leadership of the Non-Aligned Movement from 1979 – 83 and Cuba 's medical internationalism , increased Cuba 's profile on the world stage and earned its leader great respect in the developing world . Following the Soviet Union 's dissolution in 1991 , Castro led Cuba into its " Special Period " and embraced environmentalist and anti-globalization ideas . In the 2000s he forged alliances in the Latin American Pink Tide – namely with Hugo Chávez 's Venezuela – and signed Cuba to the Bolivarian Alliance for the Americas . In 2006 he transferred his responsibilities to Vice-President Raúl Castro , who formally assumed the presidency in 2008 .

Castro was born out of wedlock at his father 's farm on August 13 , 1926 . His father , Ángel Castro y Argiz , was a migrant to Cuba from Galicia , Northwest Spain . He had become financially successful by growing sugar cane at Las Manacas farm in Birán , Oriente Province , and after the collapse of his first marriage , he took his household servant , Lina Ruz González - also of Spanish origin , as his mistress and later on second wife ; together they had seven children , among them Fidel . Aged six , Castro was sent to live with his teacher in Santiago de Cuba , before being baptized into the Roman Catholic Church aged eight . Being baptized enabled Castro to attend the La Salle boarding school in Santiago , where he regularly misbehaved , and so was sent to the privately funded , Jesuit-run Dolores School in Santiago . In 1945 he transferred to the more prestigious Jesuit-run El Colegio de Belén in Havana . Although Castro took an interest in history , geography and debating at Belén , he did not excel academically , instead devoting much of his time to playing sport .

In 1945 , Castro began studying law at the University of Havana . Admitting he was " politically illiterate " , he became embroiled in student activism , and the violent gangsterismo culture within the university . Passionate about anti-imperialism and opposing U.S. intervention in the Caribbean , he unsuccessfully campaigned for the presidency of the Federation of University Students on a platform of " honesty , decency and justice " . Castro became critical of the corruption and violence of President Ramón Grau 's government , delivering a public speech on the subject in November 1946 that received coverage on the front page of several newspapers . In 1947 , Castro joined the Party of the Cuban People ( Partido Ortodoxo ) , founded by veteran politician Eduardo Chibás . A charismatic figure , Chibás advocated social justice , honest government , and political freedom , while his party exposed corruption and demanded reform . Though Chibás lost the election , Castro remained committed to working on his behalf . Student violence escalated after Grau employed gang leaders as police officers , and Castro soon received a death threat urging him to leave the university ; refusing , he began carrying a gun and surrounding himself with armed friends . In later years anti-Castro dissidents accused him of committing gang-related assassinations at the time , but these remain unproven .

In June 1947 , Castro learned of a planned expedition to invade the Dominican Republic and overthrow the right-wing military junta of Rafael Trujillo , a U.S. ally . Being President of the University Committee for Democracy in the Dominican Republic , Castro joined the expedition . The invasion force consisted of around 1,200 troops , mostly Cubans and exiled Dominicans , and they intended to sail from Cuba in July 1947 . However , under U.S. pressure , Grau 's government stopped the invasion , although Castro and many of his comrades evaded arrest . Returning to Havana , Castro took a leading role in student protests against the killing of a high school pupil by government bodyguards . The protests , accompanied by a crackdown on those considered communists , led to violent clashes between activists and police in February 1948 , in which Castro was badly beaten . At this point his public speeches took on a distinctly leftist slant by condemning social and economic inequality in Cuba . In contrast , his former public criticisms had centered on condemning corruption and U.S. imperialism . In April 1948 , Castro traveled to Bogotá , Colombia , with a Cuban student group sponsored by President Juan Perón 's Argentine government . There , the assassination of popular leftist leader Jorge Eliécer Gaitán Ayala led to widespread rioting and clashes between the governing Conservatives – backed by the army – and leftist Liberals . Castro joined the Liberal cause by stealing guns from a police station , but subsequent police investigations concluded that he had not been involved in any killings . Returning to Cuba , Castro became a prominent figure in protests against government attempts to raise bus fares . That year , he married Mirta Díaz Balart , a student from a wealthy family through whom he was exposed to the lifestyle of the Cuban elite . The relationship was a love match , disapproved of by both families , but Mirta 's father gave them tens of thousands of dollars to spend on a three-month New York City honeymoon .

That same year , Grau decided not to stand for re-election , which was instead won by his Partido Auténtico 's new candidate , Carlos Prío Socarrás . Prío faced widespread protests when members of the MSR , now allied to the police force , assassinated Justo Fuentes , a socialist friend of Castro 's . In response , Prío agreed to quell the gangs , but found them too powerful to control . Castro had moved further to the left , influenced by the Marxist writings of Karl Marx , Friedrich Engels , and Vladimir Lenin . He came to interpret Cuba 's problems as an integral part of capitalist society , or the " dictatorship of the bourgeoisie " , rather than the failings of corrupt politicians , and adopted the Marxist view that meaningful political change could only be brought about by proletariat revolution . Visiting Havana 's poorest neighborhoods , he became active in the student anti-racist campaign . In September 1949 , Mirta gave birth to a son , Fidelito , so the couple moved to a larger Havana flat . Castro continued to put himself at risk , staying active in the city ’ s politics and joining the September 30 Movement , which contained within it both communists and members of the Partido Ortodoxo . The group ’ s purpose was to oppose the influence of the violent gangs within the university ; despite his promises , Prío had failed to control the situation , instead offering many of their senior members jobs in government ministries . Castro volunteered to deliver a speech for the Movement on November 13 , exposing the government ’ s secret deals with the gangs and identifying key members . Attracting the attention of the national press , the speech angered the gangs , and Castro fled into hiding , first in the countryside and then in the U.S. Returning to Havana several weeks later , Castro lay low and focused on his university studies , graduating as a Doctor of Law in September 1950 .

Castro co-founded a legal partnership that primarily catered for poor Cubans , although it proved a financial failure . Caring little for money or material goods , Castro failed to pay his bills ; his furniture was repossessed and electricity cut off , distressing his wife . He took part in a high-school protest in Cienfuegos in November 1950 , fighting with police in protest at the Education Ministry 's ban on student associations ; arrested and charged for violent conduct , the magistrate dismissed the charges . His hopes for Cuba still centered on Chibás and the Partido Ortodoxo , and he was present at Chibás ' politically motivated suicide in 1951 . Seeing himself as Chibás ' heir , Castro wanted to run for Congress in the June 1952 elections , though senior Ortodoxo members feared his radical reputation and refused to nominate him . Instead he was nominated as a candidate for the House of Representatives by party members in Havana 's poorest districts , and began campaigning . The Ortodoxo had considerable support and was predicted to do well in the election . During his campaign , Castro met with General Fulgencio Batista , the former president who had returned to politics with the Unitary Action Party ; although both opposing Prío 's administration , their meeting never got beyond polite generalities . In March 1952 , Batista seized power in a military coup , with Prío fleeing to Mexico . Declaring himself president , Batista cancelled the planned presidential elections , describing his new system as " disciplined democracy " : Castro , like many others , considered it a one-man dictatorship . Batista moved to the right , solidifying ties with both the wealthy elite and the United States , severing diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union , suppressing trade unions and persecuting Cuban socialist groups . Intent on opposing Batista , Castro brought several legal cases against the government , but these came to nothing , and Castro began thinking of alternate ways to oust the regime .

Castro formed a group called " The Movement " which operated along a clandestine cell system , publishing underground newspaper El Acusador ( The Accuser ) , while arming and training anti-Batista recruits . From July 1952 they went on a recruitment drive , gaining around 1,200 members in a year , the majority from Havana 's poorer districts . Although a revolutionary socialist , Castro avoided an alliance with the communist PSP , fearing it would frighten away political moderates , but kept in contact with PSP members like his brother Raúl . Castro stockpiled weapons for a planned attack on the Moncada Barracks , a military garrison outside Santiago de Cuba , Oriente . Castro 's militants intended to dress in army uniforms and arrive at the base on July 25 , seizing control and raiding the armory before reinforcements arrived . Supplied with new weaponry , Castro intended to spark a revolution among Oriente 's impoverished cane cutters and promote further uprisings . Castro 's plan emulated those of the 19th century Cuban independence fighters who had raided Spanish barracks ; Castro saw himself as the heir to independence leader José Martí . Castro gathered 165 revolutionaries for the mission , ordering his troops not to cause bloodshed unless they met armed resistance . The attack took place on July 26 , 1953 , but ran into trouble ; 3 of the 16 cars that had set out from Santiago failed to get there . Reaching the barracks , the alarm was raised , with most of the rebels pinned down by machine gun fire . 4 were killed before Castro ordered a retreat . The rebels suffered 6 fatalities and 15 other casualties , whilst the army suffered 19 dead and 27 wounded . Meanwhile , some rebels took over a civilian hospital ; subsequently stormed by government soldiers , the rebels were rounded up , tortured and 22 were executed without trial . Accompanied by 19 comrades , Castro set out for Gran Piedra in the rugged Sierra Maestra mountains several miles to the north , where they could establish a guerrilla base . Responding to the attack , Batista 's government proclaimed martial law , ordering a violent crackdown on dissent , and imposing strict media censorship . The government broadcast misinformation about the event , claiming that the rebels were communists who had killed hospital patients , although news and photographs of the army 's use of torture and summary executions in Oriente soon spread , causing widespread public and some governmental disapproval .

Over the following days , the rebels were rounded up ; some were executed and others – including Castro – transported to a prison north of Santiago . Believing Castro incapable of planning the attack alone , the government accused Ortodoxo and PSP politicians of involvement , putting 122 defendants on trial on September 21 at the Palace of Justice , Santiago . Acting as his own defense counsel , Castro cited Martí as the intellectual author of the attack and convinced the 3 judges to overrule the army 's decision to keep all defendants handcuffed in court , proceeding to argue that the charge with which they were accused – of " organizing an uprising of armed persons against the Constitutional Powers of the State " – was incorrect , for they had risen up against Batista , who had seized power in an unconstitutional manner . The trial embarrassed the army by revealing that they had tortured suspects , after which they tried unsuccessfully to prevent Castro from testifying any further , claiming he was too ill . The trial ended on October 5 , with the acquittal of most defendants ; 55 were sentenced to prison terms of between 7 months and 13 years . Castro was sentenced on October 16 , during which he delivered a speech that would be printed under the title of History Will Absolve Me . Castro was sentenced to 15 years imprisonment in the hospital wing of the Model Prison ( Presidio Modelo ) , a relatively comfortable and modern institution on the Isla de Pinos .

Imprisoned with 25 comrades , Castro renamed his group the " 26th of July Movement " ( MR-26-7 ) in memory of the Moncada attack 's date , and formed a school for prisoners . He read widely , enjoying the works of Marx , Lenin , and Martí but also reading books by Freud , Kant , Shakespeare , Munthe , Maugham and Dostoyevsky , analyzing them within a Marxist framework . Corresponding with supporters , he maintained control over the Movement and organized the publication of History Will Absolve Me . Initially permitted a relative amount of freedom within the prison , he was locked up in solitary confinement after inmates sang anti-Batista songs on a visit by the President in February 1954 . Meanwhile , Castro 's wife Mirta gained employment in the Ministry of the Interior , something he discovered through a radio announcement . Appalled , he raged that he would rather die " a thousand times " than " suffer impotently from such an insult " . Both Fidel and Mirta initiated divorce proceedings , with Mirta taking custody of their son Fidelito ; this angered Castro , who did not want his son growing up in a bourgeois environment .